古文：天有五气，万物化成：木清则仁，火清则礼，金清则义，水清则智，土清则思：五气尽纯，圣德备也。
现代文：天生五行之气，万物由它变化而成。木气清净就有仁爱，火气清净就有礼制，金气清净就有道义，水气清净就有智慧，土气清净就有思想，五气都纯净，那么圣人的德行就完备了。
English: All things are made up of the five elements. Pure wood gas is benevolence, pure fire gas is etiquette, pure gold gas is morality, pure water gas is wisdom, pure earth gas is thought, and all five elements are pure. Then a saint's virtue is complete.

古文：木浊则弱，火浊则淫，金浊则暴，水浊则贪，土浊则顽：五气尽浊，民之下也。
现代文：木气混浊就虚弱，火气温浊就淫乱，金气混浊就残暴，水气混浊就贪婪，土气混浊就顽固，五气都混浊，那么就是平民百姓中的卑陋之人了。
English: If the wood is turbid, he is weak; if the fire is hot, he is lewd; if the gold is turbid, he is cruel; if the water is turbid, he is greedy; if the earth is turbid, he is obstinate; if all the five elements are turbid, then he is a lowly person among the common people.

古文：中土多圣人，和气所交也。绝域多怪物，异气所产也。
现代文：中原多圣人，这是和顺之气互相交会的结果；交通闭塞的地方多怪物，这是奇异之气所造成的。
English: The Central Plains are full of sages, which is the result of the meeting of the two sides of the air of harmony; the traffic congested areas are full of monsters, which is caused by the strange air.

古文：苟禀此气，必有此形；苟有此形，必生此性。
现代文：如果禀受了这一种气质，就一定有这一种形体；如果有了这一种形体，就一定会产生这一种性情。
English: If you have this temperament, you must have this form; if you have this form, you must have this disposition.

古文：故食谷者智能而文，食草者多力而愚，食桑者有丝而蛾，食肉者勇橄而悍，食土者无心而不息，食气者神明而长寿，不食者不死而神。
现代文：所以吃五谷的聪明而文雅，吃草的力气大却愚蠢，吃桑叶的会吐丝但却变成蛾，吃肉的勇猛而强悍，吃泥土的没有意识却忙个不停，吃气体的神通而且长寿，不吃什么东西的不死页且神灵。
English: Therefore, those who eat grains are clever and elegant, those who eat grass are strong but stupid, those who eat mulberry leaves can vomit silk but become moths, those who eat meat are brave and powerful, those who eat dirt are unconscious but busy, those who eat gas are magical and long-lived, and those who do not eat anything are immortal and divine.

古文：大腰无雄，细腰无雌；无雄外接，无雌外育。
现代文：鸟儿扑打着空气飞翔，禽兽脚踏在实地上奔跑。
English: Birds flutter through the air, and animals run on the ground.

古文：三化之虫，先孕后交；兼爱之兽，自为牝牡；寄生因夫高木，女萝托乎茯苓，木株于土，萍植于水，鸟排虚而飞，兽跖实而走，虫土闭而蛰，鱼渊潜而处。
现代文：虫子用泥上封起来进行冬眠，鱼儿在深水潭中潜游居住。
English: Worms seal themselves in mud to hibernate, and fish swim and live in deep pools.

古文：本乎天者亲上，本乎地者亲下，本乎时者亲旁：各从其类也。
现代文：来源于空中的亲附上面，来源于地上的亲附下面，来源于对节的亲附旁边。各种事物部从属于它们的种类。
English: From above the affinity of the air, from below the affinity of the earth, from beside the affinity of the knot, the parts of things are of their kinds.

古文：千岁之雉，入海为蜃；百年之雀，入海为蛤；千岁龟鼋，能与人语；千岁之狐，起为美女；千岁之蛇，断而复续；百年之鼠，而能相卜：数之至也。
现代文：上千岁的野鸡，到海里就变成了大蛤蜊，上百岁的麻雀，到海里就变成了小蛤蜊；上千岁的乌龟、老鳖能和人谈话；上千岁的狐狸，站起来会变成美女，上千岁的大蛇，被斩断了又能连起来，上百岁的老鼠，能看相占卜。这是寿命达到了一定年数而造成的。
English: A thousand-year-old pheasant will turn into a great egret in the sea, a hundred-year-old sparrow will turn into a little egret in the sea; a thousand-year-old turtle and egret can talk to people; a thousand-year-old fox will stand up and turn into a beautiful woman, a thousand-year-old snake can be cut off and connected again, and a hundred-year-old mouse can see and tell fortunes. This is caused by a certain number of years of life.

古文：春分之日，鹰变为鸠；秋分之日，鸠变为鹰：时之化也。
现代文：春分那一天，鹰变成鸠；秋分那一天，鸠变成鹰。这是时令造成的变化。
English: On the day of the vernal equinox, the eagle turns into a stork; on the day of the autumnal equinox, the stork turns into an eagle. This is a change caused by the seasons.

古文：故腐草之为萤也，朽苇之为蛬也，稻之为也，麦之为蝴蝶也；羽翼生焉，眼目成焉，心智在焉：此自无知化为有知，而气易也。
现代文：所以，腐烂的草变成萤火虫，腐烂的芦苇变成蟋蟀，稻谷变成蛀虫，麦子变成蝴蝶，羽毛翅膀长出来了，眼睛长成了。意念智慧也就存在了，这是从没有知觉变成了有知觉而那气质也改变了。
English: So rotten grass becomes firefly, rotten reed becomes worm, rice becomes aphid, wheat becomes butterfly, feather comes out, wing comes out, eye comes out, and there is the mind-wisdom, which is from no consciousness to consciousness and that temperament is changed.

古文：雀之为獐也，蛬之为虾也：不失其血气，而形性变也。
现代文：鹤变为獐，蟋蟀变为虾，没有丧失它们的血气但形状本性变了。
English: The crane changes into a cormorant, the cormorant into a shrimp, they do not lose their blood but their shape and nature changes.

古文：若此之类，不可胜论。
现代文：像这样的例子，不胜枚举。
English: There are many examples like this.

古文：应变而动，是为顺常；苟错其方，则为妖眚。
现代文：适应着变化的规律而变动，这是顺应常规。如果违背了变化的规律而变动，就造成了妖怪和灾祸。
English: If it changes in accordance with the law of change, it is conforming to the norm. If it changes in violation of the law of change, it will create monsters and disasters.

古文：故下体生于上，上体生于下：气之反者也。人生兽，兽生人：气之乱者也。男化为女，女化为男：气之贸者也。
现代文：所以，下身的器官长在上身，上身的器官长在下身，这是元气逆反而造成的；人生下禽兽，禽兽生出人，这是元气混乱而造成的；勇人变为女人，女人变为男人，这是元气互换而造成的。
English: Therefore, the organs of the lower body grow in the upper body, and the organs of the upper body grow in the lower body, which is caused by the reversal of vitality; people give birth to animals, and animals give birth to people, which is caused by the confusion of vitality; the brave man becomes a woman, and the woman becomes a man, which is caused by the exchange of vitality.

古文：鲁，牛哀，得疾，七日化而为虎，形体变易，爪牙施张。
现代文：鲁国的牛哀得了病，七天后便变成了老虎，形状改变了，便张牙舞爪起来，他哥哥开门进去，他就把哥哥抓住吃了。
English: Lu's ox, Guan, fell ill, and seven days later he turned into a tiger, his shape changed, he opened his jaws and claws, his brother opened the door, he grabbed his brother and ate him.

古文：其兄启户而入，搏而食之。方其为人，不知其将为虎也；方有为虎，不知其常为人也。
现代文：当牛哀是人的时候，他并不知道自己将要变成老虎；当他成为老虎的时候，也不知道自己曾经是人。
English: When he was a man, he didn't know he was going to become a tiger; when he became a tiger, he didn't know he was a man.

古文：故晋，太康中，陈留阮士瑀，伤于虺，不忍其痛，数嗅其疮，已而双虺成于鼻中。
现代文：所以，晋朝太康年间，陈留郡的阮士瑀被毒蛇咬伤了，他不能忍受那疼痛，屡次去闻那伤口，不久就有两条毒蛇长在鼻子中。
English: Therefore, during the Taikang period of the Jin Dynasty, Ruan Shijuan of Chenliu County was bitten by a venomous snake. Unable to bear the pain, he repeatedly sniffed the wound, and soon there were two venomous snakes growing in his nose.

古文：元康中，历阳纪元载客食道龟，已而成瘕，医以药攻之，下龟子数升，大如小钱，头足壳备，文甲皆具，惟中药已死。
现代文：元康年间，历阳县的纪元载，在外地吃了路上的乌龟，不久腹中就结了硬块，医生用药来治它，他便泻下几升小乌龟，大小像小铜钱，头和脚都长全了，龟纹和硬壳也都具备，只是中了药毒已经死去。
English: During the era of Yuan Kang, the first year of the era of Liyang County, he ate a turtle on the road in the field, and soon there was a hard lump in his stomach. The doctor used medicine to treat it. He poured down several liters of small turtles, the size of which was like a small copper coin. The head and feet were fully grown, and the turtle lines and hard shell were also present. However, he was poisoned and died.

古文：夫妻非化育之气，鼻非胎孕之所，享道非下物之具：从此观之，万物之生死也，与其变化也，非通神之思，虽求诸已，恶识所自来。
现代文：夫妻不是化育万物的元气，鼻腔不是怀胎的地方，肠道不是生产幼体的器官。从这一点来看，各种事物的生死及其变化，如果没有通达神灵的思考，即使从自己的身上仔细体会寻找，也不能知道它们是从什么地方来的。
English: A husband and wife are not the life force of all things, the nasal cavity is not the place of conception, and the intestine is not the organ that produces the young. From this point of view, the life and death of all kinds of things and their changes, if there is no thinking through the gods, even if you carefully experience and search from your own body, you cannot know where they come from.

古文：然朽草之为萤，由乎腐也；麦之为蝴蝶，由乎湿也。
现代文：但是，腐烂的草变质萤火虫，是由于腐烂的缘故；麦子变成蝴蝶，是由于潮湿的缘故。
English: But rotten grass turns into fireflies because of decay; wheat into butterflies because of moisture.

古文：尔则万物之变，皆有由也。
现代文：这样看来，那么各种事物的变化，都是有原因的。
English: From this perspective, all kinds of things change for a reason.

古文：农夫止麦之化者，沤之以灰；圣人理万物之化者，济之以道：其然与；不然乎？
现代文：农民要阻止麦子的变化，就用灰来浸泡；圣人治理各种事物的变化，用道来接济。难道不是这样吗？
English: If a farmer wants to prevent the transformation of wheat, he will soak it with ashes; if a sage wants to control the transformation of all things, he will use the Tao to help. Isn't that so?

古文：季桓子穿井，获如土缶，其中有羊焉，使问之仲尼，曰： 吾穿井其获狗，何耶？ 
现代文：季桓子挖井，得到一个像瓦器那样的东西，那里面有只羊。他就派人去问孔子，说： 我挖井得到一只狗，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Ji Huan Zi dug a well and got something like a pottery vessel with a sheep in it. He sent someone to ask Confucius, saying, "I dug a well and got a dog. Why is that?"

古文：仲尼曰： 以丘所闻，羊也。
现代文：孔子说： 依我的见识，那应该是羊。
English: Confucius said, "As far as I know, it is a sheep."

古文：丘闻之：木石之怪，夔， 魍魉。 水中之怪，龙， 罔象。 土中之怪曰 贲羊。  
现代文：我听说，树木、石头中的精怪，是夔、蝄；水中的精怪，是龙、罔像，泥土中的精怪，叫做贲羊。 
English: I've heard that the creatures in the trees and stones are grasshoppers and centipedes; the creatures in the water are dragons and centipedes; and the creatures in the dirt are called marmots.

古文：夏鼎志曰：  罔象 如三岁儿，赤目，黑色，大耳，长臂，赤爪。索缚，则可得食。 
现代文：《夏鼎志》记载说： 罔像，像三岁的小孩，红眼睛，黑颜色，大耳朵，长臂膀，红色的脚爪，用绳子把它缚住就可以吃它了。 
English: "Xia Ding Zhi" recorded that: the dragonfly is like a three-year-old child, with red eyes, black color, big ears, long arms, and red claws. If you tie it with a rope, you can eat it.

古文：王子曰： 木精为 游光， 金精为 清明  也。
现代文：王子说： 木精是游光，金精是清明。 
English: The prince said, "The wood sprite is swimming light, and the gold sprite is clear.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，吴郡娄县怀瑶家忽闻地中有犬声隐隐。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，呈郡娄县怀瑶家中，忽然听见地下有汪汪汪的狗叫声。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Yuankang, at his home in Huaiyi, Chengxian County, he suddenly heard the barking of a dog underground.

古文：视声发处，上有小窍，大如螾穴。
现代文：仔细察看那发出声音的地方，上面有一个小洞，大小像蚯蚓洞那样。
English: Look closely at the spot where the sound came from. There's a small hole in it, about the size of a wormhole.

古文：瑶以杖刺之，入数尺，觉有物。
现代文：怀瑶用棍子戳那小洞，戳进去有几尺深，发现里面有东西。
English: He poked the small hole with a stick. It was a few feet deep, and he found something inside.

古文：乃掘视之，得犬子，雌雄各一，目犹未开，形大于常犬。
现代文：于是就掘开土查看，得到小狗两只，一雌一雄，眼睛还没睁开，体型比平常的狗大。
English: So he dug up the dirt and got two puppies, one female and one male, their eyes were not yet open, and they were larger than normal dogs.

古文：哺之，而食。
现代文：给它们喂奶，它们就吃了。
English: You give them milk and they eat it.

古文：左右咸往观焉。
现代文：左邻右舍都去看这小狗。
English: Neighbors came from all over to see the puppy.

古文：长老或云： 此名 犀犬， 得之者，令家富昌，宜当养之。 
现代文：有的老人说： 这叫做犀犬，得到它的人可以发家致富，所以应该好好喂养它。 
English: Some old people said, "It's called a rhinoceros, and people who get it can become rich, so you should feed it well."

古文：以目未开，还置窍中，覆以磨砻，宿昔发视，左右无孔，遂失所在。
现代文：因为小狗眼睛还没有睁开，所以怀瑶又把它们放回到洞中去了，还用磨盘把洞盖好。过了不久，他打开磨盘去察看，已经不见了，左右也没有洞。
English: As the puppy's eyes had not yet opened, the father-in-law put them back into the hole, and covered the hole with a grinder. Soon afterwards, he opened the grinder to have a look, and they were gone, and there were no holes left or right.

古文：瑶家积年无他祸幅。
现代文：怀瑶家中多年来也没有什么其他的灾祸和幸福。
English: There has been no other misfortune or happiness in the Huaiyu family for many years.

古文：至太兴中，吴郡太守张懋，闻斋内床下犬声。求而不得。既而地坼，有二犬子，取而养之，皆死。
现代文：到太兴年间，吴郡太守张懋，听见书房里床下有狗叫声，去找却找不到，不久那块地就裂开了，有两只小狗在里面。张懋取出喂养它们，结果都死了。
English: During the Taixing years, the Wu County magistrate Zhang Xuan heard a dog barking under a bed in his study. He went to look for it but couldn't find it. Soon, the ground cracked open and two puppies were inside. Zhang Xuan took them out to feed them, but they all died.

古文：其后懋为吴兴兵沈充所杀。
现代文：后来张懋被吴兴郡的兵卒沈充杀了。
English: Later, Zhang Qian was killed by a soldier from Wuxing County, Shen Chong.

古文：尸子曰： 地中有犬，名曰 地狼； 有人，名曰 无伤。 
现代文：《尸子》说： 地下有狗，名字叫做地狼；地下有人，名字叫做无伤。 
English: "The Corpse" said: There is a dog underground, its name is the Ground Wolf; there is a person underground, his name is No Injury.

古文：夏鼎志曰： 掘地而得狗，名曰 贾； 掘地而得豚，名曰 邪； 掘地而得人；名曰 聚：  聚 无伤也。 
现代文：《夏鼎志》说： 掘地而得到狗，叫做贾；掘地而得到猪，叫做邪，掘地而得到人，叫做聚。聚，就是无伤。
English: "Xia Ding Zhi" said: digging up the earth and getting a dog is called Jia; digging up the earth and getting a pig is called evil; digging up the earth and getting a person is called poly. Poly is unharmed.

古文：此物之自然，无谓鬼神而怪之。
现代文：这些都是天然的东西，不要认为是鬼神而感到奇怪。
English: These are all natural things, don't be surprised if you think they are ghosts.

古文：然则 贾 与 地狼 名异，其实一物也。
现代文：不过贾与地狼，名称不同，实际上它们是同一样东西。 
English: However, Jia and the Ground Wolf have different names, but they are actually the same thing.

古文：淮南毕万曰： 千岁羊肝，化为 地宰； 蟾蜍得 ， 卒时为 鹑。  
现代文：《淮南万毕》说： 上千岁的羊肝，变成地宰；癞蛤蟆得到茭白，死的时候就变成鹌鹑。 
English: "Huainan Wanbi" said: The thousand-year-old sheep's liver becomes the slaughterer; the cocoon becomes the cocoon when it turns white, and the cocoon becomes the cocoon when it dies.

古文：此皆因气化以相感而成也。
现代文：这都是因为气质的变化而使它们互相感应而变成的啊。
English: It's all because of temperamental changes that cause them to interact with each other.

古文：吴诸葛恪为丹阳太守，尝出猎，两山之间，有物如小儿，伸手欲引人。
现代文：吴郡人诸葛恪任丹阳太守，有一次他出去打猎，看见在两座山之间，有一样东西像个小孩，伸出手来想拉人。
English: Zhuge, a native of Wuxi County, once went hunting and saw something between two mountains that looked like a child reaching out to pull someone.

古文：恪令伸之，乃引去故地。
现代文：诸葛恪就让它把手伸出来，然后就拉着它的手使它离开了原来的地方。
English: Zhuge Ke then asked it to put its hand out, and then he pulled its hand and made it leave the original place.

古文：去故地，即死。
现代文：那东西一离开原来的地方就死了。
English: That thing died as soon as it left its original spot.

古文：既而参佐问其故，以为神明。
现代文：事情过后，部下问诸葛恪这是什么缘故，认为他像神一样能通达事理。
English: After the incident, Zhuge's subordinates asked Zhuge what the reason was, thinking that he was as knowledgeable as a god.

古文：恪曰： 此事在白泽图内；曰： 两山之间，其精如小儿，见人，则伸手欲引人，名曰 傒囊， 引去故地，则死。 
现代文：诸葛格说： 这事在《白泽图》内有记载，《白泽图》说： 两座山之间，那精怪像小孩，看见人就伸出手来想拉人，它的名字叫做傒囊。拉着它离开原来的地方它就会死去。 
English: Zhugegege said: This matter is recorded in the "White Zeta Chart." The "White Zeta Chart" says: Between two mountains, that creature is like a child. When it sees a person, it reaches out its hand to pull the person. Its name is the cocoon. If it is pulled away from its original place, it will die.

古文：无谓神明而异之。诸君偶未见耳。 
现代文：你们不要认为我神通广大而感到奇怪，各位只是偶然没有见到这记载罢了。 
English: You should not be surprised that I have a wide range of supernatural powers, you just haven't seen this record by chance.

古文：王莽建国四年，池阳有小人景，长一尺余，或乘车，或步行，操持万物，大小各自相称，三日乃止。
现代文：王莽建国四年，池阳县出现小人的影子，长一尺多，有的乘车，有的步行，手里拿着各种东西，东西的大小也都与小人相配，这些小人影子出现了三天才消失。
English: In the fourth year of Wang Mang's founding of the People's Republic of China, the shadow of a villain appeared in Chiyang County. It was more than a foot long. Some were riding in a car, some were walking, holding various things in their hands. The size of the things also matched the shadow of the villain. The shadow of the villain appeared for three days before disappearing.

古文：莽甚恶之。
现代文：王莽对这些小人十分憎恶。
English: Wang Mang was very disgusted.

古文：自后盗贼日甚，莽竟被杀。
现代文：从此以后强盗一天比一天多，王莽最后被杀死。
English: From then on, the robbers increased day by day, and Wang Mang was finally killed.

古文：管子曰： 涸泽数百岁，谷之不徙，水之不绝者，生 庆忌。 
现代文：《管子》说： 干枯的湖泽经过几百年，山谷没有移位、水源没有断绝的，这里面就会主出水怪庆忌。
English: "Pipe" said: If a dry lake has been stagnant for hundreds of years, the valley has not shifted, and the water source has not been cut off, there will be a water monster in it.

古文： 庆忌 者，其状若人，其长四寸，衣黄衣，冠黄冠，戴黄盖，乘小马，好疾驰，以其名呼之，可使千里外一日反报。 
现代文：庆忌这种怪物，他们的形状像人，身长四寸，穿着黄色的衣服，戴着黄色的帽子，打着黄色的华盖，乘坐着小马拉的车，喜欢飞快地奔驰。用他的名字叫他，可以让他在千里以外当天赶回来。 
English: Celebrate this monster, they are shaped like people, four inches long, wearing yellow clothes, wearing a yellow hat, wearing a yellow bonnets, riding a horse-drawn carriage, like to drive fast. Call him by his name, let him come back the same day from thousands of miles away.

古文：然池阳之景者，或 庆忌 也乎。
现代文：这样说来，那池阳县的小人影子，或许就是庆忌么？
English: In this way, is the shadow of the villain in Chiyang County perhaps a cause for celebration?

古文：又曰： 涸小水精，生 蚳。  
现代文：《管子》又说： 干枯的河川中的小水怪，则是从蚳那里产生的。
English: "Pipe" also said: The small water monsters in the dry rivers are produced from the earthworms.

古文： 蚳 者，一头而两身，其状若蛇，长八尺，以其名呼之，可使取鱼鳖。
现代文：蚳，长着一个头两个身体，它的形状像蛇，身长八尺。拿它的名字呼唤它，可以让它抓鱼鳖。 
English: A dragonfly with two heads and two bodies, it is shaped like a snake and is eight feet long. If you call it by its name, you can get it to catch fish.

古文：晋，扶风杨道和，夏于田中，值雨，至桑树下，霹雳下击之，道和以锄格折其股，遂落地，不得去。
现代文：晋朝扶风郡的杨道和，夏天在田间干活的时候遇上下丽，就到桑树下躲雨，霹雳神下来打他，杨道和就用锄头来抵抗，打断它的大腿，就落在了地上，不能离去了。
English: Yang Daowhe of Fufeng County in the Jin Dynasty encountered a thunderstorm while working in the fields in the summer. He went under the mulberry tree to shelter from the rain. The thunder god came down and hit him. Yang Daowhe used a hoe to resist, broke its thigh, and fell to the ground, unable to leave.

古文：唇如丹，目如镜，毛角长三寸，余状似六畜，头似狝猴。
现代文：这霹雳神嘴唇像丹砂，眼睛像镜子，长毛的角长三寸多，形体像六畜，头像猕猴。
English: This dragon god's lips are like fine sand, his eyes are like mirrors, his long horns are more than three inches long, his body is like a six-legged animal, and his head is like a macaque monkey.

古文：秦时，南方有 落头民， 其头能飞。
现代文：秦朝时，南方有一种落头人，他们的头能飞。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, there was a type of headless man in the south whose head could fly.

古文：其种人部有祭祀，号曰 虫落， 故因取名焉，吴时，将军朱桓，得一婢，每夜卧后，头辄飞去。
现代文：这种人的都落内有祭祀，叫做 虫落 ，所以这部落也就取名叫 虫落 。三国孙吴时，将军朱桓得到一个婢女，每天夜里睡觉后，头就飞出去。
English: When the Three Kingdoms were ruled by Sun Wu, General Zhu Huan got a servant girl, and every night when she went to sleep, her head would fly out.

古文：或从狗窦，或从天窗中出入，以耳为翼，将晓，复还。
现代文：她的头或者从狗洞中进出，或者从天窗中进出，用耳朵作翅膀。
English: Her head either pops in and out of a dog hole or a skylight, using her ears as wings.

古文：数数如此，傍人怪之，夜中照视，唯有身无头，其体微冷，气息裁属。乃蒙之以被。
现代文：快天亮的时候，她的头再飞回来。接二连三地老是这样，旁边的人便感到很奇怪，就在夜里点了灯去看那婢女，见她只有身体没有头，她的身体稍微冷一些，呼吸仅勉强能接得上，人们就用被子把她的身体盖住了。
English: When it was almost dawn, her head flew back again. This happened again and again, and the people around her felt very strange, so they lit a lamp in the night to see the maid, and saw that she only had a body without a head, her body was slightly colder, her breath could only be barely caught, and they covered her body with a quilt.

古文：至晓，头还，碍被不得安，两三度，堕地。噫咤甚愁，体气甚急，状若将死。
现代文：到拂晓时，她的头回来了，因为被子遮住了身体，头就不能安上去了，两三次掉在地上，那头叹息着十分愁苦，而身体的呼吸很急促，样子好像快要死了。
English: At dawn, her head came back, and because the quilt covered her body, she couldn't lift it, and it fell to the ground two or three times. Her head was sighing very sadly, and her body was breathing very fast, as if she were about to die.

古文：乃去被，头复起，傅颈。有顷，和平。
现代文：于是人们就拿掉被子，头又飞起来，安附在脖子上，过了一会儿就平静了。
English: So people take off the covers, the head flies up again, attaches to the neck, and after a while it calms down.

古文：桓以为大怪，畏不敢畜，乃放遣之。
现代文：朱桓以为这婢女是个大妖怪，吓得不敢再收养她了，就打发她走了。
English: Zhu Huan thought that this maid was a big monster, and was too scared to adopt her again, so he sent her away.

古文：既而详之，乃知天性也。
现代文：过后详细地去了解她的情况，才知道这是她的天性。
English: It was only when I went to find out more about her that I realised it was her nature.

古文：时南征大将，亦往往得之。
现代文：当时南征的大将军，也往往得到这种人。
English: At that time, the generals of the Southern Expedition often got this kind of person.

古文：又尝有覆以铜盘者，头不得进：遂死。
现代文：又曾经有人用铜盘去盖住那飞走了头的脖子，头不能接上去，就死了。
English: Another time, someone used a copper plate to cover the neck of a head that had flown away. The head could not be attached, and the person died.

古文：江，汉之域，有 貙人， 其先，廪君之苗裔也，能化为虎。
现代文：长江和汉水之间一带地方，有一种人。他们的祖先，是禀君的后代，他们能变成老虎。
English: In the area between the Yangtze River and the Han River, there is a kind of people. Their ancestors are descendants of Ying Jun. They can turn into tigers.

古文：长沙所属蛮县东高居民，曾作槛捕虎，槛发，明日众人共往格之，见一亭长，赤帻，大冠，在槛中坐。
现代文：长沙郡所属的蛮县东高口的居民，曾经做了木栅栏来捕捉老虎。栅栏的机关被弹开了，第二天，人们便一起去打老虎，却看见一个亭长，包着红头巾，戴着大帽子，在木栅栏中坐着。
English: The residents of Donggaokou, Mugu County, which belongs to Changsha County, once made a wooden fence to catch tigers. The mechanism of the fence was bounced open, and the next day, people went to fight tigers, but saw a pavilion leader, wrapped in a red bandana and wearing a large hat, sitting in the wooden fence.

古文：因问 君何以入此中？ 
现代文：人们就问： 您怎么到这里面来了。 
English: People ask: how did you get into this?

古文：亨长大怒曰： 昨忽被县召，夜避雨，遂误入此中。
现代文：亭长十分恼火地说： 昨天我忽然被县里召见，夜里躲雨，就误跑到这里面来了。
English: The head of the pavilion was very annoyed and said, "Yesterday, I was suddenly summoned by the prefectural government. I was taking shelter from the rain at night, and I ran into here by mistake.

古文：急出我。 
现代文：请你们赶快放我出去！ 
English: Please let me out of here!

古文：曰： 君见召，不当有文书耶？ 
现代文：人们又问： 您被召见，不是应该有文书吗？ 
English: People also asked: You have been summoned, shouldn't there be a document?

古文：即出怀中召文书。于是即出之。
现代文：亭长就从怀里掏出召见他的文书，于是人们就把他放了出来。
English: The chief steward took out from his arms the document summoning him, and the people set him free.

古文：寻视，乃化为虎，上山走。
现代文：一会儿再仔细看着，他却变成了老虎，跑上山去了。
English: After looking at him carefully for a while, he turned into a tiger and ran up the mountain.

古文：或云： 貙，虎化为人，如着紫葛衣，其足无踵，虎，有五指者，皆是貙。 
现代文：有人说： 虎变成人，喜欢穿紫色的葛布衣，他的脚没有脚跟。老虎脚上有五个指头的，都是。 
English: Some people say: The tiger turned into a man, likes to wear purple quilted clothes, his feet have no heel. The tiger has five toes on its feet, all of them.

古文：蜀中西南高山之上，有物，与猴相类，长七尺，能作人行，善走逐人，名曰 猳国， 一名 马化， 或曰 玃猿。 
现代文：蜀国内西南部的高山上，有一种动物，和猴子相似，身长七尺，能像人一样站起来走路，善于奔跑追人，它们的名称叫 猳国 ，又叫 马化 ，又叫 玃猿 。
English: In the high mountains in the southwestern part of Shou, there is an animal that is similar to a monkey. It is seven feet long, can stand up and walk like a human, and is good at running and chasing people. Their names are "Changguo," "Mahua," and "Changzai."

古文：伺道行妇女有美者，辄盗取，将去，人不得知。
现代文：它们经常探察路过的妇女，看有漂亮的，就强抢带走，人们不知道它们究竟把这些美女带到了什么地方。
English: They often look for women who are passing by, and if they see a pretty one, they snatch her away. People don't know where exactly they have taken these beautiful women.

古文：若有行人经过其旁，皆以长绳相引，犹故不免。
现代文：即使有些过路人经过它们的旁边时，都用长绳子互相牵着走，还是不能避免被它们抢去。
English: Even if some passers-by hold each other with long ropes when they pass by, they can't avoid being snatched by them.

古文：此物能别男女气臭，故取女，男不取也。
现代文：这种动物能辨别男女的气味，所以它们只抢女的，不抢男的。
English: This animal can distinguish the smell of men and women, so they only snatch women, not men.

古文：若取得人女，则为家室。
现代文：如果抢到了女子，就把她当作妻子。
English: If you win a woman, you are to treat her as your wife.

古文：其无子者，终身不得还。
现代文：那当了妻子不生孩子的，就到死也不能回来了。
English: If a man's wife does not bear him children, he cannot return to her until he dies.

古文：十年之后，形皆类之。意亦迷惑，不复思归。
现代文：十年以后，这些被抢去的妇女，形体也就和它们类似了，思想也迷惑了，不再想回家了。
English: Ten years later, the women who had been robbed of their homes resembled them physically and mentally, and they no longer wanted to go home.

古文：若有子者，辄抱送还其家，产子，皆如人形。
现代文：至于生了孩子的，它们总是抱着孩子连同母亲送还给她的家。
English: When they have a baby, they always carry the child with the mother back to her home.

古文：有不养者，其母辄死；故惧怕之，无敢不养。
现代文：养出来的孩子都像人的形状，如果回家后不抚养孩子，那么这孩子的母亲就要被搞死，所以母亲们很害怕，没有敢不抚养的。
English: The children they raise are all shaped like humans. If they don't raise the child when they get home, then the child's mother will be killed, so the mothers are very scared and don't dare not to raise the child.

古文：及长，与人不异。皆以杨为姓。
现代文：等到这些小孩长大，和人没有什么不同，都把 杨 当作姓。
English: When these children grow up, they are no different from other people, and they all take Yang as their surname.

古文：故今蜀中西南多诸杨，率皆是 国  马化 之子孙也。
现代文：所以现在蜀国内西南部多姓杨的人家，他们大概都是猳国、马化的子孙。
English: Therefore, most of the people with the surname Yang in the southwestern part of Shou are probably the descendants of Shao and Ma.

古文：临川间诸山有妖物，来常因大风雨，有声如啸，能射人，其所着者，有顷，便肿，大毒。
现代文：临川郡内那些山上有一种怪物，它们来临的时候常常因随着狂风暴雨，发出的声音很悠长，能射击人。被它们射中的地方，一会儿就肿起来了，非常毒。
English: There is a kind of monster in those mountains in Linchuan County. When they come, often accompanied by violent storms and rain, the sound they make is very long and can shoot people. The place they hit swells up in a short time and is very poisonous.

古文：有雌雄：雄急，而雌缓；急者不过半日间，缓者经宿。
现代文：这种怪物有雌有雄，被雄的射中毒性来得快，而被雌的射中毒性来得慢。毒性快的不超过半天时间就死了，毒性慢的可以过一夜。
English: This kind of monster has a female and a male, and the toxicity of the male's shot comes quickly, while the toxicity of the female's shot comes slowly. The toxicity of the fast shot dies in no more than half a day, and the toxicity of the slow shot can last overnight.

古文：其旁人常有以救之，救之少迟，则死。
现代文：那山边的人常常有办法抢救被怪物射伤的人，抢救得稍微晚了一点，受伤的人就死了。
English: People on the other side of the mountain often have the means to rescue someone who has been shot by a monster, but the rescue is a little late, and the injured person dies.

古文：俗名曰 刀劳鬼。 
现代文：民间都把这种怪物叫做 刀劳鬼 。
English: Folks call this kind of monster a "toil ghost."

古文：故外书云： 鬼神者，其祸福发扬之验于世者也。 
现代文：所以野书上说： 鬼神，是祸福发散并在社会上得到验证的东西。 
English: Therefore, the field book said: Ghosts and gods are things that disperse misfortune and fortune and have been verified in society.

古文：老子曰： 昔之得一者：天得一以清，地得一以宁，神得一以灵，谷得一以盈，侯王得一以为天下贞。 
现代文：《老子》说： 过去得到一的有：天得到一而清爽，地得到一而安宁；神得到一页灵验，深谷得到一而盈满；侯王得到一，就能成为天下的君长。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: In the past, if you get one, the sky will be refreshed, the earth will be calm, the gods will be enlightened, the valleys will be filled, and the prince will become the ruler of the world.

古文：然则天地鬼神，与我并生者也；气分则性异，域别则形殊，莫能相兼也。
现代文：这样看来，那么天地鬼神，都是和我们并存的东西。气质有区别那么天性就不同，界域有区别那么形体就不同，没有什么东西能兼有不同的天性形体。
English: From this perspective, heaven and earth, ghosts and gods are all things that coexist with us. If there is a difference in temperament, then nature is different, if there is a difference in boundaries, then the body is different, and nothing can have different natural forms.

古文：生者主阳，死者主阴，性之所托，各安其生，太阴之中，怪物存焉。
现代文：活的东西以阳气为主，死的东西以阴气为主，天性所依附的东西，各自安存于它们所生存之处。极盛的阴气之中，怪物就生存在里面。
English: Living things are dominated by yang, dead things are dominated by yin, and things that are naturally attached to each other exist peacefully in the place where they live. In the midst of the greatest yin, monsters live inside.

古文：越地深山中有鸟，大如鸠，青色，名曰 冶鸟， 穿大树，作巢，如五六升器，户口径数寸：周饰以土垭，赤白相分，状如射侯。
现代文：越国一带的深山中有一种鸟，大小像鸠，青颜色，名叫 冶鸟 。它们在大村上打洞做窠，那洞就像五六升大的容器，洞口的直径有几寸，洞口周围用泥土垒起小堤障作为装饰，那泥上红的白的互相分开，形状就像射礼中用的箭靶子。
English: There is a kind of bird in the deep mountains around Yueguo, the size of which is like a dragonfly and the color of which is blue, and it is called a "metalliferous bird." They make a hole in the large village to make a cocoon. The hole is like a five- or six-liter container. The diameter of the hole is a few inches. A small embankment is used as a decoration around the hole. The muddy red and white parts are separated from each other, and the shape is like an arrow target used in shooting.

古文：伐木者见此树，即避之去；或夜冥不见鸟，鸟亦知人不见，便鸣唤曰： 咄咄上去！ 
现代文：砍代树木的人看见这种树，就避开它。有时候天黑了人看不见鸟，鸟也知道人看不见它，它们就对人叫唤说： 咄，咄，上去。 
English: Sometimes when it's dark, you can't see the birds, and the birds know you can't see them, so they call out to you, "Come on, come on, come on."

古文：明日便宜急上； 咄咄下去！ 
现代文：明天便应该赶快到上面去砍伐。如果鸟叫唤说： 咄，咄，下去。 
English: Tomorrow we should hurry up and cut it down. If a bird calls out, "Come on, come on, let's go."

古文：明日便宜急下；若不使去，但言笑而不已者，人可止伐也。
现代文：明天就应该赶快到下面去砍伐。如果那鸟不让你上去或下去，只是谈笑不停，人们就可以停止砍伐了。
English: If the bird doesn't let you go up or down, but just keeps talking and laughing, people can stop cutting.

古文：若有秽恶及其所止者，则有虎通夕来守，人不去，便伤害人。
现代文：如果有污秽恶浊的东西弄到了它栖息的地方，那么就有老虎通宵来守着，人如果不离开，老虎便会伤害人。
English: If something filthy and vile has made it to the roosting place, then there is a tiger to guard it all night, and if you do not leave, the tiger will hurt you.

古文：此鸟，白日见其形，是鸟也；夜听其鸣，亦鸟也；时有观乐者，便作人形，长三尺，至涧中取石蟹；就人炙之，人不可犯也。
现代文：这种鸟，白天看见它的形状，是鸟；夜里听见它的鸣叫，也是鸟；有时候它们出外观赏游乐，便变成人的模样，身长三尺，到山涧中去抓石蟹，把它放在火上烤来吃，这时人们不可以去触犯它们。
English: This bird, when its shape is seen during the day, is a bird; when its song is heard at night, it is also a bird; sometimes, when they go out to enjoy themselves, they become human-like, three feet long, and go to the mountains to catch stone crabs and roast them on the fire to eat. At this time, people are not allowed to touch them.

古文：越人谓此鸟是 越祝 之祖也。
现代文：越国的人说这种乌是越国巫祝的始祖。
English: The people of Yue said that this Wu was the progenitor of the Wushu of Yue.

古文：南海之外，有鲛人，水居，如鱼，不废织绩。
现代文：南海郡外的大海中，有一种鲛人，像鱼一样住在水中，她们不停地纺织着。
English: In the sea off Nanhai County, there is a kind of dragonfly that lives in the water like a fish. They are constantly weaving.

古文：其眼，泣，则能出珠。
现代文：她们的眼睛在哭泣时就能流出珍珠。
English: Their eyes shed pearls when they cry.

古文：庐江耽，枞阳二县境，上有大青小青黑居山野之中，时闻哭声多者至数十人，男女大小，如始丧者。
现代文：庐江郡、枞阳二县的边界上，传说有大青、小青隐居着，所以那山野之中，时常可以听见哭声，哭声多的时候达几十人，男女老少的哭声都有，好像刚死了人一样。
English: On the border of the two counties of Lijiang County and Shenyang, there is a legend that there is a hermit who lives in seclusion. Therefore, in the mountains and fields, you can often hear crying. When there is a lot of crying, there are dozens of people, both men and women, young and old, crying, as if they had just died.

古文：邻人惊骇，至彼奔赴，常不见人。
现代文：住在附近的人都非常惊惧，就奔到那里，却常常看不见人。
English: People who live nearby were very frightened and rushed there, but they often couldn't see anyone.

古文：然于哭地，必有死丧。
现代文：但在哭的地方一定有人死亡。
English: But where there is weeping, there must be death.

古文：率声若多，则为大家；声若小，则为小家。
现代文：一般说来，哭声听上去大的就是大户人家死了人，哭声听上去小的就是小户人家死了人。
English: Generally speaking, the cry that sounds big is the death of a large family, and the cry that sounds small is the death of a small family.

古文：庐江大山之间，有 山都， 似人，裸身，见人便走。
现代文：庐江郡的大山之中，有一种野兽叫山都，长得像人，但赤身裸体，看见人就逃跑。
English: In the mountains of Lijiang County, there is a beast called a mountain goat. It looks like a human, but it is naked and runs away when it sees a human.

古文：有男，女，可长四五丈，能相唤，常在幽昧之中，似魑魅鬼物。
现代文：它们也有男女的分别，大约长四五丈，能互相呼唤，常常在黑暗之中活动，就像魑魅怪物那样。
English: They also have a male and female difference, about four or five feet long, can call each other, and often move in the dark, like a disenchanted monster.

古文：汉光武中平中，有物处于江水，其名曰 蜮， 一曰 短狐。 能含沙射人。
现代文：汉朝中平年间，有一种怪物生活在长江之中，它的名字叫 蜮 ，又叫 短狐 ，能含沙射人。
English: During the middle of the Han Dynasty, there was a monster that lived in the Yangtze River. Its name was, also known as the short fox, and it could shoot people with sand.

古文：所中者，则身体筋急，头痛，发热。剧者至死。
现代文：被它射中的人，就会全身抽筋、头痛发热，严重的甚至死亡。
English: People who are hit by it will suffer from cramps all over the body, headaches, fever, and even death.

古文：江人以术方抑之，则得沙石于肉中。诗所谓 为鬼，为蜮， 则不可测也。
现代文：长江边上的人用方术治它，就在肉中找到了沙石。这就是《诗经》所就的 你如果是鬼或是蜮，那就不堪入目 中的 蜮 啊。
English: The people on the edge of the Yangtze River used magic to cure it, and found sandstone in the flesh. This is what the "Song of Songs" is based on. If you are a ghost or a dragonfly, then you are an ugly dragonfly.

古文：今俗谓之 溪毒。 
现代文：现在民间把它称为 溪毒 。
English: Now people call it "stream poison."

古文：先儒以为男女同川而浴，淫女，为主乱气所生也。
现代文：古代的儒者认为男女在同一条河川中洗澡，淫乱的女子占了上风，那淫乱的元气就会产生这种怪物。
English: The ancient Confucians believed that men and women bathed in the same river, and that lustful women had the upper hand, and that lustful energy would produce this monster.

古文：汉，永昌郡不违县，有禁水；水有毒气，唯十一月，十三月差可渡涉，自正月至十月不可渡；渡辄病杀人，其气中有恶物，不见其形，其似有声。
现代文：汉代永昌郡不韦县有条禁水，水里有毒气，只有十一月、十二月勉强可以渡过河去。从正月到十月，不可以渡河，如果渡河，就会生病，甚至死人。那毒气中有一种邪恶的物体，看不见它的形状，但有声音，好像有什么东西在投掷似的。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a water ban in Buwei County, Yongchang County. There was poisonous gas in the water, and it was only possible to cross the river in November and December. From the first month to October, it was not possible to cross the river. If you crossed the river, you would get sick and even die. There was an evil object in the poisonous gas. You could not see its shape, but there was a sound, as if something was throwing it.

古文：如有所投击内中木，则折；中人，则害。
现代文：这毒气中的物体打中树木，树木就被打断，打中了人，人就被杀害。
English: The object in the gas hits the tree, the tree is broken, hits the person, the person is killed.

古文：士俗号为 鬼弹。 
现代文：当地的人们称它为 鬼弹 。
English: Locals call it the "ghost bomb."

古文：余外妇姊夫蒋士，有佣客，得疾，下血；医以中蛊，乃密以蘘荷根布席下，不使知，乃狂言曰： 食我虫者，乃张小小也。 
现代文：我外妇的姐夫蒋士，家里有个佣人。得了一种便血的疾病。医生认为他中了蛊毒，于是就偷偷地用蘘荷的根放在病人的席子下，不让病人知道。病人就胡言乱语地说： 吃掉我的蛊的，就是张小小。 
English: My mother-in-law's brother-in-law, Chiang Shih, who had a servant at home, came down with a bloody diarrhea disease. The doctor thought he was poisoned by the centipede, so he secretly used the root of the centipede to put it under the patient's mat without letting the patient know. The patient then said in gibberish: "The one who ate my centipede is Zhang Xiao Xiao."

古文：乃呼 小小亡 云，今世攻蛊，多用蘘荷根，往往验。
现代文：于是就去叫张小小，张小小已逃走了。现在治疗蛊毒，大多用蘘荷根，往往很灵验。
English: So he went to call Zhang Xiao Xiao, but Zhang Xiao Xiao had already fled. Now, most of the treatment for poisoning is done with ginger root, which is often very effective.

古文：蘘荷，或谓嘉草。
现代文：蘘荷又叫做嘉草。
English: It is also known as Jia Cao.

