古文：文帝下
现代文：文帝下
English: Emperor Wen

古文：魏大统元年春正月己酉，进太祖督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台，改封安定郡王。
现代文：魏大统元年春正月二日，太祖升任督中外诸军事、录尚书事、大行台，改封安定郡王。
English: On the 2nd day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the great ancestor was promoted to the military governor of the Middle and Foreign Provinces, recorded the records, and the grand march, and changed his title to the stable county king.

古文：太祖固让王及录尚书事，魏帝许之，乃改封安定郡公。
现代文：太祖坚持不受郡王之封及录尚书事之职，魏帝答应，于是改封安定郡公。
English: The great-grandfather insisted that he would not accept the title of the county king and the duty of recording the affairs of the county. Emperor Wei agreed, so he changed his title to the county governor of Anping.

古文：东魏遣其将司马子如寇潼关，太祖军霸上，子如乃回军自蒲津寇华州，刺史王罴击走之。
现代文：东魏派将领司马子如侵犯潼关，太祖驻军霸上，司马子如撤军，从蒲津侵犯华州，被刺史王罴击退。
English: If the Eastern Wei faction's general Sima Zi invaded Shaoguan, Taizu would garrison and dominate the region. If Sima Zi withdrew, he would invade Huazhou from Pudong, but he was repulsed by the assassin Shi Wangqi.

古文：三月，太祖以戎役屡兴，民吏劳弊，乃命所司斟酌今古，参考变通，可以益国利民便时适治者，为二十四条新制，奏魏帝行之。
现代文：三月，由于战争、劳役不息，官民劳顿困苦，太祖就命令部属参酌古今成例，加以变通，选择可以益国利民，合乎农时，宜于施政的，定出二十四条新制，奏请魏帝推行。
English: In March, due to the war, continuous labor service, and the hardships of the government and the people, the great-grandfather ordered the subordinates to take into account the ancient and modern precedents, to be flexible, and to choose what could benefit the country and the people, suit the agricultural time, and be suitable for governance. He set out 24 new systems and asked Emperor Wei to implement them.

古文：二年春三月，东魏袭陷夏州，留其将张琼、许和守之。
现代文：二年春三月，东魏攻陷夏州，留将领张琼、许和镇守。
English: In the spring and March of the second year, the Eastern Wei Dynasty invaded and occupied Xiazhou, leaving Zhang Qiong and Xu He, the town guards, in charge.

古文：夏五月，秦州刺史、建中王万俟普拨率所部叛入东魏。
现代文：夏五月，秦州刺史、建中王万俟普拨率领部属叛变，窜入东魏。
English: In the summer of May, Qin Zhou Zhi Shi and Jianzhong Wang Wanzhong Pujiao led a mutiny and broke into the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：太祖勒轻骑追之，至河北千余里，不及而还。
现代文：太祖指挥轻装骑兵追赶，在黄河以北追赶一千余里，没有追上，将军队撤回。
English: The great-grandfather commanded the light cavalry to chase, and chased more than a thousand miles north of the Yellow River, but did not catch up, and withdrew the army.

古文：三年春正月，东魏寇龙门，屯军蒲阪，造三道浮桥度河。
现代文：三年春正月，东魏侵犯龙门，驻军蒲坂，造三道浮桥，打算渡过黄河。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, the Eastern Wei invaded Longmen, stationed troops in Pusan, built three floating bridges, and planned to cross the Yellow River.

古文：又遣其将窦泰趣潼关，高敖曹围洛州。
现代文：又派将领窦泰进攻潼关，高敖曹包围洛州。
English: He also sent the general Dou Tai to attack Shaoguan, and Gao Bing Cao to encircle Luozhou.

古文：太祖出军广阳，召诸将曰： 贼今掎吾三面，又造桥于河，示欲必渡，是欲缀吾军，使窦泰得西入耳。
现代文：太祖从广阳出军，召集众将说： 如今贼军从三面拖住我军，又在黄河上架起浮桥，显示定要渡河，这是想吸引我军，使窦泰乘机西进。
English: The great-grandfather marched out from Guangyang and gathered the generals and said, "Nowadays, the bandit army is dragging our army from three sides, and they have set up a floating bridge on the Yellow River to show that they are determined to cross the river. This is to attract our army and make Dou Tai take the opportunity to advance westward."

古文：久与相持，其计得行，非良策也。
现代文：我军与贼军久久相持不下，贼军诡计即可得逞，这不是好的计策。
English: Our army cannot hold out against the bandit army for a long time, and the bandit army's trick can succeed. This is not a good strategy.

古文：且欢起兵以来，泰每为先驱，其下多锐卒，屡胜而骄。
现代文：况且高欢起兵以来，窦泰必任先锋，其部下多精锐士卒，屡屡告捷而骄傲自满。
English: Moreover, since Gao Huan raised an army, Dou Tai must be the vanguard, and his subordinates are mostly elite soldiers, who have repeatedly achieved success and are proud and complacent.

古文：今出其不意，袭之必克。
现代文：如今出其不意，突施袭击，一定可击败他。
English: Now, by surprise, with a surprise attack, we can definitely defeat him.

古文：克泰则欢不战而自走矣。 
现代文：一旦击败窦泰，高欢必不战而自退。 
English: Once Dou Tai is defeated, Gao Huan will retreat without a fight.

古文：诸将咸曰： 贼在近，舍而远袭，事若蹉跌，悔无及也。 
现代文：诸将都说： 贼军在近处，舍弃近敌而奔袭远贼，倘若失利，后悔就来不及了。 
English: All the generals said: The bandits are close by, abandon the nearby enemy and attack the distant bandits. If they fail, they will not have time to regret it.

古文：太祖曰： 欢前再袭潼关，吾军不过霸上。
现代文：太祖说： 前时高欢再度袭击潼关，我军未过霸上。
English: The great-grandfather said: Recently, Gaohuan attacked Shaoguan again, but our army did not take over.

古文：今者大来，兵未出郊。
现代文：如今敌人大举来犯，而我军尚未走出京郊。
English: Now the enemy has come in large numbers, and our army has not yet left the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：贼顾谓吾但自守耳，无远斗意。又狃于得志，有轻我之心。
现代文：贼人以为我军只图自守，并无远行迎战的打算，又傲慢成性，轻视我军。
English: The thieves thought that our army was only trying to defend itself and had no intention of going to war, and they were arrogant and despised our army.

古文：乘此击之，何往不克。
现代文：乘此进攻，为何不可取胜？
English: With this attack, why can't we win?

古文：贼虽造桥，不能径渡。
现代文：贼军虽已造桥，但无法迅速渡河。
English: Although the bandits had built a bridge, they were unable to cross the river quickly.

古文：此五日中，吾取窦泰必矣。公等勿疑。 
现代文：这五日之内，我必定活捉窦泰。各位不要怀疑。 
English: Within these five days, I will definitely capture Dou Tai alive. Don't doubt it.

古文：庚戌，太祖率骑六千还长安，声言欲保陇右。
现代文：八日，太祖率骑兵六千人返回长安，扬言要保卫陇山以西。
English: On the eighth day, Taizu returned to Chang'an with six thousand cavalry, threatening to defend the west of Lushan.

古文：辛亥，谒帝而潜出军。
现代文：九日，朝见皇帝后，悄悄出兵。
English: On the 9th, after meeting the emperor, he quietly dispatched troops.

古文：癸丑旦，至小关。
现代文：十一日黎明，抵达小关。
English: At dawn on the 11th day, we arrived at Komatsu.

古文：窦泰卒闻军至，惶惧，依山为阵，未及成列，太祖纵兵击破之，尽俘其众万余人。
现代文：窦泰突然听说我军开到，惊慌恐惧，背靠山岗布阵，阵势尚未布好，太祖放手猛攻，大败敌军，将其部众一万余人全部俘虏。
English: Dou Tai suddenly heard that our army had arrived, panicked and feared, backed by the mountains to set up a formation, the formation was not yet ready, the great ancestor let go of the onslaught, defeated the enemy army, and captured all of his more than ten thousand people.

古文：斩泰，传首长安。
现代文：斩杀窦泰，把他的首级传示长安。
English: Execute Dou Tai and send his head to Chang'an.

古文：高敖曹适陷洛州，执刺史泉企，闻泰之殁，焚辎重弃城走。
现代文：高敖曹恰在此时攻陷洛州，捉住刺史泉企，听说窦泰被杀，就焚毁军用物资，弃城而逃。
English: It was at this time that Gao Bing Cao invaded Lozhou and caught the assassin Quan Qi. When he heard that Dou Tai had been killed, he burned military supplies and fled the city.

古文：齐神武亦撤桥而退。
现代文：齐神武也撤桥退兵。
English: Gao Huan also withdrew from the pontoon bridge and retreated.

古文：企子元礼寻复洛州，斩东魏刺史杜密。
现代文：泉企之子泉元礼随即收复洛州，斩东魏刺史杜密。
English: The son of Quanqi, Quan Yuanli, immediately recovered Lozhou and defeated Dong Wei and Shishi Du Mi.

古文：太祖还军长安。
现代文：太祖领军返回长安。
English: Taizu led the army back to Chang'an.

古文：六月，遣仪同于谨取杨氏壁。
现代文：六月，派仪同于谨攻占杨氏壁。
English: In June, the faction took the initiative to seize the Yang's Wall.

古文：太祖请罢行台，帝复申前命，太祖受录尚书事，余固让，乃止。
现代文：太祖请求取消行台之职，魏帝又申明上次的诏命，太祖接受录尚书事一职，对其他职务再三谦让，魏帝同意。
English: The great-great-grandfather requested to cancel the post of marching to Taiwan, and Emperor Wei also affirmed the last imperial decree. The great-great-grandfather accepted the post of record-keeping and repeatedly made concessions on other posts, and Emperor Wei agreed.

古文：秋七月，征兵会咸阳。
现代文：秋七月，征调军队，在咸阳会合。
English: In autumn and July, the army was conscripted and gathered in Xianyang.

古文：八月丁丑，太祖率李弼、独孤信、梁御、赵贵、于谨、若干惠、怡峰、刘亮、王德、侯莫陈崇、李远、达奚武等十二将东伐。
现代文：八月十四日，太祖率领李弼、独孤信、梁御、赵贵、于谨、若干惠、怡峰、刘亮、王直心、侯莫陈崇、李远、达奚武等十二名将领东征。
English: On August 14th, Taizu led 12 generals, including Li Xi, Du Guoxin, Liang Gu, Zhao Gui, Yu Zhen, Guo Hui, Yi Feng, Liu Liang, Wang Zhi Xin, Hou Mo, Chen Chong, Li Yuan, and Dadongwu, on an eastward expedition.

古文：至潼关，太祖乃誓于师曰： 与尔有众，奉天威，诛暴乱。
现代文：抵达潼关后，太祖告诫将士道： 我与你们众将士，上奉天威，诛灭暴乱。
English: After arriving at Shaoguan, the great-grandfather admonished the soldiers: "I and all of you soldiers, by the power of heaven, put down the riot.

古文：惟尔士，整尔甲兵，戒尔戎事，无贪财以轻敌，无暴民以作威。
现代文：你们将士，要整理好自己的盔甲兵器，准备作战，不得因贪财而轻敌，不得害民以逞威。
English: You soldiers, you should tidy up your armor and weapons and prepare for battle. You must not despise the enemy because of greed, and you must not harm the people with arrogance.

古文：用命则有赏，不用命则有戮。
现代文：效力则有赏赐，不效力则有惩罚。
English: Effectiveness is rewarded, ineffectiveness is punished.

古文：尔众士其勉之。 
现代文：各位将士要自我勉励。 
English: All soldiers should encourage themselves.

古文：遣于谨居军前，徇地至盘豆。
现代文：派于谨居大军之前，一路进攻至般木豆。
English: He sent his troops to attack all the way to Huanmuzu before the large army arrived.

古文：东魏将高叔礼守栅不下，谨急攻之，乃降。
现代文：东魏将领高叔礼固守栅栏，攻不进去，于谨加紧进攻，高叔礼投降。
English: The Eastern Wei general Gao Shuli held fast to the fence and could not enter, so he stepped up the attack and Gao Shuli surrendered.

古文：获其戍卒一千，送叔礼于长安。
现代文：俘虏其士卒一千人，将高叔礼送到长安。
English: He captured a thousand of his soldiers and sent Gao Shuli to Chang'an.

古文：戊子，至弘农。
现代文：二十五日，抵达弘农。
English: On the 25th, he arrived in Hongnong.

古文：东魏将高干、陕州刺史李徽伯拒守。
现代文：东魏将领高干、陕州刺史李徽伯固守。
English: The Eastern Wei general Gao Gan, and the Shaanxi statesman Li Huibao were staunchly defended.

古文：于时连雨，太祖乃命诸军冒雨攻之。
现代文：当时连绵多雨，太祖命令各军冒雨进攻。
English: At that time, it rained incessantly, and Taizu ordered all the troops to attack in the rain.

古文：庚寅，城溃，斩徽伯，虏其战士八千。
现代文：二十七日，城墙崩塌，斩李徽伯，俘虏其战士八千人。
English: On the 27th, the city wall collapsed, beheading Li Huibao and capturing eight thousand of his soldiers.

古文：高干走度河，令贺拔胜追擒之，并送长安。
现代文：高干逃走，渡过黄河，令贺拔胜追上捉住，一块押送长安。
English: Gao Gan fled, crossed the Yellow River, let He Baxing catch up with him, and escorted him to Chang'an.

古文：于是宜阳、邵郡皆来归附。
现代文：于是宜阳、邵郡都来归附。
English: As a result, both Yiyang and Shao County were annexed.

古文：先是河南豪杰多聚兵应东魏，至是各率所部来降。
现代文：最初，黄河以南豪杰大多聚兵响应东魏，到这时都率部属前来投降。
English: At first, most of the heroes south of the Yellow River gathered soldiers in response to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and at this time they all led their subordinates to surrender.

古文：齐神武惧，率众十万出壶口，趋蒲阪，将自后土济。
现代文：齐神武害怕，率军十万从壶口出发，向蒲坂推进，准备从后土渡河。
English: Qi Shenwu was afraid, so he led an army of 100,000 from Hukou and pushed toward Pusan, preparing to cross the river from Houdu.

古文：又遣其将高敖曹以三万人出河南。
现代文：又派将领高敖曹率三万人从黄河以南出兵。
English: He also sent General Gao Bing Cao and 30,000 troops from south of the Yellow River.

古文：是岁，关中饥。
现代文：当年，关中饥荒。
English: That year, Guanzhong suffered from famine.

古文：太祖既平弘农，因馆谷五十余日。
现代文：太祖平定弘农后，在当地筹措军粮五十余天。
English: After the great-great-grandfather Pingding Hongnong, he spent more than 50 days in the local area to raise military rations.

古文：时战士不满万人，闻齐神武将度，乃引军入关。
现代文：当时战士不到一万人，听说齐神武即将渡黄河，就领军入据潼关。
English: At that time, there were less than ten thousand soldiers. Hearing that Qi Shenwu was about to cross the Yellow River, he led the army into Zhisheng Pass.

古文：齐神武遂度河，逼华州。
现代文：齐神武渡过黄河，进逼华州。
English: Qi Shenwu crossed the Yellow River and entered Huazhou.

古文：刺史王罴严守。
现代文：刺史王罴严密防守。
English: Sashi Wangya is on the defensive.

古文：知不可攻，乃涉洛，军于许原西。
现代文：齐神武知道无法攻克，就涉过洛水，驻扎在许原以西。
English: Knowing that he could not be defeated, Qi Shenwu waded through Luoshui and stationed himself west of Xuyuan.

古文：太祖据渭南，征诸州兵皆会。
现代文：太祖占据渭水以南，征调各州兵马，均未会合。
English: Taizu occupied the south of Surabaya and conscripted soldiers and horses from all prefectures, but they did not meet.

古文：乃召诸将谓之曰： 高欢越山度河，远来至此，天亡之时也。
现代文：于是召集诸将，对他们说： 高欢翻过高山，渡过黄河，从远处来到这里，这真是上天灭亡他的机会。
English: Then he called together all the generals and said to them: Gao Huan rode across the mountains, crossed the Yellow River, and came here from far away. This is truly Heaven's opportunity to destroy him.

古文：吾欲击之何如？ 
现代文：我打算进攻他，怎么样？ 
English: I'm going to attack him, okay?

古文：诸将咸以众寡不敌，请待欢更西，以观其势。
现代文：诸将都认为敌众我少，难以抵挡，请求等高欢向西再深入一些，以相机行事。
English: The generals all thought that the number of enemies was small and difficult to resist, and requested that Gao Huan go further west and act with a camera.

古文：太祖曰： 欢若得至咸阳，人情转骚扰。
现代文：太祖说： 高欢如果得以抵达咸阳，人心就会骚动。
English: Grandfather said: If Gao Huan can reach Xianyang, the people's hearts will be stirred.

古文：今及其新至，便可击之。 
现代文：如今等他刚到，便可进攻。 
English: Now, as soon as he arrives, he can attack.

古文：即造浮桥于渭，令军人赍三日粮，轻骑度渭，辎重自渭南夹渭而西。
现代文：立即在渭水上建造浮桥，令军人准备三日干粮，骑兵轻装渡过渭水，军用物资从南岸沿渭水西行。
English: Immediately build a pontoon bridge over Surabaya, have the soldiers prepare three days of dry rations, the cavalry cross Surabaya lightly loaded, and the military supplies travel from the south bank along Surabaya to the west.

古文：冬十月壬辰，至沙苑，距齐神武军六十余里。
现代文：冬十月一日，到达沙苑，距离齐神武军营有六十余里。
English: On the first day of October in winter, they arrived at Sha Yuan, more than sixty miles away from the Qi Shenwu military camp.

古文：齐神武闻太祖至，引军来会。
现代文：齐神武听说太祖军到，率兵前来迎战。
English: When Qi Shenwu heard that the Taizu Army had arrived, he led his soldiers to meet the enemy.

古文：癸巳旦，候骑告齐神武军且至。
现代文：二日黎明，巡逻骑兵报告齐神武军将至。
English: At dawn on the second day, the patrol cavalry reported that the Qi Shenwu army was approaching.

古文：太祖召诸将谋之。
现代文：太祖召集诸将商议。
English: The great-grandfather called the generals together for discussion.

古文：李弼曰： 彼众我寡，不可平地置阵。
现代文：李弼说： 敌众我寡，不可在平坦地带布阵。
English: Li Wei said: I have few enemies, so I can't set up a camp on the plain.

古文：此东十里有渭曲，可先据以待之。 
现代文：由此往东十里有渭水弯曲之处，可以先占据以待敌军。 
English: From here, there are ten places east of the bend of the Surabaya River that can be occupied first to wait for the enemy.

古文：遂进军至渭曲，背水东西为阵。李弼为右拒，赵贵为左拒。
现代文：于是进军到渭曲，背靠渭水，布成东西阵势，李弼在右，赵贵在左。
English: Therefore, they marched to Xingqu, with their backs to Xingshui, forming an east-west formation, with Li Yao on the right and Zhao Gui on the left.

古文：命将士皆偃戈于葭芦中，闻鼓声而起。
现代文：命令将士都藏在芦苇丛中，以鼓声为号。
English: He ordered his soldiers to lay down in the grass and get up when they heard the drums.

古文：申时，齐神武至，望太祖军少，竞驰而进，不为行列，总萃于左军。
现代文：申时，齐神武军队开到，远远看见太祖兵少，竞相急驰而进，不成阵势，集中兵力向左军冲去。
English: At the time of Shen, Qi Shenwu's army arrived and saw that Taizu's soldiers were few and far between. They raced forward at high speed, did not form a formation, and concentrated their forces to rush towards the left army.

古文：兵将交，太祖鸣鼓，士皆奋起。
现代文：两军将要接触，太祖击鼓，将士都奋勇冲出。
English: The two armies will come into contact, the patriarch will beat the drum, and the soldiers will rush out bravely.

古文：于谨等六军与之合战，李弼等率铁骑横击之，绝其军为二队，大破之，斩六千余级，临阵降者二万余人。
现代文：于谨等六军与敌交战，李弼等人率领铁甲骑兵进攻敌军腰部，将敌军大队分割成两块，大破敌军，斩首六千余级，临阵投降者二万余人。
English: While waiting for the six armies to engage with the enemy, Li Jun and others led the iron cavalry to attack the waist of the enemy army, split the enemy brigade into two, broke the enemy army, beheaded more than six thousand, and more than twenty thousand surrendered.

古文：齐神武夜遁，追至河上，复大克获。
现代文：齐神武乘夜逃跑，太祖追到黄河岸边，又俘虏许多敌人。
English: Qi Shenwu fled by night, and Taizu chased him to the bank of the Yellow River, where he captured many enemies.

古文：前后虏其卒七万。
现代文：前后共俘虏敌军士卒七万人。
English: A total of 70,000 enemy soldiers and officers were captured.

古文：留其甲士二万，余悉纵归。
现代文：留下带甲士兵二万，其余的都放他们回去。
English: Leave twenty thousand soldiers with armor, and let the rest of them go back.

古文：收其辎重兵甲，献俘长安。
现代文：没收其辎重武器盔甲，献俘于长安。
English: He obtained a lot of military supplies and armour from the enemy and sent the captives to Chang'an to present them to the imperial court.

古文：还军渭南，于是所征诸州兵始至。
现代文：当军队撤回渭水南岸时，所征调的各州兵马才到。
English: When the army withdrew to the southern coast of Surabaya, the conscripted soldiers and horses from various states only arrived.

古文：乃于战所，准当时兵士，人种树一株，以旌武功。
现代文：太祖准许参战士兵每人在战场植树一株，以表彰战功。
English: The great-grandfather allowed the soldiers who participated in the war to plant one tree each on the battlefield in recognition of their war service.

古文：进太祖柱国大将军，增邑并前五千户。
现代文：升太祖为柱国大将军，食邑增至五千户。
English: His great-grandfather was promoted to the general of the pillar country, and the food villages increased to five thousand households.

古文：李弼等十二将亦进爵增邑。
现代文：李弼等十二名将领也都进爵，增加食邑之户。
English: Twelve generals, including Li Qian, were also ennobled, and the number of households with restaurants increased.

古文：并其下将士，赏各有差。
现代文：下属将士各有赏赐。
English: Each subordinate soldier received a reward.

古文：遣左仆射、冯翊王元季海为行台，与开府独孤信率步骑二万向洛阳；洛州刺史李显趋荆州；贺拔胜、李弼渡河围蒲阪。
现代文：太祖派左仆射、冯翊王元季海为行台，与开府独孤信率领步兵、骑兵共二万人向洛阳推进；洛州刺史李显挺进荆州；贺拔胜、李弼渡过黄河，围攻蒲坂。
English: The great-grandfather sent Zuo Fuxia and Feng Xuan Wang Yuan Ji Hai as the marching bands, and together with Kaifu Duxuanxin, they led a total of 20,000 infantry and cavalry to Luoyang; Luozhou stabber Li Xian marched into Jingzhou; He Baxing and Li Xuan crossed the Yellow River and besieged Puzhan.

古文：牙门将高子信开门纳胜军，东魏将薛崇礼弃城走，胜等追获之。
现代文：牙门将高子信打开城门，让贺拔胜军入据蒲坂，东魏将领薛崇礼弃城而逃，被贺拔胜等人追上捉住。
English: The gatekeeper, Gao Zixin, opened the gate and let He Baxing's victorious army enter the fortress of Pusan. The Eastern Wei general, Xue Chongli, abandoned the city and fled, but was caught by He Baxing and others.

古文：太祖进军蒲阪，略定汾、绛。
现代文：太祖进军蒲坂，平定汾州、绛州。
English: Taizu marched into Gamasaka, pacified Luzhou and Luzhou.

古文：于是许和杀张琼以夏州降。
现代文：许和杀死张琼，以夏州投降。
English: Xu He killed Zhang Qiong and surrendered to Xia Zhou.

古文：初，太祖自弘农入关后，东魏将高敖曹围弘农，闻其军败，退守洛阳。
现代文：当初，太祖从弘农入潼关后，东魏将领高敖曹包围弘农，听说东魏军失利，退守洛阳。
English: At first, after Emperor Taizu entered Shouguan from Hongnong, the Eastern Wei general Gao Bing Cao surrounded Hongnong. Hearing that the Eastern Wei army was defeated, he retreated to Luoyang.

古文：独孤信至新安，敖曹复走度河，信遂入洛阳。
现代文：独孤信到新安，高敖曹渡过黄河而逃，独孤信于是入据洛阳。
English: Duxunxin went to Xin'an, Gao Ying Cao fled across the Yellow River, and Duxunxin went to Luoyang.

古文：东魏颍川长史贺若统与密县人张俭执刺史田迅举城降。
现代文：东魏颍川长史贺若统与密县人张俭捉住刺史田迅，以城来降。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, He Ruotong, the chief historian of Luochuan, and Zhang Jian, a native of Mixian County, captured the assassin Tian Xun and brought him down to the city.

古文：荥阳郑荣业、郑伟等攻梁州，擒其刺史鹿永吉；清河人崔彦穆、檀琛攻荥阳，擒其郡守苏定：皆来附。
现代文：荥阳人郑荣业、郑伟等进攻梁州，活捉梁州刺史鹿永吉；清河人崔彦穆、檀琛进攻荥阳，活捉郡守苏定，都前来归附。
English: Zheng Rongye and Zheng Wei from Shenyang attacked Liangzhou and captured Liangzhou's governor Lu Yongji alive; Cui Yanmu and Danglong from Qinghe attacked Shenyang and captured the county governor Su Ding alive.

古文：自梁、陈已西，将吏降者相属。
现代文：从梁州、陈州以西，东魏的文武官员投降者接连不断。
English: Generals and officials from Liang, Chen and the west came to surrender in an endless stream.

古文：于是东魏将尧雄、赵育、是云宝出颍川，欲复降地。
现代文：于是东魏将领尧雄、赵育、是云宝等人从颍川出兵，想收复已降之地。
English: At this time, the Eastern Wei generals Hsiung Hsiung, Zhao Yu, and Zi Yun Bao sent troops from Luochuan to recover the land brought to the Western Wei by the surrenders.

古文：太祖遣仪同宇文贵、梁迁等逆击，大破之。
现代文：太祖派仪同宇文贵、梁迁等人迎击，大败敌军。
English: The great ancestor sent Yi Tong, Yu Wengui, Liang Qian and others to counterattack, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：赵育来降。
现代文：赵育前来投降。
English: Zhao Yu came to surrender.

古文：东魏复遣将任祥率河南兵与雄合，仪同怡峰与贵、迁等复击破之。
现代文：东魏又派将领任祥率领黄河以南之兵，与尧雄会合，仪同怡峰与赵贵、梁迁又将其击败。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty also sent generals led by Ren Xiang to lead the soldiers south of the Yellow River to meet with Juxiong, and Yidong Yifeng and Zhao Gui and Liang Qian defeated them.

古文：又遣都督韦孝宽取豫州。
现代文：又派都督韦孝宽攻占豫州。
English: Uwentai also sent the governor Wei Xiaokang to invade Yuzhou.

古文：是云宝杀其东扬州刺史那，以州来附。
现代文：是云宝杀掉东魏东扬州刺史那椿，以东扬州来降。
English: It was Yun Bao who killed East Wei and East Yangzhou and stabbed Shina Tsvangirai to bring about East Yangzhou's downfall.

古文：四年春三月，太祖率诸将入朝。
现代文：四年春三月，太祖率领诸将入朝，拜谒皇帝。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year, the great-grandfather led the generals into the court and paid homage to the emperor.

古文：礼毕，还华州。
现代文：礼仪结束后，返回华州。
English: After the ceremony, they returned to Washington.

古文：七月，东魏遣其将侯景、厍狄干、高敖曹、轨、可朱浑元、莫多娄贷文等围独孤信于洛阳。
现代文：七月，东魏派将领侯景、厍狄干、高敖曹、韩轨、可朱浑元、莫多娄贷文等人把独孤信包围在洛阳。
English: In July, the Eastern Wei faction's generals Houjing, Yu Dikang, Gao Bing Cao, Han Trai, Ke Zhuhun Yuan, and Modo Jianwen encircled Du Guoxin in Luoyang.

古文：齐神武继其后。
现代文：齐神武跟在后面。
English: Qi Shenwu followed behind.

古文：先是，魏帝将幸洛阳拜园陵，会信被围，诏太祖率军救信，魏帝亦东。
现代文：最初，魏帝打算驾幸洛阳祭祀陵园，恰好独孤信被围，诏令太祖率军援救独孤信，魏帝也随军东去。
English: At first, Emperor Wei planned to visit Luoyang's sacrificial cemetery, but it happened that Duolongxin was besieged. He ordered the great-grandfather to lead the army to rescue Duolongxin, and Emperor Wei also went east with the army.

古文：八月庚寅，太祖至谷城，莫多娄贷文、可朱浑元来逆，临阵斩贷文，元单骑遁免，悉虏其众送弘农。
现代文：八月三日，太祖抵达谷城，莫多娄贷文、可朱浑元前来迎战，在战阵上斩莫多娄贷文，可朱浑元匹马而逃，将其部众全部俘虏，解送弘农。
English: On August 3, Taizu arrived in Gucheng. Modo and Zhu Hunyuan came to meet the battle. Modo and Zhu Hunyuan were killed in the battle, but Zhu Hunyuan escaped on horseback, captured all his subordinates, and sent them to Hongnong.

古文：遂进军瀍东。
现代文：于是进军氵廛水东岸。
English: As a result, Uwentai marched to the east of Surabaya.

古文：是夕，魏帝幸太祖营，于是景等夜解围去。
现代文：当晚，魏帝驾幸太祖军营，侯景等人连夜解围而去。
English: On that night, Emperor Wei drove the military camp of Emperor Taizu, and Hou Jing and others left the encirclement overnight.

古文：及旦，太祖率轻骑追之，至于河上。
现代文：天明时，太祖率领轻装骑兵追赶，抵达黄河岸边。
English: At dawn, Taizu led the light cavalry in pursuit and arrived at the bank of the Yellow River.

古文：景等北据河桥，南属邙山为阵，与诸军合战。
现代文：侯景等人北据河桥，南连邙山，布下阵势，与诸军交战。
English: Hou Jing and others in the north, according to the river bridge, and in the south, Lushan, laid out their positions and fought with the armies.

古文：太祖马中流矢，惊逸，遂失所之，因此军中扰乱。
现代文：太祖的坐骑被乱箭射中，惊骇远奔，不知所在，军中因此混乱。
English: The great-grandfather's horse was hit by a stray arrow and ran away in fright, not knowing where it was. As a result, there was confusion in the army.

古文：都督李穆下马授太祖，军以复振。
现代文：都督李穆下马，将坐骑让给太祖，全军士气重新振作。
English: The governor Li Mu dismounted and gave the horse to Taizu, and the morale of the whole army was reinvigorated.

古文：于是大捷，斩高敖曹及其仪同李猛、西兖州刺史宋显等，虏其甲士一万五千，赴河死者以万数。
现代文：终于获得大捷，斩高敖曹及其仪同李猛、西兖州刺史宋显等人，俘虏其带甲将士一万五千人，跳入黄河而溺死者上万人。
English: Finally, they won a great victory, beheading Gaozhuang Cao and his attendant Li Meng, Xizang Zizhi Song Xian and others, capturing 15,000 of their armored soldiers, jumping into the Yellow River and drowning tens of thousands of people.

古文：是日置阵既大，首尾悬远，从旦至未，战数十合，氛雾四塞，莫能相知。
现代文：当天布阵又大，首尾相距极远，从天明到午后，交战数十次，浓雾蔽野，互不相知。
English: On the same day, the battle lines were large and far apart, from dawn to afternoon, dozens of battles were fought, thick fog covered the field, and they did not know each other.

古文：独孤信、李远居右，赵贵、怡峰居左，战并不利，又未知魏帝及太祖所在，皆弃其卒先归。
现代文：独孤信、李远在右，赵贵、怡峰在左，作战均告失利。又不知魏帝及太祖的位置，于是都丢弃他们的部下，自己先回来。
English: Du Guoxin, Li Yuan on the right, Zhao Gui and Yifeng on the left, all lost the battle. And they did not know the position of Wei Di and Taizu, so they all abandoned their subordinates and came back first.

古文：开府李虎、念贤等为后军，遇信等退，即与俱还。
现代文：开府李虎、念贤等人为后军，遇见独孤信等人退却，就同他们一块返回。
English: Kaifu Lihu, Nian Xian and others were the rearguard, and when they encountered Du Guoxin and others retreating, they returned with them.

古文：由是乃班师，洛阳亦失守。
现代文：因此全军撤回，洛阳也告失守。
English: Therefore, the whole army withdrew, and Luoyang was also defeated.

古文：大军至弘农，守将皆已弃城西走。
现代文：大军到弘农时，守将都已弃城西逃。
English: When the large army arrived at Hongnong, the guards had all fled west of the city.

古文：所虏降卒在弘农者，因相与闭门拒守。进攻拔之，诛其魁首数百人。
现代文：在弘农的被俘降兵，趁机关上城门抵抗。太祖攻克弘农，处死降兵首领数百人。
English: In Hongnong, the captured and surrendered soldiers took advantage of the authorities to resist at the city gate. Taizu defeated Hongnong and executed hundreds of leaders of the soldiers.

古文：大军之东伐也，关中留守兵少，而前后所虏东魏士卒，皆散在民间，乃谋为乱。
现代文：大军东征时，关中留守兵员较少，而前后俘虏的东魏士兵，都散在民间，于是图谋叛乱。
English: When the great army marched eastward, there were fewer soldiers left behind in Guanzhong, and the East Wei soldiers captured before and after were scattered among the people, so they plotted a rebellion.

古文：及李虎等至长安，计无所出，乃与公卿辅魏太子出次渭北。
现代文：等李虎等人到长安时，想不出办法，只得与公卿辅佐魏太子出居渭水以北。
English: When Li Hu and others arrived in Chang'an, they couldn't think of a way out, so they had to move to the north of Surabaya with the court noble and assistant Wei Taizi.

古文：关中大震恐，百姓相剽劫。
现代文：关中极为震惊恐慌，百姓互相抢掠。
English: Guanzhong was extremely shocked and panicked, and people robbed each other.

古文：于是沙苑所俘军人赵青雀、雍州民于伏德等遂反。
现代文：沙苑俘兵赵青雀、雍州百姓于伏德等人反叛。
English: Sha Yuan prisoner of war Zhao Qingzhao, Yongzhou people in Fude and others revolted.

古文：青雀据长安子城，伏德保咸阳，与太守慕容思庆各收降卒，以拒还师。
现代文：赵青雀占领长安小城，于伏德据守咸阳，与太守慕容思庆各自收编降卒，抵抗返回的军队。
English: Zhao Qingzhao occupied the small city of Chang'an, in Fude, he defended Xianyang, and the eunuch Murong Siqing collected the troops and resisted the returning army.

古文：长安大城民皆相率拒青雀，每日接战。
现代文：长安大城百姓都相继抵抗赵青雀，每日交战。
English: The people of Chang'an Big City have successively resisted Zhao Qingzhu, fighting every day.

古文：魏帝留止阌乡，遣太祖讨之。
现代文：魏帝留居阌乡，派太祖前去讨伐。
English: Emperor Wei stayed in Handan and sent his great-grandfather to lead the crusade.

古文：长安父老见太祖至，悲且喜曰： 不意今日复得见公！ 
现代文：长安父老见太祖到来，又悲又喜地说： 没想到今日又能见到您！ 
English: When Chang'an's father saw his great-grandfather arrive, he said with both sadness and joy, "I didn't expect to see you again today!"

古文：士女咸相贺。
现代文：成年男女都互相祝贺。
English: Both men and women congratulate each other.

古文：华州刺史导率军袭咸阳，斩思庆，擒伏德，南度渭与太祖会攻青雀，破之。
现代文：华州刺史宇文导率军袭击咸阳，斩慕容思庆，活捉于伏德，又南渡渭水，与太祖合攻赵青雀，将其击败。
English: Huazhou general Yu Wenzhong led an army to attack Xianyang, but was captured alive in Fude. He was also taken south to Surabaya, where he joined forces with Taizu to attack Zhao Qingzhao and defeat him.

古文：太傅梁景睿先以疾留长安，遂与青雀通谋，至是亦伏诛。
现代文：太傅梁景睿原先因病留在长安，与赵青雀共同谋反，到这时也被处死。
English: Taifu Liang Jingrui originally stayed in Chang'an due to illness and plotted a rebellion together with Zhao Qingzhao. At this time, he was also executed.

古文：关中于是乃定。
现代文：关中至此才得安定。
English: It was only at this point that the situation in the detention centre stabilised.

古文：魏帝还长安，太祖复屯华州。
现代文：魏帝返回长安，太祖仍驻军华州。
English: Emperor Wei returned to Chang'an, but Emperor Taizu was still stationed in Huazhou.

古文：冬十一月，东魏将侯景攻陷广州。
现代文：冬十一月，东魏将领侯景攻陷广州。
English: In the winter of November, the Eastern Wei general Hou Jing invaded Guangzhou.

古文：十二月，是云宝袭洛阳，东魏将王元轨弃城走。
现代文：十二月，是云宝袭击洛阳，东魏将领王元轨弃城逃走。
English: In December, it was Yunbao that raided Luoyang. The East Wei governor Wang Yuanlu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：都督赵刚袭广州，拔之。
现代文：都督赵刚袭击广州，将其攻克。
English: Governor Zhao Gang attacked Guangzhou and conquered it.

古文：自襄、广以西城镇复内属。
现代文：自襄州、广州以西的城镇重新归属我国。
English: The towns west of Xiangzhou and Guangzhou reverted to China.

古文：五年冬，大阅于华阴。
现代文：五年冬，在华阴举行大阅兵。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, a large military parade was held in Huayin.

古文：六年春，东魏将侯景出三鵶，将侵荆州，太祖遣开府李弼、独孤信各率骑五千出武关，景乃退还。
现代文：六年春，东魏将领侯景从三亚鸟出兵，打算侵犯荆州，太祖派开府李弼、独孤信各领骑兵五千人从武关出发，侯景退兵。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Eastern Wei general Hou Jing sent troops from Sanya Bird to invade Jingzhou, and the great-grandfather sent 5,000 cavalry led by Li Xi and Du Guoxin from Wuguan, and Hou Jing withdrew.

古文：夏，茹茹度河至夏州，太祖召诸军屯沙苑以备之。
现代文：夏季，蠕蠕渡过黄河到夏州，太祖征调各军屯集沙苑，以作防备。
English: In summer, he crossed the Yellow River to Xiazhou, and the great ancestor sent troops to set up camp in Sha Yuan to prepare for the invasion.

古文：七年春三月，稽胡帅、夏州刺史刘平伏据上郡叛，遣开府于谨讨平之。
现代文：七年春三月，稽胡帅、夏州刺史刘平伏占据上郡叛乱，派开府于谨将其讨平。
English: In March of the spring of the seventh year, Liu Pingfu, the inspector Hu and the governor of Xia, occupied the rebellion in Shang County and sent Kaifu Yu Zhen to quell it.

古文：冬十一月，太祖奏行十二条制，恐百官不勉于职事，又下令申明之。
现代文：冬十一月，太祖上奏，准予推行十二条制，担心百官不勤于职守，又下令重申。
English: In the winter of November, Emperor Taizu issued a proclamation, approving the implementation of the 12-Article System, and, fearing that hundreds of officials were not diligent in their duties, he also issued an order to reiterate it.

古文：八年夏四月，大会诸军于马牧。
现代文：八年夏四月，在马牧集合各军，举行大阅兵。
English: In April of the summer of the eighth year, all the armies gathered in Mamou and held a grand military parade.

古文：冬十月，齐神武侵汾、绛，围玉壁。
现代文：冬十月，齐神武侵犯汾州、绛州，包围玉壁。
English: In the winter of October, Qi Shenwu invaded Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou and surrounded Yubi.

古文：太祖出军蒲阪，将击之。
现代文：太祖军从蒲坂出兵，准备进攻。
English: Taizu's army marched out from Busaka and prepared to attack.

古文：军至皂荚，齐神武退。
现代文：军队抵达皂荚时，齐神武撤退。
English: When the army arrived at Sozhen, Qi Shenwu retreated.

古文：太祖度汾追之，遂遁去。
现代文：太祖渡过汾水追击，齐神武逃走。
English: The ancestor crossed Surabaya in pursuit, and Qi Shenwu fled.

古文：十二月，魏帝狩于华阴，大飨将士。
现代文：十二月，魏帝在华阴围猎，举行盛大宴会款待将士。
English: In December, Emperor Wen of Wei went hunting in Huayin and lavished praise on all the soldiers.

古文：太祖率诸将朝于行在所。
现代文：太祖率领众将赴皇帝居处朝见。
English: The great-grandfather will lead the crowd to the emperor's residence to see the emperor.

古文：九年春，东魏北豫州刺史高仲密举州来附，太祖帅师迎之，令开府李远为前军。
现代文：九年春，东魏北豫州刺史高仲密以全州前来归附，太祖率军迎接，令开府李远担任前军。
English: In the spring of the 9th year of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Zhongmi, the leader of the East Wei and North Henan states, came to annex the whole state. Taizu led the army to welcome him, and Li Yuan of Kaifu served as the vanguard.

古文：至洛阳，遣开府于谨攻柏谷坞，拔之。三月，齐神武至河北。
现代文：到洛阳时，派开府于谨攻占柏谷坞。三月，齐神武抵达黄河北岸。
English: When they arrived in Luoyang, Pai Kaifu seized the Kashi Valley dock. In March, Qi Shenwu arrived on the north bank of the Yellow River.

古文：太祖还军瀍上以引之。
现代文：太祖回军氵廛水，以引诱敌军。
English: The great-great-grandfather went back to his army at Surabaya to lure the enemy troops away.

古文：齐神武果度河，据邙山为阵，不进者数日。
现代文：齐神武果然渡过黄河，占据邙山，布下阵势，连续数日不进攻。
English: Qi Shenwu successfully crossed the Yellow River, occupied Lushan, set up a position, and did not attack for several days.

古文：太祖留辎重于瀍曲，士皆衔枚，夜登邙山。
现代文：太祖把军用物资留在氵廛水拐弯处，士兵皆衔枚，乘夜登上邙山。
English: The great-grandfather left the military supplies at the bend of the Surabaya River. The soldiers all carried them and rode up the mountain at night.

古文：未明，击之，齐神武单骑为贺拔胜所逐，仅而获免。
现代文：天未明，发动进攻，齐神武一人骑着马被贺拔胜追赶，侥幸逃脱。
English: At dawn, they launched an attack. Qi Shenwu, riding a horse, was chased by He Baxing and narrowly escaped.

古文：太祖率右军若干惠等大破齐神武军，悉虏其步卒。
现代文：太祖率右军若干惠等人大败敌军，将其步兵全部俘虏。
English: The great-grandfather led the right army and several Hui and other people defeated the enemy army and captured all of its infantry.

古文：赵贵等五将军居左，战不利。
现代文：赵贵等五名将领在左方，作战失利。
English: Five generals, including Zhao Gui, attacked the left wing, which was disadvantageous in battle.

古文：齐神武军复合，太祖又不利，夜乃引还。
现代文：齐神武军重新集结，太祖作战又失利，连夜撤退。
English: The Qishen army regrouped, but the Taizu army lost the battle again and withdrew overnight.

古文：既入关，屯渭上。
现代文：入潼关，屯兵渭水。
English: Enter Shaoguan, garrison Shishui.

古文：齐神武进至陕，开府达奚武等率军御之，乃退。
现代文：齐神武进抵陕州，开府达奚武等人率军抵抗，使其退却。
English: When Qi Shenwu entered Shaanxi, Kaifu Daxinwu and others led the army to resist and retreat.

古文：太祖以邙山之战，诸将失律，上表请自贬。
现代文：太祖由于邙山之战，诸将不守纪律，上表请求将自己降职。
English: As a result of the Battle of Lushan, the generals were undisciplined and requested to be demoted.

古文：魏帝报曰： 公膺期作宰，义高匡合，仗钺专征，举无遗算。
现代文：魏帝回答道： 你承受天命为宰相，正气凛然，匡合天下，受命征讨，神机妙算。
English: Wei Di replied: You are the prime minister who has received the destiny of heaven, you are righteous, you are in harmony with the world, you have been ordered to collect and discuss, and you are very clever.

古文：朕所以垂拱九载，实资元辅之力，俾九服宁谧，诚赖翊赞之功。
现代文：朕能不费气力在位九年，全仗你的效力；使天下安宁，也全仗你的辅佐之功。
English: I have been able to stay on the throne for nine years without any effort, thanks to your effectiveness; I have been able to bring peace to the world thanks to your assistance.

古文：今大寇未殄，而以诸将失律，便欲自贬，深亏体国之诚。
现代文：如今大敌未平，而由于诸将失去约束，便请求自降官职，实在有亏于你对国家的忠诚。
English: Now that the great enemy is far from being subdued, and since you are about to lose your restraints, you are asking to step down from your post, which is really a failure of your loyalty to the country.

古文：宜抑此谦光，恤予一人。 
现代文：应当暂且抑止这种谦让的风度，顾惜我本人。 
English: For the time being, I should restrain this self-indulgent demeanor and take care of myself.

古文：于是广募关陇豪右，以增军旅。
现代文：于是广泛招募关、陇一带豪族，以增加兵力。
English: As a result, powerful clans in the Guan and Min regions were widely recruited to increase the number of troops.

古文：冬十月，大阅于栎阳，还屯华州。
现代文：冬十月，在栎阳举行大规模阅兵，其后仍驻军华州。
English: In the winter of October, a large-scale military parade was held in Shenyang, after which the troops were still stationed in Huazhou.

古文：十年夏五月，太祖入朝。
现代文：十年夏五月，太祖入朝。
English: In the summer and May of the tenth year, Taizu entered the imperial court.

古文：秋七月，魏帝以太祖前后所上二十四条及十二条新制，方为中兴永式，乃命尚书苏绰更损益之，总为五卷，班于天下。
现代文：秋七月，魏帝把太祖前后上奏的二十四条及十二条新制，一并作为复兴朝政的永久典章，又命令尚书苏绰再作增删，合为五卷，颁布天下。
English: In the autumn and July, Emperor Wei made the 24 articles and 12 articles of the new system, which were played before and after the great-grandfather, together as a permanent ordinance for the revival of the imperial government, and ordered the Shangshu Su Zhuo to be added and deleted again, combined into five volumes, and promulgated to the world.

古文：于是搜简贤才，以为牧守令长，皆依新制而遣焉。
现代文：搜罗选拔贤能之士，任命他们担任刺史、郡守、县令、里长，都依照新制派遣任命。
English: We will collect and select capable people and appoint them as county magistrate, county governor, county magistrate, and village chief, all of whom will be dispatched and appointed in accordance with the new system.

古文：数年之间，百姓便之。
现代文：过了几年，百姓就适应了新制。
English: After a few years, the people adapted to the new system.

古文：冬十月，大阅于白水。
现代文：冬十月，在白水举行大规模阅兵。
English: In the winter of October, a large-scale military parade was held in Baishui.

古文：十一年春三月，令曰：古之帝王所以外建诸侯内立百官者，非欲富贵其身而尊荣之，盖以天下至广，非一人所能独治，是以博访贤才，助己为治。
现代文：十一年春三月，下令说： 古代的帝王之所以外封诸侯而内设百官，并不是打算显示自己的富贵和尊荣，而是因为天下极大，非一个人所能单独治理，所以广泛寻访贤能之士，以帮助自己治理。
English: In the spring and March of the eleventh year, he ordered: The reason why the emperors of ancient times set up a hundred officials within their external fiefdoms was not to show their wealth and honor, but because the world is so vast that no one person can govern alone, so they extensively searched for capable people to help them govern.

古文：若其知贤也，则以礼命之。
现代文：如果了解他是贤才，就依照礼节来任命他。
English: If he is known to be a good man, then appoint him according to propriety.

古文：其人闻命之日，则惨然曰： 凡受人之事，任人之劳，何舍己而从人。 
现代文：这人听到任命的消息时，就会悲伤地说： 凡受人委托，必将为人效劳，为什么舍弃自己而服从别人呢？ 
English: On hearing the news of his appointment, the man said sadly: "Whoever is entrusted by someone will serve someone, so why should I give up myself and obey someone else?

古文：又自勉曰： 天生俊士，所以利时。
现代文：又自勉道： 上天降生俊杰之士，是为了有益时世。
English: He also humbled himself and said, "Good people are born in order to benefit the world.

古文：彼人主者，欲与我为治，安可苟辞。 
现代文：君王打算与我一块治理天下，怎么可以推辞呢？ 
English: How can the king refuse if he wants to rule the world with me?

古文：于是降心而受命。
现代文：于是抑制心志而接受任命。
English: So he held his nerve and accepted the appointment.

古文：及居官也，则昼不甘食，夜不甘寝，思所以上匡人主，下安百姓；不遑恤其私而忧其家，故妻子或有饥寒之弊而不顾也。
现代文：在任职期间，白天食而不知其味，夜间不得安睡，思虑如何才能辅佐君王，安抚百姓；无暇顾念私事，担忧家人，所以妻子孩儿有时遭受饥寒之苦而不能照顾。
English: During his term of office, he did not know what to eat during the day and could not sleep at night, thinking about how to help the king and pacify the people. He did not have time to think about private affairs and worry about his family, so his wife and children sometimes suffered from hunger and cold and could not be taken care of.

古文：于是人主赐之以俸禄，尊之以轩冕，而不以为惠也。
现代文：于是君王赐给他俸禄，封给他官位爵号，并不认为是施舍的恩惠。
English: So the king gave him a salary and gave him a title of nobility, which he did not consider to be charity.

古文：贤臣受之，亦不以为德也。
现代文：贤臣接受了，也并不认为应当感激。
English: The minister accepted, but did not think it was something to be grateful for.

古文：位不虚加，禄不妄赐。
现代文：官职不随意升迁，俸禄不随意赏赐。
English: Official posts shall not be arbitrarily promoted and salaries shall not be arbitrarily awarded.

古文：为人君者，诚能以此道授官，为人臣者，诚能以此情受位，则天下之大，可不言而治矣。
现代文：为君王者，确实能依照这个原则任命官员；为臣子者，确实能以这种感情接受任命，那么天下虽大，也可无为而治了。
English: If those who are monarchs can really appoint officials in accordance with this principle, and if those who are courtiers can really accept appointments with this kind of feeling, then the world, though large, can also be governed without doing anything.

古文：昔尧、舜之为君，稷、契之为臣，用此道也。
现代文：从前尧、舜为君，稷、契为臣，都是依照这个原则。
English: In the past,,  stood for jun, and, 契 stood for vassal, all in accordance with this principle.

古文：及后世衰微，此道遂废，乃以官职为私恩，爵禄为荣惠。
现代文：等到后世衰微，这个原则逐渐被废弃，竟把任命官职当作私人的恩典，把享受爵禄当作个人的荣耀。
English: This principle was gradually abandoned until the decline of later generations, when the appointment of officials was regarded as a private grace, and the enjoyment of knighthoods as a personal honor.

古文：人君之命官也，亲则授之，爱则任之。
现代文：君王任命官员时，只要与自己亲近的就授给他官职，只要自己宠爱的就任用他。
English: When the king appoints officials, he appoints only those who are close to him, and uses them only for the positions he likes.

古文：人臣之受位也，可以尊身而润屋者，则迂道而求之；损身而利物者，则巧言而辞之。
现代文：臣子在接受任命时，凡可以使自己尊崇而富有的，即便走邪路也要谋求；凡对自己有害而有利于他人的，那就花言巧语加以推辞。
English: When a vassal receives an appointment, he should seek out anything that can make him respected and rich, even if he takes the wrong path; and he should reject anything that is harmful to him but beneficial to others.

古文：于是至公之道没，而奸诈之萌生。
现代文：于是极公正的原则消失了，而作奸欺诈之风滋长起来。
English: Thus the principle of perfect justice disappeared, and a culture of treachery and fraud grew up.

古文：天下不治，正为此矣。
现代文：天下无法治理，正是因为这样。
English: That is why the world is ungovernable.

古文：今圣主中兴，思去浇伪。
现代文： 如今圣明君王振兴我朝，考虑消除浮薄虚伪的风气。
English: Now, King Shengming is revitalizing our dynasty and considering the elimination of the superficial and hypocritical culture.

古文：诸在朝之士，当念职事之艰难，负阙之招累，夙夜兢兢，如临深履薄。
现代文：各位官员应当体念任职之艰难，受命之烦累，日夜兢兢业业，如临深渊，如踏薄冰。
English: All officials should bear in mind the difficulty of holding office, the tediousness of receiving orders, and the day and night dedication, as if approaching the abyss, as if treading on thin ice.

古文：才堪者，则审己而当之；不堪者，则收短而避之。
现代文：才能可以胜任的，则谨慎地予以承担；无法胜任者，则抑制己之短处而避开它。
English: Those who are able to do so, undertake it with caution; those who are not able to do so, suppress their shortcomings and avoid it.

古文：使天官不妄加，王爵不虚受，则淳素之风，庶几可反。
现代文：倘若官职不任意升迁，爵位不无故授封，那么诚朴的风气，差不多就可返回了。 
English: If officials are not arbitrarily promoted, and if titles of nobility are not awarded without reason, then the simple and honest culture can almost return.

古文：冬十月大阅于白水，遂西狩岐阳。
现代文：冬十月，在白水举行大规模阅兵，又西赴岐阳围猎。
English: In the winter of October, a large-scale military parade was held in Baishui, and he went west to hunt around Qiyang.

古文：十二年春，凉州刺史宇文仲和据州反。
现代文：十二年春，凉州刺史宇文仲和据州反叛。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, Yu Wenzhong, the governor of Liangzhou, rebelled against Guozhou.

古文：瓜州民张保害刺史成庆，以州应仲和。
现代文：瓜州百姓张保杀害刺史成庆，以全州响应宇文仲和。
English: Guazhou people Zhang Bao killed assassin Shi Chengqing, and the whole state responded to Yuwen Zhonghe.

古文：太祖遣开府独孤信讨之。
现代文：太祖派开府独孤信征讨。
English: The great-grandfather sent a delegation to the capital to solicit support for independence.

古文：东魏遣其将侯景侵襄州，太祖遣开府若干惠率轻骑击之。
现代文：东魏派将领侯景侵犯襄州，太祖派开府若干惠率领轻装骑兵迎击。
English: The Eastern Wei faction sent the general Houjing to invade Xiangzhou, while the Taizu faction sent Kaifu Guo Hui to lead the light cavalry to counterattack.

古文：至穰，景遁去。
现代文：到达穰地时，侯景逃走。
English: When he arrived in Handan, Hou Jing fled.

古文：夏五月，独孤信平凉州，擒仲和，迁其民六千余家于长安。
现代文：夏五月，独孤信平定凉州，活捉宇文仲和，将凉州百姓六千余家迁到长安。
English: In the summer and May, Du Guoxin subdued Liangzhou, captured Yu Wenzhong alive, and relocated more than 6,000 Liangzhou people to Chang'an.

古文：瓜州都督令狐延起义诛张保，瓜州平。
现代文：瓜州都督令狐延杀掉张保，瓜州平定。
English: The governor of Guazhou ordered the rebels to kill Zhang Bao, and Guazhou was also leveled.

古文：七月，太祖大会诸军于咸阳。
现代文：七月，太祖在咸阳举行大规模阅兵。
English: In July, Taizu held a large-scale military parade in Xianyang.

古文：九月，齐神武围玉壁，大都督韦孝宽力战拒守，齐神武攻围六旬不能下，其士卒死者什二三。
现代文：九月，齐神武包围玉壁，大都督韦孝宽尽力抵御，齐神武围攻六十天未能占领，其士卒死者十之二三。
English: In September, Qi Shenwu besieged Yubi, and the Grand Dictator Wei Xiaokuan tried his best to resist. Qi Shenwu's siege failed to occupy the city for sixty days, and its soldiers died at a rate of one in twenty-three.

古文：会齐神武有疾，烧营而退。
现代文：恰巧齐神武患病，就烧掉军营退兵。
English: Coincidentally, when Qi Shenwu fell ill, he burned down the military camp and left the army.

古文：十三年春正月，茹茹寇高平，至于方城。
现代文：十三年春正月，蠕蠕侵犯高平，抵达方城。
English: In the first month of spring in the 13th year, the creep invaded Gaoping and arrived at Fangcheng.

古文：是月，齐神武薨。
现代文：当月，齐神武去世。
English: That month, Qi Shenwu passed away.

古文：其子澄嗣，是为文襄帝。
现代文：其子高澄继位，这是文襄帝。
English: His son Gao Cheng succeeded to the throne, this is Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：与其河南大行台侯景有隙，景不自安，遣使请举河南六州来附。
现代文：高澄与其河南大行台侯景不和，侯景不安，派使者请求以黄河以南六州前来归附。
English: Gao Cheng and his vassals in Henan and Taiwan were at odds and uneasy, and Gao Cheng sent an envoy to request that the six states south of the Yellow River be annexed.

古文：齐文襄遣其将韩轨、厍狄干等围景于颍川。
现代文：齐文襄派将领韩轨、厍狄干等人把侯景包围在颍川。
English: Qi Wenzhong sent generals Han Zhao, Zi Dikang and others to encircle Houjing in the Min River.

古文：三月，太祖遣开府李弼率军援之，轨等遁去。
现代文：三月，太祖派开府李弼率兵支援侯景，韩轨等人逃去。
English: In March, Emperor Taizu dispatched the prefect of Kaifu, Li Xi, and his soldiers to support Hou Jing, and Han Rail and others fled.

古文：景请留收辑河南，遂徙镇豫州。
现代文：侯景请求留下，以平定黄河以南，于是移守豫州。
English: Hou Jing requested to stay to pacify the south of the Yellow River, so he moved to Yuzhou.

