古文：陈东，字少阳，镇江丹阳人。
现代文：陈东字少阳，镇江丹阳人。
English: Chen Dongzha Shaoyang, Zhenjiang Danyang people.

古文：早有隽声，俶傥负气，不戚戚于贫贱。
现代文：早有俊秀的声名，洒脱不拘不肯屈居人下，不为贫寒低贱所忧惧。
English: He has long had a reputation for being handsome, a free-spirited person who is not willing to be subservient to others, and is not afraid of the poor and lowly.

古文：蔡京、王黼方用事，人莫敢指言，独东无所隐讳。
现代文：蔡京、王黼用事专权，人们不敢指责，只有陈东无所隐瞒忌讳。
English: Cai Jing and Wang Qian wielded absolute power, and people dared not criticize them. Only Chen Dong had nothing to hide.

古文：所至宴集，坐客惧为己累，稍引去。
现代文：他所到场的宴会集会，在座的客人害怕连累自己，逐渐避开。
English: At the banquets and gatherings he attended, the guests gradually avoided him for fear of being implicated.

古文：以贡入太学。
现代文：陈东以贡士进入太学。
English: Chen Dong entered Taigaku with a stipend.

古文：钦宗即位，率其徒伏阙上书，论： 今日之事，蔡京坏乱于前，梁师成阴谋于后。李彦结怨于西北，朱勔结怨于东南，王黼、童贯又结怨于辽、金，创开边隙。
现代文：宋钦宗即皇帝位，陈东率领他的门徒拜伏于宫阙下上奏书，议论说： 今天的政事，蔡京败坏乱政于前，梁师成暗中策划做坏事在后，李彦结怨仇于西北，朱面力结怨恨于东南，王黼、童贯又结怨仇于辽国、金国，创开边事。
English: Song Qinzong was the emperor, Chen Dong led his disciples to prostrate themselves under the imperial eaves to submit a report, discussing: Today's political affairs, Cai Jing corrupted and disrupted the government in the past, Liang Shicheng secretly plotted to do bad things in the future, Li Yan harbored grudges in the northwest, Zhu Menli harbored grudges in the southeast, Wang Xi and Tong Can harbored grudges in the Liao and Jin states, and created border affairs.

古文：宜诛六贼，传首四方，以谢天下。 言极愤切。
现代文：应当诛杀六贼，把他们的首级传送四方，以谢罪于天下。 言语极为愤恨恳切。
English: The six thieves should be killed and their heads sent to the four corners of the earth to atone for their sins.

古文：明年春，贯等挟徽宗东行，东独上书请追贯还正典刑，别选忠信之人往侍左右。
现代文：第二年春天，童贯等人挟持宋徽宗向东巡行，陈东独自上奏书请求朝廷追回童贯按典刑治罪，另外选择忠信的人前往侍奉徽宗左右。
English: In the spring of the next year, Tongran and others took Song Huizong to the east, and Chen Dong alone petitioned the court to recover Tongran and punish him according to the ceremony. In addition, loyal people were selected to serve around Huizong.

古文：金人迫京师，又请诛六贼。
现代文：金人迫近京师，陈东又请求朝廷诛杀六贼。
English: The goldsmith was approaching the capital, and Chen Dong asked the imperial court to kill the six thieves.

古文：时师成尚留禁中，东发其前后奸谋，乃谪死。
现代文：当时梁师成还留在禁中，陈东揭发他的前后奸诈阴谋，于是被贬谪而死。
English: At that time, Liang Shicheng was still under house arrest. Chen Dong exposed his back-and-forth treacherous plot, so he was demoted and died.

古文：李邦彦议与金和，李纲及种师道主战，邦彦因小失利罢纲而割三镇，东复率诸生伏宣德门下上书曰：
现代文：李邦彦建议与金国求和，李纲和种师道主张抗金，李邦彦因为小小的失利罢免李纲而割让三镇，陈东又率领太学诸生拜伏在宣德门下上奏书说：
English: Li Bangyan proposed to sue for peace with Kim Guo, Li Gang and Zhu Shidao advocated resistance to Kim, Li Bangyan dismissed Li Gang because of a small defeat and ceded three towns, Chen Dong also led the students to worship at Xuan De's door and wrote a letter saying:

古文：在廷之臣，奋勇不顾、以身任天下之重者，李纲是也，所谓社稷之臣也。
现代文： 在朝廷的大臣，奋勇不顾自身安危，以身任天下重任的，是李纲这样的人，这就叫作国家的大臣。
English: It is people like Li Gang who, as ministers of the imperial court, bravely take on the most important tasks in the world, regardless of their own safety and security. They are called ministers of the state.

古文：其庸缪不才、忌疾贤能、动为身谋、不恤国计者，李邦彦、白时中、张邦昌、赵野、王孝迪、蔡懋、李棁之徒是也，所谓社稷之贼也。
现代文：其庸俗荒谬没有才能、忌贤妒能动不动为自己谋算，不体恤国家大事的是李邦彦、白时中、张邦昌、赵野、王孝通、蔡懋、李等这些人，这就叫作国家的贼臣。
English: Their vulgarity and absurdity have no talent, and their envy and jealousy can always calculate for themselves. It is Li Bangyan, Bai Shizhong, Zhang Bangchang, Zhao Ye, Wang Xiaotong, Cai Qi, Li and other people who are insensitive to national affairs. This is called being a traitor to the country.

古文：陛下拔纲列卿之中，不一二日为执政，中外相庆，知陛下之能任贤矣。
现代文： 陛下提拔李纲位列大臣之中，不到一二天为执政大臣，中外互相庆贺，知道陛下能任用贤能了。
English: His Majesty promoted Li Gang to the highest rank of minister, and he became the ruling minister in less than a day or two. Both China and abroad congratulated each other, knowing that His Majesty was able to appoint a capable person.

古文：斥时中而不用，知陛下之能去邪矣。
现代文：斥退白时中而不加任用，知道陛下能去掉邪恶了。
English: Rejecting the white and not appointing, knowing that his majesty can get rid of the evil.

古文：然纲任而未专，时中斥而未去，复相邦彦，又相邦昌，自余又皆擢用，何陛下任贤犹未能勿贰，去邪犹未能勿疑乎？
现代文：但李纲任事而未能单独掌权，白时中受到摈斥而没有离开朝廷，恢复李邦彦的宰相职位，又以张邦昌为宰相，其余的人又都提拔任用，为什么陛下任用贤能还不能不怀疑，去掉邪佞还不能不疑虑呢？
English: However, Li Gang was unable to take power alone, he was rebuked in the middle of the day and did not leave the imperial court, Li Bangyan was restored to the post of prime minister, and Zhang Bangchang was appointed as prime minister, and the rest of the people were promoted and appointed. Why is it that His Majesty still has doubts about the appointment of virtuous people, and still has doubts about getting rid of evil people?

古文：今又闻罢纲职事，臣等惊疑，莫知所以。
现代文：现在又听说罢免李纲的官职，我们感到惊疑，不知道这是什么原因。
English: Now that we have heard that Li Gang was removed from office, we are surprised and don't know what the reason is.

古文：纲起自庶官，独任大事。邦彦等疾如仇雠，恐其成功，因用兵小不利，遂得乘闲投隙，归罪于纲。
现代文： 李纲起自下级官吏，独任国家大事，李邦彦等人像仇人一样憎恨他，恐怕他成功，因为用兵有小小不利，于是得以趁机会钻空子，归罪于李纲。
English: Since Li Gang was a lower-level official, he was solely responsible for national affairs. Li Bangyan and others hated him like an enemy. I'm afraid he succeeded, because there are small disadvantages to using soldiers, so he was able to take advantage of the opportunity to take advantage of loopholes and blame Li Gang.

古文：夫一胜一负，兵家常势，岂可遽以此倾动任事之臣。
现代文：大概一胜一负，兵家常事，怎么可以就因此排挤任事的大臣！
English: Probably one win and one loss, a common occurrence in the military, how can the minister in charge be ousted because of this!

古文：窃闻邦彦、时中等尽劝陛下他幸，京城骚动，若非纲为陛下建言，则乘舆播迁，宗庙社稷已为丘墟，生灵已遭鱼肉。
现代文：我私下听说李邦彦、白时中等人都劝陛下临幸他地，引起京师动乱，如果不是李纲替陛下陈述意见，那么皇帝播迁，宗庙社稷已经成为废墟，百姓已遭受残害。
English: Privately, I have heard that Li Bangyan, Bai Shi and others have all advised His Majesty to visit other places, causing turmoil in Beijing. If Li Gang did not make a statement on His Majesty's behalf, then the emperor would have moved, the ancestral temple and shrine would have fallen into ruins, and the people would have suffered damage.

古文：赖聪明不惑，特从其请，宜邦彦等谗嫉无所不至。
现代文：依恃陛下聪明不被迷惑，特地同意李纲的请求，大概李邦彦等人谗言嫉妒无所不至。
English: His Majesty was wise enough not to be fooled, and specifically agreed to Li Gang's request. Perhaps Li Bangyan and others' insults and jealousy are all-pervasive.

古文：陛下若听其言，斥纲不用，宗社存亡，未可知也。
现代文：陛下如果听信他们的话，罢斥李纲不予任用，那么国家存亡，就不能知道了。
English: If His Majesty listens to them and dismisses Li Gang from his post, the country's survival will be in doubt.

古文：邦彦等执议割地，盖河北实朝廷根本，无三关四镇，是弃河北，朝廷能复都大梁乎？
现代文：李邦彦等人坚持意见割让土地而河北危，河北实在是朝廷的根本，没有三关四镇，这是丢弃河北，朝廷能够再建都大梁吗？
English: Li Bangyan and others insisted on the idea of ceding land while Hebei is in danger, Hebei is really the foundation of the imperial court, there are no three gates and four towns, this is abandoning Hebei, can the imperial court rebuild the capital?

古文：则不知割太原、中山、河间以北之后，邦彦等能使金人不复败盟乎？
现代文：而且不知割让太原、中山、河间三镇以北之后，李邦彦等人能够使金人不再背弃盟约吗？
English: And I don't know, after ceding Taiyuan, Zhongshan, and the three towns north of Hema, will Li Bangyan and others be able to make Jinren no longer renege on the covenant?

古文：一进一退，在纲为甚轻，朝廷为甚重。
现代文： 一进一退，在李纲本人来说很轻，对朝廷来说是很重大的事情。
English: One advance and one retreat is very light for Li Gang himself, but it is a very important matter for the imperial court.

古文：幸陛下即反前命，复纲旧职，以安中外之心，付种师道以阃外之事。
现代文：希望陛下马上推翻前命，恢复李纲的旧职。以安定中外之心，把军事托付给种师道。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will immediately overturn the previous order and restore Li Gang to his former position. With the aim of stabilizing China and the world, he will entrust the military to Shao Shi Dao.

古文：陛下不信臣言，请遍问诸国人，必皆曰纲可用，邦彦等可斥也。
现代文：陛下不相信我的话，请遍问各国人民，必定都会说李纲可用，李邦彦等人可以罢斥。
English: Your Majesty does not believe my words, please ask the people of all countries, they will surely say that Li Gang can be used, and Li Bangyan and others can be dismissed.

古文：用舍之际，可不审诸！
现代文：任用与舍弃之间，不可不审慎！ 
English: Between appointment and resignation, one must be prudent!

古文：军民从者数万。
现代文：因随从陈东的军民有几万人。
English: Because tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians followed Chen Dong.

古文：书闻，传旨慰谕者旁午，众莫肯去，方舁登闻鼓挝坏之，喧呼震地。
现代文：奏书传到皇帝手里，传圣旨慰抚的人交错，众人不肯离去，正要抬登闻鼓把它击破，喧哗呼喊震地。
English: The music book passed into the emperor's hands, the people who preached the holy word of consolation staggered, the people refused to leave, they were about to lift the drum to break it, and the noise and shouts shook the earth.

古文：有中人出，众脔而磔之。
现代文：有宦官出来，大家割他的肉并把他裂体分尸。
English: A eunuch came out, and they cut his flesh and divided his body.

古文：于是亟诏纲入，复领行营，遣抚谕，乃稍引去。
现代文：于是急速诏令李纲入朝，重新统领行营，派人安抚劝谕众人，才逐渐退去。
English: Therefore, he quickly ordered Li Gang to enter the court, re-lead the camp, and sent someone to pacify and advise the people, before gradually retreating.

古文：金人既解去，学官观望，时宰议屏伏阙之士，先自东始。
现代文：金人已经撤走，学官互相观望，当时宰执议论除去拜伏在宫阙上的士人，首先从陈东开始。
English: The goldsmiths had already left, and the scholar-officials were looking at each other. At that time, the chancellor discussed the removal of the scholar-officials who were worshiping at the palace gate, starting with Chen Dong.

古文：京尹王时雍欲尽致诸生于狱，人人惴恐。
现代文：京兆尹王时雍想把学生们全都下狱，人人恐惧。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Wang Shiyong wants to put all the students in prison, everyone is afraid.

古文：朝廷用杨时为祭酒，复东职，遣聂山诣学抚谕，然后定。
现代文：宋朝廷任用杨时为祭酒，恢复陈东的职位，派聂山到太学安抚示谕，然后安定下来。
English: The Song Dynasty court appointed Yang Shi as a sacrificial wine, restored Chen Dong's position, and sent Shaoshan to Taishu to appease the oracle, and then settled down.

古文：吴敏欲弭谤，议奏补东官，赐第，除太学录。
现代文：吴敏想平息诽谤，建议奏补陈东官职，赐给住宅，被任为太学录。
English: Wu Min wanted to quell the slander, suggested that Chen Dong's official position should be supplemented, he was given a house, and he was appointed as the Taishu Record.

古文：东又请诛蔡氏，且力辞官以归，前后书五上。
现代文：陈东又请求诛杀蔡氏，而且极力辞官以回家，前后五次上奏书。
English: Chen Dong also requested to kill Cai, and tried his best to leave the office and go home. He submitted his resignation five times.

古文：既归，复预乡荐。
现代文：既然回去，又参与乡荐。
English: Now that I'm back, I'm participating in the township recommendation.

古文：高宗即位五日，相李纲，又五日召东至。
现代文：南宋高宗即皇帝位五天，以李纲为宰相，又过五天召陈东到朝廷。
English: Gaozong of the Southern Song Dynasty was emperor for five days, with Li Gang as prime minister, and five days later he summoned Chen Dong to the imperial court.

古文：未得对，会纲去，乃上书乞留纲而罢黄潜善、汪伯彦。
现代文：陈东没有得到应对的机会，适逢李纲去相位，就上奏书请求挽留李纲而罢免黄潜善、汪伯彦。
English: Chen Dong didn't get a chance to respond, and when Li Gang left the scene, he sent a petition to retain Li Gang and dismissed Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：请亲征以还二圣，治诸将不进兵之罪，以作士气；车驾归京师，勿幸金陵。
现代文：陈东请求皇帝亲征以使徽、钦二帝回来，对诸将不进兵予以治罪，来振作士气；皇帝车驾回京师，不要临幸金陵。
English: Chen Dong asked the emperor to personally recruit Hui and Qin emperors to come back, and to punish those who would not enter the army, to boost morale; the emperor drove back to Beijing Division, not to visit Jinling.

古文：又不报。
现代文：又没有得到答复。
English: Again, there was no reply.

古文：潜善辈方揭示纲幸金陵旧奏，东言纲在中途，不知事体，宜以后说为正，必速罢潜善辈。
现代文：黄潜善等人才揭示李纲要皇帝临幸金陵的旧奏章，陈东说李纲在路中途，不知道国家事体，应该以后说为正，必须迅速罢免黄潜善这些人。
English: Huang Qianzen and other talents revealed the old music of Emperor Linxing's Jinling to Li Gang, Chen Dong said that Li Gang was in the middle of the road, did not know the national situation, should be said to be correct in the future, and Huang Qianzen must quickly dismiss these people.

古文：会布衣欧阳澈亦上书言事，潜善遽以语激怒高宗，言不亟诛，将复鼓众伏阙。
现代文：恰逢布衣士人欧阳澈也上奏书讨论国家大事，黄潜善就以话激怒高宗，说不赶快杀陈东，将要又鼓动众人拜伏在宫阙上。
English: At the same time, Ouyang Che, a Buxi man, also wrote a book to discuss national affairs. Huang Qianshan angered Gao Zong with his words, saying that if he did not kill Chen Dong soon, he would encourage everyone to worship on the palace mound.

古文：书独下潜善 所。
现代文：诏书惟独传达到黄潜善的住所。
English: The edict only reached Huang Xuancheng's residence.

古文：府尹孟庾召东议事，东请食而行，手书区处家事，字画如平时，已乃授其从者曰： 我死，尔归致此于吾亲。 食已如厕，吏有难色，东笑曰： 我陈东也，畏死即不敢言，已言肯逃死乎？ 吏曰： 吾亦知公，安敢相迫。 顷之，东具冠带出，别同邸，乃与澈同斩于市。
现代文：府尹孟庾召陈东讨论事情，陈东请求吃了饭才走，亲手书写对家事的分别处置，字画像平时一样，写完就授给他的跟从说 ：我死，你把它送回去给我的双亲。 吃完饭上厕所，官吏面有难色，陈东笑着说 ：我是陈东，害怕死就不敢说话，已经说了肯逃避死亡吗？ 官吏说： 我认识您，怎么敢相逼迫。 一会儿，陈东备办帽子衣带出来，告别同事，就与欧阳澈在集市中被斩杀。
English: The prefect, Yin Mengyao, called Chen Dong to discuss the matter. Chen Dong asked to have dinner before leaving. He wrote down the separate disposal of household chores with his own hand. The word picture was the same as usual. After writing, he gave it to his follower and said, "I'm dying, you should send it back to my parents." After eating and going to the toilet, the official looked puzzled. Chen Dong smiled and said, "I'm Chen Dong, I'm afraid of death and I don't dare to speak. Have you already said whether you want to escape death?" The official said, "I know you, how dare you persecute

古文：四明李猷赎其尸瘗之。
现代文：四明李猷赎买他的尸体埋葬。
English: Four-year-old Li Qiye bought his corpse and buried it.

古文：东初未识纲，特以国故，至为之死，识与不识皆为流涕。
现代文：陈东起初不认识李纲，只是因为国家的缘故，到为之而死，认识与不认识陈东的人都替他悲伤流涕。
English: Chen Dong did not know Li Gang at first, but he died for the sake of the country. People who knew Chen Dong or did not know him shed tears of sorrow for him.

古文：时年四十有二。
现代文：当时陈东年纪四十二岁。
English: At that time, Chen Dong was 42 years old.

古文：潜善既杀二人，明日府尹白事，独诘其何以不先关白，微示愠色，以明非己意。
现代文：黄潜善已杀害陈东、欧阳澈二人，第二天，府尹报告事情，只诘问他为什么不先禀报再杀，稍微显示不高兴的脸色，以表明不是自己的意思。
English: Huang Qianshan had already killed Chen Dong and Ou Yang Jie. The next day, Fu Yin reported the matter and asked him why he didn't report the killing first, showing a slightly unhappy face to show that he didn't mean it.

古文：越三年，高宗感悟，追赠东、澈承事郎。
现代文：过了三年，高宗感动悔悟，追赠陈东、欧阳澈为承事郎。
English: After three years, Gao Zong was moved to repentance and posthumously awarded Chen Dong and Ouyang Che as stewards.

古文：东无子，官有服亲一人，澈一子，令州县抚其家。
现代文：陈东没有儿子，以他的亲戚一人及欧阳澈的一个儿子为官，命令州县安抚他们的家人。
English: Chen Dong did not have a son, and he used one of his relatives and one of Ouyang Che's sons as officials to order the prefecture to appease their families.

古文：及驾过镇江，遣守臣祭东墓，赐缗钱五百。
现代文：等到皇帝车驾过镇江，派守臣祭祀陈东墓，赐予缗钱五百。
English: When the emperor's carriage drove across the Zhenjiang River, he sent a retainer to offer a sacrifice at Chen Dong's tomb and bestowed 500 yuan.

古文：绍兴四年，并加朝奉郎、秘阁修撰，官其后二人，赐田十顷。
现代文：绍兴四年，陈东、欧阳澈一起加朝奉郎、秘阁修撰，以他们的后代二人为官，赐给田地一百亩。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoxing, Chen Dong and Ouyang Zhe together with Chaobing Lang and Hike Shuxian, with their two descendants as officials, granted a hundred mu of fields.

古文：欧阳澈，字德明，抚州崇仁人。
现代文：欧阳澈字德明，抚州崇仁人。
English: Ouyang Chezhi Deming, Fuzhou Chongren.

古文：年少美须眉，善谈世事，尚气大言，慷慨不少屈，而忧国闵时，出于天性。
现代文：年轻时是个美男子，善于谈论世事，崇尚气节和正大的言论，意气激昂不为屈服，而忧国悯时，出于他的天性。
English: When he was young, he was a handsome man, good at talking about world affairs, advocating high morals and upright speech, spirited not to give in, but when he was worried about the country, it was because of his nature.

古文：靖康初，应制条敝政，陈安边御敌十策，州未许发。退而复采朝廷之阙失，政令之乖违，可以为保邦御俗之方、去蠹国残民之贼者十事，复为书，并上闻。
现代文：靖康初年，应对制策条陈弊政，上陈安边御敌十策，州官府不准传送，欧阳澈退下州府而又搜集朝廷的阙失，时政的乖违，可以用来保卫国家抵御恶俗的办法、除去蠹国害民的贼臣十件事，再次写成奏章，并且被传送给皇帝。
English: In the first year of Jingkang, in response to the formulation of the policy article Chen evil politics, the top ten policies of Chen Anbian against the enemy were not allowed to be transmitted by the state government, Ouyang Chie withdrew from the state government and collected the losses of the imperial court, the violations of the current government, the methods that could be used to defend the country against evil customs, and the ten things to remove the vassals who harmed the people of the country, were again written into a record, and were transmitted to the emperor.

古文：已而复论列十事，言： 臣所进三书实为切要，然而触权臣者有之，迕天听者有之，或结怨富贵之门，或遗怒台谏之官，臣非不知，而敢抗言者，愿以身而安天下也。 所上书为三巨轴，厩置卒辞不能举，州将为选力士荷之以行。
现代文：不久又论列十事，说： 我所进献的三个奏章确实是切中要害，但是有的是触犯当权大臣，有的是违背陛下的听闻，或者结怨于富贵人家，或者遗怒于御史台、谏院的官员，我不是不知道，却敢于向陛下直言不讳的原因，是希望用自身而使天下安定。 欧阳澈所上奏书为三个巨轴，驿站的士兵推辞拿不动，州将为此挑选力士扛在肩上行走。
English: He then went on to list ten things, saying, "The three pieces of music I have presented are indeed the crux of the matter, but some of them offend the ministers in power, some are contrary to what Your Majesty has heard, or cause resentment to the rich and noble, or anger to the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office and the Imperial Palace. I do not know, but the reason why I dare to speak frankly to Your Majesty is that I hope to use myself to stabilize the world. The book presented by Ouyang Che is three great axes, the soldiers of the station are reluctant to refuse, and the state will select wrestlers to carry on their shoulders.

古文：会金人大入，要盟城下而去，澈闻，辄语人曰： 我能口伐金人，强于百万之师，愿杀身以安社稷。
现代文：适逢金人大举入侵，胁迫宋朝廷在汴京城下缔结盟约而离去，欧阳澈听说此事，就告诉他人： 我能够用口讨伐金人，比百万军队要强，愿意杀身以安定社稷国家。
English: When the gold miners invaded en masse and forced the Song Dynasty to sign an alliance treaty at the foot of Beijing, Ouyang Che heard about it and told others: I can fight the gold miners with my mouth, I am stronger than a million troops, and I am willing to kill myself to stabilize the society and the country.

古文：有如上不见信，请质子女于朝，身使穹庐，御亲王以归。 乡人每笑其狂，止之不可，乃徒步走行在。
现代文：如果皇帝不信任我，请把我的子女放在朝廷作为人质，自身出使金国，奉亲王返回。 同乡人每每笑他狂妄，阻止他而不能，欧阳澈就徒步走到皇帝临时居住的地方。
English: If the emperor does not trust me, please put my children in the imperial court as hostages, send Jin Guo himself, and return with the prince. His fellow villagers laughed at his arrogance, but could not stop him, and Ouyang Che walked on foot to the place where the emperor temporarily lived.

古文：高宗即位南京，伏阙上封事，极诋用事大臣，遂见杀，见《陈东传》。
现代文：宋高宗在南京即皇帝位，欧阳澈拜伏在宫阙上上书奏事，极力诋骂当权的大臣，于是被杀害，见《陈东传》。
English: Song Gaozong became emperor in Nanjing, and Ouyang Chebai wrote a report on the palace gate, strongly slandering the minister in power, and was killed, see "The Biography of Chen Dong."

古文：死时年三十七。
现代文：死时年纪三十七岁。
English: He was thirty-seven years old when he died.

古文：许翰在政府，罢朝，问潜善处分何人，曰： 斩陈东、欧阳澈耳。 翰惊失色，因究其书何以不下政府，曰： 独下潜善，故不得以相视。 遂力求罢。
现代文：许翰在政事堂，退朝后，他问黄潜善处分什么人，黄潜善说： 斩陈东、欧阳澈。 许翰大惊失色，因而查究诏书为什么没有送政事堂的原因，黄潜善说： 只送给我黄潜善，所以你不能看到。 
English: Xu Han was in the Great Hall of the People. After retiring from the throne, he asked Huang Chuxian what kind of person to punish. Huang Chuxian said, "Kill Chen Dong and Ouyang Che." Xu Han was shocked and lost his temper, so he investigated the reason why the edict was not sent to the Great Hall of the People. Huang Chuxian said, "Only send me Huang Chuxian, so you can't see it."

古文：为东、澈著哀词。
现代文：许翰于是极力要求解除职务。他替陈东、欧阳澈撰写哀词。
English: Xu Han then strongly demanded to be relieved of his duties. He wrote a lament for Chen Dong and Ouyang Che.

古文：澈所著《飘然集》六卷，会稽胡衍既刻之，丰城范应钤为之祠学中。
现代文：欧阳澈所著《飘然集》六卷，会稽胡衍已把它刻印，丰城人范应钫在学校中为欧阳澈建立祀祠。
English: The six-volume "Floating Collection" written by Ouyang Che has been engraved by Hu Yan, a scholar from Fengcheng, and Fan Yingtao has established a shrine for Ouyang Che in the school.

古文：马伸，字时中，东平人。
现代文：马伸字时中，东平人。
English: Ma Shenzhi is middle-aged, and Dongpingren is young.

古文：绍圣四年进士。
现代文：绍圣四年进士。
English: Shaosheng is a four-year-old trainee.

古文：不乐驰骛，每调官，未尝择便利。
现代文：不喜欢奔走趋赴，每次调任官职，未曾选择便利的地方。
English: He does not like to rush around, and each time he is transferred to an official position, he has not chosen a convenient place.

古文：为成都郫县丞，守委受成都租。
现代文：任成都郫县县丞，郡守委托他收取成都的租税。
English: He was appointed as the county magistrate of Jixian County in Chengdu, and the county governor entrusted him to collect taxes in Chengdu.

古文：前受输者率以食色玩好蛊訹而败，伸请绝宿弊。
现代文：从前收缴税的人都因接受美色珍玩喜好引诱而失败，马伸请求杜绝素来就有的弊端。
English: In the past, people who collected taxes failed because they accepted the lure of beautiful and rare play preferences. Ma Sheng requested to eliminate the drawbacks that have always existed.

古文：民争先输，至沿途假寐以达旦，常平使者孙俟早行，怪问之，皆应曰： 今年马县丞受纳，不病我也。 俟荐于朝。
现代文：百姓争先输纳租税，以致沿途和衣而睡等到天亮，常平使者孙俟早上出行，奇怪地询问他们，百姓都说 ：今年马县丞接受纳租不使我们为难。 孙俟向朝廷推荐马伸。
English: The people scrambled to accept the tax, so much so that along the way they slept in their clothes and waited until dawn. Sun Yat-sen, the envoy of Changping, traveled in the morning and asked them strangely. The people all said, "This year, Ma Xian Rong accepted to accept the tax, so it will not be difficult for us." Sun Yat-sen recommended Ma Xing to the imperial court.

古文：崇宁初，范致虚攻程颐为邪说，下河南府尽逐学徒。
现代文：崇宁初年，范致虚攻击程颐制造邪说，下令河南府把他的学生全部逐走。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Fan Zhixu attacked Cheng Yao for creating evil theories and ordered Henan Province to expel all of his students.

古文：伸注西京法曹，欲依颐门以学，因张绎求见，十反愈恭，颐固辞之。
现代文：马伸为京西法曹，打算依程颐门下求学，托张绎求见，来回十次反而愈加恭敬，程颐坚决辞谢。
English: Ma Shen is a lawyer in Beijing and Xi'an. He planned to study under Cheng Yao's tutelage, and asked for his advice. However, after ten times of going back and forth, he became more and more respectful, and Cheng Yao firmly declined.

古文：伸欲休官而来，颐曰： 时论方异，恐贻子累，子能弃官，则官不必弃也。 曰： 使伸得闻道，死何憾，况未必死乎？ 颐叹其有志，进之。
现代文：马伸想辞官而来，程颐说： 时论正异，恐怕给你连累，你能丢弃官职，那么官就不必舍弃了。 马伸说： 使我得以闻见道理，死有什么遗憾，何况未必死呢？ 程颐感叹马伸有志气，引进了他。
English: Ma Shen wanted to resign from the post, Cheng Yao said: The time is different, I'm afraid it will be a burden to you, if you can abandon the post, then you don't have to give up the post. Ma Shen said: Let me hear the truth, what is the regret of death, let alone death? Cheng Yao lamented that Ma Shen had ambition and introduced him.

古文：自是公暇虽风雨必日一造，忌娼者飞语中伤之，弗顾，卒受《中庸》以归。
现代文：从此马伸闲暇时即使是刮风下雨必每天去造访程颐一次，嫉妒的人流言蜚语中伤他，他不顾，终于受学《中庸》而返回。
English: From then on, even if it was windy and rainy, Ma Shin would visit Cheng Yao once a day in his spare time. Jealous people slandered him with gossip, but he ignored it and finally returned to study "Middle Way."

古文：靖康初，孙傅以卓行荐召，御史中丞秦桧迎辟之，擢监察御史。
现代文：靖康初年，孙傅以卓越德行推荐马伸，御史中丞秦桧迎接征召他，提拔为监察御史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, Sun Fu recommended Ma Shin for his outstanding moral conduct, and Grand Historian Chujo Qin Yu welcomed his conscription and promoted him to the position of Supervisor of the Grand Historian.

古文：及汴京陷，金人立张邦昌，集百官，环以兵胁之，俾推戴。
现代文：等到汴京陷落，金人立张邦昌为皇帝，集中百官，周围用军队威胁他们，使他们推戴张邦昌。
English: After the fall of Yanjing, the Jin established Zhang Bangchang as emperor, gathered hundreds of officials, and surrounded them with troops to threaten them and make them support Zhang Bangchang.

古文：众唯唯，伸独奋曰： 吾职谏争，忍坐视乎！ 乃与御史吴给约秦桧共为议状，乞存赵氏，复嗣君位。
现代文：众人唯唯诺诺，马伸唯独挺身说： 我的职守是上谏争论，忍心袖手旁观吗？ 就与御史吴给相约秦桧共同写议状，请求保存赵氏，恢复嗣君的皇位。
English: Everyone acquiesced, but Ma Shinwei stood up alone and said, "My duty is to argue with the emperor, can I stand by and watch?" So he and the governor Wu jointly wrote a petition to the emperor Qin Hui, requesting the preservation of the Zhao clan and the restoration of the emperor's throne.

古文：会统制官吴革起义，募兵图复二帝，伸预其谋。
现代文：适逢统制官吴革起义，招募军队以图恢复徽、钦二帝的皇位，马伸参预了吴革的谋划。
English: At the time of the uprising of the regent Wu Ge, the army was recruited in an attempt to restore the emblem and the throne of Emperor Qin II. Ma Sheng participated in Wu Ge's plan.

古文：邦昌既僣立，贼臣多从臾之，伸首具书请邦昌速迎奉元帅康王。
现代文：张邦昌已僭立皇帝位，贼臣多随从献媚他，马伸首先写信请张邦昌赶快迎奉元帅康王。
English: Zhang Bangchang had already been enthroned as emperor, and most of his vassals followed and courted him. Ma Shin first wrote a letter to Zhang Bangchang, asking him to quickly welcome Marshal Kang Wang.

古文：同院无肯连名者，伸独持以往，而银台司视书不称臣，辞不受。
现代文：谏院没有肯与他连名的人，马伸独自拿着信前往，但银台司看到信不称臣，拒辞不接受。
English: There was no one at the Imperial Household Agency who was willing to be associated with him, so Ma Shin went alone with the letter, but when the Bank of Taiwan saw that the letter was not flattering, he refused to accept the resignation.

古文：伸投袂叱之曰： 吾今日不爱一死，正为此耳，尔欲吾称臣邪？ 即缴申尚书省，以示邦昌。
现代文：马伸拂动衣袖叱责说 ：我今天不惜一死，正是为了这个而已，你想要我称臣吗？ 银台司立即向尚书省交付陈述，以给张邦昌看。
English: Ma Shin whipped his sleeve and scolded, "I'm willing to die today, just for this, do you want me to praise you?" The director of the Bank of Taiwan immediately delivered a statement to the Ministry of Education to show to Zhang Bangchang.

古文：其书略曰：
现代文：其信大略说：
English: The letter reads in part:

古文：相公服事累朝，为宋辅臣。比不幸迫于强敌，使当伪号，变出非常，相公此时岂以义为可犯，君为可忘，宗社神灵为可昧邪？
现代文： 相公事奉几朝，为宋朝的辅佐大臣，近来不幸被强敌逼迫，使你担任伪号，事变出于突如其来，相公此时难道认为节义可以侵犯，君主可以忘却，国家百姓可以蒙蔽吗？
English: You have served several dynasties. You were the assistant minister of the Song Dynasty. Recently, unfortunately, you were persecuted by a strong enemy, forcing you to serve as a pseudonym. The incident came out of the blue. At this time, do you think that the festival can be violated, the monarch can forget, and the people of the country can be blinded?

古文：所以忍须臾死而诡听之者，其心若曰：与其虚逊于人而实亡赵氏之宗，孰若虚受于己而实存以归之耳。
现代文：之所以忍耐片刻死亡而假装听从他们，其心里像在说：与其白白逊位给他人而实际上亡掉赵氏的祖庙，不如虚受于自己而实际上保存赵氏以归位。
English: The reason why he tolerated death for a moment and pretended to obey them was as if he was saying in his heart: rather than abdicating to others and actually losing the ancestral temple of the Zhao clan, it would be better to suffer from himself and actually preserve the Zhao clan.

古文：忠臣义士未即就死，阖城民庶未即生变者，亦以相公必能立赵孤也。
现代文：忠臣义士没有立即就死，全城百姓没有立即发生变乱的原因，也是认为相公一定能够立赵氏遗孤为皇帝。
English: The reason why the loyal vassal did not die immediately, and the people of the whole city did not immediately revolt, was also the belief that the relative ruler would surely be able to make the orphan of the Zhao clan the emperor.

古文：今金人北还，相公义当忧惧，自列于朝。
现代文： 现在金人北还，相公义当忧虑恐惧，自行列于朝臣。
English: Now, Kim Renpuk is also self-appointed as a courtier, which is a cause for concern and fear.

古文：康王在外，国统有属，狱讼讴歌，人皆归往。
现代文：康王在外面，国家统绪有所属，监狱里的罪犯歌颂，人们都归心向往。
English: King Kang is on the outside, the country's national unity has its place, and the criminals in prison are singing praises. People are yearning to return to their hearts.

古文：宜即发使通问，扫清宫室，率群臣共迎而立之。
现代文：应该马上派使臣往来问候，清扫宫室，率领群臣一起迎康王而立他为皇帝。
English: He should immediately send envoys to exchange greetings, clean up the palace, and lead a group of ministers to welcome King Kang and establish him as emperor.

古文：相公易服退处，省中庶事皆禀命太后，其赦书施恩惠、收人心等事，日下拘收，俟康王御极施行。
现代文：相公易服退隐居住，禁宫之中的大小事务都禀命于太后，其下赦书施以恩惠，收拢人心等事，暂且拘束，等康王登皇位施行。
English: In the Forbidden Palace, all matters big and small were entrusted to the empress dowager, including public and private duties, retirement and residence, granting favors with letters of pardon, and winning hearts and minds. However, these matters were temporarily restricted until the ascension of King Kang to the throne.

古文：然后相公北面引咎，以明身为人臣，昧于防患，遭寇仇胁污，当时不能即死，以待陛下，今复何面目事君，请归死司寇，为人臣失节之戒，伏阙下俟命。
现代文：然后相公称臣由自己承担错误的责任，以表明身为人臣，为防止祸患所欺瞒，遭受仇敌胁迫玷污，当时不能就死，以待陛下，今天还有什么面目事奉君主，向刑部投案自首请求处死，作为人臣失去气节的惩戒，拜伏宫阙下等待命令。
English: Then the public relations officer said that the minister assumed the wrong responsibility by himself to show that he was a minister, was deceived by the enemy to prevent the evil, was defiled by the coercion of the enemy, could not die at that time, waited for his majesty, what kind of face is there today to serve the monarch, surrendered to the criminal department and requested to be executed, as a punishment for the loss of dignity of the minister, and waited for orders under the palace.

古文：如此，则明主必能察相公忠实存国，义非苟生，且弃过而录功矣。
现代文：像这样，那么贤明的君主一定能够明察相公忠实保存国家，本义不是偷生，而且忘记过错而以功录用。
English: In this way, such a wise monarch will surely be able to keep an eye on the public and faithfully preserve the country. The original meaning is not to steal a living, but to forget the fault and be awarded with merit.

古文：今乃谋不出此，时日已多，肆然尚当非据，偃寝禁闼，若固有之。
现代文： 现在你的计谋不是从这出发，已经很有些时候了，毫无顾忌还当作出乎意料的凭据，安卧在禁中，好像是本来就有的。
English: Now your stratagem does not start from here, it has been around for a long time, and you should not hesitate to make unexpected evidence, lie down under the ban, as if it were already there.

古文：群心狐疑，道路混澒，谓相公方挟强金，使人游说康王，姑令南遁，为久假不归之计。
现代文：大家的心犹豫不决，道路纷乱弥漫，说相公正挟持强大的金国，派人去游说康王，暂且令他南逃，作为使他久远不回来的计策。
English: Everyone's heart is hesitant, the road is full of chaos, and it is fair to say that the powerful Kim Guo is holding the powerful Kim Guo hostage, sending people to lobby King Kang to temporarily let him escape to the south, as a strategy to make him not come back for a long time.

古文：上天难欺，下民可畏。
现代文：上天难欺，百姓可畏。
English: Heaven cannot be deceived, and the people are to be feared.

古文：相公若以愚言粗知觉悟，及此改图，犹可转祸为福于匪朝伊夕之间。
现代文：相公如果因我的话粗略有所觉悟，至此改变图谋，还可以转祸为福于朝夕之间。
English: If, because of my words, my father-in-law has a rough awareness and changes his plan, he can turn misfortune into blessing between morning and evening.

古文：过此以往，则相公包藏已深，志虑转异，外饰事端，悽日待期，而阴结寇仇，合从为乱，九庙在天，万无成理，伸必不能辅相公为宋朝叛臣也。
现代文：过了这之后，那么相公包藏已深，志虑转向异志，对外掩饰事端，荒废日子等待希望，却暗中交结仇敌，联合作乱，帝王祖先在天，决没有成功的道理，马伸一定不能辅助相公成为宋朝的叛臣。
English: After this, then, the Emperor's bag has been deeply hidden, the ambition has turned to a different ambition, the incident has been concealed from the outside world, the days have been wasted waiting for hope, but secretly allied with the enemy, jointly caused chaos, the Emperor's ancestors are in heaven, there is no reason for success, Ma Shin must not assist the Emperor to become a traitor to the Song Dynasty.

古文：请先伏死都市，以明此心。 
现代文：我请求首先在都市受死，以表明这种心迹。 
English: I ask to die in the city first, to show this intention.

古文：邦昌得书，气沮谋丧。
现代文：张邦昌得到马伸的奏书，气沮谋丧。
English: Zhang Bangchang got Ma Shin's report and was devastated.

古文：明日，议迎哲宗后孟氏垂帘，追还伪赦，乃遣冯澥、李回等迎康王。
现代文：第二天，讨论迎接哲宗皇后孟氏垂帘听政，追还伪赦令，于是派冯氵解、李回等人迎接康王回朝。
English: The next day, discussions were held to welcome Zhezong Empress Meng's return to politics and the return of the pseudo-pardon order, so Feng Rongde and Li Hui were sent to welcome King Kang back to the dynasty.

古文：时王及之等犹请籍龙德宫宝货，斥卖灵沼鱼藕，以资官用。
现代文：当时王及之等还请求登记龙德宫珍贵的物品，变卖灵池鱼藕，以资助官府用度。
English: At that time, Wang and others also requested the registration of the precious items of the Longde Palace and sold the Lingchi fish bait to subsidize the use of the government.

古文：伸复慨然引义檄之曰： 古者人臣去国，三年不反，然后收其田里。
现代文：马伸又慨然引证气节晓谕他们说： 古代人臣离职，三年不再返回，然后收回他的田地房屋。
English: Ma Shin also angrily quoted the qi festival and told them: "Ancient courtiers left their posts and did not return for three years, and then they took back their fields and houses.

古文：君之礼臣如此，臣之报君宜如何？
现代文：君主这样礼遇臣下，臣下报答君主应当怎样呢？
English: If the monarch treats his subjects with such courtesy, how should the subjects repay the monarch?

古文：今二圣远狩，犹未出境，天下之人方且北首，欲追挽而还之。
现代文：现在徽、钦二帝到远地巡狩，还没有出国境，天下之人翘首北望，想要追随把二帝拉回来。
English: At present, Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin have gone on a long-distance hunting trip and have not yet left the country. People all over the world are looking northward, wanting to follow and pull the Second Emperor back.

古文：君之府藏燕游，忍一朝而毁乎？
现代文：皇帝的财物文书，能忍心一个早上而被毁掉吗？
English: Could the emperor's property documents bear to be destroyed in one morning?

古文：尔等逆节甚矣！ 力争乃止。
现代文：你们违背节义太过分了！ 马伸力争才使王及之等人罢手。
English: You have gone too far away from righteousness; the horse is too strong for the king and his attendants.

古文：高宗即位，伸拜章以城陷不能救，主迁不能死，请就窜削。
现代文：宋高宗即皇位，马伸跪下上奏章以都城失陷不能救援，君主被掳走不能死义，请求就地放逐削职。
English: Song Gaozong is the imperial throne, Ma Shin kneeled down and played a song to say that the fall of the capital cannot be rescued, the monarch cannot be taken away, and he asked to be banished and dismissed.

古文：上知其有忠力于国，擢殿中侍御史，抚谕荆湖、广南，以诛邦昌及其党王时雍等。
现代文：皇帝知道他有忠义之心效力于国家，提拔他为殿中侍御史，抚谕荆湖、广南，以诛杀张邦昌及其党徒王时雍等人。
English: The emperor knew that he had a loyal heart to serve the country, and promoted him to serve as a historian in the palace, and ordered Jinghu and Guangnan to kill Zhang Bangchang and his party member Wang Shiyong and others.

古文：所过州县，诹察吏之贤否与民利疚，以次列上于朝。
现代文：马伸所过州县，询问考察官吏贤能与否以及百姓的利害病端，以便依次排列向朝廷上奏。
English: Ma Sheng passed through Zhoushu County to inquire about the ability of officials and the interests of the people, so that they could be arranged in order to report to the court.

古文：伸自湖、广将入奏黄潜善、汪伯彦不法凡十有七事，草疏已具，朝廷方召孙觌、谢克家，乃先奏： 觌、克家趋操不正，在靖康间与王时雍、王及之等七人结为死党，附耿南仲倡为和议，助成贼谋。有不主和议者，则欲执送金人。
现代文：马伸从荆湖、广南将要入朝上奏黄潜善、汪伯彦不法行为共十七事，草疏已经备办，朝廷正召用孙觌、谢克家，于是首先上奏： 孙觌、谢克家旨趣操行不端正，在靖康年间与王时雍、王及之等七人结为死党，依附耿南仲倡为和议，助成奸贼的谋划，有不主张和议的人，就打算捉住送给金人。
English: Ma Shin from Jinghu and Guangnan is about to enter the imperial court to report a total of seventeen illegal acts committed by Huang Kuanshan and Wang Bohian. The dossier has already been prepared. The imperial court is calling on the Sun Yat-sen and the Shiek family. Therefore, the following is first to be reported: The Sun Yat-sen and the Shiek family did not conduct themselves in a proper manner. During the Jing and Kang dynasties, they formed a deadly alliance with Wang Shiyong, Wang and seven others, adhered to Geng Nanzhong's proposal for peace, and assisted the plan of the traitors. If there are people who do not

古文：觌受金人女乐，草表媚之，极其笔力，乃负国之贼，宜加远窜。 不报。
现代文：孙觌接受金人的女子乐队，起草章表献媚金人，极其笔力之所能，是有负于国家的奸贼，应该加以流放远地。 
English: Sun Yat-sen accepted the goldsmith's girl band, and drafted the articles of association to flatter the goldsmith. He was a traitor to the country and should have been exiled far away.

古文：伸又进疏曰：
现代文：没有得到朝廷的答复。马伸又进疏说：
English: There was no reply from the court. Ma Shin went on to say:

古文：陛下得黄潜善、汪伯彦以为辅相，委任不复疑。
现代文： 陛下得到黄潜善、汪伯彦任他们为辅佐宰相，委任不再怀疑。
English: His Majesty received Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian and appointed them as assistant prime ministers. The appointment is no longer in doubt.

古文：然自入相以来，处事未尝惬当物情，遂使女真日强，盗贼日炽，国本日蹙，威权日削。
现代文：然而自从他们入为宰相以来，处理事情不曾符合众人的感情，于是使女真日益强大，盗贼日益势盛，国家根本日益迫促，威严权力日益削弱。
English: However, since they became prime ministers, their handling of affairs has not been in line with the feelings of the people. As a result, the handmaidens have become increasingly powerful, the thieves have become increasingly powerful, the country has become increasingly urgent, and the authority has become increasingly weakened.

古文：且三镇未服，汴都方危，前日遽下还都之诏，至今銮舆未能顺动。
现代文：而且三镇不服，汴都正危，前天忽然下还都的诏书，至今皇驾不能顺利动身。
English: Moreover, the three towns are not satisfied, Shidu is in danger, the day before yesterday, the imperial edict was suddenly issued, so far, the imperial car cannot start smoothly.

古文：其不谨诏命如此。
现代文：他们不谨遵诏命如此。
English: They didn't do what they were ordered to do.

古文：草茅对策不如式，考官罚金可矣，一日黜三舍人，乃取沈晦、孙觌、黄哲辈诸群小以掌诰命。
现代文：在野未出仕的人对策不合法式，考官罚钱可以了，一天贬斥三个舍人，而用沈晦、孙觌、黄哲这些群小来掌管诰命。
English: The countermeasures for those who have not served in the field are illegal, and the examiner can impose a fine. One day, three subordinates are reprimanded, and Shen Hui, Sun Ye, and Huang Zhe are used to control the lives of subordinates.

古文：其黜陟不公如此。
现代文：他们升降进退人材如此不公平。
English: It's so unfair how they promote and demote people.

古文：吴给、张訚以言事被逐，邵成章缘上言远窜。
现代文：吴给、张因言事被逐贬，邵成章因向皇帝言事被流放远地。
English: Wu Ji and Zhang were banished for their speech, and Shao Chengzhang was exiled to a distant land for his speech to the emperor.

古文：其壅塞言路如此。
现代文：他们堵塞言路如此。
English: That's how they stifle speech.

古文：祖宗旧制，谏官御史有阙，御史中丞、翰林学士具名以进，三省不敢预，厥有深旨。
现代文：祖宗原有制度，谏官御史有缺额，御史中丞、翰林学士开列名单以进用，三省不敢干预，有深刻的含义。
English: The original system of ancestors, the eunuch imperial historian has a shortfall, the imperial historian chujo and the Hanlin scholar make a list to be used, and the three provinces do not dare to intervene, which has a profound meaning.

古文：近拟用台谏，多取亲旧，不过欲为己助。
现代文：近来拟用台谏官，大多取用亲戚故友，不过是想作为自己的助手。
English: Recently, most of the eunuchs who want to be eunuchs are relatives and old friends, but they want to be their own assistants.

古文：其毁法自恣如此。
现代文：他们败坏法律毫无顾忌如此。
English: They have no qualms about subverting the law.

古文：张悫、宗泽、许景衡公忠有才，皆可任重，潜善、伯彦忌之，沮抑至死。
现代文：张悫、宗泽、许景衡公正忠诚有才能，都可以担负重任，黄潜善、汪伯彦忌妒他们，后压抑迫害他们至死。
English: Zhang Qian, Zong Ze, Xu Jingheng are fair, loyal and talented, and can shoulder heavy responsibilities. Huang Qianshan and Wang Bohian are jealous of them, suppress and persecute them to death.

古文：其妨功害能如此。
现代文：其妨功害能如此。
English: This may be the case.

古文：或责以救焚拯溺之事，则曰难言，盖谓陛下制之不得施设也。
现代文：有人责成他们以救火拯溺的事情，就说难言，大概认为陛下控制他们以致不能够执行。
English: It is hard to say what they were ordered to do in terms of firefighting and rescue, and it is likely that they thought that His Majesty was controlling them so that they would not be able to do it.

古文：或问陈东之死，则曰不知，盖谓其事繇于陛下也。
现代文：有人询问陈东之死，就说不知道，大概认为这件事是由于陛下的缘故。
English: When someone asked about Chen Dong's death, he said that he did not know, and probably thought that the matter was due to His Majesty.

古文：其过则称君、善则称己如此。
现代文：他们有过错就声称是君主、有好事就声称是自己如此。
English: When things go wrong, they claim to be monarchs; when things go right, they claim to be themselves.

古文：吕源狂横，陛下逐去，不数月由郡守升发运。其强狠自专如此。
现代文：吕源狂妄刁横，陛下把他贬逐离开朝廷，不到几个月他由郡守升任发运使，他们强狠自专如此。
English: Lyu Yuan was arrogant and domineering. His majesty banished him from the imperial court. Within a few months, he was promoted from county governor to dispatching envoy. They did this to themselves.

古文：御营使虽主兵权，凡行在诸军皆其所统，潜善、伯彦别置亲兵一千人，请给居处，优于众兵。
现代文：御营使虽然主掌兵权，凡是行在各军都属他的统辖，黄潜善、汪伯彦另外建立亲军一千人，请托供给居住的地方，比众兵优厚。
English: Although the commander-in-chief is in charge of the military, everything that goes on in each army is under his control. Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Bohian also set up a thousand soldiers, and asked him to provide them with a place to live, which was better than the soldiers.

古文：其务收军情如此。
现代文：他们勉力收拢军心如此。
English: They're trying to rally the troops.

古文：广市私恩，则多复祠官之阙；同恶相济，则力庇王安中之罪。
现代文：广泛地贩卖私人恩惠，就多恢复祠官的缺额；共同作恶的人互相救助，就极力庇护王安中的罪行。
English: Extensive selling of personal favors, it is more to restore the shortage of ancestral officials; people who commit evil together help each other, and they strongly protect Wang Anzhong's crimes.

古文：摭其所为，岂不辜陛下倚任之重哉？
现代文：摘取他们所作所为，难道不是辜负了陛下的重托吗？
English: Isn't it a betrayal of His Majesty's trust to pick apart what they did?

古文：陛下隐忍不肯斥逐，涂炭遗民固已绝望，二圣还期在何时邪？
现代文： 陛下勉力含忍不肯贬逐他们，极端困苦劫后残留的人民已经感到绝望，二帝回朝的日子在什么时候呢？
English: His Majesty tried his best not to disparage them. The people who remained after the extreme hardships have already felt despair. When will the day come when the two emperors return to the country?

古文：臣每念此，不如无生。
现代文：我每每想到这些，就不如没有生命。
English: Every time I think about it, I'd rather not be alive.

古文：岁月如流，时几易失，望速罢潜善、伯彦政柄，别选贤者，共图大事。
现代文：岁月如流，时机容易失去，希望陛下迅速解除黄潜善、汪伯彦的权力，另外选择贤能，共同图谋国家大事。 
English: As time goes by, opportunities are easily lost. I hope that His Majesty will quickly remove the power of Huang Xuanzen and Wang Bohian, and select other talents to jointly plot national affairs.

古文：疏入，留中。
现代文：奏疏入内，留在朝中。
English: Sono-so went inside and stayed in the center of the court.

古文：明日，改卫尉少卿。
现代文：第二天，马伸改任卫尉少卿。
English: The next day, Ma Shin was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：伸以论事不行，辞不拜，录其疏申御史台，且叠上章言： 臣言可采，即乞施行，若臣言非是，合坐诬罔之罪。 移疾待命。
现代文：马伸因论事不被采纳，辞谢不接受官职，抄录他的奏疏申送御史台，又多次上奏章说： 我所说的可以采纳，就请求施行，如果我所说的不对，应当按欺骗蒙蔽治罪。 
English: Ma Shin did not accept the official position because his argument was not accepted, and he did not accept the official position. He copied his report and sent it to the Imperial History Museum. He also repeatedly said on the report: If what I say can be accepted, I request that it be implemented. If what I say is not right, it should be punished by deception.

古文：旬日，诏伸言事不实，送吏部责濮州监酒税。
现代文：上书称病辞职等待命令。十天后，诏令马伸所说的事不符合实事，送吏部责令他到濮州监酒税。
English: He submitted a letter saying that he was ill and was resigning to await the order. Ten days later, Ma Shin was ordered by the imperial edict that what he had said did not correspond to reality, and the dispatching department ordered him to go to Zhangzhou to pay the liquor tax.

古文：时用事者恚甚，必欲杀之，以濮迫寇境，故有是命。
现代文：当时当权的人非常愤怒，一定想杀掉他，因濮州近敌人边境，所以有这一命令。
English: The people in power at the time were very angry and must have wanted to kill him. This order was given because Zhangzhou was close to the enemy's border.

古文：趣使上道，伸怡然袱被而行，死道中。
现代文：当权者催促马伸上路，马伸安适愉快地整理行装而上路，死在道路途中。
English: The authorities urged Ma Xing to go on the road, Ma Xing happily packed up and went on the road, and died on the way.

古文：或曰王渊在濮，潜善密嗾其不利于伸。
现代文：有人说王渊在濮州，黄潜善秘密促使他对马伸下手。
English: Some people said that Wang Yuan was in Zhangzhou, and Huang Qianshan secretly urged him to lay hands on Ma.

古文：天下识与不识皆冤痛之。
现代文：天下认识或者不认识马伸的人都为马伸感到冤屈痛惜。
English: Everyone in the world who knows or does not know Ma Sheng feels sorry for him.

古文：明年，金人陷广陵，伸言始验，潜善、伯彦始以误国窜殛。于是台臣奏伸尝论潜善等罪，乃复以卫尉少卿召，实未知其存亡也。
现代文：第二年，金人攻陷广陵，马伸的话开始灵验，黄潜善、汪伯彦才因误国被流窜诛戮，于是御史台官员上奏马伸曾论黄潜善等人的罪行，就又以卫尉少卿召用马伸，实际上不知道他是活是死。
English: In the second year, when the Jin conquered Guangling, Ma Shin's words began to bear fruit, and Huang Kuanzhen and Wang Boyan were exiled and killed for making a mistake. Therefore, the official of the State Historian's Office reported that Ma Shin had talked about the crimes of Huang Kuanzhen and others, and then summoned Ma Shin as the Junior Lieutenant of the Guards. In fact, he did not know whether he was alive or dead.

古文：寻加直龙图阁。
现代文：不久加官直龙图阁。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Jilong Tu Ge.

古文：绍兴初，胡安国上《时政论》，有曰： 伸言潜善、伯彦措置乖方，条其罪状，凡举一事，必立一证，皆众所共知共见，不敢以无为有，以是为非。
现代文：绍兴初年，胡安国上《时政论》，其中有这样的话说： 马伸说黄潜善、汪伯彦处置违逆，条陈他们的罪状，凡是举一事例，必定立一证据，都是众人所共知共见的，不敢以无为有，以是为非。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, Hu'an Guo's "Political Theory of the Times" had this to say: Ma Shin said that Huang Kuanzhong was good, Wang Baiyan dealt with treason, and listed their crimes. If you give an example, you must establish a proof. They are all known and seen by everyone. Don't dare to treat them as nothing, because they are wrong.

古文：而当时曾不从用，反以为言事不实而重责之，是罚沮忠谠，邪说何由而息，公道何由而明乎？
现代文：但当时曾没有听从施行，反而以为他所说的事情不实而重重责罚他，这是惩罚沮丧忠义正直，邪妄之说怎么停息，公道怎么明晰呢？
English: However, at that time, he did not listen to the enforcement, but thought that what he said was untrue and punished him heavily. This is the punishment of frustration, loyalty and honesty. How can the evil talk be stopped, and how can justice be clear?

古文：伸既远贬，虽有诏命，邈无来期，君子闵焉。
现代文：马伸已被贬逐到远地，虽然有诏命，但归期渺茫，君子感到悯惜。
English: Ma Shin has been banished to a distant land. Although there is an imperial edict, his return date is uncertain. The gentleman feels pity.

古文：贲以龙图，犹未尽褒劝之典。
现代文：以龙图阁作为文饰，还是未尽褒奖劝诫的法度。
English: Taking Longtu Ge as a literary decoration is still a law of praise and exhortation.

古文：乞重加追奖，及其子孙，以承天意。 诏赠谏议大夫。
现代文：请重加追奖，泽及他的子孙，以承奉天意。 诏令赠马伸为谏议大夫。
English: Please give the award back to Ze and his children and grandchildren for following the will of heaven.

古文：伸天资纯确，学问有原委，勇于为义，而所韫深厚，耻以自名。
现代文：马伸天资纯朴刚强，学问有本末，勇于为义，但蕴藏深厚，以自我出名为耻。
English: Ma Sheng's talent is pure, simple and strong. He has learned a lot and has the courage to stand up for justice. However, he has a lot to offer. He is ashamed of being famous.

古文：建炎初，右正言邓肃尝论朝士臣邦昌者，例贬二秩，伸不辨也。
现代文：建炎初年，右正言邓肃曾论朝廷官员对张邦昌称臣的人，一律贬二秩，马伸没有为自己争辩。
English: In the first year of Jianyan, Deng Su, the Right Zheng Quan, once said that all the officials of the imperial court who claimed to be Zhang Bangchang's vassals would be demoted two ranks. Ma Shin did not argue for himself.

古文：凡有建明，辄削其稿，人罕知之。
现代文：凡是有所心得，就删削修改稿子，人们很少知道他。
English: People rarely know him because he cuts and edits the manuscript whenever he has an idea.

古文：居官，晨兴必整衣端坐，读《中庸》一遍，然后出涖事。
现代文：当官时，早晨起来必须整衣端坐，读一遍《中庸》，然后出来处理事务。
English: When you are an official, you have to get up in the morning, get dressed, sit down, read "Middle Way" once, and then go out to deal with matters.

古文：每曰： 吾志在行道。
现代文：每每说 ：我的志向在于行道。
English: Beimi said: My ambition lies in the street.

古文：以富贵为心，则为富贵所累；以妻子为念，则为妻子所夺，道不可行也。 故在广陵，行箧一担，图书半之。
现代文：以富贵为心，就被富贵所牵累，以妻子儿女为念头，就被妻子儿女而改变自己的志向，这样道就不能传播了。 所以在广陵时，一担行李，一半是图书。
English: If one's mind is set on wealth, one will be dragged down by wealth; if one's mind is set on one's wife and children, one will be dragged down by one's wife and children, and one's will will will be changed by one's wife and children.

古文：吕祖俭字子约，祖谦之弟也，受业祖谦如诸生。监明州仓，将上，会祖谦卒。部法半年不上者为违年，祖俭必欲终期丧，朝廷从之，诏违年者以一年为限，自祖俭始。
现代文：监明州仓，将要上任，恰逢吕祖谦去世。按照吏部四选注授官员差遣的规定半年不上任的为逾限过犯，吕祖俭决心打算服满为期一年的丧期，朝廷同意了他的请求，诏官员上任逾限以一年为期限，以吕祖俭开始。
English: In accordance with the regulations of the four-year election of officials by the Ministry of Personnel, those who do not take office for half a year are considered to have exceeded the limit. Lu Zu Jian was determined to complete the one-year mourning period, and the court agreed to his request. Officials who exceed the limit take one year as a deadline, starting with Lu Zu Jian.

古文：终更赴铨，丞相周必大语尚书尤袤招之，祖俭已调衢州法曹而后往见。
现代文：吕祖俭守满一年丧赴铨选，丞相周必大告诉尚书尤袤招用他，吕祖俭已调任衢州法曹而后来前往拜见。
English: Lv Zu Jian, who had been dead for a year, went to the election in Handan. The prime minister Zhou Bida told Shangshu Youjun to recruit him. Lv Zu Jian had been transferred to the law office of Handan and later went to visit him.

古文：潘时经略广东，欲辟为属，祖俭辞。
现代文：潘时经略广东，想要征召他为属官，吕祖俭辞谢。
English: When Pan Shih, the governor of Guangdong Province, wanted to recruit him as a subordinate official, Lü Zuxian declined.

古文：寻以侍从郑侨、张杓、罗点、诸葛庭瑞荐，召除籍田令。
现代文：不久因侍从郑侨、张杓、罗点、诸葛庭瑞推荐，朝廷召见他授予籍田令。
English: Not long after, the Imperial Court summoned him to be awarded the land registration order on the recommendation of his attendants, Zheng Qiao, Zhang Xuan, Luo Dian and Zhuge Tingrui.

古文：中丞何澹所生父继室周氏死，澹欲服伯母服，下太常百官杂议。
现代文：中丞何澹亲生父亲的继室周氏死，何澹打算穿哀悼伯母的丧服，传送太常礼院百官杂议。
English: After the death of his father's step-sister Zhou Shi, He Yao, a middle-ranking courtier, planned to wear the mourning clothes of his aunt and convey the misgivings of hundreds of officials at the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：祖俭贻书宰相曰： 《礼》曰： 为伋也妻者，是为白也母。
现代文：吕祖俭写信给宰相说： 《礼》曰： 作为亻及的妻子，是为白的母亲。 
English: Lu Zu Jian wrote to the prime minister, saying: "Li" said: "As the wife of Zou Ji, I am the mother of Bai.

古文：今周氏非中丞父之妻乎？
现代文：现在周氏不是中丞父亲的妻子吗？
English: Isn't Zhou the wife of Chujo's father now?

古文：将不谓之母而谓之何？
现代文：打算不称她为母亲而称什么呢？
English: What are you going to call her if you don't call her mother?

古文：中丞为风宪首，而以不孝令，百僚何观焉。 除司农簿，已而乞补外，通判台州。
现代文：中丞作为讽谏的御史台长官，却以不孝，使百官僚臣如何看待这件事。 被任命为司农簿，不久以后请求补任外官，通判台州。
English: Chujo, as a ridiculed chief of the Imperial Historian's Office, used his filial piety to influence hundreds of bureaucrats and ministers on how to view the matter. He was appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, and soon after that, he requested to be appointed as the Foreign Minister of Taizhou.

古文：宁宗即位，除太府丞。
现代文：宁宗即皇帝位，任命他为太府丞。
English: Ningzong, the emperor, appointed him as Grand Prefect.

古文：时韩侂胄浸用事，正言李沐论右相赵汝愚罢之。
现代文：当时韩胄渐渐当权，正言李沐议论右相赵汝愚要求罢免他。
English: At that time, Han Kuo was gradually taking power, and the righteous Li Mu was discussing the right-hand man, Zhao Rugu, and demanded that he be dismissed.

古文：祖俭奏： 汝愚亦不得无过，然未至如言者所云。 侂胄怒曰： 吕寺丞乃预我事邪？ 会祭酒李祥、博士杨简皆上书讼汝愚，沐皆劾罢之。
现代文：吕祖俭上奏 ：赵汝愚也不能没有过错，但是没有到像议论的人所讲的那样的地步。 韩胄愤怒地说 ：吕寺丞难道要干预我的事情吗？ 适逢祭酒李祥、博士杨简都上书为赵汝愚辨冤，李沐都一一弹劾罢免他们。
English: Lv Zu Jian played up: Zhao Ru Gu could not be without fault, but it did not reach the point as the commentators said. Han Zheng angrily said: "Is Lv Terayo going to intervene in my affairs? When the sacrificial wine Li Xiang and Dr. Yang Jian both submitted a letter to judge Zhao Ru Gu's grievances, Li Mudu impeached and dismissed them one by one.

古文：祖俭乃上封事曰： 陛下初政清明，登用忠良，然曾未逾时，朱熹老儒也，有所论列，则亟使之去；彭龟年旧学也，有所论列，亦亟许之去；至于李祥老成笃实，非有偏比，盖众听所共孚者，今又终于斥逐。
现代文：吕祖俭就用袋封缄上书奏事说 ：陛下刚开始政治清明，选拔重用忠良之士，然而未执行多久，朱熹是耆宿儒臣，有所议论，就赶快使他离开朝廷；彭龟年是旧时学者，有所议论，就赶快答应他离开朝廷；至于李祥阅历多而练达世事、笃敬诚实，没有偏向，这是众人所共同信服的，现在又终于被斥责放逐。
English: Lv Zu Jian used a bag seal to attach a letter to the record, saying: His Majesty has just begun to be politically clear, selecting loyal and good people, but it has not been implemented for a long time. Zhu Xi is a scholar of Confucius, and if there is any discussion, he will quickly leave the imperial court; Peng Jian is a scholar in the old days, and if there is any discussion, he will quickly agree to leave the imperial court; as for Li Xiang, he has a lot of experience and has mastered worldly affairs, respects honesty, and has no bias. This is what everyone believes, and now he has finally been expelled.

古文：臣恐自是天下有当言之事，必将相视以为戒，钳口结舌之风一成而未易反，是岂国家之利邪？ 
现代文：我恐怕从此天下有应当说的事情，必将会相视以为告诫，闭口不敢进言的风气一旦形成而不容易纠正过来，这难道对国家有利吗？ 
English: I am afraid that from now on, there will be things that should be said in the world, and it will be regarded as a warning. Once the culture of shutting up and not daring to speak is formed, it will not be easy to correct. Is this good for the country?

古文：又曰： 今之能言之士，其所难非在于得罪君父，而在忤意权势。
现代文：吕祖俭又说 ：现在的敢于讲话的士人，他们所犯难的不是在于得罪君王父亲，而在于忤逆权势。
English: Lu Zu Jian also said: The scholars who dare to speak out now are not guilty of offending the king's father, but of defying authority.

古文：姑以臣所知者言之，难莫难于论灾异，然言之而不讳者，以其事不关于权势也。
现代文：姑且以我所知道的讲一讲，难莫难于议论灾异，但言而不讳的，是因为其事与权势之人无关。
English: As far as I know, it is not difficult to discuss disasters, but they do not speak openly because they have nothing to do with powerful people.

古文：若乃御笔之降，庙堂不敢重违，台谏不敢深论，给、舍不敢固执，盖以其事关贵幸，深虑乘间激发而重得罪也。
现代文：如果是皇帝御笔之降，朝廷不敢难违，御史台、谏院不敢深加议论，给事中、中书舍人不敢固执己见，原因是因为此事有关贵要宠臣，很担心乘间激发而受牵连得罪他们。
English: If it was the Emperor's order, the Imperial Court would not dare to disobey, the Imperial Historian's Office and the Privy Council would not dare to discuss the matter in depth, and those who did not agree with the Emperor's order would not dare to stick to their own opinions. The reason for this was that the matter concerned important favorites, and they were very worried that they would be provoked by others and be implicated and offend them.

古文：故凡劝导人主事从中出者，盖欲假人主之声势，以渐窃威权耳。
现代文：所以凡是劝导皇帝事从中出的人，大概想借皇帝的声势，以逐渐窃取威权而已。
English: Therefore, anyone who tried to persuade the emperor to intervene was probably just trying to use the emperor's influence to gradually steal power.

古文：比者闻之道路，左右御，于黜陟废置之际，间得闻者，车马辐凑，其门如市，恃权怙宠，摇撼外庭。
现代文：近来路人皆知，左右亲近大臣，在官吏的进退升降、任免之际，间或得到显达的人，车马辐凑，门庭如市，凭借权力宠爱，摇撼朝廷。
English: Recently, it is well-known that ministers are close to each other, and when officials are promoted, promoted, appointed or removed, they occasionally get prominent people. They are in close contact with each other, and the court is like a city. By virtue of power, they are favored and shake the imperial court.

古文：臣恐事势浸淫，政归幸门，不在公室。凡所荐进皆其所私，凡所倾陷皆其所恶，岂但侧目惮畏，莫敢指言，而阿比顺从，内外表里之患，必将形见。
现代文：我担心事态积渐而扩及，政归宠臣，不在朝廷，凡所引荐进用的都是其所亲近的人，凡所倾覆陷害的都是其所厌恶的人，其只是侧目畏惧，不敢指责，而且阿附顺从，内外表里的祸患，必将出现。
English: I'm worried that the situation will gradually expand. Politics is for the favorites, not for the imperial court. Those who are recommended and promoted are those who are close to them. Those who are overthrown and framed are those who are disgusted by them. They only look sideways, are afraid, dare not blame, and are subservient. The external and internal evils will surely appear.

古文：臣因李祥获罪而深及此者，是岂矫激自取罪戾哉？
现代文：我因李祥获罪而深究及此，这难道是矫激自取罪戾吗？
English: I am deeply investigating this because of Li Xiang's conviction. Is this a self-inflicted punishment?

古文：实以士气颓靡之中，稍忤权臣，则去不旋踵。
现代文：实在是因为士气颓废之中，稍稍忤逆权臣，则离去不再回来。
English: In fact, it is because of the decadence of morale that the power minister who is a little rebellious will leave and never return.

古文：私忧过计，深虑陛下之势孤，而相与维持宗社者浸寡也。 
现代文：私下担忧太甚，很担心陛下势单力孤，而相与维持国家的人渐少。 
English: Privately, I am very worried. I am very worried that His Majesty is all alone, and that there are fewer and fewer people to maintain the country.

古文：疏既上，束檐待罪。
现代文：奏疏已上呈，祖俭在家待罪。
English: The report has been submitted, and Zu Jian is at home awaiting trial.

古文：有旨：吕祖俭朋比罔上，安置韶州。
现代文：有圣旨，吕祖俭与人互相勾结欺罔皇帝，贬谪到韶州居住。
English: According to a sacred edict, Lv Zu Jian conspired with others to defraud the emperor, and was banished to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：中书舍人邓驲缴奏，祖俭罪不至贬。
现代文：中书舍人邓阳交奏，祖俭罪不至贬。
English: Chinese calligrapher Deng Yang's symphony, Zu Jian's sin will not be belittled.

古文：御笔： 祖俭意在无君，罪当诛。
现代文：皇帝御笔批示 ：祖俭意在没有君主，罪责当杀，流窜贬逐已经是宽恩他了。 
English: The emperor's written instruction: Zuzhen intended to have no monarch, the guilt should be killed, and the exile was already a mercy to him.

古文：窜逐已为宽恩。 会楼钥进读吕公著元祐初所上十事，因进曰： 如公著社稷臣，犹将十世宥之，前日太府寺丞吕祖俭以言事得罪者，其孙也。
现代文：恰逢楼钥给皇帝进读吕公著元初年所上陈十事，因此进言说： 像吕公著是国家大臣，还可十代宽宥其家，前不久太府寺丞吕祖俭因言事得罪，他是吕公著的孙子。
English: It just so happened that the key to the palace was given to the emperor for him to read through the Ten Events of the First Year of the Yuan Dynasty written by Lu Gongzhu. Therefore, the foreword said: Just as Lu Gongzhu was a minister of state and could be pardoned by ten generations of his family, not long ago, Dafu-ji cheng, Lu Zujian, was offended by words and deeds. He was the grandson of Lu Gongzhu.

古文：今投之岭外，万一即死，圣朝有杀言者之名，臣窃为陛下惜之。 上问： 祖俭所言何事？ 然后知前日之行不出上意。
现代文：现在把他投贬岭外，万一倘若死去，圣朝有杀害言官的名声，我私下替陛下怜惜。 皇帝问 ：吕祖俭所说的是什么事？ 楼钥然后才知前不久对吕祖俭的贬谪不是出自皇帝的意思。
English: Now I cast him out of the palace, and in case he should die, since the Holy Dynasty has a reputation for killing officials, I privately felt sorry for His Majesty. The emperor asked, "What was it that Lv Zu Jian said?" Only then did he know that the recent disparagement of Lv Zu Jian was not meant by the emperor.

古文：侂胄谓人曰： 复有救祖俭者，当处以新州矣。 众莫敢出口。
现代文：韩胄对他人说： 再有救助吕祖俭的，当把他安置在新州居住了。 众人不敢说话。
English: Han Zheng said to others, "If there is any more help for Lü Zu Jian, he should be resettled in Xinzhou." Everyone was afraid to speak.

古文：有谓侂胄曰： 自赵丞相去，天下已切齿，今又投祖俭瘴乡，不幸或死，则怨益重，曷若少徙内地。 侂胄亦悟。
现代文：有人对韩胄说： 自从赵丞相离开朝廷，天下已经愤恨到极点，现在又把吕祖俭贬投瘴气之地，如果不幸死亡，那么怨恨愈加严重，不如稍稍徙往内地。 韩胄也醒悟。
English: Someone said to Han Zheng: Since Zhao Zhengxian left the imperial court, the world has become extremely resentful, and now he has relegated Lü Zu Jian to a place of disgust. If he unfortunately dies, then the resentment will become more serious. It would be better to move inland for a while. Han Zheng also woke up.

古文：祖俭至庐陵，将趋岭，得旨改送吉州。
现代文：吕祖俭到达庐陵，将要往岭外，得朝旨改送吉州居住。
English: When Lu Zu Jian arrived in Fuling, he was going to go outside the Ling, but the imperial edict ordered him to be sent to live in Jizhou.

古文：遇赦，量移高安。
现代文：遇朝廷大赦，酌量移往高安。
English: In the event of an amnesty by the imperial court, the discretionary amount will be transferred to Gaoan.

古文：二年卒，诏令归葬。
现代文：庆元二年去世，诏令归葬。
English: He died in the second year of the Qing Dynasty and was buried according to the imperial edict.

古文：祖俭之谪也，朱熹与书曰： 熹以官则高于子约，以上之顾遇恩礼则深于子约，然坐视群小之为，不能一言以报效，乃令子约独舒愤懑，触群小而蹈祸机，其愧叹深矣。 祖俭报书曰： 在朝行闻时事，如在水火中，不可一朝居。
现代文：吕祖俭贬谪，朱熹写信给他说： 我以官职则比子约你高，以皇上顾遇恩礼比子约你重，但坐视一群小人的作为，不能讲一句话以报效皇上，却让子约你独舒烦闷不平，触犯众小人而赴祸机，非常惭愧叹息。 吕祖俭回信说 ：在朝廷参予时事，就像在水火中，不可以居住一早上。
English: Zhu Xi wrote to Lv Zu Jian: I am more important to you than your son because of my official position, and more important to you than your son because of the emperor's kindness and courtesy, but I can't say a word to repay the emperor for the actions of a group of villains, but I can't let my son talk to you alone, which is troublesome and unequal, and it is a disaster to offend all the villains, and I am very ashamed. Lv Zu Jian replied: Participating in current affairs at the court is like living in the fire and water, you can't live in the morning.

古文：使处乡闾，理乱不知，又何以多言为哉？ 在谪所，读书穷理，卖药以自给。
现代文：如果住在乡闾间，治乱不知，又怎么多说呢？ 在谪所，吕祖俭读书穷理，卖药以自给。
English: If you live in the countryside and don't know how to deal with chaos, how much more can you say? In the countryside, Lu Zu Jian studied poor logic and sold medicine to support himself.

古文：每出，必草履徒步，为逾岭之备。
现代文：每次出行，一定穿着草鞋徒步行走，作为过南岭的准备。
English: Every time I travel, I always walk on foot wearing straw sandals, as a preparation for crossing Nanling.

古文：尝言： 因世变有所摧折，失其素履者，固不足言矣；因世变而意气有所加者，亦私心也。 所为文有《大愚集》。
现代文：他曾说： 因为世道变化有所摧折，而失去一向节操的人，本不值得讲了；因为世道变化而意志勇气有所增益的，也是出于本心。 所写文章有《大愚集》。
English: He once said: "It is not worth talking about those who have lost their self-discipline because of the changes in the world; those who have gained courage of will because of the changes in the world are also from the heart."

古文：祖俭从弟祖泰。
现代文：吕祖俭堂弟吕祖泰。
English: Lv Zu Jian's cousin Lv Zu Tai.

古文：祖泰。字泰然，夷简六世孙，寓常之宜兴。
现代文：吕祖泰字泰然，寿州人，吕夷简六世孙，寓居在常州的宜兴。
English: Lyu Zu Tai Zi Tingran, a native of Shoushu, the sixth grandchild of Lyu Yijian, lived in Yixing, Changzhou.

古文：性疏达，尚气谊，学问该洽。
现代文：性情通达，崇尚义气友谊，学问广博。
English: They are open-minded, advocate righteousness and friendship, and have a wide range of knowledge.

古文：遍游江、淮，交当世知名士，得钱或分挈以去，无吝色。
现代文：遍游江、淮地区，交结当代知名人士，得到钱物有时分给他们携带离去，毫无吝啬之气。
English: He traveled all over the Yangtze River and Huaihai region, mingled with contemporary celebrities, and sometimes gave them money and goods to carry away. He was not stingy at all.

古文：既移瑞州，祖泰徒步往省之，留月余，语其友王深厚曰： 自吾兄之贬，诸人箝口。我虽无位，义必以言报国，当少须之，今未敢以累吾兄也。 及祖俭没贬所，嘉泰元年，周必大降少保致仕，祖泰愤之，乃诣登闻鼓院上书，论侂胄有无君之心，请诛之以防祸乱。
现代文：饮酒至几斗不醉，议论时事无所忌讳，听说的人有的掩耳而走。庆元初年，吕祖俭因言事被贬谪到韶州居住，既而移住瑞州，吕祖泰步行前往省视，逗留了一个多月，告诉他的朋友王深厚说： 自从我兄长被贬，各人紧闭嘴巴，我虽然没有职位，义必以言报国，当稍稍等待，现在不敢因此连累我的兄长。 等到吕祖俭死于贬所，嘉泰元年，周必大降职少保辞官，吕祖泰对此愤恨，就到登闻鼓院上书，论说韩胄有无君之心，请求杀之以防止祸乱。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Lv Zu Jian was demoted to live in Zhangzhou due to his speech, and he moved to Ruizhou. Lv Zu Tai walked to the provincial capital and stayed there for more than a month. He told his friend Wang Sheng Hou: "Since my brother was demoted, everyone has kept their mouths shut. Although I don't have a position, I have to speak for the country. I have to wait a little, and now I don't dare to embarrass my brother. When Lv Zu Jian died in the place where he was demoted, in the first year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, Zhou Bida was demoted to

古文：其略曰： 道学，自古所恃以为国也。
现代文：其大致说 ：道学，是从古代就作为国家所凭借的东西。
English: Broadly speaking, it means that morality is something that the state has relied on since ancient times.

古文：丞相汝愚，今之有大勋劳者也。
现代文：丞相赵汝愚，是现在有很大功勋劳绩的人。
English: The prime minister, Zhao Rugu, is now a man of great merit.

古文：立伪学之禁，逐汝愚之党，是将空陛下之国，而陛下不知悟邪？
现代文：树立伪学之禁，贬逐赵汝愚的朋辈，这是将要掏空陛下的国家，而陛下不知醒悟吗？
English: Establishing the prohibition of pseudoscience, and disparaging Zhao Ruwu's peers, this is a country that will hollow out His Majesty, and does His Majesty not realize it?

古文：陈自强，侂胄童孺之师，躐致宰辅。
现代文：陈自强、韩胄以儿童妇人之师，逾越等级到宰相辅臣的位置。
English: Chen Ziqiang and Han Qi, who were tutors to children and women, rose through the ranks to the position of prime minister and assistant minister.

古文：陛下旧学之臣，若彭龟年等，今安在邪？
现代文：陛下旧学大臣，如彭龟年等人，现在在哪里呢？
English: Your Majesty, where are the former ministers of education, such as Peng Kuei and others, now?

古文：苏师旦，平江之史胥，以潜邸而得节钺；周筠，韩氏之厮役，以皇后亲属得大官。
现代文：苏师旦，是平江的吏胥，因皇帝即位之前居平江而得到符节和斧钺；周筠，是韩氏的仆役，因皇后亲属得做大官。
English: Su Shidan, an official of the Pingjiang River, was given a rune and an axe because he lived in the Pingjiang River before the emperor ascended to the throne; Zhou Qi, a servant of the Han Dynasty, was made a high-ranking official because he was a relative of the queen.

古文：不识陛下在潜邸时果识师旦乎？
现代文：不知陛下在平江宅邸时果真认识苏师旦吗？
English: I wonder if His Majesty really knew Su Shidan when he was at the Pingjiang Mansion.

古文：椒房之亲果有筠乎？
现代文：后妃的亲属中果真有周筠吗？
English: Is there really a Zhou Yu among the relatives of the Empress Dowager?

古文：凡侂胄之徒，自尊大而卑朝廷，一至于此也！
现代文：凡是韩胄之徒，自我尊大而卑视朝廷，一下到了这样的地步！
English: All the followers of Han Xuan, self-exalted and contemptuous of the imperial court, have suddenly come to this point!

古文：愿亟诛侂胄及师旦、周筠，而罢逐自强之徒。
现代文：希望速诛胄及苏师旦、周筠，而且罢免贬逐陈自强之徒。
English: It is hoped that Hayashi, Su Shitan, and Zhou Qi will take the lead, and that Chen Ziqiang's detractors will be dismissed.

古文：独周必大可用，宜以代之，不然，事将不测。 书出，中外大骇。
现代文：只有周必大可以任用，应该以他代理相位，不然的话，事情将不能预测。 奏书一出，中外大为惊骇。
English: Only Zhou Bida can be appointed, and he should act as his deputy, otherwise, things will not be predictable. As soon as the report came out, China and abroad were shocked.

古文：有旨： 吕祖泰挟私上书，语言狂妄，拘管连州。 右谏议大夫程松与祖泰狎友，惧曰： 人知我素与游，其谓预闻乎？ 乃独奏言： 祖泰有当诛之罪，且其上书必有教之者，今纵不杀，犹当杖黥窜远方。 殿中侍御史陈谠亦以为言。
现代文：有旨： 吕祖泰挟私怨上书，语言狂妄，发连州拘禁管制。 右谏议大夫程松与吕祖泰亲近友爱，恐惧说： 人家知道我平素与他交游，岂不以为我预闻吗？ 于是独自上奏说： 吕祖泰有当杀之罪，而且他上书一定有教唆的人，现在即使不杀，可当杖脊黥面流窜远方。 殿中侍御史陈谠也这样说。
English: There is a meaning: Lyu Zu-tai is guilty of private grudge, his language is arrogant, and he is subject to Lianzhou detention control. Dr. Cheng Song, the right-hand man, is close and friendly with Lyu Zu-tai, and fear says: If people know that I have always traveled with him, won't they think that I've predicted it? So he alone said: Lyu Zu-tai has the crime of murder, and he must have instigated the person who wrote the letter, and now, even if he doesn't kill him, he can be sent far away. The palace attendant Chen Yao also said so.

古文：乃杖之百，配钦州牢城收管。
现代文：于是杖脊一百，发配钦州牢城收管。
English: As a result, 100 canes were issued to take control of the Qinzhou Prison.

古文：初，监察御史林采言伪习之成，造端自必大，故有少保之命。
现代文：开始，监察御史林采说伪习之成，自周必大发端，所以有降为少保的诏命。
English: At the beginning, the inspector, Mr. Shilin, said that the result of false learning must have originated from Zhou, so there was an order to reduce the number of guards.

古文：祖泰知必死，冀以身悟朝廷，无惧色。
现代文：吕祖泰知道自己必死无疑，希望以自身唤醒朝廷，没有畏惧之色。
English: Lyu Zu Tai knew that his death was inevitable, and he hoped to awaken the imperial court with himself. He was not afraid.

古文：既至府廷，尹为好语诱之曰： 谁教汝共为章？
现代文：既到州府堂上，府尹用好话劝诱他说： 是谁教你一起写奏章？
English: As soon as he arrived at the prefectural hall, Fu Yin used kind words to persuade him, saying: "Who taught you to write music together?

古文：汝试言之，吾且宽汝。 祖泰笑曰： 公何问之愚也。
现代文：你且说出来，我将会宽恕你。 吕祖泰笑着说 ：你怎么这样愚蠢地问呢？
English: Just say it, and I will forgive you," Lu Zutai said with a smile, "How could you ask such a stupid question?

古文：吾固知必死，而可受教于人，且与人议之乎？ 尹曰： 汝病风丧心邪？ 祖泰曰： 以吾观之，若今之附韩氏得美官者，乃病风丧心耳。 
现代文：我本来知道必死，而可以受教于人，又与人议论他人吗？ 府尹说： 你丧心病狂了吗？ 吕祖泰说： 依我看，像现在依附韩氏得到美官的人，就是丧心病狂。 
English: I knew I would die, but can I be taught by others and talk about others with others? Fu Yin said, "Are you crazy?" Lu Zutai said, "In my opinion, people who are attached to Han now to get a good position are crazy."

古文：祖泰既贬，道出潭州，钱文子为醴陵令，私赆其行。
现代文：吕祖泰已被贬斥，经过潭州，钱文子任醴陵县令，私下赠送给祖泰路费。
English: Lu Zutai has been denigrated. After passing through Tanzhou, Qian Wenzi, the governor of Fuling County, privately presented to Zutai the road fee.

古文：侂胄使人迹其所在，祖泰乃匿襄、郢间。
现代文：韩胄派人追寻祖泰踪迹之所在，祖泰于是躲藏在襄阳、郢州之间。
English: Han Yu sent someone to track down the whereabouts of Zu Tai, who then hid between Xiangyang and Zhangzhou.

古文：侂胄诛，朝廷访得祖泰所在，诏雪其冤，特补上州文学，改授迪功郎、监南岳庙。
现代文：韩胄被杀，朝廷访求得到吕祖泰所在地方，诏令洗雪他的冤屈，特补上州文学，改授迪功郎、监南岳庙。
English: Han Zheng was killed, the imperial court visited the place where Lu Zutai was located, and the imperial decree was issued to wash away his grievances, supplement Shangzhou literature, and re-award Di Gonglang and Junnan Yue Temple.

古文：行字用叟，以父任补官，有二子，与端朝同登进士第。
现代文：母亲去世无以埋葬，到都城与诸公商量，染上寒病，索取纸张书写说 ：我与兄长一起攻击权臣，现在权臣被杀，我死而无憾。
English: After her mother's death, she could not be buried, so she went to the capital to consult with officials, caught a cold, and asked for a piece of paper to write, "I and my brother attacked a powerful minister, and now that powerful minister has been killed, I have no regrets about my death."

古文：仲麟字景仲，傅字象夫，久居学校，忠鲠有闻，咸以不偶死。
现代文：唯独我生还无以报国，又没能埋葬我母亲，是可遗憾的事情。 于是去世。
English: However, it is a pity that I did not have the opportunity to report to the country and bury my mother, so I passed away.

古文：范自有传。
现代文：府尹王木冉替他备办棺材殓尸归葬。
English: The prefect Yin Wang Mullan prepared a coffin for him to be buried in.

古文：华岳，字子西，为武学生，轻财好侠。
现代文：华岳字子西，贵池人，为武学生，轻财好侠。
English: Hua Yue Zixi Xi, a native of Guiqi, is a martial arts student, a good man with little money.

古文：韩侂胄当国，岳上书曰：
现代文：韩胄当权，华岳上书说：
English: With Han Kuo in power, Hua Yue wrote:

古文：旬月以来，都城士民彷徨四顾，若将丧其室家；诸军妻子隐哭含悲，若将驱之水火。
现代文： 一个月以来，都城士人百姓彷徨四顾，好像将要丧失其家室；军队士兵的妻子儿女隐哭含悲好像将要驱使他们赴水火。
English: For a month, the citizens of the capital have been looking around as if they were about to lose their homes; the wives and children of army soldiers have been crying inconsolably as if they were about to be driven to the water and fire.

古文：闤阓籍籍，欲语复噤，骇于传闻，莫晓所谓。
现代文：市区喧腾纷乱，想要说又闭口不言，惊骇于传闻，不知道所说什么。
English: The urban area is noisy and chaotic, I want to speak but I keep my mouth shut, I'm shocked by rumors and I don't know what to say.

古文：臣徐考之，则侍卫之兵日夜潜发，枢机之递星火交驰，戎作之役倍于平时，邮传之程兼于畴昔，乃知陛下将有事于北征也。
现代文：我慢慢考证之，则是侍卫之兵星夜兼程地遣发，朝廷重要机构的驿车星火交驰，征伐的战役倍于平时，邮传的路程加倍于往昔，于是知道陛下将会有事于对北征战。
English: I slowly verified that it was the soldiers of the bodyguard who were dispatched at all hours of the night, the carriages of the important institutions of the imperial court were in full swing, the campaign of conquest was twice as long as usual, and the distance of the post was twice as long as in the past, so I knew that His Majesty would have something to do in the Northern Expedition.

古文：侂胄以后族之亲，位居极品，专执权柄，公取贿赂；畜养无籍吏仆，委以腹心，卖名器，私爵赏，睥睨神器，窥觇宗社，日益炎炎，不敢向尔。
现代文： 韩胄以皇家族之亲，位居极品，擅掌权柄，公然收取贿赂，蓄养没有官籍的吏员仆从，以腹心来委任，出卖国家名器，私自以爵位封赏，侧目窥察帝位，窥伺宗社，日益昌炽，只是不敢出声而已。
English: As a relative of the imperial family, Han Xuan is in the best of the best, wielding power, openly taking bribes, cultivating bureaucrats and servants without official registration, appointing them as confidants, selling the country's famous instruments, rewarding himself with a knighthood, spying on the imperial throne, and spying on the patriarchal society. He is becoming more and more prosperous, but he does not dare to speak out.

古文：此外患之居吾腹心者也。
现代文：这是居于我腹心的外患。
English: This is an external disease that resides in my inner circle.

古文：朝臣有以庸琐之资，请姻师旦，骤入政府者；有以谀佞之资，附阿侂胄，致身显贵者。
现代文： 朝廷大臣有以平庸猥琐的资质，请求与苏师旦联姻，骤然进入政府中的人；有以阿谀谄媚的资质，依附奉承韩胄，使自己显贵的人。
English: The ministers of the imperial court are those who suddenly enter the government with the mediocre and trivial qualification of requesting the marriage of Su Shidan; and those with the sycophantic qualification of adhering to and flattering Han Zheng and making themselves conspicuous.

古文：陈自强老不知耻，贪不知止，私植党与，阴结门第，凡见诸行事，惟知侂胄，不知君父。
现代文：陈自强年老不知羞耻，贪赃不知止境，私自培植党羽，暗中勾结门第，凡是见诸行事，只知韩胄，不知君父。
English: Chen Ziqiang knows no shame in his old age, his greed knows no bounds, he secretly cultivates party members, secretly colludes with his relatives, and when he acts, he only knows Han Zi and does not know his father.

古文：此外患之居吾股肱者也。
现代文：这是居于我帝王左右的外患。
English: This is a foreign disease that lives around my emperor.

古文：爽、奕、汝翼诸李之贪懦无谋，倪、僎、倬、杲诸郭之膏粱无用，诸吴之恃宠专僣，诸彭之庸孱不肖；皇甫斌、魏友谅、毛致通、秦世辅之雕瘵军心、疮痍士气，以致陈孝庆、夏兴祖、商荣、田俊迈之徒，皆以一卒之材，各得把麾专制，平日剜膏刻血，包苴侂胄，以致通显，饥寒之士咸愿食其肉而不可得。
现代文： 李爽、李奕、李汝翼诸李贪生懦弱没有谋略，郭倪、郭巽、郭倬、郭杲诸郭富贵子弟没有用，诸吴恃宠专事僭越，诸彭平庸低劣不肖，皇甫斌、魏友谅、毛致通、秦世辅损伤军心，创伤士气，以致陈孝庆、夏兴祖、商荣、田俊迈这些人，都以一个士卒的才能，各得以把持旗帜专制用事，平日搜括民脂民膏，贿赂韩胄，以致通达显贵，饥寒交迫的士人都希望吃他们的肉而不可得。
English: Li Shuang, Li Yi, Li Ru Ying, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang, Li Shuang,

古文：万一陛下付以大事，彼之首领自不可保，奚暇为陛下计哉？
现代文：万一陛下把大事交付给他们，他们的脑袋自己都不可以保证，怎么有空替陛下计议呢？
English: In the unlikely event that His Majesty entrusts important matters to them, their brains cannot guarantee themselves, so how can they have time to deliberate on His Majesty's behalf?

古文：此外患之居吾爪牙者也。
现代文：这是居于我武臣中的外患。
English: This is a foreign disease among my retainers.

古文：程松之纳妾求知，或以售妹入府，或以献妻入阁，鲁〈宜宜〉之贡子为郎，富宫之庸驽充位。
现代文： 程松纳妾求得知遇，或者因出卖妹妹入官府，或者因献妻进入门；鲁宜宜进贡儿子为郎官，富宫平庸迟钝充位。
English: Cheng Song accommodated his concubine to seek opportunities, or entered the government by selling his sister, or entered the door by offering his wife; Lu Yi's tribute son was the steward, and Fugu was mediocre and dull.

古文：此外患之居吾耳目者也。
现代文：这是居于我耳目中的外患。
English: It's a foreign body in my ear and eye.

古文：苏师旦以秽吏冒节钺，牙侩名爵；周筠以隶卒冒戎钤，市易将相。
现代文： 苏师旦以污吏的身份冒充节钺之权，买卖名器爵位；周筠以差役的身份冒掌军队大印，买卖将相。
English: Su Shidan, in his capacity as a corrupt official, pretended to have the right to set aside money and buy and sell famous instruments and titles; Zhou Qi, in his capacity as a clerk, pretended to have the military seal and bought and sold generals.

古文：此外患之扼吾咽喉者也。
现代文：这是扼住我咽喉的外患。
English: It's a foreign body in my throat.

古文：彼之所谓外患者实未足忧，而此之外患盖已周吾一身之间矣。
现代文：他们所说的外患其实不足忧虑，但这些外患已遍布我朝廷全身之间了。
English: What they call external troubles are actually not enough to worry about, but these external troubles have spread throughout my entire court.

古文： 礼乐征伐，自天子出 。
现代文：  礼乐征伐，自天子出。 
English: Ritual music conquest, from the son of heaven.

古文：所贵乎中国者，皆听命于陛下也。
现代文：中国所可贵的，在于都听命于陛下。
English: What is precious about China is that they all obey His Majesty.

古文：今也与夺之命、黜陟之权，又不出于陛下，而出于侂胄。
现代文：现在生杀予夺的命令，官吏进退升降的权力，又不出自陛下，而出自韩胄。
English: Now the order to kill or be killed, and the power to promote and demote officials, do not come from His Majesty, but from Han Xuan.

古文：是吾有二中国也。
现代文：这是我们有两个中国。
English: This is why we have two Chinas.

古文：命又不出于侂胄，而出于苏师旦、周筠。是吾有三中国也。
现代文：诏命又不出自韩胄而出自苏师旦、周筠，这是我们有三个中国。
English: The imperial edict was not issued from Han Dynasty, but from Su Dynasty and Zhou Dynasty, which means that we have three Chinas.

古文：女真以区区之地，犹能逼我淮、汉，曾谓外患之居吾腹心、股肱、耳目、爪牙及吾咽喉，而不冯陵吾之宗庙社稷乎？
现代文：女真以区区之地，尚且能够进逼我淮河、汉水地区，怎说居于我腹心、股肱、耳目、爪牙和我咽喉的外患，却不会凌驾我宗庙社稷呢？
English: If a woman can force me to go to the Huaihe River and Hanshui area, how can I say that the foreign diseases that live in my abdomen, groin, ears, eyes, teeth and throat, but will not overpower my family, temple and shrine?

古文：曾谓一家之中自为秦、越，一舟之中自为敌国，而能制远人乎？
现代文：怎说一家之中各自为秦、越，一船之中自为敌国，而能够扼制外族人吗？
English: How can it be said that each member of a family is a Qin and a Yue, and each member of a ship is an enemy country, but they can suppress foreigners?

古文：比年军皆掊克，而士卒自仇其将佐；民皆侵渔，而百姓自畔其守令，家自为战。
现代文：近年军队都聚敛贪狠，而士兵自然仇视其将佐长官；人都侵夺谋取，而百姓自然反叛他的太守县令，家自为战。
English: In recent years, armies have been amassing greedily, and soldiers naturally hate their commanders and commanders; people are encroaching and seeking to gain, and the people naturally rebel against his governor-general, and fight for themselves.

古文：此又启吾中国亿万之仇敌也。
现代文：这是又开启我中国亿万仇敌。
English: This is another opening for my hundreds of millions of enemies in China.

古文：今不务去吾腹心、股肱、爪牙、耳目、咽喉与夫亿万之仇敌，而欲空国之师，竭国之财，而与远人相从于血刃相涂之地，顾不外用其心欤？
现代文：现在不致力消除我腹心、股肱、爪牙、耳目、咽喉与亿万仇敌之患，却想倾全国的军队，竭尽国家的财力，而与外族人征战于沙场，反而不是外用其心吗？
English: Now, instead of devoting myself to eliminating the ills of my subordinates, vassals, minions, ears, eyes, throat, and hundreds of millions of enemies, I want to pour in the national army, exhaust the country's financial resources, and fight with foreigners in the battlefield, instead of using my heart externally?

古文：臣尝推演兵书，自去岁上元甲子，五福太一初度吴分，四神直符对临荆、楚，始击蜚符旁临瓯、粤，青门直使交次于幽、冀，黑杀黄道正按于燕、赵。
现代文： 我曾经推演兵书，自从去年上元甲子，五福太一刚经过吴地，四神直符对临荆、楚，始击蜚符旁临瓯、粤，青门直使交次于幽、翼，黑杀黄道正按于燕、赵。
English: I once read a military book. Since last year's Shangyuan Jiazi, Wufu Taichi has just passed through Wudi, the four gods are directly opposite Lintong and Chu, the first strike is next to Lintong and Yue, the youth gate is directly next to Yu and Ying, and the black kill zodiac is according to Yan and Zhao.

古文：考之成法，主算最长，客算最短。
现代文：考察已有的法则，主算最长，客算最短。
English: Examine the existing rules, the host is the longest, and the guest is the shortest.

古文：兵以先发为客，后发为主。
现代文：用兵以先发为客，后发为主。
English: The use of soldiers to start first as a guest, later as the main.

古文：自太岁乙丑至庚午六年之间，皆不利于先举。
现代文：从乙丑年到庚午年六年期间，都不利于首先发兵。
English: During the six-year period from the year of the Ox to the year of the Horse, it was not conducive to the first dispatch of troops.

古文：傥其畔盟犯义，挠我疆场，至于事不获已，然后应之，则反主为客，犹曰庶几。
现代文：倘若金人背弃盟约违犯道义，骚扰我国边地，至于事情不得已，然后对付它，那么反主为客，还说得过去。
English: If the Kim people renege on the treaty, violate morality, and harass our country's border, as far as the matter is concerned, and then deal with it, then it can be said that the anti-lord is a guest.

古文：万一国家首事倡谋，则将帅内睽，士卒外畔，肝脑万民，血刃千里。
现代文：万一国家首先从事倡议谋划，那么将帅内部不合，士兵向外叛变，万民惨死，血刃千里。
English: In the unlikely event that the country first engages in initiative planning, then the generals will have internal disagreements, the soldiers will rebel outside, the people will die miserably, and there will be a lot of bloodshed.

古文：此天数之不利于先举也。
现代文：这是天数不利于首先发兵。
English: That's not a good number of days to send troops in the first place.

古文：矧将帅庸愚，军民怨怼，马政不讲，骑士不熟，豪杰不出，英雄不收，馈粮不丰，形便不固，山砦不修，堡垒不设，吾虽带甲百万，餫饷千里，而师出无功，不战自败。
现代文：何况将帅平庸愚蠢，军民怨恨，马政不加讲求，骑兵不熟练，豪杰不出来，英雄不被收录，军饷粮食不丰富，有利的地理形势不牢固，山寨不修，堡垒不设，我虽然带兵百万，千里运送粮饷，但师出无名，不战自败。
English: What's more, the generals were mediocre and stupid, the soldiers and the people were resentful, horse politics was not emphasized, the cavalry was unskilled, the heroes did not come out, the heroes were not included, the army was not rich in grain, the favorable geographical situation was not solid, the cottages were not repaired, and the fortresses were not set up. Although I led millions of soldiers and transported grain for thousands of miles, my division was unknown, and I would have been defeated without a fight.

古文：此人事之不利于先举也。
现代文：这是人事不利于首先举兵。
English: This is a personnel disadvantage to raising troops first.

古文：臣愿陛下除吾一身之外患。
现代文： 我希望陛下清除国家一身的外患。
English: I hope His Majesty will purge the country of all foreign influences.

古文：吾国中之外患既已除，然后公道开明，正人登用，法令自行，纪纲自正，豪杰自归，英雄自附，侵疆自还，中原自复；天下自底于和平，四海自跻于仁寿，何俟乎兵革哉？
现代文：我国家中的外患既已清除，然后公道开明，正人君子被提拔任用；法令自然实行，法度自然端正，豪杰自然回来，英雄自然归附，被侵占的疆土自然归还，中原自然恢复，天下自然达到和平安定，四海自然跻身于仁厚而且长久，为什么要等待战争呢？
English: Once the external troubles in our country have been eliminated, then the justice will be enlightened, the upright will be promoted and appointed; the laws will be implemented naturally, the laws will be naturally correct, the heroes will naturally return, the heroes will naturally return, the occupied territories will naturally return, the Central Plains will naturally recover, the world will naturally achieve peace and stability, and the four seas will naturally become benevolent and long-lasting. Why wait for war?

古文：不然，则乱臣贼子毁冕裂冠，哦九锡隆恩之诗，恃贵不可侔之相，私妾内姬，阴臣将相，鱼肉军士，涂炭生灵，坠百世之远图，亏十庙之遗业。
现代文：不这样，那么乱臣贼子毁裂皇冠，哦吟多次赐与隆恩的诗歌，依仗尊贵一副不可求的样子，私下结交内姬，暗中臣服将相，鱼肉兵士，涂炭生灵，毁掉百世的远大谋略，毁坏十朝遗留下来的基业。
English: Otherwise, the unruly vassals and thieves will destroy the crown, recite the poems of granting long-term grace many times, rely on nobility for an unattainable appearance, make private friends with Neiji, secretly submit to generals, fish soldiers, and charcoal creatures, destroy the great strategy of a hundred lifetimes, and destroy the inheritance left by the Ten Dynasties.

古文：陛下此时虽欲不与之偕亡，则祸迫于身，权出于人，俯首待终，何脐可噬。
现代文：陛下这时候虽然不想与之一起灭亡，但祸迫于身，权出于他人，低头等待终结，后悔已迟。
English: At this time, although His Majesty did not want to perish together with them, but the calamity pressed on him, the power came from others, he bowed his head and waited for the end, and it was too late to regret.

古文：事之未然，难以取信，臣愿以身属之廷尉，待其军行用师，劳还奏凯，则枭臣之首风递四方，以为天下欺君罔上者之戒。
现代文： 事情没有发生，难以取信，我希望以身归属廷尉，等待军行用师，得胜回朝，就把我悬头示众风递四方，作为天下欺君罔上的告诫。
English: It didn't happen, it's hard to get a letter, I hope to be a court lieutenant, wait for a military instructor, win back to the government, then hang my head in the wind and send it to the four directions, as a warning to the world's tyrants.

古文：傥或干戈相寻，败亡相继，强敌外攻，奸臣内畔，与臣所言尽相符契，然后令臣归老田里，永为不齿之民。
现代文：倘若战争接连不断而来，败亡相继，强大的敌人从外进攻，奸臣在内跋扈，与我所说的尽相符合，然后令我归老田里，永远为不收录的百姓。 
English: If the wars continue to come, the defeats continue to come, the powerful enemies attack from the outside, and the traitors attack from the inside, which is consistent with what I have said, then I will return to my hometown, and I will always be an unrecorded people.

古文：书奏，侂胄大怒，下大理，贬建宁圜土中。
现代文：书奏上，韩胄大怒，把华岳投入大理寺狱，贬斥到建宁牢狱中。
English: During the recital, Han Zheng was furious and threw Hua Yue into the Dali Temple prison and banished him to the Jianning prison.

古文：郡守傅伯成怜之，命狱卒使出入毋系。
现代文：建宁郡守傅伯成怜惜他，命令狱卒让他出去不加拘禁。
English: Jianning County Governor Fu Bocheng took pity on him and ordered the jailer to let him go without detention.

古文：伯成去，又迕守李大异，复置狱。
现代文：傅伯成离开，华岳又得罪郡守李大异，又把他置于牢狱。
English: Fu Bocheng left, and Hua Yue offended the county governor Li Dayong and put him in prison.

古文：侂胄诛，放还，复入学登第，为殿前司官属，郁不得志。
现代文：韩胄被杀，华岳被放回。又入太学登进士第，为殿前司官属，郁郁不得志。
English: Han Zheng was killed, and Hua Yue was released. He entered Taigaku again and was promoted to the rank of scholar. He belonged to the court's former magistrates, and was deeply discouraged.

古文：谋去丞相史弥远，事觉，下临安狱。
现代文：谋划除去丞相史弥远，事情败露，被投入临安牢狱。
English: The plot to remove the prime minister, Shiyan, was uncovered, and he was thrown into Lin'an Prison.

古文：狱具，坐议大臣当死。
现代文：罪案已成，因议论大臣当判死罪。
English: The crime has already been committed, and the minister should be sentenced to death for discussing it.

古文：宁宗知岳名，欲生之，弥远曰： 是欲杀臣者。 竟杖死东市。
现代文：宁宗知道华岳的名字，打算救他，史弥远说： 这是想杀我的人。 最终被杖击而死，弃尸于东市。
English: Ningzong knew Hua Yue's name and planned to save him. Shi Miyuan said, "This is the man who tried to kill me." He was eventually beaten to death with a cane and his body was dumped in Dongshi.

