古文：罗元则李元平刘参闫敬立崔书生李则陆凭浔阳李生
现代文：罗元则李元平刘参闫敬立崔书生李则陆凭浔阳李生
English: Luo Yuan Zi, Li Yuan Ping, Liu Zhanqi, Jing Li, Cui Shusheng, Li Zhelu, Bei Yang, Li Sheng

古文：罗元则
现代文：罗元则
English: Luo Yuanze

古文：历阳罗元则，尝乘舟往广陵，道遇雨，有一人求寄载，元则引船载之。察其似长者，供待甚厚。
现代文：历阳的罗元则，曾经乘船到广陵去，途中遇雨。有一人要求搭乘，罗元则将船靠岸让他上船，看他象个长者，供奉对待他特别好。
English: Luo Yuan of Liyang once took a boat to Guangling, and it rained on the way. One person asked to take the boat, and Luo Yuan put the boat ashore and let him on board. He looked like an elderly man, and the attendants treated him particularly well.

古文：无他装囊，但有书函一枚，元则窃异之。
现代文：他没有什么行装，只有书套一个，元则暗自惊异。
English: He didn't have any clothes, just a book cover, and he was secretly surprised.

古文：夜与同卧，旦至一村，乃求暂下岸，少顷当还。君可驻船见待，慎无发我函中书也。
现代文：夜间与他一起睡觉。第二天早晨到达一个村庄，那人要求暂时下船上岸，说：一会儿就回来，你可停船等一下，小心不要打开我封套中的信。
English: The next morning, when we arrived at a village, the man asked to disembark temporarily, saying: "I'll be back in a minute. You can stop the boat and wait. Be careful not to open the letter in my envelope."

古文：许之乃下去。
现代文：元则答应，那人就下船离去。
English: Yuan agreed, and the man disembarked and left.

古文：须臾，闻村中哭声，则知有异。乃窃其书视之，曰：某日至某村，当取其乙，某村名良是。
现代文：一会儿，听到村中有哭声，元则明白有异常情况，就私自打开他的信看，上面写道：某日到某村，应该取某人，那村名正是这个村。
English: After a while, he heard crying in the village, and knowing that something was out of the ordinary, he opened his letter to see for himself. It said, "Someday, when you go to a certain village, you should pick up someone. The name of that village is this village."

古文：元则名次在某下，元则甚惧而鬼还。
现代文：元则的名字排在某人的下面。元则非常恐惧那鬼就回来了。
English: Mototsune's name was at the bottom of someone's list. Mototsune was so scared that the ghost came back.

古文：责曰：君何视我书函？
现代文：责备道：你为什么看我的书信？
English: Scolded: Why are you reading my letters?

古文：元则乃前自陈伏，因乞哀甚苦。
现代文：元则上前陈诉认错，苦苦哀求。
English: Yuan then came forward to make a complaint, admitted his mistake, and begged for forgiveness.

古文：鬼愍然，谓：君尝负人否？
现代文：鬼露出怜悯的样子，问他曾经有过违背人意否。
English: The ghost showed pity and asked him if he had ever disobeyed anyone.

古文：元则熟思之曰：平生唯有夺同县张明道十亩田，遂至失业，其人身已死矣。
现代文：元则细细想后说：一生只有抢夺过同县张明通十亩田地，于是造成他失去生计，那人已经死了。
English: After careful consideration, Yuan Zexu said: In his lifetime, he only robbed 10 mu of land from Zhang Mingtong of the same county, which caused him to lose his livelihood. That person is dead.

古文：鬼曰：此人诉君耳。
现代文：鬼说：那人告你了。
English: The demon said, "That man is accusing you."

古文：元则泣曰：父母年老，惟恃元则一身，幸见恩贷。
现代文：元则哭着说：父母年老，只靠我一人，希望你发发慈悲。
English: Yuan Zetian cried and said, "My parents are old and I am the only one who can rely on them. I hope you will have mercy on me."

古文：良久曰：念君厚恩相载，今舍去，君当趋归。三年无出门，此后可延十年耳。
现代文：过了很久才说：念你厚恩让我乘船，现在放你离去，你赶紧回家，三年内不要出家门，此后可延长十年寿命。
English: It was a long time before he said: "For your kindness, let me take the boat. Now I'll let you go. You should hurry home. Don't leave the house for three years. After that, you can extend your life by ten years."

古文：即下船去。
现代文：鬼就下船离去。
English: So the demon got out of the boat and left.

古文：元则归家中，岁余，其父使至田中收稻，即固辞之。
现代文：元则回到家中，过了一年多，他的父亲让他到田里去收割稻谷。元则坚决推辞。
English: After more than a year, his father asked him to go to the fields to harvest rice, but he firmly refused.

古文：父怒曰：田家当自力，乃欲偷安甘寝，妄为妖辞耶？
现代文：父愤怒道：种田人家应当出力，你只想偷安做美梦，不要听信鬼话！
English: The father angrily said, "Farmers should work hard. You just want to steal the peace and make a beautiful dream. Don't listen to gossips!"

古文：将杖之，元则不得已。
现代文：要用杖打他。
English: You have to beat him with a stick.

古文：乃出门，即见前鬼，髡头裸体，背尽疮爛，前持曰：吾为君至此，又不能自保惜。今即相逢，不能相置。
现代文：元则没有办法，才出门，就看见了以前的那个鬼，光头裸体，背上都是烂疮。上前抓住说：我为你达到这种程度，又不能保护自己，今即相遇，不能放过。
English: Yuan had no choice but to go out and saw the ghost from before, bald and naked, with sores all over his back. He grabbed her and said, "I've reached this point for you, and I can't protect myself. Now we've met, and I can't let go."

古文：元则曰：舍我辞二亲。
现代文：元则说：放我辞别二老双亲。
English: Yuan Zi said, "Let me say goodbye to my parents."

古文：鬼许，具以白父。
现代文：鬼答应。把全部情况告诉父亲。
English: The ghost agreed. He told his father the whole story.

古文：言讫，奄然遂绝。
现代文：说完，气息奄奄接着就断了气。
English: After saying that, she gasped for breath and then passed out.

古文：其父方痛恨之，月余亦卒。
现代文：他的父亲才痛苦悔恨，过了一个多月也死了。
English: His father only bitterly regretted it and died more than a month later.

古文：李元平
现代文：李元平
English: Li Yuanping

古文：李元平者，睦州刺史伯成之子，以大历五年客于东阳精舍读书。
现代文：李元平是睦州刺史伯成的儿子。于大历五年客居在东阳精舍读书。
English: Li Yuanping is the son of Mutsuzhou poet Shi Bocheng. In the fifth year of the lunar calendar, he lived and studied in Dongyang Seishe.

古文：岁余暮际，忽有一美女服红罗裙襦，容色甚丽，有青衣婢随来。
现代文：一年后的一个傍晚，忽然有一个美女穿着红罗衣裙，容貌姿色甚美，有青衣女婢跟随而来，进入元平所住院子其他僧房中。
English: One evening a year later, suddenly a beautiful woman wearing a red dress, with a very beautiful appearance, was followed by a maid in a blue dress, and entered the other monks' quarters of the hospitalized children of Yuanping.

古文：入元平所居院他僧房中，平悦而趋之，问以所适，及其姓氏。
现代文：元平高兴而奔去。
English: Motohira ran away happily.

古文：青衣怒云：素未相识，遽尔见逼，非所望王孙也。
现代文：问她们要到哪里去和她的姓名。青衣女婢怒道：素不相识，就来逼问，真不是所盼望的贵家子弟啊。
English: Ask them where they want to go and their names. The maidservant in blue angrily said, "I didn't know you, so I came to make you ask. You really aren't the son of a noble family that I was hoping for."

古文：元平初不酬对，但求拜见。
现代文：元平开始不答对，只求拜见。
English: At first, Yuanping did not answer correctly, but only asked to see him.

古文：须臾，女从中出，相见忻悦，有如旧识，欢言者久之，谓元平曰：所以来者，亦欲见君，论宿昔事，我已非人，君无惧乎？
现代文：一会儿，那女人从屋里出来，相见很高兴，好象是旧相识，欢快地谈了好久。她对元平说：我来的原因，就是要见你，谈谈往昔的事，我已经不是人，你不害怕吗？
English: After a while, the woman came out of the room. She was happy to see me, as if we were old acquaintances, and we had a long, happy conversation. She said to Yuanping, "The reason I came here is to see you and talk about the past. I'm no longer a person. Aren't you afraid?"

古文：元平心既相悦，略无疑阻，谓女曰：任当言之，仆亦何惧？
现代文：元平内心喜悦，没有一点凝虑。对女人说：任凭你说，我有什么害怕的。
English: Yuan Ping was delighted and did not hesitate at all. He said to the woman, "Let me tell you what I'm afraid of.

古文：女云：己大人昔任江州刺史，君前生是江州门夫，恒在君家长直，虽生于贫贱，而容止可悦。
现代文：女人说：我父亲从前做江州刺史，你前生是江州门夫。我长期在刺史家培育长大，你虽然生长在贫贱人家，可是容貌举止令人喜欢。
English: The woman said, "My father used to be a historian of Jiangsu Province. In your previous life, you were a janitor of Jiangsu Province. I was raised in a family of historians for a long time. Although you grew up in a poor family, your appearance and manners are pleasing.

古文：我以因缘之故，私与交，通君才百日，患霍乱没。
现代文：我因为这个缘故，私自与你交往。你仅仅百日，你就患霍乱死亡。
English: That's why I took it upon myself to get in touch with you. You were only a hundred days old when you died of cholera.

古文：故我不敢哭，哀倍常情。
现代文：但我不敢哭，倍感哀伤。
English: But I didn't dare to cry, I was so sad.

古文：素持千手千眼菩萨呪，所愿后身各生贵家，重为婚姻。
现代文：经常拿着千手千眼菩萨祷告，但愿来世各自投生到高贵人家，重新结为婚姻。
English: They often pray with the bodhisattva of a thousand hands and a thousand eyes, hoping that in the next life they will each be born into a noble family and re-married.

古文：以朱笔涂君左股为志，君试看之。若有朱者，我言验矣。
现代文：我用红笔涂你左大腿做为记号。你看着，如有红的，我说的就验证了。
English: I used a red pen to mark your left thigh. You watch, if there is red, I will verify what I said.

古文：元平自视如其言，益信，因留之宿。
现代文：元平自己看后象她说的，更加相信。
English: As she said, Yuanping believed even more after seeing it for herself.

古文：久之，情契既洽，欢惬亦甚。
现代文：于是留她住下，过了很久，情投意合，非常欢愉。
English: So I let her stay, and after a long time, we hit it off, and it was a lot of fun.

古文：欲曙，忽谓元平曰：诧生时至，不得久留，意甚恨恨。
现代文：天将亮，她忽然对元平说：投生时辰已到，不能久留，感到非常遗憾。
English: As dawn broke, she suddenly said to Yuanping, "The time for reincarnation has come. I can't stay for long. I feel very sorry."

古文：言讫悲涕，云：后身父为今县令，及我年十六，当得方伯。此时方合为婚姻，未间。
现代文：说完悲伤痛哭。又说：投生后的父亲现在做县今，到我十六岁时，你能做地方长官，那时才能完婚，不到时候，希望你不要结婚。
English: He also said, "Now that my reincarnated father is the county magistrate, when I'm sixteen, you can be the district magistrate. Only then can you get married. If it's not the right time, I hope you don't get married."

古文：幸无婚也。
现代文：天命已定，你虽然想结婚，也是办不到的。
English: As fate would have it, even if you wanted to get married, you couldn't.

古文：然天命已定，君虽欲婚，亦不可得。言讫诀去。
现代文：说完告别离去。
English: Say goodbye and leave.

古文：刘参
现代文：刘参
English: Liu San

古文：唐建中二年，江淮讹言有厉鬼自湖南来，或曰毛鬼，或曰毛人，或曰枨，不恒其称。
现代文：唐朝建中二年，江淮一带谣传有厉鬼从湖南来。有的说是毛鬼，有的说是毛人，有的说象木柱子。
English: In the second year of the middle of the Tang Dynasty, there were rumors of fierce ghosts coming from Hunan in the Jianghuai area. Some said they were hairy ghosts, some said they were hairy people, and some said they were like wooden pillars.

古文：而鬼变化无方。
现代文：说法不一，鬼变化无常。
English: Accounts vary, and ghosts are fickle.

古文：人言鬼好食人心，少女稚男，全取之。
现代文：人传鬼喜欢吃人心，少女少男，全都抓取。
English: The ghost likes to eat people's hearts, girls and boys, grabbing them all.

古文：民恐惧，多聚居，夜烈火不敢寐，持弓刀以备。
现代文：老百姓害怕，大多数都聚集起来居住，夜间点燃烈火不敢睡觉，拿着弓箭大刀以备不测。
English: The common people are afraid, and most of them have gathered to live. They dare not sleep at night because of the blazing fires. They carry bows and arrows and large swords to be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：每鬼入一家，万家击板及铜器为声，声振天地。
现代文：每当鬼进入一家，各家都击打木板和铜器制造声响，响声震天动地。
English: Whenever a ghost enters a house, each family hits the wooden planks and copperware to create a sound that shakes the earth.

古文：人有狂慑而死者。
现代文：有人狂吓而死的。
English: People have been scared to death.

古文：所在如此，官禁不能息。
现代文：到处都是如此，官府禁止也不能平息。
English: This is the case everywhere, and the ban by the government cannot be appeased.

古文：前兖州功曹刘参者，旧业淮泗，因家广陵。
现代文：前兖州功曹刘参，原先在淮泗，家迁广陵，有六个儿子，都好斗。
English: Liu San, the former Gong Cao of Zhangzhou, originally from Huaiyi, moved his family to Guangling. He had six sons, all of whom were pugnacious.

古文：有男六人，皆好勇，刘氏率其子，操弓矢夜守。
现代文：刘氏率领他的儿子，操持弓箭守夜。有几个女的关在屋内。
English: Mr. Liu led his son in a vigil with bows and arrows. Several women were locked inside.

古文：有数女闭堂内，诸郎巡外。夜半后，天色暝晦，忽闻堂中惊叫，言鬼已在堂中，诸郎骇。
现代文：各儿郎在外巡视。半夜后，天色昏暗，忽然听到屋内惊叫，说鬼已在屋里，各儿郎惊惧。
English: After midnight, with the sky darkening, they suddenly heard a scream from inside the house, saying that a ghost was in the house. The children were terrified.

古文：既闭户，无因入就，乃守窥之。见一物方如床，毛鬣如蝟，高三四尺，四面有足，转走堂内。
现代文：门已关闭，无法进入救人，就守在外面往里看，看见一物方形象床，刚毛象刺猬，高有三四尺，四面有脚，在屋内转跑。
English: When the door was shut and there was no way to rescue anyone, he stood outside and looked in. He saw a bed shaped like a cube, with a bristly shape like a hedgehog, three or four feet high, with feet on all sides, running around inside the house.

古文：旁又有鬼，玄毛披体，爪牙如剑，把小女置床上，更擒次女。
现代文：旁边有一鬼，赤黑的毛披散在身体上，爪和牙象利剑。把小女儿放在毛床上，接着去抓次女。
English: Beside him is a ghost, red and black fur spread over his body, claws and teeth like sharp swords. He puts his little daughter on a bed of fur and then goes to grab his second daughter.

古文：事且迫矣，诸郎坏壁面而入，以射毛床，毛床走，其鬼亦走。
现代文：情况紧急，各儿郎破墙而入，用箭射毛床。毛床跑，那鬼也跑。
English: The situation is urgent, each of the children breaks through the wall and shoots the bed with an arrow. The bed runs, and the ghost also runs.

古文：须臾，失鬼所在，而毛床东奔，中镞百数，且不能走。
现代文：一会儿，失去鬼的踪影，毛床向东奔跑，中箭数百，不能跑。
English: After a while, losing track of the ghost, the hairspring ran to the east. Hundreds of arrows hit it, and it couldn't run.

古文：一人擒得，抱其毛，力扦之。
现代文：一个人捉到，抱住他的毛，用力拽他。
English: One man caught him, grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and pulled him hard.

古文：食顷，俱堕河梁，大呼曰：我今抱得鬼。
现代文：一顿饭的工夫，一起掉到河里，大叫道：我现在抱住鬼了！
English: After a meal, he fell into the river and shouted, "I'm holding a ghost now!"

古文：鬼困。
现代文：鬼已困乏，赶紧用火援助我。
English: The ghost is exhausted, hurry up and help me with fire.

古文：急以火相救，及以火照之，但见抱桥柱耳。刘子尽爪损，小女遗于路。
现代文：等到用火照时，只见他抱着桥柱而已。刘参的儿子都被抓坏了，小女儿被扔在路上。
English: When the fire was lit, he was only seen holding the bridge pillar. Liu San's sons were all caught, and his little daughter was thrown on the road.

古文：居数日，营中一卒夜见毛鬼飞驰屋上，射之不可，叫呼颇动众，明日伏罪。以令百姓，因而有盗，窃托以妖妄。
现代文：过了几天，军营中有一士兵，夜间看见一个毛鬼飞奔到屋上，射它没有射着，叫喊惊动了很多人，第二天受到惩处，用以使百姓明白，由于有盗贼盗窃，借故推托是妖怪。
English: A few days later, a soldier in the camp saw a hairy ghost run up to the roof at night. He did not shoot it, but shouted, which alarmed many people. The next day, he was punished to make the people understand that because there were thieves stealing, it was a monster.

古文：既而自弥。亦不知其然。
现代文：以后自行消失，也不知那是怎么回事。
English: After that, it disappeared on its own, and I don't know what happened to it.

古文：闫敬立
现代文：闫敬立
English: Jing Li

古文：兴元元年，朱泚乱长安。
现代文：兴元元年，朱泚作乱长安。
English: In the first year of Xingyuan, Zhu Xi caused the Chang'an Rebellion.

古文：有闫敬立为段秀实告密使，潜途出凤翔山，夜欲抵太平馆。
现代文：闫敬立作段秀实的告密使，秘密离开凤翔山，夜晚要到达太平馆。
English: Zou Jinglian is a suave snitch who secretly leaves Fengxiang Mountain and arrives at the Taiping Pavilion at night.

古文：其馆移十里，旧馆无人已久，敬立误入之，但讶莱芜鲠涩。
现代文：那馆已迁移了十里，旧馆无人已很久。敬立误入旧馆，只是惊奇荒芜枯涩。
English: The museum has moved ten miles away, and the old museum has not been used for a long time. Keiichi mistakenly entered the old museum, but was surprised by the desolation and dryness.

古文：即问此馆何以寂寞如是，皂衫人对曰：亦可住。
现代文：有两个穿黑衣服的人迎门行拜，控制马辔到大厅，就问此馆因为什么寂寞到如此地步。穿黑衣人回答说：也可以住。
English: Two people dressed in black came to the door to pay homage, led the horse to the hall, and asked why the hall was so lonely. The man in black replied, "You can live here, too."

古文：既坐，亦如当馆驿之礼。
现代文：坐后，一切都遵照馆驿的礼数进行着。
English: After sitting down, everything proceeded according to the number of bowls in the hall.

古文：须臾，皂衫人通曰：知馆官前凤州河池县尉刘俶。
现代文：过了一会儿，黑衣人通报说：知馆官前凤州河池县尉刘俶到。
English: After a while, the man in black announced: "Former Fengzhou Hechi County Lieutenant Liu Ye, the liaison officer, has arrived."

古文：敬立见之，问曰：此馆甚荒芜，何也？
现代文：敬立接见他。问道：这馆很荒芜，为什么？
English: Jing Li met him and asked, "This hall is deserted, why?

古文：对曰：今天下榛莽，非独此馆，宫阙尚生荆棘矣。
现代文：回答说：现在天下草木丛杂，不单单这个驿馆，宫殿还生荆棘呢。
English: He replied, "Nowadays, the world is full of weeds and thorns. Not only the Summer Palace, but also the Imperial Palace is full of thorns.

古文：敬立奇其言，语论皆出人右。
现代文：敬立认为他的话奇特，谈论在一般人之上。
English: Jing Li thought that his words were strange and that he was talking above the average person.

古文：俶乃云：此馆所由并散逃。
现代文：叔说此馆所用的人都已逃走。
English: My uncle said that all the people who used this library had fled.

古文：因指二皂衫人曰：此皆某家昆仑奴，一名道奴，一名知远，权且应奉尔。
现代文：指着两个穿黑衣人说：这都是我家的昆仑奴，一个叫道奴，一个叫知远，暂且来侍奉你。
English: Pointing to two black-clad people, he said, "These are all my family's Kunlun slaves. One is called Tao, and one is called Zhiyuan. Let them serve you for the time being."

古文：敬立因于烛下，细目其奴。皂衫下皆衣紫白衣，面皆昆仑，兼以白字印面分明，信是俶家人也。
现代文：敬立于是在灯烛下，细看那奴仆，黑衫下都穿着紫白衣服，面上都有昆仑，再加上用白字印面上很分明，确实是刘俶家的人。
English: Jing then stood under the candle and looked closely at the manservant. Under the black shirt, they were all wearing purple and white clothes. They all had Kunlun on their faces. In addition, it was very clear from the white characters printed on their faces that they were indeed from the Liu Ye family.

古文：令觇厨中，有三数婢供馔具，甚忙，信是无所由。
现代文：让看厨房，有几个女仆陈设食具，很忙，确实没有其他的人。
English: Let's see the kitchen, there are a few maids setting up utensils, very busy, there is really no one else.

古文：良久，盘筵至。食精。
现代文：过了很久，筵席摆上，食物精美。
English: After a long time, the table is set and the food is delicious.

古文：敬立与俶同飡，甚饱。
现代文：敬立和刘俶一起进餐，很饱。
English: Jing Li and Liu Yao are having dinner together. They are very full.

古文：畜仆等皆如法，乃寝。
现代文：仆人等也都如此，才睡觉。
English: And likewise the servants; and they went to sleep.

古文：敬立问俶曰：缘倍程行，马瘦甚，可别假一马耶？
现代文：敬立问俶道：由于加倍兼程，马累得很瘦，能另外借一匹马吗？
English: Jing Li asked the groom: Due to the double part-time course, the horse is very tired and thin. Can I borrow another horse?

古文：答曰：小事耳。
现代文：回答说：小事罢了。
English: And he said, It is a light thing.

古文：至四更，敬立命驾欲发，俶又具馔，亦如法。
现代文：到了四更天，敬立命令整理车马准备出发。刘俶又准备了饭菜，也象那种方法。
English: On the fourth day, Jing Li ordered the horses and chariots to be prepared for departure. Liu Ye prepared the meal, also in the same way.

古文：俶处分知远，以西槽马，送大使至前馆。兼令道奴被东槽马：我饯送大使至上路。
现代文：刘俶安排知远，取西槽的马，送大使到前边的驿馆，并让道奴备好东槽的马，亲自送大使上路。
English: Liu Bei arranged for Zhiyuan to take the horse of the west groove and send the ambassador to the front of the pavilion, and let the Taoist prepare the horse of the east groove and personally send the ambassador on his way.

古文：须臾马至，敬立乃乘西槽马而行，俶亦行。
现代文：一会儿马到，敬立骑西槽的马而行。刘俶也跟着走。
English: After a while, the horse arrived, and Ge Li rode the horse of the west groove. Liu Ye also followed.

古文：可二里，俶即却回执别，异于常馆官。
现代文：走了二里地，刘俶就执手告别返回，和平常的馆官不同。
English: After walking for two miles, Liu Wei returned with a farewell handshake, which was different from the usual librarian.

古文：别后数里，敬立觉所借马，有人粪之秽，俄而渐盛，乃换己马被驮。
现代文：分别后走了几里，敬立感觉所借的马，有人粪的秽气，一会儿渐渐味大，于是换自己的马骑。
English: After walking a few miles separately, Jing Li felt the borrowed horse, the foul breath of someone's excrement, and gradually became nauseous, so he changed his horse to ride.

古文：前馆方有吏迎拜，敬立惊曰：吾才发馆耳。
现代文：走了四五里，东方像要亮了，前边驿馆正好有官吏迎拜。敬立吃惊的说：我才出驿馆呀。
English: After walking for four or five miles, the east seemed to be getting brighter, and there happened to be government officials bowing in front of the pavilion. Surprised, Jing Li said, "I just came out of the pavilion."

古文：曰：前馆无人。大使何以宿，大讶。
现代文：说：前馆没有人，大使凭什么住宿？大惊。
English: He said, "There is no one in the front hall, so why is the ambassador staying here? I'm shocked."

古文：及问所送仆马，俱已不见，其所驮辎重，已却回百余步置路侧。
现代文：到问所送的马匹，全都不见了，那所驮的辎重，已退回百余步放到路边。
English: When I asked about the horses, they were all gone. The heavy load of the plough had been moved back more than a hundred paces to the side of the road.

古文：至前馆，馆吏曰：昔有前官凤州河池县尉刘少府殡宫，在彼馆后园，久已颓毁。
现代文：到了前馆，馆吏说：从前有原做凤州河池县尉的刘少府的殡宫，在那驿馆的后园，早已废毁。
English: Arriving at the front hall, the librarian said, "There used to be a funeral hall for Liu Shaofu, the former lieutenant of Fengzhou Hechi County, in the backyard of that hall. It has long been abandoned and destroyed.

古文：敬立却回验之，废馆更无物，唯墙后有古殡宫。东厂前有搭鞍木马，西侧中有高脚木马，门前废堠子二，殡宫前有冥器数人。
现代文：敬立回去验证它，废馆再无什么东西，只是墙后有个古殡宫，东厂前有个搭鞍的木马，西侧中有个高脚木马，门前有废土堡两座，殡宫前有殉葬品数人。
English: Jing Li went back to verify it. There was nothing else in the waste hall, but there was an ancient funeral hall behind the wall, a saddled wooden horse in front of the east factory, a high-legged wooden horse in the west side, two wasteland castles in front of the door, and several people with funerary goods in front of the funeral hall.

古文：渐觉喉中有生食气，须臾吐昨夜所食，皆作杇烂气。如黄衣曲尘之色。斯乃榇中送亡人之食也。童仆皆大吐，三日方复旧。
现代文：敬立渐渐感觉嗓子眼有生食味，一会儿，吐出昨夜所吃的食物，都是腐烂味，象黄衣曲尘的颜色，这是棺材里送给死人的食物，童仆等人都大吐，三日后才复旧。
English: Jing Li gradually felt the taste of raw food in her throat. After a while, she spit out the food she had eaten last night. It was all rotten, like the color of yellow dust. This was the food given to the dead in the coffin. The servants and others vomited profusely. It took three days before she regained her old self.

古文：崔书生
现代文：崔书生
English: Cui Shusheng

古文：博陵崔书生，往长安永乐里。
现代文：博陵姓崔的书生，到长安永乐里。
English: Boling surnamed Cui, a scholar, went to Chang'an Yongle Village.

古文：先有旧业在渭南。
现代文：祖先有旧业在渭南。
English: Ancestors have old businesses in southern Fujian.

古文：贞元中，尝因清明节归渭南，行至昭应北墟垅之间，日已晚，歇马于古道左。
现代文：贞元年间，曾经在清明节回渭南，走到昭应北，荒坟之间，天已晚，在古道旁歇马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, she once went back to southern Fujian on the Tomb-Sweeping Day, walked to the north of Zhaoying, between the tombs, and, when it was too late, rested her horse beside the ancient road.

古文：比百余步，见一女人，靓粧华服，穿越榛莽，似失路于松柏间。
现代文：百余步外，看见一女子，浓妆华服，穿越在芫杂丛生的草木中，好象在松柏间迷失了路。
English: More than a hundred paces away, I saw a woman, heavily made-up and dressed in glamorous clothes, crossing through the tangled vegetation, as if she had lost her way among the pines.

古文：崔闲步劘逼渐近，乃以袂掩面，而足趾跌蹶，屡欲仆地。
现代文：崔漫步前行渐渐走近，那女子用衣袖遮脸。而脚跟不稳要跌倒，多次要倒地。
English: Cui Wanzhong walked forward and gradually approached, the woman covered her face with her sleeves, and the heel was not stable, and she fell down and fell to the ground many times.

古文：默不对。又令一童，将所乘马逐之，更以仆马奉送。
现代文：崔让小童走近看她，是个年方二八的绝代美人。于是让小童问她：天已晚为什么没有伴侣，凄怆惊慌地在荒坟之中行走呢？默默地不回答。
English: Cui let the child come closer to see her. She was a twenty-eight-year-old unparalleled beauty. So let the child ask her: It's too late, why is there no partner, why are you walking in the desolate graves in a terrible panic? She silently didn't answer.

古文：美人回顾，意似微纳，崔乃偻而缓逐之，以观其近远耳。
现代文：又让另一童，骑马追她，又把仆人和马匹送她使用，美人回头看看，意思是象同意接受。崔就曲背而慢慢地追她，看她到何处去。
English: Another boy chased her on horseback, and he also gave her servants and horses for her to use. When the beautiful woman looked back, it was as if she had agreed to accept. Cui bent over and slowly chased her to see where she was going.

古文：美人上马，一仆控之而前。
现代文：美人上马，一仆人牵马在前。
English: Beauty mounts a horse, a servant leads the way.

古文：才数百步，忽见女奴三数人。哆口坌息，踉跄而谓女郎曰：何处来？
现代文：才走了几百步，忽然看见个女奴，张口喘息，踉跄而来对女郎说：从何处来？
English: He had only walked a few hundred paces when he suddenly saw a slave girl, panting with her mouth open, come running up to him and say to the girl: "Where are you from?

古文：数处求之不得。
现代文：多处找你找不到。
English: I can't find you anywhere.

古文：拥马行十余步，则长年青衣驻立以俟。
现代文：簇拥着马走了十余步，看见一年长的婢女站立等待。
English: They walked more than ten steps, hugging the horses, and saw a one-year-old maidservant standing and waiting.

古文：崔渐近，乃拜谢崔曰：郎君悯小娘失路，脱骖仆以济之，今日色已暮，邀郎君至庄可矣？
现代文：崔渐渐走近，青衣拜谢崔说：你怜悯小娘子失路，让出马匹和仆人帮助她，现在天色已晚，邀请你到庄上可以吗？
English: Cui gradually approached. Qingyi Bai Xie Cui said, "You took pity on the little girl who lost her way, and gave up your horses and servants to help her. Now it's too late. Can I invite you to Zhuangshan?"

古文：崔曰：小娘子何忽独步凄惶如此？
现代文：崔曰：小娘子为什么独自行走凄怆惊慌到如此程度？
English: Cui said: "Why did the little girl walk alone and panic to such an extent?

古文：青衣曰：因被酒兴酣至此。
现代文：青衣说：因喝酒尽兴过量达到如此地步。
English: Aoi said: I got to this point by drinking too much and having too much fun.

古文：取北行一二里，复到一树林，室屋甚盛，桃李甚芳。
现代文：取道向北走了一二里，又到一树林，房屋很美，桃李香气很浓。
English: Take the road north for a mile or two, and you'll come to a grove of trees. The houses are beautiful, and the peach and plum scent is very strong.

古文：又有青衣七八人，迎女郎而入。
现代文：又有青衣七八个人，迎接女郎进去。
English: Another seven or eight men in blue suits came to welcome the girl inside.

古文：少顷，一青衣出，传主母命曰：小外生因避醉，逃席失路，赖遇君子，卹以仆马。不然日暮，或值恶狼狐媚，何所不加。
现代文：片刻，一青衣出来，传女主人命令说：小外甥女因逃避酒醉，逃离宴席迷失了路，全靠遇着你，周济了仆人和马匹，不这样的话，天晚如果遇上恶狼狐狸精，怎么能不遇害。
English: After a while, a young woman came out and ordered the hostess to say: "My little niece lost her way because she was drunk and ran away from the banquet. It was all thanks to you that she met you and was able to feed her servants and horses. Otherwise, if she were to meet the evil wolf, the fox spirit, how could she not be killed.

古文：阖室戴佩。且憩，即当奉邀。
现代文：现关在屋里穿戴打扮，你暂且休息，马上邀你进入。
English: You are now confined to your room to dress and groom yourself. If you would like to take a break, you are invited to enter immediately.

古文：青衣数人更出候问，如亲戚之密。
现代文：青衣多人连续出来问候，象亲戚那样亲密。
English: Many people in blue came out in succession to say hello, as close as relatives.

古文：顷之，邀崔入宅。
现代文：一会儿，邀请崔生进屋。
English: After a while, he invited Cui Sheng into the house.

古文：既见，乃命食。
现代文：进见后，命令上食品，吃完又上酒宴。
English: After the audience, the food was ordered, and after eating, the wine banquet was served.

古文：食毕酒至，从容叙言：某王氏外生女，丽艳精巧，人间无双，欲待君子巾栉，何如？
现代文：青衣舒缓地说：王氏是我的外甥女，姿色艳丽，性情精巧，人间无二，想要侍候你，怎么样？
English: Aoi said soothingly, "Wang is my niece. She has a beautiful appearance, exquisite temperament, and is one of a kind. How about if she wants to wait on you?"

古文：崔放逸者，因酒拜谢于座侧。
现代文：崔生是个豪放的人，靠着酒兴在座侧拜谢。
English: Cui Sheng is a bold person, and thanks the audience with a glass of wine.

古文：俄命生出，实神仙也。
现代文：一会儿命外甥女出来，确实是神仙。
English: After a while, my niece came out. She really is a fairy.

古文：一住三日，宴游欢洽，无不酣畅。
现代文：一住就是三天，饮宴游玩欢乐融洽，无比的畅快。
English: One stay is three days, banqueting and playing are fun and harmonious, incomparably enjoyable.

古文：王氏常呼其姨曰玉姨。
现代文：王氏常叫她姨为玉姨。
English: Mr. Wang often called her Aunt Yu.

古文：玉姨好与崔生长行，爱崔口脂合子。玉姨输，则有玉环相酬。
现代文：玉姨喜欢与崔生赌长行。喜爱崔生的口脂合子，玉姨输了，就给玉环酬对。
English: Yutong likes to gamble with Cui Sheng. She likes Cui Sheng's lipstick son, and if Yutong loses, she will give Yutong a pair.

古文：崔输且多，先于长安买得合子六七枚，半已输玉姨，崔亦赢玉指环二枚。
现代文：崔生输的多，先前在长安买的合子六七个，一半已输给玉姨，崔生也赢了玉环二个。
English: Cui Sheng lost a lot. He had previously bought six or seven gems in Chang'an, and half of them had been lost to his aunt. Cui Sheng also won two gems.

古文：忽一日，一家大惊曰：有贼至。其妻推崔生于后门出。
现代文：忽然一天，全家大惊说，来贼了，他的妻子推崔生从后门出去。
English: Suddenly one day, the whole family was shocked and said that a thief had come, and his wife pushed Cui Sheng out of the back door.

古文：才出，妻已不见，但自于一穴中。
现代文：才出去，妻子已经不见了，只是自己在一个洞穴中。
English: When he came out, his wife was gone, and he was alone in a cave.

古文：唯见芫花半落，松风晚清，黄萼紫英，草露沾衣而已。
现代文：只见芫花半落，松间夜晚的清风，黄萼紫英，草上的露水沾湿了衣服罢了。
English: I could only see the half-fallen camellias, the night breeze between the pines, the yellow calyx, and the dew on the grass drenching my clothes.

古文：其赢玉指环犹在衣带。
现代文：那赢的玉指环还在衣带上。
English: The winning jade ring is still on the belt.

古文：却省初见美人之路而行，见童仆以锹锸发掘一塞穴，已至榇中，见铭记曰：原周赵王女玉姨之墓。
现代文：沿着当初见美人的路而去。看见童仆用锹挖掘一个墓穴，已挖到棺材，发现那上面刻记着，后周赵王女玉姨之墓。
English: He went along the road where he had first seen the beauty. He saw the boy servant digging a grave with a pickaxe. He had already dug a coffin and found inscribed on it, the grave of Aunt Yu, the Queen of Zhao.

古文：平生怜重王氏外生，外生先殁，后令与生同葬。
现代文：平生爱怜王氏这个外甥女，外甥女先死，后让与外甥女同葬，棺柩整齐完好。
English: In her lifetime, she loved this niece of Wang's. The niece died first, and was then buried with her niece. The coffin was neat and in good condition.

古文：棺柩俨然，开榇，中有一合，合内有玉环六七枚。
现代文：打开棺材，里面有一个合子，合子里有玉环六七个。
English: He opened the coffin, and inside was a box with six or seven jade rings.

古文：崔比其睹者，略无异矣。
现代文：崔生和他赌赢的比较，没有一点差异。
English: There is not a bit of difference between Cui Sheng and him in terms of winning bets.

古文：又一合，中有口脂合子数枚，乃崔生输者也。
现代文：另一合，里面有口脂合子数个，是崔生输的。
English: Another match, which contained several lipstick conjoined twins, was lost by Cui Sheng.

古文：崔生问仆人，但见郎君入柏林，寻觅不得，方寻掘此穴，果不误也。
现代文：崔生问仆人，仆人说只见你进入柏林，寻找不着，才追寻挖掘这个墓穴，果然不错。
English: Cui Sheng asked the servant, and the servant said that he only saw you enter Berlin and couldn't find you, so he pursued the excavation of this tomb, which was really good.

古文：玉姨呼崔生奴仆为贼耳。崔生感之，急为掩瘗仍旧矣。
现代文：玉姨叫崔生的奴仆是个贼，崔生感谢她，立刻掩埋如旧。
English: Aunt Yu called Cui Sheng's servant a thief. Cui Sheng thanked her and immediately buried him as before.

古文：李则
现代文：李则
English: Li Zexu

古文：贞元初，河南少尹李则卒，未敛，有一朱衣人来，投刺申吊，自称苏郎中。
现代文：贞元年初，河南少尹李则死，未下葬。有一个穿红衣的人来，投上名片进行吊唁。自称是苏郎中。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Zhengyuan, Henan Shao Yin Li died and was not buried. A person wearing a red coat came and cast a business card for condolences. He claimed to be Su Langzhong.

古文：既入，哀恸尤甚。
现代文：进去后，哀伤恸哭特别厉害。
English: Once inside, the wailing was particularly intense.

古文：俄顷尸起，与之相搏。
现代文：一会儿尸体起来，与他搏斗。
English: After a while, the corpse got up and fought him.

古文：家人子惊走出堂，二人闭门殴击，及暮方息，孝子乃敢入。见二尸共卧在床，长短形状，姿貌须髯衣服，一无差异。
现代文：全家人吓跑出屋。二人关门殴打，到晚上才平息。戴孝的儿子才敢进去，见两具尸体一起躺在床上，长短形状，姿态容貌胡须衣服，没有一点差别。
English: The whole family was scared out of the house. The two of them closed the door and beat each other until they calmed down in the evening. It was only when Dai Xiao's son dared to go in that he saw the two bodies lying together on the bed. There was not the slightest difference in their length, shape, posture, appearance, beards or clothing.

古文：於是聚族不能识，遂同棺葬之。
现代文：于是聚集全族的人都不能辨别，就同棺埋葬了他们。
English: And when they had gathered all the people together, they could not tell them apart, and they buried them in one grave.

古文：陆凭
现代文：陆凭
English: Lu Biao

古文：吴郡陆凭少有志行，神彩秀澈，笃信谦让。
现代文：吴郡的陆凭年少就有志向和品行，神彩秀美，忠实谦让，家在湖州长城。
English: Lu Biao of Wuxi County has the ambition and moral character at a young age. She is radiant, beautiful, loyal and humble. Her home is in Huzhou City.

古文：家于湖州长城，性悦山水，一闻奇丽，千里而往，其纵逸未尝宁居。
现代文：天性喜欢山水，一听到有奇丽的景观，不远千里而往，他恣纵豪放未曾安稳住过。
English: By nature, he likes the landscape. As soon as he hears of a beautiful landscape, he will travel thousands of miles. He has never lived in a stable environment.

古文：贞元乙丑三月，游永嘉，遘疾而殁。
现代文：贞元乙丑年三月，游览永嘉，得病而死。
English: In March of the year of the Ugly Goat, Sadamoto went on a tour of Yongjia and fell ill and died.

古文：凭素与吴兴沈苌友善，苌梦凭颜色憔悴，曰：我游至永嘉，苦疾将困。君为知我者，愿托家事。
现代文：凭平时与吴兴的沈苌友好。苌梦见凭脸色憔悴，说：我游览到永嘉，苦于疾病将睡去，你是我的知己，愿把家事托付于你。
English: By virtue of his friendship with Wu Xing's Shen Yao in ordinary times, he said, "I will visit Yongjia, I will suffer from illness and go to sleep, you are my confidant, I am willing to entrust the housework to you."

古文：苌悲之。
现代文：苌很悲痛。
English: I'm heartbroken.

古文：又叙旧欢，宴语久之。因述文章，话虚无之事，乃谓苌曰：赠君《浮云诗》一篇，以寄其怀。
现代文：又叙说过去的欢乐，平静地说了很久，于是谈论文章，说些虚无的事，对苌说：赠送你浮云诗一篇，用来寄托我的情怀。
English: He also recounted the joys of the past, and spoke calmly for a long time. Then he talked about the article, said some empty things, and said to Zou: "I will give you a poem of floating clouds, which will be used to express my feelings."

古文：诗曰： 虚虚复空空，瞬息天地中。
现代文：诗写道：虚虚复空空，瞬息天地中。
English: The poem says, "Voidness returns to voidness, and breath returns to the world."

古文：假合成此像，吾亦非吾躬，悲吟数四。
现代文：假合成此象，吾亦非吾躬。悲吟多遍。
English: I'm not ashamed to fake it. I've cried many times.

古文：临去曰：凭船已发来，明日午时到此。
现代文：临去时说：我的船已开来，明天午时到这里。
English: When he was about to leave, he said, "My ship has sailed. I'll be here at noon tomorrow."

古文：执手而去。及觉，所记甚分明，乃书而录之。
现代文：招手离去，到醒觉，记忆特别清楚，就写下记录它。
English: When you wake up, if your memory is particularly clear, write it down and record it.

古文：如期而凭丧船至。
现代文：按期凭的丧船到。
English: The ship arrived on schedule.

古文：苌抚孤而恸，赙助倍礼。
现代文：苌抚摸着遗孤而痛哭。加倍拿礼物资助办丧事。
English: caresses the bereaved and cries bitterly. Take double the gift to support the funeral.

古文：词人杨丹为之誌，具旌神感，铭曰：笃生府君，美秀而文。
现代文：词人杨丹为他写墓志，备办表彰让神感知。墓志铭写道：笃生府君，美秀而文。
English: Lyricist Yang Dan wrote an epitaph for him, preparing a commendation for the gods to perceive. The epitaph reads: Duxianfukun, beautiful and literate.

古文：没而不起，寄音浮云。
现代文：没而不起，寄音浮云。
English: I can't help it, it's a floating cloud.

古文：浔阳李生
现代文：浔阳李生
English: Shenyang Lisheng

古文：李生者，贞元中，举进士，下第归浔阳，途次商洛。会汉南节使入觐，为道骑所迫。四顾唯苍山万重，不知所适。
现代文：李生，贞元年间，考举进士，落榜回浔阳，途经商洛，适逢汉南节使入京会见天子，被道骑所逼迫，四外望去只有苍山万重，不知道应到哪里去。
English: Li Sheng, in the first year of Zhengyuan, entered the examination, fell back to Fenyang, passed through Shangluo, coincided with the Hannan Festival to enter Beijing to meet the Son of Heaven, was forced by the road riding, looking out only Cangshan Wanjie, do not know where to go.

古文：时日暮马劣，无仆徒。
现代文：当时天晚马累，没有仆人，只见深深的荆棘，有殡宫在那里。
English: At that time, it was late in Male, there were no servants, only deep thorns could be seen, and there was a funeral home there.

古文：见荆棘之深，有殡宫在焉，生遂投匿其中。使既过，方将前去，又不知道途之几何，乃叹曰：吾之寄是，岂非命哉？
现代文：李生于是藏匿在那里，节使已经过去，才向前去。又不知道路途多少，就叹息说：我就住在这里，难道不是命吗？
English: So Li Sheng hid there. The festival had already passed, so he went ahead. He didn't know how far he had to go, so he sighed and said, "I live here, isn't that life?"

古文：于是止于殡宫中，先拜而祝曰：某家庐山，下第南归，至此为府公前驱所迫，既不得进，又不得退，是以来。魂如有知，愿容一夕之安。
现代文：于是停止在殡宫中。先拜谢而祷告说：我家住在庐山，落第向南回家，到这被府公前驱所逼迫，既不能前进，又不能后退，这才来到这里，鬼魂如果有知，希望能容纳一个夜晚的安歇。
English: So he stopped at the mortuary. First he bowed and prayed, saying, "My family lived in Shaoshan, and I went south to go home. I was forced to come here by the prefectural government. I can neither go forward nor backward. I just came here. If the ghosts know, I hope they can have a night's rest."

古文：既而闲望，时风月澄霁。虽郊原数里，皆可洞见。
现代文：接着四下闲看，当时风清月朗，即使郊野几里，都可以看见。
English: Then I looked around, when the wind was clear and the moon was bright, even if it was several miles away in the countryside, I could see it.

古文：又有殡宫，在百步外，仿佛见一人，渐近，乃一女子，妆饰严丽，短不尽尺，至殡宫南，入穴中。
现代文：另有殡宫，在百步以外，仿佛看见一人，渐渐走近。是一个女子，妆饰端整美丽，身高不足一尺，到殡宫南面，进入墓穴中。
English: There was another mortuary, a hundred paces away, and as if he saw someone, he gradually approached. It was a woman, beautifully made up, less than a foot tall, who went to the south of the mortuary and entered the tomb.

古文：生且听之，闻其言曰：金华夫人奉白崔女郎，今夕风月好，可以肆目，时难再得，愿稍留念。
现代文：李生听之，听到她说：金华夫人奉告崔女郎，今晚风月美好，可以观望，时机再难得到，希望稍微留作纪念。
English: Li Sheng listened to it and heard her say: Mrs. Jinhua told the Cui girl that the weather was beautiful tonight, she could watch, the time was hard to get, and she hoped to leave something as a souvenir.

古文：穴中应曰：属有贵客，寄吾之舍，吾不忍去，乖一夕之欢，不足甚矣。
现代文：穴中应答说：适值有贵客，住在我的馆舍，我不忍心离去，违背一夕的欢乐，不是特别可惜的。
English: The man in the hole replied, "Whenever I have a distinguished guest staying in my house, I can't bear to leave. It's not particularly a shame to miss out on an evening of joy."

古文：其人乃去，归殡宫下。
现代文：那人才离去。
English: The man just walked away.

古文：生明日至逆族问之，有知者，是博陵崔氏女也，随父为尉江南，至此而殁，遂藁葬焉。生感之，乃以酒膳致奠而去。
现代文：李生第二天到客舍打听，有了解的，这是博陵崔氏女儿，跟随父亲做江南尉，到这而死，于是埋葬在那里，李生感激她，用酒食祭奠后而离去。
English: The next day, Li Sheng went to the guesthouse to inquire. There was some understanding that this was Boling Cui's daughter, who followed her father to be a lieutenant of the Southern Yangtze River, died here, and was buried there. Li Sheng was grateful to her and left after offering wine and food.

