古文：杜正玄李义琛陈子昂王维杨暄萧颖士乔彝许孟容张正甫阎济美潘炎令狐峘熊执易
现代文：杜正玄李义琛陈子昂王维杨暄萧颖士乔彝许孟容张正甫阎济美潘炎令狐峘熊执易
English: Du Zhengxuan, Li Yiqun, Chen Zi, Ang Wang, Wei Yangqun, Xiao Yingzhi, Qiao Yao, Xu Mengrong, Zhang Zhengfu, Yan Ji, Mei Pan, Yan Yanling, Xiong Xiong Xiong

古文：杜正玄
现代文：杜正玄
English: Du Zhengxuan

古文：隋仁寿中，杜正玄、正藏、正伦。俱以秀才擢第。
现代文：隋文帝仁寿年间，杜正玄、杜正藏、杜正伦，都由秀才而中进士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, Du Zhengxuan, Du Zhengzang, and Du Zhenglun all rose to prominence through their talents.

古文：隋代举进士，总一十人，正伦一家三人。
现代文：隋文帝时代，每年只取十名进士。那一科，杜氏三兄弟皆中。
English: In the Sui Dynasty era, only ten students were admitted each year. In that one subject, all three To brothers were in the top.

古文：李义琛
现代文：李义琛
English: Lee Eui-yong

古文：武德五年，李义琛与弟义琰，三从弟上德同年三人进士。
现代文：唐高祖武德五年，李义琛同他的二弟李义琰、以及三从弟李上德，三人同中进士。
English: In the fifth year of Tang Gao's ancestor Wu De, Li Yixuan and his second brother Li Yixuan, as well as his third younger brother Li Shangde, all three became junior high school graduates.

古文：义琛等陇西人，世居邺城。
现代文：他们是陇西人，世代居住在邺城。
English: They are Shaanxi people who have lived in Shicheng for generations.

古文：国初草创未定，家业素贫之，与上德同居，事从姑，定省如亲焉。
现代文：唐政权刚建立不久，不是很稳固。李义琛出身贫寒，家境不好，跟上德住在一起。对待他的从姑像自己的亲娘一样。
English: The Tang regime had only been established for a short time and was not very stable. Li Yijun was born into a poor family and lived with his stepmother. He treated his stepmother-in-law like his own daughter.

古文：随计至潼关，遇大雪，逆旅不容，有咸阳商人见而怜之，延与同寝处。
现代文：三兄弟商议到潼关去，遇到大雪，饥寒交迫没有住处。有一位咸阳的商人很同情他们，请他们一起住。
English: The three brothers discussed going to Shouguan, but encountered heavy snow, cold and hunger, and had no place to live. A merchant from Xianyang took pity on them and invited them to live together.

古文：居数日，雪霁而去。
现代文：住了好几天，天才晴朗。
English: I stayed there for several days, and everything was fine.

古文：琛等议鬻驴，以一醉酬之。商人窃知，不辞而去。
现代文：李义琛三兄弟商议把所骑的驴卖掉，请商人喝酒，以报答他。商人私下听到他们的打算，不辞而别。
English: The three Li Yixuan brothers discussed selling the donkey they were riding and invited the merchant to drink to repay him. The merchant heard their plan in private and left without a word.

古文：复先赠以稻粮。
现代文：并事先赠送给他们粮食。
English: They were also given food in advance.

古文：琛后宰咸阳，召商人。与之抗礼亲厚。
现代文：李义琛做咸阳县丞，把那个商人请来，以平等的礼节待他。
English: Li Yixuan, as the Xianyang County magistrate, invited the merchant and treated him with equal courtesy.

古文：位至刑部侍郎雍州长史。
现代文：李义琛后来升到刑部侍郎、也做过雍州长史。
English: Later, Li Yixuan rose to the position of the head of the criminal investigation department and also served as the head of the Yongzheng prefectural government.

古文：义琰相高宗，上德司门郎中。
现代文：李义琰在唐高宗时做到宰相。李上德做到司门郎中的官。
English: Li Yixuan became the prime minister when Tang Gaozong was in power, and Li Shangde became the second-highest official in Simen Lang.

古文：陈子昂
现代文：陈子昂
English: Chen Zi'ang

古文：陈子昂，蜀射洪人，十年居京师，不为人知。
现代文：陈子昂是四川射洪县人。在京城住了十年，没有谁知道他。
English: Chen Ziang is from Sichuan's Shehong County. He has lived in Beijing for ten years, and no one knows him.

古文：时东市有卖胡琴者，其价百万。
现代文：当时市场上有一个卖胡琴的，要价一百万。
English: At the time, there was a vendor on the market selling harpsichords, asking one million crowns.

古文：日有豪贵传视，无辨者。
现代文：每天都有有钱的人去看这件东西，没人明白它的价值。
English: Every day, rich people come to see this thing, but no one understands its value.

古文：子昂突出于众，谓左右，可辇千缗市之。
现代文：陈子昂突然从人群里走出来，跟人们说，我可以用一千缗来交换。
English: Chen Ziang suddenly came out of the crowd and told people that I could exchange it for a thousand baht.

古文：众咸惊问曰：何用之？
现代文：大家很惊讶地问这东西有什么用？
English: Everyone was surprised and asked what this thing was for.

古文：答曰：余善此乐。
现代文：陈子昂回答说，我善于弹奏这件乐器。
English: Chen Ziang replied, "I am good at playing this instrument."

古文：或有好事者曰：可得一闻乎？
现代文：有好奇的人便问，你能弹给我们听吗？
English: Curious people ask, can you play for us?

古文：答曰：余居宣阳里，指其第处，并具有酒，明日专候。
现代文：陈子昂说：我住在宜阳里。指给地址，告诉这些人说： 明天我准备酒，专门等候诸位。
English: Chen Ziang said: I live in Yiyang. Point to the address, tell these people and say: Tomorrow I will prepare wine and wait for you.

古文：不唯众君子荣顾，且各宜邀召闻名者齐赴，乃幸遇也。
现代文：不仅各位可以来，还可以邀请一些知名人士一起来。很荣幸与大家相会。 
English: Not only can you come, but you can also invite some famous people to come with you. It's an honor to meet you.

古文：来晨，集者凡百余人，皆当时重誉之士。
现代文：第二天早晨，来了一百多人，都是当时很有名望的。
English: The next morning, more than a hundred people came, all of whom were very famous at the time.

古文：子昂大张宴席，具珍羞。
现代文：陈子昂好酒好菜款待他们。
English: Chen Ziang entertained them with good wine and good dishes.

古文：食毕，起捧胡琴，当前语曰：蜀人陈子昂有文百轴，驰走京毂，碌碌尘土，不为人所知。
现代文：吃过饭，捧出胡琴，对客人们说：四川人陈子昂有文章好几百轴，跑到京城来，东奔西走，却不为人重视。
English: After the meal, he held out a huqin and said to the guests: Chen Ziang, a Sichuanese, has hundreds of articles. He came to Beijing and ran around, but no one paid attention to him.

古文：此乐贱工之役，岂愚留心哉！
现代文：这件乐器不是什么值钱的东西，怎么值得我放在心上？
English: This musical instrument is not a valuable thing, so why should I care about it?

古文：遂举而弃之。
现代文：于是把胡琴举起来摔了。
English: So he picked up the harp and dropped it.

古文：舁文轴两案，遍赠会者。
现代文：把他写在帛上的文章取出来，摆了两案子，分别赠送给客人。
English: He took out the article he had written on the table and set out two cases, which he presented to the guests separately.

古文：会既散，一日之内，声华溢都。
现代文：聚会后，一天之内便名满京都。
English: After the party, Kyoto became famous within a day.

古文：时武攸宜为建安王，辟为记室。后拜拾遗。归觐，为段简所害。
现代文：当时武攸宜被封为建安王，请他作记室，后来又做拾遗，回家省亲，被段简害死。
English: At that time, Wu Youyi was appointed as the King of Jianan, and he was asked to be a recorder. Later, he was asked to collect relics, and he went home to visit his relatives. He was killed by Duan Jian.

古文：王维
现代文：王维
English: Wang Wei

古文：王维右丞年未弱冠，文章得名。
现代文：王维少年时，喜欢音乐，琵琶弹得好。
English: When Wang Wei was a boy, he liked music and played the lute well.

古文：性闲音律，妙能琵琶。
现代文：王维在亲贵之间来往，岐王尤其看中他。
English: Wang Wei goes back and forth between relatives, and Qi Wang is particularly fond of him.

古文：游历诸贵之间，尤为岐王之所眷重。
现代文：当时张九皋有很高的名声。有人经常到公主家里，并把张九皋的文章拿给公主，为其推荐。
English: At that time, Zhang Jiuyong had a high reputation. Someone often went to the princess's home and took Zhang Jiuyong's article to the princess to recommend it.

古文：时进士张九臬声称籍甚，客有出入公主之门者，为其地，公主以词牒京兆试官，令以九臬为解头。
现代文：公主写信给京都的主考官，让他取张九皋为第一名。王维本来也打算参加考试，把这件事告诉岐王。请求岐王帮忙。岐王说：以公主的尊贵和势力，是不能力争的，我给你想办法。
English: The princess wrote a letter to the chief examiner in Kyoto, asking him to choose Zhang Jiuyong as the first. Wang Wei had also planned to take the exam and told Qi Wang about this. He asked Qi Wang for help. Qi Wang said: With the dignity and power of the princess, it is impossible to compete, I will find a way for you.

古文：维方将应举，言于岐王，仍求焉。
现代文：把你过去写的诗，选清越的抄十篇。
English: Copy ten poems that you have written in the past.

古文：子之旧诗清越者可录十篇，琵琶新声之怨切者可度一曲，后五日至吾。
现代文：琵琶曲子怨切的准备一曲。
English: The pipa tune is a grudge-filled preparatory piece.

古文：维即依命，如期而至。
现代文：五天后，到我这里来。五天后，王维如约而来。
English: Five days later, he came to me. Five days later, Wang Wei came as agreed.

古文：岐王谓曰：子以文士请谒贵主，何门可见哉！子能如吾之教乎？
现代文：岐王说：你以文士的身份去谒见公主，她不能接见你，你能听我的话吗？
English: King Qi said, "You have come as a scribe to see the princess. She cannot receive you. Can you listen to my words?"

古文：维曰：谨奉命。
现代文：王维说：我听你的教诲。
English: Wang Wei said: I listen to your teachings.

古文：岐王乃出锦绣衣服，鲜华奇异，遣维衣之，仍令赍琵琶，同至公主之第。岐王入曰：承贵主出内，故攜酒乐奉宴。
现代文：岐王让王维换上华贵的衣服，捧着琵琶一起到公主家去，对公主说： 我趁你从宫内出来的机会，到你家里来，带着好酒，还有好的音乐。 
English: The king of Qi had Wang Wei change into luxurious clothes and take the lute with him to the princess's house. He said to the princess, "I will take the opportunity when you leave the palace to come to your house, bringing good wine and good music."

古文：即令张筵，诸令旅进。
现代文：公主就让人备办酒席，让人跳舞。
English: So the princess had a banquet prepared and people danced.

古文：维妙年洁白，风姿都美，立于行，公主顾之，谓岐王曰：斯何人哉？
现代文：王维生得美而白。公主回头看见他，问岐王： 这个人是谁？ 岐王说： 他是知音。 
English: Wang Wei was born beautiful and white. When the princess looked back and saw him, she asked King Qi: Who is this man? King Qi said: He is Zhiyin.

古文：答曰：知音者也。即令独奉新曲，声调哀切，满坐动容。
现代文：就让王维独奏。王维的琵琶弹得哀哀切切，满座的人为之动容。
English: Wang Wei was asked to play the lute solo. Wang Wei's lute played so mournfully that the entire audience was moved.

古文：公主自询曰：此曲何名？
现代文：公主问： 这个曲子叫什么名字？ 
English: The princess asked: "What is the name of this piece of music?"

古文：维起曰：号郁轮袍。
现代文：王维说： 叫郁轮袍。 
English: Wang Wei said, "It's called Yulun robe."

古文：公主大奇之。
现代文：公主非常奇怪。
English: The princess is very strange.

古文：岐王因曰：此生非止音律，至于词学，无出其右。
现代文：岐王说这个读书人不仅精通音乐，诗词文章没有人超过他。
English: Qi Wang said that this reader is not only proficient in music, but also in poetry.

古文：公主尤异之。则曰：子有所为文乎？
现代文：公主更觉得王维不一般，就问： 你有什么文章吗？ 
English: The princess felt even more that Wang Wei was unusual, so she asked: Do you have any articles?

古文：维则出献怀中诗卷呈公主。
现代文：王维就把怀里的文章呈献给公主。
English: Wang Wei presented the article in his arms to the princess.

古文：公主既读，惊骇曰：此皆儿所诵习，常谓古人佳作，乃子之为乎？
现代文：公主读了王维的诗，非常吃惊，说： 这都是我儿子和张九皋这些少年们读的，都说是古人写的，原来是你写的呀？ 
English: When the princess read Wang Wei's poem, she was very surprised and said, "My son and Zhang Jiuyong, these boys, read all of this. They said it was written by the ancients, but it was actually written by you."

古文：因令更衣，升之客右。维风流蕴藉，语言谐戏，大为诸贵之钦瞩。
现代文：让他换了衣服，坐在客位的首席，王维俊美飘逸，谈吐潇洒，语言的艺术性很强，在座的达官贵人们无不赞叹。
English: Let him change his clothes and sit at the head of the guest seat. Wang Weijun is beautiful, fluent, talkative, and his language is very artistic. The dignitaries present are all impressed.

古文：岐王因曰：若令京兆府今年得此生为解头，诚为国华矣。
现代文：岐王说：如果今年京兆的考试，让王维做第一，绝对是全国的光荣。
English: Qi Wang said: If this year's Beijing Zhao exam, let Wang Wei be the first, it is absolutely a national honor.

古文：公主乃曰：何不遣其应举？
现代文：公主说：那为什么不让他去参加考试竞争？
English: The princess said, "Then why not let him go and compete in the examination?"

古文：岐王曰：此生不得首荐，义不就试，然已承贵主论托张九臬矣。
现代文：岐王说，没人举荐他做第一，他是不肯参加的，并且听说公主已经举荐张九皋。
English: Qi Wang said that no one recommended him to be the first, he did not want to participate, and heard that the princess had recommended Zhang Jiuyuan.

古文：公主笑曰：何预儿事，本为他人所托。
现代文：公主笑着说：我其实不参与少年们的事。可是别人托我，我只好做。
English: The princess smiled and said, "Actually, I don't get involved in the boys' business. But others entrust me with it, and I have to do it.

古文：顾谓维曰：子诚取，当为子力致焉。
现代文：公主对王维说：你确实可取，我一定为你尽力。王维谦恭地致谢。
English: The princess said to Wang Wei, "You are indeed desirable, I will certainly do my best for you." Wang Wei humbly thanked her.

古文：维起谦谢。公主则召试官至第，遣宫婢传教，维遂作解头，而一举登第矣。
现代文：公主就把主考官叫到家里，叫她的使女传话说明。王维得了第一，一举夺魁。
English: The princess called the chief examiner to the house and asked her maid to send a message to explain. Wang Wei won first place, taking the top spot in one fell swoop.

古文：及为太乐丞，为伶人舞黄师子，坐出官。
现代文：他后来做太乐丞的官，教舞女们跳黄师子舞，被罢官。
English: He later became an official of Tai Le Zheng, teaching the dancers to dance the Huang Shi Zi dance, and was dismissed.

古文：黄师子者，非一人不舞也。
现代文：黄师子舞是一个人跳的。
English: Huang Shizi Dance is danced by one person.

古文：天宝末，禄山初陷西京，维及郑虔、张通等，皆处贼庭。
现代文：天宝末年，安禄山攻陷长安，王维同郑虔、张通这些人都投降他，做他的官。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Anlu Mountain invaded and occupied Chang'an. Wang Weidong, Zheng Qian and Zhang Tong all surrendered to him and became his officials.

古文：洎克复，俱囚于宣杨里杨国忠旧宅。
现代文：张洎打跑了安禄山，收复了长安，把他们押在宣杨里杨国忠原来的府第里。
English: Zhang Bing ran away from Anlu Mountain, recovered Chang'an, and put them in Xuanyang, the former capital of Yang Guozhong.

古文：崔圆因召于私第，令画数壁。
现代文：崔圆把王维请去，让他在墙壁上作画。
English: Cui Yuan invited Wang Wei to paint on the wall.

古文：当时皆以圆勋贵无二，望其救解，故运思精巧，颇绝其能。
现代文：当时都认为崔圆很显贵，郑虔、张通等人都指望他解救。王维作画构思奇巧，下笔如神。
English: At that time, everyone thought that Cui Yuan was very prominent, and Zheng Qian, Zhang Tong and others were counting on him to save them. Wang Wei's artistic conception was ingenious, and his penmanship was like a god.

古文：后由此事，皆从宽典；至于贬黜，亦获善地。
现代文：郑虔等因此得到从宽，即使被贬出京，也能得到一个好地方。
English: As a result, Zheng Qian and others have been promoted widely, and even if they are expelled from Beijing, they can get a good place.

古文：今崇义里窦丞相易直私第，即圆旧宅也，画尚在焉。
现代文：现在的长安崇义里窦丞相买的房子，就是崔圆过去的住宅，那些画还在。
English: The house bought by the current minister of Chang'an, Chongyi Li Douzheng, is Cui Yuan's former residence. Those paintings are still there.

古文：维累为给事中，禄授以伪官。
现代文：尚书在的时候，王维做给事中。安禄山陷落长安，授给王维伪官。
English: When Shangshu was alive, Wang Wei was in the middle of something. When Anlu Mountain fell to Chang'an, Wang Wei was given the post of pseudo-official.

古文：及贼平，凡缙为北都副留守，请以己官爵赎之，由是免死。
现代文：安禄山被平定后，凡缙做北都副留守，请求以他的官爵来赎王维的罪。
English: After Anlu Mountain was subdued, Fan Xuan, the vice governor of the Northern Capital, stayed behind and asked for his official title to atone for Wang Wei's crime.

古文：累为尚书右丞。于蓝田置别业，留心释典焉。
现代文：王维被免去死刑，又逐渐升到尚书右丞，后来他在蓝田地方买了房子、土地，潜心研究佛经。
English: Wang Wei was exempted from the death penalty, and gradually rose to Shang Shuju Rong. Later, he bought a house and land in Lantian and devoted himself to studying Buddhist scriptures.

古文：杨暄
现代文：杨暄
English: by Yang Hui

古文：杨国忠之子暄，举明经，礼部侍郎达奚珣考之，不及格，将黜落，惧国忠而未敢定。
现代文：杨国忠的儿子杨暄以通晓经书被举荐，由礼部侍郎达奚珣考他，不及格。达奚珣准备公布杨暄落第，又惧怕杨国忠的势力，不敢决定。
English: Yang Guozhong's son, Yang Hui, was recommended for his knowledge of scriptures. He was examined by the attendant of the etiquette department, Daju, but failed. Daju was preparing to announce Yang Hui's failure, but he was afraid of Yang Guozhong's power and did not dare to make a decision.

古文：时驾在华清宫，珣子抚为会昌尉。
现代文：当时，唐玄宗在华清池。达奚珣的儿子达抚做会昌县尉。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong was in Huaqing Pool. Dafu, the son of Dafu, became the lieutenant of Huichang County.

古文：珣遽召使，以书报抚，令候国忠，具言其状。
现代文：达奚珣就让他带着自己的书信去候见杨国忠，说明情况。
English: Daju asked him to take his letter to Yang Guozhong to explain the situation.

古文：抚既至国忠私第，五鼓初起，列火满门，将欲趋朝，轩盖如市，国忠方乘马。抚因趋入，谒于烛下。
现代文：达抚到了杨家门前，天刚五更。烛光、火把通明，杨国忠将去参加早朝，冠盖、仪卫如云。杨国忠刚要上马，达抚就跑过去，在烛光下参谒。
English: When Dafu arrived in front of Yang's house, it was already five in the morning. The candlelight and torches were bright, and Yang Guozhong was going to attend the early morning ceremony. The crown and ceremonial guards were like clouds. As soon as Yang Guozhong was about to mount his horse, Dafu ran over and took part in the ceremony by candlelight.

古文：国忠谓其子必在选中，抚盖微笑，意色甚欢。
现代文：杨国忠以为他的儿子一定能考中，手扶彩幡的杆子微笑，很高兴的样子。
English: Yang Guozhong thought that his son would surely pass the exam. He held the pole of the colored banner in his hand and smiled, looking very happy.

古文：抚乃白曰：奉大人命，相君之子试不中，然不敢黜退。
现代文：达抚禀告说：奉我父亲的命令，来报告宰相，你儿子没有考中。但是，不敢宣布落第。
English: The Dafu obituary said: On my father's orders, I came to report to the Prime Minister that your son did not pass the exam. However, I did not dare to announce the failure.

古文：国忠却立大呼曰：我儿何虑不富贵，岂籍一名，为鼠辈所卖！
现代文：杨国忠大声说：我儿子还愁不富贵吗？
English: Yang Guozhong said loudly: Is my son still worried about being rich?

古文：即不顾，乘马而去。
现代文：在乎一个进士？你们这些出卖人的鼠辈！丢下达抚，骑上马走了。
English: Do you care about a penny? You traitorous rats! Put down your tassels, get on your horses and ride away.

古文：抚惶骇，遽奔告于珣曰：国忠恃势倨贵，使人之惨舒，出于咄嗟，奈何以校其曲直？
现代文：达抚很害怕，立即赶回去见父亲，说杨国忠依仗自己是有势力的权贵，谁都惧怕，他要收拾谁，不是举手之劳吗？
English: Dafu was very scared and immediately rushed back to see his father, saying that Yang Guotong was relying on himself as a powerful dignitary, everyone was afraid, and he had to take care of everyone. Wasn't it just a matter of raising his hand?

古文：因致暄于上第。
现代文：人们在他面前大气不敢出，怎么跟他说理？
English: People don't dare to make a fuss in front of him, how can you reason with him?

古文：既为户部侍郎？
现代文：达奚珣没有办法，叹来叹去，终于把杨暄取在前几名。
English: Daju couldn't do anything, sighed and sighed, and finally took Yang Xuan in the first few places.

古文：珣才自礼部侍郎转吏部侍郎，与同列。
现代文：杨暄做到户部侍郎，达奚珣才由礼部侍郎转为吏部侍部。
English: Yang Hui became a household attendant, and it was Dadu who was transferred from a ceremonial attendant to an administrative attendant.

古文：暄话于所亲，尚叹己之淹徊，而谓珣迁改疾速。萧颖士
现代文：两人一样大的官，杨暄在亲信面前还叹息自己的官升的慢，反说达奚珣转官快。萧颖士
English: As high-ranking officials as the two of them, Yang Hui still sighed in front of his cronies about the slowness of his promotion, but said that he would be promoted quickly. Xiao Yingshi

古文：萧颖士开元二十三年及第。
现代文：唐玄宗开元二十三年，萧颖士考中进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Xiao Ying passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：恃才傲物。
现代文：自恃才华，傲慢无比。
English: Self-proclaimed talent, arrogance beyond compare.

古文：曼无与比。
现代文：经常携着一壶酒到野外去喝。
English: He often goes out drinking with a jug of wine.

古文：常自携一壶逐腾胜郊野，偶憩于逆旅，独酌独吟。
现代文：偶然在一处休息，自己喝酒吟诗。正赶上狂风暴雨。
English: He happened to be resting in a certain place, drinking and chanting poetry by himself. He was just catching up with the storm.

古文：会有风雨暴至，有紫衣老人领一小僮避雨于此。
现代文：有一位穿紫衣的老人领着一个小孩在同一处避雨。
English: An old man in purple led a child to shelter in the same place.

古文：颖士见之散冗，颇肆陵侮。
现代文：萧颖士见老人散漫的样子，口出不逊。
English: When Xiao Yingshi saw the rambling appearance of the old man, he spoke harshly.

古文：逡巡，风定雨霁，车马卒至，老人上马，呵殿而去。
现代文：很快雨停，云去天开。马上来了车马，老人上了马，侍卫在后面吆喝着走了。
English: Soon the rain stopped and the clouds parted. The carriage and horse came immediately, the old man mounted his horse, and the guards rode away shouting in the back.

古文：颖士仓忙觇之，左右曰：吏部王尚书。
现代文：萧颖士急忙打听，有人告诉他这是吏部王尚书。
English: Xiao Yingshi hurriedly inquired, and someone told him that it was Wang Shangshu, the head of the personnel department.

古文：颖士常造门，未之面，极惊愕。
现代文：过去萧颖士去求见了好几次，没有接见，此时很惊愕。
English: In the past, Xiao Yingshi went to see him several times, but he did not receive him. At this time, he was very surprised.

古文：明日，具长笺造门谢。
现代文：第二天写了很长的信，到王尚书家里去谢罪。
English: The next day, I wrote a long letter and went to Wang Shangshu's home to apologize.

古文：丘命引至庑下，坐责之。且曰：所恨与子非亲属，当庭训之耳。
现代文：王尚书让人把萧颖士领到偏房的廊下，坐下来责备他，并说：遗憾你不是我的亲属，不然我一定要狠狠地教训你。
English: Wang Shangshu had someone take Xiao Yingshi to the hallway of a side room, sat down and scolded him, saying: "I'm sorry you're not my relative, otherwise I'll definitely teach you a hard lesson."

古文：顷曰：子负文学之名，踞忽如此，止于一第乎？
现代文：停了一会儿又说：你自恃才名，所以才傲慢到这个样子，只能是中个进士吧。
English: He paused for a moment and then said, "You pride yourself on being a talented person, that's why you're so arrogant. You can only be a middle-ranking officer."

古文：颖士终扬州功曹。
现代文：萧颖士死在扬州功曹任上。
English: Xiao Yingshi died on the post of Yangzhou Gong Cao.

古文：乔彝
现代文：乔彝
English: Qiao Wei

古文：乔彝，京兆府解试时，有二试官。
现代文：乔彝参加京兆府的考试，有两个考官。
English: Qiao Wei took the exam in Beijing Shao Prefecture. There were two examiners.

古文：彝日午扣门，试官令引入，则已矄醉。
现代文：乔彝天快中午时去扣门请见。试官让人领他进来，自己醉醺醺的。
English: Qiao Yao went to close the door at around noon. The examiner asked him to come in. He was drunk.

古文：视题曰幽兰赋，彝不肯作曰：两个汉相对，作得此题，速改之。
现代文：一看题目是《幽兰赋》，乔彝不肯做，说两个男人相对坐在这里写什么《幽兰赋》？
English: At first glance, the title is "Wu Lan Fu." Qiao Yao refused to do it, saying that two men are sitting here to write "Wu Lan Fu."

古文：遂改渥洼马赋。
现代文：请痛快改个题目。
English: Please feel free to change the subject.

古文：曰：此可矣。
现代文：试官就改题目为《渥洼马赋》，乔彝说这可以。
English: The examiner changed the title to "Wu Wa Ma Fu," which Qiao Wei said was fine.

古文：奋笔斯须而成。警句云：四蹄曳练，翻瀚海之惊澜。一喷生风，下湘山之乱叶。
现代文：意思说，那马蹄撒开，大海之浪滔为之翻腾，打一个喷嚏生出的风，刮得湘山树叶纷飞。
English: That is to say, the horse's hoof spread, the waves of the sea churned and churned, the wind from a sneeze blew, and the leaves of the Xiangshan Mountains flew.

古文：便欲首送。
现代文：试官准备取他第一。
English: The examiners were ready to give him first place.

古文：京兆曰：乔彝峥嵘甚，以解副荐之可也。
现代文：京兆府尹说，这个人锋芒太露，可以第二。
English: Jing Zhaofu Yin said that this person's edge is too dewy and can be second.

古文：许孟容
现代文：许孟容
English: Xu Meng Rong

古文：许孟容进士及第，学究登科，时号锦袄子上著莎衣。
现代文：许孟容以渊博的学识考中进士，又去考学究科。当时的人说他这是穿了锦绣的衣服，在上面又套了一层草衣服。
English: Xu Meng Rong used his profound knowledge to pass the junior high school entrance examination, and went to the college entrance examination. At that time, people said that he was wearing embroidered clothes, and put a layer of grass clothes on top.

古文：蔡京与孟容同。
现代文：蔡京也是这样。
English: It's the same with Cai Jing.

古文：张正甫
现代文：张正甫
English: Zhang Zhengfu

古文：李丞相绛，先人为襄州督部。
现代文：李绛是唐宪宗时代的宰相。他的前辈曾经是襄州都督的部属。
English: Li Xi was the prime minister in the era of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty. His predecessor was once a subordinate of the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：方赴举，求乡荐。
现代文：李绛准备赴考，需要人推荐。
English: Li Yao is preparing to take the exam and needs someone's recommendation.

古文：时樊司空泽为节度使，张常侍正甫为判官。主乡荐。
现代文：当时樊泽做节度使，张正甫做节度判官，主管乡荐的事。
English: At that time, Heze was the festival delegate, and Zhang Zhengfu was the festival judge, in charge of the township recommendation.

古文：张公知绛有前途，启司空曰：举人中悉不如李秀才，请只送一人。诸人之资，悉以奉之。
现代文：张正甫知道李绛是一个有前途的人，就向樊泽禀告，说举子中谁也不如李绛，咱们只举荐他一个人，把准备赠送给诸举子的钱物都给他。
English: Zhang Zhengfu knew that Li Qian was a promising person, so he sent a message to He Zhe, saying that no one in the clique was as good as Li Qian, we would only recommend him as one person, and give him all the money and goods that were prepared to be given to the clique.

古文：欣然允诺。又荐绛弟为同舍郎，绛感泽殊常之恩，不十年登庸，泽之子宗易为朝官。
现代文：不到十年，李绛做到宰相。樊泽的儿子樊宗易在朝里做官，有人问李绛，樊宗易的文章怎么样？
English: In less than ten years, Li Zhe became the prime minister. Zhe Zhe's son, Zhe Zong Yi, was an official in the imperial court. Someone asked Li Zhe, "What about Zhe Zong Yi's articles?"

古文：人问宗易之文于绛，绛戏而答曰：盖代。
现代文：李绛开玩笑说，盖世文章。当时的人们把盖代作为口碑。
English: Li Yao joked that it was a world record. People at the time took the record as word of mouth.

古文：时人因以盖代为口实。相见论文，必曰：莫是李三盖代否？
现代文：每看到什么新的文章，都会说：是不是李三盖代的文章？
English: Every time they see a new article, they will say, "Isn't that an article by Li Sangay?"

古文：及绛为户部侍郎也。常侍为本司郎中。
现代文：李绛做户部侍郎时，张正甫做户部郎中。
English: When Li Qian became the steward of the household department, Zhang Zhengfu became the steward of the household department.

古文：因会，把酒请侍郎唱歌，李终不唱而哂之，满席大噱。
现代文：在一次宴会上，张正甫捧着酒杯请李绛唱歌，李绛微笑不唱，在座的人大笑。
English: At a banquet, Zhang Zhengfu held a glass of wine and asked Li Yao to sing. Li Yao smiled but did not sing, and everyone present burst out laughing.

古文：阎济美
现代文：阎济美
English: Yan Jime

古文：阎济美，前朝公司卿许与定分，一志不为，某三举及第。初举，刘单侍郎下杂文落；第二举，坐王侍郎杂文落第。
现代文：再科其杂文又被王侍郎批落。
English: His essays were once again censured by Wang Shilang.

古文：某当是时，年已蹭蹬，常于江激往径山钦大师处问法。
现代文：当时，年龄已长。曾渡江到径山向钦大师请教。春天，因为落第，准备回乡。
English: At that time, he was already old. He had crossed the river to Qianshan to consult with Master Qin. In the spring, because he failed, he was preparing to return to his hometown.

古文：是春，某既下第，又将出关。因献坐主六韵律诗曰：謇谔王臣直，文明雅量全。
现代文：向主考赠送一首六韵诗：謇谔王臣直，文明雅量全。
English: Presenting a six-rhyme poem to the examiner: 王臣直,文明雅量全.

古文：望鈙金自跃，应物镜何偏。
现代文：望鈙金自跃，应物镜何偏。
English: If you look at the target, you can see how far it is away from you.

古文：南国幽沈尽，东堂礼乐宣。
现代文：南国幽沈尽，东堂礼乐宣。
English: The south of the country has sunk into the abyss, and the East Hall's proclamation of the liturgy has begun.

古文：转今游异士，更昔至公年。
现代文：转今游异士，更昔至公年。
English: This time, it's a different man, but it's been going on for a long time.

古文：芳树欢新景，青云泣暮天。
现代文：芳树欢新景，青云泣暮天。
English: The trees rejoice in the new scenery, and the clouds weep in the twilight.

古文：唯愁凤池拜，孤贱更谁怜。
现代文：唯愁凤池拜，孤贱更谁怜。
English: But woe betide the phoenix, and woe betide the lowly.

