古文：言是而不能立，言非而不能废；有功而不能赏，有罪而不能诛，若是而能治民者，未之有也。
现代文：正确的主张不能用，错误的主张不能废，有功而不能赏，有罪而不能罚；像这样而能治理好人民的，从来没有过。
English: Correct propositions cannot be used, incorrect propositions cannot be abolished, meritorious deeds cannot be rewarded, and crimes cannot be punished; there has never been anyone who could govern the people well like this.

古文：是必立，非必废，有功必赏，有罪必诛，若是安治矣，未也，是何也？
现代文：正确的坚决采用，错误的坚决废止，有功必赏，有罪必罚，这就可以治理好了吗？还不能。
English: The correct and resolute adoption, the wrong and resolute abolition, the merit must be rewarded, the crime must be punished, can this be governed well? Not yet.

古文：曰：形势器械未具，犹之不治也。形势器械具四者备，治矣。
现代文：为什么？因为，不具有军事力量和军事器械，仍然不能治理好。
English: Why? Because without military power and military equipment, it is still not possible to govern well.

古文：不能治其民，而能彊其兵者，未之有也。
现代文：有了军事力量和军事器械以后，再具备上述四项，那就可以治理好了。
English: After having military forces and military equipment, and then having the above-mentioned four items, then it can be governed well.

古文：能治其民矣，而不明于为兵之数，犹之不可。
现代文：不能治理好人民而能强化其军队的事情，从来没有；但是，能治其民而不懂用兵的策略，仍然不行。
English: There never was a time when a country could not govern its people well and strengthen its army; but it is still impossible to govern its people without knowing the strategy of using the army.

古文：不能彊其兵，而能必胜敌国者，未之有也；能彊其兵，而不明于胜敌国之理，犹之不胜也。
现代文：不能强化其军队而能必胜敌国的事情，从来没有；但是，能够强化其军队而不明胜敌国之理，仍然不能打胜。
English: There has never been a time when a country could defeat an enemy without strengthening its military; however, a country could not defeat an enemy without strengthening its military.

古文：兵不必胜敌国，而能正天下者，未之有也。
现代文：兵力没有必胜敌国的把握而能够征服天下的事情，从来没有；但是，兵力有了必胜的把握而不明征服天下的纲领，仍然是不行的。
English: It has never been the case that military forces can conquer the world without the certainty of victory over the enemy country; however, it is still not possible for military forces to have the certainty of victory without knowing the program of conquering the world.

古文：兵必胜敌国矣，而不明正天下之分，犹之不可，故曰：治民有器，为兵有数，胜敌国有理。正天下有分：
现代文：所以说：治民要有军备，用兵要有策略，战胜敌国要有理，匡正天下要有纲领。
English: Therefore, it is said: to govern the people, there must be armaments, to use troops, there must be a strategy, to defeat the enemy country, there must be a reason, and to make the world righteous, there must be a program.

古文：则、象、法、化、决塞、心术、计数，根天地之气，寒暑之和，水土之性，人民鸟兽草木之生物，虽不甚多，皆均有焉，而未尝变也，谓之则。
现代文：七法关于规律、形象、规范、教化、决塞、心术和计数：探索天地的元气，寒暑的协调，水土的性质以及人类、鸟兽、草木的生长繁殖；事物虽多，但都有一个共同性，而且是不变的，这就叫做 规律 。
English: The seven laws are about laws, images, norms, enlightenment, determination, mind tricks, and counting: exploring the vitality of heaven and earth, the coordination of cold and heat, the nature of water and soil, and the growth and reproduction of humans, birds, beasts, and plants; although there are many things, they all have a commonality and are unchanging, which is called laws.

古文：义也、名也、时也、似也、类也、比也、状也、谓之象。
现代文：事物的外形、名称、年代、相似、类属、依次、状态等等，叫作 形象 。
English: The shape, name, age, similarity, genus, sequence, state, etc. of things are called images.

古文：尺寸也、绳墨也、规矩也、衡石也、斗斛也、角量也、谓之法。
现代文：尺寸、绳墨、规矩、衡石、斗斜、角量等等，叫做 规范 。
English: Sizes, rope sizes, rules, weights, diagonals, angular weights, and so on, are called specifications.

古文：七法渐也、顺也、靡也、久也、服也、习也、谓之化。
现代文：渐进、驯服、磨炼、熏陶、适应、习惯等等，叫作 教化 。
English: Gradual progress, taming, tempering, indoctrination, adaptation, habit, etc., are called indoctrination.

古文：予夺也、险易也、利害也、难易也、开闭也、杀生也、谓之决塞。
现代文：予与夺、险与易、利与害、难与易、开与闭、死与生等等，叫作 决塞 。
English: Give and take, risk and ease, benefit and harm, difficult and easy, open and closed, death and life, etc., are called decision.

古文：实也、诚也、厚也、施也、度也、恕也、谓之心术。
现代文：老实、忠诚、宽厚、 施舍、度量、容让等等，叫做心术。
English: Honesty, loyalty, generosity, charity, moderation, tolerance, and so on, are called mental techniques.

古文：刚柔也、轻重也、大小也、实虚也、远近也、多少也、谓之计数。
现代文：刚柔、轻重、大小、虚实、远近、多少等等叫作 计数 。
English: Rigid and soft, heavy and light, big and small, true and false, near and far, how much, and so on, are called "numbers."

古文：不明于则，而欲出号令，犹立朝夕于鉉均之上，檐竿而欲定其末。
现代文：不明白规律，而想要立法定制，就好比把测时的标竿插在转动者的陶轮上，摇动竹竿而妄想稳定它的末端一样。
English: If you don't understand the laws, but want to legislate customization, it's like sticking a time-measuring rod on a spinning potter's wheel, shaking a bamboo pole and trying to stabilize its end.

古文：不明于象，而欲论材审用，犹绝长以为短，续短以为长。
现代文：不了解形象，而想量才用人，就好比把长材短用，短材长用一样。
English: If you don't understand the image, and only employ people according to their ability, it's like using a long piece of wood for a short time, and a short piece of wood for a long time.

古文：不明于法，而欲治民一众，犹左书而右息之。
现代文：不了解事物的规范，而想治理人民统一群众，就好比用左手写字，而闲着右手一样。
English: Not understanding the norms of things and trying to govern the people and unify the masses is like writing with the left hand while the right hand is idle.

古文：不明于化，而欲变俗易教，犹朝揉轮而夕欲乘车。
现代文：不明白教化而想移风易俗，就好比早上刚制造车轮，晚上就要乘车一样。
English: If you don't understand enlightenment and want to change customs, it's like making a wheel in the morning and taking a bus in the evening.

古文：不明于决塞，而欲敺众移民，犹使水逆流。
现代文：不了解决塞之术而想驱使和调遣人民，就好比使水倒流一样。
English: Without the art of solving blockages, trying to drive and mobilize the people is like trying to reverse the flow of water.

古文：不明于心术，而欲行令于人，犹倍招而必拘之。
现代文：不了解心术而想对人们发号施令，就好比背着靶子射箭而一定希图命中一样。
English: Wanting to dictate to people without understanding mental techniques is like shooting arrows with a target on your back and hoping to hit it.

古文：不明于计数，而欲举大事，犹无舟楫而欲经于水险也。
现代文：不了解计数而想要举办大事，就好比没有舟辑想渡过水险一样。
English: If you want to hold a big event without knowing the count, it's like trying to cross the river without a boat.

古文：故曰：错仪画制，不知则不可。论材审用，不知象不可。和民一众，不知法不可。变俗易教，不知化不可。敺众移民，不知决塞不可。布令必行，不知心术不可。举事必成，不知计数不可。
现代文：所以说：立法定制，不了解规律不行；量才用人，不了解形象不行；治理人民统一群众，不了解规范不行；移风易俗，不了解教化不行；驱使和调遣人民，不了解决塞不行；发布命令保证必行，不了解心术不行；举办大事保证必成，不了解计数不行。
English: Therefore, it is said that: legislating customization is not possible without understanding the law; employing people only according to quantity is not possible without understanding the image; governing the people and unifying the masses is not possible without understanding the norms; changing customs without understanding the education is not possible; driving and dispatching people is not possible without solving the blockage; issuing orders must be done without understanding the mind, and holding major events is not possible without understanding the count.

古文：四伤百匿
现代文：四伤百匿
English: Four injuries, one hundred absences

古文：百匿伤上威。奸吏伤官法。奸民伤俗教。贼盗伤国众。
现代文：宫庭的各种坏人伤害君主的权威，奸邪的官吏伤害国家的法制，奸民伤害风俗和教化，贼盗伤害国内的民众。
English: Various villains in the palace court harm the authority of the monarch, treacherous officials harm the country's legal system, traitors harm customs and enlightenment, and thieves harm the people of the country.

古文：威伤，则重在下。法伤，则货上流。教伤，则从令者不辑。众伤，则百姓不安其居。
现代文：权威被伤害，君权就会往下移；法制被伤害，财货就会通过贿赂往上流；教化被伤害，臣民就不会和睦；民众被伤害，百姓就不得安居。
English: If the authority is harmed, the monarchy will move downwards; if the legal system is harmed, the wealth and goods will flow upwards through bribery; if the enlightenment is harmed, the subjects will not be harmonious; if the people are harmed, the people will not be able to live in peace.

古文：重在下，则令不行。货上流，则官徒毁。从令者不辑，则百事无功。
现代文：君权下移，政令便无法推行；财货上流，官德就必然败坏；臣民不和，百事都无功效；百姓不得安居，就会造成为盗者留而务农者离散的局面。
English: When the monarch's power moves down, government decrees cannot be implemented; when wealth and goods move upstream, official morality will inevitably deteriorate; when subjects are at odds, nothing will work; when the people cannot live safely, it will create a situation where thieves stay and farmers disperse.

古文：百姓不安其居，则轻民处而重民散，轻民处，重民散，则地不辟；地不辟，则六畜不育；六畜不育，则国贫而用不足；国贫而用不足，则兵弱而士不厉；兵弱而士不厉，则战不胜而守不固；战不胜而守不固，则国不安矣。
现代文：为盗者留、务农者散的结就是土地不得开辟，土地不开辟则六畜不能繁育，六畜不育则国贫而财不足，国贫而财用不足则兵弱而士气不振，兵弱而士气不振，则战不能胜、守不能固，战不胜而守不固，国家就不会安定了。
English: For the thief to stay and the farmer to disperse, the knot is that the land must not be developed; if the land is not developed, the six animals cannot breed; if the six animals are sterile, the country is poor and the wealth is insufficient; if the country is poor and the wealth is insufficient, the soldiers are weak and the morale is not strong; if the soldiers are weak and the morale is not strong, the war cannot be won and the defense cannot be firm; if the war cannot be won and the defense cannot be firm, the country will not be stable.

古文：故曰：常令不审，则百匿胜；官爵不审，则奸吏胜；符籍不审，则奸民胜；刑法不审，则盗贼胜；国之四经败，人君泄见危，人君泄，则言实之士不进；言实之士不进，则国之情伪不竭于上。世主所贵者宝也，所亲者戚也，所爱者民也，所重者爵禄也，亡君则不然，致所贵，非宝也，致所亲，非戚也；致所爱，非民也；致所重，非爵禄也，故不为重宝亏其命，故曰： 令贵于宝 。
现代文：当代一般的君主，所重视的是珍宝，所亲一近的是亲戚，所珍爱的是属民，所重惜的是爵禄。
English: The average contemporary monarch values treasures, is close to relatives, cherishes the people, and cherishes peerage.

古文：不为爱亲危其社稷，故曰： 社稷戚于亲 。不为爱人枉其法，故曰： 法爱于人 。
现代文：英明的君主则不是这样。他最重视的不是珍宝，最亲近的不是亲戚，最珍惜的不是属民，最看重的不是爵禄。
English: A wise prince, on the other hand, is not like this. What he values most is not treasure, what is closest to him is not his relatives, what is dearest to him is not his subjects, and what is most important to him is not peerages.

古文：不为重爵禄分其威，故曰： 威重于爵禄 。不通此四者，则反于无有。
现代文：所以，他不会为重宝损害政令，就是说 令贵于宝 ；不会为亲戚危害国家，就是说 社稷重于亲戚 ；不会为爱其属民而违反法律，就是说 爱法高于爱人 ；不会为重惜爵禄而削弱威信，就是说 威信重于爵禄 。君主如不懂得这四条，就会一无所得。
English: Therefore, he will not damage the government order for the treasure, that is, to make it more valuable; he will not harm the country for the relatives, that is, the society is more important than the relatives; he will not violate the law for the love of his people, that is, the love of the law is higher than the love of the people; he will not weaken the prestige for the sake of the peerage, that is, the prestige is more important than the peerage. If the monarch does not understand these four articles, he will get nothing.

古文：故曰：治人如治水潦，养人如养六畜，用人如用草木。
现代文：所以说：治人如治水，养人如养六畜，用人如用草木。
English: Therefore, it is said, "Managing people is like managing water, raising people is like raising six animals, and employing people is like using plants and trees."

古文：居身论道行理，则群臣服教，百吏严断，莫敢开私焉。
现代文：君主自身能按理办事，群臣就服从政令，百官就断事严明，谁也不敢彻私了。
English: If the monarch himself can act according to reason, the ministers will obey the government orders, and the officials will make strict judgments, and no one will dare to do anything against me.

古文：论功计劳，未尝失法律也。
现代文：在评计功劳的时候，不能离开法令规定。
English: When assessing merit, it is impossible to deviate from the provisions of the law.

古文：便辟、左右、大族、尊贵、大臣、不得增其功焉。
现代文：宠臣、侍从、大族、权贵和大臣们，不得凭特权加功。
English: Favourite vassals, attendants, great clansmen, dignitaries and ministers are not allowed to receive merit based on privilege.

古文：疏远、卑贱、隐不知之人、不忘其劳，故有罪者不怨上，爱赏者无贪心，则列陈之士，皆轻其死而安难，以要上事，本兵之极也。
现代文：关系远的、地位低的、不知名的，有功也不得埋没。
English: The distant, the low-ranking, the unknown, the meritorious must also be buried.

古文：为兵之数
现代文：为兵之数
English: Number of soldiers

古文：为兵之数，存乎聚财，而财无敌。存乎论工，而工无敌。存乎制器，而器无敌。存乎选士，而士无敌。存乎政教，而政教无敌。存乎服习，而服习无敌。存乎遍知天下，而遍知天下无敌。存乎明于机数，而明于机数无敌。
现代文：用兵的方法，一在于积聚财富，而要使财富无敌；二在于考究军事工艺，而要使工艺无敌；三在于制造兵器，而要使兵器无敌；四在于选择战士，而要使战士无敌；五在于管理教育，而要使管教工作无敌；六在于军事训练，而要使训练工作无敌；七在于调查各国情况，而要使调查工作无敌；八在于明察战机和策略，而要使明察战机和策略无敌。
English: The methods of employing soldiers are, first, to accumulate wealth and make it invincible; second, to study military techniques and make them invincible; third, to manufacture weapons and make them invincible; fourth, to select soldiers and make them invincible; fifth, to administer education and make the work of discipline invincible; sixth, to conduct military training and make the work of training invincible; seventh, to investigate the conditions of various countries and make the work of investigation invincible; eighth, to observe warplanes and strategies and make them invincible.

古文：故兵未出境，而无敌者八；是以欲正天下，财不盖天下，不能正天下；财盖天下，而工不盖天下，不能正天下；工盖天下，而器不盖天下，不能正天下；器盖天下，而士不盖天下，不能正天下；士盖天下，而教不盖天下，不能正天下；教盖天下，而习不盖天下，不能正天下；习盖天下，而不遍知天下，不能正天下；遍知天下，而不明于机数，不能正天下；故明于机数者，用兵之势也。
现代文：这就是说，军队没有调出国境，就已经保证八个方面无可匹敌了。因此，要征服天下，财力不压倒天下，不能征服；财力压倒天下，而工艺不压倒天下，不能征服；工艺压倒天下，而兵器不压倒天下，不能征服；兵器压倒天下，而战士不压倒天下，不能征服；战士压倒天下，而管理教育工作不压倒天下，不能征服；管教工作压倒天下，而军事训练不压倒天下，不能征服；训练压倒天下，而不普遍了解天下的情况，不能征服；普遍了解天下情况，而不明察战机和策略，还是不能征服天下的。所以，明察战机和策略是用兵的关键。
English: Therefore, in order to conquer the world, if the financial strength does not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the financial strength overwhelms the world, but the technology does not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the technology overwhelms the world, but the weapons do not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the weapons overwhelm the world, but the soldiers do not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the soldiers overwhelm the world, but the management and education work does not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the discipline work overwhelms the world, but the military training does not overwhelm the world, it cannot be conquered; if the training overwhelms the

古文：是故器成卒选，则士知胜矣。
现代文：首要的是掌握作战时机，其次是作战计划。所以，兵器制成，士兵选定，勇士就有了取胜的信心。
English: The most important thing is to grasp the timing of the battle, followed by the battle plan. Therefore, the weapons are made, the soldiers are selected, and the warriors have the confidence to win.

古文：遍知天下，审御机数，则独行而无敌矣。
现代文：普遍了解天下的情况，精心掌握战机与策略，那就可以所向无敌了。
English: If you have a general understanding of the situation in the world, and have a good grasp of aircraft and strategy, then you can be invincible.

古文：所爱之国，而独利之；所恶之国，而独害之；则令行禁止，是以圣王贵之。
现代文：对于友好的国家，要给予特殊扶持；对于敌对国家，要给予特殊惩罚。这样就发令能行，言禁能止。因此，英明的君主很重视这种作法。
English: For friendly nations, special favors are to be given; for hostile nations, special punishments are to be meted out. In this way, orders can be issued and words can be banned. Therefore, a wise monarch attaches great importance to this practice.

古文：胜一而服百，则天下畏之矣。立少而观多，则天下怀之矣。罚有罪，赏有功，则天下从之矣。
现代文：战胜一国而威服百国，天下都会畏惧；持植少数而影响多数，天下都会怀德；惩罚有罪，赏赐有功，天下也都跟着服从了。
English: Conquer one country and dominate a hundred countries, and the whole world will be afraid; support the minority and influence the majority, and the whole world will be blessed; punish the guilty, reward the meritorious, and the whole world will obey.

古文：故聚天下之精财，论百工之锐器，春秋角试，以练精锐为右；成器不课不用，不试不藏。
现代文：因此，要聚集天下最好的物材，研究各种工匠的兵器；春秋两季进行比试，精锐的列为上等。制成的武器，不经检查不使用，不试验合格不入库。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to gather the world's best materials and study the weapons of various craftsmen; the spring and autumn will be held in competition, and the elite will be ranked as superior. The weapons made will not be used without inspection, and will not be stored without passing the test.

古文：收天下之豪杰，有天下之骏雄；故举之如飞鸟，动之如雷电，发之如风雨，莫当其前，莫害其后，独出独入，莫敢禁圉。成功立事，必顺于礼义，故不礼不胜天下，不义不胜人；故贤知之君，必立于胜地，故正天下而莫之敢御也。选阵
现代文：贤明智慧的君主，总是站在必胜的立场，所以能征服天下而无人敢于抗拒。选阵
English: The wise and intelligent monarch always stands in the position of victory, so he can conquer the world and no one dares to resist.

古文：若夫曲制时举，不失天时，毋圹地利。
现代文：关于部队作战的时机，应该不失天时，不废地利。
English: With regard to the timing of the army's operations, it should not miss the opportunity, nor waste the opportunity.

古文：其数多少，其要必出于计数。
现代文：军事上数字的多少，其主要项目一定要根据计划。
English: As far as military figures are concerned, their major projects must be in accordance with the plan.

古文：故凡攻伐之为道也，计必先定于内，然后兵出乎境；计未定于内，而兵出乎境，是则战之自胜，攻之自毁也。
现代文：所以，凡是攻战的原则，都要求计划必须先定于国内，然后再举兵出境。计划没有事前确定于国内而竟举兵出境，这是战之自败，攻之自毁的。
English: Therefore, all the principles of offensive warfare require that the plan must first be determined within the country, and then the troops must be raised outside the country. If the plan is not determined in advance within the country and the troops are actually raised outside the country, this is self-defeating in war and self-destructive in attack.

古文：是故张军而不能战。围邑而不能攻。得地而不能实，三者见一焉。则可破毁也。
现代文：因此，摆开阵势还没有确定打仗，包围城邑还不能确定攻取，得了土地还不能确定据守，三种情况有一种，就是要被毁灭的。
English: Therefore, it is not certain to fight when setting up a position, it is not certain to capture when encircling a city, and it is not certain to defend when gaining land. There are three kinds of situations, one of which is to be destroyed.

古文：故不明于敌人之政，不能加也，不明于敌人之情，不可约也。不明于敌人之将，不先军也。不明于敌人之士，不先陈也。
现代文：所以，事前不明了敌人的政治，不能进行战争；不明了敌人的军情，不能约定战争；不明了敌人的将领，不先采取军事行动；不明了敌人的士兵，不先摆列阵势。
English: Therefore, if you do not know the enemy's politics in advance, you cannot wage war; if you do not know the enemy's military situation, you cannot agree on war; if you do not know the enemy's generals, you will not take military action first; if you do not know the enemy's soldiers, you will not first set up a position.

古文：是故以众击寡，以治击乱，以富击贫，以能击不能，以教卒练士击敺众白徒。故十战十胜，百战百胜。
现代文：只有保证以众击寡，以治击乱，以富击贫，以能用兵的将帅击不能用兵的将帅，以经过教练的士卒打击临时征集的乌合之众，才可以十战十胜，百战百胜。
English: Only by ensuring the use of the masses to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the rich, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich to fight the poor, the rich

古文：故事无备，兵无主，则不蚤知。野不辟，地无吏，则无蓄积。官无常，下怨上，而器械不功。朝无政，则赏罚不明。
现代文：所以，战事没有准备，部队又没有主事的统帅，那就不可能预先掌握敌情；荒地没有开发，农业又没有专管的官吏，那就不可能积蓄粮草；官府没有常规，工匠抱怨上级；武器就不会精良；朝廷没有政令，赏罚很不分明，民众就侥幸偷生。
English: Therefore, if there is no preparation for war, and the troops do not have a commander in charge, it is impossible to grasp the enemy situation in advance; if the wasteland is not developed, and there is no official in charge of agriculture, it is impossible to accumulate grain and grass; if the government does not have a routine, the craftsmen will complain to their superiors; the weapons will not be sophisticated; if the court does not have a decree, the reward and punishment are very unclear, and the people will be lucky to survive.

古文：赏罚不明，则民幸生。故蚤知敌人如独行，有蓄积，则久而不匮。器械功，则伐而不费。赏罚明，则人不幸。人不幸，则勇士劝之。
现代文：因此，先知敌情，才能够所向无敌；积蓄粮草，才能够久战而不贫困；武器精良，打起仗来才能顺利；赏罚严明，人们才不会侥幸偷生；而人们都不侥幸偷生，勇士也就努力了。
English: Therefore, only the prophet can make the enemy invincible; only the accumulation of grain and grass can make the war last long without poverty; only the weapons are sophisticated and the war can be successful; only the rewards and punishments are strict, and people will not be lucky to survive; and people are not lucky to survive, and the warriors will work hard.

古文：日量蓄积，齐勇士，遍知天下，审御机数，兵主之事也。
现代文：所以，用兵这件事情，一定要详审地理情况，掌握天时，计算军需贮备，教练勇士，普遍掌握天下的情况，认真抓好战机和运用策略。而这些也正是统帅的本职。
English: Therefore, in the matter of using soldiers, it is necessary to examine the geographical situation in detail, master the time of day, calculate the military supply and reserve, train warriors, generally master the situation of the world, carefully grasp the warplanes and the use strategy. And these are also the duties of the commander.

古文：故有风雨之行，故能不远道里矣。有飞鸟之举，故能不险山河矣。有雷电之战，故能独行而无敌矣。有水旱之功，故能攻国救邑。有金城之守，故能定宗庙，育男女矣。有一体之治，故能出号令，明宪法矣。
现代文：军队有像风雨一般的行进，就不怕路途遥远；有像飞鸟一般的举动，就不怕山河险阻；有像雷电一般的进攻，就所向无敌； 有像水旱一般的摧毁效果就能够攻人之国，救人之城；有像金城一般的设防固守，就能够安定宗庙，繁育人口；再有浑为一体的统一政治，就能够发布号令，明定法制了。
English: If an army marches like the wind and rain, it will not be afraid of the long distance; if it moves like a bird, it will not be afraid of mountains and rivers; if it attacks like lightning, it will be invincible; if it destroys like floods and droughts, it will be able to invade other people's countries and save other people's cities; if it fortifies and defends like a golden city, it will be able to stabilize ancestral temples and breed the population; and if it has a unified politics, it will be able to issue orders and clearly establish the legal system.

古文：风雨之行者，速也。飞鸟之举者，轻也。雷电之战者，士不齐也。水旱之功者，野不收，耕不获也。金城之守者，用货财，设耳目也。一体之治者。去奇说。
现代文：这是因为：风雨一般的行进，就是要作到快速；飞鸟一般的举动，就是要作到轻捷；雷电一般的进攻，就是使敌兵不及布阵；水旱一般的摧毁效果，就是使敌方土地无收、耕种无获；金城一般的据守，就是要收买敌人，派出间谍；浑为一体的政治，就是要禁止邪说和奢侈风俗。
English: This is because: the wind and rain-like march is to make it fast; the bird-like movement is to make it light; the thunder and lightning-like attack is to make the enemy soldiers fall short of deployment; the water and drought-like destruction effect is to make the enemy's land uncollected and cultivation unprofitable; the Jincheng-like defense is to bribe the enemy and send spies; the integrated politics is to prohibit evil theories and extravagant customs.

古文：禁雕俗也。不远道里，故能威绝域之民，不险山河，故能服恃固之国。
现代文：而军队不怕路途遥远，就能够威慑远地的臣民。不怕山河之阻，就能够征服依险固守的敌国。
English: And the army is not afraid of the long journey, it can deter the distant subjects. It is not afraid of the obstacles of the mountains and rivers, it can conquer the enemy country that clings to danger.

古文：独行无敌，故令行而禁止。
现代文：所向无故，就必然令行禁止。
English: If there is no reason, it will inevitably be banned.

古文：故攻国救邑，不恃权与之国，故所指必听。
现代文：攻人之国，救人之邑，又不依靠盟国，就必然是军队指向哪里，哪里就得听从。
English: If you want to attack someone's country or save someone's town, and you don't rely on allies, you must listen to where the army is pointing.

古文：定宗庙，育男女，天下莫之能伤，然后可以有国。
现代文：安定宗庙，繁育儿女，无人敢于伤害，然后就可以巩固政权。
English: Stabilize the ancestral temple, breed children, no one dares to hurt, and then you can consolidate the regime.

古文：制仪法，出号令，莫不向应，然后可以治民一众矣。
现代文：立法定制，发号施令，无人不来响应，然后就可以治理人民和统一百姓行动了。
English: Customize legislation, issue orders, no one will not respond, and then you can govern the people and unify the people's actions.

