古文：凡人禀贵命於天，必有吉验见於地。
现代文：人从天那里禀受富贵之命，必定会在地上有吉祥的应验出现。
English: If a person receives the command to be rich and noble from heaven, there will surely be an auspicious fulfillment on earth.

古文：见於地，故有天命也。
现代文：有吉祥的应验在地上出现，所以是有天命。
English: There is an auspicious fulfillment appearing on the earth, so there is a destiny.

古文：验见非一，或以人物，或以祯祥，或以光气。
现代文：应验的出现不只一种，有的以圣人吉物，有的以吉祥征兆，有的以佛光仙气。
English: There is more than one kind of fulfillment, some with saints and auspicious objects, some with auspicious signs, and some with Buddha's light and fairy spirits.

古文：传言黄帝妊二十月而生，生而神灵，弱而能言。
现代文：传说黄帝被怀二十个月才生下来，一出生就有神奇灵异的表现，从小就能说话。
English: Legend has it that the Yellow Emperor was born at the end of the 20th month of pregnancy. As soon as he was born, he showed signs of supernatural powers and was able to speak from an early age.

古文：长大率诸侯，诸侯归之；教熊罴战，以伐炎帝，炎帝败绩。
现代文：长大之后能统率诸侯，诸侯又都归附他。能驯化熊罴作战，以讨伐炎帝，炎帝大败。
English: After he grew up, he was able to command the lords, and the lords were all attached to him. He was able to tame the bear cub to fight, to fight the Emperor Yan, and the Emperor Yan was defeated.

古文：性与人异，故在母之身留多十月；命当为帝，故能教物，物为之使。
现代文：这是生性与常人不同，所以在其母的身体内多停留了十个月；命该做皇帝，所以能驯化动物，使动物听他使唤。
English: This is because his nature is different from that of ordinary people, so he stayed in his mother's body for an extra ten months; his destiny is to be an emperor, so he can tame animals and make animals listen to his call.

古文：尧体就之如日，望之若云。
现代文：尧的身体靠近他有如太阳，远看他好像云彩。
English: The body of the dragonfly looks like the sun when it is close to him, but it looks like a cloud when it is far away.

古文：洪水滔天，蛇龙为害，尧使禹治水，驱蛇龙，水治东流，蛇龙潜处。
现代文：洪水滔天，蛇龙为害，尧派禹去治水，驱逐蛇龙，结果水被治好向东流去，蛇龙被迫潜藏。
English: The flood was tremendous, and the snake and dragon were harmed. The dragon sent Yu to control the water and expel the snake and dragon. As a result, the water was cured and flowed to the east, and the snake and dragon were forced to hide.

古文：有殊奇之骨，故有诡异之验；有神灵之命，故有验物之效。
现代文：这是有特殊奇异的骨相，所以才有不同寻常的应验出现；有神灵奇异的命，所以才有应验的事来证明。
English: This is a special and strange skeleton, so there is an unusual fulfillment; there is a god's strange life, so there is a fulfillment to prove.

古文：天命当贵，故从唐侯入嗣帝后之位。
现代文：从天禀承的命该尊贵，所以在唐侯之后就继承了帝王的职位。
English: The order of inheriting the throne from the emperor is very important, so he inherited the position of emperor after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：舜未逢尧，鳏在侧陋。
现代文：舜在没遇见尧的时候，是个鳏夫，住的地方狭窄简陋。
English: When he is not with her, he is a widower and lives in a cramped, humble place.

古文：瞽瞍与象谋欲杀之。使之完廪，火燔其下；令之浚井，土掩其上。
现代文：父亲瞽瞍和弟弟象，密谋想杀他：让他去修理粮仓，在下面用火烧他；叫他去掏井，从上面用土掩盖他。
English: His father, the donkey, and his brother, the elephant, conspired to kill him: let him repair the granary, and burn him underneath; let him dig a well, and cover him with earth from above.

古文：舜得下廪，不被火灾；穿井旁出，不触土害。
现代文：舜只得跳下粮仓，却没有被火烧伤；只好凿穿井壁从旁边逃出，而没有被土掩埋。
English: The badger had to jump down from the granary, but was not burned by the fire; he had to cut through the wall of the well to escape from the side, but was not buried by the soil.

古文：尧闻征用，试之於职。官治职修，事无废乱。
现代文：尧听说后把他召来做官，在任职中来考验他。
English: When he heard about it, he called him to be an official to test him in his duties.

古文：使入大麓之野，虎狼不搏，蝮蛇不噬；逢烈风疾雨，行不迷惑。
现代文：在做官任职中，他勤于职守，处理事情没有搁置和混乱的现象。让他到山麓旷野去，虎狼不扑他，蝮蛇不咬他；碰到狂风暴雨，走路也不会迷失方向。
English: In his work as an official, he is diligent in his duties, and there is no phenomenon of postponement and confusion in dealing with things. Let him go to the foothills of the mountains, the tigers and wolves will not attack him, the pythons will not bite him; in the face of violent storms and rain, he will not lose his way.

古文：夫人欲杀之，不能害，之毒螫之野，禽虫不能伤，卒受帝命，践天子祚。
现代文：人想杀他，不能加害；到满是猛兽毒虫的荒野，禽兽虫子也不能伤害。终于禀受帝命，登上了天子的宝座。
English: If someone wanted to kill him, they could not harm him; in a wilderness full of ferocious beasts and poisonous insects, the beasts and insects could not harm him. Finally, he accepted the emperor's order and ascended to the throne of the Son of Heaven.

古文：后稷之母，履大人迹，或言衣帝喾之服，坐息帝喾之处，妊身。
现代文：后稷的母亲，踩了巨人的脚印，有人说是穿着帝喾的衣服，在帝喾的位子上坐着休息了一会儿，就怀了孕。
English: Houyi's mother stepped on the giant's footprints. Some people said that she wore the emperor's clothes, sat on the emperor's seat and rested for a while, and became pregnant.

古文：怪而弃之隘巷，牛马不敢践之；寘之冰上，鸟以翼覆之，庆集其身。
现代文：后稷生下来，他母亲认为是妖怪，就把他扔到小巷里，可是牛马却不敢去践踏他。又放他在冰上，鸟就用翅膀遮盖住他，成群地聚集在地的身上。
English: When he was born, his mother thought he was a monster and threw him into the alley, but the cows and horses did not dare to trample on him. When she put him on the ice, the birds covered him with their wings and flocked to the ground.

古文：母知其神怪，乃收养之。长大佐尧，位至司马。
现代文：他母亲知道他神奇，于是收养了他，待长大辅佐尧，官做到司马。
English: His mother knew he was amazing, so she adopted him and waited for him to be promoted to the rank of vice-commander.

古文：乌孙王号昆莫，匈奴攻杀其父，而昆莫生，弃於野，乌衔肉往食之。
现代文：乌孙的君主叫昆莫，匈奴进攻杀害了他的父亲，而这时昆莫刚出生，被扔在野外，乌鸦就叼肉去喂他。
English: The king of Wusun was called Kunmo. The Xiongnu attacked and killed his father. At this time, Kunmo had just been born and was thrown out into the open. The crows picked the meat to feed him.

古文：单于怪之，以为神，而收长。
现代文：单于感觉奇怪，认为他神奇就收养了他。
English: It just felt weird, like he'd magically adopted him.

古文：及壮，使兵，数有功。单于乃复以其父之民予昆莫，令长守於西城。
现代文：等到了壮年，让他率领军队，多次有功，单于于是重新又把他父亲的百姓交给了他，叫他当君长在西城防守。
English: When he came of age, he was given the command of an army, which he led successfully several times, and then he was given his father's people again, and he was put in charge of the defense of the western city.

古文：夫后稷不当弃，故牛马不践，鸟以羽翼覆爱其身；昆莫不当死，故乌衔肉就而食之。
现代文：可见，后稷不该被抛弃，所以牛马不践踏，群鸟用翅膀遮盖保护他的身体；昆莫不该死，所以乌鸦叼肉去喂他。
English: It can be seen that the stork should not be abandoned, so the cattle and horses do not trample, the birds cover his body with wings to protect him; Kunmo should not die, so the crow steals meat to feed him.

古文：北夷橐离国王侍婢有娠，王欲杀之。
现代文：北方橐离国王的侍女有娠妊，国王想杀她。
English: The king of the North wants to kill his estranged lady-in-waiting because she is pregnant.

古文：婢对曰： 有气大如鸡子，从天而下，我故有娠 。
现代文：侍女解释说： 我肚子里有团气大得像只鸡，从天而降，所以我怀了孕。 
English: The chambermaid explained: I had a lump in my stomach as big as a chicken, which fell from the sky, so I was pregnant.

古文：後产子，捐於猪溷中，猪以口气嘘之，不死；复徙置马栏中，欲使马借杀之，马复以口气嘘之，不死。
现代文：后来生下孩子，丢在猪圈中，猪用口中之气慢慢地呵他，没有死。又移放在马栏中，想让马踏死他，可是马又用口中之气缓缓地呵他，竟活了下来。
English: Later, she gave birth to a child and left him in a pigsty. The pig slowly scratched him with the breath in his mouth, but he did not die. She then moved him to a stable and wanted the horse to trample him to death, but the horse slowly scratched him with the breath in his mouth, and he survived.

古文：王疑以为天子，令其母收取，奴畜之，名东明，令牧牛马。
现代文：国王疑心以为是上天的儿子，就命令他的母亲把他当奴隶收养起来，起名叫东明，叫他牧牛放马。
English: Suspecting that he was the son of heaven, the king ordered his mother to adopt him as a slave, naming him Dongming and ordering him to herd cattle and drive horses.

古文：东明善射，王恐夺其国也，欲杀之。
现代文：东明的箭射得很好，国王害怕东明夺去他的国家，想杀死他。
English: Dongming's arrows were very good, and the king was afraid that Dongming would take over his country and wanted to kill him.

古文：东明走，南至掩淲水，以弓击水，鱼鳖浮为桥，东明得渡，鱼鳖解散，追兵不得渡，因都王夫馀。
现代文：东明就逃跑，一直向南到了掩淲水，用弓击打河水，鱼鳖浮出水面架成桥，东明得已渡过，之后鱼鳖解散，追兵无法渡河。
English: Dongming ran away, all the way to the south to cover the water, hit the river with a bow, the bait floated to the surface to build a bridge, Dongming had already crossed, and then the bait dissolved, the pursuers could not cross the river.

古文：故北夷有夫馀国焉。
现代文：于是就在夫余建都称王，所以北方有个夫余国。
English: As a result, the capital was built in Fuyu, so there is a Fuyu country in the north.

古文：东明之母初妊时，见气从天下，及生，弃之，猪马以气吁之而生之。
现代文：东明的母亲最初怀孕时，看见气从天降，等生下来，抛弃了他，猪马用气缓缓地呵他才活了下来。
English: When Dongming's mother was pregnant for the first time, she saw qi falling from the sky, waited for him to be born, and then abandoned him. He only survived because the pig slowly pulled him with qi.

古文：长大，王欲杀之，以弓击水，鱼鳖为桥。
现代文：长大，国王想杀他，追到河边，他用弓击打河水，鱼鳖就为他架起了桥。
English: When he grew up, the king wanted to kill him, so he chased him to the river. He hit the water with his bow, and the fish's gills built a bridge for him.

古文：天命不当死，故有猪马之救；命当都王夫馀，故有鱼鳖为桥之助也。
现代文：可见，天命不当他死，所以有猪马拯救；命该在夫余建都称王，所以有鱼鳖架桥援助。
English: It can be seen that the fate of heaven is not appropriate for him to die, so there are pigs and horses to save; life should be king in husband Yu Jiandu, so there are fish hooks to bridge the bridge.

古文：伊尹且生之时，其母梦人谓已曰： 臼出水，疾东走。
现代文：伊尹快要出生的时候，他的母亲梦见有人对自己说： 石臼冒出水来，赶快朝东边跑，不要回头看。 
English: When Yi Yin was about to be born, his mother had a dream in which someone said to her: "There is water coming out of the stone mill. Run quickly to the east and don't look back."

古文：母顾！ 明旦视臼出水，即东走十里，顾其乡，皆为水矣。
现代文：第二天早上，她看见石臼里果然冒出水来，马上朝东跑了十里，回头一看她住的地方，完全被水淹了。
English: The next morning, when she saw that water was indeed coming out of the mill, she immediately ran ten miles to the east, and when she looked back at where she lived, it was completely flooded.

古文：伊尹命不当没，故其母感梦而走。
现代文：伊尹命不该被水淹，所以他母亲感受梦的启示而离开。
English: Yiyun's life was not supposed to be flooded, so his mother felt the inspiration of the dream and left.

古文：推此以论，历阳之都，其策命若伊尹之类，必有先时感动在他地之效。
现代文：按这来推论，历阳城中，那策命像伊尹一样的人，一定会有事前感动让他们躲到别处去的预兆。
English: According to this inference, in Liyang City, those who are like Yi Yin will surely be moved in advance so that they can hide elsewhere.

古文：齐襄公之难，桓公为公子，与子纠争立。
现代文：齐襄公被害，桓公成了公子，与子纠争夺立为君主。
English: After the death of Prince Qixiang, Prince Huan became the prince and fought with his son to become the monarch.

古文：管仲辅子纠，鲍叔佐桓公。
现代文：管仲辅佐子纠，鲍叔牙辅佐桓公。
English: Guan Zhong Fu Su Zi Guan, Bao Shu Ya Fu Su Guan.

古文：管仲与桓公争，引弓射之，中其带钩。
现代文：管仲跟桓公争，开弓射箭，定要射中桓公腰带上的钩。
English: Guanzhong fought with Huan Gong, and opened his bow to shoot arrows. He was sure to hit the hook on Huan Gong's belt.

古文：夫人身长七尺，带约其要，钩挂於带，在身所掩，不过一寸之内，既微小难中，又滑泽钴靡，锋刃中钩者，莫不蹉跌。
现代文：人身高七尺，带子缠在腰上，钩在带上挂着，钩在身上占的地方不会超过一寸，既微小难中，又光滑锐密，锋利的箭头射中带钩的，没有不滑落到旁边去。
English: The person is seven feet tall, the strap is wrapped around the waist, the hook is hanging on the strap, and the hook does not occupy more than one inch on the body. It is both tiny and hard, and it is smooth and sharp. If a sharp arrow is shot with a hook, it will not slip to the side.

古文：管仲射之，正中其钩中，矢触因落，不跌中旁肉。
现代文：管仲射箭，正射中桓公的带钩，箭碰着带钩随即跌落在地，没有误中钩旁的肉。
English: Guanzhong shot an arrow, and the arrow hit the hook in the middle of the shot. The arrow hit the hook and immediately fell to the ground, and did not hit the meat next to the hook.

古文：命当富贵，有神灵之助，故有射钩不中之验。
现代文：桓公命该富贵，有神灵的帮助，所以有射钩不中的应验。
English: Kan's order was to be rich and noble, and he had the help of the gods, so it came true.

古文：楚共王有五子：子招、子圉、子干、子晰、弃疾。
现代文：楚共王有五个儿子：子招、子围、子干、子皙、弃疾。
English: The King of Chu had five sons: Zizhao, Ziwei, Zikang, Zijian, and Xuanjia.

古文：五人皆有宠，共王无适立，乃望祭山川，请神决之。
现代文：五人都受到庞爱，共王还没有立继承人，于是举行望祭，祭祀山川，请神来决定。
English: All five of them were greatly loved, and the co-princes had not yet appointed an heir, so they held a memorial service, worshipped mountains and rivers, and asked God to decide.

古文：乃与巴姬埋璧於太室之庭，令五子齐而入拜。
现代文：就与巴姬在太室的院子里埋下玉璧，叫五个儿子斋戒之后进去朝拜。
English: Together with Baji, he buried the jade Buddha in the courtyard of the imperial room and told his five sons to fast and then go in to worship.

古文：康王跨之；子圉肘加焉；子干、子晰皆远之；弃疾弱，抱而入，再拜皆压纽。
现代文：康王超过了玉璧；子围的手肘压在埋璧的地方；子干、子皙离玉璧都较远；弃疾年幼，抱着进去，二次下拜都压在埋玉璧纽的地方。
English: King Kang surpassed Jade Pi; Ziwei's elbow was pressed against the place where Jade Pi was buried; Zi Gan and Zi Xuan were far away from Jade Pi; abandoning the young, embracing them, and bowing down twice were all pressed against the place where Jade Pi was buried.

古文：故共王死，招为康王，至子失之；圉为灵王，及身而弑；子干为王，十有余日；子晰不立，又惧诛死，皆绝无後。弃疾後立，竟续楚祀，如其神符。
现代文：子干做五十多天，子皙还没有受封，又同时被杀害，都绝代无后。弃疾最后即位，终于延续了楚国的宗祀，正像他得到神降的吉祥征兆一样。
English: For more than fifty days, Zi Gan did not receive the title, and at the same time he was killed, and there was no successor. He finally abdicated and succeeded to the throne, and finally continued the ancestral worship of Chu, just as he received the auspicious sign of God's descent.

古文：其王日之长短，与拜去璧远近相应也。
现代文：他们五人做王时间的长短，与下拜时距离玉璧的远近相应。
English: The length of time for the five of them to be kings corresponds to how close they are to the Jade Emperor when they bow down.

古文：夫璧在地中，五子不知，相随入拜，远近不同，压纽若神将教跽之矣。
现代文：玉璧埋在地中，五个儿子都不知道，一个跟着一个进去朝拜，各人距离埋玉璧地方的远近不同，独弃疾压在玉璧纽上，就像神扶持着教他跪在那里似的。
English: The Jade Buddha was buried in the ground, and the five sons did not know about it. One after the other went in to worship. The distance to the place where the Jade Buddha was buried was different for each of them. They all pressed on the Jade Buddha's necklace, as if the gods were supporting and teaching him to kneel there.

古文：晋屠岸贾作难，诛赵盾之子。
现代文：晋国的屠岸贾作乱，杀了赵盾的儿子。
English: In Jin, Tu Kuan Jia caused a riot and killed the son of Zhao Dun.

古文：朔死，其妻有遗腹子。
现代文：赵朔死后，他的妻子有了遗腹子。
English: After Zhao Shuo's death, his wife had a stillborn child.

古文：及岸贾闻之，索於宫，母置兒於裤中，祝曰： 赵氏宗灭乎？
现代文：等屠岸贾听到这消息，就到宫中搜索，赵朔的妻子把儿了放在裤子中，祷告道： 赵氏的宗室该灭的话，你就哭；要是不该灭，你就别出声。 
English: When Tu Guan Jia heard the news, he went to the palace to search. Zhao Shuo's wife put her son in her pants and prayed: "If Zhao's family should perish, you should cry; if it should not perish, you should not speak out."

古文：若当啼。即不灭，若无声。 
现代文：直到搜索完毕始终没有啼哭，于是逃脱得活。
English: He didn't cry until the search was over, and he got out alive.

古文：及索之，而终不啼，遂脱得活。程婴齐负之，匿於山中。至景公时，韩厥言於景公，景公乃与韩厥共立赵孤，续赵氏祀，是为文子。
现代文：程婴背着他到山中隐藏起来。直到景公的时候，韩厥对景公说了这件事，景公于是与韩厥共同立赵氏孤儿为卿，延续了赵氏的后代，这个人就是赵文子。
English: Cheng Ying hid behind him in the mountains until the time of King Jing, when Han Jue told King Jing about the matter. King Jing then, together with Han Jue, appointed the orphan of the Zhao clan as the lord, continuing the descendants of the Zhao clan. This man was Zhao Wenzi.

古文：当赵孤之无声，若有掩其口者矣。
现代文：当时赵氏孤儿没有出声，好像有个掩住他口的人。
English: At the time, the Zhao orphan did not speak out, as if someone was covering his mouth.

古文：由此言之，赵文子立，命也。
现代文：这样说来，赵文子被立为卿，是命中注定。
English: In this sense, Zhao Wenzi's elevation to nobility was predestined.

古文：高皇帝母曰刘媪，尝息大泽之陂，梦与神遇。是时雷电晦冥，蛟龙在上。
现代文：汉高祖的母亲叫刘媪，曾在太湖岸边休息，梦中与神交媾，这时，雷电交加天色昏暗，蛟龙在腾空。
English: The mother of Han Gao Zu, named Liu Ye, was resting on the shore of Taihu Lake. In her dream, she had intercourse with a god. At that time, the sky was dark with thunder and lightning, and dragons were flying in the sky.

古文：及生而有美。
现代文：等生下来就有美好的形体。
English: When you are born, you have a beautiful body.

古文：性好用酒，尝从王媪、武负贳酒，饮醉止卧，媪、负见其身常有神怪。
现代文：他生性喜好喝酒，曾经从王媪，武妇那儿赊酒，喝醉了，就躺下来休息，老媪和妇人看见他身上常有神怪。
English: His natural inclination was to drink. He used to get alcohol from Wang Yao and Wu Wu, and when he was drunk, he would lie down to rest. Lao Yao and his wife often saw the supernatural in him.

古文：每留饮醉，酒售数倍。
现代文：每逢逗留在店里喝醉了，店里的酒就会多卖出几倍。
English: Every time you stay in the store drunk, the store's liquor will be sold several times more.

古文：後行泽中，手崭大蛇，一妪当道而哭，云： 赤帝子杀吾子。 
现代文：后来去到泽中，手斩大蛇，一个老妇在路中间痛哭说： 赤帝的儿子杀了我的儿。 
English: Later, when he went to Zezhong and cut off a large snake with his hand, an old woman cried bitterly in the middle of the road and said, "The son of the Red Emperor killed my son."

古文：此验既著闻矣。
现代文：这话应验了前边说的，已是众所周知了。
English: This is in line with what has been said before and is well known.

古文：秦始皇帝常曰： 东南有天子气 。
现代文：秦始皇经常念道： 东南方有天子气。 
English: Qin Shihuang often recited: The southeast has the spirit of the son of heaven.

古文：於是东游以厌当之。
现代文：由此他向东巡游以便压制阻拦。
English: From there he cruised east to suppress the blockade.

古文：高祖之气也，与吕后隐於芒、山泽间。
现代文：当高祖刚起事时，与吕后在芒、砀山泽之间隐藏。
English: When Gao Zu first rose up, he and Lü Guo hid in the mountains between Meng and Lushan.

古文：吕后与人求之，见其上常有气直起，往求，辄得其处。
现代文：吕后和其他人去找他，如果看见哪儿上面常有云气直起，就去寻找总是能找到他所在的地方。
English: Lvou and the others went to look for him, and if they saw a place where the sky was often overcast, they went to look for the place where they could always find him.

古文：後与项羽约，先入秦关，王之。
现代文：后来跟项羽约定，先进入函谷关就尊他为王。
English: Later, he made an agreement with Xiang Yu that he would enter into the valley of Hanzhong first and respect him as the king.

古文：高祖先至，项羽怨恨。范增曰： 吾令人望其气，气皆为龙，成五采，此皆天子之气也。
现代文：高祖先到，项羽怨恨，范增说： 我叫人看了他的气象，气象都是龙、成青、黄、赤、白、黑五色，这全是天子的气象，要赶快杀掉他。 
English: Gao Ancestor arrived, Xiang Yu was resentful, Fan Zeng said: I made people look at his meteorology, the meteorology is dragon, blue, yellow, red, white, black five colors, this is all the meteorology of the Son of Heaven, I want to kill him quickly.

古文：急击之 。高祖往谢项羽。羽与亚父谋杀高祖，使项庄拔剑起舞。
现代文：高祖去向项羽谢罪，项羽和范增密谋要杀高祖，就叫项庄拔剑起舞。
English: Gaozu went to Xiang Yu to apologize. Xiang Yu and Fan Zeng plotted to kill Gaozu, so they asked Xiang Zhuang to draw his sword and dance.

古文：项伯知之，因与项庄俱起。
现代文：项伯知道这事，于是跟项庄一同舞剑。
English: Xiang Bo knew this, so he danced with Xiang Zhuang.

古文：每剑加高祖之上，项伯辄以身覆高祖之身，剑遂不得下，杀势不得成。
现代文：每逢项庄的剑要刺向高祖的身上，项伯总用自己的身体遮往高祖的身子，项庄的剑始终不能下手，杀高祖机会无法得到。
English: Whenever Xiangzhuang's sword wanted to stab Gaozu's body, Xiangbo always used his own body to cover Gaozu's body. Xiangzhuang's sword could not be used, and the opportunity to kill Gaozu could not be obtained.

古文：会有张良、樊哙之救，卒得免脱，遂王天下。
现代文：以后长大，在酒店媪、妇又看见有云气的神怪现象。
English: Later, when he grew up, he and his wife saw a strange cloud-like phenomenon in a hotel.

古文：初妊身有蛟龙之神；既生，酒舍见云气之怪；夜行斩蛇，蛇妪悲哭；始皇、吕后，望见光气；项羽谋杀，项伯为蔽，谋遂不成，遭得良、哙，盖富贵之验，气见而物应、人助辅援也。
现代文：夜间去手斩大蛇，蛇妪悲伤痛哭。秦始皇与吕后看见神光云气。项羽要密谋杀害，项伯为他遮蔽，密谋始终不能成功，又遇上张良、樊哙来救。这大概是富贵的证明，云气出现而事情应和，又有来帮助、辅佐和救援。
English: In the night, he went to cut the snake with his hand, and the snake wept bitterly with grief. Emperor Qin and Empress Lu saw the divine light and cloud. Xiang Yu wanted to conspire to kill, Xiang Bo covered for him, but the conspiracy was never successful, and he met Zhang Liang and Zhai to rescue him. This is probably a proof of wealth. When the cloud appeared, things were harmonious, and they helped, assisted and rescued.

古文：窦太后弟名曰广国，年四五岁，家贫，为人所掠卖。其家不知其所在。
现代文：窦太后的弟弟名叫广国，四五岁的时候，因家里贫穷，被人所拐卖，他家里不知道他在什么地方。
English: The Dowager Dowager Dou's younger brother was named Guang Guo. When he was four or five years old, he was kidnapped and sold because his family was poor. His family did not know where he was.

古文：传卖十余家。至宜阳，为其主人入山作炭。
现代文：转卖十多家之后，到了宜阳，为其主人进山烧炭。
English: After reselling more than a dozen, he arrived in Yiyang and went into the mountains to burn charcoal for his master.

古文：暮寒，卧炭下百余人，炭崩尽压死，广国独得脱。
现代文：晚上冷，睡在炭下，炭垮下来一百多人完全被压死，唯独广国得逃脱。
English: Cold at night, sleeping under the coals, more than a hundred people were completely crushed to death when the coals collapsed. Only Guang Guo was able to escape.

古文：自卜数日当为侯，从其家之长安，闻窦皇后新立，家在清河观津，乃上书自陈。
现代文：自己卜算要不了多久该封为侯。就从他主人家去长安，听说新立了窦皇后，她家原在清河观津，于是上书自己陈述情况。
English: He thought that it would not take long for Dou to be enthroned, so he went to Chang'an from his master's home. He heard that Dou Quen was newly established, and her home was originally in Qinghe Guanzin, so he submitted a letter to report the situation.

古文：窦皇后言於景帝，召见问其故，果是，乃厚赐之。
现代文：窦皇后对文帝说了这事，召见问他往事，果然说得对，就丰厚地赏赐了他。
English: Empress Dou told Emperor Wen about this, summoned him to ask him about the past, and when he was right, she rewarded him handsomely.

古文：景帝立，拜广国为章武侯。
现代文：景帝即位，授广国为章武侯。
English: Emperor Jing ascended the throne and granted Guanggu to Zhangwu.

古文：夫积炭崩，百余人皆死，广国独脱，命当富贵，非徒得活，又封为侯。
现代文：堆积的炭垮下来，一百多人都压死了，广国一个独能逃脱，他命该富贵，不光得活，还被封为侯。
English: The pile of coal collapsed and more than a hundred people were crushed to death. Guanggu was the only one who could escape. He deserved to be rich, not only to live, but also to be knighted.

古文：虞子大，陈留东莞人也。
现代文：虞子大是陈留东昏人，他出生的时间在夜晚。
English: Yu Zida was born in the evening.

古文：其生时以夜，适免母身，母见其上若一匹练状，经上天。
现代文：刚从母体分娩下来，其母看见他身上像一匹光洁的白绢样，那光亮径直冲上天。
English: When he had just been born, his mother saw that his body was like a shining egret, and the light went straight up to heaven.

古文：明以问人，人皆曰： 吉，贵。 
现代文：天亮后以此问人，人们都说： 吉祥，富贵。 
English: If you ask people about it after dawn, they will all say, "It's auspicious, it's rich and valuable."

古文：气与天通，长大仕宦，位至司徒公。
现代文：他气与天相通，长大做官，官位直到司徒公。
English: He had a knack for communicating with the heavens, and he grew up to become an official, rising to the official rank of Stogong.

古文：广文伯河东蒲坂人也，其生亦以夜半时，适生，有人从门呼其父名。
现代文：广文伯是河东蒲坂人，他出生也在半夜。刚出生，有人从门外喊他父亲的名字。
English: Guang Wenbo was born in the middle of the night. When he was born, someone called his father's name from outside the door.

古文：父出应之，不见人，有一木杖植其门侧，好善异於众，其父持杖入门以示人，人占曰： 吉 。
现代文：他父亲出去答应，不见人，只见一根木杖立在他的门边，木杖质好形美与众不同。他父亲拿着木杖进门来把它给人看，有人推测说： 吉利 。
English: His father went out to agree, but saw no one, only a wooden cane standing by his door. The cane was of good quality and shape, and was different from the others. His father took the wooden cane into the door to show it to the people, and some people speculated: "Good luck."

古文：文伯长大学宦，位至广汉太守。
现代文：文伯长大学做官，官做到广汉太守。
English: Wenbo Chang University officials, officials to do Guanghan Taishou.

古文：文伯当富贵，故父得赐杖，杖当子力矣。
现代文：文伯该富贵，所以他父亲能得赐予木杖，以木杖预示他会得力于儿子。
English: Wenbo should be rich and noble, so his father could be given a wooden cane, with the wooden cane foreshadowing that he would be able to help his son.

古文：光武帝建平元年十二月甲子生於济阳宫後殿第二内中，皇考为济阳令，时夜无火，室内自明。
现代文：汉光武帝，建平元年十二月初六在济阳宫后殿第二间屋里出生。他死去父亲当时是济阳县令。这晚没有灯火，室内却自然明亮。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu was born on the 6th day of the 12th month of the first year of Jianping in the second room of the back hall of Jiyang Palace. His deceased father was the Jiyang County Governor at the time. There were no lights on this night, but the room was naturally bright.

古文：皇考怪之，即召功曹吏充兰，使出问卜工。
现代文：他死去的父亲感到奇怪，立即召来功曹史充兰，派他去问会占卜的人。
English: His dead father was puzzled and immediately summoned Gong Cao Shicheng Lan and sent him to ask the fortuneteller.

古文：兰与马下卒苏永俱之卜王长孙所。
现代文：充兰跟马下率苏永一起去卜人王长孙的住所。
English: Cheng Lan went to the residence of Bu Ren Wang's eldest grandson with Ma Xiao and Su Yong.

古文：长孙卜，谓永、兰曰： 此吉事也。毋多言。 
现代文：王长孙卜卦后，对苏永和充兰说： 这是件吉利的事情，不用多说了。 
English: After doing some divination, Wang Changsun said to Su Yong and Cheng Lan: This is a lucky thing, there is no need to say more.

古文：是岁，有禾生景天中，三本一茎九穗，长於禾一二尺，盖嘉禾也。
现代文：这年，在房前栽景天的地方有小米长出来，共三株，每株一根茎九个穗，比一般小米要长一二尺，真是好小米。
English: This year, millet sprouted at the place where Jingten was planted in front of the house. There were a total of three plants, and each stem had nine spikes. It was a foot or two longer than ordinary millet, and it was really good millet.

古文：元帝之初，有凤凰下济阳宫，故今济阳宫有凤凰庐。
现代文：汉哀帝初年，有凤凰飞到济阳宫，所以到今天济阳宫还有凤凰庐。
English: In the first year of Emperor Han's reign, a phoenix flew to Jiyang Palace, so there is still a phoenix cocoon in Jiyang Palace today.

古文：始与李父等俱起，到柴界中，遇贼兵，惶惑走济阳旧庐。
现代文：光武帝开始和李通等一道起兵，到了柴界，碰到王莽的军队，感觉恐惧，惊慌逃回济阳原来的小屋。
English: Emperor Guangwu began to raise an army with Li Tong and others. When he arrived at Chaiye, he encountered Wang Mang's army, felt fear, panicked and fled back to the original hut in Jiyang.

古文：比到，见光若火，正赤，在旧庐道南，光耀憧憧上属天，有顷，不见。
现代文：等到那里，看见光芒像火烧得正红，在原来小屋靠路的南面，光芒闪烁得直上天，可是一会儿就不见了。
English: When I got there, I saw a bright red light, like a fire, on the south side of the road where the original hut was. The light flashed up into the sky, but it was gone in an instant.

古文：王莽时，谒者苏伯阿能望气，使过舂陵，城郭郁郁葱葱。
现代文：王莽的时候，谒者苏伯阿能望云气测吉凶，被派出差经过舂陵，看见外城的草木长得郁郁葱葱气势旺盛。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, Su Boa, the eunuch, was able to look at the clouds to measure good and bad luck. He was sent on a journey through Fuling and saw that the vegetation outside the city was lush and vigorous.

古文：及光武到河北，与伯阿见，问曰： 卿前过舂陵，何用知其气佳也？ 
现代文：等光武帝到黄河以北，跟苏伯阿见面时，便问道： 你前次经过舂陵，根据什么知道那里的气象好呢？ 
English: When Emperor Guangwu came to the north of the Yellow River to meet Suba, he asked: The last time you passed through Fuling, how did you know that the weather there was good?

古文：伯阿对曰： 见其郁郁葱葱耳。 
现代文：苏伯阿回答说： 看见那里郁郁葱葱罢了 。
English: Su Boa replied, "I just saw that it was lush there."

古文：盖天命当兴，圣王当出，前後气验，照察明著。
现代文：大概天命当兴起，圣王该出现，前前后后总有气象应验得明明白白。
English: Presumably, when the heavenly destiny arises, the holy king should appear, and there is always a meteorological fulfillment before and after.

古文：继体守文，因据前基，禀天光气，验不足言。创业龙兴，由微贱起於颠沛；若高祖、光武者，曷尝无天人神怪光显之验乎！
现代文：那继承帝位，奉行传统典章制度，凭借以前父兄基业，禀受天气的，其应验的事就不多说了，创立王业，像汉高祖、汉光武帝那样由低贱出身在战乱中兴起的人，何尝没有天、人、神、怪、光显示的应验呢！
English: For those who inherit the imperial throne, follow the traditional award system, rely on the previous paternal and paternal inheritance, and are affected by the weather, there is not much to say about their fulfillment, the creation of royal inheritance, and those who rise from humble origins in the midst of war, like Han Gao Zu and Han Guangwu Emperor, why do they not have the fulfillment of heaven, man, god, monster, and light display?

