古文：王守仁王守仁，字伯安，余姚人。
现代文：王守仁，字伯安，余姚人。
English: Wang Shouren, Zi Bo'an, Yu Yao Ren.

古文：父华，字德辉，成化十七年进士第一。
现代文：他的父亲王华，字德辉，成化十七年考中进士第一名。
English: His father, Wang Hua, alias Dehui, won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination in Chenghua.

古文：授修撰。
现代文：授编修。
English: The awarding of the post is a self-assessment.

古文：弘治中，累官学士、少詹事。
现代文：弘治中，逐渐做到学士、少詹事。
English: During his studies in Hongzhi, he gradually achieved a bachelor's degree and became a minor official.

古文：华有器度，在讲幄最久，孝宗甚眷之。
现代文：王华很有度量和才能，在讲幄时间最长，孝宗很眷恋他。
English: Wang Hua is very meticulous and talented. He speaks the longest, and Xiaozong is very attached to him.

古文：李广贵幸，华讲《大学衍义》，至唐李辅国与张后表里用事，指陈甚切。
现代文：李广受世宗宠爱时，王华讲解《大学衍义》，说到唐代李辅国与张皇后内外勾结所作所为，陈述得很切直。
English: When Li Guang was favored by Shizong, Wang Hua explained the "University Derivation" and said that the behavior of the Tang Dynasty Li Shuo Guo and the Queen Zhang colluded inside and outside. The statement was very straightforward.

古文：帝命中官赐食劳焉。
现代文：孝宗让宦官送食品慰劳他。
English: Xiaozong asked the eunuch to send food to comfort him.

古文：正德初，进礼部左侍郎。
现代文：正德初，升礼部左侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the Zhengde era, he was the left-hand attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：以守仁忤刘瑾，出为南京吏部尚书，坐事罢。
现代文：因为冲撞刘瑾，外放为南京吏部尚书，因为别的事未成此行。
English: Because of the collision with Liu Wei, he was banished to Nanjing as the official of the Ministry of Public Security, and because of other things, this trip did not happen.

古文：旋以《会典》小误，降右侍郎。
现代文：不久因为《会典》有小的错误，降职为右侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was demoted to the position of Right Attendant because of a small error in the "Charter."

古文：瑾败，乃复故，无何卒。
现代文：刘瑾败亡，才官复原职，没有多久就死掉了。
English: Liu Xuan was defeated and died not long after being reinstated as an official.

古文：华性孝，母岑年逾百岁卒。
现代文：王华为人孝顺，他的母亲岑氏活过一百岁才死。
English: Wang Hua was a dutiful person. His mother, Zou Shi, lived to be over a hundred years old before she died.

古文：华已年七十余，犹寝苫蔬食，士论多之。
现代文：王华当时已经七十多岁了，守丧期间还睡在草垫上，吃素食，因此士人们每每称赞他。
English: Wang Hua was more than 70 years old at that time. During the mourning period, he slept on a straw mat and ate vegetarian food, so the scholars praised him.

古文：守仁娠十四月而生。
现代文：守仁在母胎中怀了十四个月才出生。
English: Morihito was born after fourteen months of pregnancy.

古文：祖母梦神人自云中送儿下，因名云。
现代文：他的奶奶梦见神仙从云彩中间送婴儿下来，所以给孙子取名叫云。
English: His grandmother dreamed that a fairy was sending a baby down from the middle of the clouds, so she named her grandson Yun.

古文：五岁不能言，异人拊之，更名守仁，乃言。
现代文：他五岁还不会说话，一个有道术的人抚摸了他，改名守仁，才会说话。
English: When he was five years old, he could not speak. A Taoist touched him and changed his name to Shujin so that he could speak.

古文：年十五，访客居庸、山海关。
现代文：十五岁时，曾到居庸关、山海关附近访问客人。
English: At the age of fifteen, he visited guests near Juyongguan and Shanhaiguan.

古文：时阑出塞，纵观山川形胜。
现代文：经常混在人群中走出边塞，放眼观览山川地形。
English: He often mingles with the crowd to get out of the border fortress and take a closer look at the mountain and river terrain.

古文：弱冠举乡试，学大进。
现代文：年才加冠，乡试中举，学业大有长进。
English: He won the crown only in his junior year, passed the junior high school entrance examination, and made great progress in his studies.

古文：顾益好言兵，且善射。
现代文：但他越来越喜欢谈论军事，并且很会射箭。
English: But he increasingly likes to talk about the military and is a keen archer.

古文：登弘治十二年进士。
现代文：弘治十二年考中进士。
English: He passed the 12th-year entrance examination for junior high school.

古文：使治前威宁伯王越葬，还而朝议方急西北边，守仁条八事上之。
现代文：朝廷命他为威宁伯王越办理丧葬事，回来后朝廷正在议论并为西北的边务着急呢，守仁便条陈八事献给孝宗。
English: The imperial court ordered him to handle the funeral of Wening Bo Wang Yue. When he returned, the imperial court was discussing and worrying about the border affairs in the northwest. Shuren wrote a note of eight things dedicated to Xiaozong.

古文：寻授刑部主事。
现代文：不久授官刑部主事。
English: He was soon promoted to head of the criminal justice department.

古文：决囚江北，引疾归。
现代文：在江北审讯犯人，称病返乡。
English: He interrogated prisoners in Jiangbei and returned home saying he was ill.

古文：起补兵部主事。
现代文：复职后补任兵部主事。
English: After his reinstatement, he was appointed as the head of the military department.

古文：正德元年冬，刘瑾逮南京给事中御史戴铣等二十余人。
现代文：正德元年冬天，刘瑾逮捕南京中御史戴铣等二十多人。
English: In the winter of the first year of Zhengde, Liu Ye arrested more than twenty people including Nanjing Zhong Mi Shi Dai Ye.

古文：守仁抗章救，瑾怒，廷杖四十，谪贵州龙场驿丞。
现代文：守仁不顾一切递上奏章企图解救，刘瑾发怒了，把他杖打四十六棍，贬为贵州龙场驿丞。
English: Defying all odds, Shuren handed over the musical score in an attempt to save him, but Liu Yao became angry and beat him with forty-six sticks, demoting him to the status of Guizhou Longchang Jiezheng.

古文：龙场万山丛薄，苗、僚杂居。
现代文：龙场一带群山连绵，苗族、僚族人杂居。
English: The mountains around Longchang are continuous, and the Miao and other ethnic groups live together.

古文：守仁因俗化导，夷人喜，相率伐木为屋，以栖守仁。
现代文：守仁根据他们的风俗加以教化、领导，这些少数民族人民很高兴，大家一起砍伐树木建造房子给守仁居住。
English: These ethnic minority people were very happy that Shuren had educated and led them according to their customs. They all cut down trees together to build a house for him to live in.

古文：瑾诛，量移庐陵知县。
现代文：刘瑾伏诛以后，经考察改任庐陵知事。
English: After Liu Xiufu died, he was appointed governor of Fuling after an inspection.

古文：入觐，迁南京刑部主事，吏部尚书杨一清改之验封。
现代文：入京进见武宗后，升任南京刑部主事，吏部尚书杨一清却让他改做验封官。
English: After he entered Beijing and met with Emperor Wu, he was promoted to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department. However, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Yang Yiching, asked him to become a sealing inspector.

古文：屡迁考功郎中，擢南京太仆少卿，就迁鸿胪卿。
现代文：后来几次提升，为考功郎中，南京太仆少卿、鸿胪卿。
English: Later, he was promoted several times, and Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing and Hongyuqing were promoted as meritorious scholars.

古文：兵部尚书王琼素奇守仁才。
现代文：兵部尚书王琼一向以为守仁是个奇才。
English: Hyobusho Wang Qiong always thought that Morihito was a genius.

古文：十一年八月擢右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：十一年八月因为他的推荐，守仁升右佥都御史，巡抚南、赣。
English: In August of the eleventh year, because of his recommendation, Shuren was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the governor of the capital, the governor of the south, and the governor of the north.

古文：当是时，南中盗贼蜂起。
现代文：当时，南中地带盗贼蜂拥而起。
English: At the time, thieves were swarming in the south-central region.

古文：谢志山据横水、左溪、桶冈，池仲容据浰头，皆称王，与大庾陈曰能、乐昌高快马、郴州龚福全等攻剽府县。
现代文：谢志山占领横水、左溪、桶冈，池仲容占领氵利头，都自封为王，与大庾的陈曰能、乐昌的高快马、郴州的龚福全等互相呼应，进占、剽掠各处府县。
English: Xie Zhishan occupied Hengshui, Zuoxi, and Deguang, and Chizhong Rong occupied Qiliqiao, all of which were self-appointed kings. They echoed each other with Chen Zhaeneng of Daxi, Gaokang Ma of Lechang, and Zifu Quan of Ganzhou, and occupied and plundered all prefectures.

古文：而福建大帽山贼詹师富等又起。
现代文：而福建大帽山的叛军詹师富等又起兵。
English: But the rebels of Fujian's Taihu Mountain, such as Zhan Shifu, also raised an army.

古文：前巡抚文森托疾避去。
现代文：前任巡抚文森托病去职。
English: The previous inspector general, Vincento, left the post due to illness.

古文：志山合乐昌贼掠大庾，攻南康、赣州，赣县主簿吴玭战死。
现代文：谢志山联合乐昌的叛军夺取大庾，进攻南康、赣州，赣县主簿吴王比在战斗中死去。
English: Xie Zhishan allied with rebels from Lechang to seize Dalat and attack Nankang and Zhangzhou. Wu Wangbi, the chief official of Zhang County, died in the battle.

古文：守仁至，知左右多贼耳目，乃呼老黠隶诘之。隶战栗不敢隐，因贳其罪，令填贼，贼动静无勿知。
现代文：守仁到任后，知道身边有不少人是叛军的耳目，于是传呼年老而狡黠的仆役加以审问，仆役浑身哆嗦不敢隐瞒，如实坦白，守仁就此赦免了他们的罪过，让他们侦探叛军的情报，于是对于叛军的动静他无所不知。
English: After taking office, Shujin knew that many people around him were the eyes and ears of the rebels, so he summoned an old and cunning servant to interrogate him. The servant did not dare to hide, and confessed truthfully. Shujin thus pardoned their sins and let them detect the information of the rebels, so he knew everything about the movements of the rebels.

古文：于是檄福建、广东会兵，先讨大帽山贼。
现代文：于是他传令福建、广东会兵一处，首先讨伐大帽山的叛军。
English: Therefore, he ordered the soldiers of Fujian and Guangdong to gather in one place, and to first fight the rebels on Mount Taihu.

古文：明年正月，督副使杨璋等破贼长富村，逼之象湖山，指挥覃桓、县丞纪镛战死。
现代文：二年正月，督副使杨璋等在长富村打败叛军，进一步追到象湖山，指挥覃桓、县丞纪镛战死。
English: In the first month of the second year, the governor and vice-envoy Yang Jie and others defeated the rebels in Changfu Village, and further pursued them to Xianghu Mountain. The commander Zou Kuan and the county magistrate Jizhe were killed in the battle.

古文：守仁亲率锐卒屯上杭。佯退师，出不意捣之，连破四十余寨，俘斩七千有奇，指挥王铠等擒师富。
现代文：守仁亲自率领精锐部队驻扎在上杭，又佯装撤兵，出其不意直捣敌人营寨，俘虏、杀伤七千多敌人。指挥王铠等活捉了詹师富。
English: Shuren personally led the elite troops stationed in Shanghang, and also pretended to withdraw troops, unexpectedly directly attacked the enemy camp, captured and killed more than seven thousand enemies. Commander Wang Qian and others captured Zhan Shifu alive.

古文：疏言权轻，无以令将士，请给旗牌，提督军务，得便宜从事。
现代文：守仁接着给武宗上书，说自己权力太小，没办法指挥将士，请给他旗牌，让他管辖军务，享有见机行事的权力。
English: Morihito then sent a letter to Takemune, saying that his power was too small to command the generals. Please give him a flag, let him be in charge of military affairs, and enjoy the power to act at his own discretion.

古文：尚书王琼奏从其请。
现代文：兵部尚书王琼奏请听从了他的请求。
English: Please listen to his request, Hyobu Shoshu Wang Qiongso.

古文：乃更兵制：二十五人为伍，伍有小甲；二伍为队，队有总甲；四队为哨，哨有长，协哨二佐之；二哨为营，营有官，参谋二佐之；三营为阵，阵有偏将；二阵为军，军有副将。
现代文：于是守仁改革部队编制：二十五个人为一伍，伍有小甲；两伍为一队，队有总甲；四队为一哨，哨有哨长，协哨两人助理；两哨为一营，营有营官，参谋两人助理；三营为一阵，阵有偏将；两阵为一军，军有副将。
English: As a result, Shouren reformed the composition of the troops: twenty-five people for a troop, the troop has a small A; two troops for a team, the team has a total A; four teams for a post, the post has a postmaster, the co-postmaster has two assistants; two posts for a battalion, the battalion has a battalion officer, the staff officer has two assistants; three battalions for a battalion, the battalion has a general; two battalions for an army, the army has a vice-general.

古文：皆临事委，不命于朝；副将以下，得递相罚治。
现代文：都是临有行动时委命，而不是由朝廷任命；自副将以下，可以层层加以惩罚、治罪。
English: They are all appointed by the committee when there is an action, rather than appointed by the imperial court; from the vice-commander on down, they can be punished and punished.

古文：其年七月进兵大庾。
现代文：那年七月向大庾进军。
English: In July of that year, they marched to Daxu.

古文：志山乘间急攻南安，知府季斅击败之。
现代文：谢志山乘机向南安发动猛攻，知府季学支打败了他。
English: Xie Zhishan took the opportunity to launch a fierce attack on Nan'an, and the prefectural government defeated him.

古文：副使杨璋等亦生絷曰能以归。遂议讨横水、左溪。
现代文：副使杨璋等也活捉了陈曰能，凯旋归来，于是开始计议讨伐横水、左溪的叛军。
English: Vice-envoy Yang Xuan and others also captured Chen Zhianeng alive and returned triumphantly, so they began to plan to fight the rebels in Hengshui and Zuoxi.

古文：十月，都指挥许清、赣州知府邢珣、宁都知县王天与各一军会横水，斅及守备郏文、汀州知府唐淳、县丞舒富各一军会左溪，吉安知府伍文定、程乡知县张戩遏其奔轶。
现代文：十月，由都指挥许清、赣州知府刑王旬、宁都知县王天与各率一军会师横水，季学支及守备郏文、汀州知府唐淳，县丞舒富各率一军会师左溪，吉安知府伍文定，程乡知县张戬扼守险要防范叛军逃跑。
English: In October, Xu Qing, the commander of the capital, Wang Shun, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Wang Tian, the governor of Ningdu County, each led an army to join the division of Hengshui, Ji Xue Branch and the defense of Jiwen, Tang Chun, the governor of Dingzhou, and Shufu, the county commander, each led an army to join the division of Zuoxi, Wu Wending, the governor of Ji'an, and Zhang Ye, the governor of Chengxiang County, to prevent the rebels from escaping.

古文：守仁自驻南康，去横水三十里，先遣四百人伏贼巢左右，进军逼之。
现代文：守仁自己驻军南康，离横水三十里，先派兵四百人埋伏在敌军营地左右，然后进军攻打。
English: Shuren himself stationed his army in Nankang, 30 miles from Hengshui. He first sent 400 soldiers to lie in ambush around the enemy camp, and then marched in to attack.

古文：贼方迎战，两山举帜。贼大惊，谓官军已尽犁其巢，遂溃。
现代文：叛军正在迎战，两边山上的伏兵举起了官兵的旗帜，叛军一见大为吃惊，以为官军已经攻占了自己的营地，因此溃不成军。
English: The rebels were facing the battle, and the ambushes on the mountains on both sides raised the flags of the officers and soldiers. At first glance, the rebels were very surprised, thinking that the government army had captured their camp, so they could not form an army.

古文：乘胜克横水，志山及其党萧贵模等皆走桶冈。左溪亦破。
现代文：官兵乘胜攻克横水，谢志山及其党羽萧贵模等都逃到桶冈去了，左溪也被官兵占领。
English: The officers and soldiers took advantage of the victory to conquer Hengshui. Xie Zhishan and his henchmen Xiao Guimou and others fled to Bucket Hill. Zuo Creek was also occupied by officers and soldiers.

古文：守仁以桶冈险固，移营近地，谕以祸福。
现代文：守仁因为桶冈地势险固，易守难攻，所以把兵营安置在接近平地的地方，用或战或降或祸或福的道理晓谕敌人。
English: Because of the perilous and difficult terrain of Bucket Hill, Shuren placed the barracks close to the flat land and told the enemy the truth of battle, defeat, disaster or blessing.

古文：贼首蓝廷凤等方震恐，见使至大喜，期仲冬朔降，而珣、文定已冒雨夺险入。
现代文：叛军的首领蓝廷凤等正在惶恐不安之中，见到守仁的信使很高兴，约定十一月初一投降，可是刑王旬、伍文定的官兵已经冒着大雨，夺险而入。
English: The leader of the rebel army, Lan Tingfeng, and others were in a state of panic and anxiety. They were happy to see the messenger of Shou Ren and agreed to surrender on the first day of November. However, the officers and soldiers of Wang Jun and Wu Wenzhong had already braved the heavy rain and took the risk.

古文：贼阻水阵，珣直前搏战，文定与戩自右出，贼仓卒败走，遇淳兵又败。
现代文：叛军碍于水阵，无以施展，刑王旬一直向前，英勇奋战，伍文定和张戬又从右边出击，叛军措手不及，战败而逃，路上撞着唐淳的官兵，又被打败。
English: The rebels were hindered by the water line and had nothing to do. Chihwangjun marched forward and fought bravely. Wu Wending and Zhang Ye attacked from the right. The rebels were caught off guard, defeated and fled. On the way, they ran into Tang Chun's officers and soldiers and were defeated again.

古文：诸军破桶冈，志山、贵模、廷凤面缚降。
现代文：各路官兵攻占了桶冈，谢志山、萧贵模、蓝廷凤等叛军首领把自己捆绑了来到守仁帐下请求投降。
English: The officers and soldiers from all directions occupied the bucket hill, and rebel leaders such as Xie Zhishan, Xiao Guimou, Lan Tingfeng and others tied themselves up and came to Shuren's account to request surrender.

古文：凡破巢八十有四，俘斩六千有奇。
现代文：总计此次战役，攻占叛军营地八十四个，俘虏、斩首六千余人。
English: In total, during this battle, eighty-four rebel camps were captured, and more than six thousand people were captured or beheaded.

古文：时湖广巡抚秦金亦破福全。其党千人突至，诸将擒斩之。
现代文：当时，湖广巡抚秦金也打败了龚福全，龚军部属约一千人逃窜到此，诸将立即擒拿了他们，并予以斩首。
English: At that time, the governor of Hukang, Qin Jin, also defeated Fu Fuquan. About a thousand of Fu Fuquan's subordinates fled to this place. The generals immediately captured them and beheaded them.

古文：乃设崇义县于横水，控诸瑶。
现代文：于是在横水设立崇义县，控制瑶民各部。
English: As a result, Chongyi County was established in Hengshui to control all the provinces.

古文：还至赣州，议讨浰头贼。
现代文：还师赣州，计划攻打氵利头地方的乱军。
English: He also studied in Bozhou and planned to attack the rebels in Shantou.

古文：初，守仁之平师富也，龙川贼卢珂、郑志高、陈英咸请降。
现代文：当初，守仁平定詹师富的乱军时，龙川的盗贼首领卢珂、郑志高、陈英都自请投降。
English: At first, when the rebel army led by Zhan Shifu was defeated by Shuren, Lu Ke, Zheng Zhigao, and Chen Ying, the leaders of thieves in Longchuan, all voluntarily surrendered.

古文：及征横水，浰头贼将黄金巢亦以五百人降，独仲容未下。
现代文：到征讨横水时，氵利头的盗贼将领黄金巢也领五百人投降，只有池仲容还没有拿下。
English: When he arrived to conquer Hengshui, the head of the thieves, the general of the gold nests, also led five hundred people to surrender, only the middle of the pond has not been won.

古文：横水破，仲容始遣弟仲安来归，而严为战守备。诡言： 珂、志高，仇也，将袭我，故为备。 
现代文：横水败后，池仲容才派他的弟弟池仲安来表示归顺，而又郑重其事地做着战斗或防御的准备，诈称卢珂、郑志高是他的仇敌，将会袭击我部，所以才做些防备。
English: It was only after the crushing defeat that Chizhong Rong sent his younger brother Chizhong An to show his submission, and he made serious preparations for battle or defense, falsely claiming that Lu Ke and Zheng Zhigao were his enemies and would attack our troops, so he made some preparations.

古文：守仁佯杖系珂等，而阴使珂弟集兵待，遂下令散兵。
现代文：守仁假装把卢珂等杖打了一顿，背地里命令卢珂的弟弟集合部队等待战斗，然后下令疏散部队。
English: Shuren pretended to beat Luke and the others with a cane, secretly ordered Luke's brother to gather troops to wait for the battle, and then ordered the evacuation of the troops.

古文：岁首大张灯乐，仲容信且疑。
现代文：新春时节张灯结彩，举行娱乐，池仲容半信半疑。
English: During the Spring Festival, lanterns are lit, entertainment is held, and everyone is half-believing and half-doubting.

古文：守仁赐以节物，诱入谢。
现代文：守仁派人赏他节日物品，引诱他来称谢。
English: Morihito sent someone to reward him with holiday items and lure him to give thanks.

古文：仲容率九十三人营教场，而自以数人入谒。
现代文：池仲容果然带九十三个人下山，驻兵教场上，用几个做陪从进入王守仁军帐中求见。
English: Chi Zhong Rong did indeed take ninety-three people down the mountain, stationed them on the training ground, and used several of them as escorts to enter Wang Shou-Ren's military account to see him.

古文：守仁呵之曰： 若皆吾民，屯于外，疑我乎？ 
现代文：守仁指责他说 ：你们都是我的百姓，却屯兵于外面，难道是怀疑我不成？ 
English: Shorin accused him: "You are all my people, but you have stationed troops outside. Is it because you suspect me?

古文：悉引入祥符宫，厚饮食之。
现代文：接着就把他们全部带进祥符宫中，用丰美的饮食招待。
English: He then took them all to the Xiangfu Palace and treated them to a sumptuous meal.

古文：贼大喜过望，益自安。
现代文：叛军于是大喜过望，越发感到安全。
English: The rebels were overjoyed and felt increasingly safe.

古文：守仁留仲容观灯乐。
现代文：守仁把池仲容挽留下来观灯行乐。
English: Morihito kept Ike no Nakanori to watch the lanterns and have fun.

古文：正月三日大享，伏甲士于门，诸贼入，以次悉擒戮之。
现代文：正月初三举办盛大宴席，在门里头埋伏了刀斧手，乱军将领进来后，挨个儿一一加以擒拿、杀戮。
English: A grand banquet was held on the third day of the first month of the year. Swordsmen lay in wait at the door. After the rebel generals came in, they were captured and killed one by one.

古文：自将抵贼巢，连破上、中、下三浰，斩馘二千有奇。
现代文：接着亲率大军攻打叛军巢穴，接连打入上、中、下三氵利，杀敌二千有余。
English: Next, he led a large army to attack the rebels' lair, and successively broke into the upper, middle and lower three ridges, killing more than two thousand enemies.

古文：余贼奔九连山。山横亘数百里，陡绝不可攻。
现代文：余下的叛兵逃奔九连山，山势绵延数百里，地形陡峭，无法攻打。
English: The remaining rebels fled to Mount Jiu Lian, which stretches for hundreds of miles and is too steep to attack.

古文：乃简壮士七百人衣贼衣，奔崖下，贼招之上。
现代文：守仁于是简选七百名壮士，穿着叛军的服装，跑到山崖下边呼叫，叛军就招呼他们上去了。
English: Shorin then selected seven hundred strong men, dressed in rebel clothing, ran to the bottom of the cliff and called out, and the rebels beckoned them up.

古文：官军进攻，内外合击，擒斩无遗。
现代文：官兵又从外边攻打，内外呼应、夹击，叛军被擒拿、斩杀，无所遗留了。
English: The officers and soldiers also attacked from the outside, echoed and clamped inside and outside, and the rebels were captured and killed, leaving nothing behind.

古文：乃于下浰立和平县，置戍而归。
现代文：于是在下氵利设立和平县，安置部队防守，班师回朝。
English: Therefore, Heping County was established in Lower Qili, the troops were placed in defensive positions, and the division returned to the imperial court.

古文：自是境内大定。
现代文：从此国境之内，大为安定了。
English: Since then, the situation within the country's borders has become much more stable.

古文：初，朝议贼势强，发广东、湖广兵合剿。
现代文：当初，朝廷认为盗贼势力强大，所以发动广东、湖广的兵力联合进剿。
English: At first, the imperial court thought that the thieves were powerful, so they sent troops from Guangdong and Hukang to jointly invade.

古文：守仁上疏止之，不及。桶冈既灭，湖广兵始至。及平浰头，广东尚未承檄。
现代文：守仁递奏章上去制止这样做，但奏章没能到京，平定桶冈后，湖广的部队才到位；到平定氵利头时为止，广东部队还没有接到命令。
English: Shuren sent a military order to stop this, but the order did not reach Beijing. After pacifying Kegang, the troops of Hukang were in place; by the time of pacifying Shili, the Guangdong troops had not received the order.

古文：守仁所将皆文吏及偏裨小校，平数十年巨寇，远近惊为神。
现代文：守仁所带领的都是些文职官吏和偏裨军校，但他平定了几十年形成的强大叛军，所以远近人士大为惊奇，奉他为神明。
English: The people led by Shuren were all civil servants and military cadets, but he quelled a powerful rebel army that had formed over decades, so people near and far were very surprised and worshipped him as a god.

古文：进右副都御史，予世袭锦衣卫百户，再进副千户。
现代文：朝廷升他的官为右副都御史，给他世袭锦衣卫百户的封赏，后又增至副千户。
English: The Imperial Court promoted him to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, and gave him the award of 100 hereditary brocade clothing guards, which was later increased to 1,000.

古文：十四年六月，命勘福建叛军。行至丰城而宁王宸濠反，知县顾佖以告。
现代文：正德十四年六月受命前往福建平定军队的反叛，走到丰城，宁王朱宸濠造反，知县顾亻必把这事报告给王守仁。
English: In June of the 14th year of Zhengde, he was ordered to go to Fujian to quell the rebellion of the army, and went to Fengcheng. Ning Wang Zhu Xi rebelled, and Zhixian Gu Xi had to report this to Wang Shouren.

古文：守仁急趋吉安，与伍文定征调兵食，治器械舟楫，传檄暴宸濠罪，俾守令各率吏士勤王。
现代文：守仁立即进兵吉安，和伍文定一道征召兵马、调运粮草，准备战争使用的器械和船只，并发布檄文揭露宸濠的罪行，要州县官吏各自率领下属和士绅起兵勤王。
English: Shuren immediately marched into Ji'an, and together with Wu Wenzing, he conscripted soldiers and horses, transported grain and grass, prepared equipment and ships for use in war, and issued a proclamation to expose the crimes of the warlords. He asked the officials of the county to lead their subordinates and gentry to serve the king.

古文：都御史王懋中，编修邹守益，副使罗循、罗钦德，郎中曾直，御史张鳌山、周鲁，评事罗侨，同知郭祥鹏，进士郭持平，降谪驿丞王思、李中，咸赴守仁军。
现代文：都御史王懋中，编修邹守益，副使罗循、罗钦德，郎中曾直，御史张鳌山、周鲁，评事罗侨，同知郭祥鹏，进士郭持平，贬官驿丞王思、李中，都参加了王守仁的部队。
English: Wang Shuzhong, the editor-in-chief, Wang Shouyi, the vice-envoys Luo Xun and Luo Chingde, the vassals Zeng Zenao, the vassals Zhang Shushan and Zhou Lu, the commentator Luo Guoqiao, the comrade Guo Xiangpeng, the enlisted soldier Guo Jiping, the demoted officer Wang Si and Li Zhong, all participated in Wang Shuren's troops.

古文：御史谢源、伍希儒自广东还，守仁留之纪功。
现代文：御史谢源、伍希儒从广东还朝路过，守仁留下他们负责记功。
English: Gu Shi Xieyuan and Wu Xiru from Guangdong also passed by in the morning, leaving Shuren to be responsible for recording their achievements.

古文：因集众议曰： 贼若出长江顺流东下，则南都不可保。
现代文：于是召集众人开会，说： 宸濠假如出兵沿长江顺流东下，那么南京就无法防守。
English: So he called a meeting and said: "If we send troops east along the Yangtze River, then Nanjing cannot be defended.

古文：吾欲以计挠之，少迟旬日无患矣。 
现代文：我想用计阻挠他东下，哪怕他迟误十天也就没有什么可怕的了。 
English: I want to use the device to prevent him from going east, even if he is delayed for ten days, there is nothing terrible.

古文：乃多遣间谍，檄府县言： 都督许泰、郤永将边兵，都督刘晖、桂勇将京兵，各四万，水陆并进。
现代文：于是他派出很多间谍，传命府县说： 都督许泰、谷阝永率领边疆的部队，都督刘晖、桂勇率领北京的守军各四万人，水陆并进。
English: So he sent out a lot of spies, and the prefectures were ordered to say: the governor Xu Tai and Gu Ying Yong led the troops in the frontier, and the governor Liu Wei and Gui Yong led the defenders of Beijing, each with 40,000 men, marching on land and sea.

古文：南赣王守仁、湖广秦金、两广杨旦各率所部合十六万，直捣南昌，所至有司缺供者，以军法论。 
现代文：南赣王守仁、湖广秦金、两广杨旦各率领自己的部队，计十六万人，直接攻打南昌，所到地方官吏没有守职的，以军法论罪。 
English: Nanluo Wang Shuren, Hukang Qin Jin, and two Guangyang Dang each led their own troops, totaling 160,000 people, to directly attack Nanchang. Therefore, if local officials did not perform their duties, they would be convicted by military law.

古文：又为蜡书遗伪相李士实、刘养正，叙其归国之诚，令从臾早发兵东下，而纵谍泄之。
现代文：又写了一封蜡封的密信给伪政府的丞相李士实、刘养正，内中说到他们归国的诚心，让他们诱劝宸濠早些发兵东下。然后让间谍人员泄漏信的内容。
English: He also wrote a wax-sealed secret letter to the pseudo-government's prime ministers, Li Shishi and Liu Yaozheng, in which he spoke of their sincerity in returning to the country and asked them to persuade Zou to send troops to the east earlier. Then he asked the spies to leak the contents of the letter.

古文：宸濠果疑。
现代文：宸濠果然心中怀疑。
English: He had doubts in his heart.

古文：与士实、养正谋，则皆劝之疾趋南京即大位，宸濠益大疑。
现代文：和士实、养正商议战事，他们都劝宸濠急速攻战南京，就皇帝位，宸濠这下越发狐疑不定。
English: He discussed the war with Shi Shi and Yao Zheng, and they both advised him to quickly attack Nanjing and take the throne, which made the situation more and more uncertain.

古文：十余日诇知中外兵不至，乃悟守仁绐之。
现代文：十多天后刺探得知中外部队并没来到，才明白是守仁欺骗了他。
English: More than ten days later, the spy learned that the Chinese and foreign troops had not arrived, and only then did he understand that Morihito had deceived him.

古文：七月壬辰朔，留宜春王拱嵒居守，而劫其众六万人，袭下九江、南康，出大江，薄安庆。
现代文：七月初一日留宜春王朱拱木条据守本营，劫持他的部下六万人，袭击、占领九江、南康，然后兵出长江，逼向安庆。
English: On the first day of early July, Zhu Qiangmu, the king of Yichun, stayed behind to guard the main camp, kidnapped 60,000 of his subordinates, attacked and occupied Jiujiang and Nankang, and then the soldiers went out of the Yangtze River and forced them to Anqing.

古文：守仁闻南昌兵少则大喜，趋樟树镇。
现代文：守仁听说南昌兵少就高兴起来，马上进军樟树镇。
English: When Morihito heard that the number of soldiers in Nanchang was small, he was delighted and immediately marched into the town of Banyan Tree.

古文：知府临江戴德孺、袁州徐琏、赣州邢珣，都指挥余恩，通判瑞州胡尧元、童琦、抚州邹琥、安吉谈储，推官王暐、徐文英，知县新淦李美、泰和李楫、万安王冕、宁都王天与，各以兵来会，合八万人，号三十万。
现代文：知府临江戴德孺、袁州徐琏、赣州刑繤，都指挥余恩，通判瑞州胡尧元、童琦，抚州邹琥、安吉谈储，推官王日韦、徐文英，知县新淦李美、泰和李楫、万安王冕、宁都王天兴，各自带兵前来会合，共八万人，号称三十万。
English: The prefectural governors of Linjiang Dedong, Yuanzhou Xu Rong, and Zhangzhou Xing Rong all commanded Yu En, and the judges of Ruizhou Hu Rong Yuan, Tong Rong, Fuzhou Rong Amber, and Anji Rong Zang, and the supervisors of Wang Rong Wei, Xu Wenying, and the prefectural governors of Zhixian Xinyi Li Mei, Taihe Li Rong, Wan'an Wang Guan, and Ningdu Wang Tian Xing, each brought soldiers to the meeting, a total of 80,000 people, known as 300,000 people.

古文：或请救安庆，守仁曰： 不然。
现代文：有人请出兵援助安庆，守仁说： 不能这样。
English: When asked to send troops to aid Anqing, Morihito said, "This is unacceptable.

古文：今九江、南康已为贼守，我越南昌与相持江上，二郡兵绝我后，是腹背受敌也。
现代文：现在九江、南康已被敌军占有，我们越过南昌和敌人在江面上争持，九江、南康两郡兵力断我后路，这样将会腹背两面受敌。
English: Now Jiujiang and Nankang have been occupied by the enemy. We have crossed Nanchang and the enemy is holding out on the river. The forces of Jiujiang and Nankang counties have cut off our rear path. In this way, we will be attacked from both sides.

古文：不如直捣南昌。
现代文：不如我们直接攻打南昌。
English: We might as well attack Nanchang directly.

古文：贼精锐悉出，守备虚。
现代文：敌人的精锐部队全出动了，防御力量虚弱。
English: The enemy's elite troops are all out, and the defenses are weak.

古文：我军新集气锐，攻必破。
现代文：我军刚刚会合，气势正锐，攻打南昌一定能胜。
English: Our army has just met, the momentum is sharp, attacking Nanchang will certainly be able to win.

古文：贼闻南昌破，必解围自救。逆击之湖中，蔑不胜矣。 
现代文：宸濠知道南昌被打下，一定会回师解围，我们迎上去在鄱阳湖中打击他，没有不能取胜的道理。 大家一齐说 好 。
English: Yao knew that Nanchang had been defeated and would certainly return to the division to relieve the siege, so we went to fight him in Poyang Lake. There was no reason why we couldn't win. Everyone said yes.

古文：众曰 善 。己酉次丰城，以文定为前锋，选遣奉新知县刘守绪袭其伏兵。
现代文：七月十八日驻兵丰城，以文定为先锋，先遣奉新知县刘守绪袭击了敌人的伏兵。
English: On July 18th, Fengcheng garrison, with Wen as the vanguard, sent Liu Shousu from Xinchi County to attack the enemy's ambush.

古文：庚戌夜半，文定兵抵广润门，守兵骇散。
现代文：十九日夜半时分，文定的部队进抵广润门，守兵吓得一哄而散。
English: At half past midnight on the 19th day of the month, Wenzing's troops arrived at Guangrun Gate, and the guards were so scared that they scattered.

古文：辛亥黎明，诸军梯縆登，缚拱嵒等，宫人多焚死。
现代文：二十日黎明，各路官兵用云梯、绳索登上城墙，打下南昌，俘缚了拱木条等，宫人大多已被烧死。
English: At dawn on the 20th, officers and soldiers of all ranks used ladders and ropes to climb the city wall, beat down Nanchang, captured the arch strips, etc. Most of the palace people had been burned to death.

古文：军士颇杀掠，守仁戮犯令者十余人，宥胁从，安士民，慰谕宗室，人心乃悦。
现代文：官兵在南昌有不少杀人、抢劫行为，守仁斩了十多个违犯军令的官兵，赦免了从犯人员，并安定南昌士绅和百姓，慰问、劝告宗室遗留，南昌人民才又高兴起来。
English: There were many killings and robberies by officers and soldiers in Nanchang. Shuren beheaded more than ten officers and soldiers who violated military orders, pardoned the accomplices, and stabilized Nanchang's gentry and people. The people of Nanchang were happy again after condolences and advice were left by the family.

古文：居二日，遣文定、珣、琏、德孺各将精兵分道进，而使尧元等设伏。
现代文：过了两天，派文定、刑繤、徐琏、德孺各领精兵分路前进，让尧元等将设下埋伏。
English: After two days, sent Wending, Chingxuan, Xu Rong, De Rong and other elite soldiers to advance separately, so that Xuan Yuan and others would set up an ambush.

古文：宸濠果自安庆还兵。乙卯遇于黄家渡。
现代文：宸濠果然从安庆撤兵而回，二十四日两军相遇于黄家渡。
English: He withdrew from Anqing and returned. On the 24th, the two armies met at Huangjiadu.

古文：文定当其前锋，贼趋利。
现代文：文定的部队抵挡敌人的前锋，宸濠的部队以为好欺迅速进攻。
English: The disciplined troops fend off the enemy's forwards, while the cowardly troops think they can bluff their way to a quick attack.

古文：珣绕出贼背贯其中，文定、恩乘之，琏、德孺张两翼分贼势，尧元等伏发，贼大溃，退保八字脑。
现代文：刑繤部从敌人后面绕出打击其中部队伍，文定、余恩追逐敌人，徐琏、德孺分两翼进攻，分散敌人的力量，尧元等率领的伏兵又发起攻势，敌人大败，退而防守八字脑。
English: The Execution Division circled out from behind the enemy to strike the troops in the middle. Wending and Yu En chased the enemy. Xu Xi and De Xi divided into two wings to attack and disperse the enemy's forces. The ambush led by Xuan Yuan launched an offensive. The enemy was defeated and retreated to defend the Eight-Syllable Brain.

古文：宸濠惧，尽发南康、九江兵。
现代文：宸濠害怕了，发动了南康、九江的全部兵力。
English: He was afraid and mobilized the entire forces of Nankang and Jiujiang.

古文：守仁遣知府抚州陈槐、饶州林城取九江，建昌曾玙、广信周朝佐取南康。
现代文：守仁于是派知府抚州陈槐、饶州林城攻取九江，建昌曾王与、广信周朝佐攻取南康。
English: Shuren then dispatched the governors of Fuzhou, Chen Xi, and Raozhou, Lincheng, to capture Jiujiang, and Jianchang, Zengwang, and Guangxin, Zhou Chaosa, to capture Nankang.

古文：丙辰复战，官军却，守仁斩先却者。诸军殊死战，贼复大败。退保樵舍，联舟为方阵，尽出金宝犒士。
现代文：二十五日又一次战斗，官军退却，守仁把先后退的给杀了，于是各路人马拼死战斗，敌人又一次大败，退保樵舍，把战船连在一起组成方阵，又拿出全部金银财宝犒赏将士。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, there was another battle. The government army retreated, and Shuren killed those who retreated one after another. As a result, all parties fought to the death. The enemy was once again defeated, withdrew from the defense, linked the warships together to form a phalanx, and took out all the gold and silver treasures to reward the soldiers.

古文：明日，宸濠方晨朝其群臣，官军奄至。以小舟载薪，乘风纵火，焚其副舟，妃娄氏以下皆投水死。
现代文：第二天清晨，宸濠正在会见群臣，官军覆压而来，用小船载着柴草，乘着风势放火，烧坏了宸濠坐用的副舰，宸濠的妃子自娄氏以下都投水而死。
English: In the early morning of the next day, Yao was meeting with a group of courtiers, when the government army arrived in force, carrying firewood and grass in small boats and taking advantage of the wind to set fires, which burned down the auxiliary ship used by Yao. Yao's concubines, from Yao's family on down, all drowned and died.

古文：宸濠舟胶浅，仓卒易舟遁，王冕所部兵追执之。
现代文：宸濠的坐船搁浅，仓卒之中换了一条船逃跑，王冕部下的士兵追上去逮住了他。
English: His boat ran aground, and in his haste he changed to another boat to escape. The soldiers of the crown chased after him and caught him.

古文：士实、养正及降贼按察使杨璋等皆就擒。
现代文：士实、养正及投降敌人的按察使杨璋等人都被活捉。
English: Yang Hui and others were all captured alive as a result of the inspection of the enemy's morale, self-restraint and surrender.

古文：南康、九江亦下。
现代文：南康、九江也打下来了。
English: Nankang and Jiujiang were also defeated.

古文：凡三十五日而贼平。
现代文：前后仅三十五天宸濠叛乱就被平定了。
English: It took only thirty-five days for the rebellion to be put down.

古文：京师闻变，诸大臣震惧。
现代文：当初，京城里得知叛乱事发，朝廷里的大臣们感到震惊、恐惧。
English: At first, when the capital learned of the rebellion, the ministers in the imperial court were shocked and frightened.

古文：王琼大言曰： 王伯安居南昌上游，必擒贼。 至是，果奏捷。
现代文：王琼扬言说： 王伯安驻兵南昌上游，一定会活捉宸濠的。 
English: Wang Qiong threatened: Wang Bo'an stationed soldiers in the upper reaches of Nanchang, he will surely catch the baboons alive.

古文：帝时已亲征，自称 威武大将军 ，率京边骁卒数万南下。
现代文：到此时，果然得到报上的胜利消息。武宗皇帝当时已经亲自出征，自称威武大将军，率领京郊勇悍的驻军数万人南下作战。
English: At that time, Emperor Wuzong had already set out in person, claiming to be a mighty general and leading tens of thousands of brave garrison troops from the suburbs of Beijing to fight in the south.

古文：命安边伯许泰为副将军，偕提督军务太监张忠、平贼将军左都督刘晖将京军数千，溯江而上，抵南昌。
现代文：任命安边伯许泰为副将军，和提督军务的太监张忠、平贼将军左都督刘晖率领京兵数千人溯江而上，抵达南昌。
English: Anbian Buxutai was appointed vice-general, and Zhang Zhong, the eunuch of the admiral's military affairs, and Liu Ye, the left-hand governor of the general, led thousands of Beijing soldiers up the river and arrived in Nanchang.

古文：诸嬖幸故与宸濠通，守仁初上宸濠反书，因言： 觊觎者非特一宁王，请黜奸谀以回天下豪杰心。 
现代文：这些得到武宗宠爱的小人们原本是和宸濠声气相通的，守仁最初报告宸濠造反的上书中有这样的话 ：图谋篡位的不只是一个宁王，请罢黜那些奸人和从谀之臣以挽回天下英雄豪杰不能安分的心思。 
English: These little people, who were favored by Emperor Wu, were originally sympathetic to Shun. Shuren's initial report on the rebellion contained the following words: "It is not just King Ning who is plotting to usurp the throne. Please oust those traitors and subordinates of Shun in order to save the world's heroes.

古文：诸嬖幸皆恨。
现代文：所以这些小人都心中怀恨。
English: That's why these little people have hatred in their hearts.

古文：宸濠既平，则相与媢功。
现代文：宸濠叛乱平定以后，就一齐起来嫉妒守仁的功劳。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, they all became jealous of Shujin's achievements.

古文：且惧守仁见天子发其罪，竞为蜚语，谓守仁先与通谋，虑事不成，乃起兵。
现代文：又因为怕守仁见到皇帝时揭发他们的罪证，所以争着制造流言蜚语，说守仁原先曾和宸濠往来谋划，后来考虑到叛乱不能成功，才起兵镇压叛乱。
English: In addition, because they were afraid that Shuren would expose their evidence of guilt when he saw the emperor, they fought to create rumors that Shuren had originally planned to meet with Gong, and then, considering that the rebellion could not succeed, he raised an army to suppress the rebellion.

古文：又欲令纵宸濠湖中，待帝自擒。
现代文：又想要守仁把宸濠假释于鄱阳湖中，好让武宗自己擒拿他。
English: He also wanted Shuren to parole Gong into Poyang Lake, so that Busong could capture him himself.

古文：守仁乘忠、泰未至，先俘宸濠，发南昌。
现代文：守仁在张忠、许泰兵马来到之前就已经俘虏了宸濠，打下南昌。
English: Before Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai's soldiers and horses arrived, Shuren had already captured Yan and taken Nanchang.

古文：忠、泰以威武大将军檄邀之广信。
现代文：张忠、许泰用威武大将军的名义传令要守仁到广信去。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai used the name of General Weiwu to order Shuren to go to Guangxin.

古文：守仁不与，间道趋玉山，上书请献俘，止帝南征。
现代文：守仁不予理睬，而从小路进驻玉山，上书请亲献俘虏，并制止武宗带兵南下。
English: Shujin did not pay attention, but entered Yushan from a small road, and sent a letter to ask the emperor to personally sacrifice the captives, and to stop Emperor Wuzong from marching south with his soldiers.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：武宗不听他的请求。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：至钱唐遇太监张永。
现代文：守仁行到钱塘，遇见太监张永。
English: Shuren went to Qiantang and met the eunuch Zhang Yong.

古文：永提督赞画机密军务，在忠、泰辈上，而故与杨一清善，除刘瑾，天下称之。
现代文：张永提督赞划机密军务，在张忠、许泰官阶之上。过去曾和杨一清友好，翦除刘瑾，天下人都称赞他。
English: Admiral Zhang Yong was in charge of classified military affairs, higher than Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai. He had been friendly with Yang Iqing in the past, and the whole world praised him for getting rid of Liu Ye.

古文：守仁夜见永，颂其贤，因极言江西困敝，不堪六师扰。
现代文：守仁夜间拜会张永，称颂他的贤德，借此极力说起江西的贫困破败，不能再承受皇帝官兵的烦扰了。
English: Shuren visited Zhang Yong at night, praised his virtue, and used this opportunity to talk about the poverty and ruin of Jiangxi, and could no longer bear the annoyance of the emperor's officers and soldiers.

古文：永深然之，曰： 永此来，为调护圣躬，非邀功也。
现代文：张永赞同他的意见，说 ：我这次来，是为了调理、照顾皇上的身体，不是为了邀功。
English: Zhang Yong agreed with his opinion and said, "I came this time to take care of the emperor's body, not to ask for merits."

古文：公大勋，永知之，但事不可直情耳。 
现代文：你的大功，我知道，但是事情不能办得太直率了。 
English: You've done a great job, I know, but it can't be done too bluntly.

古文：守仁乃以宸濠付永，而身至京口，欲朝行在。
现代文：守仁于是把宸濠交给了张永，自己到京口，想要觐见皇帝。
English: So Shuren gave the scepter to Zhang Yong and went to the capital to see the emperor.

古文：闻巡抚江西命，乃还南昌。
现代文：接到巡抚江西的任命，才回到南昌。
English: He returned to Nanchang only after receiving the appointment of the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：忠、泰已先至，恨失宸濠。故纵京军犯守仁，或呼名嫚骂。
现代文：此时张忠、许泰已经先来到南昌，恨自己没能拿到宸濠，所以怂恿京军向守仁挑衅，甚或直呼其名，大肆谩骂。
English: At this time, Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai had come to Nanchang first, hating that they had not been able to get the gong, so the Beijing troops provoked Shou Ren, even calling his name and swearing profusely.

古文：守仁不为动，抚之愈厚。
现代文：守仁不为所动，相反对他们的慰劳愈见亲厚。
English: Morihito was unmoved, and became more and more affectionate as he consoled them.

古文：病予药，死予棺，遭丧于道，必停车慰问良久始去。
现代文：病的给他药吃，死的给他棺材埋葬，路上碰见出丧，肯定停下车来，慰问他们很长时间才会离去。
English: If you are sick, give him medicine to eat, if you are dead, give him a coffin to bury, if you meet a funeral on the road, you must stop the car and give them condolences before they leave for a long time.

古文：京军谓 王都堂爱我 ，无复犯者。
现代文：京军说王都堂这般爱护我们，所以没有再来侵扰的了。
English: The Beijing army said that Wangdu Hall loved us so much, so there was no more intrusion.

古文：忠、泰言： 宁府富厚甲天下，今所蓄安在？ 
现代文：张忠、许泰问： 宁王府的富有天下称首，其积蓄现在哪里去了？ 
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai asked: Ningwangfu is the richest place in the world. Where are its savings now?

古文：守仁曰： 宸濠异时尽以输京师要人，约内应，籍可按也。 
现代文：守仁答道 ：宸濠当时都用来贿赂京城要人，约定内应了，现有凭单可以查看。 
English: Morihito replied, "At that time, the money was used to bribe important people in the capital, it was agreed upon, and the existing vouchers can be viewed."

古文：忠、泰故尝纳宸濠贿者，气慑不敢复言。
现代文：张忠、许泰过去曾经收受过宸濠的贿赂，所以气色收敛，不敢再说了。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai had received huge bribes in the past, so they were reluctant to say anything more.

古文：已，轻守仁文士，强之射。
现代文：过后，他们轻看守仁是个读书人，逼着他到校场里射箭去。
English: Later, they made light of the fact that the guard, Ren, was a student and forced him to go to the school grounds to shoot arrows.

古文：徐起，三发三中。
现代文：守仁从容地拉开弓弦，三射三中。
English: Morihito calmly pulled the string of the bow and fired three times.

古文：京军皆欢呼，忠、泰益沮。
现代文：京军都在大声欢呼，张忠、许泰越发沮丧。
English: The Beijing troops were cheering loudly, and Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai were getting more and more frustrated.

古文：会冬至，守仁命居民巷祭，已，上冢哭。
现代文：到了冬至时节，守仁传命城里居民在街头巷尾大行祭祀，然后，到坟地去哀哭。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the residents of the city held a large-scale sacrifice in the streets and alleys, and then went to the cemetery to mourn.

古文：时新丧乱，悲号震野。
现代文：当时刚刚经历宸濠叛乱，死伤人多，所以悲号痛哭之声响彻四野。
English: At that time, it had just experienced a rebellion by the Kuomintang (KMT) and many people had been killed and injured, so the sounds of wailing and weeping resounded throughout the countryside.

古文：京军离家久，闻之无不泣下思归者。
现代文：京军离家久了，听到这样的丧祭之声无不泪流纵横，各思还乡。
English: The Beijing troops had been away from home for a long time, and when they heard this funeral procession, they all shed tears and went back to their hometowns.

古文：忠、泰不得已班师。
现代文：张忠、许泰迫不得已，班师还朝去了。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai had no choice but to go, and the class teacher also went in the morning.

古文：比见帝，与纪功给事中祝续、御史章纶谗毁百端，独永时时左右之。
现代文：等见到武宗，和纪功给事中祝续、御史章纶一起，对守仁百端污蔑、中伤，只有张永从中斡旋，常常替守仁开脱罪名。
English: When he saw Wu Zong, together with Ji Gong, who was congratulating and congratulating, and Gushi, who was congratulating and congratulating, he slandered and slandered Shuren a hundred times. Only Zhang Yong mediated between them, and often exonerated Shuren.

古文：忠扬言帝前曰： 守仁必反，试召之，必不至。 
现代文：张忠在武宗面前扬言道 ：王守仁日后必反，试着召他来觐见，一定不会来的。 
English: Zhang Zhong threatened in front of Wu Zong: Wang Shouren will rebel in the future. If you try to call him for an audience, he will definitely not come.

古文：忠、泰屡矫旨召守仁。守仁得永密信，不赴。
现代文：张忠、许泰几次用假圣旨召唤守仁，守仁得到张永的秘密信件，都不赴会。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai summoned Shou Ren several times with a fake imperial edict. Shou Ren received Zhang Yong's secret letter and did not attend the meeting.

古文：及是知出帝意，立驰至。
现代文：至此知道是武宗的真意，立即骑马而来。
English: At this point, knowing that it was the true intention of the Emperor, they immediately came on horseback.

古文：忠、泰计沮，不令见帝。
现代文：张忠、许泰计谋破败，就不叫他见到武宗。
English: When Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai's plot failed, they didn't let him see Wu Zong.

古文：守仁乃入九华山，日晏坐僧寺。
现代文：守仁于是上到九华山上，每日里宴游或独坐在和尚的寺庙里。
English: So Shuren went up to the Jihua Mountain, and every day he went on a banquet tour or sat alone in a monk's temple.

古文：帝觇知之，曰： 王守仁学道人，闻召即至，何谓反？ 
现代文：武宗派人窥探得知这些，说： 王守仁是个学道的人，听见召唤就来了，怎么说他要造反呢？ 
English: When the Wu sect sent spies to find out about this, they said, "Wang Shou-Ren is a scholar. He heard the summons and came. How can he say he wants to rebel?"

古文：乃遣还镇，令更上捷音。
现代文：于是放他回去镇守南昌，要他有机会再上捷报。
English: So they let him go back to guard Nanchang and gave him a chance to appear in the newspaper again.

古文：守仁乃易前奏，言 奉威武大将军方略讨平叛乱 ，而尽入诸嬖幸名，江彬等乃无言。
现代文：守仁于是修改了以前的奏章，说是按照威武大将军的方略讨平叛乱，并且把那帮小人的名字都放入有功之列，江彬等至此才无话可说了。
English: Shuren then revised the previous score, saying that it was in accordance with the strategy of General Weiwu to quell the rebellion, and put the names of the villains into the ranks of the meritorious, so that Jiang Bin had nothing to say.

古文：当是时，谗邪构煽，祸变叵测，微守仁，东南事几殆。
现代文：当时谗言四起，奸邪勾结，祸乱、变化之机深不可测，没有守仁，东南一带的国事几于败乱。
English: At that time, rumors were rampant, treachery and evil colluded, calamity and change were unfathomable, there was no protection and benevolence, and the national affairs in the southeastern region were almost in a state of chaos.

古文：世宗深知之。甫即位，趣召入朝受封。
现代文：世宗深深懂得这一点，所以才即位就催召守仁入朝受封。
English: Sejong deeply understood this, which is why he immediately called for Shorin to be enthroned in the imperial court.

古文：而大学士杨廷和与王琼不相能。
现代文：可是大学士杨廷和与王琼相互忌妒。
English: However, college graduates Yang Tinghe and Wang Qiong are jealous of each other.

古文：守仁前后平贼，率归功琼，廷和不喜，大臣亦多忌其功。
现代文：守仁前前后后平定多处叛乱，大率归功于王琼，廷和心中不愉快，其他大臣也很忌恨他的功勋。
English: Before and after Shuren, many rebellions were quelled, which was largely attributed to Wang Qiong. The imperial court was not happy with him, and other ministers also detested his achievements.

古文：会有言国哀未毕，不宜举宴行赏者，因拜守仁南京兵部尚书。
现代文：正好朝中有人说先皇帝逝世，国哀没有结束，不适于举办宴会、论功封赏，因而只任命守仁做南京兵部尚书。
English: Just at that time, some people in the imperial court said that the death of the former emperor, the national mourning had not ended, and it was not suitable to hold a banquet and discuss the award of merit. Therefore, only Shuren was appointed as the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：守仁不赴，请归省。
现代文：守仁没有去上任，上书请允许他回乡省亲。
English: Morihito did not go to take office. Please allow him to return to his hometown to visit his relatives.

古文：已，论功封特进光禄大夫、柱国、新建伯，世袭，岁禄一千石。
现代文：过后，评价功绩晋升为特进光禄大夫、柱国、新建伯，允许世袭，每年俸禄一千石。
English: Afterward, he was promoted to the special promotion of Guanglu Doctor, Zhu Guo, and Xinjian Bo according to the evaluation of his merits, and was allowed to inherit, with an annual salary of one thousand koku.

古文：然不予铁券，岁禄亦不给。
现代文：但是没有颁发铁券，每年的岁禄也没有兑现。
English: However, no iron certificates were issued, and the annual reward was not honored.

古文：诸同事有功者，惟吉安守伍文定至大官，当上赏。
现代文：和他同事立了功的，只有吉安太守伍文定做了大官，受到上等的奖赏。
English: Of his colleagues, only Ji'an Taishouwumending became a high-ranking official and received the highest award.

古文：其他皆名示迁，而阴绌之，废斥无存者。
现代文：其他人名义上都升了，而背地里都遭抑制，废弃罢免得无一幸存。
English: All the others were nominally promoted, but they were suppressed behind the scenes, and none of them survived the dismissal.

古文：守仁愤甚。
现代文：守仁心中愤恨至极。
English: The resentment in Morihito's heart was extreme.

古文：时已丁父忧，屡疏辞爵，乞录诸臣功，咸报寝。
现代文：当时他的父亲已经去世，他多次上书辞免爵位不接受，请登录其他人的功劳，都没有结果。
English: At that time, his father had already passed away, and he repeatedly wrote to renounce his knighthood and not accept it. Please list other people's achievements, all to no avail.

古文：免丧，亦不召。
现代文：守丧完毕，也不再召他入官。
English: After the funeral, he was no longer invited to join the government.

古文：久之，所善席书及门人方献夫、黄绾以议礼得幸，言于张璁、桂萼，将召用，而费宏故衔守仁，复沮之。
现代文：很久以后，友人席书及门弟子方献夫、黄绾因为议论礼制得到皇帝宠爱，他们对张璁、桂萼说起此事，打算召守仁入官，而费宏一向忌恨守仁，又破坏了这事。
English: After a long time, his friend Shi Shu and his disciples Fang Xianfu and Huang Qi were favored by the emperor because they talked about the etiquette. They mentioned this to Zhang Xi and Gui Cai, intending to call Shuren into office, but Feihong always hated Shuren, and destroyed this matter.

古文：屡推兵部尚书，三边总督，提督团营，皆弗果用。
现代文：总之，屡次提出让守仁充兵部尚书、三边总督、提督团营，都没能实现。
English: In short, the idea of appointing Shujin as the commander-in-chief of the military, the governor-general of the Three Provinces, and the commander-in-chief of the Admiralty was repeatedly proposed, but none of these ideas came to fruition.

古文：嘉靖六年，思恩、田州土酋卢苏、王受反。
现代文：嘉靖六年，思恩、田州的民族首领卢苏、王受造反。
English: In the sixth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shenn, and the ethnic leaders of Tianzhou, Lu Su and Wang Shou, rebelled.

古文：总督姚镆不能定，乃诏守仁以原官兼左都御史，总督两广兼巡抚。
现代文：总督姚镆不能镇压，朝廷才发布诏书让守仁以原先的官职兼左都御史，总督两广并兼为巡抚。
English: Governor Yao Wei could not suppress it, and the imperial court only issued an edict to let Shuren take up his former official position as the governor of the Left Capital and the governor of the two provinces as well as the governor.

古文：绾因上书讼守仁功，请赐铁券、岁禄，并叙讨贼诸臣，帝咸报可。
现代文：黄绾借此机会上书争辩守仁的功绩，请赐给他铁券和岁禄，并评定以前讨伐宸濠的大臣们的功劳，世宗都说可以。
English: Huang Qi took this opportunity to write a letter to argue the merits of Shujin, please give him iron coupons and ryo-ro, and evaluate the merits of the ministers who had previously fought against Yao, all the sects said yes.

古文：守仁在道，疏陈用兵之非，且言： 思恩未设流官，土酋岁出兵三千，听官征调。
现代文：守仁在行军途中，上书陈说用兵的错误，并且讲道 ：思恩还没有设立汉人充任的流官时，民族首领每年派出三千士兵听从官府征用。
English: On the way to the march, Shuren wrote a letter saying that it was a mistake to use soldiers, and preached: When Sion had not yet set up a stream official to be filled by Han people, the ethnic leaders sent three thousand soldiers every year to obey the requisition of the government.

古文：既设流官，我反岁遣兵数千防戍。
现代文：设流官以后，朝廷反而年年派兵数千人在这里防守。
English: After the establishment of the shogunate, the imperial court sent thousands of soldiers to defend here every year.

古文：是流官之设，无益可知。
现代文：这样说来设立流官没有用处是显然可知的了。
English: In this light, it is clear that there is no use in setting up a streaming officer.

古文：且田州邻交阯，深山绝谷，悉瑶、僮盘据，必仍设土官，斯可藉其兵力为屏蔽。若改土为流，则边鄙之患，我自当之，后必有悔。 
现代文：况且田州与交趾接壤，深山绝谷，都被瑶人、僮人盘踞着，肯定还是设立土著人充任的土官，才好凭借他们的兵力作为中国的屏障，如果改土官为流官，那么边境的兵患，只有朝廷自己担当了，以后一定会有悔恨的。 
English: Moreover, since Tianzhou and Jiaozuo share a border, and deep mountains and valleys are all occupied by the Jurchens and Jurchens, it is certain that it is better to set up a local official to be filled by the indigenous people, so that they can use their military strength as a barrier to China. If the local official is changed to a stream official, then only the imperial court itself will be responsible for the soldiers' suffering at the border, and there will certainly be regret in the future.

古文：章下兵部，尚书王时中条其不合者五，帝令守仁更议。
现代文：他的奏章被下发到兵部讨论，尚书王时中列举了其中不恰当的地方共五条，世宗命令守仁再做商议。
English: His report was sent to the military department for discussion, and Shoshu Wang Shizhong listed a total of five inappropriate areas. Shizong ordered Shuren to discuss it further.

古文：十二月，守仁抵浔州，会巡按御史石金定计招抚。悉散遣诸军，留永顺、保靖土兵数千，解甲休息。
现代文：十二月，守仁抵达浔州，正好巡按御史石金已经定计准备招抚，就遣散了各路兵马，留下永顺、保靖的土著士兵数千人，解除战备，原地休息。
English: In December, when Shuren arrived in Zhangzhou, just as the inspector general of history, Shi Jian, had already made a scheduled preparation for the visit, he dismissed the soldiers and horses from all directions, leaving thousands of Yongshun and Baojing indigenous soldiers, relieved of combat readiness, and rested in place.

古文：苏、受初求抚不得，闻守仁至益惧，至是则大喜。
现代文：卢苏、王受本来就想得到招安而不能，听说守仁的部队来更加害怕了，只到这时才十分高兴起来。
English: Lu Su and Wang Xiu originally wanted to recruit An An but couldn't. Hearing that Shou Ren's troops were coming made them even more afraid, and only then did they become very happy.

古文：守仁赴南宁，二人遣使乞降，守仁令诣军门。
现代文：守仁到南宁，他们二人派遣使节请求投降，守仁命令他们来帐前听候命令。
English: Shuren went to Nanning, and the two of them sent envoys to ask for surrender. Shuren ordered them to come to the inn and await orders.

古文：二人窃议曰： 王公素多诈，恐绐我。 
现代文：二人私下里议论说： 这位王公一向多诡诈，可别给他哄骗了啊。 
English: The two of them discussed it in private and said, "This prince has always been very deceitful, but don't let him trick you."

古文：陈兵入见。
现代文：所以布置了兵阵方才进去相见。
English: That's why we set up a line of soldiers before we went in to see each other.

古文：守仁数二人罪，杖而释之。
现代文：守仁列举了他们的罪过，各打了一顿大棍，然后放了他们。
English: Morihito enumerated their sins, beat them each with a big stick, and then released them.

古文：亲入营，抚其众七万。
现代文：又亲自进入他们的军营，安抚他们的七万兵卒。
English: And he entered into their camp, and set at rest seventy thousand of their foot soldiers.

古文：奏闻于朝，陈用兵十害，招抚十善。
现代文：接着，写奏章上报给朝廷，陈说了用兵的十种害处，与招安的十大好处。
English: Next, he wrote a musical score and reported it to the imperial court, stating the ten harms of using soldiers and the ten benefits of recruiting soldiers.

古文：因请复设流官，量割田州地，别立一州，以岑猛次子邦相为吏目，署州事，俟有功擢知州。
现代文：就此请仍旧设立流官，酌情裁割田州的地盘，另立一新州，以岑猛的第二个儿子岑邦相为代理长官，暂时管理州事，等以后立了功正式提升为知州。
English: In this regard, please still set up a stream official, as appropriate, cut off the site of Tianzhou, set up a new state, with the fierce second son, Shan Guoxiang, as the acting chief, temporarily manage state affairs, and then officially promoted to Zhizhou.

古文：而于田州置十九巡检司，以苏、受等任之，并受约束于流官知府。
现代文：在田州，设置了十九个巡检司，以卢苏、王受等人统领其事，一并接受流官知府的管辖。
English: In Tianzhou, nineteen inspectorates were set up, headed by Lusu, Wang Shou and others, and subject to the jurisdiction of the government.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：世宗都听从了他的意见。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：断藤峡瑶贼，上连八寨，下通仙台、花相诸洞蛮，盘亘三百余里，郡邑罹害者数十年。
现代文：断藤峡一带瑶族的乱民，往上接连着八寨，往下和仙台、花相等洞居的蛮人相通，势力绵延达三百多里，郡邑受其害已有几十年。
English: The chaotic people of the Yi ethnic group in the area of Fengtu Gorge are connected to the eight villages upstream and to the barbarians living in caves such as Sendai and Huazhong downstream. Their influence stretches more than three hundred miles, and the county has suffered from them for decades.

古文：守仁欲讨之，故留南宁。
现代文：守仁想讨伐他们，所以留在南宁。
English: Morihito wanted to fight them, so he stayed in Nanning.

古文：罢湖广兵，示不再用。
现代文：解退湖广一带的部队，以显示不再用兵。
English: The troops around Hukang were withdrawn to show that they would no longer be used as soldiers.

古文：伺贼不备，进破牛肠、六寺等十余寨，峡贼悉平。
现代文：伺敌人不加戒备的机会，挺师而进，打下牛肠、六寺等十多个营寨，断藤峡的乱民全被平定了。
English: Taking advantage of the enemy's unguarded opportunity, the division marched forward and knocked down more than a dozen camps, including the Cow Gut and the Six Temples, and the disorderly people in the Fengtu Gorge were completely subdued.

古文：遂循横石江而下，攻克仙台、花相、白竹、古陶、罗凤诸贼。
现代文：于是沿着横石江向下，打败了仙台、花相、白竹、古陶、罗凤等地的乱民。
English: As a result, they went down the Yokoishi River and defeated the rioters in Sendai, Hanaso, Shirochiku, Kotou, Luofeng and other places.

古文：令布政使林富率苏、受兵直抵八寨，破石门，副将沈希仪邀斩轶贼，尽平八寨。
现代文：命令布政使林富率领卢苏、王受的部队一直挺进八寨，攻克石门，副将沈希仪请出兵斩杀败逃的乱民，就这样荡平了八寨。
English: Bu Zheng ordered the troops of Lin Fu, led by Lu Su, and Wang Zhu, to advance all the way to Bazhai and conquer Shimen. Vice Admiral Shen Xiyi invited the troops to kill the defeated and fleeing disorderly people, thus flattening Bazhai.

古文：始，帝以苏、受之抚，遣行人奉玺书奖谕。
现代文：开始，世宗因为卢苏、王受的招安，派遣使臣持加盖玉玺的诏书前往奖谕。
English: In the beginning, King Sejong sent his envoys with an imperial edict stamped with a jade seal to the award ceremony because of the invitation to Lusu and Wangju.

古文：及奏断藤峡捷，则以手诏问阁臣杨一清等，谓守仁自夸大，且及其生平学术。
现代文：及守仁报上断藤峡的捷报，世宗却用手诏问阁臣杨一清等人，以为守仁自我吹嘘，并且问到守仁生平的学术思想。
English: When Shujin Newspaper reported Fujikyo's victory, Shizong asked Yang Iqing, a cabinet minister, and others with a hand gesture, thinking that Shujin was boasting, and asked about Shujin's life and academic thoughts.

古文：一清等不知所对。
现代文：一清等不知怎么回答才好。
English: I don't know how to answer.

古文：守仁之起由璁、萼荐，萼故不善守仁，以璁强之。
现代文：守仁这次得到起用，是由于张璁、桂萼的推荐，桂萼原本不喜欢守仁，他的推荐是张璁强迫才做出的。
English: This time, Shuren was appointed due to the recommendation of Zhang Ye and Gui Caly. Gui Caly originally did not like Shuren, and his recommendation was forced by Zhang Ye.

古文：后萼长吏部，璁入内阁，积不相下。
现代文：后来桂萼领职吏部，张璁入主内阁，双方势均力敌，不相上下。
English: Later, Gui Caly led the official cadre department, and Zhang Xuan entered the main cabinet. Both sides were equal in strength and were on a par with each other.

古文：萼暴贵喜功名，风守仁取交阯，守仁辞不应。
现代文：桂萼平步青云，喜好功名，曾劝守仁占领交趾。守仁辞谢不听。
English: Gui Calyp was a young man, fond of fame, and had once urged Shuren to occupy Kota. Shuren refused to listen.

古文：一清雅知守仁，而黄绾尝上疏欲令守仁入辅，毁一清，一清亦不能无移憾。
现代文：一清很了解守仁，可是黄绾曾上书世宗想让守仁入为辅臣，诋毁一清，一清因此也不能没有迁恨之心。
English: I Ching knew Shou Ren very well, but Huang Qi had written to the Sejong that he wanted to make Shou Ren a vassal, slandering I Ching. Therefore, I Ching could not help but harbor a grudge.

古文：萼遂显诋守仁征抚交失，赏格不行。
现代文：桂萼于是公开批评守仁征战、招安一并失误，因此，对守仁例行的封赏被取消了。
English: Gui Caly then publicly criticized Shou Ren's enlistment in the war and the recruitment of An, both of which were mistakes. As a result, the routine award to Shou Ren was cancelled.

古文：献夫及霍韬不平，上疏争之，言： 诸瑶为患积年，初尝用兵数十万，仅得一田州，旋复召寇。
现代文：方献夫和霍韬感到不公正，上书世宗争论说 ：各路瑶民多年以来是国家的祸患，起初朝廷曾用兵几十万，仅仅占领一个思州，不久又被乱民占有。
English: Fang Xianfu and Huo Jian felt that this was unfair, and wrote to Shizong to argue: For many years, people from all walks of life have been a scourge to the country. At first, the imperial court used hundreds of thousands of soldiers to occupy only one Shizhou, which was soon occupied by the disorderly people.

古文：守仁片言驰谕，思、田稽首。
现代文：守仁片言只语传送过去，思恩、田州的乱民低头纳降。
English: Morihito's words were only transmitted to the past, and the disorderly people of Shinn and Tenzhou bowed their heads and accepted the surrender.

古文：至八寨、断藤峡贼，阻深岩绝冈，国初以来未有轻议剿者，今一举荡平，若拉枯朽。
现代文：至于八寨、断藤峡的乱民，为深岩绝壁所阻隔，开国以来，没人敢轻易说到剿除他，现在一举铲平，好似摧枯拉朽。
English: As for the disorderly people in Bajie and the Broken Rattan Gorge, they are separated by the deep rock cliff. Since the founding of the country, no one dared to easily talk about eliminating them. Now, they are leveled in one fell swoop, as if they were destroying and pulling down.

古文：议者乃言守仁受命征思、田，不受命征八寨。
现代文：可是议论的人却说守仁接到的命令是出征思恩、田州，不曾命令他讨伐八寨。
English: However, the commentators said that the order that Shujin received was to go to Sion and Tianzhou, and he was never ordered to fight against Bajie.

古文：夫大夫出疆，有可以安国家，利社稷，专之可也，况守仁固承诏得便宜从事者乎？
现代文：封疆大吏外出征战，有可以安定国家，造福社稷的机会，专断应是可以的。况且守仁曾经领到诏旨，允许灵活机动，见机行事，怎么就不可以这么办呢？
English: It should be possible to arbitrarily decide whether or not to allow officials from the fiefdoms to go out to fight when there is an opportunity to stabilize the country and benefit the society. Moreover, Shuren once received an imperial edict that allowed him to be flexible and act at his own discretion, so why can't he do so?

古文：守仁讨平叛藩，忌者诬以初同贼谋，又诬其辇载金帛。
现代文：守仁平定宁王叛乱，忌恨他的人诬蔑他当初曾和宁王同谋，又谎称他以车辆载运钱帛。
English: Shuren quelled the rebellion of King Ning, and his detractors slandered him as having been an accomplice of King Ning at the beginning, and also falsely claimed that he used a vehicle to transport money.

古文：当时大臣杨廷和、乔宇饰成其事，至今未白。
现代文：当时大臣杨廷和、乔宇装饰成真，至今还不曾为守仁平反昭雪。
English: At that time, the ministers Yang Tinghe and Qiao Yu were decorated into reality, and so far they have not been for the defense of Renping against Zhao Xue.

古文：夫忠如守仁，有功如守仁，一屈于江西，再屈于两广。
现代文：作为大臣忠诚得像守仁那样，有大功勋像守仁那样，一受委屈于江西，再受委屈于两广。
English: As a minister, he is as loyal as Shou Ren, and has made great contributions. Like Shou Ren, he was once wronged by Jiangxi, and then wronged by Guangxi.

古文：臣恐劳臣灰心，将士解体，后此疆圉有事，谁复为陛下任之！ 
现代文：我们真怕做事的大臣灰了心，部队里将士离散，以后我明朝边疆有战事时，谁还肯再为陛下分挑担子呢？ 
English: We are really afraid that the ministers who do things will be discouraged, and the soldiers in the army will be scattered. In the future, when there is a war on the border between the North and the South, who will be willing to share the burden for His Majesty?

古文：帝报闻而已。
现代文：世宗对此也只是说知道而已。
English: Sejong only said that he knew about it.

古文：守仁已病甚，疏乞骸骨，举郧阳巡抚林富自代，不俟命竟归。
现代文：守仁这时已经病得很厉害，上书请求告老回乡，推荐勋阳巡抚林富代替自己，不等朝廷的批复就回去了。
English: At this time, Shuren was already very ill. He sent a letter to the emperor requesting him to return to his hometown, recommending the governor of Xiongyang, Lin Fu, to replace him, and did not wait for the approval of the imperial court to return.

古文：行至南安卒，年五十七。
现代文：走到南安就病死了，终年五十七岁。
English: He fell ill and died in Nan'an, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：丧过江西，军民无不缟素哭送者。
现代文：灵柩经过江西，军民无不身着白衣，哭泣相送。
English: The casket passed through Jiangxi, and the soldiers and civilians, all dressed in white, wept as they saw it off.

古文：守仁天姿异敏。
现代文：守仁天生不同常人。
English: Morihito was born different from ordinary people.

古文：年十七谒上饶娄谅，与论朱子格物大指。
现代文：十七岁时拜访上饶人娄谅，和他讲论朱子格物之学的大意。
English: At the age of seventeen, he visited Shangrao Rongren, and talked to him about the essence of Zhu Zige's study of things.

古文：还家，日端坐，讲读《五经》，不苟言笑。
现代文：回家以后，每日里正身而坐，研读《五经》，不轻易和人说笑。
English: After returning home, he would sit upright every day, study the Five Classics of Confucianism, and not easily laugh with others.

古文：游九华归，筑室阳明洞中。泛滥二氏学，数年无所得。
现代文：从九华山游历归来，在阳明洞中建造住室，泛览道、释两家的学说，几年下来没有什么收获。
English: After returning from a trip to Mount Jiuhuashan, he built a residence in Yangming Cave, surveyed the road, and explained the teachings of the two families. After a few years, there was nothing to be gained.

古文：谪龙场，穷荒无书，日绎旧闻。
现代文：贬官于龙场时，荒僻之地，无书可读，只好天天思索旧日已得的知识。
English: When he was in the dragon field, in a desolate place, there was no book to read, so he had to think about the knowledge he had gained in the past every day.

古文：忽悟格物致知，当自求诸心，不当求诸事物，喟然曰： 道在是矣。 
现代文：一天，忽然悟到格物致知，应当自求于己心，而不能去向事物求索，慨然感叹说： 道就在这里呀。 
English: One day, he suddenly realized that to know things, he should search his own heart, but he could not search things. He sighed with emotion and said, "Here is the way."

古文：遂笃信不疑。
现代文：从此深信不疑。
English: I've been convinced ever since.

古文：其为教，专以致良知为主。
现代文：他因道设教，专门以发明良知为主旨。
English: He was educated in Taoism, and his main aim was to invent conscience.

古文：谓宋周、程二子后，惟象山陆氏简易直捷，有以接孟氏之传。
现代文：认为宋代周敦颐、二程兄弟以后，只有象山陆九渊的学说简易直捷，能够上接孟轲的学统。
English: It is believed that after Zhou Dunyi and the Erchen brothers in the Song Dynasty, only the teachings of Xiangshan Lu Jiuyuan are simple and straightforward, and can take up the academic tradition of Meng Xi.

古文：而朱子《集注》、《或问》之类，乃中年未定之说。
现代文：而朱熹的《集注》、《或问》等，是中年时还不成熟的学说。
English: However, Zhu Xi's "Collection of Notes," "Question" and so on, are still immature theories in middle age.

古文：学者翕然从之，世遂有 阳明学 云。
现代文：当世学者翕然而听从，所以社会上有 阳明学 的称法。
English: Contemporary scholars, however, obey, so the society has the name of "Yangmingology."

古文：守仁既卒，桂萼奏其擅离职守。
现代文：守仁死后，桂萼弹劾他擅离职守。
English: After Morihito's death, Katsura impeached him for leaving office without permission.

古文：帝大怒，下廷臣议。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，下令朝廷大臣议论。
English: Sejong was very annoyed and ordered the minister of the imperial court to discuss.

古文：萼等言： 守仁事不师古，言不称师。
现代文：桂萼等人说： 守仁做事不取法先贤，讲学不称道前儒。
English: Gui Caly and others said: Shou Ren is not a legal scholar when doing things, and he is not a pre-Confucian scholar when lecturing.

古文：欲立异以为高，则非朱熹格物致知之论；知众论之不予，则为朱熹晚年定论之书。
现代文：想要标新立异抬高自己，才批评朱熹格物致知的学说；知道群众的公论不得赞成他，所以掇弄一本关于朱熹晚年定论的书。
English: He wanted to set a new standard and elevate himself, so he criticized Zhu Rongge's theory of knowledge; knowing that the public opinion of the masses could not agree with him, he mocked up a book about Zhu Rong's final theory in his later years.

古文：号召门徒，互相倡和。
现代文：召引门徒，相互唱和。
English: calling the disciples together, and singing hymns.

古文：才美者乐其任意，庸鄙者借其虚声。
现代文：有才能的人喜欢他的随意，没出息的人借用他的虚名。
English: Talented people like his casual, unpromising people borrow his false name.

古文：传习转讹，背谬弥甚。
现代文：师传弟习，转生错讹，越来越荒谬。
English: It's getting more and more absurd that we're all reincarnated in the wrong body.

古文：但讨捕軬贼，擒获叛藩，功有足录，宜免追夺伯爵以章大信，禁邪说以正人心。 
现代文：但是守仁讨伐地的叛乱，活捉造反的宁王，功劳还是值得纪念的，应该免予追夺伯爵，以显示皇朝的信誉，禁止传播邪说，以端正人民的思想。 
English: However, the rebellion of Shujin and the capture of the rebellious King Ning alive are still worthy of commemoration. They should be exempted from chasing the count to show the credibility of the imperial dynasty, prohibit the spread of evil theories, and rectify the people's thoughts.

古文：帝乃下诏停世袭，恤典俱不行。
现代文：世宗于是发布诏书，停止了世袭伯爵的特权，后事处理的典礼也不予举行。
English: The Sejong then issued an edict, suspending the hereditary count's privileges, and the ceremony to deal with the aftermath was not held.

古文：隆庆初，廷臣多颂其功。诏赠新建侯，谥文成。
现代文：隆庆初年，朝廷大臣很赞扬他的功绩，穆宗于是下诏追赠他为新建侯，谥文成。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the Minister of the Imperial Court highly praised his achievements, and the Emperor then issued a posthumous edict awarding him the title of newly-created marquis, 文成.

古文：二年予世袭伯爵。
现代文：二年准予世袭伯爵。
English: In two years he was granted the hereditary title of count.

古文：既又有请以守仁与薛瑄、陈献章同从祀文庙者。帝独允礼臣议，以瑄配。
现代文：以后又有请把守仁与薛蠧、陈献章一齐放在文庙中从祀的，穆宗允准大臣讨论，结果以薛蠧从祀。
English: Later, Mu Zong allowed the minister to discuss the request to enshrine Shujin together with Xue Qi and Chen Xianzhang in the temple, and the result was to enshrine Xue Qi.

古文：及万历十二年，御史詹事讲申前请。
现代文：到万历十二年，御史詹事讲又重申以前的请求。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, the Emperor reiterated his previous request.

古文：大学士申时行等言： 守仁言致知出《大学》，良知出《孟子》。
现代文：大学士申时行等人说： 守仁所讲致知出自《大学》，良知出自《孟子》。
English: University scholar Shin Shigyo and others said, "The wisdom that Morihito spoke about comes from "The University," and the conscience comes from "Mencius."

古文：陈献章主静，沿宋儒周敦颐、程颢。
现代文：陈献章主静，继承宋朝大儒周敦颐、程颢。
English: Chen Xianzhang Zhujing succeeded the great Confucian scholars of the Song Dynasty, Zhou Dunxi and Cheng Qi.

古文：业弘愤，持疏入禁门诉。自刎不殊，执下狱，寻释。
现代文：况且孝友之德，进退出处像献章，气节、文章、功业像守仁，不能说是禅客。实在应予尊崇、祭祀。 
English: Moreover, the virtue of filial piety and friendship, the entry and exit points are like offering a medal, and the qi section, articles, and achievements are like guarding the benevolence, can not be said to be a Zen guest. It really should be respected and worshiped.

古文：先通袭伯四年，流贼陷京师，被杀。
现代文：并且说胡居仁思想纯正，行为笃实，为社会舆论所肯定，也该一道祭祀。
English: He also said that Hu Jiaoren's thoughts are pure and his actions are solid, which are affirmed by the public opinion. They should also be worshipped together.

古文：守仁弟子盈天下，其有传者不复载。
现代文：神宗皇帝听从了他。一直到明代灭亡，孔庙中从祀的也只守仁等四个人而已。守仁的学生遍布天下，那些专门列传的不再记载。
English: Emperor Shenzong obeyed him. Up until the end of the Ming Dynasty, only four people, including Shujin, were worshipped in the Confucius Temple. Shujin's students spread all over the world, and those specifically listed are no longer recorded.

古文：惟冀元亨尝与守仁共患难。
现代文：只有冀元亨曾经和守仁共过患难。
English: Only Ji Yuanheng once shared the hardships with Morihito.

古文：冀元亨，字惟乾，武陵人。笃信守仁学。
现代文：冀元亨，字惟乾，武陵人，深信守仁的学说。
English: Jiyuan Heng, the word is only dry, Wuling people, deeply believe in the doctrine of Shouren.

古文：举正德十一年乡试。
现代文：考中正德十一年乡试。
English: Zhengde passed the 11th year of the middle school entrance examination.

古文：从守仁于赣，守仁属以教子。
现代文：跟从守仁在赣时，守仁嘱托他教育自己的儿子。
English: When he was a pupil of Shujin, Shujin asked him to educate his son.

古文：宸濠怀不轨，而外务名高，贻书守仁问学，守仁使元亨往。
现代文：宸濠心怀不轨，但外表却追求高名，曾写信给守仁向他请教学问，守仁派元亨前往讲学。
English: He had a bad heart, but outwardly he pursued fame. He once wrote to Shou Ren to ask him to teach, and Shou Ren sent Yuan Heng to give a lecture.

古文：宸濠语挑之，佯不喻，独与之论学，宸濠目为痴。
现代文：宸濠说一些挑逗性的话，元亨假装不明白他的意思，只是和他谈学问，宸濠以为他痴迷。
English: Zou said something provocative, Yuanheng pretended not to understand what he meant, just talked to him about learning, Zou thought he was obsessed.

古文：他日讲《西铭》，反覆君臣义甚悉。
现代文：后来为宸濠讲解《西铭》，反复多次，把君臣之间的大义讲得很明白。
English: Later, he explained "Ximing" to Zou, repeatedly and repeatedly, and clearly explained the great justice between the emperor and the people.

古文：宸濠亦服，厚赠遣之，元亨反其赠于官。
现代文：宸濠也佩服了，给他很多礼物，送他回去，元亨把这些礼物入了公。
English: Yu also admired him, gave him many gifts, and sent him back. Yuanheng made these gifts public.

古文：已，宸濠败，张忠、许泰诬守仁与通。
现代文：后来，宸濠叛乱失败，张忠、许泰诬蔑守仁曾和他勾结。
English: Later, when the rebellion failed, Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai slandered Shou Ren and colluded with him.

古文：诘宸濠，言无有。
现代文：审问宸濠，宸濠说没有。
English: You interrogate me, I say no.

古文：忠等诘不已，曰： 独尝遣冀元亨论学。 
现代文：张忠等人不停地审问，宸濠说： 只是他曾经派冀元亨来和我讲论过学问。 
English: Zhang Zhong and others interrogated him incessantly, and Zou said, "It's just that he once sent Ji Yuanheng to give me a lecture on learning."

古文：忠等大喜，搒元亨，加以炮烙，终不承，械系京师诏狱。
现代文：张忠等这下十分高兴，就对元亨施以棒打，加以炮烙，元亨最后还是不承认，被戴上枷锁，投入京城的大牢之中。
English: Zhang Zhong and others were very happy about this, so they beat Yuan Heng with a stick and branded him. In the end, Yuan Heng still did not admit it, and was put in chains and thrown into the big jail in Beijing.

古文：世宗嗣位，言者交白其冤，出狱五日卒。
现代文：世宗皇帝即位后，议论者一次次说明他的冤屈，被释放才五天也就死了。
English: After Emperor Sejong ascended the throne, the controversialist explained his grievances again and again, and died five days after being released.

古文：元亨在狱，善待诸囚若兄弟，囚皆感泣。
现代文：元亨在监狱中，对待其他囚犯如同兄弟，犯人们都感动得落泪。
English: In prison, Yuanheng treated other prisoners like brothers, and the prisoners were moved to tears.

古文：其被逮也，所司系其妻李，李无怖色，曰： 吾夫尊师乐善，岂他虑哉！ 
现代文：他被逮捕时，官吏同时收捕了他的妻子李氏，李氏面无惧色，说道： 我的丈夫尊敬师儒，热爱善德，哪里还有别的意图呢？ 
English: When he was arrested, officials also arrested his wife, Li Shizhen. Li Shizhen looked fearless and said: My husband respects teachers and scholars and loves virtue. What other intentions does he have?

古文：狱中与二女治麻枲不辍。
现代文：在监狱中，还和两个女儿一齐不停地编理麻粆。
English: While in prison, she and her two daughters also worked tirelessly to straighten their hair.

古文：事且白，守者欲出之。曰： 未见吾夫，出安往？ 
现代文：事情将澄清的时候，看守想放她们出去，她说 ：不能看到我丈夫，出狱后我们到哪去？ 
English: The guards want to let them out when things are clearer, she said: "If I can't see my husband, where will we go when we get out of prison?"

古文：按察诸僚妇闻其贤，召之，辞不赴。
现代文：按察司的官太太们听说了她的贤慧，召她上门，她婉词谢绝。
English: According to the inspector's wives, they heard about her wisdom and invited her to their homes, but she politely declined.

古文：已就见，则囚服见，手不释麻枲。
现代文：她们亲自到监狱探望，李氏还是穿着囚服相见，手里还没有放下麻粆编理的活儿。
English: They visited the prison in person, and Mr. Li still met them in his prison uniform, his hands still busy with making mochi.

古文：问其夫学，曰： 吾夫之学，不出闺门衽席间。 
现代文：问到她丈夫的学问，她说： 我丈夫的学问就是妇女不要走出闺门与衽席之间。 
English: Asked about her husband's teachings, she said: "My husband's teachings are that women should not go out between the maiden's door and the banquet.

古文：闻者悚然。
现代文：这些官太太们一听这话，顿时肃然起敬。
English: On hearing this, the officers' wives were awestruck.

古文：赞曰：王守仁始以直节著。比任疆事，提弱卒，从诸书生扫积年逋寇，平定孽藩。
现代文：评论：王守仁最初因为正直有节操而著名，等到负责疆场的战事的时候，率领一支无战斗力的军队，背后几个文弱书生，却也能扫除多年不法的乱民，平定藩王的武装叛乱。
English: Comment: At first, Wang Shouren was famous for his honesty and self-restraint. When he was put in charge of the battlefield, he led a non-combatant army, with a few weak scholars behind him, but he was able to sweep away the lawless rioters for many years and quell the armed rebellion of the king of the domain.

古文：终明之世，文臣用兵制胜，未有如守仁者也。
现代文：整个明朝一代，文官用兵而克敌制胜，没有像守仁这样出色的。
English: In the entire Ming Dynasty, there was no one as outstanding as Shujin in the generation of civil servants who used soldiers to defeat the enemy.

古文：当危疑之际，神明愈定，智虑无遗，虽由天资高，其亦有得于中者欤。
现代文：当着险难重重，并为皇帝疑心的时候，他能够做到精神专一、策划周到。这虽然因为他天资高明，不也是得益于他那精神世界吗？
English: In the face of danger and doubt for the emperor, he was able to be single-minded and well-planned. Although this was because of his talent, did he not also benefit from his spiritual world?

古文：矜其创获，标异儒先，卒为学者讥。
现代文：可是他夸耀自己的学术创见，标新立异，不同于先代的大儒，最后受到了学者的批评。
English: However, he boasted of his academic creativity, innovation, and difference from the previous generation of great scholars, and was eventually criticized by scholars.

古文：守仁尝谓胡世宁少讲学，世宁曰： 某恨公多讲学耳。 
现代文：守仁生前曾说胡世宁没有讲学，世宁说： 我倒是恨先生你多了讲学一事！ 
English: Before his death, Morihito had said that Hu Shining did not lecture, and Shining said: I really hate the fact that you lecture so much!

古文：桂萼之议虽出于媢忌之私，抑流弊实然，固不能以功多为讳矣。
现代文：桂萼对他的指责虽然源出嫉恨的私心，但守仁学说的流弊是那样的，这不能因为他功绩很多就为他忌讳不说。
English: Although Gui Caly's accusations against him stem from the selfishness of jealousy, the corruption of the Shou Ren doctrine is such that it cannot be shunned because of his many achievements.

