古文：大射之仪。
现代文：大射的礼仪：国君发布命令：准备射箭。
English: The etiquette of archery: The sovereign issues an order: Prepare to shoot arrows.

古文：君有命戒射，宰戒百官有事于射者。射人戒诸公、卿、大夫射，司士戒士射与赞者。
现代文：冢宰告诉百官将有射箭的事。射人告诉各公卿大夫准备射箭的事；司士告诉士人和辅佐的人准备射箭的事。
English: The eunuch told the hundred officials that there would be archery. The archer told the nobles and doctors to prepare for archery; the magistrate told the nobles and assistants to prepare for archery.

古文：前射三日，宰夫戒宰及司马、射人宿视涤。
现代文：射箭前三天，宰夫告诉宰和司马。
English: Three days before the archery, Zayev told Zayev and Sima.

古文：司马命量人量侯道与所设乏以貍步，大侯九十，参七十，干五十，设乏各去其侯西十、北十。
现代文：射人在射箭前一天查看射箭工具、器皿洗涤和场地扫除情况，是否准备齐整，司马命令量人测量发射处至射布的距离和要设置的躲避箭矢的位置。用貍步来量：有熊饰的射布距离九十步；有豹、麋装饰的射布距离七十步；有犴装饰的射布距离五十步。在距离各射布的西边十步，北边十步的地方设躲避箭矢地方。
English: On the day before the archery, the archer should check the status of the archery tools, the washing of the utensils and the sweeping of the site, and whether they are ready. Sima ordered the measurer to measure the distance from the launch site to the shooting cloth and the position of the arrows to be dodged. To measure with paces: the shooting cloth with bear decoration is 90 paces away; the shooting cloth with leopard and dragonfly decoration is 70 paces away; the shooting cloth with dragonfly decoration is 50 paces away. A place to dodge arrows is set 10 paces to the west and 10 paces to the north of each shooting cloth.

古文：遂命量人、巾车张三侯。大侯之崇，见鹄于参；参见鹄于干，干不及地，不系左下纲。
现代文：接着命令量人、巾车张挂三张射布，有熊饰的射布的高度，在有豹、麋饰的射布的上缘可看到中心的鹄；有豹、麋饰的射布的高度，在犴饰的射布的上缘可以看到中心的鹄；有犴饰的射布离地一尺二寸，不到地面，不系左下边的绳。
English: Next, he ordered the measurer and the drawer to hang up three shooting cloths. The height of the shooting cloth with a bear decoration can be seen in the upper edge of the shooting cloth with a leopard and a dragonfly decoration; the height of the shooting cloth with a leopard and a dragonfly decoration can be seen in the upper edge of the shooting cloth with a dragonfly decoration; the shooting cloth with a dragonfly decoration is one foot two inches from the ground, not reaching the ground, and does not tie the lower left rope.

古文：设乏西十、北十，凡乏用革。
现代文：在射布西边十步、北边十步的位置上设置躲避箭矢的器具，凡是用来躲避箭矢的器具都用皮革制成。
English: Arrows and arrows-dodging devices shall be placed ten paces to the west and ten paces to the north of the shooting cloth. All arrows and arrows-dodging devices shall be made of leather.

古文：乐人宿县于阼阶东，笙磬西面，其南笙钟，其南鑮，皆南陈。
现代文：乐人在射箭的前一天在东阶的东边悬乐器。笙、磬朝西，它的南边是笙钟。笙钟的南边是鑮，都靠近南边陈设。
English: On the day before the archery, the musicians hung musical instruments on the east side of the east steps. The gong and gong face west, and the gong bell is on the south side. The gong bell is on the south side of the gong bell, and they are all displayed close to the south side.

古文：建鼓在阼阶西，南鼓，应鼙在其东，南鼓。
现代文：建鼓在东阶的西边，敲击的鼓面朝南。应鼙在它的东边，敲击的鼓面朝南。
English: The standing drum is on the west side of the east step, and the beating drum faces south. The responding gong is on its east side, and the beating drum faces south.

古文：西阶之西，颂磬东面，其南钟，其南鑮，皆南陈。
现代文：在西阶的西边，颂磬朝东，它的南边是钟，钟的南边是鑮，都靠南陈设。
English: On the west side of the west steps, the chanting gong faces east, its south side is the bell, and the south side of the bell is the gong, all of which are set up to the south.

古文：一建鼓在其南，东鼓，朔鼙在其北。
现代文：一个建鼓在它们的南边，敲击的鼓面朝东，朔鼙在建鼓的北边。
English: A tambourine is on the south side of them, the beating face of the drum faces east, and the cymbals are on the north side of the tambourine.

古文：一建鼓在西阶之东，南面。
现代文：一个建鼓在西阶的东边，敲击鼓面朝南。
English: A drum is built on the east side of the west steps, and the drum is beaten facing south.

古文：簜在建鼓之间，□倚于颂磬西紘。
现代文：笙箫类的乐器在两个建鼓之间。鼗鼓倚放在颂磬旁，系鼗的绳子朝西。
English: A cymbal-like instrument is between two standing drums. The cymbal rests next to the psaltery, and the strings of the cymbals swing to the west.

古文：厥明，司宫尊于东楹之西，两方壶，膳尊两甒在南。有丰。幂用锡若絺，缀诸箭。盖幂加勺，又反之。
现代文：第二天，司宫在东楹柱的西边放置两个方壶。国君盛酒的两个瓦甒在南边，有丰，盖酒器的巾用细布或细葛布，把它们连缀在细竹上，盖上巾，放上勺，再把垂下的巾撩起盖在勺上。
English: On the second day, the palace secretary placed two square jars on the west side of the east pillar. The two corrugated jars containing the king's wine were on the south side, and there were plenty of them. The cloth used to cover the wine container was a thin cloth or a thin georgette cloth. They were attached to a thin bamboo, covered with a cloth, placed on a spoon, and then the hanging cloth was picked up and covered with a spoon.

古文：皆玄尊。酒在北。
现代文：都有玄尊，酒在北边。
English: All of them have Genson, and sake is on the north side.

古文：尊士旅食于西鑮之南，北面，两圜壶。
现代文：给士已入官未受正禄的人在西鑮的南边朝北放置两个圆壶。
English: The person who gave the salary to the person who had been appointed to the post but did not receive the salary placed two jars facing north on the south side of Xidi.

古文：又尊于大侯之乏东北，两壶献酒。
现代文：又在有熊饰射布的躲避箭矢器具的东北放两壶献酒。
English: In addition, two jars of wine were placed in the northeast corner of the arrow-dodging apparatus with a bear-decorated arrow cloth.

古文：设洗于阼阶东南，罍水在东，篚在洗西，南陈。
现代文：在东阶的东南放置洗。罍水在东边，篚在洗的西边，靠南陈设。
English: Place the washer on the southeast of the east step. The washing water is on the east side, and the ladle is on the west side of the washer, and it is set up on the south side.

古文：设膳篚在其北，西面。又设洗于获者之尊西北，水在洗北。篚在南，东陈。
现代文：在篚的北边朝西放置盛饭食的篚。又在获者的酒尊的西北放置洗。水在洗的北边，篚在洗的南边，靠东陈设。
English: On the north side of the urn, the urn containing the meal is placed facing west, and the washing is placed on the northwest side of the recipient's sake. The water is placed on the north side of the washing, and the urn is placed on the south side of the washing, facing east.

古文：小臣设公席于阼阶上，西乡。司宫设宾席于户西，南面，有加席。
现代文：小臣在东阶上为国君设席，席头朝西，司宫在室门的西边为主宾设席，席头朝南，有增加的席。
English: The vassal seats the sovereign on the east step, with the head of the table facing west, while the chief guest is seated on the west side of the chamber door, facing south, with an additional seat.

古文：卿席宾东，东上。小卿宾西，东上。
现代文：卿的席在主宾席的东边，以东边为上位，小卿的席在主宾席的西边，以东边为上位。
English: The lord's seat is on the east side of the chief guest's seat, with the east side being the highest, and the junior lord's seat is on the west side of the chief guest's seat, with the east side being the highest.

古文：大夫继而东上，若有东面者，则北上。
现代文：大夫的席位挨着小卿的席位也以东边为上位。如果有面朝东的席就以北边为上位。
English: The doctor's seat next to the small lord's seat is also higher on the east side. If there is a seat facing east, it is higher on the north side.

古文：席工于西阶之东，东上。
现代文：乐工的席位在西阶的东边以东边为上位。
English: The musicians' seats are on the east side of the west steps, with the east side being the highest.

古文：诸公阼阶西，北面，东上。
现代文：诸公的席位在东阶的西边，面朝北以东边为上位。
English: The seats of the princes are on the west side of the east steps, facing north, with the east side being the uppermost.

古文：官馔。羹定。
现代文：百官的饭食由膳宰分送到席位上。
English: The meal for the officials was brought from the dining hall to their seats.

古文：射人告具于公，公升，即位于席，西乡。
现代文：狗肉已经烹熟。射人向国君报告准备完备。国君登堂在席位上就座，面朝西。
English: The dog meat is already cooked. The shooters are ready to report to the sovereign. The sovereign enters the hall and takes a seat in the pew, facing west.

古文：小臣师纳诸公、卿、大夫，诸公、卿、大夫皆入门右，北面东上。
现代文：小臣师引领诸公卿大夫进入。诸公卿大夫都进到门的右侧，面朝北，以东边为上位。
English: The junior minister led the noble doctors in. The noble doctors all entered the right side of the door, facing north, with the east side as the upper side.

古文：士西方，东面北上。
现代文：士在西边，面朝东，以北边为上位。
English: Shishi is in the west, facing east, with the north as the upper side.

古文：大史在干侯之东北，北面东上。
现代文：太史在有犴饰的射布的东北方，面朝北，以东边为上位。
English: Taishi is in the northeast of the embroidered cloth, facing north, with the east side as the upper side.

古文：士旅食者在士南，北面东上。
现代文：士已入官未受正禄的人在士的南边，面朝北以东边为上位。
English: Those who have been appointed to the post but have not yet received their salary are placed on the south side of the post, facing north to east.

古文：小臣师从者在东堂下，南面西上。
现代文：小臣师的属下在东堂下，面朝南以西边为上位。
English: The subordinates of the junior minister division are under the east hall, facing south to west for the upper level.

古文：公降，立于阼阶之东南，南乡。
现代文：国君下堂站在东阶的东南，面朝南。
English: The lower court of the sovereign stands southeast of the eastern steps, facing south.

古文：小臣师诏揖诸公、卿大夫，诸公、卿大夫西面北上。
现代文：小臣师告诉并拱手行礼请诸公卿大夫，诸公卿大夫面朝西以北边为上位。
English: The junior minister told and bowed to the court noble doctors, and the court noble doctors faced west with the north side as the upper side.

古文：揖大夫，大夫皆少进。
现代文：小臣师向大夫拱手行礼，大夫都稍进前。
English: The junior minister bowed to the doctor, and the doctor stepped forward.

古文：大射正摈。
现代文：大射正为传命人。
English: Daesha is acting as a messenger.

古文：摈者请宾，公曰： 命某为宾。 
现代文：传命人请国君指定主宾。国君说： 命某大夫为主宾。 
English: The bearer of the order asked the sovereign to designate the chief guest. The sovereign said: I order a certain doctor to be the chief guest.

古文：摈者命宾，宾少进，礼辞。
现代文：传命人把国君的命令告诉主宾，主宾稍进前，行礼辞谢。
English: The bearer of the order tells the chief guest of the sovereign's order. The chief guest advances a little and thanks him with a curtsey.

古文：反命，又命之。
现代文：传命人把主宾的话告诉国君，国君又一次命令主宾。
English: The messenger told the words of the chief guest to the sovereign, who once again ordered the chief guest to leave.

古文：宾再拜稽首，受命。
现代文：主宾行两次稽首礼，接受命令。
English: The chief guest bowed twice and accepted the order.

古文：摈者反命。
现代文：传命人把主宾的话告诉国君。
English: The messenger told the words of the chief guest to the sovereign.

古文：宾出，立于门外，北面。
现代文：主宾出门，站在门外面朝北。
English: The chief guest went out and stood outside the door, facing north.

古文：公揖卿、大夫，升就席。
现代文：国君拱手行礼，卿大夫登堂就席。
English: The sovereign bowed his head and saluted, and the noble doctor took his seat.

古文：小臣自阼阶下北面，请执幂者与羞膳者。
现代文：小臣在东阶下面朝北，请拿盖巾的人和进献饮食的人。
English: The vassal faces north under the east staircase. The one who brings the handkerchief and the one who brings the food are invited to leave.

古文：乃命执幂者。执幂者升自西阶，立于尊南，北面东上。
现代文：接着以国君的命令命令掌盖巾的人，拿盖巾的人从西阶登堂，站在尊的南边，面朝北，以东边为上位。
English: Then, by order of the sovereign, he ordered those who held the handkerchiefs, and those who took the handkerchiefs, to enter the hall from the west steps, and to stand on the south side of the throne, facing north, with the east side being higher.

古文：膳宰请羞于诸公卿者。
现代文：膳宰请向诸公卿大夫进献饮食的人。
English: The butler brought delicious food to the nobles.

古文：摈者纳宾，宾及庭，公降一等揖宾，宾辟，公升，即席。
现代文：传命人引导主宾进入，主宾到庭，国君走下一级台级向主宾拱手行礼，主宾避开国君的礼。国君登堂就席。
English: The bearer of the order guides the chief guest to enter, the chief guest arrives at the court, the sovereign steps down one step to bow to the chief guest, the chief guest avoids the sovereign's bow. The sovereign enters the court and takes his seat.

古文：奏《肆夏》，宾升自西阶。
现代文：奏《肆夏》乐曲，主宾从西阶登堂，主人跟随他。
English: The music of "All Summer Long" was played, and the guest of honor entered the hall from the west steps, followed by the host.

古文：主人从之，宾右北面，至再拜。宾答再拜。
现代文：主宾站在右边，面朝北，主人登堂两次行拜礼，主宾回拜两次。
English: The chief guest stands on the right, facing north. The host enters the hall twice to pray, and the chief guest returns the prayer twice.

古文：主人降洗，洗南，西北面。
现代文：主人下堂洗涮，在洗的南边，面朝西北面。
English: The chief guest then returns the salute. The host comes down the hall to be baptised, on the south side of the font, facing northwest.

古文：宾降阶西，东面。
现代文：主宾下堂在台阶的西边，面朝东。
English: The chief guest enters the hall on the west side of the steps, facing east.

古文：主人辞降，宾对。
现代文：主人辞谢主宾下堂，主宾答谢。
English: The host declined to thank the guest of honor, and the guest of honor responded with thanks.

古文：主人北面盥，坐取觚，洗。宾少进，辞洗。
现代文：主人面朝北洗手，坐下拿觚洗涮，主宾稍进前，辞谢主人洗觚。
English: The host washes his hands facing north, sits down to take the basin and washes, the guest of honor comes forward a little, thanks the host and washes.

古文：主人坐奠觚于篚，兴对。宾反位。
现代文：主人坐下把觚放在篚中，站起来答谢，主宾返回台阶西边。
English: The host sits down, places the bowl in the urn, stands up and thanks the guest of honor, who returns to the west side of the steps.

古文：主人卒洗。宾揖，乃升。
现代文：主人洗完，主宾拱手行礼，然后登堂。
English: After the host finished washing, the guest of honor bowed and then entered the hall.

古文：主人升，宾拜洗。
现代文：主人登堂，主宾拜谢主人洗觚。
English: The host enters the hall, the chief guest thanks the host and washes the dishes.

古文：主人宾右奠觚答拜，降盥。
现代文：主人在主宾右边放下觚回拜。
English: The host places the gong on the right side of the guest of honor, bowing, and then goes down to wash his hands.

古文：宾降，主人辞降，宾对。
现代文：主人下堂洗手，主宾下堂，主人辞谢主宾下堂，主宾回谢。
English: The guest also went down the hall, the host thanked the guest for coming down the hall, and the guest also gave a speech.

古文：卒盥。宾揖升。主人升，坐取觚。
现代文：洗手完毕，主宾拱手行礼登堂，主人登堂，坐下取觚，拿盖巾的人掀起盖巾，主人斟酒。
English: After washing hands, the guest of honor enters the hall with a bow, the host enters the hall, sits down and takes the gong, the person holding the towel lifts the towel, and the host pours the wine.

古文：执幂者举幂，主人酌膳，执幂者盖幂。酌者加勺，又反之。筵前献宾。
现代文：拿盖巾的人盖上盖巾，斟酒的人把勺子放在盖巾上，拿盖巾的人把垂下的盖巾撩起盖在勺上，在席筵前献给主宾，主宾在西阶上拜谢。
English: The person with the napkin covers the napkin, the person pouring the wine puts the spoon on the napkin, the person with the napkin picks up the hanging napkin and covers it on the spoon, offering it to the guest of honor in front of the table, and the guest of honor thanks the guest of honor on the west steps.

古文：宾西阶上拜，受爵于筵前，反位。主人宾右拜送爵。
现代文：在席筵前接过酒爵，返回原位，主人在主宾的右侧为送上爵行拜礼。
English: After receiving the chevalier before the table, he returned to his original place. The host, on the right side of the chief guest, performed a prayer for the delivery of the chevalier.

古文：宰胥荐脯醢。宾升筵。庶子设折俎。
现代文：宰胥进献干肉、肉酱，主宾登上筵席，庶子摆上盛有牲体的俎。
English: The chief guest is seated at the banquet table, while the guest of honor is presented with dried meat and meat sauce, and the guest of honor is presented with a yakitori platter filled with animals.

古文：宾坐，左执觚，右祭脯醢，奠爵于荐右；兴取肺，坐绝祭，哜之；兴加于俎，坐兑手，执爵，遂祭酒，兴，席末坐啐酒，降席，坐奠爵，拜，告旨，执爵兴。
现代文：主宾坐下，左手拿觚，右手祭干肉、肉酱。把爵放在祭物的右边，站起来取肺，坐下行绝祭，尝肺，站起来，把肺放在俎上，坐下擦手，拿起酒爵，然后祭酒。站起来，在席的末端坐下尝酒，走下席位，坐下放下酒爵，行拜礼，告诉说 味道鲜美 。
English: The chief guest sits down, holds the yakitori in his left hand, and offers the dried meat and meat sauce in his right hand. He places the yakitori on the right side of the offering, stands up to take the lungs, sits down to perform the yakitori, tastes the lungs, stands up, places the lungs on the yakitori, sits down to wipe his hands, picks up the yakitori, and then offers the wine. Stands up, sits down at the end of the table to taste the wine, steps down from the seat, sits down and puts down the yakitori, prays, and says, "This is delicious."

古文：主人答拜。
现代文：拿着酒爵站起，主人回拜。
English: The host returns the compliment.

古文：乐阕。
现代文：音乐终止。
English: The music stops.

古文：宾西阶上北面坐，卒爵，兴；坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主宾在西阶上面朝北坐下，喝完爵中酒，站起来。
English: The chief guest sits down at the top of the west steps, facing north. After drinking the wine, he stands up.

古文：主人答拜。宾以虚爵降。主人降。
现代文：坐下放下爵，行拜礼，拿着爵站起，主人回拜。
English: Sit down, put down your sword, bow down, stand up with your sword, bow down to your master.

古文：宾洗南西北面坐奠觚，少进，辞降。
现代文：主宾拿着空爵下堂，主人下堂。主宾在洗的南边面朝西北，坐下放下觚。稍进前辞谢主人下堂。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall with the empty gong, and the host goes down the hall. The chief guest sits on the south side of the wash facing northwest, sits down and puts down the gong. A little forward to thank the host.

古文：主人西阶西东面少进对。
现代文：主人在西阶的西边，面朝东，稍进前回答。
English: The owner, on the west side of the west steps, facing east, stepped forward to answer.

古文：宾坐取觚，奠于篚下，盥洗。
现代文：主宾坐下拿觚放在篚的南边。
English: The chief guest sat down, took out the bowl and placed it on the south side of the bowl. He then washed his hands.

古文：主人辞洗。
现代文：洗手洗觚。主人辞谢洗觚。
English: The host declined.

古文：宾坐奠觚于篚，兴对，卒洗，及阶，揖升。
现代文：主宾坐下把觚放在篚中。
English: The chief guest sits down and places the bowl in the urn.

古文：主人升，拜洗如宾礼。宾降盥，主人降。
现代文：站起来回答。洗觚完毕，到台阶前，拱手行礼登堂，主人登堂，拜谢洗觚如同主宾的礼仪相同。主宾下堂洗手，主人下堂，主宾辞谢下堂。
English: Stand up and answer. After washing, go to the front of the steps, bow and enter the hall, the host enters the hall, and washes as the guest of honor. The guest of honor leaves the hall, washes his hands, the host leaves the hall, and the guest of honor leaves the hall.

古文：宾辞降，卒盥，揖升。
现代文：洗手完毕，拱手行礼登堂。
English: After washing your hands, go to the hall with a handshake.

古文：酌膳、执幂如初，以酢主人于西阶上。主人北面拜受爵。
现代文：斟酒、拿巾和初始时相同。在西阶上向主人敬酒，主人面朝北拜谢接受爵。
English: The pouring of the wine and the handing of the napkin are the same as at the beginning. The host is toasted on the west step, and the host bows his head to the north to receive the knighthood.

古文：宾主人之左拜送爵。
现代文：主宾在主人的左边为送上爵行拜礼。
English: The chief guest is on the host's left, performing the rite of investiture.

古文：主人坐祭，不啐酒，不拜酒，遂卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，不尝酒，不为酒行拜礼，然后喝完爵中酒站起。
English: The host sits down to the sacrificial wine, does not taste the wine, does not pray for the wine, and then stands up after drinking the wine.

古文：宾答拜。
现代文：坐下放下爵，行拜礼。
English: Sit down, put down the wine goblet, bow, take the goblet and stand up.

古文：主人不崇酒，以虚爵降，奠于篚。
现代文：拿着爵站起，主宾回拜。主人不添酒，拿着空爵下堂，放在篚中。
English: The host does not add wine, but takes the empty goblet down the hall and places it in the urn.

古文：宾降，立于西阶西，东面。
现代文：主宾下堂，站在西阶的西边，面朝东。
English: The chief guest went down the hall and stood on the west side of the west steps, facing east.

古文：摈者以命升宾。宾升，立于西序，东面。
现代文：传命人以国君的命令、命令主宾登堂，主宾登堂，站立在西墙下，面朝东。
English: The bearer of the order, by order of the sovereign, ordered the chief guest to enter the hall, the chief guest entered the hall, stood under the west wall, facing east.

古文：主人盥，洗象觚，升酌膳，东北面献于公。
现代文：主人洗手洗象觚，登堂斟酒。面朝东北献给国君。
English: The host washes his hands like an eunuch, enters the hall and pours wine. He faces northeast and offers it to the sovereign.

古文：公拜受爵，乃奏《肆夏》。
现代文：国君行拜礼接受象觚。然后奏《肆夏》乐曲。
English: The monarch went to the temple to receive the elephant tusks, after which the music of "Summer" was played.

古文：主人降自西阶，阼阶下北面拜送爵。
现代文：主人从西阶下堂，在东阶下面朝北为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: The host goes down the hall from the west steps and faces north on the east steps to offer prayers.

古文：宰胥荐脯醢，由左房。庶子设折俎，升自西阶。
现代文：宰胥从东边房中进献干肉、肉酱，庶子由西阶登堂摆放盛有牲体的俎。
English: The slaughterer brings dried meat and meat sauce from the eastern room, and the son-in-law places the yakitori filled with animal carcasses from the western staircase.

古文：公祭，如宾礼，庶子赞授肺。
现代文：国君祭与主宾的礼仪相同。
English: The etiquette of the Sovereign's Festival is the same as that of the chief guest.

古文：不拜酒，立卒爵；坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。主人答拜，乐阕。
现代文：庶子辅佐把肺献给国君，国君不为酒行拜礼，站着喝尽象觚中的酒，坐下放下象觚，行拜礼。拿着象觚站起，主人回拜，音乐终止。
English: The son-in-law offered his lungs to the sovereign, but the sovereign did not make a prayer for wine. He stood and drank all the wine in the goblet, sat down, put down the goblet, and made a prayer. He stood up with the goblet, the master bowed back, and the music stopped.

古文：升受爵，降奠于篚。
现代文：主人登堂接过象觚，下堂放在篚中。
English: The master went up to the hall to receive the elephant shovel, and put the lower hall in the shovel.

古文：更爵，洗，升，酌散以降；酢于阼阶下，北面坐奠爵，再拜稽首。公答拜。
现代文：更换酒器，主人洗觚。登堂从方壶中斟酒，拿着此酒下堂，在东阶下接受国君回敬。面朝北坐下，放下爵，两次行拜礼，行稽首礼，国君回拜。
English: Change the wine vessel, the host washes the gourd. Enter the hall, pour wine from the square jug, take this wine down the hall, accept the sovereign's return salute under the east steps. Sit facing north, put down the sword, perform two prostrations, perform the head bow, and the sovereign returns the salute.

古文：主人坐祭，遂卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，再拜稽首。公答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，然后喝完爵中酒，站起。坐下放下爵，行两次稽首礼，国君回拜。
English: The host sits down, drinks the sacrificial wine, and then stands up after drinking the wine in the chalice. He sits down, puts down the chalice, performs two bowing ceremonies, and the sovereign returns the bow.

古文：主人奠爵于篚。
现代文：主人把爵放在篚中。
English: The master put the knight in the urn.

古文：主人盥洗，升媵觚于宾，酌散，西阶上坐奠爵，拜。
现代文：主人洗手洗觚，登堂向主宾献觚，从方壶中斟酒，在西阶上坐下放下爵，行拜礼。
English: The host washes his hands and rinses his beard, enters the hall to present the beard to the chief guest, pours wine from a square jug, sits down on the west steps, puts down the cross, and prays.

古文：宾西阶上北面答拜。
现代文：主宾在西阶上面朝北回拜。
English: The guests bowed to their host on the west steps, facing north.

古文：主人坐祭，遂饮。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，然后喝酒。
English: The host sits down to a libation, then drinks.

古文：宾辞。卒爵兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：主宾辞谢主人代国君饮酒，不站着饮。
English: The chief guest thanked the host and drank on behalf of the sovereign, not standing up.

古文：宾答拜。主人降洗，宾降。
现代文：主人喝完酒站起，坐下放下爵，行拜礼。拿着酒爵站起，主宾回拜。
English: When the host has finished drinking, he stands up, sits down, puts down his goblet, and prays. He stands up with his goblet, and the guest of honor prays back.

古文：主人辞降，宾辞洗。
现代文：主人下堂洗觚，主宾下堂，主人辞谢主宾下堂，主宾辞谢主人洗觚。
English: The host goes down the hall to wash dishes, the guest of honor goes down the hall, the host thanks the guest of honor goes down the hall, the guest of honor thanks the host for washing dishes.

古文：卒洗。宾揖升，不拜洗。
现代文：洗觚完毕，主宾拱手行礼登堂，不拜谢洗觚。
English: After washing the dishes, the guest of honor made a grand entrance, thanking the launderer profusely.

古文：主人酌膳。宾西阶上拜，受爵于筵前，反位。
现代文：主人斟酒，主宾在西阶上行拜礼，在筵席前接过酒爵，返回原位。
English: The host pours the wine, the guest of honor performs a prayer on the west steps, receives the host before the banquet, and returns to his original place.

古文：主人拜送爵。
现代文：主人为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: The host sends the baron a bottle of wine and thanks him profusely.

古文：宾升席，坐祭酒，遂奠于荐东。
现代文：主宾登席就位，坐下祭酒。接着把酒爵放在祭物的东边。
English: The chief guest mounts the seat, sits down the sacrificial wine, and then places the wine goblet on the east side of the offering.

古文：主人降，复位。
现代文：主人下堂回到原位。
English: The host went down the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：宾降筵西，东南面立。
现代文：主宾走下席位，在筵席的西边，面朝东南站立。
English: The chief guest enters the hall from the west side of the table and stands facing southeast.

古文：小臣自阼阶下请媵爵者，公命长。
现代文：小臣由东阶下请国君命定献酒爵的人。
English: A person whose vassal invites the sovereign to offer a knighthood from beneath the East Steps.

古文：小臣作下大夫二人媵爵。
现代文：国君命令从长者中挑选。小臣让下大夫二人献爵。
English: The person who is the first among the doctors appointed by the sovereign. The junior minister conveys the sovereign's order to have the two doctors knighted.

古文：媵爵者阼阶下皆北面再拜稽首。
现代文：献爵的人在东阶下，都面朝北行两次稽首礼。
English: At the foot of the East Staircase, those who were to be knighted all performed the ceremonial bow twice, facing north.

古文：公答拜。
现代文：国君回拜。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：媵爵者立于洗南，西面北上，序进，盥洗角觯，升自西阶，序进，酌散，交于楹北，降，适阼阶下，皆奠觯，再拜稽首，执觯兴。公答拜。
现代文：献爵的人站在洗的南边，面朝西以北为上位，依次进前洗手，洗角觯。由西阶登堂，依次进前从方壶中斟酒，在西楹柱的北边交错。下堂，到东阶下，都放下觯，行两次稽首礼。拿着觯站起，国君回拜。
English: The person offering the knighthood stood on the south side of the wash, facing west to north as the higher rank, and in turn went forward to wash his hands and wash the horn. From the west steps, he entered the hall, poured wine from a square jug, and staggered on the north side of the west pillar. Down the hall and to the east steps, he put down the gong and performed the bowing ceremony twice. He stood up with the gong and the sovereign bowed back.

古文：媵爵者皆坐祭，遂卒觯，兴，坐奠觯，再拜稽首，执觯兴。公答再拜。
现代文：献爵的人都坐下祭酒，接着把觯中酒喝尽，站起。坐下放下觯，行两次稽首礼。拿着觯站起，国君回拜两次。
English: The knights all sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then drink up the wine in their goblets and stand up. Sit down, put down your goblets, and perform two prostrations. Stand up with your goblets, and the sovereign will bow twice.

古文：媵爵者执觯待于洗南。
现代文：献爵的人拿着觯在洗的南边等待。
English: The bearer of the knighthood stood on the south side of the Wash with a scepter, awaiting the death of the monarch.

古文：小臣请致者。
现代文：小臣请国君指定献觯的人。
English: The vassal asked the sovereign to designate a person to present the scepter.

古文：若命皆致，则序进，奠觯于篚，阼阶下皆北面再拜稽首。
现代文：如果让二人都献觯就依次进献，把觯放在篚里，在东阶下都面朝北行两次稽首礼。
English: If both of them are asked to present the urns, they should present them in turn, place the urns in the urns, and both face north at the bottom of the east steps and perform the ceremonial bowing twice.

古文：公答拜。
现代文：国君回拜。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：媵爵者洗象觯，升实之；序进，坐奠于荐南，北上；降，适阼阶下，皆再拜稽首送觯。公答拜。
现代文：献爵的人洗象觯，登堂，斟酒，依次进前，坐下把象觯放在祭物的南边，以北边为上位。下堂，到东阶下，都为送上象觯行两次稽首礼。国君回拜。
English: The person offering the knighthood washes the elephant tusk, enters the hall, pours the wine, advances in turn, sits down and places the elephant tusk on the south side of the sacrifice, with the north side as the higher side. Down the hall and to the east steps, two bowing ceremonies are performed to present the elephant tusk. The sovereign returns the bow.

古文：媵爵者皆退反位。
现代文：献觯的人都退回到门右北面的位置。
English: Those who had offered their gifts retreated to a position on the north right side of the door.

古文：公坐取大夫所媵觯，兴以酬宾。
现代文：国君坐下拿过大夫所献的象觯，站起，向主宾敬酒。
English: The sovereign sat down, took the scepter offered by the doctor, stood up and used it to reward the chief guest.

古文：宾降，西阶下再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾下堂，在西阶下行两次稽首礼。
English: The chief guest went down the hall, bowed twice under the west steps, and performed the ceremonial bow.

古文：公坐奠觯，答拜，执觯兴。
现代文：小臣之长辞谢。主宾登堂行两次拜礼。国君坐下放下象觯，回拜。
English: The chief guest enters the hall and performs two prostrations. The sovereign sits down, puts down the elephant saddle, and returns the prostration.

古文：宾进，受虚觯，降，奠于篚，易觯，兴洗，公有命，则不易不洗。
现代文：拿着象觯站起，主宾进前接过空象觯，下堂，把象觯放在篚中。换觯，站起来，洗觯。国君命令：不换，不洗。
English: He stood up holding the elephant shovel. The chief guest stepped forward and took the empty elephant shovel. He went down the hall and placed the elephant shovel in the urn. He changed the urn, stood up, and washed the urn. The sovereign ordered: do not change, do not wash.

古文：反升酌膳，下拜。
现代文：返回来登堂斟酒，再下堂行拜礼。
English: After returning, they went to the church to pour wine, and then went down to pray.

古文：小臣正辞。
现代文：小臣之长辞谢。
English: My junior minister is resigning.

古文：宾升，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾登堂行两次稽首礼。
English: The chief guest enters the church, performs two prostrations, and performs the ceremonial head salute.

古文：公答拜。
现代文：国君回拜。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：宾告于摈者，请旅诸臣。
现代文：主宾告诉传命人，请求依次向群臣劝酒。
English: The chief guest told the bearer of the order to ask the ministers in turn to be persuaded to drink.

古文：摈者告于公，公许。
现代文：传命人报告给国君，国君允许。
English: The bearer of the order reports to the sovereign, who grants permission.

古文：宾以旅大夫于西阶上。摈者作大夫长升受旅。
现代文：主宾在西阶上依次向大夫劝酒。传命人让大夫长登堂接受劝酒。
English: The chief guest persuades the doctor to drink in turn on the west steps. The bearer of the order has the doctor-in-chief come into the hall to accept the persuasion.

古文：宾大夫之右坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主宾在大夫的右边，坐下，放下觯，行拜礼。拿着觯站起。
English: The chief guest is on the right side of the doctor, sits down, puts down the sickle, and prays. Stands up with the sickle.

古文：大夫答拜。
现代文：大夫回拜。
English: The doctor returned the compliment.

古文：宾坐祭，立卒觯，不拜。
现代文：主宾坐下祭酒，站着喝尽觯中酒，不行拜礼。
English: The chief guest sits down to the sacrificial wine, stands and drinks all the wine in the goblet, and does not pray.

古文：若膳觯也，则降、更觯，洗，升实散。
现代文：如果是象觯，就下堂更换酒觯，洗觯。登堂，认方壶中斟酒。
English: If it is like a gourd, go down to the hall to change the gourd, wash the gourd. Go up to the hall and pour the wine into a jug.

古文：大夫拜受。
现代文：大夫拜谢接受。
English: The doctor gratefully accepted.

古文：宾拜送，遂就席。
现代文：主宾为送上酒觯行拜礼，接着就席。
English: The chief guest bows to receive the wine and then takes his seat.

古文：大夫辩受酬，如受宾酬之礼，不祭酒。
现代文：大夫们都接受了敬酒，如同接受主宾敬酒的礼仪，不祭酒。
English: The doctors all accepted the toast, as is the etiquette of accepting the toast of the chief guest, without offering wine.

古文：卒受者以虚觯降，奠于篚，复位。
现代文：最后接受敬酒的人拿着空觯下堂，把空觯放在篚里，返回原位。
English: Finally, the person receiving the toast leaves the hall with the empty urn, places it in the urn, and returns to the original position.

古文：主人洗觚，升实散，献卿于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗觚，登堂，从方壶中斟酒，在西阶上献给卿。
English: The host washes the basin, enters the hall, pours wine from a square jug, and offers it to the lord on the west steps.

古文：司宫兼卷重席，设于宾左，东上。
现代文：司宫在主宾的左侧给每个卿都铺设重席，以东边为上位。
English: The imperial palace lays a double-layered cloth for the lord, placing it on the left side of the chief guest, with the east side as the upper side.

古文：卿升，拜受觚。
现代文：卿登堂，行拜礼接受觚。
English: The lord enters the hall, performs a prayer, and receives the gong.

古文：主人拜送觚。
现代文：主人为送上觚行拜礼。
English: The master of the house went up to pay his respects.

古文：卿辞重席，司宫彻之。
现代文：卿辞让重席，司宫撤去。
English: The lord resigned his important seat, and the imperial palace was evacuated.

古文：乃荐脯醢。
现代文：然后进献干肉、肉酱。
English: Then dry meat and meat sauce are added.

古文：卿升席。庶子设折俎。
现代文：卿登席就位，庶子摆放盛有牲体的俎。
English: The lord takes his place at the table, and the son-in-law sets out the urn containing the animal.

古文：卿坐，左执爵，右祭脯醢，奠爵于荐右，兴，取肺，坐，绝祭，不哜肺，兴，加于俎，坐梲手，取爵，遂祭酒，执爵兴，降席，西阶上北面坐卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵兴。
现代文：卿坐下，左手拿酒爵，右手祭干肉、肉酱，把酒爵放在祭物的右边，站起来，取肺，坐下绝祭，不尝肺。
English: Sir, sit down, take the wine goblet in your left hand, offer the dried meat and meat sauce in your right hand, put the wine goblet on the right side of the sacrifice, stand up, take the lungs, sit down and do not taste the lungs.

古文：主人答拜，受爵。
现代文：拿着酒爵站起，主人回拜，接受酒爵。
English: The master returns to worship and receives a knighthood.

古文：卿降，复位。
现代文：卿下堂回到朝西的位置。
English: Kyo-shita-do returns to the west-facing position.

古文：辩献卿。
现代文：献酒给所有的卿。
English: A toast to all the lords.

古文：主人以虚爵降，奠于篚。
现代文：主人拿着空爵下堂，把它放在篚里。
English: The host went down the hall with the empty sword and placed it in the urn.

古文：摈者升卿，卿皆升，就席。
现代文：传命人让卿登堂，卿都登堂就席位。
English: The man who passed on the order let the nobles enter the hall, and all the nobles entered and took their seats.

古文：若有诸公，则先卿献之，如献卿之礼，席于阼阶西，北面东上，无加席。
现代文：如果有诸公，就在卿前先献酒给他们，其礼仪与献卿的礼仪相同。其席位在东阶的西边，面朝北，以东边为上位，没有增加的席。
English: If there are nobles, offer them wine before the lord, and the etiquette is the same as the etiquette for offering the lord. Their seats are on the west side of the east step, facing north, with the east side as the higher side, and there are no additional seats.

古文：小臣又请媵爵者，二大夫媵爵如初。
现代文：小臣又一次请国君指定献爵的人，二大夫献爵同初始时一样。
English: The junior minister once again asked the sovereign to appoint a person to confer the title of knight. The second daifu conferred the same title as at the beginning.

古文：请致者。若命长致，则媵爵者奠觯于篚，一人待于洗南，长致者阼阶下再拜稽首，公答拜。
现代文：请国君指定献爵的人，如果命令长者一人献觯，那么，献爵的人就把觯放在篚中。一人在洗的南边等待。献觯的长者在东阶下行两次稽首礼。国君回拜。
English: If you ask the sovereign to designate a person to present the scepter, and if you order one of the elders to present the scepter, then the person to present the scepter will place the scepter in the scepter. One person will wait on the south side of the laver. The elder who presents the scepter will perform the genuflection twice under the east steps. The sovereign returns the bow.

古文：洗象觯，升实之，坐奠于荐南，降，与立于洗南者二人皆再拜稽首送觯。公答拜。公又行一爵，若宾，若长，唯公所赐。
现代文：献觯的长者洗象觯，登堂斟酒。
English: The elder of the offering washes the elephant dung and goes to the hall to pour the wine.

古文：以旅于西阶上，如初。大夫卒受者以虚觯降，奠于篚。
现代文：国君又一次举起放在祭物南边的象觯，或主宾，或长者，任国君赐予，如果赐予主宾，主宾在西阶上依次向大夫敬酒，大夫中最后接受敬酒的人，拿着空觯下堂，把它放在篚中。
English: Once again, the sovereign raises the elephant urn, or the chief guest, or the elder, which is placed on the south side of the offering, and allows the sovereign to give it. If the chief guest is given, the chief guest will toast the doctor in turn on the west steps. The last doctor to accept the toast will take the empty urn down the hall and place it in the urn.

古文：主人洗觚，升，献大夫于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗觚，登堂，在西阶上献给大夫。
English: The host washes the crockery, enters the hall, and offers it to the doctor on the west steps.

古文：大夫升，拜受觚。
现代文：大夫登堂，行拜礼接受觚。
English: The doctor enters the church and goes through the rite of receiving the urn.

古文：主人拜送觚。
现代文：主人为送上觚行拜礼。
English: The master of the house went up to pay his respects.

古文：大夫坐祭，立卒爵，不拜既爵。
现代文：大夫坐下祭酒，站着喝尽爵中酒。不拜谢。
English: The host washes and goes up to the hall, offers wine to the doctor on the west steps, and the doctor goes up to the hall to receive the wine. He sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, stands up to finish the wine, and does not pray for the sake of drinking the wine.

古文：主人受爵。大夫降复位。
现代文：已经喝尽爵中酒，主人接过空爵，大夫下堂回到原位。
English: The host received a knighthood, the doctor left the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：胥荐主人于洗北，西面。
现代文：胥宰在洗的北边，面朝西向主人进献干肉、肉酱，没有牲体。
English: The slaughterhouse is on the north side of the wash, facing west, offering dry meat and meat sauce to the owner. There is no animal.

古文：脯醢，无脀。
现代文：逐一向大夫献酒，接着进献干肉、肉酱。
English: One by one, the doctors were offered wine, followed by the dry meat and meat sauce.

古文：辩献大夫，遂荐之，继宾以西，东上，若有东面者，则北上。
现代文：挨着主宾西边，以东边为上位，如果有面朝东者，就以北边为上位。
English: Next to the main guest on the west side, the east side is superior, and if there is a person facing east, the north side is superior.

古文：卒，摈者升大夫。大夫皆升，就席。
现代文：献毕，传命人让大夫登堂，大夫都登堂就席。
English: After the dedication, the preacher invited the doctors to enter the hall, and they all took their seats.

古文：乃席工于西阶上，少东。
现代文：然后在西阶上稍东的地方为乐工设席。
English: Then seats are set up for the musicians a little to the east on the west steps.

古文：小臣纳工，工六人，四瑟。
现代文：小臣引乐工进入。乐工六人，四人鼓瑟。
English: A junior minister ushered the musicians in. Six musicians and four drummers marched.

古文：仆人正徒相大师，仆人师相少师，仆人士相上工。
现代文：仆人之长空手扶助大师，仆人师扶助少师，仆人士扶助上瞽。
English: The servant karate master helps the master, the servant instructor helps the junior instructor, and the servants help the apprentice.

古文：相者皆左何瑟，后首，内弦，挎越，右手相。
现代文：扶助上工的人都左手拿瑟、瑟头朝后，弦朝里，抠住瑟下小孔，右手扶助上工。
English: Those who support the workers should hold the saddle in their left hand, hold the saddle in the morning, hold the saddle in the afternoon, hold the small hole under the saddle, and support the workers with their right hand.

古文：后者徒相入。
现代文：扶助大师、少师的人空手扶着他们进入。
English: The people supporting the master and the apprentice enter with empty hands.

古文：小乐正从之。
现代文：小乐正跟随着他们，由西阶登堂。
English: Xiaole is following them, walking up from the west steps.

古文：升自西阶，北面东上。坐授瑟，乃降。小乐正立于西阶东。
现代文：乐工六人面朝北以东为上位，坐下，扶助上工的人把瑟交给他们，然后下堂站在西悬的北边。小乐正站立在西阶的东边。
English: The six musicians, facing north and east, are at the top, sit down, help the musicians to give them their shirts, and then go down to stand on the north side of the west staircase. Xiaole is standing on the east side of the west staircase.

古文：乃歌《鹿鸣》三终。
现代文：然后乐工歌唱《鹿鸣》三遍。
English: The musicians then sing "Deersong" three times.

古文：主人洗，升实爵，献工。
现代文：主人洗觚，登堂，斟酒献给乐工。
English: The host washes the urns, enters the church, and pours wine for the musicians.

古文：工不兴，左瑟；一人拜受爵。
现代文：乐工不站起，把瑟放在左边，一人行拜礼接过酒爵。
English: The musician does not stand up, but places the reed on his left, and goes alone to receive the baron.

古文：主人西阶上拜送爵。
现代文：主人在西阶上为送上爵行拜礼。
English: On the west steps, the owner is performing a religious service for the delivery of a peerage.

古文：荐脯醢。使人相祭。卒爵，不拜。
现代文：进献干肉、肉酱，让人帮助乐工祭，喝完爵中酒，不拜谢。
English: Offer dried meat, meat sauce, let people help the music festival, drink the wine, do not thank.

古文：主人受虚爵。
现代文：主人接过空爵。
English: The master took over the empty chair.

古文：众工不拜，受爵，坐祭，遂卒爵。
现代文：众乐工不拜谢接过酒爵，坐下祭酒，把爵中酒喝完。
English: The musicians accepted the chalice without thanking him, sat down to drink the sacrificial wine, and finished the wine in the chalice.

古文：辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：都有干肉、肉酱，不祭。
English: All musicians have dried meat and meat sauce, but no sacrificial wine.

古文：主人受爵，降奠于篚，复位。
现代文：主人接过爵，下堂，把爵放在篚中，回到原位。
English: The master took the knight, went down the hall, put the knight in the urn, and returned to his original place.

古文：大师及少师、上工皆降，立于鼓北，群工陪于后。乃管《新宫》三终。
现代文：大师和少师上工都下堂站在鼓的北边，众乐工在后边陪立。然后吹奏《新宫》三遍。
English: Both the master and the apprentice went to the hall and stood on the north side of the drum, and all the musicians stood behind them. Then they played "Xin Gong" three times.

古文：卒管。大师及少师、上工皆东坫之东南，西面北上，坐。
现代文：吹奏完毕，大师和少师上工都在东边土坫的东南方坐下，面朝西以北边为上位。
English: After playing, both the master and the apprentice sat down on the southeast side of the mound on the east side, facing west with the north side as the upper side.

古文：摈者自阼阶下请立司正。公许，摈者遂为司正。
现代文：传命人在东阶下请国君立司正，国君允许，传命人于是充当司正。
English: The bearer of the order asked the sovereign to set up a secretary under the eastern staircase. The sovereign allowed it, and the bearer of the order then acted as a secretary.

古文：司正适洗，洗角觯，南面坐奠于中庭，升，东楹之东受命于公，西阶上北面命宾、诸公、卿、大夫。
现代文：司正到洗前，洗角觯，面朝南在中庭坐下，放下角觯。司正登堂，在东楹柱的东边接受国君的命令，在西阶上面朝北命令主宾诸公卿大夫。
English: Prior to the ablution, the priest washes the horn, sits down in the atrium facing south, and puts down the horn. The priest enters the hall, receives the sovereign's order on the east side of the east pillar, and commands the chief guests, the nobles and doctors, on the west side of the west staircase.

古文：公曰： 以我安！ 
现代文：国君说： 以我的意愿使宾客安坐。 
English: The sovereign said: Let the guests be seated according to my wishes.

古文：宾、诸公、卿、大夫毕对曰： 诺！敢不安？ 
现代文：诸公卿大夫都回答说： 是，怎敢不安坐。 
English: All the nobles and doctors replied, "Yes, how dare you not sit down."

古文：司正降自西阶，南面坐取觯，升、酌散、降，南面坐奠觯、兴，右还，北面少立、坐取觯，兴、坐，不祭，卒觯，奠之，兴、再拜稽首，左还，南面坐取觯，洗、南面反奠于其所，北面立。司射适次，袒决遂，执弓，挟乘矢，于弓外见镞于弣，右巨指钩弦。
现代文：喝完觯中酒，放下觯。站起来，行两次稽首礼。向左转身，面朝南坐下取觯，洗觯。面朝南把角觯放回原来位置，面朝北站立。司射到更衣的地方，露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，在弓把外夹持四枝箭，箭头在弓把中部位置，右手大拇指钩弦。
English: After drinking the wine from the gourd, put down the gourd. Stand up and perform two prostrations. Turn to the left, sit down facing south, take the gourd, wash the gourd. Face south, put the horn gourd back to its original position, stand facing north. The player shoots to the changing place, exposes his left arm, puts on the wrench, puts on the leather jerkin, holds the bow, holds four arrows outside the bow handle, the arrow is in the middle of the bow handle, and the right thumb hooks the string.

古文：自阼阶前曰： 为政请射。 
现代文：司射在东阶前对国君说： 请司马行射礼。 
English: The archer said to the sovereign in front of the east steps, "Please ask Sima to perform the archery salute."

古文：遂告曰： 大夫与大夫，士御于大夫。 
现代文：接着报告说： 大夫和大夫为耦，不足由士侍于大夫，与大夫为耦。 
English: Then the report said: "The doctor and the doctor are a couple, and it is not enough for the doctor to serve the doctor, and the doctor to be a couple.

古文：遂适西阶前，东面右顾，命有司纳射器，射器皆入。
现代文：于是到西阶前，面朝东，向右回头命令属吏拿射箭器具，射箭器具都拿进来。
English: So he went to the west front, facing east, and turned around to the right to order the officials to take the archery equipment, and the archery equipment was brought in.

古文：君之弓矢适东堂。宾之弓矢与中、筹、丰，皆止于西堂下。
现代文：国君的弓矢放在东墙的东边，主宾的弓矢和中、筹码、丰都放在西堂的西边。
English: The bow and arrows of the sovereign are placed on the east side of the east wall, and the bow and arrows of the chief guest are placed in the middle, chips, and richness on the west side of the west hall.

古文：众弓矢不挟。手忽众弓矢、楅，皆适次而俟。
现代文：众人的弓矢不拿，把众人的弓矢和承矢的器具集中在一起，放到更衣的地方，等待。
English: Instead of taking the people's bows and arrows, he gathered the people's bows and arrows and arrow-making equipment together, put them in the changing area, and waited.

古文：工人、士与梓人升自北阶，两楹之间。
现代文：工人士和梓人由北阶登堂，在两根楹柱中间测量尺寸，或红色或黑色，画出一横一竖垂直交叉的标志做为射箭站立的地方。
English: Workers and carpenters enter the hall from the northern steps, measure the size, either red or black, in the middle of the two pillars, and draw a horizontal and vertical cross sign as a place to stand for archery.

古文：射正莅之。
现代文：射正亲临现场视看。
English: The shooters were on site to watch.

古文：卒画，自北阶下。
现代文：画完，由北阶下堂。
English: After painting, go down the hall from the north steps.

古文：司宫扫所画物，自北阶下。
现代文：司宫打扫画物的地方，由北阶下堂。
English: When cleaning the paintings, go down from the north staircase.

古文：大史俟于所设中之西，东面以听政。
现代文：太史在将设置中的位置的西边，面朝东等待执掌自己的政事。
English: Taishi is on the west side of the position that will be set up, facing east, waiting to take charge of his own affairs.

古文：司射西面誓之曰： 公射大侯，大夫射参，士射干。
现代文：司射面朝西告诉太史说： 国君射画有熊饰的射布；大夫射画有豹、麋饰的射布；士射画有犴饰的射布。
English: Asahi, the shooting master, told Taishi: The king shoots a shooting cloth with a bear decoration; the doctor shoots a shooting cloth with a leopard and a dragonfly decoration; the scholar shoots a shooting cloth with a dragonfly decoration.

古文：射者非其侯，中之不获！
现代文：射箭的人射的不是自己应射的射布，射中不算。
English: An archer does not shoot at the target he is supposed to shoot at, and it is not counted as a hit.

古文：卑者与尊者为耦，不异侯！ 
现代文：地位卑微的人和尊贵的人结为一耦，二人同射一个射布。 
English: A lowly person and a high-ranking person are united as a couple, and the two of them shoot a piece of cloth.

古文：大史许诺。
现代文：太史答应了。
English: Taishi agreed.

古文：遂比三耦。
现代文：接着比配三耦。
English: This is followed by the three-couple combination.

古文：三耦俟于次北，西面北上。
现代文：三耦在更衣的地方的北边站立，面朝西以北边为上位。
English: The three couples stand on the north side of the changing area, facing west, with the north side being the highest.

古文：司射命上射，曰： 某御于子。 
现代文：司射告诉上射说： 某人侍侯您射箭。 
English: The archer told the archer: "Someone is waiting for you to shoot arrows.

古文：命下射，曰： 子与某子射。 
现代文：告诉下射说： 您和某人射箭。 
English: Tell the archer: You are going to shoot arrows with someone.

古文：卒，遂命三耦取弓矢于次。
现代文：说完，接着告诉三耦到更衣的地方取弓矢。
English: Having said that, he then told the three couples to go to the changing area to get their bows and arrows.

古文：司射入于次，搢三挟一个，出于次，西面揖，当阶北面揖，及阶揖，升堂揖，当物北面揖，及物揖，由下物少退，诱射。
现代文：司射进到更衣的地方，腰插三枝箭，两指夹持一枝箭从更衣的地方出来。面朝西拱手行礼。对着台阶面朝北拱手行礼，到台阶拱手行礼，登堂拱手行礼，对着物面朝北拱手行礼，到物前拱手行礼，从下物稍退后，引导射箭。
English: The archer enters the changing area, sticks three arrows in his waist, and comes out from the changing area with two fingers holding one arrow. He bowed with his face to the west. He bowed with his face to the north on the steps, bowed with his face to the steps, bowed with his face to the hall, bowed with his face to the north on the cloth, bowed with his face to the front of the cloth, bowed with his face to the west, bowed with his face to the north on the steps, bowed with his face to the north on the steps, bowed with his face to the front of the cloth, bowed with his face to the front

古文：射三侯，将乘矢，始射干，又射参，大侯再发。卒射，北面揖。
现代文：向三张射布射箭，每人射四枝箭。开始向画有犴饰的射布射箭，再向画有豹、麋图饰的射布射箭，再向画有熊饰的射布射箭。射完，面朝北拱手行礼。
English: They shot arrows at three shooting cloths, four arrows each. They started by shooting arrows at a shooting cloth decorated with a dragonfly, then at a shooting cloth decorated with a leopard and a dragonfly, and then at a shooting cloth decorated with a bear. After shooting, they bowed their heads to the north.

古文：及阶，揖降，如升射之仪。
现代文：到台阶，拱手行礼下堂，和登堂射箭的礼仪相同。
English: When you reach the steps, bow your heads and walk down the hall, the same as the etiquette for entering the hall for archery.

古文：遂适堂西，改取一个挟之。
现代文：接着到堂的西边，改取一枝箭，两指夹持。
English: Next, go to the west side of the hall, take an arrow instead, and hold it with two fingers.

古文：遂取扑搢之，以立于所设中之西南，东面。
现代文：然后拿扑，插入腰带，站立在将设置中的地方的西南，面朝东。
English: Then take the plunge, insert the girdle, and stand facing east, southwest of where you will be setting up.

古文：司马师命负侯者： 执旌以负侯。 
现代文：司马师命令负侯的人拿着旌旗背向射布。
English: Sima ordered the person in charge of the camp to take the banner and shoot the cloth with his back.

古文：负侯者皆适侯，执旌负侯而俟。
现代文：负侯的人都到射布前，拿着旌旗背向射布等着。
English: All those who were responsible for the disaster went to the front of the firing cloth and waited with their backs to the firing cloth, holding the banner.

古文：司射适次，作上耦射。
现代文：司射到更衣的地方，让上耦射箭。
English: The archer shoots into the changing area, allowing the upper pair to shoot arrows.

古文：司射反位。上耦出次，西面揖进。上射在左，并行。
现代文：司射返回原位，上耦走出更衣的地方，面朝西拱手行礼前行。上射在左边，同行。
English: The shooters return to their original positions, the upper couples come out of the changing area, face west, and walk forward with a bow. The upper shooters are on the left, walking together.

古文：当阶北面揖，及阶揖。
现代文：对着台阶面朝北拱手行礼，到台阶前拱手行礼。
English: Bow to the north of the steps, bow to the front of the steps.

古文：上射先升三等，下射从之，中等。
现代文：上射先登上三级台阶，下射跟在后面，隔一级台阶。
English: The upper shot first goes up three steps, the lower shot then climbs the steps, and the upper shot is separated by one step.

古文：上射升堂，少左。
现代文：上射登堂稍左。
English: Go up the stairs a little to the left.

古文：下射升，上射揖，并行。
现代文：下射登堂，上射拱手行礼，同行。
English: The lower shot enters the hall, the upper shot makes a bow, and they walk together.

古文：皆当其物北面揖，及物揖。
现代文：都对着物面朝北拱手行礼，到物前拱手行礼。
English: They all bow to the kimono face facing north, and bow to the front of the kimono.

古文：皆左足履物，还，视侯中，合足而俟。
现代文：都用左足踩物，转身看射布中心。两足合并等。
English: Use your left foot to step on the object, turn around to look at the center of the mark. Join both feet, etc.

古文：司马正适次，袒决遂，执弓，右挟之，出，升自西阶，适下物，立于物间，左执弣，右执箫，南扬弓，命去侯。
现代文：司马正到更衣的地方，露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，右手夹持箭，出来，由西阶登堂，到达左边的物，站在两个物中间，左手拿着弓，右手拿着弓梢，向南举起弓，命令负侯的人离开射布。
English: Sima was on his way to the changing area. He bared his left arm, put on his ring finger, put on his leather armour, took a bow, held an arrow in his right hand, came out, went up the west steps, reached the object on the left, stood in the middle of the two objects, held the bow in his left hand, held the bow tips in his right hand, raised the bow to the south, and ordered the person in charge to leave the shooting cloth.

古文：负侯皆许诺，以宫趋，直西，及乏南，又诺以商，至乏，声止，授获者，退立于西方。
现代文：负侯人用宫声答应着快速向西到达避箭器具的南边，又用商声答应着直到避箭器具的地方，声音停止。负侯的人把旌旗交给代替他的人，退后站在西方。
English: The bearer of the imperial seal promised with the imperial voice to quickly move westward to the south of the arrow-dodging apparatus, and with the merchant's voice promised to go to the place of the arrow-dodging apparatus, and the sound stopped. The bearer of the imperial seal handed the banner to the person who replaced him, and stood back in the west.

古文：获者兴，共而俟。
现代文：获者站起来，和他一起等待。
English: The winner stands up and waits with him.

古文：司马正出于下射之南，还其后，降自西阶，遂适次，释弓，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：司马正从下射的南边出来，转过身后从西阶下堂，然后到更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: Sima is coming out from the south side of the downspout, turning behind him from the west steps down the hall, then to the changing place, put down the bow, remove the wrench, take off the leather jerkin, put on the jacket, and return to the original position.

古文：司射进，与司马正交于阶前，相左，由堂下西阶之东北面视上射，命曰： 毋射获！
现代文：司射进前，和司马正在台阶前身体左边相交错，在堂下西阶的东边，面朝北看上射，命令说： 不要射到人，不要射到旁边去。 
English: Before Sima entered, he and Sima were crossing each other on the left side of the body in front of the steps. On the east side of the west steps of the hall, facing north, he looked up at Sima and ordered: Don't shoot at people, don't shoot at the side.

古文：毋猎获！ 上射揖。司射退，反位。
现代文：上射拱手行礼，司射退回，返回原位。
English: The upper archers salute, the lower archers step back and return to their original positions.

古文：乃射，上射既发，挟矢，而后下射射，拾发以将乘矢。
现代文：然后射箭。上射已经发出一箭，夹起第二枝箭，然后下射射箭。交替着射出四枝箭。
English: Then he shoots an arrow. He shoots an arrow up, picks up a second arrow, and shoots an arrow down. He shoots four arrows alternately.

古文：获者坐而获，举旌以宫，偃旌以商，获而未释获。
现代文：获者坐着说： 射中了 ，在宫声中举起旌旗，在商声中收起旌旗，射中而不放筹码。
English: The winner sat down and said: I hit the target, raised the banner in the palace's voice, put down the banner in the merchant's voice, hit the target without putting down the chips.

古文：卒射，右挟之，北面揖，揖如升射。
现代文：射完后，右手挟弦，面朝北拱手行礼，拱手行礼同登堂射箭的礼仪相同。
English: After shooting, the right hand clasps the string, faces north and makes a bow. The bowing gesture is the same as the etiquette of archery.

古文：上射降三等，下射少右，从之，中等；并行，上射于左。
现代文：上射走下三级台阶，下射稍靠右边跟从，与上射间隔一级台阶，同行。
English: There are three steps between the upper and lower shoots, and the lower shoots are slightly to the west, following the upper shoots to the lower hall, with one step between the upper and lower shoots.

古文：与升射者相左，交于阶前，相揖。
现代文：上射在左边，和登堂射箭的人在台阶前身体左边相交错，相互拱手行礼。
English: After going down the hall, go forward side by side, and shoot up on the east side. The person who shoots arrows with the person who goes up the hall intersects each other on the other side's left hand in front of the steps and shoots each other.

古文：适次，释弓，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：到达更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: Arrive at the changing area, put down the bow, remove the wrench, take off the leather jerkin, put on the top, and return to the original position.

古文：三耦卒射如之。
现代文：三耦射完也是如此。
English: This was also the case after the triple jump.

古文：司射去扑，倚于阶西，适阼阶下，北面告于公，曰： 三耦座射。 
现代文：司射去掉扑，倚放在台阶西边，到东阶下，面朝北向国君报告说： 三耦射完。 
English: The archer removed his paw and reclined on the west side of the steps. When he reached the bottom of the east steps, facing north, he reported to the sovereign: "Three-couple archery completed."

古文：反，搢扑，反位。
现代文：转身插上扑，返回原位。
English: Turn around, plug in the flap and return to the original position.

古文：司马正袒、决、遂，执弓，右挟之，出；与司射交于阶前，相左。
现代文：司马正露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，右手夹持弓弦，出来，和司射在台阶前身体左边相交错。
English: Sima is exposing his left arm, putting on a thumbscrew, putting on a leather jerkin, holding a bow, holding the bowstring in his right hand, coming out, and intersecting with Sima on the left side of his body in front of the steps.

古文：升自西阶，自右物之后，立于物间；西南面，揖弓，命取矢。
现代文：由西阶登堂，从右边的物的后边，站在两个物中间，面朝西南，推弓，命令拿箭。
English: Enter the hall from the west steps, from the back of the object on the right, stand in the middle of the two objects, facing southwest, push the bow, and order the arrows.

古文：负侯许诺，如初去侯，皆执旌以负其侯而俟。
现代文：负侯的人答应，同初始离开射布时一样，都拿着旌旗背向射布等待。
English: The bearers of the burden agreed to wait with their backs to the tarpaulin, as they had done when they first left the tarpaulin.

古文：司马正降自西阶，北面命设楅。
现代文：司马正由西阶下堂，面朝北命令摆设插箭的器具。
English: Sima is coming down the hall from the west steps, facing north, and orders the arrows to be set up.

古文：小臣师设楅。
现代文：小臣师设置插箭的器具。
English: An assistant instructor sets up a device for inserting arrows.

古文：司马正东面，以弓为毕。
现代文：司马正面朝东，用弓作为指教的工具。
English: Sima faces east and uses a bow as a teaching tool.

古文：既设楅，司马正适次，释弓，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：已经设置了插箭的器具，司马正到更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: The equipment for inserting arrows has been set up. Sima is on his way to the changing area. He puts down his bow, takes off his wrench, takes off his leather jacket, puts on his jacket, and returns to his original position.

古文：小臣坐委矢于楅，北括；司马师坐乘之，卒。
现代文：小臣坐下，把箭放在插箭器具上，箭的末端朝北。司马师坐下，四枝四枝地数箭，数完。
English: The junior minister sat down and placed the arrows on the arrow-inserting device, with the ends of the arrows facing north. Sima sat down and counted the arrows four by four, and finished counting.

古文：若矢不备，则司马正又袒执弓，升，命取矢如初，曰： 取矢不索！ 
现代文：如果箭不足，那么司马正就再一次露出左臂，拿弓箭登堂，命令拿箭与初始时一样。说： 取箭，用不着选择！ 
English: If there are not enough arrows, then Sima Zheng will once again show his left arm, take the bow and arrows into the hall, and order the arrows to be taken in the same way as at the beginning.

古文：乃复求矢，加于楅。卒，司马正进坐，左右抚之，兴，反位。
现代文：于是再去取箭，把取来的箭插在插箭器具上，插完，司马正进前坐下，把箭分为上下射。站起来，返回原位。
English: So he went to fetch the arrows again, and inserted the retrieved arrows into the arrow-inserting device. After inserting them, Sima walked forward, sat down, and divided the arrows into up and down shots. He stood up and returned to his original position.

古文：司射适西阶西，倚扑；升自西阶，东面请射于公。
现代文：司射到西阶的西边，把扑倚放在那，由西阶登堂，面朝东向国君请求射箭，国君答应。
English: The archer shot to the west side of the west steps, put the crossbow there, went up the west steps, faced east and asked the sovereign to shoot an arrow. The sovereign agreed.

古文：公许。遂适西阶上，命宾御于公，诸公、卿则以耦告于上，大夫则降，即位而后告。
现代文：于是司射到西阶上，命令主宾侍侯国君射箭。诸公卿大夫把自己的射耦报告给堂上。大夫则下阶就位而后报告。
English: So the archery master went to the west steps and ordered the chief guest to shoot arrows for the lord of the manor. The nobles and doctors reported their archery to the hall. The doctor then reported to the lower steps.

古文：司射自西阶上，北面告于大夫，曰： 请降！ 
现代文：司射由西阶上登堂，面朝北告诉大夫说： 请下堂。 
English: Sisera entered the hall from the west steps, facing north, and told the doctor, "Please leave the hall.

古文：司射先降，搢扑，反位。
现代文：司射先下堂，插上扑，返回原位。
English: The archer goes down the hall first, inserts the pike, and returns to his original position.

古文：大夫从之降，适次，立于三耦之南，西面北上。
现代文：大夫跟随他下堂，依着次序，站在三耦的南边。面朝西以北边为上位。
English: The doctor followed him down the hall, following the order, standing on the south side of the triple coupling. Facing west, the north side is higher.

古文：司射东面于大夫之西，北耦。
现代文：司射面朝东在大夫的西边，比配大夫和大夫的射耦。
English: The shooter faces east to the west of the doctor, matching the doctor and the doctor's shooter.

古文：大夫与大夫，命上射曰： 某御于子。 命下射曰： 子与某子射。 
现代文：命令上射说： 某人侍候您射箭。 命令下射说： 您与某人耦射。 
English: On command, the archer says, "Someone is waiting for you to shoot arrows." On command, the archer says, "You are paired with someone."

古文：卒，遂比众耦。
现代文：比配完毕，接着比配士的射耦。
English: The pairing is complete, followed by the projection of the pairing partner.

古文：众耦立于大夫之南，西面北上。
现代文：士的射耦站立在大夫的南边，面朝西以北为上位。
English: The bishop's bishop stands on the south side of the doctor, facing west, with the bishop on the north.

古文：若有士与大夫为耦，则以大夫之耦为上，命大夫之耦曰： 子与某子射。 
现代文：如果有士和大夫为耦，就以大夫的射耦为上射。命令大夫的射耦说： 您和某人耦射。 
English: If there is a man and a woman coupled, the man's partner shoots first, commanding the woman's partner to say, "You are coupled with someone."

古文：告于大夫曰： 某御于子。 
现代文：告诉大夫说： 某人侍候您射箭。 
English: Tell the doctor, "Someone is waiting for you to shoot arrows."

古文：命众耦，如命三耦之辞。
现代文：命令士的射耦和命令三耦的词语相同。
English: The words "commander's projectile" and "command triple" are the same.

古文：诸公、卿皆未降。
现代文：诸公卿都没有下堂。
English: None of the nobles left the hall.

古文：遂命三耦各与其耦拾取矢，皆袒、决、遂，执弓，右挟之。
现代文：接着司射命令三耦各与自己的射耦交替拿箭，都露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣拿着弓，右手挟着弓弦。
English: Next, the archer ordered the three couples to take the arrows alternately with their own couples, all exposing their left arms, putting on the wrenches, putting on the leather armor to hold the bow, and holding the bowstring in their right hands.

古文：一耦出，西面揖，当楅北面揖，及楅揖。上射东面，下射西面。上射揖进，坐横弓，却手自弓下取一个，兼诸弣，兴，顺羽且左还，毋周，反面揖。下射进，坐横弓，覆手自弓上取一个，兼诸弣，兴；顺羽，且左还，毋周，反面揖。
现代文：左手在弓的表面，右手取一枝箭，和弓背中部合并在一起。站起来，理顺箭翎同时向左转身，不要转成圆圈，面对相背的方向拱手行礼。下射进前坐下，把弓南北方向放，左手在弓里，右手取一枝箭，和弓背中部合并在一起。站起来，理顺箭翎，同时向左转身，不要转成圆圈，面对相背的方向拱手行礼。
English: With the left hand on the surface of the bow, take an arrow with the right hand and merge with the middle of the back of the bow. Stand up, straighten the crossbow and turn to the left, do not turn into a circle, bow in the opposite direction. Shoot forward and sit down, put the bow in the north-south direction, with the left hand in the bow, take an arrow with the right hand and merge with the middle of the back of the bow. Stand up, straighten the crossbow and turn to the left, do not turn into a circle, bow in the opposite direction.

古文：既拾取矢，捆之。兼挟乘矢，皆内还，南面揖；适楅南，皆左还，北面揖；搢三挟一个。
现代文：已经交替拿完箭，把四箭平齐，合并四箭，挟持四箭，二人都向内转身，面朝南拱手行礼。到插箭器具南边，都向左转身，面朝北拱手行礼，腰插三枝箭，两指夹一箭。
English: Having finished taking the arrows in turn, flattening the four arrows, merging the four arrows, and holding the four arrows, they both turned inward, facing south and bowed. When they reached the south side of the arrow-inserting device, they both turned to the left, facing north and bowed, inserted three arrows into their waists, and held one arrow between their two fingers.

古文：揖，以耦左还，上射于左。
现代文：拱手行礼，和射耦向左转身，上射在左边。
English: Arch the hand in a salute, turn to the left together with the shooter, and circle the upper shooter on the left.

古文：退者与进者相左，相揖。
现代文：退下的人和进前的人身体左边相交错。
English: The left sides of the bodies of the retreating and advancing people intersect.

古文：退释弓矢于次，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：相互拱手行礼。退下的人在更衣的地方放下弓箭，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: They bowed to each other, and those who had retired put down their bows and arrows in the changing area, removed their wrenches, took off their leather jackets, put on their coats, and returned to their original positions.

古文：二耦拾取矢，亦如之。
现代文：其余二耦交替拿箭，也是如此。
English: The same is true for the remaining two couples, who take the arrows alternately.

古文：后者遂取诱射之矢，兼乘矢而取之，以授有司于次中。皆袭，反位。
现代文：最后的人接着拿引导射箭的箭，一次拿四枝箭。在更衣的地方把它交给有司。都穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: The last person then takes the arrows of the guided archery, taking four arrows at a time. At the changing place, give it to the archer. They all put on their jackets and return to their original positions.

古文：司射作射如初。
现代文：司射使人射箭与初始时相同。
English: The archer shoots arrows in the same way as at the beginning.

古文：一耦揖、升如初。
现代文：一耦拱手行礼登堂和初射时相同。
English: A pair of archers enter the hall in the same way as for the first shot.

古文：司马命去侯，负侯许诺如初。
现代文：司马命令离开射布，负侯的人答应和初始时相同。
English: Sima ordered to leave the shooting cloth, and the person in charge agreed to do the same as at the beginning.

古文：司马降，释弓，反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓，返回原位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：司射犹挟一个，去扑；与司马交于阶前，适阼阶下，北面请释获于公；公许，反，搢扑；遂命释获者设中；以弓为毕，北面。
现代文：司射仍夹着一箭，去掉扑。和司马在台阶前交错，到东阶下，面朝北向国君请求放筹码。
English: Sima still clamped an arrow, remove the flapping. and Sima staggered in front of the steps, to the east steps, face north to the sovereign to request to put chips.

古文：大史释获。
现代文：国君允许。
English: With the Emperor's permission.

古文：小臣师执中，先首，坐设之；东面，退。
现代文：司射返回，插扑，然后命令放筹码的人设置中，用弓作为指教的工具，面朝北站立在所设中的南边。
English: The archer returns, chimes in, and then commands the player to set up, using the bow as a teaching tool, facing north and standing on the south side of the set up.

古文：大史实八筭于中，横委其馀于中西，兴，共而俟。
现代文：太史放筹码，小臣师拿着中，中头朝前，坐下设置中，面朝东。退下。
English: Taishi put the chips, Xiao Min division holding the middle, the middle head forward, sit down to set the middle, facing east. Back off.

古文：司射西面命曰： 中离维纲，扬触，捆复，公则释获，众则不与！
现代文：太史在中里放八枝筹码，其余的筹码横放在中的西边，站起来，等着放筹码。司射面朝西命令说： 超过射布射中系绳，射中他物弹起后触到射布，箭到射布没射进反弹回来，国君就可以放筹码，众人就不算数。
English: Taishi put eight chips in the middle, and the rest of the chips were placed horizontally on the west side of the middle. He stood up and waited for the chips to be placed. The archer, facing west, ordered: If you shoot more than the shooting cloth, you will hit the tether. If you hit something else, it will bounce up and touch the shooting cloth. If the arrow does not hit the shooting cloth and bounces back, the sovereign can place the chips. Everyone else does not count.

古文：唯公所中，中三侯皆获。 
现代文：国君只要射中，射中三张射布的哪一张都算数。 
English: As long as the sovereign shoots, whichever of the three shooting cloths is shot counts.

古文：释获者命小史，小史命获者。
现代文：放筹码的人命令小史。小史命令获者。
English: The person placing the chips orders a short story. The person who receives the short story order wins.

古文：司射遂进由堂下，北面视上射，命曰： 不贯不释！ 
现代文：司射接着在堂下进前，面朝北看着上射命令说： 不射中不放筹码。 
English: The archer then marched down the hall, facing north, looking at the order to shoot, and said, "If you don't shoot, don't put your chips in."

古文：上射揖。
现代文：上射拱手行礼。
English: The upper shot to the lower shot is one stroke.

古文：司射退，反位。
现代文：司射退回原位。
English: Sirai fell back to his original position.

古文：释获者坐取中之八筭，改实八筭，兴，执而俟。
现代文：放筹码的人坐下拿出中的八枝筹码，改换八枝放入。站起来，拿着筹码等着。
English: The person placing the chips sits down, takes out the middle eight chips, replaces the eight chips and puts them in. Stands up, takes the chips and waits.

古文：乃射。若中，则释获者每一个释一筭，上射于右，下射于左。
现代文：然后开始射箭，如果射中，那么放筹码的人就每一箭放一个筹码。上射在右边，下射在左边。
English: Then the archery begins, and if the archer hits, the person placing the chips places a chip on each arrow. The up shot is on the right, and the down shot is on the left.

古文：若有馀筭，则反委之。
现代文：如果有剩余的筹码，就转身放下。
English: If you have any chips left, turn around and put them down.

古文：又取中之八筭，改实八筭于中。
现代文：再拿中里的八枝筹码，改换八枝放入中里，站起来，拿着筹码等候。
English: Then take the eight chips in the middle, change the eight chips and put them in the middle, stand up, hold the chips and wait.

古文：兴，执而俟。三耦卒射。
现代文：三耦射完。
English: Three-couple shot complete.

古文：宾降，取弓矢于堂西。
现代文：主宾下堂，在堂的西边拿弓箭。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall and takes a bow and arrow on the west side of the hall.

古文：诸公、卿则适次，继三耦以南。
现代文：诸公卿大夫则到更衣的地方，依顺序排在三耦的南边。
English: The court nobles and doctors went to the changing area and lined up in order on the south side of the triple coupling.

古文：公将射，则司马师命负侯，皆执其旌以负其侯而俟，司马师反位。隶仆人扫侯道。
现代文：国君将要射箭，司马师命负侯的人都拿着旌旗背向着射布等待。司马师返回原位，隶、仆人扫侯道。
English: The sovereign is about to shoot arrows, and all those who are responsible for the death of Sima Shi are waiting with their backs to the shooting cloth, holding a banner. Sima Shi returns to his original position, and his attendants and servants sweep the road.

古文：司射去扑，适阼阶下，告射于公，公许，适西阶东告于宾，遂搢扑，反位。
现代文：司射去掉扑，到东阶下，向国君报告可以射箭，国君答应。司射到西阶的东边向主宾报告。然后插扑，返回原位。
English: Sisho removed the flapping and went to the bottom of the east steps to report to the sovereign that he could shoot arrows, and the sovereign agreed. Sisho went to the east side of the west steps to report to the chief guest. Then he inserted the flapping and returned to his original position.

古文：小射正一人，取公之决拾于东坫上，一小射正授弓拂弓，皆以俟于东堂。
现代文：小射正一人，在东边的土坫上拿取国君的扳指和皮制臂衣。一名小射正从大射正手中接过弓，拂去弓上的灰尘，两名小射正都在东堂等候。
English: Xiao Ya Zheng was the only one on the east mound to pick up the crown prince's thumbscrew and leather armor. One Xiao Ya Zheng took the bow from Da Ya Zheng's hand and brushed the dust off the bow. Both Xiao Ya Zheng were waiting in the east hall.

古文：公将射，则宾降，适堂西，袒决遂，执弓，搢三挟一个，升自西阶，先待于物北，一笴，东面立。
现代文：国君将射箭，主宾就下堂到堂的西边，露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，腰中插三枝箭，两指夹一枝箭，由西阶登堂，先在物的北边三尺的地方等待，面朝东站立。
English: The sovereign will be shooting arrows, and the chief guest will go down to the west side of the hall, exposing his left arm, putting on the trigger finger, putting on the leather armband, holding the bow, inserting three arrows in the waist, two fingers clutching one arrow, entering the hall from the west steps, first waiting three feet north of the object, and standing facing east.

古文：司马升，命去侯如初；还右，乃降，释弓，反位。
现代文：司马登堂，命令离开射布和初始时相同。从右物的南边转身，然后下堂，放下弓，返回原位。
English: Sima Dengtang, the order to leave the shooting cloth is the same as at the beginning. Turn around from the south side of the right object, then go down the hall, put down the bow and return to the original position.

古文：公就物，小射正奉决拾以笥，大射正执弓，皆以从于物。
现代文：国君走近物，小射正用笥捧着扳指和皮制臂衣，大射正拿着弓，都跟从国君到物。
English: The sovereign approached the object. Xiao Ya was holding a pickaxe and a leather armor, and Da Ya was holding a bow. They all followed the sovereign to the object.

古文：小射正坐奠笥于物南，遂拂以巾，取决，兴，赞设决、朱极三。
现代文：小射正坐下在物的南边放下笥。接着用巾拂试，拿取扳指，站起来，佐助国君戴上扳指和红色皮制的食指、中指、无名指的指套。
English: Xiao Ya is sitting down on the south side of the object to put down the anchor. Next, he whisks it with a towel, takes the wrench, stands up, and Sasuke Guojun puts on the wrench and the red leather forefinger, middle finger, and ring finger.

古文：小臣正赞袒，公袒朱襦，卒袒，小臣正退俟于东堂。
现代文：小臣正佐助袒衣，国君露出红色上衣。袒衣完毕，小臣正退回在东堂等候。
English: The junior vassal is helping to undress, and the sovereign is revealing a red blouse. The undressing is complete, and the junior vassal is returning to wait in the East Hall.

古文：小射正又坐取拾，兴。
现代文：小射正又坐下拿取皮制臂衣，站起来，佐助国君戴上。
English: Xiao Ya Zheng sat down again to take the leather jerkin, stood up, and put it on Sasuke Guojun.

古文：赞设拾，以笥退奠于坫上，复位。
现代文：拿着笥退回，在东边土坫上放下笥，回到原位。
English: Take the shovel back, drop the shovel on the east mound, and return to the original position.

古文：大射正执弓，以袂顺左右隈，上再下一，左执弣，右执箫，以授公。
现代文：大射正拿着弓，用衣袖撢拂弓把的上下弯曲处，上边两次，下边一次。
English: Daesho was holding a bow, and he used his sleeve rake to sweep the upper and lower bends of the handle, twice on the upper side and once on the lower side.

古文：公亲揉之。小臣师以巾内拂矢，而授矢于公，稍属。
现代文：左手拿着弓的中部，右手拿着弓梢，把弓交给国君，国君亲自试弓的强弱。小臣师用巾向里拂箭，然后把箭交给国君，国君发一箭小臣师递一箭。
English: Holding the middle of the bow in his left hand and the tip of the bow in his right hand, he handed the bow to the sovereign, who personally tested the strength of the bow. The vassal-master whisked the arrows inward with a handkerchief, then handed the arrows to the sovereign, who shot one arrow and the vassal-master passed one arrow.

古文：大射正立于公后，以矢行告于公。下曰留，上曰扬，左右曰方。
现代文：大射正站立在国君的后边，把箭的运行情况报告国君。 下 是 没射到 ， 上 是 超过 ， 左右 是 射到旁边 。
English: The archer is standing behind the sovereign, reporting to the sovereign on the arrow's progress: down is miss, up is over, left and right are off to the side.

古文：公既发，大射正受弓而俟，拾发以将乘矢。
现代文：国君已经射完，大射正接过弓等待，国君和主宾交替地射，把四枝箭射完。
English: The sovereign has finished shooting, the archer is waiting to take the bow, the sovereign and the guest of honor alternate shooting, and the four arrows are finished.

古文：公卒射，小臣师以巾退，反位，大射正受弓，小射正以笥受决拾，退奠于坫上，复位。
现代文：国君射完箭，小臣师拿着巾退回原位。大射正接过弓，小射正用笥接过扳指、皮制臂衣退回放在东边的土坫上，回到原位。
English: After the sovereign had finished shooting his arrows, the junior vassal returned to his original position holding a handkerchief. The senior archer took the bow, the junior archer riveted the wrench, and the leather armlet was placed back on the mound on the east side, returning to its original position.

古文：大射正退，反司正之位。
现代文：大射正退返回司正的位置。
English: The large projectile is retreating back to its original position.

古文：小臣正赞袭。
现代文：小臣正佐助国君穿好上衣。
English: The junior vassal, Sasuke Kuniharu, puts on his jacket.

古文：公还而后宾降，释弓于堂西，反位于阶西东面。
现代文：国君返回以后，主宾下堂在堂的西边放下弓，返回到台阶西边的位置，面朝东。
English: After the sovereign's return, the chief guest goes down the hall, places the bow on the west side of the hall, and returns to the position on the west side of the steps, facing east.

古文：公即席，司正以命升宾。宾升复筵而后卿大夫继射。
现代文：国君就席，司正用国君的命令使主宾登堂，主宾登堂回到筵席，然后卿大夫接着射箭。
English: The sovereign takes his seat, the steward uses the sovereign's order to make the chief guest enter the hall, the chief guest enters the hall and returns to the table, and then the lord doctor continues to shoot arrows.

古文：诸公、卿取弓矢于次中，袒决遂，执弓，搢三挟一个，出，西面揖，揖如三耦，升射、卒射、降如三耦，适次，释弓，说决拾，袭，反位。众皆继射，释获皆如初。
现代文：诸公卿在更衣的地方取弓和箭，露出左臂、套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，腰插三枝箭，两指夹一技箭，出来，面朝西拱手行礼，拱手行礼和三耦一样，登堂射箭，射箭完毕，下堂和三耦一样，到更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位，众人都接着射箭，放筹码都和初始时一样。
English: The nobles took their bows and arrows from the changing area, exposing their left arms, putting on their wrenches, putting on their leather jackets, holding their bows, inserting three arrows into their waists, two fingers clutching a javelin, coming out, bowing to the west, bowing like the three couples, entering the hall to shoot arrows, finishing the archery, leaving the hall like the three couples, going to the changing area, putting down their bows, taking off their wrenches, taking off their leather jackets, putting on their jackets, returning to their original positions, and everyone continued to shoot arrows, placing their chips as

古文：卒射，释获者遂以所执余获，适阼阶下，北面告于公，曰： 左右卒射。 
现代文：射完，放筹码的人于是就拿着剩下的筹码到东阶下面朝北向国君报告说： 上、下都已射完。 
English: After the shooting, the person who placed the chips then took the remaining chips to the bottom of the east step and reported to the sovereign: "Both the top and bottom have been shot."

古文：反位，坐委余获于中西，兴，共而俟。
现代文：返回原位，坐下把剩下的筹码放在中的西边，站起身来等着放筹码。
English: Return to your original position, sit down and place the remaining chips on the west side of the middle, stand up and wait for the chips to be placed.

古文：司马袒执弓，升，命取矢如初。
现代文：司马露出左臂，拿着弓，登堂。
English: Sima showed his left arm, holding a bow, and entered the hall.

古文：负侯许诺，以旌负侯如初。
现代文：同初始时一样命令取箭，负侯的人答应，用旌旗背向射布同初始时一样。
English: As at the beginning, the order was given to take the arrows, and the bearer of the burden consented, shooting the cloth with his back to the shield, as at the beginning.

古文：司马降，释弓如初。小臣委矢于楅，如初。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓同初始时一样，小臣把箭放在插箭器具上同初始时一样。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down the bow as in the beginning, and the vassal put the arrow on the arrow-inserting device as in the beginning.

古文：宾、诸公、卿、大夫之矢皆异束之以茅，卒，正坐左右抚之，进束，反位。
现代文：主宾、诸公卿大夫的箭都分别用茅草捆扎、捆完，司马正坐下，把箭左右分开，把箭束放在前边，返回原位。
English: The arrows of the chief guest and the noblemen and doctors were all tied with thatch, and when the tying was finished, Sima was sitting down, separating the arrows left and right, putting the arrow bundle in front, and returning to the original position.

古文：宾之矢，则以授矢人于西堂下。
现代文：主宾的箭就在西堂下把它交给矢人。司马放下弓，返回原位。
English: The chief guest's arrow was handed to the archer under the West Hall. Sima put down his bow and returned to his original position.

古文：司马释弓，反位，而后卿、大夫升就席。
现代文：然后卿大夫登堂就席。
English: Sir Doctor then took his seat.

古文：司射适阶西，释弓，去扑，袭；进由中东，立于中南，北面视筭。
现代文：司射到台阶西边，放下弓，去掉扑，穿好上衣。由 中 的东边进前，站立在 中 的南边，面朝北看数筹码。
English: The archer goes to the west side of the steps, puts down his bow, takes off his cloak, and puts on his coat. He goes forward from the east side of the middle, stands on the south side of the middle, and faces north to count the chips.

古文：释获者东面于中西坐，先数右获。
现代文：放筹码的人面朝东在 中 的西边坐下，先数右边的筹码，二枝筹码为一纯。
English: Those who were released sat on the west side of the middle, facing east. The first to shoot was the winner.

古文：二筭为纯，一纯以取，实于左手。
现代文：一纯一纯地取，放在左手，十纯就把它东西方向放下。
English: Take one pure and one pure, put it on the left hand, and put it down in the east-west direction when it is ten pure.

古文：十纯则缩而委之，每委异之。
现代文：每十纯区别开。有余下的纯，就横放在近前。
English: Separate every tenth pure. If there is any remaining pure, it is placed horizontally in front.

古文：有馀纯，则横诸下。
现代文：一枝筹码为奇，奇就东西方向放在纯的近前。
English: A chip is strange, strange is placed near the pure in the east-west direction.

古文：一筭为奇，奇则又缩诸纯下。
现代文：站起来，从 中 的前边到 中 的左边，面朝东坐下。
English: Stand up, move from the front of the middle to the left of the middle, and sit down facing east.

古文：兴，自前适左，东面坐，坐，兼敛筭，实于左手，一纯以委，十则异之，其馀如右获。
现代文：坐下把筹码都收敛在一起。放在左手，够一纯就放下，十纯就区别开。其余的和右边的筹码的放法相同。
English: Sit down and gather all the chips together. Put them in your left hand. If you have enough chips, put them down if they are one-pure, and separate them if they are ten-pure. The rest is the same as the chips on the right.

古文：司射复位。
现代文：司射回到原位。
English: The archer returns to his position.

古文：释获者遂进取贤获，执之，由阼阶下，北面告于公。若右胜，则曰右贤于左。
现代文：放筹码的人接着进前，拿取胜的人的筹码，拿着筹码到东阶下，面朝北向国君报告。如果右边的胜了，就说： 右边胜了左边。 
English: The one who placed the chips then goes forward, takes the winning person's chips, takes the chips to the bottom of the east steps, faces north and reports to the sovereign. If the right side wins, say: The right side won over the left.

古文：若左胜，则曰左贤于右。
现代文：如果左边胜了，就说： 左边胜了右边。 
English: If the left side wins, say: The left side won over the right.

古文：以纯数告；若有奇者，亦曰奇。
现代文：用纯的数目报告，如果有奇数就报告说： 某胜某若干纯，若干奇。 
English: Report the logarithm of the winning number, if there is an odd number, also report its odd number.

古文：若左右钧，则左右各执一算以告，曰左右钧。
现代文：如果左右均等，就左右手各拿一枝筹码报告说： 左右均等。 
English: If the left and right are equal, take a chip from each of the right and left hands and report: "Equal left and right."

古文：还复位，坐，兼敛算，实八算于中，委其馀于中西，兴，共而俟。司射命设丰。
现代文：转身回到原位，坐下把筹码收敛在一起，在 中 里放八枝筹码，把其余的筹码放在 中 的西边，站起来，等着射箭放筹码。司射命令设置丰。
English: Turn around and return to the original position, sit down and gather the chips together, put eight chips in the middle, put the remaining chips in the middle and west, stand up, wait for archery to put the chips.

古文：司官士奉丰，由西阶升，北面坐设于西楹西，降复位。
现代文：司宫士捧着丰由西阶登堂，面朝北坐下，在西楹柱的西边设置丰。
English: The Master of the Imperial Household, holding Feng, entered the hall from the west steps, sat down facing north, and set up Feng on the west side of the west pillar.

古文：胜者之弟子洗觯，升酌散，南面坐奠于丰上，降反位。
现代文：下堂回到原位。胜方的年轻人洗觯，登堂从方壶中斟酒。面朝南坐下，把觯放在丰上，下堂回到原位。
English: The young man from the winning side washes the gourd, the winner pours wine from a square jug, sits down facing south, places the gourd on top of the bowl, and the winner returns to his original position.

古文：司射遂袒执弓，挟一个，搢扑，东面于三耦之西，命三耦及众射者： 胜者皆袒决遂，执张弓。
现代文：司射露出左臂，拿着弓，两指挟一枝箭，插扑，在三耦的西边，面朝东命令三耦和众射箭的人： 胜的一方都露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿能射的弓。
English: The archer exposed his left arm, holding a bow, holding an arrow between his two fingers, thrusting, and on the west side of the tricoule, facing east, he ordered the tricoule and all the archery people: The winning side should expose their left arm, put on the trigger finger, put on a leather armband, and take a bow that can shoot.

古文：不胜者皆袭，说决拾，却左手，右加弛弓于其上，遂以执弣。 
现代文：没有胜的一方都穿好衣服，脱下皮制臂衣，左手手心向上，右手把不能射的弓放在左手上，然后拿着弓把中部。 
English: The winning side must get dressed, take off the wrenches and armor, the right hand raises the bow of the string on the left hand, the left hand up the crossbow grip, and then the right hand also holds the bow handle.

古文：司射先反位。
现代文：司射先返回原位。
English: The shooting guard returns to his original position.

古文：三耦及众射者皆升饮射爵于西阶上。
现代文：三耦和众射箭的人都登堂，在西阶上饮罚酒。
English: The three couples and all the archery people went to the hall and drank wine on the west steps.

古文：小射正作升饮射爵者，如作射。
现代文：小射正让人登堂饮罚酒如同让人射箭一样。
English: Xiao Ya is making people go to the hall to drink alcohol as if they were making people shoot arrows.

古文：一耦出，揖如升射，及阶，胜者先升，升堂少右。
现代文：一耦出来，拱手行礼如同登堂射箭一样。到台阶，胜的一方先登堂，登堂后立在稍右的地方。
English: As soon as they are paired off, they hold hands and salute as if they were entering a hall for archery. When they reach the steps, the winning side enters the hall first, and stands slightly to the right after entering the hall.

古文：不胜者进，北面坐取丰上之觯，兴；少退，立卒觯，进；坐奠于丰下，兴，揖。
现代文：不胜的一方进前，面朝北坐下，拿取丰上的酒觯，站起来，稍退后，站着把酒喝完，进前，坐下把酒觯放在丰的南边。
English: The losing side advances, sits down facing north, takes the wine goblet on the hoard, stands up, steps back a little, drinks the wine while standing, advances, sits down and places the wine goblet on the south side of the hoard.

古文：不胜者先降，与升饮者相左，交于阶前，相揖；适次，释弓，袭，反位。
现代文：站起来，拱手行礼。不胜的一方先下堂，在台阶前和登堂喝酒的人身体左侧相交错，相互拱手行礼。到更衣的地方，放下弓，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: Stand up and make a bow. The losing side goes down first. Before the steps, the left side of the body of the person drinking and the person entering the hall interlace and make a bow to each other. At the changing area, put down the bow, put on the shirt and return to the original position.

古文：仆人师继酌射爵，取觯实之，反奠于丰上，退俟于序端。
现代文：仆人师继续斟罚酒，拿酒觯斟酒，反身放在丰上，退回站立在西墙前端等待。
English: The servant continued to pour the wine, took the gourd to pour the wine, placed his back on the bowl, and returned to stand in front of the west wall to wait.

古文：升饮者如初。
现代文：登堂饮酒的人如同初始时一样。
English: The next rite of passage for drinking alcohol is the same as before.

古文：三耦卒饮。
现代文：三耦喝完酒。
English: The three couples have finished drinking.

古文：若宾、诸公、卿、大夫不胜，则不降，不执弓，耦不升。
现代文：如果主宾、诸公卿大夫不胜，就不下堂，不拿弓，射耦不登堂。
English: If the chief guests, the nobles and doctors, do not win, they will not go down to the hall, do not take the bow, and do not enter the hall.

古文：仆人师洗，升实觯以授；宾、诸公、卿、大夫受觯于席，以降，适西阶上，北面立饮，卒觯，授执爵者，反就席。
现代文：仆人洗酒觯，登堂，在酒觯中斟上酒，交给他们。主宾、诸公卿大夫在席位上接过酒觯，拿着酒觯走下席位，到西阶上，面朝北站着喝酒，喝完酒觯中的酒，把酒觯交给拿酒爵的人，返回就席。
English: The servant washes the goblets, enters the hall, pours the wine into the goblets and hands them over. The chief guests, the noble doctors, receive the goblets at their seats, take the goblets down from their seats, stand on the west steps, facing north, and drink. After drinking the wine from the goblets, they hand the goblets over to the bearer of the goblet and return to their seats.

古文：若饮公，则侍射者降，洗角觯，升酌散，降拜；公降一等，小臣正辞，宾升、再拜稽首，公答再拜；宾坐祭，卒爵，再拜稽首，公答再拜；宾降，洗象觯，升酌膳以致，下拜，小臣正辞，升、再拜稽首，公答再拜；公卒觯，宾进受觯，降洗散觯，升实散，下拜，小臣正辞，升、再拜稽首，公答再拜；坐，不祭，卒觯，降奠于篚，阶西东面立。
现代文：喝完觯中酒，下堂，把空觯放在篚中，在台阶西边，面朝东站立。
English: After drinking the wine in the urn, go down the hall, put the empty urn in the urn, and stand on the west side of the steps, facing east.

古文：摈者以命升宾，宾升就席。
现代文：传达命令的人用国君的命令让主宾登堂。主宾登堂就席。
English: The person conveying the order uses the sovereign's order to let the guest of honor enter the hall. The guest of honor enters the hall and takes a seat.

古文：若诸公、卿、大夫之耦不胜，则亦执弛弓，特升饮。
现代文：如果诸公卿大夫的射耦不胜，那么就拿着不能用的弓单独登堂喝酒。
English: If you can't beat the archery of the nobles and doctors, then take the bow that can't be used and go to the hall to drink alone.

古文：众皆继饮射爵，如三耦。
现代文：众人都接着喝罚酒，如同三耦喝罚酒一样。
English: Everyone proceeded to drink the wine, just as the three couples drank the wine.

古文：射爵辩，乃彻丰与觯。
现代文：都喝过罚酒，然后撤去丰和觯。
English: All of them have been fined for drinking, and then removed from Fenghe.

古文：司宫尊侯于服不之东北，两献酒，东面南上，皆加勺设洗于尊西北，篚在南，东肆，实一散于篚。
现代文：司宫在唱靶的人的东北方摆放两壶献酒，朝东以南边为上位，都放上勺。在这两壶酒的西北方设置洗，篚在洗的南边，靠东陈设，在篚上放一个散。
English: The imperial palace placed two jars of wine offering in the northeastern part of the chanting people, with the southeastern side being the uppermost, and both were placed on a spoon. In the northwest of these two jars of wine, a washer was set up, and a ladle was set up on the south side of the washer, on the east side, and a spoon was placed on the ladle.

古文：司马正洗散，遂实爵，献服不。
现代文：司马正洗散，然后在散中斟满酒，献给唱靶的人。
English: Sima is washing the sans, and then pouring wine into the sans, dedicated to the singers.

古文：服不侯西北三步，北面拜受爵。
现代文：唱靶的人在射布西北三步的地方，面朝北行拜礼接受散爵。
English: The chanting target is at the place three steps northwest of the shooting area, facing north to worship and receive the sanshaku.

古文：司马正西面拜送爵，反位。
现代文：司马正面朝西为送上散爵行拜礼，返回原位。
English: Sima Zhengyuan went to the west to perform a religious service for Shang Shangzhao and returned to his original position.

古文：宰夫有司荐，庶子设折俎。
现代文：宰夫的属吏进献干肉、肉酱，庶子摆放盛有牲体的俎。
English: The attendants of the steward presented dried meat and meat sauce, and the bastards put out baskets full of animals.

古文：卒错，获者适右个，荐俎从之。
现代文：干肉、肉酱、俎已经摆放完毕。画有熊饰射布的获者到东边的个，干肉、肉酱、俎都随着摆上。
English: The dried meat, meat sauce, and clams have been placed. The winner of the bear-decorated cloth is the first to the east, and the dried meat, meat sauce, and clams are all placed together.

古文：获者左执爵，右祭荐俎，二手祭酒；适左个，祭如右个，中亦如之。
现代文：获者左手拿着酒爵，右手祭干肉、肉酱、俎，两手祭酒。到西边的个，祭仪如同祭东边的个一样，祭中也是如此。
English: The winner holds a wine goblet in his left hand, with dried meat, meat sauce, and bean paste in his right hand, and the sacrificial wine in both hands. For the west side, the ritual is the same as for the east side, and this is also the case during the festival.

古文：卒祭，左个之西北三步，东面。设荐俎，立卒爵。
现代文：祭完，获者到西边的个的西北三步的地方，面朝东，摆设干肉、肉酱、俎，站着喝完爵中酒。
English: At the end of the festival, the winners go to a place three steps northwest of the west gate, face east, set up dried meat, meat sauce, and bean paste, and drink the wine while standing.

古文：司马师受虚爵，洗献隶仆人与巾车、获者，皆如大侯之礼。
现代文：司马师接过空爵。洗爵，献给隶、仆人和巾车、获者，都如同献给画有熊饰射布的人的礼仪一样。
English: Sima Shi took over the empty knighthood. The knighthood, dedicated to the courtier, the servant and the handkerchief, the recipient, was like the etiquette dedicated to the person with the bear-decorated scarf.

古文：卒，司马师受虚爵，奠于篚。
现代文：献毕，司马师接过空爵，把它放在获者的篚中。
English: After the dedication, Sima took the empty sword and put it in the winner's bag.

古文：获者皆执其荐，庶子执俎从之，设于乏少南。
现代文：获者都拿着干肉、肉酱，庶子拿着俎跟随着，在避箭器具稍南的地方摆设。
English: The winners are all holding dried meat and meat sauce, the bastards are following with their crossbows, and the arrow-dodging equipment is placed slightly to the south.

古文：服不复负侯而俟。
现代文：到洗前，洗觚，登堂斟酒。
English: Go to the washroom, wash the dishes, go to the hall to pour the wine.

古文：司射适阶西，去扑，适堂西，释弓，说决拾，袭，适洗，洗觚，升，实之，降，献释获者于其位，少南。
现代文：下堂在放筹码的人的位置稍南的地方把酒献给他。
English: The downstairs hall dedicated the wine to the man who placed the chips a little to the south.

古文：荐脯醢、折俎，皆有祭。
现代文：进献干肉、肉酱、牲体，都有祭。
English: There are also offerings of dried meat, meat sauce, and animals.

古文：释获者荐右东面拜受爵。司射北面拜送爵。
现代文：放筹码的人在祭物的右边，面朝东行拜礼接受酒爵，司射面朝北为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: The person placing the chips is on the right side of the offering, facing east to receive the chalice, while the shooter faces north to receive the chalice.

古文：释获者就其荐坐，左执爵，右祭脯醢，兴取肺，坐祭，遂祭酒；兴，司射之西，北面立卒爵，不拜既爵。
现代文：放筹码的人就在其祭物旁坐下，左手拿着酒爵，右手祭干肉、肉酱，站起来拿肺，坐下祭肺，然后祭酒。站起来，到司射的西边，面朝北站着喝完爵中酒，喝完后不行拜礼。
English: The person placing the chips sits down next to his offering, holding a wine goblet in his left hand, offering dried meat and meat sauce in his right hand, standing up to take the lungs, sitting down to offer the lungs, and then offering wine. Stand up, go to the west of the archer, stand facing north after drinking the wine in the goblet, and do not pray after drinking it.

古文：司射受虚爵，奠于篚。
现代文：司射接过空爵，把它放在篚中。
English: Sisera took the empty jar and put it in a basket.

古文：释获者少西辟荐，反位。
现代文：放筹码的人稍靠西，避开祭物，返回原位。
English: The person placing the chips moves slightly to the west, avoids the offering, and returns to his original position.

古文：司射适堂西，袒决遂，取弓，挟一个，适阶西，搢扑以反位。
现代文：司射到堂的西边，露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，挟着一枝箭，到台阶西边，插扑，返回原位。
English: Sisera went to the west side of the hall, bared his left arm, put on his wrench, put on a leather armband, took a bow, clutched an arrow, went to the west side of the steps, interjected, and returned to his original position.

古文：司射倚扑于阶西，适阼阶下，北面请射于公，如初。
现代文：司射把扑倚放在台阶西，到东阶下，面朝北向国君请求射箭，如同初始时一样。
English: The archer places his paw on the west side of the steps, goes to the bottom of the east steps, and faces north to ask the sovereign for archery, just as he did at the beginning.

古文：反搢扑，适次，命三耦皆袒决遂，执弓，序出取矢。
现代文：返回插扑，到更衣的地方，命令三耦都露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，依次出来取箭。
English: Return to the jamb, to the changing place, order the three couples to expose their left arm, put on the wrench, put on the leather jerkin, hold the bow, and come out in turn to take the arrow.

古文：司射先反位。
现代文：可射先返回原位。
English: The shooting guard returns to his original position.

古文：三耦拾取矢如初，小射正作取矢如初。
现代文：三耦像初始一样交替取箭。小射正让人取箭同初始一样。
English: The tri-couple takes the arrows alternately as in the beginning. The small arrow makes the person take the arrows in a circle as in the beginning.

古文：三耦既拾取矢，诸公、卿、大夫皆降如初位，与耦入于次，皆袒决遂，执弓，皆进当楅，进坐，说矢束。
现代文：三耦已经交替取完箭，诸公卿大夫都下堂，同初始时一样的位置。和射耦进入到更衣的地方，都露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，拿着弓，都进前对着插箭器具，进前坐下，解开捆扎的箭矢。
English: The three couples have finished taking the arrows in turn, all the noblemen and doctors have left the hall, the same position as at the beginning, and the shooting couple have entered the changing place, both exposing their left arm, putting on the wrench, putting on the leather jerkin, holding the bow, all moving forward to the arrow insertion device, moving forward to sit down, and untying the arrow.

古文：上射东面，下射西面，拾取矢如三耦。
现代文：上射面朝东，下射面朝西，交替拿箭和三耦一样。
English: The upper shooting surface faces east, the lower shooting surface faces west, and the arrows are taken alternately, just like the triple coupling.

古文：若士与大夫为耦，士东面，大夫西面。
现代文：如果士与大夫为射耦，士面朝东，大夫面朝西。
English: If the gentleman and the doctor are mated, the gentleman faces east and the doctor faces west.

古文：大夫进坐，说矢束，退反位。
现代文：大夫进前坐下，解开捆扎的箭矢，退回原位。
English: The doctor steps forward, sits down, unties the bound arrows and returns to his original position.

古文：耦揖进坐，兼取乘矢，兴，顺羽，且左还，毋周，反面揖。
现代文：射耦拱手行礼进前坐下，一次拿四枝箭，站起来，箭翎和弓把同一方向，向左转身，毋转成圆圈，再面对相反的方向拱手行礼。
English: Archer-couple-arch-hand salute: advance, sit down, take four arrows at a time, stand up, hold the quiver and bow in the same direction, turn to the left, rather than turning into a circle, and then face the opposite direction.

古文：大夫进坐，亦兼取乘矢，如其耦；北面搢三挟一个，揖进。
现代文：大夫进前坐下，也一次拿四枝箭，和他的射耦一样。面朝北腰插三箭，挟一个，拱手行礼进前。
English: The doctor stepped forward and sat down, also taking four arrows at a time, just like his shooting partner. Facing north, he inserted three arrows into his waist, tucked one away, and stepped forward with a bow.

古文：大夫与其耦皆适次，释弓，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：大夫和他的射耦都到更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，退回原位。
English: The doctor and his partner both went to the changing area, put down their bows, removed their wrenches, took off their leather jackets, put on their coats, and returned to their original positions.

古文：诸公、卿升就席。
现代文：诸公卿登堂就席。
English: The nobles enter the hall and take their seats.

古文：众射者继拾取矢，皆如三耦，遂入于次，释弓矢，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：众射箭的人接着交替拿取箭，都如同三耦一样，然后进入更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: The archers then take turns picking up their arrows, all in pairs of three, and then enter the changing area, put down their bows, take off their wrenches, take off their leather jackets, put on their coats, and return to their original positions.

古文：司射犹挟一个以作射，如初。一耦揖升如初。
现代文：司射仍挟着一枝箭，如同初始时一样让人射箭。
English: The archer still has an arrow in his hand, and people are shooting arrows as they did in the beginning.

古文：司马升，命去侯，负侯许诺。
现代文：一耦拱手行礼登堂如同初始时一样。司马登堂，命令离开射布，负侯人答应。
English: A couple of archers entered the hall as in the beginning. Sima entered the hall, ordered to leave the cloth, and the vassal agreed.

古文：司马降，释弓反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓返回原位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：司射与司马交于阶前，倚扑于阶西，适阼阶下，北面请以乐于公。
现代文：司射和司马在台阶前交错，司射把扑倚放在台阶西边，到东阶下，面朝北向国君请求奏乐为节，国君答应。
English: Sirai and Sima staggered in front of the steps. Sirai placed his paw on the west side of the steps, under the east steps, facing north, and asked the sovereign to play music for the festival. The sovereign agreed.

古文：公许。司射反，搢扑，东面命乐正曰： 命用乐！ 乐正曰： 诺。 
现代文：司射返回台阶西边，插扑，面朝东命令乐正说： 国君命令奏乐伴射箭。 乐正说： 是。 
English: Sisera returned to the west side of the steps, stepped in and, facing east, ordered Le Zheng to say: The sovereign ordered the music to be played along with the archery.

古文：司射遂适堂下，北面视上射，命曰： 不鼓不释！ 
现代文：司射于是到堂下，面朝北看着上射，命令说： 不与鼓乐节拍相应，不放筹码。 
English: The archer then went down to the hall and, facing north, looked at the upper archer and gave him an order: "If it doesn't correspond to the beat of the drum, don't put your chips in."

古文：上射揖。司射退反位。
现代文：上射拱手行礼，司射退返原位。
English: The first shot went up and the second shot came back down.

古文：乐正命大师，曰： 奏《狸首》，间若一！ 
现代文：乐正命令大师说： 奏《狸首》，间隔如一。 
English: He ordered the music master to say: "Play "The Head of the Fox" at the same interval."

古文：大师不兴，许诺。
现代文：大师不站起，答应。
English: The master didn't get up and make a promise.

古文：乐正反位。
现代文：乐正返回原位。
English: Le Zheng returned to his original position.

古文：奏《狸首》以射，三耦卒射。
现代文：演奏《狸首》来伴射箭。三耦射完。
English: A performance of "Bullhead" to accompany the archery. Three couples complete the shot.

古文：宾待于物如初。
现代文：主宾同初始时一样站在物上等待。
English: The chief guest stood on the thing and waited, just as he did at the beginning.

古文：公乐作而后就物，稍属，不以乐志。
现代文：国君在乐曲奏起后走近物，接续不断地射箭，不以音乐的节拍为节度。
English: After the music begins, the sovereign approaches the object and shoots arrows continuously, without regard to the beat of the music.

古文：其他如初仪，卒射如初。
现代文：其他如同初射的礼仪，射箭完毕如同初射一样。
English: The rest is like the etiquette of the first shot, and when the archery is over, it's like the first shot.

古文：宾就席。
现代文：主宾就席。
English: The chief guest is seated.

古文：诸公、卿、大夫、众射者皆继射，释获如初。
现代文：诸公卿大夫、众射者都接着射箭，放筹码如同初射一样。
English: The nobles, doctors, and archers all continued to shoot arrows, placing their chips as if they were shooting for the first time.

古文：卒射，降反位。
现代文：射箭完毕，下堂返回原位。
English: After finishing the archery, go down the hall and return to your original position.

古文：释获者执余获进告： 左右卒射。 如初。
现代文：放筹码的人拿着剩下的筹码进前报告。上、下都已射完，礼仪和初射相同。
English: The person placing the chips takes the remaining chips and reports. The up and down shots have been completed, and the etiquette is the same as the first shot.

古文：司马升，命取矢，负侯许诺。
现代文：司马登堂，命令拿箭。负侯人答应。
English: Sima went to the hall and ordered to take the arrows. The vassal agreed.

古文：司马降，释弓反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓返回原位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：小臣委矢，司马师乘之，皆如初。
现代文：小臣放下箭、司马师四枝四枝地数箭，都和初始一样。
English: The junior minister put down his arrows, and Sima Shi counted four arrows from four branches, all the same as in the beginning.

古文：司射释弓、视筭，如初。
现代文：司射放下弓，和初始时一样查看数筹码。
English: The archer puts down his bow and looks at the number of chips as he did at the beginning.

古文：释获者以贤获与钧告，如初。复位。
现代文：放筹码的人把胜方或相平的情况像初始时一样报告。返回原位。
English: The dealer reports the winner or tie as at the start. Return to your original position.

古文：司射命设丰、实觯，如初。
现代文：司射命令设置丰，在觯中斟上酒，同初始时一样。
English: The sommelier orders the wine to be set at a high level, and the wine is poured into the urn, just as it was at the beginning.

古文：遂命胜者执张弓，不胜者执弛弓，升、饮如初。
现代文：接着命令胜的一方拿能射的弓，不胜的一方拿着不能射的弓。登堂，如同初始时一样喝酒。
English: Then he ordered the winning side to take a bow that could be shot, and the losing side to take a bow that could not be shot.

古文：卒，退丰与觯，如初。
现代文：喝完酒，和初始时一样撤去丰和觯。
English: After drinking the wine, remove the bonito and ginger as you did at the beginning.

古文：司射犹袒决遂，左执弓，右执一个，兼诸弦，面镞，适次，命拾取矢，如初。
现代文：司射仍露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，左手拿着弓，右手拿着一枝箭，和弓弦并在一起，尚镞。到更衣的地方，命令交替取箭，同初始一样。
English: The archer still shows his left arm, puts on the thumbscrew, puts on the leather armor, holds the bow in his left hand, holds an arrow in his right hand, and holds it together with the bowstring. When he gets to the changing area, he orders the arrows to be taken alternately, as in the beginning.

古文：司射反位。
现代文：司射返回原位。
English: The sprayer returns to its place.

古文：三耦及诸公、卿、大夫、众射者，皆袒决遂以拾取矢，如初。
现代文：三耦和诸公卿大夫，众射箭的人都露出左臂，套上扳指，穿上皮制臂衣，交替取箭，同初始一样。
English: The three couples and the nobles and doctors, all the archery people showed their left arm, put on the trigger finger, put on the leather armor, and took arrows alternately, as in the beginning.

古文：矢不挟，兼诸弦，面镞；退适次，皆授有司弓矢，袭，反位。
现代文：箭不挟持，和弦并在一起，尚镞。退回到更衣的地方，都把弓箭交给有司，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: The arrows are not held, the chords are joined together, and it's all over. Retire to the changing area, hand over the bow and arrow to the archer, put on the jacket, and return to the original position.

古文：卿、大夫升就席。
现代文：卿大夫登堂就席。
English: Dr. Kyo enters the hall and takes his seat.

古文：司射适次，释弓，说决拾，去扑，袭，反位。
现代文：司射到更衣的地方，放下弓，摘下扳指，脱下皮制臂衣，去掉扑，穿好上衣，返回原位。
English: The archer went to the changing area, put down the bow, removed the wrench, took off the leather armor, removed the flaps, put on the tunic, and returned to his original position.

古文：司马正命退楅解纲。
现代文：司马正命令撤去插箭器具，解开射布的绳子。
English: Sima is ordering the removal of the arrow-inserting device and the untying of the shooting cloth.

古文：小臣师退楅，巾车、量人解左下纲。
现代文：小臣师撤去插箭器具，中车、量人解开射布左下端的绳子。
English: The assistant referee removed the arrow-inserting device, and the middle car and the measurer untied the rope at the lower left end of the shooting cloth.

古文：司马师命获者以旌与荐俎退。
现代文：司马师命令获者拿着旌旗和干肉、肉酱、俎退下。
English: Sima ordered those who had received the order to take the banner and the dried meat, meat sauce, and bean paste and withdraw.

古文：司射命释获者退中与筭而俟。
现代文：司射命令放筹码的人撤去 中 和筹码，等待。
English: The archer orders the person placing the chips to remove the middle and the chips, and wait.

古文：公又举奠觯，唯公所赐。若宾，若长，以旅于西阶上，如初。
现代文：国君又举起放下的酒觯，任随国君赏赐，或者主宾，或者大夫之长，像初始一样在西阶上向大夫们敬酒。
English: The sovereign then raised the wine goblet that had been set down, allowing the sovereign to reward, or the chief guest, or the head of the doctors, to toast the doctors on the west steps as in the beginning.

古文：大夫卒受者以虚觯降，奠于篚，反位。
现代文：大夫中最后接受敬酒的人拿着空觯下堂，把觯放在篚中。返回原位。
English: The last of the doctors to receive the toast goes down the hall with an empty gong, places it in the urn, and returns to his original position.

古文：司正升自西阶，东楹之东，北面告于公，请彻俎，公许。
现代文：司马正由西阶登堂，在东楹柱的东边，面朝北向国君报告，请求撤去俎，国君答应。
English: Sima was entering the hall from the west steps, on the east side of the east pillar, facing north to report to the sovereign, requesting the removal of the shackles, and the sovereign agreed.

古文：遂适西阶上，北面告于宾。
现代文：于是到西阶上，面朝北向主宾报告。
English: So he went to the west steps, facing north, to report to the chief guest.

古文：宾北面取俎以出。
现代文：主宾面朝北拿着俎出门。
English: The chief guest went out holding a scepter, facing north.

古文：诸公、卿取俎如宾礼，遂出，授从者于门外。
现代文：诸公卿拿着俎同主宾的礼仪一样，然后出门，在门外把俎交给随从的人。
English: The nobles take the scepter, as is the custom of the chief guest, and then go out and hand it to the attendants outside the door.

古文：大夫降复位。
现代文：大夫下堂回到原位。
English: The doctor went down the hall and returned to his original position.

古文：庶子正彻公俎，降自阼阶以东。
现代文：庶子正撤去国君的俎，由东阶的东边下堂。
English: The son-in-law is removing the sovereign's scepter and is leaving the hall from the east side of the east steps.

古文：宾、诸公、卿皆入，东面北上。
现代文：主宾、诸公卿都进门，面朝东，以北边为上位。
English: The chief guests and the nobles all enter the door, facing east, with the north side as the upper level.

古文：司正升宾。宾、诸公、卿、大夫皆说屦，升就席。
现代文：司正让主宾登堂主宾、诸公卿大夫都脱下鞋，登堂就席。
English: The chief guest and all the nobles and doctors took off their shoes and took their seats.

古文：公以宾及卿、大夫皆坐，乃安，羞庶羞。
现代文：国君和主宾及卿大夫都坐下，然后才安定下来。
English: The sovereign and the chief guest and the doctor all sat down before settling down.

古文：大夫祭荐。
现代文：进献■、肝等。大夫祭这些祭物。
English: It is the offering of the Dafu Matsuri.

古文：司正升受命，公曰： 众无不醉！ 
现代文：司正登堂接受命令，然后命令主宾、诸公卿大夫： 国君说： 众人不应该有不醉的 ！ 
English: The secretary was entering the hall to receive an order, and then ordered the chief guests, the nobles and doctors, to get up: The sovereign said: People should not have anything that is not drunk!

古文：宾及诸公、卿、大夫皆兴，对曰： 诺！敢不醉？ 
现代文：主宾和诸公卿大夫都站起来，回答说： 是，不敢不醉。 
English: The chief guest and all the noble doctors rose to their feet and answered: "Yes, I dare not not be drunk.

古文：皆反位坐。
现代文：都返回原位坐下。
English: They all returned to their seats and sat down.

古文：主人洗、酌，献士于西阶上。
现代文：主人洗觯斟酒，在西阶上献给士。
English: The host washes and pours the wine and offers it to the priest on the west steps.

古文：士长升，拜受觯，主人拜送。
现代文：士之长登堂，行拜礼接受觯。主人为送上酒觯行拜礼。
English: The head priest enters the church and performs a ceremony to receive the chalice. The host performs a ceremony to present the chalice.

古文：士坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵。
现代文：士坐下祭酒，站着饮酒，喝完爵中酒不行拜礼。
English: The priests sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and drink it standing up. After drinking the wine, they cannot pray.

古文：其他不拜，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：其他的士不行拜礼，尘着祭酒，站着喝酒。
English: The rest of the people do not pray. They sit down to drink the sacrificial wine and drink it standing up.

古文：乃荐司正与射人于觯南，北面东上，司正为上。
现代文：于是在觯的南边进献司正和射人酒，面朝北以东边为上位，司正为上。
English: Therefore, the south side of the gong is used to present shochu and shochu, while the north-facing and east-facing sides are considered superior, and the shochu side is considered superior.

古文：辩献士。
现代文：遍献所有的士。
English: A toast to all the taxi drivers.

古文：士既献者立于东方，西面北上。
现代文：已经受献酒的士站在东方，面朝西以北为上位。
English: The taxis that have already been donated stand in the east, and the ones that face west are ranked higher.

古文：乃荐士。
现代文：于是进献士。
English: That's why he became a priest.

古文：祝史、小臣师亦就其位而荐之。
现代文：祝史、小臣师也就其位进献。
English: I wish history and the younger ministers will also be promoted.

古文：主人就士旅食之尊而献之。
现代文：主人就近士已入官而未受正禄的人的酒尊向他们敬酒。
English: The host proposed a toast to those who had been promoted to government posts but had not yet received their official salaries.

古文：旅食不拜，受爵，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：士已入发未受正禄的人不行拜礼，接受酒爵，坐下祭酒，站着喝酒。
English: Those who have been officials but have not received the official stipend cannot perform the ritual, accept the wine award, sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and stand up to drink.

古文：主人执虚爵，奠于篚，复位。
现代文：主人拿着空爵，把它放在篚中，返回原位。
English: The owner took the empty knight, put it in a basket, and returned to his original position.

古文：宾降洗，升，媵觯于公，酌散，下拜。
现代文：主宾下堂洗觯，登堂向国君献觯，人方壶中斟酒，下堂行拜礼。
English: The chief guest washes the dishes in the hall, goes up to the hall to present the dishes to the sovereign, pours wine into the goblet, and goes down the hall to pray.

古文：公降一等，小臣正辞。
现代文：国君走下一级台阶，小臣正辞谢。
English: The sovereign is stepping down a notch, and the vassal is bowing out.

古文：宾升再拜稽首，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾登堂行两次稽首礼。国君回拜两次。
English: The chief guest entered the hall and performed the ceremonial bow twice. The sovereign bowed twice.

古文：宾坐祭，卒爵，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾坐下祭酒，喝完爵中酒，行两次稽首礼。
English: The chief guest sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, and after drinking the noble wine, he performs the ceremonial bow twice.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君回拜两次。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：宾降，洗象觚，升酌膳，坐奠于荐南，降拜。
现代文：主宾下堂洗象觯，登堂，从方壶中斟酒，坐下把象觯放在祭物的南边，下堂行拜礼。
English: The chief guest washes the elephant dung in the lower hall, enters the hall, pours wine from a square jug, sits down and places the elephant dung on the south side of the offering, and goes down the hall to pray.

古文：小臣正辞。
现代文：小臣正辞谢。
English: My junior minister is resigning.

古文：宾升成拜，公答拜。
现代文：主宾登堂行两次稽首礼。国君回拜。
English: The chief guest enters the hall and performs two ceremonial prostrations. The sovereign returns the bow.

古文：宾反位。
现代文：主宾返回席位。
English: The chief guest returns to his seat.

古文：公坐取宾所媵觯，兴。唯公所赐。
现代文：国君坐下，拿取主宾所送的象觯，站起来，任随国君赏赐。
English: The sovereign sits down, takes the elephant skull sent by the chief guest, stands up, and lets the sovereign reward him.

古文：受者如初受酬之礼。
现代文：接受赏赐的人如同初始接受赏赐的礼仪。
English: The recipient of the reward acts as the initial recipient of the reward.

古文：降，更爵，洗；升酌膳；下，再拜稽首。
现代文：下堂，更换酒爵，洗爵，登堂从方壶中斟酒，下堂，两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: Down the hall, change the brandy, baptize, enter the hall, pour the wine from the square jug, down the hall, pray twice, perform the head ceremony.

古文：小臣正辞，升成拜。
现代文：小臣正辞谢。
English: My junior minister is resigning.

古文：公答拜。
现代文：登堂行两次稽首礼。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：乃就席，坐行之，有执爵者。
现代文：国君回拜，然后就席，坐下劝酒。有拿酒爵斟酒的人。
English: The sovereign returns the bow, then takes a seat, sits down and is offered a drink. A man with a bottle opener pours the drink.

古文：唯受于公者拜。
现代文：唯有受到国君劝酒的人行拜礼。
English: Only those who have been persuaded to drink by the sovereign are allowed to make the pilgrimage.

古文：司正命 执爵者爵辩，卒受者兴以酬士。 
现代文：司正命令拿酒爵斟酒的人为每个人都斟上酒。
English: The steward ordered the bartender to pour the drinks for everyone.

古文：大夫卒受者以爵兴，西阶上酬士。
现代文：最后接受斟酒的人站起来向士劝酒。大夫最后接受斟酒的人拿着酒爵站起来，在西阶上向士劝酒。
English: At the end, the person receiving the pour stood up to make a toast.

古文：士升，大夫奠爵拜，士答拜。
现代文：士登堂，大夫放下酒爵行拜礼。士回拜。
English: At the end, the doctor who received the award stood up with the award and toasted the soldiers on the west steps.

古文：大夫立卒爵，不拜，实之。士拜受，大夫拜送。
现代文：大夫站着喝完爵中酒，不行拜礼，斟满酒爵，士行拜礼接受。大夫为送上酒爵行拜礼。
English: The doctor stood up and finished drinking the wine in the jar, he could not perform the blessing, he filled the jar with wine and accepted the blessing. The doctor performed the blessing to send the jar.

古文：士旅于西阶上，辩。
现代文：士在西阶上依次向众人劝酒。
English: Prayer is not allowed. The pouring of wine is acceptable, but the priestly prayer is not. The doctor prays for the sake of the baron.

古文：士旅酌。
现代文：士按次序自己斟酒、劝酒。
English: Members pour and serve their own drinks in order.

古文：若命曰： 复射！ 
现代文：如果国君命令说： 再次射箭。 
English: If the sovereign orders, "Shoot the arrows again."

古文：则不献庶子。
现代文：就不向庶子献酒。
English: he would not give wine to his son-in-law.

古文：司射命射，唯欲。
现代文：司射命令说： 想要射箭的人可以射箭。 
English: The archery command said: Anyone who wants to can shoot arrows.

古文：卿、大夫皆降，再拜稽首。公答拜。
现代文：卿大夫都下堂，行两次稽首礼，国君回拜。
English: The lord doctors all went down to the hall, performed two bowing ceremonies, and the sovereign returned the bow.

古文：一发，中三侯皆获。
现代文：射出一箭，射中三张射布中的哪一张都算射中。
English: When an arrow is shot, whichever of the three arrows is hit is counted as a hit.

古文：主人洗，升自西阶，献庶子于阼阶上，如献士之礼。
现代文：主人洗爵，自西阶登堂，在东阶上献给庶子，如同献士的礼仪。
English: The host washes the goblet, enters the hall from the west steps, and offers it to the son-in-law on the east steps. The etiquette is the same as that of the officiant.

古文：辩献。降洗，遂献左右正与内小臣，皆于阼阶上，如献庶子之礼。
现代文：都献过，下堂洗爵，然后在东阶上献给左右正和内小臣，如同献庶子的礼仪。
English: All of them were presented, and he was given a knighthood on the way down the hall, and then on the east steps he was presented to the left and right officials and inner ministers, just like the etiquette of presenting an illegitimate child.

古文：无算爵。
现代文：不计算爵数地喝。
English: They then proceeded to drink to excess.

古文：士也，有执膳爵者，有执散爵者。执膳爵者酌以进公；公不拜，受。
现代文：士人有拿着美酒的，有拿着方壶酒的，拿着美酒的斟酒进献给国君，国君不拜接受。
English: The nobles brought fine wine, goblets of wine, and gallons of wine to offer to the sovereign, but the sovereign would not accept.

古文：执散爵者酌以之公，命所赐。
现代文：拿着方壶酒的斟酒，国君命令赐予某人，就把酒进献给某人。
English: Holding a square jug of liquor, they presented it to the sovereign, who gave it to them.

古文：所赐者兴受爵，降席下，奠爵，再拜稽首；公答再拜。
现代文：接受赐予的人站起来接受酒爵，走到席西放下酒爵，行两次稽首礼，国君回拜两次。
English: The person receiving the gift stands up to receive the sake sash, walks to the west to put down the sake sash, performs two bowing ceremonies, and the sovereign returns the bow twice.

古文：受赐爵者以爵就席坐，公卒爵，然后饮。
现代文：接受赐爵的人拿着爵就席坐下，等待国君喝完爵中酒然后饮。
English: The recipient of the award sits down on a seat with the award, the sovereign finishes drinking the wine, and then the bastard drinks it.

古文：执膳爵者受公爵，酌，反奠之。
现代文：拿着美酒的士接过国君的酒爵，斟酒，放回国君席前。
English: The person with the fine wine took the empty jar from the sovereign, filled it with wine, and placed it back in front of the sovereign's seat on the south side of the offering.

古文：受赐者兴，授执散爵者。
现代文：接受赐爵的人站起来，把酒爵交给拿方壶酒的人，拿方壶酒的人于是斟上酒，劝酒。
English: The person receiving the knighthood stands up and hands the knighthood to the person holding the goblet of wine. The person holding the goblet of wine then pours the wine and persuades the person to drink.

古文：执散爵者乃酌行之。
现代文：只有在国君那接受酒爵的人行拜礼。
English: Only those who receive a baronetcy from the sovereign are given the salute.

古文：唯受于公者拜。卒爵者兴以酬士于西阶上。士升。大夫不拜乃饮，实爵；士不拜，受爵。大夫就席。士旅酌，亦如之。
现代文：最后接受酒爵的人站起来，在西阶上向士敬酒，士登堂，大夫不行拜礼而饮酒，在爵中斟满酒，士不行拜礼接受酒爵，大夫就席，士依次斟酒劝酒也如大夫一样。
English: Finally, the person receiving the chevalier stands up, toasts the gentleman on the west steps, the gentleman enters the hall, the doctor does not bow and drinks alcohol, pours wine in the gentleman, the gentleman does not bow and accepts the chevalier, the doctor sits down, the gentleman pours wine in turn, and the same as the doctor.

古文：公有命彻幂，则宾及诸公、卿、大夫皆降，西阶下北面东上，再拜稽首。
现代文：国君有命令撤去遮盖酒壶的巾，主宾及诸公卿大夫都下堂，在西阶下面朝北，以东为上位，行两次稽首礼。
English: The sovereign gave the order to remove the scarf covering the wine jug, and the chief guests and the noble doctors all went down the hall, facing north under the west steps, with the east as the upper level, and performed two bowing ceremonies.

古文：公命小臣正辞，公答拜。
现代文：国君命令小臣正辞谢。国君回拜。
English: The sovereign orders the vassal to resign. The sovereign returns the bow.

古文：大夫皆辟。
现代文：大夫都避开。
English: Doctors are staying away.

古文：升，反位。
现代文：登堂、返回原位。
English: They enter the church and return to their original positions.

古文：士旅于上，如初。
现代文：士结束劝酒，如同初始一样。
English: At the end of the sermon, as at the beginning.

古文：无算乐。
现代文：国君进入，奏《骜》乐曲。
English: Then they sing and play an unlimited number of songs.

