古文：刘峻，字孝标，平原平原人。
现代文：刘峻字孝标，平原平原人。
English: Liu Junzha Xiaobian, a plain plain man.

古文：父珽，宋始兴内史。
现代文：他的父亲刘埏，宋时任始兴内史。
English: His father, Liu Bei, was the first emperor of Song Dynasty.

古文：峻生期月，母携还乡里。
现代文：刘峻刚刚一岁，他母亲把他带回家乡。
English: Liu Jun was just one year old when his mother took him back to his hometown.

古文：宋泰始初，青州陷魏，峻年八岁，为人所略至中山，中山富人刘实愍峻，以束帛赎之，教以书学。
现代文：宋泰始初年，青州沦陷在魏人手中，刘峻八岁的时候，被人抢走带到中山，中山一个有钱人刘实同情刘峻的遭遇，用五匹帛把刘峻赎出来，教他写字读书。
English: In the first year of Song Taishi, Qingzhou fell into the hands of the Wei people. When Liu Jun was eight years old, he was snatched away and taken to Zhongshan. Liu Si, a rich man in Zhongshan, sympathized with Liu Jun's plight and used five donkeys to redeem Liu Jun and teach him to write and read.

古文：魏人闻其江南有戚属，更徙之桑乾。
现代文：魏人听说刘峻在江南有亲戚，又把他迁徙到桑干。
English: When the Wei people heard that Liu Jun had relatives in the south of the Yangtze River, they moved him to Sangan.

古文：峻好学，家贫，寄人庑下，自课读书，常燎麻炬，从夕达旦，时或昏睡，爇其发，既觉复读，终夜不寐，其精力如此。
现代文：刘峻好学，家中贫穷，寄居在别人家裹，但自己给自己规定读书进程，他常常点燃麻秆做成的火炬照明，通宵读书，有时偶尔昏睡过去，火炬烧着了他的头发，他醒过来就又接着读书，整夜整夜不睡觉，他专心一意读书竟然到了这种地步。
English: Liu Jun was a good student. His family was poor, and he lived in other people's homes, but he set his own reading schedule. He often lit a torch made of mochi, and read all night. Sometimes he would occasionally fall asleep, and the torch would burn his hair. When he woke up, he would continue reading. He did not sleep all night. He was so focused on reading that he got to this point.

古文：齐永明中，从桑乾得还，自谓所见不博，更求异书，闻京师有者，必往祈借，清河崔慰祖谓之 书淫 。
现代文：齐永明年间，刘峻得以从桑干回到齐，他自认为见识还不广博，就再去寻求另外的自己没见遇的书，听到京城谁家有这样的书，一定赶去请求借读，清河崔慰祖称他为 书淫 。
English: During the second year of Qiyong, Liu Jun was able to return to Qiyong from Sangkang. He thought that his knowledge was not yet extensive, so he went to look for another book that he had not seen. When he heard that someone in Beijing had such a book, he must rush to ask to borrow it. Qinghe Cui Jiuzu called him a bookworm.

古文：时竟陵王子良博招学士，峻因人求为子良国职，吏部尚书徐孝嗣抑而不许，用为南海王侍郎，不就。
现代文：当时真堕工萧子良广为招揽学士，型峻就通过人请求在萧子良王国中任职，吏部尚书徐孝嗣贬抑他而没有答应，衹用他为南海王侍郎，他不肯就职。
English: At that time, the true fallen worker Xiao Ziliang was a soliciting scholar, and the model was requested to serve in Xiao Ziliang's kingdom by the person. The official, Shangshu Xu Xiaozhi, demeaned him and did not agree, and used him as the attendant of the South Sea King. He refused to take office.

古文：至明帝时，萧遥欣为豫州，为府刑狱，礼遇甚厚。
现代文：到明帝时，萧遥欣任豫州刺史，命刘峻为府刑狱，对他的礼遇十分隆厚。
English: When he came to the Ming Dynasty, Xiao Yuxin was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, and Liu Jun was sentenced to prison. He was treated very generously.

古文：遥欣寻卒，久之不调。
现代文：萧遥欣不久就去世，刘峻很久都不得升调。
English: Xiao Yaoxin died soon after, and Liu Jun was not promoted for a long time.

古文：天监初，召入西省，与学士贺踪典校秘书。
现代文：天监初年，刘峻被召入西省，舆学士贺踪一起典校秘书。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Liu Jun was called to West Province, and he became the secretary of the academy together with He Zu.

古文：峻兄孝庆，时为青州刺史，峻请假省之，坐私载禁物，为有司所奏，免官。
现代文：刘峻之兄刘垄庆，当时任刺史，塑陛请假去探望他，因为私自载运禁物，被有司弹劾，因而被罢免官职。
English: Liu Jun's brother, Liu Rengqing, was appointed to the post of historian at that time, and he asked for leave to visit him, because he was carrying prohibited items. He was impeached by the court, and was dismissed from his post.

古文：安成王秀好峻学，及迁荆州，引为户曹参军，给其书籍，使抄录事类，名曰《类苑》。未及成，复以疾去，因游东阳紫岩山，筑室居焉。
现代文：喜欢学问，到他迁任刺史的时候，提拔为产曹参军，供给型些书籍，让他分事类抄录成册，起名为《类苑》，书还未编成，刘峻又因为生病而离去，因为游览东阳紫岩山，就在那裹建了房子住下来了。
English: He was fond of learning. When he was transferred to the post of historian, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant and joined the army. He was provided with some books, and he was asked to transcribe them into a book, which was named "Similar Garden." The book has not yet been compiled. Liu Jun left because of illness, and because of the tour of Dongyang Ziyan Mountain, he built a house there and lived there.

古文：为《山栖志》，其文甚美。
现代文：刘峻撰写了《山栖志》，文字很美。
English: Liu Jun wrote "Yamazushi," the writing is very beautiful.

古文：高祖招文学之士，有高才者，多被引进，擢以不次。
现代文：高祖招揽文学之士，有高才的人，多被荐拔举用，往往不循资历而提拔。
English: Gaozhu invites literary people, and people with high talents are mostly recommended for promotion, and are often promoted without qualifications.

古文：峻率性而动，不能随众沉浮，高祖颇嫌之，故不任用。
现代文：刘峻循着自己的性情行动，不能随着众人沉浮，高祖很嫌弃他，所以不任用他。
English: Liu Jun acted according to his own disposition and could not follow the ups and downs of others. Gao Zu disliked him very much, so he did not appoint him.

古文：乃著《辨命论》以寄其怀曰：
现代文：刘峻于是撰写《辨命论》寄托自己的情怀，文章说：
English: Liu Jun then wrote "Theory of Life Discernment," in which he pinned his feelings, the article said:

古文：主上尝与诸名贤言及管辂，叹其有奇才而位不达。
现代文：皇上曾经和众多名贤谈到管辂，为管辖有奇才但官位不高而感叹。
English: The emperor once spoke with many eminent people about the governance of the imperial court, and he lamented the fact that the magistrates were talented, but their official rank was not high.

古文：时有在赤墀之下，预闻斯议，归以告余。
现代文：当时有个朋友正在朝堂之中，听到了这番议论，于是回来后告诉我。
English: A friend was in the hall at the time, heard the argument and came back to tell me.

古文：余谓士之穷通，无非命也。故谨述天旨，因言其略云。
现代文：我认为士人处境的窘迫和通达，没有一样不是由命运决定的，所以恭谨地述说天命的大略，并说说自己的志向。
English: I believe that there is no predicament or predicament that is not determined by fate, so I will respectfully describe the outline of fate, and talk about my aspirations.

古文：臣观管辂天才英伟，珪璋特秀，实海内之髦杰，岂日者卜祝之流。
现代文：依我看，管辖是天降之才，宏伟卓越，才能杰出，人品优异，实在是海内的俊杰，哪裹衹是一般的占筮卜祝之流。
English: In my opinion, governance is a talent from heaven, magnificent and excellent, talent is outstanding, character is excellent, it is really a national hero, which is the general flow of divination.

古文：而官止少府丞，年终四十八，天之报施，何其寡欤？
现代文：但他的官职衹是少府丞，终年四十八岁，上天赐予管辖的，又是多么少啊!
English: But his official title is Shōfujō, and he is forty-eight years old. How few are those who are given jurisdiction by God!

古文：然则高才而无贵仕，饕餮而居大位，自古所叹，焉独公明而已哉？
现代文：然而高才之人却没有显贵的官职，似饕餮凶残贪婪之徒却处在显要的官位，这种现象从古以来就常使人感叹，岂祇管公明一人而已啊!
English: However, highly talented people do not have a prominent official position, but people who seem to be cruel and greedy are in a prominent official position. This phenomenon has often made people sigh since ancient times.

古文：故性命之道，穷通之数，夭阏纷纶，莫知其辨。
现代文：所以人的天性和禀赋，一生的窘困和通达，挫折失败、成功辉煌，没有人能了解其中的分别。
English: Therefore, no one can understand the difference between human nature and endowment, life's predicament and attainment, frustration and failure, success and glory.

古文：仲任蔽其源，子长阐其惑。
现代文：谈到这个问题，王仲任掩蔽了它的根本，司马子长说出了自己的疑惑。
English: When talking about this issue, Wang Zhongren covered up the root of it, and Sima Zichang expressed his doubts.

古文：至于鹖冠甕牖，必以悬天有期；鼎贵高门，则曰唯人所召。
现代文：至于身穿贱服、居住草棚的贫贱之人，一定要说，命运被上天掌握，吉凶祸福在于机运；对于富贵大户人家，就说祸福不分人家，衹是由人的德行招来。
English: As for the lowly people who wear cheap clothes and live in grass huts, it must be said that fate is controlled by heaven, and good fortune lies in luck; for the rich and large families, it is said that misfortune and good fortune do not discriminate between people, and bad luck is caused by people's virtue.

古文：譊々讠雚咋，异端俱起。
现代文：七嘴八舌，争论不休，各种说法都纷纷出现。
English: There was a lot of chatter, a lot of debate, a lot of claims.

古文：萧远论其本而不畅其流，子玄语其流而未详其本。
现代文：李萧远论说了命运的根本却没有畅叙它的流变，郭子玄说出了命运的流变却未弄清它的本原。
English: Li Xiaoyuan talked about the root of fate but did not describe its vicissitudes, Guo Zixuan talked about the vicissitudes of fate but did not understand its origin.

古文：尝试言之曰：夫道生万物，则谓之道；生而无主，谓之自然。
现代文：我来试着谈谈这个问题：大道生万物，所以称之为道；生而没有什么主宰，就称之为自然。
English: Let me try to talk about this issue: the road gives birth to all things, so it is called the road; if there is no master, it is called nature.

古文：自然者，物见其然，不知所以然；同焉皆得，不知所以得。
现代文：自然，就是指万物都生长，却不知道为什么生长；万物都各得其所，却不知道为什么能各得其所。
English: Nature means that all things grow, but we do not know why they grow; all things have their place, but we do not know why they can have their place.

古文：鼓动陶铸而不为功，庶类混成而非其力；生之无亭毒之心，死之岂虔刘之志；坠之渊泉非其怒，升之霄汉非其悦。
现代文：鼓动天下，生成万物却不看作自己的力量，不看作自己的成效。活着并没有养育它的心意，死去也并非杀戮所造成。坠进深渊为鱼龙，并非是上天的怒罚；升至霄汉为飞鸟，并非是上天的悦宠。
English: He agitates the world and creates all things, but he does not regard them as his own strength or achievement. He does not live with the intention of nurturing them, and death is not caused by killing. Falling into the abyss as a fish and dragon is not God's wrath; rising to the sky as a bird is not God's favor.

古文：荡乎大乎，万宝以之化；确乎纯乎，一作而不易。
现代文：这个道，坦荡无际，博大无边，万物部随着它变化；但又笃厚纯正，一旦生成就不再改变。
English: This way is serene and boundless, vast and boundless, and all things change with it; but it is also pure and profound, and once it is achieved, it will not change.

古文：化而不易，则谓之命。
现代文：生成了就不会改变，这就叫做命。
English: Once created, it does not change. This is called life.

古文：命也者，自天之命也。
现代文：命，就是指上天降下的命运。
English: Life, that is, refers to the fate that comes down from heaven.

古文：定于冥兆，终然不变。
现代文：命运在冥冥之中确定，始终不会改变。
English: One's fate is predetermined and will never change.

古文：鬼神莫能预，圣哲不能谋；触山之力无以抗，倒日之诚弗能感；短则不可缓之于寸阴，长则不可急之于箭漏；至德未能逾，上智所不免。
现代文：鬼神不能预知，圣哲不能审察。碰塌大山的力量也无法抗拒，使太阳返行的诚心也不能影响。命运来得快也不能延缓片时，来得慢也不能提前漏刻。至德圣贤不能超越命运安排，上智之人也免不了命运的约束。
English: Ghosts and gods cannot be predicted, saints and sages cannot be examined. The power to topple a mountain cannot be resisted, and the sincerity to make the sun turn back cannot be influenced. Fate comes fast and cannot delay the time, and it comes slowly and cannot leak ahead of time. Even saints and sages cannot go beyond the fate arrangement, and wise people cannot escape the constraints of fate.

古文：是以放勋之代，浩浩襄陵；天乙之时，燋金流石。
现代文：因此，放勋在位的时代，洪水浩荡，淹没山陵；成汤为帝的时代，旱灾肆虐，晒化金石。
English: Therefore, in the era of the reign of the emperor, the floods were huge and submerged the mountains; in the era of the emperor, the droughts were raging and the gold and stones were sunburned.

古文：文公疐其尾，宣尼绝其粮；颜回败其丛兰，冉耕歌其芣苡；夷、叔毙淑媛之言，子舆困臧仓之诉。
现代文：晋文公屡遭挫折，孔宣尼在陈绝粮。颜回头发早白，冉耕患上恶疾。伯夷、叔齐因妇人之言而饿死，孟子舆因臧仓的谗言而困窘。
English: Jin Wenkong suffered repeated setbacks, Kong Xuan Ni was starved of food. Yan Hui's hair turned prematurely white, Ran Gao suffered from a vicious disease. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi starved to death because of the woman's words, and Men Zi Mei was embarrassed because of Kamakura's insults.

古文：圣贤且犹若此，而况庸庸者乎！
现代文：圣贤尚且这样摆脱不了命运的安排，更何况庸庸碌碌的凡夫俗子啊!
English: Even saints and sages cannot escape the arrangement of fate in this way, let alone mediocre and ordinary people!

古文：至乃伍员浮尸于江流，三闾沉骸于湘渚；贾大夫沮志于长沙，冯都尉皓发于郎署；君山鸿渐，铩羽仪于高云；敬通凤起，摧迅翮于风穴：此岂才不足而行有遗哉？
现代文：至于伍员尸体被抛进江流；三闾大夫屈原自沉于湘水；贾大夫买谊壮志受挫贬谪垦沙；冯都尉冯唐在郎署蹉跎直至满头白发；桓君山踏进仕途，却因云台之议而折翅失意；冯敬通有凤凰之德，却因为谗言毁谤而摧折羽翼。这些人难道是才能不够、德行有缺欠吗?
English: As for the corpses of the officers and men, they were thrown into the river; Dr. Qu Yuan of the Third Division drowned himself in the waters of Hunan; Dr. Jia of the Second Division had his great ambition thwarted and was banished to the desert; Lieutenant Feng Tang of the First Division lived in poverty until his hair turned white; Mt. Huanjun entered his career, but was disheartened by the discussion of Yuntai; Feng Jing Tong had the virtue of a phoenix, but his wings were broken because of slander. Are these people not talented enough, and do they lack virtue?

古文：近代有沛国刘献、献弟璡，并一时之秀士也。
现代文：近代沛国刘珊，刘珊之弟刘珐，都是当时的杰出人才。
English: Modern Liu Shan, Liu Shan's brother Liu Wei, were all outstanding talents at that time.

古文：献则关西孔子，通涉《六经》，循循善诱，服膺儒行。
现代文：刘珊正是关西孔子，他广泛地通晓《六经》，循循善诱，教导后辈，衷心地遵奉儒家的准则。
English: Liu Shan is the Kansai Confucius, he is widely familiar with the "Six Classics," follows the principles of good and evil, teaches the younger generation, and sincerely follows the principles of Confucianism.

古文：璡则志烈秋霜，心贞昆玉，亭亭高竦，不杂风尘。
现代文：刘珑品质高洁，如同秋霜，心地纯正，如同昆仑山的美玉，他特立独行，人品突出，不随波逐流，附和世俗。
English: Liu Wei is of high quality, like autumn frost, with a pure heart, like the beauty of Kunlun Mountain. He is a maverick, with outstanding character, does not go with the flow, and conforms to the world.

古文：皆毓德于衡门，并驰声于天地。
现代文：他们两人都出身贫寒之家，但都修养德行，名声播扬于天地之间。
English: Both of them came from poor families, but both cultivated virtue, and their fame spread between heaven and earth.

古文：而官有微于侍郎，位不登于执戟，相继徂落，宗祀无飨。
现代文：但他们官职低于侍郎，地位比不上侍卫，这两人相继去世，祭祀无人继承。
English: However, their official position was lower than that of a chamberlain, and their status was lower than that of an attendant. The two men died one after the other, and there was no one to succeed them.

古文：因斯两贤，以言古则：昔之玉质金相，英髦秀达，皆摈斥于当年，韫奇才而莫用，候草木以共凋，与麋鹿而同死。膏涂平原，骨填川谷，湮灭而无闻者，岂可胜道哉！
现代文：从这两位贤者的遭遇，我们可以看出古代的一些规律：那些才学品质如同金玉、英俊出众的贤人，都在当时被槟弃，他们怀藏奇才却没有人任用。他们像草木一样凋谢，像麋鹿一样死去，膏血流洒原野，尸骨填塞谷，像这样湮减而默默无闻的人，数也敷不清，说也说不尽!
English: From what happened to these two sages, we can see some of the laws of antiquity: those sages whose academic qualities were like gold and jade, and who were handsome and outstanding, were all abandoned at that time. They harbored wondrous talents, but no one appointed them. They withered like plants, died like elk, blood flowed in the wilderness, and bones filled the valley. People who were reduced to obscurity like this are too numerous to count, and it is impossible to say!

古文：此则宰衡之与皁隶，容、彭之与殇子，猗顿之与黔娄，阳文之与敦洽，咸得之于自然，不假道于才智。
现代文：这样看来，那么尊贵的宰相和低贱的皂隶，长寿的容成公、彭祖和未成年就死去的殇子，富人猗顿和贫穷，美女阳文和丑女敦洽，全都是自然产生，并不是凭藉才智。
English: From this perspective, the high-ranking prime minister and the low-ranking so-and-so, the long-lived Rong Chenggong, Peng Zu and the cripple who died as a minor, the rich and the poor, the beautiful woman and the ugly woman, are all natural, not by virtue of talent.

古文：故曰 死生有命，富贵在天 ，其斯之谓矣。
现代文：人们说 死生全由命运决定，富贵贫贱取决于上天 ，大概指的就是这一类情况。
English: People say that life and death are all determined by fate, and that wealth and poverty depend on the heavens, which roughly refers to this type of situation.

古文：然命体周流，变化非一，或先号后笑，或始吉终凶，或不召自来，或因人以济。
现代文：但是命运的形式处处出现，变化多端，有的人一生先号哭然后欢笑，有的人命运先吉后凶，有的人福灾不请自来，有的人要藉助别人的力量才实现命运的安排。
English: But the forms of fate appear everywhere, and they are ever-changing. Some people cry first and then laugh, some people are lucky first and then unlucky, some people receive blessings and misfortunes uninvited, and some people need the help of others to realize their destiny.

古文：交错纷纠，循环倚伏。非可以一理征，非可以一途验。而其道密微，寂寥忽慌，无形可以见，无声可以闻。
现代文：各种命运交错缠结，吉凶循环往复，祸福互相包容，不能凭藉一条道理去考求，不能凭藉一种方法去验证，但是命运的规律却又细微而严密，没有声音，没有形体，所以看不见，听不到。
English: All kinds of fates are intertwined and entangled, the cycle of good luck and bad luck is repeated, and misfortune and good luck are mutually inclusive. It is not possible to use a single principle to investigate, and it is not possible to use a single method to verify, but the laws of fate are subtle and strict. There is no sound, no shape, so it cannot be seen or heard.

古文：必御物以效灵，亦凭人而成象，譬天王之冕旒，任百官以司职。
现代文：命运一定要藉助人显示它的灵验，也凭藉人体现它的征兆，逭就如同皇上的冕旒，又如同任用百官要他们主管各自的职事。
English: Destiny must show its efficacy by means of men, and its signs by means of men, just as the crowns of emperors are crowns, and as the offices of a hundred magistrates are their respective functions.

古文：而惑者睹汤、武之龙跃，谓龛乱在神功；闻孔、墨之挺生，谓英睿擅奇响；视彭、韩之豹变，谓鸷猛致人爵；见张、桓之硃绂，谓明经拾青紫。
现代文：一些糊涂人见到成汤、武王登上帝位，就认为他们依靠神武之功戡定祸乱；听说孔丘、墨翟道德雄冠当时，就认为是非同凡响的言论使他们英明睿智；见到彭越、韩信突然间地位显贵，就认为是勇猛凶狠帮助他们获得封爵；见到张禹、桓荣获得高官，就认为是明习经术致使他们博取官位。
English: When some foolish people saw Cheng Tang and King Wu ascend to the throne of God, they thought that they were relying on the merits of gods and warriors to avert calamity; when they heard that Confucius and Mo Yan were crowned with morality, they thought that their extraordinary remarks made them wise and intelligent; when they saw Peng Yue and Han Xin suddenly rise to prominence, they thought that they were brave and ferocious to help them get knighted; when they saw Zhang Yu and Huan Rong get high-ranking officials, they thought that they had learned the scriptures to help them win official positions.

古文：岂知有力者运之而趋乎？
现代文：有人容貌美丽，皮肤细嫩；有人形貌丑陋，五官不正，这是形体上的差别。
English: There is a difference in the beauty of a person's face and the delicacy of his skin, and there is a difference in the ugliness of a person's face and the crookedness of his features.

古文：故言而非命，有六蔽焉。
现代文：有人清晨出生，早晨就死去；有人像龟鹤那样，寿长千年，这是年寿上的差别。
English: Some people are born in the morning and die in the morning; others, like the turtle and crane, live for a thousand years. This is the difference in life expectancy.

古文：余请陈其梗概：夫靡颜腻理，哆噅頞，形之异也；朝秀辰终，龟鹤千岁，年之殊也；闻言如响，智昏菽麦，神之辨也。固知三者定乎造化，荣辱之境，独曰由人。是知二五而未识于十，其蔽一也。
现代文：有人应对自如，反应敏捷，有入神智糊涂，菽麦不辨，这是神智上的差别。本来都知道，这三方面都是由上天决定，而人的荣辱境遇，却反而说是由人决定的，造就如同衹知道两个五，却不懂得它们加起来等于十。这是第一种糊涂观念。
English: Some people are easy to deal with, quick to react, mentally confused, and can't tell the difference between quinoa and buckwheat. This is a mental difference. We all know that these three aspects are determined by heaven, but people's honor and disgrace are said to be determined by people, creating a situation like a centipede knows two fives, but doesn't understand that they add up to ten. This is the first kind of confused idea.

古文：龙犀日角，帝王之表；河目龟文，公侯之相。
现代文：龙犀日角，是帝王的仪表；河目龟文，是公侯的相貌。
English: Long rhinoceros horn, is the emperor's instrument; River-eyed turtle, is the prince's appearance.

古文：抚镜知其将刑，压纽显其膺录。
现代文：照镜相面，就知道自己将要遭受刑戮；拜神时压住暗中埋下的印纽，就显示出他将要继承王位。
English: When he looks into the mirror, he knows that he is going to be tortured; when he worships God, he presses the hidden seal, indicating that he will inherit the throne.

古文：星虹枢电，昭圣德之符；夜哭聚云，郁兴王之瑞。
现代文：星如长虹，雷电绕枢，这是显示圣王降生的征兆；老姗夜晚哭着说赤帝子杀死了白帝子，彤云白天聚集，这是预示将有帝王要兴起的祥瑞。
English: Stars like a long rainbow, thunder and lightning around the pivot, this is a sign showing the birth of a holy king; Lao Zi cried at night saying that the Red Emperor killed the White Emperor, and clouds gathered during the day, this is a sign that there will be an emperor to rise.

古文：皆兆发于前期，涣汗于后叶。
现代文：造都是在事前出现预兆，在后代流布并变成现实。
English: All of them are signs that appear in advance, spread to future generations and become a reality.

古文：若谓驱貔虎，奋尺剑，入紫微，升帝道；则未达窅冥之情，未测神明之数，其蔽二也。
现代文：假如认为率领勇士在疆场驰驱，扬起武器奋击敌人，就能进入宫廷，登上帝位，那就是不了解冥冥中的情况，不明白神明安排命运的规律。
English: If you think that leading warriors in the battlefield, raising weapons to fight the enemy, you can enter the court and ascend to the throne of God, then you do not understand the situation in the world, do not understand the law of the gods arranging the fate.

古文：空桑之里，变成洪川；历阳之都，化为鱼鳖。
现代文：这是第二方面的糊涂观念。孔子出生的空桑之地，变成大河；历阳之郡，变成鱼鳖戏水的湖泊。
English: This is the second aspect of muddled thinking. The land of the empty mulberry tree, where Confucius was born, has turned into a great river; the county of Liyang has turned into a lake where cormorants play.

古文：楚师屠汉卒，睢河鲠其流；秦人坑赵士，沸声若雷震。
现代文：项羽的军队屠戮汉王的士卒，睢水被尸体堵塞，河水不能流动；秦军活埋赵国的士兵，叫喊声如同雷震。
English: Xiang Yu's army massacred the Han king's soldiers. The water of the Yangtze was blocked by the dead bodies, and the river could not flow. The Qin army buried the soldiers of Zhao alive, and their cries were like thunder.

古文：火炎昆岳，砾石与琬琰俱焚；严霜夜零，萧艾与芝兰共尽。
现代文：火烧昆冈，美玉和砂石一同被焚毁；严霜在夜晚降落，香草芝兰就和萧艾一同被冻死。
English: In the fire of Kungang, the beautiful jade and the sandstone were burned together; the frost fell in the night, and the vanilla geranium was frozen to death together with Xiao Ai.

古文：虽游、夏之英才，伊、颜之殆庶，焉能抗之哉？
现代文：即使子游、子夏那样的英才，伊尹、颜渊能预知征兆、卓有远见的贤人，又怎能抵御这样的事情发生呢?
English: Even if Ziyu and Zixia have such great talents, and Yi Yin and Yan Yuan are able to predict signs and are sages with far-sightedness, how can they resist such a thing happening?

古文：其蔽三也。
现代文：这是第三方面的糊涂观念。
English: This is the third aspect of the muddled thinking.

古文：或曰，明月之珠，不能无牴；夏后之璜，不能无考。
现代文：有人说，明月之珠，不会没有类；夏后氏之璜，不会没有瑕疵。
English: Some people say that the pearl of the bright moon will not be without class; the pearl of the summer queen will not be without flaw.

古文：故亭伯死于县长，长卿卒于园令，才非不杰也，主非不明也，而碎结绿之鸿辉，残悬黎之夜色，抑尺之量有短哉？
现代文：所以崔亭伯死时衹任小县县长之职，司马长卿也衹任孝文园令就死去。他们的才能不能不算是杰出，他们遇上的君主不能说不圣明，但是光辉润泽的结绿美玉破碎了，夜中发光的悬黎美玉残缺了，莫非是寸有所长、尺有所短吧?
English: Therefore, when Cui Tingbo died, he was in the position of small county governor, and Sima Changqing also died in the position of Xiaowen Yuanling. Their talents can not be regarded as outstanding, and the monarchs they met can not be said to be unholy, but the shiny and moist green jade is broken, and the glowing jade in the middle of the night is missing. Is it because the size is long and the length is short?

古文：若然者，主父偃、公孙弘对策不升第，历说而不入，牧豕淄原，见弃州部。
现代文：如若这样的话，主父偃、公孙弘参加对策之后不被擢拔，多次进言不被采纳，那就仍然在淄!
English: If this is the case, if the main father Yu and Gongsun Hong are not promoted after participating in the countermeasures, and the suggestions are not accepted many times, then it is still Yu!

古文：设令忽如过隙，溘死霜露，其为诟耻，岂崔、马之流乎？
现代文：田野上牧猪，被家乡地方长官槟弃，假如短促的一生飞快地逝去，他们因为患病而突然死去，那他们留下的耻辱，又哪裹衹是崔亭伯、司马长卿那样啊?
English: Herding pigs in the fields, being abandoned by the local magistrate of their hometown, if their short life passes quickly and they die suddenly due to illness, then what is the shame they left behind, and what is Cui Tingbo and Sima Changxing like?

古文：及至开东阁，列五鼎，电照风行，声驰海外，宁前愚而后智，先非而终是？
现代文：等到为他们开设束阁，把他们任为贵官，他们的声名如闪电照耀，如春风流布，传遍海内外，难道是他们从前愚昧、以后才明智，从前的言行错误、以后的言行才正确?
English: Wait until they open a pavilion for them, appoint them as dignitaries, their reputation shines like lightning, spreads like a spring breeze, and spreads all over the world. Are they stupid in the past, wise in the future, wrong in words and deeds in the past, and correct in words and deeds in the future?

古文：将荣悴有定数，天命有至极，而谬生妍蚩？
现代文：还是荣耀和困辱有一定安排，天命有一定的准则呢?
English: Or is there a certain arrangement of glory and humiliation, and a certain standard of destiny?

古文：其蔽四也。夫虎啸风驰，龙兴云属，故重华立而元、凯升，辛受生而飞廉进。
现代文：不懂得这些而妄加评论，这是第四方面的糊涂观念。虎啸，风即时而至；龙飞，云接踵而来。所以虞舜登位，八元八凯就被进用，商纣登位，飞廉就受到宠幸。
English: It is the fourth aspect of muddled thinking to make comments without understanding these points. When the tiger roars, the wind arrives immediately; when the dragon flies, the clouds come one after another. Therefore, when the egret ascends to the throne, the eight yuan and eight kilos are used, and when the merchant egret ascends to the throne, the flying egret is favored.

古文：然则天下善人少，恶人多；暗主众，明君寡。
现代文：但是天下善人少，恶人多；昏庸的君主多，明哲的圣君少。
English: But there are few good people in the world, and many evil ones; there are many dull monarchs, and few wise saints.

古文：而薰莸不同器，枭鸾不接翼。
现代文：而香草、臭草不会盛装在同一容器中，枭鸟、鸾乌不会一同栖息。
English: However, vanilla and stinkweed will not be contained in the same container, and ostriches and marmots will not roost together.

古文：是使浑沌、梼杌，踵武云台之上；仲容、庭坚，耕耘岩石之下。
现代文：这样就使浑沌、梼杌这样的恶人接二连三地盘踞在云台书府之中，使倥查、产坚这样的贤人在深山岩石之下耕耘。
English: In this way, the wicked people such as Chaos and Zou were allowed to stay in the Yuntai Library one after another, and the wise people such as Zucha and Shoujian were allowed to work under the deep mountain rocks.

古文：横谓废兴在我，无系于天，其蔽五也。
现代文：面对这种情况，却漠然地说，国家的兴废全在于我，和上天无关。这是第五方面的糊涂观念。
English: Faced with this situation, however, they indifferently say that the prosperity of the country depends entirely on me, and has nothing to do with God. This is the fifth aspect of muddled thinking.

古文：彼戎狄者，人面兽心，宴安鸩毒，以诛杀为道德，以蒸报为仁义。
现代文：那魏国是戎狄之国，人面兽心他们身处逸乐之中，招致杀身之祸。
English: That Wei is a country of soldiers, human-like and animal-like, they are in the midst of pleasure, leading to the disaster of killing themselves.

古文：虽大风立于青丘，凿齿奋于华野，比其狼戾，曾何足逾。
现代文：他们以诛戮杀伐为道德，把淫荡乱伦作仁义，即使是在青丘为害的大风，在华野行凶的凿齿，和毯国戎狄的狼戾凶恶相比，也完全不会超过。
English: They regard killing and slaughtering as morality, and they regard lewdness and incest as benevolence and righteousness. Even if it is a strong wind that is harmful in Qingqiu, the chisel teeth that are murderous in the wilderness, and the wolf-like ferocity of the blanket country army, it will not exceed.

古文：自金行不竞，天地版荡，左带沸脣，乘间电发。
现代文：自从置塑衰败，天下动乱，左衽的丑虏，看准时机疾速进攻，于是占领沪、洛，攻陷五都。
English: Since the installation of decay, the world is in turmoil, the left-handed ugly, look at the opportunity to attack rapidly, so the occupation of Shanghai, Luo, and the fall of the five capitals.

古文：遂覆瀍、洛，倾五都；居先王之桑梓，窃名号于中县；与三皇竞其氓黎，五帝角其区宇。种落繁炽，充牜刃神州。呜呼！
现代文：居住在先代帝王的家乡。在中原窃取皇帝的名号。争夺三皇的百姓，抢占五帝的土地，繁殖子孙，致使戎狄之种，充盈神州。呜呼!
English: Living in the hometown of the previous emperor. Stealing the emperor's name in the Central Plains. Competing for the people of the three emperors, seizing the land of the five emperors, breeding offspring, causing the seeds of eunuchs to fill the divine state. Alas!

古文：福善祸淫，徒虚言耳。
现代文：上天降福给善人，降祸给淫邪之人，衹是句空话而已。
English: Heaven sends blessings to those who are good and curses to those who are evil. This is just empty talk.

古文：岂非否泰相倾，盈缩递运，而汩之以人？
现代文：这难道不是祸福互相对立存在，兴衰交替出现，而让人来扰乱天下吗?
English: Isn't it a case of good and evil existing in opposition to each other, with rise and fall occurring alternately, and people being allowed to disrupt the world?

古文：其蔽六也。
现代文：这是第六个方面的糊涂观念。
English: This is the sixth area of confusion.

古文：然所谓命者，死生焉，贵贱焉，贫富焉，理乱焉，祸福焉，此十者天之所赋也。
现代文：然而所说的命运，死生，贵贱，贫富，国家的治乱，祸福，这十个方面都是上天赋予的。
English: However, the above-mentioned ten aspects of fate, life and death, high and low, rich and poor, the governance of the country, and good and evil, are all bestowed by heaven.

古文：愚智善恶，此四者人之所行也。
现代文：愚智，善恶，这四个方面是人所实践的。
English: Stupidity, good and evil, these four aspects are practiced by man.

古文：夫神非舜、禹，心异硃、均，才絓中庸，在于所习。
现代文：假如一个人不是像舜、禹那样神睿明智，又不是像丹朱、商均心存邪恶之心，衹要才质在中等程度，那他是善是恶就在于环境的习染、熏陶。
English: If a person is not as shrewd and wise as Yu and Yu, and is not like Dan Zhu and Shang Jun, who have evil in their hearts, and their talents are at an intermediate level, then whether he is good or evil depends on the influence of the environment.

古文：是以素丝无恒，玄黄代起；鲍鱼芳兰，入而自变。
现代文：因此白丝不会长久保持洁白，有时变成玄，有时染成黄；鲍鱼发臭，兰芝芳香，进入这环境就自然会发生改变。
English: Therefore, the white silk will not stay white for a long time, sometimes it will become dark, sometimes it will be dyed yellow; the abalone is smelly, the orchid is fragrant, and it will naturally change when it enters this environment.

古文：故季路学于仲尼，厉风霜之节；楚穆谋于潘崇，成悖逆之祸。
现代文：所以至路在健星那儿学习就砥砺了坚贞高洁的操守，楚迁王向酝咨询就成了弑君叛逆的祸首。
English: Therefore, Zhi Lu's study at Jian Xing sharpened his chastity and integrity, and Chu Qian Wang's consultation with Zhao became the scourge of Zou Jun's rebellion.

古文：而商臣之恶，盛业光于后嗣；仲由之善，不能息其结缨。
现代文：而楚穆王童旦那样的恶人，他的后嗣有盛德大业；季路那样的善人，不能在系结缨带时让敌人停止攻击以致战死。
English: But a wicked man like Trm Văn Tông's husband, his heir had a great career; a good man like Ji L, could not make the enemy stop attacking while tying the scabbard and died in battle.

古文：斯则邪正由于人，吉凶存乎命。
现代文：造就是行为的邪正由人决定，而吉凶却由命运决定。
English: In other words, the evil of one's actions is determined by people, while the good and evil are determined by fate.

古文：或以鬼神害盈，皇天辅德。
现代文：有人认为，鬼神祸害骄盈自满的人，上天庇护德行仁厚的人。
English: Some people believe that ghosts and gods are the bane of the arrogant and self-satisfied, and that heaven protects the virtuous and benevolent.

古文：故宋公一言，法星三徙；殷帝自剪，千里来云。
现代文：所以宋景公一句仁德之言，使被称作执法之星的荧惑星退后三舍；殷帝汤自剪头发指甲梼神求雨，千里之外的云都来聚集，雨马上降临。
English: Therefore, Song Jinggong's benevolent words caused the fluorescent planet, known as the star of law enforcement, to retreat; Yin Di Tang cut his hair and nails and prayed for rain, and the clouds thousands of miles away gathered, and rain immediately fell.

古文：善恶无征，未洽斯义。
现代文：假如说善恶没有应验，就和这几件事情的道理不相合。
English: If we say that good and evil have not been fulfilled, it is not consistent with the truth of these things.

古文：且于公高门以待封，严母扫墓以望丧。此君子所以自强不息也。
现代文：况且于定国之父高建间门等待受封子孙的高车驷马，严延年之母清扫墓地准备接纳将要败亡的儿子的丧柩，这是君子勉励自己自强不息的举动。
English: Moreover, the father of Ding Guo, Gao Jianmen, was waiting at the gate to receive the high carriage and horses of his sons, and the mother of Yan Yan Nian was cleaning the cemetery to prepare for the funeral of her son who was about to die. This was a gentleman's act of encouraging himself to be self-reliant.

古文：如使仁而无报，奚为修善立名乎？
现代文：假如实行仁义却没有回报，那为什么还去行善立名呢?
English: If there is no reward for practicing benevolence and righteousness, then why do good deeds and make a name for yourself?

古文：斯径廷之辞也。
现代文：这是偏激的话。
English: That's a strong word.

古文：夫圣人之言，显而晦，微而婉，幽远而难闻，河汉而不极。
现代文：圣人的言论，浅显而又艰深，微妙而又委婉，道理幽深，很难透彻了解，像河、汉的水流，深广而无边。
English: The sayings of sages are at once shallow and profound, subtle and tactful. The truth is profound and difficult to understand thoroughly. Like the rivers and streams of the Han Dynasty, they are deep, wide and boundless.

古文：或立教以进庸惰，或言命以穷性灵。积善余庆，立教也；凤鸟不至，言命也。
现代文：有时进行教育，使不求上进的懒惰之人奋进，有时谈论命运以揭示人们的内心世界。 积善之家，必有余庆 的说法，是进行教育； 凤鸟不至 ，未遇圣君的慨叹，是谈论命运。
English: Sometimes education is carried out to make lazy people who do not seek advancement strive, and sometimes fate is talked about to reveal people's inner world.The saying that the home of good deeds must have a celebration is to carry out education; if the phoenix does not come, if the saint does not meet the sigh, it is to talk about fate.

古文：今以其片言辩其要趋，何异乎夕死之类而论春秋之变哉？
现代文：现在衹用圣人的片断言论去理解圣人的思想精髓，这和朝生夕死的蟪蛄小虫去议论春秋季节的变化有什么两样!
English: What is the difference between using fragments of sayings of saints to understand the essence of their thoughts, and talking about the changes of the spring and autumn seasons with a small worm that is born and dies every morning?

古文：且荆昭德音，丹云不卷；周宣祈雨，珪璧斯罄。
现代文：而且楚昭王也说了和宋景公一样的仁德之言，但象征妖异的云气却不消失；周宣王也像商汤一样祈祷求雨，珪璧全都献给神灵却未见降雨。
English: Moreover, King Chu Zhao also said the same words of benevolence as Song Jing Gong, but the symbol of the mysterious cloud did not disappear; King Zhou Xuan also prayed for rain like Shang Tang, and all the treasures were dedicated to the gods, but no rain was seen.

古文：于叟种德，不逮勋、华之高；延年残犷，未甚东陵之酷。
现代文：于定国之父积下的阴德，赶不上放勋、舜华；严延年的残忍凶暴，也比不上盗跖。
English: The filth accumulated by the father of Dingguo can't keep up with the glory and splendor; the cruelty and ferocity of Yan Lianyuan can't match the thievery.

古文：为善一，为恶均，而祸福异其流，废兴殊其迹。
现代文：干的善事是一样的，干的恶事是相同的，但得到的祸福却不相同，兴衰的情况也不一致。
English: The good deeds done are the same, the evil deeds done are the same, but the blessings and disasters received are not the same, and the rise and fall are not consistent.

古文：荡荡上帝，岂如是乎？
现代文：博大宽广、无所不知的上天，难道是这样的吗?
English: Is this the case with the vast, vast, all-knowing Heavens?

古文：《诗》云： 风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。 
现代文：《诗》中说： 虽然风雨不停，天色晦暗，但是鸡总是呜叫不停。 
English: "Poem" said: Although the wind and rain are incessant, and the sky is dark, the chicken always whines incessantly.

古文：故善人为善，焉有息哉？
现代文：所以善人总是行善，哪会停止啊!
English: That's why good people always do good things, and they never stop!

古文：夫食稻梁，进刍豢，衣狐貉，袭冰纨，观窈眇之奇儛，听云和之琴瑟，此生人之所急，非有求而为也。
现代文：食用稻粱，进用鱼肉，穿上狐皮衣裘，披上洁白的捆绢，观看奇妙精美的舞蹈，聆听云和良材制作的琴瑟演奏，这是百姓生活的需要，并不是要求取什么才这样干。
English: To eat paddy straw, to eat fish, to wear a fox-skin coat, to put on a white bonnets, to watch a wonderful and exquisite dance, to listen to the music of a lute made of cloud and good wood, this is the need of the people's life, not a request for what to do so.

古文：修道德，习仁义，敦孝悌，立忠贞，渐礼乐之腴润，蹈先王之盛则，此君子之所急，非有求而为也。
现代文：培养道德，学习仁义，建立深厚的孝悌之情，树立忠贞的节操，接受礼乐的浸润、熏陶，遵循先王的典则，这是君子生活的需要，并不是要求取什么才这样干。
English: To cultivate morality, to learn benevolence and righteousness, to establish a deep sense of filial piety, to establish the discipline of loyalty, to accept the infiltration and influence of ceremonial music, to follow the code of the former king, this is the need of a gentleman's life, not a request for what to do so.

古文：然而君子居正体道，乐天知命。
现代文：这样，那么君子遵循正道，实施正道，乐从天道的安排，安守自身的命运。
English: In this way, the gentleman follows the right path, implements the right path, enjoys the arrangement of the heavenly way, and safeguards his own destiny.

古文：明其无可奈何，识其不由智力。
现代文：他们明白面对命运无可奈何，懂得兴衰荣辱并不依赖人的智慧和力量。
English: They understand that they are helpless in the face of fate, and that they do not rely on human wisdom and strength to rise, fall, and rise again.

古文：逝而不召，来而不距，生而不喜，死而不戚。
现代文：因此福庆逝去而不去寻找，祸殃来临而不去抗拒，能够生存也不特别喜悦，面对死丧也不感到忧戚。
English: Therefore, Fuqing passed away without searching, the disaster came without resisting, it was not particularly joyful to be able to survive, and it did not feel sad in the face of death.

古文：瑶台夏屋，不能悦其神；土室编蓬，未足忧其虑。
现代文：居住瑶台厦屋，不能使他欢悦；身处土室蓬户，不会使他忧虑。
English: Living in a mansion will not make him happy; living in a hovel will not make him anxious.

古文：不充诎于富贵，不遑遑于所欲。
现代文：处在富贵当中，不会得意忘形、目空一切，对于想要得到的东西，不会寝食不安、极力追求。
English: If you are in the midst of wealth, you won't get carried away with pride and vanity, and you won't be anxious about what you want to get and pursue it as hard as you can.

古文：岂有史公、董相《不遇》之文乎？
现代文：这样的话，哪会有太史公司马迁、江都相董仲舒《悲士不遇赋》这类的文章出现啊!
English: In such a case, where will there be articles such as the Tai Shi Company's "Ma Qian" and Jiangdu's "Tragedy Does Not Encounter Fu" by Dong Zhongshu?

古文：论成，中山刘沼致书以难之，凡再反，峻并为申析以答之。
现代文：刘峻的《辨命论》写成之后，中山刘沼写信驳斥刘峻，一共去信两次，刘峻也都一一申辩分析，给刘沼以答覆。
English: After Liu Jun's "Discernment of Life" was written, Zhongshan Liu Numa wrote a letter to refute Liu Jun, and sent a total of two letters. Liu Jun also made a defense analysis and gave Liu Numa a reply.

古文：会沼卒，不见峻后报者，峻乃为书以序之曰： 刘侯既有斯难，值余有天伦之戚，竟未之致也。
现代文：恰好刘沼去世，没见到刘峻后来回覆的信件，刘峻于是写信追答已经去世的刘沼，叙述事情前后经过以及自己的情怀说： 刘沼已经提出这样的诘难，正遇上我家有兄弟死丧之事，竟然未能及时回覆他。
English: It happened that Liu Numa passed away, and he did not see the letter that Liu Jun later replied to. Liu Jun then wrote a letter to reply to Liu Numa, who had passed away, describing the events before and after and his feelings, saying: Liu Numa has raised such a difficulty, I am facing the death of a brother in my family, and I have not been able to reply to him in time.

古文：寻而此君长逝，化为异物，绪言余论，蕴而莫传。
现代文：不久，刘沼先生和我们永别，变成异物，他的其他言论，就此藏着没有传出来。
English: Soon, Mr. Liu Numa said goodbye to us forever, becoming a foreign object, and his other remarks were hidden and did not come out.

古文：或有自其家得而示余者，悲其音徽未沫，而其人已亡，青简尚新，而宿草将列，泫然不知涕之无从。
现代文：有人从他的家中得到这些言论给我看，他的美言未能全部说出，人却已经亡故；文章的字迹还新，而墓上的青草却已生长茂盛，我为此而悲伤，涟涟的泪水不知对着谁流淌。
English: I am saddened by the fact that someone from his family showed me these words. His words could not be said in full, but the man has passed away. The writing of the article is still new, but the grass on the grave has grown luxuriantly. I do not know for whom the tears flow.

古文：虽隙驷不留，尺波电谢；而秋菊春兰，英华靡绝。
现代文：虽然人生短促，如驷马过隙，光阴似箭，如水波流逝，电光闪烁。他的人品如秋菊春兰，他的美好声誉不会消逝。
English: Although life is short, like a horse passing through a gap, time is like an arrow, like water waves passing, lightning flashing. His character is like the autumn chrysanthemum, his good reputation will not fade away.

古文：故存其梗概，更酬其旨。
现代文：所以记下这事的大概经过，以酬答刘沼的美意。
English: Therefore, write down the general course of this matter and respond to Liu Numa's good intentions.

古文：若使墨翟之言无爽，宣室之谈有征。冀东平之树，望咸阳而西靡；盖山之泉，闻弦歌而赴节。
现代文：假如墨翟所说的杜伯死后有知的说法没差错，页谊在宣室谈论的鬼神之事有应验，那就希望你墓地的树木能像束乎冢上的树，为表达你思念故国之情，而都指向京城；希望你能像盖山的泉水，听到音乐之声能够应着节拍涌流。
English: If there is no mistake in the statement that Tubo had knowledge after his death, and the ghosts and gods discussed in the mission room are fulfilled, then I hope that the trees in your cemetery can be like the trees on the cocoon, in order to express your nostalgia for the motherland, and all point to the capital; I hope that you can be like the spring water that covers the mountain, and hear the sound of music that can flow according to the beat.

古文：但悬剑空垄，有恨如何！ 其论文多不载。
现代文：我衹能像延陵季子那样把宝剑悬挂在坟墓上酬答友人，遣让我感到多么遗憾啊! 刘峻的论文因为太长而不登载。
English: How sorry I am that I was not able to reward my friend by hanging his sword over his grave like Yanling Jizi! Liu Jun's paper was not published because it was too long.

古文：峻又尝为《自序》，其略曰： 余自比冯敬通，而有同之者三，异之者四。
现代文：刘峻又曾经撰写《自序》，大略的内容说： 我拿自己和冯敬通相比，我和他有三个方面是共同的，四个方面是不同的。
English: Liu Jun also once wrote "Self-ordering," the outline of which said: I compare myself with Feng Jingtong, I have three aspects in common with him, and four aspects are different.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：敬通雄才冠世，志刚金石；余虽不及之，而节亮慷慨，此一同也。
现代文：冯敬通才华出众，在当时首屈一指，志气刚烈，坚如金石；我虽然比不上他，但是我节操坚贞，豪爽刚毅，这是相同的第一个方面。
English: Feng Jing Tong was an outstanding talent, second to none at the time, with a strong will, as solid as a rock; although I am not as good as him, I am steadfast and courageous, which is the first aspect of the same.

古文：敬通值中兴明君，而终不试用；余逢命世英主，亦摈斥当年，此二同也。
现代文：冯敬通恰好遇上中兴国运的圣明君主，但最终不被试用；我也遇上以治国著称的英明君主，也在壮年时期就遭到槟斥，这是相同的第二个方面。
English: Feng Jingtong just happened to meet the holy monarch of the ZTE National Movement, but he was not tried in the end; I also met a wise monarch famous for governing the country, who was also rejected in his prime, which is the second aspect of the same.

古文：敬通有忌妻，至于身操井臼；余有悍室，亦令家道感轲，此三同也。
现代文：冯敬通家中有生性妒忌的妻子，为此他甚至于要亲自汲水舂米，操持家务；我家中也有个凶悍的妻子，也使得我家中生活困顿，不得安定，这是相同的第三个方面。
English: Feng Jingtong has a jealous wife at home, for which he even has to personally draw water and carry out housework; I also have a fierce wife at home, which also makes my home life difficult and unstable, which is the same third aspect.

古文：敬通当更始之世，手握兵符，跃马食肉；余自少迄长，戚戚无欢，此一异也。
现代文：冯敬通生逢更始年代，曾经担任将领，带兵打仗；我从年轻到年老，始终忧伤失意，抱负未能舒展，这是不同的第一个方面。
English: Feng Jingtong was born at the beginning of a new era. He once served as a general and led soldiers to war. From young to old, I have always been sad and frustrated, and my ambitions have not been able to stretch. This is the first aspect of difference.

古文：敬通有一子仲文，官成名立；余祸同伯道，永无血胤，此二异也。
现代文：冯敬通有一个儿子冯仲文，有官位，有名声；我遇上了和邓伯道同样的祸事，始终没有自己的亲生骨肉，这是不同的第二个方面。
English: Feng Jingtong has a son, Feng Zhongwen, who has an official position and a good reputation; I have encountered the same misfortune as Deng Baoduo, and have never had my own flesh and blood. This is the second different aspect.

古文：敬通膂力方刚，老而益壮；余有犬马之疾，溘死无时，此三异也。
现代文：冯敬通体强力大，老而益壮；我患有疾病，不知道什么时候会突然死去，这是不同的第三个方面。
English: Feng Jingtong has a strong body and is getting stronger with age; I have a disease and do not know when I will die suddenly. This is a different third aspect.

古文：敬通虽芝残蕙焚，终填沟壑，而为名贤所慕，其风流郁烈芬芳，久而弥盛；余声尘寂漠，世不吾知，魂魄一去，将同秋草，此四异也。
现代文：冯敬通虽然像芝草蕙草被焚毁，无声无息地死去，但他被名贤仰慕，他的流风余韵散发出浓郁的芳香，流传越久。他的名声会更大；我生活淡泊，声名寂寂无闻，世人都不了解我，一旦离开人世，就像枯死的秋草，无人间津，这是不同的第四个方面。
English: Although Feng Jingtong was burned and died silently like a grasshopper, he was admired by the great and the good. The aftertaste of his life gave off a rich aroma, which will be passed down for a long time. His reputation will be greater; I live a dull life, my reputation is unknown, and the world does not understand me. Once I leave this world, I will be like a dead autumn grass, and no one will care about me. This is the fourth different aspect.

古文：所以自力为叙，遗之好事云。 
现代文：所以自己勉力撰写遣篇叙，留给关心我的人。 
English: Therefore, I tried my best to write a personal narrative, leaving it to those who care about me.

古文：峻居东阳，吴、会人士多从其学。
现代文：刘峻居住在束阳，吴、会人士很多跟从他学习。
English: Liu Jun lives in Sokyang, and many members of the Wuxi Association have studied under him.

古文：普通二年，卒，时年六十。
现代文：普通二年，刘峻去世，死时六十岁。
English: Two years later, Liu Jun passed away at the age of 60.

古文：门人谥曰玄靖先生。
现代文：门人给他谧号定为玄靖先生。
English: The doorkeeper gave him the nickname Mr. Xuanzang.

古文：刘沼，字明信，中山魏昌人。
现代文：刘沼字明信，中山魏昌人。
English: Liu Numa, Zi Mingxin, Zhongshan Wei Changren.

古文：六代祖舆，晋骠骑将军。
现代文：他六代以前的祖父刘舆，晋时被追赠为骠骑将军。
English: His grandfather Liu Yiwu, who lived six generations ago, was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Horse during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：沼幼善属文，既长博学。
现代文：刘沼从小就善于写文章，长大成人之后，学问渊博。
English: Liu Numa has been good at writing articles since he was a child. After he became an adult, he learned a lot.

古文：仕齐起家奉朝请，冠军行参军。
现代文：他在齐朝初出仕任奉朝请，冠军行参军。
English: At the beginning of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed to serve the imperial court, and he joined the army on the championship march.

古文：天监初，拜后军临川王记室参军，秣陵令，卒。
现代文：乃初年，型迢被拜为后军监丛王记室参军，秣陵令，他在遣期间去世。
English: In the first year, the model was worshipped as the post-military inspector Cong Wang Ji joined the army, and he died during his deployment.

古文：谢几卿，陈郡阳夏人。
现代文：谢几卿，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Qiqing, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：曾祖灵运，宋临川内史；父超宗，齐黄门郎；并有重名于前代。
现代文：他的曾祖父谢灵运，宋时任临川内史；父亲谢超宗，变时任黄门郎。都在前代享有盛名。
English: His great-grandfather, Xie Lingyun, was appointed as the governor of Linchuan in the Song Dynasty, and his father, Xie Chaozong, was appointed as the governor of Huangmeng in the Song Dynasty. Both of them were famous in the previous generation.

古文：几卿幼清辩，当世号曰神童。
现代文：邀几卿从小机警聪明有口才，当时人们称他为神童。
English: He was smart and eloquent from a young age, and people called him a child prodigy.

古文：后超宗坐事徙越州，路出新亭渚，几卿不忍辞诀，遂投赴江流，左右驰救，得不沉溺。
现代文：后来谢超宗因事获罪被贬谪去越州，途经新亭渚，谢几卿不忍和父亲诀别，于是投入江中，左右的人急忙营救，得以没有沉溺江中。
English: Later, Xie Chao Zong was sentenced to exile in Yuezhou for a crime. He passed through Xingting Beach. Xie Qiqing could not bear to say goodbye to his father, so he plunged into the river. People around him rushed to rescue him, so that he did not drown in the river.

古文：及居父忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：到为父亲守丧的时候，他因哀痛而毁伤了身体，超过了礼仪的规定。
English: By the time of his father's funeral, his grief had ravaged his body beyond the limits of propriety.

古文：服阕，召补国子生。
现代文：服丧期满，他被召补为国子生。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was summoned to fill in as the son of the country.

古文：齐文惠太子自临策试，谓祭酒王俭曰： 几卿本长玄理，今可以经义访之。 
现代文：齐文惠太子亲自主持策试，他对国子祭酒王俭说： 谢几卿本来的特长就是精通玄学，现在可以用经义考问他。 
English: Prince Qibun Hui personally led the test of the plan. He said to the prince of the country, "Xie Qi's original strength is his mastery of metaphysics. Now you can ask him about the sutra.

古文：俭承旨发问，几卿随事辨对，辞无滞者，文惠大称赏焉。
现代文：王俭按照文惠太子的意思提出问题，谢几卿随着问题答对，文辞流畅，文惠太子对谢几卿大加称赞。
English: Wang Jian asked questions according to the intention of Prince Wen Hui, and Xie Jia Rong answered the questions correctly and fluently. Prince Wen Hui praised Xie Jia Rong.

古文：俭谓人曰： 谢超宗为不死矣。 
现代文：王俭对人说： 谢超宗算是后继有人了。 
English: Wang Jian said to people: Xie Chao Zong is a successor.

古文：既长，好学，博涉有文采。
现代文：谢几卿长大成人之后，十分好学，他广泛涉猎群书，又有文采。
English: After Xie Qiqing became an adult, he was very eager to learn. He was widely involved in reading and writing.

古文：起家豫章王国常侍，累迁车骑法曹行参军、相国祭酒。出为宁国令，入补尚书殿中郎、太尉晋安王主簿。
现代文：初出仕任豫章王国常侍，积功迁任车骑法曹行参军，相国祭酒，出京任宁国令，又入京补尚书殿中郎、太尉晋安王主簿。
English: At the beginning of his service, he was appointed as a regular attendant of the Kingdom of Yuzhang, and after his distinguished service, he was transferred to join the army as a chariot and cavalry cavalry sergeant, and participated in the country's national festival. He was appointed as the governor of Ning Province, and he also entered Beijing as the vice-chairman of the Shoden and the captain of the King of Jinan.

古文：天监初，除征虏鄱阳王记室、尚书三公侍郎，寻为治书侍御史。
现代文：天监初年，谢几卿被授任征虏鄱阳王记室，尚书三公郎，不久又任治书侍御史。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Inspector, Lord Xie Qi was assigned to the office of recruiting and recording the records of the King of Shenyang, and he was also appointed as the third prince of records, and soon he was appointed as the second prince of records.

古文：旧郎官转为此职者，世谓为南奔。
现代文：以前郎官转任侍御史之职，人们戏称为 南奔 。
English: In the past, when a vassal was transferred to the position of an attendant, it was jokingly referred to as Nanpeng.

古文：几卿颇失志，多陈疾，台事略不复理。
现代文：谢几卿因此感到很是失意，常常称说有病，台府中的事务全不再过问。
English: As a result, Xie Qiqing felt very disappointed, often saying that he was ill, and that he would no longer be involved in the affairs of the Taiwanese government.

古文：徙为散骑侍郎，累迁中书郎、国子博士、尚书左丞。
现代文：谢几卿又徙为散骑侍郎，积功迁任中书郎，国子博士，尚书左丞。
English: Xie Jiaqing was also transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, and his achievements were transferred to the positions of junior secretary, provincial doctor, and senior secretary.

古文：几卿详悉故实，仆射徐勉每有疑滞，多询访之。
现代文：谢几卿详细了解旧事常例，仆射徐勉每次遇上疑难，常常向他询问。
English: Xie Qiqing has a detailed understanding of the old practices, and whenever his servant Xu Mian is in trouble, he often asks him.

古文：然性通脱，会意便行，不拘朝宪。
现代文：但是谢几卿生性放达，不拘小节，符合自己心意的事情就去干，不受朝廷法纪的约束。
English: However, Xie Qiqing had a high-spirited nature, and would do whatever he wanted without regard to detail, and was not bound by the court's legal discipline.

古文：尝预乐游苑宴，不得醉而还，因诣道边酒垆，停车褰幔，与车前三驺对饮，时观者如堵，几卿处之自若。
现代文：他曾经参加乐游苑的宴饮，未能吃醉就回来了，他就在归途路边酒家，停下车，褰起帷幔，就坐在车上和车前三个侍从马夫对饮，当时围观的人犹如一堵堵墙，谢几卿若无其事，处之泰然。
English: He once attended a banquet at the Le Youyuan, and came back without getting drunk. On his way back, he stopped at a roadside bar, raised the curtain, and sat in the car with three attendants and grooms in front of the car to drink. At that time, the onlookers were like a wall. If nothing happened, Xie Qiqing was calm.

古文：后以在省署，夜著犊鼻裈，与门生登阁道饮酒酣呼，为有司纠奏，坐免官。
现代文：后来，谢几卿因为在朝廷官署裹，夜晚穿着短裤，舆门生在阁道中饮酒狂呼，被有司纠弹，因此获罪而免去官职。
English: Later, Lord Xie was purged from his official post after he was found guilty of wearing shorts at night, drinking and shouting in the hallway while he was wrapped in the Imperial Household Agency, and was reprimanded by a judge.

古文：寻起为国子博士，俄除河东太守，秩未满，陈疾解。
现代文：不久又起用他为国子博士，不久他又被授任为河东太守，任期未满，他陈说自己有病而解职。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the son of the state, and soon after that, he was appointed as the governor of Hedong Province. His term of office was not completed, but he resigned saying that he was ill.

古文：寻除太子率更令，迁镇卫南平王长史。
现代文：不久，谢几卿又被授任为太子率更令，迁任镇卫南平王长史。
English: Not long after, Xie Jiaqing was also appointed as the prince's regent and transferred to the position of the guard of Nanping Wang Changshi.

古文：普通六年，诏遣领军将军西昌侯萧渊藻督众军北伐，几卿启求行，擢为军师长史，加威戎将军。
现代文：普通六年，皇上下诏派领军将军西昌侯萧渊藻督率各路人马北伐，谢几卿上表启奏请求随军北伐，被提拔为军师长史，加威戎将军。
English: Six years later, the emperor sent the leading general Xichang Hou Xiao Yuanmao Guo to lead the army in the Northern Expedition. Xie Qiqing requested to accompany the army in the Northern Expedition, and was promoted to the army division chief, General Jia Wei Rong.

古文：军至涡阳退败，几卿坐免官。
现代文：北伐军到涡阳败退，谢几卿因此获罪而免去官职。
English: The Northern Expeditionary Force was defeated and retreated to the Turbulent Sun. As a result, Xie Qiqing was convicted and removed from his official post.

古文：居宅在白杨石井，朝中交好者载酒从之，宾客满坐。
现代文：谢几卿的住宅在白杨石井，朝中那些与他交情好的官员常会带着酒去他那儿，他家常常宾客满座。
English: The residence of Lord Xie Qi is in Poplar Rock. Those officials in the imperial court who were on good terms with him would often bring wine to him, and his house was often full of guests.

古文：时左丞庾仲容亦免归，二人意志相得，并肆情诞纵，或乘露车历游郊野，既醉则执鐸挽歌，不屑物议。
现代文：当时左丞庾仲容也因免官家居，他们两人志趣相投，都放荡情怀，不拘小节，有时乘着无盖无帷的敞车去郊野游玩，喝醉了就手击金铎唱哀歌，不理睬人们的议论。
English: At that time, Zuo Zhenzhongrong was also dismissed from his official residence. The two of them shared the same interests, indulged in debauchery, and did not care about the rules. Sometimes, they would travel to the countryside in an open-top car without a hood or curtains. When they were drunk, they would sing dirges and ignore people's discussions.

古文：湘东王在荆镇，与书慰勉之。
现代文：湘束王在荆州，写信安慰鼓励他。
English: Xiangzhu Wang in Jingzhou, wrote a letter to comfort and encourage him.

古文：几卿答曰： 下官自奉违南浦，卷迹东郊，望日临风，瞻言伫立。仰寻惠渥，陪奉游宴，漾桂棹于清池，席落英于曾岨。
现代文：谢几卿回信说：下官我自从和你在南浦分别，就在柬郊隐居，每逢望日，登高临风，伫立远望回想你的恩泽，回忆那陪同游宴的情景，在清池中驾着桂桌荡漾，在高山顶的落花上席地而坐赏玩风景。
English: Xie Qiqing wrote back: "Lieutenant, since I separated from you in Nampo, I have been living in seclusion on the outskirts of Cambodia. Whenever I look up at the sun, I climb high and face the wind, stand and look far and wide to recall your grace, recall the scene of the accompanying banquet, drive the Gui table in the clear pond, and sit and enjoy the scenery on the fallen flowers at the top of the mountain.

古文：兰香兼御，羽觞竞集，侧听余论，沐浴玄流。
现代文：沐浴着兰花的馨香，举杯痛饮美酒，在旁听着贤士的高论，如同倘佯在玄学的长河中。
English: Bathed in the sweet fragrance of orchids, raising a glass of wine, listening to the high discourse of the sages, it was like being in the middle of a long river of metaphysics.

古文：涛波之辩，悬河不足譬；春藻之辞，丽文无以匹。
现代文：辩才如波涛汹涌。口若悬河尚不足比况；文辞如春藻丰美，华丽的花纹也无法匹敌。
English: His eloquence is like the surging waves, his eloquence is like the rushing river, his words are like the abundant spring algae, and his gorgeous patterns are beyond comparison.

古文：莫不相顾动容，服心胜口，不觉春日为遥，更谓修夜为促。
现代文：个个都为之感动，口服心服。在这种环境中，不觉得春日的漫长，衹感到长夜的短促。
English: Everyone was moved and convinced. In this environment, I didn't feel like the spring day was long, I felt like the long night was short.

古文：嘉会难常，抟云易远，言念如昨，忽焉素秋。
现代文：这种欢乐的聚会很难常常进行，友朋如风云一样易于远离，想起逭欢乐的日子如同在昨天，忽然间又是秋天来临。
English: It's hard to have this kind of happy gathering often. Friends and relatives are as easy to move away from as the wind and clouds. I remember those happy days like it was yesterday, and all of a sudden it's autumn again.

古文：恩光不遗，善谑远降。
现代文：你的恩惠照样施加给我，善意的劝告从远处送来。
English: Your lovingkindness is as great as ever toward me, and your good counsel is as far away as ever.

古文：因事罢归，岂云栖息。
现代文：我因事罢官回家，哪裹算是隐居。
English: I was sent home from my post because of the incident, but I don't consider it a seclusion.

古文：既匪高官，理就一廛。
现代文：既然不是高官，理应回到自己的田宅。
English: Since he is not a high-ranking official, he should go back to his farm.

古文：田家作苦，实符清诲。
现代文：耕田劳作，完全符合你的教诲。
English: Farming is perfectly consistent with your teachings.

古文：本乏金羁之饰，无假玉璧为资；徒以老使形疏，疾令心阻，沉滞床簟，弥历七旬。梦幻俄顷，忧伤在念，竟知无益，思自袪遣。
现代文：我本就缺少愿受羁绊的品格，更不愿凭藉官爵作进身之资，衹是因为年老而使行动迟钝，因为疾病而使内心沮丧，辗转在床榻上，已经经历七十余天，梦幻时时出现，忧伤久存心中，最终知道这样下去没有好处，想着要自己排遣烦忧。
English: I originally lacked the character of being willing to be constrained, and I was even more unwilling to rely on officials and nobles as a means of advancement. Because of old age, I was slow to act, and because of illness, I was depressed. I was lying on the bed, having experienced more than seventy days. Dreams appeared from time to time, and sadness lingered in my heart for a long time. I finally knew that it was no good to continue like this, and I wanted to get rid of my worries.

古文：寻理涤意，即以任命为膏酥；揽镜照形，翻以支离代萱树。
现代文：寻找玄理涤荡心志，就以顺应命运当作美味佳肴；拿镜自照形貌，反而以衰疲当作令人忘忧的萱树。
English: In the search for metaphysics to purify one's mind, one regards following one's destiny as a delicious dish; when taking a mirror to see one's own appearance, one regards one's weariness as an unforgettable eucalyptus.

古文：故得仰慕徽猷，永言前哲；鬼谷深栖，接舆高举；遁名屠肆，发迹关市；其人缅邈，余流可想。
现代文：所以能仰慕君子之道，怀念前代贤哲，鬼谷深藏不现，接舆隐居不出，有的为逃命隐于屠肆，有的从关市发迹，那些人距今已经久远，但其遣风令人仰慕。
English: Therefore, it is possible to admire the way of the gentleman, to remember the sages of the previous generation, the ghost valley is deeply hidden and does not appear, it is impossible to live in seclusion, some hide in the slaughterhouse to escape, and some make a fortune from the city of Guan. Those people have been around for a long time, but their wind is admirable.

古文：若令亡者有知，宁不萦悲玄壤，怅隔芳尘；如其逝者可作，必当昭被光景，欢同游豫；使夫一介老圃，得簉虚心末席。
现代文：假如让那些死去的人还有知觉，他们难道不会在九泉之下为悲伤缠绕，怅恨没赶上这群贤毕集的美好时光；假如让那些逝去的人能重返人生，他们一定会在阳光灿烂的日子，高高兴兴地同去游览玩乐，使我这个种田的老农夫，能战战兢兢地忝居末座。
English: If those who died were still conscious, wouldn't they be wrapped up in sorrow under the nine springs, hating that they didn't catch up with the beautiful time of this group of sages; if those who passed away could return to life, they would certainly be happy to go sightseeing and have fun together on a sunny day, so that I, an old farmer, could tremblingly sit in the last seat.

古文：去日已疏，来侍未孱；连剑飞凫，拟非其类；怀私茂德，窃用涕零。 
现代文：离开你的子已经很久，前来陪从你的日子尚未有期，用连剑飞凫比喻我的心情，并不适合。怀念你的恩德，衹会自己暗中垂泪。
English: It has been a long time since I left your son, and the day I came to accompany you has not yet been scheduled. It is not appropriate to use a flying sword to compare my mood. I miss your kindness, and I will shed tears in secret.

古文：几卿虽不持检操，然于家门笃睦。
现代文：谢几卿虽然不注重操守，但他全家十分和睦融洽。
English: Although Xie Qiqing does not pay attention to ethics, his whole family is very harmonious.

古文：兄才卿早卒，其子藻幼孤，几卿抚养甚至。
现代文：他的兄长谢才卿去世很早，谢才卿之子谢藻很早就成为孤儿。谢几卿抚养谢藻，照顾十分周到。
English: His older brother, Xie Caiqing, died very early, and Xie Caiqing's son, Xie Mo, became an orphan very early. Xie Qianqing raised Xie Mo and took very good care of him.

古文：及藻成立，历清官公府祭酒、主簿，皆几卿奖训之力也。
现代文：到谢藻长大自立，历任清贵的官职公府祭酒、主簿，都是谢几卿鼓励诱导的结果。
English: Until Xie Cao grew up and became independent, the successive noble and dignified officials, the public office, the sacrificial wine, and the master book were all the results of encouragement and induction by Xie Qianqing.

古文：世以此称之。
现代文：世人因此称道谢几卿。
English: As a result, people around the world praised and thanked him.

古文：几卿未及序用，病卒。
现代文：谢几卿还未等到朝廷按资历任用。就因病去世。
English: Xie Qiqing died of illness before he could be appointed by the imperial court according to his seniority.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：他有文集流传于世。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：刘勰，字彦和，东莞莒人。
现代文：刘勰字彦和，东莞莒人。
English: Liu Zhenzhi and Dongguan Zhenren.

古文：祖灵真，宋司空秀之弟也。
现代文：他的祖父刘灵真，是司空刘昼主之弟。
English: His grandfather, Liu Lingzhen, was the younger brother of Liu Rongzhong.

古文：父尚，越骑校尉。
现代文：父亲，任越骑校尉。
English: His father was a cavalry captain in Vietnam.

古文：勰早孤，笃志好学。家贫不婚娶，依沙门僧祐，与之居处，积十余年，遂博通经论，因区别部类，录而序之。
现代文：刘勰早年失去父亲，志向坚定，爱好学习，家境贫穷，他不结婚娶妻，而依附和尚僧佑，同遣和尚一起相处，经过十多年，于是他精通佛教的三藏，他就区别门类，排列收藏。
English: Liu Yao lost his father at an early age. He had a strong ambition, loved to study, and his family was poor. He did not marry, but depended on the monks and monks, and got along with the monks. After more than ten years, he was proficient in the three collections of Buddhism. He distinguished the categories and arranged the collection.

古文：今定林寺经藏，勰所定也。
现代文：现在定林寺收藏的经书，就是刘勰整理的。
English: The scriptures now in the collection of Dinglin Temple were arranged by Liu Ye.

古文：天监初，起家奉朝请、中军临川王宏引兼记室，迁车骑仓曹参军。
现代文：天监初年，刘勰初出仕任奉朝请，中军临川王萧宏选用他为兼记室，他又迁车骑仓曹参军。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Inspector, Liu Yuxin was first appointed to serve the imperial court, and the Chinese army of Linchuan Wang Xiaohong selected him as a part-time secretary, and he also moved to join the army.

古文：出为太末令，政有清绩。
现代文：刘勰出京任太末令，治政有清正廉洁的政绩。
English: Liu Bei went to Beijing to serve as the last prime minister, and governed the country with a clean and honest record.

古文：除仁威南康王记室，兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：他又被除授为仁威南康王记室，兼柬宫通事舍人。
English: He was also stripped of his position as the secretary to the king of Nankang and the secretary of the Cambodian palace.

古文：时七庙飨荐已用蔬果，而二郊农社犹有牺牲。
现代文：当时祭祀七庙的馈飨祭品，已经改用蔬食果品，但郊祀天地、祭祀农神社神还使用牛羊豕作牺牲。
English: At that time, the sacrificial offerings of the seven temples had been changed to fruits and vegetables, but the suburban worship of heaven and earth and the worship of the gods of the agricultural shrines still used oxen and goats as sacrifices.

古文：勰乃表言二郊宜与七庙同改，诏付尚书议，依勰所陈。
现代文：刘勰于是上表进言，认为郊祀天地礼仪应当和祭祀七庙的礼仪作同样的改变，祭品也用蔬食果品。皇上下诏交付尚书议决，最后确定依照刘勰的陈奏办。
English: Liu Bei then made a suggestion, saying that the etiquette of worshipping the heavens and the earth in the suburbs should be changed in the same way as the etiquette of worshipping the seven temples, and that the offerings should also be made of fruits and vegetables. The imperial edict was submitted to Shang Shu for deliberation, and it was finally determined to be in accordance with Liu Bei's edict.

古文：迁步兵校尉，兼舍人如故。
现代文：刘勰迁任步兵校尉，兼舍入之职不变。
English: Liu Xuanqian was appointed as an infantry captain, and his position as a rounding officer remained unchanged.

古文：昭明太子好文学，深爱接之。
现代文：昭明太子喜好文学之士，他仰慕刘勰，和刘勰密切交往。
English: He admired Liu Ye and kept in close contact with him.

古文：初，勰撰《文心雕龙》五十篇，论古今文体，引而次之。
现代文：起初，刘勰撰写《文心雕龙》五十篇，论说古今文体，他编定后依次排列。
English: At first, Liu Wei wrote "Wenxin Jiaolong" fifty articles, discussing ancient and modern styles, he compiled and arranged them in order.

古文：其序曰：
现代文：《文心雕龙》的序说：
English: The preamble says:

古文：夫文心者，言为文之用心也。
现代文：文心，是指写文章的用心。
English: "Wenxin" refers to the intention of writing an article.

古文：昔涓子《琴心》，王孙《巧心》，心哉美矣夫，故用之焉。
现代文：从前，涓子写《琴心》，王孙子写《巧心》，都因为 心 表达的意思淳厚完美，所以用它作书名。
English: Once upon a time, Zou Zi wrote "Qin Xin" and Wang Sun Zi wrote "Craftsmanship," both of which used it as a book title because the meaning expressed by Xin was pure and perfect.

古文：古来文章，以雕纟辱成体，岂取驺奭群言雕龙也。
现代文：从古以来写文章，都依靠雕琢修饰写成，恐怕是取用鞫奭的典实，所以大家都称写文章为雕龙。
English: Since ancient times, articles have been written by relying on carving and embellishment. I'm afraid it's the same as using a chisel to carve a dragon, so everyone calls writing articles "dragon carving."

古文：夫宇宙绵邈，黎献纷杂，拔萃出类，智术而已。
现代文：古往今来，时代久远，世上庸人和贤人混杂，那些出类拔萃的人，衹是依靠才智和计谋而已。
English: From ancient times to the present, from time immemorial, the world has been a mixture of mediocrities and sages. Those who stand out from the crowd rely solely on their talent and cunning.

古文：岁月飘忽，性灵不居，腾声飞实，制作而已。
现代文：岁月会飞快地流逝，人的聪明才智不可能永存，要使声名和事业留传下来，就衹能依靠写作了。
English: The years go by so quickly, and no man's wit lasts forever, that he can't depend on his writing to carry on his name and his career.

古文：夫肖貌天地，禀性五才，拟耳目于日月，方声气乎风雷，其超出万物，亦已灵矣。
现代文：人类的形貌象征着天地，又从五行中秉受了天性，耳目好似日月，声气好比风雷。人超出万物，也算是最为灵异的了。
English: The shape of human beings symbolizes heaven and earth, and they have received nature from the five elements. Their ears and eyes are like the sun and moon, and their tone is like wind and thunder. Human beings are beyond all things, and they are also the most extraordinary.

古文：形甚草木之脆，名逾金石之坚，是以君子处世，树德建言，岂好辩哉？不得已也。
现代文：但是人的身体比草木还要脆弱，而声名却可以胜过金石的坚固，长存不朽，因此君子活在世上，要建立功德，撰写著作，这哪裹是喜欢辩论，是为了树立声名而不得已啊!
English: But the human body is more fragile than plants, while fame can outlast the solidity of gold and stone, and remain immortal. Therefore, a gentleman lives in the world, builds up merits, and writes books. Is it because he likes to debate, is it because he wants to establish a reputation?

古文：予齿在逾立，尝夜梦执丹漆之礼器，随仲尼而南行，旦而寤，乃怡然而喜。
现代文：我年纪已遇三十，曾在一个夜晚梦见自己手上拿着红漆祭器，跟随着孔子向南走，早上醒来，内心十分高兴。
English: I am in my thirties. One night, I dreamed that I was walking south with Confucius, holding a red lacquer offering in my hand. When I woke up in the morning, I was very happy.

古文：大哉圣人之难见也！乃小子之垂梦欤！
现代文：伟大的圣人是很难见到的，现在他竟屈尊降临我这无名小卒的梦中!
English: A great sage is hard to find, and now he has condescended to come to me, a nobody, in my dreams!

古文：自生人以来，未有如夫子者也。
现代文：自有人类以来，从没有像孔子这样的圣人。
English: Since the dawn of mankind, there has never been a sage like Confucius.

古文：敷赞圣旨，莫若注经，而马、郑诸儒，弘之已精，就有深解，未足立家。
现代文：要阐发圣人的思想，没有什么方法胜过给经书作注，但马融、郑玄这些前代大儒，已经精辟地弘扬了圣人的思想，即使我有什么深入的见解，也不足以自成一家。
English: There is no better way to explain the thoughts of a sage than to make notes on scriptures, but Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan, the great scholars of the previous generation, have brilliantly carried forward the thoughts of the sage. Even if I have some in-depth views, it is not enough to become a family.

古文：唯文章之用，实经典枝条，五礼资之以成，六典因之致用，君臣所以炳焕，军国所以昭明。
现代文：祇有文章能发挥功用，它犹如经典的枝条，五种礼制依靠它来制定实施，六种法典依靠它发挥作用，君臣业绩依赖它得以焕发光辉，军令国法依赖它得以昭明世人。
English: Only an article can play a role. It is like a classic branch. Five kinds of etiquette rely on it to formulate and implement, six kinds of codes rely on it to play a role, the performance of monarchs and ministers rely on it to shine, and military orders and national laws rely on it to reveal to the world.

古文：详其本源，莫非经典。
现代文：详究文章的本原，没有一样不是出自经典。
English: There is nothing in the original text of the article that is not a classic.

古文：而去圣久远，文体解散，辞人爱奇，言贵浮诡，饰羽尚画，文绣鞶帨，离本弥甚，将遂讹滥。
现代文：但后代距离圣人时代已很久远，文章体制逐渐衰败，作家追求新奇，言辞崇尚浮浅怪异，好比在华丽的羽毛上再加纹饰，在巾带上再绣上花纹，文章于是离开根本越来越远，最终造成乖谬和浮滥。
English: However, the descendants have been far away from the age of sages, the article system has gradually deteriorated, writers have pursued novelty, and the rhetoric has advocated superficiality and weirdness, just like adding ornaments to gorgeous feathers and embroidering patterns on the scarf, so the article has moved further and further away from the root, eventually causing perversion and extravagance.

古文：盖《周书》论辞，贵乎体要；尼父陈训，恶乎异端。
现代文：《周书》评论文辞，重视贴切简要；王迂教育学生，憎恨异端邪说。
English: "Zhou Shu" commented on the words and emphasized the pertinent and concise; Wang Du educated students and hated heresy.

古文：辞训之异，宜体于要。
现代文：这两种说法有区别，应当领会其中的要点。
English: There is a difference between these two statements, and the main points should be understood.

古文：于是搦笔和墨，乃始论文。
现代文：于是我提笔磨墨，开始论文。
English: So I sharpened my pen and began my thesis.

古文：详观近代之论文者多矣。
现代文：考察近代，论文的人已经很多了。
English: Looking at modern times, there are already a lot of people who have written dissertations.

古文：至如魏文述《典》，陈思序《书》，应蒨《文论》，陆机《文赋》，仲洽《流别》，弘范《翰林》，各照隅隙，鲜观衢路。
现代文：如魏文帝曹丕的《典论》，陈思王曹植的《与杨德祖书》，应场的《文质论》，陆机的《文赋》，挚仲洽的《文章流别论》，李弘范的《翰林论》。
English: For example, Wei Emperor Cao Pi's "On Classics," Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi's "On Yang Dezu's Books," Lu Ji's "On the Quality of Literature," Lu Ji's "On Literature," the cordial "On the Departure of Articles," and Li Hongfan's "On Hanlin."

古文：或臧否当时之才，或铨品前修之文，或泛举雅俗之旨，或撮题篇章之意。
现代文：它们各自祇接触到文章的一个方面，很少能从各个角度分析。它们有的褒贬当时的人才，有的品评前贤的文章，有的泛泛指出文章意旨的雅正和鄙俗，有的对文章内容作粗略的概括。
English: Each of them only came into contact with one aspect of the article, and they were rarely able to analyze it from all angles. Some of them praised and criticized the talents of the time, some commented on the articles of the predecessors, some generally pointed out the elegance and vulgarity of the article's intention, and some made a rough summary of the content of the article.

古文：魏《典》密而不周，陈《书》辩而无当，应《论》华而疏略，陆《赋》巧而碎乱，《流别》精而少功，《翰林》浅而寡要。
现代文：魏文帝《典论》内容细密，但不完备；陈思王《舆杨德祖书》颇为明晰，但漫无边际；应场《文质论》有文采，可是粗疏；陆机《文赋》构思巧妙，但琐碎杂乱；挚仲洽《文章流别论》内容精粹，但不切实用；李弘范《翰林论》浅薄而不得要领。
English: Wei Wendi's "Classification Theory" is detailed but incomplete; Chen Si Wang's "Ming Yang De Zu Shu" is quite clear, but rambling; On the Spot's "On the Quality of Literature" is literary, but rough; Lu Ji's "Literature" is cleverly conceived, but trivial and messy; the content of "Articles of Farewell" is refined, but not practical; Li Hongfan's "Hanlin Theory" is shallow and lacking in essentials.

古文：又君山、公干之徒，吉甫、士龙之辈，泛议文意，往往间出，并未能振叶以寻根，观澜而索源。不述先哲之诰，无益后生之虑。
现代文：又有桓君山、刘公干之流，应吉甫、陆士龙之辈，泛泛讨论过文章的立意，时或有较好的意见出现，但他们都没有能从树木的枝叶中追寻到根本，从水的波澜追溯到源头，没有继承前代圣贤的教导，因而对开拓后辈的思路没有益处。
English: Others, such as Huan Junshan, Liu Gonggan, Ying Ji Fu, and Lu Shilong, have generally discussed the intention of the article, and sometimes there are better opinions, but they have not been able to trace the root from the branches and leaves of trees, and trace the source from the waves of water. They have not inherited the teachings of the previous generation of sages, and thus are not beneficial to the development of the younger generation's thinking.

古文：盖《文心》之作也，本乎道，师乎圣，体乎经，酌乎纬，变乎《骚》，文之枢纽，亦云极矣。
现代文：《文心雕龙》的写作，立足正道，效法圣人，依据经典，参酌纬书，从《楚辞》中探究变化，文章的关键，也算是探究穷尽了。
English: The writing of "Wenxin Jiaolong" is based on the right path, imitating the sage, according to the classics, reference books, and exploring the changes from "Chuji," the key to the article, is also an exhaustion of exploration.

古文：若乃论文叙笔，则囿别区分，原始以表末，释名以章义，选文以定篇，敷理以举统；上篇以上，纲领明矣。
现代文：至于论述有韵和无韵的篇章，就按文体区分，推究文体的来源，叙述文体的流变，解释各种文体的名称，揭示名称的意义，选定各种文体的文章加以评论，阐述写作道理，总结各种文体的特点。本书的上篇，已经明确了纲领。
English: As for the chapters on rhyming and non-rhyming, they are divided according to style, investigate the source of style, describe the flow of style, explain the names of various styles, reveal the meaning of names, select articles of various styles and comment on them, explain the principles of writing, and summarize the characteristics of various styles.

古文：至于割情析表，笼圈条贯，摛神性，图风势，苞会通，阅声字，崇赞于《时序》，褒贬于《才略》，怊怅于《知音》，耿介于《程器》，长怀《序志》，以驭群篇；下篇以下，毛目显矣。
现代文：至于剖析情理，分析文采，全面分析文章脉络，推论《神思》和《体性》，考虑《风骨》和《定势》，包容《附会》和《通变》，观察《声律》和《练字》，在《时序》中谈到了文章的兴衰，在《才略》中议及了褒贬，在《知音》中寄托了惆怅感叹，在《程器》中发表了感慨，在《序志》中畅叙情怀，统驭各篇。下篇的细目，也就此揭示了。
English: As for the analysis of the situation, the analysis of literature, the comprehensive analysis of the context of the article, the deduction of "Spirit" and "Physicality," the consideration of "Stem" and "Fixed Situation," the inclusion of "Side Meeting" and "Transformation," the observation of "Vocal Rhythm" and "Word Practice," the rise and fall of the article was discussed in the "Timing," the praise and criticism were discussed in the "Outline of Talents," the sighs and exclamations were pinned in the "Friendship," the sighs and exclamations were published in the "Pathfinder," and the feelings were expressed in the "

古文：位理定名，彰乎《大易》之数，其为文用，四十九篇而已。
现代文：安排内容，确定名称，一共五十篇，恰好符合《易》的《大衍》之数。其中讨论文章功用的，衹有四十九篇而已。
English: There are a total of fifty articles on arranging the content and determining the name, which is exactly the same as the number of "Dayan" in "Yi." Among them, there are only forty-nine articles discussing the function of the article.

古文：夫铨叙一文为易，弥纶群言为难。
现代文：评论一篇作品比较容易，全面评价许多作品就很困难。
English: It is relatively easy to comment on a work, but it is difficult to evaluate many works in an all-round way.

古文：虽复轻采毛发，深极骨髓，或有曲意密源，似近而远，辞所不载，亦不胜数矣。
现代文：本书虽然衹采择细如毛发的少数篇章，进行了深入骨髓的详尽剖析，有的文章用意曲折，源头邃密，看似浅近，实则深远，本书没有谈到，也是数不胜数。
English: Although this book only selects a few chapters that are as fine as hair, and carries out an in-depth detailed analysis of the bone marrow, some articles have twists and turns, the source is meticulous, it seems shallow, but it is far-reaching. This book does not talk about it, but it is also countless.

古文：及其品评成文，有同乎旧谈者，非雷同也，势自不可异也；有异乎前论者，非苟异也，理自不可同也。
现代文：至于品评文章的文字，有的和前人之说相同，这并不是有意雷同，是因为按理不能不同。也有的和前人见解不同，这也不是随意标新立异，是因为按理不能相同。
English: As for the words of the review article, some are the same as the predecessors, which is not intentional similarity, because it can not be different. There are also different opinions from the predecessors, which is not arbitrary innovation, because it can not be the same.

古文：同之与异，不屑古今，擘肌分理，唯务折衷。
现代文：有的说法相同，有的说法不同，不必计较这些说法是古人的还是今人的，主要是分析文章结构条理，力求公允恰当。
English: Some sayings are the same, some sayings are different. It is not necessary to consider whether these sayings are ancient or modern. The main thing is to analyze the structure of the article and strive to be fair and appropriate.

古文：案辔文雅之场，而环络藻绘之府，亦几乎备矣。
现代文：驰骋在文学领域，周游艺苑之地，这些议论也接近于完备了。
English: galloping in the field of literature, touring the land of art, these discussions are also close to completion.

古文：但言不尽意，圣人所难，识在瓶管，何能矩矱。
现代文：衹是语言不能把心意完全表达，圣人也曾为此而深感困难，凭我这浅陋的见识，怎么能给人建立法度规矩?
English: Even though words cannot fully express one's heart, and sages have been deeply troubled by this, with my shallow understanding, how can I establish rules and regulations for others?

古文：茫茫往代，既洗予闻；眇眇来世，傥尘彼观。
现代文：众多的前代先贤，使我开阔了眼界；在我不能预知的未来，这本书或许要让大家屈尊一读。
English: Numerous predecessors and sages have broadened my horizons; in my unpredictable future, this book may make everyone deign to read it.

古文：既成，未为时流所称。
现代文：刘勰《文心雕龙》写成之后，并没受到当时名人重视。
English: After Liu Xuan's "Wenshin Jiaolong" was written, it did not receive much attention from celebrities at the time.

古文：勰自重其文，欲取定于沈约。
现代文：刘勰看重自己的文章，想要获得沈约的评价。
English: Liu Yao values his own articles and wants to get Shen Yao's evaluation.

古文：约时贵盛，无由自达，乃负其书，候约出，干之于车前，状若货鬻者。
现代文：沈约当时地位十分显贵，刘勰无法见到沈约，刘勰于是背着自己的书，在路上等候沈约出门，然后上前拦住沈约的车，样子像是要卖书。
English: At that time, Shen Yao's status was very prominent. Liu Yao could not see Shen Yao, so Liu Yao, carrying his own book, waited for Shen Yao to go out on the road, and then stopped Shen Yao's car, looking like he wanted to sell books.

古文：约便命取读，大重之，谓为深得文理，常陈诸几案。
现代文：沈约当即命人取来阅读，他十分看重这部书，认为逭书深刻地说出了写文章的道理。他常常把这部书陈放在自己的几案上。
English: Shen Yao immediately ordered someone to read it. He valued this book very much and believed that it profoundly expressed the reason for writing articles. He often put this book on his cases.

古文：然勰为文长于佛理，京师寺塔及名僧碑志，必请勰制文。
现代文：但是刘勰写文章阐述佛教教义是他的特长，京城的寺塔及出名僧人的碑志，一定要请刘勰撰写。
English: However, Liu Ye's specialty is to write articles expounding Buddhist doctrines. The temples and pagodas of Beijing and the epitaphs of famous monks must be written by Liu Ye.

古文：有敕与慧震沙门于定林寺撰经证，功毕，遂启求出家，先燔鬓发以自誓，敕许之。
现代文：皇上下达命令要刘勰与慧震和尚在定林寺撰写经证。事情完成之后，刘勰于是上表启奏，请求出家为僧，他事先燔烧自己的鬓发，发下誓愿。皇上准许了他。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Bei and Huizhen Monk to write a scripture in Dinglin Temple. After the matter was completed, Liu Bei then went to the table and asked to be ordained as a monk. He burned his hair and made a vow in advance. The emperor allowed him.

古文：乃于寺变服，改名慧地。
现代文：刘勰于是就在定林寺中改穿僧衣，改名为慧地。
English: As a result, Liu Wei changed his name to Huidi and changed his robe in Dinglin Temple.

古文：未期而卒。文集行于世。
现代文：刘勰出家不到一年就去世了。
English: Liu Hui died less than a year after becoming a monk.

古文：王籍，字文海，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：他的文章在世上流传。王籍字文海，琅邪临沂人。
English: His articles have been circulated all over the world. He is a member of the royal family, a man of letters and a man of letters.

古文：祖远，宋光禄勋。
现代文：他的祖父王远，宋时任光禄勋。
English: His grandfather, Wang Yuan, was a member of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父僧祐，齐骁骑将军。
现代文：父亲王僧佑，齐时任骁骑将军。
English: His father, Wang Xiangyou, was the general of the imperial cavalry at that time.

古文：籍七岁能属文。及长，好学博涉，有才气，乐安任昉见而称之。
现代文：王籍七岁时就能写文章，到长大成人之后十分好学，广泛涉猎群书，而又有才气，乐安任叻见到他十分赞许。
English: At the age of seven, the prince was able to write articles. When he became an adult, he was very eager to learn, read a lot of books, and had talent. Le An Renhong was very pleased to see him.

古文：尝于沈约坐赋得《咏烛》，甚为约赏。
现代文：王籍曾经在沈约家为宾客，即兴赋得《咏烛》诗，沈约很是赏识。
English: A member of the royal family was once a guest at Shen Yojia's home and improvised the poem "Candle," which Shen Yojia greatly appreciated.

古文：齐末，为冠军行参军，累迁外兵、记室。
现代文：齐代末年，王籍任冠军行参军，积累功劳升迁为外兵、记室。
English: In the last years of the Qi Dynasty, the royal family served as champions, joined the army, accumulated merits, and were promoted to foreign soldiers and recorders.

古文：天监初，除安成王主簿、尚书三公郎、廷尉正。
现代文：天监初年，王籍被除授安成王主簿，尚书三公郎，廷尉正。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, the royal family was stripped of the main book of Ancheng Wang, the third prince of Shangshu, and the court lieutenant.

古文：历余姚、钱塘令，并以放免。
现代文：历任余姚、钱塘令，都因为不检点而被免官。
English: The successive Yuyao and Qiantang rulers were all removed from office for indiscretions.

古文：久之，除轻车湘东王谘议参军，随府会稽。
现代文：过了很久，王籍又被除授为轻车湘束王谘议参军，随王府到会稽。
English: After a long time, the royal family was stripped of its citizenship, and the king of Hunan Province was advised to join the army, and he followed the royal court to the registration hall.

古文：郡境有云门、天柱山，籍尝游之，或累月不反。
现代文：会稽郡境内有云门山、天柱山，王籍曾经到这两座山上游览，有时在山上几个月不回家。
English: There are Yunmen Mountain and Tianzhu Mountain on the territory of Hefei County. The royal family has visited these two mountains, and sometimes they do not go home for several months.

古文：至若邪溪赋诗，其略云： 蝉噪林逾静，鸟鸣山更幽。 
现代文：王籍到若邪溪时赋诗，其中有句说： 蝉噪林逾静，鸟鸣山更幽。 
English: A poem was composed when the royal family arrived at the Waka Yaku Stream, in which there is a line that says: The cicadas in the noisy forest are quieter than the birds in the quiet mountain.

古文：当时以为文外独绝。
现代文：当时人们认为，这两句诗的言外之意无与伦比。
English: At the time, it was thought that the hidden meaning of these two verses was incomparable.

古文：还为大司马从事中郎，迁中散大夫，尤不得志，遂徒行市道，不择交游。
现代文：王籍回京任大司马从事中郎，迁中散大夫，王籍感到特别不得志，于是徒步在集市道上漫游，随意与人交往。
English: The royal family returned to Beijing to take up the posts of grand steward and middle steward, and moved to the position of middle-ranking doctor. The royal family felt particularly discouraged, so they roamed the market streets on foot and mingled with people at will.

古文：湘东王为荆州，引为安西府谘议参军，带作塘令。
现代文：湘东王任荆州刺史，提拔王籍为安西府谘议参军，兼作塘令。
English: The king of eastern Hunan served as the governor of Jingzhou, promoted the royal family to consult and join the army of Anxi Prefecture, and also served as the commander of Tang.

古文：不理县事，日饮酒，人有讼者，鞭而遣之。
现代文：王籍不处理县中事务，衹是每天饮酒，有来县府诉讼的人，王籍下令鞭打他们然后放他们走。
English: The royal family does not deal with county affairs, but drinks alcohol every day. If there are people who come to the county government for litigation, the royal family orders them to be whipped and then let them go.

古文：少时，卒。
现代文：不久王籍就去世了。
English: The royal line died out soon after.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：王籍有文集在世上流传。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：子碧，亦有文才，先籍卒。
现代文：王籍之子王碧，也很有文才，比王籍早去世。
English: Wang Bi, the son of the royal family, was also very literate and died earlier than the royal family.

古文：何思澄，字元静，东海郯人。
现代文：何思澄字元静，东海郯人。
English: Ho Shizhen, also known as Yuan Jing, is a famous actress in the East China Sea.

古文：父敬叔，齐征东录事参军、余杭令。
现代文：他的父亲刘敬叔，齐时任征束录事参军、余杭令。
English: His father, Liu Jingshu, was conscripted into the army at the same time as Qi, and was sent to Yuhang.

古文：思澄少勤学，工文辞。
现代文：何思澄从小勤奋好学，精于写文章。
English: He Sizheng has been diligent and studious since childhood, and is good at writing articles.

古文：起家为南康王侍郎，累迁安成王左常侍，兼太学博士，平南安成王行参军，兼记室。
现代文：他从家居出仕任南康王侍郎，积功升迁为安成王左常侍，兼太学博士，平南安成王行参军，兼记室。
English: He served as the attendant of the king of Nankang from his home, and was promoted to the left attendant of the king of Ancheng, and also a doctor of theology. He joined the army of the king of Ancheng in Pingnan, and also served as a secretary.

古文：随府江州，为《游庐山诗》，沈约见之，大相称赏，自以为弗逮。
现代文：何思澄随王府到丝，写了《游庐山诗》，选垫读到这首诗，十分赞赏，认为自己的作品赶不上这首诗。
English: He Sichen followed the king's palace to the silk, wrote "You Lushan Poem," and when the chooser read this poem, he appreciated it very much, and thought that his work could not catch up with this poem.

古文：约郊居宅新构阁斋，因命工书人题此诗于壁。
现代文：沈约位于郊外的住宅新建了书斋，沈约就命精于书法的人把这首诗题写在书斋的墙壁上。
English: Shen Yu ordered a calligrapher to write the title of the poem on the wall of the study in the newly built study room of his suburban residence.

古文：傅昭常请思澄制《释奠诗》，辞文典丽。
现代文：傅昭曾经请何思澄撰写《释奠诗》，文辞典雅华丽。
English: Fu Zhao once asked He Sizheng to write "Interpretation Poem," and the dictionary is gorgeous.

古文：除廷尉正。
现代文：何思澄被除授为廷尉正。
English: He Shizhen was stripped of his title of imperial lieutenant.

古文：天监十五年，敕太子詹事徐勉举学士入华林撰《遍略》，勉举思澄等五人以应选。
现代文：天监十五年，高祖命太子詹事徐勉荐举学士进华林园编撰《褊略》，徐勉荐举何思澄等五人应选。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heaven's Supervisor, Prince Gao Zu's son Zhan Zhi Xu recommended that a bachelor be selected to compile the "Outline" in the Jinhua Forest Park, and Xu recommended that five people, including He Sichen, be selected.

古文：迁治书侍御史。
现代文：何思澄迁任治书侍御史。
English: He Shizhen was transferred to the post of secretary to the emperor.

古文：宋、齐以来，此职稍轻，天监初始重其选。车前依尚书二丞给三驺，执盛印青囊，旧事纠弹官印绶在前故也。
现代文：宋、齐以来，这个官职渐渐不被重视，梁天监初年才重视对治书侍御史的选任，治书侍御史依尚书二丞的规格，车前也安排三名仆从，手执盛放官印的青囊。这样安排是因为按照旧例，纠弹不法行为的官员印绶都安放在车前的缘故。
English: Since the Song and Qi dynasties, this official position has gradually been de-emphasized. It was not until the first year of Liang Tianjun's reign that importance was attached to the selection of the secretary-general. The secretary-general was appointed in accordance with the specifications of Shang Shuling, and three servants were also arranged in front of the car, holding the official seal in their hands. This arrangement was due to the fact that, according to the old example, the stamps of officials who corrected illegal behavior were placed in front of the car.

古文：久之，迁秣陵令，入兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：过了很久，何思澄迁任秣陵令，入朝兼东宫通事舍人。
English: After a long time, He Sichen was transferred to the position of the imperial mausoleum, and he entered the imperial court and the East Palace.

古文：除安西湘东王录事参军，兼舍人如故。
现代文：又除授安西湘束王绿事参军，兼舍人之职不变。
English: In addition to awarding Anxi Xiangzhu Wanglul to join the army, his duties remain unchanged.

古文：时徐勉、周舍以才具当朝，并好思澄学，常递日招致之。
现代文：当时徐勉、周舍都凭藉才气和能力在朝中掌管政事，他们两人都倾慕何思澄的才学，常常轮流把他邀来聚谈。
English: At that time, both Xu Qian and Zhou She used their talent and ability to take charge of political affairs in the DPRK. Both of them admired He Sizhen's talent and often invited him to gather for talks.

古文：昭明太子薨，出为黟县令。
现代文：昭明太子去世，何思澄出京任黟县令。
English: After the death of Prince Akimei, He Sizheng left Beijing to serve as the magistrate of Shixian County.

古文：迁除宣惠武陵王中录事参军，卒官，时年五十四。
现代文：迁任宣惠武陵王中录事参军，在任职期间去世，死时五十四岁。
English: When he was transferred to the position of Xuan Hui Wuling Wang Zhong Luo, he enlisted in the army and died during his term of office, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：文集十五卷。
现代文：何思澄有文集十五卷。
English: He Shizhen has a collection of fifteen volumes.

古文：初，思澄与宗人逊及子朗俱擅文名，时人语曰： 东海三何，子朗最多。 
现代文：以前，何思澄与同宗族的何逊以及何子朗都有善写文章的名声，当时人称说： 东海三何，何子朗最有才。 
English: In the past, He Shizhen and his relatives, He Sun and He Zilang, had the reputation of being good at writing articles. At that time, people said: "There are three things in the East China Sea, and He Zilang is the most talented."

古文：思澄闻之，曰： 此言误耳。
现代文：何思澄听到这话，说： 这话错了。
English: When He Sichen heard this, he said, "This is wrong.

古文：如其不然，故当归逊。 
现代文：至于要说的话，仍应当算何逊最有才。 
English: As for what to say, it should still be the least talented.

古文：思澄意谓宜在己也。
现代文：何思澄说这话的意思是，最有才的名声应当归于自己。
English: When He Sichen said this, he meant that the most talented reputation should be attributed to himself.

古文：子朗，字世明，早有才思，工清言，周舍每与共谈，服其精理。
现代文：何子朗字世明，早年就很有才气，遇事有独到的见解，精于清谈玄理，周舍每每与他交谈，叹服他玄理的精妙。
English: He Zi Lang was a man of the world. In his early years, he was very talented, had unique opinions in times of trouble, and was good at talking about metaphysics. Zhou She talked with him every day, and marveled at his exquisite metaphysics.

古文：尝为《败冢赋》，拟庄周马棰，其文甚工。
现代文：何子朗曾经撰写《败冢赋》，是仿照庄周《至乐篇》马捶髑髅之说而写成，文字十分精巧。
English: He Zilang once wrote "Failed Gift," which was modeled after Zhuang Zhou's "Perfect Music" and written by Ma Xizhi. The writing is very exquisite.

古文：世人语曰： 人中爽爽何子朗。 
现代文：当时人们称说： 俊朗出众算何子朗。 
English: At that time, people said: "He who is the most handsome is the best."

古文：历官员外散骑侍郎，出为固山令。卒，时年二十四。
现代文：历任官职有员外散骑侍郎，出京任国山令，在这期间去世，死时二十四岁。
English: Successive officials had non-members riding horseback as attendants, went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the country, died during this period, and was 24 years old at the time of death.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：有文集在世上流传。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：刘杳，字士深，平原平原人也。
现代文：刘杳字士深，平原平原人。
English: Liu Xuan is a profound scholar and a man of the plains.

古文：祖乘民，宋冀州刺史。
现代文：他的祖父刘乘民，宋时任冀州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Liu Xianmin, was the governor of Jizhou Province during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父闻慰齐东阳太守，有清绩，在《齐书·良政传》。
现代文：父亲刘闻慰，齐时任束阳太守，有清明廉洁的政绩，刘闻慰的事迹记载在《齐书。良政传》中。
English: Liu Wenyu's father, Liu Wenyu, was the governor of Ziyang at the time, and had a clean and honest political record. Liu Wenyu's deeds are recorded in the "Qi Shu. Liang Zheng Chuan."

古文：杳年数岁，征士明僧绍见之，抚而言曰： 此儿实千里之驹。 
现代文：刘杳还衹有几岁的时候，征士明僧绍见到他，拍着他说： 这个孩子确实是千里驹。 
English: When Liu Yao was still a few years old, the renowned scholar Xiao Ming saw him and patted him and said: "This child is truly a great talent.

古文：十三，丁父忧，每哭，哀感行路。
现代文：刘杳十三岁时，父亲去世，他守丧每次哭吊，哀痛之情感动行路之人。
English: When Liu Wei was thirteen years old, his father passed away. Every time he mourned, he wept and wailed. He was a person who walked with the emotion of grief.

古文：天监初，为太学博士、宣惠豫章王行参军。
现代文：天监初年，刘杳任太学博士、宣惠豫章王行参军。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Liu Ye was appointed as Doctor of Theology, and Xuan Hui, Yu Zhang and Wang Xing joined the army.

古文：杳少好学，博综群书，沈约、任昉以下，每有遗忘，皆访问焉。
现代文：刘杳从小好学，博览并精通各种书籍，沈约、任防以及在他们之下的文人，每每有遣忘的知识，都向刘杳询问。
English: Liu Wei has been eager to learn since childhood. He is well-versed and proficient in all kinds of books. Shen Yu, Ren Wei, and the literati under them have asked Liu Wei for every forgotten knowledge.

古文：尝于约坐语及宗庙牺樽，约云： 郑玄答张逸，谓为画凤皇尾娑娑然。
现代文：刘杳曾经在沈约处宾客坐席上谈及祭祀宗庙所用的牺樽，沈约说： 郑玄回答张逸，说是牺樽上画着婆娑起舞的凤凰尾。
English: Liu Yao had once talked about the sacrificial barrels used to worship the ancestral temple at the guests' table at Shen Yao's place. Shen Yao said: Zheng Xuan answered Zhang Y, saying that the sacrificial barrels were painted with the phoenix tail of the dance of the goddess.

古文：今无复此器，则不依古。 
现代文：现在没有这种酒器，就是没有遵循古代的规制。 
English: If you don't have this kind of wine container now, you're not following the ancient regulations.

古文：杳曰： 此言未必可按。
现代文：刘杳说： 郑玄这话未必可以作为依据。
English: Liu Wei said: Zheng Xuan's words cannot necessarily be used as a basis.

古文：古者樽，皆刻木为鸟兽，凿顶及背，以出内酒。
现代文：古代樽彝等酒器，都用木刻成鸟兽的形状，凿开头顶直到背部，以便酒器内的酒可以倒出来。
English: Ancient caskets and other wine vessels were carved in wood into the shape of birds and beasts. They were chiseled from the top of the head to the back so that the wine inside the vessel could be poured out.

古文：顷魏世鲁郡地中得齐大夫子尾送女器，有牺樽作牺牛形；晋永嘉贼曹嶷于青州发齐景公冢，又得此二樽，形亦为牛象。
现代文：以前魏代在鲁郡从地下发掘到齐大夫子尾陪送女儿的礼器，其中有牺樽，形状是供祭祀作牺牲的牛形；晋代永嘉年间逆贼曹嶷在青州盗掘齐景公的墓冢，又得到这样的两个酒樽，外形也是牛的形状。
English: Previously, Wei Dynasty excavated from the ground in Lu County to Qi Ziwei accompanied his daughter's gift, including a sacrificial barrel, the shape of which was a cow for sacrifice; during the Jin Dynasty Yongjia, the traitor Cao Wei robbed the tomb of Qi Jinggong in Qingzhou, and obtained two such wine barrels, also in the shape of a cow.

古文：二处皆古之遗器，知非虚也。 
现代文：两个地方发掘出来的都是古代遗留下来的礼器，由此可知，樽彝等酒器用木刻成鸟兽的形状，并不是假的。
English: The ceremonial objects unearthed in both places are all cucumbers left over from ancient times, which shows that the wine vessels such as caskets, carved into the shape of birds and beasts, are not fake.

古文：约大以为然。
现代文：沈约认为刘杳说得非常正确。
English: Shen Yu believed that Liu Ye was very correct.

古文：约又云： 何承天《纂文》奇博，其书载张仲师及长颈王事，此何出？ 
现代文：沈约又说： 何承天《纂文》遣部书非常渊博，书中记载张仲师和长颈王的事，这事出自什么地方? 
English: Shen Yu also said: He Chengtian's "Codification" is very profound. The book records the story of Zhang Zhongshi and the Long-necked King. Where did this story come from?

古文：杳曰： 仲师长尺二寸，唯出《论衡》。
现代文：刘杳说： 张仲师身长一尺二寸，衹在《论衡》中见到这个记载。
English: Liu Wei said: Zhang Zhongshi is one foot two inches tall. I saw this record in "On Balance."

古文：长颈是毘骞王，硃建安《扶南以南记》云：古来至今不死。 
现代文：长颈王就是毗骞王，朱建安《扶南以南记》中说：长颈王从古到现在都没死。 
English: The king of the long neck is the king of Vihar, Zhu Jian'an said in "The Southern Annals of Funan": The king of the long neck has not died from ancient times to the present.

古文：约即取二书寻检，一如杳言。
现代文：沈约就把两部书拿来查找，果然全都像刘查说的那样。
English: Shen Ying took the two books to look up, and they all turned out to be as Liu Cha said.

古文：约郊居宅时新构阁斋，杳为赞二首，并以所撰文章呈约，约即命工书人题其赞于壁。
现代文：沈约位于郊外的住宅新建书斋，刘杳为书斋作了二首赞，把赞和自己的文章一起呈送沈约，沈约就命精于书法的人把刘杳的赞抄写在书斋的墙壁上。
English: Shen Yu built a new study hall in his suburban residence. Liu Wei wrote two poems in praise of the study hall and sent them to Shen Yu together with his articles. Shen Yu ordered a calligrapher to copy Liu Yu's praise on the walls of the study hall.

古文：仍报杳书曰： 生平爱嗜，不在人中，林壑之欢，多与事夺。
现代文：接着写信给刘杳回覆说： 我生平的嗜好，并不在于人间富贵，衹是游览山林的乐趣，常常因为政事繁忙而不能享受。
English: He then wrote to Liu Wei, replying: My life's hobby is not about human wealth, but the pleasure of visiting the mountains and forests, which I often cannot enjoy because I am busy with political affairs.

古文：日暮涂殚，此心往矣；犹复少存闲远，征怀清旷。
现代文：现在我已年暮，这种兴致已经过去了；但还是稍微存有求取安逸、远离尘世的想法，存有清淡旷达的情怀。
English: Now that I am getting old, this interest has passed; but there is still a slight idea of seeking comfort and being away from the world, and there is a light and expansive feeling.

古文：结宇东郊，匪云止息，政复颇寄夙心，时得休偃。
现代文：在东郊建房，并不是为了长住，正是想藉此稍微寄托以前的志向，时而能够在此偷闲休息。
English: The purpose of building a house in the eastern suburbs is not to live there for a long time, but to use it as a means of pinning down old ambitions, and to be able to take a break from time to time.

古文：仲长游居之地，休琏所述之美，望慕空深，何可仿佛。
现代文：健垦面游居自娱之地，尘还型所述的佳美之境，衹能空怀深深仰慕之情，又哪裹能够仿效他们。
English: They live in a place of self-entertainment, the beauty of the landscape described by the dust, and they can have a deep admiration, and they can imitate them.

古文：君爱素情多，惠以二赞。辞采妍富，事义毕举，句韵之间，光影相照，便觉此地，自然十倍。
现代文：你爱好质朴，感情深厚，惠赠我两篇赞，文辞赡富，文采妍丽，叙事抒情，两全其美，文句音韵，光采照人，读了你的赞辞，便觉这块地方，增添了十倍的自然风光。
English: You are fond of simplicity, have deep feelings, and have given me two praise articles. Your words are rich, elegant, and lyrical, with the best of both worlds. Your sentences and rhymes are beautiful, and your light is radiant. After reading your praise, I feel that this place has added ten times the natural scenery.

古文：故知丽辞之益，其事弘多，辄当置之阁上，坐卧嗟览。
现代文：由此可知，华丽的文辞，带来的好处大而且多，我立即就把它挂在书斋裹，坐卧都可阅读玩赏。
English: From this it can be seen that the magnificent literature brings great and many benefits. I immediately hung it in my study, and I can read and play while lying down.

古文：别卷诸篇，并为名制。
现代文：送来的其他文章，也都是佳作。
English: The other articles sent to us are also excellent.

古文：又山寺既为警策，诸贤从时复高奇，解颐愈疾，义兼乎此。
现代文：山中寺院僧人时时给人策励，众堂兄弟又都是高远奇才，藉此可以欢笑，藉此可以愈疾，在这束郊建住房，就是兼取逭两点。
English: The monks of the mountain temple are always encouraging people, and all the cousins are high-flying wizards. With this you can laugh, with this you can heal the disease, in this bunch of suburban housing, it is to take two points.

古文：迟此叙会，更共申析。 
现代文：等到会面的时候，再一起共叙情怀。 
English: When the time comes to meet, we will recount our feelings together.

古文：其为约所赏如此。
现代文：刘杳被沈约赏识竟到了这样的程度。
English: Liu Ye was appreciated by Shen Yu to such an extent.

古文：又在任昉坐，有人饷昉曌酒而作榐字。昉问杳： 此字是不？ 
现代文：刘杳又曾经在任叻家坐谈，有人赠送楛酒给任防，而礼单上写作 搌酒 问玺喳： 这个字是对是错? 
English: Liu Yao once had a discussion at Ren Yao's house. Someone gave Ren Bao wine as a gift, but on the gift list it was written 酒. Q: Is this word right or wrong?

古文：杳对曰： 葛洪《字苑》作木旁絜。 
现代文：回答说： 姜苏《字苑》这个字作木旁，右边是若。 
English: He replied: Jiangsu, the word "Zhiyuan" is written next to the tree, and on the right is the word "Jiao."

古文：昉又曰： 酒有千日醉，当是虚言。 
现代文：任防又说： 酒有千日醉，恐怕是假话。 
English: Ren Bao also said, "There are a thousand days of drunkenness. I'm afraid that's a lie."

古文：杳云： 桂阳程乡有千里酒，饮之至家而醉，亦其例也。 
现代文：刘杳说： 巡有种千里酒，喝了这种酒回到家才醉，也和千日醉酒类似。 
English: Liu Wei said, "There is a kind of thousand-mile liquor in the patrol, and it is similar to the thousand-day drunkenness.

古文：昉大惊曰： 吾自当遗忘，实不忆此。 
现代文：任防十分吃惊，说： 我全忘了，实在记不起这种千里酒的事。 
English: He was very surprised and said, "I've completely forgotten, I really can't remember this kind of thing."

古文：杳云： 出杨元凤所撰《置郡事》。
现代文：刘杳说： 这事出自彊五凰撰写的《置郡事》。
English: Liu Wei said: This matter comes from the "County Affairs" written by Zou Wuhuang.

古文：元凤是魏代人，此书仍载其赋，云三重五品，商溪摖里。 
现代文：杨元凤是魏代人，这部书还载有他的赋，说到三重五品，盗握。 
English: Yang Yuanfeng was a man of the Wei Dynasty, and this book also contains his fu, talking about the three-fold and five-fold, and the stolen grip.

古文：时即检杨记，言皆不差。
现代文：当时就查检彊五周的书，型查说的都不错。
English: At that time, I checked five weeks of books, and everything I found was good.

古文：王僧孺被敕撰谱，访杳血脉所因。
现代文：王僧孺奉皇上之命撰写谱谍，向型查询问血统源流。
English: Wang Sangyao was ordered by the emperor to write a spy story and inquire about the origin of the bloodline from the type checker.

古文：杳云： 桓谭《新论》云： 太史《三代世表》，旁行邪上，并效周谱。 以此而推，当起周代。 
现代文：说： 但望《新论》说： 太史公《三代世表》用横行斜线排列成表格，全都仿效周代的谱谍，以此来推论，血统应当从旦伐开始。 
English: Said: But the "New Theory" said: Taishi Gong's "Third Generation Table" is arranged into tables with diagonal slashes, all of which are modeled after Zhou Dynasty's spies, to infer that the lineage should begin with Danfar.

古文：僧孺叹曰： 可谓得所未闻。 
现代文：王僵噩感叹道： 这可以算是学到了未曾听到遇的东西。 
English: Wang Jianyong sighed: This can be regarded as learning something that has never been heard before.

古文：周舍又问杳： 尚书官著紫荷橐，相传云 挈囊 ，竟何所出？ 
现代文：周舍又问刘杳： 尚书官随身带着紫荷橐，相传说是 携带夹囊 ，遣究竟出自何处? 
English: Zhou She also asked Liu Wei: Shang Shukan always carries a purple lotus with him. Legend has it that he carries a pouch. Where did the pouch come from?

古文：杳答曰： 《张安世传》曰 持橐簪笔，事孝武皇帝数十年 。
现代文：刘杳回答说： 《张安世传》说： 手持橐，手板上插着笔，事奉孝武皇帝几十年。
English: Liu Yao replied: "Zhang's Biography" says: Holding a scepter in his hand, with a pen on his palm, he served Emperor Xiaowu for decades.

古文：韦昭、张晏注并云 橐，囊也。近臣簪笔，以待顾问 。 
现代文：注都说： 橐，就是。皇上的近臣手板上插着笔，等待皇上询问。  
English: The notes all say:, that is. The emperor's close retainer has a pen in his hand, waiting for the emperor to inquire.

古文：范岫撰《字书音训》，又访杳焉。
现代文：范岫编撰《字书音训》，又向刘杳询问。
English: Fan Jun compiled "Zi Shu Yin Xun" and inquired from Liu Jun.

古文：其博识强记，皆此类也。
现代文：刘杳博闻强记，都像上面记载的那样。
English: Liu Zibo's memoirs are all like the above.

古文：寻佐周舍撰国史。
现代文：不久就佐助旦捡编撰国史。
English: Before long, Sasuke was busy compiling a national history.

古文：出为临津令，有善绩。秩满，县人三百余人诣阙请留，敕许焉。
现代文：又出京任临建令，任职期间有很好的政绩，任期满后，临津县有三百余人到宫廷请求让刘杳留任，皇上答应了他们的要求。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as the Lian Jianling. During his term of office, he had very good political achievements. After his term of office expired, more than three hundred people from Linjin County went to the court to request that Liu Ye remain in office. The emperor agreed to their request.

古文：杳以疾陈解，还除云麾晋安王府参军。
现代文：刘杳以有病为由上表请求解职，回京城被授为云麾置圭王府参军。
English: Liu Ye requested to be relieved of his duties on the grounds that he was ill, and was given permission to return to Beijing to join the army in the capital.

古文：詹事徐勉举杳及顾协等五人入华林撰《遍略》，书成，以本官兼廷尉正，又以足疾解。
现代文：詹事徐勉荐举塑庐及颅协等五人进周编撰《遍略》。书编成以后，以原来官职兼廷尉正，又因为脚病而解职。
English: Zhan Zhi Xu recommended that five people, including the head sculptor and the cranial association, compile the "Outline" in a week. After the book was compiled, he was dismissed from his original official position as a court lieutenant, and because of foot disease.

古文：因著《林庭赋》。
现代文：随即写了《林庭赋》。
English: He immediately wrote "Lin Ting Fu."

古文：王僧孺见之叹曰： 《郊居》以后，无复此作。 
现代文：王僧孺见到这篇赋赞叹说： 《郊居赋》之后，再没有像《林庭赋》遣么好的作品。 
English: On seeing this fu, Wang Sangyu said with admiration: "After "Suburban Fu," there is no other work that is as good as "Forest Garden Fu."

古文：普通元年，复除建康正，迁尚书驾部郎；数月，徙署仪曹郎，仆射勉以台阁文议专委杳焉。
现代文：普通元年，刘杳又被授为谴正，迁任尚书驾部郎，数月之后，又徙署仪曹郎，仆射涂塑把尚书省的文书事务全都交给刘杳处置。
English: In the first year of the common era, Liu Wei was also awarded the title of vice-premier and transferred to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. A few months later, Liu Wei was assigned to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the post of secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：出为余姚令，在县清洁，人有馈遗，一无所受，湘东王发教褒称之。
现代文：刘杳又出京任余姚令，在职期间清正廉洁，有人馈赠，他全不收受，挝墓王颁发文告称赞褒奖他。
English: Liu Bei also went to Beijing to serve as Yuyao's regent. During his tenure, he was upright and incorruptible. Some people gave him gifts, but he did not accept them at all. The king of Laos issued a proclamation to praise and reward him.

古文：还除宣惠湘东王记室参军，母忧去职。
现代文：刘杳回京城又被授为宣惠湘东王记室参军，因母亲去世而离职。
English: After returning to Beijing, Liu Ye was awarded the honor of joining the army for the benefit of the East Hunan King's Records Office, but left the service due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，复为王府记室，兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：服丧期满，刘杳又任王府记室，兼东宫通事舍人。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Liu Ye was appointed as the secretary of the royal office, and also the secretary of the East Palace.

古文：大通元年，迁步兵校尉，兼舍人如故。
现代文：大通元年，刘杳迁任步兵校尉，兼舍人之职不变。
English: In the first year of Datong, Liu Qianqian was appointed as an infantry lieutenant, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：昭明太子谓杳曰： 酒非卿所好，而为酒厨之职，政为不愧古人耳。 
现代文：昭明太子对刘杳说： 从前阮籍因为步兵厨营人善于酿酒，就请求任步兵校尉之职。
English: Prince Zhao Ming said to Liu Ye: In the past, Ruan Ji requested to be appointed as an infantry captain because the infantry cook was good at brewing wine.

古文：俄有敕，代裴子野知著作郎事。
现代文：酒不是你喜欢的东西，而你却担任了步兵校尉之职，就正是因为你的才学无愧于古人。 
English: Wine is not your cup of tea, and it is because of your ancient learning that you hold the rank of lieutenant in the infantry.

古文：昭明太子薨，新宫建，旧人例无停者，敕特留杳焉。
现代文：不久，皇上命刘杳代裴子野知着作郎事。昭明太子去世，新立太子，按惯例原任太子官员没有留任的，皇上命刘杳破例留任。
English: Not long after, the emperor appointed Liu Ye to succeed Peizhino as the crown prince. After the death of Prince Zhao Ming, a new crown prince was appointed, and according to the usual practice, the former crown prince officials did not remain in office. However, the emperor appointed Liu Ye to remain in office as an exception.

古文：仍注太子《徂归赋》，称为博悉。
现代文：刘杳接着为太子《徂归赋》作注，他的注被称为广博周全。
English: Liu Ye then annotated the prince's "The Return of the King," and his annotation is said to be extensive and comprehensive.

古文：仆射何敬容奏转杳王府谘议，高祖曰： 刘杳须先经中书。 
现代文：仆射何敬容启奏让刘杳转任王府谘议，高祖说： 刘杳必须先具备在中书省任职的经历。 
English: Gao Zu said: Liu Ye must first have the experience of serving in the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：仍除中书侍郎。
现代文：接着就授刘杳为中书侍郎。
English: Next, Liu Ye was awarded the title of Censorship Attendant.

古文：寻为平西湘东王谘议参军，兼舍人、知著作如故。
现代文：不久后刘杳又任平西湘束王谘议参军，兼舍人、知著作等职不变。
English: Soon after, Liu Wei was appointed as the Pingxi Xiangzhu Wang to consult and join the army, and his posts as a layman and intellectual remained unchanged.

古文：迁为尚书左丞。
现代文：又迁任尚书左丞。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Shoshu-zojo.

古文：大同二年，卒官，时年五十。
现代文：大同二年，刘杳在任职期间去世，死时五十岁。
English: In the second year of Datong, Liu Ye passed away during his term of office, at the age of fifty.

古文：杳治身清俭，无所嗜好。
现代文：刘杳注重自身修养，清廉俭朴，没有嗜好。
English: Liu Wei pays attention to self-cultivation, is clean and frugal, and has no hobbies.

古文：为性不自伐，不论人短长，及睹释氏经教，常行慈忍。
现代文：生性不自夸，不议论别人的长短，到他见到佛教的经文教义之后，常行慈悲，并能忍辱。
English: By nature he is not boastful and does not discuss the merits or demerits of others, but after he saw the Buddhist scriptures and teachings, he often practiced compassion and was able to endure humiliation.

古文：天监十七年，自居母忧，便长断腥膻，持斋蔬食。
现代文：天监十七年，自从母亲去世之后，刘杳便长期不吃腥膻，遵循戒律衹吃蔬食。
English: In the 17th year of Tianjing, after the death of his mother, Liu Yao did not eat bitter gourd for a long time, and followed the precepts to eat vegetables.

古文：及临终，遗命敛以法服，载以露车，还葬旧墓，随得一地，容棺而已，不得设灵筵祭醊。
现代文：刘杳临终的时候，留下遗言，要在殡殓时给他穿上僧人的法衣，用无盖无帷的敞车装载灵柩，运回家葬在祖先墓地襄，随便得到一块地，衹要容得下棺柩就够了，不要设灵筵祭奠。
English: When Liu Yao was on his deathbed, his last words were to dress him in a monk's robe at the funeral, load the coffin with an open car with no cover and no drapes, transport it home and bury it in the ancestral cemetery, and get a piece of land. If you want to accommodate the coffin, it is enough, do not set up a coffin.

古文：其子遵行之。
现代文：刘杏的儿子都一一遵照办理。
English: Liu An's sons all complied.

古文：杳自少至长，多所著述。
现代文：刘杳从年幼直到成年，著述很多。
English: From childhood to adulthood, Liu Ye wrote many books.

古文：撰《要雅》五卷、《楚辞草木疏》一卷、《高士传》二卷、《东宫新旧记》三十卷、《古今四部书目》五卷，并行于世。
现代文：撰有《要雅》五卷，《楚辞草木疏》一卷，《高士传》二卷，《东宫新旧记》三十卷，《古今四部书目》五卷，都流传于世。
English: He wrote five volumes of "To Ya," one volume of "Chu Zhi Caoshuo," two volumes of "The Biography of Gao Shi," 30 volumes of "The History of the Eastern Palace," and five volumes of "Four Bibliographies of Ancient and Modern Times," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：谢征，字玄度，陈郡阳夏人。
现代文：谢征字玄度，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Zhengzhi Xindu, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：高祖景仁，宋尚书左仆射。
现代文：他的高祖父谢景仁，宋时任尚书左仆射。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Xie Jingren, was Song Dynasty's second-in-command.

古文：祖稚，宋司徒主簿。
现代文：祖父谢稚，宋时任司徒主簿。
English: His grandfather, Xie Zhi, was the chief bookkeeper of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父璟，少与从叔朓俱知名。
现代文：父亲谢璟，年少时就和堂叔谢跳同样出名。
English: When he was young, his father Xie Yao was just as famous as his uncle Xie Zang.

古文：齐竟陵王子良开西邸，招文学，璟亦预焉。
现代文：齐竟陵王萧子良开建西邸，招揽文学之士。
English: Xiao Ziliang, the king of the imperial mausoleum, began to build a western residence to attract literary figures.

古文：隆昌中，为明帝骠骑谘议参军，领记室。
现代文：谢璟也在被招之列。隆昌年间，谢璟任明帝骠骑谘议参军，领记室。
English: Xie Jun was also one of those who were called up. During the Longchang era, Xie Jun was appointed by the Ming Emperor to ride on horseback to consult on joining the army.

古文：迁中书郎，晋安内史。
现代文：迁任中书郎，晋安内史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Chushiro and became a member of the Jinan Inner Court.

古文：高祖平京邑，为霸府谘议、梁台黄门郎。
现代文：高垫平定京城，邀堤任霸府谘议，凿台黄门郎。
English: Gao Mat pacified the capital, invited Di to serve as the consultation of the bully, and chiseled Huangmenro.

古文：天监初，累迁司农卿、秘书监、左民尚书、明威将军、东阳太守。
现代文：天监初年，谢彊积功迁升为司农卿，秘书监，左民尚书，明威将军、束阳太守。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, Xie Juxu accumulated merits and was promoted to Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary Supervisor, Left People's Secretary, Mingwei General, and Sokyang Governor.

古文：高祖用为侍中，固辞年老，求金紫，未序，会疾卒。
现代文：高祖要用谢璟为侍中，邀堤以年老为由坚决推辞，请求任金印紫绶之职，还未按等级任命官职，谢璟就因病而去世了。
English: Gao Zu wanted to use Xie Jun as an attendant, but Zhaotie resolutely refused on the grounds of old age, requesting to be appointed to the post of Jin Ying Zi Jun. He had not yet been appointed to an official post according to his rank, and Xie Jun passed away due to illness.

古文：征幼聪慧，璟异之，常谓亲从曰： 此儿非常器，所忧者寿；若天假其年，吾无恨矣。 
现代文：谢征从小聪慧，邀荡认为他才能优异，常常对自己的亲属说： 这个孩子不是平常之辈，令人担忧的是他的寿命；假若上天给他年寿，我就没有遗憾了。 
English: From a young age, Xie Zheng was clever and thought his talent was excellent. He often said to his relatives: This child is not an ordinary person. What is worrying is his longevity. If God gave him a long life, I would have no regrets.

古文：既长，美风采，好学善属文。
现代文：谢征长大成人之后，风度仪表都很美，爱好学习，善于写文章。
English: After Xie Zheng became an adult, his manners and appearance were all beautiful, he loved to study and was good at writing articles.

古文：初为安西安成王法曹，迁尚书金部三公二曹郎、豫章王记室，兼中书舍人。
现代文：谢征最初任安西窒盛王法曹，迁任尚书金部三公二曹郎，豫章王记室，兼中书舍人。
English: Xie Zheng was initially appointed as the legal assistant of Anxi Nian Sheng Wang, and was transferred to the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade of the third grade.

古文：时魏中山王元略还北，高祖饯于武德殿，赋诗三十韵，限三刻成。
现代文：又迁任平北谘议参军，兼鸿膻卿，舍人之职不变。当时魏中山王孟监返回北方，产趄在武擅毖为他饯行。高祖要群臣在酒宴上赋诗三十韵，限定三刻完成。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongshan King Meng Jian returned to the north, and the puerperium was carried out for him in Wuxi. Gao Zu asked his vassals to compose a poem of 30 rhymes at the wine banquet, limited to three minutes.

古文：征二刻便就，其辞甚美，高祖再览焉。
现代文：谢征二刻就把诗写好，文辞很美，高担读了又读。
English: Xie Zheng wrote the poem in two minutes, the words were beautiful, Gao Dan read and read.

古文：又为临汝侯渊猷制《放生文》，亦见赏于世。
现代文：谢征又为临汝侯渊《放生文》，也被当代人赞赏。
English: Xie Zheng also starred in Lin Ru Houyuan's "Hosho Wen," which was also appreciated by contemporaries.

古文：中大通元年，以父丧去职，续又丁母忧。
现代文：中大通元年，堂堂因为父亲去世而离职守丧，接着母亲又去世。
English: In the first year of junior high school, because of the death of his father, Doudou left the school for mourning, and then his mother died.

古文：诏起为贞威将军，还摄本任。
现代文：皇上下诏命谢征守丧期间起复为贞威将军，回京暂时摄理原来的职务。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to reinstate General Zhenwei during the mourning period, and he returned to Beijing to temporarily take charge of his original duties.

古文：服阕，除尚书左丞。
现代文：服丧期满，被授为尚书左丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded the title of Shangshuzojo.

古文：三年，昭明太子薨，高祖立晋安王纲为皇太子，将出诏，唯召尚书左仆射何敬容、宣惠将军孔休源及征三人与议。
现代文：中大通三年，昭明太子去世，高祖立董网为皇太子，将要颁发诏令的时候，高祖衹是把尚书左仆射何敬容、宣惠将军孔述递以及谢蛮等三人召来，和他们商议。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Prince Zhaoming passed away, and Gaozulidong became the crown prince. When the imperial edict was about to be issued, Gaozulun summoned three people, including Shangshu's left-hand man, He Jingrong, General Xuan Hui, and Xie Man, to discuss with them.

古文：征时年位尚轻，而任遇已重。
现代文：邀堂当时年纪还轻，职位不高，但对他的任用、恩宠都很厚重。
English: At that time, Yidang was still young and his position was not high, but his appointment and grace were very heavy.

古文：四年，累迁中书郎，鸿胪卿、舍人如故。
现代文：四年，谢銮积功迁任为中书郎，鸿胪卿、舍人之职不变。
English: In four years, Xie Xuan accumulated merits and was transferred to the post of middle school teacher, and the posts of Hongyuqing and Sheanting remained unchanged.

古文：六年，出为北中郎豫章王长史、南兰陵太守。
现代文：中大通六年，谢征出京任北中郎邃童工长史、尘卢噬太守。
English: Six years after graduating from junior high school, Xie was drafted to Beijing to serve as the governor of the Northern Middle Kingdom.

古文：大同二年，卒官，时年三十七。
现代文：谢征任职期间去世，死时三十七岁。
English: Xie Zheng died while in office, at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：友人琅邪王籍集其文为二十卷。
现代文：谢征的友人琅邪王签收集他的文稿整理为二十卷。
English: Xie Zheng's friends collected his manuscripts and arranged them into twenty volumes.

古文：臧严，字彦威，东莞莒人也。
现代文：臧严字彦威，东莞莒人。
English: Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan.

古文：曾祖焘，宋左光禄。
现代文：他的曾祖父臧焘，宋时追赠为左光禄大夫。
English: His great-grandfather, Zou Song, was posthumously awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：祖凝，齐尚书右丞。
现代文：祖父臧凝，齐时任尚书右丞。
English: His grandfather, Zou Jing, was appointed to the post of secretary-general of the Central Military Commission.

古文：父夌，后军参军。
现代文：父亲臧棱，任后军参军。
English: His father, Zhenren, joined the army after his appointment.

古文：严幼有孝性，居父忧以毁闻。
现代文：臧严年幼时有孝敬的德性，为父亲守丧时因哀伤而毁伤身体，因此而出名。
English: When he was young, Yan Yan had the virtue of filial piety. When he was mourning for his father, he injured his body due to grief, so he became famous.

古文：孤贫勤学，行止书卷不离于手。
现代文：他失去父亲，家中贫穷，但却勤奋好学，一举一动手上不放下书卷。
English: He lost his father, his family was poor, but he was diligent and eager to learn, and he never put down his books.

古文：初为安成王侍郎，转常侍。
现代文：最初任安成王侍郎，转任常侍。
English: He was initially a chamberlain to King Ansei, and later became a regular chamberlain.

古文：从叔未甄为江夏郡，携严之官，于涂作《屯游赋》，任昉见而称之。
现代文：臧严的堂叔臧未甄任江夏太守，带着臧严去上任，臧严在旅途中写了《屯游赋》，任防见到逭篇赋，十分赞赏。
English: Yan Yan's uncle, Dong Xiuqi, was appointed as the governor of Jiangxia without screening, and took Yan Yan with him to take office. Yan Yan wrote "Tun You Fu" on his journey. It was very appreciated to see Yan Yan Fu.

古文：又作《七算》，辞亦富丽。
现代文：臧严又作《七算》，文辞也很富赡华丽。
English: Yan Yan also wrote "Seven Calculation," and the words are also rich and gorgeous.

古文：性孤介，于人间未尝造请。仆射徐勉欲识之，严终不诣。
现代文：臧严生性耿直方正，不随俗浮沉，在尘世间未曾有过拜访进见请托一类的事情，仆射徐勉想要认识他，但臧严始终不肯去拜谒徐勉。
English: Yan Yan was born with the nature of Geng Nao and Fang Zheng. He did not follow the ups and downs of the world. He had never done such a thing as visiting and asking for help in the earthly world. His servant, Xu Mian, wanted to know him, but Yan Yan still refused to go and worship Yan Xu Mian.

古文：迁冠军行参军、侍湘东王读，累迁王宣惠轻车府参军，兼记室。
现代文：臧严迁任冠军行参军、侍湘束王读，又积功迁任湘束王宣惠轻车府参军，兼记室。
English: Yan Yan was transferred as a champion to join the army, and served as an attendant to Hunan King Xuan Hui. He was also transferred as a champion to join the army, and served as a recorder.

古文：严于学多所谙记，尤精《汉书》，讽诵略皆上口。
现代文：臧严学习熟记的知识很多，尤其精于《汉书》，背诵纯熟，全能脱口而出。
English: There is a lot of knowledge to learn and memorize strictly, especially proficient in "Chinese Classics," reciting proficiently, and being able to blurt out.

古文：王尝自执四部书目以试之，严自甲至丁卷中，各对一事，并作者姓名，遂无遗失，其博洽如此。
现代文：湘东王曾经自己拿着四部书目测试臧严，臧严从甲卷到丁卷，每卷回答湘束王问的一件事，以及作者姓名，竟然全无遣漏。臧严学识渊博竟到了这样的程度。
English: Xiangdong Wang once took four volumes of the bibliography to test the rigor. The rigor went from volume A to volume D. Each volume answered one of the questions asked by Xiangzhu Wang, as well as the author's name, and there were no omissions. The rigor and depth of knowledge had reached such a level.

古文：王迁荆州，随府转西中郎安西录事参军。
现代文：湘束王迁任荆州刺史，臧严随王府转任西中郎安西录事参军。
English: Xiangzhu Wang was transferred to Jingzhou, and Yan Yan was transferred to Xi Zhonglang and Anxi Lu to join the army.

古文：历监义阳、武宁郡，累任皆蛮左，前郡守常选武人，以兵镇之；严独以数门生单车入境，群蛮悦服，遂绝寇盗。
现代文：威严历任义阳郡监、武宁太守，多次任职都在蛮夷地区，以前的郡守常常选用武将，率军镇守；臧严却仅仅率领几个门生乘坐一辆车进入郡境，群蛮都心悦诚服，于是寇盗之事也都绝迹了。
English: Majestic has served as Yiyang County Supervisor and Wu Ning Governor for many times, many of which were in the barbarian areas. Former county governors often chose military generals to lead the army to guard the town. However, Majestic only led a few disciples to enter the county by car, and the barbarians were all pleased. As a result, robberies have also disappeared.

古文：王入为石头戍军事，除安右录事。
现代文：湘东王进京任石头戍军事，臧严被除授为安右录事。
English: The king of eastern Hunan entered Beijing as a military commander of the Stone Army, and Yan Yan was removed from his post as the Minister of Public Security.

古文：王迁江州，为镇南谘议参军，卒官。
现代文：湘束王迁任江州刺史，臧严任镇南谘议参军。
English: Xiangzhu Wang was transferred to the post of the governor of Jiangzhou, and Yan Yan was appointed to the post of the counselor of Zhenan to join the army.

古文：文集十卷。
现代文：臧严在任职期间去世。他有文集十卷。
English: Yan Yan died during his term of office. He had a collection of ten volumes.

古文：伏挺，字士标。
现代文：伏挺字士标。
English: Stand up and be counted.

古文：父芃，为豫章内史，在《良吏传》。
现代文：他的父亲伏佢，任豫章内史，伏佢的事迹记载在《良吏传》中。
English: His father Fuxi, Ren Yu Zhang's internal history, Fuxi's deeds are recorded in the "Biography of a Good Official."

古文：挺幼敏寤，七岁通《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：伏挺自幼聪明，七岁时能读通《孝经》、《论语》。
English: He has been clever since he was a child. At the age of seven, he was able to read through "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects."

古文：及长，有才思，好属文，为五言诗，善效谢康乐体。
现代文：长大成人之后，很有才气，喜欢写文章，他作的五言诗，善于仿效谢康乐的风格。
English: After he became an adult, he was very talented and liked to write articles. His five-sentence poems were good at imitating the style of Xie Kangle.

古文：父友人乐安任昉深相叹异，常曰： 此子目下无双。 
现代文：伏挺父亲的朋友乐安任防深深赞赏他，认为他是奇才。
English: His father's friend, Le An Ren Fang, deeply admired him and thought he was a genius.

古文：齐末，州举秀才，对策为当时第一。
现代文：任防曾经说： 伏挺这样的人才，京城当今没有第二个。 齐代末年，州中举伏挺为秀才，伏挺的对策在当时居于第一位。
English: Ren Fang once said: There is no other talent like Fuding in Beijing today. In the last years of the Qi Dynasty, Fuding was an excellent talent in the middle school of the state, and the countermeasure of Fuding was the first at that time.

古文：高祖义师至，挺迎谒于新林，高祖见之甚悦，谓曰 颜子 ，引为征东行参军，时年十八。
现代文：高祖义军来到京城的时候，伏挺赶到新林去迎接义军，拜谒高祖，高祖见到他十分高兴，称他为 颜子 ，提拔他为征束行参军，这时候伏挺才十八岁。
English: When Gao Zu's rebels came to Beijing, Fuding rushed to Xinlin to meet the rebels and pay homage to Gao Zu. Gao Zu was very happy to see him, calling him Yan Zi and promoting him to join the army. At this time, Fuding was only eighteen years old.

古文：天监初，除中军参军事。
现代文：天监初年，伏挺被授为中军参军事。
English: In the first year of the Tianguan, Futian was awarded the title of "Chinese Military Participant."

古文：宅居在潮沟，于宅讲《论语》，听者倾朝。
现代文：伏挺的住宅在潮沟，他在宅中讲论语》，满朝的官员都来听他讲说。
English: Fudong's residence was in Chaogou, and he used to give discourses in the house, and officials from all over the country came to listen to him.

古文：迁建康正，俄以劾免。
现代文：伏挺迁任建康正，不久就因为受到弹劾而免职。
English: Fuding was transferred to Jiankang Zheng, who was soon removed from office due to impeachment.

古文：久之，入为尚书仪曹郎，迁西中郎记室参军，累为晋陵、武康令。
现代文：过了很久，伏挺又入京任尚书仪曹郎，迁任西中郎记室参军，历任晋陵、武康令。
English: After a long time, Fudunari entered Beijing again to be appointed as the secretary of Shoshi, moved to the secretary's office of Nishinakuro to join the army, and successively held the posts of Jinling and Bukang.

古文：罢县还，仍于东郊筑室，不复仕。
现代文：免除县令职务后回京城，于是在东郊建房子，不再出仕。
English: After being relieved of his duties as county magistrate, he returned to the capital, whereupon he built a house in the eastern suburbs and no longer served.

古文：挺少有盛名，又善处当世，朝中势素，多与交游，故不能久事隐静。
现代文：伏挺年轻时就有很大名声，在当时又和人相处得很好，朝中身处要职的权臣和无实权的闲官，多数与伏挺有交往，所以伏挺不能久处隐退的地位。
English: When he was young, Fudong had a great reputation. At that time, he got along very well with people. Most of the high-ranking officials and officials without real power in the central government had dealings with Fudong, so Fudong could not stay in seclusion for a long time.

古文：时仆射徐勉以疾假还宅，挺致书以观其意曰：
现代文：当时仆射徐勉因为有病请假回家，伏挺写信给徐勉以揣度徐勉的心意，信中说：
English: At that time, Xu's servant, Xu Mian, took a leave of absence to go home due to illness. He wrote a letter to Xu Mian to guess Xu Mian's intention. The letter said:

古文：昔士德怀顾，恋兴数日；辅嗣思友，情劳一旬。
现代文：从前士德怀念旧友，思念之情萦绕数日；王辅嗣想念友人，忧思不断长达一旬。
English: For a long time, the old man missed his old friend, and the feeling of missing lingered for a few days; Wang Yuxi missed his friend, and the sorrow continued for a long time.

古文：故知深心所系，贵贱一也。
现代文：由此可知，祇要是深情相系，无论贵贱，思念之情是相同的。
English: From this, it can be seen that only if there is a deep emotional connection, no matter how high or low, the feeling of missing is the same.

古文：况复恩隆世亲，义重知己，道庇生人，德弘覆盖。
现代文：何况像你，施仁庇护百姓，仁德广布天下，对我们家有隆厚的恩德，对我又有知己之恩，我更是时时眷念。
English: What's more, just like you, you have protected the people with benevolence, spread benevolence all over the world, been of great benefit to our family, and have been a close friend to me. I think of you all the time.

古文：而朝野悬隔，山川邈殊，虽咳唾时沾，而颜色不觏。
现代文：但是你身居朝廷，我闲居山野，山川阻隔，地位悬殊，虽然时常拜读你的诗文，但却没见到你。
English: But you live in the imperial court, while I live in the countryside, separated by mountains and rivers, with a very different status. Although I often read your poems, I have not seen you.

古文：《东山》之叹，岂云旋复；西风可怀，孰能无思。
现代文：《东山》篇中远行的感叹，什么时候才能回归；西风曾引起人们的思乡之情，我面对此情此景，又哪能不触动思念之情。
English: In the "East Mountain" story, the traveler laments, "When will I be able to return?"; the west wind once caused people's homesickness, I face this situation and this scene, and I can't help but touch the feeling of missing home.

古文：加以静居廓处，顾影莫酬，秋风四起，园林易色，凉野寂寞，寒虫吟叫。
现代文：更加上静居空屋，没有友朋交往酬答，秋风四起，园林枯黄。山野凄凉寂寞，秋虫吟叫。
English: More and more people live quietly in empty houses, there is no exchange of friends and relatives, the autumn wind is blowing, the gardens are withered. The mountains and fields are desolate and lonely, and the autumn insects are chirping.

古文：怀抱不可直置，情虑不能无托，时因吟咏，动辄盈篇。
现代文：胸中之情不好直接写出，但内心的情思又不能没有寄托，因而时时凭藉吟诗作赋寄托情怀，往往能凑足篇章。
English: It is not good to write directly about the feelings in one's heart, but one's inner feelings cannot be without inspiration. Therefore, it is often possible to write enough chapters by relying on the inspiration of poems.

古文：扬生沉郁，且犹覆盎；惠子五车，弥多春驳。
现代文：扬雄学问深而广，还有人担心他的文章被用来覆盖酱瓿；惠王学富五车，更被人指责为杂乱谬误，何况我这文章更不值一提。
English: Yang Xiong's knowledge is profound and wide-ranging, and there are people who are worried that his article will be used to cover the sauce ladle; Hui Wang's study is rich in five cars, and is even accused of being a cluttered fallacy, and my article is even less worth mentioning.

古文：一日聊呈小文，不期过赏，还逮隆渥，累牍兼翰，纸缛字磨，诵复无已，徒恨许与过当，有伤准的。
现代文：有一天姑且呈献短文给你，想不到你却给予超乎寻常的赞赏，承蒙你优厚的关照，回信连篇累牍地夸奖，我捧着你的回信，一次又一次地诵读，衹怕你称赞太过分，超出了标准。
English: One day, I submitted a short essay to you. Unexpectedly, you gave me an extraordinary appreciation. Thanks to your generous care, I received a letter of praise. I held your letter and read it again and again. I am afraid that your praise is too excessive and exceeds the standard.

古文：昔子建不欲妄赞陈琳，恐见嗤哂后代；今之过奢余论，将不有累清谈？
现代文：从前曹子建不想随意称赞陈琳，就是担心被后代人嗤笑。现在你给我过多的赞美，恐怕会影响你的名声。
English: In the past, Cao Zijian did not want to praise Chen Lin at will, fearing that he would be laughed at by future generations. Now, if you give me too much praise, I'm afraid it will affect your reputation.

古文：挺窜迹草莱，事绝闻见，藉以讴谣，得之舆牧。
现代文：我隐居在草莱之中，见闻很少，凭藉歌谣听到一些，从轿夫牧人那裹学到一些。
English: I live in the solitude of the meadow, seeing and hearing little, hearing a little through songs, and learning a little from the sedan herdsmen.

古文：仰承有事砭石，仍成简通，娱肠悦耳，稍从摈落，宴处荣观，务在涤除。
现代文：仰承公卿的谆谆教诲，最终养成简易通达的习性，娱肠的美味、悦耳的音乐都渐渐槟弃，安适的居室、盛美的景象也全都涤除。
English: Adhering to the teachings of the nobles, they eventually developed the habit of easy access, and gradually abandoned the delicious entertainment and pleasant music. The comfortable living room and the beautiful scenery were all eliminated.

古文：绮罗丝竹，二列顿遣；方丈员案，三桮仅存。
现代文：绫罗美服、丝竹乐器，全都丢弃不用；一丈见方的小屋、一张小小的圆桌，三杯薄酒的嗜好依然保留。
English: The sumptuous clothes and silk and bamboo musical instruments have all been discarded and are no longer used; the square-shaped hut, a small round table, and a penchant for three glasses of wine still remain.

古文：故以道变区中，情冲域外；操彼弦诵，贲兹观损。
现代文：所以我认为人间形势变化，我处在域外却情怀淡泊；每日诵读诗书，教授学生，显扬我益柔损刚、舆世无争的胸怀。
English: Therefore, I think that the human situation has changed, I am outside the region, but my feelings are indifferent; I read poetry books every day, teach students, and show my more flexible, less rigid, and undisputed mind.

古文：追留侯之却粒，念韩卿之辞荣；眷想东都，属怀南岳；钻仰来贶，有符下风。
现代文：我追慕留侯张良的辟谷长生之道，向往陆韩鲤那样辞去荣显职位。我眷念束都，寄情南鱼，捧读你的来信，感到确实符合我的情况。
English: I yearn for Zhang Liang's way of living a long life in the valley, longing to resign from an honorable position like Lu Hanjun. I miss Sucdu, send love to Nanrui, and read your letter, I feel that it really fits my situation.

古文：虽云幸甚，然则未喻。
现代文：虽然感到十分荣幸，但还有不明白的地方。
English: Although I feel very honored, there is still something I don't understand.

古文：虽复帝道康宁，走马行却，《由庚》得所，寅亮有归。
现代文：现在帝业安宁，战事平息，顺道应时的圣主接受天命，百姓恭顺敬奉圣明的君主。
English: Now the empire is at peace, the war has subsided, the Lord of the right time has accepted the mandate of heaven, and the people are obedient and respect the monarch who serves the Lord of the right time.

古文：悠悠之人，展氏犹且攘袂；浩浩白水，甯叟方欲褰裳。
现代文：众多之人归服，像展氏那样的仁德之人也奋发而起，辅佐圣主；面对浩浩白水，像宁叟那样的贤才也正想褰裳渡水，归顺圣主。
English: A large number of people have submitted, and people of benevolence like Mr. Zhan have also risen up to assist the Lord. Faced with the vast expanse of whitewater, sages like Ning Xi are also trying to cross the water and submit to the Lord.

古文：是知君子拯物，义非徇己。
现代文：由此可知君子是为了济助世人，按道义行事，并非是谋求私利。
English: From this, we can see that a gentleman is to help the world, to act according to morality, not to seek personal gain.

古文：思与赤松子游，谁其克遂。
现代文：想追随赤松子作神仙之游，谁能做得到?
English: If you want to follow the red pine as a fairy godmother, who can do it?

古文：愿驱之仁寿，绥此多福。
现代文：衹希望进入仁寿之域，安定天下，祈求多福。
English: I hope to enter the realm of benevolence and longevity, stabilize the world, and pray for many blessings.

古文：虽则不言，四时行矣。
现代文：上天虽然不说话，但四季顺行，万物生长。
English: Although God does not speak, the four seasons go smoothly and all things grow.

古文：然后黔首有庇，荐绅靡夺；白驹不在空谷，屠羊豫蒙其赉。
现代文：这样，百姓得到庇护，官吏不会被免职，贤人不再隐于空谷，低贱之人也能蒙受赏赐。
English: In this way, the people will be protected, the officials will not be dismissed, the wise will no longer hide in the valley, and the lowly will be rewarded.

古文：岂不休哉？岂不休哉？
现代文：逭难道不是盛世之美吗，遣难道不是盛世之美吗!
English: Isn't it the beauty of the golden age, isn't it the beauty of the golden age!

古文：昔杜真自闭深室，郎宗绝迹幽野。难矣，诚非所希。
现代文：从前杜真把自己关在房屋裹，不应征辟；郎宗挂冠悬印，逃隐于幽野，这样做很难啊，遣实在并不是我的愿望。
English: Once upon a time, Du Zhen locked himself up in a house and should not be extorted; his son-in-law hung a crown and a seal and fled to the wilderness. It is difficult to do so, and it is not really my wish to send him away.

古文：井丹高洁，相如慢世，尚复游涉权门，雍容乡邑，常谓此道为泰，每窃慕之。
现代文：井丹生性高洁，也还是和权贵交往；司马相如傲视世人，但在家乡也表现出华贵的身份，我常认为这样处世就会获取安泰的生活，每每暗中倾慕他们。
English: Jing Dansheng has a noble nature and still associates with the powerful; Sima Xiang is proud of the world, but also shows a noble identity in his hometown. I often think that this way of life will get a safe life, and I secretly admire them.

古文：方念拥帚延思，以陈侍者，请至农隙，无待邀求。
现代文：我正想拥帚清扫道路，延请我思念之人，热情款待，请你在农事闲暇之时光临，不要我再行邀请。
English: I was thinking of inviting you to sweep the roads, to invite those I miss, to give you hospitality, to invite you to come during your leisure time on the farm, not to invite me again.

古文：挺诚好属文，不会今世，不能促节局步，以应流俗。
现代文：我虽然喜欢写文章，但是不能投合当代之人，又不能改变自己的志向和操守，顺应时俗。
English: Although I like to write articles, I can't adapt to contemporary people, and I can't change my aspirations and ethics to conform to the times.

古文：事等昌菹，谬彼偏嗜，是用不羞固陋，无惮龙门。
现代文：像壬迂仿效旦塞王嗜食昌蒲那样，我也倾慕前贤，有所偏好，因此撰写文章，不以自己鄙陋浅薄而羞愧，面对被人称为龙门的司马迁也毫不忌惮。
English: Like Rinpoche's emulation of the Dangsa King's love of food, I also admire the former sages and have a preference, so I write articles, I am not ashamed of my own meanness and shallowness, and I am not afraid to face Sima Qian, who is known as the Dragon Gate.

古文：昔敬通之赏景卿，孟公之知仲蔚，止乎通人，犹称盛美，况在时宗，弥为未易。
现代文：从前遇曲玺赞赏委墓量卿，刘孟公赏识张仲蔚，他们还衹是受到学识渊博通达之人的赞赏，都称得上是美善之事，何况我受到一代宗师的赏识，更是件不容易的事情。
English: In the past, it was a beautiful and virtuous thing to be praised by the Committee of Appreciation for the Tomb of Generalissimo Qu Yuan, and for Liu Menggong to be praised by Zhang Zhongwei. They were also praised by people with profound knowledge. Moreover, it was not an easy thing for me to be appreciated by a generation of great masters.

古文：近以蒲椠勿用，笺素多阙，聊效东方，献书丞相，须得善写，更请润诃，傥逢子侯，比复削牍。
现代文：近来没有提笔，未去书信及时请安，现在姑且仿效东方朔，献书给丞相，需要重新抄写，就请你指正润色，如果遇上子侯，也请再行修正。
English: Recently, you haven't picked up a pen, and you haven't sent a letter in time to ask for peace. Now, let's follow the example of Dongfang Shuo and dedicate a book to the prime minister. If you need to re-copy, please indicate the correct polish, and if you encounter a problem, please make corrections again.

古文：勉报曰：复览来书，累牍兼翰；事苞出处，言兼语默；事义周悉，意致深远；发函伸纸，倍增愤叹。
现代文：徐勉回信说：反复阅读你的来信，全篇文字，列举出世入世之事，谈及隐退仕进话题，事理周详，意趣深远，打开你的来信拜读，更增加愤激感慨之情。
English: Xu replied: "Reading your letter again and again, reading the entire text, listing the events of coming into the world, and talking about the topic of retreating into the world, the matter is detailed and far-reaching. Opening your letter and reading it will increase the feelings of indignation and emotion.

古文：卿雄州擢秀，弱冠升朝，穿综百家，佃渔六学；观眸表其韶慧，视色见其英朗，若鲁国之名驹，迈云中之白鹤。
现代文：你是大州荐拔的秀才，刚成年就进入朝廷，参与政事，纵览百家之书，涉猎六艺之学，看眼神就表现出你的俊美聪慧，观神色就显示你的俊逸明达，你如同鲁国的名驹，是才学超群的年轻后辈，你超出云中白鹤，品格高洁、志向远大。
English: You are a talented person recommended by the state, you entered the imperial court as an adult, participated in political affairs, reviewed hundreds of books, dabbled in the study of the six arts, your eyes show your beauty and wisdom, your appearance shows your beauty and wisdom, you are like the famous Lu, a young generation of outstanding students, you are beyond the white crane in the cloud, with high moral character and high aspirations.

古文：及占显邑，试吏腴壤，将有武城弦歌，桐乡谣咏，岂与卓鲁断断同年而语邪？
现代文：曾经在大邑中验证你的才能，在富裕之乡试验你做官的能力，将要像子游作武城宰那样施行礼乐教化，像朱邑在桐乡为吏那样留下惠政，被百姓歌颂，哪裹会同卓茂、鲁恭那样忠诚专一的官吏同年而语呢?
English: Once you have proved your talent in a big town, and tested your ability to be an official in a rich township, you will carry out liturgy and music education like Ziyou as a military governor, and leave a favorable government like Zhuyi as an official in Tongxiang, and be praised by the people. How can you be the same year as loyal and dedicated officials like Zhuo Mao and Lukong?

古文：方当见赏良能，有加宠授，饰兹簪带，置彼周行。
现代文：你杰出的才能将要受到赏识，皇帝要授予官爵，戴上冠簪，系上绅带，加进朝廷官员的行列。
English: Your outstanding talent will be appreciated, the emperor will award you a knighthood, wear a crown, tie a gentleman's belt, and join the ranks of court officials.

古文：而欲远慕卷舒，用怀愚智，既知益之为累，爰悟满则辞多，高蹈风尘，良所钦挹。
现代文：而你却仰慕隐退之举，怀着自己的聪明想法，认为已经官职增高会成为自己的拖累，从中领悟恩宠过多要委婉拒绝，于是就从尘世中退隐，实在使我十分钦敬。
English: But you admire the act of retreating, with your own clever ideas, thinking that having been promoted would become a drag on yourself, from which you understand that too much grace should be tactfully rejected, so you retreat from the world, which I really admire.

古文：况以金商戒节，素秋御序，萧条林野，无人相乐，偃卧坟籍，游浪儒玄，物我兼忘，宠辱谁滞？
现代文：何况在金商时节，素秋降临，林野萧条，没有人一起游乐，衹是在典籍中涉足，在儒道两家学说中遨游，外物和自身全都忘怀，个人的宠辱又哪会在心中滞留?
English: What's more, in the time of the gold merchants, the arrival of spring and autumn, the depression of the forests and fields, no one is having fun together, the baboons are dabbling in the classics, wandering in the two doctrines of Confucianism and Taoism, forgetting all external things and themselves, and what personal favors and insults will linger in their hearts?

古文：诚乃欢羡，用有殊同。
现代文：造实在也是一种欢乐，享用的方式不同而已。
English: Creating reality is also a joy, it's just enjoyed in a different way.

古文：今逖听傍求，兴怀寤宿，白驹空谷，幽人引领，贫贱为耻，鸟兽难群，故当捐此薜萝，出从鹓鹭，无乖隐显，不亦休哉！吾智乏佐时，才惭济世，禀承朝则，不敢荒宁，力弱途遥，愧心非一。
现代文：天下有道，仍然贫贱就算是耻辱；离开人群，不能够与鸟兽同群。所以应当抛弃披萝带荔的隐居生活，出来加入朝臣百官的行列，不要违背乱世引退、太平盛世就应出仕的准则，这不也是一桩美事吗!我缺少佐助明主治理国家的才智，也没有济助世人的能力，祇是禀承朝廷的准则，不敢荒忽懈怠，才寡力弱，任重道远，我内心惭愧，不止一天。
English: There is a way in the world, and it is a disgrace to be still poor; if you leave the crowd, you cannot be with the birds and beasts. Therefore, you should abandon the secluded life of wearing lotus and lily, and come out to join the ranks of courtiers and officials. Do not violate the rule of retiring in a turbulent world and serving in a peaceful and prosperous world. Isn't this also a beautiful thing? I lack the talent of Sasuke Akira to govern the country, and I have no ability to help the world. I only follow the rule of the imperial court. I dare not be lazy. I am weak and have a long way to go.

古文：天下有道，尧人何事？
现代文：天下有道，百姓都是尧舜时代的百姓，作为朝廷官员，我们还有什么事可干?
English: There is a way under the heavens, and the people are the people of the past. As officials of the imperial court, what else can we do?

古文：得因疲病，念从闲逸。
现代文：因此可以以疲困病弱为藉口，过着闲逸的生活。
English: Therefore, they can live a leisurely life under the pretext of being tired, sick and weak.

古文：若使车书混合，尉候无警，作乐制礼，纪石封山，然后乃返服衡门，实为多幸。
现代文：假如天下统一，车同轨，书同文，守卫边防的军队不再来报警，朝廷制订礼乐制度，刻石纪功，封禅泰山，然后就脱下官服，回到自己茅舍，实在是很幸福的事情。
English: If the whole world is unified, the cars are on the same track, the books are the same, the troops guarding the border will no longer call the police, the court will formulate a ritual music system, carve stone discipline, seal Mount Tai, and then take off the official uniform and return to their huts, it is really a very happy thing.

古文：但夙有风咳，遘兹虚眩，瘠类士安，羸同长孺，簿领沉废，台阁未理，娱耳烂肠，因事而息，非关欲追松子，远慕留侯。
现代文：但是我早年患有遇风而咳的疾病，造成这虚弱昏眩的病体，像皇甫士安那样骨瘦如柴，像汲长孺那样羸弱多病，朝廷的文书堆积未办，尚书府的公事许多未作处理，娱耳的音乐，烂肠的酒食，也都因而停下不再享用，但并不是想追慕赤松子，仰慕留侯张良。
English: However, in my early years, I suffered from a disease of coughing in the wind, which caused this weak and dizzy disease. I was as skinny as the Emperor Fu Shian, and as weak and sickly as Qi Changtao. The imperial documents were piled up, and many of the official affairs of Shang Shufu were not dealt with. The music that entertained my ears, and the rotten food and drink, were also stopped and no longer enjoyed. However, it was not because I wanted to pursue the red pine and admire Zhang Liang.

古文：若乃天假之年，自当靖恭所职。
现代文：假如上天再给我增加年寿，我自然将会恭谨奉守自己的职责。
English: If God gives me more years of life, I will naturally respectfully perform my duties.

古文：拟非伦匹，良觉辞费；览复循环，爽焉如失。
现代文：但我们不是同类的人，处境并不相同，以上的话，实在有些累赘。反复阅读，更觉茫然若失。
English: But we are not the same kind of people, the situation is not the same, the above is really a bit of a burden. Repeatedly reading, even more confused.

古文：清尘独远，白云飘荡，依然何极。
现代文：你品格高尚，远离尘世，如同白云飘荡，隐居山野，我的思念之情什么时候才能平息。
English: You are of noble character, far away from the world, drifting like a white cloud, secluded in the mountains. When will my yearning subside?

古文：猥降书札，示之文翰，览复成诵，流连缛纸。
现代文：承蒙你寄来书信，又拿文章给我拜读。我反复诵读，沉浸在辞藻文采之中。
English: Thanks to you for sending a letter and reading the article to me, I read it over and over again, immersed in the words and poetry.

古文：昔仲宣才敏，藉中郎而表誉；正平颖悟，赖北海以腾声。
现代文：从前王仲宣才思敏捷，凭藉蔡中郎才获得声誉；弥正平聪慧颖悟，依赖孔北海才名声四扬。
English: In the past, Wang Zhongxuan was famous for his quick thinking, and Cai Zhonglang was famous for his ability; Ya Zhengping was famous for his quick thinking, and Ya Zhengping was famous for his ability, and Kong Beihai was famous for his ability.

古文：望古料今，吾有惭德。
现代文：看看古代，比比今天，我德行有亏，内心有愧。
English: Look at the ancient times, Bibi, today, I have moral shortcomings, and I feel guilty in my heart.

古文：傥成卷帙，力为称首。
现代文：假如你写成书卷，我一定全力称扬，誉为第一。
English: If you write a book, I will praise it with all my might.

古文：无令独耀随掌，空使辞人扼腕。
现代文：不要让美好的文辞得不到传扬，就像明珠衹在随侯手掌中闪耀发光，空使文人扼腕叹息。
English: Don't let the beautiful words of literature not be spread, just like the pearl enamel shines brightly in the palm of the hand, and the sky makes the writer sigh.

古文：式闾愿见，宜事扫门。
现代文：我希望去见你，车到里门，我将凭轼致敬，扫门求见。
English: I hope to see you. When the car arrives at the inner gate, I will salute with my shovel and sweep the gate to see you.

古文：亦有来思，赴其悬榻。
现代文：你如果返回京城，希望你来寒舍，我一定放下高悬的坐榻，迎接嘉宾。
English: If you return to the capital, I hope you will come to the guest house. I will definitely put down the high-hanging couch and greet the guests.

古文：轻苔鱼网，别当以荐。
现代文：轻苔薄纸，专程进献。
English: Light moss thin paper, specially donated.

古文：城阙之叹，曷日无怀；所迟萱苏，书不尽意。
现代文：真有 一不见，如三月兮 的感叹，我哪天不是这样怀念你啊!希望你忘记忧愁，不要劳累。书信不能详尽表达我的心意。
English: I really miss you so much. I hope you forget your sorrow and don't get tired. A letter can't fully express my heart.

古文：挺后遂出仕，寻除南台治书，因事纳贿，当被推劾。
现代文：伏挺后来出仕，不久被任命为南台治书。因为接受贿赂，将要被审问。
English: Fuding later entered the service and was soon appointed as the Nantai magistrate. He will be interrogated for accepting bribes.

古文：挺惧罪，遂变服为道人，久之藏匿，后遇赦，乃出大心寺。
现代文：伏挺害怕被判罪，于是改变服饰化装为道士，藏匿很久。后来遇上赦令，他才从藏身的天心寺中出来。
English: Fuding was afraid of being convicted, so he changed his clothes and disguised himself as a Taoist and hid for a long time. Later, when he was pardoned, he came out of his hiding place, Tenshin-ji Temple.

古文：会邵陵王为江州，携挺之镇，王好文义，深被恩礼，挺因此还俗。
现代文：邵陵王任江州刺史，带着伏挺去江州。邵陵王爱好文学，伏挺因此深受恩宠，礼遇隆厚。伏挺就在造时还俗。
English: Shao Ling Wang was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, and went to Jiangzhou with Fuding. Shao Ling Wang loved literature, so Fuding was deeply favored and treated with great courtesy. Fuding was secularized at the time of construction.

古文：复随王迁镇郢州，征入为京尹，挺留夏首，久之还京师。
现代文：邵陵王迁任郢州刺史，伏挺又随邵陵王到郢州。邵陵王被征调回京任京尹，伏挺就留在夏首，很久才回京城。
English: Shao Ling Wang moved to Bozhou as the chief historian, and Futian followed Shao Ling Wang to Bozhou. Shao Ling Wang was conscripted and transferred back to Beijing as the governor of Beijing, and Futian stayed in XiaShou for a long time before returning to Beijing.

古文：太清中，客游吴兴、吴郡，侯景乱中卒。
现代文：太清年间，伏挺客游吴兴、吴郡。伏挺在侯景叛乱期间去世。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Fuding traveled to Wu Xing and Wu County. Fuding died during the rebellion of Houjing.

古文：著《迩说》十卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：他着有《迩说》十卷，文集二十卷。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "The Tale of the Grasshopper" and twenty volumes of anthologies.

古文：子知命，先随挺事邵陵王，掌书记。
现代文：伏挺之子伏知命，先跟随伏挺事奉邵陵王，掌书记。
English: Fuding's son, Fuchimitsu, first followed Fuding to serve King Shao Ling, holding the position of secretary.

古文：乱中，王于郢州奔败，知命仍下投侯景。
现代文：侯景叛乱期间，邵陵王在郢州败逃，伏知命就乘机顺江而下投降侯景。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Shao Ling Wang was defeated and fled in Luzhou, and Fuchi took the opportunity to go down the river to surrender to Houjing.

古文：常以其父宦途不至，深怨朝廷，遂尽心事景。
现代文：伏知命常常认为自己父亲仕途不能通达，因此深深怨恨朝廷，于是竭尽心意事奉侯景。
English: Fuchimikoto often thought that his father's career was unattainable, so he deeply resented the imperial court, so he tried his best to serve Houjing.

古文：景袭郢州，围巴陵，军中书檄，皆其文也。
现代文：侯景袭击郢州，围攻巴陵，军中文告檄文，都是出自伏知命。
English: Houjing's attack on Zhangzhou, the siege of Baling, and the army's report in Chinese were all made by Fuchi.

古文：及景篡位，为中书舍人，专任权宠，势倾内外。
现代文：侯景篡位，自立为帝，伏知命任中书舍人，深受信任，权势超过伪朝廷内外的其他人。
English: Hou Jing usurped the throne, established himself as the emperor, and Fuchi was appointed as the scribe. He was deeply trusted, and his power exceeded that of other people inside and outside the pseudo-Imperial Court.

古文：景败被执，送江陵，于狱中幽死。
现代文：侯景失败，伏知命被收捕，押送到江陵，囚禁在狱中死去。
English: Houjing failed, Fuchihime was arrested, escorted to Gangneung, and died in prison.

古文：挺弟捶，亦有才名，先为邵陵王所引，历为记室、中记室、参军。
现代文：伏挺之弟伏捶，也因有才学而出名，原先也被邵陵王选用，历任记室，中记室，参军。
English: Fuding's younger brother Fuxun, also famous for his talent in learning, was originally selected by King Shao Ling to join the army.

古文：庾仲容，字仲容，颍川焉陵人也。
现代文：庾仲容字仲容，颖川隔陵人。
English: Zou Zhong Rong, Zou Zhong Rong, Yingchuan Segregationist.

古文：晋司空冰六代孙。
现代文：他是晋司空庾冰的第六代子孙。
English: He is the sixth generation descendant of Jinji Kuo Bing.

古文：祖徽之，宋御史中丞。
现代文：他的祖父庾徽之，宋时任御史中丞。
English: His grandfather, Zou Huizhi, was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of History in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父漪，齐邵陵王记室。
现代文：父亲庾漪，齐时任邵陵王记室。
English: His father, Qi, was the secretary of Shao Ling Wang at that time.

古文：仲容幼孤，为叔父泳所养。
现代文：庾仲容幼时失去父亲，由叔父庾泳抚养。
English: Gong Zhong Rong lost his father when he was young and was raised by his uncle Gong Yong.

古文：既长，杜绝人事，专精笃学，昼夜手不辍卷。
现代文：长大成人之后，他杜绝与人交往，专心一意潜心学习，白天黑夜都手不释卷。
English: After he became an adult, he cut off contact with other people and concentrated on his studies, working day and night.

古文：初为安西法曹行参军。泳时已贵显，吏部尚书徐勉拟泳子晏婴为宫僚，泳垂泣曰： 兄子幼孤，人才粗可，愿以晏婴所忝回用之。 
现代文：最初任安西法曹行参军，庾泳当时已经担任显贵之职，吏部尚书徐勉打算让庾泳的儿子庾晏婴担任太子属官，庾泳流着眼泪对徐勉说： 我哥哥的孩子庾仲容从小就成为孤儿，才能略微有一些，希望用庾晏婴将要充任的职务转而任用他。 
English: At first, Ansi was appointed as a legal officer to join the army. At that time, Hao Yong had already served as a dignitary. Xu Mian, the head of the personnel department, planned to let Hao Yong's son, Hao Jiao, serve as the crown prince's subordinate officer. Hao Yong said to Xu Mian with tears: My brother's child, Hao Zhongrong, has been an orphan since childhood, and has only a few talents. I hope to use Hao Jiao's position to appoint him.

古文：勉许焉，因转仲容为太子舍人。
现代文：徐勉答应了庾泳的要求，就转任庾仲容为太子舍人。
English: Xu Mian agreed to Gong Ying's request, and he was transferred to Gong Zhong Rong as the prince's concubine.

古文：迁安成王主簿。
现代文：庾仲容又迁任安成王主簿。
English: Zou Zhong Rong was also transferred to the position of the main book of Ancheng Wang.

古文：时平原刘孝标亦为府佐，并以强学为王所礼接。
现代文：当时平原刘孝标也在王府中任僚属，他们两人都因勤勉学习而受到安成王的礼遇。
English: At that time, Pingyuan Liu Xiaobiao also served as a subordinate in the royal court, and both of them were treated with courtesy by King Ancheng for their diligent study.

古文：迁晋安功曹史。
现代文：庾仲容迁任晋安王功曹史。
English: Zou Zhongrong was transferred to the post of Jinan Wang Gong Cao Shi.

古文：历为永康、钱唐、武康令，治县并无异绩，多被劾。
现代文：历任永康、钱唐、武康令，治理县中事务都没有突出的业绩，而且常常被弹劾。
English: Successive governors Yongkang, Qiantang, and Wu Kangling did not have outstanding performance in the governance of county middle school affairs, and were often impeached.

古文：久之，除安成王中记室，当出随府，皇太子以旧恩，特降饯宴，赐诗曰： 孙生陟阳道，吴子朝歌县。未若樊林举，置酒临华殿。 
现代文：过了很久，庾仲容被除授为安成王中记室，将要出京随王府行动，皇太子因为庾仲容原任太子宫属，顾念旧情而破例举行饯别酒宴，皇太子赐诗给庾仲容说： 孙生陟阳道，吴子朝歌县，未若樊林举，置酒临华殿。 
English: After a long time, Zou Zhong Rong was removed from the office of Ancheng Wang Zhong Ji, and he was going to go to Beijing to follow the action of the royal court. The crown prince held an exceptional farewell banquet because Zou Zhong Rong was originally assigned to the prince's palace, taking into account the old feelings. The crown prince gave a poem to Zou Zhong Rong, saying: Sun Sheng Xinyang Road, Wuzi Chaoga County, If you do not go to Yulin, drink wine at the Chinese court.

古文：时辈荣之。
现代文：当时人都认为遣对庾仲容是极大的荣耀。
English: At that time, everyone thought it was a great honor to be sent to Shizucho.

古文：迁安西武陵王谘议参军。
现代文：庾仲容迁任安西武陵王谘议参军。
English: Zou Zhongrong was transferred to Anxi Wuling Wang to advise him to join the army.

古文：除尚书左丞，坐推纠不直免。
现代文：后又被授为尚书左丞，因为审察案情、纠弹官员不公正而被免职。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Zuojo, but he was dismissed from his post because the investigation of the case and the correction officers were unfair.

古文：仲容博学，少有盛名，颇任气使酒，好危言高论，士友以此少之。
现代文：庾仲容学问渊博，年轻时就有很大名声，但是他很意气用事，藉酒使性，又喜欢发表正直而不同凡响的言论，士人中的友人就因此而看轻他。
English: Zhai Zhongrong was well-educated and had a great reputation when he was young. However, he was mean-spirited, addicted to alcohol, and liked to make honest and extraordinary remarks, which made his friends among the scholars look down on him.

古文：唯与王籍、谢几卿情好相得，二人时亦不调，遂相追随，诞纵酣饮，不复持检操。
现代文：庾仲容衹和王籍、谢几卿等人性格相合，交情很好。王籍、谢几卿二人当时也与众人不相合，于是三个人结伴交往，纵情酣饮，不再注重操守。
English: At that time, the two of them did not fit in with everyone, so the three of them socialized together, indulged in sex and drinking, and no longer paid attention to ethics.

古文：久之，复为谘议参军，出为黟县令。
现代文：过了很久，庾仲容又任谘议参军，出京任黟县令。
English: After a long time, Zou Zhong Rong was again appointed to advise and join the army, and went to Beijing to serve as the county magistrate.

古文：及太清乱，客游会稽，遇疾卒，时年七十四。
现代文：到太清年间发生动乱的时候，庾仲容客居会稽，因为患病而去世，死时七十四岁。
English: By the time of the turmoil in the Taiching era, Yan Zhong Rong passed away from illness at the age of seventy-four.

古文：仲容抄诸子书三十卷，众家地理书二十卷，《列女传》三卷，文集二十卷，并行于世。
现代文：庾仲容抄写诸子书三十卷，各家地理书二十卷，《列女传》三卷，他还有文集二十卷，这些书都在世间流传。
English: Zou Zhongrong copied 30 volumes of children's books, 20 volumes of geography books, three volumes of "Biographies of Women" and 20 volumes of anthologies, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：陆云公，字子龙，吴郡人也。
现代文：陆云公字子龙，吴郡人。
English: Lu Yungong Zilong, a native of Wuxi County.

古文：祖闲，州别驾。
现代文：他的祖父陆闲，任州别驾。
English: His grandfather was a landless laborer.

古文：父完，宁远长史。
现代文：父亲陆完，任宁远长史。
English: After his father's death, Ren Ning had a long history.

古文：云公五岁诵《论语》、《毛诗》，九岁读《汉书》，略能记忆。
现代文：陆云公五岁时可以背诵《论语》、《毛诗》，九岁时读《汉书》，全能记下来。
English: At the age of five, Lu Yungong could recite "Analects of Confucius" and "Mao Poetry," and at the age of nine, he could read "Chinese Classics" and write it down.

古文：从祖倕、沛国刘显质问十事，云公对无所失，显叹异之。
现代文：他的从祖父陆便、沛国刘显向他考问《汉书》中的十件事，他都能一一回答，无所遣漏，刘显赞叹不已，认为他异于常人。
English: When his grandfathers, Lu Ben and Pei Guo Liu Xian, asked him about the ten things in the "Chinese Book," he was able to answer them one by one, without any omissions. Liu Xian was full of admiration and thought that he was different from ordinary people.

古文：既长，好学有才思。
现代文：长大成人之后，陆云公好学而有才气。
English: After he became an adult, Lu Yungong was eager to learn and talented.

古文：州举秀才。
现代文：州中举为秀才。
English: He was a standout in the state's junior high.

古文：累迁宣惠武陵王、平西湘东王行参军。
现代文：陆云公积功迁任宣惠武陵王、平西湘束王行参军。
English: King Xuanwu of Wuling and King Xiangzhu of Pingxi joined the army.

古文：云公先制《太伯庙碑》，吴兴太守张纘罢郡经途，读其文叹曰： 今之蔡伯喈也。 
现代文：陆云公原先撰写了《太伯庙碑》，吴兴太守张缵离职回京城，在途中读到陆云公写的碑文，感叹地说： 这个人简直是当代的蔡伯喈。 
English: Lu Yun Gong originally wrote "Tai Bo Temple Monument." Wu Xing Taizhou Zhang Ye left his post to return to Beijing. On the way, he read the inscription written by Lu Yun Gong and said with a sigh: This person is simply a contemporary Cai Bo Gong.

古文：缵至都掌选，言之于高祖，召兼尚书仪曹郎，顷之即真，入直寿光省，以本官知著作郎事。
现代文：张缵到京城后主管铨选官员的事务，他向高祖推荐陆云公，高祖于是召陆云公兼尚书仪曹郎，不久就实授此职，入值寿光省，又以本来官职知著作郎事。
English: After Zhang Ye arrived in Beijing, he was in charge of the affairs of selecting officials, and he recommended Lu Yun Gong to Gao Zu. Gao Zu then called Lu Yun Gong and Shang Shuxi Cao, and soon he was actually awarded this position. He was assigned to Shouguang Province, and he used his official position to write books.

古文：俄除著作郎，累迁中书黄门郎，并掌著作。
现代文：不久又除授为著作郎，积功迁任中书黄门郎，并掌著作。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of "Writer-in-Residence" and transferred to the post of "Chushu Huangmenro" and was in charge of writing.

古文：云公善弈棋，尝夜侍御坐，武冠触烛火，高祖笑谓曰： 烛烧卿貂。 
现代文：陆云公善于下围棋，一次曾经在夜晚陪侍高祖，他戴的武冠碰上了烛火，高祖笑着对他说： 烛烧坏了你帽子上的貂尾。 
English: Lu Yun Gong was good at playing Go. Once, when he was accompanying Gao Zu at night, the crown he was wearing caught fire from a candle. Gao Zu said to him with a smile, "The candle burned the tip of your hat."

古文：高祖将用云公为侍中，故以此言戏之也。
现代文：高祖将要用陆云公为侍中，侍中冠上有貂尾为饰，所以高祖用这样的话来和陆云公开玩笑。
English: Gao Zu will use Lu Yun Gong as an attendant, and the attendant's crown will be decorated with a ponytail, so Gao Zu uses such words to openly joke with Lu Yun.

古文：是时天渊池新制鳊鱼舟，形阔而短，高祖暇日，常泛此舟，在朝唯引太常刘之遴、国子祭酒到溉、右卫硃异，云公时年位尚轻，亦预焉。
现代文：当时天渊池新制造了一艘鳊鱼舟，舟形阔而短，高祖在闲暇的子裹常常乘坐这艘船随波荡漾，在朝臣中衹是带着太常刘之遴、国子祭酒到溉、右卫朱异，陆云公当时年纪轻，职位也不高，但是也在陪高祖泛舟的朝臣之列。
English: At that time, Tianyuan Lake newly made a catfish boat. The boat shape was wide and short. Gao Zu often rode the boat to follow the waves in his free time. Among the courtiers, Gao was accompanied by Liu Zhichuan, Guo Zi sacrifice wine to irrigation, and Yu Wei Zhu Yi. Lu Yun Gong was young at the time and his position was not high, but he was also among the courtiers who accompanied Gao Zu on the boat.

古文：其恩遇如此。
现代文：高祖对他的恩宠厚待竟到了这样的程度。
English: This is how generous Gaozu was to him.

古文：太清元年，卒，时年三十七。
现代文：太清元年，陆云公去世，死时三十七岁。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Lu Yungong died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：高祖悼惜之，手诏曰： 给事黄门侍郎、掌著作陆云公，风尚优敏，后进之秀。
现代文：高祖为他的死哀伤惋惜，亲手写诏书说： 给事黄门侍郎、掌著作陆云公，风姿仪态秀美，学问博洽通达，是后起之秀。
English: Gao Zu was saddened by his death and wrote an imperial edict in his own hand, saying: Lu Yun, the Yellow Gate attendant, the author of the book, has a beautiful demeanor, a well-rounded education, and is an up-and-comer.

古文：奄然殂谢，良以恻然。
现代文：他突然间去世，深深令人痛心。
English: His sudden death is deeply distressing.

古文：可克日举哀，赙钱五万、布四十匹。 
现代文：应当确定日期为他举哀。赠钱五万、布四十匹帮助他家办理丧事。 
English: A date should be set for a memorial service for him, and a donation of 50,000 yuan and 40 pieces of cloth should be made to help his family with the funeral.

古文：张缵时为湘州，与云公叔襄、兄晏子书曰： 都信至，承贤兄子贤弟黄门殒折，非唯贵门丧宝，实有识同悲，痛惋伤惜，不能已已。
现代文：张缵当时任湘州刺史，他写信给陆云公的叔父陆襄、兄长陆晏子说：京城的信使来，知道你们贤兄之子、贤弟黄门侍郎不幸去世的消息，这不衹是你们家失去了优异的人才，衹要是认识他的人都同感悲伤，哀痛惋惜，不能休止。
English: At that time, Zhang Qian was in charge of the history of Hunan Province. He wrote to Lu Yungong's uncle, Lu Xiang, and his elder brother, Lu Xunzi, saying: "A messenger from Beijing has come to know the news of the unfortunate death of your elder brother's son, the elder brother Huangmen Zhi Lang. This is not only your family has lost an outstanding talent, but everyone who knows him is sad, sad and sorry, and can not stop.

古文：贤兄子贤弟神情早著，标令弱年，经目所睹，殆无再问。
现代文：贤兄之子、贤弟天生的才情早就显露，弱冠之年更是俊异非凡，书籍一经过目，用不着第二次翻阅。
English: The natural talents of the sons and brothers of the wise men have long been revealed, and the year of the weak crown is even more beautiful and extraordinary. Once the books have been read, there is no need to read them a second time.

古文：怀橘抱柰，禀自天情；倨坐列薪，非因外奖。
现代文：有陆绩怀橘孝亲之举、王祥为母抱柰之情，这是天生的禀性；能踞坐苦读、跻身贤才行列，并不是凭藉外人的帮助。
English: It is an innate tenacity to cherish one's parents and Wang Xiang's mother. It is not with the help of outsiders that Wang Xiang is able to study hard and join the ranks of geniuses.

古文：学以聚之，则一箸能立；问以辩之，则师心独寤。
现代文：学者相聚，那他能以自己的撰述立于学者之林；问难答辩，那他就能谈出自己的心得，常有独到的见解。
English: When scholars get together, he can use his writings to stand out from the crowd of scholars; when he answers difficult questions, he can talk about his own experiences, and often has unique opinions.

古文：始逾弱岁，辞艺通洽，升降多士，秀也诗流。
现代文：刚刚过了弱冠之年，他就已经精通文辞和六艺，评论众多的士人，他正是杰出的诗人。
English: Just after the year of the weak crown, he was already proficient in literature and the six arts, commenting on numerous scholars, he is an outstanding poet.

古文：见与齿过肩随，礼殊拜绝，怀抱相得，忘其年义。
现代文：我曾舆他同为朝廷之官，互相追随，交情深厚，因为志气相投，就成了忘年之交。在朝一年，朝夕相处。
English: I once considered him to be an official of the Imperial Court. We followed each other and had a deep friendship. Because we shared the same ideals, we became friends for life. We spent the whole year together, morning and evening.

古文：朝游夕宴，一载于斯；玩古披文，终晨讫暮。平生知旧，零落稍尽，老夫记意，其数几何。
现代文：从早到晚，玩赏古籍，披板文章。平生的知交旧友，差不多都渐渐殂谢，老夫我记得旧友，在世已经不多了。
English: From morning to night, I enjoy ancient books and paperback articles. Almost all of my lifelong acquaintances and old friends are gradually thanking me. I remember my old friends, and there are not many of them left.

古文：至若此生，宁可多过，赏心乐事，所寄伊人。
现代文：至于我遣一生，还有多少时间，怡悦心志的乐事，就在于和他交往。
English: As for how much time I have left in my life, the joy of my heart lies in interacting with him.

古文：弟迁职潇、湘，维舟洛汭，将离之际，弥见情款。
现代文：我职务迁调，前往潇、湘，船停在京城江岸，将要离别之时，更看出我和他之间的交往深情。
English: When I was transferred to Xiao and Hunan, and the ship stopped at the bank of the Beijing River, I was about to leave, and I saw that my interaction with him was affectionate.

古文：夕次帝郊，亟淹信宿，徘徊握手，忍分歧路。
现代文：晚上在京城郊外暂住，我和他促膝而谈，滞留了一夜又一夜，恋恋不舍，握手道别，强忍悲酸，各登前程。
English: In the evening, I stayed in the suburbs of Beijing for a while. I had a quick conversation with him and stayed there night after night. We fell in love with each other, shook hands and said goodbye. We endured the sadness and bitterness, and each of us went on a journey.

古文：行役数年，羁病侵迫，识虑惛怳，久绝人世。
现代文：我在外任职数年，被疾病缠绕侵扰，昏愤糊涂，很久已不与人交往。
English: I have been working abroad for several years, plagued by illness, dizzy with anger, and have not been in contact with people for a long time.

古文：凭几口授，素无其功；翰动若飞，弥有多愧。
现代文：凭几口授，手下又一向没有可托以此任的美才；自己动笔，字迹又轻重不匀，若减若没，更增添愧疚之情。
English: With a few words of instruction, his subordinates have never had the talent to be entrusted with this task; he writes by himself, the handwriting is uneven, and if it is reduced or not, it will add to the feeling of guilt.

古文：京洛游故，咸成云雨，唯有此生，音尘数嗣。
现代文：京城中知交旧友，都像云雨，有的分离，有的永别，祇有和他的交往，书信互相问讯，未曾断绝。
English: In the capital, acquaintances and old friends are like clouds and rain. Some are separated, some say goodbye forever, and only have contact with him. Letters and mutual inquiries have not been severed.

古文：形迹之外，不为远近隔情；襟素之中，岂以风霜改节？
现代文：我们的交往在形迹之外，不会被路途遥远而阻隔；我们的友情在襟怀之中，不会因岁月的流逝而改变。
English: Our interactions are off-the-beaten-track, and will not be blocked by long-distance travel; our friendship is in the bosom, and will not change with the passage of time.

古文：客游半纪，志切首丘，日望东归，更敦昔款。
现代文：我在外做官五六年，殷切期望能回到家乡，天天盼望着束归京城，再和他重温昔日的深情。
English: I have been working abroad for five or six years, eagerly looking forward to returning to my hometown, looking forward to returning to the capital every day, and reliving the old affection with him.

古文：如何此别，永成异世！
现代文：为什么这次分别，竟使我们永远成为隔世之人!
English: Why did this separation turn us into people from another world forever!

古文：挥袂之初，人谁自保，但恐衰谢，无复前期。
现代文：当初挥手告别的时候，谁能保住自己长命百岁，我祇怕自己突然衰谢，所以没有其他的安排。
English: At the beginning, when I waved goodbye, who can keep himself alive for a hundred years, I was only afraid of my sudden decline, so there was no other arrangement.

古文：不谓华龄，方春掩质，埋玉之恨，抚事多情。
现代文：想不到他在风华正茂的年龄去世，学问渊博的贤才被埋葬，更叫人增加伤感之情。
English: It is inconceivable that he died at such a young age, and that such a learned and talented man was buried. It is all the more saddening.

古文：想引进之情，怀抱素笃，友于之至，兼深家宝。
现代文：想当年我引荐他，就因为他一直志向坚定，你们兄弟感情深厚，又加上把他看作陆家家实，更有挚爱之情。
English: I wanted to recommend him back then, because he has always been determined, your brothers have deep feelings, plus he sees him as a Lu family member, with more love.

古文：奄有此恤，当何可言！
现代文：突然间遇上这令人忧伤痛心之事，我还能说什么!
English: What can I say in the face of this sudden sorrow and heartbreak!

古文：临白增悲，言以无次。 
现代文：临到写信更增加悲哀伤痛，以致语无伦次。
English: When it came to writing letters, the sadness and pain increased even more, to the point of being incoherent.

古文：云公从兄才子，亦有才名，历官中书郎、宣成王友、太子中庶子、廷尉卿，先云公卒。
现代文：陆云公堂兄陆才子，也因为有才气而出名，他历任中书郎、宣成王友，太子中庶子。廷尉卿，比陆云公先去世。
English: Lu Yungong's cousin, Lu Zaizi, was also famous for his talent. He was successively the middle school teacher, Xuancheng Wangyou, and the prince's middle child. He was a courtier and died before Lu Yungong.

古文：才子、云公文集，并行于世。
现代文：陆才子、陆云公都有文集，也都在世上流传。
English: Lu Cai Zi and Lu Yun Gong both have literary collections, and they are also circulated in the world.

古文：任孝恭，字孝恭，临淮临淮人也。
现代文：任孝恭字孝恭，临淮临淮人。
English: Ren Xiaoqong, Zi Xiaoqong, Lin Huai, Lin Huai.

古文：曾祖农夫，宋南豫州刺史。
现代文：他的曾祖父任农夫，宋时任南豫州刺史。
English: His great-grandfather was a farmer, and during the Song Dynasty, he served as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：孝恭幼孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：任孝恭年幼时就失去父亲，他事奉母亲十分孝敬，因此而出名。
English: Ren Xiaoqiong lost his father when he was young, and he is famous for being very filial to his mother.

古文：精力勤学，家贫无书，常崎岖从人假借。
现代文：任孝恭专心一意，勤奋学习，家中贫穷，没有书可演就常常辗转请托向人借书。
English: Ren Xiaoqiong is single-minded, diligent in his studies, and his family is poor. When he has no books to perform, he often asks others to lend him books.

古文：每读一遍，讽诵略无所遗。
现代文：每读一遍，他就可以背诵，全无遗漏。
English: Every time he reads it, he can recite it without missing a beat.

古文：外祖丘它，与高祖有旧，高祖闻其有才学，召入西省撰史。
现代文：任耋苤的外祖父丘它，与高祖原有交情，听说任孝恭有才学，就把他召入西省编撰史书。
English: Ren Yao's grandfather-in-law Qiu It, who had a friendship with Gao Zu, heard that Ren Xiaogang had a talent for learning, and summoned him to West Province to compile a history book.

古文：初为奉朝请，进直寿光省，为司文侍郎，俄兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：任孝恭最初任奉朝请，进值寿光省，为司文侍郎，不久兼中书通事舍人。
English: At first, Ren Xiaoqiong was appointed to serve the imperial court, and was assigned to the Shouguang Province of Jin Province. He served as the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：敕遣制《建陵寺刹下铭》，又启撰高祖集序文，并富丽，自是专掌公家笔翰。
现代文：高祖下诏命任孝恭撰写《建陵寺刹下铭》，任孝恭又呈奏自己撰写的高祖文集的《序文》，文辞都富赡华丽，从逭以后，任孝恭专职主管朝廷的文书。
English: Emperor Gao's edict ordered Ren Xiaogong to write "The Inscription of the Founding of the Mausoleum," and Ren Xiaogong also presented the "Introduction" of Gao Zu's anthology written by himself. The words are rich and gorgeous. After his death, Ren Xiaogong was the full-time supervisor of the imperial court's documents.

古文：孝恭为文敏速，受诏立成，若不留意，每奏，高祖辄称善，累赐金帛。
现代文：任孝恭写文章敏捷迅速，接到诏命立即就能成文，看起来不很花费心思，写好文章呈奏，高祖每每都称赞他的文章写得好，多次赐给他金帛。
English: Ren Xiaoqiong writes articles quickly and quickly, and can write them immediately after receiving the imperial edict. It does not seem to take a lot of effort to write a good article and present it well. Gaozhu has praised his articles for being well written, and has given him gold medals many times.

古文：孝恭少从萧寺云法师读经论，明佛理，至是，蔬食持戒，信受甚笃。
现代文：任孝恭在年轻时跟随萧寺云法师读经文，通晓释教教义，到遣时任孝恭衹食用蔬食，遵守戒律，信奉佛教十分诚恳。
English: When he was young, Ren Xiaoqiong read scriptures with Xiao Jianyun and was well versed in the teachings of the exegesis. At the time of his ordination, Ren Xiaoqiong ate vegetables, observed the precepts, and believed in Buddhism very sincerely.

古文：而性颇自伐，以才能尚人，于时辈中多有忽略，世以此少之。
现代文：但任孝恭生性很喜欢夸耀自己的功劳，常凭藉自己的才能凌驾于别人之上，对于当时有名的人物多表现出轻视的态度，世人也就因此而看轻他。
English: However, Ren Xiaoqiong liked to boast about his merits, often using his talent to surpass others. He often showed a contemptuous attitude towards famous people at the time, and the world looked down on him for this reason.

古文：太清二年，侯景寇逼，孝恭启募兵，隶萧正德，屯南岸。
现代文：太清二年，侯景进犯京城，任孝恭启奏招募军士，他率领招募的军人隶属于萧正德，驻扎在江南岸。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing invaded Beijing. Ren Xiaogong led the recruiting sergeants. The soldiers he recruited were subordinated to Xiao Zhengde and stationed on the south bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：及贼至，正德举众入贼，孝恭还赴台，台门已闭，因奔入东府，寻为贼所攻，城陷见害。
现代文：到叛贼军队来到的时候，萧正德率军投降侯景，任孝恭返回赶赴宫城，宫城城门已经关闭，任孝恭于是逃进东府，不久束府被叛贼攻破，任孝恭被害。
English: When the rebel army came, Xiao Zhengde led the army to surrender Houjing, and Ren Xiaogong returned to rush to Miyagi. The gate of Miyagi was closed, so Ren Xiaogong fled to Dongfu. Soon, Sokfu was breached by the rebels, and Ren Xiaogong was killed.

古文：文集行于世。
现代文：任孝恭的文集在世间流传。
English: Ren Xiaoqiang's literary works have been circulated around the world.

古文：颜协，字子和，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：颜协字子和，琅邪临沂人。
English: Yan Xie, Zi Zi, and Zi Yao are the main characters.

古文：七代祖含，晋侍中、国子祭酒、西平靖侯。
现代文：他七代以前的祖上颜含，晋时任侍中、国子祭酒、西平靖侯。
English: His ancestor seven generations ago, Yan Han, was a chamberlain during the Jin Dynasty, the head of the Imperial Household Agency, and Xiping Jinghou.

古文：父见远，博学有志行。
现代文：他的父亲颜见远，博学而且有志向，有操守。
English: His father was far-sighted, erudite and ambitious, with integrity.

古文：初，齐和帝之镇荆州也，以见远为录事参军，及即位于江陵，以为治书侍御史，俄兼中丞。
现代文：以前，齐和帝镇守荆州的时候，任颜见远为绿事参军，到齐和帝在江陵登上帝位的时候，命颜见远任治书侍御史，不久又兼中丞。
English: In the past, when Qi He and Emperor Zhen were guarding Jingzhou, Ren Yanyuan saw Yuan as a green thing to join the army. When Qi He and Emperor Zhen ascended to the throne in Jiangling, Ren Yanyuan saw Yuan as the secretary of history, and soon he was also the vice-president.

古文：高祖受禅，见远乃不食，发愤数日而卒。
现代文：高祖接受齐的禅让之后，颜见远于是绝食，含恨几天而去世。
English: After Gaozu accepted Qi's offer of Zen, Yan Shiyuan went on a hunger strike and died a few days later.

古文：高祖闻之曰： 我自应天从人，何预天下士大夫事？
现代文：高祖听到这消息说： 我是顺应天命，顺从人意，和天下士大夫有什么关系?
English: When Gaozu heard this news, he said, "I am following the will of heaven and the will of man. What does it have to do with the world's sheriff?

古文：而颜见远乃至于此也。 
现代文：而颜见远竟然做出了这种事情! 
English: And Yan Dianyuan actually did such a thing!

古文：协幼孤，养于舅氏。
现代文：颜协从小失去父亲，在舅氏家抚养。
English: Yan Xie lost her father at a young age and was raised by her uncle.

古文：少以器局见称。
现代文：他从小以度量大而被人们称赞。
English: He grew up being praised for his big heart.

古文：博涉群书，工于草隶。
现代文：颜协广泛涉猎群书，精于写草书和隶书。
English: Yan Xie extensively dabbled in calligraphy and was good at writing cursive and calligraphy.

古文：释褐湘东王国常侍，又兼府记室。
现代文：颜协初出仕就任湘东王国常侍，又兼府记室。
English: For the first time, Yan Xie was appointed as the attendant of the Kingdom of Shandong, and also the prefectural record office.

古文：世祖出镇荆州，转正记室。
现代文：世祖出京镇守荆州，颜协转任实授记室。
English: The ancestor went to Beijing to guard Jingzhou, and Yan Xie was transferred to the actual awarding office.

古文：时吴郡顾协亦在蕃邸，与协同名，才学相亚，府中称为 二协 。
现代文：当时吴郡顾协也在王府中任职，他和颜协同名，才学也相匹敌，王府中称他们为 二协 。
English: At that time, Wu County Gu Xie also served in the royal court. He and Yan had the same name, and their talents were comparable. The royal court called them the Second Xie.

古文：舅陈郡谢暕卒，协以有鞠养恩，居丧如伯叔之礼，议者重焉。
现代文：颜协之舅陈郡谢陈去世，颜协因为舅舅对自己有抚养之恩，因此用对待伯父叔父的礼仪为舅舅守丧，谈论这事的人因此更看重颜协的情义。
English: Yan Xie's uncle, Chen County Xie Chen, passed away. Yan Xie mourned his uncle with the etiquette of an uncle because his uncle had been a blessing in his upbringing. People who talk about this matter therefore attach more importance to Yan Xie's feelings.

古文：又感家门事义，不求显达，恒辞征辟，游于蕃府而已。
现代文：颜协又感到家中父亲属守义而死，因此不去追求显达的职位，常常拒绝朝廷的征召，衹是在藩王府任职而已。
English: Yan Xie also felt that the father of the family was a righteous man and died, so he did not pursue a prominent position and often refused to be recruited by the imperial court, but only served in the royal palace of the clan.

古文：大同五年，卒，时年四十二。
现代文：大同五年，颜协去世，死时四十二岁。
English: In the same year, Yan Xie died at the age of forty-two.

古文：世祖甚叹惜之，为《怀旧诗》以伤之。
现代文：世祖为他的去世嗟叹惋惜，为此而着《怀旧诗》哀悼他。
English: The patriarch lamented his death and mourned him with "Nostalgic Poem."

古文：其一章曰： 弘都多雅度，信乃含宾实。
现代文：其中一章说： 气量弘大而风度高雅，实在是名实一致的高才啊!
English: One of the chapters says: He has a huge amount of energy and an elegant demeanor. He is a true talent!

古文：鸿渐殊未升，上才淹下秩。 
现代文：虽已仕进却还未升迁，致使高才还滞留在俸禄不高的职位上。 
English: Although they have been promoted, they have not yet been promoted, resulting in high talents remaining in positions with low salaries.

古文：协所撰《晋仙传》五篇、《日月灾异图》两卷，遇火湮灭。
现代文：颜协撰写的《晋仙传》五篇，《日月灾异图》两卷，因为遇上火灾都烧毁了。
English: Five volumes of "Jinxian Biography" and two volumes of "Sun and Moon Calamity" written by Yan Xie were all burned in the fire.

古文：有二子：之仪、之推，并早知名。
现代文：颜协有两个儿子：颜之仪，颜之推，都出名很早。
English: Yan Xie had two sons: Yan Zhi Yi and Yan Zhi Pu, both of whom became famous very early.

古文：之推，承圣中仕至正员郎、中书舍人。
现代文：颜之推在承圣年间官职升至正员郎、中书舍人。
English: During the years of consecration, Yan Zhi Pu was promoted to the official post of the head priest and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：魏文帝称古之文人，鲜能以名节自全。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：魏文帝说，古代文人，很少有人能保持自己的名节。为什么呢?
English: Chen Li Department Shang Shu Yao said: Wei Wendi said that ancient literati, few people can keep their own name day. Why?

古文：何哉？夫文者妙发性灵，独拔怀抱，易邈等夷，必兴矜露。
现代文：文人要巧妙地运用自己的聪明才智，与众不同地披露自己的胸怀，因此，他们容易藐视同辈之人，显露夸耀自大之心。
English: The literati should skillfully use their intelligence and talent to reveal their minds in a unique way. Therefore, they are prone to despise their peers and show their arrogance.

古文：大则凌慢侯王，小则慠蔑朋党；速忌离訧，启自此作。
现代文：在大的场合就会凌辱轻慢侯王，在小的场合就会轻视侮慢朋友，招致妒忌，陷入罪遇，全都由此产生。
English: On big occasions, contemptuous princes will be insulted, and on small occasions, friends will be despised and insulted, causing jealousy and falling into crime, all of which arise from this.

古文：若夫屈、贾之流斥，桓、冯之摈放，岂独一世哉？盖恃才之祸也。
现代文：像屈原、买谊被弃斥放逐，桓谭、冯衍被槟斥不用，遣哪裹衹是一朝一代才有的事啊，实在是这些文人恃才自傲带来的祸患啊!
English: Like Qu Yuan and Buyei, who were banished and exiled, and Kuan Tan and Feng Yan, who were banished and exiled, it is a once-in-a-generation thing, and it is really a disaster brought about by the arrogance of these literati!

古文：群士值文明之运，摛艳藻之辞，无郁抑之虞，不遭向时之患，美矣。
现代文：以上记载的文学之士，正值教化昌明的时代，撰写辞藻华丽的文章，没有郁闷压抑的忧虑，不会遇上前代文人遭遇的祸患，实在太好了。
English: The literary figures recorded above were writing their eloquent essays at a time when enlightenment was on the rise. They did not have depressing anxieties and did not encounter the ills that befell previous generations of literary figures. This was truly wonderful.

古文：刘氏之论，命之徒也。
现代文：议论，说明他是讲求命运的一类人物。
English: argument, indicating that he is a kind of person who seeks his destiny.

古文：命也者，圣人罕言欤，就而必之，非经意也。
现代文：命运这种东西，圣人很少谈及，趋向命运之说，认为命运必然操纵人生，这不是圣人经典的意思。
English: Fate is something that sages rarely talk about. They tend to speak of fate, and believe that fate inevitably manipulates life. This is not the meaning of the sages' classics.

