古文：齐王将见燕、赵、楚之相于卫，约外魏。
现代文：齐王将要在卫国会见燕国、赵国、楚国的相国，准备一起抵抗魏国。
English: King Qi will meet with his counterparts from Yan, Zhao, and Chu at the Imperial Palace to prepare for a joint resistance against Wei.

古文：魏王惧，恐其谋伐魏也，告公孙衍。
现代文：魏王感到很害怕，害怕他们谋划进攻魏国，于是把这件事告诉了公孙衍。
English: The Wei king was very scared, afraid that they were planning to attack Wei, so he told Gongsunyan about it.

古文：公孙衍曰： 王与臣百金，臣请败之。 
现代文：公孙衍说： 大王给臣下百金，臣下请求去破坏他们的合约。 
English: Gongsunyan said: The great king gave the vassal a hundred gold coins, and the vassal asked to break their contract.

古文：王为约车，载百金。
现代文：魏王给他准备车辆，装载百金。
English: Wei Wang prepared a vehicle for him and loaded it with one hundred gold coins.

古文：犀首期齐王至之曰，先以车五十乘至卫间齐，行以百金以请先见齐王，乃得见。
现代文：公孙衍约定好齐国到达卫国的日期，先率车五十辆到达卫国私下会见齐国人，给齐国的使者百金，请求拜见齐王，于是顺利见到了齐王。
English: Gongsunyan agreed on a date for the arrival of the Qi Kingdom to the defense of the country, and led fifty cars to arrive at the defense of the country to meet privately with the Qi people, gave the ambassador of the Qi Kingdom a hundred gold, and asked to see the Qi King, so he successfully saw the Qi King.

古文：因久坐安，从容谈三国之相怨。
现代文：因为坐了很长时间，不紧不慢地闲谈，那三个国家的相国就产生了怨恨。
English: Because they sat for a long time, chatting unhurriedly, the neighbors of the three countries developed a grudge.

古文：谓齐王曰： 王与三国约外魏，魏使公孙衍来，今久与之谈，是王谋三国也也。 
现代文：对齐王说： 大王同我们三国约定一起排斥魏国，魏国派公孙衍来出使，今天您长时间同他交谈，这是大王在谋划我们三国呀！ 
English: King Qi said, "The Great King and our three countries agreed to exclude Wei together. Wei sent Gongsunyan as an envoy, and today you had a long talk with him. This is the Great King plotting against our three countries!"

古文：齐王曰： 魏王闻寡人来，使公孙子劳寡人，寡人无与之语也。 
现代文：齐王说： 魏王听说寡人来到卫国，派公孙先生慰劳寡人，寡人没有与他密谈。 
English: King Qi said: King Wei heard that many people came to defend the country and sent Mr. Gongsun to comfort some people. Some people did not talk to him.

古文：三国之不相信齐王之遇，遇事遂败。
现代文：三个国家的相国不相信齐王的联合，联合的事情就被破坏了。
English: The neighboring countries of the three countries did not believe in the alliance of King Qi, and the alliance was destroyed.

