古文：颜延之颜延之，字延年，琅邪临沂人也。曾祖含，右光禄大夫。祖约，零陵太守。父显，护军司马。
现代文：颜延之字延年，山东琅王牙郡临沂县人，曾祖父颜含官至右光禄大夫；祖父颜约，官至零陵太守；父亲颜显，官至护军司马。
English: Yan Yan Zi, born in Linyi County, Shandong Province, was the son of Yan Yan, the great-grandfather of Yan Han, who rose to the rank of doctor of the Right Guanglu; Yan Yao, the grandfather of Yan Yan Zi, who rose to the rank of grand steward of the Imperial Mausoleum; and Yan Xian, the father of Yan Yan Zi, who rose to the rank of guard sergeant.

古文：延之少孤贫，居负郭，室巷甚陋。
现代文：延之少失双亲，家境贫寒，他住在城郭边上，房屋简陋。
English: Yan Zhizhong lost his parents and was born into a poor family. He lived on the edge of the city wall in a humble house.

古文：好读书，无所不览，文章之美，冠绝当时。
现代文：但颜延之却很好学，博览群书。他的文章写得非常漂亮，在当时算首屈一指，他喜欢喝酒，不拘小节。
English: But Yan Yanzhi was very studious and well-read. His articles were very beautifully written, second to none at the time, and he liked to drink, no matter what.

古文：饮酒不护细行，年三十，犹未婚。
现代文：年至三十，尚未婚配。
English: He is in his early thirties and not yet married.

古文：妹适东莞刘宪之，穆之子也。
现代文：约好见面审察一番，延之却没有赴约。
English: They made an appointment to meet for an inspection, but they didn't go.

古文：穆之既与延之通家，又闻其美，将仕之；先欲相见，延之不往也。
现代文：后将军，吴国内史刘柳推举延之做他的内参军。后来延之升迁主簿。
English: Later, Liu Liu, the general of Wu's internal history, promoted Yan Zhi to join the army. Later, Yan Zi's promotion led to the main book.

古文：后将军、吴国内史刘柳以为行参军，因转主簿，豫章公世子中军行参军。
现代文：又升任豫章公世子的中军行参军。晋安帝义熙十二年，刘裕北伐，朝廷授予刘裕宋公爵位。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor An of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Yuxiang was awarded the title of Duke of Song by the imperial court.

古文：义熙十二年，高祖北伐，有宋公之授，府遣一使庆殊命，参起居；延之与同府王参军俱奉使至洛阳，道中作诗二首，文辞藻丽，为谢晦、傅亮所赏。
现代文：刘裕派一个代表到朝廷接受这个奖励，并问候皇上的生活。延之和他的同事王参军一起回使京城，经过洛阳，延之在路上作诗二首，这诗的语言非常丰富和华丽，谢晦与傅亮见后非常赞赏。
English: Liu Yu sent a representative to the imperial court to accept this award and greet the emperor's life. Yan Zhi and his colleague Wang Shanjun returned to the capital together. After passing Luoyang, Yan Zi wrote two poems on the way. The language of this poem is very rich and gorgeous. Xie Gui and Fu Liang were very appreciated after meeting.

古文：宋国建，奉常郑鲜之举为博士，仍迁世子舍人。
现代文：宋王朝建立，奉常郑鲜之举荐延之为博士。颜延之再升任世子舍人。
English: It was established in the Song Dynasty, and Yan Yan was promoted to doctor on the recommendation of Chang Zhengxian. Yan Yan was then promoted to the position of heir.

古文：高祖受命，补太子舍人。
现代文：刘裕即位，延之补迁太子舍人。
English: Liu Yu acceded to the throne, and Prince Yan's succession was postponed.

古文：雁门人周续之隐居庐山，儒学著称，永初中，征诣京师，开馆以居之。
现代文：雁门人周续之隐居庐山，研究儒学非常有名。永初年中，被请到京师，朝廷为他专门建立了一个学馆。
English: It is famous for the study of Confucianism. In the first year of his life, he was invited to study in Beijing, and the imperial court specially built a school for him.

古文：高祖亲幸，朝彦毕至，延之官列犹卑，引升上席。
现代文：刘裕亲临此地，满朝文武都在座。
English: Liu Yu himself came to this place, and all the princes and generals were present.

古文：上使问续之三义，续之雅仗辞辩，延之每折以简要。既连挫续之，上又使还自敷释，言约理暢，莫不称善。
现代文：延之此时官职还很小，也被请到前面，刘裕叫人问周续之三句话，周续之旁征博引，万方比喻，延之则言简意赅，常常难倒周续之，刘裕看到这些，又再叫颜延之作详细解释，他更是条分缕析，众人听了无不赞叹。
English: At this time, Yan Yan's official position was still small, and he was also invited to the front. Liu Yu asked people to ask questions about Yan Yan's three sentences, Yan Yan's side-by-side quotations, universal metaphors, Yan Yan's concise words, and Yan Yan's detailed explanations. Liu Yu saw these, and then asked Yan Yan for a detailed explanation. He was even more dissected, and everyone listened with admiration.

古文：徙尚书仪曹郎，太子中舍人。
现代文：因此延之又升任尚书仪曹郎官，再转太子中舍人。
English: Therefore, Yan Zhi was again promoted to the position of Shang Shuxi's aide-de-camp, and then transferred to the position of the prince's middle son.

古文：时尚书令傅亮自以文义之美，一时莫及，延之负其才辞，不为之下，亮甚疾焉。
现代文：当时尚书令傅亮自以为文才举世无双，但延之却非常相信自己的才能一点也不比傅亮差，傅亮非常嫉妒颜延之。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling Fu Liang thought that his literary talent was unparalleled in the world, but Yan Zhi was very confident that his talent was no worse than Fu Liang. Fu Liang was very jealous of Yan Zhi.

古文：庐陵王义真颇好辞义，待接甚厚；徐羡之等疑延之为同异，意甚不悦。少帝即位，以为正员郎，兼中书，寻徙员外常侍，出为始安太守。
现代文：庐陵王刘义真也很喜欢做文章，对待延之很好。徐羡之等人怀疑延之附从刘义真，反对自己，便改延之做正员郎，管中书事务，不久又转他为员外常侍，再排挤他出去做始安太守。
English: Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling, also liked to write articles and treated Yan Yan very well. Xu Enzhi and others suspected Yan Yan of being a follower of Liu Yizhen and opposed themselves, so they changed Yan Yan to be the official assistant, in charge of the book business, and soon he was transferred to be a non-official attendant, and then pushed him out to be the first governor of An.

古文：领军将军谢晦谓延之曰： 昔荀勖忌阮咸，斥为始平郡，今卿又为始安，可谓二始。 
现代文：领军将军谢晦对延之说： 从前荀勖嫉妒阮咸，贬阮咸做始平郡太守。今日足下又被贬做始安太守，可算是前后辉映的 二始 。 
English: General Xie Hui, the leader of the army, said to Yan Zhi: "In the past, you were jealous of Nguyn Ánh and demeaned Nguyn Ánh as the governor of Xípíng County. Today, you have been demeaned as the governor of Xían County, which can be regarded as the beginning of a bright future.

古文：黄门郎殷景仁亦谓之曰： 所谓俗恶俊异，世疵文雅。 
现代文：黄门郎殷景仁也对延之说： 你这事正如俗话说的 庸人嫉妒贤人，世俗苛求才子 。 
English: Huangmen Lang, Yin Jingren, also said to Yan Zhi, "You are just like the saying: The mediocre envy the wise, and the world demands talent.

古文：延之之郡，道经汨潭，为湘州刺史张纪祭屈原文以致其意，曰：
现代文：颜延之到始安上任，途经汨罗江，替湘州刺史张邵作了一篇《祭屈原文》，表达他的悲愤，大意说：
English: Yan Yanzhi went to Xi'an to take office, passing through the Minluo River, and wrote a "sacrificial text" for Zhang Shao, the governor of Hunan Province, to express his grief and indignation, saying:

古文：恭承帝命，建旧楚。访怀沙之渊，得捐佩之浦。弭节罗潭，舣舟汨渚，敬祭楚三闾大夫屈君之灵：
现代文： 我惶恐地接受皇上的命令，到湘楚之地做官，凭吊屈原投江的旧地，亲临屈子咏诗的旧波，驻马于汨罗江畔，泊舟于汨罗江边，恭敬地祭祀楚国三闾大夫屈原君的灵魂：
English: With trepidation, I accepted the emperor's order to go to Hunan and Chu to work as an official, to visit the old place where Qu Yuan threw himself into the river, to be close to the old wave of Qu Zi's poem, to stay on the banks of the Mino River, to moor the boat on the banks of the Mino River, and to respectfully sacrifice the soul of Qu Yuan, the three-branched doctor of Chu:

古文：兰薰而摧，玉贞则折。物忌坚芳，人讳明洁。
现代文： 馨香的兰花往往被熏坏和摧毁，坚硬的玉石往往被折断，万物最可怕的是它的美好，人最怕的是他的贤明高洁。
English: The sweet-scented orchid is often smoked and destroyed, the hard jade is often broken, the most terrible thing about everything is its beauty, and the most feared thing about man is his wisdom and purity.

古文：曰若先生，逢辰之缺。
现代文：就比如屈先生您，便逢到这样一个不幸的时代。
English: Just like Mr. Qu, you have come to such an unfortunate era.

古文：温风迨时，飞霜急节。嬴、芊遘纷，昭、怀不端。谋折仪、尚，贞蔑椒、兰。
现代文：春光一下子便流逝，冬天很快便到来，秦国与楚国正交战不停，秦昭王和楚怀王竭尽他们的智力，您挫败张仪和令尹子兰的阴谋。
English: Spring is passing quickly, winter is coming soon, Qin and Chu are constantly at war, Qin Zhao Wang and Chu Huai Wang are trying their best to defeat Zhang Yi and Yin Zilan's plot.

古文：身绝郢阙，迹遍湘干。比物荃荪，连类龙鸾。
现代文：你的品行比兰花更坚负，远离国都，浪迹湘江，却日夜渴望回到故国，你真是比灵草还芬香，比荷花还清纯。你如神龙般矫健，如鸾凤般纯粹。
English: Your moral conduct is more steadfast than that of an orchid. You are far away from the national capital, lost in the Xiangjiang River, yet yearn day and night to return to your homeland. You are truly more fragrant than a reed and more pure than a lotus. You are as agile as a divine dragon and as pure as a phoenix.

古文：声溢金石，志华日月。如彼树芬，实颖实发。
现代文：你的声音比金石之光更加长久，你的志向可与日月争光，你像那橘树一一一香溢四野，又如小嫩枝般初发初长。
English: Your voice is more lasting than the light of the precious stone, your aspirations can compete with the sun and the moon, you are like the orange tree, and you are like a small branch.

古文：延之好酒疏诞，不能斟酌当世，见刘湛、殷景仁专当要任，意有不平，常云： 天下之务，当与天下共之，岂一人之智所能独了！ 
现代文：文帝非常看重颜延之，延之平素喜欢饮酒，放荡不羁，不能与时人相合，因为看见刘湛、殷景仁手握大权，心里非常不满，常对别人说： 天下大事就应当与天下贤人共同商讨，难道它是一个人的智力能对付得了的吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen attached great importance to Yan Yanzhi. Yan Yanzhi liked to drink alcohol and indulge in debauchery. He could not fit in with the people of the time. Seeing Liu Zhan and Yin Jingren holding great power, he was very dissatisfied. He often said to others: The great events of the world should be discussed with the sages of the world. Can it be handled by one's intellect?

古文：辞甚激扬，每犯权要。谓湛曰： 吾名器不升，当由作卿家吏。 
现代文：他说了很多这样激烈的话，每每触犯当权人物，他曾对刘湛说： 我的官职和名誉不增加，大概是因为跟你作部属所引起的。 
English: He said a lot of such fierce words. Whenever he offended a person in power, he said to Liu Zhan: My official position and reputation will not increase, probably because of being your subordinate.

古文：湛深恨焉，言于彭城王义康，出为永嘉太守。
现代文：刘湛怀恨他，向彭城王刘义康进谗言，把颜延之排挤出外当永嘉太守。
English: Liu Zhan held a grudge against him and spoke harshly to Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, to force Yan Yan out of his position as Yongjia's eunuch.

古文：延之甚怨愤，乃作《五君咏》以述竹林七贤，山涛、王戎以贵显被黜，咏嵇康曰： 鸾翮有时铩，龙性谁能驯。 
现代文：颜延之非常愤恨，于是又写了一首《五君咏》歌唱竹林七贤的故事。其中包括山涛、王戎从显贵到罢官的事。咏到稽康时是： 鸾翮有时铩，龙性谁能驯。 
English: Yan Yanzhi was very angry, so he wrote another song, "Five Princes and Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest," which included the story of Shantao and Wang Rong's rise from nobility to dismissal. When Shantao came to Jikang, he said: "Sometimes I am angry. Who can tame the dragon's nature?"

古文：咏阮籍曰： 物故可不论，途穷能无恸。 
现代文：咏阮籍说： 物故可不论，途穷能无恸。 
English: Nguyn Quc said: No matter what the circumstances are, we will do our best.

古文：咏阮咸曰： 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守。 
现代文：咏到阮咸说： 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守。 
English: He said to Nguyn Ánh: "If you are repeatedly recommended, you will not be promoted. If you are recommended, you will not be promoted."

古文：咏刘伶曰： 韬精日沉饮，谁知非荒宴。 
现代文：咏刘伶诗说： 韬精日沉饮，谁知非荒宴。 
English: Zhou Liu's poem said: "If you drink heavily on a fine day, who knows if it will be a bad feast."

古文：此四句，盖自序也。湛及义康以其辞旨不逊，大怒。
现代文：这四句，大概也是描叙自己，刘湛和刘义康听到这些不恭的话，勃然大怒。
English: These four sentences probably also describe themselves. Liu Zhan and Liu Yikang were furious when they heard these disrespectful words.

古文：时延之已拜，欲黜为远郡，太祖与义康诏曰： 降延之为小邦不政，有谓其在都邑，岂动物情，罪过彰著，亦士庶共悉，直欲选代，令思愆里闾。
现代文：当时颜延之已拜永嘉太守，他们想把颜延之贬到更远的地方。这时文帝给刘义康下了一道诏书： 贬颜延之为小郡太守而不让他参与朝政。有人说留他在京城里，还不至于会蛊惑人心，他的罪过很明显，可以说大家都是很熟悉的，只需要撤换一下，叫他回家闭门思过。
English: At that time, Yan Yanzhi had already become Yongjia's daimyo, and they wanted to demote Yan Yanzhi to a more distant place. At that time, Emperor Wen issued an edict to Liu Yikang: to demote Yan Yanzhi to a small county daimyo and not let him participate in the imperial government. Some people said that keeping him in Beijing was not enough to demoralize the people. His crime was obvious, and it could be said that everyone was very familiar with it. It only needed to be removed, and he was told to go home and think about it behind closed doors.

古文：犹复不悛，当驱往东土。乃志难恕，自可随事录治。殷、刘意咸无异也。 
现代文：假如他自己不悔改，再贬到东方也不迟，如果他仍执迷不悟，自然可以绳之以法，殷景仁、刘湛等也有这种看法。 
English: If he does not repent, it is not too late for him to be relegated to the East, and if he still persists, he can naturally be brought to justice. Yin Jingren, Liu Zhan and others also have this view.

古文：乃以光禄勋车仲远代之。
现代文：并命令光禄勋车仲远代替颜延之，是因为车仲远与颜延之一贯关系不好。
English: He also ordered the Guanglu Honored Car Chuan Yuan to replace Yan Yan, because the relationship between Chuan Yuan Yuan and Yan Yan has always been bad.

古文：延之与仲远世素不协，屏居里巷，不豫人间者七载。中书令王球名公子，遗务事外，延之慕焉；球亦爱其材，情好甚款。延之居常罄匮，球辄赡之。
现代文：于是颜延之闭门闲居，七年不和外界往来。中书令王球是名人子弟，非常超脱，颜延之仰慕他，王球也欣赏颜延之的才能，两人关系紧密，颜延之经济拮据，常常困乏，王球总是周济他。
English: As a result, Yan Yan lived behind closed doors and did not have any contact with the outside world for seven years. According to Chinese books, Wang Qiu was the son of a famous person and was very detached. Yan Yan admired him, and Wang Qiu also appreciated Yan Yan's talent. The two had a close relationship. Yan Yan was in financial difficulties and was often poor. Wang Qiu always gave him money.

古文：晋恭思皇后葬，应须百官，湛之取义熙元年除身，以延之兼侍中。邑吏送札，延之醉，投札于地曰： 颜延之未能事生，焉能事死！ 
现代文：晋朝恭思皇后安葬时，百官都参加了，刘湛因为颜延之义熙元年出仕做官，于是推举颜延之做侍中，有关单位给颜延之送信笺，颜延之把它扔到地上，大声说道： 我颜延之连活人都伺候不了，更不用说是死人了！ 
English: When the Empress Jinshi of the Jin Dynasty was buried, hundreds of officials attended. Liu Zhan, because Yan Yan served as an official in the first year of Yixi, then promoted Yan Yan to be an attendant. The relevant units sent Yan Yan a letter, Yan Yan threw it to the ground and said loudly: I can't even serve the living, let alone the dead!

古文：闲居无事，为《庭诰》之文。
现代文：颜延之闲居家中，无事时往往作些文章，其中有一篇《庭诰》。
English: Yan Yanzhi lives at home, and when he has nothing to do, he often writes articles, one of which is "Tuiyuan."

古文：今删其繁辞，存其正，著于篇。
现代文：现在删去里面的多余部分，留下精华，放在这里。
English: Now remove the excess inside, leaving the essence, and place it here.

古文：曰：《庭诰》者，施于闺庭之内，谓不远也。
现代文：文章说：《庭诰》一文，主要是说家务事而不是国家事。
English: The article said: "Tu Wei" is mainly about family affairs rather than national affairs.

古文：吾年居秋方，虑先草木，故遽以未闻，诰尔在庭。
现代文：我现在年岁已高，常怕某天去世，以至不能留名后世，所以作一篇《庭诰》的文章。
English: Now that I'm old, I'm often afraid of dying one day and not being able to leave my name to posterity, so I'm writing an article about the garden gnome.

古文：若立履之方，规鉴之明，已列通人之规，不复续论。
现代文：关于立身处世，劝诫世人，这些话已被圣人们所阐明，此处不必再加论述。
English: With regard to standing in the world and exhorting the world, these words have been expounded by the saints and need no further elaboration here.

古文：今所载咸其素畜，本乎性灵，而致之心用。
现代文：目前我说的写的都是平生多年思考的感受，完全出自我的真诚心性，只是用来指导我做人的指针。
English: At present, what I say and write are the feelings that I have been thinking about for many years in my life, completely from my sincere heart, and are just pointers to guide me as a person.

古文：夫选言务一，不尚烦密，而至于备议者，盖以网诸情非。
现代文：我喜欢简明扼要，不喜欢繁词富语，但有时又议论得过分详细，这只是为了约束不规范的地方。
English: I like to be concise, I don't like to be wordy, but sometimes I go into too much detail, and that's just to control the irregularities.

古文：古语曰得鸟者罗之一目，而一目之罗，无时得鸟矣。
现代文：正如古人说得好：获得一个鸟只要一个网口，但一个网口却得不到一只鸟，我的文章也是这样，挂一漏万，这是我做文章的想法。
English: As the ancients said: to get a bird, all you need is a mouth, but a mouth can't get a bird, and my article is the same.

古文：此其积意之方。道者识之公，情者德之私。
现代文：大道是公德，情感是私心，按道德行事，可以和神灵相通，让它们保佑自己。
English: The road is public morality, the emotion is selfishness, act according to morality, can communicate with the gods, let them bless themselves.

古文：公通，可以使神明加向；私塞，不能令妻子移心。
现代文：自私只会导致隔阂，却不能叫妻子儿女与自己同心。
English: Selfishness only leads to estrangement, but it cannot unite a wife and children with oneself.

古文：是以昔之善为士者，必捐情反道，合公屏私。
现代文：所以从前真正的君子，必须收敛情感，遵循道德，顺从公理，摒弃私欲。
English: Therefore, in the past, a true gentleman had to restrain his emotions, follow morality, obey justice, and abandon his selfish desires.

古文：寻尺之身，而以天地为心；数纪之寿，常以金石为量。
现代文：大丈夫长不满一丈，却把巨大的天地变成自己的心神；寿不过百十年，却希望与金石相终始。
English: A healthy man is dissatisfied with his height, but he has turned the vast world into his heart and soul; his life expectancy is only a hundred years, but he hopes to end up with the precious stone.

古文：观夫古先垂戒，长老余论，虽用细制，每以不朽见铭；缮筑末迹，咸以可久承志。
现代文：看些古人的箴言，近观当代名士的论述，即使是生活小节，往往追求万世之名，日常琐事，却竟在千古后流传。
English: Look at some of the proverbs of the ancients, look closely at the discussion of contemporary celebrities, even if it is a life section, it often pursues the name of the world, daily trivia, but it has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：况树德立义，收族长家，而不思经远乎。
现代文：况且是建立道德，成立名义，抚养家人，教育全族，难道可以不作长远的打算？
English: Moreover, is it possible not to make long-term plans for establishing morality, establishing a name, raising a family, and educating the whole family?

古文：曰身行不足遗之后人。
现代文：一种说法说自己的德行不值得留给后人。
English: A way of saying that one's virtues are not worth passing on to future generations.

古文：欲求子孝必先慈，将责弟悌务为友。
现代文：但是希望儿子孝顺必须自己慈爱；要求弟弟恭敬，必须自己友爱。
English: But if you want your son to be filial, you must be loving; if you want your brother to be respectful, you must be loving.

古文：虽孝不待慈，而慈固植孝；悌非期友，而友亦立悌。
现代文：虽然说孝顺不完全取决于慈爱，但慈爱往往培养出孝子，和顺不全在于友爱，但友好的兄长却引导恭谨的弟弟。
English: Although it is said that filial piety does not entirely depend on love, but love often brings up filial children, and obedience does not entirely lie in friendship, but a friendly elder brother guides a respectful younger brother.

古文：夫和之不备，或应以不和；犹信不足焉，必有不信。
现代文：如果一个人不和气，那么别人对他也不客气，好比不信任他人，别人也不信任他。
English: If a person is not friendly, then others are not polite to him, like not trusting others, others do not trust him.

古文：傥知恩意相生，情理相出，可使家有参、柴，人皆由、损。
现代文：假如知道恩爱相生，情感和道德相辅相承，便可以使每家都有曾参、子弓，人人都成子路、子贡。
English: If we know that kindness and love are born together, and emotions and morals are mutually reinforcing, we can make every family have Zengsang and Ziyu, and everyone will become a son and daughter.

古文：夫内居德本，外夷民誉，言高一世，处之逾默；器重一时，体之滋冲。
现代文：至于自身有很高的品行，外表却与人一般无异，谈论比当时人精彩，但却保持缄默，才德在众人之上，却谦恭待人，不因为自己能干而压迫别人，不因自己高明便讥讽他人。
English: As for himself, he has a high moral character, but his appearance is no different from that of ordinary people. He talks more brilliantly than people at that time, but he remains silent. His talent is superior to others, but he treats people with humility. He does not oppress others because of his ability, and he does not ridicule others because of his ability.

古文：不以所能干众，不以所长议物，渊泰入道，与天为人者，士之上也。若不能遗声，欲人出已，知柄在虚求，不可校得，敬慕谦通，畏避矜踞，思广监择，从其远猷，文理精出，而言称未达，论问宣茂，而不以居身，此其亚也。
现代文：保持谦虚退让的美德，与天地为一体，这才是最上等的君子。如不能扬名于世，希望别人引拔自己，知道达到目的的方法在于虚心学习，或知道成功不可侥幸实现，只有仔细地体会，逐渐通解，矜持沉稳，深思熟虑，择善而从，铭记深刻的教训，作文情理并茂，精彩迭出，名称尚未闻达，而询问广泛而明白，并且不骄傲，这也算得上是上等的。
English: If you can't make a name for yourself in the world, if you want others to promote you, if you know that the way to achieve your goal is to study with an open mind, or if you know that success can't be achieved by chance, only by carefully experiencing, gradually understanding, holding steady, thoughtful, choosing the best, bearing in mind the profound lessons, the composition is consistent, wonderful, the name has not yet been heard, and the inquiry is extensive and clear, and not proud, this is also considered to be superior.

古文：若乃闻实之为贵，以辩画所克，见声之取荣，谓争夺可获，言不出于户牖，自以为道义久立，才未信于仆妾，而曰我有以过人，于是感苟锐之志，驰倾觖之望，岂悟已挂有识之裁，入修家之诫乎！
现代文：至于羡慕富贵，竭尽全力钻营，追求名声的显赫，通过争夺而获得，言论不关大道，而以为道德具备，本领不能信服妻子儿女，却说才华过人，于是终日汲汲于利，欲壑难填，哪晓得已被贤人所厌弃，更违反古人戒律。
English: As for envying the rich and noble, trying their best to drill camp, pursuing the fame of the prominent, obtained through competition, the speech is not related to the avenue, but thinking that morality is available, the ability can not convince his wife and children, but said that the talent is superior to others, so he is absorbed in profit all day long, the desire is difficult to fill, which is known to have been rejected by the wise, and even more contrary to the precepts of the ancients.

古文：记所云 千人所指，无病自死 者也。
现代文：书中说的 被千人所指点，即使不病也会死亡。 
English: It says in the book that if you are pointed out by a thousand people, you will die even if you are not ill.

古文：行近于此者，吾不愿闻之矣。
现代文：如果像这样做人，我是连听也不愿意听的。
English: I don't even want to listen to people like that.

古文：凡有知能，预有文论，不练之庶士，校之群言，通才所归，前流所与，焉得以成名乎。
现代文：凡是有些知识的人，往往作些文章。如果不经过日常生活的锻炼，与朋友们的广泛切磋，大师们的引点，与先贤们的交流，怎么能写出真正好文章而成名呢？
English: People who have some knowledge often write some articles. If you do not go through the exercise of daily life, extensive exchanges with friends, quotes from masters, and exchanges with sages, how can you write a really good article and become famous?

古文：若呻吟于墙室之内，喧嚣于党辈之间，窃议以迷寡闻，妲语以敌要说，是短算所出，而非长见所上。
现代文：东拼西凑以糊弄无知的人，附会当时的偏见来抗拒真理，这是一种近视行为，而不是长远的打算。
English: It is a short-sighted act, not a long-term plan, to band together to deceive the ignorant and add to the prejudices of the time to resist the truth.

古文：适值尊朋临座，稠览博论，而言不入于高听，人见弃于众视，则慌若迷涂失偶，黡如深夜撤烛，衔声茹气，腆默而归，岂识向之夸慢，祗足以成今之沮丧邪！
现代文：如果恰巧遇到一些通人硕学在座，自己唾沫横飞，纵横议论，但却不被这些人所赞同。往往导致自己被舆论所否定，这样一来便仿佛像迷路的陌生人。
English: If you happen to meet some learned scholars in the audience, you will spit and discuss, but you will not be approved by these people. It often leads to being denied by public opinion, so you will be like a lost stranger.

古文：此固少壮之废，尔其戒之。
现代文：失去朋友们的信托，就如在暗夜中行走而没有灯光。
English: Losing the trust of friends is like walking in the dark without a light.

古文：夫以怨诽为心者，未有达无心救得丧，多见诮耳。此盖臧获之为，岂识量之为事哉！
现代文：自己则忍气吞声，难堪滚蛋，怎么会料到先前的吹牛，反而成为今日倒楣的引线。
English: On the other hand, he swallowed his pride and was embarrassed. How could he have expected the previous bragging, but instead became the leader of today's misfortune.

古文：是以德声令气，愈上每高，忿言怼议，每下愈发。
现代文：这是一种下等人的行为，而不是达人君子应该具有的，所以越是杰出的人，品行越高，平庸的人，品行越低。
English: This is the behavior of a low-class person, not that of an accomplished gentleman, so the more outstanding the person, the higher the conduct, and the more mediocre the person, the lower the conduct.

古文：有尚于君子者，宁可不务勉邪！
现代文：立志做一个君子，难道不可以勉励自己吗？
English: If you want to be a gentleman, shouldn't you encourage yourself?

古文：虽曰恆人，情不能素尽，故当以远理胜之，么算除之，岂可不务自异，而取陷庸品乎。
现代文：纵然是普通人，常常沉缅于常情之中，然而自己也应以高明的道理鞭策自己。聪明的思考洗去亵猥下流的品质，怎么能沉沦、庸俗而不追求上进呢？
English: Even if they are ordinary people, they often indulge in ordinary feelings, but they should also urge themselves with a high-level reason. Clever thinking washes away the obscene and vulgar qualities, how can they sink and be vulgar without pursuing progress?

古文：富厚贫薄，事之悬也。
现代文：富裕和贫穷是社会分化的结果。
English: Wealth and poverty are the result of social differentiation.

古文：以富厚之身，亲贫薄之人，非可一时同处。
现代文：如果自己富有，反而去亲近贫穷的人，并不是一下能相处得好的。
English: If you are rich, but get close to poor people, it is not easy to get along well.

古文：然昔有守之无怨，安之不闷者，盖有理存焉。
现代文：然而过去仍然有人能处理好这种关系，大概是有一种方法的缘故。
English: However, in the past, there were still people who were able to handle this relationship, probably because of a method.

古文：夫既有富厚，必有贫薄，岂其证然，时乃天道。
现代文：世界上有富足，必然就有贫困，不是偶然，而是必然的。
English: If there is abundance in the world, there will inevitably be poverty. This is not a coincidence, but an inevitability.

古文：若人皆厚富，是理无贫薄。
现代文：如果人人都富有，必定没有穷人，对吗？
English: If everyone is rich, there must be no poor people, right?

古文：然乎？
现代文：自然是不对。
English: Of course it's wrong.

古文：必不然也。若谓富厚在我，则宜贫薄在人。
现代文：如果说我一定要富有，别人一定要贫穷，能吗？
English: If I must be rich, others must be poor, right?

古文：可乎？
现代文：也不能。
English: The shopkeeper pleaded with Yang Wei Lang to open his eyes.

古文：又不可矣。道在不然，义在不可，而横意去就，谬生希幸，以为未达至分。
现代文：不一定如此，不一定能够，反而不安分守己，异想天开，我以为还是不明白天命的缘故。
English: Not necessarily so, not necessarily able, but on the contrary, anxious, self-restrained, whimsical, I thought I still did not understand the fate of fate.

古文：蚕温农饱，民生之本，躬稼难就，止以仆役为资，当施其情愿，庀其衣食，定其当治，递其优剧，出之休飨，后之捶责，虽有劝恤之勤，而无沾曝之苦。
现代文：养蚕和种田的人保持温饱，这两种职业是人们生存的根本方式，亲自去耕作不一定能养活一家人，仅用仆人长工作事，应该根据他们的情况，保证他们的穿衣和吃饭，规定他们的职责，划定他们的大小优劣等级，听话的赏赐，抗命的惩罚，虽然自己也很辛苦，却不经受日晒夜露的痛苦。
English: People who raise silkworms and farmers keep themselves fed and warm. These two occupations are the fundamental way of people's survival. It is not necessarily possible to feed a family by farming in person. Only with the help of a servant should work. According to their situation, they should ensure that they are dressed and fed, determine their duties, delineate their size and quality, reward obedience, and punish disobedience. Although they are very hard, they do not endure the pain of sun and dew.

古文：务前公税，以远吏让，无急傍费，以息流议，量时发敛，视岁穰俭，省赡以奉己，损散以及人，此用天之善，御生之得也。
现代文：一定要先交税收公粮，避开税吏们的纠缠，不留取额余的钱财，避免他人的议论，根据季节收进和卖出，根据年岁的丰歉，尽量减少自己的供奉，周济乡邻仆人，这是因时制宜，治理产业的方法。
English: It is necessary to pay the tax grain first, avoid the entanglement of the tax officials, do not keep the excess money, avoid the discussion of others, collect and sell according to the season, according to the year of the year, minimize their own offerings, and help the servants of the neighbors. This is a time-appropriate method of governing the industry.

古文：率下多方，见情为上；立长多术，晦明为懿。
现代文：管理下人的方法很多，洞见他们的心理是最高明的。
English: There are many ways to manage people, and insight into their psychology is the most intelligent.

古文：虽及仆妾，情见则事通；虽在畎亩，明晦则功博。
现代文：做长辈诸多方法中，了解隐藏的东西才了不起。
English: Of all the ways to be an elder, knowing what's hidden is the greatest.

古文：若夺其常然，役其烦务，使威烈雷霆，犹不禁其欲；虽弃其大用，穷其细瑕，或明灼日月，将不胜其邪。故曰： 孱焉则差，的焉则暗。 
现代文：即使和仆人女佣相处，了解他们的心情则相互理解，纵然在田地中间，懂得他们心事会事半功倍。如果违背他们的性情，命令做他们讨厌的，即使你发出雷霆般的愤怒，自己仍不能遏制他们的想法；如果利用他们的长处，苛求他们的缺点，即使如日月般的明白，自己也不能制住他们邪恶的心。所以俗话说： 孱焉则差，的焉则。 
English: Even if you get along with servants and maids, if you understand their feelings, you will understand each other; even if you are in the middle of a field, you will understand that their thoughts will be more effective. If you go against their temperament and order them to do what they hate, even if you emit thunderous anger, you still can't control their thoughts; if you use their strengths and demand their shortcomings, even if you understand them like the sun and the moon, you can't control their evil hearts. Therefore, as the saying goes: "It's bad to be lazy, it's better to be lazy."

古文：是以礼道尚优，法意从刻。
现代文：所以文治崇尚宽容，法制追求苛刻。
English: Therefore, the civil law advocates tolerance, while the legal system pursues harshness.

古文：优则人自为厚，刻则物相为薄。
现代文：对人宽容时，人们便变得厚道，对人刻薄时，人与人之间必然相互仇恨。
English: When people are tolerant, they become kind; when they are mean, they become hateful.

古文：耕收诚鄙，此用不忒，所谓野陋而不以居心也。
现代文：春种秋收虽然是琐事，按这样办便没有危害，这也是所谓雅人所说的鄙陋之事而不把它们放在心里的。
English: Although spring planting and autumn harvest are trifles, there is no harm in doing it this way, which is also what the so-called gentry say without taking them to heart.

古文：含生之氓，同祖一气，等级相倾，遂成差品，遂使业习移其天识，世服没其性灵。
现代文：普通的百姓，仍然是和我们一样的，同样受天地的气息而生长的，因为等级制度的缘故，于是分成无数阶层，于是使人们的习惯改变了他们的性格，上下差别改变他们的气质。
English: The common people are still the same as we are, growing up in the same atmosphere of heaven and earth. Because of the hierarchical system, they are divided into countless layers, so that people's habits change their personalities, and the differences between the top and bottom change their temperament.

古文：至夫愿欲情嗜，宜无间殊，或役人而养给，然是非大意，不可侮也。
现代文：人们的各种欲望，应该差不多，甚至有的人以使唤他人而生存。但是，任何人的基本判断，仍不能被否定，这些大是大非的道理，是不能改变的。
English: People's various desires should be similar, and some people even live for the sake of others. However, no one's basic judgment can still be denied, these are the principles of right and wrong, and cannot be changed.

古文：隅奥有灶，齐侯蔑寒，犬马有秩，管、燕轻饥。
现代文：祭祀的地方有祭物，齐侯可以忘掉寒冷，马圈狗圈里的保持秩序，管仲晏婴可以不在乎自己的饥饿。
English: There are offerings in the place of worship, Qi Hou can forget the cold, keep order in the horse ring and dog ring, and the baby can not care about his own hunger.

古文：若能服温厚而知穿弊之苦，明周之德；厌滋旨而识寡嗛之急，仁恕之功。
现代文：如果穿着厚实的衣服的人能体会穿破衣人的痛苦，便是圣人明白的心态。吃着山珍海味而能感觉吃不饱的人的困难，便算是有仁心和善意。
English: If a person wearing thick clothes can feel the pain of a person wearing torn clothes, it is a sage's understanding mentality. The difficulties of people who eat mountain and sea delicacies and can feel that they can't get enough are benevolence and goodwill.

古文：岂与夫比肌肤于草石，方手足于飞走者，同其意用哉！
现代文：这些人怎么能与那些没有同情心的同日而语呢？惩罚应避免过多，施恩应避免太少。
English: How can these people be compared with those who have no compassion? Too much punishment should be avoided, and too little kindness should be avoided.

古文：罚慎其滥，惠戒其偏。
现代文：惩罚太多会使惩罚失去威力，施恩太少还不如不要施恩。
English: If you punish too much, the punishment will lose its power. If you give too little, it is better not to give.

古文：罚滥则无以为罚，惠偏则不如无惠，虽尔眇末，犹扁庸保之上，事思反己，动类念物，则其情得，而人心塞矣。抃博蒱塞，会众之事，谐调哂谑，适坐之方，然失敬致侮，皆此之由。
现代文：虽然主人算不了什么角色，但毕竟管理一些下人。凡遇事都应反躬自问，要知自己下人都是人，这样便可以得到他们的拥护，否则便会失去他们的爱戴。至于射覆掷骰的场合，众人聚会的地方，笑话取乐的时候，应该保持规矩的态度。然而人们往往因为亲密太过招致别人的侮辱，也是这样的地方。
English: Although the master is not a role, he manages some subordinates after all. In any case, you should ask yourself, to know that your subordinates are people, so that you can get their support, otherwise you will lose their love. As for the occasion of throwing the dice, the place where people gather, and when jokes are made, you should maintain a disciplined attitude. However, people often invite insults from others because they are too close, and this is also the case.

古文：方其克瞻，弥丧端俨，况遭非鄙，虑将丑折。岂若拒其容而简其事，静其气而远其意，使言必诤厌，宾友清耳；笑不倾妩，左右悦目。
现代文：当他们在放肆的调笑中，顾不上尊严，一旦遭到别人的讥讽，又觉得丢了面子，倒不如不参加那些猥亵的谈话而少介入，静静地观看，保持距离，做到言语谨慎，不说下流话，微笑时不要前仰后合，这样便不会招致别人的厌恶。
English: When they do not care about their dignity in their impudent banter, once they are ridiculed by others and feel that they have lost face, it is better not to participate in those lewd conversations and intervene less, watch quietly, keep a distance, be careful with words, do not say dirty words, and do not smile when you smile, so you will not attract the disgust of others.

古文：非鄙无因而生，侵侮何从而入，此亦持德之管龠，尔其谨哉。
现代文：自然侮辱的事不会发生，触犯尊严的情况不会出现，这也是保持风度的一种方法。你们要认真记牢。
English: Naturally, insults will not occur, there will be no violation of dignity, and this is also a way to maintain good manners. You should seriously remember this.

古文：嫌惑疑心，诚亦难分，岂唯厚貌蔽智之明，深情怯刚之断而已哉。
现代文：有时猜疑也不免发生，真假很难分清，不仅只有忠厚的外表掩盖他的智慧，而且深厚的感情使果断的人犹豫。
English: Suspicions sometimes arise, and it is difficult to distinguish the true from the false; not only does a loyal exterior hide his wisdom, but deep feelings make the resolute person hesitate.

古文：必使猜怨愚贤，则颦笑入戾，期变犬马，则步顾成妖。
现代文：如果聪明人蠢人一同怀疑，那么人家的一个微笑也可能是不怀好意，如果怀疑狗和马的差别，那么反顾自己的身影，也会当成妖怪。
English: If a wise man and a stupid man are suspicious together, then a smile from the other person may also be ill-intentioned. If you doubt the difference between a dog and a horse, then you will look back at your own figure and see it as a monster.

古文：况动容窃斧，束装滥金，又何足论。
现代文：况且拾到斧头的人的表情好像偷了斧头，打扮得很好的装束可能藏有金块，这些就更不足一谈了。
English: Not to mention the fact that the person who found the axe looked as if he had stolen it, and that the well-dressed attire might have contained gold nuggets.

古文：是以前王作典，明慎议狱，而僭滥易意；硃公论璧，光泽相如，而倍薄异价。
现代文：所以古人立法，在判案时尤其谨慎，是因为此时容易主观臆断。汉朝朱博判断玉璧的真假，认为必须具有相应的光泽，但常会忽视其他的宝石。
English: Therefore, the ancients were particularly cautious when judging cases, because it was easy to make subjective judgments at this time. The Han Dynasty Zhu Bo judged the authenticity of jade, believing that it must have the corresponding luster, but often overlooked other gems.

古文：此言虽大，可以戒小。
现代文：这说的远了，但是可以作为求实的例子。
English: That's a long way off, but it's an example of trying to be realistic.

古文：游道虽广，交义为长。
现代文：交朋友的途径很多，以仁义相交才是真正的方法。
English: There are many ways to make friends, but the real way is to make friends with benevolence.

古文：得在可久，失在轻绝。久由相敬，绝由相狎。爱之勿劳，当扶其正性；忠而勿诲，必藏其枉情。
现代文：好的是长久不衰，坏的是轻易绝交，交往长久是因为相互尊重，断绝关系是因为太过亲密，爱护他应该不怕麻烦，应该发扬他的良好品质，忠实的朋友如果不规劝他，那么便会培养他的坏品德。
English: The good is long-lasting, the bad is easy to break off the relationship, the long-term relationship is because of mutual respect, the severance of the relationship is because it is too close, the love he should not be afraid of trouble, should carry forward his good qualities, loyal friends if they do not persuade him, then they will cultivate his bad character.

古文：辅以艺业，会以文辞，使亲不可亵，疏不可间，每存大德，无挟小怨。率此往也，足以相终。
现代文：以文会友，切磋技术，亲密而不致于猥亵，远离而不致于被隔阂，常常念别人的好处，忘掉他的缺点，用这样的方式交朋友，可以终身相好。
English: Make friends with literature, compete with technology, be intimate without being obscene, stay away without being estranged, often read the benefits of others, forget his shortcomings, make friends in this way, and you can be friends for life.

古文：酒酌之设，可乐而不可嗜，嗜而非病者希，病而遂眚者几。既眚既病，将蔑其正。
现代文：饮酒之所以存在，是为了快乐而不是为了满足嗜好，耽爱饮酒不出错误的人很少，出了错误，必然引起严重的后果，错误麻烦一起来，将使他的正气消融，如果想保持良好的德行，去掉狂悖的缺点，大概只有有限制地喝酒了。
English: The reason why drinking exists is for pleasure rather than to satisfy a hobby. There are very few people who indulge in drinking without making a mistake. If a mistake is made, it will inevitably cause serious consequences. If the mistake is troublesome, it will melt his righteous spirit. If you want to maintain good moral conduct and get rid of the shortcomings of madness, you probably only have to drink with restrictions.

古文：若存其正性，纾其妄发，其唯善戒乎？声乐之会，可简而不可违，违而不背者鲜矣，背而非弊者反矣。
现代文：音乐的存在，可以欣赏但不过度，过度而不走向它的反面的人很少，到了这一步出了问题人就完了。
English: There are very few people who can appreciate the existence of music without going overboard, without going to the opposite side of it. At this point, if there is a problem, the person is finished.

古文：既弊既背，将受其毁。必能通其碍而节其流，意可为和中矣。
现代文：既出问题又背离正道，可能遭致毁灭，只有了解他们的好坏之别而采取克制态度，才不致于有弊无利。
English: Only by understanding the difference between their good and bad and adopting a restrained attitude can we avoid harm and benefit.

古文：善施者岂唯发自人心，乃出天则。与不待积，取无谋实，并散千金，诚不可能。赡人之急，虽乏必先，使施如王丹，受如杜林，亦可与言交矣。
现代文：乐善好施虽然出自人心，更主要还是出于天性，在自己不充裕时施恩，舍弃该得到的，谋取不该得的，一下子散发千金之物，确实不容易，但是救人于困难之时，虽然自己很匮乏，也必须马上给予，达到像王丹那样施舍，像杜林那样坦然接受，才可以算得上真正的交情。
English: It is not easy to be charitable, even if it comes from the heart, and even more so if it comes from nature. It is not easy to be generous when you do not have enough, to give up what you should get, to get what you should not get, and to give away a lot of money all at once. However, to save someone in a time of trouble, even if you are very poor, you must give immediately. Only when you can give like Wang Dan and accept with equanimity like Du Lin, can you be considered a true friend.

古文：浮华怪饰，灭质之具；奇服丽食，弃素之方。
现代文：华丽而奇异的妆饰品，是损害人性的工具，怪诞的衣服奢侈的饮食是背离朴素的途径。
English: Extravagant and bizarre cosmetics are a tool to undermine human nature, bizarre clothes and extravagant food are a way to deviate from simplicity.

古文：动人劝慕，倾人顾盼，可以远识夺，难用近欲从。
现代文：举动令人羡慕，衣着令人向往，只会使有识之士疏远，但不能使亲昵的人顺从。
English: Admirable behaviour and desirable clothing will only alienate those with insight, but they cannot make those who are close to you conform.

古文：若睹其淫怪，知生之无心，为见奇丽，能致诸非务，则不抑自贵，不禁自止。
现代文：如果看奇异的东西，本来出于无心和自然，因为常见到奇异美丽的东西，往往招致邪恶的事情。如果不断抑制自己而能自尊自重，不禁止也能纠正。
English: If you look at strange things, originally out of carelessness and nature, because you often see strange and beautiful things, it often leads to evil things. If you constantly restrain yourself and can self-respect, you can correct it without prohibiting.

古文：夫数相者，必有之征，既闻之术人，又验之吾身，理可得而论也。
现代文：关于相命卜筮的方法，必须得到证明，先听术士们讲，然后在自己的身上检验，方可和他们进行论谈。
English: As for the method of divination, it must be proved by listening to the magicians and then testing it on oneself before engaging in a discussion with them.

古文：人者兆气二德，禀体五常。二德有奇偶，五常有胜杀，及其为人，宁无叶沴。
现代文：人秉天地阴阳二气，遵循五行的规律，阴阳有奇有偶，五行有克有生，人也是这样，难道没有这些特性吗？
English: People adhere to the principles of heaven and earth, yin and yang, and follow the rules of the five elements. Yin and yang have odd and even, and the five elements have good and bad. People are the same way. Don't they have these characteristics?

古文：亦犹生有好丑，死有夭寿，人皆知其悬天；至于丁年乖遇，中身迂合者，岂可易地哉！
现代文：好比人生有美有丑、有长寿有夭折。至于青年坎坷，中晚年腾达的情况，怎么能改变呢？
English: It is as if there is beauty and ugliness in life, longevity and premature death. As for the bumpy youth and the prosperous middle and old age, how can it be changed?

古文：是以君子道命愈难，识道愈坚。
现代文：所以有识之士论命是很难的，但却更能了解命运的本质。
English: Therefore, it is difficult for people with insight to talk about fate, but they are more able to understand the essence of fate.

古文：古人耻以身为溪壑者，屏欲之谓也。
现代文：古人把太多的欲望当成耻辱，无非是为了禁欲。
English: The ancients regarded too much desire as a disgrace, but only for the sake of abstinence.

古文：欲者，性之烦浊，气之蒿蒸，故其为害，则熏心智，耗真情，伤人和，犯天性。
现代文：欲望是人性的污浊之气，它一旦产生危害，会败坏心智，残耗精神，损坏人的平静，破坏人的天性。
English: Desire is the filth of human nature. Once it causes harm, it will corrupt the mind, wear out the spirit, damage people's peace, and destroy people's nature.

古文：虽生必有之，而生之德，犹火含烟而妨火，桂怀蠹而残桂，然则火胜则烟灭，蠹壮则桂折。
现代文：虽然人生都有欲望，但人生的特点，好比火中总含着烟雾，但烟雾又妨碍火的燃烧，桂树生虫但蠹虫不妨害桂林，如果火旺那么烟雾就少些，蛀虫壮健桂树便折断。
English: Although there are desires in life, but the characteristics of life, such as the fire always contains smoke, but the smoke also hinders the burning of fire, the cinnamon tree produces insects but the aphids may not harm Guilin, if the fire is strong, then the smoke will be less, the aphids will be strong and the cinnamon tree will be broken.

古文：故性明者欲简，嗜繁者气惛，去明即惛，难以生矣。
现代文：所以明达之士欲望寡少，欲望强的气质便昏聩，抛开清明之气息增加昏乱之性格，那便难以生存。
English: Therefore, those who are enlightened have few desires, and those who have strong desires are delirious. It is difficult to survive if one abandons the spirit of clarity and increases the character of confusion.

古文：其以中外群圣，建言所黜，儒道众智，发论是除。
现代文：所以中国外国的众多哲人，他们的观点都主张摒弃欲望，儒家道家的看法同样主张铲除嗜欲。
English: Therefore, many philosophers in China and abroad advocate the abandonment of desire, and the views of Confucianism and Taoism also advocate the eradication of desire.

古文：然有之者不患误深，故药之者恆苦术浅，所以毁道多而于义寡。
现代文：然而有欲望的人执迷不悟，以故拯救的人常常担心救治方法太不济事，所以残害人性的东西多助益的东西少。
English: However, people who have desires do not realize that they are clinging, and people who save people often worry that the treatment method is too useless, so there are more things that harm human nature and fewer things that help.

古文：顿尽诚难，每指可易，能易每指，亦明之末。
现代文：如果能明白每个意思，也算是有点聪明。恬淡和贪心是两种品格，敬畏和羡慕也是这样。
English: If you can understand each meaning, it is also a bit clever. Indifference and greed are two characters, so are awe and envy.

古文：廉嗜之性不同，故畏慕之情或异，从事于人者，无一人我之心，不以己之所善谋人，为有明矣。
现代文：处理与别人的关系，不要以小人之心度君子之腹，不因为自己的某些长处来苛求别人这样，便算得上明智了。
English: When dealing with others, it is wise not to treat them with the heart of a villain and the stomach of a gentleman, and not to be so demanding of others because of some of your own strengths.

古文：不以人之所务失我，能有守矣。己所谓然，而彼定不然，弈棋之蔽；悦彼之可，而忘我不可，学颦之蔽。
现代文：不因为别人的特长而丧失自信，可谓有操行了，自己认为对的，对方认为是错的，这是下棋的缺点；肯定对方的意见，却忘掉了自己的立场，是附和的弊端。
English: Not to lose self-confidence because of other people's strengths, it can be said that there is a practice, they think they are right, the other side thinks they are wrong, this is the disadvantage of playing chess; affirming the other side's opinion, but forgetting their own position, is the drawback of echoing.

古文：将求去蔽者，念通怍介而已。
现代文：如果想去掉你的缺点，只有多想想，多反省而已。
English: If you want to get rid of your shortcomings, all you have to do is think more and reflect more.

古文：流言谤议，有道所不免，况在阙薄，难用算防。
现代文：至于流言蜚语，即使是有道德的人也避免不了，况且是品德低下的人，就更难防止它们的袭击。
English: As for gossip, even a virtuous person cannot avoid it, and it is even more difficult for a person of low moral character to prevent their attacks.

古文：接应之方，言必出己。
现代文：对于谎言，必须好好修养道德。
English: When it comes to lying, we must cultivate good morals.

古文：或信不素积，嫌间所袭，或性不和物，尤怨所聚，有一于此，何处逃毁。
现代文：有的人经常不讲信用，往往流言集中到他头上。有的人与人关系极差，往往是别人怨恨的对象。有这任何一个缺点，哪里去逃避诽谤呢？
English: Some people are often untrustworthy, and rumors are often concentrated on him. Some people have a very poor relationship with others, and are often the object of others' resentment. If you have any of these shortcomings, where can you escape slander?

古文：苟能反悔在我，而无责于人，必有达鉴，昭其情远，识迹其事。
现代文：假如能自我反省，不要责怪人，必须明白其中的来去原因，明白其中的真伪，洞察其中的过程。
English: If you can self-reflect, do not blame others, you must understand the reasons for coming and going, understand the truth and falsehood, and understand the process.

古文：日省吾躬，月料吾志，宽默以居，洁静以期，神道必在，何恤人言。
现代文：每天三省自身，每月梳理自己的思想，宽心少语地过日子，使自己的品行高尚起来，神灵必然保佑他，还怕别人什么。
English: Every day, the three provinces themselves, combing their thoughts every month, living a life with a light heart and few words, and making their behavior noble, the gods will inevitably bless him, and he will be afraid of others.

古文：谚曰，富则盛，贫则病矣。
现代文：俗话说 富足则一切顺利，贫穷则有问题了 。
English: As the saying goes, if you are rich, everything will go well, but if you are poor, there will be problems.

古文：贫之病也，不唯形色粗黡，或亦神心沮废；岂但交友疏弃，必有家人诮让。
现代文：贫穷的结果，是外表粗黑，而且心神沮丧，不仅朋友疏远，而且亲人讽刺。
English: The result of poverty is a swarthy appearance and a depressed mind, not only alienated friends, but also ironic relatives.

古文：非廉深识远者，何能不移其植。
现代文：如果不是天性清廉或特别有见识的话，怎么能不改变他的性格！
English: How could he not change his character, unless he was naturally incorruptible, or particularly insightful!

古文：故欲蠲忧患，莫若怀古。
现代文：所以想去掉忧患，最好向古人看齐。
English: So if you want to get rid of your worries, it's best to look to the ancients.

古文：怀古之志，当自同古人，见通则忧浅，意远则怨浮，昔有琴歌于编蓬之中者，用此道也。
现代文：向古人学习，应该完全像古人一样。有通达的见识，便少忧患。如有深远的思想那么便使你的怨恨减少，古人有在茅屋草庐之中而能弹琴自乐的人，就是用这样办法。
English: If you learn from the ancients, you should be exactly like the ancients. If you have insight, you will have fewer worries. If you have far-reaching thoughts, then you will reduce your resentment. The ancients had people who could play the piano in the middle of the thatched grass, and that is how they used it.

古文：夫信不逆彰，义必出隐，交赖相尽，明有相照。
现代文：信任不明明白白，往往使别人产生误解，朋友之道关键在于真诚，了解对方的心理。
English: Unclear and unclear trust often leads to misunderstanding. The key to friendship is sincerity and understanding the other person's psychology.

古文：一面见旨，则情固丘岳；一言中志，则意入渊泉。
现代文：开门见山便会建立深厚的感情。话说到别人的心坎上，那么心意会彻底相通。
English: Open-mindedness will build deep feelings. When it comes to other people's hearts, then the hearts will be completely connected.

古文：以此事上，水火可蹈，以此托友，金石可弊。
现代文：用这方法对待上司，可以上刀山下火海，用这方法对待朋友，比金子石头更加长久。
English: If you treat your boss in this way, you can go up to the mountain and down to the sea of fire. If you treat your friend in this way, it will last longer than a gold stone.

古文：岂待充其荣实，乃将议报，厚之篚筐，然后图终。
现代文：怎么能等到给了别人一些好处，然后便要求报答，送他整筐整箩的东西，然后才叫真正的友谊呢？
English: How can you wait until you have given someone some benefits, and then ask for a reward, send him a whole basket of neat things, and then call it true friendship?

古文：如或与立，茂思无忽。
现代文：想真正做了一个像样的人，要细细想这些而不要忽视它们。
English: If you really want to be a decent person, you have to think about these things and not ignore them.

古文：禄利者受之易，易则人之所荣；蚕穑者就之艰，艰则物之所鄙。
现代文：接受国家的俸禄是很容易的，所以人们都以此为荣。获得绸丝谷物要克服许多困难，因为难所以人们都很轻视做这农活的人。
English: Receiving a state salary is easy, so people are proud of it. Obtaining silk grain requires overcoming many difficulties, because of which people despise those who do this agricultural work.

古文：艰易既有勤倦之情，荣鄙又间向背之意，此二涂所为反也。
现代文：一个难一个容易，一个贫苦一个安逸，而容易的光荣，艰难的可耻，这是贵贱贫富的差异。
English: One is difficult and one is easy, one is poor and one is comfortable, while easy is glorious and difficult is shameful. This is the difference between rich and poor.

古文：以劳定国，以功施人，则役徒属而擅丰丽；自埋于民，自事其生，则督妻子而趋耕织。必使陵侮不作，悬企不萌，所谓贤鄙处宜，华野同泰。
现代文：通过艰苦的斗争安定国家，建立卓越的功勋以拯救百姓，才可以使唤一般的民众，享受富贵荣华的生活。和多数百姓一样，自己终日操作，那么只能使唤妻子儿女，每月耕田织布而已，如果一定要消除压迫和侮辱，去掉下等人的觊觎之心，必须上等人和下等人各得其所，贵族与平民同样幸福。
English: Only by stabilizing the country through arduous struggles and establishing outstanding feats to save the people can the general public be able to enjoy a rich and glorious life. Like most people, if you operate all day, then you can only serve your wife and children, and weave cloth every month. If you must eliminate oppression and humiliation, and get rid of the jealousy of the lower class, the upper class and the lower class must have their own place, and the aristocrats and the commoners must be equally happy.

古文：人以有惜为质，非假严刑；有恆为德，不慕厚贵。有惜者，以理葬；有恆者，与物终。
现代文：人们如果有廉耻之心，便不需严厉的刑罚；保持不变的美德，便不需仰慕富贵，有廉耻之心的人，寿终正寝，保持美德的人，善始善终。
English: If people have a sense of shame, they do not need severe punishment; if they maintain constant virtue, they do not need to admire the rich and noble. People with a sense of shame will die at the end of their lives, and those who maintain virtue will have a good beginning and a good end.

古文：世有位去则情尽，斯无惜矣。
现代文：世上还有退休离职的人，便不照顾，这是不讲义气。
English: There are still people in the world who have retired and left their jobs, but they are not taken care of. This is not a sign of loyalty.

古文：又有务谢则心移，斯不恆矣。
现代文：又有官任结束便对他改变态度，这叫不守道德。
English: There was also a change of attitude towards him at the end of his term of office, which is called moral turpitude.

古文：又非徒若此而已，或见人休事，则勤蕲结纳，及闻否论，则处彰离贰，附会以从风，隐窃以成衅，朝吐面誉，暮行背毁，昔同稽款，今犹叛戾，斯为甚矣。
现代文：见人有好事，便百方巴结。
English: If something good happens to someone, they'll do everything they can to cover it up.

古文：又非唯若此而已，或凭人惠训，藉人成立，与人余论，依人扬声，曲存禀仰，甘赴尘轨。衰没畏远，忌闻影迹，又蒙之，毁之无度，心短彼能，私树己拙，自崇恆辈，罔顾高识，有人至此，实蠹大伦。
现代文：一到听说大事不好，便公开的表示和他没有关系，甚至于附会谣言陷害他人。预备毒计攻击他人。在人面前吹捧，背后便进行毁谤，以前对人说心里话，今天则完全是敌人是坏蛋，这太过分了。又不仅如此而已，有的是别人教育成长，依靠他人建功立业，借他人之推荐，通过他人显名扬声，依附他人而生长，先前能为他人赴汤蹈火，一旦别人失势便远远地避开，尽力掩饰与人家的联系，甚而抹杀他人的优点，肆意的诬陷他人，掩没他人的长处，显示自己的能力，吹嘘平庸的伙伴，否定贤明之人的见识，一个人到了这地步，确实是极大的败坏了道德。
English: As soon as they hear that something is not good, they openly say that they have nothing to do with him, and even set up others with the rumors of the affiliated association. Prepare poison plans to attack others. Tout in front of others, slander behind them. In the past, they spoke to people in their hearts, but today they are completely enemies and villains, which is too much. And not only that, some are educated by others, rely on others to build a career, borrow from others' recommendation, grow through others' fame, and depend on others. Previously, they could go through the fire for others. Once others lose their power, they will avoid far away, try their best to cover up their

古文：每思防避，无通闾伍。
现代文：应该提防这种人，不要和他们搞到一块。
English: You should beware of such people and not get involved with them.

古文：睹惊异之事，或无涉传；遭卒迫之变，反思安顺。若异从己发，将尸谤人，迫而又迕，愈使失度。
现代文：突然发现怪事，应该尽量避开，碰到紧急的事，应该想怎样缓和它们，如果是自己首先表示异议，将负诽谤他人的责任。失去常态违背他人的意思，那就更糟糕了。
English: If you suddenly find strange things, you should try to avoid them as much as possible. If you encounter urgent matters, you should think about how to alleviate them. If you are the first to object, you will be responsible for slandering others. Losing normalcy against the will of others is even worse.

古文：能夷异如裴楷，处逼如裴遐，可称深士乎。
现代文：如果能像裴楷那样坦然的面对怪事，像裴遐那样从容面对逼迫方可以称为杰出的人。
English: If you can face strange things as calmly as Pei Kai, and face persecution as calmly as Pei Yao, you can be called an outstanding person.

古文：喜怒者有性所不能无，常起于褊量，而止于弘识。
现代文：喜怒是人性固有的两面，它们的外露往往是气量不足，而喜怒不形于色，说明有深远的见识。
English: Happiness and anger are two aspects inherent to human nature. They often reveal a lack of stamina, while happiness and anger are invisible, indicating far-reaching insight.

古文：然喜过则不重，怒过则不威，能以恬漠为体，宽愉为器者，大喜荡心，微抑则定，甚怒烦性，小忍即歇。
现代文：高兴过分便不尊重，愤怒过分便失去威严。心神，稍稍抑制一下便会平静。发怒不利于身心，稍稍忍耐一下便会消除。
English: Excessive joy is disrespectful, excessive anger is undignified, a little restraint will calm the mind, anger is harmful to the body and mind, and a little patience will eliminate it.

古文：故动无愆容，举无失度，则物将自悬，人将自止。
现代文：能这样行事便没有错误，举动没有出轨，那么一切便会明白，你们将会平静安宁。
English: If you can act in this way, there will be no mistakes, there will be no deviations, then everything will be clear, you will be calm and peaceful.

古文：习之所变亦大矣，岂唯蒸性染身，乃将移智易虑。
现代文：习惯能大大地改变一个人，不仅改变你的性格和身体，而且改变人的智力和理智。
English: Habits can profoundly change a person, not only altering your personality and body, but also altering your intelligence and sanity.

古文：故曰： 与善人居，如入芷兰之室，久而不闻其芬。 
现代文：所以说： 和善人生活在一起，好比进了香草兰花的院子。
English: So he said, "Living with a good person is like entering a garden of fragrant orchids.

古文：与之化矣。 与不善人居，如入鲍鱼之肆，久而不知其臭 。
现代文：长久会不知道其中的芬香，是因为被它影响，和恶人生活在一起，好像到了卖咸鱼的集市，时间长了便不知道它的臭味，是和它一起同化的原因。
English: For a long time, you will not know the fragrance in it, because you are affected by it and live with the wicked. It is like going to the salted fish market, and you will not know its stench for a long time, which is the reason for assimilating with it.

古文：与之变矣。是以古人慎所与处。
现代文：所以古人特别注意和他们生活在一起的人的道德。
English: So the ancients paid special attention to the morals of the people with whom they lived.

古文：唯夫金真玉粹者，乃能尽而不污尔。
现代文：只有那些坚强的意志的人方能长久保持其品德而不被污染。
English: Only those who are strong-willed can maintain their character for a long time without being tainted.

古文：故曰： 丹可灭而不能使无赤，石可毁而不可使无坚。 
现代文：所以说： 红颜料可以消失，但总有一点痕迹。石头可以打碎但总有一点碎片。 
English: So: red paint can disappear, but there is always a trace; stone can be broken, but there is always a fragment.

古文：苟无丹石之性，必慎浸染之由。
现代文：如果没有红颜料和石子的坚强特性，必须在细微的地方加以注意。
English: If there is no red pigment and the stone does not have strong characteristics, it is necessary to pay attention to the details.

古文：能以怀道为人，必存从理之心。
现代文：能有志于道的探索，应该保持遵循道德的心态。
English: To be able to aspire to the exploration of Tao, one should maintain the mentality of following morality.

古文：道可怀而理可从，则不议贫，议所乐尔。或云： 贫何由乐？ 
现代文：既遵从道德，便不会讥笑贫穷，而只谈论那些有意义的东西，有人说： 贫穷为什么快乐？ 
English: Moral people do not laugh at poverty, but only talk about the things that are meaningful. Some people say, "Why is poverty happy?"

古文：此未求道意。
现代文：这说明还未得道。
English: This has yet to be proven.

古文：道者，瞻富贵同贫贱，理固得而齐。
现代文：对于胸怀道德的人来说：富贵和贫贱在他看来都一样。
English: For the moral man, rich and poor are the same to him.

古文：自我丧之，未为通议，苟议不丧，夫何不乐。
现代文：本来是一样。丧失美德，不是通达高尚的人，假如保持这些美德那便时时刻刻快乐了。
English: It is always the same. It is not the man who attains nobility who loses his virtues, but if he keeps them, he will be happy at all times.

古文：或曰，温饱之贵，所以荣生，饥寒在躬，空曰从道，取诸其身，将非笃论，此又通理所用。
现代文：有人说，温暖吃饱的可贵，是因为他们能使生命生长不息，饥饿寒冷正侵扰一个人，谈论遵守道德是句空话，从自身的遭遇出发，却又远远背离真理，这便是世间的习惯。
English: Some people say that warmth and fullness are precious because they can make life grow and grow, hunger and cold are bothering a person, talking about abiding by morality is empty talk, starting from their own experiences, but far from the truth, this is the habit of the world.

古文：凡养生之具，岂间定实，或以膏腴夭性，有以菽藿登年。
现代文：凡是美好的物质，怎么会是因为它的不同而确定它的好坏，有的人吃山珍海味而早死，有的人吃菽麦杂谷而长寿。
English: All beautiful substances, how can it be because of its difference and determine its good or bad, some people eat mountain and sea food and die early, some people eat buckwheat and live long.

古文：中散云，所足与，不由外。是以称体而食，贫岁愈嗛；量腹而炊，丰家余餐。
现代文：稽康说，内心世界充实时，不在乎外在的暖饱，所以根据人的食量来吃饭，歉收的年岁吃得很少，丰收的年岁便会顿顿有余，并不是粮食多少，而是因为年岁的丰收或不足。
English: Jingkang said that the inner world is full and does not care about external warmth and satiety, so people eat according to their food intake. In years of poor harvest, they eat very little, and in years of good harvest, they will have more than enough, not because of how much grain there is, but because of years of good harvest or lack of it.

古文：非粒实息耗，意有盈虚尔。况心得复劣，身获仁富，明白入素，气志如神，虽十旬九饭，不能令饥，业席三属，不能为寒。岂不信然！
现代文：况且是具有美好的理想，拥有安仁富足的快乐，明白天下万物，如神明般的安详，纵然十天吃九餐，也不能叫他觉得饥饿，冬月以席子为铺垫，也不会觉得寒冷，难道不是如此吗？
English: Moreover, he has a beautiful ideal, has the happiness of peace and abundance, understands all things in the world, and is as peaceful as a god. Even if he eats nine meals a day for ten days, it cannot make him feel hungry. With a mat as a cushion, the winter moon will not feel cold. Isn't that so?

古文：且以己为度者，无以自通彼量。
现代文：所以完全从个人的感觉出发，无法感受身外的广大的世界的丰富。
English: Therefore, starting entirely from personal feelings, it is impossible to feel the richness of the vast world outside oneself.

古文：浑四游而干五纬，天道弘也。
现代文：东西南北广大无边，金木水火土循循不息，是天的伟大。
English: The vast and boundless east, west, north and south, and the continuous movement of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, are the greatness of heaven.

古文：振河海而载山川，地道厚也。
现代文：黄河东海奔腾不息，山川运动不止，是地的伟大；人的活动的世界必须遵循道德，是人的伟大。
English: The East Sea of the Yellow River is rushing ceaselessly, the movement of mountains and rivers is incessant, which is the greatness of the earth; the world of human activities must follow morality, which is the greatness of man.

古文：一情纪而合流贯，人灵茂也。昔之通乎此数者，不为剖判之行，必广其风度，无挟私殊，博其交道，无怀曲异。故望尘请友，则义士轻身，一遇拜亲，则仁人投分。
现代文：所以古人深深明白天地人的人，不在个人的小聪明上作文章，而与天地万物同呼吸，不抱着个人的陈见不放，而广泛的学习他人的长处和优点，心中不装着浅薄的见识而看齐大道。对于像潘岳那样，是不值得崇尚的，但一碰到有道德之士，则倾心归顺。
English: Therefore, the ancients deeply understood that the people of heaven and earth do not dwell on the small wisdom of individuals, but breathe with all things in heaven and earth, do not hold personal stereotypes, but extensively study the strengths and merits of others, and do not hold shallow insights in their hearts and look at the road. For people like Pan Yue, they are not worthy of admiration, but when they encounter a moral person, they are inclined to submit.

古文：此伦序通允，礼俗平一，上获其用，下得其和。
现代文：这是君臣父子的大理，礼法所规范的东西。尊贵者拥有他们可以支配下人，做下人的可以获得上位者的赞赏。
English: This is the great principle of the father and son of a prince and a courtier, something that is regulated by etiquette. Those who are respected have something they can dominate their subordinates, and those who are subordinates can gain the appreciation of those above them.

古文：世务虽移，前休未远，人之适主，吾将反本。
现代文：世界不断发展，但真理是不会改变的，人家以安逸为目标，我则追求古代的道德。
English: The world is constantly developing, but the truth will not change. People aim for comfort, while I pursue ancient morality.

古文：三人至生，暂有之识，幼壮骤过，衰耗骛及。
现代文：人生在世，总是有意识的，从少年到成年，迅速飞过，之后衰老疾病又迅速来临。
English: Life in the world, always conscious, from adolescence to adulthood, quickly flew by, and then the aging disease came quickly.

古文：其间夭郁，既难胜言，假获存遂，又云无几。
现代文：这中间夭折短命的不胜枚举，纵然活下来，也没有几多。
English: There are countless examples of short-lived cranes that died prematurely, and even if they survived, they were few and far between.

古文：柔丽之身，亟委土木，刚清之才，遽为丘壤，回遑顾慕，虽数纪之中尔。
现代文：脆弱的生命，迅速地与土草相伴，卓越的才干，迅速地消失黄土之下。回顾人生的经历，也不过几十年。
English: Fragile life, quickly accompanied by soil and grass, outstanding talent, quickly disappearing under the loess. Looking back on life's experience, it's only a few decades.

古文：以此持荣，曾不可留，以此服道，亦何能平。
现代文：在这样的迅速人生中，想保持荣华，那是不能永久的。想彻底的通达大道，也是不那么容易的。
English: In such a fast-paced life, if you want to maintain your glory, it can't be permanent. If you want to completely reach the avenue, it's not so easy.

古文：进退我生，游观所达，得贵为人，将在含理。
现代文：在人生的前前后后几十年，做一个现实的人，最关键的在于心怀真理保持道德。
English: In the decades before and after life, to be a realistic person, the most important thing is to maintain morality with the truth.

古文：含理之贵，惟神与交，幸有心灵，义无自恶，偶信天德，逝不上惭。
现代文：第一是自己的心灵的纯洁，其次是人际关系的和谐，有纯洁的心灵，便不至于陷入罪恶之中，信仰道德，便不至于惭愧。
English: The first is the purity of one's own soul, and the second is the harmony of interpersonal relationships. If you have a pure soul, you will not fall into sin, and if you believe in morality, you will not be ashamed.

古文：欲使人沈来化，志符往哲，勿谓是赊，日凿斯密。
现代文：要是希望人们接受这样的教育，使他的志向符合圣人的教导，努力去进取，那么便一日胜似一日，渐渐接近大道。
English: If you want people to receive such an education, to make his aspirations consistent with the teachings of the saints, and strive to make progress, then every day is better than the day, gradually approaching the avenue.

古文：著通此意，吾将忘老，如固不然，其谁与归。
现代文：如果明白这些道理，我们将忘记老之将至，如果不了解这些，你又将到哪里去呢？
English: If you understand these principles, we will forget the old age, if you do not understand these, where will you go?

古文：值怀所撰，略布众修；若备举情见，顾未书一。
现代文：我偶然写到这些，粗略地敷陈一下我的观点，如果以严格的标准要求，那是远远不够的。
English: I write this by accident, and a cursory exposition of my views, if held to a rigorous standard, would be woefully inadequate.

古文：赡身之经，别在田家节政；奉终之纪，自著燕居毕义。
现代文：维持生命的办法，在于田地的耕耘，勤俭节约。保持一生的完美，便是遵循古代的教导。
English: The way to sustain life is to cultivate the fields, be thrifty and frugal. To maintain a perfect life is to follow the ancient teachings.

古文：刘湛诛，起延之为始兴王浚后军谘议参军，御史中丞。
现代文：刘湛被杀，朝廷调动颜延之当始兴王刘浚后军咨议参军，兼任御史中丞。
English: When Liu Zhan was killed, Yan Yan was transferred by the imperial court to join the army at the request of Liu Jun, the Prince of Shixing. He also served as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：在任纵容，无所举奏。
现代文：在任期中，他无所事事，任意而行，没有弹劾任何一个人。
English: During his term, he did nothing, acted arbitrarily, and did not impeach anyone.

古文：迁国子祭酒、司徒左长史，坐启买人田，不肯还直。
现代文：又升迁国子祭酒和司徒府左长史。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Kuniko Matsuri Sake and the post of Shitofu Left Senior Historian.

古文：尚书左丞荀赤松奏之曰： 求田问舍，前贤所鄙。延之唯利是视，轻冒陈闻，依傍诏恩，拒捍余直，垂及周年，犹不毕了，昧利苟得，无所顾忌。
现代文：因为买了他人的田不肯还人家的钱，尚书左丞荀赤松为此写了一个奏疏控告颜延之说： 买田置屋，是圣贤鄙视不做的，颜延之一心谋利，肆意冒充官府的名义，依靠皇上诏书的威望，买别人的田地却拒绝付钱，已一年了，仍不能解决，通过不正当手段图谋好处，肆意妄为。
English: Because he bought someone else's farmland and refused to return the money, Shoshu Zuojo and Akamatsu wrote a complaint against Yan Yan saying: "Buying farmland and setting up a house is something that sages despise and do not do. Yan Yan is one of those who are intent on making a profit, wantonly impersonating the name of the government, relying on the prestige of the Emperor's edict, buying someone else's farmland but refusing to pay. It has been a year, but it still cannot be resolved. He is trying to make a profit through improper means and acting wantonly.

古文：延之昔坐事屏斥，复蒙抽进，而曾不悛革，怨诽无已。
现代文：颜延之当年因某些事被放归家居，又被重新推荐出来，竟然一点也不悔改，不断怨恨和诽谤他人。
English: In the past, Yan Yanzhi had been expelled for a crime and promoted again, but she did not repent and kept complaining and slandering.

古文：交游阘茸，沈迷曲蘖，横兴讥谤，诋毁朝士。仰窃过荣，增愤薄之性；私恃顾盼，成强梁之心。外示寡求，内怀奔竞，干禄祈迁，不知极已，预燕班觞，肆骂上席。
现代文：和下贱的人相友好，沉溺于俗利之中，反而诽谤朝廷大臣，借助朝廷给予的光荣，更增怨恨刻薄的德性，凭着皇上的恩宠，养成他横行罪行的习惯，表面上装得好像很恬淡，实际上满肚子利欲熏心，妄图升官发财，无休无止，侥幸被皇上请来同席，却肆意地辱骂尊崇的客人。
English: He befriended the lowly, indulged in profiteering, and instead slandered the imperial minister. With the help of the glory given by the imperial court, he increased his resentment and vitriolic virtue. With the emperor's grace, he developed his habit of rampant crime. On the surface, he pretended to be very dull, but in fact, he was full of greed and greed. He tried to get promoted and get rich, endlessly. He was lucky enough to be invited by the emperor, but he abused the respected guests.

古文：山海含容，每存遵养，爱兼雕虫，未忍遐弃，而骄放不节，日月弥著。
现代文：我听说孟子对于名声过于完善，感到耻辱。况且颜延之的名声不是靠自己的才德，而是自我吹嘘所致。
English: I heard that Mencius was ashamed of his reputation for being too perfect, and that Yan Yan's fame was not due to his talent, but to his boasting.

古文：臣闻声问过情，孟轲所耻，况声非外来，问由己出，虽心智薄劣，而高自比拟，客气虚张，曾无愧畏，岂可复弼亮五教，增曜台阶。请以延之讼田不实，妄干天听，以强凌弱，免所居官。 
现代文：虽然他的见识道德不怎么样，但每每夸重自己，自我标榜，一点也不惭愧，怎么能让这种人掌管礼教秩序，给朝廷带来光荣？我请求因颜延之买田诉讼不公的事实，侵犯圣朝的劣迹，凌辱小民的霸道，免去他现有的官职。 
English: Although his knowledge and morals are not good, he always exaggerates himself, flaunts himself, and is not at all ashamed. How can such a person be allowed to control the order of etiquette and bring glory to the imperial court? I request that he be removed from his current official position due to the fact that Yan Yan's lawsuit to buy land is unfair, the bad deeds of violating the Holy Dynasty, and the domineering way of humiliating the common people.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇上下诏书同意荀的控告。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：复为秘书监，光禄勋，太常。
现代文：不久他又转官秘书监，再转光禄勋，又转太常。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of secretary-supervisor, then to the post of honorable mention, and then to the post of superintendent.

古文：时沙门释慧琳，以才学为太祖所赏爱，每召见，常升独榻，延之甚疾焉。因醉白上曰： 昔同子参乘，袁丝正色。此三台之坐，岂可使刑余居之。 
现代文：当时有个和尚叫慧琳的，因为学问见识被文帝刘义隆宠爱，每次召见时，慧琳都被请到专门为他设置的床席上，颜延之非常嫉妒他，一次利用自己喝醉的机会对文帝说： 当年宦官赵淡和文帝同乘一车，袁盎庄严地进谏，这是三公的座位，怎么能让被惩处的人呆在这里。 
English: At that time, there was a monk named Hui Lin, who was favored by Emperor Wen Liu Yilong because of his knowledge and insight. Every time he was summoned, Hui Lin was invited to a special bed seat set up for him. Yan Yanzhi was very jealous of him, and once used the opportunity to get drunk to say to Emperor Wen: At that time, the eunuch Zhao Tan and Emperor Wen were riding in the same car, and Yuan Ang solemnly entered the eunuch's seat. This was the seat of the three kings. How could the punished person stay here?

古文：上变色。
现代文：文帝顿时颜色大变，勃然大怒。
English: The Emperor's face changed with anger.

古文：延之性既褊激，兼有酒过，肆意直言，曾无遏隐，故论者多不知云。
现代文：颜延之性格偏激，加上常常喝酒过度，任意放纵，半点也不加掩饰，所以舆论评价极低。
English: Yan Yan's personality is extreme, plus he often drinks excessively, indulges in any way, and does not hide anything, so the public opinion evaluation is extremely low.

古文：居身清约，不营财利，布衣蔬食，独酌郊野，当其为适，傍若无人。
现代文：然而他平常生活俭朴，不汲汲于财物，穿着粗布衣裳，吃清淡的饭菜，有时一个人独自在野外自斟自饮，当他感到舒服时，好像周围没有任何人。
English: However, he usually lives a frugal life, does not care about possessions, wears coarse clothes, eats light meals, and sometimes drinks alone in the field. When he feels comfortable, it seems that there is no one around.

古文：二十九年，上表自陈曰： 臣闻行百里者半于九十，言其末路之难也。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，颜延之递上一个奏疏请求： 贱臣我听说即使走了九十里路，距到达百里的目标仍只算走了一半。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Yan Yanzhi submitted a request for a memorial service: My humble minister, I heard that even if you walk ninety miles, you are still only halfway to reaching the goal of one hundred miles.

古文：愚心常谓为虚，方今乃知其信。
现代文：正是说的最后一段的困难。我私下认为这话有些偏颇，现在才知道说得确实正确。
English: It's the difficulty of that last sentence, which I privately thought was a bit of a stretch, that I now know to be true.

古文：臣延之人薄宠厚，宿尘国言，而雪效无从，荣牒增广，历尽身雕，日叨官次，虽容载有途，而妨秽滋积。
现代文：贱臣我颜延之才能低劣，以前曾违犯制度和法律，但一直没有机会洗刷，反而不断的升官。岁月流逝，生命终有终极。
English: I, Yan Yan, a low-ranking vassal with inferior talent, had previously violated the system and laws, but had never had the opportunity to be purged. Instead, I was constantly promoted. The years pass, and life eventually has an end.

古文：早欲启请余算，屏蔽丑老。但时制行及，归慕无赊，是以腆冒愆非，简息干黩耗歇难支，质用有限，自去夏侵暑，入此秋变，头齿眩疼，根痼渐剧，手足冷痹，左胛尤甚。
现代文：每天做不称职的官，居然能被皇上容允，但却更不利于我的道德，贱臣我早就想请求皇上允许我的打算，允许无能的我退休归家。但朝廷严格执行制度而使我退休没有机会，所以我每日还在做不称职的工作，干侵害好风气的事情。我的身体日益衰弱，有时甚至难以支持。体力有限，从去年夏初到今年早秋，牙齿疼痛，头脑发昏，老病越来越多。手和脚的老伤口也重新发作，特别是左边肩膀动也动不得。
English: Being an incompetent official every day was tolerated by the emperor, but it was even more detrimental to my morals. I had long wanted to ask the emperor to allow my plan, to allow me to retire to my home. But the court strictly enforced the system and there was no chance for me to retire, so I was still doing incompetent work every day, doing things that violated good morals. My body was getting weaker and weaker, sometimes even difficult to support. My physical strength was limited, from the beginning of last summer to the early autumn of this year, my teeth hurt, my head was dizzy, and old diseases were increasing. Old wounds on my hands and feet also recurred, especially on

古文：素不能食，顷向减半。本犹赖服，比倦悸晚，年疾所催，顾景引日。
现代文：向来我食量不大，最近也只有平常的一半，本来人是靠的温暖和饮食维持生命，但最近常常疲倦衰弱到半夜，年老多病左右夹攻。
English: I have always eaten a small amount of food, and recently only half of the usual amount. Originally, people relied on warmth and diet to maintain life, but recently I have often been tired and weak until midnight, and I am old and sick.

古文：臣班叨首卿，位尸封典，肃祗朝校，尚恧匪任，而陵庙众事，有以疾怠，宫府觐慰，转阙躬亲。
现代文：我不过是苟延岁月而已。
English: I'm just getting on with it.

古文：息庸微，过宰近邑，回泽爰降，实加将监，乞解所职，随就药养。
现代文：贱臣侥幸的做了太常这么重要的官，实际上是不配的。整顿朝延礼仪和文学风教，我很惭愧是不胜任的，况且管理皇陵宗庙祭祀这么重要的大事，可能因为病情所误，皇帝朝见之礼的顺利进行，可能有所欠缺。
English: I am ashamed to say that I am not competent to rectify the etiquette and literary customs of the Joseon Dynasty. Moreover, the management of such an important event as the rituals of the Imperial Mausoleum and Imperial Family Temple may be lacking due to my illness, and the smooth progress of the Imperial Audience may be lacking.

古文：伏愿圣慈，特垂矜许。禀恩明世，负报冥暮，仰企端闱，上恋罔极。 
现代文：我时时想望到朝廷，时时想念皇上，永远，永远！ 文帝没同意，第二年颜延之才退休。
English: I always wanted to visit the Imperial Court, I always missed the Emperor, forever and ever! Emperor Wen did not agree, and Yan Yan did not retire until the following year.

古文：不许。明年致事。元凶弑立，以为光禄大夫。
现代文：刘邵杀文帝的时候，颜延之被迫做光禄大夫。
English: When Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen, Yan Yanzhi was forced to become a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：先是，子竣为世祖南中郎谘议参军。
现代文：这之前，他的儿子颜竣当武陵王刘骏的南中郎咨议参军。
English: Prior to this, his son Yan Shun, who was the southern middle son of the king of Wuling, Liu Bei, proposed to join the army.

古文：及义师入讨，竣参定密谋，兼造书檄。
现代文：当武陵王率军向建康讨伐刘邵，颜竣参加了这个活动，并管理所有的文书工作。
English: When Wuling Wang led the army to Jiankang to fight Liu Shao, Yan Shun participated in this activity and managed all the paperwork.

古文：劭召延之，示以檄文，问曰： 此笔谁所造？ 延之曰： 竣之笔也。 
现代文：刘邵把颜延之请来，给颜延之看檄文，并问颜延之 这文章是哪个写的 ，颜延之回答说： 是颜竣写的。 
English: Liu Shao invited Yan Yan to come and read the article to Yan Yan, and asked Yan Yan who wrote the article, Yan Yan replied: Yan Yan wrote it.

古文：又问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：又问他： 你怎么知道是他写的？ 
English: He also asked: How do you know?

古文：延之曰： 竣笔体，臣不容不识。 
现代文： 颜竣的笔迹，我不可能不熟悉。 
English: Yan Jun's handwriting, I can't help but be familiar with it.

古文：劭又曰： 言辞何至乃尔。 
现代文：刘邵又问： 他的话怎么说得这么绝？ 
English: Liu Shao also asked: How did he say such an extreme thing?

古文：延之曰： 竣尚不顾老父，何能为陛下。 
现代文：延之说： 颜竣连我也不顾，怎么能站在陛下一边。 
English: Yan Zhen said: Yan Zhen does not even care about me, how can he stand on the side of His Majesty.

古文：劭意乃释，由是得免。
现代文：刘邵心中的疑惑这才打消，颜延之方才保住性命。
English: Only then did Liu Xuan's anger dissipate, and he was able to avoid disaster.

古文：世祖登阼，以为金紫光禄大夫，领湘东王师。
现代文：宋孝武帝即位，让颜延之做金紫光禄大夫，兼任湘东王刘的师傅。
English: When Emperor Song Xiaowu ascended the throne, he made Yan Yan the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the master of Liu, the king of eastern Hunan.

古文：子竣既贵重，权倾一朝，凡所资供，延之一无所受，器服不改，宅宇如旧。常乘羸牛笨车，逢竣卤簿，即屏往道侧。
现代文：他儿子颜竣掌握大权，在朝廷中权势赫赫，凡是颜竣送给的物品，颜延之一点也不接受，家用器物，身上衣着以及住宅和过去一样，上朝时常坐老牛拖的破车，每逢颜竣出巡，便躲到道路旁边。
English: His son Yan Shun wields great power and wields great influence in the imperial court. Yan Yan did not accept any of the items given to him by Yan Shun. As in the past, Yan Yan did not accept household utensils, clothing, and houses. During the last dynasty, Yan Shun often rode in a broken-down car pulled by an old ox. Whenever Yan Shun went on a tour, he would hide by the side of the road.

古文：又好骑马，遨游里巷，遇知旧辄据鞍索酒，得酒必颓然自得。
现代文：此外，他还很喜欢骑马，在大街小巷游荡，遇到老朋友便在马背上要酒喝。喝了酒便随处卧倒。
English: In addition, he also likes to ride horses, roam the streets and alleys, and when he meets old friends, he asks for a drink on horseback. When he drinks, he falls down everywhere.

古文：常语竣曰： 平生不喜见要人，今不幸见汝。 
现代文：他常常对颜竣说： 我一贯不喜欢与大人物相见，现在不幸见到了你。 
English: He often said to Yan Shunlu: I have always disliked meeting important people, and now, unfortunately, I have met you.

古文：竣起宅，谓曰： 善为之，无令后人笑汝拙也。 
现代文：颜竣修建住宅，颜延之对他说： 好好地做，不要叫后世人见了，笑话你的屋做得不好。 
English: When Yan Chun was building a house, Yan Yan Zhi said to him, "Do it well, don't let the world see that your house is not well done.

古文：表解师职，加给亲信三十人。
现代文：他上书请求解除自己的湘东王刘师傅的职务，但孝武帝反而增加了三十个仆人伺候他。
English: He petitioned for the dismissal of Liu Shifu, the king of eastern Hunan, but Emperor Xiaowu instead increased the number of his servants by thirty.

古文：孝建三年，卒，时年七十三。
现代文：孝建三年，颜延之逝世，享年七十二岁。
English: Three years after Xiao Jian, Yan Yan passed away at the age of seventy-two.

古文：追赠散骑常侍、特进，金紫光禄大夫如故。
现代文：之后朝廷又赠给他散骑常侍官职和特进的职位。另外金紫光禄大夫仍旧保存。
English: Later, the imperial court also gave him the post of horseback riding attendant and the post of special envoy. In addition, the gold and purple doctor's robe was still preserved.

古文：谥曰宪子。
现代文：谥号叫宪子。
English: Her nickname is "Hoshi."

古文：延之与陈郡谢灵运俱以词彩齐名，自潘岳、陆机之后，文士莫及也，江左称颜、谢焉。
现代文：颜延之和陈郡谢灵运都以文章同著大名，从晋朝潘岳、陆机之后，其他文人是远远不及的，南朝称他们为 颜谢 ，他作的文章在社会上广为流传。
English: Yan Yan Zhi and Chen County Xie Lingyun are both famous for their articles. From the Jin Dynasty, after Pan Yue and Lu Ji, other writers are far behind. The Southern Dynasty called them Yan Xie, and his articles were widely circulated in society.

古文：所著并传于世。竣别有传。竣弟测，亦以文章见知，官至江夏王傅义恭大司徒录事参军，蚤卒。
现代文：颜竣另有传记，颜竣的弟弟颜测，也因文章著名，官职做到江夏王刘义恭的大司徒、录事参军，早死。
English: Yan Shun has another biography. Yan Shun's younger brother, Yan Xu, is also famous for his articles. He became the official disciple of Jiangxia King Liu Yigong, joined the army, and died early.

古文：太宗即位，诏曰： 延之昔师训朕躬，情契兼款。
现代文：宋明帝登位之后，下诏称： 颜延之当年教育我，对我很好，又很亲密。
English: After Emperor Song Ming ascended the throne, he issued the following edict: Yan Yan, who educated me that year, was very kind to me and very close.

古文：前记室参军、济阳太守伏勤蕃朝，绸缪恩旧。
现代文：前任记室参军，汉阳太守颜翊服侍殷勤，对亲戚朋友很关心，可以提升为中书侍郎。 
English: The predecessor of the record office joined the army, Hanyang Taizhu Yanqi served diligently, was very concerned about relatives and friends, and could be promoted to the middle secretary.

古文：可擢为中书侍郎。 ，延之第三子也。
现代文：颜翊是颜延之的第三个儿子。
English: Yan Yan is Yan Yan's third son.

