古文：戊寅十二月初一日在官庄茶房。
现代文：戊寅年十二月初一日在官庄茶房。
English: On the first day of December in the year of Wu Yin, at the tea house of the official residence.

古文：时顾仆病虽少瘥，而孱弱殊甚，尚不能行。
现代文：此时顾仆的病虽然稍稍痊愈，但屏弱得十分厉害，还不能行走。
English: At this time, although Gu Min's illness was slightly cured, the screen was very weak and he could not walk.

古文：欲候活佛寺僧心法来，同向黑盐井，迂路两日，往姚安府，以此路差可行，不必待街子也。
现代文：打算等候活佛寺的僧人心法来后，同去黑盐井，绕两天的路程，到姚安府，因为这条路勉强能够通行，不必等街子天。
English: After waiting for the monks of the Living Buddha Temple to come, they went to the Black Salt Well, a two-day journey, to Yao'an Government, because this road was barely passable, and there was no need to wait for the street children.

古文：初二日、初三日、初四日在茶房。
现代文：初二日、初三日、初四日在茶房。
English: On the first two days, the first three days and the first four days, it is brewed in the tea room.

古文：悟空日日化化缘米以供食，而顾仆孱弱如故。
现代文：悟空天天去求人施舍米以提供饭食，而顾仆仍和原来一样屏弱。
English: Goku went every day to ask for alms rice to provide meals, and his servant was still as weak as before.

古文：心法亦不至。
现代文：心法也没来到。
English: That didn't happen either.

古文：初五日前上雷应诸蜀僧返。
现代文：初五日在前攀登雷应山的众位蜀地僧人返回。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, the numerous monks from Shu, who had climbed Mount Lei Ying, returned.

古文：诸僧待明日往马街，随街往炉头出大姚。
现代文：众位僧人等着明天去马街，由马街往炉头出到大姚县。
English: A number of monks are waiting to go to Ma Jie tomorrow, and from Ma Jie to the furnace head, they will go to Dayao County.

古文：余仍欲随之，而病者不能霍然疾病迅速消除，为之怏怏郁郁不乐。
现代文：我还是想跟随他们走，但生病的人不能迅速消除疾病，因此郁郁不乐。
English: I still want to follow them, but people who are sick can't get rid of the disease quickly, so they are depressed.

古文：马街在西谿上，南去元谋县二十五里，北去黄瓜园三十五里，东至雷应山篝口十里，西至溪西坡五里，当大坞适中处，东西抵山，共径十五里，南抵山，北逾江，共径一百三十里，平坞之最遥者也。
现代文：马街在西溪东坡上，南面距离元谋县二十五里，北面距离黄瓜园三十五里，东面到雷应山著口十里，西面到溪西坡五里，位于大坞的适中处。大坞东西两边抵达山，直距共有十五里，南边抵达山，北边越过金沙江，直距共有一百三十里，是延伸最远的平坦山坞。
English: Ma Jie is located on the eastern slope of Xixi River. It is 25 miles away from Yuanmou County in the south, 35 miles away from Cucumber Garden in the north, 10 miles away from the mouth of Leiying Mountain in the east, and 5 miles away from the western slope of Xixi River in the west. It is located in the middle of the dock. The east and west sides of the dock reach the mountain, with a total straight distance of 15 miles. The south side reaches the mountain, and the north side crosses the Jinsha River, with a total straight distance of 130 miles. It is the farthest flat dock.

古文：其东南有聚庐曰官庄，为黔府庄田。
现代文：山坞东南有房舍聚集，名官庄，是黔府的庄田。
English: There is a cluster of buildings to the southeast of the dockyard. It is a prestigious manor, and is the most prestigious manor in Gifu.

古文：然此驿在江北，其前后二十里之地，所谓江外者，又属和曲州；无谋北界，实九十五里而已。江驿向有驿丞。二十年来，道路不通，久无行人，今止金沙江巡检司带管。直东六十里为墟灵驿东岭头，与和曲州接界；直西四十里为西岭，与大姚县接界。
现代文：茶房就在马街所在的坡北。元谋县在马头山西面七里处，马街南面二十五里处。正南三十五里处是腊坪，和广通县接壤；正北九十五里处是金沙江，渡过江往北十五里是江骤，和黎溪接壤；正东六十里处是墟灵释东面的岭顶，与和曲州交界；正西四十里处是西岭，与大姚县交界。
English: The teahouse is just north of Po, where Ma Jie is located. Yuanmu County is seven miles west of Ma Tou Shan, and 25 miles south of Ma Jie. Thirty-five miles due south is Laping, bordering Guangdong County; ninety-five miles due north is the Jinsha River, and 15 miles north across the river is Jiangzhuang, bordering Lixi; sixty miles due east is the top of the ridge east of Huilingzi, bordering Quzhou; forty miles due west is Xiling, bordering Dayao County.

古文：其地北遥与会川卫直对，南遥与新化州直对，东遥与嵩明州直对，西遥与大姚县直对。
现代文：这里北方远处和会川卫正对，南方远处与新化州正对，东方远处和嵩明州正对，西方远处和大姚县正对。
English: Here, the far north is on the right of Hoechuanwei County, the far south is on the right of Xinhua County, the far east is on the right of Songming County, and the far west is on the right of Dayao County.

古文：东界大山即墟灵驿与雷应山也，南自大麦地，直北抵金沙江南岸，横亘二百里，平障天半焉。
现代文：东部的大山是墟灵骚与雷应山，南部从大麦地开始，一直往北延伸到金沙江南岸，横贯二百里，整整挡住了半边天。
English: The big mountains in the east are Huilingso and Lei Yingshan, and in the south, starting from the barley fields, it extends all the way north to the south bank of the Jinsha River, spanning two hundred miles and completely blocking half the sky.

古文：西界山层叠错出，亦皆自南而北。
现代文：西部的山层层叠叠，错落耸出，也是从南往北延伸。
English: The mountains in the west are piled on top of each other, jutting out in staggered formations, and also extend from south to north.

古文：县治之支，南自楚雄府定远县东来，分支结为县治。
现代文：县治的支脉，南部从楚雄府定远县东延伸来，分出一支结为县治。
English: The branch of the county government extends from the south of Chuxiong Prefecture to the east of Dingyuan County, and is divided into the county government.

古文：其余支西绕者，由县西直北十五里西溪之口而止，是为第一层；又一支南自定远县分支来，与县西之支同夹而北，至西溪口，东支已尽，此支更夹之而北，至扁担浪而止，是为第二层；又一支西自定远西与姚安府东界分支东来，与扁担浪之支同夹而北，中界苴林后水，即所谓西尖界岭也；又一支西自姚安府东北分支东来，与西尖界岭同夹而北，中界炉头溪水，即所谓炉头西乱石冈也；又一支定远县西北妙峰山分支东来，与乱石冈同夹而北，中界河底之水，即所谓舌甸独木桥西山也。
现代文：其余往西绕的一支脉，从县西北延伸十五里，到西溪口为止，这是第一层；又有一支脉南部从定远县分支过来，和县西的支脉一齐平行往北延伸，延伸到西溪口，靠东的支脉已延伸到尽头，这一支脉和另外的山脉平行往北延伸，到扁担浪才停止，这是第二层；又有一支脉西部从定远县西界与姚安府东界的分支往东伸过来，和扁担浪的支脉一齐平行往北延伸，中间以宜林后水为界，就是所谓的西尖界岭；又有一支脉西部从姚安府东北边的分支往东伸过来，和西尖界岭一齐平行往北延伸，中间以炉头溪水为界，就是所谓的炉头西边的乱石冈；又有一支脉从定远县西北妙峰山的分支往东伸过来，和乱石冈一齐往北延伸，中间以河底的水为界，就是所谓的舌甸独木桥西山。
English: The rest is the first layer, which is a branch that goes around to the west, extending fifteen miles from the northwest of the county to the west of Xikou. There is also a branch in the south that branches off from Dingyuan County, extending parallel to the branch in the west of the county to the north, extending to the west of Xikou. The branch to the east has extended to the end. This branch and other mountains extend parallel to the north, and only stop at the flat wave, which is the second layer. There is also a branch in the west that extends from the west of Dingyuan County to the east of Yao'an Prefecture. It extends parallel to the branch of the flat wave

古文：诸山皆夹川流北出，或合西溪，或出苴榷而下金沙，故自县以北，其西界诸山，一支既尽，一支重出，若鳞次而北抵金沙焉。
现代文：各支山脉夹带的川流都向北流出去，有的汇入西溪，有的流出宜榷后流入金沙江，所以从县城往北，其西部各支山脉，一支延伸到尽头后，一支又重新伸出，像鱼鳞那样有秩序地往北延伸到金沙江。
English: The river streams of each mountain range flow northward, some flowing into the West Stream, and some flowing out into the Jinsha River. Therefore, from the county seat to the north, the western mountain ranges, one extending to the end, and one extending again, extend northward to the Jinsha River in an orderly manner like fish scales.

古文：其东界水皆小，惟墟灵驿一支较大，南出马头山之南，经县治东而北与西溪合。
现代文：其东部的水都小，只有墟灵释一股比较大，南部源出于马头山的南边，流经县治东后往北与西溪汇合。
English: The water in the eastern part is small, with only one relatively large stream, the Khu Ling Xie. The southern source comes from the southern side of Mount Ma Tou, flows through the eastern part of the county, and then merges with the West Stream to the north.

古文：其村有木棉树，大合五六抱。县境木棉树最多，此更为大。又十五里为黄瓜园。
现代文：从这里往北，西溪东边的村庄，傍靠东部山麓的很多：从官庄往北，十里是环州释，又十里是海闹村，又十五里是黄瓜园。
English: From here to the north, there are many villages on the east side of Xixi and near the eastern foot of the mountain: from Guanzhuang to the north, there are ten miles of Huanzhou Xie, another ten miles of Haizhu village, and another fifteen miles of cucumber garden.

古文：溪西之村，倚西界山之麓亦甚多：西坡下村，与官庄对峙，北十五里为五富村，又十里为苴宁村，又北逾岭二十里，为扁担浪，于是北夹西溪，尽于金沙焉。
现代文：西溪西边的村庄，傍靠着西部山麓的也很多；西坡下村和官庄对峙，往北十五里是五富村，又十里是宜林村，又往北越岭二十里是扁担浪，于是两边的山夹着西澳往北，到金沙江为尽头。
English: There are also many villages on the west side of Xixi that are adjacent to the western foot of the mountain. The village on the lower west slope is in confrontation with Guanzhuang. Fifteen miles to the north is Wufu village, another ten miles is Yilin village, and twenty miles to the north is Yuegling, so the mountains on both sides are sandwiched by Western Australia to the north, ending at the Jinsha River.

古文：西界诸山，俱自定远夹流分支，东北而尽于金沙江。
现代文：西部众多的山脉，都是来自于定远县的夹带川流的分支山脉，往东北延伸到金沙江结束。
English: Many of the mountains in the western part of the country are branches of the rivers flowing from Dingyuan County, extending to the northeast to the end of the Jinsha River.

古文：其西北又有大山方顶矗峙于北，与金沙北岸 蜀滇交会 之岭，骈拥天北。
现代文：其西北又有大山的方顶，矗立在北部，和金沙江北岸 蜀滇交会 之岭，并排占据了北部天际。
English: In the northwest, there is also the square top of a large mountain, which stands in the north, and the north bank of the Jinsha River, the ridge of the Shuqi Fair, which occupy the northern skyline side by side.

古文：从坞中北向遥望，若二眉高列于坞口焉。
现代文：从坞中向北遥望，像两道眉毛高高排列在坞口那里。
English: From the middle of the dock, looking to the north, it looks like two pairs of eyebrows are lined up high at the dock entrance.

古文：余初以为俱江北之山，及抵金沙江上，而后知江从二山之中，自北而南，环东山于其北，界西山于其西，始知此方顶之山，犹在金沙之南也。
现代文：我当初认为都是金沙江北岸的山，到抵达金沙江边时，才知道江流从两座山中间，由北向南，绕流过在江北岸的东山和江西岸的西山，而这座方顶的山，还是在金沙江的南岸。
English: At first, I thought that they were all mountains on the north bank of the Jinsha River, but when I arrived at the edge of the Jinsha River, I realized that the river flows from the middle of the two mountains, from north to south, bypassing Dongshan on the north bank of the river and Xishan on the west bank of the river, and this square-topped mountain is still on the south bank of the Jinsha River.

古文：其山一名方山，象形一名番山，以地因其音之相近而名之。
现代文：其山一名方山，一名番山，因两个字音相近而用来取名。
English: Its mountains are called Fangshan and Banshan, named for the similar sound of the two words.

古文：其地犹大姚县属，在县东北百四十里苴榷之境，东临金沙江。
现代文：这里仍然属于大姚县，在县东北一百四十里的直榷境内，东边濒临金沙江。
English: It still belongs to Dayao County, and is located in Zhouzhuang, 140 miles northeast of the county, bordering the Jinsha River to the east.

古文：是此山又从西北北胜州界环突东南，界金沙于外，抱三姚于中，与此西界回合，而对峙为门户者也。
现代文：因此这座山又从西北北胜州界内绕出东南，以金沙界为外界，中间怀抱姚安府、姚州和大姚县，和元谋坝子西部山环绕、汇合，从而对峙为元谋坝子的门户。
English: Therefore, this mountain also goes around from the northwest to the northeast of the north-shengzhou boundary, with the Jinsha boundary as the outside world, embracing Yao'an Prefecture, Yaozhou and Dayao County in the middle, and surrounding and converging with the western mountain of Yuanmou Dam, thus confronting the portal of Yuanmou Dam.

古文：金沙巡司，乃金沙江南曲之极处，自此再东，过白马口、普渡河北口，即从乌蒙山之西转而北下乌蒙、马湖。
现代文：金沙江巡检司，是金沙江向南弯曲的最南处。从这里再往东，经过白马口、普渡河北口，就从乌蒙山的西面转向北，然后下到乌蒙府、马湖府。
English: The Jinsha River Patrol and Inspection Station is the southernmost point of the southward bend of the Jinsha River. From here to the east, after passing the Baima mouth and the north mouth of the Purdu River, it turns from the west side of Mount Umong to the north, and then down to Umong Prefecture and Ma Hu Prefecture.

古文：巡司之西，其江自北来，故云南之西北界，亦随之而西北出，以抵北胜、丽江焉。
现代文：巡检司的西边，金沙江从北流来，所以云南省的西北部，也顺着江向西北伸出去，而抵达北胜州、丽江府。
English: To the west of the Inspection and Quarantine Division, the Jinsha River flows from the north, so the northwest of Yunnan Province also extends along the river to the northwest, reaching Beishengzhou and Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：初六日是早，云气少翳，诸蜀僧始欲游街子，俟下午渡溪而宿，明晨随街子归人同逾岭。
现代文：初六日这天早晨，云气稍稍隐退，众位蜀地僧人于是想去游逛街子，等下午时过西溪去住宿，明天早晨跟随赶街回去的人一齐翻越山岭。
English: On the morning of the 6th day of the first lunar month, the clouds retreated a little, so the monks of Shu wanted to go for a walk around the streets. In the afternoon, they crossed the Xixi River to go to their lodgings. Tomorrow morning, they would follow the people returning from the streets and climb over the mountains together.

古文：既晨餐，或有言宜即日行者。
现代文：吃过早餐后，有人说应当今天就启程。
English: After breakfast, someone said we should leave today.

古文：悟空以余行有伴，辞不去，而顾仆又以恹恹ｙｎ精神不振不能速随诸僧后，虽行，心为忡忡。
现代文：悟空因为我有伴同行，便告辞不一齐走，而顾仆又因为精神不振、不能迅速地跟在众位僧人之后，虽然出发了，感到忧心忡忡。
English: Because I was accompanied by a companion, Goku did not say good-bye and left together, while his attendant was worried because he was not in good spirits and could not quickly follow the monks, although he set off.

古文：出茶房西一里半，渡西溪，溪从此西曲，从其南岸随之。
现代文：从茶房出发往西行一里半，渡过西溪，溪水从这里往西弯曲，从溪南岸跟着溪流走。
English: Starting from the teahouse, walk west for a mile and a half, cross the West Stream, the stream bends west from here, and follow the stream from the south bank of the stream.

古文：又一里余，抵西山下，溪折而北，又从其西崖傍山麓随之。
现代文：又一里多，来到西山下，溪流曲折向北，又从溪西崖傍山麓跟着溪流走。
English: Another kilometer more, came to the west of the mountain, the stream twists and turns to the north, and from the west of the creek to the foot of the cliff to follow the stream.

古文：又北一里余，有村当路北，遂由其南西向入峡。
现代文：又往北一里多，有村庄位于路北，于是从村庄南边往西进入峡谷。
English: Another mile further north, there is a village on the north side of the road, so we enter the canyon from the south side of the village to the west.

古文：半里，涉枯涧，乃蹑坡上。
现代文：走了半里，越过干枯的沟涧，就爬坡往上走。
English: After walking for half a mile, we crossed a dry gully and climbed up the slope.

古文：其坡突石，皆金沙烨烨，如云母堆叠，而黄映有光。
现代文：这座坡突起的石头，都是金光闪亮的沙石，如同云母堆积重叠，而且映着黄色，发出光亮。
English: The stones of this jutting slope are all shiny gold sandstone, like mica piled on top of each other, and reflect yellow, emitting light.

古文：时日色渐开，蹑其上，如身在祥云金粟中也。
现代文：这时日色逐渐明朗，在坡上攀行，如同置身在吉祥的彩云、金色的谷堆之中。
English: At this time, the sun gradually brightens, and climbing up the slope is like being in the midst of auspicious clouds and golden corn heaps.

古文：一上二里，逾其顶，望其西又辟一界，有尖山独耸，路出其间，乃望之而趋。
现代文：一共上了二里，越过坡顶，向坡西边看去又是一片境界，有座尖山单独耸立，道路从那里出去，于是看着尖山快步走。
English: It was a total of two miles up, over the top of the slope, and looking to the west of the slope, there was another piece of border. There was a sharp mountain standing alone, and the road went out from there, so I looked at the sharp mountain and walked quickly.

古文：西向渐下，三里，抵坞中，有水自南峡中来，至此绕坞东北去。
现代文：逐渐向西下，三里，抵达坞中。有水从南边的峡谷中流来，到这里绕着山坞向东北流去。
English: Gradually westward, three miles, arriving at the dock. Water flows from the canyon on the south, and here it flows around the dock to the northeast.

古文：其水不深而阔，路北数十家，倚河东岸。
现代文：这条河不深但宽阔，路北有数十家人，傍靠在河东岸居住。
English: The river is not deep but wide. There are dozens of families in the north of the road, living on the east bank of the river.

古文：由其南渡河而西，其处木棉萁有高一丈余者，云两三年不凋。有枯涧自西来，其中皆流沙没足，两傍俱回崖亘壁，夹峙而来，底无滴水，而沙间白质皑皑，如严霜结沫，非盐而从地出，疑雪而非天降，则硝之类也。
现代文：从其南渡过河往西走，有道干枯的沟涧从西边伸来，涧中全是流沙，淹没双足，两傍都是曲折连绵的崖壁，夹着沟涧对峙而来，沟涧底部没有一滴水，而流沙白皑皑的质地，如同严寒霜冻结成的白沫，并不是盐却从地下涌出，怀疑是雪花而不从天降，那是硝一类的东西。
English: Crossing the river from the south to the west, there is a dry gully stretching from the west. The reeds are full of quicksand, drowning both feet. On both sides are meandering cliffs, sandwiching the gully. There is not a drop of water at the bottom of the gully, and the texture of the quicksand is white, like foam frozen into frost. It is not salt, but it gushes from the ground. It is suspected to be snowflakes, but it does not fall from the sky. It is a type of grit.

古文：路当从涧底直入，诸僧之前驱者，误从南坡蹑岭上。
现代文：道路正从沟涧底一直进去，众位僧人中的前驱者，误顺南坡攀岭而上。
English: The road was entering from the bottom of the ravine, and the forerunners among the monks were climbing up the south slope by mistake.

古文：上一里，见其路愈南，而西尖在西，知其误，乃与僧西北望涧底攀崖下坠。
现代文：往上一里，看到此路越发朝南，而西边的尖山还在西部，知道路走错了，于是和众僧看着沟涧底，攀着崖壁从西北往下坠。
English: After walking for a mile, he saw that the road was heading south, while the sharp mountain on the west was still in the west. He knew that he had taken the wrong road, so he and the monks looked at the bottom of the ravine and climbed the cliff wall to fall down from the northwest.

古文：一里，复循底西行，见壁崖上悬金丸累累，如弹贯丛枝，一坠数百，攀视之，即广右所见颠茄也。
现代文：一里，又顺沟涧底往西行，看见壁崖上悬挂着很多的金球，如同弹丸穿在丛密的枝叶上，一枝坠有数百个，攀援着仔细看，就是在广西省所见到的颠茄。
English: After a mile, I drove west along the bottom of the gully and saw a lot of golden balls hanging on the cliff, like a projectile pierced through the dense branches and leaves. There were hundreds of drops on each branch. Climbing and looking carefully, it was the belladonna seen in Guangxi Province.

古文：《志》云： 枝中有白浆，毒甚，土人炼为弩药，著物立毙。 
现代文：志书记载： 枝中有白浆，很毒，当地人提炼后涂在箭上的药，动物沾着立即倒毙。 
English: Zhizhi wrote: There was white pulp in the branches, which was very poisonous. The local people refined the medicine and applied it to the arrows. The animals died immediately.

古文：行涧底二里，其底转自西北来，路乃从西南蹑岭。
现代文：勺在沟涧底行二里，其底转从西北伸来，道路则从西南攀岭。
English: The spoon travels two miles at the bottom of the gully, the bottom of which extends from the northwest, and the road climbs from the southwest.

古文：一里半，盘岭头西出，又一里半，西南下坡。
现代文：走一里半，盘绕着岭头往西出去，又走一里半，往西南下坡。
English: Walk a mile and a half, winding around the ridge to the west, and then walk another mile and a half, downhill to the southwest.

古文：其处开壑湾环而北，涉壑底而西，不见有水。
现代文：这里开阔的壑谷弯转向北，越过壑底向西走，没看见有水。
English: Here, the wide Shibuya bend turns to the north, and we walk west across Shibuya, without seeing any water.

古文：半里，循西坑入，见石峡中有水潺潺，其峡甚逼，水亦甚微。
现代文：半里，顺着西坑进去，看见石峡中有潺潺流水，峡非常狭窄，水也很小。
English: Half a mile along the West Pit, I saw a stream of water flowing in the stone gorge. The gorge was very narrow and the water was very small.

古文：一里，其峡有自南流而出者，下就涉之。
现代文：一里，峡中有从南面流出来的水，我下到峡中渡水。
English: For a mile, there was water flowing from the south in the gorge, and I went down to the gorge to cross the water.

古文：其流之侧，有窞如半匏，仰东崖下，涵水一盂，不流不竭，亦潴水之静而有常，不与流俱汩者也。
现代文：流水旁边，有像半个鲍瓜一样的深坑靠在东边的崖石下，坑内有一孟水，不流动不枯竭，也是储水，平静而不变，不同于峡中的积水。
English: Next to the flowing water, there is a deep pit like a half-peacock lying under the cliff stone on the east side. There is a thousand tons of water in the pit. It does not flow or run out, but is also water storage. It is calm and unchanging, unlike the stagnant water in the gorge.

古文：涉细流西上，逾坡半里，有植木为坊者，上书 黔府官庄 。
现代文：渡过细流往西上，穿越坡半里，有木坊竖立着，上面写着 黔府官庄 。
English: After crossing the small stream to the west, half a mile up the slope, there is a wooden hut standing upright, with the words 府官莊 written on it.

古文：西下半里，有数家在坡北，其壑亦湾环而北，中有田塍数十畦，想即石峡之上流，得水如线，遂开此畦，所谓 黔府庄田 是也。
现代文：往西下半里，有数家人住在坡北，其壑谷也弯转向北，中间有数十畦田地，想来是在石峡水的上游，能够得到如同线一样细小的水源，于是开垦出这些畦田，这就是所谓的 黔府庄田 了。
English: In the lower half to the west, there are several families living in the north slope, and their reed valley also bends to the north. There are dozens of reed fields in the middle, presumably in the upper reaches of the Stone Gorge Water, where they can get a water source as small as a line. So they reclaimed these reed fields, which is the so-called Shifu Shoda.

古文：时诸僧未及携餐，令其徒北向彝家觅火。
现代文：此时众位僧人因没来得及携带午餐，让他们的徒弟向北去彝人家寻找火。
English: At this time, the monks did not have time to bring lunch, so they asked their apprentice to go to the north to find a fire.

古文：余辈随大道绕其南而西，一里，又有木坊在西坡，书亦如前，则其西界也。
现代文：我们顺大路绕过彝村南向西走，一里，又有木坊立在西坡，上面写的字也和前面的相同，那么是 黔府官庄 的西界了。
English: We walked along the main road, bypassing the south of Ye village and heading west. After one mile, there was another wooden hut standing on the west slope. The words written on it were the same as the previous one, so it was the western boundary of Ye village.

古文：从此西下，又涉一枯涧，遂西上岭，其上甚峻。
现代文：从这里往西下，又越过一道枯涧，于是往西上岭，岭上很陡。
English: From here, we went west and crossed a dry moat, and then headed west to Shangling Ridge, which is very steep.

古文：前乞火僧携火至，而不得泉，莫能为炊。
现代文：先前去找火的僧人携带着火来到，但没有泉水，不能做饭吃。
English: The monks who had been looking for fire earlier came with fire, but there was no spring water, so they couldn't cook or eat.

古文：上岭二里，盘峡而西，又半里，转而南，半里，一坪北向，环洼中亦无水，余乃出所携饭分啖之。
现代文：上岭二里，盘绕峡谷往西走，又半里，转向南，半里，有一块朝北的平地，环洼中也没有水，我于是拿出所带的饭分着吃。
English: I walked two miles up the ridge, winding around the canyon to the west, and another half mile, turning south, half a mile, there was a flat land facing north, and there was no water in the sinkhole, so I took out the rice I had brought and ate it separately.

古文：随坪稍南，半里，复西上，其上愈峻。
现代文：顺着平地逐渐往南走，半里，又往西上，越上越陡。
English: Walk along the flat land gradually to the south, half a mile, and then to the west, getting steeper and steeper.

古文：二里，登冈头，以为逾岭矣，而不知其上乃东垂之脊也。
现代文：二里，登上冈头，以为越过岭了，却不知道冈头是东边的岭脊。
English: After two miles, I reached the top of the ridge and thought I had crossed the ridge, but I didn't know that the top of the ridge was the ridge to the east.

古文：望西尖尚在其北，隔一深坑甚遥，西尖又有南北二横山亘其两头，又自成一界焉。
现代文：远看西边的山尖还在冈头北面，隔着一个深坑，相距很远，西边的山尖又有南北两座山横贯其两头，又各自形成一边。
English: From a distance, the western mountain peak is still north of the cape, separated by a deep pit, far apart. The western mountain peak has two mountains from north to south across its two ends, each forming a side.

古文：从脊向西行二里半，又南转峡上，循而环之，又西北上，再陟峻岭。
现代文：顺着岭脊往西行二里半，又向南转从峡谷上，沿峡谷绕着走，又往西北上，再攀登峻岭。
English: Follow the ridge ridge westward for two and a half miles, turn south from the canyon, walk along the canyon, go northwest, and then climb the steep ridge.

古文：二里，登冈头，又以为逾岭矣，而其上犹东垂之脊也。
现代文：二里，登上冈头，又以为越过岭了，而冈头仍然是东边的岭脊。
English: After two miles, when I reached the top of the ridge, I thought I had crossed the ridge, but the ridge was still a ridge to the east.

古文：又从脊西向行，于是脊两旁皆深坠成南北壑，壑蟠空于下，脊端突起于外，西接横亘之界，树丛石错，风影飒飒动人，疑是畏途。
现代文：又顺着岭脊向西行，在这里岭脊两边都深深地坠下去，形成南北壑谷，壑谷盘曲着悬空于下，岭脊边突起于外，往西和横贯的山相接，树林丛密，石头交错，风吹树木飒飒地响，使人心惊，怀疑是畏途。
English: He also followed the ridge to the west, where both sides of the ridge fell deeply, forming a north-south valley. The valley hangs suspended in the air, the ridge edge protrudes outward, and connects to the west with the transverse mountain. The woods are dense, the stones are interlaced, and the wind blows the trees. It is frightening, and doubt is a daunting path.

古文：时肩担者以陟峻难前，顾仆以体弱不进，余随诸僧后，屡求其待之与俱，每至一岭，辄坐待久之，比至，诸僧复前，彼二人复后。
现代文：这时挑夫因为山路陡峻，难以向前，顾仆因为体弱不能前进，我跟在众僧后面，多次请求他们等等挑夫、顾仆一齐走。每到一座岭，就坐着等待很久，等挑夫、顾仆来了，众僧人又朝前走，他们二人还是落在后面。
English: At this time, it was difficult for the porter to go forward because of the steep mountain road, and the attendant could not go forward because of his weakness. I followed behind the monks and repeatedly asked them to wait for the porter and the attendant to go together. Every time I reached a ridge, I sat and waited for a long time. When the porter and the attendant came, the monks went forward again, but they both remained behind.

古文：余心惴惴，既恐二人之久迟于后，又恐诸僧之速去于前，屡前留之，又后促之，不胜惶迫，愈觉其上不已也。
现代文：我心里惴惴不安，既怕二人长久落在后面，又怕众僧人在前面快速走掉，多次朝前挽留僧人，又到后面催促二人，不胜惶恐、急迫，更加觉得岭高得没有止境。
English: I felt uneasy in my heart. I was afraid that the two of them would be left behind for a long time, and I was also afraid that all the monks would quickly leave in front of them. I repeatedly kept the monks in front and urged the two of them to go to the back. I was overwhelmed with fear and urgency. I felt even more that the ridge was too high to stop.

古文：从脊行三里，复从岭西上一里，遂陟横亘南山之北巅。
现代文：顺着岭脊行三里，又从岭西上一里，于是登上横贯于南端之山的北巅。
English: I walked three miles along the ridge and one mile west of the ridge, and then climbed to the northern peak of the mountain that runs across the southern end.

古文：其巅与中突之尖，南北相对，上有石叠垣横界，是为元谋东界、大姚西界，即武定、姚安二府所分壤处也。
现代文：山巅与中部突起的山尖南北相对，上面有堆砌的石墙横界，这是元谋县的西界、大姚县的东界，就是武定府、姚安府的分壤处。
English: The top of the mountain is opposite the north-south mountain peak protruding in the middle, and there is a cross-border stone wall piled on top. This is the western border of Yuanmou County and the eastern border of Dayao County, which is the border between Wuding Prefecture and Yao'an Prefecture.

古文：路由其间，登巅之绝处，则有盘石当顶，于是从南横之巅，南向陟其脊，东瞰元谋，西瞰炉头，两界俱从屐底分坞焉。
现代文：路顺着分界中间，登上山巅最高处，就有盘石在顶部，于是从横贯南端的山巅，往南登上山脊，东边俯瞰元谋县，西边府瞰炉头，元谋西界和大姚东界都顺山底分成山坞。
English: The road follows the middle of the demarcation and climbs to the highest point of the mountain, there are boulders at the top, so from the mountain peak at the southern end, climb the ridge to the south, overlook Yuanmou County on the east, overlook the hearth on the west side, and the western border of Yuanmou and the eastern border of Dayao are divided into docks along the bottom of the mountain.

古文：南行脊上二里，西向下二里，路侧渐坠成峡，石坎累累，尚元滴水。
现代文：往南在脊上行二里，往西下二里，路边渐渐坠成峡谷，石坎很多，还是没有一滴水。
English: Two miles up the ridge to the south, two miles down to the west, the roadside gradually falls into a canyon, there are many boulders, but there is still not a drop of water.

古文：历石坡直下，一里，抵峡中。
现代文：顺着石坡直下，一里，抵达峡谷中。
English: Go straight down the stone slope, one mile, and arrive in the canyon.

古文：峡西又有回冈两重，自东北而蟠向西南。
现代文：峡谷西面又有两重弯曲的山冈，从东北向西南弯曲。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there is another double-curved mountain, curving from the northeast to the southwest.

古文：于是涉峡盘冈，再逾坡两重，共七里，乃西南下岭。
现代文：于是穿越峡谷盘绕山冈，再越过两重坡，一共走了七里，就往西南下岭。
English: So I walked through the canyon, around the mountain, and then over the double slope, a total of seven miles, to the southwest lower ridge.

古文：一里，始及其麓，其坞乃南北大开，中有溪界之，望见滇西有大聚落，是为炉头。
现代文：一里，才到达山麓，这里的山坞南北走向，十分开阔，中间有溪水分界，看见溪水西面有个大的村落，这是炉头。
English: It's a mile before you reach the foot of the mountain. The dock here runs north-south and is very open. In the middle is the creek watershed. You can see a large village on the west side of the creek. This is the furnace.

古文：时诸僧已饥，且日暮，急于问邸，遂投东麓下草庐家宿。
现代文：此时众僧已经饿了，而且太阳落山，急着寻问旅店，于是到东麓下，到住草房的人家投宿。
English: At this time, the monks were already hungry, and the sun was setting. They were in a hurry to find a hotel, so they went to the eastern foot of the mountain and stayed at the homes of people who lived in grass huts.

古文：初七日土人言，自炉头往独木桥，路止四十里，不及官庄来三之一。
现代文：初七日当地人说，从炉头去独木桥，只有四十里路，不到从官庄来炉头的三分之一。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the local people said that it was only a forty-mile road from the furnace head to the single-tree bridge, less than a third of the furnace head from Guanzhuang.

古文：余信之。
现代文：我相信此话。
English: I believe this.

古文：时顾仆奄奄，诸僧先饭而去，余候顾仆同行。
现代文：这时顾仆气息微弱，众僧人先吃过饭就走了，我等候顾仆一同走。
English: At this time, Gu Min's breath was weak. The monks left after eating first, and I waited for Gu Min to leave with them.

古文：是早阴翳如昨，西望炉头大村行。
现代文：这天早晨和昨天一样阴云遮蔽，往西看着炉头大村走。
English: On this morning, covered by the same overcast clouds as yesterday, I watched Otokami Omura walk westward.

古文：半里，渡一北流溪，又西一里余，直抵西界山麓。
现代文：半里，渡过一条向北流的溪水，又往西走一里多，直达西部山麓。
English: Half a mile, across a stream flowing north, and then more than a mile to the west, all the way to the western foothills.

古文：又有一溪颇大，自南峡中来，渡之，北上崖，即炉头大村也。
现代文：又有一条比较大的溪水，从南边的峡谷中流来，渡过溪水，往北登上山崖，就是炉头大村。
English: There is also a relatively large stream that flows from the canyon in the south, crosses the stream, and climbs the cliff to the north, which is the village of Wutou.

古文：其溪环村之前，转而北去。
现代文：溪水环绕过村庄前面，转向北流去。
English: The stream winds around the front of the village, heading north.

古文：炉头村聚颇盛，皆瓦屋楼居，与元谋来诸村迥别。
现代文：炉头村聚居的人家比较多，都是瓦房楼房，和从元谋县一路来的众村庄差别很大。
English: There are more people living together in the village of Houtou, and they all live in tile-roofed buildings, which is very different from the villages that have come all the way from Yuanmou County.

古文：其西复有山斜倚，循其东麓西南溯流行，三里，逾一东突之坡，乃南下。
现代文：村西又有山斜靠，顺着山东麓往西南溯流而行，三里，越过一座向东突起的坡，于是往南下。
English: On the west side of the village, there is a hill, and I followed the southwestern stream along the eastern foot of the mountain. After three miles, I crossed a slope that jutted out to the east, and then headed south.

古文：半里，涉坞，一里，又南涉坡而上。
现代文：半里，穿越山坞，一里，又向南往上爬坡。
English: Half a mile, across the dock, one mile, and then south up the slope.

古文：其坡自西而东突，与北坡东向，环成中坞，溪流北注于前，田塍环错于内。
现代文：其坡从西向东突出，与北坡在东边相对，中间环绕成坞，溪流往北注入坞前，田埂交错于坞内。
English: Its slope protrudes from west to east, opposite the north slope on the east side, surrounded by a dock in the middle, the stream flows north into the dock, and the rice fields are interlaced in the dock.

古文：陟南坡一里，见溪东又盘曲成田，倚东山为坞。
现代文：攀登南坡一里，看见溪流东边又弯曲为田，傍靠东山形成山坞。
English: After climbing one mile on the south slope, I saw that the east side of the stream was curved into a field, and a dock was formed next to the east mountain.

古文：由坡西南行一里，下坡，溪自北而南，乃横涉之。
现代文：顺着坡往西南走一里，下坡，溪水从北向南流，于是横渡溪水。
English: Walk along the slope to the southwest for one mile, downhill, the stream flows from north to south, and then cross the stream.

古文：登其西崖，则见所涉之北，其溪复自北来，有支流自北峡来者，小水也。
现代文：登上其西边的山崖，就看见所渡过的溪水北面，其溪又从北流来，有股从北边峡谷流来的支流，是小河。
English: Climbing up the cliff on its western side, you can see the stream you have crossed to the north, its stream flowing from the north, and some tributaries flowing from the northern canyon. It is a small river.

古文：从崖西行，已复逾溪之南岸，溯溪上。
现代文：顺山崖往西行，不久又越到溪水南岸，溯溪流而上。
English: I walked along the cliff to the west, and soon crossed to the south bank of the stream and followed the stream.

古文：溪在北峡，有数家倚其南冈。从其中西行二里，北峡两崖对竦，石突如门。
现代文：溪水在北边峡谷，有数家人靠着峡谷南冈住、从峡谷中往西行二里，北峡谷两边的山崖对峙高耸，崖石像门一样地突起。
English: The stream is in the canyon on the north side. A few families live on the south side of the canyon, and walk two miles west from the canyon. The cliffs on both sides of the north canyon are towering, and the cliff stones protrude like doors.

古文：其北崖石半有流环其腰，土人架木度流，引之南崖，沸流悬度于上，亦奇境也。
现代文：北边崖石中间有水流环绕其腰，当地人架木槽引渡水流，引到南边的崖石，翻腾的水流悬空引渡于上，也是奇境。
English: In the middle of the cliff on the north side, there is a stream of water around his waist. The local people set up a wooden trough to deliver the stream of water, which leads to the cliff on the south side. The churning stream of water is suspended in the air and delivered to the top. It is also a wonderland.

古文：路循南崖之腰，盘崖西下，又半里，则其溪又自南而北，南北俱削崖峙门，东西又危坡夹堑，境奇道险。
现代文：道路顺着南边崖石中部，盘绕崖石往西下，又走半里，则其溪又从南往北流，南北都是如门对峙的陡峭崖石，东西又是陡坡夹着深堑，环境奇妙、道路险要。
English: The road runs along the middle of the cliff on the southern edge of the cliff, winding around the cliff to the west, and then going half a mile, its stream flows from south to north. The north and south are steep cliffs like doors, and the east and west are steep slopes with deep valleys. The environment is strange and the road is dangerous.

古文：渡溪，又西上坡半里，蹑坡南，则复逾溪之北崖，溯溪上。
现代文：渡过溪水，又往西上坡半里，从坡南攀登，则又翻越到溪水北边的石崖，溯溪流而上。
English: After crossing the stream, I walked half a mile uphill to the west, climbed from the south of the slope, then climbed over the stone cliff to the north of the stream, and followed the stream.

古文：西二里，一峰危突溪西，溪身自其南环峡而出，支溪自其北堑壑而下。
现代文：往西走二里，一座峰直直地突起在溪水西边，溪水从峰南绕峡谷而出，分出一支从峰北穿沟壑而下。
English: Two miles to the west, a peak juts straight up on the west side of the stream. The stream flows from the south of the peak around the canyon, and separates from the north of the peak through a gully.

古文：有岐西渡支溪，直蹑西峰者，小路也；自支溪之东崖，陟坡循峡而北入者，大道也。
现代文：有岔路往西渡过分支溪水，一直登上西边的山峰，是条小路；从分支溪水东边的山崖登坡，顺着峡谷往北进去的是大路。
English: There is a small road that crosses the branch stream to the west and climbs all the way up to the mountain peak on the west, it is a small road; from the cliff on the east side of the branch stream, it is a large road that follows the canyon to the north.

古文：余乃从大道北上坡。
现代文：我于是顺大路往北上坡。
English: So I followed the main road north uphill.

古文：半里，由坡峡平行，一里，随峡折而北，路缘堑，木丛路旁，幽箐深崖，令人有鸟道羊肠之想。
现代文：半里，沿着坡上的峡谷平走，一里，随着峡谷转向北，道路攀援沟壑，路旁树木丛密，著沟幽静，山崖深远，令人有小路绝险，仅通飞鸟，山路崎岖曲折，状如羊肠的联想。
English: Half a mile, flat walk along the canyon on the slope, one mile, as the canyon turns north, the road climbs the ravine, the roadside trees are dense, the ditch is quiet, the cliff is far away, there are dangerous paths, only birds pass, the mountain road is rugged and twisted, like a sheep's intestine.

古文：一里余，峡渐从下而高，路稍由高而下，两遇之。
现代文：走一里多，峡谷渐渐从低处向高处延伸，道路渐渐从高处往低处下去，峡谷和道路两次相遇。
English: After walking for more than a mile, the canyon gradually extended from low to high, the road gradually descended from high to low, and the canyon and the road met twice.

古文：遂西陟峡中细流，复从峡西蹑峻西上，即盘而北，乃知是为中悬之冈，其西复有峡流自北来，与所涉之峡流即会于冈前。
现代文：于是往西渡过峡谷的小水，又顺着峡谷西部攀登险峻的山路往西上，不久绕向北，才知道这是峡中悬空而立的山冈，冈西又有峡谷流水从北边来，和所渡过的峡中小水在冈前会合。
English: As a result, the small stream crossed the canyon to the west, followed the western part of the canyon and climbed the steep mountain road to the west, and soon went around to the north, only to find out that this was a mountain in the canyon, with the water flowing through the canyon from the north, and the small stream crossed the canyon and met in front of the mountain.

古文：缘冈北上一里，左右顾瞰，其下皆峡，而流贯其中，斯冈又贯二流之中，始觉西尖之岭，峰隆泉缩，不若此之随地逢源也。
现代文：沿山冈往北上一里，往下左顾右看，下面都是峡谷，而流水贯穿其中，这冈又横贯二流之中，才觉得西边尖山之岭，峰高泉少，比不上这里随地逢源。
English: Along the mountains and hills to the north for a mile, look down to the left and right, below are canyons, and running water runs through them, this hill also runs across the second stream, only to feel that the west side of the mountain ridge, the peak high spring is less, not comparable to here with the source.

古文：从冈脊北向，以渐上跻，亦以渐转西，二里，登冈之首，望其冈，犹自西峰东突而下者。
现代文：顺着冈脊往北走，逐渐向上登，也逐渐转向西。二里，登上冈顶，望其冈，还是起自往东突出而往下延伸的西峰。
English: Walk along the ridge to the north, gradually climb up, and gradually turn to the west. Two miles, climb to the top of the hill, look at the hill, it is still the west peak protruding from the east and extending down.

古文：盖山脊自西南来至此，既穹南山一重，即从其北峡中度而北，再起中峰，又亘为此山一重，即从其北岭环支而东，又亘为北山一重，恰如 川 字，条支东南走而所上者，是其中支也。
现代文：原来山脊从西南延伸到这里，弯隆起一重南山后，就顺其北边的峡谷往北延伸，再耸起中峰，又横贯为这一重山，就顺其北边山岭绕出支脉往东延伸，又横贯为一重北山，三重山恰好像 川 字一样，往东南走向而我所攀登的那一条支脉，是三重山的中间一支。
English: Originally, the ridge stretched from the southwest to here. After curving up a south mountain, it extended northward along the canyon on its north side. Then the middle peak rose, and it extended eastward across this heavy mountain. It extended eastward along the mountain ridge on its north side, and it extended across a north mountain. Mieyama is just like a river, heading southeast. And the branch I climbed is the middle one of Mieyama.

古文：从冈首又西向平行二里，直抵其西中峰最高之下，乃循其峰之东崖西南上，一里半，是为乱石冈，遂凌其峰之崖，下瞰南峡之底，即其中度处也，峡中之水遂东西分焉。
现代文：顺冈顶又向西平行二里，直抵西边中峰最高点之下，于是沿着中峰的东面山崖往西南上，一里半，这是乱石冈，于是登上峰崖，往下看南边峡谷底，就是从中越过的地方，峡谷中的水从这里往东西分流。
English: Along the top of the hill, another two miles parallel to the west, straight to the west below the highest point of the middle peak, then along the eastern cliff of the middle peak to the southwest, one and a half miles, this is a rock hill, then climb the peak cliff, look down to the bottom of the southern canyon, that is, the place where it passes through, the water in the canyon flows from here to the east and west.

古文：由岭崖最高处西转而下，逶迤曲折，下四里，复从冈上西北行，忽见冈左右复成溪而两夹之，其溪流分大小。
现代文：沿岭崖最高处转向西下，山 路透巡曲折，下了四里，又顺冈上往西北走，忽然看见山冈左右又形成溪流而从两边夹着山冈，其溪流分成大小。
English: I turned westward along the highest point of the ridge cliff, the mountain Reuters twists and turns, descends four miles, and then goes up the hill to the northwest. Suddenly, I saw a stream forming around the mountain and sandwiching the mountain from both sides. The stream is divided into size.

古文：平行冈上二里，即从其端下，西渡大溪。
现代文：在冈上平行二里，就顺冈边下，往西渡过大溪。
English: After walking two miles parallel to the hill, I walked down the side of the hill and crossed the big stream to the west.

古文：由溪西上坡，稍转而北，半里，从北峡转西，遂向西坞入，于是溯西来大溪之北，循北山西行矣。
现代文：从溪西上坡，逐渐转向北走，半里，顺北边的峡谷转西，就朝西坞走进去，于是溯西边过来的大溪北，沿着北山往西走。
English: Walk uphill from the west side of the creek, gradually turn to the north, walk half a mile, turn west along the canyon on the north side of the canyon, walk into the west dock, then trace the west side of the creek to the north, and walk west along the north mountain.

古文：二里半，有村在溪南，倚南山之坡，北山亦至是南突，路遂从所突峡中上。
现代文：二里半，有村庄位于溪流南岸，傍靠着南山坡，北山到这里也向南突出，路就顺突出的峡谷延伸。
English: Two and a half miles away, there is a village located on the south bank of the stream, next to the south slope of the mountain, the north mountain also protrudes to the south here, and the road extends along the protruding canyon.

古文：乃踞峡石而饭。
现代文：于是蹲坐在峡谷中的石头上吃饭。
English: So he squatted on a rock in the canyon to eat.

古文：又一里，盘其南崖，从崖转西。
现代文：又走一里，盘绕南边的山崖，顺山崖转西走。
English: Walk another mile, wind around the cliff on the south side, and turn west along the cliff.

古文：又一里，逾其西坳，乃西下坡。
现代文：又一里，越过西坳，于是往西下坡。
English: Another mile, over the Xidi, then downhill to the west.

古文：半里，抵坡之西麓，其西复开成坞。
现代文：半里，到达坡的西麓，西面又敞开成山坞。
English: Half a mile later, at the western foot of the slope, the western side opens up into a dock.

古文：半里，路循溪北之山，又有村倚溪南之麓，与前倚溪南之坡者，皆所谓 夷村 也。
现代文：半里，道路沿着溪北的山延伸，又有村庄傍靠在溪南山麓，和前面傍靠在溪南山坡的村子一样，都是所谓的 夷村 。
English: For half a mile, the road extends along the mountains north of Xi'an, and there are villages adjacent to the foot of Xi'an Mountain, as well as villages adjacent to the front of the slope of Xi'an Mountain, all of which are so-called "Yi Village."

古文：西行三里，一溪自南峡来，路亦随之南转。
现代文：往西走三里，一条溪水从南边峡谷流来，道路也随之往南转。
English: Three miles to the west, a stream flows from the southern canyon, and the road turns south.

古文：稍下，渡西来小水，从南坡西上，二里逾其坳，西北下一里，下至壑中。
现代文：逐渐往下走，渡过从西边流来的小水，顺南坡往西上，二里越过坡坳，往西北下一里，下到壑谷中。
English: Gradually walk down, cross the small stream coming from the west, go up the south slope to the west, cross the slope for two miles, go northwest for one mile, and go down to the middle of the valley.

古文：其壑南向，而大山环其北，又有小水东南流，当亦下大溪者，而大溪盘其东南峡中，不见也。
现代文：其壑朝南，而大山环绕其北，又有小河往东南流，应当也是流入大溪，而大溪盘绕在东南边的峡谷中，看不见了。
English: Its beak faces south, while large mountains surround it to the north, and small rivers flow to the southeast, and should also flow into large streams, while large streams are coiled in the canyon on the southeast side and cannot be seen.

古文：渡小水，又西上一里，透西坳出，始见西坞大开，大溪贯其中，自西而东，抵所透坳南，破其峡壁东去，其峡逼束甚隘，回顾不能见。
现代文：渡过小河，又往西上一里，穿出西坳，才看见西坞十分开阔，大溪贯穿坞中，从西往东流，流到所穿过的坳南，冲破峡壁向东流去，峡谷被山约束得十分狭隘，迂回曲折看不见溪水。
English: After crossing a small river, another mile to the west, and passing out of Xidi, I saw that the west dock was very open. A large stream ran through the dock, flowing from west to east, flowing to the south of Fujian through which it passed, and breaking through the canyon wall to the east. The canyon was constrained by the mountains to be very narrow, and the meandering could not see the stream.

古文：西下坡半里，抵坞中，遵溪北坞西行，半里，过一小村。又西一里，忽坞塍间甃砖为衢，半里，绕大村之前，又西半里，抵村侧新桥而止，是为大舌甸村。
现代文：往西下坡半里，抵达坞中，跟着溪流北面的山坞往西走，半里，经过一个小村庄，又往西走一里，忽然坞中田间有砖砌的街道，半里，绕过大村前面，又往西半里，抵达村庄旁边的新桥而止，这是大舌甸村。
English: Half a mile downhill to the west, arriving at the dock in the middle, following the dock north of the stream to the west, half a mile, passing a small village, another mile to the west, suddenly there are brick streets in the middle of the dock, half a mile, bypassing the front of the village, and half a mile to the west, arriving at the new bridge next to the village, this is the village of Dazhidian.

古文：其坞来溪为田，坞环而田甚辟；其村倚山为衢，村巨而家甚古，盖李氏之世居也。
现代文：这里山坞顺溪水两岸开垦为田地，山坞环绕而田地开辟得很多；村庄靠山形成街道，村庄大而居家很古老，是李氏世代居住的地方。
English: Here, the docks along the creek have been reclaimed as fields on both sides of the water, the docks are surrounded by cows and the fields have been opened up a lot; the villages are backed by mountains to form streets, the villages are large and the houses are very old, and it is the place where the Li generation lives.

古文：村后一山横拥于北，又一山三峰递下，斜突于西南。
现代文：村后有一座山横拥在北面，又有一座山三座峰顺着往下延伸，斜斜地突起在西南面。
English: At the back of the village, there is a mountain to the north, and another mountain with three peaks extending downwards, rising obliquely to the south-west.

古文：有小流自其峡中出，由村西而南入大溪，架桥其上，西逾之，遂循斜突南峰下西南行。
现代文：有条小河从其峡谷中流出，沿村西往南流入大溪，有桥架在溪上，往西过桥，就沿着斜斜突起的南峰下面往西南走。
English: A small river flows out of its canyon and flows south along the west of the village into a large stream. There is a bridge over the stream. Cross the bridge to the west and walk southwest along the bottom of the obliquely protruding southern peak.

古文：二里，抵其西垂，则大溪自南直捣其麓，乃逾堰东向。
现代文：二里，抵达南峰西垂，则大溪从南面直捣峰麓，于是越过拦河坝向东走。
English: Two miles later, when it reached the south peak and the west ridge, the large stream ran straight to the foot of the peak from the south, and then crossed the barrage to the east.

古文：其麓为水所啮被水冲刷浸蚀，石崖逼削，几无置足处。
现代文：峰麓被水流冲刷，石崖狭窄陡峭，几乎没有下脚的地方。
English: The foot of the peak is washed by the current, the stone cliff is narrow and steep, and there is almost no place to set foot.

古文：历堰之西，上流停洄，自南而北，路从其西转而南入峡。
现代文：经过拦河坝的西面，上游停滞回旋，从南往北流，道路从其西转向南进入峡谷。
English: After passing through the west side of the barrage, the upstream stagnation swirls, flows from south to north, and the road turns from its west to south to enter the canyon.

古文：又行南峡一里余，则有石梁一巩，东西跨溪上，是为独木桥。
现代文：又往南在峡谷中走了一里多，就有一座石桥，横跨在溪流的东西两边，这是独木桥。
English: Further south, more than a mile into the canyon, there is a stone bridge that spans the east and west sides of the stream. It is a wooden bridge.

古文：路从桥西直南上坡；其逾桥而东者，乃往省大道。
现代文：道路顺着桥西一直往南上坡；其过桥而往东的，是去省城的大路。
English: The road along the west of the bridge has been heading south uphill; it crosses the bridge and heads east, which is the main road to the provincial capital.

古文：是桥昔以独木为之，今易以石，有碑名之曰蹑云，而人呼犹仍其旧焉。
现代文：这座桥从前用独木建造，如今改用石头建造，有碑文取名为摄云，但人们还是沿袭其旧名称呼。
English: The bridge, which was once made of a single piece of wood, is now made of stone. There is an inscription naming it "Photogram," but people still call it by its old name.

古文：桥侧有梅一株，枝丛而干甚古，瓣细而花甚密，绿蒂朱蕾，冰魂粉眼，恍见吾乡故人，不若滇省所见，皆带叶红花，尽失其 雪满山中，月明林下 之意也。
现代文：桥旁有一棵梅树，枝密而树干很古，瓣小而花朵很多，绿色的花蒂、红色的花蕾，傲寒怒放，耀人眼目，仿佛见到了我家乡的故人，不像在云南省城所见到的梅树，都是带叶的红花，完全丧失了梅花 雪满山中，月明林下 的意境。
English: There is a plum tree next to the bridge. The branches are dense and the trunk is very old. The petals are small but the flowers are many. The green flower buds and red flower buds. The cold is fierce and the eyes are dazzling. It is as if I have seen the deceased in my hometown. Unlike the plum trees I have seen in the city of Yunnan Province, they are all red flowers with leaves. I have completely lost the artistic mood of plum blossoms in the snow-covered mountains and under the moonlit forest.

古文：乃折梅一枝，少憩桥端。
现代文：于是折下一枝梅，在桥头稍作休息。
English: So he broke off a plum tree and took a short break at the bridgehead.

古文：仍由其西上南坡，随坡西转，盖是溪又从西坞来，至是北转而逾石堰，是坡当其转处。
现代文：仍旧从桥西登上南坡，顺着坡往西转，原来这条溪流又从西坞流来，到这里转北越过石坝，这座坡位于溪流转弯处。
English: I still ascended the south slope from the west of the bridge and followed the slope to the west. Originally, this stream flowed from the west dock, and then turned north over the stone dam. This slope is located at the turn of the stream.

古文：其南又开东西大坞，溪流贯之。
现代文：坡南又敞开东西走向的大坞，溪流贯穿其中。
English: South of the slope, there is a large dock open to the east and west, with a stream running through it.

古文：路溯溪北崖，循北山西行，一里，有聚落倚北山下，是为独木桥村。
现代文：道路从北崖溯溪流而上，顺北山往西行，一里，有一个村落傍靠在北山下，这是独木桥村。
English: The road follows the stream upstream from the North Cliff and goes west along the North Mountain. For one mile, there is a village next to the North Mountain, which is Dokubashi Village.

古文：有寺当村之中，其门南向，其处村无旅店，有北京僧接众于中，余乃入宿。
现代文：村中有一座寺庙，寺门向南，这里的村庄没有旅店，有个北京僧人在寺中接待众人，我子是进寺住宿。
English: There is a temple in the village. The temple gate faces south. There are no hotels in this village. A Beijing monk receives people in the temple. My son is staying in the temple.

古文：初八日晨起寒甚。
现代文：初八日早晨起来时很冷。
English: It was very cold when I got up in the morning on the eighth day of the first month.

古文：顾仆复病，余亦苦于行，止行一里，遂憩水井屯寺中。
现代文：顾仆又病着，我也被旅途所苦，只走子一里，就在水井屯寺中休息。
English: Gu Min was sick again, and I was also suffering from the journey. I only walked one mile and rested in the Shui Tun Temple.

古文：有小水北来。五里，孚众桥。
现代文：初九日从寺中出发走一里半，经过口家庄。走半里，转向南走，半里，是仓屯桥。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, I walked one and a half miles from the temple, passing through the village of Kuchiya. After walking half a mile, I turned south and walked half a mile to Cangtun Bridge.

古文：有西北、西南二小水。
现代文：二里半，是泅峡口，转向西走五里，是王家桥。
English: Two-and-a-half miles away is the mouth of the Kunlun Gorge, and five miles to the west is Wangjiaqiao.

古文：西上山，十里至脊。
现代文：走五里，是孚众桥。往西上山，十里到达山脊。
English: Go five miles, it is Fuzhong Bridge. Go west up the mountain, ten miles to reach the ridge.

古文：转南半里，庙山营。
现代文：转南走半里，是庙山营。
English: Half a mile to the south is Miao Mountain Camp.

古文：西下半里，庙前打哨。
现代文：往西下半里，是庙前打哨。
English: Half a mile to the west, there is a watchtower in front of the temple.

古文：西下二里，有岐转北坳。
现代文：往西下二里，有岔路转向北坳。
English: Two miles to the west, there is a fork in the road leading to Beilun.

古文：一里，复西随平峡北。
现代文：一里，又往西随着平峡往北走。
English: One mile, and then go west along the Pingxia to the north.

古文：二里，又西下，二里，至峡底。
现代文：二里，又往西下，二里，到峡谷底。
English: Two miles west, two miles to the bottom of the canyon.

古文：西平行一里半，复于峡北上。
现代文：往西平行一里半，又从峡谷中往北上。
English: Parallel to the west for a mile and a half, and from the canyon to the north.

古文：一里，转北坳而西，又北半里，过一峡脊。
现代文：一里，转北坳往西走，又往北走半里，经过一道峡脊。
English: One mile, turn north and walk west, then walk half a mile north, passing through a ridge.

古文：又北下半里，又北度一峡底。
现代文：又往北下半里，又往北越过一道峡谷底。
English: Another half-mile north, and another half-mile north over the bottom of a canyon.

古文：又西上坡，一里，转而北，又一里，转而西下，一里，至脊间，又西二里余，乃下脊。
现代文：又往西上坡，一里，转向北，又一里，转向西下，一里，到脊间，又往西走二里多，于是下脊。
English: Further west uphill, one mile, turn north, another mile, turn west downhill, one mile, to the ridge, go west for more than two miles, and then down the ridge.

古文：又西四里，抵西山下，有村。
现代文：一里多，到达脊北，名小讫佬村。又往西走四里，抵达西山下，有村庄。
English: After more than one kilometer, we arrived at the north of the ridge, a village called Xiao Yao Yao. We walked another four miles to the west, and arrived at the west foot of the mountain, where there was a village.

古文：转南一里，西过一小坳，又半里，西南过新坝屯。
现代文：转南走一里，往西穿过一道小坳，又走半里，往西南经过新坝屯。
English: Turn south and walk one mile, west through a small stream, and walk half a mile, southwest through Xinbatun.

古文：又西半里，过新坝桥。又西一里，转而南，二里，盘西山嘴，转而西北，一里余，入大姚东门。
现代文：又往西半里，过新坝桥 又往西走一里，转向南，二里，绕西山嘴，转向西北走，一里多，进入大姚县东门。
English: Another half-mile to the west, over the Xinba Bridge, another mile to the west, turn south, two miles, around the West Hill, turn northwest, more than a mile, into the East Gate of Dayao County.

古文：半里，过县前。
现代文：半里，经过县衙前。
English: Half a mile, past the county seat.

古文：又西南至旅肆歇。
现代文：又往西南去旅店住下。
English: He also went to the southwest to stay at a hotel.

