古文：起玄黓敦牂，尽阏逢涒滩五月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：玄黓敦牂，尽阏逢涒滩五月，凡二年有奇。
English: Every two years, there is a strange event that occurs in May.

古文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝中之下
现代文：高祖神尧大圣光孝皇帝中之下
English: Emperor Gaozhushin and Emperor Guangxiao, middle and lower

古文：武德五年壬午，公元六二二年
现代文：唐高祖武德五年春季正月，刘黑闼自称汉东王，改年号为天造，都城设在州。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Liu He Rong claimed to be the king of the East Han Dynasty, changed his name to Tian Zi, and set up the capital in Zhou.

古文：春，正月，刘黑闼自称汉东王，改元天造，定都洺州。以范愿为左仆射，董康买为兵部尚书，高雅贤为右领军；征王琮为中书令，刘斌为中书侍郎；窦建德时文武悉复本位。其设法行政，悉师建德，而攻战勇决过之。
现代文：任命范愿为左仆射，董康买为兵部尚书，高雅贤为右领军，征召王琮为中书令，刘斌为中书侍郎，窦建德时期的文武官员全部恢复了原来的职位。刘黑闼的法令行政，全部效法窦建德，但他作战勇猛果敢则超过窦建德。
English: He appointed Fan Zhengyan as the left-hand man, Dong Kangmei as the left-hand man, Gao Yaxian as the right-hand man, Wang Qian as the second-in-command, Liu Bin as the second-in-command, and all the civil and military officials of the Dou Jiande period were restored to their original positions. Liu Heixuan's laws and administration all followed Dou Jiande, but his bravery and courage in battle surpassed Dou Jiande.

古文：丙戌，同安贼帅殷恭邃以舒州来降。
现代文：丙戌，同安盗贼首领殷恭邃以舒州降唐。
English: Gong An, the leader of the Tongan bandits, Yin Jiongjun, took Shuzhou and went down to Tang.

古文：丁亥，济州别驾刘伯通执刺史窦务本，以州附徐圆朗。
现代文：丁亥，唐济州别驾刘伯通捉住刺史窦务本，以济州归附徐圆朗。
English: Ding Hai, Tang Jeju, don't drive Liu Baotong, catch Zi Shi Dou Wuben, and attach Jeju to Xu Yuanlang.

古文：庚寅，东盐州治中王才艺杀刺史田华，以城应刘黑闼。
现代文：庚寅，唐东盐州治中王才艺杀死刺史田华，以城池响应刘黑闼。
English: Geng Yin, Tang Dong Yanzhou Zhi Zhong Wang Zai Yi killed the assassin Tian Hua, and responded to Liu Heyao with a castle.

古文：秦王世民军至获嘉，刘黑闼弃相州，退保洺州。
现代文：秦王李世民的大军到获嘉，刘黑闼放弃相州，撤退保卫州。
English: The great army of Qin King Li Shimin arrived in Guojia, and Liu Heyao gave up Xiangzhou and withdrew to defend the province.

古文：丙申，世民复取相州，进军肥乡，列营洺水之上以逼之。
现代文：丙申，李世民收复相州，进军肥乡，在水边布营进逼刘黑闼。
English: Bishen, Li Shimin recovered Xiangzhou, marched into Feixiang, and marched into the waterside camp to force Liu Heyao.

古文：萧铣既败，散兵多归林士弘，军势复振。
现代文：萧铣败亡后，他的散兵大部分投靠了林士弘，林士弘的军队因此重振势力。
English: After Xiao Yao's defeat and death, most of his scattered soldiers sided with Lin Shihong, and Lin Shihong's army thus regained its strength.

古文：己酉，岭南俚帅杨世略以循、潮二州来降。
现代文：己酉，岭南俚族首领杨世略以循、潮二州降唐。
English: Ji Kun, Yang Shiliu, the leader of the Lingnan Yi people, followed suit, and the two states of Chaozhou fell to Tang.

古文：唐使者王义童下泉、睦、建三州。
现代文：唐朝使者王义童夺取泉、睦、建三州。
English: Wang Yidong, an emissary of the Tang Dynasty, conquered Quan, Mutsu and built Sanshou.

古文：幽州总管李艺将所部兵数万会秦王世民讨刘黑闼，黑闼闻之，留兵万人，使范愿守洺州，自将兵拒艺。
现代文：唐幽州总管李艺率领他的几万部队会同秦王李世民讨伐刘黑闼，刘黑闼闻讯，留下一万兵力，命范愿守卫州，自己率军抵抗李艺。
English: Li Yiyi, the head of Tangyuzhou, led his tens of thousands of troops to join Qin King Li Shimin to fight Liu Heyao. Liu Heyao heard the news and left ten thousand troops. He was willing to defend the state for the rest of his life and lead his army to resist Li Yiyi.

古文：夜，宿沙河，程名振载鼓六十具，于城西二里堤上急击之，城中地皆震动。
现代文：夜晚，刘黑闼在沙河县宿营，程名振带六十面大鼓，在州城西二里处的河堤上猛擂鼓，城中的地面都感到震动。
English: In the evening, Liu Heya camped in Shahe County, Cheng Naing vibrated with sixty-sided drums, and on the river embankment two miles west of the city of Zhu, the ground in the city was shaken.

古文：范愿惊惧，驰告黑闼；黑闼遽还，遣其弟十善与行台张君立将兵一万击艺于鼓城。
现代文：范愿惊慌失措，派飞骑报告刘黑闼，刘黑闼迅速返回州，派他的弟弟刘十善和行台张君立率领一万兵马在鼓城攻打李艺。
English: Panic-stricken, Fan Rong sent his cavalry to report to Liu Heijun. Liu Heijun quickly returned to the state, and sent his brother Liu Shushan and Xingtai Zhang Junli to lead ten thousand soldiers and horses to attack Li Yi in Gucheng.

古文：壬子，战于徐河，十善、君立大败，所失亡八千人。
现代文：壬子，双方在徐河交战，刘十善、张君立大败，损失八千人。
English: In Jinsi, the two sides fought in Xuhe, and Liu Shishan and Zhang Junli were defeated, losing eight thousand people.

古文：洺水人李去惑据城来降，秦王世民遣彭公王君廓将千五百骑赴之，入城共守。
现代文：洛水县人李去惑占据城池降唐，秦王李世民派彭公王君廓率一千五百名骑兵赴水，进城与李去惑共同守城。
English: Li Shimin, a man from Luoshui County, occupied the city when the Tang Dynasty was overthrown. King Li Shimin of the Qin Dynasty sent Peng Gongwangjun to lead 1,500 cavalrymen to the water and entered the city to jointly defend the city with Li Shimin.

古文：二月，刘黑闼引兵还攻洺水，癸亥，行至列人，秦王世民使秦叔宝邀击破之。
现代文：二月，刘黑闼带军回师攻打水，癸亥，走到列人县，秦王李世民命秦叔宝截击并打败了刘黑闼。
English: In February, Liu Hefei led the army back to the division to attack the water, and went to Lehen County. Qin King Li Shimin ordered Qin Shubao to intercept and defeat Liu Hefei.

古文：豫章贼帅张善安以虔、吉等五州来降，拜洪州总管。
现代文：豫章盗贼首领张善安以虔、吉等五州降唐，官拜洪州总管。
English: The leader of the Yuanzhang thieves, Zhang Shan'an, used five states, including Qian and Ji, to bring down the Tang Dynasty. He became the head of Hongzhou.

古文：戊辰，金乡人阳孝诚叛徐圆朗，以城来降。
现代文：戊辰，金乡人阳孝诚背叛徐圆朗，以金乡县城降唐。
English: In Wucheng and Jinxiang, Yang Xiaocheng, a native of Jinxiang, betrayed Xu Yuanlang and took the county seat of Jinxiang to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：己巳，秦王世民复取邢州。
现代文：己巳，秦王李世民收复邢州。
English: At that time, the Qin King Li Shimin recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：辛未，并州人冯伯让以城来降。
现代文：辛未，井州人冯伯让以城降唐。
English: In Xinwei, Feng Bojang, a native of Jingzhou, was the first to surrender the city to Tang.

古文：丙子，李艺取刘黑闼定、栾、廉、赵四州，获黑闼尚书刘希道，引兵与秦王世民会洺州。
现代文：丙子，李艺夺取刘黑闼占据的定、栾、廉、赵四州，抓获刘黑闼的尚书刘希道，然后带兵与秦王李世民在州会师。
English: Bing Zi, Li Yi captured Ding, Yao, Liang and Zhao of the four states occupied by Liu Heyao, captured Liu Heyao's Shangshu Liu Xi Dao, and then led the troops to join forces with Qin King Li Shimin in the state.

古文：刘黑闼攻洺水甚急。
现代文：刘黑闼攻水很猛。
English: Liu Heyao attacked the water very fiercely.

古文：城四旁皆有水，广五十馀步，黑闼于城东北筑二甬道以攻之；世民三引兵救之，黑闼拒之，不得进。
现代文：水城四周都是水，水宽五十多步，刘黑闼在城东北修建二条甬道用来攻城；秦王李世民三次带军救援，都受到刘黑闼的阻拦，无法前进。
English: Shuicheng is surrounded by water, and the water is more than fifty paces wide. Liu Heiguo built two causeways in the northeast of the city to attack the city. Qin King Li Shimin led the army to rescue the city three times, but was blocked by Liu Heiguo and could not advance.

古文：世民恐王君廓不能守，召诸将谋之，李世勣曰： 若甬道达城下，城必不守。 
现代文：李世民怕王君廓守不住城池，召集众将领商议救援之事，李世说： 如果甬道修到城下，城池必定失守。 
English: Li Shimin was afraid that Wang Junku would not be able to defend the castle, so he called together the generals to discuss the matter of rescue. Li Shimin said: If the causeway is built under the castle, the castle will certainly be lost.

古文：行军总管郯勇公罗士信请代君廓守之。
现代文：行军总管郯勇公罗士信请求代替王君廓守城。
English: Luo Shixin, the general manager of the march, requested to take the place of Wang Junku in the defense of the city.

古文：世民乃登城西南高冢，以旗招君廓，君廓帅其徒力战，溃围而出。士信帅左右二百人乘之入城，代君廓固守。
现代文：李世民于是登上城南的高坟，用旗语招王君廓，王君廓率领部下奋战，突出包围，罗士信趁机率二百士卒进城，代替王君廓坚守城池。
English: Li Shimin then ascended the high tomb in the south of the city and used the flag language to invite Wang Junku. Wang Junku led his subordinates to fight and encircle prominently. Luo Shixin took the opportunity to enter the city with 200 soldiers and hold the city instead of Wang Junku.

古文：黑闼昼夜急攻，会大雪，救兵不得往，凡八日，丁丑，城陷。
现代文：刘黑闼昼夜猛攻水，恰逢大雪，唐军无法增援，经过八天，丁丑，水城陷落。
English: Liu Heixuan stormed the water day and night, coinciding with heavy snow, the Tang army could not reinforce, after eight days, Dingwuxi, Shuicheng fell.

古文：黑闼素闻其勇，欲生之，士信词色不屈，乃杀之，时年二十。
现代文：刘黑闼早就听说罗士信勇猛，不想杀他，罗士信言语态度威武不屈，于是刘黑闼杀了他，当时罗士信仅二十岁。
English: Liu Hefei had long heard that Roshxin was brave and fierce, and did not want to kill him. Roshxin's words and attitude were unyielding, so Liu Hefei killed him. At that time, Roshxin was only twenty years old.

古文：戊寅，汴州总管王要汉攻徐圆朗杞州，拔之，获其将周文举。
现代文：戊寅，唐汴州总管王要汉攻打徐圆朗占据的杞州，夺取了城池，抓获徐圆朗的将领周文举。
English: Wu Yin, the general manager of Zhangzhou of Tang Dynasty, wanted Han to attack Zhangzhou occupied by Xu Yuanlang, captured the city and captured Xu Yuanlang's general Zhou Wenju.

古文：庚辰，延州道行军总管段德操击梁师都石堡城，师都自将救之；德操与战，大破之，师都以十六骑遁去。
现代文：庚辰，唐延州道行军总管段德操攻击梁师都的石堡城，梁师都亲自带兵救援，段德操与梁师都交锋，大败梁师都，梁师都只带十六名骑兵逃跑。
English: Geng Chen, the general manager of the march of Tang Yanzhou Road, Duan Deqiao attacked the Shibao Castle of Liang Shidu, Liang Shidu personally led the soldiers to rescue, Duan Deqiao and Liang Shidu clashed, defeated Liang Shidu, Liang Shidu fled with only sixteen cavalrymen.

古文：上益其兵，使乘胜进攻夏州，克其东城，师都以数百人保西城。会突厥救至，诏德操引还。
现代文：高祖增加了段德操的兵力，让他乘胜进军攻打夏州，段德操攻克了夏州东城，梁师都带几百人保守夏州西城，恰好突厥救援梁师都的军队到达，高祖下诏命段德操撤军。
English: Gaozu increased the strength of Duan Deshu's army and let him take advantage of the victory to invade and attack Xiazhou. Duan Deshu conquered the eastern city of Xiazhou, and Liang Shidu took several hundred people to protect the western city of Xiazhou. Just as the Turkish army arrived to rescue Liang Shidu, Gaozu ordered Duan Deshu to withdraw.

古文：辛巳，秦王世民拔洺水。
现代文：辛巳，秦王李世民攻下水。
English: Suddenly, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, attacked the water.

古文：三月，世民与李艺营于洺水之南，分兵屯水北。
现代文：三月，李世民和李艺在水以南扎营，分兵驻扎在水以北。
English: In March, Li Shimin and Li Yi camped south of the water, and the detachment was stationed north of the water.

古文：黑闼数挑战，世民坚壁不应，别遣奇兵绝其粮道。
现代文：刘黑闼多次来挑战，李世民坚壁不应战，却另派奇兵切断了刘黑闼的粮食运输线。
English: Liu Heihe repeatedly challenged Li Shimin to a duel, but Li Shimin did not want to fight, so he sent another soldier to cut off Liu Heihe's grain transportation line.

古文：壬辰，黑闼以高雅贤为左仆射，军中高会。
现代文：壬辰，刘黑闼任命高雅贤为左仆射，军中举行盛大宴会。
English: In Imjin, Liu Heixuan appointed Gao Yaxian as his left-hand man, and a grand banquet was held in the army.

古文：李世勣引兵逼其营，雅贤乘醉，单骑逐之，世勣部将潘毛刺之坠马；左右继至，扶归，未至营而卒。
现代文：李世带兵逼近刘黑闼军营，高雅贤趁酒醉，单枪匹马追逐李世，李世的部将潘毛把他刺下马，高雅贤随从继后赶到，扶高雅贤回营，未到营地高雅贤就死了。
English: Li Shih led his soldiers to approach Liu Heixuan's camp. Gao Yaxian took advantage of his drunkenness and chased Li Shih single-handedly. Li Shih's subordinate, Pan Mao, stabbed him off his horse. Gao Yaxian followed and helped Gao Yaxian back to the camp. Gao Yaxian died before reaching the camp.

古文：甲午，诸将复往逼其营，潘毛为王小胡所擒。
现代文：甲午，唐军诸将领再次前进逼近刘黑闼的营地，潘毛被王小胡抓获。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, the generals of the Tang army advanced again and approached Liu Heyao's camp. Pan Mao was captured by Wang Xiaohu.

古文：黑闼运粮于冀、贝、沧、瀛诸州，水陆俱进，程名振以千馀人邀之，沉其舟，焚其车。
现代文：刘黑闼从冀、贝、沧、瀛各州运粮，水陆并进，程名振用一千多人截击，弄沉了运粮船，烧毁了运粮车。
English: Liu Heixuan transported grain from Hebei, Bei, Cang and Handan Provinces. Cheng Nian Zhen used more than a thousand people to intercept, sink the grain ship and burn the grain truck.

古文：宋州总管盛彦师帅齐州总管王薄攻须昌，征军粮于潭州；刺史李义满与薄有隙，闭仓不与。
现代文：唐宋州总管盛彦师率领齐州总管王薄攻打须昌，向潭州征调军粮；潭州刺史李义满因与王薄有矛盾，关闭粮仓不给军粮。
English: Morihiko Shishi, the governor of Tang and Song, led by the governor of Qizhou, Wang Bo, attacked Shuchang and requisitioned military grain from Tanzhou; the governor of Tanzhou, Li Yimang, had a conflict with Wang Bo and closed the granary and did not give military grain.

古文：及须昌降，彦师收义满，系齐州狱，诏释之。
现代文：待须昌投降，盛彦师逮捕了李义满，关入齐州监狱，高祖下诏命令释放李义满。
English: While waiting for Suchang to surrender, Morihiko arrested Li Yimang and put him in the Qizhou Prison. Gaozu issued an order to release Li Yimang.

古文：使者未至，义满忧愤，死狱中。
现代文：朝中下达诏令的使者还没到齐州，李义满因为忧愤，已经死在狱中。
English: The envoy who issued the edict from the central government had not yet arrived in Qizhou, and Li Yimang had already died in prison due to grief and anger.

古文：薄还，过潭州，戊戌夜，义满兄子武意执薄，杀之；彦师亦坐死。
现代文：王薄回师，经过潭州，戊戌夜晚，李义满的侄子李武意捉住王薄并杀了他；盛彦师也获罪被处死。
English: After Wang Bo Hui's division passed through Tanzhou, Li Yimang's nephew, Li Wuyi, captured Wang Bo and killed him in the evening of the 7th day of the 7th month; Morihiko's division was also convicted and executed.

古文：上遣使赂突厥颉利可汗，且许结婚。颉利乃遣汉阳公瑰、郑元璹、长孙顺德等还，庚子，复遣使来修好，上亦遣其使者特勒热寒、阿史那德等还。
现代文：高祖派遣使节贿赂突厥颉利可汗，并且答应与颉利结为婚姻之好，于是颉利送汉阳公李、郑元、长孙顺德等人返回唐朝，庚子，颉利重新派遣使节来唐修好，高祖也送突厥使者特勒热寒、阿史那德等人回突厥。
English: Gaozhu sent envoys to bribe the Turkic Khan of Goli, and promised to marry Goli, so Goli sent Hanyang Gongli, Zheng Yuan, the eldest grandson Shunde and others back to the Tang Dynasty, Geng Zi, Goli re-sent envoys to Tang to mend fences, and Gaozhu also sent the Turkic envoys Teller Regan, Ashnard and others back to Turkey.

古文：并州总管刘世让屯雁门，颉利与高开道、苑君璋合众攻之，月馀，乃退。
现代文：唐并州总管刘世让驻扎在雁门，颉利与高开道、苑君璋合兵攻打刘世让，一个多月才退军。
English: Liu Shijang, the head of the Tang and unified state, was stationed in Yanmen. Gongli, Gao Kaido, and Yuanjun joined forces to attack Liu Shijang, and it took more than a month for him to retreat.

古文：甲辰，以隋交趾太守丘和为交州总管。和遣司马高士廉奉表请入朝，诏许之，遣其子师利迎之。
现代文：甲辰，唐任命隋朝交趾太守丘和为交州总管，丘和派司马高士廉奉表请求入朝，皇帝下诏准许他的请求，并派丘和的儿子丘师利前往迎接。
English: At the time of the Jia Chen, the Tang Dynasty appointed the Sui Dynasty's Jiaozi Emperor to be the governor of Jiaozhou. Yau and his deputy Ma Gao Shillian submitted a request to enter the imperial court, and the emperor granted his request, and sent Yau and his son Chu Shili to meet him.

古文：秦王世民与刘黑闼相持六十馀日。
现代文：秦王李世民与刘黑闼相持六十多天。
English: Qin King Li Shimin and Liu Heyao held each other for more than sixty days.

古文：黑闼潜师袭李世勣营，世民引兵掩其后以救之，为黑闼所围。尉迟敬德帅壮士犯围而入，世民与略阳公道宗乘之得出。
现代文：刘黑闼暗中率军袭击李世的营地，李世民带兵突然袭击刘黑闼的背后以救援李世，结果被刘黑闼包围，尉迟敬德率领壮士冲入包围圈，李世民与略阳公李道宗趁势脱险。
English: Liu Heixuan secretly led an army to attack Li Shimin's camp. Li Shimin led an army to suddenly attack Liu Heixuan's back to rescue Li Shimin. As a result, he was surrounded by Liu Heixuan. Li Shimin and Li Daozong took advantage of the situation to escape danger.

古文：道宗，帝之从子也。
现代文：李道宗是皇帝的侄子。
English: Li Daozong was the emperor's nephew.

古文：世民度黑闼粮尽，必来决战，乃使人堰洺水上流，谓守吏曰： 待我与贼战，乃决之。 
现代文：李世民推测刘黑闼的粮食已经吃光，必定前来决战，于是命人在水上游筑坝截断河水，对看守堤坝的官吏说： 等我和敌人交战时，就决开堤坝。 
English: Li Shimin surmised that Liu Heyao had run out of food and was sure to come for a decisive battle, so he ordered someone to build a dam upstream to cut off the river water, and said to the officials guarding the dam: "When I fight with the enemy, I will break the dam."

古文：丁未，黑闼帅步骑二万南度洺水，压唐营而陈。世民自将精骑击其骑兵，破之，乘胜蹂其步兵。
现代文：丁未，刘黑闼率领两万步兵骑兵向南渡过水，逼近唐军营寨列阵，李世民亲自统率精锐骑兵攻打刘黑闼的骑兵，打败了刘军，乘胜用马踩踏刘的步兵。
English: Ding Wei, Liu Heixuan led 20,000 infantry and cavalry to the south across the water, approaching the Tang army camp. Li Shimin personally led the elite cavalry to attack Liu Heixuan's cavalry, defeated Liu's army, and used the victorious horse to trample Liu's infantry.

古文：黑闼帅众殊死战，自午至昏，战数合，黑闼势不能支。
现代文：刘黑闼带领部队殊死战斗，从中午到黄昏，几度交锋，刘黑闼的兵力无法再坚持下去。
English: Liu Heixuan led the troops in a desperate battle. From noon to dusk, they clashed several times. Liu Heixuan's troops could not hold out any longer.

古文：王小胡谓黑闼曰： 智力尽矣，宜早亡去。 
现代文：王小胡对刘黑闼说： 我们的智能体力都已耗尽，应该快点逃走。 
English: Wang Xiaohu said to Liu Heyao: Our intelligence and physical strength have been exhausted, we should hurry to escape.

古文：遂与黑闼先遁，馀众不知，犹格战。
现代文：王小胡便和刘黑闼先逃跑，其余的将士不知道头领已经逃走，还在继续格斗。
English: Wang Xiaohu and Liu Heyao ran away first. The rest of the soldiers did not know that the leader had fled and continued to fight.

古文：守吏决堰，洺水大至，深丈馀，黑闼众大溃，斩首万馀级，溺死数千人，黑闼与范愿等二百骑奔突厥，山东悉平。
现代文：唐看守堤坝的官吏决开堤坝，水一下子涌到战场，水深一丈多，刘黑闼的军队大败，一万多人被杀，几千人被淹死，刘黑闼与范愿等二百人骑马逃入突厥，唐平定了整个山东地区。
English: The officials of Tang guarding the dike broke the dike, the water suddenly surged to the battlefield, the water depth was much deeper, Liu Heyao's army was defeated, more than ten thousand people were killed, several thousand people were drowned, Liu Heyao and Fan Zheng and other two hundred people fled to Turku on horseback, and Tang leveled the entire Shandong region.

古文：高开道寇易州，杀刺史慕容孝幹。
现代文：高开道侵犯易州，杀死唐易州刺史慕容孝千。
English: Gao Kaido invaded Yizhou and killed Murong Xiaoqian, a Tang dynasty official from Yizhou.

古文：夏，四月，己未，隋鸿胪卿宁长真以宁越、郁林之地请降于李靖，交、爱之道始通；以长真为钦州总管。
现代文：夏季，四月己未，隋朝鸿胪卿宁长真以宁越、郁林地区向李靖请求投降，这才打通了通往交州与爱州的道路。唐任命宁长真为钦州总管。
English: In the summer, before April, Ning Changzheng, the general of the Sui Dynasty, requested the surrender of Ningyue and Yulin regions to Li Jing, which opened the way to Jiaozhou and Aizhou. Tang appointed Ning Changzheng as the general manager of Qinzhou.

古文：以夔州总管赵郡王孝恭为荆州总管。
现代文：唐任命夔州总管赵郡王李孝恭为荆州总管。
English: Tang appointed the general manager of Zhangzhou, Zhao County Wang Li Xiaogong, as the general manager of Jingzhou.

古文：徐圆朗闻刘黑闼败，大惧，不知所出。
现代文：徐圆朗听说刘黑闼失败，大为恐慌，不知所措。
English: When Xu Yuanlang heard that Liu Heyao had failed, he panicked and was at a loss.

古文：河间人刘复礼说圆朗曰： 有刘世彻者，其人才略不世出，名高东夏，且有非常之相，真帝王之器。
现代文：河间人刘复礼劝徐圆朗道： 有位名叫刘世彻的人，是很难得的人才，在东夏有很高的名望，并且相貌非凡，真有帝王的器度。
English: Liu Fuli, a resident of Kawama, advised Xu Yuanlang: "There is a man named Liu Shicheru. He is a rare talent, has a high reputation in Dongxia, and his appearance is extraordinary. He really has the stature of an emperor.

古文：将军若自立，恐终无成；若迎世彻而奉之，天下指挥可定。 
现代文：将军您如果自立为王，恐怕最终会一事无成；如果迎来刘世彻并拥戴他为主，就可以轻易地取得天下。 
English: General, if you set yourself up as king, I'm afraid you'll end up accomplishing nothing; if you welcome Liu Shicheh and embrace him as your master, you can easily take over the world.

古文：圆朗然之，使复礼迎世彻于浚仪。
现代文：徐圆朗同意了他的意见，命刘复礼到浚仪迎接刘世彻。
English: Xu Yuanlang agreed with his opinion and ordered Liu Fulei to meet Liu Shicheng at the ceremony.

古文：或说圆朗曰： 将军为人所惑，欲迎刘世彻而奉之，世彻若得志，将军岂有全地乎！
现代文：有人对徐圆朗说： 将军被人骗了，想迎立刘世彻，世彻如果得志，哪里有将军您的保全之地呢？
English: Someone said to Xu Yuanlang, "The general has been deceived by someone and wants to welcome Liu Shicheh. If Liu Shicheh succeeds, where is the general to protect you?"

古文：仆不敢远引前古，将军独不见翟让之于李密乎？ 
现代文：我不用援引前代之事，您就没看到翟让与李密的例子吗？ 
English: If I don't have to refer to the previous generation, haven't you seen the example of Yu Zhen and Li Mi?

古文：圆朗复以为然。
现代文：徐圆朗也认为很对。
English: Xu Yuanlang also thought it was right.

古文：世彻至，已有众数千人，顿于城外，以待圆朗出迎；圆朗不出，使人召之。
现代文：刘世彻到来时，已有几千人马，停在城外，等待徐圆朗出城迎接，徐圆朗不出城，命人召刘世彻进城。
English: When Liu Shicheh arrived, there were already several thousand horses parked outside the city, waiting for Xu Yuanlang to leave the city to meet them. Xu Yuanlang did not leave the city, and ordered someone to call Liu Shicheh into the city.

古文：世彻知事变，欲亡走，恐不免，乃入谒；圆朗悉夺其兵，以为司马，使徇谯、杞二州。东人素闻其名，所向皆下，圆朗遂杀之。
现代文：刘世彻知道事情发生了变化，想逃走，又怕逃不脱，于是进城谒见徐圆朗，徐圆朗夺了他的全部人马，任命他为司马，让他攻打谯、杞二州，东部的人久闻他的大名，刘世彻所到之处纷纷投降，徐圆朗便杀了刘世彻。
English: Liu Shicheng knew that things had changed, he wanted to escape, but he was afraid that he could not escape, so he went to the city to see Xu Yuanlang. Xu Yuanlang took all his men and horses, appointed him as the Sima, and let him attack Shandong and Fujian provinces. People in the east had long heard of his great name. Everywhere Liu Shicheng went, they surrendered, and Xu Yuanlang killed Liu Shicheng.

古文：秦王世民自河北引兵将击圆朗，会上召之，使驰传入朝，乃以兵属齐王元吉。
现代文：秦王李世民从河北带兵准备攻打徐圆朗，恰好高祖召他，让他乘驿站车马急速回长安，于是李世民将军队交给齐王元吉统领。
English: Qin King Li Shimin led an army from Hebei to prepare to attack Xu Yuanlang, just as Gao Zu called him and asked him to quickly return to Chang'an by stagecoach, so Li Shimin handed over the army to the leader of Qi Wang Yuanji.

古文：庚申，世民至长安，上迎之于长乐。
现代文：庚申，李世民到达长安，高祖到长乐坂迎接他。
English: Gao Shen, Li Shimin arrived in Chang'an, Gao Zu went to Changle Slope to meet him.

古文：世民具陈取圆朗形势，上复遣之诣黎阳，会大军趋济阴。
现代文：李世民详细陈述了攻打徐圆朗的形势，高祖又派他赴黎阳，会同大军火速赶到济阴。
English: Li Shimin described in detail the situation of attacking Xu Yuanlang, and Gaozu sent him to Liyang, and together with the army, they quickly arrived in Jiyin.

古文：丁卯，废山东行台。
现代文：丁卯，唐废除山东行台。
English: Dingwu, Tang abolished Shandong Xingtao.

古文：壬申，代州总管定襄王李大恩为突厥所杀。
现代文：壬申，唐代州总管定襄王李大恩被突厥杀害。
English: In Jinshin, the Tang Dynasty Governor of the State Ding Xiang Wang Li Daing was killed by the Turks.

古文：先是，大恩奏称突厥饥馑，马邑可取，诏殿内少监独孤晟将兵与大恩共击苑郡璋，期以二月会马邑；失期不至，大恩不能独进，顿兵新城。
现代文：此前，李大恩上奏章说明突厥闹饥荒，可攻取马邑，高祖下诏命殿内少监独孤晟带兵与李大恩共同攻打苑君璋，约定二月在马邑会师，独孤晟未能按期到达，李大恩不能孤军挺进，将军队停在新城。
English: Previously, Emperor Gaozong had issued an edict that the Turks were starving, and that Ma'e could be captured. Emperor Gaozong ordered the palace's junior warden, Du Youyou, to lead the troops and Li Daen to jointly attack Yuanjunjun, and they agreed to meet at Ma'e in February. Du Youyou did not arrive on schedule, and Li Daen could not advance alone, and stopped the troops at Xincheng.

古文：颉利可汗遣数万骑与刘黑闼共围大恩，上遣右骁卫大将军李高迁救之。
现代文：突厥颉利可汗派几万骑兵与刘黑闼一起包围了李大恩，高祖派右骁卫大将军李高迁救援李大恩。
English: The Turkic Khagan sent tens of thousands of cavalry together with Liu Heyao to encircle Li Dayen, Gao Zu sent the Right Guard General Li Gaoqian to rescue Li Dayen.

古文：未至，大恩粮尽，夜遁，突厥邀之，众溃而死，上惜之。
现代文：李高迁还未到达，李大恩因军粮吃光，半夜逃遁，遭突厥阻截，军队溃败而被害，高祖很痛惜他的死亡。
English: Li Gaoqin had not yet arrived, and Li Dain had run out of food, fled in the middle of the night, was intercepted by the Turks, and was killed in the army's defeat. Gao Zu was very sorry to hear of his death.

古文：独孤晟坐减死徙边。
现代文：独孤晟获罪被判处减死，流放到边远地区。
English: A lone woman was convicted, sentenced to death, and exiled to a remote area.

古文：丙子，行台民部尚书史万宝攻徐圆朗陈州，拔之。
现代文：丙子，唐行台民部尚书史万宝攻打徐圆朗占据的陈州，攻克陈州。
English: Cun Zi, Tang Xingtai Minbu Shang Shushi Wanbao attacked Chenzhou, which was occupied by Xu Yuanlang, and conquered Chenzhou.

古文：戊寅，广州贼帅邓文进、隋合浦太守宁宣、日南太守李晙并来降。
现代文：戊寅，广州盗贼首领邓文进、隋朝合浦太守宁宣、日南太守李一同降唐。
English: Wu Yin, the leader of the Guangzhou thieves, Deng Wenzhin, the Sui Dynasty, Ning Xuan, the governor of Pu, and Li, the governor of Nichinan, all went down to Tang.

古文：五月，庚寅，瓜州士豪王幹斩贺拔行威以降，瓜州平。
现代文：五月庚寅，瓜州土豪王干杀死贺拔行威降唐，瓜州平定。
English: In May, Geng Yin and Guazhou's local strongman Wang Gan killed He Bajing and brought down the Tang Dynasty. Guazhou was pacified.

古文：突厥寇忻州，李高迁击破之。
现代文：突厥侵犯忻州，被李高迁击败。
English: The Turks invaded Bozhou and were defeated by Li Gaoqian.

古文：六月，辛亥，刘黑闼引突厥寇山东，诏燕郡王李艺击之。
现代文：六月辛亥，刘黑闼带突厥侵犯山东，唐高祖下诏命燕郡王李艺迎敌。
English: In June of Xinhai, Liu Heyao led the Turks to invade Shandong, and Tang Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Yan County King Li Yi to meet the enemy.

古文：癸丑，吐谷浑寇洮、旭、叠三州，岷州总管李长卿击破之。
现代文：癸丑，吐谷浑侵犯洮、旭、叠三州，唐岷州总管李长卿打败了来犯之敌。
English: Jiuyug, Tuyugun invaded the three states of Qi, Xu and Lai, and Li Changqing, the head of the state of Tang, defeated the invading enemy.

古文：乙卯，遣淮安王神通击徐圆朗。
现代文：乙卯，唐派淮安王李神通攻打徐圆朗。
English: Second, Tang sent Huai'an King Li Shentong to attack Xu Yuanlang.

古文：丁卯，刘黑闼引突厥寇定州。
现代文：丁卯，刘黑闼带突厥侵犯定州。
English: Dingwu and Liu Heyao led the Turks to invade Dingzhou.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，为秦王世民营弘义宫，使居之。
现代文：秋季，七月甲申，唐为秦王李世民建造弘义宫，供李世民居住。
English: In the autumn, in July of Jiaxing, the Tang Dynasty built the Hongyi Palace for the Qin King Li Shimin to live in.

古文：世民击徐圆朗，下十馀城，声震淮、泗，杜伏威惧，请入朝。
现代文：李世民攻打徐圆朗，夺取了十几座城池，声势震动了淮水、泗水地区，杜伏威很恐惧，请求入朝。
English: Li Shimin attacked Xu Yuanlang and captured more than a dozen cities. The news shook the Huai Shui and Surabaya regions. Du Fuwei was very afraid and asked to enter the imperial court.

古文：世民以淮、济之间略定，使淮安王神通、行军总管任瑰、李世勣攻圆朗；乙酉，班师。
现代文：李世民因淮、济之间已大致平定，让淮安王李神通、行军总管任、李世攻打徐圆朗；乙酉，李世民班师回朝。
English: Li Shimin, because the conflict between Huai and Jie had been largely settled, let Huai'an King Li Shentong, the commander-in-chief of the march, and Li Shih attack Xu Yuanlang; acetylene, Li Shimin's squadron returned to the imperial court.

古文：丁亥，杜伏威入朝，延升御榻，拜太子太保，仍兼行台尚书令，留长安，位在齐王元吉上，以宠异之。
现代文：丁亥，杜伏威入朝，被引进登上御榻，官拜太子太保，仍兼行台尚书令，留在长安，上朝位置在齐王元吉之前，表示对他特别恩宠。
English: Dinghai, Du Fuwei entered the imperial court, was introduced to mount the imperial couch, and was given the official title of the Crown Prince Taibo. He still concurrently carried out the Tai Shang Shuling and stayed in Chang'an. He was in the position of the imperial court before Qi Wang Yuanji, and expressed his special favor to him.

古文：以阚稜为左领军将军。
现代文：唐任命阚棱为左领军将军。
English: Tang appointed Yu Ren as the general leading the left army.

古文：李子通谓乐伯通曰： 伏威既来，江东未定，我往收旧兵，可以立大功。 
现代文：李子通对乐伯通说： 杜伏威已来长安，江东尚未安定，我们回去收拾旧部，可以立大功。 
English: Li Zitong said to Le Bertong: Du Fuwei has come to Chang'an, the East River is not yet stable. We can go back and clean up the old part and make great contributions.

古文：遂相与亡至蓝田关，为吏所获，俱伏诛。
现代文：于是一起逃跑，到蓝田关，被官吏抓获，均被处死。
English: So they ran away together, to Lantian Pass, were caught by officials, and were all executed.

古文：刘黑闼至定州，其故将曹湛、董康买亡命在鲜虞，复聚兵应之。
现代文：刘黑闼到定州，他的旧部下曹湛、董康买逃亡在鲜虞，重新召集兵马响应刘黑闼。
English: Liu Heyao went to Dingzhou. His old subordinates Cao Zhan and Dong Kangmei were in imminent danger of fleeing, and the army was reconvened in response to Liu Heyao.

古文：甲午，以淮阳王道玄为河北道行军总管以讨之。
现代文：甲午，唐任命淮阳王李道玄为河北道行军总管讨伐刘黑闼。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Tang appointed Li Daoxuan, the king of Huaiyang, as the chief marshal of Hebei Province to fight against Liu Heixuan.

古文：丙申，迁州人邓士政执刺史李敬昂以反。
现代文：丙申，迁州人邓士政捉住刺史李敬昂，反叛朝廷。
English: Bishin, Deng Shizheng, who had moved to Suzhou, captured the assassin Li Jing'ang and rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：丁酉，隋汉阳太守冯盎承李靖檄，帅所部来降，以其地为高、罗、春、白、崖、儋、林、振八州，以盎为高州总管，封耿国公。
现代文：丁酉，隋朝汉阳太守冯盎接受了李靖的檄文，率领部属降唐，唐在冯盎的辖地设置高、罗、春、白、崖、儋、林、振八州，任命冯盎为高州总管，封爵耿国公。
English: In Dingwu, the Sui Dynasty, Hanyang Governor Feng Ang accepted Li Jing's imperial edict and led his subordinates to the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty set up eight provinces in Feng Ang's jurisdiction, including Gao, Luo, Chun, Bai, Jia, Yao, Lin and Zhen, and appointed Feng Ang as the governor of Gao Province and knighted him Geng Guogong.

古文：先是，或说盎曰： 唐始定中原，未能及远，公所领二十馀州地，已广于赵佗，宜自称南越王。 
现代文：此前，有人劝冯盎道： 唐才平定了中原，还无力顾及边远地区，您所管辖的二十州的范围已超过汉代的赵佗，应当自称南越王。 
English: Previously, someone had advised Feng Ong: "Tang only leveled the Central Plains, and has not yet been able to take into account the remote areas. The scope of the twenty states under your jurisdiction has exceeded that of Zhao Xuan in the Han Dynasty. You should call yourself the King of South Vietnam."

古文：盎曰： 吾家居此五世矣，为牧伯者不出吾门，富贵极矣。常惧不克负荷，为先人羞，敢效赵佗自王一方乎！ 
现代文：冯盎说： 我家在此地定居已经五代了，此地的长官都由我家的人担任，已极尽富贵了，常常怕承担不起重担，使先人蒙受耻辱，怎么敢效法赵佗自己称王一方呢？ 
English: Feng Ang said: My family has been settled in this place for five generations. The local officials are all from my family. They have become extremely wealthy. They are often afraid of not being able to bear the burden and bringing shame to their ancestors. How dare they follow the example of Zhao Wei, who claimed to be the king?

古文：遂来降。
现代文：于是前来投降。
English: They came to surrender.

古文：于是岭南悉平。
现代文：从此岭南地区全部平定。
English: Since then, the entire Lingnan region has been pacified.

古文：八月，辛亥，以洺、荆、交、并、幽五州为大总管府。
现代文：八月辛亥，唐以、荆、交、并、幽五州为大总管府。
English: In August Xinhai, Tang I, Jing, Jia, Bian, and You Five Provinces became the Great General Headquarters.

古文：改葬隋炀帝于扬州雷塘。
现代文：唐将隋炀帝改葬于扬州雷塘。
English: Emperor Tang had Emperor Sui Xuan reburied in Letang, Yangzhou.

古文：甲戌，吐谷浑寇岷州，败总管李长卿。
现代文：甲戌，吐谷浑侵犯岷州，打败了唐总管李长卿。
English: Jia Jiao and Tu Guhun invaded Bozhou and defeated the Tang general Li Changqing.

古文：诏益州行台右仆射窦轨、渭州刺史且洛生救之。
现代文：唐高祖下诏命益州行台右仆射窦轨、渭州刺史且洛生救援李长卿。
English: Emperor Gao of Tang issued an edict ordering his right-hand man in Yizhou to march to Taiwan to shoot the enemy, and his right-hand man in Zhangzhou to stab the enemy and rescue Li Changqing.

古文：乙卯，突厥颉利可汗寇边，遣左武卫将军段德操、云州总管李子和将兵拒之。
现代文：乙卯，突厥颉利可汗侵犯唐国边境，唐派遣左武卫将军段德操、云州总管李子和带兵抵抗。
English: At the same time, the Turkic Khagan invaded the border of Tang, and Tang dispatched the Zuo Wei generals Duan Deqiao and Li Zi, the head of Yunnan, to lead the resistance.

古文：子和本姓郭，以讨刘黑闼有功，赐姓。
现代文：李子和本姓郭，因讨伐刘黑闼有功，赐姓李。
English: Li Zi and his family name Guo were given the surname Li for their achievements in fighting against Liu Heyao.

古文：丙辰，颉利十五万骑入雁门，己未，寇并州，别遣兵寇原州；庚申，命太子出幽州道，秦王世民出秦州道以御之。李子和趋云中，掩击可汗，段德操趋夏州，邀其归路。
现代文：丙辰，颉利的十五万骑兵进入雁门，己未，侵犯并州。另外又派兵侵犯原州。庚子，唐高祖命太子李建成从豳州道，秦王李世民从泰州道出兵抵御突厥，李子和急速赶赴云中，突然袭击颉利可汗，段德操赶赴夏州，阻截突厥的退路。
English: Genshi, the 150,000 cavalrymen of Goryeo, entered the Wild Goose Gate and invaded and annexed Goryeo. In addition, they sent troops to invade Wonju. Geng Zi, the crown prince of the Tang Dynasty, Li Jiancheng, sent troops from the Goryeo Road, Qin King Li Shimin sent troops from the Taizhou Road to resist the Turks. Li Zi quickly rushed to Yunzhong and suddenly attacked the Goryeo Khan. Duan Defu rushed to Xiazhou to block the retreat of the Turks.

古文：辛酉，上谓群臣曰： 突厥入寇而复求和，和与战孰利？ 
现代文：辛酉，高祖对群臣说： 突厥入侵，但又来求和，和与战哪个更有利？ 
English: Sincerely, Gaozu said to his courtiers: The Turks invaded, but they came to sue for peace. Which is more advantageous, war or peace?

古文：太常卿郑元璹曰： 战则怨深，不如和利。 
现代文：太常卿郑元说： 交战会加深仇怨，不如讲和有利。 
English: Zheng Yuan, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, said: "Fighting will deepen hatred, it is better to make peace."

古文：中书令封德彝曰： 突厥恃犬羊之众，有轻中国之意，若不战而和，示之以弱，明年将复来。
现代文：中书令封德彝认为： 突厥仗着兵力众多，轻视我们中原的大唐王朝，如果不战而和，是向他们显示软弱，明年还会重来。
English: In the middle of the book, Feng Deyao said: The Turks have a large number of troops and despise the Great Tang Dynasty in our Central Plains. If there is no war, it is a sign of weakness to them. It will happen again next year.

古文：臣愚以为不如击之，既胜而后与和，则恩威兼著矣。 
现代文：以臣的愚见不如打击他们，取胜以后再讲和，这样就恩威并重了！ 
English: It is better to defeat the foolishness of the vassals, and then make peace after the victory. In this way, grace and dignity are equally important!

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了封德彝的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：己巳，并州大总管襄邑王神符破突厥于汾东；汾州刺史萧顗破突厥，斩首五千馀级。
现代文：己巳，唐并州大总管襄邑王李神符在汾东打败突厥；汾州刺史萧打败突厥，斩首五千多级。
English: At that time, Xiangyi Wang Lishenfu, the general manager of the Tang Dynasty's unified states, defeated the Turks in Shandong; Zhi Shi Xiao of Bozhou defeated the Turks and beheaded more than 5,000 people.

古文：吐谷浑陷洮州，遣武州刺史贺拔亮御之。
现代文：吐谷浑侵犯洮州，唐派武州刺史贺拔亮抵御来敌。
English: Tugu Hun invaded Bozhou, and Tang sent the Buzhou statesman He Bailiang to resist the invaders.

古文：丙子，突厥寇廉州；戊寅，陷大震关。
现代文：丙子，突厥侵犯廉州，戊寅，攻陷大震关。
English: Bong Zi, the Turks invaded Lianzhou, Wu Yin, captured the Great Seismic Barrier.

古文：上遣郑元璹诣颉利。
现代文：高祖派郑元去见颉利可汗。
English: Gao Zu sent Zheng Yuan to meet with Qili Khan.

古文：是时，突厥精骑数十万，自介休至晋州，数百里间，填溢山谷。
现代文：当时，突厥几十万精骑兵，弃斥着从介休到晋州几百里之间的山谷。
English: At that time, the Turks had hundreds of thousands of elite cavalry, abandoned in the valley between Jiexiu and Jinzhou.

古文：元璹见颉利，责以负约，与相辨诘，颉利颇惭。
现代文：郑元见到颉利，责备他背叛盟约，与颉利展开辩论，颉利颇为惭愧。
English: When Zheng Yuan saw Gong Li, he accused him of betraying the covenant and started a debate with Gong Li. Gong Li was quite ashamed.

古文：元璹因说颉利曰： 唐与突厥，风俗不同，突厥虽得唐地，不能居也。
现代文：郑元趁机劝颉利道： 唐与突厥，风俗不同，突厥就是得到唐的领土，也不能居住。
English: Zheng Yuan took the opportunity to persuade Gong Li: Tang and Turk, customs are different, Turk is to get the territory of Tang, can not live.

古文：今虏掠所得，皆入国人，于可汗何有？
现代文：如今俘虏与抢夺的财物，都给了突厥百姓，可汗您得到了什么？
English: Now the captives and the plundered property have all been given to the Turkish people. Khan, what have you gained?

古文：不如旋师，复修和亲，可无跋涉之劳，坐受金币，又皆入可汗府库，孰与弃昆弟积年之欢，而结子孙无穷之怨乎！ 
现代文：不如回军，重新和亲，可以免除了跋涉的辛劳，坐享金银财物，并且都进了可汗您的仓库，比起抛弃了兄弟之间多年的交情，给子孙后代结下无穷的仇怨，哪一个更好呢？ 
English: Would it not be better to return to the army, make new friends, be spared the toil of the trek, enjoy the gold, silver and property, and all go into Khan your warehouse, than to abandon the friendship between brothers for many years and create endless hatred for future generations, which one is better?

古文：颉利悦，引兵还。
现代文：颉利愉快地听从了他的意见，带兵撤回突厥。
English: Hari happily followed his advice and led his troops back to Turkey.

古文：元璹自义宁以来，五使突厥，几死者数焉。
现代文：郑元从义宁年间以来，五次出使突厥，多次面临死亡的威胁。
English: Zheng Yuan has been sent to Turkey five times since the Yining era, and has repeatedly faced the threat of death.

古文：九月，癸巳，交州刺史权士通、弘州总管宇文歆、灵州总管杨师道击突厥于三观山，破之。
现代文：九月癸巳，唐交州刺史权士通、弘州总管宇文歆、灵州总管杨师道在三观山攻击并打败了突厥。
English: In September of the same year, the Tang Jiaozhou governor Guanzhi Tong, the general manager of Hongzhou, U Wenjun, and the general manager of Lingzhou, Yang Shidao, attacked and defeated the Turks in Sanguan Mountain.

古文：乙未，太子班师。
现代文：乙未，太子李建成班师回朝。
English: B, Prince Li Jiancheng returned to the imperial court.

古文：丙申，宇文歆邀突厥于崇岗镇，大破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：丙申，宇文歆在崇岗镇阻截突厥，大败突厥，斩首一千多级。
English: Bishin, Uwenjun blocked the Turks in Chonggang Town, defeated the Turks, and beheaded more than a thousand.

古文：壬寅，定州总管双士洛等击突厥于恒山之南，丙午，领军将军安兴贵击突厥于甘州，皆破之。
现代文：壬寅，唐定州总管双士洛在恒山南麓攻击突厥，丙午，唐领军将军安兴贵在甘州攻打突厥，均打败了突厥。
English: Jinyin, the general manager of Tang's Dingzhou, Shuang Shiluo, attacked the Turks at the southern foot of the Hengshan Mountains, and in the afternoon, Tang's leading general, An Xinggui, attacked the Turks in Ganzhou, both of which defeated the Turks.

古文：刘黑闼陷瀛州，杀刺史马匡武。
现代文：刘黑闼攻陷瀛州，杀死唐瀛州刺史马匡武。
English: Liu Heixuan invaded Zhangzhou and killed the Tang dynasty Zhangzhou assassin Ma Kuangwu.

古文：盐州人马君德以城叛附黑闼。
现代文：盐州人马君德以盐州城反叛归附了刘黑闼。
English: Ma Junde, a resident of Yanzhou, annexed Liu Heyao as a result of the rebellion in Yanzhou City.

古文：高开道寇蠡州。
现代文：高开道侵犯蠡州。
English: Gaokao encroaches on Zhangzhou.

古文：冬，十月，己酉，诏齐王元吉讨刘黑闼于山东。
现代文：冬季，十月己酉，唐高祖下诏命齐王李元吉在山东讨伐刘黑闼。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Gaozhu of Tang ordered Qi Wang Li Yuanji to fight Liu Heyao in Shandong.

古文：壬子，以元吉为领军大将军、并州大总管。
现代文：壬子，任命李元吉为领军大将军、并州大总管。
English: Jinsi, appointed Li Yuanji as the leading general and the chief administrator of the State University.

古文：癸丑，贝州刺史许善护与黑闼弟十善战于鄃县，善护全军皆没。
现代文：癸丑，唐贝州刺史许善护在县与刘黑闼之弟刘十善交战，许善护全军覆没。
English: Ugly, Tangbe Prefecture's most notorious warlord, Xu Zenshu, fought with Liu Heyao's younger brother, Liu Shishan, in the county, and Xu Zenshu's entire army was wiped out.

古文：甲寅，右武候将军桑显和击黑闼于晏城，破之。
现代文：甲寅，唐右武候将军桑显和在晏城攻击打败了刘黑闼。
English: A Yin, Tang Yu Wu and General Sang Hsien attacked and defeated Liu He Rong in Lucheng.

古文：观州刺史刘会以城叛附黑闼。
现代文：唐观州刺史刘会以观州城反叛，归附了刘黑闼。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Guanzhou Liu Clan rebelled by seizing the city of Guanzhou, which was then annexed by Liu Heyao.

古文：契丹寇北平。
现代文：契丹侵犯北平。
English: Khitan invaded Beiping.

古文：甲子，以秦王世民领左、右十二卫大将军。
现代文：甲子，唐以秦王李世民统领左、右十二卫大将军。
English: In ancient times, the Tang Dynasty had the Qin King Li Shimin as the leader of the 12 generals of the Left and Right Guards.

古文：乙丑，行军总管淮阳壮王道玄与刘黑闼战于下博，军败，为黑闼所杀。
现代文：乙丑，唐行军总管淮阳壮王李道玄与刘黑闼在下博交战，唐军失败，李道玄被刘黑闼杀死。
English: In the second ugly, Li Daoxuan, the general manager of the Tang marching army, Huaiyang Zhuang Wang, and Liu Heixuan fought in the lower Bo, the Tang army failed, and Li Daoxuan was killed by Liu Heixuan.

古文：时道玄将兵三万，与副将史万宝不协；道玄帅轻骑先出犯陈，使万宝将大军继之。
现代文：当时李道玄带领三万兵马，与副将史万宝不和，李道玄率领轻骑兵率先出战冲入敌阵，命史万宝率大军随后。
English: At that time, Li Daoxuan led thirty thousand soldiers and horses, and was at odds with Vice Admiral Shi Wanbao. Li Daoxuan led the light cavalry to rush into the enemy line first, followed by the army led by Shi Wanbao.

古文：万宝拥兵不进，谓所亲曰： 我奉手敕云，淮阳小儿，军事皆委老夫。
现代文：史万宝按兵不动，对他的亲信说： 我奉皇帝手书敕令说淮阳王是毛孩子，军队行动均委托老夫我。
English: Shi Wanbao did not move an inch, and said to his cronies: "I obey the emperor's handwritten order that Huaiyang Wang is Mao's child, and the army's actions are entrusted to me.

古文：今王轻脱妄进，若与之俱，必同败没，不如以王饵贼，王败，贼必争进，我坚陈以待之，破之必矣。 
现代文：现在淮阳王冒冒失失地出击，如果和他一同进攻，必然一起失败导致覆没，不如用淮阳王作饵引诱敌人，如果淮阳王失败，敌人必定争相前进，我坚守以待，就一定能够打败敌人！ 
English: Now King Huaiyang is venturing to attack. If we attack together with him, we will inevitably fail together, leading to annihilation. It is better to use King Huaiyang as a bait to lure the enemy. If King Huaiyang fails, the enemy will certainly rush forward. If I hold on and wait, I will definitely be able to defeat the enemy!

古文：由是道玄独进败没。
现代文：因此李道玄孤军深入敌阵战败阵亡。
English: As a result, Li Daoxuan's lone army went deep into the enemy lines and was defeated and killed.

古文：万宝勒兵将战，士卒皆无斗志，军遂大溃，万宝逃归。
现代文：史万宝带兵准备战斗，但士兵都没有了斗志，唐军因此大败，史万宝逃回。
English: Shi Wanbao led the soldiers to prepare for battle, but the soldiers had no fighting spirit. As a result, the Tang army was defeated, and Shi Wanbao fled back.

古文：道玄数从秦王世民征伐，死时年十九，世民深惜之，谓人曰： 道玄常从吾征伐，见吾深入贼陈，心慕效之，以至于此。 
现代文：李道玄多次跟随秦王李世民征伐，死时才十九岁，李世民深为痛惜，对人说道： 道玄常跟随我征伐，见我深入敌阵，心中羡慕想要模仿，才会这样。 
English: Li Daoxuan followed Qin King Li Shimin to conquer many times, and was only nineteen years old when he died. Li Shimin was deeply sorry and said to people: Daoxuan often followed me to conquer, saw me go deep into the enemy's lines, and envied in his heart and wanted to imitate, that's why.

古文：为之流涕。
现代文：并为李道玄的阵亡而痛哭。
English: and wept bitterly for the death of Li Daoxuan.

古文：世民自起兵以来，前后数十战，常身先士卒，轻骑深入，虽屡危殆而未尝为矢刃所伤。
现代文：李世民自从太原起兵以来，前前后后经过几十仗，经常身先士卒，轻骑深入敌阵，虽然屡次濒临绝境，但从来没有被刀箭伤过。
English: Since the Taiyuan Uprising, Li Shimin has been through dozens of battles, often leading the way, riding lightly deep into the enemy lines. Although he has repeatedly been on the brink of disaster, he has never been wounded by a sword or arrow.

古文：林士弘遣其弟鄱阳王药师攻循州，刺史杨略与战，斩之，其将王戎以南昌州降。
现代文：林士弘派遣他的弟弟鄱阳王林药师攻打循州，唐循州刺史杨略与林药师交战，杀了他，林药师的将领王戎以南昌州投降。
English: Lin Shihong sent his younger brother, Jinyang Wang Lin Pharmacist, to attack Xizhou, Tang Xizhou's general, Wang Rong, surrendered to Nanchang.

古文：士弘惧，己巳，请降。
现代文：林士弘害怕了，己巳，也请求投降。
English: Lin Shih-hong was afraid, so he also asked for surrender.

古文：寻复走保安成山洞，袁州人相聚应之；洪州总管若干则遣兵击破之。
现代文：随即又逃入安成的山洞，袁州百姓相互聚合响应林士弘，唐洪州总管若干则派兵打败了他们。
English: They then fled into a cave in Ancheng. The people of Yuanzhou rallied together in response to Lin Shihong, while several officers of the Tang Hongzhou General Administration sent troops to defeat them.

古文：会士弘死，其众遂散。
现代文：恰好林士弘死亡，他的部下便散去。
English: Just as Lin Shihong died, his subordinates dispersed.

古文：淮阳王道玄之败也，山东震骇，洺州总管庐江王瑗弃城西走，州县皆叛附于刘黑闼，旬日间，黑闼尽复故地，乙亥，进据洺州。
现代文：淮阳王李道玄失败，山东地区感到震惊，唐州总管庐江王李瑗放弃城池向西逃跑，州县也都反叛归附了刘黑闼，十天之内，刘黑闼就收复了他原来的全部地盘，乙亥，进军占据了州。
English: Huaiyang king Li Daoxuan failed, Shandong region was shocked, Tangzhou general manager Li Jiang abandoned the city and fled to the west, and all counties rebelled and were annexed by Liu Heixuan. Within ten days, Liu Heixuan regained all of his original territory, and Yi Hai marched into and occupied the state.

古文：十一月，庚辰，沧州刺史程大买为黑闼所迫，弃城走。
现代文：十一月庚辰，唐沧州刺史程大买因为刘黑闼的逼近，放弃城池逃跑。
English: In November, Gengchen, Tang Cangzhou stabbed Shicheng because of Liu Heyao's approach, abandoning the city and fleeing.

古文：齐王元吉畏黑闼兵强，不敢进。
现代文：齐王李元吉畏惧刘黑闼军队的强盛，不敢进军。
English: The king of Qi, Li Yuanji, was afraid of the strength of Liu Heyao's army and did not dare to march.

古文：上之起兵晋阳也，皆秦王世民之谋，上谓世民曰： 若事成，则天下皆汝所致，当以汝为太子。 
现代文：高祖在晋阳起兵，都是秦王李世民的计谋，高祖对李世民说： 如果事业成功，那么天下都是你带来的，该立你为太子。 
English: Gao Zu said to Li Shimin: "If your cause is successful, then you have brought the whole world with you, and you should be made the crown prince."

古文：世民拜且辞。
现代文：李世民拜谢并推辞。
English: Li Shimin bowed and declined.

古文：及为唐王，将佐亦请以世民为世子，上将立之，世民固辞而止。
现代文：待到高祖成为唐王，将领们也请求以李世民为世子，高祖准备立他，李世民坚决推辞才作罢。
English: It wasn't until Gao Zu became the king of Tang that the generals also requested that Li Shimin be his heir. Gao Zu was ready to appoint him, but Li Shimin firmly refused.

古文：太子建成，性宽简，喜酒色游畋；齐王元吉，多过失；皆无宠于上。
现代文：太子李建成性情松缓惰慢，喜欢饮酒，贪恋女色，爱打猎；齐王李元吉，常有过错，均不受高祖宠爱。
English: Prince Li Jiancheng had a lax and lazy temperament, liked drinking, lusted after women, and loved hunting; the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, was often at fault, and was not favored by Gao Zu.

古文：世民功名日盛，上常有意以代建成，建成内不自安，乃与元吉协谋，共倾世民，各引树党友。
现代文：李世民功勋名望日增，高祖常常有意让他取代李建成为太子，李建成心中不安，于是与李元吉共同谋划，一起排挤李世民，他们各自交结建立自己的党羽。
English: The fame of Li Shimin's merits increased day by day. Gaozhu often intended to let him replace Li Jian as the crown prince. Li Jiancheng was uneasy in his heart, so he and Li Yuanji jointly plotted to oust Li Shimin, and they each established their own party.

古文：上晚年多内宠，小王且二十人，其母竞交结诸长子以自固。
现代文：高祖晚年宠幸的妃嫔很多，有近二十位小王子，他们的母亲争相交结各位年长的王子来巩固自己的地位。
English: Gaozu had many favorite concubines in his later years. There were nearly twenty little princes, and their mothers vied with each other to intermarry with the older princes in order to strengthen their position.

古文：建成与元吉曲意事诸妃嫔，谄谀赂遗，无所不至，以求媚于上。
现代文：李建成和李元吉都曲意侍奉各位妃嫔，奉承献媚、贿赂、馈赠，无所不用，以求得皇上的宠爱。
English: Both Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanjie were eager to serve the concubines, flattering, bribing, and giving gifts. They did everything to win the emperor's favor.

古文：或言蒸于张婕妤、尹德妃，宫禁深秘，莫能明也。
现代文：也有人说他们与张婕妤、尹德妃私通，宫禁幽深神秘，此事无从证实。
English: Some people also said that they had sexual intercourse with Zhang Ye and Yin Defei, and that the palace ban was deeply mysterious, which could not be confirmed.

古文：是时，东宫、诸王公、妃主之家及后宫亲戚横长安中，恣为非法，有司不敢诘。
现代文：当时，太子东宫、各王公、妃主之家以及后宫妃嫔的亲属，在长安横行霸道，为非作歹，而主管部门却不敢追究。
English: At that time, the relatives of the East Palace of the Crown Prince, the princes and princesses, the house of the empress and the concubines of the harem, were domineering in Chang'an, committing misdeeds, but the competent departments did not dare to investigate.

古文：世民居承乾殿，元吉居武德殿后院，与上台、东宫昼夜通行，无复禁限。
现代文：李世民住在承乾殿，李元吉住在武德殿后院，他们的住处与皇帝寝宫、太子东宫之间日夜通行，不再有所限制。
English: Li Shimin lives in the Chengxian Palace, and Li Yuanji lives in the backyard of the Wude Palace. There are no longer any restrictions between their residences and the emperor's sleeping palace and the prince's eastern palace.

古文：太子、二王出入上台，皆乘马、携弓刀杂物，相遇如家人礼。
现代文：太子与秦、齐二王出入皇帝寝宫，均乘马、携带刀弓杂物，彼此相遇只按家人行礼。
English: The prince and the Qin and Qi kings entered and left the emperor's bedchamber on horseback, carrying swords, bows and other items. When they met, they only bowed to each other as family members do.

古文：太子令、秦、齐王教与诏敕并行，有司莫知所从，唯据得之先后为定。
现代文：太子所下达的令，秦、齐二王所下达的教和皇帝的诏敕并行，有关部门不知所从，只有按照收到的先后为准。
English: The orders issued by the prince, the teachings issued by the Qin and Qi kings, and the emperor's edict go hand in hand, and the relevant departments do not know what to do, only in accordance with the order received.

古文：世民独不奉事诸妃嫔，诸妃嫔争誉建成、元吉而短世民。
现代文：唯有李世民不去讨好诸位妃嫔，诸妃嫔妃争相称赞李建成、李元吉而诋毁李世民。
English: Only Li Shimin did not try to please the concubines. The concubines praised Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji, but slandered Li Shimin.

古文：世民平洛阳，上使贵妃等数人诣洛阳选阅隋宫人及收府库珍物。
现代文：李世民平定洛阳，高祖让贵妃等几人到洛阳挑选隋朝宫女和收取仓库里的珍宝。
English: Li Shimin subdued Luoyang, Gao Zu let Guifei and several others go to Luoyang to select the Sui imperial princess and collect the treasures in the warehouse.

古文：贵妃等私从世民求宝货及为其亲属求官，世民曰： 宝货皆已籍奏，官当授贤才有功者。 
现代文：贵妃等人私下向李世民要宝物并为自己的亲戚求官，李世民回答说： 宝物都已经登记在册上报朝廷了，官位应当授予贤德有才能和有功劳的人。 
English: Guifei and others privately asked Li Shimin for treasures and sought positions for their relatives. Li Shimin replied, "The treasures have all been registered and reported to the imperial court. Official positions should be awarded to people with virtue, talent and merit."

古文：皆不许，由是益怨。
现代文：没有答应她们的任何要求，因此妃嫔们更加恨他。
English: He didn't agree to any of their demands, so the concubines hated him even more.

古文：世民以淮安王神通有功，给田数十顷。
现代文：李世民因为淮安王李神通有功，拨给他几十顷田地。
English: Li Shimin, because Huai'an King Li Shentong had made great contributions, allocated him dozens of hectares of fields.

古文：张婕妤之父因婕妤求之于上，上手敕赐之，神通以教给在先，不与。
现代文：张婕妤的父亲通过张婕妤向高祖请求要这些田，高祖手写敕令将这些田赐给他，李神通因为秦王的教在先，不让田。
English: Zhang Ye's father asked Gao Zu for these fields through Zhang Ye. Gao Zu gave these fields to him with a handwritten order. Li Shentong did not let the fields go because the teachings of King Qin took precedence.

古文：婕妤诉于上曰： 敕赐妾父田，秦王夺之以与神通。 
现代文：张婕妤向高祖告状道： 皇上敕赐给我父亲的田地，被秦王夺去了给了神通。 
English: Zhang Xuan complained to Gao Zu, saying: The Emperor Xuan gave my father's farmland, but it was taken away by King Qin and given to Shentong.

古文：上遂发怒，责世民曰： 我手敕不如汝教邪！ 
现代文：高祖因此发怒，责备李世民说： 难道我的手敕不如你的教吗？ 
English: Gaozhu was angry and scolded Li Shimin, saying, "Is my bracelet not as good as your teachings?

古文：他日，谓左仆射裴寂曰： 此儿久典兵在外，为书生所教，非复昔日子也。 
现代文：过了些天，高祖对左仆射裴寂说： 这孩子长期在外掌握军队，受书生们教唆，已经不再是原来的那个儿子了。 
English: A few days later, Gaozu said to his left-hand man, Sho Peizhang, "This boy has been out of the army for a long time and has been taught by scholars. He is no longer the same son.

古文：尹德妃父阿鼠骄横，秦王府属杜如晦过其门，阿鼠家童数人曳如晦坠马，殴之，折一指，曰： 汝何人，敢过我门而不下马！ 
现代文：尹德妃的父亲尹阿鼠骄横跋扈，秦王府的官员杜如晦经过他的门前，尹阿鼠的几名家童把杜如晦拽下马，揍了他一顿并打断了他一根手指，说道： 你是什么人，胆敢过我的门前不下马！ 
English: Yin Defei's father, Yin Ah Rui, was arrogant and domineering. Du Ruo, an official of the Qin royal court, passed in front of his door. Several of Yin Ah Rui's children pulled Du Ruo off his horse, beat him up and broke one of his fingers, saying: "Who are you, daring to pass in front of my door without dismounting!

古文：阿鼠恐世民诉于上，先使德妃奏云： 秦王左右陵暴妾家。 
现代文：尹阿鼠怕李世民告诉皇上，先让尹德妃对皇上说： 秦王的亲信欺侮我家人。 
English: Yin Ah Mouse was afraid that Li Shimin would tell the emperor, so he first asked Yin Defei to say to the emperor: The close friends of King Qin have bullied my family.

古文：上复怒责世民曰： 我妃嫔家犹为汝左右所陵，况小民乎！ 
现代文：高祖又生气地责备李世民说： 我的妃嫔家都受你身边的人欺凌，何况是小老百姓！ 
English: Gao Zu also angrily rebuked Li Shimin, saying, "All my concubines are bullied by the people around you, not to mention the common people!"

古文：世民深自辩析，上终不信。
现代文：李世民反复为自己辩解，但高祖始终不相信他。
English: Li Shimin repeatedly defended himself, but Gaozu never believed him.

古文：世民每侍宴宫中，对诸妃嫔，思太穆皇后早终，不得见上有天下，或歔欷流涕，上顾之不乐。
现代文：李世民每次在宫中侍奉高祖宴饮，面对诸位妃嫔，想起母亲太穆皇后死得早，没能看到高祖拥有天下，有时不免叹气流泪，高祖看到后很不高兴。
English: Every time Li Shimin served Gao Zu at a banquet in the palace, facing all the concubines, he remembered that his mother, Empress Taimu, had died early and had not been able to see Gao Zu own the world. Sometimes he sighed and shed tears. Gao Zu was very unhappy when he saw it.

古文：诸妃嫔因密共谮世民曰： 海内幸无事，陛下春秋高，唯宜相娱乐，而秦王每独涕泣，正是憎疾妾等。陛下万岁后，妾母子必不为秦王所容，无孑遗矣！ 
现代文：各位妃嫔趁机暗中一同诋毁李世民道： 天下幸好平安无事，陛下年寿已高，只适合娱乐娱乐，而秦王总是一个人流泪，这实际上是憎恨我们，陛下作古后，我们母子必定不为秦王所容，会被杀得一个不留！ 
English: All of you concubines took advantage of the opportunity to secretly denigrate Li Shimin together: Fortunately, there is nothing wrong with the world. His Majesty's age is already high, only suitable for entertainment. And Qin Wang always shed tears alone, which is actually hate us. After His Majesty's death, our mother and son will certainly not be tolerated by Qin Wang, and they will be killed one by one!

古文：因相与泣，且曰： 皇太子仁孝，陛下以妾母子属之，必能保全。 
现代文：因此相互对着流泪，并且说： 皇太子仁爱孝顺，陛下将我们母子托付给太子，必然能获得保全。 
English: Therefore, they shed tears for each other and said, "Crown Prince, be kind, loving and filial. Your Majesty entrusted our mother and son to the Crown Prince, and they will surely be protected."

古文：上为之怆然。
现代文：高祖也为此很伤心。
English: Gaozu is also very sad about this.

古文：由是无易太子意，待世民浸疏，而建成、元吉日亲矣。
现代文：从此高祖打消了改立太子的念头，对李世民逐渐疏远，而对李建成、李元吉却日益亲密了。
English: From then on, Gao Zu dispelled the idea of changing the crown prince, and gradually distanced himself from Li Shimin, while he became increasingly close to Li Jiancheng and Li Yuanji.

古文：太子中允王珪、洗马魏征说太子曰： 秦王功盖天下，中外归心；殿下但以年长位居东宫，无大功以镇服海内。
现代文：太子中允王、太子洗马魏徽劝太子说： 秦王功盖天下，内外归心于他；而殿下不过是因为年长才被立为太子，没有大功可以镇服天下。
English: Prince Zhong Yun Wang and Prince Zi Ma Wei Hui advised the prince, saying, "Qin Wang has made great contributions to the world, and people at home and abroad are devoted to him. However, His Royal Highness was only made the prince because of his age, and no great contribution can conquer the world."

古文：今刘黑闼散亡之馀，众不满万，资粮匮乏，以大军临之，势如拉朽，殿下宜自击之以取功名，因结纳山东豪杰，庶可自安。 
现代文：现在刘黑闼的兵力分散逃亡之后，剩下不足一万人，又缺乏粮食物资，如果用大军进逼，势如摧枯拉朽，殿下应当亲自去攻打以获得功劳名望，趁机结交山东的豪杰，也许就可以保住自己的地位了。 
English: Now, after Liu Heixuan's troops dispersed and fled, there are less than ten thousand people left, and there is a lack of grain and food supplies. If you use a large army to advance, the situation will be devastating. Your highness should personally attack to gain merit and fame, take the opportunity to make friends with the heroes of Shandong, and maybe you can maintain your position.

古文：太子乃请行于上，上许之。
现代文：太子于是向高祖请求带兵出征，高祖答应了他的请求。
English: The prince then asked Gaozu to lead an army into battle, and Gaozu agreed to his request.

古文：珪，頍之兄子也。
现代文：王是王兄长的儿子。
English: Wang is the son of Wang's elder brother.

古文：甲申，诏太子建成将兵讨黑闼，其陕东道大行台及山东道行军元帅、河南、河北诸州并受建成处分，得以便宜从事。
现代文：甲申，高祖下诏命太子李建成带兵讨伐刘黑闼，陕东道大行台及山东道行军元帅、河南、河北各州均受建成处置，他有权随机行事。
English: Gao Sheng, Gao Zu's descendant, issued an edict ordering Prince Li Jiancheng to lead an army to fight Liu Hecun, and the marshals of the Great March of Shaanxi and the Great March of Shandong, and the states of Henan and Hebei were all subject to Jiancheng's disposition, and he had the right to act randomly.

古文：乙酉，封宗室略阳公道宗等十八人为郡王。
现代文：乙酉，唐封宗室略阳公李道宗等十八人为郡王。
English: Eighteen people, including Atsuko and Li Daozong, the Tang Dynasty empress Dowager's concubine and concubine of Emperor Xiaoyang, were the county kings.

古文：道宗，道玄从父弟也，为灵州总管，梁师都遣弟洛儿引突厥数万围之，道宗乘间出击，大破之。
现代文：李道宗是李道玄的堂弟，官居灵州总管，梁师都派弟弟梁洛儿带几万突厥军包围他，李道宗趁机出击，大败敌军。
English: Li Daozong was the cousin of Li Daoxuan, the governor of Lingzhou. Liang Shidu sent his brother Liang Lore to encircle him with tens of thousands of Turkic troops. Li Daozong took the opportunity to attack and defeated the enemy army.

古文：突厥与师都连结，遣其郁射设入居故五原，道宗逐出之，斥地千馀里。
现代文：突厥与梁师都相互勾结，派郁射设进入唐境，居住在原先的五原，李道宗把郁射设赶出五原，并开拓了一千多里的领土。
English: Both the Turks and Liang Shi colluded with each other to send Yuzha to enter Tang territory and live in the original Wufang, Li Daozong drove Yuzha out of Wufang and opened up more than a thousand miles of territory.

古文：上以道宗武干如魏任城王彰，乃立为任城郡王。
现代文：高祖因为道宗的武功才干犹如曹魏的任城王曹彰，于是立他为任城郡王。
English: Because Gao Zu's martial arts ability of Taoism is just like Cao Wei's Rencheng King Cao Chang, he appointed him as Rencheng County King.

古文：丙申，上幸宜州。
现代文：丙申，唐高祖亲临宜州。
English: It is said that Tang Gaozu himself came to Yizhou.

古文：己亥，齐王元吉遣兵击刘十善于魏州，破之。
现代文：己亥，齐王李元吉派兵在魏州攻击刘十善，打败了他。
English: At the same time, the king of Qi, Li Yuanji, sent troops to attack Liu Shishan in Weizhou and defeated him.

古文：癸卯，上校猎于富平。
现代文：癸卯，唐高祖在富平围猎。
English: According to legend, Tang Gaozu went hunting in Fuping.

古文：刘黑闼拥兵而南，自相州以北州县皆附之，唯魏州总管田留安勒兵拒守。
现代文：刘黑闼召集兵马向南进发，自相州以北的唐朝州县均归附了刘黑闼，唯有魏州总管留因安带兵坚守抵抗。
English: Liu Heibei gathered his soldiers and horses and marched southward. All of the counties of the Tang Dynasty north of Xiangzhou were annexed by Liu Heibei. Only the governor of Wei Province, Rui Yinan, held out with his soldiers.

古文：黑闼攻之，不下，引兵南拔元城，复还攻之。
现代文：刘黑闼攻不下魏州，便带军向南攻取了元城，又回军攻打魏州。
English: Liu Heyao could not conquer Weizhou, so he led his army to the south to conquer Yuancheng, and then returned to attack Weizhou.

古文：十二月，庚戌，立宗室孝友等八人为郡王。
现代文：十二月庚戌，唐立宗室李孝友等八人为郡王。
English: In December, Geng Yao, Tang Li's ancestor Li Xiaoyu and eight others were crowned county kings.

古文：孝友，神通之子也。
现代文：李孝友是淮安王李神通的儿子。
English: Li Xiaoyu is the son of Huai'an King Li Shengtong.

古文：丙辰，上校猎于华池。
现代文：丙辰，唐高祖在华池县围猎。
English: Xing Chen, Tang Gao's ancestor, went hunting in Huachi County.

古文：戊午，刘黑闼陷恒州，杀刺史王公政。
现代文：戊午，刘黑闼攻陷恒州，杀死唐恒州刺史王公政。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st lunar month, Liu Hefei invaded Hengzhou and killed Tang Hengzhou assassin Wang Gongzheng.

古文：庚申，车驾至长安。
现代文：庚申，唐高祖回到长安。
English: Gaoshen, Tang Gao Zu returned to Chang'an.

古文：癸亥，幽州大总管李艺复廉、定二州。
现代文：癸亥，幽州大总管李艺收复廉、定二州。
English: Zou Hai, Yuzhou Chief Superintendent Li Yi recovered Lian, Ding two states.

古文：甲子，田留安击刘黑闼，破之，获其莘州刺史孟柱，降将卒六千人。
现代文：甲子，田留安攻打刘黑闼，打败了他，并抓获刘黑闼的莘州刺史孟柱，刘黑闼六千名将领士兵投降了田留安。
English: First, Tian Rui'an attacked Liu Hei'an, defeated him, and captured Liu Hei'an's eunuch Meng Zhu. Liu Hei'an's six thousand generals and soldiers surrendered to Tian Rui'an.

古文：是时，山东豪杰多杀长吏以应黑闼，上下相猜，人益离怨；留安待吏民独坦然无疑，白事者无问亲疏，皆听直入卧内，每谓吏民曰： 吾与尔曹俱为国御贼，固宜同心协力，必欲弃顺从逆者，但自斩吾首去。 
现代文：当时，山东地区的豪杰纷纷杀死本地长官响应刘黑闼，因此上下互相猜疑，百姓也日益离心离德；只有田留安对待下属、百姓坦然无疑，有人报告事情，无论亲疏都听任他们直接到寝室，还常常对下属、百姓说： 我和各位都是为国家抵抗来敌，自然应当同心协力，如果有人一定要弃顺从逆，只管自己来砍了我的头拿走。 
English: At that time, the heroes of Shandong region killed local officials one after another in response to Liu Heyao. As a result, there was mutual suspicion between the top and the bottom, and the people were increasingly alienated from virtue. Only Tian Ruian treated his subordinates and the people calmly and indubitably. When someone reported the matter, he allowed them to go directly to the bedroom, regardless of whether they were relatives or strangers. He often said to his subordinates and the people: I and all of you are enemies for the country's resistance. Naturally, we should work together. If someone must abandon obedience, just cut off my head and take it away.

古文：吏民皆相戒曰： 田公推至诚以待人，当共竭死力报之，必不可负。 
现代文：下属、百姓都相互提醒道： 田公以至诚之心待人，我们应当共同尽心竭力报答他，一定不要辜负他的信任。 
English: Subordinates and ordinary people all reminded each other: Tian Gong treats people with the utmost sincerity, we should make every effort to repay him, and we must not betray his trust.

古文：有苑竹林者，本黑闼之党，潜有异志。
现代文：有一名叫苑竹林的人，本来是刘黑闼的党羽，暗中怀有异心。
English: There was a man named Yuan Zhu Lin, who was originally a member of Liu Heyao's party, but secretly harbored a different opinion.

古文：留安知之，不发其事，引置左右，委以管钥；竹林感激，遂更归心，卒收其用。
现代文：田留安知道苑竹林的事，却没有揭发他，而是将他安置在身边，让他掌管钥匙；苑竹林深受感动，便改而归顺了田留安，这样做最终收到了它效用。
English: Tian Liu'an knew about Yuan Zhu Lin, but did not expose him, but placed him at his side and let him control the key; Yuan Zhu Lin was deeply moved, so he changed his allegiance to Tian Liu'an, and in doing so finally received its effect.

古文：以功进封道国公。
现代文：田留安因功进爵封为道国公。
English: For his achievements, Tiruyasu was knighted and given the title of provincial governor.

古文：乙丑，并州刺史成仁重击范愿，破之。
现代文：乙丑，唐并州刺史成仁重攻打范愿，打败了他。
English: Second Ugly, Tang Yingzhou stabbed Shih Chengren, and attacked and defeated him.

古文：刘黑闼攻魏州未下，太子建成、齐王元吉大军至昌乐，黑闼引兵拒之，再陈，皆不战而罢。
现代文：刘黑闼没有攻下魏州，太子李建成、齐王李元吉的大军到达昌乐，刘黑闼带兵来抵抗，两次列阵，都没有打就停了下来。
English: Liu Hefei did not conquer Weizhou, the army of Prince Li Jiancheng and Qi King Li Yuanji reached Changle, Liu Hefei led the troops to resist, and they lined up twice, but stopped without fighting.

古文：魏征言于太子曰： 前破黑闼，其将帅皆悬名处死，妻子系虏；故齐王之来，虽有诏书赦其党与之罪，皆莫之信。
现代文：魏徵对太子说： 以前打败刘黑闼，他的将帅都预先写上名字处以死罪，妻儿被俘虏，因此齐王前来，虽然有诏书赦免刘黑闼党羽的罪过，但他们都不相信。
English: Wei Zheng said to the prince: He had defeated Liu Heihe before, his generals had written their names in advance and were sentenced to death, and his wife and children were captured. Therefore, King Qi came, and although there was an edict to pardon the sins of Liu Heihe's followers, they did not believe it.

古文：今宜悉解其囚俘，慰谕遣之，则可坐视其离散矣！ 
现代文：如今应当全部放掉那些被囚禁和俘虏的人，加以安慰晓谕再放他们走，这样就可以眼看着刘黑闼的势力分崩离析了！ 
English: Now is the time to release all those who have been imprisoned and captured, to comfort them and let them go, so that we can watch Liu Heyao's forces fall apart!

古文：太子从之。
现代文：太子听从了他的意见。
English: The prince obeyed.

古文：黑闼食尽，众多亡，或缚其渠帅以降。
现代文：刘黑闼粮食吃光了，部下纷纷逃跑，有些绑了自己的头领投降了唐军。
English: Liu Heyao ran out of food, his subordinates fled one after another, and some of them tied up their leaders and surrendered to the Tang army.

古文：黑闼恐城中兵出，与大军表里击之，遂夜遁。
现代文：刘黑闼恐怕魏州城里的守军出来，与唐大军里外夹击，便于夜晚逃跑。
English: Liu Heixuan feared that the defenders in the city of Weizhou would come out and clash with the Tang army inside and outside, making it easier to escape at night.

古文：至馆陶，永济桥未成，不得度。
现代文：跑到馆陶，永济桥还未建好，不能过河。
English: When I got to Guentao, the Yongji Bridge had not yet been built, so I couldn't cross the river.

古文：壬申，太子、齐王以大军至，黑闼使王小胡背水而陈，自视作桥成，即过桥西，众遂大溃，舍仗来降。
现代文：壬申，太子、齐王率大军到馆陶，刘黑闼让王小胡背靠河水列阵，自己看着桥搭好，立即过桥到了西岸，于是他的兵马迅速崩溃，士兵放下兵器前来投降。
English: Jinshin, the prince, and King Qi led a large army to Guangtou. Liu Heya let Wang Xiaohu line up with his back against the river. He watched as the bridge was built, and immediately crossed the bridge to the west bank. His troops quickly collapsed, and the soldiers laid down their weapons and surrendered.

古文：大军度桥追黑闼，度者才千馀骑，桥坏，由是黑闼得与数百骑亡去。
现代文：唐大军过桥追击，才过了一千多骑兵，桥梁毁坏，刘黑闼因此得以和几百名骑兵逃走。
English: Tang's army pursued across the bridge, and only after more than a thousand cavalry, the bridge was destroyed, so Liu Heyao was able to escape with several hundred cavalry.

古文：上以隋末战士多没于高丽，是岁，赐高丽王建武书，使悉遣还；亦使州县索高丽人在中土者，遣归其国。
现代文：高祖因为随朝末年有很多战士沦落在高丽，这一年，赐予高丽王建武信函，让他遣返流落在高丽的所有隋朝战士；又让州县搜寻在中国的高丽人，遣送他们回国。
English: Gaozu, because there were many soldiers who fell in Goryeo at the end of the dynasty, sent a letter to King Jianwu of Goryeo this year, asking him to repatriate all the Sui Dynasty soldiers who had been exiled in Goryeo; he also asked the prefectures to search for Goryeo people in China and send them back home.

古文：建武奉诏，遣还中国民前后以万数。
现代文：建武接受诏令，前后放回了数以万计的中国百姓。
English: Jianwu accepted the imperial edict and released tens of thousands of Chinese people.

古文：武德六年癸未，公元六二三年春，正月，己卯，刘黑闼所署饶州刺史诸葛德威执黑闼，举城降。
现代文：武德六年春季，正月己卯，刘黑闼任命的饶州刺史诸葛德威捉住刘黑闼，举城降唐。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Wude, in the first month of the year, the Raozhou assassin Zhuge Dewi, who was appointed by Liu Heixuan, captured Liu Heixuan and raised the city to Tang.

古文：时太子遣骑将刘弘基追黑闼，黑闼为官军所迫，奔走不得休息，至饶阳，从者才百馀人，馁甚。
现代文：当时太子李建成派骑兵将领刘弘基追击刘黑闼，刘黑闼被唐军追赶，日夜奔逃无法休息，到达饶阳，随行的才一百多人，十分饥饿。
English: At that time, Prince Li Jiancheng sent cavalry general Liu Hongji to chase Liu Heyao. Liu Heyao was chased by the Tang army, running day and night without rest, and arrived in Raoyang, accompanied by only more than a hundred people, very hungry.

古文：德威出迎，延黑闼入城，黑闼不可；德威涕泣固请，黑闼乃从之。
现代文：诸葛德威出城迎接刘黑闼，请他进城，刘黑闼不进城，诸葛德威流泪反复请求，于是刘黑闼答应了他的邀请。
English: Zhuge Dewei went out of the city to meet Liu Heyao, and asked him to come into the city. Liu Heyao did not come into the city, Zhuge Dewei repeatedly asked with tears, so Liu Heyao agreed to his invitation.

古文：至城旁市中憩止，德威馈之食；食未毕，德威勒兵执之，送诣太子，并其弟十善斩于洺州。
现代文：到城旁边的市场中休息，诸葛德威送给他们食物，还没吃完，诸葛德威便带兵把刘黑闼抓了起来，送到李建成处，刘黑闼和他的弟弟刘十善一起在州被斩首。
English: They rested in the market next to the city. Zhuge Dewi gave them food. Before they had finished eating, Zhuge Dewi led the soldiers to arrest Liu Heyao and sent him to Li Jiancheng's place. Liu Heyao and his brother Liu Shishan were beheaded together in the state.

古文：黑闼临刑叹曰： 我幸在家鉏菜，为高雅贤罪所误至此！ 
现代文：刘黑闼在临刑前叹息道： 我有幸在家种菜，却被高雅贤这些人害得落到如此下场！ 
English: Before his execution, Liu Heyao sighed, "I am fortunate to grow vegetables at home, but I was harmed to such an end by these people of high moral standards!

古文：壬午，巂州人王摩沙举兵，自称元帅，改元进通；遣骠骑将军卫彦讨之。
现代文：壬午，州人王摩沙起兵，自称元帅，改年号为进通，唐派遣骠骑将军卫彦讨伐。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the king of the people of the state, Mosa, raised an army, called himself a marshal, changed his name to Shuntong, and Tang dispatched the cavalry general, Wei Yan, to fight.

古文：庚子，以吴王杜伏威为太保。
现代文：庚子，唐任命吴王杜伏威为太保。
English: Geng Zi, Tang appointed Wu King Du Fu Wei as Tai Bao.

古文：二月，庚戌，上幸骊山温汤；甲寅，还宫。
现代文：二月庚戌，唐高祖亲临骊山温泉浴地；甲寅，返回宫中。
English: In February, Emperor Gaozong personally visited the Lushan Hot Spring Bathing Area; Emperor Jiaozong returned to the palace.

古文：平阳昭公主薨。
现代文：平阳昭公主去世。
English: Princess Heiyang Zhao passed away.

古文：戊午，葬公主。诏加前后部鼓吹、班剑四十人，武贲甲卒。
现代文：戊午，公主下葬，高祖下诏送葬行列增加前后部鼓吹乐、持班剑的仪仗队四十人，以及武装勇士卫护。
English: In the afternoon, the princess was buried, and the funeral procession of Emperor Gaozhu was increased by the front and rear parts of the propaganda music, the honor guard of forty people holding swords, and the armed warriors.

古文：太常奏： 礼，妇人无鼓吹。 
现代文：太常寺上奏： 按礼所规定，妇人不用鼓吹乐。 
English: Taizhoji Temple: According to the rules of the ritual, women do not have to play music.

古文：上曰： 鼓吹，军乐也。公主亲执金鼓，兴义兵以辅成大业，岂与常妇人比乎！ 
现代文：高祖回答： 鼓吹是军乐，公主亲自号令军队，兴起义军辅成帝王大业，怎么能与普通妇人相比呢？ 
English: Gao Zu replied, "Preaching is military music, the princess herself commanded the army, raised the rebel army and assisted the emperor's great cause, how can it be compared with an ordinary woman?

古文：丙寅，徐圆朗穷蹙，与数骑弃城走，为野人所杀，其地悉平。
现代文：丙寅，徐圆朗因形势窘迫，放弃城池和几名骑兵逃走，被乡村百姓杀死，他占据的地区全部平定。
English: Due to the difficult situation, Hsin Yin and Xu Yuan Lang abandoned the city and fled with several cavalrymen. They were killed by the villagers, and all the areas he occupied were pacified.

古文：林邑王梵志遣使入贡。
现代文：林邑王梵志派遣使节到唐进献贡品。
English: Linyi King Fanzhi sent an envoy to Tang to pay tribute.

古文：初，隋人破林邑，分其地为三郡。及中原丧乱，林邑复国，至是始入贡。
现代文：当初，隋朝打败林邑，在林邑国设置三个郡，待到中原大乱，林邑国又恢复，到这时开始进贡。
English: At first, the Sui Dynasty defeated Linyi and set up three counties in Linyi Province. It was not until the Central Plains War that Linyi Province was restored and tribute began to be paid.

古文：幽州总管李艺请入朝；庚午，以艺为左翊卫大将军。
现代文：唐幽州总管李艺请求入朝；庚午，唐任命李艺为左翊卫大将军。
English: Li Yiyi, the head of Tang Yuzhou, requested to enter the imperial court; in the afternoon, Tang appointed Li Yiyi as General Zuo Wei.

古文：废参旗等十二军。
现代文：唐废除武德二年设置的参旗等十二军。
English: The Tang Dynasty abolished the twelve armies such as the Sang banner set up by Wu De in the second year.

古文：三月，癸未，高开道掠文安、鲁城，骠骑将军平善政邀击，破之。
现代文：三月癸未，高开道掠夺文安、鲁城，唐骠骑将军平善政阻截并打败了他。
English: On the last day of March, Gao Kai Road plundered Wen'an and Lucheng, and Tang Xuan's cavalry general Ping Shan Zheng intercepted and defeated him.

古文：庚子，梁师都将贺遂、索同以所部十二州来降。
现代文：庚子，梁师都的将领贺遂、索同以所管辖的十二个州降唐。
English: Geng Zi, the general of Liang Shidu, congratulated Sui and Sokong on the fall of Tang in the twelve provinces under their jurisdiction.

古文：乙巳，前洪州总管张善安反，遣舒州总管张镇周等击之。
现代文：乙巳，前洪州总管张善安反叛，唐派遣舒州总管张镇周等人攻打张善安。
English: At this time, Zhang Zhen Zhou, the former head of Hongzhou, rebelled, and Tang sent Zhang Zhen Zhou, the head of Shuzhou, and others to attack Zhang Zhen Zhou.

古文：夏，四月，吐谷浑寇芳州，刺史房当树奔松州。
现代文：夏季四月，吐谷浑侵犯芳州，唐芳州刺史房当树逃奔松州。
English: In the summer of April, the Tuyuhun invaded Fangzhou, and the Tang Fangzhou stabbed the Shifang when the tree fled to Songzhou.

古文：张善安陷孙州，执总管王戎而去。
现代文：张善安攻陷孙州，捉住总管王戎后撤军。
English: Zhang Shan'an invaded Sunzhou, captured the commander-in-chief Wang Rong and then withdrew.

古文：乙丑，鄜州道行军总管段德操击梁师都，至夏州，俘其民畜而还。
现代文：乙丑，唐州道行军总管段德操攻打梁师都，到夏州，虏获梁师都的百姓牲畜后回军。
English: In the second year of the Ugly, the general management section of the march of Tangzhou Road attacked Liang Shidu, went to Xiazhou, captured the people and livestock of Liang Shidu and returned to the army.

古文：丙寅，吐谷浑寇洮、岷二州。
现代文：丙寅，吐谷浑侵犯洮、岷二州。
English: Hsin-Yin and Tugu-Hun encroached on the two states of Yan and Jie.

古文：丁卯，南州刺史庞孝恭、南越州民宁道明、高州首领冯暄俱反，陷南越州，进攻姜州；合州刺史宁纯引兵救之。
现代文：丁卯，唐南州刺史庞孝恭、南越州百姓宁道明、高州首领冯暄均反叛，攻陷南越州，进而又攻打姜州；唐合州刺史宁纯率军救姜州。
English: Ding Wu, Tang Nanzhou leader Pang Hsiao-kyong, South Vietnam leader Ning Daoming, and Gaozhou leader Feng Hui all rebelled, invaded and conquered South Vietnam, and then attacked Jiangzhou; Tang Hezhou leader Ning Chun led the army to save Jiangzhou.

古文：壬申，立皇子元轨为蜀王、凤为豳王、元庆为汉王。
现代文：壬申，唐立皇子李元轨为蜀王、李凤为豳王、李元庆为汉王。
English: According to Jinshin, the Tang Dynasty prince Li Yuanlu was the king of Shu, Li Feng was the king of Qi, and Li Yuanqing was the king of Han.

古文：癸酉，以裴寂为左仆射，萧瑀为右仆射，杨恭仁为吏部尚书兼中书令，封德彝为中书令。
现代文：癸酉，唐任命裴寂为左仆射，萧为右仆射，杨恭仁为吏部尚书兼中书令，封德彝为中书令。
English: At the same time, the Tang Dynasty appointed Pei Jia as the Left Footman, Xiao as the Right Footman, Yang Guoren as the Secretary of the General Staff and the Secretary of the Central Committee, and Feng Dejun as the Secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：五月，庚辰，遣岐州刺史柴绍救岷州。
现代文：五月庚辰，唐派遣岐州刺史柴绍救岷州。
English: In May, Gengchen, Tang dispatched the Qizhou cutter Chai Shao to rescue Bozhou.

古文：庚寅，吐谷浑及党项寇河州，刺史卢士良击破之。
现代文：庚寅，吐谷浑以及党项侵犯河州，唐河州刺史卢士良击败来敌。
English: Geng Yin, Tu Gu Hun and the party invaded Hezhou, and Tang Hezhou stabbed Slu Shiliang to defeat the enemy.

古文：丙申，梁师都将辛獠儿引突厥寇林州。
现代文：丙申，梁师都的将领辛獠儿带突厥侵犯林州。
English: Xinshen, the general of Liang Shidu, led the Turks to invade Linzhou.

古文：戊戌，苑君彰将高满政寇代州，骠骑将军李宝言击走之。
现代文：戊戌，苑君璋的将领高满政侵犯代州，唐骠骑军林宝言击退了来敌。
English: The generals Gao Man Zheng of Wuqi and Yuanjunjun invaded Daizhou, and the Tang Dynasty cavalry Lin Bao Yan fought off the enemy.

古文：癸卯，高开道引奚骑寇幽州，长史王诜击破之。
现代文：癸卯，高开道带奚族骑兵侵犯幽州，唐幽州长史王诜打败了他。
English: However, Gao Kai Dao invaded Yuzhou with the Yao cavalry, and the governor of Tang Yu, Shi Wangyi, defeated him.

古文：刘黑闼之叛也，突地稽引兵助唐，徙其部落于幽州之昌平城；高开道引突厥寇幽州，突地稽将兵邀击，破之。
现代文：刘黑闼反叛时，突地稽带兵协助唐朝，将他的部落迁到幽州的昌平城；高开道带突厥侵犯幽州，突地稽带兵阻截，打败了高开道等。
English: When Liu Heixuan rebelled, the Tujidi warden led soldiers to assist the Tang Dynasty and moved his tribe to Changping City in Yuzhou; the Turks invaded Yuzhou from the Gaokai Road, and the Tujidi warden led soldiers to intercept and defeat the Gaokai Road, etc.

古文：六月，戊午，高满政以马邑来降。
现代文：六月戊午，高满政以马邑降唐。
English: In the afternoon of June, Gao Man Zheng took Ma'i and went to Tang.

古文：先是，前并州总管刘世让除广州总管，将之官，上问以备边之策，世让对曰： 突厥比数为寇，良以马邑为之中顿故也。
现代文：此前，前并州总管刘世让调任广州总管，即将赴任，高祖向他询问防边的策略，刘世让回答道： 突厥近来多次入侵，实在是因为有马邑作为中途休整基地的缘故。
English: Previously, the former governor of the annexed provinces, Liu Shijang, was transferred to the governor of Guangzhou and was about to take office. Gaozu asked him about the strategy of border defense. Liu Shijang replied: The Turks have recently invaded many times, really because of Ma'yun as a midway rest base.

古文：请以勇将戍崞城，多贮金帛，募有降者厚赏之，数出骑兵掠其城下，蹂其禾稼，败其生业，不出岁馀，彼无所食，必降矣。 
现代文：希望派勇将戍守崞城，多贮藏物资，招到投降的人就给予厚赏，经常派兵掠夺马邑城下，毁掉他们的庄稼，破坏他们的谋生之业，不出一年，敌人没有粮食，必然会投降。 
English: It was hoped that he would be brave enough to hold the city of Handan, store more supplies, and give a high reward to those who surrendered. He often sent troops to plunder the city of Ma'i, destroy their crops, and destroy their livelihoods. Within a year, the enemy would have no food and would inevitably surrender.

古文：上然其计，曰： 非公，谁为勇将！ 
现代文：高祖很赞同他的计策，说道： 除了您，还有谁是勇将！ 
English: Gaozu agreed with his strategy and said, "Besides you, who else is a hero!"

古文：即命世让戍崞城，马邑病之。
现代文：当即命令刘世让戌守崞城，马邑人很怵他。
English: He immediately ordered Liu Shiyu to let him keep the city, and the people of Ma'iu were very fond of him.

古文：是时，马邑人多不愿属突厥，上复遣人招谕苑君璋。
现代文：当时，马邑人大多不愿意隶属于突厥，高祖又派人招谕苑君璋。
English: At that time, most of the people of Maye did not want to belong to the Turks, and Gaozu sent someone to recruit Yuanjunjun.

古文：高满政说君璋尽杀突厥戍兵降唐，君璋不从。
现代文：高满政劝苑君璋杀死所有的突厥守军投降唐朝，苑君璋不听。
English: Gao Man Zheng advised Yuan Junyao to kill all the Turkic defenders and surrender to the Tang Dynasty, but Yuan Junyao did not listen.

古文：满政因众心所欲，夜袭君璋，君璋觉之，亡奔突厥，满政杀君璋之子及突厥戍兵二百人而降。
现代文：高满政利用人心所向，半夜袭击苑君璋，苑君璋发觉后，逃入突厥，高满政杀死苑君璋的儿子以及突厥的二百名守军，投降了唐朝。
English: Gao Manzheng took advantage of the people's desire and attacked Yuan Junyao in the middle of the night. After Yuan Junyao was discovered, he fled to Turkey. Gao Manzheng killed Yuan Junyao's son and 200 Turkish defenders and surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：壬戌，梁师都以突厥寇匡州。
现代文：壬戌，梁师都率突厥军队侵犯匡州。
English: At the same time, Liang Shidu led the Turkish army to invade Kuanzhou.

古文：丁卯，苑君璋与突厥吐屯设寇马邑，高满政与战，破之。
现代文：丁卯，苑君璋与突厥的吐屯设侵犯马邑，高满政和他们交战，打败了来敌。
English: Dingwu, Yuanjunjun and the Turk's Tutun set out to invade Ma's village. Gao Man Zheng fought with them and defeated the invaders.

古文：以满政为朔州总管，封荣国公。
现代文：唐任命高满政为朔州总管，封爵荣国公。
English: Tang appointed Gao Manzheng as the general manager of Shuozhou and knighted him as Rongguogong.

古文：瓜州总管贺若怀广按部至沙州，值州人张护、李通反，怀广以数百人保子城；凉州总管杨恭仁遣兵救之，为护等所败。
现代文：唐瓜州总管贺若怀广巡视到沙州，恰遇沙州人张护、李通反叛，贺若怀广率几百人保卫子城；唐凉州总管杨恭仁派兵救援，被张护等人打败。
English: He Ruohai Guang, the head of Tangguazhou, made an inspection tour to Shazhou, and happened to meet Zhang You and Li Tong, the rebels from Shazhou. He Ruohai Guang led several hundred people to defend the city; Yang Guoren, the head of Tangliangzhou, sent soldiers to help, but was defeated by Zhang You and others.

古文：癸酉，柴绍与吐谷浑战，为其所围，虏乘高射之，矢下如雨。
现代文：癸酉，柴绍与吐谷浑作战，被吐谷浑包围，敌军占据高处射击柴绍的军队，箭羽犹如下雨一样密集。
English: At that time, Chai Shao fought with Tu Guhun and was surrounded by Tu Guhun. The enemy occupied high ground and shot Chai Shao's army. The arrow feathers were as dense as rain.

古文：绍遣人弹胡琵琶，二女子对舞。虏怪之，驻弓矢相与聚观，绍察其无备，潜遣精骑出虏陈后，击之，虏众大溃。
现代文：柴绍让人弹奏胡琵琶，两名女子相对起舞，敌军觉得很奇怪，放下弓箭一起围观，柴绍观察敌军没有了防备，暗中派精锐骑兵绕到敌军背后，攻打敌军，吐谷浑军队大败。
English: Chai Shao had people play the Chinese lute, two women danced against each other, the enemy army felt very strange, put down their bows and arrows and watched together. Chai Shao observed that the enemy army was unprepared, secretly sent elite cavalry to go around the back of the enemy army, attack the enemy army, and the Tugu Hun army was defeated.

古文：秋，七月，丙子，苑君璋以突厥寇马邑，右武候大将军李高迁及高满政御之，战于腊河谷，破之。
现代文：秋季，七月丙子，苑君璋率突厥军队侵犯马邑，唐右武候大将军李高迁及高满政迎击来敌，在腊河谷交战，打败了苑君璋。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yuan Junqi led the Turkish army to invade Ma'yun, and Tang Uygur General Li Gaoqian and Gao Man Zheng met the enemy and fought in Lahe Valley, defeating Yuan Junqi.

古文：张护、李通杀贺若怀广，立汝州别驾窦伏明为主，进逼瓜州；长史赵孝伦击却之。
现代文：张护、李通杀死贺若怀广，立汝州别驾窦伏明为首领，进逼瓜州，被瓜州长史赵孝伦击退。
English: Zhang Guo and Li Tong killed He Ruo Huai Guang, established Ruzhou Beidou Dou Fuming as the leader, forced Guazhou, and was repulsed by Guazhou Governor Shi Zhao Xiaolun.

古文：高开道掠赤岸镇及灵寿、九门、行唐三县而去。
现代文：高开道掠夺赤岸镇以及灵寿、九门、行唐三个县之后离去。
English: Gao Kaido left after plundering Chakangan Town and the three counties of Lingshou, Jiumen and Xingtan.

古文：丁丑，岗州刺史冯士翙据新会反，广州总管刘感讨降之，使复其位。
现代文：丁丑，冈州刺史冯士占据新会反叛，唐广州刺史刘感领兵讨伐，冯士投降，刘感恢复了他的职位。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Gansu Zhisheng, Feng Shih occupied the new association and rebelled, Tang Guangzhou Zhisheng, Liu Xiang led the troops to fight, Feng Shih surrendered, Liu Xiang resumed his position.

古文：辛巳，高开道所部弘阳、统汉二镇来降。
现代文：辛巳，高开道所统领的弘阳、统汉二镇降唐。
English: It was not long before the two towns of Hongyang and Tonghan, which had been under the control of Gaokao, fell to Tang.

古文：癸未，突厥寇原州；乙酉，寇朔州。
现代文：癸未，突厥侵犯原州；乙酉，又侵犯朔州。
English: In the past, the Turks invaded Yuanzhou; in the present, they have invaded Shuozhou.

古文：李高迁为虏所败，行军总管尉迟敬德将兵救之。
现代文：李高迁被突厥打败，行军总管尉迟敬德带兵救援。
English: Li Gaoqian was defeated by the Turks, and the chief marching officer Chi Jingde led the troops to rescue him.

古文：巳亥，遣太子将兵屯北边，秦王世民屯并州，以备突厥。
现代文：己亥，唐派遣太子李建成统率军队驻扎在北部边境，秦王李世民驻扎在并州，防备突厥。
English: At the same time, the Tang Dynasty dispatched Prince Li Jiancheng to lead the army stationed at the northern border, and Qin King Li Shimin was stationed in Bianzhou to guard against the Turks.

古文：八月，甲辰，突厥寇真州，又寇马邑。
现代文：八月丙辰，突厥侵犯真州，又侵犯马邑。
English: In August, the Turks invaded Zhenzhou and Ma'iyu.

古文：壬子，淮南道行台仆射辅公祏反。
现代文：壬子，唐淮南道行台仆射辅公反叛。
English: Jinsi, Tang Huainan Road, Xingtai minion, Jia Fu, rebelled.

古文：初，杜伏威与公祏相友善，公祏年长，伏威兄事之，军中谓之伯父，畏敬与伏威等。
现代文：当初，杜伏威与辅公很要好，辅公年纪大，杜伏威像对兄长一样对他，军中称辅公为伯父，敬畏他同敬畏杜伏威一样。
English: At first, Du Fu Wei and Fu Gong were on very good terms. Fu Gong was older, and Du Fu Wei treated him like an older brother. The army called Fu Gong an uncle, and feared him as much as they feared Du Fu Wei.

古文：伏威浸忌之，乃署其养子阚棱为左将军，王雄诞为右将军，潜夺其兵权。
现代文：杜伏威逐渐猜忌他，于是任命自己的养子阚棱为左将军，王雄诞为右将军，暗中夺辅公的兵权。
English: Du Fu Wei gradually became suspicious of him, so he appointed his adopted son Yu Ren as the left general, and Wang Xiong as the right general, secretly seizing the military power of the prince.

古文：公祏知之，怏怏不平，与其故人左游仙阳为学道辟谷以自晦。
现代文：辅公知道后，很不服气，假装和他的老相识左游仙学道、辟谷掌掩饰自己。
English: After he found out, Fu Gong was very unconvinced and pretended to be his old acquaintance Zuoyou Xian Xue Dao, hiding himself with his hand in the valley.

古文：及伏威入朝，留公祏守丹杨，令雄诞典兵为之副，阴谓雄诞曰： 吾至长安，苟不失职，勿令公祏为变。 
现代文：等杜伏威入朝，留辅公守卫丹杨，命王雄诞掌握军队作辅公的副手，私下对王雄诞说： 我到了长安，假如没有失去职位，千万不要让公发生变故。 
English: When Du Fuwei entered the imperial court, Ru Fu Gong guarded Danyang, and Wang Youxing commanded the army as the deputy of Du Fu Gong. He said to Wang Youxing in private: "I have arrived in Chang'an. If you haven't lost your position, don't let your position change."

古文：伏威既行，左游仙说公祏谋反；而雄诞握兵，公祏不得发。
现代文：杜伏威走了以后，左游仙劝辅公反叛，但是王雄诞掌握兵权，辅公无法动手。
English: After Du Fuwei left, Zuo Youxian persuaded Fu Gong to rebel, but Wang Yuxing held the military power, and Fu Gong could not do anything.

古文：乃诈称得伏威书，疑雄诞有贰心，雄诞闻之不悦，称疾不视事；公祏因夺其兵，使其党西门君仪谕以反计。
现代文：于是他假称收到杜伏威的来信，怀疑王雄诞有二心，王雄诞听说后很不高兴，声称有病不到衙门治事，辅公趁机夺了王雄诞的兵权，让自己的党羽西门君仪告诉王雄诞反叛的计划。
English: So he pretended to have received a letter from Du Fu Wei, suspecting that Wang Xiongzhi was of two minds. Wang Xiongzhi was very unhappy when he heard about it, claiming that he was too ill to govern the palace. Fu Gong took the opportunity to seize Wang Xiongzhi's military power and let his henchman Ximen Junyi tell Wang Xiongzhi about the rebel plan.

古文：雄诞始寤而悔之，曰： 今天下方平定，吴王又在京师，大唐兵威，所向无敌，奈何无故自求族灭乎！
现代文：王雄诞才醒悟并后悔不已，说道： 如今天下刚刚平定，吴王又在京师长安，大唐军队威力，所向无敌，怎么可以无缘无故自找灭族呢？
English: Wang Xiongxing only woke up and regretted deeply, saying: If the situation has just been pacified today, and King Wu is in Beijing to subdue Chang'an, and the power of the Datang army is invincible, how can they seek to exterminate the people for no reason?

古文：雄诞有死而已，不敢闻命。
现代文：我王雄诞唯有一死相报，恕不能听从命令。
English: I, Wang Youzhi, have only one death to pay for, and I can't obey orders.

古文：今从公为逆，不过延百日之命耳，大丈夫安能爱斯须之死，而自陷于不义乎！ 
现代文：现在跟着您倒行逆施，也不过是延长一百天的性命罢了，大丈夫怎能因为舍不得片刻之死而陷自己于不义呢？ 
English: Now, if I follow you and do the opposite, it is nothing more than extending my life by a hundred days. How can it be okay to trap myself in injustice because I cannot bear to die for a moment?

古文：公祏知不可屈，缢杀之。
现代文：辅公知道不能说服他，便勒死了王雄诞。
English: Fu Gong knew that he could not convince him, so he strangled Wang Yuxing.

古文：雄诞善抚士卒，得其死力，又约束严整，每破城邑，秋毫无犯。死之日，江南军中及民间皆为之流涕。
现代文：王雄诞很会体恤部下，能让士兵为他卖命，而且纪律严明，每次攻下城镇，都秋毫无犯，他死的那天，江南军中的将士以及民间百姓都失声痛哭。
English: Wang Yuxing was very considerate of his subordinates, he was able to make soldiers work for him, and he was very disciplined. Every time he captured a town, he committed no crime. On the day of his death, soldiers and civilians in the south of the Yangtze River lost their voices and cried.

古文：公祏又诈称伏威不得还江南，贻书令其起兵，大修铠仗，运粮储。
现代文：辅公又假称杜伏威无法返回江南，送来书信命他起兵，于是他大肆装备武器，运粮储备。
English: Assuming that Du Fuwei would not be able to return to the south of the Yangtze River, the governor sent a letter ordering him to raise an army, so he went to great lengths to equip weapons and transport grain reserves.

古文：寻称帝于丹杨，国号宋，修陈故宫室而居之。署置百官，以左游仙为兵部尚书、东南道大使、越州总管，与张善安连兵，以善安为西南道大行台。
现代文：随即在丹杨称帝，国号为宋，修复陈朝的旧宫殿居住，设置百官，任命左游仙为兵部尚书、东南道大使、越州总管，和张善安联合，以张善安为西南道大行台。
English: Subsequently, Emperor was proclaimed in Danyang, the country was named Song, the old palace of the Chen Dynasty was restored and resided in, hundreds of officials were set up, and Zuo Youxian was appointed as the military department of Shangshu, the ambassador of Southeast Province, the general manager of Yuezhou, and Zhang Shan'an was jointly appointed, with Zhang Shan'an as the general manager of Southwest Province.

古文：己未，突厥寇原州。
现代文：己未，突厥侵犯原州。
English: Before long, the Turks invaded the proto-state.

古文：乙丑，诏襄州道行台仆射赵郡王孝恭以舟师趣江州，岭南道大使李靖以交、广、泉、桂之众趣宣州，怀州总管黄君汉出谯、亳，齐州总管李世勣出淮、泗，以讨辅公祏。
现代文：乙丑，唐高祖下诏命襄州道行台仆射赵郡王李孝恭率水军开赴江州，岭南道大使李靖带交、广、泉、桂等州兵力开赴宣州，怀州总管黄君汉取道谯州、亳州，齐州总管李世取道淮水、泗水，讨伐辅公。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to Li Xiaogong, the vassal of Xiangzhou Dao Xing Tai and the king of Shao Zhao County, to lead the naval forces to Jiangzhou; Li Jing, the ambassador of Lingnan Dao, led the military forces of Jiaotong, Guangxi, Quan and Guizhou to Xuanzhou; Huang Junhan, the governor of Huizhou, led the military forces to Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou; Li Shitong, the governor of Qi Province, led the military forces to Huai Shui and Lishui, to fight against Fu Gong.

古文：孝恭将发，与诸将宴集，命取水，忽变为血，在坐皆失色，孝恭举止自若，曰： 此乃公祏授首之征也！ 
现代文：李孝恭出发前和众将领会餐，命人取水，忽然水变成了血，在坐的人都吓得变了脸色，李孝恭却神色自如地说道： 这是辅公灭亡的征兆！ 
English: Before setting out, Li Xiaogang and the generals received the banquet, and ordered someone to fetch water. Suddenly, the water turned into blood, and everyone sitting there turned pale with fear. Li Xiaogang, however, looked at ease and said, "This is a sign of the demise of Fu Gong!"

古文：饮而尽之，众皆悦服。
现代文：喝光血水，众人都从心里佩服他。
English: After drinking all the blood and water, everyone admired him from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：丙寅，吐谷浑内附。
现代文：丙寅，吐谷浑归附唐朝。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to his hometown.

古文：辛未，突厥陷原州之善和镇；癸酉，又寇渭州。
现代文：辛未，突厥攻陷原州的善和镇；癸酉，突厥又侵犯渭州。
English: In Xinwei, the Turks captured Yuanzhou's Shanhe Town; then, the Turks invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：高开道以奚侵幽州，州兵击却之。
现代文：高开道率奚族军队侵犯幽州，唐幽州军队击退来敌。
English: The high opening rate of the Yao army invaded Yuzhou, and the Tang Yuzhou army repulsed the enemy.

古文：九月，丙子，太子班师。
现代文：九月，太子李建成班师回朝。
English: In September, Prince Li Jiancheng returned to the North as a teacher.

古文：戊子，辅公祏遣其将徐绍宗寇海州，陈政通寇寿阳。
现代文：戊子，辅公派遣他的将领徐绍宗攻打海州，陈政道攻打寿阳。
English: Wuzi, Fu Gong sent his general Xu Shaozong to attack Haizhou, and Chen Zhengdao attacked Shouyang.

古文：邛州獠反，遣沛公郑元璹讨之。
现代文：邛州獠民反叛，唐派遣沛公郑元前往讨伐。
English: When the people of Zhangzhou rebelled, Tang dispatched Pei Gong Zheng Yuan to lead the crusade.

古文：庚寅，突厥寇幽州。
现代文：庚寅，突厥侵犯幽州。
English: The Turks invaded Yuzhou.

古文：壬辰，诏以秦王世民为江州道行军元帅。
现代文：壬辰，唐高祖下诏任命秦王李世民为江州道行军元帅。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Gaozhu of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to appoint Qin King Li Shimin as marshal of marching troops in Jiangzhou Province.

古文：乙未，窦伏明以沙州降。
现代文：乙未，窦伏明以沙州投降。
English: B, Dou Fuming surrenders in Shazhou.

古文：高昌王麹伯雅卒，子文泰立。
现代文：高昌王伯雅去世，他的儿子文泰继立为王。
English: King Baoya of Gaochang died, and his son, Wen Tai, succeeded him as king.

古文：丙申，渝州人张大智反，刺史薛敬仁弃城走。
现代文：丙申，渝州人张大智反叛，唐渝州刺史薛敬仁放弃城池逃跑。
English: Bishen, Zhang Dazhi of Yuzhou rebelled, and Xue Jingren of Tang Yuzhou abandoned the city and fled.

古文：壬寅，高开道引突厥二万骑寇幽州。
现代文：壬寅，高开道带二万突厥骑兵侵犯幽州。
English: Jinshin, Gaokaido invaded Yuzhou with 20,000 Turkish cavalry.

古文：突厥恶弘农公刘世让为己患，遣其臣曹般陁来，言世让与可汗通谋，欲为乱，上信之。
现代文：突厥恨弘农公刘世让成为他们的威胁，派大臣曹般来唐，说刘世让和突厥可汗交通密谋，准备叛乱，高祖相信了这些话。
English: The Turks hated the peasant Liu Shijang as a threat to them, and sent the minister Cao Panglong to Tang, saying that Liu Shijang and the Turkic khan Kotsu were plotting and preparing a rebellion. Gaozu believed these words.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，杀世让，籍其家。
现代文：冬季，十月丙午，唐杀死刘世让，没收了他的家产。
English: In the winter, on the afternoon of October 3rd, Tang killed Liu Shijang and confiscated his family property.

古文：秦王世民犹在并州，己未，诏世民引军还。
现代文：秦王李世民还停留在并州，己未，诏命李世民率军返回长安。
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, was still in Bianzhou, but he had not yet issued an edict ordering Li Shimin to return to Chang'an with his army.

古文：上幸华阴。
现代文：唐高祖驾临华阴。
English: Tang Gao's ancestor arrived in Huayin.

古文：张大智侵涪州，刺史田世康等讨之，大智以众降。
现代文：张大智侵犯涪州，唐涪州刺史田世康等人讨伐他，张大智带领人马投降。
English: Zhang Dazhi invaded Bozhou, Tang Bozhou assassinated Tian Shikang and others to fight him, Zhang Dazhi led the troops to surrender.

古文：初，上遣右武候大将军李高迁助朔州总管高满政守马邑，苑君璋引突厥万馀骑至城下，满政击破之。
现代文：当初，高祖派遣右武候大将军李高迁协助朔州总管高满政守卫马邑，苑君璋带着一万多突厥骑兵到马邑城下，高满政打败了苑君璋。
English: At first, Gaozu dispatched the right-armed general-in-waiting Li Gaoqian to assist the general manager of Shuozhou, Gao Man Zheng, in guarding Ma'e. Yuan Junqi took more than 10,000 Turkish cavalrymen to the city of Ma'e. Gao Man Zheng defeated Yuan Junqi.

古文：颉利可汗怒，大发兵攻马邑。
现代文：颉利可汗发怒，出动大军攻打马邑。
English: Enraged, Khari Khan sent a large army to attack Ma's village.

古文：高迁惧，帅所部二千人斩关宵遁，虏邀之，失亡者半。
现代文：李高迁怕了，带领二千名部下冲破关卡连夜逃跑，遭到突厥阻截，损失一半兵力。
English: Li Gaoqian was afraid, and led two thousand of his men to break through the checkpoint and escape overnight. They were intercepted by the Turks and lost half of their troops.

古文：颉利自帅众攻城，满政出兵御之，或一日战十馀合。
现代文：颉利可汗亲自率领大军攻马邑，高满政出兵抵抗，有时一天打十几仗。
English: Qili Khan personally led a large army to attack Ma's village, and Gaoman Zheng sent troops to resist, sometimes fighting more than a dozen battles a day.

古文：上命行军总管刘世让救之，至松子岭，不敢进，还保崞城。
现代文：高祖命令行军总管刘世让救援马邑，刘世让到了松子岭，不敢再前进，回军保守崞城。
English: Gao Zu ordered Liu Shijang, the general manager of the march, to rescue Ma'i. Liu Shijang gave way to Songziling, did not dare to advance again, and returned to the army to protect Lucheng.

古文：会颉利遣使求婚，上曰： 释马邑之围，乃可议婚。 
现代文：恰好颉利派遣使节向唐求婚，高祖说： 先撤了马邑的围，才能够谈论婚姻。 
English: It just so happened that Goryeo sent an envoy to Tang to propose marriage. Gaozu said, "We can only talk about marriage after the siege of Ma'eup is lifted."

古文：颉利欲解兵，义成公主固请攻之。
现代文：颉利想撤军，隋义成公主坚持要求攻打马邑。
English: Haili wanted to withdraw, but Princess Sui Yicheng insisted on attacking Ma'in.

古文：颉利以高开道善为攻具，召开道，与之攻马邑甚急。
现代文：颉利因为高开道擅长制作攻城武器，便召来高开道，和他一起猛攻马邑。
English: Because Gao Kaido was good at making siege weapons, Meli summoned Gao Kaido and stormed Ma'e with him.

古文：颉利诱满政使降，满政骂之。
现代文：颉利诱劝高满政投降，高满政大骂颉利。
English: Hao Li persuaded Gao Man Zheng to surrender, and Gao Man Zheng cursed Hao Li.

古文：粮且尽，救兵未至，满政欲溃围走朔州，右虞候杜士远以虏兵盛，恐不免，壬戌，杀满政降于突厥，苑君璋复杀城中豪杰与满政同谋者三十馀人。
现代文：马邑城中粮食即将耗尽，救兵未到，高满政想突围去朔州，右虞候杜士远见突厥兵力强大，恐怕突围不成，壬戌，杜士远杀死高满政投降了突厥，苑君璋又杀死城中与高满政同谋的豪杰三十多人。
English: The grain in the city of Ma'iyi was about to run out, and before the rescuers arrived, Gao Manzheng wanted to break out of the encirclement and go to Shuozhou. Du Shizhen foresaw that the Turkish forces were strong, and feared that the breakout would not be successful. Ren Ren and Du Shiyuan killed Gao Manzheng and surrendered to the Turks. Yuan Junqi also killed more than 30 heroes in the city who were complicit with Gao Manzheng.

古文：上以满政子玄积为上柱国，袭爵。
现代文：高祖任命高满政的儿子高玄积为上柱国，承袭高满政的爵位。
English: Gao Zu appointed Gao Man Zheng's son Gao Xuan Zhe as Shangzhu Guo, inheriting Gao Man Zheng's peerage.

古文：丁卯，突厥复请和亲，以马邑归唐；上以将军秦武通为朔州总管。
现代文：丁卯，突厥再次向唐请求和亲，把马邑归还给唐朝；高祖任命将军秦武通为朔州总管。
English: Dingwu, the Turks once again asked the Tang Dynasty to make peace and return Ma'i to the Tang Dynasty; Gaozu appointed General Qin Wutong as the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：突厥数为边患，并州大总管府长史窦静表请于太原置屯田，以省馈运；议者以为烦扰，不许。
现代文：突厥屡次为祸边境，唐并州大总管府长史窦静上表请求在太原设置屯田以省军粮的运输，议政者认为过于麻烦，不批准。
English: The Turks repeatedly caused trouble at the border, and the governor of the Tang-annexed state, Shi Doujing, made a request to set up a garrison in Taiyuan to transport military supplies. The legislators thought it was too troublesome and did not approve.

古文：静切论不已，敕征静入朝，使与裴寂、萧瑀、封德彝相论难于上前，寂等不能屈，乃从静议，岁收数千斛，上善之，命检校并州大总管。
现代文：窦静不停地极力论说此事，高祖下敕令征窦静入朝，让他与裴寂、萧、封德彝等人在皇上面前辩论此事，裴寂等人无法说服窦静，于是听从了窦静的建议，每年收获数千斛粮食，高祖很赞赏他，命窦静为检校并州大总管。
English: Dou Jing kept trying to discuss the matter. Gao Zu issued an order to summon Dou Jing to the court, and asked him to debate the matter with Pei Jia, Xiao, Feng Dejun and others in front of the emperor. Pei Jia and others could not convince Dou Jing, so he followed Dou Jing's advice and harvested thousands of stalks of grain every year. Gao Zu appreciated him very much, and ordered Dou Jing to be the chief inspector of the school and the state university.

古文：静，抗之子也。
现代文：窦静是窦抗的儿子。
English: Dou Jing is Dou An's son.

古文：十一月，辛巳，秦王世民复请增置屯田于并州之境，从之。
现代文：十一月辛巳，秦王李世民又请求在并州境内增设屯田，高祖批准了他的请求。
English: In November, Li Shimin, the king of Qin, also requested to establish additional military camps in the territory of the annexed state, and Gaozu approved his request.

古文：黄州总管周法明将兵击辅公祏，张善安据夏口，拒之。
现代文：唐黄州总管周法明带兵攻打辅公，张善安占据夏口抵抗周法明。
English: Zhou Farming, the general manager of Tang Huangzhou, led troops to attack Fu Gong, and Zhang Shan'an occupied Xia Kou to resist Zhou Farming.

古文：法明屯荆口镇，壬午，法明登战舰饮酒，善安遣刺客数人诈乘鱼鲽而至，见者不以为虞，遂杀法明而去。
现代文：周法明驻扎在荆口镇，壬午，周法明登上战船饮酒，张善安派遣几名刺客伪装渔民乘着渔船到荆口镇，见到的人没有产生怀疑，于是他们杀了周法明后离去。
English: Zhou Farming was stationed in Jingkou Town. At noon, Zhou Farming boarded a warship to drink alcohol. Zhang Shan'an sent several assassins disguised as fishermen to take a fishing boat to Jingkou Town. The people they saw did not have any doubts, so they killed Zhou Farming and left.

古文：甲申，舒州总管张镇周等击辅公祏将陈当世于猷州之黄沙，大破之。
现代文：甲申，唐舒州总管张镇周等在猷州的黄沙攻打辅公的将领陈当世，大败陈军。丁亥，高祖在华阴围猎。
English: Jia Shun, Tang Shuzhou Governor Zhang Zhen Zhou and other generals attacked and defeated Chen Dangshi, the general of Fu Gong, in Huangsha, Ganzhou, and defeated Chen Jun. Ding Hai, Gao Zu hunted in Huayin.

古文：己丑，迎劳秦王世民于忠武顿。
现代文：己丑，在忠武顿迎接慰问秦王李世民。
English: He was so ugly that he received the condolences of Qin King Li Shimin in Zhongwutong.

古文：十二月，癸卯，安抚使李大亮诱张善安，执之。
现代文：十二月癸卯，唐安抚使李大亮诱骗张善安，捉住了张。
English: At the end of December, Tang Anping had Li Dayang trick Zhang Zhenan and capture Zhang.

古文：大亮击善安于洪州，与善安隔水而陈，遥相与语。
现代文：李大亮在洪州攻打张善安，与张善安隔水列阵，遥相对话。
English: Li Daliang attacked Zhang Shan'an in Hongzhou, and held a dialogue with Zhang Shan'an across the water.

古文：大亮谕以祸福，善安曰： 善安初无反心，正为将士所误；欲降又恐不免。 
现代文：李大亮向张善安说明祸福利害关系，张善安说： 善安最初没有反叛的意思，被部下将士们所误，想投降又怕不能免罪。 
English: Li Daliang explained to Zhang Shan'an the relationship between evil, welfare and harm. Zhang Shan'an said: At first, Shan'an had no intention of rebelling. He was misled by his subordinates. He wanted to surrender but was afraid that he would not be exonerated.

古文：大亮曰： 张总管有降心，则与我一家耳。 
现代文：李大亮说： 张总管有投降的心意，和我就是一家人了。 
English: Li Dayang said, "General Zhang has the will to surrender, and I am family.

古文：因单骑渡水入其陈，与善安执手共语，示无猜间。
现代文：于是一个人骑马渡过河进入张善安的阵地，和张善安拉着手交谈，表示相互没有猜忌。
English: As a result, a person rode across the river into Zhang Shan'an's position and started a conversation with Zhang Shan Allah, saying that there was no mutual suspicion.

古文：善安大悦，遂许之降。
现代文：张善安十分喜悦，于是答应李大亮投降。
English: Zhang Shan'an was very pleased, so he agreed to surrender to Li Dayang.

古文：既而善安将数十骑诣大亮营，大亮止其骑于门外，引善安入，与语，久之，善安辞去，大亮命武士执之，从骑皆走。
现代文：不久张善安带领几十名骑兵到李大亮的营地，李大亮让随行的骑兵停在营门之外，带张善安入营，和他交谈。过了很长时间，张善安告辞，李大亮命令武士把他捉起来，张善安随行的骑兵全部逃走。
English: Soon, Zhang Shan'an led dozens of cavalry to Li Dayang's camp. Li Dayang asked the accompanying cavalry to stop outside the camp gate, took Zhang Shan'an into the camp, and talked with him. After a long time, Zhang Shan'an bid farewell. Li Dayang ordered the samurai to catch him, and all the cavalry accompanying Zhang Shan'an fled.

古文：善安营中闻之，大怒，悉众而来，将攻大亮。
现代文：张善安的军队闻讯，十分气愤，全部出动，准备攻打李大亮。
English: When Zhang Shan'an's army heard the news, they were very angry and prepared to attack Li Dayang.

古文：大亮使人谕之曰： 吾不留总管。总管赤心归国，谓我曰： 若还营，恐将士或有异同，为其所制。 
现代文：李大亮派人对他们说： 不是我留住张总管，是总管忠心归附朝廷，对我说： 如果返回营地，恐怕将士们有不同意见，会受他们钳制。 
English: Li Dayang sent a man to them saying, "It was not I who retained Zhang Shouguan, it was Shouguan who loyally attached himself to the imperial court. He said to me, "If you return to the camp, I'm afraid the generals will have different opinions and you will be controlled by them."

古文：故自留不去耳，卿辈何怒于我！ 
现代文：因此自己留下来不走，你们这些人为什么生我的气？ 
English: So why are you people mad at me for staying and not leaving?

古文：其党复大骂曰： 张总管卖我以自媚于人。 
现代文：张善安的部下又大骂道： 张总管出卖我们，自己去讨好别人。 
English: Zhang Shan'an's subordinates also scolded: Zhang Shan sold us out and tried to please others.

古文：遂皆溃去。
现代文：随即溃散而去。
English: They immediately dispersed.

古文：大亮追击，多所虏获。
现代文：李大亮出兵追击，俘虏了许多人。
English: Li Dayang sent out troops to pursue and captured many people.

古文：送善安于长安，善安自称不与辅公祏交通，上赦其罪，善遇之；及公祏败，得所与往还书，乃杀之。
现代文：李大亮送张善安到长安，张善安自己声称和辅公并没有来往，高祖赦免了他的罪过，对他很好；待到辅公失败后，得到他们相互往来的信件，于是杀了张善安。
English: Li Dayang sent Zhang Shan'an to Chang'an. Zhang Shan'an himself claimed that he had no dealings with Fu Gong. Gao Zu pardoned his sins and was very kind to him. After Fu Gong's defeat, he obtained the letters between them, and then killed Zhang Shan'an.

古文：甲寅，车驾至长安。
现代文：甲寅，唐高祖回到长安。
English: Jia Yin, Tang Gao's ancestor returned to Chang'an.

古文：己巳，突厥寇定州，州兵击走之。
现代文：己巳，突厥入侵定州，定州军队击退来敌。
English: Suddenly, the Turks invaded Dingzhou, and the Dingzhou army repulsed the invaders.

古文：庚申，白简、白狗羌并遣使入贡。
现代文：庚申，白简、白狗羌均派遣使节到唐进献贡品。
English: Goshun, Bai Jian and Bai Gushan all sent envoys to Tang to pay tribute.

古文：武德七年甲申，公元六二四年
现代文：武德七年甲申，公元年
English: In June of the 7th year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Xin Ugly, Gao Zu went to the Ren Zhi Palace for the summer.

古文：春，正月，依周、齐旧制，每州置大中正一人，掌知州内人物，品量望第，以本州门望高者领之，无品秩。
现代文：春季，正月，唐按照北周、北齐的旧制度，每州设置大中正一人，掌管了解州内人物、品评衡量家族的等级，由本州家族资望高的人担任，没有品级俸禄。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, in accordance with the old system of Northern Zhou and Northern Qi, Tang set up one person in each state to be in charge of knowing the people in the state, evaluating and measuring the level of the family, which was held by a person with high family capital in the state, and there was no grade salary.

古文：壬午，赵郡王孝恭击辅公祏别将于枞阳，破之。
现代文：壬午，赵郡王李孝恭在枞阳打败辅公的别将。
English: In Renwu, Zhao County King Li Xiaogong defeated Fu Gong's second-in-command in Fenyang.

古文：庚寅，邹州人邓同颖杀刺史李士衡反。
现代文：庚寅，邹州人邓同颖杀死唐邹州刺史李士衡，反叛。
English: Geng Yin and Deng Tongying, a native of Zhangzhou, killed Li Shiheng, a famous statesman of Tang and Zhangzhou, and rebelled.

古文：丙申，以白狗等羌地置维、恭二州。
现代文：丙申，唐在白狗等羌族地区设置维、恭二州。
English: Bishen, Tang set up Wei and Gong two states in the Shan areas such as Baigou.

古文：安抚使李大亮引兵击公祏，破之。
现代文：二月，辅公派兵围攻猷州，唐猷州刺史左难当环城自卫。安抚使李大亮带兵打败辅公。
English: In February, Fu Gong sent troops to besiege Zhangzhou, and Tang Zhangzhou sent troops to defend itself. To pacify the situation, Li Dayang led troops to defeat Fu Gong.

古文：赵郡王孝恭攻公祏鹊头镇，拔之。
现代文：赵郡王李孝恭攻克辅公的鹊头镇。
English: The king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, attacked the Shantou Town of Kefu Gong.

古文：丁未，高丽王建武遣使来请班历。
现代文：丁未，高丽王建武派遣使节来唐，请求颁赐历法。
English: At the same time, King Jianwu of Goryeo sent an envoy to Tang to request the calendar.

古文：遣使册建武为辽东郡王、高丽王；以百济王夫馀璋为带方郡王，新罗王金真平为乐浪郡王。
现代文：唐派遣使节册封建武为辽东郡王、高丽王；册封百济王扶余璋为带方郡王，新罗王金真平为乐浪郡王。
English: Tang dispatched envoys to enthrone Feijianwu as the king of Liaodong County and the king of Goryeo; to enthrone Baekje King Fuyuk as the king of Bifang County, and Silla King Jinzhenping as the king of Lelang County.

古文：始州獠反，遣行台仆射窦轨讨之。
现代文：始州獠民反叛，唐派行台仆射窦轨讨伐叛獠。
English: When the people of Shizhou rebelled, the Tang faction marched to the capital to fight against the rebels.

古文：己酉，诏： 诸州有明一经以上未仕者，咸以名闻；州县及乡皆置学。 
现代文：己酉，唐颁布诏令： 各州有通晓一种以上经书而没有入仕的，均将姓名上报奏闻；州县及乡均设置学校。 
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty issued an edict: If anyone in each prefecture knew more than one scripture but did not enter the service, his or her name would be reported to the government; schools would be set up in every prefecture and township.

古文：壬子，行军副总管权文诞破辅公祏之党于猷州，拔其枚洄等四镇。
现代文：壬子，唐行军副总管权文诞在猷州打败辅公的党羽，攻克枚洄等四镇。
English: Ren Zi, the deputy commander-in-chief of the Tang marching army, defeated Fu Gong's party in Zhangzhou and conquered four towns including Hailuo.

古文：丁巳，上幸国子学，释奠；诏诸王公子弟各就学。
现代文：丁巳，唐高祖亲临国子监，行释奠礼；下诏命诸王公子弟分别入学。
English: At that time, Emperor Gaozong personally came to the Imperial Procuratorate to offer a congratulatory speech; he then issued an edict ordering all the princes and princesses to go to school separately.

古文：戊午，改大总管为大都督府。
现代文：戊午，唐改大总管为大都督府。
English: In the afternoon, the chief administrator of the Tang Dynasty was transferred to the Dadu Prefecture.

古文：己未，高开道将张金树杀开道来降。
现代文：己未，高开道的将领张金树杀死高开道来降唐。
English: Before long, Gao Kaido's general Zhang Jinshu killed Gao Kaido to bring down the Tang Dynasty.

古文：开道见天下皆定，欲降，自以数反覆，不敢；且恃突厥之众，遂无降意。
现代文：高开道见天下全部得到平安，想投降，但认为自己几次降而复叛，所以不敢来降；而且依仗突厥的势力，便打消了投降的念头。
English: Gao Kaidou saw that the whole world was safe and wanted to surrender, but he thought that he had surrendered and rebelled several times, so he did not dare to surrender; and relying on the power of the Turks, he dispelled the idea of surrender.

古文：其将卒皆山东人，思乡里，咸有离心。
现代文：高开道手下的将士都是山东人，思念故乡，都想逃走。
English: Gao Kaido's soldiers are all from Shandong. They miss their hometown and want to escape.

古文：开道选勇敢士数百，谓之假子，常直阁内，使金树领之。
现代文：高开道挑选了几百名勇士，称为义子，经常在阁内值班，由张金树统领。
English: Gao Kaido selected several hundred warriors, known as Yoshiko, who were often on duty in the cabinet, led by Zhang Jinshu.

古文：故刘黑闼将张君立亡在开道所，与金树密谋取开道。
现代文：原刘黑闼的将领张君立逃到高开道处，和张金树密谋杀高开道。
English: Zhang Jianli, the former general of Liu Heixuan, fled to Gao Kaido, and conspired with Zhang Jinshu to murder Gao Kaido.

古文：金树遣其党数人入阁内，与假子游戏，向夕，潜断其弓弦，藏刀槊于床下，合暝，抱之趋出，金树帅其党大噪，攻开道阁，假子将御之，而弓弦皆绝，刀槊已失，争出降；君立亦举火于外与相应，内外惶扰。
现代文：张金树派他的几名同党进入阁内，和高开道的义子们玩耍，临近黄昏，暗中搞断了义子们的弓弦，把刀枪藏到床下，到就寝时，抱着刀枪迅速离去，张金树带领同党大声喧哗，攻打高开道的阁房，义子们准备抵抗，但弓弦已断，刀枪已失，于是争相投降；张君立也在外放火作为呼应，内外惶惶不安。
English: Zhang Jinshu sent several of his party members into the attic to play with Gao Kido's godchildren. Near dusk, he secretly broke the godchildren's bow strings, hid the swords and guns under the bed, and when he went to bed, he quickly left with the swords and guns. Zhang Jinshu led his party members in a loud noise to attack Gao Kido's attic. The godchildren were ready to resist, but the bow strings were broken and the swords and guns were lost, so they fought to surrender. Zhang Junli also set fire outside as a response, causing panic inside and out.

古文：开道知不免，乃擐甲持兵坐堂上，与妻妾奏乐酣饮，众惮其勇，不敢逼。天且明，开道缢妻妾及诸子，乃自杀。
现代文：高开道知道逃不脱，于是身披铠甲手持兵器坐在堂上，和妻妾们奏乐畅饮，众人害怕他的英勇，不敢靠近，天快亮时，高开道勒死妻妾和儿子们，然后自杀身亡。
English: Gao Kaidou knew that he could not escape, so he sat in the hall, wearing armor and armed with weapons, playing music and drinking with his wives and concubines. People were afraid of his bravery and did not dare to approach. When the day was about to dawn, Gao Kaidou strangled his wife and concubines and sons, and then committed suicide.

古文：金树陈兵，悉收假子斩之，并杀君立，死者五百馀人。
现代文：张金树列阵，捉住高开道所有义子，全部杀死，并杀死张君立，一共死了五百多人。
English: Zhang Jinshu arrayed, captured all the sons-in-law of Gaokaido, killed them all, and killed Zhang Junli, a total of more than five hundred people died.

古文：遣使来降，诏以其地置妫州。
现代文：张金树派人向唐投降，唐下诏于原地设置妫州。
English: Zhang Jinshu sent people to surrender to the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to set up Bozhou in the same place.

古文：壬戌，以金树为北燕州都督。
现代文：壬戌，任命张金树为北燕州都督。
English: Jinshan, appointed Zhang Jinshu as the governor of North Yanzhou.

古文：戊辰，洋、集二州獠反，陷隆州晋城。
现代文：戊辰，洋、集二州獠民反叛，攻陷隆州晋城。
English: Boshen, Yang, and Ji led the people of the two states to rebel and capture Longzhou Jincheng.

古文：是月，太保吴王杜伏威薨。
现代文：当月，太保吴王杜伏威去世。
English: That month, the eunuch Wu Wang Du Fuwei passed away.

古文：辅公祏之反也，诈称伏威之命以绐其众。及公祏平，赵郡王孝恭不知其诈，以状闻；诏追除伏威名，籍没其妻子。
现代文：辅公反叛时，诈称杜伏威的命令欺骗部下，待到辅公被平定，赵郡王李孝恭不知辅公使诈，把情况上报朝廷；唐下诏追免杜伏威官职，没收他的妻儿为官奴。
English: When Fu Gong rebelled, he defrauded his subordinates by falsely claiming that it was Du Fu Wei's order, and waited until Fu Gong was subdued. Zhao County King Li Xiaogong did not know that Fu Gong was a fraud, and reported the situation to the imperial court; the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to dismiss Du Fu Wei from his official post and confiscate his wife and children as official slaves.

古文：及太宗即位，知其冤，赦之，复其官爵。
现代文：等到太宗即位，知道杜伏威被冤杜，赦免并恢复了杜伏威的官爵。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he knew that Duvois had been wronged, and pardoned and restored Duvois' title.

古文：三月，初定令，以太尉、司徒、司空为三公，次尚书、门下、中书、秘书、殿中、内侍为六省，次御史台，次太常至太府为九寺，次将作监，次国子学，次天策上将府，次左、右卫至左、右领卫为十四卫；东宫置三师、三少、詹事及两坊、三寺、十率府；王、公置府佐、国官，公主置邑司，并为京职事官。
现代文：三月，唐初次定令，以太尉、司徒、司空为三公，其次是尚书、门下、中书、秘书、殿中、内侍六个省，其次是御史台，其次太常至太府等九个寺，其次是将作监，其次国子学，其次天策上将府，其次左、右卫至左、右领卫等十四卫；东宫设置三师、三少、詹事以及两坊、三寺、十率府；王、公设置府佐、国官，公主设置邑司，以上部门官员均为京职事官。
English: In March, the Tang Dynasty first decreed that the three princes should be the ethereal lieutenant, the scholar, and the scholar, followed by the six provinces of the scholar, the disciple, the scholar, the secretary, the courtier, and the chambermaid, followed by the imperial historian, followed by the nine temples from the imperial palace to the great capital, followed by the magistrate, followed by the imperial scholar, followed by the imperial general, followed by the left, the right guard to the left, and the right guard, followed by the fourteen guards; the eastern palace was set up with the three divisions, the three junior divisions, the junior divisions, and the two camps, the three temples,

古文：州、县、镇、戌为外职事官。
现代文：州、县、镇、戍的官员为外职事官。
English: Officials of prefectures, counties, towns and counties are foreign service officers.

古文：自开府议同三司至将仕郎二十八队，为文散官；骠骑大将军至陪戎副尉三十一阶，为武散官；上柱国至武骑尉十二等，为勋官。
现代文：从开府仪同三司到将仕郎，共二十八阶，为文散官；骠骑大将军至陪戎副尉，共三十一阶，为武散官；上柱国到武骑尉，共十二等，为勋官。
English: From Kaifu giri to Sanji to Shoshiro, a total of 28 ranks, they are Bunzan officers; from Shoko taishogun (general of cavalry) to Baewon vice-lieutenant, a total of 31 ranks, they are Busan officers; from Shangzhuangguo to Bukitanzhi, a total of 12 ranks, they are medal officers.

古文：丙戌，赵郡王孝恭破辅公祏于芜湖，拔梁山等三镇。
现代文：丙戌，赵郡王李孝恭在芜湖打败辅公，攻克梁山等三镇。
English: He Xuan, Zhao County King Li Xiaogong defeated Fu Gong in Wuhu and conquered Liangshan and other three towns.

古文：辛卯，安抚使任瑰拔扬子城，广陵城主龙龛降。
现代文：辛卯，唐安抚使任攻克扬子城，广陵城主龙龛投降。
English: Xinwu, Tang's pacifier, sent Ren to conquer Yangzi City, Guangling's lord, Longyu, surrendered.

古文：丁酉，突厥寇原州。
现代文：丁酉，突厥侵犯原州。
English: Ding Xuan, the Turks invaded Yuanzhou.

古文：戊戌，赵郡王孝恭克丹杨。
现代文：戊戌，赵郡王李孝恭攻克丹杨。
English: Wuzhen, Zhao County King Li Xiaogong defeated Kdan Yang.

古文：先是，辅公祏遣其将冯慧亮、陈当世将舟师三万屯博望山，陈正通、徐绍宗将步骑二万屯青林山，仍于梁山连铁锁以断江路，筑却月城，延袤十馀里，又结垒江西以拒官军。
现代文：在此之前，辅公派遣手下将领冯慧亮、陈当世率领三万水兵驻扎在博望山，陈正通、徐绍宗率领三万步兵骑兵驻扎在青林山，又在梁山用锁链切断江中航道，修筑却月城，延绵十多里，又在长江之西构筑工事抵抗唐军。
English: Prior to this, Fu Gong dispatched his generals Feng Huiliang and Chen Dangse, who led 30,000 sailors, to be stationed in Bohang Mountain; Chen Zhengtong and Xu Shaosong, who led 30,000 infantry and cavalry, to be stationed in Qinglin Mountain; in Liangshan, they used chains to cut off the shipping route in the middle of the river, and built Chaoyue City, which stretched for more than ten miles; and in the west of the Yangtze River, they constructed works to resist the Tang army.

古文：孝恭与李靖帅舟师次舒州，李世勣帅步卒一万渡淮，拔寿阳，次硖石。
现代文：李孝恭与李靖率领水军停泊在舒州，李世率领一万步兵渡过淮河，攻下寿阳，驻扎在硖石。
English: Li Xiaogong and Li Jing led the naval forces anchored in Shuzhou, Li Shitong led ten thousand infantry across the Huai River, captured Shouyang, and stationed in Shanshi.

古文：慧亮等坚壁不战，孝恭遣奇兵绝其粮道，慧亮等军乏食，夜，遣兵薄孝恭营，孝恭安卧不动。
现代文：冯慧亮等人坚壁不战，李孝恭派奇兵切断了敌军的粮食运输线，冯慧亮等军缺乏军粮，半夜，派兵逼近李孝恭的军营，李孝恭坚持不出战。
English: Feng Huiliang and others were adamant not to fight, Li Xiaogang sent a miracle soldier to cut off the enemy's grain transportation line, Feng Huiliang and others lacked military grain, in the middle of the night, they sent soldiers to approach Li Xiaogang's military camp, Li Xiaogang insisted on not fighting.

古文：孝恭集诸将议军事，皆曰： 慧亮等拥强兵，据水陆之险，攻之不可猝拔，不如直指丹杨，掩其巢穴。丹杨既溃，慧亮等自降矣！ 
现代文：李孝恭召集诸位将领商议军事行动，各位将领都说： 冯慧亮等人拥有强大的军队，占据水陆两方面的险要，我军进攻不能很快奏效，不如直接进逼丹杨，出其不备袭击辅公的老巢，丹杨溃败后，冯慧亮等人自然会投降了！ 
English: Li Xiaogong called all the generals to discuss military operations. All the generals said: Feng Huiliang and others have a strong army, occupying the water and land areas. Our army's attack cannot work quickly. It is better to directly attack Danyang and attack Fu Gong's old nest. After Danyang's defeat, Feng Huiliang and others will naturally surrender!

古文：孝恭将从其议，李靖曰： 公祏精兵虽在此水陆二军，然后自将亦为不少，今博望诸栅尚不能拔，公祏保据石头，岂易取哉！
现代文：李孝恭准备采纳众将领的意见，李靖说： 辅公的精锐部队虽然在这里有水陆两支军队，但是他自己统率的军队也不少，如今博望的各个敌营尚且不能攻克，辅公凭借石头城自保，又岂是容易攻克的！
English: Li Xiaogang was ready to accept the opinions of the generals. Li Jing said, "Although Fu Gong's elite troops have two land and water armies here, he also has a lot of troops under his command. The various enemy battalions that are now admired cannot be conquered. Fu Gong protects himself with the aid of the stone city. How easy it would be to conquer!

古文：进攻丹杨，旬月不下，慧亮等蹑吾后，腹背受敌，此危道也。
现代文：进军攻打丹杨，十天半个月攻不下，冯慧亮等人紧随在我军背后，我军腹背受敌，这是很危险的。
English: It takes ten days and half a month to attack Danyang. Feng Huiliang and others are right behind our army, and our army is being attacked from behind. This is very dangerous.

古文：慧亮、正通皆百战馀贼，其心非不欲战，正以公祏立计使之持重，欲以老我师耳。
现代文：冯慧亮、陈正通都是身经百战的老将，并非他们不想出战，而是因为辅公定下的计策让他们按兵不动，想以此拖垮我军罢了。
English: Feng Huiliang and Chen Zhengtong are veterans who have been through hundreds of battles. It's not that they don't want to go to war, it's just that they want to drag down our army by letting their soldiers stand still because of the strategy set by Fu Gong.

古文：我今攻其城以挑之，一举可破也！ 
现代文：我们现在主动挑战攻城，可一举破敌！ 
English: We are now actively challenging to attack the city, and we can defeat the enemy in one fell swoop!

古文：孝恭然之，使羸兵先攻贼垒而勒精兵结陈以待之。
现代文：李孝恭表示赞同，用老弱残兵先进攻敌人的营垒，自己统领着精兵严阵以待。
English: Li Xiaogang agreed, and used the old and weak remnants to advance to attack the enemy's camp, while he himself led the elite soldiers to wait.

古文：攻垒者不胜而走，贼出兵追之，行数里，遇大军，与战，大破之。
现代文：攻打敌人营垒的部队失败逃跑，敌军出兵追击，走出几里地，遇到唐大军，双方交战，唐军大败敌军。
English: The troops that attacked the enemy's camp failed and fled, the enemy sent troops to chase, walked several miles, encountered the Tang army, the two sides fought, and the Tang army defeated the enemy army.

古文：阚稜免胄谓贼众曰： 汝曹不识我邪？
现代文：阚棱摘下头盔对敌军说道： 你们不认识我吗？
English: He took off his helmet and said to the enemy, "Don't you know me?

古文：何敢来与我战！ 
现代文：怎么胆敢来与我交战！ 
English: How dare you come to fight me!

古文：贼众多稜故部曲，皆无斗志，或有拜者，由是遂败。
现代文：敌军中有很多阚棱的旧部下，均丧失了斗志，也有一些人向阚棱行礼，敌军因此溃败。
English: Among the enemy troops, there were many old subordinates who had lost their fighting spirit, and there were also some people who bowed to the enemy. As a result, the enemy troops were defeated.

古文：孝恭、靖乘胜逐北，转战百馀里，博山、青林两戍皆溃，慧亮、正通等遁归，杀伤及溺死者万馀人。
现代文：李孝恭、李靖乘胜追击逃敌，转战一百多里，敌军博山、青林两处部队均溃败，冯慧亮、陈正通等人逃回丹杨，被唐军杀伤及淹死的敌军有一万多人。
English: Li Xiaogong and Li Jing successfully pursued the fleeing enemy and fought for more than a hundred miles. The enemy troops in Boshan and Qinglin were both defeated. Feng Huiliang, Chen Zhengtong and others fled back to Danyang. More than 10,000 enemy troops were killed and drowned by the Tang army.

古文：李靖兵先至丹杨，公祏大惧，拥兵数万，弃城东走，欲就左游仙于会稽，李世勣追之。
现代文：李靖的部队先到达丹杨，辅公大为惊慌，带着几万兵马，放弃丹杨城向东逃跑，打算到会稽投靠左游仙，李世在后面追击他。
English: Li Jing's troops arrived in Danyang first, and Fu Gong was greatly alarmed. He took tens of thousands of soldiers and horses, abandoned Danyang City, and fled eastward, intending to go to Huiqi to seek refuge with Zuo Youxian. Li Shih pursued him in the rear.

古文：公祏至句容，从兵能属者才五百人，夜，宿常州，其将吴骚等谋执之。
现代文：辅公到句容，随从的军队能跟上他的才五百人，夜晚，在常州宿营，他手下的将领吴骚等人谋划把他逮起来。
English: When Fu Gong reached Jue Rong, only five hundred of his army could keep up with him. At night, in the camp in Changzhou, his generals Wu Shao and others plotted to capture him.

古文：公祏觉之，弃妻子，独将腹心数十人，斩关走。
现代文：辅公觉察到吴骚等人的意图，丢下妻儿，独身带领几十名心腹，冲破关卡逃走。
English: Aide-de-camp sensed the intention of Wu Shao and others, left his wife and child, and single-handedly led dozens of confidants to break through the checkpoint and escape.

古文：至武康，为野人所攻，西门君仪战死。执公祏，送丹杨枭首，分捕馀党，悉诛之，江南皆平。
现代文：辅公到武康，受到农民的攻击，西门君仪战死，农民捉住辅公，送到丹杨处死，悬首示众，唐军分别搜捕辅公的余党，全部处决，江南地区全部平定。
English: Fu Gong went to Wu Kang and was attacked by the peasants. Ximen Junyi was killed in the battle. The peasants captured Fu Gong, sent him to Danyang and executed him. His head was displayed to the public. The Tang army separately searched for Fu Gong's remaining party members and executed them all. The southern part of the Yangtze River was completely pacified.

古文：己亥，以孝恭为东南道行台右仆射，李靖为兵部尚书。
现代文：己亥唐任命李孝恭为东南道行台右仆射，李靖为行台兵部尚书。
English: Ji Hai Tang appointed Li Xiaogong as the right-hand man of the Southeast Military Region, and Li Jing as the right-hand man of the Southeast Military Region.

古文：顷之，废行台，以孝恭为杨州大都督，靖为府长史。
现代文：不久，又废除东南道行台，任命李孝恭为扬州大都督，李靖为大都督府长史。
English: Soon after, he abolished the Southeast Dao Gangdai and appointed Li Xiaogong as Yangzhou Grand Governor and Li Jing as Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：上深美靖功，曰： 靖，萧、辅之膏肓也。 
现代文：高祖深深地赞美李靖的功劳，说道： 李靖是萧铣、辅公的克星。 
English: Gao Zu deeply praised the merits of Li Jing, saying: Li Jing is the nemesis of Xiao Yu and Fu Gong.

古文：阚稜功多，颇自矜伐。
现代文：阚棱立了功勋，颇自傲。
English: He was quite proud of his achievement.

古文：公祏诬稜与己通谋。
现代文：辅公诬陷阚棱与自己合谋。
English: The vice-premier falsely accused the prime minister of colluding with him.

古文：会赵郡王孝恭籍没贼党田宅，稜及杜伏威、王雄诞田宅在贼境者，孝恭并籍没之；稜自诉理，忤孝恭，孝恭怒，以谋反诛之。
现代文：恰好赵郡王李孝恭查封没收辅公党羽的田地房产，阚棱以及杜伏威、王雄诞在辅公境内的田地房产，李孝恭也一起没收；阚棱自己申诉说明，触犯了李孝恭，李孝恭很生气，以谋反的罪名杀了阚棱。
English: It just so happened that the king of Zhao County, Li Xiaogong, seized and confiscated the farmland properties of the auxiliary public party. He also confiscated the farmland properties of Zou Ren, Du Fu Wei and Wang Xuan Zi in the territory of the auxiliary public. Zou Ren himself stated in his complaint that he had violated Li Xiaogong. Li Xiaogong was very angry and killed Zou Ren on the charge of plotting rebellion.

古文：夏，四月，庚子朔，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月庚子朔，唐大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zishuo, Tang Dynasty general amnesty to the world.

古文：是日，颁新律令，比开皇旧制增新格五十三条。
现代文：当天，颁布新的律令，新律比隋朝开皇的旧制增加了五十三条新法规。
English: On the same day, the new law was promulgated. The new law added 53 new regulations to the old system of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：初定均田租、庸、调法：丁、中之民，给田一顷，笃疾减什之六，寡妻妾减七；皆以什之二为世业，八为口分。
现代文：唐初次制定均田制与租、庸、调的办法：每位成年丁男及十六岁以上二十以下的中男，给一顷田，有严重疾病者减去十分之六，寡妻、寡妾减去十分之七，所有授田均以其中十分之二为世业田，十分之八为口分田。
English: For the first time, the Tang Dynasty established the equal field system and the method of rent, average, and adjustment: each adult male and middle-aged male over the age of 16 and under the age of 20 were given one hectare of land, those with serious illnesses were subtracted six tenths, and widowed wives and widowed concubines were subtracted seven tenths.

古文：每丁岁入租粟二石。
现代文：每一成年男子每年交纳的租是二石粟。
English: The annual rent paid by every adult male was two koku of millet.

古文：调随土地所宜，绫、绢、絁、布。
现代文：调按照当地物产情况，分别交纳绫、绢？布。
English: Adjusted according to the local product situation, respectively, for cotton and non-woven fabrics.

古文：岁役二旬；不役则收其佣，日三尺；有事而加役者，旬有五日，免其调；三旬，租、调俱免。
现代文：每年劳役二十日，不服劳役则收取，每天三尺；有事增加劳役者，加十五日劳役，免除应交之调；加三十日劳役，应交纳的租、调均予免除。
English: Every year, the labor service is 20 days, and those who do not accept the labor service will be charged, up to three feet per day; if there is anything to increase the labor service, add 15 days of labor service, exempt from the transfer; add 30 days of labor service, and the rent and transfer payable are exempted.

古文：水旱虫霜为灾，什损四以上免租，损六以上免调，损七已上课役俱免。
现代文：如遇水、旱、虫、霜等自然灾害，收成损失十分之四以上，免除租；损失十分之六以上，免除调；损失在十分之七以上，免去全部应交纳的租调及应服劳役。
English: In the event of natural disasters such as floods, droughts, insects, and frosts, if more than four-tenths of the harvest is lost, the rent shall be exempted; if more than six-tenths of the harvest is lost, the transfer shall be exempted; if more than seven-tenths of the harvest is lost, the transfer of rent and the labor service shall be exempted.

古文：凡民赀业分九等。
现代文：百姓的资产分为九等。
English: People's assets are divided into nine classes.

古文：百户为里，五里为乡，四家为邻，四邻为保。
现代文：一百户为一里，五个里成为一乡，四家为邻，四个邻成一保。
English: One hundred households make up a village, five villages make up a township, four families make up a neighborhood, and four neighborhoods make up a county.

古文：在城邑者为坊，田野者为村。
现代文：在城镇居住区为坊，在乡村居住区为村。
English: In urban residential areas, they are called wangs, and in rural residential areas, they are called villages.

古文：食禄之家，无得与民争利；工商杂类，无预士伍。
现代文：官宦之家有国家俸禄，不准与百姓争夺利益；工商杂色人等，不准加入士人阶层。
English: The families of government officials and bureaucrats receive state salaries and are not allowed to compete with the people for profits; businessmen and women of mixed race, etc. are not allowed to join the scholar class.

古文：男女始生为黄，四岁为小，十六为中，二十为丁，六十为老。
现代文：男女初生为黄，四岁以上为小，十六岁以上为中，二十岁以上为丁，六十岁以上为老。
English: Male and female newborns are yellow, four years old or older is small, 16 years old or older is medium, 20 years old or older is small, and 60 years old or older is old.

古文：岁造计帐，三年造户籍。
现代文：每年编制计帐，每三年编造一次户籍。
English: Accounts are prepared annually, and a household register is compiled every three years.

古文：丁未，党项寇松州。
现代文：丁未，党项侵犯松州。
English: Ding Wei, the party invaded Songzhou.

古文：庚申，通事舍人李凤起击万州反獠，平之。
现代文：庚申，唐通事舍人李凤起攻打并平定了万州反叛的獠民。
English: Goshun and Li Feng attacked and pacified the rebellious people of Wanzhou.

古文：五月，辛未，突厥寇朔州。
现代文：五月辛未，突厥侵犯朔州。
English: In May, shortly after Xinwei, the Turks invaded Shuozhou.

古文：甲戌，羌与吐谷浑同寇松州。遣益州行台左仆射窦轨自翼州道，扶州刺史蒋善合自芳州道击之。
现代文：甲戌，羌族与吐谷浑一同侵犯松州，唐派遣益州行台左仆射窦轨从翼州道，扶州刺史蒋善合从芳州道攻击羌与吐谷浑。
English: Armor, Yi and Tuyuhun invaded Songzhou together. Tang sent Yizhou Xingtai Zuo to attack Tuyuhun from Yingzhou Road, and Fuzhou Xizhi Jiang to attack Yu and Tuyuhun from Fangzhou Road.

古文：丙戌，作仁智宫于宜君。
现代文：丙戌，唐在宜君县修建仁智宫。
English: Tang built the Ren Zhi Palace in Yijun County.

古文：丁亥，窦轨破反獠于方山，俘二万馀口。
现代文：丁亥，窦轨在方山打败反叛的獠民，俘虏二万多人。
English: Dinghai and Douluo defeated the rebellious Min people in Fangshan and captured more than 20,000 people.

