古文：杨业，并州太原人。
现代文：杨业，并州太原人。
English: Yang Ye, a native of Taiyuan.

古文：父信，为汉麟州刺史。
现代文：他的父亲杨信，任后汉麟州刺史。
English: His father, Yang Xin, became Hanlin prefect after taking office.

古文：业幼倜傥任侠，善骑射，好畋猎，所获倍于人。
现代文：杨业幼年洒脱不羁，好行侠义，擅长骑马射箭，喜打猎，所猎之物比他人多一倍。
English: At a young age, Yang Ye was free and uninhibited, good at chivalry, good at riding horses, archery, and hunting. He hunted twice as much as others.

古文：尝谓其徒曰： 我他日为将用兵，亦犹用鹰犬逐雉兔尔。 弱冠事刘崇，为保卫指挥使，以骁勇闻。
现代文：他曾对他的伙伴说 ：我将来当将军用兵，也要像今天用鹰犬追逐野鸡、山兔一样。 他二十岁左右追随北汉刘崇，任保卫指挥使，以勇猛而闻名。
English: He once said to his partner: "In the future, when I am a general and a soldier, I want to chase pheasants and mountain rabbits with eagle-dogs, just like today." He was about twenty years old when he followed Liu Chong of the Northern Han Dynasty and served as a guard commander, and was famous for his bravery.

古文：累迁至建雄军节度使，屡立战功，所向克捷，国人号为 无敌 。
现代文：接连升职至建雄军节度使，屡立战功，所到之处即闻克敌报捷，国人称他为 无敌 。
English: He was successively promoted to Jianxiong's military commander, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and defeated the enemy wherever he went. The Chinese people called him invincible.

古文：太宗征太原，素闻其名，尝购求之。
现代文：宋太宗征讨太原，常听到杨业的威名，曾悬赏想得到他这个人。
English: Song Taizong's conquest of Taiyuan, often heard the prestige of Yang industry, once offered a reward to get him this person.

古文：既而孤垒甚危，业劝其主继元降，以保生聚。
现代文：不久，太原成为一座孤城，形势危急，杨业劝他的国主刘继元投降，以保全百姓的生命财产。
English: Soon, Taiyuan became a lonely city, the situation was critical, Yang Ye advised his sovereign Liu Jiyuan to surrender in order to preserve the lives and property of the people.

古文：继元既降，帝遣中使召见业，大喜，以为右领军卫大将军。
现代文：刘继元投降后，宋太宗派宦官传旨召见杨业，一见大喜，任命他为右领军卫大将军。
English: After Liu Jiyuan's surrender, the eunuchs of the Song Taizong sect summoned Yang Ye, who was overjoyed at the sight and appointed him as the right-hand leader of the Army of Wei.

古文：师还，授郑州刺史。
现代文：班师后，授杨业郑州刺史之职。
English: After the class, Yang Ye was awarded the post of Zhengzhou chief historian.

古文：帝以业老于边事，复迁代州兼三交驻泊兵马都部署，帝密封橐装，赐予甚厚。
现代文：皇帝认为杨业对边疆事务很有经验，又升他任代州兼三交驻泊兵马都部署，密封珠宝玉器，赏赐给他极丰厚。
English: The emperor thought that Yang Ye was very experienced in frontier affairs, and promoted him to the post of daizhou and stationed soldiers and horses in the three ports, sealed jewels and jade, and rewarded him very richly.

古文：会契丹入雁门，业领麾下数千骑自西陉而出，由小陉至雁门北口，南向背击之，契丹大败。
现代文：正赶上契丹入侵雁门关，杨业率领部下数千名骑兵从西陉出发，由小道赶到雁门北口，再转向南下从敌人背后攻击，契丹大败。
English: Just in time for the Khitan invasion of the Wild Goose Gate, Yang Ye, leading thousands of cavalrymen, set out from Xidi, drove along the trail to the North Gate of the Wild Goose Gate, and then turned south to attack from behind the enemy. The Khitan were soundly defeated.

古文：以功迁云州观察使，仍判郑州、代州。
现代文：杨业因战功升任云州观察使，仍兼郑州和代州的刺史及驻泊兵马都部署。
English: Yang Ye was promoted to the post of Yunnan observation envoy due to his war service, and he was also deployed to Zhengzhou and Daizhou as well as stationed at the garrison.

古文：自是，契丹望见业旌旗即引去。
现代文：从此，契丹军队一望见杨业的旗帜，就退去。
English: From then on, as soon as the Khitan army saw Yang Jing's flag, they retreated.

古文：主将戍边者多忌之，有潜上谤书斥言其短，帝览之皆不问，封其奏以付业。
现代文：守边的主将大多妒忌他，有的人暗中向皇帝写诬告信指责他的缺点，皇帝见了都不追问，反把这些奏章封好交给杨业。
English: Most of the border guards were jealous of him. Some of them secretly wrote false letters to the emperor, accusing him of his shortcomings. The emperor did not ask any questions, but sealed the letters and gave them to Yang Ye.

古文：雍熙三年，大兵北征，以忠武军节度使潘美为云、应路行营都部署，命业副之，以西上阁门使、蔚州刺史王侁，军器库使、顺州团练使刘文裕护其军。
现代文：雍熙三年，宋军北征，以忠武军节度使潘美为云、应路行营都部署，命杨业为他的副职。派西上门使、蔚州刺史王亻先，军器库使、顺州团练使刘文裕监护这支军队。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, the Northern Expedition of the Song Army was deployed with Pan Mei as the commander and Yang Ye as his deputy, in accordance with the loyal army festival. He sent the Western Gate Envoy, Ulshu Prince Wang Xuanxian, the Armory Envoy, and Shunzhou Regiment Training Envoy Liu Wenyu to supervise this army.

古文：诸军连拔云、应、寰、朔四州，师次桑乾河，会曹彬之师不利，诸路班师，美等归代州。
现代文：各路宋军接连攻下云、应、寰、朔四州，大军进驻桑乾河，恰逢曹彬这路军战事不利，各路宋军只得撤退，潘美这些人回到代州。
English: The Song armies from all directions successively invaded the four prefectures of Yun, Ying, Yan and Shuo, and the large army was stationed in the Sangqian River. It happened that Cao Bin's army was not doing well in the war. The Song armies from all directions had to retreat, and Pan Mei's people returned to Daizhou.

古文：未几，诏迁四州之民于内地，令美等以所部之兵护之。
现代文：没过多久，宋廷下诏迁移四州的百姓到内地，命令潘美等人以所统领的士兵护送他们。
English: Soon after, Song Ting issued an edict to relocate the people of the four states to the inland, and ordered Pan Mei and others to escort them with their soldiers.

古文：时契丹国母萧氏与其大臣耶律汉宁、南北皮室及五押惕隐领众十余万，复陷寰州。
现代文：这时，契丹国辽圣宗的母亲萧太后与她的大臣耶律汉宁、南北皮室和五押惕隐领兵十多万，又攻占了寰州。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Xiao, the mother of Liao Shengzong of Khitan, and her ministers, Ye Lu Hanning, Nanfang Bishu and Wushti Tianyin, led more than one hundred thousand soldiers to conquer Zhangzhou.

古文：业谓美等曰： 今辽兵益盛，不可与战。
现代文：杨业对潘美等人说 ：现在辽兵更加强盛，不可与他们对战。
English: Yang Ye said to Pan Mei and others, "Now that the Liao soldiers are more powerful, you can't fight them.

古文：朝廷止令取数州之民，但领兵出大石路，先遣人密告云、朔州守将，俟大军离代州日，令云州之众先出。
现代文：朝廷只命令我们移取几个州的百姓，只须领军从大石路出，先派人暗中告诉云州、朔州的守将，等大军离开代州的日子，命令云州的百姓先出。
English: The imperial court only ordered us to transfer the people of several prefectures. All we had to do was to lead the army out of Dashi Road and first send someone to secretly tell the guards of Yunnan and Shuo prefectures to order the people of Yunnan to go out first on the day when the large army left Daizhou.

古文：我师次应州，契丹必来拒，即令朔州民出城，直入石碣谷。
现代文：我们的军队驻在应州，契丹兵必定来抵抗，此时立即命令朔州的百姓出城，直接进入石碣谷。
English: Our troops were stationed in Yingzhou, and the Khitan soldiers would certainly come to resist. At this time, they immediately ordered the people of Shuozhou to leave the city and go directly to Shizhu Valley.

古文：遣强弩千人列于谷口，以骑士援于中路，则三州之众，保万全矣。 侁沮其议曰： 领数万精兵而畏懦如此。
现代文：我们派弓箭手一千人列在谷口，用骑兵增援中路，这样，三州的百姓，可确保安全了。 王亻先反对这个建议说： 率领数万精兵却害怕、软弱到这样程度。
English: We will send a thousand archers to form a line at Taniguchi and reinforce the middle route with cavalry, so that the people of the three states can be assured of safety.Wang Xian opposed this suggestion, saying, "He is afraid and weak to lead tens of thousands of elite soldiers to such an extent.

古文：但趋雁门北川中，鼓行而往。 文裕亦赞成之。
现代文：我军只管直奔雁门北川中，击鼓前进。 刘文裕也赞成这个意见。
English: Our army should just march straight to the middle of the Wild Goose Gate Beichuan and march forward beating drums. Liu Wenyu also agrees with this opinion.

古文：业曰： 不可，此必败之势也。 侁曰： 君侯素号无敌，今见敌逗挠不战，得非有他志乎？ 业曰： 业非避死，盖时有未利，徒令杀伤士卒而功不立。
现代文：杨业说： 不能这样，这是必定失败的形势。 王亻先说： 君侯你向来号称无敌，如今看见敌人就停止不前、屈服不战，莫非你还有别的打算吗？ 杨业说： 我杨业不是躲避死，只因为此时对我们有不利之处，白白地被人杀伤士卒而得不到成功。
English: Yang Ye said, "This can't be, this is a situation that is bound to fail." Wang Xuan said, "Prince, you have always claimed to be invincible, but now that you see the enemy, you have stopped advancing and surrendered without a fight. Don't you have any other plans?" Yang Ye said, "I, Yang Ye, am not avoiding death, but only because there is something unfavorable for us at this time, we are being killed and killed in vain and cannot succeed.

古文：今君责业以不死，当为诸公先。 将行，泣谓美曰： 此行必不利。
现代文：现在你用怕死来责备我杨业，我应当在各位的前面作战。 快要出发时，杨业哭着对潘美说： 此次行动必定不利。
English: Now you use your fear of death to reproach me, Yang Ye, that I should fight in front of you all.As we were about to set off, Yang Ye cried to Pan Mei, "This action is bound to be unfavorable.

古文：业，太原降将，分当死。
现代文：杨业，是太原的降将，死应是分内的事。
English: Yang Ye is Taiyuan's demoted general, and death should be an internal affair.

古文：上不杀，宠以连帅，授之兵柄。非纵敌不击，盖伺其便，将立尺寸功以报国恩。
现代文：皇上不杀我，信任地任我为连帅，授给我兵权，我并不是放掉敌人而不打，只是为了等待便于攻敌的条件，将立尺寸之功以报答国恩。
English: The emperor did not kill me, but trusted me to be a company commander and granted me the right to fight. I did not let the enemy go without fighting, but only to wait for conditions that would make it easier to attack the enemy, and to repay the country's favor by establishing the size of the achievement.

古文：今诸君责业以避敌，业当先死于敌。 因指陈家谷口曰： 诸君于此张步兵强弩，为左右翼以援，俟业转战至此，即以步兵夹击救之，不然，无遗类矣。 美即与侁领麾下兵阵于谷口。
现代文：今天各位用躲避敌人的名义来责备我杨业，我杨业应当先战死在敌人中。 于是杨业指着陈家谷口说 ：各位在那里摆下步兵弓箭手，作为左右翼用来增援，等我杨业转战到这里，立即用步兵夹击敌人救援我，不这样，就没有活着的人了。 潘美与王亻先率领部下的士兵在谷口布战阵势。
English: Today, in the name of evading the enemy, you all blamed me, Yang Ye, saying that I, Yang Ye, should fight and die in the midst of the enemy first. So, Yang Ye pointed to Taniguchi, the Chen family, and said, "You have placed infantry archers there, to be used as reinforcements for the left and right wings. When I, Yang Ye, come to fight here, immediately use infantry to pin down the enemy and rescue me. Otherwise, there would be no one left alive." Pan Mei and Wang Xuan led their soldiers to set up battle positions in Taniguchi.

古文：自寅至巳，侁使人登托逻台望之，以为契丹败走，欲争其功，即领兵离谷口。
现代文：从凌晨寅时到上午巳时，王亻先派人登上托逻台望，以为契丹已经逃跑，想争这场战争的功劳，就领军离开谷口。
English: From the wee hours of the morning to the wee hours of the morning, Wang Xian first sent people to board the Tolou observation deck, thinking that the Khitan had fled, and in order to compete for the credit of this war, he led the army to leave Taniguchi.

古文：美不能制，乃缘交河西南行二十里。
现代文：潘美没能制止，于是沿灰河往西南走二十里。
English: Pan Mei couldn't stop him, so he walked twenty miles southwest along the Grey River.

古文：俄闻业败，即麾兵却走。
现代文：不久听说杨业战败，潘美立即领兵退走。
English: Soon after hearing of Yang Ye's defeat, Pan Mei immediately withdrew his troops.

古文：业力战，自午至暮，果至谷口。
现代文：杨业奋力战斗，自中午杀到日落，果然到达谷口。
English: Yang Ye fought hard, from noon to sunset, and finally reached Taniguchi.

古文：望见无人，即拊膺大恸，再率帐下士力战，身被数十创，士卒殆尽，业犹手刃数十百人。
现代文：看到这里没有人，就拍着胸脯大哭，再率领帐下的将士奋力战斗，身受数十处创伤，而身边的士兵都快战死，杨业还亲手杀死几十人到上百人。
English: Seeing that there was no one here, he beat his chest and cried loudly, and then led his soldiers to fight hard, suffering dozens of traumas, while the soldiers around him were dying in battle. Yang Ye also killed dozens to hundreds of people with his own hands.

古文：马重伤不能进，遂为契丹所擒，其子延玉亦没焉。
现代文：他的马受重伤不能前进，于是他被契丹兵捉住，他的儿子杨延玉也战死在这里。
English: His horse was seriously injured and could not move forward, so he was captured by Khitan soldiers, and his son Yang Yanyu also died here.

古文：业因太息曰： 上遇我厚，期讨贼捍边以报，而反为奸臣所迫，致王师败绩，何面目求活耶！ 乃不食，三日死。
现代文：杨业因而叹息说 ：皇上对我很看重，我本打算用讨伐贼寇保卫边疆来报答他，却反被奸臣所迫害，致使国家的军队战败，还有什么脸求活着呢！ 于是杨业绝食三日而死。
English: As a result, Yang Ye sighed and said, "The emperor thinks highly of me. I had planned to repay him by fighting against the bandits and protecting the border, but I was persecuted by traitors, which led to the defeat of the country's army. How can I live?" So Yang Ye went on a three-day hunger strike and died.

古文：帝闻之，痛惜甚，俄下诏曰： 执干戈而卫社稷，闻鼓鼙而思将帅。
现代文：宋朝皇帝听说这事，十分痛心惋惜，不久下诏书说： 执干戈而保卫社稷，听军鼓而思念将帅。
English: When the Emperor of the Song Dynasty heard about this, he was very sad and regretful, and soon issued an edict saying: "Wage war to defend the country, listen to the military drum to miss the general."

古文：尽力死敌，立节迈伦，不有追崇，曷彰义烈！
现代文：竭全力战死敌寇，树立气节超过同类，不给以追悼而推重，怎么能够表彰忠义英烈呢！
English: How can we commend the loyalty and heroism of those who fought and died against the enemy bandits with all their strength, who set a standard higher than their peers, and who do not give importance to commemoration?

古文：故云州观察使杨业诚坚金石，气激风云。
现代文：已故的云州观察使杨业忠诚坚定如金石，浩气可激荡风云。
English: The late Yunnan observation made Yang Ye's loyalty as firm as a rock, and his generosity could stir up the storm.

古文：挺陇上之雄才，本山西之茂族。
现代文：所选拔的陇上英才，本是山西的望族。
English: The selected outstanding talents were originally from prestigious families in Shanxi Province.

古文：自委戎乘，式资战功。方提貔虎之师，以效边陲之用。而群帅败约，援兵不前。
现代文：自从委任他军旅之事，他就一心思立战功，最先率领勇猛的军队，以作为效力边陲的力量，然而将领们毁坏了协约，援救的军队没有上前。
English: From the time of his commission, he had set his heart on winning the war, first leading a valiant army to serve as a force on the frontier, but the generals broke the treaty and the relief army did not advance.

古文：独以孤军，陷于沙漠；劲果猋厉，有死不回。
现代文：杨业独自率领孤军，被困在沙漠；其猛烈之状，果然像暴风一样迅疾，将士作战，只有死战，不想生还。
English: Yang Ye alone led a lone army, trapped in the desert; its fierce state, indeed, as swift as a storm, the soldiers fought, only a fight to the death, do not want to survive.

古文：求之古人，何以加此！
现代文：探求古代的人，怎能做到这种地步！
English: How could the ancient explorers have done such a thing!

古文：是用特举徽典，以旌遗忠。魂而有灵，知我深意。
现代文：所以，我们应大举善典，借以表彰后世的忠心，魂魄若有灵，会明白我的含意。
English: Therefore, we should do a lot of good deeds to commend the loyalty of future generations. If there is a soul, it will understand my meaning.

古文：可赠太尉、大同军节度，赐其家布帛千匹、粟千石。
现代文：可追赠杨业为太尉、大同军节度使，赏赐他家里布帛一千匹，粮食一千石。
English: Yang Ye could be posthumously awarded the title of Taijun and Datong Army Festival Envoy, and his family would be rewarded with a thousand pieces of cloth and a thousand stones of grain.

古文：大将军潘美降三官，监军王侁除名、隶金州，刘文裕除名、隶登州。 
现代文：大将军潘美降官三级，监军王亻先解除官籍，隶金州；刘文裕解除官籍，隶登州。 
English: General Pan Mei was demoted to the third level, and the supervisor of the army, Wang Qianxian, was relieved of his official registration and assigned to Jinzhou; Liu Wenyu was relieved of his official registration and assigned to Jinzhou.

古文：业不知书，忠烈武勇，有智谋。
现代文：杨业不知书，但忠烈勇猛，有才智和谋略。
English: Yang Ye doesn't know how to read, but he is loyal and brave, and has talent and strategy.

古文：练习攻战，与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：他带兵训练攻击作战，能与士卒同甘共苦。
English: He led soldiers in training and attack operations, and was able to share the joys and sorrows with his soldiers.

古文：代北苦寒，人多服毡罽，业但挟纩露坐治军事，傍不设火，侍者殆僵仆，而业怡然无寒色。
现代文：代北极其寒冷，人们大多习惯用毡防寒，杨业只是用胳膊夹住棉絮，坐在露天处理军事，身旁又不生火，侍候的人几乎冻僵倒下，而杨业却心情畅快没有怕冷的样子。
English: It was extremely cold in Debei, and most people were accustomed to using cocoons to protect themselves from the cold. Yangye only used his arms to hold cotton wool and sat in the open air to deal with military matters. There was no fire next to him, and the waiters almost froze to death. However, Yangye was in a cheerful mood and did not seem afraid of the cold.

古文：为政简易，御下有恩，故士卒乐为之用。
现代文：他处理政事简练，对部下有情义，所以士卒心甘情愿为他所用。
English: He deals with political affairs concisely and is kind to his subordinates, so his subordinates are willing to be used by him.

古文：朔州之败，麾下尚百余人，业谓曰： 汝等各有父母妻子，与我俱死，无益也，可走还，报天子。 众皆感泣不肯去。
现代文：在朔州兵败时，他的部下还有一百多人，杨业对他们说： 你们这些人各有自己的父母妻子儿女，同我一起死没有益处，可以逃走，回去报效天子。 将士都感动得哭着不肯离去。
English: At the time of the defeat of the Shuozhou soldiers, there were more than a hundred of his subordinates. Yang Ye said to them, "You people each have your own parents, wives, and children. It is of no use to die with me. You can escape and return to serve the Son of Heaven." The soldiers were moved to tears and refused to leave.

古文：淄州刺史王贵杀数十人，矢尽遂死，余亦死，无一生还者。
现代文：淄州刺史王贵杀敌数十人，箭用完了终于战死。其余的人也都战死，没有一个活着回来的。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Wang Gui killed dozens of enemies, ran out of arrows and finally died in battle. The rest of the people also died in battle, and none of them came back alive.

古文：闻者皆流涕。
现代文：听说这事的人都流下了泪。
English: People were in tears when they heard about it.

古文：业既没，朝廷录其子供奉官延朗为崇仪副使，次子殿直延浦、延训并为供奉官，延瑰、延贵、延彬并为殿直。
现代文：杨业战死后，宋朝廷录用其子供奉官杨延朗为崇仪副使，次子殿直延浦、延训一同录用为供奉官，延瑰、延贵、延彬一起录用为殿直。
English: After the death of Yang Ye after the war, the Song Dynasty court appointed his children Yang Yanlang, a vassal, as the vice-envoy of Chongyi, the second son, Don Chao Yanpu, and Don Chao Yanxun, as vassals, and Don Chao, Don Chao, Yan Gui, and Don Chao Bin.

古文：延昭本名延朗，后改焉。
现代文：杨延昭本名杨延朗，后来改名延昭，他幼时沉默寡言，儿童时，喜欢多做军阵之类的游戏。
English: Yang Yan Zhao, whose real name was Yang Yan Lang, later changed his name to Yan Zhao. When he was young, he was taciturn, and when he was a child, he liked to play games such as army formation.

古文：幼沉默寡言，为儿时，多戏为军阵，业尝曰： 此儿类我。 每征行，必以从。
现代文：杨业曾经说 ：这个儿子像我。 
English: Yang Ye once said: This son is just like me.

古文：太平兴国中，补供奉官。
现代文：杨业每次出征，一定让他跟随军中。太平兴国年间，杨延昭被补选为供奉官。
English: Every time Yang Ye went to war, he was sure to have him follow him in the army. During the Taiping-Xingguo era, Yang Yanzhao was elected as a tributary officer.

古文：业攻应、朔，延昭为其军先锋，战朔州城下，流矢贯臂，斗益急。
现代文：杨业领兵进攻应、朔时，延昭担任这支军的先锋，奋战于朔州城下，被乱箭射穿手臂，却越战越勇。
English: Yang Ye led the attack at the time of Ying and Shuo, and Yan Zhao served as the vanguard of this army. He fought hard under Shuo Prefecture. He was shot through the arm by a stray arrow, but he fought more bravely.

古文：以崇仪副使出知景州。
现代文：朝廷派他以崇仪副使职外任景州知州。
English: The imperial court sent him to Jingzhou and Chizhou as vice-emissary of Chongyi.

古文：时江、淮凶歉，命为江、淮南都巡检使。
现代文：当时长江、淮河一带受灾歉收，朝廷任命他为江、淮南都巡检使。
English: At that time, the Yangtze River and the Huai River area suffered from bad harvests, and the imperial court appointed him as the chief inspector of the Yangtze River and the South Huai River.

古文：改崇仪使、知定远军，徙保州缘边都巡检使，就加如京使。
现代文：又改任崇仪使，知定远军，调任保州缘边都巡检使，委以重任如同京师的使者。
English: He was also appointed as the envoy of Chongyi, the envoy of Zhiding Yuanjun, and the inspector of Bozhou periphery. He was entrusted with important duties as the envoy of the Beijing division.

古文：咸平二年冬，契丹扰边，延昭时在遂城。
现代文：咸平二年冬，契丹骚扰边疆，杨延昭当时在遂城。
English: In the winter of the second year of Xianping, the Khitan harassed the frontier. Yang Yanzhao was in Suicheng at the time.

古文：城小无备，契丹攻之甚急，长围数日。
现代文：城小而无准备，契丹攻城又很急，合围攻城数天。
English: The city was small and unprepared, and the Khitan attacked the city in a hurry, besieging the city for several days.

古文：契丹每督战，众心危惧，延昭悉集城中丁壮登陴，赋器甲护守。
现代文：契丹国主之母萧太后督促指挥作战，宋兵人人自危很害怕，杨延昭召集城中的所有丁壮登上城上的矮墙，给予兵甲器械使之守护城墙。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao, the mother of the Khitan sovereign, urged him to take command of the battle. The Song soldiers were very afraid of their own danger. Yang Yan Zhao summoned all the Ding Zhuang in the city to climb the low wall on the city, and gave them armor and equipment to guard the city wall.

古文：会大寒，汲水灌城上，旦悉为冰，坚滑不可上，契丹遂溃去，获其铠仗甚众。
现代文：正好天气十分寒冷，取水泼洒城墙，天明，水全结成了冰，坚硬光滑，敌人不能爬上来。契丹兵于是瓦解退去，宋兵缴获敌人丢下的兵器很多。
English: Just as the weather was very cold, water was taken and splashed on the city wall. By dawn, the water had completely turned into ice, hard and smooth, and the enemy could not climb up. The Khitan soldiers then disintegrated and retreated, and the Song soldiers captured many weapons left by the enemy.

古文：以功拜莫州刺史。
现代文：杨延昭以战功升任莫州刺史。
English: Yang Yanzhao was promoted to the post of Mozhou magistrate for his war service.

古文：时真宗驻大名，傅潜握重兵顿中山。
现代文：当时宋真宗驻军大名，傅潜握重兵停留在中山。
English: At that time, Song Zhenzong was the daimyo of the garrison, and Fu Xianjian's heavy troops stayed in Zhongshan.

古文：延昭与杨嗣、石普屡请益兵以战，潜不许。
现代文：杨延昭与杨嗣、石普多次请求增加兵力去作战，傅潜都不答应。
English: Yang Yan Zhao, Yang Zhi and Shi Pu repeatedly asked for more troops to fight, but Fu Qian did not agree.

古文：及潜抵罪，召延昭赴行在，屡得对，访以边要。帝甚悦，指示诸王曰： 延昭父业为前朝名将，延昭治兵护塞有父风，深可嘉也。 厚赐，遣还。
现代文：等到傅潜获罪，宋真宗召杨延昭前往皇上的行营处，他都能回答皇上询问的边疆要务，真宗十分高兴，指着他对诸王说： 杨延昭的父亲杨业是前朝的名将，杨延昭统率军队保护边塞，有他父亲的遗风，很值得嘉奖呵。 真宗丰厚地赏赐他，仍令他还任。
English: When Fu Xian was found guilty, Song Zhenzong called Yang Yanzhao to go to the emperor's encampment, and he was able to answer the emperor's inquiry about frontier duties. Zhenzong was very happy, pointing to him and saying to the kings: Yang Yanzhao's father, Yang Ye, was a famous general of the former dynasty, and Yang Yanzhao led the army to protect the frontier fortress, which was his father's legacy, and was very worthy of praise. Zhenzong richly rewarded him and still kept him in office.

古文：是冬，契丹南侵，延昭伏锐兵于羊山西，自北掩击，且战且退。
现代文：这年冬天，契丹南下入侵宋境，杨延昭把精兵埋伏在羊山西边，从北面乘敌不备袭击敌人，边战边退。
English: In the winter of that year, the Khitans invaded Song territory from the south, and Yang Yan Zhao ambushed the elite soldiers on the west side of Yangshan Mountain, attacked the enemy from the north, taking advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness, and retreated while fighting.

古文：及山西，伏发，契丹众大败，获其将，函首以献。
现代文：等退到西山，宋伏兵发起攻击，契丹兵大败，俘虏契丹将领，用匣子装着敌将首级献上报功。
English: After retreating to the West Mountain, the Song ambush launched an attack, the Khitan soldiers were defeated, the Khitan generals were captured, and the heads of the enemy were presented with a box.

古文：进本州团练使，与保州杨嗣并命。
现代文：杨延昭进升本州团练使，与保州杨嗣一起受命。
English: Yang Yan Zhao was promoted to Honshu regimental drill sergeant, and received the order together with Bozhou Yang Xi.

古文：帝谓宰相曰： 嗣及延昭，并出疏外，以忠勇自效。
现代文：真宗对宰相说： 杨嗣与杨延昭，一同在遥远的外地任职，以忠心勇猛亲身效命国家。
English: Zhen Zong said to the prime minister: Yang Shih and Yang Yan Zhao served together in distant foreign countries, and served the country with loyalty and courage.

古文：朝中忌嫉者众，朕力为保庇，以及于此。 五年，契丹侵保州，延昭与嗣提兵援之，未成列，为契丹所袭，军士多丧失。命李继宣、王汀代还，将治其罪。
现代文：朝廷中妒忌他们的人众多，我尽力为他们庇护，才至于此。 咸平五年，契丹兵进攻保州，杨延昭与杨嗣率领宋军前往救援，宋军尚未摆成阵列，就被契丹兵袭击，宋军损失较多，朝廷命李继宣、王汀代还，将要治他们的罪。
English: There were many people in the imperial court who envied them, and I did my best to shelter them, until this happened. In the fifth year of the Han dynasty, the Khitan soldiers attacked Bozhou, and Yang Yan Zhao and Yang Shi led the Song army to rescue them. The Song army had not yet formed an array, but was attacked by the Khitan soldiers, and the Song army suffered more losses. The imperial court ordered Li Jixuan and Wang Tingdei to be punished for their crimes.

古文：帝曰： 嗣辈素以勇闻，将收其后效。 即宥之。
现代文：皇帝说 ：杨嗣这些人向来以勇猛闻名，将来可获得他们的效力。 随即宽宥了他们。
English: The emperor said, "Yang He, these people have always been famous for their bravery, and in the future they can gain their effectiveness." He then pardoned them.

古文：六年夏，契丹复侵望都，继宣逗遛不进，坐削秩，复用延昭为都巡检使。
现代文：咸平六年夏，契丹兵又进攻望都，李继宣逗留不敢上前，获罪被削去官职。朝廷又起用杨延昭任都巡检使。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Xianping, the Khitan soldiers attacked the capital again. Li Jixuan did not dare to go forward and was punished and removed from his official post. The imperial court appointed Yang Yanzhao as the capital inspector.

古文：时讲防秋之策，诏嗣及延昭条上利害，又徙宁边军部署。
现代文：当时正谋划秋天御敌的策略，真宗诏令杨嗣和杨延昭分条列出利弊上奏，又调杨延昭任宁边军部署。
English: At that time, they were planning the strategy of defeating the enemy in the autumn. Emperor Zhenzong ordered Yang Zhi and Yang Yan Zhao to list the advantages and disadvantages in a line-up, and transferred Yang Yan Zhao to be in charge of the deployment of the Ningxia Frontier Army.

古文：景德元年，诏益延昭兵满万人，如契丹骑入寇，则屯静安军之东。
现代文：景德元年，真宗诏令增加杨延昭的军队达到一万人，如果契丹骑兵入侵，就屯军于静安军的东边。
English: In the first year of King Jingde's reign, Emperor Zhenzong issued an edict to increase Yang Yanzhao's army to ten thousand, and if the Khitan cavalry invaded, they would camp on the east side of the Jing'an army.

古文：令莫州部署石普屯马村西以护屯田。
现代文：命令莫州部署石普屯军于马村西边用以保护屯田。
English: Mochou was ordered to deploy Shipputun troops to the west of Ma village to protect the tundra.

古文：断黑卢口、万年桥敌骑奔冲之路，仍会诸路兵掎角追袭，令魏能、张凝、田敏奇兵牵制之。
现代文：切断黑卢口、万年桥敌人骑兵奔击的道路，仍会集各路军队互为掎角追袭敌军，令魏能、张凝、田敏用奇兵牵制敌军。
English: Cut off the road of the enemy cavalry rushing from Heilukou and Wanyenqiao, the troops from all directions will still be gathered to pursue the enemy troops, and Wei Neng, Zhang Jian and Tian Min will use the special soldiers to hold back the enemy troops.

古文：时王超为都部署，听不隶属。
现代文：当时王超任都部署，听任事不隶属之。
English: At that time, Wang Chaoren was deployed, and he was not subordinate to it.

古文：延昭上言： 契丹顿澶渊，去北境千里，人马俱乏，虽众易败，凡有剽掠，率在马上。
现代文：杨延昭进言说： 契丹驻军澶渊，距北边境千里，人马都疲乏了，虽兵众但易被击败，凡是抢劫掠夺的物品，都放在马上。
English: Yang Yanzhao said: "The Khitan garrison is thousands of miles away from the northern border. The men and horses are exhausted. Although there are many soldiers, they are easily defeated. All the goods that were looted and plundered are placed on the horse.

古文：愿饬诸军，扼其要路，众可歼焉，即幽、易数州，可袭而取。 奏入，不报，乃率兵抵辽境，破古城，俘馘甚众。
现代文：希望诫勉诸路军，扼守各自的险要道路，敌兵就可歼灭在这里，那么幽、易数州就可袭击而夺取。 上奏皇帝而没答复。杨延昭于是率兵直抵辽境，攻破古城，俘获敌人极多。
English: He hoped that by exhorting and exhorting the troops along the road and guarding their respective dangerous roads, the enemy soldiers could be annihilated here, and then Yu and Yizhou could be attacked and captured. He appealed to the emperor, but there was no reply. Yang Yanzhao then led the troops straight to Liaoning, broke through the ancient city, and captured a large number of enemies.

古文：及请和，真宗选边州守臣，御笔录以示宰相，命延昭知保州兼缘边都巡检使。
现代文：等到请和，宋真宗选守卫边境各州的官员，亲笔录用给宰相看，任命杨延昭为保州知州兼缘边都巡检使。
English: Waiting for the invitation, Song Zhenzong selected officials to guard the border of each state, personally hired them to see the prime minister, and appointed Yang Yanzhao as the patrol envoy of Bozhou, Zhizhou and Yanzhong.

古文：二年，追叙守御之劳，进本州防御使，俄徙高阳关副都部署。
现代文：景德二年，追叙杨延昭守边御敌的功劳，进升他任保州防御使，不久调任高阳关副都部署。
English: In the second year of King Jingde's reign, Yang Yanzhao was posthumously promoted for his service in defending the border against the enemy. He was promoted to the post of Bozhou defense envoy, and was soon transferred to the post of Gaoyang Guanzhong deputy.

古文：在屯所九年，延昭不达吏事，军中牒诉，常遣小校周正治之，颇为正所罔，因缘为奸。
现代文：他在屯所九年，不通晓吏事，军中的文书和诉状，常派小军官周正处理，深为周正所蒙骗，周正借机为奸作恶。
English: During his nine years in the garrison, he was not familiar with official matters, military documents and complaints. He was often assigned to deal with the petty officer Zhou Zheng. He was deeply deceived by Zhou Zheng, and Zhou Zheng took the opportunity to commit treason.

古文：帝知之，斥正还营而戒延昭焉。
现代文：真宗知道这事，斥责周正，令回兵营，而后以这事告诫杨延昭。
English: Shinshu knew about this, reprimanded Zhou Zheng, ordered him to return to the barracks, and then warned Yang Yanzhao about this.

古文：大中祥符七年，卒，年五十七。
现代文：大中祥符七年，杨延昭死，终年五十七岁。
English: Yang Yan Zhao died at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：延昭智勇善战，所得奉赐悉犒军，未尝问家事。
现代文：杨延昭智勇善战，他把所得的赏赐都用来慰劳军队，未尝问及家事。
English: Yang Yan Zhao was a clever, brave and good fighter. He used all the rewards he received to comfort the army, and did not ask about his family affairs.

古文：出入骑从如小校，号令严明，与士卒同甘苦，遇敌必身先，行阵克捷，推功于下，故人乐为用。
现代文：他进出的排场像小军官一样，他号令严明，能与士卒同甘共苦，遇到敌人必定身先士卒，作战获胜报捷，把功劳归于部下，所以人人愿意为他效力。
English: He entered and exited the parade like a petty officer. He gave strict orders, was able to share the joys and sorrows with his subordinates, and when encountering the enemy, he was sure to be the first to help, win the battle, and repay the merits to his subordinates. Therefore, everyone was willing to work for him.

古文：在边防二十余年，契丹惮之，目为杨六郎。
现代文：他在边防二十余年，契丹军畏怕他，称他为杨六郎。
English: He has been guarding the border for more than 20 years. The Khitan army is afraid of him and calls him Yang Rokuro.

古文：及卒，帝嗟悼之，遣中使护榇以归，河朔之人多望柩而泣。
现代文：到他死去时，真宗叹息、悼念他，派宦官护送灵柩回他家乡，河朔一带人看到他的灵柩大都痛哭。
English: At the time of his death, Jianzong sighed and mourned for him, and sent eunuchs to escort his coffin back to his hometown. Most people around Hexuo cried when they saw his coffin.

古文：录其三子官，其常从、门客亦试艺甄叙之。
现代文：朝廷录用他的三个儿子为官。对他的亲随、门客也都量材选择录用。
English: The imperial court hired his three sons as officials, and his entourage and guests were also recruited according to their ability.

古文：子文广。
现代文：他的儿子叫杨文广。
English: His son's name is Yang Wenguang.

