古文：初，苏秦弟厉因燕质子而求见齐王。
现代文：当初，苏秦的弟弟苏厉因燕国人质的事求见齐王。
English: At first, Su Qin's younger brother, Su Li, asked to see King Qi because of the hostage situation in Yan.

古文：齐王怨苏秦，欲囚厉，燕质子为谢乃已，遂委质为臣。
现代文：齐王由于怨恨苏秦，就要囚禁苏厉，燕国的人质替苏厉请罪才罢了，于是齐王让苏厉做人质的信使。
English: Because of his grudge against Su Qin, King Qi wanted to imprison Su Li. The hostage of Yan only pleaded guilty on behalf of Su Li. Therefore, King Qi let Su Li be the messenger of the hostage.

古文：燕相子之与苏代婚，而欲得燕权，乃使苏代持质子于齐。
现代文：由于燕国相国子之与苏代是姻亲，子之又想得到燕国的大权，才让苏代带着做人质的公子来到齐国。
English: As Yan Guo and Su Dai were relatives by marriage, and Su Dai wanted to obtain the power of Yan Guo, he allowed Su Dai to come to Qi with his hostage son.

古文：齐使代报燕，燕王哙问曰： 齐王其伯也乎? 
现代文：齐国派苏代回报燕国：燕王哙问苏代说： 齐王能称霸吗？ 
English: Qi sent the Su Dynasty to return the favor to Yan: King Yan asked the Su Dynasty: Can King Qi dominate?

古文：曰： 不能。 
现代文：苏代说： 不能。 
English: Sudet answered: "Impossible.

古文：曰： 何也? 
现代文：燕王说， 为什么？ 
English: Yan Wang said, "Why?

古文：曰： 不信其臣。 
现代文：苏代说： 他不信任自己的太臣。 
English: Sudai replied, "King Qi does not trust his vassals."

古文：于是燕王专任子之，已而让位，燕大乱。
现代文：因此燕王把政事单独委任给子之，不久让出王位，燕国发生了大乱。
English: Therefore, King Yan delegated the political affairs to his son alone, and soon abdicated the throne, and a great disturbance occurred in Yan's country.

古文：齐伐燕，杀王哙、子之。
现代文：齐国进攻燕国，杀死了燕王哙、子之。
English: Qi took advantage of the opportunity to attack Yan and killed Yan's king, Yu Kazuchika.

古文：燕立昭王。而苏代、厉遂不敢入燕，皆终归齐，齐善待之。
现代文：燕国人拥立昭王，苏代、苏厉不敢进入燕国，最终都回到齐国，齐国很友好地对待他们。
English: The people of Yan supported Zhao Wang, and Su Dai and Su Li did not dare to enter Yan. In the end, they all returned to Qi. Qi treated them very kindly.

古文：苏代过魏，魏为燕执代。
现代文：苏代经过魏国：魏国替燕国扣留了苏代。
English: The Su Dynasty passed through Wei, and Wei arrested the Su Dynasty on behalf of Yan.

古文：齐使人谓魏王曰： 齐请以宋封泾阳君，秦不受。
现代文：齐国派人对魏玉说： 齐国请求把宋地封赏给泾阳君，秦国没有接受。
English: The person sent by the State of Qi to Wei Yu said: The State of Qi requested that the Song Dynasty land be awarded to Fenyang Jun, but the State of Qin did not accept it.

古文：秦非不利有齐而得宋地也，不信齐王与苏子也。
现代文：秦国并不认为有齐国的联合及得到宋地对自己不利，而是不信任齐王和苏代。
English: It was not that King Qin did not want the assistance of King Qi to seize the land of Song, but that he did not trust King Qi and Mr. Su.

古文：今齐、魏不和，如此其甚，则齐不欺秦。
现代文：观在齐、魏两国不和达到如此程度，齐国就不会再欺骗秦国。
English: According to Qin, if the discord between Qi and Wei reached such a level, Qi would no longer deceive Qin.

古文：秦信齐，齐、秦合，泾阳君有宋地，非魏之利也。
现代文：秦国如果听信齐国，齐、秦两国联合起来，泾阳君得到宋地，这并非对魏国有利。
English: If the State of Qin listens to the State of Qi, and the States of Qi and Qin unite, and the Prince of Shenyang obtains the State of Song, this will not be beneficial to the State of Wei.

古文：故王不如东苏子，秦必疑而不信苏子矣。
现代文：所以大王不如让苏代东去齐国，秦国一定会产生怀疑，不信任苏代。
English: Therefore, it is better for the great king to let the Su dynasty go to Qi, and Qin will certainly have doubts and distrust the Su dynasty.

古文：齐、秦不合，天下无变，伐齐之形成矣。 
现代文：齐、秦两国不能联合，天下不发生什么变故，进攻齐国的形势就形成了。 
English: If the two countries of Qi and Qin could not unite, and no changes occurred in the world, the situation of attacking Qi was formed.

古文：于是出苏代之宋，宋善待之。
现代文：于是魏王让苏代离开魏国来到宋国，宋国很友好地接待了苏代。
English: As a result, the Wei king asked the Su dynasty to leave Wei and come to Song, and Song received the Su dynasty in a friendly manner.

