古文：张无颇王锜马朝郄元位夏阳赵尉卢嗣宗三史王生张生
现代文：张无颇王锜马朝郄元位夏阳赵尉卢嗣宗三史王生张生
English: Zhang Mupo Wang Xiongma Zhaozhong Yuan Xiayang Zhao Fei Lu Shizong San Shi Wang Sheng Zhang Sheng

古文：张无颇
现代文：张无颇
English: Zhang Mupo

古文：长庆中，进士张无颇，居南康，将赴举，游丐番禺。
现代文：长庆年间，进士张无颇在南康住。在准备赶考之前，曾到广东番禺县去找一位认识的府帅求助。
English: During the Changqing period, Zhang Mupo lived in Nankang. Before preparing for the exam, he went to Panyu County in Guangdong to seek help from a governor he knew.

古文：值府帅改移，投诣无所。
现代文：然而等他到了番禺后才知道府帅已换了个不认识的人。他投靠无门。
English: However, when he arrived in Panyu, he learned that the governor had been replaced by someone he did not know. He had no one to turn to.

古文：愁疾卧于逆旅，仆从皆逃。
现代文：忧愁得病倒在一个旅店里，他的仆人也离他而去。
English: He fell into a melancholy illness in an inn, and his servant left him.

古文：忽遇善易者袁大娘，来主人舍，瞪视无颇曰：子岂久穷悴耶？
现代文：这时忽然有一个会算命的袁大娘来到旅店，细看了看无颇后，说：您绝不会永远这样穷困下去的。
English: At this time, a fortune-teller named Yuan Da Niang suddenly came to the hotel. After taking a closer look at everything, she said, "You will never be so poor forever."

古文：遂脱衣买酒而饮之，曰：君窘厄如是，能取某一计，不旬朔。自当富赡，兼获延龄。
现代文：无颇就卖了一件衣服请袁大娘喝酒。袁大娘说：你现在穷困在这里，我告诉你一个办法，你如果去做，不出十天半月，自然会富贵起来，而且还能延长你的寿命。
English: Without further ado, he sold a piece of clothing and invited Ms. Yuan to have a drink. Ms. Yuan said, "You are poor here now. Let me tell you a way. If you do it, in no more than ten and a half days, you will naturally become rich, and you can also extend your life.

古文：无颇曰：某困饿如是，敢不受教。
现代文：无颇说：我如今又穷又饿，你怎么说我就怎么做。
English: Muppo said: I am now poor and hungry, I will do whatever you say.

古文：大娘曰：某有玉龙膏一合子。
现代文：大娘说，我有一盒玉龙膏，是能起死回生的灵丹妙药，你可以因为这个药得到一个贵族女子。
English: The eldest daughter said, "I have a box of jade dragon ointment. It is a magic potion that can bring the dead back to life. You can get a noble woman because of this medicine."

古文：不惟还魂起死。
现代文：你可以贴一个布告，说你是神医。
English: You can put up a sign saying you're a psychic.

古文：因此永遇名姝。
现代文：如果是普通人来求医，你就不要给他治。
English: If it's an ordinary person who comes to see a doctor, you don't treat them.

古文：但立一表白，曰，能治业疾。
现代文：如果有身份高贵的人来求医，你就去给他治，给他用这个药就行。
English: If a high-ranking person comes to seek medical treatment, you just go and treat him, just give him this medicine.

古文：若常人求医，但言不可治；若遇异人请之，必须持此药而一往，自能富贵耳。
现代文：说罢就给无颇一个暖金盒，里面装着玉龙膏。袁大娘又说，天冷时你拿出这个暖金盒来，屋里就立刻会非常热，连炉子都不用生了。
English: As soon as she said that, she gave Mupo a warm gold box, which contained Jade Dragon Balm. Aunt Yuan also said that when it was cold, if you took out this warm gold box, the room would immediately become very hot, and even the stove would not need to be turned on.

古文：无颇拜谢受药，以暖金合盛之。
现代文：无颇拜谢了袁大娘，并且贴出一个布告。
English: Yuan's daughter thanked him profusely and posted a notice.

古文：曰：寒时但出此盒，则一室暄热，不假炉炭矣。无颇依其言，立表数日，果有黄衣若宦者，扣门甚急，曰：广利王知君有膏，故使召见。
现代文：过了几天，果然有一个穿黄衣的人，象是宫中的太监，急急地敲无颇的门，对无颇说，我们广利王知道你有仙丹灵药，所以派我来召见你。
English: A few days later, a man dressed in yellow, like a eunuch from the palace, hurriedly knocked on Muppo's door and said to Muppo, "We, the king of Guangli, know that you have the elixir of immortality, so we have sent me to summon you."

古文：无颇志大娘之言，遂从使者而往。
现代文：无颇想起袁大娘的话，就随太监去了。
English: Without thinking much about what Yuan Da Niang had said, he went with the eunuch.

古文：江畔有画舸，登之甚轻疾。
现代文：来到江边，见停着一只画船，上船后，船走的又轻又快。
English: When I came to the river, I saw a painting boat parked. After getting on the boat, the boat was light and fast.

古文：食顷，忽睹城宇极峻，守卫甚严。
现代文：走了有一顿饭功夫，来到一个城前，守卫十分森严。
English: After a hard day's walking, we arrived in front of a castle, which was heavily guarded.

古文：宦者引无颇入十数重门，至殿庭。
现代文：太监领无颇走过了十几道大门，来到大殿。
English: The eunuch leader Mupo walked through more than a dozen gates and came to the main hall.

古文：多列美女，服饰甚鲜，卓然侍立。
现代文：殿前列队站着很多服饰华丽的美女。
English: In the front of the hall, there are many beautiful women in gorgeous costumes.

古文：宦者趋而言曰：召张无颇至。
现代文：太监上殿报告说，大王召的张无颇已经到了。
English: The eunuch reported to the palace that Zhang Mupo, who had been summoned by the great king, had arrived.

古文：遂闻殿上使轴帘，见一丈夫。衣王者之衣，戴远游冠，二紫衣侍女，扶立而临砌，招无颇曰：请不拜。
现代文：这时有人打开殿门的帘子，见殿上坐着一个人，穿着皇帝的衣服，头戴远游冠，由两个穿紫衣的侍女搀扶着走下殿阶。两个紫衣侍女对无颇说，不必跪拜了。
English: At this time, someone opened the curtain of the palace door and saw a man sitting on the palace, dressed in the emperor's clothes, wearing a long-distance crown on his head, supported by two purple-clad maids and walking down the steps of the palace. The two purple-clad maids said to Mupo, you don't have to kneel.

古文：王曰：知秀才非南越人，不相统摄，幸勿展礼。
现代文：大王说，我知道你不是南越人，不是我的臣民，不用行礼了。
English: The great king said, "I know you are not a South Vietnamese, you are not my subject, so there is no need to bow."

古文：无颇强拜，王罄折而谢曰：寡人薄德，远邀大贤，盖缘爱女有疾，一心钟念，知君有神膏。
现代文：无颇一定要跪拜，大王立刻大大地弯下腰来答谢，说，我实在太冒昧了，把你这位贤人从远方请来。我的一个最疼爱的女儿得了病，听说你有神膏，如果能给我的爱女治好病，我真是太感激你了。
English: The great king immediately bent down to thank him, saying, "I am really too presumptuous to invite you, a wise man, from far away. One of my dearest daughters is ill, and I have heard that you have divine ointment. If I can cure my beloved daughter, I will be so grateful to you."

古文：遂令阿监二人，引入贵主院。
现代文：说罢，叫两个太监把无颇领到公主住的院子去。
English: Go on, tell the two eunuchs to take Mupo to the courtyard where the princess lives.

古文：无颇又经数重户，至一小殿。
现代文：无颇跟着又过了好几道大门，来到一个小殿。
English: Mupra followed and passed several gates and came to a small hall.

古文：廊宇皆缀明玑，翠楹楣，焕耀若布金钿，异香氲郁，满其庭户。
现代文：只见楼阁画廊的帘上都装着珍珠，门楣上镶着宝石，整个宫殿都镶金挂银，到处都弥漫着一种特殊的香气。
English: The curtains of the castle gallery were covered with pearls, the lintels with jewels, the entire palace with gold and silver, and a special aroma pervaded everywhere.

古文：俄有二女褰帘，召无颇入。
现代文：不一会儿，有两个宫女打开珠帘，召无颇进了公主的寝宫。
English: In a little while, two ladies-in-waiting opened the beaded curtains, and called Muffat into the princess's bedchamber.

古文：睹真珠绣帐中。有一女子，才及笄年，衣翠罗缕金之襦。
现代文：无颇见珍珠绣帐里有一个少女，看样子刚刚十六七岁，穿着红色绸缎镶金边的衣裙。
English: There was a girl in a pearl embroidered tent, who looked to be just sixteen or seventeen years old, wearing a red satin dress trimmed with gold.

古文：无颇切其脉，良久曰：贵主所疾，是心之所苦。
现代文：无颇就给这位公主切脉。过了半天说，公主您的病是心火所苦。
English: After half a day, he said, "Princess, your illness is caused by the heat of your heart."

古文：遂出龙膏，以酒吞之，立愈。
现代文：然后拿出玉龙膏，请公主就着酒吃下去，公主立刻就好了。
English: Then she took out the jade dragon ointment and invited the princess to drink it and eat it. The princess was immediately cured.

古文：贵主遂抽翠玉双鸾篦而遗无颇，目成者久之。无颇不敢受，贵主曰：此不足酬君子。
现代文：这时公主就从头上拔下一个翠玉作的双鸾篦送给无颇。无颇不敢接受，公主说，我并不是付给你看病的报酬，只是表达我的心意罢了。
English: At this time, the princess plucked a pair of emerald bracelets from her head and gave them to Muppo. Muppo did not dare to accept them, but the princess said, "I am not paying you to see a doctor, I am just expressing my heart's desire."

古文：但表其情耳。
现代文：我父王还会正式酬谢你的。
English: My father will officially reward you.

古文：然王当有献遗。
现代文：无颇只好拜谢收下了。
English: I had no choice but to accept the apology.

古文：无颇媿谢。
现代文：太监就领无颇去见大王。
English: So the eunuch went to the great king with nothing.

古文：阿监遂引之见王。王出骇鸡犀翡翠碗丽玉明瑰，而赠无颇。
现代文：大王拿出了骇鸡犀、悲翠碗等极贵重的金玉宝物赠送无颇。
English: The great king brought out extremely valuable golden treasures such as the chicken rhinoceros horn and the pathetic bowl, and presented them to everyone.

古文：无颇拜谢。宦者复引送于画舸，归番禺。
现代文：无颇拜谢接受了，太监又领无颇出宫送他上了那只画船。
English: Muppo accepted the thanks, and the eunuch took Muppo out of the palace and sent him on the painting boat.

古文：主人莫能觉，才货其犀，已巨万矣。
现代文：无颇回到番禺，光卖那只骇鸡犀就得了银钱巨万。
English: After returning to Panyu, he made a huge amount of money just by selling the rhinoceros.

古文：无颇睹贵主华艳动人，颇思之。
现代文：那位公主美丽娇艳楚楚动人，无颇也很想念她。
English: That princess was so beautiful and charming. I miss her very much.

古文：月余。忽有青衣，扣门而送红笺。
现代文：一个多月后，忽然有个青衣使女，敲门送来一个红信笺。
English: More than a month later, a maid in blue suddenly knocked on the door to deliver a red envelope.

古文：有诗二首，莫题姓字。无颇捧之。青衣倏忽不见。
现代文：上面题着两首诗，没写姓名，无颇接过诗笺后，那青衣使女就忽然消失了。
English: There were two poems inscribed on it, but no names were written. After receiving the poem, the maid in the blue dress suddenly disappeared.

古文：无颇曰：此必仙女所制也。
现代文：无颇说，这一定是仙女写的诗。
English: Needless to say, this must be a poem written by a fairy.

古文：词曰：羞解明珰寻汉渚。但凭春梦访天涯。
现代文：两首诗是：羞解明珰寻汉渚，但凭春梦访天涯。
English: The two poems are as follows: Shyly, the bright dragonfly is looking for the rocky shore, but with the help of the spring dream, it visits the end of the world.

古文：红楼日暮莺飞去，愁杀深宫落砌花。
现代文：红楼日暮莺飞去，愁杀深宫落砌花。
English: The red-roofed building flew away at dusk, and the masonry flowers fell in the deep palace.

古文：又曰：燕语春泥堕锦筵，情愁无意整花钿。
现代文：燕语春泥堕锦筵，情愁无意整花钿。
English: Swallowing spring mud, falling brocade, sentimental unintentional flowers.

古文：寒闺欹枕梦不成，香炷金炉自袅烟。
现代文：寒闺欹枕梦不成，香炷金炉自袅烟。
English: The cold-hearted girl's pillow dream will not come true, and the champagne gold stove will self-smoke.

古文：顷之，前时宦者又至，谓曰：王令复召，贵主有疾如初。
现代文：不一会儿，以前的那个太监又来了，对无颇说，大王又召你去，我们公主又病了，病情和上次一样。
English: In a little while, the former eunuch came again, and said to Mupo, the great king has summoned you again, our princess is ill again, and her condition is the same as last time.

古文：无颇忻然复往。
现代文：无颇很高兴地又随太监去了。
English: Miserably, he went with the eunuch.

古文：见贵主，复切脉次。
现代文：见到公主后，又给她切了脉。
English: After seeing the princess, he cut her pulse again.

古文：左右云：王后至。
现代文：这时侍女们说，王后到。
English: Then said the maids, The queen is come.

古文：无颇降阶，闻环之响，宫人侍卫罗列。
现代文：无颇赶快到门外台阶下相迎。
English: They hurried to the steps outside the door to greet each other.

古文：见一女子，可三十许，服饰如后妃。
现代文：这时听到女人环珮的声音传来，见一个三十多岁的女人，在一大群宫女的簇拥下走来，看样子就是王后了，无颇赶快跪拜。
English: At this time, a woman's ringing voice was heard, and a woman in her thirties, surrounded by a large group of ladies-in-waiting, appeared to be the queen, and quickly knelt down.

古文：无颇拜之，后曰：再劳贤哲，实所怀惭。
现代文：王后说，这次又劳动你到这儿来，实在惭愧。
English: The queen said, "I am ashamed that I have made you come here again.

古文：然女子所疾，又是何苦？
现代文：可是我女儿病了，不知道到底是什么病。
English: But my daughter is sick and I don't know what it is.

古文：无颇曰：前所疾耳，心有击触而复作焉。
现代文：无颇说，这是以前的病根没除掉，公主有心事，所以又犯了。
English: Needless to say, this was the root of the previous illness that had not been removed, and the princess had an affair, so she committed it again.

古文：若再饵药，当去根干耳。
现代文：我再给她服一次药，定能去除病根。
English: I'll give her another dose, and I'm sure it will get rid of the root cause.

古文：后曰：药何在？
现代文：王后问，药在那里呢？
English: "Where is the medicine?" asked the queen.

古文：无颇进药合，后睹之默然，色不乐，慰喻贵主而去。
现代文：无颇就把那个暖金药呈给皇后、皇一见药盒，半天没说话，现出很不高兴的样子，安慰了几句公主就走了。
English: Without hesitation, he presented the warming potion to the Empress and the Emperor at the first sight of the potion box. He did not speak for half a day and appeared very unhappy. He consoled the princess with a few words and then left.

古文：后遂白王曰：爱女非疾，私其无颇矣。
现代文：王后回去对大王说，咱们的女儿不是病了，而是和无颇有情了。
English: The queen went back to the king and told him that our daughter was not ill, but had gone mad.

古文：不然者，何以宫中暖金合，得在斯人处耶？
现代文：不然的话，为什么咱们宫里的暖金盒会在无颇手里呢？
English: Otherwise, why would our warm gold box in the palace be in the wrong hands?

古文：王愀然良久曰：复为贾充女耶？吾亦当继其事而成之，无使久苦也。
现代文：大王感叹地说，既然我们的女儿象汉代贾充的女儿看上了韩公子，我们也只好尽快地成全他们，别使女儿再吃苦了。
English: The king said with regret that since our daughter, like the daughter of Han Dai Jia Chong, had fallen in love with Han Gongzi, we had no choice but to fulfill them as soon as possible, so as not to make our daughter suffer any more.

古文：无颇出，王命延之别馆，丰厚宴犒。
现代文：无颇出来后，大王请他到另一个房间住下，给了很丰富的礼品，并设宴慰赏。
English: After nothing came out, the king invited him to live in another room, gave him very rich gifts, and set up a banquet to reward him.

古文：后王召之曰：寡人窃慕君子之为人，辄欲以爱女奉托，如何？
现代文：然后又召见无颇说，寡人很敬慕你的为人，想把我的爱女许配给你，你意下如可？
English: Then he summoned Muppo and said, "Many people admire you very much and want to marry my beloved daughter to you. What do you think?"

古文：无颇再拜辞谢，心喜不自胜。
现代文：无颇喜出望外，连忙多次拜谢大王。
English: He was overjoyed and bowed to the king several times.

古文：遂命有司，择吉日，具礼待之。王与后敬仰愈于诸婿，遂止月余，欢宴俱极。
现代文：大王就命宫中管事的，选定了良辰吉日，为无颇和公主举行了隆重的婚礼，大王和王后对无颇的尊重，超过了对其他的那些女婿。
English: The great king ordered the palace officials to choose a good time and a good day, and held a grand wedding for Muppo and the princess. The great king and the queen respected Muppo more than the other sons-in-law.

古文：王曰：张郎不同诸婿，须归人间。
现代文：无颇在宫中住了一个多月。每日欢宴游乐。大王说，张郎不同于别的女婿，必须回到人间。
English: Mupo lived in the palace for more than a month, feasting and having fun every day. The king said that Zhang Lang, unlike other sons-in-law, must return to the human world.

古文：昨夜检于幽府云，当是冥数，即寡人之女，不至苦矣。
现代文：好在昨夜我到冥府去查了生死薄，你的阳寿还很多。这样，我的女儿不至于长期守空房。
English: Fortunately, last night I went to the Hades to check the life and death book, your Yang Shou is still a lot. In this way, my daughter will not keep an empty room for a long time.

古文：番禺地近，恐为时人所怪。
现代文：你若回番禺去，离我们太近，来往会让人们奇怪。
English: If you go to Panyu again, you'll be too close to us, and people will be surprised by your coming and going.

古文：南康又远，况别封疆，不如归韶阳甚便。
现代文：如果让你到南康去，又离我们太远，况且南康也不是我管辖的范围了。我看，你不如回韶阳去吧，这样两方面都很方便。
English: If you want to go to Nankang, it's too far away from us, and moreover, Nankang is not within my jurisdiction. I think you'd better go back to Fenyang, which is convenient in both respects.

古文：无颇曰：某意亦欲如此。
现代文：无颇说，我也正是这个意思。
English: That's exactly what I mean.

古文：遂具舟楫，服饰异珍，金珠宝玉。
现代文：于是大王开始给无颇准备了很多服装珍宝，还备了船。
English: So the great king began to prepare a lot of clothing treasures for Muppo, and also prepared a boat.

古文：无颇曰：唯侍卫辈即须自置，无使阴人，此减算耳。
现代文：无颇说，我的侍卫和仆从就由我来安排吧，不要用阴间的人了。
English: Nay, but let me now prepare my guards and my servants, and let them not be with the children of the dead.

古文：遂与王别。
现代文：一切准备好以后，无颇就离别了大王。
English: After everything was ready, the great king left without much ado.

古文：曰：三年即一到彼，无言于人。
现代文：临别时大王说，以后我每隔三年去看你们一次，你千万不要对别人说。
English: At parting, the great king said, "From now on, I will visit you once every three years. You must not tell anyone."

古文：无颇挈家居于韶阳。人罕知者。
现代文：无颇带着公主在韶阳住下，人们都不知道他们的来历。
English: None of the princes and princesses lived in Shenyang, and people did not know where they came from.

古文：住月余，忽袁大娘扣门见无颇。
现代文：刚住了一个多月，一天袁大娘忽然敲门，无颇一见袁大娘大吃一惊。
English: After living there for just over a month, one day Yuan Da Niang suddenly knocked on the door. Seeing this, Yuan Da Niang was taken aback.

古文：无颇大惊，大娘曰：张郎今日赛口，及小娘子酬媒人可矣。
现代文：袁大娘说，张郎今天日子过得这么好，你和你小娘子该谢谢我这个媒人了吧！
English: Grandmother Yuan said, Zhang Lang is having such a good day today, you and your little daughter should thank me for being the matchmaker!

古文：二人各具珍宝赏之，然后告去。
现代文：无颇和妻子赶快拿出很多贵重珍品答谢袁大娘，大娘就走了。
English: Mupo and his wife quickly took out a lot of valuable treasures to thank Yuan's elder daughter, and the elder daughter left.

古文：无颇诘妻，妻曰：此袁天纲女，程先生妻也，暖金合即某宫中宝也。
现代文：无颇问妻子，妻子说，袁大娘就是袁天纲的女儿，穆先生的夫人。暖金盒就是我们宫中的宝物。
English: No need to ask his wife. She said, "Grandmother Yuan is the daughter of Yuan Tiangang and the wife of Mr. Mu. The warm gold box is the treasure of our palace."

古文：后每三岁，广利王必夜至张室。后无颇为人疑讶，于是去之，不知所适。王锜
现代文：后来每隔三年，广利王一定夜晚到张无颇家来看望女儿女婿，后来这事引起了别人的怀疑，就搬走了。搬到哪里去了，谁也不知道。王锜
English: Later, every three years, Guangli Wang would come to Zhang Mupo's house at night to visit his daughter's son-in-law. Later, this aroused the suspicion of others, and he moved away. No one knows where he moved to.

古文：天兴丞王锜，宝历中，尝游陇州。
现代文：宝历年间，天兴县丞王锜曾到陇州去。
English: During the Baoli years, Tianxing County leader Wang Qian once went to Ganzhou.

古文：道息于大树下，解鞍籍地而寝。
现代文：半路上在一棵大树下休息，解下马鞍来放在地上靠着睡觉。
English: On the way, they rested under a big tree and took off their saddles to sleep on the ground.

古文：忽闻道骑传呼自西来，见紫衣乘车，从数骑，敕左右曰：屈王丞来。
现代文：忽然听见一阵马蹄声从西边传达来，只见一个紫衣人坐在车里，后面跟着几个骑马的随从。紫衣人停车后对随从说，请王锜县丞到我这里来。
English: Suddenly, I heard the sound of a horse's hoof coming from the west, and saw a man in purple sitting in a car, followed by several attendants on horseback. After parking, the man in purple said to the attendants, "Please Wang Yuxian Rong come to me."

古文：引锜至，则帐幄陈设已具。
现代文：随从领王锜来见紫衣人，看见紫衣人已坐在一个陈设齐备的帐篷里了。
English: He followed the leader Wang Yao to see the man in purple, and saw that the man in purple was already seated in a well-furnished tent.

古文：与锜坐语良久，锜不知所呼，每承言，即徘徊卤莽。
现代文：紫衣人和王锜坐着谈了好半天了，王锜仍不知该怎么称呼他的官衔，所以答话时常常吞吞吐吐觉得很失礼。
English: The man in purple and Wang Yao had been sitting and talking for more than half a day. Wang Yao still did not know what to call his official title, so he often hesitated when answering and felt very rude.

古文：紫衣觉之，乃曰：某潦倒一任二十年，足下要相呼，亦可谓为王耳。
现代文：紫衣人发觉了，就说，我已经潦倒二十年了，不过您要称呼我，还是可以叫我大王的。
English: When the man in purple found out, he said, "I've been dead for twenty years, but if you want to call me, you can still call me the great king."

古文：锜曰：未谕大王何所自？
现代文：王锜就问，不知大王从何处来？
English: Wang Yao asked, "I don't know where the great king came from?"

古文：曰：恬昔为秦筑长城，以此微功，屡蒙重任。
现代文：紫衣人说，我就是秦代的大将军蒙恬。当年我为秦始皇修建长城，以这个功劳多次蒙受重任。
English: The man in purple said, "I am the great general of the Qin Dynasty. That year, I built the Great Wall for Qin Shi Huang, and with this achievement, I was given many important tasks.

古文：洎始皇帝晏驾，某为群小所构，横被诛夷。
现代文：后来秦始皇归天了，我被一些小人陷害诬告，终于被杀了。
English: Later, when Qin Shihuang returned to heaven, I was framed and falsely accused by some villains, and was finally killed.

古文：上帝仍以长城之役，劳功害民，配守吴岳。
现代文：我死后，天帝仍然认为修长城是劳民伤财害了百姓，发配我到吴岳当一个管山岳的官。
English: After my death, the Heavenly Emperor still believed that the Great Wall was built by the labor of the people, which hurt the people's wealth, and sent me to Wuyue to be an official in charge of the mountains.

古文：当时吴山有岳号，众咸谓某为王。
现代文：当时管山的官都有称号，人们就也管我叫大王。
English: At that time, the officials in charge of the mountain all had titles, and people called me the great king.

古文：其后岳职却归于华山，某罚配年月未满，官曹移便，无所主管，但守空山。人迹所稀，寂寞颇甚。
现代文：可是后来吴山却划归华山管辖，而我罚配的年限还没满。我管吴山的实权已交给华山君，我什么可管的都没有，整日守着一座空山，山里人烟稀少，十分寂寞。
English: But later, Wushan was placed under the jurisdiction of Huashan, and my penalty period was not yet over. I have handed over the real power of Wushan to Huashan. I have nothing to manage. I have been guarding an empty mountain all day. The mountain is sparsely populated and very lonely.

古文：又缘已被虚名，不能下就小职，遂至今空窃假王之号。
现代文：又因为我已虚有了大王的称号，不能再放下架子当更小的官，所以现在只是个名义上的大王而已。
English: And because I have already falsely acquired the title of great king and can no longer lower myself to be a lesser official, I am now only a great king in name only.

古文：偶此相遇，思少从容。
现代文：这次和您相遇，想求您帮帮忙。
English: When I met you this time, I wanted to ask you for help.

古文：锜曰：某名迹幽沉，质性孱懦，幸蒙一顾之惠，不知何以奉教？
现代文：王锜说，我只不过是个无名的小县丞，既无能又懦弱，见到大王十分荣幸，但又能为大王做些什么呢？
English: Wang Yao said, I am just a nameless small county magistrate, both incompetent and cowardly. It is a great honor to see the great king, but what can I do for the great king?

古文：恬曰：本缘奉慕，顾展风仪，何幸遽垂厚意。
现代文：蒙恬说，我是由于敬慕您才来和您见面，一看您果然是个很有风度十分正直的人。
English: Meng Yao said, I came to meet you because of my admiration for you. At first glance, you are indeed a very personable and honest person.

古文：诚有事则又如何？
现代文：如果能得到您的关照，能否为我办点事呢？王锜说，我一定遵命。
English: If I can get your attention, can you do something for me? Wang Yao said, I will definitely follow your order.

古文：锜曰：幸甚。恬曰：久闲散，思有以效用。
现代文：蒙恬就说，我闲散了这么久了，很想再能有点作为。
English: "I've been idle for so long, I'd like to be able to do something again," Meng Yao said.

古文：如今士马处处有主，不可夺他权柄。
现代文：然而现在到处都没有空缺，兵马也都有主管，我不能去硬夺别人的官职。
English: However, now that there are no vacancies anywhere, and the soldiers and horses have supervisors, I can't go and grab someone else's post.

古文：此后三年，兴元当有八百人无主健儿。若早图谋，必可将领。
现代文：三年后，兴元地方将会有八百名无人统领的士兵，我如果早点做好准备，就可以作这八百人的统领。
English: In three years, Xingyuan will have 800 soldiers without a commander. If I prepare myself early, I can be the commander of these 800 soldiers.

古文：所必奉托者，可致纸钱万张，某以此藉手，方谐矣。
现代文：我要托的事，是请你给我一万张纸钱，我以这些钱做军饷，就可以办成了。
English: The matter I want to entrust to you is to ask you to give me ten thousand pieces of paper money. I can use this money to pay my military salary and get it done.

古文：锜许诺而寤，流汗霡霂，乃市纸万张以焚之。
现代文：王锜当即答应了，然后就惊醒了，吓得出了一身汗。于是就买了一万张纸烧了。
English: Wang Yao immediately agreed, and then he woke up and was so scared that he broke out in a sweat. So he bought 10,000 pieces of paper and burned them.

古文：乃太和四年。兴元节度使李绛遇害，后节度使温造，诛其凶党八百人。
现代文：到了太和四年，果然发生了兴元节度使李绛被害的事，新上任的节度使温造把反叛的八百名士兵全部杀了，这就是蒙恬托梦说的那八百名士兵。
English: In the fourth year of the Taihe era, the Xingyuan Festival caused the death of Li Lan, and the newly appointed festival caused Wen Zog to kill all eight hundred soldiers who rebelled. These were the eight hundred soldiers that Meng Xiangtou had mentioned.

古文：马朝
现代文：马朝
English: Ma Dynasty

古文：马朝者，天平军步卒也。
现代文：马朝是天平军中的一个士兵。
English: Ma Chao was a soldier in the Tianping Army.

古文：太和初，沧州李同捷叛，诏郓师讨之，朝在是行。
现代文：太和初年，沧州发生了李同捷的叛乱，上面命令驻守郓城的军队前去平叛，马朝也在平叛的军队里。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Li Tongjie's rebellion took place in Cangzhou, and the army stationed in Licheng was ordered to go to counter-rebellion. Ma Chao was also in the counter-rebellion army.

古文：至平原南，与贼相持累旬。
现代文：部队到了平原南面，和叛军对峙了十多天。
English: The troops reached the southern side of the plain and confronted the rebels for more than ten days.

古文：朝之子士俊，自郓馈食，适至军中。
现代文：马朝的儿子马士俊，从郓城送饭到部队来找父亲。
English: Ma Shijun, the son of Ma Chao, sent rice from Lucheng to the troops to find his father.

古文：会战有期，朝年老，启其将曰：长男士俊，年少有力，又善弓矢。
现代文：马上就要和叛军会战了，马朝年纪大了，就向主将报告说，我的大儿子士俊，年轻有力，又善于射箭，请允许他替代我参加会战。
English: The battle with the rebels was about to begin. As Ma Chao was getting older, he reported to the commander-in-chief, "My eldest son, Shijun, is young and strong, and good at archery. Please allow him to take my place in the battle."

古文：主将许之。
现代文：主将同意了。
English: The captain agreed.

古文：乃战，郓师小北，而士俊连中重疮，仆于闘场，夜久得苏。忽有传呼，语言颇类将吏十数人者。
现代文：战斗开始后，郓城部队受挫撤退，马士俊身受重伤昏倒在战场上。半夜里他苏醒过来，忽然听到传呼点名的声音，好象有十几个大小军官就在附近。
English: After the battle began, the Baicheng troops retreated in frustration, and Ma Shijun was seriously injured and fainted on the battlefield. In the middle of the night, he woke up and suddenly heard the sound of calling names, as if there were more than a dozen officers nearby.

古文：且无烛，士俊窥之不见。但闻按据簿书，称点姓名。
现代文：当时没有光亮，士俊看不清是些什么人，只听见有人按照本子上的记录一个个的点名。
English: There was no light at the time, and Shijun couldn't see clearly who the people were. He only heard someone calling out names one by one according to the records in the book.

古文：俄次士俊，则呼马朝。
现代文：点到马士俊跟前，喊的却是父亲马朝。
English: Pointing to Ma Shijun, it was his father Ma Chaow who called out.

古文：傍有人曰：不是本身，速令追召。
现代文：旁边有人说：这不是马朝本人。于是点名者命令赶快去把马朝捉来。
English: Someone nearby said: This is not Ma Chao himself. So the person who called out the name ordered to quickly go and catch Ma Chao.

古文：言旋遂过，及远，犹闻其检阅未已。
现代文：说完这些人就走过去了，一直走了很远，还能听到他们点名的声音。
English: After saying this, these people walked past, and kept walking for a long time, and I could still hear the sound of their names being called.

古文：士俊惶惑，力起徐归。四更方至营门，营吏纳之，因扶持送至朝所。
现代文：士俊很害怕，不知道这是怎么回事，就挣扎着爬起来慢慢往回走，到四更才到了军营。营里的军官收留了他，搀扶他找到了父亲。
English: Shijun was very scared and didn't know what was going on, so he struggled to get up and slowly walked back. It took him four days to get to the military camp. The camp's officers took him in and helped him find his father.

古文：朝谓其已死，及见惊喜，即洗疮傅药。乃曰：汝可饮少酒粥，以求寝也。
现代文：马朝原以为士俊已经阵亡，一见又惊又喜，赶快给他洗伤上药，然后说，你喝一点兑了酒的粥，就能睡着了。
English: Ma Chao originally thought that Shijun had been killed in battle, and was surprised and happy at the sight. He quickly washed and medicated him, and then said, "If you drink a little porridge with wine, you can fall asleep."

古文：即出汲水。
现代文：然后就出去打水。
English: Then he went out to fetch water.

古文：时营中士马极众，每三二百人，则同一井。
现代文：当时军营里人马很多，每二三百人才有一个井。
English: At that time, there were a lot of people in the military camp, and every two or three hundred people had a well.

古文：井乃周圆百步，皆为隧道，渐以及泉，盖使众人得以环汲也。
现代文：井周围一百多步都挖了水沟，把井水引进沟里，让士兵们能围着打水。
English: A trench was dug more than a hundred paces around the well, and the well water was brought into the trench so that the soldiers could fetch water around it.

古文：时朝以瓮汲水，引重之际，泥滑，颠仆于地。
现代文：马朝用水罐打水，刚要提起来时，脚下一滑，跌倒在地上。
English: Ma Chao was filling a water can with water, and just as he was about to lift it up, his foot slipped and he fell to the ground.

古文：地中素有折刀，朝心正贯其刃。
现代文：地上恰恰有一段折断了的军刀，一下子穿透了马朝的胸口。
English: On the ground, there was a piece of a broken saber, which suddenly pierced the chest of Ma.

古文：久而士俊惧其未回，告于同幕者。及到则已绝矣。
现代文：马士俊在营帐里等了半天不见父亲回来，怕出什么事情，告诉了同事后，到井边一看，马朝已经死去。
English: Ma Shijun waited in the tent for half a day without seeing his father come back, afraid of something happening. After telling his colleagues, he went to the well and saw that Ma Chao had died.

古文：士俊旬日乃愈。
现代文：而士俊十多天后就痊愈了。
English: But Shijun recovered after more than ten days.

古文：郄元位
现代文：郄元位
English: by 元位

古文：河东衙将郄元位者，太和初，常奉使京辇。
现代文：太和初年，河东衙将郄元位奉命护送使者京城。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Empress Dowager of Hedong was ordered to escort the envoy

古文：行至沙苑，会日暮。见一人，长丈余，衣紫佩金，容状丰伟。御白马，其马亦高丈余。
现代文：走到沙苑，天色将晚，看见一人，身材有一丈高，穿着紫袍，佩着金饰，仪表威严，骑着白马，马也有一丈多高。
English: When I walked to Sha Yuan, it was getting late in the day, and I saw a person with a tall stature, wearing a purple robe, gold ornaments, a majestic appearance, riding a white horse, and the horse was also tall.

古文：导从近十辈，形状非常，执弧矢，自南来。
现代文：前面开路的侍卫近十名，也非同凡人，都带着弓箭，从南面驰来。
English: The nearly ten guardsmen who open the road ahead are also not ordinary people. They are all carrying bows and arrows and are coming from the south.

古文：元位甚惊异，立马避之。
现代文：郄元位很惊异，停下马来躲避。
English: Xuan Yuan was very surprised and stopped his horse to take cover.

古文：神人忽举鞭西指，若有所见，其导从辈俱随指而望。
现代文：这时只见那神人举起鞭子指着西方，那些侍从也随着往西方张望。
English: At this time, the man of God raised his whip and pointed to the west, and the attendants also followed and looked to the west.

古文：元位亦西望，寂然无睹。
现代文：郄元位也往西面看，什么也没看见。
English: Xuan Yuan also looked to the west and saw nothing.

古文：及回视之，皆不见矣。
现代文：等他一回头，那群人已经消失了。
English: When he looked back, the group had disappeared.

古文：元位瘁然汗发，髀战心惊，不觉堕马。因病热，肩舆以归，旬余方愈。
现代文：元位吓出了一身汗，双腿哆嗦，不觉跌下马来，生了热病，只好被抬了回来。
English: He was so scared that he was drenched in sweat, his legs were cramped, he fell off his horse and developed a fever, so he had to be carried back.

古文：时河东连帅司空李愿卒。
现代文：原来才知道，那天河东连帅司空李愿死了。
English: Originally, I only knew that on that day, the commander of the Eastern Military District, General Li Xiang, died.

古文：夏阳赵尉
现代文：夏阳赵尉
English: Xiayang Zhaofei

古文：冯翊之属县夏阳，据大河。
现代文：冯翊管辖下有个夏阳县，靠着黄河，县东有池塘在太华山的中部。
English: Under the jurisdiction of Feng Qi, there is a Xiayang County, along the Yellow River, east of the county there is a pond in the middle of Mount Taihua.

古文：县东有池馆，当太华中条，烟霭岚霏，昏旦在望。又有瀵泉穴其南，泉水清澈，毫缕无隐。
现代文：山头平时雾气迷漫云烟缭绕，白天晚上都能看见。城南有个瀵泉，泉水清澈见底，水里一切都历历在目。
English: The mountaintop is usually foggy and smoky, and can be seen both during the day and at night. There is a spring in the south of the city, the spring water is crystal clear, and everything in the water is visible.

古文：太和中，有赵生者，尉于夏阳。
现代文：太和年间，有位姓赵的到夏阳当县尉。
English: During the Taihe era, a man surnamed Zhao went to Xiayang to serve as a county official.

古文：尝一夕雨霁，赵生与友数辈，联步望月于瀵泉上。
现代文：有次雨过天晴，他约了几个朋友到瀵泉附近赏月。
English: Once, when the rain had passed and the weather was fine, he made an appointment with a few friends to watch the moon near the spring.

古文：忽见一人，貌甚黑，被绿袍，自水中流，沿泳久之。吟曰：夜月明皎皎，绿波空悠悠。
现代文：忽然看见一个人，脸很黑，穿着绿袍子，在水流中间游来游去，边游边唱到，夜月风皎皎，绿波空悠悠。
English: Suddenly I saw a man with a very dark face, wearing a green robe, swimming around in the middle of the current, singing as he swam. The night and the moon were windy, and the green waves were floating in the sky.

古文：赵生方惊，其人忽回望水滨，若有所惧，遂入水，唯露其首，有顷亦没。
现代文：赵生吃了一惊，那个人也忽然回头向岸上望，好像也很吃惊，很快沉入水里，只露个脑袋，过了一会就不见了。
English: Zhao Sheng was taken aback. The man also suddenly looked back to the shore, as if he was also surprised. He quickly sank into the water, revealing only his head, and disappeared after a while.

古文：赵生明日又至泉所。是岸傍数十步，有神祠，表共门曰瀵水神。
现代文：赵生第二天又到这里来，见离岸傍十步，有一个庙，门上写的是瀵水神庙。
English: Zhao Sheng came here again the next day and saw that there was a temple ten paces away from the shore. The sign on the door said that it was the Temple of the Water Dragon.

古文：赵生因入庙，见神坐之左右，搏埴为偶人，被绿袍者，视其貌，若前时所见水中人也。
现代文：赵生进了庙，见神坐的两旁排列着几个泥作的偶像，其中有一个穿着绿袍，看他的长相，很象昨天看见的那个水里的人。
English: Zhao Sheng entered the temple and saw several clay idols lined up on both sides of the god. One of them was wearing a green robe, and judging by his appearance, he was very much like the man in the water he had seen yesterday.

古文：赵生曰：此瀵壤也，尚能惑众，非怪而何？
现代文：赵生说，这个瀵水神竟让他管的人在自己眼皮底下做怪，怎么得了！
English: Zhao Sheng said that this god of water actually let the people he was in charge of do strange things under his own eyes, how come!

古文：将用划其庙。
现代文：就打算把庙拆毁。
English: They planned to demolish the temple.

古文：有县吏曰：此神庙，且能以风雨助生植。苟若毁其屋，适足为邑人之患。
现代文：旁边有个官员说，这个神庙能够兴风雨帮助庄稼生长，如果毁了庙，恐怕会给本地人民带来灾害。
English: Next to him, an official said that this temple could make wind and rain to help crops grow, and if the temple was destroyed, it would probably bring disaster to the local people.

古文：于是不果隳。
现代文：于是就作罢了。
English: So I stopped.

古文：卢嗣宗
现代文：卢嗣宗
English: Lu Shizong

古文：蒲津有舜祠，又有娥皇、女英祠，在舜祠之侧。
现代文：蒲津县有舜的祠庙。庙的旁边，还有舜的二妃娥皇、女英祠。
English: There is an ancestral temple of the Empress Dowager Cixi in Putuo County. Beside the temple, there is also the Second Empress Dowager Cixi and the Empress Dowager Cixi's ancestral temple.

古文：土偶之容，颇尽巧丽。
现代文：二位女神的偶像容貌塑得十分秀美。
English: The idols of the two goddesses are very beautiful.

古文：开成中，范阳卢嗣宗，假职于蒲津。
现代文：开成年间，范阳人卢嗣宗到蒲津当代理地方官。
English: At the turn of the century, Lu Shizong, a native of Fanyang, went to Pudong as an acting local official.

古文：一日，与其友数辈，同游舜庙。
现代文：一天，他和几位朋友一同游舜庙，又进了娥皇女英祠。
English: One day, he and several friends toured the Anhui Temple and went to the Ancestral Hall of Empress E.

古文：至娥皇女英祠，嗣宗戏曰：吾愿为帝子之隶，可乎？
现代文：卢嗣宗对着二女神的神像开玩笑说，我想跟二位女神去，作奴仆也行，怎么样？
English: Lu Shizong joked to the statues of the two goddesses, saying, "I want to go with the two goddesses, I can even be a slave, how about that?"

古文：再拜而祝者久之。
现代文：说罢还不断地拜礼祝祷。
English: Saying this, he continued to offer prayers.

古文：众皆谓曰：何侮易之言，渎于神乎？
现代文：朋友们都说：你怎么能用这样不敬的言词来侮辱女神呢？
English: Friends said: "How can you insult the goddess with such disrespectful words?"

古文：嗣宗笑益酣。
现代文：卢嗣宗大笑起来毫不在乎。
English: Lu Shizong doesn't care if he bursts out laughing.

古文：自是往往独游娥皇祠，酒酣，多为亵渎语。
现代文：以后他还常常独自游娥皇祠，酒醉后总是胡言乱语，调笑侮辱女神。
English: After that, he often wandered around the Imperial Ancestral Hall on his own. When he was drunk, he would always talk nonsense and insult the goddess.

古文：俄被疾，肩舁以归。
现代文：于是嗣宗突然得了病，被人从庙里抬了回来。
English: As a result, Shizong suddenly fell ill and had to be carried back from the temple.

古文：色悸而战，身汗如沥，其夕遂卒。
现代文：只见他满脸恐惧，浑身战抖，汗如雨下，当天夜里就死了。
English: I only saw his face full of fear, trembling all over, sweating like rain, and he died that night.

古文：家僮辈见十余人，摔拽嗣宗出门，望舜祠而去。
现代文：这天夜里，家里的仆人看见闯进来十几个人，连打带拖的把卢嗣宗拉出了家门，直奔舜祠而去。
English: That night, the servants of the family saw more than a dozen people breaking in. They dragged Lu Shizong out of the house and went straight to the Ancestral Hall.

古文：及视嗣宗尸，其背有赤文甚多，若为所扑。
现代文：后来就发现他尸体后背上有很多红道子，像是被鞭子抽的。
English: It was later discovered that the back of his corpse had many red marks on it, as if it had been whipped.

古文：蒲之人咸异其事。
现代文：蒲县人都觉得这事太奇怪了。
English: Everyone in the county thought it was very strange.

古文：三史王生
现代文：三史王生
English: Sanshi Wangsheng

古文：有王生者，不记其名，业三史，博览甚精。
现代文：有个王生，不知道名字，专门攻读三史，读得很精。
English: There was a Wang Sheng, I don't know his name, who specialized in the study of the three histories, and read very well.

古文：性好夸炫，语甚容易。
现代文：王生性情好夸耀学问，说话很随便。
English: Wang Sheng's nature is to boast about his knowledge, and he speaks very casually.

古文：每辩古昔，多以臆断。
现代文：每当读书遇到讲古代的事，常常凭主观判断。
English: Whenever reading encounters talking about ancient things, it is often based on subjective judgment.

古文：旁有议者，必大言折之。
现代文：旁边如果有人不同意，他就大肆攻击。
English: If someone disagrees with him, he lashes out.

古文：尝游沛，因醉入高祖庙，顾其神座，笑而言曰：提三尺剑，灭暴秦，剪强楚，而不能免其母乌老之称。
现代文：王生曾到沛县游玩，喝醉酒进了汉高祖的庙。他看着高祖的神像说，你能提着三尺宝剑，灭了残暴的秦国，除了强大的楚国，却不能免去你母亲叫 乌老 这不雅的名字。
English: Wang Sheng once visited Peixian County and drunkenly entered the temple of Han Gaozu. He looked at Gaozu's statue and said, "You can carry a three-foot sword and destroy the cruel Qin State. In addition to the powerful Chu State, you can't get rid of the indecent name of your mother called Wulao."

古文：徒歌大风起兮云飞扬，曷能威加四海哉！
现代文：你作歌说， 大风起兮云飞扬，威加海内兮归故乡 你真能威加四海吗？
English: You say in your song, "When the winds blow and the clouds roll in, When you're lost at sea and you're back home," Can you really be lost at sea?

古文：徘徊庭庑间，肆目久之，乃还所止。
现代文：王生在庙堂里走来走去，长时间很放肆的盯着高祖神像。
English: Wang Sheng walked around the temple and stared at the statue of Gao Zuo for a long time.

古文：是夕才寐而卒。
现代文：王生回到家后当天夜里刚睡下就死了。
English: On the same night after Wang Sheng returned home, he just fell asleep and died.

古文：见十数骑，擒至庙庭。汉祖按剑大怒曰：史籍未览数纸，而敢亵渎尊神。乌老 之言。
现代文：死时他看见有十几个骑士闯进来把他抓到汉高祖庙，高祖手按宝剑大怒说，你没看过几页史书，就敢亵渎我，你说我母亲名叫乌老，这是哪本书里说的？
English: At the time of his death, he saw a dozen knights break in and capture him in the temple of the Han Emperor Gao Zu. Gao Zu raised his sword in anger and said, "You have not read a few pages of history books, and you dare to blaspheme me. You say my mother's name is Wulao. Which book says this?"

古文：出自何典？若无所据，尔罪难逃。
现代文：你要是找不出根据，你就难逃罪责！
English: If you can't find the evidence, you can't get away with it!

古文：王生顿首曰：臣常览大王《本纪》见司马迁及班固云， 母刘媪。而注云乌老反。
现代文：王生磕头说，我曾读过您的传记，司马迁和班固在您的传记中说您母亲是刘媪，在注释中说 媪，乌老反 。
English: Wang Sheng Shantou said, I have read your biography, Sima Qian and Ban Gu said in your biography that your mother is Liu Ye, and said in the annotation that you are Wu Laotang.

古文：释云， 老母之称也 。
现代文：可见乌老就是你母亲的名字了。
English: So Wu Lao is your mother's name.

古文：见之于史，闻之于师，载之于籍，炳然明如白日。
现代文：王生又说：这事史书上有记载，老师也这样讲过，像白日一样的明白，不是我凭空编造的呀！
English: Wang Sheng also said, "This matter is recorded in the history books, and the teacher has also spoken about it. It is as clear as day. I did not make it up out of thin air!"

古文：非臣下敢出于胸襟尔。汉祖益怒曰：朕中外泗水亭长碑，昭然具载矣。曷以外族温氏而妄称乌老乎？
现代文：汉高祖怒气更盛地说，我的皇宫和泗水亭上都立有碑纪，明明白白地记着我母亲的姓名，你怎敢以外族的什么 媪氏 ，称我的母亲为 乌老 呢？
English: Han Gao Zu said angrily, "There are inscriptions on the walls of my palace and the Lishui Pavilion, which clearly remember my mother's name. How dare you, a foreigner from the Yi clan, call my mother 'Wulao'?"

古文：读错本书，且不见义，敢恃酒喧于殿庭。付所司劾犯上之罪。
现代文：读错了史书，不懂书中的真义，还敢借酒醉跑到我的大殿上胡言乱叫，就应该以犯上之罪处置你！
English: If you read the wrong history book, do not understand the true meaning of the book, and dare to use drunkenness to run to my great hall to shout nonsense, you should be dealt with for the crime committed!

古文：语未终，而西南有清道者，扬言太公来。
现代文：高祖还没说完，外面西南方就有喝道声，说是太公来了。
English: Before Gaozu had finished speaking, there was a shout from the southwest, saying that the Grand Duke had arrived.

古文：方及阶，顾王生曰：斯何人而见辱之甚也？
现代文：太公刚走上大殿，就看见王生，就问高祖，这是什么人，你对他这样辱骂是为什么呀？
English: As soon as the grand duke entered the main hall, he saw Wang Sheng and asked Gao Zu, "Who is this man, and why are you abusing him like this?"

古文：王生逞目太公，遂厉声而言曰：臣览史籍，见侮慢其君亲者，尚无所贬。而贱臣戏语于神庙，岂期肆于市朝哉！汉祖又怒曰：在典册，岂载侮慢君亲者？
现代文：高祖赶快下阶迎接，说，这是一个狂妄无礼的人，犯了该斩的大罪！这时王生就紧紧盯着太公说，我读遍了史书，见历史上嘲笑君王的人都没有因而获罪，我只不过在庙里说了几句笑话，难道比在街上或在宫廷里说这笑话的罪还大吗？汉高祖生气地质问道，史书上难道还记载有嘲笑君王的事吗？
English: At this time, Wang Sheng stared intently at the Grand Duke and said, "I have read all the history books, and I have seen that no one in history has been punished for mocking the king. I only told a few jokes in the temple. Is it a greater crime than telling this joke on the street or in the court?" Han Gaozu angrily asked, "Does the history book still contain the matter of mocking the king?"

古文：当试征之。
现代文：你举例给我看看！
English: Show me an example!

古文：王生曰：臣敢征大王可乎？
现代文：王生说，我就举大王你的例子行不行？
English: Wang Sheng said, "Can I use you as an example?"

古文：汉祖曰：然。
现代文：高祖说，行。
English: Gaozu said, "That's fine.

古文：王生曰：王即位，会群臣，置酒前殿，献太上皇寿。有之乎？
现代文：王生说，大王你登了帝位后，大宴群臣，给你的父亲太上皇献寿，有没有这事？
English: Wang Sheng said, "Great King, after you ascended the throne, you held a grand banquet for your ministers to celebrate the life of your father, the Emperor. Did you do this?

古文：汉祖曰：有之。
现代文：高祖说，有啊。
English: Gaozu said yes.

古文：既献寿，乃曰。大人常以臣无赖，不事产业，不如仲力。
现代文：王生说，献寿时，你对太上皇说， 父亲您过去常说我是无赖，没有置下家业，不如我弟弟好。
English: Wang Sheng said that at the time of his death, you said to the Empress Dowager, Father, you used to say that I was a scoundrel, did not leave the family business, and was not as good as my brother.

古文：今某之业，孰与仲多？ 
现代文：现在你看我的家业和我弟弟比，谁的多？ 
English: Now look at my family business compared to my brother, who has more?

古文：有之乎？
现代文：这事有没有？
English: Is there any truth to this?

古文：汉祖曰：有之。
现代文：高祖说，有。
English: Gaozu said yes.

古文：殿上群臣皆呼万岁，大笑为乐，有之乎？
现代文：王生问，宫中的群臣听了你的话都高呼万岁，大笑起来，这事有没有？
English: Wang Sheng asked, when the courtiers in the palace heard your words, they all shouted "long live" and burst into laughter. Is this true?

古文：曰：有之。
现代文：高祖说，有。
English: A: Yes.

古文：王生曰：是侮慢其君亲矣。
现代文：王生说，你这不是嘲笑侮慢你的太上皇父亲吗？
English: Wang Sheng said, "Aren't you mocking and insulting your father, the Emperor?"

古文：太公曰：此人理不可屈，宜速逐之。
现代文：太公听后对高祖说，这人讲的有理，你快放了他吧。
English: After listening to Gaozu, Taigong said to Gaozu, "What this man said is reasonable. Let him go."

古文：不尔，必遭杯羹之让也。
现代文：不然，你就得把你的杯盘中的食物让给他了。
English: Otherwise, you'll have to give up the food on your plate to him.

古文：汉祖默然良久曰：斩此物，污我三尺刃。
现代文：汉高祖默不作声，半天才悻悻地说，杀了这家伙，怕弄脏了我的宝剑哩！
English: Hango-zoo was silent for half a day before he chirped out, "Kill this fellow, or I'll soil my sword!"

古文：令搦发者掴之。
现代文：命人扯着王生的头发打耳光。
English: The officer pulled Wang Sheng's hair and slapped him.

古文：一掴惘然而苏，东方明矣，以镜视腮。
现代文：一耳光把王生打醒了，一看，天已经亮了。
English: A slap in the face woke up Wang Sheng. At a glance, it was already dawn.

古文：有若指踪，数日方灭。
现代文：用镜子照脸，见脸上有红红的指印，过了好几天才消失。
English: I looked at my face in the mirror and saw red fingerprints on my face, which took several days to disappear.

古文：张生
现代文：张生
English: Zhang Sheng

古文：进士张生，善鼓琴，好读孟轲书。
现代文：进士张生善于弹琴。好读孟子的书。
English: Zhang Sheng is good at playing the piano and reading Mencius's books.

古文：下第游浦关，入舜城。
现代文：赴考回乡时游蒲关。进了舜帝城。
English: When I went back to my hometown for the entrance examination, I visited Baguan. I entered the city of Shantian.

古文：日将暮，乃排闼耸辔争进，因而马蹶。
现代文：这时天已经快黑了，进城的人抢着赶马往城门里涌。
English: At this time, it was already getting dark, and people rushing into the city were rushing to the city gate.

古文：顷之马死，生无所投足。遂诣庙吏，求止一夕。
现代文：张生就打马飞驰加快速度，这样马跌倒，不一会儿马就死了。张生无处投宿，就找到一个庙里，求管庙的小官留他住一宿。
English: Zhang Sheng made his horse gallop faster and faster, causing the horse to fall, and soon the horse died. Zhang Sheng had nowhere to stay, so he found a temple and asked a minor official of the temple to let him stay there for one night.

古文：吏止檐庑下曰：舍此无所诣矣。
现代文：小庙吏指一指庙侧的厢房说，除了这里再也没地方了。
English: The small temple official pointed to a wing on the side of the temple and said that there was no other place to go.

古文：遂止。
现代文：张生只好对付着住下来。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：初夜方寝，见降衣者二人，前言曰：帝召书生。
现代文：夜里刚刚睡下，张生就见两个穿红色衣服的人走来说，舜帝要召见你。
English: Just after falling asleep at night, Zhang Sheng saw two people in red clothes walking away and said that Emperor Gong would summon you.

古文：生遽往，帝问曰：业何道艺之人？
现代文：张生就急忙跟着走。见到舜帝后，舜帝问道，你有什么技艺？
English: Zhang Sheng hurriedly followed him. After seeing Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong asked, "What skills do you have?"

古文：生对曰：臣儒家子，常习孔孟书。
现代文：张生回答说，臣是个读书的人，常读孔、孟的著作。
English: Zhang Sheng replied that the minister was a reader and often read the works of Kong and Meng.

古文：帝曰：孔圣人也，朕知久矣。
现代文：舜帝说，孔子是位圣人，朕早就知道。
English: "I have known for a long time that Confucius is a saint," said the emperor.

古文：孟是何人？得与孔同科而语？
现代文：孟子是什么人，你怎么把他和孔子相提并论？
English: Who was Mencius, and how can you compare him to Confucius?

古文：生曰：孟亦传圣人意也。
现代文：张生说：孟子也是能传达圣人意志的人。
English: Zhang Sheng said: Mencius is also a person who can convey the will of a sage.

古文：祖尚仁义，设礼乐而施教化。
现代文：他向来崇尚仁义，设礼乐对人民进行教育。
English: He has always advocated benevolence and righteousness, and set up ceremonial music to educate the people.

古文：帝曰：著书乎？
现代文：舜帝问，孟子也写书吗？
English: "Did Mencius also write books?" the emperor asked.

古文：生曰：著书七千二百章，盖与孔门之徒难疑答问，及鲁论齐论。
现代文：张生说，孟子著作有七千二百章，都是和孔子的弟子们辩论和回答问题的。他的《鲁论》《齐论》都讲述了很好的道理。
English: Zhang Sheng said that there are 7,200 chapters in the works of Mencius, all of which are debates and answers to questions with the disciples of Confucius. His "Lu" and "Qi" all tell a good story.

古文：俱善言也。帝曰：记其文乎？
现代文：舜帝又问，你能记得孟子的文章吗？
English: Hao Di asked again, "Can you remember Mencius's article?"

古文：曰：非独晓其文，抑亦深其义。
现代文：张生说，我不但能背诵孟子的文章，而且懂得文章中深刻的含意。
English: Zhang Sheng said, I can not only recite Mencius's article, but also understand the profound meaning of the article.

古文：帝乃令生朗念，倾耳听之。
现代文：舜帝就让张生大声朗读，他仔细听着。
English: Zhai Di asked Zhang Sheng to read aloud, and he listened carefully.

古文：念《万章问》：舜往于田，号位于旻天。
现代文：当念到《万章问》时，张生背诵原文：舜往于田，号泣于旻天。
English: When reading the "Question of Ten Thousand Chapters," Zhang Sheng recited the original text: Longing for the fields, weeping for the sky.

古文：何为其号泣也？
现代文：何为其号泣也？
English: What is there to cry about?

古文：孟子曰： 怨慕也。
现代文：孟子曰， 怨慕也。 
English: Mencius said, "Resentment is also rife."

古文：万章问曰： 父母爱之，喜而不忘；父母恶之，劳而不怨。
现代文：万章问曰， 父母爱之，喜而不忘，父母恶之，劳而不怨。
English: Wan Zhang asked, "If your parents love you, don't forget their joy. If your parents are evil, don't complain about your hard work."

古文：然则舜怨乎？ 
现代文：然则怨乎 ？
English: And then complain?

古文：答曰： 长息问于公明高曰。舜往于田，则吾得闻命矣。
现代文：答曰： 长息问于公明高曰，舜往于田，则吾得闻命矣。
English: He replied, "If I want to live long and prosper, I must go to the fields. Otherwise, I will die."

古文：号泣于旻天，怨于父母，则吾不知也。
现代文：号泣于旻天，怨于父母，则吾不得知也。 
English: I don't know why I would cry out to the heavens and be angry at my parents.

古文：帝止生之词，怃然叹曰：盖有不知而作之者，亦此之谓矣。
现代文：背诵到这里，舜帝让张生停住，十分感慨地说，原来也有并不真懂道理就写文章的人，这就是个例子啊。
English: At this point in the recitation, Hao Di asked Zhang Sheng to stop and said with great emotion that originally there were also people who wrote articles without really understanding the truth, and this was an example.

古文：朕舍天下千八百二十载，暴秦窃位，毒痛四海，焚我典籍，泯我帝图，蒙蔽群言，逞恣私欲。
现代文：朕离开天下臣民一千八百二十年了，这当中，秦始皇窃取了天下，凶狠暴虐，残害黎民，烧毁我的文献典籍，毁灭了我的帝系，蒙蔽百姓的眼睛，独断专行，无限度地满足他的私欲。
English: I have been away from the subjects of the world for eighteen hundred and twenty years. During this time, Qin Shihuang stole the whole world, cruelly brutalized and killed the people, burned my documents and books, destroyed my imperial lineage, blinded the eyes of the people, ruled arbitrarily, and satisfied his selfish desires to an unlimited extent.

古文：百代之后，经史差谬。辞意相及，邻于诙谐。
现代文：而百代之后，经史的记载也是错误百出，有些记载和事实出入太大，简直是笑话一样。
English: And after hundreds of generations, the records of history are also full of mistakes, some records and facts are too big, it's like a joke.

古文：常闻赞唐尧之美曰： 垂衣裳而天下理， 盖明无事也。
现代文：比如我听说史书上赞颂唐尧盛世，说尧坐在皇帝的室座上连衣服都不动就把天下治理好了，意思说唐尧时天下太平无事。
English: For example, I heard that the history books praised Tang Xuan's prosperous times, saying that he ruled the world well while sitting on the emperor's throne without even moving his clothes, meaning that the world was peaceful when Tang Xuan was in power.

古文：然则平章百姓，协和万邦，至于滔天怀山襄陵。
现代文：然而尧帝平抚百姓的骚乱，协调万国之间的矛盾，这不都是说明有事而不是太平无事吗？
English: However, Emperor Qian appeased the people's unrest and coordinated the contradictions between all countries. Doesn't this all indicate that something is going on, rather than that everything is peaceful?

古文：下民其咨，夫如是则与垂衣之义乖矣。
现代文：至于后来洪水大泛滥，淹没了平原在山陵间汹涌，人民悲痛哀叹失去生计，这些事实和 垂衣而治 的说法不就差得更远了吗？
English: As for the subsequent massive flooding, the flooded plains surging between the mountains, the people grieving and lamenting the loss of their livelihoods, are these facts not even further removed from the story of "cloak and dagger"?

古文：亦闻赞朕之美曰： 无为而治。
现代文：我也听史书上赞扬我的功绩，说我 无为而治 ，意思说我对天下事听之任之，天下就自然太平了。
English: I have also heard the history books praise my exploits, saying that I did nothing but govern, meaning that if I left the affairs of the world to others, the world would naturally become peaceful.

古文：乃载于典则云： 宾四门，齐七政，类上帝，禋六宗，望山川，遍群神，流共工，放骁欢兜，殛鲧，窜三苗。
现代文：可史书上又偏偏记载了我 接待四方来的宾朋，把七种重大的政事都理顺管好，像天帝一样尊严。祭祀祖先，视察高山大河，为民祭告所有的神灵。流放了允兜和共工，杀了治水不利的鲸，赶跑了三苗。 
English: However, the history books also record that I received friends and guests from all over the world, managed the seven major political affairs well, and was as dignified as a heavenly emperor. I sacrificed ancestors, inspected the Gaoshan River, and offered sacrifices to all the gods for the people. I exiled Yundao and co-workers, killed whales that were unfavorable to water control, and drove away three seedlings.

古文：夫如是与无为之道远矣。
现代文：我做了这么多事，这不和 无为而治 相去太远了吗？
English: I've done so much, is that too far from doing nothing?

古文：今又闻泣于旻天，怨慕也，非朕之所行。
现代文：现在孟子又说我向着苍天哭号是因为心中积怨太多，这更不是我干的事了。
English: Now Mencius also said that I was crying out to the heavens because there were too many grievances in my heart, and this was not my doing.

古文：夫莫之为而为之者，天也；莫之致而致之者，命也。
现代文：我认为，不能做成的事做成了这是靠天的祐护，不能达到的目的达到了这是靠命运。
English: I believe that the things that can't be done are done by the help of heaven, and the goals that can't be achieved are achieved by fate.

古文：朕泣者，怨己之命，不合于父母，而诉于旻天也。
现代文：我哭是怨我的命运，跟父母没有关系，只能向苍天哭诉了。
English: I cry because I blame my fate, I have nothing to do with my parents, I can only cry to the heavens.

古文：何万章之问，孟轲不知其对？传圣人之意，岂宜如是乎？
现代文：在《万章问》这篇文章里，孟子回答不出万章的问题就信口胡说，这样传达圣人的意志，怎么能对头呢。
English: In this article of "Question of Ten Thousand Chapters," Mencius could not answer the question of ten thousand chapters, so he spoke nonsense. How could he be wrong in conveying the will of a sage in this way?

古文：嗟不能已，久之谓生曰：学琴乎？曰：嗜之而不善。
现代文：说罢又感叹了好半天。过了一会儿舜帝又问张生学不学弹琴，张生说，喜欢弹，但弹得不好。
English: After a while, Emperor Qianlong asked Zhang Sheng if he wanted to learn to play the piano. Zhang Sheng said that he liked to play, but he was not good at it.

古文：帝乃顾左右取琴，曰：不闻鼓五弦，歌《南风》，奚足以光其归路？
现代文：舜帝就让人取来琴，对张生说，你不听一听我弹五弦琴，唱《南风》曲，怎么能回去有所夸耀呢？
English: Emperor Qian had someone fetch a lute and said to Zhang Sheng, "If you don't listen to me play the five-stringed lute and sing the "South Wind" song, how can you go back and boast?"

古文：乃抚琴以歌之曰：南风薰薰兮草芊芊，妙有之音兮归清弦。
现代文：说罢，就一面弹琴一面唱了起来：南风薰薰兮草芊芊，妙有之音兮归清弦。
English: After saying this, she began to sing while playing the piano: the south wind is soothing and the grass is rustling, and a wonderful sound is returning to the clear strings.

古文：荡荡之教兮由自然，熙熙之化兮吾道全。薰薰兮思何传。
现代文：荡荡之教兮由自然，熙熙之化兮吾道全，薰薰兮思何传。
English: The teaching of swinging comes from nature, the transformation of boisterousness comes from our way of life, and the inculcation of thought comes from what is transmitted.

古文：歌讫，鼓琴为《南凤弄》。
现代文：歌唱完了，又弹了一曲《南风》，音律十分清新流畅，听后令人心情清爽。
English: After the singing was over, they played another song, "South Wind." The melody was very fresh and smooth, and it was refreshing to listen to.

古文：音歆清畅，爽朗心骨，生因发言曰：妙哉！乃遂惊悟。
现代文：张生忍不住大声赞叹说，太美妙了！然后就突然惊醒过来。
English: Zhang Sheng couldn't help but exclaim loudly, "It's wonderful!" and then he suddenly woke up.

