古文：匈奴刘聪，字玄明，一名载，冒顿之后也。
现代文：匈奴族人刘聪，字玄明，又名刘载，是匈奴冒顿单于的后代。
English: Liu Cong, also known as Liu Zai, a member of the Xiongnu ethnic group, is a descendant of the Xiongnu Emperor Dongdan.

古文：汉高祖以宗女妻冒顿，故其子孙以母姓为氏。
现代文：汉高祖将其宗室之女嫁给冒顿，所以他的子孙就以其母的姓作为姓氏。
English: Henkel's great-great-grandfather married the daughter of his father's family to Morton, so his descendants took their mother's surname as their surname.

古文：祖豹，为左贤王。
现代文：刘聪的祖父刘豹，被封为左贤王。
English: Liu Cong's grandfather, Liu Pan, was given the title of Zuoxian Wang.

古文：及魏分匈奴之众为五部，以豹为左部帅。
现代文：到了曹魏时，把匈奴部族民众分为五部，以刘豹为其左部的部帅。
English: When Cao Wei arrived, he divided the Xiongnu tribesmen into five groups, with Liu Pan leading the left group.

古文：豹虽分属五部，然皆家于晋阳汾涧之滨。
现代文：刘豹虽然属于匈奴五部，但其家都居住在晋阳汾水之滨。
English: Although Liu Bao belongs to the Five Branches of the Xiongnu, his family all live along the coast of Jinyang's Surabaya.

古文：父渊，形容伟壮，膂力过人。
现代文：刘聪的父亲刘渊，体貌异常魁伟强壮，体力超过常人。
English: Liu Cong's father, Liu Yuan, was unusually tall and strong, with physical strength exceeding that of an ordinary person.

古文：晋初为任子，在洛阳。
现代文：晋朝初年他作为匈奴派出的人质，居住在洛阳。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, he lived in Luoyang as a hostage sent by the Xiongnu.

古文：豹卒，渊代之。
现代文：刘豹死后，刘渊就取代他为匈奴左部主帅。
English: After Liu Pan's death, Liu Yuan replaced him as the Hun left-side coach.

古文：后改帅为都尉，以渊为北部都尉。
现代文：后来把帅改为都尉，就授任刘渊为北部都尉。
English: Later, the superintendent was changed to captain, and Liu Yuan was appointed as the northern captain.

古文：杨骏辅政，以渊为建威将军、五部大都督，封汉光乡侯。
现代文：杨骏辅佐晋帝执政的时候，授刘渊为建武将军、五部大都督，封爵为汉光乡侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yang Jintao, Liu Yuan was awarded the titles of General Jianwu, Governor of the Five Provinces, and Knight of Han Guang Township.

古文：后坐部民叛出塞，免官，永宁初，成都王颍表渊行宁朔将军，监五部军事。
现代文：后来他因匈奴人反叛而获罪出走塞外，官爵被免除。晋惠帝永宁初年，成都王颖上表奏请刘渊为宁朔将军，监督五部军事。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongning of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Ying of Chengdu formally invited Liu Yuan to become the general of Ningshuo and supervise the five military departments.

古文：及齐王冏、长沙王乂与颍等自相诛灭，北部都督刘宣等窃议反叛，谋推渊为大单于。
现代文：后来齐王司马礒、长沙王司马与成都王颖等人兴乱，自相残杀，北部都督刘宣等人暗中计议图谋反叛，企图推举刘渊为大单于。
English: Later, Qi Wang Simak, Changsha Wang Simak and Chengdu Wang Ying and others rioted and killed each other, and the northern governor Liu Xuan and others secretly plotted to rebel and attempt to nominate Liu Yuan as the Great Monk.

古文：时渊在鄴，乃使呼延攸以此谋告之。
现代文：当时刘渊还在邺，刘宣就派呼延攸前往把这项计划告诉他。
English: At that time, Liu Yuan was still in exile, and Liu Xuan sent Huyan You to tell him about this plan.

古文：渊请归会葬，颍不许。
现代文：刘渊就借口参加葬丧之礼请求北归，成都王司马颖不答应。
English: Liu Yuan requested to return to the north on the pretext of attending the funeral ceremony, but Chengdu Wang Sima Ying did not agree.

古文：颍为皇太弟，以渊为太弟屯骑校尉。
现代文：颖是皇太弟，就授任刘渊为太弟屯骑校尉。
English: Ying was the younger brother of the crown prince, so he appointed Liu Yuan as his younger brother's cavalry lieutenant.

古文：晋惠帝之伐颍也，以渊为辅国将军、都督北城守事。
现代文：晋惠帝讨伐成都王司马颖的时候，授任刘渊为辅国将军、都督北城守事之职。
English: When Emperor Jinhui fought against Chengdu's King Sima Ying, he appointed Liu Yuan as an auxiliary general and the governor of Beicheng.

古文：及惠帝败，以渊为冠军将军，封卢奴伯。
现代文：惠帝被打败之后，授刘渊为冠军将军，封爵为卢奴伯。
English: After Hui Di was defeated, Liu Yuan was awarded the title of champion general, and Lu Nubo was knighted.

古文：既而并州刺史司马腾、幽州刺史王浚，起兵伐颍，颍师战败。
现代文：不久，并州刺史司马腾、幽州刺史王浚，起兵讨伐成都王，颖军战败。
English: Not long after, Sima Teng and Yuzhou Wang Jun, both of whom were imperial princes, raised an army to fight the king of Chengdu, and Ying's army was defeated.

古文：渊谓颍曰： 今二镇跋扈，众逾十万，恐非宿卫及近郡士民所能御之。
现代文：刘渊对成都王颖说： 现在并州、幽州二镇将帅飞扬跋扈，拥兵超过十万之众，恐怕不是王宫卫队和附近各郡兵民所能够抵御的。
English: Liu Yuan said to Chengdu Wang Ying: Now, the two towns of Ganzhou and Yuzhou will be flying high, with more than 100,000 soldiers. I am afraid that the palace guard and the soldiers and civilians in the nearby counties will not be able to resist.

古文：渊当为殿下还说五部，鸠合义众，以赴国难。 
现代文：我应当替殿下回去游说五部，集合各部义民，以赴国难。 
English: On behalf of His Imperial Highness, I should go back and lobby the five ministries, gather the righteous people of each ministry, and go to the country.

古文：颍悦，拜渊为北单于，参丞相军事。
现代文：成都王颖十分高兴，就授予刘渊为北单于，参丞相军事。
English: Wang Ying of Chengdu was very pleased and awarded Liu Yuan the title of Bei Shan Yu, and he was promoted to the post of minister of war.

古文：渊至左国城，刘宣等上大单于之号，二旬之间，众便五万，都于离石。
现代文：刘渊到达左国城，刘宣等人就给他进上大单于的称号，二十天之内，就集合部众五万人，在离石建立国都。
English: When Liu Yuan arrived in the city of Zuo Guo, Liu Xuan and others gave him the title of "great leader." Within 20 days, he gathered 50,000 people to establish the national capital in Liangshi.

古文：渊谓宣等曰： 帝王岂有常哉，当上为汉高，下为魏武。
现代文：刘渊对刘宣等人说： 自古帝王哪里会有久长不变的，应当是在前有汉高祖，在后有魏武帝。
English: Liu Yuan said to Liu Xuan and others: Since ancient times, wherever there is an emperor who will remain unchanged for a long time, there should be a Hango ancestor in the past and a Wei Emperor in the future.

古文：然晋人未必同我，汉有天下世长，恩德结于民心，吾又汉氏之甥，约为兄弟，兄亡弟绍，不亦可乎？
现代文：然而晋朝人未必与我有共同之处，汉朝得到天下的时间长久，恩惠与德泽都系结在民众的心里，我又是刘汉的外甥，大概相当于兄弟的关系，兄长不在了由弟弟承接，不是也很合道理的吗？
English: However, the people of the Jin Dynasty do not necessarily have anything in common with me. The Han Dynasty has been around for a long time. Grace and virtue are tied together in the hearts of the people. I am also the nephew of Liu Han, which is roughly equivalent to a brotherly relationship. When the elder brother is away, the younger brother takes over. Isn't that very reasonable?

古文：今且可称汉，追尊后主，以怀民望。 
现代文：现在我姑且称国为汉，给刘后主追加尊号，以安抚天下百姓的人心。 
English: For now, I'll just call the country Han and give Empress Liu an additional honorific to appease the hearts of the people around the world.

古文：乃迁左国城，自称汉王，置百官，年号元熙，追尊刘禅为孝怀皇帝。
现代文：于是迁都到左国城，自称为汉王，设置文武百官，定年号为元熙，追加刘禅的尊号为孝怀皇帝。
English: As a result, the capital was moved to Sakoku-jo, he called himself Han Wang, set up a hundred civil and military officials, fixed the year as Yuan Xi, and added Liu Zen's honorific as Emperor Xiaohui.

古文：攻击郡县。
现代文：继而发兵攻击晋朝的郡县。
English: It then sent troops to attack the counties of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：桓帝十一年，晋并州刺史司马腾来乞师，桓帝亲率万骑救腾，斩渊将綦母豚，渊南走蒲子。
现代文：桓帝十一年，晋朝并州刺史司马腾来朝廷请求派兵，桓帝亲自率领一万骑兵救援司马腾，斩杀刘渊部将綦毋豚，刘渊向南逃往蒲子。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Kuan, Sima Teng, the governor of the annexed state of Jin, came to the imperial court to request the dispatch of troops. Emperor Kuan personally led ten thousand cavalry to rescue Sima Teng, killed Liu Yuan, and Liu Yuan fled south to Puzi.

古文：语在《序纪》。晋光熙元年，渊进据河东，克平阳、蒲坂，遂都平阳。
现代文：晋光熙元年，刘渊领兵进据河东，攻占平阳、蒲坂，就在平阳建都。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin Guangxi, Liu Yuan led an army into the eastern part of He, conquered Pingyang and Busan, and built the capital in Pingyang.

古文：晋永嘉二年，渊称帝，年号永凤。
现代文：晋永嘉二年，刘渊称帝，定年号为永凤。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yongjia, Emperor Liu Yuan was enthroned, and his regnal name was Yongfeng.

古文：后汾水中得玉玺，文曰： 有新保之 ，盖王莽之玺也。
现代文：后来，有人在汾水中找到一块玉玺，玺上刻有 有新保之 四个字，这是王莽的玉玺。
English: Later, someone found a piece of jade ingot in the turbid water. The four characters "有新保之" were engraved on the ingot. This was Wang Mang's jade ingot.

古文：得者因增 渊海光 三字而献之，渊以为己瑞，号年为河瑞。
现代文：那个得到玉玺的人又在上面添刻上 渊海光 三个字，并把它进献给刘渊，刘渊认为这是自己吉利的预兆，就把年号改为河瑞。
English: The person who received the jade bracelet also engraved the three characters "渊海光" on it, and dedicated it to Liu Yuan. Liu Yuan thought that this was a sign of his good luck, so he changed the year to "河瑞."

古文：以聪为大司马、大单于、录尚书事，置单环境台于平阳西。渊死，子和僭立。
现代文：刘渊任命刘聪为大司马、大单于、录尚书事，给他在平阳西边建置单于台。
English: Liu Yuan appointed Liu Cong as the chief secretary, major single in, record book, and built a single in the west of Pingyang for him.

古文：聪即和第四弟也，杀和而自立。
现代文：刘渊死后，他的儿子刘和继其位。刘聪就是刘和的第四个弟弟，他杀了刘和而自立为主。
English: After Liu Yuan's death, his son Liu He succeeded him. Liu Cong was Liu He's fourth brother. He killed Liu He and became independent.

古文：聪猿臂善射，弯弓三百斤。
现代文：刘聪臂长如猿，善于射箭，能够张开三百斤力的大弓。
English: Liu Cong's arms are as long as a monkey's, he is good at archery and can open a big bow with a force of three hundred kilos.

古文：晋新兴太守郭颐辟为主簿，任以郡事。
现代文：晋朝新兴太守郭颐征召他任主簿之职，委任他管理郡事。
English: Guo Gan, the newly appointed governor of the Jin Dynasty, called him to serve as chief accountant and appointed him to manage county affairs.

古文：举良将，为骁骑别部司马。
现代文：举荐良将时，任用他为骁骑别部司马。
English: When recommending a good general, he appointed him as the secretary of the Department of Horse Riding.

古文：齐王冏以为国中尉。
现代文：齐王礒又任他为国中尉。
English: Qi Wangjun also appointed him as a lieutenant of the country.

古文：出为左部司马，寻迁右部尉。
现代文：后又任左部司马之职，不久又升为右部尉。
English: Later he was appointed to the post of Sima of the Left Division, and soon he was promoted to the post of Lieutenant of the Right Division.

古文：太宰、河间王颙表为赤沙中郎将。
现代文：太宰、河间王司马上表奏请授任他为赤沙中郎将。
English: Dazai and Kawama no Oji immediately requested that he be appointed as Akasachuro no shogun.

古文：以渊在鄴，惧为成都王颍所害，亡奔颍，颍甚悦，拜右积弩将军，参前锋战事。
现代文：因为刘渊在邺，刘聪害怕自己被成都王司马颖所陷害，就前往投奔成都王颖，颖得到他非常高兴，就授予他右积弩将军之职，让他参与前锋战事。
English: Because Liu Yuan was in Handan, Liu Cong was afraid that he would be framed by Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, so he went to Chengdu to join Chengdu Wang Ying. Ying was very happy to have him, so he awarded him the position of General of the Right Division and let him participate in the forward battle.

古文：随还左国。
现代文：随后，刘聪回到左国城。
English: Afterwards, Liu Cong returned to Sakoku City.

古文：渊称大号，拜大司马，封楚王。
现代文：刘渊称帝以后，授予他大司马之职，并封他为楚王。
English: After Liu Yuan was proclaimed emperor, he was given the post of grand steed and named King of Chu.

古文：及僭位，年号光兴。
现代文：刘聪自立为帝的时候，定年号为光兴。
English: When Liu Cong became emperor, the era name was Guangxing.

古文：聪遣王弥、刘曜攻陷洛阳，执晋怀帝，改年为嘉平。
现代文：刘聪派王弥、刘曜率兵攻陷洛阳，捉住了晋怀帝，把年号改为嘉平。
English: Liu Cong sent Wang Mi and Liu You to attack Luoyang, captured Emperor Jinhuai, and changed the era name to Jiaping.

古文：聪于是骄奢淫暴，杀戮无已，诛翦公卿，旬日相继。
现代文：刘聪称帝以后，就变得非常骄奢淫暴，不断地杀戮部下，诛杀翦灭公卿大臣，持续十多天。
English: After Liu Cong was proclaimed emperor, he became very arrogant and violent, constantly killing his subordinates and attempting to kill and exterminate nobles and ministers, which lasted for more than ten days.

古文：纳其太保刘殷二女为左右贵嫔，又纳殷孙女四人为贵人，六刘之宠，倾于后宫。
现代文：刘聪受纳他的太保刘殷的两个女儿为左右贵嫔，又纳刘殷的四个孙女为贵人，刘氏六女所受到的宠爱，超过后宫的所有嫔妃。
English: Liu Cong received the two daughters of his eunuch Liu Yin as the left and right noblewomen, and also received the four granddaughters of Liu Yin as noblewomen. The six daughters of the Liu family were favored more than all the concubines in the harem.

古文：聪希复出外，事皆中黄门纳奏，左贵嫔决之。
现代文：刘聪很少走出宫外理政，一切事情都是由中黄门接受进奏，由左贵嫔进行决断。
English: Liu Cong rarely stepped out of the palace to manage the government. All matters were handled by Zhonghuangmen and decided by Zuo Guizhen.

古文：其都水使者襄陵王摅以鱼蟹不供，将作大匠望都公靳陵以营作迟晚，并斩于东市。
现代文：他的都水使者襄陵王摅因为鱼蟹供应不及时，他的将作大匠望都公靳陵因为营建工作稍有迟缓，都被他斩于东市。
English: His messenger to the capital of water, Xiangling Wang Yao, was killed in Dongshi because the supply of fish and crabs was not timely, and his great craftsman, Wangdu Gong's mausoleum, was killed because the construction work was a little slow.

古文：聪游猎无度，晨出暮归，观鱼于汾，以烛继昼。
现代文：刘聪没有止境地沉溺于游猎，早出晚归，在汾水观看捕鱼，总是燃起烛火夜以继日。
English: Liu Cong never stopped indulging in hunting, going out early and returning late, watching fishing in Surabaya, always lighting candles day and night.

古文：其弟乂及子粲舆榇切谏，聪怒曰： 吾岂桀纣幽厉乎，而汝等生来哭人也！ 
现代文：刘聪的弟弟刘、儿子刘粲都用车载着棺木跟随自己，冒死前去痛切地对他进行劝谏，刘聪大怒说： 我难道成了夏桀、商纣、周幽王、周厉王吗？要你们这帮人前来生死哭劝！ 
English: Liu Cong's brother, Liu, and his son, Liu Yao, both followed him with caskets in their cars, and risked their lives to earnestly persuade him. Liu Cong said angrily, "Have I become Xia Yao, Shang Yao, Zhou Yu Wang, Zhou Li Wang? I want you people to come and cry and persuade me!

古文：先是，刘琨来告难，穆帝亲率大众，令长子六修击粲等，大破之。
现代文：当初，刘琨来朝廷告急，晋穆帝亲自统率大军，令长子六攻击刘粲等人，把他们打败。
English: At first, Liu Bei came to the imperial court in a hurry, and Emperor Jinmu personally led a large army and ordered the eldest son to attack Liu Bei and others and defeat them.

古文：语在《序纪》。聪与群臣饮宴，逼晋帝行酒。
现代文：刘聪与群臣饮酒宴乐，强逼晋怀帝替他们逐个斟酒劝饮。
English: Liu Cong had a drinking party with his courtiers, and forced Emperor Jinhuai to pour wine for them one by one.

古文：晋光禄大夫庾珉等谋以平阳应刘琨，于是害晋帝，诛珉等。
现代文：晋朝光禄大夫庾珉等人谋划在平阳策应刘琨，于是刘聪就杀害了晋怀帝，诛斩了庾珉等人。
English: The Jin Dynasty, the Guanglu Emperor, Doctor Zou and others plotted to deal with Liu Bei in Pingyang, so Liu Cong killed the Jin Emperor and executed Zou and others.

古文：改嘉平为建元。
现代文：刘聪把他的年号嘉平改为建元。
English: Liu Cong changed his era name from Jiaping to Jianyuan.

古文：平阳地震，聪崇明观陷为池，水赤如血，赤气至天，有赤龙奋迅而去。
现代文：当时平阳发生地震，刘聪的崇明观塌陷成了池沼，池里的水都变成红色如同鲜血，红色的雾气直冲到天，有一条红色的龙从水中奋起疾速飞去。
English: At that time, there was an earthquake in Pingyang, and Liu Cong's Chongmingguan collapsed into a pond. The water in the pond turned red like blood, and the red mist rushed straight to the sky. A red dragon rose from the water and flew away at high speed.

古文：流星起于牵牛，入紫微，龙形委蛇，其光照地，落于平阳北十里。
现代文：天上有颗流星从牵牛星座出现，泻入紫微星座，成一条龙的形状逶迤而下，它发出的光照亮了大地，最后坠落在平阳北边十里远的地方。
English: The meteor appeared from the Cowherd star, entered the purple micro-lodge, meandered like a dragon, shined brightly, and landed ten miles north of Pingyang.

古文：视之则肉，长三十步，广二十七步，臭达于平阳。
现代文：坠落后看上去却是一堆腐肉，长有三十步，宽达二十七步，熏天臭气一直传到平阳城。
English: After the fall, however, it looked like a pile of rotting meat, thirty paces long and twenty-seven paces wide, and the stench of the stench went all the way to Pingyang City.

古文：肉帝常有哭声，昼夜不止。
现代文：腐肉旁边经常听到有哭泣的声音，昼夜都不停息。
English: The sound of weeping is often heard next to the carrion, day and night.

古文：聪恶之。
现代文：刘聪对此感到十分厌恶。
English: Liu Cong was very disgusted by this.

古文：刘后产一蛇一虎，各害人而走，寻之不得，须之见在陨肉之旁。
现代文：不久刘聪的皇后生下一条蛇和一头虎，各自咬死人而逃走，人们四处寻找不见，不多时终于在从天陨落的腐肉旁边发现了它们。
English: Soon after, Liu Cong's queen gave birth to a snake and a tiger, each of which bit someone to death and ran away. People searched for them everywhere, and eventually found them next to the rotting meat that fell from the sky.

古文：聪遣刘曜攻陷长安，执晋愍帝，改建元为麟嘉。
现代文：刘聪派遣刘曜攻陷了长安，抓住了晋愍帝，把年号由建元改为麟嘉。
English: Liu Cong sent Liu You to invade Chang'an, capture Emperor Jingu, and change the era name from Jianyuan to Linjia.

古文：其武库陷，入地一丈五尺。
现代文：他的兵器仓库突然塌陷，陷入地下一丈五尺深。
English: His weapons depot suddenly caved in, plunging five feet underground.

古文：聪自去冬至是，遂不受朝贺，立市于后庭，与宫人宴戏，积日不醒。
现代文：刘聪从上年冬天到这时，就不再接受群臣的朝贺，在后宫中建立一个小城，与宫女们游宴嘻戏，整日酒醉不醒。
English: From last winter to this time, Liu Cong no longer accepted the morning greetings of the courtiers, built a small city in the harem, feasted and danced with the courtesans, and was drunk all day.

古文：立上皇后樊氏，樊氏是聪张后之侍婢也。
现代文：他册立樊氏为上皇后，樊氏原先是刘聪的张后的侍婢。
English: He proclaimed Ms. Zou as the previous empress. Ms. Zou was originally a servant of Liu Cong's concubine.

古文：时称后者四人，佩皇后玺绶者七人。
现代文：当时刘聪宫中称皇后的有四个人，佩带皇后玺印绶带的有七个人。
English: At that time, there were four people in Liu Cong Palace who claimed to be the queen, and seven people wearing the queen's seal and ribbon.

古文：阿谀日进，货贿公行，后宫赏赐，动至千万。
现代文：阿谀谄媚之徒日益增多，收受钱财贿赂的人无所顾忌，后宫用于赏赐的财物，动辄成千上万。
English: The number of flatterers is increasing day by day. Those who accept money and bribes have no scruples. The harem is used to reward thousands of people.

古文：有豕著进贤冠，犬冠武弁带绶，并升聪座，俄而斗死，宿卫之人无见入者。
现代文：甚至让猪头著儒生所带的进贤冠，让狗佩带武士用的绶带，一同升坐在刘聪的坐位之上，然后让它们互相厮斗而死，而在宫中担任警卫的人却没有人能够进去。
English: They even made a pig's head wear a crown of merit brought by a Confucian scholar, and a dog wear a samurai sash, and they sat together on Liu Cong's seat, and then let them fight each other to death, but no one who was a guard in the palace could enter.

古文：平文二年，聪死。
现代文：平文二年，刘聪死。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Liu Cong died.

古文：子粲，袭位，号年汉昌。
现代文：刘聪之子刘粲，承袭其位，定年号为汉昌。
English: Liu Cong's son, Liu Ye, succeeded him, and his era name became Hanchang.

古文：粲荒耽酒色，游荡后庭，军国之事，决于大将军靳准。
现代文：刘粲放纵沉溺于酒色，整天在后宫游乐放荡，军国之事，全都由大将军靳准决断。
English: Liu Ye indulged in drinking, spent all day in the harem, and the affairs of the military state were all decided by the general.

古文：大雅立，号年延熙。
现代文：靳准率兵杀了刘粲，只要是刘氏的男女不分老幼都予以诛杀。
English: Yan Quanzhong led the soldiers to kill Liu Hui, and as long as they were men and women of the Liu clan, they would be killed regardless of age.

古文：石虎废大雅为海阳王而僭立，寻杀之。虎，字季龙，勒之从子也。
现代文：靳准自称汉王，设置文武百官。不久，他被靳明所杀，靳明的部众投降于刘渊同族兄弟之子刘曜。石虎，字季龙，是石勒的侄子。
English: Quanzhong claimed to be the king of Han and set up a hundred civil and military officials. Soon, he was killed by Xingming, whose followers surrendered to Liu You, the son of Liu Yuan's brother. Shihu, the character Ji Long, was Shi Le's nephew.

古文：祖曰匐邪，父曰寇觅。
现代文：石虎的祖父叫寇觅。
English: Shihu's grandfather was named Kouyou.

古文：寇觅有七子，虎第四。
现代文：寇觅有七个儿子，石虎排行第四。
English: Kouyou has seven sons, and Shihu ranks fourth.

古文：勒父幼而子之，故或谓之为勒弟也。
现代文：石虎是由石勒的父亲抚养并收为儿子，所以有人又说他是石勒的弟弟。
English: Shihu was raised and adopted as a son by Shi Le's father, so some people also say that he is Shi Le's younger brother.

古文：晋永兴中，与勒相失。
现代文：晋永兴年间，石虎与石勒离散。
English: During the reign of Jin Yongxing, Shigu and Shile were separated.

古文：永嘉五年，刘琨送勒母王氏及虎于葛陂，时年十七矣。
现代文：永嘉五年，刘琨送石勒的母亲王氏和石虎到葛陂，当时他已经十七岁了。
English: In the fifth year of Yongjia, Liu Ye sent Shi Le's mother Wang and Shi Hu to Ge Yao, when he was already seventeen years old.

古文：性残忍，游猎无度，能左右射，好以弹弹人，军中甚患之。
现代文：石虎性情残忍，沉溺于游猎，能两手左右开弓射箭，喜欢用弹丸打人，军队里的人都把他看成是祸害。
English: The stone tiger has a cruel temperament, indulges in hunting, can shoot arrows with both hands, likes to hit people with pellets, and people in the army see him as a scourge.

古文：勒白母曰： 此兒凶暴无赖，使军人杀之，声名可惜，宜自除也。 
现代文：石勒曾对他母亲说： 这个孩儿凶暴无赖，倘若被军队里的人杀掉，有损于我家的声名，最好是我们自己把他除掉。 
English: Schiele once said to his mother: "This boy is a violent ruffian. If he is killed by someone from the army, it will damage the reputation of my family. It would be better if we got rid of him ourselves."

古文：王曰： 快牛为犊子时，多能破车。
现代文：王氏说： 拉车的快牛还是牛犊的时候，大多都会把车子弄坏。
English: Mr. Wang said, "Most of the time, when the fast ox or the calf is pulling the cart, it will damage the cart.

古文：为复小忍，勿却之。 
现代文：对他现在的情况只有暂且忍受，不要把他除掉。 
English: Don't get rid of him, just put up with him for now.

古文：至年十八，身长七尺五寸，弓马迅捷，勇冠当时。
现代文：到了石虎十八岁的时候，长成身高七尺五寸，骑马射箭迅速敏捷，他的勇猛在当时可算得独一无二。
English: By the time Shihu was eighteen years old, he had grown to a height of seven feet five inches, riding a horse and shooting arrows quickly. His bravery was unique at that time.

古文：将佐亲戚，莫不敬惮，勒深嘉之。
现代文：石勒属下的将佐以及他的亲戚，没有人不对石虎恭敬畏惧，石勒对他也非常夸赞。
English: Shi Le's subordinate General Zuo and his relatives, no one is not afraid of Shi Huqiong, Shi Le also praised him very much.

古文：而酷害过差，军中有壮健与己齐者，因猎戏谑，辄杀之。
现代文：但石虎为人过分残酷好杀，凡是军队中有和自己一样健壮的人，就借打猎玩笑的机会把他杀死。
English: However, the stone tiger is too cruel to kill, and anyone in the army who is as strong as himself will take the opportunity to kill him as a hunting joke.

古文：至于降城陷垒，不复断别善恶，坑斩士女，鲜有遗类。
现代文：至于每次攻陷城池堡垒，他就不判断辨别好坏善恶，活埋和斩杀成年男女，他们很少有被他放过的。
English: As for every time he attacked a castle fortress, he did not judge whether it was good or bad, buried alive and beheaded adult men and women, and he rarely let them go.

古文：御众严整，莫敢犯者，指授攻讨，所向无前。
现代文：石虎所统辖的部队严肃整齐，没有人敢违犯军令，指挥他们攻占讨伐，个个一往无前，所向无敌。
English: The troops under the command of Shihu were serious and orderly, and no one dared to violate the military order and command them to conquer the crusade. Each one of them was invincible.

古文：故勒宠信弥隆，仗以专征之任。
现代文：所以，石勒对他宠爱信任日益加重，命他专门担负征战的任务。
English: Therefore, Shiller's trust in his favorite was increasing day by day, and he ordered him to take on the task of going to war.

古文：刘聪以虎为魏郡太守，镇鄴三台；又封繁阳侯，食邑三千户。
现代文：刘聪曾委任石虎为魏郡太守，派他镇守邺城里的三台；又封他为繁阳侯，食邑三千户。
English: Liu Cong once appointed Shi Hu as the governor of Wei County, and sent him to guard the three towns in the city of Shao; he was also appointed as the mayor of the bustling city, with 3,000 households.

古文：勒为赵王，以虎为车骑将军，加侍中、开府，进封中山公。
现代文：石勒称赵王时，授任石虎为车骑将军，加授侍中、开府，进封为中山公。
English: When Shi Le called Zhao Wang, he appointed Shi Hu as the general of chariot and cavalry, as well as the junior chamberlain and the governor of Kaifu, and promoted him to the position of Zhongshan Gong.

古文：勒称尊号，为太尉、守尚书令，封中山王，食邑万户。
现代文：石勒称帝之后，又授予他太尉、守尚书令等职，封为中山王，食邑一万户。
English: After Shiller was proclaimed emperor, he was also awarded the positions of captain and Shushang Shuling, and was named the King of Zhongshan, with 10,000 households.

古文：勒死，虎擅诛右光禄大夫程遐、中书令徐光，遣子邃率兵入大雅宫，直卫文武皆奔散。
现代文：石勒死后，石虎擅权诛杀了右光禄大夫程遐、中书令徐光，派他的儿子石邃率兵进入石勒之子大雅宫内，在宫中值勤守卫的文武官员全都四处逃散。
English: After Shi Le's death, Shi Hu took the power to kill Uguanglu's doctor Cheng Quan and the Chinese scholar Xu Guang, and sent his son Shi Quan to lead soldiers into Shi Le's son Daya's palace. All the civil and military officials on guard duty in the palace fled in all directions.

古文：大雅大惧，自陈弱劣，让位于虎。
现代文：大雅深为恐惧，只得自己承认能力薄弱低劣，让位给石虎。
English: Deeply frightened, Daya had to admit to herself that her ability was weak and inferior, and give way to Shihu.

古文：虎曰： 若其不堪，天下自当有大义，何足豫论。 
现代文：石虎对他说： 倘若你果真不堪胜任皇位，天下之人自当会有公论，何须你自己预先说明。 
English: Shihu said to him, "If you are really unfit for the throne, people all over the world will have a public discussion. Why do you need to explain yourself in advance?

古文：遂逼立之。
现代文：于是就逼迫大雅继位。
English: As a result, he forced Daya to succeed.

古文：虎自为丞相、魏王。
现代文：石虎自己充任丞相、魏王。
English: Shihu himself served as chancellor, Wei Wang.

古文：虎以勒文武旧臣，皆补丞相闲任，其府僚旧昵，悉居台省禁要。
现代文：石虎又把石勒的文武旧臣，全都委任为辅助丞相的闲散官员，而他原来王府的官员和旧日的亲信，全部都位居各台省和宫禁的要职。
English: Shihu also appointed all of Shiller's former civil and military ministers as idle officials to assist the prime minister, while his former royal officials and old cronies all held important positions in various provinces and the Imperial Palace.

古文：改勒太子宫曰崇训宫，徙勒妻刘氏已下居之，简其美淑及车马服御，皆归虎第。
现代文：把石勒的太子宫改名叫崇训宫，把石勒的妻子刘氏迁到这里幽禁起来，选择石勒的美女和车马衣服之类，尽都收归自己的府第。
English: He changed the name of Shi Ler's Prince's Palace to Chongxun Palace, moved Shi Ler's wife Liu to this place and imprisoned her, and selected Shi Ler's beautiful women, chariots and horses, and clothes, all of which were brought back to his palace.

古文：刘氏谓其彭城王石堪曰： 丞相便相凌蹈，恐国祚之灭不复久矣。
现代文：刘氏对石勒的彭城王石堪说： 丞相如此欺凌践踏，恐怕国家灭亡的日子不会太远了。
English: Mr. Liu said to Pengcheng Wang Shikan of Shiller: The prime minister is so bullying and trampling, I am afraid that the day of the country's demise will not be too far away.

古文：真可谓养虎自残者也。
现代文：真正可以说是养虎自残啊。
English: It can truly be said that raising a tiger is self-mutilation.

古文：王将何以图之？ 
现代文：你彭城王将有什么计策来对付他呢？ 
English: What will you, King of Pengcheng, do to deal with him?

古文：堪曰： 先帝旧臣，皆以斥外，众旅不复由人，宫殿之中，亡所厝计。
现代文：石堪说道： 先帝原有的旧臣，都已被他排斥在外，各路军队也不再听从我们指挥，在京都宫殿之中，根本无法计议筹措。
English: Ishikan said, "All of the former emperor's former retainers have been ostracized by him, and the various armies no longer obey our commands. In the palace in Kyoto, there is no way to discuss the matter.

古文：臣请出奔兗州，据廪丘，扶南阳王恢为盟主，宣太后诏于诸牧守、征镇，令各率义兵财讨恶逆，蔑不济也。 
现代文：我请求逃出京城奔往兖州，依据廪丘这个地方，扶持南阳王恢为盟主，把太后你的诏令宣示于各地牧守、征镇，令他们各自率领义兵共同讨伐万恶的逆贼，此事没有不成功的。 
English: I begged them to escape from Beijing and go to Zhangzhou, and to support Nanyang Wang to return as the leader according to the location of Zhangqiu Hill, and to proclaim the Empress Dowager's edict to herdsmen and towns all over the country, so that they would each lead volunteers to jointly fight against the evil traitors. This matter was not unsuccessful.

古文：刘氏然之。
现代文：刘氏同意他的计划。
English: Mr. Liu agreed to his plan.

古文：既而，堪计不果，虎灸而杀之，又杀刘氏。
现代文：后来，石堪的计谋没有能够实现，石虎抓住了他并用火把他烧死，然后又杀了刘氏。
English: Later, Shi Kan's scheme failed to materialize, and Shi Hu caught him and burned him to death, and then killed Mr. Liu.

古文：石生先镇长安，石朗镇洛阳，并起兵讨虎，为虎所灭。
现代文：原先石生镇守长安，石朗镇守洛阳，这时他们一齐起兵讨伐石虎，但都被石虎消灭。
English: Originally, Shisheng Town guarded Chang'an and Shilang Town guarded Luoyang. At that time, they all raised an army to fight the stone tiger, but they were all destroyed by the stone tiger.

古文：虎遂自立为大赵王，号年建武，自襄国徙居于鄴。
现代文：石虎于是自立为大赵王，定年号为建武，并从襄国迁到邺城居住。
English: Shihu then established himself as the Great King Zhao, with the given name Jianwu, and moved from Xiang Province to live in Shicheng.

古文：乃杀大雅及其母程氏，并大雅诸弟。
现代文：不久又杀了大雅和他的母亲程氏，以及大雅的几个弟弟。
English: He soon killed Daya and his mother, Cheng, as well as Daya's younger brothers.

古文：初，虎衣衮冕，将祀南郊，照镜无首，大恐怖，不敢称皇帝，乃自贬为王。
现代文：起初，石虎穿上绣有龙的衮服，戴上行礼的冠冕，准备到南郊祭祀，当他照镜子时，看到自己没有脑袋，心里大为恐怖，因而不敢称皇帝，就自己贬低地位为王。
English: At first, Shihu put on a dragon-embroidered robe and a ceremonial crown and prepared to go to the southern suburb to offer sacrifices. When he looked in the mirror and saw that he had no head, he was so terrified that he did not dare to call himself an emperor, so he demeaned his position as king.

古文：使其太子邃省可尚书奏事，唯选牧守、祀郊庙、征伐、刑断，乃亲览之。
现代文：石虎让他的太子石邃审查尚书奏议诸事，惟有选任牧守、祭祀郊庙、用兵征伐、判断刑狱等项事情，才亲自去过问。
English: Shihu asked his prince, Shishu, to examine and discuss various matters, but he only personally went to inquire about matters such as the appointment of a shepherd, the worship of a suburban temple, the use of soldiers, and the judgment of imprisonment.

古文：虎又改称大赵天王。
现代文：后来石虎又改称为大赵天王。
English: Later, Shihu changed his name to Da Zhao Tianwang.

古文：邃以事呈之，恚曰： 此小事，何足呈也！ 
现代文：石邃把有关事务呈上给他处理，他愤怒地斥责说： 这等小事，有什么值得上呈给我！ 
English: Shi Hao brought the relevant matters to him for handling, and he angrily rebuked, "Such a small matter, what is worth bringing to me!

古文：时有所问，复怒曰： 何以不呈！ 
现代文：有时石虎又要过问某些事，就又愤怒地斥责石邃说： 这样重要的事为什么不向我禀告！ 
English: Sometimes the stone tiger wanted to inquire about certain things, so he angrily rebuked the stone dragon and said, "Why don't you report such an important matter to me!

古文：诮责杖捶，月至再三。
现代文：对石邃又是斥责，又是杖笞，一个月至少也有两三次。
English: There were reprimands and caning at least two or three times a month.

古文：邃甚愠恨，私谓中庶子李颜等曰： 官家难称，吾欲行冒顿之事，卿从我乎？ 
现代文：石邃对此非常恼怒气愤，私下里对中庶子李颜等人说道： 我于官于家都难以称心如意，我想要做冒顿单于杀父自立的事，你们依从我吗？ 
English: Shi Hao was very angry and indignant about this, and privately said to the middle child, Li Yan, and others: I am unsatisfactory both in office and at home, I want to do something that is independent of killing my father, will you obey me?

古文：颜等状不敢对。
现代文：李颜等人吓得低下头不敢回答。
English: Li Yan and the others were too scared to answer.

古文：虎闻而大怒，杀邃及其男女二十六人，一棺埋之，诛其宫臣支党二百余人。
现代文：石虎听说这件事之后大怒，就杀掉石邃和他的妻子儿女共计二十六人，把他们装在一个棺材里埋葬，又诛杀石邃的宫臣和党羽二百多人。
English: When the stone tiger heard about this, it flew into a rage and killed Shih Kuo, his wife and children, a total of twenty-six people, and buried them in a coffin. It also killed more than two hundred of Shih Kuo's palace courtiers and party members.

古文：立次子宣为太子。
现代文：把自己第二个儿子石宣立为太子。
English: He made his second son, Shi Xuan, crown prince.

古文：虎于鄴起台四十余所，营长安、洛阳二宫，作者四十余万人。
现代文：石虎在邺城起盖台榭楼观四十余处，营建长安宫和洛阳宫，参加兴建的匠作工役达四十多万人。
English: Shihu built more than forty towers in Shicheng, built Chang'an Palace and Luoyang Palace, and more than 400,000 craftsmen participated in the construction.

古文：又欲自鄴起阁道，至于襄国。
现代文：还打算在邺城和襄国之间修建一条阁道。
English: There are also plans to build an elevated road between Lucheng and Xiangguo.

古文：敕河南四州具南师之备，并、朔、秦、雍严西讨之资，青、冀、幽州三五发卒。
现代文：又敕令黄河南边四州准备好向南进兵的军队，并州、朔州、秦州、雍州等四州征集向西讨伐的军队，青州、冀州、幽州等三州也要三丁发二、五丁发三以扩充军队。
English: He also ordered the four states on the south side of the Yellow River to prepare troops to march southward, and the four states of Shuozhou, Shuozhou, Qinzhou, and Yongzhou to recruit troops to march westward, and the three states of Qingzhou, Jizhou, and Yuzhou to send two or three troops to expand the army.

古文：诸州造甲者五十万人。
现代文：各个州都要准备甲兵五十万人。
English: Each state is to prepare 500,000 armored soldiers.

古文：扰役黎元，民庶失业，得农桑者十室而三。
现代文：用各种劳役和兵役侵扰黎民百姓，平民百姓都失去本业，能够从事农桑的十家仅有三家。
English: The people of Li have been harassed with all kinds of labor service and military service. The common people have lost their jobs, and there are only three out of ten families that can engage in agricultural mulberry.

古文：船夫十七万人，为水所没，为虎所害，三分而一。
现代文：征集各地船夫十七万人，有的被大水淹死，有的被老虎咬死，损失的人数达三分之一。
English: A total of 170,000 boatmen from all over the country were conscripted. Some drowned in the floodwaters, while others were killed by tigers, accounting for one-third of the losses.

古文：课责征士，五人车一乘、牛二头、米各十五斛、绢十匹。
现代文：又按照士卒人数向各地征收赋税，每五人需车一乘、牛二头、米各十五斛、绢十匹。
English: In addition, taxes were levied on each region according to the number of officers and men, with every five people requiring one car, two cows, fifteen bushels of rice and ten yakitori.

古文：诸役调有不办者，皆以斩论。
现代文：各种差役赋税的征调如有不照办的，都以斩杀论处。
English: The levying and transferring of all kinds of taxes levied on officials, if not complied with, will be dealt with harshly.

古文：穷民率多鬻子以充军制，而犹不足者，乃自经于道路。
现代文：贫困穷苦的百姓大多数只得卖儿卖女来缴纳穷兵黩武之所需，但仍然无法达到要求的百姓，只有在道路旁自杀而亡。
English: Most of the poor and destitute people had to sell their sons and daughters to pay for the needs of the war, but those who were still unable to meet the requirements only committed suicide on the side of the road.

古文：死者相望，犹求发无己。
现代文：死者到处可见，但各种征发始终没有停止。
English: The dead can be seen everywhere, but the various requisitions have not stopped.

古文：太武殿成，图画忠臣、孝子、烈士、贞女，皆变为胡状，头缩入肩。
现代文：太武殿建成之后，殿堂上绘制的忠臣、孝子、烈士、贞女各种图画，全都变成胡人的形状，把头缩在肩胛里面。
English: After the completion of the Taiwu-den, all the pictures of loyal subjects, sons and daughters, martyrs, and maids of honour painted on the hall of fame were transformed into the shape of a goose, with its head tucked inside its shoulder girdle.

古文：虎大恶之。
现代文：石虎见了之后大为厌恶。
English: Shihu was disgusted after seeing it.

古文：遣司虞中郎将贾霸率工匠四千，于东平冈山造猎车千乘，辕长三丈，高一丈八尺，置高一丈七尺；格虎车四十乘，立行楼二层于其上。
现代文：石虎派遣司虞中郎将贾霸率领工匠四千人，在东平冈山营造出猎的车辆一千乘，车辕有三丈长，车高一丈八尺，用来捕猎的网高一丈七尺；用来捕捉考虎的车十乘，车上造有两层行楼。
English: The stone tiger dispatched Siyuzhong Lang to lead Jia Ba and four thousand craftsmen to build a thousand-seat vehicle for hunting in the Dongping Mountains. The chariot was three meters long, the car was eight meters high, and the net used for hunting was seven meters high. The car used to catch the tiger was ten meters long, and the car had a two-story building.

古文：南至荥阳，东极阳都，使御史监司。
现代文：划定狩猎区南至荥阳，东到阳都，派御史前往监察管理。
English: The hunting area was delineated as far south as Fenyang and as far east as Yangdu, and the imperial historian was sent to supervise the management.

古文：其中禽兽，民有犯者罪至大辟。
现代文：区域内的各种飞禽走兽，老百姓如果有人去捕猎，就要治罪甚至处以死刑。
English: All kinds of birds and beasts in the region, if people go hunting, they will be punished and even sentenced to death.

古文：御史因之，擅作威福，民有美女、好牛马，求之不得，便诬以犯兽论，民死者相继，海岱、河济之间，民无宁志矣。
现代文：派去的御史也就借此机会，在民众中作威作福，发现民间有美色女子、好牛良马，就要抢占，如果有人不给，就诬陷他捕杀了猎区的禽兽，抓去论罪，老百姓因此而被害死的接连不断，东海与泰山之间、黄河与济水之间，黎民百姓不得安宁。
English: The dispatched imperial historian also took this opportunity to dominate the people and seek their good fortune. When he discovered that the people had beautiful women and good cattle and horses, he had to seize them. If someone did not give it to him, he would frame him for killing the animals in the hunting area and arrest him for a crime. As a result, the people were killed and killed one after another. Between the East Sea and Mount Tai, between the Yellow River and Jishui, the people of Lijiang were not at peace.

古文：又发民牛二万余头，配朔州牧官。
现代文：又征发民间牛二万余头，分配给朔州的牧官管理。
English: In addition, more than 20,000 heads of folk cattle were requisitioned and allocated to the pastoral management of Shuozhou.

古文：增内官二十四等，东宫十二等，诸公侯七十余国，皆为置女官九等。
现代文：又增设女官二十四等，东宫设有十二等，各公侯七十余国，都给他们设置女官九等。
English: In addition, twenty-four grades of court ladies were added, twelve grades were set up in the East Palace, and nine grades of court ladies were set up for the princes of more than seventy countries.

古文：先是，大发民女二十已下、十三已上三万余人，为三等之第，以分配之。
现代文：开初，石虎大量征发民女二十岁以下、十三岁以上的共计三万多人，把她们分为三个等级次第，加以分配。
English: At the beginning of the year, Shihu conscripted a large number of women under the age of 20 and over the age of 13, totaling more than 30,000 people, and divided them into three grades and distributed them.

古文：郡县有希旨，务于美淑，夺人妇者九千余人。
现代文：郡县官吏迎合上面的旨意，专一寻求美貌女子，抢夺人妇达九千余人。
English: County and county officials cater to the will of the above, specifically seeking beautiful women, robbing more than nine thousand women.

古文：民妻有美色，豪势因而胁之，率多自杀。
现代文：老百姓的妻室如果稍有姿色，地方上的豪势就来强行胁迫，许多人都因此而自杀身亡。
English: If a commoner's wife has a bit of grace, the local magnate will come to forcefully coerce her, and many people have committed suicide as a result.

古文：太子、诸公私令采发者，亦垂一万。
现代文：此外，太子和各公侯下令征发的女子，也达到一万人。
English: In addition, the number of women conscripted by order of the prince and the dukes also reached ten thousand.

古文：建国九年，虎遣使朝贡。
现代文：建国九年，石虎曾派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: In the ninth year of the founding of the country, Shihu once sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：虎使其太子宣及宣弟秦公韬递日省可尚书奏事。
现代文：石虎让他的太子石宣和石宣的弟弟秦公石韬轮流交替处置朝中一切政事。
English: Shihu let his prince, Shi Xuan, and Shi Xuan's younger brother, Qin Gong Shijun, take turns handling all political affairs of the dynasty.

古文：宣恶韬侔己，谓嬖人杨柯、牟成等曰： 汝等杀韬，吾入西宫，当以韬之国邑分封汝等。
现代文：石宣对石韬的权力和自己相等非常嫉恨，就对自己的宠信杨杯、牟成等人说： 你们去杀掉石韬，等我当了皇帝之后，就把石韬所享受的国邑分别封赐给你们。
English: Shixuan was very jealous of Shih Kuo's power, which was equal to his own. He said to his favorites Yang Cup, Mucheng and others, "Go and kill Shih Kuo. When I become emperor, I will give you the provinces enjoyed by Shih Kuo."

古文：韬既死，上必亲临，因行大事，亡不济矣。 
现代文：石韬一死，皇上必定亲自去参加葬礼，我们就趁此机会杀了他以成大事，事情肯定会成功的。 
English: As soon as Ishizuchi died, the Emperor would surely go to the funeral in person. We should take this opportunity to kill him and make a big deal out of it. Things would definitely work out.

古文：柯等许诺，乃夜入韬第而杀之。
现代文：杨杯等人答应了，就趁夜晚进入石韬的府第把他杀了。
English: Yang Hai and the others agreed, and they took advantage of the night to enter Shi Yao's mansion and kill him.

古文：虎将出临韬丧，其司空李农谏，乃止。
现代文：石虎准备出来参加石韬的丧礼，他的司空李农极力劝阻，才没有去。
English: Shihu prepared to come out to attend Shi Yao's funeral, but his secretary, Ku Li Nong, tried his best to dissuade him from going.

古文：翌日，有人告之，虎大怒，以铁钚穿宣颔而锁之，作数斗木槽，和以羹饭，以猪狗法食之。
现代文：第二天，有人把事情的真相告诉石虎，石虎大怒，就令人用铁环穿透石宣的颔骨把他锁上，又做了一个几斗大的木槽，把残菜剩饭拌合在一起，像喂猪狗一样喂给石宣吃。
English: The next day, someone told Shihu the truth of the matter. Shihu was furious, so he had someone put an iron ring through Shi Xuan's shinbone to lock him up. He also made a wooden trough several feet in size, mixed together the leftover vegetables and rice, and fed it to Shi Xuan like a pig dog.

古文：取害韬刀仗，舐其上血，号叫之声，震动宫殿。
现代文：又取来杀害石韬用的刀仗，让石宣舔去上面的鲜血，石宣痛哭号叫，叫声震动宫殿。
English: He also brought the sword used to kill Shi Yan, and let Shi Xuan lick the blood off it. Shi Xuan cried out in pain, and his cries shook the palace.

古文：积柴城北，树标其上，标末置鹿卢，穿之以绳。
现代文：然后，石虎叫人在城北堆积一个柴垛，在上面树立一根长大的木杆，树杆上头放置一个滑轮，把绳索穿过滑轮。
English: Then, the stone tiger asked people to pile up a pile of firewood in the north of the city, set up a long wooden pole on it, put a pulley on the top of the pole, and pass the rope through the pulley.

古文：送宣于标所，使韬所亲宦者郝雅、刘灵拔其发，抽其舌，以绳贯其颔，鹿绞上之。
现代文：把石宣送到树立木杆的地方，让石韬的亲信太监郝雅、刘霸拔掉他的头发，抽掉他的舌头，用绳索穿透他的下巴，用滑轮把石宣绞上去挂起来。
English: He sent Shi Xuan to the place where the wooden pole was erected, and let Shi Yan's close friends, the eunuchs Xinya and Liu Ba, pull out his hair, pull out his tongue, use a rope to penetrate his jaw, and use a pulley to hang Shi Xuan.

古文：刘霸断其手足，斫眼溃腹，如韬之伤。
现代文：刘霸用刀砍断了他的手和脚，挖去了眼睛，刮开腹部，都按照石韬所受伤创一样行事。
English: Liu Ba cut off his hands and feet with a knife, gouged out his eyes, and scraped open his abdomen, all of which followed the same pattern as Shi Yao's injuries.

古文：四面纵火，烟焰际天，虎从昭仪已下数千人，登中台以观之。
现代文：然后四面纵火烧着柴垛，浓烟烈火直冲天际，石虎驱使他的昭仪以下数千人，登上铜雀台观看这种情景。
English: After that, firecrackers were set on fire on all four sides, and the thick smoke and flames shot straight up into the sky. Shihu drove thousands of people, including his wife Zhaoyi, to board the Copper Sparrow to watch the scene.

古文：火灭，取灰分置诸门交道中。
现代文：大火熄灭之后，把灰烬取来放置在宫内各个门前和通道中。
English: After the fire was extinguished, the ashes were taken and placed separately in the middle of the crossroads leading to each gate.

古文：杀其妻子二十九人，诛其四率已下三百人，宦者五十人，皆车裂、节解，弃之漳水。
现代文：石虎又杀死石宣的妻子儿女二十九人，诛杀他的东宫卫率以下人员三百人、太监五十人，都是用车裂、节解的刑罚来处置的，处死之后全部扔到漳水之中。
English: Shihu also killed 29 of Shi Xuan's wives and children, as well as 300 people from the Eastern Palace Guard and below, and 50 eunuchs, all of which were punished with chariot cracking and dismemberment. After the execution, they were all thrown into the river.

古文：洿其东宫，以养猪牛。
现代文：石虎还以石宣所居的东宫，用来饲养猪牛。
English: Shihu also used the East Palace, where Shi Xuan lived, to raise pigs and cattle.

古文：十二年，虎自称皇帝，号年太宁。
现代文：建国十二年，石虎自称皇帝，定年号为太宁。
English: In the 12th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Shihu claimed to be the emperor, and his regnal name was Taining.

古文：虎死，少子世僭立。
现代文：石虎死后，他的最小的儿子石世继其位。
English: After the death of Shihu, his youngest son Shi Shihong succeeded him.

古文：虎养孙闵杀世，以世兄遵为主。
现代文：石虎的养孙石闵杀了石世，奉石世的哥哥石遵为主。
English: The foster grandson of Shihu, Shi Hao, killed Shi Shi, and honored Shi Shi's brother, Shi Zun.

古文：遵以闵为大将军辅政。
现代文：石遵授任石闵为大将军并辅佐朝政。
English: Shizun conferred the title of grand general to Shijun and assisted him in governing the court.

古文：遵立七日，大风、雷震、昼昏，火水俱下，灾其太武殿，延及宫内府库，至于阊阖门。
现代文：石遵即位后的第七天，突然刮起大风，雷声震耳，暗无天日，水火一齐成灾，灾祸起于太武殿，延伸到宫禁之内的府库，一直达到阊阖门。
English: On the seventh day after Shizun ascended the throne, a strong wind suddenly blew. The thunder was deafening, the sky was dark, and the water and fire all became a disaster. The disaster started at Taibu-den, extended to the treasury within the palace, and reached all the way to Shimen.

古文：火月余乃灭。
现代文：大火一直烧了一个多月才熄灭。
English: The fire burned for more than a month before it was extinguished.

古文：遵兄鉴，又杀遵而自立，号年青龙。
现代文：石遵的哥哥石鉴，又把石遵杀掉而自立为帝，定年号为青龙。
English: Shizun's brother, Shijian, killed Shizun and became emperor himself. His era name was Qinglong.

古文：鉴弟苞与胡张才、孙伏都等谋杀闵，不克而死。
现代文：石鉴的弟弟石苞与胡张才、孙伏都等人图谋诛杀石闵，未能成功而自取死亡。
English: Shi Jian's younger brother, Shi Jiao, together with Hu Zhangcai, Sun Fudu and others, attempted to kill Shi Jiao, but failed and took his own life.

古文：自凤阳门至琨华殿，积尸如丘，流血成池。
现代文：从凤阳门一直到琨华殿，尸首堆积如山，血流汇成小池。
English: From Fengyang Gate all the way to Yuhua Hall, the corpses piled up like a mountain, and the blood flow merged into a small pool.

古文：大逸豆归部将潜为内应，垂勒兵密进，永奔北门，为前驱所获，垂数而戮之，并斩永公卿已下刁云、大逸豆归等三十余人。
现代文：石闵知道胡人不能为自己所信用，就关闭邺城的四处城门，杀尽城内所有的胡人，晋人有的形貌与胡人相似的也多被滥杀致死。石闵于是就杀掉石鉴而自立为帝，对石氏的人尽行诛灭。
English: Knowing that the Hu people could not be trusted, Shi Yan closed the four gates of Lucheng and killed all the Hu people in the city. Jin people who were similar in appearance to the Hu people were also killed indiscriminately. Shi Yan then killed Shijian and became an emperor himself, annihilating the people of the Shi clan.

古文：永所统新旧民户，及服御、图书、器乐、珍宝，垂尽获之。垂，字道明，元真第五子也。
现代文：石闵本来姓冉，此时就恢复他原来的姓氏。他自称大魏皇帝，定年号为永兴。不久，冉闵被慕容隽擒获。慕容垂，字道明，慕容元真的第五子。
English: Shi Yan's original family name was Ran, but at this time he restored his original family name. He claimed to be the Emperor of the Great Wei Dynasty, and his given name was Yongxing. Soon, Ran was captured by Murong. Murong is the fifth son of Murong Yuancheng.

古文：甚见宠爱，常目而谓诸弟曰： 此兒阔达好奇，终能破人家，或能成人家。 
现代文：小时候很受宠爱，元真经常看着他对诸弟说： 这孩子豁达好奇，终久既能破人家，也能成人家。 
English: When he was a child, he was very much loved. Yuan Zhen often looked at him and said to his younger brothers: This child is open-minded and curious, and will eventually be able to break through others and become an adult.

古文：故名霸，字道业，恩遇逾于俊，故俊不能平之。
现代文：所以取名为霸，字道业，得到父亲的恩遇超过其兄慕容俊，所以慕容俊不能与他平起平坐。
English: Therefore, he took the name of Ba, the word Taoism, and received more favors from his father than his brother Murong Jun, so Murong Jun could not be on an equal footing with him.

古文：及即王位，以垂坠马伤齿，改名为，外以慕却为名，内实恶之。寻以谶记之文，乃去乂，以垂为名焉。
现代文：慕容俊即王位后，因为慕容垂从马上摔下来伤了牙齿，就将他改名为，表面上说是因仰慕谷阝而为之取名，骨子里却是因为厌恶他，不久又凭谶记上的文字，就去掉旁，用 垂 为名。
English: After Murong Jun took the throne, he changed his name to Murong Diao because he fell off his horse and hurt his teeth. On the surface, it was said that he was named because he admired Gu Yao, but in his heart, it was because he disliked him. Soon after, he removed the word "diao" and used "diao" as his name.

古文：年十三，为偏将，所在征伐，勇冠三军。
现代文：慕容垂十三岁时做偏将，每次征伐，勇冠三军。
English: At the age of thirteen, Murongdol became a partial general, and every time he led a campaign, he led three armies to victory.

古文：俊平中原，垂为前锋，累战有大功。
现代文：慕容隽平定中原时，慕容垂当前锋，累战有大功。
English: When Murong Yao conquered the Central Plains, Murong was at the forefront and achieved great success in the war.

古文：及僭尊号，拜黄门郎，出为安东、冀州牧，封吴王。
现代文：慕容隽称帝之后，授给慕容垂黄门郎之职，出任安东、冀州牧，封为吴王。
English: After Murong Qian was proclaimed emperor, he was given the position of Murong Tiehuangmenro, served as the herdsman of Andong and Jizhou, and was crowned King of Wu.

古文：以侍中、右禁将军。录留台事，镇龙城，大收东北之和。
现代文：慕容垂又以侍中、右禁将军之职，总领留台事，镇守龙城，使东北一带得以和平。
English: Murongtai also held the posts of Vice-Commander-in-Chief and General of the Right Division, and remained in Taiwan as commander-in-chief, guarding Longcheng and bringing peace to the northeastern region.

古文：历位镇东、平州、征南大将军、荆兗二州牧、司隶校尉。
现代文：历任镇东、平州牧、征南大将军、荆兖二州牧、司隶校尉等职。
English: He held the posts of Zhendong, Pingzhou herdsman, Southern Expeditionary General, Jingye Erzhou herdsman, and Sili school lieutenant.

古文：以军骑大将军败桓温于枋头，威名大震。
现代文：他因为任车骑大将军时在枋头打败桓温，威名大震。
English: Because he defeated Kuan Wen in Shantou when he was a cavalry general, his prestige was shaken.

古文：不容于暐，西奔苻坚。
现代文：后因受到慕容日韦的忌恶，投奔苻坚。
English: Later, because of the loathing of Murong Sun Wei, he joined Su Jian.

古文：坚甚重之，拜冠军将军，封宾都侯。
现代文：苻坚十分器重他，授以冠军将军，封宾都侯。
English: Zou Jian valued him highly and awarded him the title of champion general and the title of guest of the capital.

古文：坚败于淮南，入于垂军。
现代文：苻坚大败于淮南，投奔慕容垂军。
English: Yu Jian was defeated in Huainan and joined the Murongliao army.

古文：子宝劝垂杀之，垂以坚遇之厚也，不听。
现代文：其子慕容宝劝他杀掉苻坚，他因苻坚曾对他厚遇，不从。
English: His son Murong Bao advised him to kill Xuan Jian, but he refused to do so because Xuan Jian had treated him well.

古文：行至洛阳，请求拜墓，许之，遂起兵。
现代文：行军至洛阳，慕容宝请求拜墓，慕容垂答应了他，于是起兵。
English: Marching to Luoyang, Murong Bao asked to pay homage to the tomb, Murong Tie agreed to this, and the army was raised.

古文：攻苻丕于鄴，乃引漳水以灌之，不没者尺余。
现代文：在邺进攻苻丕，引漳水来灌城，城池被淹没只剩尺余。
English: When the dragon attacked the dragon, it drew the dragon's water to flood the city, and the city was flooded with only a foot or so left.

古文：丁零翟斌怨垂，使人夜往决堰，水溃，故鄴不拔。
现代文：丁零人翟斌怨恨慕容垂，派人乘黑夜掘开堤坝，河水溃退，因此邺城未能攻破。
English: Ding Zili's subordinate Yu Bin resented Mu Rongtui and sent someone to dig a dike in the dark, causing the river to recede. As a result, Yu Cheng was unable to break through.

古文：垂称燕王，置百官，年号燕元。
现代文：于是慕容垂自称燕王，设置百官，定年号为燕元。
English: As a result, Murongtai called himself Yan Wang, set up a hundred officials, and the fixed year was Yan Yuan.

古文：引师去鄴，开苻丕西归之路。
现代文：又率人马攻邺，放开一条路让苻丕弃城西归。
English: He also led his men and horses to attack the castle, opening up a path for the abandoned castle to return to the west.

古文：丕固守鄴城，请援于司马昌明。
现代文：但苻丕固守邺城，派人向司马昌明求援。
English: However, he held fast to Shicheng and sent someone to Sima Changming to ask for help.

古文：垂怒曰： 苻丕，吾纵之不能去，方引南贼规固鄴都，不可置也。 
现代文：慕容垂大怒说： 苻丕，我放开一条路你不走，你还要引来南贼想固守邺都，真是罪不容赦。 
English: Murong Du said angrily, "Ma, if I open a path for you and you don't follow it, and if you try to lure the Southern Thieves to hold on to Xindu, it's really an unforgivable sin.

古文：乃复进师。
现代文：于是又进军攻城。
English: So they marched to attack the city again.

古文：丕乃弃鄴奔并州。
现代文：苻丕只得抛弃邺城逃往并州。
English: He had no choice but to abandon Lucheng and flee to Anhui Province.

古文：垂以兄子鲁阳王和为南中郎将，镇鄴。
现代文：慕容垂任命其兄之子鲁阳王慕容和为南中郎将，镇守邺。
English: Murongdere appointed his brother's son, Luyang Wang Muronghe, as the Southern Vice Admiral and the town's guardian.

古文：垂定都中山。
现代文：慕容垂定都中山。
English: Mt. Murong is located in the center of the capital.

古文：登国元年，垂僭称大位，号年为建兴。
现代文：登国元年，慕容垂称帝，定年号为建兴。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, Murong Du was proclaimed emperor, and his era name was Jianxing.

古文：建宗庙社稷于中山，尽有幽、冀、平州之地。
现代文：在中山修建宗庙社稷，占有幽州、冀州、平州的全部地区。
English: He built his ancestral temple and shrine in Zhongshan, occupying the entire regions of Yuzhou, Jizhou and Pingzhou.

古文：垂遣使朝贡。
现代文：慕容垂派使者前来朝贡。
English: Murong Du sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三年，太祖遣九原公仪使于垂，垂又遣使朝贡。
现代文：登国三年，太祖派九原公拓跋仪出使慕容垂，慕容垂又派遣使者来朝贡。
English: Three years after the Emperor's ascension to the throne, the great-grandfather sent the envoy of Kuyuan Gong Tuoba Yi to Murongdeli, and Murongdeli also sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：四年，太祖遣陈留公虔使于垂，又遣使朝贡。
现代文：登国四年，太祖派陈留公虔出使慕容垂，垂又遣使朝贡。
English: Four years after his ascension to the throne, the great-grandfather sent Chen Liu Gongyan to dispatch an envoy, Mu Rongtui, who in turn sent a tribute.

古文：五年，又遣秦王觚使于垂，垂留觚不遣，遂绝行人。
现代文：登国五年，又派秦王觚出使慕容垂，慕容垂将觚留下不遣还，于是两下就断绝了往来。
English: Five years after the Emperor's ascension to the throne, the Qin King sent an envoy to Murongdiao, but Murongdiao did not send back the envoy, and the two countries broke off diplomatic relations.

古文：垂议讨慕容永，太史令靳安言于垂曰： 彗星经尾箕之分，燕当有野死之王，不出五年，其国必亡，岁在鹑火，必克长子。 
现代文：慕容垂计议讨伐慕容永，太史令靳安向慕容垂进言说： 彗星经尾箕之分，燕国当有野死之王，不出五年，国家必定灭亡，岁在鹑火，必克长子。 
English: Mu Rongtai planned to fight Mu Rongyong, and Taishi ordered Qian An to make a speech to Mu Rongtai, saying: "When the comet passes through the tail fin, Yan's country should be the king of wild death. Within five years, the country will surely perish. The year is in the campfire, and the eldest son will surely die."

古文：垂乃止。
现代文：慕容垂听了才停止计议。
English: Murong listened attentively before stopping the deliberation.

古文：安出而谓人曰： 此众既并，终不能久。 
现代文：靳安出来后对人说： 这些情况既然并行，燕国终究不能长久。 
English: After Xuan An came out, he said to the people: Since these situations are parallel, Yan Guo can't last long.

古文：安意盖知太祖之兴也，而不敢言。
现代文：靳安的本意是知道太祖的兴盛，而不敢说出来。
English: Xuan An's original intention was to know the prosperity of his great-grandfather, but he did not dare to speak out.

古文：先是，丁零翟辽叛垂，后遣使谢罪，垂不许，辽怒，遂自号大魏天王，有众数万，屯于滑台，与垂相击。
现代文：起初，丁零人翟辽背叛慕容垂，后又派使者请罪，慕容垂不答应。翟辽大怒，于是自号大魏天王，拥有数万之众，屯扎在滑台，同慕容垂相抗击。
English: At first, Ding Zi's follower Gong Liao betrayed Murong Diao, and later sent an envoy to plead guilty, but Murong Diao did not agree. Gong Liao was furious, so he called himself the Great Wei Heavenly King, with tens of thousands of people, camped on the slide, and fought with Murong Diao.

古文：辽死，子钊代之，及垂征克滑台，钊奔长子。
现代文：翟辽死后，其子翟钊取代他，及至慕容垂出兵攻克滑台，翟钊就投奔长子。
English: After the death of Gong Liao, his son Gong replaced him, and when Murong Dang sent troops to conquer the slide, Gong joined the eldest son.

古文：垂议征长子，诸将咸谏，以永国未有衅，连岁征役，士卒疲怠，请待他年。
现代文：慕容垂打算征讨长子，诸将都来谏劝，认为永国并没有什么罪过，却连年征役，士卒疲怠，请留待他年再作计议。
English: Murongtli planned to conscript his eldest son, and all the generals came to persuade him, saying that Yongguo did not commit any crime, but he had been conscripted for years, and the soldiers were tired. Please wait for another year to make a decision.

古文：垂将从之。垂弟司徒、范阳王德固劝垂征。
现代文：慕容垂打算听从诸将的意见，但他任司徒的弟弟、范阳王慕容德坚持劝他出征。
English: Murongdeli intended to follow the advice of the generals, but his younger brother, Fan Yang Wang Murongde, who was appointed as a tutor, insisted that he go to war.

古文：垂曰： 司徒议与吾同，二人同心，其利断金。
现代文：慕容垂说： 司徒的意见和我完全相同，二人同心，其利断金。
English: Murong said: "Seto's opinion is exactly the same as mine. The two of us are of the same mind and it's a win-win situation.

古文：吾计决矣。
现代文：我的主意已经定了。
English: My mind is made up.

古文：且吾投老，叩囊底智足以克之，不复留逆贼以累子孙。 
现代文：况且我已到老了，凭自己的智慧足以战胜他，不必再留下逆贼而给子孙带来祸害。 
English: Besides, I am old enough to defeat him with my own wisdom, so I don't have to remain a traitor and bring harm to my descendants.

古文：垂率步骑七万伐永，克之。
现代文：慕容垂率步骑七万征讨永国，终于克敌制胜。
English: Murong led the 70,000-strong expedition against Yongguo at full gallop and finally defeated the enemy.

古文：十年，垂遣其太子宝来寇。时太祖幸河南宫，乃进师临河，筑台告津，奋扬威武，连旌氵公河，东西千有余里。
现代文：登国十年，慕容垂派太子慕容宝来犯，当时太祖驾幸河南宫，于是进军到黄河边，在渡口筑台祷告，振奋军威，军队旌旗相连，沿黄河东西一千多里。
English: In the 10th year of his ascension to the throne, Murong Li sent Prince Murong Bao to invade China. At that time, the great-great-grandfather was visiting the Henan Palace, so he marched to the Yellow River, built a prayer platform at the ferry, invigorated the army, and the army and the flag were connected, more than a thousand miles along the Yellow River.

古文：是时，陈留公虔五万骑在河东，要山截谷六百余里，以绝其左；太原公仪十万骑在河北，以承其后；略阳公遵七万骑塞其南路。
现代文：当时，陈留公虔率五万骑兵在黄河东，在六百余里的山谷地带拦截，以绝其左路；太原公仪率十万骑兵在黄河北，以断其后路；略阳公遵率七万骑塞其南路。
English: At that time, Chen Liugongqian led fifty thousand cavalry in the east of the Yellow River and intercepted it in the valley area of more than six hundred miles to cut off its left path; Taiyuan Gongyi led one hundred thousand cavalry in the north of the Yellow River to cut off its back path; Lioyang Gongzun led seventy thousand cavalry to cut off its south path.

古文：太祖遣捕福宝中山行人，一二尽擒，马步无脱。宝乃引船列兵，亦欲南渡。
现代文：太祖派兵捕捉慕容宝部下将士，全部擒获，马步兵无一漏网，于是慕容宝引船列兵，想要南渡。
English: The great-grandfather sent soldiers to capture Murong Bao's subordinates, all of whom were captured, and none of the horse infantry escaped. Therefore, Murong Bao led the boat of soldiers and wanted to go to the south.

古文：中流，大风卒起，漂宝船数十艘泊南岸，擒其将士三百余人。
现代文：船到中流，大风骤起，将其数十艘战船漂到南岸，太祖军擒获其将士三百余人。
English: When the ship reached the middle of the stream, a strong wind suddenly arose, and dozens of its warships floated to the south bank. The Taizu army captured more than three hundred of its soldiers.

古文：太祖悉赐衣服遣还。
现代文：太祖赐给他们衣服，全部遣送回去。
English: My great-grandfather gave them clothes and sent them all back.

古文：始宝之来，垂已有疾，自到五原，太祖断其行路，父子问绝。
现代文：慕容宝开始来犯之时，慕容垂已经有病，亲自去到五原，太祖断其去路，使他们父子间音讯断绝。
English: When Murong Bao began to commit crimes, Murong Zhuang was already ill and went to Wuhuan in person. The great-grandfather cut off his path and severed communication between the father and son.

古文：太祖乃诡其行人之辞，令临河告之曰： 汝父已死，何不遽还！ 
现代文：太祖又让部下散布谣言，令他们到黄河边告诉慕容宝说： 你父亲已死，为何还不快回！ 
English: The great-grandfather also had his subordinates spread rumors, ordering them to go to the Yellow River to tell Murong Bao: Your father is dead, why are you still not happy to return!

古文：兄弟闻之，忧怖，以为信然。
现代文：他们兄弟听说，十分忧惧，信以为真。
English: When their brothers heard this, they were greatly alarmed and believed it to be true.

古文：于是士卒骇动，往往间言，皆欲为变。
现代文：于是士卒惊骇骚动，四处暗中传言，都想哗变。
English: As a result, the soldiers were shocked and agitated, and there were rumours everywhere that they wanted to mutiny.

古文：初，宝至幽州，其所乘车轴，无故自折，占工靳安以为大凶，固劝令还，宝怒不从。
现代文：当初，慕容宝行至幽州，他所乘坐的车，车轴无缘无故自己断裂，掌占卜的靳安认为这是大凶之兆，坚决劝说他下令归还，慕容宝怒而不从。
English: At first, Murong Bao went to Yuzhou. The axle of the car he was riding in broke itself for no reason. The palm-diviner Yan'an thought this was a sign of great evil. He strongly persuaded him to return the car, but Murong Bao was angry and refused to do so.

古文：至是问安，安对曰： 今天变人事，咎征已集，速去可免。 
现代文：这时他便问靳安，靳安回答说： 如今天数的变化预兆人事，灾祸的征兆已经聚集，速速回去可以免去灾祸。 
English: At this time, he asked Xuan An, and Xuan An replied: If today's changes in the number of omen personnel, the signs of disaster have gathered, go back quickly to avoid disaster.

古文：宝逾大恐。
现代文：慕容宝越发感到恐惧。
English: Murong Bao became more and more frightened.

古文：安退而告人曰： 今皆将死于他乡，尸骸委于草野，为乌鸟蝼蚁所食，不复见家矣。 
现代文：靳安退出来对他人说： 我们现在全都将死于他乡，尸骸将抛弃于草野，被乌鸟蝼蚁吃掉，不能再见到家乡了。 
English: Yan An stepped out and said to the others: "We are all going to die in a foreign land now. Our corpses will be left in the meadow, eaten by blackbirds and ants, and we will never see our hometown again."

古文：冬十月，宝烧船夜遁。
现代文：这年冬天十月，慕容宝烧掉战船连夜逃遁。
English: In October of that winter, Murong Bao burned the warship and fled overnight.

古文：是时，河冰未成，宝谓太祖不能渡，故不设斥候。
现代文：当时，黄河还未结冰，慕容宝认为太祖不能渡河，所以没有派人放哨。
English: At that time, the Yellow River had not yet frozen, and Murong Bao thought that Taizu could not cross the river, so he did not send anyone to keep watch.

古文：十一月，天暴风寒，冰合。
现代文：十一月，突然大风降温，黄河冰冻。
English: In November, the wind suddenly dropped and the Yellow River froze.

古文：太祖进军济河，留辎重，简精锐二万余骑急追之，晨夜兼行，暮至参合陂西。
现代文：太祖进军渡河，选精锐二万余骑轻装急追，晨夜兼行，傍晚到达参合陂以西。
English: The great ancestor marched into the river crossing, selected more than twenty thousand elite riders, lightly loaded, and hurriedly chased, traveling in the morning and evening, and reaching the west of Sangheili in the evening.

古文：宝在陂东，营于蟠羊山南水上。
现代文：幕容宝在参合陂东，扎营在蟠羊山南水上。
English: Mak Rong Bao camped in the eastern part of Shenhe, and camped in the southern part of Shanyang Mountain.

古文：靳安言于宝曰： 今日西北风劲，是追军将至之应，宜设警备，兼行速去，不然必危。 
现代文：靳安对慕容宝说： 今天西北风很大，这是追兵将至的预兆，应立即设警备，派人兼行速去，不然必定十分危险。 
English: Hao An said to Murong Bao: Today, the northwest wind is very strong. This is an omen that the pursuit will come. You should immediately set up a guard and send someone to go at the same time. Otherwise, it will be very dangerous.

古文：宝乃使人防后。
现代文：慕容宝就派人防后。
English: Murong Bao sent guards to the scene.

古文：先步抚循，军无节度，将士莫为尽心，行十余里，便皆解鞍寝卧，不觉大军在近。
现代文：由于事先没有对将士进行安抚，军队失去控制，将士们没有谁愿意替他尽心打仗，行走十余里，就都解鞍寝卧，没有发觉对方大军就在附近。
English: Since there was no prior appeasement of the soldiers, the army lost control, and the soldiers had no one who was willing to fight for him wholeheartedly. After walking more than ten miles, they all unsaddled and lay down, without noticing that the other side's army was nearby.

古文：前驱斥候，见宝军营，还告。
现代文：太祖军的前哨发现慕容宝的军营，立即回报。
English: An outpost of Taizu's army found Murongbao's camp and immediately returned.

古文：其夜，太祖部分众军相援，诸将罗落东西，为掎角之势。
现代文：当天深夜，太祖布署众军相援，诸将排列埋伏于东西两侧，成犄角之势。
English: In the late evening of the same day, Taizu dispatched his troops to help, and they lined up and ambushed on both sides of the east and west, creating a tense situation.

古文：约勒士卒，束马口，衔枚无声。
现代文：太祖约束士卒，缚住马口，衔枚无声。
English: The great-grandfather restrained the soldiers, tied the horse's mouth, and made no sound.

古文：昧爽，众军齐进，日出登山，下临其营。
现代文：拂晓，众军齐进，日出时登上山，从上监视着慕容宝的军营。
English: At dawn, the army marched in. At sunrise, they climbed the mountain and watched Murong Bao's camp from above.

古文：宝众晨将东引，顾见军至，遂惊扰奔走。
现代文：慕容宝军打算一早就向东退却，看见太祖军至，纷纷惊扰奔逃。
English: Murong Bao's army planned to retreat to the east early in the morning, but when they saw Taizu's army approaching, they panicked and fled.

古文：太祖纵骑腾蹑，大破之，有马者皆蹶倒冰上，自相镇压，伤者万数。
现代文：太祖纵马腾跃，大破慕容军。慕容宝军中有马的都仆倒在冰上，自相踏压，死伤者数以万计。
English: The great ancestor pranced his horse and defeated the Murong army. All the horses in the Murong treasure army fell down on the ice and trampled each other, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths and injuries.

古文：宝乃诸父兄弟，单马迸散，仅以身免。
现代文：慕容宝及诸父兄弟，都单人匹马各自奔散，仅免于死。
English: Murong Bao and his brothers all ran away separately, only to be saved from death.

古文：于是宝军四五万人，一时放仗，敛手就羁矣。
现代文：于是，慕容宝军四五万人，一时间都放下兵器，束手就擒。
English: As a result, Murong Bao's army of forty to fifty thousand men all laid down their weapons at once and went to sleep.

古文：其遗迸去者不过千余人。
现代文：其余奔逃的不过千余人。
English: The rest, just over a thousand, fled.

古文：生擒其王公文武将吏数千，获宝宠妻及宫人，器甲、辎重、军资杂财十余万计。
现代文：这一仗，生擒慕容氏王公文武将吏数千人，俘获慕容宝的宠妻及宫人、器甲、辎重、军资杂财十余万计。
English: In this battle, thousands of princes, generals and military officers of the Murong clan were killed, and more than 100,000 pieces of treasure, including Murong Bao's favorite wife and courtiers, armor, baggage, military equipment and miscellaneous wealth, were captured.

古文：垂复欲来寇，太史曰： 太白夕没西方，数日后见东方，此为躁兵，先举者亡。 
现代文：慕容垂又一次想来犯，太史对他说： 太白星晚上没于西方，数日后才现于东方，这是浮躁之兵，先发者必定灭亡。 
English: Murongdeli once again wanted to commit a crime, and Taishi said to him: Taibai Xing did not appear in the west in the evening, and only appeared in the east a few days later. This is an impetuous soldier, and the first mover will surely perish.

古文：旦而侍婢以告，法与弟坚率壮士数百人入云龙门，宿卫者皆舍仗归坚。
现代文：慕容垂不从，凿山开道以进军。到先前慕容宝兵败之处，看见骨骸堆积如丘，便设祭悼念。
English: However, Murong did not comply, and he chiseled a path through the mountains to advance. When he arrived at the place where Murong Bao had been defeated, he saw the bones piled up like a hill, so he set up a memorial service.

古文：废生为越王，俄而杀之。
现代文：死者的父兄子弟都痛哭呼号，声震山川。慕容垂惭愤交加，呕血发病而还，死于上谷。
English: The father, brother and children of the deceased all cried out in anguish, and the sound shook the mountains and rivers. Murong was so ashamed and angry that he vomited blood and died in the upper valley.

古文：坚，字永固，一字文玉，雄第二子也。
现代文：慕容宝僭位。苻坚，字永固，又字文玉，是苻雄的第二个儿子。
English: Murong Baojun. Murong Jian, also known as Murong Yonggu, is the second son of Murong Xiong.

古文：既杀苻生，以位让其兄清河王法，法固以推坚。
现代文：苻坚杀了苻生之后，把皇位让给他的哥哥清河王苻法，苻法不肯，坚决推举苻坚为王。
English: After Gong Jian killed his son, he ceded the throne to his brother, Qinghe King Gong Fa. Gong Fa refused and resolutely promoted Gong Jian as king.

古文：于是去皇帝之号，僭称天王，号年永兴。
现代文：于是苻坚免去皇帝的称号，自称天王，定年号为永兴。
English: As a result, Yan Jian was exempted from the title of emperor and called himself Tianwang, with the fixed era name of Yongxing.

古文：以法为丞相、东海公，寻以疑忌杀之。
现代文：授任苻法为丞相、东海公，不久因为对他有怀疑猜忌之心而把他杀掉。
English: He appointed Xingfa as chancellor and governor of the East Sea, but soon killed him because he was suspicious of him.

古文：改年为甘露，时建国二十二年也。
现代文：把年号改为甘露，当时是皇魏建国二十二年。
English: The year was changed to the 22nd year of the reign of Emperor Wei.

古文：坚从弟晋公柳反于蒲坂，魏公庾反于陕，燕公武反于安定，坚弟赵公双反于上邽，皆讨平之。
现代文：苻坚的堂弟晋公苻柳在薄坂反叛，魏公苻庾在陕反叛，燕公苻武在安定反叛，苻坚的弟弟赵公苻双在上圭阝反叛，苻坚都发兵征讨一一予以平定。
English: Yan Jian's cousin Jin Gong Baoliu rebelled in Huzhan, Wei Gong Yao rebelled in Shaanxi, Yan Gong Baowu rebelled in Ding'an, and Yan Jian's younger brother Zhao Gong Yao rebelled in Shanggui, all of which Yan Jian sent troops to quell.

古文：慕容垂奔于坚，王猛劝坚杀之，坚不从。
现代文：慕容垂兵败投奔于苻坚，王猛劝苻坚把他杀掉，苻坚没有照办。
English: Defeated, Murong Tiao's soldiers rushed to Xuanjian. Wang Meng advised Xuanjian to kill him, but Xuanjian did not comply.

古文：三十八年，改为建元。
现代文：建国二十八年，苻坚改年号为建元。
English: In the 28th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Jian Jian changed his name to Jian Yuan.

古文：坚遣使牛恬朝贡。
现代文：他曾派遣使者牛恬前来朝贡。
English: He had sent the envoy Niulang to pay tribute.

古文：使尚书令王猛伐鄴，坚亲率大众以继之。
现代文：苻坚派尚书令王猛率兵进攻邺城，他自己亲自督率大军作为后续。
English: Zou Jian sent Shang Shu to order Wang Meng to lead the troops to attack the city of Handan, and he personally led the army as a follow-up.

古文：克鄴，擒慕容暐。
现代文：攻占邺城之后，将慕容日韦生擒。
English: After the capture of Lucheng, Murong will grow day by day.

古文：坚使其右将军杨安攻克汉中，仍平蜀；又遣其武卫将军苟苌西伐凉州，降张天锡；遣其子长乐公丕攻克襄阳。
现代文：苻坚派遣他的右将军杨安攻克了汉中，接着平定蜀地；又派他的武卫将军苟苌向西讨伐凉州，张天锡被迫投降；派他的儿子长乐公苻丕攻占了襄阳。
English: Yu Jian sent his right-hand general Yang An to conquer Hanzhong and then Shu; he also sent his general of the armed forces Guo Wei to fight in the west against Liangzhou, and Zhang Tianxi was forced to surrender; he sent his son Changle Gongyi to conquer Xiangyang.

古文：坚观其史书，见母苟氏通李威之事，惭怒，乃焚其书。
现代文：有一次苻坚阅读史书，见到其中记载母亲苟氏与李威私通之事，感到十分羞惭恼怒，就把书全都烧掉了。
English: On one occasion, Yu Jian was reading a history book, and when he saw the story of his mother's adultery with Li Wei, he was so ashamed and angry that he burned all the books.

古文：坚南伐司马昌明，戎卒六十万，骑二十七万，前后千里，旗鼓相望。
现代文：苻坚向南大举进攻东晋司马昌明，发步兵六十万、骑兵二十七万，军队浩浩荡荡，前后千里相接，旗鼓相望。
English: Yu Jian launched a large-scale attack to the south against East Jin Sima Changming, dispatching 600,000 infantrymen, 270,000 cavalrymen, and a vast army, thousands of miles apart and facing each other.

古文：坚至项城，凉州兵始达咸阳，蜀汉之军，顺流而下，幽冀之众，至于彭城，东西万里，水陆齐进，运漕万艘，自河入石门，达于汝颍。
现代文：苻坚已经到了项城，从凉州出发的军队才到达咸阳，蜀地、汉中的军队，顺水路而下，幽州、冀州的军队，也进发到了彭城，从东至西万里之地，水路陆路同时进军，运送漕粮的船只累以万计，从黄河进入石门，抵达汝、颍。
English: Yu Jian had already arrived in Xiangcheng. The army from Liangzhou only arrived in Xianyang. The army from Shu and Hanzhong went down the waterway. The army from Yuzhou and Jizhou also went to Pengcheng. From the east to the west, there were thousands of miles of land and water routes. There were tens of thousands of ships transporting grain. From the Yellow River, they entered Shimen and arrived in Ru and Handan.

古文：坚弟阳平公融攻寿春，克之。
现代文：苻坚的弟弟阳平公苻融进攻寿春，并占领了它。
English: Yan Jian's younger brother Yang Ping Gong Rong Rong attacked Shuchun and occupied it.

古文：融驰使白坚曰： 贼少易俘，但惧越逸，宜速进军。 
现代文：苻融派出使者驰报苻坚说： 敌兵人少容易俘获，只是怕他们突围逃跑，应当快速进军攻击。 
English: Gong Rong sent an envoy to report to Gong Jian and said: The enemy soldiers are few and easy to capture, but if they are afraid to break through and escape, they should quickly march to attack.

古文：坚大悦，舍大军于项城，轻骑八千，兼道赴之。
现代文：苻坚大喜，就将大部队留在项城，亲自统领八千轻骑，日夜兼程赶赴前线。
English: Yu Jian was overjoyed, so he left the large force in Xiangcheng, personally led eight thousand light cavalry, and rushed to the front line day and night.

古文：坚与融登城，望昌明将谢石军，又望八公山上草木皆类人形，顾谓融曰： 此亦劲敌也，何谓少乎！ 
现代文：苻坚与苻融一道登上城楼，望见晋将谢石统领的军队，又看见八公山上的草木，全都像是人的形状，苻坚回头对苻融说： 这也是一支强劲的军队啊，怎么说他们人数很少呢！ 
English: Yu Jian and Yu Rong ascended the city tower together, saw the army led by Jin general Xie Shizhu, and saw the plants and trees on the Eight Mountains, all resembling human shapes. Yu Jian turned to Yu Rong and said, "This is also a strong army, how can you say they are few in number!"

古文：怃然有惧色。
现代文：顿时茫然自失，面有惧色。
English: He was suddenly at a loss, and his face was pale with fear.

古文：谢石欲战，苻融陈逼肥水，石遣使谓融曰： 君若小退师，令将士周旋，仆与君公缓辔而观之，不亦美也？ 
现代文：谢石想要迎战，苻融就紧靠肥水布阵，阻挡晋军，谢石派使者前去对苻融说： 你倘若把军队稍稍后退，让双方将士得以交战，我与你骑马缓行从容观战，不是很好吗？ 
English: Xie Shih wanted to meet the battle, Zhaoyong was close to the fertile water formation, blocking the Jin army. Xie Shih sent an envoy to Zhaoyong and said: If you pull the army back a little, so that the soldiers of both sides can fight, I will ride slowly with you to watch the battle, isn't it good?

古文：融于是麾军却陈，欲因其济，覆而取之。
现代文：苻融于是就指挥军队向后退却，指望乘晋军渡水之机，回师而战将其打败。
English: Yan Rong then commanded the army to retreat, hoping to take advantage of the opportunity of the Jin army to cross the water, return to the division and defeat it.

古文：军遂奔退，制之不可止。
现代文：谁知军队后退时乱了阵脚，竞相奔走，想要制止已经来不及。
English: Who knew that when the army retreated, it was in disarray, racing to run, and it was too late to stop it.

古文：融马倒见杀，军遂大败。
现代文：苻融因坐骑倒地而被杀，军队大败而逃。
English: Zhaoyong was killed when his horse fell to the ground, and the army was defeated and fled.

古文：谢石乘胜追击，至于青冈，死者相枕。
现代文：谢石乘胜挥兵追击，一直追杀到青冈，苻坚军死者甚众，尸首相互枕藉。
English: Xie Shi took advantage of the victory to pursue the troops and chased them all the way to Qinggang. There were a lot of dead soldiers, and the corpses were lying next to each other.

古文：坚单骑遁还淮北。
现代文：苻坚也落得单人独骑逃回淮水之北。
English: Yan Jian also managed to escape back to the north of Huai Shui on his own.

古文：初，谣言曰： 坚不出项。
现代文：当初，有歌谣传说： 坚不出项。 
English: In the beginning, there was a song and a legend: There is no such thing as a solid item.

古文：君臣劝坚停项，为六军声镇，坚不从。
现代文：群臣都劝说苻坚就停留在项城不要出击，以其声威安定军心，鼓舞士气，但苻坚不听。
English: The group of courtiers all persuaded Yu Jian to stay in Xiangcheng and not to attack, and to use his authority to stabilize the military spirit and boost morale, but Yu Jian did not listen.

古文：诸军悉溃，唯其冠军慕容垂一军独全，坚以千余骑赴之。
现代文：苻坚所部诸军全都溃败，惟独他的冠军将军慕容垂所率领的一支军队得以保全，苻坚只得带领一千多骑兵投入慕容垂军中。
English: He Jian's armies were all routed, but only one army led by his champion general Murongtang was saved. He Jian had to lead more than a thousand cavalry into Murongtang's army.

古文：收集离散，比至洛阳，众十余万。
现代文：一路收容集合逃散的士卒，及至到达洛阳，共得部众十余万。
English: All the way to Luoyang, more than one hundred thousand escaped soldiers were received.

古文：行未及关，垂有贰志，说坚请巡抚燕代，并求拜墓，许之。
现代文：行军还没有到达潼关，慕容垂有背叛之意，向苻坚请求让他巡抚燕、代等地，并要求准他上坟扫墓，苻坚准许他的请求。
English: The march had not yet reached Shaoguan. Murong, with an air of treachery, asked Zou Jian to let him supervise Yan and other places, and asked for permission to go to the grave to sweep the grave. Zou Jian granted his request.

古文：垂遂杀坚骁骑将军石越、镇军将军毛当，引丁零之众攻坚子长乐公丕于鄴。
现代文：慕容垂就杀死了苻坚部将骁骑将军石越、镇军将军毛当，率领丁零的部众在邺城攻击苻坚的儿子长乐公苻丕。
English: Murongtui then killed the commander of Yu Jian's cavalry, General Shi Yue, and the general of the town's army, Mao Dang, and led the troops of Ding Zi to attack Yu Jian's son, Changle Gongyi, in Yu City.

古文：慕容泓、冲起兵华泽，坚遣子叡、晖前后击泓，为泓所败。
现代文：慕容泓、慕容冲也在华泽起兵，苻坚派遣两个儿子苻睿又和苻晖前后夹击慕容泓，被慕容泓打败。
English: Murong Yao and Murong Chong also raised an army in Huazhe. Zou Jian dispatched his two sons Zha Rui and He He to attack Murong Yao and was defeated by Murong Yao.

古文：长安鬼夜哭三旬。
现代文：长安有鬼在夜晚哭泣，整整三十天。
English: A ghost in Chang'an has been crying at night for a full 30 days.

古文：冲又击杀坚将姜宇于灞上，遂屯阿房，进逼长安。
现代文：慕容冲又在灞上进击，杀死了苻坚部将姜宇，于是屯兵阿房，进逼长安。
English: Murongchong attacked again in Shijiazhuang, killed the commander of Shijiazhuang Jianbu, Jiang Yu, and then the troops of A Fang marched into Chang'an.

古文：坚登城观之，叹曰： 此虏何从而出？
现代文：苻坚登上城楼观看敌军，叹息说： 这股虏贼是从哪里钻出来的？
English: Zou Jian went up to the city tower to watch the enemy army, sighed and said: Where did this band of robbers come from?

古文：其强若斯！ 
现代文：阵容竟如此强大！ 
English: The line-up is so strong!

古文：大言责冲曰： 尔辈群奴，正可牧牛羊，何为送死！ 
现代文：他大声责骂慕容冲，说： 你们这群奴才，正适合去放牧牛羊，为什么跑到这里来送死？ 
English: He loudly scolded Murongchong, saying: "You bunch of slaves, you are just fit to graze cattle and sheep, why did you come here to die?

古文：冲曰： 奴则奴矣，既厌奴苦，取尔见代。 
现代文：慕容冲回答说： 奴才就奴才，我们早已厌恶奴才之苦，现在就要除掉你而代之。 
English: Murongchong replied, "A slave is a slave. We have long been disgusted with the suffering of slaves. Now we are going to get rid of you and replace you.

古文：坚遣使送锦袍一领遗冲，便者称有诏： 古人兵交，使在其间。
现代文：苻坚派遣使者把一领锦袍赠送给慕容冲，使者声称苻坚有诏令说： 自古以来两家交兵，使者往返其间。
English: Zou Jian sent an envoy to present a necklace of brocade robes to Murong Chong. The envoy claimed that Zou Jian had a decree saying: Since ancient times, the two families have exchanged soldiers, and the envoy went back and forth between them.

古文：卿远来草创，得无劳乎？
现代文：你远道而来初次交战，难道不感到辛劳吗？
English: Don't you find it hard to come all this way for your first engagement?

古文：今送一袍，以明本怀。
现代文：现在送给你锦袍一领，以表示我对你的关怀。
English: Now I am giving you a brocade collar to show my concern for you.

古文：朕于卿恩分如何，而于一朝忽为此变？ 
现代文：我对于你们的恩惠如何，而你等为什么要在一朝之间忽然作出这种叛变的举动？ 
English: What is my favour to you, and why do you suddenly commit this act of treason?

古文：冲命詹事答之，亦称皇太弟有令： 孤今心在天下，岂顾一袍小惠。
现代文：慕容冲令他的詹事回答，也自称是皇太弟有令： 我如今志在取得天下，难道会看得起一件锦袍这种小恩小惠。
English: Murong rushed to answer his question, and also claimed to be the crown prince's younger brother: I am now aiming to conquer the world, can I really afford such a small favor as a brocade robe?

古文：苟能知命，便可君臣束手，早送皇帝。
现代文：如果你还能懂得天命，就应当君臣一起束手就擒，早早交出皇帝之位。
English: If you can still understand the destiny of heaven, you should be a monarch and a minister together, and surrender the emperor's position early.

古文：自当宽贷苻氏，以酬曩好，终不使既往之事，独美于前。 
现代文：我自然会饶恕宽免你苻氏之人，以报答你昔日的友善，终究不能把早已过去了的事情，拿到现在来特加赞美。 
English: Of course, I will forgive and pardon the people of your family to repay your past friendliness. After all, I can't take things that have long since passed and praise them now.

古文：坚大怒曰： 朕不用王景略、阳平公之言，使白虏敢至于此！ 
现代文：苻坚听罢大怒，说： 我没有采纳王景略和阳平公的意见，致使慕容氏竟敢如此猖狂。 
English: Hearing this, Yu Jian lost his temper and said, "I did not adopt the opinions of Wang Jingliu and Yang Pingguo, which made Murong dare to be so reckless."

古文：长安大饥，人民相食。
现代文：长安城大闹饥荒，百姓相互以人为食。
English: Famine was rampant in Chang'an, and people resorted to cannibalism.

古文：姚苌叛于北地，与冲连和，合攻长安。
现代文：姚苌在北地反叛，与慕容冲联合，合兵攻打长安。
English: Yao Wei rebelled in the north and joined forces with Murong Chong to attack Chang'an.

古文：有君乌数万，鸣于长安城上，其声甚悲，占者以为不终年，有甲兵入城之象。
现代文：当时有数以万计的一群乌鸦，在长安城上鸣叫不止，叫声十分悲戚，占卜的人认为，这是不到年末就会有甲兵入城的征候。
English: At that time, there was a flock of tens of thousands of crows chirping incessantly on Chang'an City. Their cries were very mournful, and soothsayers believed that this was a sign that there would be soldiers entering the city before the end of the year.

古文：每夜有人周城大呼曰： 杨定健兒应属我，宫殿台观应坐我，父子同出不共汝。 
现代文：每天夜里有人围绕城墙大声呼喊道： 杨定健儿应属我，宫殿台观应坐我，父子同出不共汝。 
English: Every night, someone around the city wall shouted loudly: Yang Dingjian should belong to me, the palace stage should be my seat, father and son should not go out together.

古文：旦遣寻求，不见人迹。
现代文：天亮以后四处寻找，却不见人迹。
English: After dawn, they searched everywhere, but there was no sign of anyone.

古文：先是，又谣曰： 坚入五将山长得。 
现代文：起初，又有谣谚说： 坚入五将山能得以长久。 
English: At the beginning, there was also a saying: "If you stick to the five virtues, you can last a long time."

古文：坚大信之，告其太子永道曰： 天或导余，脱如谣言。
现代文：苻坚对此十分相信，对太子苻永道说： 也许是上天引导我，要想免除灾祸就要如同谣言所说那样做。
English: Yu Jian fully believed this and said to Prince Yu Yongdao: "Perhaps the heavens are guiding me. If you want to avoid disaster, you should do as the rumor says."

古文：留汝兼总戎政，勿与贼争利。
现代文：现在把你留在这里总领军事和政务，不要同贼寇争一时之利。
English: Now leave you here in charge of military and political affairs, and do not fight with the bandits for momentary gain.

古文：吾当出陇收兵，运粮以给汝。
现代文：我当即到陇地征集兵马，运送粮草供给你。
English: I immediately went to Shantou to recruit soldiers and horses to transport grain and grass for you.

古文：天其或者正训予也。 
现代文：上天或许正在训导我哩。 
English: Maybe the gods are training me.

古文：遣其卫将军杨定击冲于城西，为冲所擒。
现代文：苻坚派遣他的卫将军杨定在城西攻击慕容冲，杨定被慕容冲生擒。
English: Yu Jian sent his guard general Yang Ding to attack Murong Chong in the west of the city. Yang Ding was defeated by Murong Chong.

古文：坚弥惧，付永道以后事，率骑数百出如五将，宣告州郡，期救长安。
现代文：苻坚越发恐惧，就把后事委付给苻永道，率领数百名骑兵突围到五将山，宣示各个州郡，积聚力量以期援救长安。
English: Yu Jian became more and more frightened, so he sent the post-incident committee to Yu Yongdao, led hundreds of cavalry to break through to Wuzhong Mountain, announced to all states and counties, and gathered strength in order to rescue Chang'an.

古文：月余，永道寻将母妻、宗室、男女数千骑出奔武都，遂假道入司马昌明。
现代文：过了一个多月，苻永道随即带领母亲妻子、宗室男女和数千骑兵逃出，奔往武都，借道投奔司马昌明。
English: After more than a month, Gong Yongdao immediately led his mother and wife, male and female members of his family, and thousands of cavalry to flee to Wudu and then to Sima Changming.

古文：慕容冲入据长安。
现代文：慕容冲便占据了长安。
English: Murongchong then occupied Chang'an.

古文：坚至五将山，姚苌遣其将吴忠围之。
现代文：苻坚到了五将山后，姚苌派大将吴忠把他包围起来。
English: After Yu Jian reached Wuzhong Mountain, Yao Hong sent General Wu Zhong to surround him.

古文：坚众奔散，独左右十数人，神色自若，坐而待之，召宰人进食。
现代文：苻坚的部下四面逃散，只剩下他的左右十多人，但苻坚依旧神色自若，坐等敌军的到来，并叫掌管膳食的官员为他进奉饮食。
English: Yu Jian's subordinates fled in all directions, leaving only his left and right more than ten people, but Yu Jian still looked confident, sat waiting for the arrival of the enemy army, and asked the officials in charge of meals to serve him meals.

古文：俄而兵至，执坚及其夫人张氏与少女宝锦，送诣姚苌。
现代文：没过多久，吴忠领兵到来，捉拿了苻坚和他的夫人张氏以及他的幼女宝锦，并把他们送到姚苌那里。
English: Not long after, Wu Zhong arrived to lead the soldiers and captured Yu Jian, his wife Zhang, and his infant daughter Baojin, and sent them to Yao Yao.

古文：苌囚之，将害焉。
现代文：姚苌把他们囚禁起来，准备杀害他们。
English: Yao Yao locked them up and prepared to kill them.

古文：坚自以平生遇苌厚，忿之，厉声大骂，谓张氏曰： 岂令羌奴辱吾兒！ 
现代文：苻坚自认为平素对待姚苌非常宽厚，见他这样做感到十分愤怒，就厉声大骂姚苌忘恩负义，并对张氏说： 我怎能让姚苌这个羌奴侮辱我的女儿？ 
English: Yu Jian thought that he had always treated Yao Yao very generously. Seeing him do this, he felt very angry. He shouted at Yao Yao for being ungrateful, and said to Mr. Zhang: How can I let Yao Yao, this scoundrel, insult my daughter?

古文：苌死，子兴袭位，秘不发丧。
现代文：于是就亲手把宝锦杀死。姚苌就把苻坚吊死在新平的一座佛寺内。
English: After the death of Yao Xuan, his son Yao Xing succeeded to the throne, concealing that he was not in mourning.

古文：兴，字子略，苌长子也。
现代文：苻永道投奔司马昌明，被安置在江州，后来桓玄任用他为梁州刺史，最终被刘裕所杀。
English: Yan Yongdao defected to Sima Changming and was placed in Jiangzhou. Later, Huan Xuan appointed him as a historian of Liangzhou, and he was eventually killed by Liu Yu.

古文：既灭苻登，乃发丧行服，僭称皇帝于槐里，号年皇初。
现代文：永道的名犯了高祖的庙讳。姚兴，字子略，是姚苌的长子。姚兴消灭苻登后，才为父亲办理丧事，服丧守孝，在槐里自称皇帝，定年号为皇初。
English: Yongdao's name violated the temple taboo of Gao Zu. Yao Xing, abbreviated, is the eldest son of Yao Xing. After Yao Xing eliminated Xing Deng, he only handled the funeral for his father, paid his respects, and called himself emperor in Xingli, with the fixed year as the beginning of the emperor.

古文：天兴元年，兴去皇帝之号，降称天王，号年洪始。
现代文：大魏天兴二年，姚兴自己免去皇帝的称号，降称天王，定年号为弘始。
English: In the second year of the Great Wei Emperor Tianxing, Yao Xing himself was exempted from the title of emperor, reduced to the title of emperor, and the fixed year was Hongshi.

古文：兴克洛阳，以其弟东平公绍镇之。
现代文：姚兴派兵攻克洛阳，令他的弟弟东平公姚绍在此镇守。
English: Yao Xing sent troops to attack Klooyang and ordered his brother Dongping Gong Yao Shao to defend the town.

古文：三年，兴遣使朝贡，太祖遣谒者仆射张济使于兴。
现代文：天兴三年，姚兴派遣使者前来朝贡，太祖派谒者仆射张济出使姚兴。
English: In the third year of Tianxing, Yao Xing sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor. The great-grandfather sent Zhang Jizhi to send Yao Xing.

古文：兴又大破乞伏乾归，遂入枹罕，获铠马六万匹，乾归降于兴。
现代文：姚兴又大破乞伏乾归，于是占领了粃罕，缴获带着铠甲的战马六万匹，乞伏乾归向姚兴投降。
English: Yao Xing also made a great effort to beg the Qianbei to return, so he occupied Shuhan, captured sixty thousand horses with armor, and begged the Qianbei to surrender to Yao Xing.

古文：太祖遣军袭兴高平公没弈于，于弃部众，率数千骑与赫连屈孑奔于秦州。
现代文：太祖派遣军队袭击姚兴所属高平公没弈于，没弈于抛弃他的部众，率领数千骑兵同赫连屈孑逃奔到秦州。
English: The great-great-grandfather sent troops to attack Gaoping Gong, who belonged to Yao Xing, did not hesitate, did not hesitate to abandon his subordinates, and led thousands of cavalrymen to flee to Qinzhou with He Lian Qu.

古文：追至于瓦亭，长安震惧。
现代文：魏军追击他们到了瓦亭，长安城中为之震惊恐惧。
English: The Wei army chased them to Watei, causing shock and fear in Chang'an City.

古文：兴大议为寇，其臣咸以为不可，兴不从。
现代文：姚兴与众臣商议要攻击魏军，臣僚们都认为不可贸然行事，姚兴不听。
English: Yao Xing and his ministers discussed attacking the Wei army. The ministers all believed that they should not act rashly, but Yao Xing did not listen.

古文：天兴五年夏，兴遣其弟义阳公平率众四万侵平阳，攻乾壁六十余日，壁中众少失井，乃陷之。
现代文：天兴五年夏天，姚兴派他的弟弟义阳公姚平率领四万人马入侵平阳，围攻乾壁达六十多天，因乾壁守军人少又缺乏井水，终于被攻陷。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of Tianxing, Yao Xing sent his younger brother, Yiyang Gong Yao Ping, to invade Pingyang, leading forty thousand horses. They besieged the dry wall for more than sixty days. Due to the small number of soldiers guarding the dry wall and the lack of well water, they were finally defeated.

古文：六月，太祖将讨平，遣毗陵王顺等三军六万骑为先锋。
现代文：同年六月，太祖准备讨伐姚平，派毗陵王拓跋顺等人率三军六万骑作为先锋。
English: In June of the same year, Taizu prepared to fight against Yao Ping, and sent Viling Wang Tuo Busun and others to lead the three armies of sixty thousand cavalry as the vanguard.

古文：七月，车驾亲征；八月，次于永安。
现代文：七月，太祖亲自出征；八月，太祖军临时驻扎在永安。
English: In July, Emperor Taizu personally went to the front; in August, Emperor Taizu's army was temporarily stationed in Yongan.

古文：平募遣勇将，率精骑二百窥军，为太祖前锋将长孙肥所擒，匹马不返。
现代文：姚平派遣勇猛的部将，率精锐骑兵二百人前来窥视魏军，被太祖的前锋将领长孙肥擒获，连一匹马也未能逃脱。
English: Yao Ping dispatched brave generals and led 200 elite cavalrymen to spy on the Wei army. They were captured by the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner of the forerunner.

古文：平遂退走，太祖急追，及于柴壁。
现代文：姚平只得退兵逃走，太祖发兵紧追不放，一直到达柴壁。
English: Yao Ping had no choice but to retreat and run away. The great-great-grandfather pursued the soldiers relentlessly until they reached the wall of firewood.

古文：平因守固，太祖围之，兴乃悉举其众救平。
现代文：姚平在此固守不出，太祖派兵将其包围，姚兴就带领他的全部军队前往解救姚平。
English: Yao Ping could not hold out here, the Great Ancestor sent soldiers to surround him, and Yao Xing led his entire army to rescue Yao Ping.

古文：太祖闻兴将至，增筑重围，内以防平之出，外以拒兴之入。
现代文：太祖听说姚兴将要到来，就令部众增筑多层围子，对内用以防止姚平突围，对外用以阻挡姚兴的援兵。
English: When Taizu heard that Yao Xing was about to arrive, he ordered his subordinates to build a multi-layered fence to prevent Yao Ping from breaking through, and to block Yao Xing's reinforcements.

古文：又截汾曲为南北浮桥，乘西岸筑围。
现代文：又拦截汾水弯曲处架设南北两座浮桥，凭靠汾水西岸构筑围子。
English: In addition, two floating bridges were built to intercept the bend of the Surabaya River from the north and south, and an enclosure was constructed by leaning on the west coast of the Surabaya River.

古文：太祖以步骑三万余人，渡蒙坑南四十里，逆击兴。
现代文：太祖派步骑兵三万余人，渡河到蒙坑南面四十里之处，从背后袭击姚兴。
English: Taizu sent more than thirty thousand infantry and cavalry to cross the river to forty miles south of Mengkeng and attack Yao Xing from behind.

古文：兴晨行北引，未及安营，太祖军卒至，兴众怖忧。
现代文：姚兴早上出兵向北行进，还没有来得及安营扎寨，太祖大军突然出现，姚兴的部众惊恐大乱。
English: In the morning, Yao Xing sent troops to march north. Before they had time to set up camp, the Great Ancestor's army suddenly appeared, and Yao Xing's subordinates panicked.

古文：太祖诏毗陵王顺以精骑冲击，获兴甲骑数百，斩首千余级。
现代文：太祖令毗陵王顺率精锐骑兵冲锋突击，俘虏姚兴铁骑数百，斩首一千余级。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Viling Wang Shun to lead an elite cavalry charge, capture hundreds of Yao Xing Tie riders, and behead more than a thousand.

古文：兴退，南走四十余里，太祖引还。
现代文：姚兴败退，向南逃窜四十余里，太祖引兵退回。
English: Yao Xing retreated in defeat and fled more than forty miles to the south, while Taizu led the troops back.

古文：平竟不敢出，但使人烧围数百步而已。
现代文：姚平竟死守不敢出击，只是派人烧毁魏军的围子数百步而已。
English: Yao Ping actually did not dare to attack, but sent people to burn the Wei army's encirclement a few hundred paces away.

古文：太祖知兴气挫，乃南绝蒙坑之口，东杜新坂之隘，守天渡，屯贾山，令平水陆路绝，将坐甲而擒之。
现代文：太祖看到姚兴锐气已经挫败，就在南边截断蒙坑的出口，在东边阻塞新坂的山隘，坚守天渡，屯兵贾山，使得姚平水陆两路都断绝，并让将士披甲不卧，坐以待敌，准备擒拿姚兴部众。
English: In September of that year, Yao Xing went north from the west side of Surabaya and built a fortress to defend himself by leaning on the mountains.

古文：太祖知兴气挫，乃南绝蒙坑之口，东杜新坂之隘，守天渡，屯贾山，令平水陆路绝，将坐甲而擒之。
现代文：太祖又令将士沿汾水一带的山丘树立栅栏，长达数十里，用来防卫割草放牧的人。这一年九月，姚兴从汾水西面北下，凭靠山壑构筑堡垒用以防守。
English: In September of that year, Yao Xing went north from the west side of Surabaya and built a fortress to defend himself by leaning on the mountains.

古文：太祖又缘汾带冈树栅数十里，以卫刍牧者。九月，兴从汾西北下，凭壑为垒以自固。
现代文：姚兴又带领数千骑兵，登上西岸窥视太祖军营，把柏树扎成一捆一捆，从汾水上游漂流下来，想要撞毁魏军架设的浮桥，魏军就用长钩把柏木拉上来，用来当柴烧火做饭。
English: Yao Xing also led thousands of cavalrymen to climb the west coast to peep into Taizu's military camp, tied the cypress trees into bundles, drifted down from the upper reaches of the Surabaya River, and wanted to crash the pontoon bridge erected by the Wei army. The Wei army used a long hook to pull up the cypress trees to be used as firewood for cooking.

古文：兴又将数千骑，乘西岸窥视太祖营，束柏材从汾上流下之，欲以毁桥，官军钩取以为薪蒸。
现代文：姚兴只得回到他的堡垒中。太祖估计他必定会来攻击西边的围子，就诏令修挖围子下的壕堑，把它加宽。
English: Yao Xing had to return to his fortress. The great-grandfather thought that he would definitely attack the enclosure on the west side, so he gave the order to dig a trench under the enclosure and widen it.

古文：兴还垒。太祖度其必攻西围，乃命修堑，增广之。至夜，兴果来攻，梯短不及，弃之堑中而还。
现代文：到了夜晚，姚兴果然来进攻西围，因为梯子太短够不着，只得把梯子丢弃在壕沟里退了回去。
English: At night, Yao Xing attacked Xibei, but because the ladder was too short to reach, he had to throw it away in the ditch and retreat.

古文：又分其众，临汾为垒，叩逼水门，举平相望。
现代文：姚兴又分出一部分军队，靠近汾水构筑垒寨，逼攻水闸，与城内的姚平隔水相望。
English: Yao Xing also separated a part of the army, built a fortress near Surabaya, forced the sluice, and looked across the water from Yao Ping in the city.

古文：太祖因截水中，兴内外隔绝，士众丧气。
现代文：太祖就凭着汾水进行拦截，使得姚兴与姚平内外隔绝，将士的斗志丧失殆尽。
English: The great-grandfather intercepted with the help of water, making Yao Xing and Yao Ping isolated inside and outside, and the fighting spirit of the soldiers was exhausted.

古文：于是平粮尽窘急，夜悉众将突西南而出。
现代文：于是，城内的姚平粮草耗尽，十分窘急，只得趁夜晚在西南方向出城突围。
English: As a result, Yao Ping ran out of grain and grass in the city and was in a desperate situation. He had to take advantage of the night to break out of the city in the southwest direction.

古文：兴列兵汾西，举烽鼓噪，为平接援。
现代文：姚兴在汾水西边陈列军队，燃起烽火，击鼓呼叫，替姚平接应援助。
English: Yao Xing displayed troops on the west side of Surabaya, lit bonfires, beat drums and called for assistance for Yao Ping.

古文：太祖简诸军精锐，屯汾西，固守南桥，绝塞水口。
现代文：太祖从各部军队中挑选精锐部队，屯驻在汾水西岸，固守南边的浮桥，断绝阻塞水闸。
English: Taizu selected elite troops from all branches of the military, stationed them on the west coast of Surabaya, held fast to the pontoon bridge on the south side, and stopped blocking the sluice.

古文：兴夜闻声，望平力战突免；平闻外鼓，望兴攻围引接。
现代文：姚兴在晚上听到城内突围之声，希望姚平能够奋力作战突出重围；姚平听到城外鼓噪之声，希望姚兴能够攻破包围接应救援。
English: In the evening, Yao Xing heard the sound of breaking through the encirclement in the city and hoped that Yao Ping could fight hard to break through the encirclement; Yao Ping heard the sound of drums outside the city and hoped that Yao Xing could break through the encirclement and respond to the rescue.

古文：故但叫呼，虚相应和，莫敢逼围。
现代文：所以两下里只能大呼大叫，虚张声势地相互应和，都不敢逼近突击包围圈。
English: Therefore, they could only shout loudly and bluffly to match each other, and they did not dare to approach the assault encirclement.

古文：平引不得出，穷迫，乃将二妾赴水而死。
现代文：姚平带领人马突围不能成功，被逼得走投无路，就带着两个妾投水而死。
English: Yao Ping could not succeed in leading his men and horses to break out of the encirclement, and was forced into a corner. He drowned himself with his two concubines.

古文：兴安远将军不蒙世、扬武将军雷重等将士四千余人，随平投水。
现代文：姚兴所属的安远将军不蒙世、扬武将军雷重等将士共四千多人，都跟着姚平跳进汾水。
English: A total of more than four thousand soldiers, including General Anyuan and General Yangwu, both of whom belonged to Yao Xing, followed Yao Ping into Surabaya.

古文：太祖令泅水钩捕，无得免者。
现代文：太祖令士卒泅水用弯钩抓捕，没有一个人得以幸免。
English: Grandfather ordered the soldiers to catch them with hooks, and no one was spared.

古文：平众三万余人，皆敛手受执，擒兴尚书右仆射狄伯支，越骑校尉唐小方，积弩将军姚梁国，建忠将军雷星、康官，北中郎将康猥，兴从子伯禽已下四品将军已上，四十余人。
现代文：姚平的部众三万余人，全数束手就擒，魏军生俘姚兴的尚书右仆射狄伯支，越骑校尉唐小方，积弩将军姚梁国，建忠将军雷星、康宦，北中郎将康猥，姚兴的侄儿姚伯禽以下，四品将军以上，共计四十余人。
English: There were more than 30,000 people in Yao Ping's army, all of whom were put to death. The Wei soldiers captured Yao Xing's right-hand man, Shang Shu, his right-hand man, Sha Di Bo Zhi, the Vietcong cavalry captain, Tang Xiao Fang, the general Yao Liang Guo, the general Jianzhong, Lei Xing, Kang Yao, the general Beizhong Lang, the general Kang Nai, Yao Xing's nephew, Yao Bo Jian, and more than four generals, a total of more than forty people.

古文：兴远来赴救，自观其穷，力不能免，举军悲号，震动出谷，数日不止。
现代文：姚兴远道前来救援姚平，只能亲眼目睹姚平的彻底覆没，而自己无计可施，力不能及，全军上下悲恸呼号，声音震动山谷，几天几夜都没有停息。
English: Yao Xingyuan came all the way to rescue Yao Ping. He could only witness the complete annihilation of Yao Ping with his own eyes, but there was nothing he could do, his strength was not enough. The whole army cried out in grief, the sound shook the valley, and did not stop for several days and nights.

古文：频遣使请和，太祖不许，乃班师。
现代文：姚兴一再派出使者请求媾和，太祖未予准许，胜利班师回朝。
English: Yao Xing repeatedly sent emissaries to ask for peace, but Emperor Taizu did not grant permission, and the victorious army returned to the North.

古文：兴还长安。
现代文：姚兴回到长安。
English: Yao Xing returned to Chang'an.

古文：有雀数万头，斗于兴庙，毛羽折落，多有死者，月余乃止。
现代文：当时有数万只鸟雀，在姚兴的殿堂之上互相厮斗，羽毛折断纷纷飘落，有不少被啄死，这种情形持续一个多月才停止。
English: At that time, there were tens of thousands of birds and finches fighting each other on top of Yao Xing's hall of fame. Feathers were broken and fell, and many were choked to death. This situation lasted for more than a month before it stopped.

古文：识者曰： 今雀斗庙上，子孙当有争乱者乎？ 
现代文：有识之人说： 现在鸟雀厮斗于庙堂之上，姚氏子孙是不是也会发生争斗动乱呢？ 
English: People with insight said: Now that birds and finches are fighting on top of the temple, will the descendants of the Yao clan also have conflicts and turmoil?

古文：又兴殿有声如牛吼。
现代文：又姚兴的殿堂里常常发出一种声音，如同牛吼。
English: There is also a sound often heard in Yao Xing's hall of fame, like a cow's bellowing.

古文：有二狐入长安，一登兴殿屋，走入宫，一入于市，求之不得。
现代文：有两只狐狸跑进长安城，一只登上姚兴的殿堂，径直走进内宫，一只走到街市之上，人们四处搜寻都没有找到。
English: Two foxes ran into Chang'an City. One of them climbed onto Yao Xingwu's hall of fame and walked straight into the inner palace. One of them walked onto the street market. People searched everywhere but couldn't find it.

古文：先是，谯纵略有益宁之地，僭称尊号，遣使称蕃于兴，兴以纵为蜀王，加九赐。
现代文：当初，谯纵抢占了益宁这一带地方，僭称皇帝尊号，派使者向姚兴自称蕃国，姚兴封谯纵为蜀王，加赐给他九锡。
English: At first, Zheng Zheng occupied this area of Yining, falsely claiming the title of emperor, and sent an envoy to Yao Xing, claiming to be the king of Shu. Yao Xing declared Zheng Zheng to be the king of Shu, and gave him Jiuxi.

古文：永兴三年，兴遣周宝朝贡。
现代文：永兴三年，姚兴派遣周宝前来朝贡。
English: Three years after Yongxing, Yao Xing sent Zhou Bao to pay tribute.

古文：五年，兴遣使朝贡，并请进女，太宗许之。
现代文：五年，姚兴又派使者前来朝贡，并请求进献他的女儿，太宗准许了他的请求。
English: Five years later, Yao Xing sent another envoy to pay tribute and asked for his daughter to be presented, and Emperor Taizong granted his request.

古文：兴中子广平公弼有宠，季之朝政。
现代文：姚兴的儿子广平公姚弼受到宠幸，姚兴把朝廷政事委托给他。
English: Yao Xing's son, Guangping Gong Yao Xing, was favored, and Yao Xing entrusted him with the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：兴疾笃，长子泓侍疾于中，弼集党数千人，候兴死，欲杀泓自立。
现代文：姚兴得了重病，他的长子姚泓在宫中侍奉姚兴，姚弼就暗中纠集党羽数千人，一心等待姚兴死去，想要杀掉姚泓自立为帝。
English: Yao Xing fell seriously ill. His eldest son, Yao Jun, served Yao Xing in the palace. Yao Jun secretly gathered thousands of party members, waiting for Yao Xing to die, and wanted to kill Yao Jun and make himself emperor.

古文：兴诸子侄外镇者，闻之，皆起兵讨弼。
现代文：姚兴在外镇任职的其他儿子和侄儿听说此事，都起兵讨伐姚弼。
English: When Yao Xing's other sons and nephews, who worked in the outlying towns, heard about this, they all raised an army to fight Yao Xing.

古文：兴疾瘳，不忍诛弼，免官而已。
现代文：姚兴的病痊愈之后，不忍心诛杀姚弼，只是罢免了他的官爵而已。
English: After Yao Xing recovered from his illness, he did not have the heart to kill Yao Yao, but only dismissed his official title.

古文：神瑞元年，兴遣兼散骑常侍、尚书吏部郎严康朝贡。
现代文：神瑞元年，姚兴派遣兼散骑常侍、尚书吏部郎严康来大魏朝贡。
English: In the first year of Shen Rui's reign, Yao Xing dispatched Yan Kang, a knight-errant and the imperial secretary, to pay tribute to the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：二年，兴遣散骑常侍东武侯姚敞、尚书姚泰奉其西平公主于太宗，帝以后礼纳之。
现代文：神瑞二年，姚兴又派散骑常侍东武侯姚敞、尚书姚泰进奉他的西平公主给太宗，太宗以皇后之礼接纳了她。
English: In the second year of Shen Rui, Yao Xing also sent Dongwu Prince Yao Zhan and Shangshu Yao Taijin, both of whom were equestrian attendants, to present his Xiping Princess to Taizong, who received her as an empress.

古文：兴复以弼为中军大将军，配兵三万，屯于渭北。
现代文：姚兴再次起用姚弼为中军大将军，分配给他三万军队，屯驻在渭水之北。
English: Yao Xing once again appointed Yao Jun as the general of the Chinese army, assigned him thirty thousand troops, and stationed him in the north of Surabaya.

古文：兴又疾甚，弼遣其党姚武伯等率众攻端门。
现代文：及至姚兴再次得了重病的时候，姚弼派遣他的死党姚武伯等人率兵攻击端门。
English: When Yao Xing fell seriously ill again, Yao Zhe sent his best friend Yao Wubo and others to attack the front gate.

古文：泓时侍疾，遣兵拒之，兴力疾临前殿，杀弼，弼党乃散。
现代文：姚泓当时正在侍奉重病的父亲，就派兵进行抵抗，姚兴拖着病体来到前殿，杀死了姚弼，姚弼的党羽才被驱散。
English: At that time, Yao Xing was serving his seriously ill father, so he sent soldiers to resist. Yao Xing dragged the sick body to the front hall and killed Yao Xing. Only then were Yao Xing's followers dispersed.

古文：泰常元年，兴死，泓僭立。
现代文：泰常元年，姚兴病死，姚泓便僭立为帝。
English: In the first year of the Tai Chang Dynasty, Yao Xing died of illness, and Yao Yu became emperor.

