古文：武成世祖武成皇帝，讳湛，神武皇帝第九子，孝昭皇帝之母弟也。
现代文：世祖武成皇帝名叫高湛，是神武皇帝的第九个儿子，孝昭皇帝的同母弟弟。
English: Emperor Wu Cheng's ancestor was named Gao Zhan. He was the ninth son of Emperor Shenwu and the half-brother of Emperor Xiao Zhao.

古文：仪表瑰杰，神武尤所钟爱。神武方招怀荒远，乃为帝聘蠕蠕太子庵罗辰女，号 邻和公主 。
现代文：仪表俊美奇伟，神武特别爱他，神武正招抚边远地方，就为武成帝同蠕蠕太子庵罗辰的女儿订婚，号称 邻和公主 。
English: His appearance was handsome and magnificent. Shenwu especially loved him. When Shenwu was courting the outlying areas, he betrothed the daughter of Emperor Wu Chengdi to the Prince of Worms, An Luo Chen. They were known as "Neighbor and Princess."

古文：帝时年八岁，冠服端严，神情闲远，华戎叹异。
现代文：武成帝当时八岁，衣帽端正庄重，神情闲静深远，华夏和戎族的人都很惊叹。
English: Emperor Wucheng was eight years old at the time, his clothes and hat were dignified, and his look was calm and far-reaching. The people of Huaxia and the Eunuchs were amazed.

古文：元象中，封长广郡公。
现代文：元象年间，封为长广郡公。
English: During the Yuanxiang era, he was appointed as the governor of Changguang County.

古文：天保初，进爵为王，拜尚书令，寻兼司徒，迁太尉。
现代文：天保初年，进升爵位为王，授任尚书令，不久兼任司徒，升迁为太尉。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the peerage of the king, and was awarded the title of Shang Shuling. Soon, he also served as a scholar, and was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：乾明初，杨愔等密相疏忌，以帝为大司马，领并州刺史。
现代文：干明初年，杨情等人暗地裹疏远猜忌，任命武成帝为大司马，兼任并州刺史。
English: In the first year of Ganming, Yang Rong and others secretly wrapped up estrangement and suspicion, and appointed Emperor Wu Chengdi as the chief secretary, and also served as the state secretary of history.

古文：帝既与孝昭谋诛诸执政，迁太傅、录尚书事、领京畿大都督。
现代文：武成帝就和孝昭帝密谋杀掉各执掌国政的人，升任太傅、录尚书事、兼任京畿大都督。
English: Emperor Wucheng conspired with Emperor Xiaozhao to murder all those in charge of state affairs, and was promoted to taifu, record keeper of records, and concurrently the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：皇建初，进位右丞相。
现代文：皇建初年，进升职位为右丞相。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jian, he was promoted to the position of Minister of the Right.

古文：孝昭幸晋阳，帝以懿亲居守邺，政事咸见委托。
现代文：孝昭帝到晋阳，武成帝以至亲的身份镇守邺城，政事都委托给他。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao went to Jinyang, and Emperor Wu Cheng, as a close relative, guarded Lucheng, and the government affairs were entrusted to him.

古文：二年，孝昭崩，遗诏征帝入统大位。
现代文：皇建二年，孝昭帝崩逝，遣诏征召武成帝继承帝位。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jian, Emperor Xiaozhao passed away, and Emperor Wu Cheng was summoned to succeed the throne.

古文：及晋阳宫，发丧于崇德殿。
现代文：到了晋阳的宫中，在崇德殿公布孝昭帝的死讯。
English: When he arrived at the palace in Jinyang, he announced the death of Emperor Xiao Zhaodi at the Chongde Hall.

古文：皇太后令所司宣遗诏，左丞相斛律金率百僚敦劝，三奏，乃许之。
现代文：皇太后命令主管官员宣读遣诏，左丞相斛律金率领百官敦促劝进，三次上奏。才答应了。
English: The empress dowager ordered the officials in charge to read out the imperial rescript, and the left-wing chancellor, Li Rujin, led hundreds of officials to urge them to go ahead and read it out three times. Only then did they agree.

古文：大宁元年冬十一月癸丑，皇帝即位于南宫，大赦，改皇建二年为大宁。
现代文：大宁元年冬十一月癸丑，皇帝在南宫登帝位，大赦，改换年号皇建二年为大宁。
English: In the winter and November of the first year of the Danying Dynasty, the emperor ascended the throne in the Southern Palace, amnestied, and changed the year name of the imperial construction for two years to Danying.

古文：乙卯，以司徒、平秦王归彦为太傅，以尚书右仆射、赵郡王睿为尚书令，以太尉尉粲为太保，以尚书令段韶为大司马，以丰州刺史娄睿为司空，以太傅、平阳王淹为太宰，以太保、彭城王浟为太师、录尚书事，以冀州刺史、博陵王济为太尉，以中书监、任城王潜为尚书左仆射，以并州刺史斛律光为右仆射，封孝昭皇帝太子百年为乐陵郡王。
现代文：乙卯，任命司徒、平秦王高归彦为太傅，任命尚书右仆射、趟郡王高散为尚书令，任命太尉尉粲为太保，任命尚书令段韶为大司马，任命丰州刺史娄散为司空，任命太傅、平阳王高淹为太宰，任命太保、彭城王高澈为太师、绿尚书事，任命冀州刺史、博陵王高济为太尉，任命中书监、任城王高潸为尚书左仆射，任命并州刺史斛律光为右仆射，封孝昭皇帝的太子高百年为乐陵郡王。
English: Yi Wu, appointed Szeto and Pingqin Wang Gao Gui Yan as taifu, appointed Shang Shuxu Yu Min Shi, and Wai Guo Wang Gao San as Shang Shuling, appointed Tai Lai Liang as Taifu, appointed Shang Shuling Duan Yan as Da Sima, appointed Fengzhou Shishi Shuxan as Siku, appointed Taifu, Pingyang Wang Gao Ruan as Dazai, appointed Taipo, Pengcheng Wang Gao Ke as Taishi, and Green Shang Shuxi, appointed Jizhou Shishi and Boling Wang Gao Ji as Taifu, appointed Zhongshu Guan, and

古文：庚申，诏大使巡行天下，求政善恶，问人疾苦，擢进贤良。
现代文：庚申，下韶书大使出行巡察天下，征求政事的好坏，访问人民的疾苦，提拔进荐有才德的人。
English: Goshun, the ambassador of the Lower Han Dynasty, traveled around the world, inquired about the good and bad of politics, visited the sufferings of the people, and promoted and recommended talented people.

古文：是岁，周武帝保定元年。
现代文：这一年，是厘亘适堡室元年。
English: This year is the first year of the construction of the first floor of the castle.

古文：河清元年春正月乙亥，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：河清元年春正月乙亥，武成帝从晋阳到达京城。
English: Emperor Wucheng arrived in Beijing from Jinyang in the first month of the spring of the first year of Heqing.

古文：辛巳，祀南郊。
现代文：辛巳，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the third day, in the southern suburbs, the ancestors were worshipped.

古文：壬午，享太庙。
现代文：壬午，供奉太庙。
English: Renwu, dedicated to the Great Temple.

古文：丙戌，立妃胡氏为皇后，子纬为皇太子。
现代文：丙戌，立妃子胡氏为皇后，儿子高纬为皇太子。
English: He set up his daughter-in-law, Princess Hu, as empress, and his son, Gao Wei, as crown prince.

古文：大赦，内外百官普加泛级，诸为父后者赐爵一级。
现代文：大赦天下，朝廷内外百官普遍加级，各作为父亲的继承人的赐给爵位一级。
English: The world was amnestied, and hundreds of officials inside and outside the imperial court were generally promoted, and each was given a first-class knighthood as his father's heir.

古文：己亥，以前定州刺史、冯翊王润为尚书左仆射。
现代文：己亥，任命前定州刺史、冯翊王高润为尚书左仆射。
English: Ji Hai, appointed the former Dingzhou Shishi, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man.

古文：诏断屠杀以顺春令。
现代文：下韶书禁止屠杀牲畜以顺应春天的时令。
English: A decree was issued prohibiting the slaughter of livestock in order to adapt to the spring season.

古文：二月丁未，以太宰、平阳王淹为青州刺史、太傅、领司徒，以领军大将军、宗师、平秦王归彦为太宰、冀州刺史。
现代文：二月丁未，任命太宰、平阳王高淹为青州刺史、太傅、兼任司徒，任命领军大将军、宗师、平秦王高归彦为太宰、冀州刺史。
English: In February of Dingwei, the Dazai, Pingyang Wang Gao Ran, was appointed as the Qingzhou Shishi, Taifu, and concurrently as the Sito, and the leader of the army, the grandmaster, Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang, was appointed as the Dazai, Jizhou Shishi.

古文：乙卯，以兼尚书令、任城王湝为司徒。
现代文：乙卯，任命兼任尚书令、任城王高浩为司徒。
English: Second, he also appointed Shang Shuling and appointed Gao Hao, the king of the city, as his disciple.

古文：诏散骑常侍崔瞻聘于陈。
现代文：下诏书令散骑常侍崔瞻到陈国访问。
English: The imperial edict ordered the imperial equerry Cui Zhan to visit Chen Guo.

古文：夏四月辛丑，皇太后娄氏崩。
现代文：夏四月辛丑，皇太后娄氏崩逝。
English: In the summer of April, the Empress Dowager Shun passed away.

古文：乙巳，青州刺史上言，今月庚寅河、济清。
现代文：乙巳，青州刺史上书说，当月庚寅黄河、济水变清。
English: At the same time, the history book of Qingzhou said that the Yellow River and the Jishui River became clear that month.

古文：以河、济清，改大宁二年为河清，降罪人各有差。
现代文：因黄河、济水变清，改换年号大宁二年为河清，减轻罪犯刑罚各有差别。
English: Because the Yellow River and the Jishui River have become clear, the year of the Daning River has been changed to the year of the Heqing River for two years, and there are differences in the reduction of criminal penalties.

古文：五月甲申，祔葬武明皇后于义平陵。
现代文：五月甲申，将武明皇后合葬在义平陵。
English: In May, Emperor Jiaxun buried Empress Wu Ming together in the Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：己丑，以尚书右仆射斛律光为尚书令。
现代文：己丑，任命尚书右仆射斛律光为尚书令。
English: He was so embarrassed that he appointed his right-hand man, Shotoku Ritsuko, as his secretary.

古文：秋七月，太宰、冀州刺史、平秦王归彦据州反，诏大司马段韶、司空娄睿讨擒之。
现代文：秋七月，太宰、冀州刺史、平秦王高归彦占据本州反叛，下韶书令大司马段韶、司空娄敷讨伐活捉他们。
English: In autumn and July, Dazai, Jizhou Shishi, and Pingqin Wang Gao Guihang rebelled in Honshu, and the emperor ordered the grand secretary Ma Duanjun and the secretary Kuo Jiki to fight and capture them alive.

古文：乙未，斩归彦并其三子及党与二十人于都市。
现代文：乙未，在都城的集市上斩了高归彦同他的三个儿子以及党羽二十人。
English: Second, at the market in the capital, he beheaded Gao Guihang, his three sons, and twenty party cadres.

古文：丁酉，以大司马段韶为太傅，以司空娄睿为司徒，以太傅、平阳王淹为太宰，以尚书令斛律光为司空，以太子太傅、赵郡王睿为尚书令，中书监、河间王孝琬为尚书左仆射。
现代文：丁酉，任命大司马段韶为太傅，任命司空娄敷为司徒，任命太傅、平阳王高淹为太宰，任命尚书令斛律光为司空，任命太子太傅、赵郡王高敷为尚书令，中书监、河间王高孝琬为尚书左仆射。
English: Ding Jun, appointed the grand secretary Ma Duanjun as taifu, appointed the secretary Kuanzhiki as stu, appointed the secretary Kuanzhiki and Pingyang Wang Gaozhun as dazai, appointed the secretary Gao Riguang as taifu, appointed the prince taifu and Zhao Gu Wang Gaozhiki as secretary Kuanzhiki, and appointed the middle school librarian and Kawama Wang Gao Xiaojun as the secretary Kuanzhiki.

古文：癸亥，行幸晋阳。
现代文：癸亥，出行到晋阳。
English: Yanhai, travel to Jinyang.

古文：陈人来聘。
现代文：陈国人前来访问。
English: Chen Guojin came to visit.

古文：冬十一月丁丑，诏兼散骑常侍封孝琰使于陈。
现代文：冬十一月丁丑，下韶书兼任散骑常侍挝耋壁出使速国。
English: In the winter, in November, Ding Ug, the lower part of the book, he also served as a horseback riding attendant of Laos, and was dispatched to Sui Province.

古文：十二月丙辰，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：十二月丙辰，逮尘适从置匮到达京城。
English: At the stroke of midnight on December 4th, the "Fu Ducheng" arrived in Beijing from Jiaozuo.

古文：是岁，杀太原王绍德。
现代文：遣一年，杀了塞厘王矗超壁。
English: After one year of imprisonment, he killed the Seli Wangqiao wall.

古文：二年春正月乙亥，帝诏临朝堂策试秀才。
现代文：河清二年春正月乙亥，武成帝下韶书到朝堂对秀才进行考试。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring of Heqing, Emperor Wucheng sent an imperial edict to the morning hall to conduct an examination for the gifted.

古文：以太子少傅魏收为兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命太子少傅魏收为兼尚书右仆射。
English: He appointed the young prince Fu Wei Jie as his right-hand man.

古文：己卯，兼右仆射魏收以阿纵除名。
现代文：己卯，兼右仆射魏收因包庇纵容而被除名。
English: His aide and right-hand man, Sho Wei Shu, was expelled for conniving and covering up.

古文：丁丑，以武明皇后配祭北郊。
现代文：丁丑，在北郊祭祀以武明皇后配祭。
English: In the northern suburb of Dingwu, the festival is held with the Wu Ming Empress as the officiant.

古文：辛卯，帝临都亭录见囚，降在京罪人各有差。
现代文：辛卯，武成帝到都亭审查被囚禁犯人的罪状，减轻在京罪犯的刑罚各有差别。
English: Xinwu, Emperor Wu Cheng went to Du Ting to examine the crimes of the prisoners and reduce the sentences of the criminals in Beijing.

古文：三月乙丑，诏司空斛律光督五营军士筑戍于轵关。
现代文：三月乙丑，下韶令司空斛律光督管五营的士兵在轵关修筑城堡。
English: On the second day of the third month of the year, the emperor ordered the governor of the five battalions to build a castle in Shaoguan.

古文：壬申，室韦国遣使朝贡。
现代文：壬申，室韦国派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: Jinshin, Shibuya sent an envoy to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：丙戌，以兼尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
现代文：丙戌，任命兼尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
English: He appointed Zhao Yanshen, his right-hand man, as his left-hand man.

古文：夏四月，并、汾、晋、东雍、南汾五州虫旱伤稼，遣使赈恤。
现代文：夏四月，并、汾、晋、束雍、南汾五州虫灾旱灾损害庄稼，派遣使者救济。
English: In the summer of April, the five prefectures of Anhui, Jin, Sokyang and Nan'an suffered from insect and drought damage to crops, and envoys were dispatched to provide relief.

古文：戊午，陈人来聘。
现代文：戊午，陈国人前来访问。
English: In the afternoon, Chen Guojin came to visit.

古文：五月壬午，诏以城南双堂闰位之苑，乃造大总持寺。
现代文：五月壬午，下韶书在城南双堂闰位上的园苑，环绕着建造大总持寺。
English: On the afternoon of May, the lower part of the book is in the garden on the intersecting place of the double hall in the south of the city, surrounded by the construction of the Dai Sojiji Temple.

古文：六月乙巳，齐州言济、河水口见八龙升天。
现代文：六月乙巳，齐州说在济水、黄河的汇合口看到八条龙升上天。
English: In June, eight dragons were seen rising into the sky at the confluence of the Yellow River and the Jishui River, according to Qizhou.

古文：乙卯，诏兼散骑常侍崔子武使于陈。
现代文：乙卯，下韶书兼散骑常侍崔子武出使陈国。
English: In the second half of the eighteenth century, the envoy Chen Guo was dispatched by Choi Zi Wu, the lower eunuch and horseback riding attendant.

古文：庚申，司州牧、河南王孝瑜薨。
现代文：庚申，司州牧、河南王高孝瑜薨。
English: Gao Shen, Sizhou Maki, Henan Wang Gao Xiaoyu.

古文：秋八月辛丑，诏以三台宫为大兴圣寺。
现代文：秋八月辛丑，下诏书将三台宫改为大兴圣寺。
English: Autumn and August were grim, and the next imperial edict changed Sandai-gu to Daxing Holy Temple.

古文：冬十二月癸巳，陈人来聘。
现代文：冬十二月癸巳，陈国人前来访问。
English: In the winter of December, the Chen people came to visit.

古文：己酉，周将杨忠帅突厥阿史那木汗等二十余万人自恒州分为三道，杀掠吏人。
现代文：己酉，周围将领杨忠率领突厥阿史那木汗等二十多万人从恒州分为三路，杀害掳掠官吏百姓。
English: More than two hundred thousand people, including Ji Yan, and the surrounding general Yang Zhong, led by the Turk Ashinamukhan, divided into three routes from Hengzhou, killing and looting officials and people.

古文：是时，大雨雪连月，南北千余里平地数尺，霜昼下，雨血于太原。
现代文：遣时，一连几个月下大雪，由南到北一千多里平地几尺厚的雪，白天降霜，在太原下血雨。
English: At the turn of the millennium, heavy snow fell for several months in a row. From the south to the north, more than a thousand miles of flat ground were covered with several feet of snow. During the day, frost fell, and it rained blood in Taiyuan.

古文：戊午，帝至晋阳。
现代文：戊午，武成帝到晋阳。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Wu Chengdi arrived in Jinyang.

古文：己未，周军逼并州，又遣大将军达奚武帅众数万至东雍及晋州，与突厥相应。
现代文：己未，周国军队进逼并州，又派遣大将军达奚武率领几万军队到束雍以及晋州，和突厥相呼应。
English: Before long, the Zhou army invaded and annexed the prefecture, and dispatched the great general Dabiwu to lead tens of thousands of troops to Sokchong and Jinzhou, echoing the Turks.

古文：是岁，室韦、库莫奚、靺羯、契丹并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这一年，室韦、库莫奚、棘羯、契丹都派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In that year, Shumowei, Kumogun, Goryeo, and Khitan all sent envoys to the Imperial Court to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月庚申朔，周军至城下而陈，战于城西。
现代文：河清三年春正月庚申初一，周国军队在城下摆开阵势，在城西面交战。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Heqing, the Zhou army set up a position under the city and fought on the west side of the city.

古文：周军及突厥大败，人畜死者相枕，数百里不绝。
现代文：周国军队和突厥被打得大败，死去的人和牲畜相互堆积，几百里不间断。
English: The Zhou army and the Turks were soundly defeated, and the dead people and livestock piled up on top of each other for hundreds of miles.

古文：诏平原王段韶追出塞而还。
现代文：下韶书平原王段韶追出边塞然后返回。
English: In the lower part of the book, Wang Duan of the Plain chased the cormorant out of the border and then returned.

古文：三月辛酉，以律令班下，大赦。
现代文：三月辛酉，将法令颁布下来，大赦天下。
English: In March, the decree was promulgated, and the amnesty came into effect.

古文：己巳，盗杀太师、彭城王浟。
现代文：己巳，盗贼杀了太师、彭城王高澈。
English: As expected, the thieves killed the grand master, Pengcheng Wang Gao Che.

古文：庚辰，以司空斛律光为司徒，以侍中、武兴王普为尚书左仆射。
现代文：庚辰，任命司空斛律光为司徒，任命侍中、武兴王高普为尚书左仆射。
English: Geng Chen, appointed the Secretary of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：甲申，以尚书令、冯翊王润为司空。
现代文：甲申，任命尚书令、冯翊王高润为司空。
English: Jiaxin, appointed Shang Shuling, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as the secretary of the sky.

古文：夏四月辛卯，诏兼散骑常侍皇甫亮使于陈。
现代文：夏四月辛卯，下诏书兼散骑常侍皇甫亮出使陈国。
English: In the summer of April, the Emperor's messenger Chen Guo appeared with the imperial edict and horseback riding.

古文：五月甲子，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：五月甲子，武成帝从晋阳到京城。
English: In May, Emperor Wu Chengdi moved from Jinyang to Beijing.

古文：壬午，以尚书令、赵郡王睿为录尚书事，以前司徒娄睿为太尉。
现代文：壬午，任命尚书令、赵郡王高教为录尚书事，任命前司徒娄数为太尉。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Shang Shuling and Zhao Gu Wang Gao Jiao were appointed to record Shang Shuling affairs, and the former Sittou Yanzi was appointed to be the first lieutenant.

古文：甲申，以太傅段韶为太师。
现代文：甲申，任命太傅段韶为太师。
English: Gao Shin, appointed the Grand Master Duan Zang as the Grand Master.

古文：丁亥，以太尉、任城王湝为大将军。
现代文：丁亥，任命太尉、任城王高浩为大将军。
English: Dinghai, appointed the captain, appointed the king of the city Gao Hao as the general.

古文：壬辰，行幸晋阳。
现代文：壬辰，出行到晋阳。
English: Imjin, travel to Jinyang.

古文：六月庚子，大雨昼夜不息，至甲辰乃止。
现代文：六月庚子，大雨日夜不停，到甲辰才停下来。
English: In June, heavy rain continued day and night, stopping only in Jia Chen.

古文：是月，晋阳讹言有鬼兵，百姓竞击铜铁以捍之。
现代文：遣一月，晋阳传言有鬼兵，老百姓争着敲打铜铁器来防护。
English: In January, Jinyang was rumored to have ghost soldiers, and the people fought to beat copper and iron to protect themselves.

古文：杀乐陵王百年。
现代文：杀掉乐陵王高百年。
English: It's been a hundred years since he killed King Gao of Leling.

古文：归宇文媪于周。
现代文：把宇文氏老妇人归还给周国。
English: Return the old woman of the Uwen clan to Zhou Guo.

古文：秋九月乙丑，封皇子绰为南阳王，俨为东平王。
现代文：秋九月乙丑，封皇子高绰为南阳王，高俨为柬平王。
English: In the autumn and September, Emperor Gaozong made Gaozhuang the king of Nanyang and Gaozhuang the king of Campeon.

古文：是月，归阎媪于周。
现代文：这一月，将阎氏老妇人归还给周国。
English: This month, the old woman of the Yan clan was returned to Zhou.

古文：陈人来聘。
现代文：陈国人前来访问。
English: Chen Guojin came to visit.

古文：突厥寇幽州，入长城，虏掠而还。
现代文：突厥侵犯幽州，进入长城，掳掠后返回。
English: The Turks invaded Yuzhou, entered the Great Wall, plundered and returned.

古文：闰月乙未，诏遣十二使巡行水潦州，免其租调。
现代文：闰月乙未，下诏书派遣十二个使者出行巡察遭水灾的州，免除这些地方的租税赋役。
English: On the second day of the leap month, the next imperial edict dispatched twelve emissaries to travel and inspect the flood-stricken states, exempting these places from paying taxes and fees.

古文：乙巳，突厥寇幽州。
现代文：乙巳，突厥侵犯幽州。
English: Suddenly, the Turks invaded Yuzhou.

古文：周军三道并出，使其将尉迟迥寇洛阳，杨檦入轵关，权景宣趣悬瓠。
现代文：周国军队三路一起出动，派遣他们的将领尉迟迥侵犯洛阳，杨树进入轫关，权景宣奔赴悬瓠。
English: The three armies of Zhou launched an attack together, sending their generals and lieutenants to encroach on Luoyang, Poplar to enter Shaoguan, and Quan Jing Xuan to go to Xuanwu.

古文：冬十一月甲午，迥等围洛阳。
现代文：冬十一月甲午，尉迟迥等围攻洛阳。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of November in winter, the soldiers besieged Luoyang.

古文：戊戌，诏兼散骑常侍刘逖使于陈。
现代文：戊戌，下韶书兼散骑常侍刘逖出使陈国。
English: Wu Yao, the second secretary of the imperial court, and Liu Yao, the aide-de-camp, dispatched Chen Guo.

古文：甲辰，太尉娄睿大破周军于轵关，擒杨檦。
现代文：甲辰，太尉娄数在轵关把周国军队打得大败，活捉了杨尉。
English: Jia Chen, Taifu Xing Ji defeated the Zhou army in Shaoguan, and captured Yang Li alive.

古文：十二月乙卯，豫州刺史王士良以城降周将权景宣。
现代文：十二月乙卯，豫州刺史王士良献城向周国将领权景宣投降。
English: On December 2nd, Wang Shiliang, the governor of Yuzhou Province, surrendered the city to the Zhou general Jing Xuan.

古文：丁巳，帝自晋阳南讨。
现代文：丁巳，武成帝从晋阳向南征讨。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu Cheng marched south from Jinyang.

古文：己未，太宰、平阳王淹薨。
现代文：己未，太宰、平阳王高淹薨。
English: Before I knew it, Dazai and Pingyang Wanggao were drowned.

古文：壬戌，太师段韶大破尉迟迥等，解洛阳围。
现代文：壬戌，太师段韶把尉迟迥等人打得大败，解除了洛阳之围。
English: Rinchen, Grand Master Duan Xuan, Lieutenant Chi Xuan and others were soundly defeated, and the siege of Luoyang was lifted.

古文：丁卯，帝至洛阳，免洛州经周军处一年租赋，赦州城内死罪已下囚。
现代文：丁卯，武成帝到洛阳，免除洛州有周国军队经过的地方一年的租税赋役，赦免本州城内死罪以下的囚犯。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Wu Cheng went to Luoyang, exempted the places in Luozhou where the Zhou army had passed for one year of tax and service, and pardoned the prisoners with less than capital crimes in the city of Honshu.

古文：己巳，以太师段韶为太宰，以司徒斛律光为太尉，并州刺史兰陵王长恭为尚书令。
现代文：己巳，任命太师段韶为太宰，任命司徒斛律光为太尉，并州刺史、兰陵王高长恭为尚书令。
English: At the same time, he appointed Grand Master Duan Zi as Dazai, and appointed Szu Zi Liguang as Tai Li, and appointed Shuzhi Zorong and Lanling Wang Gao Changgong as Shang Shuling.

古文：壬申，帝至武牢，经滑台，次于黎阳，所经减降罪人。
现代文：壬申，武成帝到武牢，经过滑台，驻扎在黎阳，在经过的地方减轻罪犯的刑罚。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Wu Cheng went to Wudang, passed through the slide, stationed in Liyang, and commuted the punishment of criminals in the places he passed.

古文：丙子，车驾至自洛阳。
现代文：丙子，皇帝从洛阳到达京城。
English: Bongzi, the emperor arrived in Beijing from Luoyang.

古文：是岁，高丽、靺羯、新罗并遣使朝贡。
现代文：遣一年，高丽、秣羯、新罗都派遣使者朝见进贡。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Koryo, Goryeo, and Silla all sent emissaries to pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：山东大水，饥死者不可胜计，诏发赈给，事竟不行。
现代文：山东发大水，饿死的人多得数不清。下诏书开仓救济，事情竟然行不通。
English: Shandong was flooded, and countless people starved to death. The next edict was to open relief warehouses, but things didn't work out.

古文：四年春正月癸卯，以大将军、任城王湝为大司马。
现代文：河清四年春正月癸卯，任命大将军、任城王高浩为大司马。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Heqing, he appointed the general and appointed the king of the city, Gao Hao, as the chief secretary.

古文：辛未，幸晋阳。
现代文：辛未，武成帝到晋阳。
English: Xinwei, Emperor Wu Chengdi went to Jinyang.

古文：二月甲寅，诏以新罗国王金真兴为使持节、东夷校尉、乐浪郡公、新罗王。
现代文：二月甲寅，下诏书任命新罗国王金真兴为使持节、束夷校尉、乐浪郡公、新罗王。
English: In February, the next imperial edict named the King of Silla, Jin Zhenxing, as the envoy of Jisong, the captain of Sokgyi, the governor of Lelang County, and the King of Silla.

古文：壬申，以年谷不登，禁酤酒。
现代文：壬申，因粮食歉收，禁止买卖酒。
English: In Jinshin, due to poor grain harvest, the sale and purchase of alcohol is prohibited.

古文：己卯，诏减百官食禀各有差。
现代文：己卯，下诏书减少百官俸粮各有差别。
English: In fact, there are differences in the decrees to reduce the salaries of officials.

古文：三月戊子，诏给西兖、梁、沧、赵州，司州之东郡、阳平、清河、武都，冀州之长乐、渤海遭水潦之处贫下户粟，各有差。
现代文：三月戊子，下韶书给西兖、梁、沧、赵州，司州的束郡、阳平、清河、武都，冀州的长乐、渤海遭受水灾的地方贫困户粟米，各有差异。
English: In March, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs distributed corn to the poor households in Xidi, Liang, Cangzhou, Zhaozhou, Sokun, Yangping, Qinghe, Wudu, Changle, Jizhou, and flood-stricken areas in the Bohai Sea, with differences in each case.

古文：家别斗升而已，又多不付。
现代文：各家的区别衹是斗升罢了，又有很多没有付给。
English: The only difference between the companies is the amount of money raised, and a lot of it is not paid.

古文：是月，彗星见；有物陨于殿庭，如赤漆鼓带小铃；殿上石自起，两两相对。
现代文：这一月，彗星出现；有东西落到宫殿的庭院裹，像带着小铃涂上红漆的鼓；宫殿上的石头自己拱起来，两两相对。
English: This month, a comet appeared; something fell into the courtyard of the palace and rolled up, like a drum with a small bell painted red; the stones on the palace arched themselves, two against two.

古文：又有神见于后园万寿堂前山穴中，其体壮大，不辩其面，两齿绝白，长出于唇，帝直宿嫔御已下七百人咸见焉。
现代文：又有神出现在后园万寿堂前的山洞裹，他的身体健壮硕大，看不见他的面目，两颗牙齿十分洁白，从嘴唇裹伸出，武成帝值宿的嫔妃和宫女以下七百人都看见了。
English: Another deity appeared in a cave in front of the Houyuan Wanzhou Hall. His body was robust and large, and his face was invisible. His two teeth were very white and protruded from his lips. Emperor Wu Cheng's concubine and seven hundred concubines saw it.

古文：帝又梦之。
现代文：武成帝又梦见了他。
English: Emperor Wucheng dreamed of him again.

古文：夏四月戊午，大将军、东安王娄睿坐事免。
现代文：夏四月戊午，大将军、东安王娄散因犯罪被免职。
English: On the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, the great general, Dongan Wang Yansan, was removed from his post for committing a crime.

古文：乙亥，陈人来聘。
现代文：乙亥，陈国人前来访问。
English: Yi Hai, Chen people came to visit.

古文：太史奏天文有变，其占当有易王。
现代文：太史上奏天象有变化，经占卜是要改换帝王。
English: In the history of the Chinese zodiac, there are changes in celestial phenomena, and divination is to change the emperor.

古文：丙子，乃使太宰段韶兼太尉，持节奉皇帝玺绶传位于皇太子，大赦，改元为天统元年，百官进级降罪各有差。
现代文：丙子，就派遣太宰段韶兼太尉，带着符节捧着皇帝的印玺将帝位传给皇太子，大赦天下，改换年号为天统元年，百官进升职级减轻罪罚各有差别。
English: Cun Zi sent Dazai Duan Zi and Taifu to pass the imperial throne to the crown prince with the Emperor's seal in his hand, and granted amnesty to the whole world. The year was changed to the first year of the unification of heaven. There were differences in the promotion and promotion of hundreds of officials to reduce the punishment.

古文：又诏皇太子妃斛律氏为皇后。
现代文：又下韶书封皇太子妃斛律氏为皇后。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to crown the crown prince's wife, the Empress Dowager, as empress.

古文：于是群公上尊号为太上皇帝，军国大事咸以奏闻。
现代文：于是各王公给武成帝奉上尊号为太上皇帝，军队和国家的重大事情全都要呈奏。
English: As a result, the princes gave Emperor Wucheng the title of supreme emperor, and all the important matters of the army and the country had to be presented.

古文：始将传政，使内参乘子尚乘驿送诏书于邺。
现代文：开始将要传告政事，派遣内参乘子尚乘着驿车把诏书送到邺城。
English: At the beginning, he was going to announce the government affairs, and dispatched his son, who was a member of the Inner Council, to take the imperial edict to Lucheng in a carriage.

古文：子尚出晋阳城，见人骑随后，忽失之，尚未至邺而其言已布矣。
现代文：乘子尚出了晋阳城，看见有人骑着马跟在后面，忽然不见了，他还没到邺城而他传告的话已经传遍了。
English: When the son-in-law went out of Jinyang City, he saw someone riding a horse behind him, and suddenly disappeared. He had not yet arrived in Handan City, but his words had already spread all over.

古文：天统四年十二月辛未，太上皇帝崩于邺宫乾寿堂，时年三十二，谥曰武成皇帝，庙号世祖。
现代文：天统四年十二月辛未，太上皇帝在邺城宫中干画堂崩逝，当时三十二岁，谧号称武成皇帝，庙号世担。
English: In December of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Tian Rong, Emperor Taishang passed away in the painting hall of the Shicheng Palace. He was 32 years old at the time. His posthumous name was Emperor Wu Cheng, and his temple name was Shitan.

古文：五年二月甲申，葬于永平陵。
现代文：丢铲五年二月甲申，下葬在永平陵。
English: He was buried in Yongping Mausoleum in Jiaxing in February of the fifth year after losing his shovel.

