古文：夷貊下东夷西戎蛮西域诸国蠕蠕
现代文：东夷各国，以朝鲜为大，因为曾受到过箕子的教化，所用器物还带有礼乐的影响。
English: Dongyi countries, with North Korea as the largest, because they had been indoctrinated by dice, the utensils used were also influenced by ceremonial music.

古文：东夷之国，朝鲜爲大，得箕子之化，其器物犹有礼乐云。
现代文：三国魏时，朝鲜以东马韩、辰韩等国，世代与中国交往。
English: During the Three Kingdoms Period, Korea, along with other countries such as East Malaysia, South Korea, and North Korea, had been interacting with China for generations.

古文：自晋过江，泛海来使，有高句丽、百济，而宋、齐间常通职贡，梁兴又有加焉。
现代文：自从晋朝南渡，渡海前来出使的，有高句丽、百济，而宋、齐时常来进贡，梁朝时来往又有增加。
English: Since the Southern Expedition of the Jin Dynasty, envoys from Goguryeo and Baekje have come to the sea, while the Song Dynasty and Qi Dynasty often came to pay tribute, and the number of visits from the Liang Dynasty increased.

古文：扶桑国，在昔未闻也，梁普通中有道人称自彼而至，其言元本尤悉，故并录焉。
现代文：扶桑国，以前没有听说过，梁朝普通年间有和尚自称从那里来，所说的话很详尽，所以一并记录下来。
English: Fusang, which had not been heard of before, had a monk who claimed to come from there during the ordinary years of the Liang Dynasty. The words he spoke were very detailed, so they were recorded together.

古文：高句丽，在辽东之东千里，其先所出，事详北史。
现代文：高句丽高句丽，在辽东东面千里之外，它祖先的来历，详见于《北史》。
English: GoguryeoGoguryeo, a thousand miles to the east of Liaodong, the origin of its ancestors is detailed in "Northern History."

古文：地方可二千里，中有辽山，辽水所出。
现代文：土地方圆约二千里，其中有辽山，辽水从中流出。
English: The earth has a circumference of about two thousand miles, including the Liao Mountains, from which the Liao Water flows.

古文：汉、魏世，南与朝鲜獩貊、东与沃沮、北与夫馀接。
现代文：汉、魏时候，南边与朝鲜、犭岁貊，东边与沃沮，北边与夫余接壤。
English: During the Han and Wei Dynasties, the south side was bordered by Korea and Shandong Province, the east side was bordered by Wuxi Province, and the north side was bordered by Fujian Province.

古文：其王都于丸都山下，地多大山深谷，无原泽，百姓依之以居，食涧水。
现代文：其王在丸都山下建都，国土大多是大山深谷，没有平原湖沼，百姓依山而居，饮山涧的水。
English: Its king built the capital at the foot of Mount Marutsu. The land is mostly mountains and deep valleys, with no plains or lakes. The people live in the mountains and drink water from the mountains.

古文：虽土着，无良田，故其俗节食，好修宫室。
现代文：虽然生活方式是农耕，但没有良田，因此有节食习惯。
English: Although the way of life is farming, there are no good fields, so there are dieting habits.

古文：于所居之左立大屋，祭鬼神，又祠零星、社稷。
现代文：爱修建房屋，在住处的左侧造大屋，祭祀鬼神，又搭祭主稼穑的零星、社稷。
English: He loved to build houses, and on the left side of his residence he built a large house, where he worshipped ghosts and deities.

古文：人性凶急，喜寇钞。
现代文：民性凶强急躁，喜欢抢掠。
English: The people's nature is fierce and impatient, and they like to loot.

古文：其官有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹加、主簿、优台、使者、皁衣、先人，尊卑各有等级。
现代文：他们的官职有相加、对卢、沛者、古邹加、主簿、优台、使者、阜衣、先人，尊卑各有等级。
English: Their official positions are the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same, the same.

古文：言语诸事，多与夫馀同，其性气衣服有异。
现代文：语言方面，多和夫余相同，而性情衣服不同。
English: In terms of language, they are mostly the same as their husbands, but their temperament and clothes are different.

古文：本有五族，有消奴部、绝奴部、慎奴部、灌奴部、桂娄部。
现代文：有五个部族，有消奴部、绝奴部、慎奴部、灌奴部、桂娄部。
English: There are five tribes, including the anti-slavery department, the anti-slavery department, the anti-slavery department, the anti-slavery department, the anti-slavery department and the anti-slavery department.

古文：本消奴部爲王，微弱，桂娄部代之。
现代文：本来是消奴部为王，因其微弱，被桂娄部取代。
English: Originally, the elimination of slavery department was the king, but because of its weakness, it was replaced by the Guizhou Department.

古文：其置官，有对卢则不置沛者，有沛者则不置对卢。
现代文：对官吏的设置，是有对卢就不设沛者，有沛者就不设对卢。
English: Gao Guanzhong appointed officials, those who have the right will not set up the right, and those who have the right will not set up the right.

古文：俗喜歌舞，国中邑落，男女每夜群聚歌戏。
现代文：习俗喜爱歌舞，国中各个村落，男女每夜聚会歌舞游戏。
English: Custom loves song and dance, every village in the country, men and women gather every night to sing and dance.

古文：其人洁净自喜，善藏酿，跪拜申一脚，行步皆走。
现代文：那儿的人喜欢洁净、善于酿酒，跪拜时伸出一脚，走路很快。
English: People there like to be clean, are good at making wine, extend a foot when kneeling, and walk fast.

古文：以十月祭天大会。
现代文：在十月举行祭天大会。
English: A festival is held in October.

古文：其公会衣服皆锦绣金银以自饰，大加、主簿头所着似帻而无后，其小加着折风，形如弁。
现代文：参加公事会晤者都穿着锦绣饰以金银，大加、主簿头上戴的像包头巾但后边空着，小加戴折风，形状如弁。
English: The participants in the business meeting are all wearing brocade embroidered with gold and silver, plus, the main book is worn on the head like a headscarf but the back is empty, and the small book is folded, shaped like a valve.

古文：其国无牢狱，有罪者则会诸加评议，重者便杀之，没入其妻子。
现代文：国内没有监狱，有人犯罪就集会加以评议，重罪便杀掉，其妻儿入官为奴。
English: There are no prisons in the country. People who commit crimes are judged at meetings, those who commit serious crimes are killed, and their wives and children are enslaved.

古文：其俗好淫，男女多相奔诱。
现代文：其风俗喜欢淫乱，男女多相引诱私奔。
English: Their people love lewdness; men and women seduce each other and run away.

古文：已嫁娶便稍作送终之衣。
现代文：嫁娶后的男女便开始逐渐添置送终的衣服。
English: After marriage, men and women began to gradually buy more and more clothes.

古文：其死葬，有椁无棺。
现代文：死人下葬，有木郭无棺。
English: When a person dies, they are buried with or without a coffin.

古文：好厚葬，金银财币尽于送死。
现代文：喜欢厚葬，金银财产都用来陪送死人。
English: They like to be buried with a lot of gold, silver and money.

古文：积石爲封，列植松柏。
现代文：堆积石头作坟，排列种植松柏。
English: Stones were piled up to make graves, and pine trees were planted in rows.

古文：兄死妻嫂。
现代文：哥哥死了就娶嫂子为妻。
English: After the death of his elder brother, his younger brother married his sister-in-law.

古文：其马皆小，便登山。国人尚气力，便弓矢刀矛，有铠甲，习战斗，沃沮、东濊皆属焉。
现代文：高句丽人崇尚体力，娴于弓矢刀矛，备有铠甲，惯于战斗，沃沮、东氵岁都臣属于它。
English: The Goguryeo people advocated physical strength. They were fond of bows and arrows, swords and spears, had armor, and were accustomed to fighting.

古文：晋安帝义熙九年，高丽王高琏遣长史高翼奉表，献赭白马，晋以琏爲使持节、都督营州诸军事、征东将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
现代文：晋安帝义熙九年，高丽王高琏派遣长史高翼进呈章表，献赭白马，晋封高琏为使持节、都督营州诸军事、征东将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor An of Jin and Emperor Yixi of Goryeo, King Gaozong of Goryeo sent Gaozong Gaozong to present the chapter table and present a white horse, and Gaozong of Jin was awarded the Envoy Festival, the Military Governor of Yingzhou, the General of the Expedition to the East, the King of Goryeo, and the Prince of Le Lang.

古文：宋武帝践阼，加琏征东大将军，余官并如故。
现代文：宋武帝称帝，加封高琏征东大将军，其余官职如故。
English: Emperor Songwu proclaimed himself emperor, Gao Gan was given the title of General of the Eastern Expedition, and the rest of the official positions remained the same.

古文：三年，加琏散骑常侍，增督平州诸军事。
现代文：宋武帝永初三年，加封高琏散骑常侍，增督平州诸军事之职。
English: In the first three years of Emperor Songwu Yongzheng, Gao Qi was given the additional title of Gao Qi Sanzhiyi Changzhi, and he was also given the additional title of Governor of Pingzhou and other military posts.

古文：少帝景平二年，琏遣长史马娄等来献方物，遣谒者朱邵伯、王邵子等慰劳之。
现代文：少帝景平二年，高琏派长史马娄等人来进献地方特产；宋派谒者朱邵伯、王邵之去慰劳。
English: In the second year of the young emperor Jingping, Gao Zheng sent the governor Shima Zheng and others to donate local special products; Song sent the emperors Zhu Shao Bo and Wang Shao Zheng to comfort labor.

古文：元嘉十五年，冯弘爲魏所攻，败奔高丽北丰城，表求迎接。
现代文：元嘉十五年，冯弘被魏国进攻，战败逃奔到高丽北丰城，并上表请宋朝派人去接他回去。
English: In the 15th year of Yuan Jia, Feng Hong was attacked by Wei, defeated and fled to Beifeng City, Korea, and asked the Song Dynasty to send someone to pick him up.

古文：文帝遣使王白驹、赵次兴迎之，并令高丽资遣。
现代文：文帝派使者王白驹、赵次兴去接他，并令高丽护送。
English: Emperor Wen sent emissaries Wang Baiyao and Zhao Zixing to pick him up, and ordered Goryeo to escort him.

古文：琏不欲弘南，乃遣将孙漱、高仇等袭杀之。
现代文：高琏不愿让冯弘南归，就派将领孙漱、高仇出其不意杀了冯弘。
English: Gao Gan did not want Feng Hong to return to the south, so he sent generals Sun Shu and Gao Qian to kill Feng Hong.

古文：白驹等率所领七千余人生禽漱，杀仇等二人。
现代文：白驹等人率领的七千多人生擒孙漱、高仇，并杀了二人。
English: More than seven thousand people, led by the White Egrets and others, killed Sun Sui, Gao Qi, and killed two people.

古文：琏以白驹等专杀，遣使执送之。
现代文：高琏因白驹等人擅自杀人，派人把他们抓起来送交宋朝。
English: Gao Yao sent people to arrest them and hand them over to the Song Dynasty because Bai Yao and others had committed suicide.

古文：上以远国不欲违其意，白驹等下狱见原。
现代文：文帝因为高丽是远方国家，不愿把关系搞坏，就把白驹等人下狱，又被赦免。
English: Because Goryeo was a faraway country and Emperor Wen did not want to spoil the relationship, he sent Bai Ju and others to prison, and they were pardoned.

古文：琏每岁遣使。
现代文：高琏每年派遣使者前来。
English: Every year, Takatsuki sends an emissary to Mt.

古文：十六年，文帝欲侵魏，诏琏送马，献八百匹。
现代文：元嘉十六年，文帝打算侵魏，下诏让高琏送马来，高琏献上八百匹。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Jia, Emperor Wen planned to invade Wei, and issued an edict to let Gao Gan send horses, and Gao Gan presented eight hundred horses.

古文：孝武孝建二年，琏遣长史董腾奉表，慰国哀再周，并献方物。
现代文：宋孝武帝孝建二年，高琏派长史董腾上表，慰问文帝去世两周年，并进献地方物产。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaojian of Song and Wu, the leader of the Gaocheng faction, Shi Dongteng, came to the table to offer condolences on the second anniversary of the death of Emperor Wen, and to present local products.

古文：大明二年，又献肃慎氏楛矢石砮。
现代文：大明二年，又献肃慎氏木苦木箭和石箭头。
English: In the 2nd year of the Daming Dynasty, he also dedicated the wood and stone arrows to Shenshi.

古文：七年，诏进琏爲车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，馀官并如故。
现代文：七年，下诏晋封高琏为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，其余官职如故。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, Emperor Jin appointed Gao Jian as the general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and the rest of the official positions remained unchanged.

古文：明帝泰始、后废帝元徽中，贡献不绝，历齐并授爵位，百馀岁死。
现代文：明帝太始、后废帝元徽年间，高琏的进贡不断，经历齐朝也都被授予爵位，百余岁死去。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty and later during the reign of the deposed Emperor Yuan Hui, Gao Qi's tribute continued, and through the Qi Dynasty he was also awarded a peerage, and he died more than a hundred years old.

古文：子云立，齐隆昌中，以爲使持节、散骑常侍、都督营平二州、征东大将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
现代文：儿子高云继位。齐朝隆昌年间，封他为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营、平二州、征东大将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
English: His son, Gao Yun, succeeded to the throne. During the reign of the Qi Dynasty, he was given the titles of the Emissary, the Cavalryman, the Governor of the Capital, the Governor of the Two Provinces, the General of the Expedition to the East, the King of Goryeo, and the Prince of Le Lang.

古文：梁武帝即位，进云车骑大将军。
现代文：梁武帝即位，晋封高云为车骑大将军。
English: Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, and Gao Yun was promoted to General of Cavalry.

古文：天监七年，诏爲抚东大将军、开府仪同三司，持节、常侍、都督、王并如故。
现代文：天监七年，下诏封高云为抚东大将军、开府仪同三司，持节、常侍、都督、王等职务都不变。
English: In the seventh year of Tianjun, Gao Yun was given the title of Fudong Grand General, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and the positions of holding festivals, regular attendants, governor and king remained unchanged.

古文：十一年、十五年，累遣使贡献。
现代文：十一年、十五年，屡次派使者来朝贡。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianjun and the fifteenth year of Tianjun, Gao Yun repeatedly sent emissaries to offer tribute.

古文：十七年，云死，子安立。
现代文：十七年，高云死，儿子高安继位。
English: In the 17th year of Tianjing, Gao Yun died, and his son Gao An succeeded to the throne.

古文：普通元年，诏安纂袭封爵，持节、督营平二州诸军事、甯东将军。
现代文：普通元年，下诏让高安承袭父亲的封爵，并封持节、督营平二州诸军事、宁东将军。
English: In the first year of the common era, the emperor issued an edict to let Gao An inherit his father's knighthood, and he was also given the title of General of Ningdong, Commander-in-Chief of the Military of the Two Provinces of Ping and Ningdong.

古文：七年，安卒，子延立，遣使贡献。
现代文：普通七年，高安死，儿子高延继位，派使臣来进贡。
English: Normally seven years, Gao An died, his son Gao Yan succeeded to the throne, and sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：诏以延袭爵。
现代文：朝廷下诏让高延承袭其父的封爵。
English: The imperial court decreed that Gao Yan should inherit his father's title.

古文：中大通四年、六年，大同元年、七年，累奉表献方物。
现代文：中大通四年、六年、大同元年、七年，屡次上表进献地方物产。
English: In the fourth year of the Middle Daesong, the sixth year of the Middle Daesong, the first year of the Datong, and the seventh year of the Datong, Gao Yan repeatedly sent emissaries to present the badge and offer local special products.

古文：太清二年，延卒，诏其子成袭延爵位。
现代文：太清二年，高延死，梁朝下诏让他儿子高成承继他的爵位。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Gao Yan died, and the Liang Dynasty issued an edict that his son Gao Cheng should succeed to his title.

古文：百济者，其先东夷有三韩国：一曰马韩，二曰辰韩，三曰弁韩。
现代文：百济百济的来历是：以前东夷有三个韩国，一个叫马韩、一个叫辰韩，一个叫弁韩。
English: The origin of Baekje Baekje is: there used to be three Koreas in Dongyi, one called Ma Han, one called Chen Han, and one called Ben Han.

古文：弁韩、辰韩各十二国，马韩有五十四国。
现代文：弁韩、辰韩各有十二国，马韩有五十四国。
English: Benhan and Chenhan each had twelve vassal states, and Ya Rong had fifty-four vassal states.

古文：大国万馀家，小国数千家，总十余万户，百济即其一也。
现代文：大国有万余家，小国有数千家，总共十余万户，百济是其一国。
English: There are more than 10,000 households in large countries and thousands in small countries, with a total of more than 100,000 households. Baekje is one of these countries.

古文：后渐强大，兼诸小国。
现代文：后来逐渐强大，兼并了各小国。
English: Later, Baekje gradually became powerful and annexed many small countries.

古文：其国本与句丽俱在辽东之东千余里，晋世句丽既略有辽东，百济亦据有辽西、晋平二郡地矣，自置百济郡。
现代文：百济本与句丽都在辽东以东千余里，晋朝时句丽占据了辽东后，百济也占据了辽西、晋平二郡的地方，自己设置了百济郡。
English: Both Baiji and Guoli are more than a thousand miles east of Liaodong. After Guoli occupied Liaodong during the Jin Dynasty, Baiji also occupied the two counties of West Liaoning and Jinping, and set up Baiji County on its own.

古文：晋义熙十二年，以百济王馀映爲使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东将军、百济王。
现代文：晋义熙十二年，朝廷封百济王余映为使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东将军、百济王。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yixi, the imperial court appointed King Yu Ying of Baekje as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Baekje, the general of Zhen Dong, and the King of Baekje.

古文：宋武帝践阼，进号镇东大将军。
现代文：宋武帝称帝，封号为镇东大将军。
English: Emperor Songwu proclaimed himself emperor, and was given the title of Zhen Dongda Shogun.

古文：少帝景平二年，映遣长史张威诣阙贡献。
现代文：少帝景平二年，余映派遣长史张威到朝廷进贡。
English: In the second year of the young Emperor Jingping, Yu Ying sent Changshi Zhang Wei to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：元嘉二年，文帝诏兼谒者闾丘恩子、兼副谒者丁敬子等往宣旨慰劳，其后每岁遣使奉献方物。
现代文：元嘉二年，文帝下诏派兼谒者闾丘恩子、兼副谒者丁敬子等人到百济宣示旨意以示慰劳，后来每年百济都派使者来进献地方物产。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Wenzong sent the concurrently appointed person of the imperial edict, Gaochu Enzi, and the concurrently appointed person of the imperial edict, Ding Keizi, and others to Baekje to announce the will as a sign of consolation. Later, Baekje sent an emissary every year to present local products.

古文：七年，百济王余毗复修贡职，以映爵号授之。
现代文：元嘉七年，百济王余毗又向朝廷纳贡，朝廷把余映的爵号授予他。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, King Yufi of Baekje again paid tribute to the court, and the court awarded him the title of Yu Ying.

古文：二十七年，毗上书献方物，私假台使冯野夫西河太守，表求易林、式占、腰弩，文帝并与之。
现代文：二十七年，余毗上书献地方物产，私封朝廷使节冯野夫代理西河太守，上表求取《易林》、《式占》、腰弩，文帝都给予他。
English: In the 27th year, Yufi presented a book of local products, and the private imperial envoy Feng Nong, acting as the acting governor of the West River, asked for "Yilin," "Shikizan" and "Kosei" on the table, and Emperor Wen gave them to him.

古文：毗死，子庆代立。
现代文：余毗死，儿子余庆代立。
English: Yu Bi died, and his son Yu Qing succeeded him.

古文：孝武大明元年，遣使求除授，诏许之。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年，派使者来求取封号，朝廷下诏准许。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu sent an envoy to request the seal number, and the imperial court granted the request.

古文：二年，庆遣上表，言行冠军将军、右贤王余纪十一人忠勤，并求显进。
现代文：二年，余庆派使者上表，称言兼领冠军将军、右贤王余纪等十一人忠贞辛劳，要求给他们表彰晋升。
English: In the second year, Yu Qing sent an emissary to the table, praising the champion general and the right wise king Yu Ji and other eleven people for their loyalty and hard work, and requested that they be commended and promoted.

古文：于是诏并加优进。
现代文：于是朝廷下诏对他们都褒奖提升。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court decreed that they would all receive higher awards.

古文：明帝泰始七年，又遣使贡献。
现代文：明帝泰始七年，又派使节来朝贡。
English: In the first seven years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, he also sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庆死，立子牟都。
现代文：余庆死，立儿子牟都。
English: After the death of Yu Qing, his son Mutu was born.

古文：都死，立子牟大。
现代文：牟都死，立儿子牟大。
English: Mu Du died and his son, Mu Da, was born.

古文：齐永明中，除大都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军、百济王。
现代文：齐永明年间，封牟大为都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军、百济王。
English: During the reign of Qianlong, Fomuda became the military governor of Baekje, the general of Zhendong, and the king of Baekje.

古文：梁天监元年，进大号征东将军。
现代文：梁天监元年，给牟大晋封号征东将军。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, he was given the title of General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：寻爲高句丽所破，衰弱累年，迁居南韩地。
现代文：不久被高丽攻破，多年衰弱不振，迁居到南韩地方。
English: Soon defeated by Goryeo, it languished for many years and moved to South Korea.

古文：普通二年，王馀隆始复遣使奉表，称累破高丽，今始与通好，百济更爲强国。
现代文：普通二年，百济王余隆才又派使臣向梁朝上表，说是屡次打败高丽，如今开始关系和好，百济又成为强国。
English: It was not until two years later that King Yulong of Baekje sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty, saying that he had repeatedly defeated Goryeo, and now relations had begun to improve, and Baekje had once again become a powerful country.

古文：其年，梁武帝诏隆爲使持节、都督百济诸军事、甯东大将军、百济王。
现代文：当年，梁武帝委任余隆为使持节、都督百济诸军事、宁东大将军、百济王。
English: In that year, Emperor Liangwu appointed Yu Long as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the military governor of Baekje, the general of Ningdong and the king of Baekje.

古文：五年，隆死，诏复以其子明爲持节、督百济诸军事、绥东将军、百济王。
现代文：普通五年，余隆死，朝廷下诏让他儿子余明为持节、督百济诸军事、绥东将军、百济王。
English: Five years later, after Yu Long's death, the imperial court decreed that his son, Yu Ming, would be given the title of Jijie, the military governor of Baekje, the general of Shandong, and the king of Baekje.

古文：号所都城曰固麻，谓邑曰檐鲁，如中国之言郡县也。
现代文：百济称自己的都城叫固麻，把城邑叫檐鲁，如中国所说的郡县。
English: Baekje calls its capital Goma, and its cities and towns Jilu, which is the Chinese word for county.

古文：其国土有二十二檐鲁，皆以子弟宗族分据之。
现代文：国内有二十二檐鲁，都派子弟宗族分别据守。
English: There are twenty-two Bailu in the country, and all of them sent their sons and sons of the clan to defend their territories.

古文：其人形长，衣服洁净。
现代文：百济人个子高，衣服洁净。
English: Baekje people are tall and their clothes are clean.

古文：其国近倭，颇有文身者。
现代文：国土靠近倭国，有不少文身的人。
English: Baekje is close to Wakoku, so there are a lot of tattooed people.

古文：言语服章略与高丽同，呼帽曰冠，襦曰复衫，裤曰褌。
现代文：语言和官吏的服饰大体和高丽一样，把帽子叫作冠，襦叫衫，裤叫衤军。
English: The language and dress of officials are generally the same as that of Gaoli. The hat is called the crown, the shirt is called the shirt, and the trousers are called the trousers.

古文：其言参诸夏，亦秦、韩之遗俗云。
现代文：语言中掺杂着中国话，大约是秦、韩遗留的习俗。
English: Among the languages of ancient Liao mixed with the language of ancient China, this is also a custom that has been passed down from Qin and Korea.

古文：中大通六年、大同七年，累遣使献方物，并请涅盘等经义、毛诗博士并工匠画师等，并给之。
现代文：中大通六年、大同七年，屡次派使者来献地方物产，并求取《涅》等经义、《毛诗》博士和工匠画师等，武帝一并给予。
English: In the sixth and seventh years of the reign of Emperor Datong, Emperor Wu repeatedly sent emissaries to present local products, and asked for "Neh" and other scriptures, "Mao Shi" and craftsmen and painters.

古文：太清三年，遣使贡献。及至，见城阙荒毁，并号恸涕泣。
现代文：太清三年，派使者来进贡，等来到后，看到城池宫阙毁坏荒芜，都痛哭流涕。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, an envoy was sent to pay tribute. When he arrived, he saw the ruined castle and palace and the desolation, and wept bitterly.

古文：侯景怒，囚执之，景平乃得还国。
现代文：侯景发怒，把他们抓了起来，等侯景被平定后才得以还国。
English: Hou Jing got angry, arrested them, and waited for Hou Jing to be subdued before returning to the country.

古文：新罗，其先事详北史，在百济东南五千馀里。
现代文：新罗新罗，它早先的历史详见《北史》，在百济东南五千余里。
English: Shilla Shilla, whose early history is detailed in "Northern History," is more than 5,000 miles southeast of Baekje.

古文：其地东滨大海，南北与句丽、百济接。
现代文：国土东临大海，南北和句丽、百济接壤。
English: The country is bordered by the sea to the east, and by the provinces of Wakuli and Baekje to the north and south.

古文：魏时曰新卢；宋时曰新罗，或曰斯罗。
现代文：魏时叫新卢，宋时叫新罗，或者叫斯罗。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, it was called Xinlu, and during the Song Dynasty, it was called Silla, or Sluo.

古文：其国小，不能自通使聘。
现代文：国家很小，不能独立行使外交活动。
English: Silla is a small country and cannot send an envoy on its own.

古文：梁普通二年，王姓募名泰，始使使随百济奉献方物。
现代文：梁普通二年，新罗王姓募名泰的，才派使者随百济一起来贡献地方物产。
English: It wasn't until the second year of Liang's reign that the Silla king, whose family name was Baekje, sent an envoy to Baekje to contribute local products.

古文：其俗呼城曰健牟罗，其邑在内曰啄评，在外曰邑勒，亦中国之言郡县也。
现代文：其风俗把城叫作健牟罗，村镇在城里叫啄评，在外边叫邑勒，也就是中国所说的郡县。
English: The people of Silla call the city Jianmuro, and the capital city is called Jianping, and the outlying areas are called Yule, just as counties are called Guanxian in China.

古文：国有六啄评、五十二邑勒。
现代文：国内有六个啄评，五十二个邑勒。
English: In China, there are six gongs and fifty-two eulogies.

古文：土地肥美，宜植五谷，多桑麻，作缣布，服牛乘马，男女有别。
现代文：土地肥美，适合种植五谷，种有很多桑麻；纺织绢布，驾牛骑马，男女有别。
English: The land is fertile, suitable for growing cereals, and there are many varieties of mulberry; textile fabrics, driving cattle and riding horses, men and women are different.

古文：其官名有子贲旱支、壹旱支、齐旱支、谒旱支、壹吉支、奇贝旱支。
现代文：其官职名称有子贲旱支、壹旱支、齐旱支、谒旱支、壹吉支、奇贝旱支。
English: Its official names are Yizi Zhaozhou Branch, Yizhaozhou Branch, Qi Zhaozhou Branch, Zhaozhou Branch, Yijie Branch and Qibai Zhaozhou Branch.

古文：其冠曰遗子礼，襦曰尉解，裤曰柯半，靴曰洗。
现代文：冠叫遗子礼，襦叫尉解，裤子叫柯半，靴叫洗。
English: The crown is called "Wu Zixi Li" (遗子礼), the rooster is called "Fei Xie" (尉解), the trousers are called "Ke Han" (柯半), and the shoes are called "Shuang" (洗).

古文：其拜及行与高丽相类。
现代文：行拜礼和走路和高丽相似。
English: The act of worship and walking are similar to goryo.

古文：无文字，刻木爲信。
现代文：没有文字，刻木头作为凭证。
English: There is no writing, only the carved wood as a proof.

古文：语言待百济而后通焉。
现代文：语言得通过百济翻译才能懂。
English: They want to communicate with other countries through Baekje.

古文：倭国，其先所出及所在，事详北史。
现代文：倭国倭国，其祖先的来历及所处的地方，详见《北史》。
English: For details on the origin and location of the ancestors of Wakoku, see "Northern History."

古文：其官有伊支马，次曰弥马获支，次曰奴往鞮。
现代文：其官职有伊支马，其下叫弥马获支，再下叫奴往革是。
English: The officials of the Wakoku Kingdom were called Ichima, the second-highest was called Yima, the third-highest was called Nama, and the first-highest was called Naka.

古文：人种禾、稻、紵、麻，蚕桑织绩，有姜、桂、橘、椒、苏。
现代文：人民种植谷物、稻子、纟宁、麻，种桑养蚕纺织，有姜、桂、橘、椒、苏。
English: The people grow cereals, rice, fenugreek, and hemp, grow mulberry, and raise silkworms for textile, and have ginger, cinnamon, tangerine, pepper, and bean curd.

古文：出黑雉、真珠、青玉。
现代文：出产黑雉、珍珠、青玉。
English: It produces black tungsten, pearl and blue jade.

古文：有兽如牛名山鼠，又有大蛇吞此兽。
现代文：有一种像牛一样的野兽叫山鼠，又有大蛇吞食这种野兽。
English: There is a kind of beast like a cow called a mountain rat, and there is also a big snake devouring this beast.

古文：蛇皮坚不可斫，其上有孔，乍开乍闭，时或有光，射中而蛇则死矣。
现代文：蛇皮坚韧刀砍不进，上边有孔，一开一闭，有时里边发光，射中孔蛇就会死。
English: Snake skin is tough and cannot be cut with a knife. It has a hole on the top, which opens and closes, and sometimes glows on the inside. Snakes will die if they are shot through the hole.

古文：物産略与儋耳、朱崖同。
现代文：物产大体和儋耳、朱崖相同。
English: The products are generally the same as those of Jiali and Zhuyi.

古文：地气温暖，风俗不淫。
现代文：那地方气候温暖。风俗不淫乱。
English: The climate is warm and the customs are not lewd.

古文：男女皆露髫，富贵者以锦绣杂采爲帽，似中国胡公头。
现代文：男女都露着发髻不包。富贵者用锦绣杂色彩帛作帽，似中国的胡公头。
English: Both men and women wore their hair uncovered, and the rich wore caps made of brocade and other colors, resembling the head of the Chinese god Hu.

古文：食饮用笾豆。
现代文：饮食器具用笾豆。
English: The people of Wakoku eat and drink with ceremonial objects such as taro beans.

古文：其死有棺无椁，封土作冢。
现代文：人死后有棺无木郭，堆土作坟。
English: After a person dies, there is a coffin without a wooden frame, and a mound of earth is used as a grave.

古文：人性皆嗜酒。
现代文：人人都爱喝酒。
English: The people of Wa are all alcoholics.

古文：俗不知正岁，多寿考，或至八九十，或至百岁。
现代文：其风俗不懂得历法。人多长寿，有的活到八九十岁，有的活到百岁。
English: Their customs do not know the calendar. Most people live a long life, some live to eighty or ninety, some live to a hundred.

古文：其俗女多男少，贵者至四五妻，贱者犹至两三妻。
现代文：国情为女多男少，有地位的人有四五个妻子，低贱的也有两三个。
English: The situation in the country is that there are more women than men, and those with status have four or five wives, while those with low status have two or three.

古文：妇人不媱妒，无盗窃，少诤讼。若犯法，轻者没其妻子，重则灭其宗族。
现代文：妇女不轻浮嫉妒，国内没有盗窃，很少有打官司的；如果犯法，轻的把他的老婆孩子入官为奴，重的灭掉他的家族。
English: Women are not frivolous and jealous, there is no theft in the country, and there are few people who sue; if he breaks the law, he will easily enslave his wife and children and destroy his family.

古文：晋安帝时，有倭王赞遣使朝贡。
现代文：晋安帝时，有倭王叫讠赞的派使者来朝贡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin of An, there was an envoy sent by the king of Wa to pay tribute.

古文：及宋武帝永初二年，诏曰： 倭赞远诚宜甄，可赐除授。 
现代文：到宋武帝永初二年，朝廷下诏说： 倭王讠赞在远方的忠诚应以表彰，可赐以封号。 
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wudi Yong of the Song Dynasty, the imperial court issued an edict saying, "The loyalty of King Yuzen of Wa in a distant land should be commended, and he may be given a seal."

古文：文帝元嘉二年，赞又遣司马曹达奉表献方物。
现代文：文帝元嘉二年，讠赞又派司马曹达上表进献地方物产。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wen's reign, Emperor He again sent Sima Cao to present local products.

古文：赞死，弟珍立，遣使贡献，自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王，表求除正。
现代文：讠赞死，弟珍继位，派使者来朝贡，自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
English: After the death of Yu Zan, his younger brother Zhen succeeded to the throne and sent an envoy to pay tribute to the court, claiming to be the envoy of Ji Jie, the governor of Wa, Baekje, Silla, the military of the Six Kingdoms of Qin, Han, and Han, General Anton, and the king of Wa.

古文：诏除安东将军、倭国王。
现代文：上表请求正式承认。朝廷下诏封他为安东将军、倭国王。
English: The request was officially recognized, and the imperial court granted him the title of General Anton, King of Wa.

古文：珍又求除正倭洧等十三人平西、征虏、冠军、辅国将军等号，诏并听之。
现代文：珍又请求承认倭洧等十三人平西、征虏、冠军、辅国将军等号，朝廷下诏一并应允。
English: Zhen also requested the recognition of thirteen persons such as Pingxi, Conscript, Champion, and General of the Auxiliary State, and the Imperial Court agreed to all of them.

古文：二十年，倭国王济遣使奉献，复以爲安东将军、倭国王。
现代文：元嘉二十年，倭国王济派使者来朝贡，朝廷又委任他为安东将军、倭国王。
English: In the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the king of Wa sent an envoy to pay tribute, and the court appointed him as General Anton, the king of Wa.

古文：二十八年，加使持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事，安东将军如故；并除所上二十三人职。
现代文：二十八年，加封济为使持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事，安东将军不变，并委任倭国所上报的二十三人职务。
English: In the 28th year of the Heian period, Emperor Go-Shirakawa appointed Nagaro, Qin, Han, Mu, and the militaries of the Six Kingdoms of Korea as governors-general, and appointed the twenty-three officials reported by the Kingdom of Japan.

古文：济死，世子兴遣使贡献。
现代文：济死后，太子兴派使者来朝贡。
English: After Ji's death, Prince Heung sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：孝武大明六年，诏授兴安东将军、倭国王。
现代文：孝武帝大明六年，朝廷下诏加封兴为安东将军、倭国王。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the imperial court issued an imperial edict and enthroned Xing as General Anton and King of Wa.

古文：兴死，弟武立，自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩七国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
现代文：兴死后，弟武继位，自称使持节、都督倭百济新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩七国诸军事、安东大将军、倭国王。
English: After the death of Xing, his younger brother Wu succeeded to the throne, claiming to be the envoy of the Emperor, the governor of Baekje, Silla, Nagaro, Qin, Han, the military of the Seven Kingdoms of Korea, General Anton, and the king of Wa.

古文：顺帝升明二年，遣使上表，言 自昔祖禰，躬擐甲胄，跋涉山川，不遑宁处。
现代文：顺帝升明二年，派使者上表，声称： 自从我们的祖先起，就亲披甲胄，跋涉山川，没有功夫安居。
English: Two years after Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he sent an envoy to the table, claiming: Since our ancestors, we have been wearing armor, trekking through mountains and rivers, and living peacefully without effort.

古文：东征毛人五十五国，西服衆夷六十六国，陵平海北九十五国。
现代文：东征毛人五十五国，西降伏众夷六十六国。平定海北九十五国，王道昌盛。
English: In the East, the Maoists conquered 55 countries; in the West, 66 countries surrendered to the barbarians; in the North, 95 countries were pacified, and Wang Dao prospered.

古文：王道融泰，廓土遐畿，累叶朝宗，不愆于岁。
现代文：作为远方之国，我们对上国累世朝拜，连年不断。
English: As a distant country, we have worshipped Shangguo for generations, year after year.

古文：道径百济，装饰船舫，而句丽无道，图欲见吞。
现代文：朝贡时途经百济，整修船只，而句丽强暴，想要抢夺贡品。
English: The tributes passed through Baekje on their way, and the ships were repaired, but Guli was violent and wanted to rob the tributes.

古文：臣亡考济方欲大举，奄丧父兄，使垂成之功，不获一篑。
现代文：我的先父济曾打算大动干戈，但不料忽然间我的父兄都相继去世，以至功亏一篑。
English: My forefather Ji had planned to go to war, but all of a sudden, my father and brother passed away one after another, so that his efforts were in vain.

古文：今欲练兵申父兄之志，窃自假开府仪同三司，其馀咸各假授，以劝忠节 。
现代文：如今我想要操练兵马，来完成父兄的遗愿。我私自代行开府仪同三司名号，其他各人也都授以代理名号，以鼓励忠勇之士努力作战。 
English: Now I want to train soldiers and horses to fulfill the last wish of my father and brother. I personally perform the opening ceremony and the three names, and everyone else is also given a proxy name to encourage the brave men to fight hard.

古文：诏除武使持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭王。
现代文：朝廷下诏封武为使持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭王。
English: The imperial court decreed that Wu would be the festival of envoys, and appointed Nagaro, Qin, Han, and the militaries of the Six Kingdoms of Korea as the governors of Wa and Silla, General Anton, and the king of Wa.

古文：齐建元中，除武持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、镇东大将军。
现代文：齐朝建元年间，封武持节、都督倭新罗任那加罗秦韩慕韩六国诸军事、镇东大将军。
English: During the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as the military commander of the six countries and the general of Zhendong during the Armed Forces Day, and the governor of Wa and Silla.

古文：梁武帝即位，进武号征东大将军。
现代文：梁武帝即位，晋武封号为征东大将军。
English: Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of General of the Expedition to the East.

古文：其南有侏儒国，人长四尺。
现代文：倭国以东有侏儒国。人长四尺。
English: To the east of Wakoku, there is a country of dwarfs. People are four feet long.

古文：又南有黑齿国、裸国，去倭四千馀里，船行可一年至。
现代文：南边又有黑齿国、裸国，离倭国四千多里，船行大约一年才能到。
English: To the south, there are the Black-toothed Cranes and the Naked Cranes. It is more than four thousand miles from Wakoku, and it takes about a year by ship to get there.

古文：又西南万里有海人，身黑眼白，裸而丑，其肉美，行者或射而食之。
现代文：西南万里外又有海人，身黑眼白，裸体而丑陋，他们的肉好吃，有的过路人就射杀他们吃肉。
English: Thousands of miles away in the southwest, there are also sea people, black-eyed and white, naked and ugly. Their meat is delicious, and some passers-by shoot them to eat the meat.

古文：文身国在倭东北七千馀里，人体有文如兽，其额上有三文，文直者贵，文小者贱。
现代文：文身文身国在倭国东北七千多里处，人身上有野兽一样的花纹，额头上有三道纹，纹直的尊贵，纹小的低贱。
English: The land of tattoos is located more than seven thousand miles to the northeast of Wakoku. People have animal-like patterns on their bodies, and three stripes on their foreheads. Those with straight stripes are noble, while those with small stripes are lowly.

古文：土俗欢乐，物丰而贱，行客不齎粮。
现代文：当地风俗爱欢乐，物产丰富而价格低廉，行路人不带粮食。
English: Local customs are fun-loving, produce is plentiful and inexpensive, and pedestrians do not bring food.

古文：有屋宇，无城郭。
现代文：有房屋，无城郭。
English: They have houses, but no city walls.

古文：国王所居，饰以金银珍丽，绕屋爲堑，广一丈，实以水银，雨则流于水银之上。
现代文：国王所住的地方用金银珍奇华丽之物装饰，环绕房屋挖有壕沟，宽一丈，灌上水银，下雨就流在水银上面。
English: The place where the king lived was adorned with gold and silver, with rare and beautiful things, and around the house there was a trench dug, a foot wide, filled with quicksilver, and rain fell on the quicksilver.

古文：市用珍宝。
现代文：用珍宝进行交易。
English: Use treasures to purchase items at the market.

古文：犯轻罪者则鞭杖，犯死罪则置猛兽食之，有枉则兽避而不食，经宿则赦之。
现代文：犯轻罪的用鞭杖责打，犯死罪的就扔给猛兽去吃，有冤枉猛兽就会避而不食，过上一夜就赦免他。
English: Those who committed minor crimes were whipped with a whip, and those who committed capital crimes were thrown to be eaten by wild beasts. If a person had done something wrong, the wild beasts would avoid him and not eat him, and they would pardon him after one night.

古文：大汉国在文身国东五千馀里，无兵戈，不攻战，风俗并与文身国同而言语异。
现代文：大汉大汉国在文身国东五千多里处，没有兵器，不打仗，风俗和文身国都一样，只有语言不同。
English: Great Han Great Han is more than five thousand miles east of Tattoo Country. There are no weapons, no war, and the customs are the same as Tattoo Country, only the language is different.

古文：扶桑国者，齐永元元年，其国有沙门慧深来至荆州，说云： 扶桑在大汉国东二万馀里，地在中国之东。其土多扶桑木，故以爲名。
现代文：扶桑扶桑国，在齐永元元年，其国有和尚慧深来到荆州，说： 扶桑在大汉国东边二万余里，国土在中国的东面，土地上有很多扶桑树，故以此为国名。
English: Fusang Fusang country, in the first year of Qiyong, its state-owned monk Huishen came to Jingzhou and said: Fusang is more than 20,000 miles east of the Han Dynasty, the land is in the east of China, there are many Fusang trees on the land, so this is the name of the country.

古文：扶桑叶似桐，初生如笋，国人食之。
现代文：扶桑叶和桐叶相似，初生如笋，国内人吃它。
English: Fusang leaves are similar to paulownia leaves, and the first-born are like sprouts. People in China eat it.

古文：实如梨而赤，绩其皮爲布，以爲衣，亦以爲锦。
现代文：果实像梨而色红，把它的皮织成布，作成衣服，也用它织成锦。
English: The fruit is red like a pear, and its skin is used to make cloth, clothing, and brocade.

古文：作板屋，无城郭。
现代文：造板屋而居，没有城郭。
English: They live in prefabricated wooden houses. Fushun has no city walls.

古文：有文字，以扶桑皮爲纸。
现代文：有文字，用扶桑皮作纸。
English: There is writing, and paper is made from Fusang leather.

古文：无兵甲，不攻战。
现代文：没有兵器盔甲，不打仗。
English: No armor, no weapons, no war.

古文：其国法有南北狱，若有犯，轻罪者入南狱，重罪者入北狱。
现代文：按国家的法律有南北狱，若有犯罪的，轻罪的入南狱，重罪的入北狱。
English: According to the laws of the country, there are north and south prisons. If there is a crime, the misdemeanors will go to the south prison, and the felonies will go to the north prison.

古文：有赦则放南狱，不赦北狱。
现代文：有赦免就释放南狱的，不赦北狱。
English: Those who are pardoned and released from the Southern Prison will not be pardoned from the Northern Prison.

古文：在北狱者男女相配，生男八岁爲奴，生女九岁爲婢。
现代文：在北狱的男女相配，生下男孩八岁作奴隶，生下女孩九岁作婢女。
English: In the northern prison, men and women are matched, giving birth to a boy of eight years old as a slave, and giving birth to a girl of nine years old as a maid.

古文：犯罪之身，至死不出。
现代文：罪犯本人，至死也不能出狱。
English: Criminals themselves are not allowed to leave prison until they die.

古文：贵人有罪，国人大会，坐罪人于坑，对之宴饮分诀若死别焉。
现代文：如果是贵族犯罪，就招集国民开大会，让罪人坐在坑里，摆上酒宴和他吃喝分手，就像是死别一样。
English: If the crime is committed by an aristocrat, a national assembly is convened, the guilty person is made to sit in a ditch, and a banquet is laid out for him to eat and drink, as if it were a farewell.

古文：以灰绕之，其一重则一身屏退，二重则及子孙，三重者则及七世。
现代文：然后用灰在他边上环绕，绕一圈他本人不得再作官，绕两圈则子孙两代不能作官。三圈就七世不能作官。
English: Then he was surrounded with ashes. After one circle, he himself could no longer hold office. After two circles, his descendants could not hold office for two generations. After three circles, the seventh generation could not hold office.

古文：名国王爲乙祁。
现代文：国王叫作乙祁。
English: The king's name is Acetylene.

古文：贵人第一者爲对卢，第二者爲小对卢，第三者爲纳咄沙。
现代文：贵人名列第一的叫对卢，第二的叫小对卢，第三的叫纳咄沙。
English: The first-ranked honorable person is called Duanlu, the second is called Xiao Duanlu, and the third is called Naqisha.

古文：国王行有鼓角导从。
现代文：国王出行有鼓角引导跟从。
English: When the king travels, there are marching bands and ceremonial battles.

古文：其衣色随年改易，甲乙年青，丙丁年赤，戊己年黄，庚辛年白，壬癸年黑。
现代文：衣服的颜色随年头改换，甲乙年穿青色，丙丁年穿红色，戊己年穿黄色，庚辛年穿白色，壬癸年穿黑色。
English: The color of his clothes changes every year, in the order of the ten dry days, wearing blue clothes in the year of A, B, red clothes in the year of B, yellow clothes in the year of G, white clothes in the year of G, and black clothes in the year of Y.

古文：有牛角甚长，以角载物，至胜二十斛。
现代文：有牛角很长，用它装东西，能超过二十斛。
English: There is a kind of cow in the country with a long horn. People ask the cow to carry things with its horn. The horn can actually carry something as heavy as twenty stalks of rice.

古文：有马车、牛车、鹿车。
现代文：有马车、牛车、鹿车。
English: There are horse-drawn carriages, ox-drawn carriages and deer-drawn carriages.

古文：国人养鹿如中国畜牛，以乳爲酪。
现代文：本国人养鹿就像中国人养牛，用鹿奶作乳酪。
English: The locals raise deer like the Chinese raise cattle, and use deer milk to make cheese.

古文：有赤梨，经年不坏。
现代文：有赤梨，放一年也不坏。
English: There are red pears, and it's not a bad idea to leave them for a year.

古文：多蒲桃。
现代文：多产葡萄。
English: The grapes are prolific.

古文：其地无铁有铜，不贵金银。
现代文：那里无铁有铜，不贵重金银。
English: Fusang has no iron but produces copper, and does not value gold and silver.

古文：市无租估。
现代文：做生意不收税。
English: No taxes are collected at the market.

古文：其昏姻法，则婿往女家门外作屋，晨夕洒扫，经年而女不悦即驱之，相悦乃成昏。
现代文：婚姻的规矩，是女婿在女家门外盖间房子住下，早晚为女家打扫，过一年如果女的不喜欢就把他赶走，喜欢就成婚。
English: The rule of marriage is that the son-in-law builds a house outside the door of the woman's house, lives there, cleans for the woman's house sooner or later, and if the woman does not like it after a year, she will drive him away, and if she likes it, she will get married.

古文：昏礼大抵与中国同。
现代文：婚礼大致与中国相同。
English: The wedding ceremony is roughly the same as in China.

古文：亲丧七日不食，祖父母丧五日不食，兄弟伯叔姑姊妹三日不食。
现代文：父母去世七天不吃饭，祖父母去世五天不吃饭，兄弟伯叔姑姊妹去世三天不吃饭。
English: Parents died seven days without eating, grandparents died five days without eating, brothers and sisters died three days without eating.

古文：设座爲神像，朝夕拜奠，不制衰絰。嗣王立，三年不亲国事。
现代文：设牌位作为死者的神像，早晚礼拜祭奠，不穿孝服，新王继位，三年不管国事。
English: Plaques are set up as statues of the dead, morning and evening worship is held, no filial piety is worn, the new king succeeds to the throne, and there is no state affairs for three years.

古文：其俗旧无佛法。宋大明二年，罽宾国尝有比丘五人游行其国，流通佛法经像，教令出家，风俗遂改。 
现代文：国内原来没有佛教，宋大明二年，宾国曾有五个僧人到扶桑游历，传播佛教经典和佛像，劝导人们出家，风俗于是改变。 
English: Originally, there was no Buddhism in China. In the second year of the Song Dynasty, there were five monks who traveled to Fusang, spreading Buddhist classics and Buddha statues, and persuading people to become monks. As a result, customs changed.

古文：慧深又云： 扶桑东千馀里有女国，容貌端正，色甚洁白，身体有毛，发长委地。
现代文：慧深又说： 扶桑以东千余里处有女国，国人容貌端正，脸很白净，身上有毛，长发垂地。
English: Huishen also said, "More than a thousand miles east of Fusang, there are women's countries everywhere. The people of these countries are neat-looking, with very white faces, hairy bodies, and long hair hanging down to the ground.

古文：至二三月竞入水则任娠，六七月産子。
现代文：到二三月间争相跳入水中就怀孕，六七月生孩子。
English: By February and March, they are competing to jump into the water and become pregnant, giving birth to a child in June and July.

古文：女人胸前无乳，项后生毛，根白，毛中有汁以乳子。
现代文：女人胸前没有乳房，脖子后面长毛，根部色白，毛中有乳汁用来喂孩子。
English: The woman has no breasts in front of her chest, the back of her neck is hairy, the roots are white, and there is milk in the hair to feed the child.

古文：百日能行，三四年则成人矣。
现代文：小孩一百天能走路，三四年就长成大人。
English: A child can walk after a hundred days, but it takes three or four years to grow into an adult.

古文：见人惊避，偏畏丈夫。
现代文：见外人就惊惶躲避，特别怕男人。
English: When a woman sees someone, she panics and avoids them. She is especially afraid of men.

古文：食咸草如禽兽。咸草叶似邪蒿，而气香味咸。
现代文：像禽兽一样吃咸草，咸草叶子像邪蒿，气香味咸。 
English: They eat salty grass like animals, and the leaves of salty grass are like grasshoppers, and the smell is salty.

古文：梁天监六年，有晋安人度海，爲风所飘至一岛，登岸，有人居止，女则如中国，而言语不可晓。
现代文：梁天监六年，有晋安人渡海，被风吹到一个岛上，登岸后，看到有人居住，女的和中国人一样，但语言听不懂。
English: Six years after Liang Tianjun, a Jinan man crossed the sea and was blown by the wind to an island. After landing, he saw people living there. The woman was just like the Chinese, but she did not understand the language.

古文：玉门以西达于西海，考之汉史，通爲西域，高昌迄于波斯，则其所也。
现代文：玉门以西直到西海，考查汉代史书，通称为西域，从高昌到波斯，就是西域之地。
English: From the west of Yumen to the West Sea, according to the Han Dynasty history books, it is commonly known as the Western Regions. From Gaochang to Persia, it is the land of the Western Regions.

古文：自晋、宋以还，虽有时而至，论其风土，甚未能详。
现代文：自从晋、宋以来，虽然西域人有时也到中国来，但说起那里的风土民情，书上却都说不清楚。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, although Westerners have sometimes come to China, when it comes to the customs and customs there, it is not clear in the book.

古文：今略备西域诸国，编之于次云。
现代文：如今大体收集西域各国的情况，编入本书。高昌
English: Nowadays, the situation in Western countries is generally collected and compiled into a book. Gaochang

古文：高昌国，初阚氏爲主，其后爲河西王沮渠茂虔弟无讳袭破之。其王阚爽奔于蠕蠕。
现代文：高昌国，起初以阚氏为君主，后来被河西王沮渠茂虔的弟弟无讳攻袭战败，高昌王阚爽逃奔到蠕蠕去了。
English: Gaochang was originally ruled by the Qin Dynasty, but was later attacked and defeated by the younger brother of the King of Hexi, the dejected and pious Wang Lingshuang. The King of Gaochang fled to Crum Crum.

古文：无讳据之称王，一世而灭于魏。
现代文：无讳占据高昌地盘称王，只经一代就被魏灭掉。
English: It unabashedly occupied the territory of Gaochang and called itself the king, only to be wiped out by Wei after one generation.

古文：其国人又推曲氏爲王，名嘉，魏授爲车骑将军、司空公、都督秦州诸军事、秦州刺史、金城郡公。
现代文：其国人又推举麴氏为王。麴氏名嘉，魏封他为车骑将军、司空公、都督秦州诸军事、秦州刺史、金城郡公。
English: His countrymen also elected the Qin clan as the king. The Qin clan was famous, and in Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry, the general of cavalry.

古文：在位二十四年卒，国諡曰昭武王。
现代文：在位二十四年死，他的国内送他谥号为昭武王。
English: He died after a reign of twenty-four years, and his country gave him the nickname Shouwu Wang.

古文：子子坚，子坚嗣位，魏授使持节、骠骑大将军、散骑常侍、都督瓜州刺史、西平郡公、开府仪同三司、高昌王。
现代文：有儿子子坚。子坚继位，魏封他为使持节、骠骑大将军、散骑常侍、都督瓜州刺史、西平郡公、开府仪同三司、高昌王。
English: He had a son, Zijian. Zijian succeeded to the throne, and in the Wei Dynasty, he was given the titles of Envoy, Cavalry General, Cavalryman, Governor of Guazhou, Governor of Xiping County, Kaifu, and King of Gaochang.

古文：其国盖车师之故地，南接河南，东近敦煌，西次龟兹，北邻敕勒。
现代文：高昌国在车师的故地上，南接河南，东近敦煌，西傍龟兹，北邻敕勒。
English: Gaochang Province is in the driver's ancestral land, connected to Henan in the south, close to Dunhuang in the east, next to Hebei in the west, and next to Shandong in the north.

古文：置四十六镇，交河田地高宁临川横截柳婆洿林新兴由甯始昌笃进白力等镇。
现代文：设置四十六镇，有交河、田地、高宁、临川、横截、柳婆、氵夸林、新兴、由宁、始昌、笃进、白力等镇。
English: Forty-six towns were set up, including Jiahe, Tianchi, Gaoming, Linchuan, Qiaojie, Liuba, Qualin, Xinxing, Yuning, Shichang, Dukjin, and Baili.

古文：官有四镇将军，及置杂号将军、长史、司马、门下校郎、中兵校郎、通事舍人、通事令史、谘议、谏议、校尉、主簿。
现代文：官职有四镇将军，以及设置有杂号将军、长史、司马、门下校郎、中兵校郎、通事舍人、通事令史、谘议、谏议、校尉、主簿。
English: There are four town generals in the official position, as well as miscellaneous generals, long history, Sima, subordinate schoolmaster, junior soldier schoolmaster, secretary, secretary history, consultation, discussion, school officer, and master book.

古文：国人言语与华略同。
现代文：国人言语和中国大体一样。
English: The native language is generally the same as that of China.

古文：有五经、历代史、诸子集。
现代文：有《五经》、历代史书、诸子文集。
English: There are "Five Classics," historical books, and anthologies.

古文：面貌类高丽，辫发垂之于背。
现代文：长相类似高丽，发辫垂在背上。
English: She looks similar to Koryo, with her hair hanging down her back.

古文：着长身小袖袍、缦裆裤。
现代文：穿长身小袖袍子、封裆裤。
English: He wears a long robe with short sleeves and trousers with cuffs.

古文：女子头发，辫而不垂，着锦缬缨络环钏。
现代文：女人的头发结成辫子而不垂挂，穿戴锦绣染花丝绸、串珠饰物及玉环金钏。
English: Women's hair is braided rather than hanging down, and they wear brocaded silk, beaded jewelry, and jade bracelets.

古文：昏姻有六礼。
现代文：婚姻有六礼。
English: There are six rites of marriage.

古文：其地高燥，筑土爲城，架木爲屋，土覆其上。
现代文：地方高爽干燥，筑土作城，架木为屋，上面盖土。
English: The land is high and dry, the soil is used to build the city, the timber is used to build the houses, and the top is covered with soil.

古文：寒暑与益州相似，备植九谷，人多噉面及牛羊肉。
现代文：气温和益州相似，各种谷物都种的有，人们都爱吃面食和牛羊肉。
English: The temperature is similar to Yizhou, all kinds of cereals are grown, and people like to eat pasta and beef and mutton.

古文：出良马、蒲桃酒、石盐。
现代文：出产好马、葡萄酒、石盐。
English: It produces good horses, wine and rock salt.

古文：多草木，有草实如茧，茧中丝如细纑，名曰白叠子，国人取织以爲布。布甚软白，交市用焉。
现代文：草木众多，有一种草的果实像蚕茧，茧里的丝像细麻缕，名叫白叠子，那里的人拿来织成布，布很软很白，用它在市场上作交易。
English: There are many plants and trees, and there is a kind of grass fruit that looks like a cocoon, and the silk in the cocoon looks like fine hemp strands, called white tuft. People there use it to weave cloth, which is very soft and white, and use it to trade in the market.

古文：有朝乌者，旦旦集王殿前，爲行列，不畏人，日出然后散去。
现代文：有一种叫朝乌的鸟，天天早上聚集在高昌王殿前，排成行列，不怕人，太阳出来后才飞走。
English: There is a kind of bird called the morning crow, which gathers every morning in front of the Prince of Gaochang Palace, lining up in rows, not afraid of people, and only flies away when the sun comes out.

古文：梁大同中，子坚遣使献鸣盐枕、蒲桃、良马、氍獀等物。
现代文：梁大同年间，子坚派人来献鸣盐枕、葡萄、良马、毛毯等物品。
English: During the same year of Liang Da, Zi Jian sent people to donate salt pillows, grapes, good horses, blankets and other items.

古文：滑国者，车师之别种也。
现代文：滑国滑国，是车师的别支。
English: Skid country skid country, is the other branch of the driver.

古文：汉永建元年，八滑从班勇击北虏有功，勇上八滑爲后部亲汉侯。
现代文：汉顺帝永建元年，八滑跟从班勇出击匈奴有功，班勇上奏朝廷，封八滑为后部亲汉侯。
English: In the first year of Emperor Han Shun's reign, Hachisuke followed Banyong to attack the Xiongnu, and achieved great success. Banyong played for the imperial court, while Hachisuke was a pro-Han prince in the rear.

古文：自魏、晋以来，不通中国。
现代文：自魏晋以来，不和中国来往。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, it has not had any dealings with China.

古文：至梁天监十五年，其王厌带夷栗陀始遣使献方物。
现代文：到梁天监十五年，滑国王厌带夷栗才派遣使者来献地方物产。
English: It was not until the 15th year of Liang Tianjun that the king of Niu sent an envoy to offer local products.

古文：普通元年，遣使献黄师子、白貂裘、波斯锦等物。
现代文：普通元年，派使者来献黄狮子、白貂裘、波斯锦等物品。
English: In the first year of the common era, emissaries were sent to offer gifts such as yellow lions, white doves, and Persian brocades.

古文：七年，又奉表贡献。
现代文：七年，又上表朝贡。
English: Seven years later, imperial tribute was again paid.

古文：魏之居代都，滑犹爲小国，属蠕蠕。
现代文：北魏国都在代郡时，滑还是小国，隶属于蠕蠕。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty was still in power, Nanshan was still a small country and was subordinated to Cixi.

古文：后稍强大，征其旁国波斯、渴盘陀、罽宾、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒、姑墨、于阗、句般等国，开地千馀里。
现代文：后来逐渐强大，征伐它的邻国波斯、渴盘陀、宾、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒、姑墨、于阗、句般等，开拓土地数千里。
English: Later, it gradually became powerful, conquering its neighboring countries of Persia, Khitan, Bin, Yan, Kuez, Shule, Gumo, Yu, and Gu, and opening up thousands of miles of land.

古文：土地温暖，多山川，少树木，有五谷。
现代文：那里土地温暖，山地河流多，树木少，有五谷。
English: The land there is warm, there are many mountain rivers, few trees, and there are valleys.

古文：国人以面及羊肉爲粮。
现代文：国人以面及羊肉为口粮。
English: The Chinese are living on rations of noodles and mutton.

古文：其兽有师子、两脚骆驼，野驴有角。
现代文：兽类有狮子、两脚骆驼，野驴有角。
English: The animals of the land of Sui include the lion, the two-legged camel, and the wild ass. The wild ass has horns.

古文：人皆善骑射，着小袖长身袍，用金玉爲带。
现代文：人都善于骑射，穿小袖长身袍，用金玉作腰带。
English: People are good at riding and shooting, wear short-sleeved robes, and use gold as a belt.

古文：女人被裘，头上刻木爲角，长六尺，以金银饰之。
现代文：女人披皮袍，头上戴着木头做的角，长六尺，并用金银装饰。
English: The woman wore a leather gown and a six-foot-long wooden horn on her head, decorated with gold and silver.

古文：少女子，兄弟共妻。无城郭，毡屋爲居，东向开户。
现代文：女人少，兄弟共妻，没有城墙，毡房作居室，门向东开。
English: Few women, brothers and their wives, no city walls, rooms made of straw, doors opening to the east.

古文：其王坐金床，随太岁转，与妻并坐接客。
现代文：国王坐金床，方向随着太岁星转，和妻子并肩而坐接待客人。
English: The king of the State of Nusa Tenggara is sitting on a golden hammock. The position of the hammock changes with the rotation of the sun. The king and his wife are sitting side by side to receive guests.

古文：无文字，以木爲契。
现代文：没有文字，刻木为契约。
English: There is no writing, but a contract carved into the wood.

古文：与旁国通，则使旁国胡爲胡书，羊皮爲纸。
现代文：与邻国有什么外交活动，就让邻国胡人用胡文书写，羊皮作纸。
English: If there are any diplomatic activities with neighboring countries, let the neighboring Hu people write in Hu script and use sheepskin for paper.

古文：无职官。
现代文：没有官职。
English: There are no official positions in the Republic of Korea.

古文：事天神、火神，每日则出户祀神而后食。
现代文：侍奉天神、火神。每天从屋里出来先祭神后吃饭。
English: They worship the god of heaven and the god of fire, and only eat after they go out to offer sacrifices to the gods every day.

古文：其跪一拜而止。
现代文：下跪只拜一次。
English: They kneel and prostrate and stop after one prostration.

古文：葬以木爲椁。
现代文：下葬用木头做棺材。
English: The coffin is made of wood.

古文：父母死，其子截一耳，葬讫即吉。
现代文：父母死，儿子割下一只耳朵，葬毕就完事大吉，没有其他守孝的礼节。
English: After the death of the parents, the son cut off one ear, and even after the burial, the mourning period was over.

古文：其言语待河南人译然后通。
现代文：他们的语言要靠河南国人翻译才能懂。
English: They have to rely on Henan compatriots to translate their language in order to communicate with other countries.

古文：呵跋檀、周古柯、胡密丹等国，并滑旁小国也。
现代文：呵跋檀、周古柯、胡密丹等国，都是滑近旁的小国。
English: Countries such as Hobadan, Zhou Guco, and Humidan are all small countries close to the skating rink.

古文：凡滑旁之国，衣服容貌皆与滑同。
现代文：所有滑国近旁的国家，衣服容貌都和滑国相同。
English: In all the neighboring countries of the Yuan Dynasty, people's clothing and appearance were the same as those of the Cheng people.

古文：普通元年，使使随滑使来贡献方物。
现代文：梁普通元年，它们派人随滑国使者来进贡地方物产。
English: In the first year of Liangzhuang, they sent people to accompany the envoy of the State of Nanning to pay tribute to local products.

古文：白题国王姓支名史稽毅，其先盖匈奴之别种胡也。
现代文：白题白题国王姓支名史稽毅，祖先大概是匈奴人中的一支。
English: King Baizi Baizi's family name was Shiqi, and his ancestor was probably one of the Huns.

古文：汉灌婴与匈奴战，斩白题骑一人是也。
现代文：汉朝时灌婴和匈奴作战，斩白题骑一人，说的就是这白题国了。
English: When the Han Dynasty and the Xiongnu were at war, Bai Zi rode alone, and it was called Bai Zi's country.

古文：在滑国东，去滑六日行，西极波斯。
现代文：它在滑国东边。离滑国有六天的路程，往西就到了波斯。
English: It is to the east of the Land of Israel, six days' journey from the Land of Israel, and to the west of Persia.

古文：土地出粟、麦、瓜果，食物略与滑同。
现代文：白题土地出产谷、麦、瓜果，食物大体与滑国相同。
English: Paektu produces millet, wheat and melons, and its food is generally the same as that of Nome.

古文：普通三年，遣使献方物。
现代文：普通三年，派遣使者来献土产。
English: Usually every three years, Baidai Province sends an envoy to present local special products.

古文：十三年，又献波罗婆步鄣。
现代文：龟兹龟兹是西域旧有的国家。
English: In the thirteenth year of the overseer's reign, they again presented the Bora Bora step stool.

古文：十八年，又献琉璃罂。
现代文：自从晋朝南渡以后断了来往。
English: In the 18th year of the Tenjin era, the glazed ware was presented again.

古文：大同七年，又献外国刻玉佛。
现代文：到梁普通二年，龟兹王尼瑞摩珠那胜派使者向朝廷上表朝贡。
English: In the seventh year of the Datong era, a jade Buddha statue from a foreign country was also presented.

古文：渴盘陀国，于阗西小国也。
现代文：渴盘繤渴盘繤国，是于阗西部的小国。
English: Shanxi is a small country in the west of China.

古文：西邻滑国，南接罽宾国，北连沙勒。
现代文：西邻滑国，南接宾国，北连沙勒。
English: Neighboring the west is the state of Nizhniy Novgorod, to the south is the state of B&N, and to the north is the state of Saratov.

古文：国都在山谷中，城周回十馀里。
现代文：国都在山谷里，城墙周边十余里。
English: The whole country is in the valley, and the city wall is more than ten miles around.

古文：国有十二城，风俗与于阗相类。
现代文：国内有十二城，风俗和于阗相似。
English: There are twelve cities in China with customs similar to that of Yunnan.

古文：衣古贝布，着长身小袖袍、小口裤。地宜小麦，资以爲粮。
现代文：穿棉布，长身窄袖袍，小口裤，土地适合种小麦，靠它作粮食。
English: They wear cotton cloth, long narrow-sleeved robes, and small trousers. The land is suitable for growing wheat, and they depend on it for food.

古文：多牛马骆驼羊等。
现代文：有很多牛马骆驼羊等。
English: Cattle, horses, camels, sheep and other livestock abound.

古文：出好毡。
现代文：出产好毡。
English: The production of strawberries is good.

古文：王姓葛沙氏，梁中大同元年，始通江左，遣献方物。
现代文：国王姓葛沙氏。梁中大同元年，开始和江南交通，遣使节来献地方物产。
English: The king's family name was Gesha. In the first year of Liangzhong University, he began to communicate with the south of the Yangtze River and sent envoys to present local products.

古文：末国，汉世且末国也。
现代文：末末国，就是汉朝时的且末国。
English: The last country is the last country in the desert era.

古文：胜兵万馀户。
现代文：能从军的有万余户。
English: There are more than 10,000 households that can join the army.

古文：北与丁零、东与白题、西与波斯接。
现代文：北边与丁零、东边与白题、西边与波斯接壤。
English: It is bordered to the north by Dingye, to the east by Baiji, and to the west by Persia.

古文：土人剪发，着氊帽、小袖衣，爲衫则开颈而缝前。
现代文：土著人剪发，戴毡帽，穿窄袖衣，衣衫的颈部敞开，衣缝在身前正中。
English: Indigenous people cut their hair, wear a skullcap, wear narrow sleeves, the neck of the shirt is open, and the clothes are sewn in the middle in front of them.

古文：多牛羊骡驴。
现代文：有很多牛羊骡驴。
English: At the end of the country, there are more cattle, sheep and donkeys.

古文：其王安末深盘，梁普通五年，始通江左，遣使来贡献。
现代文：国王安末深盘，梁普通五年，才与江南交通，派使者来朝贡。
English: It took King Anmue Shenpan and General Liang five years to communicate with the south of the Yangtze River and send envoys to pay tribute.

古文：波斯国，其先有波斯匿王者，子孙以王父字爲氏，因爲国号。
现代文：波斯波斯国，其祖先有波斯匿王，子孙以国王父亲字为姓氏，并因此成为国号。
English: The Persian Empire, whose ancestors included King Ananias of Persia, and whose descendants took the king's father's name as their surname, thus becoming the country's name.

古文：国有城周回三十二里，城高四丈，皆有楼观。
现代文：国内有城周长三十二里，城高四丈，四周都有楼观。
English: In China, there is a city with a perimeter of thirty-two miles and a height of four meters. There are buildings all around.

古文：城内屋宇数百千间，城外佛寺二三百所。
现代文：城内房屋有千百间，城外佛寺有二三百所。
English: There are thousands of houses in the city and two or three hundred Buddhist temples outside the city.

古文：西去城十五里有土山，山非过高，其势连接甚远。
现代文：西边离城十五里有土山，山不太高，但连绵直到远方。
English: Fifteen minutes to the west of the city there are hills. They are not very high, but they stretch far into the distance.

古文：中有鹫鸟噉羊，土人极以爲患。
现代文：山中有鹰吃羊，当地人以为大患。
English: There are eagles in the mountains that eat sheep, and the locals think it's a big problem.

古文：国中有优钵昙花，鲜华可爱。
现代文：国中有优钵昙花，鲜丽可爱。
English: In the country of Persia, there is an excellent rhododendron, bright and beautiful, very lovely.

古文：出龙驹马。
现代文：出产龙驹马。
English: Production of draught horses is booming.

古文：咸池生珊瑚树，长一二尺。
现代文：盐池生珊瑚树，长一二尺。
English: Coral trees grow in the salt pond, reaching a length of one to two feet.

古文：亦有武魄、马脑、真珠、玫瑰等，国内不以爲珍。
现代文：还有琥珀、玛瑙、珍珠、玫瑰等，国内并不把它们当作珍宝。
English: There are also amber, onyx, pearls, roses, etc. They are not considered precious in China.

古文：市买用金银。
现代文：做买卖用金银。
English: Buy things at the bazaar with gold and silver.

古文：昏姻法，下娉财讫，女婿将数十人迎妇。
现代文：婚姻的方式，下完聘礼，女婿带几十个人去迎娶新娘。
English: After the betrothal ceremony, the son-in-law takes dozens of people to marry the bride.

古文：婿着金线锦袍、师子锦裤，戴天冠。
现代文：女婿穿金线锦袍、狮子锦裤，头戴天冠。
English: The son-in-law wore a gold brocade robe, lion brocade trousers and a crown on his head.

古文：妇亦如之。
现代文：新娘也是这种打扮。
English: That's how brides dress, too.

古文：妇兄弟便来捉手付度，夫妇之礼，于兹永毕。
现代文：新娘的兄弟就来拉着新娘的手交到新郎手中，夫妇之礼就算全部完成。
English: The bride's brother comes to take the bride's hand and give it to the groom, and the couple's ceremonial time is over.

古文：国东与滑国、西及南俱与娑罗门国、北与泛栗国接。
现代文：东边与滑国、西边与南边和婆罗门国、北边与泛忄栗国接壤。
English: It is bordered to the east by the state of Nammu, to the west and south by the state of Brahman, and to the north by the state of Ubud.

古文：梁中大通二年，始通江左，遣使献佛牙。
现代文：梁中大通二年，开始和江南交通，派使者来献佛牙。
English: In the second year of Liangzhong Datong, he began to communicate with the south of the Yangtze River and sent an envoy to offer Buddha's tooth.

古文：北狄种类实繁，蠕蠕爲族，盖匈奴之别种也。
现代文：北狄种类繁多，蠕蠕作为一个种族，大概是匈奴的一个分支。
English: There are many types of North Dyke, and the Cree as a race is probably a branch of the Xiongnu.

古文：魏自南迁，因擅其故地。
现代文：自从北魏南迁后，便占据了魏国故地。
English: Since the Northern Wei Dynasty moved to the south, it has occupied the former place of Wei.

古文：无城郭，随水草畜牧，以穹庐居。
现代文：国内没有城郭，随水草放牧，住帐篷。
English: There are no castles in the country, they graze on grass and live in tents.

古文：辫发，衣锦小袖袍、小口裤、深雍韡。
现代文：头发梳成辫子，穿锦衣、窄袖袍、小口裤、深筒靴。
English: Her hair is in pigtails, and she wears a brocade dress, a narrow-sleeved gown, small trousers, and deep boots.

古文：其地苦寒，七月流澌亘河。
现代文：其地酷寒，七月河里还流冰不断。
English: The weather in Shandong Province is very cold. In July, the river is still full of just-melted ice.

古文：宋升明中，遣王洪范使焉，引之共谋魏。齐建元三年，洪范始至。
现代文：宋升明年间，朝廷派王洪范出使蠕蠕，拉它一块攻北魏，齐建元三年，洪范才走到。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the imperial court sent Wang Hongfan to invade the Northern Wei Dynasty as an envoy. It was not until the third year of Jianyuan that Wang Hongfan arrived.

古文：是岁通使，求并力攻魏。
现代文：当年通使节，求合力攻魏。
English: At that time, the envoy was seeking cooperation to attack Wei.

古文：其相国刑基只罗回表，言 京房谶云： 卯金卒，草肃应王。 
现代文：蠕蠕相国刑基祗罗回上表说： 汉代京房有谶语说： 卯金卒，草肃应王。 
English: Demu Demu's Minister of State Security, Kitaro, returned to the table and said: In the Han Dynasty, there was a slang saying in the capital: "Ukinzu, goshu yingwang."

古文：历观图纬，代宋者齐。 
现代文：遍观河图纬书，代宋而立的是齐。 
English: If you look at the map of the river, you will see that it is Qi that stands for the Song Dynasty.

古文：又献师子皮裤褶。
现代文：又献狮子皮裤褶。
English: And the lion skin crotch.

古文：其国后稍侵弱，永明中，爲丁零所破，更爲小国而南移其居。
现代文：国势后来逐渐衰弱，永明年间，被丁零打败，成为小国而向南移居。
English: Later, the state gradually weakened, and in the middle of the 17th century, it was defeated by Ding Zi, became a small country and moved south.

古文：梁天监十四年，遣使献马、貂裘。
现代文：梁天监十四年，派使者来献马、貂裘。
English: In the 14th year of Liang Tianjun's reign, he sent an envoy to offer horses and horse-drawn carriages.

古文：普通元年，又遣使献方物。
现代文：普通元年，又派使者来献地方物产。
English: In the first year of the year, an envoy was sent to present local special products.

古文：是后数岁一至焉。
现代文：此后几年来一次。
English: From then on, a group of envoys from the dragonfly would come to the capital every two years.

古文：大同七年，又献马一匹，金一斤。
现代文：大同七年，又献马一匹，金一斤。
English: In the seventh year of Datong, he also donated a horse and won one jin of gold.

古文：其国能以术祭天而致风雪，前对皎日，后则泥潦横流，故其战败莫能追及。
现代文：蠕蠕国能用法术祭天而招来风雪，前面是烈日当头，后面泥水横流，所以他们战败没人能追得上。
English: They can cause snowstorms with sorcery and festivals, and sometimes the front is high in the daytime, while behind is muddy and water-logged, so they are defeated and run away, and no one can catch up with them.

古文：或于中夏爲之，则不能雨，问其故，盖以暖云。
现代文：他们有人在中国施此法术，却招不来雨，问他原因，他说是天气太暖和了。
English: They had someone do this in China and it didn't bring rain and they asked him why and he said it was too warm.

古文：论曰：自晋氏南度，介居江左，北荒西裔，隔碍莫通。
现代文：评论说：自从晋代南渡，夹居江东，西北部荒凉偏远地区，被阻隔不能交通。
English: Comment: Since the Jin Dynasty, Nandu, sandwiched between Jiangdong and the northwestern desolate remote areas, has been cut off from transportation.

古文：至于南徼东边。界壤所接，洎宋元嘉抚运，爰命干戈，象浦之捷，威震冥海。于是鞮译相系，无绝岁时。
现代文：至于东南边疆，国界相连，到宋代元嘉应天顺时，动用武力，象浦大捷，威震海外，于是各国使节接连不断，年年都来朝拜。
English: As for the southeastern frontier, the national borders are connected, and when the Song Dynasty and Yuan Dynasty were at their peak, they used force, like the Pu Dynasty, to conquer overseas, so the envoys of various countries kept coming, and they came to pay homage every year.

古文：以洎齐、梁，职贡有序。
现代文：直到齐、梁年间，各国贡奉都不失臣仆之礼。
English: Until the Qi and Liang dynasties, all countries paid tribute to their vassals.

古文：及侯景之乱，边鄙日蹙。
现代文：到了侯景作乱，边境日益告急。
English: When the Houjing Rebellion broke out, the border became more and more urgent.

古文：陈氏基命，衰微已甚，救首救尾，身其几何。
现代文：陈朝的基业，已是十分衰微，不是救首就是救尾，身躯还能存在几天呢。
English: The foundation of the Chen dynasty is already very weak. Whether it is a lifesaver or a lifesaver, the body can still exist for a few days.

古文：故西赆南琛，无闻竹素，岂所谓有德则来，无道则去者也。
现代文：就不见于史册。恐怕这就是所谓的有德则来，无道则去吧。
English: I'm afraid this is the so-called "come if you have virtue, go if you don't."

