古文：儒书称： 尧、舜之德，至优至大，天下太平，一人不刑。 又言： 文、武之隆，遗在成、康，刑错不用四十余年。 
现代文：儒者的书上称颂尧、舜的道德，是最优秀最高尚的，所以天下太平，一个人也没有被用过刑罚；又说周文王、周武王的道德崇高，一直延续到周成王和周康王，刑罚被废弃四十多年没有用过。
English: In the books of Confucians, the morality of Zhou and Zou is praised as the best and most noble, so the world is peaceful, and no one has been punished. It is also said that the high morality of King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu has continued to King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang, and the punishment has not been used for more than forty years.

古文：是欲称尧、舜，褒文、武也。
现代文：这是想称颂尧、舜，赞扬文王和武王。
English: This is to praise the,, and to praise King Wen and King Wu.

古文：夫为言不益，则美不足称；为文不渥，则事不足褒。
现代文：这样做，是认为说话不过头，那么一个人的美德就不足以被赞颂；作文章不过分，那么一个人的功绩就不足以被赞扬。
English: To do so is to think that if one does not talk too much, then one's virtue is not enough to be praised; if one does not write too much, then one's merit is not enough to be praised.

古文：尧、舜虽优，不能使一人不刑；文、武虽盛，不能使刑不用。
现代文：其实尧、舜的道德即使最优秀，也不能使任何一个人都不被刑罚过；文王、武王的道德即使崇高，也不能使刑罚不用。
English: As a matter of fact, even if the morality of emperors Wen and Zhou is the best, it cannot prevent anyone from being punished; even if the morality of emperors Wen and Wu is lofty, it cannot prevent punishment from being used.

古文：言其犯刑者少，用刑希疏，可也；言其一人不刑，刑错不用，增之也。
现代文：如果是说那时候触犯刑法的人少，使用刑罚不多，是可以的；要说那时候任何一个人都没有被刑罚过，刑罚被废置不用，就太夸大了。
English: If it is said that at that time there were few people who violated the criminal law, and the use of punishment was not much, it is possible; if it is said that at that time no one was punished, and punishment was abolished, it is too exaggerated.

古文：夫能使一人不刑，则能使一国不伐；能使刑错不用，则能使兵寝不施。
现代文：因为能使所有人不被刑罚，就能使所有诸侯国不被征伐；能使刑法废弃不用，就能使武器收起不用。
English: For if all men could be saved from punishment, all principalities could be saved from conquest; if criminal law could be made obsolete, weapons could be made obsolete.

古文：案尧伐丹水，舜征有苗，四子服罪，刑兵设用。
现代文：据考察，尧讨伐过丹水一带的民族，舜征伐过有苗，共工、驩兜、三苗和鲧才认罪，可见刑罚和武器都使用过。
English: According to the investigation, Yan fought against the ethnic groups in the Danshui area, Yan fought against Arimiao, and only confessed to the crimes of working together, banditry, three seedlings and banditry. It can be seen that both punishments and weapons were used.

古文：成王之时，四国篡畔，淮夷、徐戎，并为患害。
现代文：周成王的时候，四个诸侯国想篡权背叛，淮夷和徐戎，也一起参与危害活动。
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang was king, four vassal states tried to usurp power and commit treason. Huaiyi and Xu Rong also participated in the harmful activities together.

古文：夫刑人用刀，伐人用兵，罪人用法，诛人用武。
现代文：杀人用刀，砍人用武器，治人的罪用刑法，惩罚人用武力。
English: The knife is used to kill people, the weapon is used to cut people, the criminal law is used to punish people, and the use of force is used to punish people.

古文：武、法不殊，兵、刀不异。巧论之人，不能别也。
现代文：武力与刑法没有两样，武器与刀没有不同，即使是善于辩论的人，也不能把它们截然分开。
English: Force is no different from criminal law, weapons are no different from knives, and even those who are good at debate cannot completely separate them.

古文：夫德劣故用兵，犯法故施刑。
现代文：对道德恶劣的人必然要用武器，对犯法的人必然要用刑法。
English: Weapons must be used against people with bad morals, and criminal law must be used against those who break the law.

古文：刑与兵，犹足与翼也，走用足，飞用翼。形体虽异，其行身同。
现代文：刑法与武器，就像脚与翅膀一样。跑步用脚，飞用翅膀，脚与翅膀的形体虽然不同，但它们能使身体移动却是相同的。
English: Criminal law and weapons are like feet and wings. Running uses feet, flying uses wings. Although the shape of feet and wings are different, they can make the body move but they are the same.

古文：刑之与兵，全众禁邪，其实一也。
现代文：刑法与武器，在保全百姓和禁止奸邪上，它们实质是一样的。
English: Criminal law and weapons are essentially the same in terms of protecting the people and prohibiting adultery.

古文：称兵之用，言刑之不施，是犹人缺目完，以目完称人体全，不可从也。
现代文：宣扬要用武器，却说不要使用刑法，这就像人的耳朵没有了而眼睛还很完美，于是只根据眼睛完美就称人身体健全，这是不能信从的。
English: To preach the use of arms, but not the use of the criminal law, is like saying that a man's ears are gone, but his eyes are still perfect. To say that a man is sound only because his eyes are perfect is not credible.

古文：人桀於刺虎，怯於击人，而以刺虎称谓之勇，不可听也。
现代文：有人敢杀老虎，害怕杀人，而以杀老虎受称赞，说他很勇敢，这话不能听。
English: I can't listen to someone who dares to kill a tiger and is afraid of killing people, but is praised for killing a tiger and said to be very brave.

古文：身无败缺，勇无不进，乃为全耳。
现代文：身体没有残缺，勇敢得没有不能去的地方，这才算是完全的人。
English: A complete person is one who has no physical defects and is brave enough to go where no one else can.

古文：今称 一人不刑， 不言一兵不用；褒 刑错不用， 不言一人不畔：未得为优，未可谓盛也。
现代文：如今说所有人不被刑罚，不说所有武器不用；赞扬刑法废弃不用，不说所有人不背叛，这不能称作道德优秀，也不能说是天下兴旺。
English: Nowadays, to say that all people will not be punished, not to say that all weapons will not be used; to praise the abolition of criminal law, not to say that all people will not betray, this cannot be called moral excellence, nor can it be said that the world is prosperous.

古文：儒书称： 楚养由基善射，射一杨叶，百发能百中之。 
现代文：儒者的书上称赞楚国一个姓养名由基的人善于射箭，他射一片杨树叶子，百发能百中。
English: A Confucianist's book praised a man in the state of Chu, whose surname was Yu Ji, as being good at archery. He shot a poplar leaf, and it was a perfect hit.

古文：是称其巧於射也。
现代文：这是称赞他擅长于射箭。
English: It was a compliment that he was good at archery.

古文：夫言其时射一杨叶中之，可也；言其百发而百中，增之也。
现代文：说他有时射中一片杨树叶子，可以；说他百发百中，就太夸大了。
English: To say that he sometimes hit a poplar leaf is fine; to say that he hit a hundred times is too exaggerated.

古文：夫一杨叶射而中之，中之一再，行败穿不可复射矣。
现代文：一片杨树叶子能射中，但一再射中它，就要破碎不能再射了。
English: A poplar leaf can be shot, but if it is shot again and again, it will be broken and cannot be shot again.

古文：如就叶悬於树而射之，虽不欲射叶，杨叶繁茂，自中之矣。
现代文：如果是靠近长在树上的叶子来射，虽然不想射中，由于杨树叶子茂密，自然能射中它。
English: If you shoot near the leaves growing on the tree, although you don't want to hit it, because the poplar leaves are dense, you can naturally hit it.

古文：是必使上取杨叶，一一更置地而射之也。
现代文：要不这肯定是让人上树把杨树叶子取下来，一一调换放的地方再射。
English: Otherwise, this is definitely a case of someone climbing up a tree, taking down the poplar leaves, and then shooting where they are replaced one by one.

古文：射之数十行，足以见巧；观其射之者亦皆知射工，亦必不至於百，明矣。
现代文：射它几十次，就完全可以表现出他的技巧，看他射的人也都知道他射箭的功夫，但也一定不会射到一百次，这是很清楚的。
English: If he shoots it dozens of times, he can fully demonstrate his skills. People who watch him shoot also know his archery skills, but he will definitely not shoot a hundred times, this is very clear.

古文：言事者好增巧美，数十中之，则言其百中矣。
现代文：传说事情的人喜欢夸大他技术高超，射中几十次，就说他射中一百次。
English: People who tell stories like to exaggerate that he is highly skilled. If he shoots dozens of times, he shot a hundred times.

古文：百与千，数之大者也。
现代文：百和千，是数字的大者。
English: One hundred and one thousand is a big number.

古文：实欲言 十 则言 百 ，百则言 千 矣。
现代文：他们真想说十次就会说一百次，想说一百次就会说一千次。
English: If they really wanted to say it ten times, they would say it a hundred times, and if they really wanted to say it a hundred times, they would say it a thousand times.

古文：是与《书》言 协和万邦 ，《诗》曰 子孙千亿 ，同一意也。
现代文：这是跟《尚书·尧典》上说尧 能使上万个邦和睦相处 ，《诗经·大雅·假乐》上说周成王有 子孙千亿 ，是同一个意思。
English: This is the same meaning as "Shangshu·Yuanxuan" said that Zhou could make tens of thousands of countries live in harmony, and "Shijing·Daya·Fu Le" said that Zhou Chengwang had hundreds of millions of descendants.

古文：儒书言： 卫有忠臣弘演，为卫哀公使，未还，狄人攻哀公而杀之，尽食其肉，独舍其肝。
现代文：儒者的书上说： 卫国有个忠臣叫弘演，被卫懿公派去当使者，没有回来，这时狄人进攻懿公而且把他杀了，吃光他的肉，只扔掉他的肝。
English: The book of the Confucians says: There was a loyal retainer of the defenders of the country, named Hongyuan, who was sent by the Duke of Wei to be an envoy, but he did not return. At that time, the Di people attacked the Duke of Wei and killed him, ate up his flesh, and only threw away his liver.

古文：弘演使还，致命於肝，痛哀公之死，身肉尽，肝无所附，引刀自刳其腹，尽出其腹实，乃内哀公之肝而死。 
现代文：弘演出使回来，对着懿公的肝讲述完成使命的经过。他悲痛懿公的死，身上的肉被吃光，连肝都没有依附的地方，于是取出刀来剖开自己的肚子，全部掏出肚子里的东西，这才放进懿公的肝死去 。
English: He was saddened by Gonggong's death. The flesh on his body had been eaten away, and there was no place for his liver to attach, so he took out a knife to cut open his stomach and took out everything that was in his stomach. Only then was he put into Gonggong's liver to die.

古文：言此者，欲称其忠矣。
现代文：说这话的人，是想称赞他的忠心。
English: Whoever said that was trying to praise his loyalty.

古文：言其自刳内哀公之肝而死，可也；言尽出其腹实乃内哀公之肝，增之也。
现代文：说弘演自己剖开肚子放进懿公的肝而死去，是可能的；说他全部掏出自己肚子里的东西这才放进懿公的肝，未免太夸大了。
English: It is possible to say that Hong En died by cutting open his stomach and putting it into the liver of the dragonfly; it is too exaggerated to say that he took out everything in his stomach and put it into the dragonfly's liver.

古文：人以刃相刺，中五藏辄死。
现代文：人们用刀刃互相刺杀，刺中五脏就立即死去。
English: People stabbed each other with blades, and when they were stabbed, they died immediately.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：五藏，气之主也，犹头，脉之凑也。
现代文：因为五脏是气的主宰，像头是血脉集中的地方一样。
English: Because the five viscera are the master of qi, just as the head is the place where blood is concentrated.

古文：头一断，手不能取他人之头著之於颈，奈何独能先出其腹实，乃内哀公之肝？
现代文：头一断，手就不能再取别人的头附着在自己的颈子上，怎么唯独能先掏出他肚子里的东西，才放进懿公的肝呢？
English: Once the head is severed, the hand can no longer take someone else's head and attach it to one's own neck. How is it that the hand can only take out what is in the stomach before putting it into the skull?

古文：腹实出，辄死，则手不能复把矣。
现代文：肚子里的东西一掏出来人就会立即死去，那手就不能再拿住东西了。
English: Once the contents of the stomach are pulled out, the person will die immediately, and the hand will no longer be able to hold anything.

古文：如先内哀公之肝，乃出其腹实，则文当言 内哀公之肝，出其腹实。 
现代文：如果是先放进懿公的肝，才掏出他肚子里的东西，那么文章上该说放进懿公的肝，再掏出他肚子里的东西。
English: If it is put into the baboon's liver first, and then pull out what is in his stomach, then the article should say put into the baboon's liver, and then pull out what is in his stomach.

古文：今先言 尽出其腹实，内哀公之肝， 又言 尽 ，增其实也。
现代文：如今先说全部掏出他自己肚子里的东西，才放进懿公的肝，而且还说是 全部 ，这是在夸大事实。
English: Now he says that he first took out everything that was in his own stomach before putting it into the baboon's liver, and he also says that it was everything, which is an exaggeration of the truth.

古文：儒书言： 楚熊渠子出，见寝石，以为伏虎，将弓射之，矢没其卫。 
现代文：儒者的书上说： 楚国的熊渠子夜出，看见一块横着的石头，以为是伏在地上的老虎，就用弓箭射它，箭射进去看不见箭尾的羽毛。 
English: The Confucianist's book says: A bear in Chu went out at night and saw a stone lying on its side. Thinking it was a tiger lying on the ground, he shot it with a bow and arrow. When the arrow went in, the feathers at the end of the arrow could not be seen.

古文：或曰：养由基见寝石，以为兕也，射之，矢饮羽。 或言： 李广 。
现代文：有人说： 是养由基看见横卧在地上的石头，以为是头犀牛，拿箭射它，箭射进去连箭尾的羽毛都看不见。 有人说： 是李广。 
English: Some people said: It was Yao Youji who saw a stone lying on the ground, thought it was a rhinoceros, took an arrow and shot it, and when the arrow went in, even the feathers at the end of the arrow could not be seen.Some people said: It was Li Guang.

古文：便是熊渠、养由基、李广主名不审，无实也。或以为 虎 ，或以为 兕 ，兕、虎俱猛，一实也。
现代文：即使熊渠、养由基、李广谁是当事人的名字没有弄清楚，也没有关系，有人认为是老虎，有人认为是犀牛，犀牛、老虎同样凶猛，实际上是一回事。
English: Even if the names of Xiongqu, Yaoyuki, and Li Guang are not clear, it does not matter. Some people think it is a tiger, some people think it is a rhinoceros. Rhinoceros and tiger are equally fierce. In fact, it is the same thing.

古文：或言 没卫 ，或言饮羽，羽则卫，言不同耳，要取以寝石似虎、兕，畏惧加精，射之入深也。
现代文：有人说 没卫 ，有人说 饮羽 ， 羽 就是 卫 ，方言不同罢了。总之是想说明横卧在地的石头像老虎、像犀牛，由于害怕，倍加精力集中，所以箭射进石头很深。
English: Some people say that there is no defense, some people say that drinking feather, feather is defense, dialects are different. In short, it is to show that the stone lying on the ground is like a tiger, like a rhinoceros, because of fear, double the energy concentration, so the arrow shot into the stone is very deep.

古文：夫言以寝石为虎，射之矢入，可也；言其没卫，增之也。
现代文：说以为横在地上的石头是老虎，所以把箭射进了石头，是可能的；说连箭尾的羽毛都看不见，就太夸张了。
English: It is possible to shoot an arrow into a stone, thinking that the stone lying on the ground is a tiger; it is too exaggerated to say that you can't even see the feathers at the end of the arrow.

古文：夫见似虎者，意以为是，张弓射之，盛精加意，则其见真虎，与是无异。
现代文：看见像老虎，心中就认为是真的，于是张弓射它，精力集中，加倍用心，那他们看见真老虎跟这情况没有两样。
English: When they see something that looks like a tiger, they think it's real in their hearts, so they shoot it with a bow and arrow, concentrate their energy, and redouble their efforts. When they see a real tiger, it's no different.

古文：射似虎之石，矢入没卫，若射真虎之身，矢洞度乎？
现代文：射像老虎的石头，箭能射进去看不见箭尾的羽毛，要是射真老虎的身体，箭能穿过它吗？
English: If you shoot a stone that looks like a tiger, the arrow can go in, but you can't see the feather at the end of the arrow. If you shoot the body of a real tiger, can the arrow go through it?

古文：石之质难射，肉易射也。
现代文：石头的质地箭很难射进去，而肉却容易射进去。
English: Stone-textured arrows are hard to hit, while flesh is easy to hit.

古文：以射难没卫言之，则其射易者洞不疑矣。
现代文：以能射进难入的石头而连箭尾的羽毛都看不见来说，那他射容易进的肉，射穿是毫无疑问的。
English: If he can shoot a stone that is difficult to penetrate, but cannot see the feather at the end of the arrow, there is no doubt that he can shoot flesh that is easy to penetrate.

古文：善射者能射远中微，不失毫厘，安能使弓弩更多力乎？
现代文：擅长射箭的人能射中远处微小的目标，不差毫厘，怎么能使弓弩增加更多的力量呢？
English: A person who is good at archery can hit a tiny target in the distance, within a millimeter, how can the crossbow add more power?

古文：养由基从军，射晋侯中其目。
现代文：养由基参加军队打仗，用箭射晋侯，射中了他的眼睛。
English: Yaoyuki joined the army to fight in the war and shot Jinhou with an arrow, hitting him in the eye.

古文：夫以匹夫射万乘之主，其加精倍力，必与射寝石等。
现代文：以一个平常人用箭射大国的君主，他加倍集中精力，一定跟射横着的石头情况相同。
English: For the monarch of a great country to be shot at by an ordinary man with an arrow, he must have been as concentrated as if he were shooting at a stone lying on its side.

古文：当中晋侯之目也，可复洞达於项乎？
现代文：当他射中晋侯眼睛的时候，难道能够再穿到颈后去吗？
English: When he shot Jin Hou in the eye, would he be able to wear it again on the back of his neck?

古文：如洞达於项，晋侯宜死。
现代文：如果能穿到颈后，晋侯就该死了。
English: If you can wear it up to the nape of the neck, you're a shoo-in for promotion.

古文：车张十石之弩，恐不能入一寸，摧为三，况以一人之力，引微弱之弓，虽加精诚，安能没卫？
现代文：用牛车拉开有十石力气才能拉开的弩，恐怕不能射进石头一寸，箭就会折成三段，何况是用一个人的力气，拉开只用微弱力气就能拉开的弓，即使集中精力，加倍用心，怎么能射进去看不见箭尾的羽毛呢？
English: It takes ten stone of strength to pull open a hoop with an ox-drawn cart, I'm afraid you can't shoot an inch into the stone, and the arrow will break into three pieces. What's more, it takes one person's strength to pull open a bow that can only be pulled open with weak strength. Even if you concentrate and redouble your efforts, how can you shoot in and not see the feathers at the end of the arrow?

古文：人之精乃气也，气乃力也。
现代文：人的精力就是气，气就是力。
English: Human energy is qi, and qi is power.

古文：有水火之难，惶惑恐惧，举徙器物，精诚至矣，素举一石者，倍举二石。
现代文：人碰上水火的灾难，感到惶惑恐惧，抬东西搬东西，精力集中，加倍用心到极点，平常抬一块石头的也会加倍用力抬起二块石头来。
English: People encounter disasters of water and fire, feel bewilderment and fear, lift things and carry things, concentrate their energy, double their efforts to the extreme, and those who usually lift one stone will double their efforts to lift two stones.

古文：然则，见伏石射之，精诚倍故，不过入一寸，如何谓之没卫乎？
现代文：像这样，那么看见横躺着的石头用箭射它，精力、用心都比原来加倍，顶多不过射进去一寸，怎么说看不见箭尾的羽毛呢？
English: In this way, if you see a stone lying on its side and shoot it with an arrow, your energy and attention are doubled than before, and at most you can only shoot an inch, how can you say that you can't see the feather at the end of the arrow?

古文：如有好用剑者，见寝石，惧而斫之，可复谓能断石乎？
现代文：如果有喜欢用剑的人，看见横躺着的石头，由于害怕而砍它，难道又说他能够砍断石头吗？
English: If someone who likes to use a sword sees a stone lying on its side and cuts it out of fear, does that mean he can cut the stone?

古文：以勇夫空拳而暴虎者，卒然见寝石，以手椎之，能令石有迹乎？
现代文：以力大能赤手空拳跟老虎搏斗的人，突然看见横躺着的石头，用手捶它，能使石头有痕迹吗？
English: Can a man who fights a tiger with his powerful bare hands suddenly see a stone lying on its side and rub it with his hands, leaving a mark on the stone?

古文：巧人之精，与拙人等；古人之诚与今人同。使当今射工，射禽兽於野，其欲得之，不余精力乎？
现代文：善射的人集中精力与平常人一样，古人加倍用心跟今人相同，让现在能射箭的人在野外射禽兽，他们想获得它，不是把全部力量都使出来了吗！
English: People who are good at shooting concentrate their energy like ordinary people, the ancients doubled their efforts to be the same as people today, so that people who can shoot arrows now shoot animals and beasts in the wild. If they want to get it, don't they use all their strength?

古文：及其中兽，不过数寸。
现代文：至于他们射中野兽，不过射进去几寸。
English: As for them shooting the beast, it only went a few inches.

古文：跌误中石，不能内锋，箭摧折矣。
现代文：要是由于差错误中石头，就不可能把箭头射进石头里去，而箭就会被折断。
English: If you hit the stone by mistake, it is impossible to shoot the arrow into the stone, and the arrow will be broken.

古文：夫如是，儒书之言楚熊渠子、养由基、李广射寝石，矢没卫饮羽者，皆增之也。
现代文：像这样，儒者的书上说楚国的熊渠子、养由基、李广射横躺着的石头，箭射进看不见箭尾的羽毛，都是夸大。
English: Thus, the books of Confucians that say that the bear canals of Chu, Yaoyuki, and Li Guang shot stones lying on their sides, and that arrows were shot into feathers with invisible arrow tails, are all exaggerations.

古文：儒书称： 鲁般、墨子之巧，刻木为鸢，飞之三日而不集 。
现代文：儒者的书上称赞鲁般和墨子技艺高超，用木头雕刻成老鹰，飞了三天不会落下来。
English: The book of Confucianists praised Lu Pang and Mo Zi for their superb skills. They carved an eagle out of wood, and it flew for three days without falling down.

古文：夫言其以木为鸢飞之，可也；言其三日不集，增之也。
现代文：说他们用木头做成老鹰会飞，是可能的；说它飞了三天不下来，就是夸大。
English: To say that they made an eagle out of wood that could fly is possible; to say that it flew for three days and did not come down is an exaggeration.

古文：夫刻木为鸢以象鸢形，安能飞而不集乎？既能飞翔，安能至於三日？
现代文：用木头雕刻成老鹰，就因为仅仅像老鹰的样子，怎么能飞上天就不下来了呢、既然会飞翔，怎么能达到三天之久呢？
English: An eagle carved out of wood, just because it looks like an eagle, how can it fly up into the sky and not come down? Since it can fly, how can it last for three days?

古文：如审有机关，一飞遂翔，不可复下，则当言遂飞，不当言三日。
现代文：如果真有机关，飞上天就一直翱翔，不会再落下来，那么该说终于能一直翱翔，不该说三天不落下来。
English: If there really is an organ that flies up into the sky and keeps soaring and never falls down again, then it should be said that it can finally keep soaring, and it should not be said that it will not fall down for three days.

古文：犹世传言曰： 鲁般巧，亡其母也。 
现代文：像世间流传的话说： 鲁般技艺高超，丢失了他的母亲。 
English: As the popular saying goes: Lu Han Rong is highly skilled and has lost his mother.

古文：言巧工为母作木车马、木人御者，机关备具，载母其上，一驱不还，遂失其母。
现代文：这是说巧工鲁般为他母亲做木车马、木车夫，机关完全齐备，那上面坐着他母亲，车一跑就不回来了，鲁般终于失去了他母亲。
English: This is to say that Lu Ban, a skilled craftsman, made a wooden carriage for his mother. The mechanism was fully equipped, and his mother sat on it. The carriage would not return as soon as it ran away. Lu Ban finally lost his mother.

古文：如木鸢机关备具，与木车马等，则遂飞不集。
现代文：如果木老鹰机关完备，跟木车马一样，那么就会飞上天不下来。
English: If the wooden eagle organ is complete, like the wooden carriage horse, then it will fly up to the sky and not down.

古文：机关为须臾间，不能远过三日，则木车等亦宜三日止於道路，无为径去以失其母。
现代文：实际上，机关只能在很短时间内起作用，不会超过三天，那么木车马一样也该三天内在路上停下来，不会一去不回因此而丢失鲁般的母亲。
English: In fact, the organ can only work for a very short time, not more than three days, so the horse and buggy should also stop on the road within three days, and will not be lost forever.

古文：二者必失实者矣。
现代文：看来这二件事一定都不符合真实情况。
English: It seems that these two things must not correspond to the real situation.

古文：书说：孔子不能容於世，周流游说七十余国，未尝得安。
现代文：书上说： 孔子不能被世人任用，就周游七十多国进行游说，还未曾得到安身。
English: The book said: "Confucius cannot be appointed by the world. He traveled to more than 70 countries to lobby, and has not yet been able to settle down.

古文：夫言周流不遇，可也；言干七十国，增之也。
现代文：说孔子周游得不到赏识和重用，是可能的；说他去七十国追求官禄，是夸大。
English: It is possible to say that Confucius's travels are not appreciated and reused; it is an exaggeration to say that he went to seventy countries in pursuit of official positions.

古文：案《论语》之篇、诸子之书，孔子自卫反鲁，在陈绝粮，削迹於卫，忘味於齐，伐树於宋，并费与顿牟，至不能十国。
现代文：察看《论语》和各家学派的书，孔子从卫国返回鲁国，途中在陈国断了粮食，在卫国被铲除车迹，在齐国忘记了肉味，在宋国因习礼大树被砍，再加上到费城和顿牟城去做官，到过的地方不超过十个国家。
English: Looking at the "Analects" and the books of various schools of thought, Confucius returned to the State of Lu from the State of Wei. On the way, he ran out of food in the State of Chen, his car tracks were removed in the State of Wei, he forgot the taste of meat in the State of Qi, a large tree was chopped down in the State of Song for the sake of etiquette. In addition, he went to Philadelphia and Dongmucheng to be an official, and he visited no more than ten countries.

古文：传言七十国，非其实也。
现代文：传说到过七十国，不是事实。
English: The legend of having been to 70 countries is not true.

古文：或时干十数国也，七十之说，文书传之，因言干七十国矣。
现代文：或许孔子为求取官禄到过十多个国家，至于到过七十国的说法，是书籍上的记载，因而说他为求取官禄到过七十国。
English: Perhaps Confucius went to more than ten countries to seek official reward. As for the saying that he went to seventy countries, it is a record in books, so he said that he went to seventy countries to seek official reward.

古文：《论语》曰： 孔子问公叔文子於公明贾曰： 信乎，夫子不言、不笑、不取乎？ 
现代文：《论语·宪问》说： 孔子向公明贾问公叔文子说： 真的，他不说话、不笑、不要财物吗？ 
English: "The Analects of Confucius and the Constitution" says: Confucius asked his uncle Confucius: "Is it true that he doesn't speak, doesn't smile, and doesn't want possessions?

古文：公明贾对曰： 以告者，过也。
现代文：公明贾回答说： 这是由于告诉你的人把事情讲过头了。
English: Gongming Jia replied, "It's because the person who told you exaggerated the matter."

古文：夫子时然後言，人不厌其言也；乐然後笑，人不厌其笑也；义然後取，人不厌其取也。 
现代文：他是该说的时候才说，人们不讨厌他说话；有了高兴的事然后才笑，人们不讨厌他笑；合乎礼义之后才接受财物，人们不厌恶他接受财物。 
English: He speaks when he ought to speak, and people do not hate him for it; he laughs when he ought to laugh, and people do not hate him for it; he receives gifts when it is proper, and people do not hate him for it.

古文：子曰： 岂其然乎！
现代文：孔子说： 难道他是这样吗？
English: Confucius said, "Is he really like that?

古文：岂其然乎！  
现代文：难道他真是这样吗？  
English: Was he really like that?

古文：夫公叔文子实时言、时笑、义取，人传说称之；言其不言、不笑、不取也，俗言竟增之也。
现代文：公叔文子确实是该说才说，有高兴事才笑、合乎礼义才接受财物，人们传说称赞他；至于说他不说话、不笑、不要财物、那是庸人说的竟然把事情过分夸张了。
English: It is true that Uncle Fumiko should speak before he speaks, laugh when he is happy, and accept money only when it is proper, and people praise him. As for saying that he doesn't speak, doesn't laugh, and doesn't want money, that is a vulgar exaggeration.

古文：书言：秦缪公伐郑，过晋不假途，晋襄公率羌戎要击於崤塞之下，匹马只轮无反者。
现代文：书上说： 秦缪公讨伐郑国，经过晋国不借路，被晋襄公率领姜戎军队中途在崤塞之下拦截，一匹马，一辆战车都没有回去的。 
English: The book said: "Qin Muigong fought Zheng Guo, passed through Jin Guo without taking the road, and was intercepted by Jin Xiang Guo led by Jiang Rong's army in the middle of the way under the pretext, one horse, one chariot did not go back.

古文：时秦遣三大夫孟明视、西乞术、白乙丙皆得复还。
现代文：当时秦派遣的三位大夫孟明视、西乞术、白乙丙都又被放回去。
English: At that time, the three doctors sent by Qin, Meng Mingxi, Xi Qizhi and Bai Yipi, were all sent back.

古文：夫三大夫复还，车马必有归者；文言匹马只轮无反者，增其实也。
现代文：三位大夫又被放回去车马一定有跟着回去的，文章说一匹马一辆车都没有返回的，是夸大事实。
English: The three doctors were put back in the car and the horses must have followed them back. The article said that one horse and one car did not return, which is an exaggeration of the truth.

古文：书称： 齐之孟尝，魏之信陵，赵之平原，楚之春申君，待士下客，招会四方，各三千人。 
现代文：书上称赞：齐国的孟尝君，魏国的信陵君，赵国的平原君，楚国的春申君，能谦恭地款待下面的门客，于是招引会聚了四面八方来的士，各得三千人。
English: The book praised: Meng Yaojun of Qi, Xin Lingjun of Wei, Pingyuan of Zhao, and Chunshen of Chu were able to humbly entertain the guests below, so they invited and gathered 3,000 people from all over the world.

古文：欲言下士之至，趋之者众也。
现代文：这是想说他们谦恭地待士到极点，投奔他们的人们多。
English: This is to say that they humbly waited for the soldiers to the extreme, and more people joined them.

古文：夫言士多，可也；言其三千，增之也。
现代文：说投奔的士很多，是可能的；要说各得三千人，则是夸张。
English: It is possible to say that there are a lot of taxis running; it is an exaggeration to say that there are three thousand each.

古文：四君虽好士，士至虽众，不过各千余人。书则言三千矣。
现代文：四位君子虽然喜欢士，士来的即使很多，不会超过各一千多人，书上却说三千人。
English: Although the four gentlemen are fond of scholars, even if there are many scholars coming, it will not exceed more than a thousand people each, but the book says three thousand.

古文：夫言众必言千数，言少则言无一。世俗之情，言事之失也。
现代文：说多一定说以千数，说少则说一个也没有，这是世间一般人的情况，是叙述事情的错误。
English: To say more is to say thousands, to say less is to say none. This is the situation of ordinary people in the world, and it is a mistake to describe things.

古文：传记言： 高子羔之丧亲，泣血三年未尝见齿。君子以为难。 
现代文：传书记载说： 高子羔死了亲人，眼睛哭出了血，守孝三年没有露过牙齿，君子认为难能可贵。 
English: According to the legend: Gao Zi Lam died of a relative, his eyes bled, he did not show his teeth for three years, and the gentleman thought it was precious.

古文：难为故也。
现代文：这是因为很难做到的缘故。
English: That's because it's so hard to do.

古文：夫不以为非实而以为难，君子之言误矣。
现代文：不认为它不是事实，而认为难能可贵，是君子的言论有错误。
English: I don't think it's not true, but I think it's valuable, and it's a gentleman's speech that has mistakes.

古文：高子泣血，殆必有之。
现代文：高子眼睛哭出血，大概一定有这事。
English: Takako's eyes were bleeding from crying. This must have happened.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：荆和献宝於楚，楚刖其足，痛宝不进，己情不达，泣涕，涕尽因续以血。
现代文：荆和进献宝玉给楚王，楚王砍掉了他的双脚，他痛惜宝玉不被接受，自己的心情不被理解，痛哭流涕，眼泪流尽了接着继续流血出来。
English: Jing He offered the precious jade to King Chu. King Chu chopped off his feet. He regretted that the precious jade was not accepted and that his feelings were not understood. He shed tears and continued to bleed.

古文：今高子痛亲，哀极涕竭血随而出，实也。
现代文：如今高子悲痛亲人哀伤到了极点，泪水流完了，血随着流出来，是事实。
English: Today, Gao Zi's grief and the grief of his relatives have reached the extreme, the tears have finished flowing, and the blood is flowing out, it is a fact.

古文：而云三年未尝见齿，是增之也。
现代文：但是说他 三年没有露过牙齿 ，这是夸大。
English: But to say he hasn't brushed his teeth in three years is an exaggeration.

古文：言未尝见齿，欲言其不言、不笑也。
现代文：说没有露过牙齿，是想说他不说话、不欢笑。
English: To say that he has not bared his teeth is to say that he does not speak or laugh.

古文：孝子丧亲不笑，可也，安得不言？
现代文：孝子死了亲人不欢笑，是应该的，怎么能不说话呢？
English: If relatives don't laugh when their son or daughter dies, it's only right. How can they not speak?

古文：言安得不见齿？
现代文：要说话，怎么能不露牙齿呢？
English: If you want to speak, how can you not show your teeth?

古文：孔子曰： 言不文。 
现代文：孔子说： 守丧时说话不要太华丽。 
English: Confucius said: When attending a funeral, don't speak too pompously.

古文：或时不言，传则言其不见齿；或时传则言其不见齿三年矣。高宗谅阴，三年不言。
现代文：或许他曾短期不说话，传书就说他不露牙齿；或许不欢笑，传书则说他三年不露牙齿。殷高宗有意沉默，三年不说话。
English: Perhaps he did not speak for a short time, and the letter said that he did not show his teeth; perhaps he did not laugh, and the letter said that he did not show his teeth for three years. Yin Gaozong deliberately kept silent and did not speak for three years.

古文：尊为天子，不言，而其文言不言，犹疑於增，况高子位贱，而曰未尝见齿，是必增益之也。
现代文：尊贵为天子不说国事，而《尚书·无逸》就说他 不说话 ，子张就曾怀疑有夸大，何况高子地位卑贱，却说 没有露过牙齿 ，这肯定是过分夸张了。
English: The noble son does not talk about state affairs, and "Shang Shu-Mou Yat" said that he did not speak, Zi Zhang suspected that he was exaggerating. Not to mention that Gao Zi's status was low, but he said that he did not bare his teeth, which was certainly an exaggeration.

古文：儒书言：禽息荐百里奚，缪公未听，禽息出，当门仆头碎首而死。
现代文：儒者的书上说： 禽息推荐百里奚，秦缪公不接受，缪公离开。禽息就对着门撞头终于打碎了脑袋而死。
English: The Confucianist's book says: The bird's breath recommended the hundred li cormorant, Qin Miao Gong did not accept, Miao Gong left. The bird's breath hit the door and finally broke his head and died.

古文：缪公痛之，乃用百里奚。
现代文：缪公感到悲痛，就任用了百里奚。
English: Miao Gong felt sad, and used a hundred li to take office.

古文：此言贤者荐善，不爱其死，仆头碎首而死，以达其友也。
现代文：这是说贤者推荐道德高尚、有才能的人，不惜自己生命，用撞头打碎脑袋而死来举荐他的朋友。
English: This is to say that the sage recommends a virtuous and talented person, and at the cost of his own life, he smashes his head with a club and dies to recommend his friend.

古文：世士相激，文书传称之，莫谓不然。
现代文：世上的读书人都以此相互激励，许多书上传颂这件事，没有说它不是这样的。
English: Readers all over the world inspire each other with this, and many books extol this, without saying that it is not so.

古文：夫仆头以荐善，古今有之。
现代文：其实，用头叩地来举荐贤人、能人的，古今都有。
English: In fact, there have always been wise and capable people who have been recommended with head-tapping.

古文：禽息仆头，盖其实也；言碎首而死，是增之也。
现代文：禽息用头撞地，大概是事实；但说打碎了脑袋而死，这是夸大。
English: It is probably true that the duckling hit the ground with its head, but it is an exaggeration to say that it broke its head and died.

古文：夫人之扣头，痛者血流，虽忿恨惶恐，无碎首者。
现代文：人叩头，心里悲痛的人会叩得流血，即使是愤恨惶恐，也没有打碎脑袋的。
English: People bow their heads, and those who are sad in their hearts can be beaten until they bleed. Even if they are angry and frightened, they have not broken their heads.

古文：非首不可碎，人力不能自碎也。
现代文：不是头不能打碎，而是人的力量不能自己打碎。
English: It is not the head that cannot be broken, but man's strength that cannot be broken.

古文：执刃刎颈，树锋刺胸，锋刃之助，故手足得成势也。
现代文：拿刀刃抹脖子，自杀，树起刀锋刺进胸膛，由于有锋刃的帮助，所以手完全能够形成这样的威力。
English: Take the blade of the knife, wipe the neck, commit suicide, and stab the blade into the chest. Because of the help of the blade, the hand is fully capable of forming such power.

古文：言禽息举椎自击，首碎，不足怪也；仆头碎首，力不能自将也。
现代文：要说禽息举起槌子自己打碎脑袋，不足奇怪；叩头打碎脑袋，是人力不能自己做到的。
English: It is not enough to say that it is strange for a bird to lift a mallet and smash its own head; it is not humanly possible to smash one's own head by kowtowing.

古文：有扣头而死者，未有使头破首碎者也。
现代文：有叩头死的人，没有把脑袋破碎的人。
English: There are people who died of kowtowing, people who didn't have their heads broken.

古文：此时或扣头荐百里奚，世空言其死；若或扣头而死，世空言其首碎也。
现代文：这也许是禽息叩头举荐百里奚，世间的人凭空捏造说他因此死了；或者是叩头死的，世间的人却凭空捏造说他打碎了脑袋。
English: It may be that he died of a heart attack, and people in the world fabricated out of thin air that he died as a result; or that he died of a heart attack, but people in the world fabricated out of thin air that he broke his head.

古文：儒书言：荆轲为燕太子刺秦王，操匕首之剑，刺之不得。
现代文：儒者的书上说： 荆轲为燕太子丹刺杀秦王政，拿着短剑，刺杀没有成功。
English: The Confucianist's book said, "Jing Tong assassinated Qin Wang Zheng for Yan Daizi Dan, holding a short sword, but the assassination was unsuccessful.

古文：秦王拔剑击之。
现代文：秦王拔剑刺他。
English: King Qin drew his sword and stabbed him.

古文：轲以匕首掷秦王不中，中铜柱，入尺。
现代文：荆轲用短剑掷秦王不中，击中铜柱，刺进去一尺深。 
English: With his short sword, Jing Xi threw Qin Wang, but missed, hit the copper pillar, and stabbed it a foot deep.

古文：欲言匕首之利，荆轲势盛，投锐利之刃，陷坚强之柱，称荆轲之勇，故增益其事也。
现代文：这是想说短剑锐利，荆轲力大，投锐利的锋刃，穿入坚硬的铜柱。由于想称赞荆轲的勇敢，因此过分夸大了这事。
English: This is to say that the short sword is sharp, the jing qi is strong, and the sharp blade of the jing qi penetrates the hard copper pillar. Because he wanted to praise the bravery of the jing qi, he exaggerated the matter.

古文：夫言入铜柱，实也；言其入尺，增之也。
现代文：说刺进铜柱，是事实；说他刺进去一尺深，则是夸张。
English: To say that he pierced a copper pillar is a fact; to say that he pierced a foot deep is an exaggeration.

古文：夫铜虽不若匕首坚刚，入之不过数寸，殆不能入尺。
现代文：铜虽然不如短剑坚硬，掷进去不过几寸，大概不会进去一尺深。
English: Although copper is not as hard as a short sword, it can only be thrown a few inches, and will probably not go a foot deep.

古文：以入尺言之，设中秦王，匕首洞过乎？
现代文：拿进去一尺深来说，假设刺中秦王，短剑能穿透他吗？
English: Let's say it's a foot deep. Suppose Qin Wang is stabbed, can the short sword penetrate him?

古文：车张十石之弩，射垣木之表，尚不能入尺。
现代文：用车拉开具有十石之力的弩，射立在墙上的木靶，尚且箭不能进去一尺深。
English: Pulling a ten-stone crossbow with a car, shooting a wooden target standing on the wall, even though the arrow can't go a foot deep.

古文：以荆轲之手力，投轻小之匕首，身被龙渊之剑刃，入坚刚之铜柱，是荆轲之力劲於十石之弩，铜柱之坚不若木表之刚也。
现代文：用荆轲手的力量，投一把又轻又小的短剑，加之身上又被秦王的龙渊宝剑砍伤，还能掷进坚硬的铜柱，这是说荆轲的力量比具有十石之力的弩还大，铜柱的坚硬不如木靶的强。
English: With the strength of the hand of the wren, cast a light and small short sword, in addition to the body being cut by the dragon's sword of the Qin King, it can also be thrown into a hard copper column. This means that the strength of the wren is greater than that of the ten-stone dragon, and the hardness of the copper column is not as strong as the wooden target.

古文：世称荆轲之勇，不言其多力。
现代文：世人称赞荆轲的勇敢，没有说他力大。
English: The world praised Jing Tao's bravery, but did not say that he was powerful.

古文：多力之人，莫若孟贲。
现代文：力大的人，都不如孟贲。
English: Powerful people are not as good as Meng Xuan.

古文：使孟贲挝铜柱，能出一尺乎？
现代文：即使孟贲掷短剑击铜柱，能穿透一尺深吗？
English: Even if Meng Yao throws a short sword at a copper pillar, can it penetrate one foot deep?

古文：此亦或时匕首利若干将、莫邪，所刺无前，所击无下，故有入尺之效。
现代文：这也许短剑要锋利得像干将、莫邪那样，没有东西刺不穿，没有东西砍不下，才确实有掷进一尺深的效验。
English: Perhaps the short sword should be so sharp as to be able to pierce through anything and cut through anything, just like the go-getters and evil-doers. Only then will it really have the effect of plunging a foot deep.

古文：夫称干将、莫邪，亦过其实。
现代文：其实，称赞干将、莫邪，也超过了事实。
English: In fact, the praise of the go-getters and the evildoers also exceeds the facts.

古文：刺击无前下，亦入铜柱尺之类也。
现代文：夸它们没有东西刺不穿，没有东西砍不下，也和说短剑能掷进铜柱一尺深是一类。
English: To say that there is nothing they cannot pierce, nothing they cannot cut, is the same as saying that a short sword can pierce a copper pillar a foot deep.

古文：儒书言： 董仲舒读《春秋》，专精一思，志不在他，三年不窥园菜。 
现代文：儒者的书上说： 董仲舒读《春伙》，专一精思，志向不在别的上面，三年不看一眼菜园。 
English: The Confucianist's book said: "Dong Zhongshu read "Spring Comrades," devoted himself to study, aspired to nothing higher, and did not look at a vegetable garden for three years.

古文：夫言不窥园菜，实也；言三年，增之也。
现代文：说不看一眼菜园，是事实；说三年之久，是夸张。
English: It is a fact to say that the vegetable garden was built without a single glance; it is an exaggeration to say that it took three years.

古文：仲舒虽精，亦时解休，解休之间，犹宜游於门庭之侧；则能至门庭，何嫌不窥园菜？
现代文：董仲舒即使专心一意，也有松懈和休息的时候，在松懈和休息的时间，也应当到门和厅堂边走走，能到门和厅堂边，怎么会不看一眼菜园呢？
English: Even if Dong Zhongshu is single-minded, he also has time to relax and rest. During the time of relaxation and rest, he should also walk around the door and hall. If he can walk around the door and hall, how can he not look at the vegetable garden?

古文：闻用精者，察物不见，存道以亡身；不闻不至门庭，坐思三年，不及窥园也。
现代文：听说用心专一的人察看东两看不见，专心思考 道 会忘掉自身，但没有听说不到门和厅堂去，要坐着思考三年，来不及看一眼菜园的。
English: It is said that a single-minded person can't see the East and the West, and can forget himself if he concentrates on thinking, but it is not said that he can't go to the door and the hall, and has to sit and think for three years before he can look at the vegetable garden.

古文：《尚书毋佚》曰 君子所其毋逸，先知稼穑之艰难，乃佚 。
现代文：《尚书·毋佚》说： 君子做官不能贪图安逸，首先要了解耕种收获的艰难，然后才能安逸。 
English: "Shangshu Beozhuang" said: A noble official cannot be greedy for comfort. First, he must understand the difficulties of farming and harvesting, and then he can be comfortable.

古文：者也。
现代文：安逸，就是松懈。
English: To be at ease is to be lax.

古文：人之筋骨，非木非石，不能不解。
现代文：人的筋骨不是木头和石头，不能不松懈。
English: The sinews and bones of man are not wood and stone, and they cannot but slacken.

古文：故张而不弛，文王不为；弛而不张，文王不行；一弛一张，文王以为常。
现代文：所以把弦绷得很紧而不松驰，周文王不干；光放松而不紧张，周文王不做；有松弛有紧张，周文王把它当作常规。
English: Therefore, the strings are tightly tightened but not loosened, and Zhou Wenwang does not do it; the light is relaxed but not strained, and Zhou Wenwang does not do it; there is relaxation and tension, and Zhou Wenwang takes it as a routine.

古文：圣人材优，尚有弛张之时。仲舒材力劣於圣，安能用精三年不休？
现代文：圣人能力极强，尚且有松弛与紧张的时候，董仲舒比圣人的能力差，怎么能够用心专一三年不休息呢！
English: A saint has strong ability, but when there is slackness and tension, Dong Zhongshu is less capable than a saint, how can he concentrate for one or three years without rest!

古文：儒书言：夏之方盛也，远方图物，贡金九牧，铸鼎象物，而为之备，故入山泽不逢恶物，用辟神奸，故能叶於上下，以承天休。
现代文：儒者的书上说： 夏朝正有德兴盛的时候，把远方的东西画成图像，让九州的长官进贡青铜，铸成鼎，并把图像铸在鼎上，使之齐备，让老百姓认识它们，所以进入山林水泽不会碰上不利的东西，可以避开魑魅魍魉，因此能够和协上下，以承受上天的福禄。
English: The Confucianist's book said: "During the summer dynasty, when virtue was flourishing, distant things were drawn into images, and the governor of Kyushu was asked to pay a tribute of bronze and cast a tripod, and the images were cast on the tripod to make them complete, so that the common people could recognize them. Therefore, when entering the mountains, forests, rivers and lakes, they would not encounter any unfavorable things, and they could avoid the charms. Therefore, they would be able to harmoniously go up and down in order to receive the blessings of heaven.

古文：夫金之性，物也，用远方贡之为美，铸以为鼎，用象百物之奇，安能入山泽不逢恶物，辟除神奸乎？
现代文：青铜的本性是物体，以远方进贡的东西为好，用它铸造成鼎，以鼎上的图像像各种东西的奇形怪状，怎么就能使人们进入山林水泽不会碰上不利的东西，避开妖魔鬼怪呢？
English: The nature of bronze is that it is an object. It is better to take something from far away as a tribute, and use it to cast a crown. The images on the crown are like the strange shapes of various things. How can people enter the mountains, forests, and streams without encountering unfavorable things, and avoid demons and monsters?

古文：周时天下太平，越裳献白雉，倭人贡鬯草。
现代文：周朝的时候天下太平，越裳人进献白野鸡，倭人进贡鬯草。
English: At the time of the Zhou Dynasty, the world was at peace. The Yue people offered white pheasants, and the Wa people paid tribute with rushes.

古文：食白雉，服鬯草，不能除凶；金鼎之器，安能辟奸？
现代文：吃白野鸡，喝鬯草酿造的香酒，尚且不能除去妖魔，青铜铸的鼎，又怎么能避开鬼怪呢？
English: Eating white pheasants and drinking fragrant liquor brewed from valerian can't get rid of demons, but how can you avoid ghosts with a bronze ring?

古文：且九鼎之来，德盛之瑞也。
现代文：况且九鼎的形成，是夏朝功德隆盛的吉祥征兆。
English: Moreover, the formation of Jiuding is an auspicious sign of the prosperity of the summer dynasty.

古文：服瑞应之物，不能致福。
现代文：实际上，佩带吉祥的东西，也不能得福。
English: In fact, wearing something auspicious can not be blessed.

古文：男子服玉，女子服珠。珠玉於人，无能辟除。
现代文：男人佩玉，女人带珠，珠玉对于人，也不能避奸除凶。
English: Men wear beads, women wear beads, and for people, beads cannot prevent adultery.

古文：宝奇之物，使为兰服，作牙身，或言有益者，九鼎之语也。
现代文：宝物奇物，即使是兰草，或者是象牙，有人说对避邪有好处，其实也跟九鼎能避鬼怪的话一样。
English: Treasures and strange objects, even orchids, or ivory, are said to be good for avoiding evil, in fact, they are the same as Jiuding can avoid ghosts.

古文：夫九鼎无能辟除，传言能辟神奸，是则书增其文也。
现代文：九鼎不能避奸除凶，传说它能避开妖魔鬼怪，这是那些儒书上夸张的文辞。
English: Jiuding can't ward off evil spirits, but it is said that it can ward off evil spirits, which is an exaggerated phrase in Confucianism.

古文：世俗传言： 周鼎不爨自沸；不投物，物自出。 
现代文：世间一般流传说： 周天子的鼎不用烧火水会自己开，不放东西，东西会自己出来。 
English: The world's popular legend: Zhou Tianzi's ding dong does not need to be burned, the water will open by itself, do not put things, things will come out by themselves.

古文：此则世俗增其言也，儒书增其文也，是使九鼎以无怪空为神也。
现代文：这是世间庸人夸大的说法，是儒书夸张的文辞。这是使不神奇的九鼎凭空变成神了。
English: This is an exaggerated saying of the world's mediocrities, and the exaggerated words of Confucianism. This is to make the non-magical Jiuding into a god out of thin air.

古文：且夫谓周之鼎神者，何用审之？
现代文：要说周天子的鼎是神，拿什么来证明呢？
English: If you want to say that Zhou Tianzi's Ding is a god, what can you use to prove it?

古文：周鼎之金，远方所贡，禹得铸以为鼎也。其为鼎也，有百物之象。
现代文：因为周天子铸鼎的青铜，是远方进贡的。大禹得铜铸成了鼎，铸成的鼎，上面有各种东西的图像。
English: Because the bronze of Zhou Tianzi's casting of the tripod is a tribute from afar. Dayu got the bronze cast into a tripod, a cast tripod, with images of various things on it.

古文：如为远方贡之为神乎，远方之物安能神？
现代文：如果认为远方进贡的东西是神，那么远方的东西怎么会是神呢？
English: If something that pays tribute from far away is considered to be a god, then how can something far away be a god?

古文：如以为禹铸之为神乎，禹圣不能神，圣人身不能神，铸器安能神？
现代文：如果认为禹铸的鼎是神，禹圣为什么不能成神呢？圣人自己不能成神，铸造的器物怎么是神呢？
English: If it is believed that the deity cast by Yu is a god, why can't Yu Shenglu become a god? A saint himself can't become a god, so how can a cast object be a god?

古文：如以金之物为神乎，则夫金者石之类也，石不能神，金安能神？
现代文：如果认为青铜的东西是神，那么青铜是石头之类的东西，石头不能成神，青铜怎么能成神呢？
English: If a bronze object is considered to be a god, then bronze is a stone or something similar. A stone cannot become a god, so how can bronze become a god?

古文：以有百物之象为神乎，夫百物之象犹雷樽也，雷樽刻画云雷之形，云雷在天，神於百物，云雷之象不能神，百物之象安能神也？
现代文：以有各种东西的图象是神，那各种东西的图像，像有云纹和雷纹的酒杯，有云纹和雷纹的酒杯上刻着云和雷的形状，云和雷在天上，比各种东西更像神，云和雷的形象不能成神，那么各种东西的图像又怎么能成神呢？
English: To have the image of all things is to be a god. The images of all things, like the wine goblets with clouds and thunder, and the wine goblets with clouds and thunder, and the clouds and thunder in the sky, are more like gods than all things. The image of clouds and thunder cannot become a god, so how can the image of all things become a god?

古文：传言：秦灭周，周之九鼎入於秦。
现代文：传说： 秦灭掉周，周天子的九鼎归秦。 
English: Legend: Qin wiped out Zhou, and the nine dynasties of Zhou's sons reverted to Qin.

古文：案本事，周赧王之时，秦昭王使将军攻王赧，王赧惶惧奔秦，顿首受罪，尽献其邑三十六、口三万。
现代文：考察本来的事实。周赧王的时候，秦昭王派将军摎进攻赧王。赧王感到惶恐害怕就跑到秦国，磕头接受惩处，全部献出他的三十六座城，三万人。
English: In the time of King Zhou Enlai, King Qin Zhao sent his general Zou to attack King Zou. King Zou, panicked and afraid, ran to Qin, accepted the punishment of Shantou, and gave up all of his thirty-six cities and thirty thousand people.

古文：秦受其献还王赧。
现代文：秦国接受了他献出的东西，放他回去。
English: Qin State accepted what he offered and let him go back.

古文：王赧卒，秦王取九鼎宝器矣。
现代文：赧王死，秦王得到了珍贵的重器九鼎。
English: After the death of Qian Wang, Qin Wang obtained the precious heavy weapon Jiuding.

古文：若此者，九鼎在秦也。
现代文：像这样，九鼎就在秦国。
English: As such, Jiuding is located in Qin.

古文：始皇二十八年，北游至琅邪，还过彭城，齐戒祷祠，欲出周鼎，使千人没泗水之中，求弗能得。
现代文：始皇二十八年，秦始皇向北巡游到琅邪山，回来经过彭城，就斋戒祭祀祝告，想从水中找出周天子的鼎，便叫上千人下到泗水中去，找了很久没有能够得到。
English: In the 28th year of the First Emperor, Qin Shi Huang went on a northward cruise to Lushan Mountain and came back through Pengcheng. He wished for fasting and sacrifice, and wanted to find the ring of Zhou Tianzi from the water. He called thousands of people to go down to Lushan. After searching for a long time, they could not find it.

古文：案时，昭王之後三世得始皇帝，秦无危乱之祸，鼎宜不亡，亡时殆在周。
现代文：考察时间，秦昭王之后经过三代到始皇帝，秦国没有大的战乱灾祸，鼎应该没有丢失，要丢失时间大概在周代。
English: After three generations from Qin Zhao Wang to the First Emperor, there was no major war or disaster in Qin. The tripod should not have been lost, and the time to lose it was probably in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：传言王赧奔秦，秦取九鼎，或时误也。
现代文：流传的说法是赧王跑到秦国去，秦国得了九鼎。或许这个传说不对。
English: It is said that King Gong went to Qin and Qin won the Nine Treasures. Perhaps this legend is not true.

古文：传又言： 宋太丘社亡，鼎没水中彭城下，其後二十九年，秦并天下。 
现代文：又传说： 是在宋国太丘土地庙丢失的，鼎被沉入彭城下的泗水中。那之后二十九年，秦国兼并了天下。 
English: Another legend: It was lost in the land temple of Taiqiu in the Song Dynasty, and was sunk into the brackish water under Pengcheng. Twenty-nine years later, Qin State annexed the world.

古文：若此者，鼎未入秦也。
现代文：照这样说，鼎没有在秦国。
English: According to this, Ding did not end up in Qin.

古文：其亡，从周去矣，未为神也。
现代文：它的丢失，是随着周朝的灭亡而消失，并不是神了。
English: It was lost with the demise of the Zhou Dynasty, and is no longer a god.

古文：春秋之时，五石陨於宋。
现代文：春秋的时候，五块陨石坠落在宋国。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, five meteorites fell in Song.

古文：五石者星也，星之去天，犹鼎之亡於地也。
现代文：五块陨石是五颗星星。星星离开天，就像鼎在地上丢失一样。
English: Five meteorites are five stars. Stars leave the sky, just like a ring is lost on the ground.

古文：星去天不为神，鼎亡於地何能神？
现代文：星星离开天不算神，鼎在地上丢失怎么还能成神呢？
English: The stars are not gods if they leave the sky. How can they become gods if they are lost on the ground?

古文：春秋之时，三山亡，犹太丘社之去宋，五星之去天。
现代文：秦朝的时候，三座山消失了，就像太丘的土地庙在宋消失，五颗星星在天消失一样。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, the three mountains disappeared, just as the land temple of Taiyue disappeared in the Song Dynasty, and the five stars disappeared in the sky.

古文：三山亡，五石陨，太丘社去，皆自有为。
现代文：三座山消失，五块陨石坠落，太丘土地庙不见，都自有原因。
English: The disappearance of three mountains, the fall of five meteorites, and the disappearance of the Taiyuan Land Temple all have their own reasons.

古文：然鼎亡，亡亦有应也。未可以亡之故，乃谓之神。
现代文：然则鼎丢了，丢了也有它相应的道理，不能因为丢失的缘故，就说它是神。
English: However, if the crown is lost, there is a corresponding reason for the loss, and it cannot be said that it is a god because it is lost.

古文：如鼎与秦三山同乎，亡不能神。
现代文：如果鼎跟秦朝时候的三座山一同消失呢？消失就不能是神。
English: What if Ding disappeared together with the three mountains during the Qin Dynasty? If they disappear, they can't be gods.

古文：如有知欲辟危乱之祸乎，则更桀、纣之时矣。
现代文：如果它有知，想避天战乱的灾祸呢？那要经过桀、纣的时代。
English: If it knows and wants to avoid the calamity of war and chaos, it will have to go through the era of war and chaos.

古文：衰乱无道，莫过桀、纣，桀、纣之时，鼎不亡去。
现代文：国家衰败混乱无道的，莫过于桀、纣。桀、纣的时候，鼎没有丢失。
English: When a country is in a state of chaos and decay, there is nothing to do but wail, wail. When wailing, wailing, ding is not lost.

古文：周之衰乱，未若桀、纣。
现代文：周朝的衰败混乱，不如桀、纣。
English: The decay and chaos of the Zhou Dynasty is not as good as the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：留无道之桀、纣，去衰末之周，非止去之宜神有知之验也。
现代文：把鼎留给无道的桀、纣，而丢失在衰亡的周朝，这样的留和去是不恰当的，也不是神有知的证明。
English: It is not appropriate to leave the crown to the pathless Zou, Zou, and lose it in the declining Zhou Dynasty, nor is it a proof of God's knowledge.

古文：或时周亡之时，将军摎人众见鼎盗取，奸人铸烁以为他器，始皇求不得也。
现代文：也许正在周亡的时候，将军摎手下的人看见鼎把它偷走了，而其中奸诈的人把它冶炼铸成别的器物，所以秦始皇寻找不到。
English: Perhaps at the time of Zhou's death, the general and his subordinates saw Ding stealing it, and one of the treacherous people smelted and cast it into other objects, so Qin Shi Huang could not find it.

古文：後因言有神名，则空生没於泗水之语矣。
现代文：后来因此有它是神的说法，就凭空捏造出沉入泗水的话来。
English: Later, because of this, some people said that it was a god, and invented the words "sinking into the turbid water" out of thin air.

古文：孝文皇帝之时，赵人新垣平上言： 周鼎亡在泗水中。今河溢，通於泗水。臣望东北，汾阴直有金气，意周鼎出乎！
现代文：汉孝文皇帝的时候，赵国人新垣平对皇上说： 周天子的鼎丢在泗水中，现在黄河泛滥与泗水相通，我看东北方向，汾阴一带正有金气，估计周天子的鼎会出现！
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xiaowen, Zhao Guozhong Xinqi Ping said to the emperor: Zhou Tianzi's tripod was lost in Surabaya water, now the Yellow River flooding is connected to Surabaya water, I look to the northeast, there is gold in the area of Shuyin, it is estimated that Zhou Tianzi's tripod will appear!

古文：兆见弗迎则不至。 
现代文：吉兆出现不去迎接那是不会得到的。 
English: If you don't go out to meet it, you won't get it.

古文：於是文帝使使治庙汾阴，南临河，欲祠出周鼎。
现代文：于是汉文帝派使臣在汾阴修庙，南面靠黄河，希望通过祭祀让周鼎出来。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwen sent envoys to build a temple in Suyin, south of the Yellow River, hoping to make Zhou Dingyu come out through sacrifice.

古文：人有上书告新垣平所言神器事皆诈也，於是下平事於吏。
现代文：有人上书告新垣平说神气出现的事全是欺诈的，于是文帝把新垣平的案子交给了司法官吏。
English: Someone filed a complaint against Arakagidaira, saying that everything that happened with Shinki was fraudulent, so Emperor Wen handed Arakagidaira's case over to judicial officials.

古文：吏治，诛新垣平。
现代文：司法官吏定罪，杀了新垣平。
English: The judicial official was convicted of killing Arakakidaira.

古文：夫言鼎在泗水中，犹新垣平诈言鼎有神气见也。
现代文：说周鼎在泗水中，就像新垣平欺诈说周鼎有神气出现一样是假的。
English: Saying that Zhou Ding is in Surabaya is just as false as Arakigidaira's fraud of saying that Zhou Ding appeared with dignity.

