古文：雷公问于黄帝曰：《禁脉》之言，凡刺之理，经脉为始，营其所行，制其度量，内次五脏，外别六腑，愿尽闻其道。
现代文：雷公向黄帝问道：《禁脉》篇曾说，针刺的道理，首先是经脉，揣度其运行的终始，了解其长短，以及内部与五脏的联系，外部和六腑的分别，希望详尽地听听其中的道理。
English: Lei Gong asked Huang Di: "The Forbidden Veins" chapter once said that the reason for acupuncture is, first of all, the meridians, to calculate the beginning and end of its operation, to understand its length, as well as the connection between the inside and the five internal organs, and the difference between the outside and the six internal organs. I hope to listen to the reason in detail.

古文：黄帝曰：人始生，先成精，精成而脑髓生，骨为干，脉为营，筋为刚，肉为墙，皮肤坚而毛发长，谷入于胃，脉道以通，血气乃行。
现代文：黄帝说：人的最初生成，先受于父母之精，由精发育而生成脑髓，以骨骼为支干，以脉管藏血气而养全身，以筋连串骨骼使之坚强，以肉为墙壁保护内脏，当皮肤坚韧时，毛发就附着生长。五谷入于胃，化生出各种营养，脉道借之通行全身，血气运行不息。
English: Huangdi said: The first generation of human beings was first influenced by the essence of their parents, and the brain marrow was developed from the essence. The skeleton was used as a support, the blood vessels were used to store blood gas and nourish the whole body, the bones were made strong with a string of sinews, and the flesh was used as a wall to protect the internal organs. When the skin was tough, the hair was attached and grew. The grain entered the stomach, and various nutrients were produced. The blood vessels were used to pass through the whole body, and the blood gas continued to flow.

古文：雷公曰：愿卒闻经脉之始也。
现代文：雷公说：我想彻底地听听经脉最初生成的情况。
English: Lei Gong said: I want to thoroughly listen to the situation of the initial generation of the meridians.

古文：黄帝曰：经脉者，所以能决死生、处百病、调虚实，不可不通。
现代文：黄帝说：根据经脉的变化，可以决断死生，治疗百病，调整虚实，不可不通畅。
English: Huangdi said: According to the changes in the meridians, it is possible to decide life and death, treat all diseases, adjust the truth and falsehood, and must be smooth.

古文：肺手太阴之脉，起于中焦，下络大肠，还循胃口，上膈属肺，从肺系横出腋下，下循臑内，行少阴心主之前，下肘中，循臂内上骨下廉，入寸口，上鱼，循鱼际，出大指之端。
现代文：肺手太阴经脉，从中焦胃脘起始，向下与大肠相连接，返回循着胃的上口贲门，上贯膈膜，入属于肺，再由喉管横走，至于腋下，沿上臂内侧，行于手少阴和手厥阴之前，下达肘中，顺着前臂内侧上骨的下缘，入寸口，循着鱼际，出拇指尖端。
English: Lung and palms are yin meridians, starting from the middle coke stomach, connecting with the large intestine downwards, returning along the upper palate of the stomach, passing through the upper diaphragm, entering the lungs, and then passing through the larynx, as for the armpits, along the inner side of the upper arm, before the palms are yin and yin, reaching the middle of the elbow, along the lower edge of the medial humerus of the forearm, entering the mouth, following the fish, and exiting the tip of the thumb.

古文：其支者，从腕后直出次指内廉出其端。
现代文：它的支脉，从手腕后，直出食指尖端内侧，与手阳明大肠经相接。
English: Its branch, from the back of the wrist, straight out of the inside of the tip of the index finger, and the hand Yangming large intestine.

古文：是动则病肺胀满，膨胀而喘咳，缺盆中痛，甚则交两手而瞀，此为臂厥。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，肺部感觉胀满，气不宣畅而嘭嘭有声喘咳，缺盆里面疼痛，甚者病人就会交叉双手按着胸部，这叫臂厥。
English: Due to the lesions caused by the flow of qi in this meridian, the lungs feel bloated, the breath is not clear and there is a loud wheezing and coughing, there is pain inside the pelvis, and even the patient will cross his hands and press his chest, which is called arm cramp.

古文：是主肺所生病者，咳，上气，喘，渴，烦心，胸满，臑臂内前廉痛，厥，掌中热。
现代文：从本经所主之疾病来说，容易发生：咳嗽，呼吸急促，气喘，口渴，心烦，胸部满闷，小手臂内侧前缘作痛，厥冷，掌心发热。
English: From the point of view of the disease of this sutra, it is easy to occur: cough, shortness of breath, asthma, thirst, upset, full chest, pain in the inner forelimb of the small arm, cold, hot palms.

古文：气盛有余，则肩背痛，风寒，汗出中风，小便数而欠；气虚则肩背痛，寒，少气不足以息，溺色变。
现代文：本经气盛有余，就会出现：肩背部作痛，怕风畏寒，汗出易感风邪，以及小便次数增多而尿量减少；如果气虚不足，也会出现：肩背部疼痛，畏寒，呼吸气短，小便变色等症状。
English: If you have excess qi, you will have: pain in the back of the shoulder, fear of wind and cold, sweating and susceptibility to colds, and increased urination and decreased urine output; if you have insufficient qi, you will also have: pain in the back of the shoulder, fear of cold, shortness of breath, discoloration of urine and other symptoms.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，邪气盛就用泻法，正气虚就用补法，属热的就用疾刺法，属寒的就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法。对于那些不实不虚的病症，就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者寸口大三倍于人迎，虚者则寸口反小于人迎也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大三倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反小于人迎脉。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance is that the pulse at the base of the neck is three times larger than the human pulse; the so-called imaginary symptom is that the pulse at the base of the neck is smaller than the human pulse.

古文：大肠手阳明之脉，起于大指次指之端，循指上廉，出合谷两骨之间，上入两筋之中，循臂上廉，入肘外廉，上臑外前廉，上肩，出髃骨之前廉，上出于柱骨之会上，下入缺盆，络肺，下膈，属大肠。
现代文：大肠手阳明经脉，起于食指尖端，沿着食指上侧，通过合谷穴拇指、食指歧骨之间，上入腕上两筋中间的凹陷处，沿前臂上方，至肘外侧，再沿上臂外侧前缘，上肩，出肩端的前缘，上出于肩胛上，与诸阳经相会于柱骨大椎穴上。向下入缺盆穴，联络肺脏，下贯膈膜，会属于大肠。
English: Large intestine hand Yang Ming meridians, starting at the tip of the index finger, along the upper side of the index finger, through the glottis between the thumb and index finger, up into the depression in the middle of the two lines on the upper arm, along the upper forearm, to the outer side of the elbow, then along the outer side of the upper arm, the upper shoulder, the front edge of the outer shoulder, the upper out of the shoulder blade, and the Yang meridians meet in the postbony large vertebral hole. Down into the pelvic cavity, connecting the lungs, down through the diaphragm, will belong to the large intestine.

古文：其支者，从缺盆上颈，贯颊，入下齿中，还出挟口，交人中，左之右，右之左，上挟鼻孔。
现代文：它的支脉，从缺盆上走颈部，贯通颊部，下入齿龈，回转绕至上唇，左右两脉交会于人中，左脉向右，右脉向左，上行挟于鼻孔两侧，与足阳明胃经相接。
English: Its branching vein, from the missing basin, goes to the neck, penetrates the cheek, descends into the gums, turns around to the upper lip, the left and right veins intersect in humans, the left vein to the right, the right vein to the left, the upstream is sandwiched on both sides of the nostrils, and is connected to the foot Yang Ming stomach meridian.

古文：是动则病齿痛，颈肿。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，会出现牙齿痛、颈部肿等症状。
English: Toothache, neck swelling, and other symptoms may occur as a result of the lesions caused by the vas deferens.

古文：是主津液所生病者，目黄，口干，鼽衄，喉痹，肩前臑痛，大指次指痛不用，气有余则当脉所过者热肿；虚则寒栗不复。
现代文：本经脉主津液所发生的病变，眼睛发黄、口中发干，鼻流清涕或出血，喉喉部肿痛，肩前与上臂作痛，食指疼痛而不能动。本经气盛有余的，在经脉所过处发热而肿；本经气虚而不足的，会出现发寒战栗，难以恢复温暖的症状。
English: The lesions caused by the main sap of this meridian include yellow eyes, dry mouth, runny nose or bleeding, sore throat, pain in the front of the shoulder and upper arm, and pain in the index finger, which cannot be moved. If there is too much qi in this meridian, there will be fever and swelling around the meridian; if there is not enough qi in this meridian, there will be chills and shivers, and it will be difficult to restore warmth.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这样的病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症用疾刺法，寒症用留针法，脉虚下陷的用灸法，对不实不虚之症，就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大三倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大三倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉反比寸口脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance refers to the fact that the person's pulse is three times larger than the pulse of the cusp; the so-called false symptom refers to the fact that the person's pulse is less than the pulse of the cusp.

古文：胃足阳明之脉，起于鼻之交頞中，旁约太阳之脉，下循鼻外，入上齿中，还出挟口环唇，下交承浆，却循颐后下廉，出大迎，循颊车，上耳前，过客主人，循发际，至额颅。
现代文：胃足阳明经脉，起于鼻孔两旁，由此上行，左右相交于鼻根部，并缠束旁侧的足太阳膀胱经的经脉，向下沿着鼻的外侧，入上齿缝中，复出环绕口唇，下交于承浆穴，退回沿腮下后方，出大迎穴，沿颊车穴，上至耳前，通过客主人穴、沿发际，到达额颅。
English: Yangming meridians of the stomach and feet, starting from both sides of the nostrils and moving up from there, intersecting right and left at the base of the nose, and entangling the meridians of the foot and sun bladder meridians on the side, going down along the outside of the nose, entering the upper tooth gap, returning around the lips, going down to the bearing hole, returning along the back of the armpit, out of the large welcoming hole, along the cheek hole, up to the ear, through the guest hole, along the hairline, and reaching the forehead.

古文：其支者，从大迎前下人迎，循喉咙，入缺盆，下膈，属胃，络脾。
现代文：它的支脉，从大迎穴之前，向下走至人迎穴，沿喉咙入缺盆穴，下贯膈膜，入属于胃腑，与脾脏相联系。
English: Its offshoot, from before the large receptacle, goes down to the small receptacle, along the throat into the pelvic cavity, down through the diaphragm, into the stomach, and connects with the spleen.

古文：其直者，从缺盆下乳内廉，下挟脐，入气街中。
现代文：其直行的脉，从缺盆下行于乳房的内侧，再向下挟脐而入于阴毛两旁的气街中。
English: Its straight-running veins, from under the breech, travel up the inside of the breast, then down the vagina and into the qi street on either side of the pubic hair.

古文：其支者，起于胃口，下循腹里，下至气街中而合，以下髀关，抵伏兔，下膝膑中，下循胫外廉，下足跗，入中趾内间。
现代文：又一支脉，起于胃的下口，下循腹里，到气街前与直行的经脉相合，再由此下行至髀关穴，过伏兔穴，下至膝盖，沿胫骨前外侧，下至足背，入中趾内侧。
English: Another vein, starting from the lower mouth of the stomach, descends through the abdomen, to the front of the qi street to meet the straight line of the meridian, and then descends to the Shoguan hole, through the rabbit hole, down to the knee, along the front and outside of the tibia, down to the instep, into the inside of the middle toe.

古文：其支者，下廉三寸而别，下入中趾外间。
现代文：另一支脉，从膝下三寸处分别而行，下至足中趾外侧。
English: Another vein runs separately from three inches below the knee, down to the outside of the middle toe.

古文：其支者，别跗上，入大趾间，出其端。
现代文：又一支脉，从足背进入足大趾，直出大趾尖端，与足太阴脾经相接。
English: Another vein, from the sole of the foot into the big toe, straight out of the tip of the big toe, connected with the plantar fascia.

古文：是动则病洒洒振寒，善呻，数欠，颜黑，病至则恶人与火，闻木声则惕然而惊，心欲动，独闭户塞牖而处，甚则欲上高而歌，弃衣而走，贲响腹胀，是为骭厥。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，会感到发冷战抖，好呻吟，打呵欠，额部暗黑，病发时恶见人与火光，听到木的声音就会害怕，心跳不安，关门闭窗独住屋内，若病发剧烈时，就会登高歌呼，脱衣乱跑，并且有腹胀肠鸣等症状，这叫做骭厥。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will feel shivering, moaning, yawning, and darkening of the forehead. At the onset of the disease, it is bad to see people and firelight. Hearing the sound of wood will be afraid, the heartbeat will be uneasy, close the door and close the window and live alone in the house. If the disease is severe, it will be chanting, stripping and running, and there will be symptoms such as bloating and guttural sounds. This is called 厥.

古文：是主血所生病者，狂疟，温淫，汗出，鼽衄，口喎，唇胗，颈肿，喉痹，大腹水肿，膝膑肿痛，循膺乳、气街、股、伏兔、骭外廉、足跗上皆痛，中趾不用，气盛则身以前皆热，其有余于胃，则消谷善饥，溺色黄；气不足则身以前皆寒栗，胃中寒则胀满。
现代文：由本经主血所发生的病变，就会发狂、疟疾，温热过甚，自汗出，鼻流清涕或出血，口角歪斜，口唇生疮，颈肿喉痹，脐以上腹部肿胀，膝盖肿痛，沿侧胸乳部、气街、大腿前缘、伏兔、足胫外侧、足背等处都发痛，足中趾不能屈伸。本经气盛有余的实症，身前胸腹部发热，若气盛有余于胃，消化快，容易饥，小便色黄；本经气虚不足的虚症，身前胸腹部发冷，胃中有寒，发生胀满等症状。
English: The lesions caused by the main blood of this meridian will be mad, malaria, overheated, sweating, runny nose clear or bleeding, crooked mouth, sore lips, swollen neck and throat, swollen abdomen above the navel, swollen knees, pain along the lateral chest and breasts, qi street, anterior edge of thighs, pharynx, lateral plantar fascia, and instep, and the middle toe cannot flex. The real symptoms of this meridian are that there is too much qi, the anterior chest and abdomen are hot, if the qi is more than the stomach, digestion is fast, easy to hunger, and

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，对虚实不明显的病症，可以按经取穴治疗。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大三倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大三倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉反小于寸口脉。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance refers to the fact that the person's pulse is three times larger than the pulse of the cusp; the so-called false symptom refers to the fact that the person's pulse is less than the pulse of the cusp.

古文：脾足太阴之脉，起于大趾之端，循趾内侧白肉际，过核骨后，上内踝前廉，上踹内，循胫骨后，交出厥阴之前，上膝股内前廉，入腹，属脾，络胃，上膈，挟咽，连舌本，散舌下。
现代文：脾足太阴经脉，起于足大趾的内侧端，沿着大趾内侧赤白肉分界处，经过大趾后的核骨，上行于内踝的前方，再上行于小腿肚的内侧，沿胫骨后方，与厥阴肝经交叉出于其前，上行膝股内侧的前缘，直达腹内，入属脾脏，连络胃腑，上过膈膜，挟行咽喉，连于舌根，散于舌下。
English: Spleen and foot are yin meridians, starting from the medial end of the big toe, along the medial big toe red and white meat demarcation, through the nucleolus after the big toe, upstream in front of the inner ankle, then upstream in the medial side of the calf belly, along the back of the tibia, crossed with the jueyin liver meridians out in front of it, upstream in the front of the medial knee, straight to the abdomen, into the spleen, connected to the gastric glands, over the diaphragm, interlaced with the throat, connected to the base of the tongue

古文：其支者，复从胃，别上膈，注心中。
现代文：它的支脉，又从胃腑分别而行，注于心中，与手少阴心经相接。
English: Its offshoots, in turn, separate from the stomach and go to the heart, and are connected to the hand and the heart.

古文：是动则病舌本强，食则呕，胃脘痛，腹胀，善噫，得后与气则快然如衰，身体皆重。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，就会发生舌根强硬，食即呕吐，胃脘疼痛，腹内发胀，常常嗳气。若大便或矢气以后，觉得非常轻快，但是身体总是感觉沉重。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause the root of the tongue to be hard, vomiting when eating, stomach cramps, abdominal distension, and often shortness of breath. If after defecation or aspiration, I feel very light, but the body always feels heavy.

古文：是主脾所生病者，舌本痛，体不能动摇，食不下，烦心，心下急痛，溏，瘕，泄，水闭，黄疸，不能卧，强立，股膝内肿厥，足大趾不用。
现代文：凡本脏所发生的病症，舌根疼痛，身体无法转动，吃不下东西，心烦不安，心下痛得厉害，大便溏泄、痢疾、或小便不通，黄疸，不能安睡，勉强站立，股膝部内侧发肿以至厥冷，足大趾不能活动。
English: All the diseases of the intestines, pain in the base of the tongue, inability to move the body, inability to eat, anxiety, severe pain in the bottom of the heart, defecation, dysentery, or inability to urinate, jaundice, inability to sleep, difficulty standing, swelling of the inner side of the thighs and knees to the point of frostbite, inability to move the big toe.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者寸口大三倍于人迎，虚者寸口反小于人迎。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大三倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反比人迎脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance is that the pulse at the neck is three times larger than the person's pulse; the so-called false symptom is that the pulse at the neck is smaller than the person's pulse.

古文：心手少阴之脉，起于心中，出属心系，下膈，络小肠。
现代文：心手少阴经脉，起于心脏中，出属于心的脉络，下过隔膜，联络小肠。
English: The heart and hand have fewer yin meridians, which originate in the heart, flow out of the heart's veins, pass under the diaphragm, and connect to the small intestine.

古文：其支者，从心系，上挟咽，系目系。
现代文：它的支脉，从心系上行，挟于咽喉，联系到目系。
English: Its branch runs from the heart up through the throat and connects to the eyes.

古文：其直者，复从心系却上肺，下出腋下，下循臑内后廉，行太阴心主之后，下肘内，循臂内后廉，抵掌后锐骨之端，入掌内后廉，循小指之内，出其端。
现代文：另一直行的经脉，又从心系上行肺部，向下横出腋下，沿上臂内侧的后缘，到达掌后小指侧高骨的尖端，进入掌内后侧，沿着小指的内侧至指端，与手太阳经相接。
English: Another meridian runs from the heart to the lungs, down from the armpit, along the back of the inner side of the upper arm, to the tip of the high bone on the posterior side of the little finger, into the posterior side of the palm, along the inner side of the little finger to the fingertip, and is connected to the hand meridian.

古文：是动则病嗌干，心痛，渴而欲饮，是为臂厥。
现代文：由本经所发生的病变，就会出现喉咙发干，心痛，口渴想喝水，这叫做臂厥。
English: The lesions caused by this sutra will cause a dry throat, heartache, and thirst to drink water, which is called arm cramps.

古文：是主心所生病者，目黄，胁痛，臑臂内后廉痛厥，掌中热痛。
现代文：本经主心脏所发生的疾病，有眼睛发黄，胁痛，上臂和下臂内侧后缘疼痛、厥冷、掌心热痛等症状。
English: The disease that occurred through the main heart has symptoms such as yellowing of the eyes, pain, pain in the medial posterior margin of the upper arm and lower arm, chills, and hot palms.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者寸口大再倍于人迎，虚者寸口反小于人迎也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大两倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反比人迎脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance is that the pulse at the neck is twice as large as the person's pulse; the so-called false symptom is that the pulse at the neck is smaller than the person's pulse.

古文：小肠手太阳之脉，起于小指之端，循手外侧上腕，出踝中，直上循臂骨下廉，出肘内侧两骨之间，上循臑外后廉，出肩解，绕肩胛，交肩上，入缺盆，络心，循咽，下膈，抵胃，属小肠。
现代文：小肠手太阳经脉，起于手小指的尖端，沿手外侧，上入腕部，过锐骨直上，沿前臂骨下缘，出肘侧两骨之间，再上行，沿上臂外侧后缘，出肩后骨缝，绕行肩胛，左右交于肩上、下入于缺盆穴，联络心脏，再沿咽部下行穿过横膈膜，到达胃部，再向下入属小肠本腑。
English: The solar meridian of the small intestine starts at the tip of the little finger, along the outer side of the hand, enters the upper arm, goes straight up through the acromion, along the lower edge of the forearm bone, between the two bones on the side of the elbow, and then goes up, along the outer lateral edge of the upper arm, out of the bone gap behind the shoulder, goes around the shoulder girdle, crosses the shoulder on the left and right, goes down into the absent pelvic cavity, contacts the heart, and then goes along the lower pharynx through the diaphragm, reaches the stomach, and then goes down into the small intestine

古文：其支者，从缺盆循颈上颊，至目锐眦，却入耳中。
现代文：它的支脉，从缺盆沿颈上抵颊部，至眼外角，回入耳中。
English: Its branching runs from the notch along the neck to the cheek, to the outer corner of the eye, and back into the ear.

古文：其支者，别颊，上䪼抵鼻，至目内眦，斜络于颧。
现代文：又一支脉，从颊部别走眼眶下，至鼻，再至眼内角，斜行而络于颧骨部，与足太阳经相接。
English: Another vein runs diagonally from the cheek, under the eyelid, to the nose, and then to the inner corner of the eye. It is connected to the tibia, and to the sole of the foot.

古文：是动则病嗌痛，颔肿，不可以顾，肩似拔，臑似折。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，就会出现咽喉痛疼，下颏发肿，不能回顾，肩痛如拔，臂痛如折等症状。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause sore throat, swelling of the lower eyelid, inability to look back, shoulder pain such as pulling, arm pain such as folding and other symptoms.

古文：是主液所生病者，耳聋、目黄，颊肿，颈、颔、肩、臑、肘、臂外后廉痛。
现代文：本经主液体所发生的疾病，如耳聋、目黄，颊颔肿，沿颈、肩、肘、臂等部的外侧后缘发痛。
English: Diseases caused by the main fluid, such as deafness, yellow eyes, swollen cheeks, pain along the outer posterior margin of the neck, shoulders, elbows, arms, etc.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大再倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大两倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉反比寸口脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi saturation is that the person's pulse is twice as large as that of the cusp; the so-called false symptom is that the person's pulse is smaller than that of the cusp.

古文：膀胱足太阳之脉，起于目内眦，上额，交巅。
现代文：膀胱足太阳经脉，起于眼内角，向上行于额部，交会于头顶之上。
English: Bladder foot solar meridians, originating in the inner corner of the eye, travel up the forehead and meet at the top of the head.

古文：其支者，从巅至耳上角。
现代文：它的支脉，从头顶至耳上角。
English: Its branch runs from the top of the head to the upper corner of the ear.

古文：其直者，从巅入络脑，还出别下项，循肩髆内，挟脊，抵腰中，入循膂，络肾，属膀胱。
现代文：它的直行经脉，从头顶入络于脑，复从脑后下行项后，沿肩胛内侧，挟脊柱的两旁直达腰中，沿膂肉深入，联络肾脏，入属于膀胱本腑。
English: Its straight meridians, from the top of the head to the brain, from the back of the brain to the back of the head, along the inside of the shoulder girdle, between the two sides of the spine to the waist, along the neck, contact the kidneys, and enter the bladder.

古文：其支者，从腰中下挟脊，贯臀，入腘中。
现代文：其另一支脉，从腰中会于后阴，通过臀部，直入膝腘窝中。
English: The other vein runs from the middle of the waist to the nape of the neck, through the buttocks and straight into the armpit.

古文：其支者，从髆内左右，别下，贯胛，挟脊内，过髀枢，循髀外，从后廉，下合腘中，以下贯踹内，出外踝之后，循京骨，至小趾外侧。
现代文：又一支脉，从左右肩髆内侧，另向下行，穿过脊肉，经过髀枢，沿髀外侧后缘，向下行，与前一支脉会合于膝腘窝中，由此再向下通过小腿肚，出外踝骨的后边，沿着京骨穴，至小趾尖端外侧，交于小趾之下，与足少阴经脉相接。
English: Another vein, from the inside of the left and right shoulder blades, another downward, through the dorsal meat, through the umbilicus, along the lateral posterior margin of the outer side of the tibia, downward, and the previous vein meet in the armpit, and then down through the calf belly, out of the back of the outer ankle bone, along the fossa, to the outside of the tip of the little toe, under the little toe, and connected with the foot small yin meridian.

古文：是动则病冲头痛，目似脱，项如拔，脊痛，腰似折，髀不可以曲，腘如结，踹如裂，是为踝厥。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，会发生邪气上冲而造成脑后眉骨间疼痛，严重时眼珠好像要脱出，脖子像受到拉拽，脊部痛，腰似折断，大腿不能屈伸，腿后窝像被结扎，小腿肚痛似撕裂，这叫踝厥。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause the evil qi to rush up and cause pain between the bones of the brow behind the brain. In severe cases, the eyeballs seem to escape, the neck seems to be pulled, the spine hurts, the waist seems to be broken, the thighs can not be flexed, the back of the leg seems to be ligated, and the calf pain seems to be torn. This is called ankle jerk.

古文：是主筋所生病者，痔，疟，狂，癫疾，头、囟、项痛，目黄，泪出，鼽衄，项、背、腰、尻、腘、踹、脚皆痛，小趾不用。
现代文：本经主筋所发生的病症，如：痔疮，疟疾，狂病，癫病，头、囟门和颈部疼痛，眼睛发黄，流泪，鼻流清涕或出血，项、背、腰、臀部、腿后窝、小腿肚、脚等部位都发生疼痛，足小趾也不能动弹。
English: Diseases that occur through the main muscle, such as: hemorrhoids, malaria, rabies, epilepsy, pain in the head, jaw and neck, yellow eyes, tears, runny nose or bleeding, pain in the neck, back, waist, buttocks, groin, calf belly, feet and other parts, and the little toe can not move.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大再倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大两倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi saturation is that the person's pulse is twice as large as that of the cusp; the so-called false symptom is that the person's pulse is smaller than that of the cusp.

古文：肾足少阴之脉，起于小趾之下，邪走足心，出于然谷之下，循内踝之后，别入跟中，以上踹内，出腘内廉，上股内后廉，贯脊，属肾，络膀胱。
现代文：肾足少阴的经脉，起于足小趾的下面，斜走足心，出于然骨之下，沿着内踝的后面，转入足跟，由此上行小腿肚内侧，出腿后窝内侧，上行大腿内侧后缘，贯脊而入属于肾脏，与膀胱联系。
English: The meridians of the nephro-foot meridians, starting from the bottom of the little toe, obliquely go to the center of the foot, go out from under the metatarsus, along the back of the inner ankle, turn into the heel, and from there go up the inner side of the calf, out of the inner side of the leg, up the inner side of the thigh, through the spine and into the kidney, and contact with the bladder.

古文：其直者，从肾上贯肝膈，入肺中，循喉咙，挟舌本。
现代文：它直行的经脉，从肾上连肝贯膈，进入肺脏，沿着喉咙，归结于舌根。
English: It runs straight through the meridians, from the kidneys, through the liver, into the lungs, down the throat and to the base of the tongue.

古文：其支者，从肺出络心，注胸中。
现代文：它的支脉，从肺出来，联络心脏，再注于胸中，与手厥阴心包络经相接。
English: Its branch, coming out of the lungs, contacts the heart, then flows into the chest, and is connected to the hand and the heart by the umbilical cord.

古文：是动则病饥不欲食，面如漆柴，咳唾则有血，喝喝而喘，坐而欲起，目䀮䀮如无所见，心如悬若饥状。气不足则善恐，心惕惕如人将捕之，是为骨厥。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，就会出现饥不欲食，面色黑瘦如漆柴，咳唾带血，喘息喝喝有声，烦躁不安，坐下就想起来，视物不清，心中动荡不安，状若饥饿，气虚的多恐惧，心慌跳动，好像有人要来捕捉他，这叫做骨厥。
English: The lesions caused by the disease of the vas deferens will cause the following symptoms: loss of appetite, face dark and thin like lacquer, coughing and spitting with blood, wheezing, drinking and talking loudly, restlessness, remembering when sitting down, blurred vision, restlessness in the heart, as if hungry, shortness of breath and fear, palpitations, as if someone is coming to catch him, which is called osteoarthritis.

古文：是主肾所生病者，口热，舌干，咽肿，上气，嗌干及痛，烦心，心痛，黄疸，肠澼，脊股内后廉痛，痿厥，嗜卧，足下热而痛。
现代文：本经主肾脏所发生的病症，口热，舌干，咽肿，气上逆，喉咙干燥而疼痛，心中烦躁而痛，黄疸，痢疾，脊股内侧后面疼痛，足部无力，厥冷，嗜睡，足心热痛。
English: Diseases caused by the main kidney, hot mouth, dry tongue, pharyngitis, gas on the contrary, dry and painful throat, irritable and painful heart, jaundice, dysentery, pain behind the medial aspect of the spine, weakness in the foot, cold, drowsiness, hot pain in the foot.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：灸则强食生肉，缓带披发，大杖重履而步。
现代文：使用灸法时，应该强迫自己吃生肉，宽缓衣带，散披头发，手扶大杖，足穿重履，缓步而行。
English: When using the moxibustion method, you should force yourself to eat raw meat, loosen your clothes, wear your hair loose, hold a cane, put on your shoes, and walk slowly.

古文：盛者寸口大再倍于人迎，虚者寸口反小于人迎也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大两倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反比人迎脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance is that the pulse at the neck is twice as large as the person's pulse; the so-called false symptom is that the pulse at the neck is smaller than the person's pulse.

古文：心主手厥阴心包络之脉，起于胸中，出属心包络，下膈，历络三焦。
现代文：心主手厥阴心包经脉，起于胸中，向外走行而联属于本经所属的脏腑心包络，向下穿过膈膜，依次联络上中下三焦。
English: The main artery of the heart, the jueyin pericardium, originates in the chest, travels outward and connects to the pericardial pericardium, which belongs to the pericardium, passes down through the diaphragm, and in turn connects the upper, middle, and lower thirds.

古文：其支者，循胸出胁，下腋三寸，上抵腋下，循臑内，行太阴、少阴之间，入肘中，下臂，行两筋之间，入掌中，循中指，出其端。
现代文：它的支脉，循行胸中，横出胁下，当腋缝下三寸处上行至腋窝，再沿上臂内侧，行于手太阴肺经和手少阴心经的中间，入肘中，下循臂，行于掌后两筋之间，入掌中，沿中指直达指尖。
English: Its offshoots run through the middle of the chest, out the side when under stress, up to the armpit when three inches below the quilting, then along the inside of the upper arm, in the middle of the palms of the hands and the palms of the hands, into the elbow, down the arm, between the two lines behind the palm, into the palm, along the middle finger to the fingertips.

古文：其支者，别掌中，循小指次指，出其端。
现代文：又一支脉，从掌中别出，沿无名指直达指尖，与手少阳三焦经相接。
English: Another vein, branching out from the palm, runs along the ring finger to the fingertips, connecting with the three meridians of the Shao Yang.

古文：是动则病手心热，臂肘挛急，腋肿，甚则胸胁支满，心中憺憺大动，面赤，目黄，喜笑不休。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，就会出现手心发热，臂肘拘挛，腋下肿胀，严重时则胸胁满闷，心动不安，面赤，目黄。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause the palms of the hands to become hot, the arms and elbows to become stiff, and the armpits to swell. In severe cases, the chest will become full, the heart will be restless, the face will be red, and the eyes will be yellow.

古文：是主脉所生病者，烦心，心痛，掌中热。
现代文：本经心主脉所生的病症，有心烦、心痛、掌心发热等。
English: Diseases caused by the main artery of the heart include anxiety, heartache, and palmar fever.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病症，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉气下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者寸口大一倍于人迎，虚者寸口反小于人迎也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大一倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反小于人迎脉。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance refers to the fact that the pulse at the base of the neck is twice as large as the person's pulse; the so-called imaginary symptom refers to the fact that the pulse at the base of the neck is smaller than the person's pulse.

古文：三焦手少阳之脉，起于小指次指之端，上出两指之间，循手表腕，出臂外两骨之间，上贯肘，循臑外，上肩，而交出足少阳之后，入缺盆，布膻中，散落心包，下膈，循属三焦。
现代文：三焦手少阳经脉，起于无名指的尖端，上行出次指之间，沿着手背到达腕部，出前臂外侧两骨的中间，向上穿过肘，沿上臂外侧上肩，而交出足少阳胆经之后，入缺盆穴，分布于膻中穴，散络于心包，下过膈膜，依序属于上中下三焦。
English: The three-focal hand Shao Yang meridian, starting from the tip of the ring finger, goes up between the second fingers, along the back of the hand to the wrist, out of the middle of the two bones on the outside of the forearm, up through the elbow, along the upper arm on the outside of the upper shoulder, and after handing over the foot Shao Yang Yang meridian, into the pelvic cavity, distributed in the middle of the navel, scattered in the pericardium, down through the diaphragm, in order belong to the upper middle and lower three-focal.

古文：支者，从膻中上出缺盆，上项，系耳后直上，出耳上角，以屈下颊至䪼。
现代文：它的支脉，从膻中穴上出缺盆穴，上走颈项，夹耳后，直上出耳上角，由此曲而下行额部，到眼眶下。
English: Its offshoots, from the hole in the middle of the eyelid to the hole in the pelvis, go up to the neck, behind the ear, straight up to the upper corner of the ear, and from there curl down to the forehead, under the eyelid.

古文：其支者，从耳后入耳中，出走耳前，过客主人前，交颊，至目锐眦。
现代文：另一支脉，从耳后入耳中，再出走耳前，经过客主人穴的前方，与前支脉会于颊部，至眼外角，与足少阳胆经相接。
English: Another vein, from behind the ear into the ear, and then out of the ear, passing through the front of the guest's hole, and the anterior branch of the vein will meet in the cheek, to the outer corner of the eye, and the foot is less than the gallbladder.

古文：是动则病耳聋，浑浑焞焞，嗌肿，喉痹。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，会出现耳聋，喉咙肿痛。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause deafness and sore throat.

古文：是主气所生病者，汗出，目锐眦痛，颊痛，耳后、肩、臑、肘、臂外皆痛，小指次指不用。
现代文：本经主气所生的病症，有汗出，眼外角痛，颊痛，耳后、肩、臑、肘、臂的外侧都痛，无名指不能活动。
English: The symptoms caused by the main qi are sweating, pain in the outer corner of the eye, cheek pain, pain behind the ear, shoulder, shin, elbow, and the outer side of the arm, and the ring finger cannot move.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大一倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大一倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉反小于寸口脉。
English: The so-called real disease of qi abundance refers to the fact that the person's pulse is twice as large as that of the cusp; the so-called imaginary disease refers to the fact that the person's pulse is smaller than that of the cusp.

古文：胆足少阳之脉，起于目锐眦，上抵头角，下耳后，循颈行手少阳之前，至肩上，却交出手少阳之后，入缺盆。
现代文：胆足少阳经脉，起于眼外角，上行至额角，向下绕到耳后，沿颈走手少阳三焦经的前面，至肩上，又交叉到手少阳三焦经的后面，入缺盆穴。
English: Gallbladder and foot Shao Yang meridians, from the outer corner of the eye, up to the corner of the forehead, down to the back of the ear, along the neck to the front of the Shao Yang three-focal meridian, to the shoulder, and then cross to the back of the Shao Yang three-focal meridian, into the pelvic cavity.

古文：其支者，从耳后入耳中，出走耳前，至目锐眦后。
现代文：它的支脉，从耳后入耳内，出于耳前，至眼外角的后方。
English: It branches from behind the ear, into the inner ear, out the front of the ear, to behind the outer corner of the eye.

古文：其支者，别锐眦，下大迎，合于手少阳，抵于䪼，下加颊车，下颈，合缺盆，以下胸中，贯膈，络肝，属胆，循胁里，出气街，绕毛际，横入髀厌中。
现代文：又一支脉，从眼外角下行至大迎穴，与手少阳三焦经相合，至眼眶下，到达颊车穴的部位，再向下循行至颈，与前一支脉合于缺盆穴，再由此下行胸中，通过膈膜，联络肝脏，联属于本经所属的脏腑胆，沿着胁部的里面向下走行，出小腹两侧的气街，绕过阴毛边缘，而横行进入髀厌中。
English: Another vein, descending from the outer corner of the eye to the great welcoming hole, coincides with the Shao Yang Sanjiao Sutra, to the lower eyelid, reaches the part of the buccal car hole, and then follows down to the neck, merges with the previous vein in the absent pelvic hole, and then descends into the chest, passes through the diaphragm, contacts the liver, connects to the viscera and gallbladder belonging to this sutra, travels down the inside of the barrier, exits the qi street on both sides of the lower abdomen, bypasses the edge of the pubic hair, and runs rampant into the middle of

古文：其直者，从缺盆下腋，循胸，过季胁，下合髀厌中，以下循髀阳，出膝外廉，下外辅骨之前，直下抵绝骨之端，下出外踝之前，循足跗上，入小趾次趾之间。
现代文：其直行的经脉，从缺盆下腋，沿着胸部过季胁，与前支脉会合于髀厌中，再下沿大腿外侧，下行至膝外缘，下走外辅骨的前方，直下至外踝上方的腓骨凹陷处，出于踝前，沿着足背，出足小趾与第四趾之间。
English: Its straight-running meridians, from the breech of the pelvis, along the chest through the season, meet with the anterior branch in the stifle, then down along the outer thigh, down to the outer edge of the knee, down to the front of the exoskeleton, straight down to the fibula depression above the outer ankle, out of the ankle, along the instep, out between the little toe and the fourth toe.

古文：其支者，别跗上，入大趾之间，循大趾歧骨内，出其端，还贯爪甲，出三毛。
现代文：另一支脉，由足背走向大趾之间，沿着大趾的骨缝，至大趾尖端，再回走穿过爪甲，出大趾丛毛，与足厥阴肝经相接。
English: The other vein, from the sole of the foot to between the big toe, along the bone seam of the big toe, to the tip of the big toe, and then back through the nail, out of the big toe hair, and the foot Jie Yin liver meridian.

古文：是动则病口苦，善太息，心胁痛，不能转侧，甚则面微有尘，体无膏泽，足外反热，是为阳厥。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，就会感到口苦，时常叹气，心胁作痛，身体不能转动，重者面有尘色，全身肌肤失去了润泽，足外侧发热，这叫做阳厥。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause the sufferer to have a dry mouth, to sigh frequently, to feel pain in the chest, to be unable to move, to have a dust-colored face, to lose the moistness of the skin all over the body, and to have fever on the outside of the feet, which is called Yang Jue.

古文：是主骨所生病者，头痛，颔痛，目锐眦痛，缺盆中肿痛，腋下肿，马刀侠瘿，汗出振寒，疟，胸、胁、肋、髀、膝外至胫、绝骨、外踝前及诸节皆痛，小趾次趾不用。
现代文：本经主骨所生的病症，有头痛，下颔痛，眼外角痛，缺盆中肿痛，腋下肿，马刀侠瘿，自汗出，寒战，疟疾，胸、胁、肋、大腿、膝以至胫骨、绝骨、外踝前以及诸关节都痛，足第四趾不能活动。
English: The diseases that are caused by the main bone are headache, jaw pain, eye pain, pelvic pain, underarm swelling, malarial spasms, sweating, chills, malaria, chest, diaphragm, ribs, thighs, knees up to the tibia, sternum, ankle and all joints are painful, and the fourth toe cannot move.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，脉虚下陷的就用灸法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者人迎大一倍于寸口，虚者人迎反小于寸口也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指人迎脉比寸口脉大一倍；所谓虚症，是指人迎脉反比寸口脉小。
English: The so-called real disease of qi abundance refers to the fact that the person's pulse is twice as large as that of the cusp; the so-called imaginary disease refers to the fact that the person's pulse is smaller than that of the cusp.

古文：肝足厥阴之脉，起于大趾丛毛之际，上循足跗上廉，去内踝一寸，上踝八寸，交出太阴之后，上腘内廉，循股阴，入毛中，过阴器，抵小腹，挟胃，属肝，络胆，上贯膈，布胁肋，循喉咙之后，上入颃颡，连目系，上出额，与督脉会于巅。
现代文：肝足厥阴经脉，起于足大趾丛毛的边缘，沿着足背上侧，至内踝前一寸处，向上至踝骨上八寸处，交叉于足太阴脾经的后方，上膝弯内缘，沿腹股沟，入阴毛中，环绕生殖器，至小腹，夹行于胃部，上行属肝，下络于胆，再上通过膈膜，散布于胁肋，从喉咙的后侧，入喉咙的上孔，联系眼球深处的脉络，再上出额部，与督脉会合于头顶中央。
English: The hepato-foot juju yin meridian starts from the edge of the big toe tuft, along the upper side of the instep, to one inch in front of the inner ankle, up to eight inches above the ankle bone, crosses behind the hepato-foot spleen meridian, the inner edge of the upper knee bend, along the groin, into the pubic hair, around the genitals, to the lower abdomen, sandwiched in the stomach, the ascending line belongs to the liver, the lower line to the gallbladder, and then up through the diaphragm, spread to the hypochondrium, from the back of the throat, into the upper

古文：其支者，从目系下颊里，环唇内。
现代文：它的支脉，从眼球深处脉络，向下行于颊部内侧，环绕口唇之内。
English: Its offshoots, from the depths of the eyeball, run down the inside of the cheeks and around the inside of the lips.

古文：其支者，复从肝，别贯膈，上注肺。
现代文：另一支脉，又从肝脏通过膈膜，上注于肺脏，与手太阴肺经相接。
English: Another vein, again from the liver, passes through the diaphragm and is infused into the lungs, where it is connected to the carotid artery.

古文：是动则病腰痛不可以俛仰，丈夫㿉疝，妇人少腹肿，甚则嗌干，面尘，脱色。
现代文：由本经脉气所发生的病变，会出现腰痛，不能俯仰，男人阴囊肿大，女人小腹部肿胀，病重的咽喉发干，面上如有灰尘没有光泽。
English: The lesions caused by the qi of this meridian will cause low back pain, inability to bend over, enlarged scrotum in men, swollen abdomen in women, dry throat, and lack of luster if there is dust on the face.

古文：是主肝所生病者，胸满，呕，逆，飧泄，狐疝，遗溺，闭癃。
现代文：本经主肝脏所发生的病症，有：胸不满闷、呕吐、气逆、飧泄、狐疝、遗尿、小便不通等。
English: The diseases that occur through the main liver include: chest discomfort, vomiting, gas reflux, diarrhea, diarrhea, urinary retention, urinary incontinence, etc.

古文：为此诸病，盛则泻之，虚则补之，热则疾之，寒则留之，陷下则灸之，不盛不虚，以经取之。
现代文：像这些病，实症就用泻法，虚症就用补法，热症就用速刺法，寒症就用留针法，不实不虚的就从本经取治。
English: Like these diseases, the real disease is treated with the laxative method, the imaginary disease is treated with the tonic method, the fever is treated with the quick prick method, the cold disease is treated with the needle retention method, and the unreal disease is treated with the original method.

古文：盛者寸口大一倍于人迎，虚者寸口反小于人迎也。
现代文：所谓气盛的实症，是指寸口脉比人迎脉大一倍；所谓虚症，是指寸口脉反比人迎脉小。
English: The so-called real symptom of qi abundance refers to the fact that the pulse at the base of the neck is twice as large as the person's pulse; the so-called imaginary symptom refers to the fact that the pulse at the base of the neck is smaller than the person's pulse.

古文：手太阴气绝，则皮毛焦。
现代文：手太阴肺经的脉气竭绝，皮毛就会焦枯。
English: If the pulse of the hand is exhausted, the fur will be scorched.

古文：太阴者，行气温于皮毛者也。
现代文：手太阴肺是能够行气柔和皮毛的。
English: The hands are too small to be able to stroke the soft fur.

古文：故气不荣，则皮毛焦；皮毛焦，则津液去皮节；津液去皮节者，则爪枯毛折；毛折者，则毛先死。
现代文：所以，气行不畅，就会使皮毛焦枯；皮毛焦枯，就表明津液耗损；津液耗损，就会伤及肌表；肌表受伤，就会使皮枯毛落；毛发脱落，就是肺经脉气先死的征象。
English: Therefore, if the qi flow is not smooth, the fur will be scorched and withered; if the fur is scorched and withered, it indicates that the qi is depleted; if the qi is depleted, it will injure the skin surface; if the skin surface is injured, it will cause the skin to wither and fall off; if the hair falls off, it is a sign of the first death of the pulmonary artery qi.

古文：丙笃丁死，火胜金也。
现代文：所以，肺病在丙日危笃，在丁日死亡，因为肺在五行属金，丙丁属火，火能胜金。
English: Therefore, lung disease is critical on the C day and death on the D day, because the lungs are gold in the five elements, and the B and D are fire, and fire can beat gold.

古文：手少阴气绝则脉不通，脉不通则血不流，血不流则发色不泽，故其面黑如漆柴者，血先死。
现代文：手少阴心经的脉气竭绝，脉道就会不通；脉道不通，血液就不能周流；血不周流，面色就无光泽；面色无光泽，就是血脉先死的征象。
English: If the pulse of the inferior vena cava is exhausted, the vascular channel will be blocked; if the vascular channel is blocked, the blood cannot circulate; if the blood does not circulate, the complexion will be dull; dull complexion is a sign of premature death of blood vessels.

古文：壬笃癸死，水胜火也。
现代文：所以，心病危笃于壬日，死亡于癸日，因为心在五行属火，壬癸属水，水能胜火。
English: Therefore, the danger of heart disease is on the 3rd day, and death is on the 4th day, because the heart is fire in the five elements, and the 3rd day is water, and water can overcome fire.

古文：足太阴气绝者则脉不荣其肌肉，唇舌者肌肉之本也。
现代文：足太阴脾经的脉气竭绝，经脉就不能滋养肌肉。
English: The pulse of the foot is too yin and the spleen is exhausted, and the menstrual pulse cannot nourish the muscles.

古文：脉不荣则肌肉软，肌肉软则舌萎人中满，人中满则唇反，唇反者肉先死。
现代文：唇舌是肌肉的根本，经脉不能滋养肌肉，肌肉就不滑润；肌肉不滑润，人中部就会肿满；人中肿满，就会出现口唇外翻；口唇外翻，就是肌肉先死的征象。
English: The lips and tongue are the foundation of the muscles. If the meridians cannot nourish the muscles, the muscles will not be smooth; if the muscles are not smooth, the middle of the person will be swollen; if the person is swollen, the lips will protrude; if the lips protrude, it is a sign that the muscles died first.

古文：甲笃乙死，木胜土也。
现代文：所以，脾病危笃于甲日，死亡于乙日，因为脾在五行属土，甲乙属木，木能胜土。
English: Therefore, the spleen disease is critical on day A, and death occurs on day B, because the spleen belongs to the earth in the five elements, and A and B belong to the wood, and the wood can overcome the earth.

古文：足少阴气绝则骨枯。
现代文：足少阴肾经的脉气竭绝，就会出现骨骼枯槁的病象。
English: If the pulse of the Shao Yin kidney meridian is exhausted, the symptoms of bone withering will appear.

古文：少阴者，冬脉也，伏行而濡骨髓者也，故骨不濡则肉不能着也，骨肉不相亲则肉软却，肉软却故齿长而垢，发无泽，发无泽者骨先死。
现代文：因为足少阴是应于冬季的脉象，它伏行深部濡养骨髓，所以如果骨髓得不到肾气的濡养，肌肉就不能贴附于骨骼了。骨肉不能相结，肌肉就会软缩；肌肉软缩，则牙齿就显得长而枯燥，头发没有光泽；头发没有光泽，就是骨已先死的征象。
English: Because foot yin deficiency is due to the pulse of winter, it lies deep and wet and nourishes the bone marrow, so if the bone marrow does not get wet and nourished by the kidney gas, the muscles cannot attach to the bones. If the bone and flesh cannot bond, the muscles will shrink; if the muscles shrink, the teeth will appear long and dry, and the hair will have no luster; if the hair has no luster, it is a sign that the bones have died first.

古文：戊笃己死，土胜水也。足厥阴气绝则筋绝。
现代文：所以，肾病、骨病一般戊日危笃，己日死亡，因为肾在五行属水，戊己属土，土能胜水。足厥阴肝经的脉气竭绝，就会使筋拘急痉挛。
English: Therefore, kidney disease and bone disease are generally critical on the third day and die on the first day, because the kidneys are water in the five elements, and the kidneys are earth, and the earth can overcome the water. If the pulse of the foot and the liver is exhausted, it will cause the muscle to be anxious.

古文：厥阴者，肝脉也，肝者筋之合也，筋者聚于阴气，而脉络于舌本也。
现代文：因为足厥阴经是属于肝脏的脉，肝脏外合于筋，而各经筋又聚于阴器，向上联系到舌根。
English: Because the meridians of the feet belong to the veins of the liver, the liver is externally connected to the sinews, and the meridians are gathered in the genitals and connected upwards to the base of the tongue.

古文：故脉弗荣则筋急，筋急则引舌与卵，故唇青舌卷卵缩则筋先死。
现代文：所以，如果肝脏不能营养于筋，就会出现筋缩挛急；筋缩挛急，就会牵引舌卷与睾丸上缩。如果出现了唇色发青、舌卷与睾丸上缩，就是筋已先死的征象。
English: Therefore, if the liver cannot nourish the muscles, there will be muscle contraction and shrinkage; muscle contraction and shrinkage will pull the tongue roll and the testicles up. If the lips turn blue and the tongue roll and the testicles shrink, it is a sign that the muscle has died first.

古文：庚笃辛死，金胜木也。
现代文：所以，肝病一般危笃于庚日，死亡于辛日，因为肝在五行属木，庚辛属金，金能胜木。
English: Therefore, liver disease is generally critical on the second day, and death on the third day, because the liver is a wood in the five elements, and the second element is gold, and the gold can win the wood.

古文：五阴气俱绝，则目系转，转则目运，目运者为志先死，志先死则远一日半死矣。
现代文：如果五脏阴经脉气全都竭绝，就会出现目系转动，目系转动就会觉得眼晕。眼晕就是五志先死的征象。五志既已先绝，那形体一天半就必然死亡了。
English: If the five viscera, yin, chakra and qi are all exhausted, there will be eye movement, eye movement will feel dizzy. Dizziness is a sign of the first death of the five aspirations. Once the five aspirations have been exhausted, the body will inevitably die in a day and a half.

古文：六阳气绝，则阴与阳相离，离则腠理发泄，绝汗乃出，大如贯珠，转出不流，即气先死，故旦占夕死，夕占旦死。
现代文：如果六腑阳经的脉气全都竭绝，就会使阴气和阳气相互分离；阴阳分离，就会使皮表不固，精气外泄，而流出大如串珠、凝滞不流的绝汗；绝汗出是人体精气败绝的病象，所以如果病人在早晨出现了这种病象，那就表明他将在当天晚上死亡，如果病人在晚上出现了这种病象，那就表明他将在第二天早晨死亡。
English: If all the pulses of the six meridians are exhausted, it will cause the yin and yang to separate from each other; if the yin and yang are separated, it will cause the skin surface to become loose, the energy will leak out, and the outflow will be large as beads, stagnant and non-flowing perspiration; the perspiration is a symptom of the body's energy depletion, so if the patient has this symptom in the morning, it means that he will die that evening, and if the patient has this symptom in the evening, it means that he will die the next morning.

古文：此十二经之败也。
现代文：这就是十二条经脉脉气竭绝的情况。
English: This is the state of exhaustion of the twelve meridians.

古文：经脉十二者，伏行分肉之间，深而不见；其常见者，足太阴过于外踝之上，无所隐故也。
现代文：十二经脉，都隐伏在体内而行于分肉之间，很深，在体表看不到。平常所能看到的，只有足太阴脾经所经过的足内踝上面的一段，毫无隐蔽可以看到。
English: The twelve meridians are all hidden within the body and travel between the meridians. They are very deep and cannot be seen on the surface of the body. The only part that can be seen normally is the section above the inner ankle of the foot, which the meridians pass through. It can be seen without any concealment.

古文：诸脉之浮而常见者，皆络脉也。
现代文：诸脉在浅表而常可见到的，都是络脉。
English: The veins, which are often seen on the surface, are the vas deferens.

古文：六经络手阳明少阳之大络，起于五指间，上合肘中。
现代文：在手足六经络脉中，手阳明大肠经、手少阳三焦经的大络，分别起于五指之间，上合于肘中。
English: In the six meridians of the hands and feet, the major meridians of the large intestine meridian of the hand and the three focal meridians of the small intestine meridians of the hand, respectively, originate between the five fingers and are joined at the elbow.

古文：饮酒者，卫气先行皮肤，先充络脉，络脉先盛，故卫气已平，营气乃满，而经脉大盛。
现代文：饮酒的人，其酒气随卫气行于皮肤，先充于络脉，使络脉满盛，此后在外的卫气已经充溢有余，就会使在内的营气也随之满盛，进而就会使经脉中的血气也大大地充盛起来。
English: For people who drink alcohol, the alcohol goes along with the qi to the skin, first filling the vas deferens, making the vas deferens full. After that, when the external qi is already full, the internal qi will also be full, and then the blood qi in the meridians will also be greatly enriched.

古文：脉之卒然动者，皆邪气居之，留于本末，不动则热，不坚则陷且空。
现代文：倘若没有饮酒，经脉就突然充盛起来，发生异常的变动，那么就说明有邪气侵袭于内，并停留在了经脉自起点至终点的循行通路上，聚集不动而化热，此后如果络脉的脉形不显坚实，那就说明邪气已经深陷于经脉，并使络脉之气空虚而衰竭了。
English: If, without drinking alcohol, the meridians suddenly swell and abnormal changes occur, then it indicates that the evil spirit has invaded and stayed in the meridians from the beginning to the end of the walk-through path, gathering heat without moving, and then if the shape of the vas deferens is not solid, then it indicates that the evil spirit has sunk deep into the meridians and exhausted the vas deferens.

古文：不与众同，是以知其何脉之动也。雷公曰：何以知经脉之与络脉异也？
现代文：凡是被邪气所侵袭了的经脉，都会出现与其他正常经脉不同的异常表现，由此就可以测知是哪一条经脉感受到了邪气而发生了异常的变动。雷公问：怎样才能知道经脉或是络脉之中发生了病变呢？
English: All the meridians that are affected by the evil spirit will have abnormal manifestations that are different from other normal meridians. From this, it can be determined which meridian has felt the evil spirit and has undergone abnormal changes. Lei Gong asked: How can we know if a lesion has occurred in the meridians or the vas deferens?

古文：黄帝曰：经脉者，常不可见也，其虚实也，以气口知之。
现代文：黄帝说：经脉隐伏在内，因此即使其发生了病变，在体表常常也是看不到的，其虚实的变化情况只能从气口部位的脉象变化来测知。
English: Huang Di said: The meridians are hidden, so even if a lesion occurs, it is often not visible on the body surface. Its actual changes can only be detected from the pulse changes in the trachea.

古文：脉之见者，皆络脉也。
现代文：而在体表可以看到的那些经脉的病变，其实都是络脉的病变。
English: However, the lesions of the meridians that can be seen on the surface of the body are actually lesions of the vas deferens.

古文：雷公曰：细子无以明其然也。
现代文：雷公说：请原谅我年幼无知还是不能理解其中的道理。
English: Lei Gong said: Please forgive my young ignorance or inability to understand the reason.

古文：黄帝曰：诸络脉皆不能经大节之间，必行绝道而出入，复合于皮中，其会皆见于外。
现代文：黄帝说：所有的络脉都不能通过大关节所在的部位，因此在走行到大关节的部位时，络脉都要经过经脉所不到的地方，出于皮表，越过大关节后，再入里而与经脉相合于皮中，此外，它们相合的部位还都会在皮表部显现出来。
English: Huang Di said: All the vas deferens cannot pass through the part where the large joint is located. Therefore, when traveling to the part of the large joint, the vas deferens must pass through the place where the meridians cannot reach, from the skin surface, after crossing the large joint, re-entering the inside and coinciding with the meridians in the skin. In addition, the parts where they coincide will also appear on the skin surface.

古文：故诸刺络脉者必刺其结上，甚血者虽无结，急取之以泻其邪而出其血。留之发为痹也。
现代文：所以在刺诸络脉时，一定要刺在它聚结的地方。病重的，虽然皮有淤血聚结，也应急刺，以泻其病邪，而放出淤血，如果淤血留在了里面，就能成为痹证。
English: Therefore, when pricking the veins, it is necessary to prick at the place where it coalesces. In severe cases, although the skin has congealed blood coalescence, it is also an emergency prick to relieve the disease and release the congealed blood. If the congealed blood remains inside, it can become a bruise.

古文：凡诊络脉，脉色青则寒且痛，赤则有热。
现代文：大凡诊视络脉的病变，如果络脉颜色青，就是有寒邪郁积并有疼痛；如果络脉颜色赤，就是有热。
English: In general, when diagnosing the lesions of the vas deferens, if the color of the vas deferens is blue, it means that there is cold accumulation and pain; if the color of the vas deferens is red, it means that there is heat.

古文：胃中寒，手鱼之络多青矣。胃中有热，鱼际络赤。
现代文：胃里有寒，手鱼部的络脉多呈青色；胃里有热，鱼际的络脉则呈现赤色。
English: In the stomach, there is cold, and the veins in the hands of the fish are mostly blue; in the stomach, there is heat, and the veins between the fish are red.

古文：其暴黑者，留久痹也。
现代文：鱼际的络脉如呈黑色，就是邪留日久的痹病。
English: If the veins of the gill are black, it is a lingering paralysis.

古文：其有赤、有黑、有青者，寒热气也。
现代文：如果络脉的颜色有赤有黑又有青色的，是寒热错杂的病变。
English: If the color of the vas deferens is red, black, and blue, it is a mixed cold and heat lesion.

古文：其青短者，少气也。
现代文：如果络脉的颜色青而脉象短，为气弱的征象。
English: If the color of the vas deferens is blue and the veins appear short, it is a sign of weak qi.

古文：凡刺寒热者，皆多血络，必间日而一取之，血尽而止，乃调其虚实。
现代文：凡是针刺胃中寒热的病变，都是多刺血络，一定要隔日一刺，淤血泻完即止针，然后再察明病症的虚实。
English: All the cold and fever lesions in the acupuncture stomach are spiny blood vessels. It is necessary to stop the needle immediately after the second day of acupuncture, and then detect the truth of the disease.

古文：其小而短者少气，甚者泻之则闷，闷甚则仆，不得言。
现代文：如络络脉颜青而脉象短的，是气少，过用泻法就会使患者心中烦乱，甚至跌倒，不能说话。
English: If the vena cava is pale and the vein is short, it is short of qi, and if the laxative is used, the patient will be upset, even fall down, and cannot speak.

古文：闷则急坐之也。手太阴之别，名曰列缺。
现代文：放血治疗时如出现患者心烦的情况，要赶快扶稳静坐，以防跌倒。手太阴肺经的别出络脉，名叫列缺络。
English: If the patient is upset during the bloodletting treatment, it is necessary to quickly stabilize and meditate in order to prevent falling. If the hand is too dark, the pulmonary vein should not be exposed, which is called the column deficiency.

古文：起于腕上分间，并太阴之经直入掌中，散入于鱼际。
现代文：起于腕上分肉之间，与手太阴经脉并行，直入掌中，散布于鱼际。
English: It originates between the metatarsal bones of the upper arm, runs parallel to the umbilical vein of the hand, goes straight into the palm of the hand, and is distributed among the fish.

古文：其病实则手锐掌热；虚则欠㰦，小便遗数。
现代文：本络脉如发生病变，属实的，锐骨和手掌会发热；属虚的，就会张口哈欠，小便失禁或频数。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is true, the sharp bones and palms of the hands will be hot; if it is false, the mouth will yawn, urinary incontinence or frequency.

古文：取之去腕半寸。
现代文：治疗时，应取腕后一寸半的列缺穴。
English: For treatment, a half-inch incision should be made behind the arm.

古文：别走阳明也。
现代文：本络即从此别走手阳明大肠经。
English: From now on, the real issue is to follow the path of the Yangming Colonization.

古文：手少阴之别，名曰通里。
现代文：手少阴心经的别出络脉，名叫通里络。
English: The outflowing veins of the palms and soles of the feet are called the meridians.

古文：去腕一寸半，别而上行，循经入于心中，系舌本，属目系。
现代文：起于腕后内侧一寸陷中，别行分出，由此而沿着手少阴心经的正经向上走行，并进入心中，然后再向上循行而联系于舌根，并连属于眼球内连于脑的脉络。
English: It originates in an inch-deep depression on the inner side of the back of the arm, and branches out from there, traveling upward along the positive meridian of the Shao Yin Heart Sutra, and entering the heart, and then traveling upward and connecting to the base of the tongue, and connecting to the vein of the eyeball connected to the brain.

古文：其实则支膈，虚则不能言。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，就会使心膈间支撑不舒；属虚的，就会不能说话。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is true, it will make the support between the heartbeats uncomfortable; if it is false, it will not be able to speak.

古文：取之掌后一寸。别走太阳也。
现代文：对于以上这些病证，都可以取用位于手掌后方一寸处的通里穴来进行治疗。本络由此别走手太阳小肠经。
English: For the above-mentioned pathologies, the treatment can be carried out by using the channel hole, which is located one inch behind the palm of the hand.

古文：手心主之别，名曰内关。
现代文：手厥阴心包络经的别出络脉，名叫内关络。
English: The outflowing vein of the hand-jue-yin-heart enveloping meridian is called the internal circulatory system.

古文：去腕二寸，出于两筋之间，别走少阳，循经以上系于心包，络心系。
现代文：在腕后内侧二寸处，从两筋的中间别行分出，由此别走手少阳三焦经，主络则沿着手厥阴心包络经的正经向上走行，而联系于心包络，并包绕联络于心脏与其他脏腑相联系的脉络。
English: At the two-inch point on the inner side of the back of the arm, separate lines are separated from the middle of the two lines, so that the Shao Yang Sanjiao Sutra does not go, and the main line runs up along the positive line of the Jue Yin Heart Envelope Sutra, and is connected to the heart envelope, and surrounds the vein that is connected to the heart and other organs.

古文：实则心痛，虚则为头强。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属于实症，就会心痛；属于虚症，就会心烦。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is a real disease, there will be heartache; if it is an imaginary disease, there will be upset.

古文：取之两筋间也。
现代文：在治疗时应取腕上二寸两筋中间的内关穴。
English: In the treatment should be taken on the arm two inches from the middle of the two-sided hole.

古文：手太阳之别，名曰支正。
现代文：手太阳小肠经的别出络脉，名叫支正络。
English: The outflowing vein of the small intestine of the hand-sun meridian is called the branching meridian.

古文：上腕五寸，内注少阴。
现代文：起于腕上五寸，向内注于手少阴心经。
English: It rises five inches from the wrist and flows inward into the palm.

古文：其别者，上走肘，络肩髃。
现代文：另有一条支络，上走肘部，再上行络于肩髃穴。
English: In addition, there is a supporting line that goes up to the elbow, and then goes up to the shoulder socket.

古文：实则节弛肘废；虚则生肬，小者如指痂疥。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属于实的，就会筋力松弛，肘部拘挛；属于虚的，就会出现赘疣，小的就像指间所生的水泡那样。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is real, the muscle strength will be slack and the elbow will be stiff; if it is imaginary, there will be a cramp, as small as a blister between the fingers.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，应取本经别出的支正穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：手阳明之别，名曰偏历。
现代文：手阳明大肠经的别出络脉，名叫偏历络。
English: The outflowing lumen of the large intestine is called the partial lumen.

古文：去腕三寸，别入太阴。其别者，上循臂，乘肩髃，上曲颊伤齿。
现代文：在手掌后方距离腕关节三寸的部位从本经分出，由此而别行并进入于手太阴肺经的经脉。
English: At the back of the hand, three inches away from the wrist joint, it is separated from the main meridian, from which it branches off and enters the pulmonary meridian in the palm.

古文：其别者，入耳，合于宗脉。实则龋聋，虚则齿寒痹隔。取之所别也。手少阳之别，名曰外关。
现代文：它的一条别行的支脉，在偏历穴处别行而出，然后就沿着手臂上行，经过肩髃穴所在的部位，再向上走行，而到达曲颊，进而斜行到牙根部并联络之。另一别出之脉，入耳中，而与耳部的宗脉会合。如本络脉发生病变，属实的，会出现龋齿、耳聋；属虚的，会出现牙齿发冷，膈间闭塞。治疗时，可取本经别出的偏历穴。
English: One of its branches branches out from the meridian at the meridian, and then travels up the arm, passing through the part where the brachial plexus is located, and then travels upwards to reach the zygomatic arch, and then travels obliquely to the tooth root and connects it. Another branching vein enters the ear and joins the main line of the ear. If there is a lesion in this vein, true, there will be tooth decay and deafness; if false, there will be cold teeth and occlusion between the jaws. During treatment, the meridian hole that was originally separated can be removed.

古文：去腕二寸，外绕臂，注胸中，合心主。
现代文：手少阳三焦经的别出络脉，名叫外关络。在腕后二寸处，向外绕行于臂部，注入胸中，与心包络经相合。
English: The outflowing vein of the Shao Yang Sanjiao Meridian is called the external meridian. At two inches behind the arm, it travels outward around the arm, is injected into the chest, and merges with the heart envelope meridian.

古文：病实则肘挛，虚则不收。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，会出现肘节拘挛；属虚的，会出现肘节弛缓不收。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is true, the elbow joint will be constrained; if it is false, the elbow joint will be relaxed.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的外关穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：足太阳之别，名曰飞扬。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的别出络脉，名叫飞扬络。
English: The outflowing vein of the solar plexus of the foot, called the flying vein.

古文：去踝七寸，别走少阴。
现代文：在足外踝上七寸处，别走足少阴肾经的经络。
English: At seven inches above the ankle, do not walk on the meridians of the anus.

古文：实则鼽窒，头背痛；虚则鼽衄。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，会出现鼻塞不通，头背部疼痛；属虚的，会出现鼻流清涕或鼻出血。
English: If there is a lesion in this vein, if it is true, there will be nasal obstruction and pain in the head and back; if it is false, there will be runny nose or nosebleed.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的飞扬穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：足少阳之别，名曰光明。
现代文：足少阳胆经的别出络脉，名叫光明络。
English: The anterior outflowing veins of the lesser yang yang meridian are called the bright veins.

古文：去踝五寸，别走厥阴，下络足跗。
现代文：在外踝上五寸，别走足厥阴肝经的经络，并经下行绕络于足背。
English: Five inches above the outer ankle, don't walk the meridians of the meridians of the foot, and walk down the meridians around the instep.

古文：实则厥，虚则痿躄，坐不能起。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，会出现厥逆；属虚的，会难以行走，坐不能起。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, if it is real, there will be a convulsion; if it is imaginary, it will be difficult to walk and unable to sit up.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的光明穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：足阳明之别，名曰丰隆。
现代文：足阳明胃经的别出络脉，名叫丰隆络。
English: The outflowing lumen of the foot Yang Ming stomach meridian is called Feng Long Luo.

古文：去踝八寸，别走太阴。
现代文：在外踝上八寸，别走足太阴脾经的经络。
English: Eight inches above the outer ankle, don't walk too close to the meridians.

古文：其别者，循胫骨外廉，上络头项，合诸经之气，下络喉嗌。
现代文：它有一条别行的支脉，在丰隆穴处别行而出，然后就沿着胫骨的外缘向上走行，一直走到头项部，与其他各经的经气相会合，然后再向下走行，并最终联络于咽喉部。
English: It has a branch of a different line, starting at the Honglong Cave, and then traveling up along the outer edge of the tibia, reaching the head and neck, meeting with the other meridians, and then traveling down, and finally connecting to the throat.

古文：其病气逆则喉痹卒瘖。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，气向上逆，会出现喉中肿闭和突然音哑。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava and the qi goes up and down, there will be swelling in the throat and sudden muteness.

古文：实则狂巅，虚则足不收，胫枯。
现代文：属实的，就会癫狂；属虚的，就会足缓不收，胫部肌肉枯萎。
English: If it is true, he will go mad; if it is false, he will be impatient, and his hip muscles will wither.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的丰隆穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：足太阴之别，名曰公孙。
现代文：足太阴脾经的别出络脉，名叫公孙络。
English: The outflowing vein of the foot is called the Gongsun vein.

古文：去本节之后一寸，别走阳明。
现代文：在足大趾本节后一寸处，别走足阳明胃经的经络。
English: In the big toe one inch after this section, do not walk the meridians of the foot Yang Ming stomach meridians.

古文：其别者，入络肠胃。
现代文：它有一条别行的支脉，向上走行，进入腹部而联络于肠胃。
English: It has an ascending collateral branch that travels up into the abdomen and connects to the stomach.

古文：厥气上逆则霍乱，实则肠中切痛，虚则鼓胀。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，厥气上逆至于肠胃，必然发生霍乱。属实的，会出现腹中痛如刀切；属虚的，会出现腹胀如鼓。
English: If there is a pathological change in the vena cava and the stomach is inflamed, cholera will inevitably occur. If it is true, there will be pain in the abdomen like a knife; if it is false, there will be bloating like a drum.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，应取本经别出的公孙穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：足少阴之别，名曰大钟。
现代文：足少阴肾经的别出络脉，名叫大钟络。
English: The outflowing veins of the Shoshoyin Kidney Sutra are called the Great Bell.

古文：当踝后绕跟，别走太阳。
现代文：在足内踝后绕足跟，别走入于足太阳膀胱经的经络。
English: Walk around the heel behind the inner ankle, do not walk into the meridians of the solar plexus.

古文：其别者，并经上走于心包，下外贯腰脊。
现代文：它有一条别行的支脉，与足少阴肾经的正经并行而上，抵达心包络，然后再向外下方走行，贯穿腰脊。
English: It has a collateral branch that runs parallel to the zenith of the Shoshoyin Renjing, up to the pericardial envelope, and then travels outward and downward, penetrating the lumbar spine.

古文：其病气逆则烦闷，实则闭癃，虚则腰痛。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，就会出现气逆烦闷，属实的，会小便不通；属虚的，会腰痛。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, there will be irritability, true, there will be incontinence; false, there will be low back pain.

古文：取之所别者也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的大钟穴。
English: During treatment, the large bell hole that is separated from the bone can be removed.

古文：足厥阴之别，名曰蠡沟。
现代文：足厥阴肝经的别出络脉，名叫蠡沟络。
English: The outflowing veins of the Yin-Yang-Yang meridians are called the meridians.

古文：去内踝五寸，别走少阳。
现代文：在内踝上五寸处，别走足少阳胆经的经络。
English: At five inches above the inner ankle, don't walk on the meridians of the inferior vas deferens.

古文：其别者，经胫上睪，结于茎。
现代文：它有一条别行的支脉，经过胫部而上行至睾丸，并聚结于阴茎。
English: It has a collateral branch that runs up through the groin to the testicles and coalesces in the penis.

古文：其病气逆则睪肿卒疝。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，邪气上逆，就会出现睾丸肿大并突发疝气暴痛。
English: If there is a lesion in the vena cava, the testicles will swell and there will be a sudden attack of colic.

古文：实则挺长，虚则暴痒。
现代文：属实的，就会导致阴茎勃起而不能回复；属虚的，阴部奇痒难忍。
English: If it is true, it will cause the penis to become erect and unable to return; if it is false, the genitals will itch unbearably.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的蠡沟穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：任脉之别，名曰尾翳。
现代文：任脉的别出络脉，名叫尾翳络。
English: The other outflowing vein of any vein is called the caudal vein.

古文：下鸠尾，散于腹。
现代文：它起始于胸骨下方的尾翳穴，由此别出下行，散于腹部。
English: It starts in the coccyx, below the sternum, and travels down to the abdomen.

古文：实则腹皮痛，虚则痒搔。取之所别也。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的就会出现腹部皮肤疼痛的症状；属虚的就会出现腹部皮肤瘙痒的症状。治疗时，可取本经别出的尾翳穴。
English: If there is a lesion of the vena cava, if it is true, the symptoms of abdominal skin pain will appear; if it is false, the symptoms of abdominal skin itching will appear.

古文：督脉之别，名曰长强。
现代文：督脉的别出络脉，名叫长强络。
English: The other outflowing lumen of the superior lumen is called the long strong lumen.

古文：挟膂上项，散头上，下当肩胛左右，别走太阳，入贯膂。
现代文：它起始于尾骨尖下方的长强穴处，由此再挟脊上行至项，散于头上，向下行于肩胛左右，别走足太阴膀胱经的经络，并深入体内，贯穿脊柱两旁的肌肉。
English: It starts at a long, strong hole below the tip of the coccyx, then travels up the spine to the collarbone, spreads over the head, travels down around the shoulder blades, passes through the meridians of the phrenic bladder, and penetrates deep into the body, penetrating the muscles on both sides of the spine.

古文：实则脊强，虚则头重，高摇之，挟脊之有过者。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，脊柱强直，不能俯仰；属虚的，头部沉重，振摇不定等症状，这都是由于本条络脉所夹行于脊柱两侧的部分发生病变而引起的。
English: If there is a lesion in this vein, it is true that the spine is strong and cannot be tilted; if it is false, the head is heavy and wobbly, and other symptoms are caused by the lesion in the part of this vein that is sandwiched on both sides of the spine.

古文：取之所别也。
现代文：治疗时，可取本经别出的长强穴。
English: During treatment, a long, strong hole can be taken from the root canal.

古文：脾之大络，名曰大包。
现代文：脾之大络，名叫大包络。
English: The spleen's large network is called the large envelope.

古文：出渊腋下三寸，布胸胁。
现代文：它起始于腋下的渊腋穴下方三寸处，由此再散布于胸胁。
English: It starts three inches below the abyssal fossa under the armpit, from where it spreads to the diaphragm.

古文：实则身尽痛，虚则百节尽皆纵。
现代文：如本络脉发生病变，属实的，全身都感觉疼痛；属虚的，全身关节弛缓无力。
English: If there is a lesion of the vena cava, if it is true, the whole body will feel pain; if it is false, the joints of the whole body will be relaxed and weak.

古文：此脉若罗络之血者，皆取之脾之大络脉也。
现代文：此外，当大包络发生病变时，还会使大包穴附近出现网络状的血色斑纹。
English: In addition, when the large envelope develops a lesion, it will also cause a network of blood-colored spots to appear near the large pouch.

古文：凡此十五络者，实则必见，虚则必下。
现代文：对于以上这些病证，治疗时，可取本经别出的大包穴。以上这十五络脉，邪气盛实则血液充满脉中明显易见，正气虚则络脉必陷下而看不见。
English: For the above-mentioned pathologies, when treating, a large pouch hole can be extracted from the original. The above-mentioned fifteen veins, if the evil spirit is strong, the blood will be clearly visible in the filled vein, and if the righteous spirit is weak, the vein will fall and cannot be seen.

古文：视之不见，求之上下。人经不同，络脉异所别也。
现代文：如果在络脉所在部位的体表处看不到任何异常的现象，那么就应当到本经别出的络穴附近仔细观察。
English: If you do not see anything unusual on the surface of the body where the vein is located, then you should take a closer look near the hole that has been drilled.

