古文：凡战，所谓守者，知己者也。
现代文：战争中所说的防守，是指在了解了己方情况后所采取的作战行动。
English: The defense in war refers to the combat actions taken after understanding the situation of one's own side.

古文：知己未有可胜之理，则我且固守，待敌可破之时，则出兵以攻之，无有不胜。
现代文：就是说，当了解到自己没有立即战胜敌人的条件时，我就坚守不与敌人交战，等到敌人出现可以被我战胜的条件时，就不失时机地出兵进攻它，这样作战就没有不胜利的。
English: That is to say, when I realized that I did not have the conditions to immediately defeat the enemy, I insisted on not engaging the enemy, and when the enemy had the conditions that I could defeat, I lost no time in sending troops to attack it. In this way, there is no war without victory.

古文：法曰： 知不可胜，则守。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 了解到自己不能立即战胜敌人时，就要采取防守作战。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: When you realize that you cannot immediately defeat the enemy, you must take defensive action.

古文：汉景帝时，吴、楚七国反，以周亚夫为太尉，东击吴、楚七国。
现代文：西汉景帝时期，吴、楚等七诸侯国发动武装叛乱，景帝命以周亚夫为太尉，率军东向进击吴、楚等七国叛军。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty of Emperor Jing, Wu, Chu and other seven states launched an armed rebellion. Emperor Jing ordered Zhou Yafu to be the first lieutenant and lead the army eastward to attack the rebels of Wu, Chu and other seven states.

古文：因自请于上曰： 楚兵剽轻，难与争锋，愿以梁委之；绝其食道，乃可制也。 
现代文：周亚夫因此而亲自请示景帝说： 楚国等军队凶悍轻捷，一时难以与它正面交锋。我打算暂时把梁国舍弃给他们，但要派兵断绝他们的运粮道路，这样才可以制服它。 
English: As a result, Zhou Yafu personally asked Emperor Jing to intervene, saying: Chu and other armies are fierce and nimble, and it is difficult to fight them head-on for a while. I plan to abandon Liang Province to them for the time being, but I must send troops to cut off their grain transportation routes, so that I can subdue it.

古文：上许之。
现代文：景帝同意了这个意见。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：亚夫至，会兵荥阳。吴方攻梁，梁急，请救于亚夫。
现代文：周亚夫受任后调集部队至荥阳时，吴国军队正在进攻梁国，梁国危急乃向周亚夫请求援救。
English: When Zhou Yafu mobilized troops to Fenyang after taking office, the Wu army was attacking Liang Province. Liang Province was in a critical situation and asked Zhou Yafu for help.

古文：亚夫率兵东北走昌邑，坚壁而守。
现代文：周亚夫却率军进至东北方向的昌邑，高筑壁垒而坚守不出战。
English: Zhou Yafu, however, led his army into the northeastern direction of Changyi, built high barriers and insisted on not fighting.

古文：梁王使使请亚夫，亚夫守便宜，不往救。
现代文：梁王派遣使者前往请求亚夫出援，亚夫以采取坚守不出的战略为有利，而不肯前往救援梁国。
English: King Liang sent an envoy to request Yafu's assistance. Yafu took advantage of the strategy of holding out, and refused to go to the rescue of Liang.

古文：梁上书于景帝，帝诏亚夫救梁。亚夫不奉诏，坚壁不出，而使弓高侯等将轻骑，绝吴、楚兵后食道。
现代文：梁王无奈，又上书于景帝，景帝诏令周亚夫救援梁国，亚夫拒不奉命，仍然坚守壁垒而不出兵救梁，同时却派遣弓高侯韩颓当等人率领轻骑切断了吴、楚军后方的运粮道路。
English: Reluctantly, Liang Wang again wrote to Emperor Jing. Emperor Jing ordered Zhou Yafu to rescue Liang Province. However, Yafu refused to follow the order and still held fast to the barrier and did not send troops to rescue Liang. At the same time, however, he sent the high-ranking archer Han Xudang and others to cut off the grain transportation road behind the Wu and Chu armies with light cavalry.

古文：吴、楚兵乏粮，饥，欲退，数挑战，终不出。
现代文：吴、楚军由于缺粮饥饿，想要退兵，并多次向亚夫部队挑战，但亚夫始终坚守壁垒而不出兵应战。
English: Wu Chu soldiers are short of food, hungry, want to retreat, many challenges, do not go out.

古文：夜，亚夫军中惊乱，自相攻击至于帐下。亚夫坚卧不起，顷之，自定。
现代文：一天夜里，亚夫军营突然惊乱，互相攻扰，竟至闹到亚夫帐前，但他却不动声色地静卧不起。
English: One night, there was a sudden disturbance in Yafu's camp. The soldiers disturbed each other and came to Yafu's tent, but he remained quietly lying down.

古文：吴奔壁东南陬，亚夫使备西北。
现代文：不一会，惊乱自息，部队重新稳定下来。
English: The Wu army rushed to the southeast corner of the camp, and Yafu let them stand guard in the northwest corner.

古文：已而，吴兵果奔西北，不得入。
现代文：其后，吴军奔袭亚夫军营的东南角，周亚夫却令部队防备西北角以调动敌人就范。
English: Subsequently, the Wu army raided the southeast corner of the Yafu camp, but Zhou Yafu ordered the troops to guard the northwest corner to mobilize the enemy.

古文：吴、楚兵饥，乃引兵退。
现代文：不久，吴军精锐主力果然奔向西北角，但却无法攻入。
English: Soon, the main force of the elite of the Wu Army ran to the northwest corner, but could not break in.

古文：亚夫出精兵追击，大破之。
现代文：吴、楚军实在饥饿难奈，便引兵撤退了。周亚夫乘机出动精锐部队跟踪追击，大破吴军。
English: The Wu and Chu armies were really starving, so they withdrew their troops. Zhou Yafu took the opportunity to send elite troops to follow and pursue, and defeated the Wu army.

古文：吴王濞弃其军，与壮士数千人亡走，保于江南丹徒。
现代文：吴王刘濞丢弃大部队，只带数千名精壮亲兵逃走，逃往江南的丹徒，企图负隅顽抗。
English: Wu Wangtao abandoned his army and fled with several thousand strong men to save himself in Dantou in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：汉兵因乘胜追击，尽获之，降其郡县。
现代文：汉军乘胜追击，全部俘获了刘濞所丢弃的部队，降服了吴国所辖之郡县。
English: The Chinese army took advantage of the victory to pursue, captured all the troops abandoned by Liu Bei, and conquered the counties under the jurisdiction of Wu.

古文：亚夫下令曰： 有得吴王者，赏千金。 
现代文：周亚夫下悬赏令说： 有谁能抓获吴王的，重赏千金。 
English: Zhou Yafu's bounty order said: Anyone who can capture the King of Wu will be rewarded with a large sum of money.

古文：月余，越人斩首以告。
现代文：一个多月以后，东越人便斩了吴王首级前来报功请赏。
English: More than a month later, the East Vietnamese cut off the head of King Wu and came to reward him.

古文：凡相攻守七月，而吴、楚悉平。
现代文：此役，周亚夫率军同叛军相攻守历时三个月，吴、楚叛乱就被全部平定了。
English: This campaign, in which Zhou Yafu led the army to fight and defend against the rebels, lasted for three months, and the Wu and Chu rebellions were all quelled.

