古文：◎道学三○朱熹张栻朱熹，字元晦，一字仲晦，徽州婺源人。
现代文：朱熹，字元晦，一字仲晦，徽州婺源人。
English: Zhu Xi, Zi Yuan Hui, Zi Zhong Hui, Huizhou Zi Yuan Ren.

古文：父松字乔年，中进士第。
现代文：父亲朱松，字乔年。曾录取为进士。
English: His father, Zhu Song, was known as Qiao Nian. He was once admitted as a junior scholar.

古文：胡世将、谢克家荐之，除秘书省正字。
现代文：胡世将、谢克家举荐他，朝廷任命他为秘书省正字。
English: Hu Shijian and the Shiek family recommended him, and the imperial court appointed him as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：赵鼎都督川陕、荆、襄军马，招松为属，辞。
现代文：赵鼎都督川陕、荆襄军马时，招朱松为幕僚，被推辞。
English: When Zhao Ding, the military governor of Chuanshan and Jingxiang, recruited Zhu Song as a staff member, he was rejected.

古文：鼎再相，除校书郎，迁著作郎。
现代文：赵鼎再次任宰相，任命朱松为校书郎，迁升任著作郎。
English: Zhao Ding was reappointed as the prime minister, appointed Zhu Song as the school scribe, and was promoted to the position of the scribe.

古文：以御史中丞常同荐，除度支员外郎，兼史馆校勘，历司勋、吏部郎。
现代文：因为御史中丞常同的推荐，被任为度支员外郎、兼任史馆校勘，历任司勋、吏部郎。
English: Because of the recommendation of Mishi Chujo Tsunetomo, he was appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Agency, concurrently serving as a history museum inspector, and successively serving as an officer of the Imperial Household Agency and an officer of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：秦桧决策议和，松与同列上章，极言其不可。
现代文：秦桧决定与金国议和，朱松与同僚上奏章，极力主张不可以与金国议和。
English: Qin Hui decided to negotiate peace with Kim Guo, Zhu Song and his colleagues signed a petition, strongly advocating that it is not possible to negotiate peace with Kim Guo.

古文：桧怒，风御史论松怀异自贤，出知饶州，未上，卒。
现代文：秦桧恼怒，示意御史弹劾朱松与朝廷有异心，而自认为是贤才，结果让朱松离朝出任饶州知州，还未上任，朱松便死了。
English: Enraged, Qin Hui signaled to Gu Shi to impeach Zhu Song, who was at odds with the imperial court and considered himself a genius. As a result, Zhu Song was allowed to leave the imperial court to take up the post of Raozhou Chizhou. Before taking up the post, Zhu Song died.

古文：熹幼颖悟，甫能言，父指天示之曰： 天也。 熹问曰： 天之上何物？ 松异之。
现代文：朱熹从小聪颖理解力强，刚能讲话时，父亲指着天告诉他说： 这是天。 朱熹问道 ：天的上面是什么？ 
English: Zhu Xi has had strong comprehension since childhood. When he was just able to speak, his father pointed to the sky and told him: "This is the sky." Zhu Xi asked: "What is above the sky?"

古文：就傅，授以《孝经》，一阅，题其上曰： 不若是，非人也。 尝从群儿戏沙上，独端坐以指画沙，视之，八卦也。
现代文：父亲感到惊异。从师受学时，教他读《孝经》，读过一遍，朱熹在书上题写道： 不能这样做，不是人。 朱熹曾经和一群儿童在沙子上玩耍，他独自端端正正地坐着，用手指在沙土上画，看他画的图形，是一幅八卦图。
English: His father was surprised. When he was learning from a teacher, he was taught to read the "Filial Piety Sutra" and read it once. Zhu Xi wrote on the title of the book: "You can't do this, it's not human." Zhu Xi had once played with a group of children on the sand. He sat alone neatly, drawing on the sand with his fingers. Looking at the figure he drew, it was a picture of the Eight Trigrams.

古文：年十八贡于乡，中绍兴十八年进士第。
现代文：十八岁时参加乡贡考试合格，绍兴十八年录取为进士。
English: At the age of eighteen, he passed the township tribute examination, and was admitted to Shaoxing as a scholar in eighteen years.

古文：主泉州同安簿，选邑秀民充弟子员，日与讲说圣贤修己治人之道，禁女妇之为僧道者。
现代文：担任泉州同安县主簿时，他挑选县里优秀的人才当自己的学生，每天给他们讲授古代圣贤讲求个人修养和治理百姓的学问，禁止妇女出家当尼姑道姑。
English: When he was the chief registrar of Quanzhou Tong'an County, he selected the best talents in the county to be his students. Every day, he taught them the teachings of ancient sages on personal cultivation and governance of the people, and forbade women to become nuns.

古文：罢归请祠，监潭州南岳庙。
现代文：朱熹罢官回乡，请求管理一个祠观，朝廷派他监潭州南岳庙。
English: Zhu Xi returned to his hometown after his retirement and requested to manage an ancestral hall. The imperial court sent him to supervise the Nangyue Temple in Tam Prefecture.

古文：明年，以辅臣荐，与徐度、吕广问、韩元吉同召，以疾辞。
现代文：第二年，因朝廷中的大臣举荐，和徐度、吕广问、韩元吉同时被朝廷召见，朱熹以生病辞谢了。
English: The following year, on the recommendation of a minister in the imperial court, he was summoned to the imperial court at the same time as Xu Dou, Lyu Guangqian, and Han Yuanji. Zhu Xi resigned on the grounds of illness.

古文：孝宗即位，诏求直言，熹上封事言： 圣躬虽未有过失，而帝王之学不可以不熟讲。
现代文：孝宗即皇帝位，下诏要求朝臣直言朝政得失。朱熹陈上密封的奏章说 ：皇上虽没有过失，但为帝王的学问却不可以不熟讲。
English: Xiaozong, that is, the emperor's throne, issued an edict demanding that courtiers speak frankly about the gains and losses of the imperial government. Zhu Xi said in the sealed record: Although the emperor did not make any mistakes, he should not be unfamiliar with the emperor's learning.

古文：朝政虽未有阙遗，而修攘之计不可以不早定。
现代文：朝政虽没有缺误，但修明朝政、抵御外敌的大计却不可不早日决定。
English: Although there is nothing wrong with the government of the dynasty, the plan to amend the government of the dynasty and resist foreign enemies must be decided as soon as possible.

古文：利害休戚虽不可遍举，而本原之地不可以不加意。
现代文：利害忧乐虽不可能全面列举，但事关国家的根本问题却不可以不加留意。
English: Although it is impossible to enumerate all the interests, concerns and joys, the fundamental issues concerning the country cannot be ignored.

古文：陛下毓德之初，亲御简策，不过风诵文辞，吟咏情性，又颇留意于老子、释氏之书。
现代文：陛下在培养自己品德的初期，亲自批阅文献奏疏，不过是诵读诗文章句，吟咏情性，又特别留意道家、佛教的书籍。
English: In the early days of cultivating his character, His Majesty personally approved the reading of literature, but it was nothing more than reciting poetry, chanting sentiments, and paying special attention to Taoist and Buddhist books.

古文：夫记诵词藻，非所以探渊源而出治道；虚无寂灭，非所以贯本末而立大中。
现代文：记诵诗文的词藻，并不能够探讨事物发展的渊源而制定出治国之道；道家的虚无和佛家的寂灭，并不能够贯穿万物的始终而建立适当的大中之道。
English: It is not possible to explore the source of the development of things and formulate a way of governing the country by memorizing and reciting poetry; the nothingness of Taoism and the solitude of Buddhism are not able to penetrate the whole of everything and establish an appropriate middle way.

古文：帝王之学，必先格物致知，以极夫事物之变，使义理所存，纤悉毕照，则自然意诚心正，而可以应天下之务。 次言： 修攘之计不时定者，讲和之说误之也。
现代文：帝王的学问，必须先穷究事物的本原而获得知识，以便透彻地认识事物的变化，使世间万物的道理，都能存在于心中，对事物的纤细微末之处全都看得透彻，就会自然意念真诚，心地端正，而可以治理好天下的事情。 其次说： 修明朝政，抵御外敌的方针之所以不能及时制定，是被讲和的论调给耽误了。
English: The emperor's learning must first obtain knowledge by exhaustively investigating the origin of things, so as to thoroughly understand the changes of things, so that the truth of all things in the world can exist in the heart, and all the subtle subtleties of things can be thoroughly seen, so that the natural thoughts will be sincere and the heart will be correct, and it can govern the world's affairs well.Secondly, the reason why the policy of reforming the imperial government and resisting foreign enemies could not be formulated in time was that the discussion was delayed.

古文：夫金人于我有不共戴天之仇，则不可和也明矣。
现代文：金人是宋朝不共戴天的仇敌，不可能和好是很明显的了。
English: The Jin people were the sworn enemies of the Song Dynasty, and it was obvious that they could not be reconciled.

古文：愿断以义理之公，闭关绝约，任贤使能，立纪纲，厉风俗。
现代文：我希望根据公道、正义果断地做出决定，封闭关隘，断绝和约。任用贤明能干的人才，确立国家法度，纯洁士风民俗。
English: I hope to make a decisive decision based on fairness and justice, close the gap, break off the peace treaty, appoint wise and competent personnel, establish national laws and regulations, and establish pure customs and folk customs.

古文：数年之后，国富兵强，视吾力之强弱，观彼衅之浅深，徐起而图之。 次言： 四海利病，系欺民之休戚，斯民休戚，系守令之贤否。
现代文：几年以后，国家富足，军队强大，根据我国力量的强弱，观察金人内部裂痕的深浅，慢慢起兵设法打败他们。 再接着说： 全国的利害，在于百姓的快乐与忧虑，百姓的安危忧乐，在于地方官员是否贤明。
English: A few years later, when the country was rich and the army was strong, according to the strength and weakness of our country's strength, we observed the depth of the cracks inside the Kim people, and slowly raised an army to try to defeat them.Then he said: The national interest lies in the happiness and anxiety of the people, the safety and happiness of the people, and whether the local officials are wise.

古文：监司者守令之纲，朝廷者监司之本也。
现代文：监司机构是监督地方官员的主要机关，而朝廷是委任监司机构官员的根本之地。
English: The supervisory agency is the main organ to supervise local officials, while the imperial court is the fundamental place to appoint the officials of the supervisory agency.

古文：欲斯民之得其所，本原之地亦在朝廷而已。
现代文：要想让百姓安居乐业，各得其所，根源也在于朝廷了。
English: If you want people to live and work in peace, each in their own place, the root also lies in the imperial court.

古文：今之监司，奸赃狼籍、肆虐以病民者，莫非宰执、台谏之亲旧宾客。
现代文：现在的监司机构及其官员，狼狈为奸，贪赃枉法，大肆地掳掠、害民的官员，主要就是宰相、台谏的亲戚、故旧、门生、朋友。
English: The present supervisory agency and its officials, the officials who conspire, embezzle, plunder, and harm the people, are mainly the relatives, old friends, disciples, and friends of the prime minister and the governor of Taiwan.

古文：其已失势者，既按见其交私之状而斥去之；尚在势者，岂无其人，顾陛下无自而知之耳。 
现代文：他们中失去了权势的人，曾经按他们所得的私利情况而罢逐了他们；还在当权的那些人，难道没有谋私利的吗？敬请陛下亲自去了解。 
English: Those of them who have lost their power have ousted them according to their own interests; those who are still in power, do they not seek their own interests? I respectfully ask Your Majesty to find out for yourself.

古文：隆兴元年，复召。
现代文：隆兴元年，又被朝廷召见。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, he was summoned by the imperial court again.

古文：入对，其一言： 大学之道在乎格物以致其知。
现代文：入朝奏对治策，其中第一点说： 大学的道理在于穷究事物的本原而获得知识。
English: The first point said: The principle of a university is to obtain knowledge by investigating the origin of things.

古文：陛下虽有生知之性，高世之行，而未尝随事以观理，即理以应事。
现代文：陛下虽然有生而知之的天性，优秀于普通人的行为，但没有能够按照事物的发展变化来观察治世的道理，按照这个道理以适应国事的治理。
English: Although His Majesty has an innate knowledge of life, superior to the behavior of ordinary people, he has not been able to observe the principle of reigning according to the development and change of things, and to adapt the governance of state affairs according to this principle.

古文：是以举措之间动涉疑贰，听纳之际未免蔽欺，平治之效所以未著。 其二言： 君父之仇不与共戴天。
现代文：这是因为在采取治国措施的过程中还有疑问而犹豫不决，而听从臣僚的意见时又不免有欺骗隐瞒的地方，所以治国平天下的效果不是很明显。 第二点说 ：君主父皇的仇耻与金人不共戴天。
English: This is because in the process of taking measures to govern the country, there are still doubts and hesitations, and when listening to the opinions of ministers, there is inevitably a place of deception and concealment, so the effect of governing the country is not obvious.The second point is: the vendetta of the monarch and the emperor and the money people do not share the sky.

古文：今日所当为者，非战无以复仇，非守无以制胜。 且陈古先圣王所以强本折冲、威制远人之道。
现代文：现在所应该做的，就是不同金人作战就不能复仇，不坚守边关就不能取得胜利。 所以暂且陈上古代先圣贤哲帝王们怎样发奋图强，巩固根本，威慑、制服边远之地的夷敌们的强国之道。
English: What should be done now is that it is impossible to take revenge without fighting the enemy, and it is impossible to achieve victory without defending the border. Therefore, let us briefly show how the ancient sages and emperors worked hard to strengthen, consolidate the foundation, deter, and subdue the enemies in remote areas.

古文：时相汤思退方倡和议，除熹武学博士，待次。
现代文：当时宰相汤思退刚刚倡导同金讲和，任命朱熹担任武学博士，等待上任。
English: At that time, Prime Minister Tong Siti had just advocated for peace with Kim and appointed Zhu Xi as a doctor of martial arts, waiting for him to take office.

古文：乾道元年，促就职，既至而洪适为相，复主和，论不合，归。
现代文：乾道元年，催促他上任就职，到了任上而适逢洪适担任宰相，又主张同金讲和，因观点不相同，朱熹回乡了。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he urged him to take office. When he took office, it was time for Hong Shi to serve as prime minister. He also advocated peace with Kim. Due to different views, Zhu Xi returned to his hometown.

古文：三年，陈俊卿、刘珙荐为枢密院编修官，待次。
现代文：三年，陈俊卿、刘珙推荐他为枢密院编修官，等待上任。
English: Three years later, Chen Junqing and Liu Wei recommended him to be the editor-in-chief of the Privy Council, waiting for him to take office.

古文：五年，丁内艰。
现代文：五年，因妻子去世回故里服丧。
English: Kande was five years old when his mother passed away.

古文：六年，工部侍郎胡铨以诗人荐，与王庭珪同召，以未终丧辞。
现代文：六年，工部侍郎胡铨把他作为诗人推荐于朝廷，他与王庭王圭同时被召见，他以没有服完丧事为由请求辞职。
English: Six years later, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, Hu Xi, recommended him to the imperial court as a poet. He was summoned at the same time as Wang Ting Wang Gui, and he requested to resign on the grounds that he had not completed the funeral.

古文：七年，既免丧，复召，以禄不及养辞。
现代文：七年，服丧已完，又被召请，他以俸禄不能养家而推辞。
English: Seven years later, after the funeral was over, he was summoned again, but he refused, saying that his salary would not be enough to support his family.

古文：九年，梁克家相，申前命，又辞。
现代文：九年，梁克家担任宰相，申述从前的召命，又被推辞。
English: Nine years later, the Liang Ke family assumed the post of prime minister, appealed the previous appointment, and was rejected.

古文：克家奏熹屡召不起，宜蒙褒录，执政俱称之，上曰： 熹安贫守道，廉退可嘉。 特改合入官，主管台州崇道观。
现代文：梁克家上奏朱熹多次召他任官而不就职，应该得到褒奖鼓励，大臣执政都称赞这个建议。皇上说： 朱熹安于贫穷，遵守廉道，廉洁、谦退，应该嘉奖。 因此，特地改命他担任官职，主管台州崇道观。
English: Liang Ke's family appealed to Zhu Xi that he should be commended and encouraged for repeatedly calling him to serve as an official without taking office, and the ministers in power all praised this suggestion. The emperor said: Zhu Xi should be commended for his poverty-free life, his adherence to honesty, integrity, and modesty. Therefore, he was specially reappointed to serve as an official in charge of Taizhou's Taoism.

古文：熹以求退得进，于义未安，再辞。
现代文：朱熹因为要求退出官场而相反得以升迁，从道义方面考虑更觉得心中不安，再次推辞。
English: Zhu Xi, on the contrary, was promoted because he asked to withdraw from the officialdom. From the moral point of view, he felt more uneasy and declined again.

古文：淳熙元年，始拜命。
现代文：淳熙元年，才开始接受任命。
English: It was only in the first year of Aung Hee that he began to accept appointments.

古文：二年，上欲奖用廉退，以励风俗，龚茂良行丞相事以熹名进，除秘书郎，力辞，且以手书遗茂良，言一时权幸。
现代文：二年，皇上打算奖掖廉洁、谦退的人，以纯洁士风民俗，龚茂良担任丞相的事务，推荐奖励朱熹，任命他担任秘书郎，朱熹坚决推辞，并且亲自写信给龚茂良，说明一时被厚爱的原因。
English: In the second year, the emperor planned to reward those who were incorruptible and modest, with the purist customs of the people, and Shao Moliang served as the prime minister of the affairs, recommended to reward Zhu Xi, appointed him as the secretary, Zhu Xi firmly refused, and personally wrote to Shao Moliang, explaining the reasons for being loved at the time.

古文：群小乘间谗毁，乃因熹再辞，即从其请，主管武夷山冲佑观。
现代文：许多小人乘机会讲谗言诽谤他，于是因为朱熹又推辞，即答应了他的请求，主管武夷山冲佑观。
English: Many villains took the opportunity to speak ill of him and slander him, so because Zhu Xi also declined, he agreed to his request and became the head of Wuyishan Chongyou Guan.

古文：五年，史浩再相，除知南康军，降旨便道之官，熹再辞，不许。
现代文：五年，史浩再次担任宰相，任命他担任南康知军，皇上下诏令他上任就职，朱熹又推辞，没有被答应、允准。
English: Five years later, Shi Hao again served as prime minister, appointing him to serve as the Southern Kangtse Chieftain. The emperor issued a decree ordering him to take office, and Zhu Xi again declined, but was not promised or approved.

古文：至郡，兴利除害，值岁不雨，讲求荒政，多所全活。
现代文：到南康军，兴行利政，革除害事，恰逢那年不下雨，精心勤于荒年政事，许多人得以活命。
English: To the Nankang Army, to carry out beneficial policies, to eliminate harmful things, to coincide with the year without rain, to be diligent in the political affairs of the barren year, many people were able to survive.

古文：讫事，奏乞依格推赏纳粟人。
现代文：到救荒事结束，上奏章请求按照法律条文奖赏交纳粟米的人。
English: At the end of the relief work, the petition requested that the person who paid the corn be rewarded in accordance with the provisions of the law.

古文：间诣郡学，引进士子与之讲论。
现代文：有时到郡县学校，招引进士学子与他们讲习学问，议论道理。
English: Sometimes they go to county schools to recruit imported scholars and students to study and discuss with them.

古文：访白鹿洞书院遗址，奏复其旧，为《学规》俾守之。
现代文：走访白鹿洞书院遗址，上奏恢复原来的样子，制订《学规》使他们遵守它。
English: They visited the site of the Shirakudo Academy, restored it to its original appearance, and formulated the "School Regulations" so that they would abide by it.

古文：明年夏，大旱，诏监司、郡守条其民间利病，遂上疏言：
现代文：第二年夏天，天气大旱，下诏令监司、郡守分别阐明老百姓的快乐与痛苦，朱熹于是上奏疏说：
English: In the summer of the second year, when the weather was very dry, the superintendent and the county governor were ordered to clarify the happiness and pain of the common people. Zhu Xi then said:

古文：天下之务莫大于恤民，而恤民之本，在人君正心术以立纪纲。
现代文： 治理天下的要事没有什么大于抚恤百姓，而抚恤百姓的根本，在于皇上端正心术用以立定规章纪律、朝纲。
English: There is nothing more important in the governance of the world than the welfare of the people, and the foundation of the welfare of the people lies in the emperor's righteous mind, which is used to establish rules, disciplines, and the imperial system.

古文：盖天下之纪纲不能以自立，必人主之心术公平正大，无偏党反侧之私，然后有所系而立。
现代文：大概天下的规章纪律、朝纲不能自身形成，一定要皇上的心术公平正大，没有受私情左右而偏颇反复、犹豫不定，然后依赖于此而建立。
English: Probably, the rules and disciplines of the world and the principles of the government cannot be formed by themselves. The emperor's mind must be fair and upright, not influenced by selfishness, but biased, repeated, hesitant, and then dependent on this to establish.

古文：君心不能以自正，必亲贤臣，远小人，讲明义理之归，闭塞私邪之路，然后乃可得而正。
现代文：皇上的心术不能自发地纯正地确立，一定要亲近贤臣，疏远小人，讲论明白仁义、道理的归宿，关闭阻塞自私的邪路，这样才能使皇上的心术纯正地确立。
English: The emperor's mind trick cannot be spontaneously established in a pure manner. It must be established in a pure manner by getting close to wise ministers, distancing villains, talking about the destination of clear benevolence and reason, and closing and blocking the evil path of selfishness.

古文：今宰相、台省、师傅、宾友、谏诤之臣皆失其职，而陛下所与亲密谋议者，不过一二近习之臣。
现代文： 现在宰相、台谏省官、师傅、宾客朋友、谏诤之臣都失职不负责任，而陛下与他们亲近、商量谋划的人，不过一、二个宠幸的大臣。
English: At present, the Prime Minister, the provincial officials of Taiwan and Fujian, the masters, the guests, the friends, and the courtiers are all derelict in their duties and irresponsible, and His Majesty is only close to one or two favored ministers who consult and plan with them.

古文：上以蛊惑陛下之心志，使陛下不信先王之大道，而说于功利之卑说，不乐庄士之谠言，而安于私之鄙态。
现代文：对上以蛊惑陛下的心思与志向，导致陛下不相信先王圣贤的大道理，而以追求功利的卑下浅见为快乐；不喜欢志士的宏大言论，而安逸于私利、鄙陋的丑态。
English: On the other hand, with the thoughts and aspirations of seducing his majesty, his majesty did not believe in the great principles of the sages and sages of the ancients, but was happy with the lowly and shallow view of pursuing utilitarianism; he did not like the grand words of the aspirants, but was at ease with selfishness and despicable ugliness.

古文：下则招集天下士大夫之嗜利无耻者，文武汇分，各入其门。
现代文：对下则招收聚集天下士大夫中好利而没有廉耻的人，文人武士各以道分，都各自加入他们的门槛。
English: On the other hand, the next step is to recruit people who are good at profit and have no shamelessness among the gathered world's scholars and doctors, and literati and samurai, each with their own points, have each joined their threshold.

古文：所喜则阴为引援，擢置清显。
现代文：所喜欢的人暗中引见接纳，升迁为显官要职。
English: The person you like is secretly introduced, accepted, and promoted to a high-ranking position.

古文：所恶则密行訾毁，公肆挤排。
现代文：所不喜欢的人则私自进行诽谤非议，或是公然进行排挤。
English: Those they don't like are privately vilified or publicly ostracized.

古文：交通货赂，所盗者皆陛下之财。
现代文：他们互相勾结、贿赂，所盗窃的都是陛下的财产。
English: They colluded, they bribed, and they stole all of His Majesty's property.

古文：命卿置将，所窃者皆陛下之柄。
现代文：他们任命官吏配置将领，所盗窃的都是陛下的权柄。
English: They have appointed officials, placed generals, and all they have stolen is His Majesty's authority.

古文：陛下所谓宰相、师傅、宾友、谏诤之臣，或反出入其门墙，承望其风旨；其幸能自立者，亦不过龊龊自守，而未尝敢一言以斥之；其甚畏公论者，乃能略警逐其徒党之一二，既不能深有所伤，而终亦不敢正言以捣其囊橐窟穴之所在。
现代文：陛下所属的宰相、师傅、宾客朋友、谏臣，或是反而出入于他们的门下，承受仰望于他们的示意主张；其中幸有能够自立的人，也不过是拘谨自守，而不敢讲一句斥责他们的话；其中十分敬畏公论的人，也仅能略加警告或驱逐他们的一、二个党徒，既不能对他们有深重地打击，而且最终也不敢以正直的言行直捣他们的藏身之所和巢穴所在。
English: His Majesty's chancellors, masters, guests, friends, and courtiers, or, on the contrary, those who come and go at their beck and call, look up to them; among them, fortunately, there are those who are able to stand on their own feet, but they are too self-restrained to say a word of reproach to them; among them, those who are too much afraid of public opinion, they can only give a slight warning or expel one or two of their party members, neither can they strike them deeply, and finally, they dare not directly attack their hiding places and nests with honest words and deeds.

古文：势成威立，中外靡然向之，使陛下之号令黜陟不复出于朝廷，而出于一二人之门，名为陛下独断，而实此一二人者阴执其柄。
现代文：他们势力已成，淫威已立，朝廷内外无不倒向他们，使陛下的号令、官员的罢黜升陟不再出自朝廷，而出自一、二个人的私门，名义上是陛下独自决定，而实际上是这么一、二个人私自暗中执掌权柄。 
English: Their power has been achieved, their arrogance has been established, and everyone inside and outside the Imperial Court has fallen to them, so that His Majesty's orders and the dismissal and promotion of officials no longer come from the Imperial Court, but from the private homes of one or two people. In name, His Majesty alone decides, but in reality, such one or two people secretly hold power.

古文：且云： 莫大之祸，必至之忧，近在朝夕，而陛下独未之知。 上读之，大怒曰： 是以我为亡也。 熹以疾请祠，不报。
现代文：又说： 巨大的灾祸，一定会来临的忧患，近在早晚，然而惟独陛下还不知道。 孝宗读了朱熹的奏章，悖然大怒说： 这是以为我宋朝将要灭亡了。 朱熹以生病为由，请求一个宫观职务，没有得到答复。
English: He also said, "A great calamity, an affliction that is sure to come, is approaching sooner or later, but only Your Majesty does not know it yet." Xiaozong read Zhu Xi's music chapter, and indignantly said, "This is because I thought that the Song Dynasty was about to perish." Zhu Xi requested a palace guard position on the grounds of illness, but did not receive a reply.

古文：陈俊卿以旧相守金陵，过阙入见，荐熹甚力。
现代文：陈俊卿以曾任宰相的身份驻守金陵，入宫觐见皇帝，极力推荐朱熹。
English: Chen Junqing stationed in Jinling as a former prime minister, entered the palace to see the emperor, and strongly recommended Zhu Xi.

古文：宰相赵雄言于上曰： 士之好名，陛下疾之愈甚，则人之誉之愈众，无乃适所以高之。
现代文：宰相赵雄对皇上说： 士大夫喜好名誉，陛下厌恶他们愈是厉害，而人们赞誉他们就愈是多，这岂不是正好抬高了他们。
English: Prime Minister Zhao Xiong said to the emperor: "Scholars are fond of fame. The more your majesty dislikes them, the more people praise them. Isn't this just elevating them?"

古文：不若因其长而用之，彼渐当事任，能否自见矣。 上以为然，乃除熹提举江西常平茶盐公事。
现代文：不如根据他们的长处而加以任用，他们渐渐担任政事以后，能力的强弱真假也就看出来了。 皇帝认为赵雄的意见对，于是任命朱熹担任提举江西常平茶盐公事。
English: The emperor thought that Zhao Xiong's opinion was right, so he appointed Zhu Xi as the official in charge of nominating Jiangxi Changping Tea and Salt.

古文：旋录救荒之劳，除直秘阁，以前所奏纳粟人未推赏，辞。
现代文：不久便记录到了朱熹救济灾荒的功劳，命朱熹任直秘阁，朱熹因为以前奏请朝廷奖赏纳粮救灾的人没有得到批准，所以辞谢了这次任命。
English: Soon, Zhu Xi's contribution to the relief of the disaster was recorded, and Zhu Xi was appointed as the direct secretary of the cabinet. Zhu Xi declined this appointment because the person who had previously petitioned the court to reward grain for disaster relief had not been approved.

古文：会浙东大饥，宰相王淮奏改熹提举浙东常平茶盐公事，即日单车就道，复以纳粟人未推赏，辞职名。
现代文：恰好碰到浙东地区发生大饥荒，宰相王淮上奏改任朱熹为提举浙东常平茶盐公事，并要他当天独自快速上路，朱熹又以纳粮救灾的人没有得到奖赏为由，辞谢这一任命。
English: Just as the great famine occurred in eastern Zhejiang, the prime minister, Wang Huai Shangso, was replaced by Zhu Xi in order to promote the eastern Zhejiang Changping tea and salt business, and asked him to go on the road quickly on his own that day. Zhu Xi also resigned from this appointment on the grounds that the people who donated grain to the disaster relief did not receive a reward.

古文：纳粟赏行，遂受职名。
现代文：等到朝廷对纳粮救灾的人实行奖赏以后，朱熹才接受了这一职务。
English: Zhu Xi did not accept this position until after the imperial court rewarded those who donated grain for disaster relief.

古文：入对，首陈灾异之由与修德任人之说，次言： 陛下即政之初，盖尝选建英豪，任以政事，不幸其间不能尽得其人，是以不复广求贤哲，而姑取软熟易制之人以充其位。
现代文：他入朝对答皇帝提问，首先陈说灾异发生的原因和修养德行、任用人才的关系，其次说道： 陛下即位当政初期，曾选拔杰出的英雄豪杰，委任以国家政事，不幸的是这中间不能全部得到合适的人选，因此，不再广泛求取贤哲人士，而暂时任用了一些性情柔和不得罪人而又容易控制的人以充任这些职务。
English: When he entered the court to answer the emperor's questions, he first explained the cause of the disaster and the relationship between the cultivation of virtue and the appointment of talents, and then said: In the early days of his reign, His Majesty had selected outstanding heroes and heroes and appointed them to national affairs. Unfortunately, he could not get all of them to be suitable candidates. Therefore, he no longer extensively sought out sages and philosophers, but temporarily appointed some people with soft dispositions who were not sinners and easy to control to fill these positions.

古文：于是左右私亵使令之贱，始得以奉燕间，备驱使，而宰相之权日轻。
现代文：于是皇帝左右的人，私自怠慢并使唤他们从事低贱的工作，侍奉于宴会之间，以供呼唤使用，因而宰相的权力日益减轻。
English: As a result, the people around the emperor neglected themselves and made them do menial work and serve between banquets, so that the power of the prime minister was increasingly reduced.

古文：又虑其势有所偏，而因重以壅己也，则时听外廷之论，将以阴察此辈之负犯而操切之。
现代文：又担心他们的权势有所偏重，而又借用权力重大来蒙蔽自己，就时常听取外廷的议论，将以暗地察访这些人违纪犯法的事实而从严从速地查办他们。
English: Fearing that their power is biased and that they use their great power to blind themselves, they often listen to the discussions of the outside court, and will secretly investigate the fact that these people have violated discipline and the law, and strictly and promptly investigate them.

古文：陛下既未能循天理、公圣心，以正朝廷之大体，则固已失其本矣，而又欲兼听士大夫之言，以为驾驭之术，则士大夫之进见有时，而近习之从容无间。
现代文：陛下既然不能够遵循天理、公正本心，用以端正朝廷纲纪，早已失去治国根本，而且又想兼听士大夫们的不同意见，作为驾驭群臣的办法，那么士大夫进见皇上有一定的时间规定，而陛下亲近的宦官则可以从容而没有间隙。
English: Since His Majesty is not able to follow the principles of heaven and justice to rectify the discipline of the imperial court, and has long lost the fundamentals of governing the country, and also wants to listen to the different opinions of the magistrates as a way to control the ministers, then the magistrates have a certain time limit to see the emperor, and the eunuchs close to His Majesty can take their time without a gap.

古文：士大夫之礼貌既庄而难亲，其议论又苦而难入，近习便辟侧媚之态既足以蛊心志，其胥史狡狯之术又足以眩聪明。
现代文：士大夫们端庄有礼而难以亲近，他们的议论又苦涩难以入耳，陛下宠幸的宦官其逢迎谄媚之态就足以蛊惑陛下的心术与志向，那些小吏狡诈诡变的伎俩又足以迷惑陛下的视听。
English: The dignified and courteous magistrates are hard to get close to, their arguments are bitter and hard to listen to, His Majesty's favorite eunuchs are enough to seduce His Majesty's mind and aspirations with their flattery, and those petty officials' cunning and treacherous tricks are enough to confuse His Majesty's audio-visual.

古文：是以虽欲微抑此辈，而此辈之势日重，虽欲兼采公论，而士大夫之势日轻。
现代文：因此陛下虽然想稍稍抑制这些小人之辈，然而这些小人们的势力却一天天加重，陛下虽然想广泛采纳公论，而士大夫的势力却一天天减轻。
English: Therefore, although His Majesty wants to restrain these little people a little, the power of these little people is increasing day by day. Although His Majesty wants to widely adopt public opinion, the power of the scholar-bureaucrats is decreasing day by day.

古文：重者既挟其重，以窃陛下之权，轻者又借力于所重，以为窃位固宠之计。
现代文：权重的小人既可以凭借他所掌握的重要权力，进一步窃取陛下的权力，权轻的人又借助于权重的小人，作为自己窃居官位，巩固宠信的方法。
English: The small man of weight can further steal the power of His Majesty by virtue of the important power he holds, and the small man of light weight can use the small man of weight as a way to steal his official position and consolidate his favor.

古文：日往月来，浸淫耗蚀，使陛下之德业日隳，纲纪日坏，邪佞充塞，货赂公行，兵愁民怨，盗贼间作，灾异数见，饥馑荐臻。
现代文：这样日积月累，渐渐损失权力，使陛下的德行基业一天天地毁坏旁落，国家的法度一天天地受到破坏，奸佞谄媚的人充塞朝廷，贿赂公行，士兵悲愁，百姓怨愤，盗贼不时发生，灾祸怪异多次出现，灾荒饥馑重新又来。
English: In this way, over time, power was gradually lost, causing His Majesty's virtuous foundation to be destroyed day by day, the laws of the country to be undermined day by day, the imperial court to be filled with treacherous and flattering people, bribery in public affairs, soldiers to be sad, the people to be angry, thieves to occur from time to time, strange disasters to appear many times, and famine and famine to come again.

古文：群小相挺，人人皆得满其所欲，惟有陛下了无所得，而顾乃独受其弊。 上为动容。
现代文：奸邪小人互相引荐，人人都得以满足自己的私欲，惟有陛下一无所得，而且独自承受这些弊端的祸害。 
English: Vicious villains are introduced to each other, and everyone is able to satisfy their own desires, but Your Majesty has nothing to gain, and bears the scourge of these evils alone.

古文：所奏凡七事，其一二事手书以防宣泄。
现代文：皇帝听后感动不已，脸色都改变了。朱熹所奏的一共七件事，亲自书写其中的一、二件事以防泄露秘密。
English: After listening, the emperor was deeply moved and his face changed. Zhu Xi played a total of seven events and personally wrote down one or two of them to prevent the secrets from being leaked.

古文：熹始拜命，即移书他郡，募米商，蠲其征，及至，则客舟之米已辐凑。
现代文：朱熹刚接受任命，就写信到其他州郡，招募米商，免除税钱，等朱熹到任时，外地船只运来的大米已汇集到这里了。
English: As soon as Zhu Rong accepted the appointment, he wrote to other states and counties to recruit rice merchants and exempt them from taxes. By the time Zhu Rong took office, the rice transported by foreign ships had been gathered here.

古文：熹日钩访民隐，按行境内，单车屏徒从，所至人不及知。
现代文：朱熹每天外出调查访问百姓的疾苦，走遍浙东全境，单人独车，不带随从，所到之处，人们都不知道他来过。
English: Zhu Xi went out every day to investigate and visit the sufferings of the people. He traveled all over the eastern part of Zhejiang, alone, without an entourage. Wherever he went, people did not know that he had come.

古文：郡县官吏惮其风采，至自引去，所部肃然。
现代文：州县官吏害怕他的严峻的作风，有些人甚至自行离职而去，他所管辖的地区风纪肃然，部下崇敬他。
English: State and county officials are afraid of his stern style, and some have even left their posts voluntarily. The area under his jurisdiction is austere, and his subordinates revere him.

古文：凡丁钱、和买、役法、榷酤之政，有不便于民者，悉厘而革之。
现代文：凡是丁钱、和买、役法、榷酤这一类政事，有不方便而祸害百姓的地方，全部加以改正和革除。
English: All the inconvenient and harmful to the people aspects of dingqian, hongmai, yingfa and qing should be rectified and eliminated.

古文：从救荒之余，随事处画，必为经久之计。
现代文：在救济灾荒之余，他都根据实际情况谋划处理，必定做出长久的打算。
English: In addition to disaster relief, he planned and dealt with according to the actual situation, and must make a long-term plan.

古文：有短熹者，谓其疏于为政，上谓王淮曰： 朱熹政事却有可观。 
现代文：有人攻击朱熹，说他不尽心而疏略于政事，皇上对王淮说： 朱熹治理政务的确有很可观的政绩。 
English: Some people attacked Zhu Xi, saying that he was not diligent and neglected political affairs. The emperor said to Wang Huai: Zhu Xi's governance of government affairs has indeed had considerable achievements.

古文：熹以前后奏请多所见抑，幸而从者，率稽缓后时，蝗旱相仍，不胜忧愤，复奏言： 为今之计，独有断自圣心，沛然发号，责躬求言，然后君臣相戒，痛自省改。
现代文：朱熹因为前后几次奏请多数被搁置，侥幸得到采用的，也都拖延迟缓耽误了时间，蝗虫旱灾相互频繁出现，他不胜忧愤，又上奏疏说： 为现在打算，只有决断出自皇上自己的意志，迅速发布诏令，责备自己并征求直言，然后君臣互相告诫，痛下决心反省改正。
English: Zhu Xi said, "For now, we can only make decisions based on the emperor's own will, quickly issue decrees, reproach ourselves and solicit candid opinions, and then the officials will admonish each other and painfully resolve to reflect and make corrections.

古文：其次惟有尽出内库之钱，以供大礼之费为收籴之本，诏户部免征旧负，诏漕臣依条检放租税，诏宰臣沙汰被灾路分州军监司、守臣之无状者，遴选贤能，责以荒政，庶几犹足下结人心，消其乘时作乱之意。
现代文：其次，拿出内库全部钱财，把供给帝王大礼的费用改为收籴粮食的本钱，诏令户部免征百姓所欠旧债，诏令转运使根据条例检查放免百姓租税，诏令宰相大臣淘汰受灾路地区的州、军监司、地方官吏中没有政绩的人，审慎选拔贤能之士，责成他们实施救济灾荒的政策，这样也许还能下结民心，消除灾民乘灾荒之际叛乱的打算。
English: Secondly, take out all the money in the treasury, change the cost of providing the emperor's gift to the cost of collecting grain, order the household department to exempt the old debt owed by the people, order the forwarding agent to inspect and exempt the people's tax according to the regulations, order the prime minister to eliminate the people who have no political achievements in the state, military supervision department and local officials in the disaster-affected areas, carefully select the capable people and instruct them to implement the disaster relief policy. In this way, it may also be possible to win the hearts of the people and eliminate the intention of the disaster victims to rebel in the face of the disaster.

古文：不然，臣恐所忧者不止于饥殍，而将在于盗贼；蒙其害者不止于官吏，而上及于国家也。 
现代文：不这样的话，我恐怕所忧虑的不止于饥饿死的人，而将在于叛乱的盗贼；蒙受其害的不仅仅是官吏，而且要涉及到危害上面的国家政权了。 
English: Otherwise, I fear that my concern will not only be for those who die of hunger, but also for the insurgent thieves, whose victims will not only be officials, but will also be involved in harming the state power above.

古文：知台州唐仲友与王淮同里为姻家，吏部尚书郑丙、侍御史张大经交荐之，迁江西提刑，未行。
现代文：台州知州唐仲友和王淮是同乡并结为亲家，吏部尚书郑丙、侍御史张大经一起推荐他，迁升为江西提刑，还没有上任。
English: Taizhou Zhizhou Tang Zhongyou and Wang Huai are compatriots and relatives, the cadre department Shangshu Zheng He and the attendant historian Zhang Da Jing recommended him together, and he was promoted to Jiangxi Tihong. He has not yet taken office.

古文：熹行部至台，讼仲友者纷然，按得其实，章三上，淮匿不以闻。
现代文：朱熹巡行视察到台州，控告唐仲友的人很多，朱熹调查到事实，三次上奏章弹劾唐仲友，王淮把朱熹的奏章隐藏起来不报告给皇上。
English: Zhu Xi's patrol inspected Taizhou. There were many people who accused Tang Zhongyou. Zhu Xi investigated the facts and impeached Tang Zhongyou three times. Wang Huai hid Zhu Xi's report and did not report it to the emperor.

古文：熹论愈力，仲友亦自辩，淮乃以熹章进呈，上令宰属看详，都司陈庸等乞令浙西提刑委清强官究实，仍令熹速往旱伤州郡相视。
现代文：朱熹更加致力弹劾他，唐仲友也上奏章为自己辩解，王淮才把朱熹的奏章进呈给皇上，皇帝命令宰相大臣们详细审查，都司陈庸等人要求下令浙西提刑委派清廉能干的官员去追查核实，仍旧命令朱熹迅速赶往遭受旱灾侵害的州郡视察。
English: Zhu Xi made more efforts to impeach him, Tang Zhongyou also wrote a report to defend himself, Wang Huai only submitted Zhu Xi's report to the emperor, the emperor ordered the prime ministers to examine it in detail, the governor Chen Yong and others requested that the Criminal Investigation Commission of Zhejiang and Xiti be ordered to send clean and competent officials to investigate and verify, and still ordered Zhu Xi to quickly rush to the counties affected by the drought to inspect.

古文：熹时留台未行，既奉诏，益上章论，前后六上，淮不得已，夺仲友江西新命以授熹，辞不拜，遂归，且乞奉祠。
现代文：朱熹当时留在台州没有走，不久接到这道诏令，愈加上奏章弹劾唐仲友，前后上了六道奏章，王淮迫不得已，取消唐仲友的江西提刑的新任命转授给朱熹，朱熹拒绝不接受，于是回乡，并且要求一个宫观闲职。
English: Zhu Xi stayed in Taizhou at that time and did not leave. Soon after receiving this edict, coupled with the report impeaching Tang Zhongyou, there were six reports. Wang Huai was forced to cancel Tang Zhongyou's new appointment to Jiangxi and transfer it to Zhu Xi. Zhu Xi refused to accept it, so he returned to his hometown and asked for a palace idle job.

古文：时郑丙上疏诋程氏之学以沮熹，淮又擢太府寺丞陈贾为监察御史。
现代文：当时郑丙上疏诋毁程氏的学说来败坏朱熹，王淮又提拔太府寺丞陈贾为监察御史。
English: At that time, Zheng Huan slandered Cheng's doctrine to corrupt Zhu Xi, and Wang Huai promoted Chen Jia, the chief priest of Taifu Temple, to supervise the imperial history.

古文：贾面对，首论近日搢绅有所谓 道学 者，大率假名以济伪，愿考察其人，摈弃勿用。
现代文：陈贾在与皇上面对面地论说时，首先论说近日士大夫中有所谓 道学 之人，大多是借助道学之名来宣传骗人的学说，希望朝廷考察这些人，清除他们不再任用。
English: In his face-to-face discussion with the emperor, Chen Jia first discussed that most of the so-called Taoists among the scholars and doctors in recent days were using the name of Taoism to propagate deceptive doctrines. He hoped that the imperial court would investigate these people and remove them from appointment.

古文：盖指熹也。
现代文：大概指的是朱熹。
English: It probably refers to Zhu Xi.

古文：十年，诏以熹累乞奉祠，可差主管台州崇道观，既而连奉云台、鸿庆之祠者五年。
现代文：淳熙十年，诏因朱熹多次请求祠观，可以派遣他主管台州崇道观，不久接连主管云台观、鸿庆观达五年时间。
English: In the 10th year of Chunxi, because Zhu Xi repeatedly requested the ancestral hall view, he could be sent to be in charge of Taizhou Chongdao view, and soon he was successively in charge of Yuntai view and Hongqing view for five years.

古文：十四年，周必大相，除熹提点江西刑狱公事，以疾辞，不许，遂行。
现代文：淳熙十四年，周必大任宰相，任命朱熹为提点江南西路刑狱公事，朱熹因生病辞谢任命，朝廷没有同意，他于是赴任。
English: In the 14th year of Chunxi, Zhou Bida, who was the prime minister, appointed Zhu Xi to be in charge of the public affairs of the prison on the west side of the Yangtze River. Zhu Xi resigned from the appointment due to illness, but the court did not agree, so he took up the post.

古文：十五年，淮罢相，遂入奏，首言近年刑狱失当，狱官当择其人。
现代文：淳熙十五年，王淮罢相，于是朱熹进奏，首先论说近年来刑罚处理不得当，狱官应该选择合适的人担任。
English: In the 15th year of Chunxi, Wang Huai resigned from the post of prime minister, so Zhu Rongjin first argued that in recent years, the punishment was not handled properly, and the prison officer should choose the right person to serve.

古文：次言经总制钱之病民，及江西诸州科罚之弊。
现代文：其次接着说经制钱、总制钱损害百姓，以及江西路各州县摊派课罚的弊端。
English: Secondly, he went on to say that the monetary system and the total monetary system harm the people, as well as the drawbacks of the apportionment of fines in various states and counties in Jiangxi Province.

古文：而其末言： 陛下即位二十七年，因循荏苒，无尺寸之效可以仰酬圣志。
现代文：奏章最后说 ：陛下即位已经二十七年，因循守旧而时间渐移，没有一尺一寸的功效可以回报陛下自己的志向。
English: At the end of the report, it said: It has been 27 years since His Majesty ascended to the throne, and time has gradually shifted due to the old guard, and there is no inch-by-inch effect that can repay His Majesty's own ambition.

古文：尝反覆思之，无乃燕闲蠖濩之中，虚明应物之地，天理有所未纯，人欲有所未尽，是以为善不能充其量，除恶不能去其根，一念之顷，公私邪正、是非得失之机，交战于其中。
现代文：我曾经反复考虑这件事，莫非是宴饮闲谈于深宫之中，没有表明待人接物的心地，天理有些不纯正，人的欲望有些没有止境，因此好的事情不能做到底，铲除恶事不能断它的根，一闪念之间，公与私、邪与正、是与非、得与失同时交替出现于思想之中。
English: I have repeatedly considered this matter, whether it was the banqueting and gossiping in the deep palace, did not show the heart to treat people, some heavenly principles are not pure, some human desires have no end, so good things can not be done to the bottom, eradicating evil can not break its root, between a flash of thought, public and private, evil and justice, right and wrong, gain and loss at the same time alternate in thought.

古文：故体貌大臣非不厚，而便嬖侧媚得以深被腹心之寄；寤寐英豪非不切，而柔邪庸缪得以久窃廊庙之权。
现代文：因此，陛下以礼相待大臣并非不厚，然而阿谀逢迎谄媚讨好的近臣小人也能得到陛下寄托心腹的重任；陛下日夜追求英豪之士并非不迫切，然而柔弱奸邪平庸乖谬之辈也能够长久地窃掌朝廷大权。
English: Therefore, it is not ungenerous for His Majesty to treat his ministers with courtesy. However, a petty vassal who is flattering and ingratiating can also get the important task entrusted by His Majesty; His Majesty's day and night pursuit of heroes is not without urgency. However, the weak, the wicked, the mediocre and the perverse can also hold the power of the court for a long time.

古文：非不乐闻公议正论，而有时不容；非不堲谗说殄行，而未免误听；非不欲报复陵庙仇耻，而未免畏怯苟安；非不爱养生灵财力，而未免叹息愁怨。
现代文：并非陛下不乐于听取公平正直的议论，然而有时不能容纳这种议论的存在；并不是陛下不憎恨谗言恶行，然而不免误听偏信；并不是陛下不想为祖宗报仇，然而不免畏惧怯懦而图一时安逸；并不是陛下不爱护和培养百姓的财力，然而不免要发出叹息产生愁怨。
English: It is not that His Majesty does not like to listen to fair and honest discussions, but sometimes cannot tolerate the existence of such discussions; it is not that His Majesty does not hate insults and evil deeds, but cannot help but mishear bigotry; it is not that His Majesty does not want to avenge his ancestors, but cannot help but fear cowardice and seek momentary comfort; it is not that His Majesty does not love and nurture the people's financial resources, but cannot help but sigh and feel sad.

古文：愿陛下自今以往，一念之顷必谨而察之：此为天理耶，人欲耶？
现代文：希望陛下从今以后，对于一闪之念必须谨慎对待仔细审察；这是天理呢？还是人欲呢？
English: I hope, Your Majesty, that from now on, a flash of thought must be treated with caution and carefully examined; is this the law of nature? Or is it human desire?

古文：果天理也，则敬以充之，而不使其少有壅阏；果人欲也，则敬以克之，而不使其少有凝滞。
现代文：果然是天理，就慎重地对它加以扩充，而不让它受到一点蒙蔽阻塞；如果真是人欲，就慎重地克制这个念头，而不让它在自己的头脑中稍有滞留。
English: If it is indeed divine, let him diligently enlarge it, and not let it be obstructed by a little illusion; if it is really human desire, let him carefully restrain the thought, and not allow it to linger in his mind.

古文：推而至于言语动作之间，用人处事之际，无不以是裁之，则圣心洞然，中外融澈，无一毫之私欲得以介乎其间，而天下之事将惟陛下所欲为，无不如志矣。 是行也，有要之于路，以为 正心诚意 之论上所厌闻，戒勿以为言。
现代文：把它推广到一言一行之间，用人处事之际，没有不用这一标准加以衡量，那么陛下的圣心就能通达，朝廷内外融合透彻，没有一丝一毫的私利欲望可以隐身于两者之间，而天下的事情将只根据陛下所想的进行，没有什么事会不合乎陛下的志向心愿。 朱熹这次赴京，有人在路上拦住他，认为 正心诚意 这种论调皇帝很讨厌听到，告诫他不要说这种话。
English: If we extend this to every word and action, and if we do not use this standard to measure when dealing with people, then His Majesty's Sacred Heart will be accessible, the inside and outside of the court will be thoroughly integrated, and there will not be the slightest desire for self-interest that can hide between the two, and the world's affairs will proceed only according to His Majesty's wishes, and nothing will go against His Majesty's aspirations and wishes. Zhu Xi went to Beijing this time, and someone stopped him on the road and thought that he was sincere. The emperor hated to hear this kind of argument and warned him not to say such things.

古文：熹曰： 吾平生所学，惟此四字，岂可隐默以欺吾君乎？ 及奏，上曰： 久不见卿，浙东之事，朕自知之，今当处卿清要，不复以州县为烦也。 
现代文：朱熹说 ：我平生一辈子所学习的，只有这四个字，怎么可以隐瞒不说以欺骗皇帝呢？ 等到他上奏时，皇帝说 ：很久没有见到你了，浙东的事情，我已经知道，现在应该安排你一个高尚而重要的职务，不再用州县的琐事来麻烦你了。 
English: Zhu Xi said, "I have only learned these four words in my entire life. How can I deceive the emperor by not telling him?" When he started to play, the emperor said, "I haven't seen you for a long time. I already know about eastern Zhejiang. Now I should assign you to a noble and important post, and no longer trouble you with the trivialities of prefectures and counties."

古文：时曾觌已死，王抃亦逐，独内侍甘昪尚在，熹力以为言。
现代文：当时曾觌已经死了，王扌卞也被驱逐，只有内侍甘还在任职，朱熹极力弹劾他。
English: At that time, Zeng Yao was already dead, Wang Yao was also expelled, and only Naishi Gan was still in office. Zhu Xi tried his best to impeach him.

古文：上曰： 昪乃德寿所荐，谓其有才耳。 熹曰： 小人无才，安能动人主。 翌日，除兵部郎官，以足疾丐祠。本部侍郎林栗尝与熹论《易》、《西铭》不合，劾熹： 本无学术，徒窃张载、程颐绪余，谓之 道学 。
现代文：孝宗说 ：甘是德寿举荐的，说他有才能。 朱熹说： 小人没有才能，怎么能够打动皇帝。 第二天，任命朱熹为兵部郎官，朱熹以脚病请求祠观的职务，兵部侍郎林栗曾经和朱熹讨论《周易》、《西铭》，两人意见不合，这时他弹劾朱熹说 ：朱熹本来没有什么学问，只会窃取张载、程颐的残余东西，称之为 道学 。
English: Xiaozong said: Gan was recommended by Deshou, saying that he had talent. Zhu Xi said: A villain has no talent, how can he impress the emperor. The next day, Zhu Xi was appointed as the military secretary. Zhu Xi requested the position of the ancestral hall inspector with a foot disease. The military secretary Lin Li had discussed "Zhou Yi" and "Ximing" with Zhu Xi, and the two disagreed. At this time, he impeached Zhu Xi and said: Zhu Xi originally had no knowledge, only stole the remnants of Zhang Zai and Cheng Xi, and called it Taoism.

古文：所至辄携门生数十人，妄希孔、孟历聘之风，邀索高价，不肯供职，其伪不可掩。 上曰： 林栗言似过。 周必大言熹上殿之日，足疾未廖，勉强登对。
现代文：朱熹所到之处都带上门人学生数十人，妄想仰慕孔子、孟子经历几次聘任的风尚，要挟索求高价，不肯就任朝廷任命的职务，他的这种虚伪不可掩盖。 孝宗说 ：林栗的话好像太过分了。 周必大说朱熹上任的那天，脚病没有痊愈，勉强登殿答对。
English: Zhu Xi brought dozens of students with him everywhere he went, with a delusional admiration for Confucius and Mencius, who went through several appointments, demanding high prices, and refusing to take up positions appointed by the imperial court. His hypocrisy could not be covered up. Xiaozong said: Lin Gui's words seem to be too excessive. Zhou Bida said that on the day Zhu Xi took office, his foot disease had not recovered, and he reluctantly went to the palace to answer the question.

古文：上曰： 朕亦见其跛曳。 左补阙薛叔似亦奏援熹，乃令依旧职江西提刑。
现代文：孝宗说 ：我也见到他走路一跛一曳的。 左补阙薛叔似也上奏声援朱熹，于是让他仍旧担任原来的职务江西提刑。
English: "I also saw him walking with a limp," said Xiaozong. "It seems that the left assistant, Zou Xuexiu, also played a role in solidarity with Zhu Xi, so he was still allowed to hold his original position."

古文：太常博士叶适上疏与栗辨，谓其言无一实者， 谓之道学 一语，无实尤甚，往日王淮表里台谏，阴废正人，盖用此术。
现代文：太常博士叶适上疏与林栗辩论，说林栗的话没有一句是事实 ，称之为道学 这句话，尤其没有事实根据，过去王淮和台谏官里外呼应，阴谋废弃正直君子，正是用的这种办法。
English: Too often, Dr. Ye Suisheng sparred with Lin Li, saying that none of Lin Li's words were facts, calling it Taoism. This sentence, in particular, had no factual basis. In the past, Wang Huai and Taiwan eunuchs echoed inside and outside, plotting to abandon honest gentlemen. This is exactly the method used.

古文：诏： 熹昨入对，所论皆新任职事，朕谅其诚，复从所请，可疾速之任。 会胡晋臣除侍御史，首论栗执拗不通，喜同恶异，无事而指学者为党，乃黜栗知泉州。
现代文：孝宗下诏说： 朱熹昨天入宫答对，所谈论的都是新任职务的事情，我相信他的诚意，再次听从他的请求，他可以迅速赴任就职。 恰逢胡晋臣任侍御史，首先抨击林栗固执拗戾不通，喜欢与自己意见相同的人，憎恨与自己意见不同的人，没有事实根据指责学者结党营私，于是罢黜林栗，让他担任泉州知州。
English: Xiaozong issued the following edict: Zhu Xi answered correctly when he entered the palace yesterday, all he talked about was the new post, I believe in his sincerity, and once again obeyed his request, he can quickly take office. It coincided with Hu Jintao's appointment as the imperial historian, he first criticized Lin Li for his stubbornness and incomprehensibility, for liking people with the same opinions as himself, for hating people with different opinions from himself, and for accusing scholars of being partisan without factual basis, so he dismissed Lin Li and let him serve as Quanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：熹再辞免，除直宝文阁，主管西京嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：朱熹再次辞谢任命，孝宗委任他直宝文阁，主管西京嵩山崇福宫。
English: Zhu Xi once again declined to accept the appointment, and Emperor Xiaozong appointed him as the director of Zhibo Library and the head of the Songshan Chongfu Palace in West Beijing.

古文：未逾月再召，熹又辞。
现代文：没有一个月再次召他赴任，朱熹又推辞了。
English: Less than a month after he was reappointed, Zhu Xi again declined.

古文：始，熹尝以为口陈之说有所未尽，乞具封事以闻，至是投匦进封事曰：
现代文：当初，朱熹曾认为用口述上陈的方法不能把自己的想法和意见全部说出来，要求密封奏事向皇帝报告自己的想法和意见。
English: At first, Zhu Xi thought that he could not express all his thoughts and opinions by dictating to the emperor, so he asked for a sealed record to report his thoughts and opinions to the emperor.

古文：今天下大势，如人有重病，内自心腹，外达四支，无一毛一发不受病者。
现代文：到这时朱熹把自己密封的奏章投至朝廷设置的匦中，里面写道： 现在国家的主要形势，好比人有重病，内部从心腹开始，外面达到手脚四肢，没有一根汗毛一根头发不生病的。
English: At this time, Zhu Xi put his sealed musical score into the urn set up by the imperial court, which wrote: The main situation of the country now is like a person who is seriously ill, starting from the heart and abdomen inside, and reaching the hands and feet and limbs outside. There is not a single hair on his head that is not sick.

古文：且以天下之大本与今日之急务，为陛下言之：大本者，陛下之心；急务则辅翼太子，选任大臣，振举纲纪，变化风俗，爱养民力，修明军政，六者是也。
现代文：暂且以天下的根本和当今的急务，试为陛下陈说：国家的根本，就是陛下的心；当务之急就是辅育培养太子，选拔任用大臣，整顿政纲严肃法纪，改变士风民俗，爱惜培养民力，整饬清明军政事务，这六事而已。
English: For the time being, let's take the fundamentals of the world and today's urgent matters as the starting point, and try to explain to His Majesty: the fundamentals of the country are His Majesty's heart; the urgent matters are the supplementary education and training of the crown prince, the selection and appointment of ministers, the rectification of the political program, the serious law and order, the change of the customs of the people, the cultivation of the people's power, and the rectification of the military and political affairs, these are just six things.

古文：古先圣王兢兢业业，持守此心，是以建师保之官，列谏诤之职，凡饮食、酒浆、衣服、次舍、器用、财贿与夫宦官、宫妾之政，无一不领于冢宰。使其左右前后，一动一静，无不制以有司之法，而无纤芥之隙、瞬息之顷，得以隐其毫发之私。
现代文： 古代圣明帝王兢兢业业，为了保持和守正这种心，所以设立师保之官，排列有谏诤之职，凡是帝王的饮食、酒浆、衣服、宫室、器用、金玉丝帛以及宦官、宫妾等政事，没有一件不统领于宰相，使帝王的前后左右，一动一静，没有不受到有关机构法规的制约，因而没有细微空间、瞬息时间，能够隐瞒他们的毫发私情。
English: In ancient times, the holy Ming emperors were very conscientious and diligent. In order to maintain and keep this kind of heart, they set up a tutor and bodyguard, and arranged the duties of officials. All the emperor's diet, wine, clothes, palace, dexterity, jade silk and eunuchs, palace concubines and other political affairs, there is nothing that is not under the control of the prime minister, so that the emperor's back and forth, one movement, one silence, is not subject to the constraints of relevant institutional laws and regulations. Therefore, there is no subtle space, instantaneous time, to conceal their personal feelings.

古文：陛下所以精一克复而持守其心，果有如此之功乎？
现代文：陛下所以精粹纯一克己复礼而坚守此心，果真能有如此的功效吗？
English: Your Majesty, why do you adhere to the essence of pure self-restraint and adhere to this heart, can it really have such an effect?

古文：所以修身齐家而正其左右，果有如此之效乎？
现代文：陛下所以修养身心整治内宫而使自己的左右中正，果真能有如此的效果吗？
English: Your Majesty, why do you cultivate your mind and body to rectify your inner palace and make yourself right and left, can it really have such an effect?

古文：宫省事禁，臣固不得而知，然爵赏之滥，货赂之流，闾巷窃言，久已不胜其籍籍，则陛下所以修之家者，恐其未有以及古之圣王也。
现代文：宫廷禁地的事情，我固然不得而知，然而赏赐爵位之滥，钱财贿赂之流，街头巷尾都在窃窃议论，这种纷乱的议论我早已受不住了，那么陛下在整治内宫方面，恐怕还没能比得上古代的圣明帝王。
English: Of course, I don't know about the forbidden places in the palace, but I can't stand the chaotic discussions about the abuse of titles, the flow of money and bribery, and the talk of theft in the streets. So I'm afraid that His Majesty hasn't been able to match the ancient Emperor Saint Ming in the rectification of the inner palace.

古文：至于左右便嬖之私，恩遇过当，往者渊、觌、说、抃之徒势焰熏灼，倾动一时，今已无可言矣。
现代文： 至于陛下左右近习嬖幸之人的私情，恩宠待遇已过分不当，过去龙大渊、曾觌、张说、王扌卞这类人权势气焰熏灼，一时能危害震撼朝廷，现在已经没有什么可说的了。
English: As for the personal feelings of those around His Majesty who are close to him, the treatment of grace has become excessively inappropriate. In the past, people such as Long Dayuan, Zeng Qi, Zhang De, and Wang Qian were so arrogant that they could temporarily harm and shake the imperial court. Now there is nothing more to say.

古文：独有前日臣所面陈者，虽蒙圣慈委曲开譬，然臣之愚，窃以为此辈但当使之守门传命，供扫除之役，不当假借崇长，使得逞邪媚、作淫巧于内，以荡上心，立门庭、招权势于外，以累圣政。
现代文：独有我前天对陛下陈述的意见，虽然经过陛下委婉开导劝说，然而我的愚见是，只能让这些人担任守卫宫门传递命令、供事打扫等劳役，不应当让他们假借陛下的威望，使他们得逞奸邪谄媚，制作过度奇巧之物于内廷之中，以此来动摇陛下的心志，招揽权势于外朝，以损害陛下的圣政。
English: The opinion I expressed to His Majesty the day before yesterday is my own. Although I was persuaded by His Majesty's gentle persuasion, my foolish opinion is that these people should only be allowed to guard the palace gates, pass orders, clean, and perform other labor. They should not be allowed to use His Majesty's prestige as a pretext, so that they can be seduced by evil and make excessively wonderful things in the inner court in order to shake His Majesty's will, and invite power from the outside world in order to damage His Majesty's sacred government.

古文：臣闻之道路，自王抃既逐之后，诸将差除，多出此人之手。
现代文：我在道路、民间听说，自从王扌卞被驱逐之后，各位将领的派遣任命，仍大多出于此人之手。
English: I have heard from people on the road and from the general public that since Wang Hui was ousted, most of the dispatching and appointment of generals is still done by this person.

古文：陛下竭生灵膏血以奉军旅，顾乃未尝得一温饱，是皆将帅巧为名色，夺取其粮，肆行货赂于近习，以图进用，出入禁闼腹心之臣，外交将帅，共为欺蔽，以至于此。
现代文：陛下竭泽穷尽百姓的民脂民膏来供养军队，军队却不曾得到一顿温饱，这都是将帅巧立名目，夺取士兵口粮，肆行贿赂陛下亲近之人，以图提拔重用的结果。能出入皇宫的心腹大臣，外面结交将帅，共同欺骗蒙蔽陛下，以致到了这种地步。
English: His majesty has exhausted the people's resources to feed the army, but the army has not received a meal. This is the result of cleverly setting up names, seizing soldiers' rations, and bribing people close to his majesty in an attempt to promote heavy use. A minister who can go in and out of the palace and make friends with generals outside have deceived and blinded his majesty to such an extent.

古文：而陛下不悟，反宠暱之，以是为我之私人，至使宰相不得议其制置之得失，给谏不得论其除授之是非，则陛下所以正其左右者，未能及古之圣王又明矣。
现代文：而陛下不能醒悟，反而宠信亲近这些奸邪小人，认为这是为我所用的家臣，致使宰相不能议论他们设置措施的得失，给谏官员不能评论他们任命官吏的是非，那么陛下在端正左右大臣方面，没有能够赶上古代的圣明帝王又是明显的了。
English: However, His Majesty could not wake up, but on the contrary, he favored these treacherous villains, thinking that they were the vassals used by me. As a result, the prime minister could not discuss the merits and demerits of the measures they had set up, and the officials could not comment on the rights and wrongs of the officials they had appointed. Therefore, it was obvious that His Majesty could not catch up with the ancient Emperor Shengming in terms of correcting and controlling ministers.

古文：至于辅翼太子，则自王十朋、陈良翰之后，宫僚之选号为得人，而能称其职者，盖已鲜矣。
现代文： 至于辅佐帮助太子，从王十朋、陈良翰之后，太子属官的选拔号称得到合适人选，然而能够称职的人，已经很少了。
English: As for the assistant to help the prince, after Wang Shifeng and Chen Lianghan, the selection of the prince's subordinate officers claimed to have the right candidate, but there are few people who can do the job.

古文：而又时使邪佞儇薄、阘冗庸妄之辈，或得参错于其间，所谓讲读，亦姑以应文备数，而未闻其有箴规之效。
现代文：而又时时让那些奸邪谄谀、轻佻薄幸、卑贱庸妄之徒，得以掺杂在里面，所谓的讲读，也只是用文章应付充数，而没有听说他们有规劝谏戒的功效。
English: On the other hand, those evil-doers, frivolous people, and low-class fools are always allowed to be mixed in it. The so-called reading is just to cope with the full amount with articles, but they have not heard that they have the effect of exhorting and forbidding.

古文：至于从容朝夕、陪侍游燕者，又不过使臣宦者数辈而已。
现代文：至于早晚和陛下随时在一起，陪伴侍奉陛下游玩宴乐的人，又不过是使臣、宦官几个人而已。
English: As for the people who are always with His Majesty in the morning and evening, and who accompany and serve His Majesty, they are just a few envoys and eunuchs.

古文：师傅、宾客既不复置，而詹事、庶子有名无实，其左右春坊遂直以使臣掌之，既无以发其隆师亲友、尊德乐义之心，又无以防其戏慢媟狎、奇邪杂进之害。
现代文：太子的师傅、宾客已不再设置，而太子詹事、太子庶子这些官职也是有名无实，于是朝廷的左右春坊就让使臣执掌，既没有启发太子崇尚师长亲近宾友、尊敬德行喜好大义的用心，又没有防止太子轻侮怠慢亲昵放荡、奇异邪恶夹杂而进的危害。
English: The prince's masters and guests were no longer set up, and the official positions of prince's secretary and prince's son-in-law were not real. Therefore, the left and right chunbo of the imperial court were put under the control of envoys, which neither inspired the prince to worship the master's closeness to the guests, respect the virtues and preferences of the great justice, nor did it prevent the harm of the prince's slighting, neglecting, intimacy, debauchery, and strange evil.

古文：宜讨论前典，置师傅、宾客之官，罢去春坊使臣，而使詹事、庶子各复其职。
现代文：应该讨论以前的典章制度，设置太子师傅、宾客的官职，废除春坊使臣，而使太子詹事、太子庶子各自恢复行使职责。
English: The previous award system should be discussed, the official positions of prince's master and guest should be set up, the spring envoy should be abolished, and the prince Zhanji and the prince's illegitimate son should resume their duties.

古文：至于选任大臣，则以陛下之聪明，岂不知天下之事，必得刚明公正之人而后可任哉？
现代文： 至于选拔任用大臣，以陛下的聪明睿智，怎会不知道天下的事件，必须得到刚正光明公正之人而后才可任用呢？
English: As for the selection and appointment of ministers, with His Majesty's cleverness and sagacity, how could he not know that the events of the world must be governed by upright, bright and fair people before they can be appointed?

古文：其所以常不得如此之人，而反容鄙夫之窃位者，直以一念之间，未能彻其私邪之蔽，而燕私之好，便嬖之流，不能尽由于法度，若用刚明公正之人以为辅相，则恐其有以妨吾之事，害吾之人，而不得肆。
现代文：之所以经常得不到这样的人才，反而收容庸俗鄙陋的人窃居这些职位，这只因一念之间，未能看透他们出自私邪的蒙蔽，然而陛下宴乐时所喜好的人物，陛下亲近宠爱的近习之流，不能全部依据法令制度办事，如果任用刚正光明公正的人做辅佐皇帝的宰相，就恐怕他会妨碍自己的私事，损害自己的人，而不能任意放纵。
English: The reason why such talents are often not obtained, but vulgar and despicable people are admitted to occupy these positions, is only because of a thought, unable to see through their selfish deception. However, the characters that His Majesty likes at the banquet, and the close relatives of His Majesty, cannot all act according to the legal system. If a person who is upright, bright and fair is appointed as the prime minister of the emperor's assistant, I am afraid that he will interfere with his private affairs and damage his own people, but cannot indulge arbitrarily.

古文：是以选择之际，常先排摈此等，而后取凡疲懦软熟、平日不敢直言正色之人而揣摩之，又于其中得其至庸极陋、决可保其不至于有所妨者，然后举而加之于位。
现代文：所以在选用人才之时，常常先排斥摈弃刚正光明公正的人，而后选取拖沓无能懦弱软熟、平时不敢坦率直言态度端庄的人而加以揣摩，又在这些人中间选择最庸懦最卑陋、定可确保他不至于有所妨碍自己的人，然后荐举他们而加以高位。
English: Therefore, in the selection of talents, people who reject the upright, bright and fair are often excluded first, and then people who are lazy, incompetent, cowardly, weak and soft, and who do not dare to speak frankly and with a dignified attitude are selected. Among these people, the most cowardly and lowly people are selected to ensure that they do not interfere with themselves, and then they are recommended and promoted to high positions.

古文：是以除书未出，而物色先定，姓名未显，而中外已逆知其决非天下第一流矣。
现代文：所以任命官员的诏令还没颁布，而人员已经事先物色确定，这些官员的姓名还没有显露，而朝廷内外已经预知这些人决不是天下第一流的人才了。
English: Therefore, the edict appointing officials has not yet been issued, but the personnel has been identified in advance, the names of these officials have not yet been revealed, and both inside and outside the court have predicted that these people are by no means the world's first-class talents.

古文：至于振肃纪纲，变化风俗，则今日宫省之间，禁密之地，而天下不公之道，不正之人，顾乃得以窟穴盘据于其间。
现代文： 至于整顿严肃政纲法纪，改变士风民俗，那么今天宫廷与中书省署之间，禁廷密苑之地，怎么会有天下不公正的道理，不正派的人物反而能够以此作为窟穴而盘踞其中呢？
English: As for the rectification of serious political programs, laws and regulations, and the change of scholarly customs and folk customs, then today, between the court and the Chinese Academy of Letters, the place of the Forbidden Palace, how can there be a principle of injustice in the world, and how can dishonest people use it as a hole to entrench themselves?

古文：而陛下目见耳闻，无非不公不正之事，则其所以熏烝销铄，使陛下好善之心不著，疾恶之意不深，其害已有不可胜言者矣。
现代文：因而陛下看到和听到的，无非是些不公不正的事情，那么在这些事情的熏蒸熔化之下，使得陛下好善之心不能显著，痛恨罪恶之心不能深刻，这种危害已到了不能用语言表达的程度了。
English: Therefore, what His Majesty saw and heard was nothing but injustice and injustice, and under the fumigation and melting of these things, His Majesty's good heart could not be pronounced, and his hatred of evil could not be deep. This harm has reached a level that cannot be expressed in words.

古文：及其作奸犯法，则陛下又未能深割私爱，而付诸外廷之议，论以有司之法，是以纪纲不正于上，风俗颓弊于下，其为患之日久矣。
现代文：等到这些不公不正之人作奸犯法之时，陛下又不能深深割去自己的私爱，而把他们交给朝廷讨论，按照有关法律处理，因此纲纪法度不正在上，士风民俗就颓废弊坏于下，他们为害的时间已很久了。
English: By the time these unfair and dishonest people commit treason and break the law, His Majesty can't deeply cut off his own selfish love, but hand them over to the court for discussion and deal with them in accordance with relevant laws. Therefore, the discipline and law are not on the rise, and the customs and folkways are decadent and bad. It has been a long time since they have done harm.

古文：而浙中为尤甚。
现代文：而且浙中地区特别严重。
English: Moreover, the drought in central Zhejiang is particularly severe.

古文：大率习为软美之态、依阿之言，以不分是非不辨曲直为得计，甚者以金珠为脯醢，以契券为诗文，宰相可啖则啖宰相，近习可通则通近习，惟得之求，无复廉耻。
现代文：大都习惯做出柔媚的姿态，说着附合顺从人的话，以不分是非，不辨曲直为最得计，更过分的人把黄金珠宝当作佐酒的肉脯食品，把地契债券作为诗歌文章，宰相可以引诱就引诱宰相，近习亲信可以私通就私通近习亲信，只求得到私利，再也没有廉耻。
English: Most of them are used to making a soft gesture, saying that they are attached to and obedient to people, and that they do not distinguish between right and wrong, and that they do not distinguish between right and wrong is the best strategy. More excessive people use gold jewelry as meat stew food with wine, and land deed bonds as poetry articles. The prime minister can seduce the prime minister, and close relatives can fornicate with close relatives. They only seek self-interest, and there is no longer any shame.

古文：一有刚毅正直、守道循理之士出乎其间，则群讥众排，指为 道学 ，而加以矫激之罪。
现代文：一旦有刚强坚毅正直不阿、恪守正道遵循天理的人在他们中间出现，就群起讥讽合伙排斥，指责为 道学 ，而加上强辞夺理、感情冲动肆意妄说的罪名。
English: As soon as a man of firmness, fortitude, honesty and uprightness, who adheres to the right path and follows the principles of heaven, appears among them, they will ridicule and exclude him, accuse him of being a theologian, and add the charge of using strong words to escape from the truth and speaking rashly out of emotional impulse.

古文：十数年来，以此二字禁锢天下之贤人君子，复如昔时所谓元祐学术者，排摈诋辱，必使无所容其身而后已，此岂治世之事哉？
现代文：十几年来，用这两个字禁锢天下的贤人君子，又好像过去所谓的元学术一样，排斥摈弃诋毁侮辱，一定要使正人君子没有容身之地才算罢休，这难道是大治之世的事情吗？
English: For more than a decade, using these two words to imprison the world's wise men and gentlemen, and, like the so-called former academics in the past, rejecting, discarding, denigrating and insulting, it is necessary to make the righteous gentleman have no place to live before it is considered to cease. Is this really a matter of ruling the world?

古文：至于爱养民力，修明军政，则自虞允文之为相也，尽取版曹岁入窠名之必可指拟者，号为岁终羡余之数，而输之内帑。
现代文： 至于爱惜培养民力，整饬清明军政事务，从虞允文担任宰相以来，把户部每年收入款项中必定可以指望得到的部分全部取走，号称是年终赋税盈余的数目，运入内库。
English: As for cherishing the cultivation of the people's power and rectifying the military and political affairs, since Yu Yunwen assumed the post of prime minister, he has taken all the part of the annual income of the household department that can be expected, claiming that it is the amount of the year-end tax surplus, and shipped it to the internal treasury.

古文：顾以其有名无实、积累挂欠、空载簿籍、不可催理者，拨还版曹，以为内帑之积，将以备他日用兵进取不时之须。
现代文：而把收入中有名无实的、多年积累拖欠的、空登录在账册上的、无法催讨管理的款项，拨还给户部，作为内库财产的积累，将它作为今后用兵进取中原时的随时需要使用的款项。
English: On the other hand, the nominal income, the arrears accumulated over the years, the empty entries in the account books, and the money that could not be recovered and managed, were allocated back to the Household Department as the accumulation of treasury property, and it was used as the money that needed to be used at any time in the future when troops were used to advance into the Central Plains.

古文：然自是以来二十余年，内帑岁入不知几何，而认为私贮，典以私人，宰相不得以式贡均节其出入，版曹不得以簿书勾考其在亡，日销月耗，以奉燕私之费者，盖不知其几何矣，而曷尝闻其能用此钱以易敌人之首，如太祖之言哉。
现代文：然而从那时以来的二十多年间，内库每年收入不知有多少，而且认为是皇帝的私人贮存，主管者也是私人，宰相不能用计入赋税来均衡节制这些款项的收支，户部不能用账册来勾定考查这些款项是在还是不在，天天销月月耗，用来支付宴请私亲费用，真不知道有多少啊，而何曾听说能用这笔钱财来换取敌人的首级，如同太祖说的那样。
English: However, in the more than twenty years since then, the annual income of the treasury is unknown, and it is considered to be the emperor's private storage. The person in charge is also a private person. The prime minister cannot use the tax to balance the income and expenditure of these funds. The household department cannot use the account book to check whether these funds are in or out. It is sold every day, month after month, and used to pay for the banquet and private expenses. I really don't know how much it is, but I have never heard that this money can be used to exchange the heads of the enemy, as the great-grandfather said.

古文：徒使版曹经费阙乏日甚，督促日峻，以至废去祖宗以来破分良法，而必以十分登足为限；以为未足，则又造为比较监司、郡守殿最之法，以诱胁之。
现代文：空使户部费用缺乏一天比一天严重，朝廷的督促一天比一天严峻，以至于废掉祖宗以来州县催征财赋达到九成以上就不再催理，户部也置之不问的好办法，而以征收赋税一定要足足十成作为限度；朝廷认为赋税征收不足，就又建立监司，州县官员以征收赋税多少为考课等差的办法，用来引诱威胁他们。
English: The shortage of household expenses caused by air pollution is becoming more and more serious day by day, and the supervision of the imperial court is becoming more and more severe day by day, so that since the abolition of the ancestors, it is no longer reasonable for the state and county to urge the collection of wealth to reach more than 90%. The household department also ignores the good method, and the collection of tax must be fully 10% as the limit; the imperial court believes that the collection of tax is insufficient, and establishes a supervisor, and the state and county officials use the collection of tax as a test and other methods to lure and threaten them.

古文：于是中外承风，竞为苛急，此民力之所以重困也。
现代文：于是形成朝廷内外奉承这种风气。竞相使用苛刻急迫的办法征收赋税，这是百姓的财力之所以严重困乏的实际原因。
English: As a result, a culture of flattery inside and outside the imperial court was formed, and people competed to use harsh and urgent methods to collect taxes. This is the actual reason why the people's financial resources were severely depleted.

古文：诸将之求进也，必先掊克士卒，以殖私利，然后以此自结于陛下之私人，而蕲以姓名达于陛下之贵将。
现代文： 将领们追求提拔，必然先在士兵身上聚敛钱物，用来增殖自己的财富，然后用这些钱物去结交陛下身边的亲近侍臣，而且祈求他们把自己的姓名告诉陛下身边的地位尊贵的将领。
English: Generals in pursuit of promotion must first accumulate money and goods from soldiers to increase their wealth, and then use these money and goods to make friends with close courtiers around His Majesty, and ask them to tell their names to high-ranking generals around His Majesty.

古文：贵将得其姓名，即以付之军中，使自什伍以上节次保明，称其材武堪任将帅，然后具奏牍而言之陛下之前。
现代文：这些地位尊贵的将领们拿到他们的名单，就把这些名单交给军队，使他们从基层什伍开始逐级得到保举，称赞这些人的才能武艺能够胜任将帅，然后写成奏章在陛下面前夸奖这些人。
English: When these distinguished generals received their lists, they handed them over to the army, promoted them from the lowest to the highest ranks, praised them for their talent in martial arts and their ability as generals, and then wrote a report praising them in front of His Majesty.

古文：陛下但见等级推先，案牍具备，则诚以为公荐而可以得人矣，而岂知其谐价输钱，已若晚唐之债帅哉？
现代文：陛下只见到逐级推举在前，文书档案齐备，就真的认为是大家一致举荐而得到了合适的人选，然而哪里知道这些人是议价交钱，已经如同晚唐的债帅了呢？
English: His Majesty only saw the step-by-step nomination in front of him, the paperwork files were ready, and he really thought that everyone was unanimously recommended and got the right candidate. However, where did he know that these people were bargaining and paying money, and had become like the late Tang Dynasty's debtors?

古文：夫将者，三军之司命，而其选置之方乖刺如此，则彼智勇材略之人，孰肯抑心下首于宦官、宫妾之门，而陛下之所得以为将帅者，皆庸夫走卒，而犹望其修明军政，激劝士卒，以强国势，岂不误哉！
现代文：将帅，是掌握三军命运的人，而选拔将帅的方法背离常道到如此地步，那么那些具有智谋勇敢才艺胆略的人，谁肯抑制内心低头而立于宦官、宫姬的门下，而陛下得到以为可任将帅的人，都是平庸之辈和仅供奔走的小卒，但陛下还希望他们整饬清明军政、激励劝勉士兵，以增加国势，岂不是谬误吗？
English: The commander-in-chief is the person who controls the fate of the three armies, and the method of selecting the commander-in-chief deviates from the norm to such an extent, then those who have the wit, bravery, talent and daring, who would restrain their hearts from bowing down and standing under the eunuch, Miyazaki, and those whom His Majesty thought could be appointed commander-in-chief, are mediocre people and pawns only for running, but His Majesty also hopes that they will rectify the military and political situation and encourage the soldiers to increase the national power, is not it a fallacy?

古文：凡此六事，皆不可缓，而本在于陛下之一心。一心正则六事无不正，一有人心私欲以介乎其间，则虽欲惫精劳力，以求正夫六事者，亦将徒为文具，而天下之事愈至于不可为矣。
现代文： 这六件事，都不可以缓慢处理，而根本仍在于陛下之心，陛下之心光明正大那么这六件事没有不正的，陛下心中一有私欲介入，那么虽想疲劳精力来求得端正这六件事，也将成为没有实际内容的一纸空文，而天下的事情就会越来越不好治理了。 
English: None of these six matters can be dealt with slowly, but they are still in His Majesty's heart. His Majesty's heart is above board, so there is nothing improper about these six matters. As soon as selfishness intervenes in His Majesty's heart, these six matters, even if you want to exhaust your energy to get them right, will become a piece of paper with no actual content, and the affairs of the world will become increasingly difficult to govern.

古文：疏入，夜漏下七刻，上已就寝，亟起秉烛，读之终篇。
现代文：朱熹这道奏疏送入宫中，夜间计时的滴漏铜壶已下七刻了，孝宗皇帝已经上床睡觉，立刻起身拿着蜡烛，把奏章全部读完。
English: Zhu Xi sent this piece of music into the palace. The dripping copper kettle, which kept time at night, had been dripping for seven hours. Emperor Xiaozong had already gone to bed. He immediately got up, took a candle, and finished reading the entire piece.

古文：明日，除主管太一宫，兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：第二天，任命朱熹主管太一宫，兼任崇政殿说书。
English: The next day, Zhu Xi was appointed as the head of the Grand Palace, and also served as the narrator of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：熹力辞，除秘阁修撰，奉外祠。
现代文：朱熹极力推辞，被任命为秘阁修撰，管理一个外地的宫观。
English: Zhu Xi strenuously refused, and was appointed as a secret editor to manage a foreign palace.

古文：光宗即位，再辞职名，仍旧直宝文阁，降诏奖谕。
现代文：光宗即皇帝位，朱熹再次推辞秘阁修撰的职务，仍旧为直宝文阁，皇帝下诏夸奖他。
English: Guangzong is the emperor, Zhu Xi once again resigns the post of secret cabinet, is still a direct treasure cabinet, and the emperor praises him.

古文：居数月，除江东转运副使，以疾辞，改知漳州。
现代文：过了几个月后，任命他为江东转运副使，朱熹以生病为由辞谢，改任为漳州知州。
English: A few months later, he was appointed Deputy Envoy for East River Transportation. Zhu Xi resigned on the grounds of illness and was reappointed as Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：奏除属县无名之赋七百万，减经总制钱四百万。
现代文：他奏请朝廷免除了漳州属县的无名杂税七百万贯，减少经制钱、总制钱四百万贯。
English: He petitioned the court to exempt the county of Bozhou from an unspecified miscellaneous tax of up to 7 million kunas, and to reduce the amount of money minted and the total amount of money minted by 4 million kunas.

古文：以习俗未知礼，采古丧葬嫁娶之仪，揭以示之，命父老解说，以教子弟。
现代文：因当地的风俗习惯不合乎礼仪，他择取古代丧葬嫁娶的礼仪之文，张贴出来告示大家，派当地父老进行解说，以教育他们的子弟。
English: Because the local customs and habits do not conform to the etiquette, he selected the text of the ancient funeral and wedding etiquette, posted it for everyone to see, and sent local parents to explain and educate their children.

古文：土俗崇信释氏，男女聚僧庐为傅经会，女不嫁者为庵舍以居，熹悉禁之。
现代文：当地风俗崇信佛教，男男女女聚集在僧舍之中做传经会，妇女不出嫁的就做庵房居住，朱熹下令禁止这些事。
English: Zhu Xi ordered a ban on the local custom of worshipping Buddhism, in which men and women gathered in monasteries to conduct sermons, while unmarried women lived in hermitages.

古文：常病经界不行之害，会朝论欲行泉、汀、漳三州经界，熹乃访事宜，择人物及方量之法上之。
现代文：他常常忧虑不能推行丈量土地、划定界限的危害，恰逢朝廷议论要在泉、汀、漳三州推行丈量土地、划定界限，于是朱熹调查访问有关事宜，选择承办人员以及制定丈量土地、划定地界的办法上报朝廷。
English: He often worried about the harm of not being able to carry out the measurement of land and delineation of boundaries. It coincided with the discussion of the imperial court to carry out the measurement of land and delineation of boundaries in Quan, Ting and Qiu three states. Therefore, Zhu Xi investigated and visited relevant matters, selected contractors and formulated the method of measuring land and delineating boundaries and reported to the imperial court.

古文：而土居豪右侵渔贫弱者以为不便，沮之。
现代文：而当地豪绅中侵夺贫弱百姓土地的人认为对他们不利，极力加以阻止。
English: However, the local magnates who invaded and seized the land of the poor and weak people considered it to be unfavorable to them and tried their best to stop it.

古文：宰相留正，泉人也，其里党亦多以为不可行。
现代文：宰相留正，泉州人，他的乡里亲友也大都认为不可以推行。
English: Prime Minister Ruzheng, a Quanzhou native, and most of his relatives and friends in his hometown also believe that it cannot be implemented.

古文：布衣吴禹圭上书讼其扰人，诏且需后，有旨先行漳州经界。
现代文：平民吴禹圭上书指责经界法骚扰百姓，皇帝下诏暂缓进行，又降诏令先在漳州实行经界。
English: Wu Yu Gui, a commoner, wrote a letter accusing the meridian law of harassing the common people. The emperor issued an edict to postpone the implementation, and issued an edict to implement the meridian in Zhangzhou first.

古文：明年，以子丧请祠。
现代文：第二年，朱熹因为儿子死亡又请求宫观职务。
English: The following year, Zhu Xi again asked Gongguan for a position because of the death of his son.

古文：时史浩入见，请收天下人望，乃除熹秘阁修撰，主管南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：当时史浩入宫见皇帝，请求招收任用天下有声望的人，于是任命朱熹为秘阁修撰，主管南京鸿庆宫。
English: At that time, Shi Hao went to the palace to see the emperor and requested the recruitment and appointment of world-renowned people, so he appointed Zhu Xi as the secret cabinet editor in charge of Nanjing Hongqing Palace.

古文：熹再辞，诏： 论撰之职，以宠名儒。 乃拜命。
现代文：朱熹一再推辞，皇帝下诏说： 论撰这样的职位，是用来恩宠著名儒士的。 
English: Zhu Xi repeatedly declined, and the emperor issued an edict saying, "The creation of such a post is used to favor famous Confucians.

古文：除荆湖南路转运副使，辞。
现代文：朱熹这才接受了任命。朝廷派他担任荆湖南路转运副使，朱熹推辞。
English: It was only then that Zhu Xi accepted the appointment. The imperial court sent him to serve as deputy envoy for the transportation of Jinghu South Road, but Zhu Xi declined.

古文：漳州经界竟报罢，以言不用自劾。
现代文：漳州正经界法竟然宣告停止推行，朱熹因为自己的意见没有得到采用而自己要求弹劾自己。
English: The Zhangzhou Zhengjing Boundary Law was even declared to have been suspended, and Zhu Xi demanded his own impeachment because his opinions were not adopted.

古文：除知静江府，辞，主管南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：被任命为静江知府，他推辞了，主管南京鸿庆宫。
English: Appointed governor of Jingjiang Province, he resigned to head the Nanjing Hongqing Palace.

古文：未几，差知潭州，力辞。
现代文：没有多久，朝廷派他出任潭州知州，朱熹极力推辞。
English: Not long after, the imperial court appointed him to the post of Tanzhou Zhizhou, but Zhu Xi strenuously refused.

古文：黄裳为嘉王府诩善，自以学不及熹，乞召为宫僚，王府直讲彭龟年亦为大臣言之。
现代文：黄裳担任嘉王府翊善，他认为自己的学问不及朱熹，请求朝廷召朱熹为太子宫中的僚佐，王府直讲彭龟年也向大臣们推荐朱熹。
English: Huang Xiang held the post of Jia Wangfu's aide-de-camp. He thought that his knowledge was not as good as Zhu Xi, so he asked the imperial court to call Zhu Xi as an aide-de-camp in the prince's womb. The imperial court also recommended Zhu Xi to the ministers in the year of the tortoise.

古文：留正曰： 正非不知熹，但其性刚，恐到此不合，反为累耳。 熹方再辞，有旨： 长沙巨屏，得贤为重。 遂拜命。
现代文：留正说 ：我留正不是不知道朱熹，但是他性格刚直，恐怕到太子宫中不合适，反而会因此受到连累的。 朱熹正好再次推辞朝廷的任命，皇帝下圣旨说： 长沙是国家的巨大屏障，能得到贤能的人最为重要。 朱熹于是接受任命。
English: Ruizheng said, "I don't mean to say that I don't know Zhu Xi, but his character is upright, and I'm afraid he's not suitable to be in the prince's womb, but he will be entangled because of it. Zhu Xi just pushed back the appointment of the imperial court again, and the emperor said: Changsha is a huge barrier to the country, and it is most important to be able to get a capable person. Zhu Xi then accepted the appointment.

古文：会洞獠扰属郡，熹遣人谕以祸福，皆降之。
现代文：恰逢洞獠骚扰潭州所属的郡县，朱熹派人把他们这样做的祸福利害告诉他们，洞獠都投降了。
English: Just as the Donglu harassed the counties and counties belonging to Tanzhou, Zhu Xi sent people to tell them the harm and benefit of doing so, and the Donglu all surrendered.

古文：申敕令，严武备，戢奸吏，抑豪民。所至兴学校，明教化，四方学者毕至。
现代文：朱熹申明朝廷敕令法律，加强武备，制止奸吏的不法行为，抑制豪民，所到之处兴办学校，倡导推行教化，四面八方的学者都来到这里。
English: Zhu Xi affirmed that the imperial court should issue decrees and laws, strengthen military preparedness, stop the illegal acts of traitors, suppress the powerful people, build schools everywhere, and advocate the implementation of enlightenment. Scholars from all over the world came here.

古文：宁宗即位，赵汝愚首荐熹及陈傅良，有旨赴行在奏事。
现代文：宁宗即位当皇帝，赵汝愚首先推荐朱熹和陈傅良，皇帝下圣旨要朱熹到临安来奏事。
English: When Emperor Ningzong ascended to the throne, Zhao Rugu first recommended Zhu Xi and Chen Fu Liang, and the emperor ordered Zhu Xi to come to Lin'an to report.

古文：熹行且辞，除焕章阁待制、侍讲，辞，不许。
现代文：朱熹一面上路一面推辞，任命他为焕章阁待制、侍讲，朱熹推辞，皇帝不答应。
English: Zhu Xi refused all the way, appointing him as a member of the Huanzhang Pavilion and an attendant speaker. Zhu Xi refused, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：入对，首言： 乃者，太皇太后躬定大策，陛下寅绍丕图，可谓处之以权，而庶几不失其正。
现代文：朱熹入宫对策朝廷时，首先说 ：从前，太皇太后亲自决定国家的大政方针，陛下恭谨地继承国家大计，可以说是用变通的办法来处理国事，几乎没有偏离过它。
English: When Zhu Rong entered the palace to respond to the imperial court, he first said: In the past, the great empress dowager personally decided the country's general policy, and His Majesty respectfully inherited the national plan. It can be said that he used flexible methods to deal with national affairs and hardly deviated from it.

古文：自顷至今三月矣，或反不能无疑于逆顺名实之际，窃为陛下忧之。
现代文：从那时到现在已有三个月了，有时反而不能对选择逆与顺、名与实的事情抱有疑问，我暗自为陛下忧虑这些事情。
English: It's been three months since then, and sometimes I can't help but have doubts about things like choosing between right and wrong, name and reality, and I secretly worry about these things for Your Majesty.

古文：犹有可诿者，亦曰陛下之心，前日未尝有求位之计，今日未尝忘思亲之怀，此则所以行权而不失其正之根本也。
现代文：如有可做托辞的话，也只能说陛下的心事，即位前的时候不曾有过谋求皇位的计划，今天不曾忘记思念亲人的心情，这就是所以实行变通的办法而没有偏离过正的根本所在。
English: If there is any excuse to be made, it can only be that His Majesty was preoccupied, that is, he had no plan to seek the throne before his accession, and today he did not forget the feeling of missing his relatives. This is why he implemented a flexible approach without deviating from the fundamental principle.

古文：充未尝求位之心，以尽负罪引慝之诚，充未尝忘亲之心，以致温凊定省之礼，而大伦正，大本立矣。 复面辞待制、侍讲，上手札： 卿经术渊源，正资劝讲，次对之职，勿复劳辞，以副朕崇儒重道之意。 遂拜命。
现代文：充满不曾谋取皇位的心事，以竭尽负罪引咎自责的诚意，充满不曾忘记亲人之心，以尽冬温夏凉早晚问安侍奉父母之礼，而父子之间的伦理完全适当了，根本也就确立了。 再次当面向皇帝辞谢待制、侍讲的官职，皇帝亲自写信说： 你研究经术学问有很深的根底，正好借用它来给帝王讲经劝勉、从中答对的职务，不要再苦苦推辞了，以符合我崇尚儒学、尊重大道的心意。 于是朱熹接受了任命。
English: He was filled with the thought of never seeking the imperial throne, with the sincerity of doing his best to bear the guilt and blame himself, with the thought of never forgetting his relatives, with the thought of serving his parents in winter, summer and autumn, and the ethics between father and son were completely appropriate and basically established. Once again, in front of the emperor, he resigned from the official post of attendant and lecturer, and the emperor personally wrote a letter saying, "Your study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of the study of

古文：会赵彦逾按视孝宗山陵，以为土肉浅薄，下有水石。
现代文：恰逢赵彦逾巡视孝宗陵墓，认为那里土层浅薄，下面有水和石头。
English: Coincidentally, Zhao Yan Yue was inspecting the mausoleum of Xiaozong, and thought that the soil layer there was shallow, with water and stones underneath.

古文：孙逢吉覆按，乞别求吉兆。
现代文：孙逢吉重新去巡视，要求另外寻找吉利的地方。
English: Sun Fengji went to inspect again and asked to look for another auspicious place.

古文：有旨集议，台史惮之，议中辍。
现代文：皇帝下圣旨要大家讨论，御史台的官吏们害怕讨论这件事，讨论中途停止。
English: The emperor decreed that everyone should discuss it, but the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office were afraid to discuss the matter, and the discussion stopped in the middle.

古文：熹竟上议状言： 寿皇圣德，衣冠之藏，当博访名山，不宜偏信台史，委之水泉沙砾之中。 不报。
现代文：朱熹却上奏章议论说 ：寿皇有至高至上的德行，埋藏孝宗衣冠的地方，应当广泛地寻访探察有名的山脉，不应该偏信御史台官吏的话，把孝宗的陵墓埋葬在水泉沙砾之中。 没有得到答复。
English: Zhu Xi, however, wrote a comment on the record, saying: Emperor Shou had the highest virtue, the place where Emperor Xiaozong's crown was buried should be extensively searched and famous mountains should be explored, and it should not be biased to believe the words of the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office and bury Emperor Xiaozong's mausoleum in the sand and gravel of water springs.

古文：时论者以为上未还大内，则名体不正而疑议生；金使且来，或有窥伺。有旨修葺旧东宫，为屋三数百间，欲徙居之。
现代文：当时议论的人认为皇帝没有回到皇宫大内，那么名实不正而疑议产生；况且金国的使臣要来，会有所窥察暗访，皇帝下圣旨修缮原来的东宫，修造房屋三百多间，打算搬进去住在里面。
English: At that time, people argued that the emperor did not return to the Imperial Palace, so the name was not true and doubts arose; moreover, the envoys of the Golden State would come, there would be some spying visits, the emperor ordered to repair the original East Palace, built more than three hundred houses, and planned to move in and live in it.

古文：熹奏疏言：
现代文：朱熹上奏疏说：
English: Zhu Xi said in his speech:

古文：此必左右近习倡为此说以误陛下，而欲因以遂其奸心。
现代文： 这一定是陛下左右亲近宠幸的小人倡导编造这一说教来蛊惑、误导陛下，而想通过这件事来实现他们的奸邪用心。
English: This must be the work of villains close to and favored by His Majesty, who fabricated this sermon to deceive and mislead His Majesty, and who wanted to achieve their evil intentions through this matter.

古文：臣恐不惟上帝震怒，灾异数出，正当恐惧修省之时，不当兴此大役，以咈谴告警动之意；亦恐畿甸百姓饥饿流离、阽于死亡之际，或能怨望忿切，以生他变。
现代文：我担心不但上天会震动发怒，灾害怪异多有出现，正当恐惧反省修养自身的时候，不应当兴造这个大工程，以违悖上天谴责时所告诫的惊动众人的用意；我也担心京城地区百姓饥饿交迫流离失所、临近死亡的边缘，或许有人会怨怒忿恨，因而发生其他变故。
English: I am worried that not only will Heaven be shocked and angered, but there will be many strange disasters. When justifying fear, reflecting on and cultivating oneself, one should not build this big project in order to violate Heaven's warning in condemning the intention of alarming everyone. I am also worried that the people in the Beijing area are hungry, displaced, and on the verge of death. Perhaps some people will be angry and resentful, and other changes will occur.

古文：不惟无以感格太上皇帝之心，以致未有进见之期，亦恐寿皇在殡，因山未卜，几筵之奉不容少弛，太皇太后、皇太后皆以尊老之年，茕然在忧苦之中，晨昏之养尤不可阙。
现代文：不仅无法感通太上皇帝的心意，以致没有进见太上皇帝的日期，我也担心孝宗皇帝大殓后没有埋葬，因为孝宗陵墓的位置还没有占卜确定，灵位前的供奉不允许稍有弛缓，太皇太后、皇太后都已到了受人尊敬的高龄，孤独之身陷于忧愁困苦之中，早晚奉养尤其不可缺少。
English: Not only is it impossible to understand the thoughts of the empress dowager, so that we do not know the date of the empress dowager's death, I am also worried that Emperor Xiaozong has not been buried after the great funeral, because the location of the mausoleum of Emperor Xiaozong has not yet been determined by divination, the worship before the spiritual position does not allow a little relaxation, the empress dowager and the empress dowager have reached a respectable old age, the loneliness is trapped in sorrow and hardship, and the morning and evening worship is especially indispensable.

古文：而四方之人，但见陛下亟欲大治宫室，速得成就，一旦翩然委而去之，以就安便，六军万民之心将有扼腕不平者矣。
现代文：然而全国各地的百姓，只见陛下急切地要大量修造朝宫殿堂，迅速建成，一旦轻快自得地丢弃这里而去太子宫殿，迁到安适方便的地方，将士百姓心中将会有愤愤不平的地方。
English: However, the people all over the country saw that His Majesty was eager to build a large number of palaces for the imperial court, and they were quickly completed. If they were to abandon the imperial palace and move to a comfortable and convenient place, there would be resentment in the hearts of the people.

古文：前鉴未远，甚可惧也。
现代文：前车之鉴不远，这是应该感到特别可怕的。
English: The precedent is not far off, and this is something that should feel particularly scary.

古文：又闻太上皇后惧忤太上皇帝圣意，不欲其闻太上之称，又不欲其闻内禅之说，此又虑之过者。
现代文： 我又听说太上皇后恐怕违逆太上皇帝的圣意，不想让他听到太上皇的称呼，又不想让他听到关于内禅的说法，这又思虑过分了。
English: I also heard that the empress dowager was afraid of going against the emperor's wishes, and did not want him to hear the emperor's name, and did not want him to hear about inner meditation, which was too much thought.

古文：殊不知若但如此，而不为宛转方便，则父子之间，上怨怒而下忧恐，将何时而已。
现代文：难道不知道如果是这样做的话，而不是婉转地告知，那么父子之间，上面怨恨愤怒而下面忧愁恐惧，到什么时候才能了结。
English: Don't you know that if you do this, instead of gently telling, then between father and son, resentment and anger above and sorrow and fear below, when will it end?

古文：父子大伦，三纲所系，久而不图，亦将有借其名以造谤生事者，此又臣之所大惧也。
现代文：父子之间这一大的伦理常道，是君臣、父子、夫妻之三纲所关系的大事，长久地拖下去而不去解决它，也可能会有假借父子大伦的道理来制造谣言横生事端的人，这又是我十分恐惧的原因。
English: This great ethical common ground between father and son is an important matter of the relationship between the three levels of monarchs and ministers, father and son, and husband and wife. If it is dragged on for a long time without being resolved, there may be people who falsely use the principle of father and son to create rumors and cause trouble. This is another reason why I am very afraid.

古文：愿陛下明诏大臣，首罢修葺东宫之役，而以其工料回就慈福、重华之间，草创寝殿一二十间，使粗可居。
现代文：我希望陛下明确地诏示大臣，首先停止修缮东宫工程，而把修缮东宫的人工材料弄回慈福宫、重华宫之间，简单地建造可供休息的殿房一二十间，使它大概马马虎虎可以居住就行了。
English: I hope that His Majesty will clearly instruct the Minister to first stop the renovation of the East Palace project, and then return the artificial materials used to repair the East Palace to between the Cifu Palace and the Chonghua Palace, and simply build a dozen or twenty temple rooms for rest, so that it can be lived in roughly.

古文：若夫过宫之计，则臣又愿陛下下诏自责，减省舆卫，入宫之后，暂变服色，如唐肃宗之改服紫袍、执控马前者，以伸负罪引慝之诚，则太上皇帝虽有忿怒之情，亦且霍然消散，而欢意浃洽矣。
现代文：至于搬到皇宫去的打算，我又希望陛下须下诏书责备自己，减省出行时的车马卫队，入宫之后，暂时改变衣服颜色，如同唐肃宗一样改穿紫色的袍子，在马前面拉着缰绳驾驭马匹，以表明负罪引咎的诚意，那么太上皇帝虽然有忿怒的情绪，也会迅速消散，而父子之间的欢情也就融洽地合谐了。
English: As for the plan to move to the Imperial Palace, I also hope that His Majesty will have to issue an edict to reproach himself, reduce the number of car and horse guards when traveling, and after entering the palace, temporarily change the color of his clothes, like Tang Su Zong, change to a purple robe, and pull the reins in front of the horse to drive the horse to show the sincerity of guilt. Then the emperor, although angry, will quickly dissipate, and the joy between father and son will harmonize harmoniously.

古文：至若朝廷之纪纲，则臣又愿陛下深诏左右，勿预朝政。
现代文： 至于像朝廷的纪律规章纲常法度，我又希望陛下下诏深切地告诫自己左右亲近的人，不要干预朝政。
English: As for the disciplinary rules and regulations of the imperial court, I also hope that His Majesty will issue an edict to deeply admonish those close to him not to interfere in the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：其实有勋庸而所得褒赏未惬众论者，亦诏大臣公议其事，稽考令典，厚报其劳。
现代文：其中确实有功劳而所得到的褒奖赏赐未能满足公众议论的人，也诏令大臣们共同讨论他们的功绩，考查奖赏功德的制度，重重地犒赏他们的功劳。
English: He also ordered the ministers to jointly discuss their merits, examine the system of rewarding merit, and reward their merits heavily.

古文：而凡号令之弛张，人才之进退，则一委之二三大臣，使之反覆较量，勿循己见，酌取公论，奏而行之。
现代文：而且凡是号令的弛与张，人才的进用和罢免，就全部把它委托给二、三个大臣，要求他们反复比较衡量，不要固执己见，斟酌采取公论，上奏皇帝而后实行这些决定。
English: Moreover, all decrees, appointments, promotions, and dismissals were entrusted to two or three ministers, who were required to repeatedly compare and measure, not to stick to their own opinions, to consider and adopt public opinions, to report to the emperor, and then to implement these decisions.

古文：有不当者，缴驳论难，择其善者称制临决，则不惟近习不得干预朝权，大臣不得专任己私，而陛下亦得以益明习天下之事，而无所疑于得失之算矣。
现代文：有不恰当的地方，把它交给大家辩驳讨论，选择好的意见由皇帝做最后的决定，那么不仅皇帝左右亲近宠幸的人不能干预朝政大权，大臣们也不能专门任用自己的亲信私党，而陛下也得以更加明白熟悉天下的政事，而对得失的计算也就没有什么疑问了。
English: If there is anything inappropriate, it will be submitted to the public for debate and discussion, and the emperor will make the final decision on the selection of good opinions. Then, not only will the emperor's close and favored people not be able to interfere with the supreme political power of the dynasty, the ministers will not be able to specifically appoint their own cronies and private parties, and His Majesty will be able to be more familiar with the political affairs of the world, and there will be no doubt about the calculation of gains and losses.

古文：若夫山陵之卜，则愿黜台史之说，别求草泽，以营新宫，使寿皇之遗体得安于内，而宗社生灵皆蒙福于外矣。
现代文： 对于像孝宗陵墓的占卜选择，我希望陛下废除御史台官吏的意见，另外寻找野外地区，以营造新的陵墓，使孝宗皇帝的遗体能够安稳地寝居于内，而国家和百姓都蒙受福佑于外了。 
English: As for the divination choice of the mausoleum of Emperor Xiaozong, I hope that His Majesty will abolish the opinions of the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office and look for a field area to build a new mausoleum, so that the remains of Emperor Xiaozong can sleep safely inside, and the country and the people will be blessed outside.

古文：疏入不报，然上亦未有怒熹意也。每以所讲编次成帙以进，上亦开怀容纳。
现代文：朱熹这道奏章进呈之后没有得到答复，然而皇帝也没有生朱熹气的意思，每次给皇帝所讲的内容，朱熹都按次序编成册子进给皇帝，皇帝也以宽大的胸怀容纳了。
English: Zhu Xi did not receive a reply after he submitted this piece of music. However, the emperor did not mean to anger Zhu Xi. Every time Zhu Xi told the emperor the content, Zhu Xi compiled a booklet in order and sent it to the emperor. The emperor also accepted it with a broad mind.

古文：熹又奏勉上进德云： 愿陛下日用之间，以求放心为之本，而于玩经观史，亲近儒学，益用力焉。
现代文：朱熹在上奏劝勉皇帝进一步提高德行时说 ：我希望陛下在使用日常费用的时候，以求得放心作为根本，而在研习经书观看史籍时，与儒学多多亲近，多用一些功夫。
English: Zhu Xi said at the recital to encourage the emperor to further improve his moral conduct: I hope that when using daily expenses, His Majesty will take reassurance as the fundamental, and when studying scriptures and viewing historical books, he will be much closer to Confucianism and use more effort.

古文：数召大臣，切劘治道，群臣进对，亦赐温颜，反覆询访，以求政事之得失，民情之休戚，而又因以察其人才之邪正短长，庶于天下之事各得其理。 熹奏： 礼经敕令，子为父，嫡孙承重为祖父，皆斩衰三年；嫡子当为其父后，不能袭位执丧，则嫡孙继统而代之执丧。
现代文：多召见大臣，切磋治理国家的方法措施，大臣们进殿奏对时，也和颜悦色地对待他们，反复询问探访，用来求出政事的得失，民情的忧乐，进而又根据这些问题来考察官吏的奸邪正直和长处短处，这样也许能使天下之事各自得到合适的处理了。 朱熹上奏说 ：礼经敕令规定，儿子为父亲、嫡孙代父亲为祖父服丧，都要服丧三年；嫡子应当为自己父亲服丧，因故不能执绋服丧，就由嫡孙继承大统而代替父亲执绋服丧。
English: He summoned more ministers to discuss the methods and measures of governing the country. When the ministers came to the palace, he treated them in a friendly manner. He repeatedly inquired about the visits, which were used to find out the gains and losses of political affairs and the sorrow and joy of the people. Then, based on these questions, he examined the treachery and wickedness of officials and their strengths and weaknesses. In this way, he might be able to make the affairs of the world be dealt with appropriately. Zhu Xi said at the report: According to the imperial edict, the son should mourn for his father and the legitimate grandchild's father for his grandfather for three years; the legitimate son should mourn

古文：自汉文短丧，历代因之，天子遂无三年之丧。
现代文：自从汉文帝减少服丧的期限，历代因袭这一期限，于是天子没有三年的丧期。
English: Since Emperor Hanwen reduced the period of mourning, all generations have followed this period, so the heavenly son does not have a three-year mourning period.

古文：为父且然，则嫡孙承重可知。
现代文：为父服丧尚且如此，那嫡孙代父服丧更是可想而知了。
English: In addition to mourning the death of his father, it is also conceivable that his great-grandchildren will also mourn the death of their father.

古文：人纪废坏，三纲不明，千有余年，莫能厘正。
现代文：做人的立身处世之道废弃衰坏，君臣、父子、夫妻三纲不明白，一千多年以来，没能加以考正弄清楚。
English: For more than a thousand years, people have not been able to examine and clarify the three principles of being a prince, a minister, a father, and a husband.

古文：寿皇圣帝至性自天，易月之外，犹执通丧，朝衣朝冠皆用大布，所宜著在方册，为万世法程。
现代文：孝宗皇帝孝亲之情来自上天，一个月之外，还是服执通行的全部丧礼，上朝穿戴的衣服帽子都是用粗布缝制的，这种孝行应该显著地记录在典籍中，成为子孙万代的法则。
English: Emperor Xiaozong's filial piety came from heaven. A month later, he still performed all the funeral rites. The clothes and hats worn by the emperor were all sewn from coarse cloth. This kind of filial piety should be clearly recorded in the classics and become the law for generations to come.

古文：间者，遗诰初颁，太上皇帝偶违康豫，不能躬就丧次。
现代文：近来，孝宗皇帝的遗诰刚刚颁布，太上皇帝偶然感到身体不适，不能亲自参加丧礼。
English: Recently, the widow of Emperor Xiaozong just announced that the empress dowager accidentally felt unwell and could not attend the funeral in person.

古文：陛下以世嫡承大统，则承重之服著在礼律，所宜遵寿皇已行之法。
现代文：陛下以嫡孙继承帝位，那么承受丧祭重任的嫡孙所应服的丧礼已著明在礼律中，所以应该遵循孝宗皇帝已经实行的方法。
English: His Majesty succeeded to the throne with his legitimate grandson, so the funeral rites to be performed by the legitimate grandson who will bear the heavy responsibility of the funeral rites have been clearly defined in the etiquette, so the method already implemented by Emperor Xiaozong should be followed.

古文：一时仓卒，不及详议，遂用漆纱浅黄之服，不惟上违礼律，且使寿皇已行之礼举而复坠，臣窃痛之。
现代文：一时仓促行事，来不及详细讨论，于是用了漆纱浅黄色的衣服，不仅仅对上违背礼仪规定，而且使孝宗皇帝已经实行的丧礼反而重新遭到破坏，我暗暗为此感到痛心。
English: I was secretly saddened by the fact that Emperor Xiaozong's funeral rites, which had already been carried out, were once again disrupted by the hasty decision to use a pale yellow dress made of lacquered yarn. This was not only a violation of etiquette, but also a violation of Emperor Xiaozong's wishes.

古文：然既往之失不及追改，唯有将来启殡发引，礼当复用初丧之服。 
现代文：然而已往的过失来不及追改了，只有将来孝宗皇帝灵柩启行时，丧礼应当重新沿用初丧时的服色。 
English: However, it is too late to correct the mistakes of the past. Only in the future, when the coffin of Emperor Xiaozong is carried out, should the funeral ceremony revert to the dress color of the first funeral.

古文：会孝宗祔庙，议宗庙迭毁之制，孙逢吉、曾三复首请并祧僖、宣二祖，奉太祖居第一室，祫祭则正东向之位。
现代文：恰逢奉孝宗神位入宗庙，讨论宗庙更迭毁弃的制度，孙逢吉、曾三复首先要求并祀僖、宣二祖，把太祖神位安置在太庙第一室，合祭祖先时就把太祖神位放在太庙朝正东的位置。
English: At the same time that Feng Xiaozong's god was enshrined in the ancestral temple and the system of changing and abandoning ancestral temples was being discussed, Sun Fengji and Zeng Sanfu first requested and worshiped Yu and Xuan Erzu, placing the great-grandfather's god in the first room of the temple, and placing the great-grandfather's god in the east of the temple when the ancestors were sacrificed.

古文：有旨集议：僖、顺、翼、宣四祖祧主，宜有所归。
现代文：皇帝降旨让大家讨论：僖祖、顺祖、翼祖、宣祖四位祖先的神主牌位，应该有所归附。
English: The emperor's order is for everyone to discuss: the position of the god of the four ancestors of the ancestor, the ancestor, the ancestor, the ancestor, and the ancestor should be attached.

古文：自太祖皇帝首尊四祖之庙，治平间，议者以世数浸远，请迁僖祖于夹室。
现代文：自从太祖皇帝首先尊崇这四位祖先的神位，治平年间，有人提议因为年代逐渐遥远，请求把僖祖神主牌位搬迁到夹室去。
English: During the Heian period, after the Emperor Taizu first honored these four ancestral deities, there was a request to move the main tablet of the ancestral deities to the storeroom because of its age.

古文：后王安石等奏，僖祖有庙，与稷、契无异，请复其旧。
现代文：后来王安石等人上奏认为，僖祖已有了神庙，与稷、契没有什么不一样，请求恢复它的原来位置。
English: Later, Wang Anshi and others argued that the ancestor had a temple, which was no different from that of Zou and Qi, and requested to restore it to its original position.

古文：时相赵汝愚雅不以复祀僖祖为然，侍从多从其说。
现代文：当时宰相赵汝愚对于恢复祭祀僖祖很不以为然，皇帝的侍从大多支持赵汝愚的意见。
English: At that time, the prime minister Zhao Rugu was very opposed to the resumption of the ancestor worship, and most of the emperor's attendants supported Zhao Rugu's opinion.

古文：吏部尚书郑侨欲且祧宣祖而祔孝宗。
现代文：吏部尚书郑侨认为远祀宣祖，把宣祖神位放进孝宗宗庙进行祭祀。
English: Shangshu Zhengqiao, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, believed that Xuanzu was worshipped far away, and the Xuanzu god was placed in the Xiaozong ancestral temple for worship.

古文：熹以为藏之夹室，则是以祖宗之主下藏于子孙之夹室，神宗复奉以为始祖，已为得礼之正，而合于人心，所谓有举之而莫敢废者乎。
现代文：朱熹认为把宣祖神位藏在夹室，就是把祖宗的神主牌位藏在子孙宗庙的夹室，神宗重新奉祀宣祖为始祖，已是得到正礼，合乎人心，这就是所谓有祭之后而不敢废弃不祭的道理。
English: Zhu Xi thought that hiding the throne of the God of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors.

古文：又拟为《庙制》以辨，以为物岂有无本而生者。
现代文：朱熹又撰写《庙制》一文参加辩论，认为世间万物岂有无本而生长的。
English: Zhu Xi also wrote the article "Temple System" to participate in the debate, believing that everything in the world would grow without a foundation.

古文：庙堂不以闻，即毁撤僖、宣庙室，更创别庙以奉四祖。
现代文：掌管祖庙的人没有转达给皇帝，马上就撤毁了僖祖、宣祖在太庙中的庙室，另外建庙来奉祀四位祖先。
English: The person in charge of the ancestral temple did not convey it to the emperor, and immediately demolished the ancestral temple room in the ancestral temple, and built another temple to worship the four ancestors.

古文：始，宁宗之立，韩侂胄自谓有定策功，居中用事。
现代文：当初，宁宗被立为皇帝，韩胄自认为有主谋尊立的功劳，在朝中当权。
English: At first, Ningzong was made emperor, and Han Zheng considered himself to be the mastermind behind the elevation, and assumed power in the court.

古文：熹忧其害政，数以为言，且约吏部侍郎彭龟年共论之。
现代文：朱熹担心他会危害国政，几次上奏说到这件事，并约吏部侍郎彭龟年共同上奏抨击韩胄。
English: Worried that he would endanger national politics, Zhu Xi mentioned the matter several times in the report, and invited the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Peng Guiren, to jointly criticize Han Xi in the report.

古文：会龟年出护使客，熹乃上疏斥言左右窃柄之失，在讲筵复申言之。
现代文：恰逢彭龟年出朝护送外国使臣，朱熹就一人上疏指出皇帝左右大臣窃取权柄的危害，在讲席上再次申明这个观点。
English: At the time of Peng Jie's visit to the DPRK to escort foreign envoys, Zhu Xi pointed out the harm of emperors and ministers stealing power, and reiterated this view at the lecture.

古文：御批云： 悯卿耆艾，恐难立讲，已除卿宫观。 汝愚袖御笔还上，且谏且拜。
现代文：宁宗御批写道 ：我怜恤你年岁已高，恐怕难以站着给我讲课，已授给你宫观官的职务了。 赵汝愚从衣袖中取出批复交还给宁宗，一面进谏一面叩拜。
English: Ningzong wrote: I pity you for your advanced age, I am afraid it is difficult for you to stand up and give me a lecture, I have given you the post of palace observer. Zhao Rugu took the document from his sleeve and handed it back to Ningzong, bowing as he entered the hall.

古文：内侍王德谦径以御笔付熹，台谏争留，不可。
现代文：内侍王德谦把皇帝的批文直接交给朱熹，台谏官争相要求留下朱熹，宁宗没有同意。
English: The palace attendant Wang Deqian handed the emperor's approval directly to Zhu Xi. The Taiwanese eunuchs clamored to keep Zhu Xi, but Ning Zong did not agree.

古文：楼钥、陈傅良旋封还录黄，修注官刘光祖、邓驲封章交上。
现代文：楼钥、陈傅良随后把写在黄纸上的朱熹任命状封还给宁宗，修注官刘光祖、邓马日密封的奏章交替呈上。
English: The key to the building and Chen Fu Liang then returned Zhu Xi's letter of appointment written on yellow paper to Ning Zong, and the seal of the commentator Liu Guangzu and Deng Ma Rih were alternately presented.

古文：熹行，被命除宝文阁待制，与州郡差遣，辞。
现代文：朱熹离开朝廷时，被任命为宝文阁待制，并给他一个州郡职务，朱熹推辞了。
English: When Zhu Xi left the imperial court, he was appointed to the Baowen Pavilion to wait for the system, and gave him a state and county post. Zhu Xi refused to resign.

古文：寻除知江陵府，辞，仍乞追还新旧职名，诏依旧焕章阁待制，提举南京鸿庆宫。
现代文：不久朝廷任命他知江陵府，朱熹推辞了，并仍然请求朝廷免除他的新旧职务，宁宗下诏让他依旧担任焕章阁待制，提举南京鸿庆宫。
English: Not long after, the imperial court appointed him to Jiangling Prefecture. Zhu Xi refused to accept the appointment, and still requested the imperial court to relieve him of his old and new duties. Ning Zong issued an edict to let him still serve as Huan Zhangge, and to elevate Nanjing Hongqing Palace.

古文：庆元元年初，赵汝愚既相，收召四方知名之士，中外引领望治，熹独惕然以侂胄用事为虑。
现代文：庆元元年初，赵汝愚已经担任宰相，收罗招徕全国各地的知名人士，朝廷内外殷切盼望朝政得到治理，惟独朱熹因恐惧韩胄当权而忧虑。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Zhao Ruwu had already served as prime minister, gathering and recruiting famous people from all over the country. Both inside and outside the imperial court were eagerly looking forward to the governance of the imperial government, but Zhu Xi was worried because of his fear of Han Xuan's power.

古文：既屡为上言，以数以手书启汝愚，当用厚赏酬其劳，勿使得预朝政，有 防微杜渐，谨不可忽 之语。
现代文：既多次对皇上说这件事，又几次写信给赵汝愚，认为应当用厚厚的赏赐来酬谢韩胄尊立宁宗的功劳，不要让他来参预朝政，信中有 及时制止萌芽时期错误的发展，谨慎小心不可疏忽 的话。
English: He repeatedly told the emperor about this, and also wrote to Zhao Rugu several times, saying that he believed that the merits of Han Xizong should be rewarded with a thick reward, and that he should not be allowed to participate in pre-imperial politics. In the letter, he said that it was necessary to stop the development of mistakes in the budding period in a timely manner, and that caution should not be neglected.

古文：汝愚方谓其易制，不以为意。
现代文：赵汝愚当时认为韩胄容易制服，对朱熹的话没有在意。
English: At that time, Zhao Rugu thought that Han Wei was easy to subdue and did not care about Zhu Wei's words.

古文：及是，汝愚亦以诬逐，而朝廷大权悉归侂胄矣。
现代文：到了这时，赵汝愚也因被诬陷遭到驱逐，而朝廷大权归于韩胄了。
English: At this time, Zhao Rugu was also expelled for being framed, and the power of the imperial court was transferred to Han Yu.

古文：熹始以庙议自劾，不许，以疾再乞休致，诏： 辞职谢事，非朕优贤之意，依旧秘阁修撰。 二年，沈继祖为监察御史，诬熹十罪，诏落职罢祠，门人蔡元定亦送道州编管。
现代文：朱熹开始以议论宗庙制度失误而自认为有罪，宁宗不允许，朱熹以有病再次要求去职退休，宁宗下诏说： 辞公职谢绝政事，不是我优待贤才的心意，你还是担任原先的秘阁修撰。 庆元二年，沈继祖任监察御史，诬告朱熹十大罪状，皇帝下诏削去朱熹秘阁修撰的职务并罢免他提举南京鸿庆宫，朱熹的学生蔡元定也被送到道州监管居住。
English: Zhu Xi began to argue about the mistakes of the ancestral temple system and considered himself guilty, but Ning Zong did not allow it. Zhu Xi once again asked to resign and retire due to illness. Ning Zong issued an edict saying: "Resigning from public office and renouncing politics is not my intention to treat the talented, you will still serve as the original secret cabinet secretary." In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Shen Jizoren, the inspector of the history, falsely accused Zhu Xi of ten major crimes. The emperor removed Zhu Xi from the post of secret cabinet secretary and dismissed him from the post of Nanjing Hongqing Palace. Zhu Xi's student Cai Yuanding was also sent

古文：四年，熹以年近七十，申乞致仕，五年，依所请。
现代文：庆元四年，朱熹以自己快满七十岁为理由，申请退休，庆元五年，朝廷同意了他的请求。
English: In the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, Zhu Xi applied for retirement on the grounds that he was nearly seventy years old. In the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, the imperial court agreed to his request.

古文：明年卒，年七十一。
现代文：第二年朱熹逝世，终年七十一岁。
English: Zhu Xi died the following year, at the age of 71.

古文：疾且革，手书属其子在及门人范念德、黄干，拳拳以勉学及修正遗书为言。
现代文：朱熹病情危急时，他亲笔写下遗言嘱托儿子朱在和学生范念德、黄干，恳切地勉励他们努力学习并要他们修订自己遗留下来的书籍。
English: When Zhu Xi's condition was critical, he personally wrote a will to entrust his son Zhu Zai and students Fan Niande and Huang Gan, earnestly encouraging them to study hard and asking them to revise the books they had left behind.

古文：翌日，正坐整衣冠，就枕而逝。
现代文：第二天，朱熹端正地坐着把衣帽穿戴得很整齐，靠着枕头去世了。
English: The next day, Zhu Rong sat upright, put on his cap and gown neatly, and died with his head on the pillow.

古文：熹登第五十年，仕于外者仅九考，立朝才四十日。
现代文：朱熹考中进士以后的五十年中，在外面做官仅有九年，在朝中做官才四十天。
English: In the fifty years since Zhu Xiakou entered the middle school, he has only been an official outside for nine years, and he has only been an official in the government for forty days.

古文：家故贫，少依父友刘子羽，寓建之崇安，后徙建阳之考亭，箪瓢屡空，晏如也。
现代文：他家中一向贫穷，年幼时依靠父亲的朋友刘子羽，寄住在建州的崇安，后来迁居建阳的考亭，虽然穷得经常吃不上饭，却处之安然。
English: His family has always been poor. When he was young, he relied on his father's friend Liu Zi Yu. He stayed in Chong'an, Jianzhou, and later moved to Kaoting, Jianyang. Although he was so poor that he often couldn't afford to eat, he was at peace.

古文：诸生之自远而至者，豆饭藜羹，率与之共。
现代文：学生中有从远方来求学的人，吃的是豆饭藜羹，朱熹都和他们一起吃。
English: Among the students, there are those who come from far away to study. They eat bean rice and bean curd soup, and the cranes eat with them.

古文：往往称贷于人以给用，而非其道义则一介不取也。
现代文：经常向别人借贷来维持家庭开支，然而不符合道义的钱却一文也不取。
English: They often borrow money from others to cover household expenses, but they do not take any money from immoral people.

古文：自熹去国，侂胄势益张。
现代文：自从朱熹离开朝廷，韩胄的势力日益扩张。
English: Since Zhu Xi left the imperial court, Han Xi's power has been expanding.

古文：何澹为中司，首论专门之学，文诈沽名，乞辨真伪。
现代文：何澹任御史中丞，首先抨击所谓精通某一门学术的学问，是用欺骗世人的文章来沽名钓誉，请求辨别这种学问的真伪。
English: First of all, he criticized the so-called mastery of a certain academic discipline, using deceptive articles to make a name and reputation, and asked to distinguish the authenticity of this kind of knowledge.

古文：刘德秀仕长沙，不为张栻之徒所礼，及为谏官，首论留正引伪学之罪。 伪学 之称，盖自此始。
现代文：刘德秀在长沙任官，没有受到张栻学生的礼遇，等到他任谏官，首先弹劾留正引进伪学的罪名。 伪学 这个名称，是从这时开始的。
English: Liu Dexiu served as an official in Changsha and did not receive the courtesy of Zhang Ye's students. When he was appointed as a eunuch, he first impeached Ruzheng for the crime of introducing pseudoscience. The name pseudoscience began at this time.

古文：太常少卿胡纮言： 比年伪学猖獗，图为不轨，望宣谕大臣，权住进拟。 遂召陈贾为兵部侍郎。
现代文：太常太卿胡说 ：近年来伪学十分势盛猖獗，他们的企图和行为越出常规，希望皇上告诉大臣，对他们暂且停止进升迁职。 于是皇帝诏任陈贾任兵部侍郎。
English: In recent years, pseudo-scholars have become rampant, and their attempts and actions have gone beyond the norm. I hope that the emperor will tell the minister to temporarily suspend promotion and transfer for them. Therefore, the emperor appointed Chen Jia as an attendant of the military department.

古文：未几，熹有夺职之命。
现代文：不多久，削夺朱熹职务的命令也就颁布了。
English: Not long after, the order to strip Zhu Xi of his position was also issued.

古文：刘三杰以前御史论熹、汝愚、刘光祖、徐谊之徒，前日之伪党，至此又变而为逆党。
现代文：刘三杰说从前御史所弹劾的朱熹、赵汝愚、刘光祖、徐谊等徒党，前些日子是伪党，这时又变而为逆党。
English: Liu Sanjie said that the clique of Zhu Xi, Zhao Rugu, Liu Guangzu, Xu Yi and others, who were impeached by the former imperial historian, were pseudo-parties a few days ago, and then changed into the opposite party.

古文：即日除三杰右正言。
现代文：当天就任命刘三杰为右正言。
English: On the same day, Liu Sanjie was appointed to the post of U Zheng.

古文：右谏议大夫姚愈论道学权臣结为死党，窥伺神器。
现代文：右谏议大夫姚愈又说道学与有权势的大臣结成顽固的反动集团，暗中窥伺帝位。
English: Yao Yu, a right-wing doctor, also said that scholars and powerful ministers formed a stubborn reactionary group to secretly spy on the imperial throne.

古文：乃命直学士院高文虎草诏谕天下，于是攻伪日急，选人余嘉至上书乞斩熹。
现代文：皇帝就命令直学士院高文虎起草诏书在全国公布，于是攻击伪学的声势一天比一天急剧，选人余哲甚至上书朝廷请求把朱熹斩首。
English: The emperor ordered Gao Wenzhu of the Zhi Academy to draft an edict and publish it throughout the country. As a result, the attack on pseudoscience became more and more intense day by day. The chosen one, Yu Zhe, even petitioned the imperial court to behead Zhu Xi.

古文：方是时，士之绳趋尺步、稍以儒名者，无所容其身。
现代文：在当时的情况下，士大夫中循规蹈矩，在儒学上稍有名声的人，没有地方可以容身。
English: Under the circumstances at that time, there was no place for those who followed the rules and had a little reputation in Confucianism.

古文：从游之士，特立不顾者，屏伏丘壑；依阿巽懦者，更名他师，过门不入，甚至变易衣冠，狎游市肆，以自别其非党。
现代文：他们的学生、有独立见地、不随波逐流的人，被摒弃埋没隐居在山林草丘田野；曲意逢迎、卑顺懦弱的人，改投靠其他老师，经过原来老师的家门也不进去，甚至改变衣帽穿着，在闹市街区店铺中随意游玩，以此来区别自己不是伪党。
English: Their students, those who have independent views and do not follow the tide, are abandoned and buried in seclusion in the mountains, forests, grasslands and fields; those who are pliable, servile and cowardly, change their allegiance to other teachers, do not go through the original teacher's home, and even change their clothes and hats to play freely in the shops in the downtown area, in order to distinguish themselves from being a pseudo-party.

古文：而熹日与诸生讲学不休，或劝以谢遣生徒者，笑而不答。
现代文：然而朱熹给他的学生们讲学一天也没有停止，有人劝朱熹说明原因遣散学生，朱熹笑了笑而没有回答。
English: However, Zhu Xi did not stop lecturing to his students for a single day. When someone urged Zhu Xi to explain the reason for dismissing students, Zhu Xi smiled and did not answer.

古文：有籍田令陈景思者，故相康伯之孙也，与侂胄有姻连，劝侂胄勿为已甚，侂胄意亦渐悔。
现代文：有一位籍田令名叫陈景思，是曾任过宰相的陈康伯的孙子，和韩胄有姻亲关系，劝韩胄不要做得太过分了，韩胄自己也渐渐后悔了。
English: There was a man named Chen Jingsi, who was the grandson of Chen Kangbo, a former prime minister, and was related to Han Zheng by marriage. He advised Han Zheng not to go too far, and Han Zheng himself gradually regretted it.

古文：熹既没，将葬，言者谓：四方伪徒期会，送伪师之葬，会聚之间，非妄谈时人短长，则缪议时政得失，望令守臣约束。
现代文：朱熹已经死了，准备安葬时，有人说：四面八方的伪学门生约定日期聚会，给伪学老师送葬，他们会聚的时候，不是越轨狂妄地谈论当时人的长短，就是错误地议论当时治国政事的得失，希望命令地方官吏对这些人加以约束。
English: When Zhu Xi had already died and was about to be buried, someone said: "Pseudo-scholars from all over the country have agreed to meet on a certain date to attend the funeral of a pseudo-scholar. When they get together, they either go off the rails and talk about the merits and demerits of the people at that time, or they discuss the merits and demerits of the governance of the country at that time, hoping to order local officials to restrain these people.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嘉泰初，学禁稍弛。
现代文：嘉泰初年，禁止道学的法令稍微放松了一些。
English: In the first year of Katai, the law prohibiting Taoism was slightly relaxed.

古文：二年，诏： 朱熹已致仕，除华文阁待制，与致仕恩泽。 后侂胄死，诏赐熹遗表恩泽，谥曰文。
现代文：嘉泰二年，皇帝下诏说 ：朱熹已经退休，追任他为华文阁待制，给与他退休的恩泽待遇。 后来韩胄死了，宁宗下诏赐朱熹遗表恩德惠泽，封谥号曰 文 。
English: In the second year of Jia Tai, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: Zhu Xi has retired, and appointed him as the successor of Hua Wenge, and gave him the graceful treatment of retirement. Later, when Han Xi died, Emperor Ningzong issued an imperial edict giving Zhu Xi the posthumous title of "Ende Huize" (恩德惠澤), and his posthumous name was "Wen."

古文：寻赠中大夫，特赠宝谟阁直学士。
现代文：不久，追赠朱熹为中大夫，特赠为宝谟阁直学士。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xi was posthumously awarded the title of junior doctor, and Zeng Bao Mokou was specially awarded the title of direct bachelor.

古文：理宗宝庆三年，赠太师，追封信国公，改徽国。
现代文：理宗宝庆三年，追赠为太师，追封朱熹为信国公，改封为徽国公。
English: In the third year of Rissong Baoqing, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, posthumously awarded the title of Zhu Xi as the Prince of Xin Province, and changed his title to the Prince of Hui Province.

古文：始，熹少时，慨然有求道之志。
现代文：当初，朱熹年少的时候，慷慨激昂有追求道义、真理的志向。
English: At first, when Zhu Rong was young, he was impassioned and had the ambition to pursue morality and truth.

古文：父松病亟，尝属熹曰： 籍溪胡原仲、白水刘致中、屏山刘彦冲三人，学有渊源，吾所敬畏，吾即死，汝往事之，而惟其言之听。 三人，谓胡宪、刘勉之、刘子翚也。
现代文：父亲朱松病危时，曾经嘱咐朱熹说： 籍溪人胡原仲、白水人刘致中、屏山人刘彦冲这三个人，学问有渊源根底，我一向尊重敬畏他们，我就要死了，你去向他们学习，而且要完全听从他们的话。 这三个人，是指胡宪、刘勉之、刘子踂。
English: When his father Zhu Song was critically ill, he once instructed Zhu Xi to say: "These three people, Hu Yuanzhong, who was born in Hixi, Liu Zhizhong, who was born in Baishui, and Liu Yanchong, who was born in Pingshan, have a profound knowledge of learning. I have always respected and feared them. I am about to die. You should learn from them and fully obey their words. These three people are Hu Xian, Liu Tianzhi, and Liu Zixuan.

古文：故熹之学既博求之经传，复遍交当世有识之士。
现代文：因此，朱熹的学问既是广泛地求索于儒家经典著作，又普遍地结交当代的饱学有识之士。
English: Therefore, Zhu Xi's learning not only extensively searched for Confucian classics, but also generally made friends with contemporary well-educated and insightful people.

古文：延平李侗老矣，尝学于罗从彦，熹归自同安，不远数百里，徒步往从之。
现代文：延平李侗已经老了，曾经跟罗从彦学习，朱熹从同安卸任回来后，不惜远行数百里，徒步前往李侗处从学拜师。
English: Yanping Li Yao is already old. He used to study with Luo Congyan. After Zhu Yao returned from Tongan, he traveled hundreds of miles on foot to Li Yao's place to learn from his teacher.

古文：其为学，大抵穷理以致其知，反躬以践其实，而以居敬为主。
现代文：朱熹做学问，大都是深入研究事物的 理 而取得知识，反过来亲身实践所取得的知识，同时其中以身心修养、磨练的居敬工夫作为加强修养的主体。
English: Zhu Xi's learning is mostly based on in-depth study of the theory of things to acquire knowledge, and in turn, the knowledge gained from personal practice, while taking physical and mental cultivation and honing the time to strengthen cultivation as the main body.

古文：尝谓圣贤道统之传散在方册，圣经之旨不明，而道统之传始晦。
现代文：朱熹曾经说古代圣贤道统的传授散播在典籍之中，由于对圣贤经书的宗旨不清楚，因而道统的传授也开始隐晦不显。
English: Zhu Xi once said that the teachings of the ancient sages and sages were spread among the classics. Since the purpose of the sages and sages was not clear, the teachings of Taoism began to be obscure.

古文：于是竭其精力，以研穷圣贤之经训。
现代文：于是他竭尽一生全部的精力，钻研穷究圣贤经典的意旨和训示原意。
English: So he devoted all his energy to studying the meaning of the sages' classics and the original meaning of the teachings.

古文：所著书有：《易》本义、启蒙、《蓍卦考误》，《诗集传》，《大学中庸》章句、或问、《论语》、《孟子》集注、《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭解》、《楚辞》集注、辨证，《韩文考异》；所编次有：《论孟集议》，《孟子指要》，《中庸辑略》，《孝经刊误》，《小学书》，《通鉴纲目》，《宋名臣言行录》，《家礼》，《近思录》，《河南程氏遗书》，《伊洛渊源录》，皆行于世。
现代文：他所撰著的书有：《易本义》、《启蒙》、《蓍卦考误》，《诗集传》、《大学》、《中庸章句》、《或问》，《论语》、《孟子集注》、《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭解》、《楚辞集注》、《辩证》，《韩文考异》；他所编写辑录的书有：《论孟集议》、《孟子指要》、《中庸辑略》、《孝经刊误》、《小学书》、《通鉴纲目》、《宋名臣言行录》、《家礼》、《近思录》、《河南程氏遗书》、《伊洛渊源录》，这些书都流传于社会。
English: The books he authored include: "Easy to understand the original meaning," "Enlightenment," "Errors in the study of the Qigong," "Collection of Poems," "University," "Chung Yeung chapter," "Question," "Discourse," "Commentary on the Mencius Collection," "Taiji Diagram," "Compendium," "Commentary on the West Ming Dynasty," "Commentary on the Chu Ci Collection," "Dialectic," and "Commentary on the Korean Language"; the books he compiled include: "Discussion on the Mencius Collection," "Suggestions of the Mencius," "Summary of the Chung Yeung

古文：熹没，朝廷以其《大学》、《语》、《孟》、《中庸》训说立于学官。
现代文：朱熹死后，朝廷把他注释的《大学》、《论语》、《孟子》、《中庸》作为学校的官定课本。
English: After Zhu Xi's death, the imperial court made his commentaries on "University," "Analects," "Mencius" and "Middle Way" official textbooks for schools.

古文：又有《仪礼经传通解》未脱稿，亦在学官。
现代文：他还有一部没有脱稿的《仪礼经传通解》，也作为学校的法定课本。
English: He also has an unfinished copy of "The Transmission of Rites and Rituals," which also serves as the school's legal textbook.

古文：平生为文凡一百卷，生徒问答凡八十卷，别录十卷。
现代文：朱熹一生写的共一百卷，他与学生们的问答共有八十卷，还有别录十卷。
English: Zhu Xi wrote a total of 100 volumes in his lifetime, and his Q&A with students totaled 80 volumes, with another 10 volumes not recorded.

古文：理宗绍定末，秘书郎李心传乞以司马光、周敦颐、邵雍、张载、程颢、程颐、朱熹七人列于从祀，不报。
现代文：理宗绍定末年，秘书郎李心传请求把司马光、周敦颐、邵雍、张载、程颢、程颐、朱熹七人列入文庙中一同跟随祭祀，没有得到答复。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Taizong Shao Ding, his secretary, Lang Li Xinchuan, requested that seven people, Sima Guang, Zhou Dunqi, Shao Yong, Zhang Zai, Cheng Yao, Cheng Yao and Zhu Yao, be included in the memorial temple to follow the ritual together, but received no reply.

古文：淳祐元年正月，上视学，手诏以周、张、二程及熹从祀孔子庙。
现代文：淳元年正月，理宗视察太学，亲自写诏书以周敦颐、张载、程颢、程颐以及朱熹一同在孔子庙中跟随祭祀，配享孔庙。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：黄干曰： 道之正统待人而后传，自周以来，任传道之责者不过数人，而能使斯道章章较著者，一二人而止耳。
现代文：黄干说 ：儒道的正统因为待合适的人而得以传承，自从周朝以来，能担任起继承传播儒道的责任人不过几个，然而能使这个道得到发扬光大而显著的，仅一、二个人而已。
English: Huang Gan said, "The orthodoxy of Confucianism can be passed down because of the right people. Since the Zhou Dynasty, there are only a few people who can be responsible for inheriting and spreading Confucianism. However, there are only one or two people who can make this way flourish and become prominent.

古文：由孔子而后，曾子、子思继其微，至孟子而始著。
现代文：从孔子以后，曾子、子思在道统微弱之际继承了它，到了孟子才开始显著。
English: After Confucius, Zeng Zi and Zi Si inherited it at a time when Taoism was weak, and it was not until Mencius that it became prominent.

古文：由孟子而后，周、程、张子继其绝，至熹而始著。 识者以为知言。
现代文：从孟子以后，周敦颐、程颢、程颐、张载在道统断绝的时候继承了它，到了朱熹道统又开始光大显著了。 
English: After Mencius, Zhou, Cheng, Cheng and Zhang inherited Taoism when it was broken, and by the time of Zhu Xi, Taoism began to shine brightly again.

古文：熹子在，绍定中为吏部侍郎。
现代文：有见识学问的人认为这是有独到见解、了解学术的内行话。朱熹的儿子朱在，绍定年间担任吏部侍郎。
English: People with insight and knowledge think that this is the inner jargon of someone who has a unique opinion and understands academia. Zhu Yao's son, Zhu Zai, served as a clerk in Shao Ding's time.

古文：张栻字敬夫，丞相浚子也。
现代文：张栻，字敬夫，丞相张浚的儿子。
English: Zhang Xuan, also known as Jingfu, was the son of the prime minister Zhang Jun.

古文：颖悟夙成，浚爱之，自幼学，所教莫非仁义忠孝之实。
现代文：聪明、有悟性，少年老成，张浚很喜欢他，从幼年始即就学，所教授的都是仁义忠孝之类的东西。
English: Zhang Jun liked him very much. He was smart and insightful. He was a typical teenager. He had been studying since he was very young. He was taught about benevolence, loyalty and filial piety.

古文：长师胡宏，宏一见，即以孔门论仁亲切之旨告之。
现代文：长大后以胡宏为老师，胡宏一见他，就以孔门论仁义的要旨告诉他。
English: When he grew up, he took Hu Hong as his teacher. As soon as Hu Hong saw him, he told him the essence of Confucianism on benevolence and righteousness.

古文：栻退而思，若有得焉，宏称之曰： 圣门有人矣。 栻益自奋厉，以古圣贤自期，作《希颜录》。
现代文：张栻退下思考，好像还有所得，胡宏称赞他说 ：圣贤的门下有传人了。 张栻也因此更加发奋努力，以古代圣贤作为自己奋斗的目标，写作《希颜录》。
English: Zhang Ye stepped back to think, as if he still had something to gain, Hu Hong praised him and said: There are descendants of sages. Zhang Ye also made more strenuous efforts to write "Hiyan Lu" with ancient sages as his goal.

古文：以荫补官，辟宣抚司都督府书写机宜文字，除直密阁，时孝宗新即位，浚起谪籍，开府治戎，参佐皆极一时之选。
现代文：张栻以父亲的荫佑补官，担任宣抚司都督府书写机宜文字，任直秘阁。当时孝宗刚刚即位，张浚从贬谪之地而被起用，开府治理戎事，参佐都是当时一流的人才。
English: In the shadow of his father, Zhang Ye was appointed as a vice-governor, and served as the procurator of the prefectural governor's office. At that time, Xiaozong had just ascended to the throne, Zhang Jun was appointed from the place of abdication, and he was in charge of the prefectural government and military affairs. The councilors were all first-class talents at that time.

古文：栻时以少年，内赞密谋，外参庶务，其所综画，幕府诸人皆自以为不及也。
现代文：张栻因当时年少，内赞密谋军机大事，外参庶务小事，他所做出的综合策划，幕府当中的人都以为不如他。
English: Because Zhang Ye was young at the time, people in the shogunate thought that he was not as good as he was.

古文：间以军事入奏，因进言曰： 陛下上念宗社之仇耻，下闵中原之涂炭，惕然于中，而思有以振之。
现代文：间或以军事入奏，因此而上书进言说： 皇帝陛下上念国家之仇恨、耻辱，下怜悯中原之地生灵涂炭，谨慎小心于其中，而思量可以赈救他们。
English: Occasionally with a military prelude, therefore, the letter went on to say: His Majesty the Emperor is mindful of the hatred and shame of the country, and has compassion for the living beings in the Central Plains, and is cautious and careful in them, and consideration can save them.

古文：臣谓此心之发，即天理之所存也。
现代文：我称此心之发，是即天理之所存的表现。
English: I call this mind-blowing, a manifestation of the very nature of existence.

古文：愿益加省察，而稽古亲贤以自辅，无使其或少息，则今日之功可以必成，而因循之弊可革矣。 孝宗异其言，于是遂定君臣之契。
现代文：希望更好仔细省察，而稽录古代、亲近贤能，用以自辅，不要使他们有稍微的歇息，那么，今天收复中原的大功必然可以成功，而因循守旧的弊端就可以革除。 孝宗对他的话感到惊奇，于是就开始有了君臣之间的默契。
English: It is hoped that they will reflect more carefully, and record the ancient, close and virtuous, and use them to supplement themselves, and not let them have a slight rest. Then, the great achievement of recovering the Central Plains today will certainly be successful, and the drawbacks of adhering to the old ways can be eliminated. Xiaozong was surprised by his words, so there began to be a tacit understanding between the monarchs and ministers.

古文：浚去位，汤思退用事，遂罢兵讲和。
现代文：张浚离职去任以后，汤思退执政用事，于是罢兵讲和。
English: After Zhang Jun left office, Tang Si retired from the government, so he went on strike to make peace.

古文：金人乘间纵兵入淮甸，中外大震，庙堂犹主和议，至敕诸将无得辄称兵。
现代文：金兵乘间隙纵兵入侵淮甸，中外大为震动，朝廷还主张和议，诏令各位将领不得随意称兵备战。
English: The invasion of Huai Tien by the Jin soldiers using the gap between the longitudinal soldiers caused great shock in China and abroad. The imperial court also advocated peace and ordered the generals not to call up soldiers to prepare for war at will.

古文：时浚已没，栻营葬甫毕，即拜疏言： 吾与金人有不共戴天之仇，异时朝廷虽尝兴缟素之师，然旋遣玉帛之使，是以讲和之念未忘于胸中，而至忱恻怛之心无以感格于天人之际，此所以事屡败而功不成也。
现代文：当时，张浚已去世，张栻刚刚埋葬完父亲，就入拜上疏说： 我与金人有不共戴天之仇，原来朝廷虽然曾兴兵复仇，然而又很快派遣携带玉帛的使节，是因为讲和之念没有在胸中忘记，而至诚恻隐的心意没有能够感动于天人之际，这就是事件所以多次失败而功不成的原因。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun had already passed away. Zhang Xuan had just finished burying his father when he bowed to Shang Shu and said, "I and the Jin people share the same deadly enemy. Originally, although the imperial court had raised an army to take revenge, it quickly sent an envoy carrying the jade scepter. This was because the thought of peace had not been forgotten in their hearts, and the thoughts of the most sincere Xuan Yin had not been able to be moved by the occasion of heaven and man. This is the reason why the event failed many times and did not succeed.

古文：今虽重为群邪所误，以蹙国而召寇，然亦安知非天欲以是开圣心哉。
现代文：现在虽然又为各个奸臣所延误，致使国势紧迫而召来寇患，然而怎知这不是天意用此开启圣心呢。
English: Now, although it has been delayed by various treacherous vassals, resulting in the urgency of the national situation and the summoning of bandits, how do we know that this is not God's will to use this to open the Sacred Heart?

古文：谓宜深察此理，使吾胸中了然无纤芥之惑，然后明诏中外，公行赏罚，以快军民之愤，则人心悦，士气充，而敌不难却矣。
现代文：认为应该深察此理，使我胸中了然无纤芥细小的迷惑，然后明白地诏示天下中外，公正地行使赏罚，以使军民的情绪感到快乐，那么人心悦服，士气饱满，而敌兵就不难被打退了。
English: I thought that it was necessary to deeply understand this principle, so that there would be no petty confusion in my heart, and then make it clear to the world that rewards and punishments should be exercised fairly, so that the mood of the military and the people would be happy. Then the people would be pleased, the morale would be full, and the enemy soldiers would not be difficult to beat back.

古文：继今以往，益坚此志，誓不言和，专务自强，虽折不挠，使此心纯一，贯彻上下，则迟以岁月，亦何功之不济哉？ 疏入，不报。
现代文：从今以往，使抗金的意志更加坚强，誓不言和，专务自强，奋发有为，虽折而不挠，使这个心事纯洁如一，贯彻朝廷、国家上下，等待一些时间，有什么功业还不能建立呢？ 
English: From now on, to make the will to resist money stronger, to make peace without words, to be self-reliant, to work hard, to be persistent, to make this matter of the heart pure as one, to implement the imperial court and the country, and to wait for some time, what kind of work can not be established?

古文：久之，刘珙荐于上，除知抚州，未上，改严州。
现代文：上疏以后，没有得到答复。好久以后，张栻被刘珙举荐给皇上，任命为抚州知州，没有上任，改任严州。
English: For a long time, Zhang Ye was recommended to the emperor by Liu Ye and appointed to Fuzhou Zhizhou, but he did not take up the post and was instead appointed to Yanzhou.

古文：时宰相虞允文以恢复自任，然所以求者类非其道，意栻素论当与己合，数遣人致殷勤，栻不答。
现代文：当时宰相虞允文以恢复中原为己任，然而，他所寻求的不与其道相类似，估计张栻平常所论当与自己的意见相合，数次遣人表示殷勤之意，张栻没有答应。
English: At that time, the prime minister, Yu Yunwen, took it upon himself to restore the Central Plains. However, what he was seeking was not similar to his path. He estimated that what Zhang Ye usually discussed should be consistent with his own opinions. He sent people several times to express his interest, but Zhang Ye did not agree.

古文：入奏，首言： 先王所以建事立功无不如志者，以其胸中之诚有以感格天人之心，而与之无间也。
现代文：上书入奏，首先说道： 先王之所以能建事立功没有不符合自己的意愿的，是因为其胸中之诚意能够感动天人之心，而与他们没有什么裂痕。
English: Introducing the book, he first said: The reason why the former king was able to build things and make contributions that did not contradict his own wishes is because the sincerity in his heart can touch the hearts of gods and mortals, and there is no rift with them.

古文：今规画虽劳，而事功不立，陛下诚深察之日用之间，念虑云为之际，亦有私意之发以害吾之诚者乎？
现代文：现在筹划打算虽很劳顿，而事功没有立，陛下诚恳地深察于日用之间，思念考虑于当为之际，难道也有私意之发以害我的诚心诚意的行为吗？
English: Now, although the planning is very laborious, and the work is not established, Your Majesty sincerely contemplates between the daily needs, thinks about the occasion, is there also a selfish act to harm my sincerity?

古文：有则克而去之，使吾中局洞然无所间杂，则见义必精，守义必固，而天人之应将不待求而得矣。
现代文：有这种私意就应当克服而抛弃它，使我的门户洞开没有任何杂念，那么，洞察仁义必然精到，遵守仁义必然坚毅，而天人之应将不需等待求取而自然会得到。
English: If there is such a selfish intention, it should be overcome and abandoned, so that my portal can be opened without any ulterior motives. Then, the insight into benevolence and righteousness must be refined, the observance of benevolence and righteousness must be firm, and the heavenly beings will naturally get what they should get without waiting for it.

古文：夫欲复中原之地，先有以得中原之心，欲得中原之心，先有以得吾民之心。
现代文：想恢复中原之地，先应该取得中原人的欢心，想得到中原人们的欢心，先应该取得我们民众的赞同支持。
English: If we want to restore the Central Plains, we must first win the hearts and minds of the Central Plains people. If we want to win the hearts and minds of the Central Plains people, we must first win the approval and support of our people.

古文：求所以得吾民之心者，岂有他哉？
现代文：寻求取得我们民众的赞同支持的途径，难道有其他的手段吗？
English: Is there any other way to seek the approval and support of our people?

古文：不尽其力，不伤其财而已矣。
现代文：即不取尽民众的人力，不损伤民众的财力而已。
English: That is, without exhausting the people's human resources, without damaging the people's financial resources.

古文：今日之事，固当以明大义、正人心为本。
现代文：今天的事情，本应当以晓明大义，使人心正为根本。
English: Today's events should have been based on the principle of knowing what is right and just.

古文：然其所施有先后，则其缓急不可以不详；所务有名实，则其取舍不可以不审，此又明主所宜深察也。 
现代文：然而其所施行的有先后，那么其缓急就不可以不详细了解；所从事的有名实的区别，那么，其取舍就不可以不审察，这又是贤明的君主所应该仔细地观察的。 
English: However, if there is a sequence to his actions, then his priorities cannot but be understood in detail; if there is a difference between what is famous and what is real, then his choices cannot but be scrutinized, which is something that a wise monarch should carefully observe.

古文：明年，召为吏部侍郎，兼权起居郎侍立官。
现代文：第二年，张栻被召为吏部侍郎，暂兼任起居郎侍立官。
English: In the second year, Zhang Ye was called to be an attendant of the cadre department, temporarily concurrently serving as an attendant of the governor.

古文：时宰方谓敌势衰弱可图，建议遣泛使往责陵寝之故，士大夫有忧其无备而召兵者，辄斥去之。
现代文：当时宰相刚认为敌势正好衰弱可图谋进攻取胜，建议遣泛使前往责难他们有关归还陵寝的罪过，士大夫有忧虑其无备而召致战端兵事又起的人，就斥逐而去。
English: At that time, as soon as the chancellor thought that the enemy's strength was just weak enough to attack and win, he suggested that the envoy should be sent to accuse them of the crime of returning the tomb, and the officers were worried about their unpreparedness and called those who caused the resumption of hostilities at the front, and they were driven away.

古文：栻见上，上曰： 卿知敌国事乎？ 栻对曰： 不知也。 上曰： 金国饥馑连年，盗贼四起。 栻曰： 金人之事，臣虽不知，境中之事，则知之矣。 上曰： 何也？ 栻曰： 臣切见比年诸道多水旱，民贫日甚，而国家兵弱财匮，官吏诞谩，不足倚赖。
现代文：皇上说 ：为什么？ 张栻说 ：我亲眼看见近年以来各地有很多水旱灾荒，民众贫穷日甚，而国家兵力弱小财力匮乏，官吏荒唐、轻漫，不能够依靠。
English: The emperor said, "Why?" Zhang Ye said, "I have seen with my own eyes that in recent years there have been many floods and droughts in various regions, the people are becoming increasingly poor, the national military is weak and lacks financial resources, and the officials are absurd and frivolous, and cannot be relied upon."

古文：正使彼实可图，臣惧我之未足以图彼也。 上为默然久之。
现代文：即使是金国他们的确可以图谋攻取，我担心我们不具有足够图取他们的实力。 孝宗听后，默然不做声许久。
English: Even if they do manage to take over China, I'm afraid we don't have enough strength to take them on. After listening to this, Xiaozong was silent for a long time.

古文：栻因出所奏疏读之曰： 臣窃谓陵寝隔绝，诚臣子不忍言之至痛，然今未能奉辞以讨之，又不能正名以绝之，乃欲卑祠厚礼以求于彼，则于大义已为未尽。而异论者犹以为忧，则其浅陋畏怯，固益甚矣。
现代文：张栻因而拿出所准备的奏疏读着说： 我认为陵寝隔绝，的确是我不忍心所谈论的切肤至痛，然而现在没有能够奉辞令以讨伐他们的能力，又不能名正言顺地去断绝他们的要求，还想以谦卑的词汇、优厚的礼仪去求于他们，则于大义已为未尽，而有不同意见的人还以为忧虑，则其浅陋畏缩怯懦，本来就很厉害了。
English: Zhang Xuan therefore took out the prepared notes and read: "I think that the isolation of the tomb is indeed the most painful thing that I can't bear to talk about. However, if you don't have the ability to fight them with words, and you can't break their demands, and you still want to ask them with humble words and graceful etiquette, then the great justice has not been exhausted, and people who have different opinions still think that anxiety is shallow and cowardly, which is very powerful.

古文：然臣窃揆其心意，或者亦有以见我未有必胜之形，而不能不忧也欤。
现代文：然而，我揣测他们的心意，或者也有以为我们并没有必胜的条件，而不能不有所顾虑。
English: However, I can't help but have misgivings when I speculate about their intentions, or think that we don't have the conditions to win.

古文：盖必胜之形，当在于早正素定之时，而不在于两阵决机之日。 上为竦听改容。
现代文：大概必胜的形状，当在于平常早已显示出来，而不在于两大军队阵营决战的这一天。 皇上听着惊心而为此改容。
English: The shape of a probable victory should have been revealed long ago, not on the day of the decisive battle between the two army camps. The emperor was shocked to hear this and changed his appearance.

古文：栻复读曰： 今日但当下哀痛之诏，明复仇之义，显绝金人，不与通使。
现代文：张栻又读着奏疏说 ：现在只是应当下哀痛的诏令，阐明复仇的道义，明确地同金人断绝往来，不与他们互通使者。
English: Zhang Ye also read the transcript and said, "Now it is only necessary to issue a sorrowful edict, clarify the morality of revenge, clearly cut off contacts with the Jin people, and not exchange envoys with them."

古文：然后修德立政，用贤养民，选将帅，练甲兵，通内修外攘、进战退守以为一事，且必治其实而不为虚文，则必胜之形隐然可见，虽有浅陋畏怯之人，亦且奋跃而争先矣。 上为叹息褒谕，以为前始未闻此论也。
现代文：然后修养德业，建立贤明的政治，使用贤能之才，抚养民众，选任将帅，训练军队，联系内修外攘、进战退守以为一宗事情，又一定治理其实际的事务而不搞一些虚假的形式，那么，必胜的形势就显然可以看见，虽有浅陋，畏缩怯懦的人，也能够发奋努力而争先了。 孝宗皇帝为此叹息并褒扬他，认为从前从未听过这样的议论。
English: Then, cultivating virtue, establishing a wise politics, using the talent of virtue, raising the people, electing generals and marshals, training the army, linking the internal with the external, going to war and retreating as one thing, and certainly governing its actual affairs without engaging in some false forms, then, the situation of victory can be clearly seen, although there are shallow, timid and cowardly people, they can also make strenuous efforts and compete for the first place. Emperor Xiaozong sighed and praised him for this, thinking that he had never heard such a discussion before.

古文：其后因赐对反复前说，上益嘉叹，面谕： 当以卿为讲官，冀时得晤语也。 
现代文：这以后赐他上朝入对，而张栻反复讲明前面的这些意见，皇上因此更加奖勉他，并当面谕旨告他 ：我以你担任侍讲，希望时常使我听到这些开导启迪的意见。 
English: After this, he was allowed to go to the imperial court for an audience, and Zhang Ye repeatedly clarified the above-mentioned opinions. The emperor therefore gave him even more praise and encouragement, and told him in person: I am using you as an assistant speaker, and I hope to hear these enlightening and inspiring opinions from time to time.

古文：会史正志为发运使，名为均输，实尽夺州县财赋，远近骚然，士大夫争言其害，栻亦以为言。
现代文：正逢史正志担任发运使，名义上为均输，实际上是夺尽州县地方的财赋，远近为此骚动不已，士大夫们争相谈论他的祸害，张栻也这样说。
English: At the time when Shi Zhengzhi served as the dispatching envoy, nominally he was an equal loser, but in fact he took all the financial resources of the state and county. There was no end to the commotion about this, from near and far. The scholars and magistrates were competing to talk about his scourge, and Zhang Ye also said so.

古文：上曰： 正志谓但取之诸郡，非取之于民也。 栻曰： 今日州郡财赋大抵无余，若取之不已，而经用有阙，不过巧为名色以取之于民耳。 上矍然曰： 如卿之言，是朕假手于发运使以病吾民也。 旋阅其实，果如栻言，即诏罢之。
现代文：孝宗皇帝说： 史正志是取之于各郡，并不是取之于民。 张栻回答说： 现在州郡地方的财赋大致都没有结余，如果取之不断，而地方经费缺乏，不过巧为名目以取之于老百姓了。 皇上惊诧地说： 按照你这句话，是我假借发运使来造成了民众的祸害。 马上令人检查其实际情况，果然像张栻所说的，即诏令罢免了。
English: Emperor Xiaozong said, "Historical achievements are made by counties, not by the people." Zhang Ye replied, "Nowadays, the financial resources of counties, prefectures and localities have almost no surplus. If they are constantly taken, and local funds are lacking, it is just a clever name to take them from the people." The emperor said in surprise, "According to your words, it was I who caused the disaster of the people by falsely sending envoys. I immediately ordered a check of the actual situation, and indeed, as Zhang Ye said, the edict was revoked."

古文：兼侍讲，除左司员外郎。
现代文：张栻兼侍讲，任命他为左司员外郎。
English: Zhang Xuan, who was also the chancellor, appointed him as the left secretary, Wairo.

古文：讲《诗葛覃》，进说： 治生于敬畏，乱起于骄淫。
现代文：讲论《诗经？葛覃》，进言说 ：治理生灵在于敬畏，祸乱起于骄奢淫逸。
English: In a lecture on "The Book of Poetry? Ge Ying," he said: "The governance of living beings lies in awe, and evil arises from pride and lust.

古文：使为国者每念稼穑之劳，而其后妃不忘织纴之事，则心不存者寡矣。 因上陈祖宗自家刑国之懿，下斥今日兴利扰民之害。
现代文：使治理国家的人常念叨稼穑的艰辛，而其后妃不忘纺织的事情，那么，心中不存敬畏的人是很少的。 因此向上陈述祖宗治家理国的美德，对下斥责今日兴利扰民的祸害。
English: So that those who govern the country often talk about the hardships of making money, and their empresses do not forget the things of weaving, then there are few people who do not have awe in their hearts.Therefore, we will present the virtues of the ancestors to govern the country, and rebuke the scourge of today's interest to disturb the people.

古文：上叹曰： 此王安石所谓 人言不足恤 者，所以为误国也。 
现代文：孝宗叹息说： 这就是王安石所谓 人言不足害怕 的说法，所以延误了国家。 
English: Xiaozong sighed and said, "This is what Wang Anshi meant when he said that he was afraid of not having enough people's support, so he delayed the country."

古文：知阁门事张说除签书枢密院事，栻夜草疏极谏其不可，旦诣朝堂，质责宰相虞允文曰： 宦官执政，自京、黼始，近习执政，自相公始。 允文惭愤不堪。
现代文：知阁门事张说任命为签书枢密院事，张栻连夜草拟奏疏特别劝谏不可这样做，早晨到宫廷上朝时，他指责、质问宰相虞允文说 ：宦官执政掌权，从蔡京、王黼任相开始，皇上宠幸的人执掌政权，从你相公开始。 虞允文因此惭愧、愤懑不堪。
English: In the morning, when he arrived at the imperial court, he criticized and questioned the prime minister, Yu Yunwen, saying, "The eunuchs in power have been in power since Cai Jing and Wang Xuan were appointed as ministers, and the people favored by the emperor have been in power since your father-in-law. As a result, Yu Yunwen felt ashamed and angry.

古文：栻复奏： 文武诚不可偏，然今欲右武以均二柄，而所用乃得如此之人，非惟不足以服文吏之心，正恐反激武臣之怒。 孝宗感悟，命得中寝。
现代文：张栻又奏道： 文武臣僚的确不可偏废，现在想提高武官的地位以平衡文武二府机构的势力，而所用的都是这样的人，不仅不足以使文官们的心境感到服气，反而正好还会激怒武将大臣。 孝宗因此而感悟，诏命前令停止执行。
English: Zhang Ye also said, "Civil and military ministers should not be neglected. Now they want to raise the status of military attachés to balance the power of the military and civilian institutions of the two prefectures, but the people they use are not enough to make the civil officials feel convinced, but on the contrary, they will just anger the military commander minister. Takamune was impressed by this and stopped the execution of the pre-decree order.

古文：然宰相实阴附说，明年出栻知袁州，申说前命，中外喧哗，说竟以谪死。
现代文：然而宰相实际上暗中附和张说，第二年令张栻出任袁州知州，重申张说从前的任命，朝廷内外为此喧哗不已，张说最终因贬谪而死。
English: However, the chancellor actually secretly agreed with Zhang that he would appoint Zhang Ye to Yuanzhou Zhizhou the following year, reiterating Zhang's previous appointment. There was an uproar inside and outside the imperial court, and Zhang eventually died from the disparagement.

古文：栻在朝未期岁，而召对至六七，所言大抵皆修身务学，畏天恤民，抑侥幸，屏谗谀，于是宰相益惮之，而近习尤不悦。
现代文：张栻在朝廷没有一年，而应召入对有六七次，所说的大抵都是修身养性，务学习业，畏天恤民，抑制侥幸，屏绝谗谀，于是宰相更加害怕他，而宠幸之臣也特别不高兴。
English: Zhang Ye had been at the court for less than a year, but he had been summoned to the court six or seven times. Most of what he said was about self-cultivation, studying, fearing heaven and pitying the people, curbing luck, and warding off misfortune. So the prime minister was even more afraid of him, and the favored vassal was particularly unhappy.

古文：退而家居累年，孝宗念之，诏除旧职，知静江府，经略安抚广南西路。
现代文：辞官后居家几年，孝宗念叨他，诏令他担任原来的职务，任静江府知府，经略安抚广南西路。
English: After leaving office, he stayed at home for several years. Xiaozong nagged him and ordered him to take up his original position as governor of Jingjiang Prefecture, and to pacify Guangnan West Road.

古文：所部荒残多盗，栻至，简州兵，汰冗补阙，籍诸州黥卒伉健者为效用，日习月按，申严保伍法。
现代文：所管辖的地区荒凉，残破且多盗贼，张栻到任后，精简州兵，裁汰冗弱，拾补阙遗，选择各州罪犯士兵中的健康者以为效用，日习月练，申令严格保伍法。
English: The area under his jurisdiction was desolate, dilapidated, and full of thieves. After Zhang Jun took office, he streamlined the National Guard, eliminated the redundant soldiers, picked up the dead soldiers, selected the healthy soldiers from the criminal soldiers in each state, trained them day by day, and ordered a strict conscription law.

古文：谕溪峒酋豪弭怨睦邻，毋相杀掠，于是群蛮帖服。
现代文：告谕溪峒酋豪停止结怨，要友睦邻里，不要互相残杀、掳掠，于是群蛮服帖。
English: He told the Khe San chiefs to stop grumbling, to be good neighbors, not to kill and plunder each other, and the group of barbarians obeyed.

古文：朝廷买马横山，岁久弊滋，边氓告病，而马不时至。
现代文：朝廷在横山买马，日长岁久，弊端日多，边疆的百姓受不了，而马不能按时买到。
English: The imperial court buys horses in Hengshan, and the days are getting longer and longer, the drawbacks are more and more, the people of the frontier can't stand it, and the horses can't be bought on time.

古文：栻究其利病六十余条，奏革之，诸蛮感悦，争以善马至。
现代文：张栻调查总结其弊端六十多条，奏请革除，各蛮部百姓感到喜悦，争相进贡好马给朝廷。
English: Zhang Ye investigated and summarized more than sixty of its drawbacks, and requested that they be eliminated. The barbarian people were delighted and scrambled to bring good horses to the imperial court.

古文：孝宗闻栻治行，诏特进秩，直宝文阁，因任。
现代文：孝宗听说张栻治政有功，特诏令他晋升官职，直宝文阁，因袭而任。
English: Xiaozong heard that Zhang Rong had made a great contribution to politics, and ordered him to be promoted to an official post, Zhiobao Pavilion, as a result of the attack.

古文：寻除秘阁修撰、荆湖北路转运副使。
现代文：不久，任命为秘阁修撰、荆湖北路转运副使。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Hikou Shuxin and Jinghu North Road Transportation.

古文：改知江陵府，安抚本路。
现代文：改知江陵府，安抚本路。
English: Change the name to Gangneung Prefecture to pacify this road.

古文：一日去贪吏十四人。
现代文：一天就免去了贪官污吏十四人。
English: Fourteen corrupt officials were pardoned in one day.

古文：湖北多盗，府县往往纵释以病良民，栻首劾大吏之纵贼者，捕斩奸民之舍贼者，令其党得相捕告以除罪，群盗皆遁去。
现代文：湖北路境内多盗，府州县官吏往往捉拿后释放以放纵他们祸害良民百姓，张栻首先弹劾官职高的人放纵盗贼之罪，捕捉斩杀奸民中为盗贼提供住处的人，令其党羽相互捕告以减免他们的罪行，群盗于是都逃跑了。
English: There were many thieves in the territory of Hubei Road. Fuzhou County officials often caught and released them to indulge them in harming the good people. Zhang Xuan first impeached high-ranking officials for indulging the crime of thieves, captured and killed people who provided thieves with a place to live, and ordered their party members to sue each other to relieve them of their crimes. The group of thieves then all fled.

古文：郡濒边屯，主将与帅守每不相下，栻以礼遇诸将，得其欢心，又加恤士伍，勉以忠义，队长有功辄补官，士咸感奋。
现代文：本郡濒临边屯之地，主将与帅守各不相让，张栻以礼相待各位将领，得到他们的欢心，又加恤士兵行伍，勉励忠义之士，队长有功就补官，士卒都感激奋发。
English: This county is on the edge of the border town, and the master and the commander are not to be conceded. Zhang Ye treated the generals with courtesy and won their favor. He also gave the soldiers a bonus for marching, encouraged the loyal men, and the captain had the merit to supplement the officers. The soldiers were grateful and worked hard.

古文：并淮奸民出塞为盗者，捕得数人，有北方亡奴亦在盗中。
现代文：并有淮南奸民出塞做盗贼的，捕捉到了几个人，有北方逃亡的奴隶也杂在其中为盗。
English: In addition, several Huainan villains were caught as thieves, and slaves who had escaped from the north were also involved in the theft.

古文：栻曰： 朝廷未能正名讨敌，无使疆场之事其曲在我。 命斩之以徇于境，而缚其亡奴归之。
现代文：张栻说： 朝廷未能正名讨伐敌人，不要使疆场之事的错误在我们一方。 命令斩杀他们以传示于边境，而捆缚北方逃亡之奴以放他们回去。
English: Zhang Ye said, "The imperial court has not been able to fight the enemy justly, do not make the mistake of the battlefield on our side, order them to be killed to be sent to the border, and tie up the slaves who fled to the north to let them go back.

古文：北人叹曰： 南朝有人。 
现代文：北方人为此感叹道 ：南朝有人才。 
English: The northerners lamented: "The Southern Dynasty had talent."

古文：信阳守刘大辩怙势希赏，广招流民，而夺见户熟田以与之。
现代文：信阳军知军刘大辩凭借势力，希望得到赏赐，广招流民，而掠夺所辖区域旧户居民的熟田给予流民。
English: Liu Dayan, the commander of the Xinyang army, recruited a large number of refugees by virtue of his power, hoping to be rewarded, and plundered the fields of the old residents of the area under his jurisdiction to give them to the refugees.

古文：栻劾大辨诈谖，所招流民不满百，而虚增其数十倍，请论其罪，不报。
现代文：张栻弹劾刘大辩的欺诈行为，说他所招流民实不满百，而向上虚报其数字增加了几十倍，请求论罚其罪，没有回答。
English: Zhang Hao impeached Liu Dayan for fraud, saying that he had attracted less than one hundred people, while falsely reporting that his number had increased by dozens of times. He did not respond to the request to punish his crime.

古文：章累上，大辩易他郡，栻自以不得其职求去，诏以右文殿修撰提举武夷山冲佑观。
现代文：多次上奏章论述此事，刘大辩改易它郡任官，张栻自认为不能尽到自己的职责而请求离职而去，诏令以右文殿修撰提举武夷山冲佑观。
English: The matter was discussed many times in the imperial rescript. Liu Daibong changed his county post to Liu Daibong, Zhang Xuan thought that he could not fulfill his duties and asked to leave the post, and Wuyishan Chongyou Confucianism was promoted by the imperial edict to the right of the palace.

古文：病且死，犹手疏劝上亲君子远小人，信任防一己之偏，好恶公天下之理。
现代文：患病而死，还手书奏疏劝皇上亲近君子，远去小人，相信、任用防止一己之偏，好恶以天下之公理为标准。
English: Suffering from illness and dying, he wrote a letter to the emperor, urging the emperor to be close to the gentleman and far away from the villain, believing that the appointment was to prevent one's own bias, and the likes and dislikes of the world's justice as the standard.

古文：天下传诵之。
现代文：天下的人都相互传扬赞颂他。
English: All the people of the world proclaim his praise to one another.

古文：栻有公辅之望，卒时年四十有八。
现代文：张栻有公辅之望，死时年龄是四十八岁。
English: Zhang Qian had the hope of becoming a public official. He was 48 years old at the time of his death.

古文：孝宗闻之，深为嗟悼，四方贤士大夫往往出涕相吊，而江陵、静江之民尤哭之哀。
现代文：孝宗听说以后，深情地为他嗟叹悼念，四方贤士大夫往往出涕痛哭相吊，而江陵、静江两府境内的民众为之哭悼显得特别悲痛。
English: After hearing the news, Xiaozong sighed for him with deep emotion. The sages and doctors from all over the country often cried together, and the people in Gangneung and Jingjiang were particularly sad.

古文：嘉定间，赐谥曰宣。
现代文：嘉定年间，宁宗赐谥号曰 宣 。
English: During the Jiading period, Ningzong bestowed the name "Xuan."

古文：淳祐初，诏从祀孔子庙。
现代文：淳初年，理宗诏令从祀孔子庙堂。
English: In the first year of A.D., the Confucius Temple was abolished by the edict of Emperor Ritsuzo.

古文：栻为人表里洞然，勇于从义，无毫发滞吝。
现代文：张栻为人直率，表里如一，勇于崇尚道义，没有毫发滞塞、吝惜。
English: Zhang Qian is a straightforward person, consistent in appearance, brave in advocating morality, and has no stagnation or stinginess.

古文：每进对，必自盟于心，不可以人主意悦辄有所随顺。
现代文：每进对之时，自己一定事先在心中拿定主意，不可能因为皇上的喜好或不悦而一味顺从他。
English: Whenever he made a decision, he must have made up his mind in advance. It is impossible to obey the emperor because of his preferences or displeasure.

古文：孝宗尝言伏节死义之臣难得，栻对： 当于犯颜敢谏中求之。
现代文：宋孝宗曾经说殉节死义的大臣很难得，张栻对答说： 皇上应当从能够犯颜敢谏的大臣中寻找。
English: Song Xiaozong once said that it was difficult to find a minister who was willing to die for the cause, to which Zhang Ye replied: The emperor should look for a minister who is willing to commit crimes.

古文：若平时不能犯颜敢谏，他日何望其伏节死义？ 孝宗又言难得办事之臣，栻对： 陛下当求晓事之臣，不当求办事之臣。
现代文：如果平时不能犯颜敢谏，它日怎么能指望他为节义而死呢？ 孝宗又说难以得到善于办事的大臣，张栻回答说： 陛下应当寻求通晓事理的大臣，而不应当寻求办事的大臣。
English: If he could not dare to offend in ordinary times, how could he be expected to die for righteousness? Xiaozong also said that it was difficult to get a minister who was good at doing things, Zhang Ye replied: Your Majesty should seek a minister who knows the facts, but should not seek a minister who does things.

古文：若但求办事之臣，则他日败陛下事者，未必非此人也。 栻自言：前后奏对忤上旨虽多，而上每念之，未尝加怒者，所谓可以理夺云尔。
现代文：假若只是搜求办事的大臣，那么，它日败坏陛下的事情的人，未必不是这样的人。 张栻自己曾说：前后奏疏入对违背皇上的旨意的时候虽然很多，而皇上每次念叨时，却没有加怒于他，所谓可以理定夺就是这个意思。
English: If it was just a minister looking for a job, then it would not necessarily be the same person who corrupted the affairs of His Majesty. Zhang Ye himself once said: Although there were many times when he violated the emperor's will, the emperor did not get angry with him every time he said it. This is the meaning of the so-called reasonable and decisive.

古文：其远小人尤严。
现代文：张栻远离小人尤为严格。
English: Zhang Ye is particularly strict about staying away from villains.

古文：为都司日，肩舆出，遇曾觌，觌举手欲揖，栻急掩其窗棂，觌惭，手不得下。
现代文：任职都司的时候，有一天，坐小轿出门，路遇曾觌，曾觌举手想作揖与他打招呼，张栻急忙掩盖上窗帘，曾觌惭愧不堪，手都不好放下来。
English: One day, when he was in charge of the capital, he was travelling in a sedan when he met Zeng Yao. Zeng Yao raised his hand to greet him, but Zhang Yao quickly covered it with a curtain. Zeng Yao was so ashamed that he couldn't put his hand down.

古文：所至郡，暇日召诸生告语。
现代文：所至州郡之地，他有空暇即召集各位学生传授学业道义。
English: Whenever he comes to a state or county, he convenes students in his spare time to teach them about academic ethics.

古文：民以事至庭，必随事开晓。
现代文：民众有事到官署，他一定随事开导处置。
English: If the public comes to the government office with a problem, he is sure to help them solve it.

古文：具为条教，大抵以正礼俗、明伦纪为先。
现代文：具体为之条教，大致都取端正礼俗，明确伦纪为先务。
English: The specific teachings are generally based on correct etiquette and etiquette, with clear ethics as the first priority.

古文：斥异端，毁淫祠，而崇社稷山川古先圣贤之祀，旧典所遗，亦以义起也。
现代文：指斥异端，毁坏淫祠，而崇尚国家社稷高山大川、古代先前圣贤的祭祀，旧典所遗留下来的，也以义起用。
English: Rejecting heresy, destroying the temple of fornication, and advocating the national shrine, the Takayama River, and the sacrifices of the saints in ancient times, the relics of the old temple were also used for righteousness.

古文：栻闻道甚早，朱熹尝言： 己之学乃铢积寸累而成，如敬夫，则于大本卓然先有见者也。 所著《论语孟子说》、《太极图说》、《洙泗言仁》、《诸葛忠武侯传》、《经世纪年》，皆行于世。
现代文：张栻接受道义很早，朱熹曾经说： 我自己的学问是一点一滴地积累而成的，至如张敬夫，则是对大的根本的是非问题早有卓然而明确的见解，有如事先有所见闻。 张栻所写的著作有《论语孟子说》、《太极图说》、《洙泗言仁》、《诸葛忠武侯传》、《经世纪年》，都流行于社会。
English: Zhang Rong accepted morality very early. Zhu Rong once said: My own learning is accumulated bit by bit. Like Zhang Jingfu, Zhang Rong had a clear and clear opinion on the fundamental right and wrong issues, as if he had seen it before. Zhang Rong's works include "The Analects of Confucius," "The Analects of Confucius," "The Analects of Confucius," "The Analects of Confucius," "The Analects of Zhuge Zhongwu," and "The Analects of Confucius," all of which are popular in society.

古文：栻之言曰： 学莫先于义利之辨。
现代文：张栻曾经说： 学业没有什么比先了解义利之辨重要。
English: Zhang Ye once said: There is nothing more important than learning about the difference between righteousness and benefit.

古文：义者，本心之当为，非有为而为也。
现代文：义，是本心所当实践的，不是为了单纯实践它而才去做它。
English: Righteousness is to be practiced from the heart, not to be practiced for the sake of practicing it.

古文：有为而为，则皆人欲，非天理。 此栻讲学之要也。
现代文：有所目的才去做它，这都是人欲，不是天理。 这就是张栻讲学的要点。
English: Only when there is a purpose to do it, this is all human desire, not divine. This is the main point of Zhang Ye's lecture.

古文：子焯。
现代文：张栻的儿子名叫张焯。
English: Zhang Ye's son's name is Zhang Ye.

