古文：昔《诗》、《书》述虞、夏之际，舜、禹受禅，积德累功，治于百姓，摄位行政，孝之于天，经数十年，然后在位。
现代文：古代的《诗经》、《尚书》中记载说，虞夏之际，舜和禹接受禅让，积德累功，与百姓关系融洽，始摄位行政，接受上天的考核，经数十年，然后在位。
English: It is recorded in the ancient "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" that when Yu Xia was at the beginning of his reign, Zou and Yu accepted Zen Zhen, accumulated virtue, had a harmonious relationship with the people, began to take the position of administration, accepted the assessment of heaven, and after decades, then reigned.

古文：殷、周之王，乃繇卨、稷，修仁行义，历十余世，至于汤、武，然后放杀。
现代文：殷周之王，是由契和后稷，修仁行义，历十余世，至于汤武，然后遭放逐杀戮。
English: The king of Yin Zhou was founded by Qi and Houyi. He practiced benevolence and righteousness for more than ten lifetimes. As for Tangwu, he was exiled and killed.

古文：秦起襄公，章文、缪、献、孝、昭、严，稍蚕食六国，百有余载，至始皇，乃并天下。
现代文：秦起襄公，历经文公、穆公、献公、孝公、昭襄王、庄襄王励精图治，开始蚕食六国，共有一百多年。至始皇，才统一天下。
English: Qin Xizang, after the reigns of King Wen, King Mu, King Xian, King Xiao, King Zhaoxiang and King Zhuangxiang, began to encroach on the Six Kingdoms, a total of more than a hundred years. It was not until the First Emperor unified the country.

古文：以德若彼，用力如此其艰难也。
现代文：即使像他们这样以德治国，可见也是历经了很多周折才奠定了今天这样的局面。
English: Even if they govern the country with such virtue, it can be seen that it took a lot of twists and turns to lay the foundation for today's situation.

古文：秦既称帝，患周之败，以为起于处士横议，诸侯力争，四夷交侵，以弱见夺。
现代文：秦始皇称帝之后，考虑到周朝之所以败亡，认为是由于那些不在朝做官的人妄加议论，诸侯势力太大，四夷交相入侵，权力逐渐被削弱而灭亡。
English: After Qin Shihuang was proclaimed emperor, considering the reasons for the defeat of the Zhou Dynasty, it was believed that it was because those who did not hold official positions in the dynasty were too arrogant, the power of the princes was too great, the four barbarians invaded, and the power was gradually weakened and perished.

古文：于是削去五等，堕城销刃，箝语烧书，内锄雄俊，外攘胡、粤，有一威权，为万世安。
现代文：于是削去五等爵位，摧毁城池，销毁兵器，禁民私议，烧毁禁书，对内铲除豪杰之士，对外抗击胡粤入侵，统一威权，以为这样就可以万世安固了。
English: Therefore, they removed the fifth-class knighthood, destroyed the city, destroyed the weapons, banned the people's private discussions, burned the banned books, eradicated the heroes inside, resisted the invasion of Hu Yue outside, and unified the authority, thinking that this would be safe for all time.

古文：然十余年间，猛敌横发乎不虞，適戍强于五伯，闾阎逼于戎狄，响应㿊于谤议，奋臂威于甲兵，乡秦之禁，适所以资豪杰而速自毙也。
现代文：然而仅仅十余年间，凶猛的敌人突然发难，罪徒之伍比春秋五霸还要强大，普通乡民比外来戎狄的威胁还要严重，天下响应比诽谤私议还要惨烈，赤手空拳比甲兵士卒还要威武。从前秦朝的禁令，正是由于有利于豪杰之士从而加速了自身灭亡的步伐。
English: However, in just over ten years, the ferocious enemy suddenly attacked, the group of criminals was more powerful than the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties, the ordinary villagers were more serious than the threat of foreign troops, the world's response was more tragic than the slander and gossip, and the bare-handed empty fist was more powerful than the armored soldiers. The ban of the former Qin Dynasty accelerated the pace of its own demise precisely because it was beneficial to the heroes.

古文：是以汉亡尺土之阶，繇一剑之任，五载而成帝业。
现代文：因此大汉虽无尺土之阶，仅凭一剑之力，五年就成就了帝业。
English: Therefore, although the great man did not have the rank of a ruler, he achieved the imperial career in five years with the power of a sword.

古文：书传所记，未尝有焉。
现代文：这是古代的典籍记载中从来没有过的事情。
English: This is something that was never recorded in ancient texts.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：古世相革，皆承圣王之烈，今汉独收孤秦之弊。
现代文：古代的权力更替，大都继承了圣王的功业，现在大汉却是独收孤秦之弊。
English: In ancient times, when power changed hands, most of them inherited the work of the holy king. Now, however, the great man is the sole recipient of the ills of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：镌金石者难为功，摧枯朽者易为力，其势然也。
现代文：镌刻金石者难以成功，摧枯拉朽者易为着力，形势使然。
English: It is difficult for those who engrave precious stones to succeed, and it is easy for those who destroy and pull down to make efforts. The situation makes it so.

古文：故据汉受命，谱十八王，月而列之，天下一统，乃以年数。
现代文：因此自汉立国时，共封了十八位异姓王，按月份排列；天下一统之后后封的，就按年代计算。
English: Therefore, since the founding of the Han Dynasty, a total of eighteen kings with different surnames have been crowned, arranged by month; those crowned after the unification of the world are calculated by year.

古文：讫于孝文，异姓尽矣。
现代文：到孝文时为止，异姓王就没有再封了。
English: By the time of Xiaowen, Wang, who had a different surname, had not been sealed again.

