古文：陈国张汉直到南阳从京兆尹延叔坚学左氏传。
现代文：陈国的张汉直到南阳去，跟随京兆尹延笃学习《左传》。
English: Zhang Han of Chen Guo went as far as Nanyang to study "Zhuan" with Jing Zhao and Yin Yanduk.

古文：行后，数月，鬼物持其妹，为之扬言曰： 我病死。丧在陌上，常苦饥寒。
现代文：他走了几个月以后，妖怪挟持他的妹妹，通过他妹妹的口扬言道： 我病死了，尸体还在路上，魂儿还常常受到饥饿与寒冷的困扰。
English: After he had been gone for several months, the demon took his sister by the hand and spoke through her: "I died of illness, my body is still on the road, and my soul is still often plagued by hunger and cold.

古文：操二三量 不借， 挂屋后楮上。传子方送我五百钱，在北墉下，皆亡取之。
现代文：我过去打好的两三双草鞋，挂在屋后的楮树上；傅子方送给我五百文钱，放在北墙下面。
English: The two or three pairs of straw sandals I had made in the past were hanging on the eucalyptus tree behind the house; Fu Zi Fang gave me five hundred yuan and put them under the north wall.

古文：又买李幼一头牛，本券在书箧中。 
现代文：这些东西我都忘记拿了。还有我向李幼买了一头牛，凭证放在书箱中。 
English: I forgot to take all these things. I also bought a cow from Li You, and the certificate is in the bookcase.

古文：往索取之，悉如其言。
现代文：大家去找这些东西，都象他妹妹说的那样。
English: Let's find these things, just like his sister said.

古文：妇尚不知有此妹，新从巩家来，非其所及。
现代文：连他的妻子都还不知道有这些东西，他妹妹刚从丈夫家里来，也不是张汉直所能碰到的。
English: Even his wife did not know about these things, and his sister had just come from her husband's home, which was beyond Zhang Han Zhi's reach.

古文：家人哀伤，益以为审。
现代文：所以家里人十分悲伤，更加认为张汉直的死是确定无疑的了。
English: Therefore, the family members are very sad, and they think that Zhang Hanzhong's death is certain.

古文：父母诸弟衰绖到来迎丧，去舍数里，遇汉直与诸生十余人相追。
现代文：于是父母兄弟，都穿了丧服来接丧。离学府还有几里地，他们却碰上张汉直和十几个同学一起走着。
English: As a result, his parents and brothers all wore mourning clothes to attend the funeral. They were still several miles away from the school, but they ran into Zhang Hanzhi and a dozen classmates walking together.

古文：汉直顾见家人，怪其如此。
现代文：张汉直看见了家里人，奇怪他们穿戴成这个样子。
English: Zhang Han Zhi saw his family and was surprised to see them dressed like this.

古文：家见汉直，谓其鬼也。怅惘良久。
现代文：家里人看见张汉直，以为他是鬼，惆怅迷惘了很长时间。
English: When the family saw Zhang Han Zhi, they thought he was a ghost and were puzzled for a long time.

古文：汉直乃前为父拜说其本末。且悲且喜。
现代文：他父亲把事情的前后经过说了，父子俩真是悲喜交集。
English: His father told the story of the incident, and the father and son were really a mixture of joy and sorrow.

古文：凡所闻见，若此非一。得知妖物之为。
现代文：凡是我所听到看到的，象这样的事情并非只有一件，所以我才知道这是妖怪造成的。
English: From what I heard and saw, there wasn't just one thing like this, so I knew it was caused by a monster.

古文：汉，陈留外黄范丹，字史云，少为尉，从佐使檄谒督邮，丹有志节，自恚为厮役小吏，乃于陈留大泽中，杀所乘马，捐弃官帻，诈逢劫者，有神下其家曰： 我史云也。
现代文：汉朝陈留郡外黄县的范丹，字史云，年轻时曾当过尉从佐使，给督邮送送文书。范丹是个有志气的人，他惭愧自己只能当这种差役小吏，于是就在陈留郡的大泽中，杀死了他骑的马，扔掉了他当差役所戴的头巾，假装自己遭到了抢劫。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Fan Dan, also known as Shi Yun, from Huang County outside Chenliu County, was a young lieutenant who worked as a courier and delivered documents to the governor. Fan Dan was a man with ambition. He was ashamed that he could only be such a minor official, so he killed the horse he was riding in Osawa, Chenliu County, threw away the headscarf he wore as a civil servant, and pretended that he had been robbed.

古文：为劫人所杀。疾取我衣于陈留大泽中。 
现代文：有个神灵降临到他家中，对他家里的人说： 我是史云，被强盗杀死了。你们赶快到陈留郡的大泽中去收拾我的衣服。 
English: A deity descended on his home and said to his family: "I am Shi Yun, who was killed by a robber. You must hurry to Osazakucho in Chenrui County to pack up my clothes."

古文：家取得一帻。
现代文：家里人去了，拿到了一块头巾。
English: A family member went and got a headscarf.

古文：丹遂之南郡，转入三辅，从英贤游学十三年，乃归。家人不复识焉。
现代文：范丹于是到了南郡，又转移到京畿地区，跟随那些精英贤良求学，十三年以后才回到家中，家里人都不再认识他了。
English: Fan Dan then went to Nan County, and then moved to the Gyeonggi region to study with those elite scholars. He returned home 13 years later, and his family no longer knew him.

古文：陈留人高其志行，及没，号曰贞节先生。
现代文：陈留郡的人们推崇他的志气德行，在他死后，给他取了个号叫贞节先生。
English: The people of Chenlu County respected his spirit and virtue. After his death, they gave him the nickname Mr. Zhengyi.

古文：吴人费季，久客于楚，时道多劫，妻常忧之。
现代文：吴国人费季，寄居在楚国已很久了，当时路上经常发生拾劫事件，妻子常常为他担忧。
English: Feizi, a native of Wu, has been living in Chu for a long time. At that time, robberies often occurred on the road, and his wife was often worried about him.

古文：季与同辈旅宿庐山下，各相问出家几时。
现代文：费季和同伴们在庐山下投宿，各人互相询问离家有多久了。
English: Feizi and his companions camped at the foot of Lushan Mountain, each asking the other how long they had been away from home.

古文：季曰： 吾去家已数年矣。
现代文：费季说： 我离家已经好几年了。
English: Fei Ji said: I have been away from home for several years.

古文：临来，与妻别，就求金钗以行。欲观其志当与吾否耳。
现代文：临走的时候，我和妻子告别，去向她要了一枚金钗才动身，我只是想试试她的心，看她是否会给我罢了。
English: Before leaving, I said goodbye to my wife and went to ask her for a gold ingot before leaving. I just wanted to test her heart and see if she would give it to me.

古文：得钗，乃以着户楣上。
现代文：我拿到了金钗，就把它放在门框上端的横木上。
English: When I got the ingot, I put it on the crossbar at the top of the door frame.

古文：临发，失与道，此钗故当在户上也。 
现代文：等我动身的时候，忘了对她说。这金钗肯定还在门上。 
English: When I left, I forgot to tell her. The gold chain must still be on the door.

古文：尔夕，其妻梦季曰： 吾行遇盗，死，已二年。
现代文：这天晚上，他的妻子梦见费季说： 我走在路上碰到了强盗，死了已经两年了。
English: That night, his wife dreamed of Feizi and said: I met a robber on the road and died two years ago.

古文：若不信吾言，吾行时，取汝钗，遂不以行，留在户楣上，可往取之。 
现代文：如果你不相信我的话，我走的时候拿了你的金钗，并没有把它带走，而是把它放在门框上端的横木上，你可以去把它取下来。 
English: If you don't believe me, I took your gold chain when I left, and instead of taking it with me, I put it on the crossbar at the top of the door frame, and you can go and take it off.

古文：妻觉，揣钗，得之家遂发丧。
现代文：他妻子醒了，去摸了一下门框上，果然拿到了金钗，家里就相信费季真是死了，便给他办了丧事。
English: When his wife woke up, she went to feel the door frame and found the gold ingot. The family believed that Feizi was really dead and held a funeral for him.

古文：后一年余，季乃归还。
现代文：过了一年多，费季却回家了。
English: After more than a year, Feizi returned home.

古文：余姚虞定国，有好仪容，同县苏氏女，亦有美色，定国常见悦之。
现代文：余姚县的虞定国，生得仪表堂堂；同县的苏家姑娘，也很漂亮。虞定国曾经见过她，便爱上了她。
English: Yu Dingguo of Yuyao County was born with a beautiful appearance; the Su girl from the same county is also very beautiful. Yu Dingguo once met her and fell in love with her.

古文：后见定国来，主人留宿，中夜，告苏公曰： 贤女令色，意甚钦之。
现代文：后来苏家看见虞定国前来，主人留他过夜。半夜时分，虞定国对苏公说： 贤女长得根漂亮，我心里十分钦佩仰慕她。
English: Later, the Su family saw Yu Dingguo coming, and the master let him stay the night. At midnight, Yu Dingguo said to Su Gong: "The virtuous woman is very beautiful, I admire and admire her very much."

古文：此夕能令暂出否？ 
现代文：今晚是否能叫她出来一下呢？ 
English: Is there any way we can get her out tonight?

古文：主人以其乡里贵人，便令女出从之。
现代文：主人因为虞定国是当地的高贵人物，便叫女儿出来陪伴侍侯他。
English: The owner felt that Dingguo was a well-respected person in the countryside, so he let his daughter come out to meet him.

古文：往来渐数，语苏公云： 无以相报。
现代文：于是虞定国来往渐渐频繁，他告诉苏公说： 我没有什么来报答您。
English: As a result, Yu Dingguo's visits became more and more frequent. He told Su Gong: I have nothing to repay you.

古文：若有官事，某为君任之。 
现代文：如果有什么官府中的公差。我就替您承担吧。 
English: If there is any official business, I will take care of it for you.

古文：主人喜，自尔后有役召事，往造定国。
现代文：主人听了很高兴。在这以后，有个差役叫苏家主人去服役，主人就去找虞定国。
English: The master was very happy to hear this. After this, an officer called the master of the Su family to serve, and the master went to find Yu Dingguo.

古文：定国大惊曰： 都未尝面命。
现代文：虞定国十分惊讶，说： 我和你根本没有面谈过，你怎么会这样？
English: Yu Dingguo was very surprised and said, "I have never had a face-to-face meeting with you. How did this happen?"

古文：何由便尔？
现代文：这里页一定有怪。 
English: There must be something wrong with this page.

古文：此必有异。 具说之。
现代文：苏家主人就详细地把那事情说了。
English: The master of the Su family explained the matter in detail.

古文：定国曰： 仆宁肯请人之父而淫人之女。
现代文：虞定国说： 我难道肯乞求人家的父亲而奸淫人家的女儿？
English: Yu Dingguo said, "Am I willing to beg someone's father and rape someone's daughter?"

古文：若复见来，便当斫之。 
现代文：如果你再看见他来，就该把他杀了。 
English: If you see him again, you should kill him.

古文：后果得怪。
现代文：后来苏公果然捉到了妖怪。
English: Later, Su Gong finally caught the monster.

古文：吴孙皓世，淮南内史朱诞，字永长，为建安太守。
现代文：淮南内史朱诞，字永长，在吴国孙皓时，任建安太守。
English: Zhu Xizhi of Huainan History, surnamed Yongchang, was appointed as the governor of Jian'an during the reign of Sun Yat-sen of Wu.

古文：诞给使妻有鬼病，其夫疑之为奸；后出行，密穿壁隙窥之，正见妻在机中织，遥瞻桑树上，向之言笑。
现代文：朱诞侍从的妻子患有鬼病，她的丈夫却怀疑她有奸情。后来侍从外出，便偷偷地在墙上打了个洞来监视她。正好看见妻子在布机上织布，但她的眼睛却远望桑树，和树上的人说说笑笑。
English: Zhu Xing's servant's wife was suffering from a mysterious illness, but her husband suspected her of having an affair. Later, when the servant went out, he secretly dug a hole in the wall to keep an eye on her. He happened to see his wife weaving on the loom, but her eyes were looking far and wide at the mulberry tree, talking and laughing with the people on the tree.

古文：给使仰视树上，有一年少人，可十四五，衣青衿袖，青幧头。
现代文：侍从抬头看那树上，只见有一个年轻人，大约在十四五岁，穿着青衣服，戴着青头巾。
English: The servant looked up at the tree and saw a young man, about fourteen or fifteen years old, dressed in blue clothes and wearing a blue turban.

古文：给使以为信人也，张弩射之，化为鸣蝉，其大如箕，翔然飞去。
现代文：侍从把他当作真人，便拉弓射他。他却变成了一只蝉，大小象畚箕，伸展着翅膀飞走了。
English: He shot him with a bow and arrow, thinking he was a messenger, and the boy immediately turned into a cicada, as big as a cricket, and flew away.

古文：妻亦应声惊曰： 噫！
现代文：妻子也随着那射箭声惊讶他说： 呀！
English: His wife was also surprised by the sound of the archery and said, "Oh!

古文：人射汝。 
现代文：有人射你。 
English: Someone's shooting at you.

古文：给使怪其故。
现代文：侍从觉得这事很奇怪。
English: For some strange reason.

古文：后久时，给使见二小儿在陌上共语曰： 何以不复见汝？ 
现代文：后来又过了很长一段时间，侍从看见两个小孩在路上交谈。有一个说： 为什么老是看不见你？ 
English: After a long time, the servant saw two children talking on the road. One said, "Why can't I always see you?"

古文：其一，即树上小儿也。答曰： 前不幸为人所射，病疮积时。 
现代文：其中一个就是树上的小孩，他回答说： 上次倒霉，被人射了，伤口拖了很长时间。 
English: One of them, the boy in the tree, replied, "Last time I was unlucky, I was shot and it took a long time to heal.

古文：彼儿曰： 今何如？ 
现代文：那小孩又问： 今天怎么样了？ 
English: The little boy asked again, "What's the matter now?"

古文：曰： 赖朱府君梁上膏以傅之，得愈。 
现代文：这小孩说： 全靠了朱太守粱上的膏药，我把它拿来敷在伤口上，这才痊愈了。 
English: He replied: Thanks to the use of plaster on the joist of Zhu Fu's house to cover the wound, it was healed.

古文：给使白诞曰： 人盗君膏药，颇知之否？ 
现代文：侍从对朱诞说： 有人偷了您的膏药，您是否有所察觉？ 
English: The messenger told Zhu Xatong, "Someone stole your plasters, do you know?

古文：诞曰： 吾膏久致梁上，人安得盗之？ 
现代文：朱诞说： 我的膏药早就放到了梁上，别人哪能偷得着呢？ 
English: Zhu Xue said: My plaster has long been placed on the beam, how can others steal it?

古文：给使曰： 不然。
现代文：侍从说： 不一定这样吧。
English: The waiter said, "That's not necessarily true.

古文：府君视之。 
现代文：您还是去看看它。 
English: You should still go and see it.

古文：诞殊不信，试为视之，封题如故。
现代文：朱诞根本不相信。他试探着去看看，那膏药还是象过去那样原封没动。
English: Zhu Xue didn't believe it at all. He probed to see if the plaster was still intact as before.

古文：诞曰： 小人故妄言，膏自如故。 
现代文：朱诞便说： 小子故意胡说八道，膏药明明还是象原来那样。 
English: Zhu Xue then said: "The boy is deliberately talking nonsense, the sticking plaster is clearly still the same as before.

古文：给使曰： 试开之。 
现代文：侍从说： 打开试试看。 
English: Presenter: Open it again and take a look.

古文：则膏去半。
现代文：朱诞一打开，只见那膏药早就丢了一半。
English: As soon as Zhu Xing opened it, he saw that half of the plaster had already been lost.

古文：为掊刮，见有趾迹。
现代文：把它收刮起来时。
English: When you scrape it off.

古文：诞因大惊。乃详问之。具道本末。
现代文：看见有脚爪的痕迹，朱诞因而非常惊讶，就详细地问侍从，侍从便把这事情的前后经过一一告诉了朱诞。
English: Seeing the claw marks, Zhu Xue was very surprised and asked the waiter in detail. The waiter then told Zhu Xue the whole story.

古文：吴时，嘉兴倪彦思居县西埏里，忽见鬼魅入其家，与人语，饮食如人，惟不见形彦思奴婢有窃骂大家者。
现代文：吴国的时候，嘉兴的倪彦恩住在县城西边的诞里，忽然看见鬼魅到他家中，跟人谈话，吃东西也象人一样，只是看不见它的形体。倪彦思的奴婢中有一个在背后骂女主人的，那鬼魅说： 现在该把她告诉给主人听了。 
English: In the time of the State of Wu, Ni Yan En of Jiaxing, who lived in the west of the county seat, suddenly saw a ghost come to his home, talk to people, and eat like a human, but he could not see its form. One of Ni Yan Si's slaves scolded her mistress behind her back, and the ghost said, "Now it's time to tell her to her master."

古文：云： 今当以语。 彦思治之，无敢詈之者。
现代文：倪彦恩收拾了这个奴婢，于是再也没有敢骂他老婆的了。
English: Ni Hian cleaned up the mess, and never dared to curse his wife again.

古文：彦思有小妻，魅从求之，彦思乃迎道士逐之。
现代文：倪彦恩有个小老婆，鬼魅缠着要她作陪，倪彦思就去请了道士来驱逐这鬼魅。
English: Ni Hian En had a little wife. A ghost was haunting her and wanted her to accompany him. Ni Hian En went and invited a Taoist priest to expel the ghost.

古文：酒殽既设，魅乃取厕中草粪，布着其上。
现代文：酒肉已经摆好了，鬼魅却从厕所中取了大粪撒在它的上面。
English: The wine and meat had been set out, but the ghost took a large turd from the toilet and sprinkled it on it.

古文：道士便盛击鼓，召请诸神。魅乃取伏虎于神座上吹作角声音。
现代文：道士便猛烈打鼓，召请各路神仙，鬼魅却拿了小便壶，在神座上吹出号角似的声音。
English: The Taoist priest then beat the drums furiously and summoned all the gods and goddesses, but the ghosts took a urinal and blew a horn-like sound on the throne.

古文：有顷。道士忽觉背上冷，惊起解衣，乃伏虎也。
现代文：一会儿，道士忽然感到背上发冷，慌忙起来脱衣服，原来是小便壶在背上。
English: After a while, the Taoist priest suddenly felt cold on his back, got up in a hurry and undressed. It turned out to be a urinal on his back.

古文：于是道士罢去。
现代文：于是道士便作罢走了。
English: So the Taoist went away.

古文：彦思夜于被中窃与妪语，共患此魅。
现代文：倪彦思夜晚在被窝里偷偷地和老婆谈话，两人都为这个鬼魅发愁。
English: Ni Yanshi secretly talks to his wife under the covers at night. Both of them are worried about this ghost.

古文：魅即屋梁上谓彦思曰： 汝与妇道吾，吾今当截汝屋梁。 
现代文：鬼魅却在屋梁上对倪彦思说： 你和妻子一起来说我，我现在该锯断你的屋梁。 
English: The ghost, however, said to Ni Yanshi on the roof beam, "You and your wife should say to me, 'I should now saw off your roof beam.'

古文：即隆隆有声。
现代文：梁上立即发出轰隆隆的声音。
English: Then I heard the sudden rumble of the girders being cut.

古文：彦思惧梁断，取火照视，魅即灭火。截梁声愈急。
现代文：倪彦恩害怕屋梁断下来，就拿了火烛照着察看，鬼魅立即把火吹灭了，而锯断屋梁的声音更猛烈了。
English: Ni Yian was afraid that the roof beam would break, so he took a candle and looked at it. The ghost immediately blew out the fire, and the sound of sawing the roof beam was even more violent.

古文：彦思惧屋坏，大小悉遣出，更取火视，梁如故。魅大笑，问彦思： 复道吾否？ 
现代文：倪彦思害怕房屋塌下来，就把全家老幼都打发到门外，又拿了火烛，再去察看屋梁，那屋梁却还是象原来那样完好无损。鬼魅哈哈大笑，问倪彦思： 你再说我吗？ 
English: Ni Yanshi was afraid that the house would collapse, so he sent the whole family, old and young, outside the door. He also took a candle and went to inspect the roof beam, but the roof beam was still intact as before. The ghost laughed and asked Ni Yanshi: Do you want to talk about me again?

古文：郡中典农闻之曰： 此神正当是狸物耳。 
现代文：郡中主管农业的官员听见了这件事，便说： 这怪物一定是只野猫精。 
English: When the county's agriculture officer heard about it, he said, "This monster must be a feral cat."

古文：魅即往谓典农曰： 汝取官若干百斛谷，藏着某处，为吏污秽，而敢论吾！
现代文：鬼魅便去对典农说： 你拿了公家几百斛谷子，藏在某某地方。你当官这样不清廉，却还敢来说我。
English: The ghost then went to the farmer and said, "You have taken hundreds of public money and hidden it somewhere. You, as an official, are so incorruptible, yet you dare to slander me.

古文：今当白于官，将人取汝所盗谷。 
现代文：今天我该向官府告发，带了人去取出你所偷的谷子。 
English: See if I don't report your dirty deeds to the authorities, and let them search out your hidden grain!

古文：典农大怖而谢之。
现代文：典农非常恐惧，连忙向它道歉。
English: The farmer was horrified and quickly apologised to it.

古文：自后无敢道者。
现代文：从这以后，再也没有敢说这鬼魅的了。
English: After that, no one dared to speak of the ghost again.

古文：三年后，去，不知所在。
现代文：三年以后，鬼魅走了，不知在什么地方。
English: Three years later, the ghost is gone, I don't know where.

古文：魏，黄初中，顿邱界，有人骑马夜行，见道中有一物，大如兔，两眼如镜，跳跃马前，令不得前。
现代文：曹魏黄初年间，顿丘县边境上有个人骑着马在夜里赶路，看见路当中有一样东西，象兔子那样大，两只眼睛象镜子一样明亮，突然跳到马的前面，使马不能再向前走了。
English: In the early years of Cao Weihuang, there was a man on the border of Dongqiu County riding a horse in the night. He saw something in the road, as big as a rabbit, with two eyes as bright as a mirror, suddenly jumped in front of the horse, so that the horse could no longer go forward.

古文：人遂惊惧，堕马。
现代文：这人大吃一惊，便从马上摔了下来。
English: The man was so startled that he fell off his horse.

古文：魅便就地捉之。惊怖，暴死。
现代文：鬼魅便在地上把他捉住了，这人又惊又怕，一下子昏死过去了。
English: The ghost caught him on the ground, and the man was so shocked and frightened that he suddenly passed out.

古文：良久得苏。苏，已失魅，不知所在。
现代文：过了好久他才苏醒过来，鬼魅已经消失了，不知道它到了什么地方。
English: It took him a long time to wake up. The ghost had disappeared and he didn't know where it had gone.

古文：乃更上马前行。数里，逢一人，相问讯已，因说向者事变如此，今相得为伴，甚欢。
现代文：他于是又上了马，向前走了几里，碰到一个人，互相问候完毕，他便说： 刚才我碰到了这样的怪事，现在能和你作伴，我十分高兴。 
English: So he mounted his horse again, and rode on for several miles, until he met a man, and when they had exchanged greetings, he said, "I have just met with such a strange occurrence, and I am very glad to be in your company.

古文：人曰： 我独行，得君为伴，快不可言。
现代文：那人说： 我一个人走路，有您作伴，快乐得不能再说了。
English: The man said: "I walk alone, with you as my companion, and I couldn't be happier.

古文：君马行疾，且前，我在后相随也。 
现代文：您的马走得快，就在前面走吧，我在后面跟着您。 
English: Your horse is running fast, go ahead, I'll follow you.

古文：遂共行。
现代文：于是他们就结伴页行。
English: So they walked side by side.

古文：语曰： 向者物何如，乃令君怖惧耶？ 
现代文：那人问他： 刚才那东西怎么样？让您担惊受怕了吗？ 
English: The man asked him: What about that thing just now? Did it frighten you?

古文：对曰： 其身如兔，两眼如镜，形甚可恶。 
现代文：他回答说： 那东西的身体象兔子，两只眼睛象镜子，形状很可怕。 
English: He replied, "It has a body like a rabbit, two eyes like a mirror, and a terrifying shape.

古文：伴曰： 试顾视我耶？ 
现代文：这伙伴说： 你想回头看看我吗？ 
English: The partner said: Do you want to look back at me?

古文：人顾视之，犹复是也。
现代文：他回头一看，又是那怪物。
English: He looked back and there was the monster again.

古文：魅便跳上马。人遂坠地，怖死。
现代文：那鬼魅便跳上了马，这人就摔到了地上，吓死了。
English: The ghost then jumped on the horse, and the man fell to the ground, terrified to death.

古文：家人怪马独归，即行推索，乃于道边得之。
现代文：家里的人奇怪这马独自回来，就去寻找，才在路边找到了他。
English: The family was surprised that the horse had returned alone and went to look for him, only to find him on the side of the road.

古文：宿昔乃苏，说状如是。
现代文：过了一夜，这人才苏醒过来，他描述的情形就象这样子。
English: After a night, the man woke up and described the situation like this.

古文：袁绍，字本初，在冀州，有神出河东，号度朔君，百姓共为立庙。
现代文：袁绍，字本初，他人在冀州，而在河东郡却有他的神灵出现，号称度朔君，百姓一起为他建立了庙宇。
English: At the beginning of Yuan Shao's life, he was in Jizhou, but in Hedong County, his spirit appeared, known as Du Shuo Jun, and the people together built a temple for him.

古文：庙有主簿大福。
现代文：庙里有个主簿非常幸福。
English: It is very fortunate that there is a directory in the temple.

古文：陈留蔡庸为清河太守，过谒庙，有子，名道，亡已三十年，度朔君为庸设酒曰： 贵子昔来，欲相见。 
现代文：他有个儿子名叫蔡道，死了已经三十年。度朔君给蔡庸置办了酒席，说： 贤子早就来了，他想见见您。 
English: He had a son named Cai Dao, who had been dead for thirty years. Du Shuo Jun arranged a banquet for Cai Yong and said, "The sage has come early, he wants to see you."

古文：须臾子来。
现代文：一会儿，蔡道就来了。
English: In a moment, Cai Dao arrived.

古文：度朔君自云： 父祖昔作兖州， 有一士，姓苏，母病，往祷。
现代文：度朔君自己说他的先辈过去曾任充州。有一个男士姓苏，母亲病了，他就到庙里来祈祷。
English: Du Shuo himself said that his ancestors had been in charge of Chenzhou in the past. There was a man surnamed Su, whose mother was ill, and he came to the temple to pray.

古文：主簿云： 君逢天士留待。 
现代文：主簿说： 您碰上了天上的神君，他要留您一下。 
English: The chief clerk said, "You have met the prince of heaven, and he wants to stay with you for a while.

古文：闻西北有鼓声，而君至。
现代文：忽然听见西北方有鼓声，接着度朔君就到了。
English: Suddenly, I heard the sound of drums in the northwest, and then Doshaku-kun arrived.

古文：须臾，一客来，着皂角单衣，头上五色毛，长数寸。
现代文：一会儿，有一个客人进来，穿着黑色的单衣，头上插着五彩缤纷的羽毛，有几寸长。
English: A moment later, a guest came in, dressed in a black singlet, with a multicolored feather, a few inches long, perched on his head.

古文：去后，复一人，着白布单衣，高冠，冠似鱼头，谓君曰： 昔临庐山，共食白李，忆之未久，已三千岁。
现代文：这客人走了后，又来了一个人，穿着白色的单衣，戴着高帽子，帽子象鱼头，对度朔君说： 从前到庐山一起吃李子，回想起来还没有多久，却已经三千年了。
English: After this guest left, another person came, dressed in a white singlet, wearing a tall hat, a hat like a fish head, and said to Du Shuo Jun: Once upon a time, we went to Lushan to eat plums together. Looking back, it hasn't been long, but it's been three thousand years.

古文：日月易得，使人怅然。 
现代文：时间过得真快，使人惆怅。 
English: The stars move, the sun and the moon move, and people are amazed.

古文：去后，君谓士曰： 先来，南海君也。 
现代文：这人走了后，度朔君对男士说： 刚才来的这个是南海王。 
English: After the man left, Du Shuo Jun said to the man: This is Nanhai Wang who just came.

古文：士是书生，君明通五经，善礼记，与士论礼，士不如也。
现代文：男士是读书人，度朔君精通《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《易》、《春秋》五经，特别熟悉《礼记》，所以与男士谈论起礼仪来，男士不及他。
English: Men are readers, Du Shuo Jun is proficient in "Poetry," "Book," "Rite," "Ease," "Spring and Autumn" Five Classics, especially familiar with "Rituals," so when talking about etiquette with men, men are not as good as him.

古文：士乞救母病。君曰： 卿所居东，有故桥，人坏之，此桥所行，卿母犯之，能复桥，便差。 
现代文：男士求度朔君治好他母亲的疾病，度朔君说： 您住宅的东面有座旧桥，有人把它搞坏了。这座桥上的神，您母亲曾经冒犯过他。
English: The man asked Du Shuo Jun to cure his mother's illness. Du Shuo Jun said: There is an old bridge on the east side of your house, someone has damaged it. The god on this bridge, your mother once offended him.

古文：曹公讨袁谭，使人从庙换千疋绢，君不与。
现代文：您如果能够修好桥，那么您母亲的病便会痊愈了。 曹操讨伐袁谭，派人到庙里来借一千匹绸缎，度朔君不给。
English: If you can repair the bridge, then your mother's illness will be completely cured.Cao Cao challenged Yuan Tan and sent someone to the temple to borrow a thousand silk cocoons.

古文：曹公遣张合毁庙。
现代文：曹操就派张郃来捣毁庙宇。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhang Ye to destroy the temple.

古文：未至百里，君遣兵数万，方道而来。
现代文：离庙还有一百里左右，度朔君便派兵几万，同路赶来。
English: With the temple still about a hundred miles away, Du Shuo Jun sent tens of thousands of soldiers to come all the way.

古文：合未达二里，云雾绕合军，不知庙处。
现代文：张郃离庙宇还有二里地，便有云雾笼罩了张郃的部队，他们不知道这庙宇在哪里。
English: Zhang Ye was still two miles away from the temple when a cloud of fog enveloped Zhang Ye's troops. They did not know where the temple was.

古文：君语主簿： 曹公气盛，宜避之。 
现代文：度朔君对主簿说： 曹操的气势很盛，应该避过他。 
English: Du Shuo Jun said to the host: Cao Cao's momentum is very strong, you should avoid him.

古文：后苏井邻家有神下，识君声，云： 昔移入湖，阔绝三年，乃遣人与曹公相闻，欲修故庙，地衰，不中居，欲寄住。 
现代文：后来苏家的隔壁邻居家有神灵降临，那男士辨认出是度朔君的声音，度朔君说： 过去我移居到匈奴去了，和你们久别了三年。 那男士就派人向曹操报告： 我想修筑一下旧庙，但那块土地已经衰败不适合居住了，我想让度朔君寄居在你那边。 曹操说： 很好。 
English: Later, a deity descended from the Su family's next-door neighbor, and the man recognized the voice of Du Shuo-kun. Du Shuo-kun said, "In the past, I moved to Xiongnu, and I have been away from you for three years." The man sent someone to report to Cao Cao: "I want to build an old temple, but the land has decayed and is not suitable for living. I want Du Shuo-kun to stay with you." Cao Cao said, "Very good."

古文：公曰： 甚善。 治城北楼以居之。
现代文：于是就修筑了城北的楼房让度朔君住在里面。
English: So they built a building in the north of the city for Dousaku to live in.

古文：数日，曹公猎得物，大如麑，大足，色白如雪，毛软滑可爱。公以摩面，莫能名也。
现代文：过了几天，曹操去打猎，猎得一个怪物，象魔一样大，大脚，颜色白得象雪，皮毛柔软滑爽得可爱，曹操用这皮毛摩擦面孔，真最舒服得没法形容。
English: A few days later, Cao Cao went hunting. He hunted down a monster, as big as a devil, with big feet, white as snow, and lovely soft and smooth fur. Cao Cao rubbed his face with this fur. It was the most comfortable feeling I can describe.

古文：夜闻楼上哭云： 小儿出行不还。 
现代文：那天夜里，曹操听见楼上有人哭着说， 小孩出行还不回来。 
English: That night, Cao Cao heard someone crying upstairs, saying that the child would not return from his trip.

古文：公拊掌曰： 此子言真衰也。 
现代文：曹操拍着手说： 这家伙说这种话，真该他衰败了。 
English: Cao Cao clapped his hands and said, "This guy is really a degenerate for saying such a thing.

古文：晨将数百犬，绕楼下，犬得气，冲突内外。
现代文：早晨他就带来了几百只狗，包围了这座楼。
English: In the morning, he brought in hundreds of dogs and surrounded the building.

古文：见有物，大如驴，自投楼下。犬杀之。庙神乃绝。
现代文：狗发现了气味，便里里外外冲击搏斗，只见有一个怪物，大小象驴子，自己跳到楼下，狗就把它咬死了，庙里的神灵从此就消失了。
English: The dog discovered the scent, pounded and fought inside and out, only to see a monster, the size of a donkey, jump downstairs on its own. The dog bit it to death, and the gods in the temple disappeared.

古文：临川陈臣家大富，永初元年，臣在斋中坐，其宅内有一町筋竹，白日忽见一人，长丈余，面如 方相， 从竹中出。径语陈臣： 我在家多年，汝不知；今辞汝去，当令汝知之。 
现代文：临川郡陈臣的家里很富裕。永初元年，陈臣坐在书房中，他住宅内有一畦筋竹，白天忽然看见一个人，长一丈多，面孔象驱疫辟邪的神象方相，从筋竹林中走出来，径直对陈臣说： 我在你家中好多年了，你一直不知道，今天要离开你了，应该让你知道我。 
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Chen Chen was sitting in his study. There was a bamboo grove in his house. During the day, he suddenly saw a tall man with a face like a god who drives away evil. He came out of the bamboo grove and said directly to Chen Chen: "I have been in your home for many years. You have never known. I am leaving you today. You should let me know."

古文：去一月许日，家大失火，奴婢顿死。
现代文：这人走了一月左右的某一天，陈家被大火烧了，奴婢一下子都被烧死了。
English: One day about a month after this person left, the Chen family was burned by fire, and all the slaves and maidservants were instantly burned to death.

古文：一年中，便大贫。
现代文：不到一年，陈家便非常贫穷了。
English: Within a year, the Chen family was very poor.

古文：东莱有一家姓陈，家百余口，朝炊釜，不沸。
现代文：东莱郡有一人家，姓陈，全家一百多口人。
English: There is a family in Donglai County, surnamed Chen, with more than a hundred members.

古文：举甑看之，忽有一白头公，从釜中出。
现代文：有一天烧早饭，锅子老是烧不开。把锅子上的蒸笼拿起来看，忽然有一个白头老人从锅子中走出来。
English: One day, he was cooking breakfast and the pot would not boil. He lifted the steamer on the pot to look at it, and suddenly an old man with a white head came out of the pot.

古文：便诣师卜。
现代文：于是陈家的人便到巫婆那里去占卜。
English: So the Chen family went to the sorceress for divination.

古文：卜云： 此大怪，应灭门。
现代文：巫婆说： 这是一件大怪事，你们全家都要死光。
English: The witch said, "This is a very strange thing, and your whole family will die.

古文：便归，大作械，械成，使置门壁下，坚闭门，在内，有马骑麾盖来扣门者，慎勿应。 
现代文：你们快回家，多做些兵器，兵器做成后，把它们放在大门边的墙壁下，把大门紧紧关上，你们都躲在家里，有骑马乘车的来敲门，千万别答应。 
English: Go home quickly, make more weapons. After the weapons are made, put them under the wall by the gate, close the gate tightly. You are all hiding at home. If there is a car on horseback knocking at the door, don't answer.

古文：乃归，合手伐得百余械，置门屋下。
现代文：于是他们就回到家中，一起动手砍削，做成了一百多件兵器，放在门厅里。
English: So they returned home and started chopping wood together to make more than a hundred weapons, which they placed in the hallway.

古文：果有人至，呼。不应。
现代文：后来果然有人来了，在门外大声呼唤，但里面没有人答应。
English: Later, someone did come, calling loudly outside the door, but no one inside said yes.

古文：主帅大怒，令缘门入，从人窥门内，见大小械百余，出门还说如此。
现代文：那主帅十分恼火，叫部下从门口闯进去。
English: The manager, exasperated, ordered his men to break in through the door.

古文：帅大惶惋，语左右云： 教速来，不速来，遂无一人当去，何以解罪也？
现代文：随从探看了一下门里边，看见大大小小的兵器一百多件，就出门向主帅汇报了这种情况，主帅听了后非常恐慌惋惜，对身旁的人说： 叫你们快点来，你们却不赶快来，因此一个人也抓不到，我们拿什么去交差呢？
English: The follower took a look inside the door and saw more than a hundred pieces of large and small weapons, and went out to report the situation to the boss. After listening, the boss was very panicked and regretful, and said to the people around him: I told you to hurry up, but you didn't hurry up, so you couldn't catch a single person. What are we going to cross?

古文：从此北行可八十里，有一百三口，取以当之。 
现代文：从这里向北走，大约八十里，有一家一百零三口人，去把他们抓了来相抵吧。 
English: Go north from here, about eighty miles, there is a family of one hundred and three people, go and catch them and meet them.

古文：后十日，此家死亡都尽。
现代文：过了十天，这北边的一家全都死光了。
English: Ten days later, the entire family on the north side was dead.

古文：此家亦姓陈云。
现代文：这一家听说也姓陈。
English: The family is also said to be surnamed Chen.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年，京师得异鸟，莫能名。
现代文：普惠帝永康元年，京城里抓到一只奇异的鸟，没有人能叫出它的名称。
English: In the first year of Pu Hui Di Yongkang, a strange bird was caught in Beijing. No one could call out its name.

古文：赵王伦使人持出，周旋城邑市，以问人。
现代文：赵王司马伦派人拿了这只鸟出去，在城内街市上来回走，见人就问。
English: Zhao Wang Simalen sent someone to take this bird out and walk back and forth in the city streets and markets, asking anyone who saw it.

古文：即日，宫西有一小儿见之，遂自言曰： 服留鸟。 
现代文：当天，皇宫西边有一个小孩看见了这鸟，就自言自语地说： 服留鸟。 
English: On the same day, a child on the west side of the palace saw the bird and said to himself, "Take care of the bird."

古文：持者还白伦。
现代文：拿鸟的人回去报告了赵王。
English: The person who took the bird went back and reported it to Zhao Wang.

古文：伦使更求，又见之。乃将入宫。
现代文：赵王派他再去寻找，又看见了那个小孩，就把他带进了皇宫。
English: Zhao Wang sent him to search again, and when he saw the child, he brought him into the palace.

古文：密笼鸟，幷闭小儿于户中。
现代文：赵王把鸟紧关在笼子里，并把这个小孩关闭在门内。
English: Zhao Wang put the bird tightly in the cage and shut the child in the door.

古文：明日往视：悉不复见。
现代文：明天再去看看，却全部不见了。
English: I'll check again tomorrow, but it's all gone.

古文：南康郡南东望山，有三人入山，见山顶有果树，众果毕植，行列整齐如人行，甘子正熟。
现代文：南康郡南部有座东望山。曾经有三个人进了山，看见山顶有果树，便爬上山顶，只见各种果树全都种上了，排列得很整齐，好象人的队伍一样。
English: In the southern part of Nankang County, there is Dongwang Mountain. Once, three people entered the mountain, saw fruit trees on the top of the mountain, climbed to the top of the mountain, and saw all kinds of fruit trees planted, arranged neatly, like a line of people.

古文：三人共食，致饱，乃怀二枚，欲出示人。
现代文：这时柑子正好熟了，三个人便一起吃了个饱，还在怀里藏了两只，想出山后拿给别人看。
English: At this time, the mandarin oranges were just ripe, and the three of them ate a full meal together. They also hid two in their arms and wanted to show them to others after they left the mountain.

古文：闻空中语云： 催放双甘，乃听汝去。 
现代文：只听见天空中有人说道： 快点放下那两只柑子，才听任你们离开！ 
English: I only heard someone in the sky say, "Hurry up and let go of those two mandarin oranges before they let you go!"

古文：秦瞻，居曲阿彭皇野，忽有物如蛇，突入其脑中。
现代文：秦瞻居住在曲阿县彭皇野外，忽然有一样东西象蛇，一下子钻进了他的脑袋中。
English: Qin Zhan lived in Penghuang field, Qua County. Suddenly, something like a snake suddenly entered his head.

古文：蛇来，先闻臭气，便于鼻中入，盘其头中。觉哄哄。仅闻其脑闲食声咂咂。数日而出。
现代文：这条蛇刚来的时候，先闻闻气味，接着便从秦瞻的鼻孔中钻进去，最后盘绕在他的头颅中，他便觉得轰轰作响，只听见那蛇在脑子里咂咂咂的吃食声，过了几天，蛇就钻出来爬走了。
English: When the snake first arrived, it first sniffed the scent, then burrowed through Qin Zhan's nostrils, and finally coiled around his head. He felt a roar, only to hear the snake's gnawing sound in his head. A few days later, the snake crawled out and left.

古文：去，寻复来。取手巾缚鼻口，亦被入。
现代文：过了不久，蛇又来了，秦瞻马上拿手巾缚住鼻子和嘴巴，但仍然被蛇钻了进去。
English: Soon after, the snake came again. Qin Zhan immediately took a hand towel and tied his nose and mouth, but he was still drilled by the snake.

古文：积年无他病，唯患头重。
现代文：这样过了好几年也没有其他毛病，只是感到头很重罢了。
English: It's been like this for several years and there are no other problems, I just have a heavy head.

