古文：宁国公主，孝慈皇后生。
现代文：宁国公主乃孝慈皇后所生。
English: Princess Ningguo was born to Empress Xiaoji.

古文：洪武十一年下嫁梅殷。
现代文：洪武十一年下嫁梅殷。
English: Hongwu married Mei Yin eleven years later.

古文：殷字伯殷，汝南侯思祖从子也，天性恭谨，有谋略，便弓马。
现代文：梅殷字伯殷，汝南侯思祖的堂侄，他天性恭敬谨慎，富有谋略，善于骑射。
English: Mei Yin Zi Bo Yin, the cousin of Junan Hou Si Zu, he is respectful and cautious by nature, full of strategy, and good at riding and shooting.

古文：太祖十六女诸驸马中，尤爱殷。
现代文：太祖在十六位驸马之中，尤其偏爱梅殷。
English: Among the sixteen horses, the great-grandfather especially favored Mei Yin.

古文：时李文忠以上公典国学，而殷视山东学政，赐敕褒美，谓殷精通经史，堪为儒宗。
现代文：当时李文忠以上公的身份主管国学，而梅殷则为山东学政，太祖赐诏褒奖赞美，说梅殷精通经史，堪为儒宗。
English: At that time, Li Wenzhong was in charge of Chinese studies as an official, while Mei Yin was in charge of Shandong studies and politics. The great-grandfather gave a commendation and praise, saying that Mei Yin was proficient in history and could be a Confucian.

古文：当世皆荣之。
现代文：当朝都以他为荣。
English: The government was proud of him.

古文：帝春秋高，诸王强盛。
现代文：太祖年事已高，诸王势力强盛。
English: The great-grandfather is old and the kings are powerful.

古文：殷尝受密命辅皇太孙。
现代文：梅殷曾接受密令辅佐皇太孙。
English: Mei Yin once received a secret order to assist the emperor's grandson.

古文：及燕师日逼，惠帝命殷充总兵官镇守淮安。悉心防御，号令严明。
现代文：当燕军日益逼近时，惠帝命梅殷担任总兵官镇守淮安，他一心防御，号令严明。
English: When Yan's army was getting closer and closer, Hui Di ordered Mei Yin to serve as the commander-in-chief of Huai'an. He was determined to defend Huai'an and gave strict orders.

古文：燕兵破何福军，执诸将平安等，遣使假道于殷，以进香为名。
现代文：燕军攻破何福军队，捉拿平安等诸将，燕王派使者向梅殷借路，以进香为名。
English: Yan's army defeated He Fu's army, captured Ping'an and other generals, and Yan Wang sent an envoy to Mei Yin to borrow the road, in the name of Jin Xiang.

古文：殷答曰： 进香，皇考有禁，不遵者为不孝。 
现代文：梅殷答道： 进香，先皇有禁令，不尊者为不孝。 
English: Mei Yin replied, "Incense is prohibited by the first emperor, and those who do not respect it are not filial.

古文：王大怒，复书言： 今兴兵诛君侧恶，天命有归，非人所能阻。 
现代文：燕王大怒，又写信道： 而今我兴兵诛君侧，是天命所归，非人所能阻挡。 
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage and wrote again, "Now that I am on the side of Xing Bingjun, it is my destiny and no one can stop me.

古文：殷割使者耳鼻纵之，曰： 留汝口为殿下言君臣大义。 
现代文：梅殷割去使者的耳朵、鼻子，然后将其释放，并对他说道 ：留下你的嘴巴去为殿下声明君臣之大义。 
English: Mei Yin cut off the messenger's ears and nose, then released him and said to him: "Leave your mouth to proclaim the righteousness of the prince for His Highness."

古文：王为气沮。
现代文：燕王为之气沮。
English: Yan Wang was very upset.

古文：而凤阳守徐安亦拆浮桥，绝舟楫以遏燕。
现代文：而凤阳守将徐安也拆除浮桥，断绝船只，遏制燕军。
English: But Xu An, the governor of Fengyang, also dismantled the pontoon bridge, cut off the ships, and curbed the Yan army.

古文：燕兵乃涉泗，出天长，取道扬州。
现代文：燕军只得渡过泗水，从天长出发，取道扬州。
English: Yan's army had to cross Surabaya and set out from Tianchang, taking the road to Yangzhou.

古文：王即帝位，殷尚拥兵淮上，帝迫公主啮血为书投殷。
现代文：燕王即帝位后，梅殷仍拥兵淮上，成祖逼迫公主咬破指头写成血书递交梅殷。
English: After the accession of Yan Wang, that is, the throne, Mei Yin still supported the soldiers. Cheng Zu forced the princess to bite her finger to write a blood book and submit it to Mei Yin.

古文：殷得书恸哭，乃还京。
现代文：梅殷收到血书之后恸哭不已，于是返回京城。
English: After Mei Yin received the bloody letter, she cried uncontrollably and returned to Beijing.

古文：既入见，帝迎劳曰： 驸马劳苦。 
现代文：入宫拜见，成祖迎接并慰劳道： 驸马辛苦了。 
English: When they entered the palace, Cheng Zu greeted them and consoled them with the words: "You have worked hard.

古文：殷曰： 劳而无功耳。 
现代文：梅殷答道 ：劳而无功啊！ 
English: Mei Yin replied, "All in vain!

古文：帝默然。
现代文：成祖默然。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：永乐二年，都御史陈瑛奏殷畜养亡命，与女秀才刘氏朋邪诅咒。
现代文：永乐二年，都御史陈瑛上奏告发梅殷蓄养亡命之徒，与女秀才刘氏朋比为奸，诅咒皇上。
English: In the second year of Yongle, Chen Ying, the Grand Historian of the Capital, sent a report to the emperor, accusing Mei Yin of harboring a traitor and betraying the emperor, and accusing her of being a traitor to the emperor and cursing the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 朕自处之。 
现代文：成祖说： 朕自会处置。 
English: Chengzu said: I'll deal with it myself.

古文：因谕户部考定公、侯、驸马、伯仪仗从人之数，而别命锦衣卫执殷家人送辽东。
现代文：因此谕示户部考察核定公、侯、驸马、伯仪仗随从人数，而另外命锦衣卫将梅殷家人逮捕送往辽东。
English: Therefore, he ordered the household department to investigate and approve the number of attendants of the prince, prince, prince's horse, and prince's horse, and in addition, he ordered the guards to arrest Mei Yin's family and send them to Liaodong.

古文：明年冬十月，殷入朝，前军都督佥事谭深、锦衣卫指挥赵曦挤殷笪桥下，溺死，以殷自投水闻。
现代文：第二年十月，梅殷入朝谒见，前军都督佥事谭深、锦衣卫指挥赵曦将梅殷挤到笪桥下溺死，却以梅殷自己投水而死上奏。
English: In October of the following year, when Mei Yin entered the imperial court, the former military governor, Tan Sheng, and the commander of the Jin Yi Wei, Zhao Xi, pushed Mei Yin under the bridge to drown, but Mei Yin threw herself into the water and died.

古文：都督同知许成发其事。
现代文：都督同知许成揭发此事。
English: The governor and his adviser, Xu Cheng, came together to expose the affair.

古文：帝怒，命法司治深、曦罪，斩之，籍其家。
现代文：成祖大怒，下令法司将谭深、赵曦治罪斩首，并抄没所有家产。
English: Cheng Zu was furious and ordered the legal department to behead Tan Shen and Zhao Xi Zhi, and confiscate all the family property.

古文：遣官为殷治丧，谥荣定，而封许成为永新伯。
现代文：又派遣官员为梅殷办理丧事，谥号荣定，而封许成为永新伯。
English: In addition, officials were dispatched to handle the funeral for Mei Yin. His posthumous name was Rongding, and he was sealed to become Yongxin Bo.

古文：初，公主闻殷死，谓上果杀殷，牵衣大哭，问驸马安在。
现代文：开始，公主获悉梅殷去世，说皇上果然处死了梅殷，牵住成祖的衣服大哭，并问驸马何在。
English: At first, when the princess learned that Mei Yin had died, she said that the emperor had indeed executed Mei Yin, held onto Cheng Zu's clothes and cried, and asked where her horse was.

古文：帝曰： 为主迹贼，无自苦。 
现代文：成祖说道： 驸马身为主子，却要跟随贼寇，你不要自己苦自己了。 
English: Cheng Zu said, "The horse is the master, but you have to follow the thief. Don't be hard on yourself."

古文：寻官殷二子，顺昌为中府都督同知，景福为旗手卫指挥使，赐公主书曰： 驸马殷虽有过失，兄以至亲不问。
现代文：不久，成祖封梅殷两子为官，顺昌为中府都督同知，景福为旗手卫指挥使，并赐信公主说： 驸马梅殷虽有过失，为兄因为他是至亲，不予追究。
English: Soon, the two sons of Chengzu Fongmei Yin became officials, Shunchang was the same as the governor of Zhongfu, and Gingfu was the flag-bearer and commander of the guards. He also sent a letter to the princess saying: Although Xingma Mei Yin was at fault, he would not be investigated as a brother because he was a close relative.

古文：比闻溺死，兄甚疑之。
现代文：获悉梅殷溺死，为兄十分怀疑。
English: When he learned that Mei Yin had drowned, his brother was very suspicious.

古文：都督许成来首，已加爵赏，谋害之人悉置重法，特报妹知之。 
现代文：都督许成前来揭发，为兄已对他加封爵位，谋害者已全部给予重法处置，特告知妹妹。 
English: The city's governor, Xu Cheng, came to reveal that his brother had been given a knighthood, and that the perpetrators had all been given heavy legal sanctions. He told his sister in particular.

古文：瓦剌灰者，降人也，事殷久，谓深、曦实杀殷，请于帝，断二人手足，剖其肠祭殷，遂自经死。
现代文：有一名投降者，名叫瓦剌灰，他为梅殷效力已久，说谭深、赵曦确实杀害了梅殷，向成祖请求，砍断了两人的手足，剖出其肠祭祀梅殷，然后自己上吊而死。
English: One of the surrenders, named Wawu Hui, who had worked for Mei Yin for a long time, said that Tan Sheng and Zhao Xi had indeed killed Mei Yin, asked Cheng Zu, cut off the two people's hands and feet, cut out their intestines to sacrifice to Mei Yin, and then hanged himself to death.

古文：十二月进封公主为宁国长公主。
现代文：十二月，成祖进封公主为宁国长公主。
English: In December, Chengzu Jinfeng Princess became Ning Guofeng Princess.

古文：宣德九年八月薨，年七十一。
现代文：宣德九年八月，宁国公主去世，终年七十一岁。
English: In August of the ninth year of Xuan De, Princess Ning Guo passed away at the age of seventy-one.

古文：初，主闻成祖举兵，贻书责以大义。
现代文：当时，公主闻知成祖举兵，写信指责成祖，并晓以大义。
English: At that time, the princess heard that Cheng Zu had raised an army, and wrote a letter to Cheng Zu, accusing him and calling for justice.

古文：不答。
现代文：成祖不予答复。
English: There was no reply.

古文：成祖至淮北，贻主书，命迁居太平门外，勿罹兵祸。
现代文：成祖到达淮北，写信给公主，命她迁居太平门外，以免遭遇战祸。
English: When Cheng Zu arrived in Huaibei, he wrote to the princess and ordered her to move outside Taiping Gate to avoid the disaster of war.

古文：主亦不答。
现代文：公主也不予回答。
English: The princess did not answer either.

古文：然成祖故重主，即位后，岁时赐与无算，诸王莫敢望。
现代文：但是成祖仍像以往一样尊重公主，即位之后，逢年过节赏赐无数，诸王无人能比。
English: However, Cheng Zu still respected the princess as he had in the past. After he ascended the throne, he gave her countless gifts every year. No other king could match her.

古文：殷孙纯，成化中举进士，知定远县，忤上官，弃归。
现代文：梅殷之孙梅纯，成化年中成为进士，担任定远县知县，因与上司发生冲突，弃官归乡。
English: Mei Yin's grandson, Mei Chun, became an officer in Chenghua in the middle of the year and served as the governor of Dingyuan County. Due to a conflict with his boss, he resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：袭武阶，为中都副留守。
现代文：承袭武阶，为中都副留守。
English: He succeeded to the military rank, but stayed on as vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission.

