古文：韦处厚，字德载，京兆人。
现代文：韦处厚字德载，京兆人。
English: Wei's place is thick with the word "Desai," the capital of China.

古文：父万，监察御史，为荆南节度参谋。
现代文：父韦万，监察御史，为荆南节度使参谋。
English: His father, Wei Wan, was an inspector of imperial history and a staff officer for the Jingnan Festival.

古文：处厚本名淳，避宪宗讳，改名处厚。
现代文：韦处厚本名淳，因避宪宗讳，改名处厚。
English: Wei Shuko Atsushi's real name is Jun, but he changed his name to Shuko Atsushi because of his anti-constitutional views.

古文：幼有至性，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：幼小即品性优良，侍奉继母以孝顺闻名。
English: He was known for his filial piety while serving his stepmother.

古文：居父母忧，庐于墓次。
现代文：父母亡故，设庐于墓侧守丧。
English: After the death of his parents, he set up an urn at the side of the grave to keep vigil.

古文：既免丧，游长安。
现代文：丧期满，游长安。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Yu Chang'an passed away.

古文：通《五经》，博览史籍，而文思赡逸。
现代文：通晓《五经》，博览史籍，而文思丰富奔放。
English: He is familiar with the "Five Classics" and is well versed in historical books, while his literary thoughts are rich and unrestrained.

古文：元和初，登进士第，应贤良方正，擢居异等，授秘书省校书郎。
现代文：元和初，登进士第，应贤良方正科试，以优等录取，授秘书省校书郎。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and passed the examination of Fangzheng, and was admitted with honors, and was awarded the secretary of the provincial school.

古文：裴垍以宰相监修国史，奏以本官充直馆，改咸阳县尉，迁右拾遗，并兼史职。
现代文：裴土自以宰相衔监修国史，奏请韦处厚以本官充任。后改任咸阳县尉，升为右拾遗，同时兼任史职。
English: Pei Tu took the title of prime minister to supervise the national history, and asked Wei Shukou to fill the position. Later, he was transferred to the Xianyang County Lieutenant, promoted to the right to collect relics, and concurrently served as a historian.

古文：修《德宗实录》五十卷上之，时称信史。
现代文：修撰《德宗实录》五十卷进献，当时被誉为信史。
English: He contributed fifty volumes to the compilation of the "True Record of the German Sect," which was hailed as a reliable history at the time.

古文：转左补阙、礼部考功二员外。
现代文：转任左补阙、礼部考功二员外。
English: He was transferred to the post of Zuo Buyei, two members of the Ministry of Rites and Deeds were removed.

古文：早为宰相韦贯之所重，时贯之以议兵不合旨出官，处厚坐友善，出为开州刺史。
现代文：早被宰相韦贯之看重，此时韦贯之因军事主张不合圣旨而出朝任职，韦处厚同他相友善即受牵连，出任开州刺史。
English: He had already been valued by the chancellor Wei Kanshi. At this time, Wei Kanshi left for the imperial court because his military proposal was not in accordance with the divine will. Wei was so friendly with him that he was implicated, and he served as the governor of Kaizhou.

古文：入拜户部郎中，俄以本官知制诰。
现代文：后入朝拜户部郎中，随即以本官知制诰。
English: After that, he became a retainer of the Imperial Household Agency, and then he was appointed to his present post.

古文：穆宗以其学有师法，召入翰林，为侍讲学士，换谏议大夫，改中书舍人，侍讲如故。
现代文：穆宗因其学有师法，召入翰林，为侍讲学士，又换任谏议大夫，改任中书舍人，仍为皇上侍讲如故。
English: Mu Zong was called to Hanlin because of his master's degree, and he was appointed as an attendant lecturer for the bachelor's degree, and he was also appointed as a lecturer for the master's degree, and he was appointed as a lecturer for the middle school, and he was still an attendant lecturer for the emperor.

古文：时张平叔以便佞诙谐，他门捷进，自京兆少尹为鸿胪卿、判度支，不数月，宣授户部侍郎。
现代文：当时张平叔凭着谗谀诙谐，由旁门歪道迅速擢升，由京兆少尹做了鸿胪卿、判度支，不数月，宣诏授户部侍郎。
English: At that time, Uncle Zhang Ping, with his wit, was quickly promoted from the side gate to the crooked road, and he was made by Jing Zhao Shao Yin into Hong Xuanqing and Shandong Branch, and after several months, he was awarded the title of Household Attendant.

古文：平叔以征利中穆宗意，欲希大任。
现代文：张平叔以征利有方使穆宗中意，希冀被重用。
English: Zhang Pingshu, hoping to be re-employed, was able to win the favor of Mu Zong.

古文：以榷盐旧法，为弊年深，欲官自粜盐，可富国强兵，劝农积货，疏利害十八条。
现代文：他认为原有盐专卖法年久弊深，欲转为官府自卖，可富国强兵，劝勉农事，积蓄资财，便上疏十八条陈说利害。
English: He believed that the original salt monopoly law had been deeply flawed for a long time, and he wanted to change it to the government's self-sale, which could enrich the country, strengthen the army, encourage agriculture, and accumulate wealth, so he wrote eighteen articles to express his interests.

古文：诏下其奏，令公卿议。
现代文：诏命下发其奏疏，令公卿计议。
English: The imperial edict ordered that a report on the matter be issued, and the court nobles were ordered to deliberate.

古文：处厚抗论不可，以平叔条奏不周，经虑未尽，以为利者返害，为简者至烦，乃取其条目尤不可者，发十难以诘之。
现代文：韦处厚坚决反对，认为张平叔所奏条目不周到，未经慎重考虑，以为有利的结果有害，以为简便的其实最麻烦，并取其条目中最不可行的，提出十个疑点来诘难他。
English: Wei Shuanhou resolutely objected, saying that the item played by Zhang Pingxiu was not thoughtful, without careful consideration, that the favorable result was harmful, that the simple one was actually the most troublesome, and that it was the most unfeasible item, and put forward ten doubts to embarrass him.

古文：时平叔倾巧有恩，自谓言无不允。
现代文：此时张平叔狡诈乖巧颇得恩宠，自以为皇上对他言无不从。
English: At this time, Zhang Pingshu's cunning and dexterity was quite favored, and he thought that the emperor had no choice but to listen to him.

古文：及处厚条件驳奏，穆宗称善，令示平叔。平叔词屈无以答，其事遂寝。
现代文：及至韦处厚逐条逐件驳奏，穆宗认为有理，命将韦处厚的奏书下示张平叔，张平叔理屈词穷无话可答，奏请之事便作罢。
English: Mu Zong thought it was reasonable to order Zhang Ping to present Wei's report to him. Zhang Ping had nothing to say in response to Wei's report, so the matter was dropped.

古文：处厚以幼主荒怠，不亲政务，既居纳诲之地，宜有以启导性灵，乃铨择经义雅言，以类相从，为二十卷，谓之《六经法言》，献之。
现代文：韦处厚因幼主好乐懈怠，不亲理政务，自己既处纳听诲君之位，当设法启发开导皇上性灵，便择编经义雅言，按类分列，编为二十卷，名为《六经法言》，进呈皇上。
English: Since Wei was too lazy to take care of government affairs due to his young age, and since he was in the position of listening to and listening to the emperor, when he tried to enlighten and enlighten the emperor's soul, he chose to compile the sutras, divided into categories, and compiled into twenty volumes, called "Six sutras," and presented it to the emperor.

古文：锡以缯帛银器，仍赐金紫。
现代文：皇上赠以缯帛银器，并赐紫服金鱼袋。
English: The emperor presented him with a set of enameled silverware and gave him a purple goldfish bag.

古文：以《宪宗实录》未成，诏处厚与路随兼充史馆修撰。
现代文：因《宪宗实录》尚未写成，诏令韦处厚与路随兼任史馆修撰。
English: Since the "Historical Record of the Jurchen Sect" had not yet been written, Wei Shuchuo and Lu Sui also served as editors of the history museum.

古文：实录未成，许二人分日入内，仍放常参。
现代文：实录未成，准许二人分日入宫，仍定时放参。
English: The actual record was not made, and the two were allowed to enter the palace every other day, and were still allowed to attend regularly.

古文：处厚俄又权兵部侍郎。
现代文：韦处厚随即又代理兵部侍郎。
English: Wei Shuchuan immediately became the acting Hyobu chamberlain.

古文：敬宗嗣位，李逢吉用事，素恶李绅，乃构成其罪，祸将不测。
现代文：敬宗嗣位，李逢吉执政，他一向嫉恨李绅，便构织罪名，李绅将遭不测之祸。
English: He always envied Li Sheng, who was the heir to the throne of Emperor Jingzong and was ruled by Li Fengji, so he fabricated the accusation that Li Sheng would suffer an unforeseen calamity.

古文：处厚与绅皆以孤进，同年进士，心颇伤之，乃上疏曰：
现代文：韦处厚与李绅皆由孤身仕进，同年得中进士，他内心颇为伤感，便上疏道：
English: Wei Chuan Hou and Li Sheng were both promoted by themselves, and were promoted to middle school in the same year. He was quite sad inside, so he said:

古文：臣窃闻朋党议论，以李绅贬黜尚轻。
现代文： 臣私下闻朋党议论，认为李绅贬黜尚轻。
English: Privately, the vassal heard his friend's party talk, and thought that it was too easy for Li Sheng to disparage him.

古文：臣受恩至深，职备顾问，事关圣德，不合不言。
现代文：臣受恩至深，职备顾问，事关圣听，不应不言。
English: The minister is deeply indebted, and the vocational training consultant should not be silent when it comes to listening to the saint.

古文：绅先朝奖用，擢在翰林，无过可书，无罪可戮。
现代文：李绅为先朝奖用，擢拔在翰林，无过失可书，无罪孽可戮。
English: Li Sheng was awarded the prize of the first dynasty, promoted in the Hanlin, no fault can be written, no sin can be slaughtered.

古文：今群党得志，谗嫉大兴。
现代文：今群党得志，谗嫉大兴。
English: Now that the group parties have won the hearts and minds of the people, there is great rejoicing.

古文：询于人情，皆甚叹骇。
现代文：若问人心，皆甚惊骇。
English: If you ask people, they are shocked.

古文：《诗》云： 萋兮菲兮，成是贝锦。
现代文：《诗》云： 彩丝交织，成此贝纹绣锦。
English: "Poetry" cloud: colored silk is interwoven to form this shell embroidery.

古文：彼谮人者，亦已太甚。 
现代文：诬人之徒，行事犹已太过。 
English: You villains have gone too far.

古文：又曰： 谗言罔极，交乱四国。 
现代文：又曰： 谗人无所不为，扰乱四方国家。 
English: It is also said: "He who does nothing is omnipotent, and disturbs the four countries."

古文：自古帝王，未有远君子近小人而致太平者。
现代文：自古帝王，从无排斥君子、亲近小人而导致天下太平之事。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have never ostracized nobles and been close to villains, leading to world peace.

古文：古人云： 三年无改于父之道，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：古人云： 三年不改其父法则，可谓孝顺。 
English: The ancients said: If you do not change your father's rules for three years, you can be called filial.

古文：李绅是前朝任使，纵有罪愆，犹宜洗衅涤瑕，念旧忘过，以成无改之美。
现代文：李绅原是先朝奖掖任用，纵有罪过，犹应消除仇隙洗净瑕污，念记旧情忘却过失，以助其养成无改父道之美德。
English: Li Sheng was originally appointed by the first emperor, and even if he was guilty, he should eliminate the vendetta, wash away the blemish, remember the old feelings and forget the fault, so as to help him develop the virtue of not changing his father's way.

古文：今逢吉门下故吏，遍满朝行，侵毁加诬，何词不有？
现代文：现今原李逢吉门下属吏，遍布朝中，诽谤诬陷，何词不有？
English: Nowadays, officials under the former Li Fengjimen are all over the country, slandering and framing, what words do they not have?

古文：所贬如此，犹为太轻。
现代文：如此贬谪，尚嫌太轻。
English: It is too light to be so derogatory.

古文：盖曾参有投杼之疑，先师有拾尘之戒。
现代文：从前曾参遭使其母投杼之杀人嫌疑，先师孔子有勿如颜渊饭中拾尘之训诫。
English: Confucius, the founder of Confucianism, warned his disciple not to pick up the dust in the rice bowl.

古文：伏望陛下断自圣虑，不惑奸邪，则天下幸甚！
现代文：臣俯首恳望陛下圣虑自断，不惑于奸邪，则天下幸甚！
English: If a vassal bows his head and implores his majesty to make up his own mind and not be fooled by treachery, then all is well in the world!

古文：建中之初，山东向化，只缘宰相朋党，上负朝廷。杨炎为元载复雠，卢杞为刘晏报怨，兵连祸结，天下不平。
现代文：建中之初，山东归顺，只因宰相营私结党，上负朝廷，故人杨炎为元载复仇，卢杞为刘晏报怨，兵连祸结，天下不平。
English: At the beginning of the middle period of construction, Shandong surrendered, only because the prime minister led a private party and went to the imperial court. The deceased Yang Yan took revenge for Yuan Zai, Lu Wei took revenge for Liu Wei, the soldiers were plagued by misfortune, and the world was unequal.

古文：伏乞圣明，察臣愚恳。
现代文：伏乞圣明，察臣愚忠。 
English: Fawning over Shomei, watching over his vassal, Guchu.

古文：帝悟其事，绅得减死，贬端州司马。
现代文：皇上省悟此事，李绅得以免死，贬为端州司马。
English: After the emperor reflected on the matter, Li Sheng was spared death and demoted to Danzhou Sima.

古文：处厚正拜兵部侍郎，谢恩于思政殿。
现代文：韦处厚正式拜兵部侍郎，谢恩于思政殿。
English: Wei formally paid homage to the attendant of the military department, and expressed his gratitude to the Sisi palace.

古文：时昭愍狂恣，屡出畋游。每月坐朝不三四日。处厚因谢，从容奏曰： 臣有大罪，伏乞面首。 
现代文：当时昭愍皇帝狂放恣肆，经常出外狩猎游玩，每月坐朝不过三四日，韦处厚趁谢恩之机从容启奏道： 臣有大罪，伏乞当面自首。 
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaohui was wild and reckless, often going out to hunt and play, and sitting in the morning only three or four days a month. Wei Shudao took advantage of the opportunity to express his gratitude and calmly said: The minister has a serious crime, and he surrendered in front of his face.

古文：帝曰： 何也？ 
现代文：皇上问： 何事？ 
English: Emperor Daowu asked: Why?

古文：处厚对曰： 臣前为谏官，不能先朝死谏，纵先圣好畋及色，以至不寿，臣合当诛。
现代文：韦处厚回答道： 臣先前为官，先朝时不能冒死相谏，纵容先圣贪恋狩猎及美色，以致不能长寿，臣罪当诛。
English: Wei Chuan Hou replied, "As a former official, I could not take the risk of killing each other when I was in the first dynasty. I indulged my father-in-law's love of hunting and beauty, so that I could not live a long life. I should be punished for my sins.

古文：然所以不死谏者，亦为陛下此时在春宫，年已十五。
现代文：然而之所以不能死谏，也因陛下此时在东宫，年已十五。
English: However, the reason why he could not die was also due to the fact that His Majesty was in the East Palace at this time and was fifteen years old.

古文：今则陛下皇子始一岁矣，臣安得更避死亡之诛？ 
现代文：现在陛下皇子才满一岁，臣怎能再逃避死亡之诛呢？ 
English: Now that your majesty's prince is only one year old, how can you escape the death penalty?

古文：上深感悟其意，赐锦彩一百匹、银器四事。
现代文：皇上深悟其意颇为感动，赐锦彩一百匹、银器四套。
English: The emperor was deeply moved by his intention and gave him a hundred horses and four sets of silverware.

古文：宝历元年四月，群臣上尊号，御殿受册肆赦。
现代文：宝历元年四月，群臣奏献皇帝尊号，皇上在御殿受册实行大赦。
English: In April of the first year of the Horyaku era, a group of courtiers presented the emperor's honorific title, and the emperor was registered in the imperial palace to implement an amnesty.

古文：李逢吉以李绅之故，所撰赦文但云左降官已经量移者与量移，不言未量移者，盖欲绅不受恩例。
现代文：李逢吉因嫉恨李绅之故，所撰赦文只说谪贬之官已经酌情调近者予以量移，而不提先前未量移者，企图不让李绅受到恩赦。
English: Because Li Fengji was jealous of Li Sheng, he only wrote an amnesty saying that the official in charge of reprimanding Li Sheng had transferred those who were close to him to be pardoned, without mentioning those who had not been pardoned before, in an attempt to prevent Li Sheng from being pardoned.

古文：处厚上疏曰： 伏见赦文节目中，左降官有不该恩泽者。
现代文：韦处厚上疏道： 臣俯首见赦文条目中，谪贬之官有不该享受恩泽的。
English: Wei Department Atsukami Sōdō: "Vassals bow their heads and see the amnesty" In the amnesty article, there are officials who should not enjoy the favor.

古文：在宥之体，有所未弘。
现代文：以圣上宽赦之本意，便有所不及。
English: With the intention of divine forgiveness, it falls short.

古文：臣闻物议皆言逢吉恐李绅量移，故有此节。
现代文：臣闻听舆论皆言李逢吉惟恐李绅受恩量移，故有此条。
English: After listening to the public opinion, Li Fengji said that he feared that Li Sheng would be favored by the public, so there was this article.

古文：若如此，则应是近年流贬官，因李绅一人皆不得量移。
现代文：若如此，则应是近年贬谪流放之官员，因李绅一人之故皆不得量移。
English: If this is the case, then it should be the officials who have been demoted and exiled in recent years, and because of Li Sheng, none of them can be transferred.

古文：事体至大，岂敢不言？
现代文：事关重大，岂敢不言？
English: It's a big deal. How dare you not say anything?

古文：李绅先朝奖任，曾在内廷，自经贬官，未蒙恩宥。
现代文：李绅乃先朝奖用，曾在内廷任职，自遭贬谪，未蒙恩赦。
English: Li Sheng was an awardee of the previous dynasty, served in the Inner Court, suffered self-deprecation, and was not pardoned.

古文：古人云： 人君当记人之功，忘人之过。 
现代文：古人云： 人君当记人之功，忘人之过。 
English: The ancients said: People should remember people's merits and forget people's faults.

古文：管仲拘囚，齐桓举为国相；冶长缧绁，仲尼选为密亲。
现代文：管仲曾被拘囚，齐桓公用他为国相；公冶长曾陷牢狱，孔仲尼选他当女婿。
English: Guan Zhong was once a prisoner, Qi Huan Gong used him as minister of state; Gong Ye Chang was once in prison, and Kong Zhong Ni chose him as his son-in-law.

古文：有罪犹宜涤荡，无辜岂可终累？
现代文：有罪者犹应涤荡其罪，无辜者岂可终生受累？
English: The guilty should still be punished for their crimes, but should the innocent suffer for the rest of their lives?

古文：况鸿名大号，册礼重仪，天地百灵之所鉴临，亿兆八纮之所瞻戴。恩泽不广，实非所宜。
现代文：何况圣上享鸿名大号，册赦之礼乃重大仪式，为天地百神所鉴临，亿兆八极所瞻戴，若恩泽不广施，确实不合适。
English: Not to mention the fact that it is a great ceremony for a saint to be given a great name and to be pardoned. It is a great ceremony, witnessed by hundreds of gods in heaven and earth, and observed by billions and trillions of people. If the grace is not given widely, it is really not appropriate.

古文：臣与逢吉素无雠嫌，与李绅本非亲党，所论者全大体，所陈者在至公，伏乞圣慈察臣肝胆。
现代文：臣与李逢吉素无仇隙，与李绅本非亲戚，之所以议论是为顾全大局，之所以陈述出自一片公心。
English: There is no feud between the minister and Li Fengji, and he is not a relative of Li Sheng. The reason for the discussion is to take into account the overall situation, and the reason for the statement is out of a common sense.

古文：倘蒙允许，仍望宣付宰臣，应近年左降官，并编入赦条，令准旧例，得量移近处。 
现代文：伏乞圣慈察臣肝胆，倘蒙允许，仍望宣令宰臣，应将近年谪贬之官，一并编入赦令条目，使其得依旧例，获赦量移近处。 
English: If it is allowed, it is still hoped to issue an order to the aide-de-camp that the aide-de-camp should be demoted to the next year, together with the entry of the pardon order, so that it can be the same as before, and the amount of pardon can be moved closer.

古文：帝览奏其事，乃追改赦文，绅方沾恩例。
现代文：皇上览毕奏疏，深悟所言事理，于是追令改写赦文，李绅才得依例沾恩。
English: The emperor saw through the ruse and deeply understood what he was saying, so he ordered to rewrite the pardon, and Li Sheng only had to follow the example.

古文：处厚为翰林承旨学士，每立视草，惬会圣旨。
现代文：韦处厚任翰林承旨学士，每起草诏书，均能准确领会圣上旨意。
English: Wei is a talented scholar of imperial edicts, and every time he drafts an edict, he is able to accurately understand the Holy Will.

古文：常奉急命于宣州征鹰鸷及杨、益、两浙索奇文绫锦，皆抗疏不奉命，且引前时赦书为证，帝皆可其奏。
现代文：曾奉急命往宣州征收鹰鸷及向扬、益、两浙索取奇纹绫绵，韦处厚皆上疏拒不受命，而且引用先前赦书为证据，皇上均准其奏。
English: He had been urgently ordered to go to Xuanzhou to collect eagle feathers and to Yang, Yi, and Zhu to request strangely-patterned embroidered cotton, but Wei's subordinates all refused to accept the order, and cited the previous pardon letter as evidence, and the emperor allowed them to play.

古文：宝历季年，急变中起。文宗底绥内难，诏命将降，未有所定。
现代文：宝历末年，宫中突生事变，文宗平定内难，欲降诏命，却犹豫不定。
English: In the last year of the Horyaku era, there was a sudden change in the imperial court, and Emperor Wenzong was in a difficult situation. He wanted to issue an imperial edict, but hesitated.

古文：处厚闻难奔赴，昌言曰： 《春秋》之法，大义灭亲，内恶必书，以明逆顺。
现代文：韦处厚闻难奔赴朝中，直言启奏道： 《春秋》之法，大义灭亲，内恶必书，以明逆顺。
English: Wei Zheng thick heard it was difficult to go to the Middle Kingdom, and bluntly said: "The law of Spring and Autumn, the great righteousness to exterminate relatives, the inner evil must be written, and the clear and contrary is good."

古文：正名讨罪，于义何嫌？
现代文：讨伐罪逆名正言顺，合乎大义有何疑惑？
English: Is there any doubt that the crime of subversion is justified and in accordance with justice?

古文：安可依违，有所避讳！ 
现代文：怎能迟疑不决，有所避讳！ 
English: How can you hesitate, how can you avoid!

古文：遂奉籓教行焉。
现代文：于是按对藩王的方式处置。
English: As a result, he was dealt with in the same way as the king of the domain.

古文：是夕，诏命制置及践祚礼仪，不暇责所司，皆出于处厚之议。
现代文：当晚，诏命制置及登极礼仪，来不及责成主管官署办理，均依照韦处厚的主张。
English: On the evening of the same day, it was too late to instruct the competent authority to handle the preparation of the imperial edict and the enthronement ceremony, both of which were in accordance with Wei Shuxiao's suggestion.

古文：及礼行之后，皆叶旧章。
现代文：及至礼仪进行，同原定法规完全符合。
English: As far as the etiquette is concerned, it is fully consistent with the original regulations.

古文：以佐命功，旋拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、监修国史，加银青光禄大夫，进爵灵昌郡公。
现代文：韦处厚因佐诏命之功，随即拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、监修国史，加银青光禄大夫，晋爵灵昌郡公。
English: Wei worked hard for the sake of Sazhao's order, and immediately became the junior secretary of the middle school, the junior secretary of the middle school, the superintendent of the national history, the doctor of Qingguanglu, and the prince of Lingchang County.

古文：处厚在相位，务在济时，不为身计。
现代文：韦处厚任宰相，致力于匡时救世，从不为自身打算。
English: Wei was appointed prime minister, dedicated to saving the world at the right time, and never thought about himself.

古文：中外补授，咸得其宜。
现代文：无论在朝内或朝外、补官或正授，均能名副其实。
English: Whether in the imperial court or outside the imperial court, as a supplementary official or as a full professor, he can truly be called a star.

古文：初，贞元中，宰相齐抗奏减冗员，罢诸州别驾，其在京百司，当入别驾者，多处之朝列。
现代文：当初，贞元间宰相齐抗奏减冗员，罢免诸州别驾，而那些在京师各署衙中当入别驾官职的，却多处朝官之列。
English: At first, the chancellors and prime ministers of various states protested against the redundancy and dismissed the governors, but those who were supposed to be appointed as governors in the various departments of Beijing were in the ranks of imperial officials in many places.

古文：元和以来，两河用兵，偏裨立功者，往往擢在周行。率以储采王官杂补之，皆盛服趋朝，硃紫填拥。
现代文：元和以来，两河用兵，将佐中立功者，往往擢升到大的官署，大都以皇上或太子属官之职杂乱补授，皆盛服趋朝，朱衣紫服挤满朝堂。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty, soldiers from the two rivers and those who served as generals and advisors were often promoted to large government offices. Most of them were appointed as imperial or crown prince subordinate officials. They were all dressed in grand attire and crowded the imperial hall in vermilion and purple.

古文：久次当进，及受代闲居者，常数十人，趋中书及宰相私第，摩肩候谒，繁于辞语。
现代文：久候当进及代职闲居者，常常数十人奔赴中书省署及宰相私宅，摩肩接踵地等候谒见，繁辞碎语无止无休。
English: Those who have been waiting for a long time and those who have been idle on behalf of the post, often dozens of people rush to the Central Book Office and the Prime Minister's private residence, waiting shoulder to shoulder for an audience, and chattering endlessly.

古文：及处厚秉政，复奏置六雄、十望、十紧、三十四州别驾以处之。而清流不杂，朝政清肃。
现代文：及至韦处厚秉政，先后奏请设置六雄、十望、十紧、三十四州别驾以安排这些人员，而不与正员相混杂，朝政得以整肃。
English: When Wei was in power, he ordered the establishment of the "six strong," "ten powerful," "ten powerful," and "thirty-four states" respectively, so that these officials would not be mixed with the regular officials, and the imperial government could be cleaned up.

古文：文宗勤于听政，然浮于决断，宰相奏事得请，往往中变。
现代文：文宗勤于听政，却轻于决断，宰相奏事得旨，诏命往往中途改变。
English: Wenzong is diligent in listening to the government, but it is lighter than the decision, the prime minister reports the order, and the order is often changed in the middle.

古文：处厚常独论奏曰： 陛下不以臣等不肖，用为宰相，参议大政。
现代文：韦处厚曾独自上奏论说： 陛下不因臣等不肖，用臣等为宰相，参议大政。
English: Wei Shituo once independently made the following argument: His Majesty does not use his ministers because they are unattractive, he uses them as prime ministers and advisors.

古文：凡有奏请，初蒙听纳，寻易圣怀。
现代文：凡有奏请，初蒙圣上听纳，随即又改变圣旨。
English: Whenever there is a request, it is first accepted by the Holy Father, and then the will is changed.

古文：若出自宸衷，即示臣等不信；若出于横议，臣等何名鼎司？
现代文：若确出陛下之意，则表明臣等不可信任，若出于朝官妄加非议，臣等在朝中有何威信？
English: If His Majesty's intentions are confirmed, then it is clear that the vassals cannot be trusted. If the officials of the imperial court make unreasonable criticisms, how much authority will the vassals have in the imperial court?

古文：且裴度元勋宿德，历辅四朝，孜孜竭诚，人望所属，陛下固宜亲重。
现代文：再说裴度乃德高望重之元勋，历辅四朝大政，孜孜不倦竭尽忠诚，民望所归，陛下本应亲近器重。
English: Furthermore, Pei Du Nian is the highly respected founder of the Four Dynasties and Four Dynasties, tirelessly devoted to loyalty, popularly respected, and His Majesty should have been close to him.

古文：窦易直良厚，忠事先朝，陛下固当委信。
现代文：窦易直善良宽厚，在先朝为臣忠心耿耿，陛下理当依赖信任。
English: Dou Yizhong is kind and generous, and he was a loyal vassal during the previous reign. His Majesty should rely on his trust.

古文：微臣才薄，首蒙陛下擢用，非出他门，言既不从，臣宜先退。 
现代文：微臣才力薄弱，首次蒙陛下擢拔重用，并非由他门旁道入朝，所言既不可听纳，臣当先自辞职。 
English: A minor vassal with weak talent, promoted and used by His Majesty for the first time, did not enter the imperial court by his side. What he said was unacceptable, and the vassal should resign first.

古文：即趋下再拜陈乞。
现代文：随即退下再拜陈说乞准。
English: He then retreated before bowing to Chen and begging for permission.

古文：上矍然曰： 何至此耶！
现代文：皇上忙道： 何以至此呢！
English: Empress Busy: How did it come to this!

古文：卿之志业，朕素自知，登庸作辅，百职斯举。
现代文：卿之志向才干，朕素来知晓，自登相位辅政以来，朝廷百官俱能尽职。
English: I have always been aware of the ambition and ability of the emperor. Since he ascended to the position of Vice-regent, hundreds of officials in the imperial court have been able to perform their duties.

古文：纵朕有所失，安可遽辞，以彰吾薄德？ 
现代文：纵然朕有失误，怎可立即辞职，以显得我薄德呢？ 
English: Even if I have made mistakes, how can I immediately resign to show my lack of virtue?

古文：处厚谢之而去，出延英门，复令召还。谓曰： 凡卿所欲言，并宜启论。 
现代文：韦处厚谢恩而去，出了延英门，皇上又下令召回，对他说： 凡卿欲说之话，应全都说出来。 
English: Wei thanked him profusely and left Yan Yingmen. The emperor ordered him to come back and said to him: "Whatever you want to say, you should say it all.

古文：处厚因对彰善瘅恶，归之法制，凡数百言。又裴度勋高望重，为人尽心切直，宜久任，可壮国威。
现代文：于是韦处厚奏论扬善惩恶、健全法制的主张，共数百言；又说裴度勋高望重，为人尽心正直，宜久任宰相，可壮国威。
English: As a result, Wei wrote several hundred words on the idea of promoting good, punishing evil, and establishing a sound legal system; he also said that Pei Duxun was highly respected and honest, and that he should serve as prime minister for a long time to strengthen national prestige.

古文：帝皆听纳。
现代文：皇上尽皆听纳。
English: The Emperor listened to everyone.

古文：自是宰臣敷奏，人不敢横议。
现代文：从此宰相奏事，朝官不敢妄加非议。
English: Since then, the prime minister has reported the matter, and the imperial officials have not dared to criticize it.

古文：俄而沧州李同捷叛，朝廷加兵。
现代文：不久沧州李同捷叛乱，朝廷发兵征讨。
English: Soon after, Li Tongjie rebelled in Cangzhou, and the imperial court sent troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：魏博史宪诚，中怀向背，裴度以宿旧自任，待宪诚于不疑。
现代文：魏博史宪诚暗怀悖心，裴度以为是老臣负气任性，对他毫不怀疑。
English: Wei Bo Shi Xiancheng secretly harbored ill-will, and Pei Du thought that the old minister was conceited and self-willed, and had no doubt about him.

古文：尝遣亲吏请事至中书。处厚谓曰： 晋公以百口于上前保尔使主，处厚则不然，但仰俟所为，自有朝典耳。 
现代文：史宪诚曾有事派亲信至中书省请示，韦处厚令来人传话： 晋公苦口婆心在皇上面前保荐你为皇上之使，我却不这样，只仰候你有所作为，自有朝典决定奖惩。 
English: Shi Xiancheng once sent a close confidant to the Chinese Ministry of Education to ask for instructions, and the Wei Office ordered a messenger to deliver a message: "Jin Gong is very anxious to recommend you as the emperor's envoy in front of the emperor, but I am not. I am only waiting for you to make a difference, and the imperial court will decide on rewards and punishments."

古文：宪诚闻之大惧，自此输竭，竟有功于沧州。
现代文：史宪诚听到这话大为恐惧，从此谒诚效忠，居然为剿灭沧州之乱立下功劳。
English: Shi Xiancheng was greatly frightened when he heard this, and from then on, he was loyal to Xiancheng and actually made a contribution to the destruction of the Cangzhou Rebellion.

古文：又尝以理财制用为国之本，撰《太和国计》二十卷以献。
现代文：韦处厚又因理财制用为治国之本，撰写《大和国计》二十卷献给朝廷。
English: Due to the fact that financial management was the foundation for governing the country, Wei Shuchuo also wrote the "Daiwa Kokuge," a twenty-volume work dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：李载义累破沧、镇两军，兵士每有俘执，多遣刳剔。
现代文：李载义屡破沧州、镇州两处叛军，每有被俘兵士，多剖胸剔肉加以杀戮。
English: Li Zaiyi repeatedly defeated two rebel armies in Cangzhou and Zhenzhou. Whenever there were captured soldiers, they were often dissected and killed.

古文：处厚以书喻之，载义深然其旨。
现代文：韦处厚致书说理，李载义深表赞同。
English: Wei Zheng thickly wrote a reason, and Li Zaiyi expressed his deep approval.

古文：自此沧、镇所获生口，配隶远地，前后全活数百千人。
现代文：从此沧州、镇州所获生俘，皆流放远地服役，前后保全了数百上千人的性命。
English: From then on, all the prisoners captured alive in Cangzhou and Zhenzhou were exiled to serve far away, saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：处厚居家循易，如不克任。
现代文：韦处厚生活上随意简朴，似乎不会理家。
English: Wei Zhenhong lives a simple life and does not seem to be able to manage his family.

古文：尝病前古有以浮议坐废者，故推择群材，往往弃瑕录用，亦为时所讥。
现代文：至于在朝廷陈奏论争，以及管理府署对待属员，则气度巍然势不可夺。他形貌并不魁伟，而且似乎很懦弱，可是僚属请示职事，皆畏惧警惕你我相顾，即使同他谈话时间很长，也不敢向他谈及私事。
English: As for his handling of controversies at the Imperial Court and the treatment of subordinates by the Administrative Agency, his demeanor is irresistible. He is not very tall and seems to be very weak, but his colleagues are afraid to ask him for instructions. They are wary of you and me. Even if you have a long conversation with him, you dare not talk to him about private matters.

古文：雅信释氏因果，晚年尤甚。聚书逾万卷，多手自刊校。
现代文：韦处厚急于启用人才，酷爱文学，古时有因空发议论而废弃了才学的人，他对此深深惋惜，故推荐选拔众多人才，往往不计其缺点而录用，也遭到人们的非议。
English: Wei was eager to employ talent and loved literature. In ancient times, there were people who abandoned their studies because of empty discussions. He deeply regretted this, so he recommended the selection of many talents, often hired regardless of their shortcomings, and was also criticized by people.

古文：奉诏修《元和实录》，未绝笔，其统例取舍，皆处厚创起焉。
现代文：韦处厚颇信佛家因果轮回之说，晚年尤甚。奉诏修撰《元和实录》，未能撰写完毕，此书体例及内容取舍，皆韦处厚创立。
English: Wei Shucheng was a firm believer in the Buddhist theory of reincarnation, especially in his later years. He was asked to revise the "Original and Actual Record," but was unable to complete it. The style and content of the book were chosen by Wei Shucheng.

古文：太和二年十二月，因延英奏对，造膝之际，忽奏 臣病作 ，遽退。
现代文：大和二年十二月，至延英殿奏对，临近皇上膝下时，忽奏 臣病发作 ，立即退下。
English: In December of the 2nd year of the Yamato era, when he was about to kneel in front of the Emperor at the court of Nobuhide, he suddenly fell ill and immediately withdrew.

古文：文宗命中官扶出，归第一夕而卒，年五十六，赠司空。
现代文：文宗命太监将他扶出归宅，只过了一夜便去世，年五十六，追赠司空。
English: Emperor Wenzong's eunuch helped him out and returned home. He died just one night later, at the age of fifty-six, and was posthumously awarded the title of Siku.

古文：处厚当国柄二周岁，启沃之谋，颇协时誉，咸共惜之。
现代文：韦处厚执掌朝政大权二周岁，竭诚进献之谋略，颇受人们称誉，对他的去世都很惋惜。
English: Wei Shuanhu was only two years old when he assumed the supreme political power of the dynasty. He was widely praised for his dedication to strategy, and his death was deeply regretted.

古文：崔群，字敦诗，清河武城人，山东著姓。
现代文：崔群字敦诗，清河武城人，为山东大姓。
English: Cui Qunzhi Dunshi, a native of Wucheng, Qinghe, is the eldest surname in Shandong.

古文：十九登进士第，又制策登科，授秘书省校书郎，累迁右补阙。
现代文：十九岁登进士第，又应制策试登科，授秘书省校书郎，屡次升迁至右补阙。
English: At the age of nineteen, he was promoted to the first grade, and he was also required to prepare for the entrance examination, was awarded the secretary of the provincial school, and was repeatedly promoted to the right supplement.

古文：元和初，召为翰林学士，历中书舍人。
现代文：元和初，召为翰林学士，历任中书舍人。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, he was called to be a scholar of Hanlin, and he has been a scholar in the past.

古文：群在内职，常以谠言正论闻于时。
现代文：崔群在朝内奉职，常以直言正论闻名于当时。
English: Cui Qun served in the imperial court and was known for his outspokenness at the time.

古文：宪宗嘉赏，降宣旨云： 自今后学士进状，并取崔群连署，然后进来。 
现代文：宪宗嘉奖他，降诏宣旨道： 从今以后学士进呈奏状，须同时取崔群之署名，然后呈来。 
English: Kenzong praised him and issued an edict: From now on, when a bachelor submits a petition, he must also obtain the signature of Cui Qun and then submit it.

古文：群以禁密之司，动为故事，自尔学士或恶直丑正，则其下学士无由上言。
现代文：崔群认为宫禁之举措动辄成为定规，从此学士中有厌恶毁谤正直者，则其下之学士无法向上投诉。
English: Cui Qun believes that the measure of palace ban is likely to become a fixed rule. From now on, if there is an aversion to defaming honesty among the bachelors, the bachelors under them cannot complain to the top.

古文：群坚不奉诏，三疏论奏方允。
现代文：因而坚持不遵奉此诏，再三上疏奏论皇上方才应允。
English: Therefore, he insisted on not abiding by this edict, and repeatedly appealed to the Emperor for permission.

古文：元和七年，惠昭太子薨，穆宗时为遂王，宪宗以澧王居长，又多内助，将建储贰，命群与澧王作让表。
现代文：元和七年，惠昭太子薨，穆宗当时为遂王，宪宗认为澧王年纪居长，又多内助，欲立遂王为皇位继承人，命崔群替澧王做辞让表。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Prince Hui Zhao died, and Mu Zong was Sui Wang at that time. Gensong thought that Sui Wang was too old and had too many assistants, and wanted to establish Sui Wang as the heir to the throne. He ordered Cui Qun to make a resignation letter for Sui Wang.

古文：群上言曰： 大凡己合当之，则有陈让之仪；己不合当，因何遽有让表？
现代文：崔群上奏道： 大抵己身当受此位，才有表示辞让之仪礼；己身不当受，因何而有让表？
English: Cui Qun made a speech: Most of the time, it is only when you are worthy of this position that you can show the ceremony of resignation; if you are not worthy of it, why do you have a resignation?

古文：今遂王嫡长，所宜正位青宫。 
现代文：现今遂王嫡生居长，当居东宫正位。 
English: Today, the eldest son of King Sui is the head of the Eastern Palace.

古文：竟从其奏。
现代文：宪宗最终听从其奏。
English: In the end, Kenzong followed his lead.

古文：时魏博节度使田季安进绢五千匹，充助修开业寺。
现代文：那时魏博节度使田季安进绢五千匹，用以助修开业寺。
English: At that time, Wei Bo Jiedu made Tian Ji'an bring in five thousand yakitori to help with the construction of Kaige Temple.

古文：群以为事实无名，体尤不可，请止其所进。
现代文：崔群认为师出无名，于理尤为不当，遂奏请制止其进献。
English: Cui Qun thought that it was particularly inappropriate for Yu Li to have a nameless teacher, and then asked him to stop his donation.

古文：群前后所论多惬旨，无不听纳。
现代文：崔群前后奏议多合圣意，皇上无不听纳。
English: Cui Qun's proposals were more in line with the emperor's wishes, and the emperor accepted them all.

古文：迁礼部侍郎，选拔才行，咸为公当。
现代文：升迁礼部侍郎，选拔才德之士，均公允恰当。
English: The promotion of etiquette attendants and the selection of talented people are all fair and appropriate.

古文：转户部侍郎。
现代文：调任户部侍郎。
English: He was reassigned to the position of household attendant.

古文：二年七月，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：元和十二年，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the attendant of Bai Zhongshu and the disciple of Bai Zhongshu.

古文：十四年，诛李师道，上顾谓宰臣曰： 李师古虽自袭祖父，然朝廷待之始终。
现代文：十四年，诛李师道，皇上当面对宰臣们说： 李师古虽从承袭其祖、父爵位入仕，然而朝廷待他始终不错。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Li Shigu, the emperor said in front of his aides-de-camp: Although Li Shigu inherited the peerage from his father and grandfather, the imperial court has always treated him well.

古文：其妻于师道即嫂叔也，虽云逆族，若量罪轻重，亦宜降等。
现代文：其妻与李师道即嫂叔关系，虽说系逆党家族，若量罪之轻重，也只应降低等级。
English: The relationship between his wife and Li Shidao, i.e. sister-in-law and uncle, although it is a family of anti-party, if the severity of the crime is measured, it should only lower the level.

古文：又李宗奭虽抵严宪，其情比之大逆，亦有不同。
现代文：又李宗虽抗拒朝廷，其情节比之大逆亦有不同。
English: And although Li Zong resisted the imperial court, the circumstances were quite different.

古文：其妻士族也，今其子女俱在掖廷，于法皆似稍深。
现代文：其妻乃士族女，今与其子女俱押在掖廷，以法量之似乎都稍过重。
English: His wife was a woman of the warrior class, and now she and her children are being held at the imperial court.

古文：卿等留意否？ 
现代文：众卿留意此事否？ 
English: Your Lordships, are you not aware of this?

古文：群对曰： 圣情仁恻，罪止元凶。
现代文：崔群答道： 圣上仁慈恻隐，罪罚限于元凶。
English: Cui Qun replied: Divine benevolence prevails, and punishment is limited to the culprit.

古文：其妻近属，倘获宽宥，实合弘煦之道。 
现代文：其妻及近亲倘获宽赦，确实合乎宽宏和煦之道。 
English: If his wife and close relatives are pardoned, it will indeed be in the spirit of magnanimity and generosity.

古文：于是师古妻裴氏、女宜娘，诏出于邓州安置。
现代文：于是李师古之妻裴氏、女宜娘，诏令出京至邓州安置。
English: As a result, Li Shigu's wife Pei and their daughter were ordered to leave Beijing and resettle in Dengzhou.

古文：宗奭妻韦氏及男女，先没掖廷，并释放；其奴婢、资货皆复赐之。
现代文：李宗之妻韦氏及合府男女先押在掖廷，一概释放，其奴婢、资财又都赐还给他们。
English: The wife of Li Zong, the Wei clan, and the men and women of Hefu were first detained in Suiting, and they were all released, and their slaves, servants, and wealth were all given back to them.

古文：又盐铁福建院官权长孺坐赃，诏付京兆府决杀。长孺母刘氏求哀于宰相，群因入对言之。
现代文：又盐铁福建院官权长儒因赃获罪，诏令交付京兆府处决，权长儒之母刘氏向宰相哀求，崔群因而入朝奏论此事。
English: In addition, Yan Tie Fujian academician Guanlong Ju was found guilty of treason and sentenced to execution by imperial edict. Guanlong Ju's mother, Liu, pleaded with the prime minister, and Cui Qun went to the imperial court to discuss the matter.

古文：宪宗愍其母耄年，乃曰： 朕将屈法赦长孺何如？ 
现代文：宪宗怜悯其母当耄耋之年，便说道： 朕将枉法赦免权长儒，如何？ 
English: Kenzong pitied his mother when she was a toddler, and said, "I will pardon Guan Changru in vain. How about that?

古文：群曰： 陛下仁恻即赦之，当速令中使宣谕。
现代文：崔群道： 陛下出于仁慈恻隐便赦免他，当速令中使宣谕。
English: Cui Qun said: His Majesty pardoned him out of benevolence and mercy, and issued a proclamation in a hasty order.

古文：如待正敕，即无及也。 
现代文：如等待正常赦免，那就来不及了。 
English: If we wait for a normal pardon, it will be too late.

古文：长孺竟得免死长流。
现代文：权长儒竟获免死而流放远地。
English: The ruler, Confucius, was spared death and exiled to a distant land.

古文：群之启奏平恕，多此类也。
现代文：崔群之启奏平和宽恕，多似此类。
English: Cui Qun's opening rendition of "Peace and Forgiveness" is much like this.

古文：时宪宗急于荡寇，颇奖聚敛之臣。故籓府由是希旨，往往捃拾，目为进奉。
现代文：当时宪宗急于扫荡盗寇，对能为朝廷聚财敛资之臣大加奖掖，故藩镇州府因此迎合朝廷意旨，往往搜求聚敛，号称进奉。
English: At that time, Emperor Kenzong was eager to sweep away the robbers and greatly rewarded the vassals who were able to collect and accumulate funds for the imperial court. Therefore, the towns and prefectures of the domain catered to the intention of the imperial court and often sought to collect and accumulate, known as Jinbo.

古文：处州刺史苗稷进羡余钱七千贯，群议以为违诏，受之则失信于天下，请却赐本州，代贫下租税。
现代文：虞州刺史苗稷进奉羡余钱七千贯，崔群认为违诏，若受之则失信于天下，奏请还赐本州，替代贫民租税。
English: Yu Zhou sent Shimei Miao to collect the remaining seven thousand crowns. Cui Qun thought that it was against the edict, and if it was accepted, it would be dishonest to the world. He also asked to give it to Honshu to replace the poor tax.

古文：时论美之。
现代文：一时受到舆论赞扬。
English: It was praised by public opinion at the time.

古文：度支使皇甫镈阴结权幸，以求宰相，群累疏其奸邪。
现代文：度支使皇甫钅甫寸暗地交结权要宠贵，以求宰相之位。
English: In order to obtain the position of prime minister, he secretly asked the emperor to grant him the right to be a favorite.

古文：尝因对面论，语及天宝、开元中事，群曰： 安危在出令，存亡系所任。
现代文：崔群屡次上疏奏其奸邪，因此曾对皇上面论，语及开元、天宝间事，崔群道： 安危在于出令，存亡系于所任。
English: Cui Qun repeatedly played down his treachery, so he had a discussion with the emperor about the language and the opening of the year and the Tianbao Incident. Cui Qun said: Safety lies in issuing orders, survival depends on what is assigned.

古文：玄宗用姚崇、宋璟、张九龄、韩休、李元纮、杜暹则理；用林甫、杨国忠则乱。
现代文：玄宗用姚崇、宋王景、张九龄、韩休、李元、杜暹则治，用李林甫、杨国忠则乱。
English: Xuanzong used Yao Chong, Song Wangjing, Zhang Jiuling, Han Xiu, Li Yuan, Du Siem, Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong.

古文：人皆以天宝十五年禄山自范阳起兵，是理乱分时，臣以为开元二十年罢贤相张九龄，专任奸臣李林甫，理乱自此已分矣。
现代文：人们皆认为天宝十五年安禄山自范阳起兵，是治乱之分界，臣认为开元二十年罢免贤相张九龄，专任奸臣李林甫，治乱自此已划分。
English: People all think that the Anlu Mountains in the 15th year of Tianbao, when troops were raised from Fan Yang, is the boundary for controlling the turmoil. The minister thinks that in the 20th year of the first century, the virtuous Zhang Jiuling and the full-time treacherous minister Li Linfu were dismissed, and the control of the turmoil has since been divided.

古文：用人得失，所系非小。 
现代文：用人得失，所关非小。 
English: The gains and losses of employing people are not small.

古文：词意激切，左右为之感动。镈深恨之。而宪宗终用镈为宰相。
现代文：词意激切，朝臣为之感动，皇甫钅甫寸深恨于他，而宪宗最终仍用皇甫钅甫寸为宰相。
English: The meaning of the words was intense, the courtier was moved by it, the Emperor Fusang Fusun deeply hated him, and the Emperor eventually still used the Emperor Fusang Fusun as prime minister.

古文：无何，群臣议上尊号，皇甫镈欲加 孝德 两字，群曰： 有睿圣，则孝德在其中矣。 
现代文：不久，群臣商议为皇上进奉尊号，皇甫钅甫寸主张加 孝德 两字，崔群道： 有睿智圣明则孝德便在其中了。 
English: Soon, the group of courtiers deliberated on the name of the emperor, and the emperor suggested adding filial piety. Cui Qun said, "If you are wise and holy, then filial piety is among you."

古文：竟为镈所构。宪宗不乐，出为湖南观察都团练使。
现代文：竟遭皇甫钅甫寸构织罪名，宪宗不乐，令崔群出任湖南观察都团练使。
English: However, he was accused of plotting by the emperor and the emperor was not happy, so Cui Qun was appointed as the training envoy of the Hunan Observation Capital Group.

古文：穆宗即位，征拜吏部侍郎，召见别殿，谓群曰： 我升储位，知卿为羽翼。 
现代文：穆宗即位，征崔群入朝拜吏部侍郎，于别殿召见，对崔群说： 我升皇储之位，知道是卿相助。 
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he invited Cui Qun to be the attendant of the eunuch, and summoned him to the Imperial Palace. He said to Cui Qun, "I have been promoted to the position of crown prince, and I know that I am a noble coadjutor.

古文：群曰： 先帝之意，元在陛下。
现代文：崔群道： 先帝之意，本来便在陛下。
English: Cui Qun said: The meaning of the former emperor was originally in his majesty.

古文：顷者授陛下淮西节度使，臣奉命草制，且曰： 能辨南阳之牍，允符东海之贵。 
现代文：随即授陛下淮西节度使，臣奉命起草诏书，也说： 能辨识南阳之文牍，预测东海之华贵。 
English: He then immediately conferred the title of His Majesty's Huaixi Festival Envoy, and the minister was ordered to draft an imperial edict, which also said: "Be able to identify the Nanyang script, and predict the East Sea's splendor."

古文：若不知先帝深旨，臣岂敢轻言？ 
现代文：若不知先帝深意，臣岂敢轻率出言？ 
English: If you don't know the emperor's intentions, how can you dare to speak rashly?

古文：数日，拜御史中丞。
现代文：数日后，拜御史中丞。
English: A few days later, Beigoshi Chujo passed away.

古文：浃旬，授检校兵部尚书，兼徐州刺史、武宁军节度、徐泗濠观察等使。
现代文：十日后，授检校兵部尚书，兼徐州刺史、武宁军节度使、徐泗濠观察使等职。
English: Ten days later, he was awarded the post of inspector of the school's military department, and also held the posts of Xuzhou military historian, Wu Ning military festival envoy, and Xu Xi observation envoy.

古文：初，幽、镇逆命，诏授沂州刺史王智兴为武宁军节度副使，领徐州兵讨伐。
现代文：当初，幽州、镇州背逆朝廷，诏令授沂州刺史王智兴为武宁军节度副使，率领徐州兵前去讨伐。
English: At first, Yuzhou and Zhenzhou rebelled against the imperial court, and Wang Zhixing, the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Army, and led the Xuzhou soldiers to go to the crusade.

古文：群以智兴早得士心，表请因授智兴旄钺，竟寝不报。
现代文：崔群认为王智兴早得军心，便上表奏请授王智兴旄钺，谁知奏表被搁置不报。
English: Cui Qun thought that Wang Zhixing had won the hearts of the soldiers at an early stage, so he asked Wang Zhixing to be awarded the medal on the medal table. However, the medal table was shelved and not reported.

古文：智兴自河北回戈，城内皆是父兄，开关延入，群为智兴所逐。
现代文：王智兴从河北回兵，城内皆是父兄，开关迎入，于是崔群被王智兴驱逐。
English: Wang Zhixing returned from Hebei, and all the people in the city were his father and brother. They were welcomed by the switch, so Cui Qun was expelled by Wang Zhixing.

古文：朝廷坐其失守，授秘书监，分司东都。
现代文：朝廷因其失守而问罪，贬为秘书监，分任东都。
English: The imperial court found him guilty of dereliction of duty, demoted him to secretary inspector, and assigned him to Dongdu.

古文：未几，改华州刺史、兼御史大夫。复改宣州刺史、歙池等州都团练观察等使，征拜兵部尚书。
现代文：没多久，改授华州刺史、兼御史大夫，又改授宣州刺史、歙池等州都团练观察使等职，征拜兵部尚书。
English: Not long after, he was re-assigned to the post of Huazhou Military Historian and Military Historian, and he was also re-assigned to the post of Xuanzhou Military Historian, Dianchi and other provincial military observation posts, and was recruited by the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：久之，改检校吏部尚书、江陵尹、荆南节度观察使。
现代文：许久以后，改授检校吏部尚书、江陵尹、荆南节度观察使。
English: After a long time, Shang Shu, Jiang Ling Yin, and Jing Nan, the inspectors of the school inspection department, were awarded the title of festival observation envoy.

古文：逾岁，改检校右仆射，兼太常卿。
现代文：一年后，改授检校右仆射，兼太常卿。
English: A year later, he was re-assigned to the inspection school of the Right Hand of the Emperor, and also to the Tai Changqing.

古文：太和五年，拜检校左仆射，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：大和五年，拜检校左仆射，兼吏部尚书。
English: In the fifth year of the Yamato era, he went to the inspection school for left-handed shooters, and also worked as a clerk.

古文：六年八月卒，年六十一，册赠司空。
现代文：大和六年八月去世，年六十一，册赠司空。
English: He died in August of the sixth year of the Yamato era, at the age of sixty-one, and was succeeded by Siku.

古文：群有冲识精裁，为时贤相。清议以俭素之节，其终不及厥初。
现代文：崔群见识超常精于决断，为当世贤相，但公允地说其节俭素朴之操守，晚年不如当初。
English: Cui Qun saw that he was extraordinarily good at making decisions and was a contemporary sage, but it is fair to say that his frugal and simple ethics were not as good in his later years as they were in the beginning.

古文：群年未冠举进士，陆贽知举，访于梁肃，议其登第有才行者，肃曰： 崔群虽少年，他日必至公辅。 
现代文：崔群年未及冠即应举进士，陆贽闻知，前去询问梁肃，议及那些有才学品行的登第者，梁肃道： 崔群虽年少，他日必定官至公辅。 
English: When Cui Qun was too young to be crowned, he should have been promoted to a higher rank. Lu Xun heard about this and went to inquire about Liang Su. When discussing those who had the talent and academic qualities to be promoted to the first rank, Liang Su said: Although Cui Qun is young, he will surely be promoted to the rank of public assistant one day.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：事实果如其言。
English: He really nailed it.

