古文：起屠维协洽，尽昭阳大渊献，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年。
English: A total of five years.

古文：太祖高皇帝建元元年
现代文：齐高帝建元元年
English: Emperor Qigong in the first year of Jianyuan

古文：春，正月，甲辰，以江州刺史萧嶷为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事、荆州刺史，尚书左仆射王延之为江州刺史，安南长史萧子良为督会稽等五郡诸军事、会稽太守。
现代文：春季，正月，甲辰，刘宋顺帝任命江州刺史萧嶷为都督荆湘等八州诸军事、荆州刺史，任命尚书左仆射王延之为江州刺史，任命安南长史萧子良为都督会稽等五郡诸军事、会稽太守。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Liu Song Shun appointed Xiao Qi, the governor of Jiangsu Province, as the military governor of eight provinces, including Jing and Hunan, and the military governor of Jing Province, appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wang Yan, as the military governor of Jiangsu Province, and appointed Xiao Ziliang, the governor of Annan Province, as the military governor of five counties, including Jing and Hunan, and the military governor of five counties.

古文：初，沈攸之欲聚众，开民相告，士民坐执役者甚众，嶷至镇，一日罢遣三千馀人。
现代文：当初，沈攸之准备聚众起事的时候，允许百姓互相告发，因此获罪服役的士人和平民甚为众多。萧嶷来到荆州以后，在一天以内就遣散了三千多人。
English: At first, when Shen Youzhi was preparing for a mass uprising, he allowed the people to inform on each other. As a result, there were a large number of officials and civilians who were convicted of serving. After Xiao Wei came to Jingzhou, he dismissed more than three thousand people within one day.

古文：府州仪物，务存俭约，轻刑薄敛，所部大悦。
现代文：刺史府与州衙中礼仪器物的陈设，都力求保持俭省节约，又能放宽刑罚，减少赋役，所以本州百姓大为欢悦。
English: The decoration of the instruments and objects of the pre-primary and junior high schools in Zhishi Prefecture and Shandong Province both strive to maintain frugality and economy, and at the same time can relax criminal penalties and reduce compulsory labor, so the people of the province are very happy.

古文：辛亥，以竟陵世子赜为尚书仆射，进号中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：辛亥，顺帝任命竟陵世子萧赜为尚书仆射，晋升封号为中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Shun appointed Emperor Ling's descendant, Xiao Jun, as Shang Shufu, and promoted him to the title of General of the Chinese Army, Kaifu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：太傅道成以谢朏有重名，必欲引参佐命，以为左长史。
现代文：太傅萧道成因谢名声显著，一定要延引他参与辅佐自己开创新朝，便让他担任左长史。
English: Grand Master Xiao Daocheng's reputation for gratitude is outstanding. He must be invited to participate in and assist in the founding of the new dynasty, and he will serve as the left chief historian.

古文：尝置酒与论魏、晋故事，因曰： 石苞不早劝晋文，死文恸哭，方之冯异，非知机也。 
现代文：萧道成曾经摆上酒席，与谢谈论魏晋时期的旧事，乘机说： 石苞没有及早劝说晋文王司马昭登基，等他死后，才去痛哭，与汉冯异相比，还不算是通晓机宜的啊。 
English: Xiao Daocheng once set up a wine table to talk with Xie about the old affairs of the Wei and Jin dynasties, and took the opportunity to say: Shi Yan did not persuade the Jin King Sima Zhao to ascend to the throne early, and waited for him to die before crying bitterly. Compared with Han Fengyi, he is not a knowledgeable opportunist.

古文：朏曰： 晋文世事魏宝，必将身终北面；借使魏依康、虞故事，亦当三让弥高。 
现代文：谢说： 晋文王累世事奉魏室，必然要使自己终生北面称臣。假如曹魏依照唐尧把帝位传给虞舜的先例行事，晋文王也应当经过三次推让，才显得更为崇高。 
English: Xie said: If Cao Wei followed the precedent of Tang Xi passing the imperial throne to Yu Xi, King Jinwen should also have to make three concessions before he appears more noble.

古文：道成不悦。
现代文：萧道成很不高兴。
English: Xiao Daocheng was very unhappy.

古文：甲寅，以朏为侍中，更以王俭为左长史。
现代文：甲寅，顺帝任命谢为侍中，另外任命王俭为左长史。
English: Jia Yin, Shun Emperor appointed Xie as an attendant, and appointed Wang Jian as the left long history.

古文：丙辰，以给事黄门侍郎萧长懋为雍州刺史。
现代文：丙辰，顺帝任命给事黄门侍郎萧长懋为雍州刺史。
English: Emperor Shun appointed the Yellow Gate servant Xiao Changyu to be Yongzhou's chief historian.

古文：二月，丙子，邵陵殇王友卒。
现代文：二月，丙子，宋邵陵殇王刘友去世。
English: In February, Liu You, the son of Song Shao Ling, the king of Song Dynasty, passed away.

古文：辛巳，魏太皇太后及魏主如代郡温泉。
现代文：辛巳，北魏太皇太后及北魏国主孝文帝前往代郡温泉。
English: Soon after, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Wei Dynasty and the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen, went to Daegun Hot Spring.

古文：甲午，诏申前命，命太傅赞拜不名。
现代文：甲午，顺帝颁诏重申以前的命令，让太傅萧道成朝拜时，不必自己称名。
English: On the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Shun issued an edict to reiterate the previous order, and to allow Taifu Xiao Dao to become a monk, without having to name himself.

古文：己亥，魏太皇太后及魏主如西宫。
现代文：己亥，北魏太皇太后及孝文帝前往西宫。
English: Ji Hai, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen went to the West Palace.

古文：三月，癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，癸卯朔，出现日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：甲辰，以太傅为相国，总百揆，封十郡，为齐公，加九锡；其骠骑大将军、扬州牧、南徐州刺史如故。
现代文：甲辰，顺帝任命太傅萧道成为相国，总领百官，封给他十个郡的封地，号称齐公，颁赐九锡，让他仍然担任骠骑大将军、扬州牧、南徐州刺史。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Emperor Shun appointed Taifu Xiao Dao to be the chief of a hundred officials in the neighboring country, granted him ten counties of fiefs, known as Qi Gong, and awarded him Jiuxi, allowing him to still serve as the riding general, Yangzhou Maki, and South Xuzhou Zhishi.

古文：乙巳，诏齐国官爵礼仪，并仿天朝。
现代文：己巳，顺帝颁诏决定，齐国的官职爵和礼典仪式，一概仿效朝廷。
English: Soon after, Emperor Shun issued an edict that all officials and dignitaries of the State of Qi, as well as their ceremonial rites, should follow the example of the imperial court.

古文：丙午，以世子赜领南豫州刺史。
现代文：丙午，顺帝任命萧道成的世子萧赜兼任南豫州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Shun appointed Xiao Daoxing's heir, Xiao Jun, to serve as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：杨运长去宜城郡还家，齐公遣人杀之。
现代文：杨运长离开宣城郡解职回家的时候，齐公萧道成派人将他杀死。
English: When Yang Yunchang left Xuancheng County to return home after being relieved of his duties, Qi Gong Xiao Daocheng sent someone to kill him.

古文：凌源令潘智与运长厚善；临川王绰，义庆之孙也。
现代文：凌源县令潘智与杨运长交情深厚。临川王刘绰，是刘义庆的孙子。
English: Lingyuan County Governor Pan Zhi has a deep friendship with Yang Yunchang. Linchuan King Liu Cao is the grandson of Liu Yiqing.

古文：绰遣腹心陈讠赞说智曰： 君先帝旧人，身是宗室近属，如此形势，岂得久全！
现代文：刘绰派遣亲信陈崐劝诱潘智说： 您是先朝皇帝的故旧之人，我本人是宗室的近亲，在这种情况下，难道我们能够长期得以保全吗？
English: Liu Cao sent his close confidant Chen Qi to persuade and entice Pan Zhi, saying, "You are an ancient person of the previous emperor, and I myself am a close relative of the imperial family. Under these circumstances, can we be preserved for a long time?

古文：若招合内外，计多有从者。
现代文：如果我们招揽聚集朝廷内外的人们，估计会有许多人追随。
English: If we invite people from both inside and outside the imperial court, it is expected that many people will follow.

古文：台城内人常有此心，正苦无人建意耳！ 
现代文：宫城以内的人经常抱有这种想法，只是苦于没有人提出这一主张罢了。 
English: People in Miyagi often have this idea, but it's just a pity that no one has put it forward.

古文：智即以告齐公。
现代文：潘智当即把这番话向齐公萧道成禀告。
English: Pan Zhi immediately reported this to Qigong Xiao.

古文：庚戌，诛绰兄弟及共党与。
现代文：庚戌，齐公萧道成诛杀了刘绰兄弟及其党羽。
English: Geng Xuan, Qi Gong and Xiao Daocheng killed the Liu Cao brothers and their followers.

古文：甲寅，齐公受策命，赦其境内，以石头为世子宫，一如东宫。
现代文：甲寅，齐公萧道成接受策书的任命，大赦齐国境内的囚犯，以石头城为世子的宫室，与皇室设立东宫完全一样。
English: A Yin, Qigong Xiao Daocheng accepted the appointment of the policy book, amnestied the prisoners within the borders of Qi, and set up the East Palace with Stone City as the heir, which is exactly the same as the royal family.

古文：褚渊引何曾自魏司徒为晋丞相故事，求为齐官，齐公不许。
现代文：褚渊援引何曾由曹魏的司徒担任西晋的丞相的旧事，请求担任齐国的官员，齐公萧道成没有应允。
English: Gongyuan quoted the old story of how Ho had been appointed by Cao Wei's tutor as the prime minister of the Western Jin Dynasty, and requested to be appointed as an official of Qi. Qi Gong Xiao Daocheng did not agree.

古文：以王俭为齐尚书右仆射，领吏部；俭时年二十八。
现代文：他却任命王俭为齐国尚书右仆射，主管吏部。当时，王俭只有二十八岁。
English: However, he appointed Wang Jian, who was only twenty-eight years old at the time, as the right-hand man of Qigong Shangshu, in charge of the personnel department.

古文：甲戌，武陵王赞卒，非疾也。
现代文：甲戌，武陵王刘赞故去，他并不是因病而终的。
English: Armour-plated, Wuling King Liu Zan passed away. He did not die of illness.

古文：丙戌，加齐王殊礼，进世子为太子。
现代文：丙戌，顺帝以特殊的礼节对待齐王萧道成，将齐国的世子称作太子。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Shun treated King Xiao Daocheng of Qi with special etiquette, and called the heir of Qi the crown prince.

古文：辛卯，宋顺帝下诏禅位于齐。
现代文：辛卯，刘宋顺帝颁诏将帝位传让给齐王。
English: Xinwu, Liu Song Shun issued an imperial edict to pass the throne to King Qi.

古文：壬辰，帝当临轩，不肯出，逃于佛盖之下，王敬则勒兵殿庭，以板舆入迎帝。
现代文：壬辰，顺帝应当到殿前去会见百官，但他不肯出面，却逃到佛像的宝盖下面。王敬则率领军队来到宫殿的庭院中，抬着一顶木板轿子入宫，去迎接顺帝。
English: According to legend, Emperor Shun was supposed to go to the front of the palace to meet with a hundred officials, but he refused to come forward, but fled under the lid of the Buddha statue. Wang Jing led the army to the courtyard of the palace, carrying a wooden palanquin into the palace to meet Emperor Shun.

古文：太后惧，自帅阉人索得之，敬则启譬令出，引令升车。
现代文：太后害怕了，便亲自率领宦官找到了顺帝，王敬则劝诱顺帝，让他从宝盖下面出来，领着他上了轿子。
English: The empress dowager was afraid, so she personally led the eunuchs to find Emperor Shun. Wang Jing persuaded Emperor Shun to come out from under the treasure lid and led him onto the palanquin.

古文：帝收泪谓敬则曰： 欲见杀乎？ 
现代文：顺帝止住眼泪，对王敬则说： 准备杀死我吗？ 
English: Shun Di stopped his tears and said to Wang Jing: "Are you going to kill me?

古文：敬则曰： 出居别宫耳。
现代文：王敬则说： 只是让你到另外的宫殿中居住罢了。
English: Wang Jing said: Just let you live in another palace.

古文：官先取司马家亦如此。 
现代文：您家先前取代司马氏一家也是这样做的。 
English: This is what your family did before replacing the Sima family.

古文：帝泣而弹指曰： 愿后身世世勿复生天王家！ 
现代文：顺帝掉着眼泪弹着食指说： 但愿我今后生生世世永远不再生在帝王家中！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Emperor Shun flicked his index finger and said, "I hope that I will never again be born into the imperial family!"

古文：宫中皆哭。
现代文：宫中的人们都哭泣起来。
English: Everyone in the palace burst into tears.

古文：帝拍敬则手曰： 必无过虑，当饷辅国十万钱。 
现代文：顺帝拍着王敬则的手说： 如果不发生意外，就赠送给你十万钱。 
English: Emperor Shun patted Wang Jingze's hand and said, "If there is no accident, I will give you one hundred thousand yuan."

古文：是日，百僚陪位。侍中谢朏在直，当解玺绶，阳为不知，曰： 有何公事？ 
现代文：当天，百官为齐王陪席，侍中谢正在值班，应当解送玺印，但他假装不知道，还说： 有什么公事吗？ 
English: On the same day, hundreds of officials attended the banquet for King Qi. Attendant Zhong Xie was on duty and was supposed to deliver the imperial seal, but he pretended not to know and said, "Is there any official business?"

古文：传诏云： 解玺绶授齐王。 
现代文：有人传达诏旨说： 解送玺印，交给齐王。 
English: Someone conveyed the imperial edict and said: "Dispatch the imperial seal and hand it over to King Qi."

古文：朏曰： 齐自应有侍中。 
现代文：谢说： 齐王自然应当另有自己的侍中。 
English: Xie Zuo said: Qi himself should have an attendant.

古文：乃引枕卧。
现代文：说着，他便拉过枕头，躺了下来。
English: I just pull over the pillow and go to sleep.

古文：传诏惧，使朏称疾，欲取兼人，朏曰： 我无疾，何所道！ 
现代文：传达诏旨的官员害怕了，便让谢声称得了疾病，打算另找一个兼任侍中的人，谢说： 我没有生病，为什么说我有病！ 
English: The official who conveyed the imperial edict was afraid, so he asked Xie Rong to claim that he had an illness, intending to find another person who would also serve as an attendant. Xie said: I am not sick, why do you say I am sick!

古文：遂朝服步出东掖门，仍登车还宅。
现代文：于是，他穿着朝服，徒步走出东掖门，上了车，回住宅去了。
English: As a result, he put on his imperial robes, walked out of the East Gate on foot, got into a car, and went back to his residence.

古文：乃以王俭为侍中，解玺绶。
现代文：齐王便让王俭担任侍中，解送玺印。
English: King Qi then asked Wang Jian to serve as an attendant and deliver the seal.

古文：礼毕，帝乘画轮车，出东掖门就东邸，问： 今日何不奏鼓吹？ 
现代文：礼典结束以后，顺帝坐着彩漆画轮的车子，出了东掖门，前往太子的府邸。顺帝问： 为什么今天没有器乐演奏？ 
English: After the end of the ceremony, Emperor Shun, sitting in a car with a painted wheel, left the East Gate and went to the prince's residence. Emperor Shun asked: Why is there no instrumental music performance today?

古文：左右莫有应者。
现代文：周围的人都没有回答。
English: No one around answered.

古文：右光禄大夫王琨，华之从父弟也，在晋世已为郎中，至是，攀车獭尾恸哭曰： 人以寿为欢，老臣以寿为戚。
现代文：右光禄大夫王琨是王华的堂弟，在晋朝已经担任了郎中，到了此时，他抓着车上悬着的獭尾痛哭着说： 人们都为长寿高兴，老臣却为长寿悲哀。
English: Right Guanglu doctor Wang Qi, a cousin of Wang Hua, who had already served as a retainer in the Jin Dynasty, at this time, he clutched the appendix hanging on the car and cried bitterly, saying: People are happy for longevity, but the old minister is sad for longevity.

古文：既不能先驱蝼蚁，乃复频见此事！ 
现代文：既然此身不能够及早死去，所以才屡次目睹今天发生的这种事情！ 
English: Since I can't die early, I have to witness what happened today over and over again!

古文：呜咽不自胜，百官雨泣。
现代文：他呜呜咽咽地哭泣着，难以自制，百官也都泪如雨下。
English: He was sobbing uncontrollably and all the officials were in tears.

古文：司空兼太保褚渊等奉玺绶，帅百官诣齐宫劝进；王辞让未受。
现代文：司空兼太保褚渊等人捧上玺印，率领百官前往齐王宫请萧道成即帝位，齐王推辞谦让，没有接受。
English: Siku and Taibo Shanyuan and others held up the imperial seal and led hundreds of officials to the palace of the king of Qi to ask Xiao Daocheng to become emperor. The king of Qi declined and did not accept.

古文：渊从弟前安成太守炤谓渊子贲曰： 司空今日何在？ 
现代文：褚渊的堂弟、前任安成太守褚对褚渊的儿子褚贲说： 今天司空却在哪里？ 
English: Gongyuan's cousin, the former Ancheng Taizhong, said to Gongyuan's son Gongyuan: "But where is Sifu today?"

古文：贲曰： 奉玺绶在齐大司马门。 
现代文：褚贲说： 在齐王宫大司马门奉献玺印。 
English: Zou said, "I will dedicate my seal at the Great Horse Gate of the Qi Royal Palace."

古文：召曰： 不知汝家司空将一家物与一家，亦复何谓！ 
现代文：褚说： 我真不知道你家司空把一家的物件交给另一家，这又算怎么一回事情！ 
English: Zou said, "I really don't know how it is that your family's steward would give one family's belongings to another family.

古文：甲午，王即皇帝位于南郊。
现代文：甲午，齐王在建康南郊即帝位。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, King Qi ascended the throne in the southern suburb of Jiankang.

古文：还宫，大赦，改元。
现代文：南齐高帝回宫以后，大赦天下罪囚，更改年号为建元。
English: After Emperor Qigong of the Southern Qi Dynasty returned to the palace, he pardoned all the prisoners and changed the year name to Jianyuan.

古文：奉宋顺帝为汝阴王，优崇之礼，皆仿宋初。
现代文：南齐高帝将顺帝奉为汝阴王，优待尊崇汝阴王的礼典，完全效仿刘宋初年的做法。
English: Emperor Qigong of the Southern Qi Dynasty revered Emperor Shun as the King of Ruyin, and gave him preferential treatment and honored the ceremony of the King of Ruyin, completely following the practice of the first year of Liu Song.

古文：筑宫丹杨，置兵守卫之。
现代文：高帝在丹杨为顺帝修筑宫室，并设置兵力守卫。
English: Emperor Gao built a palace room for Emperor Shun in Danyang and set up a military guard.

古文：宋神主迁汝阴庙，诸王皆降为公；自非宣力齐室，馀皆除国，独置南康、华容、萍乡三国，以奉刘穆之、王弘、何无忌之后，除国者凡百二十人。
现代文：刘宋诸帝的神位都被迁移到汝阴庙中，刘宋诸王都被降爵为公；如果没有为齐室出力，公侯以下一律削除国号，唯独设置南康、华容、萍乡三国，以便奉养刘穆之、王弘与何无忌的后人；削除国号的诸王计有一百二十人。
English: The deities of the emperors of the Liu Song Dynasty were all moved to the Ruyin Temple, and the emperors of the Liu Song Dynasty were all demoted to the rank of prince; if there was no contribution to the imperial family, the princes would all delete the country name, except for the three countries of Nankang, Huarong and Pingxiang, in order to cultivate the descendants of Liu Mu Zhi, Wang Hong and He Mugu; there were one hundred and twenty emperors who deleted the country name.

古文：二台官僚，依任摄职，名号不同、员限盈长者，别更详议。
现代文：刘宋与萧齐两朝廷的官员仍然保持原来的职位，对于官名称谓不同和官员超过名额的情况，另外再加详细计议。
English: The officials of Liu Song and Xiao Qi of the two dynasties still maintain their original positions. For the situation that the official names are different and the officials exceed the quota, there will be further detailed discussion.

古文：以褚渊为司徒。
现代文：高帝任命褚渊为司徒，前来祝贺的人和宾客挤满了座席。
English: Emperor Gao appointed Gongyuan as a tutor, and the seats were filled with people and guests who came to congratulate.

古文：宾客贺者满座，褚炤叹曰： 彦回少立名行，何意披猖至此！
现代文：褚叹息着说： 褚渊从少年时代便建树了自己的名望与操行，有谁料想得到他会猖狂到这般地步！
English: Zou sighed and said: Zou Yuan has built his reputation and conduct since he was a boy, who would have thought that he would be so rampant!

古文：门户不幸，乃复有今日之拜。
现代文：褚家门户不幸，才会又有今天的拜官之举。
English: It's unfortunate that it took today's gesture of obeisance for this to happen.

古文：使彦回作中书郎而死，不当为一名士邪！
现代文：假使褚渊在担任中书郎的时候死去了，难道不会成为一位名士吗！
English: If Shanyuan had died while serving as chushiro, wouldn't he have become a famous person?

古文：名德不昌，用复有期颐之寿！ 
现代文：如今他的名誉与德行都败坏了，可是偏偏会长命百岁！ 
English: Now his reputation and virtue are ruined, but he will live a long life!

古文：渊固辞不拜。
现代文：于是，褚渊坚决不肯接受任命。
English: As a result, Shanyuan resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：奉朝请河东裴觊上表，数帝过恶，挂冠径去；帝怒，杀之。
现代文：奉朝请、河东人氏裴上表指斥高帝的过失与丑行，直接辞官离去。高帝大怒，将他杀死。
English: At the emperor's request, Bae Shangfang, a member of the Hedong people, denounced Gao Di's faults and misdeeds, and directly resigned from his post. Gao Di was furious and killed him.

古文：太子赜请杀谢朏，帝曰： 杀之遂成其名，正应容之度外耳。 
现代文：太子萧赜请求杀掉谢，高帝说： 杀了他，便成就了他的名望了。我们恰恰应该把他置之度外包容下来哩。 
English: Prince Xiao Jun asked for Xie to be killed, and Emperor Gao said, "If we kill him, we will achieve his fame. We should just tolerate him."

古文：久之，因事废于家。
现代文：过了好长一段时间，谢终于因事被废免在家中。
English: After a long period of time, Xie was finally relieved of his duties at home.

古文：帝问为政于前抚军行参军沛国刘献，对曰： 政在《孝经》。
现代文：高帝向前任抚军行参军沛国人氏刘询问如何处理政务，刘回答说： 政务就在《孝经》里面。
English: When Emperor Gao asked Liu Guozhong, a former military commander, how to handle government affairs, Liu replied, "Government affairs are in the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：凡宋氏所以亡，陛下所以得者，皆是也。
现代文：大凡刘宋灭亡，陛下得国的原因，其中都包含着《孝经》阐述的道理。
English: The reasons for the demise of the great Liu Song Dynasty and the accession of His Majesty to the throne all contain the principles expounded in the Filial Piety Sutra.

古文：陛下若戒前车之失，加之以宽厚，虽危可安；若循其覆辙，虽安必危矣！ 
现代文：倘若陛下能够将前车之鉴引以为诫，再加上待人宽和仁厚，即使国家已经垂危了，也可以安定下来；倘苦陛下重蹈覆辙，即使国家原来很安定，也一定会招致危亡。 
English: If His Majesty is able to take the lessons of the past as a warning, and treat people with generosity and kindness, even if the country is already in danger, it can be stabilized; if His Majesty repeats the same mistakes, even if the country is originally stable, it will surely lead to danger.

古文：帝叹曰： 儒者之言，可宝万世！ 
现代文：高帝感叹着说： 儒士的话，真是可以用作万代之宝啊！ 
English: Gao Di sighed and said, "The words of Confucius can really be used as a treasure for all generations!"

古文：丙申，魏主如崞山。
现代文：丙申，北魏孝文帝前往崞山。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Lushan.

古文：丁酉，以太子詹事张绪为中书令，齐国左卫将军陈显达为中护军，右卫将军李安民为中领军。
现代文：丁酉，高帝任命太子詹事张绪为中书令，任命齐国左卫将军陈显达为中护军，任命右卫将军李安民为中领军。
English: Ding Xi, Emperor Gao appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Xu to be the middle marshal, appointed the left guard general of Qi Chen Xianda to be the middle guard, and appointed the right guard general Li Anmin to be the middle leader.

古文：绪，岱之兄子也。
现代文：张绪是张岱的哥哥的儿子。
English: Zhang Xu is the son of Zhang Yao's elder brother.

古文：戊戌，以荆州刺史嶷为尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。帝命群臣各言得失。
现代文：戊戌，齐高帝任命荆州刺史萧嶷为尚书令、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，任命南兖州刺史萧映为荆州刺史。
English: In Wuzhen, the Qigong Emperor appointed Xiao Ying, the governor of Jingzhou, as the minister of letters, the general of cavalry, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and the governor of Yangzhou, and appointed Xiao Ying, the governor of South Luzhou, as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：淮南、宣城二郡太守刘善明，请除宋氏大明、泰始以来诸苛政细制，以崇简易。
现代文：高帝命令群臣各自进言朝政得失。淮南、宣城二郡太守刘善明说： 请废除刘宋大明、泰始年间以来的各项苛暴琐碎的政令与制度，以示崇尚简要平易。 
English: Emperor Gao ordered the courtiers to advise each other on the merits and demerits of the government. Liu Shanming, the governor of Huainan and the two counties of Xuancheng, said: Please abolish the various harsh and trivial decrees and systems since the time of Liu Songdaming and the reign of Emperor Taizhi, in order to show that advocating simplicity is easy.

古文：又以为： 交州险远，宋末政苛，遂至怨叛。
现代文：他还认为： 交州地势险要而又荒僻遥远，由于宋末年政令苛暴，终于招致民怨，导致叛乱。
English: He also believed that: Jiaozhou's terrain is perilous and remote, and due to the harsh government orders at the end of the Song Dynasty, it finally attracted people's resentment and led to rebellion.

古文：今大化创始，宜怀以恩德。
现代文：如今广远深入的教化刚刚开创，应当以恩惠与德行感化他们。
English: Now that far-reaching and in-depth enlightenment has just begun, they should be influenced by grace and virtue.

古文：且彼土所出，唯有珠宝，实非圣朝所须之急。
现代文：况且交州土地上出产的物品，只有珠宝，这实在不是我朝急切需要的东西。
English: What's more, the only goods produced on the land of Jiaozhou are jewelry, which is not something I really need in the morning.

古文：讨伐之事，谓宜且停。 
现代文：所以，讨伐交州的事情，我认为应当暂时停止下来。 
English: Therefore, I believe that the crusade against Guangzhou should be temporarily suspended.

古文：给事黄门郎清河崔祖思亦上言，以为： 人不学则不知道，此悖逆祸乱所由生也。
现代文：给事黄门郎清河人氏崔祖思进言也认为： 如果人们不肯求学，就不明白道理，这正是叛逆与祸乱所以产生的根由。
English: Cui Zu Si, who gave advice to Huangmen Lang and Qinghe Ren, also believed that: If people do not want to study, they will not understand the truth. This is the root cause of rebellion and calamity.

古文：今无员之官，空受禄秩，凋耗民财。
现代文：现在，不在名额以内的官员，白白享受俸禄和人力的供养，损耗民众的财富。
English: Now, officials who are not included in the quota enjoy salaries and manpower for free, depleting the wealth of the people.

古文：宜开文武二学，课台、府、州、国限外之人各从所乐，依方习业，若有废惰者，遣还故郡；经艺优殊者，待以不次。
现代文：应当开设文武两类学校，考核朝廷、府州、封国中编制以外的官员，使他们各自按照本人的意愿，根据规定的办法熟悉学业。如果有人荒废学业，便将他遣返本郡；如果有人经学优异，便不拘等次地任用他。
English: It is necessary to establish two types of schools of literature and martial arts, and to examine officials who are not members of the Imperial Court, prefectural government, or vassal state, so that they can familiarize themselves with their studies according to their own wishes and in accordance with the prescribed methods. If someone wastes his studies, he will be repatriated to his county; if someone excels in his studies, he will be appointed regardless of his rank.

古文：又，今陛下虽履节俭，而群下犹安习侈靡。
现代文：再者，如今虽然陛下亲自奉行节约俭省的风尚，但是群臣仍然过惯并安于奢移浪费的生活。
English: Moreover, nowadays, although His Majesty himself follows the tradition of thrift and economy, his courtiers are still accustomed to and content with a life of extravagance and waste.

古文：宜褒进朝士之约素清修者，贬退其骄奢荒淫者，则风俗可移矣。 
现代文：应当表彰进用节俭朴素、持身清正的朝廷中的官员，贬抑斥逐那些骄横奢侈、耽于佚乐的官员，当前的风尚习俗就可以得到改变了。 
English: It is necessary to commend the officials in the imperial court who are thrifty, simple, and upright, and to disparage and expel those officials who are arrogant, extravagant, and indulge in pleasure. The current fashion and custom can be changed.

古文：宋元嘉之世，凡事皆责成郡县。
现代文：刘宋文帝元嘉年间，完全是督责郡县去完成所有的事情。
English: During the reign of Emperor Liu Songwen and Emperor Yuanjia, it was entirely the responsibility of counties and counties to complete all things.

古文：世祖征求急速，以郡县迟缓，始遣台使督之。
现代文：刘宋孝武帝凡事都要求火速办理，认为郡县行动缓慢，便开始由朝廷派遣使者督责郡县。
English: Emperor Liu Song Xiaowu demanded that everything be handled quickly, and thought that counties were slow to act, so the imperial court began to send emissaries to supervise counties.

古文：自是使者所在旁午，竞作威福，营私纳赂，公私劳扰。
现代文：从此，派出的使者到处交错而行，争着恃势弄权，谋求私利，收受贿赂，官府与百姓都遭受使者的困扰。
English: Since then, the emissaries sent have been staggering everywhere, vying for power, seeking personal gain, and accepting bribes. Both the government and the people have been troubled by the emissaries.

古文：会稽太守闻喜公子良上表极陈其弊，以为： 台有求须，但明下诏敕，为之期会，则人思自竭；若有稽迟，自依纠坐之科。
现代文：会稽太守闻喜公萧子良上表，极力陈述这一弊病，他认为： 如果朝廷有所需求，只要公开颁发诏书敕令，指定期限，人们自然就会想方设法地去完成任务了。
English: Xiao Ziliang, the procurator of the Imperial Procuratorate, went to the front and tried to explain this problem. He thought: If the imperial court has a demand, as long as the imperial edict is publicly issued and the time limit is specified, people will naturally try their best to complete the task.

古文：今虽台使盈凑，会取正属所办，徒相疑愤，反更淹懈，宜悉停台使。 
现代文：员外散骑郎刘思效进言说： 宋自从大明年间以来，逐渐显现出衰败的迹象。
English: Liu Sihei, a non-member rider, said: Song has gradually shown signs of decline since the New Year.

古文：员外散骑郎刘思效上言： 宋自大明以来，渐见凋弊，征赋有加而天府尤贫。
现代文：虽然征收赋税不断增加，但是朝廷的库存却愈见贫乏。平民哀鸣不止，几乎已经没有生机。
English: Although the collection of taxes is constantly increasing, the inventory of the imperial court is becoming increasingly poor. The commoners continue to mourn and have almost no vitality.

古文：小民嗷嗷，殆无生意；而贵族富室，以侈丽相高，乃至山泽之民，不敢采食其水草。
现代文：然而，贵族富户以生活奢侈豪华相互炫耀，却使山林湖泽间的百姓，甚至于不敢采摘他们的水草充饥。
English: However, the aristocrats and rich families show off their luxurious lifestyles to each other, but make the people in the mountains, forests and lakes even dare not to pick their aquatic plants to satisfy their hunger.

古文：陛下宜一新王度，革正其失。 
现代文：陛下应当完全刷新王者的政教，改正这一过失。 
English: His Majesty should completely renew the king's politics and religion and correct this mistake.

古文：上皆加褒赏，或以表付外，使有司详择所宜，奏行之。
现代文：高帝对刘善明等人都给与奖励，还将有的表奏交付外廷，让有关部门详细斟酌适用的办法，上奏施行。
English: Emperor Gao has given awards to Liu Shanming and others, and will also submit some forms to the court, so that the relevant departments can consider the applicable methods in detail and implement them.

古文：己亥，诏： 二宫诸王，悉不得营立屯邸，封略山湖。 
现代文：己亥，高帝颁诏说： 皇子、皇孙两宫和诸王，一律不允许营建庄园别墅，霸占山林湖泊。 
English: At the same time, Emperor Gao issued an edict saying: the prince, the grandson of the emperor, the two palaces and the kings are not allowed to build manor villas and occupy the mountains, forests and lakes.

古文：魏主还平城。
现代文：北魏孝文帝返回平城。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：魏秦州刺史尉洛侯、雍州刺史宜都王目辰、长安镇将陈提等皆坐贪残不法，洛侯、目辰伏诛，提徙边。
现代文：北魏秦州刺史尉洛侯、雍州刺史宜都王拓跋目辰、长安镇将陈提等人都因贪婪残暴，行为不轨而获罪，尉洛侯与拓跋目辰被判处死刑，陈提流放到边远地区服役。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Luo Hou (尉洛侯), Wang Tuoba Muchen (王拓跋目辰) and Chang'an Town Marshal Chen Ti (陈提) of Qinzhou, Yongzhou and Yidu were all found guilty of greed, brutality and misconduct. Luo Hou (尉洛侯) and Tuoba Muchen (拓跋目辰) were sentenced to death, while Chen Ti was exiled to serve in a remote area.

古文：又诏以 候官千数，重罪受赇不列，轻罪吹毛发举，宜悉罢之。 
现代文：北魏孝文帝还颁诏说： 朝廷设置负责侦察内外的官员有一千多人，他们对于犯有重罪的人，只要收到贿赂，便不再举报，却对犯罪较轻的人吹毛求疵地揭发检举，应当将侦察内外的官员全部罢除。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty also issued an edict saying: The imperial court has set up more than a thousand officials responsible for reconnaissance inside and outside the country. They will no longer report people who have committed serious crimes as long as they receive bribes, but they will scrupulously expose and report people who have committed minor crimes. All officials responsible for reconnaissance inside and outside the country should be dismissed.

古文：更置谨直者数百人，使防逻街衢，执喧斗而已。
现代文：北魏重新设置数百名恭谨正直的人员，让他们在城邑的街道上巡逻防卫，捉拿任意喧闹打斗的人。
English: The Northern Wei re-installed hundreds of respectful and honest personnel, and let them patrol and defend the streets of the city, and catch any noisy and fighting people.

古文：自是吏民始得安业。
现代文：从此，官吏与百姓才得以各安本业。
English: From then on, officials and ordinary people were able to go about their business in peace.

古文：自泰始以来，内外多虞，将帅各募部曲，屯聚建康。
现代文：自泰始以来，内外多虞，将帅各募部曲，屯聚建康。
English: Since the beginning of the Thai dynasty, there have been many conflicts both at home and abroad, and the generals have collected troops from all over the country and gathered together to build a healthy country.

古文：李安民上表，以为： 自非淮北常备外，馀军悉皆输遣；若亲近宜立随身者，听限人数。 上从之；五月，辛亥，诏断众募。
现代文：倘若属于与主帅亲密接近、适合随侍身旁的兵士，可以让他们限定人数。 高帝听从了他的建议。五月，辛亥，高帝颁诏命令禁止将帅招募部曲。
English: If they are soldiers who are close to the coach and suitable for accompanying the coach, they can limit the number of soldiers. Emperor Gao listened to his suggestion. In May, Xinhai, Emperor Gao issued a decree to ban the recruitment of the coach.

古文：壬子，上赏佐命之功，褚渊、王俭等进增爵、户各有差。
现代文：壬子，高帝封赏辅佐自己建立新朝的功臣，褚渊、王俭等人晋升爵位，增加封户，各有等差。
English: Ren Zi, Gao Di awarded the honorary title to the meritorious vassals who assisted him in establishing the new dynasty, Gong Yuan, Wang Jian and others were promoted to the peerage, and the number of households were increased, each with a difference.

古文：处士何点谓人曰： 我作《齐书》已竟，赞云： 渊既世族，俭亦国华；不赖舅氏，遑恤国家！  
现代文：隐士何点对人说： 我已经把《齐书》撰写完毕，有一段论赞是这样说的： 褚渊既是世家大族，王俭也是国家的精英。他们连自己的舅父都背叛了，又哪里有功夫顾惜自己的国家！  
English: The hermit said to the man: "I have finished writing the "Book of Qi," and there is a passage of praise that says: Shanyuan is not only a great family, but Wang Jian is also the elite of the country. They even betrayed their uncle, and where is the effort to take care of their country!

古文：点，尚之之孙也。
现代文：何点是何尚之的孙子。
English: What a great-grandson.

古文：渊母宋始安公主，继母吴郡公主；又尚巴西公主。俭母武康公主；又尚阳羡公主。
现代文：褚渊的母亲是刘宋的始安公主，继母是吴郡公主，自己又娶了巴西公主，王俭的母亲是武康公主，自己又娶了阳羡公主。
English: Gongyuan's mother was Liu Song's Princess Shiuan, her stepmother was Princess Wu County, and she herself married a Brazilian princess. Wang Jian's mother was Princess Wu Kang, and she herself married Princess Yang En.

古文：故点云然。
现代文：所以，何点才有这种说法。
English: That's why it's such a big deal.

古文：己未，或走马过汝阴王之门，卫士恐有为乱者奔入杀王，而以疾闻，上不罪而赏之。
现代文：己未，有人骑马经过汝阴王家门，卫士们便恐惧起来。有一个作乱的人跑进去杀死了汝阴王，却以汝阴王病故上报，高帝对他不但没有治罪，而且奖赏了他。
English: Before long, someone riding a horse passed the gate of King Ruyin's house, and the guards were terrified. A troublemaker ran in and killed King Ruyin, but reported it as King Ruyin's illness. Emperor Gao not only did not punish him, but also rewarded him.

古文：辛酉，杀宋宗室阴安公燮等，无少长皆死。
现代文：辛酉，高帝杀害了刘宋宗室阴安公刘燮等人，对这些人家，无论老少，一律处死。
English: Xin Xin, Emperor Gao killed Liu Song's ancestral family, Yin An's father Liu Xuan and others, and these people, regardless of age, were all executed.

古文：前豫州刺史刘澄之，遵考之子也，与褚渊善，渊为之固请曰： 澄之兄弟不武，且于刘宗又疏。 
现代文：前任豫州刺史刘澄之是刘遵考的儿子。由于他与褚渊交好，褚渊便替他再三讲情说： 刘澄之兄弟并不通晓军事，况且他们与刘氏的宗支关系又很疏远呢。 
English: The previous governor of Yuzhou, Liu Chengzhi, was the son of Liu Zunkao. Because of his friendship with Zou Yuan, Zou Yuan repeatedly interceded on his behalf, saying: Liu Chengzhi's brothers are not familiar with military affairs, and moreover, they have a very distant relationship with the Liu clan.

古文：故遵考之族独得免。
现代文：所以，只有刘遵考的家族得免于一死。
English: Therefore, only Liu Zunkao's family was spared from death.

古文：丙寅，追尊皇考曰宣皇帝，皇妣陈氏曰孝皇后。
现代文：丙寅，高帝追尊亡父为宣皇帝，追尊亡母陈氏为考皇后。
English: Cui Yin, Gao Di respected his deceased father as Emperor Xuan, and respected his deceased mother Chen as Empress Cao.

古文：丁卯，封皇子钧为衡阳王。
现代文：丁卯，高帝将皇子萧钧封为衡阳王。
English: At the same time, Emperor Gao enthroned Prince Xiao Yu as the King of Hengyang.

古文：上谓兗州刺史垣崇祖曰： 吾新得天下，索虏必以纳刘昶为辞，侵犯边鄙。
现代文：高帝对兖州刺史垣崇祖说： 我新近才得到天下，魏虏肯定会以我们收容刘昶为口实，前来侵犯边界地区。
English: Gao Di said to Zhang Zhou's historian, Qian Chongzu: I have only recently gained the world, Wei Krupp will certainly use our sheltering of Liu Bei as an excuse to invade the border area.

古文：寿阳当虏之冲，非卿无以制此虏也。 
现代文：寿阳地当魏虏南下的交通要道，如果没有你前去镇守，就无法制服这些胡虏了。 
English: Shouyang is an important transportation route for Wei Rui to go south. If you do not go to the town guard, you will not be able to subdue these Hu Rui.

古文：乃徙崇祖为豫州刺史。
现代文：于是，高帝将垣崇祖改任为豫州刺史。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao appointed Gao Chongzu as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：六月，丙子，诛游击将军姚道和，以其贰于沈攸之也。
现代文：六月，丙子，高帝诛杀游击将军姚道和，这是由于他因沈攸之起事而对朝廷怀有二心的原故。
English: In June, Emperor Gao killed the guerrilla general, Yao Daohe, because he harbored a grudge against the imperial court due to Shen Yue's uprising.

古文：甲子，立太子赜为皇太子；皇子嶷为豫章王，映为临川王，暠为安成王，锵为鄱阳王，铄为桂阳王，鉴为广陵王；皇孙长懋为南郡王。
现代文：甲子，南齐高帝立王太子萧赜为皇太子，皇子萧嶷为豫章王，萧映为临川王，萧晃为长沙王，萧晔为武陵王，萧为安成王，萧锵为鄱阳王，萧铄为桂阳王，萧鉴为广陵王，皇孙萧长懋为南郡王。
English: Gao Zi, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty, made the crown prince Xiao Jie the crown prince, the prince Xiao Jie the king of Yuzhang, Xiao Ying the king of Linchuan, Xiao Jiao the king of Changsha, Xiao Jie the king of Wuling, Xiao Jie the king of Ancheng, Xiao Jie the king of Shenyang, Xiao Jie the king of Guiyang, Xiao Jian the king of Guangling, and the grandson Xiao Jangjie the king of Nan County.

古文：乙酉，葬宋顺帝于遂宁陵。
现代文：乙酉，刘宋顺帝被安葬在遂宁陵。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Song Shun was buried in Suining Mausoleum.

古文：帝以建康居民舛杂，多奸盗，欲立符伍以相检括，右仆射王俭谏曰： 京师之地，四方辐凑，必也持符，于事既烦，理成不旷；谢安所谓 不尔何以为京师 也。 
现代文：由于建康居民成份复杂，存在着许多奸恶的盗贼，高帝打算设置符信，编制军民户籍，以五人为伍，以便孝察。右仆射王俭进谏说： 京城地区，各地人员汇集，如果一定要手执符信，事体既很烦琐，在情理上说，就难以持久，这就是谢安所说的 不这样怎么可以叫做京城 的意思了。 
English: Due to the complex composition of Jiankang residents, there are many treacherous thieves. Emperor Gao planned to set up a certificate, compile a military and civilian household register, with five people in order to observe filial piety. His right-hand man, Sha Wang Jian, said: In the capital area, people from all over the country gather. If you must hand-hold a certificate, the matter is cumbersome and, logically speaking, it is difficult to last. This is what Xie An said. Otherwise, how can it be called the capital?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是，高帝取消了原来的打算。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：初，交州刺史李长仁卒，从弟叔献代领州事，以号令未行，遣使求刺史于宋。
现代文：当初，交州刺史李长仁故去以后，堂弟李叔献代替他统领州中事务，由于不能够有效地发号施令，他便派遣使者向刘宋朝廷请求任命刺史。
English: At first, after the death of Li Changren, the governor of Jiaozhou, his cousin Li Shuxian took over the affairs of Jiaozhou. Since he was unable to effectively issue orders, he sent an envoy to the Liu Song court to request the appointment of a governor.

古文：宋以南海太守沈焕为交州刺史，以叔献为焕宁远司马、武平、新昌二郡太守。
现代文：刘宋朝廷任命南海太守沈焕为交州刺史，任命李叔献为沈焕的宁远司马和武平、新昌二郡太守。
English: The Liu Song court appointed the South China Sea governor Shen Huan as the governor of Jiaozhou, and appointed Li Shuxuan as the governor of Ningyuan, Sima and Wuping, and Xinchang.

古文：叔献既得朝命，人情服从，遂发兵守险，不纳焕。
现代文：李叔献得到朝廷的任命以后，人心对他便顺服了。于是，李叔献调集兵力，防守险要，不让沈焕进境到任。
English: After Li Shucheng was appointed by the imperial court, the people obeyed him. Therefore, Li Shucheng mobilized troops to defend against Shen Huan and prevent him from entering the country.

古文：焕停郁林，病卒。
现代文：沈焕在郁林停留下来，因病故去。
English: Shen Huan stayed in Yulin and died of illness.

古文：秋，七月，丁未，诏曰： 交趾、比景独隔书朔，斯乃前运方季，因迷遂往。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁未，高帝颁诏： 只有交趾、比景没有接受朝廷颁布的年号，这是由于前朝的国运正当穷途末路的时候，两国产生了迷惘，于是不肯前来请授年号。
English: In autumn, July, Dingwei, Emperor Gao issued an edict: Only Jiaozuo and Binjing did not accept the year number issued by the imperial court. This was due to the confusion between the two countries when the national movement of the previous dynasty was just a dead end, so they refused to come and ask for the year number.

古文：宜曲赦交州，即以叔献为刺史，抚安南土。 
现代文：根据这一特殊情况，应当赦免交州，现在就任命李叔献为交州刺史，前去安抚南疆。 
English: According to this special situation, Jiaozhou should be pardoned, and Li Shuxian should be appointed as the leader of Jiaozhou to pacify Southern Xinjiang.

古文：魏葭芦镇主杨广香请降，丙辰，以广香为沙州刺史。
现代文：北魏葭芦镇主杨广香请求归降。丙辰，齐高帝任命杨广香为沙州刺史。
English: Yang Guangxiang, the lord of Huludao Town in the Northern Wei Dynasty, requested to surrender. In the 4th century, Emperor Qigong appointed Yang Guangxiang as the chief historian of Shazhou.

古文：八月，乙亥，魏主如方山；丁丑，还宫。
现代文：八月，乙亥，北魏孝文帝前往方山。丁丑，返回宫中。
English: In August, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Fangshan and Dingwu, and then returned to the palace.

古文：上闻魏将入寇，九月，乙巳，复以豫章王嶷为荆、湘二州刺史，都督如故；以临川王映为扬州刺史。
现代文：高帝听说北魏将领准备前来侵犯，九月，乙巳，任命豫章王萧嶷为荆、湘二州刺史，仍旧担任都督的职务，还任命临川王萧映为扬州刺史。
English: Gao Di heard that the Northern Wei generals were preparing to invade, and in September, he appointed Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoying as Jing and Xiang Erzhou stabbing history, still holding the post of governor, and also appointed Linchuan Wang Xiaoying as Yangzhou stabbing history.

古文：丙午，以司空褚渊领尚书令。
现代文：丙午，高帝任命司空褚渊兼任尚书令。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Gao appointed Sikuo Shanyuan to serve as Shang Shuling.

古文：壬子，魏以侍中、司徒、东阳王丕为太尉，侍中、尚书右仆射陈建为司徒，侍中、尚书代人苟颓为司空。
现代文：壬子，北魏任命侍中、司徒、东阳王拓跋丕为太尉，任命侍中、尚书右仆射陈建为司徒，任命侍中、尚书代郡人氏苟颓为司空。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Tuobao of Dongyang, who was a chamberlain, an aide-de-camp, and an aide-de-camp, was appointed as a lieutenant, Chen Jian, who was a chamberlain and an aide-de-camp of Shangshu, was appointed as an aide-de-camp, and Guanzhong, who was a chamberlain and an aide-de-camp of Shangshu, was appointed as an aide-de-camp.

古文：己未，魏安乐厉王长乐谋反，赐死。
现代文：己未，北魏安乐厉王拓跋长乐谋反，孝文帝赐他自杀。
English: Before he knew it, the king of the Northern Wei dynasty, An Le, plotted a rebellion, and Emperor Xiaowen ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：庚申，魏陇西宣王源贺卒。
现代文：庚申，北魏陇西宣王源贺去世。
English: Goshun, the Northern Wei Dynasty's Western Xuan Wang Yuan He passed away.

古文：冬，十月，己巳朔，魏大赦。
现代文：冬季，十月，己巳朔，北魏大赦。
English: Winter, October, spring, the Northern Wei amnesty.

古文：癸未，汝阴太妃王氏卒，谥曰宋恭皇后。
现代文：癸未，南齐汝阴王太妃王氏故去，谥号称作宋恭皇后。
English: After the death of Queen Taifei Wang of Southern Qi Ruyin, her posthumous name was Queen Song Qiong.

古文：初，晋寿民李乌奴与白水氐杨成等寇梁州，梁州刺史范柏年说降乌奴，击杨成等，破之。
现代文：当初，晋寿百姓李乌奴与白水氐人杨成等人进犯梁州，梁州刺史范柏崐年劝说李乌奴归降，前去进击杨成，并打败了他。
English: At the beginning, Li Wunu, a citizen of Jinzhou, and Yang Cheng, a person from Baishui, invaded Liangzhou. The governor of Liangzhou, Fan Baiyun, persuaded Li Wunu to surrender, went to attack Yang Cheng, and defeated him.

古文：及沈攸之事起，柏年遣兵出魏兴，声云入援，实候望形势。
现代文：及至沈攸之举兵反抗朝廷，范柏年派兵由魏兴进发，声称前去援助朝廷，实际是在观望事态的发展情况。
English: As far as Shen Yue's raising of troops to resist the imperial court, Fan Bai sent troops from Wei Xing to the imperial court, claiming to go to assist the imperial court, but in fact he was watching the development of the situation.

古文：事平，朝廷遣王玄邈代之。诏柏年与乌奴俱下，乌奴劝柏年不受代；柏年计未决，玄邈已至。
现代文：事情平息以后，朝廷派遣王玄邈去接替他的职位，命令范柏年与李乌奴一起前往京城，李乌奴劝说范柏年不要接受替代。范柏年的打算还没有决定下来，王玄邈已经来到。
English: After things calmed down, the imperial court sent Wang Xuanqian to take over his position and ordered Fan Bainian to go to Beijing with Li Wunu. Li Wunu persuaded Fan Bainian not to accept the replacement. Fan Bainian's plan had not yet been decided, and Wang Xuanqian had already arrived.

古文：柏年乃留乌奴于汉中，还至魏兴，盘桓不进。
现代文：于是，范柏年将李乌奴留在汉中，自己回到魏兴，便有意逗留，不向前进发了。
English: As a result, Fan Bai left Li Wunu in Hanzhong and returned to Wei Xing, he deliberately stayed and did not move forward.

古文：左卫率豫章胡谐之尝就柏年求马，柏年曰： 马非狗也，安能应无已之求！ 
现代文：左卫率豫章人氏胡谐之曾经到范柏年那里索取马匹，范柏年说： 马可不是狗啊，我怎么能够满足你毫无止境的要求！ 
English: Zuo Wei, led by Yu Zhangren, once went to Fan Bainian to ask for horses. Fan Bainian said: "A horse is not a dog, how can I meet your endless demands!"

古文：待使者甚薄；使者还，语谐之曰： 柏年云： 胡谐之何物狗！
现代文：范柏年对胡谐之的使者待遇非常菲薄，使者回去以后，告诉胡谐之说： 范柏年说： 胡谐之是什么狗东西！
English: Fan Bainian treated the emissary of Hu Xinyi very poorly. After the emissary returned, he told Hu Xinyi: Fan Bainian said: What kind of dog is Hu Xinyi!

古文：所求无厌！  
现代文：索求起来，永不满足！  
English: Demand and never be satisfied!

古文：谐之恨之，谮于上曰： 柏年恃险聚众，欲专据一州。 
现代文：胡谐之记恨范柏年，便向齐高帝诬陷他说： 范柏年凭借险要，聚集徒众，打算割据一州。 
English: Hu Jingzhi hated Fan Paknian, so he slandered him to Qi Gao Di, saying: Fan Paknian, by virtue of his desperate need, gathered a crowd of followers, intending to annex a province.

古文：上使雍州刺史南郡王长懋诱柏年，启为府长史。
现代文：齐高帝让雍州刺史南郡王萧长懋劝导范柏年，萧长懋奏请任命他为本州长史。
English: Emperor Qigong asked Wang Xiao Changyu of Yongzhou and Shennan County to advise Fan Bai, and Xiao Changyu asked him to appoint him as the governor.

古文：柏年至襄阳，上欲不问，谐之曰： 见虎格得，而纵上山乎？ 
现代文：范柏年来到襄阳以后，齐高帝打算不再追究下去，胡谐之却说： 眼看着老虎就要捕获到手了，难道还要放虎归山吗？ 
English: After Fan Bai came to Yangyang, Qi Gao Di planned not to pursue the matter any further. However, Hu Yunzhi said: Seeing that the tiger is about to be captured, do you still want to release the tiger back to the mountain?

古文：甲午，赐柏年死。
现代文：甲午，高帝赐范柏年自裁而死。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Emperor Gao gave Fan Bai years of self-imposed death.

古文：李乌奴叛入氐，依杨文弘，引氐兵千馀人寇梁州，陷白马戍。
现代文：李乌奴背叛朝廷，逃到氐人居住的地区去，投靠了杨文弘，带领着氐人的兵马一千多人侵犯梁州，攻陷了白马戍。
English: Li Wunu betrayed the imperial court, fled to the area inhabited by the Xiongnu, took refuge with Yang Wenhong, and led more than a thousand soldiers and horses of the Xiongnu to invade Liangzhou and capture Baimao.

古文：王玄邈使人诈降诱乌奴，乌奴轻兵袭州城，玄邈伏兵邀击，大破之，乌奴挺身复走入氐。
现代文：王玄邈让人佯装投降，引诱李乌奴上钩。李乌奴率领兵马轻装偷袭梁州城，王玄邈埋伏着的兵马拦击阻截，大破李乌奴。李乌奴脱身以后，便又逃到氐人中间去了。
English: Wang Xuanqin had people pretend to surrender and lured Li Wunu onto the hook. Li Wunu led the lightly armed soldiers and horses to sneak attack Liangzhou City. Wang Xuanqin intercepted the ambushed soldiers and horses and defeated Li Wunu. After Li Wunu escaped, he fled to the middle of the Xiang people.

古文：初，玄邈为青州刺史，上在淮阴，为宋太宗所疑，欲北附魏，遣书结玄邈，玄邈长史清河房叔安曰： 将军居方州之重，无故举忠孝而弃之，三齐之土，宁蹈东海而死耳，不敢随将军也！ 
现代文：当初，王玄邈担任青州刺史的时候，高帝正在镇守淮阴，遭到刘宋明帝的猜疑，准备北上依附北魏，便写信邀请王玄邈联合行动。王玄邈的长史清河人氏房叔安说： 将军担负着一州的重任，没来由地将忠孝之道全部抛弃，三齐地区的人们宁肯跳到东海中淹死，也不敢随从将军的。 
English: At the beginning, when Wang Xuanqian was the chief historian of Qingzhou, Emperor Gao was guarding Huaiyin and was suspected by Emperor Liu Song of preparing to move north to join the Northern Wei Dynasty, so he wrote a letter to invite Wang Xuanqian to join forces. Wang Xuanqian's long-time friend, Uncle An of the Qinghe people, said: "The general is responsible for the important task of a state, and has no reason to abandon all the principles of loyalty and filial piety. People in the Sanqi region would rather jump into the East Sea and drown than follow the general."

古文：玄邈乃不答上书。
现代文：于是，王玄邈便没有对高帝的书信作出答复。
English: As a result, Wang Xuanqian did not reply to Gao Di's letter.

古文：及罢州还，至淮阴，严军直过；至建康，启太宗，称上有异志。
现代文：及至王玄邈解职回京，行至淮阴，他让军队严密警戎，径直开了过去。到达建康以后，他把事情告诉了刘宋明帝，声称高帝怀有叛变的意图。
English: When Wang Xuanqian was relieved of his duties and returned to Beijing, he went to Huaiyin, where he ordered the army to keep a close watch and drove straight past. After arriving in Jiankang, he told Liu Songming about the matter, claiming that Emperor Gao was harboring mutinous intentions.

古文：及上为骠骑，引为司马，玄邈甚惧，而上待之如初。
现代文：及至高帝担任骠骑大将军的时候，他延引了王玄邈担任司马，王玄邈非常恐惧，但高帝却仍然象往常一样地对待他。
English: When Emperor Gao was the general of cavalry, he brought Wang Xuanqian to be the steward of cavalry. Wang Xuanqian was very afraid, but Emperor Gao still treated him as usual.

古文：及破乌奴，上曰： 玄邈果不负吾意遇也。 
现代文：到了打败李乌奴的时候，高帝说： 王玄邈果然没有辜负我内心对他的器重啊。 
English: When it came time to defeat Li Wunu, Gao Di said, "Wang Xuanqian really did not live up to the weight of my heart for him."

古文：叔安为宁蜀太守，上赏其忠正，欲用为梁州，会病卒。
现代文：当时，房叔安担任宁蜀太守，高帝赏识他为人忠诚正直，打算任用他为梁州刺史，却正赶上他因病去世。
English: At that time, Fang Shu'an served as the governor of Ningshu. Emperor Gao appreciated his loyalty and honesty, and planned to appoint him as the governor of Liangzhou. However, he died of illness just in time.

古文：十一月，辛亥，立皇太子妃斐氏。
现代文：十一月，辛亥，高帝将裴氏立为皇太子妃。
English: In November, Xinhai, Emperor Gao made Pei the crown princess.

古文：癸丑，魏遣假梁郡王嘉督二将出淮阴，陇西公琛督三将出广陵，河东公薛虎子督三将出寿阳，奉丹杨王刘昶入寇；许昶以克复旧业，世胙江南，称籓于魏。
现代文：癸丑，北魏孝文帝派遣假梁郡王拓跋嘉督统两员将领出兵淮阴，陇西公拓跋琛督统三员将领出兵广陵，河东公薛虎子督统三员将领出兵寿阳，共同辅佐丹杨王刘昶前来侵犯南齐。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent two generals led by Wang Tuoba Jia, the governor of Guiliang County, to invade Huaiyin, three generals led by Gongtuoba Jia, the governor of West Guiliang County, to invade Guangling, and three generals led by Gongtuoba Jia, the governor of East Guiliang County, to invade Shouyang. They were jointly assisted by Tang Yang Wang Liu Yi to invade Nanqi.

古文：蛮酋桓诞请为前驱，以诞为南征西道大都督。
现代文：北魏答应让刘昶恢复刘宋昔日的基业，世世代代统辖江南地区，条件是他必须做北魏的藩属之国。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty agreed to let Liu Bei restore Liu Song's former inheritance and administer the south of the Yangtze River for generations, on the condition that he must become a member of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：义阳民谢天盖自称司州刺史，欲以州附魏，魏乐陵镇将韦珍引兵渡淮应接。
现代文：蛮人酋长桓诞请求担任前锋，孝文帝便任命桓诞为南征西道大都督。南齐义阳平民谢天盖自称司州刺史，准备率领全州归附北魏，北魏乐陵镇将韦珍领兵渡过淮水，前来接应。
English: At the request of the barbarian chieftain Huan Guo, Huan Guo was appointed as the vanguard, and Emperor Xiaowen appointed Huan Guo as the grand governor of the Southern Expedition to the West. Nanqi Yiyang civilian Xie Tiange claimed to be the governor of the state, ready to lead the whole state to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Northern Wei Leling Town led Wei Zhen's army across Huai Shui and came to meet him.

古文：豫章王嶷遣中兵参军萧惠朗将二千人，助司州刺史萧景先讨天盖，韦珍略七千馀户而去。
现代文：南齐豫章王萧嶷派遣中兵参军萧惠朗带领两千人，帮助司州刺史萧景先讨伐谢天盖，韦珍劫掠人口七千多户，便撤离了。
English: Nanqi Yuanzhang Wang Xiaohui dispatched soldiers to join the army Xiao Huilang led two thousand people to help Shizhou Zhang Shi Xiao Jing first to fight Xie Tiange, Wei Zhen looted more than seven thousand households, and then evacuated.

古文：景先，上之从子也。
现代文：萧景先是齐高帝的侄子。
English: Xiao Jingxian was the nephew of Emperor Qigong.

古文：南兗州刺史王敬则闻魏将济淮，委镇还建康，士民惊散，既而魏竟不至。
现代文：南兖州刺史王敬则得知北魏将领渡过淮水，便丢下本镇，返回建康，致使南兖州百姓惊惶失散，但后来北魏军队始终没有到来。
English: On the other hand, Wang Jing, the governor of South Luzhou, learned that the Northern Wei general had passed Huai Shui, so he left the town and returned to Jiankang, causing the people of South Luzhou to panic and disperse, but later the Northern Wei army never arrived.

古文：上以其功臣，不问。
现代文：齐高帝因王敬则是有功之臣，便没有追究罪责。
English: Emperor Qigong did not pursue criminal responsibility because Wang Jing was a meritorious vassal.

古文：上之辅宋也，遣骁骑将军王洪范使柔然，约与共攻魏。
现代文：高帝萧道成辅佐刘宋王室的时候，派遣骁骑将军王洪范出使柔然，约定与柔然共同进攻北魏。
English: When Emperor Gao Xiao Daocheng assisted the Liu Song royal family, he dispatched the cavalry general Wang Hongfan to send an envoy to Juran, and agreed to jointly attack the Northern Wei Dynasty with Juran.

古文：洪范自蜀出吐谷浑，历西域，乃得达。
现代文：王洪范从蜀中出发，过了吐谷浑，历经西域，才得以到达柔然。
English: Wang Hongfan set out from Shuzhong, passed through Tuyugun, and traveled through the western region before he was able to reach Juran.

古文：至是，柔然十馀万骑寇魏，至塞上而还。
现代文：至此，柔然十多万骑兵侵犯北魏，直抵塞上，才撤军而回。
English: At this point, more than a hundred thousand cavalrymen invaded the Northern Wei Dynasty, reaching the fortress, only to withdraw and return.

古文：是岁，魏诏中书监高允议定律令。
现代文：本年，北魏孝文帝颁诏，命令中书监高允计议并制定刑律法令。
English: This year, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict, ordering Gaoyun, the book supervisor, to discuss and formulate a criminal law decree.

古文：允虽笃老，而志识不衰。
现代文：虽然高允老迈年高，但是神志清楚，记忆不衰。
English: Although Gao Yun is very old, his mind is clear and his memory is strong.

古文：诏以允家贫养薄，令乐部丝竹十人五日一诣允以娱其志，朝晡给膳，朔望致牛酒，月给衣服绵绢；入见则备几杖，问以政治。
现代文：由于高允家境贫寒，供养菲薄，孝文帝颁诏命令乐队每隔五天便派十个人前往高允处演奏，以便使高允心情愉快；供给他早晨与晚间的膳食，每逢初一和十五日便送去牛肉与美酒，每月供给衣服、丝绵和绢帛。高允入朝进见的时候，孝文帝便为他准备几案与手杖，向他询问治理国家政务的意见。
English: Since Gao Yun's family was poor and his support was meager, Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree ordering the orchestra to send ten people to Gao Yun's place to perform every five days in order to make Gao Yun feel happy; provided him with morning and evening meals, sent beef and wine every first day and fifteenth day, and provided clothes, silk and socks every month. When Gao Yun entered the court, Emperor Xiaowen prepared several cases and canes for him and asked him for his opinion on the governance of state affairs.

古文：契丹莫贺弗勿干帅部落万馀口入附于魏，居白狼水东。
现代文：契丹莫贺弗勿干率领部落一万多人前来归附北魏，在白狼水的东面居住下来。
English: Khitan Moga Fubo Gan led more than 10,000 people of the tribe to join the Northern Wei Dynasty and settled on the east side of the White Wolf River.

古文：太祖高皇帝建元二年春，正月，戊戌朔，大赦。
现代文：二年春季，正月，戊戌朔，南齐大赦。
English: In the spring of the second year, in the first month of the year, there was a general amnesty in Nanqi.

古文：以司空褚渊为司徒，尚书右仆射王俭为左仆射；渊不受。
现代文：高帝萧道成任命司空褚渊为司徒，任命尚书右仆王俭为左仆射。褚渊没有接受任命。
English: Emperor Gao Xiao Daocheng appointed Siku Shanyuan as his disciple, and appointed Shangshu's right-hand servant Wang Jian as his left-hand servant. Shanyuan did not accept the appointment.

古文：辛丑，上祀南郊。
现代文：辛丑，高帝前往南郊祭天。
English: Sinfully ugly, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburbs to worship the heavens.

古文：魏陇西公琛等攻拔马头戍，杀太守刘从。
现代文：北魏陇西公拓跋琛等人攻克马头戍，将南齐太守刘从杀掉。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Western Gong Tuobao and others conquered Ma Touyi and killed Liu Cong, the governor of Southern Qi.

古文：乙卯，诏内外纂严，发兵拒魏，征南郡王长懋为中军将军，镇石头。
现代文：乙卯，齐高帝诏令朝廷内外实行戒严，调集兵力，抵御北魏，征召南郡王萧长懋出任中军将军，镇守石头。
English: Second, Emperor Qigong issued an edict to impose martial law inside and outside the imperial court, mobilized troops to resist the Northern Wei Dynasty, and conscripted Wang Xiao Changyu of Nan County to serve as a general of the Chinese army and guard the stone.

古文：魏广川王略卒。
现代文：北魏广川庄王拓跋略去世。
English: Northern Wei Guangchuan Zhuo Wang Tuobao passed away.

古文：魏师攻钟离，徐州刺史崔文仲击破之。
现代文：北魏军队进攻钟离，南齐徐州刺史崔文仲将北魏军打败。
English: The Northern Wei army attacked Zhongli, and the Southern Qi Xuzhou assassin, Cui Wenzhong, defeated the Northern Wei army.

古文：文仲遣军主崔孝伯渡淮，攻魏茌眉戍主龙得侯等，杀之。
现代文：崔文仲派遣军主崔孝伯渡过淮水，攻打北魏茌眉戍主龙得侯等人，并将他们杀掉。
English: Cui Wenzhong sent the commander of the army, Cui Xiaobo, across the Huai Shui River to attack and kill the Northern Wei general Long De Hou and others.

古文：文仲，祖思之族人也。
现代文：崔文仲是崔祖思的同族。
English: Cui Wenzhong is a member of the same family as Cui Zhuxi.

古文：群蛮依阻山谷，连带荆、湘、雍、郢、司五州之境，闻魏师入寇，官尽发民丁，南襄城蛮秦远乘虚寇潼阳，杀县令。
现代文：各部蛮人凭依着高山深谷，遍布荆州、湘州、雍州、郢州、司州五州的边境上。南齐听说北魏军队前来侵犯，便征集所有的人丁参军。南襄城蛮人秦远趁着朝廷空虚无备的时机侵犯潼阳，杀掉县令。
English: The barbarians of various provinces followed the high mountains and deep valleys and spread all over the borders of the five states of Jingzhou, Hunan, Yongzhou, Zhangzhou and Shizhou. Nanqi heard that the Northern Wei army came to invade and recruited all the people to join the army. Qin Yuan, the barbarian of Nanxiang City, took advantage of the empty opportunity of the imperial court to invade Fenyang and kill the county magistrate.

古文：司州蛮引魏兵寇平昌，平昌戍主苟元宾击破之。
现代文：司州蛮人带领北魏军队进犯平昌，平昌戍主苟元宾将他们击败。
English: Sizhou barbarians led the Northern Wei army to attack PyeongChang, and PyeongChang defeated them.

古文：北上黄蛮文勉德寇汶阳，汶阳太守戴元宾弃城奔江陵，豫章王嶷遣中兵参军刘伾绪将千人讨之，至当阳，勉德请降，秦远遁去。
现代文：北上黄蛮人文勉德侵犯汶阳，汶阳太守戴元宾丢下城池，逃奔江陵。豫章王肃嶷派遣中兵参军刘绪率领一千人讨伐文勉德，来到当阳的时候，文勉德请求投降，秦远逃走。
English: In the north, the Yellow Barbarians and the Manchurians invaded Bunyang. Dai Yuanbin, the governor of Bunyang, abandoned the city and fled to Jiangling. Yu Zhang Wang Sui sent soldiers to join Liu Xiu's army and led a thousand people to fight against the Manchurians. When they came to Dangyang, the Manchurians asked for surrender, and Qin Yu fled.

古文：魏将薛道标引兵趣寿阳，上使齐郡太守刘怀慰作冠军将军薛渊书以招道标；魏人闻之，召道标还，使梁郡王嘉代之。
现代文：北魏将领薛道标领兵奔赴寿阳，齐高帝让齐郡太守刘怀慰伪造冠军将军薛渊的书信，招抚薛道标。北魏方面闻讯以后，便将薛道标召回，让梁郡王拓跋嘉替代他。
English: The Northern Wei general Xue Daobao led his troops to Shouyang. The Qigong Emperor had the governor of Qi County, Liu Huaiyong, forge a letter from the champion general Xue Yuan to invite Xue Daobao. After the Northern Wei side heard about this, they recalled Xue Daobao and had Liang County's Wang Tuobaojia replace him.

古文：怀慰，乘民之子也。
现代文：刘怀慰是刘乘民的儿子。
English: Liu Huaiyong is the son of Liu Yingmin.

古文：二月，丁卯朔，嘉与刘昶寇寿阳。
现代文：二月，丁卯朔，拓跋嘉与刘昶侵犯寿阳。
English: In February, Ding Ushuo, Tuoba Jia and Liu Yao invaded Shouyang.

古文：将战，昶四向拜将士，流涕纵横，曰： 愿同戮力，以雪仇耻！ 
现代文：在将要交战的时候，刘昶面向东西南北四方，对将士们叩头行礼，崐泪流满面地说： 但愿大家齐心合力，为我报仇雪耻！ 
English: At the time of the impending battle, Liu Ye faced the four directions of east, west, north and south, bowed to the soldiers, and said with tears streaming down his face: I hope you will work together to avenge my disgrace!

古文：魏步骑号二十万，豫州刺史垣崇祖集文武议之，欲治外城，堰肥水以自固。
现代文：北魏的步、骑兵号称二十万。南齐豫州刺史垣崇祖召集文武官员商议对策，打算整治外城，在肥水上修筑堤坝，加强防守。
English: In the footsteps of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the cavalry boasted two hundred thousand. In the south of Qi, the governor of Yuzhou, Zhiqi Chongzu, convened civil and military officials to discuss countermeasures, intending to rectify the outer city, build a dam on the fertile water, and strengthen defense.

古文：皆曰： 昔佛狸入寇，南平王士卒完盛，数倍于今，犹以郭大难守，退保内城。
现代文：大家都说： 以往，佛狸拓跋焘前来侵犯，南平王兵多将广，士气高昂，兵力是现在的好几倍，尚且认为外城太大，难以守卫，所以退入内城防守。
English: Everyone said: In the past, when the Buddha's army came to invade, Nanping's soldiers were more numerous, morale was high, and the army was several times as large as it is now. Moreover, they thought that the outer city was too large and difficult to guard, so they retreated to the inner city for defense.

古文：且自有肥水，未尝堰也，恐劳而无益。 
现代文：而且，自从有肥水存在以来，从不曾有人在肥水上修筑过堤坝，恐怕此举也是徒劳无益的吧。 
English: Moreover, since the existence of manure water, no one has ever built a dam on manure water, I am afraid this move is also futile.

古文：崇祖曰： 若弃外城，虏必据之，外修楼橹，内筑长围，则坐成擒矣。
现代文：垣崇祖说： 如果我们放弃外城，胡虏肯定会占领外城，在外面修建望高台，在里面筑成长墙，那就会使我们坐以待擒了。
English: "If we give up the outer city, the Huns will surely occupy it, build a watchtower on the outside and a wall on the inside, and that will make us sit up and wait," said Gaki Chongzu.

古文：守郭筑堰，是吾不谏之策也。 
现代文：防守外城，修筑堤坝，这是我绝无劝阻余地的计策啊。 
English: Defending the outer city, building a dam, this is a strategy that I have absolutely no room to dissuade.

古文：乃于城西北堰肥水，堰北筑小城，周为深堑，使数千人守之，曰： 虏见城小，以为一举可取，必悉力攻之，以谋破堰；吾纵水冲之，皆为流尸矣。 
现代文：于是，垣崇祖在豫州城的西北方修筑堤坝，拦截肥水，在堤坝的北面修筑一座小城，四周环绕着深深的沟堑，派遣好几千人守卫在那里。垣崇祖说： 胡虏看到此城狭小，以为一下子就可以攻取下来，肯定会全力攻打此城，企图谋求破坏堤坝。这时，我们放肥水冲击他们，他们便都成了漂流着的尸体了。 
English: So, he built a dike in the northwest of Yuzhou City to intercept the fertilized water, and built a small city on the north side of the dike, surrounded by a deep ravine, and sent several thousand guards there. He said: "Hurus saw that the city was narrow and thought that they could capture it at once, and they would certainly attack the city with all their might in an attempt to destroy the dike. At that time, we let the fertilized water hit them, and they all became floating corpses.

古文：魏人果蚁附攻小城，崇祖著白纱帽，肩舆上城，晡时，决堰下水；魏攻城之众漂坠堑中，人马溺死以千数。
现代文：果然，北魏军队象蚁群般地趋附并攻打小城，垣崇祖头戴白色的纱帽，乘着轿子，登上城来。到了黄昏时分，垣崇祖命令决开堤坝，放水冲灌，北魏攻城的军队全都被冲进沟堑，淹死的人员马匹数以千计。
English: Sure enough, the Northern Wei army converged like an ant colony and attacked the small city. Wearing a white gauze cap and riding a palanquin, Qi Chongzu came up to the city. At dusk, Qi Chongzu ordered the dam to be broken and the water to be flushed. The Northern Wei army attacking the city was all washed into the gully, and thousands of people and horses drowned.

古文：魏师退走。
现代文：北魏的军队撤退逃跑了。
English: The Northern Wei army retreated and fled.

古文：谢天盖部曲杀天盖以降。
现代文：谢天盖的部曲将谢天盖杀掉，归降南齐。
English: Xie Tiangai's unit will kill Xie Tiangai and return to Nanqi.

古文：宋自孝建以来，政纲弛紊，簿籍讹谬，上诏黄门郎会稽虞玩之等更加检定，曰： 黄籍，民之大纪，国之治端。
现代文：自孝建年间以来的刘宋朝廷，政务废驰，法纪紊乱，田簿户籍谬误百出。高帝颁诏命令黄门郎会稽人氏虞玩之等人重新核查审定，还说： 户籍，是对百姓的基本记载，是国家治理的端绪。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Xiaojian of the Liu Song Dynasty, government affairs have been abandoned, legal and disciplinary disorders have been rampant, and the land register and household register are full of fallacies. Emperor Gao issued an edict ordering Huang Men Lang to re-verify and validate the auditor, Mr. Yu Yanzhi, and others. He also said: The household register is the basic record of the people and the beginning of national governance.

古文：自顷巧伪日甚，何以厘革？ 
现代文：近来弄虚作假的行为日益严重，应当怎样改正整顿呢？ 
English: Recently, the act of deception has become increasingly serious. How should rectification be carried out?

古文：玩之上表，以为： 元嘉中，故光禄大夫傅隆年出七十，犹手自书籍，躬加隐校。
现代文：虞玩之上表认为： 元嘉年间，已故的光禄大夫傅隆年过七十，仍然亲手缮写户籍，亲身认真核实。
English: According to the above table: During the Yuan Jia era, the late Guanglu doctor Fu Long, who was over seventy years old, still wrote down the household registration by hand and carefully verified it in person.

古文：今欲求治取正，必在勤明令长。
现代文：现在，要想使户籍得到整顿和纠正偏失，就一定要使各县长官精勤廉明。
English: Now, if we want to rectify the household registration and correct the deviation, we must make the prefectural governors diligent and honest.

古文：愚谓宜以元嘉二十七年籍为正，更立明科，一听首悔；迷而不返，依制必戮；若有虚昧，州县同科。 
现代文：我认为应当以元嘉二十七年的户籍为基准，重新制订明确的法令，任凭违法者自首悔过。如果执迷不悟，就一定要依照命令加以制裁。倘若谎报隐瞒，州县官吏与违法者一同治罪。 
English: I think we should use the 27th year of the Yuan Jia family registration as a benchmark to re-establish clear laws and regulations, and allow violators to surrender and repent. If they do not give up, they must be sanctioned according to the order. If they falsely report concealment, state and county officials will be punished together with violators.

古文：上从之。
现代文：高帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：上以群蛮数为叛乱，分荆、益置巴州以镇之。
现代文：由于各部落蛮人屡次制造叛乱，高帝决定从荆州与扬州两地分出一部分另设巴州，以便镇守。
English: As the barbarians of various tribes repeatedly created rebellions, Gao Di decided to separate a part of Jingzhou and Yangzhou and set up a separate Pazhou in order to defend the town.

古文：壬申，以三巴校尉明慧昭为巴州刺史，领巴东太守。
现代文：壬申，高帝任命三巴校尉明慧昭为巴州刺史，兼任巴东太守。
English: In Jinshin, Emperor Gao appointed Ming Hui Zhao, the captain of the Sanba, as the governor of Pazhou, and concurrently as the governor of Badong.

古文：是时，齐之境内，有州二十三，郡三百九十，县千四百八十五。
现代文：这时，南齐境内拥有二十三个州，三百九十个郡，一千四百八十五人县。
English: At that time, there were 23 prefectures, 390 counties and 1,485 counties in Nanqi.

古文：乙酉，崔文仲遣军主陈靖拔魏竹邑，杀戍主白仲都；崔叔延破魏睢陵，杀淮阳太守梁恶。
现代文：乙酉，崔文仲派遣军主陈靖攻克了北魏的竹邑戍，杀掉戍主白仲都。同时，崔叔延攻破了北魏的睢陵，杀掉淮阳太守梁恶。
English: At the same time, Cui Wenzhong dispatched the military commander Chen Jing to conquer the Northern Wei's Zhuye County and kill the warlord Baizhongdu. At the same time, Cui Shuyuan conquered the Northern Wei's Fuling County and killed the Huaiyang Taishou Liang Qi.

古文：三月，丁酉朔，以侍中西昌侯鸾为郢州刺史。
现代文：三月，丁酉朔，高帝任命侍中、西昌侯萧鸾为郢州刺史。
English: In March, Emperor Gao appointed Xiao Jie, an aide-de-camp and Xichang marquis, as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：鸾，帝兄始安贞王道生之子也，早孤，为帝所养，恩过诸子。
现代文：萧鸾是齐高帝的哥哥始安贞王萧道生的儿子。他幼年丧父，被高帝收养，高帝对崐他的疼爱，超过了亲生诸子。
English: Xiao Yao was the son of Emperor Qi Gao's brother, Emperor Shi'an Zhenwang Xiao Daosheng. He lost his father at a young age and was adopted by Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao loved him more than his own sons.

古文：魏刘昶以雨水方降，表请还师，魏人许之；丙午，遣车骑大将军冯熙将兵迎之。
现代文：由于正当雨季，北魏刘昶上表请求将军队撤回，孝文帝允许了他的请求。丙午，孝文帝派遣车骑大将军冯熙率领军队前去迎接刘昶。
English: Due to the rainy season, the Northern Wei Emperor Liu Bei requested the withdrawal of the army, and Emperor Xiaowen allowed his request. In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Xiaowen sent the cavalry general Feng Xi to lead the army to meet Liu Bei.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，魏主如白登山；五月，丙申朔，如火山；壬寅，还平城。
现代文：夏季四月，辛巳，北魏孝文帝前往白登山。五月，丙申朔，孝文帝前往火山。壬寅，返回平城。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Mount Paektu. In May, Emperor Xiaowen went to the volcano. In June, he returned to Pingcheng.

古文：自晋以来，建康宫之外城唯设竹篱，而有六门。
现代文：自从晋朝以来，建康宫室的外城只是用竹篱环绕着，有六个大门。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, the outer city of Jiankang Mansion has only been surrounded by a bamboo fence and has six gates.

古文：会有发白虎樽者，言 白门三重关，竹篱穿不完 。
现代文：适逢有人揭开白虎樽的盖子，饮酒进言说： 建康白门三层关，竹篱穿破不完全。 
English: When someone opened the lid of the white tiger barrel, the drinker said: Jiankang white gate three-layer pass, the bamboo fence is not completely broken through.

古文：上感其言，命改立都墙。
现代文：齐高帝被这个人的话感动了，便命令改建城墙。
English: Emperor Qi Gao was moved by this man's words and ordered the city wall to be rebuilt.

古文：李乌奴数乘间出寇梁州，豫章王嶷遣中兵参军王图南，将益州兵从剑阁掩击之；梁、南秦二州刺史崔慧景发梁州兵屯白马，与图南覆背击乌奴，大破之，乌奴走保武兴。
现代文：李乌奴多次乘机出兵侵犯梁州，豫章王萧嶷派遣中兵参军王图南率领益州军队，由剑阁突袭李乌奴。梁州、南秦州两州刺史崔慧景调集梁州军队驻扎在白马，与王图南前后夹击李乌奴，将他打得大败，李乌奴逃往武兴，据城防守。
English: Li Wunu repeatedly took the opportunity to send troops to invade Liangzhou, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui dispatched soldiers to join the army, Wang Tunan led the Yizhou army, and raided Li Wunu from Jiange. Liangzhou and South Qinzhou were stationed in Baima. Cui Huijing mobilized Liangzhou troops and attacked Li Wunu with Wang Tunan. He was defeated. Li Wunu fled to Wuxing and defended the city.

古文：慧景，祖思之族人也。
现代文：崔慧景是崔祖思的同族。
English: Cui Huiqing is a member of the same family as Cui Zu Si.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，魏主如火山。
现代文：秋季七月，辛亥，北魏孝文帝前往火山。
English: In the autumn of July, Xinhai, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen went to the volcano.

古文：戊午，皇太子穆妃裴氏卒。
现代文：戊午，南齐皇太子穆妃裴氏故去。
English: In the afternoon, the crown prince of Nanqi, Mu Fei, passed away.

古文：诏南郡王长懋移镇西州。
现代文：高帝颁诏命令南郡王萧长懋迁移到西州。
English: Emperor Gao issued an edict ordering Wang Xiao Changyu of Nan County to move to Xizhou.

古文：角城戍主举城降魏；秋，八月，丁酉，魏遣徐州刺史梁郡王嘉迎之。
现代文：角城戍主率领全城归降北魏。秋季，八月，丁酉，北魏派遣徐州刺史梁郡王拓跋嘉迎接角城戍主。
English: In the autumn, in August of Dingwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Wang Tuobaojia from Xuzhou Jishiliang County to meet the warlord of Jiaocheng.

古文：又遣平南将军郎大檀等三将出朐城，将军白吐头等二将出海西，将军元泰等二将出连口，将军封延等三将出角城，镇南将军贺罗出下蔡，同入寇。
现代文：北魏还派遣平南将军郎大檀等三员将领出兵朐城，将军白吐头等两员将领出兵海西，将军元泰等两员将领出兵连口，将军封延等三员将领出兵角城，镇南将军贺罗出兵下蔡，一同前去侵犯南齐。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty also sent three generals, including the Pingnan general Lang Datan, to lead the troops out of Huancheng City, two generals, including the general Bai Tu Tou, to lead the troops out of Haixi City, two generals, including the general Yuan Tai, to lead the troops out of Liankou City, three generals, including the general Feng Yan, to lead the troops out of Hekou City, and the Zhennan general Hero to lead the troops out of Shimo Cai City to invade Nanqi.

古文：甲辰，魏主如方山；戊申，游武州山石窟寺。
现代文：甲辰，北魏孝文帝前往方山。戊申，孝文帝游览武州山的石窟寺。
English: Jia Chen, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan. Wu Shen, Emperor Xiaowen visited the cave temple in Mount Wuzhou.

古文：庚戌，还平城。
现代文：庚戌，孝文帝返回平城。
English: Emperor Gyeongsang and Emperor Xiaowen returned to Heijo.

古文：崔慧景遣长史裴叔保攻李乌奴于武兴，为氐王杨文弘所败。
现代文：崔慧景派遣长史裴叔保在武兴进攻李乌奴，被氐王杨文弘击败。
English: Cui Huijing dispatched the warlord Shi Pei Shubo to attack Li Wunu in Wuxing and was defeated by the warlord Yang Wenhong.

古文：九月，甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，甲午朔，出现日食。
English: In September, at the stroke of midnight, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙午，柔然遣使来聘。
现代文：丙午，柔然派遣使者前来南齐通问修好。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Zhu Rong sent an envoy to Nanqitong to ask for a truce.

古文：汝南太守常元真、龙骧将军胡青苟降于魏。
现代文：汝南太守常元真和龙骧将军胡青苟向北魏投降。
English: Emperor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty Changyuan Zhen and Dragon Emperor General Hu Qinggong surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：闰月，辛巳，遣领军李安民循行清、泗诸戍以备魏。
现代文：闰九月，辛巳，高帝派遣领军李安民巡视清水、泗水一带的各个据点，防备北魏的进攻。
English: In late September, Emperor Gao sent Li Anmin, the leader of the army, to inspect the various strongholds in the vicinity of Shimizu and Surabaya to prevent the attack of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏梁郡王嘉帅众十万围朐山，朐山戍主玄元度婴城固守，青、冀二州刺史范阳卢绍之遣子奂将兵助之。
现代文：北魏梁郡王拓跋嘉率领十万兵马包围朐山，朐山戍主玄元度环城坚守，青州、冀州两州刺史范阳人氏卢绍之派遣儿子卢奂率兵援助玄元度。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Tuoba Jia of Liang County led 100,000 soldiers and horses to encircle Lushan. The lord of Lushan, Xuan Yuan Du, stood firm around the city. Lu Shao, the son of the famous statesman Fan Yangren of Qingzhou and Jizhou, dispatched soldiers led by Lu Xun to aid Xuan Yuan Du.

古文：庚寅，元度大破魏师。
现代文：庚寅，玄元度大败北魏军。
English: Geng Yin and Xuan Yuan thoroughly defeated the Northern Wei Army.

古文：台遣军主崔灵建等将万馀人自淮入海，夜至，各举两炬；魏师望见，遁去。
现代文：南齐朝廷派遣军主崔灵建等人率领一万余人崐由淮水进入东海，黑夜降临的时候，每人各自举着两把火炬，北魏军见此情景，便逃走了。
English: Cui Lingjian, the commander of the army dispatched by the Nanzhi imperial court, and others led more than ten thousand people from Huai Shui into the East China Sea. When night fell, each person held two torches. The Northern Wei army saw this scene and fled.

古文：冬，十月，王俭固请解选职，许之；加俭侍中，以太子詹事何戢领选。
现代文：冬季十月，王俭再三请求解除自己执掌吏部的职务，高帝答应下来，加授王俭为侍中，任命太子詹事何戢主持铨选。
English: In the winter of October, Wang Jianmao repeatedly requested to be relieved of his duties in charge of the cadre department, and Emperor Gao agreed, and appointed Wang Jianmao as an attendant, and appointed Prince Zhan Zhihe to preside over the election.

古文：上以戢资重，欲加常待，褚渊曰： 圣旨每以蝉冕不宜过多。
现代文：高帝认为何戢的资望很高，便打算加授他为常侍。褚渊说： 皇上的旨意往往认为金蝉珥貂的侍从贵近的官员不应该过多。
English: Emperor Gao thought that He Zhen's reputation was very high, so he planned to award him the title of "permanent attendant." Shanyuan said: The emperor's will often believed that the attendants of Jin Zhen should not be too many noble officials.

古文：臣与王俭既已左珥，若复加戢，则八座遂有三貂；若帖以骁、游，亦为不少。 
现代文：我与王俭已经在朝冠左方加饰貂尾，如果再给何戢挂貂，在六曹尚书、令、仆八座中便有三人冠饰貂尾了。如果让他兼任骁骑将军或是游击将军，职位也不算低的了。 
English: Wang Jian and I have already decorated the left side of the imperial crown with the appendages. If we were to decorate the right side with the appendages again, there would be three crowns and appendages among the six emperors, eight emperors and eight servants. If he were to serve concurrently as a general of cavalry or a general of guerrillas, his position would not be too low.

古文：乃以戢为吏部尚书，加骁骑将军。
现代文：于是，高帝任命何戢为吏部尚书，加任骁骑将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao appointed He Jian as the secretary of the cadre department and appointed him as the general of the cavalry.

古文：甲辰，以沙州刺史杨广香为西秦州刺史，又以其子炅为武都太守。
现代文：甲辰，高帝任命沙州刺史杨广香为西秦州刺史，还任命他的儿子杨炅为武都太守。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao appointed Yang Guangxiang, the governor of Shazhou, as the governor of Western Qin, and also appointed his son Yang Jun as the governor of Wudang.

古文：丁未，魏以昌黎王冯熙为西道都督，与征南将军桓诞出义阳，镇南将军贺罗出钟离，同入寇。
现代文：丁未，北魏孝文帝任命昌黎王冯熙为西道都督，与征南将军桓诞出兵义阳，另使镇南将军贺罗出兵钟离，共同前去侵犯南齐。
English: Ding Wei, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen appointed Changli King Feng Xi as the governor of the West Road, and sent troops to Yiyang with the Southern General Huan Zhao, and sent troops to Zhongli with the Southern General Herao, to jointly invade Nanqi.

古文：淮北四州民不乐属魏，常思归江南，上多遣间谍诱之。
现代文：淮水北岸四州百姓不愿意归属北魏，经常希望返回江南地区。高帝派遣了许多暗探前去诱导他们反抗北魏。
English: The people of Shizhou on the north bank of the Huai River did not want to belong to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and often wanted to return to the south of the Yangtze River. Emperor Gao sent many spies to induce them to rebel against the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：于是，徐州民桓标之、兗州民徐猛子等所在蜂起为寇盗，聚众保伍固，推司马朗之为主。
现代文：因此，徐州百姓桓标之、兖州百姓徐猛子等人到处蜂拥而起，明抢暗劫，集结民众，防守五固，推举司马朗之担任首领。
English: Therefore, the people of Xuzhou, such as Huan Banzhi and the people of Zhangzhou, such as Xu Mengzi, swarmed everywhere, robbed secretly, gathered the people, defended the five fortresses, and elected Sima Lang as the leader.

古文：魏遣淮阳王尉元、平南将军薛虎子等讨之。
现代文：北魏派遣淮阳王尉元和平南将军薛虎子等人前去讨伐他们。
English: The Northern Wei dispatched Huaiyang Wangfei Yuan and Pingnan General Xue Huozi and others to go and fight them.

古文：十一月，戊寅，丹阳尹王僧虔上言： 郡县狱相承有上汤杀囚，名为救疾，实行冤暴。
现代文：十一月，戊寅，南齐丹阳尹王僧虔进言说： 郡县的监狱历来沿袭着用有毒的汤药杀害生病的罪囚的做法，名义上说是要救活病人，实际上是制造冤狱，肆为暴行。
English: In November, Wu Yin, Danyang Yin Wang, a monk from Nanqi, said, "County and county prisons have always followed the practice of killing sick prisoners with poisonous decoctions. In name, it is to save the lives of the sick, but in reality, it is to create unjust prisons and to commit wanton violence.

古文：岂有死生大命，而潜制下邑！
现代文：怎能将这人命关天的大事，由地方官暗中控制！
English: How can local officials secretly control this important matter of human life!

古文：愚谓囚病必先刺郡，求职司与医对共诊验，远县家人省视，然后处治。 
现代文：我认为，如果罪囚病了，一定要先向刺史禀告，要求主管刑狱的官员会同医生一齐前去诊断验查。对于家住僻远各县的罪囚，要让家人前来探望，然后才能处方治病。 
English: In my opinion, if a criminal prisoner is ill, he must first report to the magistrate and ask the officer in charge of the prison to go with the doctor for diagnosis and inspection. For prisoners who live in remote counties, they must let their families come to visit before they can prescribe treatment.

古文：上从之。
现代文：高帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：戊子，以杨难当之孙后起为北秦州刺史、武都王，镇武兴。
现代文：南齐高帝任命杨难当的孙子杨后起为北秦州刺史、武都王，镇守武兴。
English: Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed Yang Houqi, the grandson of Yang Nantang, as the governor of North Qin Province, the king of Wudang, and the town guard of Wuxing.

古文：十二月，戊戌，以司空褚渊为司徒。
现代文：十二月，戊戌，南齐高帝任命司空褚渊为司徒。
English: In December, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed Siku Shanyuan as his disciple.

古文：渊入朝，以腰扇障日，征虏功曹刘祥从侧过，曰： 作如上举止，羞面见人，扇障何益！ 
现代文：褚渊入朝进见，用折扇遮蔽阳光，征虏功曹刘祥在从他身边经过的时候说： 作出这样的举动，羞于当面见人，用扇子遮掩，又有什么用处！ 
English: When Cao Liu Xiang passed by him, he said, "What's the use of making such a gesture, being ashamed to meet people face to face, and covering yourself with a fan!

古文：渊曰： 寒士不逊！ 
现代文：褚渊说： 穷念书人太出言不逊了！ 
English: Gongyuan said, "Poor students are too arrogant!

古文：祥曰： 不能杀袁、刘，安得免寒士！ 
现代文：刘详说： 既然不能诛杀袁粲和刘秉，怎么能不当一个穷念书人呢？ 
English: Liu Zhe said: Since it is not possible to kill Yuan Shao and Liu Bing, how can a poor student be wronged?

古文：祥，穆之之孙也。
现代文：刘祥是刘穆之的孙子。
English: Liu Xiang is the grandson of Liu Muzhi.

古文：祥好文学，而性韵刚疏，撰《宋书》，讥斥禅代；王俭密以闻，坐徙广州而卒。
现代文：刘祥喜爱文献经典，性情刚正，才调疏狂。他撰修了一部《宋书》，讥讽诋斥帝位禅让，王俭暗中上报高帝，使他因此获罪，被贬到广州，后来就故去了。
English: Liu Xiang loved literature and classics, he had a straightforward temperament, and he was able to adjust his alienation. He wrote a "Song Book," ridiculed and denigrated the emperor's abdication, and Wang Jian secretly reported to Emperor Gao. As a result, he was found guilty, was relegated to Guangzhou, and later died.

古文：太子宴朝臣于玄圃，右卫率沈文季与褚渊语相失，文季怒曰： 渊自谓忠臣，不知死之日何面目见宋明帝！ 
现代文：南齐太子萧赜在玄圃宴请朝廷百官，右卫率沈文季与褚渊话不投机，沈文季生气地说： 褚渊认为自己是一个忠臣，不知道他死后怎么还能有脸去见宋明帝！ 
English: The prince of Nanqi, Xiao Wei, invited hundreds of officials from the imperial court to a banquet in the garden. Shen Wenzhi, the head of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, did not want to speculate with Gongyuan. Shen Wenzhi said angrily: Gongyuan considered himself a loyal subject and did not know how he could still have the face to meet Song Mingdi after his death!

古文：太子笑曰： 沈率醉矣 
现代文：太子萧赜笑着说： 沈文季是喝醉啦。 
English: Prince Xiao Yao said with a smile: Shen Wenshu is drunk.

古文：壬子，以豫章王嶷为中书监、司空、扬州刺史，以临川王映为都督荆、雍等九州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：壬子，南齐高帝任命豫章王萧嶷为中书监、司空、扬州刺史，任命临川王萧映为都督荆、雍等九州诸军事和荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoyuan as the Central Library Supervisor, Sikuo and Yangzhou Historian, and appointed Linchuan Wang Xiaoying as the Governor of Jing, Yong and other military regions of Kyushu and Jingzhou Historian.

古文：是岁，魏尚书令王睿进爵中山王，加镇东大将军；置王官二十二人，以中书侍郎郑羲为傅，郎中令以下皆当时名士。又拜睿妻丁氏为妃。
现代文：本年，北魏尚书令王睿晋升爵位为中山王，加任镇东大将军。王府设置官员二十二人，由中书侍郎郑羲担任王傅，郎中令以下各官职，也都是由当时的知名之士来担任，孝文帝还将王睿的妻子丁氏封为王妃。
English: This year, the Northern Wei Emperor Shang Shuling promoted Wang Rui to the title of the King of Zhongshan and appointed him as the General of the Eastern Towns. The royal palace set up 22 officials, with the servant of the Emperor Shang Shuling, Zheng Qi, serving as Wang Fu, and the servant of the Emperor Shang Shuling and the following official positions were also held by well-known people at that time. Emperor Xiaowen also made Wang Rui's wife, Ding Shi, a princess.

古文：太祖高皇帝建元三年
现代文：建元三年
English: Founded in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：春，正月，封皇子锋为江夏王。
现代文：春季正月，南齐高帝将皇子萧锋封为江夏王。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Gao of Southern Qi crowned Prince Xiao Feng as the King of Jiangxia.

古文：魏人寇淮阳，围军主成买于甬城，上遣领军将军李安民为都督，与军主周盘龙等救之。
现代文：北魏军队侵犯淮阳，把军主成买包围在甬城里面，南齐高帝派遣领军将军李安民担任都督，与军主周盘龙等人前去援救成买。
English: The Northern Wei army invaded Huaiyang and encircled the military leader Chengmai in Lucheng. Emperor Gao of Southern Qi dispatched the leading general Li Anmin to serve as the governor, and went to rescue Chengmai with the military leader Zhou Panlong and others.

古文：魏人缘淮大掠，江北民皆惊走，渡江，成买力战而死。
现代文：北魏军队在淮水沿岸大肆劫掠，长江以北的南齐百姓纷纷惊惶逃走，渡过长江南下，成买奋力战斗而死。
English: The Northern Wei army plundered the coast of Huai Shui, and the people of Nanqi north of the Yangtze River fled in panic, crossed the Yangtze River to the south, and died in battle.

古文：盘龙之子奉叔以二百人陷陈深入，魏以万馀骑张左右翼围之。
现代文：周盘龙的儿子周奉叔，率领二百人冲入北魏军阵的深处，北魏派出一万多人的骑兵，分成左右两翼，包围周奉叔。
English: Zhou Fengshu, the son of Zhou Panlong, led two hundred people to rush into the depths of the Northern Wei army. The Northern Wei sent more than ten thousand cavalry, divided into left and right wings, to surround Zhou Fengshu.

古文：或告盘龙云 奉叔已没 ，盘龙驰马奋槊，直突魏陈，所向披靡。
现代文：有人向周盘龙报告说： 周奉叔已经阵亡。 周盘龙跃马疾驱，奋力挥动长槊，径直冲入北魏军阵，所到之处，无不惊慌溃败。
English: Someone reported to Zhou Panlong: "Zhou Fengshu has been killed in battle." Zhou Panlong leapt onto his horse and galloped, waved his long scepter vigorously, and rushed straight into the Northern Wei army line. Everywhere he went, he was panicked and routed.

古文：奉叔已出，复入求盘龙。
现代文：周奉叔冲出敌阵以后，又前去寻找周盘龙。
English: After Uncle Zhou Fong rushed out of the enemy lines, he went to look for Zhou Panlong.

古文：父子两骑萦扰，魏数万之众莫敢当者；魏师遂败，杀伤万计。
现代文：周氏父子两人骑马左右奔驰，四处冲撞，北魏好几万人马中无人有胆量抵挡他们。于是北魏军队败了下来，死伤的人马数以万计。
English: Zhou's father and son galloped around on horseback, crashing everywhere. Of the tens of thousands of horses in the Northern Wei Dynasty, no one had the courage to resist them. As a result, the Northern Wei Army was defeated, and tens of thousands of people were killed and injured.

古文：魏师退，李安民等引兵追之，战于孙溪渚，又破之。
现代文：北魏军队撤退的时候，李安民等人又率领军队前去追击，在孙溪渚发生战斗，又一次打败北魏军队。
English: When the Northern Wei army retreated, Li Anmin and others led the army to pursue, and there was a battle at Sunxi Beach, once again defeating the Northern Wei army.

古文：己卯，魏主南巡，司空苟颓留守；丁亥，魏主至中山。
现代文：己卯，北魏孝文帝南下巡视，司空苟颓留守平城。丁亥，北魏孝文帝来到中山。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen went to the south to inspect the situation. Emperor Gaozong stayed in Pingcheng. Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to Zhongshan.

古文：二月，辛卯朔，魏大赦。
现代文：二月，丁卯朔，北魏大赦。
English: February, Ding Ushuo, Northern Wei amnesty.

古文：丁酉，游击将军桓康复败魏师于淮阳，进攻樊谐城，拔之。
现代文：丁酉，南齐游击将军桓康在淮阳再次打败北魏军队，接着进攻樊谐城，又将该城攻克。
English: Ding Jun, the Nanzhi guerrilla general Huan Kang defeated the Northern Wei army again in Huaiyang, and then attacked and conquered the city of Jingyi.

古文：魏主自中山如信都；癸卯，复如中山；庚戌，还，至肆州。
现代文：北魏孝文帝从中山前往信都。癸卯，再次前往中山。庚戌，孝文帝启程返回，来到肆州。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen went from Zhongshan to Xindu, and then went to Zhongshan again, and then returned to Hezhou.

古文：沙门法秀以妖术惑众，谋作乱于平城；苟颓帅禁兵收掩，悉擒之。
现代文：僧人法秀以邪术迷惑民众，打算在平城制造叛乱。苟颓率领禁卫军前去收捕掩袭，将他们全部捉获。
English: The monk Hosshu used magic to confuse the people, intending to create a rebellion in Heijo. Gohjo led the Imperial Guard to attack and capture them all.

古文：魏主还平城，有司囚法秀，加以笼头，铁锁无故自解。
现代文：孝文帝回到平城以后，有关部门将法秀拘禁起来，给他戴上笼头，但是笼头上的铁锁毫无缘由地自动打开了。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen returned to Pingcheng, the relevant departments detained Faxiu and put him in a cage, but the iron lock on the cage automatically opened for no reason.

古文：魏人穿其颈骨，祝之曰： 若果有神，当令穿肉不入。 
现代文：看守人员准备用铁链穿透法秀的颈骨，便诅咒他说： 倘若你果真神通广大，就应该让铁链穿不进皮肉。 
English: The guards prepared to use a chain to penetrate the neck bone of Faxiu, and then cursed him, saying: "If you are really a magician, you should not allow the chain to penetrate the flesh."

古文：遂穿以徇，三日乃死。
现代文：结果看守人员用铁锁链穿着法秀的颈骨示众，历时三天，法秀这才死去。
English: As a result, the guards used an iron chain to wear the neck bone of Fa Xiu to show the public. It took three days, and Fa Xiu died.

古文：议者或欲尽杀道人，冯太后不可，乃止。
现代文：有些计议此事的人打算将僧人全部杀掉，冯太后不同意，于是没有施行。
English: Some people who considered the matter intended to kill all the monks, but Empress Dowager Feng did not agree, so it was not carried out.

古文：垣崇祖之败魏师也，恐魏复寇淮北，乃徙下蔡戍于淮东。
现代文：垣崇祖打败北魏军队以后，担心北魏再来侵犯淮水北岸地区，便将下崐蔡戍迁移淮东地区。
English: After defeating the Northern Wei army, he was worried that the Northern Wei would invade the northern coast of Huai Shui again, so he moved the Lower Wei Caiyi to the eastern part of Huai Shui.

古文：既而魏师果至，欲攻下蔡；闻其内徙，欲夷其故城。
现代文：不久，北魏军队果然前来，准备攻打下蔡，得知下蔡迁移到内地以后，便打算铲平下蔡旧城。
English: Soon, the Northern Wei army came and prepared to attack Lower Cai. After learning that Lower Cai had moved inland, they planned to level Lower Cai's old city.

古文：己酉，崇祖引兵渡淮击魏，大破之，杀获千计。
现代文：己酉，垣崇祖率领军队渡过淮水，进击北魏，将北魏打得大败，杀死和捉获得兵员数以千计。
English: At the same time, Qi Chongzu led the army across the Huai River and attacked the Northern Wei Dynasty, defeating the Northern Wei Dynasty and killing and capturing thousands of soldiers.

古文：晋、宋之际，荆州刺史多不领南蛮校尉，别以重人居之。
现代文：在晋、宋时期，荆州刺史往往并不兼任南蛮校尉，朝廷另外委派重要官员担任此职。
English: During the Jin and Song dynasties, the Jingzhou Sashishi often did not concurrently serve as the Nanban Lieutenant, and the imperial court appointed other important officials to serve in this position.

古文：豫章王嶷为荆、湘二州刺史，领南蛮。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷担任荆、湘两州刺史的时候，却兼任了南蛮校尉的职务。
English: When Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui served as the chief historian of Jing and Hunan, he also served as the captain of Nanban.

古文：嶷罢，更以侍中王奂为之，奂固辞，曰： 西土戎烬之后，痍毁难复。
现代文：萧嶷罢职以后，高帝又让侍中王奂出任两州刺史兼南蛮校尉，王奂再三推辞着说： 西部疆土在经受战火以后，遭到的破坏已经难以恢复。
English: After Xiao Jian stepped down from his post, Emperor Gao also appointed the equerry Wang Jian to serve as the governor of the two states and the southern barbarian captain. Wang Jian repeatedly said: After the war, the western territory has been damaged and it is difficult to recover.

古文：今复割撤太府，制置偏校，崇望不足助强，语实交能相弊。
现代文：现在，朝廷又要分散州郡长官的权力，去设置一些偏将。推重大臣的名望不足以增强实力，说到实际的情况却能够造成弊病。
English: Now, the imperial court also wants to disperse the power of prefectural governors to set up some partial generals. It is not enough to promote the reputation of the minister to enhance strength, but it can cause maladies when it comes to the actual situation.

古文：且资力既分，职司增广，众劳务倍，文案滋烦，窃以为国计非允。 
现代文：何况物资与权力分散以后，职能部门就增多了，大家的劳务必须成倍增加，公文案卷愈加繁复。我个人认为若为国家利益着想，这种做法并不允当。 
English: Moreover, after the decentralization of materials and power, the number of functional departments has increased, everyone's labor must be doubled, and official documents have become more and more complicated. I personally believe that this approach is not appropriate if it is for the sake of national interests.

古文：癸丑，罢南蛮校尉官。
现代文：癸丑，高帝取消了南蛮校尉的建置。
English: Unfortunately, Emperor Gao cancelled the establishment of the Southern Barbarian Captain.

古文：三月，辛酉朔，魏主如肆州；己巳，还平城。
现代文：三月，辛酉朔，北魏孝文帝前往肆州。己巳，孝文帝返回平城。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Zhouzhou. Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen returned to Pingcheng.

古文：魏法秀之乱，事连兰台御史张求等百馀人，皆以反，法当族。
现代文：北魏法秀作乱的事情，牵连到兰台御史张求等一百多人，按照有关谋反的刑法全部应当灭族。
English: According to the criminal law of the Northern Wei Dynasty, all those who conspired to revolt should be exterminated, including more than a hundred people who were implicated in the Lantai Emperor Zhang Qiu.

古文：尚书令王睿请诛首恶，宥其馀党。
现代文：尚书令王睿请求只诛杀罪魁祸首，而宽恕法秀残余的党羽。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Rui to request that only the culprit be killed, while forgiving the remnants of the party.

古文：乃诏： 应诛五族者，降为三族；三族者，门诛；门诛，止其身。 所免千馀人。
现代文：于是，孝文帝颁诏说： 应当诛灭五族的，降为诛灭三族；应当诛灭三族的，降为诛灭全家；应当诛灭全家的，只诛灭本人。 
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict saying: Those who should exterminate five ethnic groups should be reduced to exterminating three ethnic groups; those who should exterminate three ethnic groups should be reduced to exterminating an entire family; those who should exterminate an entire family should only be exterminated themselves.

古文：夏，四月，己亥，魏主如方山。
现代文：因此幸免的有一千多人。夏季四月，己亥，北魏孝文帝前往方山。
English: Therefore, more than a thousand people were spared. In the summer of April, Ji Hai, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan.

古文：冯太后乐其山川，曰： 它日必葬我于是，不必祔山陵也。 
现代文：冯太后喜爱这里山青水秀，便说： 将来一定要把我安葬在此地，不一定要把我合葬在先帝的陵寝中。 
English: Empress Dowager Feng loved the beauty of the landscape here, and said: In the future, I must be buried here, I don't have to be buried in the former emperor's mausoleum.

古文：乃为太后作寿陵，又建永固石室于山上，欲以为庙。
现代文：于是，孝文帝为冯太后预修陵墓，又在方城山上修建永固石室，准备用作陵庙。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen prefabricated a mausoleum for Empress Dowager Feng and built a permanent stone chamber on Fangcheng Mountain to prepare it for use as a mausoleum.

古文：桓标之等有众数万，寨险求援；庚子，诏李安民督诸将往迎之，又使兗州刺史周山图自淮入清，倍道应接。
现代文：南齐桓标之等人拥有好几万兵马，在险要处安营扎寨，向朝廷请求援助。庚子，高帝命令李安民督统各位将领前去迎接桓标之等人，还让兖州刺史周山图由淮水转入清水，兼程赶路，前去接应。
English: Emperor Gao ordered Li Anmin and all the generals to go to meet Huanzhang and his men. He also ordered the Zhangzhou general Zhou Shisheng to move from Huai Shui to Qingshui to meet them on the way.

古文：淮北民桓磊磈破魏师于抱犊固。
现代文：淮水北岸百姓桓磊在抱犊固打败北魏军队。
English: The people of Huanlei on the north bank of the Huai River defeated the Northern Wei army in the battle.

古文：李安民赴救迟留，标之等皆为魏所灭，馀众得南归者尚数千家；魏人亦掠三万馀口归平城。
现代文：李安民前去救援，行动缓慢，桓标之等人全部被北魏消灭，得以返回南方的残余百姓仍然有好几千家。北魏人也虏掠了三万多人，送回平城。
English: Li Anmin went to the rescue, but the action was slow. Huan Biao and others were all wiped out by the Northern Wei Dynasty. There are still several thousand remaining people who were able to return to the south. The Northern Wei Dynasty also captured more than 30,000 people and sent them back to Pingcheng.

古文：魏任城康王云卒。
现代文：北魏任城康王拓跋云去世。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Kang Wang died.

古文：五月，壬戌，邓至王像舒遣使入贡于魏。
现代文：五月，壬戌，邓至王像舒派遣使者向北魏进贡。
English: In May, Deng Zi Wangzongshu sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to pay tribute.

古文：邓至者，羌之别种，国于宕昌之南。
现代文：邓至是羌人的一个分支，在宕昌南面建立国家。
English: Deng Zhi was a branch of the Qiang people who established a state in the south of Tang Chang.

古文：六月，壬子，大赦。
现代文：六月，壬子，南齐大赦。
English: In June, there was a general amnesty in Nanzi and Nanzi.

古文：甲辰，魏中山宣王王睿卒。睿疾病，太皇太后、魏主累至其家视疾。
现代文：甲辰，北魏中山宣王王睿故去，在王睿患病期间，太皇太后和孝文帝多次到他家中探望病情。
English: In the middle of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Rui passed away. During Wang Rui's illness, Empress Dowager Cixi and Emperor Xiaowen visited his home several times to check on his condition.

古文：及卒，赠太宰，立庙于平城南。
现代文：及至王睿故去，朝廷追赠他为太宰，在平城南面设置陵庙，为王睿撰写哀诗与诔文的文学之士有一百多人。
English: After Wang Rui's death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Dazai and set up a mausoleum in the south of Pingcheng. There are more than a hundred literary figures who have written elegies and eulogies for Wang Rui.

古文：文士为睿作哀诗及誄者百馀人，及葬，自称亲姻、义旧，缞绖哭送者千馀人。
现代文：到了安葬王睿的时候，自称是王睿的姻戚、故旧，穿着丧服哭泣送葬的，有一千多人。
English: By the time of Wang Rui's funeral, there were more than a thousand people who claimed to be Wang Rui's relatives by marriage, wearing mourning clothes and crying.

古文：魏主以睿子中散大夫袭代睿为尚书令，领吏部曹。
现代文：孝文帝让王睿的儿子中散大夫王袭代替王睿担任尚书令，总领吏部各曹。
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked Wang Rui's son, Zhongshan doctor Wang He, to replace Wang Rui as Shang Shuling, the head of the General Staff Department.

古文：戊午，魏封皇叔简为齐郡王，猛为安丰王。
现代文：戊午，北魏孝文帝将皇叔拓跋简封为齐郡王，将拓跋猛封为安丰王。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty made the emperor's uncle Tuoba the king of Qi County and Tuoba the king of Anfeng.

古文：秋，七月，己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月，己未朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the autumn month of July, before the new year.

古文：上使后军参军车僧朗使于魏。
现代文：南齐高帝让后军参军车僧朗出使北魏。
English: Emperor Qigong of the Southern Qi Dynasty sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：甲子，僧朗至平城，魏主问曰： 齐辅宋日浅，何故遽登大位？ 
现代文：甲子，车僧朗来到平城。孝文帝问道： 齐辅佐宋的时间很短，能够突然登上帝位，是何道理？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked, "Qi Suo Song's time is very short, how can he suddenly ascend to the throne?

古文：对曰： 虞、夏登庸，身陟元后，魏、晋匡辅，贻厥子孙，时宜各异耳。 
现代文：车僧朗回答说： 虞舜、夏禹登位称帝，是自身上升为天子。魏、晋辅佐前朝，是将帝位留给子孙后代。这是适应各自不同的时势而已。 
English: Che Monk Lang replied, "When Gu Yu and Xia Yu ascended to the throne and became emperors, it was to elevate themselves to become the sons of heaven. When Wei and Jin Suo became emperors, it was to leave the imperial throne to future generations. It was just to adapt to their own different situations.

古文：辛酉，柔然别帅他稽帅众降魏。
现代文：辛酉，柔然别帅他稽率领本部归降北魏。
English: Sinful, gentle, not handsome, he led the headquarters to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：杨文弘遣使请降，诏复以为北秦州刺史。
现代文：北魏杨文弘派遣使者前来请求归降，南齐高帝颁诏重新任命他为北秦州刺史。
English: Yang Wenhong of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to request his return, and Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty issued an edict to reappoint him as the governor of Northern Qin.

古文：先是，杨广香卒，其众半奔文弘，半奔梁州。
现代文：此前，杨广香故去，他的部下一半投奔杨文弘，一半投奔梁州。
English: Previously, Yang Guangxiang passed away, half of his subordinates went to Yang Wenhong, and half went to Liangzhou.

古文：文弘遣杨后起据白水。
现代文：杨文弘派遣杨后起进军占领了白水。
English: Yang Wenhong sent Yang Houqi to invade and occupy Baishui.

古文：上虽授以官爵，而阴敕晋寿太守杨公则使伺便图之。
现代文：虽然高帝授给杨文弘官职爵位，但是暗中又敕令晋寿太守杨公则寻找方便的时机，设法除掉杨文弘。
English: Although Emperor Gao gave Yang Wenhong the official title of nobility, he secretly ordered Yang Gongze, the governor of Jinju, to find a convenient time and try to get rid of Yang Wenhong.

古文：宋升明中，遣使者殷灵诞、苟昭先如魏，闻上受禅，灵诞谓魏典客曰： 宋、魏通好，忧患是同。
现代文：刘宋升明年间，顺帝派遣使者殷灵诞、苟昭先前往北魏。得知南齐高帝接受帝位禅让以后，殷灵诞便对北魏的典客官说： 宋、魏通问修好，一方的忧患就是另一方的忧患。
English: During the reign of Liu Song Sheng, Emperor Shun sent emissaries Yin Ling Xing and Guo Zhao to the Northern Wei Dynasty. After learning that Emperor Nanqi Gao accepted the abdication of the imperial throne, Yin Ling Xing said to the Northern Wei Dynasty guest officer: Song and Wei have a good relationship, and the sorrow of one side is the sorrow of the other side.

古文：宋今灭亡，魏不相救，何用和亲！ 
现代文：现在宋朝灭亡了，魏朝却不肯相救，两国和睦相亲还有什么用处！ 
English: Now that the Song Dynasty has perished, but the Wei Dynasty refuses to come to the rescue, what is the use of the two countries' harmonious relationship?

古文：及刘昶入寇，灵诞请为昶司马，不许。
现代文：及至刘昶前来侵犯南齐，殷灵诞请求担任刘昶的司马，刘昶没有答应。
English: When Liu Bei came to invade Nanqi, Yin Lingxue requested to serve as Liu Bei's steed, but Liu Bei did not agree.

古文：九月，庚午，魏阅武于南郊，因宴群臣，置车僧朗于灵诞下，僧朗不肯就席，曰： 灵诞昔为宋使，今为齐民。
现代文：九月，庚午，北魏在平城南郊检阅兵马，因而设宴招待群臣。北魏将车僧朗的座次安置在殷灵诞的下首，车僧朗不肯入席，他说： 过去殷灵诞是宋朝的使者，现在却成了齐国的平民。
English: In the afternoon of the 9th month, the Northern Wei Dynasty held a military parade in the southern suburb of Pingcheng, so they set up a banquet to invite the ministers. The Northern Wei Dynasty placed the seat of Chezonglang at the bottom of Yinling Festival. Chezonglang refused to sit down, saying: In the past, Yinling Festival was an envoy of the Song Dynasty, but now it has become a civilian of Qi.

古文：乞魏主以礼见处。 
现代文：我请求魏国皇帝按照礼节对待我。 
English: I ask the Emperor of Wei to treat me with courtesy.

古文：灵诞遂与相忿詈。
现代文：于是殷灵诞与他愤怒地相互辱骂。
English: So Yin Lingxue and he angrily hurled insults at each other.

古文：刘昶赂宋降人解奉君于会刺杀僧朗，魏人收奉君，诛之；厚送僧朗之丧，放灵诞等南归。
现代文：刘昶贿赂刘宋朝的降将解奉君，在宴会上刺死车僧朗。北魏方面收捕解奉君，将他杀死，隆重地为车僧朗送葬，将殷灵诞等人放还南朝。
English: Liu Bei bribed Liu Song Dynasty to demote Jie Fongjun, and stabbed Jie Sang Lang to death at a banquet. The Northern Wei side arrested Jie Fongjun, killed him, ceremoniously buried Jie Sang Lang, and released Yin Lingzhi and others back to the Southern Dynasty.

古文：及世祖即位，昭先具以灵诞之语启闻，灵诞坐下狱死。
现代文：及至南齐武帝即位，苟昭先将殷灵诞说的话全部启奏武帝，殷灵诞因此获罪，在牢狱中死去。
English: When Emperor Nanqi Wu ascended the throne, Gou Zhao first reported all the words of Yin Lingzhao to Emperor Wu. As a result, Yin Lingzhao was convicted and died in prison.

古文：辛未，柔然主遣使来聘，与上书，谓上为 足下 ，自称曰 吾 ，遣上师子皮袴褶，约共伐魏。
现代文：辛未，柔然可汗派遣使者前来南齐通问致意，在给高帝的国书中，称高帝为 足下 ，自称为 吾 ，向高帝赠送了狮子皮制成的一身骑装，约定共同讨伐北魏。
English: Xinwei, Zhu Rong Khan sent an envoy to come to Nanqi to ask for compliments. In the state book to Gao Di, he called Gao Di his footman, called himself "Wu," presented Gao Di with a riding outfit made of lion skin, and agreed to jointly fight against Northern Wei.

古文：魏尉元、薛虎子克五固，斩司马朗之，东南诸州皆平。
现代文：北魏尉元与薛虎子攻克五固，斩杀司马朗之，东南各州的变乱全部被平定了。
English: Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan and Xue Hu Zi conquered Wugu, killed Sima Lang, and all the rebellions in the southeastern states were quelled.

古文：尉元入为侍中、都曹尚书，薛虎子为彭城镇将，迁徐州刺史。
现代文：尉元回朝后担任侍中、都曹尚书，薛虎子担任彭城镇将，晋升为徐州刺史。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Ye Yuan served as a chamberlain, Du Cao Shangshu, and Xue Hu Zi served as a general of Peng Town, and was promoted to the leading role in Xuzhou history.

古文：时州镇戍兵，资绢自随，不入公库。
现代文：当时，戍守州镇的军队，都是将财物绢帛随军携带，不用上缴官府的仓库。
English: At that time, the troops of the garrison towns carried their belongings with them and did not have to hand them over to the government warehouse.

古文：虎子上表，以为： 国家欲取江东，先须积谷彭城。
现代文：薛虎子上表认为： 既然朝廷准备进取江东地区，就必须首先在彭城贮积谷物。
English: Xue Hu believed that since the imperial court was preparing to invade the eastern Jiangsu region, grain must first be stored in Pengcheng.

古文：切惟在镇之兵，不减数万，资粮之绢，人十二匹；用度无准，未及代下，不免饥寒，公私损费。
现代文：我考虑安置在州镇上的兵力，不少于数万人，充当军资粮饷的绢帛，每人十二匹，由于开支没有准则，士兵们没等到被替换下来，就不能够避免忍饥受冻了，这对于官府与私人说来，都是一种损害和浪费。
English: I am considering placing troops in the state towns, no less than tens of thousands of people, to serve as ploughs for the army's rations, twelve horses each. Since there is no standard for expenses, the soldiers can not wait to be replaced, they can not avoid starving and freezing. This is a damage and waste for the government and private people.

古文：今徐州良田十万馀顷，水陆肥沃，清、汴通流，足以溉灌。
现代文：现在，徐州拥有良田十万多顷，水源充足，土壤肥沃，清水与汴水流经全境，足够灌溉土地的了。
English: Now, Xuzhou has more than 100,000 hectares of good fields, sufficient water resources, fertile soil, and clear and brackish water flowing through the whole territory, which is enough to irrigate the land.

古文：若以兵绢市牛，可得万头，兴置屯田，一岁之中，且给官食。
现代文：倘若用军用的绢帛去购买耕牛，能够买到一万头，用来兴办屯田。在头一年里，可以暂且由官府供应军队的食用。
English: If a military mule is used to buy a cow, it can buy 10,000 head of cattle, which can be used to establish a military garrison. During the first year, the government can temporarily supply the army with food.

古文：半兵芸殖，馀兵屯戍，且耕且守，不妨捍边。
现代文：用一半的兵员开荒种地，用其余的兵员屯兵戍守，边耕种，边防守，并不妨碍保卫边疆。
English: Using half of the soldiers to clear wasteland and plant crops, and using the rest of the soldiers for garrisoning, while cultivating and defending, does not hinder the defense of the frontier.

古文：一年之收，过于十倍之绢；暂时之耕，足充数载之食。
现代文：而一年的收获，要超过绢帛价值的十倍，短期的耕种，能够满足数年的食需。
English: A year's harvest is more than ten times the value of straw, and short-term farming can meet food needs for several years.

古文：于后兵资皆贮公库，五稔之后，谷帛俱溢，非直戍卒丰饱，亦有吞敌之势。 
现代文：此后，军用物资要全部贮存在官府的仓库里，五年之后，谷物与绢帛便都会充盈起来，不仅可以使屯戍的士兵丰衣足食，而且会产生消灭敌军的气势。 
English: After that, all military supplies should be stored in the government warehouse, and after five years, grain and straw will be filled up, which can not only make the soldiers well-fed, but also produce the momentum of destroying the enemy army.

古文：魏人从之。
现代文：孝文帝听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Xiaowen heeded his advice.

古文：虎子为政有惠爱，兵民怀之。
现代文：薛虎子处理政务时恩惠与慈爱兼施，军民都归向于他。
English: When handling government affairs, Xue Huo Zi was both benevolent and merciful, and the military and the people all turned to him.

古文：会沛郡太守邵安、下邳太守张攀以赃污为虎子所案，各遣子上书，告虎子与江南通，魏主曰： 虎子必不然。 
现代文：适逢沛郡太守邵安与下邳太守张攀贪污的案件由薛虎子按察，邵安与张攀便各自指使儿子上书，控告薛虎子暗通南齐。孝文帝说： 薛虎子肯定不会做出这种事来的。 
English: When the corruption cases of Pae County Governor Shao'an and Zhang Pann, the lower eunuch governor, were discovered by Xue Huzi, Shao'an and Zhang Pann each ordered their sons to write a letter to accuse Xue Huzi of secretly communicating with Nanqi. Emperor Xiaowen said: Xue Huzi would certainly not do such a thing.

古文：推按，果虚，诏安、攀皆赐死，二子各鞭一百。
现代文：经过追究按察，果然事属虚构，孝文帝便颁诏赐邵安与张攀一律自裁而死，对他们二人的儿子分别笞打一百皮鞭。
English: After investigation and inspection, it turned out to be a fiction, and Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict that both Shao'an and Zhang Pang should die of their own accord, and the sons of the two of them should be beaten with one hundred whips.

古文：吐谷浑王拾寅卒，世子度易侯立。
现代文：吐谷浑王慕容拾寅故去，长子慕容度易侯即位。
English: King Murong Shuin of the Tuyun Kingdom passed away, and his eldest son Murong Duyi ascended the throne.

古文：冬，十月，戊子朔，以度易侯为西秦、河二州刺史、河南王。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊子朔，南齐高帝任命慕容度易侯为西秦、河二州刺史，封为河南王。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Wuzisaku of Southern Qi Gao appointed Murong Duyi as the prince of West Qin and He Erzhou, and crowned him as the king of Henan.

古文：魏中书令高闾等更定新律成，凡八百三十二章；门房之诛十有六，大辟二百三十五，杂刑三百七十七。
现代文：北魏中书令高闾等人重新制定新的律令告竣，共有八百三十二章。其中，有关灭门灭族的律令有十六章，有关死刑的律令有二百三十五章，其它各种刑罚的律令有三百七十七章。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gao Jian and others re-enacted the new code, which had a total of 832 chapters. Among them, there were 16 chapters on the extermination of people, 235 chapters on the death penalty, and 377 chapters on other punishments.

古文：初，高昌王阚伯周卒，子义成立；是岁，其从兄首归杀义成自立。
现代文：当初，高昌王阚伯周故去，儿子阚义成即位。当年，他的堂兄阚首归杀死阚义成，自立为王。
English: At first, the king of Gochang, Zou Bo Zhou, died, and his son, Zou Yicheng, ascended to the throne. That year, his cousin, Dagger Gui, killed Zou Yicheng and became king himself.

古文：高车王可至罗杀首归兄弟，以敦煌张明为高昌王。国人杀明，立马儒为王。
现代文：高车王可至罗杀死阚首归兄弟，将敦煌张明立为高昌王，国人又杀死张明，将马儒立为国王。
English: The king of Gaochao, Kechiro, killed the brother of Dagger Gui, and established Dunhuang Zhang Ming as the king of Gaochang. The Chinese also killed Zhang Ming and established Maru as the king.

古文：太祖高皇帝建元四年
现代文：建元四年
English: Built in the 4th year of the 8th century

古文：春，正月，壬戌，诏置学生二百人，以中书令张绪为国子祭酒。
现代文：春季，正月，壬戌，南齐高帝颁诏设置学生二百人，任命中书令张绪为国子祭酒。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi Dynasty issued an edict to set up 200 students and appointed Zhang Xu as the national son's festival wine.

古文：甲戌，魏大赦。
现代文：甲戌，北魏大赦。
English: Armor, the Northern Wei Dynasty amnestied the world.

古文：三月，庚申，上召司徒褚渊、尚书左仆射王俭受遗诏辅太子；壬戌，殂于临光殿。
现代文：三月，庚申，南齐高帝召见司徒褚渊和尚书左仆射王俭接受遗诏，辅佐太子。壬戌，高帝在临光殿去世。
English: In March, Goshun, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi summoned the monk and left-hand servant, Shao Wang Jian, to receive the imperial edict and assist the crown prince. Soon after, Emperor Gao died in the Lin Guang Palace.

古文：太子即位，大赦。
现代文：太子即帝位，宣布大赦。
English: Linhai Prince Chen Bozong became emperor and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：高帝沉深有大量，博学能文。
现代文：南齐高帝深谋远虑，宽宏大量，学识广博，能写文章，生性朴素节俭。
English: Nanqi Gao Di was far-sighted, magnanimous, learned, able to write articles, and simple and frugal by nature.

古文：性清俭，主衣中有玉导，上敕中书曰： 留此正是兴长病源！ 
现代文：看崐见主衣库中有一个玉导，高帝便敕令中书说： 留着此物，正是滋长一切弊病的根源！ 
English: Gao Di saw that there was a jade guide in the main wardrobe, and Gao Di wrote a note saying: Keep this thing, it is the root cause of all ills!

古文：即命击碎；仍案检有何异物，皆随此例。
现代文：他当即命令将玉导打碎，还检查库中存放着什么奇巧的物品，一概依照这一事例处理。
English: He immediately ordered that the jade guide be smashed, and also checked what strange items were stored in the library, all in accordance with this case.

古文：每曰： 使我治天下十年，当使黄金与土同价。 
现代文：他经常说： 假如我能够有十年时间治理天下，我就能让黄金的价值与泥土相等。 
English: He often said: If I had ten years to rule the world, I would make gold equal in value to dirt.

古文：乙丑，以褚渊录尚书事，王俭为侍中、尚书令，车骑将军张敬儿开府仪同三司。
现代文：乙丑，南齐任命褚渊为录尚书事，任命王俭为侍中、尚书令，任命车骑将军张敬儿为开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year, Nanqi appointed Zouyuan to record the official records, appointed Wang Jian as the chamberlain and the official record keeper, and appointed the cavalry general Zhang Jing'er as the keeper of the official records and the three departments.

古文：丁卯，以前将军王奂为尚书左仆射。
现代文：丁卯，任命前任将军王奂为尚书左仆射。
English: Dingwu, appointed the former general Wang Qian as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：庚午，以豫章王嶷为太尉。
现代文：庚午，任命豫章王萧嶷为太尉。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, he appointed Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Jun as the first lieutenant.

古文：庚辰，魏主临虎圈，诏曰： 虎狼猛暴，取捕之日，每多伤害；既无所益，损费良多，从今勿复捕贡。 
现代文：庚辰，北魏孝文帝亲临虎圈，颁布诏书说： 虎狼凶猛残暴，捕捉它们的时候，往往要伤害许多人，既没有什么好处，浪费又实在太多。从现在起，不要再捕捉它们进贡。 
English: Geng Chen, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, personally visited the tiger enclosure and issued an edict saying: Tigers and wolves are ferocious and cruel, and when they are captured, they often hurt many people. There is no benefit, and there is too much waste. From now on, do not capture them for tribute.

古文：夏，四月，庚寅，上大行谥曰高皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：夏季四月，庚寅，南齐为已故的皇帝上谥号称高皇帝，庙号称作太祖。
English: In the summer of April, the late Emperor Gao was called Emperor Gao, and the temple was called Taizu.

古文：丙午，葬泰安陵。
现代文：丙午，高帝被安葬在泰安陵。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Gao Di was buried in the Tai'an Mausoleum.

古文：辛卯，追尊穆妃为皇后。
现代文：辛卯，南齐武帝追尊穆妃为皇后。
English: In Xinwu, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi crowned Princess Mu as empress.

古文：六月，甲申朔，立南郡王长懋为皇太子。
现代文：六月，甲申朔，武帝将南郡王萧长懋立为皇太子。
English: In June, Emperor Wu made King Xiao Chang of Nan County crown prince.

古文：丙申，立太子妃王氏。
现代文：丙申，武帝立王氏为太子妃。
English: In other words, Emperor Wu made Wang the crown princess.

古文：妃，琅邪人也。
现代文：太子妃是琅邪人。
English: The crown princess is a wicked person.

古文：封皇子闻喜公子良为竟陵王，临汝公子卿为庐陵王，应城公子敬为安陆王，江陵公子懋为晋安王，枝江公子隆为随郡王，子真为建安王，皇孙昭业为南郡王。
现代文：武帝还封皇子闻喜公萧子良为竟陵王，临汝公萧子卿为庐陵王，应城公萧子敬为安陆王，江陵公萧子懋为晋安王，枝江公萧子隆为随郡王，萧子真为建安王，皇孙萧昭业为南郡王。
English: Emperor Wu also named Emperor Wenqi's son Prince Xiao Ziliang as the King of Xingling, Prince Linru's son Prince Xiao Zicheng as the King of Huling, Prince Yingcheng's son Prince Xiao Zicheng as the King of Anlu, Prince Jiangling's son Prince Xiao Zicheng as the King of Jin'an, Prince Yejiang's son Prince Xiao Zilong as the King of Su County, Prince Xiao Zhen as the King of Jian'an, and the Emperor's grandson Prince Xiao Zhaoye as the King of Nan County.

古文：司徒褚渊寝疾，自表逊位，世祖不许，渊固请恳切，癸卯，以渊为司空，领骠骑将军。侍中、录尚书如故。
现代文：南齐司徒褚渊卧病不起，自动上表请求退职，武帝没有答应。褚渊恳切地再三请求，癸卯，武帝任命褚渊为司空，兼任骠骑将军，依然担任侍中、录尚书事。
English: Emperor Wu did not agree to Emperor Qibao's repeated and earnest request that Emperor Wu appoint Emperor Qibao as the Empress Dowager. Emperor Wu appointed Emperor Qibao as the Empress Dowager, concurrently serving as the General of the Horse, and still serving as an aide-de-camp and secretary.

古文：秋，七月，魏发州郡五万人治灵丘道。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏调集各州郡五万人修筑灵丘道。
English: In the autumn of July, the Northern Wei Dynasty mobilized fifty thousand people from all prefectures to build Lingqiu Road.

古文：吏部尚书济阳江谧，性谄躁，太祖殂，谧恨不豫顾命；上即位，谧又不迁官；以此怨望、诽谤。
现代文：南齐吏部尚书济阳人氏江谧，生性谄媚浮躁。高帝去世的时候，江谧因没有接受高帝临终交托遗命而遗憾不已，武帝即位以后，江谧又没有升官，因此他怨恨不满，口出诽谤之言。
English: At the time of Emperor Gao's death, Jiang Yao was full of regret for not accepting Emperor Gao's last will and testament. After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, Jiang Yao was not promoted, so he was resentful and dissatisfied and spoke slanderous words.

古文：会上不豫，谧诣豫章王嶷请问，曰： 至尊非起疾东宫又非才，公今欲作何计？ 
现代文：适逢武帝身患疾病，江谧便前往豫章王萧嶷处请求秘密进言说： 皇上已经得了不治之症，太子又没有帝王的才具，如今您准备作何打算？ 
English: When Emperor Wu fell ill, Jiang Xuan went to Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi's place to ask for secret advice, saying: The emperor has already got an incurable disease, and the prince does not have the talent of the emperor. What are you going to do now?

古文：上知云，使御史中丞沈冲奏谧前后罪恶，庚寅，赐谧死。
现代文：武帝闻讯，指使御史中丞沈冲奏陈江谧历来犯下的罪恶。庚寅，武帝赐江谧自裁而死。
English: Emperor Wu heard the news and ordered the Grand Historian Shen Chongzhao to expose the evil Chen Jiangyao had committed in the past. Emperor Wu gave Jiangyao the go-ahead to commit suicide.

古文：癸卯，南康文简公褚渊卒，世子侍中贲耻其父失节，服除，遂不仕，以爵让其弟蓁，屏居墓下终身。
现代文：癸卯，南康文简公褚渊去世。他的长子侍中褚贲为父亲失去节操而深感羞耻，在服丧期满以后，便不再做官。
English: At the same time, Nan Kangwen Jian Gong Jianyuan passed away. His eldest son, Zhaozhong Jianyuan, was deeply ashamed of his father's loss of discipline, and ceased to work as an official after the end of the mourning period.

古文：九月，丁巳，以国哀罢国子学。
现代文：他将爵位让给弟弟褚蓁，终生在褚渊的坟墓旁隐居。九月，丁巳，由于高帝的丧事，武帝命令裁撤国子学。
English: He gave up his title to his younger brother Yao and lived in seclusion next to Yao Yuan's tomb for the rest of his life. In September, due to Emperor Gao's funeral, Emperor Wu ordered the abolition of imperial education.

古文：氐王杨文弘卒。诸子皆幼，乃以兄子后起为嗣。
现代文：氐王杨文弘故去，由于诸子都还幼小，便让哥哥的儿子杨后起做自己的后嗣。
English: King Yang Wenhong passed away, and since his sons were still young, he let his brother's son Yang Houjun become his heir.

古文：九月，辛酉，魏以后起为武都王，文弘子集始为白水太守。
现代文：九月，辛酉，北魏任命杨后起为武都王，任命杨文弘的儿子杨集始为白水太守。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yang Houqi as the King of Wudu and Yang Jishi, the son of Yang Wenhong, as the Governor of Baishui.

古文：既而集始自立为王，后起击破之。
现代文：不久，杨集始自立为氐王，杨后起将他打败。
English: Soon after, Yang Jizhi became the self-proclaimed King of Gong, and Yang Houjun defeated him.

古文：魏以荆州巴、氐扰乱，以镇西大将军李崇为荆州刺史。
现代文：由于荆州的巴人与氐人骚扰变乱，北魏任命镇西大将军李崇为荆州刺史。
English: Due to the disturbance caused by the harassment of Ba people and Ya people in Jingzhou, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Zhenxi General Li Chong as the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：崇，显祖之舅子也。
现代文：李崇是献文帝拓跋弘舅父的儿子。
English: Li Chong is the son of Emperor Tuoba's uncle.

古文：将之镇，敕发陕、秦二州兵送之，崇辞曰： 边人失和，本怨刺史。
现代文：李崇准备上任的时候，孝文帝敕令调集陕州与秦州两地兵马去护送他，李崇推辞说： 边地的百姓有失和睦，本来是由怨恨当地刺史造成的。
English: When Li Chong was preparing to take office, Emperor Xiaowen ordered the mobilization of soldiers and horses from Shaanxi and Qin to escort him. Li Chong declined, saying: The people of the border areas have lost harmony, which was originally caused by resentment of local history.

古文：今奉诏代之，自然安靖；但须一诏而已，不烦发兵自防，使之怀惧也。 
现代文：现在，我接受诏命去替代那里的刺史，当地百姓自然会安定下来。我只需要一纸诏书就足够了，不心麻烦陛下派兵保护，使当地百姓心怀恐惧。 
English: Now, I accept the imperial edict to replace the history there, and the local people will naturally settle down. I only need one imperial edict, and I don't want to bother His Majesty to send troops to protect and instill fear in the local people.

古文：魏朝从之。
现代文：北魏朝廷听从了他的主张。
English: The Northern Wei court followed his advice.

古文：崇遂轻将数十骑驰至上洛，宣诏慰渝，民夷贴然。
现代文：于是，李崇轻装率领数十人骑马急奔到上洛，宣布诏书，安慰劝导，当地的民户与夷人都心悦诚服。
English: As a result, Li Chong dressed lightly and led dozens of people on horseback to rush to Shangluo, announced the edict, comforted and advised, and the local households and the barbarians were sincerely convinced.

古文：崇命边戍掠得齐人者悉还之，由是齐人亦还其生口二百许人，二境交和，无复烽燧之警。
现代文：李崇命令边防据点将掳掠来的南齐百姓全部送还，因此南齐方面也将大约二百名俘虏送还北魏，两国边境军民和睦相处，不再发生战事。
English: Li Chong ordered the border defense stronghold to return all the captured Nanqi people. Therefore, the Nanqi side also returned about two hundred prisoners to the Northern Wei Dynasty. The border soldiers and civilians of the two countries lived in harmony, and there was no more war.

古文：久之，徙兗州刺史。
现代文：过了很长时间，李崇被改任为兖州刺史。
English: After a long time, Li Chong was reappointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：兗土旧多劫盗，崇命村置一楼，楼皆悬鼓，盗发之处，乱击之；旁村始闻者，以一击为节，次二，次三，俄顷之间，声布百里；皆发人守险要。
现代文：以往，兖州境内经常出现抢劫的盗匪，李崇命令在每一个村庄都设置一座楼，楼内都悬挂着大鼓。在强盗出现的地方，要猛烈敲打大鼓，最初听到鼓声的邻近村庄，以击敲一下为信号，听到一下鼓声的村庄就击鼓两下，听到鼓声两下的村庄就击鼓三下，不一会儿，鼓声传遍百里，各村庄都派人防守险要地带。
English: In the past, robberies frequently occurred in Zhangzhou, and Li Chong ordered a building to be set up in every village, with a large drum hanging inside the building. Where the robbers appeared, the large drum should be beaten violently. The neighboring villages that first heard the drum sound should take one beat as a signal. The villages that heard the drum sound should beat the drum twice, and the villages that heard the drum sound twice should beat the drum three times. Soon, the drum sound spread across a hundred miles, and all villages sent people to defend the critical area.

古文：由是盗发无不擒获。
现代文：从此，只要强盗有所行动，没有不被捉获的。
English: From then on, there was no way the robbers could act without being caught.

古文：其后诸州皆效之，自崇始也。
现代文：后来，各州都效法这一做法，就是由李崇首创的。
English: Later, all states followed this practice, which was pioneered by Li Chong.

古文：辛未，以征南将军王僧虔为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，以尚书右仆射王奂为湘州刺史。
现代文：辛未，南齐武帝任命征南将军王僧虔为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，任命尚书右仆射王奂为湘州刺史。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Qiwu of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed the Southern Expeditionary General Wang Xiangqian as Zuo Guanglu Doctor, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments, and appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Sha Wangqi as Hunan Provincial Historian.

古文：宋故建平王景素主簿何昌、记室王摛及所举秀才刘璡，前后上书陈景素德美，为之讼冤。
现代文：刘宋已故的建平王刘景素的主簿何昌寓和记室参军王以及他举荐的秀才刘，先后多次上书陈诉刘景素品德高尚，为他讼理冤屈。
English: Liu Song, the main book of the late Jianping King Liu Jingsu, the He Chang Apartment and the Records Office of the Sangun King, and the talented Liu recommended by him, have repeatedly petitioned Liu Jingsu for high moral character and litigated grievances for him.

古文：冬，十月，辛丑，诏听以士礼还葬旧茔。
现代文：冬季，二月，辛丑，武帝颁诏准许他们以士人的礼仪将刘景素重新安葬在原来的坟墓中。
English: In winter, February, Xinwu, Emperor Wu issued an edict allowing them to re-bury Liu Jingsu in the original tomb with the etiquette of a scholar.

古文：璡，献之弟也。
现代文：刘是刘的弟弟。
English: Liu is Liu's younger brother.

古文：十一月，魏高祖将亲祀七庙，命有司具仪法，依古制备牲牢、器服及乐章；自是四时常祀皆举之。
现代文：十一月，北魏孝文帝准备亲自祭祀祖先七庙，命令有关部门备办礼仪程式，依照古代的制度置办祭祀用的牲畜、礼器、礼服以及乐章。从此，一年四季中通常的祭祀都按时进行了。
English: In November, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty prepared to personally offer sacrifices to the ancestors of the Seven Temples, and ordered the relevant departments to prepare a ritual program and purchase sacrificial animals, ceremonial objects, ceremonial clothes, and music according to the ancient system. Since then, the usual sacrifices have been carried out on time throughout the year.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上
现代文：齐武帝永明元年世祖武皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Qiwu in the first year of the Yongming era, above the ancestor Emperor Wu

古文：太祖高皇帝永明元年春，正月，辛亥，上祀南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季正月，辛亥，南齐武帝前往建康南郊祭天，宣布大赦，更改年号为永明。
English: In the first month of spring, Xinhai, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi went to the southern suburb of Jiankang to celebrate the festival, announced an amnesty, and changed the year to Yongming.

古文：诏以边境宁晏，治民之官，普复田秩。
现代文：南齐武帝颁诏：由于边境安宁，应当普遍恢复各州县官员的田地俸禄。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu issued an edict: Due to the tranquility of the border, the field salary of officials in each state and county should be generally restored.

古文：以太尉豫章王嶷领太子太傅。
现代文：南齐武帝任命太尉豫章王萧嶷兼任太子太傅。
English: Emperor Wu of Southern Qi appointed Prince Yuzhang Wang Xiaoqi as the prince's daifu.

古文：嶷不参朝务，而常密献谋画，上多从之。
现代文：萧嶷不肯参与朝廷政务，却经常暗中献计献策，武帝往往听从他的主张。
English: Xiao Yao refused to participate in the government affairs of the imperial court, but he often secretly offered advice. Emperor Wu often followed his advice.

古文：壬戌，立皇弟锐为南平王，铿为宜都王，皇子子明为武昌王，子罕为南海王。
现代文：壬戌十三日，南齐武帝立皇弟萧锐为南平王，萧铿为宜都王，皇子萧子明为武昌王，萧子罕为南海王。
English: On the 13th day of the lunar month, Xiao Rui, the younger brother of Emperor Wu of Southern Qi, was crowned the king of Nanping, Xiao Yao was crowned the king of Yidu, the prince Xiao Ziming was crowned the king of Wuchang, and Xiao Zihan was crowned the king of Nanhai.

古文：二月，辛巳，以征虏将军杨炅为沙州刺史、阴平王。
现代文：二月，辛巳，南齐武帝任命征虏将军杨炅为沙州刺史，封阴平王。
English: In February, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed the conscript general Yang Jie as the governor of Shazhou, and named him Yinping Wang.

古文：辛丑，以宕昌王梁弥机为河、凉二州刺史，邓至王像舒为西凉州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，南齐武帝任命宕昌王梁弥机为河、凉二州刺史，任命邓至王像舒为西凉州刺史。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi Dynasty appointed Tang Chang Wang Liang Yiji as the chief historian of He River and Liang Erzhou, and appointed Deng Zi Wang Zongshu as the chief historian of West Liangzhou.

古文：宋末，以治民之官六年过久，乃以三年为断，谓之小满；而迁换去来，又不能依三年之制。
现代文：刘宋末年，因州郡县官每任六年，时间太长，便改成三年一任，称作 小满 。然而，官吏升官改任，来来去去，还是不能够依照三年一任的制度办事。
English: At the end of the Liu Song Dynasty, because the six-year term of state, county and prefectural officials was too long, it was changed to a three-year term, known as Xiaoman. However, officials were promoted to different positions and came and went, and still could not operate according to the three-year term system.

古文：三月，癸丑，诏： 自今一以小满为限。 
现代文：三月，癸丑，南齐武帝颁诏说，从今以后，地方官员一概以三年一任为期限。
English: In March, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi issued an edict saying that henceforth, local officials would serve a three-year term.

古文：有司以天文失度，请禳之。
现代文：有关部门认为天体运行失调见于记载，请求禳除灾害。
English: Relevant departments believe that the maladjustment of celestial bodies can be seen in the records, and request the elimination of disasters.

古文：上曰： 应天以实不以文。
现代文：南齐武帝说： 顺应天象，在于实际，而不在于虚文。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu said: Conformity to the celestial phenomenon lies in reality, not in fiction.

古文：我克己求治，思隆惠政；若灾眚在我，禳之何益！ 
现代文：我克制自己的欲望，谋求为政清明，希望使仁爱政治发扬光大。
English: I restrain my desires, seek clarity in politics, and hope to make benevolent politics flourish.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，昭： 袁粲、刘秉、沈攸之，虽末节不终，而始诚可灵。 
现代文：如果灾难是由我造成的，祭祷祈福又有什么用处！ 夏季，四月，壬午，南齐武帝颁诏说： 虽然袁粲、刘秉和沈攸之没有保持晚节，但是他们最初的忠诚实在是可取的。 
English: If the disaster is caused by me, what is the use of offering prayers and blessings! In the summer, in April, at noon, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi issued an edict saying: Although Yuan Shao, Liu Bing and Shen Youzhi did not keep the evening festival, their initial loyalty is really desirable.

古文：皆命以礼改葬。
现代文：命令将三人一律按照礼法另行安葬。
English: All three were ordered to be buried separately in accordance with etiquette.

古文：上之为太子也，自以年长，与太祖同创大业，朝事大小，率皆专断，多违制度。
现代文：南齐武帝当太子的时候，认为自己年纪已大，并且与高帝一起创立帝业，所以对于朝廷中大大小小的事情，一概独断专行，常常违背制度。
English: When Emperor Nanqiwu was crown prince, he thought that he was too old and that he had founded the empire together with Emperor Gao. Therefore, he acted arbitrarily in all matters of the imperial court, large and small, and often violated the system.

古文：信任左右张景真，景真骄侈，被服什物，僭拟乘舆；内外畏之，莫敢言者。
现代文：武帝信任亲信张景真，张景真骄横奢华，所使用的衾被、衣服和日常生活用品，都超越本分，可与皇帝使用的器物相比。
English: Emperor Wu trusted Zhang Jingzhen, Zhang Jingzhen's confidant, and Zhang Jingzhen was arrogant and luxurious. The quilts, clothes and daily necessities he used were beyond his duties and could be compared to the utensils used by the emperor.

古文：司空咨议荀伯玉，素为太祖所亲厚，叹曰： 太子所为，官终不知，岂得畏死，蔽官耳目！
现代文：朝廷内外官员都畏惧他，没有人有胆量就此发表意见。司空谘议荀伯玉，平时被高帝所亲近厚待，他叹息着说： 太子做的事情，皇上始终难以知晓，难道我能畏惧一死，使皇上受到蒙蔽吗！
English: Officials both inside and outside the court were afraid of him, and no one had the courage to express an opinion about it. Zi Kuang consulted Zibo Yu, who was usually treated kindly by Emperor Gao, and he sighed and said: The things that the prince does are always difficult for the emperor to know. Can I be afraid of death and let the emperor be deceived?

古文：我不启闻，谁当启者！ 
现代文：如果连我都不能够启奏皇上，还会有谁肯得启奏呢！ 
English: If I can't even open the Emperor's concert, who else will be able to open it?

古文：因太子拜陵，密以启太祖。
现代文：他趁太子拜谒陵寝的时机，暗中向高帝启奏。
English: He took advantage of the prince's visit to the imperial mausoleum and secretly played for Emperor Gao.

古文：太祖怒，命检校东宫。
现代文：高帝大怒，命令审查太子。
English: Emperor Gao was furious and ordered a review of the crown prince.

古文：太子拜陵还，至方山，晚，将泊舟，豫章王嶷自东府乘飞燕东迎太子，告以上怒之意。
现代文：太子祭拜陵寝回来，来到方山的时候，天色晚了。太子准备停船靠岸，这时豫章王萧嶷由东府骑着名马飞燕东来迎接太子，将高帝发怒的情形告诉了他。
English: When the prince came back from paying homage to the mausoleum, it was late when he arrived at Fangshan. The prince was preparing to dock the ship, when Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoqi rode a famous horse Fei Yandong from Dongfu to meet the prince and told him the situation of Gao Di's anger.

古文：太子夜归，入宫，太祖亦停门籥待之。
现代文：太子连夜返回，进入宫中，高帝也让人别把大门上锁，等他回来。
English: The prince returned overnight and entered the palace. Emperor Gao also asked people not to lock the gate until he returned.

古文：明日，太祖使南郡王长懋、闻喜公子良宣敕诘责，并示以景真罪状，使以太子令收景真，杀之。
现代文：第二天，高帝让南郡王萧长懋和闻喜公萧子良宣布敕书，责问太子，并且向太子出示张景真的罪状，让二人以太子的命令去收捕张景真，将他杀掉。
English: The next day, Emperor Gao asked Wang Xiao Changyu of Nan County and Wang Xi Gong Xiao Ziliang to announce the forgery, interrogate the prince, and present the prince with Zhang Jingzhen's criminal charges, and let the two etheric orders to arrest Zhang Jingzhen and kill him.

古文：太子忧惧，称疾。
现代文：太子忧愁恐惧，称病不起。
English: The prince was sad and afraid, saying that he could not afford to be ill.

古文：月馀，太祖怒不解，昼卧太阳殿，王敬则直入，叩头启太祖曰： 官有天下日浅，太子无事被责，人情恐惧；愿官往东宫解释之。 
现代文：过了一个多月以后，高帝的怒气还是没有平息。有一天，高帝卧在太阳殿里，王敬则径直走进来，伏地叩头，向高帝启奏说： 陛下拥有天下，时间还短，太子无故遭受责备，人们担惊受怕。希望陛下前往东宫，消除太子的顾虑。 
English: After more than a month, Emperor Gao's anger still hadn't subsided. One day, Emperor Gao was lying in the Hall of the Sun. Wang Jing walked straight in, prostrated himself, and addressed Emperor Gao: "Your Majesty owns the world, time is short, the prince has been reproached without reason, and people are frightened. I hope Your Majesty will go to the East Palace to dispel the prince's concerns.

古文：太祖无言。
现代文：高帝沉默不语。
English: Gao Di was silent.

古文：敬则因大声宣旨，装束往东宫，又敕太官设馔，呼左右索舆，太祖了无动意。
现代文：于是，王敬则大声宣布圣旨，让人们整装前往东宫，又命崐令御厨摆设食品，呼唤周围的人要来轿子，但高帝还是没有一点要动身的意思。
English: As a result, Wang Jing loudly announced the holy will, let people prepare to go to the East Palace, and ordered the kitchen to set up food, calling the people around to come to the palanquin, but Gao Di still had no intention of leaving.

古文：敬则索衣被太祖，乃牵强登舆。
现代文：王敬则要来衣服，披在高帝的身上，这才勉强把高帝扶上轿子。
English: Wang Jing wanted to take off his clothes and put them on Gao Di's body, and only then did he reluctantly put Gao Di on the palanquin.

古文：太祖不得已至东宫，召诸王宴于玄圃。
现代文：高帝迫不得已，来到东宫，召集诸王在玄圃宴饮。
English: As a last resort, Emperor Gao came to the East Palace and gathered all the kings for a banquet in the garden.

古文：长沙王晃捉华盖，临川王映执雉尾扇，闻喜公子良持酒鎗，南郡王长懋行酒，太子及豫章王嶷、王敬则自捧酒馔，至暮，尽醉乃还。
现代文：宴上，长沙王萧晃打着遮阳伞，临川王萧映摇着雉尾扇，闻喜公萧子良端着酒，南郡王萧长懋巡行酌酒劝饮，太子以及豫章王萧嶷、王敬则亲自献上酒食，直到天色擦黑的时候，大家都喝醉了，这才各自回去。
English: At the banquet, Changsha's King Xiao Jian held a parasol, Linchuan's King Xiao Ying held a fan, Wenki's King Xiao Ziliang held a bottle of wine, Nan County's King Xiao Changyu held a procession to drink and persuade others to drink, and the prince, as well as Yuzhang's King Xiao Yao and King Jing, personally offered wine and food. By the time it got dark, everyone was drunk, and then everyone went home.

古文：太祖嘉伯玉忠荩，愈见亲信，军国密事，多委使之，权动朝右。
现代文：高帝嘉许荀伯玉对自己竭尽忠心，便更加亲近信任他了。对于军队与国家的机密要事，高帝往往委派他去办理，荀伯玉的权力震动了位列朝班右侧的达官显贵。
English: Emperor Gao appreciated Zou Bo-yu's devotion to him and trusted him even more. Emperor Gao often assigned him to handle military and state secrets. Zou Bo-yu's power shook the dignitaries on the right side of the court.

古文：遭母忧，去宅二里许，冠盖已塞路。
现代文：荀伯玉为母亲居丧的时候，在距离他的住宅约有二里地处，道路上已经站满了官吏。
English: When Zou Bo-yu was in mourning for his mother, it was about two miles away from his home, and the road was already full of officials.

古文：左率萧景先、侍中王晏共吊之，自旦至暮，始得前。
现代文：左卫率萧景先和王晏一齐前去吊唁，从早晨等到日暮，才得以近前。
English: The left guards, led by Xiao Jingsen and Wang Qian, went to pay their condolences together. They waited from morning until nightfall before they could approach.

古文：比出，饥乏，气息惙然，愤悒形于声貌。
现代文：等到出来以后，两人又饿又累，连气都喘不过来了，说话的声音，脸上的表情，都流露出内心的愤怒与沮丧。
English: When they came out, they were hungry, tired and breathless. The tone of their voices and the expressions on their faces revealed their inner anger and frustration.

古文：明日，言于太祖曰： 臣等所见二宫门庭，比荀伯玉宅可张雀罗矣。 
现代文：第二天，萧景先与王晏向高帝进言说： 我等所看到的皇子与皇孙两宫的情形，比起荀伯玉的宅邸来，真可谓门可罗雀了。 
English: The next day, Xiao Jingsen and Wang Yao made a suggestion to Emperor Gao, saying: The situation of the two palaces of the prince and the grandson that we have seen, compared to the residence of Zou Bo-yu, is really a bird in the hand.

古文：晏，敬弘之从子也。
现代文：王晏是王敬弘的侄子。
English: Wang Yao is the nephew of Wang Jinghong.

古文：骁骑将军陈胤叔，先亦白景真及太子得失，而语太子皆云 伯玉以闻 。
现代文：骁骑将军陈胤叔，原先也曾禀告过张景真以及太子的过失，但他与太子谈话时却说： 是荀伯玉向皇上报告的。 
English: Uncle Chen Yan, the cavalry general, had previously accused Zhang Jingzhen and the prince of negligence, but when he talked to the prince, he said: It was Zibo Yu who reported to the emperor.

古文：太子由是深怨伯玉。
现代文：从此，太子便深深怀恨荀伯玉了。
English: From then on, the prince held a deep grudge against Zou BoYu.

古文：太祖阴有以豫章王嶷代太子之意，而嶷事太子愈谨，故太子友爱不衰。
现代文：高帝暗中本有以豫章王萧嶷取代太子的想法。但是，萧嶷事奉太子更加谨慎，所以太子对他的友爱之情并没有衰减。
English: Emperor Gao secretly had the idea of replacing the prince with Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi. However, Xiaoqi served the prince more cautiously, so the prince's love for him did not wane.

古文：豫州刺史垣崇祖不亲附太子，会崇祖破魏兵，太祖召还朝，与之密谋。
现代文：豫州刺史垣崇祖不肯亲近阿附太子。赶巧垣崇祖打败北魏军队，高帝召他回朝，与他密商大事。
English: Emperor Gao called him back to the imperial court after he defeated the Northern Wei army, and had a secret meeting with him.

古文：太子疑之，曲加礼待，谓曰： 世间流言，我已豁怀；自今以富贵相付。 
现代文：于是，太子对他产生了怀疑，对他违心地以礼相待，还对他说： 对于外界流传着的诽谤，我已经不放在心上。从今以后，我把荣华富贵就托付给你了。 
English: As a result, the prince became suspicious of him, treated him with courtesy against his wishes, and told him: "I don't care about the slander circulating in the outside world. From now on, I entrust you with my glory and wealth."

古文：崇祖拜谢。
现代文：垣崇祖行礼致谢。
English: Take a moment to thank your ancestors.

古文：会太祖复遣荀伯玉，敕以边事，受旨夜发，不得辞东宫；太子以为不尽诚，益衔之。
现代文：适逢高帝派遣荀伯玉前来，命令垣崇祖前去处理边疆上的事务。垣崇祖接受圣旨，连夜出发，来不及向太子告别。太子认为垣崇祖对自己不能竭尽忠诚，便愈加怀恨在心了。
English: At the right time, Emperor Gao sent Zibo Yu to come and ordered Qi Chongzu to go to deal with the affairs on the frontier. Qi Chongzu accepted the edict and set out overnight. He did not have time to say goodbye to the prince. The prince thought that Qi Chongzu could not be loyal to himself, and he harbored more and more hatred in his heart.

古文：太祖临终，指伯玉以属太子。
现代文：高帝在临终前，手指着荀伯玉，把太子托付给他。
English: On his deathbed, Emperor Gao entrusted the crown prince to Zou Boyu.

古文：上即位，崇祖累迁五兵尚书，伯玉累迁散骑常侍。
现代文：武帝即位以后，垣崇祖历经升迁，担任了五兵尚书；荀伯玉历经升迁，担任了散骑常侍。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, Emperor Gaozong's ancestor, after being promoted, served as the five soldiers of Shangshu; Emperor Zibo's ancestor, after being promoted, served as a straggler.

古文：伯玉内怀忧惧，上以伯玉与崇祖善，恐其为变，加意抚之。
现代文：荀伯玉心怀忧虑疑惧。武帝因荀伯玉与垣崇祖交好，担心他们制造变故，便留意安抚他们。
English: Emperor Wu was worried and suspicious of Lady Zhou because Lady Zhou was friends with Emperor Qizong, and he was worried that they might cause trouble, so he took care to appease them.

古文：丁亥，下诏诬崇祖招结江北荒人，欲与伯玉作乱，皆收杀之。
现代文：丁亥，武帝颁诏诬陷垣崇祖招延结纳长江北岸的亡命之徒，准备与荀伯玉一起作乱，因而将他们二人都收捕杀害了。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Wu issued an edict to falsely accuse Qi Chongzu of recruiting and delaying the outlaws on the north bank of the Yangtze River, preparing to make trouble with Zou Boyu, and thus arrested and killed both of them.

古文：庚子，魏主如崞山；壬寅，还宫。
现代文：庚子，北魏孝文帝前往崞山。壬寅，孝文帝返回宫中。
English: Geng Zi, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen went to Shaoshan. Ren Yin, Emperor Xiaowen returned to the palace.

古文：闰月，癸丑，魏主后宫平凉林氏生子恂，大赦。
现代文：北魏历闰四月，癸丑，北魏孝文帝后宫中的平凉人林氏生下儿子拓跋恂，于是宣布大赦。
English: In April of the Northern Wei calendar, Lin, a commoner in the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen's harem, gave birth to a son, Tuobao, and announced an amnesty.

古文：文明太后以恂当为太子，赐林氏死，自抚养恂。
现代文：文明太后因拓跋恂应当被立为太子，便赐林氏自裁而死，由自己来抚养拓跋恂。
English: The empress dowager of civilization decided that Tuobao should be made the crown prince, so she let Lin die of natural causes and raised Tuobao by herself.

古文：五月，戊寅朔，魏主如武州山石窟佛寺。
现代文：闰五月，戊寅朔，北魏孝文帝前往武州山石窟佛寺。
English: In leap May, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen went to the Wuzhou Mountain Grottoes Buddhist Temple.

古文：车骑将军张敬儿好信梦。
现代文：南齐车骑将军张敬儿非常信梦。
English: Zhang Jing'er, general of the Nanqi Cavalry, is a firm believer in dreams.

古文：初为南阳太守，其妻尚氏梦一手热如火；及为雍州，梦一胛热；为开府，梦半身热。
现代文：当初，张敬儿担任南阳太守的时候，他的妻子尚氏梦里觉着一只手灼热如火；及至他担任雍州刺史的时候，他的妻子梦里觉着肩胛的一边发热；及至他担任开府仪同三司的时候，他的妻子梦里觉着半个身子发热。
English: At first, when Zhang Jing'er served as the Nanyang Daju, his wife Shang Shizhong felt a hand burning like fire in her dream; and when he served as the Yongzhou Shishi, his wife felt heat on one side of her shoulder blade in her dream; and when he served as the Kaifu Yi and the three departments, his wife felt heat on half of her body in her dream.

古文：敬儿意欲无限，当谓所亲曰： 吾妻复梦举体热矣。 
现代文：张敬儿的欲望没有止境，经常对自己亲近的人说： 我的妻子梦里又觉着全身发热了。 
English: Zhang Jing'er's desires knew no bounds, and she often said to those close to her, "In my dream, my wife felt her whole body heat up again.

古文：又自言梦旧村社树高至天，上闻而恶之。
现代文：张敬儿又说自己梦见家乡村庄中社庙旁的树木高耸入云。
English: Zhang Jing'er also said that she dreamed that the trees next to the temple in her home village were towering into the clouds.

古文：垣崇祖死，敬儿内自疑，会有人告敬儿遣人至蛮中货易，上疑其有异志。
现代文：武帝得知消息以后就讨厌他了。垣崇祖死后，张敬儿认为自己已经遭到怀疑。适逢有人告发张敬儿派人到蛮人中间进行贸易，武帝怀疑他这是怀有叛变的意图。
English: After Emperor Wu heard the news, he hated him. After the death of Qi Chongzu, Zhang Jing'er thought that he had been suspected. When someone accused Zhang Jing'er of sending people to trade among the barbarians, Emperor Wu suspected him of having mutinous intentions.

古文：会上于华林园设八关斋，朝臣皆预，于坐收敬儿。
现代文：恰巧赶上武帝在华林园中设置八关斋，朝廷百官都去参加斋会，武帝便在座席上收捕了张敬儿。
English: Just in time for Emperor Wu to set up a banquet in the Chinese Forest Garden, hundreds of court officials went to participate in the banquet, and Emperor Wu arrested Zhang Jing'er on the seat.

古文：敬儿脱冠貂投地曰： 此物误我！ 
现代文：张敬儿摘下朝冠，将朝冠上的貂尾丢在地上说： 就是这个东西把我害了！ 
English: Zhang Jing'er took off the crown and threw the appendix on the crown on the ground and said, "This is what has hurt me!"

古文：丁酉，杀敬儿，并其四子。
现代文：丁酉武帝杀掉张敬儿和他的四个儿子。
English: Emperor Ding Rongwu killed Zhang Jing'er and his four sons.

古文：敬儿弟恭儿，常虑为兄祸所及，居于冠军，未常出襄阳，村落深阻，墙垣重复。
现代文：张敬儿的弟弟张恭儿，经常担心哥哥一旦招致祸殃，自己会受到连累。他住在冠军县，从来不曾去过襄阳。他安身的村落山深水阻，居住的房舍墙垣重重。
English: Zhang Jing'er's younger brother, Zhang Jing'er, often worries that if his brother causes a disaster, he will be implicated. He lives in Champion County and has never been to Yangyang. The village where he lives is surrounded by mountains and deep water, and the houses he lives in are surrounded by walls.

古文：敬儿每遣信，辄上马属鞬，然后见之。
现代文：每当张敬儿送来书信的时候，张恭儿总是翻身上马，佩戴好收藏弓箭的器具，然后才肯会见送信人。
English: Whenever Zhang Jing'er sent a letter, she always turned over on her horse and put on the bow and arrow collection before she would meet the sender.

古文：敬儿败问至，席卷入蛮；后自出，上恕之。
现代文：张敬儿被杀的音讯传来以后，张恭儿全家进入蛮人居住地区。后来，张恭儿自动返回，齐武帝宽恕了他。
English: After the news of Zhang Jing'er's murder came, Zhang Jing'er's whole family entered the barbarian-inhabited area. Later, Zhang Jing'er returned voluntarily, and Emperor Qibao forgave him.

古文：敬儿女为征北咨议参军谢超宗子妇，超宗谓丹阳尹李安民曰：  往年杀韩信，今年杀彭越。 尹欲何计！ 
现代文：张敬儿的女儿是征北谘议参军谢超宗的儿媳，谢超宗对丹阳尹李安民说：  往年杀了韩信，今年又杀了彭越， ，您准备做何打算呢？ 
English: Zhang Jing'er's daughter is the daughter-in-law of Xie Chao Zong, who was an adviser to the Northern Expeditionary Force and joined the army. Xie Chao Zong said to Danyang Yin Li Anmin: In previous years you killed Han Xin, this year you killed Peng Yue, what are you going to do?

古文：安民具启之。
现代文：李安民启奏了他所有的言论。
English: Li Anmin echoed all his remarks.

古文：上素恶超宗轻慢，使兼御史中丞袁彖奏弹超宗，丁巳，收付廷尉，徙越巂，于道赐死。
现代文：武帝素来就讨厌谢超宗轻浮骄慢，便让兼御史中丞袁彖上奏弹劾谢超宗。丁巳，齐武帝命令收捕谢超宗，交付给廷尉讯审，把他贬放越，在中途便赐他自裁而死。
English: Emperor Wu had always disliked Xie Chaozong's frivolity and arrogance, so he had Yuan Shun, who was also the Vice-President of History, impeach Xie Chaozong. However, Emperor Qiwu ordered to arrest Xie Chaozong, hand him over to a court official for interrogation, deport him to Yue, and let him die of his own accord in the middle of the trial.

古文：以彖语不刻切，又使左丞王逡之奏弹彖轻文略奏，挠法容非，彖坐免官，禁锢十年。
现代文：由于袁彖检举用语不够严厉苛刻，齐武帝又让左丞王逡之上奏弹劾袁彖为文避重就轻，上奏疏略，败坏法度，宽容罪犯，袁彖因此获罪，免除官职，软禁十年，不许录用。
English: As Yuan Shikun's censure was not harsh enough, Emperor Qiwu ordered Zuo Wang Yao to impeach Yuan Shikun. Yuan Shikun was guilty of evasion, omission, corruption of the law, and tolerance of criminals. Yuan Shikun was relieved of his official position, placed under house arrest for ten years, and was not allowed to be hired.

古文：超宗，灵运之孙；彖，顗之弟子也。
现代文：谢超宗是谢灵运的孙子。袁彖是袁弟弟的儿子。
English: Xie Chaozong is the grandson of Xie Lingyun. Yuan Qi is the son of Yuan's younger brother.

古文：秋，七月，丁丑，魏主及太后如神渊池。
现代文：秋季七月，丁丑，北魏孝文帝和太后前往神渊池。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Empress Dowager Ding Yuxi went to Shenyuan Pool.

古文：甲申，如方山。
现代文：甲申，二人前往方山。
English: Ka-shin, the two of them headed for Fangshan.

古文：魏使假员外散骑常侍顿丘李彪来聘。
现代文：北魏派遣假员外散骑常侍顿丘人李彪前来南齐通问修好。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched a foreign vacationer to ride around, and the Dongqiu man Li Biao came to Nanqitong to ask for repairs.

古文：侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王僧虔固辞开府，谓兄子俭曰： 汝任重于朝，行登三事；我若复有此授，乃是一门有二台司，吾实惧焉。 
现代文：南齐侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王僧虔坚决辞让开府仪同三司一职，他对侄子王俭说： 你在朝廷中担负着重任，即将成为三公，如果我再接受这一任命，便是一家人中出现了两个宰相，我实在后怕得很哩。 
English: Nanqi Chamberlain, Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments of the Imperial Household, Wang Xiangqian, resolutely resigned from the post of Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments of the Imperial Household. He said to his nephew Wang Jian: You have taken on important responsibilities in the imperial court and are about to become the three princes. If I accept this appointment again, there will be two prime ministers in one family. I am really afraid of the future.

古文：累年不拜，上乃许之，戊戌，加僧虔特进。
现代文：接连几年，王僧虔都没有接受任命，武帝这才答应下来。戊戌，武帝加授王僧虔为特进。
English: For several years, Wang Zengqian did not accept the appointment, but Emperor Wu finally agreed to it. Therefore, Emperor Wu awarded Wang Zengqian a special promotion.

古文：俭作长梁斋，制度小过，僧虔视之，不悦，竟不入户；俭即日毁之。
现代文：王俭营建了一座横梁跨度很大的书斋，稍微超过了有关规定，王僧虔看到以后，很不高兴，竟然没有进门，王俭当天便将书斋拆毁了。
English: Wang Jian built a study with a large beam span, slightly exceeding the relevant regulations. After Wang Xiangyan saw it, he was very unhappy that he did not enter the door. Wang Jian demolished the study on the same day.

古文：初，王弘与兄弟集会，任子孙戏適。
现代文：当初，王弘与兄弟们在一起聚会，任凭儿孙游戏自适。
English: At first, Wang Hong gathered with his brothers and let his children and grandchildren play at their own pace.

古文：僧达跳下地作虎子；僧绰正坐，采蜡烛珠为凤皇，僧达夺取打坏，亦复不惜；僧虔累十二博棋，既不坠落，亦不重作。
现代文：王僧达跳下地来，装扮成小老虎的模样。王僧绰端正地坐着，用烛花做成一个凤凰，王僧达把凤凰抢过去打坏了，他也不觉得可惜。王僧虔却把十二个棋子累在一起，棋子既不倒落，也不用重累两次。
English: Wang Zongda jumped down to the ground, dressed in the guise of a small tiger. Wang Zongda sat upright and made a phoenix with a candle flower. Wang Zongda snatched the phoenix and broke it, and he did not feel sorry. Wang Zongyan, however, put twelve pieces together. The pieces did not fall down, nor did they have to be reloaded twice.

古文：弘叹曰： 僧达俊爽，当不减人，然恐终危吾家；僧绰当以名义见美；僧虔必为长者，位至公台。 
现代文：王弘叹息着说： 僧达才华出众，性情豪爽，应当说并不比别人差。但是，我担心他终究会给家族带来危难。僧达会凭着自己的名声与品行而受到赞誉。僧虔肯定是一个谨厚长者，会成为三公宰相。 
English: Wang Hong sighed and said, "Sangda has outstanding talent and a strong character, and it should be said that he is no worse than others. However, I am worried that he will eventually bring danger to the family. Sangda will be praised by his reputation and conduct. Sanggyi is certainly a dignified elder and will become the prime minister of the three kingdoms.

古文：已而皆如其言。八月，庚申，骁骑将军王洪范自柔然还，经涂三万馀里。
现代文：后来，王僧达、王僧绰、王僧虔三人的结局，果然和他预言的完全一样。八月，庚申，骁骑将军王洪范从柔然返回，经历的途程有三万多里。
English: Later, the fates of the three men, Wang Zongda, Wang Zongzhu, and Wang Zonggyi, turned out to be exactly the same as he had predicted. In August, Gaoshen, the cavalry general Wang Hongfan returned from Juran, having traveled more than thirty thousand miles.

古文：冬，十月，丙寅，遭骁骑将军刘缵聘于魏，魏主客令李安世主之。
现代文：冬季十月，丙寅，南齐武帝派遣骁骑将军刘缵向北魏通问修好。北魏主客令李安世主持接待他。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi dispatched his cavalry general Liu Bei to the Northern Wei Dynasty to ask for a truce. He was received by the Northern Wei Dynasty's chief guest Li Anshi.

古文：魏人出内藏之宝，使贾人鬻之于市。
现代文：北魏方面把内宫收藏的珠宝拿出来，让商人在市肆中出售。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty took the jewels from the collection of the Inner Palace and let the merchants sell them in the market.

古文：缵曰： 魏金玉大贱，当由山川所出。 
现代文：刘缵说： 魏国的金银珠玉价格极低，这恐怕是由于北魏本土出产这些东西吧。 
English: Liu Wei said: The price of gold, silver and precious stones in Wei is extremely low, which is probably due to the fact that the Northern Wei produced these things.

古文：安世曰： 圣朝不贵金玉，故贱同瓦砾。 
现代文：李安世说： 我朝并不看重金银珠玉，所以它们的价格贱得如同瓦砾。 
English: Li Anshi said: I do not value gold, silver and precious stones, so their prices are as cheap as rubble.

古文：缵初欲多市，闻其言，内惭而止。
现代文：刘缵原来准备多买一些北魏的珠宝，听到李安世这一席话以后，深感惭愧，便不再买了。
English: Liu Wei had originally planned to buy more Northern Wei jewelry, but after hearing Li Anshi's words, she felt deeply ashamed and stopped buying.

古文：缵屡奉使至魏，冯太后遂私幸之。
现代文：刘缵屡次奉命出使，前往北魏，北魏冯太后于是与他私通。
English: Liu Bei was repeatedly ordered to send envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Northern Wei Dynasty's Empress Dowager Feng then had an affair with him.

古文：十二月，乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，乙巳朔，出现日食。
English: In December, at the stroke of midnight, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：癸丑，魏始禁同姓为婚。
现代文：癸丑，北魏开始禁止同姓通婚。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty began to prohibit the marriage of the same surname.

古文：王俭进号卫将军，参掌选事。
现代文：南齐王俭晋升官职名号为卫将军，参与执掌选拔官吏的事务。
English: Nanqi Wang Jian was promoted to the title of Wei general, and participated in the selection of officials.

古文：是岁，省巴州。
现代文：本年，南齐撤销巴州的建置。
English: This year, Nanzhi revoked the construction of Pazhou.

古文：魏秦州刺史于洛侯，性残酷，刑人或断腕，拔舌，分悬四体。
现代文：北魏秦州刺史于洛侯，生性残酷，杀人的时候，总是要砍断手腕，割去舌头，支解四肢，分别悬挂示众。
English: Northern Wei Qin Zhou stabbed Shi in Luohu. He was cruel by nature. When he killed someone, he always had to cut off his wrists, cut out his tongue, dismember his limbs, and hang them separately for public display.

古文：合州惊骇，州民王元寿等一时俱反。
现代文：全州官民担惊受怕，州中平民王元寿等人一下子全都起来反抗。
English: The officials and people of the whole state were terrified, and Wang Yuanshou and other civilians in the state all rose up to resist at once.

古文：有司劾奏之，魏主遣使至州，於洛侯常刑人处宣告吏民，然后斩之。
现代文：有官员上奏弹劾于洛侯，孝文帝派遣专门的官员来到秦州，在于洛侯经常杀人的地方，向官吏与百姓宣布朝廷的决定，然后便将于洛侯斩杀了。
English: Some officials raised the impeachment of Luo Hou, and Emperor Xiaowen sent special officials to Qin State, where Luo Hou often killed people, to announce the decision of the imperial court to officials and people, and then killed Luo Hou.

古文：齐州刺史韩麒麟，为政尚宽，从事刘普庆说麒麟曰： 公杖节方夏，而无所诛斩，何以示威！ 
现代文：齐州刺史韩麒麟，处理政务，推尚宽和，从事刘普庆劝韩麒麟说： 您身为国家镇守一方的长官，却从来不肯杀人，您将用什么来显示威严呢！ 
English: Han Qilin, the chief historian of Qizhou, who handled government affairs, promoted the Shang Dynasty and promoted peace, and engaged in Liu Puqing, advised Han Qilin to say: You are the chief of the national town guard side, but you never want to kill people. What will you use to show your majesty?

古文：麒麟曰： 刑罚所以止恶，仁者不得已而用之。
现代文：韩麒麟说： 刑罚是用来防止犯罪的，有仁爱之心的人，只有在逼不得已的时候才会使用刑罚。
English: Han Yilin said: Punishment is used to prevent crime. People with a benevolent heart will only use punishment when they are forced to.

古文：今民不犯法，又何诛乎？
现代文：现在，百姓没有触犯法令，我又凭什么杀人呢？
English: Now that the people have not violated the law, why should I kill them?

古文：若必断斩然后可以立威，当以卿应之！ 
现代文：倘若必须问斩杀人才能够树立声威，那就由你做起吧！ 
English: If you have to ask whether a talented person can establish a reputation, then start with yourself!

古文：普庆惭惧而起。
现代文：刘普庆愧畏交加，赶忙起身离去。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Liu Puqing hurriedly got up and left.

