古文：羲和湎淫，废时乱日，胤往征之，作《胤征》。
现代文：夏朝时，掌管日月运行的羲和的后代沉湎于淫乱，胤前往征讨，在大战之前作了《胤征》来鼓舞士气。
English: During the Summer Dynasty, the descendants of Gong He, who controlled the movement of the sun and moon, indulged in sexual promiscuity. They went to collect seeds and made "Seeking Seeds" to boost morale before the Great War.

古文：惟仲康肇位四海，胤侯命掌六师。
现代文：仲康开始登上王位统治四海时，命令胤侯为大司马掌管六军。
English: When Zhongkang began to ascend the throne to rule the four seas, he ordered Tan Hou to take charge of the Six Armies as the grand steward.

古文：羲和废厥职，酒荒于厥邑，胤后承王命徂征。
现代文：羲氏与和氏放弃他的职守，回到自己的封地嗜酒荒乱。胤侯接受王命，去征伐羲和。
English: Shinshi and He abandoned their duties and returned to their fiefs, drunk and desolate. Tanhō accepted the king's order and went to conquer Shinshi.

古文：告于众曰： 嗟予有众，圣有谟训，明征定保，先王克谨天戒，臣人克有常宪，百官修辅，厥后惟明明，每岁孟春，遒人以木铎徇于路，官师相规，工执艺事以谏，其或不恭，邦有常刑。 
现代文：胤侯告戒军众说： 啊！众位官长。圣人有谟有训，清楚明白的指明了定国安邦的事。
English: He said to the soldiers, "Ah, officers and commanders, the sage has a sermon, and he has clearly pointed out the matter of establishing a peaceful country.

古文： 惟时羲和颠覆厥德，沈乱于酒，畔官离次，俶扰天纪，遐弃厥司，乃季秋月朔，辰弗集于房，瞽奏鼓，啬夫驰，庶人走，羲和尸厥官罔闻知，昏迷于天象，以干先王之诛，《政典》曰： 先时者杀无赦，不及时者杀无赦。 
现代文：先王能谨慎对待上天的警戒，大臣能遵守常法，百官修治职事辅佐君主，君主就明而又明。
English: If the king can be prudent in the face of Heaven's warning, if the ministers can abide by the common law, and if a hundred officials can assist the monarch in the performance of duties, the monarch will be more and more enlightened.

古文：今予以尔有众，奉将天罚。尔众士同力王室，尚弼予钦承天子威命。
现代文：先王的《政典》说：历法出现先于天时的事，杀掉无赦；出现后于天时的事，杀掉无赦。 现在我率领你们众长，奉行上天的惩罚。你等众士要与王室同心协力，辅助我认真奉行天子的庄严命令！
English: The Ancestor's "Political Code" said: "If the calendar appears before the time of heaven, kill it without mercy; if it appears after the time of heaven, kill it without mercy. Now I am leading you leaders to pursue the punishment of heaven. You and all the others should work together with the royal family to assist me in earnestly pursuing the solemn order of the Son of Heaven!

古文：火炎昆冈，玉石俱焚。天吏逸德，烈于猛火。
现代文：大火燃烧昆仑山时，美玉和顽石都遭到毁灭；天王的官吏如有过恶行为，害处将比猛火更甚。
English: When the great fire burned Kunlun Mountain, both the beautiful jade and the stubborn stone were destroyed; if the king's officials had evil deeds, the harm would be even worse than the fierce fire.

古文：歼厥渠魁，胁从罔治，旧染污俗，咸与维新。
现代文：消灭那些为恶的大首领，协从的人不要惩治；旧时染有污秽习俗的人，都允许更新。 啊！
English: Destroy those who are the great leaders of evil, do not punish those who are accomplices, and allow those who are tainted with the filthy customs of the past to renew them.

古文：呜呼！威克厥爱，允济；爱克厥威，允罔功。
现代文：从严治军胜过对士兵的爱惜，一定能成功；爱惜胜过从严要求，作战就不能成功。
English: Strictly managing the army is better than cherishing the soldiers, and it will surely succeed; cherishing is better than strict requirements, and the battle cannot be successful.

古文：其尔众士懋戒哉！ 
现代文：你等众士要努力戒慎呀！ 
English: You wait for everyone to be careful!

