古文：程普字德谋，右北平土垠人也。
现代文：程普，字德谋，右北平郡土垠人。
English: Cheng Pu, also known as De Mu, was a native of Tujia, Beiping County.

古文：初为州郡吏，有容貌计略，善於应对。
现代文：他起初做过州郡小官，很有姿容谋略，善于应对作答。
English: He first worked as a state and county petty officer. He is very personable and good at responding to questions.

古文：从孙坚征伐，讨黄巾於宛、邓，破董卓於阳人，攻城野战，身被创夷。
现代文：随从孙坚辗转征讨，在宛县、邓县攻打黄巾军，在阳人攻破董卓，攻城野战，身上有多处伤痕。
English: He followed Sun Jiankun in the campaign and fought against the Yellow Turban Army in Wan County and Deng County, defeated Dong Zhuo in Yangren, and fought in the field against the city. He has many scars on his body.

古文：坚薨，复随孙策在淮南，从攻庐江，拔之，还俱东渡。
现代文：孙坚去世，程普又在淮南跟随孙策，随从他进攻庐江，攻克后，回军一起东渡长江。
English: After Sun Jian's death, Cheng Pu followed Sun Ce in Huainan and followed him to attack the Minjiang River. After conquering it, he returned to the army to cross the Yangtze River together.

古文：策到横江、当利，破张英、于麋等，转下秣陵、湖孰、句容、曲阿，普皆有功，增兵二千，骑五十匹。
现代文：孙策率军赶到横江、当利，攻破张英、于麋等，转而攻克秣陵、湖孰、句容、曲阿，程普都立下战功，孙策给他增加两千士兵、战马五十匹。
English: Sun Ce led the army to Yangjiang and Dangli, defeated Zhang Ying and Yu Yao, and then went on to conquer Fuling, Hubei, Jujong, and Qu'a. Cheng Putuo made great achievements in the war, and Sun Ce gave him an additional two thousand soldiers and fifty horses.

古文：进破乌程、石木、波门、陵传、馀杭，普功为多。
现代文：又进而攻破乌程、石木、波门、陵传、余杭，程普立的战功最多。
English: He went on to break through Wucheng, Shiki, Bamen, Lingchuan, and Yuhang. Cheng Puli had the most war exploits.

古文：策入会稽，以普为吴郡都尉，治钱唐。
现代文：孙策进入会稽，任命程普为吴郡都尉，治所在钱塘。
English: Sun Ce entered the audit of the association and appointed Cheng Pu as the governor of Wu County, which is located in Qiantang.

古文：后徙丹杨都尉，居石城。复讨宣城、泾、安吴、陵阳、春谷诸贼，皆破之。
现代文：后转任丹杨都尉，据守石城，又征讨宣城、泾县、安吴、陵阳、春谷等地贼人，将他们全都攻破。
English: After that, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant Danyang, and guarded Shicheng. He also recruited thieves from Xuancheng, Yixian, Anwu, Lingyang, and Spring Valley, and defeated them all.

古文：策尝攻祖郎，大为所围，普与一骑共蔽扞策，驱马疾呼，以矛突贼，贼披，策因随出。
现代文：孙策曾进攻祖郎，被敌军层层包围，程普同一名骑兵一起掩护孙策，策马高喊，用长矛刺杀敌人，敌人往两边分开，孙策趁机跟随程普冲出重围。
English: Sun Ce had attacked Zuro and was surrounded by enemy troops. Cheng Pu and a cavalryman covered Sun Ce, shouted loudly, stabbed the enemy with a spear, and the enemy separated on both sides. Sun Ce took the opportunity to follow Cheng Pu and break out of the siege.

古文：后拜荡寇中郎将，领零陵太守，从讨刘勋於寻阳，进攻黄祖於沙羡，还镇石城。
现代文：后来程普担任荡寇中郎将，兼任零陵太守，随孙策前往寻阳征讨刘勋，在沙羡攻打黄祖，回师后仍镇守石城。
English: Later, Cheng Pu served as the ringleader of the band of robbers, and also served as the governor of Jilin Province. He went with Sun Ce to seek the sun to fight Liu Xun, attacked Huang Zu in Sha'anxi, and still guarded Shicheng after returning.

古文：策薨，与张昭等共辅孙权，遂周旋三郡，平讨不服。
现代文：孙策去世后，程普与张昭等一同辅佐孙权，随后辗转三郡，平定征讨各种不顺从的势力。
English: After Sun Ce's death, Cheng Pu and Zhang Zhao assisted Sun Quan, and then went to the three counties to subdue and recruit all kinds of disobedient forces.

古文：又从征江夏，还过豫章，别讨乐安。
现代文：又随孙权出征江夏，回师路过豫章，另外率军讨伐乐安。
English: He also accompanied Sun Quan on his expedition to the Yangtze River and the Xia River. He also led an army to fight against Le An.

古文：乐安平定，代太史慈备海昬，与周瑜为左右督，破曹公於乌林，又进攻南郡，走曹仁。
现代文：平定乐安后，程普代替太史慈驻防海昬，与周瑜分别为左右督，在乌林攻破曹操，又进军南郡，赶走曹仁。
English: After the pacification of Le'an, Cheng Pu took the place of Taishi Ci in the defense of Haiyan, and Zhou Yu was the left and right governor, defeated Cao Cao in Wulin, and marched into Nan County to drive Cao Ren away.

古文：拜裨将军，领江夏太守，治沙羡，食四县。
现代文：朝廷任命他为裨将军，兼任江夏太守，治所设在沙羡，封邑有四县。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the general of Fu, and he also served as the governor of Jiangxia. The administrative center was located in Sha'anxi, and there were four counties in the fief.

古文：先出诸将，普最年长，时人皆呼程公。
现代文：吴国早期的将领，程普最年长，当时人们称呼他 程公 。
English: Cheng Pu, the oldest general in the early days of the State of Wu, was called Cheng Gong at that time.

古文：性好施与，喜士大夫。
现代文：程普生性乐善好施，喜爱结交士大夫。
English: Cheng Pu Sheng is good at giving gifts and likes to make friends with doctors.

古文：周瑜卒，代领南郡太守。
现代文：周瑜去世后，他接替周瑜兼任南郡太守。
English: After Zhou Yu's death, he succeeded Zhou Yu and also served as the governor of Nan County.

古文：权分荆州与刘备，普复还领江夏，迁荡寇将军，卒。
现代文：孙权分荆州给刘备，程普又回到江夏兼任江夏太守，升任荡寇将军，不久去世。
English: Sun Quan gave Jingzhou to Liu Bei, Cheng Pu returned to Jiangxia and served as the governor of Jiangxia, was promoted to the general of roving bandits, and died soon after.

古文：权称尊号，追论普功，封子咨为亭侯。
现代文：孙权登基后，追述程普生前功绩，封他的儿子程咨为亭侯。
English: After Sun Quan ascended to the throne, he recounted the exploits of Cheng Pu during his lifetime and appointed his son Cheng Zhe as the prince.

古文：黄盖字公覆，零陵泉陵人也。
现代文：黄盖，字公覆，零陵郡泉陵人。
English: Huang Gai, Zi Gongyi, Ziling County, Quanling people.

古文：初为郡吏，察孝廉，辟公府。
现代文：他起初做过郡里的小官，被推举为孝廉，征召到公府。
English: At first, he worked as a minor official in the county, was promoted to filial piety, and was called up to the public office.

古文：孙坚举义兵，盖从之。
现代文：孙坚兴起义兵，黄盖跟从他。
English: Sun Jian raised a volunteer army, Huang Gai followed him.

古文：坚南破山贼，北走董卓，拜盖别部司马。
现代文：孙坚南向攻破山中贼寇，往北打跑董卓，随后任命黄盖为别部司马。
English: Sun Jiannan broke through the mountain bandits and ran to the north to fight Dong Zhuo, and then appointed Huang Gai as the secretary of the other department.

古文：坚薨，盖随策及权，擐甲周旋，蹈刃屠城。
现代文：孙坚去世，黄盖先后追随孙策、孙权，披甲上阵征战南北，冒死攻城略地。
English: After the death of Sun Jian, Huang Gai followed Sun Ce and Sun Quan to fight in the north and south, risking his life to attack the city.

古文：诸山越不宾，有寇难之县，辄用盖为守长。
现代文：山越各部族不愿顺从孙吴，还有的郡县有贼寇作乱，就任命黄盖为那里的地方行政长官。
English: The tribes of Shan Yue did not want to obey Sun Wu, and there were bandits in other counties and counties, so Huang Gai was appointed as the local chief executive there.

古文：石城县吏，特难检御，盖乃署两掾，分主诸曹。
现代文：石城县的官吏，特别难以监管约束，黄盖就派两个掾史，分别主管各部门。
English: Officials in Shicheng County are particularly difficult to supervise and constrain. Huang Gai sent two magistrates to supervise each department separately.

古文：教曰： 令长不德，徒以武功为官，不以文吏为称。
现代文：他教导这两个人说： 我这位县令没有什么德行，隆以武功得到官职，不以做文官而出名。
English: He instructed the two men: "I, the county magistrate, have no virtue. Long obtained his official position through martial arts and is not famous for being a civil servant.

古文：今贼寇未平，有军旅之务，一以文书委付两掾，当检摄诸曹，纠擿谬误。
现代文：现在贼寇还没平定，我常有军事要务，把一应公文处理事务全托付你们两位，你们应当约束省察各个部门，纠正指出他们的错误。
English: Now that the bandits have not yet been subdued, I often have important military duties, and I entrust the handling of official documents to you two. You should restrict the inspection of various departments and correct the mistakes pointed out to them.

古文：两掾所署，事入诺出，若有奸欺，终不加以鞭杖，宜各尽心，无为众先。 初皆怖威，夙夜恭职；久之，吏以盖不视文书，渐容人事。
现代文：你们的本职工作，办理或应承事情，如有奸诈欺骗行为，我始终不会处以鞭抽杖击的责罚，你们应该各自尽力尽心，不要开了不好的头。 起初两个掾史畏惧黄盖威势，日日奉公职守，过段时间，这些吏役以为黄盖不看文书，逐渐废弛公务。
English: If there is any act of treachery or deceit in the performance of your duties, in handling or undertaking matters, I will never punish you with a whip or a cane. You should each do your best not to make a bad start. At first, the two officials were afraid of Huang Gai's power, and served in public duties day after day. Over time, these officials thought that Huang Gai did not read documents, and gradually abandoned their official duties.

古文：盖亦嫌外懈怠，时有所省，各得两掾不奉法数事。乃悉请诸掾吏，赐酒食，因出事诘问。
现代文：黄盖也不满他们的松懒懈怠，不时有所省察，掌握到他们各有不守法的几件事，就将县内所有官吏请来，备好宴饮招待，拿出不遵法纪的事例责问。
English: Huang Gai was also dissatisfied with their laziness and slackness. From time to time, he reflected and grasped that each of them had several cases of non-compliance with the law. He invited all officials in the county, prepared banquets and invitations, and brought out cases of non-compliance with the law and discipline.

古文：两掾辞屈，皆叩头谢罪。
现代文：两名掾史理屈词穷，都叩头请罪。
English: Both of them were short on words, and both of them bowed their heads and pleaded guilty.

古文：盖曰： 前已相敕，终不以鞭杖相加，非相欺也。 遂杀之。
现代文：黄盖说： 以前已告诫过你们，最终不会以鞭、杖来惩罚你们，这不是欺骗你们。 
English: Huang Gai said, "I have warned you before that I would not punish you with whips and canes in the end. This is not deceiving you.

古文：县中震栗。
现代文：就处死了这两个人。全县官吏震惊战栗。
English: The officials of the whole county were shocked and trembled.

古文：后转春谷长，寻阳令。
现代文：后来他转任春谷县县长、寻阳县县令。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the governor of Spring Valley County and the county magistrate of Xiangyang County.

古文：凡守九县，所在平定。
现代文：他前后任职过的九个县，所在之地都平稳安定。
English: The nine counties where he has held office before and after are all stable and stable.

古文：迁丹杨都尉，抑强扶弱，山越怀附。
现代文：又升任丹杨都尉，抑制豪强救济贫弱，使各地百姓诚心归附。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Danyang, suppressing the brave and strong, relieving the poor and weak, and making the people around the country sincerely adhere to him.

古文：盖姿貌严毅，善於养众，每所征讨，士卒皆争为先。
现代文：黄盖样貌严肃刚毅，善于照顾下属，每次有所征战，士卒都争为先锋。
English: Huang Gai's appearance is serious and strong, and he is good at taking care of his subordinates. Every time he goes to war, his soldiers fight to be the vanguard.

古文：建安中，随周瑜拒曹公於赤壁，建策火攻，语在瑜传。
现代文：建安时期，黄盖随从周瑜在赤壁抵御曹操，献出火攻计策，其记录载在《周瑜传》中。
English: During the Jianan period, Huang Gai followed Zhou Yu in Chibi to resist Cao Cao and presented a fire attack strategy, which was recorded in "Zhou Yu Biography."

古文：拜武锋中郎将。
现代文：黄盖担任武锋中郎将。
English: Huang Gai served as a middle-ranking military commander.

古文：武陵蛮夷反乱，攻守城邑，乃以盖领太守。
现代文：武陵少数民族部落叛乱，攻陷城池，孙权于就任命黄盖兼任武陵太守。
English: When the ethnic minority tribes of Wuling rebelled and besieged the city, Sun Quan appointed Huang Gai as the governor of Wuling.

古文：时郡兵才五百人，自以不敌，因开城门，贼半入，乃击之，斩首数百，馀皆奔走，尽归邑落。
现代文：当时武陵郡的官兵只有五百人，考虑到自己实力不敌对手，就大开城门，等叛军人马进入一半后，才出兵攻打他们，斩杀敌军数百人，其余全都逃走，回到各自的村落。
English: At that time, there were only five hundred officers and soldiers in Wuling County. Considering that their strength was no match for the opponent, they opened the city gate, and waited for the rebel soldiers to enter the half before they attacked them, killing hundreds of enemy troops. The rest all fled and returned to their respective villages.

古文：诛讨魁帅，附从者赦之。
现代文：黄盖诛杀了这些反叛者的首领，那些听命随从的人都宽赦了。
English: Huang Gaixuan killed the leaders of these rebels, and those who followed his orders were pardoned.

古文：自春讫夏，寇乱尽平，诸幽邃巴、醴、由、诞邑侯君长，皆改操易节，奉礼请见，郡境遂清。
现代文：从春到夏，叛乱全都平定，那些偏远的地方巴、醴、由、诞的邑侯君长，都改变操守品行，献上礼物求见，武陵郡境内从此安定。
English: From spring to summer, the rebellions were all quelled, and the lords and princes of those remote places, such as Ba, Ya, Yu and Xing, all changed their ethics and behavior, presented gifts and sought advice, and the territory of Wuling County has been stable since then.

古文：后长沙益阳县为山贼所攻，盖又平讨。
现代文：后来长沙郡益阳县被山寇攻打，黄盖又去讨伐平定。
English: Later, Yiyang County, Changsha County, was attacked by mountain robbers, and Huang Gai went to fight and subdue them.

古文：加偏将军，病卒于官。
现代文：孙权加授他偏将军，后来在任官上去世。
English: Sun Quan promoted him to the rank of general, but he later died in office.

古文：盖当官决断，事无留滞，国人思之。
现代文：黄盖任职时果敢决断，从不拖延，吴国人都怀念他。
English: When Huang Gai was in office, he was decisive and never procrastinated. The people of Wu all miss him.

古文：及权践阼，追论其功，赐子柄爵关内侯。
现代文：等到孙权登上帝位，追论他平生功绩，赐予他的儿子黄柄爵位为关内侯。
English: When Sun Quan ascended to the throne, he reviewed his lifetime achievements and gave his son Huang Gang the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：韩当字义公，辽西令支人也。
现代文：韩当，字义公，辽西郡令支人。
English: Han Dang, also known as Yigong, was from Liaoxi County, Liaoning Province.

古文：以便弓马，有膂力，幸於孙坚，从征伐周旋，数犯危难，陷敌擒虏，为别部司马。
现代文：因他熟习弓马，臂力过人，孙坚很宠信他，跟随孙坚辗转征伐，多次遭逢危难，冲锋陷阵，战场擒敌，被任为别部司马。
English: Because he was familiar with archery and horseback archery, and his arm strength was superior to others, Sun Jian trusted him very much. He followed Sun Jianlian to go to war, and was repeatedly in danger, stormed into battle, and fought against the enemy on the battlefield. He was appointed as the secretary of other departments.

古文：及孙策东渡，从讨三郡，迁先登校尉，授兵二千，骑五十匹。
现代文：等到孙策东渡长江，韩当跟随他征讨三郡，升任先登校尉，被授予两千士兵，战马五十匹。
English: After Sun Ce's eastward crossing of the Yangtze River, Han Dang followed him to conquer three counties, was promoted to first lieutenant, and was awarded two thousand soldiers and fifty horses.

古文：从征刘勋，破黄祖，还讨鄱阳，领乐安长，山越畏服。
现代文：又随从孙策攻打刘勋，攻破黄祖，回师征讨鄱阳，兼任乐安县县长，山越人畏惧归服。
English: He also followed Sun Tse in attacking Liu Xun, defeating Huang Zu, and returning to his division to fight Poyang. He also served as the governor of Le'an County. The people of Shan Yue were afraid to submit.

古文：后以中郎将与周瑜等拒破曹公，又与吕蒙袭取南郡，迁偏将军，领永昌太守。
现代文：后来以中郎将身份与周瑜等一起抵御并攻破曹操，又与吕蒙一同袭取南郡，升任为偏将军，兼任永昌太守。
English: Later, he defended Cao Cao and defeated Cao Cao together with Zhou Yu and others, and attacked Nan County together with Lv Meng. He was promoted to general and concurrently held the position of Yongchang governor.

古文：宜都之役，与陆逊、朱然等共攻蜀军於涿乡，大破之，徙威烈将军，封都亭侯。
现代文：宜都战役中，他与陆逊、朱然等在涿乡合力进攻蜀军，大破蜀军，升任威烈将军，封为都亭侯。
English: In the Battle of Yidu, he joined forces with Lu Xun and Zhu Ran to attack the Shu army in Xiangxiang, defeated the Shu army, and was promoted to General Wei Rong and appointed as the governor of Yidu.

古文：曹真攻南郡，当保东南。
现代文：曹真攻打南郡，韩当负责守卫南郡东南。
English: Cao Zhen attacked Nan County, and Han Dang was responsible for guarding the southeast of Nan County.

古文：在外为帅，厉将士同心固守，又敬望督司，奉遵法令，权善之。
现代文：他在外为将，激励将士同心固守，又敬重长官，奉守法令，孙权很赞赏他。
English: Sun Quan appreciated him very much because he was a general on the outside, encouraged his soldiers to stick together, respected his superiors, and obeyed the law.

古文：黄武二年，封石城侯，迁昭武将军，领冠军太守，后又加都督之号。
现代文：黄武二年，韩当被封为石城侯，升为昭武将军，兼任冠军太守，后又被加授都督之职。
English: In the second year of Huangwu, Han Dang was named the marquis of Shicheng, promoted to the general of Shouwu, concurrently served as the champion governor, and was later awarded the post of governor.

古文：将敢死及解烦兵万人，讨丹杨贼，破之。
现代文：他率领 敢死 与 解烦 兵一万人，征讨丹杨敌军，大获全胜。
English: He led ten thousand soldiers of "Dare to Die" and "Dissolve the Troubles" to conquer the Danyang enemy army and won a complete victory.

古文：会病卒，子综袭侯领兵。
现代文：不久生病去世，他的儿子韩综继承爵位，统率他的部队。
English: He died of illness soon after, and his son, Han Zong, inherited the title and led his troops.

古文：其年，权征石阳，以综有忧，使守武昌，而综淫乱不轨。
现代文：同年，孙权征讨石阳，考虑到韩综父亲新丧，令他守卫武昌，而韩综荒乱无度多行不轨之事。
English: In the same year, Sun Quan subdued Shiyang and, considering the recent death of Han Si's father, ordered him to guard Wuchang, while Han Si ran amok and committed many irregularities.

古文：权虽以父故不问，综内怀惧，载父丧，将母家属部曲男女数千人奔魏。
现代文：孙权虽然因为他父亲韩当的缘故而不加责问，但韩综内心恐惧，用车载着父亲的棺木，带着母亲、家眷及亲兵男女数千人逃奔到魏国。
English: Although Sun Quan went unchallenged because of his father Han Dang, Han Zong was terrified and fled to Wei with his father's coffin in his car, his mother, his family, and thousands of men and women who were his soldiers.

古文：魏以为将军，封广阳侯。
现代文：魏国任命他为将军，封为广阳侯。
English: Wei appointed him as a general, and he was given the title of Guangyang marquis.

古文：数犯边境，杀害人民，权常切齿。
现代文：他多次进犯东吴边境，杀害东吴百姓，孙权对他切齿痛恨。
English: He repeatedly invaded the border of East Wu and killed the people of East Wu. Sun Quan hated him bitterly.

古文：东兴之役，综为前锋，军败身死，诸葛恪斩送其首，以白权庙。
现代文：东兴战役，韩综做为魏军前锋，战场上兵败身死，诸葛恪砍下他的头送回吴国，祭奠太庙中孙权之灵。
English: In the Dongxing Campaign, Han Zong served as a vanguard of the Wei army. He was defeated and died on the battlefield. Zhuge Jia chopped off his head and sent it back to the State of Wu to pay tribute to the spirit of Sun Quan in the Grand Temple.

古文：蒋钦字公奕，九江寿春人也。
现代文：蒋钦，字公奕，九江郡寿春人。
English: Jiang Qin, Zi Gong Yi, Jiujiang County Shou Chunren.

古文：孙策之袭袁术，钦随从给事。
现代文：孙策突袭袁术，蒋钦随从任职。
English: Sun Ce raided Yuan Shu, and Jiang Qin followed suit.

古文：及策东渡，拜别部司马，授兵。与策周旋，平定三郡，又从定豫章。
现代文：等到孙策东渡长江，蒋钦担任别部司马，并统率部队，与孙策辗转征讨，平定三郡，又随从孙策平定豫章。
English: When Sun Tse-tung crossed the Yangtze River, Jiang Qin served as the second-in-command and led the troops. He and Sun Tse-tao led the campaign to subdue the three counties, and he also followed Sun Tse-tung in subduing Yuzhang.

古文：调授葛阳尉，历三县长，讨平盗贼，迁西部都尉。
现代文：被调任葛阳县县尉，历任三个县的县长，讨伐平定盗寇，升任西部都尉。
English: He was transferred to the post of county lieutenant of Geyang County, successively served as the county governor of three counties, fought and suppressed bandits, and was promoted to the post of western captain.

古文：会稽冶贼吕合、秦狼等为乱，钦将兵讨击，遂禽合、狼，五县平定，徙讨越中郎将，以经拘、昭阳为奉邑。
现代文：会稽郡冶地的贼寇吕合、秦狼等作乱，蒋钦率兵攻打，擒获了吕合、秦狼，平定了五县，转任为讨越中郎将，将经拘、昭阳两县作为封地。
English: Lu He and Qin Lou, the bandits in the county of Huiqi, caused a disturbance, and Jiang Qin led the troops to attack and capture Lu He and Qin Lou, and leveled five counties. He was transferred to the position of commander in chief of Tuoyue, and the two counties of Jingzhou and Zhaoyang were made into fiefs.

古文：贺齐讨黟贼，钦督万兵，与齐并力，黟贼平定。
现代文：贺齐征讨黟县贼寇时，蒋钦督领上万兵马，与贺齐齐力进攻，黟县贼寇被平定。
English: During He Qi's campaign against the bandits in Jixian County, General Jiang Qin led more than ten thousand soldiers and horses in a concerted attack with He Qi, and the bandits in Jixian County were subdued.

古文：从征合肥，魏将张辽袭权於津北，钦力战有功，迁荡寇将军，领濡须督。
现代文：蒋钦跟随孙权讨伐合肥，魏国将领张辽在逍遥津北面突袭孙权，蒋钦殊死奋战有功，被升为荡寇将军，兼任濡须督。
English: Jiang Qin followed Sun Quan to fight against Hefei. Zhang Liao, the general of Wei, raided Sun Quan in the north of Xuan Yao Jin. Jiang Qin fought valiantly and was promoted to the general of roving bandits and concurrently served as the governor of Wuxu.

古文：后召还都，拜右护军，典领辞讼。
现代文：后朝廷召他返回京都，任为右护军，主管诉讼事宜。
English: Later, the Imperial Court called him back to Kyoto and appointed him as the right guard, in charge of litigation.

古文：权尝入其堂内，母疏帐缥被，妻妾布裙。
现代文：孙权曾进入蒋钦家的后堂，见蒋母使用的是粗布帷帐和素色被子，蒋家妻妾穿着一般布裙。
English: Sun Quan once entered the back hall of Jiang Qin's house and saw that Jiang's mother used coarse cloth curtains and plain quilts, while Jiang's wife and concubine wore ordinary cloth skirts.

古文：权叹其在贵守约，即敕御府为母作锦被，改易帷帐，妻妾衣服悉皆锦绣。
现代文：孙权赞叹蒋钦在富贵之时坚持节俭，当即下令御府为蒋母制作锦被、改换帷帐，蒋氏妻妾衣服全都用上锦绣绸缎。
English: Sun Quan praised Jiang Qin for adhering to frugality when he was rich. He immediately ordered the imperial government to make a brocade quilt and change the curtains for Jiang's mother. The clothes of Jiang's wife and concubine were all embroidered with brocade.

古文：初，钦屯宣城，尝讨豫章贼。
现代文：起初，蒋钦驻守宣城，曾征讨豫章贼寇。
English: At the beginning, Jiang Qin was stationed in Xuancheng and had to fight against Yuzhang bandits.

古文：芜湖令徐盛收钦屯吏，表斩之，权以钦在远不许，盛由是自嫌於钦。
现代文：芜湖县县令徐盛抓捕到蒋钦手下一名屯守官，上表请求将他处死，孙权考虑到蒋钦在远地领兵而未应允，徐盛由此自认为与蒋钦有了怨恨。
English: Xu Sheng, the county magistrate of Wuhu County, arrested a garrison officer under Jiang Qin and requested that he be put to death. Sun Quan did not agree, considering that Jiang Qin was leading troops in a distant land. Xu Sheng believed that he had a grudge against Jiang Qin.

古文：曹公出濡须，钦与吕蒙持诸军节度。
现代文：曹操出兵濡须，蒋钦与吕蒙统领节制各军。
English: Cao Cao did not send troops, and Chiang Ch'ing and Lv Meng led the troops in restraint.

古文：盛常畏钦因事害己，而钦每称其善。
现代文：徐盛常担心蒋钦借故陷害自己，而蒋钦常常称赞徐盛的优点。
English: Xu Sheng often worried that Jiang Qin was using him to frame him, while Jiang Qin often praised Xu Sheng's merits.

古文：盛既服德，论者美焉。
现代文：徐盛敬服蒋钦的品德，议论者也颇加赞美。
English: Xu Sheng respected the moral character of Jiang Qin, and the commentators also praised him.

古文：权讨关羽，钦督水军入沔，还，道病卒。
现代文：孙权讨伐关羽，蒋钦督领水军入沔水，班师返程时，病逝于途中。
English: Sun Quan fought against Guan Yu, Jiang Qin led the naval force into the Yunnan waters, and when the squadron returned, he died of illness on the way.

古文：权素服举哀，以芜湖民二百户、田二百顷，给钦妻子。
现代文：孙权穿着丧服哀悼，将芜湖地区百姓二百户、田二百顷赐给蒋钦的妻子儿女。
English: Wearing mourning clothes, Sun Quan gave 200 households and 200 hectares of farmland in Wuhu District to Jiang Qin's wife and children.

古文：子壹封宣城侯，领兵拒刘备有功，还赴南郡，与魏交战，临陈卒。
现代文：蒋钦的儿子蒋壹被封为宣城侯，带兵抗击刘备有功，还军奔赴南郡，与魏军交战，战死阵前。
English: Jiang Qin's son, Jiang Yi, was appointed as the mayor of Xuancheng. He led the troops to fight against Liu Bei, and returned to Nan County, where he fought with the Wei army and died before the battle.

古文：壹无子，弟休领兵，后有罪失业。
现代文：蒋壹无子，他的弟弟蒋休受领军队，后来犯罪失去了领兵的职任。
English: Jiang Yimushi, his younger brother Jiang Xiu received the army, and later lost the position of army leader due to a crime.

古文：周泰字幼平，九江下蔡人也。
现代文：周泰，字幼平，九江郡下蔡县人。
English: Zhou Tai, also known as Youping, was from Shimo Cai County, Jiujiang County.

古文：与蒋钦随孙策为左右，服事恭敬，数战有功。
现代文：他和蒋钦随从孙策成为身边得力将领，办事恭敬严谨，数次上阵都立下战功。
English: He and Jiang Qin followed Sun Ce to become the most powerful generals around him. They were respectful and rigorous in their work, and made great achievements in battle several times.

古文：策入会稽，署别部司马，授兵。
现代文：孙策出兵会稽，周泰代理别部司马一职，并统兵。
English: Sun Ce dispatched troops, Zhou Tai acted as the secretary of other departments, and led the troops.

古文：权爱其为人，请以自给。
现代文：孙权喜欢周泰的为人，请求孙策将周泰调归自己。
English: Sun Quan liked Zhou Tai as a person and asked Sun Ce to transfer Zhou Tai to him.

古文：策讨六县山贼，权住宣城，使士自卫，不能千人，意尚忽略，不治围落，而山贼数千人卒至。
现代文：孙策征讨六县山贼，孙权驻守宣城，命令兵士自卫，兵员不到一千，他心中依旧忽视大意，不修整防御工事，而山越贼寇数千人突然到来。
English: Sun Ce summoned the bandits from six counties, Sun Quan garrisoned Xuancheng and ordered the soldiers to defend themselves. With less than a thousand soldiers, he still ignored the general idea in his heart and did not repair the fortifications, while thousands of bandits from mountains and rivers suddenly arrived.

古文：权始得上马，而贼锋刃已交於左右，或斫中马鞍，众莫能自定。惟泰奋激，投身卫权，胆气倍人，左右由泰并能就战。
现代文：孙权刚跨上马背，而敌军锋锐的刀枪已从左右交叉而至，有的还砍中了马鞍，众士兵都还未能定神，惟有周泰奋身激越，用身体拼死护卫着孙权，胆量勇气过人数倍，旁边的士卒出于周泰的影响也和他并肩作战。
English: Sun Quan had just mounted his horse, but the enemy's sharp knives and guns had already crossed from the left and right, and some had even hit the saddle. The soldiers were still unable to calm down. However, Zhou Tai was so excited that he used his body to protect Sun Quan. He had more courage than many people, and the soldiers next to him also fought alongside him because of Zhou Tai's influence.

古文：贼既解散，身被十二创，良久乃苏。
现代文：贼兵退后离去后，周泰因身上受了十二处创伤，很久才苏醒过来。
English: After the robber soldiers retreated and left, Zhou Tai suffered twelve wounds on his body, and it took him a long time to wake up.

古文：是日无泰，权几危殆。
现代文：这天如果没有周泰，孙权几乎丧命。
English: On this day, without Zhou Tai, Sun Quan almost died.

古文：策深德之，补春谷长。
现代文：孙策深深感谢周泰，补任他为春谷县县长。
English: Sun Ce deeply thanked Zhou Tai and appointed him as the governor of Spring Valley County.

古文：后从攻皖，及讨江夏，还过豫章，复补宜春长，所在皆食其征赋。
现代文：后来他又随孙策攻打皖县，及至征讨江夏，回军经过豫章时，又被补任为宜春县县长，所任职的县份里的赋税全归他自己所得。
English: Later, he followed Sun Ce in attacking and conquering Yixian County, and went as far as collecting taxes from Jiangxia. When he returned to the army, he was reappointed as the head of Yichun County, and the taxes in the county he served in were all his own income.

古文：从讨黄祖有功。
现代文：周泰随从孙权征讨黄祖立有战功。
English: Zhou Tai followed Sun Quan to conquer Huang Zu and achieved great military feats.

古文：后与周瑜、程普拒曹公於赤壁，攻曹仁於南郡。
现代文：后与周瑜、程普一同在赤壁抵御曹操于，在南郡进攻曹仁。
English: Later, together with Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu, they resisted Cao Cao in Chibi and attacked Cao Ren in Nan County.

古文：荆州平定，将兵屯岑。
现代文：荆州平定后，率军驻守岑县。
English: After Jingzhou was pacified, he stationed his army in Min County.

古文：曹公出濡须，泰复赴击，曹公退，留督濡须，拜平虏将军。
现代文：曹操进军濡须，周泰再次赶赴进攻，曹操撤军后，周泰留守督管濡须坞，升任平虏将军。
English: Cao Cao marched into Nusu, Zhou Tai again rushed to attack. After Cao Cao's withdrawal, Zhou Tai remained in charge of Nusu dock and was promoted to General Pingrui.

古文：时朱然、徐盛等皆在所部，并不伏也，权特为案行至濡须坞，因会诸将，大为酣乐。权自行酒到泰前，命泰解衣，权手自指其创痕，问以所起。
现代文：当时朱然、徐盛等都在周泰的部队中，他们都不信服周泰，孙权为此特地到濡须坞巡视，趁机宴请将领们，大家饮酒奏乐，沉醉欢乐，开怀痛饮，孙权亲自斟酒到周泰面前，叫周泰解开衣服，孙权手指着他身上的创伤，问各处为何受伤。
English: At that time, Zhu Ran, Xu Sheng, etc. were all in Zhou Tai's army. They were not convinced by Zhou Tai. For this reason, Sun Quan made a special inspection to Nuxu Dockyard. He took the opportunity to invite the generals to a banquet. Everyone drank and played music, drunk with joy, and drank hard. Sun Quan personally poured wine in front of Zhou Tai and asked Zhou Tai to undo his clothes. Sun Quan pointed to the wounds on his body and asked why he was injured everywhere.

古文：泰辄记昔战斗处以对，毕，使复服，欢宴极夜。
现代文：周泰便回忆起昔日战斗的各种情形来回复，说完后，孙权让他穿好衣服，欢饮达旦。
English: Zhou Tai then recalled the various situations of the past battles to reply. After saying this, Sun Quan asked him to get dressed and have a drink.

古文：其明日，遣使者授以御盖。
现代文：第二天，孙权派人将自己的御用青丝头巾授予周泰。
English: The next day, Sun Quan sent someone to award Zhou Tai with his royal blue silk headscarf.

古文：於是盛等乃伏。
现代文：于是徐盛等人才完全信服周泰。
English: As a result, Xu Sheng and other talents were completely convinced by Zhou Tai.

古文：后权破关羽，欲进图蜀，拜泰汉中太守、奋威将军，封陵阳侯。
现代文：后来孙权攻破关羽，想要进兵谋取西蜀，任命周泰为汉中太守、奋威将军，封为陵阳侯。
English: Later, Sun Quan broke through Guan Yu, wanted to enter the army to seek West Shu, appointed Zhou Tai as the Han Dynasty Governor, General Teng Wei, and was named Lingyang Hou.

古文：黄武中卒。
现代文：黄武年间，周泰去世。
English: Xu Sheng died in the Huangwu Dynasty.

古文：子邵以骑都尉领兵。
现代文：周泰儿子周邵以骑都尉身份统兵。
English: Zhou Tai's son Zhou Shao led the troops as a cavalry captain.

古文：曹仁出濡须，战有功，又从攻破曹休，进位裨将军，黄龙二年卒。
现代文：曹仁进军濡须，周邵力战有功，又随孙权攻破曹休，升为裨将军。黄龙二年，周邵去世。
English: Cao Ren marched into Wushu, Zhou Shao Li fought well, and with Sun Quan defeated Cao Xiu and was promoted to general. In the second year of Huanglong, Zhou Shao died.

古文：弟承领兵袭侯。
现代文：他的弟弟周承统率军队，承袭爵位。
English: His younger brother, Zhou Cheng, led the army and inherited the title.

古文：陈武字子烈，庐江松滋人。
现代文：陈武，字子烈，庐江郡松滋县人。
English: Chen Wu, also known as Zi Li, was from Songzhi County, Minjiang County.

古文：孙策在寿春，武往脩谒，时年十八，长七尺七寸，因从渡江，征讨有功，拜别部司马。
现代文：孙策在寿春时，陈武前去拜见，当时十八岁，身长七尺七寸，随后跟随孙策东渡长江，征战立下战功，被任为别部司马。
English: At the time of Sun Ce's birthday, Chen Wu went to meet him. At that time, he was eighteen years old and seven feet and seven inches tall. Later, he followed Sun Ce to the Yangtze River, where he distinguished himself in battle and was appointed as the secretary of the Second Division.

古文：策破刘勋，多得庐江人，料其精锐，乃以武为督，所向无前。
现代文：孙策攻破刘勋，俘获很多庐江人，挑选其中精锐，令陈武督管，使这支部队所向无敌。
English: Sun Ce defeated Liu Xun, captured many Liangjiang people, selected the elite among them, put Chen Wu in charge, and made this army invincible.

古文：及权统事，转督五校。
现代文：等到孙权主管朝政，陈武转任督领五校。
English: When Sun Quan became the head of the Imperial Court, Chen Wu was transferred to be the superintendent of five schools.

古文：仁厚好施，乡里远方客多依讬之。
现代文：他仁慈宽厚乐善好施，他的同乡和远来之人很多人都依附他。
English: He was kind, generous, and charitable, and many of his countrymen and strangers depended on him.

古文：尤为权所亲爱，数至其家。
现代文：孙权特别厚待他，孙权几次到他家中。
English: Sun Quan was especially kind to him. Sun Quan came to his home several times.

古文：累有功劳，进位偏将军。
现代文：因他多次立有功劳，被升任为偏将军。
English: Because of his many meritorious services, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：建安二十年，从击合肥，奋命战死。
现代文：建安二十年，他跟随孙权攻打合肥，殊死奋战战死阵前。
English: In the 20th year of Jian'an, he followed Sun Quan to attack Hefei and fought to the death.

古文：权哀之，自临其葬。
现代文：孙权哀痛他的去世，亲自参加他的葬礼。
English: Sun Quan mourned his death and attended his funeral in person.

古文：子脩有武风，年十九，权召见奖厉，拜别部司马，授兵五百人。
现代文：陈武的儿子陈脩，很有陈武的风范，十九岁时，孙权召见并奖励他，任命他为别部司马，授予五百士兵。
English: At the age of nineteen, Sun Quan summoned Chen Wu's son, Chen Hui, who had a very Chen Wu demeanor, and rewarded him by appointing him as the leader of the Second Division and awarding him five hundred soldiers.

古文：时诸新兵多有逃叛，而脩抚循得意，不失一人。
现代文：当时的新兵中有很多叛逃的，而陈脩因对手下安抚得当，所以他的部队没有一人叛逃。
English: There were many defections among the recruits at that time, but Chen Xuan was properly appeased by his opponents, so none of his troops defected.

古文：权奇之，拜为校尉。
现代文：孙权很是惊奇，任命他为校尉。
English: Sun Quan was very surprised and appointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：建安末，追录功臣后，封脩都亭侯，为解烦督。
现代文：建安末年，孙权追录功臣后代，封陈脩为都亭侯，任 解烦兵 都督。
English: At the end of the Jianan era, Sun Quan recorded the descendants of meritorious soldiers, appointed Chen Xi as the governor of the capital, and appointed Xie Yuebing as the governor of the capital.

古文：黄龙元年卒。
现代文：黄龙元年，陈脩去世。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Chen Xi passed away.

古文：弟表，字文奥，武庶子也，少知名，与诸葛恪、顾谭、张休等并侍东宫，皆共亲友。
现代文：陈脩的弟弟陈表，字文奥，陈武的妾所生的儿子，他年少时便有声名，与诸葛恪、顾谭、张休等人一同侍奉东宫，相互间友好和睦。
English: Chen Biao's younger brother, Chen Biao, the son of Chen Wu's concubine, Chen Wen'ao, became famous when he was young. He served the East Palace together with Zhuge Ke, Gu Tan, Zhang Hui and others, and they were friendly and harmonious with each other.

古文：尚书暨艳亦与表善，后艳遇罪，时人咸自营护，信厚言薄，表独不然，士以此重之。
现代文：尚书暨艳也与陈表友爱，后来暨艳犯罪，当时人人都设法保护自己，许诺相帮者甚多而真正出头者则少，而惟独陈表不这样，故此士子们都因此敬重他。
English: Shang Shuxu and Yan Yan also fell in love with Chen Biao, and later he and Yan Biao committed crimes. At that time, everyone tried to protect themselves. There were many who promised to help each other, but few who actually did so. However, this was not the case with Chen Biao, which is why the nobles respected him.

古文：从太子中庶子，拜翼正都尉。
现代文：他从太子中庶子，被授为翼正都尉。
English: He was the illegitimate son of the crown prince and was awarded the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：兄脩亡后，表母不肯事脩母，表谓其母曰： 兄不幸早亡，表统家事，当奉嫡母。
现代文：他哥哥陈脩死后，陈表母亲不肯侍奉陈的母亲，陈表对自己的母亲说： 哥哥不幸早逝，我总管家中事务，理当奉养嫡母。
English: After the death of his brother, Chen Yao, Chen Yao's mother refused to serve Chen Yao's mother. Chen Yao said to his mother: "Unfortunately, my brother passed away at an early age. I am in charge of the affairs of the family, and it is my duty to support my mother."

古文：母若能为表屈情，承顺嫡母者，是至愿也；若母不能，直当出别居耳。 表於大义公正如此。
现代文：母亲如能为我受屈一时之情，承顺嫡母的话，则是我的最大愿望，如果母亲不能做到，就只好出去另外居住了。 陈表对于道义的公正之心即为这样。
English: If my mother can bear with me for a while and obey my mother's words, that is my greatest wish, but if she can't do that, then I will have to go and live somewhere else.

古文：由是二母感寤雍穆。
现代文：由此两位母亲深受感悟相处和睦。
English: As a result, the two mothers are deeply impressed and get along well.

古文：表以父死敌场，求用为将，领兵五百人。
现代文：陈表以父亲战死沙场为由，请求被用为将，领兵五百人。
English: On the grounds that his father died on the battlefield, Chen Bo requested to be used as a general to lead five hundred soldiers.

古文：表欲得战士之力，倾意接待，士皆爱附，乐为用命。
现代文：陈表想得到兵士们的效力，便倾心善待他们，兵士们都很爱戴和依附服从，乐于为他效命。
English: In order to gain the soldiers' cooperation, Chen Bo treated them with kindness. The soldiers loved and obeyed him and were willing to serve him.

古文：时有盗官物者，疑无难士施明。
现代文：当时有偷盗公家东西的人，上方怀疑是 无难军 的兵士施明。
English: At that time, there was a person who stole public property, and the superiors suspected that it was a soldier of the Relief Army, Shiming.

古文：明素壮悍，收考极毒，惟死无辞，廷尉以闻。
现代文：施明一向强壮剽悍，拘捕后受到极为惨毒的拷打，但他宁死不说一句话，廷尉将这件事向上汇报。
English: Sheming had always been strong and tough. After his arrest, he was subjected to extremely cruel torture, but he preferred to die rather than say a word. The court officer reported the matter to the higher-ups.

古文：权以表能得健儿之心，诏以明付表，使自以意求其情实。
现代文：孙权考虑到陈表能得军中勇士们的信任，诏令将施明交给陈表处理，让陈表随自己的方便去获取真情。
English: Sun Quan, considering that Chen Bo could win the trust of the warriors in the army, ordered that Shimei be handed over to Chen Bo to deal with, and let Chen Bo obtain the truth at his own convenience.

古文：表便破械沐浴，易其衣服，厚设酒食，欢以诱之。
现代文：陈表便打开施明的枷锁并让他洗澡，换上他的衣服，厚办酒席，在酒席间劝诱施明。
English: Chen Yao then opened Shimei's shackles and let him take a shower, put on his clothes, held a banquet, and coaxed Shimei between the banquets.

古文：明乃首服，具列支党。
现代文：施明于是自首服罪，将同党一一交代出来。
English: Shiming then turned himself in to serve his sentence and will be handed over to the same party one by one.

古文：表以状闻。
现代文：陈表上表汇报。
English: Report on the table.

古文：权奇之，欲全其名，特为赦明，诛戮其党。
现代文：孙权认为陈表非同常人，为了保全他的名声，特地赦免了施明，而将施明的同党全部斩首。
English: Sun Quan thought that Chen Biao was not an ordinary person. In order to preserve his reputation, he specifically pardoned Shimei and beheaded all of Shimei's party members.

古文：迁表为无难右部督，封都亭侯，以继旧爵。
现代文：升陈表为无难军右部督，封爵都亭侯，以继承他父亲生前的爵位。
English: He was promoted to the position of the commander of the Right Division of the Relief Army, and was given the title of Duke of Doting to inherit his father's title.

古文：表皆陈让，乞以传脩子延，权不许。
现代文：陈表上书全部辞让，请求将这些封赐转给陈脩的儿子陈延，孙权不允许。
English: Sun Quan did not allow Chen Yan, Chen Yao's son, to inherit all of these titles.

古文：嘉禾三年，诸葛恪领丹杨太守，讨平山越，以表领新安都尉，与恪参势。
现代文：嘉禾三年，诸葛恪兼任丹杨太守，讨伐平定山越，以陈表兼任新安都尉，与诸葛恪互相协助治理其地。
English: In the three years of Jiahe, Zhuge Ke also served as the governor of Danyang, and fought to pacify Shan Yue. He also served as the governor of Xin'an with Chen He, and assisted Zhuge Ke in governing the region.

古文：初，表所受赐复人得二百家，在会稽新安县。
现代文：起初，陈表曾受赐被免除赋税的人家二百户，这些人在会稽新安县。
English: At the beginning, Chen table was given to 200 families of people who were exempted from paying taxes, and these people were the auditors of Xin'an County.

古文：表简视其人，皆堪好兵，乃上疏陈让，乞以还官，充足精锐。
现代文：陈表调察这批人，都能用来作很好的兵士，于是上表辞让，请求将他们归还国家，以充实精锐兵力。
English: Chen inspected this group of people, all of whom could be used to make good soldiers, so he made a concession and requested that they be returned to the country to replenish the elite troops.

古文：诏曰： 先将军有功於国，国家以此报之，卿何得辞焉？ 表乃称曰： 今除国贼，报父之仇，以人为本。
现代文：朝廷诏书说： 您的先人陈武将军有功于国，国家将这批人作为赏赐来报答，您怎么能推辞呢？ 陈表于是解释说： 如今歼灭国家的仇敌，为我父亲报仇，应以人为根本。
English: The imperial edict said: Your forefather, General Chen Wu, has contributed to the country, and the country will reward this group of people as a reward. How can you refuse? Chen Yeh then explained: Now, to annihilate the enemies of the country and avenge my father, it should be based on people.

古文：空枉此劲锐以为僮仆，非表志也。 皆辄料取以充部伍。
现代文：徒使这些精锐的兵力作为我的家仆，并非我的心愿。 于是他将这些人选取以充实自己的部队。
English: But it was not my desire to take the best of them for my personal servants, so he chose them and put them in his army.

古文：所在以闻，权甚嘉之。下郡县，料正户羸民以补其处。
现代文：当地官员将这一情况上报朝廷，孙权甚为赞赏，下令郡县挑选安排官府服役的人家与贫民来充实陈表所受赏赐的户数。
English: Local officials reported this situation to the imperial court. Sun Quancheng was very appreciative and ordered the counties to select the families of those who had served in the government and the poor to enrich the number of households that received the award.

古文：表在官三年，广开降纳，得兵万馀人。
现代文：陈表在官任上三年，广开门径招纳兵力，得一万多人。
English: During his three years in office, Chen Biao opened the door wide to recruit troops, gaining more than ten thousand people.

古文：事捷当出，会鄱阳民吴遽等为乱，攻没城郭，属县摇动，表便越界赴讨，遽以破败，遂降。
现代文：情况紧急便率领他们出战。正值鄱阳的百姓吴遽等作乱，攻占城池，所属各县动荡不宁。陈表便越过郡界奔赴征讨，吴遽被打败，于是投降。
English: When the situation was urgent, he led them into battle. At that time, Wu Huan, a citizen of Fenyang, caused a riot, captured the city, and the counties he belonged to were in turmoil. Chen Bo rushed across the county border to fight, and Wu Huan was defeated and surrendered.

古文：陆逊拜表偏将军，进封都乡侯，北屯章坑。
现代文：陆逊任命陈表为偏将军，晋封为都乡侯，北往驻守章阝亢。
English: Lu Xun appointed Chen Bo as a partial general, promoted him to the position of capital township lord, and sent him north to garrison Zhangye.

古文：年三十四卒。
现代文：陈表三十四岁时即去世。
English: Chen died at the age of thirty-four.

古文：家财尽於养士，死之日，妻子露立，太子登为起屋宅。
现代文：他的家财全用来供养士人，去世那天，妻子儿女都露天站立，太子孙登为他们建起了屋宅。
English: On the day of his death, his wife and children were standing in the open, and his children and grandchildren built a house for them.

古文：子敖年十七，拜别部司马，授兵四百人。
现代文：他的儿子陈敖十七岁，被任命为别部司马，领兵四百人。
English: His seventeen-year-old son, Chen Zhe, was appointed the second-in-command of the horse, leading four hundred soldiers.

古文：敖卒，脩子延复为司马代敖。
现代文：陈敖死后，陈的儿子陈延复为别部司马以接替陈敖。
English: After Chen Yu's death, Chen's son, Chen Yanfu, became the second-in-command to succeed Chen Yu.

古文：延弟永，将军，封侯。
现代文：陈延的弟弟陈永，官为将军，被封侯。
English: Chen Yan's younger brother Chen Yong, a general, was made a lord.

古文：始施明感表，自变行为善，遂成健将，致位将军。
现代文：当初施明感激陈表，自己转变为良好品行，终于成为军中健将，官至将军。
English: At first, Shimei was grateful for Chen's watch, transformed himself into a good character, and finally became a military general.

古文：董袭字元代，会稽馀姚人，长八尺，武力过人。
现代文：董袭，字元代，会稽郡余姚县人，身长八尺，武力超群。
English: Dong Wei, the representative of the characters, is from Yuyao County, Hefei County. He is eight feet tall and has superior strength.

古文：孙策入郡，袭迎於高迁亭，策见而伟之，到署门下贼曹。
现代文：孙策进入会稽，董袭到高迁亭迎接他，孙策见到他后认为他很壮伟，就让他在自己属下管理贼盗的部门任职。
English: When Sun Ce entered the auditorium, Dong Gao went to Gaojenting to meet him. After seeing him, Sun Ce thought he was very magnificent, and let him work in the department that managed thieves under his supervision.

古文：时山阴宿贼黄龙罗、周勃聚党数千人，策自出讨，袭身斩罗、勃首，还拜别部司马，授兵数千，迁扬武都尉。
现代文：当时山阴惯匪黄龙罗、周勃聚集部众几千人，孙策亲自率军攻打，董袭亲手砍下黄龙罗、周勃的首级，返回后被任为别部司马，带兵数千人，升任扬武都尉。
English: At that time, the bandits Huang Long Luo and Zhou Bo, who were accustomed to the mountains and valleys, gathered thousands of people. Sun Ce personally led the army to attack, and Dong He personally cut off the heads of Huang Long Luo and Zhou Bo. After returning, he was appointed as the secretary of the other department, led thousands of soldiers, and was promoted to Yangwu lieutenant.

古文：从策攻皖，又讨刘勋於寻阳，伐黄祖於江夏。
现代文：他随从孙策攻打皖县，又在寻阳讨伐刘勋，在江夏讨伐黄祖。
English: He followed Sun Tse to attack Shixian County, and fought Liu Xun in Guiyang, and Huang Zu in Jiangxia.

古文：策薨，权年少，初统事，太妃忧之，引见张昭及袭等，问江东可保安否，袭对曰： 江东地势，有山川之固，而讨逆明府，恩德在民。
现代文：孙策去世后，孙权年少，刚开始掌管国事，吴太妃很是忧虑，就召见张昭及董袭等人，询间江东能否保守安稳，董袭回答说： 江东地理形势，有山川可以据险固守，而讨逆将军为贤明的州牧，恩德惠及百姓。
English: After Sun Ce's death, when Sun Quan was young and had just taken charge of state affairs, Wu Taifei was very worried. He summoned Zhang Zhao and Dong Nai and others to inquire whether the East River could be kept safe and stable. Dong Nai replied: The geographical situation of the East River, there are mountains and rivers that can be kept safe, and the rebel general is a wise state herdsman, benefiting the people.

古文：讨虏承基，大小用命，张昭秉众事，袭等为爪牙，此地利人和之时也，万无所忧。 众皆壮其言。
现代文：讨虏将军承袭基业，上下齐心听令效力，张昭掌政主管大小事务，我董袭等人做为部下，这正是据有地利、人和的时候，绝无什么可忧虑的！ 
English: When the general inherits the foundation, and the top and bottom work together to obey orders, and Zhang Zhao is in charge of the government and is in charge of large and small affairs, and I am in charge of the director and others as subordinates, this is exactly when there is a place and people, there is absolutely nothing to worry about!

古文：鄱阳贼彭虎等众数万人，袭与凌统、步骘、蒋钦各别分讨。
现代文：大家都为他的言论感到雄壮。鄱阳郡贼寇彭虎等有几万部众，董袭与凌统、步陟马、蒋钦分兵征讨。
English: Everyone felt proud of his speech. There were tens of thousands of followers of the Poyang County bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, the bandits, etc.

古文：袭所向辄破，虎等望见旌旗，便散走，旬日尽平，拜威越校尉，迁偏将军。
现代文：董袭所到之处都攻破贼寇，彭虎等一望见他的旌旗，便四散逃走，十天之内全部平定。董袭被任为威越校尉，升任偏将军。
English: Peng Hu and others scattered and fled as soon as they saw his banner, and within ten days all of them were subdued. Dong Hei was appointed as Wei Yue's lieutenant and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：建安十三年，权讨黄祖。
现代文：建安十三年，孙权征讨黄祖。
English: In the 13th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan went to conquer Huang Zu.

古文：祖横两蒙冲挟守沔口，以栟闾大绁系石为碇，上有千人，以弩交射，飞矢雨下，军不得前。
现代文：黄祖用两条蒙冲巨舰横截河面守住沔口，用棕榈大缆拴住大石墩来固定战舰，舰上安排上千士兵，用弓弩交错射击，箭如雨下，东吴军队无法往前。
English: Huang Zu used two Mengchong giant ships to cross the river to hold the mouth of the estuary, and used a large palm cable to tie a large stone anchor to fix the warship. Thousands of soldiers were arranged on the ship, and they shot at each other with bows and arrows. The Dongwu army could not move forward.

古文：袭与凌统俱为前部，各将敢死百人，人被两铠，乘大舸船，突入蒙冲里。
现代文：董袭与凌统都是前锋，他们各率一百名敢死壮士，每人身披两层铠甲，乘坐大船，冲进黄祖的蒙冲巨舰里。
English: Dong Hei and Ling Tong were both forwards. Each of them led a hundred brave men, each wearing two layers of armor, on a large ship, rushing into Huang Zu's Mengchong giant ship.

古文：袭身以刀断两绁，蒙冲乃横流，大兵遂进。
现代文：董袭亲手用刀砍断两根大缆，黄祖的巨舰就随水横移开去，孙权大军得以继续前进。
English: Dong Wei personally cut two large cables with a knife, and Huang Zu's huge ship moved away with the water, allowing Sun Quan's army to continue moving forward.

古文：祖便开门走，兵追斩之。
现代文：黄祖只得打开城门逃走，吴兵追上并斩杀了他。
English: Huang Zu had no choice but to open the city gate and flee. Wu soldiers caught up with him and killed him.

古文：明日大会，权举觞属袭曰： 今日之会，断绁之功也。 
现代文：第二天大宴将士，孙权举杯对董袭说： 今日的宴会，归于你断缆之功！ 
English: On the second day of the grand banquet, Sun Quan raised his glass to Dong Hei and said, "Today's banquet belongs to you for breaking the cable!

古文：曹公出濡须，袭从权赴之，使袭督五楼船住濡须口。
现代文：曹操进军濡须，董袭跟随孙权赶赴当地，孙权让董袭督领五楼船驻守濡须口。
English: Cao Cao marched into Wushu, and Dong Hei followed Sun Quan to rush to the area. Sun Quan asked Dong Hei to lead the fifth floor ship to guard Wushu.

古文：夜卒暴风，五楼船倾覆，左右散走舸，乞使袭出。
现代文：夜里突然刮起狂风，五楼船都倾覆了，手下人四散逃到小船上，请求董袭出来。
English: A violent wind suddenly blew up in the night, the fifth floor boats all capsized, and the subordinates scattered and fled to the small boat, asking Dong to come out.

古文：袭怒曰： 受将军任，在此备贼，何等委去也，敢复言此者斩！ 於是莫敢干。
现代文：董袭愤怒地说： 我受将军委派，在此防备贼寇，怎么能抛下战船离去呢？敢再劝我走者，斩！ 于是无人敢再干涉。
English: Dong Qi said angrily, "I have been assigned by the general to guard against thieves and robbers here, how can I leave the warship and leave? If you dare to persuade me to leave again, behead me!" So no one dared to interfere again.

古文：其夜船败，袭死。
现代文：当夜船沉，董袭淹死。
English: The ship sank that night, and Dong Hei drowned.

古文：权改服临殡，供给甚厚。
现代文：孙权换上丧服亲临葬礼，对他的家属供应很是丰厚。
English: Sun Quan changed into mourning clothes to attend the funeral in person, and his family was well provided for.

古文：甘宁字兴霸，巴郡临江人也。
现代文：甘宁，字兴霸，巴郡临江人。
English: Ganning, Zi Xingba, Ba County Linjiang people.

古文：少有气力，好游侠，招合轻薄少年，为之渠帅；群聚相随，挟持弓弩，负毦带铃，民闻铃声，即知是宁。
现代文：他年轻时很有气力，爱好交游行侠仗义，聚集一些轻薄少年，做他们的首领。他们拉帮结派形成一大批，带着弓弩箭羽，骑着系有铃铛的马，百姓一听到马铃声，就知道是甘宁来了。
English: When he was young, he was very strong and liked to march in processions, gather some light-skinned boys to be their leaders. They formed a large number of gangs, carrying bows and arrows, riding horses with bells. As soon as the people heard the horse bells, they knew that Ganning was coming.

古文：人与相逢，及属城长吏，接待隆厚者乃与交欢；不尔，即放所将夺其资货，於长吏界中有所贼害，作其发负，至二十馀年。
现代文：大家与他结交，以至于他所在的城中官吏，隆重接待他的人，他才乐意和他结交，否则，他就放任聚集的祸乱少年抢夺那人财产。他就这样在官吏群体中做了一些害人的事，等他猛然醒悟，已二十余年了。
English: Everyone befriended him, so much so that the officials in the city where he was, who received him with great pomp, were the only ones he was willing to befriend. Otherwise, he would have let the gathered mischievous youths rob the man's property. In this way, he did some harmful things among the group of officials, and it has been more than twenty years since he suddenly woke up.

古文：止不攻劫，颇读诸子，乃往依刘表，因居南阳，不见进用，后转托黄祖，祖又以凡人畜之。
现代文：就停止过去那种攻打抢劫的行为，通读很多诸子书籍，随后前往依附刘表，就此住在南阳，但不受刘表重用，他后来又转而依靠黄祖，黄祖也一样将他作普通人养着。
English: He stopped attacking and robbing in the past, read through many children's books, and then went to depend on Liu Biao, and lived in Nanyang. However, he was not reused by Liu Biao, and he later turned to rely on Huang Zu. Huang Zu also raised him as an ordinary person.

古文：於是归吴。
现代文：于是甘宁就归附了东吴。
English: As a result, Ganning was annexed to Dongwu.

古文：周瑜、吕蒙皆共荐达，孙权加异，同於旧臣。
现代文：周瑜、吕蒙都一同举荐他显达于朝，孙权更加看重他，如旧臣一样对待他。
English: Zhou Yu and Lv Meng both recommended him to the imperial court. Sun Quan valued him more and treated him like an old vassal.

古文：宁陈计曰： 今汉祚日微，曹操弥忄乔，终为篡盗。
现代文：甘宁献计说： 如今汉氏国运日益衰微，曹操更为骄矜蛮横，最终要成为篡汉的国贼。
English: "Nowadays, the Han dynasty is waning, and Cao Cao is more arrogant and insolent, and will eventually become a usurper of Han," said Ganning.

古文：南荆之地。山陵形便，江川流通，诚是国之西势也。
现代文：南荆地区，山势屏障便利，江河流畅通行，实在是我国西边的有利地势。
English: The Nanjing region, with its convenient mountainous barrier and smooth flow of rivers, is truly a favorable location in the west of our country.

古文：宁已观刘表，虑既不远，儿子又劣，非能承业传基者也。
现代文：我早已观察刘表思虑不深无远见，儿子们又顽劣，不是能继承他基业的样子。
English: I have long observed that Liu Yubei's thoughts are not profound and far-sighted, and his sons are bad, and they are not able to inherit his inheritance.

古文：至尊当早规之，不可后操。
现代文：主上应当尽早规划谋取，不可落在曹操之后。
English: The Lord should plan and seek as early as possible, and must not fall behind Cao Cao.

古文：图之之计，宜先取黄祖。
现代文：图谋刘表的计划，第一步应该先谋取黄祖。
English: If you want to plan Liu table, the first step should be to seek Huang Zu.

古文：祖今年老，昏耄已甚，财谷并乏，左右欺弄，务於货利，侵求吏士，吏士心怨，舟船战具，顿废不脩，怠於耕农，军无法伍。至尊今往，其破可必。一破祖军，鼓行而西，西据楚关，大势弥广，即可渐规巴蜀。 权深纳之。
现代文：这些人都心中生怨，而战船及各种作战器具，损毁而不加修整，怠慢农事，军队缺乏严整的队伍。主上现在前往夺取，一定能攻破他。一旦攻破黄祖的大军，即可击鼓西进，往前占据楚关，势力随即增大扩广，这样可逐渐谋取巴蜀之地了。 孙权很是赞同他的建议。
English: These people all have grudges in their hearts, and warships and all kinds of war equipment are damaged and destroyed without being repaired, agricultural affairs are neglected, and the army lacks a well-organized team. The Lord is now going to conquer, and he will surely be able to defeat him. Once he defeats Huang Zu's army, he can march westward with drums, occupy Chu Guan, and his power will increase and expand. In this way, he can gradually seek the land of Bashu. Sun Quan very much agrees with his suggestion.

古文：张昭时在坐，难曰： 吴下业业，若军果行，恐必致乱。 宁谓昭曰： 国家以萧何之任付君，君居守而忧乱，奚以希慕古人乎？ 权举酒属宁曰： 兴霸，今年行讨，如此酒矣，决以付卿。
现代文：当时张昭在坐，他诘问甘宁说： 吴国内部危急，如果军队真的西征，恐怕必然导致国内大乱。 甘宁回答张昭： 国家将萧何那样的重任托付给您，而您留守却担心有祸乱，用什么来追慕古人呢？ 孙权举起酒杯向甘宁敬酒说： 兴霸，今年即将出军征讨，就像这杯酒，我决定把它托付给你了。
English: At that time, Zhang Zhao was sitting, he asked Ganning: Wu is in a critical situation, if the army really marches to the west, it will inevitably lead to domestic turmoil. Ganning replied to Zhang Zhao: The country has entrusted you with such an important task as Xiao, but you are worried about disasters while you are staying, what will you use to admire the ancients? Sun Quan raised his glass to Ganning and said: Xingba, this year is about to go to the army for conscription, just like this glass of wine, I decided to entrust it to you.

古文：卿但当勉建方略，令必克祖，则卿之功，何嫌张长史之言乎。 权遂西，果禽祖，尽获其士众。
现代文：你只需勉力做好作战方略，使我们一定能攻破黄祖，如此就是你立了大功，何必计较张长史的话呢？ 孙权随后西征，果然生擒黄祖，并俘虏了他的全部军队。
English: You only need to do your best to prepare a battle strategy, so that we can definitely defeat Huang Zu. So if you have made a great contribution, why do you need to worry about a long history? Sun Quan then went to the West, and finally defeated Huang Zu and captured all of his army.

古文：遂授宁兵，屯当口。
现代文：随后给甘宁拨付军队，让他驻扎在当口。
English: Subsequently, troops were assigned to Ganning, and he was stationed at Danggou.

古文：后随周瑜拒破曹公於乌林。
现代文：后来甘宁又跟随周瑜在乌林抵御并攻破曹操。
English: Later, Gan Ning followed Zhou Yu to resist and defeat Cao Cao in Wulin.

古文：攻曹仁於南郡，未拔，宁建计先径进取夷陵，往即得其城，因入守之。
现代文：在南郡攻打曹仁，未能攻克，甘宁献计先径直夺取夷陵，他率军前往当即占领这座城池，于是进城驻守。
English: In Nan County, he attacked Cao Ren, but failed to conquer him. Gan Ning planned to seize Yiling directly first, and he led the army to immediately occupy the city, so he entered the city to stay.

古文：时手下有数百兵，并所新得，仅满千人。
现代文：当时他手下有几百士兵，加上刚俘获的士兵，也只刚满一千。
English: At that time, he had several hundred soldiers under his command, plus the soldiers he had just captured, only just over a thousand.

古文：曹仁乃令五六千人围宁。
现代文：曹仁却派出五六千人围攻甘宁。
English: Cao Ren, however, sent five or six thousand men to besiege Ganning.

古文：宁受攻累日，敌设高楼，雨射城中，士众皆惧，惟宁谈笑自若。
现代文：甘宁被接连围困几天，敌军架起攻城高楼，从楼上将箭像雨点般地射入城内，兵士们都很惊恐，只有甘宁谈笑自如。
English: Ganning was besieged for several days in a row. The enemy army attacked the high-rise buildings of the city and shot arrows into the city from the upper floors like raindrops. The soldiers were very frightened, but Ganning was able to talk and laugh freely.

古文：遣使报瑜，瑜用吕蒙计，帅诸将解围。
现代文：他派人将情况上报周瑜，周瑜采纳吕蒙的计策，率领将领们前来给甘宁解除围困。
English: He sent someone to report the situation to Zhou Yu. Zhou Yu adopted Liumeng's strategy and led the generals to come and lift the siege on Ganning.

古文：后随鲁肃镇益阳，拒关羽。
现代文：后来甘宁随鲁肃镇守益阳，抗击关羽。
English: Later, Gan Ning followed Rusu Town to defend Yiyang and resisted Guan Yu.

古文：羽号有三万人，自择选锐士五千人，投县上流十馀里浅濑，云欲夜涉渡。
现代文：关羽号称有三万兵马，他亲自挑选五千精锐士兵，往河里投放物品堵住上游十多里的浅水地带，说打算夜里渡水过河。
English: Guan Yu boasted that he had thirty thousand soldiers and horses. He personally selected five thousand elite soldiers and threw goods into the river to block the shallow waters more than ten miles upstream, saying that he planned to cross the river at night.

古文：肃与诸将议。
现代文：鲁肃与将领们商议对策。
English: Rusu discussed countermeasures with the generals.

古文：宁时有三百兵，乃曰： 可复以五百人益吾，吾往对之，保羽闻吾欬唾，不敢涉水，涉水即是吾禽。 肃便选千兵益宁，宁乃夜往。
现代文：甘宁当时有兵三百人，就说： 能否再给我增添五百人，我前去对付他，保证关羽一听到我咳唾之声，就不敢渡河，如他渡河就被我擒获。 鲁肃便择选一千人增添甘宁部队，甘宁就连夜赶往资水上游。
English: At that time, Gan Ning had three hundred soldiers, so he said: Can you give me another five hundred people, I will go to deal with him, to ensure that Guan Yu will not dare to cross the river as soon as he hears my coughing and spitting, if he crosses the river, he will be captured by me.

古文：羽闻之，住不渡，而结柴营，今遂名此处为关羽濑。
现代文：关羽得知甘宁赶到，就停止渡河行动，就地修造柴木营房，如今那地方就叫做 关羽濑 。
English: When Guan Yu learned that Gan Ning had arrived, he stopped crossing the river and built a wood barracks on the spot. Today, that place is called Guan Yu.

古文：权嘉宁功，拜西陵太守，领阳新、下雉两县。
现代文：孙权嘉赏甘宁的功绩，升任他为西陵太守，兼任阳新、下雉两县县令。
English: Sun Quan appreciated Ganning's achievements and promoted him to the position of the governor of Xiling, and he also served as the county magistrate of Yangxin County and the two counties of the Lower Yunnan Province.

古文：后从攻皖，为升城督。
现代文：后来甘宁跟随孙权进攻皖县，担任升城督。
English: Later, Ganning followed Sun Quan in the attack on Jixian County and served as the governor of the city.

古文：宁手持练，身缘城，为吏士先，卒破获朱光。
现代文：他手持练绳，亲自爬上城墙，身先士卒，终于攻破皖城抓获朱光。
English: Holding a training rope in his hand, he climbed the city wall himself, leading the way, and finally broke through the city and captured Zhu Guang.

古文：计功，吕蒙为最。宁次之，拜折冲将军。
现代文：战后计功，吕蒙第一，甘宁第二，被任命为折冲将军。
English: After the war, Lv Meng was appointed as the first and Gan Ning as the second to be promoted to the rank of General.

古文：后曹公出濡须，宁为前部督，受敕出斫敌前营。权特赐米酒众殽，宁乃料赐手下百馀人食。
现代文：后来曹操进军濡须，甘宁做为吴军前部督，奉命出兵斫砍敌人前营，孙权特给他赐赏米酒和很多菜肴，甘宁就将这些酒菜分给手下一百多人吃。
English: Later, Cao Cao marched into Wushu, and Ganning, as the commander of the front of the Wu army, was ordered to go out and cut down the enemy's front camp. Sun Quan specially rewarded him with rice wine and many dishes, and Ganning distributed these wines and dishes to more than a hundred people.

古文：食毕，宁先以银碗酌酒，自饮两碗，乃酌与其都督。都督伏，不肯时持。
现代文：吃完后，甘宁先用银酒碗斟酒，自饮了两碗，随后又倒酒递给部下都督，都督低下身子，不肯当即接过酒杯。
English: After eating, Ganning first poured the wine in a silver wine bowl, drank two bowls himself, and then poured the wine and handed it to his subordinate, the governor. The governor bent down and refused to immediately take the glass.

古文：宁引白削置膝上，呵谓之曰： 卿见知於至尊，孰与甘宁？
现代文：甘宁拿起一把雪亮的刀放在膝上，呵斥都督说： 你受到主上知遇，与甘宁相比怎样？
English: Ganning picked up a shiny sword and laid it on his lap, shouting at the governor and saying: You have been favored by the Lord, how do you compare to Ganning?

古文：甘宁尚不惜死，卿何以独惜死乎？ 都督见宁色厉，即起拜持酒，通酌兵各一银碗。
现代文：我甘宁尚且不怕死，你为什么独独怕死？ 都督见甘宁疾言厉色，立即起身拜谢接酒，全体兵士也全都各斟一碗酒。
English: I, Gan Ning, am not afraid of death, why are you afraid of death alone? The governor saw Gan Ning's harsh words and immediately got up to thank him for the drink, and all the soldiers also poured a bowl of wine each.

古文：至二更时，衔枚出斫敌。
现代文：到二更时分，众人口里衔着枚出动砍杀敌人。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, a group of people led by a woman set out to hack and kill the enemy.

古文：敌惊动，遂退。
现代文：敌军震动，就败退了。
English: The enemy was shaken and retreated.

古文：宁益贵重，增兵二千人。
现代文：甘宁更加受到人们的敬重，孙权给他增加两千士兵。
English: Ganning was more respected by the people, and Sun Quan gave him an additional two thousand soldiers.

古文：宁虽粗猛好杀，然开爽有计略，轻财敬士，能厚养健儿，健儿亦乐为用命。
现代文：甘宁虽然粗鲁凶猛好杀人，但性格开朗善于谋划，轻视钱财礼敬名士，能厚待英勇善战的官兵，这些官兵也乐于为他效命。
English: Although Ganning is rude, fierce and good at killing, he has a cheerful personality, is good at planning, despises money and honors celebrities, and can be kind to officers and soldiers who are brave and good at fighting. These officers and soldiers are also willing to serve him.

古文：建安二十年，从攻合肥，会疫疾，军旅皆已引出，唯车下虎士千馀人，并吕蒙、蒋钦、凌统及宁，从权逍遥津北。
现代文：建安二十年，他跟随孙权进攻合肥，适逢疾疫流行，军队都已退走，只有孙权车下虎士一千多人，以及吕蒙、蒋钦、凌统和甘宁，随从孙权在遥津的北岸。
English: In the 20th year of Jian'an, he followed Sun Quan to attack Hefei. At the time of the epidemic, the troops had all retreated. Only Sun Quan's car with more than a thousand tigers, as well as Lv Meng, Jiang Qin, Ling Tong and Ganning, followed Sun Quan on the north shore of Yao Jin.

古文：张辽觇望知之，即将步骑奄至。
现代文：张辽探查观望后知道吴军的实情，当即率领步、骑兵突然奔来。
English: Zhang Liao knew the true situation of the Wu army after inspecting and watching, and immediately led the cavalry to come suddenly.

古文：宁引弓射敌，与统等死战。
现代文：甘宁拉弓射敌，与凌统等殊死奋战。
English: Gan Ning drew his bow and shot the enemy, and fought desperately with Ling Tong and others.

古文：宁厉声问鼓吹何以不作，壮气毅然，权尤嘉之。
现代文：甘宁厉声问军中鼓吹手们为什么不奏军乐，豪壮之气刚毅凛然，孙权甚是嘉赏他。
English: Ganning asked the military trumpeters why they didn't play the military music, and Sun Quan was very appreciative.

古文：宁厨下儿曾有过，走投吕蒙。
现代文：甘宁厨中一个仆人曾犯有过错，逃走投靠吕蒙那儿。
English: A servant in Gan Ning's kitchen once made a mistake and ran away to stay with Lv Meng.

古文：蒙恐宁杀之，故不即还。
现代文：吕蒙怕甘宁把仆人杀死，所以没有立即送还。
English: Lv Meng was afraid that Ganning would kill the servant, so he did not immediately send him back.

古文：后宁赍礼礼蒙母，临当与升堂，乃出厨下儿还宁。
现代文：后来甘宁带着礼物来拜见吕蒙的母亲，临到将要与甘宁进入后堂时，吕蒙才将那个厨人送还甘宁。
English: Later, Ganning brought a gift to meet Lv Meng's mother, and it was only when he was about to enter the back hall with Ganning that Lv Meng returned the cook to Ganning.

古文：宁许蒙不杀。
现代文：甘宁答应吕蒙不杀那人。
English: Ganning promised Lv Meng not to kill the man.

古文：斯须还船，缚置桑树，自挽弓射杀之。
现代文：不久回到船上，甘宁将仆人绑在桑树上，亲自拉弓射杀了那个人。
English: Shortly after returning to the ship, Ganning tied his servant to a mulberry tree and shot the man himself with a bow.

古文：毕，敕船人更增舸缆，解衣卧船中。
现代文：事毕，甘宁命令船上人再增加几根船缆，自己脱衣躺在船上。
English: After that, Ganning ordered the crew to add a few more ropes and undressed himself on the boat.

古文：蒙大怒，击鼓会兵，欲就船攻宁。
现代文：吕蒙大怒，击鼓聚集部队，想到船上攻杀甘宁。
English: Lü Meng flew into a rage, beat the drum to gather troops, and thought of attacking and killing Ganning on the ship.

古文：宁闻之，故卧不起。
现代文：甘宁得知消息，故意躺着不起身。
English: When Ganning heard the news, he deliberately lay down and did not get up.

古文：蒙母徒跣出谏蒙曰： 至尊待汝如骨肉，属汝以大事，何有以私怒而欲攻杀甘宁？
现代文：吕蒙母亲赤着脚跑出来劝阻吕蒙说： 主上待你如同骨肉兄弟，将大事托付给你，怎么能因私人恩怨而想攻杀甘宁呢？
English: Lv Meng's mother ran out barefoot to dissuade Lv Meng and said, "The Lord treats you like a brother, entrusting you with important matters. How can you want to attack and kill Ganning because of a personal grudge?

古文：宁死之日，纵至尊不问，汝是为臣下非法。 蒙素至孝，闻母言，即豁然意释，自至宁船，笑呼之曰： 兴霸，老母待卿食，急上！ 宁涕泣歔欷曰： 负卿。 与蒙俱还见母，欢宴竟日。
现代文：甘宁被杀之后，纵然主上不责问你，你作为臣子这样做也是违背礼法的。 吕蒙素来极为孝顺，听了母亲的话，即豁然醒悟怒气消解，亲自来到甘宁的船前，笑着招呼甘宁： 兴霸，老母正等你吃饭，快上岸吧！ 甘宁流泪唏嘘地说： 我有负于您。 便与吕蒙一起回去拜见吕母，终日欢乐宴饮。
English: After Ganning was killed, even if the Lord did not reprimand you, it would be a violation of etiquette for you to do so as a courtier. Lü Meng had always been extremely filial, and he listened to his mother's words, that is, he suddenly realized that his anger had dissipated, and he personally came to Ganning's boat and greeted Ganning with a smile: Xingba, my mother is waiting for you to eat, let's go ashore! Ganning said with tears and lies: I have failed you. So he and Lü Meng went back to see Lü Meng, and feasted happily all day.

古文：宁卒，权痛惜之。
现代文：甘宁去世后，孙权非常痛惜。
English: After Ganning's death, Sun Quan was very sorry.

古文：子瑰，以罪徙会稽，无几死。
现代文：甘宁的儿子甘瑰，因犯罪迁居会稽，不久去世。
English: Gan Ning's son, Gan Kui, died soon after he was arrested for criminal association.

古文：凌统字公绩，吴郡馀杭人也。
现代文：凌统，字公绩，吴郡余杭县人。
English: Ling Tong, surnamed Gong Rong, from Yuhang County, Wuxi County.

古文：父操，轻侠有胆气，孙策初兴，每从征伐，常冠军履锋。
现代文：他的父亲凌操，轻壮侠气很有胆气。孙策初兴兵时，凌操常随他四处征战，常勇冠三军身先士卒。
English: His father, Ling Du, was a strong and courageous man. When Sun Ce was a young soldier, Ling Du often went to war with him. He was the most courageous soldier in the three armies.

古文：守永平长，平治山越，奸猾敛手，迁破贼校尉。
现代文：做了永平县县长，平定治理山越，奸猾之徒都收敛了手脚，升任破贼校尉。
English: He became the county magistrate of Yongping County, pacified the governance of Shan Yue, and the treacherous people all restrained their hands and feet, and was promoted to the captain of the thief.

古文：及权统军，从讨江夏。
现代文：等到孙权统率军队，凌操跟随孙权讨伐江夏。
English: When Sun Quan led the army, Ling Cao followed Sun Quan to fight against Jiangxia.

古文：入夏口，先登，破其前锋，轻舟独进，中流矢死。
现代文：攻入夏口时，凌操率先登岸，攻破敌人前锋，他独自驾驶小船前进，被流箭射中而死。
English: When he entered Xiakou, Ling Cao was the first to go ashore and broke through the enemy's advance. He drove a small boat alone and was shot by a stray arrow and died.

古文：统年十五，左右多称述者，权亦以操死国事，拜统别部司马，行破贼都尉，使摄父兵。
现代文：凌统十五岁，孙权身边大多都称赞他，孙权也因凌操为国战死，就任凌统为别部司马，代理破贼都尉，让他统管凌操的部队。
English: When Ling Tong was fifteen years old, most of the people around Sun Quan praised him. Sun Quan also died in the war for the country because of Ling Tong. He appointed Ling Tong as the Sima of the other department, the acting thief-busting captain, and let him control the troops of Ling Tong.

古文：后从击山贼，权破保屯先还，馀麻屯万人，统与督张异等留攻围之，克日当攻。
现代文：后跟随孙权攻打山越叛贼，孙权攻破保屯先行回朝，剩下麻屯一万敌军，凌统与都督张异等留下来继续包围攻打，并限定攻克期限。
English: After that, he followed Sun Quan to attack the rebels in Shan Yue. Sun Quan broke through Baotun and returned to the North first. There were 10,000 enemy troops left in Ma Tun. Ling Tong and the governor Zhang Yi stayed to continue the siege and attack, and set a time limit for the attack.

古文：先期，统与督陈勤会饮酒，勤刚勇任气，因督祭酒，陵轹一坐，举罚不以其道。
现代文：在此之前，凌统与都督陈勤一同饮酒，陈勤刚强放纵，以都督身份为祭酒欺压在座宾客，不按规矩罚酒。
English: Prior to this, Ling Tong and Governor Chen Qin had been drinking together. Chen Qin forcibly indulged, using his status as governor to bully the guests present with the sacrificial wine, and did not follow the rules to punish the wine.

古文：统疾其侮慢，面折不为用。
现代文：凌统愤恨陈勤的轻侮怠慢，当面驳回他的要求并拒绝他任祭酒。
English: Ling Tong took umbrage at Chen Qin's slight, dismissed his request to his face and refused to serve him the sacrificial wine.

古文：勤怒詈统，及其父操，统流涕不答，众因罢出。
现代文：陈勤怒骂凌统，甚至骂到他父亲凌操，凌统流泪不答，众人因此离席散去。
English: Chen Qin angrily scolded Ling Du, and even scolded his father Ling Du. Ling Du shed tears and did not answer, and the crowd dispersed.

古文：勤乘酒凶悖，又於道路辱统。
现代文：陈勤趁着醉酒行事凶狠狂悖，又在路上侮辱凌统。
English: Chen Qin took advantage of being drunk to behave in a violent and disorderly manner, and insulted Ling Dang on the road.

古文：统不忍，引刀斫勤，数日乃死。
现代文：凌统忍无可忍，拿刀砍伤陈勤，几天后陈勤死了。
English: Unable to bear it any longer, Ling Tong took a knife and slashed Chen Qin. A few days later, Chen Qin died.

古文：及当攻屯，统曰： 非死无以谢罪。 乃率厉士卒，身当矢石，所攻一面，应时披坏，诸将乘胜，遂大破之。
现代文：等到将要攻打麻屯时，凌统说： 我不战死无法谢罪！ 就督率激励将士，冒着箭石身先士卒，所攻打的一面，很快就被攻破，将领们乘胜进攻，最后大破敌军。
English: When it came time to attack Ma Tun, Ling Tong said, "I can't be forgiven if I don't die in battle!" So he led the commanders to inspire the soldiers, and risked his life to be the first to attack. The attacked side was quickly defeated, and the generals took advantage of the victory to attack, and finally defeated the enemy army.

古文：还，自拘於军正。
现代文：回师后，凌统将自己捆起来送到军正那里。
English: After returning to his division, Ling Tong tied himself up and sent him to the military headquarters.

古文：权壮其果毅，使得以功赎罪。
现代文：孙权认为他的果敢坚毅很是勇壮，让他将功赎罪。
English: Sun Quan thought that his courage and tenacity were very brave, and let him redeem his sins.

古文：后权复征江夏，统为前锋，与所厚健儿数十人共乘一船，常去大兵数十里。
现代文：后来孙权再次出征江夏，凌统做前锋，与他平日厚待的数十名勇猛将士共乘一条船，常常远离大部队几十里水路。
English: Later, Sun Quan once again went to fight in the Yangtze River and the Xia River, with Ling Tong as the vanguard, and he and the dozens of brave soldiers he usually treated generously shared a boat, often sailing dozens of miles away from the main army.

古文：行入右江，斩黄祖将张硕，尽获船人。
现代文：船行入右江，斩杀黄祖的将领张硕，将敌船上的人尽数俘虏。
English: The ship sailed into the Yu River, killed the general Zhang Shuo of Huang Zu, and captured as many people as possible on the enemy ship.

古文：还以白权，引军兼道，水陆并集。
现代文：凌统返回上报孙权，孙权率领大军日夜兼行，水陆并进。
English: Ling Tong returned to report to Sun Quan. Sun Quan led a large army and marched day and night, marching on land and sea.

古文：时吕蒙败其水军，而统先搏其城，於是大获。
现代文：当时吕蒙攻破敌人水军，而凌统又先占领城池，于是大获全胜。
English: At that time, Lü Meng defeated the enemy's navy, while Ling Tong occupied the city first, and thus won a complete victory.

古文：权以统为承烈都尉，与周瑜等拒破曹公於乌林，遂攻曹仁，迁为校尉。
现代文：孙权任命凌统为承烈都尉，与周瑜等在乌林抗击并攻破曹操，随后攻打曹仁，被升为校尉。
English: Sun Quan appointed Ling Tong as Captain Cheng Lie, and together with Zhou Yu and others, he fought against and defeated Cao Cao in Wulin, and then attacked Cao Ren, and was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：虽在军旅，亲贤接士，轻财重义，有国士之风。
现代文：凌统虽在军旅之中，但他亲近礼待贤士，轻财重义，颇有国士风范。
English: Although Ling Tong was on a military trip, he was close to and treated the sages with courtesy. He valued wealth more than justice, and had the demeanor of a statesman.

古文：又从破皖，拜荡寇中郎将，领沛相。
现代文：他又跟随孙权占据皖县，被任命为荡寇中郎将，兼任沛相。
English: He also followed Sun Quan to occupy Jixian County and was appointed as the leader of the band of robbers. He also served as Pei's minister.

古文：与吕蒙等西取三郡，反自益阳，从往合肥，为右部督。
现代文：凌统与吕蒙等向西攻取三郡，从益阳回军，又随从孙权奔赴合肥，做为右部督。
English: Ling Tong and Lv Meng conquered three counties in the west, returned to the army from Yiyang, and followed Sun Quan to Hefei as the governor of the Right Division.

古文：时权彻军，前部已发，魏将张辽等奄至津北。
现代文：当时孙权撤军，前头部队已经出发，魏国将军张辽等突然杀到逍遥津北面。
English: At that time, Sun Quan was withdrawing his army, the front troops had already set off, and the Wei general Zhang Liao and others suddenly arrived in the north of Xiaoyangjin.

古文：权使追还前兵，兵去已远，势不相及，统率亲近三百人陷围，扶扞权出。
现代文：孙权派人去追回先锋部队，但大军已走远，情况紧急来不及赶回救援，凌统率领亲近士兵三百人冲入敌军重围，掩护孙权突围。
English: Sun Quan sent someone to recover the vanguard troops, but the large army had already gone far away, and the situation was too urgent to rush back for rescue. Ling Tong led three hundred close soldiers to rush into the enemy's encirclement and cover Sun Quan's breakthrough.

古文：敌已毁桥，桥之属者两版，权策马驱驰，统复还战，左右尽死，身亦被创，所杀数十人，度权已免，乃还。
现代文：敌军已破坏河桥，桥面上仅有两块木板，孙权策马疾奔过桥，凌统返回战场杀敌，身边人全部战死，他自身也身受刀伤，但还杀死了几十个敌兵，估计孙权已经逃脱，他才抽身返回。
English: The enemy army had destroyed the river bridge, and there were only two planks on the bridge. Sun Quan galloped across the bridge with his horse, and Ling Tong returned to the battlefield to kill the enemy. All the people around him died in the battle. He himself was also wounded by a knife, but he also killed dozens of enemy soldiers. It was estimated that Sun Quan had escaped, and he only withdrew to return.

古文：桥败路绝，统被甲潜行。
现代文：但桥被损毁道路断绝，凌统只得身穿盔甲潜水离开。
English: However, the bridge was damaged and the road was cut off, and Ling Tong had to dive out wearing armor.

古文：权既御船，见之惊喜。
现代文：孙权赶到御船后，见到凌统非常惊喜。
English: After Sun Quan arrived at the ship, he was very surprised to see Ling Tong.

古文：统痛亲近无反者，悲不自胜。
现代文：凌统痛心自己的亲兵无一生还，悲伤欲绝。
English: Ling Tong was heartbroken that none of his soldiers survived. He was overwhelmed with grief.

古文：权引袂拭之，谓曰： 公绩，亡者已矣，苟使卿在，何患无人？ 拜偏将军，倍给本兵。
现代文：孙权拉着自己的衣袖为凌统擦泪，对他说： 公绩，死的已经死了，只要您还活着，何患无人？ 就任命他为偏将军，加倍增添他的亲近士兵。
English: Sun Quan tugged at his sleeve to wipe away tears for Ling Tong and said to him: "Public service, dead is dead, as long as you are still alive, how can you hurt anyone?" He appointed him as a vice-general and doubled the number of his close soldiers.

古文：时有荐同郡盛暹於权者，以为梗概大节，有过於统，权曰： 且令如统足矣。 后召暹夜至，时统已卧，闻之，摄衣出门，执其手以入。
现代文：当时有人向孙权举荐凌统同郡人盛暹，认为盛暹应对各种重大事情，有超过凌统之处，孙权说： 只要他能像凌统那样就足够了。 后来征召盛暹夜里前来，当时凌统已经睡下，得知后，披着衣服外出房门，拉着盛暹的手进屋。
English: At that time, someone recommended to Sun Quan that Ling Tong and Sheng Siem, who was from the county, should deal with various important matters. Sun Quan thought that Sheng Siem was superior to Ling Tong. Sun Quan said, "As long as he can be like Ling Tong, that's enough." Later, he summoned Sheng Siem to come in the night, when Ling Tong had already fallen asleep. After learning this, he went out of the door with his clothes on and took Sheng Siem's hand to enter the house.

古文：其爱善不害如此。
现代文：凌统就是如此爱惜能人而无妒忌之心。
English: Ling Tong is so fond of people without jealousy.

古文：统以山中人尚多壮悍，可以威恩诱也，权令东占且讨之，命敕属城，凡统所求，皆先给后闻。
现代文：凌统认为山中人还有不少强壮剽悍者，可用恩威并施招诱他们，孙权就命令他往东占领土地并征讨那些山里人，又下令各所属的州郡官员，凡是凌统所需物品，都要先提供给他然后再上报。
English: Sun Quan ordered him to go east to occupy the land and recruit those mountain people, and ordered the state and county officials to provide him with all the necessary items before reporting to him.

古文：统素爱士，士亦慕焉。
现代文：凌统素来爱惜士卒，将士们也都敬慕他。
English: Ling Tong always cherished his soldiers, and the soldiers also admired him.

古文：得精兵万馀人，过本县，步入寺门，见长吏怀三版，恭敬尽礼，亲旧故人，恩意益隆。
现代文：他得到精兵一万多，路过自己家长县城，就入县衙大门，见官长们持着三版官笏，恭敬相待礼节到位，亲旧朋友，恩情更深。
English: He got more than ten thousand elite soldiers, passed through the county seat of his parents, entered the county gate, saw the officials holding three versions of the official seal, treated each other with respect and etiquette in place, and was close to old friends, and his gratitude was deeper.

古文：事毕当出，会病卒，时年四十九。
现代文：处理完事务将要启程，碰巧因病去世，时年四十九岁。
English: He was about to leave after settling his affairs when he died of an illness at the age of 49.

古文：权闻之，拊床起坐，哀不能自止，数日减膳，言及流涕，使张承为作铭诔。
现代文：孙权得知后，捶床坐起，悲哀无法自制，几天都减少了饭量，一谈到他就泪流满面，令张承为凌统作了祭文和铭文。
English: After Sun Quan learned of this, he sat up in bed, unable to control his grief, and reduced the amount of food he ate for several days. As soon as he talked about it, he burst into tears, and ordered Zhang Cheng to make an offering and inscription for Ling Tong.

古文：二子烈、封，年各数岁，权内养於宫，爱待与诸子同，宾客进见，呼示之曰： 此吾虎子也。 及八九岁，令葛光教之读书，十日一令乘马，追录统功，封烈亭侯，还其故兵。
现代文：凌统的两个儿子凌烈、凌封，年龄只有几岁。孙权将他们带到宫内抚养，对他们爱护相待如同自己的几个儿子，每有宾客进见，便招呼他俩让客人看，并说： 这是我的虎子！ 等到八九岁时，让葛光教授他们读书，十天让他们练习骑马一次。孙权追述凌统功劳，封凌烈为亭侯，归还他父亲生前的部队。
English: Ling Rong's two sons, Ling Rong and Ling Feng, were only a few years old. Sun Quan brought them to the palace and raised them, treating them with love and care as if they were his own sons. Whenever a guest came in, he would greet them and show them to the guests, saying, "This is my tiger cub! Wait until they are eight or nine years old, let Ge Guang teach them to read, and let them practice riding a horse for ten days. Sun Quan recounted the merits of Ling Rong, made Feng Ling Rong the prince, and returned his father's troops.

古文：后烈有罪免，封复袭爵领兵。
现代文：后来凌烈因罪被免去爵位和职位，又让凌封袭爵统兵。
English: Later, Ling Rong was stripped of his title and position for his crime, and he was also stripped of his title as a general.

古文：徐盛字文向，琅邪莒人也。
现代文：徐盛，字文向，琅王牙郡莒县人。
English: Xu Sheng, Zhiwen Xiang, from Wangya County, Shandong Province.

古文：遭乱，客居吴，以勇气闻。
现代文：遭逢祸乱，客居吴地，以勇气闻名。
English: After encountering misfortune and turmoil, he lived as a guest in Wudi and became famous for his courage.

古文：孙权统事，以为别部司马，授兵五百人，守柴桑长，拒黄祖。
现代文：孙权掌管国事，以徐盛为别部司马，授予五百士兵，任柴桑县县长，抗击黄祖。
English: Sun Quan was in charge of state affairs, with Xu Sheng as the secretary of other departments, awarded five hundred soldiers, appointed as the governor of Chaisang County, and fought against Huang Zu.

古文：祖子射，尝率数千人下攻盛。
现代文：黄祖的儿子黄射，曾率领几千人顺流而下进攻徐盛。
English: Huang Zu's son, Huang Ya, once led several thousand people down the river to attack Xu Sheng.

古文：盛时吏士不满二百，与相拒击，伤射吏士千馀人。
现代文：当时徐盛的将士不足二百，抵御敌人进击，杀伤黄射一千多士兵。
English: At that time, Xu Sheng's soldiers were less than two hundred, resisting the enemy's attack and killing and wounding more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：已乃开门出战，大破之。
现代文：随后大开城门出战，大败黄射。
English: Subsequently, the city gate was opened wide and they went out to fight, but they were soundly defeated.

古文：射遂绝迹不复为寇。
现代文：黄射从此绝迹不再侵扰。
English: Since then, yellow fever has become extinct and is no longer an infestation.

古文：权以为校尉、芜湖令。
现代文：孙权以徐盛为校尉、芜湖县县令。
English: Sun Quan made Xu Sheng a school lieutenant and the county magistrate of Wuhu County.

古文：复讨临城南阿山贼有功，徙中郎将，督校兵。
现代文：徐盛又因征讨临城南阿山越贼寇有功，升任中郎将，督领校兵。
English: Xu Sheng was also promoted to the position of vice-commander and superintendent of the school soldiers for his contribution to the subjugation of the Lincheng South Ashan Yue bandits.

古文：曹公出濡须，从权御之。
现代文：曹操进军濡须，徐盛随从孙权前往抵御。
English: Cao Cao marched into Wushu, and Xu Sheng followed Sun Quan to resist.

古文：魏尝大出横江，盛与诸将俱赴讨。
现代文：魏军曾大举出兵横江，徐盛和将领们一同奔赴征讨。
English: The Wei army had sent troops to Hengjiang on a large scale, and Xu Sheng and his generals went to the battle together.

古文：时乘蒙冲，遇迅风，船落敌岸下，诸将恐惧，未有出者，盛独将兵，上突斫敌，敌披退走，有所伤杀，风止便还，权大壮之。
现代文：当时他们乘着蒙冲战舰，遭遇急速大风，船只漂到敌方岸边，将领们都很惊恐，没有敢出船的，徐盛独自率兵，上岸突袭砍杀敌人，敌人败退逃走，杀伤了不少人，风停后，徐盛部队就乘船返回，孙权认为他很是勇猛。
English: At that time, they were on the Mengchong warship, encountered a rapid gale, the ship drifted to the enemy's shore, the generals were very frightened, did not dare to leave the ship, Xu Sheng alone led the soldiers, went ashore to raid and kill the enemy, the enemy retreated and fled, killing and wounding many people, after the wind stopped, Xu Sheng's troops returned by boat, Sun Quan thought he was very brave.

古文：及权为魏称藩，魏使邢贞拜权为吴王。
现代文：等到孙权向魏国藩属称臣时，魏国使者邢贞来吴授予孙权吴王称号。
English: While Sun Quan was praising his vassal to the Wei clan, the Wei emissary Yu Zhen came to Wu to confer the title of King of Wu on Sun Quan.

古文：权出都亭候贞，贞有骄色，张昭既怒，而盛忿愤，顾谓同列曰： 盛等不能奋身出命，为国家并许洛，吞巴蜀，而令吾君与贞盟，不亦辱乎！ 因涕泣横流。
现代文：孙权出京到都亭迎接邢贞，邢贞脸色骄矜，张昭已发怒，而徐盛更为愤恨，他转头对同列官员说： 我等不能奋身作战，为国夺得许、洛之地，吞并巴、蜀之邦，导致我们国君与邢贞盟誓，不也是耻辱吗？ 说完泣涕而下。
English: Sun Quan went to Beijing to meet Yu Zhen at Du Ting. Yu Zhen's face was proud, Zhang Zhao was already angry, and Xu Sheng was even more indignant. He turned to the same officials and said: "Isn't it a shame that we can't fight for the country, seize the land of Xu and Luo, annex the states of Ba and Shu, and cause our sovereign to swear an oath with Yu Zhen? After saying that, weep and go down.

古文：贞闻之，谓其旅曰： 江东将相如此，非久下人者也。 ，
现代文：邢贞得知后，便对随从们说： 江东有这样的将相，不会长久居于人下。 
English: When Yu Zhen learned of this, she said to her followers: "The Kiangdong has such a future, it will not live under the people for long.

古文：后迁建武将军，封都亭侯，领庐江太守，赐临城县为奉邑。
现代文：徐盛后来升任建武将军，封为都亭侯，兼任庐江太守，被赐临城县为封邑。
English: Later, Xu Sheng was promoted to General Jianwu, given the title of Du Ting Hou, concurrently served as the governor of the Minjiang River, and was given Lincheng County as a fief.

古文：刘备次西陵，盛攻取诸屯，所向有功。
现代文：刘备出兵西陵，徐盛夺取他很多营地，每到一地都立有战功。
English: Liu Bei sent troops to Xiling, and Xu Sheng captured many of his camps. Each place he went to, he made war achievements.

古文：曹休出洞口，盛与吕范、全琮渡江拒守。
现代文：曹休进兵洞口，徐盛与吕范、全琮渡江拒守。
English: Cao Xiu marched into Dongkou, while Xu Sheng, Lv Fan and Quanzhang refused to cross the river.

古文：遭大风，船人多丧，盛收馀兵，与休夹江。
现代文：遭遇大风，船上士兵大多丧命，徐盛聚集剩下士兵，与曹休隔江对峙。
English: Encountering high winds, most of the soldiers on board were killed. Xu Sheng gathered the remaining soldiers and confronted Cao Xiu across the river.

古文：休使兵将就船攻盛，盛以少御多，敌不能克，各引军退。
现代文：曹休派兵将上船攻打徐盛，徐盛以少敌多，敌军没有攻克，各自率军退还。
English: Cao Xiu sent soldiers to board the ship to attack Xu Sheng. Xu Sheng used the principle of "less is more." The enemy army was not defeated, and each of them led the army back.

古文：迁安东将军，封芜湖侯。
现代文：徐盛升任安东将军，封为芜湖侯。
English: Xu Sheng was promoted to the rank of General Anton and appointed as the Marquis of Wuhu.

古文：后魏文帝大出，有渡江之志，盛建计从建业筑围，作薄落，围上设假楼，江中浮船。
现代文：后来魏文帝大举出兵，有渡过长江的想法，徐盛献计从建业修筑围墙，建藩篱，围墙上设置假城楼，江中停浮战船。
English: Later, Emperor Weiwen dispatched a large number of troops and had the idea of crossing the Yangtze River. Xu Sheng proposed to build a wall from the construction industry, build a fence, set up a fake city tower on the wall, and stop the floating warships in the river.

古文：诸将以为无益，盛不听，固立之。
现代文：诸将认为这样做没用，徐盛不听，坚持实施。
English: The generals thought it was useless to do so, but Xu Sheng did not listen and insisted on carrying it out.

古文：文帝到广陵，望围愕然，弥漫数百里，而江水盛长，便引军退。
现代文：魏文帝到达广陵，望见围墙很是惊愕，围墙延续数百里，而江水又正在猛涨，就率军退回。
English: When Emperor Wei Wen reached Guangling, he was very surprised to see the enclosure wall. The enclosure wall extended for hundreds of miles, and the river water was rising sharply. He led the army back.

古文：诸将乃伏。
现代文：众将这才服气。
English: The general public will only be convinced by this.

古文：黄武中卒。
现代文：徐盛在黄武年间去世。
English: Xu Sheng died in the Huangwu Dynasty.

古文：子楷，袭爵领兵。
现代文：他的儿子徐楷，承袭爵位、统兵。
English: His son, Xu Kai, inherited the title of nobility and became a general.

古文：潘璋字文珪，东郡发干人也。
现代文：潘璋，字文王圭，东郡发干县人。
English: Pan Jun, alias Wen Wang Gui, from Fanggan County, Dong County.

古文：孙权为阳羡长，始往随权。
现代文：孙权做阳羡县县长时，他开始前往随从孙权。
English: When Sun Quan was the governor of Yangzi County, he began to follow Sun Quan.

古文：性博荡嗜酒，居贫，好赊酤，债家至门，辄言后豪富相还。
现代文：潘璋生性放纵，嗜好饮酒，家中贫困，喜欢赊酒喝，债主上门讨债，他总说等富贵以后再还钱。
English: Pan Xuan Rong is sexually indulgent, has a penchant for drinking, his family is poor, he likes to drink alcohol, and creditors come to his door to collect debts. He always says that he will pay back the money when he is rich.

古文：权奇爱之，因使召募，得百馀人，遂以为将。
现代文：孙权认为他很奇特，很看重他，就让他招募士兵，得到一百多人，孙权就任命他为将领统兵。
English: Sun Quan thought he was very special and valued him very much, so he asked him to recruit soldiers and get more than a hundred people, and Sun Quan appointed him as a general.

古文：讨山贼有功，署别部司马。
现代文：他因征讨山贼立下功劳，代行别部司马一职。
English: He was commended for his efforts to capture the bandits, and was appointed to the post of deputy head of another department.

古文：后为吴大巿刺奸，盗贼断绝，由是知名，迁豫章西安长。
现代文：后来为吴地的大集市铲除奸邪，盗贼从此无踪，他也由此而闻名，升为豫章郡西安县县长。
English: Later, he eradicated the evil of adultery for the large bazaar in Wudi, and the thief disappeared without a trace. He became famous for this, and was promoted to the county head of Yuanzhang County, Xi'an County.

古文：刘表在荆州，民数被寇，自璋在事，寇不入境。
现代文：刘表在荆州时，百姓多次遭受侵扰，自潘璋在此处任职以来，贼寇再也不侵入边境。
English: When Liu Biao was in Jingzhou, the people were harassed many times. Since Pan Ye took office here, the bandits have never invaded the border.

古文：比县建昌起为贼乱，转领建昌，加武猛校尉，讨治恶民，旬月尽平，召合遗散，得八百人，将还建业。
现代文：邻县建昌强盗兴起作乱，潘璋转任建昌县县令，加授武猛校尉，攻打惩治凶恶之人，一个月内便尽数平定，他召集流亡散逸的百姓，得到八百人，带领这些人返还建业。
English: The bandits in the neighboring county of Jianchang rose up and started a riot. Pan Yu was transferred to the position of the county magistrate of Jianchang County, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Wu Meng. He attacked and punished the evil-doers. Within a month, he had subdued all of them. He gathered the exiled and dispersed people, got eight hundred people, and led these people back to Jianye.

古文：合肥之役，张辽奄至，诸将不备，陈武斗死，宋谦、徐盛皆披走，璋身次在后，便驰进，横马斩谦、盛兵走者二人，兵皆还战。
现代文：合肥战役，魏国将领张辽突然赶到，东吴将领们没有防备。陈武战死，宋谦、徐盛都战败逃走，潘璋处在队伍后头，便策马奔前，横马斩杀两名宋谦、徐盛军中的逃兵，士兵都返回战场。
English: In the Battle of Hefei, the Wei general Zhang Liao suddenly arrived, and the Eastern Wu generals were unprepared. Chen Wu was killed in the battle, Song Qian and Xu Sheng were defeated and fled, Pan Yu was at the back of the line, and he ran forward and killed two deserters from Song Qian and Xu Sheng's army. The soldiers all returned to the battlefield.

古文：权甚壮之，拜偏将军，遂领百校，屯半州。
现代文：孙权很是看重，任命他为偏将军，于是率领百校队伍，驻守半州。
English: Sun Quan thought highly of him and appointed him as a partial general, so he led a hundred-school team and stationed in Hanzhou.

古文：权征关羽，璋与朱然断羽走道，到临沮，住夹石。
现代文：孙权讨伐关羽，潘璋与朱然截断关羽的后路，大军行进到临沮，驻扎在夹石。
English: Sun Quan fought Guan Yu, Pan Zheng and Zhu Ran cut off Guan Yu's back route, and the army marched to Lingshui and stationed in Jiaishi.

古文：璋部下司马马忠禽羽，并羽子平、都督赵累等。
现代文：潘璋部下司马马忠活捉了关羽、关羽儿子关平以及都督赵累等人。
English: Pan Xuan's subordinate, Ma Ma Zhong, captured Guan Yu, Guan Yu's son Guan Ping, and the governor Zhao Lei.

古文：权即分宜都巫、秭归二县为固陵郡，拜璋为太守、振威将军，封溧阳侯。
现代文：孙权随即将宜都郡的巫县和秭归两个县分为固陵郡，任命潘璋为郡太守、振威将军，封为溧阳侯。
English: Sun Quan then divided the two counties of Wuxian and Yugu in Yidu County into Guling County, appointed Pan Yu as the governor of the county, Zhen Wei as the general, and made him the marquis of Poyang.

古文：甘宁卒，又并其军。
现代文：甘宁去世后，潘璋收编了他的部队。
English: After Ganning's death, Pan Xuan reorganized his troops.

古文：刘备出夷陵，璋与陆逊并力拒之，璋部下斩备护军冯习等，所杀伤甚众，拜平北将军、襄阳太守。
现代文：刘备进军夷陵，潘璋与陆逊共同抵御，潘璋的部下斩杀刘备的护军都尉冯习等人，杀伤了很多蜀军将士。潘璋被任命为平北将军、襄阳太守。
English: Liu Bei marched into Yiling, Pan Zheng and Lu Xun jointly resisted, Pan Zheng's subordinates killed Liu Bei's escort captain Feng Xi and others, and killed and wounded many Shu soldiers. Pan Zheng was appointed the general of Pingbei and the governor of Xiangyang.

古文：魏将夏侯尚等围南郡，分前部三万人作浮桥，渡百里洲上，诸葛瑾、杨粲并会兵赴救，未知所出，而魏兵日渡不绝。
现代文：魏国将领夏侯尚等围攻南郡，分派先锋部队三万人架浮桥，渡江到百里洲上，诸葛瑾、杨粲一起聚集部队赶赴救援，但不知向何处进军，而魏军每日接连渡江。
English: The Wei generals Xia Hou Shang and others besieged Nan County, and dispatched a vanguard force of 30,000 men to build a pontoon bridge and cross the river to Baizhou. Zhuge Liang and Yang Liang gathered troops together to rush to the rescue, but they did not know where to march, while the Wei army crossed the river one after another every day.

古文：璋曰： 魏势始盛，江水又浅，未可与战。 便将所领，到魏上流五十里，伐苇数百万束，缚作大筏，欲顺流放火，烧败浮桥。
现代文：潘璋说： 魏军气势正盛，江水又浅，不可与之交战。 就率领自己的队伍，前往魏军上游五十里地，砍伐几百万束芦苇，捆在一起扎成大筏，打算放火顺流而下，烧掉浮桥。
English: Pan Zhe said: The Wei army is in full swing, the river is shallow, and it is impossible to fight with it. He led his team to the upper reaches of the Wei army for fifty miles, cut down millions of reeds, tied them together into large rafts, and planned to set fire to the river and burn the pontoon bridge.

古文：作筏適毕，伺水长当下，尚便引退。
现代文：大筏刚扎完毕，等候水涨就放筏，夏侯尚就率军撤走。
English: As soon as the large rafts were tied up, the rafts were released while waiting for the water to rise, and Xia Hou Shang led the army to withdraw.

古文：璋下备陆口。
现代文：潘璋到下游防守陆口。
English: Pan Yu went downstream to defend the land port.

古文：权称尊号，拜右将军。
现代文：孙权登基后，任命潘璋为右将军。
English: After Sun Quan ascended to the throne, he appointed Pan Ye as the right general.

古文：璋为人粗猛，禁令肃然，好立功业，所领兵马不过数千，而其所在常如万人。
现代文：潘璋为人粗鲁勇猛，军中法令严整，他喜好建立功业，所带领的兵马只有几千人，而他所到之处常常像有上万士兵。
English: Pan Xuan was a rough and tough man. The military regulations were very strict. He liked to build achievements. The soldiers and horses he led were only a few thousand, but everywhere he went, it often seemed like there were tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：征伐止顿，便立军巿，他军所无，皆仰取足。
现代文：征战驻扎，就在军营中设立市场，其他军队没有的东西，都仰赖他的军内市场补足。
English: He set up a market in the military camp when he was stationed there. He relied on the military market to supplement what other armies did not have.

古文：然性奢泰，末年弥甚，服物僣拟。
现代文：但他性格奢靡挥霍，晚年更加严重，衣着器用都超越本分，与位高者攀比。
English: However, his character was extravagant and profligate, which became more serious in his later years. His use of clothing and utensils exceeded his duty and was comparable to that of a high-ranking person.

古文：吏兵富者，或杀取其财物，数不奉法。
现代文：将士之中富有的人，有的被他杀死夺走财物，多次不遵守律令。
English: Some of the rich soldiers he killed and robbed of their property repeatedly disobeyed his orders.

古文：监司举奏，权惜其功而辄原不问。
现代文：监察官员们上报他的行为，孙权总是看重他的功劳而原谅他没有责问。
English: The supervising officials reported his behavior, and Sun Quan always valued his merits and forgave him for not reprimanding him.

古文：嘉禾三年卒。
现代文：嘉禾三年，潘璋去世。
English: Three years after the founding of Jiahe, Pan Jun died.

古文：子平，以无行徙会稽。
现代文：他的儿子潘平，因言行无状被流放会稽。
English: His son, Pan Ping, was banished from the party for words and deeds without a warrant.

古文：璋妻居建业，赐田宅，复客五十家。
现代文：潘璋的妻子居住在建业，朝廷赐给她田地房宅，又赐免除赋役的佃客五十家。
English: Pan Zheng's wife lived in Jianye, and the court gave her a farmhouse and a house, and also granted exemption from service to fifty of her clients.

古文：丁奉字承渊，庐江安丰人也。
现代文：丁奉，字承渊，庐江郡安丰县人。
English: Ding Bong, surnamed Chengyuan, from Anfeng County, Minjiang County.

古文：少以骁勇为小将，属甘宁、陆逊、潘璋等。
现代文：他年少时因骁勇作了军中小将，隶属于甘宁、陆逊、潘璋等人部下。
English: When he was young, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general for his bravery, and was subordinate to the likes of Ganning, Lu Xun and Pan Ye.

古文：数随征伐，战斗常冠军。
现代文：他多次跟随他们征战，战场上常常勇冠全军。
English: He followed them into battle many times, often leading the entire army on the battlefield.

古文：每斩将搴旗，身被创夷。
现代文：每每斩将拔旗，身受创伤。
English: Every time the flag was raised, I was traumatized.

古文：稍迁偏将军。
现代文：聊聊升为偏将军。
English: He was promoted to vice-general.

古文：孙亮即位，为冠军将军，封都亭侯。
现代文：孙亮即位称帝后，丁奉为冠军将军，封为都亭侯。
English: After Sun Liang was enthroned as emperor, Ding Bong became the champion general and was given the title of duke.

古文：魏遣诸葛诞、胡遵等攻东兴，诸葛恪率军拒之。
现代文：魏国派诸葛诞、胡遵等人进攻东兴，诸葛恪率军抵御。
English: Wei sent Zhuge Zi, Hu Zun and others to attack Dongxing, and Zhuge Ke led the army to resist.

古文：诸将皆曰： 敌闻太傅自来，上岸必遁走。 奉独曰： 不然。
现代文：诸位将领都说： 敌军得知太傅亲自前来，上岸后一定会逃走。 只有丁奉说： 不是这样！
English: All the generals said, "If the enemy knew that Taifu had come in person, they would certainly flee after coming ashore." Only Ding Feng said, "That's not true!"

古文：彼动其境内，悉许、洛兵大举而来，必有成规，岂虚还哉？
现代文：敌人动员了全国的力量，调集许昌、洛阳的全部军队大举而来，必定有完整计划，岂能空手而归？
English: The enemy has mobilized the strength of the whole country, mobilized the entire army of Xuchang and Luoyang, and must have a complete plan. Can they return empty-handed?

古文：无恃敌之不至，恃吾有以胜之。 及恪上岸，奉与将军唐咨、吕据、留赞等，俱从山西上。
现代文：不要依赖于敌人不来，而要依靠我们能够获胜的有利之处。 等到诸葛恪上岸，丁奉和将军唐咨、吕据、留赞等都从山下转而向西。
English: Don't rely on the enemy not to come, but rely on the advantages that we can win.Wait until Zhuge cormorants come ashore, Ding Bong and generals Tang Zi, Lv Zi, Ruizan, etc. all turn westward from the foot of the mountain.

古文：奉曰： 今诸军行迟，若敌据便地，则难与争锋矣。 乃辟诸军使下道，帅麾下三千人径进。
现代文：丁奉说： 现在各军行进迟缓，如果敌人占据有利地势，就难与他们争锋了。 就排开各军让出道路，率领自己部下三千人径直奔前。
English: Ding Feng said, "Right now, all the armies are marching slowly, and if the enemy occupies a favorable position, it will be difficult to fight with them." He lined up all the armies to give way, and led 3,000 of his subordinates straight ahead.

古文：时北风，奉举帆二日至，遂据徐塘。
现代文：当时正刮北风，丁奉扬帆两天就到了，随后占据徐塘。
English: At that time, the north wind was blowing, and Ding Feng arrived after two days of sailing, and then occupied Xutang.

古文：天寒雪，敌诸将置酒高会，奉见其前部兵少，相谓曰： 取封侯爵赏，正在今日！ 乃使兵解铠著胄，持短兵。
现代文：天冷下雪，敌军将领正摆酒宴饮享乐，丁奉看到敌人先锋部队兵少，就对将士们说： 夺得封侯爵位和赏赐，就在今天了！ 就让士卒解甲戴盔，手持短器。
English: It was a cold and snowy day, and the enemy generals were feasting and drinking. When Ding Feng saw that the enemy's vanguard troops were few, he said to the soldiers: "Today is the day to win the marquis title and reward!" He asked the soldiers to take off their armor, wear helmets, and hold short weapons.

古文：敌人从而笑焉，不为设备。
现代文：敌人放纵笑谈，没有防备。
English: The enemy indulges in chatter and is unprepared.

古文：奉纵兵斫之，大破敌前屯。
现代文：丁奉纵兵尽力砍杀，大破敌军先头部队的营寨。
English: Ding Feng's soldiers tried their best to cut and kill, and the camp of the enemy's leading troops was completely destroyed.

古文：会据等至，魏军遂溃。
现代文：正值吕据等人赶到，魏军溃败四散。
English: Just as Lü Zhi and others arrived, the Wei army was defeated and scattered.

古文：迁灭寇将军，进封都乡侯。
现代文：丁奉升任灭寇将军，晋爵为都乡侯。
English: Ding Feng was promoted to the general of exterminating the kangaroos, and he was promoted to the peerage as the mayor of the capital.

古文：魏将文钦来降，以奉为虎威将军，从孙峻至寿春迎之，与敌追军战於高亭。
现代文：魏国将军文钦前来投降，朝廷任命丁奉为虎威将军，跟随孙峻前往寿春迎接文钦，与敌人的追兵在高亭交战。
English: The Wei general Wenqin came to surrender, the imperial court appointed Ding Feng as the general of the tiger, followed Sun Jun to Shuchun to meet Wenqin, and fought with the enemy's pursuers in Gaoting.

古文：奉跨马持矛，突入其陈中，斩首数百，获其军器。
现代文：丁奉骑马手持长矛，冲入战场，斩杀数百人，缴获敌军兵器。
English: Riding a horse and holding a spear, Ding Feng rushed into the battlefield, slaughtered hundreds of people, and captured the enemy's weapons.

古文：进封安丰侯。
现代文：被晋封为安丰侯。
English: He was promoted to Anfeng Marquis.

古文：太平二年，魏大将军诸葛诞据寿春来降，魏人围之。
现代文：太平二年，魏国大将军诸葛诞据守寿春前来投降，魏军围攻寿春。
English: In the second year of the Taiping era, the great general of the Wei State, Zhu Gezheng, came to surrender to Shuchun, and the Wei army besieged Shuchun.

古文：遣朱异、唐咨等往救，复使奉与黎斐解围。
现代文：东吴派遣朱异、唐咨等赶赴援救，再派丁奉与黎斐前往解围。
English: Dongwu dispatched Zhu Rong, Tang Zhe and others to rush to the rescue, and then sent Ding Feng and Li Fei to relieve the siege.

古文：奉为先登，屯於黎浆，力战有功，拜左将军。
现代文：丁奉先到，在黎浆驻扎，殊死奋战立下战功，升任左将军。
English: Ding Bong arrived first, stationed in Li Pulp, fought hard and distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted to General Zuo.

古文：孙休即位，与张布谋，欲诛孙綝，布曰： 丁奉虽不能吏书，而计略过人，能断大事。 休召奉告曰： 綝秉国威，将行不轨，欲与将军诛之。 奉曰： 丞相兄弟友党甚盛，恐人心不同，不可卒制，可因腊会，有陛下兵以诛之也。 休纳其计，因会请綝，奉与张布目左右斩之。
现代文：孙休称帝后，与张布谋划，想诛杀孙綝。张布说： 丁奉虽不能撰写公文，但计谋胆略过人，能决断大事。 孙休召见丁奉并告诉他： 孙綝把持朝政，将有不轨行径，希望和将军一起诛杀他。 丁奉说： 丞相兄弟的友党很多，恐怕人心各异，不可突然控制，可以借腊祭之会，以陛下的卫兵诛杀他。 孙休听取他的计谋，借腊祭之会请孙綝前来，丁奉与张布用眼神示意左右兵士杀了孙綝。
English: Sun Xiu, who claimed to be the empress dowager, plotted with Zhang Bu to assassinate Sun Rong. Zhang Bu said: Although Ding Bong could not write official documents, he could outmaneuver others and decide important matters. Sun Xiu summoned Ding Bong and told him: Sun Rong, in charge of the imperial government, would commit irregularities and hoped to assassinate him together with the general. Ding Bong said: The prime minister's brothers have many friends and enemies, and I am afraid their hearts are all different. You cannot suddenly control them. You can use the wax festival to assassinate him with your majesty's guards. Sun Xiu listened to his plot

古文：迁大将军，加左右都护。
现代文：丁奉升任大将军，加授左右都护。
English: Ding Feng was promoted to the rank of general, and was awarded the title of left and right tutelage.

古文：永安三年，假节领徐州牧。
现代文：永安三年，丁奉又被授予符节，兼任徐州牧。
English: In the third year of Yongan, Ding Bong was awarded the Fu Festival, and also served as the Xuzhou herdsman.

古文：六年，魏伐蜀，奉率诸军向寿春，为救蜀之势。
现代文：永安六年，魏军征讨蜀国，丁奉率领各军进兵寿春，作出救援蜀国的姿势。
English: In the sixth year of Yongan, the Wei army went to conquer Shu, and Ding Bong led the army into Shuchun and made a gesture to rescue Shu.

古文：蜀亡，军还。
现代文：蜀国灭亡，丁奉率军返回。
English: After the fall of Shu, Ding Bong returned with his army.

古文：休薨，奉与丞相濮阳兴等从万彧之言，共迎立孙皓，迁右大司马左军师。
现代文：孙休去世，丁奉和丞相濮阳兴等听从万彧之言，共同迎立孙皓称帝。丁奉升为右大司马左军师。
English: After the death of Sun Xiu, Ding Bong and the chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty, Jinyang Xing, listened to the words of Wan Xuan and jointly ushered in the reign of Emperor Sun Yat-sen. Ding Bong was promoted to the right major general Ma Zuo Junshi.

古文：宝鼎三年，皓命奉与诸葛靓攻合肥。
现代文：宝鼎三年，孙皓下令丁奉与诸葛靓进攻合肥。
English: Three years after Baoding, Sun Yat-sen ordered Ding Bong and Zhuge Liang to attack Hefei.

古文：奉与晋大将石苞书，构而间之，苞以徵还。
现代文：丁奉给晋国大将石苞去信，意在离间他，石苞因此被征召回朝。
English: Ding sent a letter to the general of the Jin Dynasty, Shi Hao, with the intention of alienating him. As a result, Shi Hao was conscripted back to the dynasty.

古文：建衡元年，奉复帅众治徐塘，因攻晋谷阳。
现代文：建衡元年，丁奉再次率军修治徐塘，趁机进攻晋国的谷阳。
English: In the first year of Jianheng, Ding Bong once again led the army to repair Xu Tang, and took the opportunity to attack Guyang in Jin.

古文：谷阳民知之，引去，奉无所获。
现代文：谷阳百姓得知消息后，全部离开，丁奉没有收获。
English: After the people of Guyang learned the news, they all left, and Ding Bong had no harvest.

古文：皓怒，斩奉导军。
现代文：孙皓大怒，杀了丁奉军中的向导。
English: Sun Yat-sen flew into a rage and killed Ding Bong, a military guide.

古文：三年，卒。
现代文：建衡三年，丁奉去世。
English: Three years after Jianheng, Ding Bong passed away.

古文：奉贵而有功，渐以骄矜，或有毁之者，皓追以前出军事，徙奉家於临川。
现代文：丁奉地位贵重且立有功劳，逐渐骄傲自负，有人就谮害他，孙皓追究以前他出军毫无所得之事，将丁奉的家属迁徙到临川。
English: Ding Bong's status was valuable and he had distinguished services. He gradually became proud and conceited. Some people slandered him. Sun Yat-sen investigated the fact that he had no income before he went to the army and moved Ding Bong's family members to Linchuan.

古文：奉弟封，官至后将军，先奉死。
现代文：丁奉弟弟丁封，官至后将军，先于丁奉去世。
English: Ding Bong's younger brother Ding Feng, who later became a general, died before Ding Bong.

古文：评曰：凡此诸将，皆江表之虎臣，孙氏之所厚待也。
现代文：评曰：这些将领，都是江表地区的猛将，孙氏一族厚待之人。
English: The review said: These generals are all fierce generals in the Jiangbei region, who are well treated by the Sun clan.

古文：以潘璋之不脩，权能忘过记功，其保据东南，宜哉！
现代文：以潘璋这样不修德政，孙权也能不记过失追述功劳，他能占有东南地区，实在是应该啊！
English: With Pan Xuan's lack of ethics, Sun Quan can also recount his merits without remembering his mistakes. If he can occupy the southeastern region, it really should be!

古文：陈表将家支庶，而与胄子名人比翼齐衡，拔萃出类，不亦美乎！
现代文：陈表出身将领世家的旁支，却能和名门世家子弟齐名比肩，出类拔萃，不也是美谈吗！
English: Chen table is from the side branch of the generals' family, but it can stand shoulder to shoulder with the children of the famous family, outstanding, isn't it a beautiful story!

