古文：冯子曰： 智者，术所以生也；术者，智所以转也。
现代文：冯梦龙说： 术就是方法，真正的方法是从智慧中产生的；而通过适当的方法，智慧才能够发挥出无比的功效。
English: Feng Menglong said: Skill is the method, the real method comes from wisdom; and through appropriate methods, wisdom can play an incomparable effect.

古文：不智而言术，如傀儡百变，徒资嘻笑，而无益于事。无术而言智，如御人舟子，自炫执辔如组，运楫如风，原隰关津，若在其掌，一遇羊肠太行、危滩骇浪，辄束手而呼天，其不至颠且覆者几希矣。
现代文：没有智慧而只强调方法，就如同傀儡之戏的变化，非但于事无益，而且只是一场闹剧罢了；只有智慧而没有方法，则像驾车行船的人，在风平浪静或平坦广阔的原野上时，一切好像都得心应手，但一遇羊肠小道或险滩大浪，则束手无策，想不倾覆都难。
English: Without wisdom, emphasizing only the method, it is like the changes in the puppet play, which is not only useless, but also just a farce; only wisdom without methods, it is like driving a boat, when the wind is calm or on a flat and vast plain, everything seems to be handy, but in the event of a narrow path or high waves on a dangerous beach, there is nothing to do, and it is difficult not to capsize.

古文：蠖之缩也，蛰之伏也，麝之决脐也，蚺之示创也，术也。
现代文：蠖虫在行进时要有伸有缩，冬季的昆虫要藏于地下过冬，至春才出来，麝在被人追逐时会产生分泌物，蟒蛇翻身示创以明胆已被人取走，这都是对方法的运用。
English: Tapeworms have to stretch and contract when they travel, winter insects have to hide underground for the winter and come out in the spring, earthworms produce secretions when they are chased, and pythons turn over to show that they have been taken away. These are all applications of methods.

古文：物智其然，而况人乎？
现代文：连动物都有这样的智慧，更何况是人呢？
English: Even animals have such wisdom, let alone humans?

古文：李耳化胡，禹入裸国而解衣，孔尼较猎，散宜生行贿，仲雍断发文身，裸以为饰。 
现代文：老子李耳教化胡人，大禹进入裸人国而脱去衣服，孔子与人比赛打猎，散宜生的行贿，仲雍南入蛮夷，断发文身，以裸身为服饰。 
English: Lao Tzu's Li Er taught people to turn into Hu, Dayu entered the country of naked people and took off his clothes, Confucius competed with people to hunt, scattered bribes, Zhong Yongnan entered the barbarians, broke off tattoos, and used nakedness as clothing.

古文：不知者曰： 圣贤之智，有时而殚。 
现代文：无知的人说： 圣贤之人的智慧有时也有穷尽的时候。 
English: The ignorant say: The wisdom of the sages is sometimes exhausted.

古文：知者曰： 圣贤之术，无时而窘。 
现代文：智慧的人说： 圣贤之人的方法，没有穷尽的时候。 
English: Wise men say: The methods of the wise are inexhaustible.

古文：婉而不遂，谓之 委蛇 ；匿而不章，谓之 谬数 ；诡而不失，谓之 权奇 。
现代文：有时婉转而不直行，称之为 委蛇 ；有时暂且隐匿不显，称之为 谬数 ；有时诡谲而不失原则，称之为 权奇 。
English: Sometimes it is called a "snake" when it turns gently and does not go straight; sometimes it is called a "fallacy" when it is temporarily hidden and does not appear; sometimes it is called a "magic" when it is devious and does not lose its principle.

古文：不婉者，物将格之；不匿者，物将倾之；不诡者，物将厄之。
现代文：若不懂婉转，外物就会压制他；不懂隐匿，外物就会倾陷他；不懂诡谲，外物就会困厄他。
English: If he doesn't know how to be gentle, external things will oppress him; if he doesn't know how to hide, external things will overwhelm him; if he doesn't know how to be cunning, external things will oppress him.

古文：呜呼!
现代文：唉呀！
English: Alas!

古文：术神矣!智止矣!
现代文：方法太神妙了，是智慧的最高境界!
English: The method is too wonderful, it is the highest realm of wisdom!

