古文：杨存中，本名沂中，字正甫，绍兴间赐名存中，代州崞县人。
现代文：杨存中本名沂中，字正甫，绍兴年间高宗赐名存中，代州崞县人。
English: Yang Cunzhong's real name was Zongzhong, and he was given the name Zhengfu by Gao Zong during his time in Shaoxing. He was from Daizhou's Zongxian County.

古文：祖宗闵，永兴军路总管，与唐重同守永兴，金人陷城，迎战死之。
现代文：祖父杨宗闵，曾任永兴军路总管，与唐重一同守卫永兴，金军攻陷城池，迎敌战死。
English: His grandfather, Yang Zonglu, was once the general manager of the Yongxing Military Road, and he and Tang Chong guarded Yongxing together. The Chinese army captured the city and died in battle.

古文：父震，知麟州建宁砦，金人来攻，亦死于难。
现代文：父亲杨震，曾知麟州建宁寨，金军来攻，也死于难。
English: Yang Zhen's father, Zeng Zhi Lin Zhou Jian Ning Zhai, was also killed in the attack by the Golden Army.

古文：存中魁梧沈鸷，少警敏，诵书数百言，力能绝人。
现代文：杨存中身材魁梧，性情沉鸷，少时机敏，背书数百言，力气超人。
English: Yang Cunzhong is a big man, with a gruff disposition, a sense of timing, hundreds of endorsements, and superhuman strength.

古文：慨然语人曰： 大丈夫当以武功取富贵，焉用俯首为腐儒哉！ 于是学孙、吴法，善射骑。
现代文：慨然对人说 ：大丈夫应当用武功博取富贵，怎能俯首贴耳成为腐儒呢！ 于是学习孙武、吴起兵法，善于骑射。
English: He indignantly said to people, "It's all right to use martial arts to gain wealth, but how can you bow your head and stick your ear to become a rotten person!" So he studied Sun Wu and Wu Qi's military methods, and was good at riding and shooting.

古文：宣和末，山东、河北群盗四起，存中应募击贼，积功至忠翊郎。
现代文：宣和末年，山东、河北地区群盗四起，杨存中应募从军击贼，积功至忠翊郎。
English: At the end of the Xuanhe era, there were four robberies in the Shandong and Hebei regions. Yang Cunzhong was recruited from the army to fight the robbers, and he became a loyal soldier.

古文：靖康元年，金人再围汴京，诸道兵勤王，存中与张俊、田师中从信德府守臣梁扬祖以万兵入援，后隶张俊部曲。
现代文：靖康元年，金军再次围攻汴京，各道军队勤王，杨存中与张俊、田师中随从信德府守将梁扬祖率万兵入援，后来成为张俊部属。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the Chinese army once again besieged Beijing, and the armies of various provinces followed the king. Yang Cunzhong, Zhang Jun and Tian Shizhong followed the governor of Shinde Prefecture, Liang Yangzu, and led ten thousand soldiers to help, and later became Zhang Jun's subordinates.

古文：上问将于俊，俊以存中对。
现代文：皇上向张俊询问将领，张俊以杨存中答对。
English: The emperor asked Zhang Jun about generals, and Zhang Jun replied with Yang Cunzhong.

古文：召见，赐袍带。
现代文：皇上召见杨存中，赐给袍带。
English: The emperor summoned Yang Cunzhong and gave him a robe and belt.

古文：时元帅府草创，存中昼夜扈卫寝幄，不顷刻去侧。
现代文：当时元帅府正值草创之时，杨存中昼夜护卫皇上寝帐，没有片刻离开旁边。
English: At that time, when the Marshal's Palace was under construction, Yang Cun guarded the emperor's bedside day and night, never leaving his side for a moment.

古文：帝知其忠谨，亲信之。
现代文：皇上知道他忠诚谨慎，亲近信任他。
English: The Emperor knew that he was loyal and prudent, and trusted him closely.

古文：剧贼李昱据任城，久不克，存中以数骑入，击杀数百人。
现代文：一股势力强大的盗贼李昱占据任城，官军久攻不下，杨存中率领数名骑兵冲入贼阵，击杀数百人。
English: A powerful band of thieves, Li Qian, occupied Rencheng, and the government army was unable to conquer it for a long time. Yang Cunzhong led several cavalrymen to rush into the bandit formation and killed hundreds of people.

古文：帝乘高望见，介胄尽赤，意其被重创。
现代文：高宗登高望见，杨存中甲胄全部变成红色，以为他受了重伤。
English: Gao Zong climbed to the top and saw that Yang Cunzhong's armor had all turned red, thinking that he had been seriously injured.

古文：召视之，皆污贼血，壮之，饮以酒，曰： 酌此血汉。 存中请复往，帝止之。
现代文：召他前来观看，原来都是贼血污染，激励他，赐他饮酒，说： 饮此血酒。 杨存中请求再往，高宗阻止他。
English: He called him to come and see that they were all contaminated with thieves' blood, encouraged him, gave him alcohol, and said, "Drink this blood alcohol." Yang Cunzhong asked him to go further, but Gaozong stopped him.

古文：存中曰： 此贼胆碎，即成擒矣。 遂大破之，复任城，迁阁门祗候。
现代文：杨存中说 ：这些盗贼已经破胆，就要被擒拿了。 于是大破盗贼，收复任城，迁任门祗候。
English: Yang Cun said, "These thieves have already lost their courage and are about to be captured, so we smashed the thieves, recaptured Rencheng, and relocated Rencheng."

古文：建炎二年，讨贼徐明于嘉兴，先登。
现代文：建炎二年，杨存中在嘉兴征讨贼寇徐明，率先登上城墙。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, Yang Cunzhong was the first to climb the city wall in Jiaxing to fight the bandit Xu Ming.

古文：主帅将屠城，存中力谏止之，戮其渠魁而已，郡赖以全。
现代文：主将准备屠城，杨存中极力劝阻他，杀掉罪魁祸首而已，嘉兴赖以保全。
English: Yang Cunzhong tried his best to dissuade him and kill the culprit, but Jia Xinglu was saved.

古文：迁荣州刺史。
现代文：迁任荣州刺史。
English: The history of the transfer to Rongzhou.

古文：高宗南渡，以胜捷军从张俊守吴门；苗、刘之变，又从俊赴难。
现代文：高宗渡过长江，杨存中率胜捷军随从张俊守卫吴门；苗、刘叛变时，又随从张俊前往解救危难。
English: Gao Zong crossed the Yangtze River, Yang Cunzhong led the victorious victorious army and followed Zhang Jun to guard the Wu Gate; when Miao and Liu rebelled, they also followed Zhang Jun to relieve the crisis.

古文：迁贵州团练使，寻为御前右军统领。
现代文：迁贵州团练使，不久任御前右军统领。
English: He was transferred to Guizhou as a regimental drill envoy, and soon became the commander of the imperial right army.

古文：金人攻明州，又从俊与田师中、赵密殊死战，破之。
现代文：金军攻明州，又随从张俊与田师中、赵密一起殊死搏斗，击败金军。
English: The gold army attacked Mingzhou, and Zhang Jun, together with Tian Shizhong and Zhao Mi, fought to the death to defeat the gold army.

古文：以奇功迁文州防御使、御前中军统制。
现代文：因立下大功迁任文州防御使、御前中军统制。
English: Due to his great achievements, he was transferred to the post of the Defense Minister of Wenzhou and became the commander of the Imperial Chinese Army.

古文：绍兴元年，从俊讨李成。
现代文：绍兴元年，随从张俊讨伐李成。
English: In the first year of Shaoxing, a follower of Zhang Jun fought against Li Cheng.

古文：诸将议，多欲分道进，存中曰： 贼势如此，兵分则力弱，又诸将位均势敌，非招讨督之，必不相为用。 俊然之。
现代文：从将计议，大多主张分道前进，杨存中说 ：敌势如此，分兵力量就会削弱，加上诸将职位相同，没有招讨使督促，必然不能互相协同。 
English: From the point of view of the generals, most of them advocated a separate way forward, Yang Cun said: the enemy situation is such that the force of the division will be weakened. In addition, the generals have the same position, there is no solicitation and supervision, and they must not cooperate with each other.

古文：整军至豫章，存中率兵数千，首破贼于玉隆观，追至筠州。
现代文：张俊采纳了他的意见。整军到豫章，杨存中率兵数千人，首先在玉隆观击败敌众，追到筠州。
English: Zhang Jun adopted his opinion. The whole army went to Yuzhang, Yang Cunzhong led thousands of soldiers, first defeated the enemy in Yulongguan and chased them to Zhangzhou.

古文：贼骁将以众十万来援，夹河而营。
现代文：敌人骁将率众十万前来支援，夹河而阵。
English: The enemy hordes will lead hundreds of thousands of people to come to support, rushing into battle.

古文：存中谓俊曰： 彼众我寡，击之当用奇，愿以骑见属，公以步兵居前。 俊从之。
现代文：杨存中对张俊说： 敌众我寡，攻击敌人应使用奇兵，愿意率骑隶属，公以步兵居前。 张俊听从了他的意见。
English: Yang Cunzhong said to Zhang Jun, "Since we have few enemies, we should attack the enemy with extraordinary soldiers. I am willing to lead my subordinates on horseback and lead the infantry." Zhang Jun listened to his opinion.

古文：存中夜衔枚渡筠河，出西山，驰下击贼，俊以步兵夹攻，俘八千人。
现代文：杨存中夜里衔枚渡筠河，出西山，急驰而下攻击敌人，张俊以步兵夹攻，俘敌八千人。
English: In the middle of the night, Yang Cun crossed the Minhe River, went out of the West Mountain, and raced down to attack the enemy. Zhang Jun attacked with infantry and captured eight thousand enemy.

古文：诸将夜见存中曰： 战未休，降卒多，忽有变，奈何？
现代文：众将夜见杨存中说 ：战斗没有停止，降卒太多，突然发生叛乱，怎么办？
English: The generals saw Yang Cunrong at night and said, "The battle hasn't stopped, there have been too many soldiers killed, and suddenly there's a rebellion. What should we do?"

古文：非尽歼之不可。 存中曰： 杀降吾不忍。 诸将转告俊，竟夜坑之。
现代文：非将他们全部歼灭不可。 杨存中说 ：我不忍杀死投降的敌人。 众将转告张俊，竟然在夜晚全部坑杀俘虏。
English: Yang Cunfu said, "I can't bear to kill the enemy who surrendered," and the crowd told Zhang Jun that he had killed all the captives at night.

古文：乘胜追至九江，成遂遁去。
现代文：乘胜追到九江，李成于是逃走。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, he chased Li Cheng to Jiujiang, whereupon Li Cheng fled.

古文：迁宣州观察使。
现代文：迁任宣州观察使。
English: Transferred to the post of Xuanzhou observation envoy.

古文：二年春，进神武中军统制，宰相吕颐浩袖敕以授存中。
现代文：绍兴二年春，杨存中进任神武中军统制，宰相吕颐浩从袖中拿出敕令交给杨存中。
English: In the spring of the second year of Shaoxing, Yang Cunzhong was appointed as the commander of the Shenwu Zhongjun. The prime minister Lv Yinghao took out the imperial edict from his sleeve and handed it to Yang Cunzhong.

古文：俊奏留存中军中，上曰： 宿卫乏帅，朕所选，为不可易也。 存中亦固辞，且谓： 神武诸帅如韩世忠、张俊，皆贵拥旄钺，名望至重，如臣么麽，一旦位与之抗，实不自安。 不许，遣中使宣押，乃视事。
现代文：张俊奏请将杨存中留在军中，高宗说： 宿卫部队缺乏将帅，我所挑选的，不能改变。 杨存中也坚决推辞，并且说 ：神武诸将如韩世忠、张俊，皆贵拥旄钺，名望至重，像我这样微不足道的人，一旦地位与他们相抗衡，实在难以自安。 高宗不答应，派宦官宣押，杨存中才就职视事。
English: Zhang Junso asked Gao Zong to keep Yang Cunzhong in the army, Gao Zong said, "There is a shortage of generals in the Home Guard, and what I have chosen cannot be changed." Yang Cunzhong also firmly refused, and said, "Divine warriors such as Han Shizhong and Zhang Cunzhong are all precious supporters, and fame is the most important thing. People as insignificant as I am, once their status is in competition with them, it is really difficult to feel secure." Gao Zong did not agree, and sent a eunuch to announce the appointment, and Yang Cunzhong took office.

古文：兼提举宿卫亲兵。
现代文：兼提举宿卫亲兵。
English: He also mentioned the raising of the guards' own soldiers.

古文：时中军卒不满五千，疲癃者居半。
现代文：当时中军士卒不满五千人，疲弱老病的占一半。
English: At that time, there were less than 5,000 junior non-commissioned officers, half of whom were frail and ill.

古文：存中请拘神武卒借出于外者归军中，由是军政浸修。
现代文：杨存中请求将神武士卒借调到其他部队的拨回军中，从此军政渐渐得到治理。
English: Yang Cunzhong requested that the divine warriors be seconded to other troops and sent back to the army, and from then on, military affairs were gradually governed.

古文：三年，严州妖贼缪罗据白马源，杀王官，存中讨平之。
现代文：绍兴三年，严州妖贼缪罗占据白马源，杀死官员，杨存中率兵讨平。
English: In the third year of Shaoxing, the Yanzhou thief Mu Luo occupied Baima Yuan, killed officials, and Yang Cunzhong led soldiers to settle the dispute.

古文：除带御器械，加保信军承宣使、权发遣鄜延路马步军副总管。
现代文：除带御器械，加保信军承宣使，权发遣延路马步军副总管。
English: In addition to taking his equipment with him, Gao Guoxin accepted the post of envoy and was appointed deputy commander of the Yanlu Horse Marching Army.

古文：六年，为龙神卫四厢都指挥使、密州观察使。
现代文：绍兴六年，任龙神卫四厢都指挥使、密州观察使。
English: In six years in Shaoxing, he served as the commanding envoy of Long Shenwei and the observation envoy of Myizhou.

古文：先是，张浚视师，谋渡淮以图刘豫，倚韩世忠为用。
现代文：原先，张浚视察军队，谋画渡过淮河攻打刘豫，倚靠韩世忠部实行。
English: Originally, Zhang Jun inspected the army, planned to cross the Huai River to attack Liu Yu, and relied on Han Shizhong to implement the plan.

古文：世忠围淮阳，从浚乞张俊将赵密为助，俊拒之。
现代文：韩世忠包围淮阳，通过张浚请求张俊部将赵密出兵协助，张俊拒绝了他的要求。
English: Han Shizhong besieged Huaiyang, and through Zhang Jun, he asked Zhang Jun's department to send soldiers to help Zhao Mi. Zhang Jun refused his request.

古文：赵鼎语浚曰： 世忠所欲者赵密尔，存中武勇，不减于密，盍令存中助之。 浚请于朝，故有是命。
现代文：赵鼎对张浚说 ：韩世忠所要求的是赵密，杨存中的武勇，不差于赵密，何不令杨存中协助他。 张浚向朝廷请示，因此才有这一命令。
English: Zhao Ding said to Zhang Jun: What Han Shizhong asked for was Zhao Mi, Yang Cunzhong's bravery is not inferior to Zhao Mi, why not let Yang Cunzhong assist him. Zhang Jun asked the court for instructions, so this order was given.

古文：于是存中以八队万人，趋督府助世忠。
现代文：于是杨存中率领八队一万人，奔赴督府协助韩世忠。
English: As a result, Yang Cunzhong led eight teams of ten thousand people and rushed to the governor's office to assist Han Shizhong.

古文：十月，存中与刘猊战于藕塘，大破之。
现代文：十月，杨存中在藕塘同刘猊展开激战，大败刘猊。
English: In October, Yang Cunzhong fought a fierce battle with Liu Yao in Putang, and defeated Liu Yao.

古文：猊之初入也，淮西宣抚使刘光世欲弃庐州，退保太平。
现代文：刘猊当初南侵之时，淮西宣抚使刘光世打算放弃庐州，退保太平。
English: At the time of Liu Bei's invasion of the south, Liu Guangshi's intention to abandon Zhangzhou and retreat to Taiping was made public by the Western Huai Dynasty.

古文：贼众十万已次濠、寿间，浚命张俊拒之，使存中往泗州与俊合。
现代文：敌众十万已到达濠、寿州之间，张浚命令张俊抵御，派杨存中前往泗州同张俊会合。
English: One hundred thousand of the enemy had arrived between Luzhou and Shoushou. Zhang Jun ordered Zhang Jun to resist and sent Yang Cunzhong to Luzhou to meet Zhang Jun.

古文：及至泗，则光世已舍庐去。
现代文：等到了泗州，刘光世已经放弃庐州而去。
English: By the time he reached Zhangzhou, Liu Guangzhe had already abandoned Zhangzhou.

古文：浚遣人谕之曰： 一人渡江，即斩以狥。 光世不得已还庐驻兵，与存中相应。
现代文：张浚派人劝告他说 ：一人渡江南下，便立即斩首示众。 刘光世迫不得已返回庐州驻兵，与杨存中相互应援。
English: Zhang Jun sent someone to advise him, saying, "If one person crosses the river to the south, he will immediately cut off his head and show it to the public." Liu Guangshi was forced to return to Bozhou to stay with Yang Cunzhong for mutual support.

古文：贼先犯定远县，存中以兵二千袭败于越家坊。
现代文：敌人先进犯定远县，杨存中率兵二千在赵家坊袭击打败敌人。
English: The enemy advanced to Dingyuan County, and Yang Cunzhong led two thousand soldiers to attack and defeat the enemy in Zhaojiafang.

古文：既而与猊兵遇藕塘，贼据山列阵，矢下如雨。
现代文：不久与刘猊兵在藕塘相遇，敌军据山列阵，矢如雨下。
English: Soon after, he met Liu Yibing in Shantang. The enemy army was lined up against the mountain, and it was raining arrows.

古文：存中急击之，且使统制吴锡以劲骑五千突其阵。
现代文：杨存中急忙出击，并派统制吴锡率劲骑五千突入敌阵。
English: Yang Cunzhong hurriedly attacked, and sent the commanding Wu Xi to lead the five thousand into the enemy line.

古文：阵乱，存中鼓大军乘之，自以精骑冲其肋，大呼曰： 破贼矣！ 贼错愕骇视。
现代文：敌阵混乱，杨存中鼓动大军乘胜出击，自率精兵冲击敌军中部，高声呼叫 ：击破敌人了！ 
English: With the enemy in disarray, Yang Cunzhong encouraged the large army to take advantage of the victory and attack. He led his elite soldiers to attack the middle of the enemy army, shouting loudly: "We have defeated the enemy!"

古文：前军统制张宗颜自泗来，乘背击之，贼大败。
现代文：敌众惊慌失措目瞪口呆。前军统制张宗颜从泗州赶来，从敌背后出击，敌人大败。
English: The enemy panicked and were dumbfounded. The former army commander Zhang Zongyan arrived from Zhangzhou, attacked from behind the enemy, and the enemy was defeated.

古文：猊以首抵谋主李愕曰： 适见髯将军，锐不可当，果杨殿前也。 即以数骑遁去。
现代文：刘猊将头撞击谋士李愕说 ：刚才看见一位长满胡子的将军，锐不可当，果然是杨存中。 急忙率数骑逃走。
English: Liu Ye bumped his head against the adviser, Li Appa, and said, "Just now, I saw a bearded general, he's tough as nails, it's Yang Cunzhong, hurry up and ride away."

古文：余党万人僵立失措，存中跃马叱之，皆怖而降。
现代文：余众万人僵立失措，杨存中跃马呵斥他们，都恐怖而降。
English: The remaining tens of thousands of people were at a loss. Yang Cunzhong jumped on his horse and shouted at them, and they all fell down in fear.

古文：麟在顺昌，孔彦舟方围光州，闻之皆拔砦遁去，北方大恐。
现代文：当时刘麟在顺昌，孔彦舟刚围攻光州，听说这一消息后都拔营逃走，北方大震。
English: At that time, Liu Lin was in Shunchang, Kong Yanzhou had just besieged Gwangju, and after hearing this news, they all pulled out and fled, causing a great earthquake in the north.

古文：所得贼舟数百艘，车数千两。
现代文：此战宋军共缴获舟船数百艘，车数千辆。
English: In this battle, the Song Army captured hundreds of boats and thousands of vehicles.

古文：捷闻，帝遣中使劳赐，谓宰执曰： 卿辈始知朕得人也。 除保成军节度使、殿前都虞候寻兼领马步帅。
现代文：捷报传来，高宗派宦官赐赏慰问，对宰相说： 你们现在才知道我所任得人吧。 任命杨存中为保成军节度使、殿前都虞候，不久兼领马步帅。
English: When the news of the victory came, the eunuchs of the Gaozhong faction offered their condolences and said to the prime minister, "You only know now that I have appointed the right person." Yang Cunzhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Baocheng Army, and waited in front of the palace, and soon he was also the leader of the horse.

古文：存中奏： 祖宗置三衙，鼎列相制，今令臣独总，非故事也。 不允。
现代文：杨存中上奏： 祖宗时设置三衙，鼎立相制，现在我一人独揽，不符合旧例。 
English: Yang Cunzhong Shangso: In the time of our ancestors, we set up a three-pronged, three-pronged phase system. Now I am the only one, which does not conform to the old example.

古文：七年，为淮南西路制置使，将以抚定郦琼诸军，不果行，语在《王德传》。
现代文：高宗没有答应。绍兴七年，任淮南西路制置使，准备让他抚定郦琼各军，后来没有成行，这些事记载在《王德传》中。
English: Gao Zong did not agree. In Shaoxing for seven years, he was appointed as Huainan West Road construction envoy to prepare for him to settle the armies of Qiaojiong, but later did not go, these things are recorded in "Wang De Biography."

古文：九年，迁殿前副都指挥使。
现代文：绍兴九年，迁任殿前副都指挥使。
English: In Shaoxing nine years ago, he was transferred to the former vice-commander of the palace.

古文：十年，金人叛盟取河南，命存中为淮北宣抚副使，引兵至宿州，以步军退屯于泗。
现代文：绍兴十年，金朝背叛盟约攻取河南，朝廷命令杨存中任淮北宣抚副使，率兵到宿州，以步兵退屯于泗州。
English: In the tenth year of Shaoxing, the Kim dynasty betrayed the alliance and attacked Henan. The imperial court ordered Yang Cunzhong to serve as deputy envoy of the Huaibei Proclamation, led the troops to Suizhou, and retreated to Quzhou with the infantry.

古文：金人诡令来告敌骑数百屯柳子镇。
现代文：金人派人送假情报说敌骑数百屯于柳子镇。
English: The goldsmith sent someone to send false information that hundreds of enemy cavalry were in Liuzi Town.

古文：存中欲即击之，或以为不可，存中不听。
现代文：杨存中打算前往攻击，有人认为不可，杨存中不听。
English: Yang Cunzhong planned to attack. Some people thought it was impossible, but Yang Cunzhong would not listen.

古文：留王滋、萧保以千骑守宿，自将五百骑夜袭柳子镇，黎明，不见敌而还。
现代文：留王滋、萧保率一千骑兵守卫宿州，自率五百骑夜袭柳子镇，黎明时，没有见到敌人而回。
English: Rui Wangzhi and Xiao Bao led a thousand cavalry to guard Shuzhou, and led five hundred cavalry to attack Liuzi Town at night. At dawn, they did not see the enemy and returned.

古文：金人以精兵伏归路，存中知之，遂横奔而溃。
现代文：金军以精兵埋伏在杨存中归路上，杨存中知道这一情况，于是横冲溃散。
English: The Chinese army ambushed Yang Cunzhong on his way back with elite soldiers. Yang Cunzhong knew this situation, so he broke loose.

古文：参议官曹勋不知存中存亡，以闻，朝廷震恐，于是有权宜退保之命。
现代文：参议官曹勋不知道杨存中死活，上报朝廷，朝廷震恐，于是下令暂且退保泗州。
English: Councillor Cao Xun did not know whether Yang Cunzhong was alive or dead, and reported this to the imperial court. The imperial court was shocked, and ordered him to temporarily retreat to Bozhou.

古文：既而存中自寿春渡淮归泗，人心始安。
现代文：不久杨存中从寿春渡过淮河回到泗州，人心才安定下来。
English: It wasn't long before Yang Cunzhong crossed the Huai River from Shuchun to return to Zhangzhou, and people's hearts settled down.

古文：冬，引兵还行在。
现代文：冬天，率兵返回行在。
English: In the winter, he led his soldiers back to Tsuen.

古文：十一年，兀术耻顺昌之败，复谋来侵。
现代文：绍兴十一年，兀耻于顺昌之败，又谋南侵。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, he was ashamed of the defeat of Shunchang and plotted to invade the south.

古文：诏大合兵于淮西以待之。
现代文：朝廷诏令各地大军集结于淮西以等待敌人。
English: The imperial court ordered the armies from all over the country to gather in Huaxi to await the enemy.

古文：于是存中以殿司兵三万卒戍淮，与金人战于柘皋，败之。
现代文：于是杨存中率领殿前司兵三万人戍守淮河，同金军在柘皋展开激战，击败金军。
English: As a result, Yang Cunzhong led 30,000 soldiers from the palace guarding the Huaihe River, and launched a fierce battle with the Chinese army in Shao, defeating the Chinese army.

古文：时张俊为宣抚使，存中为副使，刘锜为判官，王德为都统制，田师中、张子盖为统制官。
现代文：当时张俊任宣抚使，杨存中任副使，刘钅奇任判官，王德任都统制，田师中、张子盖任统制官。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun served as the envoy, Yang Cunzhong served as the deputy envoy, Liu Bingqi served as the judge, Wang De served as the governor, and Tian Shizhong and Zhang Zigei served as the governor.

古文：金人以拐子马翼进，存中曰： 敌恃弓矢，吾有以屈之。 使万人操长斧，如墙而进，诸军鼓噪奋击，金人大败，退屯紫金山。是役也，失将士九百人，金人死者以万计，而濠围犹未解。
现代文：金军以拐子马在两翼掩护前进，杨存中说： 敌军依仗弓矢，我有办法对付它。 让万人手持长斧，如城墙而进，各军鼓噪奋击，金军大败，退屯紫金山，此战，损失将士九百人，金军死伤数以万计，而濠州之围依然未解。
English: Yang Cun said: "The enemy army relies on bows and arrows, I have a way to deal with it. Let ten thousand people armed with long axes advance like a city wall, each army drums and beats, the Chinese army is defeated, retreats to Zijin Mountain, this battle, the loss of nine hundred soldiers, the death and injury of the Chinese army is tens of thousands, and the siege of Zhangzhou is still unresolved.

古文：俊与存中、锜先议班师。
现代文：张俊同刘钅奇、杨存中先计议班师。
English: Zhang Jun with Liu Rongqi and Yang Cunzhong in the preliminary discussion team.

古文：会有云濠路已通者，俊谓锜曰： 吾欲与杨太尉耀兵淮上，安抚濠梁之民，取宣化归金陵，杨太尉则渡瓜洲还临安。 明日，命二帅行。
现代文：恰逢有人告知前往濠州的道路已经畅通，张俊对刘钅奇说： 我打算与杨存中驻兵淮上，安抚濠梁地区民众，取宣化后回到金陵，杨存中则渡过瓜洲返回临安。 第二天，张俊命令两人行动。
English: Just as someone informed him that the road to Zhangzhou was open, Zhang Jun said to Liu Bingqi: I plan to station soldiers with Yang Cunzhong on Huai, pacify the people in the Qilian area, take Xuanhua and return to Jinling, while Yang Cunzhong will cross Guazhou and return to Lin'an. The next day, Zhang Jun ordered the two men to act.

古文：谍报金攻濠甚急，仓皇复回，邀锜会于黄连埠，距濠六十里，闻城陷矣，召存中、锜谋之。
现代文：间谍报告金军急攻濠州，张俊仓忙退回，邀刘钅奇在黄连埠会合，距离濠州六十里，听说濠州城已经失陷，召见杨存中、刘钅奇商议。
English: The spies reported that the Chinese army made a sudden attack on Bozhou. Zhang Juncang hurriedly retreated and invited Liu Bingqi to meet in Huanglianbu, sixty miles away from Bozhou. Hearing that Bozhou City had fallen, Yang Cunzhong and Liu Bingqi were summoned for discussion.

古文：锜谓存中： 何以处此？ 存中曰： 战尔，相公与太尉在后，存中当居前。 锜曰： 本来救濠，濠既已失，进无所依，人怀归心，胜气已索，此危道也。
现代文：阵势排列未定，城中烟火升起，金军埋伏的骑兵一万多人分两翼而出。
English: The line-up was undecided, fireworks went off in the city, and more than ten thousand cavalry ambushed by the Golden Army came out in two wings.

古文：不若退师据险，俟其去，为后图。 诸将皆曰： 善。 鼎足而营，遣人俟敌，曰： 已去矣。 俊自以为功，谓锜毋往，命存中与德偕至濠。
现代文：杨存中回首对王德说 ：怎么办？ 
English: Looking back, Yang Cunzhong said to Wang De: What should I do?

古文：列阵未定，烟起城中，金人伏骑万余分两翼出。
现代文：王德回答 ：我是小将，怎么敢参预表达意见？ 杨存中用鞭指挥军队说 ：那么回去。 
English: Wang De replied: I am a junior general, how dare I participate in expressing opinions? Yang Cunzhong commanded the army with a whip and said: Then go back.

古文：存中顾德曰： 何如？ 德曰： 德小将，焉敢预事？ 存中以策麾军曰： 那回！ 诸军以为令其走也，遂散乱南奔，无复纪律，金人追杀甚众。
现代文：各军以为命令他们逃走，于是散乱南逃，再无行列纪律，金军在后追杀很多。
English: Each army thought that they were ordered to flee, so they scattered to the south and fled. There was no line discipline, and the Chinese army chased and killed many.

古文：后一日，韩世忠大军至，已无及矣。
现代文：过了一天，韩世忠率领大军来到，但已经来不及了。
English: A day later, Han Shizhong arrived with a large army, but it was too late.

古文：存中乃自宣化渡江归行在。
现代文：杨存中于是从宣化渡江回到行在。
English: Yang Cunzhong then returned from Xuanhua to the Yangtze River.

古文：加检校少保、开府仪同三司兼领殿前都指挥使，盖录柘皋之功而掩濠梁之败也。
现代文：加检校少保、开府仪同三司兼领殿前都指挥使，大概是奖赏柘皋战胜之功劳而免去濠梁战败的过错。
English: It was probably a mistake to reward Gong Liang for his victory and absolve Gong Liang for his defeat, since he was the second-in-command of the inspection school, the keeper of the imperial residences and the third-in-command of the imperial palace.

古文：十二年，徽宗梓宫攒永固陵，命存中都护。
现代文：绍兴十二年，徽宗棺椁下葬永固陵，命令杨存中都护。
English: In the twelfth year of Shaoxing, Huizong buried Yonggu Ling under the coffin, and ordered Yang Cunzhong to protect the capital.

古文：竣事，拜少傅，以保傅为管军自存中始。
现代文：事毕后，拜少傅，以保傅任管军队从杨存中开始。
English: After the event, Bai Shao Fu and Bao Fu were put in charge of the army starting from Yang Cunzhong.

古文：十四年，存中请诣太学谒先圣，帝曰： 学校既兴，武人亦知崇尚，如汉羽林士皆通《孝经》，况其他乎？ 二十年，封恭国公。
现代文：绍兴十四年，杨存中请求到太学拜谒先圣，高宗说： 学校既兴，武将也知崇尚，如汉朝羽林士都精通《孝经》，更何况其他呢？ 绍兴二十年，杨存中被封为恭国公。
English: In the 14th year of Shaoxing, Yang Cunzhong requested to go to Taishu to pay homage to Yu Xian Sheng. Gao Zong said, "Since the school is flourishing, the generals also know how to worship, for example, the Han Dynasty and Wu Lin scholars are all proficient in the "Book of Filial Piety," how much more the others?" In the 20th year of Shaoxing, Yang Cunzhong was given the title of the Prince of the Nation.

古文：二十八年，拜少师，恩数视枢密使。
现代文：二十八年，拜为少师，地位视同枢密使。
English: In 1928, he was promoted to the rank of Junior Instructor, the same status as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：存中以凡重地皆有统制官，独荆、襄无之，请于朝，于是荆南、襄阳初置诸统制。
现代文：杨存中由于凡是军事重地都有统制官，唯独荆、襄地区没有，请示朝廷，于是才在荆南、襄阳设诸统制。
English: In Yang Cun, because there was a commanding officer in every important military region, but not in Jing and Xiang regions, he asked the imperial court to set up a commanding system in the south of Jing and Xiangyang.

古文：存中在殿严凡二十五载，权宠日盛，太常寺主簿李浩、敕令所删定官陆游、司封员外郎王十朋、殿中侍御史陈俊卿相继以为言。
现代文：杨存中在殿中共二十五年，权力恩宠日盛，太常寺主簿李浩、敕令所删定官陆游、司封员外郎王十朋、殿中侍御史陈俊卿相继谏言。
English: Yang Cunzhong has been in the palace for a total of twenty-five years, and the power of grace has increased day by day. Li Hao, the main bookkeeper of Taizhong Temple, Lu You, the official deleted by the imperial edict, Wang Jipeng, the secretary of the palace, and Chen Junqing, the attendant of the palace, have successively criticized.

古文：三十一年，罢为太傅、醴泉观使，进封同安郡王，赐玉带，朝朔望。
现代文：绍兴三十一年，杨存中被罢为太傅、醴泉观使，进封同安郡王，赐玉带，朔望时入朝。
English: In 31st year of Shaoxing, Yang Cun was deposed as Taifu and Quanquan Guanzhi, he was made the King of Tongan County, given a jade belt, and entered the imperial court at the time of Shuo Wang.

古文：时金主亮有南侵意，存中上备敌十策。
现代文：当时金主完颜亮有南侵的意图，杨存中进呈备敌十策。
English: At that time, the financial master was fully aware of the intention to invade the south, and Yang Cunzhong proposed ten measures to prepare for the enemy.

古文：步帅赵密谋夺存中权，因指为喜功生事。
现代文：步军司统帅赵密密谋夺取杨存中兵权，因此指责杨存中是喜功生事。
English: General Zhao Mi, commander of the Infantry Division, plotted to seize Yang Cunzhong's military power, so he accused Yang Cunzhong of being a hero.

古文：存中闻之，上章乞免，密竟代之。
现代文：杨存中听说后，上奏请求免职，赵密最终取代了他。
English: After hearing this, Yang Cunzhong requested to be relieved of his duties, and Zhao Mi eventually replaced him.

古文：未几，边声日急，九月，诏存中为御营宿卫使。
现代文：不久，边防风声日益紧急，九月，诏令杨存中任御营宿卫使。
English: Soon, the situation on the border became more and more urgent. In September, Yang Cunzhong was ordered to take up the post of Oying Juwei envoy.

古文：刘汜战败于瓜洲，命存中往京口，为守江计。
现代文：刘汜在瓜洲战败，朝廷命令杨存中前往京口，作为守江计。
English: Liu Bei was defeated in Guazhou, and the imperial court ordered Yang Cunzhong to go to Jingkou as a plan to defend the river.

古文：虞允文自采石来会，存中与之协力拒敌。敌不能济。
现代文：虞允文从采石来同他会合，杨存中同他齐心协力抗拒敌人，金军没能渡江。
English: Yu Yunwen came from quarrying to join him, Yang Cunzhong and he made a concerted effort to resist the enemy, and the Golden Army failed to cross the river.

古文：金主亮死，与允文轻舟渡江以伺敌。
现代文：金主完颜亮死后，杨存中同虞允文乘轻舟渡江观察敌情。
English: After the death of the financier, Yang Cunzhong and his comrade, Yu Yunwen, took a light boat to cross the river to observe the enemy situation.

古文：及金人请和，存中奏俟彼得新主之命，无遽许之。
现代文：当金人请求和解时，杨存中上奏等到彼得新主之命，不要急忙答应。
English: When the goldsmith asked for reconciliation, Yang Cunzhong waited until Peter's new master's order, and did not rush to agree.

古文：帝如建康，诏存中扈跸，因语宰相曰： 杨存中唯命东西，忠无与二，朕之郭子仪也。 金使复请和，存中请拘之江口，移书审问，若能归我族属，还旧壤，损岁币，复白沟之界，以通兄弟之好，如是则和议可从；不然，请斩其使，亟图恢复。
现代文：皇上到建康，诏令杨存中护卫，并对宰相说 ：杨存中唯命是从，忠贞不二，是我的郭子仪。 金朝使节又来请和，杨存中请求在江口把他拘留，移书审问，如能归还我的民众，交归旧土，减少岁币，恢复原白沟疆界，双方结为兄弟之好，像这样才能同金和议；否则，请求斩杀使者，急图恢复。
English: When the emperor arrived at Jiankang, he ordered Yang Cunzhong to escort him, and said to the prime minister, "Yang Cunzhong only obeys orders, is loyal and never changes, and is my Guo Ziyi. The envoy of the Kim dynasty came again to ask for peace, and Yang Cunzhong requested that he be detained at the mouth of the river, transferred and interrogated. If it is possible to return my people, return to the old land, reduce the old money, and restore the original Baigou border, and the two sides are brothers, like this we can discuss peace with Kim; otherwise, he requested to kill the envoy, and

古文：会驾还，以存中为江、淮、荆、襄路宣抚使，给、舍不书黄，命遂寝。
现代文：恰逢皇上回驾，任命杨存中为江、淮、荆、襄路宣抚使，但给事中、中书舍人不书黄签押，这一任命于是作罢。
English: The emperor's return coincided with the appointment of Yang Cunzhong as the envoy of Jiang, Huai, Jing and Xianglu, but during the ceremony, the Chinese envoy refused to sign the document, so the appointment was cancelled.

古文：未几，仍奉祠。
现代文：不久，杨存中依旧奉祠。
English: Soon, Yang Cunzhong was still serving the shrine.

古文：隆兴元年，王师溃于符离，复起存中为御营使。
现代文：隆兴元年，官军在符离溃败，朝廷又任命杨存中为御营使。
English: In the first year of the Longxing, the government army was defeated at Fuxi, and the imperial court appointed Yang Cunzhong as the imperial envoy.

古文：二年，金人再入关，议割蜀之和尚原以畀之。
现代文：隆兴二年，金军再次入关，朝议割让四川的和尚原给敌人。
English: In the second year of the Longxing, the Chinese army entered the pass again, and the imperial court negotiated to cede Monzhangyuan in Sichuan to the enemy.

古文：存中入对，曰： 和尚原，陇右之藩要也。
现代文：杨存中入对，说： 和尚原，是陇右藩篱要害之地。
English: Yang Cunzhong made a comparison and said, "Monk's original is the key place of the right-hand fence.

古文：敌得之，则可以睥睨汉川；我得之，则可以下兵秦雍。
现代文：敌人得到它，就可以睥睨汉川；我们得到它，就能够下兵秦雍。
English: If the enemy gets it, they can cross the Han River; if we get it, we can go to Qin and Yong.

古文：曩议予金人，吴璘力争不从。
现代文：以前议论给予金朝，吴瞞力争不从。
English: In the past, discussions were given to the Kim dynasty, but Wu Zhe did not comply.

古文：今璘在远，不及知。
现代文：现在吴瞞在远方，来不及知道。
English: Now that Wu Xie is far away, it's too late to know.

古文：臣若不言，非特负陛下，亦有愧于璘。
现代文：我如不说，不仅有负陛下，也有愧于吴瞞。
English: If I don't say it, I'll not only disappoint Your Majesty, but also Wu Xie.

古文：近者，王师尽锐而后得，愿毋弃。 
现代文：近来，王师尽出精锐而后才得到这块地方，希望不要放弃。 
English: Recently, Wang Shi did his best to get this place. I hope he won't give up.

古文：未几，金人复攻淮甸，诏存中同都督江、淮事。
现代文：不久，金军又攻淮甸，诏令杨存中同都督江、淮事。
English: Soon, the Chinese army attacked Huai Tien again, and ordered Yang Cunzhong to negotiate with the governor of Jiangsu and Huai.

古文：汤思退罢，升都督，陛辞，赐坐，赐玉鞍勒。
现代文：汤思退被罢免后，升任都督，杨存中入宫辞谢，皇上赐座，并赐给玉鞍勒。
English: After Tang Si retired and was dismissed, he was promoted to the governor, Yang Cunzhong entered the palace and resigned, the emperor gave him the throne, and gave him the jade saddle.

古文：时诸军各守分地，不相统一，存中集诸将调护之。于是始更相为援。
现代文：当时诸军各自守卫自己辖区，不能互相协同，杨存中召集诸将进行协调，于是才互相应援。
English: At that time, the armies were each guarding their own jurisdiction, and could not cooperate with each other. Yang Cunzhong called together the generals to coordinate, so they came to each other's aid.

古文：帝亲札赐之曰： 诸帅协和，互相策应，卿之力也。 会金兵已深入，朝议欲舍淮保江，存中持不可，乃已。
现代文：皇上亲自写信赐他说 ：诸将协同和睦，互相策应，是你的功劳。 恰逢金军已深入南下，朝廷计议准备舍弃淮河保卫长江，杨存中坚持不可，才作罢。
English: The emperor himself wrote a letter to him, saying, "It is to your credit that all of you will work together harmoniously and coordinate with each other. Just as the gold army has gone deep into the south, the imperial court is planning to abandon the Huaihe River to defend the Yangtze River, and Yang Cunzhong insists that it is impossible to do so.

古文：金兵在扬州，或劝存中击之。
现代文：金军在扬州，有人劝杨存中派兵攻打。
English: The gold army was in Yangzhou, and someone advised Yang Cunzhong to send troops to attack.

古文：存中不敢渡，独临江固垒以老之。
现代文：杨存中不敢渡江，只是临江固垒以防敌军。
English: Yang Cunzhong did not dare to cross the river, but fortified the river to prevent the enemy.

古文：金人寻请盟。
现代文：金军不久请求恢复和好。
English: The Chinese army soon asked for the restoration of peace.

古文：乾道元年班师，加昭庆军节度使，复奉祠。
现代文：乾道元年班师，朝廷加杨存中昭庆军节度使，再次奉祠。
English: In the first year of the Qian Dao, the imperial court plus Yang Cunzhong, the commander of the Zhaoqing Army, once again offered the shrine.

古文：时兴屯田，存中献私田在楚州者三万九千亩。
现代文：当时兴起屯田，杨存中将自己在楚州的私田三万九千亩献出。
English: At that time, there was a rise in the number of private farms, and Yang Cunzhong donated 39,000 mu of his private farmland in Chuzhou.

古文：二年，卒，年六十五。
现代文：乾道二年，去世，时年六十五岁。
English: He died two years later at the age of sixty-five.

古文：以太师致仕，追封和王，谥武恭。
现代文：以太师身份退休，被追封为和王，谥号 武恭 。
English: He retired as an eunuch and was given the posthumous title of "Wang," also known as "Wugong."

古文：高宗追念旧臣，为之出涕，赙钱十万。
现代文：高宗追念以前的臣僚，为他流泪，赠钱十万。
English: Gaozong paid tribute to his former minister, shed tears for him, and gave him 100,000 yuan.

古文：高宗假借诸将，眷存中尤深，尝曰： 朕于存中，抚绥之过于子弟。 濠、庐之役，亲笔戒之曰： 若不便进，当行军法。 赵密代领殿帅，则举唐崔祐甫夺王驾鹤兵权事，豫戒大臣。
现代文：高宗依靠诸将，对杨存中眷顾尤其深厚，曾经说： 我对杨存中，抚绥胜过对我的子弟。 濠、庐之战，亲笔告诫他说： 如不前进，当以军法论处。 赵密代替他统帅殿前司，就例举唐朝崔佑甫夺取王驾鹤兵权事，预戒大臣。
English: Gao Zong relied on the generals and was especially fond of Yang Cunzhong. He once said, "I am more fond of Yang Cunzhong than I am of my younger brother." During the Battle of Jiuyuan and Jiuyuan, Gao Zong personally warned Yang Cunzhong, "If you don't advance, you should be punished by military law." Zhao Mi replaced him as commander-in-chief of the palace, and cited the example of the Tang Dynasty's Cui Youfu seizing the military power of Wangjihe as a warning to the minister.

古文：及竣事，又曰： 杨存中之罢，朕不安寝者三夕。 
现代文：等到事毕后，又说 ：杨存中被罢免，我三天夜晚睡不安寝。 
English: After waiting for the matter to be over, he also said: Yang Cunming was removed from office, and I couldn't sleep for three nights.

古文：存中天资忠孝敢勇，大小二百余战，身被五十余创。
现代文：杨存中天资忠孝勇敢，历经大小二百余战，身受创伤五十余处。
English: Yang Cunzhong was gifted, loyal, filial and brave. He went through more than 200 battles and suffered more than 50 injuries.

古文：宿卫出入四十年，最寡过。
现代文：宿卫皇帝出入四十年，过错最少。
English: Emperor Suwa, who has been in and out of power for forty years, has made the fewest mistakes.

古文：孝宗以为旧臣，尤礼异之，常呼郡王而不名。
现代文：孝宗因为他是高宗旧臣，对他尤其礼遇，常常称呼郡王而不直呼他的名字。
English: Because he was an old retainer of Gao Zong, Xiaozong treated him with special courtesy, often calling him the county king without calling him by his first name.

古文：父、祖及母皆死难，存中既显，请于朝，宗闵谥忠介，震谥忠毅，赐庙曰显忠，曰报忠。
现代文：父亲、祖父和母亲都死于国难，杨存中显贵之后，请示朝廷，杨宗闵谥号忠介，杨震谥号忠毅，分别赐庙叫显忠，叫报忠。
English: His father, grandfather and mother all died in the national calamity. After Yang Cunzhong became a prominent person, he asked the imperial court to give the temple the names of Yang Zongxuan (忠介) and Yang Zhenxuan (忠毅) respectively.

古文：又以家庙、祭器为请，遂许祭五世，前所无也。
现代文：又请求家庙、祭器，于是被允许祭祀五代，这是以前所没有的。
English: He also asked for a family temple and sacrificial vessels, so he was allowed to offer sacrifices for five generations, which was unprecedented.

古文：祖母刘流落蜀、陇，存中日夜祷祠访问，间关数千里，卒迎以归。
现代文：祖母刘氏流落川、陇，杨存中日夜祈祷寻访，间关阻隔数千里，终于迎接回来。
English: Grandmother Liu has been living in Sichuan and Shandong, and Yang Cunrong has been praying and searching for her day and night, thousands of miles apart, finally welcoming her back.

古文：御军宽而有纪，所用将士，专以才勇选，不私部曲之旧。
现代文：统驭军队宽而有纪，选用人才专以才能勇敢为标准，不私用部曲故旧。
English: The command of the army is broad and disciplined, the selection of talents is based on talent and bravery, and there is no private use.

古文：李显忠以罪斥，存中奏为统制官，后为名将。
现代文：李显忠曾因罪过被贬斥，杨存中奏请任他为统制官，后来终于成为名将。
English: Lee Hsien Chung was once reprimanded for his misdeeds, and Yang Cun Chung-soo appointed him as his regent, and he eventually became a great general.

古文：尝以克敌弓虽劲而蹶张难，遂以意创马皇弩，思巧制工，发易中远，人服其精。
现代文：曾经因为克敌弓虽强劲但难以蹶张，于是创制马皇弩，制工精巧，易发射远，人人佩服其精妙。
English: Once upon a time, because the archer's bow was strong but difficult to bend, the horse-king's crossbow was created. The craftsmanship is exquisite, it is easy to launch far, and everyone admires its sophistication.

古文：尝营居凤山，十年而就，极山川之胜，后献于朝廷，更筑室焉。
现代文：曾经在凤山营造居处，十年而成，极尽山川之优美，后来献给朝廷，另外修建居室。
English: He once built a residence in Fengshan, which took ten years to complete and was as beautiful as the mountains and rivers. Later, he dedicated it to the imperial court and built another living room.

古文：又葺园亭于湖山之间，高宗为书 水月 二字。
现代文：又在湖山之间修葺亭园，高宗为他题写 水月 两字。
English: He also renovated the pavilion between the lake and the mountain, and Gaozong inscribed the word "Mizuki" for him.

古文：所居建阁以藏御书，孝宗题曰 风云庆会之阁 。
现代文：所居之地建阁收藏皇上御书，孝宗为他题写叫 风云庆会之阁 。
English: He built a pavilion in the place where he lived to collect the emperor's books, and he was given the title of "Celebration Pavilion of the Wind and Clouds" by Emperor Xiaozong.

