古文：青衣水出青衣县西蒙山，东与沫水合也。
现代文：青衣水发源于青衣县西部的蒙山，东流与沫水汇合。
English: The Qingyi River originates from the Mengshan Mountains in the western part of Qingyi County. The eastern stream merges with the foaming water.

古文：县故青衣羌国也。
现代文：青衣县，就是从前的青衣羌国。
English: Tsing Yi County is the former Tsing Yi Province.

古文：安帝延光元年，置蜀郡属国都尉，青衣王子心慕汉制，上求内附。
现代文：按《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王十年撤废沈黎郡，分设两部都尉，其中一处治所就在青衣，管理汉族人民。
English: According to the "Bamboo Annals," in the tenth year of the reign of Liang Huicheng, Shenli County was abolished and divided into two capitals, one of which was in Qingyi, to administer the Han people.

古文：顺帝阳嘉二年，改曰汉嘉。
现代文：公孙述割据蜀地时，青衣人不肯降服，受到世祖的赞扬，建武十九年，设置为郡。
English: When the great-grandson recounted the separation of Shu, the people of Qing refused to submit and were praised by the patriarch. In the 19th year of Jianwu, it was set up as a county.

古文：嘉得此良臣也。
现代文：安帝延光元年，改名为汉嘉，庆贺得到一位贤臣。
English: In the first year of Yan Guang, An Di changed his name to Han Jia, and was congratulated by a wise minister.

古文：县有蒙山，青衣水所发，东径其县，与沫水会于越巂郡之灵关道。
现代文：县里有蒙山，是青衣水的发源地。青衣水往东流经县境，在越钱郡的灵关，道和沫水汇合。
English: There is Mengshan in the county, which is the birthplace of Qingyi Water. Qingyi Water flows eastward through the county, and in Lingguan of Yueqian County, the road and the water merge.

古文：青衣水又东，邛水注之，水出汉嘉严道邛来山，东至蜀郡临邛县，东入青衣水。
现代文：青衣水又往东流，邓水注入。邓水发源于汉嘉郡严道县的邓来山，东流到蜀郡临邓县，往东注入青衣水。
English: Tsing Yi water also flows eastward and is injected with Dengshui. Dengshui originates from Denglaishan in Yandao County, Hanya County, flows eastward to Lintang County, Shu County, and is injected with Tsing Yi water to the east.

古文：至犍为南安县，入于江。
现代文：一 到键为郡南安县，注入江水。
English: One of the key areas is Nan'an County, where river water has been injected.

古文：青衣水径平乡，谓之平乡江。
现代文：青衣水流经平乡，叫平乡江。
English: The Qingyi River flows through Pingxiang and is called the Pingxiang River.

古文：《益州记》曰：平乡江东径峨眉山，在南安县界，去成都南千里。
现代文：《益州记》说：平乡江往东流，经过峨眉山，山在南安县边界，南距成都一千里。
English: "Yizhou Chronicle" said: Pingxiang River flows eastward, passing through Mount Emei, a mountain on the border of Nan'an County, a thousand miles south of Chengdu.

古文：然秋日清澄，望见两山相峙，如蛾眉焉。
现代文：但在秋高气爽的日子，远远可以望见两峰对峙，状如蛾眉。
English: However, on a crisp autumn day, the confrontation between the two peaks can be seen from far away, resembling a moth's brow.

古文：青衣水又东流注于大江。
现代文：青衣水又往东流，注入大江。
English: The Qingling water also flows eastward and is injected into the Dajiang River.

古文：桓水出蜀郡岷山，西南行羌中，入于南海。
现代文：桓水发源于蜀郡的氓山，往西南流过羌中，注入南海。
English: The Kuan Shui originates from the Hooligan Mountain in Shu County, flows southwest through the middle of Yunnan, and flows into the South China Sea.

古文：《尚书。禹贡》：岷、既艺，沱、潜既道，蔡、蒙旅平，和夷底绩。
现代文：《尚书•禹贡》：崛山、潘家山都可以耕种了；沱水、潜水经疏导后都畅通了；蔡山、蒙山治水工程已经完竣；和夷也来通报大功告成了。
English: "Shangshu • Yugong": Mount Qingshan and Mount Panjiashan can be cultivated; flood control and diving are smooth after dredging; Mount Cai and Mount Mengshan flood control projects have been completed; and Heyi also came to announce that the great work has been completed.

古文：郑玄曰：和上，夷所居之地也，和读曰桓。《地理志》曰：桓水出蜀郡蜀山西南行羌中者也。
现代文：郑玄说，和上，是夷人所居的地方。矛贬读作桓、《地理志》说：桓水发源于蜀郡的蜀山，往西南流经羌中。
English: Zheng Xuan said that He Shang was a place where barbarians lived. Spearman read it as Huan, and "Geography" said: Huan water originated from Shushan in Shushan County and flowed to the southwest through Yuzhong.

古文：《尚书》又曰：西倾因桓是来。
现代文：《尚书》又说：从西倾可由桓水来到这里。
English: "Shoshu" also said: From the west, you can come here by Kansui.

古文：马融、王肃云：西治倾山，惟因桓水是来，言无他道也。
现代文：马融、王肃说：西部所辖的倾山，只能由桓水到这里来，这是说再没有别的道路了。
English: Ma Rong and Wang Su said, "The western region of Danshan can only be reached from Huanshui, which means there is no other way.

古文：余按《经》据《书》岷山、西倾，俱有桓水。桓水出西倾山，更无别流，所导者惟斯水耳。
现代文：我依据《水经》和《尚书》来看，眠山、西倾都有桓水，桓水发源于西倾山，山间再也没有别的河流，所通的也只有这条水了。
English: According to "Shui Jing" and "Shang Shu," both Mingshan Mountain and Xiling Mountain have Xiangshui. Xiangshui originates from Xiling Mountain. There are no other rivers in the mountains, and only this water flows through.

古文：浮于潜、汉而达江、沔。故《晋地道记》曰：梁州南至桓水，西抵黑水，东限扞关。今汉中、巴郡、汶山、蜀郡、汉嘉、江阳、朱提、涪陵、阴平、广汉、新都、梓潼、犍为、武都、上庸、魏兴、新城，皆古梁州之地。
现代文：由潜水、汉水乘船可到达江水、污水，所以《晋书•地道记》说＊梁州疆域南到桓水，西到黑水，东以扦关为界，现在的汉中、巴郡、坟山、蜀郡、汉嘉、江阳、朱提、涪陵、阴平、广汉、新都、梓撞、键为、武都、上庸、魏兴、新城，都是古时梁州的地域。
English: It is possible to reach the river water and sewage by boat from diving and Han water. Therefore, "Jinshu•Jindu Ji" said * the territory of Liangzhou is bounded by Huan water in the south, Heishui in the west, and Shaoguan in the east. Present-day Hanzhong, Ba County, Gohyang, Shu County, Hanzhong, Jiangyang, Zhuti, Fuling, Yinping, Guanghan, Xindu, Zizhong, Qianwei, Wudu, Shangyong, Weixing, and Xincheng were all regions of Liangzhou in ancient times.

古文：自桓水以南为夷，《书》所谓和夷底绩也。然所可当者，惟斯水与江耳。桓水盖二水之别名，为两川之通称矣。
现代文：桓水以南是夷人地区，就是《尚书》里说的来通报大功告成的和夷，但可相对应的水，只有此水和江水了 桓水大概就是这两条水的别名，也是它们的通称。
English: To the south of Kansui is the Heiren region, that is, Heiji, which is said in the "Shang Shu" to announce the completion of the great work, but the corresponding water is only this water and river water. Kansui is probably another name for these two waters, and is also their common name.

古文：郑玄注《尚书》，言织皮谓西戎之国也。
现代文：郑玄给《尚书》加注时说：织皮，是指西戎之国，西倾则是雍州的山。
English: Zheng Xuan said when adding notes to the "Shang Shu": "Weaving leather" refers to the country of Xi Rong, and "Westward-leaning" refers to the mountains of Yongzhou.

古文：西倾，雍州之山也，雍、戎二野之间，人有事于京师者，道当由此州而来。
现代文：雍州、西戎两个地区之间，人们有事要去京师，所走的路应当从此州而来。
English: Between the two regions of Yongzhou and Xi'an, people have to go to Beijing, and the road they take should come from this state.

古文：桓是陇坂名，其道盘桓旋曲而上，故名曰桓，是今其下民谓是坂曲为盘也，斯乃玄之别致，恐乖《尚书》因桓之义，非浮潜入渭之文。余考校诸书，以具闻见。
现代文：桓是，这是陇地山坡名，那里道路盘桓曲折上行，所以叫桓是。
English: Kuan Ze, this is the name of a hillside in Shunde, where the road twists and turns uphill, so it is called Kuan Ze.

古文：今略缉综川流沿注之绪，虽今古异容，本其流俗，粗陈所由。
现代文：现在山下的人把山坡叫是，曲折叫盘。这是郑玄的一家之说，恐怕违背《尚书》由桓水前来之说的本意，也是不符由潜水乘船入渭水这句话的含义的。
English: Now the people at the foot of the mountain call the slope "Yes" and the twists and turns "No." This is what Zheng Xuan's family said, which is probably contrary to the original meaning of the "Shang Shu" saying that they came from Huanshui, and also does not match the meaning of the sentence that they went from diving by boat into Huanshui.

古文：然自西倾至葭萌，人于西汉，即郑玄之所谓潜水者也。
现代文：我翻阅了各种典籍以广见闻，现在大略综述一下河流的来龙去脉，虽然古今地貌有所不同，但按一般说法，还是可以大致叙述一下诸水所经的地方的。
English: I have read all kinds of classics to be widely known. Now I will give a general overview of the history of rivers. Although the landforms of ancient and modern times are different, according to general terms, it is still possible to roughly describe the places through which the waters pass.

古文：自西汉溯流而届于晋寿界。
现代文：那么从西倾到霞萌注入西汉水的，就是郑玄所谓潜水了。
English: Then, from Xidun to Xiamen to infuse water into the Western Han Dynasty, is Zheng Xuan's so-called diving.

古文：沮漾枝津南，历冈穴，迤逦而接汉，沿此入漾，《书》所谓浮潜而逾沔矣。
现代文：从西汉水溯流到达晋寿边界，沮水、漾水等支流往南流过山冈下的洞穴，透巡流奔，与汉水相接，又沿汉水而进入漾水―这就是《尚书》所谓从潜水乘船到达河水了。
English: From the trailing stream of the West Han River to the border of Jinzhou, the branch streams such as the Despondent Water and the Surge Water flow southward through the cave under the mountain, run through the cruising current, connect with the Han Water, and then enter the Surge Water along the Han Water - this is what "Shang Shu" calls reaching the river by boat from diving.

古文：历汉川至南郑县，属于褒水。溯褒暨于衙岭之南溪水，枝灌于斜川届于武功，而北达于渭水。此乃水陆之相关，川流之所经，复不乖《禹贡》入渭之宗，实符《尚书》乱河之义也。
现代文：经汉水到南郑县，连接褒水；从褒水溯流而上，达到衙岭的南溪水，分支注入斜川，抵达武功，往北直到渭水，这是有水路陆路相互衔接，有河流所经的路线可循的，并不违背《禹贡》中入渭的说法，实际上也是符合于《尚书》中直渡河水的意思的。
English: It runs through Hanshui to Nanzheng County, connecting with Baoshui. From Baoshui, it flows upstream and reaches the Nanxi Water of Jiaoling, branches into the Shiaochuan, arrives at Wugong, and goes north to Lishui. This is because there are waterways and land routes that connect with each other, and there are rivers that can be followed. It does not contradict the saying of "entering the river" in "Yugong," and in fact it is also consistent with the meaning of "directly crossing the river" in "Shangshu."

古文：若水出蜀郡旄牛徼外，东南至故关为若水也。
现代文：若水发源于蜀郡旋牛县边境以外，往东南流到故关的就是若水。
English: If the water originates from outside the border of Zhenyu County, Shu County, it is the water that flows to the southeast to the old pass.

古文：《山海经》曰：南海之内，黑水之间，有木名曰若木，若水出焉。
现代文：《山海经》说：南海以内，黑水之间，有一棵树叫若木，若水就发源在这里。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" says: Within the South China Sea, between the black water, there is a tree called the young tree, and the young water originates here.

古文：又云：灰野之山有树焉，青叶赤华，厥名若木。
现代文：又说：灰野之山上有一棵树，青叶红花，名叫若木。
English: And he said, There is a tree in the mountain of the field of Hades, which produces lilies of the valley, and the tree is called a young tree.

古文：黑水之间，厥木所植，水出其下，故水受其称焉。
现代文：它生在昆仑山，西边依傍着西极。《淮南子》说：若木在建木西，树上有十朵花，光芒照耀着大地，所以屈原《离骚•天问》说：日神羲和没有上升到中天，若木的花是什么光芒？
English: It was born in the Kunlun Mountains, on the west side of the West Pole. "Huainanzi" said: The young tree is in the west of Jianmu, the tree has ten flowers, and the light shines on the earth, so Qu Yuan's "Issao • Tianqian" said: The sun did not rise to the middle of the sky, what is the light of the young tree's flower?

古文：若水沿流，间关蜀土，黄帝长子昌意，德劣不足绍承大位，降居斯水，为诸侯焉。
现代文：但若木生长的地方不止一处。若木生在黑水之间，水在树下流出，所以也因木而得名了。若水在蜀地崎岖的山岭间辗转奔流，黄帝的长子昌意品德恶劣，不配继承王位，因而被贬，滴居于若水，成为诸侯。
English: But there is more than one place for young trees to grow. Young trees are born between black water and water flows out under the trees, so they are also named after trees. Young water flows between the rugged mountains of Shudi. The eldest son of the Yellow Emperor, Changyi, was of bad moral character and was not worthy of inheriting the throne, so he was demoted and lived in Young water and became a vassal.

古文：娶蜀山氏女，生颛顼于若水之野。
现代文：他娶了蜀山氏的女儿，就在若水之野生了撷项。
English: He married a daughter of the Shushan clan and had a wild affair in Wakamizu.

古文：有圣德，二十登帝位，承少皞金官之政，以水德宝历矣。
现代文：撷顶有圣人的德望，二十岁就登上帝位，接过少晦的金官职务，以水德而为王。
English: He had the moral stature of a saint, ascended to the throne at the age of twenty, took over the duties of a young gold official, and ruled with the virtue of water.

古文：若水东南流，鲜水注之，一名州江。大度水出徼外，至旄牛道，南流入于若水。
现代文：若水往东南流，接纳了鲜水，又名州江；大度水发源于边境以外，到旎牛道，往南流注入若水。
English: If the water flows to the southeast, it receives fresh water, also known as the Zhujiang River; the water originates from outside the border, to the snail road, and the southward flow injects the young water.

古文：又径越巂大莋县入绳。
现代文：若水又经越锡大作县注入绳水。
English: If the water is fresh, it will be injected into the rope water through the Yuexi Dazhao County.

古文：绳水出徼外。
现代文：绳水发源于边境以外。
English: Ropes and water originate outside the border.

古文：《山海经》曰：巴遂之山，绳水出焉，东南流分为二水：其一水，枝流东出，径广柔县，东流注于江。
现代文：《山海经》说：巴遂之山是绳水的发源地，往东南流分为两条：其中一条分支东出，经过广柔县东流注入江水；另一条往南流经旎牛道，到大作与若水汇合。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Mount Basui is the birthplace of rope water, and the southeastern stream is divided into two: one branching eastward, passing through the eastern stream of Guangru County to inject river water; the other flowing southward through the yakitori road, to Datong and Wakamizu confluence.

古文：其一水，南径旄牛道，至大莋与若水合，自下亦通谓之为绳水矣。
现代文：自此以下，也就通称绳水了。
English: Since then, it has been commonly known as Ropemizu.

古文：作，夷也，汶山曰夷，南中曰昆弥，蜀曰邛，汉嘉、越巂曰莋，皆夷种也。
现代文：作是夷族。住在坟山的叫夷，住在南中的叫昆弥，住在蜀的叫邓，住在汉嘉、越钱的叫作，都是夷族。
English: They are called "Yi" who live in Guishan, "Kun" who live in Nanzhong, "Deng" who live in Shou, and "Yi" who live in Hanya and Yueqian.

古文：南过越巂邛都县西，直南至会无县，淹水东南流注之。
现代文：往南流过越巂邛都县西，一直南流到会无县，淹水往东南流注入若水。
English: It flows southward through the west of Yueqidu County, and flows southward until it reaches Huanwu County. Flood water is injected into the southeastern stream by the young water.

古文：邛都县，汉武帝开邛巂置之。
现代文：邓都县是汉武帝开辟邓作时所设。
English: Dengdu County was established when Emperor Hanwu opened up Dengzhuang.

古文：县陷为池，今因名为邛池，南人谓之邛河。
现代文：县城地面沉降，成为池沿，因而现在名为邓池，南方人叫邓河，河中有蜂褐山。
English: The ground of the county seat has subsided and become the edge of the pond, so it is now called Dengchi, the southerners call it Denghe, and there is a bee brown mountain in the river.

古文：河中有蚌巂山，应劭曰：有巂水言越此水以章休盛也。后复后叛，元鼎六年，汉兵自越巂水伐之，以为越巂郡，治邛都县。
现代文：应肋说：有褐水，意思是说越过此水以彰明美善兴盛。后来夷人又反叛了，元鼎六年前，汉朝从越钱水出兵讨伐，设置越棋郡，治所在邓都县。
English: Ying Li said: There is brown water, which means that beyond this water, there is prosperity. Later, the barbarians rebelled again. Six years before the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent troops from Yue Qianshui to set up Yueqi County, which was governed by Dundu County.

古文：王莽遣任贵为领戎大尹，守之，更名为集巂也。
现代文：王莽派遣任贵为领戎大尹镇守在这里，改名集钱。
English: Wang Mang dispatched Ren Gui to be the leader of the Yongda Yin Town Guard here, and changed his name to collect money.

古文：县故邛都国也。
现代文：邓都县从前是邓都国。
English: Dengdu County was formerly known as Dengdu Province.

古文：下汤沐洗，能治宿疾。昔李骧败李流于温水是也。
现代文：越锡水就是混水、若水，似乎是随水流所经之地而更名的。又有温水，冬夏常热不变，源头温度很高，可以煮熟鸡肉和猪肉；在温泉里洗澡，能治愈多年顽疾。
English: Yuexishui is mixed water, fresh water, and it seems to be renamed according to the place where the water flow passes. There is also warm water, which is always hot in winter and summer, and the source temperature is very high, which can cook chicken and pork; bathing in hot springs can cure many years of persistent diseases.

古文：若水又径会无县，县有骏马河，水出县东高山。山有天马径，厥迹存焉。
现代文：从前李骤曾在温水打败李流。若水又流经会无县，县里有骏马河。骏马河发源于县东的高山，山上有天马径，马的足迹还在。
English: Once upon a time, Li Shuang defeated Li Liu in warm water. If the water flowed again, there would be no county, but there would be the Baima River in the county. The Baima River originates from the mountains in the east of the county. There is a heavenly horse path in the mountains, and the horse's footprints are still there.

古文：马日行千里，民家马牧之山下，或产骏驹，言是天马子。
现代文：马日行千里，居民的马放牧到山下，如果生了茁壮的小马，都说是天马之子。
English: Horses travel thousands of miles every day, and the residents' horses graze at the foot of the mountain. If a strong pony is born, it is said to be the son of Heavenly Horse.

古文：河中有贝子胎铜，以羊祠之，则可取也。
现代文：河中有贝子，是铜胎，用羊祭祀就可以捞到。
English: There is shellfish in the river, it is a copper tire, it can be fished with a sheep sacrifice.

古文：又有孙水焉。水出台高县，即台登县也。
现代文：又有孙水，发源于台高县，就是台登县。
English: There is also Sun Shui, which originated in Taigao County, that is, Taitung County.

古文：孙水一名白沙江，南流径邛都县，司马相如定西南夷，桥孙水，即是水也。
现代文：孙水又叫白沙江，往南流过邓都县，司马相如安抚了西南夷，在孙水架桥，就是这条水。
English: Sunshui, also known as Baisha River, flows southward through Dundu County. Sima Xiangru pacified the Southwest Yi, and it is this water that is bridged in Sunshui.

古文：又南至会无，入若水。
现代文：孙水往南流到会无县注入若水。
English: The sun shines southward, and there is no county to inject fresh water.

古文：若水又南径云南郡之遂久县，青岭水入焉。
现代文：若水又往南流，经过云南郡的遂久县，接纳了青岭水。
English: If the water flows south again, it passes through Suiju County in Yunnan County and receives Qingling Water.

古文：水出青蛉县西，东径其县下，县以氏焉，有石猪圻，长谷中有石猪，子母数千头。
现代文：青岭水发源于青岭县西，往东流过县城下，县就是因水而得名的。县里有石猪析，深长的山谷中有许多石猪，母猪、小猪多达数千头。
English: The Qingling River originates in the west of Qingling County and flows eastward through the county town. The county is named after the water. There are stone pigs in the county, and there are many stone pigs in the deep valley. There are thousands of sows and piglets.

古文：长老传言，夷昔牧此，一朝化为石，迄今夷人不敢往牧。
现代文：据老人们相传，从前夷人在这里牧猪，一天忽然都变成了石头；因此至今夷人仍不敢到那里去牧猪。
English: According to the old people's legend, once the barbarians herded pigs here, and one day they suddenly turned into stone; therefore, the barbarians still dare not go there to herd pigs.

古文：贪水出焉。
现代文：贪水发源在这里。
English: The thirst for water originated here.

古文：青蛉水又东，注于绳水。
现代文：青岭水又往东流，注入绳水。
English: Qingling water also flows eastward, injecting rope water.

古文：绳水又径三绛县西，又径姑复县北，对三蜂县，淹水注之。
现代文：泥水又流经三绛县西，又流经姑复县，姑复县北对三绛县，有淹水注入。
English: The muddy water also flowed through the west of Samye County, Gufu County, and the north of Gufu County to Samye County, with flooding.

古文：三绛一曰小会无，故《经》曰：淹至会无注若水。
现代文：三绛又名小会无，所以《水经》说：淹水到会无注入若水。
English: Sanxing, also known as Xiao Huizhou, so the "Water Sutra" said: flooding to Huizhou will not inject fresh water.

古文：若水又与母血水合。
现代文：若水又与母血水汇合。
English: The amniotic fluid merges with the amniotic fluid.

古文：水出益州郡弄栋县东农山母血谷，北流径三绛县南，北入绳。
现代文：母血水发源于益州郡弄栋县东农山母血谷，往北流经三绛县南，往北注入泥水。
English: The mother's blood water originates from the mother's blood valley of East Nongshan Mountain, Nandong County, Yizhou County, and flows northward through the south of Sanlu County, injecting muddy water to the north.

古文：绳水又东，涂水注之。
现代文：绳水又往东流，涂水注入。
English: The rope water flows eastward again, and the coated water is injected.

古文：水出建宁郡之牧靡南山。县、山并即草以立名。
现代文：涂水发源于建宁郡牧靡县的南山，县和山都以草取名。
English: Tu Shui originated in the Nanshan of Mu Mui County, Jianning County. Both the county and the mountain are named after the grass.

古文：山在县东北乌句山南五百里，山生牧靡，可以解毒。
现代文：牧靡山在该县东北乌句山以南五百里。山上长着牧靡草，可以解毒。
English: Mt. Muimai is located 500 miles south of Mt. Wukusan in the northeast of the county. The mountain is covered with Muimai grass, which can detoxify.

古文：百卉方盛，鸟多误食，乌喙口中毒，必急飞往牧靡山，啄牧靡以解毒也。
现代文：当百草生长旺盛时，鸟常误食，咏口中毒，就必定会急急忙忙地飞往牧靡山，啄食牧靡来解毒。
English: When the growth of paraquat is vigorous, the birds often eat by mistake, and the beak is poisoned, so they will certainly fly to Muimai Mountain in a hurry, and eat Muimai to detoxify.

古文：涂水导源腊谷，西北流至越巂入绳，绳水又径越巂郡之马湖县，谓之马湖江。又左合卑水，水出卑水县，而东流注马湖江也。
现代文：涂水发源于腊谷，往西北流，到越钱注入绳水。绳水又流经越禽郡的马湖县，称为马湖江，又在左边汇合了卑水，卑水发源于卑水县，往东注入马湖江。
English: The Tu Shui originates in Lugu and flows northwest to Yueqian, where it is injected into the Jiu Shui. The Jiu Shui also flows through Mahu County, Yueji County, and is called the Mahu River. On the left, it meets the He Shui. The He Shui originates in He Shui County and flows east into the Mahu River.

古文：又东北至犍为朱提县西，为泸江水。
现代文：又往东北流到犍为郡朱提县西边，就是庐江水。
English: It also flows to the northeast to the west of Zhuti County, Zhuwei County, which is the Lijiang River water.

古文：朱提山名也。
现代文：朱提是山名。
English: Juti is the name of the mountain.

古文：按永昌郡有兰仓水，出西南博南县，汉明帝永平二年置。
现代文：应劭说：山在朱提县西南，县也因山而得名。朱提县原是键为属国，在郡治南约一千八百里。建安二十年设置。
English: Yingqi said: The mountain is in the southwest of Juti County, and the county is also named after the mountain. Juti County was originally a key to the country, about 1,800 miles south of the county. It took 20 years to build.

古文：博南，山名也，县以氏之。
现代文：博南是山名，县就因山而得名。
English: Bonan is the name of a mountain, and the county was named after the mountain.

古文：其水东北流径博南山，汉武帝时，通博南山道，渡兰仓津，土地绝远，行者昔之。
现代文：兰仓水往东北流经博南山，汉武帝时开通了博南山的路，在兰仓津过渡，地方极其遥远，往来行人深以为苦。
English: Lancang water flows to the northeast through Bonan Mountain. When Emperor Hanwu opened the Bonan Mountain Road, it passed through Lancangjin. The place is extremely remote, and pedestrians find it difficult to come and go.

古文：歌曰：汉德广，开不宾，渡博南，越仓津，渡兰仓，为作人！
现代文：有一首歌谣说：汉朝恩德广大无边，教化未归顺的夷民。翻过博南山，越过兰仓津，渡过兰仓江，一批批全是服役的人。
English: There is a folk song that says: The Han Dynasty's benevolence is vast and boundless, enlightening the unconverted barbarians. Over the Bonan Mountain, over the Lancangjin, over the Lancang River, a batch of batches are all service people.

古文：山高四十里。
现代文：山高四十里。
English: The mountain is forty miles high.

古文：兰仓水出金沙，越人收以为黄金。又有珠光穴，穴出光珠，又有琥珀、珊瑚、黄、白、青珠也。
现代文：兰仓水出产金沙，越人淘沙制成黄金；又有光珠穴，洞穴里出产光珠 ；还有唬拍、珊瑚和黄的、白的、青的珠子。
English: Lancang water produces golden sand, and the Yue people make the sand into gold; there are also light bead caves, and light beads are produced in the caves; there are also bats, corals and yellow, white and blue beads.

古文：兰仓水又东北径不韦县，与类水合，水出巂唐县，汉武帝置。
现代文：兰仓水又往东北流经不韦县，与类水相汇合。类水发源于钱唐县，崔唐县在汉武帝时设置。
English: The Lancang Water also flows to the northeast through Buwei County, and merges with the similar water. The similar water originated in Qiantang County, and Cui Tang County was set up during the Han Dynasty.

古文：类水西南流。曲折又北流，东至不韦县，注兰仓水。
现代文：类水往西南流，弯弯曲曲地又转向北流，往东到不韦县注入兰仓水。
English: This kind of water flows to the southwest, bends and turns to the north, and injects Lancang water to the east of Buwei County.

古文：又东与禁水合。
现代文：兰仓水又往东流，与禁水相汇合。
English: The Lancang River also flows eastward, converging with the Forbidden River.

古文：水自永昌县而北径其郡西，水左右甚饶犀象，山有钩蛇，长七八丈，尾末有岐，蛇在山涧水中，以尾钩岸上人牛食之。
现代文：禁水从永昌县往北流，经过郡城西面，两岸犀牛、大象很多；山上有钩蛇，长七八丈，尾端分叉。蛇躲在山涧的水中，用尾巴来钩岸上的人和牛吞食。
English: The forbidden water flows from Yongchang County to the north, passing through the west of the county seat. There are many rhinos and elephants on both sides of the river. There are hooked snakes on the mountain, seven or eight meters long, with a forked tail. The snake hides in the water of the mountains, and uses its tail to hook people and cattle on the shore to eat.

古文：此水傍瘴气特恶。气中有物，不见其形，其作有声，中木则折，中人则害，名曰鬼弹。
现代文：这条水边瘴气特别厉害，气中有个东西，虽然看不到它的形状，出动时却有声音，打着树木，树木就折断，打着了人，人就丧命，名叫鬼弹。
English: This waterside miasma is particularly powerful. There is something in the air, and although its shape cannot be seen, it makes a sound when it is set off. If it hits trees, the trees break, and if it hits a person, the person dies. It is called a ghost bomb.

古文：惟十一月、十二月差可渡，正月至十月，径之无不害人。
现代文：只有十一或十二月还勉强可以渡河，如在正月到十月之间经过，无人不受其害的。
English: Only on the 11th or 12th of the month is it still possible to cross the river, and if it happens between the first month and October, no one is safe.

古文：故郡有罪人，徙之禁旁，不过十日皆死也。
现代文：所以郡里有犯人，就把他们流放到禁水旁，不出十日就都死了。
English: Therefore, if there were prisoners in the county, they were exiled to the forbidden waters, and all of them died within ten days.

古文：禁水又北注泸津水，又东径不韦县北而东北流，两岸皆高山，数百丈，泸峰最为杰秀，孤高三千余丈。
现代文：禁水又往北流，注入沪津水，沪津水又往东流经不韦县北，然后往东北流。两岸都是几百丈的高山，其中以沪峰最为高峻秀丽，孤峰拔起，高三千余丈。
English: The forbidden water then flows northward, injecting the Hanzhong water, and the Hanzhong water then flows eastward through the north of Buwei County, and then flows to the northeast. Both sides are several hundred meters high mountains, of which the Hanzhong peak is the most beautiful, and the lonely peak is more than three thousand meters high.

古文：是山于晋太康中崩，震动郡邑。
现代文：此山在晋太康年间崩塌，震得整个郡城都摇动起来。
English: The mountain collapsed during the Jin and Taikang dynasties, shaking the entire county.

古文：水之左右，马步之径裁通，而时有瘴气，三月、四月，径之必死，非此时犹令人闷吐。
现代文：沪津水左右两岸，仅有小径相通，可步行或骑马；但时常有瘴气，三月和四月间经过这里，必死无疑，即使不在这个时候，也还要使人胸闷或呕吐。
English: On the left and right banks of the Shanghai-Tianjin Waterway, only footpaths are connected, and it is possible to walk or ride a horse. However, there is often bad air. If you pass here between March and April, you will undoubtedly die, and even if it is not at this time, it will also cause people to choke or vomit.

古文：五月以后，行者差得无害。
现代文：五月以后危害才较少。
English: It is only after May that there is less damage.

古文：故诸葛亮表言：五月渡泸，并日而食，臣非不自惜也，顾王业不可偏安于蜀故也。
现代文：所以诸葛亮《出师表》说：五月渡沪，两天只吃一天的食粮，我不是不珍惜自己，只是因为王业不可能偏处蜀地一隅而保持安定的缘故。
English: Therefore, Zhuge Liang said in "Teacher's Table": I went to Shanghai in May and ate only one day's worth of food for two days. I'm not unappreciative of myself, but it's just because Wangye can't be in a corner of Shudi and remain stable.

古文：《益州记》曰：泸水源出曲罗巂下三百里，曰泸水。
现代文：《益州记》说：沪水的源头出自曲罗钱，下流三百里才叫沪水。
English: "Yizhou Chronicle" said: The source of Shanghai water comes from Qu Luoqian, and it is only 300 miles downstream that it is called Shanghai water.

古文：两峰有杀气，暑月旧不行，故武侯以夏渡为艰。
现代文：两峰有杀气，过去在酷暑季节是不能行走的，所以武侯把夏天渡沪水看作一件难事。
English: The two peaks have a murderous spirit. In the past, it was impossible to walk during the hot season, so Wuhou regarded it as a difficult task to cross the water in the summer.

古文：泸水又下合诸水而总其目焉，故有庐江之名矣。
现代文：沪水下流又汇合了诸水，但都以此水为总称，所以有沪江这水名。
English: The waters downstream of the Shanghai River also converge, but they are all collectively referred to as this water, which is why the water is called the Shanghai River.

古文：自朱提至道有水步道，水道有黑水、羊官水，至险难。三津之阻，行者苦之，故俗为之语曰：栖溪赤水，盘蛇七曲，盘羊乌栊，气与天通。
现代文：从朱提到焚道有水路和步行小路，水路有黑水、羊官水，极其艰险难行，要过三处险渡，行人深以为苦，所以民间谚语说：栖溪、赤水曲又弯，东流西转像蛇盘。太阳无光窗户昏，瘴气直与天相通。
English: There are waterways and footpaths along the incineration road from Zhu to Zhu, and waterways with black water and Yangguan water. It is extremely difficult and dangerous to travel. It is necessary to cross three dangerous passages, and pedestrians are deeply distressed. Therefore, folk proverbs say: Qixi Creek and red water are crooked and bent, and the east-west flow is like a snake tray. The sun has no light, the windows are dim, and the wind is directly connected to the sky.

古文：看都濩泚，住柱呼伊，庲降贾子，左担六里。
现代文：大汗淋漓爬山苦，柱杖小憩呼伴侣。床降小贩多苦劳，七里险路左肩熬。
English: It is hard to climb the mountain when drenched in perspiration, and a walking stick calls for a companion when taking a rest. A hawker who hops out of bed is more laborious, and the seven-mile treacherous road is hard on the left shoulder.

古文：又有牛叩头、马搏颊坂，其艰险如此也。
现代文：又有牛叩头坂和马搏颊坂，道路是这样艰险难行！
English: There is also a cow kowtowing slope and a horse cheek slope, the road is so arduous and dangerous!

古文：又东北至道县，入于江。
现代文：又往东北流到英道县，注入大江。
English: It also flows to the northeast to Yingdao County, where it flows into the Yangtze River.

古文：若水至道，又谓之马湖江，绳水、泸水、孙水、淹水、大渡水随决入而纳通称。
现代文：若水流到焚道，又叫马湖江。绳水、沪水、孙水、淹水、大渡水，随着诸水相汇流，于是也得到了通称。
English: If the water flows to the fire road, it is also called the Mahu River. The rope water, the Shanghai water, the sun water, the flooded water, and the Dadu water, along with the confluence of the water phases, thus also got the nickname.

古文：是以诸书录记群水，或言入若，又言注绳，亦咸言至道入江，正是异水沿注，通为一律，更无别川可以当之。
现代文：所以各种书籍记述诸水，有的说注入若水，也有说注入绳水，又有说到焚道入江。这正是因为各水流注相通，成为一水之故，除却此水，再也没有别的可相对应的河流了。
English: That is why various books describe the waters, some say that they are infused with young water, some say that they are infused with rope water, and others say that they are burned into the river. This is precisely because the water flows into each other and becomes one water, and there is no other river that can correspond to this water.

古文：水有孝子石，昔县人有隗叔通者，性至孝，为母给江膂水，天为出平石，至江膂中。
现代文：水上有孝子石，从前县里有个叫魄叔通的人，生性非常孝顺，天天为母亲从江心汲水；于是上天为他把一片平坦的岩石伸到江心，现在还叫孝子石。
English: There is a filial stone on the water. Once upon a time, there was a man in the county called Zappetsu-tsu, who was very filial by nature. He used to draw water from the river for his mother every day. Therefore, the heavens stretched a flat rock to the center of the river for him, and it is still called the filial stone.

古文：今犹谓之孝子石，可谓至诚发中而休应自天矣。
现代文：这真可说内心确有极大的诚意，上天也会降福了。
English: This can truly be said that there is indeed great sincerity in the heart, and heaven will be blessed.

古文：沫水出广柔微外，县有石纽乡，禹所生也。
现代文：沫水发源于广柔县境外，广柔县有石纽乡，是大禹诞生的地方。
English: The foam originated from outside Guangru County, Guangru County has Shinui Township, where Dayu was born.

古文：今夷人共营之，地方百里，不敢居牧。有罪逃野，捕之者不逼，能藏三年，不为人得，则共原之，言大禹之神所祐之也。
现代文：此乡方圆百里，现在夷人聚居在这里，却不敢定居放牧；有罪的人逃到野外，要抓他的人如不逼得很紧，能够藏身三年，抓他不到，大家也就宽有了他，以为他得到大禹神灵的保佑。
English: This village is a hundred miles in circumference. The barbarians now live here, but they do not dare to settle down and graze their cattle. The guilty man fled into the open. If the people who wanted to catch him did not push him very hard, he could hide for three years. If they could not catch him, everyone would have him, thinking that he was blessed by the Great God.

古文：东南过旄牛县北，又东至越巂灵道县，出蒙山南，灵道县一名灵关道，汉制：夷狄曰道。
现代文：往东南流过旋牛县北边，又往东流到越禽郡灵道县，从蒙山南边流出，灵道县又名灵关道。按汉朝的制度，夷狄地区的行政区划叫道。
English: It flows to the southeast through the north of Zhenyu County, and flows eastward to Lingdao County, Yueji County, flowing out from the south side of Mengshan Mountain. Lingdao County is also known as Lingguan Road. According to the system of the Han Dynasty, the administrative regions of the Yidi region are called roads.

古文：县有铜山，又有利慈渚。
现代文：县里有铜山，又有利慈清。
English: There are copper mines in the county, which is advantageous to Cixing.

古文：晋太始九年，黄龙二见于利慈池。
现代文：晋泰始九年利慈池两次出现黄龙。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jintai, there were two yellow dragons in Lici Pond.

古文：县令董玄之率吏民观之，以白刺史王濬，濬表上之晋朝，改护龙县也。
现代文：县令董玄之带领官吏和百姓前去观看，报告刺史王浚，王浚向皇帝上表，于是晋朝将它改名为护龙县。
English: The county magistrate, Dong Xuan, led officials and common people to go and watch, and reported the stabbing to Wang Jun. Wang Jun reported to the emperor, so the Jin Dynasty changed its name to Jiaolong County.

古文：沫水出岷山西，东流过汉嘉郡，南流冲一高山，山上合下开，水径其间，山即蒙山也。
现代文：沫水发源于眠山西边，东流经汉嘉郡，然后往南向一座高山流去，这座山顶上合拢，山下却洞开，水就从中间流过。这就是蒙山。
English: The foam water originates from the west side of the sleeping mountain, flows east through Hanga County, and then flows south to a high mountain. The top of the mountain is closed, but the bottom of the mountain is open, and the water flows through the middle. This is Mengshan.

古文：东北与青衣水合，《华阳国志》曰：二水于汉嘉青衣县东，合为一川，自下亦谓之为青衣水。
现代文：往东北与青衣水汇合，《华阳国志》说：这两条水在汉嘉郡青衣县东面汇合成为一条河流，自此以下也叫青衣水。
English: To the northeast, it merges with the Qingyi Water. "Huayang Guozhi" said: These two waters converge in the east of Qingyi County, Hanzha County to become a river, henceforth also called the Qingyi Water.

古文：沫水又东，径开刊县，故平乡也，晋初置。
现代文：沫水又往东流，经过开刊县，这就是旧时的平乡县，是晋初所置。
English: The foam flowed eastward, passing through the opening county, which was the old Pingxiang County, which was established at the beginning of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：沫水又东径临邛南，而东出于江原县也。
现代文：沫水又往东流，经过临邓县南面，然后从江原县往东流去。
English: The foam also flowed eastward, passing through the south of Lintang County, and then from Gangwon County to the east.

古文：东入于江。
现代文：往东注入大江。
English: Injecting river water to the east.

古文：昔沫水自蒙山至南安西溷崖，水脉漂疾，破害舟船，历代为患。
现代文：从前沫水从蒙山到南安西面的涸崖，水流湍急，船只常被冲毁，是历代的大患。
English: From the foothills of Mengshan to the dry cliffs on the west side of Nan'an, the water flow is rapid, and ships are often washed away, which is a big problem in all ages.

古文：蜀郡太守李冰发卒，凿平溷崖。河神赑怒，冰乃操刀入水与神斗，遂平溷崖，通正水路，开处即冰所穿也。
现代文：蜀郡太守李冰调遣兵卒，凿平泅崖，河神暴怒起来，李冰握刀跳进水里与河神搏斗、终于制伏了河神，凿平了泅崖，水路也畅通了。
English: Li Bing, the governor of Shu County, dispatched soldiers to flatten the cliff. The river god became furious. Li Bing held a knife and jumped into the water to fight the river god. He finally subdued the river god, flattened the cliff, and the waterway was smooth.

古文：延江水出健为南广县，东至牂柯鄨县，又东屈北流，鄨县故健为郡治也，县有犍山，晋建兴元年，置平夷郡。
现代文：如今崖上的水口，就是李冰打通的。延江水发源于键为郡南广县，往东流到样柯郡鳖县，又往东转向北流，瞥县从前是键为郡的治所。县里有键山。晋建兴元年设置平夷郡。
English: The water outlet on the cliff today was opened by Li Bing. The water of the Yangtze River originates in Nanguang County of Jianye County, flows eastward to Jianye County of Samye County, and turns eastward to the north stream. Bie County was once the administrative center of Jianye County. There is Jianye Mountain in Jianye County. Pingyi County was established in the first year of Jianxing.

古文：县有鄨水，出鄨邑西不狼山，东与温水合。
现代文：县里有瞥水，发源于瞥邑西边的不狼山，东流与温水汇合。
English: There is a stream in the county, which originates from the Wulaoshan Mountain on the west side of Wulai Town, and the east stream meets the warm water.

古文：温水一曰暖水，出犍为符县，而南入鄨水，鄨水亦出符县，南与温水会，阚駰谓之阚水，俱南入鄨水。
现代文：温水又名媛水，发源于键为郡符县，往南注入黔水，黔水也发源于符县，往南流与温水汇合。阐驰称温水为阐水，二水都往南流，注入瞥水。
English: The warm water, also known as Hime-no-mizu, originates from the county of Fushun in Kansai, and is injected southward into Mino, and the Mino also originates in Fushun, and flows southward to meet the warm water. The warm water is referred to as Hime-no-mizu, and both waters flow southward and are injected into Goshimizu.

古文：鄨水于其县而东注延江水。
现代文：瞥水在瞥县往东流注入延江水。
English: The waters of the Yangtze River are injected by the eastward flow of the Bieshui River in Bieshui County.

古文：延江水又与汉水合，水出犍为、汉阳道山闟谷，王莽之新通也。
现代文：延江水又与汉水汇合，汉水发源于键为郡汉阳道山阂谷。汉阳道就是王莽的新通。
English: Yanjiang Water also merges with Han Water, which originates from the valley of the county's Hanyang Road. Hanyang Road is Wang Mang's new road.

古文：东至鄨邑入延江水也。
现代文：汉水往东流到瞥邑注入延江水。
English: The Han River water flows eastward to the town of Biao, where it is injected into the Yangtze River water.

古文：至巴郡涪陵县注更始水。
现代文：到巴郡涪陵县，注入更始水。
English: To Ba County, Fuling County, inject fresh water.

古文：更始水，即延江枝分之始也。
现代文：更始水就是延江支流的源头部分。
English: Qianshi Water is the source of the Yangtze River tributary.

古文：延江水北入涪陵水，涪陵水出县东，故巴郡之南鄙，王莽更名巴亭，魏武分邑立为涪陵郡。张堪为县，会公孙述击堪，同心义士选习水者，筏渡堪于小别江，即此水也。
现代文：延江水北流注入涪陵水。涪陵水发源于涪陵县东面，涪陵是旧时巴郡的南疆，王莽改名为巴亭。魏武帝分邑，立为涪陵郡，张堪当县令，适逢公孙述来攻打他，有个同心的义士挑选了熟悉水性的人，用竹筏送他渡过小别江，就是此水。
English: The water of the Yangtze River flows north into the water of Fuling. The water of Fuling originates in the east of Fuling County. Fuling is the southern part of the old Ba County, and Wang Mang changed its name to Batei. The Wei Emperor's branch was established as Fuling County, and Zhang Kangtang was the county magistrate. When Gongsun came to attack him, a like-minded righteous man selected a person who was familiar with the nature of water and sent him across the Xiaobai River with a bamboo raft. It was this water.

古文：其水北至枳县入江，更始水东入巴东之南浦县，其水注引渎口石门，空岫阴深，邃涧暗密，倾崖上合，恒有落势，行旅避瘴，时有经之，无不危心于其下。
现代文：水往北流，到积县入江。更始水往东流入巴东郡南浦县，水流注入渠口的石门。空寂的山谷沉浸在浓重的阴影里，深邃的山涧幽暗而寂静，倾斜的悬崖顶上合拢，望去像是就要崩塌下来的样子。往返行人躲避瘴气，时常从这里经过，到了崖下无人不感到提心吊胆的。
English: The water flows to the north, entering the river in Jie County. The first water flows east into Nampo County, Badong County, and the water flows into the stone gate at the mouth of the canal. The empty valley is immersed in heavy shadows, the deep mountains are dark and silent, and the sloping cliff tops are closed, looking like they are about to collapse. Pedestrians avoid the miasma and often pass through here, and no one feels anxious when they reach the cliff.

古文：又谓之西乡水，亦谓之西乡溪，溪水间关二百许里，方得出山。又通波注远，复二百余里，东南入迁陵县也。
现代文：这条水又叫西乡水，也称西乡溪。溪水辗转奔流约二百里，方才出山，又泛着清波流向远方；又奔流了二百余里，就往东南进入迁陵县。
English: This water is also called Xixiang Water, also known as Xixiang Creek. The stream turns and flows for about two hundred miles before it emerges from the mountains and flows with clear waves to the distance. After flowing for more than two hundred miles, it enters Qianling County to the southeast.

古文：又东南至武陵西阳县，入于西水。
现代文：又往东南流到武陵郡酉阳县，注入西水。
English: It also flows southeast to Poyang County, Wuling County, and is injected into the West Water.

古文：《武陵先贤传》曰：潘京世长为郡主簿，太守赵伟甚器之，问京：贵郡何以名武陵？
现代文：《武陵先贤传》说：潘京世世代代都在郡里做主簿，太守赵伟非常器重他。赵伟问道：贵郡为什么叫武陵呢？
English: "The Biography of Wuling's Forerunners" says: Pan Jing has been the county's master for generations. The governor Zhao Wei held him in high regard. Zhao Wei asked: Why is your county called Wuling?

古文：京答曰：鄙郡本名义陵，在辰阳县界，与夷相接，数为所破。光武时移抬东山之上，遂尔易号。
现代文：潘京答道：鄙郡本来叫义陵，在辰阳县边境与夷人地区邻接，屡次被夷人攻破，光武帝时，把郡治迁移到东山上，就把郡名改了。
English: Pan Jing replied: My county was originally called Yiling, and it was adjacent to the barbarian areas on the border of Chenyang County. It was repeatedly invaded by barbarians. When Emperor Guangwu moved the county seat to Dongshan, the county name was changed.

古文：《传》曰：止戈为武。
现代文：《左传》说：止戈为武。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: "The only way out is to fight."

古文：《诗》云高平曰陵，于是名焉。
现代文：《诗经》说：高而且平叫陵。于是就叫武陵。
English: "Shijing" said: high and flat is called mausoleum. Therefore, it is called Wuling.

古文：西水北岸有黚阳县，许慎曰：温水南入黚。
现代文：酉水北岸有黔阳县，许慎说：温水往南流入黔水。
English: On the north coast of Surabaya, there is Poyang County. Xu Shen said: Warm water flows south into Surabaya.

古文：盖鄨水以下津流沿注之通称也。故县受名焉。
现代文：黔水大概是瞥水以下各支流的通称，所以县也得名了。
English: Surabaya is probably the common name for all the tributaries below Goshimizu, so the county also got its name.

古文：西乡溪口在迁陵县故城上五十里，左合酉水，西水又东际其故城北，又东径西阳故县南而东出也。
现代文：西乡溪口在迁陵县老城上游五十里，左边与酉水汇合。酉水又往东流，傍着老城北面流过，又东经酉阳县老城南面，然后往东流去。
English: Xixiang Creek Mouth is located 50 miles upstream of the old city of Qianling County. On the left, it merges with Surabaya River. Surabaya River also flows eastward, passing by the old city to the north, and eastward to the south of the old city of Poyang County, and then flows eastward.

古文：两县相去，水道可四百许里，于酉阳合也。
现代文：两县县城之间，水路相距四百里左右，在酉阳汇合。
English: Between the two counties, the waterways are about four hundred miles apart, and they converge in Fenyang.

古文：西水东南至沅陵县，入于沅。
现代文：酉水往东南流到沉陵县，注入沅水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast to Shenling County and is injected into Surabaya.

古文：存水出犍为县，王莽之孱也。
现代文：存水发源于犍为县，犍为就是王莽的屏马队益州大姓雍阁造反，在山上构筑堡垒，在木椿上拴马。
English: Cangshui originated from Zhuwei County. Zhuwei is where Wang Mang's Pingma team, the eldest son of Yizhou Yongge rebelled, built a fortress on the mountain, and rode horses on the wood camellia.

古文：益州大姓雍闿反，结垒于山，系马柳柱，柱生成林，今夷人名曰雍无粱林，梁，夷言马也。存水自县东南流，径牧靡县北，又东径且兰县北而东南出也。
现代文：木椿后来长成树林，现在夷人把它叫做雍无梁林。梁，夷语指马。存水从存阝马阝县往东南流，经过牧靡县北面，又东经且兰县北面，然后向东南流去。
English: The wood camellia later grew into a forest, and now the Yi people call it Yongwu Lianglin. Liang, in Yi language, means horse. The stored water flows southeastward from Cuncheng Mawei County, passing through the north of Muyi County, and eastward through the north of Lan County, and then flows southeastward.

古文：东南至郁林定周县，为周水。
现代文：往东南流到郁林郡定周县，叫周水。
English: It flows southeast to Dingzhou County, Yulin County, and is called Zhoushui.

古文：存水又东，径牂柯郡之毋敛县北，而东南与毋敛水合，水首受牂柯水，东径毋敛县为毋敛水，又东注于存水。
现代文：存水又往东流，经过拜柯郡的毋敛县北面，然后往东南流，与毋敛水汇合。毋敛水上流承接拜柯水，往东流经毋敛县叫毋敛水，又往东流注入存水。
English: The stored water then flows eastward, passing through the northern part of Bezoar County, Baike County, and then flows southeast to meet the stored water. The upstream flow of the stored water receives the Baike water, the eastward flow through Bezoar County is called the Bezoar water, and the eastward flow injects the stored water.

古文：存水又东径郁林定周县，为周水，盖水变名也。
现代文：存水又往东流，经过郁林郡定周县，称为周水，是这条水的变名。
English: The stored water then flows eastward, passing through Dingzhou County, Yulin County, and is called Zhou Water, which is a variation of the name of this water.

古文：又东北至潭中县，注于潭。
现代文：又往东北流到潭中县，注入潭水。
English: It also flows to the northeast to Tanzhong County, injecting water into the lake.

古文：温水出牂柯夜郎县，县故夜郎侯国也，唐蒙开以为县，王莽名曰同亭矣。
现代文：温水发源于样柯郡夜郎县，夜郎县就是旧时的夜郎侯国，唐蒙开拓夜郎，设置为县，王莽称为同亭。
English: The hot water originates from Yelang County, Xiangke County. Yelang County is the old Yelang Hou Guo, Tang Meng Kaiyelang, set up as a county, and Wang Mang is called Tongting.

古文：温水自县西北流，径谈藁，与迷水合。
现代文：温水从夜郎往西北流，经谈莫与迷水汇合。
English: The warm water flows from Yelang to the northwest, and cannot be said to converge with the lost water.

古文：晋太元十四年，宁州刺史费统言：晋宁郡滇池县两神马，一白一黑，盘戏河水之上。有滇州，元封二年立益州郡，治滇池城。刘禅建宁郡也。
现代文：迷水发源于西方益州郡铜懒县谈虏山，往东流过谈真县，在右岸注入温水。温水又西流，经过昆泽县南面，又流经味县―味县是旧时滇国的都城。诸葛亮平定南中，刘禅建兴三年设置益州郡，治所在滇池城，就是刘禅的建宁郡。
English: The Lost Water originates from Dangruishan Mountain, Tongliao County, Yizhou County in the west, flows eastward through Danzhen County, and injects warm water into the right bank. The warm water also flows westward, passes through the south of Kunze County, and flows through Aimi County - Aimi County was the capital of the old Shandong Province. Zhuge Liang pacified the south, and Liu Zen Jianxing set up Yizhou County for three years. The city is located in Dianchi City, which is Liu Zen's Jianning County.

古文：温水又西会大泽，与叶榆仆水合。
现代文：温水又往西流，汇入大泽，与叶榆仆水合流。
English: The warm water then flows westward and flows into the Osawa, where it joins up with the Yejiu tributary.

古文：温水又东南，径牂柯之毋单县。
现代文：温水又往东南流，经过拜柯的毋单县。
English: The warm water also flows to the southeast, passing through Baike's Nezhan County.

古文：一名河水，与邪龙分浦，后立河阳郡，治河阳县，县在河源洲上，又有云平县，并在洲中。
现代文：建兴年间，刘禅把毋单县划入建宁郡，桥水在这里注入温水。桥水又名河水，上流承接俞元的南池，县治在龙池洲上，这片沙洲周长四十七里，俞元县与邪龙县以水口为分界。后来设置河阳郡，治所在河阳县；县城在河源洲上。还有云平县也在洲上。
English: During the period of Jianxing, Liu Zen divided Bezhan County into Jianning County, and the bridge water injected warm water here. The bridge water, also known as river water, flowed upstream to connect the south pond of Yanyuan, and the county government was on Longchi Island. This sandbar has a circumference of forty-seven miles, and the boundary between Yanyuan County and Yalong County is the water outlet. Later, Heyang County was set up, and the county government was located in Heyang County; the county seat was on Heyuan Island. Yunping County was also on the island.

古文：桥水东流至毋单县，注于温。
现代文：桥水往东流到毋单县，注入温水。
English: The bridging water flows eastward to Bezhan County, injecting warm water.

古文：温水又东南，径兴古郡之毋棳县东。王莽更名有棳也。与南桥水合。水出县之桥山，东流，梁水注之。
现代文：温水又往东南流经兴古郡毋掇县东面一一王莽改名为有掇一一与南桥水汇合，南桥水发源于县内的桥山，往东流，有梁水注入。
English: The warm water also flows southeastward through the eastern part of Beyo County, Xinggu County, changing its name to Wang Mang and merging with Nanqiao Water. Nanqiao Water originates from Qiaoshan in the county and flows eastward, where it is injected by Liang Water.

古文：梁水上承河水于俞元县而东南径兴古之胜休县，王莽更名胜棳县。
现代文：梁水上流在俞元县承接河水，往东南流，经过兴古郡的胜休县，王莽改名为胜夔县。
English: The upstream Liangshui River joins the river in Luyuan County and flows southeast, passing through Shengxiu County in Xinggu County. Wang Mang was renamed Shengxiu County.

古文：梁水又东径毋棳县，左注桥水。桥水又东，注于温。
现代文：梁水又往东流过毋掇县，在左岸注入桥水；桥水又往东流，注入温水。
English: Liangshui also flows eastward through Bezhe County, injecting bridge water on the left bank; bridge water also flows eastward, injecting warm water.

古文：温水又东南，径律高县南，刘禅建兴三年，分牂柯置兴古郡，治温县。《晋书地道记》治此。
现代文：温水又往东南流，经过律高县南面。刘禅建兴三年，分徉柯没置兴古郡，治所在温县―据《晋书•地道记》，治所在此。
English: The warm water flowed to the southeast, passing through the south of Rugao County. Liu Zhen Jian Xing County was established three years after Liu Zhen Jian Xing County was established. According to "Jinshu•Jidoki," the administrative center was located in Wenzhou County.

古文：温水又东南，径梁水郡南，温水上合梁水，故自下通得梁水之称，是以刘禅分兴古之盢南，置郡于染本县也。
现代文：温水又往东南流，经梁水郡南面，温水上流与梁水汇合，所以自此以下也就有了梁水的通称。刘禅划出兴一占的篮南，就在梁水县设立郡治。
English: The warm water flowed to the southeast, passing through the south of Liangshui County, and the warm water upstream converged with Liangshui County, hence the common name of Liangshui County. Liu Zen delineated the southern part of the basket occupied by Xingyi, and established the county seat in Liangshui County.

古文：温水东南，径镡封县北，又径来惟县东，而仆水右出焉。
现代文：温水往东南流，经过谭封县北面，又经过来惟县东面，仆水在这里从右边分出。
English: The warm water flows to the southeast, passing through the northern part of Tanfeng County, and then through the eastern part of Laiwei County. Here, the water is separated from the right side.

古文：又东至郁林广郁县，为郁水。
现代文：又往东流到郁林郡广郁县，叫郁水。
English: It also flows eastward to Guangyu County, Yulin County, and is called Yushui.

古文：秦桂林郡也。汉武帝元鼎六年，更名郁林郡。王莽以为郁平郡矣。
现代文：郁林，就是秦时的桂林郡，汉武帝元鼎六年改名为郁林郡，王莽称为郁平郡。
English: Yulin is the Guilin County of the Qin Dynasty. It was renamed Yulin County in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, and Wang Mang was called Yuping County.

古文：应劭《地理风俗记》曰：《周礼》郁人掌器，凡祭醊宾客之事，和郁鬯以实樽彝。
现代文：应劭《地理风俗记》说：据《周礼》，郁人掌管祭祀的酒器，凡是祭祀和敬客之类事务，就由他把香酒注满酒蹲。
English: According to the "Geography and Customs," it is said that according to the "Weekly Rituals," Ikujin was in charge of the sacrificial vessels, and he was responsible for filling the wine jars with wine for all sacrificial rituals and hospitality.

古文：郁，芳草也，百草之华，煮以合酿黑黍，以降神者也。
现代文：郁是香草，是百草中的精华，煮郁草与黑黍一起酿酒，用以祭神，求神降福。
English: Iku is a fragrant herb, the essence of all herbs. Boiled Iku grass is brewed with black gooseberry to make wine, which is used to worship the gods and pray for good fortune.

古文：或说，今郁金香是也。
现代文：有人说那就是现在的郁金香。
English: Some say it is the tulips of today.

古文：一曰郁人所贡，因氏郡矣。
现代文：有一种说法，以为这是郁人所贡，因此就作为郡名了。
English: There is a theory that this was a tribute from Iku, and thus became the name of the county.

古文：温水又东径增食县，有文象水注之，其水导源牂柯句町县。
现代文：温水又往东流，经过增食县，有文象水注入。文象水发源于准柯郡句盯县。
English: The warm water flowed eastward again, passing through Zengshui County, and was injected with Wenxiang Water. Wenxiang Water originated in Junke County, Guanzhong County.

古文：应劭曰：故句町国也。
现代文：应韵说：那就是旧时的句盯国。
English: According to the rhyme: That's the old-time sentence staring at the country.

古文：王莽以为从化。
现代文：王莽改为从化。
English: Wang Mang changed it to Conghua.

古文：文象水、蒙水与卢惟水、来细水、伐水，并自县东，历广郁至增食县，注于郁水也。
现代文：文象水、蒙水和卢帷水、来细水、伐水都从句盯县往东流，经过广郁到增食县，注入郁水。
English: Wenxiang Water, Mengwu Water, Luqian Water, Laixiao Water, and Felling Water all flow eastward from Guanzhong County, passing through Guangyu to Zengshu County, and injecting Yulshui.

古文：又东至领方县，东与斤南水合。
现代文：又东流到领方县东面，与斤南水汇合。
English: It also flows eastward to the east of Lingang County, where it meets the Jinan River.

古文：县有朱涯水，出临尘县，东北流，泿水注之。
现代文：领方县有朱涯水，发源于临尘县，往东北流，有骥水注入。
English: In Lianfang County, there is Zhuya water, which originates in Linfen County, flows to the northeast, and is infused with radon water.

古文：水源上承牂柯水，东径增食县而下注朱涯水。朱涯水又东北径临尘县，王莽之监尘也。县有斤南水、侵离水，并径临尘，东入领方县，流注郁水。
现代文：灌水源头在上流承接样柯水，往东流经增食县，下流注入朱涯水，朱涯水又往东北流，经过临尘县一二就是王莽的监尘，县内有斤南水、侵离水，都经临尘，往东流进入领方县，注入郁水。
English: The source of the irrigation water flows upstream to receive the sample Ke water, flows eastward through Zuoxi County, flows downstream to inject Zhuya water, and Zhuya water flows northeastward, passes through Linfen County 12 is Wang Mang's monitoring dust, and there are Jin Nan water and encroaching water in the county, all of which pass through Linfen and flow eastward into Lianfang County, injecting stagnant water.

古文：东北入于郁。
现代文：往东北注入郁水。
English: Injecting stagnant water to the northeast.

古文：郁水即夜郎豚水也。
现代文：郁水就是夜郎豚水，汉武帝时，有个竹王曾在豚水上兴起。
English: Ikusui is Yelang pork water. During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there was a bamboo king who rose on pork water.

古文：汉武帝时，有竹王兴于豚水，有一女子，浣于水滨，有三节大竹，流入女子足间，推之不去。
现代文：一天，有个女人在水边洗衣服，忽然漂来三节大竹，漂到她的两脚间，推也推不开，而且听到里面有声音。
English: One day, a woman was washing clothes by the water's edge, when suddenly three large bamboo sticks floated up to her feet. She couldn't push them away, and she heard a sound inside.

古文：闻有声，持归破之，得一男儿。
现代文：她把大竹拿回家中，剖了开来，竟得到一个男孩子。
English: She took the bamboo home, cut it open, and got a boy.

古文：遂雄夷濮，氏竹为姓。所捐破竹，于野成林，今竹王祠竹林是也。
现代文：以后他就在夷淮称雄，以竹为姓，丢弃的破竹在田野间长成了竹林，就是现在竹王祠周围那片竹林。
English: Later, he became famous in Yihuai, with the surname of Bamboo. The discarded broken bamboo grew into a bamboo forest in the fields, which is now the bamboo forest around the Bamboo King's Ancestral Hall.

古文：王尝从人止大石上，命作羹。从者白无水。
现代文：竹王曾与侍从一起在大石上歇息，叫他们做羹；侍从察告说：没有水。
English: The king of the bamboo once rested with his attendants on a large rock and ordered them to make soup; the attendant reported: "There is no water."

古文：王以剑击石出水，今竹王水是也。
现代文：竹王用剑向岩石捅了一下，岩石里就流出水来，这就是现在的竹王水。
English: Bamboo King stabbed the rock with his sword, and water flowed out of the rock, which is now Bamboo King Water.

古文：后唐蒙开牂柯，斩竹王首，夷獠咸怨，以竹王非血气所生，求为立祠。
现代文：后来唐蒙开拓拜柯，砍了竹王的头，夷撩各族都心怀怨恨，因竹王不是人的血气所生，要求给他立祠。
English: Later, Tang and Meng explored Baiko, cut off the head of the Bamboo King, and all ethnic groups harbored resentment, because the Bamboo King was not born of human blood, and demanded that a shrine be built for him.

古文：帝封三子为侯，及死，配父庙，今竹王三郎祠，其神也。
现代文：皇帝封他的三个儿子为侯，死后也附于他们父亲的祠庙，同享祭祀。现在的竹王三郎祠奉的就是他们的神灵。
English: The emperor made his three sons princes, and after his death, they were also attached to their father's ancestral temple and shared in the sacrificial rites. It is their deities that the present Bamboo King Saburo ancestral temple worships.

古文：豚水东北流，径谈藁县，东径牂柯郡且兰县，谓之牂柯水。
现代文：豚水往东北流经谈草县，东流经过拜柯郡且兰县，称为群柯水。
English: The pig water flows to the northeast through Danzao County, and the eastward flow passes through Baike County and Qilan County, and is called Qunke Water.

古文：水广数里，县临江上，故且兰侯国也。一名头兰，牂柯郡治也。
现代文：水阔好几里，县城在江边，就是旧时的且兰侯国，又名头兰，是舫柯郡的治所。
English: The water is several miles wide, and the county seat is on the edge of the river. It is the old Ketsu Lanhu Province, also known as Lan, which is the capital of Shinko County.

古文：楚将庄蹻溯沅伐夜郎，椓牂柯系船，因名且兰为牂柯矣。
现代文：楚国将军庄跻，溯沉水而上，去讨伐夜郎，敲下木椿来系船，夜郎称木椿为牌柯，因此就把且兰称为拜柯了。
English: General Zhuang of the State of Chu waded into the water, followed the sinking water upstream, went to fight against Yelang, and knocked down the wooden camellia to tie the boat. Yelang called the wooden camellia Baike, so he called the camellia Baike.

古文：应劭《地理风俗记》曰：日南故秦象郡，汉武帝元鼎六年开日南郡，治西卷县。
现代文：徉柯是汉武帝元鼎六年开发的，王莽改名为同亭，有柱浦关。样柯也是江中由两座山名。左思《吴都赋》说：在群柯激扬波浪。元鼎五年平定南越后所置。王莽改郡名为桓合，县名为桓亭。孙权黄武七年开发日南郡，治所在西卷县。
English: Xing Ke was developed by Emperor Hanwu in the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty. Wang Mang changed the name to Tong Ting, and there is a pillar called Pugang. Sam Ke is also the name of two mountains in the river. Zuo Si, "Wu Du Fu," said: "In Gung Ke, waves are stirred up." It was placed after the Yuan Dynasty had pacified South Vietnam in the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty. Wang Mang changed the name of the county to Huanhe, and the county was named Huan Ting. Sun Quan Huang Wu developed Nichinan County in the seventh year, and it is governed by Ximeng County.

古文：《林邑记》曰：城去林邑步道四百余里。
现代文：《林邑记》说：由郡城到林邑，陆路四百余里。
English: "Linyi Ji" said: from the county seat to Linyi, more than four hundred miles by road.

古文：《交州外域记》曰：从日南郡南去，到林邑国，四百余里。
现代文：《交州外域记》说：从日南郡南到林邑国四百余里。
English: "Jiaozhou Expat Diary" says: It is more than four hundred miles from the south of Nichinan County to Linyi Province.

古文：准径相符，然则城故西卷县也。
现代文：路程相符，那么区粟就是旧时的西卷县了。
English: If the distances are the same, then Kukawa is the old Nishimaki County.

古文：《地理志》曰：水入海，有竹可为杖。
现代文：《地理志》说：水流入海，有竹可制手杖。
English: "Geography" said: water flows into the sea, bamboo can be made into canes.

古文：王莽更之曰日南亭。
现代文：王莽改名为日南亭。
English: Wang Mang was renamed as Nichinan Pavilion.

古文：《林邑记》曰：其城治二水之间，三方际山，南北瞰水。东西涧浦，流凑城下。
现代文：《林邑记》说：城治在二水之间，三面依山，南北临水，东西两面是溪涧和水口，流到城下相汇合。
English: "Lin Yue Ji" said: the city is located between two waters, the three sides are on the mountain, the north and south are adjacent to the water, the east and west sides are the creeks and water outlets, and the streams converge under the city.

古文：城西折十角，周围六里，一百七十步，东西度六百五十步，砖城二丈，上起砖墙一丈，开方隙孔。砖上倚板，板上五重层阁，阁上架屋，屋上架楼，楼高者七八丈，下者五六丈。
现代文：城墙西面一角开裂，周围六里，一百七十步，东西长六百五十步；砖城高二丈，城上筑了高一丈的砖墙，墙上开方孔；砖上铺板，板上造了五层楼阁，阁上架屋，屋上建楼，城楼高七八丈，低的五六丈。
English: On the west side of the city wall, one corner is cracked, with a circumference of six miles, one hundred and seventy paces, and a length of six hundred and fifty paces from east to west; the brick city is two stories high, and a brick wall one story high is built on the city, and square holes are opened on the wall; the bricks are covered with boards, and five-story buildings are built on the boards, and the houses are built on the roofs, and the buildings are built on the roofs, and the buildings are seventy-eight stories high and fifty-six stories low.

古文：城开十三门，凡宫殿南向，屋宇二千一百余间。
现代文：城墙周围开了十三座城门，宫殿都朝南，有屋宇二千一百余间。
English: Thirteen gates have been opened around the city wall, the palaces all face south, and there are more than 2,100 buildings.

古文：市居周绕，阻峭地险。故林邑兵器战具，悉在区粟。
现代文：四周是市场和住宅区，悬崖峭壁，地势险要，所以林邑的兵器和作战工具，都贮存在区粟。
English: Surrounded by markets and residential areas, cliffs and precipitous terrain, Lin's weapons and combat tools are stored in the area.

古文：多城垒，自林邑王范胡达始。
现代文：林邑各地所建城堡很多。从林邑王范胡达时开始，自秦迁徙过去的移民，都与夷族同化了，日南的旧风俗也全部改变了。
English: Many castles were built in various parts of Linyi. From the time of King Fan Huda of Linyi, the immigrants who had migrated from the Qin Dynasty had assimilated with the barbarians, and the old customs of Nichinan had all changed.

古文：秦余徙民，染同夷化，日南旧风，变易俱尽，巢栖树宿，负郭接山，榛棘蒲薄，腾林拂云，幽烟冥缅，非生人所安。
现代文：人们在树一上搭巢居住。傍着山边的城郭，是一片荆棒乱草，原始森林上拂青云，阴霆的远方飘散着一缕缕幽荒的野烟―这一片荒凉的土地，实在不是人类所能栖身的。
English: People build nests in the trees and live there. Next to the castle on the edge of the mountain, there is a tangle of thorns and thistles, the primeval forest is streaked with blue clouds, and in the gloomy distance wafts wisps of desolate wild smoke - this desolate land is really not fit for human habitation.

古文：区粟建八尺表，日影度南八寸，自此影以南，在日之南，故以名郡。
现代文：区粟立了一根高达八尺的标竿，日影移到南边八寸，因为此影以南都在太阳的南边了，所以就以日南为郡名。
English: A pole with a height of eight feet was set up in the district, and the sun's shadow was moved eight inches to the south, because the south of this shadow is south of the sun, so Nichinan is the name of the county.

古文：望北辰星，落在天际，日在北，故开北户以向日，此其大较也。
现代文：在这里遥望北斗星，已沉落到天边了。太阳在北，所以房屋都开北窗面向太阳。这是大略情况。
English: Here you can see the Big Dipper in the distance, which has fallen to the edge of the sky. The sun is in the north, so the houses all open their north windows to face the sun. This is the general situation.

古文：范泰《古今善言》曰：日南张重，举计入洛。正旦大会，明帝问：日南郡北向视日邪？
现代文：范泰《古今善言》说：日南张重去洛阳赴考，在元旦朝会时，明帝问道：日南郡是不是朝北望太阳的？
English: Fan Tai's "Ancient and Modern Sayings" said: Nichinan Zhang Chong went to Luoyang to take the exam. At the New Year's Day morning meeting, Emperor Ming asked: Does Nichinan County look at the sun from the north?

古文：重曰：今郡有云中、金城者，不必皆有其实。日亦俱出于东耳。
现代文：张重说：现在郡有云中、金城之名，不一定都是名如其实，太阳也都是从东方升起的。
English: Zhang Chong said: Now the county has the names of Yunzhong and Jincheng, but they are not necessarily true to their names. The sun also rises from the east.

古文：至于风气暄暖，日影仰当，官民居止随情，面向东西南北，回背无定。
现代文：至于那里的风，总是温煦的，日影位置正在脚下，官民住宅则随环境不同而选择朝向，或朝东西，或向南北，并无一定。
English: As for the wind there, it is always warm and gentle, and the position of the sun's shadow is at the foot of the mountain. The public and private residences choose the direction according to the environment, either east-west or north-south, which is not certain.

古文：人性凶悍，果于战斗，便山习水，不闲平地。
现代文：人民生性凶悍，勇于战斗，上山下水，习以为常，但不惯于平地生活。
English: People are naturally fierce, brave in battle, go up and down the mountain, and are accustomed to it, but they are not accustomed to living on flat land.

古文：古人云：五岭者，天地以隔内外，况绵途于海表，顾九岭而弥邈，非复行路之径阻，信幽荒之冥域者矣。
现代文：古人说：五岭是天地间分隔内外的壁障，何况路途迢迢，远在天崖海角；回望九岭，渺渺茫茫，非但行路艰难险阻，实在也是个穷荒绝域的边远地区啊！
English: The ancients said: Wuling is the barrier separating the inside and outside of heaven and earth. What's more, the road is rough, far away in the cape of the sky cliff. Looking back at Jiuling, it is dim and vague. Not only is the journey difficult and dangerous, but it is also a remote area of the barren desert!

古文：寿泠水自城南，东与卢容水合，东注郎究，究水所积，下潭为湖，谓之郎湖浦口。
现代文：寿冷水自城南东流，与卢容水汇合，东注于郎究，究水在下潭积漪成湖，称为郎湖。
English: The Shouling water flows from the southeast of the city, merges with the Lu Rong water, flows east to the Langqu, and the water is accumulated into a lake in the lower lake, called the Lang Lake.

古文：《交州记》曰：凿南塘者，九真路之所经也，去州五百里。
现代文：浦口有秦时的象郡，废址仍然存在。从湖边南望，湖水外与寿冷相通，从郎湖流入四会浦。
English: In Pukou, there is Qin Dynasty's Xiang County, and the waste site still exists. Looking south from the lake, the outside of the lake is connected to Shouling, and flows from Langhu into Sihui Pu.

古文：建武十九年，马援所开。《林邑记》曰：外越纪粟。
现代文：元嘉二十年马援所开。《林邑记》说：去外越纪粟望都。
English: In the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the Horse Aid Station was opened. "Lin Yue Ji" said: "Going abroad is like going to the capital."

古文：望都纪粟出浦阳，渡便州至典由，渡故县至咸驩。
现代文：从纪粟取道浦阳，经过便州，可到典由；经过旧县，可到咸灌。
English: From Urayang, Jiwatori Road, through Benshou, you can go to Dianyou; through the old county, you can go to Xiangan.

古文：咸驩属九真。
现代文：咸灌隶属于九真。
English: Xiangan belongs to JiuZhen.

古文：咸驩已南，獐麂满冈，鸣咆命畴，警啸聒野。孔雀飞翔，蔽日笼山。
现代文：咸骥以南，山冈上全是膺鹿，哟哟地叫唤着伴侣，荒野里响彻一片惊叫声；孔雀也极多，成群飞翔时，会把山冈太阳都遮住。
English: South of Hamhung, the hills are full of elk, yo yo yelling for a mate, the wilderness resounding with screams; peacocks are also very numerous, and when flying in flocks, they will cover the mountains with the sun.

古文：渡治口，至九德。
现代文：渡过治口，就到九德。
English: After passing through Jikou, you will come to Jiude.

古文：按《晋书地道记》有九德县，《交州外域记》曰：九德县属九真郡，在郡之南，与日南接。
现代文：按《晋书•地道记》，有九德县。《交州外域记》说：九德县隶属于九真郡，该郡南部与日南接界。
English: According to "Jinshu•Jindo Ji," there is Jiude County. "Jiaozhou Gaowu Ji" said: Jiude County belongs to JiuZhen County, and the southern part of the county is bordered by the south of Japan.

古文：蛮卢舆居其地，死，子宝纲代，孙党服从吴化，定为九德郡，又为隶之。
现代文：蛮王卢攀统治着那个地区，他死后，儿子宝纲继位；孙子卢党遵从吴国的政教，立为九德郡，隶属于吴。
English: The barbarian king Lu Pang ruled the area, and after his death, his son Bao Gang took over the throne; his grandson Lu Ting followed the politics and religion of Wuxi and established Jiude County, which was subordinate to Wuxi.

古文：《林邑记》曰：九德，九夷所极，故以名郡。
现代文：《林邑记》说：九德是九夷的尽头，所以作为郡名。
English: "Lin Yue Ji" said: Jiude is the end of Jiujiang, so it is used as the county name.

古文：郡名所置，周越裳氏之夷国。
现代文：该郡的辖境，就是周代越裳氏的夷国。
English: The jurisdiction of the county is the Yishi Province of the Yoshioshi clan in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：《周礼》九夷，远极越裳。白雉象牙，重九译而来。
现代文：据《周礼》，九夷以越裳为最远，他们通过翻译，带了白堆、象牙前来进贡。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," the Jiuyi were the furthest away from Yuezhuang, and they brought white heaps and ivory to pay tribute through an interpreter.

古文：自九德通类口，水源从西北远荒，径宁州界来也。
现代文：从九德通类口的那条水，源头是从西北的边远地区经宁州边界流来的。
English: The source of the water flowing from Jiudetongluokou comes from a remote area in the northwest across the Ningzhou border.

古文：九德浦内径越裳究、九德究、南陵究。
现代文：九德浦经过越裳究、九德究、南陵究通往内地。
English: Jiudepo passes through Yuexiao, Jiudepo and Nanling to the mainland.

古文：按《晋书地道记》，九德郡有南陵县，晋置也。
现代文：按《晋书•地道记》，九德郡有南陵县，晋时所置。
English: According to "Jinshu•Jindo Ji," Nanling County was located in Jiude County at the time of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：长围跨山，重栅断浦，驱象前锋，接刃城下，连日交战，杀伤乃退。《地理志》曰：九真郡，汉武帝元鼎六年开，治胥浦县。王莽更之曰驩成也。《晋书地道记》曰：九真郡有松原县。
现代文：按竺枝《扶南记》，山溪的礁滩称为究，《地理志》说：郡中有小溪流五十二条，合并成大川，这些溪流都可称为究。《林邑记》说：义熙九年开拓的，治所在青浦县，王莽改名为灌城石《晋书•地道记》说：九真郡有松原县。
English: According to Fu Nan Ji, the reef beach of the mountain stream is called "Kuching." Geography said: There are fifty-two small streams in the county, merged into large rivers, and these streams can all be called "Kuching." Lin Yu Ji said: Wang Mang, who pioneered in the ninth year of Yixi, was located in Qingpu County, and changed his name to Guancheng Stone. Jin Shu • Local History said: Jiuzhen County has Songyuan County.

古文：《林邑记》曰：松原以西，鸟鲁驯良，不知畏弓。寡妇孤居，散发至老。
现代文：《林邑记》说：松原以西，鸟兽都很驯良，不知害怕弓箭，寡妇单身居住，到老都披头散发。
English: "Lingyi Ji" said: West of Songyuan, birds and beasts are very tame, unknowingly afraid of bows and arrows, widows live alone, and spread their heads to the capital.

古文：南移之岭，崪不逾仞。
现代文：到了南方，都是低丘小岭，仓庚在山北唱着情歌，翡翠鸟在山南晒着太阳。
English: In the south, it's all low hills and ridges. Cang Geng is singing love songs in the north of the mountain, and Jade Bird is basking in the sun in the south of the mountain.

古文：仓庚怀春于其北，翡翠熙景乎其南，虽嘤欢接响，城隔殊非，独步难游，俗姓涂分故也。自南陵究出于南界蛮，进得横山。
现代文：虽然欢乐的肠嗽一声接一声，但隔着一座城墙情况却全然两样，人们很难单独一人出来行走，这是因为当地风俗各部族分别聚居，分道行走的缘故。从南陵究出南部边界，蛮族入侵就会夺取横山。
English: Although the joyous guttural sounds are one after another, the situation is completely different across a city wall. It is difficult for people to come out and walk alone. This is because of the local customs of various tribes living separately and walking in separate directions. If the southern border is investigated from the southern mausoleum, the barbarian invasion will seize Hengshan.

古文：如淳曰：故以比景名县。
现代文：太和三年紧密相合。如淳说：所以用比景作县名。
English: Too and three years are closely related.Ru Jun said: Therefore, it is best to use the analogy as the name of the county.

古文：阚駰曰：比读荫庇之庇，景在己下，言为身所庇也。
现代文：阐驰说：比，读作荫庇的庇。影在自己脚下，是被自己的身体所蔽。
English: The shadow under his feet is covered by his own body.

古文：《林邑记》曰：渡比景至朱吾，朱吾县浦，今之封界。
现代文：《林邑记》说：过了比景，就到朱吾。朱吾是水口，就是现在的疆界。
English: "Lin Yue Ji" said: After the comparison, it comes to Zhuwu. Zhuwu is the mouth of the river, which is the current border.

古文：朱吾以南，有文狼人，野居无室宅，依树止宿，食生鱼肉，采香为业，与人交市，若上皇之民矣。具南有文狼究，下流径通。
现代文：•朱吾以南，有文狼人，他们在荒野居住，没有房屋，歇宿时就背靠着树木；生鱼生肉，拿到就吃；他们以采香为职业，与人做买卖，就好像上古圣皇时的人民一样、县南有文狼究，与下流相通。
English: • To the south of Zhuwu, there are civilized werewolves. They live in the wilderness, have no houses, and rest with their backs against the trees. They eat raw fish and raw meat as soon as they get it. Their occupation is to collect incense, and they do business with people. Just like the people in the time of the ancient holy emperors, there are civilized werewolves in the south of the county, and they are in contact with the lower classes.

古文：《晋书地道记》曰：朱吾县属日南郡，去郡二百里。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》说：朱吾县属于日南郡，离郡城二百里。
English: "Jinshu•Jidoki" says: Zhuwu County belongs to Nichinan County, two hundred miles away from the county seat.

古文：此县民，汉时不堪二千石长吏调求，引屈都乾为国。
现代文：汉时该县百姓因受不了二千石长吏的苛征暴敛，叛汉而认屈都乾为宗主国。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, the people of the county could not bear the harsh taxation of the 2,000-koku officials and rebelled against the Han Dynasty, claiming to be the suzerain.

古文：《林邑记》曰：屈都，夷也。
现代文：《林邑记》说：屈都是夷族。
English: "Linyi Ji" said: Qu are all barbarians.

古文：建国起自汉末，初平之乱，人怀异心，象林功曹姓区，有子名逵，攻其县，杀令，自号为王。
现代文：朱吾浦内通无劳湖，无劳究水通寿冷浦。元嘉元年之乱时，人们都怀有野心，象林一位姓区的功曹，有个儿子名遴，攻入县城，杀了县令，自号为王。
English: Zhuwupunai is connected to Wulao Lake, and Wulao Water is connected to Shulingpu. During the Yuan Jia Rebellion in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, people were full of ambition. Xiang Lin, a meritorious person with the surname of Gu, had a son named Guan, invaded the county seat, killed the county magistrate, and claimed to be the king.

古文：值世乱离，林邑遂立，后乃袭代，传位子孙。三国鼎争，未有所附。
现代文：当时正值天下大乱，林邑于是建立，以后世代传位子孙，在三国鼎立时期，没有归附任何一国。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, so Lin'eup was established and passed down to future generations. During the period of the rise of the Three Kingdoms, it did not belong to any country.

古文：吴有交土，与之邻接，进侵寿泠，以为疆界。
现代文：吴所领属的交州，与一林邑相邻；林邑入侵寿冷，以此为界。
English: Jiaozhou, which belonged to Wu, was adjacent to Linyi; Linyi invaded Shouling, and this became the boundary.

古文：自区逵以后，国无文史，失其纂代，世数难详，宗胤灭绝，无复种裔。
现代文：自从区逢以后，国家不修文史，帝位传承的世系也没有记录，究竟传了几代也不清楚，而且宗族也灭绝了，不再有人可以传宗接代了。
English: Since the war, the country has not revised its literary history, and there is no record of the line of succession to the imperial throne. It is not clear how many generations have been passed down. Moreover, the family line has also died out, and there is no longer anyone who can pass down the family line.

古文：外孙范熊代立，人情乐推。
现代文：于是外孙范熊代之而立，人民也乐于推他登位。
English: As a result, his grandson, Fan Xiong, took his place, and the people were happy to promote him to the throne.

古文：后熊死，子逸立，有范文，日南西卷县夷帅范椎奴也。
现代文：范熊死后，儿子范逸即位。当时有个范文，是日南西卷县夷人头目范椎的奴隶。
English: After the death of Fan Xiong, his son Fan Yi ascended to the throne. At that time, there was a Fan Wen, who was the slave of Fan Shi, the leader of the barbarians in the south of the country.

古文：文为奴时，山涧牧羊，于涧水中，得两鲤鱼，隐藏挟归，规欲私食。
现代文：范文做奴隶时，在山涧牧羊，在涧水中捉到两条鲤鱼，藏起来带回家中，想私自烧了吃。
English: When Fan Wen was a slave, she was herding sheep in the mountains. She caught two eels in the muddy water, hid them and took them home. She wanted to burn them to eat.

古文：郎知检求，文大惭惧，起托云：将而石还，非为鱼也。
现代文：主人知道了，向他要鱼，范文非常羞惭害怕，就撒谎说：我只拿了磨石回来，不是鱼呀！
English: When his master found out, he asked him for a fish. Fan Wen was very ashamed and afraid, so he lied and said, "I only came back with a grindstone, not a fish!"

古文：郎至鱼所，见是两石，信之而去。
现代文：主人到藏鱼的地方，看见真是两块石头，就相信他，回头走了。
English: When the owner went to the place where the fish was hidden and saw two stones, he believed him and went back.

古文：文始异之。
现代文：范文这才觉得奇怪。
English: This is what I find strange about Fan Wen.

古文：石有铁，文入山中，就石冶铁，锻作两刀。
现代文：石头中含有铁质，范文到山里去用石来冶铁，打了两把刀。
English: The stone contains iron, Fan Wen went to the mountains to use the stone to smelt iron, and made two knives.

古文：举刀向鄣，因祝曰：鲤鱼变化，冶石成刀，斫石鄣破者，是有神灵，文当得此，为国君王。斫不入者，是刀无神灵。
现代文：他举刀对着挡在前面的岩石，祝祷道：鲤鱼会变化，冶石炼成刀，如果一刀砍破岩石，就是有神灵相护了，我范文应当得刀，做国中君王；如果砍不进去，就是刀没有神灵。
English: He raised his sword to the rock in front of him and prayed: "The eel will change, the stone will turn into a sword. If a sword cuts through the rock, it is protected by the gods. I, Fan Wen, should get the sword and become the king of the country. If I can't cut it, then the sword has no gods."

古文：进斫石鄣，如龙渊、干将之斩芦藁，由是人情渐附。
现代文：他上前向岩石一刀劈了下去，就像用龙渊、干将这样的宝剑研芦苇枯枝一般。因此民心渐渐归附他了。
English: He went up to the rock and cut it with a knife, just like using a sword such as Longyuan and Ganjun to sharpen reed dead branches. Therefore, the people's hearts gradually attached to him.

古文：今斫石尚在，鱼刀犹存，传国子孙，如斩蛇之剑也。
现代文：现在他当年劈过的岩石和鱼刀都还存在，传国给子孙时，把鱼刀也一起传下去，就像汉高祖斩蛇的宝剑一样。
English: Now, the rocks and fish knives he chopped that year are still there. When he passed the country down to his descendants, he also passed down the fish knives, just like the sword of Henkel's ancestor.

古文：椎尝使文远行商贾，北到上国，多所闻见，以晋愍帝建兴中，南至林邑，教王范逸，制造城他，缮治戎甲，经始廓略。
现代文：范椎曾派范文去远地做生意，到了北方的上国，增长了很多见识。晋憨帝建兴年间，他到了南方的林邑，指导国王范逸建筑城池，制造甲胃兵器，着手扩张势力。
English: Fan Shi once sent Fan Wen to do business in a distant land. He went to Shangguo in the north and gained a lot of insight. During the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, he went to Lin'eup in the south to guide King Fan Yi in building a city, manufacturing armored stomach weapons, and starting to expand his power.

古文：王爱信之，使为将帅，能得众心。
现代文：国王很宠信他，叫他去当将帅，他也能得人心。
English: The king was very fond of him and asked him to be a marshal, and he was able to win people's hearts.

古文：文谗王诸子，或徙或奔，王乃独立。
现代文：范文对国王屡进谗言，毁谤他的儿子们。
English: Fan Wen repeatedly insulted the king and slandered his sons.

古文：成帝咸和六年死，无胤嗣。
现代文：使得他们放逐的放逐，逃走的逃走。
English: which made them exile after exile, flight after flight.

古文：文迎王子于外国，海行取水，置毒子中。
现代文：于是国王被孤立起来了。
English: As a result, the king was isolated.

古文：饮而杀之，遂胁国入，自立为王。取前王妻妾，置高楼土，有从己者，取而纳之，不从己者，绝其饮食而死。
现代文：成帝咸和六年,国王死了，没有后嗣，范文把国王在国外的儿子迎接回来，在海上航行途中，去打水时暗地把毒药放进椰子里，毒死了王子，于是就胁迫国人，自己当了国王。他把已故国王的妻妾放在高楼上，肯跟从他的，就娶了过来，不肯从他的，就不给饭吃，让她们饿死。
English: Six years after Emperor Chengxian's death, the king died and had no heirs. Fan Wen took the king's son abroad to welcome him back. On the way to fetch water, he secretly put poison into a coconut and poisoned the prince. He then coerced the countrymen and became king himself. He put the late king's wife and concubine on a high-rise building. If they followed him, he would marry them. If they did not follow him, he would not give them food and let them starve to death.

古文：《江东旧事》云：范文，本扬州人，少被掠为奴，卖堕交州。
现代文：《江东旧事》说：范文原来是扬州人，小时被抢去做奴隶，贩卖流落到交洲。
English: "Jiangdong Old Story" said: Fan Wen was originally from Yangzhou. He was kidnapped as a slave and trafficked to Jiaozuo.

古文：年十五六，遇罪当得杖，畏怖因逃，随林邑贾人渡海远去，没入于王，大被幸爱。
现代文：十五六岁时，有罪要受杖刑，心里害怕，因而逃走，跟着林邑商人渡海远去，于是被国王收为奴仆，很受宠爱。
English: When he was fifteen or sixteen years old, he was threatened with the cane, and he was so frightened that he ran away. He followed the merchant of Lin-yi across the sea, and he was taken as a slave by the king, and he was very much loved.

古文：经十余年，王死，文害王二子，诈杀侯将，自立为王，威加诸国。
现代文：十余年后，国王死了，范文谋害了国王的两个儿子，嫁祸于公侯和大将，把他们杀了。于是自立为王，用武力压服各国。
English: More than ten years later, the king died, and Fan Wen plotted to kill the king's two sons, blaming them on the duke and the general, and killed them. So he became king himself and used force to subdue countries.

古文：或夷椎蛮语，口食鼻饮，或雕面镂身，狼裸种，汉魏流赭，威为其用。
现代文：这些国家，有的束着夷人的发髻，说着蛮人的话语，用口吃东西，用鼻子吸水，有的刺面纹身，是裸体的狼慌部族。汉魏时期被流放的囚徒，都被他收留利用。
English: Some of these countries wear the hair of barbarians, speak the language of barbarians, eat with their mouths, suck water with their noses, some have tattoos on their faces, and are naked wolf panic tribes. The prisoners who were exiled during the Han and Wei Dynasties were all taken in and used by him.

古文：建元二年，攻日南、九德、九真，百姓奔迸，千里无烟，乃还林邑。
现代文：建元二年，他进攻日南、九德、九真，百姓都逃散了，千里之地荒无人烟，这才回到林邑。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he attacked Nichinan, Jiude and Jiuzhen. The people all fled, and thousands of miles of land were deserted. Only then did he return to Linyi.

古文：林邑西去广州二千五百里，城西南角高山长岭，连接天鄣岭，北接涧。
现代文：林邑西距广州二千五百里，城的西南角是高山长岭，与天郭岭相连接。
English: Linyi is 2,500 miles west of Guangzhou. The southwest corner of the city is the high mountain Changling, which is connected to the Tianguoling.

古文：大源淮水出郍郍远界，三重长洲，隐山绕西，卫北回东，其岭南开涧，小源淮水出松根界，上山壑流，隐山绕南曲街回，东合淮流，以注典冲。
现代文：山岭北面连接着山涧。大源淮水发源于遥远的郎舟肠边界，从万山深处流出，水中有三道狭长的沙洲；水从山中流绕到城西，又流向城北，转到城东。岭南的山涧，小源淮水发源于松根边界的山谷里，从山上的深涧流出，在山间绕南曲折东流与淮水汇合，流向典冲。
English: The mountains to the north are connected by ridges. The Daiyuan Huai Water originates in the distant border of Langzhu and flows out from the depths of the mountains. There are three narrow sandbanks in the water. The water flows from the middle of the mountain to the west of the city, then flows to the north of the city and turns to the east of the city. The mountains to the south of the Lingnan Mountains, the Xiaoyuan Huai Water originates in the valley of the pine root border, flows out from the depths of the mountain, and flows around the south of the mountains to the east to merge with the Huai Water and flow to Dianchong.

古文：其城西南际山，东北瞰水，重堑流浦，周绕城下。东南堑外，因傍薄城，东西横长，南北纵狭，北边西端，回折曲入。城周围八里一百步，砖城二丈，上起砖墙一丈，开方隙孔，砖上倚板，板上层阁，阁上架屋，屋上构楼。高者六七丈，下者四五丈。飞观鸱尾，迎风拂云，缘山瞰水，骞翥嵬崿。
现代文：林邑城西南依山，东北临水，城下环绕着两重城河一，东南面的城河迫近城墙，城的形状东西长而南北狭，北边西头，曲折地向内弯，城周围长八里一百步，砖城高二丈，城上筑砖墙，高一丈，墙上开方孔；砖上铺板，板上建起层阁，阁上架屋，屋上建楼，高的六七丈，低的四五丈；飞阁依山面水，巍峨雄伟，鸥尾高翘，迎风拂云，但建筑粗大，仿古拙劣。
English: Linyi City is surrounded by mountains in the southwest and water in the northeast. The double city river I flows under the city. The city river in the southeast is close to the city wall. The shape of the city is long from east to west and narrow from north to south. The west end of the north is curved inwards. The circumference of the city is eight miles and one hundred paces. The brick city is two high, the brick wall is built on the city, one high, and a square hole is opened on the wall. The brick is covered with boards, and a multi-storey pavilion is built on the board. The pavilion is built on the roof, and the building is built on

古文：但制造壮拙。稽古夷俗，城开四门，东为前门，当两淮渚滨，于曲路有古碑，夷书铭赞前王胡达之德。
现代文：按夷人风俗，城上开城门四座，朝东的是前门，面临两条淮水的岸边；弯曲的道路上有古碑，用夷文刻着称颂前国王范胡达的恩德。
English: According to the custom of the barbarians, there are four gates on the castle, the front gate facing east is the highest, facing the shore of two rivers; there are ancient monuments on the curved road, engraved with the praise of the former king, Fan Huda.

古文：西门当两重堑，北回上山，山西即淮流也。南门度两重堑，对温公垒。
现代文：西门前临两重护城河，城墙向北回转上山，山的西面就是淮水，南门隔着两道护城河，朝向温公垒。
English: The west gate faces the double moat, the city wall turns north and climbs up the mountain, the west side of the mountain is Huai Shui, and the south gate is separated by two moats and faces the Wengong Fort.

古文：升平二年，交州刺史温放之，杀交趾太守杜宝别驾阮朗，遂征林邑，水陆累战，佛保城自守，重求请服，听之。
现代文：升平二年，交州刺史温放之杀了交趾太守杜宝和别驾阮朗，于是就出征林邑，经过多次水上和陆上的战斗，范佛入城自保，不久重又请求归顺，温放之也答应了他。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Jiaozhou assassin Wen Fanzhi killed Du Bao, the imperial governor of Jiaozi, and his second-in-command, Ruan Lang. He then set out to conquer Lin'eup. After many battles on land and on the water, Fan Fo entered the city to protect himself. Soon after, he again asked to surrender, and Wen Fanzhi agreed.

古文：今林邑东城南五里，有温公二垒是也。
现代文：现在林邑东城南面五里的温公二垒，就是当时的遗迹。
English: The remains of that time are now the Wengong 2nd Base, five miles south of Linyi Dongcheng.

古文：北门滨淮，路断不通。城内小城，周围三百二十步，合堂瓦殿，南壁不开，两头长屋，脊出南北，南拟背日。
现代文：北门濒淮水，路被阻断不通了，城内又有小城，周围长三百二十步，合堂为瓦殿，南壁不开窗户，两头的长屋，屋脊取南北向，南边背着太阳。
English: The north gate is on the edge of Huai Shui, the road is blocked and impassable, there is a small city within the city, the perimeter is three hundred and twenty paces long, the hall is a tile hall, the south wall does not open windows, the long house at both ends, the roof ridge is north-south, and the south side backs the sun.

古文：西区城内，石山顺淮面阳，开东向殿，飞檐鸱尾，青琐丹墀，榱题桷椽，多诸古法。
现代文：西区城内，沿河石山向阳一面，建筑了一座朝东的宫殿，飞檐鸥尾，青琐纹的门饰，红色的台阶，出檐的方椽，大多依照古法。
English: In the western district of the city, on the side facing the sun along the river and the stone mountain, a palace facing east was built, with flying buttresses, blue-and-black door decorations, red steps, and square eaves, mostly in accordance with ancient methods.

古文：阁殿上柱，高城丈余五，牛屎为埿。
现代文：阁殿上层的柱子，比城高一丈五尺，以牛屎作泥涂墙，墙壁带着青色的光泽；转过曲折的掖庭，到处是雕镶得十分精美的窗户。
English: The pillars on the upper floor of the pavilion are five feet taller than the city, the walls are coated with cow dung, and the walls have a bluish sheen. Around the winding courtyard, there are beautifully carved windows everywhere.

古文：墙壁青光回度，曲掖绮牖，紫窗椒房，嫔媵无别，宫观，路寝，永巷，共在殿上，临踞东轩，径与下语。子弟臣侍，皆不得上。
现代文：椒房里住着殡腾都没有区别，宗庙台榭，国王的正室和后宫的长巷，都在宫殿上面。国王凭依着长廊的窗子，直接与下面说话，子弟和大臣侍从都不许上登。
English: There is no difference between a preacher's house and a funeral parlour. The throne room of the ancestral temple, the king's official residence and the long alley of the harem are all above the palace. The king leans on the window of the corridor and speaks directly with those below. His sons and ministers are not allowed to go up.

古文：屋有五十余区，连甍接栋，檐宇相承。
现代文：房屋五十多幢，屋栋连着屋栋，屋檐接着屋檐。
English: There are more than fifty houses, building after building, eaves after eaves.

古文：神祠鬼塔，小大八庙，层台重树，状似佛刹。
现代文：神祠鬼塔，大大小小共八座庙宇，层台重榭，就像佛寺一样。
English: Shrine ghost tower, large and small a total of eight temples, multi-layered, just like a Buddhist temple.

古文：郭无市里，邑寡人居，海岸萧条，非生民所处，而首渠以永安，养国十世，岂久存哉？
现代文：城里没有市场和居民区的划分，都城里居民很少，海岸冷落萧条，不是能住人的地方，而首领却以为这样天下就永远太平了。国家只延续了十代，哪里说得上久长呢？
English: There is no distinction between the market and the residential area in the city, there are few residents in the capital city, the coast is cold and depressed, it is not a place where people can live, but the leaders thought that the world would be forever peaceful. The country has only lasted for ten generations, how can it be said to be long?

古文：言语饮食，尚与华同。山川移易，铜柱今复在海中，正赖此民以识故处也。《林邑记》曰：建武十九年，马援树两铜柱于象林南界，与西屠国分，汉之南疆也。
现代文：元嘉年间一，檀和之出征林邑，林邑国王阳迈带着全城人民连夜逃奔到山林里去，檀和之占领了林邑都城，缴获了无数财宝，部队回去之后，阳迈也回到都城，家园和都城都残破荒芜了，人民也都背井离乡了。他欲行又止，不禁顿足捶胸，悲愤得死去活来。到元嘉二十三年，马援在象林南部边界建立了两根铜柱，与西屠国分界，这是汉朝的南疆。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, King Yangmai of Linyi led the entire people of the city to flee to the mountains and forests overnight. He occupied the capital city of Linyi and captured countless treasures. After the troops returned, Yangmai also returned to the capital city. His home and the capital city were devastated, and the people had left their homes. He wanted to go and stop, but he couldn't help but beat his chest and died of grief. In the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ma Yuan built two bronze pillars on the southern border of Linyi, separating it from Xitou, which was the southern border of the Han Dynasty.

古文：土人以之流寓，号曰马流，世称汉子孙也。
现代文：土人因为他们流寓于此，号称马流，世人称为汉子孙。
English: The natives, because they live here, are known as horse people, and the world is known as the descendants of Han.

古文：《山海经》曰：郁水出象郡而西南注南海，入须陵东南者也。
现代文：《山海经》说：郁水发源于象郡，往西南注入南海。这就是流入须陵东南的那条水。
English: "Sanghaikyo" says: Yu Shui originates in Xiang County and flows southwest into the South China Sea. This is the water that flows into the southeast of Shuling.

古文：应劭曰：郁水出广信东入海。
现代文：应劫说：郁水发源于广信，东流入海。
English: It is said that Yulishui originated from Guangxin and flowed into the sea from the east.

古文：言始或可，终则非矣。
现代文：他这句话中说到郁水的起点倒还可以，说到它的终点就不对了。
English: In this sentence, he said that it was okay to say the starting point of Yu Shui, but it was not right to say its end.

