古文：韩愈，字退之，昌黎人。
现代文：韩愈字退之，昌黎人。
English: Han Yüzhi retreated, and the people of Changli followed.

古文：父仲卿，无名位。
现代文：父名仲卿，无声名地位。
English: His father's name was Nakakyo, and he was a silent celebrity.

古文：愈生三岁而孤，养于从父兄。
现代文：韩愈三岁时便成了孤儿，寄养在堂兄家中。
English: Han Yu became an orphan at the age of three and was fostered at his cousin's home.

古文：愈自以孤子，幼刻苦学儒，不俟奖励。
现代文：韩愈自念是孤儿，从小便刻苦读书，无须别人嘉许勉励。
English: Han Yu considers himself an orphan. He has been studying hard since he was a child, and he doesn't need anyone's praise or encouragement.

古文：大历、贞元之间，文字多尚古学，效杨雄、董仲舒之述作，而独孤及、梁肃最称渊奥，儒林推重。
现代文：大历至贞元之间，文章大多崇尚仿古，模拟扬雄、董仲舒的著述风格，而独孤及、梁肃学问最为深奥，受到知识界推崇。
English: Between the Great Calendar and Zhenyuan, most of the articles advocated imitation of ancient times, imitating the writing style of Yang Xiong and Dong Zhongshu, while the unique and profound Liang Su culture was highly respected by the intellectual community.

古文：愈从其徒游，锐意钻仰，欲自振于一代。
现代文：韩愈同这一班人交往，锐意钻研，希望自己在一代人中崭露头角。
English: Han Yu interacts with this group of people, studies hard, and hopes to make a name for himself in the next generation.

古文：洎举进士，投文于公卿间，故相郑余庆颇为之延誉，由是知名于时。
现代文：及至应进士科考，文章投递到公卿之间，前宰相郑余庆极力为他播扬声誉，因此韩愈一时便出了名。
English: When it came to the entrance examination, the article was submitted to the nobles, and the former prime minister Zheng Yuqing tried his best to promote his reputation, so Han Yu became famous for a while.

古文：寻登进士第。
现代文：不久，韩愈便中了进士。
English: Soon, Han Yu was promoted.

古文：宰相董晋出镇大梁，辟为巡官。
现代文：宰相董晋出京镇戍大梁，征召韩愈为巡官。
English: The prime minister, Dong Jin, went to the capital to inspect the situation, and Han Yu was called up as inspector.

古文：府除，徐州张建封又请为其宾佐。
现代文：董晋调任，徐州张建封又聘请他做幕僚。
English: Dong Jin was transferred, and Xuzhou Zhang Jianfeng also hired him as a staff member.

古文：愈发言真率，无所畏避，操行坚正，拙于世务。
现代文：韩愈说话直爽坦率，从不畏惧或回避什么，操行坚定纯正，却不善于处理一般事务。
English: Han Yu speaks straightforwardly and frankly, never fears or avoids anything, his behavior is firm and pure, but he is not good at handling general affairs.

古文：调授四门博士，转监察御史。
现代文：后来调任四门博士，转任监察御史。
English: Later, he was reassigned to Shimon hakase and transferred to the position of inspector of history.

古文：德宗晚年，政出多门，宰相不专机务。宫市之弊，谏官论之不听。
现代文：德宗晚年时，朝政落到多家权贵手中，宰相不能决断机要事务，宫中宦官到民市强行买卖的弊端，谏官上奏批评，皇上不听取。
English: In the later years of Emperor Dezong's reign, the imperial government fell into the hands of many powerful nobles. The prime minister was unable to make decisions on important matters, and the eunuchs in the palace forced people to buy and sell. The eunuchs criticized the emperor, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：愈尝上章数千言极论之，不听，怒贬为连州山阳令，量移江陵府掾曹。
现代文：韩愈曾呈递数千言的奏章竭力陈说，皇上不接受，反而发怒将韩愈贬为连州阳山县令，后酌情移近任江陵府属官。
English: Han Yu had submitted a petition of several thousand words and tried his best to present it, but the emperor did not accept it. Instead, he angrily relegated Han Yu to the position of Lianzhou Yangshan County magistrate, and then moved him closer to the position of a subordinate official of Gangneung Prefecture.

古文：元和初，召为国子博士，迁都官员外郎。
现代文：元和初年，韩愈被召为国子博士，又升都官员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the Heian period, Han Yu was called to be a Kuniko doctor, and he was also promoted to be an official of the capital.

古文：时华州刺史阎济美以公事停华阴令柳涧县务，俾摄掾曹。
现代文：当时华州刺史阎济美因公事停止华阴县令柳涧的职务，让他代行属吏职事。
English: At that time, the governor of Huaying County, Yan Jimei, suspended the duties of the Huaying County magistrate Liu Ye for official business, and asked him to carry out official duties on his behalf.

古文：居数月，济美罢郡，出居公馆，涧遂讽百姓遮道索前年军顿役直。
现代文：数月后，阎济美被罢免，离开官衙去住公馆，柳涧便煽动百姓拦路索取前些年的军务劳役费。
English: A few months later, Yan Jimei was removed from office and left the official residence to live in a mansion. Liu Ye then incited the people to block the road to claim the previous years' military labor service fees.

古文：后刺史赵昌按得涧罪以闻，贬房州司马。
现代文：后来刺史赵昌查出柳涧煽动之罪将此事上奏，贬柳涧为房州司马。
English: Later, the assassin Zhao Chang discovered the crime of incitement by Liu Ye and reported the matter to the emperor, denouncing Liu Ye as the Sima of Fangzhou.

古文：愈因使过华，知其事，以为刺史相党，上疏理涧，留中不下。
现代文：韩愈因公差经过华州，闻知此事，认为继任刺史庇护前任，便上疏为柳涧辩护，皇上将奏疏留在禁中不予处理。
English: Han Yu, who was passing through Huazhou on a business trip, heard about the matter and thought that since he was the successor to the predecessor who was assassinated, Shang Suo would defend Liu Xuan, and the Emperor would not deal with Shang Suo in prison.

古文：诏监察御史李宗奭按验，得涧赃状，再贬涧封溪尉。
现代文：皇上命监察御史李宗核查，查得柳涧贪污受贿的事实，再度贬柳涧为封溪县尉。
English: Li Zong, the inspector of imperial history, checked the facts of corruption and bribery of Liu Ye, and once again demoted Liu Ye to the position of Fengxi County lieutenant.

古文：以愈妄论，复为国子博士。
现代文：因韩愈妄加议论，又将他降为国子博士。
English: As Han became more and more outspoken, he was demoted to Kuniko hakase.

古文：愈自以才高，累被摈黜，作《进学解》以自喻曰：
现代文：韩愈认为自己才学高深，却屡次遭贬斥，于是做《进学解》以自喻。
English: Han Yu thought that he was only a high-level student, but he was repeatedly disparaged, so he made "Advancement Solution" as a self-explanatory.

古文：国子先生晨入太学，召诸生立馆下，诲之曰： 业精于勤，荒于嬉；行成于思，毁于随。
现代文：文章写道： 国子先生早晨走进太学，召集学生们站立在校舍前，教诲他们说： 学业精深来自勤奋，学习荒废由于玩乐；德行养成依靠深思熟虑，德行败坏由于因循苟且。
English: The article wrote: Mr. Kuniko walked into Taihaku in the morning and called the students to stand in front of the school building. He taught them that: academic excellence comes from diligence, learning is wasted due to play; moral development depends on deliberation, and moral corruption is due to meticulousness.

古文：方今圣贤相逢，治具华张。拔去凶邪，登崇俊良。
现代文：现今圣君贤臣相遇，法律政令俱已制订，铲除了凶险邪恶之辈，选拔了德才兼优的人。
English: Today, saints and sages have met, laws and decrees have been formulated, dangerous and evil people have been eliminated, and people with both virtue and excellence have been selected.

古文：占小善者率以录，名一艺者无不庸。
现代文：具些许长处者一概录用，以一技而出名的人无不授职。
English: Those with a few strengths are always hired, and those who are famous for one skill are always given a job.

古文：爬罗剔抉，刮垢磨光。
现代文：发掘搜罗鉴别挑选，除去污垢磨出光辉。
English: Excavate, collect, identify and select, remove dirt and grind out brilliance.

古文：盖有幸而获选，孰云多而不扬？
现代文：或许有学问欠佳而侥幸中选者，谁说学识渊博的人得不到举用？
English: Perhaps there are poorly educated people who are chosen by chance, but who says that well-educated people cannot be promoted?

古文：诸生业患不能精，无患有司之不明；行患不能成，无患有司之不公！ 
现代文：诸位学子只须担心学业不能精深，不用害怕主管官员不能明察；只须担心德行不能养成，不要害怕主管官员不公正。 
English: All you students only need to worry about not being able to do well in your studies, and do not need to fear that the competent officials cannot see you; only need to worry about not being able to develop virtue, and do not need to fear that the competent officials are not fair.

古文：言未既，有笑于列者曰： 先生欺予哉！
现代文： 话未说完，就有学生在行列里笑着说： 先生在骗我们吧！
English: Before he had finished speaking, a student in the queue laughed and said: "The teacher is lying to us!"

古文：弟子事先生，于兹有年矣。
现代文：弟子跟着先生学习，至今有好些年了。
English: The apprentice has been learning from his master for several years now.

古文：先生口不绝吟于六艺之文，手不停披于百家之编。
现代文：先生口中从未停止吟诵六经文句，手中从未停止翻阅诸子百家著述。
English: He never stopped reciting the six sutras, and he never stopped reading hundreds of books.

古文：记事者必提其要，纂言者必钩其玄。
现代文：读纪事文章必定总结其要点，读说理文章必定探讨其深奥含义。
English: Reading a chronicle article will certainly summarize its main points, and reading a narrative article will certainly explore its profound meaning.

古文：贪多务得，细大不捐。
现代文：贪图多学务求有所获，无论重大或细微的内容均不放弃。
English: Strive to learn more and strive to gain something, regardless of major or minor content are not given up.

古文：烧膏油以继晷，常矻矻以穷年。先生之业，可谓勤矣。
现代文：点灯燃烛夜以继日，终年孜孜不倦地刻苦用功。先生治学，可以说够勤奋了。
English: Lighting lamps and lighting candles night after night, working tirelessly and diligently throughout the year. As a teacher, you can say that you are diligent enough.

古文：牴排异端，攘斥佛、老；补苴罅漏，张皇幽眇；寻坠绪之茫茫，独旁搜而远绍；障百川而东之，回狂澜于既倒。
现代文：抵制异端邪说，排斥佛教道教，弥补儒学的缺漏，阐发儒学道统，独自旁搜博引将它从远古继承下来；犹如防堵百川泛滥而使它东流入海，挽回已经倾泻的狂澜。
English: Resisting heretical heresies, rejecting Buddhism and Taoism, making up for the shortcomings of Confucianism, expounding the Confucianism and Taoism, and inheriting it from ancient times by independently collecting and introducing books; it is like preventing the flooding of a hundred rivers and letting it flow east into the sea, and saving the already pouring torrents.

古文：先生之于儒，可谓有劳矣。
现代文：先生对于捍卫和传播儒家学说，可以说劳苦功高了。
English: It can be said that he has made great efforts to defend and disseminate Confucianism.

古文：沉浸醲郁，含英咀华，作为文章，其书满家。
现代文：沉浸在古代典籍之深厚义蕴中，咀嚼品味其中的精华，写成文章，那些著作把家里都堆满了。
English: Immersed in the profound meaning of ancient classics, chewing the essence of taste, writing articles, those works are piled up at home.

古文：上规姚、姒，浑浑无涯；《周诰》、《殷盘》，佶屈聱牙；《春秋》谨严，《左氏》浮夸；《易》奇而法，《诗》正而葩；下迨《庄》、《骚》，太史所录，子云、相如，同工异曲。
现代文：向上代取法，虞舜夏禹之作，深奥无穷。
English: Taking the method to the next generation, the work of Yu Xiayu is profound and profound.

古文：先生之于文，可谓闳其中而肆其外矣。
现代文：《周诰》、《殷盘》，文句艰深难读。《春秋》文辞简要严谨，《左传》语言铺张华美。《易》奇妙而有法则，《诗》纯正而华丽。
English: "Zhou Xuan" and "Yin Pan" are difficult to read. "Spring and Autumn" is concise and rigorous, "Zo Zhuan" is extravagant and beautiful. "Yi" is strange and has rules, and "Poetry" is pure and gorgeous.

古文：少始知学，勇于敢为；长通于方，左右具宜。
现代文：少小时就懂得学习，勇于大胆实践；随着年龄增长便通晓事理，处理各种事情都能恰如其分。
English: They know how to learn and dare to practice at an early age; as they grow older, they will understand the facts and deal with all kinds of things appropriately.

古文：先生之于为人，可谓成矣。
现代文：先生在做人方面，可以说是德行完美了。
English: In terms of being a person, it can be said that he has perfected his virtue.

古文：然而公不见信于人，私不见助于友；跋前踬后，动辄得咎。
现代文：然而在公务上不能被人信任，私事上得不到朋友帮助，进退两难，动辄获罪。
English: However, they can't be trusted in their official duties, can't get help from friends in their private affairs, face dilemmas, and are often found guilty.

古文：暂为御史，遂窜南夷；三为博士，冗不见治。
现代文：没当几天御史，就被撵到南方边远之地。三度任国子博士，是个闲职不能有所作为。
English: After only a few days as imperial historian, he was banished to a remote place in the south. He was appointed Kuniko doctor three times, but he could not make a difference as an idler.

古文：命与仇谋，取败几时。
现代文：命中注定老要同仇敌打交道，屡遭失败。
English: Destined to always have to deal with the enemy, repeatedly failed.

古文：冬暖而兒号寒，年丰而妻啼饥。
现代文：冬季即使天气较暖孩子们也冷得叫喊，丰收之年妻子也因饥饿而啼哭。
English: In winter, even if the weather is warmer, the children cry out in the cold, and in the year of the harvest, the wife cries from hunger.

古文：头童齿豁，竟死何裨？
现代文：先生头顶秃了牙齿脱落，即使熬到死又能得到什么好处？
English: Mr. bald on top of his head, his teeth falling out, even if he waits until he dies, what benefit can he get?

古文：不知虑此，而反教人为！ 
现代文：不知多想想这些，反倒来教训别人！ 
English: I don't know how much to think about this, but to teach others!

古文：先生曰： 吁，子来前！
现代文： 先生说： 喂，你到前面来。
English: The teacher said: Hey, you come to the front.

古文：夫大木为杗，细木为桷，栌侏儒，椳闑扂楔，各得其宜，施以成室者，匠氏之工也。
现代文：那大木头可做栋梁，小木头可做椽子，斗拱短柱，门臼门槛门闩门框，各派适当用场，用以建成房屋，这是工匠们的巧妙技术。
English: The large pieces of wood can be used as beams, the small pieces of wood can be used as rafters, short columns for arches, door mortises, thresholds, lintels, and door frames. Each group has its appropriate use for building houses. This is the skillful technique of craftsmen.

古文：玉札丹砂，赤箭青芝，硃溲马勃，败鼓之皮，俱收并蓄，待用无遗者，医师之良也。
现代文：贵重的地榆朱砂，天麻龙芝，普通的车前草马勃菌，陈旧的鼓皮，兼收并蓄，备用而不至于缺遗，这是医师的高明之处。
English: The precious mantle cinnabar, Tianma longzhi, common psyllium plantain, and old drum skin are all mixed together, and can be used without being wasted. This is the doctor's cleverness.

古文：登明选公，杂进巧拙，纡余为妍，卓荦为杰，校短量长，唯器是适者，宰相之方也。
现代文：选拔人才准确公正，优秀的、稍差的一并量才任用，有的以委曲周全见长，有的以超绝旷达出众，比较他们的长处和短处，将他们安置到适合各自特点的职位上，这是宰相用人的原则。
English: The selection of talents is accurate and fair, and only the best and the worst can be appointed. Some are well-appointed, some are outstanding, compare their strengths and weaknesses, and place them in positions suitable for their respective characteristics. This is the principle of employing prime ministers.

古文：昔者，孟轲好辩，孔道以明，辙环天下，卒老于行。
现代文：古时孟轲擅长辩论，孔子的学说因而得以阐明传播，他的车迹遍及天下，在周游列国中度过一生。
English: In ancient times, Meng Xuan was good at debate, and the teachings of Confucius were able to clarify and spread. His car tracks spread all over the world, and he spent his life traveling around the world.

古文：苟卿守正，大论是弘，逃谗于楚，废死兰陵。
现代文：荀卿坚守正道，儒家的伟大理论因而发扬光大，为逃避齐人的谗言来到楚国，最后被楚国废为平民死在兰陵。
English: Gongqing adhered to the right path, and the great theory of Confucianism was thus carried forward. In order to escape the criticism of Qi people, he came to Chu, and was finally abolished by Chu as a civilian and died in Lanling.

古文：是二儒者，吐辞为经，举足为法，绝类离伦，优入圣域，其遇于世何如也？
现代文：这两位大儒，说出话来就成为经典，一举一动都成为法则，远远超过同辈人，优异卓绝达到了圣人的境地，他们在世上的遭遇又怎样呢？
English: These two great Confucians, uttering words became classics, every move became a law, far surpassing their contemporaries, and their excellence reached the status of saints. What happened to them in the world?

古文：今先生学虽勤，不由其统；言虽多，不要其中；文虽奇，不济于用；行虽修，不显于众。
现代文：今天先生我治学勤奋，但不能继承儒家道统；言论虽多，却未能切中要领；文章虽新奇，但不合于实用；德行虽具一定修养，却不能超群出众。
English: Today, sir, I am a diligent student, but I cannot inherit the Confucian doctrine; although there are many speeches, I cannot get to the point; although the article is novel, it is not practical; although I have a certain cultivation of virtue, I cannot be outstanding.

古文：犹且月费俸钱，岁靡廪粟，子不知耕，妇不知织，乘马从徒，安坐而食，踵常涂之促促，窥陈编以盗窃。
现代文：尚且月月取用朝廷的俸钱，年年耗费国库的粮食，孩子们不会种田，妻子不会织布，我骑马出门带着随从，安坐家中便吃现成饭，沿着常人之路小心地迈步，从古籍中窃取前人的言论。
English: In addition, I take the salary money of the imperial court every month, and consume the grain of the national treasury every year. My children can't farm, my wife can't weave cloth, I go out on horseback with my entourage, I sit at home and eat ready-made meals, I walk carefully along the road of ordinary people, and I steal the words of my predecessors from ancient books.

古文：然而圣主不加诛，宰臣不见斥，此非其幸哉！
现代文：然而圣主不加责罚，宰臣不斥逐我，这不是很幸运吗？
English: However, isn't it fortunate that the Lord didn't punish me and the vice-minister didn't banish me?

古文：动而得谤，名亦随之。
现代文：动一动便遭毁谤，名声随之被毁坏。
English: At every turn, they are slandered and their reputations ruined.

古文：投闲置散，乃分之宜。
现代文：将我安放在闲散的位置，这是理所当然的。
English: Put me in an idle position, that's for sure.

古文：若夫商财贿之有无，计班资之崇庳，忘己量之所称，指前人之瑕疵，是所谓诘匠氏之不以杙为楹，而訾医师以昌阳引年，欲进其豨苓也。 
现代文：至于去思虑利禄之有无，计较职位的高低，而忘记自己的才干只适合担任什么职务，指责自己上司的毛病，这犹如质问木匠为何不用小木桩做屋柱、指责医师用昌蒲使人延年益寿而打算推荐猪苓一样的荒谬。  
English: As for worrying about the existence of bonuses, considering the level of the position, forgetting that one's talent is only suitable for what position, and blaming one's boss for the problems, this is just as absurd as asking a carpenter why he does not use small wooden piles to make house pillars, or accusing a doctor of using magnolia to prolong life and planning to recommend bristlecones.

古文：执政览其文而怜之，以其有史才，改比部郎中、史馆修撰。
现代文：执政官看了这篇文章很同情他，认为他有史学方面的才识，改派他任比部郎中、史馆修撰。
English: After reading this article, the consul sympathized with him and thought that he had a talent for history, and reassigned him to be a member of the history club and a writer for the history museum.

古文：逾岁，转考功郎中、知制诰，拜中书舍人。
现代文：一年后，调任考郎中、兼掌制诺，又拜为中书舍人。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the post of middle school examiner, concurrently holding the position of chief examiner, and also serving as a teacher of Chinese literature.

古文：俄有不悦愈者，摭其旧事，言愈前左降为江陵掾曹，荆南节度使裴均馆之颇厚，均子锷凡鄙，近者锷还省父，愈为序饯锷，仍呼其字。
现代文：不久，有人不喜欢韩愈，抓住他的旧事不放，说韩愈先前降职为江陵掾曹时，荆南节度使裴均留他住宿礼遇厚重，裴均之子裴锷乃平庸浅陋之人，最近裴锷回来看望父亲，韩愈在为裴锷送行的文章序中，仍称呼裴锷的字。
English: Soon, some people didn't like Han Yu and seized on his past, saying that when Han Yu had previously been demoted to the post of Jiangling Jiu Cao, Jingnan Festival made Pei Jun stay with him and treated him with great courtesy. Pei Jun's son, Pei Xuan, was a mediocre and shallow person. Recently, Pei Xuan came back to visit his father. Han Yu still called Pei Xuan the word "Pei Xuan" in the preamble of the article to send off Pei Xuan.

古文：此论喧于朝列，坐是改太子右庶子。
现代文：这一说法在朝官中引起很大反响，因此韩愈被改授太子右庶子。
English: This statement caused a great reaction among the imperial officials, so Han Yu was awarded the title of Prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：元和十二年八月，宰臣裴度为淮西宣慰处置使，兼彰义军节度使，请愈为行军司马，仍赐金紫。
现代文：元和十二年八月，宰相裴度任淮西宣慰处置使、兼彰义军节度使，聘请韩愈为行军司马，赐紫服佩金鱼袋。
English: In August of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Prime Minister Baidu was appointed as the Huaxi Consolation and Disposition Envoy, and also as the Accomplishment of the Volunteer Army Festival Envoy, and hired Han Yu as the Marching Sima, and gave him a purple dress and a goldfish bag.

古文：淮、蔡平，十二月随度还朝，以功授刑部侍郎，仍诏愈撰《平淮西碑》，其辞多叙裴度事。
现代文：淮西、蔡州平定以后，十二月随裴度回朝，因功被授刑部侍郎，圣上便命他撰写《平淮西碑》碑文，其中很大篇幅叙述裴度的事迹。
English: After the pacification of Huaixi and Caizhou, he returned to the imperial court in December with Pei Du, and was awarded the title of "servant of the Department of Punishment" for his service. The saint ordered him to write the "Pinghuaixi Monument" inscription, in which he described the deeds of Pei Du in great detail.

古文：时先入蔡州擒吴元济，李愬功第一，愬不平之。
现代文：当时率先进入蔡州生擒吴元济，李功劳最大，他对韩愈所写愤愤不平。
English: At that time, Wu Yuanji, who was the first to enter Caizhou, made the greatest contribution. He was indignant about what Han Yu had written.

古文：愬妻出入禁中，因诉碑辞不实，诏令磨愈文。
现代文：李之妻可以出入宫禁，于是诉说碑辞与事实不符，圣上便下令磨掉韩愈所写碑文。
English: Li's wife was forbidden to enter the palace, so she complained that the inscription did not match the facts, and the saint ordered the inscription written by Han Yu to be rubbed off.

古文：宪宗命翰林学士段文昌重撰文勒石。
现代文：宪宗皇帝命翰林学士段文昌重新撰写刻石为碑。
English: Emperor Gensong ordered Hanlin to rewrite the stone monument.

古文：凤翔法门寺有护国真身塔，塔内有释迦文佛指骨一节，其书本传法，三十年一开，开则岁丰人泰。
现代文：凤翔法门寺有座护国真身塔，塔内有释迦文佛的一节手指骨，可以书写经文传布佛法，三十年开启一次，塔开时便年丰人泰。
English: Fengxiang Famen Temple has a pagoda of the protector of the country's true body. There is a section of the finger bone of Buddha Shaka in the pagoda, which can write scriptures and spread Buddhism. It is opened once every thirty years. When the pagoda is opened, it is prosperous.

古文：十四年正月，上令中使杜英奇押宫人三十人，持香花赴临皋驿迎佛骨。
现代文：元和十四年正月，圣上命中使杜英奇带领宫女三十人，手持香料鲜花，前往临皋驿迎接佛骨。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the saint ordered Du Yingqi to lead 30 court ladies, carrying spices and flowers, to Linyi to meet the Buddha's bones.

古文：自光顺门入大内，留禁中三日，乃送诸寺。
现代文：从光顺门进入皇宫，留在宫中三日，然后送往各寺。
English: Enter the Imperial Palace through the Koshun Gate, stay in the palace for three days, and then be taken to the temples.

古文：王公士庶，奔走舍施，唯恐在后。
现代文：王侯公卿士大夫及平民百姓，人人奔走迎送，施舍钱财，唯恐落在他人之后。
English: Princes, court nobles, scholars, and common people all rushed to greet and see him off, giving alms and money, for fear of falling behind others.

古文：百姓有废业破产、烧顶灼臂而求供养者。
现代文：百姓中有人不惜耗尽家产、灼烧头顶和手臂以求供养佛骨。
English: Among the common people, there are people who have exhausted their family assets and burned the top of their heads and arms in order to provide Buddhist relics.

古文：愈素不喜佛，上疏谏曰：
现代文：韩愈向来不喜欢敬佛之事，便上疏劝谏道：
English: Han Yu had always disliked the idea of worshipping Buddha, so he went to the priest to persuade him:

古文：伏以佛者，夷狄之一法耳。
现代文： 臣俯首以为佛这东西，不过是夷狄的一种法术。
English: The vassal bowed his head and thought that this thing, Buddha, was nothing more than a magic trick of the Yidi.

古文：自后汉时始流入中国，上古未尝有也。
现代文：从后汉时开始流传到中国，上古时并不曾有。
English: It has been spread to China since the late Han Dynasty, but it did not exist in ancient times.

古文：昔黄帝在位百年，年百一十岁；少昊在位八十年，年百岁；颛顼在位七十九年，年九十八岁；帝喾在位七十年，年百五岁；帝尧在位九十八年，年百一十八岁；帝舜及禹年皆百岁。
现代文：从前黄帝在位百年，活到一百一十岁；少昊在位八十年，活了一百岁；颛顼在位七十九年，活了九十八岁；帝喾在位七十年，活了一百零五岁；帝尧在位九十八年，活了一百一十八岁；帝舜和帝禹都年满百岁。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor reigned for one hundred years and lived to be one hundred and ten years old; Shao Hao reigned for eighty years and lived to be one hundred years old; Yao reigned for seventy-nine years and lived to be ninety-eight years old; Diệm reigned for seventy years and lived to be one hundred and five years old; Diệm reigned for ninety-eight years and lived to be one hundred and eighteen years old; Diệm and Diệm both lived to be one hundred years old.

古文：此时天下太平，百姓安乐寿考，然而中国未有佛也。
现代文：这些年代天下太平，百姓安乐长寿，然而当时中国并没有佛。
English: In those days, the world was peaceful and people lived long and happy lives. However, there was no Buddha in China at that time.

古文：其后殷汤亦年百岁，汤孙太戊在位七十五年，武丁在位五十年，书史不言其寿，推其年数，盖亦俱不减百岁。
现代文：那以后商汤也活到百岁，他的孙子太戊在位七十五年，武丁在位五十年，史书未记载他们的年寿，推断他们的生年，大概都不少于一百岁。
English: After that, Shang Tang also lived to be a hundred years old. His grandson Taewu reigned for seventy-five years, and Wuding reigned for fifty years. History books do not record their life expectancy, and it is estimated that they were all at least a hundred years old.

古文：周文王年九十七岁，武王年九十三岁，穆王在位百年。
现代文：周文王活了九十七岁，武王活了九十三岁，穆王在位百年。
English: King Zhou Wen lived ninety-seven years, King Wu lived ninety-three years, and King Mu reigned for one hundred years.

古文：此时佛法亦未至中国，非因事佛而致此也。
现代文：这时佛法也未传到中国，他们并非奉佛而能久居君位和高寿。
English: At this time, Buddhism had not yet spread to China, and they were not able to stay on the throne for a long time and live a long life by worshiping Buddha.

古文：汉明帝时始有佛法，明帝在位，才十八年耳。
现代文： 汉明帝时开始有佛法，而他在位只有十八年。
English: Buddhism began to spread under Emperor Han Ming, who reigned for only eighteen years.

古文：其后乱亡相继，运祚不长。宋、齐、梁、陈、元魏已下，事佛渐谨，年代尤促。
现代文：之后战乱亡国之祸接踵而来，国运不能久长，宋、齐、梁、陈、元魏以来，奉佛越来越恭谨虔诚，而朝代更加短促。
English: After that, the calamity of war and the ruin of the country came one after another, and the national movement could not last long. Since the Song, Qi, Liang, Chen, and Yuan Wei Dynasties, the worship of Buddha has become more and more respectful and pious, and the dynasties have become shorter.

古文：唯梁武帝在位四十八年，前后三度舍身施佛，宗庙之祭，不用牲牢，昼日一食，止于菜果。
现代文：其间只有梁武帝在位四十八年，前后三次舍身做佛徒，祭祀宗庙不再用牲畜做祭品，每昼夜只吃一餐，食物限于蔬菜和果品。
English: Among them, only Emperor Liangwu, who reigned for 48 years, sacrificed himself three times to become a Buddhist, no longer used livestock as sacrifices to worship the ancestral temple, ate only one meal every day and night, and his food was limited to vegetables and fruits.

古文：其后竟为侯景所逼，饿死台城，国亦寻灭。
现代文：后来竟为侯景所逼迫，饿死在台城，国家不久便灭亡。
English: Later, he was actually persecuted by Hou Jing, starved to death in Taicheng, and the country soon perished.

古文：事佛求福，乃更得祸。
现代文：敬佛本为求福，反倒招致灾祸。
English: Reverence for the Buddha is meant to bring good fortune, but on the contrary, it brings disaster.

古文：由此观之，佛不足信，亦可知矣。
现代文：由此看来，佛不值得信奉，可以明白了。
English: From this perspective, it is clear that Buddha is not worth believing in.

古文：高祖始受隋禅，则议除之。
现代文： 高祖灭隋建国之初，即主张废止佛教。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Gaozhu advocated the abolition of Buddhism.

古文：当时群臣识见不远，不能深究先王之道、古今之宜，推阐圣明，以救斯弊，其事遂止。
现代文：当时群臣缺乏远见，不能深刻领悟先王治政方略及古今理国的规律，传播圣上的英明见解，以补救奉佛造成的弊害，这事便没去做。
English: At that time, the courtiers lacked foresight and were unable to deeply understand the previous king's governing strategy and the laws governing the country from ancient times to the present. They did not do anything to spread the holy and wise opinions to remedy the evils caused by the worship of Buddha.

古文：臣尝恨焉！
现代文：臣曾为此深感遗憾呀！
English: The minister was deeply sorry about this!

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下，神圣英武，数千百年以来未有伦比。
现代文：臣俯首思虑皇帝陛下神圣英武，数千百年来无人能比。
English: His subjects bowed their heads in reverence, thinking, "His Majesty, the Emperor, is divine and mighty. For thousands of years, no one has been able to match him."

古文：即位之初，即不许度人为僧尼、道士，又不许别立寺观。
现代文：陛下即位之初，就禁止剃度常人为僧尼、道士，又禁止另建佛寺道观。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's reign, it was forbidden to ordain ordinary people as monks, nuns, and Taoists, and it was forbidden to build another Buddhist temple for Taoism.

古文：臣当时以为高祖之志，必行于陛下之手。
现代文：臣当时认为高祖的遗志，必经陛下之手而得以实现。
English: At that time, the minister believed that Gao Zu's last wish would be realized through the hands of His Majesty.

古文：今纵未能即行，岂可恣之转令盛也！
现代文：眼下纵然不能立即实行，难道可以纵容奉佛之风使它愈演愈烈吗？
English: Even if it cannot be implemented immediately, can the trend of worshipping Buddha be allowed to become more and more intense?

古文：今闻陛下令群僧迎佛骨于凤翔，御楼以观，舁入大内，令诸寺递迎供养。
现代文： 现在听说陛下让僧人们从凤翔迎来佛骨，登楼观看，还抬进了皇宫，让各寺相继迎接供养。
English: Now I heard that His Majesty let the monks welcome the Buddhist bones from Fengxiang, climb the building to watch, and also carried them into the Imperial Palace, so that the temples could receive the offerings one after another.

古文：臣虽至愚，必知陛下不惑于佛，作此崇奉以祈福祥也。直以年丰人乐，徇人之心，为京都士庶设诡异之观、戏玩之具耳。
现代文：臣虽然十分愚笨，也必定知道陛下不会被佛法迷惑而采取大礼供奉以祈求福瑞吉祥，只不过是因年丰民乐，顺应人心，为京都士大夫百姓设置一个奇特的观赏物、一个游戏玩乐的器具而已。
English: Although the vassal was very stupid, he must have known that his majesty would not be fooled by Buddhism and take a large offering to pray for good fortune, but because of the abundance of folk music, he obeyed the will of the people and set up a strange ornament, a play equipment for the people of Kyoto Shidafu.

古文：安有圣明若此而肯信此等事哉！
现代文：哪有如此圣明却肯相信这种荒诞事情的呢？
English: Who could be so saintly as to believe such nonsense?

古文：然百姓愚冥，易惑难晓，苟见陛下如此，将谓真心信佛。
现代文：可是百姓愚昧，易受诱惑难明事理，假如看陛下这样，会以为陛下真心信佛。
English: However, the common people are stupid, susceptible to temptation and unable to reason. If they see His Majesty like this, they will think that His Majesty truly believes in Buddhism.

古文：皆云天子大圣，犹一心敬信；百姓微贱，于佛岂合惜身命。
现代文：于是都说天子最圣明，尚且虔心敬佛，咱们百姓渺小卑贱，奉佛难道还应吝惜自己的身家性命吗？
English: So they all say that the Son of Heaven is the most holy, and yet they are pious and worship the Buddha. Our people are insignificant and lowly. Should they spare their own property and lives to worship the Buddha?

古文：所以灼顶燔指，百十为群，解衣散钱，自朝至暮。转相仿效，唯恐后时，老幼奔波，弃其生业。
现代文：所以焚灼头顶烧去手指，数十百人聚集一起，解衣脱衫散布钱财，从早到晚，转相仿效，唯恐落于众人之后，老老少少四处奔走，将谋生之事尽皆抛弃。
English: Therefore, burning the top of the head to burn the fingers, tens of hundreds of people gathered together, undressed and spread money, from morning to night, imitating each other, lest they fall behind the crowd, old and young running around, abandoning everything to make a living.

古文：若不即加禁遏，更历诸寺，必有断臂脔身以为供养者。
现代文：如果不立即加以禁止，等到佛骨经过各寺庙，必定有砍断手臂割碎身体用以供养的。
English: If it is not banned immediately, by the time the Buddha's bones have passed through all the temples, there will certainly be people who have cut off their arms and chopped up their bodies to use as offerings.

古文：伤风败俗，传笑四方，非细事也。
现代文：伤风败俗，被四方之国传为笑谈，这不是小事啊。
English: It's not a small thing to be vulgar and be ridiculed by countries in all four directions.

古文：佛本夷狄之人，与中国言语不通，衣服殊制。
现代文： 佛本是夷狄之人，同中国言语不通，服饰形制完全不同。
English: Buddha was a barbarian. He did not speak Chinese, and his clothing style was completely different.

古文：口不道先王之法言，身不服先王之法行，不知君臣之义、父子之情。
现代文：他口中不说合乎先王礼法的言论，身上不穿合乎先王礼法的衣服，不懂君臣之间的道义、父子之间的情分。
English: He does not speak words in accordance with the etiquette of the former king, does not wear clothes in accordance with the etiquette of the former king, and does not understand the morality between monarchs and ministers and the affection between father and son.

古文：假如其身尚在，奉其国命，来朝京师，陛下容而接之，不过宣政一见，礼宾一设，赐衣一袭，卫而出之于境，不令惑于众也。
现代文：假使他仍活着，奉着他们国家的使命，来我京师朝拜，陛下容纳并接待他，不过在宣政殿见他一见，安排一次待客的礼仪，赐他衣服一套，护送他出境，不会让他去迷惑百姓。
English: If he were still alive, he would come to Beijing to pay homage to me in accordance with the mission of his country. Your Majesty would accommodate and receive him, but he would not allow him to deceive the people by meeting him at the Palace of Proclamation, arranging a welcoming ceremony, giving him a set of clothes, and escorting him out of the country.

古文：况其身死已久，枯朽之骨，凶秽之余，岂宜以入宫禁！
现代文：何况他身死已久，不过是一块枯朽的骨头，污秽不祥的残物，怎么适宜让它进入宫禁呢！
English: Moreover, he has been dead for a long time, but he is just a dead bone, a filthy and ominous remnant, how appropriate to let it enter the palace ban!

古文：孔子曰： 敬鬼神而远之。 
现代文：孔子说： 敬重鬼神但要远离他。 
English: Confucius said, "Respect ghosts and gods, but keep away from them."

古文：古之诸侯，行吊于国，尚令巫祝先以桃，祓除不祥，然后进吊。
现代文：古时诸侯，在国中进行祭吊，尚且命巫祝先用桃枝编的笤帚扫除不祥，然后再行祭吊。
English: In ancient times, lords carried out the hanging ceremony in the country, but they also wished to use the peach branch to sweep away the ominous first, and then carry out the hanging ceremony.

古文：今无故取朽秽之物，亲临观之，巫祝不先，桃不用，群臣不言其非，御史不举其失，臣实耻之。
现代文：现在平白无故迎奉枯朽污秽之物，亲临观赏，不先命巫祝，不使用桃枝笤帚，群臣不说陛下有错，御史不指出陛下的过失，臣确实为此感到羞耻。
English: Now, for no reason at all, I welcome the objects of decay and filth, I come to see them in person, I don't make a wish beforehand, I don't use the peach branch, the courtiers don't say that Your Majesty is wrong, the history doesn't point out Your Majesty's mistakes, I really feel ashamed of this.

古文：乞以此骨付之水火，永绝根本，断天下之疑，绝后代之惑。
现代文：乞求陛下将这块骨头交付水火，使奉佛之事永远断根，断绝当今天下人和后代的疑惑。
English: I implore Your Majesty to hand over this bone to the water and fire, so that the worship of Buddha will be forever rooted, and the doubts of today's people and future generations will be eliminated.

古文：使天下之人，知大圣人之所作为，出于寻常万万也，岂不盛哉！
现代文：让天下人知道大圣人的作为非同寻常，难道不是一桩盛美之举吗！
English: Wouldn't it be a magnificent act to let the world know that the great sage's actions were extraordinary!

古文：岂不快哉！
现代文：难道不痛快吗！
English: Isn't it great!

古文：佛如有灵，能作祸祟，凡有殃咎，宜加臣身。
现代文：佛如有灵，真能降祸作祟，只要有灾殃，就加到我身上来吧。
English: If there is a spirit of Buddha, it can really bring down evil and do harm. As long as there is a calamity, let it be inflicted on me.

古文：上天鉴临，臣不怨悔。
现代文：老天有眼，我不会怨恨后悔。 
English: God has eyes, I won't hold a grudge or regret.

古文：疏奏，宪宗怒甚。
现代文：疏文奏上，宪宗非常恼怒。
English: At the recital of the poem, Kenzong was very angry.

古文：间一日，出疏以示宰臣，将加极法。裴度、崔群奏曰： 韩愈上忤尊听，诚宜得罪，然而非内怀忠恳，不避黜责，岂能至此？
现代文：隔了一天，皇上将疏文出示给宰臣看，打算对韩愈处以极刑，裴度、崔群奏道： 韩愈触犯陛下，确实应当问罪，然而若不是心怀忠诚，不惧罢官责罚，怎能到这样地步？
English: A day later, the emperor showed the imperial edict to the vice-minister, intending to punish Han Yu with capital punishment. Pei Du and Cui Qun said: Han Yu violated his majesty and should indeed be punished. However, if he was not loyal and did not fear dismissal and punishment, how could he get to this point?

古文：伏乞稍赐宽容，以来谏者。 
现代文：乞求圣上稍赐宽容，以使别人敢于劝谏。 
English: to ask the saint for a little indulgence, so that others may dare to speak out.

古文：上曰： 愈言我奉佛太过，我犹为容之。
现代文：皇上道： 韩愈说我奉佛太过分，我还可以容忍。
English: Empress Dowager: Han Yu said that I worship Buddha too much, I can still tolerate it.

古文：至谓东汉奉佛之后，帝王咸致夭促，何言之乖刺也？
现代文：至于说东汉奉佛之后，帝王都招致性命夭折皇位短促，怎么话说得这样刺耳呢？
English: As for saying that after the Eastern Han Dynasty followed Buddhism, the emperors all died young and the imperial throne was short-lived, how can it be said so harshly?

古文：愈为人臣，敢尔狂妄，固不可赦！ 
现代文：韩愈身为人臣，胆敢如此狂妄，一定不能宽赦。 
English: Han Yu, as a vassal, dared to be so arrogant, and must not be pardoned.

古文：于是人情惊惋，乃至国戚诸贵，亦以罪愈太重，因事言之，乃贬为潮州刺史。
现代文：一时人心震惊叹惜，乃至皇亲国戚们也认为对韩愈加罪太重，便就事情本身为韩愈说情，于是将他贬为潮州刺史。
English: For a moment, people were shocked and lamented, and even the relatives of the emperor thought that the crime against Han Yu was too serious, so they interceded for Han Yu on the matter itself, and then relegated him to the history of Chaozhou.

古文：愈至潮阳，上表曰：
现代文：韩愈到了潮阳，上奏道：
English: When Han Yu arrived at Chaoyang, he began to play:

古文：臣今年正月十四日，蒙恩授潮州刺史，即日驰驿就路。
现代文： 臣于今年正月十四日，蒙恩被授潮州刺史，即日驱车上路。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of this year, he was given the honor of being awarded the history of Chaozhou, and drove on the road that day.

古文：经涉岭海，水陆万里。
现代文：经南岭、涉大海，水陆万里途程。
English: Through Nanling, wading into the sea, the water and land are thousands of miles away.

古文：臣所领州，在广府极东。去广府虽云二千里，然来往动皆逾月。
现代文：臣所任职州郡，在广府最东边，离广府虽说二千里路，然而往来都要花费一个月以上。
English: The vassal's office is in Zhoushu County, in the easternmost part of Guangfu. Although it is two thousand miles away from Guangfu, it takes more than a month to travel there and back.

古文：过海口，下恶水，涛泷壮猛，难计期程，飓风鳄鱼，患祸不测。
现代文：经过海口，下到险恶的水域，波涛壮阔急流凶猛，难以测算行期，飓风时起鳄鱼出没，祸患不可预料。
English: Through the estuary, down to the treacherous waters, the waves are magnificent, the rapids are ferocious, it is difficult to measure the duration, the crocodiles come out during the hurricane, the disaster is unpredictable.

古文：州南近界，涨海连天，毒雾瘴氛，日夕发作。
现代文：州南地近边界，海水涨时波涛连天，毒雾瘴气早晚散发。
English: The southern part of the state is close to the border. When the sea water rises, the waves continue to rise, and the poisonous haze and argon gas are emitted in the morning and evening.

古文：臣少多病，年才五十，发白齿落，理不久长。
现代文：臣年轻时多病，年刚五十，便头发斑白牙齿脱落，按理命不久长。
English: When he was young, the minister was often ill. At the age of fifty, his hair turned white and his teeth fell out. He was not expected to live long.

古文：加以罪犯至重，所处又极远恶，忧惶惭悸，死亡无日。
现代文：加上所犯之罪极重，所处之地又极偏远荒瘠，臣忧虑惶恐惭愧惊悸，死期不远了。
English: In addition, the crime he committed was extremely serious, the place he was in was extremely remote and desolate, the minister was worried, frightened, ashamed and shocked, and his death was not far away.

古文：单立一身，朝无亲党，居蛮夷之地，与魍魅同群。苟非陛下哀而念之，谁肯为臣言者。
现代文：臣立蛮夷之地，与山神鬼怪打交道。假使不是陛下哀怜而惦记我，谁肯为臣说一句话呢。
English: If it were not for Your Majesty's pity and concern for me, who would be willing to say a word on my behalf?

古文：臣受性愚陋，人事多所不通，唯酷好学问文章，未尝一日暂废，实为时辈推许。
现代文： 臣生性愚笨无知，人情世故多有不懂，只酷爱做学问写文章，没有一天停止过，确实得到同辈人推崇赞许。
English: He is stupid and ignorant by nature, has no understanding of human feelings and world customs, and only loves to study and write articles. He hasn't stopped for a single day, and has indeed been praised by his peers.

古文：臣于当时之文，亦未有过人者。至于论述陛下功德，与《诗》、《书》相表里。作为歌诗，荐之郊庙，纪太山之封，镂白玉之牒；铺张对天之宏休，扬厉无前之伟迹；编于《诗》、《书》之策而无愧，措于天地之间而无亏。
现代文：臣在应时文章方面，也无过人之处，至于论述陛下功德，则能与《诗》、《书》相比并；所做诗歌，用为郊祀的献辞；记载泰山封禅大典，镂刻在白玉碑石上成为传世典籍；陈述宏大盛美齐天之功绩，传颂前无古人之伟业，编入《诗》、《书》之类的经典也毫无愧色，放置于天地之间也不觉逊色。
English: As far as the discussion of His Majesty's merits is concerned, it can be compared with "Poetry" and "Book"; the poems that were made were used as dedications for suburban shrines; the Taishan Hozan Grand Text was recorded and engraved on the white jade monument stone to become a classic book passed down through the ages; the magnificent achievements of the grandeur and beauty of the heavens were stated, and the great deeds of the ancients were extolled. The classics compiled into "Poetry" and "Book" were also without shame, and they were not inferior when placed between heaven and earth.

古文：虽使古人复生，臣未肯多让。
现代文：即使古代文豪复生，臣也不肯多加退让。
English: Even if the ancient literary greats were revived, the minister was not willing to make more concessions.

古文：伏以大唐受命有天下，四海之内，莫不臣妾南北东西，地各万里。
现代文：臣俯首以为大唐受天命而统治天下，四海之内，没有谁不称臣屈服，南北西东，各有疆域万里。
English: The vassals bowed their heads and thought that the Great Tang Dynasty was destined by heaven to rule the world. Within the four seas, there was no one who would not submit to the vassals. The north, south, west and east each had a territory of ten thousand miles.

古文：自天宝之后，政治少懈，文致未优，武克不纲。
现代文：自天宝以后，政令措施稍觉松懈，礼乐不完善，军备不雄厚。
English: After Tianbao, government decrees and measures were a bit lax, ceremonial music was not perfect, and armaments were not strong.

古文：孽臣奸隶，外顺内悖；父死子代，以祖以孙。如古诸侯，自擅其地，不朝不贡，六七十年。
现代文：叛臣奸人，外表恭顺内心悖逆，父子相继，祖孙相传，像古时诸侯，独霸一方，不向圣上朝拜纳贡，有六七十年了。
English: A traitor, outwardly obedient, inwardly disobedient, father and son successively, grandfather and grandson, like ancient princes, dominating one side, not paying tribute to the holy emperor, for sixty or seventy years.

古文：四圣传序，以至陛下，躬亲听断，干戈所麾，无不从顺。
现代文：古时四圣所传秩序，直到陛下，您亲自听政断事，干戈所指，无不顺从。
English: In ancient times, the Four Sanctuaries preached order, until Your Majesty, you personally listen to the government and make decisions. Whatever you say, you must obey.

古文：宜定乐章，以告神明；东巡泰山，奏功皇天，使永永万年，服我成烈。
现代文：应当制定乐章，禀告神明，东巡泰山，向皇天奏报功勋，使江山万世长存，护佑我大唐成就伟业。
English: It is necessary to work out a piece of music, report to the gods, tour Mount Tai in the east, and report the merits to the emperor, so that the country and the mountains will last forever, and protect my Great Tang Dynasty to achieve a great career.

古文：当此之际，所谓千载一时，不可逢之嘉会。而臣负罪婴衅，自拘海岛，戚戚嗟嗟，日与死迫；曾不得奏薄伎于从官之内、隶御之间，穷思毕精，以赎前过。
现代文：正当此时，可说是千载难逢的好机遇，可是臣负罪在身，被拘禁在海岛，忧伤叹息，一天天逼近死期，竟不能任侍从官职、服事御前，竭尽思虑使尽精力，以赎回先前的过失。
English: Just at this time, it can be said to be a once-in-a-lifetime good opportunity, but the vassal is guilty, detained on the island, sad and sighing, approaching the time of death day by day, unable to serve as an attendant, to serve in front of him, to think hard and make every effort to redeem the previous mistakes.

古文：怀痛穷天，死不闭目！
现代文：心怀苦痛度尽时光，至死不能瞑目！
English: With pain in my heart, I'll do my best, I can't stop until I die!

古文：瞻望宸极，魂神飞去。
现代文：遥望北极星，魂神飞离。
English: Look at the North Star in the distance, and your soul will fly away.

古文：伏惟陛下，天地父母，哀而怜之。
现代文：俯首恳请陛下，您就是天地父母，同情、怜惜我吧。 
English: Bow your head and implore Your Majesty, you are the parent of heaven and earth, to have compassion and mercy on me.

古文：宪宗谓宰臣曰： 昨得韩愈到潮州表，因思其所谏佛骨事，大是爱我，我岂不知！
现代文：宪宗对宰臣说道： 昨日收到韩愈到潮州后的上表，所以想起他谏迎佛骨之事，他很是爱护我，我难道不知道？
English: Gensong said to the Vice-Minister: Yesterday, I received the watch from Han Yu after he arrived in Chaozhou, so I remembered him welcoming the Buddha's bones. He is very fond of me, don't I know it?

古文：然愈为人臣，不当言人主事佛乃年促也。
现代文：但韩愈身为人臣，不应当说人主奉佛就位促寿短。
English: However, Han Yu was a vassal, and it should not be said that people should worship Buddha in order to shorten their lives.

古文：我以是恶其容易。 
现代文：我因此讨厌他太轻率了。 
English: I hated him for being so flippant.

古文：上欲复用愈，故先语及，观宰臣之奏对。
现代文：皇上意欲重新起用韩愈，所以先说及，看宰臣们怎样答对。
English: The emperor wants to reinstate Han Yu, so let's talk about it first and see how the vice-ministers respond.

古文：而皇甫镈恶愈狷直，恐其复用，率先对曰： 愈终大狂疏，且可量移一郡。 
现代文：可是皇甫憎恨韩愈为人心直口快，怕他重被起用，便抢先回答说； 韩愈终究太狂放粗疏，暂且可考虑调到别郡。 
English: However, the crown prince hated Han Yu's outspokenness, fearing that he would be reappointed, so he preemptively replied; Han Yu was too wild and rude after all, and he might consider transferring to another county for the time being.

古文：乃授袁州刺史。
现代文：于是任命韩愈为袁州刺史。
English: As a result, Han Yu was appointed as Yuan Zhou's successor.

古文：初，愈至潮阳，既视事，询吏民疾苦，皆曰： 郡西湫水有鳄鱼，卵而化，长数丈，食民畜产将尽，以是民贫。 
现代文：当初，韩愈到潮阳上任以后，向属吏询问百姓有何疾苦，都说： 那城西深潭之中有鳄鱼，产卵孵化，有数丈长，把百姓豢养的家畜都要吃光了，因此百姓贫穷。 
English: At first, after Han Yu took office in Chaoyang, he asked his subordinate officials about the hardships of the people, and they all said: There are crocodiles in the deep pool west of the city, spawning and hatching, and there are several long-necked crocodiles, which have eaten up the livestock raised by the people, so the people are poor.

古文：居数日，愈往视之，令判官秦济砲一豚一羊，投之湫水，祝之曰：
现代文：过了几天，韩愈前去视察，命判官秦济烤了一只小猪一只羊，投进潭水中，祷告道：
English: A few days later, Han Yu went to inspect. The judge, Qin Ji, roasted a piglet and a sheep, threw them into the pool and prayed:

古文：前代德薄之君，弃楚、越之地，则鳄鱼涵泳于此可也。
现代文：前代德威衰降之君主，抛弃楚、越之地，那么鳄鱼在此栖息是可以的。
English: The former monarch of the decline of Dulwich abandoned Chu and Yue, so it is possible for crocodiles to roost here.

古文：今天子神圣，四海之外，抚而有之。
现代文：现今天子神圣，四海之外，均能据有。
English: Today, the sun is sacred and can be found everywhere.

古文：况扬州之境，刺史县令之所治，出贡赋以共天地宗庙之祀，鳄鱼岂可与刺史杂处此土哉？
现代文：何况古扬州地域，刺史县令管辖之境，需献出贡物赋税代天地祖先宗庙祭祀所用，鳄鱼怎能同刺史一同居处这块土地上呢？
English: What's more, the ancient Yangzhou region, under the jurisdiction of Zhishi County, is required to pay tribute and tax for the use of the ancestral temple of the ancestors of heaven and earth. How can the crocodile live with Zhishi on this land?

古文：刺史受天子命，令守此土，而鳄鱼睅然不安溪潭，食民畜熊鹿麞豕，以肥其身，以繁其卵，与刺史争为长。
现代文：刺史受天子派遣，命他在此驻守，鳄鱼伏居潭中胆敢不安分，而去吞食供百姓猎用的熊鹿獐猪来喂肥自身，繁殖后代，与刺史争做主宰。
English: Tashi was sent by the Son of Heaven and was ordered to stay here. The crocodile lived in the pond and was afraid to be disturbed. Instead, it devoured the bear, deer, and boar, which were used for hunting by the people, to fatten itself, breed offspring, and compete with Tashi for dominance.

古文：刺史虽驽弱，安肯为鳄鱼低首而下哉！
现代文：刺史虽然低能懦弱，怎肯向鳄鱼低头屈服呢？
English: Even though he is weak and cowardly, how could he bow down to the crocodile?

古文：今潮州大海在其南，鲸鹏之大，虾蟹之细，无不容，鳄鱼朝发而夕至。
现代文：现在大海在潮州南面，大至鲸鹏，小至虾蟹，无不容纳，鳄鱼早晨动身晚上即可到达。
English: Now the sea is in the south of Chaozhou. It can accommodate everything from whales to shrimps and crabs. Crocodiles can be reached in the evening after setting out in the morning.

古文：今与鳄鱼约，三日乃至七日，如顽而不徙，须为物害，则刺史选材伎壮夫，操劲弓毒矢，与鳄鱼从事矣！
现代文：现与鳄鱼约定，三至七日内，如鳄鱼顽固不化不肯迁往大海，定要加害于人，那么刺史将挑选才高体壮之人，持强弓毒箭，同鳄鱼一决雌雄！
English: It is now agreed with the crocodile that within three to seven days, if the crocodile stubbornly refuses to move to the sea and is determined to harm people, then the sting will select a tall and strong person, hold a strong bow and arrow, and fight with the crocodile!

古文：祝之夕，有暴风雷起于湫中。
现代文：祷告的当晚，暴风雷霆从潭中生起。
English: On the night of the prayer, a thunderstorm arose from the lake.

古文：数日，湫水尽涸，徙于旧湫西六十里。
现代文：几天后，潭水干涸，迁移到旧潭以西六十里。
English: A few days later, the lake dried up and the herd moved sixty miles west of the old lake.

古文：自是潮人无鳄患。
现代文：从此潮州人再不受鳄鱼危害。
English: From then on, the Chaozhou people were no longer endangered by crocodiles.

古文：袁州之俗，男女隶于人者，逾约则没入出钱之家。
现代文：袁州风俗，平民女儿抵押给人家做奴婢，超越契约期限而不赎回，就由出钱人家没为家奴。
English: According to the customs of Yuzhou, if a commoner's daughter is mortgaged to a person to be a slave, and if she exceeds the term of the contract and is not redeemed, then the payer is not a domestic slave.

古文：愈至，设法赎其所没男女，归其父母。
现代文：韩愈到后，设法赎出那些被没为家奴的男女，让他们回到父母身边。
English: After Han Yu arrived, he tried to ransom the men and women who had not been enslaved, so that they could return to their parents.

古文：仍削其俗法，不许隶人。
现代文：于是禁止此种风俗，不许买人为奴。
English: So the custom was banned, and no one was allowed to buy a slave.

古文：十五年，征为国子祭酒，转兵部侍郎。
现代文：元和十五年，征召韩愈为国子祭酒，转任兵部侍郎。
English: In the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Han Yu was conscripted to serve as Kuniko's sacrificial wine, and was transferred to the position of Hyobushirō.

古文：会镇州杀田弘正，立王廷凑，令愈往镇州宣谕。
现代文：正值镇州人杀了田弘正，拥立王廷凑，朝廷命韩愈去镇州传旨晓谕。
English: Just as the people of Zhenzhou killed Tian Hongzheng and supported Wang Tingpiao, the imperial court ordered Han Yu to go to Zhenzhou to deliver the imperial edict.

古文：愈既至，集军民，谕以逆顺。辞情切至，廷凑畏重之。
现代文：韩愈到后，召集军民，说明反逆与归顺的不同后果，情感深挚言辞真切，王廷凑听了又怕又敬重。
English: After Han Yu arrived, he called together the military and the people to explain the different consequences of rebellion and submission. His words were sincere and full of emotion. Wang Ting listened with both fear and respect.

古文：改吏部侍郎。转京兆尹，兼御史大夫。
现代文：后韩愈改任户部侍郎，转任京兆尹，兼御史大夫。
English: Later, Han Yu was reassigned to the post of Household Attendant, then to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, and also to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：以不台参，为御史中丞李绅所劾。
现代文：由于不参谒中臣，被御史中丞李绅弹劾。
English: As he did not attend the court ceremony, he was impeached by the Imperial Historian, Chujo Risshen.

古文：愈不伏，言准敕仍不台参。
现代文：韩愈不服，说皇上恩准便不必参谒中臣。
English: Han Yu was not satisfied, saying that the Emperor's approval meant there was no need to consult the middle vassal.

古文：绅、愈性皆褊僻，移刺往来，纷然不止，乃出绅为浙西观察使，愈亦罢尹为兵部侍郎。
现代文：李绅、韩愈性情都固执不让，你往我来，争辩不止，于是派李绅出任浙西观察使，韩愈也被罢免京兆尹，任兵部侍郎。
English: Both Li Sheng and Han Yu were stubborn. You came to me and argued more and more. Therefore, Li Sheng was sent to serve as the Western Zhejiang Observation Envoy, and Han Yu was also removed from the post of Jing Zhaoyun and served as the attendant of the military.

古文：及绅面辞赴镇，泣涕陈叙。穆宗怜之，乃追制以绅为兵部侍郎，愈复为吏部侍郎。
现代文：等到李绅告辞皇上赴镇任职，流泪陈说，穆宗怜惜他，便追发诏书授李绅为兵部侍郎，韩愈又任吏部侍郎。
English: When Li Sheng resigned from the imperial court and went to serve in the town, Chen said with tears that Mu Zong pitied him, and then issued an imperial edict awarding Li Sheng as the attendant of the military department, and Han Yu as the attendant of the administrative department.

古文：长庆四年十二月卒，时年五十七，赠礼部尚书，谥曰文。
现代文：长庆四年十二月韩愈辞世，时年五十七岁，追赠礼部尚书，谥号文。
English: In December of the 4th year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Han Yu passed away at the age of 57. His posthumous gift was a gift of a ceremonial book with his posthumous name.

古文：愈性弘通，与人交，荣悴不易。
现代文：韩愈性情开朗豁达，与人交往，无论对方发迹或是潦倒，他始终态度不变。
English: Han Yu's disposition is cheerful and open-minded. When interacting with people, regardless of whether the other person is successful or unsuccessful, his attitude is always the same.

古文：少时与洛阳人孟郊、东郡人张籍友善。
现代文：年轻时同洛阳人孟郊、东郡人张籍友善。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Meng Jiao, a resident of Luoyang, and Zhang Zenkong, a resident of Dong County.

古文：二人名位未振，愈不避寒暑，称荐于公卿间，而籍终成科第，荣于禄仕。
现代文：这两人声名地位还不高，韩愈不避寒暑，在公卿中赞扬推崇他们。张籍终于科考得中，荣获利禄官位。
English: These two did not have a high reputation yet, but Han Yu did not avoid the cold and the heat, and praised and respected them among the nobles. Zhang Ji was finally admitted to the Middle School of Science and Technology, and was awarded the official rank of Lilu.

古文：后虽通贵，每退公之隙，则相与谈宴，论文赋诗，如平昔焉。
现代文：后来韩愈虽然身份显贵，每当办完公事的闲暇，便同他们一起谈话宴饮，论文赋诗，和过去一样。
English: Later, although Han Yu's status was distinguished, whenever he had leisure time after doing business, he would talk and dine with them, and write essays and poems, as in the past.

古文：而观诸权门豪士，如仆隶焉，瞪然不顾。
现代文：而对那些权豪势要，看作奴仆一般，瞪着眼睛不屑一顾。
English: On the other hand, they stare at those powerful and influential people as if they were their slaves and treat them with disdain.

古文：而颇能诱厉后进，馆之者十六七，虽晨炊不给，怡然不介意。
现代文：韩愈很善于诱导勉励后进，留在家中做宾客对待的十分之六七，即使自己早餐也吃不上了，仍然和颜悦色毫不在意。
English: Han Yu is very good at inducing encouragement and encouragement. Sixty-seven out of ten guests treated at home, even if they can't eat breakfast, still don't care about beauty.

古文：大抵以兴起名教，弘奖仁义为事。
现代文：总是以振兴名声教化、弘扬仁义为己任。
English: It is always his duty to revitalize the reputation, educate and promote benevolence and righteousness.

古文：凡嫁内外及友朋孤女仅十人。
现代文：帮助内外亲和朋友的孤女婚嫁的近十人。
English: There are nearly ten people who have helped the orphaned daughters of friends and relatives get married.

古文：常以为自魏、晋已还，为文者多拘偶对，而经诰之指归，迁、雄之气格，不复振起矣。
现代文：韩愈常认为，自魏晋以来做文章的人多拘于骈句对偶，而古代经典的意旨，司马迁、扬雄的气韵风格，不再发扬了。
English: Han Yuer often believes that people who have written articles since the Wei and Jin dynasties are more concerned with haiku couplets, and the meaning of ancient classics, Sima Qian, Yang Xiong's airy style, is no longer carried forward.

古文：故愈所为，文，务反近体；抒意立言，自成一家新语。
现代文：所以韩愈所写文章，务必同近时文体相反，抒发意旨创立学说，自成一家崭新见解。
English: Therefore, the articles written by Han Yu, contrary to the contemporary style, must express the meaning of the founding theory and become a brand-new opinion.

古文：后学之士，取为师法。
现代文：当时作家很多，没人能超过他，所以世上有 韩文 之誉。
English: At that time, there were many writers, and no one could surpass him, so the world had a reputation for Korean literature.

古文：当时作者甚众，无以过之，故世称 韩文 焉。
现代文：但是他不时仗恃才华肆意而言，也有远离孔、孟的观点。
English: However, from time to time, he has a point of view that is far from Kong and Meng.

古文：然时有恃才肆意，亦有盩孔、孟之旨。若南人妄以柳宗元为罗池神，而愈撰碑以实之；李贺父名晋，不应进士，而愈为贺作《讳辨》，令举进士；又为《毛颖传》，讥戏不近人情：此文章之甚纰缪者。
现代文：譬如南方人荒唐地将柳宗元当作罗池神，而韩愈撰写罗池庙碑便作为真有其事来记载；李贺因父名晋肃，不应参加进士考试，而韩愈为李贺写了《讳辩》一文，让他去考进士；又写了《毛颖传》，讥讽戏谑不近人情：这是文章的最大失误。
English: For example, the southerners absurdly regarded Liu Zongyuan as a Luo Chi god, while Han Yu wrote the Luo Chi temple monument and recorded it as a real thing; Li He, due to his father's name of Jinshu, should not participate in the entrance examination, while Han Yu wrote an article "Concealment" for Li He, so that he could take the entrance examination; and he also wrote "Mao Ying Biography," mocking and teasing people: this is the biggest mistake of the article.

古文：时谓愈有史笔，及撰《顺宗实录》，繁简不当，叙事拙于取舍，颇为当代所非。
现代文：当时人称韩愈有史家的笔力，等到他撰写《顺宗实录》，由于繁简不当，叙事取舍也不恰当，深为当时人指责。
English: At that time, people said that Han Yu had the writing power of a historian. When he wrote "Shunzong Record," he was deeply criticized by the people at that time because it was improperly simplified and the narrative choice was inappropriate.

古文：穆宗、文宗尝诏史臣添改，时愈婿李汉、蒋系在显位，诸公难之。
现代文：殷宗、文宗都曾命令史臣增添修改，那时韩愈的女婿李汉、蒋系官居显位，诸位史臣很觉为难。
English: Both Yinzong and Wenzong had ordered the statesmen to add amendments. At that time, Han Yu's son-in-law Li Han and officials from the Chiang dynasty were in power, and the statesmen were very perplexed.

古文：而韦处厚竟别撰《顺宗实录》三卷。
现代文：而韦处厚竟然另外撰写了《顺宗实录》三卷。
English: However, Wei Chenghuang actually wrote another three volumes of the "Shunzong Record."

古文：子监，大中初登进士第。
现代文：韩愈有文集四十卷，李汉为文集作序。韩愈之子名昶，也考中了进士。
English: Han Yu has a collection of forty volumes, and Li Han is the preface to the collection. Han Yu's son, Meitao, also passed the entrance examination.

古文：刘禹锡，字梦得，彭城人。祖云。父溆，仕历州县令佐，世以儒学称。
现代文：刘禹锡字梦得，彭城人，祖父刘云，父刘溆，历任州县官吏或幕僚，以儒学被世人称道。
English: Liu Yuxi, a native of Pengcheng, grandfather Liu Yun, father Liu Yao, successive state and county officials or staff members, has been praised by the world for his Confucianism.

古文：禹锡贞元九年擢进士第，又登宏辞科。
现代文：刘禹锡于贞元九年应进士考及第，不久又考中博学宏辞科。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, Liu Yuxi got the first place in the entrance examination, and soon passed the middle school examination in the erudite macro-diction.

古文：禹锡精于古文，善五言诗，今体文章复多才丽。
现代文：刘禹锡精通古文，善做五言诗，今体诗和文章亦富于才华、辞藻瑰丽。
English: Liu Yuxi is proficient in ancient literature and good at writing five-character poems. His modern-style poems and articles are also rich in talent and beautiful words.

古文：从事淮南节度使杜佑幕，典记室，尤加礼异。
现代文：做淮南节度使杜佑幕僚时，任掌书记，杜佑对他格外器重。
English: When he was a staff member of the Huainan Provincial Party Committee, Du You was the secretary. Du You was very important to him.

古文：从佑入朝，为监察御史。与吏部郎中韦执谊相善。
现代文：后随杜佑入朝，任监察御史，同吏部郎中韦执谊相友善。
English: Later, he followed Du You into the imperial court and was appointed inspector of imperial history. He was on friendly terms with his father-in-law, Zhongwei, who was in charge of the administrative department.

古文：贞元末，王叔文于东宫用事，后辈务进，多附丽之。
现代文：贞元末，王叔文任太子侍读，许多年轻人欲求上进，都去依附他。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, Wang Shouwen was appointed as the prince's attendant, and many young people wanted to advance, and they all followed him.

古文：禹锡尤为叔文知奖，以宰相器待之。
现代文：王叔文特别赏识刘禹锡，把他作为宰相人选来对待。
English: Wang Shouwen especially appreciated Liu Yuxi and treated him as the prime minister candidate.

古文：顺宗即位，久疾不任政事，禁中文诰，皆出于叔文。
现代文：顺宗即位后，长期患病不能主持政务，朝廷文诰，都由王叔文掌管。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shunzong, Wang Xiwen was unable to preside over government affairs due to a long-term illness.

古文：引禹锡及柳宗元入禁中，与之图议，言无不从。
现代文：王叔文将刘禹锡及柳宗元召入宫中，同他们商议，对二人的意见没有不听从的。
English: Wang Shouwen summoned Liu Yuxi and Liu Zongyuan to the palace and held discussions with them. He did not disobey the opinions of the two men.

古文：转屯田员外郎、判度支盐铁案，兼崇陵使判官。
现代文：刘禹锡调任屯田员外郎、判度支盐铁案，兼崇陵使判官。
English: Liu Yuxi was transferred to the post of foreign field officer, judge of the salt and iron case, and judge of the Chongling envoy.

古文：颇怙威权，中伤端士。
现代文：他们颇依仗权势，中伤正直人士。
English: They rely heavily on power and slander honest people.

古文：宗元素不悦武元衡，时武元衡为御史中丞，乃左授右庶子。
现代文：柳宗元一向不喜欢武元衡，当时武元衡任御史中丞，于是被降职做右庶子。
English: Liu Zongyuan had always disliked Takemoto Hirai. At that time, Takemoto Hirai was appointed to the position of goshi chujo, and was then demoted to the position of 右庶子.

古文：侍御史窦群奏禹锡挟邪乱政，不宜在朝。群即日罢官。
现代文：侍御史窦群上奏弹劾刘禹锡心怀叵测扰乱朝政，不宜留在朝内，结果窦群当天便被罢官。
English: The chamberlain, Shi Douqun, raised the impeachment of Liu Yuxi, saying that Liu Yuxi was determined to disrupt the imperial government and should not remain in the imperial court. As a result, Douqun was removed from office on the same day.

古文：韩皋凭藉贵门，不附叔文党，出为湖南观察使。
现代文：韩皋仗着自己出身显贵，不依附王叔文一党，便被调出任湖南观察使。
English: Han Zheng was transferred to the post of Hunan Observation Envoy, because he was of noble birth and did not adhere to Wang Shouwen's one-party system.

古文：既任喜怒凌人，京师人士不敢指名，道路以目，时号 二王、刘、柳。 
现代文：他们既然凭自己的喜怒欺凌旁人，京师人士不敢指名斥责，路上遇着则以白眼相看，当时号称二王、刘、柳。
English: Since they bullied others with their own emotions and anger, people in Beijing did not dare to name and reprimand them, and when they met on the road, they looked at each other with blank eyes. At that time, they were known as the two kings, Liu and Liu.

古文：叔文败，坐贬连州刺史。在道，贬朗州司马。
现代文：王叔文失败后，刘禹锡亦获罪贬为连州刺史，赴任途中，又贬为郎州司马。
English: After Wang Shouwen's defeat, Liu Yuxi was also found guilty and demoted to the rank of Lianzhou Sima, and on his way to the post, he was also demoted to the rank of Lanzhou Sima.

古文：地居西南夷，士风僻陋，举目殊俗，无可与言者。
现代文：郎州在西南夷人之地，风气很落后，习俗处处与中原不同，没有一个能交谈的人。
English: Lanzhou is a place of barbarians in the southwest, the culture is very backward, the customs are different from the Central Plains everywhere, and there is no one who can talk.

古文：禹锡在朗州十年，唯以文章吟咏，陶冶情性。
现代文：刘禹锡在郎州十年，惟有靠作文吟诗来陶冶性情。
English: During his ten years in Lanzhou, Liu Yuxi could only rely on composing poetry to cultivate his character.

古文：蛮俗好巫，每淫祠鼓舞，必歌俚辞。
现代文：蛮夷之风俗崇尚巫术，每每滥修祠庙，击鼓舞蹈，必定唱言辞俚俗的歌曲。
English: Barbaric customs advocate witchcraft, every temple, drumming dance, must sing vulgar songs.

古文：禹锡或从事于其间，乃依骚人之作，为新辞以教巫祝。
现代文：刘禹锡间或也参与其中，便依照屈原等人作品，写了新辞教巫祝歌唱。
English: Liu Yuxi sometimes also participated in it, and then, based on the works of Qu Yuan and others, he wrote a new dictum, "Witch, wish, sing."

古文：故武陵溪洞间夷歌，率多禹锡之辞也。
现代文：所以郎州地方夷人唱歌，多是刘禹锡所做歌词。
English: Therefore, most of the songs sung by the local people in Lanzhou are lyrics written by Liu Yuxi.

古文：初，禹锡、宗元等八人犯众怒，宪宗亦怒，故再贬。
现代文：当初刘禹锡、柳宗元等八人触犯众怒，宪宗也很生气，所以对他们一再贬谪。
English: At first, eight people, including Liu Yuxi and Liu Zongyuan, offended the public, and Xianzong was very angry, so he repeatedly disparaged them.

古文：制有 逢恩不原 之令。
现代文：诏书上有 逢恩不宽恕 的命令。
English: In the imperial edict, there was a command to show no mercy.

古文：然执政惜其才，欲洗涤痕累，渐序用之。
现代文：然而执政官惋惜他们的才华，欲待事情淡化后，逐步提升他们。
English: However, the consul deplored their talents and wanted to promote them gradually after the matter was diluted.

古文：会程异复掌转运，有诏以韩皋及禹锡等为远郡刺史。
现代文：等到程异再次掌管转运事务，朝廷下诏派韩皋以及刘禹锡等人任边远州郡刺史。
English: When Cheng Yixing took charge of the transshipment business again, the imperial court sent Han Wei and Liu Yuxi and others to serve as the governor of the outlying prefectures.

古文：属武元衡在中书，谏官十余人论列，言不可复用而止。
现代文：恰好武元衡官居中书省，让谏官十余人列举理由，说刘禹锡等人不可再用，于是作罢。
English: It just so happened that the official, Wu Yuanheng, was in charge of the Central Literature Department. He asked more than ten eunuchs to list the reasons why Liu Yuxi and others should not be used again, and so it was cancelled.

古文：禹锡积岁在湘、澧间，郁悒不怡，因读《张九龄文集》，乃叙其意曰： 世称曲江为相，建言放臣不宜于善地，多徙五溪不毛之乡。
现代文：刘禹锡多年在湘州、澧州一带，忧郁不乐，于是读《张九龄文集》，并做叙表明自己的见解道： 世人说张曲江做宰相时，建议被放逐之臣不宜到条件好的地方，因此多流放到湘黔五溪不毛之地。
English: Liu Yuxi lived for many years in the areas of Hunan and Ganzhou and was depressed and unhappy, so he read "Zhang Jiu Ling's Anthology" and made a narrative to express his opinion: When the world said that Zhang Qujiang was the prime minister, it was suggested that the exiled minister should not go to a place with good conditions, so he was exiled to the barren land of Hunan and Wuxi.

古文：今读其文章，自内职牧始，安有瘴疠之叹，自退相守荆州，有拘囚之思。
现代文：现在读他的文章，他从朝官被贬为始安郡守，便叹息身处烟瘴疫病之地；从宰相贬为荆州刺史，便感觉自己像被囚禁的犯人。
English: Now, reading his article, he was demoted from the imperial official to the governor of Shi'an County, and he sighed to be in the land of smog and plague; from the prime minister to the governor of Jingzhou, he felt like a prisoner.

古文：托讽禽鸟，寄辞草树，郁然与骚人同风。
现代文：托言于叹禽鸟，寄辞于咏草树，郁郁然具有与屈原之辈相同的风格。
English: The preface is written in the style of a sighing bird, and the epitaph is written in the style of an eucalyptus tree. It has the same style as that of Qu Yuan's generation.

古文：嗟夫，身出于遐陬，一失意而不能堪，矧华人士族，而必致丑地，然后快意哉！
现代文：哎呀，自己本生长偏远之地，一旦失意便不能忍受，何况生长中原或出身士族之人，难道必定要遣送到贫瘠之地，然后才觉得称心如意吗？
English: Alas, I grew up in a remote place and cannot bear to be disappointed. What is more, people who grew up in the Central Plains or came from the warrior class must be sent to a barren land before they feel satisfied?

古文：议者以曲江为良臣，识胡雏有反相，羞与凡器同列，密启廷诤，虽古哲人不及。而燕翼无似，终为馁魂。
现代文：议者认为张曲江是个良臣，看出安禄山有反叛之意，羞于与那些平庸之辈同列朝班，便秘密启奏圣上，即使古代圣贤也赶不上他，作为辅佐之臣虽无人可比，却最终落得惨败。
English: The councillor thought that Zhang Qujiang was a good vassal, saw that An Lushan had a rebellious intention and was ashamed to be on the same level as those mediocre people, so he secretly played the sacred music. Even the ancient sages could not catch up with him. As an assistant vassal, although there was no one comparable, he eventually failed miserably.

古文：岂忮心失恕，阴谪最大，虽二美莫赎耶？
现代文：难道不是因忌妒之心不能宽恕人，暗中遭到最大的报复，即使二美也不能相救吗？
English: Isn't it because of jealousy that you can't forgive someone and secretly suffer the greatest revenge, even if you can't save yourself?

古文：不然，何袁公一言明楚狱而钟祉四叶。
现代文：若非如此，为什么袁安一平反楚王株连之冤狱便四世受福呢？
English: If it were not so, why would the fourth generation be blessed with the unjust imprisonment of Yuan An Yiping against Chu King Zhu Lian?

古文：以是相较，神可诬乎？ 
现代文：把两者相比较，难道神灵是可以不信的吗？ 
English: Comparing the two, is it possible to disbelieve in gods?

古文：元和十年，自武陵召还，宰相复欲置之郎署。
现代文：元和十年，刘禹锡从朗州被召回，宰相仍打算将他安置在郎署。
English: Ten years ago, Liu Yuxi was recalled from Lanzhou, and the prime minister still intends to place him in the Lanzhou police station.

古文：时禹锡作《游玄都观咏看花君子诗》，语涉讥刺，执政不悦，复出为播州刺史。
现代文：当时刘禹锡做《游玄都观咏看花君子诗》，诗句有讥讽朝政之嫌，宰相不高兴，再次将他调出京师任播州刺史。
English: At that time, Liu Yuxi wrote "Yu Xuandu Guanzhong, Look at the Flower Gentleman's Poem," the poem was suspected of ridiculing the imperial government, the prime minister was not happy, and he was once again transferred out of Beijing to be appointed as Banshu stabbing history.

古文：诏下，御史中丞裴度奏曰： 刘禹锡有母，年八十余。
现代文：诏书下达，御史中丞裴度奏道： 刘禹锡有母，八十多岁了。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and Grand Historian Baidu said: Liu Yuxi has a mother who is more than 80 years old.

古文：今播州西南极远，猿狖所居，人迹罕至。
现代文：这播州在京师西南极远处，是猿犭穴居住之地，人迹罕至。
English: This Banshu is located in the farthest southwest of the Beijing Division. It is a place inhabited by apes, and is rarely visited.

古文：禹锡诚合得罪，然其老母必去不得，则与此子为死别，臣恐伤陛下孝理之风。
现代文：禹锡确实应受处罚，然而他的老母必定不能去，那么同这个儿子便是死别了，臣担心伤害陛下倡导的孝道之传统。
English: It is true that Yuxi should be punished, but his old mother must not go, then it is goodbye to this son, and the minister is worried about harming the tradition of filial piety advocated by His Majesty.

古文：伏请屈法，稍移近处。 
现代文：臣俯首恳请委屈法规，将他换到稍近一点的地方。 
English: The vassal bowed his head and implored the grievance law to change him to a place a little closer.

古文：宪宗曰： 夫为人子，每事尤须谨慎，常恐贻亲之忧。
现代文：宪宗道： 为人之子，每件事都要特别谨慎，时时担忧给亲人留下祸患。
English: Gensong: As a son of man, you should be very cautious in everything. You should always be worried about bringing misfortune to your relatives.

古文：今禹锡所坐，更合重于他人，卿岂可以此论之？ 
现代文：现在刘禹锡所获罪罚，应更重于旁人，爱卿怎能用这番道理原谅他。 
English: Now Liu Yuxi's punishment should be heavier than others, how can Aiqing use this reason to forgive him.

古文：度无以对。
现代文：裴度无言对答。
English: Pei Du was speechless.

古文：良久，帝改容而言曰： 朕所言，是责人子之事，然终不欲伤其所亲之心。 
现代文：过了许久皇上改变了态度说道： 我所说的，是责备为人之子所做的事，然而终究不想让他的亲人伤心。 
English: After a long time, the emperor changed his attitude and said, "What I said was to reproach the son of man for what he had done, but in the end I didn't want to make his relatives sad.

古文：乃改授连州刺史。
现代文：于是改授刘禹锡为连州刺史。
English: As a result, Liu Yuxi was reclassified as a Lianzhou scholar.

古文：去京师又十余年。连刺数郡。
现代文：刘禹锡离开京师又十多年，接连做了几个郡的刺史。
English: Liu Yuxi left Beijing for more than ten years and successively made the history of several counties.

古文：太和二年，自和州刺史征还，拜主客郎中。
现代文：大和二年，刘禹锡从和州任上被召回，官拜主客郎中。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, Liu Yuxi was recalled from the post of Hezhou, and became a guest of honor.

古文：禹锡衔前事未已，复作《游玄都观诗序》曰： 予贞元二十一年为尚书屯田员外郎，时此观中未有花木。是岁出牧连州，寻贬朗州司马。
现代文：刘禹锡为先前的事含恨不已，又做《游玄都观诗序》说： 贞元二十一年我任尚书省屯田员外郎，当时这观中没花木，这一年出京任连州刺史，接着便贬为朗州司马。
English: Liu Yuxi was filled with hatred for the previous matter, and he also wrote "Yu Xuan Du Guan Poem Prelude": In the twenty-first year of the Zhengyuan, I was appointed as the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor of the tutor.

古文：居十年，召还京师，人人皆言有道士手植红桃满观，如烁晨霞，遂有诗以志一时之事。
现代文：十年后，召回京师，人人都说有道士在观中遍植红桃，如朝霞闪耀，于是做诗记述当时的事。
English: Ten years later, when he was recalled to the capital, everyone said that there was a Taoist monk who planted red peaches everywhere in the monastery, shining like the morning sun, so he wrote a poem to describe what happened at that time.

古文：旋又出牧，于今十有四年，得为主客郎中。重游兹观，荡然无复一树，唯兔葵燕麦动摇于春风，因再题二十八字，以俟后游。 
现代文：很快又出京任职，至今已十四年，才回京任主客郎中，重游此观，空荡荡已无一株桃树，惟有兔葵燕麦在春风中摆动，因此又题二十八字，以待日后再来游览。 
English: Soon, he left for Beijing again. It has been 14 years since he returned to Beijing as a guest of honor. Returning to this view, there is not a single peach tree in the empty space. Only rabbit and sunflower oats are swaying in the spring breeze. Therefore, he also wrote 28 words, so that he could visit again in the future.

古文：其前篇有 玄都观里桃千树，总是刘郎去后栽 之句，后篇有 种桃道士今何在，前度刘郎又到来 之句，人嘉其才而薄其行。
现代文：他所做前篇中有 玄都观里桃千树，总是刘郎去后栽 之句，后篇有 种桃道士今何在，前度刘郎又到来 之句，人们赞赏他的才华而鄙薄他的行为。
English: In the first part of his work, there is a sentence saying that there are thousands of peach trees in Xuandu Guan, and they are always planted after Liu Lang leaves. In the second part, there is a sentence saying that there are thousands of peach trees in Xuandu Guan, and they are always planted after Liu Lang leaves. In the third part, there is a sentence saying that there are thousands of peach trees in Xuandu Guan, and they are always planted after Liu Lang leaves. People appreciate his talent but despise his behavior.

古文：禹锡甚怒武元衡、李逢吉，而裴度稍知之。
现代文：刘禹锡很恨武元衡、李逢吉，而裴度比较了解他。
English: Liu Yuxi hated Wu Yuanheng and Li Fengji very much, while Pei Du had a better understanding of him.

古文：太和中，度在中书，欲令知制诰。执政又闻《诗序》，滋不悦。累转礼部郎中、集贤院学士。
现代文：大和年间，裴度在中书省，打算让刘禹锡掌管制诰之事，而当权宰相又看到他的《诗序》，越发不高兴，因此只让他先后任礼部郎中、集贤院学士等职。
English: During the Yamato era, Baidu planned to let Liu Yuxi take control of the matter while he was at the Ministry of Chinese Literature. However, when the Prime Minister saw his "Poetic Sequence," he became more and more unhappy, so he only allowed him to hold the posts of Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies and Bachelor of the Jixian Academy.

古文：度罢知政事，禹锡求分司东都。
现代文：裴度被罢宰相职务后，刘禹锡请求去东都洛阳任职。
English: After Baidu was removed from the post of prime minister, Liu Yuxi requested to go to Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：终以恃才褊心，不得久处朝列。
现代文：终究因仗恃才华心胸狭隘，不能长久任职朝内。
English: In the end, because of his narrow-mindedness and lack of talent, he was unable to serve in the imperial court for a long time.

古文：六月，授苏州刺史，就赐金紫。
现代文：六月，授苏州刺史，当即赐紫服佩金鱼袋。
English: In June, he was awarded the History of Suzhou, and was immediately given a purple dress and a goldfish bag.

古文：秩满入朝，授汝州刺史，迁太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：任满回朝，授汝州刺史，又调任太子宾客，到东都任职。
English: He returned to the imperial court at the end of his term, was awarded the title of Ruzhou historian, and was transferred to the prince's guest, and served in Dongdu.

古文：禹锡晚年与少傅白居易友善，诗笔文章，时无在其右者。
现代文：刘禹锡晚年与少傅白居易友善，写诗做文，一时无人超过他。
English: In his later years, Liu Yuxi was friendly with Shao Fu Bai Juyi and wrote poems and essays. At one time, no one surpassed him.

古文：常与禹锡唱和往来，因集其诗而序之曰： 彭城刘梦得，诗豪者也。
现代文：白居易常与刘禹锡往来唱和，于是将唱和之诗汇编成集并做序道： 彭城刘梦得，是诗中豪杰。
English: Bai Juyi often sang harmony with Liu Yuxi, so he compiled the harmony poems into a collection and made a preface: Pengcheng Liu Mengde is a hero in poetry.

古文：其锋森然，少敢当者。
现代文：他的笔锋锐利，很少有人能同他匹敌。
English: His pen is razor-sharp and few can match him.

古文：予不量力，往往犯之。
现代文：我自不量力，往往冒犯他。
English: I push myself beyond my limits and often offend him.

古文：夫合应者声同，交争者力敌。
现代文：能应合者同样有美声，能相争者力量相当。
English: Those who can meet have the same beauty, and those who can compete have the same strength.

古文：一往一复，欲罢不能。
现代文：你往我来，欲罢不能。
English: You come to me, you can't stop.

古文：由是每制一篇，先于视草，视竟则兴作，兴作则文成。
现代文：于是每做一篇，先起草稿琢磨，琢磨透彻便诗兴大发，诗兴发做诗句便写成。
English: As a result, for each piece of work, the draft is first refined, and then the poem is written, and then the poem is written.

古文：一二年来，日寻笔砚，同和赠答，不觉滋多。
现代文：一两年来，每日做诗，彼此赠答唱和，不觉越来越多。
English: Over the past year or two, we have been making poems every day, giving each other answers, singing and chanting, unconsciously more and more.

古文：太和三年春以前，纸墨所存者，凡一百三十八首。
现代文：大和三年春天以前，书写留存的，总计一百三十八首。
English: A total of one hundred and thirty-eight poems were written down and preserved before the spring of 1923.

古文：其余乘兴仗醉，率然口号者，不在此数。
现代文：其余乘兴或借醉，随口吟咏者不在此数之内。
English: The rest were taking part in entertainment or were drunk, and those who were singing along were not included in this number.

古文：因命小侄龟兒编勒成两轴。
现代文：于是命小侄龟儿编录，刻印成两轴。
English: As a result, the life of the little nephew of the turtle was recorded and engraved into two axes.

古文：仍写二本，一付龟兒，一授梦得小男仑郎，各令收藏，附两家文集。
现代文：并书写两本，一本交付龟儿，一本交付梦得的小儿子仑郎，令他们各自收藏，附于两家文集之后。
English: And write two books, one delivered to the turtle, one delivered to the dream of the little son Renro, so that they each collect, attached to the two anthologies.

古文：予顷与元微之唱和颇多，或在人口。
现代文：我近来与元微之唱和颇多，有的已被人们传诵。
English: Recently, I have sung quite a few songs with Yuan Wei, some of which have been recited by people.

古文：尝戏微之云： 仆与足下二十年来为文友诗敌，幸也！亦不幸也。
现代文：我曾对微之打趣道： 我与足下二十年为文友诗敌，幸运啊，也不幸呀。
English: I once quipped to Weizhi: I've been a rival poet for twenty years. I'm lucky, but also unlucky.

古文：吟咏情性，播扬名声，其适遗形，其乐忘老，幸也！
现代文：吟咏情性，播扬名声，舒畅而忘形，快乐而忘老，这是幸运。
English: It is fortunate to be able to sing one's sentiments, to spread one's fame, to be comfortable and forget one's shape, to be happy and forget one's age.

古文：然江南士女语才子者，多云元、白，以子之故，使仆不得独步于吴、越间，此亦不幸也！
现代文：然而江南智男慧女言及才子，多半口称元、白，因您之故，使我不能在吴、越间独占鳌头，这也是不幸呀。
English: However, most of the wise men and women in the south of the Yangtze River referred to their talents as "Yuan" and "Bai." Because of you, I can't take the lead in Wu and Yue, which is also unfortunate.

古文：今垂老复遇梦得，非重不幸耶？ 
现代文：现今年老又遇梦得。岂不是加倍的不幸吗？ 
English: Now this year, I've been having dreams again. Isn't that a double misfortune?

古文：梦得梦得，文之神妙，莫先于诗。
现代文：梦得梦得，文字之神妙，首推诗歌。
English: Dream after dream, the magic of words, poetry first.

古文：若妙与神，则吾岂敢？
现代文：若说到诗的神妙，我怎敢占先？
English: When it comes to the magic of poetry, how dare I get ahead of myself?

古文：如梦得 雪里高山头白早，海中仙果子生迟 ， 沉舟侧畔千帆过，病树前头万木春 之句之类，真谓神妙矣！
现代文：如梦得 雪里高山头白早，海中仙果子生迟 ， 沉舟侧畔千帆过，病树前头万木春 之句之类，真可谓神妙哇。
English: If you dream of snow in the high mountains in the early morning, the sea in the middle of the sea is late, the sinking boat has passed a thousand sails, the diseased tree in front of the tree, and the like, it is really wonderful.

古文：在在处处，应有灵物护持，岂止两家子弟秘藏而已！ 
现代文：他的诗无论在哪儿，都应有神灵护佑，岂止是两家子弟秘藏呀！ 
English: No matter where his poems are, they should be protected by the gods. They are more than just the secrets of two children!

古文：开成初，复为太子宾客分司，俄授同州刺史。
现代文：作为名流他应享此称誉。梦得曾做《西塞怀古》、《金陵五题》等诗，被江南文士誉为佳作。
English: As a celebrity, he deserves this accolade. He once wrote poems such as "Xi Sai Hua Gu" and "The Five Themes of Jinling" and was praised as an excellent work by Jiangnan scribes.

古文：秩满，检校礼部尚书、太子宾客分司。
现代文：虽然他身份地位不高，公卿大僚许多人同他交往。开成初年，刘禹锡再度担任太子宾客分司，不久又任同州刺史。
English: Although his status was not high, many of the nobles' senior colleagues had dealings with him. In the first year of Kaisei, Liu Yuxi once again served as the prince's guest division, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Tongzhou.

古文：会昌二年七月卒，时年七十一，赠户部尚书。
现代文：会昌二年七月，刘禹锡去世，时年七十一岁，追赠户部尚书。
English: In July of the second year of Huichang, Liu Yuxi died, at the age of seventy-one, and was posthumously awarded the Book of the Household.

古文：子承雍，登进士第，亦有才藻。
现代文：子承雍，应考进士及第，亦有才华。
English: His son, Chengyong, should take the entrance examination and pass, and is also talented.

古文：柳宗元，字子厚，河东人。后魏侍中济阴公之系孙。
现代文：柳宗元字子厚，河东人，后魏侍中济阴公柳旦的远代子孙。
English: Liu Zongyuan Zizihu, a person from the east of the river, is a descendant of the descendants of Liu Dan, who was an attendant of Jiyin in the late Wei Dynasty.

古文：曾伯祖奭，高祖朝宰相。
现代文：他的曾伯祖父柳，高宗朝任宰相。
English: His great-uncle grandfather Liu Gaozong served as prime minister.

古文：父镇，太常博士，终侍御史。
现代文：父柳镇，曾任太常博士，最后官至侍御史。
English: His father, Liu Zhen, was once a doctor of the imperial court, and eventually became a courtier to the emperor.

古文：宗元少聪警绝众，尤精《西汉诗骚》。
现代文：柳宗元从小聪明机警过人，尤精于写作西汉体诗赋。
English: Since childhood, Liu Zongyuan has been clever and alert, and is especially good at writing poetry in Western Han style.

古文：下笔构思，与古为侔。
现代文：下笔构思，能与古人相比。
English: The design of the next stroke can be compared with the ancients.

古文：登进士第，应举宏辞，授校书郎、蓝田尉。
现代文：精心剪裁细密安排，像珠贝灿然有光彩。当时文人们都推重他，后来任校书郎、蓝田县尉。
English: Carefully cut and meticulously arranged, resplendent like a pearl shell. At that time, writers all gave him high praise, and he later served as a school librarian and a prefect of Lantian County.

古文：贞元十九年，为监察御史。
现代文：贞元十九年，任监察御史。
English: In 1869, he assumed the post of Inspector-General of History.

古文：顺宗即位，王叔文、韦执谊用事，尤奇待宗元。
现代文：顺宗即位，王叔文、韦执谊当权，特别器重柳宗元。
English: Shunzong ascended to the throne, Wang Shouwen and Wei Xieyi took power, with special emphasis on Liu Zongyuan.

古文：与监察吕温密引禁中，与之图事。
现代文：将他与监察御史吕温秘密引入宫中，同他们商议国事。
English: He secretly brought him into the palace with the inspector general, Lü Wen, and discussed state affairs with them.

古文：转尚书礼部员外郎。
现代文：不久柳宗元又升任尚书省礼部员外郎。
English: Soon after, Liu Zongyuan was promoted to the Ministry of Education's member of the etiquette department.

古文：叔文欲大用之，会居位不久，叔文败，与同辈七人俱贬。
现代文：王叔文打算重用他，正好在职不久王叔文便失败，柳宗元与同辈的另七人均遭贬谪。
English: Wang Shouwen planned to reuse him, but shortly after taking office, Wang Shouwen failed, and Liu Zongyuan and the other seven of his contemporaries were all demoted.

古文：宗元为邵州刺史。在道，再贬永州司马。
现代文：柳宗元被贬为邵州刺史，赴任途中，再贬为永州司马。
English: Liu Zongyuan was relegated to the position of Shaozhou magistrate, and on his way to the post, he was relegated to Yongzhou magistrate.

古文：既罹窜逐，涉履蛮瘴，崎岖堙厄，蕴骚人之郁悼。写情叙事，动必以文。
现代文：既遭放逐，身入蛮荒烟瘴之地，道路崎岖环境闭塞，胸中蕴蓄落魄诗人的郁闷伤感，无论抒情叙事，动笔皆成文章。
English: Having been exiled, being in a wild and desolate place, the road is blocked by a rugged environment, and the depressed and sad feelings of a lost poet are stored in the chest, no matter the lyrical narrative, the writing is an article.

古文：为骚文十数篇，览之者为之凄恻。
现代文：写成骚体文十数篇，读过的人无不为之悲伤。
English: He wrote more than a dozen satirical essays, and those who read them were saddened.

古文：元和十年，例移为柳州刺史。
现代文：元和十年，柳宗元依例移任柳州刺史。
English: In the tenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Zongyuan was transferred to Liuzhou Shishi as usual.

古文：昌朗州司马刘禹锡得播州刺史，制书下，宗元谓所亲曰： 禹锡有母年高，今为郡蛮方，西南绝域，往复万里，如何与母偕行？
现代文：当时朗州司马刘禹锡调任播州刺史，诏令下达，柳宗元对亲近的人说： 禹锡有母年高，现在禹锡要去蛮荒之地当刺史，那里是西南边疆，往返万里，怎能逼着母亲同行。
English: At that time, the governor of Lanzhou, Liu Yuxi, was appointed as the head of Banzhou's history, and the imperial decree was issued. Liu Zongyuan said to the people close to him, "Yuxi is as old as my mother. Now, Yuxi is going to be a historian in a wild land. It is the southwestern frontier, and it is a round trip of ten thousand miles. How can I force my mother to accompany me?

古文：如母子异方，便为永诀。
现代文：假如母子分居两地，就等于永别。
English: If mother and son live in two different places, it's like saying goodbye forever.

古文：吾于禹锡为执友，胡忍见其若是？ 
现代文：我是禹锡的好友，怎忍心看到他这样？ 
English: I am a good friend of Yu Xi, how can I bear to see him like this?

古文：即草章奏，请以柳州授禹锡，自往播州。
现代文：立即写了奏章，恳请圣上将柳州刺史授与刘禹锡，自己前去播州。
English: He immediately wrote a petition, imploring the Admiral to award Liu Yuxi the title of Liuzhou's Grand Historian, and to go to Banzhou himself.

古文：会裴度亦奏其事，禹锡终易连州。
现代文：恰好裴度也向皇上奏请此事，刘禹锡终于改任连州刺史。
English: It just so happened that Pei Du also reported the matter to the emperor, and Liu Yuxi was finally transferred to the post of Lianzhou magistrate.

古文：柳州土俗，以男女质钱，过期则没入钱主，宗元革其乡法。
现代文：柳州当地风俗，借钱用子女做抵押，过期不还子女就没入钱主做奴婢。
English: The local custom in Liuzhou is to borrow money using children as collateral, and if the money is not repaid by the due date, the children will become the master's slaves.

古文：其已没者，仍出私钱赎之，归其父母。
现代文：柳宗元便自己出钱替他们赎身，让他们回到父母身边。
English: Liu Zongyuan then ransomed them for his own money, allowing them to return to their parents.

古文：江岭间为进士者，不远数千里皆随宗元师法；凡经其门，必为名士。
现代文：长江五岭之间应进士科考的人，都不惜远行数千里前来跟随柳宗元学习；凡是经过他指教的，必定成为名士。
English: Among the five ridges of the Yangtze River, those who should enter the scientific research are willing to travel thousands of miles to come and follow Liu Zongyuan to study; anyone who has been taught by him will surely become a celebrity.

古文：著述之盛，名动于时，时号柳州云。
现代文：柳宗元著述之多，声名震动当世，人们称他柳柳州。
English: Liu Zongyuan wrote so many books that his fame shook the world. People called him Liu Liuzhou.

古文：有文集四十卷。
现代文：有文集四十卷传世。
English: Forty volumes of the anthology have been handed down to posterity.

古文：元和十四年十月五日卒，时年四十七。
现代文：元和十四年十月五日逝世，终年四十七岁。
English: He died on October 5, 1914, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：子周六、周七，才三四岁。
现代文：子周六、周七，这时才三四岁。
English: My son was three or four years old on Saturday and Sunday.

古文：观察使裴行立为营护其丧及妻子还于京师，时人义之。
现代文：观察使裴行立主持丧事并护送柳宗元灵柩及其妻儿返回京师，当时人们赞赏裴行立的义举。
English: The observation made Pei Xingli preside over the funeral and escort Liu Zongyuan's coffin and his wife and children back to Beijing. At that time, people appreciated Pei Xingli's act of kindness.

