古文：孝文皇帝四男：窦皇后生孝景帝、梁孝王武，诸姬生代孝王参、梁怀王揖。
现代文：孝文帝有四个儿子：窦皇后生孝景帝、梁孝王武，诸姬生下代孝王参和梁怀王揖。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had four sons: Empress Dou gave birth to Emperor Xiaojing, Emperor Liang gave birth to Emperor Wangwu, Empress Zhuji gave birth to Empress Xiaowang San and Empress Liang Huai gave birth to Empress Yan.

古文：梁孝王武以孝文二年与太原王参、梁王揖同日立。
现代文：梁孝王刘武在孝文帝二年与太原王刘参、梁王刘揖同日封王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowen, Liang Xiaowang Liu Wu was crowned king on the same day as the Taiyuan kings Liu San and Liang Wang Liu Ye.

古文：武为代王，四年徙为淮阳王，十二年徙梁，自初王通历已十一年矣。
现代文：刘武初封为代王，孝文帝四年时转封为淮阳王，孝文帝十二年时刘武又转封到了梁国，从初封开始共计当了十一年王。
English: Liu Wu was first appointed as the acting king. When Emperor Xiaowen was four years old, he was appointed as the king of Huaiyang. When Emperor Xiaowen was twelve years old, Liu Wu was appointed as the king of Liang Province. In total, he was the king for eleven years since his first appointment.

古文：孝王十四年，入朝。
现代文：孝王十四年，刘武入朝。
English: In the fourteenth year of King Xiao, Liu Wu entered the imperial court.

古文：十七年、十八年，比年入朝，留。其明年，乃之国。
现代文：十七年、十八年接连入朝，并留在京师，第二年才回国。
English: In the 17th and 18th years, he successively went to the DPRK and stayed in Beijing, only returning to the country in the second year.

古文：二十一年，入朝。
现代文：二十一年再入朝。
English: He returned to the imperial court in 1921.

古文：二十二年，文帝崩。
现代文：二十二年，文帝驾崩。
English: Twenty-two years later, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：二十四年，入朝。
现代文：二十四年入朝。
English: Twenty-four years since he entered the imperial court.

古文：二十五年，复入朝。
现代文：二十五年，再一次入朝。
English: Twenty-five years later, he once again entered the imperial court.

古文：是时，上未置太子，与孝王宴饮，从容言曰： 千秋万岁后传于王。 
现代文：那时，皇上还未定太子，与孝王刘武宴饮时曾随口说： 我死之后传位给你。 
English: At that time, the emperor had not yet decided on a crown prince, and during a banquet with Prince Liu Wu, he casually said: "After my death, I will pass the throne to you."

古文：王辞谢。
现代文：孝王辞谢了。
English: After hearing this, Liang Wang hurriedly retracted.

古文：虽知非至言，然心内喜。
现代文：孝王虽然知道皇上讲的不是真心话，但心裹也很高兴。
English: Although he knew that what Emperor Jing said was not true, he was secretly pleased.

古文：太后亦然。
现代文：太后也是这样。
English: The Queen Mother was equally delighted.

古文：其春，吴、楚、齐、赵七国反，先击梁棘壁，杀数万人。
现代文：这年春天，吴、楚、齐、趟等七国反叛，首先攻打梁国棘壁，杀了数万人。
English: In the spring of this year, Wu, Chu, Qi, Wati and other seven countries rebelled, first attacking the thorny wall of Liang, killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：梁王城守睢阳，而使韩安国、张羽等为将军以距吴、楚。
现代文：梁王刘武固守于睢阳，派韩安国、张羽等为将抗击吴、楚。
English: Liang Wang Liu Wu remained firmly in Fenyang and sent Han An Guo, Zhang Yu and others to fight against Wu and Chu.

古文：吴、楚以梁为限，不敢过而西，与太尉亚夫等相距三月。
现代文：吴、楚被梁国拦住了，不敢再往西进，与太尉周亚夫等对峙了三个月。
English: Wu and Chu were stopped by Liang Guo and did not dare to go further west. They were in confrontation with Lieutenant Zhou Yafu and others for three months.

古文：吴、楚破，而梁所杀虏略与汉中分。
现代文：吴、楚等国战败，梁国和汉朝虏杀的敌军数量大约相同。
English: Wu, Chu and other countries were defeated, and the number of enemy troops captured by Liang and Han dynasties was about the same.

古文：明年，汉立太子。
现代文：第二年，汉朝策立了太子。
English: The following year, the Han Dynasty established a crown prince.

古文：梁最亲，有功，又为大国，居天下膏腴地，北界泰山，西至高阳，四十余城，多大县。
现代文：梁国与皇帝最亲，立有战功，又是大国，国土肥沃，北到泰山，西到高阳，共有四十余城，多数是大县。
English: Liang Guo was the emperor's closest relative. Liang Guo had military achievements, was a great power, and had a fertile land. There were more than forty cities, most of which were large counties, stretching from Mount Tai in the north to Gaoyang in the west.

古文：孝王，太后少子，爱之，赏赐不可胜道。
现代文：孝王刘武是太后的小儿子，太后很喜欢他，给他的赏赐不计其数。
English: Xiao Wang Liu Wu is the youngest son of the empress dowager. The empress dowager likes him very much and has given him countless rewards.

古文：于是孝王筑东苑，方三百余里，广睢阳城七十里，大治宫室，为复道，自宫连属于平台三十余里。
现代文：孝王于是修建了束苑，方圆有三百多里，比睢阳城还广七十里。他在东苑大建宫室，楼阁之间修建了空中通道，从王宫筑路三十多里连接平台离宫。
English: Xiao Wang then built Sokuen, with a circumference of more than three hundred miles, seventy miles wider than Fenyang City. He built a palace room in Dongyuan, built an air passage between the pavilions, and built a road of more than thirty miles from the royal palace to connect the platform to the palace.

古文：得赐天子旌旗，从千乘万骑，出称警，入言跸，拟于天子。
现代文：他打着天子赐予的旌，随从千乘万骑，出入皆使行人回避，跟天子差不多。
English: He rides a donkey given to him by the Son of Heaven, and is accompanied by a thousand horsemen. He avoids pedestrians at every entrance and exit, much like the Son of Heaven.

古文：招延四方豪桀，自山东游士莫不至：齐人羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳之属。
现代文：他又招揽四方豪杰，山东的羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳等游士纷纷投奔而来。
English: He also recruited heroes from the four directions, and wanderers such as Shandong's Yang Sheng, Gongsun Zi, and Fenyang rushed to join him.

古文：公孙诡多奇邪计，初见日，王赐千金，官至中尉，号曰公孙将军。
现代文：公孙诡这个人诡计多端，孝王第一次会面后即赐他千金，官做到中尉，号称公孙将军。
English: Gongsun Qiu was a man of many stratagems. After their first meeting, Prince Xiaowang gave him a large sum of money and promoted him to the rank of lieutenant. He was known as Gongsun General.

古文：多作兵弩弓数十万，而府库金钱且百巨万，珠玉宝器多于京师。
现代文：孝王又令人制兵弩弓箭数十万之多，而府库中的金钱有几百万，珠宝玉器比京城的还多。
English: Emperor Xiaowang also ordered hundreds of thousands of soldiers to be armed with bows and arrows, while the government treasury contained millions of dollars and more jewels and jade than the capital city.

古文：二十九年十月，孝王入朝。
现代文：二十九年十月，孝王入朝。
English: In October of the 29th year, Emperor Xiaowang entered the imperial court.

古文：景帝使使持乘舆驷，迎梁王于关下。
现代文：景帝派人乘四马之车到城外去迎。到朝后，孝王上书景帝，就留了下来。
English: Emperor Jing sent someone to meet him outside the city in a four-horse carriage. When Emperor Xiaowang arrived, Prince Xiaowang went to see Emperor Jing and stayed behind.

古文：既朝，上疏，因留。以太后故，入则侍帝同辇，出则同车游猎上林中。
现代文：因为太后的原因，孝王入则与景帝同辈，出则与景帝同车，一起去山林打猎。
English: Because of the reason of the empress dowager, Prince Xiaowang was a peer of Emperor Jing when he entered the palace, and when he left, he rode in the same car as Emperor Jing and went hunting in the mountains.

古文：梁之侍中、郎、谒者著引籍出入天子殿门，与汉宦官亡异。
现代文：梁国的侍中、郎、谒者凭通名状即可进出天子殿门，与漠宦官无异。
English: The attendants, retainers, and eunuchs of Liang Province could enter and leave the gate of Tianzi Palace with a common name certificate, which was no different from that of the eunuchs.

古文：十一月，上废栗太子，太后心欲以梁王为嗣。
现代文：十一月，皇上废了栗太子，太后心想让梁王继位。
English: In November, the emperor deposed Prince Li, and the empress dowager wanted Prince Liang to succeed to the throne.

古文：大臣及爰盎等有所关说于帝，太后议格，孝王不敢复言太后以嗣事。
现代文：大臣们和袁盎等向景帝谏阻，太后的建议被搁置，孝王也不敢再和太后讨论继位的事。
English: The ministers and Yuan Ang obstructed Emperor Jing, the empress dowager's proposal was shelved, and Prince Xiaowang did not dare to discuss the succession with the empress dowager.

古文：事秘，世莫知，乃辞归国。
现代文：事属秘密，世人不知晓，孝王随即告辞回国。
English: The matter is a secret, the world does not know, and Prince Xiao Wang immediately resigned and returned to China.

古文：其夏，上立胶东王为太子。
现代文：夏天，皇上立胶束王为太子。
English: In the summer, the emperor made the Prince of the Succulent King the crown prince.

古文：梁王怨爰盎及议臣，乃与羊胜、公孙诡之属谋，阴使人刺杀爰盎及他议臣十余人。
现代文：梁王恨袁盎及众进言之臣，便与羊胜、公孙诡等人密谋，暗中派人去刺杀袁盎及其他十几名大臣。
English: King Liang hated Yuan Ang and all the courtiers, so he conspired with Yang Sheng, Gongsun Qi and others to secretly send people to assassinate Yuan Ang and more than a dozen other ministers.

古文：贼未得也。
现代文：结果刺客行刺未遂。
English: As a result, the assassin failed in his attempt.

古文：于是天子意梁，逐贼，果梁使之。
现代文：天子怀疑此事乃梁国所为，尾追查知，果然是梁国派的。
English: Tianzi suspected that the incident was committed by Liang Guo, and after further investigation, it turned out to be Liang Guo's faction.

古文：遣使冠盖相望于道，复案梁事。
现代文：于是派大队人马，去梁国查办此事。
English: As a result, a large number of people were sent to Liangguo to investigate the matter.

古文：捕公孙诡、羊胜，皆匿王后宫。
现代文：公孙诡、羊胜遭到追捕，躲进梁王后宫。
English: Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng were hunted down and hid in the Liangwang Palace.

古文：使者责二千石急，梁相轩丘豹及内史安国皆泣谏王，王乃令胜、诡皆自杀，出之。
现代文：使者派二千石官员去催梁王交人。梁国丞相轩丘豹与内史韩安国哭着劝梁王，梁王才令羊胜、公孙诡自杀，然后交出。
English: The envoy sent a 2,000-koku official to urge Liang Wang to hand over the person. Liang Guozhenxiang Xuanqiu and Naishi Han'an Guo cried and persuaded Liang Wang. Liang Wang only made Yang Sheng and Gongsun Qi commit suicide, and then handed over.

古文：上由此怨望于梁王。
现代文：皇上由此而对梁王生气。
English: As a result, the emperor became angry with Liang Wang.

古文：梁王恐，乃使韩安国因长公主谢罪太后，然后得释。
现代文：梁王恐慌之下，就派韩安国通过长公主向太后谢罪，才缓和下来。
English: King Liang was afraid, so he sent Han An Guo to confess his sins to the empress dowager through the eldest princess and ask for forgiveness. Only then did he receive forgiveness.

古文：上怒稍解，因上书请朝。
现代文：等皇上怒气稍解之后，梁孝王即上书请朝。
English: The emperor's anger gradually subsided, and Liang Wang sent a letter requesting an audience with the emperor.

古文：既至关，茅兰说王，使乘布车，从两骑入，匿于长公主园。
现代文：来到城外时，大夫茅兰劝孝王乘以布为帷幔的车入城，衹带两个骑士，先躲到长公主的园里。
English: When they arrived outside the city, the doctor, Maoran, advised Prince Takao to take a cloth-draped carriage into the city, take two knights with him, and first hide in the garden of the eldest princess.

古文：汉使迎王，王已入关，车骑尽居外，外不知王处。
现代文：等汉帝的使者来接孝王时，孝王已经进了城，但车马都在城外，别人不知道他去哪儿了。
English: By the time the emissary of the Han Emperor came to pick up Xiao Wang, Xiao Wang had already entered the city, but the chariot and horse were outside the city, and others did not know where he had gone.

古文：太后泣曰： 帝杀吾子！ 
现代文：太后哭着说： 皇帝杀了我儿子了! 
English: The Empress Dowager cried: The Emperor killed my son!

古文：帝忧恐。
现代文：皇帝也很紧张。
English: The emperor was also nervous.

古文：于是梁王伏斧质，之阙下谢罪。然后太后、帝皆大喜，相与泣，复如故。
现代文：不久梁孝王来到皇宫负荆请罪，太后、皇帝见了大喜，相互哭泣一番后，便和好如初了。
English: Soon after, Liang Xiaowang came to the imperial palace to apologize. The empress dowager and the emperor were overjoyed to see him. After weeping together for a while, they reconciled.

古文：悉召王从官入关。
现代文：孝王的随从也都被召进了城。
English: He then summoned all of Liang Wang's subordinate officials to the customs.

古文：然帝益疏王，不与同车辇矣。
现代文：然而，景帝更加疏远孝王，不与他同乘车辇了。
English: However, Emperor Jing distanced himself even further from Prince Xiaowang and no longer rode in the carriage with him.

古文：三十五年冬，复入朝。上疏欲留，上弗许。
现代文：三十五年冬，孝王又入朝，上书想留下，被皇上拒绝。
English: In the winter of 1935, Prince Takahito entered the imperial court again. He sent a letter to the emperor asking to stay, but the emperor refused.

古文：归国，意忽忽不乐。
现代文：孝王回国后便闷闷不乐。
English: After Liang Wang returned to the feudal state, his mind was drowsy and unhappy.

古文：北猎梁山，有献牛，足上出背上，孝王恶之。
现代文：一天孝王到北边的梁山上去打猎，有人献上一头牛，脚从背上长出，孝王看了很不喜欢。
English: One day, Prince Xiao Wang went to the northern Liangshan Mountain to go hunting. Someone offered a cow with a foot growing out of its back. Prince Xiao Wang didn't like it.

古文：六月中，病热，六日薨。
现代文：六月六日，孝王得热病而死。
English: On June 6, Prince Xiaowang died of fever.

古文：孝王慈孝，每闻太后病，口不能食，常欲留长安侍太后。
现代文：孝王很孝顺，每次听说太后病了，就吃不下饭，往往想留在长安陪侍太后。
English: Xiaowang was very dutiful. Every time he heard that the empress dowager was ill, he could not eat. He often wanted to stay in Chang'an to accompany the empress dowager.

古文：太后亦爱之。
现代文：太后也很喜欢他。
English: The Queen Mother loved him, too.

古文：及闻孝王死，窦太后泣极哀，不食，曰： 帝果杀吾子！ 
现代文：听到孝王死后，窦太后哭得很伤心，不吃不喝，并说： 皇帝果然杀了我儿! 
English: Upon hearing of the death of Prince Xiaowang, Empress Dowager Dou cried inconsolably, refused to eat or drink, and said, "The emperor really did kill me!"

古文：帝哀惧，不知所为。
现代文：皇帝又伤心又害怕，不知怎么办才好。
English: The emperor was sad and afraid, and did not know what to do.

古文：与长公主计之，乃分梁为五国，尽立孝王男五人为王，女五人皆令食汤沐邑。
现代文：皇帝与长公主商量之后，决定把梁国分成五国，把孝王的五个儿子都分别封王，给孝王的五个女儿封地俸禄。
English: After discussion with the eldest princess, the emperor decided to divide Liang Province into five provinces, to crown the five sons of Prince Xiao separately, and to give the five daughters of Prince Xiao a fief salary.

古文：奏之太后，太后乃说，为帝壹餐。
现代文：这事奏明太后，太后才高兴起来，看在皇上面子，吃了一顿饭。
English: The matter was brought to the attention of the empress dowager, and only then did the empress dowager become happy and, out of consideration for the emperor, ate a meal.

古文：孝王未死时，财以巨万计，不可胜数。
现代文：孝王未死时，财产以万万计，数不胜数。
English: When Liang Xiaowang was still alive, his property was in the hundreds of millions, and it was impossible to count.

古文：及死，藏府余黄金尚四十余万斤，他财物称是。
现代文：到他死的时候，府中藏的黄金还有四十多万斤，别的财物也与之相当。
English: By the time of his death, there were more than 400,000 kilos of gold hidden in the mansion, and other property was comparable.

古文：代孝王参初立为太原王。
现代文：代孝王刘参初封为太原王。
English: Liu San, the king of filial piety, was crowned King of Taiyuan for the first time.

古文：四年，代王武徙为淮阳王，而参徙为代王，复并得太原，都晋阳如故。
现代文：孝文帝四年，原代王刘武封为淮阳王，刘参就改封为代王，并继续掌管太原，还是以晋阳为都城。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xiaowen, Liu Wufeng, the original king, was appointed as the king of Huaiyang, and Liu San was appointed as the acting king, and continued to govern Taiyuan, with Jinyang as the capital.

古文：五年一朝，凡三朝。
现代文：他每五年入京朝拜一次，共入朝三次。
English: He visits Beijing once every five years to pay homage to the emperor, and has visited the emperor three times in total.

古文：十七年薨，子共王登嗣。
现代文：十七年后，代王去世，儿子共王刘登继位。
English: Seventeen years later, the acting king died and was succeeded by his son, Co-King Liu Deng.

古文：二十九年薨，子义嗣。
现代文：二十九年后，刘登去世，他儿子刘义继位。
English: Twenty-nine years later, Liu Deng died and was succeeded by his son Liu Yi.

古文：元鼎中，汉广关，以常山为阻。徙代王于清河，是为刚王。
现代文：元鼎年间，汉朝扩建山关，以常山为险关，代王府被迁到清河，改称刚王府。
English: During the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty expanded the mountain pass, taking Changshan as a dangerous pass, and the King's House was moved to Qinghe and renamed the King Gang's House.

古文：并前在代凡立四十年薨，子顷王汤嗣。
现代文：加上当代王的时间，在位四十年去世。他儿子倾王刘汤即位。
English: In addition to the time of the current king, he died after forty years on the throne, and his son, King Liu Tang, ascended the throne.

古文：二十四年薨，子年嗣。
现代文：二十四年后去世，由其子刘年继位。
English: Twenty-four years later, he died and was succeeded by his son Liu Nian.

古文：地节中，冀州刺史林奏年为太子时与女弟则私通。
现代文：地节年间，冀州刺史林上书奏称刘年当太子时曾与妹妹刘则私通。
English: During the festival, Zhi Xilin of Jizhou Province wrote a letter saying that he had an affair with his sister Liu Zi when Liu Nian was crown prince.

古文：及年立为王后，则怀年子，其婿使勿举。
现代文：到刘年封为王以后，刘则怀上了刘年的孩子。
English: After Liu Nianfeng became king, Liu became pregnant with Liu Nian's child.

古文：则曰： 自来杀之。 
现代文：刘则的丈夫不让她养这孩子，刘则就说： 你亲自来把他杀了。 
English: Liu Ze's husband did not allow her to raise the child, so Liu Ze said, "You come and kill him yourself."

古文：婿怒曰： 为王生子，自令王家养之。 
现代文：她丈夫怒道： 你给刚王生孩子，当然要给刚王去养。 
English: Her husband angrily said, "If you give birth to a child for Kong Wang, of course you should raise it for Kong Wang.

古文：则送儿顷太后所。
现代文：刘则就把小儿送到顷太后家。
English: Liu then sent the child to the empress dowager's home.

古文：相闻知，禁止则，令不得入宫。
现代文：王府丞相知道后，便阻止她，不让她入宫。
English: When Minister Wangfujo found out, he stopped her from entering the palace.

古文：年使从季父往来送迎则，连年不绝。
现代文：刘年却派从季父往来迎送刘则，连年不断。
English: Liu Nian, on the other hand, sent Liu Zeng to meet and greet him from Ji's father, year after year.

古文：有司奏年淫乱，年坐废为庶人，徙房陵，与汤沐邑百户。
现代文：有司上奏说刘年淫乱有罪，于是刘年被废为平民，徙到了房陵，给予百户封邑。
English: A superior officer said that Liu Nian was guilty of adultery, so Liu Nian was abolished as a commoner, moved to Fangling, and given a hundred fiefs.

古文：立三年，国除。
现代文：三年后，国被废除了。
English: Three years later, the state was abolished.

古文：元始二年，新都侯王莽兴灭继绝，白太皇太后，立年弟子如意为广宗王，奉代孝王后。
现代文：元始二年，新都侯王差扶植灭绝的王国，上奏太皇太后，把型生的弟弟之子主喧立为尘塞王，以继代孝王之后。
English: In the first two years, Wang Chia, the prince of the new capital, supported the extinction of the kingdom, played the role of the great empress dowager, and set up his younger brother's son as the king of dust, to succeed King Xiao.

古文：莽篡位，国绝。
现代文：王菱篡位后，封国被废除。
English: After Wang Ling usurped the throne, the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：梁怀王揖，文帝少子也。
现代文：梁怀王揖虽是文帝的小儿子。
English: Liang Huai Wang Yao was the youngest son of Emperor Wen.

古文：好《诗》、《书》，帝爱之，异于他子。
现代文：他爱好《诗踯、《尚书》，主查喜欢他，与对待别的儿子不同。
English: He is fond of "Poetry and Song" and "Shangshu." Master Cha likes him and treats him differently from other sons.

古文：五年一朝，凡再入朝。
现代文：他每五年一入朝，共入朝两次。
English: He visits the DPRK once every five years and has visited the DPRK twice in total.

古文：因堕马死，立十年薨。
现代文：由于堕马而死，在位十年。
English: He died after falling from his horse and reigned for ten years.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：因无后继，国被废除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：明年，梁孝王武徙王梁。
现代文：第二年，銮孝王窒噬迁封狂。
English: In the second year, Emperor Gongxiao became obsessed with the relocation.

古文：梁孝王子五人为王。太子买为梁共王，次子明为济川王，彭离为济东王，定为山阳王，不识为济阴王，皆以孝景中六年同日立。
现代文：梁孝王五个儿子都封了王：长子刘买为梁共王，次子刘明为济王，三子彭离为济束王，四子刘宣为山阳王，五子丕邀为迺旦牡。他们都是在孝景帝中六年的同一天封王的。
English: The five sons of Liang Xiao Wang were all crowned kings: the eldest son Liu Mai was crowned King of Liang, the second son Liu Ming was crowned King of Jizhou, the third son Peng Li was crowned King of Jizhou, the fourth son Liu Xuan was crowned King of Shanyang, and the fifth son Yu Yu was crowned King of Shantang. They were all crowned kings on the same day in the sixth year of Emperor Xiao Jing's middle school.

古文：梁共王买立七年薨，子平王襄嗣。
现代文：梁共王刘买在位七年后去世，他儿子平王刘襄继位。
English: Liang Zong Wang Liu Bei died after seven years on the throne, and his son Ping Wang Liu Xiang succeeded him.

古文：济川王明以垣邑侯立。
现代文：济川王刘明由垣邑侯而封王。
English: Liu Ming, the king of Jishuan, was crowned by the lord of Waki.

古文：七年，坐射杀其中尉，有司请诛，武帝弗忍，废为庶人，徙房陵，国除。
现代文：他在位七年的时候，因射杀了手下一名中尉，有司上奏，请求问斩，基壶不忍心杀他，废为平民，迁往房陵县，废了他的王国。
English: During the seven years of his reign, he shot and killed a lieutenant under his command, and his superior requested that he be beheaded, but Ki-chuk could not bear to kill him, so he became a commoner, moved to Fangling County, and abolished his kingdom.

古文：济东王彭离立二十九年。
现代文：济东王彭离在位二十九年。
English: It has been 29 years since King Peng of Jidong left the throne.

古文：彭离骄悍，昏暮私与其奴亡命少年数十人行剽，杀人取财物以为好。
现代文：彭离性情骄悍，晚上常偷偷地与手下亡命少年数十人一起出门打劫，以杀人抢财为乐。
English: Peng Liang was a proud person. At night, he often secretly went out with dozens of his subordinates to rob houses, taking pleasure in killing and robbing.

古文：所杀发觉者百余人，国皆知之，莫敢夜行。
现代文：他们所杀的人就人们所知已超过百人，这事全国都知道，老百姓晚上不敢出门。
English: More than a hundred people are known to have been killed by them, and this is known throughout the country. Ordinary people do not dare to go out at night.

古文：所杀者子上书告言，有司请诛，武帝弗忍，废为庶人，徙上庸，国除，为大河郡。
现代文：受害人子女上书告状，有司便上奏请皇上将他斩首。武帝于，不忍，把他废为平民，迁到上庸县，废了他的封国，改为大河郡。
English: The victim's children filed a complaint, and some officials petitioned the emperor to behead him. Emperor Wu, unable to bear it, abolished him as a commoner, moved him to Shangyong County, abolished his fief, and changed it to Dahe County.

古文：山阳哀王定立九年薨。亡子，国除。
现代文：山阳哀王刘定在位九年后去世，因无子，封国被废除了。
English: Sanyang mourned the death of King Liu Ding after nine years on the throne. As he had no son, the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：济阴哀王不识立一年薨。亡子，国除。
现代文：济阴哀王不识在位一年即去世，也无子，封国被废。
English: King Jiyinmo died within a year of his reign, without having a son, and the state was abolished.

古文：孝王支子四王，皆绝于身。
现代文：孝王还有庶子四人封王，都身死无后继人了。
English: Prince Takahito and his four illegitimate children, all of whom were given the title of king, died without heirs.

古文：梁平王襄，母曰陈太后。
现代文：梁平王刘襄的母亲是陈太后。
English: Liang Ping Wang Liu Xiang's mother was Empress Dowager Chen.

古文：共王母曰李太后。
现代文：梁共王的母亲是李太后。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager Li.

古文：李太后，亲平王之大母也。
现代文：李太后是梁平王的亲祖母。
English: Empress Dowager Ri was the great-grandmother of King Ping.

古文：而平王之后曰任后，任后甚有宠于襄。
现代文：梁平王的王后是任后，她很得刘襄宠爱。
English: Liang Ping Wang's queen is a post-office, she is very much favored by Liu Xiang.

古文：初，孝王有雷尊，直千金，戒后世善宝之，毋得以与人。
现代文：当初孝王有一个饰有云雷状花纹的酒樽，价值千金。孝王生前曾叮嘱后代要好好保管它，千万别给别人。
English: Originally, Prince Takao had a wine bottle decorated with a thundercloud pattern, worth thousands of dollars. Before his death, Prince Takao had told his descendants to keep it safe and not to give it to others.

古文：任后闻而欲得之。
现代文：任后听说有此酒樽后，就想得到它。
English: When I heard about this cask after taking office, I wanted to get it.

古文：李太后曰： 先王有命，毋得以尊与人。
现代文：李太后说： 先王有命，这酒樽不能给别人。
English: Empress Dowager Li said, "The late king is still alive, and this wine barrel cannot be given to others."

古文：他物虽百巨万，犹自恣。 
现代文：其他东西不管值多少钱，你都可以拿。 
English: Anything else, no matter how much it's worth, you can take.

古文：任后绝欲得之。
现代文：可任后却执意要得到它。
English: But after being appointed, he insisted on getting it.

古文：王襄直使人开府取尊赐任后，又王及母陈太后事李太后多不顺。
现代文：于是刘襄直接派人开府门取出酒樽，赐予任后。刘襄及其母陈太后对李太后不够孝顺。
English: As a result, Liu Xiang directly sent someone to open the door of the palace to take out the wine barrels, and after being given the post, Liu Xiang and his mother, Empress Dowager Chen, were not sufficiently filial to Empress Dowager Li.

古文：有汉使者来，李太后欲自言，王使谒者中郎胡等遮止，闭门。
现代文：有一次漠帝使者来了，李太后想亲自去诉苦。刘襄派谒者中郎胡某等加以阻止，关上大门。
English: Once, an emissary of the Emperor of the Desert came, and Empress Dowager Li wanted to personally complain about the hardships. Liu Xiang sent a messenger, Zhonglang Hu, to stop them and close the gate.

古文：李太后与争门，措指，太后啼呼，不得见汉使者。
现代文：李太后想抢出门，挤伤了手指，又哭又喊，还是未见到汉使。
English: Empress Dowager Li tried to grab the door, bruised her fingers, cried and shouted, but still did not see the envoy.

古文：李太后亦私与食官长及郎尹霸等奸乱，王与任后以此使人风止李太后。
现代文：因李太后与食官长及郎官尹霸等通奸，平王与任后便派人以此去劝阻李太后，李太后便作罢。
English: Because Empress Dowager Li had an adulterous affair with the head of the Imperial Household Agency and her second-in-command Yin Bao, King Ping sent someone to dissuade Empress Dowager Li, and she broke off the affair.

古文：李太后亦已，后病薨。病时，任后未尝请疾；薨，又不侍丧。
现代文：后来李太后病死了。李太后生病时，任后未去看望过；她死时，任后也未去服丧。
English: Later, Empress Dowager Li fell ill and died. When Empress Dowager Li fell ill, she did not visit her after taking office; when she died, she did not go to the funeral after taking office.

古文：元朔中，睢阳人犴反，人辱其父，而与睢阳太守客俱出同车。犴反杀其仇车上，亡去。
现代文：元朔年间，有人侮辱了睢阳人犴反的父亲。那人出门与睢阳太守的客人同车，犴反跳上车杀了仇人，随后逃跑。
English: During the Yuan Shuo era, someone insulted the father of the ruler of Shenyang. The man went out with the guests of the governor of Shenyang, jumped on the car and killed the enemy, and then fled.

古文：睢阳太守怒，以让梁二千石。
现代文：睢阳太守大怒，责成梁国二千石官员去抓回逃犯。
English: Shenyang Daju was furious and ordered Liang Guo's 2,000-koku officials to recapture the fugitive.

古文：二千石以下求反急，执反亲戚。
现代文：二千石手下抓犴反很急，先扣他的亲戚做人质。
English: His two thousand koku minions were in a hurry to catch him, and first took his relatives hostage.

古文：反知国阴事，乃上变告梁王与大母争尊状。
现代文：犴反知道梁国宫中丑事，便上告了梁王与祖母争酒樽的事。
English: Knowing about the scandal in the Liangguo Palace, Xuanfan sued the King of Liang and his grandmother for the sake barrel.

古文：时相以下具知之，欲以伤梁长吏，书闻。
现代文：那时丞相以下的人都知道了这事，想以此事整治梁国高级官吏。
English: At that time, everyone from the prime minister on down knew about this and wanted to use it to discipline high-ranking officials in Liang Guo.

古文：天子下吏验问，有之。
现代文：有人上书给皇帝，皇帝派人去查问，发现此事属实。
English: Tianzi handed the matter over to officials for investigation and interrogation, which is indeed the case.

古文：公卿治，奏以为不孝，请诛王及太后。
现代文：公卿查办此案后，上奏皇上，欲以不孝罪名斩梁王及陈太后。
English: After investigating the case, the court noble reported to the emperor that he wanted to behead King Liang and Empress Chen on the charge of being unfilial.

古文：天子曰： 首恶失道，任后也。
现代文：天子说： 罪魁祸首是任后。
English: The son of heaven said: The chief culprit is the post.

古文：朕置相吏不逮，无以辅王，故陷不谊，不忍致法。 
现代文：至于梁王，是我任命丞相、官吏不当，没能辅助好他，以致他有此不当之举。我不忍心让他伏法。 
English: As for King Liang, I appointed the prime minister and officials improperly and failed to support him well, so that he did this improper act. I can't bear to let him go to the law.

古文：削梁王五县，夺王太后汤沐成阳邑，枭任后首于市，中郎胡等皆伏诛。
现代文：于是衹削掉梁王五个县的地盘，收走陈太后的成阳邑地，将任后枭首示众，中郎胡等处斩。
English: As a result, he cut off Liang Wang's five-county territory, took away Chen's Chengyang village, and beheaded his son-in-law, Zhong Lang Hu.

古文：梁余尚有八城。
现代文：这样梁国还剩下八个城。
English: This leaves eight cities in Liang Province.

古文：襄立四十年薨，子顷王无伤嗣。
现代文：刘襄在位四十年后去世，他儿子顷王无伤继位。
English: Liu Xiang died after a reign of forty years, and his son, He Wang, succeeded him without injury.

古文：十一年薨，子敬王定国嗣。
现代文：无伤登位十一年后去世，其子敬王定国继位。
English: Eleven years after he ascended the throne unharmed, he died and was succeeded by his son, Kei Wang Dingguo.

古文：四十年薨，子夷王遂嗣。
现代文：定国在位四十年后去世，儿子夷王刘遂继位。
English: Dingguo died after forty years on the throne, and his son Liu Yi Wang succeeded to the throne.

古文：六年薨，子荒王嘉嗣。
现代文：刘遂在位六年后去世，儿子荒王刘嘉继位。
English: Liu Sui died after six years on the throne and was succeeded by his son Liu Jia.

古文：十五年薨，子立嗣。
现代文：刘嘉在位十五年后去世，儿子刘立继位。
English: Liu Jia died after 15 years on the throne and was succeeded by his son Liu Li.

古文：鸿嘉中，太傅辅奏： 立一日至十一犯法，臣下愁苦，莫敢亲近，不可谏止。
现代文：鸿嘉年间，太傅辅上奏说： 刘立一天犯法达十一次，臣下愁苦不堪，无人敢接近他，没人能劝止他。
English: During Hong Jia's reign, the Taifu (the second-in-command) said: "Liu Li broke the law eleven times a day. His vassals were miserable. No one dared to approach him, and no one could dissuade him.

古文：愿令王，非耕、祠，法驾毋得出宫，尽出马置外苑，收兵杖藏私府，毋得以金钱财物假赐人。 
现代文：请皇上下令给梁王，非为耕耘、祭祀之事，车马不得出宫门，并将马都放在宫苑之外，兵器刑具收入府中，不得以金钱财物滥赐他人。 
English: Please ask the emperor to issue an order to King Liang, if it is not for cultivation or sacrifice, the chariots and horses must not leave the palace gate, and the horses must be placed outside the palace garden, the weapons and instruments of torture must be brought into the palace, and money and property must not be given to others.

古文：事下丞相、御史，请许。
现代文：事下丞相、御史，请皇上准奏。
English: The next in line, the prime minister and the minister of history, please report to the emperor.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇上准奏了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：后数复驱伤郎，夜私出宫。
现代文：可后来刘立还是数次打伤郎官，并在夜裹私自出宫。
English: But later, Liu Li still wounded his son-in-law several times, and left the palace at night.

古文：傅相连奏，坐削或千户或五百户，如是者数焉。
现代文：太傅、丞相接连奏本，因犯法有时被削一千户或五百户。如此反复数次。
English: The daifu and chojo successively recited the script, and sometimes one thousand or five hundred households were cut off for violating the law. This was repeated several times.

古文：荒王女弟园子为立舅任宝妻，宝兄子昭为立后。
现代文：荒王的妹妹园子是刘立舅舅任宝的妻子，任宝哥哥的女儿任昭是刘立的王后。
English: Arawang's sister Sonoko was the wife of Liu Li's uncle, Ren Bao, and Ren Zhao, the daughter of Ren Bao's brother, was Liu Li's queen.

古文：数过宝饮食，报宝曰： 我好翁主，欲得之。 
现代文：刘立数次去任宝家吃喝，对他说： 我喜欢公主，我要她。 
English: Liu Li went to Ren Bao's house several times to eat and drink, and said to him: I like the princess, I want her.

古文：宝曰： 翁主，姑也，法重。 
现代文：任实说： 公主是你姑妈，犯这法是重罪。 
English: Let's be honest: The princess is your aunt, and breaking this law is a felony.

古文：立曰： 何能为！ 
现代文：刘立说： 怎么会呢! 
English: Liu Li said: "How could this happen!

古文：遂与园子奸。
现代文：于是与园子通奸。
English: So she committed adultery with Sonoko.

古文：积数岁，永始中，相禹奏立对外家怨望，有恶言。
现代文：几年过去了，永始年间，丞相禹上奏说刘立怨恨外戚家，有恶言辱骂朝廷。
English: A few years later, during the Yongshi era, the chancellor Yu Shangso said that Liu Li resented his maternal relatives and abused the imperial court.

古文：有司案验，因发淫乱事，奏立禽兽行，请诛。
现代文：有司去查案，发现了刘立的淫乱之事，因此上奏说刘立行如禽兽，应当斩首。
English: An official went to investigate the case and found out about Liu Lixing's immorality, so the report said that Liu Lixing was like an animal and should be beheaded.

古文：太中大夫谷永上疏曰： 臣闻 礼，天子外屏，不欲见外 也。
现代文：太中大夫谷永上疏说： 臣听说 礼为天子屏风，天子行进其中。 
English: Tai Zhong Daifu Gu Yong Shang Zuo said: The minister heard that the ceremony is a screen for the heavenly son, and the heavenly son is marching in it.

古文：是故帝王之意，不窥人闺门之私，听闻中冓之言。
现代文：所以做帝王的不窥探他人房中之事，不偷听他人室内之言。
English: That's why emperors don't pry into other people's rooms or eavesdrop on their conversations.

古文：《春秋》为亲者讳。
现代文：《春秋》亦不言亲戚之间事。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is also about an affair between relatives.

古文：《诗》云 戚戚兄弟，莫远具尔 。今梁王年少，颇有狂病，始以恶言按验，既亡事实，而发闺门之私，非本章所指。
现代文：《诗经》上说 远近亲戚，多远也亲，梁王年少无知，有些狂妄，当初按恶言查办，如今既未查到事实根据，却去揭发什么闺门隐私，已经出了初查立案的范围了。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that no matter how close or distant relatives are, Liang Wang is young, ignorant, and somewhat arrogant. At the beginning, the investigation was carried out according to bad words, but now it has not found the factual basis, but to expose what kind of girlfriends' privacy, has gone beyond the scope of the initial investigation and filing.

古文：王辞又不服，猥强劾立，傅致难明之事，独以偏辞成罪断狱，亡益于治道。
现代文：梁王既声称不服，坚持弹劾他这件难以说清的事，根据一方之辞判罪定案，恐怕于皇上治国之道不利。
English: Since King Liang declared that he was not satisfied and insisted on impeaching him over this hard-to-explain matter, and the case was convicted based on the resignation of one side, I am afraid that it is unfavorable to the emperor's way of governing the country.

古文：污蔑宗室，以内乱之恶披布宣扬于天下，非所以为公族隐讳，增朝廷之荣华，昭圣德之风化也。
现代文：辱没宗室门庭，将内乱之恶公布张扬于天下，不能够为宗族保声名，为朝廷增光彩，为皇室添德辉。
English: It is not possible to preserve the reputation of the clan, add luster to the imperial court, and add virtue to the royal family by humiliating the family gate and publicizing the evil of the civil war.

古文：臣愚以为王少，而父同产长，年齿不伦；梁国之富，足以厚聘美女，招致妖丽；父同产亦有耻辱之心。
现代文：臣认为梁王岁数小，他父亲的亲姐姐岁数大，二者年龄不相称；梁国也很富，有足够的钱聘纳美女，招来佳人；况且他姑姑也会有耻辱之心。
English: The minister thought that Liang Wang was too young and his father's sister was too old, and the two were not age-appropriate; Liang Guo was also very rich and had enough money to hire beautiful women and attract beautiful women; moreover, his aunt would also have a sense of shame.

古文：案事者乃验问恶言，何故猥自发舒？
现代文：办案的人本来是要查犯上恶言的，为什么要找出这么一件事来查?
English: The person handling the case was originally going to investigate the perpetrator of the bad words, why find out such a thing to investigate?

古文：以三者揆之，殆非人情，疑有所迫切，过误失言，文吏蹑寻，不得转移。
现代文：从以上三点来看，此事不合常情。我怀疑梁王不过是在紧迫情况下，失口说出了两句错话。
English: Judging from the above three points, this matter is not normal. I suspect that Liang Wang was just in an urgent situation and blurted out two wrong words.

古文：萌牙之时，加恩勿治，上也。
现代文：如果有司属下官员继续追根问底，将不利于其自新。错误才发生时，给予关怀而不是制裁是上策。
English: If some subordinate officials continue to dig up the roots, it will be detrimental to their self-improvement. When mistakes occur, it is best to give care rather than sanctions.

古文：既已案验举宪，宜及王辞不服，诏廷尉选上德通理之吏，更审考清问，著不然之效，定失误之法，而反命于下吏，以广公族附疏之德，为宗室刷污乱之耻，甚得治亲之谊。 
现代文：既然案件现在已查结，应考虑到梁王不服之辞，让廷尉选一名品德好通情理的官员，进一步查问，以纠正不当、不实之处，再将清白的事实说明交给有司，则可扬皇族亲戚美德，去宗室污秽耻辱，很好地处理这事。 
English: Since the case has now been investigated and concluded, it should be considered that King Liang's words of non-conformity should be taken into account, and the courtier should select an official with good moral character and reasonableness, further investigate to correct the improper and untruthful points, and then submit a clear statement of facts to the judge, then the virtue of the royal relatives can be promoted, go to the ancestral room of filth and shame, and deal with the matter well.

古文：天子由是寝而不治。
现代文：天子因此不治梁王之罪。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven did not punish King Liang.

古文：居数岁，元延中，立复以公事怨相掾及睢阳丞，使奴杀之，杀奴以灭口。
现代文：几年后，元延年间，刘立又因公事恨丞相属官与睢阳丞，就派奴仆杀了他们，又杀了奴仆以灭口。
English: A few years later, during the Yuan and Yan dynasties, Liu Li also hated the subordinate officials of the prime minister and Shanyang for official business, so he sent his slaves to kill them, and then killed the slaves to silence them.

古文：凡杀三人，伤五人，手驱郎吏二十余人。
现代文：这次共杀了三人，伤了五人，打了郎官二十多人。
English: This time, three people were killed, five were injured, and more than twenty retainers were beaten.

古文：上书不拜奏。
现代文：上书不拜奏。
English: There will be no reading before the recital.

古文：谋篡死罪囚。
现代文：谋篡死罪囚。
English: Conspiracy to commit capital murder.

古文：有司请诛，上不忍，削立五县。
现代文：有司奏请将他斩首，皇上不忍，衹削掉了梁国五个县。
English: The emperor could not bear it, so he cut off five counties of Liang Province.

古文：哀帝建平中，立复杀人。
现代文：哀帝建平年间，刘立又杀人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianping, Liu Li went on a killing spree.

古文：天子遣廷尉赏、大鸿鼐由持节即讯。
现代文：天子派廷尉赏、大鸿胪由奉旨专程去查问。
English: Tianzi sent Tingyi to reward, and Dahongyu made a special trip to inquire.

古文：至，移书傅、相、中尉曰： 王背策戒，悖暴妄行，连犯大辟，毒流吏民。
现代文：他们到达后，告诉太傅、丞相、中尉说： 梁王背弃了封王时的诫令，妄行暴虐，连犯死罪，坑害宫民。
English: When they arrived, they told the daifu, the chancellor, and the lieutenant: "King Liang has abandoned the commandment when he was crowned king, he has committed wanton violence, he has even committed the crime of death, and he has harmed the palace people.

古文：比比蒙恩，不伏重诛，不思改过，复贼杀人。
现代文：皇上多次开恩，未加严惩。但梁王不思悔过白新，却再次杀人。
English: The emperor repeatedly showed his gratitude and did not impose a severe punishment. However, Liang Wang did not repent of Bai Xin, but killed again.

古文：幸得蒙恩，丞相长史、大鸿胪丞即问。
现代文：今皇上又开恩，让丞相长史、大鸿胪丞来此审问。
English: Now the emperor has been kind enough to let the prime minister, Nagashi, and the chancellor, Taihong, come here for questioning.

古文：王阳病抵谰，置辞骄嫚，不首主令，与背畔亡异。
现代文：然而梁王却装病抵赖，言辞傲慢，不低头认罪，就法令来说与背叛无异。
English: However, Liang Wang pretended to be ill and denied it, his words were arrogant, and he did not bow his head and plead guilty. In terms of laws and regulations, it was no different from betrayal.

古文：丞相、御史请收王玺绶，送陈留狱。
现代文：请丞相、御史收起梁王玉玺，将他送到陈留狱中去。
English: I would like to ask the Minister of Justice and the Minister of History to arrest Liang Wang Yuxuan and send him to Chenliu Prison.

古文：明诏加恩，复遣廷尉、大鸿胪杂问。
现代文：皇上有特殊恩惠。还要派廷尉、大鸿胪去审问。
English: The emperor has a special favor. He will also send a courtier and a great giant to interrogate him.

古文：今王当受诏置辞，恐复不首实对。
现代文：现在梁王理当据旨招供，恐怕他又不肯从实招供了。
English: Now that Liang Wangli has confessed according to his intention, I am afraid that he is not willing to confess truthfully.

古文：《书》曰： 至于再三，有不用，我降尔命。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 我教你多次了，你还是不行，我就要取你的性命了。 
English: "Weekly Shoshu" said: I've taught you many times, but you still can't do it, I'm going to take your life.

古文：傅、相、中尉皆以辅正为职， 虎兕出于匣，龟玉毁于匮中，是谁之过也？ 书到，明以谊晓王。
现代文：太傅、丞相、中尉都应当忠于职守，扶正压邪。 老虎逃出笼子，珠宝毁于柜中，是谁的过错引起的，皇上旨意在此，对梁王晓以大义。
English: The daifu, the chancellor, and the lieutenant should all be loyal to their duties and suppress evil; the tiger escaped from the cage, the jewels were destroyed in the cabinet, who caused the fault, the emperor's will is here, and he is righteous towards Liang Wangxiao.

古文：敢复怀诈，罪过益深。
现代文：如若再有不忠背叛行为，那可就罪加一等了。
English: If there is another act of disloyalty and betrayal, then the crime will be increased.

古文：傅、相以下，不能辅导，有正法。 
现代文：太傅、丞相及其手下，如不能辅助梁王走正道，也要正法。 
English: Taifu, chancellor and their subordinates, if they cannot help Liang Wang walk the right path, they should also rectify the law.

古文：立惶恐，免冠对曰： 立少失父母，孤弱处深宫中，独与宦者婢妾居，渐渍小国之俗，加以质性下愚，有不可移之姿。
现代文：刘立害怕起来，脱下帽子回答说： 我很小就失去了父母，孤孤单单地活在深宫中，衹与宦官、婢女们住在一起，慢慢养成了不良习惯，加上智力低下，达到无法聪明起来的地步。
English: Liu Li was scared and took off his hat to answer: I lost my parents when I was very young, and I lived alone in a deep palace, living with eunuchs and maids, and slowly developed bad habits, coupled with low intelligence, to the point where I couldn't become smart.

古文：往者傅、相亦不纯以仁谊辅翼立，大臣皆尚苛刻，刺求微密。
现代文：这些年来太傅、丞相也不单单用仁义来辅助我，大臣们又比较挑剔，喜欢刺探我的秘密。
English: Over the years, grand masters and prime ministers have not only assisted me with benevolence and righteousness, but the ministers are also more picky and like to pry into my secrets.

古文：谗臣在其间，左右弄口，积使上下不和，更相眄伺。宫殿之里，毛氂过失，亡不暴陈。
现代文：这些人中间又有谗臣，专门搬弄是非，致使如今上下不和，互相窥视，宫廷裹些微过失，也会传出门去。
English: Among these people, there are also courtiers who specialise in stirring up trouble, as a result of which there is now discord between the upper and lower echelons, who spy on each other, and minor faults in the court are also reported.

古文：当伏重诛，以视海内，数蒙圣恩，得见贳赦。
现代文：我本当认罪受斩，以平天下，有幸蒙皇上多次开恩，获得赦免。
English: I truly confessed and was beheaded, and with the whole world at peace, I was fortunate enough to receive the emperor's favor many times and was pardoned.

古文：今立自知贼杀中郎曹将，冬月迫促，贪生畏死，即诈僵仆阳病，侥幸得逾于须臾。
现代文：现在我又杀了中郎手下的副将。因为知道冬天行刑之日即将来临，贪生怕死，便装病不起，想侥幸多活几天。
English: Now I've killed the vice-commander of Zhong Lang's men again, because I know that the day of the winter execution is approaching, I'm greedy for life and afraid of death, so I'm pretending to be sick, hoping to live a few more days.

古文：谨以实对，伏须重诛。 
现代文：这裹我已把实情告诉你们了，认罪待诛。 
English: Now that I've told you the truth, I'm ready to plead guilty.

古文：时冬月尽，其春大赦，不治。
现代文：那时冬天过完了，第二年春天皇上又大赦，因此梁王未被治罪。
English: At that time, the winter was over, and in the spring of the following year, the emperor granted an amnesty, so Liang Wang was not punished.

古文：元始中，立坐与平帝外家中山卫氏交通，新都侯王莽奏废立为庶人，徙汉中。
现代文：元始年间，刘立因为与平帝外祖父中山卫氏家往来，新都侯王莽奏请把刘立废为平民，并将他迁到汉中去。
English: At the beginning of the year, because Liu Lisi was in contact with the Zhongshan Wei family, the maternal grandfather of the Ping Emperor, the new capital lord Wang Mangso asked Liu Lisi to become a commoner and moved him to Hanzhong.

古文：立自杀。
现代文：刘立遂自杀。
English: Liu Li then committed suicide.

古文：二十七年，国除。
现代文：他在位二十七年后，封国被废除。
English: After twenty-seven years of his reign, the feudal state was abolished.

古文：后二岁，莽白太皇太后立孝王玄孙之曾孙沛郡卒史音为梁王，奉孝王后。
现代文：过了两年，王莽禀告太皇太后封耋王玄孙的曾孙适型的小官员型童为銮王，以继茎王宗祠。
English: Two years later, Wang Mang announced that the great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson

古文：莽篡，国绝。
现代文：王差篡位后，凿迩又一次被废除。
English: After Wang Zha usurped the throne, the gong was once again abolished.

古文：赞曰：梁孝王虽以爱亲故王膏腴之地，然会汉家隆盛，百姓殷富，故能殖其货财，广其宫室车服。
现代文：赞日：梁孝王虽然因与皇帝最亲而封得肥沃之地，又遇上汉朝兴盛，百姓富裕，才得以收敛大批财物，扩建宫殿，建造华车美服。
English: Praise: Although King Liang Xiao Wang was given a fertile land due to being the closest relative to the emperor, and the Han Dynasty flourished and the people were rich, he was able to accumulate a large number of assets, expand the palace, and build a luxury car.

古文：然亦僣矣。
现代文：然而他也太超越制度了。
English: But he was also too outside the system.

古文：怙亲亡厌，牛祸告罚，卒用忧死，悲夫！
现代文：仗着至亲关系贪得无厌，受到怪牛的不吉祥谴告，终于担忧而死，真可悲啊!
English: He became insatiably greedy on the strength of his kinship, received an unlucky reprimand from a strange cow, and finally died of worry. How sad!

