古文：世忠驻镇江，金人与刘豫合兵分道入侵。
现代文：原文南宋的名将韩世忠镇守镇江的时候，金人和刘豫合兵分路入侵。
English: When Han Shizhong, the famous general of the Southern Song Dynasty, was guarding the Zhenjiang River, Jin and Liu Yuehai invaded separately.

古文：帝手札命世忠饬守备，图进取，辞旨恳切。
现代文：宋高宗亲笔下诏，命令韩世忠严加防备，并希望韩世忠能够进取。
English: Song Gaozong personally issued an edict, ordering Han Shizhong to be on high alert, and hoped that Han Shizhong would be able to advance.

古文：世忠遂自镇江渡师，俾统制解元守高邮，候金步卒；亲提骑兵驻大仪，当敌骑。
现代文：诏书言辞恳切动人，韩世忠于是从镇江亲自率军渡江，除了命令统制官解元防守高邮，抵御金人的步兵之外，自己则亲自率领骑兵驻守大仪，抵挡金人的骑兵。
English: Han Shizhong personally led the army from Zhenjiang to cross the river, and in addition to ordering the commander-in-chief to defend Gaoyuan and resist Jinren's infantry, he personally led the cavalry to guard the Great Ceremony and resist Jinren's cavalry.

古文：伐木为栅。自断归路，会遣魏良臣使金，世忠撤炊爨，绐良臣： 有诏移屯守江。 
现代文：韩世忠让人砍伐树木做成栅栏，阻断自己军队的后退之路，以坚定士兵奋勇杀敌的决心。恰好遇到魏良臣奉命出使金国，于是立即下令撤去炊爨，骗魏良臣说： 有诏书命令部队移驻防守长江。 
English: Han Shizhong had people cut down trees to make a fence to block the retreat of his army and to strengthen the determination of soldiers to kill the enemy. He happened to meet Wei Liangchen, who was ordered to dispatch Jin Guo, so he immediately ordered to remove the cooking pots. He lied to Wei Liangchen and said: There is an edict ordering the troops to move to defend the Yangtze River.

古文：良臣疾驰去，世忠度良臣已出境，而上马令军中曰： 视吾鞭所向。 
现代文：于是，魏良臣策马疾驰而去，韩世忠估算魏良臣已经离开边境之后，就上马对全军的士兵说： 注意看我的马鞭所指的方向。 
English: As a result, Wei Liangchen galloped away on his horse. Han Shizhong estimated that Wei Liangchen had already left the border, and said to the soldiers of the whole army: Pay attention to the direction indicated by my horse whip.

古文：于是引军至大仪，勒五阵，设伏二十余所，约闻鼓即起击。
现代文：于是让全军开到大仪地区，排列成了五个军阵，并在二十多个险要的地方埋伏了士卒，约定以鼓声为信号出击。
English: Therefore, he ordered the whole army to drive to the Daxi area, arranged into five army lines, and ambushed the soldiers in more than twenty critical places, agreeing to use the drum sound as a signal to attack.

古文：良臣至金军，金人问王师动息，具以所见对。
现代文：魏良臣到达金人的营地之后，金人询问魏良臣有关宋军部署的情形，魏良臣都一一据实回答了。
English: After Wei Liangchen arrived at Jinren's camp, Jinren asked Wei Liangchen about the deployment of the Song Army, and Wei Liangchen answered truthfully.

古文：聂儿孛堇闻世忠退，喜甚。
现代文：聂儿孛堇听说韩世忠退兵守江，十分高兴，率兵来到江口，距离大仪大约有五里路。
English: Hearing that Han Shizhong had withdrawn to guard the river, Zou Erqi was very happy. He led his soldiers to the mouth of the river, about five miles from the Great Hall.

古文：引兵至江口，距大仪五里，别将挞孛也引千骑过五阵东，世忠传小麾，鸣鼓，伏兵四起。
现代文：这时副将挞孛也率领一千名骑兵，正经过宋军五阵的东面。
English: At this time, Vice Admiral Zou also led a thousand cavalrymen and was passing through the eastern side of the Song Army's five fronts.

古文：旗色与金人旗杂出。金军乱，我军迭进，背嵬军各持长斧，上揕人胸，下斫马足。敌披重甲，陷泥淖，世忠麾劲骑四面蹂躏，人马俱毙，遂擒挞孛也等。
现代文：韩世忠传令小兵击鼓，埋伏的士兵蜂拥而出，宋军的旗帜和金人的旗帜混杂在了一起，金兵顿时方寸大乱，宋军乘胜发起猛烈的进攻，韩世忠更督令背嵬兵每人手持一把长斧，上刺人胸，下砍马脚，金兵身上穿着笨重的盔甲，陷在泥地里面，根本没有办法挥刀抵抗，这时韩世忠再命令精锐的骑兵从四面八方冲杀陷在泥地里的金兵，人马均亡，擒获了挞孛也等人。
English: Han Shizhong ordered the foot soldiers to play the drums, and the ambushed soldiers swarmed out. The flags of the Song Army and the Jin people were mixed together. The Jin soldiers were suddenly in chaos. The Song Army launched a fierce attack after the victory. Han Shizhong further ordered the dorsal soldiers to each hold a long axe, stab the chest, and cut the horse's feet. The Jin soldiers were wearing heavy armor and were stuck in the mud, and there was no way to wield a sword to resist. At this time, Han Shizhong ordered the elite cavalry to rush from all directions to kill the Jin soldiers stuck in the mud. All of them

