古文：北过北地富平县西，河侧有两山相对，水出其间，即上河峡也，世谓之为青山峡。
现代文：又往北流过北地郡富平县西边，河畔有两座山峰相对并峙，河水就从两山间流出一一这就是上河峡，世人称为青山峡。
English: It also flows northward through the west side of Fuping County, Beidi County. There are two peaks on the river bank, which are opposite and juxtaposed. The river water flows out from between the two mountains - this is the Upper River Gorge, known to the world as the Aoyama Gorge.

古文：《地理志》，浑怀都尉治塞外者也。
现代文：河水穿过山峡北流，往东分出一条支流。河水又往北流经富平县旧城西边，秦时设置北部都尉，治所就在这座县城。
English: The river flows through the northern stream of the mountain gorge, and a tributary flows out to the east. The river also flows north through the west of the old city of Fuping County. When the Qin Dynasty was in power, the northern capital was set up, and the seat of government was in this county seat.

古文：太和初，二齐平，徙历下民居此，遂有历城之名矣。南去北地三百里。
现代文：王莽称郡为威戎，县名持武。建武年间初年，平定了三齐，把历下的百姓迁到这里来居住，因而有了历城这地名，这里南距北地三百里。
English: Wang Mang called the county Wei Rong, and the name of the county was Jiwu. In the first year of the Jianwu era, he leveled Sanqi and moved the people of Licheng to live here, thus giving rise to the name of Licheng, which is three hundred miles south of the north.

古文：河水又东北历石崖山西，去北地五百里。
现代文：河水又往东北流经石崖山西边，山离北地五百里。
English: The river then flows northeast through the western side of Shiyan Mountain, which is 500 miles to the north.

古文：山石之上，自然有文，尽若虎马之状，粲然成著，类似图焉，故亦谓之画石山也。
现代文：山间的岩石上，有天然形成的纹理，形状都像虎和马，轮廓分明，像是画成一般，所以又叫画石山。
English: On the rocks between the mountains, there are naturally formed textures, all shaped like tigers and horses, with distinct contours, as if they were painted, so they are also called painted stone mountains.

古文：又北过朔方临戎县西，河水东北径三封县故城东。
现代文：又往北流过朔方郡临戎县西边，河水往东北流经三封县老城东边。
English: It also flows north through the west side of Lin Rong County, Shuofang County, and flows northeast through the east side of the old town of Sanfeng County.

古文：汉武帝元狩三年置。
现代文：三封县置于汉武帝元狩三年。
English: Sanfeng County was placed under Hanwu Emperor Yuan's control for three years.

古文：《十三州志》曰：在临戎县西百四十里。
现代文：《十三州志》说：三封县在临戎县西一百四十里。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: Sanfeng County is one hundred and forty miles west of Lin Rong County.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，开朔方郡县，即西部都尉治。
现代文：河水又往北流经临戎县老城西边。临戎县置于元朔五年开拓朔方郡，县城就是西部都尉治所。
English: The river then flows north through the west side of the old town of Linjong County. Linjong County is located in the pioneering Shuofang County in the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo era, and the county seat is the western governor's residence.

古文：有道，自县西北出鸡鹿塞，王莽更郡曰沟搜，县曰极武。
现代文：那里有一条路，从县城西北通出鸡鹿塞。王莽把郡名改为沟搜，县名改为极武。
English: There is a road leading from the northwest of the county seat to Chiluxai. Wang Meng changed the county name to Gousou, and the county name to Jiwu.

古文：其水积而为屠申泽，泽东西百二十里。
现代文：河水溢出后积聚成屠申泽，这片沼泽东西广达一百二十里。
English: After the overflowing of the river, it accumulated into a swamp. This swamp is as wide as 120 miles from east to west.

古文：故《地理志》曰：屠申泽在县东。即是泽也。
现代文：《地理志》说：屠申泽在县东，指的就是此泽。
English: "Geography" said: Tu Shenze is in the east of the county, referring to this lake.

古文：阚駰谓之窳浑泽矣。
现代文：阐胭则称为廊浑泽。
English: Elucidation is called corridor muddiness.

古文：屈从县北东流，河水又屈而东流，为北河。
现代文：从县北转弯东流，河水又转弯东流，这就是北河。
English: From the north of the county, the river turns to the east, and the river turns to the east again. This is the North River.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，大将军卫青绝梓岭，梁北河是也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年，大将军卫青越过梓岭，在北河造桥。
English: In the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, General Wei Qing crossed the Zi Ling and built a bridge over the Beichuan River.

古文：东径高阙南。
现代文：北河往东流经高网南边。
English: The North River flows eastward through the southern part of Gao Netting.

古文：《史记》，赵武灵王既袭胡服，自代并阴山下，至高阙为塞。
现代文：《史记》载，赵武灵王采用胡人服装以后，从代沿着阴山脚下直到高网，都建了要塞。
English: According to the "Histories," after King Zhao Wuling adopted the Hu people's clothing, fortresses were built from generation to generation along the foot of the gloomy mountains up to Gao Net.

古文：即状表目，故有高阙之名也。自闭北出荒中，阙口有城，跨山结局，谓之高阙戍。
现代文：山下有长城，长城旁边，连绵的山脉高插云天，中间有个：断口，在两岸巍然耸立，多有云雾缭绕，望去就像宫胭似的，以形状取名，所以叫高网。从高网往北去荒中，胭口有一座城，跨山构筑，称为高胭戍。
English: There is the Great Wall at the foot of the mountain. Next to the Great Wall, there are continuous mountains high in the sky. In the middle, there is a cleft. It stands tall on both sides, and is often surrounded by clouds and fog. It looks like a mirage. It is named after its shape, which is why it is called Gao Netting. From Gao Netting to the north, in the middle of the desert, there is a city at the entrance, built across the mountains, called Gao Netting.

古文：自古迄今，常置重捍，以防塞道。
现代文：从古代直到今天，常在城内驻扎重兵守卫，以守备边塞的要道。
English: From ancient times to the present day, heavy guards have often been stationed in the city to guard the important roads of the frontier fortress.

古文：汉元朔四年，卫青将十万人，败右贤王于高阙。
现代文：汉朝元朔四年前，卫青率领了十万大军，在高网打败了右贤王，就是这地方。
English: Four years before the founding of the Han Dynasty, Wei Qing led a hundred thousand-strong army and defeated King Uxian at Gao Netting. This is the place.

古文：即此处也。河水又东径临河县故城北。
现代文：河水又往东流经临河县旧城北边。
English: The river then flows east through the northern part of the old town of Linhe County.

古文：汉武帝元朔三年，封代恭王子刘贤为侯国，王莽之监河也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔三年，把这里封给代恭王的儿子刘贤，立为侯国；这就是王莽的监河。
English: In the third year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, this place was given to Liu Xian, the son of King Daigong, and he established it as a vassal state. This is Wang Mang's Supervision River.

古文：至河目县西，河水自临河县东径阳山南。
现代文：到河目县西边，河水从临河县往东流经阳山南麓。
English: To the west of Hemu County, the river flows from Linhe County to the east through the southern foot of Yangshan Mountain.

古文：《汉书注》曰：阳山在河北。
现代文：《汉书注》说：阳山在河北。
English: "Hanshu Annotation" says: Yangshan is in Hebei.

古文：指此山也。
现代文：指的就是这座山。
English: It refers to this mountain.

古文：东流径石迹阜西。
现代文：河水往东流过石迹阜西边。
English: The water of the river flows eastwards past the west side of the stone monument.

古文：是阜破石之文，悉有鹿马之迹，故纳斯称焉，南屈径柯目县，在北假中。
现代文：这座小山上的岩石，碎裂后露出的斑纹都有马、鹿的蹄痕，因而得名。河水转弯南流，从河目县旧城流过，县城在北假地带。
English: The rocks on this hill are named after the horse and deer hoofprints that appear in the fractures of the rocks. The river turns south and flows through the old town of Hamoku Prefecture, with the prefectural capital in the northern resort area.

古文：地名也。自高阙以东，夹山带河，阳山以往，皆北假也。
现代文：北假是个地名，从高网以东，沿河在两岸连山之间，直到阳山以远一带地方，都叫北假。
English: Beihuai is a place name. From the east of Gao'an, along the river between the mountains on both sides, to the area far from Yangshan, it is called Beihuai.

古文：《史记》曰秦使蒙恬将十万人，北击胡，度河取高阙据阳山北假中是也。
现代文：《史记》说：秦派蒙恬率领十万人马，北上攻打胡人，渡河夺取了高网，把守住阳山的北假。
English: "Historical Records" said: Qin sent Meng Xuan, led by a hundred thousand horses, to the north to attack the Hu people, crossed the river and captured Gao Net, and guarded the northern vacation of Yangshan.

古文：北河又南合南河。
现代文：北河又南流，与南河汇合。
English: The North River also flows south, merging with the South River.

古文：南河上承西河，东径临戎县故城北，又东径临河县南，又东径广牧县故城北。
现代文：南河上游承接西河，往东流经临戎县老城北边，又往东流经临河县南一边，又往东流过广牧县老城北边。
English: The upper reaches of the South River follow the West River, flowing eastward through the northern part of the old city of Lin Rong County, flowing eastward through the southern part of Linhe County, and flowing eastward through the northern part of the old city of Guangmu County.

古文：东部都尉治，王莽之盐官也。
现代文：老城是东部都尉治所，就是王莽的盐官。
English: The old city is the eastern governor's office, that is, Wang Mang's salt officer.

古文：径流二百许里，东会于河。
现代文：南河流了二百里左右路程，往东与河水相汇合。
English: The Nanhe River has traveled about two hundred miles and has merged with the river to the east.

古文：河水又南径马阴山西。
现代文：河水又往南流过马阴山西边。
English: The river then flows south through the western side of Mount Ma Yin.

古文：《汉书音义》曰：阳山在河北，阴山在河南。
现代文：《汉书音义》说：阳山在河北，阴山在河南。
English: "Hanshu Yinyi" says: Yangshan is in Hebei, Yinshan is in Henan.

古文：谓是山也，而即实不在河南。
现代文：说的就是这座山。但据实地核查，阴山却不在河南。
English: But according to on-the-spot verification, Yinshan is not in Henan.

古文：《史记音义》曰：五原安阳县北有马阴山。
现代文：《史记音义》说：五原安阳县北有马阴山。
English: "Historical Notes" says: There is Ma Yin Mountain in the north of Wuhan Anyang County.

古文：今山在县北，言阴山在河南，又传疑之，非也。
现代文：现在山在县北，却说是在河南，这又是存疑造成的错误。
English: Now the mountain is in the north of the county, but it is said to be in Henan, which is again a mistake caused by doubt.

古文：余案南河、北河及安阳县以南，悉沙阜耳，无他异山。故《广志》曰：朔方郡北移沙七所，而无山以拟之，是义、志之僻也，阴山在河东南则可矣。
现代文：我按南河、北河以及安阳县以南，都是沙丘，没有其他特别的山，所以《广志》说：朔方郡北部有流沙七处，却没有与此相当的山，这是《音义》、《广志》的偏见。说阴山在河水东南，倒还差不多。
English: According to the South River, the North River and south of Anyang County, they are all sand dunes, and there is no other special mountain, so "Guangzhi" said: There are seven places of quicksand in the northern part of Shuofang County, but there is no mountain equivalent to this. This is the prejudice of "Onyi" and "Guangzhi." It is almost the same to say that Yinshan is southeast of the river.

古文：河水又东南径朔方县故城东北，《诗》所谓城彼朔方也。
现代文：河水又往东南流经朔方县旧城东北。《诗》说：在那朔方筑城，说的就是这地方。
English: The river also flows southeast through the northeast of the old city of Shuofang County. "Poem" says: Build a city in that Shuofang, it is this place.

古文：汉元朔二年，大将军卫青取河南地为朔方郡，使校尉苏建筑朔方城，即此城也。
现代文：汉元朔二年前大将军卫青把河南那片地方立为朔方郡，派校尉苏建去筑朔方城，就是此城。
English: Two years ago, General Wei Qing of the Han Dynasty made that part of Henan into Shuofang County, and sent Captain Su Jian to build Shuofang City, which is this city.

古文：王莽以为武符者也。案《地理志》云：金连盐泽、青盐泽并在县南矣。
现代文：王莽则称为武符。按《地理志》说：金连盐泽、青盐泽都在县南。
English: Wang Mang is called Wu Fu. According to "Geography," Jinlian Yanzawa and Qingyanzawa are both in the south of the county.

古文：又案《魏土地记》曰：县有大盐池，其盐大而青白，名曰青盐。
现代文：又按《魏土地记》说：县里有个大盐池，池里的盐颗粒粗大而色泽青白，名叫青盐，又叫戎盐，可入药。
English: According to the "Diary of the Wei Dynasty," there is a large salt pond in the county. The salt particles in the pool are coarse and have a blue-white color. They are called blue salt and eun salt, and can be used as medicine.

古文：又名戎盐，入药分，汉置典盐官。
现代文：汉时设置典盐官。
English: During the Han Dynasty, a salt official was set up.

古文：池去平城宫千二百里，在新秦之中。
现代文：大盐池离平城宫一千二百里，在新秦一带。
English: The Great Salt Pond is 1,200 miles away from the Heijo Palace, in the area of Xinqin.

古文：服虔曰：新秦，地名，在北方千里。
现代文：服虔说：新秦是地名，在北面方圆千里。
English: Fuxian said: "New Qin is a place name, and it is a thousand miles to the north.

古文：如淳曰：长安以北，朔方以南也。
现代文：如淳说：在长安以北，朔方以南。
English: As Jun said: north of Chang'an, south of Shuofang.

古文：薛瓒曰：秦逐匈奴，收河南地，徙民以实之，谓之新秦也。
现代文：薛攒说：秦驱逐了匈奴，把河南一带纳入版图，并迁了一些百姓过去，以充实人口，称为新秦。
English: Xue Nan said: Qin expelled the Xiongnu, incorporated the Henan area into the territory map, and moved some people to the past to enrich the population, known as New Qin.

古文：屈南过五原西安阳县南，河水自朔方东转，径渠搜县故城北。
现代文：折向南方，流过五原都西安阳县南边，河水从朔方向东转弯，从渠搜县老城北边流过。
English: Turning to the south, it flows through the south of the Five Plains Capital Xi'an Yang County. The river turns east from the direction of Shuo and flows through the north of the old city of Duxuo County.

古文：《地理志》，朔方有渠搜县，中部都尉治，王莽之沟搜亭也。
现代文：按《地理志》，朔方有渠搜县，是中部都尉治所，就是王莽的沟搜亭。
English: According to the "Geography," there is a canal search county in Shuofang, which is the central governor's office, that is, Wang Mang's ditch search pavilion.

古文：《礼三朝记》曰：北发渠搜，南抚交趾。
现代文：《礼•三朝记》说：北方开发渠搜，南方安抚交趾。
English: "The Chronicle of the Three Dynasties" says: the north develops and explores, the south pacifies and befriends.

古文：此举北对南。《禹贡》之所云析支、渠搜矣。
现代文：这里把北方与南方相对并举，这也就是《禹贡》里所说的析支、渠搜。
English: Here, the north and the south are compared side by side, which is the branch analysis and channel search mentioned in "Yugong."

古文：河水又东，径西安阳县故城南，王莽更之曰漳安矣。
现代文：河水又往东流经西安阳县老城南边，王莽改名为漳安。
English: The river flowed eastward through the southern part of the old city of Xi'an Yang County, and Wang Mang was renamed Lu'an.

古文：河水又东，径田辟城南。
现代文：河水又往东流经田辟城南边。
English: The river then flows east through fields to the south of the city.

古文：《地理志》曰：故西部都尉治也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是旧时的西部都尉治所。
English: "Geography" said: This is the old western governor's office.

古文：屈东过九原县南，河水又东径成宜县故城南，王莽更曰文虏也。
现代文：折向东方，流过九原县南边，河水又往东流经成宜县老城南边，王莽改名为艾虏。
English: Turning to the east, the river flowed through the southern edge of Jiuyuan County, and the river flowed eastward through the southern edge of the old city of Chengyi County. Wang Mang was renamed Ai Rui.

古文：河水又东径原亭城南。
现代文：河水又往东流经原亭城南边。
English: The river then flows eastwards past the southern edge of the castle.

古文：阚駰《十三州志》曰：中部都尉治。
现代文：阐胭《十三州志》说：这是中部都尉治所。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: This is the Central Governor's Office.

古文：河水又东径宜梁县之故城南。
现代文：河水又往东流经宜梁县旧城南边。
English: The river then flows east through the southern part of the old city of Yiliang County.

古文：阚駰曰：五原西南六十里，今世谓之石崖城。
现代文：阐驹说：在五原西南六十里，现在人们称为石崖城。
English: "Sixty miles southwest of Wuhuan, people now call it Stone Cliff City.

古文：河水又东径稒阳城南，东部都尉治。又径河阴县故城北，又东径九原县故城南。秦始皇置九原郡，治此。汉武帝元朔二年，更名五原也。王莽之获降郡、成平县矣。
现代文：河水又往东流经稠阳城南边，这就是东部都尉治所；又从河阴县旧城北边流过，又往东流经九原县旧城南边，秦始皇设置九原郡，治所就在这里；汉武帝元朔二年，改名为五原，也就是王莽的获降郡成平县。
English: The river also flows eastward through the south side of Chouyang City, which is the eastern governor's office; it also flows from the north side of the old city of Heyin County and flows eastward through the south side of the old city of Jiuyuan County. Qin Shihuang set up Jiuyuan County, and the governor's office is here; in the second year of Emperor Hanwu, it was renamed Wuhan, that is, Wang Mang's demoted county Chengping County.

古文：西北接对一城，盖五原县之故城也，王莽之填河亭也。
现代文：老城西北与一城相对，大概是五原县老城，也就是王莽的填河亭。
English: In the northwest of the old city, opposite the first city, is probably the old city of Wuhuan County, that is, Wang Mang's reclamation pavilion.

古文：《竹书纪年》，魏襄王十七年，邯郸命吏大夫奴迁于九原，又命将军大夫通子戍吏，皆貉服矣。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：魏襄王十七年前，邯郸朝廷命令吏大夫的奴仆迁居到九原，又命令将军大夫的嫡子和驻防边境的官吏，都穿上胡人的服装。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Seventeen years before the reign of King of Wei and Xiang, the Han court ordered the servants of the doctor to move to Jiuyuan, and ordered the doctor's son-in-law and the officials stationed at the border to wear Hu costumes.

古文：其城南面长河，北背连山，秦始皇逐匈奴，并河以东，属之阴山，筑亭障为河上塞。
现代文：老城南对长河，北依连山。秦始皇驱逐了匈奴，傍着河水东岸修筑保垒，与阴山连成一线，成为河上的要塞。
English: The old city faces the Yangtze River to the south and Mount Ili to the north. Qin Shihuang drove out the Xiongnu and built a protective barrier along the east bank of the river, linking it with the Yin Mountains and becoming a fortress on the river.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：阴山在五原北。
现代文：徐广《史记音义》说：阴山在五原以北。
English: Xu Guang's "History of Music" said: The Yin Mountains are north of the Wuhuan Mountains.

古文：即此山也。始皇三十三年，起自临洮，东暨辽海，西并阴山，筑长城及开南越地，昼警夜作，民劳怨苦，故杨泉《物理论》曰：秦始皇使蒙恬筑长城，死者相属，民歌曰：生男慎勿举，生女哺用，不见长城下，尸骸相支拄。
现代文：所以杨泉《物理论》说：秦始皇派蒙恬修筑长城，到处躺满了死尸。
English: That's why Yang Quan said in "Theory of Physics," "Qin Shi Huang sent Meng Yao to build the Great Wall, and there were dead bodies everywhere.

古文：其冤痛如此矣。
现代文：民歌说：生儿你别去抚养，生女你喂她成长。
English: Folk song says: If you have a child, don't raise it. If you have a daughter, feed her to grow up.

古文：蒙恬临死曰：夫起临洮，属辽东，城堑万余里，不能不绝地脉，此固当死也。
现代文：你没看见长城下，遍地是尸骨纵横！百姓的怨恨痛苦，已经到了这地步蒙恬临死时说：从临挑开始直到辽东，筑城挖壕万余里，不可能不橱断地脉，这本来就该办死罪一了！
English: Don't you see that under the Great Wall, there are bones and corpses everywhere! The people's resentment and pain have reached such a level that, when he was about to die, he said, "From Lintai to Liaodong, it is impossible to build a city and dig trenches for thousands of miles without breaking the ground. This should have been a capital crime!"

古文：又东过临沃县南，王莽之振武也。
现代文：又往东流过临沃县南边，庙沃就是王莽的振武。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Linwo County. Miaowo is Wang Mang's Zhenwu.

古文：河水又东，枝津出焉。
现代文：河水又东流，分出一条支流。
English: The river also flows to the east, creating a tributary.

古文：芒干水又西南，径云中城北，白道中溪水注之，水发源武川北塞中，其水南流，径武川镇城。
现代文：河水又东流，石门水往南注入。石门水发源于石门山。《地理志》说：发源于北方的石门障，说的就是这座山。
English: The river also flows to the east, and the Shimen water is injected to the south. The Shimen water originates from the Shimen Mountain. "Geography" says: It originates from the northern Shimen barrier, which is this mountain.

古文：城以景明中筑，以御北狄矣。
现代文：从石门障往西北走就到光禄城。甘露三年为防御北狄而筑。
English: If you walk northwest from the stone gate barrier, you will reach Guanglu City. It was built three years ago to defend northern Di.

古文：其水西南流，历谷，径魏帝行宫东。世谓之阿计头殿。
现代文：水往西南流，穿过峡谷，流过魏帝行宫东边，世人称为阿计头殿。
English: The water flows to the southwest, through the canyon, and flows past the east side of the Wei Emperor's Palace, known to the world as the Atzhe Tousen.

古文：宫城在白道岭北阜上，其城圆角而不方，四门列观，城内惟台殿而已。
现代文：宫城在白道岭北边的山上，城角建成圆形，不是方方正正的；四座城门上高筑城楼，城内只有高台殿宇而已。
English: Miyagi is on the mountain on the north side of the Baidoa Ridge. The corner of the city is round, not square. The four gates are topped with high towers, and there are only high-rise buildings in the city.

古文：其水又西南历中溪，出山西南流，于云中城北，南注芒干水。
现代文：水又往西南流过中溪，出山后往西南流，在云中城以北往南注入芒干水。
English: The water then flows south-west across Zhongxi, flows south-west after leaving the mountains, and injects dry water north to south of Yunzhongcheng.

古文：芒干水又西，塞水出怀朔镇东北芒中，南流径广德殿西山下。
现代文：芒干水又西流，塞水发源于怀朔镇东北的芒中，往南流经广德殿西山下。
English: Meng dry water also flows westward. The blocked water originates in Mengzhong, northeast of Waishuo Town, and flows southward through Guangde Temple to the west of the mountain.

古文：余以太和十八年，从高祖北巡，届于阴山之讲武台，台之东，有高祖《讲武碑》，碑文是中书郎高聪之辞也。
现代文：我在太和十八年随从高祖到北方巡察，到了阴山的讲武台。台的东边有高祖《讲武碑》，碑文是中书郎高聪的手笔。
English: In the 18th year of the Taisho era, I accompanied Gaozu on an inspection tour to the north, and arrived at the lecture hall for martial arts in Yinshan. On the east side of the hall, there is Gaozu's "Lecture Hall for Martial Arts." The inscription was written by the Chinese scholar Gao Cong.

古文：自台西出南上山，山无树木，惟童阜耳，即广德殿所在也。
现代文：从台西出去，往南登山，山上没有树木，只是一座光山而已，广德殿就在那里。
English: Go out from the west of Taizhou and climb the mountain to the south. There are no trees on the mountain, it is just a mountain of light. Guangde Hall is right there.

古文：其殿四注两夏，堂字绮井，图画奇禽异兽之象。
现代文：殿宇四面披檐，两边有廊，厅堂内和藻井上都描绘奇禽异兽。
English: The four sides of the hall are covered with paintings, and there are corridors on both sides. Strange beasts and birds are depicted both inside the hall and above the moat.

古文：殿之西北，使得焜煌堂，雕楹镂桷，取状古之温室也。
现代文：宫殿西北是馄煌堂，楹柱方椽都精雕细琢，模仿古时的温室殿。
English: Northwest of the palace is the Hall of Splendour, with finely carved pillars and columns, imitating an ancient greenhouse.

古文：其时，帝幸龙荒，游鸾朔北。南秦王仇池杨难当舍著委诚，重译拜阙，陛见之所也。
现代文：当时高祖莺驾临幸朔北荒漠的边区，南秦王仇池杨难当撤去藩国称号前来投诚归顺，通过翻译来朝拜高祖，这就是他觑见的地方，所以取名广德殿。
English: At that time, Gao Zu's car drove to the border area of the northern desert of Xuanshuo. When the Southern Qin King Quchi Yang Nang removed the title of the domain, he came to surrender and worship Gao Zu through an interpreter. This was the place he overlooked, so he named it Guangde Hall.

古文：故殿以广德为名。魏太平真君三年，刻石树碑，勒宣时事，碑颂云：肃清帝道，振慑四荒。
现代文：魏太平真君三年刻石立碑，颂扬当时这件史事，碑文的颂词说：清除国内的祸害，威慑四境的边疆。
English: Wei Taiping Zhenjun carved a stone monument three years ago to celebrate this historical event at that time. The inscription's eulogy said: "Clear the domestic scourge, deter the four frontiers of the frontier."

古文：有蛮有戎，自彼氏羌，无思不服，重译稽颗。
现代文：无论是蛮戎各族，直到那西方的氏羌，无人不心悦诚服，携带翻译前来拜望。
English: No matter whether it was the barbarian tribes or the western clans, no one was offended and came to pay a visit with an interpreter.

古文：恂恂南秦，敛敛推亡，峨峨广德，奕奕焜煌。
现代文：南秦恭顺地俯首听命，敬畏地纳土请降。巍峨的广德殿，壮丽的馄煌堂！
English: The Southern Qin humbly bowed their heads and obeyed, bowing down in awe. The towering Guangde Hall, the magnificent magnificent hall!

古文：侍中、司徒东郡公崔浩之辞也。
现代文：这是侍中、司徒、东郡公崔浩的手笔。
English: This is the handwriting of the chamberlains, Sito, and Higashigunko Choiho.

古文：碑阴题宣城公李孝伯、尚书卢逻等从巨姓名，若新镂焉。
现代文：碑的背面题着宣城公李孝伯、尚书卢遐等随从大臣的姓名，仿佛新刻的一样。
English: The back of the monument is inscribed with the names of the attendant ministers such as Xuancheng Li Xiao Bo and Shangshu Lu Yao, as if they were newly carved.

古文：其水历谷南出山，西南入芒干水。
现代文：塞水经过山谷南端出山，往西南注入芒干水。
English: The dammed water passes through the southern end of the valley out of the mountain, and the dry manganese water is injected into the southwest.

古文：芒干水又西南注沙陵湖，湖水西南入于河。
现代文：芒干水又往西南流，注入沙陵湖，湖水往西南注入大河。
English: The dry manganese water flows to the southwest and is injected into the Saling Lake, and the lake water is injected into the large river to the southwest.

古文：河水南入桢陵县西北，缘胡山，历沙南县东北，两山、二县之间而出。
现代文：河水往•南流进祯陵县西北，沿着胡山，流经沙南县东北，从二县的两山之间流出。
English: The river flows southward into the northwest of Fuling County, along Hu Mountain, flows through the northeast of Shannan County, and flows out between the two mountains of the two counties.

古文：余以太和中为尚书郎，从高祖北巡，亲所径涉。
现代文：我在太和年间当尚书郎，随从高祖到北方巡察，那一带是我亲身经历过的地方。
English: I was a calligrapher in Taichung during the Taichung era, and I followed Gaozu to the north to inspect the area, which I experienced firsthand.

古文：县在山南，王莽之槙陆也，北去云中城一百二十里。
现代文：县城在山南，就是王莽的棋陆，北距云中城一百二十里。
English: The county seat is in Shannan, which is Wang Mang's hometown, 120 miles north of Yunzhong.

古文：县南六十许里。有东、西大山，山西枕河，河水南流，脉水寻《经》，殊乖川去之次，似非关究也。
现代文：县南六十里左右，有两座大山东西对峙，山的西边临河，河水往南流。按照水脉来核对经文，其中记述川流经过之地，次序却颇不相符，似乎是风马牛不相及的。
English: About sixty miles south of the county, there are two large mountains facing east and west, the west side of the mountain is adjacent to the river, and the river flows to the south. Check the scriptures according to the water vein, which describes the place where the river flows, but the order does not quite match, it seems to be different.

古文：又南过赤城东，又南过定襄桐过县西，定襄郡，汉高帝六年置，王莽之得降也。
现代文：又往南流过赤城东边，又往南流过定襄郡桐过县西边，定襄郡是在汉高帝六年设置，就是王莽的得降。
English: It also flows southward past the east side of Akagi, and southward past the west side of Dingxiang County. Dingxiang County was set up in the sixth year of Emperor Gao, which was Wang Mang's demotion.

古文：桐过县，王莽更名椅桐者也。
现代文：桐过县，王莽改名为椅桐。
English: In Tongxian County, Wang Mang changed his name to Tong.

古文：河水于二县之间，济有君子之名。
现代文：河水在二县中间的一段，有个渡口叫君嚼子济。
English: In a section of the river between the two counties, there is a ferry called the Junjiazi River.

古文：皇魏桓帝十一年，西幸榆中，东行代地，洛阳大贾，赍金货随帝后行，夜迷失道，往投津长曰：子封送之。
现代文：皇魏桓帝十一年，皇上西行到榆中视察，往东去代郡各地巡行。洛阳有个大商人带了钱币货物跟在后面，夜间迷了路，去投宿于渡口津长处。津长名叫子封，送他过河。
English: In the eleventh year of Emperor Wei Huan, the emperor went west to Luozhong to inspect, and went east to parade around the county. A great merchant from Luoyang followed behind with money and goods. He lost his way at night and went to stay at the crossing of Tsunaga. Tsunaga's name was Zifeng, and he sent him across the river.

古文：渡河，贾人卒死，津长埋之。
现代文：不料商人暴病而死，津长把他埋葬了。
English: Unexpectedly, the merchant died of a violent illness, and Tsunaga buried him.

古文：其子寻求父丧，发冢举尸，资囊一无所损。
现代文：商人的儿子来寻父亲的遗体，掘开坟墓，抬出尸体，所带的行李财货丝毫没有损失。
English: The merchant's son came to look for his father's body, dug up the grave, and carried out the body. His luggage and goods were not damaged at all.

古文：其子悉以金与之，津长不受。
现代文：商人的儿子把所有的金银都赠送给津长，津长却不接受。
English: The merchant's son presented all the gold and silver to Tsunaga, but Tsunaga did not accept it.

古文：事闻于帝，帝曰：君子也。
现代文：这件事传到皇帝那边，皇帝说：真是一位君子！
English: The matter was reported to the emperor, who said: "What a gentleman!

古文：即名其津为君子济。
现代文：于是就把渡口取名为君子济。
English: As a result, the ferry crossing was named the Gentleman's Ferry.

古文：济在云中城西南二百余里。
现代文：渡头在云中城西南二百余里。
English: Watanabe is more than two hundred miles southwest of Yunzhong.

古文：河水又东南，左合一水，水出契吴东山，西径故里南，北俗谓之契吴亭。
现代文：河水又往东南流，在左边汇合了一条水。这条水发源于契吴的东山，往西流经旧时乡里的南边，北方俗称契吴亭。
English: The water of the river flows to the southeast, and on the left there is a confluence of water. This water originates from the eastern mountains of Qiu, and flows westward through the southern part of the old township. In the north, it is commonly known as Qiu Ting.

古文：其水又西流注于河。
现代文：水又西流，注入河水。
English: The water also flows west, injecting river water.

古文：河水又南，树颓水注之，水出东山西南流，右合中陵川水，水出中陵县西南山下，北俗谓之大浴真山，水亦取名焉。东北流，径中陵县故城东，北俗谓之北右突城。王莽之遮害也。
现代文：河水又南流，有树颓水注入。树颓水发源于东山，往西南流，右边汇合中陵川水。川水发源于中陵县西南山下，北方俗称大浴真山，水也叫大浴真水，往东北流经中陵县老城东边，北方俗称北右突城，就是王莽的遮害。
English: The river also flows to the south, with tree sap water being injected. The tree sap water originates in Dongshan, flows to the southwest, and merges with the Zhongling River water on the right. The river water originates in the southwest of Zhongling County, commonly known as Dayu Zhenshan in the north, and the water is also called Dayu Zhen water. It flows to the northeast through the east of the old city of Zhongling County, commonly known as the north right city, which is the shelter of Wang Mang.

古文：《十三州志》曰：善无县南七十五里有中陵县，世祖建武二十五年置。
现代文：《十三州志》说：善无县南七十五里有中陵县，世祖建武二十五年置。
English: "The History of the Thirteen States" said: In the south seventy-five of Zhenwu County, there is Zhongling County, and the ancestor Jianwu was placed in the top twenty-five.

古文：其水又西北，右合一水，水出东山，北俗谓之贷敢山，水又受名焉。
现代文：川水又往西北流，右边汇合了一条水，这条水发源于东山，北方俗称贷敢山，水也叫贷敢水。
English: The water of the river flows to the northwest, and a stream of water is joined on the right. This water originates from Dongshan Mountain, commonly known as Guizang Mountain in the north, and the water is also called Guizang Water.

古文：其水西北流，注于中陵水。
现代文：水往西北流，注入中陵水。
English: The water flows to the northwest, injecting Zhongling water.

古文：中陵水又西北流，径善无县故城西。王莽之阴馆也。
现代文：中陵水又往西北流经善无县老城西边，就是王莽的阴馆。
English: The Zhongling River also flows northwest through the west side of the old city of Zhenwu County, which is Wang Mang's house of the dead.

古文：《十三州志》曰：旧定襄郡治。《地理志》，雁门郡治。
现代文：《十三州志》说：这是旧时定襄郡的治所，按《地理志》，是雁门郡的治所。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Prefectures" said: This is the seat of the former Dingxiang County. According to "The History of Geography," it is the seat of the Ganmen County.

古文：其水又西北流，右会一水。
现代文：水又往西北流，右边汇合了一条水。
English: The water flowed to the northwest, and a stream of water merged on the right.

古文：水出东山下，北俗谓之吐文水，山又取名焉。
现代文：这条水发源于东山脚下，北方俗称吐文水，山也叫吐文山。
English: This water originates from the foot of the East Mountain, commonly known as Tuwen Water in the north, and the mountain is also called Tuwen Mountain.

古文：北流径锄亭南，又西流径土壁亭南，西出峡，左入中陵水，中陵水又北分为二水，一水东北流，谓之沃水。又东径沃阳县故城南，北俗谓之可不埿城，王莽之敬阳也。
现代文：水往北流经锄亭南边，又往西流经土壁亭南边，西流出峡，在左边注入中陵水。中陵水又北流，分成两条，一条往东北流，叫沃水；又往东流经沃阳县老城南边，北方俗称可不堡城，就是王莽的敬阳。
English: The water flows to the north through the south side of the pavilion, flows to the west through the south side of the earth wall pavilion, flows out of the gorge to the west, and injects the Zhongling water on the left. The Zhongling water also flows to the north, divided into two, one flows to the northeast, called the Woshui; it also flows to the east through the south of the old city of Woyang County, and the north is commonly known as the castle city, that is, Wang Mang's Jingyang.

古文：又东北径沃阳城东，又东合可不埿水，水出东南六十里山下，西北流注沃水。
现代文：又往东北流经沃阳城东边，又往东与可不堡水汇合。这条水发源于东南六十里的山下，往西北流，注入沃水。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the eastern side of Woyang City, and to the east it merges with the Kobu Castle Water. This water originates at the foot of the mountain, sixty miles southeast, and flows to the northwest, injecting Woyang Water.

古文：沃水又东，径参合县南。
现代文：沃水又往东流经参合县南边。
English: The fertile water also flows eastward through the southern part of Sanhe County.

古文：魏因参合陉以即名也。北俗谓之仓鹤陉。道出其中，亦谓之参合口。
现代文：参合县是魏国依参合隆而命名的，北方俗称仓鹤隆，有路从中间通过，那地方也叫参合口。
English: Sanghe County was named after Sanghe Long in the Wei Dynasty. The northern part is commonly known as Canghe Long, and there is a road passing through the middle. That place is also called Sanghegou.

古文：陉在县之西北，即《燕书》所谓太子宝自河西还师参合，三军奔溃，即是处也。
现代文：这个山口在县城西北，《燕书》中所谓太子宝从河西领兵回到参合，三军溃散奔逃，说的就是这地方。
English: This mountain pass is in the northwest of the county seat. In the "Book of Swallows," the so-called prince Bao led the troops from Hexi back to Senghe, and the three armies scattered and fled. This is the place mentioned.

古文：魏立县以隶凉城郡，西去沃阳县故城二十里。
现代文：魏国立为县，隶属于凉城郡，西距沃阳县老城二十里。
English: Wei Guozhong is a county, belonging to Liangcheng County, 20 miles west of the old city of Woyang County.

古文：县北十里，有都尉城。
现代文：县城北面十里，有个都尉城。
English: Ten miles north of the county seat, there is a captain's town.

古文：《地理志》曰：沃阳县西部都尉治者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是沃阳县西部都尉治所。
English: "Geography" said: This is the western capital of Voi Yang County.

古文：北俗谓之阿养城。
现代文：北方俗称阿养城。
English: The north is commonly known as Ayeongseong.

古文：其水又东合一水，水出县东南六十里山下，北俗谓之灾豆浑水。西北流，注于沃水。
现代文：沃水又东流，汇合了一条水，这条水发源于县城东南六十里的山下，北方俗称灾豆浑水，往西北流，注入沃水。
English: The fertile water also flows eastward, bringing together a stream of water that originates at the foot of the mountain sixty miles southeast of the county seat. In the north, it is commonly known as the "muddy water" and flows northwest, injecting fertile water.

古文：沃水又东北流，注盐池。
现代文：沃水又往东北流，注入盐池。
English: Fresh water also flows to the northeast and is injected into the salt ponds.

古文：《地理志》曰：盐泽在东北者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：盐泽在东北。指的就是盐池。
English: "Geography" says: Shiozawa is in the northeast. It refers to Shiotsuke.

古文：今盐池西南去沃阳县故城六十五里，池水徵渟，渊而不流，东西三十里，南北二十里。
现代文：现在盐池西南距沃阳县老城六十五里，池水澄清宁静，渊深不流，东西长三十里，南北二十里。
English: At present, the southwest of the salt pond is 65 miles away from the old town of Woyang County. The water of the pool is clear and quiet, the depth is not flowing, the length is 30 miles from east to west, and 20 miles from north to south.

古文：池北七里，即凉城郡治。池西有旧城，俗谓之凉城也，郡取名焉。
现代文：池北七里就是凉城郡治；池西有一座旧城，俗称凉城，郡也按此城取名。
English: Seven li north of the pond is the county seat of Liangcheng County; there is an old city west of the pond, commonly known as Liangcheng, and the county is also named after this city.

古文：《地理志》曰：泽有长丞。此城即长丞所治也。
现代文：《地理志》说：盐泽有长、尽等官，凉城就是他们的治所。
English: "Geography" said: Shiozawa has a long, full-fledged official, and Liangcheng is their jurisdiction.

古文：城西三里有小阜，阜下有泉，东南流注池，北俗谓之大谷北堆，水亦受目焉。
现代文：城西三里有小山，山下有泉水，往东南流注入池中。这座小山北方俗称大谷北堆，水也因山而取名。
English: There is a hill in the western part of the city, and there is a spring under the hill, which flows southeast into the pond. This hill is commonly known as Otani Kitadai in the north, and the water is also named after the mountain.

古文：中陵川水自枝津西北流，右合一水于连岭北。
现代文：中陵川水从支流分出处往西北流，右边在连岭北边汇合了一条水。
English: The water of the Zhongling River flows from the source of the tributary to the northwest. On the right, a stream of water merges on the north side of Lianling.

古文：水出沃阳县东北山下，北俗谓之乌伏真山，水曰诰升袁河。西南流径沃阳县，左合中陵川，乱流西南与一水合，北俗谓之树颓水。
现代文：这条水发源于沃阳县东北山下，北方俗称乌伏真山，水叫浩升袁河，往西南流经沃阳县，在左边与中陵川汇合，往西南乱流，汇合了一条水，北方俗称树颓水。
English: This water originates from under the northeastern mountain of Woyang County, commonly known as Wufu Zhenshan in the north. The water is called Gaosheng Yuanhe. It flows through Woyang County to the southwest, and merges with Zhongling River on the left. The turbulent flow to the southwest merges a water, commonly known as Shushun water in the north.

古文：水出东山下，西南流，右合诰升袁水，乱流西南注，分谓二水。左水枝分南出，北俗谓之太罗河；右水西径故城南，北俗谓之昆新城。其水自城西南流，注于河。
现代文：树颓水发源于东山下，往西南流，在右边与浩升袁水汇合，乱流向西南奔去，分为两条：左边那条分支往南流，北方俗称太罗河；右边那条往西流经老城南面，北方俗称昆新城，水从城边往西南流，注入大河。
English: The Shu'ao River originates in the eastern mountains and flows to the southwest. On the right, it merges with the Haosheng Yuan River. The turbulent flow runs to the southwest and is divided into two: the left branch flows to the south, commonly known as the Taro River in the north; the right branch flows to the west through the south of the old city, commonly known as Kunxin City in the north. The water flows from the edge of the city to the southwest and is injected into the big river.

古文：河水又南，大罗水注之，水源上承树颓河，南流西转，径武州县故城南。
现代文：河水又南流，有太罗水注入。太罗水上源承接树颓河，往南流，向西转弯，流过武州县老城南边。
English: The river also flows south, with water from the Tai Lo River flowing into it. The source of the Tai Lo River joins the Shusha River, flows south, turns west, and flows through the southern part of the old city of Wuzhou County.

古文：《十三州志》曰：武州县在善无城西南百五十里。北俗谓之太罗城，水亦藉称焉。
现代文：《十三州志》说：武州县在善无城西南一百五十里，北方俗称太罗城，水也依城命名。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: Wuzhou County is 150 miles southwest of Zhenmucheng, commonly known as Taira City in the north, and the water is also named after the city.

古文：其水西南流，一水注之。水导故城西北五十里，南流径城西，北俗名之曰故槃回城。又南流注太罗河。
现代文：太罗水往西南流，有一条水注入，这条水从老城西北五十里流来，往南流经老城西，北方俗称故架回城，又南流注入太罗河。
English: The water of the Taira River flows to the southwest, and a stream of water is injected. This water flows from the northwest of the old city for fifty miles, flows south through the west of the old city, and is commonly known as the old bridge back to the city in the north, and the south stream is injected into the Taira River.

古文：太罗河又西南流，注于河。
现代文：太罗河又往西南流，注入大河。
English: The Taro River flows to the southwest and flows into the Big River.

古文：河水又左得湳水口。水出西河郡美稷县，东南流。
现代文：河水又在左边流到浦水口，浦水发源于西河郡美樱县，往东南流。
English: On the left, the river flows to the mouth of the Pushui River. The Pushui River originates in Misakura County, Saihe County, and flows southeast.

古文：《东观记》曰：郭伋，字细侯，为并州牧。
现代文：《东观记》说：郭极，字细侯，当并州牧。
English: "Dong Guan Ji" said: Guoji, Zi Xiu Hou, Dang Nian Zhou Mu.

古文：前在州，素有恩德，老小相携道路，行部到西河美稷，数百小儿各骑竹马迎拜，伋问：儿曹何自远来？
现代文：先前在州任职时，平时对百姓有恩德，因此老老小小手拉着手在路上迎接他。他到西河美樱巡察时，有儿百个小孩跨着竹马来迎接拜见他。郭极间道：你们为什么老远来到这里？
English: When he previously served in the state, he was usually kind to the people, so old and young held hands to meet him on the road. When he went to the West River to inspect the cherry blossoms, there were hundreds of children on stilts to meet him. Guo Jiuma said: Why did you come all the way here?

古文：曰：闻使君到，喜，故迎。
现代文：孩子们说：听说您来了，我们很高兴，所以来迎接您。
English: The children said: "We are very happy to hear that you are coming, so we have come to welcome you."

古文：伋谢而发去，诸儿复送郭外。问：使君何日还？
现代文：郭极向他们道谢后，就打发他们回去，孩子们又送他到城外，问道：您哪一天回来呀？
English: After Guo Ji thanked them, he sent them back home. The children also sent him outside the city and asked: When will you come back?

古文：伋计日告之。
现代文：郭极估算了一下，就把日期告诉他们。
English: Guo Ji made an estimate and told them the date.

古文：及还，先期一日，念小儿，即止野亭，须期至乃往。
现代文：但回来时却早了一天，想到了孩子们，他就在野亭里留宿，待到约定的日子才走。
English: But when he came back, he was a day early. Thinking of the children, he stayed in the field pavilion and did not leave until the agreed day.

古文：其水又东南流，羌人因水以氏之。
现代文：水又往东南流，羌人都以水为姓氏。
English: The water also flows to the southeast, and the people of Yao all have water as their surname.

古文：汉冲帝时，羌湳狐奴归化，盖其渠帅也。
现代文：汉冲帝时，羌人浦狐奴归化于汉，他就是羌人的头目。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Chong, the Xiongren Pu Xiongnu was naturalized in Han, and he was the leader of the Xiongren.

古文：其水，俗亦谓之为遄波水，东南流入长城东。
现代文：这条水民间也称为遗波水，往东南流进长城东边。
English: This water, which is also known as the last wave water, flows southeast into the eastern side of the Great Wall.

古文：咸水出长城西咸谷，东入湳水。
现代文：咸水发源于长城西边的咸谷，东流注入浦水。
English: The salty water originates from the salty valley on the west side of the Great Wall, and the east stream flows into the Ura River.

古文：湳水又东南，浑波水出西北穷谷，东南流注于湳水。
现代文：浦水又往东南流，浑波水发源于西北方的穷谷，往东南流注入浦水。
English: The Pushui also flows to the southeast. The muddy water originates from the valley in the northwest, and flows to the southeast into the Pushui.

古文：湳水又东径西河富昌县故城南，王莽之富成也。
现代文：浦水又往东流经西河富昌县老城南边，就是王莽的富成。
English: Pushui also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Sichuan Fuchang County, which is Wang Mang's Fucheng.

古文：湳水又东流入于河。
现代文：浦水又东流，注入大河。
English: Pushui also flows east, and flows into the Yangtze River.

古文：河水左合一水，出善无县故城西南八十里，其水西流，历于吕梁之山，而为吕梁洪。
现代文：河水在左边汇合了一条水，这条水发源于善无县老城西南八十里。水往西流，经吕梁之山，称为吕梁洪。
English: On the left, the river meets a stream of water that originates 80 miles southwest of the old town of Zhenwu County. The water flows westward through the mountains of Luliang, known as Luliang Hong.

古文：其山岩层岫衍，涧曲崖深，巨石崇竦，壁立千仞，河流激荡，涛涌波襄，雷渀电泄，震天动地。
现代文：吕梁山岩石层沓，山谷低平，山涧弯弯曲曲，崖岸又高又深；高耸的巨岩陡峭千丈，河流冲激，波涛汹涌，势如雷电，轰隆之声震天动地。
English: The rock strata of Luliangshan are rugged, the valleys are low and flat, the ridges are crooked, the cliffs are high and deep; the towering boulders are steep and high, the rivers are impetuous, the waves are turbulent, the force is like thunder and lightning, and the roaring sound is earthshaking.

古文：昔吕梁未辟，河出孟门之上，盖大禹所辟，以通河也。
现代文：从前吕梁没有开凿时，河水从孟门流出来，大禹凿通这里来疏导河水。
English: In the past, when Luliang was not excavated, the river water flowed out from Mengmen, and Dayu chiseled through here to channel the river water.

古文：司马彪曰：吕梁在离石县西。
现代文：司马彪说：吕梁在离石县以西。
English: Sima Biao said: Luliang is west of Shixian.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：圁阴县西五十里有鸿门亭、天封苑、火井庙，火从地中出。圁水又东，梁水注之，水出西北梁谷，东南流，注圁水。
现代文：今天在县西爬山越岭探寻河水，都看不到有什么阻障，到了这里才成为河上重大的险地。这就是吕梁，在离石北方偏东约二百余里。
English: Today, in the west of the county, we climbed mountains and crossed ridges to explore the river, and we could not see any obstacles. It was only here that it became a major dangerous place on the river. This is Luliang, about two hundred miles east of the north of Shishi.

古文：圁水又东径圁阴县北。汉惠帝五年立，王莽改曰方阴矣。
现代文：又往南流过西河郡固阳县东边，西河郡设置于汉武帝元朔四年所立，王莽改名为方阴。
English: It also flows south through the eastern edge of Guyang County, Xihe County. Xihe County was established in the fourth year of the Han Emperor Yuan Shuo, and Wang Mang changed its name to Fangyin.

古文：又东，桑谷水注之，水出西北桑溪，东北流，入于圁。
现代文：又东流，桑谷水注入。桑谷水发源于西北方的桑溪，往东北流，注入固水。
English: It also flows to the east and is injected with water from the Mulberry Valley, which originates from the Mulberry Creek in the northwest and flows to the northeast, where it is injected with solid water.

古文：圁水又东径圁阳县南，东流注于河，河水又东，端水入焉。
现代文：固水又往东流经囿阳县南边，东流注入河水。河水又东流，有端水注入。
English: The solid water also flows eastward through the south of Fenyang County, and the eastward flow injects the river water. The river water also flows eastward, and the end water is injected.

古文：水西出号山。
现代文：端水发源于西方的号山。
English: The source of the water originates from the western peak of the mountain.

古文：《山海经》曰：其木多漆棕，其草多穹穷，是多圁石，端水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：《山海经》说：山上的树大多是漆棕，草大多是芍劳，又多怜石，端水就发源在这里，东流注入河水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Most of the trees on the mountain are lacquered palm trees, most of the grasses are grasses, and there are many stones. The headwaters originate here, and the east stream is injected into the river.

古文：河水又南，诸次之水入焉，水出上郡诸次山。
现代文：河水又南流，有诸次之水注入。这条水发源于上郡的诸次之山。
English: The river also flows south and is fed by the waters of the Suzuka River, which originates from the Suzuka Mountains in Kamigori.

古文：《山海经》曰：诸次之山，诸次之水出焉。
现代文：《山海经》说：诸次之山是诸次之水的发源地。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: "Many mountains are the source of many waters."

古文：是山多木无草，鸟兽莫居，是多象蛇。
现代文：山上多树无草，没有鸟兽栖息，但大象和蛇却很多。
English: There are many trees and no grass on the mountain, and no birds or animals live there, but there are many elephants and snakes.

古文：其水东径榆林塞，世又谓之榆林山，即《汉书》所谓榆溪旧塞者也。
现代文：水往东流经榆林塞，世人又称为榆林山，就是《汉书》所谓榆溪旧塞。
English: The water flows eastward through the Yulin River, also known as the Yulin Mountain, which is the so-called "old Yuxi River" in the "Chinese Book."

古文：自溪西去，悉榆柳之薮矣。缘历沙陵，届龟兹县西北。故谓广长榆也。
现代文：从这条溪流往西走，都是长满榆树和柳树的泽地，沿着沙陵一直延展到龟兹县西北，所以叫广长榆。
English: From this stream to the west, it is a meadow full of eucalyptus and willow trees, extending along the Saling to the northwest of Kezi County, so it is called Guangchang Fen.

古文：王恢云：树榆为塞。
现代文：王恢说：种植榆树作为屏障。
English: Wang Huai said: planting eucalyptus as a barrier.

古文：谓此矣。
现代文：就是指这地方。
English: It means this place.

古文：苏林以为榆中在上郡，非也。
现代文：苏林认为榆中在上郡，其实不是。
English: Su Lin thought that the middle school was in the upper county, but in fact it was not.

古文：案《始皇本纪》，西北逐匈奴，自榆中并河以东。属之阴山。
现代文：按照《始皇本纪》，在西北驱逐了匈奴，从榆中沿着河水以东，与阴山相连。
English: According to the "Historical Records of the First Emperor," the Xiongnu were expelled from the northwest, and from the middle of the Yunnan Province, along the east of the river, they were connected with the Yin Mountains.

古文：然榆中在金城东五十许里，阴山在朔方东，以此推之，不得在上郡。
现代文：但榆中在金城以东五十里左右，阴山则在朔方以东，照此推断，榆中是不可能在上郡的了。
English: However, Yuzhong is about fifty miles east of Jincheng, and Yinshan is east of Shuofang. According to this deduction, it is impossible for Yuzhong to be in Shangguan.

古文：《汉书音义》，苏林为失是也。
现代文：《汉书音义》以为苏林是弄错了，这话说得不错。
English: "Hanshu Yinyi" thought that Surin had made a mistake, which was a good thing to say.

古文：其水东入长城，小榆水合焉。
现代文：诸次之水往东流进长城，与小榆水汇合。
English: Successive streams of water flowed eastward into the Great Wall, merging with the Xiaobian River.

古文：历涧西北，穷谷其源也。
现代文：沿着溪涧往西北走，到了山谷尽头就是它的源头了。
English: Walk along the creek to the northwest, and at the end of the valley is its source.

古文：又东合首积水，水西出首积溪，东注诸次水，又东入于河。
现代文：又往东流与首积水汇合。首积水发源于首积溪，往东注入诸次水，又往东流，注入河水。
English: The eastward flow also merges with the Shouji Water. The Shouji Water originates from the Shouji Creek, and is injected with various water to the east, and the eastward flow is injected with river water.

古文：《山海经》曰：诸次之水，东流注于河，即此水也，河水又南，汤水注之。
现代文：《山海经》说：诸次之水东流注入河水，说的就是这条水。河水又南流，汤水注入。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" says: The eastward flow of successive waters injects river water, and it is this water that is spoken of. River water also flows southward, and soup water is injected.

古文：《山海经》曰：水出上申之山，上无草木，而多硌石，下多榛楛，汤水出焉。东流注于河也。
现代文：《山海经》说：汤水发源于上申之山，山上没有草木，却多大石，下面棒树和楷树却很多，汤水就发源在这里，东流注入河水。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: the soup water originates from the upper Shinzoku Mountain. There are no plants or trees on the mountain, but there are large boulders. However, there are a lot of conifers and alder trees below. The source of the soup water is here, and the east stream flows into the river water.

古文：又南离石县西，奢延水注之。
现代文：又往南流过离石县西边，奢延水在这里注入河水。
English: It also flows southward through the west side of Shixian County, where the water is injected into the river.

古文：水西出奢延县西南赤沙阜，东北流，《山海经》所谓生水出孟山者也。
现代文：奢延水发源于奢延县西南的赤沙阜，往东北流。《山海经》说生水发源于孟山，就指这条水。
English: Shuanyan water originates from the southwest of Shuanyan County, Chishafu, and flows to the northeast. "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says that fresh water originates from Monsan, referring to this water.

古文：郭景纯曰：孟或作明。
现代文：郭景纯说：孟字也有写作明字的。
English: Guo Jingjun said: Mengzi also has clear writing.

古文：汉破羌将军段颎破羌于奢延泽，虏走洛川。
现代文：汉时破羌将军段顺在奢延泽击溃羌人，羌人都逃往洛川。
English: Han Dynasty general Duan Shun defeated the Yao people in Yanze, and the Yao people fled to Luochuan.

古文：洛川在南，俗因县土谓之奢延水，又谓之朔方水矣。
现代文：洛川在南，民间因此水流经县境，就叫它奢延水，又叫朔方水。
English: The Luo River is in the south, so people call the water that flows through the county border "luxurious water" or "square water."

古文：世甚珍之。
现代文：雄威震慑天下，就像风吹草伏。
English: It is like the wind blowing and the grass swaying.

古文：又铸铜为大鼓，及飞廉、翁仲，铜驼、龙虎，皆以黄金饰之，列于宫殿之前。
现代文：世人十分珍视这把宝刀。又用铜铸成大鼓、飞廉神兽、铜人、铜驼、龙虎之类，都用黄金装饰，排列在宫殿前面。
English: This precious sword was highly prized by the people of the world. Large drums, flying monsters, bronze men, bronze camels, dragons and tigers, all decorated with gold, were cast from copper and lined up in front of the palace.

古文：则今夏州治也。
现代文：这座统万城就是现在夏州的治所。
English: This unified city is now the seat of government of Xiazhou.

古文：奢延水又东北与温泉合。
现代文：奢延水又往东北流，与温泉水汇合。
English: The luxurious water flows to the northeast and merges with the hot spring water.

古文：源西北出沙溪，而东南流注奢延水。
现代文：水源出自西北的沙溪，往东南注入奢延水。
English: The water source comes from the Shaxi River in the northwest and is injected into the southeast.

古文：奢延水又东，黑水入焉。
现代文：奢延水又东流，有黑水注入。
English: Luxurious water flows eastward, and black water is injected.

古文：水出奢延县黑涧，东南历沙陵，注奢延水。
现代文：黑水源出奢延县的黑涧，往东南流过沙陵，注入奢延水。
English: The source of the black water comes from the Heihe Reservoir in Chaoyang County, and flows southeast through Sha Ling, injecting water into Chaoyang County.

古文：奢延水又东台交兰水。
现代文：奢延水又东流，汇合了交兰水。
English: Luxuriously stretched water also flows to the east, merging with the Jiaolan River.

古文：水出龟兹县交兰谷，东南流注奢延水。
现代文：交兰水发源于龟兹县交兰谷，往东南流，注入奢延水。
English: The Jiaolan River originates in the Jiaolan Valley of Guizi County and flows to the southeast, injecting luxuriant water.

古文：奢延水又东北流与镜波水合，水源出南邪山南谷，东北流注于奢延水。
现代文：奢延水又往东北流，与镜波水汇合。镜波水发源于南邪山的南谷，往东北流，注入奢延水。
English: The luxuriant water flows to the northeast and merges with the mirror water. The mirror water originates in the southern valley of Nanzha Mountain and flows to the northeast, injecting luxuriant water.

古文：奢延水又东径肤施县，帝原水西北出龟兹县，东南流。
现代文：奢延水又往东流经肤施县，有帝原水发源于西北方的龟兹县，往东南流。
English: Luxurious water also flows eastward through Kutsushi County, while Diyuan water originates in the northwest of Guez County and flows southeast.

古文：县因处龟兹降胡著称。
现代文：这地方因收留过龟兹国投降的胡人居住，所以得名。
English: This place got its name because it was inhabited by the Hu people who took in the surrendered people of Kuez.

古文：又东南注奢延水。
现代文：水又往东南流，注入奢延水。
English: The water then flows to the southeast, injecting fresh water.

古文：奢延水又东，径肤施县南。
现代文：奢延水又东流，从肤施县南边流过。
English: The luxuriant water also flows eastward, passing through the southern part of Jinshi County.

古文：秦昭王三年置，上郡治。
现代文：肤施县设于秦昭王三年前，是上郡的治所。
English: Kunshi County was established three years before the reign of Qin Zhaowang. It was the seat of Shang County.

古文：汉高祖并三秦，复以为郡。
现代文：汉高祖平定了三秦，又立为郡。
English: Han Gaozhu conquered Sanqin and established it as a county.

古文：王莽以汉马员为增山连率，归，世祖以为上郡太守。
现代文：王莽任命马员为增山连率，王莽失败后，马员归降世祖，世祖仍旧任命他为上郡太守。
English: Wang Mang appointed Ma Jian as Zengshan Liaison Officer. After Wang Mang's failure, Ma Jian returned to his ancestor, who still appointed him as Shang County Governor.

古文：司马彪曰：增山者，上郡之别名也。
现代文：司马彪说：增山是上郡的别名。
English: Sima Biao said: Zengshan is another name for Shang County.

古文：东入五龙山。
现代文：奢延水往东流进五龙山。
English: The water flows eastward into the Wulong Mountain.

古文：《地理志》曰：县有五龙山、帝原水。自下亦为通称也。
现代文：《地理志》说：县里有五龙山、帝原水，从这里起，下流也通称为帝原水。
English: "Geography" said: There are Wulong Mountain and Diyuan Water in the county. From here, the downstream is also commonly known as Diyuan Water.

古文：历长城东，出于白翟之中。
现代文：水流过长城东边，在白翟地区流出。
English: The water flowed over the eastern side of the Great Wall and flowed out in the Chalk Region.

古文：又有平水，出西北平溪东南入奢延水。
现代文：又有平水发源于西北方的平溪东南，注入奢延水。
English: There is also flat water that originates in the southeast of Pingxi in the northwest and is infused with luxuriant water.

古文：奢延水又东，走马水注之。
现代文：奢延水又东流，走马水注入。
English: The luxuriant water flows to the east, and the stagnant water is injected.

古文：水出西南长城北阳周县故城南桥山，昔二世赐蒙恬死于此。
现代文：走马水发源于西南方长城以北的阳周县老城南边的桥山，从前秦二世就是在这里逼使蒙恬自杀的。
English: Walking Horse Water originates from Qiaoshan, south of the old city of Yangzhou County, north of the Great Wall in the southwest. Former Qin II forced Mengye to commit suicide here.

古文：王莽更名上陵畤，山上有黄帝冢故也。
现代文：王莽改名为上陵峙，这是因为山上有黄帝墓的缘故。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Shangling Jiao, because of the Yellow Emperor's tomb on the mountain.

古文：帝崩，惟弓剑存焉，故世称黄帝仙矣。
现代文：黄帝死后，只留下弓和剑，所以世人都说黄帝升仙了。
English: After the death of the Yellow Emperor, only the bow and sword were left, so the world said that the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven.

古文：其水东流，昔段颎追羌出桥门至走马水，闻羌在奢延泽，即此处也。门，即桥山之长城门也。
现代文：水往东流，从前段颖追击羌人出了桥门，追到走马水，听说羌人在奢延泽，就是这地方•、 所谓门，就是桥山的长城门。
English: The water flowed eastward, from the front section of Ying to the bridge gate, and then to the horse-drawn carriage. I heard that the people of Ying were in the luxury of Yanze. This is the place. The so-called gate is the Great Wall Gate of Qiaoshan.

古文：始皇令太子扶苏与蒙恬筑长城，起自临洮，至于碣石，即是城也。
现代文：秦始皇命令太子扶苏和蒙恬一起筑长城，从愉锣胜开始直到竭石，就是这道城。
English: Emperor Qin ordered Prince Fusu and Meng Qi to build the Great Wall together, from the beginning of the victory to the end of the stone, this is the city.

古文：其水东北流入长城，又东北注奢延水。
现代文：水往东北流进长城，又往东北注入奢延水。
English: The water flows into the Great Wall in the northeast, and the water is injected into the northeast.

古文：奢延水又东，与白羊水合，其水出于西南白羊溪，循溪东北，注于奢延水。
现代文：奢延水又东流，与白羊水汇合。白羊水发源于西南的白羊溪，顺溪往东北流，注入奢延水。
English: The white amniotic fluid originates from Baiyang Creek in the southwest, flows along the creek to the northeast, and is infused with the luxuriant amniotic fluid.

古文：奢延水又东入于河。
现代文：奢延水又东流，注入河水。
English: The luxuriantly extended water also flows eastward, injecting river water.

古文：《山海经》曰：生水东流注于河。
现代文：《山海经》说：生水东流注入河水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: Raw water is injected into the river by the east current.

古文：河水又南，陵水注之。
现代文：河水又南流，陵水注入。
English: The river also flows to the south, and the Lingshui River flows into it.

古文：水出陵川北溪，南径其川，西转入河。
现代文：陵水发源于陵川的北溪，往南流过平原，折向西边注入河水。
English: The Lingshui originates from the Beixi River of the Lingshui River, flows south across the plain, and turns west to inject river water.

古文：河水又南得离石水口，水出离石北山，南流径离石县故城西。
现代文：河水又往南流到离石水口。离石水发源于离石北山，往南流经离石县老城西边。
English: The river then flows south to the mouth of the Yishi Water. The Yishi Water originates from the Yishi North Mountain and flows south through the west side of the old town of Yishi County.

古文：《史记》云：秦昭王伐赵取离石者也。
现代文：《史记》说：秦昭王攻赵，夺取离石。
English: "Histories" said: Qin Zhao Wang attacked Zhao and seized the stone.

古文：汉武帝元朔三年，封代共王子刘绾为侯国，后汉西河郡治也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔三年前，把这里封给代共王的儿子刘给，立为侯国，后汉时是西河郡的治所。
English: Three years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo assigned this place to Liu Ji, the son of the reigning emperor, and established it as a vassal state. In the late Han Dynasty, it was the administrative center of Xihe County.

古文：其水又南出西转径隔城县故城南。
现代文：水又往南流出，折向西边，流过限城县老城南边。
English: The water flowed out to the south, turned to the west, and flowed through the southern part of the old city of Jincheng County.

古文：汉武帝元朔三年，封代共王子刘忠为侯国，王莽之慈平亭也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔三年把这里封给代共王的儿子刘忠，立为侯国，就是王莽的慈平亭。
English: In the third year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Emperor Yuan Shuo gave this place to Liu Zhong, the son of the king of the dynasty, and established it as a vassal state. This is Wang Mang's Jiping Pavilion.

古文：胡俗语讹，尚有千城之称。其水西流，注于河也。
现代文：胡人因民间语讹，至今还叫它千城。水往西流，注入河水。
English: The Hu people still call it Qiancheng to this day, because of the local dialect. The water flows westward and is injected into the river.

古文：又南过中阳县西，中阳县故城在东，东翼汾水，隔越重山，不滨于河也。
现代文：又往南流过中阳县西边，中阳县旧城在东边，汾水流过城东，与河水隔了好几重山，并不濒河。
English: It also flows southward through the west side of Zhongyang County, the old city of Zhongyang County is in the east, and the floodwater flows through the east of the city, separated from the river by several mountains, and does not border the river.

古文：又南过土军县西，吐京郡治，故城，即土军县之故城也，胡、汉译言，音为讹变矣。
现代文：又往南流过土军县西边，土军县是吐京郡的治所，老城也就是土军县的老县城。由于胡语与汉语对译，音变而致讹。
English: It also flows southward through the west side of Tujun County, which is the administrative center of Tuqing County, and the old city is also the old county seat of Tujun County. Due to the Hu language and Chinese translation, the sound changed and died.

古文：其城圆长而不方，汉高帝十一年，以封武侯宣义为侯国。
现代文：城形椭圆而不方正，汉高帝十一年把它封给武侯宣义，立为侯国。
English: The city's shape is elliptical rather than square, and in the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao gave it to Wuhou Xuanyi and established it as a vassal state.

古文：县有龙泉，出城东南，道左山下，牧马川上多产名驹骏，同滇池天马。
现代文：县里有一釜龙泉。出城往东南方走去，道路左边山下的牧马川出产名马，一分雄骏，就像滇池天马一样。
English: There is a Kama Longquan in the county. If you go out of the city to the southeast, the Buma River on the left side of the road will produce famous horses, one-point stallions, just like the Dianchi Tianma.

古文：其水西北流，至其城东南，土军水出道左高山，西南注之。
现代文：水往西北流到老城东南。土军水发源于道路左边的高山上，往西南注入龙泉。
English: The water flowed northwest to the southeast of the old city. The Turkish army water originated from the high mountains on the left side of the road and flowed into Longquan to the southwest.

古文：龙泉水又北屈径其城东，西北入于河。
现代文：龙泉水又北转流经城东，往西北注入河水。
English: The water of Longquan River is diverted to the north, flows through the east of the city, and is injected into the river to the northwest.

古文：河水又南合契水，傍溪东入穷谷，其源也。
现代文：河水又南流，与契水汇合。沿溪边往东进入山谷，到尽头就是水源了。
English: The river flows south again, merging with the Chee River. It flows east along the stream into the valley, and at the end is the source of the water.

古文：又南至禄谷水口，水源东穷此溪也。
现代文：又往南流到禄谷水口，水源往东在溪流的尽处。
English: It also flows south to the mouth of the Luk Valley, with its source to the east at the end of the stream.

古文：河水又南得大蛇水。
现代文：河水又南流，接纳了大蛇水。
English: The river also flows south, receiving the waters of the Snake River.

古文：发源溪首，西流入河。
现代文：此水发源于溪头，西流注入河水。
English: This water originates from the head of the stream and is fed into the river by the westerly current.

古文：河水又南，右纳辱水。
现代文：河水又南流，在右边接纳了辱水。
English: The river flowed south again, receiving fresh water on the right.

古文：《山海经》曰：辱水出鸟山，其上多桑，其下多楮，阴多铁，阳多玉，其水东流，注于河。俗谓之秀延水。
现代文：《山海经》说：辱水发源于鸟山，山上多桑树，山下多褚树，山北多产铁，山南多产玉。水往东流注入河水，俗称秀延水。
English: The "Shanhai Jing" says: "The source of the insulting water comes from the bird mountain, there are many mulberry trees on the mountain, many eucalyptus trees below the mountain, the northern part of the mountain produces a lot of iron, and the southern part of the mountain produces a lot of jade. The water flows eastward into the river, commonly known as Xiuyan water.

古文：东流得浣水口，傍溪西转，穷溪便即浣水之源也。
现代文：辱水往东流到洗水口，沿溪往西转弯，溪流尽头就是烷水的源头。
English: The dirty water flows eastward to the wash water outlet, turns westward along the stream, and the end of the stream is the source of the alkane water.

古文：辱水又东会根水西南溪下。
现代文：辱水又东流，与根水汇合。
English: Shame water also flows to the east, merging with the groundwater.

古文：根水所发，而东北注辱水。
现代文：西南溪下就是根水的发源地，往东北注入辱水。
English: Southwest of the creek is the source of the water, and it is injected into the northeast.

古文：辱水又东南，露跳水出西露溪东流，又东北入辱水，乱流注于河。
现代文：辱水又往东南流，有露跳水从西露溪流来，先往东流，又往东北流入辱水，乱流注入河水。
English: Shame water also flows to the southeast, with dew diving from the west of Shame Stream, first to the east, and then to the northeast into Shame Water, and turbulent flow into the river.

古文：河水又南，左合信支水，水发源东露溪，西流入千河。
现代文：河水又南流，在左边汇合信支水。信支水发源于东露溪，西流汇入河水。
English: The river also flows south, joining the Shinshi Water on the left. The Shinshi Water originates from the Donglu Creek, and the west stream flows into the river.

古文：河水又南，左会石羊水，循溪东人，导源穷谷，西流注于河。
现代文：河水又南流，在左边汇合石羊水，循着溪流往东进山，水源出自山谷尽头，西流注入河水。
English: The river also flows south, merging on the left with the Shiyang River, and follows the stream east into the mountains. The water source comes from the end of the valley, and the west stream injects the river water.

古文：又南过上郡高奴县东。
现代文：又往南流过上郡高奴县东边。
English: It also flows south through the eastern part of Gaona County, Jang County.

古文：域谷水东启荒原，西历长溪，西南入于河。
现代文：域谷水从东方的荒原出发，往西流经长溪，往西南注入河水。
English: The valley water starts from the wasteland in the east, flows westward through the Changxi, and is injected into the river water in the southwest.

古文：河水又南合孔溪口。
现代文：河水又南流，与孔溪口一条水汇合。
English: The river also flows south, merging with a stream at the mouth of Kongxi.

古文：水出孔山南，历溪西流，注于河。
现代文：这条水发源于孔山南麓，循溪西流，注入河水。
English: This water originates from the southern foot of Kongshan Mountain, follows the west stream, and is injected into the river.

古文：孔山之上有穴，如车轮三所，东西相当，相去各二丈许，南北直通，故谓之孔山也。
现代文：孔山上有三个洞穴，大小如车轮，东西两边相距都差不多，约二丈左右，南北穿山直通，所以叫孔山。
English: There are three caves on Kongshan, the size of which is like a wheel, the distance between the east and west sides is similar, about two meters, and the north and south are connected through the mountain, so it is called Kongshan.

古文：山在蒲城西南三十余里。
现代文：孔山在蒲城西南三十余里。
English: Kongshan is more than 30 miles southwest of Putian.

古文：河水又右会区水。
现代文：河水又在右边汇合区水。
English: The water of the river meets the water of the district on the right.

古文：《山海经。西次四经》之首曰阴山，西北百七十里曰申山，其上多谷、柞，其下多杻、橿，其阳多金、玉，区水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：《山海经•西次四经》开头第一列山就是阴山，西北一百七十里是申山，山上多长小米和柞树，山下多扭树和僵树，山南多产金玉，区水就发源在这里，东流注入河水。
English: The first row of mountains at the beginning of the "Shanhai Jing • West Four Classics" is the Yin Mountain, and the northwest one hundred and seventy miles is the Shen Mountain. On the mountain there are many millet and eucalyptus trees, under the mountain there are many twisted trees and dead trees, and Shannan is rich in jade. The district water originates here, and the east current is injected into the river water.

古文：世谓之清水，东流入上郡长城。径老人山下，又东北流。
现代文：世人把它叫做清水，往东流入上郡长城，流经老人山下，又往东北流到老人谷。
English: The world calls it clear water, flowing eastward into the Great Wall of Shangxian County, flowing through the Old Man Mountain, and flowing northeast to the Old Man Valley.

古文：至老人谷，傍水北出，极溪便得水源。
现代文：沿着水边往北走，到了溪流尽头就是水源了。
English: Walking north along the water's edge, the source of the water is at the end of the stream.

古文：清水又东得龙尾水口，水出北地神泉障北山龙尾溪，东北流注清水。
现代文：清水又往东流到龙尾水口，龙尾水发源于北地神泉障北山的龙尾溪，往东北流，注入清水。
English: The clear water also flows eastward to the Longwei water outlet. The Longwei water originates from the Longwei Creek in Beishan, a sacred spring in the North, and flows to the northeast, injecting clear water.

古文：清水又东会三湖水，水出南山三湖谷，东北流入清水。
现代文：清水又东流，汇合了三湖水。三湖水发源于南山的三湖谷，往东北流，注入清水。
English: The fresh water also flows eastward, merging with the water of the three lakes. The water of the three lakes originates from the Three Lakes Valley in Nanshan, flows to the northeast, and injects fresh water.

古文：清水又东径高奴县，合丰林水，《地理志》谓之洧水也。
现代文：清水又往东流经高奴县，汇合了丰林水。《地理志》称为淆水。
English: Clear water also flows eastward through Gaona County, merging with rich forest water. "Geography" is called confusing water.

古文：故言高奴县有洧水，肥可，水上有肥，可接取用之。
现代文：所以说高奴县有淆水，水上有油，能燃烧，可以采集起来使用。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is muddy water in Gaona County, and there is oil in the water, which can burn and can be collected and used.

古文：《博物志》称酒泉延寿县南山出泉水，大如筥，注地为沟，水有肥如肉汁，取著器中，始黄后黑，如凝膏，然极明，与膏无异，膏车及水碓缸甚佳，彼方人谓之石漆。
现代文：《博物志》说：酒泉延寿县南山有泉水流出，大小有如箩筐，在地上冲出一条水沟。水上有油，稠腻得像肉汁一样，舀来放到器皿中，开始时呈黄色，以后就变成黑色，好像凝冻的油脂一样，点着后很明亮，和油脂没有芬别。
English: "The Natural History" says: "There is a spring in Nanshan, Nanshan County, Yanju County, with water flowing out, the size of which is like a basket, and a ditch on the ground. There is oil in the water, thick and greasy like gravy, and it is poured into a vessel. At first it is yellow, but later it turns black, like frozen grease. After it is lit, it is very bright, and there is no difference from grease.

古文：水肥亦所在有之，非止高奴县洧水也。
现代文：用这种油来漆车和水雄上的铁圈极好，当地人称为石漆。水上浮油也到处都有，不止高奴县清水一处。
English: The locals call it stone paint, and it's a great way to paint the iron rings on cars and water buffaloes. There are oil slicks all over the water, not just in Shimizu, Gaona.

古文：项羽以封董翳为翟王，居之三秦，此其一也。
现代文：项羽把这地方封给董翁为翟王，让他住在这里，所谓三秦，这就是其中之一。
English: Xiang Yu gave this place to Dong Weng as the King of Gong and let him live here, the so-called Three Qin, this is one of them.

古文：汉高祖破以县之，王莽之利平矣。
现代文：汉高祖攻下这地方，设立为县，就是王莽的利平。
English: Han Gaozhu conquered this place and established it as a county, which is Wang Mang's Liping.

古文：民俗语讹，谓之高楼城也。
现代文：民间语讹，把它称为高楼城。
English: In the vernacular, it is known as the high-rise city.

古文：丰林川长津泻注，北流会清水。
现代文：丰林川长流泻注，北流与清水汇合。
English: The long stream of the Toyo Hayashi River discharges, and the north stream merges with the Shimizu.

古文：清水又南，奚谷水注之，水西出奚川，东南流入清水。
现代文：清水又南流，奚谷水注入。奚谷水发源于西方的奚川，往东南流入清水。
English: Clear water also flows south, and Shibuya water is injected. Shibuya water originates from the Shibuya River in the west, and flows into clear water in the southeast.

古文：清水又东注于河。
现代文：清水又东流，注入河水。
English: Clear water also flows to the east, injecting river water.

古文：河水又南，蒲川水出石楼山，南径蒲城东。即重耳所奔之处也。
现代文：河水又南流，有蒲川水发源于石楼山，南流经过蒲城东边，这就是重耳逃奔的地方。
English: The river also flows to the south. The water of the Gamcheon originates from Shilou Mountain, and the south stream passes through the east side of the city of Gamcheon. This is where the long-eared cranes flee.

古文：又南历蒲子县故城西，今大魏之汾州治。
现代文：又往南流经蒲子县老城西边，这是当今大魏所属汾州的治所。
English: It also flows south through the west side of the old town of Puzi County, which is the current administrative center of Bozhou, which belongs to Wei Dynasty.

古文：徐广《晋纪》称，刘渊自离石南移蒲子者也。
现代文：徐广《晋纪》说：刘渊从离石南迁到蒲子。
English: Xu Guang's "Jin Ji" said: Liu Yuan moved from Shennan to Puzi.

古文：阚駰曰：蒲城在西北，汉武帝置。
现代文：阐胭说：蒲城在西北，汉武帝所置。
English: "Pucheng is in the northwest, and it was built by Emperor Hanwu.

古文：其水南出，得黄卢水口，水东出蒲子城南，东北入谷，极溪便水之源也。
现代文：蒲川水往南流，有黄卢水口。黄卢水发源于东方的蒲子城南边，往东北流入谷，溪流尽头就是水源了。
English: The water of the Gamcheon River flows southward, with the mouth of the Huanglu. The water of the Huanglu originates in the east, south of the city of Gamge, and flows into the valley to the northeast. The end of the stream is the source of the water.

古文：蒲水又南合紫川水，水东北出紫川谷，西南合江水，江水出江谷，西北入紫川水。
现代文：蒲水又南流，与紫川水汇合。紫川水发源于东北的紫川谷，往西南流，汇合了江水。江水发源于江谷往西北注入紫川水。
English: The Po River also flows south and merges with the water of the Purple River. The water of the Purple River originates in the northeastern Purple River Valley and flows to the southwest, merging with the river water. The river water originates from the river valley and injects the Purple River water to the northwest.

古文：紫川水又西北入蒲水，蒲水又西南入于河水。
现代文：紫川水又往西北流，注入蒲水；蒲水又往西南流，注入河水。
English: The water of the Zi River flows to the northwest and injects the water of the Pudu River; the Pudu River flows to the southwest and injects the water of the Puru River.

古文：河水又南合黑水，水出定阳县西山，二源奇发，同泻一壑，东南流径其县北，又东南流，右合定水，俗谓之白水也。
现代文：河水又南流，汇合了黑水。黑水发源于定阳县的西山，两个源头齐发，一同泻入一个深渊，往东南流经县北，又往东南流，在右边汇合定水，俗称白水。
English: The black water originates from the western mountains of Dingyang County. The two sources originate at the same time, and together fall into a deep abyss. It flows southeastward through the north of the county, and then southeastward, where it meets the Ding water on the right, commonly known as the white water.

古文：水西出其县南山定水谷，东径定阳县故城南。
现代文：定水发源于该县南山的定水谷，往东流经定阳县老城南边。
English: The Dingshui originates from the Dingshui Valley in the Nanshan of the county and flows eastward to the south of the old town of Dingyang County.

古文：应劭曰：县在定水之阳也。
现代文：应助说：县城在定水北边。
English: Yejun said: The county seat is in the north of Dingshui.

古文：定水又东注于黑水，乱流东南入于河。
现代文：定水又东流，注入黑水，乱流往东南注入河水。
English: The steady water also flows east, injecting black water, and the turbulent flow injects river water to the southeast.

