古文：夫形而上者谓之道，形而下者谓之器。
现代文：未成形的抽象的叫做 道 ，已成形的具体的叫做 器 。
English: The unformed abstract is called Tao, and the formed concrete is called vessel.

古文：神道难摹，精言不能追其极；形器易写，壮辞可得喻其真；才非短长，理自难易耳。
现代文：奇妙的道理难以表述说明，即使用精确的语言也无法将它的极妙之处写出来；具体事物虽容易描写，用有力的文辞更能体现出它的真象。这并不是由于作者的才能有大有小，而是因为事理本身就存在难易的差别罢了。
English: It is difficult to describe a wonderful truth, and even with precise language it is impossible to write out its wonderfulness; although specific things are easy to describe, they can better reflect their truth with powerful words. This is not because of the author's talent, but because of the fact that there is a difficult difference.

古文：故自天地以降，豫入声貌，文辞所被，夸饰恒存。虽《诗》、《书》雅言，风俗训世，事必宜广，文亦过焉。
现代文：所以从开天辟地以来，对于声音样貌的描述，能用文辞表达出来的，夸张的修辞一直在被使用；即使是《诗经》、《尚书》中那种雅正的语言，用来教育世俗、训导世人的书籍，使用的事理一定要广博，文辞也用夸张的修饰。
English: Therefore, since the dawn of time, exaggerated rhetoric has been used to describe the appearance of sounds, which can be expressed in words; even the elegant language in "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs," books used to educate the secular and instruct the world, must be used in a wide range of ways, and the words must also be exaggerated.

古文：是以言峻则嵩高极天，论狭则河不容舠，说多则子孙千亿，称少则民靡孑遗；襄陵举滔天之目，倒戈立漂杵之论；辞虽已甚，其义无害也。
现代文：所以《诗经》里面谈到高就说 山高可顶天 ，谈到狭窄就说 河中容不下一艘小船 ；谈到多就说 子孙有千亿 ，谈到少就说 百姓一个没有留下 。《尚书》里面讲到洪水包围丘陵，就说 水势漫过了天际 ；讲到殷王的士兵叛归周人，就说 流的血让杵棒都漂起来了 。
English: Therefore, in the "Book of Songs," when it comes to high, it says that the mountain is high enough to reach the sky, when it comes to narrow, it says that the river cannot accommodate a small boat; when it comes to more, it says that there are hundreds of billions of descendants, and when it comes to less, it says that there is no one left. In the "Book of Songs," when it comes to the flood surrounding the hills, it says that the water has filled the sky; when it comes to the soldiers of King Yin's rebellion against the people around him, it says that the flowing blood has made the sticks float.

古文：且夫鸮音之丑，岂有泮林而变好？
现代文：这些虽不免过甚其辞，但对于所要表达的基本意义却并无妨害。
English: Although these are exaggerated, they do not interfere with the basic meaning to be expressed.

古文：荼味之苦，宁以周原而成饴？并意深褒赞，故义成矫饰。
现代文：再如猫头鹰的叫声本来是难听的，怎能真像《诗经·鲁颂·泮水》中说的，因为它栖在泮水边的树上而变得好听起来了呢？
English: Even if an owl's call is originally unpleasant, how can it really sound good because it is perched on a tree by the water, as it says in the "Shijing, Rusong, Surabaya"?

古文：大圣所录，以垂宪章，孟轲所云 说诗者不以文害辞，不以辞害意 也。
现代文：因此孟轲曾说过： 解说《诗经》的人，不要因为拘泥于辞藻而妨害了对诗句的理解，也不要因为拘泥于诗句本身而误解了作者的原意。 
English: Therefore, Mencius once said: "Those who interpret the "Book of Songs" should not interfere with the understanding of the verses because of their insistence on words, nor should they misunderstand the original meaning of the author because of their insistence on the verses themselves.

古文：自宋玉、景差，夸饰始盛；相如凭风，诡滥愈甚。
现代文：从宋玉、景差开始，作品中使用夸张的修辞开始盛行起来。
English: From Song Yu and Jingzha, the use of exaggerated rhetoric in works began to flourish.

古文：故上林之馆，奔星与宛虹入轩；从禽之盛，飞廉与鹪明俱获。
现代文：司马相如继承了这种风尚并变本加厉，误谬失实的情况就更加严重了。他写到上林苑中的高楼，便说流星与曲虹好像进入了它的窗户；写到追逐飞禽的众多，竟说龙雀、焦明等奇鸟样样都能捕到。
English: Sima Xiangru inherited this tradition and intensified it, and the situation of falsehood and untruth became even more serious. He wrote about a high-rise building in Shanglinyuan, and said that meteors and rainbows seemed to have entered its windows; he wrote about the large number of chasing birds, and even said that all kinds of strange birds such as dragon finches and jiaoming could be caught.

古文：及扬雄《甘泉》，酌其馀波。语瑰奇则假珍于玉树；言峻极则颠坠于鬼神。
现代文：后来扬雄作《甘泉赋》，因为深受司马相如的影响；他为了描写的奇特，就借重玉树这一珍宝；为了形容楼阁的高耸，就说鬼神也要跌下来。
English: Later, Yang Xiong wrote "Ganquan Fu" because he was deeply influenced by Sima Xiangtu; in order to describe the strangeness, he borrowed the treasure of the heavy jade tree; in order to describe the towering of the castle, he said that the ghosts and gods would fall down.

古文：至《西都》之比目，《西京》之海若，验理则理无可验，穷饰则饰犹未穷矣。
现代文：还有班固在《西都赋》里谈到了比目鱼，张衡在《西京赋》中谈到了海若神等等。在现实中无法得到验证的，就会变得更加夸张，这种夸张使用没有穷尽。
English: Also, Ban Gu talked about flounder in "Saidofu," Zhang Heng talked about the Sea God in "Saikyofu," and so on. If it cannot be verified in reality, it will become more exaggerated, and there is no end to the use of exaggeration.

古文：又子云《羽猎》，鞭宓妃以饷屈原；张衡《羽猎》，困玄冥于朔野，娈彼洛神，既非魍魉，惟此水师，亦非魑魅；而虚用滥形，不其疏乎？
现代文：此外如扬雄的《羽猎赋》，里面说要鞭挞洛水的宓妃，要她送酒菜给屈原等人；张衡的《羽猎赋》又曾说，要把水神玄冥囚禁在北方的荒野。可是，那美好的洛神，不是鬼怪；而这水神玄冥，也不是妖魔；他们这样不切实际地任意描写，难道不是太粗疏了吗？
English: In addition, such as Yangxiong's "Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Feathered Fe

古文：此欲夸其威而饰其事，义睽剌也。
现代文：这样写不过要想增加声势，便把事情写得夸张一些，却显然违背了义理。
English: Writing like this is nothing more than exaggerating things in order to gain momentum, but it clearly violates the principle of justice.

古文：至如气貌山海，体势宫殿，嵯峨揭业，熠耀焜煌之状，光采炜炜而欲然，声貌岌岌其将动矣。莫不因夸以成状，沿饰而得奇也。
现代文：但这些作品在描绘山海的状貌和宫殿的形势上，都能充分表现出那种宏伟高大、光辉灿烂的壮观；色彩的鲜艳有如融融的火光，楼台的高耸富有飞动的气势：所有这些，都是依仗夸张手法来表现出事物的形状，借助修饰文采来显示事物的奇特。
English: But these works, in depicting the appearance of the mountains and seas and the situation of the palace, can fully demonstrate the grandeur, height, and brilliance of the spectacular; the bright colors are like molten fire, the towering of the platform is full of flying momentum: all of these are relying on exaggerated methods to show the shape of things, and to show the strangeness of things with the help of decorative literature.

古文：于是后进之才，奖气挟声，轩翥而欲奋飞，腾掷而羞跼步，辞入炜烨，春藻不能程其艳；言在萎绝，寒谷未足成其凋；谈欢则字与笑并，论戚则声共泣偕；信可以发蕴而飞滞，披瞽而骇聋矣。然饰穷其要，则心声锋起；夸过其理，则名实两乖。若能酌《诗》、《书》之旷旨，翦扬马之甚泰，使夸而有节，饰而不诬，亦可谓之懿也。
现代文：因此，后来许多才人发扬了这种风气，凭借着这种声势。
English: As a result, many talented people later carried forward this culture and took advantage of this momentum.

古文：赞曰∶夸饰在用，文岂循检。
现代文：他们振翼高举，势将奋飞；踊跃奔腾，耻于缓步。
English: They flap their wings high, ready to soar; they fly with exuberance, ashamed to slow down.

古文：言必鹏运，气靡鸿渐。倒海探珠，倾昆取琰。
现代文：他们如果写繁盛，即使是春日丽景也不如这般鲜艳；如果写衰萎，即使是荒凉的寒谷也没有这样萧条。
English: If they write about prosperity, even the beauty of spring is not as bright as this; if they write about decline, even the desolate cold valley is not so depressed.

古文：旷而不溢，奢而无玷。
现代文：写到愉快，文字好像带着欢笑一齐来到；写到悲伤，音调好像和哭泣同时并至。
English: In writing of joy, the words seem to come with laughter; in writing of sorrow, the tone seems to come with weeping.

