古文：◎哀宗下九月戊寅朔，诏减亲卫军。
现代文：九月初一，诏令削减亲卫军。
English: On the first day of September, the Imperial Edict reduced the number of bodyguards.

古文：己丑，军士杀郑门守者出奔。壬辰，起上党公张开及临淄郡王王义深、广平郡王范成进为元帅。
现代文：十五日，起用上党公张开及临淄郡王王义深、广平郡王范成进为元帅。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Kai, a high-ranking party official, and Wang Wang Yishen of Linyi County and Wang Fan Chengjin of Guangping County were appointed as marshals.

古文：行次公主苑，太后遣中官持米肉遍犒军士。
现代文：二十五日，哀宗皇帝动身前往南京，与太后、皇后、诸妃告别，很悲恸。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Aizong left for Nanjing to bid farewell to the empress dowager, the empress, and the concubines, which was very sad.

古文：辛丑，至开阳门外，麾百官退。诏谕戍兵曰： 社稷宗庙在此，汝等壮士也，毋以不预进发之数，便谓无功，若保守无虞，将来功赏顾岂在战士下？ 
现代文：二十六日，哀宗皇帝到了开阳门外，诏谕戍兵说： 社稷宗庙在此，你们是壮士，若使它们完好无损，将来功劳不在战士之下。 听得人人都流泪。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Emperor Aizong arrived outside the Kaiyang Gate, and said to the soldiers: "The ancestral temple is here, you are strong men, if you keep it intact, the future will not be under the soldiers. Everyone was in tears.

古文：闻者皆洒泣。是日，巩昌元帅完颜忽斜虎至自金昌，为上言京西三百里之间无井灶，不可往，东行之议遂决，以为尚书右丞从行，遂次陈留。
现代文：当日，巩昌元帅完颜忽斜虎从金昌到达，对哀宗皇帝说京西三百里没有水井炉灶，不可前往。于是决定向东走，用尚书右丞跟随，晚上临时住在了陈留。
English: On the same day, Marshal Gongchang arrived from Jinchang, and told Emperor Aizong that there was no water well stove in the west of Beijing for three hundred miles, so he could not go. So he decided to go east, followed by Shang Shuyuan, and temporarily stayed in Chen in the evening.

古文：壬寅，次杞县。
现代文：二十七日，临时住在鮧县。
English: On the 27th, he temporarily lived in Handan County.

古文：癸卯，次黄城。
现代文：二十八日，临时住在黄城。
English: On the 28th, he temporarily lived in Huangcheng.

古文：丞相完颜赛不之子按春有罪，伏诛。
现代文：丞相完颜赛不的儿子完颜按春有罪被杀。
English: The son of the chancellor Kanyansai, Kanyan Asaharu, was found guilty and killed.

古文：甲辰，次黄陵堈。
现代文：二十九日，临时住在黄陵冈。
English: On the 29th, he temporarily lived in Huanglinggang.

古文：乙巳，诸将请幸河朔，从之。
现代文：三十日，诸将请求到河朔，哀宗皇帝同意了。
English: On the thirtieth day, the generals requested to come to Hexuo, and Emperor Aizong agreed.

古文：二年正月丙午朔，济河，北风大作，后军不克济。
现代文：天兴二年正月初一，渡黄河，北风大作，后续军队不能渡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Tianxing, crossing the Yellow River, the north wind made a big splash, and the follow-up army could not cross.

古文：丁未，大元兵追击于南岸，元帅完颜猪儿、贺都喜死之，建威都尉完颜兀论出降。
现代文：初二，元朝兵追到南岸，元帅完颜猪儿、贺都喜战死，建威都尉完颜兀论出投降。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the former imperial soldiers were chased to the south bank, the marshal Yan Xiu'er and Hedu Xi died in battle, and Captain Jianwei Yan Xiu'er surrendered.

古文：己酉，上哭祭战死士于河北岸，皆赠官，斩兀论出二弟以殉。
现代文：初五，哀宗皇帝在黄河北岸哭祭战死将士，都赠以官职，杀完颜兀论出的二弟以殉祭。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Aizong gave official positions to all the soldiers who died in battle on the north bank of the Yellow River, and the second brother who was killed by Yan Xuan was sacrificed.

古文：赦河朔，招集兵粮，议取卫州。
现代文：初六，哀宗皇帝临时住在沤麻冈，平章政事白撒、元帅和速嘉兀底不相继而到。初七，白撒率兵攻打卫州未克。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Aizong temporarily lived in Renmagao, and the political affairs of Pingzhang and Baisa, the field marshal, and Sojia Loudi arrived one after another. On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Baisa led the troops to attack Weizhou Weike.

古文：留元帅官奴忠孝军四百五十人，都尉马用军二百八十余人，发余军赴宿、徐、陈三州就粮。三月乙丑，石盏女鲁懽乞尽散卫兵出城就食。
现代文：十一日，听说元朝军从河南渡黄河，到卫州西南，于是金退兵。十五日，哀宗皇帝跑到归德。十七日，司农大卿蒲察世达、元帅完颜忽土出归德西门奉迎哀宗皇帝到归德。十八日，派使臣召来白撒，历数其罪状，投进监狱，没收家财赏给将士，且说： 你们应该竭忠尽力，不要像他一样误了国。 
English: On the 11th day, he heard that the Yuan Dynasty army had crossed the Yellow River from Henan to the southwest of Weizhou, so Jin withdrew. On the 15th day, Emperor Aizong ran to return to Germany. On the 17th day, Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Putcha Shida and Marshal Gan Yan Qu Tu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu Qu De Ximen came to welcome Emperor Aizong to return to Germany. On the 18th day, they sent envoys to Baisa, counted his crimes, threw him into prison, confiscated his family wealth and rewards to his soldiers, and said: You should be loyal and

古文：官奴私与国用安谋，邀上幸海州，不从。
现代文：每人给金一两。二十九日，元朝将领碎不礙进兵汴京。
English: On the 29th, the generals of the Yuan Dynasty marched into Beijing.

古文：蔡帅乌石论镐以粮四百余斛至归德，表请临幸，上遣学士乌石论蒲鲜以幸蔡之意谕其州人。
现代文：三十日，禁止民间嫁娶，收集京城财物。二月初一，鱼山张王献杀死元帅完颜忽土，行省忽斜虎亲自率兵讨伐，适逢从宜严禄杀了张王献，他返回了。收集城中粮食。
English: On the 30th, it was forbidden for commoners to marry, and the property of the capital was to be collected. On the first day of February, Yu Shan Zhang Wang Xian killed the marshal, and Guan Guan personally led the troops to fight. At the same time, he killed Zhang Wang Xian from Yiyanlu, and he returned to collect grain in the city.

古文：戊辰，官奴以忠孝军为乱，攻杀马用，遂杀尚书左丞李蹊、参知政事石盏女鲁懽、点检徒单长乐，从官右丞已下三百余人。
现代文：三月二十四日，官奴率忠孝军叛乱，攻击杀了马用，进而杀了尚书左丞李蹊、参知政事石盏女鲁飀、点检徒单长乐，从官右丞以下三百多人。
English: On March 24th, the officials and slaves led the loyal and filial troops in a rebellion, attacked and killed Ma Ying, and then killed Shangshu Zuo Rong, Sangchi Zhengji Shizhen Nianglu Rong, and Dengkang Diao Shan Changle, and more than three hundred people from the officials and Rong.

古文：上赦官奴，暴女鲁懽罪状，以官奴为枢密副使、权参知政事，左右司郎中张天纲为户部侍郎、权参知政事。
现代文：哀宗皇帝赦免了官奴，公布石盏女鲁飀的罪状，任官奴为枢密副使、权参知政事，左右司郎中张天纲为户部侍郎、权参知政事。
English: Emperor Aizong pardoned the official slaves, announced the charges against Shi Zhan's daughter Lu Yao, appointed the official slaves as Privy Vice-Minister, Power Advisor, and Political Affairs, and appointed Zhang Tianzang, the Left and Right Secretary, as Household Attendant, Power Advisor, and Political Affairs.

古文：辛卯，官奴真授参知政事，兼左副元帅。
现代文：二十七日，官奴被授予参知政事，兼左副元帅。
English: On the 27th, Guan Niu was awarded the title of "Senior Vice-Governor and Vice-Marshal of the Left."

古文：官奴以上居照碧堂，禁近诸臣无一人敢奏对者。
现代文：官奴把哀宗皇帝安居在照碧堂，禁止近臣上奏回答皇帝。
English: The official slaves took Emperor Aizong to live in peace in the Zhibi Hall and forbade his close vassals to answer the emperor.

古文：上日悲泣言曰： 自古无不亡之国、不死之主，但恨朕不知用人，致为此奴所囚耳。 
现代文：哀宗悲泣说 ：自古以来没有不灭亡的国家，也没有不死的君主，只恨朕不知道用人，致使被此奴所囚。 
English: "Since ancient times, there has never been a country that did not perish, nor a monarch that did not die. I only hate that I did not know who to employ, which led to me being imprisoned by this slave," said Letsong Mournfully.

古文：六月己卯，官奴及其党阿里合、白进皆伏诛。
现代文：于是同内局令宋皀等人商议杀官奴。六月初六，官奴及其党羽阿里合、白进都被杀。
English: As a result, the Internal Affairs Bureau ordered Song Xi and others to discuss the killing of the bureaucrats. On the 6th day of the 6th month of June, the bureaucrats and their followers, Ali He and Bai Jin, were all killed.

古文：上御双门，赦忠孝军，以安反侧。
现代文：哀宗皇帝御驾双门，赦免忠孝军，以安军心防止叛乱。
English: Emperor Aizong drove through the two gates, pardoned the loyal and filial soldiers, and prevented the rebellion with a military mind.

古文：壬辰，息州行省抹撚兀典以兵袭宋人中渡店，斩获甚众。
现代文：于是决定迁往蔡州，诏令蔡、息、陈、颍各地带兵来迎接。初九，中京被攻破。
English: So they decided to move to Caizhou, and ordered Cai, Xi, Chen, and Zou to bring soldiers from all over the country to meet them. On the ninth day of the first month, Zhongjing was breached.

古文：乙未，万年节，州郡以表来贺二十余所。
现代文：十八日，哀宗皇帝从归德出发，留下元帅王璧守归德。十九日，哀宗临时驻扎亳州。二十六日，哀宗皇帝进入蔡州。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Aizong set out from Guizhou to Germany, leaving Marshal Wang Bi Shou to return to Germany. On the 19th, Emperor Aizong temporarily stationed in Zhangzhou. On the 26th, Emperor Aizong entered Caizhou.

古文：辛丑，设四隅和籴官及惠民司，以太医数人更直，病人官给以药，仍择年老进士二人为医药官。是月，假蔡州都军致仕内族阿虎带同佥大睦亲府事，使宋借粮，入辞，上谕之曰： 宋人负朕深矣。
现代文：八月初一，任秦州元帅粘哥完展权参知政事，在陕西行省事。用蜡书告诉他，九月中旬带兵在饶丰关与皇帝会合，欲出其不意攻打宋朝，以夺取兴元。初二，元朝使者王楫告谕宋朝回国，宋朝派军护送，哀宗皇帝听说此事很害怕。初五，哀宗皇帝在见山亭阅兵。本月中，任蔡州都军退休内族阿虎带为同佥大睦亲府事，出使宋朝借粮，阿虎带向哀宗皇帝辞行，哀宗告谕他说： 宋朝人负朕很深了。
English: On the first day of August, the newly appointed Qin State Marshal, Gui Ge, after exercising his right to participate in political affairs, went on a provincial tour in Shaanxi. He told him with a wax book that in mid-September, he would meet with the emperor in Rao Fengguan, and wanted to attack the Song Dynasty unexpectedly to capture Xingyuan. On the second day of the first month, the Yuan Dynasty's envoy, Wang Qian, told the Song Dynasty to return to China, and the Song Dynasty sent an army to escort him. Emperor Yezong was very afraid when he heard about this. On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Yezong

古文：朕自即位以来，戒饬边将无犯南界。
现代文：朕自即位以来，戒令边将不要侵犯南面边疆。
English: Since I ascended the throne, I have ordered border guards not to encroach on the southern border.

古文：边臣有自请征讨者，未尝不切责之。
现代文：边将有请求征讨的人，我都斥责了他们。
English: I have reprimanded anyone who has come to me asking for money.

古文：向得宋一州，随即付与。
现代文：先前得到宋朝一州，随即还给了他。
English: Previously, the Song Dynasty obtained Yizhou, and then immediately returned it to him.

古文：近淮阴来归，彼多以金币为赎，朕若受财，是货之也，付之全城，秋毫无犯。
现代文：近日淮阴来归降我们，他们多拿金币来赎，朕不爱财，把全城给了他们，且秋毫无犯。
English: Recently, Huaiyin came to surrender to us, they took more gold coins to ransom, I do not love wealth, gave them the whole city, and there was no fall.

古文：清口临阵生获数千人，悉以资粮遣之。
现代文：清口之战生擒几千人，都给他们钱粮遣回了他们。
English: They gave money and grain to several thousand survivors of the Battle of Qingkou and sent them back.

古文：今乘我疲敝，据我寿州，诱我邓州，又攻我唐州，彼为谋亦浅矣。
现代文：现在宋朝乘我们疲惫，占据我寿州，诱骗我邓州，又攻唐州，他们的谋略很短浅啊。
English: Now the Song Dynasty is taking advantage of our exhaustion, occupying my Shoushou, deceiving my Dengzhou, and attacking Tangzhou. Their strategy is very short-sighted.

古文：大元灭国四十，以及西夏，夏亡必及于我。我亡必乃于宋。
现代文：元朝灭了四十个国家，下一个是西夏，西夏灭亡后就是我们，我们灭亡了就是宋朝。
English: The Yuan Dynasty destroyed forty countries, the next was the Western Xia, after the destruction of the Western Xia, it was us, and after our destruction, it was the Song Dynasty.

古文：唇亡齿寒，自然之理。
现代文：唇亡齿寒，自然的规律。
English: Cold lips, dead teeth, it's the law of nature.

古文：若与我连和，所以为我者亦为彼也。
现代文：如果宋朝与我联合，这是为我也是为他们，你晓之此理。 
English: If the Song Dynasty unites with me, it is for me as well as for them. You know this.

古文：卿其以此晓之。 
现代文：到宋朝，宋朝不答应。
English: To the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty did not agree.

古文：至宋，宋不许。九月戊申，鲁山元帅元志率兵入援，赐以大信牌，升为总帅。
现代文：九月初七，鲁山元帅元志率军来援，赐给他大信牌，升为总帅。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Marshal Lu Shan and his troops came to help, and he was given a letter of commendation and promoted to general.

古文：庚戌，以重九拜天于节度使厅，群臣陪从成礼，上面谕之曰： 国家自开创涵养汝等百有余年。
现代文：初九，因为是重阳节，群臣陪同哀宗皇帝在节度使厅拜天，哀宗皇帝告诉他们说： 国家自开创，养你们已有一百多年了。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, because it was the Chung Yeung Festival, a group of ministers accompanied Emperor Aizong to worship the heavens in the festival hall. Emperor Aizong told them, "Since the country was founded, it has been supporting you for more than a hundred years.

古文：汝等或以先世立功，或以劳效起身，被坚执锐，积有年矣。
现代文：你们或以先世立功，或以劳效起身，披坚执锐，好多年了。
English: Either you have made merit in your previous lives, or you have risen through hard work and perseverance for many years.

古文：今当厄运，与朕同患，可谓忠矣。
现代文：现在正当厄运，与朕同患，可谓忠诚啊。
English: Now it's my turn to suffer the same fate. That's loyalty.

古文：比闻北兵将至，正汝等立功报国之秋，纵死王事，不失为忠孝之鬼。
现代文：近闻元朝兵将到，正是你们的立功报国之时，纵然为王事而死，也不失为忠孝之鬼。
English: It has recently been reported that the former imperial soldiers will arrive, just when you are to render distinguished service to the country. Even if you die for the sake of the king, you will still be a ghost of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：往者汝等立功，常虑不为朝廷所知，今日临敌，朕亲见之矣，汝等勉之。 
现代文：以前你们立功，常担心不为朝廷所知，今天临战，朕亲自观看，你们勉励吧。 
English: In the past, when you performed meritorious deeds, you often worried that the Imperial Court would not know about it. Today, when we are about to go to war, I will personally watch, so please encourage yourselves.

古文：因赐卮酒。
现代文：因此赐给卮酒。
English: So he gave him wine to drink.

古文：酒未竟，逻骑驰奏，敌兵数百突至城下。
现代文：酒未喝完，哨兵来报，敌兵几百人突然到了城下。
English: Before the wine was finished, a sentry came to report that several hundred enemy soldiers had suddenly arrived at the foot of the castle.

古文：将士踊跃咸请一战，上许之。
现代文：将士踊跃请战，哀宗皇帝批准了。
English: The generals were eager to fight, and Emperor Aizong gave his approval.

古文：辛卯，上阅射于子城，中者赏麦有差。
现代文：初十，元朝军筑长垒围蔡城。十八日，收集蔡城的粮食。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Yuan Dynasty army built a long fence around Caicheng. On the 18th day, they collected grain from Caicheng.

古文：己卯，大元兵破外城，宿州副总帅高剌哥战殁。
现代文：十二月初四，把所有的民丁都召来防守，召集强壮的妇人假扮男人，运大石头。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, he summoned all the people to defend the city, calling on strong women to pretend to be men and carry large stones.

古文：辛巳，以总帅孛术鲁娄室、殿前都点检兀林答胡土皆权参政，都尉完颜承麟为东面元帅，权总帅。己丑，大元兵堕西城，上谓侍臣曰： 我为金紫十年，太子十年，人主十年，自知无大过恶，死无恨矣。
现代文：哀宗皇帝亲自出去抚慰军队。初七，元朝兵决开练江，宋朝兵决开柴潭，水都进到汝水。初九，元朝军攻破外城，宿州副总帅高剌哥战死。十九日，元朝兵摧毁西城，哀宗皇帝对侍臣说： 我做金紫光禄大夫十年，做太子十年，做皇帝十年，自知没有大过错，死而无怨。
English: Emperor Aizong himself went out to comfort the troops. On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the soldiers of the Yuan Dynasty broke through the Lianjiang River, the soldiers of the Song Dynasty broke through the Chaitan River, and the water all went into the water. On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the soldiers of the Yuan Dynasty broke through the outer city, and the vice-commander-in-chief of Cangzhou, Gao Xingge, died in battle. On the 19th day, the soldiers of the Yuan Dynasty destroyed the western city, Emperor Aizong said to his courtiers: I have been the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu for ten years,

古文：所恨者祖宗传祚百年，至我而绝，与自古荒淫暴乱之君等为亡国，独此为介介耳。 
现代文：所怨的是祖宗江山传了百年，到我却断绝了，与自古荒淫暴乱之君一样同为亡国，独此介意。 
English: The grievance is that the ancestors of the country have been passed down for a hundred years, but I have been cut off, and I am the same as the prince of the ancient wild and violent, and I am the only one who minds this.

古文：又曰： 古无不亡之国，亡国之君往往为人囚絷，或为俘献，或辱于阶庭，闭之空谷。
现代文：又说： 自古没有不亡的国家，亡国之君往往被人囚系，或被俘虏，或在阶庭被辱，或被闭在空谷中。
English: He also said: Since ancient times, there has never been an immortal country. The ruler of a dead country is often imprisoned, or captured, or humiliated in the courtyard, or shut up in an empty valley.

古文：朕必不至于此。
现代文：朕不至于此。
English: I wouldn't do that.

古文：卿等观之，朕志决矣。 
现代文：你们看着，朕志已决。 
English: You see, I've made up my mind.

古文：都尉王爱实战殁。
现代文：都尉王爱实战死。
English: Captain Wang Aisi died in the battle.

古文：炮军总帅王锐杀元帅谷当哥，率三十人降大元。
现代文：炮兵总帅王锐杀死元帅夹谷当哥，率三十人投降元朝。
English: The artillery commander-in-chief, Wang Rui, killed the field marshal, Zhegu Dang brother, and thirty men surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：庚寅，以御用器皿赏战士。
现代文：二十日，拿御用器皿赏给战士。
English: On the 20th, the soldiers were awarded with imperial utensils.

古文：甲午，上微服率兵夜出东城谋遁，及栅不果，战而还。
现代文：二十四日，哀宗皇帝穿便衣率兵夜里出东城逃走，到栅旁没能突围出去，且战且回。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Emperor Aizong dressed in plain clothes and led his soldiers out of Dongcheng at night to escape. They were unable to break out of the gate and had to fight their way back.

古文：乙未，杀尚厩马五十疋、官马一百五十疋犒将士。
现代文：二十五日，杀马厩中五十匹马、官马一百匹犒赏将士。
English: On the 25th, 50 horses in the stable and 100 official horses were killed to reward the soldiers.

古文：三年正月壬寅，册柴潭神为护国灵应王。
现代文：天兴三年正月初三，册封柴潭神为护国灵应王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Tianxing, Chai Tan God was proclaimed as the King of the Protectors of the Country.

古文：甲辰，以近侍分守四城。
现代文：初五，用近侍分别守四城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, four castles were guarded by retainers.

古文：戊申，夜，上集百官，传位于东面元帅承麟，承麟固让。
现代文：初九夜，哀宗皇帝召集百官，传位给东面元帅承麟，承麟坚辞不受。
English: On the night of the ninth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Aizong summoned a hundred officials and passed the throne to Dongmen Marshal Chenglin. Chenglin did not accept the resignation.

古文：诏曰： 朕所以付卿者，岂得已哉？
现代文：哀宗诏说： 朕传位给你是不得已而为之。
English: Aizong Dahal said, "I gave you the position out of necessity.

古文：以肌体肥重，不便鞍马驰突。
现代文：因为朕身体肥胖，不便骑马奔跑。
English: Because I am obese, it is inconvenient to ride a horse and run.

古文：卿平日捷有将略，万一得免，祚胤不绝，此朕志也。 
现代文：你平日敏捷有将略，万一幸免一死，皇帝后代不绝，这是朕的志向。 
English: In your daily life, you are quick and skillful. If you are spared death, the emperor's descendants will never end. This is my ambition.

古文：己酉，承麟即皇帝位。
现代文：初十，承麟即皇帝位。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Chenglin became emperor.

古文：百官称贺。礼毕，亟出捍敌，而南面已立帜。
现代文：百官祝贺，礼毕匆忙出击御敌，而南面已插上了宋朝旗帜。
English: The officials congratulated him, Li Bi hurriedly attacked the enemy, and the Song Dynasty flag was already planted in the south.

古文：俄顷，四面呼声震天地。
现代文：一会儿，四面呼声震天地。
English: A moment later, shouts from all sides shook the heavens and earth.

古文：南面守者弃门，大军入，与城中军巷战，城中军不能御。
现代文：南面守军弃门，宋大军涌入城中，与城中守军展开巷战，城中守军不能抵抗。
English: The southern defenders abandoned the gate, the Song army poured into the city, and the defenders in the city started a street battle. The defenders in the city could not resist.

古文：帝自缢于幽兰轩。
现代文：哀宗在幽兰轩自缢而死。
English: Aizong hanged himself and died in Yulanxuan.

古文：末帝退保子城，闻帝崩，率群臣入哭，谥曰哀宗。
现代文：末帝承麟退保子城，听说哀宗死了，率群臣进去大哭，谥号 哀宗 。
English: The last emperor Chenglin retreated to Baozhicheng. When he heard that Aizong had died, he led a group of courtiers to go in and cry loudly. His nickname was Aizong.

古文：哭奠未毕，城溃，诸禁近举火焚之。奉御绛山收哀宗骨瘗之汝水上。
现代文：哭奠未完，城池崩溃，放火烧城，奉御绛山在汝水上收哀宗尸体及随葬物。
English: Before the mourning is over, the city collapses, the city is set on fire, and the dead bodies of the mourners and the accompanying funerary objects are carried away on the waters of Mt.

古文：末帝为乱兵所害，金亡。
现代文：末帝承麟被乱兵所害，金朝灭亡。
English: The last emperor, Chenglin, was killed by rioting soldiers, and the Kim dynasty came to an end.

