古文：梁孝王武者，孝文皇帝子也，而与孝景帝同母。
现代文：梁孝王刘武，是孝文帝的儿子，与孝景帝为同母兄弟。
English: Liang Xiaowang Liu Wu was the son of Emperor Xiaowen and the half-brother of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：母，窦太后也。
现代文：他的母亲是窦太后。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：孝文帝凡四男：长子曰太子，是为孝景帝；次子武；次子参；次子胜。
现代文：孝文帝共有四个儿子：长子为太子，就是孝景帝；次子名武；三子名参；四子名胜。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had a total of four sons: the eldest son was the crown prince, that is, Emperor Xiaoqing; the second son was Meibu; the third son was Namsan; and the fourth son was Meisho.

古文：孝文帝即位二年，以武为代王，以参为太原王，以胜为梁王。
现代文：孝文帝即位第二年，封刘武为代王，封刘参为太原王，封刘胜为梁王。
English: In the second year of the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, Liu Wu was appointed acting king, Liu San was appointed King of Taiyuan, and Liu Sheng was appointed King of Liang.

古文：二岁，徙代王为淮阳王。
现代文：过了两年，文帝改封代王为淮阳王。
English: Two years later, Emperor Wen changed the title of the acting king to King Huaiyang.

古文：以代尽与太原王，号曰代王。
现代文：把代国的封地全部划归太原王，号为代王。
English: He assigned all the fiefs of the representative country to King Taiyuan and called himself the representative king.

古文：参立十七年，孝文後二年卒，谥为孝王。
现代文：刘参在位十七年，于孝文帝后元二年去世，谥号为孝王。
English: Liu San reigned for 17 years and died in the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen. His posthumous name was Prince Xiaowang.

古文：子登嗣立，是为代共王。
现代文：孝王的儿子刘登继承王位，这就是代共王。
English: Liu Deng, the son of Prince Xiaowang, will succeed to the throne. This is the succession of co-princes.

古文：立二十九年，元光二年卒。
现代文：代共王在位二十九年，于武帝元光二年去世。
English: He reigned for 29 years during the reign of Emperor Gongzong and died in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：子义立，是为代王。
现代文：共王的儿子刘义继位，这就是现任代王。
English: Liu Yi, the son of King Gong, succeeded to the throne, and this is the current acting king.

古文：十九年，汉广关，以常山为限，而徙代王王清河。
现代文：过了十九年，汉朝扩充关塞，以常山为界，将代王迁为清河王。
English: Nineteen years later, the Han Dynasty expanded the pass, with Changshan as the boundary, and moved the king to Qinghe.

古文：清河王徙以元鼎三年也。
现代文：改迁时间在武帝元鼎三年。
English: The relocation took place three years into Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：初，武为淮阳王十年，而梁王胜卒，谥为梁怀王。
现代文：起初，刘武封为淮阳王的第十年，梁王刘胜去世，谥为梁怀王。
English: At first, Liu Wufeng was the tenth king of Huaiyang, Liang Wang Liu Sheng passed away, and Liang Huai Wang took over.

古文：怀王最少子，爱幸异於他子。
现代文：怀王是孝文帝最小的儿子，比其他的儿子更受到宠爱。
English: Prince Huai, the youngest son of Emperor Xiaowen, was loved more than the other sons.

古文：其明年，徙淮阳王武为梁王。
现代文：第二年，文帝改封淮阳王刘武为梁王。
English: The following year, Emperor Wen changed the title of Huaiyang King Liu Wu to Liang King.

古文：梁王之初王梁，孝文帝之十二年也。
现代文：刘武初受封为梁王，是在孝文帝十二年。
English: Liu Wu was first appointed as the King of Liang in the twelfth year of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：梁王自初王通历已十一年矣。
现代文：梁王自起初受封为代王到改封为梁王，前后有十一年的时间。
English: It took King Liang eleven years from the time he was first appointed as acting king to the time he was renamed King Liang.

古文：梁王十四年，入朝。
现代文：梁王十四年，入朝。
English: In the fourteenth year of King Liang, he entered the imperial court.

古文：十七年，十八年，比年入朝，留，其明年，乃之国。
现代文：十七年，十八年，连续两年入朝，并留在京师，到第二年才回到自己的封国。
English: In the seventeenth and eighteenth years, he went to the DPRK for two consecutive years, and stayed in Beijing, and only returned to his fief country in the second year.

古文：二十一年，入朝。
现代文：二十一年又入朝。
English: He returned to the imperial court in 1921.

古文：二十二年，孝文帝崩。
现代文：二十二年，孝文帝去世。
English: Twenty-two years later, Emperor Xiaowen died.

古文：二十四年，入朝。二十五年，复入朝。
现代文：二十四年入朝，二十五年又入朝。
English: He entered the imperial court in 1924 and again in 1925.

古文：是时上未置太子也。
现代文：那时景帝尚未立太子。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing had not yet become crown prince.

古文：上与梁王燕饮，尝从容言曰： 千秋万岁後传於王。 
现代文：皇上与梁王宴饮，曾经在闲谈时说： 千秋万岁之后，传位于梁王你。 
English: During a banquet with Liang Wang, the emperor once said in a casual conversation: "Long live the Emperor Liang.

古文：王辞谢。
现代文：梁王听了后连忙推辞。
English: After hearing this, Liang Wang hurriedly retracted.

古文：虽知非至言，然心内喜。
现代文：他虽然明知景帝所说的不是真心话，但心中暗喜。
English: Although he knew that what Emperor Jing said was not true, he was secretly pleased.

古文：太后亦然。
现代文：太后也同样高兴。
English: The Queen Mother was equally delighted.

古文：其春，吴楚齐赵七国反。
现代文：那年春天，吴、楚、齐、赵等七国反叛。
English: That spring, Wu, Chu, Qi, Zhao and other seven countries rebelled.

古文：吴楚先击梁棘壁，杀数万人。
现代文：吴、楚先攻击梁国的棘壁，杀死数万人。
English: Wu and Chu attacked the ridge of Liang, killing tens of thousands of people.

古文：梁孝王城守睢阳，而使韩安国、张羽等为大将军，以距吴楚。
现代文：梁孝王据守睢阳城，命韩安国、张羽等人为大将军，抵抗吴、楚之兵。
English: Liang Xiaowang firmly guarded the city of Fenyang, and ordered Han An Guo, Zhang Yu and others to act as generals to resist the soldiers of Wu and Chu.

古文：吴楚以梁为限，不敢过而西，与太尉亚夫等相距三月。
现代文：吴、楚受阻于梁，不敢越过梁国向西进兵，和太尉亚夫等人相持了三个月。
English: Wu and Chu were blocked by Liang and did not dare to cross Liang Province to march westward, and they had a three-month standoff with Taiyi Yafu and others.

古文：吴楚破，而梁所破杀虏略与汉中分。明年，汉立太子。
现代文：吴、楚破灭，计算功劳，梁国所斩杀俘获的吴、楚军队的数目和朝廷大略一样多。次年，朝廷立太子。
English: Wu and Chu were destroyed, and the number of Wu and Chu troops killed and captured by Liang Guoteng was roughly the same as that of the imperial court. The following year, the imperial court established a crown prince.

古文：其後梁最亲，有功，又为大国，居天下膏腴地。
现代文：后来梁王因是皇上的亲兄弟，立有大功，又受封于大国，据有天下肥沃的土地。
English: Later, because Liang Wang was the emperor's own brother, he made great contributions, and was also awarded the title of great power, according to which he had the most fertile land in the world.

古文：地北界泰山，西至高阳，四十馀城，皆多大县。
现代文：其封地北以泰山为界，西达高阳，共有四十余城，多数是大县。
English: Its fiefs were bounded by Mount Tai in the north and Gaoyang in the west, with a total of more than forty cities, most of which were large counties.

古文：孝王，窦太后少子也，爱之，赏赐不可胜道。
现代文：梁孝王，是窦太后的小儿子，很受宠爱，所得到的赏赐不计其数。
English: Liang Xiao Wang, the youngest son of Empress Dowager Dou, was much loved and received countless rewards.

古文：於是孝王筑东苑，方三百馀里。广睢阳城七十里。
现代文：于是，梁孝王建造东苑，方圆三百多里，扩展睢阳城至七十里。
English: As a result, Liang Xiaowang built Dongyuan, with a radius of more than three hundred miles, and expanded Shenyang City to seventy miles.

古文：大治宫室，为衤复道，自宫连属於平台三十馀里。
现代文：大兴土木，建造宫殿，修筑架空通道，从宫殿连接到平台长达三十多里。
English: Large-scale civil engineering, construction of palaces, construction of overhead passageways, connecting the palace to the platform for more than thirty miles.

古文：得赐天子旌旗，出从千乘万骑。
现代文：有天子赏赐的旌旗，外出随从千乘万骑。
English: The son of heaven has bestowed upon him the banner, and he goes out accompanied by a thousand horsemen.

古文：东西驰猎，拟於天子。
现代文：到处驰马狩猎，排场之壮盛拟似天子。
English: Hunting horses gallop everywhere, and the pomp of the parade resembles the heavenly son.

古文：出言，入言警。
现代文：出入宫殿，清道禁绝行人，言 警 称 跸。
English: Access to the palace is restricted to pedestrians via a clear road, police said.

古文：招延四方豪桀，自山以东游说之士。莫不毕至，齐人羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳之属。
现代文：揽四方豪杰，自崤山以东的游说之士，像齐人羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳等人，莫不尽归梁国。
English: The heroes of the four directions, the lobbyists from the east of Lushan Mountain, such as Qi Ren Yosheng, Gongsun Qi, and Fenyang, cannot all return to Liang Province.

古文：公孙诡多奇邪计，初见王，赐千金，官至中尉，梁号之曰公孙将军，梁多作兵器弩弓矛数十万，而府库金钱且百巨万，珠玉宝器多於京师。
现代文：公孙诡多有奇特怪诞之计，初次拜见梁王，梁王赐他千金，官职做到中尉，梁国称他 公孙将军 。梁国铸造了许多兵器，弓箭、戈矛之类就有数十万件，府库的金钱近万亿，珠玉、宝器等京师还多。
English: Gongsun Tricky had a strange and grotesque plan. The first time he met King Liang, King Liang gave him thousands of gold and made him a lieutenant. Liang Guo called him Gongsun General. Liang Guo minted many weapons. There are hundreds of thousands of bows and arrows, spears and the like. The government treasury has nearly a trillion of money, and there are also many jewels and treasures.

古文：二十九年十月，梁孝王入朝。
现代文：二十九年十月，梁孝王入京晋见景帝。
English: In October of the 29th year, Liang Xiaowang went to Beijing to meet Emperor Jing.

古文：景帝使使持节乘舆驷马，迎梁王於关下。
现代文：景帝派使者拿着符节，驾着皇帝乘坐的驷马车，到关前迎侯梁王。
English: Emperor Jing sent an emissary to Guanqian to welcome Prince Liang with the imperial banner and a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：既朝，上疏因留，以太后亲故。
现代文：朝见景帝后，呈上奏折请求留在京师，因为太后很宠爱孝王的缘故得以获准。
English: After seeing Emperor Jing in the morning, she submitted a written request to stay in Beijing, which was approved because the empress dowager was very fond of Prince Xiao.

古文：王入则侍景帝同辇，出则同车游猎，射禽兽上林中。
现代文：孝王入宫则陪侍景帝同乘步辇，出宫则同车游猎，到上林苑去射鸟兽。
English: When Prince Takahito entered the palace, he accompanied Emperor Jing on a carriage ride, and when he left the palace, they went hunting in the same car and went to Shanglin Court to shoot birds and beasts.

古文：梁之侍中、郎、谒者著籍引出入天子殿门，与汉宦官无异。
现代文：梁国的侍中、郎官、谒者只须在名簿上登记上姓名，使可以出入天子殿门，和朝廷的官员没有区别。
English: Liang's retainers, vassals, and courtiers only had to register their names in the register, so that they could enter and leave the gates of the Imperial Palace, and there was no difference between them and the officials of the Imperial Court.

古文：十一月，上废栗太子，窦太后心欲以孝王为後嗣。
现代文：十一月，皇上废黜栗太子，窦太后想要让孝王作继承人。
English: In November, the emperor deposed Prince Kuri, and Empress Dowager Dou wanted to make Prince Xiao the heir.

古文：大臣及袁盎等有所关说於景帝，窦太后义格，亦遂不复言以梁王为嗣事由此。
现代文：大臣和袁盎等人劝阻景帝，窦太后的动议受阻，从此也就不再提让梁王作继承人这件事。
English: The ministers and Yuan Ang and others dissuaded Emperor Jing, and the motion of Empress Dowager Dou was blocked. From then on, the matter of making Liang Wang the heir was no longer mentioned.

古文：以事秘，世莫知。
现代文：因为这件事很秘密，世人没有谁知道。
English: Because it was a secret, no one in the world knew about it.

古文：乃辞归国。
现代文：梁王于是辞别朝廷回归封国。
English: King Liang then resigned from the imperial court and returned to his fiefdom.

古文：其夏四月，上立胶东王为太子。
现代文：这年夏天四月，皇上立胶东王为太子。
English: In April of that summer, the emperor made Jiaodong Wang the crown prince.

古文：梁王怨袁盎及议臣，乃与羊胜、公孙诡之属阴使人刺杀袁盎及他议臣十馀人。
现代文：梁王怨恨袁盎和参与议嗣的大臣，就和羊胜、公孙诡等人谋划，暗中派人刺杀袁盎和其他参与议嗣的十多位大臣。
English: King Liang resented Yuan Ang and the ministers who took part in the discussion, so he plotted with Yang Sheng, Gongsun Qi and others and secretly sent people to assassinate Yuan Ang and more than ten other ministers who took part in the discussion.

古文：逐其贼，未得也。
现代文：朝廷缉捕凶手，未获。
English: The imperial court searched for the murderer, but did not find him.

古文：於是天子意梁王，逐贼，果梁使之。
现代文：于是天子怀疑梁王，捕获到凶手，果然是梁王所主使。
English: As a result, Tianzi suspected Liang Wang and caught the murderer, who turned out to be Liang Wang's chief envoy.

古文：乃遣使冠盖相望於道，覆按梁，捕公孙诡、羊胜。
现代文：于是景帝派遣使者不断往来于至梁国的路上，到梁国去反复按验，逮捕公孙诡、羊胜。
English: As a result, Emperor Jing sent emissaries to Liang Province, where they repeatedly inspected and arrested Gongsun Rong and Yang Sheng.

古文：公孙诡、羊胜匿王後宫。
现代文：公孙诡、羊胜藏匿在梁王的后宫。
English: Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng are hiding in King Liang's harem.

古文：使者责二千石急，梁相轩丘豹及内史韩安国进谏王，王乃令胜、诡皆自杀，出之。
现代文：使者责问二千石官员很急迫，梁相轩丘豹和内史韩安国进谏梁王，梁王才命令羊胜、公孙诡都自杀，之后把他们交出来。
English: The envoy reproached the officials of the 2,000-koku officials for being in a hurry. Liang Xiangxuanqiu Leopard and Inner History Hanan Guo entered the palace of Liang Wang. Liang Wang ordered Yang Sheng and Gongsun Rui to commit suicide, and then handed them over.

古文：上由此怨望於梁王。
现代文：皇上因此怨恨梁王。
English: As a result, the emperor resented Liang Wang.

古文：梁王恐，乃使韩安国因长公主谢罪太后，然后得释。
现代文：梁王恐惧，于是派韩安国通过长公主向太后认罪，请求宽宥，这才得到宽恕。
English: King Liang was afraid, so he sent Han An Guo to confess his sins to the empress dowager through the eldest princess and ask for forgiveness. Only then did he receive forgiveness.

古文：上怒稍解，因上书请朝。
现代文：皇上的怒气逐渐消释，梁王便上书请求朝见。
English: The emperor's anger gradually subsided, and Liang Wang sent a letter requesting an audience with the emperor.

古文：既至关，茅兰说王，使乘布车，从两骑入，匿於长公主园。
现代文：到达函谷关后，茅兰劝梁王乘坐布车，只带两个骑兵入京，躲藏在长公主的园囿之中。
English: After arriving at Hanu Pass, Mao Lan advised Liang Wang to take a cloth cart and enter Beijing with only two cavalrymen, hiding in the garden of the eldest princess.

古文：汉使使迎王，王已入关，车骑尽居外，不知王处。
现代文：朝廷派使者迎接梁王，而梁王已经入关，随从车马都在关外，不知梁王所在。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to meet Liang Wang, but Liang Wang had already entered the customs, and his attendants and horses were outside the customs, and they did not know where Liang Wang was.

古文：太后泣曰： 帝杀吾子！ 
现代文：太后哭泣道： 皇上杀了我的儿子！ 
English: The Empress Dowager cried: The Emperor killed my son!

古文：景帝忧恐。
现代文：景帝为此忧恐。
English: Emperor Jing was worried about this.

古文：於是梁王伏斧质於阙下，谢罪，然後太后、景帝大喜，相泣，复如故。
现代文：于是梁王背着刑具俯伏在宫廷门下，认罪自请处罚，太后、景帝非常高兴，相对哭泣，兄弟之情又如以前。
English: As a result, King Liang prostrated himself under the palace gate with a torture device on his back, pleaded guilty and asked for punishment. The empress dowager and Emperor Jing were very happy and wept, and the brotherly feeling was the same as before.

古文：悉召王从官入关。
现代文：然后把梁王随从官员悉召入关。
English: He then summoned all of Liang Wang's subordinate officials to the customs.

古文：然景帝益疏王，不同车辇矣。
现代文：然而景帝渐渐疏远梁王，不再和他同乘车辇了。
English: However, Emperor Jing gradually distanced himself from Liang Wang and no longer rode in the carriage with him.

古文：三十五年冬，复朝。
现代文：三十五年的冬天，梁王再次入京朝见天子。
English: In the winter of the thirty-fifth year, King Liang once again went to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：上疏欲留，上弗许。
现代文：呈上奏折请求留住京师，皇上没有答应。
English: The Emperor did not agree to the request to retain the Kyōshi, which was submitted in the report.

古文：归国，意忽忽不乐。
现代文：梁王回到封国后，心神恍忽闷闷不乐。
English: After Liang Wang returned to the feudal state, his mind was drowsy and unhappy.

古文：北猎良山，有献牛，足出背上，孝王恶之。
现代文：到北方的良山打猎，有人献上一头牛，牛足长在背上，孝王对它感到厌恶。
English: On a hunting trip to the beautiful mountains in the north, someone offered a cow with a long hind leg on its back. Prince Xiao Wang was disgusted by it.

古文：六月中，病热，六日卒，谥曰孝王。
现代文：六月中旬，梁王得了热病，过了六天就去世了。谥号为孝王。
English: In mid-June, King Liang fell ill with fever and died six days later. His nickname was King Xiaowang.

古文：孝王慈孝，每闻太后病，口不能食，居不安寝，常欲留长安侍太后。
现代文：梁孝王非常孝顺，每次听说太后生病，吃不下东西，睡不好觉，常想留在长安侍候太后。
English: Liang Xiaowang was very dutiful. Every time he heard that the empress dowager was ill, he could not eat or sleep well. He often wanted to stay in Chang'an to wait for her.

古文：太后亦爱之。
现代文：太后也疼爱他。
English: The Queen Mother loved him, too.

古文：及闻梁王薨，窦太后哭极哀，不食，曰： 帝果杀吾子！ 
现代文：得知梁王病故，窦太后哭得很悲痛，不进饮食，说： 皇上果然杀了我的儿子！ 
English: Learning that Liang Wang had died of illness, Empress Dowager Dou cried bitterly, refused to eat, and said, "The emperor really did kill my son!"

古文：景帝哀惧，不知所为。
现代文：景帝为之悲哀，忧惧，不知如何是好。
English: Emperor Jing was saddened and worried, and did not know what to do.

古文：与长公主计之，乃分梁为五国，尽立孝王男五人为王，女五人皆食汤沐邑。
现代文：景帝和长公主商量，于是分梁国为五国，把孝王的五个儿子全封为王，五个女儿也都封给她们汤沐邑。
English: Emperor Jing consulted with the eldest princess, and divided Liang Guo into five provinces, making the five sons of Prince Xiao the kings, and the five daughters of Prince Xiao the queens.

古文：於是奏之太后，太后乃说，为帝加壹餐。
现代文：把这些措施上奏给太后，太后才变得高兴起来，特地因景帝的这种处置加了一次餐食。
English: He reported these measures to the empress dowager, who only became happy and specially added a meal as a result of Emperor Jing's treatment.

古文：梁孝王长子买为梁王，是为共王；子明为济川王；子彭离为济东王；子定为山阳王；子不识为济阴王。
现代文：梁孝王长子刘买继承王位，被封为共王；次子刘明被封为济川王；三子刘彭离被封为济东王；四子刘定被封为山阳王；少子刘不识被封为济阴王。
English: The eldest son of Liang Xiao Wang, Liu Buy, succeeded to the throne and was named co-king; the second son, Liu Ming, was named King of Jichuan; the third son, Liu Pengli, was named King of Jidong; the fourth son, Liu Ding, was named King of Shanyang; and the youngest son, Liu Wujie, was named King of Jilin.

古文：孝王未死时，财以巨万计，不可胜数。
现代文：梁孝王还未去世时，财产多得以亿万计算，无法计数。
English: When Liang Xiaowang was still alive, his property was in the hundreds of millions, and it was impossible to count.

古文：及死，藏府馀黄金尚四十馀万斤，他财物称是。
现代文：死后，他府库所余的黄金尚有四十多万斤，其他财物也相当于此。
English: After his death, the remaining gold in his treasury amounted to more than 400,000 jin, and other assets were also equivalent to this.

古文：梁共王三年，景帝崩。
现代文：梁共王三年，景帝去世。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Liang, Emperor Jing died.

古文：共王立七年卒，子襄立，是为平王。
现代文：共王在位七年去世，他的儿子刘襄继位，这就是平王。
English: The king died seven years into his reign and was succeeded by his son Liu Xiang, known as King Ping.

古文：梁平王襄十四年，母曰陈太后。
现代文：梁平王刘襄十四年，梁平王的母亲是陈太后。
English: In the fourteenth year of Liu Xiang, Liang Ping Wang's mother was Empress Dowager Chen.

古文：共王母曰李太后。
现代文：共王的母亲是李太后。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager Li.

古文：李太后，亲平王之大母也。
现代文：李太后，是平王的亲祖母。
English: Empress Dowager Ri was the great-grandmother of King Ping.

古文：而平王之后姓任，曰任王后。
现代文：平王的王后姓任，叫任王后。
English: The name of the queen of the king of Taira was Ren, and she was called the Queen of Ren.

古文：任王后甚有宠於平王襄。
现代文：任王后很受平王刘襄的宠受。
English: The queen-in-waiting was very favored by the king of Ping, Liu Xiang.

古文：初，孝王在时，有罍樽，直千金。
现代文：当初，孝王在世时，有一个罍樽，价值千金。
English: Originally, when Prince Takao was alive, there was a gourd barrel worth thousands of dollars.

古文：孝王诫後世，善保罍樽，无得以与人。
现代文：孝王告戒后人，要好好保管罍樽，不得将它送给别人。
English: Xiao Wang warned his descendants to keep the gourd well and not to give it to others.

古文：任王后闻而欲得罍樽。
现代文：任王后听说以后却想得到罍樽。
English: After hearing that she had been appointed queen, she wanted to get a gourd.

古文：平王大母李太后曰： 先王有命，无得以罍樽与人。
现代文：平王祖母李太后说： 先王有遗命，不得把罍樽送给别人。
English: His grandmother, Empress Dowager Li, said, "The late king had a last will and testament, and he was not allowed to give the gourd barrels to others.

古文：他物虽百巨万，犹自恣也。 
现代文：其他的东西即使价值亿万，任你自取。 
English: Other things, even if they are worth hundreds of millions, are up to you.

古文：任王后绝欲得之。
现代文：任王后执意要得到这个罍樽。
English: The queen-in-waiting is determined to get her hands on the gong.

古文：平王襄直使人开府取罍樽，赐任王后。
现代文：平王刘襄径直使人开启府库取来罍樽，赐给任王后。
English: Liu Xiang, the king of Ping, ordered the treasury to be opened to take the gourd barrels and give them to the queen.

古文：李太后大怒，汉使者来，欲自言，平王襄及任王后遮止，闭门，李太后与争门，措指，遂不得见汉使者。
现代文：李太后大怒，朝廷的使者来梁国，李太后要亲自向使者诉说此事，平王刘襄和任王后拦阻她，关上门，李太后争着要开门，手指被门缝夹住，终于未能见到朝廷的使者。
English: Empress Dowager Li was furious. An emissary of the imperial court came to Liang Province. Empress Dowager Li wanted to personally tell the emissary about the matter. King Ping Liu Xiang and Queen Ren blocked her and closed the door. Empress Dowager Li struggled to open the door. Her fingers were caught in the door, and she was finally unable to see the emissary of the imperial court.

古文：李太后亦私与食官长及郎中尹霸等士通乱，而王与任王后以此使人风止李太后，李太后内有淫行，亦已。
现代文：李太后私下和食官长以及郎中尹霸等人通奸，于是平王和任王后派人以此暗示劝阻李太后，李太后因为内有淫乱的行为，也就作罢了。
English: Empress Dowager Li secretly committed adultery with the chief of the food officials and her son-in-law Yin Ba, and so King Ping and Empress Dowager Ren sent someone to dissuade Empress Dowager Li with this insinuation. Empress Dowager Li also stopped committing adultery because of her adulterous behavior.

古文：後病薨。
现代文：后来李太后病故。
English: Later, Empress Dowager Li died of illness.

古文：病时，任后未尝请病；薨，又不持丧。
现代文：她生病的时候，任王后未曾请安问病；病故以后，又不居丧守孝。
English: When she was ill, the queen-in-waiting did not ask for her to be cured; when she died, she did not mourn for her.

古文：元朔中，睢阳人类犴反者，人有辱其父，而与淮阳太守客出同车。太守客出下车，类犴反杀其仇於车上而去。
现代文：元朔年间，睢阳人有名叫类犴反的，有人侮辱了他的父亲，这个人和淮阳太守的门客同车外出，太守门客下车离去，类犴反在车上杀死他的仇人便逃走了。
English: During the Yuan Shuo era, the people of Poyang were famous for their so-called counter-revolutionaries. Someone insulted his father. This person went out in a car with the gatekeeper of Huaiyang Taishou. The gatekeeper got out of the car and left, while the counter-revolutionaries killed his enemy in the car and fled.

古文：淮阳太守怒，以让梁二千石。
现代文：淮阳太守大怒，以此责备梁国二千石官员。
English: Huaiyang Daju was furious and blamed Liang Guo's 2,000-koku officials.

古文：二千石以下求反甚急，执反亲戚。
现代文：二千石以下的官员缉捕类犴反非常紧急，就逮捕了类犴反的亲属。
English: It is very urgent for officials with less than 2,000 koku to arrest such rebels, so they arrested the relatives of the rebels.

古文：反知国阴事，乃上变事，具告知王与大母争樽状。
现代文：类犴反知道梁国宫中的隐秘事，于是向朝廷上书报告，详细说出平王和祖母为罍樽而争执的前后情况。
English: Knowing the hidden things in the Liangguo Palace, Luo Xuanqi wrote a report to the imperial court, detailing the situation of the dispute between King Ping and his grandmother over the gourd barrels.

古文：时丞相以下见知之，欲以伤梁长吏，其书闻天子。
现代文：当时丞相以下的官员知道了这件事，想借此打击梁国的高级官吏，于是将上书呈报给天子。
English: At that time, officials below the minister of justice knew about this matter and wanted to use it to attack high-ranking officials in Liang Guo, so they reported the petition to the emperor.

古文：天子下吏验问，有之。
现代文：天子将这件事交给官吏调查审问，确有其事。
English: Tianzi handed the matter over to officials for investigation and interrogation, which is indeed the case.

古文：公卿请废襄为庶人。
现代文：公卿奏请皇上废黜平王刘襄为平民。
English: The court nobles petitioned the emperor to depose Ping Wang Liu Xiang as a commoner.

古文：天子曰： 李太后有淫行，而梁王襄无良师傅，故陷不义。 
现代文：天子说： 李太后有淫乱的行为，梁王刘襄又没有良好的太师太傅，所以才陷于如此不义的境地。 
English: Tian Zi said: Empress Dowager Li is a fornicator, and King Liang Liu Xiang does not have a good teacher, which is why he is trapped in such an unjust situation.

古文：乃削梁八城，枭任王后首于市。
现代文：于是削减梁国八个城的封地，把任王后斩首于市。
English: As a result, the fiefdoms of eight cities in Liang Province were reduced, and the appointed queen was beheaded in the city.

古文：梁馀尚有十城。
现代文：梁国还剩下十城。
English: There are ten cities left in Liang Province.

古文：襄立三十九年卒，谥为平王。
现代文：刘襄在位三十九年去世，谥为平王。
English: Liu Xiang died in the thirty-ninth year of his reign and was dethroned as the Ping Wang.

古文：子无伤立为梁王也。
现代文：他的儿子刘无伤立为梁王。
English: His son Liu Wuzhong became the king of Liang.

古文：济川王明者，梁孝王子，以桓邑侯孝景中六年为济川王。
现代文：济川王刘明是梁孝王的次子，孝景帝中元六年由桓邑侯晋封为济川王。
English: Liu Ming, the King of Jecheon, was the second son of King Liang Xiao. He was promoted to King of Jecheon in the middle of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing by the Prince of Kan'e.

古文：七岁，坐射杀其中尉，汉有司请诛，天子弗忍诛，废明为庶人。迁房陵，地入于汉为郡。
现代文：七年后，因射杀中尉犯罪，朝廷中的有关主事官员奏请诛杀济川王，天子不忍心杀他，废黜刘明为平民，贬迁到房陵，封地归属朝廷，变为郡县。
English: Seven years later, because of the crime of shooting a lieutenant, the relevant responsible officials in the imperial court sent a request to assassinate King Jichuan. The emperor could not bear to kill him, dethroned Liu Ming as a civilian, moved to Fangling, the fief belonged to the imperial court, and became a county.

古文：济东王彭离者，梁孝王子，以孝景中六年为济东王。
现代文：济东王刘彭离是梁孝王的儿子，在孝景帝中元六年受封为济东王。
English: Liu Pengli, the King of Jidong, was the son of King Liang Xiao, and was crowned King of Jidong in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoqing.

古文：二十九年，彭离骄悍，无人君礼，昏暮私与其奴、亡命少年数十人行剽杀人，取财物以为好。
现代文：二十九年后，刘彭离骄纵凶悍，没有人君的风范，夜晚私下和他的奴仆、亡命少年几十人去打劫杀人，掠取别人的财物以为乐事。
English: Twenty-nine years later, Liu Peng, arrogant and fierce, without the demeanor of a prince, secretly went to rob and kill dozens of his slaves and exiled youths at night, taking pleasure in plundering other people's property.

古文：所杀发觉者百馀人，国皆知之，莫敢夜行。
现代文：他所杀的人被发觉的就有一百多，全国都知道，没有人敢夜间外出。
English: More than a hundred of his victims have been found, and the whole country knows that no one dares to go out at night.

古文：所杀者子上书言。
现代文：被他杀的人的儿子上书告发。
English: The son of the man he killed filed a complaint.

古文：汉有司请诛，上不忍，废以为庶人，迁上庸，地入于汉，为大河郡。
现代文：朝廷中有关主事官员奏请诛杀他。皇上不忍心，把他废黜为平民，贬迁到上庸，封地归属朝廷，变为大河郡。
English: The relevant leading officials in the imperial court requested that he be killed. The emperor could not bear it, so he was deposed as a commoner, demoted to Shangyong, the fief belonged to the imperial court, and became Tahe County.

古文：山阳哀王定者，梁孝王子，以孝景中六年为山阳王。
现代文：山阳哀王刘定是梁孝子的儿子，在孝景帝中元六年受封为山阳王。
English: Liu Ding, the Sanyang King of Lamentation, was the son of Liang Xiaozi. He was named the Sanyang King in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：九年卒，无子，国除，地入于汉，为山阳郡。
现代文：在位九年后去世，没有儿子，封国被废除，封地归属朝廷，变为山阳郡。
English: He died after nine years of reign, without a son, the fiefdom was abolished, the fief belonged to the imperial court, and became Sanyang County.

古文：济阴哀王不识者，梁孝王子，以孝景中六年为济阴王。
现代文：济阴哀王刘不识是梁孝王的儿子，在孝景帝中元六年受封为济阴王。
English: Liu, the king of mourning in Jijin, is the son of King Liang Xiao. He was named the king of Jijin in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：一岁卒，无子，国除，地入于汉，为济阴郡。
现代文：在位一年后去世，没有儿子，封国被废除，封地归属朝廷，变为济阴郡。
English: He died a year after his reign, without a son, the fiefdom was abolished, the fief belonged to the imperial court, and became Jilin County.

古文：太史公曰：梁孝王虽以亲爱之故，王膏腴之地，然会汉家隆盛，百姓殷富，故能植其财货，广宫室，车服拟於天子。
现代文：太史公说：梁孝王虽然凭借自己是天子亲兄弟、太后爱子的缘故，受封于肥沃之地为王，也正赶上国运隆盛，百姓富足，所以能够积蓄财富，扩建宫室，车马服饰和天子相似。
English: Taishikong said: Although King Liang Xiao Wang was made king in a fertile land by virtue of being the son of Heaven and the beloved son of the empress dowager, he was also catching up with the prosperity of the country and the prosperity of the people, so he was able to accumulate wealth, expand the palace, and the car and horse costumes were similar to the son of Heaven.

古文：然亦僭矣。
现代文：然而，这样做也属于僭越行为了。
English: However, to do so would also be an act of arrogance.

古文：褚先生曰：臣为郎时，闻之於宫殿中老郎吏好事者称道之也。
现代文：褚少孙先生说：我做郎官的时候，从宫殿中喜好说长论短的老郎官那里听说过梁孝王的事迹。
English: Mr. Zou Shosun said: When I was a vassal, I heard about the deeds of Liang Xiao Wang from an old vassal who liked to talk about long and short things in the palace.

古文：窃以为令梁孝王怨望，欲为不善者，事从中生。
现代文：我私下认为，使梁孝王怨恨不满，要图谋不轨，想做皇帝的祸根是从朝廷中惹出来的。
English: Privately, I believe that the root of the evil that made Liang Xiaowang resentful and dissatisfied, want to plot evil, and want to be an emperor came from the imperial court.

古文：今太后，女主也，以爱少子故，欲令梁王为太子。
现代文：当时的太后是国家的女主，因为疼爱小儿子的缘故，想让梁王为太子。
English: At that time, the empress dowager was the mistress of the country. Because she loved her youngest son, she wanted to make Liang Wang the crown prince.

古文：大臣不时正言其不可状，阿意治小，私说意以受赏赐，非忠臣也。
现代文：朝中大臣不及时直说这样做不可以的情由，还一味阿谀奉承，净说些微不足道的小事，私下讨好太后以求得到赏赐，这不是忠臣啊！
English: The ministers of the two Koreas did not say the reason why it was not allowed in a timely manner, and they continued to flatter the Empress Dowager by saying trivial things in order to get a reward. This was not a loyal subject!

古文：齐如魏其侯窦婴之正言也，何以有後祸？
现代文：假如大臣们都能像魏其侯、窦婴那样堂堂正正说话，怎么会有后来的祸患？
English: If the ministers can speak as dignified and upright as Wei Qihou and Dou Ying, how can there be a later disaster?

古文：景帝与王燕见，侍太后饮，景帝曰： 千秋万岁之後传王。 
现代文：景帝与梁孝王家宴，侍候太后饮酒，景帝说： 在我千秋万岁之后，把帝位传给你梁王。 
English: Emperor Jing and King Liang Xiao Wang had a family feast and served alcohol to the empress dowager. Emperor Jing said, "After I have lived a thousand years, I will pass the imperial throne to you, King Liang."

古文：太后喜说。
现代文：太后为此很高兴。
English: The Queen Mother was delighted.

古文：窦婴在前，据地言曰： 汉法之约，传子適孙，今帝何以得传弟，擅乱高帝约乎！ 
现代文：窦婴在宴席前，伏地谏道： 汉朝的法制规定，帝位传给长子、长孙，如今皇上怎可传给弟弟，擅自破坏高皇帝的规定呢！ 
English: Before the banquet, Dou Ying said to Voldemort, "According to the legal system of the Han Dynasty, the imperial throne is passed down to the eldest son and grandson. Now, how can the emperor pass it down to his younger brother without breaking the rules of Emperor Gao?

古文：於是景帝默然无声。
现代文：当时景帝沉默不语。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing was silent.

古文：太后意不说。
现代文：太后心里也很不高兴。
English: The Empress Dowager was not happy either.

古文：故成王与小弱弟立树下，取一桐叶以与之，曰： 吾用封汝。 
现代文：从前周成王和年幼的弟弟站在树下，他拿起一片桐叶对弟弟说： 我以此封你。 
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Cheng Wang was standing under a tree with his younger brother. He picked up a paulownia leaf and said to his brother, "I'll seal you with this."

古文：周公闻之，进见曰： 天王封弟，甚善。 
现代文：周公听见了，向前拜见道： 天子分封弟弟，很好。 
English: Zhou Gong heard this and bowed forward and said, "It's good to be the younger brother of Tianzi Fenfeng.

古文：成王曰： 吾直与戏耳。 
现代文：成王说： 我只不过和他开玩笑罢了。 
English: Cheng Wang said: I was only joking with him.

古文：周公曰： 人主无过举，不当有戏言，言之必行之。 
现代文：周公说： 作为君主不应有不得当的举动，不应该有戏言，说了就一定要做到。 
English: Zhou Gong said: As a monarch, there should be no improper actions, there should be no jokes, and what is said must be done.

古文：於是乃封小弟以应县。
现代文：于是成王就把应县封给小弟。
English: As a result, Cheng Wang gave the county title to his younger brother.

古文：是後成王没齿不敢有戏言，言必行之。
现代文：从此以后，成王终生不敢有戏言，说的话一定做到。
English: From then on, Cheng Wang never dared to make a joke for the rest of his life. Whatever he said must be done.

古文：孝经曰： 非法不言，非道不行。 
现代文：《孝经》上说： 不合法度的话不说，不合道理的事不做。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: Do not say things that are illegal, and do not do things that are unreasonable.

古文：此圣人之法言也。
现代文：这是圣人的明训啊。
English: This is the sage's clear teaching.

古文：今主上不宜出好言於梁王。
现代文：当时皇上不应该用那种好听的话对梁王许愿。
English: At that time, the emperor should not have used such pleasant words to make a wish to Liang Wang.

古文：梁王上有太后之重，骄蹇日久，数闻景帝好言，千秋万世之後传王，而实不行。
现代文：梁王上有太后可以倚重，骄傲纵恣已经很久，多次听景帝许愿之言，要千秋万岁后把帝位传给梁王，可是实际上不这样做。
English: The empress dowager can rely on King Liang, and he has been proud for a long time. He has listened to Emperor Jing's wish to pass the imperial throne to King Liang many times, but he does not actually do so.

古文：又诸侯王朝见天子，汉法凡当四见耳。
现代文：另外，诸侯王朝见天子，根据汉朝的制度，应当一共只见四次。
English: In addition, according to the system of the Han Dynasty, the princely dynasties should see the Son of Heaven only four times in total.

古文：始到，入小见；到正月朔旦，奉皮荐璧玉贺正月，法见；後三日，为王置酒，赐金钱财物；後二日，复入小见，辞去。
现代文：刚到京城时，入宫觐见，谓之 小见 ；到了正月初一的清晨，捧着皮垫摆上璧玉向皇帝道贺正月，谓之 法见 ；再过三天，皇帝为侯王设下酒宴，赐给他们金钱财物；再过两天，诸侯王又入宫 小见 ，然后辞别归国。
English: When he first arrived in the capital, he entered the palace to see the emperor, which is called a small visit; when he arrived in the early morning of the first day of the first month of the year, he held a leather cushion and placed a gemstone on it to congratulate the emperor on the first month of the year, which is called a legal visit; three days later, the emperor held a wine banquet for the princes and kings, and gave them money and property; two days later, the princes and kings again entered the palace to see the princes and kings, and then left for home.

古文：凡留长安不过二十日。
现代文：一共留居长安不过二十天。
English: They stayed in Chang'an for a total of only twenty days.

古文：小见者，燕见於禁门内，饮於省中，非士人所得入也。
现代文：所谓 小见 ，即在宫内不拘大礼相见，饮宴于王宫禁地，这不是一般士人所能进入的。
English: The so-called small meeting, that is, meeting each other in the palace without regard to great etiquette, and having a banquet in the restricted area of the royal palace, is not something that ordinary people can enter.

古文：今梁王西朝，因留，且半岁。
现代文：现在梁王西入长安朝见皇上，趁此留居宫中，将近半年。
English: Now Liang Wangxi has entered the Chang'an Dynasty to see the emperor, taking advantage of this to stay in the palace for nearly half a year.

古文：入与人主同辇，出与同车。
现代文：他入宫和皇上同辇而坐，出宫与皇上同车而乘。
English: He entered the palace together with the emperor, and left the palace together with the emperor.

古文：示风以大言而实不与，令出怨言，谋畔逆，乃随而忧之，不亦远乎！
现代文：皇上以夸大的言词讽示他将来要做皇帝而实际上又不能兑现，以致使梁王口出怨言，图谋叛逆，于是皇帝又跟着为他担忧，这不是背离事理太远了吗？
English: The emperor used exaggerated words to suggest that he would become emperor in the future, but could not actually do so, so that Liang Wang complained and plotted to rebel, so the emperor was worried about him. Isn't this too far from the truth?

古文：非大贤人，不知退让。
现代文：除了大贤大德之人，不懂得谦恭退让。
English: Except for those with great virtue, they do not know how to be humble and concede.

古文：今汉之仪法，朝见贺正月者，常一王与四侯俱朝见，十馀岁一至。
现代文：按汉朝的礼仪制度，朝见皇上庆贺正月，通常是一王和四侯一起朝见，十多年才有一次这样的机会。
English: According to the etiquette system of the Han Dynasty, it is customary for the king and the four princes to meet with the emperor to celebrate the Lunar New Year. In more than ten years, there has only been one such opportunity.

古文：今梁王常比年入朝见，久留。
现代文：而今梁王却常连年入京朝见，并久留于京。
English: Now, however, Liang Wang visits the Imperial Court in Beijing every year and stays in the capital for a long time.

古文：鄙语曰 骄子不孝 ，非恶言也。
现代文：俗语说： 骄纵的孩子不懂得孝顺。 
English: As the saying goes: Arrogant children do not understand filial piety.

古文：故诸侯王当为置良师傅，相忠言之士，如汲黯、韩长孺等，敢直言极谏，安得有患害！
现代文：这话说得不错啊。所以应当为诸侯王设置好的太师太傅，让忠正敢言之士为相辅佐他，就如汲黯、韩长孺等人那样，敢于直言极谏，又怎么会有祸患产生呢！
English: This is a good saying. Therefore, a good teacher should be set up for the princes and kings, so that the loyal and honest people who dare to speak will mutually support him, just as those who dare to speak the truth, such as Ji Ying and Han Changtao, and how can there be a disaster?

古文：盖闻梁王西入朝，谒窦太后，燕见，与景帝俱侍坐於太后前，语言私说。
现代文：听说梁王西入京师朝见，谒见窦太后，家人相见，和景帝一起陪坐在太后面前，他们母子、兄弟之间高兴地说贴心话。
English: I heard that when Liang Wangxi entered Beijing, he met with the emperor, met with the empress Dowager Dou, met with his family, and sat with Emperor Jing in front of the empress dowager. Their mother, son, and brother were happy to talk to each other.

古文：太后谓帝曰： 吾闻殷道亲亲，周道尊尊，其义一也。
现代文：太后对景帝说： 我听说殷商的制度亲其兄弟，周朝的制度尊其祖先，这个道理是一样的。
English: The Empress Dowager said to Emperor Jing: I have heard that the Yin Shang system is close to its brothers, and the Zhou Dynasty system respects its ancestors. This principle is the same.

古文：安车大驾，用梁孝王为寄。 
现代文：百年之后，我把梁孝王托付给你。 
English: After a hundred years, I entrust the Liang Xiao Wang to you.

古文：景帝跪席举身曰： 诺。 
现代文：景帝跪在坐席上抬起身子说： 是。 
English: Jingdi knelt down on the seat, raised his body and said, "Yes."

古文：罢酒出，帝召袁盎诸大臣通经术者曰： 太后言如是，何谓也？ 
现代文：宴罢出宫，景帝召集袁盎等精通经术的大臣说： 太后说了这样的话，是什么意思？ 
English: When the banquet left the palace, Emperor Jing called together Yuan Ang and other ministers who were well versed in the art of war and said, "What did the Empress Dowager mean when she said such a thing?

古文：皆对曰： 太后意欲立梁王为帝太子。 
现代文：袁盎等人一齐回答说： 太后的意思要立梁王为皇帝的太子。 
English: Yuan Ang and the others replied together, "The Empress Dowager wants to make Liang Wang the crown prince of the emperor."

古文：帝问其状，袁盎等曰： 殷道亲亲者，立弟。
现代文：景帝问其中的道理，袁盎等人说： 殷商的传统亲其兄弟，所以传位于其弟。
English: When Emperor Jing asked the reason for this, Yuan Ang and others said, "The tradition of Yin merchants is close to their brothers, so it was passed down to their younger brothers.

古文：周道尊尊者，立子。
现代文：周朝的传统尊其祖先，所以传位于其子。
English: The tradition of the Zhou Dynasty respected its ancestors, so it was passed down to its children.

古文：殷道质，质者法天，亲其所亲，故立弟。
现代文：殷商的传统崇尚质朴，质朴就效法上天，亲其亲人，所以传位于弟。
English: The tradition of Yin merchants advocated simplicity. Simplicity is to follow the law of heaven and be close to one's relatives. Therefore, it was passed down to the younger brother.

古文：周道文，文者法地，尊者敬也，敬其本始，故立长子。
现代文：周朝的传统崇尚华美，华美就效法大地，尊是敬的意思，敬其本原，所以传位于长子。
English: The tradition of the Zhou Dynasty advocated beauty, and beauty followed the example of the earth. Honor means to respect, and to respect its origin. Therefore, it was passed down to the eldest son.

古文：周道，太子死，立適孙。
现代文：周朝的制度，太子死了，立嫡孙。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty system, the prince died and the legitimate grandson was born.

古文：殷道。太子死，立其弟。 
现代文：殷朝的制度，太子死了，立其弟。 
English: In the Yin Dynasty system, the prince died and his younger brother was appointed.

古文：帝曰： 於公何如？ 
现代文：景帝说： 你们的看法如何？ 
English: Jingdi said: What is your opinion?

古文：皆对曰： 方今汉家法周，周道不得立弟，当立子。
现代文：大家一齐回答说： 现在汉朝的制度是效法周朝，周朝的制度不能立兄弟，应当立儿子。
English: They all replied together: The current Han Dynasty system is modeled after the Zhou Dynasty. The Zhou Dynasty system cannot establish brothers, but should establish sons.

古文：故春秋所以非宋宣公。
现代文：正因为这样，所以《春秋》以此指责宋宣公。
English: It is precisely because of this that "Spring and Autumn" accuses Song Xuan Gong.

古文：宋宣公死，不立子而与弟。
现代文：宋宣公死后，不立儿子而传位给弟弟。
English: After the death of Song Xuan Gong, he passed the throne to his younger brother without appointing a son.

古文：弟受国死，复反之与兄之子。
现代文：其弟继位为国君死后，又把君位归给他的哥哥的儿子。
English: After the death of his brother, who succeeded to the throne, he gave the throne to his brother's son.

古文：弟之子争之，以为我当代父後，即刺杀兄子。
现代文：其弟的儿子争夺君位，认为自己应当接替父亲身后之位，于是杀了宣公的儿子。
English: His younger brother's son was vying for the throne, and he thought he should take his place behind his father, so he killed the son of the proclamation.

古文：以故国乱，祸不绝。
现代文：因此国家大乱。祸患不断。
English: Therefore, the country is in turmoil. The calamity continues.

古文：故春秋曰 君子大居正，宋之祸宣公为之 。
现代文：所以《春秋》说： 君子尊崇遵循正道，宋国的祸乱是宣公造成的。 
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" said: Nobles respect and follow the right path, and the disaster of the Song Dynasty was caused by proclamation.

古文：臣请见太后白之。 
现代文：臣等请求谒见太后说明这个道理。 
English: The ministers requested an audience with the empress dowager to explain this.

古文：袁盎等入见太后： 太后言欲立梁王，梁王即终，欲谁立？ 
现代文：袁盎等人入宫谒见太后说： 太后说要立梁王，那么，梁王死后要立谁？ 
English: Yuan Ang and others entered the palace to see the empress dowager and said, "The empress dowager said that she wanted to set up King Liang, so who should be set up after King Liang's death?

古文：太后曰： 吾复立帝子。 
现代文：太后说： 我再立皇帝的儿子。 
English: The empress dowager said, "I will reinstate the emperor's son."

古文：袁盎等以宋宣公不立正，生祸，祸乱後五世不绝，小不忍害大义状报太后。
现代文：袁盎等人向太后陈述了这样一些史实情况：宋宣公不立应当继位的嫡子而发生祸乱，祸乱延续了五代而不断绝，以及不克制小的私心便会遗害大义。
English: Yuan Ang and others presented the following historical facts to the empress dowager: a calamity occurred because Song Xuan Gong did not appoint a legitimate son to succeed to the throne, the calamity continued for five generations and never ended, and unchecked small selfishness would harm great righteousness.

古文：太后乃解说，即使梁王归就国。
现代文：太后听了，这才理解其中的道理，因而也就高兴了，随即让梁王归回封国。
English: When the Empress Dowager heard this, she understood the reason for this, and was therefore pleased. She then allowed King Liang to return to his fiefdom.

古文：而梁王闻其义出於袁盎诸大臣所，怨望，使人来杀袁盎。
现代文：梁王听说这种意见出自袁盎等大臣，就怨恨起他们来，于是派人来杀袁盎。
English: When Liang Wang heard that this opinion came from Yuan Ang and other ministers, he resented them, so he sent someone to kill Yuan Ang.

古文：袁盎顾之曰： 我所谓袁将军者也，公得毋误乎？ 
现代文：袁盎回头看到刺客，说： 我就是所说的袁将军，你不会弄错人吧？ 
English: Yuan Ang looked back and saw the assassin and said, "I am General Yuan. You wouldn't get the wrong person, would you?"

古文：刺者曰： 是矣！ 
现代文：刺客说： 正是你！ 
English: The assassin said: It is you!

古文：刺之，置其剑，剑著身。
现代文：刺客杀了袁盎，丢弃了他的剑，剑插在袁盎的身上。
English: The assassin killed Yuan Ang, threw away his sword, and the sword was stuck in Yuan Ang's body.

古文：视其剑，新治。
现代文：查看那把剑，是刚刚磨过的。
English: Look at that sword. It's just been sharpened.

古文：问长安中削厉工，工曰： 梁郎某子来治此剑。 
现代文：查问长安城中制作或磨砺刀剑的工匠，工匠说： 梁国郎官某人曾来磨过这把剑。 
English: When the craftsman who made or sharpened the sword in Chang'an City was questioned, the craftsman said: Liang Guolangguan, someone has come to sharpen this sword.

古文：以此知而发觉之，发使者捕逐之。
现代文：以此得知线索，察觉阴谋，便派遣使者追捕凶手。
English: Having thus learned the clue and detected the plot, he sent an emissary to hunt down the murderer.

古文：独梁王所欲杀大臣十馀人，文吏穷本之，谋反端颇见。
现代文：光是梁王所要杀的大臣就有十多人，执法的官吏穷究其根源，梁王谋反的端倪已经十分明显地显露出来。
English: There are more than ten ministers that Liang Wang wants to kill. Law enforcement officials are investigating the root cause. The clues of Liang Wang's rebellion have been clearly revealed.

古文：太后不食，日夜泣不止。
现代文：太后为之食不下咽，日夜哭泣不停。
English: The Queen Mother could not swallow her food and wept day and night.

古文：景帝甚忧之，问公卿大臣，大臣以为遣经术吏往治之，乃可解。
现代文：景帝为此很担忧，问办法于公卿大臣，大臣认为遣精通经术的的官吏去处理，才可解除太后之忧。
English: Emperor Jing was very worried about this, and asked the Minister of the Court for a solution. The Minister believed that only a government official who was well versed in the art of reading and writing could solve the Empress Dowager's worries.

古文：於是遣田叔、吕季主往治之。
现代文：于是派遣田叔、吕季主去处理此案。
English: So they sent Tian Xiu and Lü Jizhong to deal with the case.

古文：此二人皆通经术，知大礼。
现代文：这两人都精通经术，识大礼。
English: Both of them are well-versed in the art of reading and writing, and are highly literate.

古文：来还，至霸昌厩，取火悉烧梁之反辞，但空手来对景帝。
现代文：结案归来，走到霸昌厩，取火把梁王谋反的证辞全部烧掉，只空手来回奏景帝。
English: After returning from closing the case, he went to the Bajang stables, lit a fire and burned all of Liang Wang's testimony of conspiring to rebel, and played Emperor Jing back and forth with only his bare hands.

古文：景帝曰： 何如？ 
现代文：景帝问： 案子办得怎么样？ 
English: Jingdi asked: How did the case go?

古文：对曰： 言梁王不知也。
现代文：回奏说： 梁王不知情。
English: Echo said: Liang Wang did not know.

古文：造为之者，独其幸臣羊胜、公孙诡之属为之耳。
现代文：参与其事的人，只有他的宠臣羊胜、公孙诡等人罢了。
English: The only people involved in the affair were his favorite vassals, Yangsheng and Gongsun Qi.

古文：谨以伏诛死，梁王无恙也。 
现代文：臣等谨按律令诛杀了他们，梁王平安无恙。 
English: The vassals killed them in accordance with the law, and King Liang was safe and sound.

古文：景帝喜说，曰： 急趋谒太后。 
现代文：景帝很高兴，说： 赶快去谒见太后。 
English: Emperor Jing was very pleased and said, "Hurry up and go see the Empress Dowager."

古文：太后闻之，立起坐餐，气平复。
现代文：太后得知，立刻起来坐着吃饭，心情恢复了平静。
English: When the empress dowager learned of this, she immediately got up, sat down to eat, and her mood returned to calm.

古文：故曰，不通经术知古今之大礼，可以为三公及左右近臣。
现代文：所以说，不精通经术、不懂古今大礼的人，不可以委任为三公及左右近臣。
English: Therefore, people who are not proficient in scripture and do not understand the ancient and modern rituals should not be appointed as the three princes and the right and left vassals.

古文：少见之人，如从管中闚天也。
现代文：孤陋寡闻之人，如同从管中窥天一样。
English: A deaf and dumb person is like looking up at the sky through a pipe.

