古文：良政傅琰虞愿刘怀慰裴昭明沈宪李圭孔琇之太祖承宋氏奢纵，风移百城，辅立幼主，思振民瘼。
现代文：齐太祖当政时，刘宋朝的风气奢侈放纵，他在全国倡导移风易俗，辅佐宋幼主，关心民生疾苦。
English: When Qi Taizu was in power, the culture of the Liu Song Dynasty was extravagant and indulgent. He advocated the change of customs throughout the country, assisted the young master Song, and was concerned about the hardships of people's livelihood.

古文：为政未期，擢山阴令傅琰为益州刺史。
现代文：执政不满一年，便提拔山阴县令傅琰作益州刺史。
English: After less than a year in power, he promoted the leader of Shanyin County, Fu Ye, to be the governor of Yizhou.

古文：乃捐华反朴，恭己南面，导民以躬，意存勿扰。
现代文：于是减少奢华，归于俭朴。当他南面称帝后，更亲自作榜样以导引民风，立意不要过于侵扰百姓。
English: As a result, he reduced luxury to frugality. When he was crowned emperor in the south, he personally set an example to guide the people, determined not to intrude too much on the people.

古文：以山阴大邑，狱讼繁滋，建元三年别置狱丞，与建康为比。
现代文：由于山阴是大都市，打官司的事情很多，所以在建元三年，比照建康的样子，另外设置了狱丞。
English: As Shanyin is a big city, there are many things to sue, so in the third year of Jianyuan, according to the appearance of Jiankang, another jailer was set up.

古文：永明继运，垂心治术。
现代文：齐武帝继承大位后，特别注重治理天下的方法。
English: After Emperor Qiwu succeeded to the throne, he paid special attention to the methods of governing the world.

古文：杖威善断，犹多漏网，长吏犯法，封刃行诛。郡县居职，以三周为小满。
现代文：依靠威势，善于决断，官员犯法，敕令严惩，尚多有漏网的。郡县官员任职，以三年为期限。
English: Relying on authority, good at decision-making, officials break the law, the edict severely punishes, and there are still many leaks. County officials hold office for a period of three years.

古文：水旱之灾，辄加赈恤。
现代文：每逢灾荒，必定开仓赈济抚恤灾民。
English: Whenever there is a natural disaster, it is inevitable to open warehouses to provide relief to the victims.

古文：明帝自在布衣，晓达吏事，君临意兆，专务刀笔，未尝枉法申恩，守宰以之肃震。
现代文：齐太祖还未做官时便已经通晓为官之事，当他为帝君临天下时，便专门注意考察官吏办案，从来没有徇私枉法来表示恩宠，所以各级官员都受到震动而小心慎重。
English: When he was on the verge of becoming emperor, he paid special attention to inspecting officials and handling cases. He never did anything selfish to show favor, so officials at all levels were shocked and cautious.

古文：永明之世十许年中，百姓无鸡鸣犬吠之警，都邑之盛，士女富逸，歌声舞节，袨服华妆，桃花绿水之间，秋月春风之下，盖以百数。
现代文：齐武帝永明时，十多年中，百姓连小小的鸡鸣狗吠的警报都没有，城市繁荣，士女们富有而闲适，在桃花绿水的美景之中，在秋月春风的良辰之下，穿着鲜丽的服装，打扮得妖冶华艳，载歌载舞的，常常有上百家。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu Yongming, for more than ten years, the people did not even have the alarm of small chickens chirping and dogs barking. The city was prosperous, the men and women were rich and leisurely. In the beautiful scenery of peach blossoms and green water, under the good morning of the autumn moon and spring breeze, there were often hundreds of families wearing beautiful clothes, dressed up beautifully, singing and dancing.

古文：及建武之兴，虏难猋急，征役连岁，不遑启居，军国糜耗，从此衰矣。
现代文：到明帝建武年间，敌虏侵略形势急迫，连年战争，百姓不能安居乐业，军费国力消耗太大，国运从此衰落。
English: By the time of Emperor Jianwu of the Ming Dynasty, the enemy invasion situation was urgent, the war lasted for years, the people could not live and work in peace, the military expenditure consumed too much national strength, and the National Movement declined from then on.

古文：齐世善政著名表绩无几焉，位次迁升，非直止乎城邑。
现代文：善于理政有著名业绩的官吏没有多少，加上职位的变化升迁，所以不一定都在郡县任职。
English: There are not many government officials who are good at governance and have outstanding achievements. In addition to the changes and promotions of positions, they may not all work in counties.

古文：今取其清察有迹者，余则随以附焉。
现代文：现在仅取那些能明察有政绩的写入《传》中，其余的则附载其后。
English: Now, only those who can clearly see the political achievements are written in the "Biography," and the rest are attached afterwards.

古文：傅琰，字季圭，北地灵州人也。
现代文：傅琰字季珪，北地灵州人。
English: Fu Yingzhi, a native of Lingshou, North Dili.

古文：祖邵，员外郎。
现代文：祖父傅邵，曾任员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Fu Shao, was once a member of the imperial court.

古文：父僧佑，安东录事参军。
现代文：父亲傅僧佑，任安东绿事参军。
English: His father, Fu Sangyou, joined the army as a young man.

古文：琰美姿仪，解褐宁蛮参军，本州主簿，宁蛮功曹。
现代文：傅琰容貌很美，仪表堂堂，出仕为宁蛮参军，本州主簿，宁蛮功曹。
English: Fu Yao is very beautiful in appearance, with a dignified appearance. He is rather a military officer, the chief accountant of Honshu Province, and a rather meritorious person.

古文：宋永光元年，补诸暨武康令，广威将军，除尚书左民郎，又为武康令，将军如故。
现代文：宋永光元年，补任诸暨郡武康县令，广威将军，授任为尚书左民郎，又为武康县令，将军衔照旧。
English: In the first year of Song Yongguang, he was appointed as the governor of Zhuji County, the governor of Bukang County, and the general of Guangwei County. He was also appointed as the governor of Bukang County, and the general's rank remained the same.

古文：除吴兴郡丞。
现代文：又授任为吴兴郡丞。
English: He was also appointed Wu Xing county magistrate.

古文：泰始六年，迁山阴令。
现代文：宋泰始六年，转官为山阴县令。
English: In the sixth year of Song Taishi, he was transferred to the post of Shanyin County magistrate.

古文：山阴，东土大县，难为长官，僧祐在县有称，琰尤明察，又著能名。
现代文：山阴，是东方的大县，作官很困难，傅僧佑在县任职时便受人称道，而傅琰则更加明察，以特别干练而闻名于世。
English: Shanyin is a large county in the east, and it is very difficult to be an official. Fu Sangyou was praised when he served in the county, while Fu Yao was more discerning and was known in the world for his special ability.

古文：其年爵新亭侯。
现代文：这一年受封为新亭侯。
English: In the same year, he was given the title of Shintingou.

古文：元徽初，迁尚书右丞。
现代文：元徽初年，转任尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Shangshu Rongzheng.

古文：遭母丧，居南岸，邻家失火，延烧琰屋，琰抱柩不动，邻人竞来赴救，乃得俱全。
现代文：遇到母亲亡故，住在南岸守丧。邻居家失火，火势蔓延烧着了傅琰住的房屋傅琰抱着母亲的棺柩不动，幸亏邻居争相跑来救援，才得以保全性命。
English: When his mother passed away, Fu Yao, who lived in Nan'an, held a memorial service. His neighbor's house caught fire, and the fire spread to burn down the house Fu Yao lived in. Fu Yao held his mother's coffin and did not move. Fortunately, his neighbors rushed to rescue him, and he was able to save his life.

古文：琰股髀之间，已被烟焰。
现代文：傅琰的大腿已被火焰烧伤了。
English: Fu Yao's thigh was burned by the flames.

古文：服阕，除邵陵王左军谘议，江夏王录事参军。
现代文：服完丧，傅琰被拜官为邵陵王左军谘议。江夏王录事参军。
English: After the funeral, Fu Yao was consulted by the worshiper for the left army of King Shao Ling. King Jiangxia signed up to join the army.

古文：太祖辅政，以山阴狱讼烦积，复以琰为山阴令。
现代文：齐太祖萧道成辅佐宋朝政事期间，因为山阴县案狱诉讼积累很多，又以傅琰舄山阴县令。
English: During the political affairs of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Qizong's ancestor Xiao Daocheng assisted the Song Dynasty, and because of the accumulation of a lot of litigation in the prison of Shanyin County, he also issued the Shanyin County Order.

古文：卖针卖糖老姥争团丝，来诣琰，琰不辨核，缚团丝于柱鞭之，密视有铁屑，乃罚卖糖者。
现代文：有两个老太婆，一个卖针，一个卖糖，为一团丝线争执不下，来见傅琰请求判定，傅琰并不分辨核查，衹是把丝团绑在柱子上用鞭抽打，仔细观察见有铁屑，于是便责罚卖糖的老太婆。
English: Two old women, one selling needles and the other selling sugar, got into an argument over a ball of silk thread. They came to Fu Yao to ask for a ruling. Fu Yao did not distinguish between the two, but tied the ball of silk to a post and whipped it. After careful observation, he found iron filings, so he punished the old woman selling sugar.

古文：二野父争鸡，琰各问 何以食鸡 。一人云 粟 ，一人云 豆 ，乃破鸡得粟，罪言豆者。
现代文：有两位乡村老人争一只鸡，傅琰分别询问他们 用什么东西喂鸡 ，一人说 用粟 ，一人说 用豆 ，于是杀鸡，在肠内得到粟，便责罚那个说用豆喂鶸的村民。
English: There were two village elders fighting over a chicken. Fu Yao asked them separately what they used to feed the chicken, one said they used millet, one said they used beans, so they killed the chicken, got millet in the intestines, and punished the villager who said they used beans to feed the quail.

古文：县内称神明，无敢复为偷盗。
现代文：因此县裹都称赞他神明，没人敢再去做偷盗之事。
English: As a result, the whole county praised him as a god, and no one dared to steal again.

古文：琰父子并著奇绩，江左鲜有。
现代文：傅琰父子两人都创造了奇绩，逭在辽墓是少有的。
English: Both Fu Yao and his son have achieved extraordinary feats, and it is rare to find a dragonfly in a Liao tomb.

古文：世云诸傅有《治县谱》，子孙相传，不以示人。
现代文：世人传说 姓傅的家有《治县谱》，子孙相传，不拿给外人看 。
English: Legend has it that the Fu family had a copy of the "History of County Governance," which was passed down from generation to generation and not shown to outsiders.

古文：升明二年，太祖擢为假节、督益宁二州军事、建威将军、益州刺史、宋宁太守。
现代文：升明二年，齐太祖提拔擢为假节，督益、宁二州军事，建威将军，益州刺史，宋宁太守。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Qi Taizu was promoted and promoted to the false festival, Du Yi, Ning Erzhou military, Jian Wei general, Yizhou Zhishi, Song Ning Taizhou.

古文：建元元年，进号宁朔将军。
现代文：建元元年，进封号为宁朔将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was given the title of Ningshuo General.

古文：四年，征骁骑将军，黄门郎。
现代文：建元四年，征召为骁骑将军、黄门郎。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was conscripted as a general of the cavalry, Huangmen Lang.

古文：永明二年，迁建威将军、安陆王北中郎长史，改宁朔将军。
现代文：永明二年，转任建威将军、安陆王北中郎长史，改任宁朔将军。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he was transferred to the post of General Jian Wei, and Wang Beizhong and Wang Beizhong of Anlu were transferred to the post of General Ningshuo.

古文：明年，徙庐陵王安西长史、南郡内史，行荆州事。
现代文：第二年，又转为庐陵王安西畏史、南郡内史，行荆州事。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the Guilin Wang Anxi Jiushi and the Nan County Inner History to carry out Jingzhou affairs.

古文：五年，卒。
现代文：永明五年去世。
English: He died five years later.

古文：琰丧西还，有诏出临。
现代文：当傅琰的灵柩向西还都时，皇帝下诏书吊唁他。
English: When Fu Xi's coffin was returned to the capital from the west, the emperor sent a condolence letter to him.

古文：临淮刘玄明亦有吏能，为山阴令，大著名绩。
现代文：临淮人刘玄明也有做官的才能，他做山阴县令时，政绩卓著，名声很大。
English: Liu Xuanming, a native of Linyi and Huai, also had the ability to be an official. When he was the governor of Shanyin County, he had outstanding achievements and a great reputation.

古文：琰子翙问之，玄明曰： 我临去当告卿。 
现代文：傅琰的儿子傅翩问他治理的方法，刘玄明说： 等我将要离任时会告诉你。 
English: When Fu Lan, the son of Fu Xi, asked Liu Xuanming about the method of governance, Liu Xuanming said, "I will tell you when I am about to leave office."

古文：将别，谓之曰： 作县唯日食一升飰，而莫饮酒。 
现代文：快要分别时，他告诉傅翩说： 做县令的要诀祇是每天吃一升米饭而不要喝酒。 
English: When they were about to separate, he told Fu Ping: The key to being a county magistrate is to eat one liter of rice a day and not drink alcohol.

古文：虞愿，字士恭，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：虞愿字士恭，会稽余姚人。
English: Yu Zhen, a member of the Communist Party of China, and Yu Yao, a member of the CPPCC.

古文：祖赉，给事中，监利侯。
现代文：祖父虞赉，官至给事中，封监利侯。
English: His grandfather, Yu Yao, was in the middle of his career as an official, and was given the title of Fuchuan.

古文：父望之，早卒。
现代文：父亲虞望之早死。
English: His father, Yu Wanzhong, died young.

古文：赉中庭橘树冬熟，子孙竞来取之，愿年数岁，独不取，赉及家人皆异之。
现代文：虞赍家庭院之中种有橘树，冬天橘子成熟时，子孙们都争着来采摘，当时虞愿年纪才几岁，祇有他不来摘取，祖父虞赍及家中人都觉得他与众不同。
English: There is an orange tree in the family yard of Yu Ying. When the oranges are ripe in winter, his children and grandchildren all compete to pick them. At that time, Yu Ying was only a few years old, but he did not come to pick them. Grandfather Yu Ying and his family all felt that he was different.

古文：元嘉末为国子生，再迁湘东王国常侍，转浔阳王府墨曹参军。
现代文：宋元嘉末年，虞愿为国子生，再升为湘束王国常侍，转官为浔阳王府墨曹参军。
English: In the last years of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, Yu was willing to be a son of the state, and was promoted to the position of a regular attendant of the Kingdom of Hunan, and was transferred to the post of the governor of the King of Shenyang to join the army.

古文：明帝立，以愿儒吏学涉，兼蕃国旧恩，意遇甚厚。
现代文：宋明帝登基，因为虞愿所学涉及儒学和吏治，加上原在藩国时与他有旧恩，所以对他很是厚爱。
English: When Emperor Song Ming ascended to the throne, he was very fond of Yu Zhen because his studies involved Confucianism and government administration, and because he had an old friendship with him when they were both feudal lords.

古文：除太常丞，尚书祠部郎，通直散骑侍郎，领五郡中正，祠部郎如故。
现代文：官拜太常丞、尚书祠部郎、通直散骑侍郎，领五郡中正，仍旧为祠部郎。
English: He was given the official titles of Tai Changzheng (太常丞), Shang Shuxu (尚書祠部郎) and Tsundao (通直) Sanzhijijijiro (通直散騎侍郎), and was given the rank of Zhongzheng (中正) of the Five Counties. He was still the chief priest.

古文：帝性猜忌，体肥憎风，夏月常著皮小衣，拜左右二人为司风令史，风起方面，辄先启闻。
现代文：明帝生性好猜忌，身体肥胖怕风，夏天常常内穿皮衫，任命左右亲信二人作司风令史，每当某方向将要刮大风，则事先奏闻。
English: Emperor Ming had a suspicious nature, he was fat and afraid of the wind, he often wore a leather shirt in summer, he appointed two close confidants to make the history of the wind, and whenever there was a strong wind blowing in a certain direction, it was reported in advance.

古文：星文灾变，不信太史，不听外奏，敕灵台知星二人给愿，常直内省，有异先启，以相检察。
现代文：至于天文星象灾异变化，明帝不相信太史，不听大臣的奏报，敕命天文台派两个懂得星象的人归属，让他们长期在宫内官署值班，遇有奇异的事情先行报告，以此来检验监察大臣。
English: As for the unusual changes in astronomical constellations, Emperor Ming did not believe in too much history and did not listen to the minister's report, so he ordered the observatory to send two people who knew the constellations, let them stay on duty at the Imperial Household Agency for a long time, and in the event of a strange event, report it in advance, in order to test the minister.

古文：帝以故宅起湘宫寺，费极奢侈。
现代文：虞愿在旧住宅上建造迩宣寺，所用钱物极为奢侈浪费。
English: Emperor Ming built the Xianggu Temple on the foundation of the old mansion, which was extremely luxurious and expensive.

古文：以孝武庄严刹七层，帝欲起十层，不可立，分为两刹，各五层。
现代文：因为塞孝武帝的庄严刹有七层楼，明童想盖十层，但按礼不能超过孝逮帝，所以分成两座寺庙，每座各盖五层。
English: Because the solemn temple of Emperor Xie Xiaowu has seven floors, Ming Tong wanted to build ten floors, but according to etiquette, it could not exceed Emperor Xiaowu, so it was divided into two temples, each with five floors.

古文：新安太守巢尚之罢郡还，见帝，曰： 卿至湘宫寺未？
现代文：新安太守巢尚之罢官还都，朝见明童，明帝对他说：你去过湘宫寺没有?
English: In the morning, Emperor Ming told Ming Tong: "Have you ever been to Xianggong Temple?

古文：我起此寺，是大功德。 
现代文：我建造这座寺院，这是很大的功德。 
English: I built this temple, which is a great merit.

古文：愿在侧曰： 陛下起此寺，皆是百姓卖儿贴妇钱，佛若有知，当悲哭哀愍。
现代文：虞愿在旁边说： 陛下建造造座寺庙，用的都是百姓出卖儿女典当妻子的钱，佛如果有知，一定会悲哭哀伤。
English: At his side, Gu Zheng said, "Your majesty built a temple with the money of the common people who sold their sons and daughters to serve as wives. If the Buddha had known, he would have wept with sorrow."

古文：罪高佛图，有何功德？ 
现代文：您的罪过比佛塔还高，有什么功德? 
English: Your sins are higher than the pagodas. What are your merits?

古文：尚书令袁粲在坐，为之失色。
现代文：当时尚书令塞塞在座，闻言吓得变了脸色。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling was stuck in the seat, and Wen Yan's face turned pale with fright.

古文：帝乃怒，使人驱下殿，愿徐去无异容。
现代文：明帝大怒，派人把卢厘赶出殿堂，卢墨面不改色缓缓离去。
English: The Ming Emperor was furious and sent someone to drive Lu Li out of the hall of fame. Lu Mo slowly left without changing the color of his face.

古文：以旧恩，少日中，已复召入。
现代文：因为有旧时的恩情，所以没过几天，明帝又将虞愿召进宫中。
English: Because of the old time's favor, a few days later, Emperor Ming summoned Yugong into the palace.

古文：帝好围棋，甚拙，去格七八道，物议共欺为第三品。
现代文：虞愿喜欢下围棋，但很笨拙，离围棋的品位相差得很远，大家骗他说他的棋艺达到第三品。
English: Yu Zhen likes to play Go, but he is very clumsy. He is far away from the grade of Go, and everyone lies to him that his chess skill has reached the third grade.

古文：与第一品王抗围棋，依品赌戏，抗每饶借之，曰： 皇帝飞棋，臣抗不能断。 
现代文：明帝和第一品位的王抗下围棋，并按照品位打赌玩，王抗每次都让他，说： 皇帝飞棋，臣王抗不能断开。 
English: Emperor Ming and the first grade Wang Chuan play Go, and play according to the grade bet, Wang Chuan let him every time, saying: The emperor plays Go, the vassal Wang Chuan cannot be broken.

古文：帝终不觉，以为信然，好之愈笃。
现代文：明帝始终没有醒悟，以为确实是这样，更加喜欢下围棋。
English: Emperor Ming did not wake up and thought that this was indeed the case, preferring to play Go.

古文：愿又曰： 尧以此教丹朱，非人主所宜好也。 
现代文：虞愿又说： 尧用围棋来教育丹朱，这不是人君所应该爱好的游戏。 
English: Gu Zheng also said to him: "He used this to teach his ugly son, Dan Zhu, so this is not something that a human master should like.

古文：虽数忤旨，而蒙赏赐犹异余人。
现代文：虞愿虽然多次违犯明帝的心意，但受到的赏赐仍然和别人不同。
English: Although he repeatedly violated Emperor Ming's will, the reward he received was still different from that of others.

古文：迁兼中书郎。
现代文：后升任兼中书郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chushiro.

古文：帝寝疾，愿常侍医药。
现代文：明帝卧病在床，虞愿常常为他侍奉医药。
English: When Emperor Ming was ill in bed, Yu would often be at his side to administer medicine.

古文：帝素能食，尤好逐夷，以银钵盛蜜渍之，一食数钵。
现代文：明帝平素食量很大，又特别喜欢吃河豚肉，用银钵装蜂蜜来浸泡它，一次吃好几钵。
English: Ming Di Ping has a large amount of vegetarian food, and especially likes to eat fugu meat, soak it with silver ingot honey, and eat several ingots at a time.

古文：谓扬州刺史王景文曰： 此是奇味，卿颇足不？ 
现代文：他对扬州刺史王景文说： 这是珍奇的美味，你吃得多不多? 
English: He asked Yangzhou barber Wang Jingwen: This food is very delicious. Have you ever had a craving?

古文：景文曰： 臣夙好此物，贫素致之甚难。 
现代文：王景文说： 我早就喜爱这种食品。但家境不富裕，要得到它很困难。 
English: Wang Jingwen said, "I have loved this kind of food for a long time, but my family is not rich, so it is very difficult to get it.

古文：帝甚悦。
现代文：明帝听了很是高兴。
English: Emperor Ming was very happy to hear this.

古文：食逐夷积多，胸腹痞胀，气将绝。
现代文：吃了很多河豚肉难以消化，胸腹郁结胀合，呼吸困难。
English: I have accumulated a lot of food, my chest and abdomen are bulging with lumps, and I feel like I'm going to pass out.

古文：左右启饮数升酢酒，乃消。
现代文：左右侍从弄开他的嘴灌下几升酷，症状才缓解。
English: Right and left attendants opened his mouth and poured a few liters of cold water, and the symptoms eased.

古文：疾大困，一食汁滓犹至三升，水患积久，药不复效。
现代文：病得很严重了，但明帝一次还要喝下汤汁三升，这种因积水引发的病长期不愈，服药也无效了。
English: He was very seriously ill, but Ming Di still had to drink three liters of soup at a time. This disease caused by stagnant water would not go away for a long time, and the medication was also ineffective.

古文：大渐日，正坐，呼道人，合掌便绝。
现代文：病危时，明帝坐得端端正正，嘴裹呼叫道人，双手一合掌便断了气。
English: When he was critically ill, Emperor Ming sat up straight, wrapped his mouth around the Taoist and called out to him. He died with his hands clasped.

古文：愿以侍疾久，转正员郎。
现代文：虞愿因为服侍明帝养病时间很久，转为正员郎。
English: Because he had served Emperor Ming for a long time when he was ill, he was transferred to the position of official attendant.

古文：出为晋平太守，在郡不治生产。
现代文：虞愿出任晋平太守，在任期间不治家产。
English: Yu was willing to serve as the governor-general of the Jin and Ping Dynasties, and during his term of office, he did not manage the family property.

古文：前政与民交关，质录其儿妇，愿遣人于道夺取将还。
现代文：前郡守因与百姓有事牵扯，便逮捕其儿媳作为人质，虞愿派人在途中夺取造名女子把她归还给百姓。
English: The former county governor arrested his daughter-in-law as a hostage because she was involved in an affair with a commoner. The state was willing to send someone to seize the famous woman on the way and return her to the commoner.

古文：在郡立学堂教授。
现代文：虞愿在郡中设立学校教授生徒。
English: schools in the county.

古文：郡旧出髯蛇胆，可为药，有饷愿蛇者，愿不忍杀，放二十里外山中，一夜蛇还床下。
现代文：郡中以前出产髯蛇胆，可以做药。有人赠送一条髯蛇给虞愿，虞愿不忍心杀它，把它放归在二十里外的山中。一天晚上，这条蛇回到虞愿的床下。
English: The county used to produce python gall, which can be used as medicine. Someone gave a python to Yu Zhen. Yu Zhen did not have the heart to kill it and put it in the mountains twenty miles away. One night, the snake returned to Yu Zhen's bed.

古文：复送四十里外山，经宿，复还故处。
现代文：虞愿又把它送到四十里以外的山中，隔夜。蛇又回到原来的地方。
English: He then sent it to a mountain forty miles away, where it spent the night. The snake then returned to its original place.

古文：愿更令远，乃不复归，论者以为仁心所致也。
现代文：虞愿于是把它送到更远的地方，蛇才没有再回来。人们说这是因为虞愿有仁爱之心才会招致这样的事情。
English: The snake did not come back, and people said that it was because of the benevolence of the elder that this happened.

古文：海边有越王石，常隐云雾。
现代文：海边有一块越王石，经常隐没在云雾中。
English: There is a rock on the seashore that is often lost in the clouds.

古文：相传云 清廉太守乃得见 ，愿往观视，清彻无隐蔽。
现代文：传说祇有清正廉明的太守才能见到它。虞愿前往观看，看得清清楚楚，毫无隐蔽。
English: Legend has it that only a pure and upright daimyō can see it. Gou is willing to go and see it, he can see it clearly, there is nothing hidden.

古文：后琅邪王秀之为郡，与朝士书曰： 此郡承虞公之后，善政犹存，遗风易遵，差得无事。 
现代文：后来琅邪人王秀之作郡太守，在给朝中大臣的信裹说： 这个郡在虞公之后，还存在良好的政治环境，他留下的风尚使人很容易遵守，几乎没有发生什么事件。 
English: Later, the county governor, who was the work of the villain Wang Xiuzhong, said in a letter to the Minister of the Middle Kingdom: After Yugong, this county still has a good political environment. The tradition he left behind is easy to follow, and almost no incidents have occurred.

古文：以母老解职，除后军将军。
现代文：虞愿因为母亲年老而解除郡守职务，被授为后军将军。
English: Because of his mother's old age, he resigned his post and was appointed as a rear-army general.

古文：褚渊常诣愿，不在，见其眠床上积尘埃，有书数帙。
现代文：褚渊经常拜访虞愿。一次虞愿不在，褚渊看见他床铺上积满灰尘，上面摆放着好几套书。
English: Gongyuan often visited Yuyan. Once, when Yuyan was not there, Gongyuan saw that his bed was covered with dust and several sets of books were placed on it.

古文：渊叹曰： 虞君之清，一至于此。 
现代文：褚渊慨叹说： 虞君的清廉，竟到了这样的地步。 
English: Zou Yuan sighed and said, "Yu Jun's integrity has reached such a level.

古文：令人扫地拂床而去。
现代文：命人扫地擦床，然后离去。
English: Have someone sweep the floor and bed for him and then leave.

古文：迁中书郎，领东观祭酒。
现代文：虞愿升为中书郎，领东观祭酒。
English: He was reassigned to the position of chushiro, in charge of brewing the Tokan Matsuri sake.

古文：兄季为上虞令，卒，愿从省步还家，不待诏便归东。
现代文：他的兄长虞季，为上虞县令，去世。虞愿便由中书省官署步行回家，不等诏书到来便束归奔丧。
English: His elder brother, the Shangyu County magistrate Yu Ji, passed away. Yu Yan walked home from the provincial government office of the People's Republic of China, and went to his death without waiting for the arrival of the imperial edict.

古文：除骁骑将军，迁廷尉，祭酒如故。
现代文：授为骁骑将军，升廷尉，仍旧兼任东观祭酒。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry, and then he was appointed as the imperial lieutenant, but his duties of offering the sacrificial wine remained unchanged.

古文：愿尝事宋明帝，齐初宋神主迁汝阴庙，愿拜辞流涕。
现代文：虞愿曾经事奉过宋明帝，齐朝初期将宋朝的国君牌位移往汝阴庙时，虞愿泪流满面地向它拜别。
English: Yu Zheng once served Song Ming Emperor. In the early days of the Qi Dynasty, when the Emperor of the Song Dynasty was transferred to the Ruyin Temple, Yu Zheng bade farewell to him with tears.

古文：建元元年卒，年五十四。
现代文：齐建元元年，虞愿去世，终年五十四岁。
English: In the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year.

古文：愿著《五经论问》，撰《会稽记》，文翰数十篇。
现代文：虞愿着有《五经论问》，撰写了《会稽记》和各种文章数十篇。
English: He is the author of "Five Classics Discussion" and has written "Audit Report" and dozens of articles.

古文：刘怀慰，字彦泰，平原平原人也。
现代文：刘怀慰字彦泰，平原郡平原县人。
English: Liu Huaiyong, a native of Pingyuan County.

古文：祖奉伯，元嘉中为冠军长史。
现代文：祖父刘奉伯，宋元嘉年间为冠军长史。
English: His grandfather, Liu Fengbo, was a champion for a long time during the Song Yuan Jia era.

古文：父乘民，冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲刘乘民是冀州刺史。
English: Her father, Liu Yingmin, was a historian from Jizhou.

古文：怀慰初为桂阳王征北板行参军。
现代文：刘怀慰最初为桂阳王征北板行参军。
English: Liu Huaiyong initially joined the army for Guiyang King's Northern Expedition.

古文：乘民死于义嘉事难，怀慰持丧，不食醯酱，冬月不絮衣。
现代文：刘乘民在义嘉事件中遇难，刘怀慰守丧，不吃醋酱等调味品，冬天不穿棉衣。
English: Liu Yingmin was killed in the Yijia Incident, Liu Huai comforted mourners, did not eat condiments such as vinegar sauce, and did not wear cotton clothes in winter.

古文：养孤弟妹，事寡叔母，皆有恩义。
现代文：抚养弟弟妹妹，事奉守寡的婶娘，都很有恩义。
English: They are very grateful for raising their younger brothers and sisters and serving their widowed aunt.

古文：复除邵陵王南中郎参军，广德令，尚书驾部郎。
现代文：再拜为邵陵王南中郎参军，广德县令，尚书驾部郎。
English: He then joined the army as Shao Ling Wang Nan Zhong Lang, Guangde County Governor, Shang Shuxu's driver.

古文：怀慰宗从善明等为太祖心腹，怀慰亦豫焉。
现代文：刘怀慰的同族人刘善明等，是齐太祖萧道成的心腹，所以刘怀慰也参舆其中。
English: Liu Huaiyong's compatriot Liu Zhenming and others were the heart and soul of the Qidai ancestor Xiao Daocheng, so Liu Huaiyong was also one of them.

古文：沈攸之有旧，令为书戒喻攸之，太祖省之称善。
现代文：因和沈攸之有旧交情，齐太祖便令刘怀慰写信给沈攸之告诫劝导他。
English: Because of his old friendship with Shen Youzhi, Emperor Qizong ordered Liu Huaiyong to write to Shen Youzhi to admonish and persuade him.

古文：除步兵校尉。
现代文：太祖看了刘怀慰所写的信后很是称好，任命他为步兵校尉。
English: After the great-grandfather read the letter written by Liu Huaiyong, he was very pleased and appointed him as an infantry captain.

古文：齐国建，上欲置齐郡于京邑，议者以江右土沃，流民所归，乃治瓜步，以怀慰为辅国将军、齐郡太守。
现代文：齐国建立，皇上想把齐郡设置在京都，大臣们都认为江束土地肥沃，是流徙的百姓所安居的地方，于是设齐郡治所于瓜步，以刘怀慰为辅国将军、齐郡太守。
English: When the State of Qi was established, the emperor wanted to set up Qi County in Kyoto. The ministers all believed that the land of Jiangsu was fertile and a safe place for the migrating people to live. Therefore, the Qi County Administration was set up in Guapu, with Liu Huaiyong as the assistant state general and the governor of Qi County.

古文：上谓怀慰曰： 齐邦是王业所基，吾方以为显任。
现代文：齐太祖对刘怀慰说： 齐邦是王业的根基，我凭藉它才发达起来。
English: Qi Taizu said to Liu Huaiyong: "Qi Bang is the foundation of the king's career, I have developed with it.

古文：经理之事，一以委卿。 
现代文：经营治理的事情，完全委托给你了。 
English: The business of management and governance has been fully entrusted to you.

古文：又手敕曰： 有文事者，必有武备。
现代文：又亲笔敕书说： 有文事者必有武备。
English: He also wrote in his own handwriting: "Those who are literate must be armed."

古文：今赐卿玉环刀一口。 
现代文：现赐给你玉环刀一把。 
English: I now give you a jade-ringed sword.

古文：怀慰至郡，修治城郭，安集居民，垦废田二百顷，决沈湖灌溉。
现代文：刘怀慰来到齐郡，修理整治城郭，安抚百姓，开垦荒地二百顷，引沈湖的水来灌溉。
English: Liu Huaiyong came to Qi County to repair and rectify the castle, pacify the people, reclaim two hundred hectares of wasteland, and divert water from Shenhu Lake for irrigation.

古文：不受礼谒，民有饷其新米一斛者，怀慰出所食麦饭示之，曰： 旦食有余，幸不烦此。 
现代文：他不接受百姓的礼赠，有人送给他新米一斛，刘怀慰便把自己吃的面食给他看，说： 每天的饭食都有剩余，希望你不要如此地烦劳。 
English: He did not accept gifts from the people. When someone gave him a bunch of new rice, Liu Huaiyong showed him the noodles he had eaten and said, "There are leftovers from every day's meal. I hope you don't have to work so hard."

古文：因著《廉吏论》以达其意。
现代文：并撰著《廉吏论》来表达自己的志向。
English: He also wrote "On Corrupt Officials" to express his aspirations.

古文：太祖闻之，手敕褒赏。
现代文：太祖闻知这件事后，亲笔写敕书给与褒奖。
English: After learning of the incident, the great-grandfather wrote a letter of commendation in his own handwriting.

古文：进督秦、沛二郡。
现代文：升任督察秦、沛二郡。
English: Promoted to inspector of Qin and Pei counties.

古文：妻子在都，赐米三百斛。
现代文：割怀慰的妻小在京都，太祖赐给他们三百斛米。
English: In Kyoto, the great-great-grandfather gave the three hundred glutinous rice to his wives.

古文：兖州刺史柳世隆与怀慰书曰： 胶东流化，颍川致美，以今方古，曾何足云。 
现代文：兖州刺史柳世隆写信给刘怀慰说： 胶束、颖川能化育百姓致使风俗淳美，以你现在的政绩与古人相比，古人又哪裹值得夸耀呢。 
English: Liu Shilong, the governor of Zhangzhou, wrote to Liu Huaiyong, saying: "Micelles and Yingchuan can educate the people to make the customs pure and beautiful. Compared with the ancients, what are the ancients worth boasting about with your current political achievements?"

古文：在郡二年，迁正员郎，领青冀二州中正。
现代文：刘德慰任郡守二年，升为正员郎，领青、冀二州中正。
English: Liu Deyong served as county governor for two years, and was promoted to the position of vice governor, leading the youth and middle school students in the two prefectures of Hebei.

古文：怀慰本名闻慰，世祖即位，以与舅氏名同，敕改之。
现代文：刘怀慰原名闻慰，齐世祖即位，因他的名字与世祖舅舅的名字相同，所以敕命他改名。
English: Liu Huaiyong's original name was Xuanyong, but he changed his name at the last minute because his name was the same as that of his uncle.

古文：出监东阳郡，为吏民所安。
现代文：刘怀慰出京师前往东阳郡视察，为各级官吏百姓所满意。
English: Liu Huaiyong went to Dongyang County to inspect the Beijing Division, which was satisfactory to officials and people at all levels.

古文：还兼安陆王北中郎司马。
现代文：回京后兼任安陆王北中郎司马。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he also served as the vice-regent of Anlu Wang Kitanaka.

古文：永明九年卒，年四十五。
现代文：永明九年去世。终年四十五岁。
English: Yongming died nine years later, at the age of 45.

古文：明帝即位，谓仆射徐孝嗣曰： 刘怀慰若在，朝廷不忧无清吏也。 
现代文：明帝即位，对仆射徐孝嗣说： 刘怀慰如果还在，朝廷就不用担心没有清正的官吏。 
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he said to his servant Xu Xiaoji: "If Liu Huaiyong is still alive, the imperial court does not have to worry about the absence of honest officials.

古文：怀慰与济阳江淹、陈郡袁彖善，亦著文翰。
现代文：刘怀慰与济阳人江淹、陈郡人袁彖相友善，在文坛也有名声。
English: Liu Huaiyong is friendly with Jiang Dun from Jiyang and Yuan Qi from Chen County, and is also famous in the literary world.

古文：永明初，献《皇德论》云。
现代文：永明初年，刘怀慰还献上《皇德论》等文章。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Liu Huaiyong also presented "On Imperialism and Nationalism" and other articles.

古文：裴昭明，河东闻喜人，宋太中大夫松之孙也。
现代文：裴昭明，河东郡闻喜县人，是宋太中大夫裴松之的孙子。
English: Pei Zhaoming, a native of Wensi County, Hedong County, is the grandson of the Song Dynasty doctor Pei Songzhu.

古文：父骃，南中郎参军。
现代文：其父裴驷任南中郎参军。
English: His father, Pei Xuan, joined the army as a Southern Middle Cossack.

古文：昭明少传儒史之业，泰始中，为太学博士。
现代文：裴昭明年轻时便传授儒学和史学，宋泰始年间任太学博士。
English: When he was young, Pei Zhaoming taught Confucianism and history, and during the Song Dynasty, he held the title of Doctor of Theology.

古文：有司奏： 太子婚，纳征用玉璧虎皮，未详何所准据。 
现代文：有司奏报说： 太子结婚，纳征礼用的是玉璧和虎皮，不清楚造有什么根据。 
English: An official report said: The prince got married and used jade and tiger skins to pay the dowry. It is not clear what the reason for this was.

古文：昭明议： 礼纳征，俪皮为庭实，鹿皮也。
现代文：裴昭明发表见解说： 周礼纳征，陈列俪皮于中庭。这俪皮就是鹿皮。
English: Pei Zhaoming expressed his opinion, saying: Zhou Lianaxian, display mink fur in the atrium. This mink fur is deer skin.

古文：晋太子纳妃注 以虎皮二 。
现代文：晋《起居注说太子纳妃 用二张虎皮 。
English: Jin's "Resident's Note" says that Prince Na's wife used two tiger skins.

古文：太元中，公主纳征，虎豹皮各一。
现代文：但晋太元年间公主结婚时的纳征礼，用了虎皮豹皮各一张。
English: However, when the princess married in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, she used a piece of tiger skin and a piece of leopard skin.

古文：岂其谓婚礼不详。
现代文：造大概是认为周礼中关于婚礼条款并不完备详尽。
English: He probably thought that the details of the wedding ceremony were not complete.

古文：王公之差，故取虎豹文蔚以尊其事。
现代文：王公之礼应有等差，所以取虎皮豹皮纹彩深密而用之，为的是使公主的婚礼显得隆重。
English: The prince's wedding should have an equal difference, so the tiger skin and leopard skin patterns were used in order to make the princess's wedding look grand.

古文：虎豹虽文，而征礼所不言；熊罴虽古，而婚礼所不及；圭璋虽美，或为用各异。
现代文：但是，虎豹皮虽有纹彩，征礼并没有说要用它；用熊熊作为礼物虽然很古雅，婚仪中并没有说要用它；珪璋虽然很美，其用途却各不相同。
English: However, although tiger and leopard skins have patterns, there is no mention of using it for gift-giving; although it is very quaint to use a teddy bear as a gift, there is no mention of using it in a wedding ceremony; although it is very beautiful, its uses vary.

古文：今宜准的经诰。凡诸僻谬，一皆详正。 
现代文：现在应当以古代的典籍为准则，凡是违反背离典籍的，都应当加以纠正。 
English: The ancient classics should now be used as a guideline, and anyone who violates or deviates from the classics should be corrected.

古文：于是有司参议，加圭璋，豹熊罴皮各二。
现代文：于是有司又多次讨论，决定在礼品中增加珪璋和豹皮熊熊皮各二张。
English: So, after many discussions, it was decided to add two each of the skull and crossbones and the leopard skin to the gift.

古文：元徽中，出为长沙郡丞，罢任，刺史王蕴谓之曰： 卿清贫，必无还资。
现代文：元徽年间，裴昭明出任长沙郡丞。罢职时，刺史王蕴对他说： 你很清贫，一定没有回去的路费。
English: During the Yuanhui era, Pei Zhaoming served as the county magistrate of Changsha. When he resigned, Zishi Wangyun said to him: You are very poor, there must be no travel expenses to go back.

古文：湘中人士有须一礼之命者，我不爱也。 
现代文：湘中人士中如果有馈赠礼物给你而求职的，我是不会吝啬的。 
English: If someone in Hunan gives you a gift to help you find a job, I won't be stingy.

古文：昭明曰： 下官忝为邦佐，不能光益上府，岂以鸿都之事仰累清风。 
现代文：裴昭明说： 下官我愧为郡的辅佐，不能够对长官您有所帮助为您争光，怎能因为卖官鬻爵的事情连累您清正的名声呢。 
English: Pei Zhaoming said: Subordinate officer, I am ashamed to be the assistant of the county, I can't help you win glory for you, how can I tarnish your clean reputation because of the matter of selling officials and barons.

古文：历祠部通直郎。
现代文：历官至祠部通直郎。
English: He rose through the ranks to become Tsuyonairo Shibusebe.

古文：永明三年使虏，世祖谓之曰： 以卿有将命之才，使还，当以一郡相赏。 
现代文：齐永明三年，裴昭明奉命出使北魏，齐世祖对他说： 因为你有承担重任的才能，出使回来之后，一定奖赏你作一个州郡的官员。 
English: In the third year of Qi Yongming, Pei Zhaoming was ordered to go to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Qi Shizu said to him: Because you have the ability to shoulder heavy responsibilities, after you return from the mission, you will certainly be rewarded as a state and county official.

古文：还为始安内史。
现代文：回来之后裴昭明作了始安内史。
English: After coming back, Pei Zhaoming made the internal history of the First Annunciation.

古文：郡民龚玄宣云神人与其玉印玉板书，不须笔，吹纸便成字，自称 龚圣人 ，以此惑众。
现代文：郡中有一个叫龚玄宣的百姓，说是神人传给他玉印玉板书，不须用笔，衹须对着纸吹气就能现出文字，自称 龚圣人 ，以此来迷惑民众。
English: In the county, there was a commoner named Zou Xuanxuan, who said that a divine being had passed down to him a jade seal and jade plate book. Without using a pen, he was able to reveal the writing by blowing on the paper, and he called himself "Zou Shengren," in order to confuse the people.

古文：前后郡守敬事之，昭明付狱治罪。
现代文：前后任郡太守对他很恭敬，而裴昭明把他逮捕入狱治罪。
English: The successive county magistrates treated him with great respect, but Pei Zhaoming arrested him and sentenced him to prison.

古文：及还，甚贫罄。
现代文：等到裴昭明任满还都，贫困得几乎一无所有。
English: By the time Pei Zhaoming returned to Beijing after completing his term of office, there was almost nothing left for the poor.

古文：世祖曰： 裴昭明罢郡还，遂无宅。
现代文：齐世祖说： 裴昭明罢职回来，连住宅也没有。
English: Qi Shizu said, "Pei Zhaoming returned from retirement without even a residence.

古文：我不谙书，不知古人中谁比？ 
现代文：我不太熟悉历史，不知道古人中有谁能和他相比? 
English: I am not very familiar with history, I do not know who among the ancients can compare with him?

古文：迁射声校尉。
现代文：提升他为射声校尉。
English: Promoted him to lieutenant.

古文：九年，复遣北使。
现代文：永明九年，又派他出使北魏。
English: In the ninth year of Yongming, he was sent to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：建武初为王玄邈安北长史、广陵太守。
现代文：建武初年，裴昭明任王玄邈的安北长史、广陵太守。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Pei Zhaoming served as Wang Xuanqin's Anbei Changshi and Guangling Taishu.

古文：明帝以其在事无所启奏，代还，责之。
现代文：齐明帝因为他在任期间没有章表上奏，所以让人代替他的职位命他回京都，并且责备他。
English: Emperor Qiming ordered him to return to Kyoto and reprimanded him because he did not record the chapter while he was in office.

古文：昭明曰： 臣不欲竞执关楗故耳。 
现代文：裴昭明说： 我是不想和别人争着执掌大权才这样做啊。 
English: Pei Zhaoming said: I don't want to fight with others to hold power, that's why I did it.

古文：昭明历郡皆有勤绩，常谓人曰： 人生何事须聚蓄，一身之外，亦复何须？
现代文：裴昭明历任过好几处郡官，都有勤劳的政绩，他常常对人说： 人生有什么事需要积蓄财物呢?除了自身之外，你还需要些什么呢?
English: Pei Zhaoming, who has served as county magistrate in several places, has diligent political achievements. He often said to people: What does life need to accumulate wealth? In addition to yourself, what else do you need?

古文：子孙若不才，我聚彼散；若能自立，则不如一经。 
现代文：子孙如果没有才能，我积蓄财物会让他们给散失殆尽；子孙如果能够自立，则不如使他们精通一种经书。 
English: If my children do not have talent, I will let them lose all their accumulated wealth; if they are able to stand on their own, it is better to make them proficient in a scripture.

古文：故终身不治产业。
现代文：所以裴昭明一辈子都不经营积聚产业。
English: Therefore, Pei Zhaoming did not run the accumulation industry all his life.

古文：中兴二年卒。
现代文：齐和帝中兴二年，裴昭明去世。
English: Two years after the enthronement of Emperor Qi, Pei Zhaoming passed away.

古文：从祖弟顗，字彦齐。
现代文：裴昭明的堂弟裴颛，字彦齐。
English: Pei Zhaoming's cousin Pei Yao, also known as Yan Qi.

古文：少有异操。
现代文：年轻时就有特殊的品格。
English: When you are young, you have a special character.

古文：泰始中于总明观听讲，不让刘秉席，秉用为参军。
现代文：宋明帝泰始年间，他在塑明观听讲，学业不比刘秉低，于是刘秉用他作参军。
English: During the early years of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, he was watching and listening to lectures in Shaping Ming, and his academic performance was not lower than that of Liu Bing, so Liu Bing used him as a role to join the army.

古文：升明末，为奉朝请。
现代文：宋升明末年，他任奉朝请。
English: In the last years of Song Shengming's reign, he was appointed to serve the imperial court.

古文：齐台建，世子裴妃须外戚谱，顗不与，遂分籍。
现代文：萧道成被封为齐公，齐公府建立，裴家嫡子裴妃要外戚谱，裴颉不给他，于是便分成两籍。
English: Xiao Daocheng was given the title of Qi Gong, and the Qi Gong Prefecture was established. The legitimate son of the Pei family, Pei Fei, wanted the genealogy of his maternal relatives, but Pei Yao would not give it to him, so they were divided into two families.

古文：太祖受禅，上表诽谤，挂冠去，伏诛。
现代文：齐太祖萧道成接受宋朝禅让，裴颉上表抨击，挂冠离职，被诛杀。
English: Xiao Daocheng, the founding father of Qi Dynasty, accepted the Song Dynasty's offer of Zen, but was attacked by Pei Xuan on the table, resigned his post, and was brutally killed.

古文：沈宪，字彦璋，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈宪字彦璋，吴兴郡武康县人。
English: Shen Xianzi, a native of Wu Kang County, Wuxing County.

古文：祖说道，巴西梓潼二郡太守，父璞之，北中郎行参军。
现代文：祖父沈说道，是巴西、梓潼二郡太守，父亲沈璞之任北中郎行参军。
English: Grandfather Shen said that he was the governor-general of the two counties of Brazil and Zaozhuang, and his father, Shen Zhen, was appointed as the commander of the Northern Middle Kingdom to join the army.

古文：宪初应州辟，为主簿。
现代文：沈宪起初接受州府的征召，为主簿。
English: Shen Xian initially accepted a call-up from the prefectural government to become the head librarian.

古文：少有干局，历临首、余杭令，巴陵王府佐，带襄令，除驾部郎。
现代文：年轻时便有办事的才能、气度，历任临安、余杭县令，巴陵王府佐，带襄县令，官拜驾部郎。
English: When he was young, he had the ability and grace to do things, and successively served as the county magistrate of Lin'an County, Yuhang County, the assistant governor of Baling County, the county magistrate of Bozhong County, and the official driver.

古文：宋明帝与宪棋，谓宪曰： 卿，广州刺史才也。 
现代文：宋明帝和沈宪下棋，对沈宪说： 你有作广州刺史的才干。 
English: Emperor Song Ming played chess with Shen Xian and said to him, "You have the ability to write the history of Guangzhou."

古文：补乌程令，甚著政绩。
现代文：补为乌程县令，政绩显著。
English: He was appointed as the magistrate of Wucheng County, and his political achievements were remarkable.

古文：太守褚渊叹之曰： 此人方员可施。 
现代文：太守褚渊赞叹他说： 这个人无论叫他干什么都能够施展才能。 
English: Tai Shou Shanyuan was full of praise, saying, "This man is able to demonstrate his talent no matter what he is asked to do.

古文：除通直郎，都水使者。
现代文：官拜通直郎，都水使者。
English: The official is called Tsuchinoiro, the messenger of the capital water.

古文：长于吏事，居官有绩。
现代文：沈宪擅长处理官府事务，做官有政绩。
English: Shen Xian is good at dealing with government affairs, and has made great achievements as a government official.

古文：除正员郎，补吴令，尚书左丞。
现代文：拜正员郎，补为吴县令，尚书左丞。
English: Bai Zhengjianro, supplemented by Wu County, Shangshu Zuo Rong.

古文：升明二年，西中郎将晃为豫州，太祖擢宪为晃长史，南梁太守，行州事。
现代文：宋顺帝升明二年，西中郎将刘晃任豫州刺史，萧道成提拔沈宪为刘晃的长史，南梁太守，负责处理豫州事务。
English: In the second year after Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne, Xi Zhonglang appointed Liu Akira as the governor of Yuzhou, Xiao Daocheng promoted Shen Xian as the governor of Yuzhou, and Nan Liang as the governor of Yuzhou, responsible for handling Yuzhou affairs.

古文：迁豫章王谘议，未拜，坐事免官。
现代文：又改任豫章王谘议，还没有正式任命，他便因事牵连而被免官。
English: He was also reappointed as an adviser to Yu Zhangwang. However, he was removed from his post because he was implicated in the case.

古文：复除安成王冠军、武陵王征虏参军，迁少府卿。
现代文：沈宪又被任命为安成王冠军、武陵王征虏参军，改为少府卿。
English: Shen Xian was also appointed as the champion of Ancheng Wang and the conscript of Wuling Wang, and was changed to Shoufuqing.

古文：少府管掌市易，与民交关，有吏能者皆更此职。
现代文：少府掌管市场贸易，和百姓打交道，凡有为官才能的人，都要改官担任这一职务。
English: Xiaofu is in charge of the market and trade, and deals with the people. Anyone who has the ability to be an official should be transferred to this position.

古文：迁王俭镇军长史。
现代文：后沈宪又改任王俭的镇军长史。
English: Later, Shen Xian was reappointed as the town military commander of Wang Jian.

古文：武陵王晔为会稽，以宪为左军司马。
现代文：武陵王刘晔任会稽太守，以沈宪为左军司马。
English: The king of Wuling, Liu Bei, appointed Shen Xian as the commander of the left army.

古文：太祖以山阴户众难治，欲分为两县。
现代文：齐太祖因为山阴县户籍众多难于治理，想把它分成两县。
English: Qi Taizu wanted to divide Shanyin County into two counties because the large number of household registrations in the county made it difficult to manage.

古文：世祖启曰： 县岂不可治，但用不得其人耳。 
现代文：萧赜上奏说： 山阴县怎么不能治理?衹不过用人不当罢了。 
English: Xiao Wei said in his report: How can Sanyin County not be governed? However, the employment of people is improper.

古文：乃以宪带山阴令，政声大著。
现代文：于是便任命沈宪兼山阴县令，他就任后政声卓著。
English: As a result, he appointed Shen Xian and Shanyin County Governor, who became a prominent politician after taking office.

古文：孔稚珪请假东归，谓人曰： 沈令料事特有天才。 
现代文：孔稚珪请假回到束土，对人说： 沈县令料理事整特别有天才。 
English: Kong Zhiqi took a leave of absence to return to Soktu, and said to the people: Shen County's leadership is particularly talented.

古文：加宁朔将军。
现代文：加封沈宪为宁朔将军。
English: He appointed Shen Xian as Ningshuo general.

古文：王敬则为会稽，宪仍留为镇军长史，令如故。
现代文：王敬则作会稽太守，沈宪仍旧留任镇军长史，依旧兼山阴县令。
English: Wang Jing was appointed as the auditor general of the association, while Shen Xian remained in his position as the town's military commander and still served as the county magistrate of Shanyin.

古文：迁为冠军长史，行南豫州事，晋安王后军长史、广陵太守。
现代文：后来沈宪升为冠军长史，行南豫州事，晋安王后军长史、广陵太守。
English: Later, Shen Xian was promoted to the champion of long history, went to South Henan Province, became the military leader of the Queen of Jinan and the governor of Guangling.

古文：西阳王子明代为南兖州，宪仍留为冠军长史，太守如故，频行州府事。
现代文：西阳王萧子明代理南兖州刺史，沈宪仍留任冠军长史，依旧为太守，多次掌管州府事务。
English: Xiyang Wang Xiao Ziming acted as the acting governor of South Luzon, and Shen Xian remained the champion for a long time. He was still the governor, and he was in charge of state affairs for many times.

古文：永明八年，子明典签刘道济取府州五十人役自给，又役子明左右，及船仗赃私百万，为有司所奏，世祖怒，赐道济死。
现代文：齐世祖永明八年，萧王属下典签型道渣擅自取用州府差役五十人供自己役使，又役使萧子明的亲信，及私下使用其车船仪仗并贪污钱财百万，被有司奏报，齐世祖大怒，赐刘道济死。
English: In the eighth year of King Yongming's reign, Xiao Wang's subordinate, the signature-type scoundrel, without authorization, used fifty state government officials to serve himself, and also used Xiao Ziming's close friends, and privately used his cars and ships for ceremonial battles and embezzled millions of money.

古文：宪坐不纠，免官。
现代文：沈宪因不能纠察而受牵连，免去官职。
English: Shen Xian was implicated for not being able to picket and removed from office.

古文：寻复为长史、辅国将军，以疾去官。
现代文：不久又恢复为长史、辅国将军，因病离职。
English: He was soon reinstated as the general of Changshi and Auxiliary Province, but left the post due to illness.

古文：除散骑常侍，未拜，卒。
现代文：后又官拜散骑常侍，还没有举行正式任命的仪式，便亡故了。
English: Later, he was appointed as a knight errant, and died before the formal appointment ceremony was held.

古文：当世称为良吏。
现代文：当时人们称赞他是良吏。
English: At that time, people praised him as a good official.

古文：宪同郡丘仲起，先是为晋平郡，清廉自立。
现代文：沈宪同郡人丘仲起，起先作晋平郡太守，清廉自立。
English: Shen Xian got along well with the people of the county and initially served as the governor of Jinping County. He was honest and self-reliant.

古文：褚渊叹曰： 见可欲心能不乱，此杨公所以遗子孙也。 
现代文：褚渊赞叹说： 看见物欲心却不被迷惑，造就是扰公留给子孙的好风尚啊。 
English: Shanyuan said with admiration: Seeing the materialistic desire but not being confused, creating is a good style of disturbing the public left to the children and grandchildren.

古文：仲起字子震，少为宪从伯领军寅之所知。
现代文：丘仲起字子震，年轻时受到沈宪堂伯父领军沈宪之的知遇。
English: When he was young, he was befriended by Shen Xiantang's uncle, the military leader Shen Xianzhi.

古文：宋元徽中，为太子领军长史，官至廷尉。
现代文：宋元徽年间，任太子领军长史，宫至廷尉。
English: During the Song and Yuan dynasties, the crown prince was appointed to lead the army of Changshi, the palace to the court lieutenant.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：李圭之，字孔璋，江夏钟武人也。
现代文：李珪之字孔璋，江夏郡钟武县人。
English: Li Yanzhi's character, Kong Yu, was from Zhongwu County, Jiangxia County.

古文：父祖皆为县令。
现代文：父祖都是县令。
English: My ancestors were all county magistrates.

古文：圭之少辟州从事。
现代文：李珪之年轻时被征召为州从事。
English: When Li Yanzhi was young, he was drafted to work for the state.

古文：宋泰始初，蔡兴宗为郢州，以圭之为安西府佐，委以职事，清治见知。
现代文：宋泰始初年，蔡兴宗任郢州刺史，以李珪之为安西府佐，委托他处理本职事务，因为清正而受到知遇。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Cai Xingzong was appointed as the prefect of Anxi Province, with Li Xuan as the deputy governor of Anxi Province. He was entrusted with handling his duties, and was well received for his integrity.

古文：迁镇西中郎谘议，右军将军，兼都水使者。
现代文：升他为镇西中郎谘议，右军将军，兼都水使者。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zhenxi Zhongro, a general of the right army, as well as a messenger of the capital water.

古文：圭之历职称为清能，除游击将军，兼使者如故。转兼少府，卒。
现代文：李珪之在历任的各种职位上都被称作清正干练，被授游击将军，依旧兼都水使者。转官兼职少府，去世。
English: In his various positions, Li Shanzhi was referred to as a "clean, upright and capable man," was awarded the title of "guerrilla general," and continued to serve as the capital's water envoy. He was transferred to the post of part-time "junior governor" and passed away.

古文：先是，四年，荥阳毛惠素为少府卿，吏才强而治事清刻。
现代文：先前，永明四年，荣阳人毛惠素为少府卿，他管理才能很强而治理事情清正深入。
English: Previously, in the fourth year of the Yongming era, Mao Huisu, a native of Rongyang, was Shaofuqing, he had strong management ability and the governance situation was clear and in-depth.

古文：敕市铜官碧青一千二百斤供御画，用钱六十万。
现代文：皇上敕命他购买铜官碧青一千二百斤供给帝室绘画用，用钱六十万。
English: The emperor was so desperate for money that he purchased twelve hundred catties of copper from Bixing to supply the imperial court with paintings, spending 600,000 catties.

古文：有谗惠素纳利者，世祖怒，敕尚书评贾，贵二十八万余，有司奏之，伏诛。
现代文：有人诽谤毛惠素收受了钱财，齐世祖大怒，命尚书评议价格，毛惠素所买贵了二十八万多，有司奏报他，因此被杀。
English: Some people slandered Mao Huisu for accepting money. Qi Shizhu was furious and ordered him to discuss the price of the book. Mao Huisu's purchase cost more than 280,000 yuan. A secretary reported him, so he was killed.

古文：死后家徒四壁，上甚悔恨。
现代文：死后家徒四壁，世祖很是后悔和遗憾。
English: After the death of his disciple, the ancestor was very regretful.

古文：孔琇之，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：孔璘之是会稽郡山阴县人。
English: Kong Yanzhi is a resident of Shanyin County.

古文：祖季恭，光禄大夫，父灵运，著作郎。
现代文：祖父孔季恭是光禄大夫，父亲孔灵运是著作郎。
English: His grandfather, Kong Jikong, was a doctor of Guanglu, and his father, Kong Lingyun, was a scholar.

古文：琇之初为国子生，举孝廉。
现代文：孔璘之起初为国子生，被举为孝廉。
English: At the beginning, Kong Xizhi was Kuniko's son and was raised as a filial son.

古文：除卫军行参军，员外郎，尚书三公郎。
现代文：官拜卫军行参军，员外郎，尚书三公郎。
English: The official paid homage to the guards marching to join the army, the member of the outer circle, Shangshuzanggong.

古文：出为乌程令，有吏能。
现代文：他被外任为乌程县令，很有管理才能。
English: He was appointed as the magistrate of Wucheng County, and was very talented in management.

古文：还迁通直郎，补吴令。
现代文：回京转官为通直郎，补为吴县县令。
English: He was transferred back to Beijing as Tong Naorong, and became the county magistrate of Wuxian County.

古文：有小儿年十岁，偷刈邻家稻一束，琇之付狱治罪。或谏之，琇之曰： 十岁便能为盗，长大何所不为？ 
现代文：他有一个十岁的儿子，偷割了邻居家一束稻，孔璘之便把他交给监狱治罪，有人劝谏他，孔璘之说： 十岁就能做盗贼，长大后什么坏事不会做呢? 
English: He had a ten-year-old son who had stolen a bunch of rice from a neighbor's house. Confucius sent him to prison to punish him. Someone advised him, and Confucius said, "A ten-year-old can be a thief. What bad things will he not do when he grows up?"

古文：县中皆震肃。
现代文：县裹人都受到震动。
English: People all over the county were shaken.

古文：迁尚书左丞，又以职事知名。
现代文：孔璘之升为尚书左丞，又因为善于处理公务而闻名。
English: Kong Shuzhisheng was a scholar and a scholar, and he was also famous for being good at handling official business.

古文：转前军将军，兼少府。
现代文：转官为前军将军，兼少府。
English: He was transferred to the post of general of the former army, and also became a minor prefect.

古文：迁骁骑将军，少府如故。
现代文：又升为骁骑将军，依旧任少府。
English: He was also promoted to Shunkei Shogun (general of horseback cavalry) and continued to serve as shofu (minor governor).

古文：出为宁朔将军、高宗冠军征虏长史、江夏内史。
现代文：外任宁朔将军、高宗冠军征虏长史、江夏内史。
English: Ex-Ningshuo General, Gaozong Champion, Conqueror Changshi, Jiang Xia's Inner History.

古文：还为正员常侍，兼左民尚书、廷尉卿。
现代文：回京后为正员常侍，兼左民尚书、廷尉卿。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he became a regular member of the Imperial Household Agency, also serving as Sadamin Shoshu and Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：出为临海太守，在任清约，罢郡还，献干姜二十斤，世祖嫌少，及知琇之清，乃叹息。
现代文：又出任临海太守，在任上清正简约，罢郡职回京，衹献上干姜二十斤，齐世祖嫌少，等到了解到孔璘之清廉，才深为叹息。
English: He also served as the Linhai governor-general. He was straightforward and concise in office, returned to Beijing from the county post, presented 20 catties of dried ginger as a gift, and disliked Qi Shizuo. It was only when he learned of Kong Xi's integrity that he was deeply saddened.

古文：除武陵王前军长史，未拜，仍出为辅国将军，监吴兴郡，寻拜太守，治称清严。
现代文：授孔璘之为武陵王前军长史，还没有正式拜授，依旧外任他为辅国将军，监吴兴郡，不久官拜吴兴太守，治理事务很是清正严明。
English: The history of the former military commander of King Wuling has not yet been officially conferred on Confucius, but he is still an auxiliary general, the superintendent of Wuxing County, and soon the governor of Wuxing Province, and his governance is very clean and strict.

古文：高宗辅政，防制诸蕃，致密旨于上佐。
现代文：高宗萧鸾辅政，防备限制各路藩王，下达秘密旨令给皇上的各位辅佐官。
English: Gao Zong, Xiao Wei's vice-regent, prepared to restrict all the kings of the domain, and issued a secret order to the emperor's aides.

古文：隆昌元年，迁琇之为宁朔将军、晋熙王冠军长史，行郢州事，江夏内史。
现代文：隆昌元年，提升孔迁琇为宁朔将军、晋熙王冠军长史，行晋熙王事，江夏内史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Kong Qianqian was promoted to Ningshuo General, the champion of the King of Jinxi, the history of the King of Jinxi, and the history of Jiangxia.

古文：琇之辞，不许。
现代文：孔琇之推辞，不答应。
English: He did not agree with Kong Yao's refusal.

古文：未拜，卒。
现代文：远未拜官便亡故了。
English: Taiming died in his first year in office at the age of fifty.

古文：史臣曰：琴瑟不调，必解而更张也。
现代文：史臣曰：琴瑟不和，定要改弦更张。
English: Shichen said, "There is discord between the players, so we must change the strings and the tuning."

古文：魏晋为吏，稍与汉乖，苛猛之风虽衰，而仁爱之情亦减。
现代文：魏、晋时作官吏，与汉代略有差别，苛刻峻猛的风气虽然有所减弱，但仁爱之情也减少了。
English: The officials in the Wei and Jin Dynasties were slightly different from those in the Han Dynasty. Although the harsh and harsh customs have weakened, the feelings of benevolence have also decreased.

古文：局以峻法，限以常条，以必世之仁未及宣理，而期月之望已求治术。
现代文：用严峻的法律、常规对人的行为加以限制，是因为历世的仁爱没来得及宣扬，而寄希望于年年求得治理的方法。
English: Restricting human behavior with severe laws and regulations is because the benevolence of past generations has not had time to spread, and hopes are pinned on year after year to find a way to govern.

古文：先公后私，在己未易；割民奉国，于物非难；期之救过，所利苟免。
现代文：先公后私，对自己来说要做到造点并不容易；取割民利以奉献国家，造件事做起来却不困难；期望这种人来救补世弊，实际上衹能暂时苟免过失而已。
English: It is not easy for me to do something for myself; it is not difficult to do something for the benefit of the people and the country, but it is not difficult to do something; expecting such a person to remedy the ills of the world, in fact, can only temporarily avoid mistakes.

古文：且目见可欲，嗜好方流，贪以败官，取与违义，吏之不臧，罔非由此。
现代文：况且眼睛看见了物质利益，嗜欲便横流而不可节制，贪得无厌而败坏官风，取得和给予都违反了礼义，官吏的不良行为，没有哪一种不是由此而来。
English: Moreover, when the eyes see material benefits, the desires are rampant and uncontrollable, the insatiable greed corrupts the official style, the acquisition and giving are in violation of etiquette, and the bad behavior of officials, none of which is not from this.

古文：擿奸辩伪，诚俟异识，垂名著绩，唯有廉平。
现代文：揭露奸邪辨别伪善，确实要有卓异的见识，衹有清廉公正，才能垂名史册政绩卓著。
English: To expose treachery and distinguish hypocrisy, it is indeed necessary to have extraordinary insight, integrity and fairness, in order to have outstanding political achievements in the annals of history.

古文：今世之治民，未有出于此也。
现代文：当今治理百姓的官吏，没有能超过这些人的。
English: The officials who govern the people today are no better than these people.

古文：赞曰：蒸蒸小民，吏职长亲。
现代文：赞曰：众多的下民，是为官者所长期接近的。
English: Zang said: A large number of subordinates have been close to officials for a long time.

古文：棼乱须理，恤隐归仁。
现代文：丝线混乱了就需要理清，怜悯百姓痛苦才能称为仁德。
English: If the silk thread is confused, it needs to be straightened out. Compassion for the people's suffering can be called benevolence.

古文：枉直交瞀，宽猛代陈。
现代文：奸邪与正直交相错乱，就应当交替使用宽刑与峻法。
English: If treachery and honesty are intertwined, lenient punishment and harsh punishment should be used alternately.

古文：伊何导物，贵在清身。
现代文：用什么去引导民风民俗?可贵之处在于自身清正廉明。
English: What do you use to guide folk customs? What is valuable is that you are honest and upright.

