古文：黄帝曰：余闻十二经脉，以应十二经水者，其五色各异，清浊不同，人之血气若一，应之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：我听说人体的十二经脉与自然界十二条大河流相对应，自然界十二条大河流有青、赤、黄、白、黑五种颜色各不一样，另外还有清浊的区别，然而人体经脉中的气血都是一样的，那怎么能说二者是相应的呢？
English: Huang Di said: I heard that the twelve meridians of the human body correspond to the twelve great rivers in nature. The twelve great rivers in nature have five different colors: blue, red, yellow, white and black. In addition, there is a difference in clarity. However, the qi and blood in the human meridians are all the same, so how can it be said that the two are corresponding?

古文：岐伯曰：人之血气，苟能若一，则天下为一矣，恶有乱者乎？
现代文：岐伯说：人体经脉中的气血如果都是一样的，那么推及整个社会所有的人就应该是相同的了，如此怎么会发生混乱的情况呢？
English: Qi Bo said: If the qi and blood in the human body's meridians are all the same, then all people in the whole society should be the same, so how can chaos occur?

古文：黄帝曰：余问一人，非问天下之众。
现代文：黄帝说：我问的是一个人的气血情况，并不是询问整个社会所有的人。
English: Huang Di said: I am asking about a person's qi and blood situation, not about all people in the whole society.

古文：岐伯曰：夫一人者，亦有乱气，天下之众，亦有乱人，其合为一耳。
现代文：岐伯说：一个人体内有逆乱之气，就跟整个社会上众人之中总会有作乱之人一样，总体的看都是一个道理。
English: Qi Bo said: If there is a rebellious spirit in a person's body, it is the same as there will always be a troublemaker among the people in the whole society. Overall, it is a reason.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻人气之清浊。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道人身之气的清浊情况。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know about the purity of a person's spirit.

古文：岐伯曰：受谷者浊，受气者清。
现代文：岐伯说：人体受纳饮食物所化生的是浊气，呼吸的自然界空气所化生的是清气。
English: Qi Bo said: The human body absorbs and drinks food to produce argon gas, and breathes natural air to produce clean air.

古文：清者注阴，浊者注阳。
现代文：清气注入属阴的五脏，浊气注入属阳的六腑。
English: Clear air is injected into the five viscera of yin, and miasma is injected into the six viscera of yang.

古文：浊而清者，上出于咽；清而浊者，则下行。
现代文：饮食物所化生的浊气中的清气，向上出于咽部；清气中的浊气，就会下行。
English: The clear gas in the argon gas generated by drinking food goes up from the pharynx; the argon gas in the clear gas goes down.

古文：清浊相干，命曰乱气。
现代文：如果清气和浊气相互干扰而不能正常的升降，就叫做乱气。
English: If the clear gas and argon gas interfere with each other and cannot rise and fall normally, it is called turbulent gas.

古文：黄帝曰：夫阴清而阳浊，浊者有清，清者有浊，清浊别之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：阴清而阳浊，浊气之中有清气，清气之中有浊气，清气和浊气的这些情况应该怎样区别呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the difference between yin and yang, yin and yang, yin and yang, yin and yang, yin and yang, yin and yang?

古文：岐伯曰：气之大别，清者上注于肺，浊者下走于胃。
现代文：岐伯说：清浊之气的大略区别为，清气上升注于肺，浊气下行走于胃。
English: Qi Bo said: The main difference between the clear and salty air is that the clear air rises and is injected into the lungs, while the salty air travels to the stomach.

古文：胃之清气，上出于口；肺之浊气，下注于经，内积于海。
现代文：胃里的清气，向上出于口；肺里的浊气，向下注于经脉，内积于气海之中。
English: The clear air in the stomach flows upward from the mouth; the stale air in the lungs flows downward into the meridians and accumulates in the air sea.

古文：黄帝曰：诸阳皆浊，何阳独甚乎？
现代文：黄帝说：各阳经都接受浊气，哪条阳经接受浊气最多呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "All the sutras accept qi. Which sutra accepts the most qi?

古文：岐伯曰：手太阳独受阳之浊，手太阴独受阴之清。其清者上走空窍，其浊者下行诸经。
现代文：岐伯说：手太阳小肠经在各阳经中接受的浊气最多，手太阴肺经在各阴经中接受的清气最多，清气向上行于面部各窍，浊气向下行于诸经脉。
English: Qi Bo said: The small intestine of the hand receives the most qi in all the meridians, and the small intestine of the hand receives the most qi in all the meridians. The small intestine of the hand receives the most qi in all the meridians. The small intestine of the hand receives the most qi in all the meridians. The small intestine of the hand receives the most qi in all the meridians.

古文：诸阴皆清，足太阴独受其浊。
现代文：各阴经都接受清气，唯独足太阴脾经接受胃中水谷所化生的浊气。
English: All yin meridians receive pure qi, but the sole meridian, the foot, receives the miasma generated by the trough in the stomach.

古文：黄帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：人体的清气、浊气异常应当怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: How should the human body's clear gas and argon gas abnormalities be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：清者其气滑，浊者其气涩，此气之常也。
现代文：岐伯说：清气的性质是滑利的，浊气的性质是滞涩的，这是清气、浊气的正常的表现。
English: Qibo said: the nature of the clear gas is smooth, and the nature of the argon gas is stagnant. This is a normal manifestation of the rise of the clear gas and argon gas.

古文：故刺阴者，深而留之；刺阳者，浅而疾之；清浊相干者，以数调之也。
现代文：所以,如果是由于浊气异常引起的病变，针刺时应当深刺而留针时间长；如果是由于清气异常引起的病变，针刺时应当浅刺而快速出针；如果是由于清气与浊气相互干扰而导致升降失常的病变，就应当察明病情，了解清气、浊气相互干扰的程度和部位，再结合清气、浊气的特性，根据具体情况采取适当的方法调治。
English: Therefore, if the lesion is caused by abnormal argon gas, the needle should be pricked deeply and the needle should be left for a long time during acupuncture; if the lesion is caused by abnormal clear gas, the needle should be pricked shallowly and the needle should be quickly released during acupuncture; if the lesion is caused by the mutual interference of clear gas and argon gas, it should detect the disease, understand the degree and location of mutual interference between clear gas and argon gas, and then combine the characteristics of clear gas and argon gas, and take appropriate treatment according to the specific situation.

