古文：武帝上高祖武皇帝讳裕，字德舆，小名寄奴，彭城县绥舆里人，汉高帝弟楚元王交之后也。
现代文：高祖武皇帝名刘裕，字德舆，小名寄奴，彭城县绥舆里人，是汉高帝的弟弟楚元王刘交的后代。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu's family name was Liu Yu, and he was also known as De Ying and Xiao Ming Ying Nong. He was a native of Ying Ying Village, Pengcheng County. He was a descendant of Emperor Gao's younger brother, King Chu Yuan Liu Jia.

古文：交生红懿侯富，富生宗正辟强，辟强生阳城缪侯德，德生阳城节侯安民，安民生阳城釐侯庆忌，庆忌生阳城肃侯岑，岑生宗正平，平生东武城令某，某生东莱太守景，景生明经洽，洽生博士弘，弘生琅邪都尉悝，悝生魏定襄太守某，某生邪城令亮，亮生晋北平太守膺，膺生相国掾熙，熙生开封令旭孙，旭孙生混，始过江，居晋陵郡丹徒县之京口里，官至武原令。
现代文：刘交生红懿侯刘富，刘富生宗正辟强，辟强生阳城缪侯刘德，刘德生阳城节侯安民，安民生阳城厘侯庆忌，庆忌生阳城肃侯刘岑，刘岑生宗正刘平，刘平生束武城令某某，某某生束莱太守刘景，刘景生明经刘洽，刘洽生博士刘弘，刘弘生琅邪都尉刘悝，刘悝生曹魏定襄太守呆某，某某生邪城令刘亮，刘亮生西晋北平太守刘膺，刘膺生相国掾刘熙，刘熙生开封令旭孙。旭孙之子刘混，刚渡过长江时，定居在晋陵郡丹徒县的京口里，任官至武原令。
English: Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu Fu, Liu Jia Sheng was born in the Red Fort of Liu

古文：混生东安太守靖，靖生郡功曹翘，是为皇考。
现代文：刘混生东妄太守室妪，刘擅生郡功曹型塑，他就是达旦查的父亲。
English: Liu Jinsheng is the father of the Eastern Delusion Grand Empress Dowager, Liu Gansheng is the father of the County Gong Cao, and he is the father of Datan Cha.

古文：高祖以晋哀帝兴宁元年岁次癸亥三月壬寅夜生。
现代文：盲祖在晋哀帝兴宁元年年次癸亥的三月壬寅夜出生。
English: The blind ancestor was born on the night of March Mengyin, the March of the Year of the Boar, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xingning.

古文：及长，身长七尺六寸，风骨奇特。
现代文：等到成人，身高七尺六寸，风度奇特。
English: When he became an adult, he was seven feet six inches tall and had a peculiar demeanor.

古文：家贫，有大志，不治廉隅。
现代文：家贫，有大志，言行洒脱而不假修饰。
English: The family is poor, he has great aspirations, and his words and deeds are free and easy, without false embellishments.

古文：事继母以孝谨称。
现代文：侍奉继母以孝著称。
English: Servant stepmothers are known for their filial piety.

古文：初为冠军孙无终司马。
现代文：起初担任冠军将军孙无终的司马。
English: At first, he served as the champion general Sun Wuzhen's Sima.

古文：安帝隆安三年十一月，妖贼孙恩作乱于会稽，晋朝卫将军谢琰、前将军刘牢之东讨。牢之请高祖参府军事。
现代文：安帝隆塞三年十一月，妖贼孙恩在会稽作乱，晋朝卫将军趱毖、前将军刘生之东伐空之请直担参谋军事。
English: In November of the third year of Anti-Imperialist Long Secession, the usurper Sun En staged a disturbance at the meeting, and promoted the general of the Imperial Guards and the former general Liu Sheng to the post of military staff officer.

古文：十二月，牢之至吴，而贼缘道屯结，牢之命高祖与数十人，觇贼远近。
现代文：十二月，牢之到吴地，而沿途多贼寇，牢之命直担和几十个人侦察贼情。
English: In December, he went to Wu Di, and along the way there were many thieves and robbers. He was directly responsible for the life of the prison and dozens of people to investigate the thieves.

古文：会遇贼至，众数千人，高祖便进与战。所将人多死，而战意方厉，手奋长刀，所杀伤甚众。
现代文：突遇几千贼兵，高担便同他们交战。所带领的人大多死去，而士气不减，手舞大刀，杀伤很多。
English: Suddenly encountering several thousand bandits, Gao Dang fought with them. Most of the people he led died, but their morale did not diminish. He wielded a large sword and caused many casualties.

古文：牢之子敬宣疑高祖淹久，恐为贼所困，乃轻骑寻之。
现代文：牢之之子敬宣怕高担长久在外，被贼围困，就率轻装骑兵寻找他。
English: The son of the dungeon Ke Xuan was afraid that Gaotang had been out for a long time and was besieged by thieves, so he led the light cavalry to look for him.

古文：既而众骑并至，贼乃奔退，斩获千余人，推锋而进，平山阴，恩遁还入海。
现代文：不久众多骑兵一起到来，贼寇才退走，杀死贼寇一千多人，乘胜前进，平定山阴，孙恩逃到海上。
English: Soon a large number of cavalry arrived together, the bandits retreated, killed more than a thousand bandits, advanced with victory, pacified the mountains, and Sun En fled to the sea.

古文：四年五月，恩复入会稽，杀卫将军谢琰。
现代文：四年五月，孙恩又侵犯会稽，杀死卫将军谢琰。
English: In May of the fourth year, Sun En violated the meeting again and killed Wei general Xie Jun.

古文：十一月，刘牢之复率众东征，恩退走。
现代文：十一月，刘牢之又率领部众束征，孙恩撤退逃跑。
English: In November, Liu Duozhi led the troops to march again, and Sun En retreated and fled.

古文：牢之屯上虞，使高祖戍句章城。
现代文：牢之驻守上虞，派高祖戍守句章城。
English: The dungeon was stationed in Shangyu, and Gao Zuo was assigned to guard Guzhang City.

古文：句章城既卑小，战士不盈数百人。高祖常被坚执锐，为士卒先，每战辄摧锋陷阵，贼乃退还浃口。
现代文：句章城本来就狭小，战士不过几百人，高祖经常披坚执锐，身先士卒，每次作战冲锋陷阵，贼寇于是退回浃。
English: The city of Quchang was originally small, with only a few hundred soldiers. Gaozhu often wore a tough and stubborn attitude, and was the first to go into battle. Every time he went into battle, the bandits fell back.

古文：于时东伐诸帅，御军无律，士卒暴掠，甚为百姓所苦。
现代文：这时束征各将带兵无方，士兵抢劫，很为百姓所厌恶。
English: At this time, there was no way for the conscript generals to lead the soldiers, and the soldiers looted, which was very abhorrent to the people.

古文：唯高祖法令明整，所至莫不亲赖焉。
现代文：衹有高祖法令严明，所到之处无不受到欢迎。
English: The laws of the founding fathers are strict, and everywhere they go, they are welcomed.

古文：五年春，孙恩频攻句章，高祖屡摧破之，恩复走入海。三月，恩北出海盐，高祖追而翼之，筑城于海盐故治。
现代文：五年春，珏墨频繁攻打包童，产担多次打败他，逊墨又逃入海中三月，孙恩向北出兵到海盐，直担从左右两翼追击，在海盐旧治所筑城。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Sunmo frequently attacked Baotong, and Zhotang repeatedly defeated him. Sunmo also fled into the sea. In March, Sun En sent troops to the north to Haiyan, and Zhotang pursued from the left and right wings, and built a city in the old government office of Haiyan.

古文：贼日来攻城，城内兵力甚弱，高祖乃选敢死之士数百人，咸脱甲胄，执短兵，并鼓噪而出。贼震惧夺气，因其惧而奔之，并弃甲散走，斩其大帅姚盛。
现代文：贼寇每天来攻城，城内兵力很薄弱，高祖就挑选敢死之士几百人，脱下钟甲，拿着短兵器，鼓噪出城，贼寇丧胆，利用他们的畏惧而冲击，贼寇都丢下镗甲四散逃跑，杀死他们的大帅姚盛。
English: Thieves and robbers came to attack the city every day. The troops in the city were very weak. Gaozu selected hundreds of people who were willing to die, took off their armor, took their short weapons, and stormed out of the city. Thieves and robbers were discouraged and used their fear to attack. Thieves and robbers left their armor and scattered to escape, killing their general, Yao Sheng.

古文：虽连战克胜，然众寡不敌，高祖独深虑之。
现代文：虽然连战皆胜，然而寡不敌众，高祖仍然深感忧虑。
English: Although Gaozu has won all consecutive battles, he is still deeply worried about being outnumbered.

古文：一夜，偃旗匿众，若已遁者。
现代文：一天夜里，放倒旗帜隐蔽部众，好似已逃走的样子。
English: One night, the flag was lowered to conceal the crowd, which seemed to have fled.

古文：明晨开门，使羸疾数人登城。
现代文：次早晨打开城门，派老弱士兵数人登上城头。
English: The next morning, he opened the gates and sent a few old and weak soldiers up to the top of the castle.

古文：贼遥问刘讳所在，曰： 夜已走矣。 
现代文：贼寇远远地询问刘裕在哪裹。回答说： 夜晚已经离开了。 
English: The thief asked Liu Yu from a distance where he was, to which he replied: "The night has gone."

古文：贼信之，乃率众大上。
现代文：贼寇相信了他们的话，就率领部众大举登城。
English: The bandits believed their words, and led a large force into the city.

古文：高祖乘其懈怠，奋击，大破之。
现代文：昼祖趁贼寇懈怠，奋力出击，大破贼寇。
English: The founder of the day took advantage of the slackness of the thieves and bandits, and fought hard to break the thieves and bandits.

古文：恩知城不可下，乃进向沪渎。
现代文：亟恩知道城池攻不下，就前去沪渎。
English: Knowing that the castle was impregnable, he set out for Shanghai.

古文：高祖复弃城追之。
现代文：直担又抛下城池追击。
English: He threw his saddlebags down and chased after them.

古文：海盐令鲍陋遣子嗣之以吴兵一千，请为前驱。
现代文：海盐令鲍陋派遣儿子嗣之率领呈地兵士一千人，请求做前锋。
English: Haiyan ordered Baohui to send his son Hezhi to lead a thousand soldiers and ask them to be the vanguard.

古文：高祖曰： 贼兵甚精，吴人不习战。
现代文：高祖说： 贼寇兵士很精锐，吴地人不熟悉战事，如果前锋失利，我军必败。
English: Gao Zu said: Thief and robber soldiers are very elite, Wu people are not familiar with warfare, if the forwards lose, our army will be defeated.

古文：若前驱失利，必败我军，可在后为声援。 
现代文：你们可在后方声援。 
English: You can support us from the rear.

古文：不从。
现代文：嗣之不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：是夜，高祖多设伏兵，兼置旗鼓，然一处不过数人。
现代文：这天夜晚，直担设下很多埋伏，添置旌旗战鼓，然而一处不过几个人。
English: On this night, there were a lot of ambushes set up by the direct bearers, and battle flags and drums were added, but there were only a few people at one place.

古文：明日，贼率众万余迎战。
现代文：次日，贼寇率领部众一万多人迎战。
English: The next day, the bandits led more than ten thousand people to fight.

古文：前驱既交，诸伏皆出，举旗鸣鼓。
现代文：前锋相交之后，各处伏兵齐出，举起旗帜敲起战鼓。
English: After the forwards intersected, the ambush soldiers came out in all directions, raised their banners and beat the war drums.

古文：贼谓四面有军，乃退。
现代文：贼寇以为四面皆兵。于是退却。
English: The bandit thought there were soldiers on all sides, so he retreated.

古文：嗣之追奔，为贼所没。
现代文：员蛙追击，被贼寇杀死。
English: He was chased by a frog and killed by a bandit.

古文：高祖且战且退，贼盛，所领死伤且尽。
现代文：高祖边战边退，贼寇强盛，直担所领兵士差不多死伤光了。
English: Gao Zu retreated from the battlefield, the bandits were strong, and the soldiers under his direct command were almost all dead or wounded.

古文：高祖虑不免，至向伏兵处，乃止，令左右脱取死人衣。
现代文：壶担考虑不能幸免，到了埋伏兵马的地方就停下来，命令左右的人脱取死人的衣服。
English: Thinking that he could not escape, he stopped at the place where the soldiers and horses were lying in wait and ordered the people around him to take off the dead man's clothes.

古文：贼谓当走反停，疑犹有伏。
现代文：贼寇以为高担应该逃跑反而停下来，怀疑还有埋伏。
English: The bandit thought that Gaotang should run away, but instead he stopped, suspecting that there was an ambush.

古文：高祖因呼更战，气色甚猛，贼众以为然，乃引军去。
现代文：高祖于是呼喊再战，神色十分威猛，贼寇以为真是如此，就率车离去。
English: Gaozu then shouted for a rematch, looking very powerful. The thief thought this was true and drove away.

古文：高祖徐归，然后散兵稍集。
现代文：高祖慢慢退回，随后失散的兵士渐渐会集。
English: Gaozu slowly retreated, and then the scattered soldiers gradually gathered.

古文：五月，孙恩破沪渎，杀吴国内史袁山松，死者四千人。
现代文：五月，孙恩攻下沪渎，杀死吴国内史袁山松，死亡的有四千人。
English: In May, Sun En conquered Huzhou and killed Yuan Shansong, the national historian of Wu, resulting in the death of four thousand people.

古文：是月，高祖复破贼于娄县。
现代文：这月，高祖又在娄县打败贼寇。
English: This month, Gaozu defeated the bandits again in Jixian County.

古文：六月，恩乘胜浮海，奄至丹徒，战士十余万。
现代文：六月，孙恩乘胜沿海路，突然到达丹徒，战士有十多万人。
English: In June, Sun En took the Sheng coastal road and suddenly arrived in Dantu. There were more than one hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：刘牢之犹屯山阴，京邑震动。
现代文：刘牢之还驻守在山阴，京城震动。
English: Liu Dolezhi is still stationed in the shadow of the mountain, and the capital is shaking.

古文：高祖倍道兼行，与贼俱至。
现代文：高祖夜赶路，和贼寇同时到达。
English: Gao Zu drove at night and arrived at the same time as the bandits.

古文：于时众力既寡，加以步远疲劳，而丹徒守军莫有斗志。
现代文：这时兵力弱小，加上长途步行兵士疲劳，而丹徒守卫的军队没有斗志。
English: At this time, the troop strength was weak, coupled with the fatigue of long-distance foot soldiers, and the army guarding Dantu had no fighting spirit.

古文：恩率众数万，鼓噪登蒜山，居民皆荷担而立。
现代文：孙恩率领部众几万人，鼓噪而登蒜山，居民都挑着担子站立。
English: Sun En led tens of thousands of people to march to the top of Mount Hiruzen in a noisy procession. The residents all stood shoulder to shoulder.

古文：高祖率所领奔击，大破之，投巘赴水死者甚众。
现代文：高祖率领部属飞奔出击，大败贼军，贼军跳下山峰投入水中而死的人很多。
English: Gao Zu led his subordinates in a galloping attack, defeating the invaders. Many of the invaders jumped off the mountain into the water and died.

古文：恩以彭排自载，仅得还船。
现代文：孙恩用盾牌承载自己。勉强得以回到船上。
English: Sun En used his shield to carry himself. He was barely able to get back on the boat.

古文：虽被摧破，犹恃其众力，径向京师。
现代文：他虽然被打败，还仗着人多，径直攻向京城。
English: Although he was defeated, he still took advantage of the large number of people and went straight to the capital.

古文：楼船高大，值风不得进，旬日乃至白石。
现代文：战船高大，遇风暴不能前进，十天后才到达直至。
English: The warship was too tall to sail through the storm and did not arrive until ten days later.

古文：寻知刘牢之已还，朝廷有备，遂走向郁洲。
现代文：不久知道刘生之已返回，朝廷有戒备，就奔向郁泌。
English: Soon after learning that Liu Shengzhi had returned, the imperial court was on alert and rushed to Yu Xuan.

古文：八月，以高祖为建武将军、下邳太守，领水军追恩至郁洲，复大破恩，恩南走。
现代文：八月，朝廷任命高祖为建武将军、下邳太守，统领水军追击孙恩到郁洲，又大败孙墨。
English: In August, the imperial court appointed Gaozu as the general of Jianwu and the governor of Jiaozuo, and he led the navy to pursue Sun En to Yuzhou, and defeated Sun Mo.

古文：十一月，高祖追恩于沪渎，及海盐，又破之。
现代文：逊墨向南逃跑。十一月，高祖追击孙恩到沪遗，在痉盐追上，又打败孙恩。
English: Sun Mo fled to the south. In November, Gaozu chased Sun En to Huyi, caught up with him in Jinshan, and defeated Sun En again.

古文：三战，并大获，俘馘以万数。
现代文：三次交战都大有收获，俘虏斩首上万。
English: The three battles were very fruitful, with tens of thousands of prisoners beheaded.

古文：恩自是饥馑疾疫，死者太半，自浃口奔临海。
现代文：孙恩部众从此因病因饿而死亡大半，从浃口逃往临海。
English: Most of Sun Enbu's followers died of disease and starvation and fled from the estuary to the sea.

古文：元兴元年正月，骠骑将军司马元显西伐荆州刺史桓玄，玄亦率荆楚大众，下讨元显。
现代文：五里元年正月，骠骑将军司马元显向西讨伐趔业刺史旦玄，但玄也率领趔楚大军，向下讨伐五迩。
English: In the first month of the 5th year of the 1st century, the general Sima Yuanxian marched westward to fight the warlord Tian Xuan. However, Xuan also led the Chu army to fight the warlord Wu Xuan.

古文：元显遣镇北将军刘牢之拒之，高祖参其军事，次溧洲。
现代文：互面派遣镇北将军刘牢之抵御，高祖为空之参谋军事。驻在速洲。
English: Both sides dispatched Zhenbei General Liu Diao to resist, and Gao Zu was the military staff officer of the air. He was stationed in Hezhou.

古文：玄至，高祖请击之，不许，将遣子敬宣诣玄请和。
现代文：桓玄到达，高祖请求出击但玄，空之不答应，将要派遣儿子敬宣前往汇那裹讲和。
English: When Kuan Xuan arrived, Gao Zu asked him to attack, but Kuan Xuan refused to do so. He was going to send his son, Jian Xuan, to Huina to make peace.

古文：高祖与牢之甥东海何无忌并固请，不从。
现代文：越和丝的外甥曲人困都一再劝阻，未被采纳。
English: Yue and Si's nephew, Qu Renshu, was repeatedly dissuaded and was not accepted.

古文：遂遣敬宣诣玄，玄克京邑，杀元显，以牢之为会稽内史。
现代文：于是派遣敬宣前往桓玄那裹。担玄攻克京城，杀五显，任命牢之为会稽内史。
English: Therefore, he dispatched Keisho to Kansugen, who conquered the capital, killed Gosen, and appointed him as the Keisho's internal auditor.

古文：惧而告高祖曰： 便夺我兵，祸其至矣。
现代文：争之畏惧而对产担说： 他夺了我的兵权，大祸就要临头。
English: And he feared, and said unto his steward, He hath broken my staff: there shall be sore plagues.

古文：今当北就高雅于广陵举事，卿能从我去乎？ 
现代文：现在应当向北投奔高雅在广陵起兵，你能随我前往吗? 
English: Now it's time to go to Beitou. Gao Yao has raised an army in Guangling. Can you go with me?

古文：答曰： 将军以劲卒数万，望风降服。
现代文：高祖回答说： 将军率领几万强兵而望风投降。
English: Gaozu replied, "The general led tens of thousands of strong soldiers and surrendered to the wind.

古文：彼新得志，威震天下。
现代文：桓玄刚得势，威震天下。
English: Kuan Xuan Gang gained momentum, dominating the world.

古文：三军人情，都已去矣，广陵岂可得至邪！讳当反复还京口耳。 
现代文：三军人心，都已散了，广陵哪裹可能到达呢我当为旧君服丧退回复里而已。 
English: The hearts of the three soldiers have all been scattered. Where can I possibly reach Guangling? I should be in mourning for the old emperor.

古文：牢之叛走，自缢死。
现代文：空之反叛逃走自缢而死。
English: The empty rebel fled and hanged himself to death.

古文：何无忌谓高祖曰： 我将何之？ 
现代文：但盘墨对奁担说： 我该到何处去? 
English: But Panmo said to Xidan, "Where should I go?"

古文：高祖曰： 镇北去必不免，卿可随我还京口。
现代文：高担说： 镇北将军此去必不能幸免，你可随我回亘旦。
English: Gaotan said, "The departure of General Zhenbei is unavoidable. You can come back with me forever."

古文：桓玄必能守节北面，我当与卿事之。不然，与卿图之。
现代文：旦玄确能保守节操侍奉君主，我当和你侍奉他；否则，和你一起图取他。
English: Dang Xuan is indeed able to maintain discipline and serve the sovereign, I should serve him with you; otherwise, I will try to take him with you.

古文：今方是玄矫情任算之日，必将用我辈也。 
现代文：现在正是桓玄矫情用智的时候，必用我们这些人。 
English: Now is the time for Kuan Xuan to use his wisdom, he must use us.

古文：桓玄从兄修以抚军镇丹徒，以高祖为中兵参军，军、郡如故。
现代文：桓玄的堂兄桓脩任抚军将军镇守丹徒，委任高祖为中兵参军，军职、郡职照旧。
English: Kuan Xuan's cousin, Kuan Ying, was appointed as the general of the supporting army, Zhenshu Dantu, and Gao Zu was appointed as a middle-ranking soldier to join the army, and his military duties and county duties remained the same.

古文：孙恩自奔败之后，徒旅渐散，惧生见获，乃于临海投水死。余众推恩妹夫卢循为主。
现代文：孙恩自从失败逃亡之后，部众逐渐离散，怕被活捉，就在临海投水而死残余的部众推举孙恩的妹夫卢循为首领。
English: After Sun En's failed escape, his followers gradually dispersed. Afraid of being captured alive, they threw water into the sea and died. The remaining followers elected Sun En's brother-in-law Lu Xun as their leader.

古文：桓玄欲且缉宁东土，以循为永嘉太守。
现代文：桓玄想要姑且安宁东部地区，任命卢循为永嘉太守。
English: Huan Xuan wanted to pacify the eastern region and appointed Lu Xun as Yongjia governor.

古文：循虽受命，而寇暴不已。
现代文：卢循虽然接受任命，而作乱劫掠不止。
English: Although he accepted the appointment, Lu Xun continued to plunder and pillage.

古文：五月，玄复遣高祖东征。
现代文：五月，桓玄又派遣高祖东征。
English: In May, Kuan Xuan sent Gao Zu on an eastward expedition.

古文：时循自临海入东阳。
现代文：当时卢循从临海进入东阳。
English: At that time, Lu Xun entered Dongyang from Linhai.

古文：二年正月，玄复遣高祖破循于东阳。
现代文：二年正月，桓玄又派遣高祖在束阳打败卢循。
English: In the first month of the second year, Kuan Xuan sent Gaozu to defeat Lu Xun in Sokyang.

古文：循奔永嘉，复追破之，斩其大帅张士道，追讨至于晋安，循浮海南走。
现代文：卢循逃奔永嘉，高祖又追击打败他，杀死他的大帅张士道，追击讨伐直到晋安，卢循从海上向南逃走。
English: Lu Xun fled to Yongjia, Gaozu chased and defeated him, killed his general Zhang Shidao, and pursued the crusade until Jin'an. Lu Xun fled south by sea.

古文：六月，加高祖彭城内史。
现代文：六月，加授高祖为彭城内史。
English: In June, Gaozu was awarded the title of Pengcheng Inner History.

古文：桓玄为楚王，将谋篡盗。
现代文：桓玄做楚王，将谋划篡夺帝位。
English: Kuan Xuan, as King of Chu, will plot to usurp the imperial throne.

古文：玄从兄卫将军谦屏人问高祖曰： 楚王勋德隆重，四海归怀。
现代文：桓玄的堂兄卫将军桓谦摒退他人询问高祖说： 楚王功高德隆，四海信服。
English: Huan Xuan's cousin, General of the Guards Huan Qian, refused to listen to others and asked Gao Zu, saying: King of Chu Gong Gao Delong, the four seas are convinced.

古文：朝廷之情，咸谓宜有揖让，卿意以为何如？ 
现代文：朝廷上下都认为应实行禅让，您以为怎么样? 
English: Everyone in the Imperial Court agrees that Zen Ren should be implemented. What do you think?

古文：高祖既志欲图玄，乃逊辞答曰： 楚王，宣武之子，勋德盖世。晋室微弱，民望久移，乘运禅代，有何不可！ 
现代文：高祖心中既想图取桓玄，就用恭顺的言语回答说： 楚王是宣武王的儿子，功高一世晋室微弱，民望早已转移，乘机禅让，有什么不可以? 
English: Gao Zu's heart wanted to capture Huan Xuan, so he replied with a respectful speech: King Chu is the son of King Xuanwu, his merit is high, the first emperor's wife is weak, the people's reputation has long been transferred, take the opportunity to meditate, what is not allowed?

古文：谦喜曰： 卿谓可尔，便当是真可尔。 
现代文：桓谦高兴地说： 您认为可以，就是真可以了。 
English: Kan Qian said happily: If you think you can, then you really can.

古文：十二月，桓玄篡帝位，迁天子于寻阳。
现代文：十二月，桓玄篡夺帝位，将天子迁到寻阳。
English: In December, Kuan Xuan usurped the imperial throne and moved the emperor to Xuanyang.

古文：桓修入朝，高祖从至京邑。
现代文：桓脩入朝，高祖随同到京城。
English: When Emperor Kanmu ascended to the throne, Gaozu followed him to the capital.

古文：玄见高祖，谓司徒王谧曰： 昨见刘讳，风骨不恆，盖人杰也。 
现代文：桓玄见到产祖，对司徒王谧说： 昨天见到刘裕，风度不凡，是人中豪杰。 
English: When Kuan Xuan saw the progenitor, he said to Szu Wang Yao: "I saw Liu Yu yesterday, his demeanor was extraordinary, he is a hero among men.

古文：每游集，辄引接殷勤，赠赐甚厚。
现代文：每次游览集会，都接待殷勤，赠送赏赐很丰厚。
English: Each tour meeting was received with great hospitality, and the gifts were very rich.

古文：高祖愈恶之。
现代文：高祖更加厌恨桓玄。
English: Gaozu hated Kuan Xuan even more.

古文：或说玄曰： 刘讳龙行虎步，视瞻不凡，恐不为人下，宜蚤为其所。 
现代文：有人劝桓玄说： 刘裕龙行虎步，气概非凡，恐怕不会甘居人下，应该早作打算。 
English: Someone advised Huan Xuan that: Liu Yulong walks at the pace of a tiger, his spirit is extraordinary, I'm afraid he won't be content to live under others, he should have made plans earlier.

古文：玄曰： 我方欲平荡中原，非刘讳莫可付以大事。
现代文：桓玄说： 我正要扫荡中原，非刘裕不足以托付大事。
English: Kuan Xuan said: I am about to sweep the Central Plains, and Liu Yu is not enough to be entrusted with important matters.

古文：关陇平定，然后当别议之耳。 
现代文：关中、陇西平定后，然后当另加考虑。 
English: After Guanzhong and Shaanxi have been pacified, then another consideration should be made.

古文：玄乃下诏曰： 刘讳以寡制众，屡摧妖锋，泛海穷追，十殄其八。
现代文：桓玄于是下诏说： 型茔以少数人制服众多的人，屡次摧败妖贼的锋芒。乘船入海穷追猛打，妖贼被歼灭十分之七八。
English: Kuan Xuan then issued the following edict: "With the help of a small number of people to subdue a large number of people, we repeatedly defeated the yakuza. We chased them into the sea and fought them fiercely. The yakuza were wiped out seven-eighths of the time.

古文：诸将力战，多被重创。
现代文：诸将拼命作战，多受重伤。
English: The generals fought hard, and many were seriously wounded.

古文：自元帅以下至于将士，并宜论赏，以叙勋烈。 
现代文：自主帅以下直到将领士兵，都应评定赏赐，来表彰功勋。 
English: From the superintendent and below to the general and soldiers, rewards should be assessed to recognize meritorious service.

古文：先是，高祖东征卢循，何无忌随至山阴，劝于会稽举义。
现代文：在这之前直担束征卢循，何想星跟随他到达山压，劝说他在盒稽起义。
English: Prior to this, he had been directly responsible for the recruitment of Lu Xun. What would you like to follow him to the mountain pressure and persuade him to revolt in the box?

古文：高祖以为玄未据极位，且会稽遥远，事济为难，俟其篡逆事著，徐于京口图之，不忧不克。
现代文：宣担以为但玄还未占据帝位，而且盒稽离京城遥远，事情难以成功，等到艳篡位叛逆的事情显著，慢慢地在塞旦收拾他，不怕不成功。
English: Xuan Dang believed that Dang Xuan had not yet occupied the imperial throne, and that Boxing was far away from Beijing, and things were difficult to succeed. When the rebellious act of usurping the throne became obvious, he slowly cleaned up Dang Xuan in Saidan, and was not afraid of failure.

古文：至是桓修还京，高祖托以金创疾动，不堪步从，乃与无忌同船共还，建兴复之计。
现代文：到这时担恺还京，产担假称刀伤发作，不能徒步随从，就和无忌同船一起回京，订下复兴晋国的计策。
English: By this time, Dangdang had returned to Beijing, and Zangdang pretended to have a knife wound and could not follow on foot, so he went back to Beijing with the ship and set a strategy for the revival of Jin.

古文：于是与弟道规、沛郡刘毅、平昌孟昶、任城魏咏之、高平檀凭之、琅邪诸葛长民、太原王元德、陇西辛扈兴、东莞童厚之，并同义谋。
现代文：于是和弟弟道规、沛郡人刘毅、平昌人孟昶、任城人魏咏之、高平人檀凭之、琅邪人诸葛长民、太原人王元德、陇西人辛扈兴、东莞人童厚之一起参与起义。
English: Therefore, he participated in the uprising together with his younger brother Daojian, Liu Yi from Pei County, Meng Qi from Pyeongchang, Wei Xizhi from Rencheng, Dang Bi from Gaoping, Zhuge Changmin from Zhuge, Wang Yuande from Taiyuan, Xin Xuxing from Shaanxi, and Tong Tong Hou from Dongguan.

古文：时桓修弟弘为征虏将军、青州刺史，镇广陵。
现代文：当时桓脩的弟弟桓弘担任征虏将军、青州刺史，镇守广陵。
English: At that time, Kanjo's younger brother, Kanehiro, served as a conscript general, the governor of Qingzhou, and the guardian of Guangling.

古文：道规为弘中兵参军，昶为州主簿。
现代文：道规任桓弘的中兵参军，孟昶任州主簿。
English: Daojie appointed Kanhiro's middle-ranking soldiers to join the army, and Meng Ye to be the chief accountant of the state.

古文：乃令毅潜往就昶，聚徒于江北，谋起兵杀弘。
现代文：于是派刘毅秘密前往会合孟昶，在长江北聚集部众，计划起兵杀死桓弘。
English: Therefore, Liu Yi secretly sent Meng Yao to the meeting, gathered the members in the north of the Yangtze River, and planned to raise an army to kill Kanhong.

古文：长民为豫州刺史刁逵左军府参军，谋据历阳相应。
现代文：长民任豫州刺史刁逵的左军府参军，谋划占据历阳相互响应。
English: Changmin joined the army from the Left Military Government of Yuzhou Province, planning to occupy Liyang and responding to each other.

古文：元德、厚之谋于京邑，聚众攻玄，并克期齐发。
现代文：元德、厚之谋划在京城聚集兵马攻打桓玄，并约定期一齐发动。
English: Gende and Atsushi planned to gather soldiers and horses in the capital to attack Kuan Xuan, and agreed to launch the attack together on a regular basis.

古文：三年二月己丑朔，乙卯，高祖托以游猎，与无忌等收集义徒，凡同谋何无忌、魏咏之、咏之弟欣之、顺之、檀凭之、凭之从子韶、弟祗、隆与叔道济、道济从兄范之、高祖弟道怜、刘毅、毅从弟籓、孟昶、昶族弟怀玉、河内向弥、管义之、陈留周安穆、临淮刘蔚、从弟珪之、东莞臧熹、从弟宝符、从子穆生、童茂宗、陈郡周道民、渔阳田演、谯国范清等二十七人；愿从者百余人。
现代文：三年二月己丑初一，乙卯高祖假托狩猎，和无忌等人聚集起义徒众，同谋的共有何无忌、魏泳之、咏之的弟弟欣之、顺之、檀凭之、凭之的侄儿檀韶、檀韶的弟弟檀祗、檀隆、道济、道济的堂兄范之、高祖的弟弟道怜、刘毅、刘毅的堂弟刘藩、孟昶、孟昶的远房弟弟怀玉、河内人向弥、管义之、陈留人周安穆、临淮人刘蔚、堂弟珪之、东莞人臧熹、堂弟宝符、侄儿穆牛、童茂宗、陈郡人周道民、渔阳人田演、谯国人范清等二十七人；愿意跟从的有一百多人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the second year of the third year of the second year of the second year of the third year of the second year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the second year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year of the third year

古文：丙辰，诘旦，城开，无忌服传诏服，称诏居前。
现代文：丙辰，清晨，城门打开，无忌穿着传达诏令的服装，念诏命走在前面。
English: In the morning, when the gate of the city is opened, there is no reason not to walk in front of it, wearing clothes that convey the imperial edict and reciting the imperial edict.

古文：义众驰入，齐声大呼，吏士惊散，莫敢动，即斩修以徇。
现代文：起义的人奔驰进城，齐声大叫，官吏兵上惊讶逃散，不敢行动，当即斩桓脩示众。
English: The insurgents galloped into the city, shouting in unison. The officers and soldiers fled in surprise, not daring to act, and immediately cut off their heads and paraded them before the public.

古文：高祖哭甚恸，厚加殡敛。
现代文：高祖哭得很悲伤，对桓脩厚加收殓。
English: Gao Zu cried with great sadness, and was deeply saddened by this.

古文：孟昶劝弘其日出猎。
现代文：孟昶劝说桓弘当天出城狩猎。
English: Meng Ye persuaded Kan Hong to go out hunting that day.

古文：未明开门，出猎人，昶、道规、毅等率壮士五六十人因开门直入。
现代文：天未亮打开城门，放出狩猎的人，孟昶、道规、刘毅等人率领壮士五六十人利用开门时径直冲入官府。
English: Before dawn, the city gate was opened and the hunters were let out. Meng Xuan, Dao Jie, Liu Yi and others led fifty or sixty strong men to use the opening of the door to rush straight into the government.

古文：弘方啖粥，即斩之，因收众济江。
现代文：桓弘正在喝粥，当即杀死他，随之聚集部众渡过长江。
English: Kanehiro was drinking porridge, immediately killed him, and the crowd crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：义军初克京城，修司马刁弘率文武佐吏来赴。
现代文：起义军刚攻克京城，桓脩的司马刁弘率领文武佐吏前来奔赴。
English: The insurgents had just conquered the capital city, when Sima Qihong of Huanqian, led by Wen Wuxia, rushed to the scene.

古文：高祖登城谓之曰： 郭江州已奉乘舆反正于寻阳，我等并被密诏，诛除逆党，同会今日。
现代文：高祖登上城头对他们说： 郭型业已拥戴皇上在寻阳重登帝位，我们都接受秘密的韶书，诛杀叛逆的党羽，在今同时发动。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the top of the castle and said to them: Guo Ji has already supported the emperor in seeking the sun to re-ascend to the throne, we all accept the secret imperial edict, kill the rebellious party members, and launch it at the same time.

古文：贼玄之首，已当枭于大航矣。
现代文：贼人担玄的首级，当已在大航示众了。
English: The head of the Thief-in-Chief has already been shown to the public at the Grand Voyage.

古文：诸君非大晋之臣乎，今来欲何为？ 
现代文：各位不是太置的臣属吗，现在来想做什么? 
English: Aren't you all too much subordinates, what do you want to do now?

古文：弘等信之，收众而退。
现代文：刁弘等人相信了这些话，集合部众退走。
English: Takahiro and the others believed these words, and the assembly retreated.

古文：毅既至，高祖命诛弘。
现代文：刘毅到达后，高祖令他杀刁弘。
English: After Liu Yi arrived, Gao Zu ordered him to kill Xing Hong.

古文：毅兄迈先在京师，事未发数日，高祖遣同谋周安穆报之，使为内应。
现代文：里邀的哥哥刘逼原先在京城，事情发动前几天，高祖派遣同谋的人周安穆告诉他，让他做内应。
English: The invited brother, Liu Nian, was originally in Beijing. A few days before the incident, Gaozu sent an accomplice, Zhou Anmu, to tell him to do a favor for him.

古文：迈外虽酬许，内甚震惧。
现代文：刘迈外表上虽然许诺，内心很害怕。
English: Although Liu Mai looks promising on the outside, inside he is very scared.

古文：安穆见其惶骇，虑事必泄，乃驰归。
现代文：安穆见他惶恐，顾虑事情必会泄露，就飞奔返回。
English: Ammu saw him panicking, worried that the matter would be leaked, and rushed back.

古文：时玄以迈为竟陵太守，迈不知所为，便下船欲之郡。
现代文：当时桓玄任命刘迈为竞陵太守，刘迈不知该怎么做，就上船想到郡中。
English: At that time, Huan Xuan appointed Liu Mai as the governor of Jingling. Liu Mai did not know what to do, so he boarded the ship and thought of Guozhong.

古文：是夜，玄与迈书曰： 北府人情云何？
现代文：这天夜间，桓玄给刘迈写信说： 比府人心如何?
English: That night, Huan Xuan wrote a letter to Liu Mai, saying, "How are the people of Bifu?

古文：卿近见刘讳何所道？ 
现代文：你近来见到刘裕讲了些什么? 
English: What did Liu Yu say when you saw him recently?

古文：迈谓玄已知其谋，晨起白之。
现代文：刘迈以为桓玄已经知道了密谋，早晨起来便去报告。
English: Liu Mai thought that Huan Xuan already knew about their plot, so he got up in the morning and told him the situation.

古文：玄惊惧，封迈为重安侯，既而嫌迈不执安穆，使得逃去，乃杀之。
现代文：桓玄震惊畏惧，封刘遇为重安侯；不久嫌刘逋没有捉住安穆，使安穆得以逃走，就杀丁刘迈。
English: Shocked and afraid, Huan Xuan appointed Liu Yu as the second-in-command; soon, he suspected that Liu Yu did not catch An Mu, so that An Mu could escape, and killed Ding Liu Mai.

古文：诛元德、扈兴、厚之等。
现代文：诛杀元德、扈兴、厚之等人。
English: He killed Yuan De, Xing Xing, Atsushi and others.

古文：召桓谦、卞范之等谋拒高祖。
现代文：召桓谦、卞范之等人谋划抗拒高祖。
English: Kuan Qian, Gong Fan Zhi and others were summoned to plot against Gao Zu.

古文：谦等曰： 亟遣兵击之。 
现代文：桓谦等人说： 马上派兵攻打他们。 
English: Huan Qian and others said: Immediately send troops to attack them.

古文：玄曰： 不然。
现代文：桓玄说： 不能这样。
English: Kangen said, "This can't be.

古文：彼兵速锐，计出万死。若行遣水军，不足相抗；如有蹉跌，则彼气成而吾事败矣！
现代文：他们的兵士行动快，不怕死如果派遣水军，不足以抗衡，假使有闪失，则他们的气势形成而我们的事情就失败了。
English: Their soldiers are swift, and dare not die; if they send a fleet, it is not enough to contend; if they fail, their strength is made, and our cause is lost.

古文：不如屯大众于覆舟山以待之。
现代文：不如在覆舟山驻扎大军来等待他们。
English: It would be better to station a large army in Zhoushan to wait for them.

古文：彼空行二百里，无所措手，锐气已挫，既至，忽见大军，必惊惧骇愕。
现代文：他们凭空行走二百里，没有动手，锐气已受挫，到达之后，忽然遇见大军。必定惊恐。
English: They have gone two hundred leagues on nothing, they have not set out, their courage has failed, and when they arrive, they suddenly meet a large army. They must be terrified.

古文：我案兵坚阵，勿与交锋。彼求战不得，自然散走。
现代文：我们屯兵不动加固阵势，不同他们交锋，他们寻求作战而不能达到，自然四散逃跑。
English: Our garrison did not move to reinforce the position, unlike their confrontation, they sought to fight but could not reach, and naturally scattered and fled.

古文：此计之上也。 
现代文：这是上等的计策。 
English: It was a masterstroke.

古文：谦等固请，乃遣顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷北拒义军。
现代文：桓谦等人坚决请求，才派遣顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷向北抗拒起义军。
English: It was only at the insistent request of Kan Kian and others that Wu Fuzhi, the governor of Dongqiu and the general of the Right Guards, was sent north to resist the insurgents.

古文：玄自闻军起，忧惧无复为计。或曰： 刘讳等众力甚弱，岂办之有成，陛下何虑之甚！ 
现代文：桓玄自从听说军队起事，就忧虑恐惧不知如何是好有人说： 刘裕等人兵力很小，哪能起事成功，陛下何必如此担忧? 
English: Ever since Huan Xuan heard about the army's uprising, he has been worried and afraid. I don't know what to do. Some people say: Liu Yu and others have a small army, how can they succeed, why should His Majesty be so worried?

古文：玄曰： 刘讳足为一世之雄，刘毅家无担石之储，摴蒲一掷百万；何无忌，刘牢之甥，酷似其舅。
现代文：桓玄说： 刘裕足以成为一代的英雄；刘毅家无担石存粮，赌博却一掷百万；坦叁昼是刘生之的外甥，很像他的舅父。
English: Huan Xuan said: Liu Yu is enough to become the hero of a generation; Liu Yi's family has no stones to store grain, but gambles a million; Tang Xunlun is Liu Shengzhi's nephew, much like his uncle.

古文：共举大事，何谓无成。 
现代文：共举大事，哪裹能说不能成功? 
English: Can it be said that it is not possible to hold a large-scale event?

古文：众推高祖为盟主，移檄京邑，曰：夫治乱相因，理不常泰，狡焉肆虐，或值圣明。
现代文：众人推举宜砠为盟主，向京城发布文告，说：治乱交替出现，没有永久的太平，贼寇作乱，往往发生在太平之时。
English: The people elected Yixuan as the leader, and issued a proclamation to the capital, saying: There is no permanent peace when there are alternating periods of rule and chaos, and when there is chaos caused by bandits, it often occurs in times of peace.

古文：自我大晋，阳九屡构。隆安以来，难结皇室。忠臣碎于虎口，贞良弊于豺狼。
现代文：自我大晋，厄运屡次出现，隆安年间以来，祸难连结于皂室，忠臣死在虎口中，良亡死在豺狼之手。
English: Since the reign of the Great Jin Dynasty, bad luck has repeatedly appeared. Since the years of Longan, misfortune has been linked to the soap room, loyal subjects have died at the hands of tigers, and virtuous people have died at the hands of jackals.

古文：逆臣桓玄，陵虐人鬼，阻兵荆郢，肆暴都邑。
现代文：叛臣驻欺凌人鬼，拥兵于荆州郢州，在京城恣意暴虐。
English: The traitor bullied people and ghosts in Jingzhou, supported soldiers in Bozhou, and arbitrarily abused people in Beijing.

古文：天未亡难，凶力繁兴，逾年之间，遂倾皇祚。
现代文：上天没有除去祸难，凶党繁茂兴盛，一年之间就倾覆皇位。
English: Heaven did not remove the calamity, the evil party flourished and prospered, and the imperial throne was overthrown within a year.

古文：主上播越，流幸非所；神器沉沦，七庙毁坠。
现代文：主上流亡到了非人生活之处，帝位陷落，七庙毁灭。
English: The Lord was exiled to a place of inhuman life, the throne fell, and the seven temples were destroyed.

古文：夏后之罹浞、豷，有汉之遭莽、卓，方之于玄，未足为喻。自玄篡逆，于今历年，亢旱弥时，民无生气。
现代文：题有鲤、堕，选有妓、垄，和但玄相比，还嫌不足。自从桓玄篡位，到现在已经一年，天早连年，民众没有生机。
English: Compared to Dang Xuan, it is still not enough. It has been a year since Dang Xuan usurped the throne, and the people have no vitality.

古文：加以士庶疲于转输，文武困于造筑，父子乖离，室家分散，岂唯《大东》有杼轴之悲，《摽梅》有倾筐之怨而已哉！
现代文：加上官吏民众为运输而疲劳，文官武将为建筑而受困，父子分离，家庭四散，岂衹是《大东》有妇女的悲伤，《标梅》有尽其所有的征收啊?
English: In addition, government officials and the public are fatigued by transportation, civil servants and military personnel are trapped by construction, fathers and sons are separated, and families are scattered. Is it true that "Da Dong" has women's sadness, and "Bo Mei" has all its collection?

古文：仰观天文，俯察人事，此而能久，孰有可亡！
现代文：仰观天体运行，俯家人间事务，这如果能长久，谁还会灭亡?
English: Looking up at the celestial bodies in motion, looking down on the affairs of men, if this continues for long, who will perish?

古文：凡在有心，谁不扼腕。
现代文：凡是有良心的人，谁不惋惜?
English: Who doesn't feel sorry for anyone with a conscience?

古文：讳等所以叩心泣血，不遑启处者也。
现代文：这是刘裕等人所以痛苦之极，不能安居的原因。
English: This is the reason why Liu Yu and others are so miserable and cannot live in peace.

古文：是故夕寐宵兴，援奖忠烈，潜构崎岖，险过履虎。
现代文：所以晚睡早起，表彰忠良，聚于崎岖道路，危险超过践踏虎尾。
English: Therefore, go to bed late and get up early, commend the loyal, gather on the rugged road, the danger is more than trampling the tiger's tail.

古文：辅国将军刘毅、广武将军何无忌、镇北主簿孟昶、兗州主簿魏咏之、宁远将军刘道规、龙骧将军刘籓、振威将军檀凭之等，忠烈断金，精贯白日，荷戈奋袂，志在毕命。
现代文：辅国将军刘毅、广武将军何无忌、镇北主簿孟昶、兖州主簿魏咏之、宁远将军刘道规、龙骧将军刘藩、振威将军檀凭之等人，其忠烈可以断金，其精诚可贯曰月，手执兵器奋起，决心为国捐躯。
English: Auxiliary General Liu Yi, General Guangwu He Muxi, Zhenbei General Meng Jun, Zhangzhou General Wei Jun, Ningyuan General Liu Daojie, Longjing General Liu Han, Zhenwei General Dangpiao and others, their loyalty can be broken, their sincerity can be penetrated, their hands hold weapons and rise up, determined to sacrifice their lives for the country.

古文：益州刺史毛璩，万里齐契，扫定荆楚。
现代文：益州刺史毛璩，万里同心，扫荡荆楚。
English: Yizhou embroidery felt, thousands of miles concentric, sweeping Jingchu.

古文：江州刺史郭昶之，奉迎主上，宫于寻阳。
现代文：江州刺史郭昶之，迎接主上，在寻阳建立宫室。
English: Guo Xizhi, the governor of Jiangzhou, built a palace in Xuanyang to welcome the emperor.

古文：镇北参军王元德等，并率部曲，保据石头。
现代文：镇北参军王元德等人，都率领部属，据守石头。
English: Wang Yuande and others who joined the army in the north of the town led their subordinates and guarded the stone.

古文：扬武将军诸葛长民，收集义士，已据历阳。
现代文：扬武将军诸葛旦匡，招集正义之士，已经占据历阳。
English: Yangwu General Zhuge Dangkuang, summoning righteous men, has occupied Liyang.

古文：征虏参军庾赜之等，潜相连结，以为内应。
现代文：征虏参军庾迹之等人，暗中集结，作为内应。
English: People who had been conscripted into the army secretly rallied as a response.

古文：同力协规，所在蜂起，即日斩伪徐州刺史安城王修、青州刺史弘首。
现代文：同心协力，各地蜂拥而起，当日斩伪徐州刺史室蝈王但篮、壹业刺史旦弘的首级。
English: With concerted efforts, people from all over the country flocked to the scene, and on the same day, the first level of the fake Xuzhou stabbing history room Wang Dan basket and the first level of stabbing history Tang Hong were cut.

古文：义众既集，文武争先，咸谓不有一统，则事无以辑。
现代文：起义兵众集合后，文武官员奋勇争先。都认为没有统一调度，事情就不能成功。
English: After the insurgent soldiers had gathered, the civil and military officials bravely raced to the front. They all believed that without a unified dispatch, things could not be successful.

古文：讳辞不获已，遂总军要。
现代文：刘裕迫不得已，总领军中要务希望上凭祖宗的威灵。
English: Liu Yu had no choice but to rely on the spirit of his ancestors to lead the army.

古文：庶上凭祖宗之灵，下罄义夫之力，翦馘逋逆，荡清京辇。公侯诸君，或世树忠贞，或身荷爵宠，而并俯眉猾竖，自效莫由，顾瞻周道，宁不吊乎！
现代文：下尽义士的力量，剪除叛逆，肃清京城。公侯诸君，有的世代忠贞，有的身受爵宠，却都向狡猾的小人低头，效命无路，观望周伐大道，难道不悲伤吗?
English: Do your best as a righteous person, eradicate rebellion, and clean up the capital city. Princes and princes, some generations are loyal, some are favored by the nobility, but they all bow to the cunning villain, there is no way out, watch the Zhou Fa Avenue, isn't it sad?

古文：今日之举，良其会也。
现代文：现在起事，实在正是机会。
English: The current uprising is really an opportunity.

古文：讳以虚薄，才非古人，接势于已替之机，受任于既颓之运。
现代文：刘裕德行薄弱，才能不及古人，获掌已经践履的枢要，受任于国运衰颓之时。
English: Liu Yudexing was weak, his ability was not as good as the ancients, and he was appointed to the pivotal position when the national movement was in decline.

古文：丹诚未宣，感慨愤跃，望霄汉以永怀，眄山川以增厉。
现代文：赤诚的心没有表达，感慨激愤，望云霄而咏叹，望山川而增添斗志。
English: Akechi's heart did not express, feeling indignant, looking at the sky and sighing, looking at the mountains and rivers and adding fighting spirit.

古文：授檄之日，神驰贼廷。
现代文：发布檄文的时候，心思已奔向贼寇的朝廷。
English: When the obituary was published, my mind was already racing to the imperial court of the bandits.

古文：以孟昶为长史，总摄后事；檀凭之为司马。百姓愿从者千余人。
现代文：任命逼赵为长史，总领后方事务；檀凭之担任司马百姓愿意跟从的有一千多人
English: The appointment of forcing Zhao as Changshi, the commander of the rear affairs; by virtue of which he served as Sima, there are more than a thousand people who are willing to follow

古文：三月戊午朔，遇吴甫之于江乘。
现代文：三月戊午初一，在江乘遭遇吴甫之。
English: On the morning of the first day of the third month, Wu Fuzhi was encountered in Jiangren.

古文：甫之，玄骁将也，其兵甚锐。
现代文：甫之，是桓玄骁勇的将领，士卒精锐。
English: After all, he was the general of Kuan Xuan Pi's valiant army, and his soldiers were the elite.

古文：高祖躬执长刀，大呼以冲之，众皆披靡，即斩甫之。
现代文：高祖亲自手执长刀，大声呼喊着冲击他们，甫之的部众都望风披靡，当即斩杀甫之。
English: Gaozhu himself held a long sword in his hand and shouted loudly to attack them. All of Fu Zhi's subordinates were desperate, and immediately killed Fu Zhi.

古文：进至罗落桥，皇甫敷率数千人逆战。
现代文：进军到罗落桥，皇甫敷率领几千人迎战。
English: Marching to Luo Luo Bridge, the Imperial Household Agency led several thousand people to meet the battle.

古文：宁远将军檀凭之与高祖各御一队，凭之战败见杀，其众退散。
现代文：宁远将军檀凭之和高祖各率一队人马，凭之战败而死，他的部下逃散。
English: General Ningyuan and Gaozu each led a team of men and horses, and died in defeat, and his men fled.

古文：高祖进战弥厉，前后奋击，应时摧破，即斩敷首。
现代文：高祖上前交战越发勇猛，前后冲击，很快打败桓玄的军队，当即斩下皇甫敷的首级。
English: Gaozu stepped forward and fought more and more bravely, storming back and forth, quickly defeating Huan Xuan's army and immediately cutting off the head of the emperor.

古文：初，高祖与何无忌等共建大谋，有善相者相高祖及无忌等并当大贵，其应甚近，惟云凭之无相。
现代文：当初高祖和何无忌等人共同确立大计，有善于看相的人看高祖和无忌等人都会大贵，应验很切近，惟独说凭之没有富贵相。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu and He Muxi and others jointly established a grand plan. Those who are good at seeing faces will see Gao Zu and Muxi and others will be very noble. The fulfillment is very close, but there is no rich and noble appearance.

古文：高祖与无忌密相谓曰： 吾等既为同舟，理无偏异。
现代文：高祖和无忌互相秘密地说： 我们既是同舟共济，道理上不能大有差异。
English: Gaozhu and Guozhu said to each other in secret: Since we are in the same boat, there can't be much difference in principle.

古文：吾徒咸皆富贵，则檀不应独殊。 
现代文：我们都当富贵，那么檀凭之不应独自不同。 
English: We're all supposed to be rich and famous, so it shouldn't make any difference who you are.

古文：深不解相者之言。
现代文：很不理解看相者的话。
English: He didn't quite understand what the onlooker was saying.

古文：至是而凭之战死，高祖知其事必捷。
现代文：到逭时凭之战死，高祖知道事情必定成功。
English: By the time he died, Gao Zu knew that things would be successful.

古文：玄闻敷等并没，愈惧，使桓谦屯东陵口，卞范之屯覆舟山西，众合二万。
现代文：桓玄听说皇甫敷等人战死，更加畏惧。派桓谦驻守东陵口，卞范之驻守覆舟山西面，部众共二万人？
English: Kuan Xuan was even more afraid when he heard that the Emperor Hoshiki and others had been killed in the battle. Did he send Kuan Qian to garrison the east mausoleum entrance, and Zhan Fan to garrison the west side of Zhoushan, with a total of twenty thousand soldiers?

古文：己未旦，义军食毕，弃其余粮，进至覆舟山东，使丐士张旗帜于山上，以为疑兵；玄又遣武骑将军庾祎之，配以精卒利器，助谦等。
现代文：己未早晨，起义军进餐完翠，抛弃剩余的粮食，推进到覆舟山东面，派乞丐在山上竖起旗帜，作为疑兵。桓玄又派遣武骑将军庾帏之，配备精锐的兵士锋利的兵器，协助桓谦等人。
English: In the early morning, the rebels finished their meal, threw away the remaining grain, and advanced to the east of Fuzhou Mountain. They sent beggars to erect flags on the mountain as suspected soldiers. Huan Xuan also sent a cavalry general, equipped with elite soldiers with sharp weapons, to assist Huan Qian and others.

古文：高祖躬先士卒以奔之，将士皆殊死战，无不一当百，呼声动天地。
现代文：高担身先士卒冲击他们，将领士兵都拼死作战，无不以一当百，呼喊声震动天地。
English: The high-spirited vanguard soldiers attacked them, the generals and soldiers fought to the death, all with one hundred, and the shouts shook the world.

古文：时东北风急，因命纵火，烟焰张天，鼓噪之音震京邑。谦等诸军，一时土崩。
现代文：当时东北风猛烈，高祖因而下令放火，烟火冲天，鼓噪的声音震撼京城桓谦等各军，一时之间上崩瓦解。
English: At that time, the northeast wind was fierce, so Gaozhu ordered to set fire, the fireworks soared into the sky, and the loud sound of drums shook the armies of Beijing Huanqian and other armies, and they collapsed in an instant.

古文：玄始虽遣军置阵，而走意已决，别使领军将军殷仲文具舟于石头，仍将子侄浮江南走。
现代文：桓玄开始虽然派兵布阵，而逃走的主意已定，另外派遣领军将军殷仲文在石头城准备船只，随即带领子侄渡江向南逃跑。
English: Although Huan Xuan began to deploy troops, the idea of fleeing had already been decided. In addition, he sent the leading general, Yin Zhongwen, to prepare ships in Stone Town, and then led his son and nephew across the river to escape to the south.

古文：庚申，高祖镇石头城，立留台，总百官，焚桓温神主于宣阳门外，造晋新主，立于太庙。
现代文：庚申，高祖镇守石头城，确立留台官员，在宣阳门外烧了桓温的牌位，造晋国的新牌位立在太庙中?
English: Goshun, Gaozouzhen guarded Stone Town, established officials to stay in Taiwan, burned the card rank of Huanwen outside Xuanyang Gate, and built a new card rank of Jin Province in Taimiao?

古文：遣诸将帅追玄，尚书王嘏率百官奉迎乘舆。
现代文：派遣将帅追击桓玄，尚书王嘏率领百官迎接皇帝。
English: He dispatched a general to pursue Kuan Xuan, and Shangshu Wang Rong led a hundred officials to meet the emperor.

古文：司徒王谧与众议推高祖领扬州，固辞。乃以谧为录尚书事，领扬州刺史。
现代文：司徒王谧和众人商议推举高祖兼任扬州刺史，宣担坚决推辞于是任用王谧为录尚书事，兼挝州刺史。
English: Wang Yao and the others discussed the appointment of Gao Zu as Yangzhou historian, but he firmly declined, so Wang Yao was appointed to record the history and write the history of Laos.

古文：于是推高祖为使持节、都督扬徐兗豫青冀幽并八州诸军事、领军将军、徐州刺史。先是，朝廷承晋氏乱政，百司纵弛，桓玄虽欲厘整，而众莫从之。
现代文：这时推举高祖为使持节、都督扰强查逸直冀幽甚八州诸军事、领军将军、徐州刺史：此前朝廷继承晋氏的混乱政局，百官放纵，但直虽想整顿，而众人不从。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was selected as the envoy of the festival, the military of the eight states, the leading generals, and the history of Xuzhou were elected as the governor of the capital to disturb and forcefully investigate the Jin Dynasty. Previously, the imperial court inherited the chaotic political situation of the Jin Dynasty, and hundreds of officials indulged, but although they wanted to rectify, they did not obey.

古文：高祖以身范物，先以威禁内外，百官皆肃然奉职。二三日间，风俗顿改。
现代文：高祖以身作则，威镇内外官员，百官都严肃地履行职责，二三口之间，风俗大变。
English: Gao Zu led by example. Officials in and out of Wizhen, hundreds of officials, all seriously performed their duties. Between two or three mouths, customs changed dramatically.

古文：且桓玄虽以雄豪见推，而一朝便有极位，晋氏四方牧守及在朝大臣，尽心伏事，臣主之分定矣。高祖位微于朝，众无一旅，奋臂草莱之中，倡大义以复皇祚。
现代文：而且桓玄虽然足以英雄豪杰受到推举。而一旦拥有帝位，置压四方的刺史郡守和在朝的大臣，都尽心侍奉，君臣的名分确定了产担在朝中地位低，部属不足五百人，起自民间，倡导大义恢复皇位。
English: Moreover, although Huan Xuan was enough of a hero and hero to be promoted, once he had the imperial throne, he put pressure on the four parties, the county governor of Sashih County and the minister of the imperial court, all of whom served wholeheartedly. The title of monarch and minister determined the low status of the burden bearer in the middle of the imperial court, with less than five hundred subordinates, from the people, advocating the restoration of the imperial throne.

古文：由是王谧等诸人时众民望，莫不愧而惮焉。
现代文：因此玉遥等各人这时失去民心，无不惭愧而畏惧。
English: As a result, Tamaharu and others lost the hearts of the people at this time, and they were ashamed and afraid.

古文：诸葛长民失期不得发，刁逵执送之，未至而玄败。
现代文：诸葛长民延误时间未能发动，刁逵捉住他押送入京，没有到京城而桓玄已败。
English: Zhuge Changmin could not launch the delay time, and Zou caught him and escorted him to Beijing. He did not get to Beijing, and Huan Xuan was defeated.

古文：玄经寻阳，江州刺史郭昶之备乘舆法物资之。
现代文：桓玄经过寻阳，江州刺史郭昶之备齐皇帝车辆器物资助他。
English: After Huan Xuan went to seek the sun, Jiangzhou stabbed Guo Xuan's preparations for the emperor's vehicles and equipment to support him.

古文：玄收略得二千余人，挟天子走江陵。
现代文：桓玄招募二千多人，挟持天于逃到江陵。
English: Kuan Xuan recruited more than two thousand people, took Tianyu hostage and fled to Gangneung.

古文：冠军将军刘毅、辅国将军何无忌、振武将军刘道规率诸军追讨。
现代文：冠军将军刘毅、辅国将军何无忌、振武将军刘道规率领各军追击讨伐。
English: Champion General Liu Yi, Auxiliary General He Muxi, and Zhenwu General Liu Daojie led the troops to pursue the crusade.

古文：尚书左仆射王愉、愉子荆州刺史绥等，江左冠族。
现代文：尚书左仆射王愉、王愉的儿子荆州刺史王绥等人，是江左的名门望族。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Wangyun, Wangyun's son Jingzhou Zishi Wangyun, and others were prominent members of Jiang Zuo's family.

古文：绥少有重名，以高祖起自布衣，甚相凌忽。
现代文：王绥年轻时有大名声，因壶担出自于平民，很轻视他。
English: When Wang Yao was young, he had a great reputation. People despised him because he was a commoner.

古文：绥，桓氏甥，亦有自疑之志。
现代文：王绥，是桓压的外甥，也有自我疑虑的心思。
English: Wang Yao, the nephew of Kanpu, also has self-doubts.

古文：高祖悉诛之。
现代文：高祖全部杀了他们。
English: Gaozu killed them all.

古文：四月，奉武陵王遵为大将军，承制，大赦天下，唯桓玄一祖后不在赦例。
现代文：四月，奉武陵王司马遵为大将军，秉承皇帝之命便宜行事。大赦天下，衹有与桓玄同祖者例外。
English: In April, he promoted Wuling King Sima Zun to the rank of general, acting on the orders of the emperor. He was pardoned by the emperor, with the exception of those who shared the same ancestor as Huan Xuan.

古文：初，高祖家贫，尝负刁逵社钱三万，经时无以还。
现代文：当初壶趄家中贫穷，曾经欠刁逵的社钱三万，长时间不还。
English: Her family was poor at the beginning, and she once owed 30,000 social money, which she did not pay back for a long time.

古文：逵执录甚严，王谧造逵见之，密以钱代还，由是得释。
现代文：卫达捉住他逼债，王谧造访刁逵时见到这件事，暗中代还丁钱，高祖因此得释。
English: Wei Da caught him and forced him to pay the debt. Wang Yao saw this when he visited Gao, and secretly paid back the money. Gao Zu was thus released.

古文：高祖名微位薄，盛流皆不与相知，唯谧交焉。
现代文：直担名声小地位低，名流都不同他相交往，惟独王谴同他交往。
English: Directly responsible for fame, small and low status, celebrities do not interact with him, except that the king forbids him to interact with him.

古文：桓玄将篡，谧手解安帝玺绂，为玄佐命功臣。
现代文：桓玄将要篡位，王谧亲手解下圭壶的玉玺丝带，成为桓玄的辅佐功臣。
English: When Kuan Xuan was about to usurp the throne, Wang Yao personally untied the jade ribbon from the jug and became Kuan Xuan's second-in-command.

古文：及义旗建，众并谓谧宜诛，唯高祖保持之。
现代文：等到起义旌旗树起，众人都说王谧应该诛杀，惟有高担保护他。
English: When the flag of the uprising was raised, everyone said that Wang Yao should fight and kill, but he was protected by Gao Dian.

古文：刘毅尝因朝会，问谧玺绂所在，谧益惧。
现代文：型塑曾利用朝廷集会，询问王谧玉玺丝带在何处，王垄更加害怕。
English: Liu Yi once took the opportunity of the morning meeting to ask Wang Yao where Jade Dragonfly was. Wang Yao was even more afraid.

古文：及王愉父子诛，谧从弟谌谓谧曰： 王驹无罪，而义旗诛之，此是剪除胜己，以绝民望。
现代文：等到王愉父子被杀，王谧的堂弟王谌对玉锤说： 王鲍没有罪过，而起义军杀了他，这是铲锄超过自己的人，来断绝民众的希望。
English: After Wang Yu's father and son were killed, Wang Yao's cousin Wang Yao said to Yu Hammer, "Wang Bao did not commit a crime, but the rebels killed him. This is a person who has surpassed himself, to break the hope of the people."

古文：兄既桓氏党附，名位如此，欲求免得乎？ 
现代文：兄长既是桓氏党羽，名声地位如此高，想求免死能达到吗? 
English: As the elder brother is a member of Huan's party, his reputation and status are so high, can he achieve the top if he wants to avoid death?

古文：驹，愉小字也。谧惧，奔于曲阿。
现代文：王驹是王愉的小名：王垄畏惧，逃到迪阿。
English: Wang Yao is Wang Yu's nickname: Wang Ruan was afraid and fled to Dua.

古文：高祖笺白大将军，深相保谧，迎还复位。
现代文：直担上书大将军，极力保护王谧，迎接他官复原职。
English: He was directly in charge of the General Staff of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and tried his best to protect Wang Qi and welcome his reinstatement.

古文：光禄勋丁承之、左卫将军褚粲、游击将军司马秀役使官人，为御史中丞王祯之所纠察，谢笺言辞怨忿。承之造司宜藏。
现代文：光禄勋卞承之、左卫将军撞塞、游击将军壁昼役使官府人员，被御史中丞王祯之纠察，道歉的文书中言辞充满怨恨愤怒丞之到司宜藏。
English: Inheritors of the Order of the Silver Star, the Left Guard generals, and the guerrilla generals, were picketed by the historian, the middle-ranking officer, the middle-ranking officer, and the officials of the government, and the words in the letter of apology were full of resentment and anger, and the middle-ranking officer, the middle-ranking officer, the middle-ranking officer, went to the imperial palace.

古文：高祖与大将军笺，白 粲等备位大臣，所怀必尽，执宪不允，自应据理陈诉，而横兴怨忿，归咎有司，宜加裁当，以清风轨 。
现代文：高祖给大将军送呈文书，禀报 褚粲等人处于大臣之位，想法必合情理。别人执法不公，自应据理陈述，然而却心怀怨恨，把过错归到有关部门。对此应加以制裁，以明法度 。
English: Gaozhu sent a document to the general, and the idea of "false report" must be reasonable. Others do not enforce the law fairly, and they should explain the reason, but they have a grudge and attribute the fault to the relevant departments. This should be sanctioned to clarify the law.

古文：并免官。
现代文：把褚粲等人都免除宫职。
English: He exempted Zou and others from palace duties.

古文：桓玄兒子韶，聚众向历阳，高祖命辅国将军诸葛长民击走之。
现代文：桓玄哥哥的儿子桓歆，聚众向历阳进发，高祖命令辅国将军诸葛长民出击打退了他。
English: Kanzen, the son of Kangen's brother, gathered a crowd to march to Liyang, and Gaozu ordered Zhuge Changmin, the general of the Auxiliary State, to defeat him.

古文：无忌、道规破玄大将郭钤等于桑落洲，众军进据寻阳。
现代文：无忌、道规在桑落洲打败桓玄的大将郭铨等人，各军前进占据寻阳。
English: Undoubtedly, Doki defeated Huan Xuan's general Guo Yu and others in Sanluo Zhou, and the armies advanced to occupy Xuanyang.

古文：加高祖督江州诸军事。
现代文：加授高祖为都督江州诸军事。
English: Gao Zu, who was awarded the award, was the military commander of Jiangzhou.

古文：玄既还荆郢，大聚兵众，召水军造楼船、器械，率众二万，挟天子发江陵，浮江东下，与冠军将军刘殷等相遇于峥嵘洲，众军下击，大破之。
现代文：桓玄回到塑业呈幽后，大量聚集兵马，征召水军制造战船、器械，率领军队二万人，挟持天子从江堕出发，从昼辽东下，同冠军将军刘毅等人在峥噬洲相遇，各军下船出击，大败桓玄。
English: After Huan Xuan returned to the plastic industry, he gathered a large number of soldiers and horses, conscripted the navy to manufacture warships and equipment, led an army of 20,000 people, held the heavenly son from the river, and went to the east of Liaodong from the afternoon. He met with the champion general Liu Yi and others on the coast of Yunnan, and all the troops disembarked and attacked, and Huan Xuan was defeated.

古文：玄弃众，复挟天子还复江陵。
现代文：桓玄抛下部众，又挟持天子返回江陵。
English: Kuan Xuan abandoned his subordinates and returned to Gangneung with Tianzi in his arms.

古文：玄党殷仲文奉晋二皇后还京师。
现代文：桓玄的同党殷仲文侍奉置鱼二位皇后回到京城。
English: Yin Zhongwen, a member of Kuan Xuan's party, returned to the capital with two queens.

古文：玄至江陵，因西走。
现代文：桓玄到达江陵，随即向西逃跑。
English: Kuan Xuan arrived in Gangneung and immediately fled westward.

古文：南郡太守王腾之、荆州别驾王康产奉天子入南郡府。
现代文：南郡太守王腾之、荆州别驾王康产侍奉天子进入南郡官府。
English: Wang Tengzhi, the governor-general of Nan County, and Wang Kang, the son of Jing Province, entered the government office of Nan County.

古文：初，征虏将军、益州刺史毛璩，遣从孙祐之与参军费恬送弟丧下，有众二百。
现代文：起初征虏将军、益州刺史王壁，派遣堂孙违之和参军费垣护送弟弟的霞柩束下，有兵士二百人。
English: At first, there were two hundred soldiers under the command of the conscript general, Ikshu stabbed Wangbi, sent his cousins and grandchildren to join the army, and Feigaki escorted his younger brother, Xia Yao.

古文：璩弟子修之时为玄屯骑校尉，诱玄以入蜀。
现代文：毛璩弟弟的儿子脩之当时任旦玄的屯骑校尉，诱骗但玄入蜀。
English: Mao Xuan's younger brother's son, Yao Zhi, was at that time a cadet of Dang Xuan, and he tricked Dang Xuan into entering Shu.

古文：至枚回洲，恬与祐之迎射之。
现代文：到达枚回泌，壹区和违之迎上前射击桓玄。
English: Reaching the re-emergence of the sheet, the first district and the counter-attack came forward to shoot Kuan Xuan.

古文：益州督护冯迁斩玄首，传京师，又斩玄子升于江陵市。
现代文：益州督护冯迁斩下旦玄的首级送到京城。又在江陵街市斩杀桓宣的儿子但昼。
English: Feng Qian, the governor of Yizhou, cut off the head of Dan Xuan and sent it to Beijing. He also killed Dan Rong, the son of Huan Xuan, in the city of Jiangling.

古文：初，玄败于峥嵘洲，义军以为大事已定，追蹑不速。玄死几一旬，众军犹不至。
现代文：当初担玄在峻哩迦失败，起义军以为大事已定，追击不力但玄死后将近十天，各军还没到。
English: At first, Tang Xuan failed at Shun Li Jia, and the rebel army thought that the matter was settled. The pursuit was not effective, but nearly ten days after Xuan's death, the army had not yet arrived.

古文：玄从子振逃于华容之涌中，招聚逆党数千人，晨袭江陵城，居民竞出赴之。
现代文：担玄的侄儿担面逃到楚容的通主，招集叛党几千人，清晨袭击江陵城，居民竞相出城投奔他。
English: Tang Xuan's nephew fled to Chu Rong and summoned thousands of rebels to attack Jiangling City in the early morning. Residents raced out of the city to join him.

古文：腾之、康产皆被杀。
现代文：跶之、屋产都被杀害。
English: As a result, the entire household was killed.

古文：桓谦先匿于沮川，亦聚众以应。振为玄举哀，立丧廷。
现代文：桓谜原先躲藏在沮贝，也聚集部众来响应桓振为桓玄发丧，设立治丧场所。
English: Originally, KANMEI was hiding in Debai, but the club members gathered to respond to KANZHOU's mourning for KANHEN and set up a place for mourning.

古文：谦率众官奉玺绶于安帝。
现代文：逗谌率领众官员把玉玺丝带献给安壶。
English: He led the officials in presenting the jade ribbon to Anjun.

古文：无忌、道规既至江陵，与桓振战于灵溪。
现代文：翅昼、道趄到达毖后，同旦面在灵选交战。
English: After reaching the cocoon, the eagle and the vulture fought with each other in a spiritual battle.

古文：玄党冯该又设伏于杨林，义军奔败，退还寻阳。
现代文：但玄的党羽迈谴在扰挞设下埋伏，起义军失败逃奔，退回寻阳。
English: However, Xuanzang's followers ambushed the rebel army under the ruse of distraction. The rebel army fled in defeat and retreated in search of the sun.

古文：兗州刺史辛禺怀贰。
现代文：查州刺史圭垦有二心。
English: There are two sides to Chashu assassin Kei Shih.

古文：会北青州刺史刘该反，禺求征该，次淮阴，又反。
现代文：遇北青州刺史刘该反叛，主星请求征讨刘茵，停驻在淮阴，又反叛。
English: In the case of the rebellion of Liu Gui, the main star requested to recruit Liu Yin, stationed in Huaiyin, and rebelled again.

古文：禺长史羊穆之斩禺，传首京师。
现代文：芒星的长史羊穆之斩杀芝虽，传送首级到京城。
English: Although the long history of Meng Xing's sheep Mu Zhi killed Zhi, he sent the first level to Beijing.

古文：十月，高祖领青州刺史。
现代文：十月，壶担兼任壹州刺史。
English: In October, the kettle bearer also served as the first secretary of the State Council.

古文：甲仗百人入殿。
现代文：率仪仗一百人进殿。
English: led a ceremonial procession of a hundred people into the hall.

古文：刘毅诸军复进至夏口。毅攻鲁城，道规攻偃月垒，皆拔之。
现代文：曲各军又进军驷。曲攻打铋，龃攻打偃月垒，都攻下来了。
English: All the armies of Qu marched into Shao again. They attacked Shao, Shao, Shao, and the base of the moon, all of which were attacked.

古文：十二月，诸军进平巴陵。
现代文：十二月，各军前进平定旦座。
English: In December, the armies advanced to settle the issue.

古文：义熙元年正月，毅等至江津，破桓谦、桓振，江陵平。天子反正。
现代文：义熙元年正月，刘毅等人到达江津，打败桓谦、桓振，江陵平定，天子重归帝位。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yixi, Liu Yi and others arrived in Jiangjin, defeated Huan Qian and Huan Zhen, pacified Jiangling, and Tianzi returned to the throne.

古文：三月，天子至自江陵。
现代文：三月，天子从江陵归来。
English: In March, Tianzi returned from Gangneung.

古文：诏曰：古称大者天地，其次君臣，所以列贯三辰，神人代序，谅理本于造昧，而运周于万叶。
现代文：下韶说：古人说首先是天地，其次是君臣，所以天上有曰月星辰，神入互相交替，道理起源于蒙昧时代，而行于万代。
English: He said, "The ancients said that heaven and earth came first, followed by kings and ministers. Therefore, there is the moon and stars in the sky, and the gods and mortals alternate with each other. The principle originated in the Age of Ignorance, and has been practiced for thousands of generations.

古文：故盈否时袭，四灵通其变；王道或昧，贞贤拯其危。天命所以永固，人心所以攸穆。
现代文：所以满亏相继出现，四种灵物贯通其中变化，王道有时衰落，忠臣贤士拯救危难，天命因此不变，人心因此和顺。
English: Therefore, the four kinds of spirits are interwoven with the changes, the royal road sometimes declines, loyal servants and sages save the peril, the fate of heaven is therefore unchanged, and the people's hearts are therefore harmonious.

古文：虽夏、周中倾，赖靡、申之绩，莽、伦载窃，实二代是维，或乘资藉号，或业隆异世，犹诗书以之休咏，记策用为美谈。
现代文：虽然夏朝、周朝中途倾覆，依赖靡、申的功绩，莽、伦窃位，维护二代。有的凭藉声望依靠名号，有的业绩隆盛于后世，《诗经》《尚书》因之歌咏，史册传为美谈。
English: Although the Xia and Zhou dynasties were overthrown in the middle of their reigns, two generations maintained their positions by relying on the exploits, recklessness, and theft of Mei and Shin. Some relied on their names by virtue of their prestige, and some of their achievements flourished in later generations. The "Song of Songs" and "Book of Songs" were sung because of them, and the history books were passed down as beautiful stories.

古文：未有因心抚民，而诚发理应，援神器于已沦，若在今之盛者也。
现代文：没有利用真心安抚民众，而真诚发出循理响应，扶持帝位于已沉沦之时，如当今这样强盛的。
English: It did not use sincerity to appease the people, but sincerely issued a rational response to support the emperor at a time when he had fallen, as strong as it is today.

古文：朕以寡昧，遭家不造，越自遘闵，属当屯极。
现代文：我以薄德弱才，遭遇家族不幸，父母之丧刚过，又遇时运艰难。
English: I was born with a weak moral character, suffered family misfortune, just after the death of my parents, and had a hard time.

古文：逆臣桓玄，乘衅纵慝，穷凶恣虐，滔天猾夏。
现代文：叛臣桓玄，乘机恣意作恶，凶残暴虐，罪恶滔天扰乱华夏。
English: The traitor Kuan Xuan took advantage of the opportunity to arbitrarily commit evil, heinous brutality, and heinous crimes to disturb Huaxia.

古文：遂诬罔人神，肆其篡乱。
现代文：欺骗大众神明，肆意篡位作乱。
English: Deceiving the gods of the people, wantonly usurping and creating chaos.

古文：祖宗之基既湮，七庙之飨胥殄，若坠渊谷，未足斯譬。
现代文：祖宗的基业埋没，七庙的祭祀断绝，犹如坠入深渊山谷，还不足以譬喻。
English: It is not enough to say that the foundation of the ancestors has been buried and the sacrificial rites of the seven temples have ceased. It is as if they have fallen into a deep valley.

古文：皇度有晋，天纵英哲，使持节、都督扬徐兗豫青冀幽并江九州诸军事、镇军将军、徐青二州刺史，忠诚天亮，神武命世，用能贞明协契，义夫响臻。
现代文：维护晋朝，天纵英才，使持节、都督扬徐兖豫青冀幽并江九州诸军事、镇军将军、徐青二州刺史，忠诚如上天般明朗，神明英武著名于当代，以此能贤士协同，义士响应。
English: To uphold the Jin Dynasty, the heavenly longing and talent, to keep the festival, the governor Yang, the military, the general of the township army, Xu Qing, and the two states of Jiangsu and Yunnan, the loyalty is as clear as the sky, and the gods are famous in the contemporary world, so that the sages can cooperate and the righteous can respond.

古文：故顺声一唱，二溟卷波；英风振路，宸居清翳。暨冠军将军毅、辅国将军无忌、振武将军道规，舟旗遄迈，而元凶传首；回戈叠挥，则荆、汉雾廓。
现代文：所以归顺的声音一发出，南海北海卷起波涛，英武的风暴震撼道路，京城肃清阴暗及至冠军将军刘毅、辅国将军无忌、振武将军道规，战船旌旗急进，而元凶的首级传送，回师挥舞旌旗，荆山、汉水廓清。
English: Therefore, as soon as the voice of surrender was issued, the South China Sea and the North Sea rolled up the waves, the storm of Yingwu shook the road, the capital city cleared the gloom, and the champion general Liu Yi, the general of the auxiliary country, the general of Zhenwu, the rules of the road, the warship carrying the flag rushed forward, and the first-level transmission of the culprit, the return division waved the flag, and the mountains and rivers were clear.

古文：俾宣、元之祚，永固于嵩、岱；倾基重造，再集于朕躬。
现代文：使宣帝、元帝的国运，如嵩山、岱山永远坚固，倾覆的根基重新构造，再度集中于我身上。
English: So that the national fortune of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Yuan, such as Songshan and Shaoshan, will always be solid, and the foundation that was overturned will be reconstructed and refocused on me.

古文：宗庙歆七百之祜，皇基融载新之命。
现代文：宗庙享受七百年的福祉，基业融入崭新的天命。
English: The ancestral temple has enjoyed seven hundred years of well-being, and the foundation has been integrated into a brand new destiny.

古文：念功惟德，永言铭怀。
现代文：思念这些功勋德行，永远铭记心中。
English: Think about these merits and virtues, and always keep them in mind.

古文：固已道冠开辟，独绝终古，书契以来，未之前闻矣。
现代文：本来已是道德高于开天辟地以来，超绝于千古，有文字记载以来，从前没有听说过。
English: Originally, morality has been higher since the dawn of time, surpassing the ages, and has not been heard of since written records.

古文：虽则功高靡尚，理至难文，而崇庸命德，哲王攸先者，将以弘道制治，深关盛衰。
现代文：虽然功高无以复加，至理难以表述，而崇尚功勋褒扬德行，英明君主将其放在首的原因，当是用以弘扬道德控制政治，深切关涉到盛衰。
English: Although there is no way to add merit, it is difficult to express the truth, and the reason why merit is praised and virtue is praised, and the wise monarch puts it first, should be used to promote moral control of politics, which is deeply related to the rise and fall.

古文：故伊、望膺殊命之锡，桓、文飨备物之礼，况宏征不世，顾邈百代者，宜极名器之隆，以光大国之盛。
现代文：所以伊尹、吕望受到特殊的赐予，齐桓公、晋文公享有完备的礼仪，何况宏大的征验旷代难出，回顾百代难有匹敌的人呢。应该用尽名号器物的隆重，来昭明大国的盛典。
English: Therefore, Yi Yin and Lvang were given special gifts, and Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen enjoyed perfect etiquette. What's more, it's hard to find a grand enlistment ceremony in a thousand generations, and it's hard to find a comparable one in a hundred generations. The grandeur of famous objects should be exhausted to show the grand ceremony of a great country.

古文：而镇军谦虚自衷，诚旨屡显。朕重逆仲父，乃所以愈彰德美也。
现代文：然而镇军将军谦虚发自内心，诚恳的心意屡次显明，我难以违忤仲父，如此镇军将军更显得德行美好。
English: However, the general of the town army is humble from the bottom of his heart, and his sincere intentions have been repeatedly revealed. It is difficult for me to disobey my stepfather, so the general of the town army is more virtuous and beautiful.

古文：镇军可进位侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事，使持节、徐青二州刺史如故。
现代文：镇军将军可升任侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军事，使持节、途直二州刺史照旧。
English: The general of the township army can be promoted to the position of the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the military governor of the capital, and so on.

古文：显祚大邦，启兹疆宇。
现代文：显著赐予大国，开拓境土。
English: Significantly given to the great powers, to open up the territory.

古文：高祖固让；加录尚书事，又不受，屡请归籓。
现代文：区型坚决推让。加授绿尚书事，又不接受，屡次请求回到封地。
English: The district resolutely pushed for concessions. It did not accept the awarding of additional green certificates, and repeatedly requested to return to the fief.

古文：天子不许，遣百僚敦劝，又亲幸公第。
现代文：天子不准，派百官劝告，又亲自前往高祖宅第。
English: The emperor did not approve, sent hundreds of officials to advise, and personally went to Gao Zu's house.

古文：高祖惶惧，诣阙陈请，天子不能夺。
现代文：高祖惶恐前往宫廷陈述，天子不改变他的主意。
English: Gao Zu panicked and went to the court to make a statement, but Tianzi did not change his mind.

古文：是月，旋镇丹徒。
现代文：这个月，高祖返回镇守丹硅。
English: This month, Gaozu returned to the town of Danshih.

古文：天子重遣大使敦劝，又不受。
现代文：天子重新派遣大使劝说，高祖又不接受。
English: The emperor again sent an ambassador to persuade him, but Gaozu did not accept.

古文：乃改授都督荆、司、梁、益、宁、雍、凉七州，并前十六州诸军事，本官如故。
现代文：于是改授为都督荆、司、梁、益、宁、雍、凉七州，加上从前为十六州诸军事，原官照旧不变。
English: As a result, the seven prefectures of Jing, Shih, Liang, Yixing, Ning, Yong and Liang were upgraded to prefectural governors, in addition to the sixteen military prefectures. The original post remained unchanged.

古文：于是受命解青州，加领兗州刺史。
现代文：这时壶担受命解除直业刺史职位，另兼任兖州刺史。
English: At this time, Juchang was ordered to dismiss the post of direct industry historian, and also served as the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：卢循浮海破广州，获刺史吴隐之。
现代文：卢妪从海上乘船攻下广州，擒获刺史吴隐之。
English: Lu Wei captured Guangzhou from the sea by ship and captured the assassin Wu Yingzhu.

古文：即以循为广州刺史，以其同党徐道覆为始兴相。
现代文：当即任用卢循为卢州刺史，任用他的同党徐道覆为始兴相。
English: He immediately appointed Lu Xuan as the governor of Luzhou and his party colleague Xu Daohui as the prime minister.

古文：二年三月，督交、广二州。
现代文：二年三月，都督交、广二州。
English: In March of the following year, he became the governor of Jiaxing and Guanzhou.

古文：十月，高祖上言曰： 昔天祸皇室，巨狡纵篡，臣等义惟旧隶，豫蒙国恩，仰契信顺之符，俯厉人臣之愤，虽社稷之灵，抑亦事由众济。
现代文：十月，高祖上疏说： 往昔上天降罪皇室，大奸贼篡位，臣下等人在道义上是旧臣属，早蒙国家恩典，上契合诚信归附的符命，下激励臣子的义愤，虽然是国家的福分，也是由众人之力。
English: In October, Gao Zuoxiao said: In the past, the imperial family was punished by heaven, the great traitor usurped the throne, and the vassals and other people were morally former vassals. They had long received the grace of the state, received the mission of adhering to the integrity, and encouraged the righteous indignation of the vassals. Although it is the blessing of the country, it is also the power of all people.

古文：其翼奖忠勤之佐，文武毕力之士，敷执在己之谦，用亏国体之大，辄申摄众军先上，同谋起义，始平京口、广陵二城。臣及抚军将军毅等二百七十二人，并后赴义出都，缘道大战，所余一千五百六十六人。又辅国将军长民、故给事中王元德等十人，各一千八百四十八人，乞正封赏。
现代文：应奖掖忠诚勤奋的佐吏，尽力而为的文武之士，宣扬主上的谦恭，以免有损国家典章制度现先行申报所统领各军，共同谋划发起义举，开始平定京、广陵二城，有臣下和抚军将军刘毅等二百七十二人以及随后奔赴大义到京城沿途大战，上述人员外余下的有一千五百六十六人，另有辅国将军长屋、已故给事中王元德等十人，合计一千八百四十八人，请求正式封授赏赐。
English: In response to the award, the loyal and diligent staff officers, the men of letters and warriors who did their best, preached the Lord's humility, so as not to impair the national award system, the commanders of the armies, who are now declared in advance, jointly planned to launch a charity campaign, began to subdue the two cities of Beijing and Guangling, there were 272 people such as the general Liu Yi of the general Liu Yi army, and then went to the great battle along the way from Dayi to Beijing. The remaining 1566 people were outside the above-mentioned personnel, and there were 10 people such as the general of the auxiliary country Nagaya and the late Wang Yuande, a total of

古文：其西征众军，须论集续上。 
现代文：西征的各军，待评定后陆续上报。 
English: The armies of the Western Expedition will report successively after being evaluated.

古文：于是尚书奏封唱义谋主镇军将军讳豫章郡公，食邑万户，赐绢三万匹。
现代文：于是尚书上奏封倡导大义的主谋镇军将军型茔为豫章郡公，食邑一万户，赐绢三万匹。
English: As a result, Shang wrote in his book that the chief strategist of the town army, who advocated righteousness, was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang County, with 10,000 households and 30,000 yakitori.

古文：其余封赏各有差。
现代文：其余封爵赏赐多少不等。
English: The remaining knighthoods are awarded in varying amounts.

古文：镇军府佐吏，降故太傅谢安府一等。
现代文：镇军将军府的佐吏，低于从前太傅谢安府一个等级
English: An aide-de-camp of the town's military commander's office, one level lower than the former Taifu Xie Anfu

古文：十一月，天子重申前令，加高祖侍中，进号车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十一月，天子重申前令，加授高祖为侍中，升为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In November, the heavenly son reiterated the previous order, and conferred Gaozu as an attendant, and promoted him to the general of cavalry and cavalry, the head of the imperial household, and the third secretary.

古文：固让。
现代文：高祖坚决推辞。
English: Gaozu resolutely refused.

古文：诏遣百僚敦劝。
现代文：天子诏令派遣百官劝说
English: The Emperor's edict to dispatch a hundred officials to persuade

古文：三年二月，高祖还京师，将诣廷尉；天子先诏狱官不得受，诣阙陈让，乃见听。
现代文：三年二月，高祖回到京城，将要前往廷尉，天子预先诏令狱官不予受理。高祖前往宫廷陈述，方得准许。
English: In February of the third year, Gaozu returned to Beijing. He was going to go to the imperial court, but the emperor had decreed in advance that the prison officials would not accept him. Gaozu went to the court to make a statement, and was granted permission.

古文：旋于丹徒。
现代文：高祖回到丹徒。
English: Gaozu returned to Dantu.

古文：闰月，府将骆冰谋作乱，将被执，单骑走，追斩之。
现代文：闰月，府中将领骆冰作乱，将要被捉，单人匹马逃跑，被追上斩杀。
English: In the leap month, the prefectural general Luo Bing made a mess, was about to be caught, ran away single-handedly, and was caught and killed.

古文：诛冰父永嘉太守球。
现代文：诛杀骆冰的父亲永嘉太守竖球。
English: Luo Bing's father, Yongjia Taishou, was a javelin thrower.

古文：球本东阳郡史，孙恩之乱，起义于长山，故见擢用。
现代文：骆球本来是东阳郡吏，孙恩之乱时，他在长山起义，所以被提拔。
English: Luoqiu was originally an official of Dongyang County. During Sun En's Rebellion, he rebelled in Changshan, so he was promoted.

古文：初，桓玄之败，以桓冲忠贞，署其孙胤。
现代文：当初桓玄失败，因桓冲忠诚坚贞，任用他的孙子桓胤。
English: At first, Kuan Xuan failed, but because of Kunchu's loyalty and steadfastness, his grandson Kuan Yin was appointed.

古文：至是冰谋以胤为主，与东阳太守殷仲文潜相连结。
现代文：到这时骆冰图谋以桓胤为君主，和东阳太守殷仲文暗中互相联合。
English: By this time, Luo Bing was plotting to make Huan Yan the monarch, and secretly allied with the Dongyang Emperor Yin Zhongwen.

古文：乃诛仲文及仲文二弟。凡桓玄余党，至是皆诛夷。
现代文：于是诛杀仲文和仲文的两个弟弟凡是桓玄的余党，至此全被杀掉
English: So he killed Zhongwen and Zhongwen's two younger brothers, and all of Kuan Xuan's remaining followers were killed.

古文：天子遣兼太常葛籍授公策曰： 有扈滔天，夷羿乘衅，乱节干纪，实挠皇极。
现代文：天子派遣兼太常葛籍授予豫章郡公策书说： 直尘罪恶滔天，裹翌乘机作乱，扰乱节度干犯法纪，削弱王室。
English: The public policy book of Yuzhang County, which was dispatched by the Son of Heaven and awarded the title of Taizang Ge, said: "Straight-up evil is monstrous, take the opportunity to make trouble, disrupt discipline, violate laws and regulations, and weaken the royal family.

古文：贼臣桓玄，怙宠肆逆，乃摧倾华、霍，倒拔嵩、岱，五岳既夷，六地易所。
现代文：贼臣桓玄，恃宠叛逆，摧垮华山、霍山，倒拔嵩山、泰山，铲平五岳，天地四方改变。
English: The thief and vassal Kuan Xuan, the favorite of the rebels, destroyed Huashan and Huoshan, uprooted Mount Song and Mount Tai, leveled the Five Mountains, and changed the world in every direction.

古文：公命世英纵，藏器待时，因心资敬，誓雪国耻。慨愤陵夷，诚发宵寐。
现代文：公才华盖世天赋英武，怀才等待时机，发自内，誓洗国家耻辱，愤慨衰微，日夜抒发诚意。
English: Public talent, world-class talent, talent, waiting for the opportunity, from the inside, swearing to wash the national shame, indignation, day and night to express sincerity.

古文：既而岁月屡迁，神器已远，忠孝幽寄，实贯三灵。
现代文：不久岁月流逝，帝位失去多时，心怀忠孝暗中寄托，沟通天地人。
English: Soon the years passed, the imperial throne was lost for a long time, with loyalty and filial piety in mind, communication between heaven and earth.

古文：尔乃介石胜机，宣契毕举，诉苍天以为正，挥义旅而一驱；奔锋数百，势烈激电，百万不能抗限，制路日直植城。
现代文：不改节操遏制凶残，倡导者和响应者一同起事，向苍天申诉正道，指挥起义军而驱驰。前锋几百人，势如闪电，百万人马不能抗衡，夺路逼近京城。
English: Without changing the discipline and restraining the ferocity, the advocates and responders rose up together, appealed to the heavens for the right way, and directed the insurgents to drive away. Several hundred forwards, like lightning, and a million horses could not compete, approaching the capital.

古文：遂使冲鲸溃流，暴鳞奔汉，庙胜远加，重氛载涤，二仪廓清，三光反照，事遂永代，功高开辟，理微称谓，义感朕心。
现代文：于是使大恶之人溃败，暴死于昼红莲丞中，谋略遥远地发出，浓密的凶气被荡涤，天地澄清，日月星辰照耀，事迹传扬千古，功高于古今，道理上难以述说，大义感动我的心。
English: As a result, the great evildoer was defeated, died violently in the middle of the day red lotus, the strategy was issued far away, the thick evil spirit was wiped out, the heaven and earth were clarified, the sun, the moon and the stars shined, the deeds were passed down for thousands of years, the achievement was higher than the past and the present, it is difficult to explain in principle, the great righteousness moved my heart.

古文：若夫道为身济，犹縻厥爵，况乃诚德俱深，勋冠天人者乎！
现代文：为救济自身而实行道义，还受到封爵，何况是诚意德行都深厚，功勋高于天人呢?
English: To practice morality for one's own relief and receive a knighthood, to say nothing of the fact that one's sincerity and virtue are profound, and one's merits are higher than those of heavenly beings?

古文：是用建兹邦国，永祚山河，言念载怀，匪云足报。
现代文：因而建立邦国，山河水固，此言出自肺腑，何足为报。
English: Therefore, the establishment of a state, the mountains and rivers are solid, this is a statement from the bottom of my heart, what a report.

古文：往钦哉！俾屏余一人，长弼皇晋，流风垂祚，晖烈无穷。
现代文：努力吧保障我一人，永久保佑晋朝，流传后世，传诸永久。
English: Work hard to protect me alone, forever bless the Jin Dynasty, pass it on to future generations, and pass it on forever.

古文：其降承嘉策，对扬朕命。 
现代文：可抑制心志接受美好的策封，应答我的诏命。 
English: You can restrain your mind to accept a beautiful seal and respond to my imperial command.

古文：十二月，司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史王谧薨。
现代文：十二月，司徒、绿尚书事、扬州刺史王谧逝世。
English: In December, Sitoro, Lv Shang Shujie and Yangzhou Sisi Wang Qi passed away.

古文：四年正月，征公入辅，授侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书、徐兗二州刺史如故。
现代文：四年正月，召豫章郡公入朝辅政，授侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，徐兖：二州刺史照旧。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Yuzhang County was summoned to join the government as an auxiliary to the government, and was awarded the title of Vice-Marshal, General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of Kaifu with three divisions, Yangzhou engraved history, recorded records, and Xu Xi: engraved history of the two states as before.

古文：表解兗州。
现代文：豫章郡公上奏解除兖州刺史职位。
English: Yuanzhang County's public envoy dismissed Zhangzhou's post of chief historian.

古文：先是，遣冠军刘敬宣伐蜀贼谯纵，无功而返。
现代文：在这以前派遣冠军将军刘敬宣讨伐蜀地贼寇谯纵，无功而回。
English: Prior to this, the champion general Liu Jingxuan was dispatched to fight against the Mongolian invaders, but returned without success.

古文：九月，以敬宣挫退，逊位，不许。
现代文：九月，因敬宣受挫退却，请求退位，未获批准。
English: In September, he retreated in frustration and requested to abdicate, but his request was not approved.

古文：乃降为中军将军，开府如故。
现代文：于是降为中军将军，开府照旧
English: As a result, he was demoted to the rank of general in the Chinese army, but continued to run the government as before.

古文：初，伪燕王鲜卑慕容德僭号于青州，德死，兄子超袭位，前后数为边患。
现代文：当初伪燕王鲜卑人慕容德在青州僭越称帝，慕容德死去，其哥哥的儿子慕容超继位，前后接连成为边境的祸患。
English: At that time, the pseudo Yan Wang Xianbei named Murong De became emperor in Qingzhou. Murong De died, and his brother's son Murong Chao succeeded to the throne, and successively became the scourge of the border.

古文：五年二月，大掠淮北，执阳平太守刘千载、济南太守赵元，驱略千余家。
现代文：五年二月，大肆掳掠淮水以北，活捉阳干太守刘干载、济南太守赵元，掠走一千多家。
English: In February of the fifth year, they plundered the north of Huai Shui and captured the Yangkang governor Liu Ganzai and the Jinan governor Zhao Yuan alive, taking away more than a thousand people.

古文：三月，公抗表北讨，以丹阳尹孟昶监中军留府事。
现代文：三月，豫章郡公上奏北伐，委任丹阳尹孟昶督察中军留守府事务。
English: In March, the governor of Yuzhang County announced the Northern Expedition and appointed Danyang Yin Mengyao as the inspector of the affairs of the Chinese troops staying in the capital.

古文：四月，舟师发京都，溯淮入泗。五月，至下邳，留船舰辎重，步军进琅邪；所过皆筑城留守。
现代文：四月，水军从京城出发，溯淮水入泅水五月，到达下邳，留下船舰车辆等，率步兵进军琅邪。所过之处都筑城留人守卫。
English: In April, the naval forces set out from Beijing and traveled from Huai Shui to Surabaya in May, arriving in Lower Surabaya, leaving behind ships, vehicles, and so on, and marching into Surabaya at the head of the infantry. Everywhere they passed, they built castles and left guards.

古文：鲜卑梁父、莒城二戍并奔走。
现代文：鲜卑的梁父、莒城两个城堡的敌人都四散逃跑。
English: The despicable Liang father, the enemy of the two castles in Lucheng, fled in all directions.

古文：慕容超闻王师将至，其大将公孙五楼说超： 宜断据大岘，刈除粟苗，坚壁清野以待之。
现代文：慕容超听说朝廷军队将要到来，他的大将公孙五楼劝说他： 应该占据左蛆，把庄稼全部割掉，坚壁清野等待他们。
English: Murong Chao heard that the imperial army was about to arrive. His general, Gongsun Wuzhong, persuaded him: They should occupy the left bank, cut all the crops, and wait for them in the open fields.

古文：彼侨军无资，求战不得，旬月之间，折棰以笞之耳。 
现代文：他们远来没有物资。寻求作战而办不到，一月之后，我们就可以出击痛打他们了。 
English: They don't have the resources, they can't afford to go looking for a fight, and after a month, we can hit them where it hurts.

古文：超不从，曰： 彼远来疲劳，势不能久；但当引令过岘，我以铁骑践之，不忧不破也。
现代文：慕容超不听，说： 他们远道而来很疲劳，势必不能持久，衹应引诱他们越过大岘，我们用铁甲骑兵出击，不愁不能击败。
English: Murong Chao did not listen and said, "They have come a long way and are very tired. They will not be able to hold out. We should lure them across the Great Wall. We will attack with iron-clad cavalry, but we will not be able to defeat them."

古文：岂有预芟苗稼，先自蹙弱邪！ 
现代文：哪有先毁掉庄稼，白行削弱的呢? 
English: Who first destroyed the crops and weakened the crops?

古文：初，公将行，议者以为贼闻大军远出，必不敢战。若不断大岘，当坚守广固，刈粟清野，以绝三军之资，非唯难以有功，将不能自反。
现代文：当初豫章郡公将出征，议论的人以为贼寇听说大军速出，必定不敢交战，如不截断大岘，也当坚守广固，坚壁清野，以断三军的用度，不仅难以取胜，还将不能返回。
English: At the beginning, the general of Yuanzhang County went to war, and the people who talked about it thought that the bandits had heard that a large army was speeding out, and they would certainly not dare to fight. If they did not cut off the Great Wall, they should also stick to the broad and solid, strong and clear fields, so as to cut off the use of the three armies, it would not only be difficult to win, but also would not be able to return.

古文：公曰： 我揣之熟矣。
现代文：豫章郡公说： 我已经揣摩透了。
English: Yuzhang County said: I have figured it out.

古文：鲜卑贪，不及远计，进利克获，退惜粟苗。谓我孤军远入，不能持久，不过进据临朐，退守广固。我一得入岘，则人无退心，驱必死之众，向怀贰之虏，何忧不克！
现代文：鲜卑人贪婪，没有长远计划，进军贪图攻城捕获，退兵顾惜谷粟禾苗会以为我们孤军深入，不能坚持长久，他们不过向前占据临朐，后退守卫广固我车一进大蛆，就没有后退的心意，指挥拼命作战的部众，攻向有二心的敌寇，何必担忧不能攻克?
English: The young men are greedy and have no long-term plan. They are eager to attack and capture the city. They are reluctant to retreat. They think that we are alone and cannot hold out for a long time. They only advance to occupy Linyi, retreat to guard Guanggu. Once my car enters Dalian, there is no intention of retreating. I command the desperately fighting men and attack the double-minded enemy bandits. Why worry about not being able to conquer?

古文：彼不能清野固守，为诸君保之。 
现代文：他们不能收藏物资固守大岘，我可为各位打包票。 
English: They can't collect materials and hold on to large bags, so I can pack tickets for everyone.

古文：公既入岘，举手指天曰： 吾事济矣！ 
现代文：豫章郡公进入左蛆后，举起手指向上天说： 我们的事情成功了! 
English: After entering the left palate, the county magistrate Yu Zhang held up his finger to the heavens and said: Our matter has been successful!

古文：六月，慕容超遣五楼及广宁王贺赖卢先据临朐城。
现代文：六月，慕容超派遣互撞和尘堑塑曲卢预先占据临朐城。
English: In June, Murong Chao dispatched Collision and Dust to occupy Linyi City in advance.

古文：既闻大军至，留羸老守广固，乃悉出。
现代文：听说大军到达后，留下体弱年老的人守卫庐厘，于是全部出动。
English: They heard that after the arrival of the large army, the frail and elderly were left to guard Bali, so they all set out.

古文：临朐有巨蔑水，去城四十里，超告五楼曰： 急往据之，晋军得水，则难击也。 
现代文：临朐有一条巨蔑水，离城四卜里。慕容超告诉五楼说： 赶紧前去占据，晋军得到河流，就难以攻打了。 
English: Linyi has a huge river, four miles away from the city. Murong Chao told the fifth floor: Hurry up to occupy, if the Jin army gets the river, it will be difficult to attack.

古文：五楼驰进。
现代文：五楼飞奔前进。
English: The fifth floor galloped forward.

古文：龙骧将军孟龙符领骑居前，奔往争之，五楼乃退。
现代文：龙骧将军孟龙符率领骑兵在前面，奔跑前去争夺巨蔑水，五楼于是退走。
English: Longjing General Meng Longfu led the cavalry in front, ran forward to fight for the water, and the fifth floor then retreated.

古文：众军步进，有车四千两，分车为两翼，方轨徐行，车悉张幔，御者执槊，又以轻骑为游军。
现代文：各军步行前进，有战车四千辆，分为两行，并排推进，车都挂上幔子，驾车的人手拿长矛又派轻装的骑兵为游动部队。
English: The armies advanced on foot. There were four thousand chariots, divided into two lines, advancing side by side. The chariots were hitched to mules. The drivers held spears and sent lightly armed cavalry as a mobile force.

古文：军令严肃，行伍齐整。
现代文：军令严明，队伍整齐。
English: The military orders are strict and the ranks are neat.

古文：未及临朐数里，贼铁骑万余，前后交至。
现代文：离临朐衹有几里路的时候，贼寇骑兵一万多人从前后交相赶来。
English: When they were a few miles away from Linyi, more than ten thousand Kleptocratic cavalrymen arrived from all directions.

古文：公命兗州刺史刘籓、弟并州刺史道怜、谘议参军刘敬宣、陶延寿、参军刘怀玉、慎仲道、索邈等，齐力击之。
现代文：豫章郡公命令兖州刺史刘藩、弟弟并州刺史道怜、谘议参军刘敬宣、陶延寿、参军刘怀玉、慎仲道、索邈等人，协力攻打他们。
English: The governor of Yuzhang County ordered Liu Han, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, and his younger brother, Daoli, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, to consult with Liu Jingxuan, Tao Yanshou, Liu Huaiyu, Shenzhong Dao, and Sokun, who had joined the army, and to work together to attack them.

古文：日向昃，公遣谘议参军檀韶直趋临朐。
现代文：太阳偏西，豫章郡公派遣谘议参军檀韶赶往临朐。
English: When the sun was westward, the public of Yuzhang County dispatched a military advisory team to rush to Linyi.

古文：韶率建威将军向弥、参军胡籓驰往，既日陷城，斩其牙旗，悉虏超辎重。
现代文：檀韶率领建威将军向弥、参军胡藩奔驰前往，当天攻下城池，砍断他们的军前大旗，全部缴获慕容超的军用物资。
English: Dang Jun led General Jian Wei to Xiangya and joined the army of Hu Han Benzi, and on the same day they captured the city, cut off their pre-war flag, and seized all of Murong Chao's military supplies.

古文：超闻临朐已拔，引众走。公亲鼓之，贼乃大破。
现代文：慕容超听说临朐已被攻下，带领部众逃跑，豫章郡公亲自击鼓，贼寇于是逃奔。
English: When Murong Chao heard that Linyi had been captured, he led his followers to flee. The county magistrate, Yu Zhang, personally played the drums, and the bandits fled.

古文：超遁还广固。
现代文：慕容超逃回广固。
English: Murong Chao fled back to Guanggu.

古文：获超马、伪辇、玉玺、豹尾等，送于京师；斩其大将段晖等十余人，其余斩获千计。
现代文：这一战缴获慕容超的马匹、车辆、玉玺、豹尾等等，送回京城。杀掉慕容超的大将段晖等十多人，杀死俘获其他人等数以千计。
English: In this battle, Murong Chao's horses, vehicles, jade arrowheads, leopard tails, etc. were captured and sent back to Beijing. More than ten people, including Murong Chao's general Duan Yu, were killed, and thousands of others were killed and captured.

古文：明日，大军进广固，既屠大城。超退保小城。
现代文：次日，大军推进到广固，常即屠灭大城，慕容超退守到小城中。
English: The next day, the large army advanced to Guanggu, often slaughtering the big city, and Murong Chao retreated to the small city.

古文：于是设长围守之，围高三丈，外穿三重堑。
现代文：于是设置长围墙来守卫，围墙高三丈，外面挖了三条沟。
English: As a result, a long enclosure wall was set up to guard it. The enclosure wall was three stories high, and three ditches were dug outside.

古文：停江、淮转输，馆谷于齐土。
现代文：停止长江、淮水的转运，在齐地食用当地谷粟。
English: Stop the transshipment of the Yangtze River and Huai Shui, and eat local corn syrup in Qi Di.

古文：抚纳降附，华戎欢悦；援才授爵，因而任之。
现代文：安抚投降归附者，华人戎人欢天喜地，依据才能授予爵位，随之加以任用。
English: To placate those who had surrendered to the annexation, the Chinese generals were delighted to confer a title of nobility on the basis of talent, and then to appoint them.

古文：七月，诏加公北青、冀二州刺史。超大将垣遵、遵弟苗并率众归顺。
现代文：七月，诏令加授豫章郡公为北青、冀二州刺史慕容超的大将垣遵、垣遵的弟弟垣茁都率领部众归顺。
English: In July, the imperial edict was issued to confer the title of county magistrate of Yuzhang County on the generals of Beicheng and Jizhou, the general of Murong Chao, and the younger brother of Murong Chao, both of whom led the troops to surrender.

古文：公方治攻具，城上人曰： 汝不得张纲，何能为也。 
现代文：豫章郡公正修造攻城器械，城头上的人说： 你们得不到张纲，哪能有作为呢? 
English: The people at the top of the castle said, "If you can't get Zhang Gang, what can you do?

古文：纲者，超伪尚书郎，其人有巧思。
现代文：张纲，是慕容超的尚书郎，这人有精巧的构思。
English: Zhang Gang is the Shang Shuro of Murong Chao, this person has a clever idea.

古文：会超遣纲称籓于姚兴，乞师请救。
现代文：正遇摹容超派遣张翅向挑兴称臣，请求出兵救助。
English: At this time, Zhang Rongchao sent Zhang Rongchao to Zhao Xing to ask for help.

古文：兴伪许之，而实惮公，不敢遣。
现代文：姚兴假装答应他，而实际上畏惧豫章郡公，不敢派出军队。
English: Yao Xing pretended to agree with him, but in fact he was afraid of Yu Zhang and did not dare to send troops.

古文：纲从长安还，泰山太守申宣执送之。
现代文：张纲从长安返回，泰山太守申宣抓住后送给豫章郡公。
English: Zhang Gang returned from Chang'an. Taishan Taishou Shen Xuan caught the horse and sent it to Yu Zhang County.

古文：乃升纲于楼上，以示城内，城内莫不失色。
现代文：就把张纲弄到战车上，给城内人看，城内的人无不害怕。
English: They put Zhang Gang on a chariot to show the people in the city that everyone in the city was afraid.

古文：于是使纲大治攻具。
现代文：于是让张纲大量修造攻城器械。
English: So he had Zhang Gang build a large number of siege engines.

古文：超求救不获，纲反见虏，转忧惧，乃请称籓，求割大岘为界，献马千匹。
现代文：慕容超求救办不到，张纲反倒被捉，变得忧愁畏惧起来。就请求向晋国称臣，割让左蛆作为边界，献马一千匹。
English: Murong Chao couldn't call for help, but Zhang Gang was captured and became sad and afraid. He asked Jin to make him a vassal, to cede the Zuoying Pass as a border, and to donate a thousand horses.

古文：不听，围之转急。
现代文：豫章郡公不依，围攻更急迫。
English: The county magistrate of Yuzhang County did not obey, and the siege became more urgent.

古文：河北居民荷戈负粮至者，日以千数。
现代文：黄河以北的民众带兵器背粮食到来的，每曰数以千计。
English: Every day, thousands of people from north of the Yellow River arrive with weapons, carrying grain.

古文：录事参军刘穆之，有经略才具，公以为谋主，动止必谘焉。
现代文：录事参军刘穆之，有谋划之才，豫章郡公把他作为主要谋士，各项活动必向他咨询。
English: According to records, Liu Mu, who joined the army, had a talent for planning, and the governor of Yuzhang County took him as his main adviser. He would be consulted on all activities.

古文：时姚兴遣使告公云： 慕容见与邻好，又以穷告急，今当遣铁骑十万，径据洛阳。
现代文：这时姚兴派遣使者告诉豫章郡公说： 慕容氏现和我国相邻和好，因走投无路告急，现在将派遣骑兵十万人，径直占据洛阳。
English: At this time, Yao Xing dispatched an envoy to tell the governor of Yuzhang County: "The Murong clan is now reconciled with our country, and because they have no choice, they are in a hurry, they will now send 100,000 cavalry to occupy Luoyang directly.

古文：晋军若不退者，便当遣铁骑长驱而进。 
现代文：晋军如不撤退，我国就将派遣骑兵长驱直入。 
English: If the Jin army does not withdraw, our country will send cavalry to drive them straight in.

古文：公呼兴使答曰： 语汝姚兴，我定燕之后，息甲三年，当平关、洛。
现代文：豫章郡公呼唤姚兴的使者回答说： 告诉你们的姚兴，我平定燕国之后，休养军队三年，将平定关中、洛阳。
English: An envoy from Yuanzhang County publicly called for Yao Xing and replied: "Tell your Yao Xing, after I pacify Yan Province, I will rest and recuperate for three years, and then I will pacify Guanzhong and Luoyang.

古文：今能自送，便可速来！ 
现代文：现在自己送死，可以快来。 
English: Now that you've killed yourself, you can come quickly.

古文：穆之闻有羌使，驰入，而公发遣已去。
现代文：穆之听说有羌人使者，急速进去，而豫章郡公打发使者已离开了。
English: When Mu Zhi heard that there was an envoy from Xingren, he rushed inside, but the envoy sent by the governor of Yuzhang County had already left.

古文：以兴所言并答，具语穆之。
现代文：豫章郡公把姚兴的话以及自己的回答，都说给穆之听。
English: Yu Zhang, the county magistrate, told Mu the words of Yao Xing and his own answer.

古文：穆之尤公曰： 常日事无大小，必赐与谋之。
现代文：穆之责备豫章郡公说： 平曰事情无论大小，必定使我参与谋划。
English: Mu Zhi reproached Yu Zhang County and said: Generally speaking, no matter how big or small the matter is, I must participate in the planning.

古文：此宜善详之，云何卒尔便答？
现代文：这件事应该妥善周详，为什么仓促地回答?
English: This matter should have been properly considered, so why the hasty response?

古文：公所答兴言，未能威敌，正足怒彼耳。
现代文：公所回答姚兴的话，不能威吓敌人，衹足以激怒他而已。
English: The public security bureau replied that Yao Xing's words could not intimidate the enemy, but only infuriate him.

古文：若燕未可拔，羌救奄至，不审何以待之？ 
现代文：如果燕国不能攻下，羌人的救兵突然到来，不知如何对待他们? 
English: If Yan's country can't be conquered, and the saviors of Yan's people suddenly arrive, how will they be treated?

古文：公笑曰： 此是兵机，非卿所解，故不语耳。
现代文：豫章郡公笑着说： 这是军事机密，你不理解，故不先告诉你。
English: Yuanzhang County Public Security Bureau said with a smile: This is a military secret, you don't understand, so I won't tell you first.

古文：夫兵贵神速，彼若审能遣救，必畏我知，宁容先遣信命。
现代文：兵贵神速，他们如真能派遣救兵，必定害怕我们知道，哪能先派遣使者?
English: If they really can send rescuers, they must be afraid We know, who can send messengers first?

古文：此是其见我伐燕，内已怀惧，自张之辞耳。 
现代文：这是他们看到我们讨伐垄玺，内心已怀有畏惧，为自己打气的话而已。 
English: These are just words to cheer themselves up when they see us fighting on the ridges and already have fear in their hearts.

古文：九月，进公太尉、中书监，固让。
现代文：九月，升豫章郡公为太尉、中书监，坚决推让。
English: In September, the county magistrate of Shengyuzhang County was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and the supervisor of Chinese books.

古文：伪徐州刺史段宏先奔索虏，十月，自河北归顺。
现代文：伪途业刺史昼塞原先投奔索虏，十月，从河北前来归附。
English: The pseudo-traveler Sun Ce originally went to Soryu, and in October, he came from Hebei to join.

古文：张纲治攻具成，设诸奇巧，飞楼木幔之属，莫不毕备。
现代文：退网修造攻城器械完成，施设各种奇妙巧思，飞楼木幔之类，无不齐备。
English: The construction of the siege equipment has been completed, and all kinds of wonderful and ingenious ideas have been set up, such as the wooden rafts for flying towers.

古文：城上火石弓矢，无所用之。
现代文：城头上的火石弓箭无法使用。
English: The flint bows and arrows at the top of the castle cannot be used.

古文：六年二月丁亥，屠广固。
现代文：六年二月丁亥，屠减广固。
English: In February of the sixth year of Dinghai, the slaughter and reduction of Guanggu began.

古文：公之北伐也，徐道覆仍有窥窬之志，劝卢循乘虚而出，循不从。
现代文：慕容超翻过城墙逃跑，被征虏贼曹乔胥擒获，杀死他的王公以下官员，没收人口一万多，马二千匹，押送摹查超到京城，在建鏖集市斩首。
English: Murong Chao climbed over the city wall to escape, was captured by the conscript thief Cao Qiao, killed his officials below the prince, confiscated more than ten thousand people and two thousand horses, escorted Gong Cha Chao to Beijing, and beheaded in the Jianye market.

古文：道覆乃至番禺说循曰： 本住岭外，岂以理极于此，正以刘公难与为敌故也。
现代文：豫章郡公北伐时，徐道覆便有窥伺之意，劝鲻乘虚出兵，龃不听面就到曲劝龃说： 你一向住在五岭以南，不是理该如此。衹是因刘公难以与你为敌的缘故。
English: During the Northern Expedition of the Duke of Yuanzhang County, Xu Daohui had the intention of spying on him. He urged him to take the initiative and send troops. When he did not listen, he went to Qu to persuade him and said: You have always lived south of the Wuling Mountains. It is not natural. It is because Liu Gong is difficult to be your enemy.

古文：今方顿兵坚城之下，未有旋日。
现代文：现在刘公正调集军队到坚固的城池之外，不知何时才能回师。
English: Now Liu Zhengjong is mobilizing troops outside the fortified city, and he doesn't know when he will be able to return to his division.

古文：以此思归死士，掩袭何、刘之徒，如反掌耳。
现代文：以此思念家乡敢于拼命之兵，袭击何无忌、刘公，取胜易如反掌。
English: With this, the soldiers who miss their hometown and dare to fight hard can easily attack Liu Gong and win.

古文：不乘此机而保一日之安，若平齐之后，小息甲养众，不过一二年间，必玺书征君。
现代文：不趁这个时机而保一时的平定，如刘公平定齐地之后，稍微休养军队，不过一二年时间，必定用玺书征召您。
English: If you do not take advantage of this opportunity to maintain a temporary pacification, for example, if Liu Bei rested the army for a while after the unification, but for a year or two, you will certainly be conscripted.

古文：若刘公自率众至豫章，遣锐师过岭，虽复将军神武，恐必不能当也。
现代文：如果刘公自己率领部众到豫章，派遣精锐部队越过五岭，即使将军神明英武，也恐怕必然不能抵挡。
English: If Liu Gong himself led his subordinates to Yuzhang and dispatched elite troops to cross the Wuling Mountains, even if the general was brilliant and brave, I am afraid he would not be able to resist.

古文：今日之机，万不可失。
现代文：今日的机会，千万不可失去。
English: Today's opportunity must not be lost.

古文：既克都邑，倾其根本。刘公虽还，无能为也。 
现代文：攻下京城后，倾覆了他们的根基，刘公虽然返回，也没有办法了。 
English: After capturing the capital, their foundations were overturned. Although Liu Gong returned, there was nothing he could do.

古文：循从之，乃率众过岭。
现代文：卢循听从他的意见，于是率领部众越过五岭。
English: Lu Xun listened to his advice and led his troops across the Wuling Mountains.

古文：是月，寇南康、庐陵、豫章，诸郡守皆委任奔走。
现代文：当月，侵犯南康、庐陵、豫章，各郡太守都弃官而逃。
English: That month, Nankang, Fuling, and Yuzhang were invaded, and the county governors of each county resigned and fled.

古文：于时平齐问未至，既驰使征公。
现代文：这时平定齐地的消息没有送到，就急速派使者征召豫章郡公。
English: At this time, the news of the pacification of Qi did not arrive, so he quickly sent an envoy to summon the county governor of Yuzhang.

古文：公之初克齐也，欲停镇下邳，清荡河、洛，既而被征使至，即日班师。
现代文：豫章郡公最初攻克齐地时，想停下镇守下邳，肃清黄河、洛水随之征召的使者到来，当天率军回朝。
English: When Emperor Yuanzhang first conquered Qi, he wanted to stop the defense of the town of Xiamen and clean up the Yellow River and Luoshui, and the envoys came, and he led the army back to the North on the same day.

古文：镇南将军何无忌与徐道覆战于豫章，败绩，无忌被害，内外震骇。
现代文：镇南将军何无忌和徐道覆在豫章交战，大败，面墨被杀。内外官员震惊畏惧。
English: Zhenan General He Muxi and Xu Daohui fought in Yuzhang, suffered a crushing defeat and were killed. Officials at home and abroad were shocked and afraid.

古文：朝廷欲奉乘舆北走就公，寻知贼定未至，人情小安。
现代文：朝廷想陪皇帝向北逃跑到豫章郡公处，不久得知贼寇确实没到达，人心稍微安定。
English: The imperial court wanted to accompany the emperor to flee north to the public office of Yuzhang County, and soon learned that the thief had indeed not arrived, and the hearts of the people were somewhat stable.

古文：公至下邳，以船运辎重，自率精锐步归。
现代文：豫章郡公到下邳，用船运输军用物资，自己率领精锐部队步行返回。
English: The governor of Yuzhang County went to Jiaozuo, transported military supplies by boat, and led the elite troops back on foot.

古文：至山阳，闻无忌被害，则虑京邑失守，乃卷甲兼行，与数十人至淮上，问行旅以朝廷消息。
现代文：到达丛厘，听说翅垦被杀，就担心京城失守，于是收起兵器夜赶路，和几十人到达淮水边，向行人询问朝廷消息。
English: When he arrived in Congli, he heard that Wing Chun had been killed, and he was worried that the capital would be lost, so he packed up his weapons and rushed there at night, arriving at Huai Shui with dozens of people to ask pedestrians for information about the imperial court.

古文：人曰： 贼尚未至，刘公若还，便无所忧也。 
现代文：行人说： 贼寇还没到，刘公如返回，就没有什么忧虑了。 
English: Pedestrians said, "The bandits haven't arrived yet. If Liu Gong returns, there will be nothing to worry about."

古文：公大喜，单船过江，径至京口，众乃大安。
现代文：豫章郡公大喜，单船渡过长江，径直到达京口，众人于是大为安心。
English: Yuanzhang County was overjoyed to cross the Yangtze River in a single boat all the way to Beijing. Everyone was very relieved.

古文：四月癸未，公至京师，解严息甲。
现代文：四月癸未，豫章郡公到达京城，解除戒严休养军队
English: On the last day of April, Yu Zhang, the county magistrate, arrived in Beijing and lifted the martial law to recuperate the army

古文：抚军将军刘毅抗表南征，公与毅书曰： 吾往习击妖贼，晓其变态，新获奸利，其锋不可轻。
现代文：抚军将军刘毅上表向南征讨，豫章郡公给刘邀写信说： 我往日多次攻打贼人，知道他们的变化，他们刚刚获胜，不可轻视。
English: Liu Yi, the general of the Fuzhou army, went to the south to fight, and the governor of Yuzhang County wrote a letter to Liu Ying, saying: I have attacked thieves many times in the past, I know their changes, they have just won, and should not be despised.

古文：宜须装严毕，与弟同举。 
现代文：应等我装备完毕，和弟弟一同出兵。 
English: I should wait until I'm fully equipped before I join my brother in the army.

古文：又遣毅从弟籓往止之。
现代文：又派遣刘毅的堂弟刘藩前去劝阻他。
English: He also sent Liu Yi's cousin Liu Han to dissuade him.

古文：毅不从，舟师二万，发自姑孰。
现代文：塞邀不听，率水军二万人，从姑孰出发。
English: He did not listen to the invitation and set out from Gushan with a naval force of 20,000 men.

古文：循之初下也，使道覆向寻阳，自寇湘中诸郡。
现代文：卢循开始束下时，派道覆攻向寻阳，自己侵犯挝丞地区各郡。
English: When Lu Xun began to settle down, he sent a road covering attack to Xuanyang, and invaded the counties in Lao Zhe area.

古文：荆州刺史道规遣军至长沙，为循所败。
现代文：曲蛆刺史这想派遣军队到长逆，被鲎妪打败。
English: Qu Zhaozhi, who wanted to send an army to Changchuang, was defeated by Zhou.

古文：径至巴陵，将向江陵。
现代文：卢握径直到达毋陵，将攻向江陆。
English: Lu grasps the path until it reaches Neoling, and will attack Jianglu.

古文：道覆闻毅上，驰使报循曰： 毅兵众甚盛，成败事系之于此，宜并力摧之。
现代文：道覆听说刘塑攻向上游，急派使者报告卢循说： 刘堑的军队很强，成败在此一战，应该合力打败他。
English: The envoy sent to report Lu Xun said: Liu Bei's army is very strong, success or failure is in this battle, we should work together to defeat him.

古文：若此克捷，天下无复事矣。
现代文：如果造一战取胜，天下就不再有事了。
English: If we win the first battle, there will be no more trouble in the world.

古文：根本既定，不忧上面不平也。 
现代文：根基平定后，不担忧上游不能平定。 
English: After the foundation is leveled, there is no need to worry that the upstream cannot be leveled.

古文：循即日发巴陵，与道覆连旗而下。
现代文：卢循当天从旦陆出发，和塑旌旗相连而东下。
English: On the same day, Lu Xun set out from Danlu, and went eastward, linked with Shuxuanqi.

古文：别有八艚舰九枚，起四层，高十二丈。
现代文：另外有八艚舰九艘，各四层，高十二丈。
English: In addition, there are nine eight-masted ships, each with four decks, twelve stories high.

古文：公以南籓覆没，表送章绶，诏不听。
现代文：豫章郡公因南部疆域沦陷，上交印绶辞职，未获批准。
English: Due to the fall of the southern territory, the governor of Yuzhang County submitted his letter of resignation, but it was not approved.

古文：五月，刘毅败绩于桑落洲，弃船步走，余众不得去者，皆为贼所擒。
现代文：五月，刘毅在桑落洲大败，抛下船舰步行逃去，其余逃不掉的部众都被贼寇所擒。
English: In May, Liu Yi suffered a crushing defeat at Sanluo Zhou, abandoned his ship and fled on foot. The rest of his soldiers who could not escape were captured by bandits.

古文：初，循至寻阳，闻公已还，不信也。
现代文：当初卢循到达寻阳，听说豫章郡公已回，不相信。
English: At first, Lu Xun arrived at Xuanyang and heard that Yu Zhang, the county magistrate, had returned, but he did not believe it.

古文：既破毅，乃审凯入之问，并相视失色。
现代文：打败刘毅后，确知豫章郡公已得胜回朝，都相顾失色。
English: After defeating Liu Yi, they knew for certain that the Duke of Yuzhang County had returned to the imperial court victorious, and they lost all respect for each other.

古文：循欲退还寻阳，进平江陵，据二州以抗朝廷。
现代文：卢循想退回寻阳，进军平定江陵，占据二州来对抗朝廷。
English: Lu Xuan wanted to retreat back to Huan Yang, march into Pingding and Jiangling, and occupy the two states to fight against the imperial court.

古文：道覆谓宜乘胜径进，固争之。
现代文：道覆以为应该乘胜推进，坚决地争辩。
English: Daohui thought that he should take advantage of the victory to advance, and argued resolutely.

古文：疑议多日，乃见从。
现代文：疑惑商议了多天，道覆的意见才被听从。
English: The doubts were discussed for several days before the appeal was heard.

古文：毅败问至，内外汹扰。
现代文：刘毅失败的消息传到，内外动荡不安。
English: The news of Liu Yi's defeat spread, causing turmoil both at home and abroad.

古文：于时北师始还，多创痍疾病。
现代文：这时北方的军队刚返回，多受创伤疾病。
English: At this time, the northern army had just returned, suffering from trauma and disease.

古文：京师战士，不盈数千。
现代文：京城的战士，不过几千人。
English: There are only a few thousand soldiers in the capital.

古文：贼既破江、豫二镇，战士十余万，舟车百里不绝。奔败还者，并声其雄盛。
现代文：贼寇攻下江州、豫州二镇，战士十多万，船舰车辆绵延百里失败逃回的人都说他们强盛。
English: The bandits captured two towns in Jiangzhou and Yuzhou, with more than a hundred thousand soldiers, ships and vehicles stretching for a hundred miles. Those who failed to escape and returned said they were strong.

古文：孟昶、诸葛长民惧寇渐逼，欲拥天子过江，公不听，昶固请不止。
现代文：孟昶、诸葛长民畏惧贼寇逐渐逼近，想保护天子渡过长江，豫章郡公不听。孟昶再三请求。
English: Meng Xuan and Zhuge Changmin were afraid of the approaching bandits, and wanted to protect Tianzi from crossing the Yangtze River, but the county magistrate of Yuzhang did not listen. Meng Xuan made repeated requests.

古文：公曰： 今重镇外倾，强寇内逼，人情危骇，莫有固志。
现代文：豫章郡公说： 现在重要的藩镇在外倾覆，强贼内逼人心惶惶，没有斗志。
English: Yuanzhang County said: Now the important towns have been overthrown outside, and the strongmen inside are panicking and have no fighting spirit.

古文：若一旦迁动，便自瓦解土崩，江北亦岂可得至！设令得至，不过延日月耳。
现代文：如一旦转移，便会土崩瓦解，长江以北哪能保全假使他们能来，不过延缓时间而已。
English: Once transferred, they will collapse and disintegrate. What can be preserved north of the Yangtze River if they can come, but only delay the time.

古文：今兵士虽少，自足以一战。
现代文：现在兵虽少，还可以一战。
English: Although there are fewer soldiers now, we can still fight a battle.

古文：若其克济，则臣主同休；苟厄运必至，我当以死卫社稷，横尸庙门，遂其由来以身许国之志，不能远窜于草间求活也。
现代文：如果能取胜，则君臣同庆；如果失败，我将以死报国，陈尸于宗庙之前，实现以身报国的夙愿，不能逃到民间苟活。
English: If I can win, then the monarchs and the ministers will celebrate together; if I fail, I will serve the country with my death, and my corpse will be placed in front of my ancestral temple, fulfilling my long-cherished wish to serve the country with my body, and I cannot escape to live among the people.

古文：我既决矣，卿勿复言！ 
现代文：我的主意决定了，你不要再说了! 
English: My mind's made up, you can stop talking!

古文：昶恐其不济，乃为表曰： 臣讳北讨，众并不同，唯臣赞讳行计，致使强贼乘间，社稷危逼，臣之罪也。
现代文：孟昶担心不能取胜，就上奏表说： 塑瞪北征，众人都不同意，惟独臣下赞同，致使贼寇钻丁空子，国家危险，是臣下的罪过。
English: Meng Xuan was worried that he could not win, so he wrote on the report form: Everyone disagreed with the Northern Expedition, but only the vassals agreed. It was the fault of the vassals that led to the banditry and the danger to the country.

古文：今谨引分以谢天下。 
现代文：现在恭谨地承认过失来向天下道歉。 
English: I now humbly admit my wrongdoing and apologize to the world.

古文：封表毕，乃仰药而死。
现代文：封上奏表，就吞毒药而死。
English: sealed his report and died by swallowing poison.

古文：于是大开赏募，投身赴义者，一同登京城之科。
现代文：于是大设赏赐募兵，投身奔赴义举的，和当年起兵进入画越的条例完全相同。
English: As a result, Daesetsu rewarded and rewarded those who enlisted and rushed to participate in the charity event, and the regulations are exactly the same as those for enlisting and entering Bagoe that year.

古文：发居民治石头城，建牙戒严。
现代文：调发民众加固石头城，树立大旗严密戒备。
English: The people were dispatched to strengthen the stone city and set up a large flag on high alert.

古文：时议者谓宜分兵守诸津要。
现代文：当时议论的人以为应该分兵把守各渡要道。
English: At that time, people who were talking about it thought that the troops should be split up to guard the main road.

古文：公以为： 贼众我寡，若分兵屯，则人测虚实。
现代文：豫章郡公以为： 贼多我少，我们如果分兵把守，人家就会知道虚实。
English: The county magistrate of Yuzhang County thought: I am not a thief. If we divide our troops and guard them, people will know the truth.

古文：且一处失利，则沮三军之心。
现代文：而且一地失利，就影响士气。
English: Moreover, a single defeat affects morale.

古文：今聚众石头，随宜应赴，既令贼无以测多少，又于众力不分。
现代文：现在集中在石头越，可随机应变。既使贼寇无法推测人数多少，又不分散军队力量。
English: Now, the more stones are concentrated, the more random the contingency can be. Even if the bandits cannot guess the number of people, it does not disperse the strength of the army.

古文：若徒旅转集，徐更论之耳。 
现代文：如果军队逐渐聚集，再慢慢商议。 
English: If the army gradually gathers, then slowly negotiate.

古文：移屯石头，乃栅淮断查浦。
现代文：迁移驻守在石头城，于是在秦淮河设栅栏而截断查递。
English: The relocation was stationed in Stone Town, so a fence was set up at Qinhuai River to cut off the inspection.

古文：既而群贼大至，公策之曰： 贼若于新亭直进，其锋不可当，宜且回避，胜负之事，未可量也；若回泊西岸，此成擒耳。 
现代文：不久贼军大量到来，豫章郡公预计说： 贼寇如果在新亭径直前进，他们的锋芒不可抵挡，应暂且回避，谁胜谁败还说不定。如果他们回师停泊在西岸，造就一定会被我们擒获了。 
English: Soon, a large number of bandits arrived, and the county magistrate Yu Zhang predicted: "If the bandits advance straightly in Xinting, their edge is irresistible, and they should be avoided for the time being. It is uncertain who will win and who will lose. If they return to the west coast, they will surely be captured by us."

古文：道覆欲自新亭、白石焚舟而上。
现代文：道覆打算从新亭、白石焚烧船只而上岸。
English: Dohuri planned to burn the ships from Shintei and Shiroishi and then go ashore.

古文：循多疑少决，每欲以万全为虑，谓道覆曰： 大军未至，孟昶便望风自裁，大势言之，自当计日溃乱。
现代文：卢循多虑而不果断，每事都想万无一失，对道覆说： 大军没到，孟昶就望见风声而自杀，就大势而言，他们自当很快溃败。
English: Lu Xun, who was cautious and indecisive, and wanted to make sure of everything, said to Daohui: The large army did not arrive, Meng Yao committed suicide at the sight of the news, and as far as the general situation was concerned, they should have been quickly defeated.

古文：今决胜负于一朝，既非必定之道，且杀伤士卒，不如按兵待之。 
现代文：现在决定胜败于一时，既不是必然的办法，又损伤兵士，不如屯兵等待他们溃败。 
English: It is better for the garrison to wait for them to be routed than to decide victory or defeat in the heat of the moment, which is not a sure way and injures the soldiers.

古文：公于时登石头城以望循军，初见引向新亭，公顾左右失色；既而回泊蔡洲。
现代文：豫章郡公这时登上石头城来了望卢循的军队，起初见到他们向新亭进发，豫章郡公回头看左右的入神色不对。不久看到卢循的军队返回停泊蔡洲。
English: At this time, the county magistrate of Yuzhang County boarded the stone city to watch the army of Lu Cun. At first, he saw them advance towards Xinting. The county magistrate of Yuzhang County looked back and saw that the expression on their faces was not right. Soon, he saw the army of Lu Cun return to anchor in Caizhou.

古文：道覆犹欲上，循禁之。
现代文：道覆还想上岸，卢循禁止他。
English: Tao Hui still wanted to go ashore, but Lu Xun forbade him.

古文：自是众军转集，修治越城，筑查浦、药园、廷尉三垒，皆守以实众。
现代文：从此各军不断聚集，加固越城，建筑查浦、药园、廷尉三处营垒，都加强了守卫。
English: Since then, the armies have been constantly gathering, strengthening Yuecheng, building three barracks, namely, Cha Pu, Drug Garden, and Courtier, and strengthening the guards.

古文：冠军将军刘敬宣屯北郊，辅国将军孟怀玉屯丹阳郡西，建武将军王仲德屯越城，广武将军刘默屯建阳门外。
现代文：冠军将军刘敬宣驻守北郊，辅国将军孟怀玉驻守丹阳郡西，建武将军王仲德驻守越城，广武将军刘怀默驻守在建阳门外。
English: The champion general Liu Jingxuan was stationed in the northern suburbs, the auxiliary general Meng Huaiyu was stationed in the west of Danyang County, the Jianwu general Wang Zhongde was stationed in Yuecheng, and the Guangwu general Liu Huimer was stationed outside the Jianyang Gate.

古文：使宁朔将军索邈领鲜卑具装虎班突骑千余匹，皆被练五色，自淮北至于新亭。
现代文：派宁朔将军索邈率领鲜卑带有老虎花纹的战马一千多匹，都披上五色绢，从秦淮河北直到新亭。
English: Ningshuo sent General Sokun to lead more than a thousand fresh horses with tiger stripes, all of which were draped with five-colored ribbons, from the north of the Qin Huaihe River to Xingting.

古文：贼并聚观，咸畏惮之；然犹冀京邑及三吴有应之者。
现代文：贼寇围观，都感到畏惧；然而还希望京城和三吴有响应他们的人。
English: Thieves and robbers are feared by onlookers; however, it is also hoped that the capital and Samgou will have people who respond to them.

古文：遣十余舰来拔石头栅。公命神弩射之，发辄摧陷，循乃止，不复攻栅。
现代文：派遣十多条战舰来攻石头栅，豫章郡公命令神箭手射击他们，每射都中，卢循于是不再攻栅栏。
English: After dispatching more than ten warships to attack the stone fence, the Duke of Yuzhang County ordered the divine archer to shoot them, and after each shot, Lu Xun would no longer attack the fence.

古文：设伏兵于南岸，使羸老悉乘舟舰向白石。公忧其从白石步上，乃率刘毅、诸葛长民北出拒之，留参军徐赤特戍南岸，命坚守勿动。
现代文：在南岸设置伏兵，派年老体弱的人全部乘船攻向白石豫童逊公担忧他们从旦互步行上岸，于是率领刘堑、诸葛长民向北出兵抗拒他们，留下参军徐赤娃戍守南岸，命令他坚守不要出动。
English: He set up an ambush on the south bank and sent all the old and infirm people by boat to attack Baishi Yu Tong Xiong. He was worried that they would go ashore on foot from both sides, so he led Liu Bei and Zhuge Changmin to send troops to the north to resist them, leaving Xu Chawa, who had joined the army, to guard the south bank and ordered him to hold fast and not to go out.

古文：公既去，贼焚查浦步上，赤特军战败，死没有百余人。
现代文：豫章郡公离开后，贼寇焚烧查浦步行上岸，赤特的军队战败，死亡的有一百多人。
English: After the county magistrate Yu Zhang left, the bandits burned Chapu and went ashore on foot. The Red Army was defeated, and more than a hundred people died.

古文：赤特弃余众，单舸济淮，贼遂率数万屯丹阳郡。
现代文：赤特丢卜其余部众，乘一只船渡过秦淮河。贼寇于是率领几万人屯驻丹堕塑。
English: The remaining members of the Red Special Division crossed the Qin Huai River by boat. The bandits then led tens of thousands of people to settle in Dangpu.

古文：公率诸军驰归，众忧贼过，咸谓公当径还拒战，公先分军还石头，众莫之晓。
现代文：速章郡公率领各军赶回。众人怕贼渡河，都认为逸章郡公应径直返回抵御。豫章郡公先分出军队返回石巫城，众人不知道他的用意。
English: The people were afraid of thieves crossing the river, and all thought that Yizhang County should go straight back to defend themselves. Yuanzhang County first sent troops to return to Shifu City, but the people did not know his intention.

古文：解甲息士，洗浴饮食之，乃出列陈于南塘。
现代文：解下枪甲让兵士休息，让他们洗浴进餐，于是出去在直撞列阵，因壶壁违犯部署，杀了他。
English: He took off his armor to let the soldiers rest, let them bathe and eat, so he went out in a straight line and killed him for violating the wall.

古文：以赤特违处分，斩之。命参军诸葛叔度、硃龄石率劲勇士千余人过淮。
现代文：命令参军褚叔度、朱龄石率领强劲勇敢的兵士一千多人渡过秦淮河。
English: Ordered to join the army, Yao Shudu and Zhu Lingshi led more than a thousand strong and brave soldiers to cross the Qinhuai River.

古文：群贼数千，皆长刀矛钅延，精甲曜日，奋跃争进。龄石所领多鲜卑，善步槊，并结陈以待之。
现代文：贼寇几千人，都手执长刀长矛，精锐的兵器如曰光闪耀，奋勇争先龄石所率领的多是鲑卑人，善于用步稍，都结成阵势来等待他们。
English: Thieves and robbers, several thousand strong, all armed with long swords and spears, the weapons of the elite are as bright as the sun, fighting valiantly for the primordial stone, led mostly by lowly people, good at taking small steps, they all form a formation to wait for them.

古文：贼短兵弗能抗，死伤者数百人，乃退走。
现代文：贼寇的短兵器不能抵抗，死伤的有几百人，因此退走。
English: The bandits' short weapons could not resist, and several hundred people were killed and injured, so they retreated.

古文：会日暮，众亦归。
现代文：天黑了，众人也返回。
English: When it got dark, they all came back.

古文：刘毅之败，豫州主簿袁兴国反叛，据历阳以应贼。
现代文：型堑失败后，型旦主簿基兴厘反叛，占据历历响应贼寇。
English: After the failure of the coup, the leader of the coup, Ji Xingli, rebelled and occupied the capital in response to the coup.

古文：琅邪内史魏顺之遣将谢宝讨斩之。
现代文：丛邮内史魏岖之派遣将领邀宣讨伐杀了他。
English: The dispatch of Shi Wei Rugi in the group of posts invited the general to attack and kill him.

古文：兴国司马袭宝，顺之不救而退，公怒斩之。
现代文：里厘的司马袭击邀昼，妪之不救助而退兵，豫章郡公发怒杀了妪之。
English: Lili's horse Sima attacked Yinglian, Yingzhi did not help and retreated, Yuanzhang County officials killed Yingzhi angrily.

古文：顺之，咏之之弟也。
现代文：顺之，是谜之的弟弟。
English: As it turns out, it's Enigma's younger brother.

古文：于是功臣震慑，莫敢不用命。
现代文：于是功臣畏惧，不敢不服从命令。
English: As a result, the heroes and heroines were afraid and did not dare to disobey orders.

古文：六月，更授公太尉、中书监，加黄钺。
现代文：六月，授予豫章郡公为太尉、中书监，加授黄铁。
English: In June, Yuanzhang County was awarded the title of Second Lieutenant and the title of Central Library Supervisor, as well as the title of Huang Tie.

古文：受黄钺，余固辞。
现代文：衹接受黄铁，其余则坚辞不受。
English: accepts huang iron, the rest are not accepted.

古文：以司马庾悦为建威将军、江州刺史，自东阳出豫章。
现代文：任命司马尘悦为建威将军、逗州刺史，从塞肠出镇跶。
English: He appointed Sima Jianyue as the general of Jianwei, and Zhouzhou Jishi as the governor of Jinshan.

古文：七月庚申，群贼自蔡洲南走，还屯寻阳。
现代文：七月庚申，贼众从蔡洲向南逃跑，返回驻守寻阳。
English: In July of Goshun, the bandits fled from Caizhou to the south and returned to the garrison of Xuanyang.

古文：遣辅国将军王仲德、广川太守刘钟、河间太守蒯恩追之。
现代文：派遣辅国将军王仲德、广太守刘钟、河间太守蒯恩追击他们。
English: Wang Zhongde, the auxiliary general, Liu Zhong, the governor-general of Guangxi, and Yan En, the governor-general of Hebei, were sent to pursue them.

古文：公还东府，大治水军，皆大舰重楼，高者十余丈。
现代文：豫章郡公回到束府，大力训练水军，都是大楼船，高的有十多丈。
English: Yuzhang Gu Gong returned to Sokfu and vigorously trained the navy. They were all large ships, more than ten meters high.

古文：卢循遣其大将荀林寇江陵，桓谦先于江陵奔羌，又自羌入蜀，伪主谯纵以为荆州刺史。
现代文：卢循派遣他的大将荀林侵犯江陵，桓谦原先从江陵投奔差人，又从羌地进入蜀地，伪主谯纵任命他为荆州刺史。
English: Lu Xun dispatched his general, Yulin, to invade Jiangling. Huan Qian had originally defected from Jiangling to Shandong, and then from Shandong to Shu. The false lord, Zheng Zong, appointed him as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：谦及谯道福率军二万，出寇江陵，适与林会，相去百余里。
现代文：担邀和谯道福率军队二万人，出兵侵犯江堕，恰好和苟林会合，相距一百多里。
English: He invited and dispatched an army of twenty thousand people led by Gong Daofu to invade Jiangpu, which coincided with the meeting of Goulin, more than a hundred miles away.

古文：荆州刺史道规斩谦于枝江，破林于江津，追至竹町，斩之。
现代文：荆州刺史道规在枝江斩杀桓谦，在江津打败荀林，追赶到竹町杀了他。
English: Jingzhou stabber Daojie killed Huanqian in Shijiang, defeated Yulin in Jiaozuo, and chased him to Zhuzhou to kill him.

古文：初，循之走也，公知其必寇江陵，登遣淮陵内史索邈领马军步道援荆州；又遣建威将军孙季高率众三千，自海道袭番禺。江州刺史庾悦至五亩峤，贼遣千余人据断峤道，悦前驱鄱阳太守虞丘进攻破之。
现代文：当初卢循逃走，豫章郡公知道他必定侵犯江陵，马上派遣淮陵内史索邈率领骑兵从小路援助型州。又派遣建威将军瑟季直率领部众三千人从海路袭击番禺江州刺史庾悦到达五亩崤，贼寇派遣一千多人占据要地截断娇道，庾悦的前锋鄱醒太守虞丘进出击打败了他们。
English: At first, Lu Xun fled, but the governor of Yuzhang County knew that he must invade Jiangling, and immediately dispatched the cavalry from the small road assistance state led by the Huairing Inner Shih Suo. He also dispatched the general Jian Wei, led by the leader of the three thousand people, to attack the Panyu River State from the sea to the five mu of the Shih Yue. The thieves sent more than a thousand people to occupy the important place to cut off the Jiao Road. The striker of the Shih Yue defeated them.

古文：公治兵大办。
现代文：邀章郡公练兵圆满结束。
English: The invitation ceremony for the county's public training soldiers was successfully concluded.

古文：十月，率兗州刺史刘籓、宁朔将军檀韶等舟师南伐。
现代文：十月，率领兖史刘藩、宁朔将军檀韶等水军南伐。
English: In October, he led the Southern Expedition of naval forces led by Liu Han and Ningshuo General Danzhang.

古文：以后将军刘毅监太尉留守府，后事皆委焉。
现代文：任命后将军刘毅统领太尉留守府，后方事务都委托给他
English: After the appointment, General Liu Yi led the captain to stay in the capital, and the rear affairs were entrusted to him

古文：是月，徐道覆率众三万寇江陵。
现代文：当月，徐道覆率部三万人侵犯江陵。
English: In the same month, 30,000 people from Xu Dao's forces invaded Jiangling.

古文：荆州刺史道规又大破之，斩首万余级，道覆走还盆口。
现代文：荆州刺史道坦又大败他们，斩首一万多级，道覆逃回盆旦。
English: Jing Zhou stabbed Dottan and defeated them, beheaded more than ten thousand, and fled back to Bonden.

古文：初，公之遣索邈也，邈在道为贼所断，道覆败后方达。
现代文：当初豫章郡公派遣塞邈，塞邀在路途被贼寇拦截，道覆失败后才到达。
English: At first, the county magistrate of Yuzhang County dispatched the sedan chair. The sedan chair was intercepted by the bandits on the road, and only arrived after it failed to overturn.

古文：自循东下，江陵断绝京邑之问，传者皆云已没。
现代文：自从卢循束下，江陵断绝了京城的消息，传言都说京城已沦陷。
English: Since Lu Xunzhu, Jiangling cut off the news of the capital, rumors say that the capital has fallen.

古文：及邈至，方知循走。
现代文：等到索邈到来，才知道卢循逃走了。
English: It wasn't until the search party arrived that they learned that Lu Xun had fled.

古文：循初自蔡洲南走，留其亲党范崇民五千人，高舰百余，戍南陵。
现代文：卢妪当初从墓迎南逃，留下他的党羽范崇民五千人，楼船一百多艘，守卫南陵。
English: Lu Wei initially fled from the tomb to the south, leaving his party of five thousand Fan Chongmin and more than a hundred ships to guard the southern mausoleum.

古文：王仲德等闻大军且至，乃进攻之。
现代文：王仲德等人听说大军将到来，就进攻崇民。
English: When Wang Zhongde and others heard that a large army was coming, they attacked Chongmin.

古文：十一月，大破崇民军，焚其舟舰，收其散卒。
现代文：十一月，大败崇虽的军队，焚烧他的船舰，招集他失散的兵士。
English: In November, a much-defeated army, burning his ships, rallied his scattered soldiers.

古文：循广州守兵，不以海道为防。
现代文：卢循在广州的守军，不设海防。
English: Lu followed the defenders in Guangzhou and did not set up a coastal defense.

古文：是月，建威将军孙季高乘海奄至，而城池峻整，兵犹数千。
现代文：当月，建威将军孙季高从海上突然到来，而城池险要严整，兵士还有几千人。
English: That month, Sun Jigao, the general of Jianwei, suddenly arrived from the sea, and the city had to be rigorously fortified, with several thousand soldiers.

古文：季高焚贼舟舰，悉力而上，四面攻之，即日屠其城。循父以轻舟奔始兴。
现代文：季高焚烧贼寇的船舰，全力上岸，四面攻打，当就屠灭城池卢循的父亲乘轻舟投奔始兴。
English: Ji Gao burned the ships of the bandits, went ashore with all his strength, and attacked on all sides. Lu Xun's father rushed to Shixing by boat.

古文：季高抚其旧民，戮其亲党，勒兵谨守。
现代文：季高安抚他们的旧民众，杀戮他们的亲属党羽，指挥兵士严密防守。
English: Ji Gao pacified their old people, killed their relatives and followers, and ordered his soldiers to keep a tight defense.

古文：初，公之遣季高也，众咸以海道艰远，必至为难；且分撤见力，二三非要。
现代文：当初豫章郡公派遣季高时，众人都以为海路艰险遥远，必难以赶到；而且分散现有兵力，并非必要。
English: At the beginning, when the dispatching season of the Yuanzhang County government was at its peak, everyone thought that the sea route was difficult and far away, and it would be difficult to catch up; and it was not necessary to disperse the existing troops.

古文：公不从。
现代文：豫章郡公不听。
English: The county magistrate did not listen.

古文：敕季高曰： 大军十二月之交，必破妖虏。
现代文：下令季高说： 大车在十二月之际，必定打败贼虏。
English: Ordered Ji Gao to say: When the chariot comes in December, it will surely defeat the bandits.

古文：卿今时当至广州，倾其巢窟，令贼奔走之日，无所归投。 
现代文：你现在应到广州，捣毁他们的巢穴，使贼寇逃跑的时候，没有地方归附投奔。 
English: You should go to Guangzhou now, destroy their nests, so that when the thieves and robbers escape, there is no place to run to.

古文：季高受命而行，如期克捷。
现代文：季高接受命令而行动，如期取胜。
English: Ji Gao accepted the order and took action to win as scheduled.

古文：循方治兵旅舟舰，设诸攻备。
现代文：卢循训练兵士建造舰船，作各种攻打准备。
English: Lu Xun trained soldiers to build ships and prepare for various attacks.

古文：公欲御以长算，乃屯军雷池。贼扬声不攻雷池，当乘流径下。
现代文：遂童难公有长远打算，于是驻守在雷池贼寇扬言不攻打雷池，将顺流直下。
English: As a result, Tong Nangong had a long-term plan, so the bandits stationed in Lei Chi threatened not to attack Lei Chi and would go straight down the river.

古文：公知其欲战，且虑贼战败，或于京江入海，遣王仲德以水舰二百于吉阳下断之。
现代文：豫章郡公知道他们想交战，而且担忧贼寇战败，或许从京江入海，就派遣王仲德用水舰二百艘在吉阳拦截他们。
English: The governor of Yuzhang County knew that they wanted to fight, and worried about the defeat of the thieves and robbers, perhaps from the Beijing River into the sea, he sent Wang Zhongde to intercept them with two hundred water vessels in Jiyang.

古文：十二月，循、道覆率众数万，方舰而下，前后相抗，莫见舳舻之际。
现代文：十二月，卢循、道覆率领部众几万人，并舟而下，前后相连，站在船头竞看不见船尾。
English: In December, Lu Xun and Daohui led tens of thousands of people to go down in the same boat. They stood at the front of the boat and could not see the back of the boat.

古文：公悉出轻利斗舰，躬提幡鼓，命众军齐力击之；又上步骑于西岸。
现代文：豫章郡公全部出动轻捷的斗舰，亲自提着幡鼓，命令各军合力攻打又让步兵骑兵在西岸。
English: The county magistrate of Yuanzhang County dispatched all the light and fast warships, personally carried the flag and drum, ordered all the armies to jointly attack and let the infantry and cavalry on the west coast.

古文：右军参军庾乐生乘舰不进，斩而徇之，于是众军并踊腾争先。
现代文：右军参军庾銮生乘船舰不前进，杀了他示众。于是各军都奋勇争先。
English: The soldiers of the right wing did not advance by ship, and killed him in public. Therefore, each army fought bravely to be the first to leave.

古文：军中多万钧神弩，所至莫不摧陷。公中流蹙之，因风水之势，贼舰悉泊西岸，上军先备火具，乃投火焚之。烟焰张天，贼众大败，追奔至夜乃归。
现代文：军中多有力气大的神箭手，所到之处无不击败贼寇，豫章郡公在河中督战，由于风向水流的态势，贼寇的战舰全部停泊在西岸。岸上的车队预先准备火器，就投出火种焚烧战舰，火焰冲天，贼军大败，追击到夜晚才返回。
English: There were many powerful archers in the army, and they defeated the bandits wherever they went. The governor of Yuzhang County supervised the battle in the river. Due to the wind direction and water flow, the bandits' warships were all anchored on the west coast. The convoy on the shore prepared the firearms in advance, and threw out the kindling to burn the warships. The flames soared into the sky, the bandits were defeated, and they pursued until the evening before returning.

古文：循等还寻阳。
现代文：卢循等人回到曼胶。
English: Lu Xun and the others went back to Mangye.

古文：初分遣步军，莫不疑怪，及烧贼舰，众乃悦服。
现代文：起初调用步兵，无不感到奇怪，等到焚烧贼寇战舰，众人才心悦诚服征召工仲德，请他返回担任前锋。
English: At first, the infantry was called up, which everyone found strange. It was not until the pirate warship was burned that the people wholeheartedly accepted the call-up of Gong Zhongde and asked him to return to serve as a forward.

古文：召王仲德，请还为前驱，留辅国将军孟怀玉守雷池。循闻有大军上，欲走向豫章，乃悉力栅断左里。
现代文：留下辅国将军孟怀玉守卫雷迤卢妪听说大军向上游进发，打算逃往豫章，就全力设栅栏截断左里。
English: Meng Huaiyu, the general of the Auxiliary State, was left to guard Laiwu. When Luwu heard that the large army was heading upstream and planned to flee to Yuzhang, he did his best to set up a fence to cut off the left lane.

古文：大军至左里，将战，公所执麾竿折，折幡沈水，众并怪惧。
现代文：大车到达左里，将要交战，豫章郡公所拿的指挥竿折断，折旗帜沉入水中，众人都奇怪畏惧。
English: When the cart arrived in Zuoli, there was going to be a battle. The command post held by the Yuzhang County government was broken, and the folded flag sank into the water. Everyone was strangely afraid.

古文：公欢笑曰： 往年覆舟之战，幡竿亦折；今者复然，贼必破矣。 
现代文：豫章郡公欢喜地笑着说： 往年覆舟山的战斗，旗竿也折断，现在又是这样，贼寇必败。 
English: Yu Zhang, the county magistrate, smiled with joy and said: In previous years, the battle of Zhoushan, the flagpole was also broken, and now it is the same, the bandits will be defeated.

古文：即攻栅而进。
现代文：当即攻打栅栏而前进。
English: It immediately attacked the fence and advanced.

古文：循兵虽殊死战，弗能禁。
现代文：卢脤的兵士虽然拼命作战，仍然不能阻挡。
English: Although Lu Wei's soldiers fought hard, they still could not stop them.

古文：诸军乘胜奔之，循单舸走。
现代文：各军乘胜追击，卢循独自乘船逃跑。
English: All the armies took advantage of the victory to pursue, and Lu Xun fled alone by boat.

古文：所杀及投水死，凡万余人。
现代文：所杀和投入水中死去的，共计一万多人。
English: In total, more than ten thousand people were killed or drowned.

古文：纳其降附，宥其逼略。遣刘籓、孟怀玉轻军追之。
现代文：接纳投降者，宽恕被劫掠的人派遣刘萝、逼怀王率领轻装的军队追击。
English: Accepting the surrenders and forgiving the plundered people, Liu Luo and Wang Huai led the lightly armed troops to chase them.

古文：循收散卒，尚有数千人，径还广州。
现代文：卢妪收集失散的兵士，还有几千人，径直回到庐州。
English: Lu Wei collected the scattered soldiers, and thousands of others, and went straight back to Ganzhou.

古文：道覆还保始兴。
现代文：道覆退回垃兴据守。
English: He retreated back to Laxing to defend himself.

古文：公旋自左里，天子遣侍中、黄门劳师于行所。
现代文：逊童：郡公从左里胜利而归。天子派遣侍中、黄门到临时住所慰问军队。
English: Sun Tong: The county magistrate returned victorious from Zuori. The Son of Heaven dispatched the chamberlains, Huangmen, to the temporary residence to console the troops.

