古文：李德林，字公辅，博陵安平人也。
现代文：李德林，字公辅，博陵安平人。
English: Li Delin, Zi Gongfu, Boling Anping.

古文：祖寿，湖州户曹从事。
现代文：祖父李寿，曾任湖州的户曹从事。
English: His grandfather, Li Shou, once worked as a Huzhou Household Cao.

古文：父敬族，历太学博士、镇远将军。
现代文：父亲李敬族，历任太学博士、镇远将军。
English: His father, Li Jingzhu, successively held the posts of Doctor of Science and General Zhenyuan.

古文：魏孝静帝时，命当世通人正定文籍，以为内校书，别在直閤省。
现代文：魏孝静帝年间，令当时知识渊博的人审定文献典籍，让李敬族校书，隶属于直阁省。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaojing of the Wei Dynasty, the literati of the time were asked to validate the literary classics, and the Li Jing School Book was placed under the jurisdiction of Zhouguo Province.

古文：德林幼聪敏，年数岁，诵左思《蜀都赋》，十余日便度。
现代文：李德林年幼时，天资聪慧，只有几岁时，读左思的《蜀都赋》，十多天就烂熟于心了。
English: Li Delin has been clever and astute since childhood. He is only a few years old. He can recite Zuo Si's "Shu Du Fu" for more than ten days.

古文：高隆之见而嗟叹，遍告朝士，云： 若假其年，必为天下伟器。 
现代文：高隆之见了，非常惊叹，把这事告诉了朝中人士，说道： 如果给他时日，将来一定会成为天下杰出的人才。 
English: When Gao Long saw it, he was very amazed and told this to people in North Korea and China, saying: If he is given time, he will surely become an outstanding talent in the world in the future.

古文：鄴京人士多就宅观之，月余，日中车马不绝。
现代文：邺京许多有名望的人士，都来到他家探视，一个多月间，每天来访的车马不断。
English: Many famous people in Beijing have come to visit his home. For more than a month, there has been a constant stream of cars and horses visiting every day.

古文：年十五，诵五经及古今文集，日数千言。
现代文：十五岁时，就开始阅读五经及古今的文集，每天阅读几千字。
English: At the age of fifteen, he began to read the Five Classics and ancient and modern anthologies, reading several thousand words a day.

古文：俄而该博坟典，阴阳纬候，无不通涉。
现代文：不久对于古代典籍、天文地理、阴阳之学，无不通晓。
English: Soon he knew everything about ancient classics, astronomy and geography, and the science of yin and yang.

古文：善属文，辞核而理暢。魏收尝对高隆之谓其父曰： 贤子文笔终当继温子升。 
现代文：他还擅长写作，文辞恳切且思路通畅，魏收曾经当着高隆之的面，对他的父亲说： 您这个孩子的文章，终究将承继温子升。 
English: He is also good at writing, his words are earnest and his thoughts are clear. Wei Jie once said to his father in front of Gao Longzhi: Your child's article will eventually succeed Wen Zi Sheng.

古文：隆之大笑曰： 魏常侍殊已嫉贤，何不近比老彭，乃远求温子！ 
现代文：高隆之听后，大笑着说： 魏常侍您未免太嫉妒贤才了，为什么不近比老、彭，却远拿温子升来比！ 
English: After listening to Gao Long, he laughed loudly and said: Wei Changzhu, you are too jealous of the sages. Why don't you compare yourself to Lao and Peng, but compare yourself to Wen Zi Rong?

古文：年十六，遭父艰，自驾灵舆，反葬故里。
现代文：李德林十六岁时，父亲去世，他亲自驾着灵车，回故乡安葬。
English: When Li Delin was sixteen, his father died and he drove the hearse to bury him in his hometown.

古文：时正严冬，单衰跣足，州里人物由是敬慕之。
现代文：当时正是严冬季节，他只穿着单薄的孝服，并赤着脚，州里的人因此更加敬慕他。
English: It was the dead of winter, and he wore only a thin robe and was barefoot, which made the people of the state admire him even more.

古文：博陵豪族有崔谌者，仆射之兄，因休假还乡，车服甚盛。
现代文：博陵豪族中有个叫崔谌的，是当朝仆射的哥哥，因为休假而还家，车马装饰十分豪华。
English: Among the Boling high-ranking clans, there is a man named Cui Xuan, who is the elder brother of the emperor's retainer. He returned home because he was on vacation. The car and horse decorations are very luxurious.

古文：将从其宅诣德林赴吊，相去十余里，从者数十骑，稍稍减留。
现代文：他准备从自己家里前往李德林家吊丧，两家相距十几里，跟随的人有几十人，他缩减跟随的人员。
English: He was preparing to travel from his own home to Li Delin's house for the funeral. The two families were more than ten miles apart, and there were dozens of people following him. He reduced the number of people following him.

古文：比至德林门，才余五骑，云不得令李生怪人燻灼。
现代文：等到了李德林家门，跟随的只五个人，说这样不会使李德林责怪我太炫耀。
English: When I got to Li Delin's house, there were only five people following me, saying that this would not make Li Delin accuse me of being too showy.

古文：德林居贫感轲，母氏多疾，方留心典籍，无复宦情。
现代文：李德林家境贫寒，经历坎坷，而且他的母亲多病，就在家潜心研读典籍，再没有做官的心思。
English: Li Delin's family was poor and experienced hardships, and his mother was often ill. He devoted himself to studying classics at home, and never thought about becoming an official.

古文：其后，母病稍愈，逼令仕进。
现代文：后来，他母亲的病略微好了点，就逼迫他去做官。
English: Later, when his mother's illness was a little better, they forced him to become an official.

古文：任城王湝为定州刺史，重其才，召入州馆。
现代文：任城王高氵皆做了定州的刺史，看重李德林的才能，把他召入州府。
English: All of the city's kings and emperors made a stab at the history of Dingzhou, valued Li Delin's talent, and called him to the state capital.

古文：朝夕同游，殆均师友，不为君民礼数。
现代文：他们俩早晚相随，几乎成了师生和朋友，不拘于君民间的礼仪。
English: The two of them went everywhere together, and almost became teachers, students, and friends, regardless of social etiquette.

古文：尝语德林云： 窃闻蔽贤蒙显戮。
现代文：高氵皆曾经对李德林说： 我私下里听说埋没人才就应受戮。
English: High school students once said to Li Delin: I have heard in private that buried talent deserves to be slaughtered.

古文：久令君沈滞，吾独得润身，朝廷纵不见尤，亦惧明灵所谴。 
现代文：让你长时呆在我身边，得不到官职，而只让我自身受益，纵然朝廷不怪罪于我，也害怕受到神灵的谴责。 
English: Let you stay with me for a long time, do not get a post, but only benefit myself, even if the court does not blame me, I am afraid of being condemned by the gods.

古文：于是举秀才入鄴，于时天保八年也。
现代文：于是李德林被举荐为秀才，送入邺京，当时是天保八年。
English: As a result, Li Delin was recommended as an outstanding talent and sent to Beijing. It was the eighth year of the Tenpo era.

古文：王因遗尚书令杨遵彦书云： 燕赵固多奇士，此言诚不为谬。
现代文：任城王给尚书令杨遵彦写了一封信，信中说道： 燕赵本来多奇才，这话确实不错。
English: Ren Chengwang wrote a letter to Shang Shuling Yang Zunyan, saying in the letter: Yan Zhao was originally a prodigy, which is really good.

古文：今岁所贡秀才李德林者，文章学识，固不待言，观其风神器宇，终为栋梁之用。
现代文：今年所选拔的秀才李德林，文章学识，自不必多说，只看他的风度神采，就知他终究会成为栋梁之材。
English: This year's selected talent, Li Delin, is a scholar, needless to say, just look at his demeanor, and you will know that he will eventually become a pillar.

古文：至如经国大体，是贾生、晁错之俦；雕虫小技，殆相如、子云之辈。
现代文：至于说到他治理国家的本领，可与贾谊、晁错同列；作文赋诗的能力，可与相如、子云相比。
English: As far as his ability to govern the country is concerned, it can be put on the same level as that of Jia Yi and Zou Hui; his ability to compose poems can be compared to that of Xiang Ru and Zi Yun.

古文：今虽唐、虞君世，俊乂盈朝，然修大厦者，岂厌夫良材之积也？
现代文：即使尧舜临世，贤才豪杰满朝，然而建造大厦的人，怎么会嫌栋梁太多呢。
English: Even if he were to come to the world, he would be full of great talents, but how could the person who built the building not like too many pillars?

古文：吾尝见孔文举《荐祢衡表》云： 洪水横流，帝思俾乂。 
现代文：我曾见孔文举的《荐祢衡表》中说道： 洪水泛滥，帝思贤佐。 
English: I once saw Kong Wenjue's "Recommend Your Weighing Table" saying: "Floods, Emperor Xianzuo.

古文：以正平比夫大禹，常谓拟谕非伦。
现代文：拿正平来比大禹，常觉比得不伦不类。
English: Comparing Zhengping to Dayu, I often feel that they are incomparable.

古文：今以德林言之，便觉前言非大。 
现代文：现在拿李德林来说，便会觉得这句话并不过分。 
English: Now, if we take Liddell, we will feel that this sentence is not excessive.

古文：遵彦即命德林制《让尚书令表》，援笔立成，不加治点。
现代文：杨遵彦随即令李德林起草《让尚书令表》，他拿起笔，顷刻间写成，不做丝毫更改。
English: Yang Zunyan then immediately ordered Li Delin to draft the "Let Shang Shuling Table." He picked up the pen and wrote it down in an instant, without making any changes.

古文：因大相赏异，以示吏部郎中陆卬。
现代文：杨遵彦因此十分欣赏他的才能，便把表给吏部郎中陆看。
English: As a result, Yang Zunhi fully appreciated his talent and showed the watch to the secretary, Rong Zhonglu.

古文：卬云： 已大见其文笔，浩浩如长河东注。
现代文：陆看后说： 可以明显地看出他的文章风格，浩浩荡荡如长河东流。
English: After reading it, Lu said, "You can clearly see his writing style, it's like a long river flowing eastward.

古文：比来所见，后生制作，乃涓浍之流耳。 
现代文：以前所见后生写的文章，与李德林的文章相比，只不过是涓涓细流而已。 
English: Compared with Liddell's article, the articles written by later generations that we have seen before are just a trickle.

古文：卬仍命其子乂与德林周旋，戒之曰： 汝每事宜师此人，以为模楷。 
现代文：于是陆让他的儿子陆早晚与李德林相随，并告诫他的儿子道： 你做每件事，都应师法这个人，把他作为你的楷模。 
English: Therefore, Lu let his son, Lu, follow Li Delin sooner or later, and admonished his son, "In everything you do, you should learn from this man and take him as your model."

古文：时遵彦铨衡，深慎选举，秀才擢第，罕有甲科。
现代文：当时杨遵彦主管选拔人才的事务，他非常谨慎地选拔，举行秀才考试，很少有甲等成绩的。
English: At that time, Yang Zunyan was in charge of the selection of talents. He was very careful in the selection and held the talent examination, and there were few A-level results.

古文：德林射策五条，考皆为上，授殿中将军。
现代文：而李德林所回答的五道试题，都为上等，被授为殿中将军。
English: However, the five test questions answered by Li Delin were all superior, and he was awarded the title of General of the Palace.

古文：既是西省散员，非其所好，又以天保季世，乃谢病还乡，阖门守道。
现代文：这官职是西省的一个闲职，不是他所期望的，又加上当时处于天保末世，于是称病还乡，闭门谢客，以保持自己的品节。
English: This post was a sinecure in the western province, not what he had expected, and he was in the last days of the Tenpo era at the time, so he called in sick and thanked the guests behind closed doors in order to maintain his dignity.

古文：乾明初，遵彦奏追德林入议曹。
现代文：乾明元年，杨遵彦奏请皇上，让李德林入朝商议国事。
English: In the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, Yang Zunyan asked the emperor to let Li Delin enter the imperial court to discuss state affairs.

古文：皇建初，下诏搜扬人物，复追赴晋阳。撰《春思赋》一篇，代称典丽。
现代文：皇建初年，皇上降诏在各地搜罗人才，他再次被迫到晋阳，写了一篇《春思赋》，世人称其典雅华丽。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, the emperor issued an edict to recruit talent from all over the country. He was once again forced to go to Jinyang, where he wrote "Spring Thoughts," which the world praised for its elegance and splendor.

古文：是时长广王作相，居守在鄴。
现代文：这时，长广王做了丞相，驻守在邺下。
English: At this time, Prince Nagahiro became chancellor and stayed under the shogun.

古文：敕德林还京，与散骑常侍高元海等参掌机密。
现代文：李德林奉旨回到京城，与散骑常侍高元海等，共同掌管军国大事。
English: Li Delin was ordered to return to the capital, and together with straggler attendant Gao Yuanhai, he took charge of military affairs.

古文：王引授丞相府行参军。
现代文：长广王召见了他，并授他为丞相府行参军。
English: The king of Changguang summoned him and gave him the order to join the army at the prime minister's office.

古文：未几而王即帝位，授奉朝请，寓直舍人省。
现代文：不久，长广王继帝位，李德林被授为奉朝请，在舍人省值夜班。
English: Soon after, Changguang Wang succeeded to the throne, and Li Delin was assigned to serve the imperial court and work the night shift in Shiren Province.

古文：河清中，授员外散骑侍郎，带斋帅，仍别直机密省。
现代文：河清年间，被授为员外散骑侍郎，掌管齐帅的事务，在机密省值班。
English: During the Heqing Dynasty, he was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer riding horseback, in charge of the affairs of Qi Shuai, and on duty in the confidential province.

古文：天统初，授给事中，直中书，参掌诏诰。寻迁中书舍人。
现代文：天统初年，李德林被授为给事中，在中书省值班，掌管诏诰文书，不久任中书舍人。
English: In the first year of the reunification of China, Li Delin was awarded the title of Zhaozhong, and was on duty in the Chinese Literature Department, in charge of the imperial edicts and documents. He was soon appointed as the Chinese literature curator.

古文：武平初，加通直散骑侍郎。又敕与中书侍郎宋士素、副侍中赵彦深别典机密。
现代文：武平初年，升为通直散骑侍郎，又奉命与中书侍郎宋士素，副侍中赵彦深一起掌管军国机密。
English: In the first year of Wu Ping, he was promoted to the position of Tsunzhi Sanzhijishi, and was also ordered to be in charge of the military state secrets together with Song Shisu, the junior secretary, and Zhao Yanshen, the deputy junior secretary.

古文：寻丁母艰去职，勺饮不入口五日。
现代文：不久因母亲去世而离职，五天颗米不进、滴水不沾。
English: Soon after, she left her job due to her mother's death. For five days, she didn't eat a single grain of rice and didn't touch a drop of water.

古文：因发热病，遍体生疮，而哀泣不绝。
现代文：因此发热病，浑身生疮，还是哀哭不绝。
English: As a result, she developed a fever, sores all over her body, and cried endlessly.

古文：若然，则世宗、高祖皆天保以前，唯入魏氏列传，不作齐朝帝纪，可乎？
现代文：许多为官的好友，像陆骞、宋士素，名医张子彦等，亲自替他调制汤药。但李德林不愿喝，浑身红肿，几天过去，竟出人意料病愈了，身体很快恢复。
English: Many friends of the official, such as Lu Wei, Song Shizuo, famous doctor Zhang Zihang, etc., personally prepared the soup medicine for him. However, Li Delin did not want to drink, his whole body was red and swollen, and after a few days, he unexpectedly recovered and his body recovered quickly.

古文：此既不可，彼复何证！
现代文：大家都说是因他的一片孝心，感动天地所致。
English: Everyone said it was because of his filial piety, which moved heaven and earth.

古文：是时中书侍郎杜台卿上《世祖武成皇帝颂》，齐主以为未尽善，令和士开以颂示德林。
现代文：太上博士巴叔仁奏述了他的事迹，受到了朝廷的嘉奖。守孝刚满一百天，不许他再守孝，让他复出。李德林因为自己久病，身体羸弱，急忙奏请辞官归乡。当时中书侍郎杜台卿奏《世祖武成皇帝颂》，齐主认为没能尽善尽美，令和士开把文章给李德林看。
English: Father Superior Doctor Ba Shujin recited his deeds and was rewarded by the imperial court. Shou Xiaoling had just completed one hundred days, and he was not allowed to perform the filial piety again, so he was allowed to return. Li Delin, because of his long illness and weak body, hurriedly recited and asked the speaker to return to his hometown. At that time, the attendant of the Central Library, Du Taiqing, played "Ode to the Ancestor of Emperor Wu Cheng," and the master of Qi thought that it was not perfect, so he ordered the waiter to open the article and show it to Li Delin.

古文：宣旨云： 台卿此文，未当朕意。
现代文：并降旨道： 杜台卿的这篇文章，不中朕意。
English: He also wrote: "This article by Dudaiqing does not meet my expectations.

古文：以卿有大才，须叙盛德，即宜速作，急进本也。 
现代文：因你有才华，一定要多记述皇恩盛德，应速速作成，马上送来。 
English: Because you are talented, you must write more about the Emperor En Shingde, you should make it quickly and send it immediately.

古文：德林乃上颂十六章并序，文多不载。
现代文：李德林于是进献颂书十六章并加上序，文献多不做记载。
English: Li Delin then went into the 16 chapters of the dedicatory book and added a preface. Most of the literature was not recorded.

古文：武成览颂善之，赐名马一匹。
现代文：武成帝看了文章，点头称好，赐给李德林名马一匹。
English: Emperor Wu Chengdi read the article, nodded his approval, and gave Li Delin a famous horse.

古文：三年，祖孝徵入为侍中，尚书左仆射赵彦深出为兗州刺史。
现代文：武成三年，祖孝徵入朝做了侍中，尚书左仆射赵彦深出京做了兖州刺史。
English: In the third year of Wucheng, Zu Xiao was drafted into the imperial court to serve as an attendant, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Zhao Yancheng, went to Beijing to serve as the scribe of Zhangzhou.

古文：朝士有先为孝徵所待遇者，间德林，云是彦深党与，不可仍掌机密。
现代文：朝中有原来被祖孝徵所厚待的官员，离间李德林与他的关系，说他是赵彦深的党羽，不能再让他掌管军国机密。
English: Some officials in the Imperial Court, who had been treated well by Zu Xiaozhu, severed the relationship between Li Delin and him, saying that he was a member of Zhao Yanshen's party and could no longer allow him to control military secrets.

古文：孝徵曰： 德林久滞绛衣，我常恨彦深待贤未足。
现代文：祖孝徵却说： 李德林滞留于绛衣微职已很久，我常常抱怨赵彦深厚待贤才不够。
English: However, Zu Xiaoqian said: Li Delin has been stuck in Shiyi micro-job for a long time. I often complain that Zhao Yan is not generous enough to wait for talents.

古文：内省文翰，方以委之。
现代文：内省文书，正好可以委托给他。
English: An introspective document that can be entrusted to him.

古文：寻当有佳处分，不宜妄说。 
现代文：不久就可以看到他很好地处理事务，不可毫无根据地乱说。 
English: It won't be long before he's seen to be getting on with things and not spouting off without foundation.

古文：寻除中书侍郎，仍诏修国史。
现代文：不久，李德林升任为中书侍郎，仍奉旨修订国史。
English: Soon after, Li Delin was promoted to the position of chancellery attendant, and he continued to revise the national history.

古文：齐主留情文雅，召入文林馆。
现代文：齐主留心天下的好文章，召他进入文林馆。
English: Qi Lord paid attention to the world's good articles and called him to enter the Wenlin Museum.

古文：又令与黄门侍郎颜之推二人同判文林馆事。
现代文：又令他与黄门侍郎颜之推二人共同管理文林馆的事务。
English: He was also made to jointly manage the affairs of the Wenlin Museum with Huangmen waiter Yan Zhutu.

古文：五年，敕令与黄门侍郎李孝贞、中书侍郎李若别掌宣传。
现代文：武成五年，诏令他与黄门侍郎李孝贞、中书侍郎李若共同管理署敕宣旨的事务。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Wucheng's reign, he was ordered by the emperor to jointly manage the affairs of the imperial edict with the attendant of Huangmen, Li Xiaozhen, and the attendant of Zhongshu, Li Ruo.

古文：寻除通直散骑常侍，兼中书侍郎。
现代文：不久又升任通直散骑常侍，兼中书侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhiki no Tsuneishi, and also to the post of Chusho-sajiro.

古文：隆化中，假仪同三司。
现代文：隆化年间，被授为假仪同三司。
English: During the Longhua era, he was awarded the title of "False Ceremony Master" and "Third Division Master."

古文：承光中，授仪同三司。
现代文：承光年间，被授为仪同三司。
English: During the Zhengguang era, he was awarded the title of Ji Tong San Shi.

古文：及周武帝克齐，入鄴之日，敕小司马唐道和就宅宣旨慰喻，云： 平齐之利，唯在于尔。朕本畏尔逐齐王东走，今闻犹在，大以慰怀，宜即入相见。 
现代文：等到周武帝攻克北齐，进入邺下的那天，诏令小司马唐道和来到李德林家，宣读圣旨晓谕抚慰，说道： 攻打北齐的好处，只在于得到你，朕本来害怕你跟随齐王往东退却，现听说你尚在，大可安慰我的心怀，应该立即入朝相见。 
English: On the day that Emperor Zhou conquered Beiqi and came under his rule, he ordered Xiao Sima Tang to come to Li Delin's house and read out the holy edict to comfort him, saying: The benefit of attacking Beiqi is only to get you. I was originally afraid that you would retreat to the east with King Qi. Now I heard that you are still there, which can greatly comfort my heart. You should immediately go to the imperial court to meet him.

古文：道和引之入内，遣内史字文昂访问齐朝风俗政教、人物善恶，即留内省，三宿乃归。
现代文：唐道和引他进入朝廷，派内史宇文昂查问齐朝的风俗教化、人物品性，当即留他在内省，三天后才让他回家。
English: Tang Daohe took him to the imperial court, and sent Shi Yuwenang to inquire about the customs, education and character of the Qi Dynasty. He was immediately left to introspect before being allowed to return home three days later.

古文：仍遣从驾至长安，授内史上士。
现代文：不久仍让他随驾到长安，封他为内史上士。
English: Soon after, he allowed him to accompany him to Chang'an and appointed him as an internal historian.

古文：自此以后，诏诰格式，及用山东人物，一以委之。
现代文：从此以后，诏诰文书，以及任用山东的人，一律委托给他。
English: From then on, the imperial edict and documents, as well as the appointment of Shandong people, were all entrusted to him.

古文：武帝尝于云阳宫作鲜卑语谓群臣云： 我常日唯闻李德林名，及见其与齐朝作诏书移檄，我正谓其是天上人。
现代文：武帝曾经在云阳宫用鲜卑话对群臣说： 我常常只听说李德林的名字，等看到他给齐朝写的诏书檄文，我还说他是天上仙人。
English: Emperor Wu once said to his courtiers at the Yunyang Palace, "I have often only heard of Li Delin's name, but when I saw the imperial edict he wrote to the Qi Dynasty, I also said that he was a celestial immortal."

古文：岂言今日得其驱使，复为我作文书，极为大异。 
现代文：哪知今天得到他为我效力，又为我做了文书，非同一般。 
English: Do you not know that this day you are a special people to me, and that you are my treasured possession?

古文：神武公纥豆陵毅答曰： 臣闻明王圣主，得骐驎凤凰为瑞，是圣德所感，非力能致之。
现代文：神武公纥豆陈颜回答道： 臣听说贤明的君主，得到麒麟凤凰是吉祥的征兆，是圣德所致，不是一般人力所能做到的。
English: Shenwu Gong Peas Chen Yan replied, "Minister, I have heard that it is an auspicious sign for a wise monarch to get a giraffe and a phoenix. It is the result of virtue and not something that can be done by ordinary people.

古文：瑞物虽来，不堪使用。如李德林来受驱策，亦陛下圣德感致，有大才用，无所不堪，胜于骐驎凤凰远矣。 
现代文：瑞物即使得到，也不堪使用，如果李德林来为您效劳，也是陛下您的圣德所致，有大才可用，无所不能，远远地胜过得到麒麟凤凰。 
English: If Li Delin comes to serve you, it is also due to Your Majesty's holiness. He has great talent and can do anything. It is far better than getting the Kirin phoenix.

古文：武帝大笑曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：武帝大笑着说： 确实如您所言。 
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly and said, "It is indeed as you said.

古文：宣政末，授御正下大夫。
现代文：宣政末年，被授为御正下大夫。
English: At the end of the Xuan Zheng year, Li Delin was given the post of imperial doctor.

古文：大象初，赐爵成安县男。
现代文：大象初年，赐成安县男爵。
English: In the elephant's first year, he was given the title of Baron of Cheng'an County.

古文：宣帝大渐，属高祖初受顾命，邗国公杨惠谓德林曰： 朝廷赐令总文武事，经国任重，非群才辅佐，无以克成大业。
现代文：周宣帝病势加剧，嘱托隋高祖受顾命辅佐少主。邗国公杨惠对李德林说： 朝廷赐令您总管文武方面的大事，治理国家任务重大，如无群才辅佐，难以完成大业。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan's illness worsened, and Sui Gaozu was entrusted with the duty of being an assistant to the major lord. Yang Hui, the Duke of Shandong, said to Li Delin: The imperial court has ordered you to be in charge of major matters in the field of literature and military affairs, and the task of governing the country is very important. If there is no group of talented assistants, it will be difficult to complete the great cause.

古文：今欲与公共事，必不得辞。 
现代文：现在想与您共同管理国家大事，请一定不要推辞。 
English: I want to plan big things with you. You mustn't refuse.

古文：德林闻之甚喜，乃答云： 德林虽庸芃，微诚亦有所在。
现代文：李德林听了，非常高兴，于是回答道： 德林虽平庸怯懦，但也还有一片赤诚。
English: Li Delin listened and was very happy, so he replied: Although Delin is mediocre and cowardly, he is also sincere.

古文：若曲相提奖，必望以死奉公。 
现代文：如果您曲意提升奖赏我，一定愿以死来报答。 
English: If you reward me by raising my tone, I will surely repay you with my death.

古文：高祖大悦，即召与语。
现代文：高祖听后十分高兴，当即召见他一起说话。
English: Gaozu was very happy to hear this and immediately summoned him to speak with him.

古文：刘昉、郑译初矫诏召高祖受顾命辅少主，总知内外兵马事。
现代文：起初刘日方、郑译伪造诏书，召高祖为顾命大臣，以辅佐少主，而统管内外兵马事务。
English: At first, Liu Yifang and Zheng Zhan forged the imperial edict and called Gao Zu to be the minister of the protection of the emperor's life, to assist the major lord, and to be in charge of domestic and foreign military affairs.

古文：诸卫既奉敕，并受高祖节度。
现代文：各位将领已奉旨，全归高祖管辖。
English: All generals have been ordered to return to Gaozu's jurisdiction.

古文：郑译、刘昉议，欲授高祖冢宰，郑译自摄大司马，刘昉又求小冢宰。
现代文：郑译、刘日方商议，想授高祖为冢宰，郑译自己做大司马，刘日方也想做小冢宰。
English: Zheng Zi and Liu Nipo had a discussion. They wanted to make Gao Zu the grand steward, Zheng Zi himself the chief steward, and Liu Nipo also wanted to be the junior steward.

古文：高祖私问德林曰： 欲何以见处？ 
现代文：高祖悄悄地问李德林： 我该怎么处理这事呢？ 
English: Gaozu quietly asked Li Delin: How should I deal with this?

古文：德林云： 即宜作大丞相，假黄钺，都督内外诸军事。
现代文：李德林回答说： 您最好做大丞相，假黄钺，统辖内外各种军务。
English: Li Delin replied, "You'd better be the grand chancellor, pretend to be Huang Qi, and supervise all kinds of military affairs both at home and abroad.

古文：不尔，无以压众心。 
现代文：不这样，无以制服众人心。 
English: Otherwise, there is no way to win people's hearts.

古文：及发丧，便即依此。
现代文：等到给周宣帝发丧之时，就按李德林所说的办了。
English: When it came time to pay tribute to Emperor Zhou Xuan, Li Delin did as he was told.

古文：以译为相府长史，带内史上大夫，昉但为丞相府司马。
现代文：以郑译为相府长史，加上内史上大夫，刘日方只做了丞相府司马。
English: With Zheng Qian as the chief of the prefectural government, plus the doctor of history, Liu Yifang only did the post of the chief of the prefectural government.

古文：译、昉由是不平。
现代文：郑译、刘日方因此心中不平。
English: As a result, Zheng Zhan and Liu Yifang felt uneasy.

古文：以德林为丞相府属，加仪同大将军。
现代文：以李德林为丞相府属，兼仪同大将军。
English: With Li Delin as a subordinate of the prime minister's office, he also served as a general.

古文：未几而三方构乱，指授兵略，皆与之参详。
现代文：不久，有三方挑起战乱，进退的韬略，高祖都与李德林一起仔细考虑。
English: Soon, the three parties were in turmoil, and Sui Emperor Wen discussed the command and dispatch of soldiers and horses with Li Delin.

古文：军书羽檄，朝夕填委，一日之中，动逾百数。
现代文：各种军事文书，早晚填写不断。一天之中，动不动超过上百件。
English: All kinds of military documents are constantly being filled out in the morning and evening, with more than a hundred being filled out at any one time.

古文：或机速竞发，口授数人，文意百端，不加治点。
现代文：有时战机紧急，几件事要同时处理，李德林就口授给几个人，意思各自不同，但从不加以修改，而准确无误。
English: Sometimes all kinds of booklets are eagerly waiting to be issued, and Li Delin will dictate to several people. There are many clues, but there is no need to modify them.

古文：郧公韦孝宽为东道元帅，师次永桥，为沁水泛长，兵未得度。
现代文：郧公韦孝宽为东道元帅，统率军队驻扎在永桥，被沁水泛滥所阻，兵马不能渡。
English: Shigong Wei Xiaokuan was the host marshal, and stationed in Yongqiao at the head of the army. He was blocked by the flooding of the Wei River, and the soldiers and horses could not cross.

古文：长史李询上密启云： 大将梁士彦、宇文忻、崔弘度并受尉迟迥饷金，军中慅慅，人情大异。 
现代文：长史李询写来密信说： 大将梁士彦、宇文忻、崔弘度都接收了尉迟迥的饷金，军中议论纷纷，人心骚动不安。 
English: The chief historian, Li Zhen, wrote a confidential letter saying: Generals Liang Shih-yan, Uwen Hui, and Cui Hongdu all received the money stolen by the lieutenant, and there were many discussions in the army, and the people were agitated and uneasy.

古文：高祖得询启，深以为忧，与郑译议，欲代此三人。
现代文：高祖看到李询的密信后，十分忧虑，与郑译商量，想派人去取代三位将领。
English: Gaozu was very worried when he saw the secret letter from Li Ying, and discussed with Zheng Ying to send someone to replace the three generals.

古文：德林独进计云： 公与诸将，并是国家贵臣，未相伏驭，今以挟令之威，使得之耳。
现代文：李德林却献计道： 您与各位将领，都是国家的贵臣，现在还不能使他们俯首受制，现在只是假借皇帝的威信，得到统帅各位将领的权力。
English: Li Delin, however, devised a plan: You and your generals are all state dignitaries, and it is not yet possible to make them bow their heads and submit to control. Now you are only using the prestige of the emperor to obtain the power of the commander-in-chief and your generals.

古文：安知后所遣者，能尽腹心，前所遣人，独致乖异？
现代文：怎么知道后来派遣的将领，一定能尽忠，而以前所派遣的将领，却有违背之意呢？
English: How do you know that the generals sent later will be loyal, while the generals sent before were disloyal?

古文：又取金之事，虚实难明，即令换易，彼将惧罪，恐其逃逸，便须禁锢。然则郧公以下，必有惊疑之意。
现代文：加上受金之事，虚实不明，即令更换，他们三人将惧罪，恐怕会逃去，就须把他们禁闭起来，那么郧公以下的将士，一定有惊疑之心。
English: In addition to the matter of receiving money, if the truth is unknown, they will be replaced, and the three of them will be afraid of crime, afraid that they will escape, so they must be confined, so the soldiers below the prince must be suspicious.

古文：且临敌代将，自古所难，乐毅所以辞燕，赵括以之败赵。
现代文：况且大敌当前更换将领，是自古以来人们就感到难办的事，也是乐毅辞燕的原因，赵括也因这样使赵国招致失败。
English: Moreover, the current replacement of generals by the great enemy is something that people have found difficult to do since ancient times, and it is also the reason why Le Yi resigned Yan, and Zhao Kuo also caused Zhao Guo to fail.

古文：如愚所见，但遣公一腹心，明于智略，为诸将旧来所信服者，速至军所，使观其情伪。
现代文：依我的拙见，只须派您的一个心腹，机智而有韬略，为各位将领原先所信服的人，立即到军队驻扎地，让他暗查此事的真假。
English: In my humble opinion, it is only necessary to send one of your confidants, who is witty and cunning, and whom the generals have previously convinced, immediately to the military garrison, and let him secretly investigate the truth or falsity of the matter.

古文：纵有异志，必不敢动。 
现代文：纵令他们三人有异志，也一定不敢轻举妄动。 
English: Even if the three of them have different ambitions, they will not dare to act rashly.

古文：丞相大悟曰： 若公不发此言，几败大事。 
现代文：丞相顿时大悟，说道： 如果不是您阐明这些道理，险些坏了大事。 
English: "If you hadn't clarified these points, it would have almost ruined the whole thing," the prime minister said, suddenly realizing the situation.

古文：即令高颎驰驿往军所，为诸将节度，竟成大功。
现代文：当即派高赹骑马飞奔，前往军队驻扎地，作为各位将领的统率，最后立了大功。
English: Even though Gao Yao quickly rushed to the garrison of the great army and restrained the dispatch of the generals, he finally achieved great success.

古文：凡厥谋谟，多此类也。
现代文：凡李德林策划的谋略，大多都是这类。
English: Most of the strategies planned by Liddellin are of this type.

古文：进授丞相府从事内郎。
现代文：进而被授为丞相府从事内郎。
English: He was promoted to chancellor's office to work as a retainer.

古文：禅代之际，其相国总百揆、九锡殊礼诏策笺表玺书，皆德林之辞也。
现代文：高祖继位之际，相国总统百揆、九锡大礼及诏策笺表各种表章诏书，都是李德林起草的。
English: At the time of the Zen Dynasty of the Sui and Wen dynasties, Li Delin was responsible for the total of one hundred sutras and nine sets of sutras.

古文：高祖登阼之日，授内史令。
现代文：高祖登基那天，授李德林为内史令。
English: On the day Gaozu ascended to the throne, Li Delin was awarded the title of Inner Historian.

古文：初，将受禅，虞庆则劝高祖尽灭宇文氏，高颎、杨惠亦依违从之。
现代文：起初，准备接受禅让，虞庆则劝高祖先全部消灭宇文氏，高赹、杨惠也违背自己的本意赞同此议。
English: At first, they were ready to accept Zen's concession, but Yu Qing advised Gao's ancestors to completely exterminate the Uwen clan. Gao Yao and Yang Hui also agreed to this proposal against their own intentions.

古文：唯德林固争，以为不可。
现代文：只有李德林固执争辩，认为不能这样做。
English: Only Li Delin was adamant in arguing that this should not be done.

古文：高祖作色怒云： 君读书人，不足平章此事。 
现代文：高祖变了脸色怒道： 你是读书人，不可以参与这件事。 
English: Gao Zu frowned and said angrily, "You are a reader, you are not allowed to participate in this matter.

古文：于是遂尽诛之。
现代文：于是就全部消灭了宇文氏。
English: As a result, the entire Umun clan was wiped out.

古文：自是品位不加，出于高、虞之下，唯依班例授上仪同，进爵为子。
现代文：自此官品不升，降到高赹、虞庆则的下面，只按分赐的惯例授了上仪同，晋升为子爵。
English: Since then, his official rank did not rise, and he was relegated to the level below that of Gao Xi and Yu Qing Ze. He was only awarded the title of Shang Yi Tong and promoted to viscount according to the usual practice.

古文：开皇元年，敕令与太尉任国公于翼、高颎等同修律令。
现代文：开皇元年，诏令李德林与太尉任国公于翼、高赹等共同制定律令。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Li Delin was ordered by the Emperor to jointly formulate the ritsuryo code with Taifu Renkongyu, Gaozhu and others.

古文：事讫奏闻，别赐九环金带一腰，骏马一匹，赏损益之多也。
现代文：完成后奏知皇上，赐赠九环金带一副，骏马一匹，赏赐他对旧律令的增删之功。
English: After the work was completed, Emperor Songzhi presented him with a pair of nine-ringed gold bands and a fine horse as a reward for his work in adding to and deleting the old ritsuryo code.

古文：格令班后，苏威每欲改易事条。
现代文：律令颁布之后，苏威每每想更改其中的条例。
English: After the promulgation of the regulation, Su Wei always wanted to change the regulations in it.

古文：德林以为格式已颁，义须画一，纵令小有踳驳，非过蠹政害民者，不可数有改张。
现代文：李德林认为律令已经颁布，按理必须统一，纵使有些小的错误或纰漏，不到损政害民的地步，就不能频繁的更改。
English: Li Delin believes that the ritsuryo code has been promulgated and must be unified according to the principle. Even if there are some small errors or omissions, they cannot be changed frequently without damaging politics and harming the people.

古文：威又奏置五百家乡正，即令理民间辞讼。
现代文：苏威又奏请五百家设置一个乡正，让他们管理民间诉讼。
English: Su Wei also asked five hundred households to set up a township government to let them manage civil litigation.

古文：德林以为本废乡官判事，为其里闾亲戚，剖断不平，今令乡正专治五百家，恐为害更甚。
现代文：李德林认为本来就应该废黜乡官判事，因为他们在乡里有内外亲属，剖析评断不公平，现在却设乡正专门管理五百家民事纠纷，恐怕为害更深。
English: Li Delin believes that the judges of the township officials should have been dismissed, because they have relatives inside and outside the township, and it is unfair to analyze and judge. However, now the township is set up to manage 500 civil disputes, I am afraid that the harm will be deeper.

古文：且今时吏部，总选人物，天下不过数百县，于六七百万户内，诠简数百县令，犹不能称其才，乃欲于一乡之内，选一人能治五百家者，必恐难得。
现代文：况且现在的吏部，总管人才的选拔，而天下不过几百个县，在六七百万户中，精心选拔出来的几百个县令，有些还不可能称职，而想在一乡之内，选拔一个能管理五百家纠纷的人，恐怕一定难以找到。
English: Moreover, there are only a few hundred counties in the world, and among the 67 million households, some of the carefully selected hundreds of county magistrates may not be competent, and if you want to select a person who can manage 500 disputes within a village, I am afraid it will be difficult to find.

古文：又即时要荒小县，有不至五百家者，复不可令两县共管一乡。
现代文：又加上有些偏僻小县，根本不足五百户人家，又不能让两县共同管理一乡。
English: In addition, some remote small counties have fewer than 500 households, and it is not possible for two counties to jointly manage one township.

古文：敕令内外群官，就东宫会议。自皇太子以下，多从德林议。
现代文：于是，皇上诏令内外群官，到东宫共同商议，从皇太子以下的官员，大都赞同李德林的意见。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering officials from both inside and outside the country to come to the East Palace for joint deliberation. Officials from the crown prince on down mostly agreed with Li Delin's opinion.

古文：唯是愚思，非奏定者，虽词乖黼藻，而理归霸德，文有可忽，事不可遗。
现代文：苏威又说可以废除郡制，李德林对他道： 制定律令时，你为何不提出废除郡制好呢？现在律令刚颁布出来，难道可以随便更改吗？ 
English: Su Wei also said that the county system could be abolished, and Li Delin said to him: When the regulation was formulated, why didn't you propose the abolition of the county system? Now that the regulation has just been promulgated, can it be changed at will?

古文：前奉敕旨，集纳麓已还，至于受命文笔，当时制述，条目甚多，今日收撰，略为五卷云尔。
现代文：而高赹赞同苏威的意见，妄说李德林凶狠暴戾，固执己见。因此高祖全部采纳了苏威的建议。开皇五年，皇上诏令李德林写篇文章，记述他做宰相时的国家大事，完成后，编为五卷，命名为《霸朝杂集》。
English: However, Gao Jun agreed with Su Wei's opinion and falsely said that Li Delin was fierce and obstinate. Therefore, Gao Zu fully adopted Su Wei's suggestion. In the first five years of the emperor's reign, the emperor ordered Li Delin to write an article describing the national events when he was the prime minister. After completion, it was compiled into five volumes and named "Occupy the Court."

古文：高祖省读讫，明旦谓德林曰： 自古帝王之兴，必有异人辅佐。
现代文：高祖读完后，第二天早晨对李德林说： 自古以来，无论哪个帝王的兴盛，一定都有奇才贤士辅佐。
English: After Gaozhu finished reading, he said to Li Delin the next morning: Since ancient times, no matter which emperor flourished, there must have been wizards and sages to assist him.

古文：我昨读《霸朝集》，方知感应之理。
现代文：我昨天读了您的《霸朝杂集》，才知道因皇上盛德而感动天地降贤人于世的道理。
English: I read "The Hegemon of the Morning" yesterday, and only then did I know the truth of divine inspiration.

古文：昨宵恨夜长，不能早见公面。
现代文：昨晚嫌夜太长，使我不能早早地见到您的面。
English: I didn't want to stay up too late last night, so I couldn't meet you early.

古文：必令公贵与国始终。 
现代文：我一定要让您处于尊贵的地位，与国家相始终。 
English: I must keep you in a dignified position, in harmony with the country.

古文：于是追赠其父恆州刺史。
现代文：于是追封李德林的父亲为恒州刺史。
English: As a result, Li Delin's father was posthumously awarded the title of "Hengzhou Historian."

古文：未几，上曰： 我本意欲深荣之。 
现代文：不久，皇上又说道： 我本来想使他更加显贵。 
English: After a while, the Emperor said, "I wanted to make him more prominent."

古文：复赠定州刺史、安平县公，谥曰孝，以德林袭焉。
现代文：又追赠他的父亲为定州刺史、安平县公，谥号为孝。让李德林承袭。
English: In addition, his father was posthumously awarded the titles of Dingzhou Shishi and Anping County official, and his posthumous name was Xiao. Let Li Delin succeed him.

古文：德林既少有才名，重以贵显，凡制文章，动行于世。
现代文：李德林本来少年就有才名，现在又身居显贵，所写的文章，广泛流传于世。
English: Li Delin was already famous as a young man, and now he is a prominent person. The articles he wrote have been widely circulated in the world.

古文：迷而未觉，谅可愍焉。
现代文：有些不知道他的人，还以为他是古人呢。
English: Some people who don't know him think he's ancient.

古文：斯故未辩玄天之心，不闻君子之论也。
现代文：李德林因为梁士彦和元谐之流，经常表露出叛逆朝廷的意向，想在大江以南，与国家抗衡，于是写了《天命论》呈给皇上。
English: Li Delin, because of Liang Shih-yan's harmony with the Yuan Dynasty, often showed his intention to rebel against the imperial court. He wanted to compete with the country south of the Yangtze River, so he wrote "Manifest Destiny" and presented it to the emperor.

古文：德林自隋有天下，每赞平陈之计。
现代文：李德林自隋拥有天下，经常进献攻打陈国的计谋。
English: Li Delin has owned the world since the Sui Dynasty, and has often devoted himself to attacking Chen Guo's stratagems.

古文：八年，车驾幸同州，德林以疾不从。
现代文：开皇八年，皇辇幸临同州，李德林因病不能随驾。
English: In the eighth year of the emperor's reign, the empress dowager was fortunate enough to visit Tongzhou, but Li Delin could not accompany her due to illness.

古文：敕书追之，书后御笔注云： 伐陈事意，宜自随也。 
现代文：皇上下了一道诏书召他，信后亲笔写着： 攻打陈的事宜，最好你能亲自来。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning him, and wrote in his own handwriting after the letter: To attack Chen's affairs, it is best that you come in person.

古文：时高颎因使入京，上语颎曰： 德林若患未堪行，宜自至宅，取其方略。 
现代文：正赶上高赹有使命要回京，皇上对高赹说： 李德林如果因病不能来，最好你去他家听取攻打陈的方略。 
English: Caught up with Gao Gan, who had a mission to return to Beijing, the emperor said to Gao Gan, "If Li Delin can't come due to illness, you'd better go to his home to listen to the strategy of attacking Chen."

古文：高祖以之付晋王广。
现代文：高祖把李德林献的计谋交给了晋王杨广。
English: Gaozhu entrusted the stratagem offered by Li Delin to Yang Guang, the King of Jin.

古文：后从驾还，在途中，高祖以马鞭南指云： 待平陈讫，会以七宝装严公，使自山东无及之者。 
现代文：后来随他辇驾归京城，在途中，高祖用马鞭指着南边说： 等到攻取陈之后，应当用七宝服来装扮你，使你在太行以东，没有人赶得上你。 
English: Later, Gaozu rode with him back to the capital. On the way, Gaozu pointed to the south with a horsewhip and said, "Wait until after the capture of Chen, you should dress up in cloak of seven treasures, so that you are east of Taihang, and no one can catch up with you."

古文：及陈平，授柱国、郡公，实封八百户，赏物三千段。
现代文：等到攻占了陈，封李德林为柱国、郡公，分封食邑八百户，赏布帛三千段。
English: After conquering Chen, Li Delin was given the title of pillar state and county magistrate, 800 households in the county were given food, and 3,000 pieces of cloth were given as a reward.

古文：晋王广已宣敕讫，有人说高颎曰： 天子画策，晋王及诸将戮力之所致也。今乃归功于李德林，诸将必当愤惋，且后世观公有若虚行。 
现代文：晋王杨广宣读圣旨已毕，有人对高赹说： 皇上出谋划策，晋王及各位将领，齐心合力攻占了陈，现在却归功于李德林，各位将领一定会愤恨，并且后世的人，也会叹息您白白地攻占了陈国。 
English: After Yang Guang, the king of Jin, had finished reading the sacred edict, someone said to Gao Yu: "The emperor made a plan, the king of Jin and all the generals worked together to conquer Chen, but now it is attributed to Li Delin. All the generals will surely be angry, and future generations will also lament that you conquered Chen in vain.

古文：颎入言之，高祖乃止。
现代文：高赹入宫把这些言论告诉了皇上，高祖就罢除了前令。
English: When Gao Jun entered the palace, he told the emperor these words, and Gao Zu cancelled the edict.

古文：初，大象末，高祖以逆人王谦宅赐之，文书已出，至地官府，忽复改赐崔谦。
现代文：起初，高祖在大象末年，把逆贼王谦原来的住宅赐给了李德林，文书已下，到了住宅所在地，忽然皇上又改赐给崔谦。
English: At first, Gao Zu, in the last years of the elephant, gave the original residence of the rebel Wang Qian to Li Delin. The document had been issued, and when it reached the location of the residence, the emperor suddenly changed it to Cui Qian.

古文：上语德林曰： 夫人欲得，将与其舅。
现代文：皇上告诉李德林，说： 那个人想要王谦的住宅，准备给他的舅弟。
English: The emperor told Li Delin, saying: That man wants Wang Qian's house and is preparing to give it to his cousin.

古文：于公无形迹，不须争之，可自选一好宅。
现代文：对您没有什么丝毫影响，不必与他争，您可以另选择一套好的住宅。
English: It doesn't affect you in the slightest, you don't have to fight with him, you can choose another good house.

古文：若不称意，当为营造，并觅庄店作替。 
现代文：如果都不称意，就别为您营建，并可寻找庄店作替换。 
English: If you are not satisfied, do not build it for you, and you can find a village store to replace it.

古文：德林乃奏取逆人高阿那肱卫国县市店八十塸为王谦宅替。
现代文：于是李德林上奏，拿逆贼高阿那肱在卫国县八十个市店，替换王谦的住宅。
English: As a result, Li Delin played up and took the rebel Gao Anaxuan to replace Wang Qian's residence in the eighty city stores of Weiguo County.

古文：九年，车驾幸晋阳，店人上表诉称： 地是民物，高氏强夺，于内造舍。 
现代文：开皇九年，皇上到晋阳，店里的人上书诉说道： 土地本是百姓的财产，高氏强夺了去，并在上面建筑房屋。 
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, the emperor went to Jinyang. The people in the store wrote to complain, saying: The land was originally the property of the people, but Gao Shiqiang took it away and built houses on it.

古文：上命有司料还价直。
现代文：皇上命令有司估价，付钱给百姓。
English: The emperor ordered an appraiser to come and pay the people.

古文：遇追苏威自长安至，奏云： 高阿那肱是乱世宰相，以谄媚得幸，枉取民地，造店赁之。
现代文：正赶上苏威奉旨从长安来，向皇上奏道： 高阿那肱是乱世宰相，因谄媚而得宠，强占民地，建筑市店出租。
English: Just in time, Su Wei came from Chang'an by order, and reported to the emperor: Gao Ananyuan was the prime minister of the chaotic era. He was favored because of his charm, occupied private land, and rented out building stores.

古文：德林诬誷，妄奏自入。 
现代文：李德林虚构事实欺骗人，虚妄奏请搬入。 
English: Li Delin fictitious facts deceive people, please move in.

古文：李圆通、冯世基等又进云： 此店收利如食千户，请计日追赃。 
现代文：李圆通、冯世基等人又进言道： 这些市店，收利如同食邑千户，请计算时日追回这些赃款。 
English: Li Yuantong, Feng Shiji and others also said: These city stores collect profits like thousands of restaurants, please calculate the time to recover these stolen funds.

古文：上因责德林，德林请勘逆人文簿及本换宅之意，上不听，乃悉追店给所住者。
现代文：皇上因此责怪李德林，李德林请他们查看高氏的文簿记载，并说明原来打算换宅的心意，皇上不听，就追回了全部市店给当地的居民。
English: The emperor therefore blamed Liderin. Liderin asked them to check Gao's records and explain the original intention to change the house. The emperor did not listen and returned all the city stores to the local residents.

古文：自是益嫌之。
现代文：从此更加讨厌他。
English: I hate him even more now.

古文：十年，虞庆则等于关东诸道巡省使还，并奏云： 五百家乡正，专理辞讼，不便于民。
现代文：开皇十年，虞庆则等人从函谷关以东巡察而回，都上奏道： 五百户设立一个乡正，专管民事纠纷，对人民没有好处。
English: In the tenth year of the Emperor's reign, Yu Qingzhe and others returned from an inspection east of the Hanyu Pass, and all reported: It is not beneficial to the people for 500 households to set up a township official to deal with civil disputes.

古文：党与爱憎，公行货贿。 
现代文：他们凭自己的爱憎徇私枉法，公开接受贿赂。 
English: They openly accept bribes for their own selfish reasons.

古文：上仍令废之。
现代文：皇上就下令废除。
English: The Emperor ordered its abolition.

古文：德林复奏云： 此事臣本以为不可。
现代文：李德林又进谏道： 这件事，我本来认为不可这样做。
English: Li Delin went on to say: I originally thought that this was something that should not be done.

古文：然置来始尔，复即停废，政令不一，朝成暮毁，深非帝王设法之义。
现代文：既然已经设置了，又突然废除，政令不统一，早晨颁布，晚上就要撤销，全然不是帝王立法的常理。
English: Since it has been set up and suddenly abolished, the decrees are not unified, promulgated in the morning and revoked in the evening, which is not at all the common sense of imperial legislation.

古文：臣望陛下若于律令辄欲改张，即以军法从事。
现代文：我希望陛下对于这类总想随意更改法令的人，立即以军法处置。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will immediately institute a court-martial for these people who always want to change the law at will.

古文：不然者，纷纭未已。 
现代文：不这样，人们就会议论不已。 
English: Otherwise, people will continue to talk about the meeting.

古文：高祖遂发怒，大诟云： 尔欲将我作王莽邪？ 
现代文：高祖于是发怒大骂道： 你想让我做王莽那样的暴君吗？ 
English: Gaozu then became angry and cursed: "Do you want me to be a tyrant like Wang Mang?

古文：初，德林称父为太尉谘议，以取赠官，李元操与陈茂等阴奏之曰： 德林之父终于校书，妄称谘议。 
现代文：当初，李德林说他的父亲是太尉谘议，以此获取赠官，李元操与陈茂等人暗地里上奏道： 李德林的父亲，去世时为校书，而他自己妄称谘议。 
English: At first, Li Delin said that his father was the first lieutenant of the advisory council, in order to obtain the honorary title. Li Yuanchao and Chen Mao secretly played the following: Li Delin's father, when he died, was a school book, and he himself pretended to be an advisory council.

古文：上甚衔之。
现代文：皇上更加恨他。
English: For this reason, Emperor Wen hated Li Delin very much.

古文：至是，复庭议忤意，因数之曰： 公为内史，典朕机密，比不可豫计议者，以公不弘耳。
现代文：到这时，李德林又在朝廷上忤逆了皇上的旨意，皇上因而历数他道： 你作为内史，掌管我的机密大事，就不应频频地干预政事，让人觉得你心地不宽阔。
English: By this time, Liddellin had once again defied the emperor's will in the court, and the emperor thus reproached him, saying: You, as an internal historian, in charge of my confidential matters, should not frequently interfere in political affairs, making people think that you are not broad-minded.

古文：宁自知乎？
现代文：难道你没有自知之明吗？
English: Have you no self-awareness?

古文：朕方以孝治天下，恐斯道废阙，故立五教以弘之。
现代文：我正用孝来治理天下，害怕它废缺，所以立五教来弘扬它。
English: I am using filial piety to govern the world. I am afraid that it will be wasted, so I have established the Five Teachings to promote it.

古文：公言孝由天性，何须设教。
现代文：而你却说孝出于人的天性，何必人为教化。
English: Publicly, however, they say that filial piety comes from nature and does not need to be taught.

古文：然则孔子不当说《孝经》也。
现代文：这样看来，孔子就不该著《孝经》了。
English: In this light, Confucius should not have written "The Filial Piety Sutra."

古文：又誷冒取店，妄加父官，朕实忿之而未能发。
现代文：你又撒谎获取市店，妄加自己父亲的官职，我确实心怀忿恨，一直没有说出来。
English: You lied to get the store, you lied to get your father into office, and I was really angry and I didn't say anything.

古文：今当以一州相遣耳。 
现代文：现在应把你遣到一个州中去任职。 
English: Now give you a state official to do it!

古文：因出为湖州刺史。
现代文：因此贬他为湖州刺史。
English: As a result, Li Delin was banished from Beijing and appointed as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：德林拜谢曰： 臣不敢复望内史令，请预散参。
现代文：李德林叩拜谢罪道： 我不敢希望再任内史令了，只请给我一个闲散的官职。
English: Li Delin bowed to Xie Sin and said, "I don't dare to hope to be appointed as the Inner Historian again. Please just give me an idle official post."

古文：待陛下登封告成，一观盛礼，然后收拙丘园，死且不恨。 
现代文：等陛下登封告成之时，好让我一观那时的盛况，然后回我故土，死而无憾。 
English: When His Majesty's enthronement is complete, so that I can take a look at the grandeur of that time, and then return to my homeland, I will die with no regrets.

古文：上不许，转怀州刺史。
现代文：皇上没有答允，他转任怀州刺史。
English: The emperor did not agree, and he was transferred to the post of Waizhou magistrate.

古文：在州逢亢旱，课民掘井溉田，空致劳扰，竟无补益，为考司所贬。
现代文：在怀州，逢大旱，李德林责成人民挖井灌溉田地，空废劳力，竟然无丝毫裨益，被考司所贬。
English: In Huizhou, when there was a big drought, Li Delin ordered the people to dig wells to irrigate the fields, but the waste of labor did not help at all, and he was demoted by the examiners.

古文：岁余，卒官，时年六十一。
现代文：过了一年多，李德林去世，时年六十一岁。
English: More than a year later, he died in office at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠大将军、廉州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠为大将军、廉州刺史，谥号文。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of general, and was nicknamed "Lianzhou Jishi" (廉州刺史).

古文：及将葬，敕令羽林百人，并鼓吹一部，以给丧事。
现代文：等到将要安葬时，皇上诏令羽林一百人，并派了一班鼓吹手，以供丧事之用。
English: When it was time for the burial, the emperor ordered a hundred men from Hulin and sent a group of propagandists for the funeral.

古文：赠物三百段，粟千石，祭以太牢。
现代文：赐布帛三百段、粟米一千石，以牛、羊、豕三牲作太牢来祭奠他。
English: He was given three hundred denarii of cloth, a thousand kilos of corn, and three animals - an ox, a sheep, and a donkey - to make a shrine in his honor.

古文：德林美容仪，善谈吐，齐天统中，兼中书侍郎，于宾馆受国书。陈使江总目送之曰： 此即河朔之英灵也。 
现代文：李德林仪表堂堂，善于谈吐，齐朝天统年间，兼任中书侍郎，在宾馆里接受陈国的国书，当时，陈国使者江总看到他后，称赞他道： 他是河朔的英才啊。 
English: Li Delin was well-groomed and good at talking. During the reign of Emperor Qin, he also served as the attendant of the Chinese envoy and received Chen Guo's envoy in the hotel. At that time, Chen Guo's envoy Jiang Zong saw him and praised him, saying, "He is a great talent."

古文：器量沉深，时人未能测，唯任城王湝、赵彦深、魏收、陆遝大相钦重，延誉之言，无所不及。
现代文：李德林涵养极深，当时没有人能测量得出来。只有任城王高氵皆、赵彦深、魏收、陆等人十分钦重他，对他的赞誉之词，无所不至。
English: At that time, no one could measure the depth of Li Delin's cultivation. Only Rencheng Gaoqian, Zhao Yanshen, Wei Jie, Lu and others admired him very much, and the words of praise for him were everywhere.

古文：德林少孤，未有字，魏收谓之曰： 识度天才，必至公辅，吾辄以此字卿。 
现代文：李德林年少时就成了孤儿，没有字，魏收对他说： 你有天才般的学识，一定可以官至公辅，我就用这两个字送给你作字。 
English: Li Delin lost his father when he was very young. He was famous but did not have a title. Wei Jie said to him, "Sir, your literacy is extraordinary. In the future, you will be promoted to the position of public assistant. I will take the title of public assistant as the title of sir."

古文：从官以后，即典机密，性重慎，尝云古人不言温树，何足称也。
现代文：进入仕途之后，他就掌管军国机密。他性情稳重，办事谨严。他曾说古人不言温和敦厚地做人，又何足称道呢。
English: After entering his career, he was in charge of military state secrets. He had a stable temperament and was rigorous in his work. He once said that the ancients were gentle and dignified, and what a compliment.

古文：少以才学见知，及位望稍高，颇伤自任，争名之徒，更相谮毁，所以运属兴王，功参佐命，十余年间竟不徙级。
现代文：他年少之时就以有才学被世人所知，等到地位、名望渐高，就有伤于太自负，一些争名之流，更以谗言毁谤他，所以他虽辅佐帝王创业，却十多年间，竟然不见升职。
English: When he was young, he was known to the world for his talent and learning. When his status and reputation grew higher, he was hurt by too much pride, some name-calling, and even slandered him with insults. Therefore, although he assisted the emperor in starting a business, he did not see a promotion for more than ten years.

古文：所撰文集，勒成八十卷，遭乱亡失，见五十卷行于世。
现代文：他一生所著的文章，编纂为八十卷，遇上动乱，现在只有五十卷流传于世。
English: His life's work, compiled into eighty volumes, was met with upheaval, and only fifty volumes now survive.

古文：敕撰《齐史》未成。
现代文：他奉旨撰写《齐史》，未完成就去世了。
English: He was ordered to write the History of Qi, but died before completing it.

古文：史臣曰：德林幼有操尚，学富才优，誉重鄴中，声飞关右。
现代文：史臣说：李德林年幼时，就有高尚的思想品质和志趣，博学多才，在邺中很有名望，声名远扬到函谷关以西。
English: Shi Zhen said: When Li Delin was young, he had a noble ideological quality and ambition, was erudite and versatile, and was very famous in the cocoon. His fame spread far and wide to the west of Hankow Pass.

古文：王基缔构，协赞谋猷，羽檄交驰，丝纶间发，文诰之美，时无与二。
现代文：隋朝霸业初创之时，积极佐助献谋，各种紧急战书、帝王诏书，繁复交错，他都准确地发出，各类文诰的言辞之美，当时没有第二个人。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty's hegemony, he actively assisted in devising strategies. He accurately issued all kinds of emergency war documents, imperial edicts, and complex interlaced documents. There was no second person at that time with the beauty of the rhetoric of various types of documents.

古文：君臣体合，自致青云，不患莫己知，岂徒言也！
现代文：君臣和睦相处，自然会平步青云。不担心没有谁知道自己，难道是一句空话吗！
English: It is natural for princes and ministers to live in harmony and grow old together. Isn't it empty talk to say that you don't have to worry if no one knows you?

