古文：杨允恭，汉州绵竹人。
现代文：杨允恭，汉州绵竹人。
English: Yang Yunqiong, Mianzhu, Hanzhou.

古文：家世豪富，允恭少倜傥任侠。
现代文：家中世代都是豪族大户，杨允恭年轻时超群脱俗、卓尔不凡、喜欢打富济贫。
English: The generations in the family are all big families of powerful ethnic groups. When Yang Yunqiong was young, he was extraordinary, extraordinary, and liked to play rich and poor.

古文：乾德中，王师平蜀，群盗窃发，允恭裁弱冠，率乡里子弟砦于清泉乡，为贼所获，将杀之。
现代文：乾德年间，宋军平定蜀州，许多盗贼暗中发乱，当时杨允恭才成年，就率领乡里子弟在清泉乡设寨防护，被盗贼俘获，盗贼准备杀死他。
English: During the Qiande era, the Song Army conquered Shuzhou, and many thieves secretly caused trouble. At that time, Yang Yunqiong was only an adult, and he led the villagers to set up a protective wall in Qingquan Township. He was captured by thieves, and the thieves were ready to kill him.

古文：允恭曰： 苟活我，当助尔。 贼素闻其豪宗，乃释之。
现代文：杨允恭说 ：如果你们让我活下来，一定帮助你们。 
English: Yang Yunkyong said, "If you let me live, I will definitely help you."

古文：阴结贼帅子，日与饮博，阳不胜，偿以赀，使伺贼。
现代文：盗贼平素就听说杨家是世代豪族大户，于是释放了他。杨允恭暗中结识贼首之子，整天与贼首之子饮酒戏博，用钱财给贼子作为报偿，让他暗中侦察盗贼的情况。
English: The thief had always heard that the Yang family was one of the most powerful families for generations, so he released him. Yang Yungyong secretly met the son of the thief's head, drank and gambled with the son of the thief's head all day, and gave the thief money as a reward to let him secretly investigate the situation of the thief.

古文：贼将害允恭，其子以告，因遁去。
现代文：盗贼准备杀害杨允恭，贼首之子前来报告，杨允恭于是逃走。
English: The thief was preparing to kill Yang Yunkyong, the son of the thief's boss came to report, and Yang Yunkyong fled.

古文：内客省使丁德裕讨贼至州，允恭以策干之，署绵、汉招收巡检，贼平，补殿前承旨。
现代文：内客省使丁德裕讨伐盗贼到达蜀州，杨允恭用论策来求仕于他，代理绵、汉招收巡检，盗贼平定后，杨允恭补殿前承旨。
English: Naike Province sent Ding Deyu to fight the thieves to Shuzhou, and Yang Yungyong used the argument to serve him, acting as Meng and Han to recruit patrols. After the thieves were subdued, Yang Yungyong fulfilled his promise.

古文：太平兴国中，以殿直掌广州市舶。
现代文：太平兴国年间，以殿直执掌广州市舶。
English: During the Taiping Xingguo period, he was directly in charge of the Guangzhou Shipbuilding Industry.

古文：自南汉之后，海贼子孙相袭，大者及数百人，州县苦之。
现代文：从南汉以后，海贼子孙承袭，大的集团达数百人，州县老百姓十分忧虑海贼。
English: Since the Southern Han Dynasty, the descendants of the pirates have inherited a large group of hundreds of people, and the people of the state and county are very worried about the pirates.

古文：允恭因部运入奏其事，太宗即命为广、连都巡检使。
现代文：杨允恭由于部运进京上奏此事，太宗就命杨允恭为广、连都巡检使。
English: As Yang Yungyong went to Beijing to report the matter, Emperor Taizong ordered Yang Yungyong to be the inspector of the capital.

古文：又以海盐盗入岭北，民犯者众，请建大庾县为军，官辇盐市之。诏建为南安军，自是冒禁者少。
现代文：又因为海盐被盗入岭北，老百姓犯禁的人很多，杨允恭建议在大庾县设置军队，官府用车将盐运往此地进行买卖，诏令建立南安军，从此以后老百姓违反禁规的人就减少了。
English: In addition, because sea salt was stolen into Lingbei, there were many people who violated the ban. Yang Yunqong suggested setting up an army in Dalat County, the government used cars to transport salt to this place for trading, and ordered the establishment of Nan'an Army. Since then, the number of people who violated the ban has decreased.

古文：贼有叶氏者，众五百余，往来海上。
现代文：盗贼中有位姓叶的人，其手下有五百余人，在海上往来横行。
English: One of the thieves, a man surnamed Ye, has more than five hundred people under his command, and they are rampant on the sea.

古文：允恭集水军，造轻舠，掩袭其首，斩之。
现代文：杨允恭聚集水军，建造轻捷小船，偷袭贼首，并将其斩首。
English: Yang Yungyong gathered the navy, built a light boat, attacked the thief's head, and beheaded him.

古文：余党弃船走，伏匿山谷，允恭伐木开道，悉歼焉。
现代文：其余盗贼弃船逃走，躲藏在山谷里，杨允恭伐木开道，将盗贼全部歼灭。
English: The rest of the thieves abandoned the ship and ran away, hiding in the valley. Yang Yunqong cleared the way by cutting down trees and annihilated all the thieves.

古文：贼寇每遇风涛，则遁止洲岛间。
现代文：海贼每次遇到大风波涛，就逃到陆地和岛上居住。
English: Every time the pirates encounter heavy winds and waves, they flee to the land and live on the island.

古文：允恭领众涉海，捕之殆尽，贼皆望风奔溃。
现代文：杨允恭率领部众渡海，将海贼全部捕捉，海贼从此都望风而逃。
English: Yang Yunqiong led the troops to cross the sea and captured all the pirates. The pirates have been running away ever since.

古文：又抵漳、泉贼所止处，尽夺先所劫男女六十余口还其家。
现代文：又到达漳、泉州。这里是海贼栖息居住的地方，将海贼以前抢劫的男女六十多人全部救出来让他们回家。
English: They also arrived in Handan and Quanzhou, where the pirates lived, and rescued more than 60 men and women who had been robbed by the pirates, and allowed them to return home.

古文：诏书嘉奖，赐钱十万，转供奉官。
现代文：朝廷颁布诏令进行嘉奖，赏赐钱十万两，转任供奉官。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree to reward him, awarding him 100,000 taels of silver and transferring him to the post of courtier.

古文：诏归，改内殿崇班。
现代文：受诏回京，改任内殿崇班。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, he returned to Kyoto and was reassigned to Uchidono Subban.

古文：时缘江多贼，命督江南水运，因捕寇党。
现代文：这时长江一带经常有海盗横行，朝廷命杨允恭督江南水运，于是捕捉盗贼。
English: At this time, there were often pirates rampant along the Yangtze River. The imperial court ordered Yang Yun Gong to supervise the southern water transport of the Yangtze River, so he caught the thieves.

古文：行及临江军，择骁卒拏轻舟伺下江贼所止，夜发军城，三鼓，遇贼百余，拒敌久之，悉枭其首。又趣通州境上蹑海贼，贼系众舟。
现代文：行军到临江军，杨允恭选拔勇猛的士卒驾驶轻快的船只暗中到达长江盗贼居住之地，晚上指挥军队攻城，击鼓三通，与百余名海贼遭遇，与海贼抗击很长一段时间，最后将海贼全部悬头示众。
English: Marching to the Linyang Army, Yang Yunqong selected brave soldiers to steer the brisk boats to secretly reach the place where the Yangtze River thieves lived. In the evening, he commanded the army to attack the city, beat the drums three times, encountered more than a hundred pirates, resisted the pirates for a long time, and finally exposed all the pirates.

古文：张幕，发劲弩、短炮。
现代文：又赶到通州境内追踪海贼，海贼将船只连在一起，挂上风帆，发射劲弩、短炮。
English: They also arrived in Tongzhou to pursue the pirates. The pirates tied the boats together, set sails, and fired harpoons and short cannons.

古文：允恭兵刃所向，多为幕所萦，炮中允恭左肩，流血及袖，容色弥壮。
现代文：杨允恭兵器战刀所指之处都被风帆萦绕，杨允恭左肩中弹，血流到了袖子上，但他脸上的气色更加雄壮。
English: Yang Yunqiong was shot in the left shoulder, blood flowed onto his sleeve, but the look on his face was more majestic.

古文：徐遣善泅者以绳连铁钩散掷之，坏其幕，士卒争进，贼赴水死者大半，擒数百人。
现代文：不久派遣擅长泅水的人用绳子绑着铁钩分别向敌船抛击，将敌船的风帆弄坏，士卒争先进攻海贼，海贼落入水中被淹死者达大半，又被俘获数百人。
English: Soon, they dispatched a man who was good at splashing water with a rope tied to an iron hook and threw it at the enemy ship separately, breaking the sails of the enemy ship. The soldiers fought to attack the pirates first. Most of the pirates fell into the water and drowned, and hundreds of people were captured.

古文：自是江路无剽掠之患。
现代文：从此以后沿长江一带没有被遭抢劫的担心了。
English: Since then, there has been no fear of being robbed along the Yangtze River.

古文：以功转洛苑副使，江、淮、两浙都大发运、擘画茶盐捕贼事；赐紫袍、金带、钱五十万。
现代文：由于战功转任洛苑副使，江、淮、两浙都大发运、擘画茶盐捕贼事；赐予紫袍、金带、钱五十万。
English: As a result of his war service, he was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of Luoyuan, and Jiang, Huai, and the two Zhejiang provinces were all promoted to the rank of general. He was awarded a purple robe, a gold belt, and 500,000 yuan.

古文：先是，三路转运使各领其职，或廪庾多积，而军士舟楫不给，虽以官钱雇丁男挽舟，而土人惮其役，以是岁上供米，不过三百万。
现代文：在此之前，三路转运使各兼任其职，有时国库积聚了许多粮食，但士兵们连船只也不能保证，即使官府出钱雇佣男丁拉船，但当地人害怕这种劳役，因此每年上供的军粮，不超过三百万。
English: Prior to this, the three-way transfer made each of them concurrently perform their duties. Sometimes the state treasury accumulated a lot of grain, but the soldiers could not even guarantee the ships. Even if the government paid to hire men to pull the ships, the locals were afraid of this kind of labor, so the annual supply of military grain did not exceed three million.

古文：允恭尽籍三路舟卒与所运物数，令诸州择牙吏，悉集，允恭乃辨数授之。
现代文：杨允恭将三路舟兵和运送的物资全部集中起来，让各州选择官吏，并全部集中起来，杨允恭才按照人员多少分发物资。
English: Yang Yungyong concentrated all the troops and materials transported by the three-way convoy, let each state choose officials, and concentrated them all. Yang Yungyong only distributed the materials according to the number of personnel.

古文：江、浙所运，止于淮、泗，由淮、泗输京师，行之一岁，上供者六百万。
现代文：江、浙运送的东西，到达淮泗，再由淮、泗运送到京师，需花费一年的时间，上供的物资达六百万担。
English: It takes one year for the goods transported from Jiangsu and Zhejiang to arrive in Huaiyi, and then transported from Huaiyi and Handan to Beijing, and the supplies amount to six million tons.

古文：淳化五年，转西京作坊使。初，产茶之地，民输赋者悉计其直，官售之，精粗不校，咸输榷务。
现代文：淳化五年，杨允恭转任西京作坊使，起初，产茶的地方，老百姓运输赋税全部计算价值，然后由官府出售，不分精粗，全部运送榷务。
English: In the fifth year of the Chunhua era, Yang Yunqong was transferred to the post of the West Beijing workshop envoy. At first, the tea-producing areas and the people transported the entire calculated value of the tax, and then the government sold it. Regardless of the quality, all were transported.

古文：商人弗肯售，久即焚之。
现代文：商人不肯出售，时间一长就将这些茶叶烧掉了。
English: The merchant did not want to sell, and after a long time he burned the tea leaves.

古文：允恭曰： 竭民利而取之，积腐而弃之，非善计也。 至道初，刘式建议请废缘江榷务，许商人过江，听私货鬻。
现代文：杨允恭说 ：竭尽老百姓的利益而夺取，聚集茶叶让它腐烂最后抛弃它，不是一种好办法。 至道初年，刘式上奏建议请求废除长江一带的榷务，允许商人过长江，让他们自由卖私货。
English: Yang Yunqong said, "It is not a good way to make every effort to seize the interests of the common people, collect tea leaves and let them rot, and finally abandon them.In the first year of the Tao, Liu Shikang proposed to request the abolition of the Yangtze River area, allow merchants to cross the Yangtze River, and let them freely sell their private goods.

古文：允恭以为诸州新陈相糅，两河诸州风土，各有所宜，非杂以数品，即商人少利。
现代文：杨允恭认为长江沿岸各州茶叶新旧相杂，两河各州风土，各有适用之处，不夹杂很多等级，就会使商人少利。
English: Yang Yungyong believed that the tea leaves of the states along the Yangtze River are a mixture of old and new, and the customs of the states along the two rivers have their own applicability. If they are not mixed with many grades, it will make merchants less profitable.

古文：请依旧江北置务，均色号，以年次给之。
现代文：请求按照旧例在长江以北设置榷务，平均各等级，按每年给予供给。
English: In accordance with the old practice, the request is to set up the service in the north of the Yangtze River, and the average of each grade will be provided annually.

古文：事下三司，盐铁使陈恕等以允恭议为是，诏从之。
现代文：此事下至三司，盐铁使陈恕等人认为杨允恭的建议正确，于是朝廷下诏遵从。
English: The matter went down to the Third Division, and Salt and Iron Minister Chen Shou and others thought that Yang Yunqong's suggestion was correct, so the Imperial Court issued an edict to comply.

古文：即命允恭为发运使，始改 擘画 为 制置 ，以西京作坊副使李廷遂、著作佐郎王子舆并为同发运使。
现代文：就任命杨允恭为发运使，开始改 擘画 为 制置 ，西京作坊副使李廷遂、著作佐郎王子舆一起任发运使。
English: He appointed Yang Yungyong as the shipping agent, and began to change the scenery of the painting into the production, and Li Tingsui, the vice-minister of the West Beijing workshop, and the author Sauro Oji, were appointed as shipping agents.

古文：巢、庐江二县旧隶庐州，道远多寇，民输劳费。
现代文：巢、庐江二县以往隶属庐州，道路僻远盗贼出没，老百姓输役劳命。
English: The two counties of Ne and Minjiang belonged to Ganzhou in the past. Thieves haunted the remote roads, and the common people were forced to work to death.

古文：允恭请以二县建军，诏许之，以无为为额。
现代文：杨允恭请求在二县建军，诏令许可，以无为军的数目为准。
English: Yang Yungyong requested permission to build an army in two counties, and the imperial edict allowed him to do so, subject to the number of non-combatants.

古文：淮南十八州军，其九禁盐地，则上下其直，民利商盐之贱，故贩者益众，至有持兵器往来为盗者。
现代文：淮南十八州军，其中九州军为禁盐地，这样盐的价格比产盐之地要高出许多，老百姓从贩盐中获利，因而贩盐的人越来越多，以致有的拿着兵器往来为盗。
English: Huainan Eighteen-State Army, including the Kyushu Army, is a prohibited salt area, so the price of salt is much higher than that of salt-producing areas. Ordinary people profit from selling salt. As a result, more and more people are selling salt, so that some people take weapons to steal.

古文：允恭以为行法宜一，即奏请悉禁，而官遣吏主之。
现代文：杨允恭认为应当统一执法，于是上奏请求全部禁盐，由朝廷派遣官吏主持此事。
English: Yang Yungyong thought that law enforcement should be unified, so he requested a total ban on salt, and the imperial court sent officials to preside over the matter.

古文：事下三司，三司言其不可，允恭再三为请，太宗始从之。
现代文：此事下至三司，三司认为此事不行，杨允恭再三上奏此事，太宗才开始依从他。
English: The matter went down to the Third Division, and the Third Division thought that the matter was unacceptable. Yang Yungyong raised the matter again and again, and Taizong began to obey him.

古文：是岁，收利巨万。
现代文：这年，得到了巨万之利。
English: This year, it made a huge profit.

古文：允恭与王子舆、秦羲同主茶盐之任，多作条制，遂变新法。
现代文：杨允恭与王子舆、秦羲共同主管盐茶之事，制定了许多条令法规，于是加以改变成为新法。
English: Yang Yungyong, who was jointly in charge of salt tea with Wang Zhiwu and Qin Hui, formulated many rules and regulations, and then changed them into a new law.

古文：真宗即位，改西京左藏库使。
现代文：真宗即位，改任西京左藏库使。
English: Shinso ascended to the throne and was appointed as the Western Capital Zuozangku Envoy.

古文：又言川峡铁钱之弊，曰： 凡民田之税，昔输铜钱之一，今输铁钱亦一；而吏卒奉旧给铜钱之一，今给铁钱五；及行用交易，则铁钱之十，为铜钱之一。
现代文：又上言川峡铁钱的弊病，说： 凡是老百姓的田税，从前交纳铜钱一份的，现在也交纳铁钱一份；官吏士卒的俸禄以往给一份铜钱的，现在给五份铁钱；用于交易旅行，那么铁钱十份，相当于铜钱一份。
English: He also commented on the drawbacks of iron money in the Sichuan Gorge, saying, "For the common people's field tax, who used to pay a copper coin, now also pay an iron coin; for the salary of officials, who used to pay a copper coin, now pay five iron coins; for trading trips, then ten iron coins are equivalent to one copper coin.

古文：且民入田税，以一为十，官失其九矣；吏卒奉给，增一为五，官又失其四矣；吏卒得五用十，复失其半矣。
现代文：老百姓的田税，以一抵十，国家损失九成，官吏士卒的俸禄，以五抵一，国家又损失四成；吏卒得到五份用掉十份，还是损失一半。
English: In the case of the common people's field tax, if one-tenth is deducted, the state loses ninety percent. In the case of the salary of officials and clerks, if five-tenths is deducted, the state loses forty percent. If officials and clerks receive five-tenths and spend ten-tenths, they still lose half.

古文：臣在先朝，尝陈其事，愿变法以革其弊，先帝方议行之，会贼顺叛扰而止。
现代文：臣下在先朝，曾经陈述过此事，希望变法来革除其弊端，太宗正在考虑这件事，恰逢盗贼李顺叛乱骚扰而没有施行。
English: Taizong was considering the matter, which coincided with the thief Li Shun's rebellion, but did not implement it.

古文：今陛下继成先烈，可遂建其法，使民不失所。
现代文：如今陛下继承先祖的大业，可以立即制定法令，以便老百姓不失去其所得。
English: Now that His Majesty has inherited the great cause of his ancestors, he can immediately enact laws so that the people do not lose their income.

古文：且饶、信之铜，积数千万，若遣运于荆，达于蜀，蜀素多铜，俾夔、益、遂各置监鼓铸，岁用均给，不十年，悉用铜钱矣。 议虽未用，然自是吏卒奉给，始改用十铁钱易铜钱之一。
现代文：况且饶、信的铜，积聚了数千万两，如果派人运到荆州、蜀州，蜀州向来有很多铜，让夔州、益州、遂州各设置监官进行冶炼，每年平均供给，不用十年，就全部使用铜钱了。 上奏的建议虽然没有采纳，但从此以后吏卒的俸禄，开始改用十份铁钱换一份铜钱。
English: Moreover, abundant and reliable copper has accumulated tens of millions of taels. If someone is sent to Jingzhou and Shuzhou, Shuzhou has always had a lot of copper. Let the supervisors in Zhangzhou, Yizhou and Suizhou carry out smelting, supply an average of every year, and it will not take ten years to use all the copper money. Although the proposal was not adopted, from now on, the salary of officials began to change from ten iron coins to one copper coin.

古文：俄知通利军，兼黄、御河发运使。
现代文：不久知通利军，兼任黄、御河发运使。
English: He soon became acquainted with the Tongli army and concurrently served as the Huang and Okawa dispatching envoys.

古文：会议减西鄙屯兵，以息转饷，召允恭与崇仪副使窦神宝、阁门祗候李允则驰往经度，图上郡县山川之形胜。
现代文：恰遇议论减少西部边境的驻兵，来减少转运之饷，诏令杨允恭与崇仪副使窦神宝、门祗候李允则前往经办，用图标出郡县山川的形势。
English: When there was a discussion about reducing the number of soldiers stationed on the western border to reduce the number of trans-shipments, Yang Yunqong and the deputy envoy of Chongyi, Dou Shenbao, and the gatekeeper Li Yun went to the agency to use the map to show the situation of counties, counties and mountains.

古文：允恭因建议曰： 自环州入积石、抵灵武七日程。刍粟之运，其策有三。
现代文：杨允恭于是建议说 ：从环州到积石、灵武要七天的时间，军粮运输，有三种办法。
English: Yang Yungyong then suggested, "From Huanzhou to Jishan and Lingwu, it will take seven days to transport military rations. There are three methods.

古文：然以人以驴，其费颇烦，而所载数鲜。
现代文：但用人用驴来运，运输十分麻烦而且费用花费也很大，但运送的数量很少。
English: However, people use donkeys to transport them, which is very troublesome and expensive, but the quantity transported is very small.

古文：莫若用诸葛亮木牛之制，以小车发卒分铺运之。
现代文：不如用诸葛亮的木牛之制，用小车派士兵分站运送。
English: It would be better to use Zhuge Liang's wooden ox system and send soldiers to the substation with a small car.

古文：每一车四人挽之，旁设兵卫，加戈刃于其上，寇至则聚车于中，合士卒之力，御寇于外。 寻为议者所沮而止。
现代文：第一车派四人牵引，派兵进行保护，将武器装在粮车上，盗贼来后则将粮车集中，集中士卒的力量，将盗贼防御在外。 这一提议立即被议者所阻止。
English: The first vehicle was towed by four people, soldiers were sent to protect it, weapons were loaded onto the truck, and when the thieves came, the trucks were concentrated, concentrating the forces of the soldiers and keeping the thieves away, a proposal that was immediately blocked by the deputies.

古文：复遣之任，又议，江、淮盐铁使陈恕力争，诏从允恭之议。加领康州刺史。
现代文：又派遣他任职，再次奏议，江、淮盐铁使陈恕据理力争，诏令依从杨允恭的奏议，兼任康州刺史。
English: He was also sent to serve, and once again made a proposal, and Jiang and Huai Yan Tie urged Chen Shou to argue rationally, and the imperial edict followed Yang Yunqong's proposal, and he also served as the governor of Kangzhou.

古文：咸平初，以北边卖马，未有定直，命允恭主平其估，乃置估马司，铸印以为常制。
现代文：咸平初年，由于北部边境卖马没有固定的价格，朝廷命杨允恭主持平定价格，于是设置估马司，铸造官印作为常制。
English: In the first year of Xianping, since there was no fixed price for selling horses along the northern border, the imperial court ordered Yang Yungyong to preside over the flat price, so he set up a horse valuation department and minted official seals as a regular system.

古文：王均之乱，上虑南方有聚寇，命允恭为荆湖、江、浙都巡检使，内殿崇班杨守遵副之，赐与甚厚。
现代文：王均叛乱，真宗担心南方聚集叛贼，命杨允恭为荆湖、江、浙都巡检使，内殿崇班杨守遵辅佐他，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Wang Jun rebelled, the True Sect feared that traitors would gather in the south, and ordered Yang Yungyong to be the inspector of Jinghu, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang. Yang Shou Zun assisted him and was rewarded very richly.

古文：二年夏，以疾闻，遣其子大理评事可乘传侍疾。
现代文：第二年夏天，由于疾病告朝，朝廷派遣他的儿子杨可乘车前去服侍。
English: In the summer of the following year, due to illness, the imperial court sent his son Yang Ke by car to serve.

古文：七月，卒于升州，年五十六，赐其次子告同学究出身，赙钱二十万、绢百匹。
现代文：七月，在升州过世，终年五十六岁。赐予他第二个儿子杨告同学究出身，资助丧钱二十万、绢百匹。
English: In July, he passed away in Shengzhou at the age of 56. He gave his second son, Yang Guo, a scholarship of 200,000 yuan and 100 horses to study his family background.

古文：又以钱五万、帛五十匹给其家。
现代文：又以钱五万、帛五十匹供给其家。
English: He also gave to his household fifty thousand pieces of silver and fifty donkeys.

古文：命扬州官造第一区赐之。
现代文：命扬州官造第一区赐予杨允恭。
English: The order of Yangzhou government-built first district was given to Yang Yungyong.

古文：允恭有胆干，能以方略捕贼。
现代文：杨允恭有胆略才干，能够用谋略捕贼。
English: Yang Yungyong is a daredevil with the ability to use strategy to catch thieves.

古文：王小波之乱也，李顺之兄自荣据绵竹，土人多被胁从。
现代文：王小波叛乱，李顺之兄李自荣占据绵竹，士人大多被胁迫服从。
English: Wang Xiaobo rebelled, Li Shun's brother Li Zirong occupied Mianzhu, and most of the scholars were coerced into obedience.

古文：允恭兄允升、弟允元，率乡里子弟并力破之；又为王师乡导，执自荣诣剑门以献。
现代文：杨允恭兄杨允升、弟杨允元，率领乡里子弟齐力攻破他们，又替宋军作向导捉拿李自荣到剑门去献给官军。
English: Yang Yungyong's elder brother, Yang Yunsheng, and younger brother, Yang Yunyuan, led their fellow villagers in a concerted effort to defeat them, and also acted as a guide for the Song army to capture Li Zirong and take him to Jianmen to present to the government army.

古文：王继恩表其事，诏赐允升学究出身，授本县令，允元什邡令。
现代文：王继恩上表言其事，诏令赐予允升学究出身，授本县令，允元为什邡县令。
English: Wang Jien expressed his opinion on the matter, and the imperial edict granted him the promotion of academic background, awarded him the county order, and made him the county order of Shifang.

古文：明年，召赴阙，授允升右赞善大夫，允元大理评事。
现代文：第二年，奉召前往京师，朝廷授予杨允升右赞善大夫、杨允元大理评事。
English: In the second year, he was called to Beijing to teach, and the imperial court awarded Yang Yunsheng the right to be a good doctor and Yang Yunyuan to be a great critic.

古文：可，咸平元年进士，喜属文，有吏干，累召试，历户部、盐铁判官，知洪、宣、润、寿、潭州，至都官员外郎。
现代文：杨可，咸平元年进士，喜欢写文章，有政治才能，多次被召试，历任户部、盐铁判官，知洪州、宣州、润州、寿州、潭州，官至都官员外郎。
English: Yang Ke, who was admitted to the Han Dynasty in the first year of the Heian period, likes to write articles, has political talent, has been called for examination many times, and has successively served as the head of the Household Division, the judge of the Salt and Iron Division, the governor of Chihon, Xuanzhou, Runzhou, Shoushou, and Tanzhou, and the foreign minister of the government officials.

古文：告，虞部员外郎。
现代文：杨告，虞部员外郎。
English: Yang Gui, member of the Political Bureau, Gai Ro.

