古文：檀韶，字令孙，高平金乡人也，世居京口。
现代文：檀韶字令孙，高平郡金乡人。世世代代居住在京口。
English: Son of Dangun Zi Ling, a native of Jinxiang, Gaoping County, who has lived in Jingkou for generations.

古文：初辟本州从事，西曹主簿，辅国司马。
现代文：最初他被任命为本州从事、西曹主簿、辅国司马。
English: At first, he was appointed to be engaged in Honshu, acting as chief secretary and assistant state secretary.

古文：高祖建义，韶及弟祗、道济等从平京城，行参高祖建武将军事。
现代文：刘裕起义时，檀韶和弟弟檀祗、檀道济随同平定京城，代理高祖建武将军事。
English: When Liu Yu revolted, Dang Xuan and his younger brothers Dang Xuan and Dang Daoji accompanied him to pacify the capital, acting as military commanders for Gao Zuo Jianwu.

古文：都邑既平，为镇军参军，加宁远将军、东海太守，进号建武将军，迁龙骧将军、秦郡太守，北陈留内史。
现代文：都城被平定后，檀韶当镇军将军、加号宁远将军、东海太守，又进号建武将军，迁任龙骧将军、秦郡太守、北陈留内史。
English: After the capital was subdued, Dangqin became the general of the town army, plus the name of General Ningyuan, the governor of the East China Sea, and then the name of General Jianwu, and he was transferred to the position of General Longyu, the governor of Qin County, and the governor of North Chen.

古文：以平桓玄功，封巴丘县侯，食邑五百户；复参车骑将军事，加龙骧将军，迁骁骑将军，中军咨议参军，加宁朔将军。
现代文：因为平定桓玄的功劳，被封为巴丘县侯，食邑五百户，又当参车骑将军事，加号龙骧将军，迁官骁骑将军、中军谘议参军，加号宁朔将军。
English: Because of his contribution to the pacification of Huan Xuan, he was named the lord of Bachu County, with 500 households in the county, and was also a military cavalry commander, plus the rank of Longyu general, the transfer officer and cavalry general, the Chinese army advisory to join the army, plus the rank of Ningshuo general.

古文：从征广固，率向弥、胡籓等五十人攻临朐城，克之。
现代文：随同征讨南燕慕容超，他率领向弥、胡藩等五十人进攻临朐城，攻下了它。
English: Accompanied by Nanyan Murongchao, he led fifty people including Xiangya and Hu Han to attack Linfen City and captured it.

古文：及围广固，慕容超夜烧楼当韶围分，降号横野将军。
现代文：到围攻广固时，慕容超的人半夜烧掉了檀韶攻城部队的战楼，檀韶便被降为横野将军。
English: When Guanggu was besieged, Murong Chao's men burned down the headquarters of the attacking troops in the middle of the night, and Dangun was demoted to the rank of General Yokono.

古文：城陷之日，韶率所领先登，领北琅邪太守，进号宁朔将军、琅邪内史。
现代文：广固城攻陷时，是檀韶率领部下最先攻入。他便被用为北琅王牙太守，同时进号宁朔将军、琅王牙内史。
English: When Guanggu City was conquered, it was Dang Xi who led his subordinates to be the first to invade. He was then used as the governor of North Gansu, and at the same time he was given the title of Ningshuo General and Gansu Inner History.

古文：从讨卢循于左里，又有战功，并论广固功，更封宜阳县侯，食邑七百户，降先封一等为伯，减户之半二百五十户，赐祗子臻。
现代文：随从刘裕讨伐在左里的卢循，他又有战功，加上在广固的攻城功劳，他被封为宜阳县侯，食邑七百户，又降封爵，封为宜阳县伯，减去食邑中的一部分二百五十户，赐给檀祗的儿子檀臻。
English: Following Liu Yu's crusade against Lu Xun in Zuoli, he also had military exploits, plus his achievements in the extensive siege of the city. He was named the lord of Yiyang County, with seven hundred households in food villages. He was also demoted to a peerage, named the lord of Yiyang County, minus a part of the two hundred and fifty households in food villages, and given to Danzhen, the son of Danzheng.

古文：坐六门内乘舆，白衣领职。
现代文：因为在宫城六门内坐轿，他被免除一切职务，变成老百姓。
English: Because he rode in a carriage in the six gates of Miyagi, he was relieved of all duties and became a commoner.

古文：义熙七年，号辅国将军。
现代文：义熙七年当辅国将军。
English: For seven years, Yixi served as the general of Shu Province.

古文：八年，丁母忧，起为冠军将军。
现代文：八年，母亲去世辞了官，之后又被调用为冠军将军。
English: Eight years later, after the death of his mother, he resigned from his post and was later promoted to the rank of Champion General.

古文：明年，复为琅邪内史，淮南太守，将军如故。
现代文：第二年，又当琅王牙内史、淮南太守，将军还照旧。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the Prince of Zhai, the governor of Huainan, and the general was still the same.

古文：镇姑孰。
现代文：镇守姑孰。
English: The town's watchman, Gu Yao.

古文：寻进号左将军，领本州大中正。
现代文：不久又进号左军将军，兼任本州大中正。
English: Soon he was promoted to the rank of General of the Left Army, and concurrently served as the Vice-President of Honshu University.

古文：十二年，迁督江州豫州之西阳新蔡二郡诸军事、江州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：十二年，檀韶迁任江州、豫州的西阳、新蔡二郡诸军事、江州刺史，将军还照旧。
English: In the 12th year, Dang Tao was transferred to Jiangzhou, Xiyang of Yuzhou, Xin Cai Er County to the military, Jiangzhou to the history, and the general was still the same.

古文：有罪，免官。
现代文：因有过错，被免去官职。
English: He was removed from his post for misconduct.

古文：高祖受命，以佐命功，增八百户，并前千五百户。
现代文：高祖称帝，檀韶因为是开国元勋，他被增八百户的食邑，加上以前的共一千五百户。
English: Gao Zu was proclaimed emperor, and because Dang Xuan was the founding father of the country, he was given an additional 800 households, adding to the previous total of 1,500 households.

古文：韶嗜酒贪横，所莅无绩，上嘉其合门从义，弟道济又有大功，故特见宠授。
现代文：檀韶特爱喝酒，贪婪横暴，在任职上没什么政绩。但高祖称赞他全家从军，他弟弟檀道济又有大的功劳，所以仍特别地受到宠遇。
English: Dangdang especially loved to drink, was greedy and violent, and had no political achievements in office. However, Gaozu praised his whole family for serving in the army, and his brother Dangdang also had great merits, so he was still particularly favored.

古文：永初二年，卒于京邑，时年五十六。
现代文：永初二年在京城去世，享年五十六岁。
English: Yongchun passed away two years ago in Beijing, at the age of 56.

古文：追赠安南将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：死后被追认为安南将军，加官散骑常侍。
English: After his death, he was revered as General Annan. He was promoted to the rank of officer and became a cavalryman.

古文：亦以功封泉陵县子，食邑五百户。
现代文：檀韶的儿子檀绪继承他的爵位。檀绪死了，没有儿子，爵位被吊销。
English: Dangxu, the son of Dangyu, inherited his title. Dangxu died without a son and his title was revoked.

古文：世祖即位，为游击将军。
现代文：檀祗有儿子叫檀臻，檀臻去世，他儿子檀遐继承。齐国建立，封爵被取消。
English: Danzhen had a son named Danzhen. Danzhen died, and his son Danzhen succeeded him. The State of Qi was established, and the peerage was abolished.

古文：顷之，卒。
现代文：檀祗、檀道济有传记。
English: There are biographies of Dangun and Dangodozhi.

古文：刘粹，字道冲，沛郡萧人也。
现代文：刘粹字道冲，沛郡萧县人。
English: Liu Zizi is a native of Douchong, Pei County and Xiao County.

古文：祖恢，持节、监河中军事，征虏将军。
现代文：他的祖父刘恢，官至持节、监河中军事、征虏将军。
English: His grandfather, Liu Huai, was a high-ranking official, inspector of the Central Military Commission, and conscript general.

古文：粹家在京口。
现代文：刘粹家住京口。
English: Liu Qi's family lives in Beijing.

古文：少有志干，初为州从事。高祖克京城，参建武军事。
现代文：他少有大志，能力出众，开始当本州从事，高祖攻克京城后，他当参建武将军。
English: He had few ambitions and outstanding ability, and began to be engaged in Honshu. After Gaozu conquered the capital, he became the general of Jianwu.

古文：从平京邑，转参镇军事，寻加建武将军、沛郡太守；又领下邳太守，复为车骑中军参军。
现代文：随同刘裕平定京都，他转任参镇军事，不久加任建武将军、沛郡太守，又兼任下邳太守。后又当车骑中军参军。
English: Together with Liu Yu, he conquered Kyoto. He was transferred to the post of Sanzhen Military, and soon he was appointed as General Jianwu, the governor of Pei County, and also the governor of the Lower Yunnan Province. Later, he joined the Chinese army as a chariot driver.

古文：从征广固，战功居多。
现代文：随同刘裕征讨广固，战功非常多。
English: Accompanying Liu Yu to conquer Guanggu, he won a lot of war exploits.

古文：以建义功，封西安县五等侯。
现代文：又因为起义的功劳，被封为西安县五等侯。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of the 5th Mayor of Xi'an County for his contribution to the uprising.

古文：军还，转中军咨议参军。
现代文：大军回京，他转任中军谘议参军。
English: The large army returned to Beijing, and he was transferred to the Chinese army to advise on joining the army.

古文：卢循逼京邑，京口任重，太祖时年四岁，高祖使粹奉太祖镇京城。
现代文：卢循进逼京城，京口的镇守责任重大，太祖当年只四岁，高祖叫刘粹辅助太祖镇守京口。
English: Lu Xun forced his way into the capital, and the town guard of Jingkou had a great responsibility. Taizu was only four years old at the time, and Gao Zu called Liu Qi to assist Taizu in the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：转游击将军。
现代文：不久转任游击将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of guerrilla general.

古文：迁建威将军、江夏相。
现代文：他迁任建武将军、江夏相。
English: He was transferred to the posts of General Jianwu and Jiang Xia.

古文：卫将军毅，粹族兄也，粹尽心高祖，不与毅同。
现代文：卫将军刘毅，是刘粹的族兄，刘粹尽忠于刘裕，不和刘毅相结好。
English: Wei general Liu Yi is Liu Zi's elder brother. Liu Zi is loyal to Liu Yu and does not make friends with Liu Yi.

古文：高祖欲谋毅，众并疑粹在夏口，高祖愈信之。
现代文：高祖想除掉刘毅，众人都怀疑刘粹在夏口，高祖更加信任他。
English: Gaozu wanted to get rid of Liu Yi. Everyone suspected that Liu Qi was in Xiakou. Gaozu trusted him more.

古文：及大军至，粹竭其诚力。事平，封滠阳县男，食邑五百户。
现代文：到大军西进时，刘粹非常卖力，刘毅被消灭后，他被封为滠阳县男，食邑五百户。
English: When the great army marched westward, Liu Zi worked very hard. After Liu Yi was eliminated, he was named the man of Poyang County, with 500 households in his hometown.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：母亲去世，他辞了官。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：俄而高祖讨司马休之，起粹为宁朔将军、竟陵太守，统水军入河。
现代文：不久高祖讨伐司马休之，起用刘粹为宁朔将军、竟陵太守，带水军进入黄河。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu fought against Sima Xiu, appointed Liu Zi as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of the imperial mausoleum, and led the navy into the Yellow River.

古文：明年，进号辅国将军，迁相国右司马、侍中、中军司马、冠军将军，迁左卫将军。
现代文：第二年，他被任为辅国将军，又迁任相国右司马、侍中、中军司马、冠军将军，迁任左卫将军。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the general of the auxiliary country, and was transferred to the position of the right secretary of the neighboring country, the chamberlain, the secretary of the Chinese army, the champion general, and the left guard general.

古文：永初元年，以佐命功，改封建安县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：永初元年，他因为是开国元勋，改封为建安县侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, because he was a founding father, he changed his title to the lord of Jian'an County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：二年，以役使监吏，免官。寻督江北淮南郡事、征虏将军、广陵太守。
现代文：二年，因为役使监吏，被免除官职，不久又被用为督江北淮南郡事、征虏将军、广陵太守。
English: Two years later, he was relieved of his official duties because he had served as an inspector, and soon he was appointed governor of Huainan County in northern Jiangsu Province, conscript general, and governor of Guangling.

古文：三年，以本号督豫司雍并四州南豫州之梁郡弋阳马头三郡诸军事、豫州刺史，领梁郡太守，镇寿阳，治有政绩。
现代文：三年，在本职的基础上兼管豫、司、雍、并四州和南豫州的梁郡、弋阳、马头三郡诸军事、豫州刺史，兼任梁郡太守，镇守寿阳，颇有政绩。
English: In three years, on the basis of this position, he concurrently managed the military and the history of the three counties of Liang, Poyang and Madu in the four prefectures of Yu, Si and Yong, as well as the four prefectures and the southern prefecture of Yu, and concurrently served as the governor of Liang County and the town guard of Shouyang, with considerable political achievements.

古文：少帝景平二年，谯郡流离六十余家叛没虏，赵炅、秦刚等六家悔倍还投陈留襄邑县，顿谋等村，粹遣将苑纵夫讨叛户不及，因诛杀谋等三十家，男丁一百三十七人，女弱一百六十二口，收付作部。
现代文：少帝景平二年，谯郡流民六十多家叛逃魏境。赵炅、秦刚等六家后悔了，再南投陈留襄邑县，呆在谋等村。刘粹派部将苑纵夫讨伐叛逃民户，没有赶上，于是苑纵夫便杀了谋等村三十家的人丁，男子一百三十七人，女人小孩一百六十二人，苑纵夫被抓到劳改营。
English: In the second year of the Young Emperor Jingping, more than 60 refugees from Min County defected to Wei. Zhao Zou, Qin Gang and other six families regretted it, and then stayed in Moutai Village, Chenluangyun County, Nantou. Liu Zi sent Yuan Zongfu to fight against the defecting households, but he did not catch up, so Yuan Zongfu killed the people of 30 households in Moutai Village, 137 men, 162 women and children. Yuan Zongfu was arrested and sent to a labor camp.

古文：粹坐贬号为宁朔将军。
现代文：刘粹因此事被贬为宁朔将军。
English: As a result, Liu Zi was demoted to the rank of Ningshuo general.

古文：时索虏南寇，粹遣将军李德元袭许昌，杀伪颍川太守庾龙，于是陈留人董邈自称小黄盟主，斩伪征虏将军、广州刺史司马世贤，传首京都。
现代文：当时魏兵南侵，刘粹派将军李元德袭击许昌，杀了魏国颍川太守庾龙，这时陈留人董邈自称小黄盟主，杀了魏国的征虏将军、广州刺史司马世贤，把司马世贤的脑袋送到京城示众。
English: At the time of the southern invasion of Wei soldiers, Liu Zi sent General Li Yuande to attack Xu Chang and killed Wei Guochuan Taishou Yulong. At this time, Chen's retainer, Dong Wei, claimed to be the leader of Xiaohuang Alliance, killed Wei Guochuan's conscript general, Guangzhou's chief historian, Sima Shixian, and sent Sima Shixian's head to Beijing to show to the public.

古文：太祖即位，迁使持节、督雍梁南北秦四州荆州之南阳竟陵顺阳襄阳新野随六郡诸军事、征虏将军、领宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、襄阳新野二郡太守。
现代文：太祖继位，刘粹迁任使持节，督察雍、梁、南北秦四州和荆州的南阳、竟陵、顺阳、襄阳、新野、随六郡诸军事、征虏将军，兼任宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，襄阳、新野二郡太守。
English: The great-grandfather succeeded to the throne, Liu Zijian was appointed as envoy to hold the festival, inspect Nanyang, Jingling, Shunyang, Xiangyang, Nianye, and other military and conscript generals in six counties in the four provinces of Yong, Liang, North and South Qin, and Jingzhou, and concurrently served as Ningban lieutenant, Yongzhou chief historian, and Xiangyang and Nianye two counties governor.

古文：在任简役爱民，罢诸沙门二千余人，以补府史。
现代文：在任职期间他很少征用民力，爱护百姓，罢除和尚尼姑二千多人，用来补任府中劳力。
English: During his tenure, he rarely requisitioned civilian labor, cherished the people, and dismissed more than two thousand monks and nuns to supplement the labor force in the government.

古文：元嘉三年讨谢晦，遣粹弟车骑从事中郎道济、龙骧将军沈敞之就粹，自陆道向江陵。
现代文：元嘉三年，文帝讨伐谢晦，派刘粹的弟弟车骑从事中郎刘道济、龙骧将军沈敝之接受刘粹指挥，从旱路进攻江陵。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Wen sent Liu Zi's younger brother, Liu Daoji, to take up the command of Liu Zi and attack Jiangling from the dry road.

古文：粹以道济行竟陵内史，与敞之及南阳太守沈道兴步骑至沙桥，为晦司马周超所败，士众伤死者过半，降号宁朔将军。
现代文：刘粹用刘道济当竟陵内史，让他和沈敝之以及南阳太守沈道兴率骑兵和步兵到沙桥，被谢晦的司马周超打败，将士们死伤超过一半，于是刘粹被降为宁朔将军。
English: Liu Zi used Liu Daoji as the head of the imperial mausoleum's internal history, and had him and Shen Xizhi, as well as the Nanyang governor Shen Daoxing, lead cavalry and infantry to the sand bridge. He was defeated by the grudging Sima Zhou Chao, and more than half of the soldiers were killed or injured. Therefore, Liu Zi was demoted to Ningshuo general.

古文：初，晦与粹厚善，以粹子旷之为参军。粹受命南讨，一无所顾，太祖以此嘉之。
现代文：当初谢晦和刘粹关系很好，用刘粹的儿子刘旷之当参军，刘粹接受命令南伐，毫不犹豫，太祖因这一点很赞赏他。
English: At first, Xie Hui had a good relationship with Liu Zi. He used Liu Zi's son, Liu Kuangzhi, to join the army. Liu Zi accepted the order to march south without hesitation. Emperor Taizu appreciated him for this.

古文：晦遣送旷之还粹，亦不害也。
现代文：谢晦也把刘旷之送回去而没有害他。
English: Xie Hui also sent Liu Guangzhi back without harming him.

古文：明年，粹卒，时年五十三。
现代文：第二年，刘粹去世，享年五十三岁。
English: The following year, Liu Qi died at the age of 53.

古文：追赠安北将军，持节、本官如故。
现代文：被追认为安北将军、持节，本官照旧。
English: He was considered to be the general of Anbei and Jisetsu, but his position remained the same.

古文：旷之嗣，官至晋熙太守。
现代文：刘旷之继承刘粹，官到晋熙太守。
English: Liu Guangzhi succeeded Liu Zi, and became the de facto ruler of Jinxi.

古文：旷之卒，子琛嗣。
现代文：刘旷之去世，他儿子刘琛继承。
English: Liu Kuanzhi passed away, and his son Liu Hui succeeded him.

古文：琛卒，无子，国除。
现代文：刘琛死，没有儿子，封爵被取消。
English: Liu Xuan died without a son and his knighthood was revoked.

古文：琛弟亮，顺帝升明末，尚书驾部郎。
现代文：刘琛的弟弟刘亮，顺帝升明末年，当尚书驾部郎。
English: Liu Xuan's younger brother Liu Liang, Shunde Shoming in the late Ming Dynasty, was Shang Shuhai's younger brother.

古文：粹庶长子怀之，为临川内史，与臧质同逆，伏诛。
现代文：刘粹的非正嫡的长子刘怀之，当临川内史，和臧质一同造反被杀。
English: Liu Huai Zhi, the illegitimate eldest son of Liu Zi, was killed when he rebelled together with Lin Chuanai Shi.

