古文：张仪又恶陈轸于秦王。曰： 轸驰楚、秦之间，今楚不加善秦而善轸，然则是轸自为而不为国也。
现代文：张仪又在秦王前面诽谤陈轸说： 陈轸奔走于楚、秦之间，但现在楚国不见得对秦友好，反而却和陈轸的关系非常亲密。
English: Zhang Yi also slandered Chen Xuan in front of the Qin king, saying: Chen Xuan runs between Chu and Qin, but now Chu is not necessarily friendly to Qin, but has a very close relationship with Chen Xuan.

古文：且轸欲去秦而之楚，王何不听乎? 
现代文：如此看来，陈轸一切举动都是为自己，而不是为了秦国。况且陈轸又企图背叛秦国而投奔楚国，大王为什么不明察此事呢？ 
English: From this perspective, Chen Xi's every move was for himself, not for the Qin State. Moreover, Chen Xi also attempted to betray the Qin State and fled to the Chu State. Why did the great king not investigate this matter?

古文：王谓陈轸曰： 吾闻子欲去秦而之楚，信乎? 
现代文：于是秦王就问陈轸说： 我听人说你准备背秦而去楚国，有这回事吗？ 
English: Then King Qin asked Chen Xi, "I have heard that you are preparing to leave Qin and go to Chu. Is this true?"

古文：陈轸曰： 然。 
现代文：陈轸回答说： 有这回事。 
English: Chen Yao replied, "There is such a thing.

古文：王曰： 仪之言果信也。 
现代文：秦王有点生气地说： 那么张仪所说的话是真的了？ 
English: Qin Wang said a little angrily: So what Zhang Yi said is true?

古文：曰： 非独仪知之也，行道之人皆知之。
现代文：陈轸回答： 何止张仪知道这件事，就连路人也知道这件事！
English: Chen Yao replied: No matter how much Zhang Yi knew about it, even passers-by knew about it!

古文：曰： 孝己爱其亲，天下欲以为子；子胥忠乎其君，天下欲以为臣。
现代文：常言道： 由于孝已孝顺他的父母，因而天下父母都希望孝已做自己的儿子；由于伍子胥忠于他的君王因而天下的君王都希望伍子胥作自己的大臣。
English: It is often said that since a filial son has been obedient to his parents, all the parents in the world hope that he will become their son; since a filial son is loyal to his king, all the kings in the world hope that he will become their minister.

古文：卖仆妾售乎闾巷者，良仆妾也；出妇嫁乡曲者，良妇也。 
现代文：卖仆妾时如果能卖到本乡，那就证明是一位好仆妾；被休的妻子如果能改嫁到本乡，那就证明他是一位好妻子。 
English: When selling a concubine, if she can be sold to her hometown, it proves that she is a good concubine; if the dismissed wife can remarry to her hometown, it proves that he is a good wife.

古文：吾不忠于君，楚亦何以轸为忠乎?
现代文：如果我不忠君爱国，忠诚于秦王，那么楚王又怎么要我做他的大臣呢？
English: If I am not loyal and patriotic, loyal to King Qin, then how can King Chu want me to be his minister?

古文：忠且见弃，吾不之楚，何适乎? 
现代文：忠心耿耿尚且被遗弃、被放逐，我不去楚国又去哪里呢？ 
English: Even though I was loyal, I was abandoned and exiled. If I don't go to Chu, where will I go?

古文：秦王曰： 善。 乃必之也。
现代文：秦王感动地说： 贤卿言之有理。 
English: King Qin was moved and said, "The sage's words are right."

