古文：孝惠皇帝，高祖太子也，母曰吕皇后。
现代文：汉惠帝，是汉高祖的太子，母亲是吕后。
English: Han Hui Di was the prince of Han Gao Zu, and his mother was Queen Lyu.

古文：帝年五岁，高祖初为汉王。
现代文：在他五岁时，汉高祖开始做汉王。
English: When he was five years old, Han Gaozu began to be the king of Han.

古文：二年，立为太子。
现代文：高祖二年，他被立为太子。
English: In the second year of Gaozu's reign, he was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：十二年四月，高祖崩。
现代文：高祖十二年四月，高祖驾崩。
English: In April of the twelfth year of Gaozu's reign, Gaozu passed away.

古文：五月丙寅，太子即皇帝位，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：五月十七日，太子即皇帝位，尊母吕后为皇太后。
English: On May 17th, the crown prince became emperor and his mother, Empress Dowager Lyu, became empress dowager.

古文：赐民爵一级。
现代文：赏赐臣民爵位一级。
English: Awarded a first-class knighthood to a subject.

古文：中郎、郎中满六岁爵三级，四岁二级。
现代文：中郎、郎中官任职满六年的提爵位三级，满四年的二级。
English: Junior vassals and junior vassals who have served for at least six years are promoted to the third grade, and those who have served for at least four years are promoted to the second grade.

古文：外郎满六岁二级。
现代文：外郎官任职满六年的二级。
English: Foreign retainers who have served for at least six years are promoted to the second level.

古文：中郎不满一岁一级。外郎不满二岁赐钱万。
现代文：中郎任职不满一年的升一级，外郎任职不满二年的赏钱一万。
English: A middle son who has served for less than one year will be promoted to the next grade, and a son who has served for less than two years will receive a reward of ten thousand.

古文：宦官尚食比郎中，谒者、执楯、执戟、武士、驺比外郎。
现代文：宦官的俸禄与郎中相同。谒者、执楯、执戟、武士、驺骑等皇帝侍从人员的俸禄与外郎相同。
English: The salary of eunuchs was the same as that of vassals, and the salary of imperial attendants such as eunuchs, eunuchs, eunuchs, warriors, and cavalrymen was the same as that of vassals.

古文：太子御骖乘赐爵五大夫，舍人满五岁二级。
现代文：太子御骖乘赏赐爵位为五大夫，舍人任职满五年的加爵位二级。
English: Crown Prince Mihoko received a knighthood for the fifth time, and those who have served for five years receive a second-level knighthood.

古文：赐给丧事者，二千石钱二万，六百石以上万，五百石、二百石以下至佐史五千。
现代文：赏赐给为高祖办丧事者，俸禄二千石的赏钱二万，六百石以上的赏钱一万，五百石以下至佐吏赏钱五千。
English: Those who held a funeral for Gao Zu were rewarded with a reward of 20,000 koku for a salary of 2,000 koku, 10,000 koku for a salary of more than 600 koku, and 5,000 koku for a salary of less than 500 koku.

古文：视作斥上者，将军四十金，二千石二十金，六百石以上六金，五百石以下至佐史二金。
现代文：为高祖建造陵墓的，将军赏钱四十金，二千石赏钱二十金，六百石以上的赏钱六金，五百石以下至佐吏赏钱二金。
English: Those who built a mausoleum for Gao Zu were rewarded with 40 gold for generals, 20 gold for 2,000 koku, 6 gold for those with more than 600 koku, and 2 gold for those with less than 500 koku.

古文：减田租，复十五税一。
现代文：减少田租，恢复十五税一的制度。
English: Reduce the field rent and restore the system of fifteen taxes and one tax.

古文：爵五大夫、吏六百石以上及宦皇帝而知名者有罪当盗械者，皆颂系；上造以上及内外公孙、耳孙有罪当刑及当为城旦舂者，皆耐为鬼薪、白粲；民年七十以上若不满十岁有罪当刑者，皆完之。
现代文：凡爵级在五大夫、六百石以上以及曾经侍奉过皇帝，皇帝也知其姓名的人，犯了罪应当披枷戴锁的，可以放宽为软禁而不投入监狱。对官职在上造以上及皇家内外公孙或血缘已疏的耳孙等，犯罪当刑的，或应判四年徒刑的，减至三年。百姓年过七十与不满十岁的有罪当刑的，都免予肉刑。
English: For those with five peerages, more than 600 koku, and those who have served the emperor and whose names are known to the emperor, those who have committed crimes that should be shackled and chained can be released to house arrest without going to prison. For those who have held official positions above the upper echelon and the grandchildren of the royal family at home and abroad, or the grandchildren of the royal family who have lost their blood relationship, those who should be punished for crimes or sentenced to four years in prison are reduced to three years. People over the age of seventy and those under the age of ten are exempted from corporal punishment.

古文：又曰： 吏所以治民也，能尽其治则民赖之，故重其禄，所以为民也。
现代文：皇帝还在令中指出： 官吏的职责就是为百姓办事，能努力把事办好就会得到百姓的信赖，之所以提高他们的爵禄，就是要求他们把百姓的事情办得更好。
English: The emperor also pointed out in the decree: The duty of government officials is to work for the people. If they can work hard to do things well, they will gain the trust of the people. The reason for raising their peerage is to require them to do things better for the people.

古文：今吏六百石以上父母妻子与同居，及故吏尝佩将军、都尉印将兵，及佩二千石官印者，家唯给军赋，他无有所与。 
现代文：凡是官吏的俸禄在六百石以上，与其父母妻子在一起居住的，以及已不在职的曾佩将军印、都尉印领过兵的或曾佩二千石官印的，都只需缴纳军赋，其他徭役皆免除。
English: All officials with a salary of more than 600 koku, who live with their parents and wives, as well as those who are no longer in office, who once wore the general's seal, the captain's seal, or who once wore the 2,000 koku official seal, are only required to pay military pay, and all other forced labor is exempted.

古文：令郡诸侯王立高庙。
现代文：下令各郡的侯王建立高祖宗庙。
English: Hou Wang of each county was ordered to build a Gaozhu ancestral temple.

古文：元年冬十二月，赵隐王如意薨。
现代文：惠帝元年冬十二月，赵隐王刘如意去世。
English: In the winter of December in the year of Emperor Hui, Zhao Yin Wang Liu Ruyi passed away.

古文：民有罪，得买爵三十级以免死罪。
现代文：规定臣民犯罪，可以出买爵三十级的钱以赎死罪。
English: It stipulated that if a subject committed a crime, he or she could atone for the crime of death by buying a peerage of up to 30 koku.

古文：赐民爵，户一级。
现代文：赏赐百姓爵，每户一级。
English: People were rewarded with peerages, one for each household.

古文：春正月，城长安。
现代文：春正月，下令修筑长安城。
English: In the first month of spring, he ordered the construction of Chang'an City.

古文：二年冬十月，齐悼惠王来朝，献城阳郡以益鲁元公主邑，尊公主为太后。
现代文：惠帝二年冬季十月，齐悼惠王前来朝见，献纳城阳郡以增加鲁元公主的汤沐邑。尊鲁元公主为太后。
English: In the winter of October in the second year of Emperor Hui's reign, a group of mourners came to pay homage to King Hui, and offered the county of Chengyang to increase the amount of Tang Muyi of Princess Luyuan. Princess Zun Luyuan was the empress dowager.

古文：春正月癸酉，有两龙见兰陵家人井中，乙亥夕而不见。
现代文：春正月初四日，有两条龙出现在兰陵一百姓家的井中。至六日晚不知去向。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of spring, two dragons appeared in the well of a commoner's house in Lanling. By the evening of the sixth day, their whereabouts were unknown.

古文：陇西地震。
现代文：陇西发生地震。
English: Shaanxi earthquake.

古文：夏旱。
现代文：当年夏季，发生旱灾。
English: In the summer of that year, a drought occurred.

古文：郃阳侯仲薨。
现代文：阳侯刘仲去世。
English: Yang Hou Liu Zhong passed away.

古文：秋七月辛未，相国何薨。
现代文：秋，七月五日，丞相萧何去世。
English: In the autumn, on July 5th, the chancellor Xiao He passed away.

古文：三年春，发长安六百里内男女十四万六千人城长安，三十日罢。
现代文：惠帝三年春季，征发长安六百里之内的男女民工十四万六千人修筑长安城，工期三十天。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hui Di, 146,000 male and female migrant workers within 600 miles of Chang'an were recruited to build Chang'an City, with a construction period of 30 days.

古文：以宗室女为公主，嫁匈奴单于。
现代文：将刘氏宗室之女作为公主，嫁给匈奴单于王为夫人以结友好。
English: He married the daughter of the Liu family as a princess to the Xiongnu king as a wife to make friends.

古文：夏五月，立闽越君摇为东海王。
现代文：夏五月，封闽越君摇为东海王。
English: In the summer of May, Emperor Gaozong of Yue ascended to the throne of the East Sea.

古文：六月，发诸侯王、列侯徒隶二万人城长安。
现代文：六月，征发各侯王、列侯的家人、奴隶二万人到长安筑城。
English: In June, 20,000 princes, their families and slaves were sent to Chang'an to build the city.

古文：秋七月，都厩灾。
现代文：秋七月，皇室的马厩发生火灾。
English: In autumn and July, a fire broke out in the royal stables.

古文：南越王赵佗称臣奉贡。
现代文：南越王赵佗称臣进贡。
English: The king of southern Vietnam, Zhao Wei, called for tribute from his vassals.

古文：四年冬十月壬寅，立皇后张氏。
现代文：惠帝四年冬十月，立张敖之女为皇后。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Hui's reign, the daughter of Zhang Ye became the empress.

古文：春正月，举民孝弟、力田者复其身。
现代文：春正月，在各地选拔孝悌力田的贤者，免除其徭役负担。
English: In the first month of spring, the wise men of filial piety are selected from all over the country, and they are exempted from the burden of duty.

古文：三月甲子，皇帝冠，赦天下。
现代文：三月十七日，皇帝举行冠礼，大赦天下。
English: On March 17th, the emperor held a coronation ceremony and pardoned the whole world.

古文：省法令妨吏民者；除挟书律。
现代文：省去妨害吏民的法令，废除挟书有罪的秦律。
English: Eliminate the laws and regulations that obstruct officials and citizens, and abolish the Qin laws that make it a crime to hold up a book.

古文：长乐宫鸿台灾。宜阳雨血。
现代文：长乐宫鸿台发生火灾，宜阳地区出现血雨。
English: A fire broke out in Hongtai, Changle Palace, and there was bloodshed in Yiyang.

古文：秋七月乙亥，未央宫凌室灾；丙子，织室灾。
现代文：秋七月二十日，未央宫凌室发生火灾；二十一日，织室发生火灾。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, a fire broke out in the weaving room of the Weiyang Palace; on the 21st day, a fire broke out in the weaving room.

古文：五年冬十月，雷；桃李华，枣实。
现代文：惠帝五年冬十月，雷声隆隆，桃李开花，枣树结实。
English: In October of the winter of Hui Di's fifth year, thunder rumbled, peach and plum blossomed, and jujube trees grew strong.

古文：春正月，复发长安六百里内男女十四万五千人城长安，三十日罢。
现代文：春正月，再次征发长安六百里以内男女民工十四万五千人到长安筑城，工期三十天。
English: In the first month of spring, 145,000 male and female migrant workers within 600 miles of Chang'an were once again sent to Chang'an to build the city, with a construction period of 30 days.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：当年夏季，发生大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：秋八月己丑，相国参薨。
现代文：秋八月，丞相曹参去世。
English: In the autumn and August, the chancellor Cao San passed away.

古文：九月，长安城成。
现代文：九月，长安城全部竣工。
English: In September, all of Chang'an City was completed.

古文：赐民爵，户一级。
现代文：赏赐百姓爵位，每户一级。
English: People were rewarded with peerages, one for each household.

古文：六年冬十月辛丑，齐王肥薨。
现代文：惠帝六年冬十月，齐王肥去世。
English: In October of the winter of Hui's sixth year, Qi Wangfei passed away.

古文：令民得卖爵。女子年十五以上至三十不嫁，五算。
现代文：皇帝下令百姓可以买卖爵位，女子年龄在十五岁以上至三十岁不出嫁的，罚款六百钱。
English: The emperor decreed that people could buy and sell titles of nobility, and that if a woman between the ages of fifteen and thirty did not marry, she would be fined six hundred yuan.

古文：夏六月，舞阳侯哙薨。
现代文：夏六月，舞阳侯樊哙去世。
English: In the summer of June, Maiyang Houyi passed away.

古文：起长安西市，修敖仓。
现代文：兴建长安西市，修建敖仓。
English: Chang'an West City was built, and Kamakura was built.

古文：七年冬十月，发车骑、材官诣荥阳，太尉灌婴将。
现代文：惠帝七年冬十月，派车骑、材官到荥阳，由太尉灌婴指挥。
English: In October of the winter of Hui Di's seventh year, he sent a cavalry officer and a quartermaster to Fenyang, under the command of Lieutenant Guan Yu.

古文：春正月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：春季正月初一日，出现日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：夏五月丁卯，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：夏季五月二十九日，出现日全食。
English: In the summer, a total solar eclipse occurred on May 29.

古文：秋八月戊寅，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：秋季八月十二日，惠帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On the 12th day of the 8th month of autumn, Emperor Hui passed away at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：九月辛丑，葬安陵。
现代文：九月五日，葬于安陵。
English: On September 5, he was buried in Anling.

古文：赞曰：孝惠内修亲亲，外礼宰相，优宠齐悼、赵隐，恩敬笃矣。
现代文：班固评论：汉惠帝内亲宗室，外礼宰相，对齐悼王、赵隐王都予以优宠，可谓恩敬笃厚。
English: Ban Gu's comment: Han Hui, the emperor's uncle's wife and the prime minister's daughter-in-law, was favored by both the mourning king and Zhao Yingwang, which can be described as a great favor.

古文：闻叔孙通之谏则惧然，纳曹相国之对而心说，可谓宽仁之主。
现代文：听到叔孙的注意礼仪的谏言就自感惭愧，接纳曹相国的健全法度的建议就深为喜悦，可谓仁德宽厚。
English: Hearing the uncle and grandson's admonition to pay attention to etiquette, he felt ashamed, and he was deeply pleased to accept Cao Xiangguo's suggestion of a sound legal system, which can be described as benevolent and generous.

古文：曹吕太后亏损至德，悲夫！
现代文：可惜由于母后吕太后所为而有亏圣德，可悲啊！
English: Unfortunately, due to the actions of his mother, Empress Dowager Lv, he is deficient in virtue. How sad!

