古文：王机为广州刺史，入厕，忽见二人著乌衣，与机相捍。
现代文：王机任广州刺史的时候，一次他上厕所，忽然看见二个人身穿黑色衣服，与王机互相推攘。
English: When Wang Ji was the chief historian of Guangzhou, he once went to the toilet and suddenly saw two people dressed in black pushing each other with Wang Ji.

古文：良久擒之，得二物如乌鸭。
现代文：王机花了很久时间把他们捉拿到，在他们身上搜得两个东西，形状像乌鸦。
English: Wang Ji took a long time to catch them, and found two things on them, shaped like crows.

古文：以问鲍靓，靓曰： 此物不祥。 机焚之，径飞上天。
现代文：王机拿去讨教鲍靓，鲍靓说： 这是不吉祥的东西。 王机就把它们拿去焚烧，它们径直飞上天去了。
English: Wang Ji took them to teach Bao Tong, and Bao Tong said, "This is an inauspicious thing." Wang Ji then took them and burned them, and they flew straight up into the sky.

古文：寻诛死。
现代文：没过多久王机被诛杀。
English: It didn't take long for the king to be killed.

古文：晋义熙中，乌伤葛辉夫，在妇家宿。
现代文：东晋的义熙年间，乌伤县有个人叫葛辉夫，有一天在妻子的娘家夜宿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a man named Ge Huifu from Wushi County stayed overnight at his wife's daughter's house.

古文：三更后，有两人把火至阶前。
现代文：到了半夜以后，有两个人手持火把来到屋门前的台阶上。
English: After midnight, two men carrying torches came to the front steps of the house.

古文：疑是凶人，往打之。欲下杖。悉变成蝴蝶，缤纷飞散。
现代文：葛辉夫以为他们是前来作恶行凶的人，就上前去打他们，刚想挥动棍棒打下去，那二人全都变成了蝴蝶，翩翩地飞散开去。
English: Ge Huifu thought that they were evil-doers who had come to do harm, so he went up to them and hit them. Just as he was about to swing the club and hit them, the two of them all turned into butterflies and fluttered away.

古文：有冲辉夫腋下，便倒地，少时死。
现代文：其中有一只蝴蝶直冲到葛辉夫胳膊的腋窝下，葛辉夫就一下子倒在了地上，一会儿就死去了。
English: One of them, a butterfly, flew straight into the armpit of Gerd's arm. Gerd immediately fell to the ground and died in an instant.

古文：诸葛长民富贵后，常一月中，辄十数夜眠中惊起跳踉，如与人相打。
现代文：东晋的诸葛长民在成就功名富贵之后，常常在一个月中总有十多个夜晚从睡梦里突然惊起跳跃不停，就像是在与别人打架一样。
English: Zhuge Changmin of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, after achieving fame and fortune, often had more than ten nights in a month when he was suddenly startled from his sleep and kept jumping, as if he were fighting with others.

古文：毛修之尝与同宿，见之惊愕，问其故，答曰： 正见一物，甚黑而有毛，脚不分明，奇健，非我无以制之也。 后来转数。
现代文：毛修之曾经与诸葛长民同在一间房里夜宿，看见这种状况惊愕不已，就问诸葛长民是怎么回事。诸葛长民回答说： 我刚才正遇到一种东西，非常黑而且长有毛，脚不很明显，特别健壮，除了我没有什么能够收服得了它。 
English: Maoshuizhi had once slept in a room with Zhuge Changmin. Seeing this situation, he was stunned and asked Zhuge Changmin what was going on. Zhuge Changmin replied: I just encountered something, very black and hairy, with feet that are not obvious, very robust, and there is nothing I can do to subdue it.

古文：屋中柱及椽桷间，悉见有蛇头。
现代文：后来诸葛长民所梦见的那东西变换了样子，房屋中的柱子以及椽桷上，都有蛇头出现。
English: Later, the thing that Zhuge Changmin had dreamed of changed its appearance, and snake heads appeared on the pillars of the house as well as on the rafters.

古文：令人以刃悬斫，应刃隐藏。去辄复出。
现代文：诸葛长民叫人拿刀悬在半空去砍，那些蛇头看到刀砍来就隐藏不见了，等拿刀的人离开后又重新出现。
English: Zhuge Changmin asked someone to hold a knife suspended in mid-air to cut. Those snakeheads saw the knife cut and disappeared, and reappeared after the person holding the knife left.

古文：又捣衣杵相与语，如人声，不可解。
现代文：诸葛长民又听见捣捶衣服的棒槌在互相说话，就像人说话的声音，但听不懂说些什么。
English: Zhuge Changmin also heard the clothes hammers talking to each other, like human voices, but he couldn't understand what they were saying.

古文：于壁见有巨手，长七八尺，臂大数围。
现代文：诸葛长民还在墙壁上看见一只巨大的手，长有七八尺，粗有好几围。
English: Zhuge Changmin also saw a huge hand on the wall, seven or eight feet long and several times thicker.

古文：令斫之，忽然不见。
现代文：诸葛长民叫人去砍那大手，那大手忽然就不见了。
English: Zhuge Changmin ordered someone to chop off the big hand, which suddenly disappeared.

古文：未几伏诛。
现代文：没过多久诸葛长民就伏法而被诛杀了。
English: It didn't take long for Zhuge Changmin to be beaten to death.

古文：新野庾谨，母病，兄弟三人，悉在侍疾。
现代文：新野县有个叫庾谨的人，他的母亲患了病，庾谨兄弟三人都在照料母亲的疾病，白天里经常烧火。
English: There is a man in Nino County named Tsuchimine. His mother is ill, and all three of Tsuchimine's brothers are taking care of their mother's illness. They often light fires during the day.

古文：白日常燃火，忽见帐带自卷自舒，如此数四。
现代文：有天忽然看见床帐的带子自动卷起来又自动伸展开，这样反复了好几次。
English: One day, I suddenly saw that the tape of the bedspread automatically rolled up and automatically stretched out, and this was repeated several times.

古文：须臾间，床前闻狗声异常。
现代文：不一会儿，又听见床前狗叫的声音跟平常不一样。
English: A short while later, the sound of a dog barking in front of the bed was different from usual.

古文：举家共视，了不见狗，见一死人头在地，头犹有发，两眼尚动，甚可憎恶。
现代文：全家人一起到床前查看，却并没有看见狗，只在地上看见一颗死人的头颅，那头颅上还有血迹，两颗眼珠还在转动，非常的令人恶心。
English: The whole family went to the bed to check, but they didn't see the dog. They only saw a dead man's head on the floor. There was still blood on the head, and the two eyes were still turning. It was very disgusting.

古文：其家怖惧。乃不持出门，即于后园中瘗之。
现代文：全家人恐惧害怕，就不敢把那死人头颅拿出门去，随即在家中后园里把它埋入地下。
English: The whole family was so scared that they did not dare to take the dead man's head out of the door, and immediately buried it underground in the backyard of their home.

古文：明日往视，乃出土上，两眼犹尔，即又埋之。
现代文：第二天全家人去查看，那死人头颅又出现在地上，两颗眼珠还同先前一样，随即又把它埋了。
English: The next day, the whole family went to check, and the dead man's head reappeared on the ground, the two eyes were still the same as before, and then buried it again.

古文：后日复出，乃以砖头合埋之，遂不复出。
现代文：第三天死人头颅又再出现了，他们就用砖头压住一起埋掉，就在也没有出现了。
English: On the third day, the dead man's head reappeared, and they buried it together under a pile of bricks, but it did not reappear.

古文：他日，其母便亡。
现代文：几天之后，庾谨的母亲就死亡了。
English: A few days later, Zou Ji's mother died.

古文：王绥字彦猷，其家夜中，梁上无故有人头堕于床，而流血滂沱。
现代文：王绥字号彦猷，有天夜里一颗人头平白无故从他家的屋梁上掉落在床上，而且鲜血像下大雨一样直流。
English: One night, a man's head fell from the roof beam of his house onto his bed without any reason, and blood flowed like heavy rain.

古文：俄拜荆州刺史，坐父愉之谋，与弟纳并被诛。
现代文：不久王绥官拜荆州刺史，因为他的父亲王愉意图谋反败露而遭连坐，他与弟弟王纳一同被诛杀。
English: Not long after, Wang Ye's father, Wang Yulong, was lynched for plotting against him, and he and his brother, Wang Na, were both killed.

古文：晋永嘉五年，张荣为高平戍逻主。
现代文：西晋永嘉五年的时候，有个叫张荣的人任高平郡守卫巡逻的主将。
English: When Xi Jin Yongjia was five years old, there was a man named Zhang Rong who was the commander of the guard patrol of Gaoping County.

古文：时曹嶷贼寇离乱，人民皆坞垒自保固。
现代文：当时遭遇曹嶷贼寇作乱引起社会动荡，老百姓们都纷纷修筑小堡垒以求保卫自己的安全稳定。
English: At that time, Cao Pi's banditry caused social turmoil, and the common people built small fortresses to protect their own safety and stability.

古文：见山中火起，飞埃绝焰十余丈，树颠火炎，响动山谷。
现代文：有一天发现山中燃烧起大火，飞扬的尘埃和冲天的火焰高达十多丈，树林的顶上火苗直窜，山谷响声震动，又听见人马喧嚣和铠甲碰撞的声音。
English: One day, they found a fire burning in the mountains, the flying dust and flames soaring more than ten meters high, the top of the forest ablaze with flames, the valley vibrating with noise, and they heard the noise of people and horses and the sound of armor colliding.

古文：又闻人马铠甲声，谓嶷贼上，人皆惶恐，并戒严出，将欲击之。
现代文：人们以为是曹嶷贼寇攻打上来了，全城的人都惊慌恐惧，并加强了戒备，严禁人们出城，张荣要发兵去攻打贼寇。
English: People thought that it was Cao Pi's bandits who attacked, and the whole city was panicked and frightened, and strengthened their vigilance. People were strictly forbidden to leave the city, and Zhang Rong wanted to send troops to attack the bandits.

古文：乃引骑到山下，无有人，但见碎火来晒人，袍铠马毛鬣皆烧。于是军人走还。
现代文：于是就率领兵马赶到山下，却没有发现一个人，只看见散乱的火苗像曝晒烈日一样炙烤人，官兵的战袍铠甲和战马的毛鬣都燃烧起来，于是官军退还回来。
English: So he led the soldiers and horses to the foot of the mountain, but they did not find a single person. They only saw scattered flames scorching people as if they were exposed to the scorching sun. The officers' and soldiers' battle robes, armor, and horses' manes were all on fire, so the government troops returned.

古文：明日往视，山中无燃火处，见髑髅百头，布散在山中。
现代文：第二天到山中去查看，山里并没有发现火烧的地方，只发现一百具死人的头骨，散乱分布在山里。
English: The next day, I went to the mountains to investigate. I did not find any burned areas in the mountains. I only found a hundred skulls of dead people, scattered in the mountains.

古文：新野赵贞家，园中种葱，未经摘拔。
现代文：新野县有个叫赵贞的人，在自家的菜园中栽种了葱子，还没有经过收割。
English: A man named Zhao Zhen in Nino County planted green onions in his vegetable garden, but they have not yet been harvested.

古文：忽一日，尽缩入地。
现代文：忽然有一天，菜园里的葱子全部都缩进地下去了。
English: Suddenly one day, all the onions in the vegetable garden shrank into the ground.

古文：后经岁余，贞之兄弟相次分散。
现代文：经过一年之后，赵贞的弟兄们相互逐次分散了。
English: After a year, Zhao Zhen's brothers dispersed one after another.

古文：吴聂友，字文悌，豫章新淦人。
现代文：三国时候东吴的聂友，字号文悌，豫章郡新淦县人。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, Dongwu's Shanyou, whose family name was Wenqiu, was from Xinqiu County, Yuzhang County.

古文：少时贫贱，常好射猎。
现代文：年轻的时候家庭贫寒，地位低下，经常喜欢用弓箭打猎。
English: When he was young, his family was poor and his status was low. He often liked to hunt with a bow and arrow.

古文：夜照见一白鹿，射中之。
现代文：有天夜里他在灯火照耀下看见一只白鹿，用箭射中了它。
English: One night he saw a white deer in the lamplight and shot it with an arrow.

古文：明寻踪，血既尽，不知所在。
现代文：聂友第二天寻找白鹿的踪迹，血迹已到尽头处，却没有看到白鹿在哪里。
English: The next day, Shinyo looked for the white deer's trail. The blood trail had ended, but he couldn't see where the white deer was.

古文：且已饥困，便卧一梓树下。
现代文：而聂友已饥饿困倦，就躺倒在一棵梓树下休息。
English: Hungry and tired, he lay down under a tree to rest.

古文：仰见射箭著树枝上，视之，乃是昨所射箭。怪其如此。
现代文：仰头看见一枝箭射插在树枝上，仔细一看，原来是自己昨天所射中白鹿的那枝箭，他奇怪为什么会这样。
English: Looking up, he saw an arrow stuck in a tree branch. On closer inspection, it turned out to be the same arrow he had shot at the white deer the day before. He wondered why it was like that.

古文：于是还家赍粮，率子弟，持斧以伐之。
现代文：聂友于是回到家里带上干粮，率领一帮子弟，手拿着斧头来砍伐这棵梓树。
English: Xingyou then returned home with dry grain and led a group of children, axes in hand, to cut down the camphor tree.

古文：树微有血，遂裁截为板二枚，牵著陂塘中。
现代文：梓树有少许血流出，于是就把它切割成两块木板，拉回家放进池塘中。
English: There was a little blood coming out of the tree, so he cut it into two pieces, dragged it home and put it in the pond.

古文：板常沉没，然时复浮出。
现代文：木板时常沉没在水里，但有时也浮出水面。
English: The planks often sink in the water, but sometimes they rise to the surface.

古文：出，家辄有吉庆。
现代文：木板浮出水面，聂友家里总会有吉祥喜庆的事情。
English: The board floats to the surface of the water, and there is always something auspicious and festive going on in the family.

古文：每欲迎宾客，常乘此板。
现代文：聂友每次要去迎接宾客，常常乘坐这木板。
English: Every time she has to greet guests, she often rides on this board.

古文：忽于中流欲没，客大惧，友呵之，还复浮出。
现代文：有一次木板忽然在渡水途中要沉没下去，客人非常恐惧，聂友大声责骂这木板，木板又重新浮出了水面。
English: On one occasion, a plank of wood suddenly sank on the way across the water. The guests were very frightened, and their friends shouted abuse at the plank. The plank then re-emerged from the water.

古文：仕宦大如愿，位至丹阳太守。
现代文：聂友的仕途官运非常如意，官位升迁到丹阳太守。
English: Shen You's career in the government was very successful, and he was promoted to Danyang governor.

古文：在郡经年，板忽随至石头。
现代文：他在丹阳郡做官一年多后，这木板忽然随着来到丹阳。
English: After he had been an official in Danyang County for more than a year, this wooden board suddenly came to Danyang.

古文：外司白云： 涛中板入石头来。 友惊曰： 板来，必有意。 即解职归家。
现代文：负责外事的官吏来禀报说： 池塘中的木板进入丹阳城来了。 聂友惊异地说： 这木板来到这里，必定有它的用意。 聂友随即辞去官职回家。
English: The official in charge of foreign affairs came to inform him that the wooden plank from the pond had just entered Danyang City, and he was surprised and said, "This wooden plank must have come here for a reason."

古文：下船便闭户，二板挟两边，一日即至豫章。
现代文：他下到船舱里，就关闭了船舱的门窗，这两块木板夹持在船的两边，一天时间就到达了豫章。
English: He went down to the cabin, closed the door and window of the cabin, and the two pieces of wood were clamped on both sides of the ship. It took one day to reach Yuzhang.

古文：尔后板出，便反为凶祸，家大轗轲。
现代文：从此之后只要木板浮出水面，就反而预示为有灾祸发生，聂友家非常不得志。
English: From then on, whenever a plank of wood surfaced, it foreshadowed a disaster. The Shinyu family was very disappointed.

古文：今新淦北二十里余，曰封溪，有聂友截梓树板，涛牂柯处。有梓树，今犹存。乃聂友向日所截，枝叶皆向下生。
现代文：现在新淦县北面二十里有个地方，名叫封溪，那里是聂友砍伐梓树切割成木板放进池塘的所在地，那棵梓树，现在还在，就因为被聂友从前砍伐过，那梓树的枝叶都向下生长。
English: At present, there is a place 20 miles north of Xinlu County, called Fangxi, which is the location where Xingyou cut down the azusa tree, cut it into planks and put it into the pond. The azusa tree is still there because it was cut down by Xingyou in the past, and the branches and leaves of the azusa tree all grow downwards.

