古文：投壶之礼，主人奉矢，司射奉中，使人执壶。主人请曰： 某有枉矢哨壶，请以乐宾。 
现代文：投壶之礼的做法是：宴席进行到一定的阶段，主人立在昨阶上，手中捧着矢；司射立在西阶上，手中捧着盛筹码的简；主人又派下人拿着壶，也是立在西阶上，靠近宾客之处。主人邀请说： 我有歪歪扭扭的矢和歪嘴歪脖的壶，愿供宾客娱乐。 
English: The practice of throwing the pot is: the banquet progresses to a certain stage, the host stands on the last step, holding an arrow in his hand; the archer stands on the west step, holding a jane full of chips in his hand; the host also sends someone to hold the pot, also standing on the west step, close to the guests. The host invited: I have crooked arrows and crooked jars, I am willing to entertain the guests.

古文：宾曰： 子有旨酒嘉肴，某既赐矣，又重以乐，敢辞。 
现代文：宾客回答道： 您有美酒佳肴，我已经很领情了。再蒙招待娱乐，实在是不敢当。 
English: The guest replied, "I've already appreciated your fine food and wine. I can't bear to be entertained again."

古文：主人曰： 枉矢哨壶，不足辞也，敢以请。 
现代文：主人又说： 歪歪扭扭的矢，歪嘴歪脖的壶，不用推辞，请足下赏脸一道娱乐。 
English: The host also said, "If you like crooked arrows, crooked beaks, and crooked necks, don't be put off. Please enjoy the fun with your friends.

古文：宾曰： 某既赐矣，又重以乐，敢固辞。 
现代文：宾客又说： 承蒙足下已经用美酒嘉肴招待过了，现在又要用娱乐招待，坚决不敢当。 
English: The guest also said: "Thanks to you, we have already invited guests with fine wine and food, and now we want to invite them with entertainment. I absolutely dare not do that.

古文：主人曰： 枉矢哨壶，不足辞也，敢固以请。 宾曰： 某固辞不得命，敢不敬从？ 
现代文：主人又邀请说： 歪歪扭扭的矢，歪嘴歪脖的壶，实在不值得您这样地客气，请足下一定赏脸答应。 毛宾客说： 我再三推辞不了，怎敢不听从？ 
English: The host also invited him, saying, "A crooked arrow and a jug with a crooked spout and neck are really not worthy of your courtesy, so please be sure to say yes with a straight face." The Mao guest said, "I can't refuse again and again, how dare I disobey?

古文：宾再拜受，主人般还，曰： 辟。 
现代文：于是宾客在西阶再拜接受箭，而主人见到宾客施礼，急忙退后转身，口中说道： 避礼。 
English: So the guests bowed again on the west steps to receive the arrows, and when the host saw the guests bowing, he hurriedly backed away and turned around, saying, "Avoid bowing."

古文：主人阼阶上拜送，宾般还，曰： 辟。 
现代文：主人在东阶上下拜送箭，宾客见状，也急忙转身，口中说道： 避礼。 
English: The host bowed down on the east step to send the arrows, and when the guests saw this, they also hurriedly turned around and said, "Avoid bowing."

古文：已拜，受矢，进即两楹间，退反位，揖宾就筵。
现代文：宾主施礼已毕，宾客从主人手里接过矢，主人从赞礼者手中接过矢，主人前进到两楹间，察看一下将要进行投壶的地方，然后退回昨阶上的原位，向宾客作揖，请他就座。
English: After the host has bowed, the guest receives the arrow from the host, the host receives the arrow from the eulogizer, and the host advances to between the two pillars to inspect the place where the pot will be thrown, and then returns to his original position on the last step, bowing to the guest and inviting him to sit down.

古文：司射进度壶，间以二矢半，反位，设中，东面，执八算兴。
现代文：司射从下人手中接过壶，上堂来至宾主席前丈量放壶的位置。壶放好后，退回西阶的原位，再把 中 放好，在 中 中插入八只筹码，面向东方，手执八只筹码站起。
English: After the pot is placed, return to the original position on the west step, then place the middle, insert eight chips in the middle, face east, and stand up holding eight chips.

古文：请宾曰： 顺投为入。比投不释，胜饮不胜者，正爵既行，请为胜者立马，一马从二马，三马既立，请庆多马。 
现代文：司射向宾宣布投壶的规则说： 箭头一端投入壶中才算投进，主宾轮流投，如果一人连续投，就算投中也不算；胜者要斟一杯罚酒让不胜者来饮。罚酒喝过之后，输者要为胜者放上一个得胜的筹码；如果有一方首先得到三个胜的筹码，另一方就要饮一杯庆贺的酒。 
English: The archer announced to the guests that the rules for throwing the jug were as follows: Only when one end of the arrow is thrown into the jug is it considered to be thrown in, the main guests take turns to throw, and if one person throws continuously, it is not considered to be thrown in; the winner has to pour a penalty glass of wine for the loser to drink. After drinking the penalty wine, the loser has to put a winning chip for the winner; if one party gets three winning chips first, the other party has to drink a celebratory glass of wine.

古文：请主人亦如之。
现代文：司射又把上述的规则告诉主人。
English: Sisera also told his master the above-mentioned rules.

古文：命弦者曰： 请奏《狸首》，间若一。 
现代文：司射又命令鼓瑟的乐工： 请奏《狸首》乐曲，乐曲每段休止的时间都要一律。 
English: Sisera also ordered the musicians of the drum corps: Please play the music of "Tuxu Shou," the music should have the same time for each pause.

古文：大师曰： 诺。 
现代文：乐队的领队回答说： 是。 
English: The band leader replied: "Yes.

古文：左右告矢具，请拾投。
现代文：司射向宾主双方报告矢已经准备好了，可以开始轮流投矢了。
English: The archer reports to both guests that the arrows are ready and they can start taking turns.

古文：有入者，则司射坐而释一算焉。
现代文：有哪一方将矢投进者，司射就跪下为他记一分。
English: If anyone throws an arrow into the ring, the archer will kneel down and score one point for him.

古文：宾党于右，主党于左。
现代文：投壶的时候，宾客一方坐在司射的右边，主人一方坐在司射的左边。
English: During the throwing of the jug, the guest sits on the right side of the shooter and the host sits on the left side of the shooter.

古文：卒投，司射执算曰： 左右卒投，请数。 
现代文：投壶结束，司射就手中执着剩余的筹码宣布说： 宾主双方投壶结束，现在开始计算分数。 
English: At the end of the potting, Sisera, holding the remaining chips in his hand, announced: "Both sides of the guests have finished potting, now start calculating the score."

古文：二算为纯，一纯以取，一算为奇。
现代文：计算的方法是，两个筹码算作一纯。
English: The method of calculation is that two chips are counted as one pure.

古文：遂以奇算告曰： 某贤于某若干纯 。
现代文：卜泛几一次取二纯，取够十纯，放成，堆，摆在地上。
English: Bu Pan several times took two pure, took enough ten pure, put into a pile, and placed on the ground.

古文：奇则曰奇，钧则曰左右钧。命酌曰： 请行觞。 
现代文：计算到最后如果只剩一个筹码，那就叫 奇 。
English: If there is only one chip left at the end of the calculation, it is called a surprise.

古文：酌者曰： 诺。 当饮者皆跪奉觞，曰： 赐灌 ；胜者跪曰： 敬养 。
现代文：计算的结果出来以后，司射就报告说： 某一方的成绩超过了另一方若于纯。 
English: After the results of the calculation came out, Shi Yao reported: One side's performance exceeded the other side's if it was less than pure.

古文：正爵既行，请立马。
现代文：如果胜算中还有奇数，还要把奇数报告出来。
English: If there is an odd number in the odds, the odd number must be reported.

古文：马各直其算。
现代文：如果双方积分相等，就说双方不分胜负。
English: If the points of both sides are equal, it is said that both sides win or lose.

古文：一马从二马，以庆。
现代文：司射对胜利一方的子弟说： 请为失败的一方斟罚酒。 
English: Sisera said to the younger son of the victorious side: Please pour wine for the losing side.

古文：庆礼曰： 三马既备，请庆多马。 
现代文：喝过庆贺的酒，司射就让人把已立的马撤掉。
English: After drinking the celebratory wine, Sisera ordered the horse to be taken down.

古文：宾主皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：需要准备多少筹码，这要根据座中参加比赛的人数来决定。
English: The number of chips to be prepared depends on the number of players in the table.

古文：正爵既行，请彻马。算多少视其坐。筹，室中五扶，堂上七扶，庭中九扶。算长尺二寸。
现代文：矢的长度，如果是在室内投壶，就用两尺长的；如果是在堂上投壶，就用两尺八寸长的；如果是在庭中投壶，就用三尺六寸长的。筹码的长度是一尺二寸。
English: The length of the arrow, if it is in the room, is two feet long; if it is in the hall, it is two feet eight inches long; if it is in the yard, it is three feet six inches long. The length of the chip is one foot two inches.

古文：壶：颈修七寸，腹修五寸，口径二寸半；容斗五升。
现代文：投壶所用的壶，颈长七寸，腹长五寸，口径是二寸半，容积是一斗五升。
English: The jug used for pouring is seven inches long at the neck and five inches long at the belly, with a diameter of two and a half inches and a volume of one and a half gallons.

古文：壶中实小豆焉，为其矢之跃而出也。
现代文：壶中盛着小豆，为的是防止投进的矢又重新跳出。
English: There are red beans in the pot to prevent the arrow from jumping out again.

古文：壶去席二矢半。
现代文：放壶的地方，距坐席有两矢半的距离。
English: The place to put the kettle is two-and-a-half yards away from the seat.

古文：矢以柘若棘，毋去其皮。
现代文：投壶所用的矢，用拓木或棘木制成，木皮不要剥掉。
English: The arrows used for throwing pots are made of rubble or thorn wood. Do not peel off the bark.

古文：鲁令弟子辞曰：毋幠，毋敖，毋偝立，毋逾言；偝立逾言，有常爵。薛令弟子辞曰：毋幠，毋敖，毋偝立，毋逾言；若是者浮。
现代文：投壶时，鲁国的司射是这样警告立在堂下的宾主双方的子弟： 不要喧哗，不要傲慢，不要背转身而立，不要远距离谈话。
English: During the throwing of the jug, the Lusatian archer warned the children of both hosts, who were standing below, as follows: Don't make a noise, don't be arrogant, don't stand with your back turned, and don't talk at a distance.

古文：鼓：○□○○□□○□○○□，半；○□○□○○○□□○□○：鲁鼓。
现代文：如果违反，必按规矩罚酒！ 薛国的司射则是这样警告宾主双方子弟的： 不要喧哗，不要傲慢，不要背转身而立，不要远距离谈话。倘有上述行为，罚酒无赦！ 投壶时敲击鼓擎的乐谱：这是鲁国击鼓的乐谱。
English: If you violate the rules, you will be punished according to the rules! Xue Guo's shooters warned the children of both guests: Don't make noise, don't be arrogant, don't turn your back and stand up, don't talk at a distance. If there is any of the above behavior, there is no forgiveness for the punishment!

古文：○□○○○□□○□○○□□○□○○□□○。
现代文：这是薛国击鼓的乐谱。 半 字以下的乐谱用于投壶礼，全部乐谱则用于射字。
English: This is the musical score of Xue Guo's drumming. The musical score of less than half a word is used for the pot-throwing ceremony, and the entire musical score is used for the word-shooting.

古文：半；○□○○○□□○：薛鼓。
现代文：司射、庭长以及立着观礼的成年人，都算作宾客一方参加投壶。
English: The shooter, the chair umpire, and any adults standing to watch are counted as guests participating in the potting.

古文：取半以下为投壶礼，尽用之为射礼。
现代文：奏乐的人、仆人以及小孩子，都算作主人一方参加投壶。这是鲁国击鼓的乐谱。
English: The musicians, servants, and children are counted as the host's side of the pot. This is the musical score of the Lu drumming.

