古文：利俗坊民太原部将成公逵送书使者臧夏踏歌鬼卢燕李湘马震刘惟清
现代文：利俗坊民太原部将成公逵送书使者臧夏踏歌鬼卢燕李湘马震刘惟清
English: The Taiyuan Department of the People's Court of the People's Court of the People's Court of the People's Court of the People's Court of the People's Court of the People's Court

古文：董观钱方义
现代文：董观钱方义
English: Dong Guan Qian Fangyi

古文：利俗坊民
现代文：利俗坊民
English: The rich and the poor

古文：长庆初，洛阳利俗坊，有民行车数两，将出长夏门。
现代文：长庆初年，洛阳利俗坊，有百姓推车数辆，将要出长复门。
English: In the first year of Changqing, Luoyang Lixuang, there were several people pushing carts, and they were about to leave Changfu Gate.

古文：有一人负布囊，求寄囊于车中，且戒勿妄开，因返入利俗坊。才入，有哭声。
现代文：有一个人背着布袋，要求把布袋寄存在车里，并且告戒不要乱打开。于是返回利俗坊，才进入，听到有哭声。
English: A man with a cloth bag on his back asked them to leave the bag in the car and warned them not to open it without permission, so they returned to Lishuangfang before entering and heard crying.

古文：受寄者因发囊视之，其口结以生绠，内有一物，其状如牛胞，及黑绳长数尺。
现代文：接受寄存的人就打开口袋看，那袋口用绳子打着结，里面有一个东西，那形状象牛的胞胎，牵扯黑绳长几尺。
English: The person receiving the deposit opened the bag and saw that it was knotted at the opening with a rope, and inside there was something in the shape of a cow's calf, with a black rope a few feet long.

古文：民惊，遽敛结之。
现代文：那人吃惊，立刻收起打上结。
English: Surprised, the man immediately tucked it away and tied a knot.

古文：有顷，其人亦复，曰：我足痛，欲憩君车中，行数里，可乎？
现代文：不久，那放布袋的人又来了，说：我脚疼，想在你的车中休息，走几里，行吗？
English: After a while, the man with the cloth bag came again and said, "My feet hurt, I want to rest in your car and walk a few miles, is that okay?

古文：民知其异，乃许之。
现代文：人们知道他奇异，就答应了他。
English: People accepted him because they knew he was strange.

古文：其人登车，览囊不悦，顾谓民曰：君何无信？
现代文：那人上车，看了口袋很不高兴，回头对车主说：你怎么不守信用呢？
English: The man got on the bus, looked in his pocket and was very unhappy. He turned to the driver and said, "Why didn't you keep your promise?"

古文：民谢之，又曰：我非人，冥司俾予录五百人，明历真、虢、晋、绛，及至此。人多虫，唯得二十五人耳。今须往徐泗。
现代文：那人谢罪。又说：我不是人，冥司派我收录五百人，我走遍了真、虢、晋、绛几个州，才来到这里，人多虫，只得到二十五人，现在要到徐泗。
English: The man repented. He also said, "I am not a human being. I was sent by God to collect five hundred people. I traveled through several prefectures including Zhen, Qu, Jin, and Qin before I came here. There were many people and many insects, but I only got twenty-five people. Now I want to go to Xuzhou."

古文：又曰：君晓予言虫乎？
现代文：又说：你明白我说的虫吗？
English: And he said, Knowest thou what I mean by worms?

古文：患赤疮即虫耳。
现代文：患赤疮就是虫啊。
English: Suffering from rosacea is a bug.

古文：车行二里，遂辞有程，不可久留，君有寿，不复忧矣。
现代文：车走了二里，就告辞登程：不能久留，你有寿命，不用担忧了。
English: After the car had travelled two miles, he said goodbye and set off: I can't stay long, you have a lifetime ahead of you, don't worry about it.

古文：忽负囊下车，失所在。
现代文：忽然背着口袋下车，失去踪影。
English: He suddenly got out of the car with his bag on his back and disappeared.

古文：其年夏，诸州人多患赤疮，亦有死者
现代文：那年夏天，各州有很多人患赤疮，也有死的。
English: That summer, many people in various states suffered from erysipelas, and some died.

古文：太原部将
现代文：太原部将
English: General Taihara

古文：长庆中，裴度为北部留守，有部将赵姓者，病热且甚。
现代文：长庆年间，裴度做北部留守，有个部将姓赵，有病发高烧很厉害。
English: During the period of Changqing, Pei Du stayed in the northern part of the country. There was a minister surnamed Zhao who was very ill with a high fever.

古文：其子煮药于室，既置药于鼎中。抅火。
现代文：他的儿子在屋里煮药，已经把药放到鼎里，点着了火。
English: His son was cooking medicine in the house. He had put the medicine in a pot and lit it on fire.

古文：赵见一黄衣人，自门来，止于药鼎旁。挈一囊，囊中有药屑，其色洁白，如麦粉状，已而致屑于鼎中而去。
现代文：赵看见一个穿黄衣的人从门进来，停在药鼎旁，拿着一个袋子，袋中有药末，那颜色洁白，象麦粉的样子，旋即把药末放到鼎里而离去。
English: Zhao saw a man dressed in yellow come through the door, stop by the medicine bottle, holding a bag. The bag contained the powder, which was white in color and looked like flour. Zhao immediately put the powder in the bottle and left.

古文：赵告其子，子曰：岂非鬼乎？
现代文：赵告诉他的儿子，儿子说：莫非是鬼吗？
English: Zhao told his son, who said, "Is it a ghost?

古文：是欲重吾父之疾也。
现代文：这是要加重我父亲的病。
English: This is to aggravate my father's illness.

古文：遂去药。
现代文：就去掉了药。
English: So they removed the drug.

古文：赵见向者黄衣人再至，又致药屑鼎中。
现代文：赵看见先前的黄衣人又来了，又把药末放到鼎里。
English: Zhao saw the previous man in yellow come again, and put the powder into the dinghy.

古文：赵恶之，亦命弃去。
现代文：赵讨厌它，又让把药扔掉。
English: Zhao hated it and had the medicine thrown away.

古文：复一日昼寝，其子又煮药，药熟而赵寤，遂进以饮之。后数日，果卒。
现代文：又一天赵白天睡觉，他的儿子又煮药，药煮好而赵睡醒，于是给他喝了，过了几天，果然死了。
English: Another day, when Zhao was sleeping during the day, his son boiled some medicine. The medicine was cooked and Zhao woke up, so he gave it to him to drink. A few days later, he died.

古文：成公逵
现代文：成公逵
English: Cheng Gongye

古文：李公颜居守北都时，有部将成少仪者，其子曰公逵，常梦一白衣人入曰：地府命令我召汝。
现代文：李公颜驻守北都的时候，有个部将叫成少仪。他的儿子叫公逵。曾经梦见一个穿白衣的人说：地府命我召你。
English: When Li Gongyan was stationed in the northern capital, there was a minister called Cheng Shao Yi. His son was called Gong Yao. He once dreamed of a man in a white robe saying: "The capital ordered me to summon you."

古文：逵拒之，使者曰：冥官遣召一属龙人，汝既属龙，何以逃之？
现代文：逵拒绝他。使者又说：冥官派遣我召一个属龙的人，你既然属龙，凭什么逃脱？
English: The messenger said, "The Necromancer has sent me to summon a dragon. Since you are a dragon, how can you escape?"

古文：公逵绐曰：某非属龙者，君何为见诬。
现代文：公逵欺骗说：我不属龙，你为什么诬陷我？
English: The magistrate lied and said, "I am not a dragon. Why are you framing me?"

古文：使者稍解，顾曰：今舍汝归，当更召属龙者。
现代文：使者稍稍缓和，看着他说：现在放你回去，应该另召一个属龙的。
English: The messenger relented a little, looked at him and said, "Now that you have been released, you should call another dragon."

古文：公逵惊寤，且以其梦白於少仪。
现代文：公逵惊醒，并且把他的梦告诉少仪。
English: He woke up and told his dream to Shao Yi.

古文：少仪有卒十余人，常在其门下，至明日，一卒无疾而卒。
现代文：少仪有士卒十多人，常在他的门下。到了第二天，一个士卒无病而死。
English: Shori had more than ten servants, who were often under his roof. The next day, one servant died of illness.

古文：少仪因讯其年，其父曰：属龙。
现代文：少仪于是打听他的年龄，他的父亲说：属龙。
English: So the young woman asked him how old he was. His father said, "He is a dragon."

古文：果公逵之所梦也。
现代文：果然是公逵梦到的。
English: It was indeed Gong Li who dreamed it up.

古文：送书使者
现代文：送书使者
English: The Messenger of the Book

古文：昔有送书使者，出兰陵坊西门，见一道士，身长二丈余，长髯危冠。
现代文：从前有个送书信的使者，出了兰陵坊西门，看见一个道士，身高二丈多，长长的胡须，高高的帽子。
English: Once upon a time, a messenger delivering a letter went out of the West Gate of Lanlingfang and saw a Taoist monk, more than two meters tall, with a long beard and a tall hat.

古文：领二青裙，羊髻，亦长丈余。
现代文：带领两个穿黑裙子的人，梳着羊髻，也高一丈多，各挑着两个大瓮。
English: He was leading two people in black skirts, also taller than he was, who were combing their beards and carrying two large sacks each.

古文：各担二大瓮，瓮中数十小儿，啼者笑者，两两三三，自相戏乐。既见使者，道士回顾羊髻曰：庵庵。
现代文：瓮里有几十个小孩，哭的笑的，三三两两，互相戏乐。看见了使者，道士回头看羊髻说：庵庵。
English: There are dozens of children in the fold, crying and laughing, three by three, two by two, playing with each other. Seeing the messenger, the Taoist looked back at the sheep fold and said, "An hermitage."

古文：羊髻应曰：纳纳。
现代文：羊髻答应说：纳纳。
English: The shepherd agreed and said, "Nana."

古文：瓮中小儿齐声曰：嘶嘶。
现代文：瓮里的小孩齐声说：嘶嘶。
English: The children in the cocoon said in unison: Hiss.

古文：一时北走。不知所之。
现代文：立刻向北跑，不知去向。
English: I immediately ran north, not knowing where I was going.

古文：臧夏
现代文：臧夏
English: Wuxia

古文：上都安邑坊十字街东，有陆氏宅，制度古醜，人常谓凶宅。
现代文：上都安邑坊十字街东，有个陆氏宅院，样式古怪，人们常说这是凶宅。
English: To the east of the cross street of Shangdu Anyifang, there is a Lu mansion with a strange style. People often say that this is a murder house.

古文：后有进士臧夏僦居其中，与其兄咸尝昼寝。
现代文：后来有个进士臧夏租赁住在那里，和他哥哥都曾在白天睡觉，忽然做恶梦惊叫，很久才醒。
English: Later, there was a young man who lived there, and both he and his brother used to sleep during the day, and suddenly had nightmares and screamed, and it took a long time to wake up.

古文：忽梦魇，良久方寤，曰：始见一女人，绿裙红袖，自东街而下。弱质纤腰，如雾潆花，收泣而云： 听妾一篇幽恨之句。
现代文：说：方才看见一个女人，穿着绿裙红袖，从东街而来，体弱腰细，象雾蒙花，停止哭泣而说道： 听我一篇幽恨诗句吧。
English: "I just saw a woman, in a green dress and red sleeves, coming from the East Street, frail and thin, like a misty flower, stop crying and say: Listen to my hateful poem.

古文：其辞曰：卜得上峡日，秋天风浪多。
现代文：那词是： 卜得上峡日，秋天凤浪多。
English: The words are: "Praying for the day on the isthmus, more phoenix waves in autumn."

古文：江陵一夜雨，肠断木兰歌。
现代文：江陵一夜雨，肠断木兰歌。
English: It rained all night in Gangneung, and the song "Mulan Song" broke out.

古文：踏歌鬼
现代文：踏歌鬼
English: Stomping Songbirds

古文：长庆中，有人於河中舜城北鹳鹊楼下见二鬼，各长三丈许，青衫白袴，连臂踏歌曰：河水流溷溷，山头种荞麦。
现代文：长庆年间，有人在河中舜城壮鹳鹊楼下看见两个鬼，各高三丈多，穿着青衫白裤，挽着臂膊踏歌道：河水流溷溷，山头种荞麦。
English: During the Changqing period, someone saw two ghosts in the middle of the river at the foot of Zhuangzhuang, wearing blue shirts and white trousers, walking arm-in-arm singing: The river is flowing, the mountain is growing buckwheat.

古文：两个胡孙门底来，东家阿嫂决一百。
现代文：两个胡孙门底来，东家阿嫂决一百。
English: If two Husuns come to the door, the head of the family, the sister-in-law, gets a hundred.

古文：言毕而没。
现代文：说完就没有了。
English: That's it.

古文：卢燕
现代文：卢燕
English: Lu Yan

古文：长庆四年冬，进士卢燕，新昌里居。
现代文：长庆四年冬天。进士卢燕。住在新昌里，早晨到坊北街。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Changqing, Lu Yan lived in Xinchangli and went to Fangbei Street in the morning.

古文：晨出坊经街，槐影扶疏，残月犹在。
现代文：槐树影子摇摆，残月还在。看见一个妇人。
English: The shadow of the elm wavered, the last of the moon was still there. I saw a woman.

古文：见一妇人，长三丈许，衣服尽黑。驱一物，状若羝羊，亦高丈许。
现代文：高三丈多，穿的衣服全是黑的，驱赶一个东西，样子象公羊，也高有一丈左右，从东向西去。
English: He was about three-and-a-half-feet tall, dressed all in black, driving a thing that looked like a ram, also about a foot tall, from east to west.

古文：自东之西，燕惶骇却走，妇人呼曰：卢五，见人莫多言。
现代文：卢燕惊恐往回跑。妇人呼喊道：卢石，看见人不要多说。
English: Lu Yan ran back in fright. The woman shouted: "Lu Shi, don't say too much when you see someone.

古文：竟不知是何物也。
现代文：竟然不知道是什么东西。
English: I didn't even know what it was.

古文：李湘
现代文：李湘
English: Li Xiang

古文：从史以左仆射为泽潞节度使，坐与镇州王承宗通谋，贬欢州，赐死於康州。
现代文：卢从史以左仆射做泽潞节度使，犯了与镇州王承宗合谋的罪贬到欢州，赐死在康州。
English: Lu Zengshi made his left-hand man Zuoying as an envoy to the Zecheng Festival, and he committed the crime of conspiring with Zhenzhou Wang Chengzong. He was demoted to Hanzhou and sentenced to death in Kangzhou.

古文：宝历元年，蒙州刺史李湘，去郡归阙。自以海隅郡守，无台阁之亲，一旦造上国，若沧海泛扁舟者。
现代文：宝历元年，蒙州刺史李湘，离郡回京城，自己认为是边远的郡守，没有台阁的亲属，一旦回到京都，就象在沧海里飘流的扁舟。
English: In the first year of the Horyaku era, Li Xiang, a historian from Mengzhou, left the county to return to Kyoto. He considered himself a remote county governor and had no relatives in Taiga. Once he returned to Kyoto, he was like a boat drifting in the sea of vicissitudes.

古文：闻端溪县女巫者，知未来之事，维舟召焉。
现代文：听说端溪县有个女巫，能知未来的事，派人请她来。
English: I heard that there was a witch in Duanxi County who could tell the future, so they sent someone to invite her.

古文：巫曰：某乃见鬼者也，见之皆可召。
现代文：女巫说：我是能看见鬼的，见到了都能召示。
English: The witch said, "I can see ghosts, and summon them when I see them.

古文：然鬼有二等，有福德者，精神俊爽。往往自与人言：贫贱者，气劣神悴，假某以言事，尽在所遇。非某能知也？
现代文：可是鬼有两等，有福德的，精神俊爽，往往自己与人说话；贫贱的，气势低劣精神憔悴，借助我而说事情，全在于所遇到的，不是我能知道的。
English: However, there are two kinds of ghosts: those who are blessed and have a good spirit, and often talk to people by themselves; and those who are poor and have a weak spirit, and say things through me. It all depends on what I encounter, not what I can know.

古文：湘曰：安得鬼而问之？
现代文：李湘说：怎么能得到鬼而问他呢？
English: Li Xiang said, "How can you get hold of a ghost and ask it questions?

古文：曰：厅前楸树下，有一人衣紫佩金者，自称泽潞卢仆射，可拜而请之。
现代文：女巫说：厅前的楸树下，有一个穿紫衣佩带金饰的，自称泽潞卢仆射，可以跪拜而请他。
English: The witch said, "Under the elm tree in front of the hall, there is a man wearing a purple robe and gold jewelry, who calls himself Ze Lu仆射. You can kneel down and ask him.

古文：湘乃公服执简，向树而拜。
现代文：李湘就穿着公服拿首简牍，面向大树而跪拜。
English: Wearing his official uniform, Li Xiang held his head in a simple bow, facing the tree and bowed down.

古文：女巫曰：仆射已答拜。
现代文：女巫说：仆射已经答拜。
English: The sorceress said, "I have answered your prayer."

古文：湘遂揖上阶，空中曰：从史死於此厅，为弓弦所迫，今尚恶之。使君床上弓，幸除去之。
现代文：李湘于是拱揖上台阶。空中说道：从史我死在这厅里，被弓箭所杀害，现在还厌恶它，你床上的弓，希望除掉。湘让去掉。
English: Li Xiang then vaulted onto the steps. He said in the air: "From history, I died in this hall, I was killed by a bow and arrow, and now I still detest it. I hope the bow on your bed will be removed. Xiang, let it be removed."

古文：湘命去焉。时驿厅副阶上，唯有一榻，湘偶忘其贵，将坐问之。
现代文：当时驿厅副阶上，只有一张床，湘偶然忘记那贵客，要坐下问他。
English: At that time, there was only one bed on the second step of the hall. Hunan accidentally forgot the guest and asked him to sit down.

古文：女巫曰：仆射官高，何不延坐，乃将吏视之？
现代文：女巫说：仆射是高官，为什么不请他坐，当做差吏对待他。
English: The sorceress said, "He is a high-ranking official, why don't you invite him to sit down and treat him like an official."

古文：仆射大怒，去矣。
现代文：仆射大怒，走了。
English: He flew into a rage and left.

古文：急随拜谢，或肯却来。
现代文：李湘急忙跟随跪拜谢罪，又诚恳地请他回来。
English: Li Xiang hurriedly followed Xie Sin on his knees and sincerely invited him to come back.

古文：湘匍匐下阶，问其所向，一步一拜，凡数十步。
现代文：李湘匍匐下台阶，问他去的方向，一步一拜，共计几十步。
English: Li Xiangyao stepped down the steps and asked him where he was going. He walked step by step, a total of dozens of steps.

古文：空中曰：公之官，未敌吾军一裨将，奈何对我而自坐？
现代文：空中说：你的官职，赶不上我军中的一个副将，怎么面对我而自己坐下？
English: He said in the air: Your official position cannot keep up with a vice-general in our army, how can you sit down in front of me?

古文：湘再三辞谢。
现代文：湘再三说明谢罪。
English: Hunan has repeatedly explained Xie's crime.

古文：巫曰：仆射回矣。
现代文：女巫说：仆射回来了。
English: The sorceress said, "The minions have returned."

古文：於是拱揖而行。及阶，巫曰：仆射上矣。
现代文：于是拱揖而走，到了台阶，女巫说：仆射上来了。
English: So she ran on, and when she came to the steps, the witch said, "Here comes the dwarf."

古文：别置榻。
现代文：别处摆放了坐床，放上坐垫请他坐。
English: A cot was placed elsewhere, and a cushion was placed for him to sit on.

古文：巫曰：坐矣。
现代文：女巫说：坐下了。
English: The witch said, "Sit down."

古文：湘乃坐。
现代文：湘才坐下。
English: Only then did Xiang sit down.

古文：空中曰：使君何所问？
现代文：空中说：你要问什么？
English: He said in the air: What do you want to ask?

古文：对曰：湘远官归朝，伏知仆射神通造化，识达未然。乞赐一言，示其荣悴。
现代文：回答说：我是边远的官吏回朝，知道仆射神通造化广大，知道未来，乞求恩赐一言，明示那荣升与困顿。
English: He replied, "I am a distant official returning to the imperial court. I know the vastness of creation, I know the future, and I beg for a word of grace to show the glory and the tribulation."

古文：空中曰：大有人接引，到城一月，当刺梧州。
现代文：空中说：大有人接待引荐，到京城一个月，就能任命为梧州剌史。
English: It said in the air: There are many people who accept the introduction, and if you come to Beijing for a month, you can be appointed as a Wuzhou historian.

古文：湘又问，不复言。
现代文：湘又问，不再说。
English: Xiang asked again, saying no more.

古文：湘因问曰：仆射去人寰久矣，何不还生人中，而久处冥寞？
现代文：湘于是问道：仆射离开人间很久了，为什么不回到人生中来，而长久处在寂寞的冥府？
English: Xiang then asked: "Duxia has been away from the world for a long time, why not come back to life and stay in the lonely underworld for a long time?"

古文：曰：吁！是何言哉？人世劳苦，万愁缠心，尽如灯蛾。争扑名利，愁胜而发白，神败而体羸。
现代文：说道：唉，这是什么话，人世间劳苦，万愁缠心，都象飞蛾扑灯，争名夺利，愁到极点而头发变白，精神颓败而身体瘦弱。
English: He said, "Alas, what is this saying? The toils of the world, the worries of the heart, are like moths chasing a lamp, competing for fame and profit, the hair turns white in extreme sorrow, the spirit is defeated and the body is thin.

古文：方寸之间，波澜万丈，相妬相贼，猛如豪兽。吾已免离，下视汤火，岂复低身而卧其间乎？
现代文：内心里，波澜万丈，互相嫉妒互相仇视，凶猛得象巨大的野兽，我已经幸免脱离向下看如汤似火的人间，难道再低身而生活在那里吗？
English: In my heart, full of waves, jealous of each other, hostile to each other, fierce like a huge beast, I have been spared from the human world that looks down like a soup, can I live there with my head down?

古文：且夫据其生死，明晦未殊。
现代文：再说根据那生与死，阴间阳间没有什么两样。
English: Furthermore, according to that life and death, there is no difference between the sun and the underworld.

古文：学仙成败，则无所异。
现代文：学仙成败，就没有什么差别。
English: There is no difference between a successful scholar and a failed one.

古文：吾已得炼形之术也。其术自无形而炼成三尺之形，则上天入地，乘云驾鹤，千变万化，无不可也。
现代文：我已得到炼形之术，那术从无形而炼成三尺之形，那么上天入地，乘云驾鹤，千变万化。没有不可以的。
English: I have obtained the art of refinement, the art of refining form from the formless to the three-feet-tall form, so I can go from heaven to earth, ride on the clouds, and change endlessly. Nothing is impossible.

古文：吾之形所未园者，三寸耳。飞行自在，出幽入明，亦可也。万乘之主不及吾，况平民乎？
现代文：我的形还没有炼圆满，只有三寸罢了，飞行自由自在，离开阴间到阳间，是可以的，皇上也赶不上我，何况平民呢？
English: My form is not yet perfected, I am only three inches tall. It is possible to fly freely, to leave the underworld for the sun. Even the emperor cannot keep up with me, let alone a commoner.

古文：湘曰：炼形之道，可得闻乎？
现代文：湘问：炼形之道，可以听听吗？
English: Xiang Q: Can we listen to the Tao of Refinement?

古文：曰：非使君所宜闻也。
现代文：回答说：不是你应该听的。
English: "It's not something you should listen to," he replied.

古文：复问梧州之后，终不言，乃去。
现代文：又问梧州之后的事情，终究没说，就离去了。
English: He also asked about what happened after Wuzhou. After all, he didn't say anything and left.

古文：湘到京，以奇货求助，助者数人。
现代文：湘到京城，用奇货求人帮助，帮助他的有几个人。
English: Xiang went to Beijing to ask for help with some rare goods. He was helped by several people.

古文：未一月，拜梧州剌史。竟终于梧州，卢所以不复言其后事也欤？
现代文：不到一个月，官拜梧州剌史，最后死在梧州，这就是卢不再说他后事的原因。
English: In less than a month, the official paid tribute to Wuzhou's history and finally died in Wuzhou, which is why Lu no longer talks about his after-effects.

古文：马震
现代文：马震
English: Ma Zhen

古文：扶风马震，居长安平康坊。
现代文：扶风的马震，居住在长安平康坊。
English: Fufeng Ma Zhen, lives in Chang'an Ping Kangfang.

古文：正昼，闻扣门。往看，见一赁驴小儿云：适有一夫人，自东市赁某驴，至此入宅，未还赁价。
现代文：正在白天，听到扣门声，前去看，见一租驴的小孩说：刚才有一个夫人，从东市租我的驴，到这进入宅院，没给租钱。
English: In the middle of the day, I heard the door slam and went to look. A child who was renting a donkey said, "Just now, there was a lady who rented my donkey from Higashi-shi, came here and entered the house, but didn't pay the rent."

古文：其家实无人来，且付钱遣之。
现代文：他家确实没有人来，暂且付钱打发他走。
English: It was true that no one from his family had come, so they paid him to leave.

古文：经数日，又闻扣门，亦又如此。
现代文：过了几天，又听到扣门声，也是如此，前后多次。
English: A few days later, I heard the door slam again, and so it did, repeatedly.

古文：前后数四，疑其有异。
现代文：怀疑这里有特异情况。
English: I suspect there's something special going on here.

古文：乃置人于门左右，日日候之。
现代文：就安排人在门的左右，天天守候。
English: He arranged for people to stand around the door and wait for him every day.

古文：是日，果有一妇人，从东乘驴来，渐近识之，乃是震母，亡十一年矣。葬于南山，其衣服尚是葬时者。
现代文：这一天，果然有一个妇人，从东乘驴来，渐渐走近，认出了她，是马震的母亲，死了已经十一年了，葬在南山，她的衣服还是安葬时穿的。
English: On this day, there was indeed a woman who came from the east on a donkey and gradually approached and recognized her. She was Ma Zhen's mother, who had been dead for eleven years and was buried in Nanshan. Her clothes were still on when she was buried.

古文：震惊号奔出，已见下驴，被人觉，不暇隐灭。
现代文：马震吃惊地哭着跑出来，已经看见她下驴，被人发觉，没有时间隐灭。
English: Shocked and crying, Ma Zhen ran out. She had already been seen getting off the donkey and had been discovered. There was no time to hide.

古文：震逐之，环屏而走。既而穷迫，入马厩中，匿身后墙而立。
现代文：马震追她，绕着屏风跑，不久实在没法，进到马厩里，藏身在后墙站立着。
English: The horse chased after her, running around the screen, and soon it was out of control, into the stable, hiding behind a wall and standing up.

古文：马生连呼，竟不动。
现代文：马生连续喊叫，竟然不动。
English: Ma Sheng shouted continuously, but he didn't move.

古文：遂牵其裾，卒然而倒，乃白骨耳。衣服俨然，而体骨具足。
现代文：于是拽她的衣襟，突然倒地，是白骨罢了，衣服依然如故，而尸骨完整无缺。
English: Then he tugged her by the lapels of her dress, and she suddenly fell to the ground. She was just a white bone, her clothes were still the same, but her bones were intact.

古文：细视之，有赤脉如红线，贯穿骨间。
现代文：细看它，有赤脉象红线，贯穿在骨间。
English: Look at it closely, there is a red vein like a red line running through the bone.

古文：马生号哭，举扶易之，往南山，验其坟域如故。
现代文：马生号啕痛哭，抬扶整理好尸骨。到南山查验那坟如旧。
English: Ma Sheng cried bitterly and helped to sort out the bones. He went to Nanshan to check that the grave was still there.

古文：发视，棺中已空矣。
现代文：打开看，棺材里已经空了。
English: Open it and see that the coffin is empty.

古文：马生遂别卜，迁窆之。而竟不究其理。
现代文：马生就另外选择，变受地方落葬，而最终也不明白其中的奥妙。
English: Ma Sheng made a different choice and was buried in a different place, but in the end he did not understand the mystery.

古文：刘惟清
现代文：刘惟清
English: Liu Weiqing

古文：阴北把关，南御并山滨济，空阔百里，无人居。地势险厄，用兵者，先据此为胜。
现代文：阴北把关，南边山连着山直到水边，空旷开阔百里，无人居住，地势险要，用兵的先占据这就能取胜。
English: Yin controls the north, and the south side of the mountain is connected to the mountain until the water's edge. There are hundreds of miles of open space, uninhabited, and the terrain is precarious. If the soldiers occupy it first, they can win.

古文：迄今天阴日暮，鬼怪往往而出。
现代文：到现在天阴日晚，鬼怪常常出来。
English: Even now, when the sky is overcast, ghosts often come out.

古文：长庆三年春，平卢节度使薛苹遣衙门将刘惟清使于东平，途出於此。
现代文：长庆三年春天，平卢节度使薛苹派衙门将刘惟清出使到东平，路经这里，当时太阳已落山。
English: In the spring of the third year of Changqing, the Pinglu Festival caused Xue Ping to send Liu Weiqing, the gatekeeper, to Dongping. He passed through here when the sun had set.

古文：时日已落，忽於野次，遥见幕幄营伍，旌旗人马甚众，烟火极远。
现代文：忽然在野地里，远远看见军营帐篷，旌旗人马很多，烟火很远。
English: Suddenly, in a field, I saw a military camp tent far away, many people waving flags, and fireworks far away.

古文：惟清少在戎旅，计其部分，可五六万人也。
现代文：惟清年少就在军旅中，估计那部人，能有五六万人。
English: However, the young men of the Qing Dynasty were on a military expedition, and it is estimated that there were fifty or sixty thousand people in that group.

古文：惟清不知。
现代文：惟清不明白是怎么回事，很害怕。
English: However, she did not understand what was going on and was very scared.

古文：甚骇之。俄有辎重鼓角，部队纷纭，或歌或语，宣言竞进。
现代文：一会儿有辎重鼓角响起，部队纷纷行动，有的唱歌有的说话，喧闹前进。
English: A moment later, a heavy drum roll sounded, and the troops began to move, some singing, some talking, advancing noisily.

古文：惟清乃缓辔出於其中。
现代文：惟清就拉着缰绳轻轻在那里经过。
English: However, Kiyoshi pulled the reins and gently passed there.

古文：忽有衣者徒行叩惟清，将夺马。
现代文：忽然有一个穿丧服的步行来叨问惟清，要夺他的马。
English: Suddenly, a mourner in mourning clothes came on foot to interrogate Woqing and take his horse.

古文：惟清与之争，因跃马绝道，而者执之愈急。
现代文：惟清和他用力争夺，于是跃马跑出道外。而穿丧服的抓着缰绳更紧。
English: Wo Qing and he fought hard, so the vaulting horse ran out of the way. And the man in the mourning clothes gripped the reins even tighter.

古文：惟清有膂力，以所执铁鞭棰其背。
现代文：惟清有体力，用拿的铁鞭连打他的背部。
English: However, he had enough strength to beat him repeatedly on the back with the iron whip he was holding.

古文：者不甚拒，良久舍去。
现代文：穿丧服的人不特别抵抗，很久才舍掉离去。
English: The man in the mourning clothes didn't put up much of a fight. It took him a long time to give up and leave.

古文：惟清复路，则向之军旅已过矣。
现代文：惟清重新上路，就朝着那些人马走过的地方奔去。
English: However, once he was on the road again, he ran towards the place where those people and horses had passed.

古文：夜阑，方及前驿，会同列将浑钊，自滑使还，亦馆於此。
现代文：夜深，才到达前边的驿站，会见同列将浑钊。浑钊从滑地出使回来，也住在这里。
English: It was late at night when I arrived at the station in front of me and met up with my companion, Muddy. Muddy had returned from a mission to the slippery ground and was also living here.

古文：闻惟清至，迎之，则惟清冥然无所知。
现代文：听说惟清到来，去迎接他，可是惟清象睡觉似的什么也不知道，大家扶持环视他，很久才醒，于是说了这件事。
English: I heard that Youqing came to meet him, but Youqing didn't know anything, as if he was sleeping. Everyone held him and looked around him. It took a long time for him to wake up, so I told him about it.

古文：众扶持环视，久之乃寤，遂话此事，不二三日，至东平，既就馆，亦不为他人道。先是东平有术士皇甫喈者，落魄不仕，衣蓝缕，众甚鄙之。
现代文：不过两三天，到达东平，住在馆里，也没对别人说。从前这东平有个术士叫皇甫喈，落魄不当官，穿着草鞋破衣服，大家都很鄙视他。
English: However, two or three days later, he arrived in Dongping and lived in a guesthouse without telling anyone. Once upon a time, there was a sorcerer in Dongping called Wang Fuxiong. He was a down-and-out bureaucrat who wore straw sandals and tattered clothes. Everyone despised him.

古文：一日，惟清出游，喈於途中遥指曰：刘押衙。
现代文：一天，惟清出去游玩，喈在路上遥遥指着说：刘押衙。
English: One day, Wo Qing went out to play. On the road, Yao pointed far and wide and said: "Liu Oshi."

古文：惟清素衣未识，因与相款。
现代文：惟清平素不认识，就和他应答。
English: But Qing Ping did not know him, so he answered him.

古文：喈曰：本恐他人取马，故牵公避道，奈何却以铁鞭相苦？赖我金铠在身，不尔，巨力坚策，岂易当哉。
现代文：喈说：本来怕别人夺取你的马，所以引你躲避道边，怎么却用铁鞭打我，靠我金铠在身，不然的话，巨大的力量坚硬的鞭子，难道容易抵挡吗？
English: The donkey said, "I was afraid that others would seize your horse, so I led you to avoid the roadside, but why did you whip me with an iron whip and rely on my golden whip? Otherwise, a whip with great strength and hardness, is it easy to resist?

古文：笑而竟去。
现代文：笑着竟然离开。
English: He actually left laughing.

古文：惟清从人辞谢，将问其故，喈跃入稠人中，不可复见。
现代文：惟清跟从那人辞谢，要问那原故，喈跑到稠密的人群中，不能再看见。
English: But when he had left the man, he ran into the crowd and could no longer be seen.

古文：后四年，李同捷反於沧景，时大下兵皆由平阴以入贼境，岂阴兵先致讨欤？
现代文：过了四年，李同捷在沧景反叛。当时天下的兵，都由平阴而进入贼境，难道阴兵先来讨伐了吗？
English: Four years later, Li Tongjie rebelled in Cangjing. At that time, all the soldiers in the world entered the thief's territory from Pingyin. Did the Yin soldiers come to fight first?

古文：董观
现代文：董观
English: Dong Guan

古文：董观，太原人，善阴阳占候之术。
现代文：董观是太原人，善于阴阳占卜之术。
English: Dong Guan is from Taiyuan and is good at yin and yang divination.

古文：唐元和中，与僧灵习善，偕适吴楚间。习道卒，观亦归并州。
现代文：唐朝元和年间，与僧人灵习友好。一同到吴楚一带去，灵习在路上死去，观也回到并州。
English: During the Yuan and He years of the Tang Dynasty, he was friendly with the monk Ling Xi. Together they went to the Wu Chu area. Ling Xi died on the way, and Guan also returned to Bianzhou.

古文：宝历中，观游汾泾，至泥阳郡。
现代文：宝历年间，观到汾经游览，到了泥阳郡，在兴龙寺会见僧人。
English: During the year of the lunar calendar, he went on a tour to see the Book of Changes, went to Dewang County, and met with monks at Xinglong Temple.

古文：会于龙兴寺，堂宇宏丽，有经书千百编，观遂留止，期尽阅乃还。
现代文：兴龙寺堂宇宏伟壮丽，有经书数千百编。观就停留在这里，打算都阅读完再回去。
English: The hall of Xinglong Temple is grand and magnificent, with thousands of copies of scriptures. Onlookers stop here, intending to read them all before going back.

古文：先是院之东庑北室，空而扃鐍，观因请居，寺僧不可，曰：居是室者，多病或死，且多妖异。
现代文：原来这院的东边廊房的北屋，空着而且上着闩锁。观于是请求居住，寺僧不同意，说：住在这个屋，大多有病有的死去，又多妖怪。
English: Originally, the north wing of the corridor on the east side of the monastery was empty and locked. The monks asked to live there, but the monks disagreed, saying, "Most of the people who live in this house are sick, some have died, and there are many monsters."

古文：观少年恃气力，曰：某愿得之。
现代文：观凭着年少气壮，说：我愿得到它。
English: "I'd like to get it," said the young and energetic onlooker.

古文：遂居焉。
现代文：于是住在那里。
English: So he lived there.

古文：旬余夜寐，辄有胡人十数，挈乐持酒来，歌笑其中，若无人。
现代文：过了十多天夜间睡觉，就有胡人几十个，带着乐器拿着酒，歌舞欢笑在那里，好象没有别人。
English: After more than ten days of sleeping at night, there are dozens of Hu people, with musical instruments holding wine, singing, dancing and laughing there, as if there were no others.

古文：如是数夕，观虽惧，尚不言于寺僧。
现代文：象这样几个晚上。观虽然害怕，还没有对寺僧说。
English: After several nights like this, Guan, although scared, still hasn't spoken to the monk.

古文：一日经罢，时已曛黑，观怠甚，闭室而寝。
现代文：一天念完经，天已经昏黑，观疲劳到极点，关门睡觉。
English: One day, after chanting the sutras, it was already dark, and I was so tired that I closed the door and went to sleep.

古文：未熟，忽见灵习在榻前，谓观曰：师行矣。
现代文：尚未睡熟，忽然看见灵习在床前，对观说：师傅走吧。
English: Not yet fully asleep, he suddenly saw Ling Xi standing in front of the bed and said to Guan: Master, let's go.

古文：观惊且恚曰：师鬼也，何为而至？
现代文：观吃惊并且愤怒地说：你是鬼，为什么到这来。
English: The onlooker, surprised and angry, said, "You are a ghost, why are you here?"

古文：习笑曰：子运穷数尽，故我得以候子。
现代文：习笑着说：你的生命已到尽头，所以我来侍候你。
English: Xi smiled and said, "Your life has come to an end, so I have come to serve you."

古文：即牵观袂去榻，观回视，见其身尚偃，如寝熟。乃叹曰：嗟乎？
现代文：就拽着观的袖子离开床。观回头看，看见他的身体还躺在那里，象睡熟了，就叹息道：唉！
English: Looking back, he saw that his body was still lying there, as if he was fast asleep, and he sighed, "Alas!

古文：我家远，父母尚在，今死此，谁蔽吾尸耶？
现代文：我家离这儿很远，父母还在，现在死在这里，谁来遮蔽我的尸体呢？
English: My home is far from here, my parents are still alive, now they are dead here, who will cover my corpse?

古文：习曰：何子之言失而忧之深乎？
现代文：习说：为什么你说得这么失望，担忧得这么深重呢？
English: Xi said: "Why are you so disappointed and worried?

古文：夫所以为人者，以其能运手足，善视听而已。此精魂扶之使然，非自然也。精魂离身故曰死，是以手足不能为，视听不能施，虽六尺之躯，尚安用乎？
现代文：那成为人的原因，是因为能运动手脚，善于看和听罢了，这都是精魂扶植使它这样，不是天然的；精魂离开身体所以叫死，因此手脚不能运动，看和听不能实施，即使是六尺的躯体，还有什么用呢？
English: The reason why he became a man was because he could move his hands and feet, and was good at seeing and hearing. All of this was done by the spirit, and it was not natural. The spirit left the body, so he died, so he couldn't move his hands and feet, and he couldn't see or hear. Even if he was six feet tall, what good would his body be?

古文：子宁足念。
现代文：你还值得想念吗？
English: Are you still worth missing?

古文：观谢之，因问习：常闻我教中有阴去身者，谁为耶？
现代文：观感谢他，于是问习道：曾经听说我教中有能隐去体的，谁能够这样做呢？
English: Guan thanked him, and then asked the practitioner, "I once heard that there is someone in my class who can go incognito. Who can do that?"

古文：习曰：吾与子谓死而未更生也。
现代文：习说：象你我这样死了但尚未托生的就是。
English: Xi said, "Like you and me, I have died but have not yet been reborn."

古文：遂相与行。其所向，虽关键甚严，辄不碍，於是出泥阳城西去。其地多草，茸密红碧，如毳毯状。
现代文：于是就和灵习一块走了，他们一路上，关卡虽然很严，但于他们也并无阻碍。于是出了泥阳城向西走去，那地方有很多的草，重迭繁密花红碧绿，象毳毯的样子。
English: So he and Lingxi walked together. Along the way, although the checkpoints were very strict, they were not hindered. So they left the muddy city and walked westward. There was a lot of grass in that place, with overlapping dense flowers of red, green and blue, like a carpet of thistles.

古文：行十余里，一水广不数尺，流而西南。
现代文：走了十多里，一河宽不到几尺，向西南方向流去。
English: After walking more than ten miles, a river less than a few feet wide flowed to the southwest.

古文：观问习，习曰：此俗所谓奈河，其源出於地府耶！
现代文：观问习，习说：这就是俗话所说的奈河，它的源头出在地府。
English: Watching and asking Xi, Xi said: This is the Naihe River, as the saying goes, and its source is in the Underworld.

古文：观即视其水，皆血，而腥秽不可近。
现代文：观就看那河水，都是血，腥臭味不可接近。
English: If you look at the river, it's all blood, and the stench is unapproachable.

古文：又见岸上有冠带裤襦凡数百。
现代文：又看见岸上有冠带裤衣共有几百件。
English: He also saw hundreds of crowns and trousers on the shore.

古文：习曰：此逝者之衣，由此趋冥道耳。
现代文：习说：这是死人的衣服，由这奔向地府的道路。
English: Xi said: "This is a dead man's clothes. This is the road to the underworld.

古文：又望水西有二城，南北可一里余。草树蒙蔽，庐舍骈接。
现代文：又看到河西有两座城，南北距离能有一里多，被树木遮蔽，房屋相连接。
English: He also saw two cities in the west of the river, more than a mile apart from north to south, sheltered by trees and connected by buildings.

古文：习与观曰：与子俱往彼，君生南城徐氏，为次子。
现代文：习对观说：和你一起往那里去，你降生到北城的侯氏家，做长子。
English: Xi said to Guan: "I will go there with you. You were born into the Hou family in Beicheng as the eldest son.

古文：我生北城侯氏，为长子。
现代文：降生十年后，应该重新和你舍弃家园回到佛门。
English: Ten years after birth, you should abandon your home and return to the Buddhist gate.

古文：生十年，当重与君捨家归佛氏。观曰：吾闻人死当为冥官追捕，案籍罪福。苟平生事行无大过，然后更生人间。
现代文：观说：我听说人死应当被冥官追捕，考察登记他的罪福，如果平生做事行为没有大的过错，然后再降生到人间。
English: Guan said, "I have heard that after a person dies, he should be pursued by the netherworld officials, and his sins and blessings should be investigated and recorded. If he has no major faults in his life and deeds, then he should be reborn on earth.

古文：今我死未尽夕，遂能如是耶？
现代文：现在我死不到一个夜晚，就能如此吗？
English: Now I can't die in one night, can I?

古文：曰：不然，冥途与世人无异。脱不为不道，宁桎梏可及身哉！
现代文：习说：不是这样，冥府和人间没有差别，倘或不做不说，难道手铐脚镣能到你的身上吗？
English: Xi said, "Isn't it true that there is no difference between the underworld and the human world? If you don't do or say anything, will the handcuffs and shackles get on your body?"

古文：言已，习即牵衣跃而过。
现代文：说完，习就拽着衣服跳过河。
English: After saying this, Xi tugged on his clothes and jumped across the river.

古文：观方攀岸将下，水豁然而开，广丈余，观惊眙惶惑。
现代文：观正要攀附岸边将要下去，河水豁然而开，宽有一丈多。观惊恐惶惑，忽然有人拽他。
English: The viewer is about to cling to the bank and is about to go under, when the river suddenly opens up and becomes much wider. The viewer is terrified and bewildered when someone suddenly pulls him under.

古文：忽有牵观者，观回视一人，尽体皆毛，状若狮子，其貌即人也。
现代文：观回头看见一人，整个身体都是毛，样子象狮子，他的面貌是人。
English: When he looked behind him, he saw a man whose whole body was hairy and who had the appearance of a lion, but his face was human.

古文：良久谓观曰：师何往？
现代文：好久对观说：师傅要到哪里去？
English: He said to the onlookers for a long time, "Where does the master want to go?"

古文：曰：往此南城耳。
现代文：回答说：往南城去呀。
English: He replied, "Let's go to Nancheng."

古文：其人曰：吾命汝阅大藏经，宜疾还，不可久留。
现代文：那人说：我让你阅读大量藏经，应该赶紧回去，不可长久停留。
English: The man said, "I let you read a lot of Tibetan scriptures, you should hurry back, don't stay too long."

古文：遂持观臂，急东西指郡城而归。
现代文：于是抓住观的胳膊，急忙向着郡城的方向往回走。
English: So he grabbed Guo's arm and hurriedly walked back in the direction of the county seat.

古文：未至数里又见一人，状如前召观者，大呼曰：可持去，将无籍。
现代文：没走几里，又看见一人，样子象先前招呼观的，大叫道：可以带回去，还没有注册。
English: After walking for a few miles, he saw another person, who looked like the person he had seen earlier, and shouted: "You can take it back, it hasn't been registered yet."

古文：顷之。逐至寺。
现代文：一会儿，就到了寺院。
English: After a while, we arrived at the temple.

古文：时天以曙，见所居室有僧数十，拥其门，视己身在榻。
现代文：当时天已经亮了，看见所住的屋里有几十个僧人，拥塞着他的房门；又见自己的身体在床上。
English: It was already daylight at the time, and he saw dozens of monks in the room where he lived, crowding the door of his house; he also saw his body on the bed.

古文：二人排观入门，忽有水自上沃其体，遂寤。
现代文：二人推观进门，忽然感到有水从上浇灌他的身体，于是就醒了。
English: They peered through the door and suddenly felt water pouring over his body and he woke up.

古文：寺僧曰：观卒一夕矣。
现代文：寺僧说，观死一夜了。
English: The monk said that it had been a long night of death watching.

古文：於是具以事语僧。
现代文：观于是把这事详细地告诉了寺僧。
English: Guan then told the monk about this in detail.

古文：后数日，于佛宇中见二土偶象，为左右侍，乃观前所见者。
现代文：过了几天，在佛殿看见两个土制偶象，是左右的侍者，是观先前看见的。
English: A few days later, I saw two earthenware figurines in the Buddha hall. They were the attendants on the right and the left, the ones I had seen before.

古文：观因誓心精思，留阅藏经，虽寒暑无少堕。
现代文：于是观发誓专心致志，阅读藏经。即使是严寒酷暑也没有稍微的懈怠，共计几年才回家。
English: Therefore, Guan swore to devote himself to reading Tibetan scriptures. Even in the severe cold and heat, he did not slacken a bit, and it took him a total of several years to return home.

古文：凡数年而归，时宝历二年五月十五日。
现代文：当时是宝历二年五月十五。
English: It was the 15th day of the 5th month in the 2nd year of the lunar calendar.

古文：会昌中，诏除天下佛寺，观亦斥去。
现代文：会昌年间，皇帝诏令为除天下佛寺，观也被排斥离去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huichang, the Emperor issued an edict to abolish all Buddhist temples, and Guan was also ostracized.

古文：后至长安，以占候游公卿门，言事往往而中。
现代文：后来到长安，以占卜游说于公卿人家，说的事情往往说中。
English: Later, when he went to Chang'an, he used divination to lobby the nobles. What he said was often what he meant.

古文：常为沂州临沂县尉。
现代文：曾经做过沂州沂县尉。
English: He was once a lieutenant of Zhangzhou and Zhangxian.

古文：余在京师，闻其事于观也。
现代文：我在京城，听到关于董观的这些事情。
English: I was in Beijing when I heard these things about Mr. Dong.

古文：钱方义
现代文：钱方义
English: Qian Fangyi

古文：殿中侍御史钱方义，故华州剌史礼部尚书徽之子。
现代文：殿中侍御史钱方义。是从前华州剌史礼部尚书徽的儿子。
English: Qian Fangyi, the palace attendant and historian, is the son of Shang Shuhui, a former member of the History and Ritual Department of the State Council of China.

古文：宝历初，独居长乐第。
现代文：宝历年间，独自住在长乐府第。
English: During the Baoli years, he lived alone in Changle Prefecture.

古文：夜如厕，僮仆从者，忽见蓬头青衣数尺来逼。
现代文：晚上上厕所，僮仆跟随，看见一个头发散乱的穿黑衣的人只有几尺逼近。
English: When I went to the toilet in the evening, my servant followed me and saw a black-clad man with disheveled hair only a few feet away.

古文：方义初惧，欲走，又以鬼神之来，走亦何益，乃强谓曰：君非郭登耶？
现代文：方义开始害怕，想要跑，又以为鬼神来了，跑又有什么用。就勉强对他说道：你莫非是郭登吗？
English: Fang Yi began to be afraid, wanted to run, and thought that ghosts and gods were coming, and what was the use of running. He reluctantly said to him: Are you Guo Deng?

古文：曰：然。曰：与君殊路，何必相见？
现代文：回答说：是方义说：和你是不同的路，何必相见？
English: He answered, "It was Fang Yi who said, 'I'm on a different path from you, why do we have to meet?'

古文：常闻人若见君，莫不致死，岂方义命当死而见耶？
现代文：曾经听人说如果看见你，没有不死的。难道是我命该死而看见你吗？
English: I have heard it said that no one can see you and not die. Do I deserve to die for seeing you?

古文：方义家居华州，女兄衣佛者亦在此。一旦溘死君手，命不敢惜，顾人弟之情不足。能相容面辞乎？
现代文：我家住华州，姐姐出家在这里，一旦突然死在你的手里，命不可惜，想到做弟弟的情谊还不完备，可以容许我当面告辞吗？
English: My family lives in Washington, my sister became a nun here. If I were to die suddenly at your hands, my life would not be a pity. The thought of being a younger brother is not yet complete. Can I be allowed to say goodbye in person?

古文：蓬头者复曰：登非害人，出亦有限。人之见者，正气不胜，自致夭横，非登杀之。
现代文：蓬头的人又说：我不想害人，出来也有限，人看见我的，正气不足，自己到达死亡，不是我杀的。
English: The man with the shaved head also said, "I don't want to harm anyone. My output is limited. If people see me, they won't be righteous enough, and they will die themselves. I didn't kill them."

古文：然有心曲，欲以托人，以此久不敢出。惟贵人福禄无疆，正气充溢，见亦无患。故敢出相求耳。
现代文：然而我有心事，想要把这个托付于人，因此好久不敢出来，只有你福禄无边，充满正气，看见我也没有祸患，所以敢出来和你相见。
English: However, I have something on my mind, I want to entrust this to someone, so I haven't dared to come out for a long time. Only you have boundless blessings, full of righteousness, and there is no harm in seeing me, so I dare to come out and meet you.

古文：方义曰：何求？
现代文：方义说：有什么相求？
English: Fang Yi said: What is the mutual demand?

古文：对曰：登久任此职，积效当迁，但以福薄，须人助。贵人能为写金字金刚经一卷，一心表白。回付与登，即登之职，遂乃小转。
现代文：回答说：我很久担任这个职务，积极效力应该升迁，只是因为福气浅薄，必须有帮助，你能给写金字金刚经一卷，诚心表白，回付给我，我的职务就能小小的转迁。
English: He replied, "I have been in this position for a long time, and I should be promoted because of my positive effect, but because I am not rich, I need help. If you can write a volume of the Diamond Sutra for me, express your sincerity, and give it back to me, I can be promoted a little.

古文：必有后报，不敢虚言。
现代文：以后一定报答你，不敢说谎。
English: I will definitely repay you in the future, I dare not lie.

古文：方义曰：诺。
现代文：方义说：好吧。
English: Fang Yi said, "That's fine.

古文：蓬头者又曰：登以阴气侵阳，贵人虽福力正强，不成疾病，亦当有少不安。
现代文：蓬头人又说：我用阴气侵犯了你的阳气，你虽然福分体力正强盛，不能得病，也能有少微的不舒适。
English: The hooded man also said, "I have violated your yang qi with yin qi. Although you are physically strong, you can't get sick, but you can have a little discomfort.

古文：宜急服生犀角、生玳瑁，麝香塞鼻则无苦。
现代文：应该立刻服用生犀角生玳瑁，用麝香堵塞鼻子就没有痛苦了。
English: Raw rhino horn and ginger should be taken immediately, and there is no pain in plugging the nose with fennel.

古文：方义至中堂，闷绝欲倒，遽服麝香等并塞鼻，则无苦。
现代文：方义到达中堂。烦闷到极点要倒地，立刻服用了麝香等药物并堵塞鼻子，就没有痛苦了。
English: Fang Yi arrived at the middle hall. He was so bored that he wanted to fall to the ground. He immediately took some medicine such as fennel and plugged his nose, and there was no more pain.

古文：父门人王直方者，居同里，久於江岭从事，飞书求得生犀角，又服之，良久方定。
现代文：父亲的弟子王直方，住在同一个里，长久在江岭做事。飞快送信给他求得生犀角，又吃了，好久才安定。
English: Wang Naofang, a disciple of his father, lived in the same village and worked in Jiangling for a long time. He quickly sent a message to him to ask for raw rhino horn, and then ate it. It took a long time to stabilize.

古文：明旦，选经工，令写金字金刚经三卷，令早毕功。
现代文：第二天早晨，选择经工，让他们抄写金字金刚经三卷，让他们早点抄完。
English: The next morning, select the scribes and let them copy the three volumes of the Diamond Sutra, and let them finish it early.

古文：功毕饭僧，回付郭登。
现代文：抄完后招待僧人，回付郭登。
English: After copying, invite the monks and pay back Guodeng.

古文：后月余，归同州别墅。下马方憩，丈人有姓裴者，家寄鄂渚，别已十年，忽自门入，径至方义阶下，方义遂遽拜之。
现代文：一个多月后，回到同州别墅，下马正在休息，有个姓裴的老人，家住鄂渚，分别已经十年，忽然从门进入，直接到方义阶下。方义就立刻拜见他。
English: More than a month later, back at the Dongzhou villa, dismounting for a rest, there was an old man surnamed Pei, who had been living in Ezhu for ten years, suddenly entered through the door and went directly to Fang Yi. Fang Yi immediately went to see him.

古文：丈人曰：有客，且出门。
现代文：老人说：有客人，请出门。
English: The old man said, "If you have guests, please go out.

古文：遂前行，方义从之，及门失之矣。
现代文：就在前边走，到了门口老人就不见了。
English: He walked straight ahead, and when he reached the door, the old man was gone.

古文：见一紫袍象笏，导从绯紫吏数十人，俟於门外。
现代文：看见一个穿紫袍拿着象笏的人，前导随从穿红紫色衣服的差役几十人，在门外等候。
English: He saw a man in a purple robe holding an elephant shovel. The foreman was waiting outside the door, followed by dozens of police officers in red and purple.

古文：俯视其貌，乃郭登也，敛笏前拜曰：弊职当迁，只消金刚经一卷。贵人仁念，特致三卷。今功德极多，超转数等，职位崇重，爵位贵豪，无非贵人之力。
现代文：低头看那相貌，是郭登。郭登收起笏板上前拜道：卑职要升迁，只需金刚经一卷，你的仁义想法，特意送给三卷，现在功德极高，越级升迁几等，职位崇高重要，爵位高贵豪迈。无不是你的大力相助。
English: Looking down at that face, it was Guo Deng. Guo Deng put away the chopping board and stepped forward and prayed: If you want to be promoted to a lower position, you only need one volume of the Diamond Sutra. Your thoughts of benevolence and righteousness are specially given to three volumes. Now your merit is extremely high, how many levels of promotion are beyond your level, your position is lofty and important, and your title is noble and heroic. All of this is your great help.

古文：虽职已骤迁，其厨仍旧。顷者当任，实如鲍肆之人。今既别司，复求就食，方知前苦，殆不可堪。
现代文：虽然职位已经迅速升迁，那厨房依旧，短时间还对付，实际象咸鱼店的人，现在离开旧司，再去就餐，才知道以前的痛苦，几乎不能忍受。
English: Although the position has been rapidly promoted, the kitchen is still the same, a short time to deal with, in fact, like the salted fish shop people, now leave the old department, and then go to eat, only to know the previous pain, almost unbearable.

古文：贵人量察，更为转金刚经七遍，即改厨矣。终身铭德，何时敢忘。
现代文：你能体量明察，再给反复念金刚经七遍，就能改变厨房，终身铭记你的恩德，什么时候敢忘记呢？
English: If you can accurately observe the body size, and then recite the Diamond Sutra seven times, you can change the kitchen, and remember your kindness for life. When do you dare to forget it?

古文：方义曰：诺。
现代文：方义说：行。
English: Fang Yi said, "That's fine.

古文：因问丈人安在，曰：贤丈江夏寝疾，今夕方困。神道求人，非其亲导，不可自已，适诣先归耳。
现代文：于是又问老人在哪里。回答说：善良的老人在江夏生病，今晚正困窘，神道求人，不是他亲自引导，不能自己前来，刚才来后先回去了。
English: Then he asked again where the old man was. He replied: "The good old man is ill in Jiangxia. He is in great distress tonight. He is begging for Shinto from someone. He did not personally lead the way. He could not come himself. He came just now and went back first."

古文：又曰：厕神每月六日例当出巡。此日人逢，必致灾难。人见即死，见人即病。
现代文：又说：厕神每月六日照例应该出去巡查，这日人遇见他，一定招致灾难，人看见他就死，他看见人就生病。
English: He also said: "The toilet god should go out for inspection six days a month as usual. If you meet him on this day, it will surely bring disaster. If you see him, you will die. If he sees you, you will get sick."

古文：前者八座抱病六旬，盖言登巡毕将归，瞥见半面耳。
现代文：先前的八座有病已六旬，说我巡完将要回去，看见一半脸面。
English: The previous eight patients were in their sixties. They said they would come back after the inspection, and I saw half of their faces.

古文：亲戚之中，递宜相戒避之也。
现代文：亲戚之间，传递应该互相回避的。
English: Between relatives, transmission should be avoided.

古文：又曰：幽冥吏人，薄福者众，无所得食，率常受饿。
现代文：又说：冥府的差役，福分薄的多，没有地方得到食品，通常挨饿，一定能吃的慷慨施舍给他们。
English: He also said, "The officials of the Netherworld are very poor in blessings. They have no place to get food and are usually starving. Give them generous alms that they can eat."

古文：必能食推食，泛祭一切鬼神，此心不忘。咸见斯众暗中陈力，必救灾厄。
现代文：广泛祭示一切鬼神，这心意不会忘记。都被这众鬼神暗中出力，一定能救灾祸。
English: We will not forget the spirit of extensively worshipping all ghosts and gods. All of these ghosts and gods are secretly exerting their power, and they will surely be able to save the disaster.

古文：方义曰：晦明路殊，偶得相遇。每一奉见，数日不平。意欲所言，幸於梦寐。转经之请，天曙为期。
现代文：方义说：阴阳路不同，偶然相遇，每次相见，多日不平静，心里想说的，希望在梦中，反复念经要求，天亮就开始。
English: Fang Yi said: Yin and yang paths are different, they meet by chance, every time they meet, they are not calm for many days, they want to say in their hearts, they hope in their dreams, they repeatedly recite the requirements, and the dawn begins.

古文：唯唯而去。
现代文：答应后离去。
English: He agreed and left.

古文：及明，因召行数僧念金刚经四十九遍，及明祝付与郭登。
现代文：到天亮，就召集行敬僧人念金刚经四十九遍，到天明祝告给郭登。
English: At dawn, the monks were summoned to recite the Diamond Sutra forty-nine times and to wish Guodeng a good morning.

古文：功毕，梦曰：本请一七，数又出之。累计其功，食天厨矣。
现代文：念完经，梦见郭登说：本来请念一个七遍，数量又增加了六倍，累计那功德，吃天厨了。
English: After reciting the sutra, Guo Denglu said in his dream: Originally, I asked you to recite the sutra seven times, and the number has increased six times. I have accumulated the merits and have eaten the heavenly cuisine.

古文：贵人有难，当先奉白。不尔，不来黩也。泛祭之请，记无忘焉。
现代文：你要有难，应先奉告，不然的话，不来骚扰，广泛祭示的要求，记住不要忘了。
English: If you have any difficulties, you should notify us first, otherwise, do not come to harass, request for extensive sacrifice, remember do not forget.

