古文：杨瑊袁继谦邠州士人王商谢彦璋崇圣寺任彦思张仁宝杨蕴中王延镐
现代文：杨瑊袁继谦邠州士人王商谢彦璋崇圣寺任彦思张仁宝杨蕴中王延镐
English: Yang Jian Yuan, followed by Qian Qizhou, Shijian Wang, Shang Xie Yan, Zong Sheng Temple, Ren Yan Si, Zhang Ren Bao, Yang Kunzhong Wang, Yan Zi

古文：僧惠进田达诚徐彦成郑郊李茵柳鹏举周洁
现代文：僧惠进田达诚徐彦成郑郊李茵柳鹏举周洁
English: Monk Hui marched into Tian Dacheng, Xu Yancheng, Zheng Jiao, Li Yin, Liu Peng, and Zhou Jie

古文：杨瑊
现代文：杨瑊
English: by Yang Hui

古文：兖州龙兴寺西南廊第一院，有经藏。
现代文：山东兖州龙兴寺西南廊的第一个院子里，收藏着珍贵的经书。
English: In the first courtyard of the southwest corridor of Longxing Temple in Luzhou, Shandong Province, there is a collection of precious scriptures.

古文：有法宝大师者，常于灵神佛堂之前见一白衣叟，如此者数日，怪而诘之，叟曰：余非人，乃杨书记宅之土地。
现代文：有一位法宝大师，曾经在灵神佛堂前看到一位白衣老者，连着看到了好几天，感到很奇怪，就上前询问。老者说：我不是人间的人，是杨书记官宅里的土地神。
English: There was a magic treasure master who once saw an old man in a white robe in front of the Ling Shen Buddha Hall. He saw him for several days in a row and felt very strange, so he came forward to inquire. The old man said: I am not a human being, I am a land god in the house of Secretary Yang.

古文：僧曰：何为至此？叟曰：彼公愎戾，兴造不辍，致其无容身之地也。
现代文：法宝大师问他到庙里来做什么，老者说：杨书记官刚愎暴戾，到处挖地基造房子，把我挤得没地方住了！
English: The treasure master asked him what he had come to the temple to do. The old man said, "Clerk Yang is a violent man, digging foundations everywhere to build houses. He has squeezed me out of a place to live!"

古文：僧曰：何不祸之？
现代文：法宝问他：你为什么不给他降灾呢？
English: The magic treasure asked him: Why don't you give him a disaster?

古文：答曰：彼福寿未衰，无奈之何。
现代文：老者说：他的福寿气数未尽，我降灾也制不了他。
English: The old man said, "His number of good fortune and longevity is not exhausted, and I can't control him by disaster.

古文：言毕不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：后数年，朱瑾弃城而遁，军乱。一家皆遇害。
现代文：过了几年，朱瑾扔下兖州逃跑了，军中大乱，杨书记全家被害。
English: A few years later, Zhu Rong abandoned Zhangzhou and ran away. The army was in turmoil, and Secretary Yang's entire family was killed.

古文：杨名瑊。累举不第。为朱瑾书记。
现代文：杨书记名叫杨瑊，赴考几次都没考中，给朱瑾当了书记官。
English: Secretary Yang's name is Yang Hui. He failed to pass the middle school entrance examination several times. He became a secretary for Zhu Hui.

古文：袁继谦
现代文：袁继谦
English: Yuan Jichian

古文：殿中少监袁继谦尝居兖州，侍亲疾，家在子城东南隅。
现代文：在宫中当少监的袁继谦，曾住在山东兖州侍护老人的病，当时他家住在子城东南角。
English: Yuan Jichian, who worked as a junior inspector in the imperial court, once lived in Luzhou, Shandong, to take care of an elderly man's illness. At that time, his family lived in the southeast corner of the city.

古文：有仆自外通刺者，署云前某州长史许延年，后云陈慰。
现代文：有一天，仆人从门上拿来一个求见者的名帖，上面署名是前某州的刺史许延年，后面写着想慰问并陈诉些事。
English: One day, a servant took a petitioner's name tag from the door. It was signed by the former governor of a certain state, Xu Yan Nian, and it said that he wanted to express his condolences and make a complaint.

古文：继谦不乐，命延入。
现代文：袁继谦不想见，勉强让仆人请他进来。
English: Yuan Jichian didn't want to see him, so he reluctantly asked his servant to let him in.

古文：及束带出，则已去矣。
现代文：自己更衣束带等着接见时，那人却已经走了。
English: When I was waiting for the interview with my dressing gown, the man had already left.

古文：仆云，徒步，衣故皂衣，张帽而至，裁投刺入车门，则去矣。
现代文：据仆人说，那人是徒步走来的，穿着一身很旧的黑衣服，戴着一顶张开口的帽子，刚把名帖送进大门就转身走了。
English: According to the servant, the man came on foot, dressed in very old black clothes, wearing an open-mouthed hat, and turned away as soon as he brought the postcard through the gate.

古文：其年亲卒，遂以其刺兼冥钱焚之。
现代文：这一年袁继谦的老人果然死了。袁继谦就把那张名帖和一些纸钱一同烧化成灰。
English: This year, Yuan Jichian's old man died. Yuan Jichian burned that famous postcard to ashes along with some paper money.

古文：邠州士人
现代文：邠州士人
English: Zhangzhou Scholars

古文：朱梁时，有士人自雍之邠，数舍，遇天晴月皎，中夜而进。
现代文：五代朱梁时，有个士人从雍州到邠州来，离邠州还有一百多里地时，已是晚上，但月光皎洁，士人就趁月光赶路。
English: In the fifth generation of Zhu Liang, a scholar came from Yongzhou to Zhangzhou. When he was still more than a hundred miles away from Zhangzhou, it was already evening, but the moonlight was bright and clear, and the scholar took advantage of the moonlight to make his way.

古文：行至旷野，忽闻自后有车骑声，少顷渐近。
现代文：走到一个野地，忽然听见身后有车马声，越来越近，士人赶快躲到路边草丛里。
English: Walking to a field, he suddenly heard the sound of a car behind him, getting closer and closer. The scholar quickly hid in the roadside bushes.

古文：士人避于路旁草莽间，见三骑，冠带如王者，亦有徒步，徐行谈话。
现代文：只见三个骑马的人，看衣冠像是君王，后面也有徒步而行的，一面走一面谈着什么。
English: I only saw three people on horseback, looking like kings in their robes, and there were also people walking behind them, talking about something as they walked.

古文：士人蹑之数十步，闻言曰：今奉命往邠州，取三数千人，未知以何道而取，二君试为筹之。
现代文：士人偷偷在几十步的后边跟着，听见他们说：现在咱们奉命到邠州取三千人的性命，不知用什么方法取才妥当，请二位出出主意吧。
English: The scholar secretly followed a few dozen paces behind, and heard them say: "Now we have been ordered to Luzhou to take the lives of three thousand people. I don't know what method to use to take the lives of these people, but I would like you two to come up with an idea."

古文：其一曰：当以兵取。
现代文：一个人回答说：应该通过打仗来取。
English: One person replied: "It should be taken by war."

古文：又一曰：兵取虽优，其如君子小人俱罪其祸何。
现代文：另一个人说：打仗的办法虽然好，但是让君子和小人都受到战祸就不好了。
English: Another person said: Although the method of fighting is good, it is not good to let both gentlemen and villains suffer from the scourge of war.

古文：宜以疫取。
现代文：我看还是散布瘟疫为好。
English: I think it would be better to spread the plague.

古文：同行者深以为然，既而车骑渐远，不复闻其言。
现代文：几个人都很同意用瘟疫的办法。他们说着就走远了，再也听不清。
English: Several were in favour of the plague, and they walked away, never to be heard of again.

古文：士人至邠州，则部民大疫，死者甚众。
现代文：士人到了邠州后，邠州果然闹起了瘟疫，不少人在瘟疫中病死。
English: After the scholars arrived in Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou really caused a plague, and many people died from the plague.

古文：王商
现代文：王商
English: Wang Shang

古文：梁贞明甲戌岁，徐州帅王殷将叛。
现代文：梁朝贞明甲戌年间，徐州统帅王殷将要叛变。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenmin of the Liang Dynasty, the commander-in-chief of Xuzhou, Wang Yin, was about to mutiny.

古文：八月二十日夜，月明如昼，居人咸闻通衢队伍之声。
现代文：八月二十日夜里，月明如昼，城中居民都听见大街上在过军队。
English: On the night of August 20th, with the moon as bright as day, the residents of the city heard that there were troops in the streets.

古文：自门隙觇之，则皆青衣兵士而无甲胄。
现代文：从门缝往外看，只见都是穿着黑色布衣的兵，都没有穿盔甲，起初都以为是州里的兵在偷偷地缉捕盗贼。
English: Looking through the cracks in the door, they saw soldiers in black cloth, without armor, and at first they thought that the soldiers from the state were secretly hunting for thieves.

古文：初谓州兵潜以扑盗耳，俄闻清啸相呼，或歌或叹，刀盾矛槊，嚣隘闾巷，怪状奇形，甚可畏惧，乃知非人也。
现代文：忽然传来大声的呼叫喧哗，还有歌声和哀叹声，夹杂着刀枪盾牌的撞击声，再看那些兵士一个个奇形怪状，而且可怕，才知道都是鬼兵。
English: Suddenly there came loud shouts and noises, and songs and lamentations, mixed with the clash of swords, guns and shields, and when I looked at the soldiers one by one, I saw that they were grotesque and terrible, and I knew that they were ghost soldiers.

古文：比自府廨，出于州南之东门，扃键无阻。
现代文：他们从府衙出来，冲出州城南面的东门，城门虽然上了锁他们照样出入。
English: They came out of the palace and rushed out of the east gate on the south side of the state capital. Although the gate was locked, they still went in and out.

古文：比至仲冬，殷乃拒诏，朝命刘鄩以兵五万致讨，凡八月而败，合境悉罹其祸。
现代文：这年冬天，王殷果然叛变，朝廷派刘鄩带了五万大军征讨平叛，打了八个月叛乱才平息，徐州全境都受到战乱的祸害。
English: This winter, Wang Yin actually rebelled. The imperial court sent Liu Ye with a 50,000-strong army to fight and quell the rebellion. It took eight months to quell the rebellion, and the entire territory of Xuzhou was plagued by war.

古文：谢彦璋
现代文：谢彦璋
English: Xie Yanyuan

古文：梁许州节度使谢彦璋遇害，朝廷命宣和库副使郝昌遇往许昌籍其家财。
现代文：梁朝的许州节度使谢彦璋遇害后，朝廷派宣和库的副使郝昌遇到许昌，去清理谢彦璋的家产。
English: After Xie Yanqi was killed by Liang Dynasty's Xuzhou Festival, the imperial court sent Xuanchang, the vice-envoy of the Propaganda and Peace Fund, to clean up Xie Yanqi's family property.

古文：别开一室，见彦璋真像之左目下，鲜血在焉，竟不知自何而有，众共异之。
现代文：打开一间偏房后，见谢彦璋的画像上，左眼下边有鲜血，大家弄不懂这鲜血是从哪儿来的，非常奇怪。
English: After opening a side room, we saw a picture of Xie Yanjun with blood under his left eye. We couldn't figure out where the blood was coming from. It was very strange.

古文：彦璋性嗜鳖，镇河阳。命渔者采以供膳，无虚日焉，不获则必加重罚。
现代文：谢彦璋喜欢吃鳖，他镇守河阳时，命令打鱼的每天必须供应他活鳖，如果渔夫捕不到鳖，就会受到重罚。
English: Xie Yanqi likes to eat clams. When he was the town guard of Heyang, he ordered the fisherman to supply him with live clams every day. If the fisherman could not catch clams, he would be severely punished.

古文：有渔人居于城东，其日未曙，将往取之。未至一二里，遇一人，问其所适，以实对。
现代文：城东有个渔夫，有一天大清早要下河捕鳖，没走出一二里地时遇见了一个人，问他到哪儿去，渔夫说要下河捉鳖。
English: There was a fisherman in the east of the city. One day, early in the morning, he wanted to go down to the river to catch trout. Before he had gone more than a mile, he met a man and asked him where he was going. The fisherman said that he wanted to go down to the river to catch trout.

古文：此人曰：子今日能且辍否？
现代文：那人说：你今天不去捉行不行？
English: The man said, "Can you not go fishing today?"

古文：渔人曰：否则获罪矣。
现代文：渔夫说：不行啊，捉不到鳖要挨罚的。
English: The fisherman said, "No, you can't. If you don't catch the cormorant, you will be punished."

古文：又曰：子若不临网罟，则赠子以五千钱，可乎？
现代文：那人说，你如果不再下网，我就送给你五千钱，行不行？
English: The man said, "If you don't get off the net again, I'll give you five thousand dollars, okay?"

古文：渔人许之，遂获五千，肩荷而回。
现代文：渔夫答应了，就收了那人五千钱，背上往回走。
English: The fisherman agreed, took the man's five thousand yuan and walked back on his back.

古文：比及晓，唯呀其轻，顾之，其钱皆纸矣。
现代文：等天色大亮时，渔夫越来越奇怪，怎么这些铜钱这么轻呢？一看，原来都是些冥府纸钱。
English: When it was broad daylight, the fisherman became more and more puzzled as to why these copper coins were so light. At first glance, they all turned out to be paper money from the underworld.

古文：寺僧谓其州官至，奔出迎接，皆非也。与僧展揖甚恭，唯少言语。
现代文：崇圣寺有一年的清明时分，汉州崇圣寺里来了两个人，一个穿红袍，一个穿紫袍，二人气度不凡，带着不少车马和仆从。
English: It was the year of the Qingming time in Chong Sheng Temple. Two people came to Chong Sheng Temple in Hanzhou, one wearing a red robe and the other wearing a purple robe. Both of them were extraordinary, with many horses, chariots and servants.

古文：命笔，各题一绝句于壁，朱衣诗曰：禁烟佳节同游此，正值酴醿夹岸香。
现代文：寺里的和尚以为是州里的官员到了，忙跑出去迎接，一看不是。二人对和尚很恭敬的施礼，但很少说话，只是让拿两支笔来，每人在墙上题了一首七言绝句。穿红袍的人题的是：禁烟佳节同游此，正值酴醿夹岸香。
English: The monk in the temple thought that a state official had arrived and hurried out to meet him, but it was not true at first glance. The two men bowed very respectfully to the monk, but rarely spoke. They just asked him to take two pens, and each of them wrote a seven-word sentence on the wall. The person in the red robe wrote: "Smoking ban holiday here, it's time to smell the incense."

古文：缅想十年前往事，强吟风景乱愁肠。
现代文：缅想十年前往事，强吟风景乱愁肠。
English: Remembering the past ten years ago, singing the scenery is melancholy.

古文：紫衣诗曰：策马暂寻原上路，落花芳草尚依然。
现代文：穿紫袍的题诗是：策马暂寻原上路，落花芳草尚依然。
English: Wearing a purple robe, the theme poem is: The horse is temporarily looking for the original road, and the flowers and herbs are still there.

古文：家亡国破一场梦，惆怅又逢寒食天。
现代文：家亡国破一场梦，惆怅又逢寒食天。
English: A dream is shattered when a family is killed and a country is destroyed.

古文：题罢，上马疾去。出松径，失其所在，但觉异香经月不散。
现代文：题完诗后，他们上马很快地离去，出了松林中的小路就不见了，留下来一股特殊的香气一个月都不散。
English: After finishing the poem, they got on their horses and quickly left. The path in the pine forest disappeared, leaving behind a special aroma that lasted for a month.

古文：其诗于今见存。
现代文：到现在，庙里墙上还留着他们题的诗。
English: To this day, their poems remain on the walls of the temple.

古文：任彦思
现代文：任彦思
English: Ren Yanshi

古文：蜀昌州牧任彦思家，忽闻空中有乐声，极雅丽悲切，竟日不休。
现代文：四川昌州牧任彦思，有一天在家中闲坐，忽然听见空中传来非常典雅悲切的音乐声，一整天也没断。
English: One day, while sitting idly at home in Changzhou, Sichuan Province, Pastor Yan Xixi suddenly heard a very elegant and mournful music sound coming from the sky, which continued for the entire day.

古文：空中言曰：与吾设食。
现代文：后来又听见空中有人说：快给我摆设酒饭。
English: Later, I heard someone in the air say, "Quickly prepare some food and drink for me."

古文：任问是何人，竟不肯言本末，乃与静室设之。
现代文：任彦思问是谁，空中的人并不回答。任彦思就在一个安静的屋子里摆好酒饭，不一会儿就被吃光，后来经常这样。
English: Ren Yanshi asked who it was, but the man in the sky didn't answer. Ren Yanshi set out the food and wine in a quiet room, and was soon eaten up, as he often was later.

古文：如人食无遗，或不与食，即致破什器，虫入人耳，烈火四起。
现代文：如果不给摆酒饭，家里的东西就会被毁坏，虫子会钻进人的耳朵，或无缘无故就着起火来。
English: If you don't put out food and drink, things in the house will be destroyed, bugs will get into people's ears, or they will start a fire for no reason.

古文：彦思恶之，移去回避，亦常先至，凡七八年。
现代文：任彦思十分憎恶，就搬了家，但那鬼怪仍然常来，一直闹腾了七八年。
English: Ren Yanshi hated it so much that he moved house, but the ghost still came often and had been causing trouble for seven or eight years.

古文：忽一日不闻乐声，置食无所飨，厅舍栿上血书诗曰：物类易迁变，我行人不见。
现代文：后来，任彦思忽然发现摆设的食物没有被吃掉，空中也没有音乐声了，只见屋里的梁上用血题着一首诗：物类易迁变，我行人不见。
English: Later, Ren Yanxi suddenly found that the food had not been eaten, and there was no music in the air. He saw a poem inscribed in blood on the beam in the house: "Species are subject to change, I am not a pedestrian."

古文：珍重任彦思。相别日已远。
现代文：珍重任彦思，相别日已远。
English: It's been a long time since I've thought about you.

古文：彦思尤恶其所题，以刀划之，而字已入木，终不知何鬼也。
现代文：彦思十分厌恶房梁上鬼题的这首诗，用刀子去刮，然而那字却渗入木头里去了，到底也不知道那是个什么鬼怪。
English: Yan Si was very disgusted with the poem with the ghost theme on the beam of the house. He scraped it with a knife, but the word seeped into the wood, and he didn't know what kind of ghost it was.

古文：张仁宝
现代文：张仁宝
English: Zhang Rimpao

古文：校书郎张仁宝素有才学，年少而逝，自成都归葬阆中，权殡东津寺中。
现代文：校书郎张仁宝非常有才学，年纪很轻就死了，死后，他家将他的灵柩从成都运回家乡阆中下葬。没下葬前，暂时停放在东津寺里。
English: Zhang Rimpao, the school scribe, was very talented and died at a very young age. After his death, his family transported his coffin from Chengdu to his hometown to be buried. Before the funeral, it was temporarily parked in Dongjin Temple.

古文：其家寒食日，闻扣门甚急，出视无人，唯见门上有芭蕉叶，上有题曰：寒食家家尽禁烟，野棠风坠小花钿。
现代文：清明这天，家里人忽然听到急促的敲门声，开门看外面却没有人，发现门上有一片芭蕉叶，上面题着一首诗：寒食家家尽禁烟，野棠风坠小花钿。
English: On the day of Qingming, the family members suddenly heard a hurried knock on the door. They opened the door to look outside, but no one was there. They found a plantain leaf on the door, with a poem inscribed on it: "Cold-food families should ban smoking, wild-tang wind falls small flowers."

古文：为今空有孤魂梦，半在嘉陵半锦川。
现代文：为今空有孤魂梦，半在嘉陵半锦川。
English: For now, there is a lonely dream in the sky, half in Jialing and half in Jinchuan.

古文：顷之克葬，不复至矣。
现代文：后来家人很快地将棺材埋葬，张仁宝就再也没来。
English: Later, the family quickly buried the coffin, and Zhang Rimpao never came back.

古文：杨蕴中
现代文：杨蕴中
English: Yang Yunzhong

古文：进士杨蕴中得罪，下成都府狱，夜梦一妇人，虽形不扬，而言词甚秀，曰：吾即薛涛也，顷幽死此室。
现代文：进士杨蕴中犯了罪，被押在成都的府衙狱中。一天夜里，他梦见一个女人，虽然姿色不佳，但谈吐十分文雅。她说：我就是薛涛啊，就是死在这间房子里的。
English: One night, he dreamed of a woman who, although she was not beautiful, spoke very elegantly. She said, "I am Xue Tao, and I died in this house."

古文：乃赠蕴中诗曰：玉漏深长灯耿耿，东墙西墙时见影。
现代文：说罢赠了杨蕴中一首诗：玉漏深长灯耿耿，东墙西墙时见影。
English: He then recited a poem by Yang Yun: The jade sink is deep, the lamp is long, the east wall and the west wall are shadowy.

古文：月明窗外子规啼，忍使孤魂愁夜永。
现代文：月明窗外子规啼，忍使孤魂愁夜永。
English: The moon shines brightly outside the window, making the lonely soul mourn forever.

古文：王延镐
现代文：王延镐
English: Wang Yanqi

古文：梓州有阳关神，即蜀车骑将军西乡侯张飞也，灵应严暴，州人敬惮之。
现代文：四川梓州有阳关神，这位神就是蜀国的车骑将军西乡侯张飞。这阳关神即严厉又灵应，梓州人对他又敬又怕。
English: In Zizhou, Sichuan, there is a yangguan god. This god is Zhang Fei, the cart and horse general of Shu. This yangguan god is stern and responsive, and the people of Zizhou respect and fear him.

古文：龙州军判官王延镐纳成都美妓人霞卿，甚宠之。
现代文：龙州军中任判官的王延镐，有一次娶了成都一个很漂亮的妓女，妓女名叫霞卿。
English: Wang Yanqi, a judge in the Longzhou Army, once married a very beautiful prostitute in Chengdu, a prostitute named Xia Qing.

古文：携之赴官，经阳关神祠前过，霞卿暴卒。
现代文：王延镐对霞卿十分宠爱，带着她去梓州上任。
English: Wang Yanqi was very fond of Xia Qing and took her to Zizhou to take office.

古文：唯所生一女，非延镐之息，倍哀悯之。
现代文：他们经过阳关神的祠庙时，霞卿突然暴亡，只留下一个女儿，还不是王延镐亲生的，王延镐十分悲痛哀怜。
English: When they passed the ancestral temple of Yangguan God, Xia Qing suddenly died violently, leaving only one daughter, who was not Wang Yanju's biological child. Wang Yanju was very sad and pitiful.

古文：一日传灵语，具云：为阳关神所录，辞而得解。从此又同寝处，写其貌而凭之。
现代文：有一天，霞卿传灵语说，她是被阳关神捉去了，经她一再请求才得以暂时解脱，从此后，又和王延镐住在一起，并画了她的像以为凭籍。
English: One day, Xia Qing passed on a spirit saying that she had been captured by the Yangguan God, and only after her repeated requests was she temporarily freed. Since then, she has lived with Wang Yanju and painted her portrait.

古文：至于盥漱饮食皆如生。
现代文：平时梳装打扮、饮食起居和过去完全一样。
English: The usual grooming, dressing, eating and living are exactly the same as in the past.

古文：乃曰：俟我嫁女，方与君别。
现代文：她对王延镐说：等我把儿女嫁出去，就和你告别了。
English: She said to Wang Yanqi, "When I marry off my children, I will say goodbye to you."

古文：延镐将更娶，告之，鬼亦许焉。
现代文：延镐打算再娶个女人，告诉霞卿，霞卿也很同意。
English: Yan Xuan planned to marry another woman and told Lady Xia, who also agreed.

古文：乃娶沈彦循女。
现代文：后来延镐就娶了沈彦循的女儿。
English: Later, Yan Rong married the daughter of Shen Yan Cun.

古文：自是或女客列坐，即有一黑蝴蝶，翩翻掠筵席而过，卒以为常。
现代文：从此家里如果来了女客时，就会有一只黑蝴蝶在筵席上飞来飞去，大家也习以为常，知道那蝴蝶就是霞卿。
English: From then on, when a female guest came to the house, there would be a black butterfly flying around at the banquet. Everyone took it for granted and knew that the butterfly was Xia Qing.

古文：其后延镐为新津令，方嫁其女，资送甚备，自是无闻。
现代文：后来延镐当了新津令，并把霞卿的儿女嫁了出去，给了很丰厚的嫁妆，后来就再也没听到霞卿的消息。
English: Later, Yan Xun became Xinjinling and married off Lady Xia's children, giving them a very rich dowry. Later, there was no news of Lady Xia.

古文：僧惠进
现代文：僧惠进
English: Monk Huijin

古文：西蜀有僧惠进者，姓王氏，居福感寺。
现代文：西蜀有位和尚，俗姓王，法名惠进，住在福感寺。
English: In West Shuxu, there was a monk with the common surname Wang and the Buddhist name Huijin. He lived in Fuquan Temple.

古文：此人亦随至，撮拽牵顿，势不可解。
现代文：有一天他清晨出门，走到资福院门口时，忽然看见身后有一个浑身发蓝的大个子跟在身后，而且越追越急。和尚赶快奔走躲避。
English: One day, he went out early in the morning, and when he reached the entrance of the Jiefu Academy, he suddenly saw a large man with a blue complexion following him, and the pursuit became more and more urgent. The monk quickly ran away to avoid him.

古文：僧哀鸣祈之，此人问：汝姓何？
现代文：到了竹箦桥，和尚一头扎进一个老百姓家，那怪物也追了进来，死死拽住和尚不放，和尚挣不脱，就哀叫求告。
English: When he arrived at the Bamboo Bridge, the monk ran headlong into a commoner's house. The monster also chased him in, tugged at the monk and wouldn't let him go. Unable to break free, the monk cried out for help.

古文：答曰：姓王。
现代文：那怪物问：你姓什么？
English: The monster asked: What is your last name?

古文：此人曰：名同姓异。
现代文：和尚说姓王。那家伙说：名倒是对，姓却不对。
English: The monk said his surname was Wang. The guy said, "The name is right, but the surname is wrong."

古文：乃舍之而去。
现代文：就放了和尚。
English: and released the monk.

古文：僧战摄，投民家，移时稍定，方归寺中。
现代文：和尚非常恐惧，投奔居民家很长时间，心神安定后，这才回到寺里。
English: The monk was very frightened and ran to the resident's house for a long time. He only returned to the temple after his mind was calmed.

古文：是夕，有与之同名异姓者死焉。
现代文：这天夜里，果然有一个与和尚同名不同姓的人死了。
English: That night, a man with the same name but a different surname died.

古文：田达诚
现代文：田达诚
English: Tian Dacheng

古文：庐陵有贾人田达诚，富于财，颇以周给为务。
现代文：江西庐陵有个商人叫田达诚。很有钱，但并不吝啬守财，经常周济穷人。
English: There was a merchant in Fuling, Jiangxi Province, named Tian Dacheng. He was very rich, but he was not stingy with his money and often gave alms to the poor.

古文：治第新城，有夜扣门者，就视无人，如是再三。
现代文：他在新城造了一所宅院，有天夜里有人敲大门，开门看却没有人，这样反复了几次后，田达诚就问道：敲门的是人还是鬼呀？
English: He built a mansion in Xincheng. One night, someone knocked on the door, but no one opened it. After repeating this several times, Tian Dacheng asked: Is it a person or a ghost knocking on the door?

古文：因呼问之：为人耶？
现代文：好半天才听到回答说：我并不是人，原住在龙泉，家里被洪水淹了，求你收留我暂住几天，等我家房子盖好我就走。
English: It took me half a day to hear the answer: I am not a human being, I used to live in Longquan, my home was flooded, please take me in for a few days, I will leave when my house is built.

古文：鬼耶？良久答曰：实非人也，比居龙泉，舍为暴水所毁。
现代文：达成不同意，说人和鬼怎么能住在一起呢，鬼说：我只是寄宿几天，绝不会祸害你，而且听说你为人仗义疏财十分有义气，我才来投奔你的。
English: Reaching a disagreement, he said, "How can a man and a ghost live together?" The ghost said, "I'm only staying for a few days, I'll never harm you, and I've heard that you're a very righteous person, so I've come to you."

古文：求寄君家，治舍毕乃去耳。
现代文：达诚就答应了。鬼又问让他住在哪里，达诚说：你就住在堂屋里吧。
English: Dasheng agreed. The ghost then asked where he should live, and Dasheng said, "You should live in the hall."

古文：达诚不许，曰：人岂可与鬼同居耶？对曰：暂寄居耳，无害于君。且以君义气闻于乡里，故告耳。达诚许之，因曰：当止我何所？
现代文：鬼拜谢了达诚就走了。过了几天鬼又来了，说：我已经在你堂屋里住下了，你一切都可照常，也可以请客人，只是让你告诉家里人注意管好火，不然万一出了意外发生了火灾，你会以为是我干的。
English: After a few days, the ghost came again and said, "I have already settled down in your hall, you can do everything as usual, you can also invite guests, just let you tell your family members to take care of the fire, otherwise, if there is an accident and there is a fire, you will think I did it."

古文：试暂回顾，则酒已尽，字已著纸矣。前后数篇，皆有意义。
现代文：可是大家一回头的工夫，却见酒被喝尽，纸上已写好了诗句，而且写了好几首，都很有新意，字是柳体，笔锋遒健。
English: However, when everyone looked back, they saw that the wine had been drunk, the poems had been written on the paper, and several poems had been written, all of which were very new, the characters were willow-shaped, and the pen was sharp.

古文：笔迹劲健，作柳体。或问其姓字。曰：吾倘言之，将不益于主人，可诗以寄言之。乃赋诗云：天然与我一灵通，还与人间事不同。
现代文：有人问鬼叫什么名字，鬼说：如果我说出我的名字，将会对主人不利，我还是把名字写进诗中吧。于是鬼就写了一首诗道：天然与我一灵通，还与人间事不同。
English: Someone asked the ghost what his name was, and the ghost said, "If I say my name, it will be detrimental to my master, so I'll write my name in the poem." So the ghost wrote a poem: "Naturally, I am very clever, and I am also different from human affairs."

古文：要识我家真姓字，天地南头一段红。
现代文：要识吾家真姓字，天地南头一段红。
English: If you want to know my family's real surname, the southernmost part of the world is red.

古文：众亦不谕也。
现代文：大家看后，仍不懂鬼的名字叫什么。
English: After everyone has seen it, they still don't know what the ghost's name is.

古文：一日复告曰：吾有少子，婚樟树神女。将以某日成礼，复欲借君后堂三日，以终君大惠，可乎？
现代文：又一天，鬼告诉达诚说：我有个小儿子，娶樟树神的女儿为妻，将要在某日办喜事，想借你的后厅用三天，同时也报达你对我这么大的恩惠，你看行不行？
English: Another day, the ghost told Dacheng, "I have a little son who is going to marry the daughter of the eucalyptus god. I am going to hold a celebration one day. I would like to borrow your back room for three days, and at the same time repay your great favor to me. Do you think it's okay?"

古文：达诚以虚其堂，以幕围之，三日复谢曰：吾事讫矣，还君此堂。
现代文：达诚就把后厅腾出来，用布幔围上给鬼用。三天后，鬼感谢地说：我家喜事已办完，后厅还给你用。
English: Three days later, the ghost said thankfully, "My family's joyous event is over, I'll give you back the back hall."

古文：主人之恩，可谓至矣。然君老婢某，可笞一百也。
现代文：你对我真是恩重如山，但你家的那个老女仆，你真该打她一百板子。
English: You've been very kind to me, but you should have beaten that old maid of yours.

古文：达诚辞谢。召婢，笞数下，鬼曰：使之知过，可止矣。
现代文：达诚忙向鬼赔礼，并把那名老女仆召来用板子打。刚打了几下，鬼就劝道：打她几下，让她知错也就算了。
English: Dasheng hastily apologized to the ghost, and summoned the old maid to beat her with a board. After a few beatings, the ghost advised: beat her a few times, and let her know she was wrong.

古文：达诚徐问其婢，言曾穴幕窃视，见宾客男女，厨膳花烛，与人间不殊。
现代文：后来达诚问那老女仆做了什么错事，她说她曾在后厅的幔幕缝中向厅偷看，见里面办喜事的宾客礼仪和一切陈设酒宴，和人间完全相同。
English: Later, Duchenne asked the old maid what she had done wrong. She said that she had peeked into the back room through a crack in the curtain, and saw that the guests' etiquette and all the furnishings of the banquet were exactly the same as on earth.

古文：后岁余，乃辞谢而去。
现代文：过了一年多，那鬼告辞走了。
English: After more than a year, the ghost said goodbye and left.

古文：达诚以事至广陵，久之不归，其家忧之。鬼复至曰：君家忧主人耶？
现代文：后来，达诚到广陵去办事，去了很久没回来，家里人十分着急，这时那个鬼又来了，说：你们是不是挂念主人的安危？
English: Later, Dacheng went to Guangling to do some business. He had been gone for a long time and had not returned. The family was very anxious. At this time, the ghost came again and said, "Are you worried about your master's safety?"

古文：吾将省之。
现代文：我可以去看看。
English: I can go and have a look.

古文：明日还曰：主人在扬子，甚无恙，行当归矣。
现代文：第二天鬼就回来了，对家人们说：主人在扬子，一切平安，快回来了。
English: The next day the ghost came back and said to the family: "My master is in Yangtze, everything is fine, I'll be back soon."

古文：新纳一妾，与之同寝，吾烧其帐后幅，以戏之尔。
现代文：他新纳了个小妾，和他同住，我把他们帐子的后幅给烧了，和她开了个玩笑。
English: He took a new concubine to live with him, and I burned the back of their tent and played a trick on her.

古文：大笑而去，达诚归，问其事皆同。
现代文：说罢大笑着走了。达诚回家后，家里人问他在外的事，他说的和鬼所报告的完全一样。
English: After he finished talking, he laughed loudly and left. When Dasheng got home, his family asked him what had happened outside. He said the exact same thing as the ghost had reported.

古文：后至龙泉，访其居，亦竟不获。
现代文：后来达诚到鬼的家乡龙泉去打听鬼的住址，始终没有打听到下落。
English: Later, Dacheng went to Longquan, the ghost's hometown, to inquire about the ghost's address, but never found out whereabouts.

古文：徐彦成
现代文：徐彦成
English: Xu Yancheng

古文：军吏徐彦成恒业市木，丁亥岁，往信州汭口场，无木可市，泊舟久之，一日晚，有少年从二仆往来岸侧，状若访人而不遇者。
现代文：军官徐彦成经常作木材生意。丁亥年间，他到江西信州的汭口场，那里没有木头可买卖，船在岸边停了很久。一天晚上，看见有个少年带着两名仆人在江岸上徘回，看样子好像是找什么人没找到。
English: Xu Yancheng, a military officer, often did timber business. During the Dinghai era, he went to the Hekou field in Shinshu, Jiangxi, where there was no wood to buy and sell, and the ship stopped on the shore for a long time. One evening, he saw a boy with two servants wandering back on the riverbank, looking as if they were looking for someone and not finding anyone.

古文：彦成因延入舟中，为设酒食，宾敬之。
现代文：徐彦成就把少年请到船上，设酒招待少年，十分恭敬。
English: Xu Yan managed to invite the boy to the boat, and invited the boy with wine, which was very respectful.

古文：少年甚愧焉，将去，谢曰：吾家近此数里别业中，君旦日能辱顾乎？
现代文：少年又感谢又惭愧，临告辞时对徐彦成说：我家在离这儿不远的别墅里，您明天能否屈尊到敝舍坐坐？
English: The boy was both grateful and ashamed. At the end of his farewell speech, he said to Xu Yancheng: My home is in a villa not far from here. Could you deign to come to the hermitage tomorrow?

古文：徐彦成许诺，明日乃往。行里余，有仆马来迎，奄至一大宅，门馆甚盛。少年出延客，酒膳丰备。
现代文：徐彦成答应了少年的邀请，第二天就往少年家去，走出一里多地，少年已派仆人牵马来迎接，不一会儿来到一个大府宅前，见门楼屋舍高大华贵，少年亲自在门外迎接，大厅上已为徐彦成备下了丰盛的筵席。
English: Xu Yancheng accepted the young man's invitation and went to the young man's home the next day, walking more than a mile. The young man had sent a servant to lead a horse to meet him. Soon he arrived in front of a grand mansion. The gatehouse was tall and luxurious. The young man himself greeted him outside the door. A sumptuous banquet had been prepared for Xu Yancheng in the hall.

古文：从容久之，彦成因言住此久，无木可市，少年曰：吾有木在山中，明当令出也。
现代文：宾主边喝酒边谈话，十分融洽。席间，彦成提到在这里住了很久也买不到木材，少年立刻说：我有很多木材在山里，我让他们给你运出来就是。
English: During the meal, Hikosei mentioned that he had lived here for a long time and could not buy wood. The boy immediately said, "I have a lot of wood in the mountains. I'll have them ship it out to you."

古文：居一二日，果有材木大至，良而价廉。
现代文：彦成住了两天后，果然从山里运来了大批的木材，物美而价廉。
English: After two days of living in Hikone, a large amount of wood was shipped from the mountains. It was beautiful and inexpensive.

古文：至吴，当获善价。彦成回，始至秦淮，会吴师殂，纳杉板为棺。以为材之尤异者，获钱数十万。彦成大市珍玩，复往汭口，以酬少年，少年复与交市。如是三往，颇获其利。
现代文：买卖完毕，就去向少年辞别，少年又叫人抬出四块大杉木板说：那些木材是咱俩的生意买卖，这四块板子是我免费奉送你，运到江浙一带会卖上好价钱。彦成运着木材回返，走到秦淮河时，正赶上吴国的国师去世了，把那四块杉板买去，认为是作棺木的上等木材，彦成得钱数十万后，又买了大量的珍宝古玩返回汭口酬谢少年。彦成往来和少年作了三次生意，获得了很高的利。
English: After the sale and purchase was completed, he went to say goodbye to the boy. The boy also asked someone to carry out four large cedar planks and said: Those woods are our business and trade. I will send you these four boards free of charge. They will be sold at a good price when transported to the Jiangsu and Zhejiang regions. When Yancheng returned with the timber and reached the Qinhuai River, he was just in time to catch up with the state teacher of Wuzhong who had passed away. He bought the four cedar planks, thinking that they were high-grade wood for coffins. After Yancheng got hundreds of thousands of money, he bought a

古文：间一岁，复诣之，村落如故，了无所见。
现代文：隔了一年，彦成又到汭口去访少年，村子还是原样，但少年的华丽府宅却不见了。
English: A year later, Hikosei visited the boy again in Hekou. The village was still the same, but the boy's gorgeous mansion was gone.

古文：访其里中，竟无能知者。
现代文：彦成在村里打听，人们竟然根本不知道有少年这个人。
English: Hikosei asked around in the village and found that people didn't even know about the boy at all.

古文：郑郊
现代文：郑郊
English: Zhengzhou

古文：郑郊，河北人，举进士下第，游陈蔡间。
现代文：河北人郑郊，考进士落了榜，在河南陈州蔡州一带游玩。
English: Zheng Qiao, a native of Hebei Province, failed the entrance examination and went to visit Chenzhou and Caizhou in Henan Province.

古文：过一冢，上有竹二竿，青翠可爱，因驻马吟曰：冢上两竿竹，风吹常袅袅。
现代文：有一次路过一座坟，见坟上有两竿竹子长得青翠可爱，就停下马来口吟一首诗：坟上两竿竹，风吹常袅袅下两句想了很久也作不出来。
English: Once, when passing by a grave and seeing two bamboo poles growing on the grave, so green and lovely, he stopped to recite a poem: "Two bamboo poles on the grave, the wind often blows, and after thinking about it for a long time, I can't come up with two sentences."

古文：久不能续，闻冢中言曰：何不云 下有百年人，长眠不知晓。
现代文：这时忽然听见坟里有人应道：为何不作成 下有百年人，长眠不知晓 呢？
English: At this time, someone in the tomb was suddenly heard to reply, "Why not create a hundred-year-old person, who will never know eternal sleep?"

古文：郊惊问之，不复言矣。
现代文：郑郊大惊，再问下去，坟里就什么声音也没有了。
English: Zheng Jiao was shocked. After further questioning, there was no sound in the grave.

古文：李茵
现代文：李茵
English: Li Yin

古文：进士李茵，襄阳人。尝游苑中，见红叶自御沟流出，上题诗云：流水何太急，深宫尽日闲。
现代文：进士李茵是襄阳人，有一次他游御苑，看见有片红叶从宫中的御河沟流出来，红叶上题了一首诗：流水何太急，深宫尽日闲。
English: Jin Shi Li Yin was from Xiangyang. Once, he was on a tour of the Imperial Palace and saw a piece of red leaf flowing out of the river ditch in the palace. The red leaf was inscribed with a poem: "What is the rush of running water? Deep palace is idle all day."

古文：殷勤谢红叶，好去到人间。
现代文：殷勤谢红叶，好去到人间。
English: Thank you for your hard work, Hongye, so that I can go out into the world.

古文：茵收贮书囊。
现代文：李茵把这片红叶珍惜地收藏书箱中。
English: Li Yin treasured this piece of red leaf and kept it in her bookcase.

古文：后僖宗幸蜀，茵奔窜南山民家。见一宫娥，自云宫中侍书，名云芳子，有才思，茵与之款接。
现代文：后来唐僖宗巡幸四川，李茵跑到南山一个老百姓家，遇见一个宫女，自称是宫中的侍书，叫云芳子。
English: Later, when Tang Xizong was on a tour of Sichuan, Li Yin went to a commoner's home in Nanshan and met a lady-in-waiting who claimed to be the palace's attendant, named Yun Fangzi.

古文：因见红叶，叹曰：此妾所题也。
现代文：云芳子很有才学，李茵和她交往后，云芳子发现了那片红叶，哀叹说：这红叶上的诗就是我写的啊！
English: Yun Fangzi is very talented in learning. After Li Yin's relationship with her ended, Yun Fangzi found that piece of red leaf and lamented: I wrote the poem on this red leaf!

古文：同行诣蜀，具述宫中之事。
现代文：云芳子和李茵一起往四川去，一路上云芳子讲了很多皇宫里事。
English: Yun Yoshi and Li Yin went to Sichuan together. Along the way, Yun Yoshi talked a lot about the palace.

古文：及绵州，逢内官田大人识之，曰：书家何得在此？
现代文：到了绵州时，有一个宫中的太监田大人认出了云芳子，说：你怎么跑到这里来了？
English: When she arrived in Mianzhou, one of the palace eunuchs, Mr. Tian, recognized Yun Yongzi and said, "How did you get here?"

古文：逼令上马，与之前去，李甚怏怅。
现代文：强迫她上马将她带走了，李茵非常难过。
English: He forced her onto a horse and took her away. Li Yin was very sad.

古文：其夕，宿逆旅，云芳复至，曰：妾已重赂中官，求得从君矣。
现代文：这天夜里，李茵住在旅店里，云芳子突然又回来了，说：我用重金贿赂了田大人才把我放掉，今后我就跟你走了。
English: That night, while Li Yin was staying at a hotel, Yun Fangzi suddenly returned and said, "I bribed Tian Tian with a large sum of money to let me go, and from now on, I'm leaving with you."

古文：乃与俱归襄阳。
现代文：于是李茵带云芳子回到襄阳。
English: So Li Yin took Yun Fangzi back to Yangyang.

古文：数年，李茵疾瘠，有道士言其面有邪气，云芳子自陈：往年绵竹相遇。实已自经而死。感君之意，故相从耳。
现代文：几年后，李茵得了病身体消瘦，道士说他脸上带有鬼气。这时云芳子才向李茵说：那年在绵竹和你相遇时，我其实已经上吊死了，为了报答你的情意我才跟了你。
English: A few years later, Li Yin fell ill and became emaciated, and the Taoist priest said that his face was haunted. It was only then that Yun Fang Zi said to Li Yin: "When I met you in Mianzhu that year, I had actually already hanged myself. In order to repay your kindness, I followed you."

古文：人鬼殊途，何敢贻患于君。
现代文：然而人、鬼是两条不同的路，我怎敢害了你呢。
English: However, people and ghosts are two different paths. How dare I hurt you?

古文：置酒赋诗，告辞而去矣。
现代文：说罢摆下酒菜和李茵对饮，又写了诗，然后就永远地走了。
English: After that, he had a drink with Li Yin, wrote a poem, and then left forever.

古文：柳鹏举
现代文：柳鹏举
English: Liu Penghu

古文：唐龙纪中，有士人柳鹏举，游杭州，避雨于伍相庙。见一女子，抱五弦，云是钱大夫家女仆。
现代文：唐朝龙纪年间，有个读书人柳鹏举到杭州游玩。在伍相庙避雨时，看见一个女子抱着一把五弦琴，自称是钱大夫家的女仆。
English: During the Dragon Age of the Tang Dynasty, a reader named Liu Penghu visited Hangzhou. While sheltering from the rain at Wuxiang Temple, he saw a woman holding a five-stringed fiddle and claiming to be the maid of Dr. Qian's family.

古文：鹏举悦之，遂诱而奔。
现代文：鹏举很喜爱她，就引诱她和自己私奔，将她藏在船中。
English: Penghu loved her very much, so he lured her to run away with him and hid her in the boat.

古文：藏于舟中，为厢吏所捕，女仆自经而死。
现代文：后来女仆还是被官员抓住送回去，上吊身亡。但后来有一天这女仆又到柳鹏举这里来了。
English: Later, the maid was still caught by officials and sent back, where she hanged herself to death. But then one day, the maid came to Liu Pengji again.

古文：一日，却到柳处，柳亦知其物故。其仆具道其情，故留之，经时而去。
现代文：柳鹏举知道她是鬼，但女鬼说了很多想念柳生的话表达她的情意，柳生就把她留了下来，过了很久女鬼才离去。
English: Liu Penghu knew that she was a ghost, but the female ghost said a lot of words about missing Yuesheng to express her feelings, and Yuesheng kept her. It took a long time for the female ghost to leave.

古文：周洁
现代文：周洁
English: Zhou Jie

古文：霍丘令周洁，甲辰岁罢任，客游淮上。
现代文：霍丘县令周洁，甲辰年罢官后在淮河一带游历。
English: Zhou Jie, the governor of Huoqiu County, traveled around the Huaihe River after his dismissal in 1998.

古文：时民大饥，逆旅殆绝，投宿无所。
现代文：当时百姓正闹饥荒，哪里也没有旅店，周洁无处投宿。
English: At that time, the people were starving, there were no hotels, and Zhou Jie had nowhere to stay.

古文：升高而望，远见村落烟火，趋而诣之。
现代文：有一天，他登高远望，远远看见有个村庄有炊烟，就直奔村庄而去。
English: One day, he climbed up to look far and wide, saw a village with cooking smoke in the distance, and went straight to the village.

古文：得一村舍，扣门久之，一女子出应门。
现代文：到了一个屋前，敲了半天门，一个女子开了门。
English: He arrived at a house, knocked on the door for a while, and a woman opened the door.

古文：告以求宿，女子曰：家中饥饿，老幼皆病，无以延客。至中堂一榻可矣。
现代文：周洁说要投宿，女子说：家里没粮，老少都病了，没法待客，只有堂屋中的一张空床，你看能住吗？
English: Zhou Jie said she wanted to stay overnight. The woman said: "There is no food in the house, the old and the young are sick, we can't receive guests, there is only one empty bed in the hallway. Can you live here?"

古文：遂入之。
现代文：周洁就住了下来。
English: Zhou Jie settled down.

古文：女子侍立于前，少顷，其妹复出，映姊而立，不见其面。
现代文：那女子在周洁面前侍立着，不大一会儿，女子的妹妹也出来了，只是躲在姐姐背后看不见面孔。
English: The woman stood in front of Zhou Jie, and after a short while, the woman's sister also came out, but she was hiding behind her sister and couldn't see her face.

古文：洁自具食，取饼二枚，以与二女，持之入室，闭关而寝，悄无人声。
现代文：周洁自己带着食物，就拿出两只饼给了两个女子，她们拿着饼进了里屋，关上门睡下，再也听不到声音，周洁心里也有点害怕。
English: Zhou Jie himself brought food and took out two loaves of bread to give to the two women. They took the bread into the back room, closed the door and fell asleep, never to hear the sound again. Zhou Jie was also a little scared.

古文：洁亦耸然而惧，向晓将去，便呼二女告之，了无声应者，因坏户而入。乃见积尸满屋，皆将枯朽。唯女子死可旬日。其妹面目已枯矣，二饼犹置胸上，洁后皆为瘗之云。
现代文：天亮后周洁要去时，招呼两个女的以便辞别，但喊了几次里屋没有人应，周就破门而入，只见满屋都堆满了死人尸体，都已朽烂，只有那女子看来像死了十多天，她的妹妹脸部已经干枯了，两只饼还放在她们的胸口上。后来，周洁把这些尸体都埋葬了。
English: When Zhou Jie was leaving after dawn, he called out to the two women to say goodbye, but after shouting several times that there was no one in the back room to answer, Zhou broke through the door. He saw that the house was full of dead bodies, all of which were rotten. Only the woman looked like she had been dead for more than ten days. Her sister's face was withered, and two cakes were still on their chests. Later, Zhou Jie buried all these bodies.

