古文：△经一
现代文：经一
English: 1st floor

古文：赏罚共则禁令不行。
现代文：君臣共同掌握赏罚大权，法令就无法推行。
English: Since the monarch and the ministers jointly hold the power to reward and punish, the decree cannot be implemented.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来说明这个道理呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：明之以造父、于期。
现代文：用造父、王良驾马的事来说明。
English: To illustrate, let's use the story of Wang Liang, the father of horse riding.

古文：子罕为出彘，田恒为圃池，故宋君、简公弑。
现代文：子罕就像突然窜出的猪，田恒就像圃池中的水草，所以宋君和齐简公终于被他们杀掉了。
English: Zohan was like a pig that suddenly burst out, Tian Heng was like a weed in a garden, so Song Jun and Qi Jian Gong were finally killed by them.

古文：患在王良、造父之共车，田连、成房之共琴也。
现代文：祸害表现在王良、造父共驾一辆车而无法指挥马，田连、成窍共弹一张琴而不能成曲调。
English: The calamity manifested itself in Wang Liang and Zou Fang driving a car together but unable to command a horse, and Tian Lian and Cheng Kuo playing a piano together but unable to compose a tune.

古文：△经二
现代文：经二
English: 2nd floor

古文：治强生于法，弱乱生于阿，君明于此，则正赏罚而非仁下也。
现代文：国家的安定和强大来自依法办事，国家的衰弱和动乱来自枉法办事，君主明白这个道理，就要公正地实行赏罚而不对下面讲仁爱。
English: The stability and strength of the country comes from acting in accordance with the law, and the weakness and turmoil of the country comes from acting in violation of the law. The monarch understands this principle, and it is necessary to implement rewards and punishments fairly without talking about benevolence to the following.

古文：爵禄生于功，诛罚生于罪，臣明于此，则尽死力而非忠君也。
现代文：爵位和俸禄来自功劳，杀戮和惩罚来自罪行，臣子明白这个道理，就会卖命出力而不对君主效私忠。
English: Titles and salaries come from merit, killings and punishments come from crimes. If courtiers understand this, they will work hard and not be loyal to the monarch.

古文：君通于不仁，臣通于不忠，则可以王矣。
现代文：君主明白不讲仁爱的道理，臣子明白不讲私忠的道理，就可以称王天下了。
English: If the monarch understands the principle of benevolence, and the vassal understands the principle of loyalty, they can be called kings.

古文：昭襄知主情而不发五苑，田鲔知臣情故教田章，而公仪辞鱼。
现代文：秦昭王懂得做君主的道理，所以不散发五苑的瓜果蔬菜去救济民众；田鲔懂得做臣子的道理，所以教育田章一切要从利害出发；公仪休虽爱吃鱼却不接受别人送的鱼，唯恐因此失去相位。
English: Qin Zhao Wang knows the principle of being a monarch, so he does not distribute the five gardens of melons, fruits and vegetables to help the people; Tian Zhao knows the principle of being a vassal, so all education of Tian Zhang should be based on interests; although Gong Yi Xiu likes to eat fish, he does not accept the fish sent by others, lest he lose phase.

古文：△经三
现代文：经三
English: 3rd floor

古文：明主者，鉴于外也，而外事不得不成，故苏代非齐王。
现代文：明君要借鉴国外的经验，然而对国外的事情借鉴不当还是不能成功，于是就有苏代批评齐王不信大臣的故事。
English: The Ming Dynasty wanted to learn from foreign experience, but it was still not possible to learn from foreign affairs improperly, so there was a story of the Su Dynasty criticizing King Qi for not trusting the minister.

古文：人主鉴于上也，而居者不适不显，故潘寿言禹情。
现代文：君主要借鉴上古的事情，然而听隐士的话而借鉴不当还是不能显耀自己，于是就有潘寿谈论夏禹传位的故事。
English: The monarch mainly draws on ancient things, but if he listens to the words of the hermit and draws improperly, he cannot show himself, so there is a story of Pan Shou talking about the succession of Xia Yu.

古文：人主无所觉悟，方吾知之，故恐同衣同族，而况借于权乎！
现代文：君主对这些一无所悟，方吾却懂得这个道理，所以他提到古礼上说穿同一服装的人不坐同一辆车子，同一家族的人不住一起，何况把君权随便转让给别人呢！
English: The monarch doesn't understand any of this, but Fangwu understands this principle, so he mentions ancient etiquette and says that people who wear the same clothes don't ride in the same car, people of the same family don't live together, and what's more, they don't hesitate to transfer royal power to others!

古文：吴章知之，故说以佯，而况借于诚乎！
现代文：吴章懂得这个道理，因此劝说君主连假的爱憎都不能表露出来，何况把真情流露给人呢！
English: Wu Zhang understood this principle, so he persuaded the monarch not to reveal even his false love and hate, let alone reveal his true feelings to others!

古文：赵王恶虎目而壅。
现代文：赵王厌恶老虎眼睛，结果却受到蒙蔽。
English: Zhao Wang detested the tiger's eyes, but he was hoodwinked.

古文：明主之道，如周行人之却卫侯也。
现代文：明君的治国方法，就要像周王朝的外交官阻挡卫侯那样维护君主尊严。
English: The Ming Dynasty's way of governing the country was to uphold the dignity of the monarch, just as the diplomats of the Zhou Dynasty did to block Wei Hou.

古文：△经四
现代文：经四
English: via four

古文：人主者，守法责成以立功者也。
现代文：君主是依靠严守法令，责求臣下完成任务来建立功业的人。
English: A monarch is someone who relies on strict adherence to laws and regulations, and requires his subjects to complete tasks to establish merit.

古文：闻有吏虽乱而有独善之民，不闻有乱民而有独治之吏，故明主治吏不治民。
现代文：只听说官吏虽然胡作非为而仍有自行守法的民众，没听说民众作乱时仍有自行依法办事的官吏，所以明君致力于管理好官吏而不去管理民众。
English: I only heard that although officials do wrong, there are still people who abide by the law on their own. I did not hear that there are still officials who act according to the law on their own when the people make trouble. Therefore, Ming Jun is committed to managing officials well without managing the people.

古文：说在摇木之本与引网之纲。
现代文：有关的解说在摇树要摇干、拉网要拉纲的故事里。
English: The relevant commentary is in the story of shaking the tree to shake it dry and pulling the net to pull the outline.

古文：故失火之啬夫，不可不论也。
现代文：所以失火时主管官员的作用是不能不弄清的。
English: Therefore, the role of the officials in charge at the time of the fire must be clarified.

古文：救火者，吏操壶走火，则一人之用也；操鞭使人，则役万夫。
现代文：救火时，主管官员自己提壶赴火，只能起一个人的作用；如果拿着鞭子指挥，就能驱使上万的人去救火。
English: When putting out a fire, the responsible official can only play the role of one person by lifting the pot and going to the fire himself; if he takes the whip and directs, he can drive tens of thousands of people to put out the fire.

古文：故所遇术者，如造父之遇惊马，牵马推车则不能进，代御执辔持策则马咸骛矣。
现代文：所以对待法术，就像造父遇到惊马一样，别人牵马推车还是不能前进，而他夺过缰绳和马鞭代为驾奴，就能使几匹马一齐奔驰向前。
English: Therefore, he treats spells like the Founding Father meets the horse, others can't move forward with the horse cart, but he can take the reins and whip as the driver, and can make several horses gallop forward.

古文：是以说在椎锻平夷，榜檠矫直。不然，败在淖齿用齐戮闵王，李兑用赵饿主父也。
现代文：因此这种说法可以借榔头、砧石用来整治不平，榜檠用来矫正不直的道理加以解释，不然的话，失败就会如同淖齿在齐国掌权而杀死齐闵王，李兑在齐国掌权而饿死主父。经五
English: Therefore, this argument can be explained by the principle that the hoe and the flint are used to rectify the uneven, and the table is used to correct the incorrect, otherwise, the failure will be like the tooth of the horse in the power of Qi and kill the king of Qi, and Li Dui in the power of Qi and starve to death the master.

古文：△经五国事之理，则不劳而成。
现代文：遵循事物法则办事，不必劳苦就能成功。
English: If you act according to the laws of things, you will succeed without having to work hard.

古文：故兹郑之踞辕而歌以上高梁也。
现代文：所以兹郑坐在车辕上唱歌来吸引行人帮他把车推上高桥。
English: So Zheng sat on the curb and sang to attract pedestrians to help him push the car onto the high bridge.

古文：其患在赵简主税吏清轻重；薄疑之言 国中饱 ，简主喜而府库虚，百姓饿而奸吏富也。
现代文：相应的祸害表现在赵简子的税官请求收税标准；薄疑说 国中饱 ，赵简子误认为国家富强而高兴，实际上却是府库空虚，百姓挨饿而奸吏富足。
English: The corresponding scourge is manifested in Zhao Jianzi's tax official's request for tax collection standards; suspiciously saying that the country is full, Zhao Jianzi mistakenly believes that the country is rich and strong, but in fact the treasury is empty, the people are starving, and the corrupt officials are rich.

古文：故桓公巡民而管仲省腐财怨女。
现代文：所以齐桓公视察民间发现有人家贫无妻，因而同意管仲发放国家多余财物、嫁出宫中未用妇女。
English: Therefore, Prince Qi Kuan inspected the people and found that some people were poor and had no wives, so he agreed to distribute the state's surplus property and marry out the unused women in the palace.

古文：不然，则在延陵乘马不得进，造父过之而为之泣也。
现代文：不遵循事物法则，就如同延陵卓子用自相矛盾的方法驾马，造父路过遇见后为之哭泣。说一
English: Not following the laws of things is like Yanling Zhuo Zi riding a horse in a self-contradictory way, and crying for his father after meeting him.

古文：△说一造父御四马，驰骤周旋而恣欲于马。
现代文：造父驾驭拉车四马，时而向前奔驰，时而绕圈打转，驾驭马是那么的得心应手。
English: Father-in-law drives the four-horse carriage, sometimes driving forward, sometimes turning around in a circle, and driving the horse is so handy.

古文：恣欲于马者，擅辔策之制也。
现代文：之所以能如此得心应手地驭马，是因为他有独掌马缰和马鞭的权力。
English: The reason why he is able to handle the horse so skillfully is because he has the power to hold the reins and the whip in one hand.

古文：然马惊于出彘而造父不能禁制者，非辔策之严不足也，威分于出彘也。
现代文：然而马被突然窜出来的猪所惊吓，造父不能控制的原因，并不是马缓和马鞭的威力不足，而是窜出来的猪把这种威力分散了。
English: However, the horse was frightened by the pig that was suddenly pulled out, and the reason why the founding father could not control it was not that the horse relieved the lack of power of the horse whip, but that the pig that was pulled out dispersed this power.

古文：王子于期为驸驾，辔策不用而择欲于马，擅刍水之利也。
现代文：王良驾驭副车，不用马缰和马鞭，而是根据马的喜好，善用草料和水进行控制。
English: Wang Liang drives the sidecar, without using a stirrup and whip, but according to the horse's preferences, making good use of grass and water to control.

古文：然马过于圃池而驸驾败者，非刍水之利不足也，德分子圃池也。
现代文：然而马经过草圃水池而副车失去控制的原因，并不是草料和水不充足，而是草圃水池把马的注意力分散了。
English: However, the reason why the horse passed through the grassland pond and the trailer lost control was not because of insufficient grass and water, but because the grassland pond distracted the horse's attention.

古文：故王良、造父，天下之善御者也，然而使王良操左革而叱咤之，使造父操右革而鞭笞之，马不能行十里，共故也。
现代文：所以，王良、造父是天下驭车能手，然而使王良掌握马勒的左边大声呵斥，使造父掌握马勒的右边用鞭抽打，马连十里也走不上，这是由于两人共同驾驭、相互干扰的缘故。
English: Therefore, Wang Liang and his father are the best drivers in the world. However, Wang Liang's mastery of Mahler's left side is loudly shouted, and his father's mastery of Mahler's right side is whipped, and the horse can't go ten miles. This is due to the two people driving together and interfering with each other.

古文：王子于期为赵简主取道争千里之表，其始发也，彘伏沟中，王子于期齐辔策而进之，彘突出于沟中，马惊驾败。
现代文：田连、成窍都是天下善于弹琴的人，然而让田连在琴首弹拨，让成窍在琴尾按捺，却不能构成曲谓，也是由于两人共用一物的缘故。以王良、造父技能的高超，共掌马缰驾驭，却不能驱使马，君主怎能跟他的臣子共掌权力而治理国家？另一种说法：造父作为齐王副车的车夫，用控制饮水的方法把马训练成功，在园圃里试车。渴马见了圃中水池，就离开车子跑去，试车因此失败。
English: Tian Lian and Cheng Guo are both good at playing the piano. However, having Tian Lian play the first string of the piano and Cheng Guo press the gong at the end of the piano cannot constitute a piece of music, which is also due to the fact that the two share the same thing. With Wang Liang and Zou Fang's superb skills, sharing the reins of the horse, but unable to drive the horse, how can the monarch share power with his vassal and govern the country? Another way of saying this is: Zou Fang, as the driver of King Qi's sidecar, used the method of controlling drinking water to train the horse successfully and tested it in the garden.

古文：司城子罕谓宋君曰： 庆赏赐与，展之所喜也，君自行之；杀戮诛罚，民之所恶也，臣访当之。 宋君曰： 诺。 
现代文：王良驾车为赵简子争夺长途赛马的锦标。车子刚出发时，有头猪伏在沟里，当壬良快马加鞭前进时，猪突然从沟里窜出，马受到惊吓，驾车失败。司城子罕对宋君说： 奖励、赏赐是民众喜欢的，请君主自己去施行；杀戮、刑罚是民众所憎恶的，请让我来掌管。 宋君说： 行。 
English: Wang Liang drove the car for Zhao Jianzi to compete for the long-distance horse racing trophy. When the car first set off, there was a pig lying in the ditch. When Nian Liang was driving fast with a whip, the pig suddenly jumped out of the ditch, the horse was frightened, and the drive failed. Shi Chengzihan said to Song Jun: Rewards and rewards are popular, please the monarch to implement them; killing and punishment are hated by the public, please let me take control. Song Jun said: OK.

古文：于是出威令，诛大臣。君曰 问子罕 也。
现代文：于是发布严令、诛杀大臣，宋君总说问子罕。
English: As a result, strict orders were issued and ministers were killed, and Song Jun always said that he did not want to ask questions.

古文：于是大臣畏之，细民归之。
现代文：于是大臣害怕子罕，平民归附子罕。
English: As a result, the minister is afraid of Zihan, and the commoners are drawn to Zihan.

古文：处期年，子罕杀宋君而夺政。
现代文：过了一年，子罕杀了宋君，夺取政权。
English: A year later, Zi Han killed Song Jun and seized power.

古文：故子罕为出彘以夺其君国。
现代文：所以说，子罕就像突然窜出来的猪一样夺取了宋君的国家。
English: Therefore, Zihan seized Song Jun's country like a pig that was suddenly pulled out.

古文：简公在上位，罚重而诛严，厚赋敛而杀戮民。
现代文：齐简公处在君位，刑罚重而诛杀严厉，赋税重而杀戮百姓。
English: Qi Jiangong is on the throne, the punishment is heavy and the killing is severe, the tax is heavy and the people are killed.

古文：田成恒设慈爱，明宽厚。
现代文：田成子对百姓表示慈爱，显示宽厚。
English: Tian Rongzi showed love and mercy to the people.

古文：简公以齐民为渴马，不以恩加民，而田成恒以仁厚为圃地也。
现代文：简公把齐国的民众当作渴马，不对他们施恩，而田成子用仁厚作为草圃水池来争取他们。
English: Jian Gong treated the people of Qi as thirsty horses and did not give them any favors, while Tian Nariko used benevolence as a grassland pond to win them.

古文：一曰：造父为齐王驸驾，以渴服马，百日而服成。
现代文：另一种说法：造父作为齐王副车的车夫，用控制饮水的方法训马，一百天后把马训成了。
English: Another way of saying this is that Zou Zifu, as the driver of the king of Qi's second carriage, trained the horse by controlling the drinking water, and after a hundred days, the horse was trained.

古文：服成，请效驾齐王，王曰； 效驾于圃中。 
现代文：训成后，请求驾车给齐王看，齐王说： 在草圃中驾车给我看。 
English: After completing the training, he asked to drive the car and show it to King Qi. King Qi said, "Show me the car in the grassland."

古文：造父驱车入圃，马见圃池而走，造父不能禁。
现代文：造父把车赶入草圃，马看见圃中水池就跑了过去，造父无法阻止。
English: The father drove the cart into the meadow, and when the horse saw the pool in the meadow, it ran over, and the father could not stop it.

古文：造父以渴服马久矣，今马见池，駻而走，虽造父不能治。
现代文：造父用控制饮水的方法训马已有很长时间了，现在马一看见水池，就凶悍地跑去，即使造父也控制不住。
English: The stallion has been trained for a long time with the method of controlling drinking water. Now, as soon as the horse sees the pool, it runs ferociously, and even the stallion cannot control it.

古文：今简公之以法禁其众久矣，而田成恒利之，是田成恒倾圃池而示渴民也。
现代文：现在齐简公用法令禁锢百姓很久了，而田成子却给百姓好处，这好比田成子倾倒出圃池里的水给陷于饥渴的百姓喝。
English: It has been a long time since the Qijan Public Utilities Law banned the people, but Tian Nariko is now giving benefits to the people. This is like Tian Nariko pouring out the water from the pond to give the thirsty people a drink.

古文：一曰：王子于期为宋君为千里之逐。
现代文：另一种说法：王良为宋君进行千里赛马。
English: Another way of saying it is that Wang Liang ran a thousand-mile horse race for Song Jun.

古文：已驾，察手吻文。
现代文：车已备好，马的情况也很正常。
English: The car is ready and the horse is fine.

古文：且发矣，驱而前之，轮中绳；引而却之，马掩迹。
现代文：即将出发，王良赶车前进，轮子正好对着车辙；赶车后退，马的前蹄正好掩盖了后蹄的脚印。
English: When Wang Liang was about to set off, he hurried forward with the wheels just in front of the ruts; when he hurried back, the horse's front hooves just covered the footprints of the hind hooves.

古文：拊而发之。
现代文：策马出发，猪突然从洞中跑了出来。
English: As the horses set off, the pig suddenly ran out of the hole.

古文：彘逸出于窦中。马退而却，策不能进前也；马駻而走，辔不能正也。
现代文：马受惊而后退缩，鞭打也无法使它前进；马非常凶悍的胡乱奔跑，缰绳也无法将其拉住。
English: The horse recoiled in fright, and the whip could not drive it forward; the horse ran wildly, and the bridle could not hold it.

古文：一曰：司城子罕谓宋君曰： 庆赏赐予者，民之所好也，君自行之；诛罚杀戮者，民之所恶也，臣访当之。 
现代文：另一种说法；司城子罕对宋君说： 奖励、赏赐是民众喜欢的，请君主自己去施行；杀戮、刑罚是民众所憎恶的，请让我来掌管。 
English: Another way of saying this is that Shicheng Zihan said to Song Jun: "Rewards and rewards are what the people like, so please let the monarch do it himself; killing and punishment are what the people hate, so please let me be in charge."

古文：于是戮细民而诛大臣，君曰： 与子罕议之。 
现代文：于是屠戮百姓和诛杀大臣，宋君就说： 去和子罕商量吧。 
English: So, after slaughtering the people and killing the minister, Song Jun said, "Let's go and discuss it with Zi Han."

古文：居期年，民知杀生之命制于子罕也，故一国归焉。
现代文：过了一年，百姓知道生杀大权掌握在子罕手里，所以全国都依附了他。
English: After a year, the people knew that the power of life and death was in the hands of Zihang, so the whole country was attached to him.

古文：故子罕劫宋君而夺其政，法不能禁也。
现代文：所以子罕挟持宋君，篡夺了政权，法令不能禁止。
English: Therefore, Zi Han held Song Jun hostage and usurped the power, which cannot be prohibited by law.

古文：故曰： 子罕为出彘，而田成常为圃池也。 
现代文：所以说： 子罕是窜出的猪，田成子是圃池中的水。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Zohan is a pig that is pulled out, and Tianchengzi is the water in the pond.

古文：令王良、造父共车，人操一边辔而出门闾，驾必败而道不至也。
现代文：让王良、造父共驾一辆车，一人掌握一边的经缰从里巷门中出发，驾驭定会失败，目的地一定无法到达。
English: Let Wang Liang and his father drive a car together, one person will control one side of the road and start from the middle of the alley, the control will fail, and the destination will not be reached.

古文：令田连、成窍共琴，人抚一弦而挥，则音必败、曲不遂突。
现代文：让田连、成窍共弹一张琴，一人按一根弦弹，弹奏就必定失败，曲子无法演完。
English: Let Tian Lian and Cheng Kuo play a piano together, one person presses a string to play, the performance will certainly fail, and the piece cannot be completed.

古文：△说二
现代文：说二
English: Say two.

古文：秦昭王有病，百姓里买牛而家为王祷。
现代文：秦昭王生病，每个里的百姓都买牛祭神，家家为他祈祷。
English: When Qin Zhao Wang fell ill, the people in every village bought oxen to sacrifice to the gods, and every family prayed for him.

古文：公孙述出见之，人贺王曰： 百姓乃皆里买牛为王祷。 
现代文：公孙述出门看见这种情形，入宫祝贺昭王说： 百姓都已在买牛为您祈祷。 
English: His great-grandson recounted that when he went out of the house, he saw this situation, and when he entered the palace, he congratulated King Zhao and said, "The people have been buying cattle to pray for you.

古文：王使人问之，果有之。
现代文：昭王派人查问，果有这回事。
English: Zhao Wang sent someone to investigate, and it turned out to be true.

古文：王曰： 訾之人二甲。
现代文：昭王说： 罚他们每人出两副甲。
English: King Zhao said, "Punish each of them with two pairs of armor."

古文：夫非令而擅祷，是爱寡人也。
现代文：没有命令而擅自祈祷，这是爱我。
English: To pray without being commanded is to love me.

古文：夫爱寡人，寡人亦且改法而心与之相循者，是法不立；法不立，乱亡之道也。
现代文：他们爱我，我如果也改变法令，用同样的心去爱他们，这样法就立不起来；法立不起来，是乱国亡身之道。
English: They love me, if I also change the law and love them with the same heart, then the law will not be established; if the law is not established, it is the way to ruin the country and die.

古文：不如人罚二甲而复与为治。 
现代文：不如每人罚两副甲，重新跟他们搞好国家的治理。 
English: It would be better to impose a fine of two A-levels per person, and work with them to improve the governance of the country.

古文：一曰：秦襄王病，百姓为之祷；病愈，杀牛塞祷。
现代文：另一种说法：秦昭王生病，百姓为他祈祷；病好后，百姓杀牛向神还愿。
English: Another version: Qin Zhao Wang fell ill, and the people prayed for him; after he recovered, the people killed a cow to make a wish to the gods.

古文：郎中阎遏、公孙衍出见之，曰： 非社腊之时也，奚自杀牛而祠社？ 
现代文：侍从官阎遏、公孙衍出门看见了，说： 现在不是祭土地神和腊祭的时候，为什么要杀牛祭袍呢？ 
English: When the attendants of the officials Yan Yan and Gong Sun Yan saw him go out, they said, "Now is not the time to offer sacrifices to the earth god and the wax god. Why do you need to kill the bull and the sacrificial robe?"

古文：怪而问之。
现代文：他们感到奇怪，就问百姓。
English: They were amazed, and they asked the people, "What does this mean?"

古文：百姓曰： 人主病，为之祷；今病愈，杀牛塞祷。 
现代文：百姓说； 国君生病，我们为他祈祷；现在他病好了，我们杀牛向神还愿。 
English: The people said: The sovereign was ill, and we prayed for him; now he is well, and we slaughtered a cow and made a wish to God.

古文：阎遏、公孙衍说，见王，拜贺曰： 过尧、舜矣。 
现代文：阎遏、公孙衍很高兴，晋见昭王拜贺道： 您胜过尧、舜了。 
English: Yan Jian and Gong Sunyan were very happy. When Jin saw Zhao Wang, he said, "You are better than Yan Jian and Gong Sunyan."

古文：王惊曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：昭王吃惊地说： 此话怎说？ 
English: King Zhao said in surprise, "How can I say this?

古文：对曰： 尧、舜，其民未至为之祷也。
现代文：他们答说： 尧和舜，还没到百姓为他们祈祷的地步。
English: They replied, "Weeping and gnashing of teeth is not enough for the people to pray for them."

古文：今王病而民以牛祷，病愈，杀牛塞祷，故臣窃以王为过治、舜也。 
现代文：现在大王生病，百姓用牛许愿；大王病愈，百姓杀牛还愿。所以我们私下认为大王是胜过尧和舜了。 
English: Now that the great king is ill, the people use oxen to make a wish; when the great king is cured, the people kill oxen and make a wish. Therefore, we secretly think that the great king is better than the donkey and the donkey.

古文：王因使人问之，何里为之，訾其里正与伍老屯二甲。
现代文：于是昭王派人查问，看是哪个里这样干的，要罚该里的里正和伍老各出两副甲。
English: As a result, King Zhao sent someone to investigate, and to see which lama had done this, they wanted to punish that lama's lama and lama's wife with two pairs of armor each.

古文：阎遏、公孙衍愧不敢言。
现代文：阎遏、公孙衍惭愧得不敢吭声。
English: Yan Yan and Gong Sun Yan were so ashamed that they dared not speak.

古文：居数月，王饮酒酣乐，阎遏、公孙衍谓王曰： 前时臣窃以王为过尧、舜，非直敢谀也。
现代文：过了几个月，昭王饮酒正痛快时，阎遏、公孙衍对昭王说： 前段时间我们私下以为大王胜过尧和舜，并非胆敢故意讨好。
English: A few months later, when King Zhao was having a good time drinking, Yan Yan and Gong Sunyan said to King Zhao: Some time ago, we privately thought that the great king was better than Zhao and Yao, and we did not dare to deliberately curry favor.

古文：尧、舜病，且其民未至为之祷也；分王病，而民以牛祷，病愈，杀牛塞涛。
现代文：尧和舜生病，百姓还不至于为他们祈祷；现在大王生病，百姓用牛许愿，大王病愈，百姓杀牛还愿。
English: When Toad and Toad were ill, the people did not pray for them. Now that the great king is ill, the people make a wish with a cow. When the great king is well, the people kill a cow and make a wish.

古文：今乃訾其里正与伍老屯二甲，臣窃怪之。 
现代文：现在竟然罚那个里的里正和伍老各出两副甲，我们私下深感奇怪。 
English: We are privately deeply puzzled that Li Zheng and Wu Lao, who were in the middle, should now be penalized with two A-levels each.

古文：王曰： 于何故不知于此？
现代文：昭王说： 你们为什么不懂这些？
English: Zhao Wang said: Why don't you understand this?

古文：彼民之所以为我用者，非以吾爱之为我用者也，以吾势之为我用者也。
现代文：那些百姓为我所用的原因，并不是因为我爱他们，他们就为我所用，而是因为我有权势，他们才为我所用。
English: The reason those people were used for me was not because I loved them and they were used for me, but because I had power and they were used for me.

古文：吾释势与民相收，若是，吾适不爱而民因不为我用也，故遂绝爱道也。 
现代文：我放弃了权势和他们相互交结，那样的话，我偶然不爱他们，他们马上就不为我所用了。所以，终归是应该摒弃仁爱的做法。 
English: I gave up my power and association with them, so if I happen not to love them, they are no longer of any use to me. Therefore, the practice of benevolence should be abandoned.

古文：秦大饥，应侯请曰： 五苑之草著：蔬菜？
现代文：秦国遇到严重饥荒，应侯请求说： 五苑的草木植物，蔬菜、栋树果、枣子、栗子，足以养活百姓，请您开放了。 
English: Qin State encountered a severe famine, and at the request of the villagers, said: The herbs and plants of the Five Gardens, vegetables, fruit trees, dates, and chestnuts, are enough to feed the people, please open.

古文：橡果、枣栗，足以活民，清发之。 昭襄王曰： 吾秦法，使民有功而受赏，有罪而受诛。今发五苑之蔬草者，使民有功与无功俱赏也。
现代文：秦昭王说： 我们秦国的法令，是让百姓有功受赏，有罪受罚。现在如果开放五苑的蔬菜瓜果，却是不论有功无功都要让百姓受到赏赐。
English: Qin Zhaowang said: The law of our Qin State is that the people should be rewarded for their merits and punished for their crimes. Now, if the vegetables and fruits of the Five Gardens are opened, the people should be rewarded regardless of their merits.

古文：夫使民有功与无功俱赏者，此乱之道也。
现代文：不论有功无功都让百姓受到赏赐，那是使国家混乱的做法。
English: Rewarding people regardless of merit is a recipe for chaos.

古文：夫发五苑而乱，不如弃枣蔬而治。 
现代文：开放五苑而使国家混乱，不如委弃瓜果蔬菜而使国家太平。 
English: It is better to make the country peaceful by abandoning fruits and vegetables than to make the country chaotic by opening the Five Gardens.

古文：一曰： 令发五苑之蓏、蔬、枣、栗，足以活民，是用民有功与无功争取也。
现代文：关于秦昭王回答的另一种说法是： 如果命令开放五苑的瓜果蔬菜，倒也足以养活百姓，但却会使有功的人和无功的人相互争夺。
English: Another way of looking at Qin Zhao Wang's answer is: If you order the opening of the Five Gardens of Fruits and Vegetables, it will be enough to feed the people, but it will cause the meritorious and the unmeritorious to compete with each other.

古文：夫生乱，不如死而治，大夫其释之。 
现代文：与其让他们活着而使国家混乱，不如让他们死掉而使国家安定，你们还是放弃自己的主张吧! 
English: Rather than let them live and bring chaos to the country, it is better to let them die and bring stability to the country.

古文：田鲸教其子田章曰： 欲利而身，先利而君；欲富而家，先富而国。 
现代文：田鲔教育儿子田章说： 你要想自己得到好处，首先要使你的君主得到好处；你要想使家庭富有，首先要使你的国家富有。 
English: Tian Yao educated his son, Tian Zhang, saying: "If you want to benefit yourself, you must first benefit your monarch; if you want to make your family rich, you must first make your country rich."

古文：一曰：田鲔数其子田章曰： 主卖官爵，臣卖智力，故自恃无恃人。 
现代文：另一种说法：田鲔教育儿子田章说： 君主售爵位给臣子，臣子出售智力给君主。
English: Another way of saying this is that Tian Yao's son, Tian Zhang, said: The monarch sells titles to his vassals, and the vassals sell their intelligence to the monarch.

古文：公仪休相鲁而嗜鱼，一国尽争买鱼而献之，公议子不受。其弟谏曰： 夫子嗜鱼而不受者，何也？ 
现代文：所以说只能自己依靠自己，不能依靠别人。 公仪休担任鲁相。他爱吃鱼，全国的人都争相买鱼进献给他。公仪休不收，他弟弟规劝说： 您爱吃鱼，却不收鱼，为什么？ 
English: Therefore, it is said that one can only rely on oneself, and cannot rely on others. Gongyi Hu served as Lu Xuan. He loved to eat fish, and people all over the country competed to buy fish to donate to him. Gongyi Hu did not accept, and his brother persuaded him: You love to eat fish, but you do not collect fish, why?

古文：对日： 夫唯嗜鱼，故不受也。
现代文：公仪休回答说： 正因为爱吃鱼，我才不收。
English: Gong Lixiu replied, "It's because I like to eat fish that I don't accept it."

古文：夫即受鱼，必有下人之色；有下人之色，将枉于法；枉于法，则免于相。
现代文：假如收了，一定会有迁就他们的表现；有迁就他们的表现，就将违背法令；违背法令就会罢免相位。
English: If it is accepted, there will certainly be a performance of accommodating them; if there is a performance of accommodating them, it will violate the law; if it violates the law, it will be dismissed.

古文：虽嗜鱼，此不必致我鱼，我又不能自给鱼。
现代文：这样一来，我即使爱吃鱼，他们也不一定再给我鱼，我也不能自己再搞到鱼。
English: As a result, even though I like to eat fish, they don't necessarily give me fish anymore, and I can't get fish myself.

古文：即无受鱼而不免于相，虽嗜鱼，我能长自给鱼。 
现代文：假使不收鱼，因而不被免相，尽管再爱吃鱼，我也能够经常自己搞到鱼。 
English: Even though I love to eat fish, I can often get fish on my own.

古文：此明夫恃人不如自恃也，明于人之为己者不如己之自为也。
现代文：这是懂得依靠别人不如依靠自己，懂得靠别人相助，不如自己帮助自己的道理。
English: This is the principle of knowing how to rely on others rather than relying on oneself, knowing how to rely on others to help, rather than helping oneself.

古文：△说三
现代文：说三
English: Say three

古文：子之相燕，贵而主断。
现代文：子之担任燕相，地位尊贵并专权独断。
English: His son served as Yan Xiang, a position of honor and arbitrary power.

古文：苏代为齐使燕，王问之曰： 齐王亦何如主也？ 
现代文：苏代为齐国出使燕国，燕王问他说： 齐宣王是怎样的一个君主？ 
English: The Su Dynasty sent an envoy to Yan for Qi, and Yan Wang asked him: What kind of monarch was Qi Xuan Wang?

古文：对曰： 必不霸矣。 燕王曰： 何也？ 
现代文：苏代回答说： 一定不会称霸天下了。 燕王说： 为什么？ 
English: Sudai replied, "We will never dominate the world."Yan Wang said, "Why?

古文：对曰： 昔桓公之霸也，内事属鲍叔，外事属管仲，桓公被发而御妇人，日游于市。
现代文：苏代回答说： 过去齐桓公称霸的时候，朝廷内的事托付给鲍叔牙，朝廷外的事托付给管仲，桓公蓬头散发和宫女肠混，每天在宫中市场游玩。
English: Su Dai replied: In the past, when Qi Huan Gong was at the top, the affairs within the imperial court were entrusted to Bao Shigu, and the affairs outside the imperial court were entrusted to Guanzhong. Huan Gong would wear a long robe and mingle with the court ladies, and he would visit the market in the palace every day.

古文：今齐王不信其大臣。 
现代文：现在的齐王不相信他的大臣。 
English: The current King Qi does not trust his minister.

古文：于是燕王因益大信子之。
现代文：于是燕王就更加信赖子之。
English: As a result, Yan Wang trusted his son even more.

古文：子之闻之，使人遗苏代金百镒，而听其所使。
现代文：子之听说后，派人赠给苏代一百镒金，随便他派什么用场。
English: When his son heard about it, he sent someone to give Sudai one hundred pennies, to be used in any way he saw fit.

古文：一曰：苏代为齐使燕，见无益子之，则必不得事而还，贡赐又不出，于是见燕王，乃誉齐王。
现代文：另一种说法：苏代为齐国出使燕国，看到不使子之获得好处，就一定不能办成事情回国，奉献和赏赐的东西也不会拿出来，于是见到燕王，就称赞齐王。
English: Another way of saying it is that the Su Dynasty sent Yan Wang to Qi, and when they saw that without the benefit of the envoy, they would not be able to accomplish things back home, and they would not be able to offer and reward things. So when they saw Yan Wang, they praised Qi Wang.

古文：燕王曰： 齐王何若是之贤也？
现代文：燕王说： 齐王这样贤明，那不是一定要称王天下了吗？ 
English: King Yan said, "If King Qi is so wise, shouldn't he be called the king of the world?"

古文：则将必王乎？ 苏代曰： 救亡不暇，安得王哉？ 
现代文：苏代说： 挽救危亡都来不及，怎么能称王呢？ 
English: Sudai said, "It's too late to save lives, how can I be called a king?"

古文：燕王曰： 何也？ 
现代文：燕王说； 为什么？ 
English: Yan Wang asked: Why?

古文：曰： 其任所爱不均。 
现代文：苏代说： 他对所爱的大臣任用不当。 
English: Sudai said: He was wrong to appoint the minister he loved.

古文：燕王曰： 其亡何也？ 
现代文：燕王说： 齐国灭亡又是为什么呢？ 
English: Yan Wang said: Why did the Qin Dynasty fall?

古文：曰： 昔者齐桓公爱管仲，置以为仲父，内事理焉，外事断焉，举国而归之，故一匡天下，九合诸侯。
现代文：苏代说： 过去齐桓公敬爱管仲，立为仲父，国内大事由他处理，国外大事由他决断、全国的事都由他掌握，所以能够彻底匡正天下，多次会合诸侯。
English: Su Dai said: In the past, Qi Huan respected Guanzhong and established him as a mediator. He handled domestic affairs, decided on foreign affairs, and controlled the affairs of the whole country. Therefore, he was able to thoroughly rectify the world and held many meetings of princes.

古文：今齐任所爱不均，是以知其亡也。 
现代文：现在的齐王对所爱的大臣任用不当，所以知道齐国要灭亡。 
English: The current king of Qi appointed his beloved minister improperly, so he knew that Qi would perish.

古文：燕王曰： 今吾任子之，天下未之闻也？ 
现代文：燕王说： 现在我任用子之，天下的人还没有听说呐。 
English: Yan Wang said, "Now that I have appointed my son, no one in the world has heard about it.

古文：于是明日张朝而听子之。
现代文：于是第二天大行朝会，全听子之。
English: As a result, the next day there was a large morning assembly, and everyone listened attentively.

古文：潘寿谓燕王曰： 王不如以国让子之。
现代文：潘寿对燕王说： 大王不如把国家让给子之。
English: Pan Shou said to Yan Wang: It is better for the great king to give the country to his son.

古文：人所以谓尧贤者，以其让天下于许由，许由必不受也，则是尧有让许由之名而实不失天下也。
现代文：人们所以说尧很贤明，是因为他把天下让给了许由，而许由又肯定不接受，那就是尧有让天下的名声而实际上又不失去天下。
English: People say that Xing is very wise, because he gave the world to Xu Rong, and Xu Rong certainly did not accept, that is, Xing has the reputation of giving the world without actually losing the world.

古文：今王以国让子之，子之必不受也，则是王有让子之之名而与尧同行也。 
现代文：现在大王把国家让给子之，子之肯定不接受，这样就是大王有让国家给子之的名声而和尧有同样的行为。 
English: Now that the great king has given the country to his son, the son will certainly not accept it. In this way, the great king has the reputation of giving the country to his son and has the same behavior as the baboon.

古文：于是燕王因举国而属之，子之大重。
现代文：于是燕王就把国家整个地托付给了子之，子之异常尊贵。
English: As a result, King Yan entrusted the entire country to his son, who was extremely noble.

古文：一曰：潘寿，隐者。
现代文：另一种说法：潘寿是个隐士。
English: Another version: Pan Shou is a hermit.

古文：燕使人聘之。
现代文：燕王派人招请他。
English: Yan Wang sent someone to invite him.

古文：潘寿见燕王曰： 臣恐子之之如益也。 
现代文：潘寿拜见燕王说： 我担心子之会像益一样。 
English: Pan Shou said to Yan Wang: I'm worried that my son will be like Yi.

古文：王曰： 何益哉？
现代文：燕王说： 怎么像益一样呢？ 
English: The swallow king said, "How can it be the same as the cow?"

古文：对曰： 古者禹死，将传天下于益，启之人因相与攻益而立启。
现代文：潘寿回答说： 古时禹死时，本打算把天下传给益，禹的儿子启的手下人就相互勾结攻益而立启。
English: Pan Shou replied, "In ancient times, when Yu died, it was his intention to pass on the world to Qiyi. Qiyi's son, Yu's son, and his subordinates colluded with each other to attack Qiyi and establish Qiyi.

古文：今王信爱子之，将传国子之，太子之人尽怀印，为子之之人无一人在朝廷者。
现代文：现在大王相信宠爱子之，准备把国家传给子之，而太子的手下人都怀有官印，子之的手下人却没有一个在朝廷做官的。
English: Now the great king believes that he favors his son and is preparing to pass the country to his son, while the prince's subordinates all bear the official seal, but none of the son's subordinates work as an official in the court.

古文：王不幸弃群臣，则子之亦益也。 
现代文：大王如果不幸去世，那么子之也就要像益一样了。 
English: If the great king unfortunately dies, then his son will have to do the same.

古文：王因收吏玺，自三百石以上皆效之子之，子之大重。
现代文：燕王因而把官吏的印都收上来，凡是俸禄在三百石以上的官印都交给子之处理，子之的地位大大尊贵了。
English: As a result, King Yan confiscated the seals of the officials. Any official seal with a salary of more than three hundred koku was handed over to his son to deal with, and his son's status was greatly respected.

古文：夫人主之所以镜照者，诸侯之士徒也，今诸侯之士徒皆私门之党也。
现代文：君主用来作为借鉴的，是诸侯手下的士人们，而现在诸侯手下的士人们都是一些私人的党羽。
English: Monarchs used as a reference, the nobles under the lords, and now the nobles under the lords are some private party.

古文：人主之所以自浅娋者，岩穴之士徒也，今岩穴之士徒皆私门之舍人也。
现代文：君主用来作为荣誉的，是隐居山林的士人们，而现在隐居山林的士人们都是一些私人的门客。这是为什么呢？
English: Monarchs used to be honoured by hermits in the mountains, but nowadays hermits in the mountains are private guests. Why is that?

古文：是何也？夺褫之资在子之也。
现代文：因为剥夺的权力在于之手里。
English: Because the power to deprive is in their hands.

古文：故吴章曰： 人主不佯僧爱人。
现代文：所以吴章说： 君主不假装恨人或爱人。
English: Therefore, Wu Zhang said: The monarch does not pretend to hate or love people.

古文：佯爱人，不得复憎也；佯憎人，不得复爱也。 
现代文：因为假装爱某人之后，就不好再恨他；假装恨某人之后，就不好再爱他了。 
English: Because once you pretend to love someone, it's hard to hate them; once you pretend to hate someone, it's hard to love them.

古文：一曰：燕王欲传国于子之也，问之潘寿，对曰： 禹爱益而任天下于益，已而以启人为吏。
现代文：另一种说法：燕王想把国家传给子之，向潘寿讨教，潘寿回答说： 禹宠爱益，要把天下托付给益，过后不久又把启手下的人任为官吏。
English: Another version: Yan Wang wanted to pass the country on to his son, so he asked Pan Shou for advice. Pan Shou replied, "Yu favor and love Yi, so I want to entrust the world to Yi. Soon after, he appointed Yi's subordinates as officials.

古文：及老，而以启为不足任天下，故传天下于益，而势重尽在启也。
现代文：禹到年老的时候，又认为启不足以担任天下大事，所以把天下传给益，但权势都在启手中。
English: When Yu became old, he also thought that Qi was not enough to serve as the world's major event, so he passed the world to Yi, but the power was all in Qi's hands.

古文：已而启与友党攻益而夺之天下，是禹名传天下子益，而实令启自取之也。
现代文：过后不久启和他的朋党向益进攻，夺了益的天下。这是禹名义上把天下传给益，实际上是叫启自己夺取天下。
English: Soon after this, Kai and his allies attacked Yick, and conquered Yick's world. This was Yu nominally handing over the world to Yick, but actually asking Kai to conquer the world himself.

古文：此禹之不及尧、舜明矣。
现代文：这表明禹远远比不上尧和舜。
English: This shows that Yu is far from being as good as Zhai and Yao.

古文：今王欲传之子之，而吏无非太子之人者也，是名传之而实令太于自取之也。 
现代文：现在大王想把国家传给子之，而官吏没有一个不是太子手下的人，这是名义上传子之而实际上让太子自己夺回。 
English: Now the great king wants to pass the country on to his son, and there is not a single official who is not a subordinate of the prince. This is nominally handing over the country to the son, but in fact letting the prince take it back.

古文：燕王乃收玺，自三百石以上皆效之子之，子之遂重。
现代文：燕王于是收回官印，凡是俸禄在三百石以上的官印都交子之处理，子之地位就尊贵了。
English: Yan Wang then withdrew the official seal, and all official seals with a salary of more than three hundred koku were handled by the son, and the son's status became more prestigious.

古文：方吾子曰： 吾闻之古礼：行不与同服者同车，不与同族者共家，而况君人者乃借其权而外其势乎！ 
现代文：方吾说： 我听说古礼上讲：出外不和穿同样服装的人坐同一辆车，居家不和同一家族的人聚居在一起，何况做君主的把权势外借呢？ 
English: Fangwu said, "I have heard that there is an ancient ritual that says, 'When you go out, don't ride in the same car as someone wearing the same clothes. When you stay at home, don't live in the same house as someone from the same family.

古文：吴章谓韩宣王曰： 人主不可佯爱人，一日不可复憎万；不可以佯憎人，一日不可复爱也。
现代文：吴章对韩宣王说： 君主不可以假装爱人，否则，其他时候就不能再恨他了；也不可以假装恨人，否则，其他时候就不能再爱他了。
English: Wu Zhang said to Han Xuan Wang: "A monarch should not pretend to love someone, otherwise, at other times, he can no longer hate him; nor should he pretend to hate someone, otherwise, at other times, he can no longer love him."

古文：赵天游于圃中，左右以兔与虎而辍，盻然环其眼。王曰： 可恶哉，虎目也！ 
现代文：所以假装恨、假装爱的感情稍有表现，阿谈奉承者就会根据这个去诋毁或称赞他人。即使是明君也不能再把爱憎收回来的，更何况是把真实的感情表露给人呢！ 赵王在花园里游玩，侍从拿兔子给老虎吃又收回来，老虎发怒地圆瞪着眼睛。赵王说： 老虎的眼睛真可恶啊！ 
English: Therefore, pretending to hate, pretending to love, if there is a slight expression of emotion, the flatterer will slander or praise others according to this. Even Ming Jun can no longer take back the love and hate, let alone reveal the true feelings to people! King Zhao was playing in the garden, the servant took the rabbit to the tiger to eat and brought it back, the tiger glared with anger. King Zhao said: The tiger's eyes are really disgusting!

古文：左右曰： 平阳君之目可恶过此。
现代文：侍从说： 平阳君的眼睛比老虎的眼睛还要可恶。
English: The attendant said, "Pingyang's eyes are even more disgusting than a tiger's."

古文：见此未有害也，见平阳君之目如此者，则必死矣。 
现代文：看到老虎瞪眼还没有危险，看到平阳君瞪眼，别人就一定要死了。 
English: There is no danger in seeing a tiger stare, but others will surely die if they see Pingyang Jun stare.

古文：其明日，平阳君闻之，使人杀言者，而王不诛也。
现代文：第二天平阳君听说后，派人杀了进言的侍从，而赵王却不责备平阳君。
English: The next day, after Pingyang heard about it, he sent someone to kill the attendant who had made the suggestion, but Zhao Wang did not blame Pingyang.

古文：卫君入朝于周，周行人问其号，对曰： 诸侯辟疆。 
现代文：卫君去朝见周天子，周外交官问卫君的名号，卫君回答说： 诸侯辟疆。 
English: Wei Jun went to see Zhou Tianzi in the morning. Zhou's diplomat asked Wei Jun's name. Wei Jun replied: Princes rule the country.

古文：周行人却之曰： 诸侯不得与天子同号。 
现代文：周外交官拒绝他说： 诸侯不能和天子用相同的名号。 
English: Zhou the diplomat refused, saying: Princes cannot use the same name as the Son of Heaven.

古文：卫君乃自更曰： 诸侯燬。 
现代文：卫君于是自动改口说： 诸侯毁。 
English: So the prince of Wei changed his mind and said: "The princes are ruined."

古文：而后内之。
现代文：然后周外交官才接纳了他。
English: It was only then that diplomat Zhou accepted him.

古文：什尼闻之曰： 远哉禁逼！虚名不以借人，况实事乎？ 
现代文：孔子听到后说： 禁止冒犯君主，意义是多么深远啊！虚名都不能拿来借给别人，何况有关实权呢？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "How profound is the prohibition against offending the sovereign! False names cannot be used to lend to others, not to mention the relevant real power.

古文：△说四
现代文：说四
English: Say four

古文：摇木者一一摄其叶，则劳而不遍；左右拊其本，而叶遍摇矣。
现代文：摇树的人如果逐一地掀动树叶，即使很劳累，也不能把叶子全部揭遍；如果左右拍打树干，那么所有的树叶就都会晃动了。
English: If the person shaking the tree shakes the leaves one by one, even if he is very tired, he cannot uncover all the leaves; if he slaps the trunk of the tree left and right, then all the leaves will shake.

古文：临渊而摇木，鸟惊而高，鱼恐而下。
现代文：在深潭的边上摇树，鸟惊而高飞，鱼恐而深游。
English: Shake the tree on the edge of the deep pool, the bird is scared and flies high, the fish is scared and swims deep.

古文：善张网者引其纲，若一一摄万目而后得，则是劳而难；引其纲，而鱼已囊矣。
现代文：善于张网捕鱼的人牵引鱼网的绳，如果逐一地拨弄网眼，然后捉鱼，那就不但劳苦，而且也难以捕到鱼了；牵引网上的纲绳，鱼就自然被网住了。
English: A person who is good at fishing with a net pulls the rope of the fishing net. If you play with the meshes of the net one by one and then catch the fish, it is not only hard work, but also difficult to catch the fish. When pulling the line on the net, the fish is naturally caught in the net.

古文：故吏者，民之本、纲者也，故圣人治吏不治民。
现代文：所以官吏是民众的树干和纲绳，因此圣明的君主管理官吏而不去管理民众。
English: That is why officials are the trunk and the sinew of the people, and that is why the enlightened monarch manages officials and does not manage the people.

古文：救火者，令吏挈壶瓮而走火，则一人之用也；操鞭箠指麾而趣使人，则制万夫。
现代文：救火时，叫主管官员提着水壶水罐跑去救火，只能起一个人的作用；拿了鞭子、短棍指挥，驱使人们，就能役使上万的人去救火。
English: When fighting a fire, only one person can play the role of telling the responsible official to run out with a kettle to fight the fire; if you take a whip and a short stick to direct and drive people, you can help tens of thousands of people to fight the fire.

古文：是以圣人不亲细民，明主不躬小事。
现代文：因此圣明的君主不亲自治理民众，不亲自处理小事。
English: Therefore, the enlightened monarch is not close to the self-governing people and does not personally deal with minor matters.

古文：造父方耨，时有子父乘车过者，马惊而不行，其子下车牵马，父子推车，请造助我推车。
现代文：造父正在锄草，这时有父子坐车路过，马受惊不肯前行，一个儿子拉住马，父子几人推车，还请造父帮他们推。
English: At that time, a father and son were passing by in a car. The horse was frightened and refused to go forward. A son pulled the horse, and several fathers and sons pushed the cart. They also asked the father to help them push it.

古文：造父因收器，辍而寄载之，援其子之乘。乃始检辔持策，未之用也，而马咸骛矣。
现代文：于是造父收拾好农具，停止操作而把它寄放在车上，拽住那个儿子拉的马，然后才拿起缰绳和鞭子，还没有使上绳、鞭，马就一起向前奔跑了。
English: So the father packed up the farm tools, stopped the operation and put it on the car, pulled the horse pulled by the son, and then picked up the reins and whip. Before the upper rope, whip, and horse ran forward together.

古文：使造父而不能御，虽尽力劳身助之推车，马犹不肯行也。
现代文：假使造父不会驾驭，即使全力帮忙推车，马还是不肯前行。
English: If the stallion does not know how to drive, even if he does his best to help push the cart, the horse still refuses to go forward.

古文：今身使佚，且寄载，有德于人者，有术而御之也。
现代文：现在他自身操作得很安逸，而且把农具寄放在车上，又有恩德施于人家，是因为有办法驾驭惊马啊。
English: Now he himself is very comfortable with the operation, and he stores the farm tools in the car, and he is kind to others, because he has a way to control the horse.

古文：故国者，君之车也；势者，君之马也。
现代文：所以国家是君主的车，权势是君主的马。
English: Therefore, the state is the monarch's chariot, and power is the monarch's horse.

古文：无术以御之，身虽劳，犹不免乱；有术以御之，身处佚乐之地，又致帝王之功也。
现代文：君主没有法术驾驭它，自己即使很劳苦，国家还是不免于乱；有法术来驾驭它，自己不但能处在安逸快乐的地位，还能取得帝王的功业。
English: The monarch has no magic to control it, and even if he works very hard, the country is still not immune to chaos; if he has magic to control it, he can not only be in a comfortable and happy position, but also obtain the emperor's career.

古文：椎锻者，所以平不夷也；榜檠者，所以矫不宜也。
现代文：榔头、砧石等是用来整治不平的；附在弓弩上的榜檠是用来矫正不直的。
English: Hoe, flint, etc. are used to straighten uneven; attached to the bow hoe is used to straighten uneven.

古文：圣人之为法也，所以平不夷、矫不直也。
现代文：圣人制定法令，就是用来整治不平、矫正不直的。
English: When sages issue decrees, they are used to rectify and correct injustice.

古文：淖齿之用齐也，擢闵王之筋；李兑之用赵也，饿杀主父。
现代文：淖齿在齐国掌权，抽了齐闵王的筋；李兑在赵国掌权，饿死了赵武灵王。
English: Zangzang took power in Qi and killed King Qi; Li Dui took power in Zhao and starved King Zhao Wuling to death.

古文：此二君者，皆不能用其椎锻榜檠，故身死为戮而为天下笑。
现代文：这两个君主都不能运用如同榔头、砧石和榜檠一样的法令，终于自己被杀死，并为天下人所耻笑。
English: Both monarchs could not use the same laws as Shantou, Shanyi and Penghu, and finally they were killed and ridiculed by the world.

古文：一曰：入齐，则独闻淖齿而不闻齐王；人赵，则独闻李兑而不闻赵王。
现代文：另一种说法：到了齐国，只会听说有淖齿，而不会听说有齐王；到了赵国，只会听说有李兑，而不会听说有赵王。
English: Another way of saying this is that when you go to Qi Province, you will only hear about Zang Zang, but not about King Qi; when you go to Zhao Province, you will only hear about Li Dui, but not about King Zhao.

古文：故曰：人主者不操术，则威势轻而臣擅名。
现代文：所以说，君主不掌握法术，威势就会减弱而使大臣垄断名望。
English: Therefore, if the monarch does not master magic, his power will be weakened and the minister will monopolize fame.

古文：一曰：武灵王使惠文王莅政，李兑为相，武灵王不以身躬亲杀生之柄，故劫于李兑。
现代文：另一种说法；赵武灵王让他儿子惠文王临政，李兑任国相，武灵王不自己亲手掌握生杀大权，所以被李兑劫杀。
English: Another theory is that King Zhao Wuling had his son Huiwen Wang Linzheng and Li Dui as ministers of state. King Wuling did not personally have the power of life and death, so he was robbed and killed by Li Dui.

古文：一曰：田婴相齐，人有说王者曰： 终岁之计，王不一以数日之间自听之，则无以知吏之奸邪得失也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：另一种说法：田婴担任齐相。有人对齐王说： 一年的财政结算，大王如果不用几天时间逐一亲自听取报告，就无法知道官吏的营私舞弊和政事得失。 齐王说： 讲得好。 
English: Some people said to King Qi: "If you don't take a few days to personally listen to the report of the annual financial settlement, you can't know the government officials' self-dealing and political gains and losses." King Qi said: "Well said."

古文：田婴闻之，即送请于王而听其计。
现代文：田婴听到后，就立即向齐王要求去听自己的财政结算。
English: After hearing this, Tian Ying immediately asked Qi Wang to listen to his financial settlement.

古文：王将听之矣，田婴令官具押券斗石参升之计。
现代文：齐王准备去听了，田婴让官吏准备好全年的财政大小收入的帐目和凭证。
English: King Qi was ready to listen, and Tian Ying asked the officials to prepare the accounts and certificates of the annual financial income.

古文：王自听计，计不胜听，罢食后，复坐，不复暮食美。
现代文：齐王亲自听取财政结算，但听不胜听，吃完饭，又坐下来，累得不再吃晚饭了。
English: King Qi personally listened to the financial settlement, but it was hard to listen. After eating, he sat down again, too tired to eat dinner.

古文：田婴复谓曰： 群臣所终岁日夜不敢偷怠之事也，王以一夕听之，则群臣有为劝勉矣。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：田婴又对齐王说； 群臣一年到头日日夜夜不敢马虎和懈怠的事情，大王用一个晚上听取报告，群臣就由此得到鼓励了。 齐王说： 好吧。 
English: Tian Ying also said to King Qi, "The courtiers dare not be careless and slack all year round. The great king used one evening to listen to the report, and the courtiers were encouraged by this." King Qi said, "Okay."

古文：俄而王已睡矣，吏尽揄刀削其押券升石之计。
现代文：一会儿齐王已睡着了，官吏抽刀削掉凭证上的结算。
English: After a while, Qi Wang fell asleep, and the official took out a knife to cut off the settlement on the voucher.

古文：王听之，乱乃始生。
现代文：君主亲自听取结算，就是国家混乱的开始。说五
English: The monarch personally heard the settlement, which was the beginning of the country's chaos.

古文：△说五
现代文：兹郑拉车过高桥而上不去。
English: Say five.

古文：兹郑子引辇上高梁而不能支。兹郑踞辕而歌，前者止，后者趋，辇乃上。
现代文：他坐在车辕上唱歌，前面行人止步，后面的行人赶上来，大家帮着推，车才上了桥。
English: He sat on the curb and sang. The pedestrians in front of him stopped, and the pedestrians behind him caught up. Everyone helped to push, and the car finally got onto the bridge.

古文：使兹郑无术以致人，则身虽绝力至死，辇犹不上也。
现代文：假如兹郑没有办法招人来，那么即使他用尽力气以至于累死，车子还是上不了桥。
English: If Zizheng couldn't find anyone to hire, then even if he tried his best to the point of exhaustion, the car still wouldn't be able to get onto the bridge.

古文：今身不至劳苦而辇以上者，有术以致人之故也。
现代文：现在兹郑不受劳苦而车却上了桥，是因为他有办法招人来的缘故。
English: Now Zi Zheng does not have to work hard, but the car is on the bridge, because he has a way to recruit people.

古文：赵简主出税者，吏请轻重。简主曰： 勿轻勿重。
现代文：赵简子派出收税的官吏，官吏请示收税标准的高低。赵简子说： 要不轻不重。
English: Zhao Jianzi sent officials to collect taxes, and the officials asked for guidance on the level of tax collection standards. Zhao Jianzi said: It should be neither light nor heavy.

古文：重，则利入于上；若轻，则利归于民。
现代文：税收重了，利就归于国家；轻了，利就归于民众。
English: When taxes are heavy, the profits go to the state; when taxes are light, the profits go to the people.

古文：束无私利而正矣。 
现代文：官吏从中捞不到私利，轻重就适中了。 
English: If government officials can gain no personal benefit from it, then it is of moderate importance.

古文：薄疑调赵简主曰： 君之国中饱。 
现代文：薄疑对赵简子说： 您的国家中间富足。 
English: A suspicious person said to Zhao Jianzi: Your country is rich in the middle.

古文：简主欣然而喜曰： 何如焉？ 
现代文：简子高兴地说： 怎么呢？ 
English: Happily, she said, "What's wrong?

古文：对曰： 府库空虚于上，百姓贫饿于下，然而奸吏富矣。 
现代文：薄疑回答说： 上面财库粮仓空虚匮乏，下面平民百姓贫穷饥饿，但是处在中间的奸吏富足了。 
English: The sceptic replied: Above, the treasury and granaries are empty and destitute, below, the common people are poor and hungry, but the traitors in the middle are rich.

古文：齐桓公微服以巡民家，人有年老而自养者，桓公问其故。
现代文：齐桓公微服出访百姓家，有一个年老而自己料理生活的人，桓公问他什么缘故。
English: When Qi Kuan Gong visited the homes of the common people, there was an old man who cooked his own food, and Kuan Gong asked him why.

古文：对日： 臣有子三人，家贫无以妻之，佣未反。 
现代文：老人回答说： 我有三个儿子，家里穷，无法为他们娶妻，出去当雇工还没有回来。 
English: The old man replied, "I have three sons. My family is poor, so I can't find wives for them. I went out to work as a hired hand, but I haven't come back yet."

古文：桓公归，以告管仲。
现代文：桓公回到宫里，把这件事告诉管仲。
English: Prince Kan returned to the palace and reported the matter to Guanzhong.

古文：管仲曰： 畜积有腐弃之财，则人饥饿；宫中有怨女，则民无妻。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：管仲说； 朝廷积蓄中有腐败的财物，民众就得挨饿；宫中有年长而不能及时出嫁的女子，民众就娶不到妻子。 桓公说： 对。 
English: Guanzhong said: If there is corrupt wealth in the court's savings, the people will have to starve; if there is an old woman in the palace who cannot marry in time, the people will not be able to marry a wife.

古文：乃论宫中有妇人而嫁之。
现代文：就考察宫中有未婚的女子让她们出嫁。
English: Let the unmarried women in the palace marry.

古文：下令于民日： 丈夫二十而室，妇人十五而嫁。 
现代文：对百姓下令道： 男子二十岁娶妻，女子十五岁嫁人。 
English: He ordered the people: A man must marry at the age of twenty, and a woman at the age of fifteen.

古文：一曰：桓公微服而行于民间，有鹿门稷者，行年七十而无妻。
现代文：另一种说法：齐桓公微服出访民间，有一个叫鹿门稷的人，年已七十而没有妻子。
English: Another way of saying this is that Qi Kuan Gong wore a short-sleeved shirt when he visited the people. There was a man named Lu Menjun, who was seventy years old and had no wife.

古文：桓公问管仲曰： 有民老而无妻者平？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 有年老而没有妻子的人吗？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "Is there an old man without a wife?"

古文：管仲曰： 有鹿门稷者，行年七十矣而无妻。 
现代文：管仲说； 有个叫鹿门稷的人，年已七十了，却没有妻子。 
English: Guanzhong said: There is a man named Lu Menjun, who is seventy years old, but he has no wife.

古文：桓公曰： 何以令之有妻？ 
现代文：桓公说： 怎样才能让他有妻子？ 
English: Prince Kan said: How can he have a wife?

古文：管仲曰： 臣闻之：上有积财，则民臣必匾乏于下；宫中有怨女，则有老而无妻者。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：管仲说： 我听说：君主有积蓄财物，臣民在下面就一定穷困匮乏；宫中有年长而不能及时出嫁的女子，就会有年老而没有妻子的人。 桓公说： 对。 
English: Guanzhong said, "I have heard that if the monarch has accumulated wealth, his subjects must be poor and destitute; if there is an old woman in the palace who cannot get married in time, there will be an old man without a wife."

古文：令于宫中 女子未尝御出嫁之 。
现代文：于是下令宫中，让君主没有临幸过的女子出嫁。
English: So he ordered the palace to let the monarch marry a woman who had not been so lucky.

古文：乃令男子年二十而室，女年十五而嫁。
现代文：然后下令，男子二十娶妻，女子十五出嫁。
English: He then ordered that twenty men should marry and fifteen women should be married.

古文：则内无怨女，外无旷夫。
现代文：这样宫内就没有年长而不及时出嫁的女子，宫外也没有无妻的成年男子。
English: In this way, there is no older woman in the palace who does not marry in time, and there is no adult man without a wife outside the palace.

古文：延陵卓子乘苍龙挑文之乘，钩饰在前，错錣在后。
现代文：延陵卓子乘坐的车子由名为 苍龙  挑文 的马拉，马身装饰华贵，前有钩、勒等物，后有上了针的鞭子。
English: The carriage that Yanling Zhuo Zi rode in was a horse-drawn carriage named "Sanglong Zhaowen." The horse's body was richly decorated, with hooks, leashes and other objects in the front, and a whip with a needle on the back.

古文：马欲进则钩饰禁之，欲退则错錣贯之，马因旁出。
现代文：马想前进，就会碰到钩、勒禁止，马想后退就有鞭针戳刺，于是马就往斜里乱跑。
English: If the horse wants to go forward, it will encounter a hook, a rope, and a ban. If the horse wants to go back, it will be poked by a whip, so the horse will run wildly in the slope.

古文：造父过而为之泣涕，曰： 古之治人亦然矣。
现代文：造父路过时看到了，为马哭泣说： 古时治人也是这样。
English: My father-in-law, who was passing by, saw this and wept for the horse, saying, "This is how it was in ancient times.

古文：夫赏所以劝之，而毁存焉；罚所以禁之，而誉加焉。
现代文：赏赐是用来勉励立功的，但毁谤也夹杂在里面；刑罚是用来禁止犯罪的，但赞美却也夹杂在里面。
English: Reward is to encourage merit, but slander is mixed with it; punishment is to forbid sin, but praise is mixed with it.

古文：民中立而不知所由，此亦圣人之所为泣也。 
现代文：人们只好呆着不动，不知所措。这也就是圣人为之哭泣的原因。 
English: The people had to remain motionless, bewildered, which is why the saint wept.

古文：一曰：延陵卓子乘苍龙与翟文之乘，前则有错饰，后则有利鎚，进则引之，退则策之。
现代文：另一种说法：延陵卓子乘坐的车子由名为 苍龙 和 翟文 的马拉，马装扮得十分华贵，前面有交错的钩、勒等饰物，后面有锋利的鞭针。马前进时就向后紧拉，马后退就用鞭抽打。
English: Another version: Yanling Zhuo Zi rode in a carriage pulled by a horse named "Sanglong" and "Yongwen." The horse was dressed very richly, with interlaced hooks and leashes on the front, and sharp whip pins on the back. When the horse moved forward, it was pulled backward, and when the horse moved backward, it was whipped.

古文：马前不得进，后不得退，遂避而逸，因下抽刀而刎其脚。
现代文：马前不能进，后不能退，于是就避开前后而乱跑，于是卓子就下车抽刀砍断了马的腿。
English: The horse can't go forward or backward, so it avoids running back and forth, so Zhuo Zi got out of the car and cut off the horse's leg with a knife.

古文：造父见之，泣，终日不食，因仰天而叹曰： 策，所以进之也，错饰在前；引，所以退之也，利錣在后。
现代文：造父看见了，流泪不止，整天不吃饭，仰天叹息说： 马鞭是用来让马前进的，钩勒却又在前；缰绳是用来让马后退的，鞭针却又在后。
English: When the father-to-be saw this, he burst into tears and did not eat for a whole day. He looked up to heaven and sighed, "The whip is used to make the horse go forward, but the hook is in front; the reins are used to make the horse go back, but the whip is behind."

古文：今人主以其清洁也进之，以其不适左右也退之；以其公正也誉之，以其不听从也废之。
现代文：现在君主因为臣下廉洁而加以任用，却又因为他不迎合身边亲信而予以辞退；因为他公正而加以称赞，却又因为他不听从旨意而予以废黜。
English: The sovereign now appoints his vassals because of their probity, and dismisses them because they do not please his friends; he praises them because they are just, and deposes them because they do not obey his will.

古文：民惧，中立而不知所由，此圣人之所为泣也。 
现代文：人们因此而害怕，站着不动，不知所措。这也就是圣人为之哭泣的原因。 
English: That is why people are afraid, that is why they stand still, that is why they are bewildered, and that is why the saints weep.

