古文：○卢恺
现代文：○卢恺
English: ○Luzhou

古文：卢恺，字长仁，涿郡范阳人也。
现代文：卢恺，字长仁，涿郡范阳人。
English: Lu Yu, the character Chang Ren, Fan Yang people of Yu County.

古文：父柔，终于魏中书监。
现代文：父亲卢柔，死在西魏中书监上。
English: Lu Rong's father died in the middle of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：恺性孝友，神情爽悟，略涉书记，颇解属文。
现代文：卢恺生性孝顺友爱，神情聪悟，略涉文献，善于写文章。
English: Lu Xun's nature is filial, obedient and friendly, he is intelligent, knows a little about literature, and is good at writing articles.

古文：周齐王宪引为记室。
现代文：北周齐王宇文宪，任他为记室。
English: North Zhou Qi Wang Yu Wen Xian, appointed him as a recorder.

古文：其后袭爵容城伯，邑千一百户。
现代文：这以后袭爵位，当容城伯，食邑一千一百户。
English: After that, he inherited the title of nobility, and became the mayor of Rongcheng, with 1,100 households.

古文：从宪伐齐，恺说柏杜镇下之。
现代文：随宇文宪讨伐北齐，卢恺游说柏杜镇，让该镇投降。
English: Following Yuwen Xian's campaign against Beiqi, Lu Wei lobbied Baidu Town to surrender.

古文：迁小吏部大夫，增邑七百户。
现代文：卢恺升任小吏部大夫，增加食邑七百户。
English: Lu Wei was promoted to the position of the doctor of the petty officials' department, and the number of restaurants was increased to 700.

古文：染工上士王神欢者，尝以赂自进，冢宰宇文护擢为计部下大夫。
现代文：染工上士王神欢，曾贿赂人，想升官，冢宰宇文护提拔他当计部下大夫。
English: The chief dyer, Wang Shenhuan, had bribed people and wanted to be promoted, so the governor, Yu Wengu, promoted him to be a junior doctor.

古文：恺谏曰： 古者登高能赋，可为大夫，求贤审官，理须详慎。
现代文：卢恺劝谏宇文护说： 古时能登高赋诗的，可以当大夫。求贤人委官职，理应审慎。
English: Lu Yao advised Zou Yuwenguo: In ancient times, those who could climb high and write poems could become doctors. It is wise to be cautious when applying for the position of the Committee of Wise Men.

古文：今神欢出自染工，更无殊异，徒以家富自通，遂与搢绅并列，实恐惟鹈之刺，闻之外境。 
现代文：现在王神欢出身于染工，又无特殊之处，只因家中富有，自求当官，就与士大夫并列，恐怕讥讽之声要传到国外去。 
English: Now Wang Shenhuan was born as a dyer, and there is nothing special about him. Just because his family is rich and he aspires to be an official, he is on the same level as a magistrate. I'm afraid the ridicule will spread abroad.

古文：护竟寝其事。
现代文：宇文护终于让这事作罢。
English: Uwengu finally let the matter rest.

古文：建德中，增邑二百户。
现代文：建德年间，卢恺增加食邑二百户。
English: During the Jiande period, Lu Ye increased the number of restaurants by two hundred.

古文：岁馀，转内史下大夫。
现代文：一年多后，转任内史下大夫。
English: A little more than a year later, he was transferred to the post of junior doctor of internal medicine.

古文：武帝在云阳宫，敕诸屯简老牛，欲以享士。
现代文：周武帝在云阳宫，让各地挑选老牛，想用来烹给士人吃。
English: In the Yunyang Palace, Emperor Zhou Wu asked various regions to select old cattle that they wanted to use for cooking and eating.

古文：恺进谏曰： 昔田子方赎老马，君子以为美谈。
现代文：卢恺进谏说： 过去田子方买老马，君子以为美谈。
English: Lu Yingjin said: In the past, Tian Zifang bought old horses, and the gentleman thought it was a beautiful story.

古文：向奉明敕，欲以老牛享士，有亏仁政。 
现代文：过去奉皇上明示，想以老牛之肉招待士人，恐怕有损仁政。 
English: In the past, Emperor Bong explicitly said that if he wanted to invite scholars with the meat of old cattle, it would be detrimental to benevolence.

古文：帝美其言而止。
现代文：武帝称赞他的话，从而作罢。
English: Emperor Wu complimented him on his words, and the argument ended.

古文：转礼部大夫，为聘陈使副。
现代文：卢恺转任礼部大夫，为出使陈国的副使。
English: Lu Xun was transferred to the post of Doctor of the Ministry of Rites and became the deputy envoy of Chen Guo.

古文：先是，行人多从其国礼，及恺为使，一依本朝，陈人莫能屈。
现代文：此前，出使他国的，多按他国礼节行事。到卢恺为使者，全按本国礼节行事，陈国人不能使他屈服。
English: Previously, when he went abroad, he mostly acted according to the etiquette of other countries. When he came to Lushan as an envoy, he acted entirely according to the etiquette of his own country. The Chen people could not make him submit.

古文：四年秋，李穆攻拔轵关、柏崖二镇，命恺作露布，帝读之大悦，曰： 卢恺文章大进，荀景倩故是令君之子。 
现代文：建德四年秋，李穆攻下轵关、柏崖二镇，命卢恺作公告，武帝读后很高兴，说： 卢恺的文章大有长进，荀景倩本是令君之子。 
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Jiande, when Li Mu conquered Shouguan and Baiyao Town, he ordered Lu Yao to make an announcement. Emperor Wu was very happy after reading it, saying: Lu Yao's article has made great progress, and this book is the son of Ling Jun.

古文：寻授襄州总管司录，转治中。
现代文：不久授卢恺襄州总管司录，转任治中。
English: Soon, he was awarded the record of the general manager of Luzhou, and transferred to the middle school.

古文：大象元年，征拜东京吏部大夫。
现代文：大象元年，授他东京吏部大夫。
English: In the first year of the Ezo era, he was awarded the title of Tokyo Chief Medical Officer.

古文：开皇初，加上仪同三司，除尚书吏部侍郎，进爵为侯，仍摄尚书左丞。
现代文：隋开皇初，加授他上仪同三司，授他尚书吏部侍郎，晋爵位为侯爵，仍兼任尚书左丞。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Sui, he was awarded the title of Shang Yi and the title of San Si, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuliribei waiter, he was promoted to the rank of marquis, and he still served as Shang Shulizhong.

古文：每有敷奏，侃然正色，虽逢喜怒，不改其常。
现代文：每每有奏折，他都侃然正色，虽然逢到喜怒之事，也不改变其常态。
English: Every time there's a drama, he's completely honest, and although there are ups and downs, he doesn't change his normal state.

古文：帝嘉恺有吏干，赐钱二十万，并赉杂彩三百匹，加散骑常侍。
现代文：高祖叹赏他有吏才，赐钱二十万，并赐缣帛三百匹，升他作散骑常侍。
English: Gao Zu praised him for his talent as an official, gave him 200,000 yuan and 300 donkeys, and promoted him to the position of errand horse attendant.

古文：八年，上亲考百僚，以恺为上。
现代文：开皇八年，皇上亲自考察百官，以卢恺为上等。
English: In the eighth year of the emperor's reign, the emperor personally inspected a hundred officials, with Lu Wei as the highest.

古文：恺固让，不敢受，高祖曰： 吏部勤干，旧所闻悉。
现代文：卢恺坚持辞让，不敢接受，高祖说： 吏部你很勤勉能干，以前我曾听说过。
English: Lu Wei insisted on the resignation and did not dare to accept it. Gaozu said, "I have heard that you are very diligent and capable in the personnel department.

古文：今者上考，佥议攸同，当仁不让，何愧之有！
现代文：如今你得到上等考绩，大家议论，都与我相同。当仁不让，你有什么惭愧呀？
English: Now that you have received a high evaluation, everyone is talking about you, just like me. What are you ashamed of?

古文：皆在朕心，无劳饰让。 
现代文：事情都在我心里，不要推让了。 
English: It's all in my head. Don't push it.

古文：岁馀，拜礼部尚书，摄吏部尚书事。
现代文：一年多后，卢恺任礼部尚书，兼管吏部尚书事。
English: More than a year later, Lu Wei was appointed as the secretary of the etiquette department and the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：会国子博士何妥与右仆射苏威不平，奏威阴事。
现代文：适逢国子博士何妥与右仆射苏威不和，何妥告苏威一些人背后的事。
English: When Dr. Kuniko He Tuo had a disagreement with his right-hand man, Su Wei, He Tuo told Su Wei about some people behind him.

古文：恺坐与相连，上以恺属吏。
现代文：卢恺受牵连，皇上把卢恺交给官吏办罪。
English: Lu Wei was implicated, and the emperor handed Lu Wei over to officials to deal with the crime.

古文：宪司奏恺曰： 房恭懿者，尉迟迥之党，不当仕进。
现代文：司法部门告卢恺说： 房恭懿，是尉迟迥一党的，不应当官。
English: The judicial department told Lu Yao: Fang Gongyao, who is a party member, should not be an official.

古文：威、恺二人曲相荐达，累转为海州刺史。
现代文：苏威、卢恺二人，曲相推荐，累次加官，任他为海州刺史。
English: Su Wei and Lu Wei, both recommended by Qu Xiang, have been promoted repeatedly, and he has been appointed as the leader of Haizhou's history.

古文：又吏部预选者甚多，恺不即授官，皆注色而遣。
现代文：另外，吏部预选为官的人很多，卢恺不立即授官职，都看人打发。
English: In addition, there are many people who have been pre-selected by the cadre department to become officials. If Lu Wei does not immediately confer an official position, it is all up to him.

古文：威之从父弟彻、肃二人，并以乡正征诣吏部。
现代文：苏威的堂弟苏彻、苏肃二人，都是乡里正式推荐到吏部的，苏彻的文书后到，却被先授官职。
English: Su Wei's two cousins, Su Che and Su Su, were both officially recommended by the village to the personnel department. Su Che's paperwork arrived later, but he was given the official post first.

古文：彻文状后至而先任用，肃左足挛蹇，才用无算，恺以威故，授朝请郎。
现代文：苏肃左脚有毛病，又无才能，卢恺因苏威的缘故，授他朝请郎之职。
English: Su Su had a problem with his left foot and had no talent. Lu Xun gave him the position of imperial courtier for Su Wei's sake.

古文：恺之朋党，事甚明白。 
现代文：卢恺搞朋党，事情很明白。 
English: It's very clear that Lu Wei is engaging in cronyism.

古文：上大怒曰： 恺敢将天官以为私惠！ 
现代文：皇上大怒说： 卢恺敢把天下的官职用作私人的恩惠！ 
English: The emperor said angrily, "How dare Lu Xun use the world's official position as a personal favor!

古文：恺免冠顿首曰： 皇太子将以通事舍人苏夔为舍人，夔即苏威之子，臣以夔未当迁，固启而止。
现代文：卢恺取下官帽叩头说： 皇太子要任通事舍人苏夔为舍人，苏夔就是苏威的儿子，我认为苏夔不应升迁，坚持禀告皇太子而作罢。
English: Lu Wei took off his official cap and bowed, saying, "The crown prince should appoint Su Wei, who is Su Wei's son, as the secretary. I don't think Su Wei should be promoted, so I insist on reporting to the crown prince and quit."

古文：臣若与威有私，岂当如此！ 
现代文：我若与苏威有私情，怎会这样！ 
English: If I am having an affair with Su Wei, how can this happen!

古文：上曰： 苏威之子，朝廷共知，卿乃固执，以徼身幸。
现代文：皇上说： 苏威的儿子，朝廷都知道，你于是固执己见，是为了邀功请赏。
English: The emperor said, "Su Wei's son, the imperial court knows that you are stubborn because you want to get a reward.

古文：至所不知者，便行朋附，奸臣之行也。 
现代文：至于朝廷不知道的，你就与之结朋党，这是奸臣作的事！ 
English: As for what the imperial court does not know, you make friends with it. This is the work of a treacherous minister!

古文：于是除名为百姓。
现代文：于是除名为百姓。
English: As a result, they were dismissed as commoners.

古文：未几，卒于家。
现代文：不久，卢恺死在家里。
English: Soon after, Lu Yao died at home.

古文：自周氏以降，选无清浊，及恺摄吏部，与薛道衡、陆彦师等甄别士流，故涉党固之谮，遂及于此。
现代文：自北周以来，选官不分清浊。到卢恺管吏部，与薛道衡、陆彦师等人，甄别士人，所以被人上谗言，说是结朋党，才落到这一步。
English: Since the Northern Zhou Dynasty, there has been no clear distinction in the selection of officials. It was not until this step was taken in the Luye Administration Department, with Xue Daoheng, Lu Yan Shi and others, that the selection of officials was made, so it was rumored that it was a party of cronies.

古文：子义恭嗣。
现代文：他儿子卢义恭继承爵位。
English: His son Lu Yigong succeeded to the title.

古文：○令狐熙
现代文：○令狐熙
English: ○ Ling Xixi

古文：令狐熙，字长熙，燉煌人也，代为西州豪右。
现代文：令狐熙，字长熙，敦煌人，其家世世代代都是西州的豪右。
English: Ling Xuxi, Zi Changxi, Dunhuang people, their families have been the heroes of Xizhou for generations.

古文：父整，仕周，官至大将军、始、丰二州刺史。
现代文：父亲令狐整，仕北周，官至大将军、始、丰二州的刺史。
English: His father was the commander of the Northern Zhou, the commander-in-chief of the Northern Zhou, the commander-in-chief of the Northern Zhou, the commander-in-chief of the Northern Zhou, and the commander-in-chief of the Northern Zhou.

古文：熙性严重，有雅量，虽在私室，终日俨然。
现代文：令狐熙生性严谨，有雅量，虽在家里，也终日很严肃。
English: Ling Xixi is strict and elegant. Although at home, he is also very serious all day long.

古文：不妄通宾客，凡所交给，必一时名士。
现代文：不随便与宾客交结，凡是交结的，必定是一时的名士。
English: Do not casually mingle with guests; anyone who does must be a celebrity of the moment.

古文：博览群书，尤明《三礼》，善骑射，颇知音律。
现代文：他博览群书，尤其精通《三礼》。善骑马射箭，颇知音乐。
English: He is well-versed in books, especially in the "Three Rites." He is good at horse riding and archery, and knows a lot about music.

古文：起家以通经为吏部上士，寻授都督、辅国将军，转夏官府都上士，俱有能名。
现代文：开始因通晓经典而任吏部上士，不久授他帅都督、辅国将军，转任夏官府都上士，都有能干之名。
English: He was initially appointed as a staff sergeant of the cadre department because of his knowledge of the classics, and soon he was given the title of marshal-governor and general of the auxiliary province, and then he was appointed as a staff sergeant of the summer government.

古文：以母忧去职，殆不胜丧。
现代文：因遭母丧而离职，几乎悲不自胜。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he left his job, almost inconsolable.

古文：其父戒之曰： 大孝在于安亲，义不绝嗣。
现代文：他父亲告诫他说： 真正的孝道，在于安定亲人的心，在道义上不应该绝子孙。
English: His father admonished him: True filial piety lies in stabilizing the hearts of relatives. Morally, there should be no grandchildren.

古文：吾今见存，汝又只立，何得过尔毁顿，贻吾忧也！ 
现代文：我现在还活着，你又独自一个，没有娶妻，怎能悲伤太过，让我担忧呢？ 
English: Now that I am still alive, and you are alone and unmarried, why should I be worried by your excessive sorrow?

古文：熙自是稍加饘粥。
现代文：令狐熙此后才稍稍喝点粥。
English: It was only after this that Ling Xuxi drank some porridge.

古文：服阕，除小驾部，复丁父忧，非杖不起，人有闻其哭声，莫不为之下泣。
现代文：服丧满后，任小驾部。又遭父丧，不拄拐杖站不起来，有人听到他的哭声，没有不为他哭泣的。
English: After his mourning was over, he became a driver. Then his father passed away, and he couldn't stand up without crutches. Someone heard his cries, and there was no one who didn't cry for him.

古文：河阴之役，诏令墨缞从事，还授职方下大夫，袭爵彭阳县公，邑二千一百户。
现代文：河阴之战，朝廷令他戴孝从军，回京后任职方下大夫，袭爵任彭阳县公，食邑二千一百户。
English: In the Battle of Hekin, the imperial court ordered him to serve in the army as Dai Xiao, and after returning to Beijing, he served as a lower-ranked doctor, and was knighted as the governor of Pengyang County, with 2,100 households.

古文：及武帝平齐，以留守功，增邑六百户。
现代文：到周武帝平定北齐，他因留守京城之功，增加食邑六百户。
English: By the time of Emperor Zhou Wu's subjugation of Northern Qi, he had increased the number of food villages by 600 due to his contribution of staying in the capital.

古文：进位仪同，历司勋、吏部二曹中大夫，甚有当时之誉。
现代文：升任仪同，历任司勋、吏部二曹中大夫，当时很有声誉。
English: He was promoted to Shidong, and successively held the positions of Shisun, and Second Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel. At that time, he had a great reputation.

古文：高祖受禅之际，熙以本官行纳言事。
现代文：高祖受禅时，令狐熙以本官身份代行纳言之事。
English: When Gaozhu was meditating, he asked Guoxi to act as his official representative.

古文：寻除司徒左长史，加上仪同，进爵河南郡公。
现代文：不久授他司徒左长史，加授上仪同，晋爵为河南郡公爵。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of "Stu Zuo Changshi" and "Shang Yi Tong" as well as the title of "Duke of Henan County."

古文：时吐谷浑寇边，以行军长史从元帅元谐讨之，以功进位上开府。
现代文：当时吐谷浑进犯边塞，他以行军长史身份随元帅元谐讨伐敌人，因功升任上开府。
English: At that time, Tugu Hunjin violated the border, he marched with the marshal to fight the enemy, and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：会蜀王秀出镇于蜀，纲纪之选，咸属正人，以熙为益州总管长史。
现代文：碰上蜀王杨秀出镇蜀地，选拔王爷的僚属，都要一些正人君子，以令狐熙为益州总管长史。
English: When King of Shu, Yang Xiu, came out of the town of Shu, he wanted to select some upright gentlemen to be his colleagues. He chose Ling Xuxi to be the governor of Yizhou.

古文：未之官，拜沧州刺史。
现代文：没到任，就拜授沧州刺史。
English: If he does not take office, he will be awarded the Cangzhou History Prize.

古文：时山东承齐之弊，户口簿籍类不以实。
现代文：当时华山以东地区承北齐之弊，户口簿籍大多是假的。
English: At that time, the areas east of Huashan had the same problems as the northern areas, and most of the household registration books were fake.

古文：熙晓谕之，令自归首，至者一万户。
现代文：令狐熙晓谕百姓，让他们各自回乡，回去的有一万户。
English: Ling Xuxi told the people to go back to their hometowns. Ten thousand households went back.

古文：在职数年，风教大洽，称为良二千石。
现代文：在任几年，民风大好，被称为好刺史。
English: During his few years in office, the people's morale was very good, known as a good stabbing history.

古文：开皇四年，上幸洛阳，熙来朝，吏民恐其迁易，悲泣于道。
现代文：开皇四年，皇上幸巡洛阳，令狐熙来朝见，官吏百姓怕他被调走，在路边痛哭。
English: In the first four years of the emperor's reign, the emperor was fortunate enough to tour Luoyang, which made the fox come to see the emperor. The officials and the people were afraid that he would be transferred away, and they cried bitterly on the roadside.

古文：及熙复还，百姓出境迎谒，欢叫盈路。
现代文：到令狐熙又回沧州时，百姓出境迎接，在路上欢呼叫喊。
English: When Ling Xuxi returned to Cangzhou, the people went out to welcome him, shouting and cheering on the road.

古文：在州获白乌、白麞、嘉麦，甘露降于庭前柳树。
现代文：在州里得到了白乌、白鹿、嘉麦等祥瑞之物，甘露降落到庭前的柳树上。
English: In the state, they obtained auspicious things such as white poppies, white deer, and barley, and the nectar fell on the willow trees in front of the courtyard.

古文：八年，徙为河北道行台度支尚书，吏民追思，相与立碑颂德。
现代文：开皇八年，转任河北道行台度支尚书，沧州吏民追思他，都立碑歌颂他的功德。
English: Eight years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to the post of Hebei Provincial Governor, and the officials and people of Cangzhou thought about him, and erected a monument to praise his merits.

古文：及行台废，授并州总管司马。
现代文：到行台废置时，授他并州总管司马。
English: At the time of the abolition of the line, he was awarded the title of state chief steward.

古文：后征为雍州别驾。
现代文：后调任雍州别驾。
English: Later, he was transferred to Yongzhou.

古文：寻为长史，迁鸿胪卿。
现代文：不久当长史，升任鸿胪卿。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Changshi and then to the post of Hongyuqing.

古文：后以本官兼吏部尚书，往判五曹尚书事，号为明干，上甚任之。
现代文：后以本官身份兼任吏部尚书，去决断五部尚书之事，被称为聪明能干，皇上很信任他。
English: Later, he concurrently served as the secretary of the Imperial Household Agency in his official capacity, to decide the matter of the five Imperial Household Agencies. He was said to be intelligent and capable, and the emperor trusted him very much.

古文：及上祠太山还，次汴州，恶其殷盛，多有奸侠，于是以熙为汴州刺史。
现代文：皇上祭祀泰山还京，路经汴州，厌恶那里太富庶，多有奸诈经商之事，于是让令狐熙任汴州刺史。
English: The emperor worshipped Mount Taishan and returned to Beijing, passing through Bozhou. He was disgusted by the fact that the people there were too rich and there was a lot of fraudulent business, so he appointed Ling Xuxi as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：下车禁游食，抑工商，民有向街开门者杜之，船客停于郭外星居者，勒为聚落，侨人逐令归本，其有滞狱，并决遣之，令行禁止，称为良政。
现代文：令狐熙一到汴州，便禁止游食，抑制工商，百姓有向街道开门经商的，把门都堵了，船客停在城外散居的，勒令他们群居，侨居他乡的百姓，让他们归本务农。有官司没及时了结的，都决断发送。令行禁止，被称为良政。
English: As soon as Ling Xixi arrived in Zhangzhou, he banned travelling for food and curbed commerce and industry. People who opened their doors to the streets to do business had their doors blocked. Boatmen who stopped and dispersed outside the city were ordered to live in groups. People who lived in other towns were ordered to return to their main business of farming. Any lawsuits that were not concluded in time were resolutely sent away. The order was banned and was called good governance.

古文：上闻而嘉之，顾谓侍臣曰： 鄴都天下难理处也。 
现代文：皇上听说后嘉奖他，回头对侍臣们说： 邺城，是天下难治理的地方。 
English: When the emperor heard of this, he praised him, and turned to his courtiers and said, "Fengcheng is a place that is difficult to govern.

古文：敕相州刺史豆卢通，令习熙之法。
现代文：令相州刺史豆卢通，让他学习令狐熙的办法。
English: Let him learn from the methods of Ling Xixi.

古文：其年来朝，考绩为天下之最，赐帛三百匹，颁告天下。
现代文：这年令狐熙来京朝见天子，考定政绩，他为天下之最。皇上赐给他布帛三百匹，并颁告天下。
English: In that year, Emperor Xizong sent Xuxi to Beijing to meet the emperor and assess his political achievements. He was the best in the world. The emperor gave him 300 cloth horses and announced to the world.

古文：上以岭南夷、越数为反乱，征拜桂州总管十七州诸军事，许以便宜从事，刺史以下官得承制补授。
现代文：皇上因岭南夷人、越人老是反叛，调令狐熙去总管桂州等十七州的军事，同意他随机行事，刺史以下官员，他可以按制度补授。
English: Because of the constant rebellion of the Lingnan Yi people and the Viet people, the emperor ordered Fox Xi to be the military chief of the seventeen states including Guizhou. He agreed to act randomly and stab officials below the history, and he could give supplementary lectures according to the system.

古文：给帐内五百人，赐帛五百匹，发传送其家累，改封武康郡公。
现代文：给他军帐内人员五百人，赐他布帛五百匹，派人送给他家中用度，改封他为武康郡公爵。
English: He gave him five hundred military personnel, gave him five hundred cloth ponies, sent someone to give him money for his family, and changed his title to Duke of Bukang County.

古文：熙至部，大弘恩信，其溪洞渠帅更相谓曰： 前时总管皆以兵威相胁，今者乃以手教相谕，我辈其可违乎？ 
现代文：令狐熙到桂州，大施恩典，讲究信誉，那些部落首领互相说： 以前的总管，总以兵力相威胁。如今的总管以手教相告，我们怎能违背他呢？ 
English: When they sent Xuxi to Guizhou, they showed great grace and cared about credibility. Those tribal leaders said to each other, "The previous general manager always threatened us with military force. Today's general manager tells us with his hand, how can we go against him?"

古文：于是相率归附。
现代文：于是相率归附。
English: As a result, the phase ratio is reduced.

古文：先是，州县生梗，长吏多不得之官，寄政于总管府。
现代文：此前，州县梗阻，官员大多无法到任，在总管府处理政事。
English: Previously, most officials were unable to arrive at their posts due to state and county obstruction, and had to deal with political affairs at the General Administration Office.

古文：熙悉遣之，为建城邑，开设学校，华夷感敬，称为大化。
现代文：令狐熙派他们全部到任，为他们修建城邑，开设学校，汉人夷人都很感激，那里被称为大行教化。
English: The Chinese and the barbarians were very grateful to him for appointing all of them, building towns and opening schools for them. It was known as the Great Enlightenment.

古文：时有宁猛力者，与陈后主同日生，自言貌有贵相，在陈日，已据南海，平陈后，高祖因而抚之，即拜安州刺史。
现代文：当时有个叫宁猛力的，与陈后主同一天出生，自称貌有贵相。在陈国时，已占据南海。平定陈国后，隋高祖因便安抚他，就授他安州刺史。
English: At that time, there was a man named Ning Mengli, who was born on the same day as the Chen Empress, and claimed to have a noble appearance. At the time of the Chen Kingdom, he had already occupied the South China Sea. After the conquest of the Chen Kingdom, Sui Gao Zu awarded him the Anzhou History for having appeased him.

古文：然骄倨，恃其阻险，未尝参谒。
现代文：但他骄傲，恃其险阻，未曾参见总管等长官。
English: But he was proud and stubborn, and had never met the director-general and other senior officials.

古文：熙手书谕之，申以交友之分。
现代文：令狐熙写信告诫他，说明与他交朋友的意思。
English: Ling Xuxi wrote a letter of admonition to him, explaining the meaning of making friends with him.

古文：其母有疢，熙复遗以药物。
现代文：他母亲有痰疾，令狐熙又送药物给她。
English: His mother has a phlegm disease, so he gave her some medicine.

古文：猛力感之，诣府请谒，不敢为非。
现代文：宁猛力很感动，到总管府请求拜见总管，表示不敢为非作歹。
English: Ning Mengli was very moved and went to the head office to ask to see the head, saying that he did not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：熙以州县多有同名者，于是奏改安州为钦州，黄州为峰州，利州为智州，德州为欢州，东宁为融州，上皆从之。
现代文：令狐熙因州县的名字多有相同的，于是上奏朝廷，请求改安州为钦州，黄州为峰州，利州为智州，德州为州，东宁为融州，皇上都听从了。
English: Ling Xixi, because most of the names of counties in the state were the same, appealed to the imperial court to change Anzhou to Qinzhou, Huangzhou to Fengzhou, Lizhou to Zhizhou, Dezhou to Zhou, Dongning to Rongzhou, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：在职数年，上表曰： 臣忝寄岭表，四载于兹，犬马之年，六十有一。
现代文：他在职几年，上表说： 我忝寄岭表，到现在四年了。我的年纪，已经六十一了。
English: He has been working for a few years, and the watch says: I have been sending the Ling Watch for four years now. I am sixty-one years old.

古文：才轻任重，愧惧兼深，常愿收拙避贤，稍免官谤。
现代文：才能既轻，任务又重，我很惭愧，很害怕，常想收起我的拙劣，避让贤才，以稍稍免一点官谤。
English: Talent is both light and task is heavy, I am ashamed, very afraid, often want to put away my clumsiness, avoid the wise, to be a little bit exempt from official slander.

古文：然所管遐旷，绥抚尤难，虽未能顿革夷风，颇亦渐识皇化。
现代文：但我所管辖的地方太大，安抚尤其困难，我虽未能马上革除夷人旧习，他们也慢慢地认识到皇朝的教化。
English: However, the area under my jurisdiction is too large, and it is particularly difficult to pacify it. Although I was not able to immediately eradicate the barbarians' old habits, they gradually realized the enlightenment of the imperial dynasty.

古文：但臣夙患消渴，比更增甚，筋力精神，转就衰迈。
现代文：但我以前就患消渴症，现在更严重。我的精力精神，很快就要全老了。
English: But I used to suffer from thirst, and now it's worse. My energy and spirit will soon be completely old.

古文：昔在壮齿，犹不如人，况今年疾俱侵，岂可犹当重寄！
现代文：我年轻时，尚且不如他人，何况如今年纪又老，疾病又重，怎能当此重任！
English: When I was young, I was not as good as others, let alone when I am old and sick, how can I be given such an important task!

古文：请解所任。 
现代文：请解除我现在的职务。 
English: Please relieve me of my current duties.

古文：优诏不许，赐以医药。
现代文：皇上不许可，赐他一些医药。
English: The emperor did not approve, but gave him some medicine.

古文：熙奉诏，令交州渠帅李佛子入朝。
现代文：令狐熙接诏，让交州渠帅李佛子入朝，李佛子想谋反，所以请求仲冬时再上路。
English: Emperor Xixi then issued an edict to allow the commander of the Jiaozhou Canal, Li Fozi, to enter the imperial court. Li Fozi wanted to rebel, so he asked to be allowed to leave in the middle of winter.

古文：佛子欲为乱，请至仲冬上道，熙意在羁縻，遂从之。有人诣阙讼熙受佛子赂而舍之，上闻而固疑之。
现代文：令狐熙以为他只是想拖一拖，也就同意了。有人上朝告令狐熙受佛子贿赂，而放了他，皇上听了很怀疑。
English: Ling Xuxi thought he was just trying to stall, so he agreed. Someone went to the court and told the emperor that Ling Xuxi had been bribed by the Buddha to let him go. The emperor was very suspicious.

古文：既而佛子反问至，上大怒，以为信然，遣使者锁熙诣阙。
现代文：不久李佛子造反的信息传到京城，皇上大怒，以为受贿是真的，就派使者抓令狐熙到京师来。
English: Soon, the news of Li Fuzi's rebellion spread to the capital. The emperor was furious, believing that the bribe was real, and sent an envoy to arrest him and bring him to Beijing.

古文：熙性素刚，郁郁不得志，行至永州，忧愤发病而卒，时年六十三。
现代文：令狐熙生性一向刚烈，郁郁不得志，到了永州，因忧愤发病而去世，时年六十三岁。
English: Ling Xixi, who was always strong-willed and depressed, came to Yongzhou and died of melancholy and anger, at the age of sixty-three.

古文：上怒不解，于是没其家财。
现代文：皇上余怒未消，于是没收他的家产。
English: The emperor was still angry, so he confiscated his family's property.

古文：及行军总管刘方擒佛子送于京师，言熙实无赃货，上乃悟，于是召其四子，听预仕焉。
现代文：到行军总管刘方活捉李佛子，把他送到京师，说令狐熙实在没有贪赃受贿，这时，皇上才醒悟，于是召来令狐熙的四个儿子，让他们作官。
English: When Liu Fang, the commander-in-chief of the march, captured Li Fozi alive and sent him to Beijing, saying that Ling Xuxi was really not greedy and took bribes, only then did the emperor wake up, so he summoned Ling Xuxi's four sons and let them serve as officials.

古文：少子德棻，最知名。
现代文：他的小儿子令狐德芬，最为有名。
English: His youngest son, Linger Defen, is the most famous.

古文：○薛胄
现代文：○薛胄
English: ○ Xue Ying

古文：薛胄，字绍玄，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：薛胄字绍玄，河东汾阴人。
English: Xue Yuxi, Shao Xuan, a member of the Shouyin people from Hedong.

古文：父端，周蔡州刺史。
现代文：父亲薛端，北周蔡州刺史。
English: Father Xue Duan, North Zhou Caizhou stabbed history.

古文：胄少聪明，每览异书，便晓其义。
现代文：薛胄小时就很聪明，每读一些奇书，就通晓其中的意思。
English: Xue Yao was very clever at an early age. Whenever he read some strange books, he knew the meaning of them.

古文：常叹训注者不会圣人深旨，辄以意辩之，诸儒莫不称善。
现代文：他常常感叹那些作注的人没有领会前人书中蕴含的深义，就用自己的理解来为之辨别、纠正，读书人没有不称赞的。
English: He often lamented that those who made notes did not understand the profound meaning contained in the previous book, and used their own understanding to distinguish and correct it. Readers have nothing but praise.

古文：性慷慨，志立功名。
现代文：他性情豪爽，立志于功名。
English: He has a strong character and is determined to succeed.

古文：周明帝时，袭爵文城郡公。累迁上仪同，寻拜司金大夫，后加开府。
现代文：在周明帝的时候，他继承了文城郡公的爵位，屡屡升迁，升到了上仪同的官职，不久拜为司金大夫，后来又加授开府。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Mingdi, he inherited the title of the Prince of Wencheng County, and was promoted many times. He was promoted to the official post of Shangyidong, and soon became the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, and later he was awarded the title of Kaifu.

古文：高祖受禅，擢拜鲁州刺史，未之官，检校庐州总管事。
现代文：隋高祖受禅后，提拔他做了鲁州刺史，没去上任，任检校庐州总管事。
English: After Sui Gaozhu accepted Zen, he was promoted to the post of Luzhou chief historian, but he did not take up the post. He was appointed as the chief inspector of Luzhou.

古文：寻除兗州刺史。
现代文：不久又授为兖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was also awarded the title of "Changzhou Sashimi Master."

古文：及到官，系囚数百，胄剖断旬日便了，囹圄空虚。
现代文：到任后，关押的数百名犯人，他审讯上十天就一一结案了，监狱里空荡荡的。
English: After taking office, he tried hundreds of prisoners and closed every case within ten days. The prisons were empty.

古文：有陈州人向道力者，伪作高平郡守，将之官，胄遇诸途，察其有异，将留诘之。
现代文：有一个陈州人名叫向道力的，假充高平郡守，在他就要去上任的时候，薛胄在途中遇到了他，发现他有问题，想把他留下来追问。
English: There was a man from Chenzhou named Xiang Daoli, a fake Gaoping county magistrate. When he was about to take office, Xue Yao met him on the way, found that he had a problem, and wanted to keep him for questioning.

古文：司马王君馥固谏，乃听诣郡。
现代文：司马王君馥苦苦规劝，薛胄才让他到高平郡去了。
English: Sima Wang Junya resolutely persuaded him not to inquire about the matter, and Xue Yao let the man go to Gaoping.

古文：既而悔之，即遣主簿追禁道力。
现代文：走后不久，薛胄又后悔了，马上派主簿去追赶拘禁道力。
English: Shortly after leaving, Xue Yao regretted it again, and immediately sent the master book to catch up with the detained Daoli.

古文：有部人徐俱罗者，尝任海陵郡守，先是已为道力伪代之。比至秩满，公私不悟。
现代文：有个在官署里任职的人，名叫徐俱罗，他曾当过海陵郡守，在此之前已被道力代替了他，等到现在，十年过去了，官府和老百姓都不曾发觉。
English: There is a person who works in the government office, named Xu Quro, who was once the governor of Hailing County. Before that, he had been replaced by Daoli. Until now, ten years have passed, the government and the people have not noticed.

古文：俱罗遂语君馥曰： 向道力以经代俱罗为郡，使君岂容疑之？ 
现代文：俱罗就对王君馥说： 向道力代我任郡守，已经多年了，刺史大人现在怎么还怀疑他呢？ 
English: The club said to Wang Junyao: It has been many years since Xiang Daoli replaced me as county magistrate, so how can Mr. Zushi still doubt him now?

古文：君馥以俱罗所陈，又固请胄。
现代文：王君馥把俱罗的话告诉薛胄，又一再向他请求。
English: Wang Junyao told Xue Yao the words of the club and repeatedly asked him.

古文：胄呵君馥曰： 吾已察知此人诈也。司马容奸，当连其坐！ 
现代文：薛胄呵斥王君馥说： 我已经清楚地知晓这个人是冒充的，司马你包庇奸人，罪当连坐！ 
English: Xue Yao rebuked Wang Junyao, saying, "I have clearly known that this person is an impostor. Sima, you are covering up for a traitor. You should be punished for your crime!"

古文：君馥乃止。遂往收之，道力惧而引伪。
现代文：王君馥这才停止劝说，于是前往逮捕道力，道力非常害怕，供认了假充之罪。
English: It was only then that Wang Junyao stopped persuading, so he went to arrest Daoli. Daoli was very scared and confessed to the crime of forgery.

古文：其发奸摘伏，皆此类也，时人谓为神明。
现代文：薛胄发现坏人并使之伏法，大都类似此事，当时人们都称他为神明。
English: When Xue Yao found a bad person and brought him to justice, most of the cases were similar. People called him a god at that time.

古文：先是，兗州城东沂、泗二水合而南流，泛滥大泽中，胄遂积石堰之，使决令西注，陂泽尽为良田。
现代文：在这之前，兖州城东边，沂水、泗水合往南流，在大泽之中泛滥成灾，薛胄于是命令人们积石筑坝将其堵住，并疏通水道，使它向西流去。这样，池塘沼泽之地都变成了良田。
English: Prior to this, on the east side of Luzhou City, the confluence of the Lishui River and the Lishui River flowed southward, causing flooding in the middle of Osawa. Xue Yao then ordered people to build a dam to block it, and clear the waterway so that it would flow westward. In this way, the pond and swamp land were turned into good fields.

古文：又通转运，利尽淮海，百姓赖之，号为薛公丰兗渠。
现代文：又打通河道运输，使淮海边的人们都受到了利益。老百姓们都依赖这条河得以为生，称这条河为 薛公丰兖渠 。
English: Water transportation was also opened, and the Huaihai area benefited a lot. The people trusted Xue Yao and called this canal the Xue Gongfeng Canal.

古文：胄以天下太平，登封告禅，帝王盛烈，遂遣博士登太山，观古迹，撰《封禅图》及仪上之。
现代文：薛胄因天下太平，建议皇上登高祭天，以宣扬功德的盛大显赫。于是派遣博士登上泰山，观览古迹，作《封禅图》和祭天的仪式礼节一并呈献给皇上。
English: Because the world was at peace, Xue Ye suggested that the emperor ascend to a high place to offer sacrifices to the heavens in order to proclaim his merits in a grand and prominent manner. Therefore, he sent a doctor to ascend Mount Tai, observe the monuments, make a "Zen Map" and present the ceremonial etiquette of offering sacrifices to the heavens to the emperor.

古文：高祖谦让不许。
现代文：高祖谦虚推让，没有应允。
English: Gaozu humbly made concessions, but received no response.

古文：后转郢州刺史，前后俱有惠政。
现代文：后来薛胄转任郢州刺史，前前后后都有仁政。
English: Later, Xue Jun was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou magistrate, and there were benevolent governments before and after.

古文：征拜卫尉卿，寻转大理卿，持法宽平，名为称职。
现代文：后来调他回京，拜他为卫尉卿，不久转任大理卿，任职期间，执法宽厚公平，很有称职的名声。
English: Later, he was transferred back to Beijing, where he was given the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and was soon transferred to the post of Lord of Dali. During his term of office, he enforced the law in a lenient and fair manner, and had a reputation for being very competent.

古文：后迁刑部尚书。
现代文：后来薛胄升任刑部尚书。
English: Later, Xue Jun was promoted to the position of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：时左仆射高颎稍被疏忌，及王世积之诛也，颎事与相连，上因此欲成颎罪。
现代文：当时左仆射高赹渐渐被皇上猜忌，等到王世积被杀之后，高赹也因事受到牵连。皇上借此想定高赹之罪。
English: At that time, the emperor gradually became suspicious of his left-hand man, Gao Qi, and after Wang Shizhe was killed, Gao Qi was also implicated in the matter. The emperor assumed Gao Qi's guilt.

古文：胄明雪之，正议其狱。由是忤旨，械系之，久而得免。
现代文：薛胄为他洗刷罪名，并且不偏不倚地讨论他的案件。就因这件事，薛胄违背了圣旨，被用镣铐拘禁起来，很久才得到赦免。
English: Because of this matter, Xue Yao violated the holy will, was detained with shackles, and was pardoned for a long time.

古文：检校相州事，甚有能名。
现代文：后来派他查核相州政事，很有能干的名声。
English: The imperial court sent him to Sangju to investigate government affairs, and he gained a reputation as a capable minister.

古文：会汉王谅作乱并州，遣伪将綦良东略地，攻逼慈州。
现代文：恰逢汉王杨谅在并州叛乱，派叛将綦良向东掠夺土地，攻打慈州。
English: Coinciding with the Han King Yang Peng's rebellion in the annexed state, he sent the renegade general Ailiang to the east to plunder land and attack Cizhou.

古文：刺史上官政请援于胄，胄畏谅兵锋，不敢拒，良又引兵攻胄，胄欲以计却之，遣亲人鲁世范说良曰： 天下事未可知，胄为人臣，去就须得其所，何遽相攻也？ 
现代文：刺史上官政向薛胄求援，薛胄害怕叛军厉害，不敢抵抗。綦良又率兵攻打薛胄，薛胄想用计退兵，就派亲近之人鲁世范劝说綦良： 天下的事情难得说清啊，薛胄作为人的臣子，在官与不在官，总要找到他应得的位置，你又何必苦苦相攻呢？ 
English: Throughout history, government and politics have turned to Xue Er for help. Xue Er was so afraid of the rebels that he did not dare to resist. Hailiang also led an army to attack Xue Er. When Xue Er wanted to retreat, he sent Lu Shifan, a person close to him, to persuade Hailiang: It is difficult to make things clear in this world. Hailiang, as a man's vassal, whether in or out of office, must always find the position he deserves. Why do you have to struggle?

古文：良于是释去，进图黎阳。
现代文：綦良于是弃之而去，进而谋取黎阳。
English: Hailiang then abandoned it and went on to seek Liyang.

古文：及良为史祥所攻，弃军归胄。
现代文：等到綦良被史祥击败，他弃军逃奔薛胄。
English: When Hailiang was defeated by Shi Xiang, he abandoned the army and fled to Xue Long.

古文：朝廷以胄怀贰心，锁诣大理。
现代文：朝廷以为薛胄有二心，把他押解到大理寺。
English: The imperial court thought that Xue Yao was of two minds and sent him to Dali Temple.

古文：相州吏人素怀其恩，诣阙理胄者百馀人，胄竟坐除名，配防岭南，道病卒。
现代文：相州的官吏、老百姓一向怀念他的恩德，到朝廷为他说好话的有一百多人。薛胄最后还是因牵连被除名，发配流放岭南，在途中因病死去。
English: The officials and people of Sangju have always remembered his kindness, and more than a hundred people have come to the imperial court to speak well of him. In the end, Xue Yao was expelled for implication, sent to exile in Lingnan, and died of illness on the way.

古文：有子、献，并知名。
现代文：他有两个儿子：薛筠、薛献，一并知名于世。
English: He has two sons: Xue Rong and Xue Jian, both of whom are famous in the world.

古文：○宇文弼
现代文：○宇文弼
English: ○Uwenso

古文：宇文弼，字公辅，河南洛阳人也，其先与周同出。
现代文：宇文弼，字公辅，河南洛阳人。其先祖与北周帝王同一祖先。
English: A native of Luoyang, Henan Province, his ancestors came from the same family as the Zhou dynasty.

古文：祖直力觐，魏巨鹿太守。
现代文：其祖父宇文直力觐，西魏巨鹿太守。
English: His grandfather, Uwen Dajili, was the governor of Jiulu in the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：父珍，周宕州刺史。
现代文：父亲宇文珍，北周宕州刺史。
English: Her father, Yu Wenzhen, was once the Zhou dynasty's secretary of state.

古文：弼慷慨有大节，博学多通，仕周为礼部上士。尝奉使邓至国及黑水、龙涸诸羌，前后降附三十馀部。
现代文：宇文弼慷慨有大节，博学多才。仕北周为礼部上士，曾奉命出使邓至国、黑水、龙涸等羌人部落，前后来降的羌人部落三十多个。
English: Wu Wenyi was a generous man with a broad mind and many talents in learning. His superior, Bei Zhou, was a staff sergeant of the Ceremonial Department. He had been ordered to send envoys to Deng Zhi Guo, Heishui, Longyan and other Hun tribes. There were more than 30 Hun tribes that came and went.

古文：及还，奉诏修定《五礼》，书成奏之，赐公田十二顷，粟百石。
现代文：回京后，奉诏修定《五礼》，书成而上奏皇上。赐他公田十二顷，粮食一百石。
English: After returning to Beijing, he revised the "Five Rites" according to the imperial edict, and presented it to the emperor. He gave him twelve hectares of public land and one hundred koku of grain.

古文：累迁少吏部，擢八人为县令，皆有异绩，时以为知人。
现代文：累次升迁，到任少吏部。他提拔八个人当县令，他们都有突出的政绩，时人认为他有知人之明。
English: He promoted eight people to county magistrate, all of whom had outstanding political achievements. At the time, people thought he knew everything.

古文：转内史都上士。
现代文：转任内史都上士。
English: He was transferred to the post of staff sergeant in charge of internal history.

古文：武帝将出兵河阳以伐齐，谋及臣下，弼进策曰： 齐氏建国，于今累叶，虽曰无道，籓屏之寄，尚有其人。
现代文：周武帝将出兵河阳以讨伐北齐，与臣下商议，宇文弼献计说： 齐氏建国，到现在已经有几代了，虽说是无道，但藩邦作屏障，还有其人。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu will send troops to Heyang to fight against Northern Qi, and discuss with his vassals, and Uwenqian said: The founding of Qi has been several generations now, although it is senseless, but the state is a barrier, and there are other people.

古文：今之用兵，须择其地。
现代文：如今对他们用兵，要选择地方。
English: Now to use force against them, you have to choose a place.

古文：河阳冲要，精兵所聚，尽力攻围，恐难得志。
现代文：河阳是要冲，又是精兵聚集之处，即使我们尽力围攻，恐怕也难奏效。
English: As Hayao is located at a strategic point and is a place with a concentration of elite soldiers, it will be difficult to achieve the goal if it is besieged with all its might.

古文：如臣所见，彼汾之曲，戍小山平，攻之易拔。
现代文：如按我的看法，他们的汾州一带，城小山平，容易攻克。用武之地，莫过于此。
English: According to my opinion, their Zhangzhou area, the city, small mountains and plains, are easy to conquer. There is no better place to use force than this.

古文：用武之地，莫过于此，愿陛下详之。 
现代文：请陛下明察。 武帝不听，出师，竟无功而还。
English: Your majesty, please take a close look. Emperor Wu did not listen, he sent a tutor, but it was of no avail.

古文：帝不纳，师竟无功。建德五年，大举伐齐，卒用弼计。
现代文：建德五年，大举讨伐齐国，还是用了宇文弼的计谋。
English: Jiande five years, large-scale crusade against Qi, still used the stratagem of Uwen Yao.

古文：弼于是募三辅豪侠少年数百人以为别队，从帝攻拔晋州。
现代文：宇文弼于是召募三辅的豪侠少年几百人，别为一队，随武帝攻占晋州。
English: Therefore, Uwen Zang called up several hundred heroic youths from the three auxiliary regions to form a team and conquer Jinzhou with Emperor Wu.

古文：身被三创，苦战不息，帝奇而壮之。
现代文：宇文弼身受三处创伤，仍然苦战不息，武帝奇壮不已。
English: With three wounds on his body, Uwen Hui still fought hard, and Wu Di was amazingly strong.

古文：后从帝平齐，以功拜上仪同，封武威县公，邑千五百户，赐物千五百段，奴婢百五十口，马牛羊千馀头，拜司州总管司录。
现代文：后随武帝平定北齐，因军功拜授上仪同，封为武威县公爵，食邑一千五百户，赐缣采一千五百段，奴婢一百五十口，马牛羊一千多头，拜授司州总管司录。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wu to pacify North Qi, and was awarded the title of Duke of Wuwei County for his military service. He was given 1,500 households, 1,500 villages, 150 slaves, and more than 1,000 horses, cattle, and sheep. He was also awarded the title of Chief Administrator of Shizhou.

古文：宣帝嗣位，迁左守庙大夫。
现代文：周宣帝继位，宇文弼调任左守庙大夫。
English: Zhou Xuandi succeeded to the throne, and Uwen Qi was transferred to the position of Zuo Miao Daifu.

古文：时突厥寇甘州，帝令侯莫陈昶率兵击之，弼为监军。
现代文：当时突厥人侵犯甘州，宣帝令侯莫陈昶率兵打击突厥兵，宇文弼当监军。
English: At that time, the Turks invaded Ganzhou, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered Hou Mocheng to lead the troops to fight the Turks, with Uwen Hu as the overseer.

古文：谓昶曰： 黠虏之势，来如激矢，去若绝弦，若欲追蹑，良为难及。
现代文：宇文弼对侯莫陈昶说： 这狡黠的突厥兵，来时快如急箭，走时飞如离弦。如要追击他们，的确难以赶上。
English: Uwen Zang said to Hou Mo Chen Zang: "These cunning Turkish soldiers, when they come, are as fast as a speeding arrow, and when they go, they fly like a javelin. If you want to chase them, it is really difficult to catch up.

古文：且宜选精骑，直趋祁连之西。
现代文：且宜挑选精良的骑兵，直奔祁连山之西。
English: And it is advisable to select excellent cavalry and go straight to the west of the Qilian Mountains.

古文：贼若收军，必自蓼泉之北，此地险隘，兼复下湿，度其人马，三日方度，缓辔追讨，何虑不及？
现代文：这地方地势险要，且又低下潮湿。估计他们的人马，三天才能走完。即使我们慢慢地去追，何愁追不上？
English: The terrain is steep, low and wet. We estimate that it will take them three days to complete the journey. Even if we go slowly, how can we not catch up?

古文：彼劳我逸，破之必矣。
现代文：敌人疲劳，我方安逸，打败他们是肯定的了。
English: The enemy soldiers are fatigued, our army is idle, we can surely defeat the enemy troops.

古文：若邀此路，真上策也。 
现代文：若在此路拦击，真是上策。 
English: If you block this road, it's really the best strategy.

古文：昶不能用之，西取合黎，大军行迟，虏已出塞。
现代文：侯莫陈昶不用其计，而是西取合黎，大军行动迟缓，突厥人已经出塞去了。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yi did not use his strategy, but took the west and the north. The great army was slow to act, and the Turks had already left the fortress.

古文：其年，弼又率兵从梁士彦攻拔寿阳，寻改封安乐县公，增邑六百户，赐物六百段，加以口马。
现代文：这一年，宇文弼又率兵随梁士彦攻占寿阳。不久，改封他为安乐县公爵，增加食邑六百户，赐他缣采六百段，外加人口、马匹。
English: In the same year, he led his troops to conquer Shouyang with Liang Shihang. Soon after, he was given the title of Duke of Anle County, with an additional 600 households to feed, 600 tracts of land to harvest, as well as more people and horses.

古文：除浍州刺史，俄转南司州刺史。
现代文：授他浍州刺史，不久转任南司州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Provincial Historian, and was soon transferred to the post of Nanshi Provincial Historian.

古文：后司马消难之奔陈也，弼追之不及。遇陈将樊毅，战于漳口，自旦及午，三战三捷，虏获三千人。
现代文：后来，司马消难投奔陈国，宇文弼追赶不及，遇上陈国将领樊毅，大战于漳口，从早晨打到中午，三战三胜，俘虏陈军三千人。
English: Later, when Sima fled to Chen Province to escape the hardships, and Uwen Yao was too late to catch up with him, he met Chen's general, Lian Yi, and the great battle was fought at the Hekou, from morning to noon, with three battles and three victories, and three thousand Chen soldiers were captured.

古文：除黄州刺史，寻转南定州刺史。
现代文：授黄州刺史，继而转任南定州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Huangzhou Historian, and then transferred to the post of South Dingzhou Historian.

古文：开皇初，以前功封平昌县公，加邑一千二百户，入为尚书右丞。
现代文：开皇初年，因以前的战功，封为平昌县公爵，增加食邑一千二百户。入京任尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was named the Duke of PyeongChang County for his previous war exploits, increasing 1,200 households. He entered Beijing as Shoshu Ujo.

古文：时西羌内附，诏弼持节安集之，置盐泽、蒲昌二郡而还。
现代文：当时西羌归顺，有诏让宇文弼当使者去安抚他们。宇文弼设置盐泽、蒲昌二郡而还京。
English: At that time, Xidi surrendered, and there was an edict asking Uwen Yao to be an envoy to appease them. Uwen Yao set up two counties, Yanchezawa and Buchang, and returned to Beijing.

古文：迁尚书左丞，当官正色，为百僚所惮，三年，突厥寇甘州，以行军司马从元帅窦荣定击破之。
现代文：转任尚书左丞。他当官正色凛然，为百官所惧惮。开皇三年，突厥人进犯甘州，他以行军司马身份随元帅窦荣定打败突厥。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shangshu Zuojo. He was a dignified official, feared by hundreds of officials. In the first three years of the emperor's reign, the Turks invaded Ganzhou, and he defeated the Turks with Marshal Dou Rongding as a marching steed.

古文：还除太仆少卿，转吏部侍郎。
现代文：回京后授太仆少卿，转任吏部侍郎。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the position of Taichu Shokei, and later he was transferred to the position of Riibu Jiro.

古文：平陈之役，杨素出信州道，令弼持节为诸军节度，仍领行军总管。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，杨素出信州道，令宇文弼持节，为诸军节度，仍然兼任行军总管。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, Yang Su went to Xinzhou Road and ordered Uwen to hold the festival, as a festival for the army, and still concurrently served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：刘仁恩之破陈将吕仲肃也，弼有谋焉。
现代文：刘仁恩打败陈国将领吕仲肃，宇文弼曾参谋其事。
English: Liu Rien defeated Chen's general Lü Zhongsu, and Uwen Zang took part in the planning.

古文：加开府，擢拜刑部尚书，领太子虞候率。
现代文：加授宇文弼开府，提升他当刑部尚书，兼任太子虞候率。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Kaifu, promoted to the position of Shosho of the Penal Department, and concurrently served as the Prince Regent.

古文：上尝亲临释奠，弼与博士论议，词致清远，观者属目。
现代文：皇上曾亲自行尊师之礼。宇文弼与博士们议论事理，词清致远，观者很注目。
English: The Emperor once paid homage to his teacher in person. Uwen Zang and the doctors discussed the matter, the words were clear and far-reaching, and the audience paid close attention.

古文：上大悦，顾谓侍臣曰： 朕今睹周公之制礼，见宣尼之论孝，实慰朕心。 
现代文：皇上很高兴，对侍臣们说： 我今天看到了周公制定礼乐，看见了孔子论孝道，真是让我感到宽慰。 
English: The emperor was very pleased and said to his courtiers, "I was so relieved to see Zhou Gong establish the ritual music today, and to see Confucius discuss filial piety.

古文：于是颁赐各有差。
现代文：于是按等级赏赐宇文弼和众博士。
English: As a result, Dr. Umenoki and Dr. Kazuchika were awarded according to their rank.

古文：时朝廷以晋阳为重镇，并州总管必属亲王，其长史、司马亦一时高选。
现代文：当时朝中以晋阳为重镇，并州的总管一定是亲王，其长史、司马也是一时的高选。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that Jinyang was a town with an important military status, and the provincial governor must be held by a prince. With his long history, Sima was also a noble candidate at that time.

古文：前长史王韶卒，以弼有文武干用，出为并州长史。
现代文：前任长史王韶去世，因宇文弼有文才武略，出京任并州总管府长史。
English: After the death of the previous governor Wang Shih, because Uwen Shih had literary and military talent, he was appointed to Beijing and became governor of Shih.

古文：俄以父艰去职，寻诏起之。
现代文：不久因父丧离职，随即有诏书调他复职。
English: Soon after, he left his post due to his father's death, and was immediately reinstated by imperial decree.

古文：十八年，辽东之役，授元帅汉王府司马，仍寻领行军总管。
现代文：开皇十八年，发起辽东战争，授宇文弼为元帅汉王府司马，仍兼任行军总管。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor's reign, the Liaodong War was launched, and Yu Wenjun was awarded the title of Marshal Han Wangfu Sima. He also served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：军还之后，历朔、代、吴三州总管，皆有能名。
现代文：回朝后，他历任朔州、代州、吴州三州总管，都有能干的名声。
English: After returning to China, he successively served as the governor of Shuozhou, Daizhou and Wuzhou, and gained a reputation for his ability.

古文：炀帝即位，征拜刑部尚书，仍持节巡省河北。
现代文：炀帝即位后，调他当刑部尚书，仍持节巡视黄河以北各地。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the Penal Department of Shangshu, and he continued to inspect all parts of the country north of the Yellow River.

古文：还除泉州刺史。
现代文：回京后授泉州刺史。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed as the governor of Quanzhou.

古文：岁馀，复拜刑部尚书，寻转礼部尚书。
现代文：一年多后，又授为刑部尚书，继而转任礼部尚书。
English: A little more than a year later, he was also awarded the title of Senior Scholar of the Ministry of Justice, and then transferred to the position of Senior Scholar of the Ministry of Rites.

古文：弼既以才能著称，历职显要，声望甚重，物议时谈，多见推许，帝颇忌之。
现代文：宇文弼既以才能著称，历任职务都很显要，声望很高，人们谈论，大多被推许，炀帝很忌恨他。
English: Although he was famous for his talent, his posts were very important and his reputation was very high. People talked about him, and he was mostly praised. Emperor Zhao hated him.

古文：时帝渐好声色，尤勤远略，弼谓高颎曰： 昔周天元好声色而国亡，以今方之，不亦甚乎？ 
现代文：当时炀帝逐渐好声色，尤其好征讨。宇文弼对高赹说： 过去周天元好声色而国亡，用今天与他相比，不是太过份了吗？ 
English: At that time, Emperor Gao gradually became more and more eloquent, and he was especially good at collecting money. Uwen Zang said to Gao Zang: In the past, Zhou Tianyuan was eloquent and the country died. Compared with him today, isn't it too excessive?

古文：又言： 长城之役，幸非急务。 
现代文：又说： 修筑长城的劳役，不是急着要办的。 
English: He also said: The project of repairing the Great Wall is not an urgent task, fortunately.

古文：有人奏之，竟坐诛死，时年六十二，天下冤之。
现代文：有人告他，他竟坐罪被杀，时年六十二岁，天下人都深感冤枉。
English: He was 62 years old when he was killed for a crime he was accused of, and the whole world felt that he had been wronged.

古文：所著辞赋二十馀万言，为《尚书》、《孝经注》行于时。
现代文：宇文弼所著辞赋二十多万字，又作《尚书注》、《孝经注》，行于时。
English: He wrote more than 200,000 words, and also wrote "Shang Shu Annotation" and "Xiao Jing Annotation," which are still in use today.

古文：有子俭、瑗。
现代文：有儿子叫宇文俭、宇文瑗。
English: They had a son named Uwenjian and Uwenjun.

古文：○张衡
现代文：○张衡
English: ○ Zhang Heng

古文：张衡，字建平，河内人也。
现代文：张衡字建平，河内人。
English: Zhang Heng, alias Jian Ping, from Hanoi.

古文：祖嶷，魏河阳太守。
现代文：祖父张嶷，西魏河阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Ye, was the regent of Heyang during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父光，周万州刺史。
现代文：父亲张光，北周万州刺史。
English: His father, Zhang Guang, was a history buff from Wanzhou in northern Zhou.

古文：衡幼怀志尚，有骨鲠之风。
现代文：张衡幼怀大志，有鲠直之风。
English: Zhang Heng is young and ambitious, with a straightforward style.

古文：年十五，诣太学受业，研精覃思，为同辈所推。
现代文：十五岁，到太学学习。他用心学习，认真研究，被同辈人所推许。
English: At the age of 15, he went to study in Taixu. He studied hard and was recommended by his peers.

古文：周武帝居太后忧，与左右出猎，衡露发舆榇，扣马切谏。
现代文：周武帝遭太后之丧，却与左右出去打猎。张衡免冠露发，抓住武帝的坐骑，直言劝谏。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was bereaved by the death of his empress dowager, but he went out hunting with his friends. Zhang Heng, bareheaded, grabbed Emperor Wu's horse and advised him bluntly.

古文：帝嘉焉，赐衣一袭，马一匹，擢拜汉王侍读。
现代文：武帝嘉奖了他，赐他衣服一袭、良马一匹，提拔他当汉王侍读。
English: Emperor Wu commended Zhang Heng, gave him a set of clothes and a horse, and promoted him to the position of the King's Attendant.

古文：衡又就沈重受《三礼》，略究大旨。
现代文：张衡又到沈重那里学习《三礼》，略略推究大意。
English: Zhang Heng also went to Shen Chong to study "Three Rites" and roughly explore the theme of "Three Rites."

古文：累迁掌朝大夫。
现代文：累次升迁，到任掌朝大夫。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of palm doctor.

古文：高祖受禅，拜司门侍郎。
现代文：隋高祖受禅登基后，拜授他为司门侍郎。
English: After Sui Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was given the title of steward.

古文：及晋王广为河北行台，衡历刑部、度支二曹郎。
现代文：到晋王杨广为河北行台时，张衡历任刑部、度支二曹郎。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, served as the governor of Hebei Province, and Zhang Heng served as the second sergeant of the Department of Criminal Justice and the Department of Justice.

古文：后以台废，拜并州总管掾。
现代文：后因河北行台废置，授他为并州总管掾。
English: Later, because of Hebei's annexation of Taiwan, it was abolished and he was awarded the title of the provincial governor.

古文：及王转牧扬州，衡复为掾，王甚亲任之。
现代文：晋王杨广转而镇守扬州后，张衡又当他的总管掾。晋王很亲重他。
English: After Yang Guang, the king of Jin, was transferred to guard Yangzhou, Zhang Heng became his chief steward. The king of Jin was very close to him.

古文：衡亦竭虑尽诚事之，夺宗之计，多衡所建也。
现代文：张衡也尽忠竭力侍奉他。夺太子之位的计谋，大多为张衡所提出。
English: Zhang Heng also served him loyally and devotedly. Most of the schemes to seize the crown prince's position were proposed by Zhang Heng.

古文：以母忧去职，岁馀，起授扬州总管司马，赐物三百段。
现代文：因母丧离职，一年多后，重新作官，当扬州总管司马，赐缣采三百段。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he left the post, and more than a year later, he resumed his position as Yangzhou's general manager Sima, and was awarded three hundred dan.

古文：开皇中，熙州李英林聚众反，署置百官，以衡为行军总管，率步骑五万人讨平之。
现代文：开皇中，熙州人李英林聚众造反，设置文武百官。朝廷以张衡为行军总管，率领步兵、骑兵五万人讨伐平定叛军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of the emperor, Li Yinglin, a native of Xizhou, rallied the people to rebel and set up a hundred civil and military officials. The imperial court appointed Zhang Heng as the commander-in-chief and led 50,000 infantry and cavalry to fight and pacify the rebels.

古文：拜开府，赐奴婢一百三十口，物五百段，金银杂畜称是。
现代文：授为开府，赐奴婢一百三十口，缣采五百段，另加金银和牲畜。
English: He was given the title of kaifu, one hundred and thirty slaves and maidservants, and five hundred dan, in addition to gold, silver and livestock.

古文：及王为皇太子，拜衡右庶子，仍领给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：晋王为皇太子后，授张衡为右庶子，兼任给事黄门侍郎。
English: After Jin Wang became the crown prince, Zhang Heng was given the title of the right illegitimate son, and also served as the attendant of Huangmen.

古文：炀帝嗣位，除给事黄门侍郎，进位银青光禄大夫，俄迁御史大夫，甚见亲重。
现代文：炀帝继位，他任给事黄门侍郎，升任银青光禄大夫，不久任御史大夫，很被炀帝亲近看重。
English: When Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne, he was appointed the Yellow Gate Attendant, promoted to the Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor, and soon became the Goshi Doctor. He was highly valued by Emperor Xuan.

古文：大业三年，帝幸榆林郡，还至太原，谓衡曰： 朕欲过公宅，可为朕作主人。 
现代文：大业三年，炀帝到榆林郡后，回到太原，对张衡说： 我想到你家里去，你为我作东道主吧。 
English: In the third year of the Taiei era, after Emperor Qian went to Yulin County, he returned to Taiyuan and said to Zhang Heng: I want to go to your home, you can be my host.

古文：衡于是驰至河内，与宗族具牛酒。
现代文：张衡于是赶到河内，与张家的人准备好牛肉美酒。
English: Zhang Heng then rushed to Hanoi to prepare beef wine with the Zhang family.

古文：帝上太行，开直道九十里，以抵其宅。
现代文：炀帝上太行山，开辟直路九十里，以到他家里。
English: Emperor Qian ascended Mount Taihang and opened a ninety-mile straight road to reach Zhang Heng's residence.

古文：帝悦其山泉，留宴三日，因谓衡曰： 往从先皇拜太山之始，途经洛阳，瞻望于此，深恨不得相过，不谓今日得谐宿愿。 
现代文：炀帝很喜欢那里的山泉，留下来饮宴三天，因而对张衡说： 以前随先皇帝拜谒太行山的时候，途经洛阳，看到这里，深深遗憾不得相访，不料今日得遂夙愿。 
English: Emperor Qian liked the mountain and river spring water here, and left the banquet for three days, saying to Zhang Heng: At first, when I followed the former emperor to visit the Tai Shan Festival, I passed through Luoyang and looked far and wide at this place. I was deeply sorry that I couldn't go there, and I couldn't imagine that I would be able to fulfill my old wish today.

古文：衡俯伏辞谢，奉斛上寿。
现代文：张衡拜伏于地，谢谢皇上，并奉杯敬祝皇上。
English: Zhang Heng bowed to the ground, thanked the emperor, and offered a toast to the emperor.

古文：帝益欢，赐其宅傍田三十顷，良马一匹，金带，缣彩六百段，衣一袭，御食器一具。
现代文：炀帝更高兴，赐他住宅旁的田地三十顷，良马一匹，金带，缣采六百段，衣服一袭，御用食器一具。
English: Emperor Xuan was even more pleased, and gave him 30 hectares of fields next to his residence, a fine horse, a gold belt, 600 pieces of jewelry, a set of clothes, and a set of royal tableware.

古文：衡固让，帝曰： 天子所至称幸者，盖为此也，不足为辞。 
现代文：张衡推辞，炀帝说： 天子到了哪里，之所以叫 幸 ，就是因为这。不必推辞了。 
English: Zhang Heng firmly refused, and Emperor Zou said, "It is not enough to thank Heaven for sending me here for this reason.

古文：衡复献食于帝，帝令颁赐公卿，下至卫士，无不沾洽。
现代文：张衡又给炀帝献食，炀帝下令赐给公卿，一直到卫士们，无不沾光。
English: Zhang Heng also offered food to Emperor Gong, which Emperor Gong ordered to be given to the nobles, all the way to the guards.

古文：衡以籓邸之旧，恩宠莫与为比，颇自骄贵。
现代文：张衡因是炀帝当藩王时的故交，恩宠无人可比，很有些骄贵。
English: Zhang Heng believed that the grace of the original princes and princes could not be compared with him, and he was very proud of himself.

古文：明年，帝幸汾阳宫，宴从官，特赐绢五百匹。
现代文：次年，炀帝到汾阳宫，宴请随从官吏，特赐绢帛五百匹。
English: The following year, Emperor Qian went to the Poyang Palace and held a banquet for the officials who accompanied him. He gave them 500 horses.

古文：时帝欲大汾阳宫，令衡与纪弘整具图奏之。
现代文：当时炀帝想扩建汾阳宫，让张衡和纪弘整画好图纸奏上。
English: At this time, Emperor Gao wanted to expand the Poyang Palace and ordered Zhang Heng and Ji Hongzhi to prepare the drawings.

古文：衡承间进谏曰： 比年劳役繁多，百姓疲敝，伏愿留神，稍加折损。 
现代文：张衡借机进谏说： 这几年劳役繁多，百姓疲惫，请您留点神，稍稍少搞点这类事。 
English: Zhang Heng took the opportunity to say: In recent years, there have been a lot of laborers and the people are tired. Please be patient and do a little less of this kind of thing.

古文：帝意甚不平。
现代文：炀帝心里很不舒服。
English: Emperor Xuan was very uncomfortable.

古文：后尝目衡谓侍臣曰： 张衡自谓由其计画，令我有天下也。 
现代文：炀帝曾看着张衡，对侍臣们说： 张衡自以为因为他的计谋，才让我有天下。 
English: Emperor Qian once looked at Zhang Heng and said to his courtiers: Zhang Heng thought that it was because of his stratagem that I had the world.

古文：时齐王暕失爱于上，帝密令人求暕罪失。
现代文：当时齐王杨失爱于炀帝，炀帝秘密让人找杨的过失。
English: At that time, King Yang of Qi fell out of love with Emperor Qian, and Emperor Qian secretly let people find Yang's fault.

古文：有人谮暕违制，将伊阙令皇甫诩从之汾阳宫。
现代文：有人告张衡违反制度，将伊阙令皇甫诩带到汾阳宫。
English: Someone falsely accused Yang of violating the system and brought the Yili Emperor Fu Rong into the Shenyang Palace.

古文：又录前幸涿郡及祠恆岳时，父老谒见者衣冠多不整。
现代文：又说以前炀帝到涿郡以及祭祠恒岳时，那些来谒见的父老乡亲，衣冠大多不整。
English: He also said that in the past, when Emperor Xizong came to Yixian County and Hengyue Shrine, most of the fathers and townsmen who came to see him were not well-dressed.

古文：帝谴衡以宪司皆不能举正，出为榆林太守。
现代文：炀帝怪罪张衡，身为司法官，不能检举处理这些问题，让他出京当榆林太守。
English: Emperor Yao accused Zhang Heng of being the constitutional secretary and not being able to rectify it, and demoted Zhang Heng from the capital to be the governor of Yulin.

古文：明年，帝复幸汾阳宫，衡督役筑楼烦城，因而谒帝。
现代文：次年，炀帝又到汾阳宫，张衡正在督促劳役修筑楼烦城，因而拜见炀帝。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xizong also visited the Xinyang Palace, and Zhang Heng urged the construction workers to build a building to annoy the city, so he saw Emperor Xizong.

古文：帝恶衡不损瘦，以为不念咎，因谓衡曰： 公甚肥泽，宜且还郡。 
现代文：炀帝厌恶张衡没有消瘦，以为他不想过失，因此对张衡说： 你长得很肥，应暂且回到郡里去。 
English: Emperor Yao detested Zhang Heng for not being thin, thinking that he did not want to make a mistake, so he said to Zhang Heng: You are very fat, you should go back to the county for the time being.

古文：衡复之榆林。
现代文：张衡又到榆林郡去。
English: Zhang Heng went to Yulin again.

古文：俄而敕衡督役江都宫。
现代文：继而令张衡监督修江都宫的劳役。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered Zhang Heng to go to the Jiangdu Palace to supervise the construction workers.

古文：有人诣衡讼宫监者，衡不为理，还以讼书付监，其人大为监所困。
现代文：有人到张衡那里告监修江都宫的人，张衡不为他处理，却把状纸交给那个监工，这个人吃了监工更大的亏。
English: Someone went to Zhang Heng to sue the supervisor of Jiangdu. Zhang Heng did not accept the complaint and went back and handed the complaint to the supervisor. As a result, the person who filed the complaint suffered severe retaliation from the supervisor.

古文：礼部尚书杨玄感使至江都，其人诣玄感称冤。
现代文：礼部尚书杨玄感出使到江都，这个人到玄感处喊冤。
English: Yang Xuanquan, secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, sent an envoy to Jiangdu, and the man went to Yang Xuanquan's residence to complain.

古文：玄感固以衡为不可。
现代文：玄感自然认为张衡的作法不对。
English: Yang Xuan sensed that Zhang Heng was very wrong to do so.

古文：及与衡相见，未有所言，又先谓玄感曰： 薛道衡真为枉死。 
现代文：到与张衡相见时，玄感又没说什么。张衡又先对玄感说： 薛道衡真是被冤死的。 
English: When he met Zhang Heng, Xuan Xuan did not say anything. Zhang Heng first said to Xuan Xuan: Xue Daoheng really was unjustly killed.

古文：玄感具上其事，江都丞王世充又奏衡频减顿具。
现代文：玄感把这些事都报告给了炀帝。江都丞王世充又奏张衡频频减少劳役的饭食。
English: Xuan Xuan reported all these things to Emperor Xuan. Jiangdu Emperor Wang Shichong also played the role of Zhang Heng, who frequently reduced the meals of laborers.

古文：帝于是发怒，锁衡诣江都市，将斩之，久而乃释，除名为民，放还田里。
现代文：炀帝于是发怒，把张衡关起来，送到江都市，将要杀他，过了很久才放他，除名为民，放他回老家乡里。
English: Emperor Qian was so angry that he locked Zhang Heng up and sent him to Jiangcheng. He was going to kill him, but it took a long time before he was released. He was only allowed to return to his hometown after being stripped of his title.

古文：帝每令亲人觇衡所为。
现代文：炀帝常令亲信窥探张衡在作些什么。
English: Emperor Qian ordered his relatives to constantly observe Zhang Heng's actions.

古文：八年，帝自辽东还都，衡妾言衡怨望，谤讪朝政，竟赐尽于家。
现代文：大业八年，炀帝从辽东回到京都，张衡的小妾说他心怀怨恨，诽谤朝政，炀帝竟然赐他在家里自尽。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong returned to Kyoto from Liaodong. Zhang Heng's concubine said that he harbored resentment and slandered the imperial government. Emperor Gong even gave him permission to commit suicide at home.

古文：临死大言曰： 我为人作何物事，而望久活！ 
现代文：他临死时大声说： 我为世人作了什么好事哦，还想久活！ 
English: As he was dying, he said aloud: "What good have I done for the world? Oh, I want to live longer!"

古文：监刑者塞耳，促令杀之。
现代文：监督行刑的塞耳不敢听，下令杀了他。
English: The jailers plugged their ears and urged them to kill Zhang Heng.

古文：义宁中，以死非其罪，赠大将军、南阳郡公，谥曰忠。
现代文：义宁中，因其死于无辜，追赠他为大将军、南阳郡公。谥号叫 忠 。
English: In Yining, because he died innocent, he was posthumously given the title of general and Nanyang County governor. His posthumous name was Zhong.

古文：有子希玄。
现代文：有子叫张希玄。
English: He has a son named Zhang Xigen.

古文：○杨汪
现代文：○杨汪
English: ○ Yang Wang

古文：杨汪，字元度，本弘农华阴人也，曾祖顺，徙居河东。
现代文：杨汪字元度，本是弘农郡华阴县人。曾祖父杨顺，迁居河东。
English: Yang Wang is originally from Huayin County, Hongnong County. His great-grandfather, Yang Shun, moved to Hedong.

古文：父琛，仪同三司，及汪贵，追赠平乡县公。
现代文：父亲杨琛，任仪同三司，杨汪显贵后，被追赠为平乡县公爵。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Duke of Pingxiang County after his father Yang Xuan, Ren Yidong, and Yang Wang Xiangui.

古文：汪少凶疏，好与人群斗，拳所殴击，无不颠踣。
现代文：杨汪小时，凶狠粗疏，好与人打群架，他打了谁，没有不被打倒的。
English: Yang Wang is small, fierce and rough, and he likes to fight with others. Whoever he fights will not be defeated.

古文：长更折节勤学，专精《左氏传》，通《三礼》。
现代文：长大后才折节读书，专精《左传》，通晓《三礼》。
English: After he grew up, he began to read at a leisurely pace, specializing in Zuo Zhuan and becoming familiar with the Three Rites.

古文：解褐周冀王侍读，王甚重之，每曰： 杨侍读德业优深，孤之穆生也。 
现代文：开始作官，任北周冀王的侍读，冀王很看重他，常说： 杨侍读品德、学业都十分好，是我的穆生啊。 
English: He began to work as an official and served as the attendant of the Northern Zhou Ji Wang. The Ji Wang valued him very much and often said: Yang attendant's moral character and studies are very good, he is my muse.

古文：其后问《礼》于沈重，受《汉书》于刘臻，二人推许之曰： 吾弗如也。 
现代文：此后，杨汪又向沈重讨教《礼》，到刘臻处学习《汉书》。二人推许他说： 我们不如他。 
English: After that, Yang Wang again asked Shen Chong to teach him "Rite" and went to Liu Zhen's place to study "Chinese Classics." The two recommended him saying, "We are not as good as him."

古文：由是知名，累迁夏官府都上士。
现代文：他因此出了名。累次升迁，到当夏官府都上士。
English: He became famous for this. He was promoted several times and became a staff sergeant at the Tangxia government office.

古文：及高祖居相，引知兵事，迁掌朝下大夫。
现代文：到隋高祖当北周丞相时，让他执掌军事，授他为掌朝下大夫。
English: When Sui Gaozu was the Minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was put in charge of the military, and he was awarded the title of Shucho Shimo no daibu.

古文：高祖受禅，赐爵平乡县伯，邑二百户。
现代文：隋高祖受禅登基后，封他为平乡县伯爵，食邑二百户。
English: After Sui Gaozhu was enthroned, he was made the count of Pingxiang County, with 200 households in the county.

古文：历尚书司勋兵部二曹侍郎、秦州总管长史，名为明干。
现代文：他历任尚书省的司勋、兵部二曹的郎官，秦州总管长史，有聪明能干的名声。
English: He successively held the titles of "Honorary Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture," "Lieutenant of the Second Lieutenant of the Ministry of Military Affairs," and "Chief Administrator of Qin State." He had a reputation of being smart and capable.

古文：迁尚书左丞，坐事免。
现代文：升任尚书左丞，因事被免职。
English: Promoted to Shoshu-zojo, but dismissed for cause.

古文：后历荆、洛二州长史，每听政之暇，必延生徒讲授，时人称之。
现代文：后来历任荆州、洛阳二州的长史。每每听政有空，总是延请学生，讲授经史。当时人都称赞他。
English: Later, he served in Jingzhou and Luoyang for a long time. Whenever he had free time, he always invited students to lecture on the history of scripture. At that time, everyone praised him.

古文：数年，高祖谓谏议大夫王达曰： 卿为我觅一好左丞。 
现代文：几年后，高祖对谏议大夫王达说： 你为我找一个好左丞。 
English: A few years later, Gao Zu said to Wang Da Zong: "Find me a good Zuo.

古文：达遂私于汪曰： 我当荐君为左丞，若事果，当以良田相报也。 
现代文：王达于是私下对杨汪说： 我要推荐你当左丞。如事情成功了，你当送我良田以相回报。 
English: Wang Da then privately said to Yang Wang: "I want to recommend you as a left-handed person. If things are successful, you should give me a good field in return."

古文：汪以达所言奏之，达竟以获罪，卒拜汪为尚书左丞。
现代文：杨汪把王达的话报告给高祖，王达因此得罪，最后还是授杨汪为尚书左丞。
English: Yang Wang reported Wang Da's words to Gao Zu, Wang Da was offended, and finally awarded Yang Wang the title of Shang Shul Zu Rong.

古文：汪明习法令，果于剖断，当时号为称职。
现代文：杨汪熟悉法律，善于分析判断，当时称为称职。
English: Yang Wang was familiar with the law, good at analysis and judgment, and was called competent at that time.

古文：炀帝即位，守大理卿。
现代文：炀帝即位后，杨汪任大理卿。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, Yang Wang was appointed as Daliqing.

古文：汪视事二日，帝将亲省囚徒。
现代文：杨汪到任了两天，炀帝将要亲自去看看囚徒。
English: Yang Wang has been in office for two days. Emperor Zhou will personally visit the prisoners.

古文：其时系囚二百馀人，汪通宵究审，诘朝而奏，曲尽事情，一无遗误，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：那时关了两百多人，杨汪通宵研究案情，审理问题，到那天早晨报告炀帝，曲尽其事，一无遗漏错误，炀帝很赞赏他。
English: At that time, more than two hundred people were detained. Yang Wang stayed up all night studying the case and examining the issues, and reported to Emperor Xizong that morning. He did his best and did not miss any mistakes. Emperor Xizong appreciated him very much.

古文：岁馀，拜国子祭酒。
现代文：一年多后，授国子祭酒。
English: More than a year later, the sake was awarded the title of "National Treasure."

古文：帝令百僚就学，与汪讲论，天下通儒硕学多萃焉，论难锋起，皆不能屈。
现代文：炀帝令文武百官都去向他学习，与杨汪讲论问题，天下的大儒博学之士大多汇集在那里，大家论辩难题蜂涌而起，都不能难倒他。
English: Emperor Qian ordered all the civil and military officials to learn from him and discuss problems with Yang Wang. Most of the world's great scholars of Confucianism gathered there. All the arguments and problems surged up, and they could not stump him.

古文：帝令御史书其问答奏之，省而大悦，赐良马一匹。
现代文：炀帝让御史记下他们的问答，报给他。炀帝看了记录，很高兴，赐杨汪良马一匹。
English: Emperor Gao asked the historian to write down their questions and answers and report to him. Emperor Gao read the record, was very pleased, and gave Yang Wangliang a horse.

古文：大业中，为银青光禄大夫。
现代文：大业中，任杨汪为银青光禄大夫。
English: In his great career, Yang Wang was appointed as a silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：及杨玄感反河南，赞治裴弘策出师御之，战不利，弘策出还，遇汪而屏人交语。
现代文：杨玄感反于黄河以南后，赞治裴弘策出兵抵抗，官军作战不利，弘策退回，遇到杨汪，两人窃窃私语。
English: After Yang Xuanxuan rebelled south of the Yellow River, Zanji Pei Hongxue sent troops to resist, the government army was unfavorable in combat, Hongxue retreated, met Yang Wang, and the two whispered.

古文：既而留守樊子盖斩弘策，以状奏汪，帝疑之，出为梁郡通守。
现代文：继而留守樊子盖杀了裴弘策，又状告杨汪。炀帝怀疑杨汪，把他调出京都当梁郡通守。
English: Subsequently, Zizi Gai, who was left behind, killed Pei Hongze and also sued Yang Wang. Emperor Wu suspected Yang Wang and transferred him out of Kyoto to be the governor of Liang County.

古文：后李密已逼东都，其徒频寇梁郡，汪勒兵拒之，频挫其锐。
现代文：后来李密已经逼进东都，其部下频频进犯梁郡，杨汪领兵抵抗，频频挫败李密军的锋锐。
English: Later, Li Mi had forced his way into Dongdu, and his subordinates frequently invaded Liang County, Yang Wang led the resistance, and frequently defeated the sharpness of Li Mi's army.

古文：炀帝崩，王世充推越王侗为主，征拜吏部尚书，颇见亲委。
现代文：炀帝死后，王世充推举越王杨侗为国主，调杨汪当吏部尚书，很被亲近重用。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan, Wang Shichong promoted Yue Wang Yang Hui as the head of the country, and promoted Yang Wang to the position of secretary. He was very close to and respected by Wang Shichong.

古文：及世充僭号，汪复用事，世充平，以凶党诛死。
现代文：王世充自己称帝后，杨汪又为世充干事。平定王世充后，杨汪以凶党罪处死。
English: Wang Shichong called himself the Empress, and Yang Wang was Shichong's officer. After Wang Shichong was subdued, Yang Wang was executed for the crime of subversion.

