古文：大司徒之职，掌建邦之土地之图与其人民之数，以佐王安扰邦国。
现代文：大司徒的职责，掌管天下各国土地的地图与记载人民数，以辅助王安定下天各国。
English: The duties of the archbishop, in charge of the map of the lands of all countries in the world and recording the number of people, to assist the king in stabilizing the countries of the world.

古文：以天下土地之图，周知九州之地域广轮之数，辨其山、林、川、泽、丘、陵、坟、衍、原、隰之名物，而辨其邦国都鄙之数，制其畿疆而沟封之，设其社稷之壝而树之田主，各以其野之所宜木，遂以名其社与其野。
现代文：依据天下土地的地图，遍知九州地域面积之数，辨别各地的山、林、川、泽、丘、陵、坟、衍、原、隰的名称与所出产之物，辨别天下的诸侯国和王畿内的采邑数，制定各国的畿疆而挖沟起土以为界。设立各国社稷的壝坛而以树作为田主，各用当地田野所宣生长的树，于是就用这种树作为社和田野的名称。
English: According to the map of the world's land, the number of the area of the Kyushu region is well known, the names of the mountains, forests, rivers, lakes, hills, mounds, tombs, yans, originals, and earthworms in various places and the products are distinguished, the number of counties and kingdoms in the world is distinguished, the Kinki region of each country is established and the ditch is dug for the boundary. The earthworms of each country are set up and the tree is used as the farmer. Each country uses the tree grown in the local field, and then uses this tree as the name of the company and field.

古文：以土会之法，辨五地之物生。
现代文：根据按土地计算贡税的法则，辨别五种不同地形所宜生长的人和物。
English: According to the rule of calculating tribute according to land, five kinds of people and things that are suitable for growing in different terrains are distinguished.

古文：一曰山林，其动物宜毛物，其植物宜早物，其民毛而方。
现代文：一是山林，那里宜于生长毛细密的动物，宜于生长栎树之类可供染色用的植物，那里的人民毛长而体方。
English: First, the mountain forest, where it is suitable for the growth of animals with fine hair, suitable for the growth of eucalyptus and other plants that can be used for dyeing, where the people are long-haired and square.

古文：二曰川泽，其动物宜麟物，其植物宜膏物，其民黑而津。
现代文：二是川泽，那里宜于生长麟甲类的动物，宜于生长莲芡之类结子多的植物，那里的人民皮肤黑而润泽。
English: The second is Kawazawa, where it is suitable for the growth of animals such as rhinoceros, suitable for the growth of plants with many seeds such as lotus, and where the people's skin is dark and moist.

古文：三曰丘陵，其动物宜羽物，其植物宜核物，其民专而长。
现代文：三是丘陵，那里宣于生长有羽毛的动物，宜于生长李梅之类有果核的植物，那里的人民体型圆而长。
English: The third is the hills, where it is recommended to grow animals with feathers, and it is suitable to grow plants with fruit nuclei such as plum, and the people's body shape is round and long.

古文：四曰坟衍，其动物宜介物，其植物宜荚物，其民皙而瘠。
现代文：四是坟衍，那里宜于生长有甲壳的动物，宜于生长有荚角的植物，那里的人民肤色白而体瘦。
English: The fourth is the tombs, where it is suitable to grow animals with carapaces, plants with horns, and people with white skin and thin bodies.

古文：五曰原隰，其动物宜裸物，其植物宜丛物，其民丰肉而庳。
现代文：五是原隰，那里宜于生长毛短浅的动物，宜于生长萑苇之类丛生的植物，那里的人民胖而矮。
English: The fifth is the protozoa, where it is suitable for the growth of short-haired animals, suitable for the growth of congested plants such as earthworms, and where the people are fat and short.

古文：因此五物者民之常，而施十有二教焉。
现代文：根据以上五种地形的生长物所形成的人民的生活习惯，而施行十二个方面的教育。
English: According to the people's living habits formed by the growths of the above five types of terrain, twelve aspects of education will be implemented.

古文：一曰以祀礼教敬，则民不苟。
现代文：一是用祭祀之礼教民尊敬，人民就不会马虎随便。
English: The first is to teach the people respect with the ritual of sacrifice, so that the people will not be careless.

古文：二曰以阳礼教让，则民不争。
现代文：二是用乡射礼、乡饮酒礼之类的阳礼教民谦让，人民就不会相争。
English: The second is to teach the people to be humble with Yangli such as township shooting ceremony and township drinking ceremony, so that the people will not quarrel.

古文：三曰以阴礼教亲，则民不怨。
现代文：三是用阴礼来教民相亲，人民就不会相互怨恨。
English: The third is to use yin and yang rituals to teach the people to get along with each other, so that the people will not resent each other.

古文：四曰以乐礼教和，则民不乖。
现代文：四是用乐教民和睦，人民就不会乖戾。
English: The fourth is to use music to teach the people to be harmonious, so that the people will not be grumpy.

古文：五曰以仪辨等，则民不越。
现代文：五是用礼仪来辨别，人民就不会僭越。
English: The fifth is to use etiquette to distinguish, so that people will not be arrogant.

古文：六曰以俗教安，则民不偷。
现代文：六是用习俗教民安居，人民就不会苟且。
English: The sixth is to teach people to live safely by using customs, so that people will not be careless.

古文：七曰以刑教中，则民不暴。
现代文：七是用刑法教民遵守礼法，人民就不会暴乱。
English: The seventh is to use criminal law to teach the people to abide by the etiquette, so that the people will not riot.

古文：八曰以誓教恤，则民不怠。
现代文：八是用誓戒教民敬慎，人民就不会懈怠。
English: Eighth, teach the people to be cautious with oaths and precepts, and the people will not slack off.

古文：九曰以度教节，则民知足。
现代文：推是用制度教民节制，人民就会知足。
English: If the system teaches the people moderation, the people will be content.

古文：十曰以世事教能，则民不失职。
现代文：十是用世间技艺之事教民技能，人民就不会失业。
English: Tenth, teach people skills using worldly skills, and people will not be unemployed.

古文：十有一曰以贤制爵，则民慎德。
现代文：十一是根据贤行颁授爵位，人民就会谨慎修养德行。
English: On the 11th, the title of nobility will be awarded according to virtuous conduct, and the people will be careful to cultivate virtuous conduct.

古文：十有二曰以庸制禄，则民兴功。
现代文：十二是根据功绩制定俸禄，人民就会致力于建立功业。
English: On the 12th, salaries will be based on merit, and the people will be committed to building a meritocracy.

古文：以土宜之法，辨十有二土之名物，以相民宅，而知其利害，以阜人民，以蕃鸟兽，以毓草木，以任土事。
现代文：依据土地相适宜的法则，辨别十二个区域土地的出产物及其名称，以观察人民的居处，而了解它们的利与害之所在，以使人民繁盛，使鸟兽繁殖，使草木生长，努力成就土地上的生产事业。
English: According to the principle of land suitability, it is necessary to distinguish the products of land and their names in 12 regions, observe the people's living places, and understand their benefits and harms, so that the people can prosper, the birds and beasts can breed, the plants and trees can grow, and the production undertakings on the land can be achieved.

古文：辨十有二壤之物，而知其种，以教稼穑树蓺。
现代文：辨别十二种土壤的作物，而知道所适宜的品种，以教民种植谷物和果树。
English: Distinguish twelve kinds of soil crops, and know the suitable varieties to teach people to plant cereals and fruit trees.

古文：以土均之法，辨五物九等，制天下之地征，以作民职，以令地贡，以敛财赋，以均齐天下之政。
现代文：用按土地合理的法则，辨别以上五种地形的生长物和九种土质，制定天下的地税，而兴起人民的各种职业，以使民贡献各种谷物，以收取钱谷赋税，以使天下赋税的征收公平合理。
English: According to the principle of land rationality, the above-mentioned five types of topographical growths and nine types of soil quality should be distinguished, and the land tax of the world should be formulated, and various occupations of the people should be raised, so that the people can contribute various grains, and the money valley tax can be collected, so that the collection of the world tax can be fair and reasonable.

古文：以土圭之法测土深，正日景，以求地中。
现代文：用土圭测日影之法测量土地四方的远近，校正日影，以求得地中央的位置。
English: Measure the distance to the four corners of the land with the method of measuring the shadow of the sun, and correct the shadow to obtain the position of the center of the land.

古文：日南则景短，多暑。
现代文：位置偏南就日影短，气候炎热。
English: Located in the south, the sun's shadow is short and the climate is hot.

古文：日北则景长，多寒。
现代文：位置偏北就日影长，气候寒冷。
English: The sun casts a long shadow when it is north of the equator, and the climate is cold.

古文：日东则景夕，多风。
现代文：位置偏东，日已偏西，气候多风。
English: The location is eastward, the sun is westward, and the climate is windy.

古文：日西则景朝，多阴。
现代文：位置偏西，日还偏东，气候多阴雨。
English: Located to the west, the sun is also to the east, the climate is mostly cloudy and rainy.

古文：日至之景，尺有五寸，谓之地中，天地之所合也，四时之所交也，风雨之所会也，阴阳之所和也。然则百物阜安，乃建王国焉。制其畿方千里，而封树之。
现代文：夏至的日影，长一尺五寸，叫做地中，这是天地之气相和合的地方，是四时之气相交替的地方，是风雨适时而至的地方，是阴阳二气和协的地方，因而百物丰盛而安康，于是在此建立王国，制定地方千里的王畿，而挖沟植树以为固。
English: The shadow of the sun at the summer solstice, one foot and five inches long, is called the middle of the earth. This is the place where the gaseous phases of heaven and earth harmonize. It is the place where the four-hour gaseous phase alternates. It is the place where the wind and rain come at the right time. It is the place where the yin and yang of the two gaseous phases harmonize. As a result, all things are abundant and healthy. Therefore, it is here that the kingdom is established, the king and queen of thousands of places are determined, and ditches are dug and trees are planted.

古文：凡建邦国，以土圭土其地而制其域。
现代文：凡建立诸侯国，用土圭测量该国的土地而制定该国的疆域。
English: Whenever a vassal state was established, the land of the country was measured with a surveying rod and the borders of the country were established.

古文：诸公之地，封疆方五百里，其食者半。诸侯之地，封疆方四百里，其食者参之一。诸伯之地，封疆方三百里，其食者参之一。
现代文：各公国的土地，疆界之内五百里见方，公可收取租税的土地占一半；各侯国的土地，疆界之内四百里见方，侯可收取租税的土地占三分之一；各伯国的土地，疆界之内三百里见方，伯可收取租税的土地占三分之一。
English: The lands of the principalities, within a radius of five hundred leagues, constitute one-half of the public revenue; the lands of the duchies, within a radius of four hundred leagues, constitute one-third of the public revenue; the lands of the counties, within a radius of three hundred leagues, constitute one-third of the public revenue.

古文：诸子之地，封疆方二百里，其食者四之一。
现代文：各子国的土地，疆界之内二百里见方，子可收取租税的土地占四分之一。
English: The land of each daughter country is up to 200 square kilometers within the borders, and the land that can be taxed by the son accounts for a quarter.

古文：诸男之地，封疆方百里，其食者四之一。
现代文：各男国的土地，疆界之内一百里见方，男可收取租税的土地占四分之一。
English: The land of each man's country, within the borders of a hundred miles square, accounts for a quarter of the land on which he can collect taxes.

古文：凡造都鄙，制其地域，而封沟之，以其室数制之。
现代文：凡建造采邑，制定该采邑的地域，而挖沟起土以为界，根据采邑的室家数来制定井田规模。
English: If a mining town is to be built, the area of the mining town should be determined, and the size of the field should be determined according to the number of households in the mining town.

古文：不易之地，家百亩。一易之地，家二百亩。再易之地，家三百亩。
现代文：无须休耕的地每家一百亩，种一年休耕一年的地每家二百亩，种一年休耕二年的地每家三百亩。
English: The land that does not need to be fallowed is one hundred mu per household, the land that is planted for one year and fallowed for one year is two hundred mu per household, and the land that is planted for one year and fallowed for two years is three hundred mu per household.

古文：乃分地职，奠地守，制地贡，而颁职事焉，以为地法，而待政令。
现代文：于是分配从事土地生产的职业，确定守护地产的官职，制定从事土地生产应交的税，而分别恪尽本职，以此作为有关地政的法则，而准备执行政令。
English: Accordingly, they assigned the occupations engaged in land production, determined the official position of guarding real estate, formulated the tax payable for engaging in land production, and separately fulfilled their duties. As a rule of land administration, they prepared to implement the decree.

古文：以荒政十有二聚万民：一曰散利，二曰薄征，三曰缓刑，四曰弛力，五曰舍禁，六曰去几，七曰眚礼，八曰杀哀，九曰蕃乐，十曰多昬，十有一曰索鬼神，十有二曰除盗贼。
现代文：用十二项救济灾荒的政策聚集万民：一是借贷种子和粮食，二是减轻赋税，三是减缓刑罚，四是免除力役，五是放松禁令，六是免除关市之税，七是简省吉礼，八是简省丧礼，九是收藏起乐器而不演奏，十是多嫁娶，十一是求索鬼神，十二是铲除盗贼。
English: Gather all the people with the twelve policies of disaster relief: one is to borrow seeds and grain, the second is to reduce taxes, the third is to reduce penalties, the fourth is to exempt forced labor, the fifth is to relax the ban, the sixth is to exempt customs taxes, the seventh is to save good luck, the eighth is to save funerals, the ninth is to collect musical instruments without playing, the tenth is to marry more, the eleventh is to search for ghosts, and the twelfth is to eradicate thieves.

古文：以保息六养万民：一曰慈幼，二曰养老，三曰振穷，四曰恤贫，五曰宽疾，六曰安富。
现代文：用六项使万民安定而繁衍生息的政策养育万民：一是慈爱幼儿，二是赡养老年人，三是拯救穷困的人，四是救助贫穷的人，五是宽免残疾人的赋役，六是使富人安心。
English: We should nurture all the people with six policies to make the people stable and prosperous: one is to love the children, the second is to support the elderly, the third is to save the poor, the fourth is to help the poor, the fifth is to pardon the disabled, and the sixth is to make the rich feel at ease.

古文：以本俗六安万民：一曰美宫室，二曰族坟墓，三曰联兄弟，四曰联师儒，五曰联朋友，六曰同衣服。
现代文：用六种传统风俗使万民安居：一是使房屋坚固，二是使坟墓按族分布，三是团结异姓兄弟，四是使乡里子弟相连合而从师学习，五是团结朋友，六是使民衣服相同。
English: Six kinds of traditional customs were used to make the people live in peace: the first was to make the houses strong, the second was to distribute the graves according to ethnicity, the third was to unite brothers with different surnames, the fourth was to connect the children of the village to learn from the teacher, the fifth was to unite friends, and the sixth was to make the clothes of the people the same.

古文：正月之吉，始和布教于邦国都鄙，乃县教象之法于象魏，使万民观教象，挟日而敛之。
现代文：正月初一，开始向各诸侯国和王畿内的采邑宣布教法，把形成文字的教法悬挂在象魏上，让万民观看教法，过十天而后收藏起来。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, he began to announce the teachings to all the principalities and kingdoms in the country, and hung the teachings that formed the characters on the elephant Wei, so that all the people could watch the teachings, and then collect them after ten days.

古文：乃施教法于邦国都鄙，使之各以教其所治民。
现代文：于是在各诸侯国和王畿内的采邑施行教法，让他们各用以教育所治理的人民。
English: Therefore, the teaching of the Fa was carried out in all the provinces and principalities, so that they could use it to educate the people they governed.

古文：令五家为比，使之相保。
现代文：令五家组成一比，使他们互相担保。
English: Let five companies form a ratio, so that they mutually guarantee each other.

古文：五比为闾，使之相受。
现代文：五比组成一闾，使他们可以互相托付。
English: The five of them form a team so that they can delegate tasks to each other.

古文：四闾为族，使之相葬。
现代文：四闾组成一族，使他们有丧葬事互相帮助。
English: The four cormorants form a family, so they have funerals to help each other.

古文：五族为党，使之相救。
现代文：五族组成一党，使他们互相救助。
English: The five ethnic groups formed a party to help each other.

古文：五党为州，使之相赒。
现代文：五党组成一州，使他们互相周济。
English: The five parties form one state, so that they can help each other.

古文：五州为乡，使之相宾。
现代文：五州组成一乡，使他们以宾客之礼相待。
English: The five states form one township, so they treat each other with the courtesy of guests.

古文：颁职事十有二于邦国都鄙，使以登万民：一曰稼穑，二曰树蓺，三曰作材，四曰阜蕃，五曰饬材，六曰通财，七曰化材，八曰敛材，九曰生材，十曰学艺，十有一曰世事，十有二曰服事。
现代文：在各诸侯国和王畿内采邑分配十二种职业，用以成就万民：一是种谷物，二是种瓜果，三是开发山林川泽的材物，四是畜牧业，五是手工业，六是商业，七是纺织业，八是采集业，九是做雇工，十是学习道艺，十一是世代相传的专业，十二是在官府服务。
English: Twelve kinds of occupations were distributed among the vassal states and the king's provinces to be used for the achievement of the people: one was to grow grain, the second was to grow melons and fruits, the third was to develop materials from the mountains and forests, the fourth was animal husbandry, the fifth was handicrafts, the sixth was commerce, the seventh was textile industry, the eighth was gathering industry, the ninth was to be a hired laborer, the tenth was to study Taoism, the eleventh was a profession passed down from generation to generation, and the twelfth was to serve in government.

古文：以乡三物教万民，而宾兴之。
现代文：用三方面内容来教育万民，而荐举贤能者。
English: Use the three aspects of content to educate the people, and recommend the best.

古文：一曰六德：知、仁、圣、义、忠、和。
现代文：一是六德：明白事理、爱人及物、通达而能预见、适时决断、言谈发自内心、刚柔适宜。
English: First, the six virtues: to understand things, to love people and things, to be able to foresee things, to make decisions in a timely manner, to speak from the heart, and to be tough and gentle.

古文：二曰六行：孝、友、睦、姻、任、恤。
现代文：二是六行：孝敬父母、友爱兄弟、和睦九族、亲爱姻戚、信任朋友、救济贫穷。
English: Second, there are six virtues: filial piety, brotherly love, harmony among the nine ethnic groups, affection for in-laws, trust in friends, and poverty relief.

古文：三曰六艺：礼、乐、射、御、书、数。
现代文：三是六艺：五类礼义、六种歌舞、五种射法、五种驾驭车马法、六种造字法、九种数学计算法。
English: Third, there are six arts: five kinds of propriety, six kinds of song and dance, five kinds of shooting, five kinds of driving, six kinds of writing, and nine kinds of mathematical calculation.

古文：以乡八刑纠万民：一曰不孝之刑，二曰不睦之刑，三曰不姻之刑，四曰不弟之刑，五曰不任之刑，六曰不恤之刑，七曰造言之刑，八曰乱民之刑。
现代文：用实行于乡中的八种刑罚纠察万民：一是针对不孝的刑罚，二是针对不和睦九族的刑罚，三是针对不亲爱姻戚的刑罚，四是针对不友爱兄弟的刑罚，五是针对不信任朋友的刑罚，六是针对不救济贫困的刑罚，七是针对制造谣言的刑罚，八是针对暴乱之民的刑罚。
English: Use the eight kinds of punishments implemented in the countryside to picket the people: one is the punishment for not being filial, the second is the punishment for not being in harmony with the nine ethnic groups, the third is the punishment for not loving relatives by marriage, the fourth is the punishment for not loving brothers, the fifth is the punishment for not trusting friends, the sixth is the punishment for not relieving poverty, the seventh is the punishment for creating rumors, and the eighth is the punishment for rioting people.

古文：以五礼防万民之伪而教之中，以六乐防万民之情而教之和。
现代文：用五礼防止万民的诈伪而教他们符合中正，用六乐防止万民的情欲而教他们心地平和。
English: Use the Five Rites to prevent the fraud of the people and teach them to conform to the Middle Way, and use the Six Rites to prevent the passions of the people and teach them peace of mind.

古文：凡万民之不服教而有狱讼者，与有地治者听而断之，其附于刑者，归于士。
现代文：凡万民不服从教化而有争讼的，就与地方官一同听取而加以评断，其中有触犯刑律的，就交给司法官审理。
English: All disputes arising from people's disobedience to the indoctrination will be heard and judged together with local officials, and those who have violated the criminal law will be referred to judicial officials for trial.

古文：祀五帝，奉牛牲，羞其肆。
现代文：祭祀五帝，就奉进牛牲，进献经过豚解的牲体。
English: When the Five Immortals are worshipped, cattle and pigs are offered as offerings.

古文：享先王亦如之。
现代文：祭祀先王也这样做。
English: The previous sacrificial king did the same.

古文：大宾客，令野修道、委积。
现代文：接待大宾客，命令在野外修整道路、积聚粮草。
English: Receiving the great guests, he ordered the roads to be repaired in the field and the grain and grass to be gathered.

古文：大丧，帅六乡之众庶，属其六引，而治其政令。
现代文：有大丧，率领六乡为丧事服役的徒众，拴系六条大绳在柩车上，而负责指挥。
English: When there was a great mourning, he led the six townships to serve the mourners, tied six ropes on the carriage, and took charge of the command.

古文：大军旅，大田役，以旗致万民，而治其徒庶之政令。
现代文：大征伐，大田猎，用旗召集万民，而负责指挥徒众。
English: He is in charge of leading the people in the great crusade, the great field hunt, and the rallying of the people with the banner.

古文：若国有大故，则致万民于王门，令无节者不行于天下。
现代文：如果国家有大事故，就召集万民到王宫门前，并命令无符节的人不得在全国各地任意通行。
English: If there is a major accident in the country, he will call all the people to the front of the royal palace and order those who do not have the symbols to not travel anywhere in the country.

古文：大荒、大札，则令邦国移民、通财、舍禁、弛力、薄征、缓刑。
现代文：遇到大灾荒或疾病大流行的年头，就命令诸侯国迁移灾民、百通米粮、放宽禁令、免除力役、减轻租税、宽缓刑罚。
English: At the beginning of a year of great disaster or disease pandemic, he ordered the vassal states to relocate the victims, provide a hundred tons of rice grain, relax the ban, exempt from forced labor, reduce taxes, and relax criminal penalties.

古文：岁终，则令教官正治而致事。
现代文：年终，命令所属官员明白审慎地整理文书资料而上报。
English: At the end of the year, order the officials to clearly and carefully sort out the document information and report it.

古文：正岁，令于教官曰： 各共尔职，修乃事，以听王命。
现代文：正月初一，命令教官们说： 各自恪尽你们的职守，努力做好你们的工作，而听从王的命令。
English: On the first day of the first month he commanded the officers, saying, "Each of you shall do his duty, and labor diligently to do his work, and be obedient to the king's command."

古文：其有不正，则国有常刑。 
现代文：如有失误，国家自有常刑处置。 
English: If there is a mistake, the state has its own punishment.

