古文：耿弇字伯昭，扶风茂陵人也。
现代文：耿弇字伯昭，扶风郡茂陵县人。
English: Geng Junzhi Biao Zhao, a native of Maolin County, Fufeng County.

古文：其先武帝时以吏二千石自巨鹿徙焉。
现代文：他的先祖在武帝时，以吏二千石从巨鹿迁徙到扶风。
English: His ancestors migrated from Koga to Fufeng with a stipend of 2,000 koku during the reign of Emperor Wu.

古文：父况，字侠游，以明经为郎，与王莽从弟伋共学《老子》于安丘先生，后为朔调连率。
现代文：父耿况，字侠游，以通晓经术为郎，与王莽从弟王伋共学《老子》于安丘先生，后为朔调连率。
English: His father, Geng Zhou, known as "Chivalrous You," was a scholar of the classics, and he and Wang Mang learned "Lao Zi" from his brother, Wang Yao, from Mr. Anqiu, and later from Mr. Shuo.

古文：弇少好学，习父业。常见郡尉试骑士，建旗鼓，肄驰射，由是好将帅之事。
现代文：耿弇少年时期就好学，学习他父亲的学业，由于经常看到郡尉考试骑士，建立旗鼓，练习跑马射箭的武功，由此耿弇对将帅产生了兴趣。
English: As a young boy, Geng Yao was eager to learn and study his father's studies. As he often saw the knights of the county lieutenant examination, set up a banner and drum, and practice the martial arts of horse racing and archery, Geng Yao became interested in the generals.

古文：及王莽败，更始立，诸将略地者，前后多擅威权，辄改易守、令。
现代文：等到王莽败，更始立，诸将掠夺土地，前前后后多擅自以自己的威权，动辄更换郡守县令。
English: Wait until the king is defeated and the war begins, the generals will plunder the land and arbitrarily replace the county magistrate with their own authority.

古文：况自以莽之所置，怀不自安。
现代文：耿况自以为是王莽任命的，心中不能自安。
English: Geng believed that Wang Mang had appointed him, and he could not calm down.

古文：时，弇年二十一，乃辞况奉奏诣更始，因赍贡献，以求自固之宜。
现代文：这时耿弇年二十一岁，就辞父亲奉奏去更始，因而带着贡品，以求自固的门路。
English: At this time, Geng Xuan was 21 years old. He resigned from his father's post and went to Changchun with a tribute in order to seek a path of self-reliance.

古文：及至宋子，会王郎诈称成帝子子舆，起兵邯郸，弇从吏孙仓、卫包于道共谋曰： 刘子舆成帝正统，舍此不归，远行安之？ 弇按剑曰： 子舆弊贼，卒为降虏耳。
现代文：等到了宋子，恰好王郎冒称自己是成帝的儿子子舆，在邯郸起兵，耿弇的从吏孙仓、卫包在路上共同谋议说： 刘子舆是成帝的正统，不向他归降，还远行到哪里去？ 耿弇按剑叱道 ：子舆是骗人的盗贼，终成降虏呢。
English: While waiting for Song Zi, Wang Lang, who pretended to be the son of Emperor Zeng, raised an army in Shao. On the way, Sun Cang and Wei Bao, officials of Geng Yao, discussed together and said: Liu Zi Ying is the orthodoxy of Emperor Zeng, if he does not surrender to him, where will he go? Geng Yao scolded with his sword: Zi Ying is a deceiving thief, and he will eventually surrender.

古文：我至长安，与国家陈渔阳、上谷兵马之用，还出太原、代郡，反复数十日，归发突骑以辚乌合之众，如摧枯折腐耳。
现代文：我到长安，为国家陈述渔阳、上谷兵马的用处，还出太原、代郡，反复数十天，回来时突发骑兵以攻乌合之众，就像摧枯拉朽一样容易，我看你们不明去就，族诛之祸就在眼前了。 
English: I went to Chang'an to explain to the country the usefulness of the Yuyang and Shanggu troops and horses. I also went to Taiyuan and Dai County, repeatedly for dozens of days. When I came back, I suddenly sent cavalry to attack the rabble. It was as easy as wiping out the dead. I see that you do not know where to go, and the calamity of the clan is in front of you.

古文：观公等不识去就，族灭不久也！ 仓、包不从，遂亡降王郎。弇道闻光武在卢奴，乃驰北上谒，光武留署门下吏。弇因说护军朱祐，求归发兵，以定邯郸。
现代文：孙仓、卫包不从，就去向王郎投降。耿弇在路上听说光武在卢奴，就北上晋谒，光武留他为门下吏。耿弇因此劝说护军朱，请求让他回去发兵，以平定邯郸。
English: Sun Cang and Wei Bao did not obey, so they went to surrender to Wang Lang. On the way, Geng Yao heard that Guangwu was in Lunu, so he went to the north to be promoted, leaving Guangwu as his subordinate. Therefore, Geng Yao persuaded Zhu, the escort, and asked him to go back and send troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：光武笑曰： 小儿曹乃有大意哉！ 因数召见加恩慰。
现代文：光武笑着说 ：小小年纪竟有大志啊！ 因此数次召见他并加恩慰。
English: With a smile, Mitsutake said, "At such a young age, he has big aspirations! That's why I called him several times to console him."

古文：弇因从光武北至蓟。
现代文：耿弇因而跟光武北至蓟。
English: As a result, Geng Yao followed Guangwu Beibei to Shandong.

古文：闻邯郸兵方到，光武将欲南归，召官属计议。
现代文：听说邯郸兵刚到，光武将要南归，召集官属商议。
English: I heard that just after the arrival of the soldiers, Guangwu will return to the south and convene officials to discuss.

古文：弇曰： 今兵从南来，不可南行。
现代文：耿弇说： 现在兵从南来，不可南行。
English: Geng Yao said: Now that soldiers are coming from the south, they must not go south.

古文：渔阳太守彭宠，公之邑人；上谷太守，即弇父也。
现代文：渔阳太守彭宠，是公的同乡；上谷太守，就是我的父亲。
English: Peng Jiao, the governor of Yuyang, is a fellow villager of the prince; Shanggui governor, is my father.

古文：发此两郡，控弦万骑，邯郸不足虑也。 光武官属腹心皆不肯，曰： 死尚南首，奈何北行入囊中？ 光武指弇曰： 是我北道主人也。 会蓟中乱，光武遂南驰，官属各分散。
现代文：发动起这两郡的人马，有万骑之众，邯郸是容易夺取的。 光武官属心腹都不肯，说： 死还要头向南面，奈何北行进入囊中呢？ 光武指着耿弇说 ：他是我北道的主人啊。 恰巧这时蓟发生骚乱，光武于是南驰，官属各自分散。
English: Guangwu pointed to Geng Di and said, "He is the master of my northern province." At that time, there was a riot, so Guangwu drove south, and the officials dispersed.

古文：弇走昌平就况，因说况使寇恂东约彭宠，各发突骑二千匹，步兵千人。
现代文：耿弇到了昌平找到父亲况，因而说服况让寇恂东约彭宠，各发快骑二千匹，步兵千人。
English: When Geng Yao arrived in Changping, he found his father's situation, so he persuaded the situation to let the east side of the Great Wall of China be about Peng Ji, and each side sent two thousand horses and one thousand infantry.

古文：弇与景丹、寇恂及渔阳兵合军而南，所过击斩王郎大将、九卿、校尉以下四百余级，得印绶百二十五，节二，斩首三万级，定涿郡、中山、巨鹿、清河、河间凡二十二县，遂及光武于广阿。
现代文：耿弇与景丹、寇恂及渔阳兵合军向南，沿途击斩王郎大将、九卿、校尉以下四百余级，得印绶一百二十五枚，符节二个，斩首三万级，平定涿郡、中山、巨鹿、清河、河间共二十二县，于是到广阿赶上了光武。
English: Geng Yao and Jing Dan, Kou Yao and Yuyang soldiers joined forces to the south, and along the way they killed Wang Lang general, nine nobles, and more than 400 ranks below lieutenant, obtained 125 seals, two symbols, and 30,000 heads, and pacified 22 counties in total, including Handan County, Zhongshan County, Kula County, Qinghe County, and Hema County, so they caught up with Guangwu in Guang'a.

古文：是时，光武方攻王郎，传言二郡兵为邯郸来，众皆恐。
现代文：当时光武正攻王郎，传说二郡兵马是从邯郸来的，都以为是王郎的救兵而惊恐。
English: At that time, Guangwu was attacking Wangro. According to legend, the soldiers and horses from the two counties had come from Yunnan. They all thought they were Wangro's rescuers and panicked.

古文：既而悉诣营上谒。
现代文：等到来军都到军营参谒光武。
English: After the arrival of the army, they all went to the military camp to visit Guangwu.

古文：光武见弇等，说，曰： 当与渔阳、上谷士大夫共此大功。 乃皆以为偏将军，使还领其兵。
现代文：光武见耿弇等，很高兴，说： 当与渔阳、上谷的士大夫共此大功。 于是都升为将军，使他们回去领其兵。
English: When Guangwu saw Geng Yao and others, he was very pleased and said, "You should share this great achievement with Yuyang and Shanggu's senior officers," and they were both promoted to general, so that they could go back and lead their troops.

古文：加况大将军、兴义侯，得自置偏裨。
现代文：加封耿况为大将军、兴义侯，偏将裨将都由他自行安置。
English: Geng Zifeng is a general and Xing Yi Hou, and he has placed all the generals and generals by himself.

古文：弇等遂从拔邯郸。
现代文：耿弇等就乘势攻拔邯郸。
English: Geng Xuan and others took advantage of the situation to attack and plunder.

古文：时，更始征代郡太守赵永，而况劝永不应召，令诣于光武。
现代文：这时更始征召代郡太守赵永，而耿况劝赵永不要应召，让他去见光武。
English: At this time, Zhao Yong, the acting county magistrate, was first called up, but Geng persuaded Zhao Yong not to answer the call and let him go to see Guangwu.

古文：光武遣永复郡。
现代文：光武遣赵永回代仍任太守。
English: Guangwu sent Zhao Yongkui to the throne and still served as the governor.

古文：永北还，而代令张晔据城反畔，乃招迎匈奴、乌桓以为援助。
现代文：赵永北还，代县县令张晔据城反叛，并招迎匈奴、乌桓以为援助。
English: Zhao Yongbei also rebelled against Zhang Xuan, the acting prefectural governor, and invited the Xiongnu and Wu Huan to come to his aid.

古文：光武以弇弟舒为复胡将军，使击晔，破之。
现代文：光武以耿弇弟耿舒为复胡将军，使他击张晔，攻破了。
English: Guangwu appointed Geng's younger brother, Geng Shu, as Fuhu's general, and had him attack Zhang Ye and defeat him.

古文：永乃得复郡。
现代文：赵永就得复为郡守。
English: Zhao Yong had to be reinstated as county governor.

古文：时，五校贼二十余万北寇上谷，况与舒连击破之，贼皆退走。
现代文：这时五校贼二十多万北侵上谷，耿况与耿舒连击破贼，贼都退走。
English: At this time, more than 200,000 five school thieves invaded Shanggu to the north. Geng Zheng and Geng Shulian defeated the thieves, and the thieves retreated.

古文：更始见光武威声日盛，君臣疑虑，乃遣使立光武为萧王，令罢兵与诸将有功者还长安；遣苗曾为幽州牧，韦顺为上谷太守，蔡充为渔阳太守，并北之部。
现代文：更始见光武声威日盛，君臣产生疑虑，于是遣使者立光武为萧王，令他罢兵与诸将中有功劳的一起回长安；派遣苗曾为幽州牧，韦顺为上谷太守，蔡充为渔阳太守，兼并北方。
English: At first, seeing Guangwu's growing prestige, the monarchs and ministers had doubts, so they sent an envoy to appoint Guangwu as King Xiao, and ordered him to leave the army and return to Chang'an together with all the generals who had meritorious service; they sent Miao to Yuzhou, Weishun to Shanggu, and Cai Chong to Yuyang, and annexed the north.

古文：时，光武居邯郸宫，昼卧温明殿。
现代文：这时光武住邯郸宫，白天卧在温明殿。
English: At this time, Takeshi lived in Shogun's palace and slept in Onmyo-den during the day.

古文：弇入造床下请间，因说曰： 今更始失政，君臣淫乱，诸将擅命于畿内，贵戚纵横于都内。
现代文：耿弇进入卧室，到床前乘光武有暇时，因而说： 今更始政治混乱，君臣淫乱，诸将在京畿之内擅自作威作福，王公贵戚们在京都纵横暴虐。
English: Geng Yao went into his bedroom, and when he had some free time before going to bed, he said, "Nowadays, political chaos has begun, the princes and ministers have been unfaithful, the generals have been acting as tyrants in Gyeonggi Province, and the relatives of the princes and nobles have been acting as tyrants in Kyoto.

古文：天子之命，不出城门，所在牧守，辄自迁易，百姓不知所从，士人莫敢自安。
现代文：天子之命，出不了城门，下面的州牧郡守，动不动就被迁徙更换，百姓不知所从，士民莫敢自安。
English: By order of the Son of Heaven, the gates of the city cannot be opened, and the governors of the lower prefectures and counties are replaced by migration at every turn. The people do not know what to do, and the scholars and the people dare not be at ease.

古文：虏掠财物，劫掠妇女，怀金玉者，至不生归。
现代文：虏掠财物，劫掠妇女，怀有金玉的大富显贵，没有能生还的。
English: No one could survive the plundering of property, the rape of women, the great wealth and nobility pregnant with gold and jewels.

古文：元元叩心，更思莽朝。
现代文：平民百姓捶胸顿足，反而更思王莽朝。
English: The common people beat their chests and stamp their feet, but think more about Wang Mangdang.

古文：又铜马、赤眉之属数十辈，辈数十百万，圣公不能办也。
现代文：又铜马、赤眉之属数十辈，每辈拥众数十百万，更始不能有成。
English: In addition, the Bronze Horse and Red Eyebrow belong to dozens of generations, each generation has tens of millions of fans, and they cannot succeed.

古文：其败不久，公首事南阳，破百万之军；今定河北，据天府之地。
现代文：更始的失败为期不远。公首举义旗于南阳，破百万之军；今平定河北，据有天府之地。
English: The public leader raised the banner of righteousness in Nanyang and led a million-strong army; now he has pacified Hebei and is in possession of Tianfu.

古文：以义征伐，发号响应，天下可传檄而定。
现代文：以大义讨伐，发出号令，群起响应，天下只要传示檄文就可以平定。
English: With a righteous crusade, issuing a call, and a swarming response, the world can be pacified as long as the message is transmitted.

古文：天下至重，不可令它姓得之。
现代文：天下是最为重要的，不可让他姓得到。
English: Heaven and earth are the most important, and he must not be allowed to have a surname.

古文：闻使者从西方来，欲罢兵，不可从也。
现代文：听说有使者从西方来，要你罢兵，千万莫听。
English: I've heard that an envoy has come from the West, asking you to disband your army. Don't listen to them.

古文：今吏士死亡者多，弇愿归幽州，益发精兵，以集大计。 光武大说，乃拜弇为大将军，与吴汉北发幽州十郡兵。
现代文：今官吏士卒死亡的多，我愿回幽州去，增发精兵，以成大计。 光武大悦，就拜耿弇为大将军，与吴汉北发幽州十郡的兵马。
English: Now there are many deaths of officials and officials, I would like to go back to Yuzhou, increase the number of elite soldiers, and make a grand plan. Guangwu Dayue, worship Geng Yao as a general, and Wu Hanbei sent soldiers and horses to ten counties in Yuzhou.

古文：弇到上谷，收韦顺、蔡充斩之；汉亦诛苗曾。
现代文：耿弇到上谷，收拾更始派出的太守韦顺、蔡充并把他们杀了；吴汉也杀了更始派出的幽州牧守苗曾。
English: Geng Xuan went to Shanggu, rounded up Emperors Weishun and Cai Chong, who had been sent from the beginning, and killed them; Wu Han also killed Yuzhou Governor Mu Miao Zeng, who had been sent from the beginning.

古文：于是悉发幽州兵，引而南，从光武击破铜马、高湖、赤眉、青犊，又追尤来、大枪、五幡于元氏，弇常将精骑为军锋，辄破走之。
现代文：于是尽发幽州兵，引而南向，跟从光武击破铜马、高湖、赤眉、青犊，又追尤来、大枪、五幡于元氏，耿弇常常率领精骑为先锋部队，将贼兵攻破驱走。
English: As a result, he dispatched all the Yuzhou soldiers and led them to the south, followed by Guangwu, who defeated the Bronze Horse, Gaohu, the Red Eyebrow, and the Blue Heron, and also pursued the Yu Lai, the Big Gun, and the Wuhan Yu Yuan. Geng Yao often led the elite cavalry as the vanguard force to break through and drive away the thieves.

古文：光武乘胜战顺水上，虏危急，殊死战。
现代文：光武乘胜战顺水上，贼危急，作拼死战。
English: Guangwu wins the battle on the water, the thief is in danger, and a fight to the death ensues.

古文：时，军士疲弊，遂大败奔还，壁范阳，数日乃振，贼亦退去，从追至容城、小广阳、安次，连战破之。
现代文：这时军士疲惫，于是大败奔回，筑壁垒坚守于范阳、小广阳、安次，连战都胜。
English: At this time, the sergeant was tired, so he ran back in defeat, built barriers and insisted on Fanyang, Xiao Guangyang, and Anji, and even won the battle.

古文：光武还蓟，复遣弇与吴汉、景丹、盖延、朱祐、邳彤、耿纯、刘植、岑彭、祭遵、坚镡、王霸、陈俊、马武十三将军，追贼至潞东，及平谷，再战，斩首万三千余级，遂穷追于右北平无终、土垠之间，至俊靡而还。
现代文：光武回蓟，再派遣耿弇与吴汉、景丹、盖延、朱、邳彤、耿纯、刘植、岑彭、祭遵、坚镡、王霸、陈俊、马武十三将军，追贼到潞东，到平谷，再战，斩首一万三千余级，于是穷追于右北平无终、土垠之间，到俊靡而还。
English: Guangwu returned to Lop Nur, then sent Geng Pi and 13 generals including Wu Han, Jing Dan, Gai Yan, Zhu, Zou, Geng Chun, Liu Zhi, Zi Peng, Sai Zun, Jian Qi, Wang Ba, Chen Jun, and Ma Wu to chase the thieves to Shandong, to Pinggu, to fight again, to behead more than 13,000 people, and then chase them endlessly to the right side of Lop Nur, between the mounds, to Junmai and return.

古文：贼散入辽西、辽东，或为乌桓、貊人所抄击，略尽。
现代文：贼散入辽西、辽东，或被乌桓、貊人所抄击，大多完蛋。
English: Thieves scattered to West Liao and East Liao, or were attacked by Wuhuan and Yao people, and most of them were killed.

古文：光武即位，拜弇为建威大将军。
现代文：光武即位，拜耿弇为建威大将军。
English: Guangwu ascended the throne, and Bai Gengkun became General Jianwei.

古文：与骠骑大将军景丹、强弩将军陈俊攻厌新贼于敖仓，皆破降之。
现代文：与骠骑大将军景丹、强弩将军陈俊攻厌新贼于敖仓，贼都被破归降。
English: Together with the cavalry general Jing Dan and the strong general Chen Jun, they attacked the new bandits in Kamakura. The bandits were all defeated and surrendered.

古文：建武二年，更封好畤侯，食好畤、美阳二县。
现代文：建武二年，改封耿弇为好畤侯，食好畤、美阳二县。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he changed the name of Gengxu to Huanhuo, and the two counties of Huanhuo and Meiyang.

古文：三年，延岑自武关出攻南阳，下数城。
现代文：三年，延岑自武关出攻南阳，攻下数城。
English: Three years later, Yan Xun attacked Nanyang from Wuguan and captured several cities.

古文：穰人杜弘率其众以从岑。
现代文：穰人杜弘率其众以从岑。
English: The eunuch, Du Hong, led the crowd to follow the eunuch.

古文：弇与岑等战于穰，大破之，斩首三千余级，生获其将士五千余人，得印绶三百。
现代文：耿弇与延岑等战于穰，大破延军，斩首三千余级，活捉其将士五千余人，得印绶三百。
English: Geng Xuan and Yan Xuan and others fought in Yunnan, defeated the Yan army, beheaded more than three thousand people, captured more than five thousand of their soldiers alive, and won three hundred seals.

古文：杜弘降，岑与数骑遁走东阳。
现代文：杜弘降，延岑与数骑遁逃东阳。
English: Du Hongyan, Yan Xuan and several cavalrymen fled to the east.

古文：弇从幸舂陵，因见自请北收上谷兵未发者，定彭宠于渔阳，取张丰于涿郡，还收富平、获索，东攻张步，以平齐地。
现代文：耿弇从光武到舂陵，面见光武自请北收上谷未发之兵，定彭宠于渔阳，取张丰于涿郡，还收富平、获索，东攻张步，以平齐地。
English: From Guangwu to Fuling, Geng Yao met Guangwu's self-invited northward collection of the unreleased soldiers in Shanggu, Ding Peng's favor in Yuyang, Zhang Feng's collection in Handan County, as well as the collection of Fuping and Ganso, and the eastward attack of Zhangpu to level the land.

古文：帝壮其意，乃许之。
现代文：帝壮其意气，就准许了。
English: When the emperor had regained his courage, he gave permission.

古文：四年，诏弇进攻渔阳。弇以父据上谷，本与彭宠同功，又兄弟无在京师者，自疑，不敢独进，上书求诣洛阳。
现代文：四年，诏耿弇进攻渔阳，耿弇以父亲据在上谷，本与彭宠功劳相同，又兄弟都不在京师，自起疑虑，不敢独进，上书请回洛阳。
English: In four years, Zhao Gengqi attacked Yuyang, Gengqi was based in Shanggu with his father, this was the same as Peng Cai's merit, and his brothers were not in Beijing, and they were hesitant to go alone, so they wrote to Luoyang.

古文：诏报曰： 将军出身举宗为国，所向陷敌，功效尤著，何嫌何疑，而欲求征？
现代文：帝以诏书回报说 ：将军一出身就举亲为国，所向克敌，功劳尤著，还避什么嫌疑，而要求征召呢？
English: The emperor replied with an imperial edict: "A general, as soon as he is born, raises his relatives as a nation, and he defeats the enemy, especially with merit. Why should he avoid suspicion and ask for conscription?"

古文：且与王常共屯涿郡，勉思方略。 况闻弇求征，亦不自安，遣舒弟国入侍。
现代文：暂且与王常共屯涿郡，再仔细考虑方略。 耿况听说耿弇求征，也自感不安，就派耿舒弟耿国到京入侍。
English: For the time being, he and Wang Chang jointly resettled in Yunnan County, and then carefully considered the strategy. When Geng heard that Geng Shu had requested to be conscripted, he felt uneasy and sent his younger brother, Geng Guo, to serve in the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：帝善之，进封况为隃糜侯。
现代文：帝以为很好，晋封耿况为阝俞麋侯。
English: The emperor thought it was very good, and Geng was promoted to the position of viceroy.

古文：乃命弇与建义大将军朱祐、汉忠将军王常等击望都、故安西山贼十余营，皆破之。
现代文：就令耿弇与建义大将军朱，汉忠将军王常等击望都，故安西山贼十余营，都攻破了。
English: He ordered Geng Xuan, Jianyi General Zhu, Han Zhong General Wang Chang and others to attack the capital, so more than ten Anxi mountain bandit battalions were defeated.

古文：时，征虏将军祭遵屯良乡，骁骑将军刘喜屯阳乡，以拒彭宠。
现代文：这时征虏将军祭遵屯兵良乡，骁骑将军刘喜屯兵阳乡，以拒彭宠。
English: At this time, the conscript general's festival was held in Zuntunheiliang Township, and the cavalry general Liu Xitunheiyang Township, in order to reject Pengcai.

古文：宠遣弟纯将匈奴二千余骑，宠自引兵数万，分为两道以击遵、喜。胡骑经军都，舒袭破其众，斩匈奴两王，宠乃退走。
现代文：彭宠派弟彭纯率领匈奴兵二千多骑兵，彭宠自己引兵数万，分兵两路以击祭遵刘喜，匈奴兵经过军都，耿舒攻破其众，斩匈奴两王，彭宠于是退走。
English: Peng Cun sent his brother Peng Chun to lead more than two thousand cavalrymen of the Hun soldiers, Peng Cun himself led tens of thousands of soldiers, and divided the soldiers in two directions to hit the festival Zun Liu Xi. The Hun soldiers passed through the capital, Geng Shu attacked the crowd, and killed the two Hun kings. Peng Cun then retreated.

古文：况复与舒攻宠，取军都。
现代文：耿况再与耿舒攻彭宠，取军都。
English: Geng then attacked Pengcheng with Geng Shu and captured the capital.

古文：五年，宠死，天子嘉况功，使光禄大夫持节迎况，赐甲第，奉朝请。
现代文：五年，彭宠死，天子嘉奖耿况的功劳，派遣光禄大夫扶迎耿况，赐以衣甲住室，奉朝请。
English: Five years later, when Peng Ji died, the Heavenly Son praised Geng Zong's merits, sent Guanglu Doctor to welcome Geng Zong, bestowed him with a suit of armor, and invited him to the imperial court.

古文：封舒为牟平侯。
现代文：封耿舒为牟平侯。
English: Geng Shu was given the title of Muping Hou.

古文：遣弇与吴汉击富平、获索贼于平原，大破之，降者四万余人。
现代文：遣耿弇与吴汉击富平、获索贼于平原，大胜，贼投降的达四万余人。
English: The envoys of Geng Xuan and Wu Han attacked Fuping and captured the bandits on the plain, achieving a great victory, with more than 40,000 bandits surrendering.

古文：因诏弇进讨张步。
现代文：因此诏令耿弇进讨张步。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered Geng Xingjin to protest.

古文：弇悉收集降卒，结部曲，置将吏，率骑都尉刘歆、太山太守陈俊引兵而东，从朝阳桥济河以度。
现代文：耿弇收集所有降卒，建立编制单位，设置将吏，率骑都尉刘歆、太山太守陈俊引兵向东，从桥阳桥济河以渡。
English: Geng Xuan gathered all the soldiers who had surrendered, established a unit, and set up officers. He led the troops eastward from Qiao Yang Qiao to the Jiehe River with Captain Liu Bei and the governor of Taishan, Chen Jun.

古文：张步闻之，乃使其大将军费邑军历下，又分兵屯祝阿，别于太山钟城列营数十以待弇。
现代文：张步听到消息，就派他的大将军费邑屯军历下，又分兵屯祝阿，另外又于太山钟城列营数十以待耿弇。
English: When Zhang Bu heard the news, he sent his great general Feiyi to march down to the camp, and sent another detachment of soldiers to the camp to congratulate him. In addition, he sent dozens of battalions to the camp in Zhongcheng, Taishan to wait for Geng Yao.

古文：弇度河先击祝阿，自旦攻城，日未中而拔之，故开围一角，令其众得奔归钟城。
现代文：耿弇渡河先击祝阿，自清晨攻城，不到中午就攻下来了，耿弇故意撤开一角的围兵，让其部众得以奔归钟城。
English: Geng Hui crossed the river to attack Zhu first. He attacked the city from the early morning and attacked it before noon. Geng Hui deliberately withdrew a corner of the besieging soldiers so that his men could rush back to Zhongcheng.

古文：钟城人闻祝阿已溃，大恐惧，遂空壁亡去。
现代文：钟城人听到祝阿已溃败，大恐惧，于是都全家逃走。
English: When the people of Zhongcheng heard that Zhu A had been defeated, they were terrified, so the whole family fled.

古文：费邑分遣弟敢守巨里。
现代文：费邑分别派遣弟费敢守巨里。
English: Fei Eup separately dispatched his younger brother Fei Dang to guard Jiu Li.

古文：弇进兵先胁巨里，使多伐树木，扬言以填塞坑堑。
现代文：耿弇进兵先威胁巨里，命令部下多砍伐树木，扬言要把坑坑洼洼填平。
English: Geng Jun, the first to enter the army, threatened Juri, ordered his subordinates to cut down more trees, and threatened to fill in the potholes.

古文：数日，有降者言邑闻弇欲攻巨里，谋来救之。弇乃严令军中趣修攻具，宣敕诸部，后三日当悉力攻巨里城。
现代文：数日，有投降的人说费邑听说耿弇要攻巨里，准备来救援，耿弇就严令军中立即修造攻城工具，传令各部，三天后全力攻巨里城。
English: A few days later, some people who had surrendered said that Feiyu had heard that Geng Xuan was going to attack Jiu Li and was preparing to come to the rescue. Geng Xuan strictly ordered the army to immediately build siege tools and ordered all departments to attack Jiu Li three days later.

古文：阴缓生口，令得亡归。
现代文：又故意放松对俘虏的看守，使他们得以亡归逃去。
English: He also deliberately loosened the guards on the captives, allowing them to escape.

古文：归者以弇期告邑，邑至日果自将精兵三万余人来救之。
现代文：归去的人以耿弇的进攻日期报告费邑，费邑到期果然率领精兵三万来救援。
English: The returnees reported to Feiyu with the date of Geng Yao's attack, and Feiyu led 30,000 elite soldiers to come to the rescue.

古文：弇喜，谓诸将曰： 吾所以修攻具者，欲诱致邑耳。
现代文：耿弇喜，对诸将说： 我之所以修攻具，就是为了诱费邑来救援，今费邑来了，正是我所希求的。 
English: Geng Yuxi said to the generals: The reason why I repaired the offensive equipment was to entice Feiyu to come to the rescue. Now Feiyu has come, which is exactly what I wanted.

古文：今来，适其所求也。 即分三千人守巨里，自引精兵上冈阪，乘高合战，大破之，临陈斩邑。既而收首级以示巨里城中，城中凶惧，费敢悉众亡归张步。
现代文：随即分三千人围守巨里，自率精兵上山岗高地，乘高合击，大破费邑军，临阵斩费邑。而以费邑首级晓示巨里城中，城中恐惧，费敢率领所有部下逃归张步。
English: Then, three thousand men immediately surrounded Joli, and led their own elite soldiers up the mountains and highlands, using high-altitude combat to break Fei Yu's army and cut off Fei Yu at the front. And Fei Yu, the first level, showed that Joli was in the city, the fear in the city, and dared to lead all his subordinates to flee back to Zhangpu.

古文：弇复收其积聚，纵兵击诸未下者，平四十余营，遂定济南。
现代文：耿弇再收其积聚，率兵攻击未下的营邑，平定四十余营，济南平定了。
English: Geng Hui regained his strength and led his troops to attack the remaining encampments, subduing more than forty of them, including Jinan.

古文：时，张步都剧，使其弟蓝将精兵二万守西安，诸郡太守合万余人守临淄，相去四十里。
现代文：这时张步定都于剧，派遣他弟弟张蓝率精兵二万守西安，诸郡太守合万余人守临淄，两地相距四十里。
English: At this time, Zhang Bu Dingdu sent his younger brother Zhang Lan to lead 20,000 soldiers to defend Xi'an, and the county governors and more than 10,000 people to defend Linyi. The two places are forty miles apart.

古文：弇进军画中，居二城之间。
现代文：耿弇进军中，处在二城的中间。
English: During Geng Xuan's advance, he was in the middle of the two cities.

古文：弇视西安城小而坚，且蓝兵又精，临淄名虽大而实易攻，乃敕诸校会，后五日攻西安。
现代文：耿弇看到西安城小但很坚固，而且张蓝的兵也精，临淄名气虽大而实际上易攻，于是命令诸将听令，后五日攻西安。
English: Geng Yao saw that Xi'an City was small but very strong, and that Zhang Lan's soldiers were also excellent. Although Linyi was famous, it was actually easy to attack, so he ordered the generals to listen to orders and attack Xi'an five days later.

古文：蓝闻之，晨夜儆守。
现代文：张蓝听到后，日夜警戒严守。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Lan kept a strict vigil day and night.

古文：至期夜半，弇敕诸将皆蓐食，会明至临淄城。
现代文：到了后四日夜半，耿弇命令诸将都天没亮就吃饱饭，天一亮就赶到临淄城下。
English: At half past midnight on the fourth day, Geng Yao ordered all the generals to have a full meal before dawn, and to rush to the outskirts of Linyi City as soon as it was light.

古文：护军荀梁等争之，以为宜速攻西安。
现代文：护军荀梁等争辩，以为应速攻西安。
English: Defenders such as Zou Liang argued that Xi'an should be attacked immediately.

古文：弇曰： 不然。
现代文：耿弇说 ：不然。
English: Geng Yao said: Not so.

古文：西安闻吾欲攻之，日夜为备；临淄出不意而至，必惊扰，吾攻之一日必拔。
现代文：西安听说我们要攻它，日夜作了准备；临淄出其不意而到，必定惊扰，我攻它一天就能拿下。
English: Xi'an heard that we were going to attack it, and made preparations day and night. Linyi, which came out of the blue, must have been taken by surprise. If I attack it, I can take it in one day.

古文：拔临淄即西安孤，张蓝与步隔绝，必复亡去，所谓击一而得二者也。
现代文：攻下临淄西安就孤立了，张蓝与张步隔绝，必定再逃亡而去，这就是击一而得二的良计。
English: After the capture of Linyi, Xi'an was isolated, and Zhang Lan was cut off from Zhang Bu. He was bound to flee again. This was a good plan to gain one thing and lose the other.

古文：若先攻西安，不卒下，顿兵坚城，死伤必多。纵能拔之，蓝引军还奔临淄，并兵合势，观人虚实，吾深入敌地，后无转输，旬日之间，不战而困。
现代文：若先攻西安，一时攻不下，屯兵在坚城之下，死伤必多，即使能攻下，张蓝引军还奔临淄，合并兵力，坐观虚实，我深入敌地，后面粮草供应不上，十日之间，不战而困了。
English: If we attack Xi'an first, we won't be able to capture it for a while. The garrison is under a fortified city, and there will be a lot of deaths and injuries. Even if we can capture it, Zhang Lan will lead the army to Linyi and combine forces. We will just watch and wait. If I go deep into the enemy's territory, I won't be able to supply grain and grass behind, and I will be stranded without fighting for ten days.

古文：诸君之言，未见其宜。 遂攻临淄，半日拔之，入据其城。
现代文：诸君的意见，不见得合。 于是攻临淄，半天就攻拔了，进据城内。
English: The opinions of the various lords did not coincide, so they attacked Linyi, and after half a day, they advanced into the city.

古文：张蓝闻之大惧，遂将其众亡归剧。
现代文：张蓝听到后大惧，就率部逃到剧去了。
English: Zhang Lan was very afraid after hearing this, so he and his entourage fled to the opera.

古文：弇乃令军中无得妄掠剧下，须张步至乃取之，以激怒步。
现代文：耿弇就命令军中不得妄自侵掠，到剧城下，必须等到张步到了才发起进攻，以激怒张步。
English: Geng Yao ordered the troops not to plunder themselves, and to wait until Zhang Bu arrived before launching an attack, in order to anger Zhang Bu.

古文：步闻大笑曰： 以尤来、大彤十余万众，吾皆即其营而破之。
现代文：张步听到后大笑说 ：以尤来、大彤十多万众，我都就其营而打败他。
English: After hearing Zhang Bu, he laughed loudly and said, "With Yu Lai and Daxu more than a hundred thousand people, I defeated him with his battalion."

古文：今大耿兵少于彼，又皆疲劳，何足惧乎！ 乃与三弟蓝、弘、寿及故大彤渠帅重异等兵号二十万，至临淄大城东，将攻弇。弇先出兵淄水上，与重异遇，突骑欲纵，弇恐挫其锋，令步不敢进，故示弱以盛其气，乃引归小城，陈兵于内。
现代文：今天耿弇兵比他们少，又都疲劳，有什么可怕呢！ 于是与三弟张蓝、张弘、张寿及过去大彤大帅重异等兵号称二十万，到临淄大城东，将攻耿弇，耿弇先出淄水上，与重异相遇，突击骑兵想出击，耿弇恐怕挫败了他们的锋芒，张步就不敢进攻了，就故意示弱以盛其气焰，就回兵小城，陈兵于城内。
English: So he and his three younger brothers, Zhang Lan, Zhang Hong, Zhang Shou, and the former grand marshal of Linyi, Shou Yi, and other soldiers, numbering two hundred thousand, went to the east of Linyi's big city to attack Geng Yao. Geng Yao went out on the water of Linyi first and met with Shou Yi. The assault cavalry wanted to attack. Geng Yao was afraid that he had thwarted their edge, and he did not dare to attack at Zhang's pace. He deliberately showed weakness by showing his pride. He returned to the small city, and Chen soldiers were in the city.

古文：步气盛，直攻弇营，与刘歆等合战，弇升王宫坏台望之，视歆等锋交，乃自引精兵以横突步陈于东城下，大破之。
现代文：张步气盛，直攻耿弇营，与刘歆等合战，耿弇登上王宫的坏台观看，看到歆等交锋，就自率精兵从侧面突击张步阵于东城下，大破张步。
English: Zhang Bu was full of energy and directly attacked Geng Xuan's camp and fought with Liu Xuan and others. Geng Xuan climbed onto the balcony of the royal palace to watch, and when he saw the battle between Geng Xuan and others, he led his elite soldiers to attack Zhang Bu's camp from the side under the East City, and broke Zhang Bu.

古文：是时，帝在鲁，闻弇为步所攻，自往救之，未至。
现代文：飞矢射中耿弇股部，耿弇第二天清晨又勒兵出战。这时帝在鲁，听说耿弇被张步所攻击，亲自前往援救，还没有到。
English: Geng Yao's unit was hit by flying arrows, and the next morning Geng Yao again sent troops to fight. At this time, the emperor was in Lu. He heard that Geng Yao was attacked by Zhang Bu, and went to rescue him in person, but did not arrive.

古文：陈俊谓弇曰： 剧虏兵盛，可且闭营休士，以须上来。 弇曰： 乘舆且到，臣子当击牛酾酒以待百官，反欲以贼虏遗君父邪？ 乃出兵大战，自旦及昏，复大破之，杀伤无数，城中沟堑皆满。
现代文：陈俊对耿弇说： 剧贼兵强盛，可暂时闭营休养士卒，以等待帝到来。 耿弇说： 天子将到，臣子应杀牛洒酒以等待百官的到来，反而还要以贼虏来麻烦君上吗？ 于是出兵大战，自清晨至黄昏，再次大破张步军，杀伤无数，城中沟壑都填满了尸体。
English: Chen Jun said to Geng Yao: The play thief soldiers are strong, you can temporarily close the camp to rest and recuperate the soldiers to wait for the arrival of the emperor. Geng Yao said: The heavenly son will arrive, the courtiers should kill cattle and sprinkle wine to wait for the arrival of the hundred officials, but do you want to trouble the prince with the thief captives? So the soldiers went to war, from early morning to dusk, and once again broke the foot soldiers, killing and wounding countless people, and the ravines in the city were filled with corpses.

古文：弇知步困将退，豫置左右翼为伏以待之。
现代文：耿弇知道张步兵困将退，预先设置左右两翼伏兵以待。
English: Knowing that Zhang's infantry would retreat, Geng Yao set up ambushes on the left and right wings in advance.

古文：人定时，步果引去，伏兵起纵击，追至钜昧水上，八九十里僵尸相属，收得辎重二千余两。
现代文：到深夜，张步果然引兵退去，两翼伏兵奋起纵击，追到钜昧水，八九十里死尸相连，收得辎重两千多辆。
English: In the middle of the night, Zhang Bu led the troops to retreat, and the two ambush soldiers rose up to attack, and chased them to the muddy water. The dead bodies were connected for eighty or ninety miles, and more than two thousand vehicles were collected.

古文：步还剧，兄弟各分兵散去。
现代文：张步回剧，兄弟各自分兵散去。
English: Zhang walked back to the play, and the brothers dispersed to their respective soldiers.

古文：后数日，车驾至临淄自劳军，群臣大会。
现代文：几天后，光武亲自到临淄劳军，群臣大会。
English: A few days later, Guangwu himself went to Linyi to attend the general assembly of the laborers and vassals.

古文：帝谓弇曰： 昔韩信破历下以开基，今将军攻祝阿以发迹，此皆齐之西界，功足相方。
现代文：帝对耿弇说 ：以前韩信破齐兵于历下以开基，今将军攻祝阿以发迹，这都是齐的西界，功劳足以相当。
English: The emperor said to Geng Yao, "In the past, Han Xin broke the Qi soldiers to lay the foundation for success in history, but now the general has broken the Qi soldiers to make a mark. This is all in the West, and the merits are quite comparable."

古文：而韩信袭击已降，将军独拔劲敌，其功乃难于信也。
现代文：而韩信袭击已降，将军独胜劲敌，其功劳比韩信更难能可贵了。
English: But Han Xin's attack has fallen, and the general has single-handedly defeated the strong enemy, and his merit is more valuable than Han Xin.

古文：又田横亨郦生，及田横降，高帝诏卫尉不听为仇。
现代文：又田横烹杀郦食其，后田横归降，高祖诏令郦食其的弟弟郦商不得报复。
English: Matada killed and ate him, Houda surrendered, and Gaozhu ordered his brother, the merchant, not to retaliate.

古文：张步前亦杀伏隆，若步来归命，吾当诏大司徒释其怨，又事尤相类也。
现代文：张步以前杀过伏隆，假使张步来归命，我也当诏令伏隆的父亲大司徒伏湛释其仇怨，这事就更相似了。
English: Zhang Bu had killed Fulong before, and if Zhang Bu came back to fulfill his duty, I should also order Fulong's father, the Grand Master Fu T'an, to release his grudge, which would be even more similar.

古文：将军前在南阳建此大策，常以为落落难合，有志者事竟成也！ 弇因复追步，步奔平寿，乃肉袒负斧锧于军门。
现代文：将军前在南阳提出讨伐张步的战略决策，以为疏阔难以实现，现在是有志者事竟成啊！ 耿弇因而再追张步，张步奔平寿，于是脱去上衣裸露肢体身负斧请罪于军门。
English: In the past, the general proposed a strategic decision to crack down on Zhangpu in Nanyang, thinking that it would be difficult to achieve expansion, but now it is possible for those who have the will! Therefore, Geng Yao chased Zhangpu again, and Zhangpu ran to Pingju, so he took off his shirt, bared his limbs and carried an axe to plead guilty to the military gate.

古文：弇传步诣行在所，而勒兵入据其城。
现代文：传令张步到行辕，而勒兵进据其城。
English: The messenger ordered Zhang to march to Xinglu, while Le marched into the city.

古文：树十二郡旗鼓，令步兵各以郡人诣旗下，众尚十余万，辎重七千余两，皆罢遣归乡里。弇复引兵至城阳，降五校余党，齐地悉平。振旅还京师。
现代文：树立所属的郡旗下，部众还有十多万人，辎重一千余辆，都罢遣回乡。耿弇再引兵至城阳，收降五校余党，齐地全部平定。振兵回京师。
English: There were more than one hundred thousand soldiers and more than one thousand wagons under the county banner. All of them were sent back to their hometowns. Geng Yao then led the army to Chengyang, defeated the remaining five parties, and all of them were defeated. The army returned to the Beijing division.

古文：六年，西拒隗嚣，屯兵于漆。
现代文：六年，西拒隗嚣，屯兵于漆。
English: In the sixth year, the West refused to be subdued, and the troops marched to Urushi.

古文：复以国弟广、举并为中郎将。
现代文：八年，从帝进攻陇。第二年，与中郎将来歙分兵平定安定、北地诸营堡，都攻克。
English: In the eighth year, he attacked Shandong from the emperor. In the second year, he and Zhong Lang subdued and stabilized the Shandong soldiers, and conquered the fortresses in the north.

古文：弇兄弟六人皆垂青紫，省侍医药，当代以为荣。
现代文：耿弇一生平定的郡共四十六个，攻下的城市共三百座，没有遭到过失败和挫折。
English: There are a total of 46 counties that Geng Qi has pacified in his lifetime, and a total of 300 cities that he has conquered. He has never suffered defeat or setback.

古文：及况卒，谥烈侯，少子霸袭况爵。
现代文：十二年，耿况抱病，光武帝几次亲临看望，等到耿况死，谥封烈侯。
English: In the twelfth year, Geng Jia fell ill, and Emperor Guangwu visited him several times in person. When Geng Jia died, he was enthroned as a martyr.

古文：十三年，增弇户邑，上大将军印绶，罢，以列侯奉朝请。
现代文：十三年，增加耿弇的食邑，上大将军印绶，免去大将军后，以列侯身份奉朝请。
English: In the thirteenth year, he increased Geng Yao's food and printed money for the general. After he was removed from the general, he became a feudal lord.

古文：每有四方异议，辄召入问筹策。
现代文：帝每遇四方有不同意见，经常召见耿弇顾问筹策。
English: Whenever the emperor encountered four parties with different opinions, he often summoned Geng Yao's adviser to make plans.

古文：年五十六，永平元年卒，谥为愍侯。
现代文：年五十六，永平元年卒。谥封为愍侯。
English: 56 years old, graduated from Yongping in the first year of the year.

古文：子忠嗣。
现代文：子忠嗣。
English: His son, Tadatsugu.

古文：忠以骑都尉击匈奴于天山，有功。
现代文：忠以骑都尉击匈奴于天山，有功。
English: The loyal cavalry captain defeated the Xiongnu in the Tianshan Mountains, which was a great achievement.

古文：忠卒，子冯嗣。
现代文：忠卒，子冯嗣。
English: A loyal pupil, the son of Feng Zhi.

古文：冯卒，子良嗣，一名无禁。
现代文：冯卒，子良嗣，一名无禁。
English: Feng Zhu, Zi Liang Zi, one person is allowed to join.

古文：延光中，尚安帝妹濮阳长公主，位至侍中。
现代文：延光中，尚安帝妹濮阳长公主，位至侍中。
English: In Yan Guang, Emperor Shang An's younger sister, the eldest princess of Shenyang, became a chambermaid.

古文：良卒，子协嗣。
现代文：良卒，子协嗣。
English: Good pupil, son and heir.

古文：隃麋侯霸卒，子文金嗣。
现代文：隃麋侯霸卒，子文金嗣。
English: He was the second son of a feudal lord, and the third son of Kinmune.

古文：文金卒，子喜嗣。
现代文：文金卒，子喜嗣。
English: Bunkin-zu, son of Yoshitsugu.

古文：喜卒，子显嗣，为羽林左监。
现代文：喜卒，子显嗣，为羽林左监。
English: Yoshitsugu's son, Shigenji, became the left overseer of Uebayashi.

古文：显卒，子援嗣。
现代文：显卒，子援嗣。
English: An illustrious pupil, a son and an heir.

古文：尚桓帝妹长社公主，为河东太守。
现代文：尚桓帝妹长社公主，为河东太守。
English: Emperor Shangkhan's younger sister, Princess Chosha, became the Empress Dowager of Hedong.

古文：后曹操诛耿氏，唯援孙弘存焉。
现代文：后曹操诛耿氏，唯援孙弘存焉。
English: After Cao Cao, only Sun Hong survived.

古文：牟平侯舒卒，子袭嗣。
现代文：牟平侯舒卒，子袭嗣。
English: Muping Hou Shou's pupil, son and heir.

古文：尚显宗女隆虑公主。
现代文：尚显宗女隆虑公主。
English: She is apparently the granddaughter of Princess Takanori.

古文：袭卒，子宝嗣。
现代文：袭卒，子宝嗣。
English: A pawn, a son, a heir.

古文：宝女弟为清河孝王妃。
现代文：宝女弟为清河孝王妃。
English: Her younger sister is Princess Kiyokawa Takao.

古文：及安帝立，尊孝王，母为孝德皇后，以妃为甘园大贵人。
现代文：及安帝立，尊孝王，母为孝德皇后，以妃为甘园大贵人。
English: And Andili, the king of filial piety, his mother was the empress of filial piety, and his wife was the great noblewoman of Gan Yuan.

古文：帝以宝元舅之重，使监羽林左骑，位至大将军。
现代文：帝以宝元舅之重，使监羽林左骑，位至大将军。
English: The emperor, with the weight of the treasure of the former uncle, made the overseer, Lin Zuo, rise to the rank of general.

古文：而附事内宠，与中常侍樊丰、帝乳母王圣等谮废皇太子为济阴王，及排陷太尉杨震，议者怨之。
现代文：而附事内宠，与中常侍樊丰、帝乳母王圣等谮废皇太子为济阴王，及排陷太尉杨震，议者怨之。
English: And incidentally, the pet of the house, the decadent crown prince, such as the middle-ranking attendant Yu Feng and the imperial wet nurse Wang Sheng, was the king of Jiyin, and Yang Zhen, the platoon captain, was the grievance of the discussants.

古文：宝弟子承袭公主爵为林虑侯，位至侍中。
现代文：宝弟子承袭公主爵为林虑侯，位至侍中。
English: The heir to the princess was Lin Qian Hou, who rose to the position of chamberlain.

古文：安帝崩，阎太后以宝等阿附嬖倖，共为不道，策免宝及承，皆贬爵为亭侯，遣就国。
现代文：安帝崩，阎太后以宝等阿附嬖倖，共为不道，策免宝及承，皆贬爵为亭侯，遣就国。
English: After the death of Emperor An, Empress Yan used treasures such as the Azukaku, which was a bad move, to get rid of treasures and inheritance. They were all demoted to the status of princes and sent to the country.

古文：宝于道自杀，国除。
现代文：宝于道自杀，国除。
English: Bao Yudao commits suicide and is expelled from the country.

古文：大贵人数为耿氏请，阳嘉三年，顺帝遂绍封宝子箕牟平侯，为侍中。
现代文：大贵人数为耿氏请，阳嘉三年，顺帝遂绍封宝子箕牟平侯，为侍中。
English: The largest number of nobles were Geng, Yang Jia for three years, Shun Emperor, Shao Feng, Bao Zi, and Muping Hou, who were chamberlains.

古文：以恒为阳亭侯，承为羽林中郎将。
现代文：以恒为阳亭侯，承为羽林中郎将。
English: With Heng as Yang Ting Hou and Zeng as Ulin Zhong Rong Zheng.

古文：其后贵人薨，大将军梁冀从承求贵人珍玩，不能得，冀怒，风有司奏夺其封。
现代文：其后贵人薨，大将军梁冀从承求贵人珍玩，不能得，冀怒，风有司奏夺其封。
English: After that, General Liang Jie asked the nobles to play a rare game, but they could not get it. He was angry, and the wind had a sitar to win his seal.

古文：承惶恐，遂亡匿于穰。
现代文：承惶恐，遂亡匿于穰。
English: Panic-stricken, he died in hiding.

古文：数年，冀推迹得之，乃并族其家十余人。
现代文：数年，冀推迹得之，乃并族其家十余人。
English: In the past few years, more than a dozen people from his family have received the award.

古文：论曰：淮阴延论项王，审料成势，则知高祖之庙胜矣。
现代文：史官评论道：韩信当着刘邦的面评论项羽，周密预料楚汉的形势，就知道高祖必胜了。
English: The historian commented: Han Xin commented on Xiang Yu in front of Liu Bang, and carefully anticipated the situation in Chu and Han, and knew that Gao Zu would win.

古文：耿弇决策河北，定计南阳，亦见光武之业成矣。
现代文：耿弇决策河北，定计南阳，也看到光武的帝业必成。
English: Geng Yao's decision-making in Hebei, and Nanyang's calculation, also saw that Guangwu's imperial career was bound to succeed.

古文：然弇自克拔全齐，而无复尺寸功。
现代文：然而自从耿弇攻拔全齐以后，就没有再立什么新功了。
English: However, since Geng Xuan's conquests were complete, there have been no new feats.

古文：夫岂不怀？
现代文：难道是不想再立新功？
English: Don't they want to make new achievements?

古文：将时之度数，不足以相容乎？
现代文：或者是当时的法度不容许他再立新功吗？
English: Or was it the law of the time that did not allow him to make new achievements?

古文：三世为将，道家所忌，而耿氏累叶以功名自终。将其用兵欲以杀止杀乎？
现代文：三世为将，道家以为是不吉祥而忌讳的，而耿氏却能世世代代以功名而自终其身，难道耿家的用兵是想以杀止杀吗？
English: As the third generation of generals, Taoists considered it unlucky and taboo, but the Geng family has been able to end its own life with the name of merit for generations. Is the Geng family's use of soldiers to kill?

古文：何其独能隆也！
现代文：为什么独能兴盛呢？
English: Why is it that only one can prosper?

