古文：吐蕃国有法王、人王。
现代文：吐蕃国有法王、人王。
English: In the state of Tubo, there is a law king and a human king.

古文：人王即领主主兵革，初有四，今并一。
现代文：人王主掌军事，最初有四个，今天合并为一个。
English: The king of men is in charge of the military. Originally there were four, but today they have been merged into one.

古文：法王喇嘛教首领主佛教，亦有二。人王以土地养法王，而不知有中国；法王代人王化人民，而遵奉朝廷。
现代文：法王主掌佛教，也有两个。人王用土地来养法王，却不知有中国；法王代替人王教化人民，但尊奉朝廷。
English: There are also two Dharma kings who are in charge of Buddhism. The human king uses land to raise the Dharma king, but does not know China; the Dharma king educates the people in place of the human king, but honors the court.

古文：其教，王与二法王更相为师弟。
现代文：他们的教规，大法王与二法王互相更替作为师弟。
English: According to their teachings, the Great Dharma King and the Second Dharma King take turns as teachers and disciples.

古文：大法王将没通 殁 ，死亡，即先语二法王以托生之地。
现代文：大法王将死时，就事先对二法王告知托生之地。
English: When the Great Dharma King was about to die, he told the two Dharma Kings in advance about the place where he would be born.

古文：二法王如其言往求之，必得所生，即抱奉归养为王，而传之道。
现代文：二法王按照他的话前去寻找，必定找到转生的人，马上抱回来奉养作为大法王并且传授给他教旨。
English: The two Dharma kings followed his words and went to look for the reincarnated person. They must have found him and immediately brought him back and raised him as a great Dharma king and taught him the teachings.

古文：其抱归时，虽年甚幼，而前生所遗事，如探环穴中，历历不爽。
现代文：他抱回来的时候，虽然年龄非常幼小，但前生的遗事，如伸手从环形洞穴中取出来一样，清清楚楚没有差错。
English: Although he was very young when he came back, the relics of his previous life, such as reaching out from the circular cave, were clearly not wrong.

古文：大与二，亦只互为渊源，而位则不更也此即所谓喇嘛教的 灵童 转世制度。
现代文：二法王死时，也是事先告知给大法王托生之地，而且前去寻找与抱回来传教，也是如此。他们托生的人家，各自不十分遥远隔绝，好似只借以作为萌生的幼芽，但结果却不变。
English: When the two Dharma kings died, they also informed the Great Dharma King in advance of the place where they were to be born, and they also went to find and bring back missionaries. The families they were to give birth to were not very far apart, as if they were only using them as young shoots, but the result was the same.

古文：庚戌年公元年，二法王曾至丽江，遂至鸡足。
现代文：大法王与二法王，也只是互为渊源，而地位则不变更。庚戌年，二法王曾到过丽江，进而到了鸡足山。
English: The Great Fa Wang and the Second Fa Wang are also only mutual sources, but their status remains unchanged. In the year of the Heian period, the Second Fa Wang once went to Lijiang, and then to the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：大宝法王于嘉靖间朝京师，参五台。
现代文：大宝法王在嘉靖年间朝见京师，参拜五台山。
English: During the Jiajing period, His Holiness the Great Treasure visited Beijing in the morning and worshipped Mount Wutai.

古文：丽江北至必烈界，几两月程。
现代文：丽江往北到必烈境内，将近两个月的路程。
English: Lijiang to the north to the territory of Bire, nearly two months' journey.

古文：又两月，西北至大宝法王。
现代文：又走两个月，往西北通到大宝法王住地。
English: It took another two months to travel northwest to the residence of the Dalai Lama.

