古文：明皇帝讳叡，字符仲，文帝太子也。
现代文：明皇帝名睿，字元仲，是文帝曹丕册封的太子。
English: Ming Emperor Ming Rui, also known as Yuan Zhong, was the crown prince of Emperor Wen.

古文：生而太祖爱之，常令在左右。
现代文：他小的时候太祖就很喜爱他，经常让他伴随在左右参与各种事务。
English: When he was a child, his great-grandfather loved him very much and often let him accompany him to participate in various affairs.

古文：年十五，封武德侯，黄初二年为齐公，三年为平原王。
现代文：十五岁时被封为武德侯，文帝黄初二年，被封为齐公，第二年又封为平原王。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was given the title of Wudehou. In the second year of Emperor Wen's reign, he was given the title of Qi Gong. The following year, he was given the title of King of the Plain.

古文：以其母诛，故未建为嗣。
现代文：但由于生母甄皇后被文帝赐死，所以未有被立为太子。
English: However, since his birth mother, Empress Zhen, was put to death by Emperor Wen, he was not made crown prince.

古文：七年夏五月，帝病笃，乃立为皇太子。
现代文：黄初七年五月十六日，文帝病情渐重，才被正式立为太子。
English: On May 16th, the 7th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen became seriously ill and was only officially appointed as the crown prince.

古文：丁巳，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：第二天文帝驾崩，睿才登上帝位。
English: The second astronomer emperor passed away, and Rui Cai ascended to the throne.

古文：尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。诸臣封爵各有差。
现代文：下诏大赦天下，尊封皇太后为太皇太后，文帝郭皇后为皇太后，朝中百官晋爵加俸各有差等。
English: The imperial edict was issued to grant amnesty to the whole world, and the Empress Dowager of the Great Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager of Emperor Wen, and the Empress Dowager of Empress Guo were all granted amnesty.

古文：癸未，追谥母甄夫人曰文昭皇后。
现代文：六月十四日，追谥生母甄夫人为文昭皇后。
English: On June 14th, Mrs. Zhen, the real mother of the twins, became the Empress of Wenzhao.

古文：壬辰，立皇弟蕤为阳平王。
现代文：二十三日，加封弟弟曹蕤为阳平王。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Pi, the younger brother of Cao Feng, became the Yangping King.

古文：八月，孙权攻江夏郡，太守文聘坚守。
现代文：这年八月，东吴孙权攻打江夏郡，江夏太守文聘坚决守卫城池，朝中商议想要发兵救援。
English: In August of that year, Sun Quan of the Eastern Wu Dynasty attacked Jiangxia County, and the Empress Dowager of Jiangxia, Empress Dowager Wenbei, resolutely guarded the city. The two Koreas discussed sending troops to rescue the city.

古文：朝议欲发兵救之，帝曰： 权习水战，所以敢下船陆攻者，几掩不备也。
现代文：明帝说： 孙权的军队擅长水战，这次吴军之所以敢于下船转到陆上攻城，是借文聘没有防备，想要突然袭击。
English: Emperor Ming said: Sun Quan's army was good at naval warfare. The reason why the Wu army dared to disembark and attack the city on land this time was because they were unprepared and wanted to make a surprise attack.

古文：今已与聘相持，夫攻守势倍，终不敢久也。 
现代文：现在文聘已和他们两军对垒，他们并不占有明显的优势，所以是不会坚持长久的。 
English: Now that Wenbei has confronted their two armies, they do not have a clear advantage, so they will not persist for a long time.

古文：先时遣治书侍御史荀禹慰劳边方，禹到，于江夏发所经县兵及所从步骑千人乘山举火，权退走。
现代文：之前，明帝曾派治书侍御史荀禹慰劳戍边将士，荀禹到江夏城外，指挥那些在去江夏路上招募的县兵以及自己的几千随从骑兵借山势举火向吴兵发起攻击，孙权败退离开。
English: Previously, Emperor Ming had sent his aide-de-camp, Sun Quan, to comfort the laboring soldiers on the border. Sun Quan went to the outskirts of Jiangxia to command the county soldiers who had been recruited on the road to Jiangxia, as well as several thousand of his own cavalry, who used their mountain strength to launch an attack on the Wu soldiers. Sun Quan was defeated and retreated.

古文：辛巳，立皇子冏为清河王。
现代文：十二月，明帝册封皇子曹冏为清河王。
English: In December, Emperor Ming proclaimed Prince Cao Pi as the King of Qinghe.

古文：吴将诸葛瑾、张霸等寇襄阳，抚军大将军司马宣王讨破之，斩霸，征东大将军曹休又破其别将于寻阳。
现代文：东吴将军诸葛瑾、张霸等进犯襄阳。抚军大将军司马懿指挥魏军讨伐攻破吴军，斩杀了张霸。征东大将军曹休也在寻阳击败了其他东吴军队。
English: Eastern Wu generals Zhuge Liang and Zhang Ba attacked Xiangyang. The general of the Fuzhou army, Sima Qian, commanded the Wei army to defeat the Wu army and killed Zhang Ba. The general of the Eastern Wu army, Cao Xiu, also defeated other Eastern Wu armies in Xiangyang.

古文：论功行赏各有差。
现代文：朝廷论功行赏，各有等级差别。
English: According to the Imperial Court, there are different ranks for the award of merit.

古文：冬十月，清河王冏薨。
现代文：这年十月，清河王曹冏去世。
English: In October of that year, Cao Pi, King of Qinghe, passed away.

古文：十二月，以太尉钟繇为太傅，征东大将军曹休为大司马，中军大将军曹真为大将军，司徒华歆为太尉，司空王朗为司徒，镇军大将军陈髃为司空，抚军大将军司马宣王为骠骑大将军。
现代文：十二月，晋升太尉钟繇为太傅，征东大将军曹休担任大司马，中军大将军曹真为大将军，司徒华歆为太尉，司空王朗为司徒，镇军大将军陈群为司空，抚军大将军司马懿为骠骑大将军。
English: In December, promoted to the rank of Taifu, the East Conquest General Cao Xiu was promoted to the rank of Taifu, the Central Army General Cao Zhen was promoted to the rank of Taifu, the Chinese Army General Cao Huayu was promoted to the rank of Taifu, the Jurchen Army General Chen Qun was promoted to the rank of Sifu, and the Fuzhou Army General Sima Qun was promoted to the rank of Xie Jie.

古文：太和元年春正月，郊祀武皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：太和元年正月，明帝去郊外祭天，以太祖武皇帝配享；又率宗族在明堂奉祀天帝，以文皇帝配享。
English: In the first month of the 1st year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming went to the suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven, which was shared by Emperor Wu. He also led his clan to worship the Heavenly Emperor in the Ming Hall, which was shared by Emperor Wen.

古文：分江夏南部，置江夏南部都尉。
现代文：又将与吴国毗邻的江夏郡南部地区分出，另设置江夏南部都尉。
English: It will also be separated from the southern area of Jiangxia County, which is adjacent to Wuzhong, and the southern capital of Jiangxia will be set up.

古文：西平曲英反，杀临羌令、西都长，遣将军郝昭、鹿盘讨斩之。
现代文：这时西平郡麴英造反，杀害了临羌令、西都长等地方官员，于是派遣将军郝邵、鹿磐率兵讨伐，斩杀了麴英。
English: At this time, Zou Ying of Xiping County rebelled and killed local officials such as the Linyi commander and the head of the western capital, and then dispatched generals Zou Shao and Lu Ban to lead soldiers to fight and kill Zou Ying.

古文：二月辛未，帝耕于籍田。
现代文：二月五日，明帝到自己名下的籍田中耕作劳动，以示重视农业。
English: On February 5th, Ming Di went to work in his home field to show the importance of agriculture.

古文：辛巳，立文昭皇后寝庙于邺。
现代文：十五日，诏令在邺城为文昭皇后修建寝庙。
English: On the 15th, the imperial edict ordered the construction of a sleeping temple for Empress Wenzhao in Lucheng.

古文：丁亥，朝日于东郊。
现代文：二十一日，明帝清早到东郊举行祭祀太阳仪式。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Ming came to the eastern suburbs early in the morning to hold a sun worship ceremony.

古文：夏四月乙亥，行五铢钱。
现代文：四月十日，发行五铢钱。
English: On April 10th, 50 yuan coins were issued.

古文：甲申，初营宗庙。
现代文：十九日，开始动工修建宗庙。
English: On the 19th, the construction of the ancestral temple began.

古文：秋八月，夕月于西郊。
现代文：八月，明帝又在西郊祭祀月亮。
English: In August, Emperor Ming again held a moon festival in the western suburbs.

古文：冬十月丙寅，治兵于东郊。
现代文：十月四日，在东郊操练军队。
English: On October 4th, the army drilled in the eastern suburbs.

古文：焉耆王遣子入侍。
现代文：西域焉耆国国王特送其儿子入宫侍奉。
English: The king of Western Yan'an specially sent his son to enter the palace to serve.

古文：十一月，立皇后毛氏。赐天下男子爵人二级，□寡孤独不能自存者赐谷。
现代文：十一月，册封毛氏为皇后，进封天下男爵子爵各进二级，孤寡老弱生活无依靠得人，由官府赐给谷物。
English: In November, the Mao clan was crowned empress, and every baron and viscount in the world was promoted to the second level. The lonely, the old and the weak had no one to rely on, and the government gave them grain.

古文：十二月，封后父毛嘉为列侯。
现代文：十二月，封毛皇后的父亲毛嘉为列侯。
English: In December, the Empress Dowager's father, Mao Jia, became a vassal lord.

古文：新城太守孟达反，诏骠骑将军司马宣王讨之。
现代文：新城太守孟达反叛，诏令骠骑将军司马懿讨伐他。
English: Mengda, the governor of Xincheng, rebelled and ordered the cavalry general Sima Yi to fight him.

古文：二年春正月，宣王攻破新城，斩达，传其首。
现代文：太和二年正月，司马懿率兵攻破新城，斩杀了孟达，将他的首级送往洛阳。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taihe era, Sima Ye led an army to break through the new city, killed Meng Da, and sent his head to Luoyang.

古文：分新城之上庸、武陵、巫县为上庸郡，锡县为锡郡。
现代文：朝廷划出原属新城的上庸、武陵、巫县，设置上庸郡，将锡县改为锡郡。
English: The imperial court marked out Shangyong, Wuling and Wuxian, which originally belonged to Xincheng, and set up Shangyong County, and changed Xixian County to Sorong County.

古文：蜀大将诸葛亮寇边，天水、南安、安定三郡吏民叛应亮。
现代文：蜀国丞相诸葛亮率部侵犯边境，天水、南安、安定三郡的官吏和百姓皆叛魏归顺诸葛亮。
English: Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, led his troops to invade the border, and the officials and people of Tianshui, Nan'an, and Anding counties all rebelled against Wei and surrendered to Zhuge Liang.

古文：遣大将军曹真都督关右，并进兵。右将军张合击亮于街亭，大破之。亮败走，三郡平。
现代文：明帝派大将军曹真督师出兵关右，又派右将军张合领兵在街亭攻打诸葛亮，蜀军失利退回，天水、南安、安定三郡得以平定。
English: Emperor Ming sent the general Cao Zhen to lead troops to Guanzhong, and sent the general Zhang He to lead troops to attack Zhuge Liang in Jie Ting. The Shu army retreated in defeat, and the three counties of Tianshui, Nan'an, and Anding were pacified.

古文：丁未，行幸长安。夏四月丁酉，还洛阳宫。赦系囚非殊死以下。
现代文：三月十八日，明帝驾临长安，四月返回洛阳，诏令赦免除殊死刑以外的所有囚犯。
English: On March 18th, Emperor Ming arrived in Chang'an and returned to Luoyang in April. He issued a decree to pardon and exempt all prisoners except those sentenced to death.

古文：乙巳，论讨亮功，封爵增邑各有差。五月，大旱。
现代文：十六日评定打败诸葛亮的战功，依功绩大小对将士们封爵增邑。五月，大旱。
English: On the 16th, the war exploits of the defeated Zhuge Liang were evaluated, and the knighthoods were awarded to the soldiers according to their merits. In May, the drought began.

古文：六月，诏曰： 尊儒贵学，王教之本也。
现代文：六月，明帝下诏说： 尊儒家学说，提倡学术研讨，是国家实行王教的根本。
English: In June, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict, saying, "Respecting Confucianism and promoting academic research are fundamental to the country's practice of Wangjiao."

古文：自顷儒官或非其人，将何以宣明圣道？
现代文：但近来有些儒官很不称职，将要靠什么来传播圣道呢？
English: But recently, some Confucian officials are very incompetent. What will they rely on to spread the gospel?

古文：秋九月，曹休率诸军至皖，与吴将陆议战于石亭，败绩。
现代文：惟有通过严格考核选拔上来的博学之士，才可以担任侍中、常侍的职位。
English: Only the most erudite people, who have been selected through rigorous assessment, can hold the positions of chamberlains and regular attendants.

古文：乙酉，立皇子穆为繁阳王。
现代文：现在诏告各郡县：今后向朝廷举荐的良才必以熟知儒家经典为先决条件。 
English: Now they are telling all counties: In the future, good talents recommended to the imperial court must be familiar with the Confucian classics as a prerequisite.

古文：庚子，大司马曹休薨。
现代文：这年九月，大司马曹休领兵到皖地，与东吴大将陆逊在石亭开战，魏军战败撤退。
English: In September of that year, Major General Ma Cao Xiu led the troops to Shantou, and fought with Dongwu General Lu Xun in Shiting. The Wei army was defeated and retreated.

古文：冬十月，诏公卿近臣举良将各一人。十一月，司徒王朗薨。
现代文：二十九日，明帝下令让朝中公卿权臣都举荐一名良将。十一月，司徒王朗病逝。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Ming ordered that all the court nobles and powerful ministers of the dynasty should recommend a good general. In November, King Sitoro died of illness.

古文：十二月，诸葛亮围陈仓，曹真遣将军费曜等拒之。
现代文：十二月，诸葛亮率蜀军包围陈仓。大将军曹真遣将军费曜等人带兵拦截。
English: In December, Zhuge Liang led the Shu army to encircle Chencang. General Cao Zhen sent General Feiyou and other soldiers to intercept.

古文：辽东太守公孙恭兄子渊，劫夺恭位，遂以渊领辽东太守。
现代文：辽东太守公孙恭哥哥的儿子公孙渊谋夺了叔叔的官位，为稳定后方，朝廷任命公孙渊为辽东太守。
English: Gongsun Yuan, the son of the Liaodong governor Gongsun Qiong's elder brother, plotted to usurp his uncle's official position. In order to stabilize the rear, the imperial court appointed Gongsun Yuan as the governor of Liaodong.

古文：三年夏四月，元城王礼薨。
现代文：太和三年四月，元城王曹礼病死。
English: In April of the third year of the Taihe era, the former king of the city, Cao Li, died of illness.

古文：六月癸卯，繁阳王穆薨。
现代文：六月二十一日，繁阳王曹穆死。
English: On June 21st, the Sun King Cao Mu passed away.

古文：戊申，追尊高祖大长秋曰高皇帝，夫人吴氏曰高皇后。
现代文：二十六日，明帝追尊在东汉桓帝时当过大长秋的高祖曹腾为高皇帝，夫人吴氏为高皇后。
English: On the 26th, the Ming Emperor posthumously made Cao Teng, Gao's great-great-great-grandfather, Emperor Gao, and his wife, the Empress Wu, Empress of Gao.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 礼，王后无嗣，择建支子以继大宗，则当纂正统而奉公义，何得复顾私亲哉！
现代文：这年七月，明帝下诏： 依照礼法，如果皇后没有子嗣，可在近亲旁支中选择贤德的人以继承大统。但像这种本非正宗而嗣大宗者理应奉公义而行，怎能借皇威一再加封自己的家人和亲戚呢？
English: In July of that year, Emperor Ming issued the following edict: According to the etiquette, if the empress has no children, she may choose a virtuous person from among her close relatives to inherit the throne. However, such a person, who is not a legitimate heir, should act justly. How can he repeatedly seal his family and relatives with the imperial authority?

古文：汉宣继昭帝后，加悼考以皇号；哀帝以外藩援立，而董宏等称引亡秦，惑误时朝，既尊恭皇，立庙京都，又宠藩妾，使比长信，□昭穆于前殿，并四位于东宫，僭差无度，人神弗佑，而非罪师丹忠正之谏，用致丁、傅焚如之祸。
现代文：汉时宣帝以旁支承嗣昭帝，给自己死去的父亲追赠皇号；哀帝也是从诸侯王的子孙中选立的，而董宏等人借前秦的先例为他加封亲属提供依据，扰乱了当时汉朝的礼法，已经尊奉他的父亲为恭皇，又京都立庙，甚至还加封他父亲的后妃，分别尊奉为皇太后，享受先帝时皇太后的待遇。于是朝廷中出现了父子在前殿同时称皇、四位皇太后并立后宫的怪事。这样的僭越违背礼法，无论臣民还是神灵都不保佑他们。朝臣师丹忠心谏言反而获罪，导制了丁、傅受焚刑这样的灾祸。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xuan supported the heir Emperor Zhao and posthumously bestowed the imperial title on his dead father; Emperor Ming was also selected from the descendants of princes, and Dong Hong and others used the precedent of the former Qin Dynasty to provide a basis for him to add relatives, disrupting the etiquette of the Han Dynasty at that time. He had already honored his father as Emperor Gong, built a temple in Kyoto, and even added his father's concubine, respectively honored as Empress Dowager, enjoying the treatment of the Empress Dowager of the previous emperor. Therefore, a strange thing occurred in the imperial court in which the father and son simultaneously proclaimed the emperor in

古文：自是之后，相踵行之。
现代文：从这以后，类似出身的帝王都仿效这样的做法。
English: Since then, it has been implemented in parallel.

古文：昔鲁文逆祀，罪由夏父；宋国非度，讥在华元。
现代文：当年鲁文公颠倒祭祀秩序，罪在夏父；宋国君主越礼厚葬，时人讥刺华元无礼。
English: At that time, Lu Wen Gong reversed the order of the ritual, and the crime was committed by Xia father; the monarch of the Song Dynasty was buried with great ceremony, and people ridiculed Hua Yuan for his rudeness.

古文：其令公卿有司，深以前世行事为戒。
现代文：我如今特告知公卿百官，一定要以前朝往事为戒。
English: I am now specifically telling the nobles and officials that they must beware of the past.

古文：后嗣万一有由诸侯入奉大统，则当明为人后之义；敢为佞邪导谀时君，妄建非正之号以干正统，谓考为皇，称妣为后，则股肱大臣，诛之无赦。
现代文：今后如果出现由曹姓诸侯王承袭皇位的情况，务必使他明白是作为先帝后人继位的大义。如果有人胆敢用歪门邪道引诱和阿谀当朝君主，随意加封皇号来扰乱皇亲正统，奉新君的父亲为皇，母亲为后，那么朝廷的股肱大臣就诛杀他不应赦免。
English: In the future, if there is a situation in which a prince with the surname Cao succeeds to the throne, it must be made clear to him that it is a great justice to succeed to the throne as a former emperor. If someone dares to use crooked methods to lure and entrap the monarch, add the imperial title at will to disrupt the orthodoxy of the imperial family, and honor the new prince's father as the emperor and his mother as the empress, then the imperial minister should not pardon him.

古文：其书之金策，藏之宗庙，着于令典。 
现代文：此诏令当用金册记录下来，藏在宗庙之中，并写进国家典章法令之中。 
English: This edict should be recorded in a golden book, hidden in the ancestral temple, and written into the national ordinance.

古文：冬十月，改平望观曰听讼观。
现代文：十月，把平望观改名为听讼观。
English: In October, it changed its name from Pingwangwang to Heungseongwang.

古文：帝常言 狱者，天下之性命也 ，每断大狱，常幸观临听之。
现代文：明帝常说： 审理公案，关系天下人的性命，不可不明察公断。 因此，每逢审断重大案件，他常亲自前往听讼观审。
English: Emperor Ming often said, "When a public case is being tried, the lives of the people of the world are at stake, and it is impossible not to observe the court's decision." Therefore, whenever a major case was adjudicated, he often went to the hearing to observe the trial in person.

古文：初，洛阳宗庙未成，神主在邺庙。
现代文：当初，洛阳宗庙尚未建成，先帝们的神位都安放在邺城宗庙。
English: At the beginning, the Luoyang ancestral temple had not yet been built, and the ancestors of the emperors were all enshrined in the Ancheng ancestral temple.

古文：十一月，庙始成，使太常韩暨持节迎高皇帝、太皇帝、武帝、文帝神主于邺，十二月己丑至，奉安神主于庙。
现代文：十一月，宗庙才建成，特派朝廷礼官太常韩暨持节到邺城迎高皇帝、太皇帝、武帝、文帝的神位。十二月十日，尊奉各位先帝神位进入洛阳宗庙。
English: In November, when the ancestral temple was just completed, the imperial court etiquette official Taizhang Han and Ji Jie were sent to Lucheng to welcome Emperor Gao, Emperor Taizhang, Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wen to the divine throne. On December 10, they entered the Luoyang ancestral temple to pay their respects to the divine throne of the past emperors.

古文：癸卯，大月氏王波调遣使奉献，以调为亲魏大月氏王。
现代文：二十四日，大月氏王波调派使者来朝拜进贡，明帝封波调为大月氏王。
English: On the 24th, King Bo of the Otsuki clan dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor, and Emperor Ming designated Bo as King of the Otsuki clan.

古文：四年春二月壬午，诏曰： 之质文，随教而变。
现代文：太和四年二月四日，明帝诏令说： 世上朴实有用的文章，都是随着王教相应改变的。
English: On February 4th of the 4th year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming decreed: All the simple and useful articles in the world have changed accordingly with the rise of Wangjiao.

古文：兵乱以来，经学废绝，后生进趣，不由典谟。岂训导未洽，将进用者不以德显乎？
现代文：自汉末战乱以来，儒家经典衰绝，年轻人的兴趣和追求，也不放在经典的学习和研究上，难道不是官府训导不合适，在官员的选拔任用上不重德行造成的吗？
English: Since the war at the end of the Han Dynasty, the Confucian classics have waned, and young people's interests and pursuits are not placed on the study and research of the classics. Is it not the result of the government's inappropriate training and guidance, and the lack of emphasis on virtue in the selection and appointment of officials?

古文：其郎吏学通一经，才任牧民，博士课试，擢其高第者，亟用；其浮华不务道本者，皆罢退之 戊子，诏太傅三公：以文帝典论刻石，立于庙门之外。
现代文：官吏们只有真正学通一部经典，其才识方可胜任管理百姓的能力。对博学高才者要严格考核，选拔真正有才能的人，立即重用，而对那些浮夸不重视立身行道的人，都罢官退职。 十日，明帝又传令太傅三公，将文帝所著《典论》一书刻在石碑上，立在宗庙门外。
English: On the 10th day, Emperor Ming ordered Taifusangong to engrave the book "On Classic" by Emperor Wen on a stone tablet and place it outside the gate of the ancestral temple.

古文：癸巳，以大将军曹真为大司马，骠骑将军司马宣王为大将军，辽东太守公孙渊为车骑将军。
现代文：十五日，任命大将军曹真为大司马，骠骑将军司马懿为大将军，辽东太守公孙渊为车骑将军。
English: On the 15th, the general Cao Zhen was appointed as the grand steed, the cavalry general Sima Yu as the grand general, and the Liaodong governor Sun Yuan as the chariot and cavalry general.

古文：夏四月，太傅钟繇薨。
现代文：四月，太傅钟繇病死。
English: In April, Taifu Zhongyao died of illness.

古文：六月戊子，太皇太后崩。
现代文：六月十一日，太皇太后驾崩。
English: On June 11, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：丙申，省上庸郡。
现代文：十九日，到上庸郡巡查。
English: On the 19th, it went to Shangyong County for inspection.

古文：秋七月，武宣卞后祔葬于高陵。
现代文：七月，将武宣卞后与武帝合葬于高陵。
English: In July, Emperor Wu and Empress Wu were buried together in the Mausoleum of Emperor Gao.

古文：诏大司马曹真、大将军司马宣王伐蜀。
现代文：接着，传令让大司马曹真、大将军司马懿率军攻打蜀地。
English: Next, the order was sent to Major-General Ma Cao Zhen and Major-General Sima Yao to lead the army to attack Shu.

古文：八月辛巳，行东巡，遣使者以特牛祠中岳。
现代文：八月五日，明帝东巡，派遣使者以一头公牛的特礼祭祀中岳山神。
English: On August 5th, Emperor Ming, on his eastern tour, sent an envoy to offer a special sacrifice of a bull to the god of Mt.Nakadake.

古文：乙未，幸许昌宫。
现代文：十九日到达许昌宫。
English: On the 19th, they arrived at Xu Chang Palace.

古文：九月，大雨，伊、洛、河、汉水溢，诏真等班师。
现代文：九月，连降大雨，伊水、洛水、黄河、汉水等洪水泛滥，乃诏令曹真、司马懿等人班师回朝。
English: In September, continuous heavy rain, flooding of the Yishui, Luoshui, Yellow River, Han River, etc. caused Cao Zhen, Sima Yao and other team leaders to return to the North.

古文：冬十月乙卯，行还洛阳宫。
现代文：十月十一日，明帝一行返回洛阳宫。
English: On October 11, Emperor Ming and his entourage returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：庚申，令： 罪非殊死听赎各有差。 十一月，太白犯岁星。
现代文：十六日，明帝传令各地：所犯的最不是死罪的囚犯，允许家人按罪过大小赎回。十一月，太白犯岁星。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Ming issued an order to all regions: prisoners who had committed crimes that were not capital crimes were allowed to be redeemed by their families according to the severity of their crimes. In November, the Taibai Criminal New Year's Star.

古文：十二月辛未，改葬文昭甄后于朝阳陵。
现代文：十二月，将文昭甄皇后改葬到朝阳陵。
English: In December, Empress Wen Zhaozhen was reburied in the Mausoleum of the Rising Sun.

古文：丙寅，诏公卿举贤良。
现代文：二十三日，诏令公卿们为朝廷举荐贤良之人。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict ordered the court nobles to recommend a virtuous person to the imperial court.

古文：五年春正月，帝耕于籍田。
现代文：太和五年正月，明帝亲往属他名下的籍田中从事农耕。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming personally went to his fiefdom to engage in farming.

古文：三月，大司马曹真薨。
现代文：三月，大司马曹真病死。
English: In March, Senior Master Sergeant Ma Cao Zhen died of illness.

古文：诸葛亮寇天水，诏大将军司马宣王拒之。
现代文：诸葛亮率蜀军进犯天水一带，明帝诏令大将军司马懿阻击。
English: Zhuge Liang led the Shu army to invade the Tianshui area, and Emperor Ming ordered General Sima Qian to resist.

古文：自去冬十月至此月不雨，辛巳，大雩。
现代文：自去年十月以来，一直都未下雨。九月，明帝率朝臣举行盛大的祭祀求雨仪式。
English: It hasn't rained since last October. In September, Emperor Ming and his courtiers held a grand ritual to pray for rain.

古文：夏四月，鲜卑附义王轲比能率其种人及丁零大人儿禅诣幽州贡名马。复置护匈奴中郎将。
现代文：四月，北方鲜卑附义王轲比能率族人及丁零大人儿禅到幽州进贡名马，又重设护匈奴中郎将。
English: In April, the Northern Xianbei Xianbei with the help of Yi Wangbi were able to lead the tribesmen and the adults of Dingzi to Yuzhou to pay tribute to the famous horse, and re-established the protection of the Xiongnu.

古文：秋七月丙子，以亮退走，封爵增位各有差。
现代文：七月六日，因为诸葛亮军队退回，朝廷对抵抗蜀军有功者分别封爵晋位加以褒奖。
English: On July 6, as Zhuge Liang's army retreated, the imperial court rewarded those who had distinguished themselves in resisting the Shu army with knighthoods and promotions.

古文：乙酉，皇子殷生，大赦。
现代文：十五日，皇后生皇子曹殷，传令大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, the Empress's son, Prince Cao Yin, was proclaimed emperor.

古文：八月，诏曰： 古者诸侯朝聘，所以敦睦亲亲协和万国也。
现代文：八月，明帝诏令说： 古代诸侯们交往密切多样，所以大家能关系比较亲近，各国之间也能和谐相处。
English: In August, Emperor Ming decreed: The ancient princes had close and diverse interactions, so we can have a closer relationship, and countries can live in harmony with each other.

古文：先帝着令，不欲使诸王在京都者，谓幼主在位，母后摄政，防微以渐，关诸盛衰也。
现代文：先帝曾立下法令，不让分到封地的诸王们留在京都，说幼主在位，母后掌握朝政，为了防止诸侯王渐渐生出篡位的野心和举动，这是关系到国家安危盛衰的大事。
English: The former emperor had issued a decree not to allow the kings assigned to the fiefdoms to stay in Kyoto, saying that the young lord was on the throne and the mother-in-law controlled the government. In order to prevent the ambitions and actions of the princes from gradually usurping the throne, this was an important matter related to the safety and prosperity of the country.

古文：朕惟不见诸王十有二载，悠悠之怀，能不兴思！
现代文：由于这个原因，我已有十二年没见到各位诸侯王了。手足情深，怎能不让我格外思念！
English: For this reason, I have not seen you princes for twelve years. Brothers and sisters are very affectionate, how can I not miss you!

古文：其令诸王及宗室公侯各将适子一人朝。
现代文：所以现在特地让各位诸侯及宗室贵族各将其嫡子一人送到都城来见我。
English: Therefore, I now specially ask all of you lords and aristocrats to each send one of your legitimate children to the capital to see me.

古文：后有少主、母后在宫者，自如先帝令，申明着于令。 
现代文：以后有少主、母后在宫中者，则仍按先帝的法令办。
English: In the future, if there is a young lord or queen mother in the palace, it will still be handled according to the former emperor's decree.

古文：冬十一月乙酉，月犯轩辕大星。
现代文：将这一规定明白告知天下并将它著入令典。 这年十一月十七日，月犯轩辕大星。
English: On the 17th of November of that year, the moon-criminal Xuan Xuan became a great star.

古文：戊戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：此月的最后一天，有日蚀发生。
English: In autumn and September, a comet appeared in the northwest sky. On September 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十二月甲辰，月犯镇星。
现代文：十二月六日，月亮再犯镇星。
English: The first hour of December, the month of Saturn.

古文：戊午，太尉华歆薨。
现代文：二十日，太尉华歆病死。
English: On the 20th, Lieutenant Hua Xi died of illness.

古文：六年春二月，诏曰： 古之帝王，封建诸侯，所以藩屏王室也。诗不云乎， 怀德维宁，宗子维城 。
现代文：太和六年二月，明帝诏令说： 古代的帝王们分封自己的兄弟亲族为四方诸侯，故而他们能齐心协力卫护王室。诗经中不也说到， 怀德维宁，宗子维城 。
English: In February of the 6th year of the Taihe, Emperor Ming decreed: The ancient emperors appointed their brothers and relatives as princes of the four directions, so that they could work together to protect the royal family.

古文：秦、汉继周，或强或弱，俱失厥中。
现代文：秦汉两朝继周朝之后，无论是强盛还是衰微，都符合中正之道。
English: Both the Qin and Han dynasties, following the Zhou dynasty, whether they were strong or weak, were in line with the Middle Way.

古文：大魏创业，诸王开国，随时之宜，未有定制，非所以永为后法也。
现代文：想我魏王朝创业之初，全是靠诸王们齐心协力平定天下。当时的一些分封之事都是依据当时实际决定的，没有一定的标准，也不足以为后世永远效法。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the Wei Dynasty, it was all about the kings working together to pacify the world. At that time, some of the division of fiefs was based on the actual decisions at the time, there was no certain standard, and it was not enough for future generations to emulate forever.

古文：其改封诸侯王，皆以郡为国。 
现代文：今决定将诸王们改封为诸侯王，都以自己所管辖的郡为诸侯国。 
English: Now, it has been decided that the kings will be changed to princes, and the counties under their jurisdiction will become princes.

古文：三月癸酉，行东巡，所过存问高年□寡孤独，赐谷帛。
现代文：三月七日，明帝东巡，凡是经过的地方都嘱咐当地官府，年老体弱的鳏寡孤独的人都应赐以谷物和衣帛。
English: On March 7th, Emperor Ming's eastern inspection tour, wherever he passed, he ordered the local government that the elderly, the infirm, the widowed and the lonely should be given grain and coats.

古文：乙亥，月犯轩辕大星。
现代文：九日，月犯轩辕大星。
English: On the 9th, monthly offender Xuan Xuan became a big star.

古文：夏四月壬寅，行幸许昌宫。
现代文：四月六日，明帝到达许昌宫。
English: On April 6, Emperor Ming reached Xu Chang Palace.

古文：甲子，初进新果于庙。
现代文：二十八日，携时鲜水果到祖庙举行祭祀。
English: On the 28th, they brought fresh fruit to the ancestral temple to hold a ritual.

古文：五月，皇子殷薨，追封谥安平哀王。
现代文：五月，皇子曹殷夭折，追封谥号为安平哀王。
English: In May, Prince Cao Yin died prematurely, and his posthumous name was changed to Anping Lv Wang.

古文：秋七月，以韂尉董昭为司徒。
现代文：七月，提升卫尉董昭担任司徒。
English: In July, Dong Zhao, a guard lieutenant, was promoted to the post of assistant.

古文：九月，行幸摩陂，治许昌宫，起景福、承光殿。
现代文：九月，明帝巡行到摩陂。下令修整许昌宫，修建景福、承光二殿。
English: In September, Emperor Ming marched to Matsu and ordered the renovation of the Xuchang Palace and the construction of the Gyeongbokgung Palace and the Jeonggwang Palace.

古文：冬十月，殄夷将军田豫帅觽讨吴将周贺于成山，杀贺。
现代文：这年十月，殄夷将军田豫率部在成山讨伐吴将周贺，击败吴军并将斩杀了周贺。
English: In October of that year, General Tian Yu of the Qi led his troops to fight Wu general Zhou He in Chengshan, defeating the Wu army and killing Zhou He.

古文：十一月丙寅，太白昼见。有星孛于翼，近太微上将星。
现代文：十一月四日，白天出现太白星，并有彗星在其两侧，接近太微上将星。
English: On November 4, a very white star appeared during the day, with comets on either side of it, close to the faint Admiral's Star.

古文：庚寅，陈思王植薨。
现代文：二十七日，陈思王曹植去世。
English: On the 27th, Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi passed away.

古文：十二月，行还许昌宫。
现代文：十二月，明帝返回许昌宫。
English: In December, Emperor Ming returned to Xu Chang Palace.

古文：青龙元年春正月甲申，青龙见郏之摩陂井中。
现代文：青龙元年正月二十三日，青龙在北邙山之摩陂的水井中出现。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year of the celestial dragon, the celestial dragon appeared in the water well of the North Lushan Mountain.

古文：二月丁酉，幸摩陂观龙，于是改年；改摩陂为龙陂，赐男子爵人二级，□寡孤独无出今年租赋。
现代文：二月六日，明帝亲自前往摩陂观龙，并改太和年号为青龙，改摩陂为龙陂，赐男子各进爵二级，鳏寡孤独之人免除当年租赋。
English: On February 6th, Emperor Ming personally went to the Dragon Viewing Palace, and changed the name of the emperor and the year to Qinglong, and changed the name of the palace to Longjing, and gave the second grade of knighthood to every man, and exempted the widows and the lonely from the rent of the year.

古文：三月甲子，诏公卿举贤良笃行之士各一人。
现代文：三月三日，下令让朝中王公贵族举荐品行良好的饱学之士各一名。
English: On March 3, an order was issued to let the princes and nobles of the Middle Kingdom nominate one well-educated person of good character.

古文：夏五月壬申，诏祀故大将军夏侯惇、大司马曹仁、车骑将军程昱于太祖庙庭。
现代文：五月十二日，下诏将已故大将军夏侯惇、大司马曹仁、车骑将军程昱的灵位移到太祖庙庭中配享祭祀。
English: On May 12, the following edict was issued to transfer the spirits of the late General Xia Houyi, General Ma Cao Ren, and Cavalry General Cheng Qi to the courtyard of Taizu Temple for worship.

古文：戊寅，北海王蕤薨。
现代文：十八日，北海王曹蕤死。
English: On the 18th, Cao Pi, the king of the North Sea, died.

古文：闰月庚寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰月初一月出之时，出现日蚀。
English: At the beginning of the leap month, a solar eclipse occurs at sunrise.

古文：丁酉，改封宗室女非诸王女皆为邑主。
现代文：八日，改封诸侯王女以外的各宗室女皆为邑主。
English: On the eighth day, all the female members of the family, except for the princes and princesses, were made lord of the town.

古文：诏诸郡国山川不在祠典者勿祠。
现代文：传诏各郡国凡是不在祭祀典册之中的山川不可举行祭祀活动。
English: It was announced that no mountain or river in any county or country that was not listed in the ritual book was allowed to hold ritual activities.

古文：六月，洛阳宫鞠室灾。
现代文：六月，京都洛阳宫中的鞠室发生火灾。
English: In June, a fire broke out in the ballroom of Kyoto's Luoyang Palace.

古文：保塞鲜卑大人步度根与叛鲜卑大人轲比能私通，并州刺史毕轨表，辄出军以外威比能，内镇步度根。
现代文：当初归附魏国并驻守边疆的鲜卑族首领步度根与反叛的鲜卑首领轲比能私通。并州刺史毕轨上书明帝报告此事，还经常操练兵马，对外以威慑轲比能，对内以警告步度根。
English: At first, the leader of the Xianbei ethnic group, who was attached to the State of Wei and stationed at the border, had sexual intercourse with the rebel Xianbei leader, Zou Bi Neng, and wrote to Emperor Ming to report the matter. He also frequently drilled soldiers and horses to deter Zou Bi Neng from the outside and to warn Zou Bi Neng from the inside.

古文：帝省表曰： 步度根以为比能所诱，有自疑心。
现代文：明帝看了毕轨的奏书说： 步度根对于轲比能的拉拢引诱，还存有疑心。
English: Emperor Ming saw the completed report and said, "Buddogen still has doubts about the seduction of Zou Bineng.

古文：今轨出军，适使二部惊合为一，何所威镇乎？ 
现代文：如今毕轨一出兵操练，只能使他们二人惊恐之下合为一体，加速步度根的反叛，这还谈得上是什么威镇呢？ 
English: Now, the completion of a military drill can only unite the two of them in horror, accelerate the pace of the rebellion, and what kind of town is this?

古文：促敕轨，以出军者慎勿越塞过句注也。
现代文：遂立即下诏给毕轨，让他所率领的部队千万不要越过边塞开到句注一带。
English: He then immediately issued an edict to complete the track, and told the troops he led not to cross the border to the area around the junction.

古文：比诏书到，轨以进军屯阴馆，遣将军苏尚、董弼追鲜卑。
现代文：但等诏书传到毕轨手中，他早指挥军队开过边塞在阴馆驻下，并派手下大将苏尚、董弼二人向轲比能的军队发起攻击。
English: However, by the time the edict reached Bi Rong, he had already ordered his army to cross the border and encamp at Yinyuan, and sent two of his generals, Su Shang and Dong Qian, to launch an attack on Zou Bineng's army.

古文：比能遣子将千余骑迎步度根部落，与尚、弼相遇，战于楼烦，二将没。
现代文：恰逢轲比能的儿子率千余名骑兵驰往步度根的营寨，两军相遇，并在楼烦展开激战。
English: At the right time, the son of Zou Bineng led more than a thousand cavalrymen to the camp of Budugen. The two armies met and fought a fierce battle.

古文：步度根部落皆叛出塞，与比能合寇边。
现代文：苏、董二人不敌，魏军溃败。步度根乘机率本部人马反叛出塞，与轲比能合兵侵扰魏国边境。
English: Su and Dong were both defeated, and the Wei army was routed. Budugen took advantage of the opportunity to rebel from the capital, and invaded the border of Wei with Zou Bineng.

古文：遣骁骑将军秦朗将中军讨之，虏乃走漠北。
现代文：明帝派骁骑将军秦朗率领精锐部队前往讨伐，叛军战败后逃到大漠之北。
English: The Ming Emperor sent the cavalry general Qin Lang to lead the elite troops to the crusade. After the rebels were defeated, they fled to the north of the desert.

古文：秋九月，安定保塞匈奴大人胡薄居姿职等叛，司马宣王遣将军胡遵等追讨，破降之。
现代文：九月，屯驻安定地区保卫边塞的匈奴首领胡薄居姿职等人又率部反叛，大将军司马懿派部将胡遵追击讨伐，很快击溃叛军并迫使叛军首领投降。
English: In September, the leader of the Huns, Hu Bo Juqi, who was stationed in the stable region to defend the border fortress, led a rebellion. General Sima Yi sent troops to pursue and attack Hu Zun, quickly defeating the rebels and forcing the rebel leader to surrender.

古文：冬十月，步度根部落大人戴胡阿狼泥等诣并州降，朗引军还。
现代文：到十月份，步度根部落的另一首领戴胡阿狼泥等人到并州归降魏军。
English: By October, the other head of the Budugen tribe, Dai Huayu, led others to return to the state and surrender to the Wei army.

古文：十二月，公孙渊斩送孙权所遣使张弥、许晏首，以渊为大司马乐浪公。
现代文：骁骑将军秦朗才率部返回京都。十二月，车骑将军公孙渊将前来劝降的东吴特使张弥、许晏二人斩杀并上报。公孙渊被封为大司马乐浪公。
English: The cavalry general Qin Langcai led his troops back to Kyoto. In December, the cavalry general Gong Sun Yuan killed two Dongwu envoys, Zhang Mi and Xu Xi, who had come to persuade him to surrender, and reported it to the emperor. Gong Sun Yuan was named the grand secretary of Ma Le Lang.

古文：二年春二月乙未，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：青龙二年二月十日，太白金星犯火星。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the Dragon, it is too white for Venus to commit Mars.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 鞭作官刑，所以纠慢怠也，而顷多以无辜死。其减鞭杖之制，着于令。 
现代文：十八日，明帝下诏说： 以鞭笞作为官方的刑罚，本是为了改变对法令的轻视，但近年却使许多无辜的人死于鞭刑，所以朝廷决定减少鞭刑的使用范围，并明确写进法令。 
English: On the 18th, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: Whipping as an official punishment was originally intended to change the contempt for laws, but in recent years it has caused many innocent people to die from whipping, so the imperial court decided to reduce the scope of whipping and clearly write it into the decree.

古文：三月庚寅，山阳公薨，帝素服发哀，遣使持节典护丧事。
现代文：三月六日，汉献帝禅位曹氏后被封为山阳公的刘协病逝，明帝穿素服致哀，并派遣使者拿着符节督察葬礼仪式，以防有人不敬。
English: On March 6th, Liu Xie, who was named the prince of Shanyang after Emperor Han Xian was enthroned as Cao, died of illness. Emperor Ming wore plain clothes to pay his respects, and sent an envoy to inspect the funeral ceremony with a rune festival in case anyone was disrespectful.

古文：己酉，大赦。
现代文：二十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 25th, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：夏四月，大疫。崇华殿灾。
现代文：四月，国内发生大瘟疫，京城崇华殿发生火灾。
English: In April, a great plague occurred in China, and a fire broke out in the Chonghua Palace in Beijing.

古文：丙寅，诏有司以太牢告祠文帝庙。追谥山阳公为汉孝献皇帝，葬以汉礼。
现代文：十二日，明帝下诏让令朝中主持祭祀礼官准备牛羊猪齐全的祭品，到文帝庙举行祭祀活动，又追封山阳公为汉孝献皇帝，以汉代天子之礼仪安葬。
English: On the twelfth day, Emperor Ming issued an edict ordering the sacrificial officials to prepare a complete offering of cattle, sheep and pigs. They went to the Emperor Wen's Temple to hold the sacrificial activities. They also sealed Sanyanggu as Han Xiao Xian Emperor and buried him with the etiquette of the heavenly son of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是月，诸葛亮出斜谷，屯渭南，司马宣王率诸军拒之。
现代文：这个月，蜀相诸葛亮率大军出斜谷，驻军在渭南。大将军司马懿率领魏军迎战，两军在渭水形成对垒之势。
English: This month, Shushan Zhuge Liang led a large army out of the valley and garrisoned troops in southern Shandong. General Sima Wei led the Wei army to fight, and the two armies formed a confrontation in Surabaya.

古文：诏宣王： 但坚壁拒守以挫其锋，彼进不得志，退无与战，久停则粮尽，虏略无所获，则必走矣。
现代文：明帝传诏司马懿说： 我军只要扼要据守挫杀蜀军的锐气，那么诸葛亮的军队，进攻不能如愿，撤军也不甘心，久驻则粮草供应不足，最后一定自动退兵。
English: Sima Yi, the Ming emperor's herald, said: As long as our army has to hold the line and frustrate the vigor of the Shu army, then Zhuge Liang's army cannot attack as desired, nor is it willing to withdraw. If it stays for a long time, the supply of grain and grass will be insufficient, and finally it will automatically withdraw.

古文：走而追之，以逸待劳，全胜之道也。 五月，太白昼见。
现代文：等蜀军撤退的时候，我军再追击，一定能大获全胜！ 五月，太白金星白日出现。
English: When the Shu army retreated, our army chased them again and won a great victory! In May, Taibai Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：孙权入居巢湖口，向合肥新城，又遣将陆议、孙韶各将万余人入淮、沔。
现代文：东吴孙权率军北上到达居巢湖，向合肥新城发起进攻；又派将军陆议、孙韶各带一万多人马分别进入淮河和汉水。
English: In Eastern Wu, Sun Quan led his army northward to reach Ju Chao Lake and launched an attack on Hefei New Town. He also sent generals Lu Zi and Sun Yat-sen with more than 10,000 men each to enter the Huai River and Hanshui River respectively.

古文：六月，征东将军满宠进军拒之。
现代文：六月，征东将军满宠率部在新城抗击吴军。
English: In June, the East Conquering General Manpiao led his troops to fight against the Wu army in Xincheng.

古文：宠欲拔新城守，致贼寿春，帝不听，曰： 昔汉光武遣兵县据略阳，终以破隗嚣，先帝东置合肥，南守襄阳，西固祁山，贼来辄破于三城之下者，地有所必争也。
现代文：满宠向明帝建议，准备弃守新城，把吴军引诱到寿春。
English: Manpiao suggested to Emperor Ming that he was ready to abandon the defense of the new city and lure the Wu army to Shuchun.

古文：纵权攻新城，必不能拔。
现代文：希望守城诸位将军协力作战，我也将亲自督师前往与吴军会战。
English: I hope that the generals guarding the city will fight together, and I will personally supervise the division to go to the battle with the Wu Army.

古文：敕诸将坚守，吾将自往征之，比至，恐权走也。 
现代文：说不准等我到达新城时，吴军早已败走了呢！ 
English: Needless to say, by the time I arrived in Xincheng, the Wu army had already been defeated!

古文：秋七月壬寅，帝亲御龙舟东征，权攻新城，将军张颖等拒守力战，帝军未至数百里，权遁走，议、韶等亦退。
现代文：七月十九日，明帝亲乘龙舟率师出征。孙权军队围攻新城多日，魏将张颖等拒守力战，吴军难以破城。闻知明帝亲率大军督师作战，锐气大减的吴军赶紧撤走了。
English: On July 19th, Emperor Ming personally set out in a dragon boat with a division. Sun Quan's army besieged the new city for many days, Wei general Zhang Ying and others refused to fight, and the Wu army was unable to break through the city. Knowing that Emperor Ming personally led a large army to fight, the weakened Wu army quickly withdrew.

古文：髃臣以为大将军方与诸葛亮相持未解，车驾可西幸长安。
现代文：孙权一退，陆议和孙韶两路兵马也不敢恋战，吴军的攻势于是全部瓦解。魏国群臣认为西边渭水大将军司马懿正与诸葛亮重兵对峙难决胜负，皇帝可乘战胜吴军的有利时机西巡长安。
English: As soon as Sun Quan retreated, soldiers and horses on both sides of Lu Zhi and Sun Yao did not dare to fight, and the offensive of the Wu Army was completely collapsed. Wei state ministers believed that the confrontation between the west side of the Lishui General Sima Yao and Zhuge Liang's heavy soldiers was difficult to win or lose, and the emperor could take advantage of the favorable opportunity to defeat the Wu Army.

古文：帝曰： 权走，亮胆破，大将军以制之，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：明帝听此建议后说： 孙权败北，诸葛亮已魂不附身，西边有大将军就足够了，我不必再为那边的事操心了。 
English: After listening to this suggestion, Emperor Ming said: Sun Quan has been defeated in the north, Zhuge Liang has lost his soul, and it is enough to have a great general in the west. I don't have to worry about things over there anymore.

古文：遂进军幸寿春，录诸将功，封赏各有差。
现代文：于是率大军到寿春，对参战诸将各记其功，均论功行赏。
English: As a result, he led a large army to Shuchun, and all the generals who participated in the war were rewarded for their merits.

古文：八月己未，大曜兵，飨六军，遣使者持节犒劳合肥、寿春诸军。
现代文：八月七日，明帝隆重典阅兵马，置丰盛的酒宴犒劳三军，同时派出专门使者持节到合肥等地慰问驻军。
English: On August 7, the Ming Dynasty held a grand parade of soldiers and horses, held a sumptuous wine banquet to reward the three armies, and sent special envoys to Hefei and other places to pay condolences to the garrison.

古文：辛巳，行还许昌宫。
现代文：二十八日，明帝才返回京都。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Ming returned to Kyoto.

古文：司马宣王与亮相持，连围积日，亮数挑战，宣王坚垒不应。
现代文：大将军司马懿率魏军与诸葛亮对峙旷日持久，蜀军三番五次向魏军挑战，司马懿只是紧闭营垒坚守不出。
English: The confrontation between the Wei army and Zhuge Liang, led by the general Sima Wei, lasted for a long time. The Shu army challenged the Wei army for the third time in five times. Sima Wei could not hold on to the closed camp.

古文：会亮卒，其军退还。
现代文：后来诸葛亮劳累过度病逝军中，蜀军才撤兵退还。
English: Later, Zhuge Liang died of overwork and disease, and the Shu army withdrew and returned.

古文：冬十月乙丑，月犯镇星及轩辕。
现代文：这年十月十四日，月犯镇星及轩辕星。
English: On October 14th of this year, the moon-criminal Zhenxing and Xuan Yuxing passed away.

古文：戊寅，月犯太白。
现代文：二十七日，月再犯太白星座。
English: On the 27th, the moon re-offended the constellation Taibai.

古文：十一月，京都地震，从东南来，隐隐有声，摇动屋瓦。
现代文：十一月，京都发生地震，震从东南来，能听到隐隐的轰隆声，房屋摇动。
English: In November, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto. The tremors came from the southeast, and a faint rumbling sound could be heard. Houses shook.

古文：十二月，诏有司删定大辟，减死罪。
现代文：十二月，明帝诏令主观司法的官员修改、删减大辟的法律条文，减少了规定死罪的条文。
English: In December, Emperor Ming decreed that officials of the subjective judiciary should revise and delete major legal provisions and reduce the provisions stipulating the death penalty.

古文：三年春正月戊子，以大将军司马宣王为太尉。
现代文：青龙三年正月八日，任命大将军司马懿为太尉。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year of the dragon, the general Sima Yu was appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：己亥，复置朔方郡。
现代文：十九日，重设朔方郡。
English: On the 19th, Shuo Fang County was re-established.

古文：京都大疫。
现代文：这时，京都又闹大瘟疫。
English: At this time, there was another great plague in Kyoto.

古文：丁巳，皇太后崩。
现代文：二月八日，皇太后驾崩。
English: On February 8, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：乙亥，陨石于寿光县。
现代文：二十六日，天降陨石落在寿光县境内。
English: On the 26th, a meteorite fell from the sky onto the territory of Shuguang County.

古文：三月庚寅，葬文德郭后，营陵于首阳陵涧西，如终制。
现代文：三月十一日，按丧葬礼制为皇太后修建陵墓于文帝首阳陵涧西。
English: On March 11, a mausoleum was built for the empress dowager according to the funeral funeral system at the Emperor Wen Shouyang Mausoleum in Shaanxi.

古文：是时，大治洛阳宫，起昭阳、太极殿，筑总章观。
现代文：此时，明帝诏令大修洛阳宫，新建昭阳殿和太极殿，筑总章观。
English: At this time, Emperor Ming ordered the Luoyang Palace to be overhauled, the Zhoyang Hall and the Taiji Hall to be newly built, and the General Chapter to be built.

古文：百姓失农时，直臣杨阜、高堂隆等各数切谏，虽不能听，常优容之。
现代文：这样大兴土木，许多百姓贻误农时而影响耕种。耿直的朝臣杨阜、高堂隆等人曾多次直谏，明帝虽未纳谏，可他倒也和颜悦色对待谏臣。
English: Such a large-scale construction of civil engineering, many ordinary people mistakenly affected the cultivation of farmers. Geng Zhi's courtiers Yang Fu, Gaodang Long and others had repeatedly made direct loans. Although Emperor Ming did not accept loans, he also treated courteous courtiers.

古文：秋七月，洛阳崇华殿灾，八月庚午，立皇子芳为齐王，询为秦王。
现代文：七月，京都洛阳宫中崇华殿发生火灾。八月二十四日，册立皇子曹芳为齐王，曹询为秦王。
English: In July, a fire broke out in the Sogo-den hall of Kyoto's Luoyang Palace, and on August 24th, Prince Cao Fang was enthroned as King Qi, and Prince Cao En as King Qin.

古文：丁巳，行还洛阳宫。命有司复崇华，改名九龙殿。
现代文：九月二日，明帝返回洛阳宫，命重新修复崇华殿，并更名为九龙殿。
English: On September 2, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang Palace and ordered the restoration of the Chonghua Hall, which was renamed the Jiulong Hall.

古文：冬十月己酉，中山王兖薨。
现代文：这年十月三日，中山王曹衮病死。
English: On October 3rd of that year, King Cao Pi of Zhongshan died of illness.

古文：壬申，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白金星在白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：十一月丁酉，行幸许昌宫。
现代文：十一月二十二日，明帝到达许昌宫。
English: On November 22nd, Emperor Ming arrived at Xu Chang Palace.

古文：四年春二月，太白复昼见，月犯太白，又犯轩辕一星，入太微而出。
现代文：青龙四年二月，太白星又在白昼出现。月犯太白，又犯轩辕星，入太微星而出。
English: In February of the year of the dragon, the white star appeared again in the daytime. The moon was too white, and the star was too bright, and the star was too small.

古文：夏四月，置崇文观，征善属文者以充之。
现代文：四月，明帝诏令设置崇文观，征召天下善于撰属的人进观。
English: In April, Emperor Ming decreed the establishment of the Chongwen Guan and called for the world's best writers to enter the Guan.

古文：五月乙卯，司徒董昭薨。
现代文：五月十三日，司徒董昭病死。
English: On May 13th, Siu Tung Chao died of illness.

古文：丁巳，肃慎氏献楛矢。
现代文：十五日，肃慎国进献楛木制成的箭矢。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Shushan offered arrows made of camphor wood.

古文：六月壬申，诏曰： 有虞氏画象而民弗犯，周人刑错而不用。
现代文：六月初一，明帝诏令说： 从前有虞氏把五刑之状画成图像公榜出去，百姓就不再触犯法律；周代虽设置了刑法却很少用得着。
English: On the first day of June, the Ming Emperor issued the following edict: Once upon a time, there was a yu clan that made the five punishments into a public image, and the people would no longer violate the law; although the Zhou Dynasty set up a criminal law, it was rarely used.

古文：朕从百王之末，追望上世之风，邈乎何相去之远？
现代文：我自继位以来，虽极力效仿以往各朝代帝王们施政的长处，想重现过去好的社会风气，但现在看来，想做到那些并不是件容易事。
English: Since my accession to the throne, although I have tried my best to emulate the strengths of the past dynasties of emperors, and to recreate the good social atmosphere of the past, it now seems that it is not an easy thing to do.

古文：法令滋章，犯者弥多，刑罚愈觽，而奸不可止。
现代文：法令越是明确地昭示天下，违法的人越是增多，刑罚实行得普遍，而各种犯罪活动仍不能制止。
English: The more clearly the decrees are made known to the world, the more people break the law, the more penalties are imposed, and the more criminal activities cannot be stopped.

古文：往者按大辟之条，多所蠲除，思济生民之命，此朕之至意也。
现代文：既然如此，我打算把过去所颁布法令中的一些苛刻条文，大多予以免除，这也是救百姓性命的一片真诚心愿。
English: That being the case, I intend to exempt most of the harsh provisions in the decrees issued in the past, which is also a sincere desire to save people's lives.

古文：而郡国毙狱，一岁之中尚过数百，岂朕训导不醇，俾民轻罪，将苛法犹存，为之陷藊乎？
现代文：听说各地审断的犯人每年多达数百，这岂不是我在治理国家中引导不够，使百姓对违反法令看成不以为然，而刑罚上又采用一些苛严的手段，从而把百姓引入误区吗？
English: I have heard that as many as hundreds of prisoners are tried in various regions every year. Isn't it my fault for not guiding the country well enough to make the people see violations of laws and regulations as insignificant, and for using harsh punishments to mislead the people?

古文：有司其议狱缓死，务从宽简，及乞恩者，或辞未出而狱以报断，非所以究理尽情也。
现代文：有关执法人员在议定案件的处理意见时，务应宽松为本。有些向我请求宽恕的犯人，往往还来不及申诉情由案子已经判决，这怎么有利于搞清事实，从而做到合情合理地决断呢？
English: When the relevant law enforcement officers agree on the disposition of the case, they must be lenient. Some prisoners who ask me for forgiveness are often too late to appeal, and the case has already been decided. How is this conducive to clarifying the facts so as to make a reasonable decision?

古文：其令廷尉及天下狱官，诸有死罪具狱以定，非谋反及手杀人，亟语其亲治，有乞恩者，使与奏当文书俱上，朕将思所以全之。
现代文：现今我特诏令廷尉及各郡国所有司法官员，今后再遇有应处以死罪的囚犯，在案情全部清理并决断后，除谋反之类大逆罪及亲手杀人的凶犯外，其他死罪犯人都应尽快通知其家属。如有向我请求宽恕的犯人，司法机关应将他所写的陈请书信和有关的案情文书一起送给我，我当尽力设法保其生命。
English: I now specifically order the Lieutenant of the Court and all judicial officers of the counties and states that in the future, when there are prisoners who should be sentenced to death, after the case has been completely cleared up and decided, all other death-row prisoners should inform their families as soon as possible, except for those who committed high treason such as rebellion and those who killed people with their own hands. If there is a prisoner who asks me for forgiveness, the judicial organ should send me the petition letter he wrote together with the relevant case documents, and I should try my best to save his life.

古文：其布告天下，使明朕意。 
现代文：望将此诏布告天下，使天下的官吏百姓都能知道我的心愿。 
English: I hope to announce this edict to the world, so that officials and people all over the world can know my wishes.

古文：秋七月，高句骊王宫斩送孙权使胡韂等首，诣幽州。
现代文：七月，辽东高句骊国王宫将东吴孙权派去联络的特使胡卫等人斩首，并将首级送到幽州。
English: In July, the King's Palace of Gaoguanzi, Liaodong, beheaded Hu Wei, the special envoy sent by Dongwu Sun Quan to liaise, and sent his head to Youzhou.

古文：甲寅，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：十三日，太白犯轩辕大星。
English: On the 13th, the great star of the Taibai crime, Xuan Xuan, was born.

古文：冬十月己卯，行还洛阳宫。
现代文：十月十日，明帝返回洛阳宫。
English: On October 10, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：甲申，有星孛于大辰，乙酉，又孛于东方。
现代文：十五日，一颗来历不明的亮星出现于大辰星近旁，十六日，又出现于东方。
English: On the 15th, a bright star of unknown origin appeared near the Great Clock Star, and on the 16th, it appeared in the east.

古文：十一月己亥，彗星见，犯宦者天纪星。
现代文：十一月六日，出现慧星并犯宦者天纪星。
English: In November of the year of the boar, a comet appears, crashing into the constellation of Aquarius and the zodiac.

古文：十二月癸巳，司空陈髃薨。
现代文：十二月十五日，司空陈群死去。
English: On December 15, Siku Chenqun passed away.

古文：乙未，行幸许昌宫。
现代文：十七日，明帝行巡至许昌宫。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Ming went on a tour to Xu Chang Palace.

古文：景初元年春正月壬辰，山茌县言黄龙见。
现代文：景初元年正月二十四日，山茌县报称有黄龙出现。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the first year of the 21st century, there was a report of a yellow dragon appearing in Shanxi County.

古文：茌音仕狸反。于是有司奏，以为魏得地统，宜以建丑之月为正。
现代文：负责典礼祭祀的官员趁机进奏，说魏王朝占有地上元气三统五行中的地统，宜以殷历的建丑之月为正月。
English: The official in charge of the ceremony and sacrifice took the opportunity to play, saying that the Wei Dynasty possessed the earth elemental energy of the three unities and five elements, and it was appropriate to use the month of Jiankui in the Yin calendar as the first month.

古文：三月，定历改年为孟夏四月。
现代文：于是朝中议定改变历法更换年号，以青龙五年三月为景初元年四月。
English: As a result, North Korea and China agreed to change the calendar and replace the year number, with March of the fifth year of the blue dragon as the scene of April of the first year of the first century.

古文：服色尚黄，牺牲用白，戎事乘黑首白马，建大赤之旗，朝会建大白之旗。
现代文：又因魏王朝占有地统，为土行，故服色尚黄色。加之行殷历，以建丑为正，所以国家大事也一因殷礼，崇尚白色。祭祀所用牛、猪、羊等祭品皆取白色，逢战事乘黑首马，举大红旌旗，朝会则用纯白色的大旗。
English: In addition, because the Wei Dynasty occupied the throne and was a land-based dynasty, the color of the clothes was yellow. In addition to the practice of the Yin calendar, which was based on the concept of ugliness, the national events were also white because of the Yin ritual. Sacrifices such as cattle, pigs, and sheep used for worship were all white. In the event of war, the black-headed horse was used, and a large red banner was raised, while the imperial court used a pure white banner.

古文：改太和历曰景初历。
现代文：太和历改称景初历。
English: The Taihe calendar was renamed the Jingchuo calendar.

古文：其春夏秋冬孟仲季月虽与正岁不同，至于郊祀、迎气、礿祠、蒸尝、巡狩、搜田、分至启闭、班宣时令、中气早晚、敬授民事，皆以正岁斗建为历数之序。
现代文：其春、夏、秋、冬季的孟、仲、季各月的时间虽与正岁不同，但诸如皇帝到郊外祭祀天地，举行祭迎五帝祈求丰年的仪式，春、夏、秋、冬四时的祭祀祖先，以及天子出巡、围猎的时间安排，朝廷颁布诏令和一年中十二节气的早晚，甚至民间各项迎神赛社活动的日期等等，仍以正岁的农历之月建为历数之序。
English: Although the time of the spring, summer, autumn, and winter months of Meng, Zhong, and Ji is different from that of the New Year, the lunar calendar month of the New Year is still used as the order of the calendar, such as the emperor going to the suburbs to sacrifice heaven and earth, holding a ceremony to welcome the five emperors and pray for a prosperous year, sacrificing ancestors at four o'clock in spring, summer, autumn, and winter, as well as the time schedule of the heavenly son's tour and hunting, the imperial decree issued by the imperial court, and the morning and evening of the twelve solar terms of the year, and even the dates of various folk activities to welcome the

古文：五月己巳，行还洛阳宫。
现代文：五月二日，明帝自许昌宫返驾回洛阳宫。
English: On May 2, Emperor Ming drove back to Luoyang Palace from Xuchang Palace.

古文：己丑，大赦。
现代文：二十二日，诏令国内实行大赦。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：六月戊申，京都地震。
现代文：六月一日，京城洛阳地震。
English: On June 1, the Beijing Luoyang earthquake occurred.

古文：己亥，以尚书令陈矫为司徒，尚书仆射韂臻为司空。
现代文：四月，提升尚书令陈矫为司徒，尚书仆射卫臻为司空。
English: In April, Chen Jiao was promoted to the post of scholar, and Shoei Zhen, a scholar's servant, was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：丁未，分魏兴之魏阳、锡郡之安富、上庸为上庸郡。省锡郡，以锡县属魏兴郡。
现代文：十一日，从魏兴郡中分出魏阳，锡郡中分出安富、上庸等地新设上庸郡，同时撤销锡郡建制，把锡县划归魏兴郡。
English: On the 11th day, Weiyang was separated from Weixing County, Anfu and Shangyong were separated from Xixi County, and Shangyong County was newly established. At the same time, the establishment of Xixi County was revoked, and Xixi County was assigned to Weixing County.

古文：有司奏：武皇帝拨乱反正，为魏太祖，乐用武始之舞。
现代文：朝中主管礼乐的官员们进奏说： 我朝武皇帝于汉末乱世之际拨乱反正，是为魏太祖，宫庭中演奏武始之乐舞。
English: The officials in charge of the ceremonial music of the Korean and Chinese dynasties intoned: I, Emperor Wu of the Korean and Chinese dynasties, at the time of the chaos at the end of the Han Dynasty, set things right. It was for Wei Taizu that the music and dance of Wu Shi was performed in the palace.

古文：文皇帝应天受命，为魏高祖，乐用咸熙之舞。
现代文：文皇帝应天受命，改朝换代，是为魏高祖，宫中演奏咸熙之乐舞。
English: Emperor Wen was ordered by heaven to change the dynasty and generation, and played the music and dance of Han Xi in the palace for Wei Gao Zu.

古文：帝制作兴治，为魏烈祖，乐用章之舞。
现代文：如今圣上继承先帝大业，使国家得以大治，是为魏烈祖，乐宜用章斌之舞。
English: Nowadays, it is appropriate to use the dance of Zhang Bin for the Holy Father to inherit the great cause of the former emperor and make the country great.

古文：三祖之庙，万世不毁。其余四庙，亲尽迭毁，如周后稷、文、武庙祧之制。
现代文：三祖之庙，将存留万世永远不毁，其余四座宗庙，则随后世历代新君的不断登基嗣位而不断变更所属，在礼仪上完全如同周王朝时后稷、文王、武王的三座宗庙与其他四座宗庙的关系。 
English: The temple of the three ancestors will remain forever and never be destroyed, and the remaining four ancestral temples will continue to change their affiliation as successive generations of new princes ascend the throne. In terms of etiquette, it is exactly the same as the relationship between the three ancestral temples of Empress Dowager, King Wen and King Wu and the other four ancestral temples during the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：秋七月丁卯，司徒陈矫薨。
现代文：七月二日，司徒陈矫死去。
English: On July 2, Szu Chen Jiao passed away.

古文：孙权遣将朱然等二万人围江夏郡，荆州刺史胡质等击之，然退走。
现代文：东吴孙权又遣部将朱然率兵二万围攻江夏郡。荆州刺史胡质指挥魏军抗击，吴军出师不利退回。
English: In East Wu, Sun Quan also sent Zhu Ran and 20,000 soldiers to besiege Jiangxia County. Jing Zizhi Hu Jian commanded the Wei army to fight back, and the Wu army retreated unfavorably.

古文：初，权遣使浮海与高句骊通，欲袭辽东。
现代文：在这之前，孙权曾派特使走海路到高句骊进行联络，图谋南北夹攻辽东。
English: Prior to this, Sun Quan had sent a special envoy to take the sea route to Gaoguanying to make contact and plot a north-south attack on Liaodong.

古文：遣幽州刺史□丘俭率诸军及鲜卑、乌丸屯辽东南界，玺书征公孙渊。
现代文：明帝闻知，便派幽州刺史毋丘俭率本部兵马以及归顺的鲜卑、乌丸部族军队开到辽东南地区，又传诏给辽东太守大司马乐浪公公孙渊，命他督师与毋丘俭配合，以击破孙权和高句骊的联合进攻。
English: When Emperor Ming heard of this, he sent soldiers and horses from Yuzhou, led by Shishi Beochujian, as well as the surrendered Xianbei and Wumaru tribal armies, to the southeastern region of Liaoning Province. He also sent a message to Sun Yuan, the grand steward of Liaoning Province, ordering him to cooperate with Beochujian to defeat the joint attack of Sun Quan and Gao Guanzhang.

古文：渊发兵反，俭进军讨之，会连雨十日，辽水大涨，诏俭引军还。
现代文：不料公孙渊率部反叛，毋丘俭只得进军平叛。适逢大雨连绵十日不停，辽河水大涨，军事行动难以展开。
English: Unexpectedly, Gongsun Yuan led a rebellion, but had no choice but to march into the counter-rebellion. This coincided with heavy rain for ten days in a row, the Liao River water rose sharply, and military operations were difficult to carry out.

古文：右北平乌丸单于寇娄敦、辽西乌丸都督王护留等居辽东，率部觽随俭内附。
现代文：明帝便传令毋丘俭引军退到右北平郡一带修整。乌丸单于寇娄敦、辽西乌丸都督王护留等也带领部属随毋丘俭退到内地。
English: Emperor Ming then sent a message to Neochiu Jian, ordering him to withdraw his army to the area around Ping County in the right north and rectify the situation there. The leaders of his subordinates, such as Wu Maru Shan in Koratun and West Liaoning's Wu Maru Tudou Wang Xuryu, also retreated to the inland with Neochiu Jian.

古文：己卯，诏辽东将吏士民为渊所胁略不得降者，一切赦之。
现代文：十四日，朝廷发布通告，宣布辽东的军队将领、地方官吏及士民百姓凡受公孙渊胁迫而不能向朝廷投降者，朝廷均宽大赦免其罪。
English: On the 14th, the imperial court issued a notice, announcing that the generals of the army, local officials and common people in Liaodong who could not surrender to the imperial court under the coercion of Gongsun Yuan would all be pardoned by the imperial court.

古文：辛卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白日出现。
English: It's hard to believe, but Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：渊自俭还，遂自立为燕王，置百官，称绍汉元年。
现代文：公孙渊自从毋丘俭退兵后，遂自封为燕王，设置小朝廷，并称这年为绍汉元年。
English: After Sun Yuan retired from the army, he proclaimed himself the King of Swallows, set up a small court, and declared this year to be the first year of the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：诏青、兖、幽、冀四州大作海船。
现代文：为从海上出兵配合讨伐公孙渊的军事行动，明帝诏令青、兖、幽、冀四州大量建造海船。
English: In order to dispatch troops from the sea to cooperate with the military operations of the crusade against Gongsunyuan, Emperor Ming decreed that Qing, Shandong, Yunnan and Hebei provinces should build a large number of ships.

古文：九月，冀、兖、徐、豫四州民遇水，遣侍御史循行没溺死亡及失财产者，在所开仓振救之。
现代文：九月，冀、兖、徐、豫四州发生水灾，明帝派侍御史为特使巡视灾区，对于洪水中幸存的灾民以及由于水灾失去财产无法生活的难民，特使所到之处皆开仓放粮加以赈济。
English: In September, floods occurred in the four prefectures of Hebei, Fujian, Xu and Henan. Emperor Ming sent the Emperor's special envoy to inspect the disaster areas. For the victims who survived the floods and the refugees who lost their property and could not live because of the floods, the special envoys opened warehouses to distribute grain to help.

古文：庚辰，皇后毛氏卒。
现代文：九月十六日，皇后毛氏患病身亡。
English: On September 16, Empress Mao fell ill and died.

古文：冬十月丁未，月犯荧惑。
现代文：十月十三日，月犯荧惑。
English: On October 13th, the monthly criminal carnival was held.

古文：癸丑，葬悼毛后于愍陵。
现代文：十九日，为毛皇后举行葬礼并安葬在愍陵。
English: On the 19th, a funeral was held for Empress Mao and she was buried in Fuling.

古文：乙卯，营洛阳南委粟山为圜丘。
现代文：二十一日，在京都洛阳南郊委粟山营造圜丘专用于祭祀皇天。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a sacred mound was built in Aoyama, Kyoto's southern suburb of Luoyang, specifically for the purpose of worshipping the emperor.

古文：十二月壬子冬至，始祀。
现代文：十二月十九日完工，举行祭祀大礼。
English: The construction was completed on December 19th, and a grand ceremony was held.

古文：丁巳，分襄阳临沮、宜城、旍阳、邔邔音其己反。四县，置襄阳南部都尉。
现代文：十二月二十四日，从襄阳郡分出临沮、宜城、旌阳、己阝四县，另设襄阳南部都尉管辖其军政事务。
English: On December 24th, four counties were separated from Xiangyang County, including Lindu, Yicheng, Shenyang and Ji'an, and the Southern Capital of Xiangyang was set up to administer its military and political affairs.

古文：己未，有司奏文昭皇后立庙京都。
现代文：二十六日，朝中掌管典礼的官员奏请在京都为明帝生母文昭皇后建立祀庙。
English: On the 26th, the official in charge of ceremonies in the imperial court requested that a temple be built in Kyoto for Empress Fumiaki, the mother of Emperor Ming.

古文：分襄阳郡之鄀叶县属义阳郡。
现代文：朝廷从襄阳郡中分出若阝叶县划归义阳郡。
English: When the imperial court split Xiangyang County from the rest of Xiangyang County, Yanye County was assigned to Yiyang County.

古文：二年春正月，诏太尉司马宣王帅觽讨辽东。
现代文：景初二年正月，明帝下诏命太尉司马懿统率大军征讨割据辽东的叛将公孙渊。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict ordering Lieutenant Sima Yu to lead a large army to subjugate the traitor Gongsun Yuan, who had been cut off from Liaodong.

古文：二月癸卯，以大中大夫韩暨为司徒。
现代文：二月十一日，提升大中大夫韩暨为司徒。
English: On February 11, Han Ji, a junior high school teacher, was promoted to an assistant professor.

古文：癸丑，月犯心距星，又犯心中央大星。
现代文：二十一日，月犯心距星，又犯心中央大星。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the offender's heart distance star, and the offender's heart center star.

古文：夏四月庚子，司徒韩暨薨。
现代文：四月九日，司徒韩暨死。
English: On April 9th, Souto Hanjiro passed away.

古文：壬寅，分沛国萧、相、竹邑、符离、蕲、铚、龙亢、山桑、洨、虹洨音胡交反。
现代文：十一日，朝廷划出沛国的萧、相、竹邑、符离、蕲、钅至、龙亢、山桑、氵交、虹等十县设汝阴郡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial court designated ten counties in Pei Province, including Xiao, Xiang, Zhuyue, Fuyuan, Zou, Zizhi, Longjing, Shanhuang, Zengjia and Hong as Ruyin County.

古文：虹音绛。十县为汝阴郡。宋县、陈郡苦县皆属谯郡。以沛、杼秋、公丘、彭城丰国、广戚，并五县为沛王国。
现代文：宋县和原属陈郡的苦县划归谯郡，以沛、杼秋、公丘、彭城丰国、广戚五县合成沛王国。十九日，实行大赦。
English: Song County and Ku County, which originally belonged to Chen County, were transferred to Pu County, and five counties including Pei, Puqiu, Gongqiu, Pengcheng, Fengguo and Guangqi were combined to form the Kingdom of Pei. On the 19th, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：庚戌，大赦。五月乙亥，月犯心距星，又犯中央大星。六月，省渔阳郡之狐奴县，复置安乐县。
现代文：五月十五日，月再犯心距星，继而再犯中央大星。六月，撤销渔阳的狐奴县，恢复其安乐县的名称。
English: On May 15th, the monthly recidivist Heart Distance Star, followed by the recidivist Central Star. In June, the withdrawal of Yuyang's Fox County and the restoration of its Anle County name.

古文：秋八月，烧当羌王芒中、注诣等叛，凉州刺史率诸郡攻讨，斩注诣首。
现代文：八月，烧当羌王芒中、注诣等人率部反叛，凉州刺史指挥诸郡兵马征讨，大获全胜，并斩杀了注诣。
English: In August, King Mengzhong of Biaodong County and others led a rebellion, and Liangzhou Zhishi commanded the troops and horses of all counties to fight, won a complete victory, and killed Zhushi.

古文：癸丑，有彗星见张宿。
现代文：二十四日，彗星在张宿出现。
English: On the 24th, the comet appeared in Zhangjuku.

古文：丙寅，司马宣王围公孙渊于襄平，大破之，传渊首于京都，海东诸郡平。
现代文：九月七日，太尉司马懿挥师将公孙渊包围在襄平，全歼叛军，公孙渊的首级被砍下送到洛阳示众。
English: On September 7th, Lieutenant Sima Bingwei's division encircled Gongsun Yuan in Yangping and completely annihilated the rebels. Gongsun Yuan's head was cut off and sent to Luoyang for public display.

古文：冬十一月，录讨渊功，太尉宣王以下增邑封爵各有差。
现代文：辽东叛乱被平息，诸郡重新归属于朝廷。十一月，朝廷评论讨伐公孙渊中将士们的功劳，自太尉司马懿以下立功者增邑封爵各有等级。
English: The rebellion in Liaodong was quelled, and the counties were reattached to the imperial court. In November, the imperial court commented on the merits of the generals who led the crusade against Gongsun Yuan. Those who made meritorious contributions from the rank of Lieutenant Sima Yi and below were awarded the rank of knight.

古文：初，帝议遣宣王讨渊，发卒四万人。
现代文：当初朝中商议派出司马懿统兵讨伐公孙渊时，准备以四万兵马出征。
English: At the beginning, when the DPRK and the PRC discussed sending the Sima Yi unified army to fight the Gongsun Yuan, they were prepared to go to war with 40,000 soldiers.

古文：议臣皆以为四万兵多，役费难供。
现代文：明帝坚持说： 漫长四千里的军事征伐，虽说可以出其不意以奇制胜，但毕竟还是要以强大的军事实力为后盾。
English: Emperor Ming insisted: The long four-thousand-mile military expedition, although it can be unexpectedly victorious, must still be backed by strong military strength.

古文：帝曰： 四千里征伐，虽云用奇，亦当任力，不当稍计役费。 
现代文：如此大规模的战事出兵四万并不为多，不应过于计较军费开支的多少。 
English: Sending 40,000 soldiers to such a large-scale war is not much, and should not be overestimated in terms of military expenditure.

古文：遂以四万人行。
现代文：于是仍以四万大军出征辽东。
English: As a result, he still went to Liaodong with 40,000 troops.

古文：及宣王至辽东，霖雨不得时攻，髃臣或以为渊未可卒破，宜诏宣王还。
现代文：待司马懿率师抵达辽东后，又赶上大雨连绵，无法展开对公孙渊的攻势。朝中群臣又议论说魏军不一定能最后打败公孙渊，应该传令让司马懿退兵。
English: After the division led by Sima Yu arrived in East Liaoning, it was also caught up in continuous heavy rain, which made it impossible to launch an offensive against Gongsun Yuan. A group of ministers in the court also argued that the Wei army would not necessarily be able to finally defeat Gongsun Yuan, and that Sima Yu should be ordered to withdraw.

古文：帝曰： 司马懿临危制变，擒渊可计日待也。 
现代文：明帝不为这些议论所动，告诫群臣说： 司马太尉统兵善于随机应变，有勇有谋，我相信用不了多时我一定能够活捉公孙渊。 后来果真如此。
English: Emperor Ming was not moved by these arguments and admonished his courtiers, saying: "Lieutenant Sima is good at random contingency, brave and resourceful, I believe I will be able to capture Gongsun Yuan alive in a short time.

古文：卒皆如所策。壬午，以司空韂臻为司徒，司隶校尉崔林为司空。
现代文：九月二十四日，任命司空卫臻为司徒，司隶校尉崔林为司空。
English: On September 24th, Sikyong Wei Zhen was appointed as Sikyong and Sikyong Lieutenant Colonel Cui Lin was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：闰月，月犯心中央大星。
现代文：闰月，月犯心中央大星。
English: Leap month, moon crime heart central star.

古文：十二月乙丑，帝寝疾不豫。
现代文：十二月八日，明帝病。
English: On December 8th, Ming Di fell ill.

古文：辛巳，立皇后。赐天下男子爵人二级，□寡孤独谷。
现代文：二十四日，册立皇后，赐天下男子各进爵二级，鳏寡孤独无靠者由官府赐给粮食。
English: On the 24th, she was proclaimed empress, and all the men in the world were given a second-class knighthood. Widows and widowers who were alone and had no one to rely on were given food by the government.

古文：以燕王宇为大将军，甲申免，以武韂将军曹爽代之。
现代文：又下诏任命燕王曹宇为大将军。二十七日，免去曹宇大将军之职，另以武卫将军曹爽代替。
English: On the 27th, Yan Wang Cao Yu was relieved of his duties as General Cao Yu and replaced by Wuwei General Cao Shuang.

古文：初，青龙三年中，寿春农民妻自言为天神所下，命为登女，当营韂帝室，蠲邪纳福。
现代文：当初在青龙三年，寿春某农夫之妻自称是天神所派，应安置在皇宫中，为帝王驱灾避邪，纳福增寿。
English: Originally, in the third year of Qinglong, Shuchun, the wife of a farmer, claimed to be sent by the gods and should be placed in the imperial palace to drive away evil and increase longevity for the emperor.

古文：饮人以水，及以洗疮，或多愈者。
现代文：她取水给犯病的人喝，饮者多能治愈，用水给人清洗疮口，也能收到明显的效果。
English: She fetches water to drink for people who are ill, and those who drink it are more likely to be cured. She also uses water to clean people's sores, and can also receive significant results.

古文：于是立馆后宫，下诏称扬，甚见优宠。
现代文：明帝很惊异，于是专门为她在后宫修建了住处，又下诏书褒扬她的才能，很是宠爱了一阵子。
English: Emperor Ming was very surprised, so he specially built a residence for her in the harem, and issued an edict praising her talent, and was very fond of her for a while.

古文：及帝疾，饮水无验，于是杀焉。
现代文：我在死前能见到你，也没什么遗憾的了。 
English: If I see you before I die, I won't have any regrets.

古文：三年春正月丁亥，太尉宣王还至河内，帝驿马召到，引入卧内，执其手谓曰： 吾疾甚，以后事属君，君其与爽辅少子。吾得见君，无所恨！ 
现代文：司马懿恸哭，连连磕头，答应了明帝托付的嘱咐。
English: Sima wailed, bowed his head repeatedly, and agreed to the instructions entrusted by Ming Di.

古文：宣王顿首流涕。即日，帝崩于嘉福殿，时年三十六。
现代文：当天，明帝驾崩于洛阳宫嘉福殿，年仅三十六岁。
English: On the same day, Emperor Ming passed away at the Jiafu Hall of Luoyang Palace, only 36 years old.

古文：癸丑，葬高平陵。
现代文：正月二十七日，被安葬在高平陵。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, he was buried in Gaoping Mausoleum.

古文：评曰：明帝沉毅断识，任心而行，盖有君人之至概焉。
现代文：评曰：明帝深沉坚毅，果断有智谋,随心而行,完全有做明君的大气概。
English: The review said: Emperor Ming was a man of deep fortitude, decisive and resourceful, who followed his heart. He had the complete makings of an emperor.

古文：于时百姓雕弊，四海分崩，不先聿修显祖，阐拓洪基，而遽追秦皇、汉武，宫馆是营，格之远猷，其殆疾乎！
现代文：在当时百姓穷困,国家四分五裂，不先修习个人德行以显传统，开拓帝王的基业,却贸然学秦始皇，汉武帝的风姿，大兴土木,置长远的打算于度外，这是快速灭亡的原因啊。
English: At that time, the people were impoverished, the country was torn apart, and they did not first practice personal virtue to show the tradition and develop the emperor's foundation, but rashly learned the style of Qin Shihuang, Emperor Hanwu, and developed civil engineering, putting long-term plans aside. This is the reason for the rapid demise.

