古文：二十有四年春，王正月。
现代文：二十四年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of 1924, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏，狄伐郑。
现代文：夏季，狄人攻打郑国。
English: In the summer, the Di people attacked Zheng.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，天王出居于郑。
现代文：冬季，周天子出行居住在郑国。
English: In winter, Zhou Tianzi travels and lives in Zhengguo.

古文：晋侯夷吾卒。
现代文：晋侯夷吾去世。
English: Jin Hou Yigo passed away.

古文：二十四年春，王正月，秦伯纳之。
现代文：二十四年春季，周王朝历法的正月，秦穆公把公子重耳送回晋国。
English: In the spring of the twenty-fourth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Qin Mu Gong sent his son back to Jin Province.

古文：不书，不告入也。及河，子犯以璧授公子曰： 臣负羁绁从君巡于天下，臣之罪甚多矣。臣犹知之，而况君乎。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载这件事，因为晋国没有向鲁国报告重耳回晋国的事。到达黄河岸边，子犯把玉璧还给公子，说： 下臣背着马笼头马缰绳跟随您在天下巡行，下臣的罪过很多，下臣自己尚且知道，何况您呢？
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record this incident, because Jin did not report to Lu about the return of Zhu Rong to Jin. Arriving on the shore of the Yellow River, the son-in-law returned the jade to his son-in-law, saying: "Your vassal is following you around the world with a horse's bridle on his back. The vassal's sins are many, and the vassal himself still knows them. How much more do you know?

古文：请由此亡。 
现代文：请您让我从这里走开吧。 
English: Please let me get out of here.

古文：公子曰： 所不与舅氏同心者，有如白水。 
现代文：公子说： 如果不和舅父同一条心，有河神作证。 
English: He said, "If you don't have the same heart as your uncle, the river gods will testify against you."

古文：投其璧于河。
现代文：把他的璧玉扔到了黄河里。
English: He threw his gems into the Yellow River.

古文：济河，围令狐，入桑泉，取臼衰。
现代文：重耳等一行渡过黄河，包围了令狐，进入桑泉，占取了臼衰。
English: Chong Er and others crossed the Yellow River, surrounded Ling Fox, entered the Mulberry Spring, and occupied the mill.

古文：二月甲午，晋师军于庐柳。
现代文：二月的一天，晋国的军队驻扎在庐柳。
English: One day in February, the troops of Jin Province were stationed in Zengliu.

古文：秦伯使公子絷如晋师，师退，军于郇。
现代文：秦穆公派遣公子絷到晋国军队里去交涉。
English: Qin Mu dispatched his son to the Jin army to negotiate.

古文：辛丑，狐偃及秦、晋之大夫盟于郇。
现代文：晋军退走，驻扎在郇地。又一天，狐偃和秦国、晋国的大夫在郇地结盟。
English: The Jin army retreated and was stationed in Loudi. The next day, Foxtrot allied with the doctors of Qin and Jin in Loudi.

古文：壬寅，公子入于晋师。
现代文：又一天，公子重耳到达晋国军队里。
English: Another day, the prince arrived in the Jin army with heavy ears.

古文：丙午，入于曲沃。
现代文：又一天，重耳进入曲沃。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the heavy ears reached Quwo.

古文：丁未，朝于武宫。
现代文：又一天，重耳在晋武公的庙宇中朝见群臣。
English: Another day, Chong Er met with a group of courtiers in the temple of Prince Jinwu.

古文：戊申，使杀怀公于高梁。
现代文：又一天，重耳派人在高梁杀死了晋怀公。
English: Another day, Chong Er sent people to Gaoliang to kill Jin Huai Gong.

古文：不书，亦不告也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载这件事，也是由于晋国没有来鲁国报告的缘故。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record this matter, also due to the fact that Jin did not report to Lu.

古文：吕、郤畏偪，将焚公宫而弑晋侯。
现代文：吕、郤两家害怕祸难逼近，准备焚烧宫室而杀死晋文公。
English: The two families of Lv and Zou, fearing the approaching disaster, prepared to burn the palace and kill Jinwen.

古文：寺人披请见，公使让之，且辞焉。曰： 蒲城之役，君命一宿，女即至。
现代文：寺人披请求进见。晋文公派人责备他，而且拒绝接见，说： 蒲城那一次战役，国君命令你一个晚上到达，你马上就来了。
English: The temple's abbot asked to see him, but he was rebuked by Jinwen's officials and refused to see him, saying: "During the battle of Pucheng, the sovereign ordered you to come one night, and you came immediately.

古文：其后余从狄君以田渭滨，女为惠公来求杀余，命女三宿，女中宿至。
现代文：后来我跟随狄君在渭水边上打猎，你为惠公来杀我，惠公命令你过三个晚上再来，你过两个晚上就来了。
English: Later, I followed Di Jun to hunt on the edge of Surabaya. You came to kill me for Hui Gong. Hui Gong ordered you to come back in three nights, and you came back in two nights.

古文：虽有君命，何其速也。
现代文：虽然有国君的命令，为什么那么快呢？
English: Even though there was an order from the sovereign, why did it happen so quickly?

古文：夫袪犹在，女其行乎。 
现代文：那只被割断的袖子还在，你还是走开吧！ 
English: The sleeve that was cut off is still there, so just go away!

古文：对曰： 臣谓君之入也，其知之矣。
现代文：寺人披回答说： 小臣原来认为国君回国以后，已经了解情况了。
English: Terahito replied, "The vassal originally thought that after the sovereign returned to the country, he already understood the situation.

古文：若犹未也，又将及难。
现代文：如果还没有，就会又一次遇到祸难。
English: If not, there will be another calamity.

古文：君命无二，古之制也。
现代文：执行国君的命令只有一心一意，这是古代的制度。
English: The execution of the sovereign's order requires a single-mindedness, which is an ancient system.

古文：除君之恶，唯力是视，蒲人、狄人，余何有焉。
现代文：除去国君所厌恶的人，只看自己有多大力量。蒲人、狄人，对我来说算什么呢？
English: Eliminate those whom the sovereign dislikes, and only look at how much power you have. What is a "Pu" or "Di" person to me?

古文：今君即位，其无蒲、狄乎？
现代文：现在您即位做国君，也会同我心目中一样没有蒲、狄吧！
English: Now, after the enthronement of the monarch, is it possible to say that there is no Pu-ren or Di-ren?

古文：齐桓公置射鉤而使管仲相，君若易之，何辱命焉？
现代文：齐桓公把射钩的事放在一边，而让管仲辅助他。
English: Lord Qi Kuan put aside the matter of archery and let Guanzhong assist him.

古文：行者甚众，岂唯刑臣。 
现代文：君王如果改变这种做法，我会自己走的，哪里需要君王的命令呢？
English: If the king changes this practice, I will go myself. Where is the need for the king's order?

古文：公见之，以难告。三月，晋侯潜会秦伯于王城。
现代文：离开的人很多，岂独是我受过宫刑的小臣？ 
English: There are a lot of people leaving. Am I the only minister who has been punished by the palace?

古文：己丑晦，公宫火，瑕甥、郤芮不获公，乃如河上，秦伯诱而杀之。
现代文：晋文公接见了寺人披，寺人披就把祸乱告诉了晋文公。三月，晋文公秘密地和秦穆公在王城会见。三十日，文公的宫殿起火。瑕甥、郤芮找不到晋文公，于是就到黄河边上去找，秦穆公把他们诱去杀死了。
English: In March, Jinwen Gong secretly met with Qin Mu Gong in the royal city. On the 30th, Qin Mu Gong's palace caught fire. Guo's nephews and nieces could not find Jinwen Gong, so they went to the edge of the Yellow River to look for him. Qin Mu Gong lured them there and killed them.

古文：晋侯逆夫人嬴氏以归。
现代文：晋文公迎接夫人嬴氏回国。
English: Emperor Jinwen welcomes his wife, Lady Zou, back to China.

古文：秦伯送卫于晋三千人，实纪纲之仆。
现代文：秦穆公赠送给晋国卫士三千人，都是一些得力的臣仆。
English: Qin Mu's gift to the defenders of Jin was three thousand men, all of whom were capable retainers.

古文：初，晋侯之竖头须，守藏者也。
现代文：当初，晋文公有个侍臣名叫头须，是专门管理财物的。
English: In the beginning, Jinwen had a personal attendant named Toushu, who was in charge of managing his property.

古文：其出也，窃藏以逃，尽用以求纳之。
现代文：当晋文公在国外的时候，头须偷盗了财物潜逃，把这些财物都用来设法让晋文公回国。没有成功，只好留在国内。
English: When Prince Jinwen was abroad, the headman stole his belongings and fled. He used these belongings to try to get Prince Jinwen to return home. He was unsuccessful and had to stay in the country.

古文：及入，求见，公辞焉以沐。
现代文：等到晋文公回来，头须请求进见。晋文公推托说正在洗头。
English: When King Jinwen came back, the headman asked to see him. King Jinwen said that he was washing his hair.

古文：谓仆人曰： 沐则心覆，心覆则图反，宜吾不得见也。
现代文：头须对仆人说： 洗头的时候心就倒过来，心倒了意图就反过来，无怪我不能被接见了。
English: The barber said to his servant: When I wash my hair, my heart turns upside down. When my heart turns upside down, my intentions turn upside down. No wonder I can't be received.

古文：居者为社稷之守，行者为羁之仆，其亦可也，何必罪居者？
现代文：留在国内的人是国家的守卫者，跟随在外的是背着马笼头马缰绳的仆人，这也都是可以的，何必要怪罪留在国内的人？
English: Those who remain in the country are the guardians of the country, and those who follow outside are the servants who carry the horse's bridle. This is also acceptable. Why should those who remain in the country be blamed?

古文：国君而仇匹夫，惧者甚众矣。 
现代文：身为国君而仇视普通人，害怕的人就多了。 
English: As a sovereign who hates ordinary people, there are more people to be afraid of.

古文：仆人以告，公遽见之。
现代文：仆人把这些话告诉晋文公，晋文公立即接见了他。
English: The servant told these words to Prince Jinwen, who immediately received him.

古文：狄人归季隗于晋而请其二子。
现代文：狄人把季隗送回到晋国，而请求留下她的两个儿子。
English: Di Ren sent Ji Yao back to Jin Province, but asked that her two sons be allowed to stay.

古文：文公妻赵衰，生原同、屏括、楼婴。
现代文：晋文公把女儿嫁给赵衰，生了原同、屏括、楼婴。
English: Jinwen Gong married his daughter to Zhao Zhen, and gave birth to a son, a daughter-in-law, a son-in-law, and a son.

古文：赵姬请逆盾与其母，子馀辞。
现代文：赵姬请求迎接盾和他的母亲。赵衰辞谢不肯。
English: Zhao Jie asked to meet Dun and his mother. Zhao Jie declined.

古文：姬曰： 得宠而忘旧，何以使人？
现代文：赵姬说： 得到新宠而忘记旧好，以后还怎样使用别人？
English: Zhao Ji said: If you get a new pet and forget the old one, how can you use others in the future?

古文：必逆之。 
现代文：一定要把他们接回来。 
English: We have to get them back.

古文：固请，许之，来，以盾为才，固请于公以为嫡子，而使其三子下之，以叔隗为内子而己下之。
现代文：坚决请求，赵衰同意了。叔隗和赵盾回来以后，赵姬认为赵盾有才，坚决向赵衰请求，把赵盾作为嫡子，而让她自己生的三个儿子居于赵盾之下，让叔隗作为正妻，而自己居于她之下。
English: After Shu Qi and Zhao Dun returned, Zhao Ji thought that Zhao Dun was talented, and resolutely asked Zhao Qi to take Zhao Dun as the legitimate son, and let her own three sons live under Zhao Dun, and let Shu Qi be the legal wife, and live under her.

古文：晋侯赏从亡者，介之推不言禄，禄亦弗及。
现代文：晋文公赏赐跟随他逃亡的人，介之推没有提及禄位，禄位也没有赐到他身上。
English: Emperor Jinwen rewarded those who fled with him, but there was no mention of a reward, and no reward was given to him.

古文：推曰： 献公之子九人，唯君在矣。
现代文：介之推说： 献公的儿子有九个，只有公子在世了。
English: "There were nine sons who dedicated themselves to the lord, and only the lord is still alive," he said.

古文：惠、怀无亲，外内弃之。
现代文：惠公、怀公没有亲近的人，国内国外都抛弃了他们。
English: Hui Gong and Huai Gong have no close relatives, and both at home and abroad have abandoned them.

古文：天未绝晋，必将有主。
现代文：上天不使晋国绝后，必定会有君主。
English: If heaven does not cause the extinction of the Jin Dynasty, there will certainly be a monarch.

古文：主晋祀者，非君而谁。
现代文：主持晋国祭祀的人，不是公子又会是谁？
English: Who will preside over the Shinto ritual, if not the prince?

古文：天实置之，而二三子以为己力，不亦诬乎？
现代文：这实在是上天立他为君，而他们这些人却以为是自己的力量，这不是欺骗吗？
English: It's as if God has made him king, and these people think it's their own power. Isn't that cheating?

古文：窃人之财，犹谓之盗，况贪天之功，以为己力乎？
现代文：偷别人的财物，尚且叫做盗，何况贪上天的功劳以为自己的力量呢？
English: Stealing other people's belongings is still called theft, and what's more, coveting the glory of heaven and thinking that you are powerful?

古文：下义其罪，上赏其奸，上下相蒙，难与处矣！ 
现代文：下面的人把贪功的罪过当成合理，上面的人对欺骗加以赏赐，上下相互欺骗，这就难和他们相处了。 
English: The people below regard the sin of coveting merit as reasonable, the people above reward deception, and the people above and below deceive each other, which makes it difficult to get along with them.

古文：其母曰： 盍亦求之，以死谁怼？ 
现代文：介之推的母亲说： 为什么不也去求赏？这样的死，又能怨谁？ 
English: "Why not ask for a reward, too? Who can be blamed for such a death?

古文：对曰： 尤而效之，罪又甚焉，且出怨言，不食其食。 
现代文：介之推回答说： 明知错误而去效法，罪就更大了。而且我口出怨言，不能吃他的俸禄。 
English: "The greater the sin, the greater the guilt," he replied, "for knowing the error and following it. Moreover, I am complaining, and I cannot eat his salary."

古文：其母曰： 亦使知之若何？ 
现代文：他母亲说： 也让他知道一下，怎么样？ 
English: His mother said: How about letting him know, too?

古文：对曰： 言，身之文也，身将隐，焉用文之？
现代文：介之推回答说： 说话，是身体的文饰。身体将要隐藏，哪里用得着文饰？
English: "Speaking is the adornment of the body," he replied. "The body is going to be hidden. What is the use of adornment?"

古文：是求显也。 
现代文：这只不过是去求显露罢了。 
English: It's just for exposure.

古文：其母曰： 能如是乎？
现代文：他母亲说： 你能够这样吗？
English: His mother said, "Can you do that?"

古文：与女偕隐。 
现代文：我和你一起隐居起来。 
English: Then I'll hide with you.

古文：遂隐而死。
现代文：于是就隐居而死。
English: So he went into seclusion and died.

古文：晋侯求之，不获，以绵上为之田，曰： 以志吾过，且旌善人。 
现代文：晋文公派人寻找介之推，找不到，就把绵上的田封给他，说： 用这来记载我的过失，来表扬好人。 
English: Jinwen Gong sent someone to look for a mediator, but when he couldn't find one, he gave him a field seal on a piece of cotton and said, "Use this to record my faults and praise good people."

古文：郑之入滑也，滑人听命。
现代文：郑军进入滑国的时候，滑人听从命令。
English: When the Zheng army entered the sliding country, the sliding people obeyed the order.

古文：师还，又即卫。
现代文：军队回去，滑国又亲附卫国。
English: The army went back, and the people of Nipu became attached to the defense of the country.

古文：郑公子士洩、堵俞弥帅师伐滑。
现代文：郑国的公子士、洩堵俞弥带兵进攻滑国。
English: The noble sons of Zheng, Lioduo Jimi, led an army to attack the State of Nian.

古文：王使伯服、游孙伯如郑请盟。
现代文：周襄王派伯服、游孙伯到郑国请求不要进攻滑国。
English: King Zhou Xiang sent his son-in-law and grandson-in-law to Zheng to plead with them not to attack the State of Nian.

古文：郑伯怨惠王之入而不与厉公爵也，又怨襄王之与卫、滑也，故不听王命而执二子。
现代文：郑文公怨恨周惠王回到成周而不给厉公饮酒礼器杯子，又怨恨周襄王偏袒卫、滑两国，所以不听周襄王的命令而逮捕了伯服和游孙伯。
English: Zheng Wengong resented Zhou Hui Wang for returning to Cheng Zhou without giving Li Gong a drinking gift cup, and also resented Zhou Xiang Wang for favoring the two countries, so he did not listen to Zhou Xiang Wang's order and arrested Bo Fu and You Sun Bo.

古文：王怒，将以狄伐郑。
现代文：周襄王发怒，准备领着狄人进攻郑国。
English: King Xiang was furious and prepared to use Di to attack Zheng.

古文：富辰谏曰： 不可。
现代文：富辰劝谏说： 不行。
English: Doctor Fuchen dissuaded him, saying, "You can't do that.

古文：臣闻之，大上以德抚民，其次亲亲以相及也。
现代文：下臣听说，最高的人用德行来安抚百姓，其次的亲近亲属，由近到远。
English: The vassal heard that the highest people use virtue to appease the people, followed by close relatives, from near to far.

古文：昔周公吊二叔之不咸，故封建亲戚以蕃屏周。
现代文：从前周公叹息管叔、蔡叔不得善终，所以把土地分封给亲戚作为周朝的屏障。
English: From the previous week, Zhou Gong sighed that Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai would not have a happy ending, so he gave the land to relatives as a barrier to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：管蔡郕霍，鲁卫毛耼，郜雍曹滕，毕原酆郇，文之昭也。
现代文：管、蔡、郕、霍、鲁、卫、毛、聃、郜、雍、曹、滕、毕、原、酆、郇各国，是文王的儿子。
English: Guan, Cai, Yao, Ho, Lu, Wei, Mao, Yao, Yao, Yong, Cao, Teng, Bi, Yuan, Yao, Yao, are the sons of King Wen.

古文：邘晋应韩，武之穆也。
现代文：邗、晋、应、韩各国，是武王的儿子。
English: He is the son of King Wu of the states of Sui, Jin, Ying and Han.

古文：凡蒋邢茅胙祭，周公之胤也。
现代文：凡、蒋、邢、茅、胙、祭各国，是周公的后代。
English: The descendants of Zhou Gong can be found in all countries, including Jiangxi, Fujian, Mao, Shandong, and Saizhou.

古文：召穆公思周德之不类，故纠合宗族于成周而作诗曰： 常棣之华，鄂不韡韡，凡今之人，莫如兄弟。 
现代文：召穆公忧虑周德衰微，所以集合了宗族在成周而做诗，说： 小叶杨的花儿，花朵是那样漂亮艳丽，现在的人们，总不能亲近得像兄弟。 
English: Zhao Mu Gong was worried about Zhou De's decline, so he gathered the clan to make a poem in Cheng Zhou, saying: Xiao Ye Yang's flowers, the flowers are so beautiful and gorgeous, people nowadays, can't always be as close as brothers.

古文：其四章曰： 兄弟阋于墙，外御其侮。 
现代文：诗的第四章说： 兄弟们在墙里争吵，一到墙外就共同对敌。 
English: The fourth chapter of the poem says: "Brothers quarrel within the walls, but outside the walls they fight together.

古文：如是则兄弟虽有小忿，不废懿亲。
现代文：像这样，那么兄弟之间虽然有小不和睦，也不能废弃好亲属。
English: In this way, even if there are minor disagreements between brothers, good relatives should not be abandoned.

古文：今天子不忍小忿以弃郑亲，其若之何？
现代文：现在您不忍耐小怨而丢弃郑国这门亲属，又能把它怎么办？
English: Now that you can't bear petty grudges and have discarded this relative from Zheng Guo, what can you do with him?

古文：庸勋亲亲，暱近尊贤，德之大者也。
现代文：酬答勋劳，亲近亲属，接近近臣，尊敬贤人，这是德行中的大德。
English: Rewarding meritorious service, being close to relatives, being close to vassals, and respecting the wise, this is the great virtue in the practice of virtue.

古文：即聋从昧，与顽用嚚，奸之大者也。弃德崇奸，祸之大者也。
现代文：靠拢耳背的人，跟从昏暗的人，赞成固陋的人，使用奸诈的人，这是邪恶中的大恶，抛弃德行，崇尚邪恶，这是祸患中的大祸。
English: He who turns a deaf ear, he who follows a gloomy spirit, he who approves of the vile, he who employs the treacherous, is the worst of evils. He who abandons virtue and exalts evil is the worst of evils.

古文：郑有平、惠之勋，又有厉、宣之亲，弃嬖宠而用三良，于诸姬为近。四德具矣。
现代文：郑国有过辅助平王、惠王的勋劳，又有厉王、宣王的亲属关系，郑国国君舍弃宠臣而任用三个好人，在姬姓诸姓中属于近亲，四种德行都具备了。
English: In Zhengzhou, there were the honored labors of the auxiliary kings Ping Wang and Hui Wang, and the kinship of the kings Li Wang and Xuan Wang. The king of Zhengzhou abandoned his favorite vassal and appointed three good men, who were close relatives of the empresses and emperors, and possessed all four kinds of virtues.

古文：耳不听五声之和为聋，目不别五色之章为昧，心不则德义之经为顽，口不道忠信之言为嚚，狄皆则之，四奸具矣。
现代文：耳朵不能听到五声的唱和是耳聋，眼睛不能辨别五色的文饰是昏暗，心里不学德义的准则是顽固，嘴里不说忠信的话是奸诈。狄人效法这些，四种邪恶都具备了。
English: An ear that cannot hear the five-part harmony is deaf; an eye that cannot distinguish the five-part ornamentation is dim; a heart that does not learn the principles of virtue and righteousness is obstinate; and a mouth that does not speak words of loyalty is treacherous.

古文：周之有懿德也，犹曰 莫如兄弟 ，故封建之。
现代文：周室具有美德的时候，尚且说 总不能亲近得像兄弟 ，所以分封建制。
English: When the Zhou family was virtuous, it was said that they could not be as close as brothers, so they were divided into fiefdoms.

古文：其怀柔天下也，犹惧有外侮，扞御侮者莫如亲亲，故以亲屏周。
现代文：当它笼络天下的时候，尚且害怕有外界的侵犯；抵御外界侵犯的措施，没有比亲近亲属再好的了，所以用亲属作为周室的屏障。
English: When it engulfs the world, it is still afraid of external encroachment; there is no better measure to resist external encroachment than close relatives, so relatives are used as a barrier to the pericardium.

古文：召穆公亦云。
现代文：召穆公也是这样说的。
English: This is also what Zhao Mu Gong said.

古文：今周德既衰，于是乎又渝周、召以从诸奸，无乃不可乎？
现代文：现在周室的德行已经衰败，而这时又改变周公、召公的措施以跟从各种邪恶，恐怕不可以吧！
English: Now the morality of the Zhou dynasty has decayed, and at this time it is not possible to change the measures of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong to follow all kinds of evils.

古文：民未忘祸，王又兴之，其若文、武何？ 
现代文：百姓没有忘记祸乱，君王又把它挑起来，怎么来对待文王、武王呢？ 
English: The people have not forgotten the calamity, and the king has stirred it up again. How should we deal with King Wen and King Wu?

古文：王弗听，使颓叔、桃子出狄师。
现代文：周襄王不听，派遣颓叔、桃子出动狄军。
English: King Zhou Xiang didn't listen, and sent Uncle Zou and Peach to dispatch the Di army.

古文：夏，狄伐郑，取栎。
现代文：夏季，狄军进攻郑国，占领了栎地。
English: In the summer, Di's army attacked Zheng and occupied Fengtian.

古文：王德狄人，将以其女为后。
现代文：周襄王感谢狄人，准备把狄君的女儿做王后。
English: King Zhou Xiang thanked Di Ren and prepared to make Di Jun's daughter the queen.

古文：富辰谏曰： 不可。
现代文：富辰劝阻说： 不行。
English: Doctor Fuchen dissuaded him, saying, "You can't do that.

古文：臣闻之曰： 报者倦矣，施者未厌。 
现代文：臣听说： 报答的人已经厌倦了，施恩的人还没有满足。 
English: The minister heard: "Those who repay are already tired, and those who show kindness are not yet satisfied."

古文：狄固贪惏，王又启之，女德无极，妇怨无终，狄必为患。 
现代文：狄人本来贪婪，而您又启发他们。女子的行为没有准则，妇人的怨恨没有终结，狄人必然成为祸患。 
English: Women are naturally greedy, but you have inspired them. There is no standard for women's behavior, and women's resentment has no end. Women are bound to become a scourge.

古文：王又弗听。
现代文：周襄王又不听。
English: Zhou Xiangwang did not listen.

古文：初，甘昭公有宠于惠后，惠后将立之，未及而卒。
现代文：当初，甘昭公受到惠后的宠爱，惠后打算立他为嗣君，没有来得及惠后就死去了。
English: At first, Ama no Akira was favored by Empress Dowager Hui, who planned to make him her heir, but he died before she could do so.

古文：昭公奔齐，王复之。又通于隗氏。
现代文：昭公逃亡到齐国，周天子让他回来，他又和隗氏私通。周天子废了隗氏。
English: Shao Gong fled to Qi Province, Zhou Tianzi allowed him to return, and he had sexual relations with the Zou clan. Zhou Tianzi abolished the Zou clan.

古文：王替隗氏，颓叔、桃子曰： 我实使狄，狄其怨我。 
现代文：颓叔、桃子说： 狄人这样，是我们指使的，狄人可能会怨恨我们。 
English: Uncle Zou and Aunt Peach said, "We are the ones who ordered the Di people to do this. The Di people may resent us.

古文：遂奉大叔，以狄师攻王。王御士将御之。王曰： 先后其谓我何？
现代文：就奉戴大叔攻打周天子，周王的侍卫人员准备抵御，周王说： 如果杀死太叔，先王后将会说我什么？
English: When Uncle Bong Dai attacked Zhou Tianzi, and Zhou Wang's bodyguards prepared to defend themselves, Zhou Wang said, "If I kill my uncle, what will the first queen say to me?"

古文：宁使诸侯图之。 
现代文：宁可让诸侯来商量一下。 
English: I'd rather let the lords discuss it.

古文：王遂出。及坎欿，国人纳之。
现代文：周王于是就离开成周，到达坎欿，都城里的人又把周王接回都城。
English: Zhou Wang then left Cheng Zhou and arrived in Can Tho. People in the capital city took Zhou Wang back to the capital city.

古文：秋，颓叔、桃子奉大叔，以狄师伐周，大败周师，获周公忌父、原伯、毛伯、富辰。
现代文：秋季，颓叔、桃子奉事太叔领了狄人的军队进攻成周，把周军打得大败，俘虏了周公忌父、原伯、毛伯、富辰。
English: In the autumn, Uncle Gong and Uncle Peach led the army of the Di people to attack Zhou, defeated the Zhou army, and captured Zhou Gong's father, grandfather, great-uncle, great-uncle, and Fuchen.

古文：王出適郑，处于氾。
现代文：周襄王离开成周去郑国，住在汜地。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang left Cheng Zhou to go to Zheng Guo and lived in Handan.

古文：大叔以隗氏居于温。
现代文：太叔和隗氏住在温地。
English: My great-uncle and Mr. Zou live in a temperate climate.

古文：郑子华之弟子臧出奔宋，好聚鹬冠。
现代文：郑国子华的兄弟子臧逃亡到宋国，喜欢收集鹬毛帽子。
English: Zheng Guo Zihua's brother Zi Wei fled to Song and liked to collect mane hats.

古文：郑伯闻而恶之，使盗诱之。
现代文：郑文公听说后很讨厌他，指使杀手骗他出来。
English: After hearing this, Zheng Wengong hated him very much and ordered the killer to trick him into coming out.

古文：八月，盗杀之于陈、宋之间。
现代文：八月，杀手将子臧杀死在陈国和宋国交界的地方。
English: In August, the killer killed Zi Yao at the border between the states of Chen and Song.

古文：君子曰： 服之不衷，身之灾也。
现代文：君子说： 衣服的不合适，这是身体的灾祸。
English: The gentleman said, "If the clothes don't fit, it's a physical disaster."

古文：《诗》曰： 彼己之子，不称其服。 
现代文：《诗》说： 那一个人啊，和他的服饰不能相称。 
English: The Poem says: That man and his dress are not well matched.

古文：子臧之服，不称也夫。
现代文：子臧的服饰，就是不相称啊！
English: Zi Chen's attire is just not appropriate!

古文：《诗》曰， 自诒伊慼 ，其子臧之谓矣。
现代文：《诗》说： 自己给自己找来祸害。 子臧就是这样。
English: "Poetry" says: You bring misfortune to yourself. That's how it is.

古文：《夏书》曰， 地平天成 ，称也。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 大地平静，上天成全。 
English: "Summer Book" said: The earth is calm, and everything is perfect.

古文：宋及楚平。
现代文：这就是上下相称了。 
English: That's proportionate.

古文：宋成公如楚，还，入于郑。
现代文：宋国和楚国讲和，宋成公到楚国。回国时，进入郑国。
English: Song and Chu made peace, and Song Chenggong went to Chu. When he returned to China, he entered Zheng.

古文：郑伯将享之，问礼于皇武子。
现代文：郑文公准备设宴招待他，向皇武子询问礼仪。
English: Zheng Wengong was preparing to host a banquet for him and asked the prince about the etiquette.

古文：对曰： 宋，先代之后也，于周为客，天子有事膰焉，有丧拜焉，丰厚可也。 
现代文：皇武子回答说： 宋国是先朝的后代，在周朝来说是客人。周天子祭祀宗庙，要送给他祭肉；有了丧事，宋国国君来吊唁，周天子是要答拜的。丰盛地招待他是可以的。 
English: The prince replied, "Song was a descendant of the previous dynasty, but a guest of the Zhou dynasty. Zhou Tianzi made offerings to the ancestral temple, and the sacrificial meat had to be given to him. When there was a funeral, Song Guo Guo Jun came to offer condolences, and Zhou Tianzi had to respond. He could be generously invited.

古文：郑伯从之，享宋公有加，礼也。
现代文：郑文公听从皇武子的话，设享礼招待宋公，比常礼有所增加。这是合于礼的。
English: Zheng Wengong listened to the words of the emperor's son, and set up an entertainment ceremony to invite Song Gong, which was more than the regular ceremony. This was in line with the ceremony.

古文：冬，王使来告难曰： 不穀不德，得罪于母弟之宠子带，鄙在郑地氾，敢告叔父。 
现代文：冬季，周襄王的使者前来报告发生的祸难，说： 不穀缺乏德行，得罪了母亲所宠爱的儿子带，现在僻处在郑国的汜地，谨敢将这件事情报告叔父。 
English: In the winter, an emissary of King Zhou Xiang came to report the calamity that had occurred, saying: "It is not the grain, but the lack of virtue that has offended the mother's beloved son, who is now in the backwoods of Zheng. I dare to report this to my uncle."

古文：臧文仲对曰： 天子蒙尘于外，敢不奔问官守。 
现代文：臧文仲回答说： 天子在外边蒙受尘土，岂敢不赶紧去问候左右。 
English: Zou Wenzhong replied, "The Son of Heaven is gathering dust outside. How dare you not rush to greet him?"

古文：王使简师父告于晋，使左鄢父告于秦。
现代文：周襄王派简师父向晋国报告，派左鄢父到秦国报告。
English: Zhou Xiangwang sent Master Jian to report to Jin and Zuo Xi to report to Qin.

古文：天子无出，书曰 天王出居于郑 ，辟母弟之难也。
现代文：天子无所谓出国，《春秋》记载说 天王出居于郑 ，意思是由于躲避兄弟所造成的祸难。
English: It doesn't matter if the heavenly son goes abroad. "Spring and Autumn" records that the heavenly king was born in Zheng, which means the calamity caused by evading his brothers.

古文：天子凶服降名，礼也。
现代文：天子穿着素服，自称 不穀 ，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the son of heaven to wear plain clothes and call himself a grain-free person.

古文：郑伯与孔将鉏、石甲父、侯宣多省视官具于氾，而后听其私政，礼也。
现代文：郑文公和孔将鉏、石甲父、侯宣多到汜地问候天子的官员和检查供应天子的用品，然后听取关于郑国的政事，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for Zheng Wenguang and Kong to take Zou, Shijiazhuang father and Hou Xuanduo to Shandong to greet the officials of Tianzi and check the supplies for Tianzi, and then listen to the political affairs of Zheng.

古文：卫人将伐邢，礼至曰： 不得其守，国不可得也。
现代文：卫国人准备攻打邢国，卫大夫礼至说： 不和他们的大官接近，是难以得到他们的国家的。
English: When the defenders of the country were preparing to attack Shandong, Wei Dafu Li Zu said: "Without getting close to their dignitaries, it is difficult to get their country.

古文：我请昆弟仕焉。 
现代文：我请求让我的兄弟去邢国做官。 
English: I asked for my brother to be made an official of the country.

古文：乃往，得仕。
现代文：他们就前去邢国，并做了官。
English: They went to Shan State and became officials.

