古文：刘焉袁术吕布刘焉字君郎，江夏竟陵人也，鲁恭王后也。
现代文：◆刘焉传，刘焉，字君郎，江夏竟陵人，是鲁恭王的后代。
English: ◆ Liu Yan Chuan, Liu Yan, Zi Junro, Jiangxia Jingling Ren, is a descendant of King Lu Gong.

古文：肃宗时，徙竟陵。
现代文：肃宗时，刘氏搬到竟陵居住。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, the Liu family moved to live in Jingling.

古文：焉少任州郡，以宗室拜郎中。
现代文：刘焉年轻时在州郡任职，因为是皇帝宗室而被授予郎中一职。
English: When Liu Yan was young, he served in Zhoushu County. Because he was the emperor's son-in-law, he was awarded the post of middle son.

古文：去官居阳城山，精学教授。
现代文：离任以后刘焉住在阳城山，专心学问，传授弟子。
English: After leaving office, Liu Yan lived in Yangcheng Mountain, concentrating on learning and teaching his disciples.

古文：举贤良方正，稍迁南阳太守、宗正、太常。
现代文：后被举荐为贤良方正，逐步升任南阳太守、宗正、太常。
English: Later, he was recommended as the virtuous Fang Zheng, and was gradually promoted to Nanyang Dazhou, Zong Zheng, and Dazhang.

古文：时，灵帝政化衰缺，四方兵寇，焉以为刺史威轻，既不能禁，且用非其人，辄增暴乱，乃建议改置牧伯，镇安方夏，清选重臣，以居其任。
现代文：当时灵帝政治教化衰败残缺，到处发生兵乱，刘焉认为刺史的职权小，既没有能力制止，所任用的人又不胜任，因而经常增加暴乱，于是建议改设牧伯，镇抚一方，慎重挑选担任重要职位的大臣去当牧伯。
English: At that time, Lingdi's political education was decadent and incomplete, and there were military conflicts everywhere. Liu Yan thought that the authority of the prince was small, and he was not able to stop it, and the people he appointed were incompetent, so they often increased the riots. Therefore, he proposed to change the position of the herdsman to the one of the governor, and carefully select the ministers who held important positions to be the herdsman.

古文：焉乃阴求为交阯，以避时难。
现代文：刘焉暗中谋求交趾太守，以躲避当时祸乱。
English: Liu Yan secretly sought the friendship of the grand marshal to avoid the calamity at that time.

古文：议未即行，会益州刺史郗俭在政烦扰，谣言远闻，而并州刺史张懿、凉州刺史耿鄙并为寇贼所害，故焉议得用。
现代文：他的建议没来得及实施，赶上益州刺史郗俭施政搅扰百姓，谣言传得很远，而且并州刺史张懿、凉州刺史耿鄙均遭寇贼杀害，所以刘焉的提议得到采纳。
English: His suggestion did not have time to be implemented, and it was too late to catch up with Yizhou's Zhang Shihong, whose frugal policies disturbed the people, and the rumor spread far and wide. Moreover, both Zhang Shihong and Liangzhou's Zhang Shihong were killed by bandits, so Liu Yan's proposal was adopted.

古文：出焉为监军使者，领益州牧，太仆黄琬为豫州牧，宗正刘虞为幽州牧，皆以本秩居职。
现代文：刘焉被派出担任监军使者，领益州牧，太仆黄琬担任豫州牧，宗正刘虞担任幽州牧，都以原先职位的俸禄当州牧。
English: Liu Yan was sent to serve as an envoy to supervise the army, leading the Yizhou herdsmen, the eunuch Huang Qi served as the Yuzhou herdsman, and Zongzheng Liu Yu served as the Yuzhou herdsman, all with the salary of the original position.

古文：州任之重，自此而始。
现代文：州牧地位的重要，自这裹开始。
English: The importance of the state's pastoral status begins here.

古文：是时，益州贼马相亦自号 黄巾 ，合聚疲役之民数千人，先杀绵竹令，进攻雒县，杀郗俭，又击蜀郡、犍为，旬月之间，破坏三郡。
现代文：这时，益州贼马相也自称为 黄巾 ，聚集起几千为劳役所苦的百姓，先杀了绵竹令，进攻雒县，杀了郗俭，接着攻打蜀郡、犍为，一个月内，就攻下毁坏了三个郡。
English: At this time, the Yizhou bandit Ma Xiang, also known as Huang Yan, gathered several thousand people who were suffering from forced labor, first killed Mian Zhu Rong, attacked Yixian County, killed Gao Jian, then attacked Shu County and Yiwu, and within one month, attacked and destroyed three counties.

古文：马相自称 天子 ，众至十余万人，遣兵破巴郡，杀郡守赵部。
现代文：马相自称 天子 ，部众达十多万人。马相派兵攻克巴郡，杀了巴郡太守趟部。
English: Ma Xiang claimed to be the son of heaven, and his followers numbered more than one hundred thousand. Ma Xiang sent troops to invade Ba County and killed the governor of Ba County.

古文：州从事贾龙，先领兵数百人在犍为，遂纠合吏人攻相，破之，龙乃遣吏卒迎焉。
现代文：益州从事贾龙原先带了几百士兵在犍为驻防，于是集合官吏百姓进攻马相，击败了马相，贾龙派官吏士兵迎接刘焉。
English: Jia Long, who was engaged in Yizhou, had originally brought several hundred soldiers to be stationed in Shao, so he gathered officials and people to attack Ma Xiang and defeated Ma Xiang. Jia Long sent officials and soldiers to meet Liu Yan.

古文：焉到，以龙为校尉，徙居绵竹。
现代文：刘焉上任后，任命贾龙为校尉，将他迁到绵竹居住。
English: After Liu Yan took office, he appointed Jialong as a school captain and moved him to Mianzhu.

古文：抚纳离叛，务行宽惠，而阴图异计。
现代文：刘焉安抚收容逃跑反叛的人，极力实行宽容恩惠的政策，但内心打算反叛
English: Liu Yan appeased and accommodated those who fled and rebelled, and tried his best to implement a policy of tolerance and benevolence, but in his heart he intended to rebel

古文：沛人张鲁，母有姿色，兼挟鬼道，往来焉家，遂任鲁以为督义司马，与别部司马张脩将兵掩杀汉中太守苏固，断绝斜谷，杀使者。
现代文：沛国人张鲁，母亲长得漂亮，加上懂得神鬼邪说，和刘焉家有往来，刘焉就任命张鲁为督义司马，与别部司马张脩率兵出其不意杀了汉中太守苏固，切断斜谷，杀死来往的使者。
English: Zhang Lu, a native of Pei Province, whose mother was beautiful, and who knew about evil spirits and evil sayings, had dealings with Liu Yan's family. Liu Yan appointed Zhang Lu as the governor of Yishima, and together with another Sima, Zhang Ye, he led his soldiers to kill Sugu, the supreme governor of Hanzhong, cut off the valley, and kill the messengers.

古文：鲁既得汉中，遂复杀张脩而并其众。
现代文：张鲁已经占领汉中，就又杀了张脩并且合并了他的部队。
English: Zhang Lu had already occupied Hanzhong, so he killed Zhang Xuan and merged his forces.

古文：焉欲立威刑以自尊大，乃托以佗事，杀州中豪强十余人，士民皆怨。
现代文：刘焉想通过设立严厉的刑法达到妄自尊大，就以其他事为藉口杀了州内的十多个豪强，弄得士人百姓都埋怨。
English: Liu Yan wanted to achieve arrogance by setting up a strict criminal law, so he killed more than a dozen heroes in the state under the pretext of other things, which made everyone complain.

古文：初平二年，犍为太守任岐及贾龙并反，攻焉。焉击破，皆杀之。
现代文：初平二年，犍为太守任岐和贾龙一道反叛，被刘焉打败，反叛的人全被杀死。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Renqi and Jialong rebelled together and were defeated by Liu Yan. All the rebels were killed.

古文：自此意气渐盛，遂造作乘舆车重千余乘。
现代文：自此以后，刘焉的意气渐渐强横，就制造了天子的乘车和一千多辆辎重车。
English: Since then, Liu Yan's spirit has gradually become stronger and stronger, and he has produced more than a thousand heavy-duty vehicles.

古文：焉四子，范为左中郎将，诞治书御史，璋奉车都尉，并从献帝在长安，唯别部司马瑁随焉在益州。
现代文：刘焉有四个儿子，刘范担任左中郎将，刘诞担任治书御史，刘璋担任奉车都尉，他们都跟随献帝在长安，衹有别部司马刘瑁随刘焉在益州。
English: Liu Yan had four sons, Liu Fan served as the left middle-rank general, Liu Xing served as the chief historian, and Liu Xie served as the captain of the imperial carriage. They all followed Emperor Xian in Chang'an, and Liu Yan's other subordinate, Sima Liu, followed Liu Yan in Yizhou.

古文：朝廷使璋晓譬焉，焉留璋不复遣。
现代文：朝廷派刘璋晓谕刘焉，刘焉将刘璋留下，不让他回去。
English: The imperial court sent Liu Qiao to Liu Yan. Liu Yan left Liu Qiao behind and would not let him go back.

古文：兴平元年，征西将军马腾与范谋诛李傕，焉遣叟兵五千助之，战败，范及诞并见杀。焉既痛二子，又遇天火烧其城府车重，延及民家，馆邑无余，于是徙居成都，遂疽发背卒。
现代文：兴平元年，征西将军马腾与刘范商量杀死李催，刘焉派五千蜀兵相助，结果被打败，刘范和刘诞均被杀死，刘焉已经由于失去两个儿子而伤心，又遇天火烧掉城中府内的车子辎重，大火还烧着了百姓的房屋，客舍城邑烧得荡然无存，刘焉只好搬到成都居住，接着背生毒疮而死。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, the general of the Western Expedition, Ma Teng, discussed with Liu Fan to kill Li Xi, and Liu Yan sent five thousand Shu soldiers to help. As a result, he was defeated. Liu Fan and Liu Xing were both killed. Liu Yan was already sad because of the loss of his two sons, and he was hit by a fire that burned the cars in the city. The fire also burned the houses of the people, and the guesthouses of the city were burned to nothing. Liu Yan had to move to Chengdu to live, and then he died of back sores.

古文：州大吏赵韪等贪璋温仁，立为刺史。
现代文：益州的大官员趟题等人贪图刘璋温和仁慈，将他立为刺史。
English: The grand officials of Yizhou, such as Wanzhi and others, coveted the gentle and benevolent Liu Xuan, and set him up as a bitter history.

古文：诏书因以璋为监军使者，领益州牧，以韪为征东中郎将。
现代文：皇帝下诏书就任命刘璋为监军使者，领益州牧，任命趟韪为征束中郎将。
English: In the imperial edict issued by the emperor, Liu Ye was appointed as the envoy to supervise the army, the leader of Yizhou, and Wai Ye was appointed as the general in charge of conscription.

古文：先是，荆州牧刘表表焉僭拟乘舆器服，韪以此遂屯兵朐备表。
现代文：在此以前荆州牧刘表上书告发刘焉僭越身份，在乘车器物衣服方面和天子比拟，因此趟韪驻兵朐腮以防备刘表。
English: Prior to this, the Jingzhou Mu Liu watch announced the identity of Liu Yan Yue in a letter. In terms of vehicles, clothing and clothing, he was comparable to the son of heaven. Therefore, he was stationed in the military camp to prevent the Liu watch.

古文：初，南阳、三辅民数万户流入益州，焉悉收以为众，名曰 东州兵 。
现代文：起初，南阳、三辅的几万家百姓流亡到益州，刘焉将他们全部收为部众，称为 束州兵 。
English: At first, tens of thousands of people from Nanyang and Sanshu went into exile in Yizhou, and Liu Yan gathered them all into a group of soldiers, called the Shuo National Army.

古文：璋性柔宽无威略，东州入侵暴为民患，不能禁制，旧士颇有离怨。
现代文：刘璋性情柔弱宽容，缺乏威信谋略。束州入侵凌横暴，成为百姓的灾难，刘璋没有能力制止，旧有的士人相当埋怨并且叛离。
English: Liu Bei's disposition was weak and tolerant, and he lacked a strategy of prestige. The invasion of Shuzhou was tyrannical and became a disaster for the people. Liu Bei was unable to stop it, and some of the old officials complained and defected.

古文：赵韩之在巴中，甚得众心，璋委之以权。
现代文：趟韪在巴中，很得百姓士兵的欢心，刘璋将大权交给他。
English: Wanzhong was very popular with the common soldiers in Bazhong, and Liu Bei handed over the supreme power to him.

古文：韪因人情不辑，乃阴结州中大姓。
现代文：赵韪见到民心不和，就暗中勾结州中的世家望族。
English: When Zhao Wei saw that there was discord in the hearts of the people, he secretly colluded with the noble families in the middle of the state.

古文：建安五年，还共击璋，蜀郡、广汉、犍为皆反应。
现代文：建安五年，赵韪掉转兵力共同进攻刘璋，蜀郡、广汉、犍为都背叛刘璋响应趟膛。
English: In the 5th year of Jian'an, Zhao Bei turned his forces to jointly attack Liu Bei, and Shu County, Guanghan, and Handan all betrayed Liu Bei in response to the attack.

古文：东州人畏见诛灭，乃同心并力，为璋死战，遂破反者，进攻韪于江州，斩之。
现代文：束州人害怕被杀头，就同心协力，为刘璋死战，结果打败了叛军，进攻在江州的赵韪，杀了赵觼。
English: The people of Sokcho were afraid of being killed, so they made a concerted effort to fight to the death for Liu Ye. As a result, they defeated the rebels, attacked Zhao Ye in Jiangzhou, and killed Zhao Ye.

古文：张鲁以璋暗懦，不复承顺。
现代文：张鲁因为刘璋糊涂懦弱，不再顺从。
English: Zhang Lu was no longer submissive because of Liu Yao's cowardice.

古文：璋怒，杀鲁母及弟，而遣其将庞羲等攻鲁，数为所破。
现代文：刘璋发怒，杀了张鲁的母亲和弟弟，并且派部将庞羲等人攻打张鲁，但多次被张鲁打败。
English: Liu Bei got angry, killed Zhang Lu's mother and brother, and sent Pang Jun and others to attack Zhang Lu, but they were repeatedly defeated by Zhang Lu.

古文：鲁部曲多在巴土，故以羲为巴郡太守。
现代文：张鲁的部队大都部署在巴郡地区，所以刘璋任命庞羲为巴郡太守。
English: Most of Zhang Lu's troops were deployed in the Bashun area, so Liu Bei appointed Pang Jun as the governor of Bashun.

古文：鲁因袭取之，遂雄于巴汉。
现代文：张鲁乘机偷袭攻占了巴郡，终于在巴郡漠中一带称雄。
English: Zhang Lu took the opportunity to sneak attack and occupied Bashir, and finally became a hero in the middle of the Bashir desert.

古文：十三年，曹操自将征荆州，璋乃遣使致敬。
现代文：十三年，曹操亲自率兵征讨荆州，刘璋于是派出使者致以敬意。
English: In the thirteenth year, Cao Cao personally led an army to conquer Jingzhou, and Liu Bei sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：操加璋振威将军，兄瑁平寇将军。
现代文：曹操加封刘璋为振威将军，封其兄刘瑁为平寇将军。
English: Cao Cao also appointed Liu Bei as General Zhenwei and his brother Liu Bei as General Pingko.

古文：璋因遣别驾从事张松诣操，而操不相接礼。
现代文：刘璋因此派别驾从事张松到曹操那裹，但曹操没有按礼节接待。
English: Liu Bei therefore sent Zhang Song to Cao Cao, but Cao Cao did not receive him according to etiquette.

古文：松怀恨而还，劝璋绝曹氏，而结好刘备。
现代文：张松心裹怀恨，回来后劝说刘璋同曹操断绝关系，而同刘备结成友好。
English: Zhang Song, harboring a grudge, came back to persuade Liu Bei to break off relations with Cao Cao and to form a friendship with Liu Bei.

古文：璋从之。
现代文：刘璋接受了张松的意见。
English: Liu Ye accepted Zhang Song's suggestion.

古文：十六年，璋闻曹操当遣兵向汉中讨张鲁，内怀恐惧，松复说璋迎刘备以拒操。
现代文：十六年，刘璋听说曹操将派兵到汉中征讨张鲁，心中恐惧，张松又劝说刘璋迎接刘备来抵挡曹操。
English: Sixteen years later, Liu Bei heard that Cao Cao was going to send troops to Hanzhong to recruit Zhang Lu, and he was terrified. Zhang Song then persuaded Liu Bei to meet Liu Bei to resist Cao Cao.

古文：璋即遣法正将兵迎备。
现代文：刘璋立刻派法正率部队迎接刘备。
English: Liu Bei immediately sent troops led by Fa Zheng to meet Liu Bei.

古文：璋主簿巴西黄权谏曰： 刘备有枭名，今以部曲遇之，则不满其心，以宾客待之，则一国不容二主，此非自安之道。 
现代文：刘璋的主簿巴西人黄权劝阻说： 刘备有骁勇的名声，现在要是以部下的身份对待他，就没法满足他的心愿；要是以宾客的身份对待他，一国不容二主，造不是使自己安全的办法。 
English: The Brazilian Huang Quan, Liu Bei's principal, dissuaded him, saying, "Liu Bei has a reputation for bravery. If you treat him as a subordinate, you will not be able to satisfy his wishes; if you treat him as a guest, one country cannot tolerate two masters, and this is not the way to make yourself safe.

古文：从事广汉王累自倒悬于州门以谏。璋一无所纳。
现代文：从事广汉人王累将自己倒吊在益州城门上劝阻刘璋，刘璋全都不予采纳。
English: Wang Lei, who was engaged in Guanghan people, hung himself upside down on the Yizhou city gate to dissuade Liu Xuan, and Liu Xuan did not accept it at all.

古文：备自江陵驰至涪城，璋率步骑数万与备会。
现代文：刘备从江陵骑马赶到涪城，刘璋率领几万步兵骑兵与刘备相会。
English: Liu Bei rode from Jiangling to Lucheng, and Liu Xuan led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to meet Liu Bei.

古文：张松劝备于会袭璋，备不忍。
现代文：张松劝说刘备见面时偷袭刘璋，刘备心中不忍。
English: Zhang Song persuaded Liu Bei to sneak up on Liu Yao when they met, but Liu Bei could not bear it.

古文：明年，出屯葭萌。
现代文：第二年，刘备外出驻守葭萌。
English: In the second year, Liu Bei went out to stay in Shumeng.

古文：松兄广汉太守肃惧祸及己，乃以松谋白璋，收松斩之，敕诸关戍勿复通。
现代文：张松的哥哥广汉太守张肃害怕灾难临头，就把张松的图谋禀告了刘璋，刘璋将张松收捕处死，下令所有关隘的守卫部队封锁道路。
English: Zhang Song's brother, the Guanghan governor Zhang Su, was afraid of impending disaster, so he reported Zhang Song's plot to Liu Bei. Liu Bei arrested Zhang Song and executed him, and ordered all the border guard troops to block the road.

古文：备大怒，还兵击璋，所在战克。
现代文：刘备大怒，掉转兵力攻打刘璋，兵锋所指全都攻克。
English: Liu Bei flew into a rage, turned his troops around and attacked Liu Bei, and conquered everything that the general pointed out.

古文：十九年，进围成都，数十日，城中有精兵三万人，谷支一年，吏民咸欲拒战。
现代文：十九年，刘备进兵包围成都，围了几十天，遣时城中有三万精良部队，粮食够支持一年，官吏百姓都想抵抗。
English: In 1919, Liu Bei's troops besieged Chengdu for dozens of days. There were 30,000 elite troops in the besieged city, and there was enough grain to support them for a year. The officials and common people all wanted to resist.

古文：璋言： 父子在州二十余岁，无恩德以加百姓，而攻战三载，肌膏草野者，以璋故也。
现代文：刘璋说： 我父子在益州二十多年，没有给百姓施加恩德，却打了三年，许多人死在草莽野外，衹是因为我的缘故。
English: Liu Yao said: My father and son have been in Yizhou for more than 20 years. They did not show any kindness to the people, but they fought for three years. Many people died in the grasslands. I am the reason for this.

古文：何心能安！ 
现代文：我怎么能够安心！ 
English: How can I be at ease!

古文：遂开城出降，群下莫不流涕。
现代文：于是打开城门，出城投降，部下没有不哭的。
English: So he opened the city gate and went out of the city to surrender. His men did not leave without shedding tears.

古文：备迁璋于公安，归其财宝，后以病卒。
现代文：刘备将刘璋迁到公安，将财宝归还给他，后来刘璋因病去世。
English: Liu Bei transferred Liu Hui to the Public Security Bureau and returned the treasure to him. Later, Liu Hui died of illness.

古文：明年，曹操破张鲁，定汉中。
现代文：第二年，曹操打败张鲁，平定汉中。
English: The following year, Cao Cao defeated Zhang Lu and pacified Han Zhong.

古文：鲁字公旗。
现代文：张鲁字公旗。
English: The official flag of Zhang Ruzi is raised.

古文：初，祖父陵，顺帝时客于蜀，学道鹤鸣山中，造作符书，以惑百姓。
现代文：起初，张鲁的祖父张陵，顺帝时客居蜀中，在鹤呜山中学习道术，制作符炼文书，用来迷惑百姓。
English: At first, Zhang Ling, Zhang Lu's grandfather, was a guest in Shu during the reign of Emperor Shun. He studied Taoism in the Hewu Mountains and produced incantations to confuse the people.

古文：受其道者辄出米五斗，故谓之 米贼 。
现代文：接受张陵道法的总是拿出五斗米，所以被称为 米贼 。
English: Those who accept the Zhangling Dao Fa always take out five buckets of rice, so they are called rice thieves.

古文：陵传子衡，衡传于鲁，鲁遂自号 师君 。
现代文：张陵传给儿子张衡，张衡传给儿子张鲁，张鲁于是自称为 师君 。
English: Zhang Ling passed it on to his son Zhang Heng, Zhang Heng passed it on to his son Zhang Lu, Zhang Lu then called himself "Master."

古文：其来学者，初名为 鬼卒 ，后号 祭酒 。
现代文：那些前来学道的人，开始叫做 鬼卒 ，后来叫做 祭酒 。
English: Those who came to learn the Tao were initially called "ghosts," later called "sacrificial wine."

古文：祭酒各领部众，众多者名曰 理头 。
现代文：祭酒各自统领部下，人数多的称为 理头 。
English: The sacrificial wine is drunk by the leaders of their subordinates, the most numerous of whom are called the leaders.

古文：皆校以诚信，不听欺妄，有病但令首过而已。
现代文：他们一律用诚实信义要求大家，不许欺骗虚妄，谁有病衹要他说出自己所犯的遇错就行了。
English: They all require everyone to be honest and trustworthy, not to cheat or lie, and anyone who is ill should just tell them what mistakes they have made.

古文：诸祭酒各起义舍于路，同之亭传，县置米肉以给行旅。
现代文：所有祭酒都在路边造起义舍，跟驿站相同，放上米和肉供给来往行人。
English: All the sacrificial wine is made in the roadside uprising house, the same as the station, put on rice and meat to supply pedestrians.

古文：食者量腹取足，过多则鬼能病之。
现代文：来吃饭的人根据自己的饭量取用，拿得过多鬼就会使他生病。
English: People who come to eat take according to their own meal. If they take too much ghost, it will make them sick.

古文：犯法者先加三原，然后行刑。
现代文：触犯法令的人先原谅三次，然后用刑。
English: Those who violate the law are first pardoned three times and then punished.

古文：不置长吏，以祭酒为理，民夷信向。
现代文：他们不设长官佐吏，祭酒就负责管理，百姓和夷民都信服归顺。
English: They did not set up chief officials and officials, and they were responsible for the management of the sacrificial wine. The common people and the barbarians all faithfully submitted.

古文：朝廷不能讨，遂就拜鲁镇夷中郎将，领汉宁太守。
现代文：朝廷无力讨伐，就派人去授予张鲁镇夷中郎将，领汉宁太守，接受他的进贡。
English: The imperial court was powerless to fight back, so it sent someone to award Zhang Ruzhen Yizhong Lang with the title of general and Han Ning with the title of governor to accept his tribute.

古文：通其贡献。韩遂、马超之乱，关西民奔鲁者数万家。
现代文：韩遂、马超之乱时，关西百姓投奔张鲁的有几万家。
English: During the Han Sui and Ma Chao Revolts, tens of thousands of Kansai people fled to Zhanglu.

古文：时人有地中得玉印者，群下欲尊鲁为汉宁王。
现代文：当时有人在地下得到玉印，部下想尊奉张鲁为汉宁王。
English: At that time, someone got the jade seal underground, and his subordinates wanted to honor Zhang Lu as the king of Hanning.

古文：鲁功曹阎圃谏曰： 汉川之民，户出十万，四面险固，财富土沃，上匡天子，则为桓、文，次方窦融，不失富贵。
现代文：张鲁的功曹阎圃劝阻说： 汉川的百姓，超过十万家，四面险要坚固，财物富足，土地肥沃，上策辅助天子，就可成为齐桓公和晋文公，次之也可以和窦融相比，不会失去富贵。
English: Zhang Lu's gong Cao Yanpu dissuaded: Hanchuan's people, more than one hundred thousand families, should be solid on all sides, rich in property, fertile land, and the best strategy to assist the heavenly son, they can become Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen Gong, and then they can also be compared with Dou Rong, they will not lose their wealth.

古文：今承制署置，势足斩断。
现代文：现在以天子名义设置官员，权力足可杀伐专断。
English: Now, officials are set up in the name of the Son of Heaven, and they have enough power to kill and arbitrarily.

古文：遽称王号，必为祸先。 
现代文：匆匆忙忙称王，必定种下祸根。 
English: He who hastily proclaims himself king sows the seeds of disaster.

古文：鲁从之。
现代文：张鲁采纳了他的意见。
English: Zhang Lu adopted his opinion.

古文：鲁自在汉川垂三十年，闻曹操征之，至阳平，欲举汉中降。
现代文：张鲁在汉川将近三十年，得知曹操征讨他，已经到达阳乎关，想以整个汉中投降。
English: Zhang Lu, who had been in Hanchuan for nearly thirty years, learned that Cao Cao had arrived at Yanghu Pass to recruit him and wanted to surrender Hanchuan as a whole.

古文：其弟卫不听，率众数万，拒关固守。
现代文：张鲁的弟弟垂蛮不答应，率领几万人坚守疆垩飓抵抗。
English: Zhang Lu's younger brother Zhu did not agree to this, and led tens of thousands of people to hold out against the hurricane.

古文：操破卫，斩之。
现代文：萱操击败张卫，杀了他。
English: He defeated Zhang Wei and killed him.

古文：鲁闻阳平已陷，将稽颡归降。
现代文：张鲁得知阳平关失陷，准备请罪归降。
English: Zhang Lu learned that Yang Pingguan had fallen and was preparing to plead guilty.

古文：阎圃说曰： 今以急往，其功为轻，不如且依巴中，然后委质，功必多也。 
现代文：阎圃说： 眼下因情况紧急投降，功劳比较小，不如暂且依凭巴中地区，然后归顺，功劳必定大。 
English: Yan Pu said: At the moment, due to the urgent surrender of the situation, the merit is relatively small. It is better to rely on the Bazhong area for the time being, and then surrender. The merit must be great.

古文：于是乃奔南山。左右欲悉焚宝货仓库。鲁曰： 本欲归命国家，其意未遂。
现代文：这样，张鲁就逃奔南山，手下人想把珍宝物品仓库全部烧掉，张鲁说： 本来想归顺朝廷，心愿未能实现。
English: In this way, Zhang Lu fled to Nanshan. His subordinates wanted to burn down the entire treasure warehouse. Zhang Lu said: I originally wanted to surrender to the imperial court, but my wish was not realized.

古文：今日之走，以避锋锐，非有恶意。 
现代文：今日逃走，目的是避开兵锋，并没有恶意。 
English: The purpose of escaping today was to avoid the front line, and there was no malicious intent.

古文：遂封藏而去。
现代文：于是封闭府藏而去。
English: They only left when they had properly placed all the treasures.

古文：操入南郑，甚嘉之。
现代文：曹操进入南郑，对张鲁很是称赞。
English: Cao Cao entered Nan Zheng and was very complimentary of Zhang Lu.

古文：又以鲁本有善意，遣人尉安之。
现代文：又因为张鲁原本抱有善意，就派人对他加以慰问安抚。
English: Also, because Zhang Lu originally had good intentions, he sent someone to comfort and pacify him.

古文：鲁即与家属出逆，拜镇南将军，封阆中侯，邑万户，将还中国，待以客礼。封鲁五子及阎圃等皆为列侯。
现代文：张鲁随即同家人部属出来迎接曹操，曹操授予他镇南将军一职，封为闾中侯，食邑一万户。曹操准备回中原，以宾客的礼节对待堡垒，封堡垒的五个儿子和厘厘等人为列侯。
English: Zhang Lu immediately came out with his family members to meet Cao Cao. Cao Cao awarded him the post of Zhennan General, and he was appointed as the middle lord of Zou, with ten thousand households. Cao Cao was preparing to return to the Central Plains, and treated the fortress with the courtesy of a guest. The five sons of the fortress and Li Li and others were the vassals.

古文：鲁卒，谥曰原侯。子富嗣。
现代文：退昼去世后，谧号为区堡，他的儿子垂直继承官职。
English: After his death at lunchtime, he was given the nickname "District Fort" and his son took over his post.

古文：论曰：刘焉睹时方艰，先求后亡之所，庶乎见几而作。
现代文：论日：刘焉目睹时局正处艰难，先谋求能够后于他人灭亡的处所，希望见机而崛起。
English: On Japan: Liu Yan saw that the situation was difficult, and first sought a place where others could perish, hoping to rise to the occasion.

古文：夫地广则骄尊之心生，财衍则僭奢之情用，固亦恒人必至之期也。
现代文：地域辽阔，就会产生骄傲自大的心理；财富丰足，僭越奢侈的欲望就会发展，这本来是常人必定到达的境界。
English: A vast territory will give rise to the psychology of pride and arrogance; wealth is abundant, and the desire to be more extravagant will develop. This is the realm that ordinary people must reach.

古文：璋能闭隘养力，守案先图，尚可与岁时推移，而遽输利器，静受流斥，所谓羊质虎皮，见豺则恐，吁哉！
现代文：刘璋能够封锁关隘，积蓄力量，守卫治理先人的版图，还可以随着岁月变迁坚持下去，但他慌忙交出权力，坐等接受放逐排斥，真是所谓身披虎皮的羊，一见豺狼就吓得要死，可叹啊！
English: Liu Bei was able to seal off the straits, accumulate strength, guard and govern the territory of his predecessors, and persevere with the changes of the years, but he hurriedly handed over power and waited to accept exile and exclusion. He was truly a so-called sheep in a tiger's skin, and was scared to death at the sight of a jackal. What a pity!

古文：袁术字公路，汝南汝阳人，司空逢之子也。
现代文：◆袁术传，袁术，字公路，汝南汝阳人，司空袁逢的儿子。
English: ◆ Yuan Shuxuan, Yuan Sh, Zhe Dao, Runan Ryu Yangren, the son of Siku Yuanfeng.

古文：少以侠气闻，数与诸公子飞鹰走狗，后颇折节。
现代文：年轻时以有侠气出名，经常与公子哥们田猎游玩，后来有很大改变。
English: When he was young, he was famous for his chivalry and often went hunting with his male friends. Later, he changed a lot.

古文：举孝廉，累迁至河南尹、虎贲中郎将。
现代文：他被举荐为孝廉，经多次调任做到河南尹、虎贲中郎将。
English: He was recommended as a filial son, and after being transferred several times, he rose to the rank of Henan Yin and Tigress middle commander.

古文：时，董卓将欲废立，以术为后将军。
现代文：当时董卓准备改立皇帝，任命袁术为后将军。
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo was preparing to replace the emperor and appoint Yuan Shou as the next general.

古文：术畏卓之祸，出奔南阳。
现代文：袁术害怕卷入董卓的祸乱，跑到南阳。
English: Yuan Shu was afraid of getting involved in Dong Zhuo's calamity and ran away to Nanyang.

古文：会长沙太守孙坚杀南阳太守张咨，引兵从术。
现代文：正好长沙太守孙坚杀死南阳太守张咨，率领部队服从袁术。
English: Just at that time, Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, killed Zhang Zi, the governor of Nanyang, and led the troops to obey Yuan Shu.

古文：刘表上术为南阳太守，术又表坚领豫州刺史，使率荆、豫之卒，击破董卓于阳人。
现代文：刘表上书推荐袁术担任南阳太守，袁术又上书举荐孙坚领豫州刺史，让孙坚率领荆州、豫州的部队，在阳人击败了董卓。
English: Liu Shi wrote a letter recommending Yuan Shu as the governor of Nanyang, and Yuan Shu also wrote a letter recommending Sun Jian as the governor of Yuzhou, and let Sun Jian lead the troops of Jingzhou and Yuzhou to defeat Dong Zhuo in Yangren.

古文：术从兄绍因坚讨卓未反，远，遣其将会稽周昕夺坚豫州。
现代文：袁术的堂兄袁绍趁孙坚讨伐董卓没回来，路途远，派部将会稽人周昕夺取了孙坚的豫州。
English: Yuan Shu's cousin, Yuan Shao, took advantage of Sun Jian to attack Dong Zhuo, but he did not return. It was a long journey, and the faction captured Sun Jian's Yuzhou.

古文：术怒，击昕走之。
现代文：袁术很生气，打跑了周昕。
English: Yuan Shuxu was very angry and ran away from Zhou Qi.

古文：绍议欲立刘虞为帝，术好放纵，惮立长君，托以公义不肯同，积此衅隙遂成。
现代文：袁绍商量想立刘虞为皇帝，袁术喜欢放纵，害怕立年长的人做皇帝，就藉口公众的意见不肯答应，积到一块两人就产生了隔阂。
English: Yuan Shao wanted to make Liu Yu the emperor, Yuan Shu liked to indulge himself and was afraid to make an older man the emperor, so he used the excuse of the public's opinion to refuse to agree.

古文：乃各外交党援，以相图谋，术结公孙瓚，而绍连刘表。
现代文：于是两人各自结交党羽作为外援，用以打对方的主意。袁术结交公孙瓒，而袁绍联合刘表。
English: As a result, the two of them each made friends with party members as foreign aid to use to defeat the other's ideas. Yuan Shou made friends with Gongsun Yao, while Yuan Shao made friends with Liu Bei.

古文：豪桀多附于绍，术怒曰： 群竖不吾从，而从吾家奴乎！ 
现代文：豪杰之士大都依附袁绍，袁术发怒说： 这些竖子不跟随我，反而跟随我家的奴仆吗？ 
English: Most of the great heroes followed Yuan Shao. Yuan Shou became angry and said, "These bastards don't follow me, but instead follow the servants of my family?

古文：又与公孙瓚书，云绍非袁氏子，绍闻大怒。
现代文：又写信给公孙瓒，说袁绍不是袁氏所生，袁绍知道后大怒。
English: He also wrote to Gongsun Yao, saying that Yuan Shao was not born of the Yuan clan. Yuan Shao was furious when he found out.

古文：初平三年，术遣孙坚击刘表于襄阳，坚战死。
现代文：初平三年，袁术派孙坚攻打在襄阳的刘表，孙坚战死。
English: In the third year of the Heian period, Yuan Shuxu sent Sun Jian to attack Liu Biao in Xiangyang. Sun Jian was killed in the battle.

古文：公孙瓚使刘备与术合谋共逼绍，绍与曹操会击，皆破之。
现代文：公孙瓒要刘备同袁术合谋共同逼迫袁绍，在袁绍和曹操的联合进攻下，全被打败。
English: Gongsun Yao wanted Liu Bei to conspire with Yuan Shu to jointly persecute Yuan Shao. Under the joint attack of Yuan Shao and Cao Cao, they were all defeated.

古文：四年，术引军入陈留，屯封丘。
现代文：四年，哀术率领部队进入陈留，驻扎在封丘。
English: In four years, Maechu led the troops into Chenliu and stationed in Tongfeng Hill.

古文：黑山余贼及匈奴於扶罗等佐术，与曹操战于匡亭，大败。
现代文：黑山剩下的贼寇以及匈奴于扶罗等帮助袁术，在匡亭与曹操会战，结果大败。
English: The remaining bandits in Montenegro and the Xiongnu in Furao helped Yuan Shu to fight against Cao Cao in Kuangting, but the result was a crushing defeat.

古文：术退保雍丘，又将其余众奔九江，杀杨州刺史陈温而自领之，又兼称徐州伯。
现代文：袁术退兵守保雍丘，又率领剩下的人马奔往九江，杀了扬州刺史陈温，自己领扬州刺史，还兼称徐州伯。
English: Yuan Shou retreated to defend Baoyongqiu, and led the remaining men and horses to Jiujiang, killed Yangzhou assassin Chen Wen, led Yangzhou assassin himself, and was also known as Xuzhou Bo.

古文：李傕入长安，欲结术为援，乃授以左将军，假节，封阳翟侯。
现代文：李催进入长安，想结交袁术作为外援，就任命袁术为左将军，假节，封他为阳翟侯。
English: Li urged him to enter Chang'an, and wanted to make friends with Yuan Shou as a foreign aid, so he appointed Yuan Shou as the left general, the false festival, and appointed him as the impotent governor.

古文：初，术在南阳，户口尚数十百万，而不修法度，以抄掠为资，奢恣无猒，百姓患之。
现代文：起初，袁术在南阳时，尚有几十万户、几百万人口，但他不注意整治法令制度，靠抄掠积蓄，奢侈放纵，贪得无厌，百姓对他很厌恶。
English: At first, when Yuan Shuxu was in Nanyang, there were still hundreds of thousands of households and millions of people, but he did not pay attention to the rectification of the legal system, relied on pillage and savings, indulged in luxury, and was insatiably greedy. The people were very disgusted with him.

古文：又少见谶书，言 代汉者当涂高 ，自云名字应之。
现代文：袁术年轻时见到谶书上说 取代汉朝的是当涂高 ，就是说自己的名字和谶书符合。
English: When Yuan Shuxu was young, he read in a book that the Han Dynasty had been replaced by Dang Tu Gao, which meant that his name was consistent with the book.

古文：又以袁氏出陈为舜后，以黄代赤，德运之次，遂有僭逆之谋。
现代文：又因为袁氏出于陈国，是舜的后代。以黄德代替赤德，符合五德运行的次序，所以心存僭越反叛的想法。
English: Also, because the Yuan clan was born in Chen Guo and was a descendant of Yao, replacing the red virtue with the yellow virtue was in line with the order of operation of the five virtues, so they kept the idea of rebellion in mind.

古文：又闻孙坚得传国玺，遂拘坚妻夺之。
现代文：他听说孙坚得到了传国玺印，就关押孙坚的妻子夺得玺印。
English: When he heard that Sun Jian had obtained the imperial seal, he imprisoned Sun Jian's wife to seize the imperial seal.

古文：兴平二年冬，天子播越，败于曹阳。
现代文：兴平二年冬天，天子流离在外，在曹阳战败。
English: In the winter of the second year of Xingping, Tianzi wandered away and was defeated in Caoyang.

古文：术大会群下，因谓曰： 今海内鼎沸，刘氏微弱。
现代文：袁术大会部下，对他们说： 现在全国形势纷扰混乱，刘氏衰弱。
English: Yuan Shuchu said to his subordinates at the meeting: The current national situation is chaotic and disorderly, and Mr. Liu is weak.

古文：吾家四世公辅，百姓所归，欲应天顺民，于诸君何如？ 
现代文：我家四代担任三公宰相，百姓归顺，我想上应苍天，下顺民心，你们大家看怎么样？ 
English: Four generations of my family have served as the three princes and prime ministers, and the people have surrendered. I want to answer to the heavens above and the hearts of the people below. What do you all think?

古文：众莫敢对。
现代文：众人都不敢回答。
English: People didn't dare to respond.

古文：主簿阎象进曰： 昔周自后稷至于文王，积德累功，参分天下，犹服事殷。
现代文：主簿间象上前说道： 过去周朝从后稷到文王，积累恩德和功绩，拥有三分之一的天下，还服从事奉殷天子。
English: The main inscription reads: "In the past, the Zhou Dynasty, from Houyi to King Wen, accumulated benevolence and merit, owned one-third of the world, and also served to worship the Son of Heaven.

古文：明公虽奕世克昌，孰若有周之盛？
现代文：您虽然世代兴旺，能比得上周朝的昌盛吗？
English: Although your generation is prosperous, can you match the prosperity of last week's morning?

古文：汉室虽微，未至殷纣之敝也。 
现代文：漠室虽然衰弱，也没有到殷纣衰败的地步。 
English: Although the desert chamber is weak, it has not reached the point of decline.

古文：术嘿然，使召张范。范辞疾，遣弟承往应之。
现代文：袁术哑口无言，派人召张范，张范推托生病，派弟弟张承前来应付。
English: Yuan Jiu was speechless and sent someone to summon Zhang Fan. Zhang Fan pretended to be ill and sent his brother Zhang Cheng to come and deal with it.

古文：术问曰 昔周室陵迟，则有桓、文之霸；秦失其政，汉接而用之。
现代文：袁术问张承： 从前周天子衰败，就出现齐桓公、晋文公的霸业；秦朝政治混乱，汉朝接替秦朝取得政权。
English: Yuan Shuxian asked Zhang Cheng: Since Zhou Tianzi's decline the previous day, the hegemony of Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wen Gong emerged; the Qin Dynasty was in political turmoil, and the Han Dynasty succeeded the Qin Dynasty to take power.

古文：今孤以土地之广，士人之众，欲徼福于齐桓，拟迹于高祖，可乎？ 
现代文：现在我凭藉广阔的土地，众多的士人和百姓，想向齐桓公求福，和汉高祖比拟功业，可以吗？ 
English: Now, by virtue of the vast land, numerous scholars and common people, I want to ask Qi Huan Gong for blessings, and compare my work with the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, is that OK?

古文：承对曰： 在德不在众。
现代文：张承回答说： 遣取决于德行而不在人多。
English: Zhang Rong replied, "Expulsion depends on one's virtue, not on the number of people.

古文：苟能用德以同天下之欲，虽云匹夫，霸王可也。
现代文：要是能够施行德政，符合天下人的需要，即使是普通百姓，也可以成为霸主天子。
English: If you can implement a moral government and meet the needs of the people of the world, even ordinary people can become overlords and sons of heaven.

古文：若陵僭无度，干时而动，众之所弃，谁能兴之！ 
现代文：如果僭越犯上，不加节制，违背时势去做，这是大家要废弃的，谁又能使它兴盛呢？ 
English: If everyone abandons it, if everyone indulges in it without restraint and against the trend of the times, who will make it flourish?

古文：术不说。
现代文：袁术听了很不高兴。
English: Yuan Shuxu was very unhappy to hear this.

古文：自孙坚死，子策复领其部曲，术遣击杨州刺史刘繇，破之，策因据江东。
现代文：白孙坚死后，他的儿子孙策又统领孙坚的部下，袁术派孙策进攻杨州刺史刘繇，打败了刘繇，孙策趁机占领江东。
English: After the death of Bai Sun Jian, his son Sun Ce also led Sun Jian's subordinates, Yuan Shu sent Sun Ce to attack Liu Ye, the governor of Yangzhou, defeated Liu Ye, and Sun Ce seized the opportunity to occupy the East River.

古文：策闻术将欲僭号，与书谏曰：董卓无道，陵虐王室，祸加太后，暴及弘农，天子播越，宫庙焚毁，是以豪桀发愤，沛然俱起。
现代文：孙策听说袁术准备僭称天子，写信劝阻袁术说：董卓残暴无道，凌逼毒虐朝廷，对太后施加毒手，凶残波及弘农，天子流离在外，皇宫宗庙被烧毁，因此豪杰之士愤然勃发，迅速堀起。
English: Sun Ce heard that Yuan Shuxi was preparing to falsely claim to be the son of heaven, and wrote a letter to dissuade Yuan Shuxi, saying: "Dong Zhuo is ruthless and cruel, forcing and abusing the imperial court, inflicting a cruel hand on the empress dowager, the ferocity has spread to Hongnong, the son of heaven has been displaced, and the imperial palace ancestral temple has been burned down. Therefore, the heroes of heroes have erupted in anger and quickly disappeared.

古文：元恶既毙，幼主东顾，乃使王人奉命，宣明朝恩，偃武修文，与之更始。
现代文：元凶董卓死后，年幼的天子东返，就派出使者，奉了朝廷命令，宣扬朝廷恩德，要求停止战争，修治文德，与朝廷一道从头开始。
English: After the death of the main culprit, Dong Zhuo, when the young emperor returned to the East, he sent an envoy and received an order from the imperial court to preach the benevolence of the imperial court, to demand an end to the war, to cultivate virtue, and to start from scratch with the imperial court.

古文：然而河北异谋于黑山，曹操毒被于东徐，刘表僭乱于南荆，公孙叛逆于朔北，正礼阻兵，玄德争盟，是以未获从命，橐弓戢戈。
现代文：然而黄河北面的袁绍联合黑山贼寇存有不良企图，曹操祸害束部徐州，南面刘表在荆州僭号并制造祸乱，公孙瓒在长城以北反叛，刘繇凭藉武力割据，刘备争夺盟主，所以没能听从收起武器停止战争的命令。
English: However, on the north side of the Yellow River, Yuan Shao and the Montenegrin bandits had bad intentions. Cao Cao brought disaster to Xuzhou. On the south side, Liu Bei marched to Jingzhou and created havoc. Gong Sun Rong rebelled north of the Great Wall. Liu Bei used force to divide the territory. Liu Bei fought for the alliance, so he could not obey the order to stop the war.

古文：当谓使君与国同规，而舍是弗恤，完然有自取之志，惧非海内企望之意也。成汤讨桀，称：有夏多罪 ；武王讨纣，曰 殷有重罚 。
现代文：原以为您同国家想法一致，但您丢下国家不管，完全抱着自己夺取天下的打算，这恐怕不是全国对您所抱的期望。成汤讨伐桀，说 有夏罪恶很多 ；周武王讨伐纣，说 殷朝的罪恶很重 。
English: Originally, I thought that your thoughts were in line with those of the country, but you left the country unattended and fully embraced your plan to seize the world. This is probably not what the whole country expects from you. Cheng Tang Taobao said that there were many evils in the summer; King Zhou Wu Taobao said that the evils of the Yin Dynasty were very serious.

古文：此二王者，虽有圣德，假使时无失道之过，无由逼而取也。
现代文：这两位天子，虽然有圣明的道德，假使当时的天子没有不合道德的罪遇，就无从强取天下。
English: These two heavenly sons, although they have a sacred morality, if the heavenly sons at that time did not have immoral crimes, they would not be able to forcefully take over the world.

古文：今主上非有恶于天下，徒以幼小胁于强臣，异于汤、武之时也。
现代文：现在的皇上对天下并非犯有罪恶，衹是因为年纪小，被强暴的大臣胁迫，与成汤周武王时代不同。
English: The current emperor is not guilty of crimes against the world, but because he is young, he is coerced by violent ministers, which is different from the era of King Cheng Tang Zhouwu.

古文：又闻幼主明智聪敏，有夙成之德，天下虽未被其恩，咸归心焉。
现代文：另外，听说年幼的皇上贤明有识，聪慧敏捷，有早熟的资质，天下虽然还没有享受到皇上的恩泽，但心裹都归顺他。
English: In addition, it was said that the young emperor was wise and insightful, intelligent and agile, and had precocious qualities. Although the world had not yet enjoyed the emperor's grace, they all obeyed him.

古文：若辅而兴之，则旦、奭之美，率土所望也。
现代文：假使辅助天子，振兴朝廷，那么就具有周公旦、召公奭的美德，这是天下人的期望。
English: If you assist the Son of Heaven and revitalize the imperial court, then you will have the virtues of Zhou Gongdan and Zhao Gongdan, which is the expectation of the people of the world.

古文：使君五世相承，为汉宰辅，荣宠之盛，莫与为比，宜效忠守节，以报王室。
现代文：您家五代继承汉家宰相职位，显贵受宠的兴旺程度，谁都没法相比，所以应该效忠朝廷，守持节操，以报答天子。
English: Five generations of your family have inherited the position of prime minister of the Han family, and no one can compare with the prosperity of the dignitaries and favorites. Therefore, you should be loyal to the imperial court, maintain discipline, and repay the heavenly son.

古文：时人多惑图纬之言，妄牵非类之文，苟以悦主为美，不顾成败之计，古今所慎，可不熟虑！
现代文：当代人不少受图谶纬书的迷惑，把毫不相下的词句胡乱附会到一起，衹是为了讨主子的欢心，不管成败的大计。这是从古到今慎之又慎的事情，怎么可以不认真考虑！
English: Many contemporary people are bewitched by books of pictures and prose, and put together words and phrases that have nothing to do with each other, in order to please the master, regardless of the success or failure of the plan. This is a prudent and prudent thing from ancient times to the present, how can it not be seriously considered!

古文：忠言逆耳，驳议致憎，苟有益于尊明，无所敢辞。
现代文：忠言逆耳，不同的意见招致仇恨，但衹要对尊贵贤明的人有好处，我就不敢隐瞒不说。
English: I am not afraid to say what I think if it is good for the honorable and the wise.

古文：术不纳，策遂绝之。
现代文：袁术听不进去，孙策于是同他断绝了往来。
English: Yuan Shuxu did not listen, so Sun Ce broke off contact with him.

古文：建安二年，因河内张炯符命，遂果僭号，自称 仲家 。
现代文：建安二：年，袁术利用河内人张炯编造的符命，终于僭称名号，自称为 仲家 。
English: Jian'an II: In the year, Yuan Shu used the charms made up by the Hanoi people Zhang Qian, and finally gave himself a nickname, calling himself Zhong Jia.

古文：以九江太守为淮南尹，置公卿百官，郊祀天地。乃遣使以窃号告吕布，并为子娉布女。
现代文：他任命九江太守为淮南尹，设立公卿百官，在郊外祭祀天地他派使者将僭称名号的事告诉吕布。并且为儿子聘娶吕布的女儿。
English: He appointed Huainan Yin as the governor of Jiujiang, set up a hundred officials of nobility, and sent an envoy to Lu Bu to tell him about the so-called name. He also hired Lu Bu's daughter to marry his son.

古文：布执术使送许。
现代文：吕布抓了袁术的使者送往许县。
English: Lü Bu captured Yuan Shu's envoy and sent him to Xu County.

古文：术大怒，遣其将张勋、桥蕤攻布，大败而还。
现代文：袁术大怒，派部将张勋、桥蕤攻打吕布，大败而归。
English: Yuan Shuxu was furious. He sent Zhang Xun and Qiao Yao to attack Lvbu, but they were soundly defeated.

古文：术又率兵击陈国，诱杀其王宠及相骆俊，曹操乃自征之。
现代文：袁术又率领部队进攻陈国，引诱杀死了陈国王刘宠和陈国相骆俊，曹操于是亲自征讨袁术。
English: Yuan Shou also led troops to attack Chen Province, lured and killed Chen King Liu Cun and Chen Guoxiang Luo Jun, and Cao Cao then personally recruited Yuan Shou.

古文：术闻大骇，即走度淮，留张勋、桥蕤于蕲阳，以拒操。
现代文：袁术知道后非常害怕，立刻渡过淮河逃跑，留下张勋、桥蕤在蕲阳抵挡曹操。
English: Yuan Shou was very scared after he found out, and he immediately fled across the Huai River, leaving Zhang Xun and Qiao Yao to resist Cao Cao in Fenyang.

古文：操击破斩蕤，而勋退走。
现代文：曹操击败二人并杀了桥蕤，张勋退兵逃走。
English: Cao Cao defeated the two and killed the bridge pier, Zhang Xun retreated and fled.

古文：术兵弱，大将死，众情离叛，加天旱岁荒，士民冻馁，江、淮间相食殆尽。
现代文：袁术军队弱小，主要将领又死了，众叛亲离。加上天旱，粮食歉收，士人和百姓饥寒交迫，长江、淮河一带粮食都快吃光了。
English: Yuan Shuxu's army was weak and small, the main generals were dead, and the rebels had left. In addition to the drought, the grain harvest was poor, and the scholars and the people were hungry and cold. The Yangtze River and the Huaihe River were almost depleted of grain.

古文：时，舒仲应为术沛相，术以米十万斛与为军粮，仲应悉散以给饥民。
现代文：当时舒仲应担任袁术的沛国相，袁术给他十万斛米作为军粮，舒仲应将粮食全部分给饥饿的百姓。
English: At that time, Shuzhong was supposed to serve as Yuan Shuxi's minister of war supplies. Yuan Shuxi gave him 100,000 stalks of rice as war supplies, and Shuzhong was supposed to give all the grain to the starving people.

古文：术闻怒，陈兵将斩之。
现代文：袁术听到后大怒，陈列部队准备杀他。
English: Upon hearing this, Yuan Shuxu flew into a rage and had his troops ready to kill him.

古文：仲应曰： 知当必死，故为之耳。
现代文：仲应说： 我知道一定要死，所以这么做。
English: "I knew I had to die, so I did it," Zhong Ying said.

古文：宁可以一人之命，救百姓于涂炭。 
现代文：我情愿以自己一人的性命，从灾难困苦中救出百姓。 
English: I would rather save the people from disaster and hardship with my own life.

古文：术下马牵之曰： 仲应，足下独欲享天下重名，不与吾共之邪？ 
现代文：袁术下马拉着他的手说： 仲应，您衹想自己享有天下美名，而不愿意与我共同分享吗？ 
English: Yuan Shuxiong took him by the hand and said, "Zhong Ying, do you want to enjoy the world's fame without sharing it with me?

古文：术虽矜名尚奇，而天性骄肆，尊己陵物。
现代文：袁术虽然自矜名声，变幻莫测，但天性骄傲放纵，自尊自大，瞧不起他人。
English: Although Yuan Shuxu prides himself on his reputation and is unpredictable, he is proud and self-indulgent by nature, has a high self-esteem and looks down on others.

古文：及窃伪号，淫侈滋甚，媵御数百，无不兼罗纨，厌梁肉，自下饥困，莫之简恤。
现代文：等到窃僭名号时，荒淫奢侈日益严重。姬妾几百个，没一个不是身穿用丝织成的衣服，吃着美食佳肴，而部下饥饿穷困，他绝不去省察体恤。
English: By the time he was named, the extravagance of his life had become more and more serious. He had hundreds of concubines, and not one of them did not wear clothes made of silk and eat delicious food, while his subordinates were starving and destitute. He never took the time to reflect.

古文：于是资实空尽，不能自立。
现代文：这样，财产全被用光，无法自我立足。
English: In this way, the property is completely used up and cannot stand on its own feet.

古文：四年夏，乃烧宫室，奔其部曲陈简、雷薄于灊山。复为简等所拒，遂大困穷，士卒散走。
现代文：建安四年的夏天，袁术就烧掉宫室，投奔在潜山的部下陈简、雷薄，又被陈简等人拒绝，终于非常穷困窘迫，士兵们溃散逃走。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Jianan, Yuan Shou burned down the palace, and rushed to his subordinates Chen Jian and Lei Bo who were hiding in the mountains. They were rejected by Chen Jian and others. Finally, they were very poor and embarrassed, and the soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：忧懑不知所为，遂归帝号于绍，曰： 禄去汉室久矣，天下提挈，政在家门。
现代文：袁术忧愁愤懑，不知道怎么办，就将称号送给袁绍，说： 天命离开汉室已经很久了，靠天下人扶持，政权出自私门。
English: Yuan Shuxu was saddened and angry, and did not know what to do, so he gave the title to Yuan Shao, saying: It has been a long time since the Mandate of Heaven left the Han Dynasty. It is supported by the people of the world, and the political power comes from the private sector.

古文：豪雄角逐，分割疆宇。
现代文：英雄豪杰争夺追逐，分割地盘。
English: Heroes and heroes compete for the chase, divide the site.

古文：此与周末七国无异，唯强者兼之耳。
现代文：这同周朝末年的七国没有两样，衹有强大的一方吞并他方。
English: This is no different from the Seven Kingdoms at the end of the Zhou Dynasty, with one powerful side annexing the other.

古文：袁氏受命当王，符瑞炳然。
现代文：袁氏禀受天命应当统治天下，符命祥瑞粲然昭著。
English: The Yuan Dynasty was ordained by Heaven to rule the world, and it is well-known for its auspiciousness.

古文：今君拥有四州，人户百万，以强则莫与争大，以位则无所比高。
现代文：现在您拥有四个州，户口达百万人，论势力谁都不可能同您争强，论地位谁都不可能比您高。
English: Now that you have four states and a million people registered to vote, no one can compete with you in terms of power, and no one can surpass you in terms of status.

古文：曹操虽欲扶衰奖微，安能续绝运，起已灭乎！谨归大命，君其兴之。 
现代文：曹操虽然想扶助衰弱的朝廷，怎么能够将断掉的天命重新接上，将已经灭亡的朝廷重新振兴呢？
English: Although Cao Cao wanted to support the weakened imperial court, how could he reconnect the severed fate of heaven and revitalize the already perished imperial court?

古文：绍阴然其计。
现代文：我恭敬地将天命送给您，希望您使它振兴。 
English: I respectfully submit my manifest destiny to you, and hope that you will revitalize it.

古文：术因欲北至青州从袁谭，曹操使刘备徼之，不得过，复走还寿春。
现代文：袁绍心裹暗暗同意袁术的看法。袁术想往：青州投靠袁谭，曹操要刘备拦住去路，袁术过不去，又退回寿春。
English: Yuan Shao secretly agreed with Yuan Shuxiong. Yuan Shuxiong wanted to go to: Qingzhou to support Yuan Tan, Cao Cao wanted Liu Bei to block the way, Yuan Shuxiong could not pass and returned to Shuchun.

古文：六月，至江亭。
现代文：六月，到达江亭。
English: In June, he arrived at Jiangting.

古文：坐篑床而叹曰： 袁术乃至是乎！ 
现代文：袁术坐在竹床上叹气说： 袁术就弄到这种地步吗？ 
English: Yuan Shuxu, sitting on a bamboo bed, sighed and said, "Did Yuan Shuxu get to this point?

古文：因愤慨结病，欧血死。
现代文：袁术由于愤慨而郁积成病，吐血而死。
English: As a result of his indignation, Yuan Shuxu became ill, vomited blood and died.

古文：妻子依故吏庐江太守刘勋。
现代文：他的妻子儿女投靠袁术从前的部下庐江太守刘勋。
English: His wife and children took refuge with Yuan Shu's former subordinate, Liu Xun, the governor of the Minjiang River.

古文：孙策破勋，复见收视，术女入孙权宫，子曜仕吴为郎中。
现代文：孙策打败刘勋，他们又被孙策收容照看。袁术的女儿选入孙权后宫，儿子袁曜在吴国担任郎中。
English: Sun Ce defeated Liu Xun, and they were taken in and looked after by Sun Ce. Yuan Shu's daughter was elected to Sun Quan's harem, and his son Yuan You served as a steward in the State of Wu.

古文：论曰： 天命符验，可得而见，未可得而言也。
现代文：论日：天命的征兆应验，可以看得见，但说不出来。
English: On the Day of Judgment: The signs of the fulfillment of God's will are visible, but they cannot be explained.

古文：然大致受大福者，归于信顺乎！
现代文：然而大致禀受天命的人，恐怕是归结于信义顺应吧！
English: However, I'm afraid that for most people who have received God's call, it comes down to faith and obedience.

古文：夫事不以顺，虽强力广谋，不能得也。
现代文：做事不顺应道，虽然力量强大，智谋众多，不可能得到天命。
English: If one's work does not conform to the Way, it is impossible to obtain the Mandate of Heaven, even though one has great power and many cunning plans.

古文：谋不可得之事，日失忠信，变诈妄生矣。
现代文：企图得到不可能得到的东西，逐渐丧失忠诚信义，权变奸诈的事情就发生了。
English: Trying to get something that is impossible to get, gradually losing loyalty and trust, the power shift and treacherous things happened.

古文：况复苟肆行之，其以欺天乎！
现代文：何况又苟且放纵去做，难道用来欺骗上天吗？
English: What's more, if it's done carelessly and indulgently, will it be used to deceive Heaven?

古文：虽假符僭称，归将安所容哉！
现代文：虽然利用符命僭称天子，但送还又哪能够为人所容呢！
English: Although the use of the charms of life is called the son of heaven, but how can the return be tolerated?

古文：吕布字奉先，五原九原人也。
现代文：◆吕布传，吕布，字奉先，五原九原人。
English: ◆ Lü Bu Chuan, Lü Bu, the word Bongxian, the five original and nine original people.

古文：以弓马骁武给并州。
现代文：由于武艺高强作战勇猛而在并州供职。
English: Due to his strong martial arts, he fought bravely and served in Bozhou.

古文：刺史丁原为骑都尉，屯河内，以布为主簿，甚见亲待。
现代文：刺史丁原担任骑都尉，在河内驻扎，任命吕布为主簿，对他很亲近。
English: Ding Zhishi, who had been a cavalry captain stationed in Hanoi, appointed Lv Bu as his principal, and was very close to him.

古文：灵帝崩，原受何进召，将兵诣洛阳，为执金吾。
现代文：灵帝崩时，丁原接到何进的征召，率领军队到洛阳，任执金吾。
English: When Emperor Ling passed away, Ding Yuan received a call from He Jin to lead the army to Luoyang and take charge of Kingu.

古文：会进败，董卓诱布杀原而并其兵。
现代文：适逢何进战败，董卓引诱吕布杀死丁原并且吞并了他的部队。
English: When He Jin was defeated, Dong Zhuo lured Lv Bu to kill Ding Yuan and absorbed his troops.

古文：卓以布为骑都尉，誓为父子，甚爱信之。
现代文：董卓任命吕布为骑都尉，同他发誓结为父子，对他十分欣赏信任。
English: Dong Zhuo appointed Lü Bu as a cavalry captain, swore with him to be father and son, and fully appreciated and trusted him.

古文：稍迁至中郎将，封都亭侯。
现代文：不久，吕布升任中郎将，被封为都亭侯。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to churo shogun and given the additional title of duke.

古文：卓自知凶恣，每怀猜畏，行止常以布自卫。
现代文：董卓知道自己凶恶放纵，平时心裹猜疑害怕，出门住宿经常要吕布保护自己。
English: Dong Zhuo knows that he is a vicious indulgence, and he is afraid of suspicion at ordinary times. When he goes out to stay, he often needs Lü Bu to protect himself.

古文：尝小失卓意，卓拔手戟掷之。
现代文：吕布有次弄得董卓不太高兴，董卓拔出小戟向吕布掷去。
English: Lv Bu once made Dong Zhuo not very happy. Dong Zhuo pulled out a small hammer and threw it at Lv Bu.

古文：布拳捷得免，而改容顾谢，卓意亦解。
现代文：吕布动作敏捷得以躲遇，并且换了笑脸赔罪，董卓才心平气和。
English: Lü Bu acted quickly to avoid the encounter, and changed his smiling face to apologize. Dong Zhuocai was calm.

古文：布由是阴怨于卓。
现代文：但吕布自此以后心中暗恨董卓。
English: However, Lü Bu secretly hated Dong Zhuo in his heart from then on.

古文：卓又使布守中阁，而私与傅婢情通，益不自安。因往见司徒王允，自陈卓几见杀之状。
现代文：董卓又要吕布把守正中的合门，而吕布私下与董卓的亲幸侍女私通，心中愈益觉得不安，就去拜见司徒王允，告诉王允差点儿被董卓杀掉的情形。
English: Dong Zhuo also wanted Lü Bu to guard the gate of Zhengzhong, and Lü Bu secretly had an affair with Dong Zhuo's lucky maid. Feeling more and more uneasy, he went to see the scholar Wang Yun and told Wang Yun about how he was almost killed by Dong Zhuo.

古文：时允与尚书仆射士孙瑞密谋诛卓，因以告布，使为内应。
现代文：当时王允正与尚书仆射士孙瑞秘密谋划杀掉董卓，就将情况告诉吕布，要他做内应。
English: At that time, Wang Yunzheng secretly plotted with Sun Rui, Shang Shu's servant and archer, to kill Dong Zhuo. He told Lv Bu about the situation and asked him to respond.

古文：布曰： 如父子何？ 
现代文：吕布说： 对父子关系怎么处理？ 
English: Lüb said: How should the father-son relationship be handled?

古文：曰： 君自姓吕，本非骨肉。
现代文：王允说： 您自个儿姓吕，本来不是亲生骨肉。
English: Wang Yun said: Your own surname is Lv, you are not your own flesh and blood.

古文：今忧死不暇，何谓父子？
现代文：现在连死都没时间想，哪裹顾得上父子关系？
English: It's too late to worry about when you're going to be killed. What's there to talk about?

古文：掷戟之时，岂有父子情也？ 
现代文：董卓向您掷戟的时候，难道存有父子之情？ 
English: When Dong Zhuo throws darts at you, does he have a father-son relationship?

古文：布遂许之，乃于门刺杀卓，事已见《卓传》。
现代文：吕布就答应了王允，于是在合门口刺死了董卓，事情已经见于《董卓传》。
English: Lü Bu agreed to Wang Yun's request, and stabbed Dong Zhuo to death at the gate. The incident has been described in "The Biography of Dong Zhuo."

古文：允以布为奋威将军，假节，仪同三司，封温侯。
现代文：王允任命吕布为奋威将军，假节，仪同三司，爵封温侯。
English: Wang Yun appointed Lv Bu as the general of Fenwei, the false festival, the three departments of the ceremony, and the prince of the peerage.

古文：允既不赦凉州人，由是卓将李傕等遂相结，还攻长安。
现代文：王允既然不肯赦免凉州人，因此董卓的部将李催等人就相互联合，掉转兵力进攻长安。
English: Since Wang Yun did not want to pardon the people of Liangzhou, the general of Dong Zhuo, Li Xie, and others joined forces to attack Chang'an.

古文：布与傕战，败，乃将数百骑，以卓头系马鞍，走出武关，奔南阳。
现代文：吕布与李催交战失败，就率领几百名骑兵，把董卓的脑袋系在马鞍上，逃出武关，奔往南阳。
English: When the battle between Lü Bu and Li Xiang failed, he led several hundred cavalrymen, tied Dong Zhuo's head to the saddle, escaped from Wuguan, and rushed to Nanyang.

古文：布自恃杀卓，有德袁氏，遂恣兵抄掠。
现代文：袁术待吕布很不错，吕布仗恃自己杀了董卓。对袁氏有恩，就放纵部下抄掠。
English: Yuan Shuxutai treated Lü Bu very well. Lü Bu killed Dong Zhuo himself. If he was kind to the Yuan clan, he would allow his subordinates to plunder.

古文：术患之。布不安，复去从张杨于河内。
现代文：袁术很头疼，吕布心裹不安，又离开袁术到河内投奔张杨。
English: Yuan Shou had a headache, Lv Bu was uneasy, and Zhang Yang left Yuan Shou to go to Hanoi.

古文：时李傕等购募求布急，杨下诸将皆欲图之。
现代文：当时李催等人悬赏捉拿吕布很紧，张杨的手下将领都在打吕布的主意。
English: At that time, Li Xie and others were offering a reward for the capture of Lü Bu. Zhang Yang's generals were all playing with Lü Bu's idea.

古文：布惧，谓杨曰： 与卿州里，今见杀，其功未必多。
现代文：吕布害怕，对张杨说： 我与您同乡，眼下杀掉我，您的功劳未必很大。
English: Lü Bu was afraid and said to Zhang Yang, "I am a fellow villager with you. If you kill me now, you will not have done much good.

古文：不如生卖布，可大得傕等爵宠。 
现代文：不如将我活着献出去，可以大大得到李催等人的封爵和宠幸。 
English: If I were to give myself up alive, I could greatly benefit from the knighthoods and favors of Li Xie and others.

古文：杨以为然。
现代文：张杨认为吕布说得有道理。
English: Zhang Yang believes that what Lüb said makes sense.

古文：有顷，布得走投袁绍，绍与布击张燕于常山。
现代文：不久，吕布得以逃出，投奔袁绍，袁绍与吕布攻打在常山的张燕。
English: Soon, Lü Bu was able to escape and joined Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao and Lü Bu attacked Zhang Yan in Changshan.

古文：燕精兵万余，骑数千匹。
现代文：张燕有一万多精兵、几千骑兵。
English: Zhang Yan had more than ten thousand elite soldiers and several thousand cavalry.

古文：布常御良马，号曰赤菟，能驰城飞堑，与其健将成廉、魏越等数十骑驰突燕阵，一日或至三四，皆斩首而出。
现代文：吕布经常骑着能够腾跃城墙、飞跨壕沟、名叫赤兔的良马，与手下猛将成廉、魏越等几十个人骑马冲击张燕的军阵，有时一天去三四次，每次都砍了敌人的首级回来。
English: Lv Bu often rode a good horse named Red Rabbit, which could leap over the city wall and fly across the ditch. He and his men, including the fierce generals Cheng Lian and Wei Yue, rode dozens of people to attack Zhang Yan's army. Sometimes he went there three or four times a day, and each time he came back with the enemy's head cut off.

古文：连战十余日，遂破燕军。
现代文：连续作战十多天，终于打败了张燕的军队。
English: After more than ten days of continuous combat, they finally defeated Zhang Yan's army.

古文：布既恃其功，更请兵于绍，绍不许，而将士多暴横，绍患之。
现代文：吕布仗恃自己的战功，再次向袁绍要求增加军队，袁绍不答应，而吕布手下的将领士兵大都凶恶残暴，袁绍很头疼。
English: Lv Bu boasted of his war exploits and once again asked Yuan Shao to increase the number of troops. Yuan Shao did not agree, and most of the generals and soldiers under Lv Bu were vicious and brutal. Yuan Shao was very worried.

古文：布不自安，因求还洛阳。
现代文：吕布感觉不安，就请求回洛阳。
English: Feeling uneasy, Lü Bu asked to go back to Luoyang.

古文：绍听之，承制使领司隶校尉，遣壮士送布而阴使杀之。
现代文：袁绍同意他的要求，以天子名义任命吕布领司隶校尉，派猛士送吕布而暗中要他杀掉吕布。
English: Yuan Shao agreed to his request, and in the name of the Son of Heaven, he appointed Lv Bu as the captain of the brigade and sent soldiers to escort Lv Bu to secretly ask him to kill Lv Bu.

古文：布疑其图己，乃使人鼓筝于帐中，潜自遁出。
现代文：吕布怀疑袁绍打自己的主意，就派入在营帐中弹着筝，自己悄悄逃了出去。
English: Lv Bu suspected Yuan Shao of plotting against him, so he sent him into the camp to play the kite, and he quietly fled.

古文：夜中兵起，而布已亡。
现代文：袁绍的部队深夜扑来时，吕布已经逃走了。
English: By the time Yuan Shao's troops arrived in the middle of the night, Lü Bu had already fled.

古文：绍闻，惧为患，募遣追之，皆莫敢逼，遂归张杨。
现代文：袁绍知道后，担心吕布对自己不利，悬赏派人追赶吕布，而这些人没有一个敢于逼近吕布，造样吕布得以投归张杨。
English: After Yuan Shao knew, he was worried that Lübu would be unfavorable to him, so he offered a reward and sent people to chase Lübu, but none of these people dared to approach Lübu, so Lübu was able to return to Zhang Yang.

古文：道经陈留，太守张邈遣使迎之，相待甚厚，临别把臂言誓。
现代文：途中经过陈留，太守张邈派人迎接吕布，对他款待，临分手时两人握住对方手臂发誓结好。
English: After passing Chen Liu on the way, the grand marshal Zhang Ye sent someone to meet Lv Bu, treat him, and the two of them held each other's arms and swore to be good friends when they parted.

古文：邈字孟卓，东平人，少以侠闻。
现代文：◆张邈字孟卓，束平人，自小以行侠著称。
English: ◆Meng Zhuo (张字孟卓), a member of the Sokping family, has been famous for his bravery since childhood.

古文：初辟公府，稍迁陈留太守。
现代文：起初被公府召用，不久升为陈留太守。
English: At first he was employed by the government, and soon rose to the position of Chen Liu Dazhong.

古文：董卓之乱，与曹操共举义兵。
现代文：董卓之乱时，张邈与曹操一同兴起义兵。
English: During the Dong Zhuo Rebellion, Zhang Ye and Cao Cao rallied volunteers.

古文：及袁绍为盟主，有骄色，邈正义责之。绍既怨邈，且闻与布厚，乃令曹操杀邈。
现代文：到袁绍当上盟主，露出骄傲的神色，张邈以刚正的道义责备袁绍，袁绍已经怨恨张邈，又得知他与吕布关系密切，就要曹操杀掉张邈。
English: When Yuan Shao became the commander-in-chief, he showed a proud look, and Zhang Ye reproached Yuan Shao with upright morality. Yuan Shao already resented Zhang Ye, and learned that he had a close relationship with Lv Bu, and asked Cao Cao to kill Zhang Ye.

古文：操不听，然邈心不自安。
现代文：曹操不理睬，但张邈心中不安。
English: Cao Cao ignored him, but Zhang Ye felt uneasy.

古文：兴平元年，曹操东击陶谦，令其将武阳人陈宫屯东郡。
现代文：兴平元年。曹操向东攻打陶谦，派将领武阳人陈宫驻守柬郡。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Cao Cao attacked Tao Qian in the east, and sent the general Wuyang Chen Gong to garrison Cam County.

古文：宫因说邈曰： 今天下分崩，雄桀并起。君拥十万之众，当四战之地，抚剑顾眄，亦足以为人豪，而反受制，不以鄙乎！
现代文：陈宫趁机劝说张邈： 现在天下分裂，英雄豪杰同时崛起，您拥有十万人的队伍，处在可以四面作战的地方，按剑雄视天下，是可以做人中豪杰，反而被人控制，不是太卑下了吗？
English: Chen Gong took the opportunity to persuade Zhang Ye: Now the world is divided, heroes and heroines are rising at the same time, you have a team of 100,000 people, you are in a place where you can fight on all sides, you see the world according to the sword, you can be a hero among men, but you are controlled by people, isn't it too lowly?

古文：今州军东征，其处空虚，吕布壮士，善虞无前，迎之共据兗州，观天下形势，俟时事变通，此亦从横一时也。 
现代文：现在本州的军队束征，其地空虚，吕布是猛士，善于作战，英勇无敌，将他接来一同占据兖州，观望天下形势，等候时事的变化好转，这可以纵横一世。 
English: Now the army of Honshu is conscripted, its land is empty, Lvbu is a brave man, good at fighting, heroic and invincible, he will be taken to occupy Zhangzhou together, watch the situation in the world, wait for changes in current affairs to improve, this can be a lifetime.

古文：邈从之，遂与弟超及宫等迎布为兗州牧，据濮阳，郡县皆应之。
现代文：张邈听从陈宫的意见，就同弟弟张超和陈宫等人迎接吕布，请他当兖州牧，占据濮阳，兖州所属郡县一同响应。
English: Zhang Rong listened to Chen Gong's opinion, and together with his younger brother Zhang Chao and Chen Gong and others, they greeted Lv Bu, asked him to be the herdsman of Zhangzhou and occupy Fenyang, and the counties belonging to Zhangzhou responded together.

古文：曹操闻而引军击布，累战，相持百余日。
现代文：曹操知道后率领军队攻打吕布，双方多次交战，相持一百多天。
English: After learning this, Cao Cao led an army to attack Lvbu. The two sides fought many times and held each other for more than a hundred days.

古文：是时，旱、蝗，少谷，百姓相食，布移屯山阳。
现代文：这时发生天旱，又有蝗虫为害，粮食不够，出现了人吃人。吕布将部队移到山阳驻扎。
English: At this time, there was a drought, plagued by locusts, there was not enough food, and people began to eat each other. Lvbu moved his troops to the mountains.

古文：二年间，操复尽收诸城，破布于钜野，布东奔刘备。
现代文：兴平二年中，曹操将兖州各城全部收复，在钜野击败吕布，吕布束逃投奔刘备。
English: In the second year of Xingping, Cao Cao recovered all the cities in Bozhou, defeated Lv Bu in the wilderness, and Lv Bu fled to Liu Bei.

古文：邈诣袁术求救，留超将家属屯雍丘。
现代文：张邈到袁术那裹求救，留下张超带着家眷部属驻守雍丘。
English: Zhang Rong went to Yuan Shuna to ask for help, leaving Zhang Chao and his family stationed in Yongqiu.

古文：操围超数月，屠之，灭其三族。
现代文：曹操包围张超，围了几个月，杀了张超和张氏三族。
English: Cao Cao besieged Zhang Chao for several months and killed him and the three Zhang clans.

古文：邈未至寿春，为其兵所害。
现代文：张邈未到寿春，就被他的士卒杀害。
English: Before Zhang Ye could reach Shuchun, he was killed by his soldiers.

古文：时，刘备领徐州，居下邳，与袁术相拒于淮上。
现代文：这时刘备领徐州牧，住在下邳，与袁术在淮河互相对峙。
English: At this time, Liu Bei led Xuzhou Mu, living in the Lower Yangtze, and Yuan Shu confronted each other in the Huaihe River.

古文：术欲引布击备，乃与布书曰： 术举兵诣阙，未能屠裂董卓。
现代文：袁术想联合吕布攻打刘备，就写信给吕布，说： 我发兵到京城，没能杀掉董卓，将其肢解。
English: Yuan Shou wanted to attack Liu Bei jointly with Lü Bu, so he wrote to Lü Bu, saying: I sent troops to Beijing, but failed to kill and dismember Dong Zhuo.

古文：将军诛卓，为术报耻，功一也。
现代文：将军杀了董卓，为袁术报了仇，这是第一件功劳。
English: The general killed Dong Zhuo and avenged Yuan Shuxu, which is the first achievement.

古文：昔金元休南至封丘，为曹操所败。将军伐之，令术复明目于遐迩，功二也。
现代文：从前金元休南下到封丘，被曹操打败，将军讨伐曹操，使我的眼睛明亮，远近都看得清，这是第二件功劳。
English: From the former Jinyuan Hu to the south to Fengqiu, defeated by Cao Cao, the general fought against Cao Cao, so that my eyes are bright and I can see clearly from far and near, this is the second merit.

古文：术生年以来，不闻天下有刘备，备乃举兵与术对战。
现代文：袁术自出生以来，没听说天下有刘备这个人，而刘备竟然发兵与我交战。
English: Since Yuan Shu was born, he had never heard of Liu Bei, and Liu Bei actually sent troops to fight me.

古文：凭将军威灵，得以破备，功三也。
现代文：凭着将军的神威，得以打败刘备，这是第三件功劳。
English: With the authority of a general, he was able to defeat Liu Bei, which is the third merit.

古文：将军有三大功在术，术虽不敏，奉以死生。
现代文：将军对袁术有三大功劳，袁术虽然没啥才能，愿到死侍奉您。
English: The general has three great merits for Yuan Shuxi. Although Yuan Shuxi has no talent, he is willing to serve you to the death.

古文：将军连年攻战，军粮苦少，今送米二十万斛。
现代文：将军连年作战，苦于军粮不够，现在送上二十万斛大米。
English: The general has been fighting for years, suffering from insufficient rations, and is now being sent two hundred thousand stalks of rice.

古文：非唯此止，当骆驿复致。
现代文：并非到此为止，将会不断送去粮食。
English: This is not the end, there will be more and more food sent.

古文：凡所短长亦唯命。 
现代文：随便您采纳不采纳。 
English: Feel free to adopt or not adopt.

古文：布得书大悦，即勒兵袭下邳，获备妻子。
现代文：吕布接到信大为高兴，随即部署军队偷袭下邳，俘获刘备的妻子和孩子。
English: Lv Bu was very pleased to receive the letter, and immediately deployed troops to make a surprise attack on Jiaozuo, capturing Liu Bei's wife and children.

古文：备败走海西，饥困，请降于布。
现代文：刘备战败逃往海西，饥饿疲惫，向吕布请求投降。
English: Defeated, Liu Bei fled to the west of the sea, starving and exhausted, and begged Lvbu to surrender.

古文：布又恚术运粮不复至，乃具车马迎备，以为豫州刺史，遣屯小沛。
现代文：吕布又恼火袁术不再运粮来，就准备了车马迎接刘备，让刘备担任豫州刺史，派他驻守小沛。
English: Lv Bu was also annoyed that Yuan Shu would no longer transport grain, so he prepared chariots and horses to meet Liu Bei, let Liu Bei serve as a historian of Yuzhou, and sent him to guard Xiaopei.

古文：布自号徐州牧。
现代文：吕布自称为徐州牧。
English: Lvbu calls itself Xuzhou Pasture.

古文：术惧布为己害，为子求婚，布复许之。
现代文：袁术害怕吕布会加害自己，为儿子求婚，吕布又答应了。
English: Yuan Shou was afraid that Lü Bu would harm himself, so he proposed marriage for his son, and Lü Bu agreed.

古文：术遣将纪灵等步骑三万以攻备，备求救于布。
现代文：袁术派将领纪灵等人率领三万步兵和骑兵进攻刘备，刘备向吕布求救。
English: Yuan Shuping sent the general Ji Ling and others, leading 30,000 infantry and cavalry, to attack Liu Bei. Liu Bei appealed to Lü Bu for help.

古文：诸将谓布曰： 将军常欲杀刘备，今可假手于术。 
现代文：众将对吕布说： 将军经常想杀掉刘备，现在可藉袁术的手除掉他。 
English: The crowd will say to Lü Bu: The general has often wanted to kill Liu Bei, now he can get rid of him with the help of Yuan Shu.

古文：布曰： 不然。
现代文：吕布说： 不对。
English: Lüb said: Not true.

古文：术若破备，则北连太山，吾为在术围中，不得不救也。 
现代文：袁术若是打败刘备，北部就会和太山相连，我在袁术的包围圈中，所以不得不援救。 
English: If Yuan Shuxu defeated Liu Bei, the northern part would be connected to Taishan. I was in Yuan Shuxu's encirclement, so I had to come to his rescue.

古文：便率步骑千余，驰往赴之。
现代文：因此率领一千多步兵和骑兵，骑马赶到那裹。
English: Therefore, he led more than a thousand infantry and cavalry and rode there.

古文：灵等闻布至，皆敛兵而止。
现代文：纪灵等人听说吕布来到，全部收起武器停止攻击。
English: Ji Ling and others heard that Lü Bu was coming, and they all put down their weapons to stop the attack.

古文：布屯沛城外，遣人招备，并请灵等与共飨饮。
现代文：吕布在沛县城外驻扎，派人去叫刘备，并且请纪灵等人一同喝酒吃饭。
English: Lv Bu stationed outside the city of Pei County, sent someone to call Liu Bei, and invited Ji Ling and others to drink and eat together.

古文：布谓灵曰： 玄德，布弟也，为诸君所困，故来救之。
现代文：吕布对纪灵说： 玄德是我的兄弟，被各位窘困，所以我来救他。
English: Lü Bu said to Ji Ling: Xuan De is my brother, he is in trouble with everyone, so I came to save him.

古文：布性不喜合斗，但喜解斗耳。 
现代文：我吕布天生不喜欢将他人弄到一起动武，衹喜欢劝解别人停止动手。 
English: By nature, I don't like to fight with people, but I like to resolve conflicts for others.

古文：乃令军候植戟于营门，布弯弓顾曰： 诸君观布谢戟小支，中者当各解兵，不中可留决斗。 
现代文：于是命令维持军纪的军官将戟树立在军营门口，吕布拉了弓掉过头来说： 各位看我射戟上的小枝，要是射中，你们应当各自罢兵，射不中你们可留下来决斗。 
English: So he ordered the officer in charge of maintaining military discipline to set up the crossbow at the gate of the camp. He drew his bow, turned his head and said: "Everyone, look at the twig on the crossbow I shot. If you hit it, you should each leave the army. If you don't hit it, you can stay and fight.

古文：布即一发，正中戟支。
现代文：吕布随即一箭，正中戟上小枝。
English: Lv Bu immediately shot an arrow, and a small branch sprouted in the middle.

古文：灵等皆惊，言 将军天威也 。
现代文：纪灵等人都很吃惊，说 将军神威 。
English: Ji Ling and others were very surprised, said Shogun Shenwei.

古文：明日复欢会，然后各罢。
现代文：第二天又欢快聚会，而后各自撤去军队。
English: The next day, they again held a banquet with the generals, and then each of them went home.

古文：术遣韩胤以僭号事告布，因求迎妇，布遣女随之。
现代文：袁术派韩胤将僭称的事告诉吕布，顺便请求接去儿媳，吕布让女儿随韩胤去。
English: Yuan Shuxu sent Han Yin to tell Lü Bu about the false accusation, and asked Lü Bu to pick up his daughter-in-law. Lü Bu let his daughter go with Han Yin.

古文：沛相陈珪恐术报布成姻，则徐、杨合从，为难未已。
现代文：沛国相陈珪担心袁术和吕布结姻，徐州和杨州合纵，造成的灾难就会没完没了。
English: Pei's minister of state, Chen Qi, was worried that if Yuan Shou and Lü Bu were to marry, and if Xuzhou and Yangzhou were to merge, the disasters that would be caused would be endless.

古文：于是往说布曰： 曹公奉迎天子，辅赞国政，将军宜与协助同策谋，共存大计。今与袁术结姻，必受不义之名，将有累卵之危矣。 
现代文：于是去劝吕布说： 曹公拥戴迎接天子，辅佐朝政，将军最好与曹公同心协力，一同商量，为国家大计着想，现在与袁术结姻，一定会背上不义的名声，就会出现累卵之危。 
English: So he went to persuade Lv Bu and said, "Cao Gong holds the position of welcoming the heavenly son and assisting the government of the dynasty. The general had better work together with Cao Gong, discuss together, and plan for the country. If he marries Yuan Shu now, he will definitely have an unfair reputation on his back, and there will be the danger of being burdened with eggs.

古文：布亦素怨术，而女已在涂，乃追还绝婚，执胤送许，曹操杀之。
现代文：吕布也一向埋怨袁术，但女儿已经上路，于是将女儿追了回来，断绝婚姻，抓了韩胤送往许县，曹操杀了韩胤。
English: Lü Bu also always complained about Yuan Shu, but his daughter was already on the road, so he chased his daughter back, broke off the marriage, caught Han Tan and sent him to Xu County, and Cao Cao killed Han Tan.

古文：陈珪欲使子登诣曹操，布固不许，会使至，拜布为左将军，布大喜，即听登行，并令奉章谢恩。
现代文：陈珪想派儿子陈登去见曹操，吕布坚持不答应，恰好朝廷使者到来，授予吕布左将军职位，吕市十分高兴，立刻就答应陈登上路，并且要他带丁奏章感谢朝廷的恩典。
English: Chen Yao wanted to send his son Chen Deng to meet Cao Cao, but Lü Bu Rong insisted that he would not agree. It so happened that an emissary from the imperial court arrived and awarded Lü Bu Zuo the position of general. Lü was very pleased and immediately allowed Chen to board the road and asked him to thank the imperial court for its grace with the Ding Zongzhang.

古文：登见曹操，因陈布勇而无谋，轻于去就，宜早图之。
现代文：陈登见到曹操，就讲述吕布英勇但没有谋略，对投靠或背弃轻率作出决定，应当早点儿对付他。
English: When Chen Deng saw Cao Cao, he said that Lv Bu was heroic but had no strategy, and made a rash decision to support or betray him. He should have been dealt with earlier.

古文：操曰： 布狼子野心，诚难久养，非卿莫究其情伪。 
现代文：曹操说： 吕布像狼崽子一样具有凶恶的本性，实在难以长期养着他，不是您谁也不了解他的真实情况。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Like a wolf cub, Lv Bu has a vicious nature. It is really difficult to keep him for a long time. Not you nor anyone else knows his true condition.

古文：即增珪秩中二千石，拜登广陵太守。
现代文：随即将陈珪的俸禄增加到中二千石，任命陈登为广陵太守。
English: He ordered that Chen Xi's annual salary be increased to 2,000 koku, and appointed Chen Deng as the governor of Guangling.

古文：临别，操执登手曰： 东方之事，便以相付。 
现代文：临分手时，曹操握住他的手说： 束边的事情，就托付给您了。 
English: When they were about to part, Cao Cao took him by the hand and said, "I have entrusted you with the affairs of Shou Bian.

古文：令阴合部众，以为内应。
现代文：要他暗中聚集人马，作为内应。
English: He was asked to secretly gather people and horses as an internal response.

古文：始布因登求徐州牧，不得。
现代文：起初吕布通过陈登当徐州牧，没有得到。
English: At first, Lü Bu passed Chen Dengdan to Xuzhou Mu, but did not get it.

古文：登还，布怒，拔戟斫机曰： 卿父劝吾协同曹操，绝婚公路。
现代文：陈登回来，吕布发怒，拔出戟砍在桌子上，说： 您父亲劝我与曹操同心协力，和袁公路断绝婚姻。
English: When Chen Deng returned, Lü Bu became angry and pulled out a hammer and chopped it on the table, saying, "Your father advised me to work together with Cao Cao and break off the marriage with Yuan Hao.

古文：今吾所求无获，而卿父子并显重，但为卿所卖耳。 
现代文：现在我所要求的东西没得到，但您父子一并显贵，我衹是被你们出卖罢了。 
English: Now I haven't got what I asked for, but your father and son are both illustrious, and I've only been betrayed by you.

古文：登不为动容，徐对之曰： 登见曹公，言养将军譬如养虎，当饱其肉，不饱则将噬人。
现代文：陈登不动声色，缓缓回答说： 我见到曹公，说养将军就如养虎，应当用肉将您喂饱，要是喂不饱您就会吃人。
English: Chen Deng remained impassive and slowly replied, "I saw Cao Gong. He said that raising a general is like raising a tiger. You should be fed with meat. If you are not fed enough, you will eat people."

古文：公曰： 不如卿言。
现代文：曹公说： 不像您说的这样。
English: Cao Gong said, "It's not like you said.

古文：譬如养鹰，饥即为用，饱则飏去。 
现代文：好比养鹰，让他饿着就为我所用，给他吃饱了就会飞走。 
English: It's like raising an eagle. If it's hungry, I'll use it. If it's full, it'll fly away.

古文：其言如此。 
现代文：曹公就这么说的。 
English: That's what we talked about.

古文：布意乃解。
现代文：吕布心中的不快才算消除。
English: Only then did Lü Bu's anger subside.

古文：袁术怒布杀韩胤，遣其大将张勋、桥蕤等与韩暹、杨奉连势，步骑数万，七道攻布。
现代文：袁术恼火吕布杀了韩胤，派手下大将张勋、桥蕤等人同韩暹、杨奉兵力配合，率几万步兵骑兵，分七路进攻吕布。
English: Exasperated with Lvbu, Yuan Shou killed Han Yin and sent his subordinate generals Zhang Xun, Qiao Wei and others to cooperate with Han Siem and Yang Feng, leading tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to attack Lvbu in seven directions.

古文：布时兵有三千，马四百匹，惧其不敌，谓陈珪曰： 今致术军，卿之由也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：当时吕布祇有三千兵力，四百匹马，担心抵挡不住，对陈珪说： 现在招来袁术的部队，是由于您造成的，您看怎么办？ 
English: At that time, Lü Bu only had three thousand troops and four hundred horses. He was worried that he would not be able to resist and said to Chen Qi: Now Yuan Shu's troops have been summoned because of you. What do you think?

古文：珪曰： 暹、奉与术，卒合之师耳。
现代文：陈珪说： 韩暹、杨奉与袁术，不过是仓促聚起来的部队而已。
English: Chen Yao said: Han Siem, Yang Bong and Yuan Shu are just hastily assembled troops.

古文：谋无素定，不能相维。
现代文：原先就没有确定计策，不可能相互维持。
English: There was no established strategy in the first place, and it was impossible to maintain it.

古文：子登策之，比于连鸡，势不俱栖，立可离也。 
现代文：我儿子陈登算定他们好比排着队的鸡，其局面不可能一同栖息，很快就可使他们离散。 
English: My son Chen Deng calculates that they are like chickens standing in a queue, whose situation is impossible to roost together, and they will soon be separated.

古文：布用珪策，与暹、奉书曰： 二将军亲拔大驾，而布手杀董卓，俱立功名，当垂竹帛。
现代文：吕布采纳陈珪的计策，写信给韩暹、杨奉说： 二位将军亲手救出皇上，而我亲手杀掉董卓，一道建立功名，将会留名青史。
English: Lv Bu adopted Chen Yao's strategy and wrote to Han Siem and Yang Bong: The two generals rescued the emperor with their own hands, while I killed Dong Zhuo with my own hands, building a reputation together, and will go down in history.

古文：今袁术造逆，宜共诛讨，奈何与贼还来伐布？
现代文：现在袁术反叛，应当一同讨伐他。你们为什么与贼寇来这儿攻打我呢？
English: Now Yuan Shu is rebelling, and we should fight him together. Why did you and the bandits come here to fight me?

古文：可因今者同力破术，为国除害，建功天下，此时不可失也。 
现代文：可趁着现在联手打败袁术，为国家除害，为天下建立功业，这个机会不可失去。 
English: But we can take advantage of this opportunity to work together to defeat Yuan Shu, eliminate harm to the country, and build a career for the world. This opportunity must not be lost.

古文：又许破术兵，悉以军资与之。
现代文：又答应打败袁术军队之后，将军中钱粮全部给他们。
English: He also promised to give them all the money and grain after defeating Yuan Shuxu's army.

古文：暹、奉大喜，遂共击勋等于下邳，大破之，生禽桥蕤，余众溃走，其所杀伤、墯水死者殆尽。
现代文：韩暹、杨奉大为高兴，就一同攻打在下邳的张勋等人，活捉了桥蕤，其余人马溃散逃走，许多人被杀死杀伤，掉在水中淹死，差不多全军覆没。
English: Han Siem and Yang Bong were very happy, and together they attacked Zhang Xun and others who were in the jaws, captured the bridge pier alive, the rest scattered and fled, many people were killed and injured, fell into the water and drowned, and almost the entire army was destroyed.

古文：时，太山臧霸等攻破莒城，许布财币以相结，而未及送，布乃自往求之。
现代文：当时太山人咸霸等人攻克莒城，答应给吕布财物钱币用来结交吕布，但没来得及送去，吕布就亲自去要。
English: At that time, the Taishan people Hamba and others conquered Lucheng and promised to give Lv Bu money and goods to be used to make friends with Lv Bu, but Lv Bu did not have time to send them, so he went to ask for them in person.

古文：其督将高顺谏止曰： 将军威名宣播，远近所畏，何求不得，而自行求赂。
现代文：吕布的督将高顺劝他不要去，说： 将军的威名传播，远近都害怕您，要什么东西不能得到，反而亲自去要财货？
English: The governor of Lvbu, General Gao Shun, advised him not to go, saying, "The general's prestige is spreading, and people near and far are afraid of you. What do you want that you can't get, but you go and ask for the goods in person?

古文：万一不克，岂不损邪？ 
现代文：万一得不到，岂不有损威名？ 
English: If you don't get it, won't your reputation be tarnished?

古文：布不从。
现代文：吕布不听。
English: Lü Bu did not listen.

古文：既至莒，霸等不测往意，固守拒之，无获而还。
现代文：已经到了莒城，臧霸等人不知道吕布来的用意，坚守莒城拒绝吕布，结果吕布什么也没得到就回来了。
English: They had already arrived in Lucheng, but Yanba and the others did not know Lvbu's intention to come. They held fast to Lucheng and refused Lvbu. As a result, Lvbu came back without getting anything.

古文：顺为人清白有威严，少言辞，将众整齐，每战必克。
现代文：高顺为人清白，仪表威严，很少说话，统率部众整齐，每次作战必定获胜。
English: Gao Shun is a clean person, dignified appearance, rarely speaks, neatly leads the leadership, and is sure to win every battle.

古文：布性决易，所为无常。
现代文：吕布天生随便作出决定或改变主张，做事情变化无常。
English: By nature, Lübbe makes decisions or changes his opinions at will, and his actions are fickle.

古文：顺每谏曰： 将军举动，不肯详思，忽有失得，动辄言误。误事岂可数乎？ 
现代文：高顺常常规劝说： 将军做事情，不肯慎重考虑，时常出现失误，说话做事总是有差错。
English: Gao Shun often exhorted: Generals do things without careful consideration, often make mistakes, and there are always mistakes in speaking and doing things.

古文：布知其忠而不能从。
现代文：失误的事情难道可以一再发生吗？ 吕布了解高顺的忠诚就是不采纳。
English: Can things that go wrong happen again and again? Lü Bu understood Gao Shun's loyalty and did not accept it.

古文：建安三年，布遂复从袁术，遣顺攻刘备于沛，破之。
现代文：建安三年，吕布终于又投靠袁术，派高顺攻打在沛县的刘备，击败刘备。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, Lv Bu finally turned to Yuan Shu and sent Gao Shun to attack Liu Bei in Pei County and defeat Liu Bei.

古文：曹操遣夏侯惇救备，为顺所败。
现代文：曹操派夏侯惇援救刘备，被高顺打败。
English: Cao Cao sent Xia Houyi to rescue Liu Bei, but he was defeated by Gao Shun.

古文：操乃自将击布，至下邳城下。
现代文：曹操于是亲自率兵攻打吕布，兵到下邳城下。
English: Cao Cao then personally led an army to attack Lvbu, and the soldiers went to the city of Jiaozuo.

古文：遗布书，为陈祸福。
现代文：曹操送了一封信给吕布，向他陈述祸福。
English: Cao Cao sent a letter to Lü Bu, telling him of the calamity.

古文：布欲降，而陈宫等自以负罪于操，深沮其计，而谓布曰： 曹公远来，势不能久。将军若以步骑出屯于外，宫将余众闭守于内。
现代文：吕布想投降，但陈宫等人由于自己对曹操负罪，极力破坏吕布的计策，而且对吕布说： 曹公从速道而来，其局势不能持久，将军如果用步兵和骑兵驻守城外，我率领其余人马关了城门把守。
English: Lü Bu wanted to surrender, but Chen Gong and others, because they were guilty of crimes against Cao Cao, tried their best to sabotage Lü Bu's strategy, and said to Lü Bu: Cao Cao is coming from the fast lane, and the situation cannot last. If the general is stationed outside the city with infantry and cavalry, I will lead the rest of the people to close the city gate.

古文：若向将军，宫引兵而攻其背；若但攻城，则将军救于外。
现代文：曹操如果向将军进攻，我带领部队从后面进攻曹军；要是曹操衹是攻城，将军就从外面救援。
English: If Cao Cao attacks the general, I will lead the troops to attack Cao's army from behind; if Cao Cao attacks the city, the general will rescue from the outside.

古文：不过旬月，军食毕尽，击之可破也。 
现代文：用不了一个月，曹军粮食全部用尽，发起进攻就可以打败曹操。 
English: It took less than a month for Cao Cao's army to run out of food and launch an attack to defeat Cao Cao.

古文：布然之。
现代文：吕布同意他的看法。
English: Lüb agrees with him.

古文：布妻曰： 昔曹氏待公台如赤子，犹舍而归我。
现代文：吕布的妻子说： 从前曹氏对待陈公台像对待婴儿一样无微不至，陈宫仍然丢下曹操投靠我们。
English: Lu Bu's wife said: Once upon a time, Cao treated Chen Gongtai like a baby. Chen Gong still left Cao Cao to us.

古文：今将军厚公台不过于曹氏，而欲委全城，捐妻、子，孤军远出乎？
现代文：现在将军对待公台的好处并未超过曹氏，却打算丢下全城和妻子儿女孤军远出吗？
English: Now the general's treatment of the public platform is no better than Cao's, but does he plan to leave the whole city and his wife and children to go far away alone?

古文：若一旦有变，妾岂得为将军妻哉！ 
现代文：一旦发生变故，我难道还能成为将军的妻子吗？ 
English: Can I still become a general's wife if something happens?

古文：布乃止。而潜遣人求救于袁术，自将千余骑出。战败走还，保城不敢出。
现代文：于是吕布作罢，但暗中派人向袁术求救，又亲自率领一千多骑兵出城，打败后退回城内，守住城不敢出去。
English: So Lü Bu gave up, but secretly sent someone to Yuan Shuxiong to ask for help, and personally led more than a thousand cavalry out of the city, defeated and retreated back into the city, kept the city and dared not go out.

古文：术亦不能救。
现代文：袁术也不能援救。
English: Yuan Shu couldn't save him either.

古文：曹操堑围之，壅沂、泗以灌其城，三月，上下离心。
现代文：曹操绕城挖了深沟，将沂水、泅水堵塞以淹灌下邳城，三个月后，城内上下叛离。
English: Cao Cao dug a deep trench around the city, blocked the floodwater and the floodwater to flood the lower city, and three months later, the city's top and bottom rebelled.

古文：其将侯成使客牧其名马，而客策之以叛。
现代文：吕布的将领侯成要门客去放牧他的名马，然而门客骑马叛逃。
English: Houcheng, the general of Lvbu, asked his concubine to graze his famous horse, but the concubine defected on horseback.

古文：成追客得马，诸将合礼以贺成。
现代文：侯成追赶门客，将马追回，将领们凑合了礼物向侯成祝贺。
English: Hou Cheng chased after the guest and recovered the horse. The generals made up a gift to congratulate Hou Cheng.

古文：成分酒肉，先入诣布而言曰： 蒙将军威灵，得所亡马，诸将齐贺，未敢尝也，故先以奉贡。 
现代文：侯成分了一部分酒肉，先到裹面见吕布说： 靠将军的神威，将失去的马追回，将领们都来祝贺，我没敢尝用，先拿来献给您。 
English: Hou made up a portion of the meat and wine. He went to see Lü Bu face-to-face first, and said, "I rely on the generals' authority to recover the lost horse. The generals all came to congratulate me. I didn't dare to try it, so I brought it to you first."

古文：布怒曰： 布禁酒而卿等醖酿，为欲因酒共谋布邪？ 
现代文：吕布发怒说： 我禁止喝酒，而你们在一起谋划，是想藉喝酒打我的主意吗？ 
English: Lü Bu said angrily, "I forbid drinking, but you are plotting together. Are you trying to defeat my plan by drinking?"

古文：成忿惧，乃与诸将共执陈宫、高顺，率其众降。
现代文：侯成又恨又怕，就与众将共同捉了陈宫、高顺，率领部下投降。
English: Hou Cheng both hated and feared, so he and his generals captured Chen Gong and Gao Shun and led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：布与麾下登白门楼。
现代文：吕布与身边部下登上白门楼。
English: Lü Bu and his subordinates boarded the White Gate Tower.

古文：兵围之急，令左右取其首诣操。
现代文：由于士兵们围攻很紧，吕布要身边的人砍下自己的脑袋去见曹操。
English: As the soldiers were besieging very tightly, Lü Bu asked the people around him to cut off their heads and go to see Cao Cao.

古文：左右不忍，乃下降。
现代文：身边的人心中不忍，就下楼投降。
English: The people around him couldn't bear it and went downstairs to surrender.

古文：布见操曰： 今日已往，天下定矣。 
现代文：吕布见到曹操，说： 从今以后，天下平定了。 
English: When Lü Bu saw Cao Cao, he said, "From now on, the world is at peace."

古文：操曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：曹操说： 为什么这么说呢？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "Why do you say that?

古文：布曰： 明公之所患不过于布，今已服矣。
现代文：吕布说： 您所担心的人没有超过我吕布的，我现在已经归顺了。
English: Lu Bu said, "The person you are worried about is no greater than me, Lu Bu. I have already surrendered."

古文：令布将骑，明公将步，天下不足定也。 
现代文：让我统率骑兵，您统率步兵，天下的平定轻而易举。 
English: Let me lead the cavalry, you lead the infantry, and the world will be pacified easily.

古文：顾谓刘备曰： 玄德，卿为坐上客，我为降虏，绳缚我急，独不可一言邪？ 
现代文：又掉过头来对刘备说： 玄德，您为座上客人，我是投降的俘虏。我被绳子捆得太紧了，难道不能为我说句话吗？ 
English: He also turned his head to Liu Bei and said: Xuan De, you are a guest at the table, I am a prisoner of surrender. I am tied too tightly with a rope, can't you say something for me?

古文：操笑曰： 缚虎不得不急。 
现代文：曹操笑着说： 捆绑老虎不能不紧。 
English: Cao Cao smiled and said, "You can't tie a tiger too tightly."

古文：乃令缓布缚。刘备曰： 不可。
现代文：于是下令将吕布的绳索捆松些。刘备说： 不可以。
English: He then ordered that Lv Bu's ropes be tied more loosely. Liu Bei said, "No."

古文：明公不见吕布事丁建阳、董太师乎？ 
现代文：您没有看到吕布侍奉丁建阳、董太师的事情吗？ 
English: Didn't you see that Lv Bu served Ding Jianyang and Dong Taishi?

古文：操颔之。
现代文：曹操摇摇头。
English: Cao Cao shook his head.

古文：布目备曰： 大耳兒最叵信！ 
现代文：吕布看着刘备说： 你这长着大耳朵的家伙最不可相信！ 
English: Lü Bu looked at Liu Bei and said, "You can't trust this guy with the big ears!"

古文：操谓陈宫曰： 公台平生自谓智有余，今意何如？ 
现代文：曹操对陈宫说： 公台平生自认为足智多谋，现在你认为怎么样？ 
English: Cao Cao said to Chen Gong: Gongtai always thought of himself as resourceful, what do you think now?

古文：宫指布曰： 是子不用宫言，以至于此。
现代文：陈宫指着吕布说： 此人不采纳我的意见，才弄到这个地步。
English: Chen Gong pointed to Lü Bu and said, "This person didn't accept my opinion, and that's how it got to this point.

古文：若见从，未可量也。 操又曰： 奈卿老母何？ 
现代文：如果听我的话，结果很难预料。 曹操说： 您老母亲怎么办？ 
English: If you listen to me, the outcome is hard to predict.Cao Cao said: What about your old mother?

古文：宫曰： 老母在公，不在宫也。
现代文：陈宫说： 老母亲取决于您而不取决于我。
English: Chen Gong said, "Old mother depends on you, not me.

古文：夫以孝理天下者，不害人之亲。 
现代文：听说以孝治理天下的人，不会杀害别人的父母。 
English: It is said that those who govern the world with filial piety will not kill other people's parents.

古文：操复曰： 奈卿妻、子何？ 
现代文：曹操又说： 您的妻子儿女怎么办？ 
English: Cao Cao also said, "What about your wife and children?"

古文：宫曰： 宫闻霸王之主，不绝人之祀。 
现代文：陈宫说： 我听说成就霸主和天子功业的人，不断绝别人的香火祭祀。 
English: Chen Gong said: I have heard that those who have accomplished the work of the overlord and the son of heaven are constantly rejecting the incense sacrifices of others.

古文：固请就刑，遂出不顾，操为之泣涕。
现代文：陈宫坚持要求受刑，接着走出门外不再回头，曹操为他掉下眼泪。
English: Chen Gong insisted on being punished, then walked out the door and never looked back. Cao Cao shed tears for him.

古文：布及宫、顺皆缢杀之，传首许市。
现代文：吕布、陈宫和高顺全被勒死，他们的首级被送到许县集市示众。
English: Lü Bu, Chen Gong and Gao Shunquan were strangled to death, and their severed heads were displayed at the market in Xu County.

古文：赞曰：焉作庸牧，以希后福。
现代文：赞曰：刘焉开始设置平庸的州牧是希望以后可以享福，怎么可以说是依靠呢？
English: Zang said: Liu Yan began to set up a mediocre state pasture in the hope that he could enjoy happiness in the future, how can it be said to rely on it?

古文：曷云负荷？地堕身逐。术既叨贪，布亦翻覆。
现代文：土地被夺，自己被赶走，袁术又无能又贪心吕布也失败了。
English: The land was seized, he was driven away, Yuan Shu was incompetent and greedy, and Lü Bu also failed.

