古文：洛水出京兆上洛县遭举山，《地理志》曰：洛出冢岭山。
现代文：洛水发源于京兆郡上洛县的灌举山，《地理志》说：洛水发源于家岭山。
English: Luoshui originated in Guanzhu Mountain, Shangluo County, Jingzhao County. "Geography" said: Luoshui originated in Jialing Mountain.

古文：《山海经》曰：出上洛西山。
现代文：《山海经》说：发源于上洛西山。
English: "Shanhai Jing" says: It originated in the Shangluosi Mountains.

古文：又曰：讙举之山，洛水出焉。
现代文：还有一说：洛水发源于灌举之山，东流与丹水汇合。
English: There is also a saying: Luoshui originates from the mountain of Guanzhu, and the east stream merges with the Danshui.

古文：东与丹水合，水出西北竹山东，南流注于洛。
现代文：丹水发源于西北方竹山的东面，南流注入洛水。
English: The Dan River originates from the eastern side of Zhushan in the northwest, and the southern stream flows into the Luo River.

古文：洛水又东，尸水注之，水北发尸山，南流入洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，尸水注入。尸水发源于北方的尸山，南流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, and the corpse water is injected. The corpse water originates from the corpse mountain in the north, and the south stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东得乳水，水北出良余山，南流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，汇合了乳水。乳水发源于北方的良余山，南流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with milk water. Milk water originates from the Liangyu Mountain in the north, and the south stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东会于龙余之水，水出蛊尾之山，东流入洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，汇合了龙余之水，这条水发源于蛊尾之山，东流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, merging with Longyu's water. This water originates from Shanwei's mountain, and the eastward flow injects Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东至阳虚山，合玄扈之水。
现代文：洛水又往东流，到阳虚山汇合玄启之水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, and joins the waters of Xuanqi at Yanghuishan.

古文：《山海经》曰：洛水东北流，注于玄扈之水是也。
现代文：《山海经》说：洛水往东北流，注入玄息之水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: Luo water flows to the northeast, infusing the water of the breath of the gods.

古文：又曰自鹿蹄之山以至玄扈之山，凡九山，玄扈亦山名也，而通与讙举，为九山之次焉。
现代文：又说：从鹿蹄之山到玄息之山，共有九座山。玄启也是山名，与灌举山一同构成九山的序列。
English: He also said, "There are a total of nine mountains from Mt. Shishu to Mt. Genki. Genki is also a mountain name, and together with Mt. Kanju, they form a sequence of nine mountains.

古文：故《山海经》曰：此二山者洛间也。
现代文：因此《山海经》说：这两座山夹着洛水。
English: Therefore, the "Song of the Mountains and the Sea" says: the two mountains are sandwiched by Luo Shui.

古文：是知玄扈之水，出于玄扈之山，盖山水兼受其目矣。
现代文：可知玄启之水发源于玄息之山，山和水就都得了这个名称了。
English: It is known that the water of the Xuanqi originates from the mountain of the Xuanxi, and both the mountain and the water have received this name.

古文：其水径于阳虚之下。
现代文：洛水流经阳虚山下。
English: The Luo River flows through the Yangxia Mountains.

古文：《山海经》又曰：阳虚之山，临于玄扈之水，是为洛汭也。
现代文：《山海经》又说：阳虚之山俯临玄息之水，这就是洛呐。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" also says: The mountains of the yang and void descend to the water of the breath of the dead, this is Lona.

古文：《河图玉版》曰：仓颌为帝，南巡，登阳虚之山，临于玄扈洛汭之水。
现代文：《河图•玉版》说：仓领为黄帝南巡时，登上阳虚之山，来到了玄肩和洛呐的水滨。
English: "River Map • Jade Version" says: When Canglian was on the southern tour of the Yellow Emperor, he climbed the Yanghu Mountain and came to the waterfront of Xuanjia and Luo Na.

古文：灵龟负书，丹甲青文以授之，即于此水也。
现代文：一只灵龟背着宝书交给他，在红甲上以青文写成。就是在这条水上。
English: A spirit turtle with a treasure book on his back was given to him, written in blue on a red armor. It was on this water.

古文：洛水又东历清他山，东合武里水，水南出武里山，东北流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又往东流经清池山旁，佳东流汇合了武里水。武里水发源于南方的武里山，往东北流，注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the side of Qingchi Mountain, and Jiadong Stream merges with Buri Stream. Buri Stream originates from the south of Buri Mountain, flows to the northeast, and injects Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，门水出焉。
现代文：洛水又东流，门水分支流出。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, and the branch of Menshui flows out.

古文：《尔雅》所谓洛别为波也。
现代文：《尔雅》所说的从洛水分出成为波水，就指此水。
English: This is the water from which the water of Luo emerges as wave water, as described in "Lya."

古文：洛水又东，要水入焉，水南出三要山，东北径拒阳城西，而东北流入于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，要水注入。要水发源于南方的三要山，往东北流经拒阳城西面，然后往东北流入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, requiring water to be injected. The required water originates from the Three Major Mountains in the south, flows to the northeast through the west of Xieyang City, and then flows into Luoshui to the northeast.

古文：洛水又东与获水合，水南出获舆山，俗谓之备水也。东北径获舆川，世名之为舆川，东北流，注于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，与获水汇合。获水发源于南方的获舆山，俗称备水，往东北流经获舆川，世人称为却川，往东北流，注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with Guishui. Guishui originates from the south of Guishan, commonly known as Guishui, flows to the northeast through Guishu River, known to the world as Qiao River, flows to the northeast, and injects Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东径熊耳山北，《禹贡》所谓导洛自熊耳。
现代文：洛水又往东流经熊耳山北面。《禹贡》说，从熊耳山疏导洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the northern side of Mount Xiong'er. "Yugong" said that Luoshui was channeled from Mount Xiong'er.

古文：《博物志》曰：洛出熊耳，盖开其源者是也。
现代文：《博物志》说：洛水发源于熊耳山，是指开通它的源头。
English: "Natural History" said: Luo Shui originated from Mount Xiong Er, referring to the opening of its source.

古文：东北过卢氏县南，洛水径隖渠关北，隖渠水南出隖渠山，即荀渠山也。
现代文：往东北流过卢氏县南面，洛水流经鸥渠关北面，鸣渠水发源于南方的鸥渠山，也就是荀渠山。
English: To the northeast, it flows through the southern part of Lu County. Lu water flows through the northern part of Qianqian Pass. The water of Ming Canal originates from the southern part of Qianqian Mountain, that is, Qianqian Mountain.

古文：其水一源两分，川流半解，一水西北流，屈而东北，入于洛。
现代文：鸣渠水一个源头分为两条，一条往西北流，折向东北，注入洛水。
English: A source of the Ming Canal water is divided into two, one flowing to the northwest, turning to the northeast and injecting Luo water.

古文：《山海经》曰：熊耳之山，浮豪之水出焉，西北流注于洛。疑即是水也。
现代文：《山海经》说：浮豪之水发源于熊耳之山，往西北流，注入洛水，说的可能就是此水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: The water of the Floating City originates from the Bear's Ear Mountain, flows to the northwest, and is infused with Luo water. It may be this water that is referred to.

古文：荀渠，盖熊耳之殊称，若太行之归山也。
现代文：荀渠山就是熊耳山的别名，正如太行山也叫归山一样。
English: Qianqiu Mountain is another name for Xiong'er Mountain, just as Taihang Mountain is also called Guishan Mountain.

古文：故《他说》曰：熊耳之山，地门也，洛水出其间。是亦总名矣。
现代文：因此《地说》说：熊耳之山是地门。洛水从这里流出，所以也是个总名。
English: Therefore, "Say" said: Xiong Er Mountain is the gate of the earth. Luo water flows out from here, so it is also a generic name.

古文：其一水东北径隖渠城西，故关城也。
现代文：另一条往东北流经鹃渠城西面，这是个老关城。
English: The other one flows to the northeast through the west side of the canal city, which is an old gate city.

古文：其水东北流，注于洛。
现代文：此水往东北流，注入洛水。
English: This water flows to the northeast, injecting Luo water.

古文：洛水又东径卢氏县故城南。
现代文：洛水又往东流经卢氏县老城南面。
English: Luo water also flows eastward to the south of the old city of Lu County.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋出公十九年，晋韩龙取卢氏城。王莽之昌富也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋出公十九年前，晋韩龙夺取卢氏城，就是王莽时的昌富。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Nineteen years before he ascended to the throne, Jin Hanlong captured Lu's City, and Wang Mangshi became rich.

古文：有卢氏川水注之，水北出卢氏山，东南流径卢氏城东，东南流注于洛。
现代文：卢氏川水在这里注入。川水发源于北面的卢氏山，往东南流经卢氏城东面，往东南注入洛水。
English: The Lu River water is injected here. The river water originates from the Lu Mountain in the north, flows southeast through the east of the Lu City, and injects Lu water to the southeast.

古文：洛水又东，翼合三川，并出县之南山，东北注洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，两边汇合三条小溪，这些小溪都发源于卢氏县的南山，往东北注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, with three small streams converging on both sides. These small streams all originate from the Nanshan Mountains in Lushi County and flow into Luoshui to the northeast.

古文：《开山图》曰：卢氏山宜五谷，可避水灾，亦通谓之石城山。
现代文：《开山图》说：卢氏山也通称石城山。适宜种五谷，可免遭水灾。
English: "Lushishan" is also commonly known as Shicheng Mountain. It is suitable for growing grain and can be protected from floods.

古文：山在宜阳山西南，千名之山，咸处其内，陵阜原隰，易以度身者也。
现代文：此山位于宜阳山西南，其中包括着许许多多的山名。这片丘陵高地和低湿地带，是可以平平安安地度过一生的。
English: This mountain is located in the southwest of Yiyang Mountain, which includes a lot of mountain names. This hilly highland and low-humidity area is a place where you can spend your whole life peacefully.

古文：又有葛蔓谷水，自南山流注洛水。
现代文：说的就是这地方。又有葛蔓谷水从南山流来，注入洛水。
English: That's the place I'm talking about. In addition, the Ge Vang Valley water flows from the Nanshan Mountains and is injected into the Luo River.

古文：洛水又东径高门城南，即《宋书》所谓后军外兵庞季明入卢氏进达高门木城者也。
现代文：洛水又往东流经高门城南面，《宋书》所说后军外兵庞季明入卢氏县，进抵高门木城，指的就是这地方。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the south of Gaomencheng. According to the Song Book, the foreign soldier Pang Jiming entered Lu County and arrived at Gaomenmu City, referring to this place.

古文：洛水东与高门水合，水出北山，东南流合洛水枝津，水上承洛水，东北流径石勒城北，又东径高门城北，东入高门水，乱流南注洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，与高门水汇合。高门水发源于北山，往东南流，汇合了洛水的支流，这条支流的上流承接洛水，往东北流经石勒城北面，又往东流经高门城北面，往东注入高门水，乱流往南注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward and merges with Gaomen Shui. Gaomen Shui originates in Beishan and flows southeastward, merging with a tributary of Luoshui. The upstream of this tributary receives Luoshui, flows northeastward through the north of Shile City, flows eastward through the north of Gaomen City, and injects Gaomen Shui to the east, and the turbulent flow injects Luoshui to the south.

古文：洛水又东，松阳溪水注之，水出松阳山，北流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，有松阳溪水注入。溪水发源于松阳山，北流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east and is fed by Songyang Stream, which originates from Songyang Mountain and flows to Luoshui from the north.

古文：洛水又东径黄亭南，又东合黄亭溪水，水出鹈鹕山。
现代文：洛水又往东流经黄亭南面，又往东流，汇合了黄亭溪水。
English: Luo Shui also flows eastward through the south of Huang Ting, and flows eastward, merging with Huang Ting Creek.

古文：山有二峰，峻极于天，高崖云举，亢石无阶，猿徒丧其捷巧，鼯族谢其轻工，及其长霄昌岭，层霞冠峰，方乃就辨优劣耳，故有大，小鹈鹕之名矣。
现代文：这条溪水发源于鹏鹏山，山上有两座险峰，陡峻地耸入天际，高崖直上云霄，绝无立足之地，即使矫捷如猿猴，轻巧如黯鼠，也难以施展它们飞腾跳跃的本领；到了云气蒸腾，升上山巅，彩霞缤纷，笼罩着峰顶的时候，才能见出它们的高低。因此有大鹊鹏和小鸭鹏之称。
English: This stream originates from the Pengpeng Mountain. There are two dangerous peaks on the mountain, which rise steeply into the sky, and the high cliff rises straight up into the clouds. There is absolutely no foothold. Even if they are as agile as a monkey and as light as a rat, it is difficult to exercise their flying jumping ability. It is only when the clouds are steaming, rising to the top of the mountain, and the colorful haze is enveloping the peak, that their height can be seen. Therefore, they are known as the Big Pengpeng and the Little Pengpeng.

古文：溪水东南流历亭下，谓之黄亭溪水，又东南入于洛水。
现代文：溪水往东南流过亭下，称为黄亭溪水，又往东南流，注入洛水。
English: The water of the stream flows south-east under the pavilion and is called Huang Ting Creek. It then flows south-east and is filled with Luo water.

古文：洛水又东得荀公溪口，水出南山荀公涧，即庞季明所入荀公谷者也。
现代文：洛水又东流，到了荀公溪口，这里的溪流发源于南山荀公涧，就是庞季明进兵时所经的荀公谷。
English: Luo water also flows eastward to the mouth of Shigong Creek, where the stream originates from Nanshan Shigong Creek, which is the Shigong Valley that Pang Qiming passed through when he marched into the army.

古文：其水历谷东北流，注于洛水。
现代文：溪水穿过峡谷往东北流，注入洛水。
English: The stream water flows through the canyon to the northeast, injecting Luo water.

古文：洛水又东径檀山南，其山四绝孤峙，山上有坞聚，俗谓之檀山坞。
现代文：洛水又往东流经檀山南面。这座山四周没有丘陵相连，独自耸立着，山上有个村庄，俗称檀山坞。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward to the south of Danshan. There are no hills connected around this mountain, it stands alone, and there is a village on the mountain, commonly known as Danshan Dock.

古文：义熙中，刘公西入长安，舟师所届，次于洛阳，命参军戴延之与府舍人虞道元即舟溯流，穷览洛川，欲知水军可至之处。
现代文：义熙年间一，刘裕西入长安，率领水军驻扎在洛阳，命令参军戴延之与府舍人虞道元乘船溯流而上，考察洛水的上下流，想查明水军船只能到达的地方。
English: In the first year of the reign of Yixi, Liu Yuxi entered Chang'an and led the naval forces stationed in Luoyang. He ordered Dai Yanzhi, who had joined the army, and the prefectural governor, Yu Douyuan, to go upstream by boat to investigate the upstream and downstream of Luoyang, in order to find out where the naval ships could only reach.

古文：延之届此而返，竟不达其源也。
现代文：戴延之到了这里就回去了，竟没有到达源头。
English: Dai Yanzhi came here and went back, but he didn't reach the source.

古文：洛水又东，库谷水注之，水自宜阳山南。三川并发，合为一溪，东北流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，库谷水注入。库谷水出自宜阳山南麓，三条课涧同流而出，汇合成一流，往东北注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, and Ku Valley water is injected. Ku Valley water comes from the southern foot of Yiyang Mountain, and three streams flow together to form a first-class stream, and Luoshui is injected to the northeast.

古文：洛水又东得鹈鹕水口，水北发鹈鹕涧，东南流入千洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，到了鹑鹏水口。鹏鹏水发源于北面的鹑鹏涧，往东南流，注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, to the mouth of the Luopeng Watercourse. The Luopeng Watercourse originates in the north of the Luopeng Reservoir and flows southeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：洛水又径仆谷亭北，左合北水，水出北山，东南流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又流经仆谷亭北面，左边汇合北水，北水发源于北山，往东南流，注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows through the north side of the pavilion. On the left, it merges with Beishui. Beishui originates from Beishan and flows to the southeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，侯谷水出南山，北流入于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，侯谷水出自南山，北流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, Hougu water comes from Nanshan, and the north stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东径龙骧城北，龙骧将军王镇恶，从刘公西入长安，陆行所由，故城得其名。
现代文：洛水又往东流经龙壤城北面。龙嚷将军王镇恶，跟随刘裕西入长安，从陆路经过这里，因而得名。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward to the north of Longyan City. Dragon General Wang Zhenxiong followed Liu Yuxi into Chang'an and passed through here by land, hence the name.

古文：洛水又东，左合宜阳北山水，水自北溪南流注洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，左边汇合宜阳北山水。这条水出自北溪，南流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, and merges with Yiyang Beishanshui on the left. This water comes from Beixi, and the south stream flows into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，广由涧水注之，水出南山由溪，北流径龙骧城东，而北流入于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，广由涧水注入。涧水发源于南山由溪，往北流经龙骤城东面，北流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, and is widely injected by Luoshui. Luoshui originates from Nanshan Yuxi, flows northward through the east of Longsheng City, and the north stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，右得直谷水，水出南山，北径屯城。西北流注于洛水也。
现代文：洛水又东流，右边汇合了直谷水。直谷水发源于南山，往北流经屯城西面，北流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, and is joined on the right by Naotani Shui. Naotani Shui originates in Nanshan, flows north through the west of Tuncheng, and the north stream flows into Luoshui.

古文：又东北过蠡城邑之南，城西有坞水，出北四里山上，原高二十五丈，故邑池县治，南对金门坞，水南五里，旧宜阳县治也。
现代文：文往东北流经蠡城邑南面，蠡城西面有坞水，发源于北面四里的山上，山高二十五丈。旧时龟池县治就设在蠢城，南面与金门坞相望。坞水以南五里是旧宜阳县治所。
English: The Wen flows to the northeast through the south of Lucheng, and there is dock water to the west of Lucheng. It originates four miles north of the mountain, and the mountain is twenty-five meters high. In the old days, the county government of Guechi was located in Wucheng, and the south faces the Kinmen dock. Five miles south of the dock water is the former county government of Yiyang.

古文：洛水右会金门溪水，水南出金门山，北径金门坞，西北流入于洛。
现代文：洛水右边汇合金门溪，溪水发源于南面的金门山，往北流经金门坞西面，北流注入洛水。
English: On the right side of Luoshui is the Huiguimen Creek. The water of the stream originates from the south side of Kinmen Mountain, flows northward through the west side of Kinmen Dock, and the north stream flows into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东合款水，其水二源并发，两川径引，谓之大款水也，合而东南入于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，汇合了款水。款水有两个源头一齐流出，称为大款水，汇合后往东南流，注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with Xiaoshui. Xiaoshui has two sources flowing out at the same time, known as large Xiaoshui. After merging, it flows to the southeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，黍良谷水入焉，水南出金门山。
现代文：洛水又东流，黍良谷水汇入。这条水发源于南面的金门山。
English: Luo water also flows to the east, and Ailiang valley water flows in. This water originates from Kinmen Mountain in the south.

古文：《开山图》曰：山多重固在韩。
现代文：《开山图》说：山上多竹，可制箫笛。
English: "The opening mountain map" says: there are many bamboos on the mountain, which can be used to make flute music.

古文：建武二年，强弩大将军陈俊转击金门、白马，皆破之，即此也，而东北流注于洛。
现代文：建武二年，强弩大将军陈俊回军攻打金门，白马，都攻下了。说的就是这地方。水往东北流，注入洛水。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the strong general Chen Jun returned to the army to attack the Golden Gate and the White Horse, both of which were captured. This is the place in question. The water flows to the northeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，左合北溪，南流入于洛也。
现代文：洛水又东流，左边汇合北溪，南流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with Beixi on the left, while the southern stream flows into Luoshui.

古文：又东过阳市邑南，又东北过于父邑之南，大阴谷水南出太阴溪，北流注于洛。
现代文：又往东流过阳市邑南面，又往东北流过于父邑南面，太阴谷水发源于南方的太阴溪，北流注入洛水。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of Yangshi-eup, and northeastward to the south of Dadong-eup. The water of Taiyin Valley originates from the south of Taiyin Creek, and the north stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东合白马溪水，水出宜阳山，涧有大石，厥状似马，故溪涧以物色受名也。
现代文：洛水又东流，与白马溪水汇合。白马溪水发源于宜阳山，溪中有一块大石，形状像马，所以这条溪涧是因了岩石的形状而得名的。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with Baima Creek. Baima Creek originates from Yiyang Mountain. There is a large rock in the stream, shaped like a horse, so this creek is named after the shape of the rock.

古文：溪水东北流注于洛。
现代文：溪水往东北流，注入洛水。
English: The stream water flows to the northeast, injecting Luo water.

古文：洛水又东，有昌涧水注之，水出西北宜阳山，而东南流，径宜阳故郡南，旧阳市邑也，故洛阳都典农治，此后改为郡。
现代文：洛水又东流，有昌涧水注入。昌涧水发源于西北方的宜阳山，往东南流经旧时的宜阳郡南面，就是旧阳市邑。从前洛阳都典农的治所就设在这里，后来才改为郡。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east and is infused with Changshui water. Changshui water originates from Yiyang Mountain in the northwest and flows southeast through the south of the old Yiyang County, that is, the old Yiyang City and County. The former Luoyang City and County Government was located here, and later it was changed to the county.

古文：其水又南注于洛。
现代文：水又南流，注入洛水。
English: The water also flows south, injecting Luo water.

古文：洛水又东径一合坞南，城在川北原上，高二十丈，南、北、东三箱，天险峭绝，惟筑西面即为固，一合之名，起于是矣。
现代文：洛水又往东流经一合坞南面，这是一座小城堡，位于洛水北岸的高地上，高二十丈，是一处禾险，南、北、东三面都是极陡峻的峭壁，只要在西面筑一道城墙，就是坚不可摧的堡垒了，一合之名就是这样来的。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the south side of the Yihe dock. This is a small castle, located on the highlands on the north shore of Luoshui. It is 20 meters high and is a grain hazard. The south, north and east sides are extremely steep cliffs. As long as you build a wall on the west side, it is an indestructible fortress. This is how the name of Yihe came about.

古文：刘曜之将攻河南也，晋将军魏该奔于此，故于父邑也。
现代文：刘耀将要攻打河南时，晋朝将军魏该赶到这里，这座城就是旧时的于父邑。
English: When Liu Yao was about to attack Henan, the Jin Dynasty general Wei should have arrived here. This city was the old Yufuancun.

古文：洛水又东合杜阳涧水，水出西北杜阳溪，东南径一合坞，东与槃谷水合，乱流东南入洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，汇合了杜阳涧水。杜阳涧水发源于西北方的杜阳溪，往东南流经一合坞，东流与架谷水汇合，往东南乱流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, merging with Duyangluoshui. Duyangluoshui originates from Duyang Creek in the northwest and flows southeast through a dock. The eastward flow merges with Jia valley water and flows into the southeastern turbulent flow of Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东，渠谷水出宜阳县南女几山，东北流径云中坞，左上迢遰层峻，流烟半垂，缨带山阜，故坞受其名。
现代文：洛水又东流，有渠谷水发源于宜阳县南面的女几山，往东北流经云中坞的左面。这里地势高峻，山腰烟雾缭绕，因此有云中坞之称。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east. The canalized water originates from the Yixian Mountains in the south of Yiyang County and flows to the northeast through the left side of Yunzhong Dock. The terrain here is high and the mountainside is surrounded by smog, so it is known as Yunzhong Dock.

古文：渠谷水又东北入洛水。
现代文：渠谷水又往东北注入洛水。
English: The canal valley water then injects the Luo water to the northeast.

古文：臧荣绪《晋书》称，孙登尝经宜阳山，作炭人见之与语，登不应，作炭者觉其情神非常，咸共传说。
现代文：减荣绪《晋书》说：孙登曾经过宜阳山，烧炭人见了他，想和他说话，孙登却不答话。烧炭人觉得他神态不同常人，就纷纷传开了。
English: Qian Rongxu's "Jin Shu" said: Sun Deng once passed through Yiyang Mountain. The charcoal burners saw him and wanted to talk to him, but Sun Deng did not answer. The charcoal burners felt that his demeanor was different from that of an ordinary person, so they spread the news.

古文：太祖闻之，使阮籍往观，与语，亦不应，籍因大啸，登笑曰：复作向声，又为啸。
现代文：晋太祖听到后，派阮籍前去看个究竟。阮籍向他招呼，他也不答话。阮籍于是高声长啸起来。孙登笑着说：再啸一下看看。
English: Upon hearing this, Jin Taizu sent Nguyn Quc to see what was going on. Nguyn Quc greeted him, but he did not answer. Nguyn Quc then let out a long, high-pitched scream. Sun Deng smiled and said, "Let's scream again and see."

古文：求与俱出，登不肯，籍因别去。
现代文：阮籍又长啸起来，并请他一起出山，但孙登不肯。阮籍于是和他作别而去。
English: Nguyen Quoc growled again and asked him to leave the mountain with him, but Sun Den refused. Nguyen Quoc then bade him farewell and left.

古文：登上峰行且啸，如萧韶笙簧之音，声振山谷。
现代文：孙登向山顶走去，边走边长啸，有如箫管笙簧齐奏，响声震荡着山谷。
English: Sun Deng walked towards the top of the mountain. As he walked, he let out a long howl, like a cymbal and reed playing in unison, the sound of which shook the valley.

古文：籍怪而问作炭人，作炭人曰：故是向人声。
现代文：阮籍很惊奇，去问烧炭人，烧炭人说：那人先前也是发出这样的声音的。
English: Surprised, Nguyn Quc went to ask the charcoal burner. The charcoal burner said, "That man used to make that sound before."

古文：籍更求之，不知所止，推问久之，乃知姓名。
现代文：阮籍再去寻他，却不知去向了，四处打听，才知道他的姓名。
English: Nguyen Quoc went to look for him again, but he didn't know where he had gone. He had to ask around to find out his name.

古文：余按孙绰之叙《高士传》，言在苏门山，又别作《登传》。
现代文：我按孙绰写作《高士传》，说孙登隐于苏门山；又另有一篇《孙登传》。
English: I wrote "The Biography of Gao Shi" according to Sun Qiao, saying that Sun Dengyuan is hidden in Mount Sumen; there is also another "The Biography of Sun Dengyuan."

古文：孙盛《魏春秋》亦言在苏门山，又不列姓名。
现代文：孙盛《魏春秋》也说是在苏门山，但没有举出姓名。
English: Sun Sheng's "Wei Chunqiu" also said that it was in Sumen Mountain, but did not give a name.

古文：阮嗣宗感之，著《大人先生论》，言吾不知其人，既神游自得，不与物交。阮氏尚不能动其英操，复不识何人而能得其姓名。
现代文：阮嗣宗心有所感，就撰写了《大人先生论》，说我不知道那人是谁。他既神游自得，不与人交往，连阮籍也不能动摇他超拔绝俗的情操，不知道还有谁能得知他的姓名。
English: Nguyn Thiệu was so moved that he wrote "On Mr. Adult" and said that he did not know who that person was. He was self-sufficient and did not socialize with people. Even his Nguyn nationality could not shake his extraordinary sentiments. He did not know who else could know his name.

古文：又东北过宜阳县南，洛水之北有熊耳山，双峦竞举，状同熊耳，此自别山，不与《禹贡》导洛自熊耳同也。
现代文：又往东北流过宜阳县南面，洛水的北岸有熊耳山，双峰并起，样子像熊的耳朵。这与《禹贡》所说从熊耳山疏导洛水的那座山不同，而是另一座山。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the south of Yiyang County. On the north bank of Luoshui, there is Xiong Er Mountain, with twin peaks rising side by side, looking like a bear's ear. This is different from the mountain that guides Luoshui from Xiong Er Mountain, but it is another mountain.

古文：昔汉光武破赤眉樊崇，积甲仗与熊耳平，即是山也。
现代文：从前汉光武帝大败樊崇的赤眉军，缴获的恺甲兵器堆得与熊耳山一样高，讲的就是这座山。
English: The Red Eyebrow Army, which was once greatly defeated and revered by Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty, captured armored weapons piled as high as Mount Xiong'er, which is the mountain in question.

古文：山际有池，池水东南流，水侧有一池，世谓之渑池矣。
现代文：山边有池，池水往东南流，旁边还有一个水池，人们称为绳池。
English: There is a pool on the edge of the mountain, the pool water flows to the southeast, and there is also a pool next to it, which people call the rope pool.

古文：又东南径宜阳县故城西，谓之西度水，又东南流入于洛。
现代文：又往东南流经宜阳县老城西南，叫西度水；又往东南流，注入洛水。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the southwest of the old city of Yiyang County, called Xidushui; it also flows to the southeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：洛水又东径宜阳县故城南。
现代文：洛水又往东流经宜阳县老城南面。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Yiyang County.

古文：秦武王以甘茂为左丞相，曰：寡人欲通三川、窥周室，死不朽矣。
现代文：秦武王以甘茂为左垂相，说：我想打通三川，窥伺周朝王室，这样死了也会不朽了。
English: King Qinwu took Ganmao as his left eye and said, "I want to penetrate the Three Rivers and spy on the Zhou Dynasty royal family. If I die in this way, I will be immortal."

古文：茂请约魏以攻韩，斩首六万，遂拔宜阳城，故韩地也，后乃县之。
现代文：甘茂请他联合魏国攻打韩国，一战杀敌六万，就攻下了宜阳城。宜阳原属韩国，后来才设县。
English: Ganmao asked him to attack Korea together with Wei. He killed 60,000 of the enemy in the First World War and captured Yiyang City. Yiyang was originally part of Korea, but was later made into a county.

古文：汉哀帝封息夫躬为侯国，城之西门，赤眉樊崇与盆子及大将等，奉玺绶剑壁处。
现代文：汉哀帝将这地方封给息夫躬，立为侯国。城的西门，就是赤眉军首领樊崇与刘盆子以及各大将军等，捧着王印、兵器、玉璧来投降的地方。
English: The Western Gate of the city is the place where the leaders of the Red Eyebrow Army, Yu Chong and Liu Bonzi, as well as the major generals, came to surrender, holding the royal seal, weapons, and gems.

古文：世祖不即见，明日，陈兵于洛水见盆子等，谓盆子丞相徐宣曰：不悔乎？
现代文：光武帝不立即见他们，第二天，集合兵士，列队于洛水之滨，才来接见刘盆子等人。他对刘盆子的尽相徐宣说：你不后悔吗？
English: Emperor Guangwu did not see them immediately. The next day, he gathered soldiers and lined them up on the waterfront of Luo to meet Liu Bonsi and others. He said to Liu Bonsi's close friend Xu Xuan: "Don't you regret it?

古文：宣曰：不悔。
现代文：徐宣说：不后悔。
English: Xu Xuan said: I have no regrets.

古文：上叹曰：卿庸中皦皦，铁中铮铮也。
现代文：光武帝感叹地说：你真是庸夫中的佼佼者，硬汉中的铮铮者。 
English: Emperor Guangwu sighed and said, "You really are the best of the mediocre, and the weakest of the tough."

古文：洛水又东与厌染之水合，水出县北傅山大陂，山无草木，其水自陂北流，屈而东南注，世谓之五延水。
现代文：洛冰又东流，与厌染之水汇合。这条水发源于县北傅山一个很大的破湖中。山上不生草木，水自湖中往北流，然后折向东南流去，世人称为五延水。
English: Luo Bing also flows eastward, merging with the water of Shan Dyeing. This water originates from a large broken lake in Fu Shan in the north of the county. There are no plants on the mountain, and the water flows north from the lake, and then turns to the southeast, and is known to the world as Wu Yan water.

古文：又东南流径宜阳县故城东，东南流注于洛。
现代文：又往东南流经宜阳县老城东面，往东南注入洛水。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the east of the old city of Yiyang County, and injects Luoshui to the southeast.

古文：洛水又东南，黄中涧水出北阜，二源奇发，总成一川，东流注于洛。
现代文：洛水又往东南流，黄中涧水发源于北阜，两个源头合成一流，往东注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the southeast, Huangzhongluoshui originates from Beifu, the two sources are first-class, and Luoshui is injected to the east.

古文：洛水又东，禄泉水注之，其水北出近溪。
现代文：洛水又东流，禄泉水注入。禄泉水出自北面附近的小溪。
English: Luo water also flows east, and Luo spring water is injected. Luo spring water comes from a stream near the north.

古文：洛水又东，共水入焉，水北出长石之山，山无草木，其西有谷焉，厥名井谷，共水出焉。
现代文：洛水又东流，共水注入。共水发源于北面的长石山，山上不长草木，西边有个山谷，名叫共谷，共水就在这里流出。
English: Luo water also flows to the east, and co-flowing water is injected. Co-flowing water originates from the north of the Changshi Mountain. There is not much vegetation on the mountain, and there is a valley in the west, called the co-flowing valley, where the co-flowing water flows out.

古文：南流得尹溪口，水出西北尹谷，东南往之，共水又西南与左涧水会，水东出近川，西流注于共水。
现代文：共水往南流，到了尹溪口。溪水发源于西北的尹谷，往东南注入共水。共水又往西南流，和左涧水汇合。左涧水发源于东边附近的小溪，西流注入共水。
English: The common water flows southward to the mouth of Yin Creek. The stream water originates from Yin Valley in the northwest, and the common water is injected to the southeast. The common water also flows to the southwest, and merges with the water from the left bank. The left bank water originates from the creek near the east, and the west stream is injected into the common water.

古文：共水又南与李谷水合，水出西北李溪，东南注蓁水。
现代文：共水又南流，与李谷水汇合？李谷水出自西北方的李溪，往东南注入秦水。
English: The common water also flows south, merging with the Li Valley water? The Li Valley water comes from the northwest of the Li Creek, and is injected into the southeast of the Qin water.

古文：蓁水发源蓁谷，西南流与李谷水合，而西南流入共水。
现代文：秦水发源于秦谷，往西南流，与李谷水汇合，然后往西南流入共水。
English: The Qin River originates in the Qin Valley, flows to the southwest, merges with the Li Valley River, and then flows to the southwest into the common water.

古文：共水，世谓之石头泉，而南流注于洛。
现代文：共水，人们也叫石头泉，往南流，注入洛水。
English: The common water, which people also call the stone spring, flows southward and injects Luo water.

古文：洛水又东，黑涧水南出陆浑西山，历于黑涧，西北入洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，黑涧水源出南方的陆浑西山，流经黑涧，往西北注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, while Heihe water flows from the source of Luhun West Mountain in the south, flows through Heihe, and flows into Luoshui in the northwest.

古文：洛水又东，临亭川水注之，水出西北近溪，东南与长涧水会，水出北山南人临亭水，又东南历九曲西，而南入洛水也。
现代文：洛水又东流，临亭川水注入。临亭川水出自西北附近的小溪，往东南流，与长涧水汇合。长涧水源出北山，往南注入临亭水，又往东南流经九曲西面，南流注入洛水。
English: Luo water also flows to the east, and the water of the Lin Ting River is injected. The water of the Lin Ting River originates from a stream near the northwest, flows to the southeast, and merges with the water of the Yangtze River. The source of the Yangtze River flows out of the North Mountain, and injects the water of the Lin Ting River to the south, and flows to the southeast through the west side of the Nine Bends, and the south stream injects the water of the Luo River.

古文：又东北出散关南，洛水东径九曲南，其地十里，有坂九曲。
现代文：又往东北流，从散关南面流出，洛水往东流经九曲南面，那地方十里之间有一条山坡，曲曲折折共有九道弯子。
English: It also flows to the northeast, flowing out from the south of Sankuan. Luo Water flows to the east through the south of Jiuquan. There is a hillside between ten miles in that place, with a total of nine bends.

古文：《穆天子传》所谓天子西征，升于九阿，此是也。
现代文：《穆天子传》所说的天子西行时登上九阿，指的就是这地方。
English: "Mu Tianzi Biography" said that when the son of heaven went west, he ascended Jiua, referring to this place.

古文：洛水又东与豪水会，水出新安县密山，南流历九曲东，而南流入于洛。
现代文：洛水又东流，与豪水汇合。豪水出自新安县密山，往南流经九曲东，又往南注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, merging with Haishui. Haishui comes from Mishan, Xin'an County, flows southward through Jiuchu East, and then flows southward into Luoshui.

古文：洛水之侧有石墨山，山石尽黑，可以书疏，故以石墨名山矣。
现代文：洛水旁有石墨山，山上岩石都是黑的，可以当墨写字，因此称山为石墨山。
English: There is a graphite mountain next to Luoshui. The rocks on the mountain are black and can be used as ink to write. Therefore, the mountain is called graphite mountain.

古文：洛水又东，枝渎左出焉。东出关，绝惠水，又径清女冢南，冢在北山上。
现代文：洛水又东流，左边分出一条支渠，东流出关，穿过惠水，又流经清女墓南面，墓在北山上。
English: Luoshui also flows to the east, and a branch canal branches off to the left. It flows out of Guan to the east, passes through Huishui, and flows through the south side of the Qing Tomb, and the tomb is on the north mountain.

古文：《耆旧传》云：斯女清贞秀古，迹表来今矣。
现代文：据老人们传说：这个女子坚贞纯洁，为古代的精英，她的事迹可作当今和后世的表率。
English: According to the old people's legend: this woman is chaste and pure, an ancient elite, and her deeds can serve as an example for today and the future.

古文：枝渎又东径周山，上有周灵王冢。
现代文：支渠又往东流经周山，山上有周灵王墓。
English: The branch canal also flows eastward through Zhoushan, and there is the tomb of King Zhou Ling on the mountain.

古文：《皇览》曰：周灵王葬于河南城西南周山上，盖以王生而神，效谥曰灵。其冢，人祠之不绝。
现代文：《皇览》说：周灵王葬在河南城西南的周山上。因为这位君王生来就有点神异，所以用灵字作为溢号，到他的坟前来祭祀的人络绎不绝。
English: "Imperial Review" said: Zhou Ling Wang was buried on Zhou Mountain in the southwest of Henan City. Because this king was born a little strange, he used the spiritual character as a superscript, and the number of people who came to his grave to worship him was endless.

古文：又东北径柏亭南，《皇览》曰周山在柏亭西北，谓斯亭也。
现代文：支流又往东北流经柏亭南面。《皇览》说：周山在柏亭西北，说的就是此亭。
English: The tributary also flows to the northeast through the south of Beiting. "Imperial Review" said: Zhou Mountain is in the northwest of Beiting, it is this pavilion.

古文：又东北径三王陵东北出，三王，或言周景玉、悼王、定王也。
现代文：又往东北流经三王陵，往东北流去。三王，有人说是指周朝的景王、悼王、定王。
English: It also flows to the northeast, passing the Three Kings' Mausoleum. Some people say that the Three Kings refer to the Zhou Dynasty's King Jing, King Miao, and King Ding.

古文：魏司徒公崔浩注《西征赋》云：定当为敬，子朝作难，西周政弱人荒，悼、敬二王，与景王俱葬于此，故世以三王名陵。
现代文：魏司徒公崔浩注《西征赋》说：定王应为敬王。子朝作乱时，西周政权衰落，人才短缺，悼王、敬王与景王都葬在这里，因此世人称为三王陵。
English: Wei scholar Cui Hao's commentary on "Western Conquest" said: Ding Wang should be Kei Wang. When the Zi Dynasty was in turmoil, the Western Zhou regime was in decline and there was a shortage of talent. King Miao, King Kei and King Jing were all buried here, so the world is known as the Three Kings' Mausoleum.

古文：《帝王世纪》曰：景王葬于翟泉，今洛阳太仓中大冢是也。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：景王葬于翟泉，现在洛阳太仓中的大坟就是景王家。
English: "The Century of Emperors" said: "King Gyeongbokgung was buried in Gyeongsangbokgung, and now the tomb in Luoyang Taicang is the King Gyeongbokgung's tomb."

古文：而复传言在此，所未详矣。
现代文：可是又有传说以为陵在这里，那就不清楚了。
English: But there are also legends that the tomb is here, so it's not clear.

古文：又悼、敬二王，稽诸史传，复无葬处。
现代文：此外，关于悼王和敬王，查考史籍和传记都没有提到所葬何处。
English: In addition, with regard to mourning the king and honoring the king, neither historical records nor biographies mentioned where he was buried.

古文：今陵东有石碑，录赧王以上世王名号，考之碑记，周墓明矣。
现代文：现在王陵东面有石碑，载有报王以上各代君主的名号，考证碑记，很清楚，那是周朝的坟墓。
English: Now there is a stone monument on the east side of the royal mausoleum, containing the names of the monarchs of all generations above the king. It is clear that it is the tomb of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：枝渎东北历制乡，径河南县王城西，历郊鄏陌。
现代文：支渠往东北流经制乡，流过河南县王城西面，流过郊娜陌。
English: The branch canal flows to the northeast through Shishe Township, flows through the west side of Wangcheng, Henan County, and flows through the suburb of Na Miao.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：县西有郏鄏陌，谓此也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：县城西面有部娜陌，说的就是这里。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: There is a part of Na Miao in the west of the county seat, and it is here that it is said.

古文：枝渎又北入谷，盖经始周启，渎久废不修矣。
现代文：支渠又往北注入谷水，但自周朝开始开凿这条渠道以来，久已废弃，没有浚治过了。
English: A branch canal was also used to inject grain water to the north, but since the Zhou Dynasty began to excavate this channel, it has long been abandoned and has not been dredged.

古文：洛水自枝渎又东出关，惠水右注之，世谓之八关水。
现代文：洛水从支渠分出处又东流出关，惠水从右边注入，世人称为八关水。
English: Luo water flows from the branch canal source to the east and flows out of Guan, and beneficial water is injected from the right, and the world is known as Luo Ba Guan water.

古文：戴延之《西征记》谓之八关泽，即《经》所谓散关，鄣自南山，横洛水，北属于河，皆关塞也，即杨仆家僮所筑矣。
现代文：戴延之《西征记》叫八关泽，就是《水经》所说的散关。城墙从南山横跨洛水，往北直到黄河，这一带都是关隘要塞，是杨仆家的憧仆所筑。
English: Dayan's "Westward Conquest" is called Hachiguanze, which is the Sankuan mentioned in the "Water Sutra." The city wall stretches from Nanshan across Luoshui to the north to the Yellow River. This area is all Guanqiao fortresses, built by the long-suffering servants of the Yang family.

古文：惠水出白石山之阳。
现代文：惠水发源于白石山南麓，往东南流，与瞻水汇合。
English: The Huisui originates from the southern foot of Shiroishi Mountain, flows southeast, and merges with the Zhouzhu.

古文：东南流与瞻水合，水东出娄涿之山，而南流入惠水。
现代文：瞻水发源于东面的娄琢之山，往南流，注入惠水。
English: The spring water originates from the east side of Mt. Tsukudaku and flows southward, injecting beneficial water.

古文：惠水又东南，谢水北出瞻诸之山；东南流，又有交触之水，北出廆山，南流，俱合惠水。
现代文：惠水又往东南流，谢水发源于北方的瞻诸之山，往东南流；又有交触之水发源于北方的鹿山，往南流，这两条水一齐汇入惠水。
English: Huishui also flows to the southeast, Xieshui originates from the north of Zhouzhu Mountain and flows to the southeast; and the intersecting water originates from the north of Lushan and flows to the south, and the two waters merge into Huishui.

古文：惠水又南流径关城北，二十里者也。其城西阻塞垣，东枕惠水。
现代文：惠水又往南流经关城以北。关城西面有关塞城墙的阻隔，东边临近惠水。
English: Huisui also flows southward to the north of Guancheng. On the west side of Guancheng, it is blocked by the city wall, and on the east side, it is close to Huisui.

古文：灵帝中平元年，以河南尹何进为大将军，率五营士屯都亭，置函谷、广城、伊阙、大谷、轘辕、旋门、小平津，盂津等八关，都尉官治此，函谷为之首，在八关之限，故世人总其统目，有八关之名矣。
现代文：灵帝中平元年，以河南尹何进为大将军，率领五营部队驻扎在都亭，设置函谷、广城、伊阀、大谷、辍辕、旋门、小平津及孟津等八关，都尉官的治所就设在这里。函谷关是第一关，在八关之列，因此人们就将它作为八关的总称。
English: In the first year of the Lingdi era, Yin Hejin of Henan Province was appointed as the grand general, and he led five battalions to be stationed in Du Ting. Eight gates were set up, including Hanyu, Guangcheng, Yiwu, Datan, Jiaozhou, Lintong, Xiaopingjin and Mengjin, and the governor's office was located here. Hanyu Gate was the first gate, among the eight gates, so people used it as the general name of the eight gates.

古文：其水又南流入于洛水。
现代文：惠水又南流注入洛水。
English: Beneficial water also flows south to infuse Luoshui.

古文：《山海经》曰：白石之山惠水出其阳，而南流注于洛。
现代文：《山海经》说：惠水发源于白石之山的南麓，南流注入洛水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: The beneficial water originates from the southern foot of Mount Shiroishi, and the southern stream is infused with Luoshui.

古文：谓是水也。
现代文：说的就是此水。
English: It is this water that is being talked about.

古文：洛水又与虢水会，水出扶猪之山，北流注于洛水。
现代文：洛水又与掳水汇合。藐水发源于扶猪之山，北流注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also merges with Liao Shui. Liao Shui originates from the mountain of Fuxin, and the north stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：之南，则鹿蹄之山也，世谓之非山。
现代文：南边就是鹿蹄之山，世人称为非山。
English: To the south is Mount Shishu, known to the world as Mt.

古文：其山阴则峻绝百仞，阳则原阜隆平，甘水发于东麓，北流注于洛水也。
现代文：山的北坡异常险峻，绝壁百初，南坡则是平缓的高地丘陵。甘水发源于东麓，北流注入洛水。
English: The northern slope of the mountain is unusually steep, with steep cliffs, while the southern slope is a gentle highland hill. Sweet water originates from the eastern foot, and the northern stream flows into Luoshui.

古文：又东北过河南县南，《周书》称周公将致政，乃作大邑成周于中土，南系于洛水，北因于郏山，以为天下之大凑。
现代文：又往东北流过河南县南面，《周书》说：周公将把政权交还成王的时候，就在中原地区建立了大城成周，南临洛水，北接郊山，作为天下的中枢。
English: It also flowed to the northeast through the south of Henan County. "Zhou Shu" said: When Zhou Gongzheng returned power to Cheng Wang, he established the great city of Cheng Zhou in the Central Plains, south of Loushui and north of the countryside, as the center of the world.

古文：《孝经援神契》曰：八方之广，周洛为中，谓之洛邑。
现代文：《孝经援神契》说：天下八方极其广大，周洛则是中心点，称为洛邑。
English: "The Filial Piety and Benevolence Pact" says: the world is extremely vast, and Zhouluo is the central point, known as Luoyang.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋定公二十年，洛绝于周。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋定公二十年前，洛水在周境断流。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Twenty years before Emperor Jinding ascended to the throne, Luo Shui cut off the flow of water in the surrounding area.

古文：魏襄王九年，洛入成周，山水大出。
现代文：魏襄王九年前，山洪暴发，洛水漫入成周城。
English: Nine years before the Wei Xiang Wang, a flash flood occurred, and Luo Shui flowed into Cheng Zhoucheng.

古文：南有甘洛城，《郡国志》所谓甘城也。
现代文：南面有甘洛城，就是《郡国志》所说的甘城。
English: To the south is the city of Ganluo, also known as "Gancheng" in the "County History."

古文：《地记》曰：洛水东北过五零陪尾，北与涧、瀍合，是二水，东入千金渠，故渎存焉。
现代文：《地记》说：洛水往东北流经五零陪尾北面，与涧水及漓水汇合。这两条水往东注入干金渠，旧河道至今仍在。
English: "Geography" says: Luoshui flows to the northeast through the north side of the 50th parallel, and merges with Shanshui and Shanshui. These two waters are injected into the dry gold channel to the east, and the old river channel is still there.

古文：又东过洛阳县南，伊水从西来往之。
现代文：又往东流过洛阳县南面，伊水从西面流来注人。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Luoyang County, and the Yishui River flows from the west.

古文：洛阳，周公所营洛邑也，故《洛浩》曰：我卜瀍水东，亦惟洛食。
现代文：洛阳就是周公时所建的洛邑。因此《洛浩》说：我在攘水东岸占卜，也只有洛邑可以定都。
English: Luoyang is the capital of Luoyang built by Zhou Gongde. Therefore, "Luohao" said: I am divining on the east coast of the water, and only Luoyang can be the capital.

古文：其城方七百二十丈，南系于洛水，北因于郏山，以为天下之凑。
现代文：洛邑城方七百二十丈，南临洛水。北连郊山，作为天下的中枢。
English: The city of Luoyang is 720 meters above sea level, with Luoshui to the south and the suburban mountains to the north, serving as the center of the world.

古文：方六百里，因西八百里，为千里。
现代文：周朝天下方圆六百里，连西部八百里，则是千里。
English: The circumference of the world from the Zhou Dynasty to the present is six hundred miles. Even if it is eight hundred miles to the west, it is still a thousand miles.

古文：《春秋》昭公三十二年，晋合诸侯大夫戍成周之城，故亦曰成周也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公三十二年前，晋联合诸侯大夫防守成周城，因此又称成周。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Thirty-two years before Zhaogong, Jin and the princes defended Zhoucheng, so it is also called Zhoucheng.

古文：司马迁《自序》云：太史公留滞周南。
现代文：司马迁《自序》说：太史公滞留在周南。
English: Sima Qian's "Self-sequence" said: Taishigong stayed in Zhunan.

古文：挚仲治曰：古之周南，今之洛阳，汉高祖始欲都之，感娄敬之言，不日而驾行矣。
现代文：挚仲治说：古代的周南，就是今天的洛阳。汉高祖开始想在这里建都，听了娄敬的话，不久就动身走了。
English: Zhi Zhongzhi said: The ancient Zhou Nan is today's Luoyang. Han Gao Zu began to want to build a capital here, listened to the words of respect, and soon left.

古文：属光武中兴，宸居洛邑，逮于魏、晋，咸两宅焉。
现代文：光武中兴时，才定都洛邑，直到魏、晋也都建都洛阳。
English: When Guangwu was revived, Luoyang was chosen as the capital. Luoyang was also the capital of Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：故《魏略》曰：汉火行忌水，故去其水而加佳，魏为土德，土水之牡也，水得上而流，土得水而柔，除佳加水。
现代文：因此《魏略》说：汉在五行中属火忌水，因此将洛字去掉水旁而加佳字。魏朝属土，土是水的依托，水有了土才会流动，土有了水才会变柔，于是又去掉佳旁而加水旁。
English: Therefore, "Weiliang" said: Han belongs to fire and avoids water in the five elements, so the Luo character is removed from the water side and the good character is added. Wei Dynasty belongs to the soil, the soil is the support of water, the water will flow with the soil, and the soil will become soft with the water, so the good side is removed and the water side is added.

古文：《长沙耆旧传》云：祝良，字召卿，为洛阳令。岁时亢旱，夭子祈雨不得，良乃曝身阶庭，告诚引罪，自晨至中，紫云水起，甘雨登降。
现代文：《长沙眷旧传》说：祝良字召卿，他当洛阳令时，有一年大旱，天子去求雨却没求到，祝良顶着烈日，赤膊站在阶下的庭院里，诚心诚意地向天公请罪，从早晨直到中午。于是紫云团团涌起，顷刻降下一阵甘霖。
English: "Changsha Ancestor's Ancestor's Anecdote" says: Zhu Liangzhu Zhaoqing, when he was the Luo Yangling, there was a year of severe drought. The heavenly son went to ask for rain but did not get it. Zhu Liang stood in the courtyard under the steps with his shirt off, braving the scorching sun. He sincerely asked the Heavenly Lord for forgiveness from morning until noon. Then the purple clouds gathered and a shower of rain fell in an instant.

古文：人为歌曰：天久不雨，烝人失所，天王自出，祝令特苦，精符感应，滂沱下雨。
现代文：有人编了一首歌谣：天公久晴不雨，百姓流离失所，天子亲自出马，祝令更是辛苦，精诚感应上天，降下谤沱大雨。
English: Some people have made up a song: the sky has been clear for a long time, but it hasn't rained, the people have been displaced, the heavenly son himself has come out on horseback, the blessing is even more arduous, the sincerity is inspired by the heavens, and the heavy rain has fallen.

古文：则县司及河南尹治，司隶，周官也，汉武帝使领徒隶，董督京畿后，因名司州焉。
现代文：洛阳县是司州和河南尹的治所，司隶是周时的官职，汉武帝时，以司隶统领役夫囚犯，巡察京城，后世称司州。
English: Luoyang County is the administrative center of Shizhou and Yin of Henan Province. Shizhu is the official post of Zhou Dynasty. During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Shizhu led the prisoners and patrolled the capital, and was later known as Shizhou.

古文：《地记》曰：洛水东入于中提山间，东流会于伊是也。
现代文：《地记》说：洛水往东流进中提山里，东流汇合伊水。
English: The "Geography" says: Luo water flows eastward into the Zhongti Mountains, and the eastward flow merges with Yi water.

古文：昔黄帝之时，天大雾三日，帝游洛水之上，见大鱼，杀五牲以蘸之，天乃甚雨，七日七夜鱼流，始得图书，今《河图视萌篇》是也。
现代文：古代黄帝时，连续三天大雾，黄帝在洛水上游览，看到一条大鱼，于是杀了五牲来祭祀，天就连下七天七夜大雨，大鱼能游动了才得到图书，这就是今天的《河图•视萌篇》。
English: In the time of the ancient Yellow Emperor, there was heavy fog for three days in a row. The Yellow Emperor went on a tour of Luo Water and saw a big fish, so he killed five animals to sacrifice. It rained heavily for seven days and seven nights. The big fish was able to swim before he got the book. This is today's "River Map•View Meng."

古文：昔王子晋好吹凤笙，招延道士，与浮丘同游伊洛之浦，含始又受玉鸡之瑞于此水，亦洛神宓妃之所在也。
现代文：从前王子晋喜欢吹凤笙，招纳道士，与浮丘公一起在伊水、洛水之滨同游。汉高帝的母亲含始也在洛水上接受了玉鸡衔来的吉祥物，同时这也是洛神毖妃所在的地方。
English: Once upon a time, Prince Jin liked to blow phoenixes, recruit Taoists, and travel with the Floating Rock along the coasts of Yishui and Luoshui. Han Gao's mother, Han Shi, also received the mascot from the Jade Rooster on Luoshui, and this is also where Luoshen's concubine is located.

古文：洛水又东，合水南出半石之山，北径合水坞，而东北流注于公路涧。
现代文：洛水又东流，合水发源于南方的半石之山，往北流经合水坞，然后往东北流，注入公路涧。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, and the confluence originates from the south of the half-rock mountain, flows northward through the confluence dock, and then flows to the northeast, injecting the highway.

古文：但世俗音讹，号之曰光禄涧，非也。
现代文：袁术，字公路，所以山涧是袁术而得名的，但民间口传音讹，称为光禄涧，其实不对。
English: Yuanshu, the word highway, so the mountain is named after Yuanshu, but the folk word-of-mouth pronunciation, known as Guanglu, is actually wrong.

古文：上有袁木固，四周绝涧，迢递百仞，广四五里，有一水，渊而不流，故溪涧即其名也。
现代文：上面有个堡垒，叫袁术固，堡垒四周围绕着深涧，地势险峻，高达百初，方圆四五里；有一条水，积聚不流，因此溪涧也因这座堡垒而得名了。
English: There is a fortress on it, called Yuan Shugu. The fortress is surrounded by four deep, steep cliffs, up to a hundred meters high, with a circumference of four or five miles. There is a water that accumulates and does not flow, so the creek is also named after this fortress.

古文：合水北与刘水合，水出半石东山，西北流径刘聚，三面临涧，在猴氏西南，周畿内刘子国，故谓之刘涧。
现代文：合水北流与刘水汇合。刘水发源于半石东山，往西北流经刘聚。刘聚三面临涧，在缎氏西南面，是周时王瓷以内的刘子国，因此叫刘涧。
English: The confluence of the north stream of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence of the confluence

古文：其水西北流注于合水，合水又北流注于洛水也。
现代文：水往西北流，注入合水；合水又往北流，注入洛水。
English: The water flows to the northwest, injecting the confluent water; the confluent water flows to the north, injecting the Luo water.

古文：又东过偃师县南，洛水东径计素渚，中朝时，百国贡计所顿，故渚得其名。
现代文：又往东流过堰师县南面，洛水又往东流经计素诸。中朝时，各国计官进京朝贡，途中都要在这里留宿，因而得名。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Yanshi County, and Luoshui also flows eastward through Jiesu County. During the Middle Kingdom, tax collectors from all over the world came to Beijing to pay tribute, and they had to stay here on the way, hence the name.

古文：又直偃师故县南，与猴氏分水。
现代文：又流经堰师老县城南面，堰师与缎氏二县就以此水为分界。
English: It also flows through the southern part of the old county of Yanshi. Yanshi and the two counties of Jinshi are separated by this water.

古文：又东，休水自南注之，其水导源少室山，西流径穴山南，而北与少室山水合，水出少室北溪，西南流注休水。
现代文：洛水又东流，休水从南方流来注入。休水发源于少室山，往西流经穴山南面，北流与少室山水汇合。少室山水源出少室北溪，往西南流，注入休水。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward, and slack water flows in from the south. The slack water originates from Shomuro Mountain, flows westward through the southern side of Anashan, and the north stream merges with Shomuro Landscape Water. The source of Shomuro Landscape Water comes from Shomuro Beixi, and flows to the southwest, injecting slack water.

古文：休水又左会南溪水，水发大穴南山，北流入休水。
现代文：休水又在左边汇合南溪水。南溪水发源于大穴南山，北流注入休水。
English: On the left, the slack water merges with the Nanxi water. The Nanxi water originates from the Da'an Nanshan Mountain, and the north stream is injected with slack water.

古文：休水又西南北屈，潜流地下，其故渎北屈出峡，谓之大穴口，北历覆釜堆东，盖以物象受名矣。
现代文：休水又往西南流，转向北方，潜入地下，旧河道向北转弯出峡，出口处称为大穴口，往北流经覆釜堆东，这地方是因岩石形状而得名的。
English: The slack water then flows southwest, turns north, and sinks into the ground. The old river turns north and emerges from the gorge. The exit is called the big hole mouth. It flows north through the east of the overburden pile, which is named for the shape of the rock.

古文：又东届零星坞，水流潜通，重源又发，侧缑氏原，《开山图》谓之缑氏山也。
现代文：又往东流到零星坞，地下水流到缎氏原的旁边，又重新冒出地面。缎氏原，《开山图》称为缎氏山，又说，有仙人在这里升天。
English: It also flows eastward to the sporadic dock, and the groundwater flows to the side of Shushi-hara, and then re-emerges from the ground. Shushi-hara, "the opening mountain map" is called Shushi-san, and it is said that a hermit ascended to heaven here.

古文：亦云仙者升焉，言王子晋控鹄斯阜，灵王望而不得近，举手谢而去，其家得遗展，俗亦谓之为抚父堆，堆上有子晋祠。
现代文：说是王子晋乘鹊停驻在这座山顶，灵王遥望着他却不能接近，他向灵王挥手告别飞升而去了。他的家人拾到了他留下的一双鞋子，民间又把这地方叫做抚父堆，堆上有子晋祠。
English: It is said that Prince Jin rode a donkey and stopped at the top of this mountain. The spirit king watched him from a distance but could not get close. He waved goodbye to the spirit king and flew away. His family picked up a pair of shoes he left behind. The people also call this place the Fudai heap. There is a son Jin shrine on the heap.

古文：或言在九山非此，世代已远，莫能辨之。
现代文：有人说祠在九山，不在这里，但因年代久远，已搞不清了。
English: Some people say that the ancestral hall is in Jiushan, not here, but because of the long history, it has become unclear.

古文：刘向《列仙传》云：世有萧管之声焉。
现代文：刘向《列仙传》说：这里时常有箫管的声音。
English: Liu said to "The Story of the Immortals": There is often the sound of a flute here.

古文：休水又径延寿城南，缑氏县治，故滑费，《春秋》滑国所都也。
现代文：休水又流经延寿城南，缎氏县的治所就在这里；也是古时的滑费，《春秋》里的滑国在这里建都。
English: The breakwater also flows through the south of Yanshou City, and the administrative center of Jinshi County is located here; it is also the sliding fee in ancient times, and the sliding country in "Spring and Autumn" built the capital here.

古文：王莽更名中亭，即缑氏城也。
现代文：王莽时改名为中亭，就是猴氏城。
English: When Wang Mang changed its name to Zhongting, it became known as Monkey Town.

古文：城有仙人祠，谓之仙人观。
现代文：城内有仙人祠，称仙人观。
English: There is a hermit's shrine in the city, known as the hermit view.

古文：休水又西转北屈，径其城西。
现代文：休水又向西转、向北弯，流经城西。
English: The slack water then turned west and north, flowing through the west of the city.

古文：水之西南有司空密陵元侯郑袤庙碑，文缺不可复识。
现代文：休水的西南面有司空密陵元侯郑裹庙碑，但碑文已风蚀残缺，无法辨认了。
English: On the southwestern side of the breakwater, there is a monument of the Sikuo-Ming Mausoleum of the former Prince Zheng Wai, but the inscription has been damaged by wind erosion and is unrecognizable.

古文：又有晋城门校尉昌原恭侯郑仲林碑，晋泰始六年立。
现代文：又有晋城门校尉昌原恭侯郑仲林碑，是晋泰始六年所立。
English: There is also the Jincheng Gate monument to Captain Changyuan Gonghou Zheng Zhonglin, which was erected in the first six years of the Jin and Tai Dynasty.

古文：休水又北流注于洛水。
现代文：休水又北流，注入洛水。
English: The slack water flows north again, injecting Luo water.

古文：洛水又东径百谷坞北。
现代文：洛水又往东流经百谷坞北面。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward through the north side of Baigu dock.

古文：戴延之《西征记》曰：坞在川南，因高为坞，高十余丈，刘武王西入长安，舟师所保也。
现代文：戴延之《西征记》说：这座城堡在水南，是利用这块高地的地势而筑的，高十余丈。刘武王西入长安时，水军就驻守在这里。
English: Dai Yan's "Record of the Conquest of the West" said: This castle was built in the south of the water, using the topography of this highland. It is more than ten meters high. When Liu Wu Wang entered Chang'an from the west, the navy was stationed here.

古文：又有《百虫将军显灵碑》，碑云：将军姓伊氏，讳益，字隤敳，帝高阳之第二子伯益者也。
现代文：洛水又北流，阳渠水注入。《竹书纪年扒晋襄公六年九月，太岁在戌，皇上派遣殿中中郎将关内侯樊广、缎氏令王与、主簿傅演，奉命颁布诏令，建造祠庙殿宇。又有百虫将军显灵碑，碑文说：将军姓伊，名益，字馈鼓，是高阳帝的二子伯益。
English: Luo water also flowed north, and the water from the Yang channel was injected. "In September of the sixth year of the Bamboo Annals, when the great-grandson of Emperor Jinxiang was six years old, the emperor dispatched the middlemen of the palace, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai, Guanai,

古文：晋元康五年七月七日，顺人吴义等建立堂庙，水平元年二月二十日刻石立颂，赞示后贤矣。
现代文：晋元康五年七月七日，顺人吴义等建立庙堂。永平元年二月二十日，刻碑立颂，以示后世贤者。
English: On July 7th of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Kangxi, Emperor Shun, Emperor Wu and others built a temple, and on February 20th of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Yongping, a monument was erected to commemorate the wise men of future generations.

古文：其水东北流入白桐涧，又北径袁公坞东，盖公路始固有此也，故有袁公之名矣。
现代文：溪水往东北流，注入白桐涧。白桐涧水又往北流经袁公坞东，因为袁公路开始筑堡时占有这地方，所以有袁公坞之名。
English: The water of the stream flows to the northeast and flows into the Paitong Reservoir. The water of the Paitong Reservoir then flows to the north, passing east of Yuan Gong Dock. Because Yuan Highway occupied this place when it began to build the castle, it was named Yuan Gong Dock.

古文：北流注于罗水。罗水又西北径袁公坞北，又西北径潘岳父子墓前。
现代文：涧水北流，注入罗水，罗水又往西北流经袁公坞北面，又往西北流经潘岳父子墓前。
English: Surabaya water flows to the north, injecting Luo water, Luo water flows to the northwest through the north of Yuan Gong Dock, and flows to the northwest through the tomb of Pan Yue and his son.

古文：有碑，岳父茈，琅琊太守，碑石破落，文字缺败。
现代文：墓前有石碑，潘岳的父亲名花，做过琅娜太守。但碑石破败，文字已残缺了。
English: There is a stone monument in front of the tomb. Pan Yue's father, the famous flower, once served as Empress Dowager Zhenna. However, the stone monument is broken and the inscription is incomplete.

古文：岳碑题云：给事黄门侍郎潘君之碑。
现代文：潘岳碑的标题是：给事黄门侍郎潘君之碑。
English: The title of the Pan Yue monument is: Monument to Pan Jun, the Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：碑云：君遇孙秀之难，阖门受祸，故门主感覆醢以增恸，乃树碑以记事。
现代文：碑文说：先生惨遭孙秀陷害，以致全家被杀。门下学生追思惨祸，倍加悲痛，因而立碑记述这一事件。
English: The inscription said: "My teacher was cruelly framed by Sun Xiu, resulting in the death of his entire family. The students under his tutelage thought about the tragedy and were deeply saddened, so they erected a monument to record this event."

古文：太常潘尼之辞也。
现代文：碑文是太常潘尼所写。
English: The inscription was written by Mrs Penny.

古文：罗水又于訾城东北入于洛水也。
现代文：罗水又在警城东北注入洛水。
English: Luoshui also injected Luoshui in the northeast of the police city.

古文：又东北过巩县东，又北入于河。
现代文：又往东北流过巩县东面，又北流注人河水。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Gong County, and flows north into the Jinren River.

古文：洛水又东，明乐泉水注之，水出南原下，三泉并导，故世谓之五道泉，即古明溪泉也。
现代文：洛水又东流，明乐泉水注入。泉水发源于南原下，五道山泉并流，因此世人称为五道泉，就是古时的明溪泉。
English: Luo water also flows to the east, and Mingle spring water is injected. The spring water originates from the south of the plain, and the five mountain springs flow side by side. Therefore, the world is called the five springs, which is the ancient Mingxi spring.

古文：《春秋》昭公二十二年，师次于明溪者也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公二十二年前，军队驻扎在明溪。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-two years ago, the army was stationed in Mingxi.

古文：洛水又东径巩县故城南，东南所居也，本周之畿内巩伯国也。
现代文：洛水又往东流经巩县老城南面，此城为东周王室所居的地方，原是周时王瓷以内的巩伯国。
English: Luoshui also flows eastward to the south of the old city of Gong County. This city is the place where the eastern Zhou royal family lived. It was originally Gongbo Province within Zhou Shi Wang Porcelain.

古文：《春秋左传》所谓尹文父涉于巩，即于此也。
现代文：《春秋左传》说，尹文父在巩涉水，指的就是这里。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend of the Left" says that Yin Wen's father waded into the water in Gong, referring to here.

古文：洛水又东，浊水注之。即古黄水也，水出南原。
现代文：洛水又东流，浊水注入，这就是古时的黄水，黄水发源于南原。
English: Luo water also flows eastward, and Luo water is injected. This is the yellow water in ancient times. Yellow water originated in the Southern Plains.

古文：京相璠曰：訾城北三里有黄亭，即此亭也。
现代文：京相潘说：警城以北三里有黄亭。指的就是此亭。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: "There is a yellow pavilion in Sanli, north of the police city. It is this pavilion that is being referred to.

古文：《春秋》所谓次于黄者也。
现代文：《春秋》说在黄屯宿，就指这地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn" says that it is in Huangdunjuku, referring to this place.

古文：洛水又东北，涧水发南溪石泉，世亦名之为石泉水也。
现代文：洛水又往东北流，字回水发源于南溪石泉，世人也把它叫做石泉水。
English: Luoshui also flows to the northeast, and the backwater originates from Nanxi Stone Spring, and the world also calls it Stone Spring Water.

古文：京相璠曰：巩东地名坎欲，在泂水东。疑即此水也。
现代文：京相播说：巩东有个地方名叫坎歌，位于洞水以东，可能就指此水。
English: Beijing Broadcasting said: There is a place in Gongdong called Kange, located east of Dongshui, which may refer to this water.

古文：又径盘谷坞东，世又名之曰盘谷水。
现代文：洞水又流经盘谷坞以东，世人又称为盘谷水。
English: The cave water also flows through the east of Panyu Dock, and the world is also known as Panyu Water.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》，巩有坎欿聚。
现代文：按司马彪《郡国志》：巩有坎欲聚。
English: According to Sima Biao's "County History": Gong has the power to gather.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十四年，王出及坎欿。
现代文：《春秋》：僖公二十四年前：襄王出走，到了坎歌。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-four years ago: Xiang Wang left for Kanka.

古文：服虔亦以为巩东邑名也。
现代文：服虔也以为巩东是城名。
English: Fu Qian also thought that Gongdong was the name of the city.

古文：今考厥文若状焉，而不能精辨耳。
现代文：如今考证这条记载，情况倒有点相符，但还不能精确地分辨清楚。
English: Now that this record has been examined, the situation is somewhat consistent, but it is not yet possible to make a precise distinction.

古文：《晋太康地记》、《晋书地道记》，并言在巩西，非也。
现代文：《晋太康地记》、《晋书•地道记》都说在巩西，这是不对的。
English: "Jin Taikang Ji Ji Ji" and "Jin Shu • Ji Dao Ji" both say that it is in Gongxi, which is incorrect.

古文：其水又北入洛，洛水又东北流，人于河。
现代文：洞水又往北注入洛水。洛水又往东北流，注入河水。
English: The cave water then flows north into the Luoshui River, and the Luoshui River then flows northeast into the river.

古文：《山海经》曰：洛水，成皋西人河是也。
现代文：《山海经》说：洛水从成皋以西流入河水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Luo water flows into the river from the west of Chenglu.

古文：谓之洛欿，即什谷也。
现代文：汇流处称为洛油，就是什谷。
English: The place of confluence is called Luoyang, that is, Shigu.

古文：故张仪说秦曰：下兵三川，塞什谷之口。
现代文：因此张仪游说秦王说：向三川进兵，把什谷之口封锁起来，就指此山。
English: Therefore, Zhang Yi lobbied the Qin King and said, "March into the Three Rivers and seal up the mouth of the Sh valley, referring to this mountain."

古文：谓此川也。《吏记音义》曰：巩县有谷水者也。
现代文：《史记音义》说：巩县有那谷水。
English: "Shiji Ongi" said: Gong County has that valley water.

古文：黄帝东巡河，过洛，修坛沉壁，受《龙图》于河，《龟书》于洛，赤文绿字。
现代文：黄帝到大河一带东巡，经过洛水，他修筑祭坛，沉璧入水致祭，在河上得到《龙图》，在洛水得到《龟书》，有红色的纹理，绿色的文字。
English: The Yellow Emperor went on an eastern tour of the Great River and passed through Luoshui. He built an altar, immersed himself in the water to make a sacrifice, and obtained the "Dragon Map" on the river and the "Turtle Book" in Luoshui. It has a red texture and green text.

古文：黑乌以浴，随鱼亦上，化为黑玉赤勒之书，黑龟赤文之题也，汤以伐桀，故《春秋说题辞》曰：河以道坤出天苞，洛以流川吐地符，王者沉礼焉，《竹书纪年》曰，洛伯用与河伯冯夷斗，盖洛水之神也。
现代文：所以帝王沉璧为祭礼。《竹书纪年》说：洛伯用因而与河伯冯夷相斗。
English: Therefore, Emperor Shen Bi made it a festival. "The Bamboo Annals" said: Lobo thus fought with Hebei Fengyi.

古文：昔夏太康失政，为羿所逐，其昆弟五人，须于洛汭，作《五子之歌》，于是地矣。
现代文：这洛伯就是洛水的神灵。古时夏朝太康不理朝政，为界所驱逐，他的五个兄弟来到洛呐等着，在这里作《五子之歌》。
English: This Lobo is the deity of Luoshui. In ancient times, the Xia Dynasty's ruler Taikang ignored court politics and was banished by the world. His five brothers came to Luona to wait and write "Song of the Five Sons" here.

古文：伊水出南阳鲁阳县西蔓渠山，《山海经》曰：蔓渠之山，伊水出焉。
现代文：伊水发源于南阳郡鲁阳县西面的蔓渠山，《山海经》说：蔓渠之山是伊水的发源地。
English: Yishui originated from the mountain of the vine channel in the west of Luyang County, Nanyang County. "Sanghaikyo" says: the mountain of the vine channel is the birthplace of Yishui.

古文：《淮南子》曰：伊水出上魏山。
现代文：《淮南子》说：伊水源出上魏山。
English: "Huainanzi" said: the source of Yishui comes from Mount Wei.

古文：《地理志》曰：出熊耳山即麓大同，陵峦互别耳。
现代文：《地理志》说：出自熊耳山。以上诸山山麓相连大致相同，不过峰峦互有区别而已。
English: "Geography" said: from Mount Xiong Er. The above mountains are connected by roughly the same foothills, but the peaks and ridges are different from each other.

古文：伊水自熊耳东北径鸾川亭北，姦水出姦山，北流际其城东而北入伊水。
现代文：伊水从熊耳山东北流经莺川亭以北。墓水发源美山，往北流，沿着城东往北注入伊水。
English: The Yishui flows from the northeast of Mount Xiong'er to the north of the Hechuan Pavilion. The tomb water originates from the beauty of the mountain, flows northward, and flows into the Yishui along the east of the city.

古文：世人谓伊水为姦水，姦水为交水，故名斯川为鸾川也。
现代文：世人称伊水为莺水，墓水为交水，因此将这条川流称为莺川。
English: The world calls the Yishui River the Yishui River and the Tomb River the Qiao Water, so this stream is called the Yishui River.

古文：又东为渊潭，潭浑若沸，亦不测其深浅也。
现代文：伊水又东流，积成深潭，潭水喷涌如沸，也不知道深浅。
English: The Yishui also flows eastward, accumulating into a deep pool. The pool gushes like boiling water, and we do not know the depth.

古文：伊水又东北径东亭城南，又屈径其亭东，东北流者也。
现代文：伊水又往东北流经东亭城南，又转弯流经亭东，往东北流去。
English: The Yishui also flows to the northeast through the south of Dongting City, and then turns to flow through the east of Dongting and flows to the northeast.

古文：东北过郭落山，阳水出阳山阳溪，世人谓之太阳谷，水亦取名焉。
现代文：往东北流过郭落山，阳水发源于阳山的阳溪，世人称为太阳谷，水也依此取名，东流注入伊水。
English: To the northeast, it flows through Guoloshan. Yangshui originates from Yang Creek in Yangshan, known to the world as Sun Valley. The water is also named after this, and the east stream is injected into Yishui.

古文：东流入伊水，伊水又东，北鲜水入焉，水出鲜山，北流注于伊。
现代文：伊水又往东北流，鲜水注入。鲜水发源于鲜山，北流注入伊水。
English: The Yishui also flows to the northeast, injecting fresh water. Fresh water originates from the fresh mountains, and the north stream injects the Yishui.

古文：伊水又与蛮水合，水出卢氏县之蛮谷，东流入于伊。
现代文：伊水又与蛮水汇合。蛮水发源于卢氏县的蛮谷，东流注入伊水。
English: The Yishui also merges with the wild water. The wild water originates in the wild valley of Lu County, and the east stream is injected into the Yishui.

古文：又东北过陆浑县南，《山海经》曰：滽滽之水，出于厘山，南流注于伊水。
现代文：又往东北流过陆浑县南面，《山海经》说：墉墉水发源于厘山，南流注入伊水。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the southern part of Lukhun County. "Shanhaikyo" says: "The Surabaya water originates from the Lishan Mountains, and the southern stream is injected into the Yishui River.

古文：今水出陆浑县之西南王母涧，涧北山上有王母祠，故世因以名溪，东流注于伊水，即滽滽之水也。
现代文：如今这条水出自陆浑县西南的王母涧，涧北山上有王母祠，因此人们就把这条溪叫王母涧。水往东流，注入伊水，就是墉墉之水。
English: Today, this water comes from Wang Muxu in the south-west of Lufun County. There is a Wang Muxu shrine on the north-eastern mountains, so people call this stream Wang Muxu. The water flows eastward and is injected into the Yishui River, which is the water of Yuxu.

古文：伊水历崖口，山峡也。
现代文：伊水流经崖口，这里是个山峡。
English: The Yishui River flows through the cliff mouth. This is a mountain gorge.

古文：翼崖深高，壁立若阙，崖上有坞，伊水径其下，历峡北流，即古三涂山也。
现代文：山峡两侧是很高的削壁，就像门户一般。崖上有一座城堡，伊水从下面流过，穿过山峡往北流―这就是古时的三涂山。
English: On both sides of the gorge are very high walls, like portals. There is a castle on the cliff, and the Yishui River flows from below, flowing through the gorge to the north - this is the ancient Sanzui Mountain.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：山在县南。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：三涂山在县南。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: Sanfu Mountain is in the south of the county.

古文：阚駰《十三州志》云：山在东南。
现代文：阐胭《十三州志》说：山在县城东面。
English: According to the "History of the Thirteen States," the mountain is in the east of the county seat.

古文：今是山在陆浑故城东南八十许里。
现代文：但实际上三涂山位于陆浑县老城东南八十多里。
English: However, in reality, Samtu Mountain is located more than eighty miles southeast of the old town of Lukhun County.

古文：《周书》，武王问太公曰：吾将因有夏之居，南望过于三涂，北瞻望于有河。
现代文：《周书》载，武王间太公道：我将承袭夏朝的旧都，朝南可祭三涂山，朝北可祭大河。
English: "Zhou Shu" stated that King Wu was too fair: I will inherit the old capital of the Summer Dynasty. The Southern Dynasty can celebrate the Three Mountains, and the Northern Dynasty can celebrate the Great River.

古文：《春秋》昭公四年，司马侯曰：四岳、三涂、阳城、太室、荆山、中南、九州之险也，服虔曰：三涂、大行、轘辕、崤、渑，非南望也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公四年前，司马侯说：四岳、三涂、阳城、太室、荆山、中南，这些都是九州险要的地方。服虔说：三涂、太行、辑辕、蜻、绳都不能朝南望祭。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Shoko four years ago, Sima Hou said: Si Yue, San Tuo, Yangcheng, Taimuro, Jingshan, Zhongnan, these are the most important places in Kyushu. Fuxian said: San Tuo, Tai Xing, Ji Xing, Yao, Rope can not look south for the festival.

古文：京相璠著《春秋土地名》，亦云：山名也。
现代文：京相潘著的《春秋土地名》也说三涂是山名。
English: "Spring and Autumn Land Names" by Pan Jing also says that San Tuo is a mountain name.

古文：以服氏之说，涂，道也。
现代文：根据服虔的说法，涂就是道路。
English: According to Buddhism, Tu is the road.

古文：准《周书》南望之文，或言宜为轘辕、大谷、伊阙，皆为非也。
现代文：照《周书》朝南望祭的话看，有人就说应当是辑辕、大谷、伊网三条路，其实这都不对。
English: According to the "Weekly Book" of the Chaonanwang Festival, some people said that there should be three roads: Jiqiao, Datian, and Yiwu. In fact, this is not true.

古文：《春秋》，晋伐陆浑，请有事于三涂。知是山明矣。
现代文：《春秋》载，晋攻打陆浑时，先在三涂致祭，可见分明是山了。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," when Jin attacked Lu and Hun, he first made a sacrifice at San-tuo, which clearly shows that it was a mountain.

古文：有七谷水注之，水西出女儿山之南七溪山，上有西王母祠，东南流注于伊水。
现代文：有七谷水在这里注入伊水。七谷水出自西方女几山以南的七溪，山上有西王母祠。水往东南流，注入伊水。
English: The water of the Seven Valleys flows into the Yishui River here. The water of the Seven Valleys comes from the Seven Streams to the south of the Western Women's Mountains. There is the West King Mother's Shrine on the mountain. The water flows to the southeast and flows into the Yishui River.

古文：又北，蚤谷水注之，水出女儿山之东谷，东径故亭南，东流入千伊水。
现代文：伊水又北流，蚤谷水注入。蚤谷水出自女几山东谷，往东流经老亭南面，东流注入伊水。
English: Yishui also flows to the north, and Flea Valley water is injected. Flea Valley water originates from the East Valley of Meiji Mountain, flows eastward through the south side of the old pavilion, and the east stream is injected into Yishui.

古文：伊水又东北径伏流岭东，岭上有昆仑祠，民犹祈焉。
现代文：伊水又往东北流经伏流岭东面，岭上有昆仑祠，人们至今还到这里来祈祷。
English: The Yishui River flows to the northeast through the eastern side of Furu-ryu Ridge. There is a Kunlun Shrine on the ridge, and people still come here to pray.

古文：刘澄之《永初记》称，陆浑县西有伏流坂者也。
现代文：刘澄之《永初记》说：陆浑县以西有伏流坂。
English: Liu Chengzhi's "Everlasting First Chronicle" said: There is an undercurrent slope to the west of Lukhun County.

古文：今山在县南崖口北二十里许，西则非也。
现代文：但实际上这座山却在县南崖口以北三十里左右，说在县西那就不对了。
English: However, in reality, this mountain is about thirty miles north of the mouth of the cliff in the south of the county. It would be wrong to say that it is in the west of the county.

古文：北与温泉水合，水出新城县之狼皋山西南阜下，西南流会于伊水。
现代文：伊水又北流，与温泉水汇合。温泉水发源于新城县狼皋山西南的山下，往西南流，与伊水汇合。
English: Yishui also flows to the north, and merges with the hot spring water. The hot spring water originates from the southwest of Wolongsan Mountain in Xincheng County, flows to the southwest, and merges with Yishui.

古文：其山介立丰上，单秀孤峙，故世谓之方山，即刘中书澄之所谓县有孤山者也。
现代文：伊水又往东北流经伏睹岭，左边接纳了焦涧水。焦涧水发源于西面的鹿膊山，往东流经孤山南，此山顶上很宽广，孤峰秀丽而独立耸峙，因此世人称它为方山。就是中书刘澄之所讲的县内有孤山。
English: Yishui also flows to the northeast through Fuzhunling, and receives Jiaozuo water on the left. Jiaozuo water originates from the Lushan Mountain in the west, and flows eastward through the south of the lonely mountain. The top of this mountain is very wide, and the lonely peak is beautiful and independent, so the world calls it Fangshan. It is the lonely mountain in the county as told by Liu Cheng in the Chinese book.

古文：东历伏睹岭南，东流注于伊。
现代文：涧水往东流经伏睹岭南麓，东流注入伊水。
English: The Surabaya water flows eastward through the southern foothills of the Fuzhan Mountains, and the eastward flow is injected into the Yishui River.

古文：伊水又东北，涓水注之，水出陆浑西山，即陆浑都也。
现代文：伊水又往东北流，有涓水注入。涓水发源于陆浑西山，就是陆浑都。
English: The Yishui River flows to the northeast and is fed by the Luhun River. The Luhun River originates from the Luhun West Mountain, which is the center of Luhun.

古文：寻郭文之故居，访胡昭之遗像，世去不停，莫识所在。
现代文：寻觅郭文的故居，探访胡昭的遗迹，但都因年代久远，不知究竟在什么地方了。
English: Looking for Guo Wen's former residence, visiting the remains of Hu Zhao, but because of the long history, I don't know where it is.

古文：其水有二源，俱导而东注虢略。
现代文：涓水有两个源头并流，往东流到貌略，貌略位于陆浑县以西九十里。
English: Surabaya's water has two sources that flow side by side. It flows eastward to Maonliao, which is located ninety miles west of Lukhun County.

古文：在陆浑县西九十里也，司马彪《郡国志》曰县西虢略地，《春秋》所谓东尽虢略者也。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：县西有貌略地区，《春秋》所说的东到藐略为匕，就指这地方。
English: Sima Biao's "County History" said: the west of the county has a rough area, and the "Spring and Autumn" said that the east is rough, referring to this place.

古文：北水东流合侯涧水，水出西北侯溪，东南流注于涓水。
现代文：涓水北支往东流，汇合侯涧水。侯涧水出自西北的侯溪，往东南流，注入涓水。
English: The northern branch of the Surabaya River flows eastward and joins the Surabaya River. The Surabaya River originates from the northwest of the Hou River and flows southeast, feeding the Surabaya River.

古文：涓水又东径陆浑县故城北。
现代文：涓水又往东流经陆浑县老城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north of the old town of Lukhun County.

古文：平王东迁，辛有适伊川，见有被发而祭于野者曰：不及百年，此其戎乎。
现代文：周平王东迁时，辛有到了伊川，看见一个人披头散发在郊野祭祀，于是说；不到一百年，这里将是戎人的地方了吧？
English: When Zhou Ping Wang moved to the east, Xin arrived in Ichuan and saw a man with a headdress distributing offerings in the countryside, so he said, "In less than a hundred years, this will be the place of the eunuchs, right?"

古文：鲁僖公二十二年，秦、晋迁阶浑之戎于伊川，故县氏之也。
现代文：鲁僖公二十二年前，秦国和晋国把陆浑一带的戎人迁到伊川，因此县也就以陆浑为名了。
English: Twenty-two years before the reign of King Lu Xun, the Qin and Jin dynasties moved the Eun people from the Lu Hun region to Ichuan, which is why the county is named after Lu Hun.

古文：涓水东南流，左合南水，水出西山七谷，亦谓之七谷水。
现代文：涓水往东南流，左边汇合南水。南水源出西山七谷，又称七谷水，由于水流受阻，因而往东流经县城南面。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast and merges with Nan Shui on the left. Nan Shui originates from the West Mountain Seven Valleys, also known as the Seven Valleys Water. As the water flow is blocked, it flows eastward through the southern part of the county seat.

古文：阻涧东逝，历其县南，又东南左会北水，乱流，左合禅渚水，水上承陆浑县东禅渚，渚在原上，陂方十里，佳饶鱼苇，即《山海经》所谓南望禅渚，禹父之所化。
现代文：又往东南流，左边汇合北水，乱流左边汇合禅诸水。禅诸水上流承接陆浑县以东的禅诸，这是一片沼泽，位于高地上，方圆十里，鱼类和芦苇很多。《山海经》说，南望禅清，就是禹的父亲变化的地方。
English: It flows southeast again, merging with the North Water on the left, and the turbulent flow merges with the Zen Water on the left. The Zen Water flows upstream from the Zen Water east of Lukhun County. This is a swamp, located on a highland, with a circumference of ten miles, with many fish and reeds. According to the "Song of Mountains and Seas," Nanwang Zenqing is the place where Yu's father changed.

古文：郭景纯注云：禅，一音暖，鲧化羽渊而复在此然已变怪，亦无往而不化矣。
现代文：郭景纯《注》说：禅，音暖，鲸是在羽渊化为黄熊的，可是又说是在这里，但既已变成精怪，那就不论到哪里都会变化了。
English: "Note" by Guo Jingshun said: "Zen, Yin and Yang, the whale is transformed into a yellow bear in the feather abyss, but it is also said to be here, but once it has become a fine, then it will change no matter where it goes.

古文：世谓此泽为慎望陂，陂水南流注于涓水。
现代文：世人把这片沼泽称为慎望破。泽水南流，注入涓水。
English: The world calls this swamp the Shennobohar. The lake water flows south and is filled with brackish water.

古文：涓水又东南注于伊水。
现代文：涓水又往东南流，注入伊水。
English: The Surabaya water flows to the southeast and is injected into the Yishui water.

古文：昔有莘氏女采桑于伊川，得婴儿于空桑中，言其母孕于伊水之滨，梦神告之曰：臼水出而东走。
现代文：古代有萃氏的姑娘，在伊川采桑，在空心桑树洞中捡到一个婴儿。传说婴儿的母亲在伊水之滨怀了孕，梦见神告诉她说：看见石臼里漫出水来，你就向东走。
English: In ancient times, a girl from the Yume clan, who was harvesting mulberry in Ikawa, found a baby in the hollow of a mulberry tree. Legend has it that the baby's mother was pregnant on the banks of the Izu River, and had a dream in which God told her: "When you see water coming out of a stone mill, go east."

古文：母明视而见臼水出焉。告其邻居而走，顾望其邑，威为水矣。
现代文：第二天母亲果然见到石臼里漫出水来，告诉邻居后就跑了，回头一看，自己原来的家园，已成为一片汪洋了。
English: The next day, the mother indeed saw water coming out of the stone mill, told her neighbor and ran away. Looking back, her original home has become a vast ocean.

古文：其母化为空桑，子在其中矣。
现代文：母亲也就化为一棵空心桑树，婴儿就在树洞中。
English: The mother also turned into a hollow mulberry tree, and the baby was in the tree hole.

古文：莘女取而献之，命养于庖，长而有贤德，殷以为尹，曰伊尹也。
现代文：姑娘将婴儿抱回献给国王，国王把他交给厨子抚养，孩子长大后很有贤德，殷汤就任命他为尹，名叫伊尹。
English: The girl took the baby back to the king, and the king gave him to the cook to raise. The child grew up to be very virtuous, and Yin Tang named him Yin. His name was Yin.

古文：《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王十六年，东周与郑高都利者也。
现代文：又往东北流过新城县南面，马怀桥长水发源于新城县西山，往东流经晋使持节征南将军宗均碑南面。宗均字文平，新城县人。碑是泰始三年，东周把高都给与郑国。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the south of Xincheng County. The long water of Mahuai Bridge originates from the west mountain of Xincheng County and flows eastward through the south side of the Jin envoy Zongjun monument. Zongjun character Wenping, Xincheng County people. The monument is the first three years of Taizhi, and the eastern Zhou gave the capital to Zheng.

古文：又来儒之水出于半石之山，西南流径斌轮城北，西历艾涧，以其水西流，又谓之小狂水也。
现代文：又有来儒水发源于半石之山，往西南流经斌轮城以北，西经艾涧，因为这条水往西流，又称小狂水。
English: Another type of Confucianism water originates from the mountains of Hanzhishi and flows to the southwest via Binluncheng in the north and Aiwu in the west. Because this water flows to the west, it is also known as small mad water.

古文：其水又西南径大石岭南，《开山图》所谓大石山也。
现代文：来儒水又往西南流经大石岭南面，就是《开山图》所说的大石山。
English: Confucianism water flows to the southwest through the southern side of the Daishi Ridge, which is the Daishi Mountain mentioned in the "Mountain Chart."

古文：山下有《大石岭碑》，河南隐士通明，以汉灵帝中平六年八月戊辰。于山堂立碑，文字浅鄙，殆不可寻。
现代文：山下有大石岭碑。河南隐士通明于汉灵帝中平六年八月戊辰日在山堂立碑，碑文肤浅粗俗，已模糊不可辨认了。
English: At the foot of the mountain, there is a monument to the Great Stone Ridge. The Henan hermit Tongming ascended to the throne of Han Ling Emperor Zhongping in August 6th, and erected the monument in the mountain hall. The inscription is superficial and vulgar, and has become blurred and unrecognizable.

古文：魏文帝猎于此山，虎超乘舆，孙礼拔剑投虎于是山。
现代文：魏文帝在山上打猎，一只老虎跳上文帝的乘车，孙礼拔剑刺死老虎，就在这座山上。
English: Emperor Weiwen hunted in the mountains, a tiger jumped on the emperor's car, and Sun Li drew his sword and stabbed the tiger to death, right on this mountain.

古文：山在洛阳南，而刘澄之言在洛东北，非也。
现代文：山在洛阳以南，但刘澄之却说在洛阳东北，他搞错了。
English: The mountain is south of Luoyang, but Liu Chengzhi said it was in the northeast of Luoyang. He was mistaken.

古文：山阿有魏明帝高平陵，王隐《晋书》曰：惠帝使校尉陈总仲元诣洛阳山请雨，总尽除小祀，惟存大石而祈之，七日大雨。
现代文：山弯里有魏明帝的高平陵。王隐《晋书》说：惠帝派了校尉陈总仲元到洛阳山求雨，陈总把山上所有的小神、庙一概废除，只留下一块大石，向它祈祷，七天以后果然下起大雨。
English: Wang Yin's "Jin Shu" said: Emperor Hui sent the captain Chen Zongzhongyuan to Luoyang Mountain to pray for rain. Chen Zongzhong abolished all the small gods and temples on the mountain, leaving only a large stone and praying to it. Seven days later, heavy rain fell.

古文：即是山也。
现代文：说的就是此山。
English: It is this mountain that is spoken of.

古文：来儒之水又西南径赤眉城南，又西至高都城东西入伊水，谓之曲水也。
现代文：来儒之水又往西南流经赤眉城南面，又往西流到高都城东面，西流注入伊水，称为曲水。
English: Laiwu's water flows to the southwest through the southern side of Chamei City, and flows west to the eastern side of Gaodu City. The west stream is injected with Yi water, which is called curved water.

古文：右壁又有石铭云：元康五年，河南府君循大禹之轨，部督邮辛曜、新城令王琨，部监作掾董猗、李褒，斩岸开石，平通伊阙，石文尚存也。
现代文：又往东北流过伊阔中间，伊水流经前亭西面。《左传》：昭公二十二年六月二十四日辛巳，涨大水，水位升高了四丈五尺，与此线相平。这是水位涨退的记录。右边石壁上也刻着：元康五年，河南府尹遵从大禹治水的法度，率领督邮辛耀，新城县令王馄，部监作椽董琦、李褒，开凿两岸岩石，使伊网水流畅通无阻。石上的文字都还在。
English: It also flowed to the northeast through the middle of Ikuro, and the water of Ikuro flowed to the west of the front pavilion. "Left hand": On the 24th day of the 6th month of the 22nd year of Zhaogong, the water rose and the water level rose by four feet and five feet, which was equal to this line. This is a record of the rise and fall of the water level. On the right stone wall, it is also engraved: In the 5th year of Yuan Kang, Yin of Henan Province, in compliance with the water control law of Dayu, led by Governor Post Sin Yao, Wang Yao of Xincheng

古文：又东北至洛阳县南，北入于洛。
现代文：又往东北流，到了洛阳县南面，往北注人洛水。
English: It also flowed to the northeast, to the south of Luoyang County, and flowed to the north.

古文：伊水自阙东北流，枝津右出焉。东北引溉，东会合水，同注公路涧，入于洛，今无水。
现代文：伊水出了阙往东北流，右岸分出一条支渠，引水流向东北灌溉农田，东流与合水汇合，一同注入公路涧，流进洛水。
English: The Yishui flows out of the dike to the northeast, and a branch canal branches off from the right bank, diverting water to the northeast to irrigate farmland. The east stream merges with the confluence, and together they are injected into the highway dike and flow into the Luoshui.

古文：《战国策》曰：东周欲为田，西周不下水，苏子见西周君曰，今不下水，所以富东周也，民皆种他种，欲贫之，不如下水以病之，东周必复种稻，种稻而复夺之，是东周受命于君矣。
现代文：现在这条支渠已经断水了。《战国策》说：东周想种稻，西周不肯给下流放水。苏子去见西周国君说：现在不给下流放水，正好富了东周，那里的农民就都种麦，不种别的东西了。若要叫他们贫穷，不如放下水去进行破坏。这一来东周必定又会种稻，待他们种了稻，我们又不给他们水，那东周就会听您摆布了。
English: Now this branch of the canal has been cut off. "Warring States" said: East Zhou wanted to grow rice, West Zhou did not want to give downstream water. Su Zi went to see West Zhou Guojun and said: Now we do not give downstream water, just as East Zhou became rich, the farmers there all grow wheat and do not grow anything else. If you want to make them poor, it is better to let the water go and destroy it. This time, East Zhou will certainly grow rice again. When they grow rice, we will not give them water, then East Zhou will be at your mercy.

古文：西周遂下水，即是水之故渠也。
现代文：于是西周就放水。水就是经过这条水的旧渠放的。
English: As a result, water was released from the west side of the city. The water was released through this old water canal.

古文：伊水又东北，枝渠左出焉，水积成湖，北流注于洛，今无水。
现代文：伊水又往东北流，一条支渠从左岸分出。水积成湖，北流注入洛水。
English: Yishui also flows to the northeast, and a branch canal branches off from the left bank. The water accumulates into a lake, and the north stream injects Luoshui.

古文：伊水又东北至洛阳县南，径圜丘东，大魏郊天之所准汉故事建之。
现代文：伊水又往东北流，到洛阳县南，流经圈丘东面。这是大魏祭天的地方。是依照汉朝的旧例建造的。
English: Yishui also flows to the northeast, to the south of Luoyang County, flowing through the eastern side of the circle hill. This is the place where the Great Wei Festival is held. It was built according to the old Han Dynasty.

古文：《后汉书。郊祀志》曰：建武二年，初制郊兆于洛阳城南七里，为圜坛八陛，中又为重坛，天地位其上，皆南向，其外坛，上为五帝位，其外为谴，重营皆紫，以像紫宫。
现代文：《后汉书•郊祀志》说：建武二年，开始在洛阳城南七里划定郊坛界址，修筑成一座圆形祭坛，共八道台阶，中央又建了双层祭坛，上面安放着天地的神位，都是坐北朝南，外层坛上是五帝的神位。坛外是围墙，围墙共两层，都涂成紫色，象征紫宫。
English: "Houhan Shu • Suburban Worship History" said: In the second year of Jianwu, the suburb altar site was delineated seven miles south of Luoyang City. It was built into a round altar with a total of eight steps. In the center, a double-layered altar was built, with the gods of heaven and earth placed on top, all sitting north and south, and the gods of the five emperors on the outer altar. Outside the altar is a wall, with two layers of walls, all painted purple, symbolizing the Purple Palace.

古文：按《礼》，天子大裘而冕，祭皞天上帝于此，今兖冕也。坛壝无复紫矣。
现代文：按照礼制：天子身穿大皮衣，头戴冠冕，在这里祭祀昊天上帝。如今穿戴的是龙衣和冠冕，祭坛的围墙也不再是紫色的了。
English: According to the ritual system: the heavenly son, dressed in a large fur coat and wearing a crown on his head, sacrificed the Heavenly God here. Nowadays, he wears a dragon robe and a crown, and the altar wall is no longer purple.

古文：伊水又东北流，注于洛水。
现代文：伊水又往东北流，注入洛水。
English: Yishui also flows to the northeast, injecting Luoshui.

古文：《广志》曰：鲵鱼声如小儿啼，有四足，形如鲮鳢，可以治牛，出伊水也。
现代文：《广志》说：貌鱼的声音很像小儿啼哭，有四只脚，形状像穿山甲，可以医治牛的瘟疫。
English: "Guangzhi" said: the voice of the fish is very similar to the crying of a child, has four feet, is shaped like a pangolin, and can cure cattle plague.

古文：司马迁谓之人鱼，故其著《史记》曰：始皇帝之葬也，以人鱼膏为烛。
现代文：这种鱼产于伊水。司马迁称它为人鱼，因此他撰著《史记》时说：秦始皇下葬时，用人鱼膏做蜡烛。
English: This kind of fish is produced in the Yishui River. Sima Qian called it mermaid, so when he wrote "Histories," he said: When the First Emperor of Qin was buried, he used mermaid paste to make candles.

古文：徐广曰：人鱼似鲇而四足，即鲵鱼也。
现代文：徐广说：人鱼像站鱼，有四条脚，就是鱿鱼。
English: Xu Guang said: The mermaid is like a fish, with four legs, it is a carp.

古文：瀍水出河南谷城县北山，县北有朁亭，瀍水出其北梓泽中，梓泽，地名也。
现代文：瀍水发源于河南郡毅城县北山，县北有个誉亭，瀍水出自亭北的梓泽。梓泽是地名。
English: Ershui originated in Beishan, Yicheng County, Henan County. There is a famous pavilion in the north of the county, and Ershui comes from Azusa in the north of the pavilion. Azusa is a place name.

古文：泽北对原阜，即裴氏墓茔所在，碑阙存焉。
现代文：梓泽北面朝向山丘高地，裴氏的坟墓就在那里，墓碑和墓网都还在。
English: To the north of Zi Ze, facing the hill highlands, is where Pei's grave is located. The tombstone and grave net are still there.

古文：其水历泽东南流，水西有一原，其上平敞，古朁亭之处也。
现代文：瀍水经过梓泽往东南流，西岸有一片高地，上面开阔平坦，就是古时朁亭所在的地方。
English: Surabaya water flows through Azusa to the southeast, and there is a highland on the west coast, which is open and flat. This is the place where Raku Tei was located in ancient times.

古文：即潘安仁《西征赋》所谓越街邮者也。
现代文：潘安仁《西征赋》中所说的走过街的邮差。
English: The postman walking through the city in Pan Anren's "Western Expedition."

古文：东与千金渠合，《周书》曰：我卜瀍水西。
现代文：东流与千金渠汇合。《周书》说：我在瀍水西岸占卜，说的就是这条水。
English: The East Stream meets the Qianjin Canal. "Zhou Shu" said: I was divining on the west coast of Surabaya, and it was this water that I was talking about.

古文：谓斯水也。东南流，水西南有帛仲理墓，墓前有碑，题云：真人帛君之表。
现代文：往东南流，水的西南面有帛仲理墓，墓前有一块石碑，题着：真人帛君墓表。
English: Flowing to the southeast, the southwest side of the water has the tomb of Zou Zhongli. In front of the tomb, there is a stone tablet with the inscription: "The tomb of the real person Zou Jun."

古文：仲理名护，益州巴郡人，晋永宁二年十一月立。
现代文：仲理名护，益州巴郡人。晋永宁二年十一月立。
English: Zhongli Nago, a native of Ba County, Yishu, was established in November of the second year of Jin Yongning.

古文：瀍水又东南流，注于谷。
现代文：瀍水又往东南流，注入谷水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, injecting valley water.

古文：谷水自千金堨东注，谓之千金渠也。
现代文：谷水自千金竭东流，称为千金渠。
English: The valley water flows eastward from the Qianjin drain and is called the Qianjin Canal.

古文：又东过洛阳县南，又东过偃师县，又东入于洛。
现代文：又往东流过洛阳县南面，又往东流经堰师县，又往东注人洛水。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Luoyang County, eastward through Yanshi County, and eastward to Jinshanluoshui.

古文：涧水出新安县南白石山，《山海经》曰：白石之山，惠水出于其阳，东南注于洛，涧水出于其阴，北流注于谷。
现代文：涧水发源于新安县以南的白石山，《山海经》说：白石之山，惠水发源于它的南坡，往东南注入洛水，涧水发源于北坡，北流注入谷水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Shiroishi Mountain in the south of Xin'an County. "Sankai Jing" says: Shiroishi Mountain, beneficial water originates from its south slope, and is injected into the southeast by Luoshui. Surabaya's water originates from the north slope, and the north stream is injected into the valley water.

古文：世谓是山曰广阳山，水曰赤岸水，亦曰石子涧。
现代文：世人称山为广阳山，称水为赤岸水，又叫石子涧。
English: The world calls the mountain the Guangyang Mountain, and the water the Chakang Water, also known as the Shizi River.

古文：《地理志》曰：涧水在新安县，东南入洛。
现代文：《地理志》说：涧水在新安县往东南注入洛水，说得很正确。
English: "Geography" said: Surabaya water is injected into Luoshui in the southeast of Xin'an County, which is very correct.

古文：是为密矣。东北流历函谷东坂东，谓之八特板。
现代文：涧水往东北流经函谷关东坂的东面，这道山坡称为八特坂。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the eastern side of the east slope of Hakodate Kanto Slope. This slope is called Hachite Slope.

古文：东南入于洛。
现代文：往东南注人洛水。
English: To the southeast, pour in the water from Renluo.

古文：孔安国曰：涧水出渑池山，今新安县西北有一水，北出渑池界，东南流径新安县，而东南流入于谷水。
现代文：孔安国说：涧水发源于绳池山。现在新安县西北有一条水，发源于北方的绳池县境，往东南流经新安县，往东南流入谷水。
English: Kong An Guo said: "The Surabaya water originates from Jiu Chi Mountain. Now there is a water in the northwest of Xin'an County, originating from the northern border of Jiu Chi County, flowing southeast through Xin'an County, and flowing southeast into the valley water.

古文：安国所言当斯水也。
现代文：孔安国所说的应当就是这条水。
English: What Kong An Guo said should be this water.

古文：然谷水出渑池，下合涧水，得其通称，或亦指之为涧水也。
现代文：然而谷水出自泥池，下游与涧水汇合，可以通称，于是有的人也就把它叫做涧水了，却没有搞清楚。
English: However, the grain water comes from the mud pond, and the lower reaches meet the salty water, so it can be called a generic name. Therefore, some people also call it salty water, but they do not understand it.

古文：并未之祥耳。今孝水东十里有水，世谓之慈涧，又谓之涧水。按《山海经》则少水也，而非涧水，盖习俗之误耳。
现代文：现在孝水以东十里有一条水，人们称为慈涧，又叫涧水。照《山海经》，那么应是少水，而不是涧水了，那是习俗的误称。
English: Now, there is a stretch of water ten miles east of Xiaoshui. People call it Cixi, and it is also called Lishui. According to the "Shanhai Jing," it should be Xiaoshui, not Lishui, which is a misnomer of custom.

古文：又按河南有离山水，谓之为涧水，水西北出离山，东南流历郏山，于谷城东而南流注于谷，旧与谷水乱流，南人于洛。
现代文：又按河南有离山水，也称为涧水。这条水发源于西北的离山，往东南流，在毁城东面，流经郊山，然后南流注入谷水。从前与鼓水乱流，往南注入洛水。
English: In addition, according to Henan, there is the outlying mountain water, also known as the turbid water. This water originates from the northwest outlying mountain, flows to the southeast, flows through the suburban mountains on the east side of the ruined city, and then flows southward into the valley water. In the past, it was turbulent with the gushing water and flowed southward into the Luo water.

古文：今谷水东入千金渠，涧水与之俱，东入洛矣。
现代文：现在谷水往东流入千金渠，涧水就和它一起注入洛水。
English: At present, the valley water flows eastward into the Qianjin Canal, and the brackish water is injected into the Luo water together with it.

古文：或以是水并为周公之所相卜也。
现代文：有人认为这条水也是周公来考察和占卜过的。
English: Some people think that this water was also visited and divined by Zhou Gong.

古文：吕忱曰：今河南死水。疑其是此水也。
现代文：吕忱说：现在河南的死水，可能就是这条水。
English: Lu Zhen said: Now the backwater of Henan may be this water.

古文：然意所未详，故并书存之耳。
现代文：然而倒底没有搞清楚，所以这里都记下来存查罢了。
English: However, it was not clear in the end, so it was just a matter of writing it all down and storing it for inspection.

