古文：慈恩僧朱悦王生贾笼轩辕集杜可筠许建宗向隐赵尊师权师
现代文：慈恩僧朱悦王生贾笼轩辕集杜可筠许建宗向隐赵尊师权师
English: Zhu Yue, Wang Sheng, Jia Guan, Xuan Zi, Du Keqian, Xu Jian Zong, Xiang Yin Zhao, and others

古文：慈恩僧
现代文：慈恩僧
English: Benevolent Monk

古文：唐王蒙与赵憬布衣之旧，知其吏才。
现代文：唐朝王蒙与赵憬在为官以前就相识，知道赵憬有做官的才能。
English: Wang Meng and Zhao Jing of the Tang Dynasty knew each other before they became officials, and knew that Zhao Jing had the talent to be an official.

古文：及赵入相，自前吉州新淦令来谒，大喜，给恤甚厚。
现代文：等到赵憬入朝当了宰相，王蒙以吉州新淦县令的身份来拜见赵憬，赵憬大喜，赠给他丰厚的礼物。
English: When Zhao Jia entered the imperial court and became the prime minister, Wang Meng came to visit Zhao Jia as the governor of Xinlu County in Jizhou. Zhao Jia was overjoyed and presented him with a rich gift.

古文：时宪府官颇阙，德宗每难其授，而赵将授之。
现代文：当时，宪府的官员有不少空额，德宗皇帝每因找不到合适人选感到很难委任，赵憬想要委任几个。
English: At that time, there were many vacancies in the officials of the Constitutional Court. Emperor Dezong found it difficult to appoint because he could not find a suitable candidate. Zhao Jing wanted to appoint a few.

古文：一日偶诣慈恩，气色僧占之曰： 观君色，殊无喜兆。
现代文：有一天，王蒙偶然来到慈恩这里，善观气色的僧人慈恩为他占卜道： 察看您的气色，实在没有可喜的兆头。
English: One day, Wang Meng happened to come to Tsien here. Tsien, a good-looking monk, divined for him: "Looking at your appearance, there is really nothing to be pleased about.

古文：他年当得一年边上御史矣。 
现代文：以后您能得到个任期一年的边镇御史职位而已。 
English: In the future, you will only be able to get a one-year position as the town's official historian.

古文：蒙大笑而归。
现代文：王蒙大笑着回去了。
English: Wang Meng laughed loudly and went back.

古文：翌日，赵乘间奏御史府殊阙人，就中监察尤为急要，欲择三数人。
现代文：第二天，赵憬找机会奏禀皇上御史府非常缺人，其中监察官尤为急需，自己想挑选几个人。
English: The next day, Zhao Jing looked for an opportunity to play the role of the emperor. The government was very short of personnel, among which the inspector was particularly urgent, and he wanted to choose a few people.

古文：德宗曰： 非不欲补此官，须得孤直茂实者充，料卿只应取轻薄后生中朝子弟耳，不如不置。 
现代文：德宗说： 不是我不想补任这些官位，应当挑选耿直诚实的人来担任才是。料你只会挑选轻薄的年轻人和朝廷里的子弟，这样还不如空着。 
English: Dezong said, "It's not that I don't want to fill these posts, it's just that we should select honest people to fill them. If you only select frivolous young people and children from the imperial court, it might as well be empty."

古文：赵曰： 臣之愚见，正如圣虑，欲于录事参军县令中求。 
现代文：赵憬说： 我的观点与皇上的考虑完全一致，我打算在录事参军和县令当中挑选。 
English: Zhao Jing said: My point of view is completely consistent with the emperor's considerations. I plan to choose between joining the army and county government.

古文：上大喜曰： 如此即是朕意，卿有人未。 
现代文：皇上大喜道： 这么办，正合我的心意。不知你物色好人选没有。 
English: Emperor Dai Xi said: It is my heart's desire to do so. I wonder if you have found a good candidate.

古文：遂举二人。
现代文：赵憬便举出两个人来。
English: Zhao Jing then brought up two people.

古文：既出，逢裴延龄，时以度支次对。
现代文：出来之后，遇见裴延龄，裴当时担任度支次对。
English: After he came out, he met Pei Yanling, who was in charge of the Party branch at the time.

古文：曰： 相公奏何事称意，喜色充溢。 
现代文：裴延龄说： 相公奏报了什么称心满意的事情，这么满脸喜色？ 
English: Pei Yanling said, "What kind of gratifying and satisfying thing did Sangong report, so full of joy?

古文：赵不之对，延龄愠詈而去云： 看此老兵所为得行否。 
现代文：赵憬没有回答他，延龄生气地嘟嘟哝哝走了，说： 看这个老兵的事情能不能办成！ 
English: Zhao Jing did not answer him, Yanling angrily walked away, saying: Let's see if this veteran thing can be done!

古文：奏事毕，因问赵憬向论请何事。
现代文：要奏明皇上的事情说完之后，延龄便问赵憬刚才谈论请示什么事情了。
English: After saying that she wanted to report the matter to the emperor, Yanling asked Zhao Jing what she was talking about.

古文：上曰： 赵憬极公心。 
现代文：皇上说： 赵憬完全是出以公心。 
English: The emperor said: Zhao Jing is completely out of public-spiritedness.

古文：因说御史事。
现代文：便说了关于补任御史的事。
English: He then spoke about the matter of filling the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：延龄曰： 此大不可，陛下何故信之。
现代文：延龄说： 这件事万万不可，皇上凭什么相信他？
English: Yanling said, "This matter is absolutely unavoidable. Why should the emperor believe him?"

古文：且赵憬身为宰相，岂谙州县官绩效，向二人又为人所称说，憬何由自知之，必私也，陛下但诘其所自，即知矣。 
现代文：而且，赵憬身为朝廷宰相，怎么能了解州县官员的政绩如何，这两个人过去又为人们所议论，赵憬根据什么说自己了解他们，其中必有私情，皇上只要盘问一下他的理由是什么，就知道了。 
English: Moreover, how could Zhao Jia, as the prime minister of the imperial court, know the political performance of the prefectural and county officials? These two people had been discussed in the past. According to what Zhao Jia said that he knew them, there must be personal feelings. The emperor only needed to interrogate him to find out what his reason was.

古文：他日果问云： 卿何以知此二人？ 
现代文：又一天，皇上果然问道： 你怎么知道这两个人的情况呢？ 
English: The next day, the Emperor asked: How do you know about these two people?

古文：曰： 一是故人，一与臣微亲，知之。 
现代文：赵憬说： 一个是过去的熟人，一个与我稍微有点亲故，所以了解他们。 
English: Zhao Jing said: One is a past acquaintance, one is a little bit related to me, so I know them.

古文：上无言。
现代文：皇上没说什么。
English: The Emperor said nothing.

古文：他日延龄入，上曰： 赵憬所请，果如卿料。 
现代文：又有一天延龄入朝，皇上说： 赵憬请示的那件事，果然像你预料的那样。 
English: One day after Zhao Jia was enthroned, the emperor said, "The matter that Zhao Jia asked me to handle is just as you expected.

古文：遂寝行。
现代文：于是，这件事便没能实行。
English: As a result, the matter could not be pursued.

古文：蒙却归故林，而赵薨于相位。
现代文：王蒙告别赵憬返回原地，赵憬死在宰相位上。
English: Wang Meng said goodbye to Zhao Jia and returned to his original place. Zhao Jia died on the prime minister's throne.

古文：后数年，边帅奏为从事，得假御史焉。
现代文：过了几年，边镇统帅奏报朝廷王蒙任为从事，王蒙便得到一个挂名的御史职衔。
English: A few years later, the commander of the border town reported to the imperial court that Wang Meng was engaged, and Wang Meng was given a nominal title of imperial historian.

古文：朱悦
现代文：朱悦
English: Zhu Yue

古文：唐鄂州十将陈士明，幼而俊健，常斗鸡为事。
现代文：唐朝鄂州十将陈士明，年幼时英俊健壮，常常斗鸡玩。
English: Chen Shiming, the tenth general of Ezhou in the Tang Dynasty, was handsome and robust when he was young, and often played cockfighting.

古文：多畜于家，始雏，知其后之勇怯，闻其鸣必辨其毛色。
现代文：他在家里养了许多鸡，还是鸡雏的时候，他就他知道以后哪只勇敢哪只怯弱，听到鸡叫声就能判断那只鸡的毛是什么颜色。
English: He kept a lot of chickens at home, and when they were still chicks, he knew which one was brave and which one was timid. He could tell what color the chicken's fur was by listening to the chicken's call.

古文：时里有道者朱翁悦，得缩地术。居于鄂。
现代文：当时，村里有个老道叫朱悦，学得缩地术，也居住鄂州。
English: At that time, there was an old Taoist in the village named Zhu Yue, who learned the art of shrinking the earth and also lived in Ezhou.

古文：筑室穿池，环布果药，手种松桂，皆成十围。而未尝游于城市。
现代文：在他盖的房子和池塘四周围统着果树和药用植物，亲手栽植的松树和桂树都有十抱粗了，他却从未到城里游玩过。
English: The house he built and the pond are surrounded by fruit trees and medicinal plants. The pines and cinnamon trees he planted with his own hands are all overgrown, but he has never visited the city.

古文：与士明近邻为佑，因与之游。
现代文：他与陈士明是近邻，这一天便与士明一起进城游玩。
English: He and Chen Shiming are close neighbors, and on this day, he went to the city to play with Chen Shiming.

古文：而士明亵狎于翁，多失敬。
现代文：士明对他很不尊重，动不动就耍弄他。
English: Shiming had no respect for him and made fun of him at every turn.

古文：翁曰： 尔孺子无赖，以吾为东家丘，吾戏试尔可否？ 
现代文：朱老翁说： 你小子真无赖，因为我是你东边的邻居，我开个玩笑考考你可以吗？ 
English: Zhu Laoweng said, "Your son is really a scoundrel, because I am your neighbor to the east. Can I play a joke on you?

古文：士明之居相去三二百步，翁以酒饮之，使其归取鸡斗。
现代文：士明居住的地方离这里二三百步远，朱翁给他弄酒喝了，让他回去拿鸡来斗。
English: Zhiming's place of residence is two or three hundred paces away from here. Zhu Rong gave him some wine to drink, and told him to go back and fight for the chicken.

古文：自辰而还，至酉不达家，度其所行，逾五十里，及顾视，不越百步。
现代文：早上辰时他就回去了，到酉时还没到家，估计他走的路已超过五十里了，但等回头看时，却不过一百步远。
English: He went back in the morning, and when it was late, he was still not home. He estimated that he had walked more than fifty miles, but when he looked back, he was only a hundred paces away.

古文：士明亟返，拜翁求恕，翁笑曰： 孺子更侮于我乎？ 
现代文：士明急忙返回来，拜倒在朱翁面前求饶，翁笑着说： 小子还侮辱我不？ 
English: Shiming hurried back, prostrated himself before Zhu Weng and begged for forgiveness. Weng smiled and said, "Did the kid insult me?

古文：士明云： 适于中途已疲，讵敢复尔。 
现代文：士明说： 刚才在途中我已很累了，哪敢再那样？ 
English: Shiming said, "I was very tired just now on the way, how dare I do that again?

古文：因垂涕，翁乃释之。
现代文：说着流起泪来，朱翁便放了他。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Zhu Rong let him go.

古文：后敬事翁之礼与童孙齿焉。
现代文：以后，士明恭恭敬敬地对待朱翁，其礼节之周到就像小孙子一样。
English: Afterward, Shiming treated Zhu Rong with courtesy and respect, and his etiquette was as thoughtful as that of a small grandson.

古文：士明至元和中，戍于巴丘，遂别朱翁。
现代文：元和中年，士明应征去巴丘戍卫，才跟朱翁告别。
English: In the early and middle ages, Shiming was conscripted to guard Bachu, and only then did he say goodbye to Zhu Weng.

古文：王生
现代文：王生
English: Wang Sheng

古文：唐韩晋公滉镇润州，以京师米贵，进一百万石，且请敕陆路观察节度使发遣。
现代文：唐代，晋公韩滉镇守润州，因为京都米价昂贵，便进奉一百万石，亦请皇上命令陆路观察节度使押运。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the prince of Jin, Hanzhong Zhen, was in charge of Renzhou, and because the price of rice in Kyoto was very high, he offered one million koku, and also asked the emperor to order the land route observation division to escort the transport.

古文：时宰相以为盐铁使进奉，不合更烦累沿路州县，帝又难违滉请，遂下两省议。
现代文：当时宰相认为盐铁使进奉物品，不宜另外烦累沿路各个州县，皇帝又难以违背韩滉的请求，便将此事交给两省议决。
English: At that time, the prime minister thought that it was not appropriate to burden the various prefectures and counties along the road with salt and iron, and it was difficult for the emperor to violate Han Yu's request, so he handed the matter over to the two provinces for deliberation.

古文：左补阙穆质曰： 盐铁使自有官使勾当进奉，不合更烦累沿路州县。
现代文：左补阙穆质说： 盐铁使自己有官使办理进奉的事，不应再烦累沿途各个州县。
English: Zuo Zhuang Muxing said: The Salt and Iron Industry should have its own officials to handle the matters of advancement, and should no longer burden the various states and counties along the way.

古文：为节度使乱打杀二十万人犹得，何惜差一进奉官。 
现代文：身为节度使随意打杀二十万人都办得到，为何舍不得派一名进奉官？ 
English: Why is it so reluctant to send an envoy, when it can kill 200,000 people at will as a matter of discretion?

古文：坐中人密闻，滉遂令军吏李栖华就谏院诘穆公。
现代文：坐中有人将穆的话秘密告诉了韩滉，滉便令军吏李栖华到谏院责问穆公。
English: During the meeting, someone told Han Qi about Mu's words in secret, and he ordered the military official Li Qianhua to go to the Summer Palace to question Mu Gong.

古文：滉云不曾相负，何得如此。
现代文：滉说过去不曾有负于穆质，凭什么这样做？
English: He said that he had never failed to live up to his moral standards in the past. Why did he do so?

古文：即到京与公廷辩。
现代文：自己要马上进京与穆公进行廷辩。
English: He wanted to go to Beijing immediately to have a court debate with Mu Gong.

古文：遂离镇，过汴州，挟刘玄佐俱行，势倾中外。
现代文：于是离镇守的地方，经过汴州，挟持着刘玄佐一块儿去，势倾朝廷内外。
English: Therefore, he left the place of the town guard, passed through Zhangzhou, and went together with Liu Xuanzu, exerting his influence both inside and outside the court.

古文：穆惧不自得，潜衣白衫，诣兴赵王生卜，与之束素，王谢曰： 劳致重币，为公夜蓍占之。 
现代文：穆质害怕得不得了，偷偷穿上白衫到兴赵求王生占卜，他给王生一捆丝布，王生称谢道： 劳您送我这么重的报酬，我要当夜就给您占卦。 
English: Muxie was so scared that he secretly put on a white shirt and went to Xingzhao to ask Wang Sheng for divination. He gave Wang Sheng a bundle of silk cloth. Wang Sheng thanked him and said, "Since you have given me such a heavy reward, I will give you divination that night."

古文：穆乃留韩年命并自留年命。
现代文：穆质使留下韩滉和自己的生辰年岁。
English: Mu Qian left behind Han Xuan and his own birth year.

古文：明日，令妹夫裴往请卦，王谓裴曰： 此中一人，年命大盛，其间威势盛于王者，是谁。
现代文：第二天，让妹夫裴前去请卦，王生对裴说： 这里面的一个人，命相特别旺盛，一生中的威势胜过为王的，这个人是谁？
English: The next day, he asked his brother-in-law, Pei, to go and ask for advice. Wang Sheng said to Pei, "There is a person in this, whose life is particularly prosperous, whose power in life is greater than that of a king. Who is this person?

古文：其次一命，与前相刻太甚，颇有相危害意。
现代文：另外一个人的命相，与前面那个人相克得太厉害，大有互相危害的意思。
English: The life of the other person is too different from that of the person in front of him, and there is a great sense of mutual harm.

古文：然前人必不见明年三月。
现代文：但前面那个人必定到不了明年三月。
English: But the one in front will definitely not make it to March next year.

古文：卦今已是十一月，纵相害，事亦不成。 
现代文：卦上的日子是今年十一月，纵然相害，事情也办不成。 
English: The date on the gua is this November. Even if it is harmful to each other, things cannot be done.

古文：韩十一月入京，穆曰： 韩爪距如此，犯著即碎，如何过得数月。 
现代文：韩滉于十一月入京，穆质说： 韩的势力如此之大，碰着他就立即粉身碎骨，怎么能拖过好几个月？ 
English: Han Zheng entered Beijing in November, Mu Qiao said: Han's power is so great that if you touch him, you will immediately be crushed, how can you drag it out for months?

古文：又质王生，终云不畏。
现代文：他又去问王生，王生一直告诉他不要畏惧。
English: He went to ask Wang Sheng again. Wang Sheng kept telling him not to be afraid.

古文：韩至京，威势愈盛，日以橘木棒杀人，判桉郎官每候见皆奔走，公卿欲谒，逡巡莫敢进。
现代文：韩滉到京城后，威势更盛，天天用橘木棒打死人，判案的官员一见到他就都逃跑，公卿大臣们本想去拜见他，也犹豫迟疑不敢登门。
English: After Han Xuan arrived in Beijing, he became more powerful. He beat people to death every day with an orange wooden stick. The officials who judged the case ran away as soon as they saw him. The nobles and ministers who wanted to visit him hesitated and did not dare to go to the door.

古文：穆愈惧，乃历谒韩诸子皋、群等求解，皆莫敢为出言者。
现代文：穆质更加恐惧，便多次拜见韩滉的儿子韩皋、韩群等请求和解，但他们谁也不敢为此事出面讲情。
English: Muxie was even more afraid, so he repeatedly visited Han Zheng's sons, Han Zheng and Han Qun, to ask for reconciliation, but none of them dared to come forward to explain the matter.

古文：时滉命三省官集中书视事，人皆谓与廷辩，或劝穆称疾，穆怀惧不决。
现代文：当时韩滉命令三省官员集合到中书省办公，人们都说韩滉要与穆质进行廷辩，有人劝说穆质称病不要出面，穆质心存疑虑拿不定主意。
English: At that time, Han Zheng ordered the officials of the three provinces to gather in the office of China's Book Province. People said that Han Zheng wanted to argue with Mu Zheng. Some people persuaded Mu Zheng to say that he was ill and not to come forward. Mu Zheng had doubts and was uncertain.

古文：及众官毕至，乃曰： 前日除张严常州刺史，昨日又除常州刺史。
现代文：等官员们都到了，韩滉便说： 前天我解除了张严的常州刺史职务，昨天又解除了一个常州刺史的职务。
English: When all the officials arrived, Han Zheng said: The day before yesterday, I relieved Zhang Yan of his duties as Changzhou chief historian, and yesterday I relieved another Changzhou chief historian of his duties.

古文：缘张严曾犯赃，所以除替。
现代文：因为张严曾经犯过贫赃的罪，所以撤换他。
English: Because Zhang Yan once committed the crime of being barren, he was replaced.

古文：恐公等不谕，告公等知。 
现代文：恐怕你们不知道，今天特意告诉你们。 
English: I'm afraid you don't know, but I'm going to tell you today.

古文：诸人皆贺穆，非是廷辩。
现代文：大家都因这次亦不是廷辩而向穆质表示祝贺。
English: Everyone congratulated Mr. Mu on the fact that this was not a courtroom argument.

古文：无何穆有事见滉，未及通。闻阁中有大声曰： 穆质争敢如此。 
现代文：没过多久，穆质有事必须去见韩滉，没等到通报便听阁中有人大声说： 穆质胆敢如此！ 
English: It didn't take long before Mu Xie had to go to see Han Zheng about something, and before he was notified, he heard someone in the pavilion say loudly, "Mu Xie dares to do this!"

古文：赞者不觉走出，以告质，质惧。
现代文：一位赞官不觉走了出来，把刚才的事告诉了穆质，穆听了十分害怕。
English: A high-ranking official came out unawares and told Mu Qi about what had just happened. Mu was very frightened.

古文：明日，度支员外齐抗五更走马谓质曰： 公以左降邵州邵阳尉，公好去。 
现代文：第二天，度支员外齐抗深夜骑马来对穆说： 您已降职为邵州的邵阳尉，只管好好地去吧。 
English: The next day, a member of the Du Branch of the Foreign Qi Resistance Riding Team came late at night to say to Mu: You have been demoted to the rank of Shaozhou's Shaoyang Lieutenant, just go.

古文：无言握手留赠，促骑而去。
现代文：两人没说什么便握手告别，策马而去。
English: Without saying anything, the two shook hands to say goodbye and rode away.

古文：质又令裴问王生，生曰： 韩命禄已绝，不过后日。
现代文：穆质又叫夫裴去问王生，王生说： 韩滉的寿命和官运已经完了，不超过后天。
English: Mu Qiao also asked her husband Pei to go and ask Wang Sheng. Wang Sheng said, "Han Xuan's life span and official career are over, no more than the day after tomorrow.

古文：明日且有国故，可万全无失矣。 
现代文：明天且有国家的大变故。现在您可万全无失了。 
English: Tomorrow there will be a great change in the country, and now you have nothing to lose.

古文：至日晚，内宣出，王薨辍朝，明日制书不下。
现代文：到了晚上，宫内宣布出来：帝王逝世，停止朝拜。第二天，穆质降职的文书没有下达。
English: In the evening, the imperial court announced that the emperor had died and that the imperial court would cease to worship him. The next day, the document of the emperor's demotion was not issued.

古文：后日韩入班倒，床舁出，遂卒。
现代文：第三天，韩滉入朝倒在班内，用床抬了出来，于是就死了。
English: On the third day, Han Qi collapsed in class, was carried out on a bed, and died.

古文：时朝廷中有恶韩而好穆者，遂不放穆敕下，并以邵阳书与穆。
现代文：当时朝廷中有厌恶韩滉而喜欢穆质的人，便不将穆质贬官的命令发下来，亦把邵阳书给了穆质。
English: At that time, there were people in the imperial court who disliked Han Xuan and liked Mu Qian, so they did not issue the order to demote Mu Qian, but also gave the Shaoyang book to Mu Qian.

古文：贾笼
现代文：贾笼
English: Jia Guan

古文：穆质初应举，试毕，与杨凭数人会。
现代文：穆质初应举，考试结束，与杨凭等数人相会。
English: At the end of the examination, he met with Yang Biao and several other people.

古文：穆策云： 防贤甚于防奸。 
现代文：穆在策论中说： 防贤甚于防奸。 
English: Mu said in the policy: "Preventing virtue is more important than preventing corruption."

古文：杨曰： 公不得矣，今天子方礼贤，岂有防贤甚于防奸。 
现代文：杨凭说： 你说得不对，当今天子正在礼待贤士，怎么说防贤甚于防奸呢。 
English: Yang Biao said, "You are not right. How can you say that the prevention of virtue is more important than the prevention of adultery, when today's children are treating the sages with courtesy.

古文：穆曰： 果如此是矣。 
现代文：穆说： 果然这样那就对了。 
English: Mu said: "This is definitely the right thing to do.

古文：遂出谒鲜于弁，弁待穆甚厚。
现代文：他们便出去谒见鲜于弁，鲜于弁待穆甚厚。
English: They went out to see if there was anything unusual about the meal, but there was nothing unusual about the meal.

古文：食未竟，仆报云： 尊师来。 
现代文：饭还没吃完，仆人报告说： 尊师来了。 
English: Before the meal was over, the servant reported, "His teacher has arrived."

古文：弁奔走具靴笏，遂命彻食。
现代文：弁急忙跑去穿上朝靴带好笏板，然后命人撤掉饭菜。
English: Ben hurriedly ran to put on his morning shoes and bring a good cutting board, and then ordered someone to remove the food.

古文：及至，一眇道士尔。
现代文：来人进屋后，原来是一个瞎老道而已。
English: After someone came into the house, it turned out to be nothing more than a blind alley.

古文：质怒弁相待之薄，且来者是眇道士，不为礼，安坐如故。
现代文：穆很恼火鲜于弁待他礼薄，而且来的又是个瞎道士，所以不向来人行礼，依然安坐不动。
English: Mu was very annoyed at the lack of courtesy shown to him, and the fact that he was a blind Taoist, so he didn't always bow and remained seated.

古文：良久，道士谓质曰： 岂非供奉官耶？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，道士对穆说： 您难道不是吃奉禄的官人吗？ 答道： 不是。 
English: After a while, the Taoist priest said to Mu Rua, "Aren't you a government official who receives a stipend?" He replied, "No."

古文：曰： 非也。 又问莫曾上封事进书策求名否，质曰： 见应制，已过试。 
现代文：又问他曾经上封事进书策而求官禄没有，穆说： 现正在应制，已经通过考试。 
English: When asked if he had ever been a bureaucrat, Mu said, "I am currently working under the system, and I have passed the exam.

古文：道士曰： 面色大喜。
现代文：道士说： 你的脸色上有大喜。
English: The moralist said, "You have great joy on your face.

古文：兼合官在清近。
现代文：及第的同时，还要在天子身边为官。
English: At the same time, it is necessary to be in the presence of the Son of God.

古文：是月十五日午后，当知之矣，策是第三等，官是左补阙。故先奉白。 
现代文：本月十五日午后，你就知道了，策论是第三等，官位是左补缺，所以我先告诉你。 
English: In the afternoon of the fifteenth day of this month, you will know that the policy is the third, and the official position is left to fill the gap, so I will tell you first.

古文：质辞去。
现代文：穆质告辞走了。
English: Mu Qie said goodbye and left.

古文：至十五日，方过午，闻扣门声即甚厉，遣人应问。曰： 五郎拜左补阙。 
现代文：到了十五日，刚过午，听见敲门声很响很急，打发人前去应对，报说： 五郎官拜左补缺。 
English: On the fifteenth day, just after midday, they heard a very loud and urgent knock on the door, and sent someone to respond, reporting: "Gorongguan Baili Left to Fill Vacancy."

古文：当时不先唱第三等便兼官，一时拜耳，故有此报。
现代文：当时，不先唱报 第三等 就是同时任了官职，要一块儿拜接喜报，所以才有刚才那样的报法。
English: At that time, if you didn't read the newspaper of the third class first, it meant that you held an official post at the same time, and you had to bow to the newspaper of joy at the same time. That's why there was just such a method of reporting.

古文：后鲜于弁诣质，质怒前不为毕馔，不与见。
现代文：后来鲜于弁来见穆质，穆生气那天没让他吃完饭，不与他见面。
English: Later, he rarely came to see Mu Ching, and Mu was angry that he didn't let him finish his meal that day and wouldn't meet with him.

古文：弁复来，质见之，乃曰： 前者贾笼也，言事如神，不得不往谒之。 
现代文：弁又来，质见了他，弁说： 前几天那个道士就是贾笼，他料事如神，我们应该去拜见他。 
English: Ben came again, questioned him, and said, "The Taoist the other day was Jia Ye, he knows things like the back of his hand, we should go and see him."

古文：质遂与弁俱往。
现代文：质便与弁一块儿去拜见。
English: Zi Poon went to see him together with Ben.

古文：笼谓质曰： 后三月至九月，勿食羊肉，当得兵部员外郎，知制诰。 
现代文：贾笼对穆质说： 后三月至九月，不要吃羊肉，你能得坐兵部员外郎职位，又有知制诰的官衔。 
English: Jia Ye said to Mu Quan: From late March to September, don't eat mutton. You can get the position of an army officer and the official title of a scholar.

古文：德宗尝赏质曰： 每爱卿对扬，言事多有行者。 
现代文：德宗皇帝曾经赏识穆质，说： 每爱卿对策，所说的事情多有可行的。 
English: Emperor Dezong once appreciated Mu Quan and said: Every countermeasure of Ai Xing, most of the things said are feasible.

古文：质已贮不次之望，意甚薄知制诰，仍私谓人曰： 人生自有，岂有不吃羊肉便得知制诰，此诚道士妖言也。 
现代文：穆质已存在更大的希望，内心很看轻知制诰，私下里对人说： 一个人该做什么官天生就有这个运气，哪有不吃羊肉便得知制诰的道理。这纯粹是道士的妖言呀！ 
English: There was already a greater hope in his heart. He was very light-hearted about the knowledge of how to control flies, and he said to people in private: A person is born with this luck in terms of what he should do. If you don't eat mutton, you will learn the truth of how to control flies. This is purely a Taoist's magic words!

古文：遂依前食羊。
现代文：于是他又像过去一样吃起羊肉来。
English: So he went back to eating mutton as before.

古文：至四月，给事赵憬忽召质云： 同寻一异人。 
现代文：到了四月，给事赵憬忽然召见穆质说： 咱俩共同去找一个异人。 
English: In April, for some reason, Zhao Jing suddenly summoned Mu Qing and said, "Let's go together to find a stranger."

古文：及到，即前眇道士也。
现代文：到那里一看，就是以前见过的那个瞎子道士。
English: When I looked there, it was the same blind Taoist monk I had seen before.

古文：赵致敬如弟子礼，致谢而坐。
现代文：赵憬像弟子一样致敬行礼，致谢之后方才落座。
English: Zhao Jing saluted and saluted like a disciple, and only sat down after giving thanks.

古文：道士谓质曰： 前者勿令食羊肉，至九月得制诰，何不相取信，今否矣，莫更有灾否，曰，有厄。 
现代文：道士对穆质说： 以前不让你吃羊肉，到九月能得制诰。
English: The Taoist priest said to Mu Ching, "Previously, you were not allowed to eat mutton. By September, you will be able to control your appetite.

古文：质曰： 莫至不全乎？ 
现代文：为什么不讲信用？如今不同了，莫不是还有灾祸吗？对了，你有厄运！ 
English: Why don't you talk about trust? It's different now, isn't there still a disaster? That's right, you have bad luck!

古文：曰： 初意过于不全，缘识圣上，得免死矣。 
现代文：穆质说： 不至于有生命危险吧？ 道士说： 本来很危险，因为你认识皇上，才能免除一死呵！ 
English: The sage said, "It's not life-threatening, is it?" The Taoist said, "It's very dangerous, because only if you know the emperor can you avoid death!"

古文：质曰： 何计可免？ 
现代文：穆质问道： 有什么办法可以避免？ 
English: Mu Qiao asked: What can be done to avoid it?

古文：曰： 今无计矣。 
现代文：答： 如今无计可施了。 
English: A: There is nothing we can do now.

古文：质又问： 若迁贬，几时得归？ 
现代文：质又问： 若遭贬迁，多长时间能够回来？ 
English: The interrogator also asked: If you are demoted, how long will it take you to return?

古文：曰： 少是十五年。
现代文：道士说： 最少是十五年。
English: The moralist said, "At least fifteen years."

古文：补阙却回，贫道不见。 
现代文：补缺要回去，贫道不能看见。 
English: I have to go back to fill the vacancy, and I can't see a way out of poverty.

古文：执手而别，遂不复言。
现代文：于是与他握手告别，不再说什么。
English: So I shook his hand and said goodbye, and said nothing more.

古文：无何，宰相李泌奏，穆质、卢景亮于大会中。皆自言频有章奏谏。曰国有善，即言自己出；有恶事，即言苦谏，上不纳；此足以惑众，合以大不敬论，请付京兆府决杀。
现代文：没过多久，宰相李泌奏称：穆质和卢景亮在大会中，都说自己不断有章奏进谏，国家有善政，他们就说是自己出的主意；有坏事就说是他们苦谏皇上不采纳；这种做法定以迷惑众人，应当以大不敬论处，请交给京兆府裁决斩杀。
English: Not long after, the prime minister, Li Xiu Song, said: "Muxun and Lu Jingliang both said in the general assembly that they had constantly made progress, the country had good governance, and they said that they had come up with their own ideas; if there were bad things, they said that they were bitter that the emperor would not adopt them; this practice was bound to confuse everyone and should be treated with great disrespect, please hand it over to the Beijing Municipal Government for ruling and killing.

古文：德宗曰： 景亮不知，穆质曾识，不用如此。 
现代文：德宗说： 卢景亮我不了解，穆质我曾经相识，不要这样对待他。 
English: Dezong said, "I don't understand Lu Jingliang, I once knew Mu Xie, don't treat him like this.

古文：又进决六十，流崖州，上御笔书令与一官，遂远贬。
现代文：又进言打杖六十，流放崖州。皇上御笔亲书命令给他一个官衔。
English: He was also sentenced to sixty lashes with the cane and banished to Yazhou. The emperor personally ordered him to be given an official title.

古文：后至十五年，宪宗方征入。
现代文：于是把穆质往边远地方贬迁了。后来，到了十五年，宪宗皇帝才把他征召入宫。
English: As a result, he was exiled to a remote place. Later, in the fifteenth year, Emperor Kenzong conscripted him into the imperial court.

古文：贾笼即贾直言之父也。
现代文：贾笼就是贾直言的父亲。
English: Jia Ye is the father of Jia Nao.

古文：轩辕集
现代文：轩辕集
English: Xuanwu Collection

古文：唐宣宗晚岁，酷好长年术。
现代文：唐宣宗晚年，酷爱长寿之术。
English: In his later years, Tang Xuanzong was passionate about the art of longevity.

古文：广州监军吴德鄘离京日，病足颇甚。
现代文：广州监军吴德鄘离京赴任的时候，脚患病，病得很重。
English: When Wu Deyu, the military governor of Guangzhou, left Beijing to take up his post, he was seriously ill with a foot ailment.

古文：及罢，已三载矣，而疾已平。
现代文：等到任满卸职时，已经三年了，脚的病也已经彻底好了。
English: By the time he left office, it had been three years and his foot had completely healed.

古文：宣宗诘之，且言罗浮山人轩辕集医之。
现代文：宣宗盘问他，他说是罗浮山人轩辕集给他医治的。
English: Xuanzong cross-examined him, and he said that it was Luofu Mountain Man Xuan Yao who gave him the treatment.

古文：遂驿诏赴京，既至，馆山亭院。
现代文：皇上便通过驿使传诏令轩辕集赴京，到京后，轩辕集住在山亭院。
English: The emperor then sent an envoy to Beijing to summon Xuan Zhi, and after arriving in Beijing, Xuan Zhi went to live in the Sanding Palace.

古文：后放归，拜朝散大夫广州司马，坚不受。
现代文：后来皇上放他回去，授职朝散大夫广州司马，轩辕集坚决不接受。
English: Later, the emperor let him go back and appointed him as a doctor of Guangzhou Sima, but Xuan Yuxi resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：临别，宣宗问理天下当得几年，集曰。五十年。
现代文：临别时，宣宗问他按理天下能有几年，轩辕集说： 五十年。 
English: At the time of parting, Xuanzong asked him how many years he could reasonably have in the world. Xuan Yuxi said: Fifty years.

古文：宣宗大悦，及至晏驾，春秋五十。
现代文：宣宗大悦。到他死亡时，整好是五十个春秋。
English: When he died, he was exactly fifty years old.

古文：杜可筠
现代文：杜可筠
English: Dukko

古文：唐僖宗末，广陵贫人杜可筠年四十余，好饮不食，多云绝粒。
现代文：唐朝僖宗末年，广陵有个穷汉子叫杜可筠，四十多岁了，爱喝酒不吃饭，许多人都说他是粒米不沾。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, there was a poor man in Guangling named Du Kejun. He was more than forty years old, and he liked to drink rather than eat. Many people said that he did not touch a grain of rice.

古文：每酒肆巡座求饮，亦不见醉。
现代文：他常常在酒店里挨个座位要酒喝，也不见他醉。
English: He would often go from table to table in the hotel asking for drinks, and he didn't look drunk.

古文：人有怜与之酒，又终不多饮，三两杯即止。
现代文：有人同情他，送给他酒，又舍不得多喝，每次三两杯而已。
English: Some people sympathized with him and gave him wine, but he was reluctant to drink more than three or two glasses at a time.

古文：有乐生旗亭在街西，常许或阴雨往他所不及，即约诣此，率以为常。
现代文：乐生在街西开了个酒亭，常让他阴雨天没处去时就到他那里去，这已经是常事了。
English: Le Sheng opened a tavern on the west side of the street, and often asked him to go there when he had nowhere to go on cloudy and rainy days. This has become a regular occurrence.

古文：一旦大雪，诣乐求饮，值典事者白乐云： 既已啮损，即须据物赔前人。 
现代文：有一天下大雪，杜可筠又到乐生那里要酒喝，赶上一个做典当工作的人对乐生说： 既然已经咬坏了，就应根据物的价钱赔偿那个人。 
English: One day, when it was snowing heavily, Du Keqiu went to Leshou again to ask for wine. He caught up with a pawnbroker and said to Leshou, "Since your bite is already broken, you should compensate that person according to the price of the item."

古文：乐不喜其说，杜问曰： 何故？ 
现代文：乐生不高兴他这么说，杜可筠问道： 什么原因？ 
English: Le Sheng was not happy to hear him say that. Du Kejun asked: What is the reason?

古文：乐曰： 有人将衣服换酒，收藏不谨，致为鼠啮。 
现代文：乐生说： 有人拿衣服换酒，因为收藏不谨慎，被老鼠咬破了。 
English: Le Sheng said: Someone took clothes to exchange for liquor, because the collection was not prudent, it was bitten by a rat.

古文：杜曰： 此间屋院几何？ 
现代文：杜说： 这里有几间房子多大的院落？ 
English: Du said: How many houses are there and how big is the courtyard?

古文：曰，若干。
现代文：乐生说有许多。
English: There is a lot to be said for having fun.

古文：杜曰： 弱年曾记得一符，甚能却鼠，即不如今有验否，请以试之，或有征，当可尽此室宇，永无鼠矣。 
现代文：杜说： 小时候曾记得一个符，很能除去老鼠，不知道现在有没有灵验，请你替我试试看，或许能成，那就可以使这座宅院干干净净，永无老鼠。 
English: Du said, "When I was a child, I once remembered a charm that was very effective at getting rid of mice. I don't know if it's effective now. Please try it for me. Maybe it will work. Then I can make this courtyard clean and free of mice forever."

古文：乐得符，依法焚之，自此遂绝鼠迹。
现代文：乐生拿到符后，照法焚烧了，从此绝了鼠迹。
English: After getting the badge, Lesheng burned it according to the law, thus eliminating the trace of mice.

古文：杜属秦彦、毕师铎重围际，容貌不改，皆为绝粮故也。
现代文：杜可筠属秦彦、毕师铎在重围中死，容貌不改变，都是因为鼠不食的缘故。
English: Du Keqiu of the genus Qin Yan and Bi Shiqiu died during the siege, but their appearance did not change. This was all due to the rats not eating.

古文：后孙儒渡江，乃寓毗陵。犯夜禁，为刃死，传其剑解矣。
现代文：原来孙儒过了江，他便住在毗陵，因为违犯了宵禁的规定，被用刀杀死了，传说杀他的那把剑也分解了。
English: Originally, Sun Ru crossed the river, he lived in Viling, because he violated the curfew, he was killed with a sword, and the legend says that the sword that killed him also disintegrated.

古文：许建宗
现代文：许建宗
English: Xu Jianzong

古文：唐济阴郡东北六里左山龙兴古寺前，路西第一院井，其水至深，人不可食，腥秽甚，色如血。
现代文：唐代，在济阴郡东北方向六里左山龙兴古寺的前面，路西边第一个院有一口井，里面的水特别深，人不能吃，又腥又臭，颜色如血。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, in front of the Longxing Ancient Temple in Lulishan, six miles to the northeast of Jiyin County, there was a well in the first courtyard on the west side of the road. The water inside was very deep, and people could not drink it. It was foul and smelly, and the color was like blood.

古文：郑还古曰： 可以同诣之。 
现代文：郑还古跟许建宗说： 我们一块儿去看看。 
English: Zheng Yaogu said to Xu Jianzong: Let's go and have a look together.

古文：及窥其井，曰： 某与回此水味何如？ 
现代文：许建宗探身察看那口井，说： 我给你们恢复这井水的味道怎么样？ 
English: Xu Jianzong bent down to inspect the well and said, "How about I restore the taste of this well water for you?"

古文：还古及院僧曰： 幸甚。 
现代文：郑还古与院里的僧人说： 太好了。 
English: Zheng Hongu said to the monks in the monastery, "That's great.

古文：遂命朱瓯纸笔，书符置井中，更无他法。
现代文：便叫人拿来朱砂钵子和纸笔，写了一道符放进井里，亦没有再用别的方法。
English: He then called for cinnabar tweezers and paper and pen, wrote a sign and put it in the well. He did not use any other method.

古文：遂宿此院，二更后，院风雨黯黑。
现代文：之后，他们就在这个院里住宿，二更天后，院里风雨交加，漆黑一团。
English: After that, they stayed in this hospital, and two days later, the hospital was covered in rain and wind, and it was pitch black.

古文：还古于牖中窥之，电光间，有一力夫，自以约索于井中，如有所钓，凡电三发光，洎四电光则失之矣。
现代文：郑还古从窗缝里往外瞧，看到电光之中有一健壮男子，自己把钓鱼用的绳子放进井里，好像有什么东西要钓，一连发了三道电光，到第四道电光时这个人就不见了。
English: Zheng Wanggu looked out from the window and saw a strong man among the lights. He put a fishing rope into the well, as if he wanted to catch something. Three lights flashed in a row, and by the fourth light, the man was gone.

古文：及旦，建宗封其井。
现代文：等到天亮，建宗把这口井盖严了。
English: By dawn, Jianzong had capped the well.

古文：三日后，甘美异于诸水，至今不变。
现代文：三天后，井水甘美异常，其他水都比不上，至今仍未改变。
English: Three days later, the water from the well was unusually sweet. No other water could compare, and it still hasn't changed.

古文：还古意建宗得道者，遂求之，云： 某非道者，偶得符术。 
现代文：郑还古认为许建宗是得了道术的人，便去求他，建宗说： 我不是道士，偶尔得到点符术而已。 
English: Zheng Yangu thought that Xu Jianzong was a person who had obtained Taoism, so he went to beg him. Jianzong said, "I am not a Taoist, I have only obtained a little bit of magic from time to time."

古文：求终不获。
现代文：还古的请求始终没得到什么。
English: There has been no response to the request so far.

古文：后去太山，不知所在。
现代文：建宗后来到太山去了，不知具体住在什么地方。
English: After that, Jianzong went to Taishan and I don't know exactly where he lived.

古文：向隐
现代文：向隐
English: Xiangyin

古文：唐天复中，成汭镇江陵，监军使张特进元随温克修司药库，在坊郭税舍止焉。
现代文：唐朝天复中年，成汭镇守江陵，监军使张特进与元随温克修看管药库，在坊边租房暂住。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, when Emperor Tianfu was in his middle age, the town of Chenglu was put in charge of guarding Jiangling, and the supervisors Zhang Tejin and Yuan followed Wenke Xiu to take care of the pharmacy. They rented a house in Fangbian for a while.

古文：张之门人向隐北邻，隐攻历算，仍精射覆，无不中也。
现代文：张特进的门人向隐住在他的北邻，向隐钻研历算，还精于射覆游戏，没有投不中的时候。
English: Zhang Tejin's doorman Xiang Ying lived in his northern neighbor, Xiang Ying studied calendars, and was also good at shooting games. There was never a time when he missed a shot.

古文：一日，白张曰： 特进副监小判官已下，皆带灾色，何也？ 
现代文：一天，向隐对张特进说： 特进和副监小判官以下，个个面带灾难的气色，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: One day, Xiang Yin said to Zhang Tejin: "Tejin and the deputy supervisors below the magistrate all look like disasters. What's going on?

古文：张曰： 人之年运不同，岂有一时受灾，吾不信矣。 
现代文：张说： 每个人的命运各有不同，哪有同一时间受灾的道理，我不相信。 
English: Zhang said: Everyone's fate is different. I don't believe that there is a reason for people to be affected by disasters at the same time.

古文：于时城中多犬吠，隐谓克修曰： 司马元戎，某年失守，此地化为丘墟，子其志之。 
现代文：这时，城里有许多狗叫的声音。向隐对温克修说： 司马元戎，某年失守，这个地方就化为废墟。你可要记着这件事。 
English: At this time, there were many sounds of dogs barking in the city. Xiang Yin said to Wenkxiu: Sima Yuan Rong, one year you lost control of the city, and the place was reduced to ruins. You should remember this.

古文：他日复谓克修曰： 此地更变，且无定主。
现代文：另一天又对克修说： 此地要变更主人，又没有固定的主人。
English: On another day, he said to Keshu: "The owner of this place should be changed, and there is no fixed owner.

古文：五年后，东北上有人，依稀国亲，一镇此邦，二十年不动，子志之。 
现代文：五年后，东北方面有人，好像是位国亲，一度镇守这块地方，二十年内不变。你记着这件事。 
English: Five years later, someone from the northeast, who seemed to be a relative of the state, once governed this area, and this did not change for twenty years.

古文：他日又曰： 东北来者二十年后，更有一人五行不管，此程更远，但请记之。 
现代文：一天又对克修说： 东北来的那个人镇守二十年后，接替他的一个人不相信阴阳五行。这段时间更长。请把这些记着。 
English: One day, he also said to Keshu: "After the man from the northeast had been in charge of the town for twenty years, the man who replaced him did not believe in yin and yang and the five elements. This period of time is even longer. Please remember these things."

古文：温以为凭虚，殊不介意。
现代文：温克修以为这些语全无实际凭据，根本不放在心上。
English: Wenckxiu thought that these words had no real evidence at all, and did not care at all.

古文：复谓温曰： 子他时婚娶无男，但生一队女也。
现代文：向隐还对他说： 你以后结婚娶妻不生男孩，只生一群女孩子。
English: Xiang Yin also said to him: "When you get married in the future, you will not give birth to a boy, but only to a group of girls.

古文：到老却作医人。 
现代文：到年老时你却从医。 
English: You become a doctor when you're old.

古文：后果密敕诛北司，张特进与副监小判官同日就戮，方验其事。
现代文：后来，朝廷果然密令诛东北司，张特进与副监小判官同一天被杀，这才应验了那件事。
English: Later, the imperial court did indeed secretly order the Northeast Division of the People's Liberation Army to kill Zhang Tejin on the same day as the deputy magistrate. This was the fulfillment of that event.

古文：成汭鄂渚失律不还，江陵为朗人雷满所据，襄州举军夺之。以赵匡明为留后。
现代文：成汭在鄂渚失利没有回来，江陵被朗州人雷满占领，襄州又发兵夺了回来，用赵匡明为留后。
English: Cheng Pi did not return after the defeat in Huzhou, Jiangling was occupied by the people of Lanzhou, and Xiangzhou sent troops to recapture it, leaving Zhao Kuangming behind.

古文：大梁伐裹州。匡明弃城自固，为梁将贺环所据。
现代文：大梁派兵攻打襄州，赵匡明放弃城池保存自己，襄州被梁将贺环据守。
English: Daryang sent troops to attack Xiangzhou, Zhao Kuangming abandoned the city to save himself, and Xiangzhou was defended by Liang general He Huan.

古文：而威望不著，朗蛮侵凌。不敢出城，自固而已。
现代文：但他的威望不高，朗州蛮人侵凌时，他不敢出城，只能固守。
English: However, his prestige was not high. When the Langzhou barbarians invaded, he did not dare to leave the city, but had to hold fast.

古文：梁主署武信王高季昌自颖州刺史为荆南兵马留后。
现代文：大梁君主命武信王高季昌从颖州刺史改为荆南兵马留后。
English: The Great Liang Emperor ordered Wuxin Wang Gao Jichang to change from Yingzhou Jishi to Jingnan Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：下车日，拥数骑至沙头，朗军慑惧，稍稍而退。
现代文：高季昌下车后，带领数人骑马来到沙头，朗军望而生畏，慢慢撤退。
English: After Gao Jichang got off the bus, he led several people on horseback to Shatou. The Lang Army was daunted and slowly retreated.

古文：先是武信王赐姓朱，后复本姓。
现代文：在这之前，武信王曾被梁主赐姓朱，后来又恢复了本来的姓。
English: Prior to this, King Wuxin had been given the surname Zhu by the Lord Liang, and later restored his original surname.

古文：果符国亲之说。
现代文：果然符合向隐所谓 国亲 的说法。
English: That certainly fits with Xiangyin's claim of being a so-called patriot.

古文：克修失主，流落渚宫，收得名方，仍善修合，卖药自给，亦便行医。
现代文：温克修失去主人后流落在渚宫，收集到许多有名的药方，精心整理修补，靠卖药维持生活，顺便行医看病。
English: After losing his master, Wenkxiu was exiled to Nagisa Palace, where he collected many famous prescriptions, carefully arranged and repaired them, supported himself by selling medicines, and practiced medicine on the side.

古文：娶妇后，唯生数女。
现代文：娶了老婆后，只生了几个女孩。
English: After marrying his wife, he only fathered a few girls.

古文：尽如向言。
现代文：上述情况都跟向隐当初所说的一样。
English: The above situation is the same as what Xiangyin said at the beginning.

古文：唐明宗天成二年丁亥，天军围江陵，军府怀忧，温克修上城白文献王，具道此，文献未之全信。
现代文：唐明宗天成二年，天子的军队围攻江陵，军府担忧，温克修上城把前面自己的经历都告诉了文献王，文献王并未完全相信这些。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Tiancheng of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Tianzi's army besieged Jiangling, the military government was worried, and Wenke Xiu Shangcheng told the king of literature all his previous experiences. The king of literature did not fully believe these.

古文：温以前事累验，必不我欺。
现代文：温克修以为前面经过的事屡屡应验，必定不是欺人之谈。
English: Wenke Xiu thought that the things that had happened before had come true again and again, and must not be a deception.

古文：俄而朝廷抽军。
现代文：不久，朝廷抽调军队，放弃了对江陵的围攻。
English: Soon, the imperial court dispatched troops and gave up the siege of Gangneung.

古文：来年，武信薨，凡二十一年。
现代文：第二年，武信王高季昌去世，在位一共二十一年。
English: The following year, King Takenobu Gao Jichang passed away, having reigned for a total of 21 years.

古文：而文献嗣位，亦二十一年，迨至南平王。
现代文：文献继承其位，也统治了二十一年，直到南平王。
English: Literature inherited his throne and also ruled for twenty-one years until King Nanping.

古文：即此程更远，果在兹乎。
现代文：向隐所说的 这段时间更长 ，果然如此。
English: This period of time, which Xiang Yin said would be longer, is indeed so.

古文：赵尊师
现代文：赵尊师
English: Zhao Zongshi

古文：赵尊师者，本遂州人，飞符救人疾病，于乡里间年深矣。
现代文：赵尊师本是遂州人，能用飞符给人治病，在乡村住了多年了。
English: Zhao Zongshi is originally from Suizhou. He can cure people with flying symbols and has lived in the countryside for many years.

古文：又善役使山魈，令挈书囊席帽，故所居前后百里内，绝有妖怪鬼物为人患者。
现代文：又善于驱使山鬼，令其给自己提着书袋席帽，所以在他住处周围一百里之内，绝对没有妖怪鬼魅伤害人的事。
English: He is also good at driving mountain ghosts, making them carry a book bag seat cap for themselves, so within a hundred miles around his residence, there is absolutely no monster ghost to hurt people.

古文：有民阮琼女，为精怪所惑，每临夜别梳妆，似有所伺，必迎接忻喜，言笑自若。
现代文：居民阮琼的女儿为精怪所迷惑，每到夜晚就特别梳妆打扮一番，好像等待什么人，必定有人来迎接贺喜，又说又笑，坦然自得。
English: The daughter of resident Ruan Qiong was bewitched by the elves. Every night, she would dress up in a special way, as if she was waiting for someone. Someone must come to greet her, and she would talk, laugh, and feel at ease.

古文：召人医疗，即先知姓名。
现代文：请人到家给她治疗，她就先知道人家的姓名。
English: If someone comes to her house to treat her, she knows their name first.

古文：琼乃奔请尊师救解，赵曰： 不劳亲去，但将吾符贴于户牖间，自有所验。 
现代文：阮琼便赶来请赵尊师解救，赵说： 用不着我亲自去，只要把我的符贴在门窗上，自会灵验。 
English: Ruan Qiong then arrived to ask Zhao Zunshi for help. Zhao said, "I don't need to go personally, just put my symbols on the doors and windows, and it will work.

古文：乃白绢朱书大符与之。
现代文：他便在白绢上用红笔写了一道大符给阮琼。
English: He then wrote a big sign for Ruan Qiong with a red pen on the birch tree.

古文：琼贴于户，至一更，闻有巨物中击之声，如冰坠地，遂攒烛照之，乃一巨鼍，宛转在地，逡巡而死，符即不见，女乃醒然自悟，惊骇涕泣。
现代文：琼回去后将符贴在门上，到一更天，听到有大的物体撞击之声，像大冰块落地一样，他便举着蜡烛去照，原来是一只大鼍在地上翻滚，折腾一会儿就死了，贴在门上的符也立即不见了，女儿也像睡醒一样明白过来，吓得直哭。
English: When Joan returned, he put the sign on the door. The next day, he heard the sound of a large object hitting, like a large ice cube falling to the ground, so he held up a candle to shine it. It turned out to be a giant centipede rolling on the ground, tossing and dying in an instant. The sign on the door disappeared immediately, and his daughter woke up as if she had been asleep, crying with fright.

古文：琼遂碎鼍之首，弃于壑间，却诣尊师，备陈其事。
现代文：阮琼把鼍的脑袋砸碎，将它扔进了沟壑，然后去见赵尊师，向他讲述了事情的经过。
English: Ruan Qiong smashed the baboon's head and threw it into a ravine, and then went to see Zhao Zunshi and told him what had happened.

古文：赵慰劳之，又与小符，令女吞之。自后无恙。
现代文：赵对他表示祝贺与慰问，又给他一道小符，让他叫女儿吞下去，此后就不会有什么病灾了。
English: Zhao expressed his congratulations and condolences to him, and gave him a small token, asking him to tell his daughter to swallow it, after which there would be no more illness.

古文：大符即归于案上。
现代文：这时，大符已经飞回来落在桌子上。
English: At this time, the great banner had flown back and landed on the table.

古文：权师
现代文：权师
English: Master of Law

古文：唐长道县山野间，有巫曰权师，善死卜。
现代文：唐朝，在长道县的山野里，有个巫师叫权师，善于死卜。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, in the mountains and fields of Changdao County, there was a sorcerer called Quan Shi, who was good at divination.

古文：至于邪魅鬼怪，隐状逃亡，地秘山藏，生期死限，罔不预知之。
现代文：至于邪魔鬼怪，隐藏的逃亡的，地下的秘密山里宝藏，以及人的生死期限等，没有他不能预先知道的。
English: As for evil demons and monsters, hidden fugitives, underground secret mountain treasures, and the duration of human life and death, etc., without him it is impossible to know in advance.

古文：或人请命，则焚香呼请神，僵仆于茵褥上，奄然而逝，移时方喘息，瞑目而言其事。
现代文：有人请他占命，他点上香呼请神灵，直挺挺地倒在草地上，气息奄奄而死去，过了一会儿才又喘气，闭着眼睛便告诉你要问的事。
English: Someone asked him to take his life, he lit incense and called for the gods, fell straight down on the grass, gasping for breath and died, after a while he gasped again, closed his eyes and told you what to ask.

古文：奏师之亲曰郭九舅，豪侠强梁，积金甚广，妻卧病数年，将不济。
现代文：这个人奏报权师说他的亲戚叫郭九舅，为人豪侠强梁，家里有许多钱，妻子卧病多年，眼看没有救了，叫您给算一算。
English: This person reported to the rights division that his relative was called Guo Jiuzhuang, he was a hero and a strongman, the family had a lot of money, his wife had been ill for many years, and there was no help in sight, so he asked you to calculate.

古文：召令卜之。闭目而言曰： 君堂屋后有伏尸，其数九。
现代文：权师闭着眼说： 这个人堂屋后面埋有死尸，共有九具。
English: Quan Shi closed his eyes and said: There are nine dead bodies buried behind this hall.

古文：遂令斸之，依其尺寸，获之不差其一，旋遣去除之。
现代文：于是令人去掘，按他说的尺寸，一点儿不差地都找到了，紧接着又派人去将尸体除掉了。
English: So someone went digging, found everything exactly according to his measurements, and then sent someone to remove the body.

古文：妻立愈，赠钱百万，却而不受，强之，方受一二万，云神不令多取。
现代文：他的妻子便立即痊愈了，主人赠钱百万，权师推却不受，硬要给他，他才只收了一二万，并说神灵不让多拿。
English: His wife was immediately cured. The owner gave him a million, but the guru did not accept the offer. He only accepted 120,000 when he was forced to give it, and said that the gods would not allow him to take more.

古文：又一日，卧于民家，瞑目轮十指云： 算天下死簿，数其遐迩州县死数甚多，次及本州村乡，亦十余人合死者，内有豪士张夫子名行儒与焉。 
现代文：又一天，权师躺在一个村民家里，闭着眼睛转动十个手指说： 算计天下死人的账簿，数着附近州县死人的数目最多，其次是本州的村乡，也有十多个该要死的人，其中有豪士张夫子名叫行儒的。 
English: Another day, Quan Shi lay down in a villager's house, closed his eyes and twirled his ten fingers, saying: "In the ledger of the world's dead, the number of dead people in the nearby counties and prefectures is the largest, followed by the villages and townships in this state. There are also more than ten people who should die, among whom is the hero Zhang Fuzi named Xing Ru.

古文：人有急告行儒者，闻而惧，遂命之至。
现代文：有人急忙去告诉了张行儒，张行儒听了非常恐惧，便叫权师去。
English: Someone hurried to tell Zhang Xingru. Zhang Xingru was very frightened and called for Quan Shi to go.

古文：谓张曰： 可以奉为，牒阎罪山免之。 
现代文：权师对张说： 我可以为您效劳，写个通牒请阎王爷把您免了。 
English: The authority said to Zhang: I can be of service to you, and write an ultimatum to ask Yan Wangye to release you.

古文：于是闭目，于纸上书之，半如篆籀，祝焚之。
现代文：于是闭上眼睛，在纸上写，写的字一半像篆文籀文。
English: So I closed my eyes and wrote on a piece of paper. Half of the words I wrote looked like scribbles.

古文：既讫，张以含胎马奔奉之，巫曰： 神只许其母，子即奉还。 
现代文：写完后，祷告着烧化了。结束后，张行儒将一匹怀胎的奔马奉还给他，权师说： 神只许其母，马仔很快就奉还给您。 
English: When it was over, Zhang Xingru gave him back a pregnant galloping horse. The authority said, "God only allows the mother, and the foal will be returned to you soon."

古文：以俟异日，所言本州十余人算尽者，应期而殁，惟张行儒免之。
现代文：过了几天，权师所说本州十多个寿命已经完了的人，都应期限而死了，唯独张行儒没有死。
English: A few days later, more than ten people in Honshu who had reached the end of their lives, according to the authority, all died on schedule, except for Zhang Xingru, who did not die.

古文：及牝诞驹，遂还其主。
现代文：等到牝马生下小驹，便送还给了主人。
English: When the mare gave birth to a foal, it was given back to its owner.

古文：其牝呼为和尚，云： 此马曾为僧不了，有是报。 
现代文：那匹牝马他呼唤为 和尚 ，说： 这匹马曾经为僧不终，所以有此报应。 
English: He called the horse a monk, saying, "This horse was once a monk, so this is his retribution."

古文：自尔为人廷算者不少，为人掘取地下隐伏者亦多，言人算尽者，不差晷刻。
现代文：从那时起，权师在家里给人家算卦的时候不少，替人家挖取地下隐藏物的时候也很多，说谁寻命已尽的，保证不差一时半刻。
English: Since then, there have been many times when the guru has given people advice at home, and there have also been many times when he has dug out underground hiding places for others. Whoever says that he has exhausted his search for life is guaranteed to be within half an hour.

古文：以至其家大富，取民家牛马资财，遍山盈室。
现代文：这样以来，他家里大大地富了起来，从人家挣来的牛羊资财，放了满山堆了满屋。
English: Since then, his family has grown enormously wealthy. The cattle and sheep wealth they have earned from others has piled up in mountains and houses.

