古文：二十四日雨止而云气蒙密。
现代文：二十四日雨停了但云气阴暗浓密。
English: The rain stopped on the 24th, but the clouds remained thick and gloomy.

古文：平明，由路亭西行，五里为太平营，而九疑司亦在焉。
现代文：天亮时，由路亭往西行，五里为太平营，九疑巡检司也在这里。
English: At dawn, from the roadside pavilion to the west, five miles to the Taiping camp, Jiuzi Inspection Division is also here.

古文：由此西北入山，多乱峰环岫，盖掩口之东峰，如排衙列戟，而此处之诸岫，如攒队合围，俱石峰森罗。
现代文：由此往西北入山，许多峰峦错杂环绕，大体掩口营东面的峰岭，如同衙门中官吏排列、戟戈成行；而此处的众多山峦，则如队伍合围，石峰密集分布。
English: From there, we entered the mountains to the northwest, surrounded by many peaks and ridges. The peaks and ridges to the east of the shelter camp are generally arranged like officials in a castle gate, marching in procession; while the many mountains and ridges here are like a procession, with stone peaks densely distributed.

古文：窈窕回合，真所谓别有天地也。
现代文：山中间环绕形成洞，穿过一条石头缝隙进到里边，如同另外筑起一道城墙。
English: The middle of the mountain is surrounded by a cave, which is entered through a stone gap, as if another city wall had been built.

古文：途中宛转之洞，卓立之峰，玲拢之石，喷雪惊涛之初涨。潆烟沐雨之新绿，如是十里而至圣殿。
现代文：山不很高，但幽深而迂回绕曲，真所谓别有天地。一路中，有曲折的洞穴，直立的山峰，玲珑的岩石，惊涛卷雪般的乱石，云雨笼罩的新绿，就这样走了十里，到达圣殿。
English: The mountain is not very high, but it is deep and twists and turns. It is truly a different world. Along the way, there are tortuous caves, upright peaks, exquisite rocks, snow-capped rocks, and fresh greenery shrouded in clouds and rain. In this way, I walked ten miles to reach the temple.

古文：圣殿者，即舜陵也。
现代文：圣殿就是舜陵。
English: The temple is the tomb.

古文：余初从路岐望之，见颓垣一二楹，而路复荒没，以为非是，遂从其东逾岭而北。
现代文：开初我从岔路处见有一两间墙壁倒塌的房屋，而路又荒没，以为不是，便从它东面翻岭往北走。
English: At the beginning of the trip, I saw one or two houses with collapsed walls at the fork in the road, and the road was deserted. Thinking that it was not, I walked from the east side of the road, over the ridge to the north.

古文：二里，遇耕者而问之，已过圣殿而抵斜岩矣。
现代文：两里，遇到个耕田的人问他，才知已过了圣殿到斜岩了。
English: After two miles, he met a farmer who asked him how he knew that he had passed the cathedral and reached the rock.

古文：遂西面登山，则穹岩东向高张，势甚宏敞。
现代文：于是往西向山上登，弯隆的岩壁朝东高高伸展，气势恢宏。
English: As a result, I climbed up the mountain to the west, and the craggy rock wall stretched high and high to the east, with a magnificent momentum.

古文：洞门有石峰中峙，界门为两，飞泉倾坠其上，若水帘然。
现代文：岩洞门内有座石峰耸立在中间，将洞门隔成两边，飞洒的泉水倾坠在洞门上方，仿佛水帘一样。
English: Inside the cave door, a stone peak stands in the middle, separating the cave door into two sides. The flying spring water falls over the cave door, like a curtain of water.

古文：岩之右，垂石纵横，岩底有泉悬空而下，有从垂石之端直注者，有从石窦斜喷者，众隙交乱，流亦纵横交射于一处，更一奇也。
现代文：岩洞右边，纵横地垂挂着些石头，岩洞底部有泉水悬空泻下，水流有从垂挂着的石头边缘直流向下的，有从石孔中斜喷出来的，孔隙交错纷乱，水流也纵横喷射，交汇到一处，这更是一奇。
English: On the right side of the cave, there are some stones hanging vertically and horizontally. At the bottom of the cave, there is a spring water hanging in the air. The water flows from the edge of the hanging stones directly downwards, and from the stone holes obliquely. The pores are intertwined and chaotic. The water also sprays horizontally and vertically, and converges to one place, which is even more amazing.

古文：其下复开一岩，深下亦复宏峻，然不能远入也。
现代文：此岩洞下又形成个岩洞，深深向下凹陷，也同样宏大高阔，然而不能进到深处。
English: Below this cave, another cave has formed, deeply sunken, also large and high, but it cannot penetrate into the depths.

古文：岩后上层复开一岩，圆整高朗，若楼阁然，正对洞门中峙之峰，其下有池，潴水一方，不见所出之处，而水不盈。
现代文：此岩洞后面的上层同样形成个岩洞，圆整高爽而明亮，若楼阁一般，它正对着洞门中耸起的石峰，两股瀑布如同悬挂的帘子，喷泻在岩洞前，这是外岩景致最优美的地方。它下面有个池塘，积了一塘水，不见水的出处，也不外溢。
English: The upper floor behind this cave also forms a cave, round, high and bright, like a castle, it is facing the stone peak rising in the cave door, two waterfalls like hanging curtains, spouting in front of the cave, this is the most beautiful place outside the rock. There is a pond below it, a pond of water, no source of water, no overflow.

古文：池之左复开一门，即岩后之下层也。
现代文：池的左边又张开个石门，这里便是岩洞后面的下层。
English: To the left of the pool, a stone door opens, revealing the lower level behind the cave.

古文：由其内坠级而下，即深入之道矣。
现代文：从门内踏着石级向下走，就是进到深处的路了。
English: Stepping down the stone steps from inside the gate is the way into the depths.

古文：余既至外岩，即炊米为饭，为深入计。
现代文：我到达外岩后，就先做饭吃，作进洞游览的打算。
English: After I arrived at the outer rock, I planned to cook and eat first, and then visit the cave.

古文：僧明宗也，曰： 此间胜迹，近则有书字岩、飞龙岩，远则有三分石。
现代文：僧人叫明宗，他说： 这地方的风景名胜，近处的有书字岩、飞龙岩，远处的有三分石。
English: The monk's name is Mingzong. He said, "This place is famous for its scenic beauty. Nearby, there are Calligraphy Rock and Flying Dragon Rock. In the distance, there is the Three-Pointed Stone.

古文：三分石不可到，二岩君当先了之，还以余晷剩余时间入洞，为秉烛游，不妨深夜也。 
现代文：三分石今天不能到达，其余两岩先生应先游览，回来后用日落前的剩余时间再进这洞，点着烛火游览，这样就算深夜也无妨碍。 
English: The tripod cannot be reached today. The remaining two rock masters should visit first, and then use the remaining time before sunset to re-enter the cave and tour by candlelight, so that even late at night there is no obstacle.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头表示赞同。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：而按《志》求所谓紫虚洞，则兹洞有碑称为紫霞，俗又称为斜岩，斜岩则唐薛伯高已名之，其即紫虚无疑矣。
现代文：然而我按照志书的记载去寻求所谓的紫虚洞，却发现此洞中有碑，碑文说此洞为紫霞洞，习惯上又称为斜岩，斜岩则是唐朝时薛伯高就已命名的，依此，此洞便是紫虚洞无疑了。
English: However, I searched for the so-called Zi Jiao Cave according to the records of the history book, but found that there was a monument in this cave. The inscription said that this cave was the Zi Xia Cave, and it was customarily called the oblique rock. The oblique rock was named by Xue Bogao in the Tang Dynasty. According to this, there is no doubt that this cave is the Zi Jiao Cave.

古文：求所谓碧虚洞、玉琯岩、高士岩、天湖诸胜，俱云无之。
现代文：又询问所谓的碧虚洞、玉馆岩、高士岩、天湖等名胜，明宗都说没有这些地方。
English: They also inquired about the so-called places of interest such as Bihu Cave, Jade Pavilion Rock, Gaozhi Rock, and Tianhu Lake. Mingzong said that there were no such places.

古文：乃随明宗为导，先探二岩。
现代文：于是在明宗的导引下，先去探游书字、飞龙两岩。
English: So, under the guidance of Mingzong, I first went to explore the two rocks of calligraphy and flying dragons.

古文：出斜岩北行，下马蹄石，其阴两旁巉石嵯峨，叠云耸翠，其内乱峰复环回成峒山洞。
现代文：走出斜岩往北行，下了马蹄石。它的北面两侧岩石高峻，叠云耸翠，高峻的岩石以内乱峰又环拱回抱形成恫。
English: I walked out of the inclined rock to the north and descended the horseshoe rock. On the north side of it, the rocks are high and steep, and the clouds are stacked, and the high rocks are surrounded by turbulent peaks and ring arches.

古文：盖圣殿之后，即峙为萧韶峰，萧韶之西即起为斜岩。
现代文：大概圣殿的后面，便耸起为箫韶峰，箫韶峰的西面便耸起为斜岩。
English: Probably behind the temple, it rises as a peak, and the west side of the peak rises as a slope.

古文：山有岭界其间。
现代文：山上有座岭隔在它们之间。
English: A ridge of mountains separates them.

古文：岭北之水，西北流经宁远城，而下入于潇江，即舜源水也。
现代文：岭北面的水，往西北流经宁远城，下游汇入潇江，它就是舜源水。
English: The water on the north side of the ridge flows northwest through Ningyuancheng, and flows downstream into the Xiao River. It is the source water.

古文：岭南之水，西北流经车头，下会舜源水而出青口，即潇水也。
现代文：岭南面的水，往西北流经车头，再往下汇合舜源水而流出青口，这便是潇水。
English: The water on the south side of the ridge flows northwest through the locomotive, and then flows down to the confluence of the source water and out of the Qingkou, which is the Xiaowu.

古文：萧韶、斜岩之南北，俱乱峰环峒，独此二峰之间，则峡而不峒，盖有岭过脊于中，北为宁远县治之脉也。
现代文：箫韶峰、斜岩的南北两边，都是乱峰环拱形成炯，唯独这两峰之间，却形成山峡而不是炯，这是因为有座岭的岭脊从这两峰之间越过去，往北延伸而成为宁远县城主山之脉。
English: On both the north and south sides of the peak and the slope of the rock, the peak ring arches form a ridge, but between the two peaks, it forms a canyon instead of a ridge. This is because the ridge of the ridge passes between the two peaks and extends northward to become the main mountain of Ningyuan County.

古文：马蹄石南，其峒宽整，问其名，为九疑洞。
现代文：马蹄石南面，那酮宽阔齐整，打听它的名称，说叫九疑洞。
English: To the south of Horseshoe Rock, the canyon is wide and straight, and if you ask about its name, you will be told that it is Jiuxi Cave.

古文：余疑圣殿、舜陵俱在岭北，而峒在岭南，益疑之。
现代文：我原就怀疑圣殿、舜陵都在岭北，而今见姻在岭南，就更加怀疑了。
English: I had suspected that the holy temple and the imperial mausoleum were both in the north of Lingding, but now that I see that the marriage is in the south of Lingding, I am even more suspicious.

古文：已过永福寺故址，础石犹伟，已犁为田。
现代文：旋即，经过永福寺故址，柱脚下的石墩子仍然雄伟，而寺基已经被犁为耕田。
English: Soon, after passing the former site of Yongfu Temple, the stone pillars at the foot of the pillar are still majestic, and the temple foundation has been turned into farmland.

古文：又南过一溪，即潇水之上流也。
现代文：又往南渡过一条溪流，它就是潇水的上游。
English: We also crossed a stream to the south, which is the upper reaches of the Xiaoshui.

古文：转而西共三里，入书字岩。
现代文：转往西共走三里，进到书字岩。
English: Turn to the west and walk three miles to Shouji Rock.

古文：岩不甚深，后有垂石夭矫，如龙翔凤翥ù飞举。
现代文：岩穴不很深，后面有石头垂悬着，屈曲而有气势，如像龙凤飞腾一般。
English: The rock cave is not very deep, there are stones hanging behind, bent and powerful, like dragons and phoenixes soaring.

古文：岩外镌 玉琯岩 三隶字，为宋人李挺祖笔。
现代文：岩穴外面用隶书刻着 玉馆岩 三字，是宋代人李挺祖的笔迹。
English: On the outside of the rock cave, the three words "Jade Pavilion Rock" are inscribed in calligraphy, which is the handwriting of Li Tingzu from the Song Dynasty.

古文：岩右镌 九疑山 又名苍梧山三大字，为宋嘉定六年知道州军事莆田方信孺笔。
现代文：岩穴右边刻有 九疑山 三个大字，是宋代嘉定六年主持道州军事的莆田人方信孺书写的。
English: On the right side of the rock cave, there are three large characters engraved with "九疑山," which were written by Xingtian Fang Xinyu, who presided over the military of the Song Dynasty Jiading for six years.

古文：其侧又隶刻汉蔡中郎《九疑山铭》，为宋淳祐六年郡守潼川李袭之属郡人李挺祖书。
现代文：它的侧面又用隶书刻着汉代蔡中郎撰写的《九疑山铭》，这是宋代淳佑六年道州刺史渔川人李袭之嘱托本州人李挺祖刻写的。
English: Its side is also engraved with "The Nine Doubts" written by Cai Zhong Lang in the Han Dynasty, which was written by Li Ting Zu, a native of Honshu, at the behest of Li Wei, a fisherman from Sichuan Province, in the sixth year of the Song Dynasty.

古文：盖袭之既新其宫，因镌其铭于侧以存古迹。
现代文：大概李袭之既然新修了蔡中郎的庙，因而就将他作的这篇铭文刻在侧面，以保存古迹。
English: It is likely that Li Wei, since he had newly built Cai Zhong Lang's temple, engraved this inscription on the side to preserve the monument.

古文：后人以崖有巨书，遂以 书字 名，而竟失其实。
现代文：后人因为崖壁上有巨大的字，便用 书字 这个名称呼此岩，因而竟然失掉了它的真实名称。
English: Because of the huge characters on the cliff wall, later generations called this rock by the name of Shouji, thus losing its true name.

古文：始知书字岩之即为玉琯，而此为九疑山之中也。始知在箫韶南者为舜陵，在玉琯岩之北者，为古舜祠。
现代文：这样，我才知道书字岩就是玉馆岩，而这里正是九疑山的中段；才知道在箫韶峰南面的是舜陵，在玉馆岩北面的是古舜祠。
English: Thus, I came to know that Shouji Rock is Tamagatuan Rock, and that this is the middle section of Jiuji Mountain; I came to know that on the south side of Shoufeng is Fuling, and on the north side of Tamagatuan Rock is Gushan Shrine.

古文：后玉琯古祠既废，意寺中得以专享，不久，寺竟芜没，可为废古之鉴。
现代文：后人把舜祠合并到舜陵处，这也晌九疑巡检司北迁到太平营一样，世间事物的变迁就是如此之大。
English: Subsequent generations have merged the Ancestral Hall into the Ancestral Mausoleum, which is also the same as the Nine Doubts Inspection Division moved north to Taiping Camp. The changes in things in the world are so great.

古文：余坐玉琯中久之，因求土人导往三分石者。
现代文：我在玉馆岩中坐了好久，于是想找个当地人导引我到三分石去。
English: I had been sitting for a long time in the middle of the Jade Pavilion Rock, so I wanted to find a local to guide me to the Three Quarters Rock.

古文：土人言： 去此甚远，俱瑶窟中，须得瑶人为导。
现代文：当地人对我说： 三分石离此处很远，周围尽是瑶族人居住的地方，必须找瑶族人作向导才行。
English: The local people said to me, "The tripod is very far from here, and the surrounding area is full of places where the Yao people live. You must find a Yao person to be your guide."

古文：然中无宿处，须携火露宿乃可。 
现代文：然而中途没有住宿处，必须携带着火把露天住宿才可以前往。 
English: However, there is no accommodation along the way, and it is necessary to bring torches with you for open-air accommodation.

古文：已而重购得一人，乃平地瑶刘姓者，期以明日晴爽乃行。
现代文：随后出重金雇到一人，是个平地瑶，姓刘，约定第二天天气晴朗就出发。
English: Subsequently, they paid a large sum of money to hire one person, a flatlander surnamed Liu, and agreed to set out the next day if the weather was fine.

古文：不然，姑须之斜岩中。
现代文：如天气不好，就姑且在斜岩中等候。
English: If the weather is bad, we will wait in the rocks.

古文：乃自玉琯还，过马蹄石之东，入飞龙岩。
现代文：于是从玉琅岩往回走，经过马蹄石东面，进到飞龙岩。
English: So I walked back from the Jade Dragon Rock, passed the eastern side of the Horseshoe Rock, and entered the Dragon Rock.

古文：岩从山半陷下，内亦宽广，有石坡中悬，而无宛转之纹。
现代文：岩从半山腰凹陷下去，里边也同样宽广，如像斜岩外层的南岩，有个石坡悬在中间，但没有曲折纵横的石纹。
English: The rock sags down from the middle of the mountainside, and the inside is just as wide, like the southern rock of the outer layer of the inclined rock. There is a stone slope hanging in the middle, but there are no zigzag lines.

古文：岩外镌 飞龙岩 三字，岩内镌 仙楼岩 三字，俱宋人笔。
现代文：岩外刻有 飞龙岩 三个字，岩内刻着 仙楼岩 三个字，都是宋代人的笔迹。
English: On the outside of the rock, there are three characters of "Flying Dragon Rock" and on the inside of the rock, there are three characters of "Sennlou Rock." Both are the handwriting of the Song Dynasty.

古文：出洞，复逾马蹄石，复共三里而返斜岩。
现代文：出了岩洞，又越过马蹄石，又总共走三里便回到斜岩。
English: Out of the cave, over the horseshoe rock, and a total of three miles back to the slanting rock.

古文：明宗乃出火炬七枚，与顾仆分携之，仍爇炬前导。
现代文：明宗于是拿出准备好的七支火把，与顾仆分别带着，他点燃了火把仍走在前面作向导。
English: Mingzong then took out seven prepared torches and carried them separately from his attendants. He lit the torches and still walked ahead as a guide.

古文：始由岩左之下层捱隙历蹬而下，水从岩左飞出，注水流与人争级，级尽路竟，水亦无有。
现代文：开始时从岩洞左边的下层钻过孔隙踩着石瞪而下，水流从岩洞左边飞泻出来，向下倾注而与人争抢石瞪，石瞪走完了，水也不再有。
English: At the beginning, from the lower layer of the left side of the cave, the drillers drilled through the pores and stepped on the stalagmites to descend. The water flowed out from the left side of the cave, poured down and competed with people for the stalagmites. When the stalagmites were gone, there was no more water.

古文：东向而入，洞忽平广。
现代文：朝东往里走，洞忽然变得平而宽广。
English: Walking eastwards, the cave suddenly becomes flat and wide.

古文：既而石田鳞次，水满其中，遂塍上行，下遂坠成深壑。
现代文：旋即一块块石田像鱼鳞一样排列着，水流灌满田中，只能从田埂上行走，石田下面便是崖壁坠陷形成深谷。
English: Instantly, the stone fields were lined up like fish scales, the water flow filled the middle of the field, and you could only walk from the top of the field. Below the stone field was a cliff wall that had fallen down to form a deep valley.

古文：石田之右，上有石池，由池涉水，乃杨梅洞道也。
现代文：石田的右上方有个石池，由池中涉水过去，是到杨梅洞的路。
English: There is a stone pond on the upper right of Ishida. The path leading to Yangmei-dong winds through the pond.

古文：舍，仍东下洞底。
现代文：我们放弃了，仍旧往东朝洞底向下走。
English: We gave up and continued to walk eastwards towards the bottom of the cave.

古文：既而涉一溪，其水自西而东，向洞内流。
现代文：随后渡过一条溪水，那溪水自西而东向洞内流。
English: Then we crossed a stream, which flows from the west to the east into the cave.

古文：截流之后，循洞右行，路复平旷，洞愈宏阔。
现代文：横渡溪水后，顺着洞右走，路又变得平而宽广，洞更加宏大空阔。
English: After crossing the stream, walk along the right side of the cave. The road becomes flat and wide again, and the cave becomes more spacious.

古文：有大柱端立中央，直近洞顶，若人端拱者，名曰 石先生 。其东复有一小石竖立其侧，名曰 石学生 ，是为教学堂。
现代文：有一根大石柱端立在洞中央，直向上耸接近洞顶，若如两手合抱端坐着的人，名叫 石先生 ；它东面又有块小石块直立在侧面，名叫 石学生 。这里是教学堂。
English: There is a large stone pillar standing in the middle of the cave, rising straight up near the top of the cave, like a man sitting with his arms folded, called Mr. Stone; to the east of it, there is a small stone block standing upright on the side, called Stone Student. This is the classroom.

古文：又东为吊空石，一柱自顶下垂，半空而止，其端反卷而大。
现代文：又往东为吊空石，一根石柱从洞顶垂下来，伸到半空中，末端反卷起而粗大。
English: Also to the east is a hanging rock. A stone pillar hangs down from the top of the cave, stretching into mid-air, the end coiled up and bulky.

古文：又东有石莲花、擎天柱，皆不甚雄壮。
现代文：再往东有石莲花、擎天柱，都不是很雄伟壮观。
English: Further to the east, there are stone lotus flowers and cranes, neither of which are very majestic.

古文：于是过烂泥河，即前所涉之下流也。
现代文：从石莲花、擎天柱处渡过烂泥河，它就是前面所过那条溪水的下游。
English: I crossed the Muddy River from Shi Lian Hua and Qing Tian Zhu, which is the downstream of the stream I passed in front of.

古文：其处河底泥泞，深陷及膝，少缓，足陷不能拔。
现代文：所过之处河底泥泞，深陷到膝盖，稍微缓慢一些，脚便陷下去而不能拔出来。
English: The river bed is muddy everywhere you go. You sink in up to your knees. If you go a little slower, your feet sink in and you can't get them out.

古文：于是循洞左行，左壁崖片楞楞下垂，有上飞而为盖者，有下庋而为台者，有中凹而为床、为龛者，种种各有名称，然俚不足纪也。
现代文：过了烂泥河顺着洞左边走，左面石壁上的崖片棱角分明，往下垂挂着，有向上飞举而如盖子的，有架置在下面如平台的，有中间凹陷而如卧床、神完的，每块每片各有名称，然而很粗俗，不值得记录。
English: After the muddy river, walk along the left side of the cave. The cliffs on the stone wall on the left are angular and hanging down. Some are flying up like a lid, some are placed below like a platform, and some are sunken in the middle like a bed. Each piece has its own name, but it is very vulgar and not worth recording.

古文：南眺中央有一方柱，自洞底屏立而上，若巨笏ù竹片然。
现代文：往南眺望，洞中央有根方形石柱，若屏风从洞底向上聂立，仿佛一片巨大的朝笛。
English: Looking to the south, there is a square stone pillar in the center of the cave. If the screen stands up from the bottom of the cave, it looks like a huge morning flute.

古文：其东有一柱，亦自洞底上穹，与之并起，更高而巨。
现代文：它东面有根石柱，也是从洞底向上高高矗立，与它并峙，并且更高更大。
English: On the east side of it there is a stone pillar, which also rises high from the bottom of the cave, standing side by side with it, and is higher and larger.

古文：其端有一石旁坐石莲上，是为观音座。
现代文：它的顶端有一石如人一般地坐在石莲花上，这是观音座。
English: At the top of it, there is a stone dragon sitting on a stone lotus like a human being. This is Guanyin.

古文：由此西下，可北绕观音座后。
现代文：从这里往西下去，可以从北面绕到观音座后边。
English: If you go west from here, you can go around the back of the Kannon from the north.

古文：前烂泥河水亦绕观音座下西来，至此南折而去。
现代文：前面所过的烂泥河水也绕过观音座下面从西面流来，至此折向南去。
English: The muddy river water that passed in front of us also flowed from the west around the base of the Guanyin, and then turned south.

古文：洞亦转而南，愈宏崇，游者至此辄止，以水深难渡也。
现代文：洞也转往南，更加宏大高敞，游人通常到此便止步，因为水深难以渡过去。
English: The cave also turns to the south, becoming larger and more spacious. Tourists usually stop here because it is difficult to cross the water.

古文：余强明宗渡水，水深逾膝，既渡，南向行，水流于东，路循其西，四顾石柱参差高下，白如羊脂，是为雪洞。以其色名也。
现代文：我强迫明宗渡水，水淹过膝盖，然而不像烂泥河那样泥泞。渡过水后，向南行，水在东面流，路顺水流向西延伸，四下顾盼，石柱高高低低错落插耸，颜色如羊脂一样白，这是雪洞，因为洞中石柱的颜色而得名。
English: I forced Mingzong to cross the water. The water flooded my knees, but it was not as muddy as the muddy river. After crossing the water, I went south. The water flowed to the east, and the road extended to the west. I looked around. The stone pillars were interspersed high and low, and the color was as white as sheep's fat. This was a snow cave, which got its name from the color of the stone pillars in the cave.

古文：又前为风洞，以其洞转风多也。
现代文：又往前为风洞，因为洞内曲折风大而得名。
English: Further ahead is the wind tunnel, so named because of the windy twists and turns inside the cave.

古文：既而又当南下渡河，明宗以从来导游，每岁不下百次，曾无至此者。故前遇观音座，辄抽炬竹插路为志记号，以便归途。
现代文：起先我曾叫顾仆给我随身带了一双，以备烂了替换，顾仆则因渡河水深，竟然自作主张地把鞋子放在观音座下面，这样便不能再往前走，只能返回。
English: At first, I had asked my servant to bring me a pair of shoes to replace the worn ones. However, since the river was deep, my servant insisted on putting my shoes under the Kannon, so I couldn't go any further and had to go back.

古文：时余草履已坏，跣一足行，不能前而返。约所入已三里余矣。
现代文：到此处进入洞中大约已有三里多了。听说洞中的水流到广东连州后，就流出地面，这恐怕是想当然的说法，大抵上它是流入潇江的水流，然而所进到之处，水四处通达，这正是所说的此洞无底的表现。
English: It is said that the water in the cave flows out of the ground after it reaches Lianzhou in Guangdong, which is probably a matter of course. For the most part, it is the flow of water into the Xiao River. However, wherever it enters, the water reaches everywhere, which is exactly the so-called bottomless performance of this hole.

古文：还过教学堂，渡一重河，上石田，遂北入杨梅洞。
现代文：往回经过教学堂，渡过一重河，上到石田处，便往北进入杨梅洞。
English: I went back and forth through the classroom, crossed a heavy river, went up to Ishida, and then went north into Yangmei-dong.

古文：先由石田涉石池，池两崖石峡如门，池水满浸其中，涉者水亦逾膝，然其下皆石底平整，四旁俱无寸土。
现代文：先由石田涉水过了石池，池两边崖壁对峙形成门一样的石峡，水浸满池中，渡水时水也没过膝盖，然而下面都是平整的石底，四周都没有寸土。
English: First, I waded through a stone pond from Ishida. The cliff walls on both sides of the pond faced each other to form a door-like stone gorge. Water flooded the pond, and when crossing the water, the water did not go over my knees. However, the bottom was a flat stone bottom, and there was no soil around.

古文：入峡门，有大石横其隘。
现代文：进入石峡门中，有大石头横阻在最狭窄险要之处。
English: Entering the stone canyon gate, there are large stones blocking the narrowest and most dangerous place.

古文：透隘入，复得平洞，宽平广博。
现代文：穿过此处往里进去，又见到个平直的洞，宽广平整宏大。
English: Passing through here and going inside, I saw a straight hole, wide, flat and magnificent.

古文：其北有飞石平铺，若楼阁然，有隙下窥，则石薄如板，其下复穹然成洞，水从下层奔注而入，即前烂泥诸河之上流也。
现代文：洞北有飞石平铺着，若楼阁一般，石块上有缝隙，从缝隙中向下窥视，石块薄如木板，下面又高高隆起形成洞，水从下层奔流而入，那水就是前面所经过的烂泥河等各河流的上游。
English: To the north of the cave, there are flat-paved stepping stones. If it were a mansion, there would be a gap in the stone. Peep down from the gap. The stone is as thin as a plank. Below, it rises high to form a hole. Water rushes in from the lower layer. That water is the upstream of the rivers such as the Mud River that passes in front.

古文：洞中产石，圆如弹丸，而凹面有蝟同 猬 纹， 杨梅 之名以此。
现代文：洞中产一种石头，圆如弹丸，凹陷下去的那面有如刺猾身上的刺一样的石纹， 杨梅 的名称由此而得。
English: The cave produces a kind of stone, round like a projectile, and the side that sinks down has a stone pattern like a thorn on a thorny body, hence the name Yangmei.

古文：然其色本黄白，说者谓自洞中水底视，皆殷紫，此附会也。
现代文：此山坞东面为箫韶峰，西面就是斜岩，南面是圣殿西边的山岭，北面为马蹄石，都是外围高里边低，如同锅底，四面的水都潜注到地下，只是不见注入的孔隙而已。
English: The east side of this dock is the peak, the west side is the oblique rock, the south side is the mountain ridge west of the temple, and the north side is the horseshoe stone. They are all high on the outside and low on the inside, like the bottom of a pot. The water on all sides is poured into the ground, but there are no pores for injection.

古文：出洞，已薄暮，烧枝炙衣，炊粥而食，遂卧岩中。
现代文：出洞已是傍晚，烧着树枝烘烤衣服，又煮些粥吃，便在岩中卧下。
English: It was already late afternoon when they emerged from the cave. They burned twigs to bake clothes, cooked some porridge to eat, and then lay down in the rock.

古文：终夜瀑声、雨声，杂不能辨，诘朝起视，则阴雨霏霏也。
现代文：一整夜瀑声、雨声交响，混杂而不能分辨，早晨起来一看，则阴雨霏霏。
English: All night long, the sounds of waterfalls and rain are a symphony, mixed and indistinguishable. When I get up in the morning, it's cloudy and rainy.

古文：此岩之瀑，非若他处悬崖泻峡而下，俱从覆石之底，悬穿窦下注，若漏卮漏斗然。
现代文：此岩中的瀑流，不像其他地方那样悬挂在崖壁间向深峡倾泻而下，而都是从卧覆的石头底悬空而下，穿过小洞向下流泻，如有漏洞的酒器一般。
English: The waterfalls in this rock, unlike those elsewhere, do not hang between the cliff walls and cascade down into the deep gorge, but are suspended from the recumbent stone bottom, flowing down through small holes, like a leaky wine container.

古文：其悬于北岩上洞之前者，二瀑皆然而最大；其悬于右岩洼洞之上者，一瀑而有数窍，较之左瀑虽小，内有出自悬石之端者一，出于石底之窦而斜喷者二，此又最奇也。
现代文：悬在北岩上洞前的，两条瀑布都如上面所说，而且最大；悬在右崖洼洞上的，一条瀑布经几个小孔泻下来，比起左边的瀑布虽然小些，但瀑布从悬吊着的石头顶端流泻出一股，从石头底下的小洞中斜喷出两股，这又是最奇特的。
English: Suspended in front of the cave on the north rock, the two waterfalls are as mentioned above, and the largest; hanging on the right cliff cave, a waterfall falls down through several small holes, although smaller than the waterfall on the left, but the waterfall pours out one stream from the top of the hanging stone, and two streams from the small hole under the stone, which is the most peculiar.

古文：二十五日静坐岩中，寒甚。
现代文：二十五日清静安闲地呆在斜岩中，天气非常寒冷。
English: For twenty-five days we stayed quietly and leisurely in the sloping rock. The weather was very cold.

古文：闲则观瀑，寒则煨枝，饥则炊粥，以是为竟日程。
现代文：无事就观赏瀑布，冷了便烧树枝烘烤，肚饿则煮稀粥吃，就这样度过了一整天。
English: We spent the whole day admiring the waterfall, roasting twigs when it was cold, and eating gruel when we were hungry.

古文：二十六日雨仍不止。
现代文：二十六日雨依然不停。
English: On the 26th, it continued to rain.

古文：下午，持盖往圣殿，仍由来路北逾岭，稍东，转出箫韶峰之北。
现代文：下午，打着伞去圣殿，依旧从来路往北翻过岭，稍向东走，转出箫韶峰北面。
English: In the afternoon, I went to the holy temple with an umbrella. I still walked north along the road, crossed the ridge, walked a little east, and turned north of the peak.

古文：盖箫韶自南而北，屏峙于斜岩之前，上分两歧，北尽即为舜陵矣。
现代文：箫韶峰自南而北纵贯，屏风般耸立在斜岩前，峰上部分为两支，它的北面尽头处就是舜陵。
English: The Lushan peak runs vertically from south to north, towering like a screen in front of the sloping rock. The upper part of the peak is two branches, and the northern end of it is Fuling.

古文：陵前数峰环绕，正中者上岐而为三，稍左者顶有石独耸。
现代文：陵前环绕着几座山峰，正中峰的上部分成三支，稍靠左边的一峰顶上有石头独立耸起。
English: In front of the mausoleum, there are several peaks surrounding it. The upper part of the middle peak is divided into three branches, and there is a peak on the left that has stones rising independently.

古文：庙中僧指上岐者娥皇峰，独耸者为女英峰，恐未必然。
现代文：庙中僧人指着上部的分支说是娥皇峰，顶上有石头独立耸起的是女英峰，恐怕未必正确。
English: The monks in the temple pointed to the upper branch and said that it was the E Emperor Peak, and the stone on the top was the Nyoei Peak, which may not be correct.

古文：盖此中古祠今殿，峰岫不一，不止于九，而九峰之名，土人亦莫能辨之矣。
现代文：大概这地方的古舜祠和如今的舜殿，分别在不同的峰峦，峰不止九座，而九峰的名称，当地人也不能分辨清。
English: Presumably, the ancient Ancestral Hall and the present Ancestral Hall in this place are located on different peaks. There are more than nine peaks, and the names of the nine peaks cannot be distinguished by the locals.

古文：陵有二大树夹道，若为双阙然，其大俱四人围，庙僧呼为 珠树 ，而不识其字云。
现代文：陵墓边两棵大树夹道而立，若双网一般，都有四人合围那么粗，庙中僧人称之为 珠树 ，但他不知道字的写法。
English: At the edge of the mausoleum, two large trees stand side by side. If the double nets are normal, they are as thick as four people together. The monks in the temple call them "beads," but they don't know how to write the words.

古文：结子大如指，去壳可食，谓其既枯而复荣，未必然也。
现代文：结的果实大如指头，剥掉壳可以吃，传说树本来已经干枯了，后又重新发芽开花，我想未必如此。
English: The fruits are finger-sized and can be eaten after the husk has been peeled off. The legend says that the tree had dried out and then sprouted and bloomed again, but I don't think that's true.

古文：两旁桫本甚巨，中亦有大四围者，寻丈而上，即分岐高耸。
现代文：树的两旁生长着巨大的渺木树，其中也有四人围抱那么大的，在八尺到一丈左右以上，就分出枝权高高耸起。
English: On either side of the tree grew huge elm trees, some of which were so large that four people could hold them in their arms. Above eight feet to one height, they branched out and towered high.

古文：由二珠树中入，有屋三楹，再上一楹。
现代文：由两棵珠树中间进去，有三间屋子，再往上又有一间。
English: In the middle of two beech trees, there are three rooms, and one room further up.

古文：上楹额云 舞干遗化 ，有虞帝牌位。
现代文：上面那间的门额上写着 舞干遗化 ，屋中有虞帝的牌位。
English: On the front of the door of the room above, it says "Dance-inherited," and there is a card of Emperor Yudi in the room.

古文：下三楹额云 虞帝寝殿 ，列五六碑，俱世庙、神庙二朝之间者，无古迹也。
现代文：下面三间的门额上写着 虞帝寝殿 ，屋中排列着五六块碑，都是世庙、神庙之间立的，没有古迹。
English: On the front of the door of the three rooms below is written "The Emperor's bedchamber," and there are five or six monuments lined up in the room, all of which stand between the World Temple and the God Temple, and there are no monuments.

古文：二室俱敝而隘，殊为不称。
现代文：两处房屋都破旧狭窄，与虞帝的身份地位极不相称。
English: Both houses are dilapidated and cramped, and are far from being commensurate with Emperor Yu's status.

古文：问窆宫落葬之地何在？帝原与何侯飞升而去，向无其处也。
现代文：询问虞帝落葬的地方在哪里，才知虞帝原来是与何侯一道成仙升天的，向来没有落葬处。
English: After inquiring about the place where Emperor Yu was buried, it was learned that Emperor Yu had originally ascended to heaven together with Ho Hou, and there had never been a burial place.

古文：是兹地乃舜鼎湖，非陵寝也。且言苍梧在九疑南二百里，即崩苍梧，葬九疑亦无可疑者。
现代文：于是遍观各碑，碑上刻的都是些诗和祭祀时祷告的话语，只有慈溪县人颜鲸撰的一篇碑文对虞帝的事迹叙说得较多，这块碑已经断了，碑文中说，此地就是古代的三苗地方，虞帝南巡到苍梧，此心就是为了和平、摒弃战争而 舞干羽 的心。
English: Therefore, he looked at all the monuments. The inscriptions on the monuments were all poems and words of prayer at the time of sacrifice. Only an inscription written by Renyanwhale of Cixi County told more about the deeds of Emperor Yu. This monument has been broken. The inscription said that this place was the ancient Sanmiao region. Emperor Yu traveled south to Gorgo. This heart is the heart that dances for peace and abandons war.

古文：唐元次山之说似未必然，其说种种姑存之。惟寝殿前除露立一碑甚钜，余意此必古碑，冒雨趋视之，乃此山昔为瑶人所据，当道剿而招抚之者。其右即为官廨，亦颓敝将倾，内有一碑已碎，而用木匡其四旁。
现代文：至于说这地方在四方部落首领管辖外，虞帝以八九十岁的高龄，不应当会作这样远距离的巡游，这是他们不知道道德完善、智能超越的虞帝有最公平而无差别的思想。中原的诸侯，统统到四方部落首领管辖的区域内朝见虞帝，而南方各少数民族地区荒凉僻远，所以他便不怕劳苦，亲自巡视，从而感化这里的民众。这种说法似乎可取。只有陵墓正殿前的台阶边露天立着一块巨大的碑，我想这必定是古碑，于是冒雨疾奔过去观看，碑文说，此山过去被瑶族人占据，当权者征剿而招抚了他们。碑的右边就是官署，也是破败不堪即将倾塌，里面有块碑已经破碎，有人用木架子框在它的四周。
English: As for saying that this place is outside the jurisdiction of the tribal chiefs of the four directions, Emperor Yu, at the ripe old age of eighty or ninety, should not have made such a long-distance cruise. This is because they do not know that Emperor Yu, who is morally perfect and intellectually superior, has the most fair and indiscriminate thoughts. The princes of the Central Plains all came to see Emperor Yu in the area under the jurisdiction of the tribal chiefs of the four directions, while the ethnic minority areas in the south are desolate and remote, so he was not afraid of hard work and personally inspected them, thereby inspiring the people here. This argument seems to be desirable. Only a huge monument

古文：亟读之，乃道州九疑山《永福禅寺记》，淳熙七年庚子公元年道州司法参军长乐郑舜卿撰，知湖、梧州军州事河内向子廓书。
现代文：我赶忙阅读，原来是道州九疑山《永福禅寺记》，它是淳熙七年庚子道州司法参军长乐县人郑舜卿撰，知湖州、梧州军州事河内县人向子廓书写的。
English: I hurried to read it. It turned out to be "Record of Yongfu Zen Temple" by Jiu Qishan of Daozhou. It was written by Zheng Yuqing, a member of the Judiciary and Military Council of Daozhou, Changle County, in the 7th year of Sun Hei, and written by Xiang Ziguo, a member of the Military Council of Huzhou and Wuzhou, Hanoi County.

古文：书乃八分体，遒逸殊甚。
现代文：字是汉代的隶书体，十分遒劲飘逸。
English: The characters are Han Dynasty script, very vigorous and flowing.

古文：即圣殿古碑，从永福移出者，然与陵殿无与，不过好事者惜其字画之妙，而移存之耳。
现代文：它是圣殿中的古碑，是从永福寺中移出来的，然而与陵殿不相干，不过是爱多事的人爱惜碑上字画的美妙，而移出来，以便保存它罢了。
English: It is an ancient monument in the holy temple, it was moved from the Yongfu Temple, but it has nothing to do with the mausoleum. It was just moved to preserve it by an adventurous person who cherished the beauty of the words and pictures on the monument.

古文：然此廨将圮，不几为永福之续耶？
现代文：但这官署快要倒塌，不是将要遭到与永福寺同样的结局吗？
English: But isn't this government agency about to collapse and meet the same fate as the Yongfu Temple?

古文：廨后有室三楹，中置西方圣人，两头各一僧栖焉，亦荒落之甚。
现代文：官署后有三间房屋，屋中置放着佛陀的塑像，两头两间内各有一个僧人住着，也是荒寂冷落得很。
English: There are three houses behind the government office. A statue of Buddha is placed in the middle of the house, and a monk lives in each of the two rooms at the two ends. It is also very desolate.

古文：乃冒雨返斜岩，濯足炙衣，晚餐而卧。
现代文：于是冒雨返回斜岩，洗脚烘衣，吃了晚餐就睡下。
English: So he braved the rain to return to the sloping rock, washed his feet, dried his clothes, ate dinner and went to sleep.

