古文：上章敦牂，一年。
现代文：上章敦牂，一年。
English: Dunsanyi Shangzhang, one year.

古文：太宗简文皇帝上大宝元年
现代文：梁简文帝大宝元年
English: Emperor Liang Jianwen in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，正月，辛亥朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季正月，辛亥朔，梁朝大赦天下，改年号为大宝。
English: In the first month of spring, Xinhai Shuo, the Liang Dynasty was pardoned by the world, and the name of the year was changed to Dabao.

古文：陈霸先发始兴，至大庾岭，蔡路养将二万人军于南野以拒之。
现代文：陈霸先率军从始兴出发，抵达大庾岭。蔡路养统率两万人驻扎在南野进行抵抗。
English: Chen Ba led the first army from Shixing and arrived in Dalatangling. Cai Lu led 20,000 people stationed in Nan'an to resist.

古文：路养妻侄兰陵萧摩诃，年十三，单骑出战，无敢当者。
现代文：蔡路养的妻侄兰陵人萧摩诃，年方十三，单骑出战，没人敢抵挡他。
English: Cai Luyang's wife's nephew, Lanling man Xiao Maqian, aged thirteen, rode out to fight alone. No one dared to resist him.

古文：杜僧明马被伤，陈霸先救之，授以所乘马。僧明上马复战，众军因而乘之。路养大败，脱身走。
现代文：杜僧明的战马受了伤，陈霸先救了他，并把自己骑的马给他；杜僧明跃上马又投入战斗，众军乘着他的气势勇猛进击，蔡路养大败，脱身逃跑了。
English: Du Xiangming's horse was injured, Chen Ba first rescued him and gave him the horse he was riding; Du Xiangming jumped on the horse and went into battle, the army took advantage of his momentum to attack bravely, Cai Lu Ya was defeated and escaped.

古文：霸先进军南康，湘东王绎承制授霸先明威将军、交州刺史。
现代文：陈霸先于是进军南康，湘东王萧绎以皇帝之令授予陈霸先明威将军、交州刺史。
English: Chen Baxian then marched into Nankang, and the king of eastern Hunan, Xiaoyan, awarded Chen Baxian the title of Mingwei General and Jiaozhou Historian by order of the emperor.

古文：戊辰，东魏进太原公高洋位丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王。
现代文：戊辰，东魏晋升太原公高洋为丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、齐郡王。
English: Boshen, Eastern Wei promoted Taiyuan Prince Gaoyang to chancellor, governor of the armies at home and abroad, record of records, grand march, and king of Qi County.

古文：庚午，邵陵王纶至江夏，郢州刺史南平王恪郊迎，以州让之，纶不受；乃推纶为假黄钺，都督中外诸军事，承制置百官。
现代文：庚午，邵陵王萧纶率人马到达江夏，郢州刺史南平王萧恪带人到郊外恭迎，并表示要把郢州让给他。萧纶不接受；于是推举萧纶为假黄钺、都督中外诸军事，以皇帝的旨意设置百官。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Jie arrived in Jiangxia with a large number of people. Nanping Wang Xiao Jie led people to the suburbs to welcome him, and said that he would give Zhangzhou to him. Xiao Jie did not accept; he then nominated Xiao Jie as a false Huang Jie, the military governor of China and other countries, and set up hundreds of officials according to the emperor's will.

古文：魏杨忠围安陆，柳仲礼驰归救之。
现代文：西魏杨忠围攻安陆，柳仲礼急忙率军驰归救援。
English: The Western Wei Yangzhong besieged Anlu, and Liu Zhongli hurriedly led his army to the rescue.

古文：诸将恐仲礼至则安陆难下，请急攻之。
现代文：诸将担心柳仲礼的援兵抵达后安陆就难以攻克了，都要求赶快加紧进攻。
English: The generals were worried that it would be difficult to capture Anlu after the arrival of Liu Zhongli, and requested that the attack be accelerated.

古文：忠曰： 攻守势殊，未可猝拔；若引日劳师，表里受敌，非计也。
现代文：杨忠说： 攻和守所处的情势很不相同，安陆是不能一下子就攻克的；如果我军拖延时日，久攻疲劳，援兵一来，里外受敌，这可不是好办法。
English: Yang Zhong said: The situation of attack and defense is very different. It is not possible to conquer the land all at once. It is not a good way for our army to delay the time and fatigue the attack for a long time. When reinforcements come, they will be attacked from both inside and outside.

古文：南人多习水军，不闲野战，仲礼师在近路，吾出其不意，以奇兵袭之，彼怠我奋，一举可克。
现代文：南方人大都习惯于水战，对陆地野战不熟悉。柳仲礼的军队就在附近，我军出其不意，以奇兵突袭，敌军懈怠，我军奋勇，一举可克。
English: Most people in the south are accustomed to water battles and are not familiar with land field battles. Liu Zhongli's army is nearby, our army is surprised and makes a surprise attack, the enemy army is slack, our army is brave and makes a great leap.

古文：克仲礼，则安陆不攻自拔，诸城可传檄定也。 
现代文：打败了柳仲礼，那么安陆就不攻自破了，诸城也就可以传檄而定。 
English: If Liu Zhongli is defeated, then Anlu will not be defeated, and the cities will also be able to pass the message.

古文：乃选骑二千，衔枚夜进，败仲礼于漴头，获仲礼及其弟子礼，尽俘其众。
现代文：于是精选两千骑兵，为了防止喧嚣而暴露意图，令所有的人口中衔着小木棍，乘夜偷袭，在头把柳仲礼打败了，促获了柳仲礼和他弟弟柳子礼，把他的军队全部俘虏了。
English: Therefore, he selected two thousand cavalrymen, in order to prevent the noise and expose the intention, made all the population hold small wooden sticks, took the night to sneak attack, defeated Liu Zhongli at the head, promoted Liu Zhongli and his brother Liu Zili, and captured all his army.

古文：马岫以安陆，别将王叔孙以竟陵，皆降于忠。
现代文：马岫献出了安陆，别将王叔孙献出了竟陵，都投降了杨忠。
English: Ma Xuan gave up Anlu, and Wang Shusun gave up Gongling, and both of them surrendered to Yang Zhong.

古文：于是汉东之地尽入于魏。
现代文：从此汉东之地全部归于西魏。
English: From then on, the eastern part of the Han Dynasty all belonged to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：广陵人来嶷说前广陵太守祖皓曰： 董绍先轻而无谋，人情不附。袭而杀之，此壮士之任耳。
现代文：广陵人来嶷去游说前广陵太守祖皓说： 董绍先为人轻慢而缺乏谋略，人心不归附他，如果您发兵袭击并歼灭他，这可是壮士应有的义举呀。
English: Guangling people came and went to lobby the former Guangling governor Zu Yuan said: "Dong Shao was a frivolous person and lacked strategy. People's hearts did not belong to him. If you sent troops to attack and destroy him, this would be a righteous deed that a strong man should do."

古文：今欲纠帅义勇，奉戴府君。
现代文：现在我想召集率领义勇之士，尊奉拥戴您去做这件大事。
English: Now, I would like to call on all the brave people to lead, respect and support you to do this great thing.

古文：若其克捷，可立桓、文之勋；必天未悔祸，犹足为梁室忠臣。 
现代文：如果这件事成功了，可以建立齐桓公、晋文公那样的千古勋业；即使他气数未尽，此事未成，也足以表示您是梁室的忠臣。 
English: If this matter succeeds, it will be possible to establish a thousand-year-old distinguished career like that of Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen; even if he is not exhausted and this matter is not accomplished, it is enough to show that you are a loyal subject of Liangshu.

古文：皓曰： 此仆所愿也。 
现代文：祖皓说： 这正是我的心愿。 
English: The ancestor said, "This is exactly what I want."

古文：乃相与纠合勇士，得百馀人。癸酉，袭广陵，斩南兗州刺史董绍先；据城，驰檄远近，推前太子舍人萧勔为刺史，仍结东魏为援。
现代文：于是和来嶷一起策划纠合勇士一百余人，癸酉，袭击广陵，杀了南兖州刺史董绍先；占据南兖州，向远近各方发布告示，推举前太子舍人萧勔为刺史，仍与东魏联合。
English: So, together with Lai Xuan, he planned to entangle more than a hundred warriors,, attacked Guangling, and killed Dong Shao Xian, the statesman of South Luzhou; occupied South Luzhou, and issued a notice to all parties near and far, nominating Xiao Xuan, the former prince's son, as the statesman, and still united with the East Wei Dynasty.

古文：皓，恒之之子；勔，勃之兄也。
现代文：祖皓是祖暅的儿子。萧勔是萧勃的哥哥。
English: Zu Rong is the son of Zu Rong. Xiao Rong is the older brother of Xiao Bo.

古文：乙亥，景遣郭元建帅众奄至，皓婴城固守。
现代文：乙亥，侯景派郭元建带兵攻打南兖州，祖皓环城固守。
English: Eihei, Houjing sent Guo Yuanjian to attack Nanluozhou with his troops, Zuyu Huancheng held firm.

古文：二月，魏杨忠乘胜至石城，欲进逼江陵，湘东王绎遣舍人庾恪说忠曰： 詧来伐叔而魏助之，何以使天下归心！ 
现代文：二月，西魏杨忠乘胜率兵抵达石城，意欲进逼江陵。湘东王萧绎派舍人庾恪去劝说杨忠，说： 萧詧目无尊长，竟然进攻叔父，而魏国帮助他，这怎么能使天下归心！ 
English: In February, Yang Zhong of the Western Wei Dynasty arrived in Shicheng with a victorious contingent of soldiers, intending to force his way into Jiangling. King Xiao Yu of the Eastern Hunan Dynasty sent a subordinate to persuade Yang Zhong, saying: Xiao Yu had no dignity, he attacked his uncle, and Wei helped him, how can this make the world come to its senses!

古文：忠遂停湕北。
现代文：杨忠听了，就停兵于湕北。
English: When Yang Zhong heard this, he halted his troops in northern Anhui Province.

古文：绎遣舍人王孝祀等送子方略为质以求和，魏人许之。
现代文：萧绎派舍人王孝祀送儿子萧方略为人质以求和，西魏人答应了。
English: Xiao Yuanyuan sent his concubine Wang Xiaoxi to send his son Xiao Fangliu as a hostage to sue for peace, and the West Wei people agreed.

古文：绎与忠盟曰： 魏以石城为封，梁以安陆为界，请同附庸，并送质子，贸迁有无，永敦邻睦。 
现代文：萧绎与杨忠订立盟约，约定 魏国以石城为封疆，梁国以安陆为国界，请求按照附庸关系，互送儿子为人质，发展贸易以通有无，永远作为邻邦和睦相处。 
English: Xiao Yu entered into a treaty with Yang Zhong, stipulating that Wei would use Shicheng as a fief, and Liang would use Anlu as a national border. They requested that, in accordance with the vassal relationship, they would send each other's sons as hostages, develop trade with all and sundry, and forever live in harmony as neighbors.

古文：忠乃还。宕昌王梁弥定为其宗人獠甘所袭，弥定奔魏，獠甘自立。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥定被他宗族里的人獠甘所袭击，梁弥定奔逃到西魏，獠甘自立为王。
English: Liang Yading, the king of Tangchang, was attacked by a member of his clan, Qigang. Liang Yading fled to West Wei, and Qigang became king.

古文：羌酋傍乞铁据渠株川，与渭州民郑五丑合诸羌以叛魏。
现代文：羌族酋长傍乞铁匆盘据渠株川，与谓州人郑五醜纠合诸羌起兵背叛西魏。
English: The chiefs of the Yi people begged for iron and hurried to get a foothold in the Zhu River, and entangled with the so-called statesman Zheng Wugyue, who raised an army to betray the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：丞相泰使大将军宇文贵、凉州刺史史宁讨之，擒斩铁、五丑。
现代文：丞相宇文泰派大将军宇文贵、凉州刺史史宁发兵征讨，擒斩傍乞铁匆和郑五醜。
English: The prime minister, Yu Wentai, dispatched the generals, Yu Wengui and Liangzhou Zhishi Shining, to raise an army to fight against the rebels, and decapitate Byeongpyeong, Tiexu and Zheng Wugu.

古文：宁别击獠甘，破之，獠甘将百骑奔生羌巩廉玉。
现代文：史宁又移兵攻打獠甘，打败了他，獠甘带领百名骑兵投奔远在塞外而不辖属于西魏的羌族首领巩廉玉。
English: Suning also moved troops to attack Hagan, defeating him. Hagan led a hundred cavalrymen to rush far outside of Serbia and not under the jurisdiction of Gong Lianyu, the leader of the Yi people who belonged to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：宁复纳弥定于宕昌，置岷州于渠株川，进击巩廉玉，斩獠甘，虏廉玉送长安。
现代文：史宁重新迎立梁弥定为宕昌王，在渠株川设置岷州，派兵进击巩廉玉，斩獠甘，俘虏了巩廉玉，把他送往长安。
English: Sning re-established Liang Mi as the king of Tangchang, set up the state of Bozhou in Quzhu River, sent troops to attack Gong Lianyu, defeated him, captured Gong Lianyu and sent him to Chang'an.

古文：侯景遣任约、于庆等帅众二万攻诸籓。
现代文：侯景派任约、于庆等带兵两万攻打梁室诸蕃王。
English: Houjing sent Renjo, Yuqing and others with 20,000 soldiers to attack Liangshu Zhuye Wang.

古文：邵陵王纶欲救河东王誉，而兵粮不足，乃致书于湘东王绎曰： 天时地利，不及人和，况乎手足肱支，岂可相害！
现代文：邵陵王萧纶想救援河东王萧誉，但兵粮不足，于是写信给湘东王萧绎说： 天时、地利也比不上人和，何况弟兄犹如手足股肱，岂可相互损害！
English: Shaoling King Xiaoyan wanted to rescue the King of Hedong, Xiaoyuan, but there was not enough food for the soldiers, so he wrote to the King of Hunan, Xiaoyuan, saying: Time and place are not comparable to people, and brothers are like limbs and limbs, how can they harm each other!

古文：今社稷危耻，创巨痛深，唯应剖心尝胆，泣血枕戈，其馀小忿，或宜容贳。
现代文：现在国家处于危难，蒙受耻辱，创伤巨大，痛苦殊深，我辈只有剖心尝胆，泣血枕戈，发奋救危雪耻，其余的小怨恨，应该能互相谅解才是。
English: Now that the country is in danger, suffering humiliation, huge trauma, and extremely deep pain, our generation only has to be brave, weep blood, work hard to save the danger, and the rest of the small grudges should be able to understand each other.

古文：若外难未除，家祸仍构，料今访古，未或不亡。
现代文：如果外难未除，仍然在家族中构祸不止，观今鉴古，没有不灭亡的道理。
English: If the external difficulties are not eliminated, there will still be more and more disasters in the family. Looking at the present and the past, there is no reason not to perish.

古文：夫征战之理，唯求克胜；至于骨肉之战，愈胜愈酷，捷则非功，败则有丧，劳兵损义，亏失多矣。
现代文：战争的道理是不顾一切，只求能胜；至于骨肉相残的战争，则愈是获胜愈加残酷，大捷也不是什么功劳，战败则必然有所损失。动用武力，损害人伦道义，亏失实在是太多了。
English: The principle of war is to do whatever it takes, only to win; as for the war between brothers and sisters, the more victory, the more cruel it is, great victory is not a merit, defeat is bound to have a loss. The use of force, the damage to human ethics and morality, the loss is really too much.

古文：侯景之军所以未窥江外者，良为籓屏盘固，宗镇强密。
现代文：侯景的军队之所以未敢进犯长江以北，实在是因为我们梁朝诸藩互为屏护，象磐石一样牢固，宗室的镇守强大而严密。
English: The reason why Houjing's army did not dare to invade north of the Yangtze River was because we, the Liang Dynasty and all the domains, protected each other like a screen, as solid as a rock, and the town's defense was strong and strict.

古文：弟若陷洞庭，不戢兵刃，雍州疑迫，何以自安，必引进魏军以求形援。
现代文：您如果攻陷洞庭而不约束兵刃，雍州方面必然怀疑您将要进逼，无以自安，势必引进西魏的军队以为援手。
English: If you attack Dongting without restraining your sword, the Yongzhou side will inevitably suspect that you are going to push forward, and will have no peace of mind, and will inevitably introduce the West Wei army as a helping hand.

古文：弟若不安，家国去矣。
现代文：这样必将给您造成威胁。您如果感到不安定，那么梁朝的天下就完了。
English: If my younger brother feels insecure and attacks Dongting, our country will perish.

古文：必希解湘州之围，存社稷之计。 
现代文：请您一定解除湘州之围，以保存国家社稷。 
English: Please make sure to lift the siege of Hunan to save the national treasure.

古文：绎复书，陈誉过恶不赦，且曰： 詧引杨忠来相侵逼，颇遵谈笑，用却秦军，曲直有在，不复自陈。
现代文：萧绎复信，逐条陈述萧誉过大恶极，法所不赦，并且说： 萧詧如果勾引杨忠来相侵逼的话，那我将象鲁仲连谈笑而却秦军一样轻而易举地打败他们。
English: Xiao Yu replied to the letter, stating step by step that Xiao Yu's reputation was too evil for the Fa to forgive, and said: "If Xiao Yu lures Yang Zhong into aggression, then I will defeat them as easily as Lu Zhonglian talked and laughed, but the Qin Army did not."

古文：临湘旦平，暮便即路。 
现代文：是非曲直明摆着，我就不再自陈了。临湘早上被攻下，晚上我就上路。 
English: With the rights and wrongs clearly laid out, I no longer felt the need to explain myself. I was captured in the morning near Hunan, and I was on my way in the evening.

古文：纶得书，投之于案，慷慨流涕曰 天下之事，一至于斯！
现代文：萧纶收到信，看后扔到案几上，慷慨流涕地说： 天下之事，竟然糟到这个地步！
English: Xiao Yao received the letter, looked at it, threw it on the docket, and said generously, "How can things get so bad!

古文：湘州若败，吾亡无日矣！ 
现代文：湘州如果陷落，我就快灭亡了！ 
English: If Xiangzhou falls, I will almost perish!

古文：侯景遣侯子鉴帅舟师八千，自帅徒兵一万，攻广陵，三日，克之，执祖皓，缚而射之，箭遍体，然后车裂以徇；城中无少长皆埋之于地，驰马射而杀之。
现代文：侯景派侯子鉴率领水军八千人，自率步兵一万人，攻打广陵。打了三天，城破，抓住了祖皓，把他缚住用箭射他，箭镞丛集遍体，然后再把他车裂示众。城中民众不分老少都被埋在地里，让士兵来回纵马奔驰，射而杀之。
English: Hou Jing sent Hou Zi Jian to lead eight thousand sailors and ten thousand infantrymen to attack Guangling. After three days of fighting, the city was broken, Zou was captured, he was tied up and shot with arrows, the arrowheads were scattered all over his body, and then he was torn to pieces. The people in the city, both young and old, were buried in the ground, and the soldiers rode horses back and forth to shoot and kill them.

古文：以子鉴为南兗州刺史，镇广陵。景还建康。
现代文：侯景任命侯子鉴当南兖州刺史，镇守广陵，他自己回建康。
English: Hou Jing appointed Hou Zi Jian to be the governor of South Luzhou Province, the town guard of Guangling, and he himself returned to Jiankang.

古文：丙戌，以安陆王大春为东扬州刺史。省吴州。
现代文：丙戌，侯景任命安陆王侯大春为东扬州刺史，裁省吴州。
English: King Anlu was appointed as the governor of East Yangzhou and the governor of Wuzhou by King Pingyu and King Houjing.

古文：乙巳，以尚书仆射王克为左仆射。
现代文：乙巳，侯景任命尚书仆射王克为左仆射。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Shang Shu's servant Sha Wangke as his left-hand man.

古文：庚寅，东魏以尚书令高隆之为太保。
现代文：庚寅，东魏任命尚书令高隆之为太保。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Yin appointed Gao Long as Taipo.

古文：宣城内史杨白华进据安吴，侯景遣于子悦等帅众攻之，不克。
现代文：宣城内史杨白华进据安吴。侯景派遣于子悦率众攻打安吴，没打下。
English: In Xuancheng, Shi Yang Baihua entered An Wu. Hou Jing sent Yu Ziyue to lead the crowd to attack An Wu, but failed.

古文：东魏行台辛术将兵入寇，围阳平，不克。
现代文：东魏行台辛术带兵入境进犯，围困阳平，没打下。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty marched into Taiwan, invaded the country with troops, and besieged Yangping, but failed to take it.

古文：侯景纳上女溧阳公主，甚爱之。
现代文：侯景娶简文帝的女儿溧阳公主，非常喜爱她。
English: Hou Jing married Emperor Jianwen's daughter, Princess Fenyang, and loved her very much.

古文：三月，甲申，景请上禊宴于乐游苑，帐饮三日。
现代文：三月，甲申，侯景请皇上修褉宴集于乐游苑，在帐幕里宴饮三天。
English: In March, in Jiaxing, Houjing invited the emperor to hold a banquet at Le Youyuan, and the banquet lasted for three days.

古文：上还宫，景与公主共据御床，南面并坐，群臣文武列坐侍宴。
现代文：简文帝还宫后，侯景与溧阳公主一起占据御床，南面并坐，让群臣文武列坐侍宴。
English: After Emperor Jianwen returned to the palace, Prince Houjing and Princess Puyang occupied the throne together, sitting side by side on the south side, allowing the courtiers to sit in a row at the banquet.

古文：庚申，东魏进丞相洋爵为齐王。
现代文：庚申，东魏晋升丞相高洋为齐王。
English: Goshun, the East Wei promoted the chancellor Gao Yang as the king of Qi.

古文：临川内史始兴王毅等击庄铁，鄱阳王范遣其将巴西侯瑱救之，毅等败死。
现代文：临川内史始兴人王毅等进攻庄铁。鄱阳王萧范派他的部将巴西人侯瑱去救援，王毅等兵败身死。
English: Wang Yi and others from the Linchuan Inner History Society attacked Zhuangye. King Xiao Fan of Shenyang sent his general, the Brazilian Hou Yi, to the rescue. Wang Yi and the other soldiers were defeated and killed.

古文：鄱阳世子嗣与任约战于三章，约败走；嗣因徙镇三章，谓之安乐栅。
现代文：鄱阳世子萧嗣与任约在三章开战，任约败走；萧嗣乘势迁移，镇守三章，称之为 安乐栅 。
English: Xiao Zhi, the son of Shanyang, went to war with Ren Zhou in the third chapter, Ren Zhou was defeated and fled; Xiao Zhi took advantage of the situation and moved to the town of the third chapter, which was called Anle Zhou.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰朔，湘东王绎以上甲侯韶为长沙王。
现代文：夏季四月，庚辰朔，湘东王萧绎任命上甲侯萧韶为长沙王。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Chenshuo, the King of Eastern Hunan, Xiao Yu, appointed Shang Jia Hou Xiao Wei as the King of Changsha.

古文：丙午，侯景请上幸西州，上御素辇，侍卫四百馀人，景浴铁数千，翼卫左右。
现代文：丙午，侯景请简文帝巡视西州，简文帝乘坐不加雕漆的素辇，带四百多名侍卫人员。而侯景则率几千名铁甲铮亮的武士，翼卫在左右。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Hou Jing invited Emperor Jianwen to inspect Xizhou. Emperor Jianwen rode in an unpainted plain carriage with more than four hundred attendants. Meanwhile, Hou Jing led several thousand brightly armored warriors, flanked by winged guards.

古文：上闻丝竹，凄然泣下，命景起舞，景亦请上起舞。
现代文：简文帝听到丝竹之声，凄然流泪，传命侯景起舞；侯景也请简文帝起舞。
English: When Emperor Jianwen heard the sound of the silk bamboo, he was moved to tears and ordered Houjing to dance; Houjing also asked Emperor Jianwen to dance.

古文：酒阑坐散，上抱景于床曰： 我念丞相！ 
现代文：酒阑人散，简文帝在床上抱着侯景说： 我心里念着丞相。 
English: When the drinking was over, Emperor Jianwen cradled Houjing in his arms on the bed and said, "In my heart, I am thinking of the prime minister."

古文：景曰： 陛下如不念臣，臣何得至此！ 
现代文：侯景回答说： 陛下如不念顾我，我哪能得到现在的地位！ 
English: Hou Jing replied: "If Your Majesty does not care about me, how can I get the current position!

古文：逮夜乃罢。
现代文：直到夜色降临才分手。
English: They didn't break up until nightfall.

古文：时江南连年旱蝗，江、扬尤甚，百姓流亡，相与入山谷、江湖，采草根、木叶、菱芡而食之，所在皆尽，死者蔽野。
现代文：这时江南连年闹旱灾、蝗灾，江州、扬州尤其严重，老百姓流离失所，成群结队逃入山谷之中，江湖之滨，采集草根、树叶、菱角、鸡头为食物。
English: At this time, the south of the Yangtze River suffered from droughts and locust plagues for several years in a row. The plague was particularly severe in Jiangzhou and Yangzhou. The common people were displaced and fled in droves into the valleys and along the coasts of rivers and lakes to collect roots, leaves, lingzhuang and chicken heads for food.

古文：富室无食，皆鸟面鹄形，衣罗绮，怀金玉，俯伏床帷，待命听终。
现代文：饥民所至，这些东西一扫而空，饿死的人横陈田野，比比皆是，富裕人家也没有吃的，一个个饿得鸟面鹄形，穿着罗绮衣裳，怀里藏着珍珠美玉，俯伏在床帷之间，等待死亡。
English: Wherever the hungry come, these things are swept away, and the starving are everywhere in the fields, and the rich have nothing to eat, and one by one, starving, haggard-looking, dressed in sackcloth, with pearls and jewels in their bosoms, they lie prostrate between the bedcovers, waiting to die.

古文：千里绝烟，人迹罕见，白骨成聚，如丘陇焉。
现代文：千里之内，炊烟断绝，人迹罕见，白骨成堆，象丘陇一样。
English: Within a thousand miles, there is no cooking smoke, human traces are rare, piles of white bones, like mounds of earthworms.

古文：景性残酷，于石头立大碓，有犯法者捣杀之。
现代文：侯景生性残酷，他在石头城设立大碓，犯法的人被抓住，就用大碓捣杀。
English: Hou Jingsheng had a cruel nature. He set up a large crossbow in Stone Town. When people who broke the law were caught, they were beaten to death with the crossbow.

古文：常戒诸将曰： 破栅平城，当净杀之，使天下知吾威名。 
现代文：平常总是告诫诸将说： 一旦攻破栅栏，踏平城市，就杀它个干干净净，使天下人知道我的厉害！ 
English: Usually, I always caution the generals, saying: Once you break through the fence and level the city, kill it cleanly, so that the world will know how powerful I am!

古文：故诸将每战胜，专以焚掠为事，斩刈人如草芥，以资戏笑。
现代文：所以他手下的诸将每次战胜，就专门以烧杀抢掠为能事，杀人如刈草芥，以此作为游戏取乐。
English: Therefore, each time the generals under his command won a battle, they specialized in burning, killing, and looting. Killing was like mowing the grass, and they used it as a game to have fun.

古文：由是百姓虽死，终不附之。
现代文：因此老百姓即使死，也绝不归附他。
English: Therefore, even if the common people die, they will never return to him.

古文：又禁人偶语，犯者刑及外族。
现代文：侯景又禁止人民在一起交头接耳，有违犯的刑罚株连到他的外族。
English: Hou Jing also forbade the people to talk to each other, and the penalty for violation was to be sent to his foreign family.

古文：为其将帅者，悉称行台，来降附者，悉称开府，其亲寄隆重者曰左右厢公，勇力兼人者曰库直都督。
现代文：当他的将帅的，都称为行台；来投降归附他的，都称为开府。他所特别亲信看重的称为左右厢公，勇气力量超人的称为库直都督。
English: Those who served as his generals were called Gyotai; those who came to surrender and join him were called Kaifu; those who were especially valued by his closest confidants were called Left and Right Wing Commanders, and those with superhuman courage and strength were called Ku-Zhi Governors.

古文：魏封皇子儒为燕王，公为吴王。
现代文：西魏封皇子元儒为燕王，元公为吴王。
English: Yuan Ru, the prince of the Western Wei Dynasty, was Yan Wang, and Yuan Gong was Wu Wang.

古文：侯景召宋子仙还京口。
现代文：侯景召宋子仙回京口。
English: Hou Jing called Song Zisen back to Beijing.

古文：邵陵王纶在郢州，以听事为正阳殿，内外斋阁，悉加题署。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶在郢州，把厅堂称为正阳殿，内外斋门门，都题上匾名。
English: Shaoling King Xiao Wei in Luzhou called the hall the Zhengyang Hall, and the inner and outer gates the Jianmen Gate.

古文：其部下陵暴军府，郢州将佐莫不怨之。
现代文：他的部下在军府里作威作福，郢州将士官佐没有不怨恨的，谘议参军江仲举，是南平王萧恪的主要谋士，他鼓励萧恪反对萧纶，取而代之。
English: His subordinates in the military government were arrogant and self-serving, and there was no resentment among the officers and non-commissioned officers of Zhangzhou, who were consulted to join the military river. He was the main strategist of Nanping King Xiao Jia, and he encouraged Xiao Jia to oppose Xiao Jia and replace him.

古文：咨议参军江仲举，南平王恪之谋主也，说恪图纶，恪惊曰： 若我杀邵陵，宁静一镇，荆、益兄弟必皆内喜，海内若平，则以大义责我矣。
现代文：萧恪大惊，说： 如果我杀了邵陵王，郢州也许可以宁静，但荆州、益州的宗室兄弟必然内心窃喜。海内如果平定，他们就会以君臣大义责备我。
English: Xiao Gu was shocked and said, "If I kill King Shao Ling, Bozhou may be able to live in peace, but my brothers and sisters in Jingzhou and Yizhou will certainly be rejoicing. If the country is pacified, they will blame me as a monarch.

古文：且巨逆未枭，骨肉相残，自亡之道也。
现代文：而且最大的逆贼没有杀掉，就骨肉相残，这是自取灭亡之道。
English: Moreover, if the biggest traitor is not killed, they will fight each other to the death. This is the road to self-destruction.

古文：卿且息之。 
现代文：你的想法不妥，还是算了吧。 
English: You've got the wrong idea. Let it go.

古文：仲举不从，部分诸将，刻日将发；谋泄，纶压杀之。
现代文：但江仲举不听，他安排部署手下的将领们，定好日子就要举事，但是事情泄漏，萧纶把他们统统压死。
English: But Jiang Zhong didn't listen. He arranged for the deployment of his generals and set a date for them to take action. However, the action leaked out and Xiao Yao crushed them all to death.

古文：恪狼狈往谢，纶曰： 群小所作，非由兄也。
现代文：萧恪非常狼狈不安地前往谢罪，萧纶说： 这都是一群小人所干的，不是由您策划的。
English: Distraught and anxious, Xiao Guo went to Xie Sin. Xiao Guo said, "This was all done by a group of villains, not planned by you.

古文：凶党已毙，兄勿深忧。 
现代文：凶党已经消灭，您不必深忧！ 
English: The evil party has been eliminated, you don't have to worry!

古文：王僧辩急攻长沙，辛巳，克之。
现代文：王僧辩猛烈地进攻长沙，辛巳，攻破城池，抓住了河东王萧誉，杀了他，并把首级送到江陵。
English: Wang Sangye violently attacked Changsha, Xin Si, broke through the city, caught the King of Hedong, Xiaoyuan, killed him, and sent his head to Jiangling.

古文：执河东王誉，斩之，传首江陵，湘东王绎反其首而葬之。
现代文：湘东王萧绎让人把首级送回长沙，和身子合在一起安葬。
English: The king of eastern Hunan, Xiao Yuanzhong, had the head returned to Changsha, where it was buried together with the body.

古文：初，世子方等之死，临蒸周铁虎功最多，誉委遇甚重。
现代文：当初，世子方等被杀死，临蒸人周铁虎功劳最大，萧誉对他委任恩遇很重。
English: At the beginning, He Zi Fang and others were killed, and Lin Xi Ren Zhou Tiehu was the most meritorious, and the bad reputation of his appointment was very heavy.

古文：僧辩得铁虎，命烹之，呼曰： 侯景未灭，奈何杀壮士！ 
现代文：王僧辩抓获周铁虎，命令手下烹杀他。周铁虎大叫： 侯景未灭，为什么杀壮士？ 
English: Wang Sangye captured Zhou Tiehu and ordered his men to cook and kill him. Zhou Tiehu shouted: "Hou Jing is not dead, why kill a strong man?

古文：僧辩奇其言而释之，还其麾下。
现代文：王僧辩觉得他吐言奇伟，就释放了他，让他回到军帐下。
English: Wang Sangyan thought that what he said was wonderful, so he released him and let him go back to the army.

古文：绎以僧辩为左卫将军，加侍中、镇西长史。
现代文：萧绎任命王僧辩为左卫将军，加侍中、镇西长史。
English: Xiao Yu appointed Wang Sangyan as the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and also appointed Zhanxi Changshi as the Vice-Marshal.

古文：绎自去岁闻高祖之丧，以长沙未下，故匿之。
现代文：萧绎自去年就听到了梁武帝驾崩的消息，因为当时长沙还没打下，所以加以封锁。
English: Xiao Yu has heard the news of Emperor Liang Wu's death since last year, because at that time Changsha had not yet been laid, so it was blocked.

古文：壬寅，始发丧，刻檀为高祖像，置于百福殿，事之甚谨，动静必咨焉。
现代文：壬寅，才发丧，用檀木雕刻梁武帝像，安放在百福殿里，朝拜很恭谨，一举一动都前往咨求。
English: Ren Yin, just before his death, carved a statue of Emperor Liangwu from sandalwood and placed it in the Baifu Hall. He was very respectful in his worship and went to seek advice at every turn.

古文：绎以为天子制于贼臣，不肯从大宝之号，犹称太清四年。
现代文：萧绎认为天子被贼臣挟制，所以不肯采用大宝的年号，还是照旧年号称太清四年。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong believed that Tianzi was held hostage by a thief, so he refused to use the year name of the treasure, and continued to use the old year name of Taiching for four years.

古文：丙午，绎下令大举讨侯景，移檄远近。
现代文：丙午，萧绎下令大举讨伐侯景，檄文传遍远近。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xiao Yu ordered a large-scale crackdown on Houjing, and the slander spread far and wide.

古文：鄱阳王范至湓城，以晋熙为晋州，遣其世子嗣为刺史，江州郡县多辄改易。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范率众进抵湓城，把晋熙郡改为晋州，派他的长子萧嗣为晋州刺史，江州所属郡县守令大部分都改换了。
English: Xiao Fan, the king of Shenyang, led the crowd to arrive in Handan City, changed Jinxi County to Jinzhou, sent his eldest son Xiao Zi to be the governor of Jinzhou, and most of the county sheriffs belonging to Jiangzhou were changed.

古文：寻阳王大心，政令所行，不出一郡。
现代文：寻阳王萧大心，政令所行，不出寻阳一郡之外。
English: Xiao Daishin, the king of Xiangyang, issued a decree to withdraw from Xiangyang County.

古文：大心遣兵击庄铁，嗣与铁素善，请发兵救之，范遣侯瑱帅精甲五千助铁。
现代文：萧大心派兵进击庄铁，萧嗣与庄铁一向关系很好，就请求萧范发兵救援他。萧范派侯瑱率领精锐甲兵五千人去帮助庄铁。
English: Xiao Daxin sent troops to attack Zhuang Tie. Xiao Zi and Zhuang Tie always had a good relationship, so he asked Xiao Fan to send troops to rescue him. Xiao Fan sent Hou Yi to lead five thousand elite soldiers to help Zhuang Tie.

古文：由是二镇互相猜忌，无复讨贼之志。
现代文：从此鄱阳、寻阳二镇互相猜忌，再也没有讨贼的心思了。
English: Since then, the two towns of Fenyang and Huanyang have been suspicious of each other, and there is no longer any thought of catching thieves.

古文：大心使徐嗣徽帅众二千，筑垒稽亭以备范，市籴不通，范数万之众，无所得食，多饿死。
现代文：萧大心让徐嗣徽率众二千，在稽亭筑垒以防备萧范，这一来切断了鄱阳的粮食流通，萧范数万军队，没地方找到粮食，大多饿死。
English: Xiao Daxin asked Xu Zhihui to lead a crowd of two thousand to build a wall in Jingting to prevent Xiao Fan. This cut off the grain circulation in Fenyang. Xiao Fan's tens of thousands of troops had no place to find grain, and most of them starved to death.

古文：范愤恚，疽发于背，五月，乙卯，卒。
现代文：萧范愤恨大怒，背上痈疽破裂，五月，乙卯，去世。
English: Xiao Fan flew into a rage, the gangrene on his back ruptured, and he passed away in May.

古文：其众秘不发丧，奉范弟安南侯恬为主，有众数千人。
现代文：萧范的部下秘不发丧，推举萧范的弟弟安南侯萧恬为主帅，有部众数千人。
English: Xiao Fan's subordinates secretly mourned, and Xiao Fan's younger brother, Annan Hou Xiao Wei, was elected as the head coach, with thousands of followers.

古文：丙辰，侯景以元思虔为东道大行台，镇钱塘。
现代文：丙辰，侯景任命元思虔为东道大行台，镇守钱唐。
English: Hsin-Chen and Hou-Jing appointed Yuan Shikian as the host of the grand procession, and the town guard of Qiantang.

古文：丁巳，以侯子鉴为南兗州刺史。
现代文：丁巳，任命侯子鉴为南兖州刺史。
English: Ding Si appointed Hou Zi Jian as the new governor of South Luzhou.

古文：东魏齐王洋之为开府也，勃海高德政为管记，由是亲昵，言无不尽。
现代文：东魏齐王高洋在设置官署的时候，任命勃海人高德政为管记，因此两人关系很亲密，什么话都可以交谈。
English: When the Eastern Wei Qi King Gao Yang set up the government office, he appointed the Bohai people Gao Dezhen as the secretary, so the two had a very close relationship and could talk about anything.

古文：金紫光禄大夫丹杨徐之才、北平太守广宗宋景业，皆善图谶，以为太岁在午，当有革命，因德政以白洋，劝之受禅。
现代文：金紫光禄大夫丹杨人徐之才、北平太守广宗人宋景业，都精通图谶占验之术。他们看到太岁星在午，认为这意味着帝室不祥，会有改朝换代的事发生，就把这种预言通过高德政告诉高洋，劝他接受禅让。
English: Tang Yang, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and Xu Zhicai, the governor of Beiping, as well as Song Jingye, the governor of Guangzong, were all proficient in the art of divination. They saw the great star in the afternoon, thought that this meant that the imperial family was ominous, and that there would be a change of dynasty. They told this prophecy to Gao Yang through Gao Dezheng and persuaded him to accept Zen.

古文：洋以告娄太妃，太妃曰： 汝父如龙，兄如虎，犹以天位不可妄据，终身北面。汝独何人，欲行舜、禹之事乎！ 
现代文：高洋把这事禀告娄太妃，太妃说： 你父亲和哥哥都是如龙似虎一样的英才，尚且认为皇位天授，不能妄图窃据，终其一生，北面事君，你是何等样人，想效法舜、禹禅让的事吗？ 
English: Gaoyang reported this to Empress Dowager Cixi. Empress Dowager Cixi said, "Your father and brother are both as talented as dragons and tigers. Even though they believe that the imperial throne is a gift from heaven, they can't try to steal it. Throughout their lives, North Face Cixi, what kind of person are you? Do you want to follow the example of Emperor Xizang and Emperor Yu?

古文：洋以告之才，之才曰： 正为不及父兄，故宜早升尊位耳。 
现代文：高洋把娄太妃的话告诉徐之才，徐之才说： 正因为您的才能都比不上父兄，所以才应该早日升上尊位呀！ 
English: Gaoyang told Xu Zhicai the words of the Empress Dowager, and Xu Zhicai said: "It is precisely because your talents are not as good as your father and brother that you should be promoted to a higher position as soon as possible!"

古文：洋铸像卜之而成，乃使开府仪同三司段韶问肆州刺史斛律金，金来见洋，固言不可，以宋景业首陈符命，请杀之。
现代文：高洋通过铸铜像进行占卜，于是让开府仪同三司段韶去征求肆州刺史斛律金的意见，斛律金听了后来求见高洋，坚决地认为这件事干不得，并以宋景业带头宣讲符命惑主为由，要求高洋杀了他。
English: Gao Yang was divining by casting a bronze statue, so he asked Kaifu Yi and Sanji Duan to solicit the opinion of Wuzhou Shishi Luo Jin. Luo Jin listened and later asked to see Gao Yang. He firmly believed that this matter could not be done, and he asked Gao Yang to kill him on the grounds that Song Jingye took the lead in preaching the character of the deceiver.

古文：洋与诸贵议于太妃前，太妃曰： 吾儿懦直，必无此心，高德政乐祸，教之耳。 
现代文：高洋和各位贵戚一起在娄太妃面前商议这件事，娄太妃说： 我儿子懦弱直爽，肯定不会有这种念头，高德政喜欢弄出祸端，唯恐天下不乱，这都是他教唆的呀！ 
English: Gao Yang and his noble relatives discussed the matter together in front of Empress Dowager Cixi. Empress Dowager Cixi said: My son is cowardly and straightforward, he certainly would not have such an idea. Gao Desheng likes to make mischief, lest the world be in turmoil. He instigated all of this!

古文：洋以人心不壹，使高德政如鄴察公卿之意，未还；洋拥兵而东，至平都城，召诸勋贵议之，莫敢对。
现代文：高洋因为人心不能一致，就派高德政去邺州观察公卿大臣们的意向，去了后还没返回，高洋就率军队向东进发，抵达平都城，召集诸位元勋重臣一起商议，但没有人敢吱声。
English: Gao Yang sent Gao Dezheng to Zhangzhou to observe the intentions of the nobles and ministers because the hearts of the people could not be united. After he went there, he did not return, and Gao Yang led the army to the east, arrived at Pingdu City, and gathered all the former nobles and senior ministers to discuss together, but no one dared to say a word.

古文：长史杜弼曰： 关西，国之劲敌，若受魏禅，恐彼挟天子，自称义兵而东向，王何以待之！ 
现代文：长史杜弼说： 关西宇文氏，是我国的强敌，如果您接受魏的禅让，恐怕宇文氏会挟持天子，自称为勤王义兵而向东讨伐，大王拿什么来对付他们呢？ 
English: Changshi Du said: The Kansai Uwen clan is a strong enemy of our country. If you accept Wei's surrender, I am afraid that the Uwen clan will hold the heavenly son hostage, call themselves loyal soldiers and march eastward. What will the great king use to deal with them?

古文：徐之才曰： 今与王争天下者，彼亦欲为王所为。纵其屈强，不过随我称帝耳。 
现代文：徐之才说： 现在和大王争天下的人，他也是想做大王所做的事的，即使他倔强不顺从，不过也随着大王的样子自己称帝罢了。 
English: Xu Zhicai said: People who are now competing with the great king, he also wants to do what the great king has done. Even if he is stubborn and does not obey, he is just praising himself as the great king.

古文：弼无以应。
现代文：杜弼听了，无言以对。
English: The cuckoo listened, speechless.

古文：高德政至鄴，讽公卿，莫有应者。
现代文：高德政抵达邺州，把高洋准备接受禅让的事暗示给公卿大臣，但没有响应的。
English: When Gao Dezheng arrived in Zhangzhou, he hinted to the noble minister that Gao Yang was ready to accept the Zen concession, but there was no response.

古文：司马子如逆洋于辽阳，固言未可。
现代文：司马子如到辽阳去迎接高洋，坚决地认为这事行不得。
English: If Sima Zi went to Liaoyang to meet Gao Yang, he would firmly believe that this could not be done.

古文：洋欲还，仓丞李集曰： 王来为何事，而今欲还？ 
现代文：高洋想返回晋阳，仓丞李集说： 大王来这一趟是干什么的，难道您忘了，现在就想回去？ 
English: Gao Yang wanted to return to Jinyang, and Cang Zheng Li Ji said: Da Wang, what are you doing on this trip? Have you forgotten that you want to go back now?

古文：洋伪使于东门杀之，而别令赐绢十匹，遂还晋阳，自是居常不悦。
现代文：高洋假装把他在东门杀了，同时另外发令，赏赐他十匹绡，于是返回到晋阳。从此高洋日常起居总是郁郁不乐。
English: Gao Yang pretended to kill him at the East Gate, and at the same time issued another order to reward him with ten horses, so he returned to Jinyang. Since then, Gao Yang's daily life has always been gloomy.

古文：徐之才、宋景业等日陈阴阳杂占，云宜早受命。
现代文：徐之才、宋景业等每天在他耳边讲陈阴阳之理、占验之事，嘀嘀咕咕说应该早点接受禅让，应承天命。
English: Xu Zhicai, Song Jingye and others spoke to him every day about the theory of Chen Yin and Yang, and the matter of divination. They muttered that he should have accepted Zen's offer earlier, and should accept the fate of heaven.

古文：高德政亦敦劝不已。
现代文：高德政也使劲劝说个没完。
English: Gao Desheng also tried hard to persuade him.

古文：洋使术士李密卜之，遇《大横》，曰： 汉文之卦也。 
现代文：高洋让术士李密占卜这件事，结果得到大横卦。李密说： 这可是汉孝文帝得到过的吉卦呀。 
English: Gao Yang asked the sorcerer Li Mi to divine the matter, and the result was a great yanggua. Li Mi said: This is the giga that Emperor Han Xiaowen obtained.

古文：又使宋景业筮之，遇《乾》之《鼎》，曰： 《乾》，君也。
现代文：高洋又让宋景业用筮草占卜，结果占到乾卦，乾卦又变化为鼎卦。宋景业说： 乾卦，意味着君主之象。
English: Gao Yang also asked Song Jingye to use the reeds for divination. As a result, the reeds were used for divination, and the reeds were changed to tripod reeds. Song Jingye said, "The reeds mean the image of the monarch."

古文：《鼎》，五月卦也。
现代文：鼎卦，是说在五月发生变化。
English: Ding Gua, is said to change in May.

古文：宜以仲夏受禅。 
现代文：您在仲夏受禅让最适宜了。 
English: It's the perfect time for you to experience Zen meditation in the middle of summer.

古文：或曰： 五月不可入官，犯之，终于其位。 
现代文：有人进言说： 按阴阳家的说法，五月不能入居官位，如果违犯这一条，就会死在官位上。 
English: Some people say, "You can't take office in May. If you do, you'll die in office."

古文：景业曰： 王为天子，无复下期，岂得不终于其位乎！ 
现代文：宋景业说： 大王贵为天子，当然没有下台离位的时候，哪能不死在自己的皇位上呢！ 
English: Song Jingye said: Great King Gui is the Son of Heaven, of course, when he did not step down from the throne, how could he not die on his throne!

古文：洋大悦，乃发晋阳。
现代文：高洋听了非常高兴，于是又从晋阳向东进发了。
English: Gao Yang was very happy to hear this, so he set off from Jinyang to the east.

古文：高德政录在鄴诸事，条进于洋，洋令左右陈山提驰驿赍事条并密书与杨愔。
现代文：高德政把在邺州察访到的情况、动向逐条记录下来，呈送给高洋。高洋命令身边的侍从陈山提沿驿路驰马急行，带着高德政进呈的事条和一封密信去给杨愔。
English: Gao Desheng recorded the situation and movement he observed in Zhangzhou one by one and presented it to Gao Yang. Gao Yang ordered the attendant Chen Shanti to ride an express horse along the Qianlu Road and take Gao Desheng's report and a secret letter to Yang Hui.

古文：是月，山提至鄴，杨愔即召太常卿邢劭等议撰仪注，秘书监魏收草九锡、禅让、劝进诸文；引魏宗室诸王入北宫，留于东斋。
现代文：就在这个月，陈山提抵达邺州，杨愔就召集太常卿邢邵负责商议制定礼仪制度，秘书监魏收起草加九锡、禅让、劝进等文告，并召集东魏宗室诸王进入北宫，留宿东斋。
English: Just this month, when Chen Shanzhi arrived in Ganzhou, Yang Di summoned the Tai Changqing, Zou Shao, to be responsible for discussing and formulating the etiquette system, and the secretary, Guan Wei, to draft proclamations such as "Add Jiu Xi," "Zen Zhan," and "Persuade Jin," and also summoned the kings of the East Wei dynasty to enter the North Palace and stay in Dongzhai.

古文：甲寅，东魏进洋位相国，总百揆，备九锡。
现代文：甲寅，东魏拥戴高洋位居相国，总领百官，加九锡。
English: Jia Yin, the Eastern Wei Dynasty, held the Gaoyang and was in the same country, the leader of a hundred officials, plus Jiu Xi.

古文：洋行至前亭，所乘马忽倒，意甚恶之。
现代文：高洋行进到前亭时，他所乘骑的马忽然倒下。
English: When Gao Yang was marching to the front pavilion, the horse he was riding suddenly fell down.

古文：至平都城，不复肯进。
现代文：高洋很厌恶这件事，抵达平都城后，就不肯再前进了。
English: Gao Yang was disgusted by this, and after arriving at Pingdu City, he refused to go any further.

古文：高德政、徐之才苦请曰： 山提先去，恐其漏泄。 
现代文：高德政、徐之才苦苦请求说： 陈山提已经先去邺城了，我们若不前进，时间拖长了，怕他会泄漏消息。 
English: Gao Desheng and Xu Zhicai pleaded: Chen Shanti has already gone to Lucheng first. If we don't move forward, the time will be too long. I'm afraid he will leak the news.

古文：即命司马子如、杜弼驰驿续入，观察物情。
现代文：高洋听了，就命令司马子如、杜弼沿驿道跟着奔驰入邺，以观察事态发展，人心动向。
English: After listening to Gao Yang, he ordered Sima Ziru and Cuckoo to follow the Mercedes into the cocoon along the cocoon road to observe the development of the situation and the movement of people.

古文：子如等至鄴，众人以事势已决，无敢异言。
现代文：司马子如等人抵达邺城以后，众人以为大势已定，没有敢表示异议的。
English: After Sima Zi and others arrived in Handan, everyone thought that the situation had been decided, and no one dared to express dissent.

古文：洋至鄴，召夫赍筑具集城南。
现代文：高洋抵达邺城，召集民夫带着建筑工具集中在城南。
English: When Gao Yang arrived in Handan, he gathered the people with construction tools and concentrated them in the south of the city.

古文：高隆之请曰： 用此何为？ 
现代文：高隆之问道： 召集民夫干什么？ 
English: Gao Longzhi asked: What is the purpose of summoning the people?

古文：洋作色曰： 我自有事，君何问为！
现代文：高洋勃然作色，说： 我自然有事，你问这干什么？
English: Gao Yang bristled and said, "Naturally, I have something to do. Why do you ask?"

古文：欲族灭邪！ 
现代文：难道想自取灭族吗？ 
English: Do they really want to exterminate their own people?

古文：隆之谢而退。
现代文：高隆之连声谢罪，唯唯而退。
English: Takahiro Yoshizane withdrew from the race.

古文：于是作圜丘，备法物。
现代文：于是众民夫开始修筑祭天用的圆形高坛，准备登基大典用的法器物事。
English: As a result, all the people began to build a round high altar for the festival, preparing the legal instruments for the enthronement ceremony.

古文：丙辰，司空潘乐、侍中张亮、黄门郎赵彦深等求入启事，东魏孝静帝在昭阳殿见之。
现代文：丙辰，司空潘乐、侍中张亮、黄门郎赵彦深等要求入宫奏事，东魏孝静帝在昭阳殿召见他们。
English: Emperor Xiaojing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty summoned Hunchin, Secretary Kuang Panle, Chamberlain Zhang Liang, Huangmen Lang Zhao Yanshen, and others to the palace to make a report. They were summoned by Emperor Xiaojing at the Shoyang Palace.

古文：亮曰： 五行递运，有始有终。
现代文：张亮说： 金木水火土五行互相递代地运行，帝命有始有终，这是天意。
English: Zhang Liang said: The five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth run one after another. The emperor's life has a beginning and an end. This is God's will.

古文：齐王圣德钦明，万方归仰，愿陛下远法尧、舜。 
现代文：齐王高洋天资圣明，道德崇高，天下归心，万众钦仰，希望陛下效法尧、舜，把帝位禅让给齐王。 
English: King Qi is a man of lofty talent and sacredness, with lofty morals. He has won the hearts and minds of the world, and is admired by all. I hope that His Majesty will follow the example of  and  and pass the imperial throne to King Qi.

古文：帝敛容曰： 此事推挹已久，谨当逊避。 
现代文：孝静帝神色凝重地说： 这件事推让很久了，我谨遵众意，理当逊位让贤。 
English: Xiao Jingdi looked solemn and said: This matter has been postponed for a long time, I would like to comply with the will of the people, it is reasonable to give up the position.

古文：又曰： 若尔，须作制书。 
现代文：又说： 如果是这样，必须写成正式诏书。 
English: He also said: If this is the case, it must be made into an official imperial edict.

古文：中书郎崔劼、裴让之曰： 制已作讫。 
现代文：中书郎崔劼、裴让之说： 诏书已经准备好了。 
English: "The imperial edict is ready," said Choi Min and Bae Jang Zhi, the chief scribes.

古文：使侍中杨愔进之。
现代文：便让侍中杨愔把让位的诏书进呈孝静帝。
English: He then asked the chamberlain Yang Jie to present the imperial edict of abdication to Emperor Xiao Jing.

古文：东魏主既署，曰： 居朕何所？ 
现代文：孝静帝签署之后，说： 退位之后，让我住到哪去？ 
English: After signing the document, Emperor Xiaojing said, "Where will I live after I abdicate?"

古文：愔对曰： 北城别有馆宇。 
现代文：杨愔回答说： 北城另外有一套楼馆房舍。 
English: Yang Wei replied: There is another set of buildings in Beicheng.

古文：乃下御坐，步就东廊，咏范蔚宗《后汉书·赞》曰： 献坐不辰，身播国屯，终我四百，永作虞宾。 
现代文：于是孝静帝走下御座，步行走向东廊，口里吟咏着范晔所作的《后汉书》中对汉献帝的一段赞辞： 献帝生不逢辰，身既播迁，国又遭难，到我为止，汉祚四百年终结了，让我永远充当虞的宾客尧子丹朱的角色吧！ 
English: So Emperor Xiaojing stepped down from the throne and walked to the East Corridor, chanting a passage of praise for Han Xianti in the "Post-Han Shu" made by Fan Yu: "It is not easy to give birth to Han Xianti, my body has been relocated, my country has suffered, and so far, the four hundred years of Han Dynasty have ended. Let me forever play the role of the guest of fortune, the son of the Emperor Dan Zhu!"

古文：所司请发，帝曰： 古人念遗簪弊履，朕欲与六宫别，可乎？ 
现代文：掌管禅位事宜的人要孝静帝马上出发到为他准备的别馆去，孝静帝说： 古人有顾念遗簪敝履的遗风，我想效法，和六宫的妃嫔们告别一下，可以吗？ 
English: The person in charge of the Zen position wanted Emperor Xiao Jing to leave immediately to go to the other hall that had been prepared for him. Emperor Xiao Jing said, "The ancients had a tradition of being careful not to step on each other's toes. I want to follow their example and say goodbye to the concubines of the Sixth Palace, is that okay?"

古文：高隆之曰： 今日天下犹陛下之天下，况在六宫！ 
现代文：高隆之说： 今天天下还是陛下的，何况六宫呢？ 
English: Gao Longzhi said: Today, the whole world is still His Majesty's, let alone the Six Palaces.

古文：帝步入，与妃嫔已下别，举宫皆哭。
现代文：孝静帝步行进宫，与妃嫔及其下属告别，整个皇宫都痛哭失声。
English: Emperor Xiaojing entered the palace on foot, bade farewell to his concubines and subordinates, and the entire palace was in tears.

古文：赵国李嫔诵陈思王诗云： 王其爱玉体，俱享黄发期。 
现代文：赵国人李嫔诵读陈思王曹植的诗： 王其爱玉体，俱享黄发期。 
English: Li Qian, a resident of Zhao, recited a poem by Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi: Wang Qian loves the jade body, and enjoys the yellow hair period.

古文：直长赵道德以故犊车一乘候于东阁，帝登车，道德超上抱之，帝叱之曰： 朕自畏天顺人，何物奴敢逼人如此！ 
现代文：直长赵道德准备好一乘牛车于东阁门，孝静帝登车，赵道德赶上车去抱住他，孝静帝喝斥他说： 我自己畏天命，顺人心，让出帝位，你是什么东西，敢这样肆无忌惮地逼我！ 
English: Zhao Daode, the immediate chief, was ready to take a cattle car at the East Gate, and Xiao Jingdi boarded the car. Zhao Daode caught up with the car to hug him. Xiao Jingdi shouted at him and said, "I myself am afraid of fate, I am a people pleaser, and I give up the imperial throne. What are you, daring to force me so recklessly!"

古文：道德犹不下。
现代文：赵道德仍然不下车。
English: Zhao Daode still didn't get off.

古文：出云龙门，王公百僚拜辞，高隆之洒泣。
现代文：孝静帝出云龙门，王公大臣们向他拜辞，高隆之流泪哭泣。
English: Emperor Xiaojing came out of the Dragon Gate, the princes and ministers bowed to him, and Gao Longzhi shed tears and cried.

古文：遂入北城，居司马子如南宅，遣太尉彭城王韶等奉玺绶，禅位于齐。
现代文：就这样孝静帝进入了北城，住在司马子如的南宅。派太尉彭城王元韶等人捧着玉玺印绶，把皇位禅让给齐王。
English: In this way, Emperor Xiaojing entered Beicheng and lived in the south house of Sima Ziru. He sent Lieutenant Pengcheng Wang Yuanqi and others to hold the jade seal and give the imperial throne to King Qi.

古文：戊午，齐王即皇帝位于南郊，大赦，改元天保。
现代文：戊午，齐王高洋在邺城南郊即皇帝位，宣布大赦天下，改年号为天保。
English: In the afternoon, King Gaoyang of Qi proclaimed himself emperor in the southern suburb of Handan, amnestied the whole country, and changed the name of the year to Tianbao.

古文：自魏敬宗以来，百官绝禄，至是始复给之。
现代文：自魏孝庄帝以来，朝廷百官都断了俸禄，到这时候才又给了。
English: Since Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Wei Dynasty, all the officials of the imperial court have been cut off from their salaries, and it was only at this time that they were given again.

古文：己未，封东魏主为中山王，待以不臣之礼。
现代文：己未，北齐封孝静帝为中山王，让他可以不用臣下之礼。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaozhing of the Northern Qi Dynasty was the king of Zhongshan, so he did not need the courtesy of his vassals.

古文：追尊齐献武王为献武皇帝，庙号太祖，后改为高祖；文襄王为文襄皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：同时追尊齐献武王为献武皇帝，庙号太祖，后来又改称为高祖；追尊文襄王为文襄皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: At the same time, they honored Qixianwu Wang as the Emperor of Xianwu, Miao Da Zu, and later changed his name to Gao Zu; they honored Wenxiang Wang as the Emperor of Wenxiang, Miao Shizong.

古文：辛酉，尊王太后娄氏为皇太后。
现代文：辛酉，尊王太后娄氏为皇太后。
English: Xin Xin, the revered queen dowager, is the empress dowager.

古文：乙丑，降魏朝封爵有差，其宣力霸朝及西、南投化者，不在降限。
现代文：乙丑，北齐把原来魏朝给大臣们的封爵按不同情况降了级，但其中随高欢起兵以来有过功勋的大臣以及关西和江南来投降归附的臣子不在降级之列。
English: Second, Northern Qi reduced the ranks of the knighthoods originally given to the ministers of the Wei Dynasty according to different circumstances, but the ministers who had meritorious service since Gao Huan raised an army and the courtiers from Kansai and the south of the Yangtze River who surrendered and joined were not downgraded.

古文：文成侯宁起兵于吴，有众万人，己巳，进攻吴郡；行吴郡事侯子荣逆击，杀之。
现代文：文成侯萧宁在吴县起兵，拥有士兵一万余人，己巳，进攻吴郡，代理吴郡政事的侯子荣出兵迎击，杀了萧宁。
English: Wencheng Hou Xiaoning raised an army in Wuxian, with more than 10,000 soldiers, and attacked Wuxian. Hou Zirong, who was in charge of the government of Wuxian, sent troops to meet the attack and killed Xiaoning.

古文：宁，范之弟也。
现代文：萧宁是萧范的弟弟。
English: Xiao Ning is Xiao Fan's younger brother.

古文：子荣因纵兵大掠郡境。
现代文：侯子荣因此纵容士兵在吴郡境内大肆抢掠。
English: As a result, Hou Zirong allowed soldiers to plunder the territory of Wuxi County.

古文：自晋氏度江，三吴最为富庶，贡赋商旅，皆出其地。
现代文：自从晋朝司马氏渡过长江以来，三吴之地是天下最为富庶的地区，供给朝廷的贡品、租赋，以及客商行旅，都出在这个地区。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, when the Sima clan crossed the Yangtze River, the land of Samgou has been the richest region in the world. The tributes and rents provided to the imperial court, as well as the travels of merchants, all originated in this region.

古文：及侯景之乱，掠金帛既尽，乃掠人而食之，或卖于北境，遗民殆尽矣。
现代文：到侯景作乱时，乱军把民间的金银财帛抢掠一空，接着就抢掠人口，有的杀了吃掉，有的卖到北方去，三吴之地的老百姓所剩无几了。
English: By the time of the Houjing Rebellion, the rebels had plundered the gold, silver and treasure of the people, and then they plundered the population. Some were killed and eaten, and some were sold to the north. There are only a few people left in the land of Sanwu.

古文：是时，唯荆、益所部尚完实，太尉、益州刺史武陵王纪移告征、镇，使世子圆照帅兵三万受湘东王节度。
现代文：这时候，只有荆州、益州所管辖的地区还比较完整充实。太尉、益州刺史武陵王萧纪移文通告各征、镇，让世子萧圆照率兵三万接受湘东王指挥。
English: At this time, only the areas under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou and Yizhou were still relatively complete and substantial. The captain and the governor of Yizhou, Wuling Wang Xiao Ji, issued a notice to each city and town, and let his son Xiao Yuan Zhao lead 30,000 soldiers to accept the command of the East Hunan King.

古文：圆照军至巴水，绎授以信州刺史，令屯白帝，未许东下。
现代文：萧圆照的军队抵达巴水时，萧绎授给他信州刺史之职，命令他驻扎在白帝城，不许他继续东下。
English: When Xiao Yuanzhao's army arrived in Bashui, Xiao Yuanzhang gave him the post of Shinshu historian and ordered him to stay in Baidicheng, not allowing him to continue eastward.

古文：六月，辛巳，以南郡王大连行扬州事。
现代文：六月，辛巳，梁朝任命南郡王萧大连掌管扬州政事。
English: In June, King Xiao Dalian of Nan County was appointed by the Liang Dynasty to be in charge of the political affairs of Yangzhou.

古文：江夏王大款、山阳王大成、宜都王大封自信安间道奔江陵。
现代文：江夏王萧大款、山阳王萧大成、宜都王萧大封从信安抄小路投奔江陵。
English: Jiangxia King Xiao Daxing, Shanyang King Xiao Dacheng, and Yidu King Xiao Dafeng went to Gangneung from Xin'an.

古文：齐主封宗室高岳等十人、功臣库狄干等七人皆为王。
现代文：北齐国主高洋封皇室高岳等十人、功臣库狄干等七人为王。
English: Ten people, including the Northern Qi sovereign Emperor Gaoyang and the royal family Gao Yue, and seven people, including the meritorious subject Kudikan, became kings.

古文：癸未，封弟浚为永安王，淹为平阳王，浟为彭城王，演为常山王，涣为上党王，淯为襄城王，湛为长广王，湝为任城王，湜为高阳王，济为博陵王，凝为新平王，润为冯翊王，洽为汉阳王。
现代文：癸未，封弟弟高浚为永安王，高淹为平阳王，高浟为彭城王，高演为常山王，高涣为上党王，高淯为襄城王，高湛为长广王，高湝为任城王，高湜为高阳王，高济为博陵王，高凝为新平王，高润为冯翊王，高洽为汉阳王。
English: At that time, Gaozhun, the younger brother of Feng, was the king of Yongan, Gaozhun was the king of Pingyang, Gaozhun was the king of Pengcheng, Gao Yuan was the king of Changshan, Gaozhun was the king of Shangdang, Gaozhun was the king of Xiangcheng, Gaozhan was the king of Changguang, Gaozhun was the king of Rencheng, Gaozhun was the king of Gaoyang, Gaozhi was the king of Boling, Gaojun was the king of Xinping, Gaorun was the king of Fenghuang, and

古文：鄱阳王范既卒，侯瑱依庄铁，铁忌之；瑱自安，丙戌，诈引铁谋事，因杀之，自据豫章。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范死了以后，侯瑱去依附庄铁，庄铁对他心怀猜忌，侯瑱心里不安稳，丙戌，假称约庄铁一块商量事情，乘机杀害了他，自己占据了豫章。
English: After the death of Xiao Fan, King of Shanyang, Hou Yi went to cling to Zhuang Tie, Zhuang Tie was suspicious of him, Hou Yi was not stable in his heart, and he took the opportunity to kill him, assuming that Zhuang Tie was discussing the matter, and he occupied Yuzhang.

古文：寻阳王大心遣徐嗣徽夜袭湓城，安南侯恬、裴之横等击走之。
现代文：寻阳王萧大心派徐嗣徽乘夜袭击湓城，安南侯萧恬、裴之横等把他打跑了。
English: Seeking the sun, King Xiao Daxin sent Xu Shihui to attack Shicheng by night, and Annan Hou Xiao Yao, Pei Zhi Heng and others beat him away.

古文：齐主娶赵郡李希宗之女，生子殷及绍德；又纳段韶之妹。
现代文：北齐国主高洋娶了赵郡人李希宗的女儿，生下儿子高殷、高绍德。又把段韶的妹妹纳为妃子。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, married the daughter of Li Xizong from Zhao County and had sons Gao Yin and Gao Shao De. He also took Duan Yu's sister as his concubine.

古文：及将建中宫，高隆之、高德政欲结勋贵之援，乃言： 汉妇人不可为天下母，宜更择美配。 
现代文：等到要确立中宫之主的时候，高隆之、高德政想勾结勋贵以为援手，就进言说： 汉族妇女不能当天下之母，应该另外选择美人为元配。 
English: When it was time to establish the lord of the middle palace, Gao Longzhi and Gao Dezheng wanted to collude with Xun Gui as a helping hand, and said: Han women can not be the mother of the world, they should choose another beauty as the first match.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：高洋没有采纳这种意见。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：丁亥，立李氏为皇后，以段氏为昭仪，子殷为皇太子。
现代文：丁亥，高洋立李希宗之女为皇后，以段韶之妹为昭仪，立皇子高殷为皇太子。
English: Dinghai, Gaoyang set up the daughter of Li Xizong as the empress, the sister of Duan Xuan as Zhaoyi, and the prince Gaoyang as the crown prince.

古文：庚寅，以库狄干为太宰，彭乐为太尉，潘相乐为司徒，司马子如为司空。
现代文：庚寅，任命库狄干为崐太宰，彭乐为太尉，潘相乐为司徒，司马子如为司空。
English: Geng Yin, appointed Kudikan as the grand vizier, Peng Le as the first lieutenant, Pan Sang Le as the secretary, and Sima Ziru as the secretary.

古文：辛卯，以清河王岳为司州牧。
现代文：辛卯，任命清河王高岳为司州牧。
English: Xinwu, appointed Qinghe Wang Gao Yue as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：侯景以羊鸦仁为五兵尚书。
现代文：侯景任命羊鸦仁为五兵尚书。
English: Hou Jing appointed Yang Rongren as the leader of the five soldiers.

古文：庚子，鸦仁出奔江西，将赴江陵，至东莞，盗疑其怀金，邀杀之。
现代文：庚子，羊鸦仁出奔到江西，将奔赴江陵，走到东莞时，强盗怀疑他带着重金，拦击把他杀死。
English: Geng Zi and Yang Guoren rushed to Jiangxi and will rush to Gangneung. When they reached Dongguan, the robbers suspected that he was carrying heavy money and stopped him and killed him.

古文：魏人欲令岳阳王詧发哀嗣位，詧辞，不受。
现代文：西魏人想让岳阳王萧詧发丧示哀，继承梁朝帝位，萧詧推辞了，没有接受。
English: The West Wei people wanted to let Yueyang King Xiao Xi send a mourning letter and inherit the imperial throne of the Liang Dynasty, but Xiao Xi declined and did not accept.

古文：丞相泰使荣权册命詧为梁王，始建台，置百官。
现代文：丞相宇文泰派遣荣权为使者，册封萧詧为梁王，萧詧这才建立台省，设置百官。
English: Emperor Wengtai dispatched Rongquan as an envoy, and made Xiao Tong the King of Liang. Xiao Tong then established Taiwan Province and set up a hundred officials.

古文：陈霸先修崎头古城，徙居之。
现代文：陈霸先重修了崎头古城，搬到那儿住下。
English: Chen Baxian rebuilt the old city of Sakigashira and moved there to live.

古文：初，燕昭成帝奔高丽，使其族人冯业以三百人浮海奔宋，因留新会。
现代文：当初，燕国昭成帝投奔高句丽，派他的同宗族的人冯业带三百人渡海投奔宋国，因此冯业及其部属就留在新会。
English: At first, Emperor Zhaocheng of Yan Province went to Goguryeo, and sent his kinsman Feng Ye with three hundred people to cross the sea to Song Province, so Feng Ye and his subordinates stayed in the new association.

古文：自业至孙融，世为罗州刺史，融子宝为高凉太守。
现代文：从冯业到他的孙子冯融，世代都任罗州刺史。冯融的儿子冯宝任高凉太守。
English: From Feng Ye to his grandson Feng Rong, generations have served as the history of Luozhou. Feng Rong's son Feng Bao is the governor of Gaoliang.

古文：高凉洗氏，世为蛮酋，部落十馀万家，有女，多筹略，善用兵，诸洞皆服其信义；融聘以为宝妇。
现代文：高凉洗氏，世代都是蛮族的酋长，拥有部落十余万家。洗氏有一个女儿，很懂得运筹韬略，善于用兵，各部落的蛮族都佩服她的信义。冯融聘她为冯宝的妻子。
English: Gao Rong Rai's family had been barbarian chieftains for generations, owning more than a hundred thousand clans. Rai had a daughter who was very good at strategizing and using soldiers, and the barbarians of all tribes admired her loyalty. Feng Rong hired her to be Feng Bao's wife.

古文：融虽累世为方伯，非其土人，号令不行；洗氏约束本宗，使从民礼，每与宝参决辞讼，首领有犯，虽亲戚无所纵舍，由是冯氏始得行其政。
现代文：冯融虽然世世为一方之长，但因自己不是土著，因此号令行不通。洗氏和冯宝结婚后，约束本宗族的人，使他们遵守老百姓应遵守的礼仪。她常常和冯宝一起研究诉讼之事，参与判决意见时，如果蛮族首领有犯法之处，虽然是自己的亲戚也毫不宽贷。从此之后冯氏的政令才得以实施。
English: Although Feng Rong has been the leader of one side all her life, because she is not an aboriginal, her order cannot be carried out. After the marriage of Saishi and Feng Bao, she restricted the people of her clan to comply with the etiquette that ordinary people should observe. She often studied the litigation together with Feng Bao, and when participating in the judgment, if the barbarian leader violated the law, although he was her relative, she would not relent. Since then, Feng's decree has been implemented.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕据大皋口，遣使召宝，宝欲往，洗氏止之曰： 刺史无故不应召太守，必欲诈君共反耳。 
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕占据大皋口，派使者去召见冯宝。冯宝想应召而行，洗氏夫人制止他说： 刺史无缘无故不应该召见太守，这次召见，一定是要骗您一块去谋反。 
English: Gaozhou assassin Li Qian occupied the Great Hall of the People and sent an envoy to summon Feng Bao. Feng Bao wanted to answer the summons, but Mrs. Saizhi stopped him and said: "The assassin should not summon the governor for no reason. This summoning must be to trick you into plotting a rebellion."

古文：宝曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：冯问道： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Feng asked: How did you know?

古文：洗氏曰： 刺史被召援台，乃称有疾，铸兵聚众而后召君；此必欲质君以发君之兵也，愿且无往以观其变。 
现代文：洗氏夫人说： 刺史受诏令去支援朝廷，但他声称自己有病不去，同时又铸造兵器，聚集队伍，然后又召您去。这一定是要拿您做人质好协逼您的军队一起出发去作乱。希望您先别去，观察一下事态的变化之后再说。 
English: Mrs. Chien said, "Tashi was ordered by the emperor to go to support the imperial court, but he claimed that he was too sick to go. At the same time, he forged weapons, gathered a team, and then called you to go. This must be to take you as a hostage and force your army to go out to make trouble. I hope you don't go first, and observe the changes in the situation before you say anything.

古文：数日，迁仕果反，遣主帅杜平虏将兵入灨石，城鱼梁以逼南康，陈霸先使周文育击之。
现代文：过了几天，李迁仕果然反叛了，他派主帅杜平虏带兵攻人灨石，在鱼梁修城以威胁南康。陈霸先派周文育去进攻他。
English: A few days later, Li Qian Shi did indeed rebel. He sent his commander Du Pingru and his troops to attack Shanshi and build a city in Yuliang to threaten Nankang. Chen Baxian sent Zhou Wenyu to attack him.

古文：洗氏谓宝曰： 平虏，骁将也，今入赣石与官军相拒，势未得还，迁仕在州，无能为也。
现代文：洗氏夫人对冯宝说： 杜平虏可是一员勇猛善战的将领，现在进据灨与官军相对抗，看这形势他一时是回不去了。
English: Mrs. Chien said to Feng Bao, "Du Pingru is a brave and skillful general, and now he is in Zhouzhuang resisting the government army. Seeing this situation, he can't go back for a while."

古文：君若自往，必有战斗，宜遣使卑辞厚礼告之曰： 身未敢出，欲遣妇参。 
现代文：他回不去，李迁仕一个人在高州是不能有什么作为的，您要是自己带兵前去，一定有一场猛烈的战斗，所以不如派使者带着厚礼，用谦卑的言辞对他说： 我自己不敢出头露面，想派我的妻子去参加您的义举。 
English: He can't go back. Li Qianshi can't do anything in Gaozhou alone. If you go there with your own soldiers, there will definitely be a fierce battle, so it's better to send an envoy with a gift and say to him with humble words: I don't dare to show my face, I want to send my wife to participate in your charity.

古文：彼闻之，必憙而无备。
现代文：他一听这话，肯定大喜过望而没有戒备。
English: He must have been overjoyed and caught off guard.

古文：我将千馀人，步担杂物，唱言输赕，得至栅下，破之必矣。 
现代文：那时，我带一千余人，步行挑担，带上各种杂物，声言是要去交纳财物以抵罪愆，这样进到他们军营的栅栏，突然发起攻击，破敌那是必然的。 
English: At that time, I took more than a thousand people, walking to pick up the burden, carrying all kinds of debris, claiming that I was going to pay property to atone for the crime, so I entered the fence of their military camp, suddenly launched an attack, and it was inevitable to break the enemy.

古文：宝从之。迁仕果不设备，洗氏袭击，大破之，迁仕走保宁都。
现代文：冯宝听从了她的计策，李迁仕果然不曾戒备，洗氏夫人挥兵袭击，大破李军。李迁仕逃跑到宁都自保。
English: Feng Bao listened to her strategy, and Li Qianshi was indeed caught off guard. Mrs. Saizhi waved her soldiers to attack and defeated Li Qianshi's army. Li Qianshi fled to Ningdu to protect himself.

古文：文育亦击走平虏，据其城。
现代文：同时，周文育也击退了杜平虏，占据了他的城堡。
English: At the same time, Zhou Wenyu also repelled Du Pingru and occupied his castle.

古文：洗氏与霸先会于灨石，还，谓宝曰： 陈都督非常人也，甚得众心，必能平贼，君宜厚资之。 
现代文：洗氏夫人与陈霸先在灨石会面，回来后，对冯宝说： 陈都督可不是一般的平庸之辈，他很得人心，肯定能够平定贼寇，您可得多给他一些军资，和他结好关系。 
English: Mrs. Chien and Chen Ba first met in Shaoshi. After returning, she said to Feng Bao: Chen Tudou is not an ordinary mediocre person. He is very popular and will surely be able to quell the bandits. You can give him more military funds and establish a good relationship with him.

古文：湘东王绎以霸先为豫州刺史，领豫章内史。
现代文：湘东王萧绎任命陈霸先为豫州刺史，兼领豫章内史的职务。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong, the king of eastern Hunan, appointed Chen Baxian as the chief historian of Yuzhou and the chief historian of Yuzhang.

古文：辛丑，裴之横攻稽亭，徐嗣徽击走之。
现代文：辛丑，裴之横攻打稽亭，徐嗣徽打跑了他。
English: Xin Ugly, Pei Zhi attacked and attacked the kiosk, and Xu Shihui ran him away.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，齐立世宗妃元氏为文襄皇后，宫曰静德。
现代文：秋季七月，辛亥，北齐国主高洋立文襄帝的妃子元氏为文襄皇后，宫名静德。
English: In the autumn of July, Xinhai, the concubine of Emperor Gaoyang of Northern Qi was crowned Empress of Wenzhong, and her name was Jingde.

古文：又封世宗子孝琬为河间王，孝瑜为河南王。
现代文：又封文襄帝的儿子高孝琬为河间王，高孝瑜为河南王。
English: In addition, Emperor Wenzhong's son Gao Xiaojun was named King of Kawama, and Gao Xiaoyu was named King of Henan.

古文：乙卯，以尚书令封隆之录尚书事，尚书左仆射平阳王淹为尚书令。
现代文：乙卯，任命尚书令封隆之为录尚书事，尚书左仆射平阳王高淹为尚书令。
English: Second, he appointed Shang Shuling Fong Long to record Shang Shuling, and Shang Shuling's left-hand man, Sha Pingyang Wang Gao Yun, to be Shang Shuling.

古文：辛酉，梁王詧入朝于魏。
现代文：辛酉，梁王萧詧去西魏朝见西魏国主。
English: Xin Zhen, Liang Wang Xiao Zhen went to the West Wei Dynasty to see the ruler of the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，东魏遣仪同武威牒云洛等迎鄱阳世子嗣，使镇皖城。
现代文：当初，东魏曾派遣仪同武威人牒云洛等人迎接鄱阳王的世子萧嗣，让他镇守皖城。
English: At the beginning, the Eastern Wei Dynasty had sent Yi and the powerful warrior Jiou Yunluo and others to welcome the King of Shenyang's heir, Xiao Zhi, and let him guard Shencheng.

古文：嗣未及行，任约军至，洛等引去；嗣遂失援，出战，败死。
现代文：萧嗣还没来得及出发，任约的军队就到了。牒云洛等人抽身退走了，萧嗣失去援助，出兵迎战任约，兵败身死。
English: Xiao Zi did not have time to set off, but Ren Yu's army arrived. Zhuo Yunluo and others withdrew, Xiao Zi lost support, sent troops to fight Ren Yu, and the soldiers were defeated and died.

古文：约遂略地至湓城，寻阳王大心遣司马韦质出战而败，帐下犹有战士千馀人，咸劝大心走保建州；大心不能用，戊辰，以江州降约。
现代文：任约于是把地盘扩大到湓城，寻阳王萧大心派司马韦质出战，战败，手下还剩下士兵一千余人，众人都劝说萧大心退保建州，萧大心不采纳众人的意见，戊辰，献出江州投降任约。
English: Ren You then expanded his territory to Lucheng. Sima Weixing was sent to fight by Xiao Daxin, the king of Guiyang, but he was defeated. There were still more than a thousand soldiers left under his command. Everyone persuaded Xiao Daxin to withdraw from Jianzhou, but Xiao Daxin did not accept everyone's opinion, and surrendered Jiangzhou to Ren You.

古文：先是，大心使前太子洗马韦臧镇建昌，有甲士五千，闻寻阳不守，欲帅众奔江陵，未发，为麾下所杀。
现代文：早先，萧大心让太子洗马韦臧镇守建昌，拥有带甲的士兵五千人。韦臧听说寻阳已经失守，想率这支军队投奔江陵，但是还没出发，就被部下杀死了。
English: Early on, Xiao Daxin had Prince Zima Weizhen guard Jianchang, with five thousand soldiers with armor. Weizhen heard that Huanyang had been lost and wanted to lead this army to Jiangling, but before he could leave, he was killed by his subordinates.

古文：臧，粲之子也。
现代文：韦臧，是韦粲的儿子。
English: Wei Wei is the son of Wei Wei.

古文：于庆略地至豫章，侯瑱屈，降之，庆送瑱建康。
现代文：于庆把地盘扩大到豫章一带，侯瑱兵力不济，就投降了于庆，于庆送侯瑱去建康。
English: Yu Qing expanded his territory to the area around Yuzhang, but Hou Yi was not strong enough, so he surrendered to Yu Qing, and Yu Qing sent Hou Yi to Jiankang.

古文：景以瑱姓，待之甚厚，留其妻子及弟为质，遣瑱庆徇蠡南诸郡，以瑱湘州刺史。
现代文：侯景因为侯瑱与自己同姓，所以对待他很优厚，把他的妻子、儿子和弟弟留为人质，派他随于庆去夺取彭蠡湖以南诸郡，并任命他为湘州刺史。
English: Hou Jing treated him very generously because Hou Yu had the same surname as himself. He kept his wife, son and brother as hostages and sent him to seize the counties south of Penghu Lake with Yu Qing, and appointed him as the governor of Hunan.

古文：初，巴山人黄法，有勇力，侯景之乱，合徒众保乡里。
现代文：当初，巴山人黄法氍，勇猛有力，侯景作乱时，他纠合徒众自保乡里。
English: At the beginning, the Bashan man Huang Faqi was brave and powerful. When Hou Jing made a disturbance, he entangled the disciples in self-protection.

古文：太守贺诩下江州，命法监郡事。
现代文：太守贺诩乘船下江州，命令黄法氍留下来监管郡中政事。
English: The governor-general He Yao went to Jiangzhou by ship and ordered Huang Fa Yao to stay behind to supervise the political affairs of the county.

古文：法屯新淦，于庆自豫章分兵袭新氵金，法败之。
现代文：黄法氍驻扎在新淦，于庆从豫章出发，分兵袭击新淦，黄法氍击败了他。
English: Huang Fahua was stationed in Xinyi, and Yu Qing departed from Yuzhang. A detachment of soldiers attacked Xinyi, and Huang Fahua defeated him.

古文：陈霸先使周文育进军击庆，法引兵会之。
现代文：陈霸先派周文育进军攻打于庆，黄法氍带领军队和他会合。
English: Chen Baxian sent Zhou Wenyu to attack Yu Qing, and Huang Fahu led the army to meet him.

古文：邵陵王纶闻任约将至，使司马蒋思安将精兵五千袭之，约众溃；思安不设备，约收兵袭之，思安败走。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶听说任约的军队要来进犯，便派司马蒋思安率精兵五千人去袭击，任约的军队被打散。蒋思安以为已经胜利了，故不加戒备，任约把溃散的士兵收集起来，反垸来袭击蒋军，蒋思安败退了。
English: Shaoling King Xiaohui heard that Renyou's army was about to attack, so he sent Sima Jiang Sian and five thousand elite soldiers to attack. Renyou's army was scattered. Jiang Sian thought he had won, so he did not take precautions. Renyou gathered the scattered soldiers and counterattacked against Jiang's army. Jiang Sian was defeated.

古文：湘东王绎改宜都为宜州，以王琳为刺史。
现代文：湘东王萧绎把宜都改为宜州，派王琳当刺史。
English: King Xiaoyan of eastern Hunan changed Yidu to Yizhou and sent Wang Lin as a messenger.

古文：是月，以南郡王大连为江州刺史。
现代文：这一月，梁朝派南郡王萧大连为江州刺史。
English: This month, Wang Dalian of Renan County made history in Jiangsu Province.

古文：魏丞相泰以齐主称帝，帅诸军讨之。
现代文：西魏丞相宇文泰因为北齐国主高洋称帝，就率各路人马去征讨他。
English: Because Emperor Gaoyang, the ruler of Northern Qi, was proclaimed emperor, the Western Wei chancellor Umentai led people from all walks of life to enlist him.

古文：以齐王郭镇陇右，征秦州刺史宇文导为大将军、都督二十三州诸军事，屯咸阳，镇关中。
现代文：西魏命令齐王元廓镇守陇右，征召秦州刺史宇文导为大将军，都督二十三州诸军事，驻扎在咸阳，镇守关中。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty ordered Qi Wangyuan Guo to guard the right side of the city, and summoned Qin Zhou Zhishi Yuwen to be the general and military governor of the 23 states, stationed in Xianyang and guarding the middle of the city.

古文：益州沙门孙天英帅徒数千人夜攻州城，武陵王纪与战，斩之。
现代文：益州和尚孙天英率徒弟几千人乘夜攻打州城，武陵王萧纪与他交战，杀了他。
English: Yizhou and Shangsun Tianying led thousands of apprentices to attack the city of Yizhou at night. Wuling King Xiao Ji fought with him and killed him.

古文：邵陵王纶大修铠仗，将讨侯景。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶大修铠甲器仗，准备讨伐侯景。
English: King of Shao Ling, Xiao Xi, was busy repairing his armor and preparing to attack Houjing.

古文：湘东王绎恶之，八月，甲午，遣左卫将军王僧辩、信州刺史鲍泉等帅舟师一万东趣江、郢，声言拒任约，且云迎邵陵王还江陵，授以湘州。
现代文：湘东王萧绎担心萧纶兵力增大，很厌恶他。八月，甲午，萧绎派左卫将军王僧辩、信州刺史鲍泉等率领水军一万人东赴江州、郢州一带，声言是为了抵抗任约进犯，而且说要迎接邵陵王萧纶回江陵，准备把湘州授给他。
English: In the afternoon of August, Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, was worried about the growing strength of Xiao Xi, and detested him. In the afternoon of August, Xiao Yu's left-guard generals, Wang Sofen and Bao Quan, the sheriff of Shinshu, led a naval force of ten thousand men eastward to the areas of Jiangzhou and Ganzhou, claiming that it was to resist any invasion, and that they wanted to welcome Xiao Yu, the king of Shao Ling, back to Jiangling and prepare to give him Hunan Province.

古文：齐主初立，励精为治。
现代文：北齐国主高洋刚刚登基，励精图治。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, had just ascended to the throne, and he worked hard to govern.

古文：赵道德以事属黎阳太守清河房超，超不发书，棓杀其使；齐主善之，命守宰各设棓以诛属请之使。
现代文：赵道德为了私事派人暗暗投书求助于黎阳太守清河人房超，房超不看求情信，而且用木杖打死使者。高洋知道了此事，很是称许，并命令各地地方官各设木杖，以杀敢于请托的使者。
English: Zhao Daode sent a person to secretly write a letter for private affairs to seek help from Li Yang, the eunuch of Qinghe, Fang Chao. Fang Chao did not care about the request for information, and killed the messenger with a wooden cane. Gao Yang knew about this, was very commendable, and ordered local officials around the country to set up wooden canes to kill the messenger who dared to ask for help.

古文：久之，都官中郎宋轨奏曰： 若受使请赇，犹致大戮，身为枉法，何以加罪！ 
现代文：过了很久，都官中郎宋轨向高洋启奏说： 奉命去行贿，还要受到诛杀，贪脏枉法的本人又怎么治罪呢！ 
English: After a long time, Song Guo, a middle-ranking official in the capital, said to Gaoyang Qisong: If you are ordered to pay bribes, you will also be beaten to death. How can you punish someone who is greedy and dishonest?

古文：乃罢之。
现代文：高洋听了，才废除了这一重刑。
English: So the matter was dropped.

古文：司都功曹张老上书请定齐律，诏右仆射薛琡等取魏《麟趾格》，更讨论损益之。
现代文：司都功曹张老给高洋上书请求制定北齐法律。高洋下诏命令右仆射薛琡等人拿北魏律书《麟趾格》为底本，在此基础上增减而成。
English: Cao Zhanglao, the governor of the capital, sent a letter to Gaoyang to request the formulation of the Northern Qi Law. Gaoyang ordered his right-hand man, Xie Xuan, and others to take the Northern Wei law book "Linti Ge" as the base, and on this basis to add and subtract.

古文：齐主简练六坊之人，每一人必当百人，任其临陈必死，然后取之，谓之 百保鲜卑 。
现代文：北齐国主高洋精选六坊的宿卫之士，每一个人要能抵挡一百个人，要求他们作战抱有必死的决心，起名为 百保鲜卑 。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, selected the guards of the six fortresses, each of whom should be able to resist a hundred people, and required them to fight with a death-defying determination, and named them Bai Bao Xianbei.

古文：又简华人之勇力绝伦者，谓之 勇士 ，以备边要。
现代文：又精选汉人中勇气力量超凡绝伦的人，叫做 勇士 ，以充实边境要害之地。
English: In addition, a selection of Chinese people with extraordinary courage and strength, called "warriors," were selected to enrich the border key areas.

古文：始立九等之户，富者税其钱，贫者役其力。
现代文：开始设立户分九等的制度，富户纳税交钱，贫户任役出力。
English: A nine-class household system was established, with the rich paying taxes and the poor working as laborers.

古文：九月，丁巳，魏军发长安。
现代文：九月，丁巳，西魏军队从长安出发伐北齐。
English: In September, the West Wei army set out from Chang'an to invade the north.

古文：王僧辩军至鹦鹉洲，郢州司马刘龙虎等潜送质于僧辩，邵陵王纶闻之，遣其子威正侯礩将兵击之，龙虎败，奔于僧辩。
现代文：王僧辩的部队抵达鹦鹉洲，郢州司马刘龙虎等偷偷地送人质到王僧辩那儿以表示友好，邵陵王萧纶听到此事，派他的儿子威正侯萧率兵去攻打他们，刘龙虎兵败，逃到王僧辩那儿。
English: Wang Sangyan's troops arrived at the Parrot Island. Liu Longhu, the secretary of the Zhangzhou Sima, and others secretly sent hostages to Wang Sangyan to express their friendship. Shaolin King Xiao Yan heard about this and sent his son Wei Zhenghou Xiao to attack them. Liu Longhu was defeated and fled to Wang Sangyan.

古文：纶以书责僧辩曰： 将军前年杀人之侄，今岁伐人之兄，以此求荣，恐天下不许！ 
现代文：萧纶写信责备王僧辩，信里说： 将军前年杀了人家的侄儿萧誉，今后又讨伐人家的兄长，这样去邀功求荣，恐怕天下之人都不会允许的吧！ 
English: Xiao Yao wrote a letter to rebuke Wang Sangye, saying in the letter: "The general killed someone's nephew Xiao You the year before last, and in the future he will attack someone's elder brother. I'm afraid no one in the world will allow him to seek glory in this way.

古文：僧辩送书于湘东王绎，绎命进军。
现代文：王僧辩把信送到湘东王萧绎那儿，萧绎命令他别理睬，继续进军。
English: Wang Sangyan sent the letter to the king of eastern Hunan, Xiao Yu, who ordered him to ignore it and continue marching.

古文：辛酉，纶集其麾下于西园，涕泣言曰： 我本无他，志在灭贼，湘东常谓与之争帝，遂尔见伐。
现代文：辛酉，萧纶把他的部下集中在西园，泪流满面地说： 我其实别无所图，一心只想消灭侯景乱贼。湘东王常常以为我要和他争帝位，于是就被他兴兵讨伐。
English: Sin Yan and Xiao Yan concentrated their subordinates in the West Park and said with tears streaming down their faces, "I actually have nothing else to do, I only want to eliminate the Houjing bandits. The King of Eastern Hunan often thought that I wanted to compete with him for the imperial throne, so he raised an army to fight against me."

古文：今日欲守则交绝粮储，欲战则取笑千载，不容无事受缚，当于下流避之。 
现代文：今天如想坚守城池则储存粮食的道路已经断绝，想作战则遗笑千古。无缘无故被俘受缚是我无法接受的，我还是逃往长江下游避避锋头吧。 
English: Today, if you want to hold on to the castle, the way to store grain has been cut off, and if you want to fight, you will be laughed at for a thousand years. I can't accept being captured and bound for no reason. I'll escape to the lower reaches of the Yangtze River to avoid the front.

古文：麾下壮士争请出战，纶不从，与礩自仓门登舟北出。
现代文：萧纶部下的壮士争着请求出战，萧纶不允许他们妄动，终于与萧登船从郢城北门逃走了。
English: The strong men under Xiao Yao's command pleaded for battle. Xiao Yao did not allow them to act recklessly, and finally he and Xiao boarded a ship and fled from the north gate of Licheng.

古文：僧辩入据郢州。
现代文：王僧辩进占了郢州。
English: Wang Sangye entered and occupied Bozhou.

古文：绎以南平王恪为尚书令、开府仪同三司，世子方诸为郢州刺史，王僧辩为领军将军。
现代文：萧绎任命南平王萧恪为尚书令、开府仪同三司，任命世子萧方诸为郢州刺史，王僧辩为领军将军。
English: Xiao Yu appointed Nanping King Xiao Jia as Shang Shuling, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, appointed his son Xiao Fang Zhu as Zhangzhou Sisi, and Wang Sofen as the leading general.

古文：纶遇镇东将军裴之高于道，之高之子畿掠其军器，纶与左右轻舟奔武昌涧饮寺，僧法馨匿纶于岩穴之下。
现代文：萧纶在逃亡路上遇到镇东将军裴之高，裴之高的儿子裴畿把萧纶的军队装备抢走了，萧纶与他的左右乘轻舟逃奔武昌涧饮寺，僧人法馨把萧纶藏在一个岩洞之中。
English: Xiao Yao met the Zhendong General Pei Zhigao on his way to escape. Pei Zhigao's son Pei Gui Ram took away Xiao Yao's army equipment. Xiao Yao and his right and left fled to Wuchang Drinking Temple by light boat. The monk Faxin hid Xiao Yao in a rock cave.

古文：纶长史韦质、司马姜律等闻纶尚存，驰往迎之，说七栅流民以求粮仗。
现代文：萧纶的长史韦质、司马姜律等听说萧纶还活着，驰马前往迎接他，并游说北江州结七栅以自保的流民为萧纶提供粮草兵器。
English: Xiao Yao's eldest sons, Shi Weijing and Sima Jianglu, heard that Xiao Yao was still alive and rode out to meet him. They also lobbied the self-protecting exiles in North Jiangzhou to provide grain and grass weapons for Xiao Yao.

古文：纶出营巴水，流民八九千人附之，稍收散卒，屯于齐昌，遣使请降于齐，齐以纶为梁王。
现代文：萧纶从岩穴出来，在崐巴水结营，有八九千流民依附他，又慢慢收集了一部分散失的士卒，在齐昌屯驻下来。萧纶派使者向北齐求和，北齐封萧纶为梁王。
English: Xiao Yu came out of the cave and set up camp at Zouba Shui. Eighty-nine thousand refugees followed him. He slowly gathered some of the scattered soldiers and settled down in Qichang Tun. Xiao Yu sent an envoy to North Qi to sue for peace, and North Qi crowned Xiao Yu as the King of Liang.

古文：湘东王绎改封皇子大款为临川王，大成为桂阳王，大封为汝南王。
现代文：湘东王萧绎改封皇子萧大款为临川王，萧大成为桂阳王，萧大封为汝南王。
English: Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, changed the title of his son Xiao Daqi to the King of Linchuan, Xiao Daqi became the King of Guiyang, and Xiao Daqi became the King of Yunnan.

古文：癸亥，魏军至潼关。
现代文：癸亥，西魏军队进至潼关。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Western Wei army marched into Shaoguan.

古文：庚午，齐主如晋阳，命太子殷居凉风堂监国。
现代文：庚午，北齐国主驾临晋阳，命令太子殷住入凉风堂监守国都。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the ruler of Northern Qi arrived in Jinyang and ordered the prince to live in the Liangfeng Hall to guard the capital.

古文：南郡王中兵参军张彪等起兵于若邪山，攻破浙东诸县，有众数万。
现代文：南郡王中兵参军张彪等人在若邪山起兵，一气攻破浙东好几个县，拥有数万人马。
English: Wang Zhongbing of Nan County joined the army, Zhang Biao and others raised an army in Waka Yaxian, broke through several counties in eastern Zhejiang in one go, and owned tens of thousands of horses.

古文：吴郡人陆令公等说太守南海王大临往依之。
现代文：吴郡人陆令公等人游说太守南海王萧大临去依附张彪。
English: The people of Wuxi County, including Lu Lingong and others, lobbied the governor of the South China Sea, King Xiao Da Lin, to follow Zhang Biao.

古文：大临曰： 彪若成功，不资我力；如其桡败，以我自解。
现代文：萧大临说： 张彪如果成功，并没依靠我的力量；如果他遭到挫败，却可以以我不中用为由来自我开脱责任。
English: Xiao Dalin said: If Zhang Biao succeeds, he did not rely on my strength; if he is defeated, he can absolve himself of responsibility on the grounds that I am of no use.

古文：不可往也。 
现代文：我不能去依附他。 
English: You can't go to Zhang Biao.

古文：任约进寇西阳、武昌。
现代文：任约进犯西阳、武昌。
English: Ren roughly attacked Xiyang and Wuchang.

古文：初，宁州刺史彭城徐文盛募兵数万人讨侯景，湘东王绎以为秦州刺史，使将兵东下，与约遇于武昌。
现代文：当初，宁州刺史彭城人徐文盛曾招募士兵几万人去讨伐侯景，湘东王萧绎任命他为秦州刺史，让他带兵东下，与任约会师于武昌。
English: At the beginning, Xu Wensheng, a native of Spengcheng, Ningzhou, had recruited tens of thousands of soldiers to fight against Houjing. King Xiaoyan of East Hunan appointed him as the governor of Qin, let him lead the soldiers to the east, and appointed him as the governor of Wuchang.

古文：绎以庐陵王应为江州刺史，以文盛为长史行府州事，督诸将拒之。
现代文：萧绎任命庐陵王萧应为江州刺史，任命徐文盛为长史行府州事，统驭诸将抵抗任约。
English: Xiao Yu appointed Gongling Wang Xiao Ying as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and appointed Xu Wensheng as the governor of Jiangsu Province to manage the affairs of Jiangsu Province.

古文：应，续之子也。
现代文：萧应，是萧续的儿子。
English: Xiao Ying is the son of Xiao Zhuang.

古文：邵陵王纶引齐兵未至，移营马栅，距西阳八十里，任约闻之，遣仪同叱罗子通等将铁骑二百袭之，纶不为备，策马亡走。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶引领的齐兵还没抵达，自己移动军营到了马栅，这个地方距离西阳八十里。任约听到消息，派仪同叱罗子通等带铁骑二百人去袭击萧纶。萧纶毫无准备，扬鞭催马逃跑了。
English: The Qi soldiers led by Shao Ling King Xiao Yao had not yet arrived, so he moved the military camp to Ma Zha, a place 80 miles away from Xiyang. Whenever he heard the news, he sent Yi and Zhaozi Tong with 200 cavalrymen to attack Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao was unprepared, and he whipped his horse to make it run away.

古文：时湘东王绎亦与齐连和，故齐人观望，不助纶。
现代文：这时湘东王萧绎也和北齐联合，所以北齐人站在一边观望，不发兵帮助萧纶。
English: At this time, Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, also allied with the Northern Qi, so the Northern Qi people stood on the sidelines and did not send troops to help Xiao Yu.

古文：定州刺史田祖龙迎纶，纶以祖龙为绎所厚，惧为所执，复归齐昌。
现代文：定州刺史田祖龙出迎萧纶，但萧纶认为田祖龙被萧绎所厚待，害怕被他抓住，所以又回齐昌去了。
English: Tian Zu Long, a member of the Dingzhou Jishi, came out to meet Xiao Yao, but Xiao Yao thought that Tian Zu Long was treated well by Xiao Yu and was afraid of being caught by him, so he went back to Qichang.

古文：行至汝南，魏所署汝南城主李素，纶之故吏也，开城纳之，任约遂据西阳、武昌。
现代文：当他走到汝南时，西魏所封的汝南城长官李素原是萧纶的老部下，所以开城门接纳了他。任约于是占据了西阳、武昌。
English: When he went to the south of the Yunnan Province, the governor of the south of the Yunnan Province, Li Su, who was appointed by the Western Wei Dynasty, was originally an old subordinate of Xiao Yao, so he opened the city gate and accepted him. Ren Ying then occupied Xiyang and Wuchang.

古文：裴之高帅子弟部曲千馀人至夏首，湘东王绎召之，以为新兴、永守二郡太守。
现代文：裴之高率领子弟部属一千余人行进到夏首，湘东王萧绎如见他，任命他为新兴，永宁二郡太守。
English: Pei Zhigao led more than a thousand people marching to the beginning of the summer, and the king of Hunan Province, Xiaoyan, saw him and appointed him as the new governor of Yongning County.

古文：又以南平王恪为武州刺史，镇武陵。
现代文：又任命南平王萧恪为武州刺史，镇守武陵。
English: He also appointed Nanping Wang Xiaoqi as the governor of Wuzhou and the town guard of Wuling.

古文：初，邵陵王纶以衡阳王献为齐州刺史，镇齐昌；任约击擒之，送建康，杀之。
现代文：当初，邵陵王萧纶任命衡阳王萧献为齐州刺史，镇守齐昌，任约进攻并捉住了他，送到建康，杀了他。
English: At the beginning, Shao Ling Wang Xiaoqi appointed Hengyang Wang Xiao Xuan as the governor of Qizhou and the town guard of Qichang, attacked and captured him at will, sent him to Jiankang, and killed him.

古文：献，畅之孙也。
现代文：萧献是萧畅的孙子。
English: Xiao Xian is the grandson of Xiao Chang.

古文：乙亥，进侯景位相国，封二十郡，为汉王，加殊礼。
现代文：乙亥，晋升侯景位居相国，封二十郡，为汉王，给以特殊礼遇。
English: Eihei, promoted to the position of Houjing, lived in the same country, sealed twenty counties, was the king of Han, and was given special courtesy.

古文：岳阳王詧还襄阳。
现代文：岳阳王萧詧回到襄阳。
English: Yueyang King Xiao Wei returned to Xiangyang.

古文：黎州民攻刺史张贲，贲弃城走。
现代文：黎州老百姓聚众攻打刺史张贲，张贲弃城逃跑。
English: The common people of Lizhou gathered in large numbers to attack Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye abandoned the city and fled.

古文：州民引氐酋北益州刺史杨法琛据黎州，命王、贾二姓诣武陵王纪请法琛为刺史。
现代文：黎州民众引领氐族酋长北益州刺史杨法琛占据黎州，派王、贾两姓的人去求见武陵王萧纪，请求让杨法琛当黎州刺史。
English: The people of Lishu led by the chief of the Yi people of North Yizhou, Yang Fahui, occupied Lishu, and sent Wang and Jia to meet with the King of Wuling, Xiao Ji, to ask Yang Fahui to be the ruler of Lishu.

古文：纪深责之，囚法琛质子崇颙、崇虎。
现代文：萧纪很严厉地斥责这种要求，把杨法琛的两个当人质的儿子杨崇颙、杨崇虎抓了起来。
English: Xiao Ji severely rebuked this demand, and arrested Yang Fahui's two hostage sons, Yang Chongyao and Yang Chonghuang.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑朔，法琛遣使附魏。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁丑朔，杨法琛派使者去对西魏表示依附。
English: In winter, in October, Ding Hushaku and Yang Fahui sent envoys to show their attachment to the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：己卯，齐主至晋阳宫。
现代文：已卯，北齐国主高洋到了晋阳宫。
English: Already, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, has arrived at the Jinyang Palace.

古文：广武王长弼与并州刺史段韶不协，齐主将如晋阳，长弼言于帝曰： 韶拥强兵在彼，恐不知人意，岂可径往投之！ 
现代文：当初，广武王高长弼与并州刺史段韶不和，高洋将去晋阳，高长弼对高洋说： 段韶在晋阳拥有强大的兵力，恐怕他的行动会出人意料之外，岂可直接去他那里！ 
English: At the beginning, Guangwu King Gao Changtao was at odds with the annexation of Guizhou, and Gao Yang would go to Jinyang. Gao Changtao said to Gao Yang: "Duan Yu has a strong military force in Jinyang. I'm afraid his actions will be unexpected. Shouldn't you go directly to him?"

古文：帝不听。
现代文：高洋不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：既至，以长弼语告之，曰： 如君忠诚，人犹有谗，况其馀乎！ 
现代文：等到抵达晋阳，把高长弼的谗言告诉段韶，说： 象您这样忠诚的臣子，人们尚且有馋言，何况其他人呢！ 
English: When he arrived in Jinyang, he told Duan Yu about Gao Changyu's criticism, saying, "As a loyal vassal like you, people still have criticisms, let alone others!

古文：长弼，永乐之弟也。
现代文：高长弼是高永乐的弟弟。
English: Gao Changyu is Gao Yongle's younger brother.

古文：乙酉，以特进元韶为尚书左仆射，段韶为右仆射。
现代文：乙酋，北齐任命特进元韶为尚书左仆射，段韶为右仆射。
English: Eihei, North Qi appointed Specially Promoted Yuan Qi as Shangshu's left minion and Duan Qi as his right minion.

古文：乙未，侯景自加宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事，以诏文呈上。
现代文：乙未，侯景给自己加封宇宙大将军、都督六合诸军事等职，写成诏书呈给简文帝看。
English: Soon after, Hou Jing awarded himself the title of General of the Universe and the title of Governor of the Six Provinces, as well as other military positions, and wrote an imperial edict to present to Emperor Jianwen.

古文：上惊曰： 将军乃有宇宙之号乎！ 
现代文：简文帝惊讶地说： 将军里竟有宇宙这样的称号吗！ 
English: Surprised, Emperor Jianwen said, "Is there such a title as 'universe' in Shogun?"

古文：立皇子大钧为西阳王，大威为武宁王，大球为建安王，大昕为义安王，大挚为绥建王，大圜为乐梁王。
现代文：简文帝册立皇子萧大钧为西阳王，萧大威为武宁王，萧大球为建安王，萧大昕为义安王，萧大挚为绥建王，萧大圜为乐梁王。
English: Emperor Jianwen decreed that Prince Xiao Dafu was the King of Xiyang, Xiao Dawei was the King of Wu Ning, Xiao Daqiu was the King of Jian'an, Xiao Dafu was the King of Yian'an, Xiao Dazhong was the King of Jian'an, and Xiao Dafu was the King of Le Liang.

古文：齐东徐州刺史行台辛术镇下邳。
现代文：北齐东徐州刺史行台辛术镇守下邳。
English: North Qi, East Qi, Xuzhou, Jinshi, Xingtai, Xinzhu Town, Shuzhu Town, Xi'an.

古文：十一月，侯景征租入建康，术帅众度淮断之，烧其谷百万石，遂围阳平，景行台郭元建引兵救之。
现代文：十一月，侯景为征收租赋进入建康，辛术率军队渡过淮河以断其后路，烧掉他的粮食百万石，并包围了阳平。侯景手下的行台郭无建带兵去救援。
English: In November, Hou Jing entered Jiankang in order to collect rents. Xin Zhi led the army across the Huai River to cut off his rear path, burned his grain of a million stones, and surrounded Yangping. Hou Jing's guerrillas did not take soldiers to rescue.

古文：壬戌，术略三千馀家，还下邳。
现代文：壬戌，辛术抢掠了三千余户人家，回到下邳。
English: In Jinzhou, Xinzhu looted more than three thousand households and returned to Jiaozuo.

古文：武陵王纪帅诸军发成都，湘东王绎遣使以书止之曰： 蜀人勇悍，易动难安，弟可镇之，吾自当灭贼。 
现代文：武陵王萧纪率领各路人马从成都进发，意欲进攻侯景。
English: Wuling King Xiao Ji led all the way from Chengdu to attack Houjing.

古文：又别纸云： 地拟孙、刘，各安境界；情深鲁、卫，书信恒通。 
现代文：湘东王萧绎派使者送一封信劝止他。信中说： 蜀地民性勇猛骠悍，容易骚动而难以安定，老弟你要好好镇守成都，我自己有能力消灭乱贼。 
English: Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, sent an envoy with a letter to dissuade him. The letter said: "Shu people are brave and fierce, easily agitated and difficult to stabilize. My brother, you should do a good job of guarding Chengdu. I myself have the ability to eliminate the bandits."

古文：甲子，南平王恪帅文武拜笺推湘东王绎为相国，总百揆；绎不许。
现代文：又用另一张纸写道： 我们之间疆界依照当年孙权、刘备各自的疆界来划分即可，我们之间的情谊则象春秋时鲁国、卫国的友谊那样深厚，希望常通书信。 
English: He also wrote on another piece of paper: The boundary between us can be divided according to the respective boundaries of Sun Quan and Liu Bei in the past, and the friendship between us is as deep as the friendship between Lu Guo and Wei Guo in the Spring and Autumn Periods. We hope to write to each other often.

古文：魏丞相泰自弘农为桥，济河，至建州。
现代文：甲子，南平王萧恪率文武官员共进奏章推举湘东王萧绎为相国，总领百宫，萧绎不许可。西魏丞相宇文泰在弘农建桥，跨黄河，到达建州。
English: Xiao Zi, Nanping King Xiao Jia and the civil and military officials jointly advanced the music chapter to nominate Shandong King Xiaoyan as the sister country, the general leader of the Hundred Palaces, Xiaoyan did not allow. Western Wei chancellor Wu Wentai built a bridge in Hongnong, crossed the Yellow River, and arrived in Jianzhou.

古文：丙寅，齐主自将出顿东城。
现代文：丙寅，北齐国主高洋亲率军队出发驻扎于晋阳之东城。
English: Cui Yin, the ruler of North Qi, Gao Yang, led the troops to leave and stationed in the East City of Jinyang.

古文：泰闻其军容严盛，叹曰： 高欢不死矣！ 
现代文：宇文泰听说高洋军容严整，军威强盛，不禁感叹说： 高欢并没有死去呵！ 
English: When he heard that the Gaoyang army was well-formed and powerful, he couldn't help but sigh and say: Gaohuan didn't die!

古文：会久雨，自秋及冬，魏军畜产多死，乃自蒲阪还。
现代文：当时正逢久雨成灾，从秋天到冬天，西魏军队中的战马死了不少，于是只好从蒲坂撤退。
English: At that time, it was raining all the time, and from autumn to winter, many horses in the West Wei army died, so they had to retreat from Busan.

古文：于是河南自洛阳，河北自平阳已东，皆入于齐。
现代文：从此黄河以南从洛阳往东、黄河以北从平阳往东，都纳入了北齐的版图。
English: Since then, the south of the Yellow River from Luoyang to the east and the north of the Yellow River from Pingyang to the east have been included in the territory map of Beiqi.

古文：丁卯，徐文盛军贝矶，任约帅水军逆战，文盛大破之，斩叱罗子通、赵威方，仍进军大举口。
现代文：丁卯，徐文盛驻军于贝矶，任约率水师迎战，徐文盛把他打得大败，杀了叱罗子通、赵威方，并继续进军大举口。
English: Dingwu, Xu Wensheng garrisoned troops in Beiji, Ren Yotong led the sailors to fight, Xu Wensheng defeated him, killed Zhaorozitong, Zhao Weifang, and continued to march forward.

古文：侯景遣宋子仙等将兵二万助约，以约守西阳，久不能进，自出屯晋熙。
现代文：侯景派宋子仙等率兵二万人去帮助任约。因为任约驻守西阳，久久不能前进，侯景自己出兵屯驻于晋熙。
English: Hou Jing sent Song Zixian and other 20,000 soldiers to help Ren Rong. Because Ren Rong was stationed in Xiyang and could not advance for a long time, Hou Jing himself stationed troops in Jinxi.

古文：南康王会理以建康空虚，与太子左卫将军柳敬礼、西乡侯劝、东乡侯勔谋起兵诛王伟。
现代文：南康王萧会理见建康空虚，就与太子左卫将军柳敬礼、西乡侯萧劝、东乡侯萧勔等人密谋起兵杀掉王伟。
English: King Xiao of Nankang saw the emptiness of Jiankang and conspired to kill Wang Wei with Prince Zuo, General Liu Jiali, Xixiang Hou Xiao, Dongxiang Hou Xiao and others.

古文：安乐侯乂理出奔长芦，集众得千馀人。
现代文：安乐侯萧勔理出逃到长芦，集结军队一千余人等待举事。
English: The lord of Anle, Xiao Lili, fled to Changlu and gathered an army of more than a thousand people to await the event.

古文：建安侯贲、中宿世子子邕知其谋，以告伟。
现代文：建安侯萧贲、中宿世子萧子邕得知他们的密谋，就向王伟告发。
English: When Xiao Zixuan, the lord of Jian'an and the heir of Zhongshu, learned of their conspiracy, he reported it to Wang Wei.

古文：伟收会理、敬礼、劝、勔及会理弟祁阳侯通理，俱杀之。
现代文：王伟抓住了萧会理、柳敬礼、萧劝、萧勔以及萧会理的弟弟祁阳侯萧通理，把他们全都杀了。
English: Wang Wei caught Xiao Huili, Liu Jieli, Xiao Zhen, Xiao Yao, and Xiao Huili's younger brother, Shenyang Hou Xiao Tongli, and killed them all.

古文：乂理为左右所杀。
现代文：萧勔理则被身边部下杀死。
English: Xiao Xili was killed by his subordinates.

古文：钱塘褚冕，以会理故旧，捶掠千计，终无异言。
现代文：钱塘人褚冕，因为是萧会理的故交旧友，虽然被王伟拷打得死去活来，到底也没有说出告发萧会理的话来。
English: Qiantang people are jealous, because they are old friends of Xiao Huili. Although they were tortured to death by Wang Wei, they did not say anything to denounce Xiao Huili.

古文：会理隔壁谓之曰： 褚郎，卿岂不为我致此？卿虽忍死明我，我心实欲杀贼！ 
现代文：萧会理在隔壁对褚冕说： 褚郎，你是为了我才被打成这样的啊，你虽然忍受着死亡的威胁想开脱我，但我是真想杀贼除乱啊！ 
English: Xiao Huili said to Zhen Guan in the next room: Zhen Lang, you were beaten up like this because of me. Although you endured the threat of death and wanted to free me, I really wanted to kill the thief and put an end to the chaos!

古文：冕竟不服，景乃宥之。
现代文：褚冕终于没有屈服，侯景看拿他没办法，就放了他。
English: Zhen Guan finally did not give in. Hou Jing saw that there was nothing he could do, so he released him.

古文：劝，昺之子；贲，正德之弟子；子邕，憺之孙也。
现代文：萧劝是萧勔的儿子。萧贲是萧正德的弟弟的儿子。萧子邕是萧勔的孙子。
English: Xiao Xuan is the son of Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao is the son of Xiao Zhengde's younger brother. Xiao Zi Yao is the grandson of Xiao Yao.

古文：帝自即位以来，景防卫甚严，外人莫得进见，唯武林侯谘及仆射王克、舍人殷不害，并以文弱得出入卧内，帝与之讲论而已。
现代文：简文帝自从即帝位以来，侯景对他防卫很严密，外人没法得到进见的机会。只有武林侯萧谘和仆射王克、舍人殷不害三人，因为他们身体文弱才得以在皇上居处进进出出。
English: Since Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, Houjing has been very protective of him, and outsiders have not been able to get a chance to see inside. Only three people, Wulin Hou Xiaozhi and his servants Wang Ke and She Ren Yin, were able to enter and leave the emperor's residence because they were physically weak.

古文：及会理死，克、不害惧祸，稍自疏。
现代文：简文帝和他们也只是闲谈而已。待到萧会理被杀死，王克、殷不害害怕自己也惹祸，就慢慢和简文帝疏远了。
English: Emperor Jianwen and they were just chatting. After Xiao Huili was killed, Wang Ke and Yin gradually distanced themselves from Emperor Jianwen, fearing that they would also cause trouble.

古文：咨独不离帝，朝请无绝；景恶之，使其仇人刁戍刺杀咨于广莫门外。
现代文：只有萧谘不离开简文帝，每天上朝问安，从不停止。侯景为此很厌恶他，指使他的仇人刁戍把萧谘刺杀在广莫门外。
English: Only Xiao Zhi did not leave Emperor Jianwen. He never stopped greeting the emperor every day. Hou Jing was disgusted with him for this, and ordered his enemies to assassinate Xiao Zhi outside Guangmo Gate.

古文：帝之即位也，景与帝登重云殿，礼佛为誓云： 自今君臣两无猜贰，臣固不负陛下，陛下亦不得负臣！ 
现代文：当简文帝即位的时候，侯景和他一起登上重云殿，向着佛像行礼发誓说：从今天起我们君臣两人互相不能有猜忌和二心，我固然不应有负于陛下，陛下也不能有负于我。 
English: When Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, Hou Jing ascended the Great Cloud Hall with him, bowed to the Buddha statue and swore: "From now on, we two princes and ministers must not have any suspicions or second thoughts about each other. Of course, I should not be inferior to Your Majesty, nor should Your Majesty be inferior to me."

古文：及会理谋泄，景疑帝知之，故杀咨。
现代文：待到萧会理的密谋泄漏，侯景怀疑简文帝知道这件事，所以就杀死萧谘以示警告。
English: When Xiao Huili's plot leaked out, Hou Jing suspected that Emperor Jianwen knew about it, so he killed Xiao Huili as a warning.

古文：帝自知不久，指所居殿谓殷不害曰： 庞涓当死此下。 
现代文：简文帝知道自己也活不长了，指着自己居住的宫殿对殷不害说： 庞涓将死在这里。 
English: Emperor Jianwen knew that he did not have long to live. Pointing to the palace where he lived, he said to Yin, "Pang Xuan will die here."

古文：景自帅众讨杨白华于宣城，白华力屈而降，景以其北人，全之，以为左民尚书，诛其兄子彬以报来亮之怨。
现代文：侯景自己亲率军队在宣城讨伐杨白华，杨白华兵败力竭，就投降了，侯景因为他是北方人，就留了他一条命，还任命他当左民尚书，只是杀了杨白华哥哥的儿子杨彬，算是报了杨白华杀来亮的仇。
English: Hou Jing himself led the army to fight Yang Baihua in Xuancheng. Yang Baihua's soldiers were exhausted and surrendered. Hou Jing, because he was a northerner, spared his life and appointed him as a left-wing scholar. However, he killed Yang Bin, the son of Yang Baihua's brother, as revenge for Yang Baihua's killing of Liang.

古文：十二月，丙子朔，景封建安侯贲为竟陵王，中宿世子子邕为随王，仍赐姓侯氏。
现代文：十二月，丙子朔，侯景封建安侯萧贲为竟陵王，中宿世子萧子邕为随王，仍然赐他们姓侯。
English: In December, B Zi Shuo, Hou Jing, Fei Jian, An Hou, Xiao Zi as the king of the tomb, and Zhongjuku's heir, Xiao Zi Zi as the king, still gave them the surname of Hou.

古文：辛丑，齐主还鄴。
现代文：辛丑，北齐国主高洋从晋阳回到邺城。
English: Sin ugly, north Qi sovereign Gao Yang from Jinyang back to Lucheng.

古文：邵陵王纶在汝南，修城池，集士卒，将图安陆。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶在汝南修筑城池召集士兵，准备夺取安陆。
English: King of Shao Ling, Xiao Wei, gathered soldiers to build a castle in the south of Ryu and prepare to seize Anlu.

古文：魏安州刺史马祐以告丞相泰，泰遣杨忠将万人救安陆。
现代文：西魏安州刺史马祐把这一动向报告了丞相宇文泰。宇文泰派杨忠带领一万人去救安陆。
English: Shishi Ma Yu of West Wei's An Prefecture reported this movement to the prime minister, Uwentai, who sent Yang Zhong to lead ten thousand people to safety.

古文：武陵王纪遣潼州刺史杨乾运、南梁州刺史谯淹合兵二万讨杨法琛，法琛发兵据剑阁以拒之。
现代文：武陵王萧纪派潼州刺史杨乾运、南梁州刺史谯淹两人合兵二万去讨伐杨法琛，杨法琛派兵占据剑阁以抵抗他们。
English: The king of Wuling, Xiao Ji, sent two men, Yang Qianyun from Zhishui of Zhangzhou and Xuanfeng from Zhishui of Nanliangzhou, together with twenty thousand soldiers to fight against Yang Fahui. Yang Fahui sent soldiers to occupy Jiange to resist them.

古文：侯景还建康。
现代文：侯景从晋熙回到建康。
English: Hou Jing returned to Jiankang from Jinxi.

古文：初，魏敬宗以尔硃荣为柱国大将军，位在丞相上；荣败，此官遂废。
现代文：当初，孝庄帝任命尔朱荣为柱国大将军，地位在丞相之上。尔朱荣势败之后，这个官职也就废止了。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed Er Zhu Rong as the great general of the pillar country, a position higher than the prime minister. After the defeat of Er Zhu Rong, this official position was also abolished.

古文：大统三年，文帝复以丞相泰为之。
现代文：大统三年，西魏文帝又任命丞相宇文泰当柱国大将军，这以后凡是有辅佐皇帝之功，名望和实绩并重的大臣，也给封上这个官职。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty also appointed the chancellor Yu Wentai as the general of the pillar country. After that, any minister who had the merit of assisting the emperor, and whose fame and achievements were of equal importance, was also given this official post.

古文：其后功参佐命，望实俱重者，亦居此官，凡八人，曰安定公宇文泰，广陵王欣，赵郡公李弼，陇西公李虎，河内公独孤信，南阳公赵贵，常山公于谨，彭城公侯莫陈崇，谓之八柱国。
现代文：共有八个人当过柱国大将军，即安定公宇文泰，广陵王元欣，赵郡公李弼，陇西公李虎，河内公独孤信，南阳公赵贵，常山公于谨，彭城公侯莫陈崇，统称为八柱国。
English: A total of eight people have served as major generals of pillar countries, namely, Prince Anning, Prince U, Prince Guangling, Prince Wang Yuanxin, Prince Zhao of Zhao County, Prince Liguo, Prince Xi of Shaanxi, Prince Duxun of Hanoi, Prince Nanyang, Prince Zhao Gui, Prince Yu of Changshan, and Prince Mo Chen of Pengcheng, collectively known as the eight pillar countries.

古文：泰始籍民之才力者为府兵，身租庸调，一切蠲之，以农隙讲阅战陈，马畜粮备，六家供之；合为百府，每府一郎将主之，分属二十四军。
现代文：宇文泰开始选才智力气出众的人为府兵，一当府兵，本该交纳的租粮、帛、银，该服的劳役，一切都免去了。入籍的府兵在农闲时学习操练战斗本领及战争阵法，他所需要的马匹粮草，由六个家庭负责供给。全国设置一百个府，每府委派一个郎将当头领，分别隶属于二十四军。
English: As soon as he became a prefectural soldier, he was exempted from paying rent for grain, rice, and silver, as well as the labor service for the uniform. Naturalized prefectural soldiers learned and practiced combat skills and war tactics during their free time. The horses, grain, and grass he needed were supplied by six families. A hundred prefectures were set up across the country, and each prefecture appointed a vassal to be the leader. They were separately subordinated to the 24th Army.

古文：泰任总百揆，督中外诸军；欣以宗室宿望，从容禁闼而已。
现代文：宇文泰自任总百揆，督中外诸军。元欣是皇帝宗室中资格老声望高的人物，不过是在皇宫内从容优游地出入而已。
English: Yu Wentai appointed himself as the commander-in-chief of hundreds of armies, commanding armies both at home and abroad. Yuan Xin was a highly qualified and prestigious person in the emperor's family, but he only entered and left the palace leisurely.

古文：馀六人各督二大将军，凡十二大将军，每大将军各统开府二人，开府各领一军。
现代文：其他六个人每个人各统率二个大将军，共有十二个大将军。每个大将军又各统率开府二人，每个开府各领一军。
English: The other six each led two generals, for a total of twelve generals. Each general also led two provincial governors, and each provincial governor led an army.

古文：是后功臣位至柱国大将军、开府仪同三司、仪同三司者甚众，率为散官，无所统御，虽有继掌其事者，闻望皆出诸公之下云。
现代文：从这以后有功之臣官职升到柱国大将军、开府仪同三司、仪同三司的很多，但大抵都是闲散之官，没有统率军队。虽然也有继续掌管军队的，可是其声名威望都在这八柱国之下。
English: Since then, there have been many meritorious officials who have been promoted to the post of general of the pillar country, such as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Yi Tong San Si, but most of them are idle officials and do not command the army. Although there are also those who continue to control the army, their reputation and prestige are all under the eight pillar countries.

古文：齐主命散骑侍郎宋景业造《天保历》，行之。
现代文：北齐国主高洋命令散骑侍郎宋景业制定《天保历》，并颁布实行。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, ordered his horseback riding attendant, Song Jingye, to formulate the "Tianbao Calendar" and to promulgate and implement it.

