古文：◎食货二
现代文：食货二
English: Groceries two

古文：○赋役
现代文：赋役
English: Endowment

古文：赋役之法，唐租庸调犹为近古。
现代文：赋税徭役的办法，唐代的租庸调还算接近古代。
English: In terms of the method of tax collection, the rent-and-tax system of the Tang Dynasty is still close to ancient times.

古文：自杨炎作两税法，简而易行，历代相沿，至明不改。
现代文：自从杨炎作两税法，简单易行，历代相沿袭用，到明代而不改变。
English: Since Yang Yan made the two-tax law, it has been simple and easy to implement, and it has been used throughout the ages, and it has not changed since the Ming Dynasty.

古文：太祖为吴王，赋税十取一，役法计田出夫。
现代文：太祖为昊王时，赋税取十分之一，徭役之法按田地计算出夫役。
English: When the great-grandfather was King Hao, the tax was one-tenth, and the husband's service was calculated according to the fields.

古文：县上、中、下三等，以赋十万、六万、三万石下为差。
现代文：县分上、中、下三等，按赋税十万、六万、三万石以下马差等。
English: Counties were divided into upper, middle, and lower tiers, with tax brackets ranging from 100,000, 60,000, and 30,000 koku.

古文：府三等，以赋二十万上下、十万石下为差。
现代文：府分三等，按赋税二十万上下、十万石以下马差等。
English: The prefectures are divided into three classes, according to the tax of 200,000 up and down, 100,000 koku or less, and so on.

古文：即位之初，定赋役法，一以黄册为准。
现代文：即位之初，制定赋税徭役之法，全部以黄册为准。
English: At the beginning of his reign, the law of tax collection was formulated, all of which were subject to the Yellow Book.

古文：册有丁有田，丁有役，田有租。
现代文：簿册有丁口有田亩，丁口有徭役，田地有租税。
English: In the ledger, there are acres of land at the end of the book, farm labor at the end of the book, and taxes on the land.

古文：租曰夏税，曰秋粮，凡二等。
现代文：租称夏税，称秋粮，共二等。
English: Rent is called summer tax, called autumn grain, a total of second-class.

古文：夏税无过八月，秋粮无过明年二月。丁曰成丁，曰未成丁，凡二等。民始生，籍其名曰不成丁，年十六曰成丁。成丁而役，六十而免。
现代文：丁称成丁，称未成丁，共二等。人民刚出生，登记其名称不成丁，年龄十六岁称成丁。成丁服劳役，六称不成丁，年龄十六岁称成丁。成丁服劳役，六十岁免服劳役。
English: People were just born, and their names were registered as not-made-ding. At the age of 16, they were called not-made-ding. At the age of 6, they were called not-made-ding. At the age of 16, they were called not-made-ding. At the age of 60, they were exempted from labor service.

古文：又有职役优免者，役曰里甲，曰均徭，曰杂泛，凡三等。
现代文：又有职役优免的。役称里甲，称均徭，称杂泛，共三等。
English: In addition, there are positions that are exempt from promotion. The positions are referred to as Li Jia, Jian Yao, and Zhe Pan, for a total of three ranks.

古文：以户计曰甲役，以丁计曰徭役，上命非时曰杂役，皆有力役，有雇役。
现代文：按户计算称甲役，按丁口计算称徭役，朝廷命令没有一定的时限称杂役，都有力役，有雇役。
English: According to the calculation of households, they are called A-service, according to the calculation of households, they are called Zou-service, and according to the order of the imperial court, they are called miscellaneous service without a certain time limit.

古文：府州县验册丁口多寡，事产厚薄，以均适其力。
现代文：府州县查酸簿册枧丁口的多少，产业的厚薄，来平均役力。
English: The thickness of the industry depends on how much of the prefecture's and county's acid book is in the mouth of the mouth.

古文：两税，洪武时，夏税曰米麦，曰钱钞，曰绢。
现代文：两税，洪武时期，夏税一是米麦，一是钱钞，一是绢。
English: Two taxes, the Hongwu period, the summer tax, one is rice and wheat, one is banknotes, one is straw.

古文：秋粮曰米，曰钱钞，曰绢。
现代文：秋粮一是米，一是钱钞，一是绢。
English: Autumn rations include rice, banknotes and strawberries.

古文：弘治时，会计之数，夏税曰大小米麦，曰麦荍，曰丝绵并荒丝，曰税丝，曰丝绵折绢，曰税丝折绢，曰本色丝，曰农桑丝折绢，曰农桑零丝，曰人丁丝折绢，曰改科绢，曰棉花折布，曰苎布，曰土苎，曰红花，曰麻布，曰钞，曰租钞，曰税钞，曰原额小绢，曰币帛绢，曰本色绢，曰绢，曰折色丝。
现代文：弘治时期，计算赋税之数，夏税一是大小米麦，一是蒿麦，一是丝绵和荒丝，一是税丝，一是丝绵折合绢，一是税丝折合绢，一是本色丝，一是农桑丝折合绢，一是农桑零丝，一是人丁丝折合绢，一是改科绢，一是棉花折布，一是苎布，一是土苎，一是红花，一是麻布，一是钞，一是租钞，一是税钞，一是原额小绢，一是币帛绢，一是本色绢，一是绢，一是折色丝。
English: During the Hongzhi period, when calculating the number of taxes, the summer tax was the size of rice and wheat, one was buckwheat, one was silk and barley silk, one was tax silk, one was silk-folded cocoon, one was tax silk-folded cocoon, one was natural silk, one was agricultural mulberry silk-folded cocoon, one was agricultural mulberry loose silk, one was human dyed silk-folded cocoon, one was modified cocoon, one was cotton-folded cloth, one was felt cloth, one was mound cocoon, one was safflower, one was hemp cloth, one was banknote, one was rent banknote

古文：秋粮曰米，曰租钞，曰赁钞，曰山租钞，曰租丝，曰租绢，曰粗租麻布，曰课程棉布，曰租苎布，曰牛租米谷，曰地亩棉花绒，曰枣子易米，曰枣株课米，曰课程苎麻折米，曰棉布，曰鱼课米，曰改科丝折米。
现代文：秋粮一是米，一是租钞，一是赁钞，一是山租钞，一是租丝，一是租绢，一是租粗麻布，一是课程棉布，一是租苎布，一是牛租米谷，一是地亩棉花绒，一是枣子易米，一是枣株课米，一是课程苎麻折米，一是棉布，一是鱼课米，一是改科丝折合米。
English: Autumn grain is rice, rent money, loan money, mountain rent money, rent silk, rent cocoon, rent coarse linen, course cotton cloth, rent cocoon cloth, cow rent rice valley, cotton wool, jujube seed rice, jujube stock rice, course nettle rice, cotton cloth, fish rice, and modified cocoon silk rice.

古文：万历时，小有所增损，大略以米麦为主，而丝绢与钞次之。
现代文：万历时期，稍微有所增加或减少，大致以米麦为主，而丝绢与钞其次。
English: During the Wanli period, there was a slight increase or decrease, with rice and wheat dominating, followed by silk and banknotes.

古文：夏税之米惟江西、湖广、广东、广西，麦荍惟贵州，农桑丝遍天下，惟不及川、广、云、贵，馀各视其地产。
现代文：夏税的米只有江西、湖广、广东、广西，蓦麦只有贵州，农桑丝遍及天下，只是不涉及川、广、云、贵，其余各自视其土地所产交纳。
English: The rice subject to the summer tax is only in Jiangxi, Hunan, Guangdong and Guangxi, the buckwheat only in Guizhou, and the agrosans throughout the world, but it does not involve Sichuan, Guangxi, Yunnan and Guizhou, and the rest are paid according to the production of their land.

古文：太祖初立国即下令，凡民田五亩至十亩者，栽桑、麻、木棉各半亩，十亩以上倍之。
现代文：太祖初建国时就下令，凡是人民有五亩至十亩田的，栽种桑、麻、木棉各半亩，十亩以上的加倍。
English: At the time of the founding of the country, the great-grandfather ordered that if the people had five mu to ten mu of land, they should plant half a mu of mulberry, hemp, and cottonseed, and more than ten mu should be doubled.

古文：麻亩徵八两，木棉亩四两。
现代文：麻每亩征收八两，木棉每亩征收四两。
English: Hemp is levied at eight rupees per mu, and wood cotton at four rupees per mu.

古文：栽桑以四年起科。
现代文：栽桑以四年按田亩交赋税。
English: For planting mulberry trees, the tax is paid in four years according to the mu of the field.

古文：不种桑，出绢一疋。
现代文：不种桑，交纳绢一匹。
English: If you don't plant mulberry, you have to hand over a partridge.

古文：不种麻及木棉，出麻布、棉布各一疋。
现代文：不种麻和木棉，交纳麻布、棉布各一匹。
English: Do not grow hemp and cotton, and hand in one each of linen and cotton.

古文：此农桑丝绢所由起也。
现代文：这是农桑丝绢的开始。
English: This was the beginning of the agrarian sangha.

古文：洪武九年，天下税粮，令民以银、钞、钱、绢代输。
现代文：洪武九年，天下交纳税粮，命令人民以银、钞、钱、绢代交。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, the whole country paid tax grain, and ordered the people to pay with silver, banknotes, money and money.

古文：银一两、钱千文、钞一贯，皆折输米一石，小麦则减直十之二。
现代文：银一雨、钱千文、钞一贯，都折合交纳米一石，小麦便减价十分之二。
English: The price of silver, money, and banknotes have all been reduced by one nanometer to one stone, and the price of wheat has been reduced by two-tenths.

古文：棉苎一疋，折米六斗，麦七斗。
现代文：棉苎一匹，折合米六斗，麦七斗。
English: One cotton swab is equivalent to six bushels of rice and seven bushels of wheat.

古文：麻布一疋，折米四斗，麦五斗。
现代文：麻布一匹，折合米四斗，麦五斗。
English: One horse of linen is equivalent to four buckets of rice and five buckets of wheat.

古文：丝绢等各以轻重为损益，愿人粟者听。
现代文：丝绢等各按轻重作为增加或减少，愿意交纳粮食的听便。
English: Silk reeds, etc. each according to the weight as an increase or decrease, willing to pay the convenience of grain.

古文：十七年，云南以金、银、贝、布、漆、丹砂、水银代秋租。
现代文：十七年，云南以金、银、贝、布、漆、丹砂、水银代替秋租。
English: In the seventeenth year, Yunnan replaced the autumn rent with gold, silver, shellfish, cloth, lacquer, sand and mercury.

古文：於是谓米麦为本色，而诸折纳税粮者，谓之折色。
现代文：于是称米麦为本色，而各种折合交纳税粮的，称为折色。
English: As a result, rice and wheat are said to be the true colors, while all kinds of folded tax-paying grains are called folded colors.

古文：越二年，又令户部侍郎杨靖会计天下仓储存粮，二年外并收折色，惟北方诸布政司需粮饷边，仍使输粟。
现代文：遇了二年，又命令户部侍郎杨靖计算天下仓储的存粮，二年外一并收折色，只有北方各布政司需要粮食供应边防，仍然使之缴纳粮食。
English: When two years had passed, he also ordered Yang Jing, the steward of the household department, to calculate the grain stored in the world. The two years were taken together, and only the political secretaries in the north needed grain supplies for border defense, and still made them pay grain.

古文：三十年谕户部曰： 行人高稹言，陕西困逋赋。
现代文：三十年，训谕户部说： 使者高稹说，陕西困于欠税。
English: Thirty years ago, the preceptor of the household department said: The messenger Gao Wei said that Shaanxi is in trouble with tax arrears.

古文：其议自二十八年以前，天下逋租，咸许任土所产，折收布、绢、棉花及金、银等物，著为令。 
现代文：他提议从二十八年以前，天下的欠租，都允许任意以土地所出产，折合收缴布、绢、棉花和金、银等物，定着为法令。 
English: He proposed that from 28 years ago, all rent arrears in the world would be allowed to be arbitrarily based on the output of the land, equivalent to the collection of cloth, straw, cotton and gold, silver and other things, and fixed as a law.

古文：於是户部定：钞一锭，折米一石；金一两，十石；银一两，二石；绢一疋，石有二斗；棉布一疋，一石；苎布一疋，七斗；棉花一斤，二斗。
现代文：于是户部规定：钞一锭，折合米一石；金一两，折合米十石；银一两，折合米二石；绢一匹，折合米一石二斗；棉布一匹，折合米一石；苎布一匹，折合米七斗；棉花一斤，折合米二斗。
English: As a result, the household department stipulated that: a banknote, equivalent to one stone of rice; a gold coin, equivalent to ten stones of rice; a silver coin, equivalent to two stones of rice; a gourd, equivalent to one stone of rice; a cotton cloth, equivalent to one stone of rice; a silk cloth, equivalent to seven stone of rice; a cottonseed, equivalent to two stone of rice.

古文：帝曰： 折收逋赋，盖欲苏民困也。
现代文：皇帝说： 折合征收欠税，是要苏解人民的困苦。
English: The emperor said: Collecting tax arrears is tantamount to asking the Soviet Union to relieve the hardships of the people.

古文：今赋重若此，将愈困民，岂恤之之意哉。
现代文：现在赋税像这样重，将更加使人民穷困，哪里是体恤人民之意呢？
English: Now that taxation is so heavy, it will further impoverish the people. Where is the compassion for the people?

古文：金、银每两折米加一倍。
现代文：金、银每两折合米加一倍。
English: Gold and silver are doubled every two folds of rice.

古文：钞止二贯五百文折一石。
现代文：钞只二贯五百文折合米一石。
English: The banknote is only two jangan and five hundred mon, which is equivalent to one koku of rice.

古文：馀从所议。 
现代文：其余的听从所议。 
English: The rest followed suit.

古文：永乐中，既得交阯，以绢，漆，苏木，翠羽，纸扇，沉、速、安息诸香代租赋。
现代文：永乐年间，已得到交趾，用绢，漆，苏木，翠羽，纸扇，沉、速、安息等香代替租赋。
English: During the Yongle era, the rent was replaced by incense such as gourd, lacquer, cypress, cedar, paper fan, and incense such as sinking, speeding, and resting.

古文：广东琼州黎人、肇庆瑶人内附，输赋比内地。
现代文：广东琼州黎人、肇庆瑶人依附内地，交纳赋税与内地一样。
English: People from Qiongzhou, Lijiang and Zhaoqing in Guangdong are dependent on the mainland and pay taxes in the same way as the mainland.

古文：天下本色税粮三千馀万石，丝钞等二千馀万。
现代文：天下本色税粮三千多万石，丝钞等二千多万。
English: There are more than 30 million koku of genuine tax grain in the world, and more than 20 million silk banknotes.

古文：计是时，宇内富庶，赋入盈羡，米粟自输京师数百万石外，府县仓廪蓄积甚丰，至红腐不可食。
现代文：总计这时国家富庶，赋税交纳盈余，米粟除输送到京城数百万石外，府县仓库的蓄积很丰富，以致变红腐烂不能吃。
English: All in all, the country was rich and bountiful at the time, with a surplus in tax payments. In addition to the millions of koku of rice poppy transported to the capital, the prefectural and county warehouses had accumulated so much that it turned red and rotted and could not be eaten.

古文：岁歉，有司往往先发粟振贷，然后以闻。
现代文：遇到灾荒，主管官吏往往先开仓放粮救济借出，然后纔上报。
English: In the event of a disaster, the officials in charge often open warehouses to lend grain for relief, and then submit the report.

古文：虽岁贡银三十万两有奇，而民间交易用银，仍有厉禁。
现代文：虽然每年贡入银三十万雨有余，而民间交易用银，仍有严厉禁令。
English: Although the annual tribute of silver is more than 300,000 ryo, there is still a strict ban on the use of silver in private transactions.

古文：至正统元年，副都御史周铨言： 行在各卫官俸支米南京，道远费多，辄以米易货，贵买贱售，十不及一。
现代文：到正统元年，副都御史周铨说： 天子所在地方各卫官俸禄支付米于南京，道路遥远，费用太多，便用米交换货物，贵买贱窦，不及十分之一。
English: In the first year of the orthodox era, the vice-governor of the capital, Zhou Yu, said: "In the place where Tianzi is located, each guard officer's salary is paid in rice in Nanjing. The road is far away, the cost is too much, and the rice is exchanged for goods. It is expensive to buy a cheap dou, less than one-tenth.

古文：朝廷虚糜廪禄，各官不得实惠。
现代文：朝廷白白地浪费了麇禄，各官又得不到实惠。
English: The imperial court wasted its income in vain, and officials did not receive any tangible benefits.

古文：请於南畿、浙江、江西、湖广不通舟楫地，折收布、绢、白金，解京充俸。 
现代文：请求在南畿、浙江、江西、湖广不通航运的地方，折合收布、绢、白金，解送京城充作俸禄。 
English: Requests in Nangui, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Huguang where shipping is not available, equivalent to the collection of cloth, silk and platinum, and the delivery of the capital city to make up the salary.

古文：江西巡抚赵新亦以为言，户部尚书黄福复条以请。
现代文：江西巡抚趟斯也这样说，户部尚书黄福又条陈请求。
English: The inspector general of Jiangxi also said this, and the head of the household also wrote Huang Fu and Chen Chen a request.

古文：帝以问行在户部尚书胡濙。
现代文：皇帝把天子所在地的问题询问户部尚书胡淡。
English: The emperor inquired about the whereabouts of the heavenly son with the head of the household, Shang Shuxu Hu Tan.

古文：濙对以太祖尝折纳税粮於陕西、浙江，民以为便。
现代文：胡淡用太祖曾经在陕西、浙江折合纳税粮，人民认为方便的事实来对答。
English: Hu Tan replied with the fact that his great-grandfather used to pay taxes on grain in Shaanxi and Zhejiang, which was considered convenient by the people.

古文：遂仿其制，米麦一石，折银二钱五分。
现代文：于是仿照其制度，米麦一石，折合银二钱五分。
English: As a result, according to its system, one stone of rice and wheat is equivalent to two and a half silver coins.

古文：南畿、浙江、江西、湖广、福建、广东、广西米麦共四百馀万石，折银百万馀两，入内承运库，谓之金花银。
现代文：南畿、浙江、江西、湖广、福建、广东、广西米麦共四百多万石，折合银一百万余两，纳入承运库，叫做金花银。
English: The total amount of rice and barley in Nanki, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hukang, Fujian, Guangdong and Guangxi is more than four million stone, equivalent to more than one million silver, and is included in the transportation warehouse, which is called gold and silver.

古文：其后概行於天下。
现代文：此后普遍施行于天下。
English: Since then, it has been universally implemented throughout the world.

古文：自起运兑军外，粮四石收银一两解京，以为永例。
现代文：除了起运由军队代运粮食之外，粮四石收银一两解送京城，作为长久的条例。
English: In addition to starting to transport grain on behalf of the army, the grain of four stones and the cash register of one or two stones will be sent to Beijing as a long-term regulation.

古文：诸方赋入折银，而仓廪之积渐少矣。
现代文：各地交纳赋税折合银两，而粮仓的积蓄渐渐减少。
English: The tax paid by various regions is equivalent to two silver coins, while the savings of grain silos are gradually decreasing.

古文：初，太祖定天下官、民田赋，凡官田亩税五升三合五勺，民田减二升，重租田八升五合五勺，没官田一斗二升。
现代文：当初，太祖制定天下官、民的田赋，凡是官田每亩收税五升三合五勺，民田减少二升，重租田八升五合五勺，役官田一斗二升。
English: At the beginning, the great-grandfather set out the land allotment of the government and the people, and the maximum tax per mu of the government field was 5 liters, 3 liters and 5 tablespoons, the people's field was reduced by 2 liters, the heavily rented field was 8 liters, 5 liters and 5 tablespoons, and the government field was 1 barrel and 2 liters.

古文：惟苏、松、嘉、湖，怒其为张士诚守，乃籍诸豪族及富民田以为官田，按私租簿为税额。
现代文：只有苏、松、嘉、湖，为其替张士诚守城而发怒，便没收众豪族和富裕之民的田地充作官田，按照私租簿册定赋税数额。
English: Only Su, Song, Jia and Hu, angry that they had to defend the city on behalf of Zhang Shicheng, confiscated the fields of many powerful clans and wealthy people to use as government land, and set the tax amount according to the private rent book.

古文：而司农卿杨宪又以浙西地膏腴，增其赋，亩加二倍。
现代文：而司农卿杨宪又因浙西土地肥沃，增加赋税，每亩加二倍。
English: However, Yang Xian, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, also increased the tax due to the fertile land in western Zhejiang, doubling the tax per mu.

古文：故浙西官、民田视他方倍蓰，亩税有二三石者。
现代文：所以浙西官、民之田税比其它地区多一倍甚至五倍，每亩赋税有二三石的。
English: Therefore, the western Zhejiang government and the people's field tax is twice or even five times more than that of other regions, and the tax per mu is two or three stones.

古文：大抵苏最重，松、嘉、湖次之，常、杭又次之。
现代文：大致苏最重，松、嘉、湖其次，常、杭又其次。
English: Su was the heaviest, followed by Song, Jia and Hu, and Chang and Hang.

古文：洪武十三年命户部裁其额，亩科七斗五升至四斗四升者减十之二，四斗三升至三斗六升者俱止徵三斗五升，其以下者仍旧。
现代文：洪武十三年命令户部裁减数额，每亩收税七斗五升至四斗四升者减去十分之二，四斗三升到三斗六升的都只征收三斗五升，在此以下的仍旧不变。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hongwu, he ordered the household department to reduce the amount. Those who collected tax per mu from 7 to 5 to 4 to 4 were deducted two-tenths, those from 4 to 3 to 6 were only levied 3 to 5 liters, and those below that remained unchanged.

古文：时苏州一府，秋粮二百七十四万六千馀石，自民粮十五万石外，皆官田粮。
现代文：当时苏州一府，秋粮二百七十四万六千多石，除了人民交粮十五万石之外，都是官田粮。
English: At that time, the autumn grain in Suzhou Province was more than 27.46 million koku, and in addition to the 150,000 koku of grain paid by the people, it was all government grain.

古文：官粮岁额与浙江通省埒，其重犹如此。
现代文：官粮岁额与浙江全省相当，其重像这样。
English: The amount of government grain is equivalent to that of Zhejiang Province, and its weight is as follows.

古文：建文二年诏曰： 江、浙赋独重，而苏、松准私租起科，特以惩一时顽民，岂可为定则以重困一方。
现代文：建文二年下诏说： 江、浙的赋税独重，而苏、松准许私租按田亩纳税，只是以此来惩治一时的顽民，怎么可以成为确定的法则以加重困窘一方呢？
English: In the second year of the Jianwen Emperor's reign, he said: Jiang and Zhejiang have the heaviest taxation, while Su and Song allow private rent to be taxed according to the mu of the field, just to punish the naughty people for a while. How can it be a definite rule to aggravate the plight?

古文：宜悉与减免，亩不得过一斗。 
现代文：应该全部减免，每亩不能超过一斗。 
English: There should be a total reduction and exemption, with no more than one bucket per mu.

古文：成祖尽革建文政，浙西之赋复重。
现代文：成祖全部革除建文政治，浙西的赋税又加重。
English: Chengzu completely abolished Jianwen politics, and the taxation of western Zhejiang increased.

古文：宣宗即位，广西布政使周干巡视苏、常、嘉、湖诸府还，言： 诸府民多逃亡，询之耆老，皆云重赋所致。
现代文：宣宗即位，广西布政使周干，巡视苏、常、嘉、湖等府回朝，说： 这几府的人民多逃亡，询问年高德重的老人，都说是沉重的赋税造成的。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Zhou Gan, the political envoy of Guangxi Province, went on a tour of Su, Chang, Jia and Hubei provinces and returned to the imperial court. He said, "Most of the people in these provinces have fled. If you ask the elderly with high moral standards, they will all say that it is due to heavy taxation."

古文：如吴江、昆山民田租，旧亩五升，小民佃种富民田，亩输私租一石。
现代文：如昊江、昆山入民的田租，旧时每亩五升，小民佃种富裕之民的田地，每亩交纳私租一石。
English: For example, the field rent of Haojiang and Kunshan residents was five liters per mu in the old days, and the fields of small people and rich people were paid one stone per mu.

古文：后因事故入官，辄如私租例尽取之。
现代文：后因事没入官，便按私租之例全部收取。
English: After that, because the matter did not go to the official, it was charged in full according to the example of private rent.

古文：十分取八，民犹不堪，况尽取乎。
现代文：取十分之八，人民尚且不能忍受，何况全部收取呢？
English: The people cannot bear to have eight-tenths taken from them, let alone all of it.

古文：尽取，则民必冻馁，欲不逃亡，不可得也。
现代文：全部收取，那么人民必定挨饿受冻，要想不逃亡，办不到啊。
English: If they collect everything, then the people will surely starve and freeze. If they don't want to flee, they can't.

古文：仁和、海宁、昆山海水陷官、民田千九百馀顷，逮今十有馀年，犹征其租。
现代文：仁和、海宁、昆山海水陷没官、民之田一千九百多顷，至今有十多年，还征收其租。
English: More than 1,900 hectares of government-owned and private land have been submerged by seawater in Ninna, Haining and Kunshan for more than 10 years, and their rent is still being collected.

古文：田没於海，租从何出？
现代文：田陷汝入大海，租税从何处出？
English: The rice paddies flow into the sea, but where does the tax come from?

古文：请将没官田及公、侯还官田租，俱视彼处官田起科，亩税六斗。海水沦陷田，悉除其税，则田无荒芜之患，而细民获安生矣。 
现代文：请求将没收的官田和公、侯归还的官田的租税，都按照他处官田计亩交税，每亩赋税六斗，海水沦陷的田地，全部免除其赋税，那么田地就没有荒芜的忧患，而小民也获得安生了。 
English: The tax on the confiscated government-owned land and the government-owned land returned by the lord and the lord's son are all taxed according to the mu of the government-owned land, and the tax per mu is six do, and the fields submerged in seawater are all exempted from the tax. Then the fields will not suffer from desolation, and the common people will have a safe life.

古文：帝命部议行之。
现代文：皇帝命令户部议定施行。
English: The emperor ordered the household department to implement the agreement.

古文：宣德五年二月诏： 旧额官田租，亩一斗至四斗者各减十之二，四斗一升至一石以上者减十之三。
现代文：宣德五年二月，下诏： 旧时额定官田租税，每亩一斗至四斗的各碱去十分之二，四斗一升至一石以上的碱去十分之三。
English: In February of the fifth year of the Xuande Emperor, the following edict was issued: The old-time official farmland tax was raised, and two-tenths of the alkali of one to four buckets per mu was removed, and three-tenths of the alkali of four buckets per mu that rose to more than one koku was removed.

古文：著为令。 
现代文：定着为法令。 
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：於是江南巡抚周忱与苏州知府况钟，曲计减苏粮七十馀万，他府以为差，而东南民力少纾矣。
现代文：于是江南巡抚周忱与苏州知府况锺，详细计算减去苏州粮税七十多万，别府以此为准有差等，而东南人民的负担稍稍缓解。
English: As a result, the governor of the south of the Yangtze River, Zhou Zhen, compared the situation with that of the governor of Suzhou, and made a detailed calculation, subtracting more than 700,000 from the grain tax of Suzhou. Other prefectures took this as the standard, but there were differences, and the burden on the people of the southeast was slightly alleviated.

古文：忱又令松江官田依民田起科，户部劾以变乱成法。
现代文：周忱又令松江官田依照民田计亩交税，户部弹劾他改变淆乱旧有税法。
English: Zhou Zhen also ordered Matsue Kanden to pay taxes according to the number of mu of private fields, and the Ministry of Households impeached him to change the confusing old tax law.

古文：宣宗虽不罪，亦不能从。
现代文：宣宗虽然不加罪，也不能依从。
English: Although the proclamation does not add to the crime, it cannot be obeyed.

古文：而朝廷数下诏书，蠲除租赋。
现代文：而朝廷多次下诏书，免除租赋。
English: However, the Imperial Court repeatedly issued imperial decrees exempting the nobility from paying rent.

古文：持筹者辄私戒有司，勿以诏书为辞。
现代文：理财之官则私下告诫有关部门，不要以韶书为辞。
English: The financial officer privately cautioned the relevant departments not to use the forged letter as an excuse.

古文：帝与尚书胡濙言 计臣壅遏膏泽 ，然不深罪也。
现代文：皇帝与尚书胡淡说： 财赋大臣阻塞朝廷恩惠。 然而又不深加怪罪。
English: Emperor Xizang wrote to Hu Tan, saying, "The Minister of Finance is obstructing the favors of the imperial court, yet he is not deeply to blame.

古文：正统元年令苏、松、浙江等处官田，准民田起科，秋粮四斗一升至二石以上者减作三斗，二斗一升以上至四斗者减作二斗，一斗一升至二斗者减作一斗。
现代文：正统元年，命令苏、松、浙江等处官田，按照民田的标准计亩收税，秋粮四斗一升至二石以上的碱作三斗，二斗一升以上至四斗的减作二斗，一斗一升至二斗的诚作一斗。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he ordered the official fields of Su, Song and Zhejiang to collect taxes according to the standard of the people's fields, and the autumn grain four-dozen to three-dozen when it rose to more than two stone, two-dozen to two-dozen when it rose to four-dozen, and one-dozen to one-dozen when it rose to two-dozen.

古文：盖宣德末，苏州逋粮至七百九十万石，民困极矣。
现代文：大致宣德末年，苏州欠税粮达到七百九十万石，人民困顿达到极点。
English: Around the end of the Xuande era, Suzhou's grain tax arrears reached 7.9 million koku, and the people's hardships reached an extreme.

古文：至是，乃获少苏。
现代文：到这时，纔稍稍获得缓解。
English: By this time, the spasms had eased slightly.

古文：英宗复辟之初，令镇守浙江尚书孙原贞等定杭、嘉、湖则例，以起科重者徵米宜少，起科轻者徵米宜多。
现代文：英宗复位之初，命令镇守浙江尚书孙原贞等制定杭、嘉、湖施行 平米法 的规则条例，以计亩收税重的征收米应该减少，计亩收税轻的征收米应该增多。
English: At the beginning of the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, he ordered the town guard of Zhejiang, Shangshu Sun Yuanzhen and others to formulate rules and regulations for the implementation of the flat rice law in Hang, Jia and Hu. The rice with heavy tax collection per mu should be reduced, and the rice with light tax collection per mu should be increased.

古文：乃定官田亩科一石以下，民田七斗以下者，每石岁徵平米一石三斗；官民田四斗以下者，每石岁徵平米一石五斗；官田二斗以下，民田二斗七升以下者，每石岁徵平米一石七斗；官田八升以下，民田七升以下者，每石岁徵平米二石二斗。
现代文：便制定官田每亩收税一石以下，民田每亩收税七斗以下的，每石每年征平米一石三斗；官、民田每亩收税四斗以下的，每石每年征平米一石五斗；官田二斗以下，民田二斗七升以下的，每石每年征平米一石七斗；官田八升以下，民田七升以下的，每石每年征平米二石二斗。
English: It was stipulated that the tax per mu in government-owned land was 1 koku or less, and the tax per mu in private land was 7 dou or less, and the annual tax per mu was 1 koku 3 dou; the tax per mu in government-owned and private land was 4 dou or less, and the annual tax per mu was 1 koku 5 dou; the tax per mu in government-owned land was 2 dou or less, and the tax per mu in private land was 2 dou or less, and the tax per mu in private land was 1 koku 7 dou or less, and the tax per mu in government-owned land was 1 koku 3 dou or less, and the tax per mu in

古文：凡重者轻之，轻者重之，欲使科则适均，而亩科一石之税未尝减云。
现代文：凡是税重的便减轻，税轻的便加重，想使税额平均，而每亩收粮一石的税不曾减少。
English: If the tax is heavy, it will be reduced, and if the tax is light, it will be increased. I want to make the tax amount average, and the tax of one stone of grain per mu has not been reduced.

古文：嘉靖二年，御史黎贯言： 国初夏秋二税，麦四百七十馀万石，今少九万；米二千四百七十馀万石，今少二百五十馀万。
现代文：嘉靖二年，御史黎贯说： 开国之初，夏、秋收二次税麦四百七十多万石，现在少九万石；米二干四百七十多莴石，现在少二百五十多万石。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, the Grand Historian Lichun said: At the beginning of the founding of the country, the summer and autumn harvest of the second tax wheat was more than 4.7 million stone, now less than 90,000 stone; rice was more than 4.7 million stone, now less than 2.5 million stone.

古文：而宗室之蕃，官吏之冗，内官之众，军士之增，悉取给其中。
现代文：而宗室的繁衍，官吏的冗余，内官的众多，军士的增加，全部取自于赋税。
English: But the multiplication of the family, the redundancy of the officials, the multiplicity of the privy councillors, the increase in the number of soldiers, all come from taxation.

古文：赋入则日损，支费则日加。
现代文：赋税收入一天天减少，支出一天天增加。
English: Tax revenues are decreasing day by day, while expenditures are increasing day by day.

古文：请核祖宗赋额及经费多寡之数，一一区画，则知赋入有限，而浮费不容不节矣。 
现代文：请求核实祖宗赋税额度和经费多少的数目，一一规划，便知道赋税收入有限，而虚浮浪费不容不节制。 
English: The number of requests to verify the amount of tax paid by the ancestors and the amount of funds raised, one by one planning, will know that tax revenue is limited, and extravagance and waste are not allowed to go unchecked.

古文：於是户部议： 令天下官吏考满迁秩，必严核任内租税，徵解足数，方许给由交代。
现代文：于是户部讨论说： 令天下官吏考绩期满升迁禄秩，必须严格审核任期内的租税，征收解送够数额，纔允许前后任相接替。
English: Therefore, the Household Department discussed that: to make the world's government officials complete the performance appraisal period and be promoted to the next rank, it is necessary to strictly review the taxes during the term of office, collect a sufficient amount of remittance, and allow the successors to succeed each other.

古文：仍乞朝廷躬行节俭，以先天下。 
现代文：仍请求朝廷亲身实行节俭，为天下领先。 
English: He still asked the imperial court to personally practice thrift and lead the world.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝接纳其言。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：既而谕德顾鼎臣条上钱粮积弊四事：
现代文：随后谕德顾鼎臣分绦上奏钱粮方面积累下来的四种弊端。
English: Subsequently, he ordered De Gu Dingchen to divide the accumulated four kinds of drawbacks in terms of money and grain.

古文：一曰察理田粮旧额。
现代文：一是审察清理田粮的旧有数额。
English: First, the old amount of field grain to be cleared was reviewed.

古文：请责州县官，於农隙时，令里甲等仿洪武、正统间鱼鳞、风旗之式，编造图册，细列元额田粮、字圩、则号、条段、坍荒、成熟步口数目，官为覆勘，分别界址，履亩检踏丈量，具开垦改正豁除之数。
现代文：请求责令州县官吏，在农闲之时，命令里甲等仿照洪武、正统年间鱼鳞、风旗的样式，编造图籍簿册，详细列出原额田粮、字圩、则号、条段、坍荒、成熟步口的数目，官吏予以复核，分别界限地址，寅地检查丈量田亩，详记土地开垦、改正、免除的数目。
English: The petition ordered the officials of the prefectures and counties to order Li Jiao and other officials to make up a book of maps in the off-peak season, imitating the fish scales and wind flags in the years of Hongwu and orthodoxy, and to list in detail the original amount of grain, characters, codes, sections, wastelands, and the number of mature footprints. The officials should review it, check the boundaries and addresses, check and measure the acres, and record in detail the number of land reclamation, correction, and exemption.

古文：刊刻成书，收贮官库，给散里中，永为稽考。
现代文：刊刻成书，收聚存放在官库，发散于里中，永远作为考核的依据。
English: Published and engraved into a book, collected and stored in the government treasury, dispersed in the country, and will always serve as the basis for assessment.

古文：仍斟酌先年巡抚周忱、王恕简便可行事例，立为定规。
现代文：仍然考虑往年巡抚周忱、王恕提出的简便可行的办法，立为确定的规则。
English: We still consider the simple and feasible methods proposed by the supervisors Zhou Zhen and Wang Shou in previous years and set them as definite rules.

古文：取每岁实徵、起运、存留、加耗、本色、折色并处补、暂徵、带徵、停徵等件数目，会计已定，张榜晓谕。
现代文：取每年实际征收、起运、存留、损耗、本色、折色并处补、暂征、带征、停征等项数目，计算清楚，张榜公布。
English: Take the number of items such as actual collection, transportation, retention, loss, original color, broken color and supplement, temporary collection, with collection, and suspension of collection each year, calculate clearly, and publish a list.

古文：庶吏胥不得售其奸欺，而小民免赔累科扰之患。
现代文：希望官吏不能奸诈欺骗，而人民免于赔钱亏累赋役骚扰的祸害。
English: It is hoped that officials will not be devious and deceitful, and the people will be free from the scourge of losing money and being harassed.

古文：一曰催徵岁办钱粮。
现代文：一是催征岁办钱粮。
English: The first is to urge the collection of money and grain.

古文：成、弘以前，里甲催徵，粮户上纳，粮长收解，州县临收。
现代文：成化、弘治以前，里甲催促征收赋税，粮户交纳，粮长收税解送，州县监收。
English: Before Chenghua and Hongzhi, Li Jia urged the collection of taxes, grain households paid, grain chiefs collected and sent taxes, and prefectural and county supervisors collected.

古文：粮长不敢多收斛面，粮户不敢搀杂水谷糠粃，兑粮官军不敢阻难多索，公私两便。
现代文：粮长不敢多收额外的聚敛，粮户不敢搀杂水谷糠秕，专门运粮的官军不敢梗阻为难多索取运费，公家和私人都方便。
English: Grain chiefs do not dare to collect more additional agglomeration, grain households do not dare to pick up stray grains, and the special grain transport army does not dare to obstruct the difficult to obtain more freight, which is convenient for both public and private.

古文：近者，有司不复比较经催里甲负粮人户，但立限敲扑粮长，令下乡追徵。
现代文：近来，主管官吏不再立定限期催促负粮的人户，只是立定限期惩罚粮长，命令他下乡追征。
English: Recently, the officials in charge no longer set a deadline to urge grain-deprived households, but only set a deadline to punish the grain chief and order him to go to the countryside to pursue conscription.

古文：豪强者则大斛倍收，多方索取，所至鸡犬为空。
现代文：豪强的人使用大斛加倍收纳，多方勒索，所到之处鸡犬为之一空。
English: Daring and strong people use large shovels to double their storage, extort from many sides, and everywhere they go, chickens and dogs are empty.

古文：孱弱者为势豪所凌，耽延欺赖，不免变产补纳。
现代文：懦弱的被权势豪强之人所欺凌，耽误拖延欺骗抵赖，不免变卖财产交纳赋税。
English: The weak are bullied by the powerful, delay, defraud and deny, and are forced to sell their property to pay taxes.

古文：至或旧役侵欠，责偿新佥，一人逋负，株连亲属，无辜之民死於箠楚囹圄者几数百人。
现代文：以至于有的旧有赋役还拖欠着，又责令偿还新赋，一人欠税，株连亲属，无辜的人民死于棍杖拷打监狱囚禁的将近数百人。
English: So much so that some of the old fufu are still in arrears, and they have been ordered to pay back the new fufu, one person owes taxes, relatives of the company, innocent people have died from cane torture, and nearly hundreds of people have been imprisoned.

古文：且往时每区粮长不过正、副二名，近多至十人以上。
现代文：而且过去，每区的粮长不过正、副二名，近来多至十人以上。
English: Moreover, in the past, there were only two chiefs and deputy chiefs in each district, but recently there have been more than ten.

古文：其实收掌管粮之数少，而科敛打点使用年例之数多。
现代文：其实收掌管粮的人少，而摊派索要行贿请托使用年例出人多。
English: In fact, the number of people in charge of collecting grain is small, but the number of people requesting bribes to be apportioned and using them is unusually high.

古文：州县一年之间，辄破中人百家之产，害莫大焉。
现代文：州县一年之间，便要使一百家中等之家破产，祸害没有比此更大的。
English: There is no greater calamity than for a state or county to cause the bankruptcy of a hundred middle-class families in one year.

古文：宜令户部议定事例，转行所司，审编粮长务遵旧规。
现代文：应该命令户部讨论确定条例，转发主管部门执行，审核编制粮长，务求遵循旧有绦规。
English: The household department should be ordered to discuss and determine the regulations, forward them to the competent departments for implementation, and review and compile the grain chiefs, so as to comply with the old regulations.

古文：如州县官多佥粮长，纵容下乡，及不委里甲催办，辄酷刑限比粮长者，罪之。
现代文：如果州县官吏多征收粮长赋税，纵容下乡，以及不委派里甲催促办理赋税，便用酷刑限期让粮长完成征收的，罚以罪行。
English: If the state and county officials collect more taxes from the grain chiefs, allow them to go to the countryside, and do not appoint a deputy to urge the tax collection, they will use torture to let the grain chiefs complete the collection within the time limit, and will be punished with a crime.

古文：致人命多死者，以故勘论。
现代文：致使人命多死的，以故勘论处。
English: If it results in the loss of more lives, it will be dealt with by way of investigation.

古文：其二则议遣官综理及复预备仓粮也。
现代文：第二点则是议论派官管理和恢复预备仓粮。
English: The second point is to discuss the appointment of officials to manage and restore grain reserves.

古文：疏下，户部言： 所陈俱切时弊，令所司举行。 
现代文：奏疏下发，卢部说： 所陈述的内容都切中时弊，命令主管部门施行。 
English: After the report was issued, Lu said, "The content of the report is timely and correct, and I order the competent department to implement it."

古文：迁延数载如故。
现代文：但是，仍然迁延数年如同以前。
English: However, it still lingers for years as before.

古文：粮长者，太祖时，令田多者为之，督其乡赋税。
现代文：粮长，是太祖时期命令田地多的人充当此任，催交其乡赋税的人。
English: During the time of the great ancestors, the chief of grain was the person who ordered the person with the most fields to act as this position and urge the person to pay taxes to his hometown.

古文：岁七月，州县委官偕诣京，领勘合以行。
现代文：每年七月，州县派官吏偕同到京城，领取验对的符契施行催征。
English: Every July, the prefectures and counties sent their officials to the capital to receive the matching certificates and enforce the conscription.

古文：粮万石，长、副各一人，输以时至，得召见，语合，辄蒙擢用。
现代文：粮一万石，粮长、副各一人，按时输税到京，能得到召见，言语合意，便蒙提升录用。
English: Ten thousand koku of grain, one grain chief and one deputy each, tax remittance to Beijing on time, if they can be summoned and agree on words, they will be promoted.

古文：末年更定，每区正副二名轮充。
现代文：洪武末年重新制定，每区正、副粮长二名轮流充任。
English: It was reformulated in the last years of Hongwu, and two chief and deputy chiefs of grain were appointed to each district in turn.

古文：宣德间，复永充。
现代文：宣德年间，又永远充任。
English: During the Xuande era, he was appointed to the post permanently.

古文：科敛横溢，民受其害，或私卖官粮以牟利。
现代文：赋敛泛滥，人民受其危害，有时私卖官粮以牟取私利。
English: Hoarding is rampant, the people are harmed by it, and sometimes they sell government grain for personal gain.

古文：其罢者，亏损公赋，事觉，至陨身丧家。
现代文：其罢除的，亏损公家赋税，事情发觉，以至于身死家破。
English: Its ousted, loss-making public taxation, the matter was discovered, so that the family was destroyed.

古文：景泰中，革粮长，未几又复。
现代文：景泰年问，革除粮长，不久又恢复。
English: Jing Tai asked, the leather is removed from the grain, and it is soon restored.

古文：自官军兑运，粮长不复输京师，在州里间颇滋害，故鼎臣及之。
现代文：自从官军兑粮运送，粮长不再输送到京城，在州县阎里之间多滋生祸害，所以顾鼎臣论及此事。
English: Since the government army has been transporting grain, the grain is no longer transported to Beijing, and there are more disasters between prefectures and counties, so Gu Dingchen discussed this matter.

古文：未几，御史郭弘化等亦请通行丈量，以杜包赔兼并之弊。
现代文：不久，御史郭弘化等人也请求通行丈量，以杜绝包赔兼并的弊端。
English: Soon, Mishi Guo Honghua and others also requested the passage measurement in order to eliminate the drawbacks of the merger.

古文：帝恐纷扰，不从。
现代文：皇帝恐怕纷扰，不听从。
English: I'm afraid the emperor will not listen to reason.

古文：给事中徐俊民言： 今之田赋，有受地於官，岁供租税者，谓之官田。
现代文：给事中徐俊民说： 现在的田赋，有在官府接受田地，每年供应租税的，叫做官田。
English: During the presentation, Xu Junmin said, "In the current field allocation, there are fields that are accepted by the government office and supplied with taxes every year, which are called government fields.

古文：有江水泛溢沟塍淹没者，谓之坍江。
现代文：有江水泛滥沟塍淹没的，叫做坍江。
English: If a gully is flooded by river water, it is called a flooded gully.

古文：有流移亡绝，田弃粮存者，谓之事故。
现代文：有人口流动死绝，田地舍弃而粮税尚存的，叫做事故。
English: If population movement dies out, the fields are abandoned, but the grain tax remains, this is called an accident.

古文：官田贫民佃种，亩入租三斗，或五六斗或石以上者有之。
现代文：官田由贫民佃种，每亩交租三斗，有的五六斗，有的甚至一石以上。
English: The government-owned land is cultivated by the poor, and the rent per mu is three dou, some are five or six dou, and some are even more than one stone.

古文：坍江、事故虚粮，里甲赔纳，或数十石或百馀石者有之。
现代文：坍江、事故的虚粮，里甲赔偿交纳，有的达敷十石甚至百余石。
English: Those who have lost their livelihoods due to river floods or accidents are required to pay compensation of up to ten or even more than one hundred koku.

古文：夫民田之价十倍官田，贫民既不能置。而官田粮重，每病取盈，益以坍江、事故虚粮，又令摊纳，追呼敲扑，岁无宁日。
现代文：民田的价格比官田高十倍，贫民既不能买，而官田粮税重，常常以收取太多而顾虑，再加上坍江、事故的虚粮，又命令摊派交纳，催逼赋税敲打鞭笞，一年到头役有安宁的日子。
English: The price of private land is ten times higher than that of government-owned land, so the poor can't buy it, but the government-owned land has heavy grain tax, and they often worry about collecting too much. In addition, there is the waste grain caused by river sinking and accidents, and they are also ordered to apportion and pay the tax. They are urged to pay the tax and beaten with whips, so that they can have a peaceful life all year round.

古文：而奸富猾胥方且诡寄、那移，并轻分重。
现代文：而奸谲的富豪狡猾的胥吏却又把自己的田地假报在别人名下，或挪借移用，合并轻税分摊重税。
English: But the treacherous plutocrats and cunning tax collectors falsely reported their fields under other people's names, or borrowed and transferred them, and combined the light tax with the heavy tax.

古文：此小民疾苦，闾阎凋瘁，所以日益而日增也。
现代文：这就是小民的疾苦。民间凋敝，一天天加重的原因。
English: This is the plight of the common people, the reason why the decline of the people is getting worse day by day.

古文：请定均粮、限田之制。
现代文：请求制定平均粮税、限定田地的制度。
English: They requested the establishment of an average grain tax and a system of limited fields.

古文：坍江、事故，悉与蠲免。
现代文：坍江、事故，全部予以免除。
English: River floods and accidents are all exempted.

古文：而合官民田为一，定上、中、下三则起科以均粮。
现代文：而合并官田与民田为一样，确定上、中、下三个等级按亩收税以平均粮税。
English: However, the merger of government-owned land and private land is the same, and the upper, middle and lower three grades are determined to be taxed by mu with an average grain tax.

古文：富人不得过千亩，听以百亩自给，其羡者则加输边税。
现代文：富人不能超过千亩，任凭他以一百亩供给自己，多余的就增加输纳边防粮税。
English: The rich can not exceed one thousand mu, let him provide himself with one hundred mu, and the excess will increase the loss of border grain tax.

古文：如此，则多寡有节，轻重适宜，贫富相安，公私俱足矣。 
现代文：如这样，便多与少有节制，轻与重适宜，贫与富彼此安乐，公与私都充足了。 
English: In this way, more and less have moderation, light and heavy are appropriate, poor and rich are at ease with each other, and public and private are sufficient.

古文：部议： 疆土民俗各异，令所司熟计其便。 
现代文：户部讨论： 疆土、民俗各不相同，命令主管官吏细致谋划各行其便。 
English: Household Department Discussion: The territory and folk customs are different, and the officials in charge are ordered to make detailed plans to suit their own convenience.

古文：不行。
现代文：其法没有施行。
English: Yang Chin is not going.

古文：越数年，乃从应天巡抚侯位奏，免苏州坍海田粮九万馀石，然那移、飞洒之弊，相沿不改。
现代文：过了几年，纔听从应天巡抚侯位的奏请，免去苏州坍海田的粮税九万多石，然而挪借移用，把田地分拨给其它农户以逃税的弊端，相沿而不改。
English: A few years later, in response to the request of the imperial procurator's court rank, Zhai exempted more than 90,000 kilos of grain tax from the Suzhou Tanghai field, but did not change the bad side of tax evasion by transferring and allocating the field to other farmers.

古文：至十八年，鼎臣为大学士，复言： 苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖、杭七府，供输甲天下，而里胥豪右蠹弊特甚。
现代文：到十八年，顾鼎臣任大学士，又上言说： 苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖、杭七府，交纳的赋税为天下第一，而乡里小吏豪强富户弊害特别严重。
English: By the 18th year, Gu Dingchen was appointed as a university scholar, and he said: Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Jia, Hubei and Hang seven provinces, the tax paid is the first in the world, and the villainy of small officials and powerful rich households in the countryside is particularly serious.

古文：宜将欺隐及坍荒田土，一一检核改正。 
现代文：应该把欺骗隐瞒以及坍荒田地，一一检查核实改正。 
English: It is necessary to check, verify and correct the deception and the abandoned fields one by one.

古文：於是应天巡抚欧阳铎检荒田四千馀顷，计租十一万石有奇，以所欺隐田粮六万馀石补之，馀请豁免。
现代文：于是应天巡抚欧阳铎检查荒田四千多顷，合计租税十一万石有余，用所欺骗隐瞒田地的粮税六万多石予以补充，其余的请求免除。
English: Therefore, in response to the inspection of more than 4,000 hectares of wasteland by the heavenly governor Ouyang Xuan, the total tax was more than 110,000 koku, and the grain tax of more than 60,000 koku was supplemented with the fields that were deceived and concealed, and the remaining requests were exempted.

古文：户部终持不下。
现代文：户部始终坚持不同意。
English: The head of the household always disagreed.

古文：时嘉兴知府赵瀛建议： 田不分官、民，税不分等则，一切以三斗起徵。 
现代文：当时嘉兴知府趟瀛建议： 田不分官田、民田，税不分等级，一切以三斗起征。 
English: At that time, the Jiaxing prefectural government proposed: no matter whether the land is government-owned or privately owned, and no matter what the tax level is, everything should be levied at 3 dou.

古文：铎乃与苏州知府王仪尽括官、民田裒益之。
现代文：欧阳铎便与苏州知府王仪全部囊括予以增加或减少。
English: Ouyang Gong and Suzhou Zhifu Wangyi were all included in the increase or decrease.

古文：履亩清丈，定为等则。
现代文：实地清理丈量土地，定为等级。
English: The land was measured and cleared in the field and graded.

古文：所造经赋册，以八事定税粮：曰元额稽始，曰事故除虚，曰分项别异，曰归总正实，曰坐派起运，曰运馀拨存，曰存馀考积，曰徵一定额。
现代文：所造的经赋册，以八个方面确定税粮：一是元额稽始，二是事故除虚，三是分项别异，四是归总正实，五是坐派起运，六是运余拨存，七是存余考积，八是征一定额。
English: According to the record, the tax on grain was determined in eight aspects: the first was the beginning of the amount, the second was the elimination of accidents, the third was the different items, the fourth was the total, the fifth was the dispatch, the sixth was the transportation surplus, the seventh was the surplus accumulation, and the eighth was the levy of a certain amount.

古文：又以八事考里甲：曰丁田，曰庆贺，曰祭祀，曰乡饮，曰科贺，曰恤政，曰公费，曰备用。
现代文：又用八个方面考核里甲：一是丁田，二是庆贺，三是祭祀，四是乡饮，五是科贺，六是恤政，七是公费，八是备用。
English: Eight aspects were also used to assess Lia A: first, Ding Tian, second, celebration, third, sacrifice, fourth, township drinking, fifth, Koga, sixth, charity, seventh, public expense, and eighth, spare.

古文：以三事定均徭：曰银差，曰力差，曰马差。
现代文：用三个方面决定平均徭役：一是银差，二是力差，三是马差。
English: Three aspects are used to determine the average weight of a horse: one is the silver difference, the second is the force difference, and the third is the horse difference.

古文：著为例。
现代文：定著作为条例。
English: Fixed as an ordinance.

古文：徵一者，总徵银米之凡，而计亩均输之。
现代文：征一，是指总征银米的总数，而计算田亩平均输缴赋税。
English: Levy one refers to the total amount of silver rice levied, while the average tax paid per mu is calculated.

古文：其科则最重与最轻者，稍以耗损益推移。
现代文：那些按田地类别、等级确定的赋税标准最重和最轻的，稍以消耗增减改动。
English: Those with the heaviest and lightest tax standards determined by field type and grade will be changed slightly by consumption increase and decrease.

古文：重者不能尽损，惟递减耗米，派轻赍折除之，阴予以轻。
现代文：重的不能全部减，只是递减耗米，派入轻税折除，暗中予以减轻。
English: The heavy can not be reduced completely, but the consumption of rice will be reduced gradually, the light tax will be deducted, and it will be reduced secretly.

古文：轻者不能加益，为徵本色，递增耗米加乘之，阴予以重。
现代文：轻税不能增加，为征收本色，递增耗米加乘，暗中予以加重。
English: The light tax cannot be increased. In order to collect the true amount, the incremental consumption is multiplied by the rice, and it is secretly increased.

古文：推收之法，以田为母，户为子。
现代文：推算收税乏法，以田地为母，人户为子。
English: Estimating the tax collection method, with the field as the mother and the household as the child.

古文：时豪右多梗其议，鼎臣独以为善，曰： 是法行，吾家益千石输，然贫民减千石矣，不可易也。 
现代文：当时富豪之人多阻止其提议，只有顾鼎臣认为好，说： 这个税法一实行，我家增加一千石税，然而贫民却减轻一千石了，不能改动。 
English: At that time, many rich people blocked his proposal, but only Gu Dingchen thought it was good, saying: As soon as this tax law was implemented, my family's tax increased by a thousand stone, but the poor people were relieved by a thousand stone, and it could not be changed.

古文：顾其时，上不能损赋额，长民者私以己意变通。
现代文：但是当时，皇上不能碱损赋税数额，官吏私下以个人的想法变通。
English: However, at that time, the emperor could not reduce the amount of tax, and officials secretly made changes according to their own ideas.

古文：由是官田不至偏重，而民田之赋反加矣。
现代文：因此官田不至于偏重，而民田的赋税反而增加了。
English: As a result, government-owned fields were not given more weight, while taxes on private fields increased.

古文：时又有纲银、一串铃诸法。
现代文：当时又有纲银、一串铃等法。
English: At that time, there were other methods such as a silver ring and a string of bells.

古文：纲银者，举民间应役岁费，丁四粮六总徵之，易知而不繁，犹网之有纲也。
现代文：纲银，是举民间应服役的岁费，丁四成粮六成总征收，易于理解而不繁杂，犹如网有纲。
English: It is easy to understand and not complicated. It is like a net with rules.

古文：一串铃，则夥收分解法也。
现代文：一串铃，则是合收分解法。
English: A string of bells, on the other hand, is a combined decomposition method.

古文：自是民间输纳，止收本色及折色银矣。
现代文：从此民间交纳赋税，只收本色和折色银了。
English: From then on, only genuine and ornate silver was collected from the people who paid taxes.

古文：是时天下财赋，岁入太仓库者二百万两有奇。
现代文：这时天下的财赋，每年纳入太仓库的二百万两有余。
English: At this time, the world's financial endowment was more than two million yuan a year.

古文：旧制以七分经费而存积三分备兵、歉，以为常。
现代文：旧有制度以七分作为国家的经常用费，而存积三分防备兵灾和歉收，作为常规。
English: The old system used seven points as the country's recurrent expenditure, while the accumulation of three points to prevent and prepare for military disasters and poor harvests was the norm.

古文：世宗中年，边供费繁，加以土木、祷祀，月无虚日，帑藏匮竭。
现代文：世宗中期，边防供费繁多，加上土木、祷祀，每月没有空遇一天，府库储藏匮乏枯竭。
English: In the middle of the reign of King Sejong, there were a lot of expenses for border defense, in addition to civil engineering and religious services, there was no free day every month, and the prefectural treasury was depleted.

古文：司农百计生财，甚至变卖寺田，收赎军罪，犹不能给。
现代文：司农用各种办法生财，甚至变卖寺院的田地，收军罪赎金，还是不能满足供应。
English: The head farmer used various methods to make money, even selling the fields of the temple and collecting ransom for military crimes, but still could not meet the supply.

古文：二十九年，俺荅犯京师，增兵设戍，饷额过倍。
现代文：二十九年，俺苔侵犯京城，增加军队防守，军饷数额超过一倍。
English: In 1929, I invaded the capital and increased the number of troops to defend it, and the amount of military pay more than doubled.

古文：三十年，京边岁用至五百九十五万，户部尚书孙应奎蒿目无策，乃议於南畿、浙江等州县增赋百二十万，加派於是始。
现代文：三十年，京城边防一年用到五百九十五万，户部尚书孙应奎忧念时局束手无策，便提议在南畿、浙江等州县增加赋税一百二十万，加派赋税从此时开始。
English: In the past 30 years, Beijing's border defense has used 5.95 million yuan a year. The head of the household department, Shang Shusun Yingkui, worried about the current situation and helpless, proposed to increase the tax by 1.2 million yuan in Nangui, Zhejiang and other prefectures and counties, and the tax increase began at this time.

古文：嗣后，京边岁用，多者过五百万，少者亦三百馀万，岁入不能充岁出之半。
现代文：以后，京城边防每年的用度，多的超过五百万，少的也三百余万，每年的收入不能补充每年支出的一半。
English: Since then, the annual expenditure of Beijing's border defense has been more than 5 million, and less than 3 million. The annual income cannot supplement half of the annual expenditure.

古文：由是度支为一切之法，其箕敛财贿、题增派、括赃赎、算税契、折民壮、提编、均徭、推广事例兴焉。
现代文：因此度支想尽一切办法，苛敛民财、题增派、括赃赎、算税契、折民壮、提编、均徭、推广事例等名目便兴起了。
English: Therefore, the central government tried every possible means, and the names of people's financial austerity, increase in the number of titles, redemption of brackets, tax calculation, reduction of people's wealth, compilation, equalization, and promotion cases have emerged.

古文：其初亦赖以济匮，久之诸所灌输益少。
现代文：开初也赖以解救匮乏，久了以后，各地输送的赋税更少。
English: At the beginning, it was also relied on to relieve scarcity. After a long time, the taxes sent from various regions were less.

古文：又四方多事，有司往往为其地奏留或请免：浙、直以备倭，川、贵以采木，山、陕、宣、大以兵荒。
现代文：又四方纷乱，主管官吏常常为自己所辖之地上奏请求留用或者请求免除：浙、直以防备倭寇为由，川、贵以采伐树木为由，山、陕、宣、大以兵荒为由。
English: There was also turmoil on all sides, and the officials in charge often requested to be retained or exempted from the land under their jurisdiction: Zhejiang and Zhizhou on the grounds of preventing Japanese piracy, Sichuan and Guizhou on the grounds of felling trees, and Shan, Shaanxi, Xuan, and Tai on the grounds of desertion.

古文：不惟停格军兴所徵发，即岁额二百万，且亏其三之一。
现代文：不仅财物储存、供给军用所征调，就是每年额定二百万，尚且亏缺三分之一。
English: Not only is the storage and supply of property requisitioned by the military, it is rated at two million a year, but it is still a third of the deficit.

古文：而内廷之赏给，斋殿之经营，宫中夜半出片纸，吏虽急，无敢延顷刻者。
现代文：而皇帝的赏赐供给，斋殿的经营，宫中半夜传出片纸，官吏虽然着急，也不敢有顷刻延缓。
English: But the emperor's reward and supply, the management of the temple, and the midnight transmission of a piece of paper in the palace, although the officials were in a hurry, they did not dare to delay for a moment.

古文：三十七年，大同右卫告警，赋入太仓者仅七万，帑储大较不及十万。
现代文：三十七年，左旦右卫报告敌情，赋税纳入太仓的只有七万，财物储藏大致不到十万。
English: In 1937, when Zuotan Yuwei reported on the hostile situation, the tax included in Taicang was only 70,000, and the property storage was approximately less than 100,000.

古文：户部尚书方钝等忧惧不知所出，乃乘间具陈帑藏空虚状，因条上便宜七事以请。
现代文：户部尚书方钝等人忧虑恐惧不知财物从何处可出，便找机会详细陈说库藏空虚的情况，于是分条呈上符合时宜的七件事提出请示。
English: Concerned, fearful, and not knowing where the money could come from, members of the household, including Shang Shufang and others, looked for an opportunity to explain in detail the situation of the emptiness of the warehouse, and then submitted a request for instructions on seven timely matters.

古文：既，又令群臣各条理财之策，议行者凡二十九事，益琐屑，非国体。
现代文：随后，又命令群臣各自条陈理财的策赂，决议施行的一共二十九条，更加琐碎，不是国家大体。
English: Subsequently, he also ordered the ministers to make their own decisions on financial bribery, and the resolution implemented a total of 29 articles, which are more trivial, not the country as a whole.

古文：而累年以前积逋无不追徵，南方本色逋赋亦皆追徵折色矣。
现代文：而历年以前积欠的租税无不追征，南方本色欠赋也都追加征收成折色了。
English: And the tax arrears accumulated over the years have all been pursued, and the South's natural resources have also been additionally levied.

古文：是时，东南被倭，南畿、浙、闽多额外提编，江南至四十万。
现代文：这时，东南遭受倭患，南畿、浙、闽多收额外提编，江南达到四十万。
English: At this time, the Southeast was affected by the Japanese invasion, and Nangui, Zhejiang, and Handan received an extra allocation, and the southern part of the Yangtze River reached 400,000.

古文：提编者，加派之名也。
现代文：提编，就是加派的叫法。
English: Addition, that is the name of addition.

古文：其法，以银力差排编十甲，如一甲不足，则提下甲补之，故谓之提编。
现代文：其规定：以财力不等分为十组，如一组不足，就提下一组补充，所以叫提编。
English: Its stipulation: It is divided into ten groups according to financial resources. If one group is insufficient, the next group will be added, so it is called the compilation.

古文：及倭患平，应天巡抚周如斗乞减加派，给事中何煃亦具陈南畿困敝，言： 军门养兵，工部料价，操江募兵，兵备道壮丁，府州县乡兵，率为民累，甚者指一科十，请禁革之。 
现代文：到倭寇平息，应天巡抚周如斗请求减少加派赋税，给事中何煌也详细陈述南畿的困顿破敝，说： 军门训养士兵，工部估料价格，操江招募兵勇，兵备道的壮丁，府州县的乡兵，都成为人民的负担，严重的指一科征十，请求禁止革除。 
English: When the Japanese invaders were subdued, He Huang also made a detailed description of the troubles in Nangui, saying, "The military training soldiers, the estimation price of the Ministry of Industry, the courage to recruit soldiers by crossing the river, the strong young men of the military training road, and the townspeople in Fuzhou County have all become a burden to the people. Serious is the levy of one subject to ten, and the request to prohibit the removal.

古文：命如煃议，而提编之额不能减。
现代文：命令按何烟的提议办，而提编的额度不能减少。
English: The order will be made according to the proposal of He Yan, and the amount of the increase cannot be reduced.

古文：隆、万之世，增额既如故，又多无艺之征，逋粮愈多，规避亦益巧。
现代文：隆庆、万历时期，增加的税额已如故，又多出无艺的征收，欠粮更多，设法躲避也更加奸巧。
English: During the Longqing and Wanli periods, the increased amount of taxes has remained the same, and there are more unskillful collection, more grain shortages, and more cunning ways to evade them.

古文：已解而愆限或至十馀年，未徵而报收，一县有至十万者。
现代文：已解送而延期的竟至于十余年，没有征而报已收，一个县有达到十万的。
English: As for those who have been deported but delayed for more than ten years, they have not been reported for collection and have been received. One county has reached one hundred thousand.

古文：逋欠之多，县各数十万。
现代文：欠税之多，每县各有数十万。
English: There are so many tax arrears, each county has hundreds of thousands of arrears.

古文：赖行一条鞭法，无他科扰，民力不大绌。
现代文：依赖施行一条鞭法，没有了别的科税的干扰，人民的财力纔不至于大困顿。
English: Relying on the implementation of a whip law, without the interference of other taxes, the people's financial resources will not be in great difficulty.

古文：一条鞭法者，总括一州县之赋役，量地计丁，丁粮毕输於官。
现代文：一条鞭法是总括一个州县的赋税，测量土地，计算人丁徭役，人丁徭役和粮税都输入官府。
English: A whip method is to summarize the taxation of a state and county, measure the land, calculate the labor service, and input the labor service and grain tax into the government.

古文：一岁之役，官为佥募。
现代文：一年的徭役，官府出银帮助招募役工。
English: A year of forced labor, the government provided money to help recruit forced laborers.

古文：力差，则计其工食之费，量为增减；银差，则计其交纳之费，加以增耗。
现代文：力役差，便计算其工钱的费用，衡量着增减；银差，便计算其交纳的费用，增加省耗。
English: If there is a difference in the amount of labor, the cost of labor will be calculated and the increase or decrease will be measured; if there is a difference in the amount of money, the cost of labor will be calculated and the cost will be increased.

古文：凡额办、派办、京库岁需与存留、供亿诸费，以及土贡方物，悉并为一条，皆计亩徵银，折办於官，故谓之一条鞭。
现代文：凡是额办、派办、京库岁需与存留、按需要供应等费用，以及土贡方物，全部并成一条，都按田亩征收银，由官府折合办理，故称为一条鞭。
English: All the expenses such as the amount, allocation, collection, storage and supply according to the needs of the capital treasury, as well as the land tax, are all combined into one, and the silver is levied according to the mu of the field, and it is handled by the government. Therefore, it is called a whip.

古文：立法颇为简便。
现代文：立法颇简便。
English: The legislation is quite simple.

古文：嘉靖间，数行数止，至万历九年乃尽行之。
现代文：嘉靖年间，多次推行又多次停止，到万历九年便全面推行。
English: During the Jiajing period, it was implemented several times and suspended several times, and it was fully implemented in the ninth year of Wanli.

古文：其后接踵三大征，颇有加派，事毕旋已。
现代文：此后接连三次大规模征伐，多有加派，战事结束随即加派停止。
English: Since then, there have been three large-scale conquests in succession, mostly with additional troops. After the end of the war, the additional troops stopped.

古文：至四十六年，骤增辽饷三百万。
现代文：到四十六年，突然增加辽事军饷三百万。
English: By 1946, Liaocheng's military budget suddenly increased to 3 million yuan.

古文：时内帑充积，帝靳不肯发。
现代文：当时内府财物充足堆积，皇帝吝惜不肯调发。
English: At that time, the imperial household's property was amply accumulated, and the emperor grudgingly refused to transfer it.

古文：户部尚书李汝华乃援征倭、播例，亩加三厘五毫，天下之赋增二百万有奇。
现代文：户部尚书李汝华便援引征伐倭、播的先例，每亩加收税三厘五毫，天下的赋税增加二百万有余。
English: Li Ruhua, the head of the household department, cited the precedent of the levying of logging and sowing, and increased the tax by three and a half percent per mu, increasing the tax of the world by more than two million.

古文：明年复加三厘五毫。
现代文：第二年，又加收三厘五毫。
English: In the second year, another 3.5 per cent was added.

古文：明年，以兵工二部请，复加二厘。
现代文：又第二年，因兵、工二部请求，又加收二厘。
English: The following year, at the request of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Ministry of Industry and Trade, an additional two percent was added.

古文：通前后九厘，增赋五百二十万，遂为岁额。
现代文：总共前后加收九厘，增加赋税五百二十万，于是成为每年的额数。
English: A total of nine percent has been added back and forth, increasing taxes by 5.2 million, so it has become an annual amount.

古文：所不加者，畿内八府及贵州而已。
现代文：不增加的，祇是畿内八府以及贵州而已。
English: Only the eight prefectures in the Kinai region and Guizhou did not see an increase.

古文：天启元年，给事中甄淑言： 辽饷加派，易致不均。
现代文：天启元年，给事中甄淑说： 辽事军饷加派，容易导致不均匀。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, Zhenshu said: the Liaocheng Army's increase of troops is likely to lead to uneven distribution.

古文：盖天下户口有户口之银，人丁有人丁之银，田土有田土之银，有司徵收，总曰银额。
现代文：大抵天下户口有户口的税银，人丁有人丁的税银，田土有田土的税银，主管部门征收，总称银额。
English: Most of the world's households have household tax, people have individual tax, and fields have field tax, which are collected by the competent department, collectively known as the silver amount.

古文：按银加派，则其数不漏。
现代文：按银加派，则其数目不遗漏。
English: According to the addition of silver, the number is not omitted.

古文：东西南北之民，甘苦不同，布帛粟米力役之法，徵纳不同。
现代文：东西南北的人民，甘苦不同，布帛粟米力役的办法，征收交纳不同。
English: The people of the east, west, south and north are different in their likes and dislikes, and the methods of using poppy seeds are different, and the tax payment is different.

古文：惟守令自知其甘苦，而通融其徵纳。
现代文：只有守令自己知道其甘苦，而变通其征收交纳。
English: Only the guarding order knows its own sweetness and bitterness, and it is easy to collect and pay.

古文：今因人土之宜，则无偏枯之累。
现代文：现在因人丁土地的方便，则没有失去平衡的困扰。
English: Now, due to the convenience of people and land, there is no problem of losing balance.

古文：其法，以银额为主，而通人情，酌土俗，颁示直省。
现代文：其办法是，以银的数额为主，而疏通人情，斟酌地方风俗，颁发各直省。
English: The method was based on the amount of silver, and issued to each province according to local customs.

古文：每岁存留、起解各项银两之数，以所加饷额，按银数分派，总提折扣，裒多益寡，期不失饷额而止。
现代文：每年存留、起解各项银两的数目，凭所加粮饷的额敷，按银数分派，总提折扣，多的碱少，少的增加，以求不失饷额而止。
English: The number of silver coins to be kept and redeemed each year shall be distributed according to the number of silver coins according to the amount of grain and rice to be added, and the total discount shall be raised, the more alkali the less, and the less the increase, so as not to lose the amount.

古文：如此，则愚民易知，可杜奸胥意为增减之弊。
现代文：如这样，那么愚民易懂，可以杜绝奸猾胥吏随意增减的弊端。
English: In this way, it is easy for the stupid people to understand, and it is possible to eliminate the drawbacks of the increase and decrease at will of the treacherous officials.

古文：且小民所最苦者，无田之粮，无米之丁，田鬻富室，产去粮存，而犹输丁赋。
现代文：并且小民最痛苦的是无田之粮税，无米的丁役，田地卖给了富裕的人，田产已去而粮税犹存，而还要轮交人赋。
English: Moreover, the most painful thing for the common people is the grain tax of no fields, no rice for dingyu, the fields are sold to the rich, the crops have gone and the grain tax still exists, but they still have to pay people in turn.

古文：宜取额丁、额米，两衡而定其数，米若干即带丁若干。
现代文：应该取额丁、额米，两方平衡而确定数额，米多少，便带丁多少。
English: You should take the amount of ding and rice, and the two sides should balance and determine the amount. The more rice, the more ding.

古文：买田者，收米便收丁，则县册不失丁额，贫民不致赔累，而有司亦免逋赋之患。 
现代文：买田的人，征收米便征收丁役，那么县册不失丁额，贫民不致赔累，而主管官吏也免于欠税的忧愁。 
English: For those who buy fields, the collection of rice will collect dingyun, so the county will not lose dingyun, the poor will not be burdened, and the competent officials will also be free from the sorrow of tax arrears.

古文：下部覆议，从之。
现代文：下交户部复议，依从其说。
English: Submit it to the Accounts Department for reconsideration, and comply with what it says.

古文：崇祯三年，军兴，兵部尚书梁廷栋请增田赋。
现代文：崇祯三年，战争兴起，兵部尚书梁廷栋请求增加田赋。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, when the war broke out, the head of the military department, Shang Shuliang Tingdong, requested an increase in rice fields.

古文：户部尚书毕自严不能止，乃於九厘外亩复徵三厘。
现代文：户部尚书毕自严不能制止，便在九厘之外，每亩又征三厘。
English: If the head of the household is still writing and cannot be stopped by self-restraint, then in addition to nine percent, another three percent will be levied per mu.

古文：惟顺天、永平以新被兵无所加，馀六府亩徵六厘，得他省之半，共增赋百六十五万四千有奇。
现代文：祇有顺天、永平因刚遭受兵祸没有办法增加，其余六府每亩征收六厘，得到别省税收的一半，一共增加赋税一百六十五万四千有余。
English: Only Shuntian and Yongping had no way to increase because they had just suffered a military disaster. The remaining six prefectures levied six percent per mu and received half of the tax revenue of other provinces, with a total increase in tax of more than 1.654 million.

古文：后五年，总督卢象升请加宦户田赋十之一，民粮十两以上同之。
现代文：此后五年，总督卢象升请求增加宦户田赋的十分之一，民粮十两以上相同。
English: In the following five years, Governor Lu Xiangsheng requested an increase of one-tenth of the Seto rice field subsidy, and more than twelve times the amount of grain for the people.

古文：既而概徵每两一钱，名曰助饷。
现代文：随后一概征收每两一钱，名叫助饷。
English: Subsequently, a one-for-two levy was imposed, known as the "support levy."

古文：越二年，复行均输法，因粮输饷，亩计米六合，石折银八钱，又亩加徵一分四厘九丝。
现代文：过了二年，又实行均输法，用粮税的标准交纳军饷，每亩计交米六合，每石折银八钱，又每亩加征一分四厘九丝。
English: Two years later, the equalization method was implemented again, and the standard of grain tax was used to pay the war bounty, with six cones of rice per mu, eight pieces of silver per stone, and one quarter of a penny per mu.

古文：越二年，杨嗣昌督师，亩加练饷银一分。
现代文：遇了二年，杨嗣昌督率军队，每亩增加练兵饷银分。
English: In the second year, Yang Shichang led the army to increase the training of soldiers and the amount of silver per mu.

古文：兵部郎张若麒请收兵残遗产为官庄，分上、中、下，亩纳租八斗至二三斗有差。
现代文：兵部郎张若麒请求收兵残的遣产作为官庄，分为上、中、下三等，每亩交租八斗至二三斗不等。
English: Zhang Ruoqi, the Minister of Military Affairs, requested that the production left over from the withdrawal of soldiers be used as the official residence, which was divided into the upper, middle, and lower tiers, and the rent paid per mu ranged from eight to two or three dou.

古文：御史卫周胤言： 嗣昌流毒天下，剿练之饷多至七百万，民怨何极。 
现代文：御史卫周胤说： 杨嗣昌毒害天下，剿贼练兵之饷多达七百万，人民的怨恨哪里有极点？ 
English: Historian Wei Zhouyin said, "Yang Shichang poisoned the whole country, and there are as many as seven million of his trained soldiers. Where is the extreme of the people's resentment?

古文：御史郝晋亦言： 万历末年，合九边饷止二百八十万。
现代文：御史郝晋也说： 万历末年，合计九边军饷只有二百八十万。
English: Gu Shijin also said: In the last year of the Wanli era, the total military expenditure of the nine provinces was only 2.8 million.

古文：今加派辽饷至九百万。
现代文：现在加派御辽军饷达到九百万。
English: Now, the additional troops of the Liao Dynasty have reached nine million.

古文：剿饷三百三十万，业已停罢，旋加练饷七百三十馀万。
现代文：剿贼军饷三百三十万，已经停止，随即又加练兵粮饷七百三十多万。
English: The theft of 3.3 million soldiers' pay has been stopped, and the training and feeding of soldiers has been increased to more than 7.3 million.

古文：自古有一年而括二千万以输京师，又括京师二千万以输边者乎？ 
现代文：自古以来有一年而总共二千万输送京城，又总共京城二千万以输送边防的吗？ 
English: Since ancient times, has there been a year with a total of 20 million transported to the capital, and a total of 20 million transported to the border defense?

古文：疏语虽切直，而时事危急，不能从也。
现代文：上疏措辞虽然严厉直截，而时局危急，不能采纳。
English: Although the above wording is stern and straightforward, the situation is critical and cannot be accepted.

古文：役法定於洪武元年。
现代文：徭役之法制定于洪武元年。
English: The law on the post of eunuch was enacted in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：田一顷出丁夫一人，不及顷者以他田足之，名曰均工夫。
现代文：田地一顷出丁夫一人，不够一顷的用别的田补足，名叫均工夫。
English: One hectare of field is enough for one man, and if one hectare is not enough, another field can be used to make up for it. This is called equal work.

古文：寻编应天十八府州，江西九江、饶州、南康三府均工夫图册。
现代文：不久编制应天十八府州，江西九江、饶州、南康三府的均工夫图册。
English: Soon, the average time of the 18 prefectures of Yingtian, Jiangxi, Jiujiang, Raozhou and Nankang was compiled.

古文：每岁农隙赴京，供役三十日遣归。
现代文：每年农闲到京城，供徭役三十日后遣返回去。
English: Every year, the peasant idlers went to the capital to work as servants and were sent back after 30 days.

古文：田多丁少者，以佃人充夫，而田主出米一石资其用。
现代文：田地多人丁少的，以佃户充役夫，而田主交米一石资助其费用。
English: There are many people in the field, but few, with Seto as the main worker, and the owner of the field donates a stone of rice to help with the costs.

古文：非佃人而计亩出夫者，亩资米二升五合。
现代文：不是佃户而计算田亩出人夫的，每亩资助米二升五合。
English: For farmers who are not tenants, the subsidy per mu is 2 liters and 5 g of rice.

古文：迨造黄册成，以一百十户为一里，里分十甲曰里甲。以上、中、下户为三等，五岁均役，十岁一更造。
现代文：到造黄册完成，以一百一十户为一里，里分十甲，称里甲，以上、中、下户为三等，五年均役，十年重造一次。
English: By the time the Yellow Book was completed, one hundred and ten households were counted as one li, and one li was divided into ten jia, which was called ri jia, and the upper, middle, and lower households were counted as three classes, with equal service for five years, and rebuilding once every ten years.

古文：一岁中诸岁杂目应役者，编第均之，银、力从所便，曰均徭。
现代文：一年中各种杂目应该出役工的，编出轮次予以均衡。出银、出力役随其自便，叫做均徭。
English: In the course of a year, all sorts of miscellaneous items should be contributed, and the number of rounds should be balanced. The contribution of silver and the contribution of labor should be done at one's own convenience, which is called equalization.

古文：他杂役。
现代文：其它杂役，叫做杂泛。
English: Other chores are called miscellaneous.

古文：凡祗应、禁子、弓兵，悉佥市民，毋役粮户。
现代文：凡是祗应、禁子、弓兵，全部指派市民，不役使粮户。
English: In all cases of yakitori, hanzi, and archery, the citizens are designated, not the grain farmers.

古文：额外科一钱、役一夫者，罪流徙。
现代文：额外征收税一钱、役使一夫的，罪罚流放。
English: An additional levy of tax is one money, and the punishment for those who serve others is banishment.

古文：后法稍驰，编徭役里甲者，以户为断，放大户而勾单小。
现代文：后来法令渐渐松弛，编制徭役里甲的人，以卢作为断限，放大卢而勾单小。
English: Later, the decree gradually relaxed, compiling the number of people in the military service, with Lu as the cut-off limit, enlarging Lu and making it smaller.

古文：於是议者言，均徭之法，按册籍丁粮，以资产为宗，核人户上下，以蓄藏得实也。
现代文：于是议论的人说，均徭的办法，按册籍丁粮，以资产作根本，核实人户上下，以蓄藏得实。
English: Therefore, the commentators said that the method of equalization is based on the registered grain, with assets as the foundation, verifying people's households up and down, and storing the grain.

古文：稽册籍，则富商大贾免役，而土著困；核人户，则官吏里胥轻重其手，而小民益穷蹙。二者交病。
现代文：考察册籍，则富贵的大商人免于徭役，而土著之人困顿；核实人户，则官员和里甲小吏随意减轻或加重，而小民更加穷困，两方面交相为患。
English: When inspecting the books, the rich and noble big businessmen are exempted from forced labor, while the indigenous people are in trouble; when verifying people's households, the officials and minor officials arbitrarily reduce or increase, while the common people are more impoverished, and the two aspects are intertwined.

古文：然专论丁粮，庶几古人租庸调之意。
现代文：然而专论丁粮，差不多接近古人租庸调的意图。
English: However, the focus on Ding Liang, is almost close to the ancient people's intention to rent.

古文：乃令以旧编力差、银差之数当丁粮之数，难易轻重酌其中。
现代文：于是令以旧时所编力差、银差的数额当丁粮的数额，困难容易，量轻量重斟酌其中。
English: Therefore, it was decided to use the amount of the difference in strength and silver made up in the old days as the amount of grain, the difficulty is easy, the amount is light and the weight is considered.

古文：役以应差，里甲除当复者，论丁粮多少编次先后，曰鼠尾册，按而徵之。
现代文：徭役应差，里甲除应当免除的外，论丁粮的多少编排出先后，称鼠尾册，按册征收。
English: In addition to the exemptions, the amount of ding rations shall be issued successively, called the rat tail book, and shall be levied according to the book.

古文：市民商贾家殷足而无田产者，听自占，以佐银差。
现代文：市民商人家富足而没有田产的，听凭自己选择，以辅助银差。
English: If a citizen merchant is rich but has no farmland, he may choose to supplement his income with silver.

古文：正统初，佥事夏时创行於江西，他省仿行之，役以稍平。
现代文：正统初年，愈事夏时创制施行于江西，其它省仿效施行，徭役因此稍稍平衡。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the summer time creation system was implemented in Jiangxi, and other provinces followed suit. As a result, the summer work was slightly balanced.

古文：其后诸上供者，官为支解，而官府公私所须，复给所输银於坊里长，责其营办。
现代文：此后各上供的人，由官家支付费用，而官府公私所需，又提供所交纳的银两给坊里长，责令他们办理。
English: After that, the officials paid the expenses of each person who made a donation, and the public and private needs of the government also provided the paid silver to the village chiefs and ordered them to handle it.

古文：给不能一二，供者或什伯，甚至无所给，惟计值年里甲祗应夫马饮食，而里甲病矣。
现代文：给予不及十分之一二，供役的人有的费用达十倍百倍，甚至没有供给，祇是计算每年里甲只应夫马饮食，而里甲困窘了。
English: Less than two-tenths of a tenth is given, and the expenses of some servants reach ten times a hundred times, and even there is no supply, only the calculation is that Li Jia only needs to eat and drink every year, and Li Jia is embarrassed.

古文：凡均徭，解户上供为京徭，主纳为中官留难，不易中纳，往复改贸，率至倾产。
现代文：凡是均徭，解送户上供为京徭，交纳主事人被内官无端阻挠，不兑换钞引，反复改卖，大都至于倾家荡产。
English: In all cases, the money was evenly distributed, the money sent to the household was Beijing money, the person in charge of the payment was obstructed by the officials without reason, the money was not exchanged, the money was repeatedly resold, and most of the money was lost.

古文：其他役苛索之弊，不可毛举。
现代文：其它徭役苛刻索取的弊端，不能琐细地列举。
English: Other drawbacks of the harsh demands of the bailiffs cannot be listed in detail.

古文：明初，令天下贡土所有，有常额，珍奇玩好不与。
现代文：明朝初年，命令天下上贡各地特产，有经常不变的数额，珍奇玩好不在此列。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the world was ordered to pay tribute to special products from all over the country, with an often unchanged amount.

古文：即须用，编之里甲，出银以市。
现代文：即使需要，也编入里甲，拿出银子来购买。
English: Even if you need it, you can add it to your budget and take out the money to buy it.

古文：顾其目冗碎，奸黠者缘为利孔。
现代文：但是其项目冗杂琐碎，奸猾的人利用机会牟取利益。
English: But its projects are cumbersome and petty, and unscrupulous people take advantage of the opportunities for profit.

古文：又大工营缮，祠官祝厘，资用繁溢。迨至中叶，倭寇交讧，仍岁河决，国用耗殚。
现代文：又有大工程营造修缮，掌祭祀之官祈求福佑，财物开支繁多，到了明朝中期，倭寇不断骚扰，加上每年黄河决口，国家的财物消耗竭尽。
English: In addition, there were large-scale construction and repair projects, officials in charge of religious rites prayed for blessings, and there was a lot of expenditure on property. By the middle of the Ming Dynasty, the country's property was exhausted due to the constant harassment of wokou and the annual break of the Yellow River.

古文：於是里甲、均徭，浮於岁额矣。
现代文：于是里甲、均徭，超过了常年的数额。
English: As a result, the surplus exceeded the annual amount.

古文：凡役民，自里甲正办外，如粮长、解户、马船头、馆夫、祗候、弓兵、皂隶、门禁、厨斗为常役。
现代文：凡是役民，除了里甲正办之外，如粮长、解户、马船头、馆夫、祗候、弓兵、皂隶、门禁、厨斗成为经常性的徭役。
English: All servants, in addition to the staff of the Legco, such as the head of the granary, the head of the household, the boatman, the porter, the steward, the bowman, the soap-maker, the doorkeeper, and the cook, became regular attendants.

古文：后又有斫薪、抬柴、修河、修仓、运料、接递、站铺、插浅夫之类，因事编佥，岁有增益。
现代文：后来又有斫薪、抬柴、修河、修仓、运料、接递、站铺、闸浅夫之类，因事编册征派，每年都有增加。
English: Later, there were conscripts to collect firewood, carry firewood, repair rivers, repair warehouses, transport materials, make deliveries, work at stations, and work as porters, and the number of conscripts increased every year.

古文：嘉、隆后，行一条鞭法，通计一省丁粮，均派一省徭役。
现代文：嘉靖、隆庆以后，施行一条鞭法，总计一省的丁粮，平均派一省的徭役。
English: After Jiajing and Longqing, a whip method was implemented, with a total of one province's grain and one province's corvee.

古文：於是均徭、里甲与两税为一，小民得无扰，而事亦易集。
现代文：于是均徭、里甲与两税合而为一，小民得以不受骚扰，而事情也容易办成。
English: As a result, the per capita tax, the personal income tax, and the two taxes were combined into one, so that the common people could not be harassed, and things could be done easily.

古文：然粮长、里长，名罢实存，诸役卒至，复佥农氓。
现代文：然而粮长、里长，名义上罢除了而实际仍存在，各种工役突然到来，又征派农民。
English: However, the head of grain and the head of the village were nominally abolished, but actually still existed. All kinds of forced laborers suddenly arrived, and farmers were conscripted.

古文：条鞭法行十馀年，规制顿紊，不能尽遵也。
现代文：一条鞭法施行十多年，规矩制度又紊乱，不能完全遵用。
English: A whip law has been implemented for more than ten years, and the rules and regulations system is disordered and cannot be fully complied with.

古文：天启时，御史李应升疏陈十害，其三条切言马夫、河役、粮甲、修办、白役扰民之弊。
现代文：天启时期，御史李应升上疏陈说十大害处，其三条直切说马夫、河役、粮甲、修办、白役侵扰人民的弊端。
English: At the time of the Apocalypse, the Grand Historian Li Ying ascended the Shou Chen to say the ten harms, three of which directly said that the horse, river, grain, cultivation, and white encroach on the people.

古文：崇祯三年，河南巡抚范景文言： 民所患苦，莫如差役。
现代文：崇祯三年，河南巡抚范景文说： 人民的忧患疾苦，没有什磨像差役那样苦。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, Fan Jingwen, the governor of Henan Province, said: The people's sorrows and sufferings are nothing like the hardships of the dispatched workers.

古文：钱粮有收户、解户、驿递有马户，供应有行户，皆佥有力之家充之，名曰大户。
现代文：钱粮有收户、解户，驿递有马户，供应有行户，都指派有财力的家庭来充当，名叫大户。
English: Families with financial resources were assigned to act as recipients and deliverers of money and grain, as well as horse-drawn carts and peddlers. They were called large households.

古文：究之，所佥非富民，中人之产辄为之倾。
现代文：探究起来，所指派的如果不是富豪户，中等产业的人便倾家荡产。
English: When probed, if the appointees are not from wealthy households, then people from the middle class will become destitute.

古文：自变为条鞭法，以境内之役均於境内之粮，宜少苏矣，乃民间仍岁奔走，罄资津贴，是条鞭行而大户未尝革也。 
现代文：自从改成一条鞭法，以境内的徭役平均于境内的粮税，应稍微缓解，而民间连年奔走，用尽财产来补贴，是一条鞭施行而大户不曾革除。 
English: Since it was changed to a whip law, the average grain tax in the territory of the territory should be slightly eased, while the people have been running for years, using up their property to subsidize, it is a whip to enforce and large households have not been eliminated.

古文：时给事中刘懋复奏裁驿夫，征调往来，仍责编户。
现代文：当时给事中刘懋又上奏裁削驿夫，微调往来，仍然责令编户承担。
English: At that time, in the middle of the matter, Liu Yao also made a report to cut down the staff and fine-tune the contacts, and still ordered the editor to bear the responsibility.

古文：驿夫无所得食，至相率从流贼为乱云。
现代文：驿夫无法得到生活费用，以致相继跟随流贼造反。
English: Unable to afford the cost of living, the woodcutter followed the bandits and rebelled one after another.

古文：凡军、匠、灶户，役皆永充。
现代文：凡是军、匠、灶户，徭后都永远充任。
English: All soldiers, craftsmen, and cooks are always appointed to their posts after retirement.

古文：军户死若逃者，於原籍勾补。
现代文：军户死亡或逃跑的，在原籍选取填补。
English: In the event of the death or escape of a military family member, a replacement will be selected from the family of origin.

古文：匠户二等：曰住坐，曰轮班。
现代文：匠户二等：一是住坐，一是轮班。
English: Second-class craftsmen: one is a resident, the other is a shift worker.

古文：住坐之匠，月上工十日。
现代文：住坐的工匠，每月上工十天。
English: The resident craftsman works ten days a month.

古文：不赴班者，输罚班银月六钱，故谓之输班。
现代文：不应班的，交纳罚班银每月六钱，所以叫做输班。
English: If you don't report for your shift, you have to pay a fine of six yuan per month, so it's called "losing a shift."

古文：监局中官，多占匠役，又括充幼匠，动以千计，死若逃者，勾补如军。
现代文：监局的宦官，多占工匠的徭役，又括充幼匠，动不动以千计，死亡或者逃亡的，选取补充如同军户。
English: The eunuchs of the Supervision Bureau are mostly craftsmen's eunuchs, including young craftsmen, and there are thousands of them at any time. If they die or escape, they are selected and supplemented like military households.

古文：灶户有上、中、下三等。
现代文：灶户有上、中、下三个等次。
English: There are three grades of kitchens: upper, middle and lower.

古文：每一正丁，贴以馀丁。
现代文：每一个正丁，附以余丁。
English: Every regular ding comes with a leftover ding.

古文：上、中户丁力多，或贴二三丁，下户概予优免。
现代文：上、中户丁力多，有的附属二三丁，下户一概予以优免。
English: Upper and middle-class households are more likely to be affected, and some have two or three children, while lower-class households are generally exempted.

古文：他如陵户、园户、海户、庙户、幡夫、库役，琐末不可胜计。
现代文：其它如陵户、园户、海户、庙户、施夫、库役，琐细不能尽计。
English: Others, such as mausoleum households, garden households, seaside households, temple households, servants, and treasurers, cannot be counted in detail.

古文：明初，工役之繁，自营建两京宗庙、宫殿、阙门、王邸，采木、陶甓，工匠造作，以万万计。
现代文：明朝初年，工役的繁多，开始于营建两京宗庙、宫殿、阙门、王邸。采伐树木、陶制甓瓦，工匠制造，以万万来计算。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there were many construction workers, starting with the construction of the two imperial temples, palaces, imperial gates, and royal residences. Trees were felled, ceramic tiles were made, and craftsmen were employed to the tune of tens of thousands.

古文：所在筑城、浚陂，百役具举。
现代文：到处修筑城墙、疏浚池陂，各种工程都兴起。
English: City walls and dredging ponds were built everywhere, and all kinds of projects sprang up.

古文：迄於洪、宣，郊坛、仓庾犹未迄工。
现代文：直到洪武、宣德，郊祀台坛、仓库还没有完工。
English: Until Hongwu and Xuande, the suburban worship platform and warehouse had not been completed.

古文：正统、天顺之际，三殿、两宫、南内、离宫，次第兴建。
现代文：正统、天顺之际，三殿、两宫、南内、离宫，依次兴建。
English: On the occasion of orthodoxy and auspiciousness, the Third Palace, the Two Palaces, the South Palace, and the Imperial Villa were built one after another.

古文：弘治时，大学士刘吉言： 近年工役，俱摘发京营军士，内外军官禁不得估工用大小多寡。
现代文：弘治时期，大学士刘吉说： 近年来的工役，都选调自京营的军士，内外军官禁止不能估算工用大小多少。
English: During the Hongzhi period, Liu Ji, a university scholar, said: In recent years, laborers have been selected from military officers in Beijing. It is forbidden for officers at home and abroad to estimate the size of laborers.

古文：本用五千人，奏请至一二万，无所稽核。 
现代文：本用五千人，奏请达到一二万，没有查核。 
English: Five thousand people were originally used, but the request reached one hundred and twenty thousand, and there was no verification.

古文：礼部尚书倪岳言： 诸役费动以数十万计，水旱相仍，乞少停止。 
现代文：礼部尚书倪岳说： 诸工程费用动不动以敷十万来计算，水灾旱灾接连不断，请求稍稍停止。 
English: Ni Yue, secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: The project costs are constantly calculated at 100,000 yuan. Floods and droughts continue one after another. The request is to stop a little.

古文：南京礼部尚书童轩复陈工役之苦。
现代文：南京礼部尚书童轩又陈说工役的痛苦。
English: Nanjing etiquette club member Shang Shudongxuan also recounted the pain of labor service.

古文：吏部尚书林瀚亦言： 两畿频年凶灾，困於百役，穷愁怨叹。
现代文：吏部尚书林瀚也说： 两畿连年饥荒，被各项工役所困扰，穷困忧愁怨恨感叹。
English: Shang Shulinhan, the head of the personnel department, also said: "The two Kisangis have been suffering from famine for several years in a row, have been plagued by various laborers, and lament poverty, sorrow, and resentment.

古文：山、陕供亿军兴，云南、广东西征发剿叛。
现代文：山、陕供应军饷兴起，云南、广东西征讨剿除叛逆。
English: Supplying armies from Shan and Shaanxi have sprung up, and Yunnan and Guangxi are leading the campaign to root out the rebels.

古文：山东、河南、湖广、四川、江西兴造王邸，财力不赡。
现代文：山东、河南、湖廑、四川、江西兴建王邸，财力不能供应。
English: Shandong, Henan, Hubei, Sichuan, and Jiangxi have built royal residences, but they do not have the financial resources to supply them.

古文：浙江、福建办物料，视旧日增多。
现代文：浙江、福建办治物资材料，比旧日增多。
English: In Zhejiang and Fujian, the amount of administrative materials has increased compared to the previous day.

古文：库藏空匮，不可不虑。 
现代文：库藏空虚匮乏，不可不忧虑。 
English: We must be concerned about the emptiness and scarcity of our storehouses.

古文：帝皆纳其言，然不能尽从也。
现代文：皇帝都采纳了他们的意见，然而不能全部依从。
English: The emperor accepted their advice, but he could not follow all of them.

古文：武宗时，乾清宫役尤大。
现代文：武宗时期，干清宫工程特别大。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, the construction of the Imperial Palace was a particularly large project.

古文：以太素殿初制朴俭，改作雕峻，用银至二千万馀两，役工匠三千馀人，岁支工食米万三千馀石。
现代文：因太素殿原来的形制朴素节俭，改作雕昼雄峻，用银达到二千多万两，役使工匠三千多人，一年支出工匠食用米一万三千多石。
English: Because the original form of Tai Su Hall was simple and frugal, it was transformed into a majestic sculpture, with silver reaching more than 20 million taels, serving more than 3,000 artisans, and spending more than 13,000 kilos of rice per year.

古文：又修凝翠、昭和、崇智、光霁诸殿，御马临、钟鼓司、南城豹房新房、火药库皆鼎新之。
现代文：又修凝翠、昭和、崇智、光霁等殿，御马监、钟鼓司、南城豹房新房、火药库都重新修建。
English: In addition, the Shogetsu, Showa, Sochi, and Mitsukuni halls, the Mima monitor, the bell and drum master, the new house of Nanjo Leopard House, and the gunpowder magazine were all rebuilt.

古文：权幸阉宦庄园祠墓香火寺观，工部复窃官银以媚焉。
现代文：权臣幸臣宦官庄园祠墓香火寺观，工部又窃用官银以献媚。
English: The powerful vassal Yukoshin visited Xianghuojigu, the ancestral tomb of the eunuch's manor, and the Ministry of Industry stole government silver to ingratiate itself.

古文：给事中张原言： 工匠养父母妻子，尺籍之兵御外侮，京营之军卫王室，今奈何令民无所赖，兵不丽伍，利归私门，怨丛公室乎？ 
现代文：给事中张原说： 工匠养育父母妻儿，记载于簿册上的军队抵御外敌入侵，京营的军队保卫王室，现在怎么令人民无所依赖，令士兵不附属于军伍，利益归于私门，怨恨丛聚于公室呢？ 
English: In his speech, Zhang Yuan said: "Craftsmen raise their parents, wives and children, the army recorded in the book resists foreign invasion, and the army of the Beijing Camp defends the royal family. How can the people be independent now, so that soldiers do not belong to the army, profits go to private households, and resentment gathers in the office?

古文：疏入，谪贵州新添驿丞。
现代文：奏疏呈入，被贬谪为贵州新添驿丞。
English: He was relegated to Guizhou Xinzhuanjunzheng.

古文：世宗营建最繁，十五年以前，名为汰省，而经费已六七百万。
现代文：世宗营建宫室最繁多，十五年以前，名义上节省省除奢侈，而财政费用已达六七百万。
English: The Sejong dynasty built the largest number of palace rooms. Fifteen years ago, the nominal savings were less than the extravagance, and the financial costs had reached 67 million.

古文：其后增十数倍，斋宫、秘殿并时而兴。
现代文：此后增加十几倍，斋宫、秘殿同时兴建。
English: Since then, the number has increased more than tenfold, with the construction of the Saigu and the Hidden Hall at the same time.

古文：工场二三十处，役匠数万人，军称之，岁费二三百万。
现代文：工场二三十处，役使工匠数万人，役使军队与此相当，每年花费达到二三百万。
English: There are twenty or thirty workshops, employing tens of thousands of craftsmen, and an army of the same number, with an annual expenditure of twenty to thirty million.

古文：其时宗庙、万寿宫灾，帝不之省，营缮益急。
现代文：当时宗庙、万寿宫襞生火灾，皇帝不能省察，营建修缮更加紧急。
English: At that time, the ancestral temple and the Wan Shou Palace were engulfed in fire, and the emperor couldn't stop to think about it, making the construction and repairs even more urgent.

古文：经费不敷，乃令臣民献助；献助不已，复行开纳。
现代文：经费不够支出，便命令臣民捐献资助；捐献资助不止，又实行与国外往来。
English: When there was not enough money to spend, he ordered his subjects to donate funds; when they did not stop donating funds, they also carried out foreign exchanges.

古文：劳民耗财，视武宗过之。
现代文：劳顿人民消耗财物，超过武宗。
English: The people of Laodong consume more wealth and goods than those of Wuzong.

古文：万历以后，营建织造，溢经制数倍，加以征调、开采，民不得少休。
现代文：万历以后，营建织造，超过经理节制的敷倍，加上征调、开采，民众不能得到片刻休养。
English: After ten thousand years of history, the construction of weaving, exceeding the limit of the manager's control, coupled with requisitioning and mining, the people can not get a moment's rest.

古文：迨阉人乱政，建第营坟，僣越亡等，功德私祠遍天下。
现代文：到宦官淆乱政治，建宅第造坟墓，超过定制，没有等级之差，功德私祠遍及天下。
English: To eunuchs confuse politics, build a house, build a tomb, exceed customization, there is no difference in rank, and private shrines of merit are all over the world.

古文：盖二百馀年，民力殚残久矣。
现代文：大致二百多年，民力伤残弹尽很久了。
English: It's been more than 200 years, and it's been a long time since civilians were injured or maimed.

古文：其以职役优免者，少者一二丁，多者至十六丁。
现代文：那些因职役优恩免除徭役的，少者一二丁，多的达十六丁。
English: Those who were exempted from military service due to the kindness of the service, the few are one or two, and the many are up to sixteen.

古文：万历时，免田有至二三千者。
现代文：万历时，免去田赋有达到二三千的。
English: Over the course of thousands of years, the number of rice fields that have been exempted has reached two to three thousand.

古文：至若赋税蠲免，有恩蠲，有灾蠲。
现代文：至于赋税的免除，有恩蠲，有灾蠲。
English: As for tax exemptions, there are benefits and drawbacks.

古文：太祖之训，凡四方水旱辄免税，丰岁无灾伤，亦择地瘠民贫者优免之。
现代文：太祖的训制，凡是四方遭受水灾、旱灾就免税，丰年没有灾伤，也选择土地薄瘠人民贫困的便施恩免除。
English: According to the teachings of the great-grandfather, if the four directions suffer from floods and droughts, they will be exempted from taxes. If there is no disaster or injury in a good year, and if the land is poor and the people are poor, they will be exempted.

古文：凡岁灾，尽蠲二税，且贷以米，甚者赐米布若钞。
现代文：凡是饥荒，全部蠲免二税，并且以米借贷，更严重的便赐给米布钱钞。
English: Whenever there is a famine, all rice is exempted from the second tax, and rice is used to borrow money, and in more serious cases, rice cloth money is given.

古文：又设预备仓，令老人运钞易米以储粟。
现代文：又设置预备仓，令老人运钞换米以储备粮食。
English: In addition, a reserve warehouse has been set up for the elderly to exchange banknotes for rice in order to reserve grain.

古文：荆、蕲水灾，命户部主事赵乾往振，迁延半载，怒而诛之。
现代文：荆、薪水灾，命令户部主事趟干前去赈济，拖延了半年，皇上发怒而诛杀了他。
English: Due to a salary crisis, he ordered the head of the household department to go on a trip to collect money. After delaying for half a year, the emperor got angry and killed him.

古文：青州旱蝗，有司不以闻，逮治其官吏。
现代文：青州遭旱灾和蝗灾，主管部门不上报，逮捕治其官吏之罪。
English: Qingzhou suffered droughts and locust plagues, the competent departments did not report, arrest and punish its officials.

古文：旱伤州县，有司不奏，许耆民申诉，处以极刑。
现代文：旱灾伤害州县，主管官吏不上报，允许年高有德之民申诉，处以极刑。
English: If the officials in charge do not report the states and counties affected by the drought, and allow the elderly and virtuous people to appeal, they will be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：孝感饥，其令请以预备仓振贷，帝命行人驰驿往，且谕户部：自今凡岁饥，先发仓庾以贷，然后闻，著为令。 
现代文：孝感饥荒，其县令请求以预备仓赈济借贷，皇帝命令使者骑着驿马疾速前往，并且训谕户部： 从今以后，凡是发生饥荒，先开仓库贷粮，然后报告，定着为法令。 
English: The emperor ordered the emissary to ride quickly on a steed, and instructed the household department: From now on, whenever there is a famine, first open the warehouse to borrow grain, then report it, and set it as a decree.

古文：在位三十馀年，赐予布钞数百万，米百馀万，所蠲租税无数。
现代文：在位三十多年，赐予布帛钱钞数百万，米一百多万，所免除的租税无法计算。
English: During more than thirty years of his reign, Bo Xilai gave away millions of banknotes and more than one million meters of rice, and the tax exemptions are incalculable.

古文：成祖闻河南饥，有司匿不以闻，逮沼之。
现代文：成祖听到河南饥荒，主管官吏隐匿不上报，逮捕治其罪。
English: When Chengzu heard about the famine in Henan, the officials in charge hid the news and did not report it. They were arrested and punished.

古文：因命都御史陈瑛榜谕天下，有司水旱灾伤不以闻者，罪不宥。
现代文：于是命令都御史陈瑛张榜告谕天下，主管官吏对水旱灾伤不报告的，罪罚不宽饶。
English: Therefore, he ordered the prefectural governor Chen Ying Zhang Bopun to announce to the world that if the officials in charge did not report the flood and drought disaster, the punishment would not be lenient.

古文：又敕朝廷岁遣巡视官，目击民艰不言者，悉逮下狱。
现代文：又命令朝廷官员每年派遣巡枧官，察看到人民生活艰难而不上报的人，全部逮捕关进监狱。
English: He also ordered the court officials to send patrol officers every year to inspect those who did not report the hardships of the people's lives, and to arrest and imprison them all.

古文：仁宗监国时，有以发振请者，遣人驰谕之，言： 军民困乏，待哺嗷嗷，尚从容启请待报，不能效汉汲黯耶？ 
现代文：仁宗监国时，有因请求开仓赈灾的人，便派人急驰前往训谕，说： 军民穷困匮乏，嗷嗷待哺，还不慌不忙地奏请等待回报，不能仿效漠代汲黯吗？ 
English: When Emperor Nianzong was the overseer of the country, he sent someone to rush to the edict because someone had asked him to open a warehouse for disaster relief. He said, "The soldiers and the people are poor and needy, they are waiting to be fed, and they are not in a hurry. Please wait for the return. Can you not follow the example of the desert generation?

古文：宣宗时，户部请核饥民。
现代文：宣宗时，户部请求查核饥荒之民。
English: At the time of the enthronement, the head of the family requested that the people affected by the nuclear famine be investigated.

古文：帝曰： 民饥无食，济之当如拯溺救焚，奚待勘。 
现代文：皇帝说： 人民饥困没有粮食，救济他们当如拯救淹在水中，被火焚烧一样，为什么要等待查核呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "The people are starving and have no food. Helping them should be like saving them from drowning in water or being burned by fire. Why wait for an inspection?"

古文：盖二祖、仁、宣时，仁政亟行。
现代文：大致二祖、仁宗、宣宗时代，仁政屡次施行。
English: Around the time of the two patriarchs, Nanzong and Xuanzong, the benevolent government was repeatedly implemented.

古文：预备仓之外，又时时截起运，赐内帑。
现代文：预备仓之外，又时时截留起运，赐予内府之财。
English: In addition to the reserve warehouse, the start of transportation was also intercepted from time to time, and the wealth of Naifu was given.

古文：被灾处无储粟者，发旁县米振之。
现代文：遭受灾害之处没有储备粮的，调发近旁之县的米来赈济。
English: If there is no grain reserve in the disaster-stricken area, rice from nearby counties will be sent to help.

古文：蝗蝻始生，必遣人捕枌。
现代文：蝗蝻开始产生时，必定派人捕杀埋掉。
English: When locusts begin to appear, someone must be sent to kill and bury them.

古文：鬻子女者，官为收赎。
现代文：卖子女的，官府为之赎回收留。
English: For those who sell their children, the government will redeem the money and keep it.

古文：且令富人蠲佃户租。
现代文：并且命令富人免除佃户的租子。
English: And ordered the rich to exempt tenants of tenants.

古文：大户贷贫民粟，免其杂役为息，丰年偿之。
现代文：大户贷给贫苦人民粮食，免除杂役为利息，丰收后偿还。
English: Large households lend grain to poor people, waive miscellaneous services as interest, and repay after a good harvest.

古文：皇庄、湖泊皆驰禁，听民采取。
现代文：皇庄、湖泊都放松禁令，听凭人民采摘捕取。
English: Imperial Villages and lakes have relaxed the ban, and let the people pick and catch them.

古文：饥民还籍，给以口粮。
现代文：饥民返还原籍，供给口粮。
English: The starving people should return to their place of origin and be provided with food rations.

古文：京、通仓米，平价出粜。
现代文：京、通的仓米，平价出耀。
English: The warehouse rice of Beijing and Tong, parity shines.

古文：兼预给俸粮以杀米价，建官舍以处流民，给粮以收弃婴，养济院穷民各注籍，无籍者收养蜡烛、幡竿二寺。
现代文：同时预先供给俸粮以压低米价，建造官舍来安置流亡之民，供给粮食以养育抛弃的婴儿。养济院让穷困的人民注籍册，没有籍册的收养在蜡烛、旖竿二寺院。
English: At the same time, pre-paid grain was provided to lower the price of rice, official residences were built to resettle the exiles, and grain was provided to raise abandoned babies. The nursing home allowed the poor people to register, and those who did not have a register were adopted in two temples.

古文：其恤民如此。
现代文：其体恤人民像这样周到。
English: His empathy for the people is so thoughtful.

古文：世宗、神宗於民事略矣，而灾荒疏至，必赐蠲振，不敢违祖制也。
现代文：世宗、神宗对人民之事虽有疏略，而灾荒的奏疏到京，必定颁赐免除赋税赈救灾民，不敢违背祖宗的旧制。
English: Although the Shizong and the Shenzong were negligent in their treatment of the people, when the report of the famine reached Beijing, they would certainly grant tax exemption and relief to the victims, and would not dare to violate the old system of the ancestors.

古文：振米之法，明初，大口六斗，小口三斗，五岁以下不与。
现代文：赈米的办法，明代初年，大口六斗，小口三斗，五岁以下不给与。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the method of giving glutinous rice was to give six dowels for a large mouthful and three dowels for a small mouthful, and not to give it to children under the age of five.

古文：永乐以后，减其数。
现代文：永乐以后，减少其数量。
English: After Yongle, reduce its quantity.

古文：纳米振济赎罪者，景帝时，杂犯死罪六十石，流徒减三之一，馀递减有差。
现代文：交纳米赈救灾民赎罪的，景帝时，杂犯死罪六十石，流放徒刑减三分之一，其余递减有差等。
English: In the time of Emperor Jing, the death penalty for minor offenders was 60 kilos, and the penalty of banishment was reduced by one-third, with the rest of the reduction varying.

古文：捐纳事例，自宪宗始。
现代文：捐献交纳财物以得功名的条例，从宪宗开始。
English: The regulations on donating and paying off property to gain fame started with the Kensei sect.

古文：生员纳米百石以上，人国子监；军民纳二百五十石，为正九品散官，加五十石，增二级，至正七品止。
现代文：生员交纳米一百石以上，进入国子监；军民交纳二百五十石，为正九品散官，加五十石，增加二级，刭正七品而止。
English: If a member of the military or the people paid 250 koku, he would be promoted to the 9th grade, and if he paid 50 koku, he would be promoted to the 2nd grade, and so on until he was promoted to the 7th grade.

古文：武宗时，富民纳粟振济，千石以上者表其门，九百石至二三百石者，授散官，得至从六品。
现代文：武宗时期，富裕之民交纳粮食赈救灾民，干石以上的旌表其门，九百石至二三百石的，授予散官，能够达到从六品。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, the wealthy people donated grain to help the victims of the disaster, and those who had more than dry stone were awarded the title of Sangan, and those who had between 900 and 2,300 stone were awarded the title of Sangan, which could be up to 6 products.

古文：世宗令义民出谷二十石者，给冠带，多者授官正七品，至五百石者，有司为立坊。
现代文：世宗命令义民出谷二十石的，给予官职，多的授官正七品，到五百石的，主管部门为之立牌坊表彰。
English: Shizong ordered that if a righteous person contributed 20 koku, he would be given an official post, and if he contributed more than that, he would be awarded the title of Zhengyi Pin, and if he contributed more than 500 koku, the competent department would set up a plaque to commend him.

古文：振粥之法，自世宗始。
现代文：赈粥的办法，从世宗开始。
English: The method of making congee started with Sejong.

古文：报灾之法，洪武时不拘时限。
现代文：报告灾情的办法，洪武时期不拘时限。
English: The method of reporting the state of disaster is no time limit during the Hongwu period.

古文：弘治中，始限夏灾不得过五月终，秋灾不得过九月终。
现代文：弘治年问，开始限制夏灾不能超过五月底，秋灾不能超过九月底。
English: According to the Hongzhi Year, the restrictions on summer disasters cannot exceed the end of May, and autumn disasters cannot exceed the end of September.

古文：万历时，又分近地五月、七月，边地七月、九月。
现代文：万历时期，又分近地为五月、七月，边地为七月、九月。
English: In the Wanli period, the most recent months were May and July, and the most recent months were July and September.

古文：洪武时，勘灾既实，尽与蠲免。
现代文：洪武时期，查核灾情属实，就全部予以免除赋税。
English: During the Hongwu period, if the nuclear disaster was verified as true, they were all exempted from taxation.

古文：弘治中，始定全灾免七分，自九分灾以下递减。又止免存留，不及起运，后遂为永制云。
现代文：弘治年间，开始制定全面灾害免除七分赋税，从九分灾害以下递减，又停止免除存留，不及起运，以后便成为长久的制度。
English: During the Hongzhi period, it began to formulate a comprehensive disaster exemption of seven points of taxation, decreasing from nine points of disasters and below, and stopping the exemption from remaining. It was not until the start of transportation that it became a long-term system.

