古文：田子方侍坐于魏文侯，数称谿工。
现代文：田子方陪坐在魏文侯的旁边，多次称赞溪工这个人。
English: Tian Zi Fang sat next to Wei Wen Hou and praised the creek worker many times.

古文：文侯曰： 谿工，子之师邪？ 
现代文：文侯说： 溪工是先生的老师吗？ 
English: Wen Hou said: Is the creek worker your teacher?

古文：子方曰： 非也，无择之里人也。
现代文：子方说： 不是，他只是我的同乡。
English: Zifang said, "No, he's just a fellow villager.

古文：称道数当故无择称之。 
现代文：讲说大道常常恰当在理，所以我称赞他。 
English: I complimented him on the fact that his way of speaking was often appropriate and logical.

古文：文侯曰： 然则子无师邪？ 子方曰： 有。 
现代文：文侯说： 那么先生没有老师吗？ 子方说： 有 。
English: Wen Hou said, "So you don't have a teacher?" Zifang said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 子之师谁邪？ 
现代文：又问： 先生的老师是谁呢？ 
English: He also asked: Who is the teacher's teacher?

古文：子方曰： 东郭顺子。 
现代文：子方说： 是东郭顺子。 
English: The girl said, "It's Dongguo Junzi."

古文：文侯曰： 然则夫子何故未尝称之？ 
现代文：文侯说： 可是，先生为什么没有称赞过呢？ 
English: Wen Hou said, "But why didn't you praise him?

古文：子方曰： 其为人也真。人貌而天虚，缘而葆真，清而容物。
现代文：子方说： 他为人真诚，具有人的体貌和天一样空虚之心，随顺物性而保持真性，心性高洁又能容人容物。
English: Zifang said: He is a sincere person. He has a human body and a heart as empty as the sky. He maintains his true nature in accordance with his physical nature. His heart is pure and can accommodate the human form.

古文：物无道，正容以悟之，使人之意也消。
现代文：人与事不合正道，他端正己之仪态使自悟其过而改之。
English: People and things do not conform to the right path. He rectified his behavior to make himself understand and change it.

古文：无择何足以称之！ 
现代文：我哪里配得上去称赞他呀！ 
English: How am I not worthy to praise him!

古文：子方出，文侯傥然，终日不言。
现代文：子方出去后，文侯表现出若有所失的神态，整天不言语。
English: After the children went out, Wen Hou showed a somewhat lost demeanor, not saying a word all day.

古文：召前立臣而语之曰： 远矣，全德之君子！
现代文：召呼立在面前之臣对他说： 太深远玄妙了，真是一位德行完备的君子！
English: The courtier standing in front of him said to him, "It's too profound and mysterious, he really is a gentleman with complete virtue!"

古文：始吾以圣知之言、仁义之行为至矣。
现代文：起先我认为仁义的行为，圣智的言论是至高无上的。
English: At first, I thought that the actions of benevolence and righteousness, and the words of wisdom were supreme.

古文：吾闻子方之师，吾形解而不欲动，口钳而不欲言。吾所学者，直土埂耳！
现代文：我听到子方讲述其老师的情况，我身体松散不愿动，口象被钳住一样不愿说话，对照我所学的东西，只是没有生命的土偶而已！
English: I heard my son's side of the story about his teacher, my body loosely unwilling to move, my mouth as unwilling to speak as if it were chained, in contrast to what I learned, just lifeless clay figurines!

古文：夫魏真为我累耳！ 
现代文：魏国真成了我的累赘啊！ 
English: Wei really has become a burden to me!

古文：温伯雪子适齐，舍于鲁。
现代文：温伯雪子去往齐国，途中寄宿于鲁国。
English: Wenbo Xuezi went to Qi Province and stayed in Lu Province on the way.

古文：鲁人有请见之者，温伯雪子曰： 不可。
现代文：鲁国有个人请求见他，温伯雪子说： 不可以。
English: An individual from Luzhou requested to see him, but Wenbo Xuezi said, "No.

古文：吾闻中国之君子，明乎礼义而陋于知人心。吾不欲见也。 
现代文：我听说中原的君子，明于礼义而浅于知人心，我不想见他。 
English: I've heard that the gentleman from Central Plains is more aware of etiquette than he is of people. I don't want to meet him.

古文：至于齐，反舍于鲁，是人也又请见。
现代文：到齐国后，返回时又住宿鲁国，那个人又请相见。
English: After arriving in Qi Province, he stayed in Lu Province when he returned, and that person asked to see him again.

古文：温伯雪子曰： 往也蕲见我，今也又蕲见我，是必有以振我也。 
现代文：温伯雪子说： 往日请求见我，今天又请求见我，此人必定有启示于我。 
English: Wenbo Xuezi said: "In the past, he asked to see me, and today he asked to see me again. This person must have had a revelation to me."

古文：出而见客，入而叹。明日见客，又入而叹。
现代文：出去见客，回来就慨叹一番，明天又见客，回来又慨叹不已。
English: Go out to meet guests, come back with a sigh, meet guests again tomorrow, come back with a sigh.

古文：其仆曰： 每见之客也，必入而叹，何耶？ 
现代文：他的仆人问， 每次见此客人，必定入而慨叹，为何呢？ 
English: His servant asked, "Why is it that every time I see this guest, I cannot help but break down in tears?"

古文：曰： 吾固告子矣：中国之民，明乎礼义而陋乎知人心。昔之见我者，进退一成规、一成矩，从容一若龙、一若虎。
现代文：回答说： 我本来已告诉过你：中原之人明于知礼义而浅于知人心，刚刚见我的这个人，出入进退一一合乎礼仪，动作举止蕴含龙虎般不可抵御之气势。
English: He replied, "I have already told you that the people of Central Plains are well-versed in etiquette, but not well-versed in the hearts of others. This person who just saw me, his entry and exit are all in accordance with etiquette, and his movements and mannerisms contain irresistible momentum like a dragon and tiger.

古文：其谏我也似子，其道我也似父，是以叹也。 
现代文：他对我直言规劝象儿子对待父亲般恭顺，他对我指导又象父亲对儿子般严厉，所以我才慨叹。 
English: He exhorted me to be as obedient as a son to his father, and he guided me as sternly as a father to his son, so I lamented.

古文：仲尼见之而不言。子路曰： 吾子欲见温伯雪子久矣。见之而不言，何邪？ 
现代文：孔子见到温伯雪子一句话也不说，子路问： 先生想见温伯雪子很久了，见了面却不说话，为何呀？ 
English: When Confucius saw Wenbo Xuezi, he didn't say a word. Zilu asked, "Teacher, I've wanted to see Wenbo Xuezi for a long time, but I didn't speak when I met her. Why?"

古文：仲尼曰： 若夫人者，目击而道存矣，亦不可以容声矣！ 
现代文：孔子说： 象这样人，用眼睛一看而知大道存之于身，也不容再用语言了。 
English: Confucius said: A man like this, who can see with his own eyes that the way is within him, should not be allowed to use words.

古文：颜渊问于仲尼曰： 夫子步亦步，夫子趋亦趋，夫子驰亦驰，夫子奔逸绝尘，而回瞠若乎后矣！ 夫子曰： 回，何谓邪？ 
现代文：颜渊问孔子说： 先生缓步我也缓步，先生急走我也急走，先生跑我也跑，先生快速奔跑，脚掌好象离开地面一般，而我只能瞪大眼睛在后面看了。 孔子说： 颜回，你说的是什么意思？ 
English: Yan Yuan asked Confucius, "Master, when you walk slowly, I also walk slowly; when you hurry, I also hurry; when you run, I also run; when you run fast, the soles of your feet seem to leave the ground, and I can only look behind with my eyes wide open." Confucius said, "What do you mean, Yan Hui?

古文：曰： 夫子步亦步也，夫子言亦言也；夫子趋亦趋也，夫子辩亦辩也；夫子驰亦驰也，夫子言道，回亦言道也；及奔逸绝尘而回瞠若乎后者，夫子不言而信，不比而周，无器而民滔乎前，而不知所以然而已矣。 
现代文：颜回说： 先生缓步我也缓步，是说先生怎样讲我也跟着怎样说；先生急走我也急走，是说先生辨析事理我也跟着辨析事理；先生跑我也跑，是说先生讲说大道我也跟着讲说大道；及至先生好象脚掌离开地面般迅跑，而我瞪大眼睛在后面看，是说先生不用言说而为人信服，不私意亲近而周遍亲附，没有官爵利禄而人们聚集于前，却不知为什么要这样做，如此而已。 孔子说： 噢！
English: Yan Hui said, "Master, when you walk slowly, I will also walk slowly, which means that I will also say what you say; when you walk quickly, I will also walk quickly, which means that you analyze things, I will also analyze things; when you run, I will also run, which means that you talk about the road, I will also talk about the road; and when you run as fast as if your feet were off the ground, and I look behind you with my eyes wide open, which means that you don't have to say anything to convince people, that you are unselfishly close and affectionate all around, that there are no officials and people gather in front of you,

古文：仲尼曰： 恶！可不察与！
现代文：不可不明察呀！
English: Don't look away!

古文：夫哀莫大于心死，而人死亦次之。
现代文：悲哀没大过心死，而身死还在其次。
English: Sorrow is not greater than the death of the heart, and the death of the body is next.

古文：日出东方而入于西极，万物莫不比方，有目有趾者，待是而后成功。
现代文：太阳从东方出来而入于西天尽头，万物莫不顺从太阳的方向而动作，凡有眼有脚的，必待日出而后有所作为。
English: The sun rises from the east and sets at the end of the western sky. All things move in the direction of the sun. Anyone who has eyes and feet must do something after sunrise.

古文：是出则存，是入则亡。
现代文：日出则操作，日入无事可作则休息。
English: Operate at sunrise, and rest at sunset if there is nothing to do.

古文：万物亦然，有待也而死，有待也而生。
现代文：万物亦是这样，待造化之往来而有生有死。
English: So it is with all things. There is birth and death according to the workings of creation.

古文：吾一受其成形，而不化以待尽。
现代文：我一秉受天赋之形体，就不会转化为他物而等待着穷尽天年。
English: As soon as I receive my natural body, I will not transform into something else and wait for the end of the world.

古文：效物而动，日夜无隙，而不知其所终。
现代文：随着外物而运动，日夜不停息，而不知终极之处。
English: It moves with external objects, day and night, without stopping, without knowing where it will end.

古文：薰然其成形，知命不能规乎其前。
现代文：和气自动聚合成形体，知命的人也不能测度将来的命运。
English: and qi automatically coalesce into a form, and a man who knows his fate cannot gauge his future destiny.

古文：丘以是日徂。
现代文：我只是天天与变化俱往。
English: I just go with the flow every day.

古文：吾终身与汝交一臂而失之，可不哀与？
现代文：我终身与你在一起，这极好机会却当面错过而不能使你了解这个道理，可不悲哀吗？
English: Isn't it sad that I've been with you all your life and this great opportunity was missed in front of your face to let you know this?

古文：女殆著乎吾所以著也。彼已尽矣，而女求之以为有，是求马于唐肆也。
现代文：你只是着眼于我显著的方面，而那些显著有形迹的东西已经过去了，你还着意追寻以为实有，这就如同在空虚市场上寻求马一样不可能。
English: You're only looking at the salient aspects of me, and those salient, tangible things are gone, and you're deliberately seeking to make them real, which is as impossible as seeking a horse in an empty market.

古文：吾服，女也甚忘；女服，吾也甚忘。
现代文：我之所习，你要把它全部遗忘；你之所习，我也把它全部遗忘。
English: What I learn, you must forget it all; what you learn, I also forget it all.

古文：虽然，女奚患焉！
现代文：虽然如此，你又何必担忧！
English: Still, you don't have to worry!

古文：虽忘乎故吾，吾有不忘者存。 
现代文：虽然忘记了过去的我，我还有永存的不被忘记的东西在。 
English: Although I have forgotten my past, there is still something about me that will never be forgotten.

古文：孔子见老聃，老聃新沐，方将被发而干，蛰然似非人。
现代文：孔子去见老聃，老聃刚洗完发，正在披散头发晾干，木然而立不象一个活人。
English: Confucius went to see the old woman. The old woman had just washed her hair and was drying it. She did not look like a living person.

古文：孔子便而待之。少焉见，曰： 丘也眩与？
现代文：孔子蔽于隐处等待，过一会儿人见，说： 是我眼花呢？
English: Confucius hid in a secluded place and waited. After a while, he was seen by someone and said, "Is it my eyes?

古文：其信然与？
现代文：还是真的呢？
English: Or is it true?

古文：向者先生形体掘若槁木，似遗物离人而立于独也。 
现代文：刚才先生身体独立不动象槁木，象遗弃万物离开众人而独立自存的样子。 
English: Just now, Mr. independent body does not move like a birch tree, like abandoning everything to leave everyone and independently self-sustaining.

古文：老聃曰： 吾游心于物之初。 
现代文：老聃说： 我在神游物初生之浑沌虚无之境。 
English: Lao Zi said, "I was born into a chaotic and empty world.

古文：孔子曰： 何谓邪？ 
现代文：孔子说： 这是何意呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "What is the meaning of this?"

古文：曰： 心困焉而不能知，口辟焉而不能言。
现代文：老聃说： 心困惑于它而不能知，口对它开而不合不能言说。
English: Lao Zi said: The heart is puzzled by it and cannot know, the mouth is open to it but cannot speak.

古文：尝为汝议乎其将：至阴肃肃，至阳赫赫。肃肃出乎天，赫赫发乎地。
现代文：尝试为你议论一下它的大略：地之极致为阴冷之气，天之极致为炎热之气，阴冷之气恨于天，炎热之气本于地。
English: Let me try to summarize it for you: the extreme of the earth is the cold air, the extreme of the sky is the hot air, the cold air hates the sky, and the hot air is native to the earth.

古文：两者交通成和而物生焉，或为之纪而莫见其形。
现代文：两者相互交通和合而生成万物，谁为这一切的纲纪而又不见它的形体。
English: Both communicate with each other and combine to create all things. Who is the discipline of all this without seeing its form?

古文：消息满虚，一晦一明，日改月化，日有所为而莫见其功。
现代文：消亡又生息，盈满又空虚，一暗一明，日日改变，月月转化，每日有所作为而不见其功效。
English: Demise and rebirth, fullness and emptiness, twilight and dawn, day to day change, month to month transformation, every day there is something to do without seeing its effect.

古文：生有所乎萌，死有所乎归，始终相反乎无端，而莫知乎其所穷。
现代文：生有所萌发之处，死有所归往之地，始终相反没有边际，而不知其穷尽。
English: Life has a place of origin, death has a place of return, but on the contrary, there is always no limit, and we do not know its exhaustion.

古文：非是也，且孰为之宗！ 孔子曰： 请问游是。 
现代文：没有它，谁来作主宰啊！ 孔子说： 请问神游大道之情形。 
English: Without it, who would be in charge? Confucius said, "I would like to ask you about the state of Shenyu Avenue.

古文：老聃曰： 夫得是至美至乐也。
现代文：老聃说： 能得神游于此为至美至乐。
English: Lao Zi said: It is the most beautiful and the most fun to be able to swim in this place.

古文：得至美而游乎至乐，谓之至人。 
现代文：能得至美而游于至乐，就叫作至人。 
English: If you can attain supreme beauty and swim in supreme happiness, you are called a supreme person.

古文：孔子曰： 愿闻其方。 
现代文：孔子说： 请问达于至美至乐之道。 
English: Confucius said: Please attain to the path of beauty and happiness.

古文：曰： 草食之兽，不疾易薮；水生之虫，不疾易水。
现代文：老聃说： 食草的兽类，不担忧更换沼泽地；水生的虫类，不担忧改换水。
English: Lao Zi said: Herbivorous animals do not worry about replacing marshland; aquatic insects do not worry about replacing water.

古文：行小变而不失其大常也，喜怒哀乐不入于胸次。
现代文：实行小的变化而未失去基本的生活条件，喜怒哀乐之情就不会进入心里。
English: If you make small changes without losing the basic living conditions, emotions will not enter your heart.

古文：夫天下也者，万物之所一也。
现代文：至于天下，是万物共同生息之所。
English: As for the world, it is a place where all things coexist.

古文：得其所一而同焉，则四支百体将为尘垢，而死生终始将为昼夜，而莫之能滑，而况得丧祸福之所介乎！
现代文：得到共同的生息之气而能混同为一，则四肢百体就将成为废物，而死生终始也将如昼夜之更迭，不能混乱，何况得失祸福之所分际啊！
English: If they get a common breath of life and can be mixed into one, then all limbs and bodies will become waste, and death and life will be like the change of day and night from beginning to end. There can be no confusion, and what's more, there is no way to distinguish between good and evil!

古文：弃隶者若弃泥涂，知身贵于隶也。
现代文：遗弃隶属于己之物如同抛弃泥土，这是知晓身贵于隶属之物。
English: Abandoning what belongs to you is like abandoning the soil. This is what it means to know that you belong to something.

古文：贵在于我而不失于变。
现代文：知自身之贵又不失与变化俱往。
English: Knows his own worth and embraces change.

古文：且万化而未始有极也，夫孰足以患心！
现代文：而且千变万化是未曾有终极的，又何必为此心忧！
English: Moreover, ever-changing is never final, and why worry about it!

古文：已为道者解乎此。 
现代文：得道之人会理解此理的？ 
English: Would a learned man understand this?

古文：孔子曰： 夫子德配天地，而犹假至言以修心。
现代文：孔子说： 先生之德与天地匹配，而还借助至道之言以修养心性。
English: Confucius said, "The virtue of a teacher matches heaven and earth, and he cultivates the mind with the help of the words of the Tao."

古文：古之君子，孰能脱焉！ 
现代文：古之君子谁又能免于修养呢！ 
English: Who of the ancient gentlemen can be exempt from cultivation?

古文：老聃曰： 不然。夫水之于汋也，无为而才自然矣；至人之于德也，不修而物不能离焉。
现代文：老聃说： 不是这样，水之于澄澈，是无为而才质自然如此的；至人之于德行，不须修养而成，万物不能离开它。
English: Lao Zi said, "It is not like that. Water is clear without any effort, but talent is naturally so. As for people's virtue, it does not need to be cultivated, and everything cannot be separated from it.

古文：若天之自高，地之自厚，日月之自明，夫何修焉！ 
现代文：就象天自然就高，地自然就厚，日月自然就明亮，何用修养啊！ 
English: Just as the sky is naturally high, the earth is naturally thick, and the sun and moon are naturally bright, what is the use of cultivation?

古文：孔子出，以告颜回曰： 丘之于道也，其犹醯鸡与！
现代文：孔子出来，把这些告诉颜回，说： 我对于道之认识，就如同醋瓮中的飞虫般渺小！
English: Confucius came out and told this to Yan, saying, "My knowledge of the Way is as insignificant as a flying insect in a jar of vinegar!

古文：微夫子之发吾覆也，吾不知天地之大全也。 
现代文：没有先生揭开我之蒙蔽，我就不知道天地大全之理啊！ 
English: If it wasn't for my teacher, I wouldn't know the meaning of heaven and earth!

古文：庄子见鲁哀公，哀公曰： 鲁多儒士，少为先生方者。 
现代文：庄子拜见鲁哀公，哀公说： 鲁国多懦学之上，很少有从事先生之道术的。 
English: Zhuangzi bowed to see Lu Aigong, and Aigong said, "In Lu's country, there are very few masters of Taoism.

古文：庄子曰： 鲁少儒。 
现代文：庄子说： 鲁国儒学之士很少。 
English: Zhuo Zi said: There are very few Confucian scholars in Lu.

古文：哀公曰： 举鲁国而儒服，何谓少乎？ 
现代文：哀公说： 全鲁国的人都穿儒者服装，怎么说少呢？ 
English: Aiko said: All the people in Lu wear Confucian clothing, how can you say less?

古文：庄子曰： 周闻之：儒者冠圜冠者知天时，履句履者知地形，缓佩玦者事至而断。
现代文：庄子说： 我听说，儒者中戴圆帽的通晓天时，穿方形鞋子的懂得地理，佩戴五彩丝带穿系玉块的，事至而能决断。
English: Zhuangzi said: I have heard that among Confucians, those who wear a round hat know the time of day, those who wear square shoes know geography, and those who wear multicolored ribbons and wear jade pieces can make decisions.

古文：君子有其道者，未必为其服也；为其服者，未必知其道也。
现代文：君子怀有其道术的，未必穿戴那样的服饰；穿戴那样服饰的，未必真有道术。
English: If a gentleman has his virtue, he may not wear such a costume; if he wears such a costume, he may not really have virtue.

古文：公固以为不然，何不号于国中曰： 无此道而为此服者，其罪死！  
现代文：公一定以为不是这样，何不号令于国中说：  不懂此种道术而穿戴此种服饰的，要处以死罪！  
English: The court must have thought that this was not the case, so why not issue an order to the country to say: If you don't understand this kind of Taoism and wear this kind of clothing, you will be sentenced to death!

古文：于是哀公号之五日，而鲁国无敢儒服者。
现代文：于是哀公发布这样命令，五天以后鲁国没有敢穿儒服的人。
English: As a result, Aiko issued such an order that after five days, there was no one in Lu who dared to wear Confucian clothing.

古文：独有一丈夫，儒服而立乎公门。
现代文：唯独有一位男子，身穿儒服立在哀公门外。
English: Only one man, dressed in a Confucian robe, stood outside the gate.

古文：公即召而问以国事，千转万变而不穷。
现代文：哀公即刻召见他以国事相问，干转万变发问也不能难住他。
English: Aiko immediately summoned him to ask him about state affairs, and the ever-changing questions could not stop him.

古文：庄子曰： 以鲁国而儒者一人耳，可谓多乎？ 
现代文：庄子说： 以鲁国之大只有一个儒者，可以说多吗？ 
English: Zhuo Zi said, "There is only one Confucianist in Yilu Province. How many can you say?

古文：百里奚爵禄不入于心，故饭牛而牛肥，使秦穆公忘其贱，与之政也。
现代文：百里奚不把官爵奉禄放在心上，所以养牛而牛肥，使秦穆公忘记了他出身低贱，而委之以国事。
English: Bai Lijuan did not care about the official peerage, so he raised cattle and cattle manure, so that Qin Mu Gong forgot his lowly birth and was entrusted with state affairs.

古文：有虞氏死生不入于心，故足以动人。
现代文：虞舜不把生死放在心上，所以能感动他人。
English: Yu Ying does not care about life and death, so she can move others.

古文：宋元君将画图，众史皆至，受揖而立，舐笔和墨，在外者半。
现代文：宋元君要画画，众位画师都来了，受君命拜揖而立，润笔调墨准备着，门外面还有一大半。
English: Song Yuanjun wants to paint, all the painters have come, bowing to his command, preparing to sharpen the brush and adjust the ink, and there is still more than half outside the door.

古文：有一史后至者，儃儃然不趋，受揖不立，因之舍。
现代文：有一位后到的画师，舒缓闲适不慌不忙地走着，受命拜揖后也不在那站着，而往馆舍走去。
English: There was a painter who arrived later, walking leisurely and unhurriedly. After being ordered to pay homage, he did not stand there, but walked to the museum.

古文：公使人视之，则解衣磅礴裸。君曰： 可矣，是真画者也。 
现代文：元公派人去看，见他脱掉上衣赤着上身盘腿而坐。元公说： 可以了，这位就是真正画师。 
English: The ex-premier sent someone to take a look and found him sitting cross-legged with his shirt off and bare-chested. The ex-premier said: "Okay, this is a real painter."

古文：文王观于臧，见一丈夫钓，而其钓莫钓。
现代文：周文王去臧地巡视，看见一位钓鱼的老者，身在钓鱼，心不在钓鱼上。
English: When Zhou Wenwang went to inspect the fishing grounds, he saw an old man who was fishing, but his heart was not in fishing.

古文：非持其钓有钓者也，常钓也。
现代文：他并非以持竿钓鱼为事，而是别有所钓，他经常就是这样钓法。
English: He wasn't fishing with a rod, he was spearfishing, which is how he usually fished.

古文：文王欲举而授之政，而恐大臣父兄之弗安也；欲终而释之，而不忍百姓之无天也。
现代文：文王想举用他，把国事交他治理，又担心大臣和父兄辈族人不肯相安；想最后舍弃此人，又不忍心让百姓们得不到善人的庇荫。
English: King Wen wanted to use him and put him in charge of the affairs of state, but he was worried that the minister would not be able to make peace with his father and brothers. He wanted to give up this person in the end, but he could not bear to let the people not be protected by a good person.

古文：于是旦而属之大夫曰： 昔者寡人梦见良人，黑色而髯，乘驳马而偏朱蹄，号曰： 寓而政于臧丈人，庶几乎民有瘳乎！  
现代文：于是就在清晨集合他的大夫们说： 昨天夜里我梦见一位好人，面黑两颊长满长须，骑的杂色马有一只蹄子是赤色，命令我说： 托付你的国事给臧地老者，差不多民就可以解除病痛了！  
English: So early in the morning his doctors assembled and said: "Yesterday night I dreamt of a good man, with a black face and long whiskers on both cheeks, riding a mixed-coloured horse with one red hoof, and he ordered me: Entrust your affairs of state to the old man of the ploughed land, and the people will be able to get rid of their illness!"

古文：诸大夫蹴然曰∶ 先君王也。 
现代文：诸位大夫惊惧不安他说： 这是先君王季历啊！ 
English: The doctors were alarmed and worried, and he said, "This is the old King's calendar!"

古文：文王曰： 然则卜之。 
现代文：文王说： 让我们占卜一下吧。 
English: King Wen said, "Let's try divination."

古文：诸大夫曰∶ 先君之命，王其无它，又何卜焉。 
现代文：诸位大夫说： 先君之命令，王无可怀疑，又何必占卜。 
English: The doctors said, "The king has no reason to doubt the order of his predecessor, and there is no need for divination."

古文：遂迎臧丈人而授之政。
现代文：于是就迎接臧地老者，授给国事。
English: So he greeted the old man from Shunde and conferred on him the affairs of state.

古文：典法无更，偏令无出。
现代文：这个人掌政，以往典章法令没有更改，一篇新政令也未发出。
English: This person is in power, the previous ordinances and decrees have not been changed, and a new decree has not been issued.

古文：三年，文王观于国，则列士坏植散群，长官者不成德，斔斛不敢入于四竟。
现代文：三年之后，文王巡视国内，则见各种文士武士结成的私党都散掉了，官长们也不建立个人功德，标准不一的量器也不敢进入国境之内。
English: Three years later, when King Wen inspected the country, he saw that the private parties formed by all kinds of scribes and warriors were scattered, the officials did not establish personal merits, and the measuring instruments with different standards did not dare to enter the country.

古文：列士坏植散群，则尚同也；长官者不成德，则同务也，斔斛不敢入于四竟，则诸侯无二心也。
现代文：文士武士们的私党散掉，则上同于君主；官长不建立个人功德，则能同以国事为务；标准不一的量器不入境，则诸侯们也就没有二心了。
English: If the private parties of scribes and warriors are dispersed, then the same applies to the monarch; if officials do not establish personal merits, then they can also take national affairs as their duty; if measuring instruments with different standards do not enter the country, then the lords will have no second thoughts.

古文：文王于是焉以为大师，北面而问曰： 政可以及天下乎？ 
现代文：文王于是把臧丈人当作者师，北面而立请教说： 这佯的政事可以推行于天下吗？ 
English: King Wen then took his father-in-law as his teacher, stood up and asked, "Can this kind of government be implemented all over the world?"

古文：臧丈人昧然而不应，泛然而辞，朝令而夜循，终身无闻。
现代文：臧丈人默然不回答，淡漠无心地告辞而去，早晨还接受文王指令，晚上就逃走了，终身没有消息。
English: His father-in-law silently didn't answer, said his farewells with indifference and left. In the morning, he also accepted King Wen's order, and in the evening he fled. There was no news for the rest of his life.

古文：颜渊问于仲尼曰： 文王其犹未邪？
现代文：颜渊问孔子说： 文王还不足以取信于人吗？
English: Yan Yuan asked Confucius, "Is King Wen not enough to gain people's trust?

古文：又何以梦为乎？ 
现代文：何必要假托于梦呢？ 孔子说： 别作声，你不要说了！
English: Why is it necessary to rely on dreams? Confucius said: Keep quiet, don't say anything!

古文：仲尼曰： 默，汝无言！
现代文：文王已经作得很完美了，你又何必议论讥刺呢！
English: King Wen has already made it perfect, why do you need to talk about ridicule!

古文：夫文王尽之也，而又何论剌焉！
现代文：他只是在短暂时刻顺应众人罢了。 
English: He's just going along with the crowd for a short while.

古文：彼直以循斯须也。 列御寇为伯昏无人射，引之盈贯，措杯水其肘上，发之，适矢复沓，方矢复寓。
现代文：列御寇为伯昏无人表演射箭，把弓拉得满满的，放一杯水在左肘上，发射出去，箭射出后又有一只扣在弦上，刚刚射出又一只寄在弦上，连续不停。
English: There was no one to perform archery for him. He drew the bow full, put a glass of water on his left elbow, and fired it. After the arrow was shot, another one was attached to the string, and just after the arrow was shot, another one was attached to the string, continuously.

古文：当是时，犹象人也。
现代文：在那个时候，他就象一个木偶一般纹丝不动。
English: At the time, he was as immobile as a puppet.

古文：伯昏无人曰： 是射之射，非不射之射也。
现代文：伯昏无人说： 这是有心于射的射法，不是无心之射的射法。
English: Oddly, no one said: This is a deliberate shot using skill, not an unintentional missed shot.

古文：尝与汝登高山，履危石，临百仞之渊，若能射乎？ 
现代文：尝试和你登上高山，踏着险石，对着百仞深渊，你能射吗？ 
English: Try to climb the mountain with you, step on the rocks, face the abyss, can you shoot?

古文：于是无人遂登高山，履危石，临百仞之渊，背逡巡，足二分垂在外，揖御寇而进之。
现代文：于是伯昏无人就登上高山，脚踏险石，背对着百仞深渊向后却退，直到脚下有三分之二悬空在石外，在那里揖请列御寇退至相同位置表演射箭。
English: And when he was come nigh to the great deep, he drew back with his back to the abyss, and his feet being two-thirds out of the water, he stretched forth his hand, and called for the band of raiders.

古文：御寇伏地，汗流至踵。
现代文：列御寇惊惧得伏在地上，冷汗流到脚跟。
English: Rei Mikko had already fallen to the ground in fright, with sweat running down to her heels.

古文：伯昏无人曰： 夫至人者，上窥青天，下潜黄泉，挥斥八极，神气不变。
现代文：伯昏无人说： 作为至人，上可探测青天，下可潜察黄泉，纵放自如于四面八方，而神情没有变化。
English: No one said: "As a supreme being, you can detect the blue sky from above and the yellow spring from below. You can freely walk in all directions, and your expression does not change."

古文：今汝怵然有恂目之志，尔于中也殆矣夫！ 
现代文：现在你有惊恐目眩之意，你于精神已经疲困了！ 
English: Now you're scared and dizzy, you're mentally exhausted!

古文：肩吾问于孙叔敖曰： 子三为令尹而不荣华，三去之而无忧色。
现代文：肩吾问孙叔敖说： 您三次作令尹而不昌盛显达，三次被免职也没有忧愁之色。
English: Shoulder to shoulder, I asked Sun Shuxuan and said: You have made orders three times without success, and you have been dismissed three times without sorrow.

古文：吾始也疑子，今视子之鼻间栩栩然，子之用心独奈何？ 
现代文：我开始时对此怀疑，现在见您呼吸轻松欢畅，您的心里是怎样想的呢？ 
English: I doubted it at first, but now that I see you breathing easily and happily, what do you think in your heart?

古文：孙叔敖曰： 吾何以过人哉！
现代文：孙叔敖说： 我哪有什么过人之处啊！
English: Sun Shuxuan said, "What's so special about me?

古文：吾以其来不可却也，其去不可止也。吾以为得失之非我也，而无忧色而已矣。
现代文：我认为它既然来了就无法推辞，它去了也无法阻止，我认为官职奉禄之得失非我所有，失去了而无忧愁之色而已。
English: I think that since it has come, I can't reject it, and since it has gone, I can't stop it. I think that I don't own all the gains and losses of official duties, and that I'm just sad because I lost it.

古文：我何以过人哉！
现代文：我哪有什么过人之处啊！
English: What's so great about me?

古文：且不知其在彼乎？其在我乎？
现代文：况巨不知荣华显贵是在于令尹呢，还是在我自身？
English: I don't know whether the glory belongs to Ling Yin or to myself.

古文：其在彼邪亡乎我，在我邪亡乎彼。
现代文：如果是在于令尹，则于我无涉；如果在我自身，则于令尹无涉。
English: If it is in Ling Yin, it has nothing to do with me; if it is in myself, it has nothing to do with Ling Yin.

古文：方将踌躇，方将四顾，何暇至乎人贵人贱哉！ 
现代文：那时我正在驻足沉思，顾及四面八方之事，哪有工夫顾及到个人的富贵和贫贱哪！ 
English: At that time, I was pausing in contemplation, taking into account all aspects of things, how time to take into account the richness and poverty of individuals!

古文：仲尼闻之曰： 古之真人，知者不得说，美人不得滥，盗人不得劫，伏戏、黄帝不得友。
现代文：孔子听后说： 古时候的真人，智者不能说服他，美色不能使之淫乱，强盗不能强制他，伏牺、黄帝这样的帝王也不能宠络亲近他。
English: After listening, Confucius said, "In ancient times, a true man was a real man. Wise men could not persuade him, beauty could not make him lewd, robbers could not coerce him, and emperors such as Fuxi and the Yellow Emperor could not befriend him.

古文：死生亦大矣，而无变乎己，况爵禄乎！
现代文：死生也算得上大事了，也不能使自己有所改变，何况是官爵奉禄之得失呢！
English: To live or die is a big deal, and you can't change yourself, not to mention the loss or gain of a peerage!

古文：若然者，其神经乎大山而无介，入乎渊泉而不濡，处卑细而不惫，充满天地，既以与人己愈有。 
现代文：象这样的人，他的精神历经大山而无障碍，入于深渊而不沾湿，处于贫贱而下疲困，充满大地之间，尽数给予别人而自己更富有。 
English: Such a person's spirit can climb mountains without any obstacles, go into the abyss without getting wet, be poor and exhausted, be full of the earth, and give others as much as possible while becoming richer.

古文：楚王与凡君坐，少焉，楚王左右曰 凡亡 者三。
现代文：楚王和凡国之君共坐，过一会儿，楚王左右之臣多次来讲凡国已经灭亡了。
English: King Chu and the king of Van sat together, and after a while, the vassals around King Chu repeatedly said that Van had perished.

古文：凡君曰： 凡之亡也，不足以丧吾存。
现代文：凡国之君说： 凡国灭亡，不足以丧失我之存在。
English: The prince of the nations said, "It is not enough that the nations perish, that I must also perish.

古文：夫凡之亡不足以丧吾存，则楚之存不足以存存。
现代文：而凡国之灭亡既不足以丧失我之存，而楚国之存在也不足以存在为存。
English: But the destruction of any country is not enough to lose my existence, and the existence of Chu is not enough to exist.

古文：由是观之，则凡未始亡而楚未始存也。
现代文：由此看来，则凡国未曾灭亡而楚国未曾存在。 
English: From this perspective, the Van Kingdom never perished and the Chu Kingdom never existed.

