古文：刘守光，深州乐寿人也。
现代文：刘守光，深州乐寿人。
English: Liu Shouguang, Shenzhou Le Shouren.

古文：其父仁恭，初随父晟客于范阳，晟以军吏补新兴镇将，事节度使李可举。
现代文：他父亲刘仁恭，当初随父亲刘晟客居范阳，刘晟以军吏身份补任新兴镇将官，服事节度使李可举。
English: His father, Liu Renkong, initially lived in Fanyang with his father, Liu Xing, and Liu Xing served as a military officer to fill the post of the new town general.

古文：仁恭幼多智机，数陈力于军中。
现代文：刘仁恭小时多有机智，屡次在军中效力。
English: Liu Rengong had a lot of wisdom when he was young, and served in the army many times.

古文：李全忠之攻易、定也，别将于晏围易州，累月不能拔，仁恭穴地道以陷之，军中号曰 刘窟头 ，稍迁裨校。
现代文：李全忠攻打易州、定州时，偏将于晏包围了易州，连月不能攻下，刘仁恭挖地道攻陷了易州，军中称他为 刘窟头 ，逐渐迁升为裨校。
English: When Li Quanzhong attacked Yizhou and Dingzhou, he surrounded Yizhou with his troops and could not capture it for months. Liu Renkong dug a tunnel and captured Yizhou. The army called him Liu Guodou, and he was gradually promoted to the position of a schoolmaster.

古文：仁恭志大气豪，自言尝梦大佛幡出于指端，或云年四十九当领旄节。
现代文：刘仁恭志向远大，胆气豪壮，自己说曾经梦见有大佛幡从手指头上出来，有人说他年四十九时当领取旄节。
English: Liu Renzhong is ambitious and courageous. He said that he once dreamed of a big Buddha banner coming out of his fingers. Some people said that he was 49 years old when he received the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：此言颇泄，燕帅李匡威恶之，不欲令典军，改为府掾，出为景城令。
现代文：这话流传很广，燕地统帅李匡威忌恨他，不想让他执掌军队，改任为府掾，出任景城县令。
English: This was widely circulated, and the commander of Yan Di, Li Kuangwei, hated him and did not want him to command the army, so he was reassigned to the prefectural government and became the governor of Jingcheng County.

古文：属瀛州军乱，杀郡守，仁恭募白丁千人讨平之，匡威壮其才，复使为帐中爪牙，令将兵戍蔚州。
现代文：正遇上瀛州军队变乱，杀死郡守。刘仁恭招募不在军籍的壮丁一千人讨伐平定了瀛州乱军，李匡威认为他干练勇壮，又派他做帐下的亲信武将，令他领兵戍守蔚州。
English: Liu Rengong recruited a thousand young men who were not in the military to fight and pacify the Zhangzhou rebel army. Li Kuangwei thought that he was capable and brave, and sent him to be his trusted general to lead the troops to defend Ulshu.

古文：兵士以过期不代，思归流怨，会李匡俦夺兄位，戍军拥仁恭为帅，欲攻幽州，比至居庸关，为府兵所败，仁恭挈族奔于太原。
现代文：戍守兵士因为超过了服役期限而没有人接替他们，都想回去，流露出怨言，正遇上李匡俦夺取了他兄长李匡威的帅位，戍军便拥立刘仁恭为统帅，想进攻幽州，等到达居庸关时，被府兵打败。刘仁恭带着家属逃奔到太原。
English: Because the soldiers of the garrison had exceeded their service period and there was no one to replace them, they all wanted to go back and complained. Just as Li Kuangyao seized the commanding position of his brother Li Kuangwei, the soldiers of the garrison supported Liu Rengong as commander and wanted to attack Yuzhou. When they reached Juyongguan, they were defeated by the soldiers of the capital. Liu Rengong fled to Taiyuan with his family.

古文：武皇遇之甚厚，赐田宅以处之，出为寿阳镇将，从征吐浑。
现代文：后唐武皇李克用待他很优厚，赐给他田地房屋以安置他，派他出任寿阳镇将官，跟随武皇征伐吐谷浑。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Li Ke treated him very generously, gave him a field house to settle him, sent him to serve as the general of Shouyang Town, and followed the emperor to conquer Tuyagun.

古文：仁恭数进画于盖寓，言幽州可图之状，愿得步骑万人，即指期可取，武皇从之。
现代文：刘仁恭多次向盖寓进献计谋，陈述幽州可以图取的情状，希望得到步兵骑兵一万人，就可指日夺取，武皇听从了他。
English: Liu Rengong repeatedly offered strategies to Gai Yue, stating the situation that Yuzhou could be captured, hoping to get 10,000 infantry and cavalry, which could be captured in a day, and the Emperor listened to him.

古文：洎仁恭举兵，屡不克捷。
现代文：到刘仁恭发兵后，屡次不能克敌致胜。
English: After Liu Rengong sent troops, he repeatedly failed to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：唐乾宁元年十一月，武皇亲征匡俦。
现代文：唐朝乾宁元年十一月，武皇亲自征讨李匡俦。
English: In November of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu personally recruited Li Kuangyao.

古文：十二月，破燕军于威塞，进拔妫州，收居庸。
现代文：十二月，在威塞打败了李匡俦的燕军，向前攻下妫州，收复了居庸关。
English: In December, he defeated Li Kuangyao's Yan army in Wessai, advanced to capture Zhangzhou, and recovered Juyongguan.

古文：二十六日，匡俦弃城而遁，武皇令李存审与仁恭入城抚劳，封府库，即以仁恭为幽州节度使，留腹心燕留德等十余人分典军政，武皇乃还。
现代文：二十六日，李匡俦丢下幽州城逃走，武皇命令李存审与刘仁恭进城安抚慰劳，查封府库，就以刘仁恭为幽州节度使，留下心腹燕留德等十多人分别执掌军政事务，武皇才回去。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Li Kuangyao left Yuzhou City and fled. Emperor Wu ordered Li Cunxin and Liu Rengong to enter the city to appease the laborers and seize the government treasury. Liu Rengong was appointed as the envoy of Yuzhou Festival, leaving more than ten people, including his confidant Yan Ruide, to separately take charge of military and political affairs. Emperor Wu only returned.

古文：二年七月，武皇讨王行瑜，师于渭北，上章请授仁恭节钺。
现代文：二年七月，武皇讨伐王行瑜，驻军于渭水北面，向唐昭宗上奏章请求授予刘仁恭节旄斧钺。
English: In July of the second year, the Emperor Wu besieged Wang Xingyu, stationed troops in the north of Surabaya, and requested the Tang Zhaozong to award Liu Rengong with the Medal of Honor.

古文：九月，天子以仁恭为检校司空、幽州庐龙军节度使。
现代文：九月，唐朝天子任刘仁恭为检校司空、幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: In September, Liu Rengong was appointed by the Tang Emperor as the inspector of the school and the envoy of the Yuzhou Lu Long Army Festival.

古文：三年，罗宏信背盟，武皇遣李存信攻魏州，征兵于燕，仁恭托以契丹入寇，俟敌退听命。
现代文：三年，罗弘信背弃盟约，武皇派李存信进攻魏州，向燕地征兵，刘仁恭托辞契丹人进犯，等契丹退兵后就听从调兵的命令。
English: In three years, Luo Hongxin reneged on the covenant, the Emperor Wu sent Li Cunxin to attack Weizhou and conscripted soldiers to Yan, Liu Rengong asked the Khitan people to attack, and after the Khitan withdrew, he obeyed the order of conscription.

古文：四年七月，武皇闻兗、郓俱陷，复征兵于仁恭，数月之间，使车结辙，仁恭辞旨不逊。
现代文：四年七月，武皇听到兖州、郓州都陷落，又向刘仁恭征调军队，几个月之间，使者的车辆不绝于路，而刘仁恭推辞旨命颇不谦逊。
English: In July of the fourth year, Emperor Wu heard of the fall of Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, and transferred the army to Liu Rengong. Within a few months, the envoy's vehicles were constantly on the road, and Liu Rengong was quite immodest in resigning.

古文：武皇以书让之，仁恭览书嫚骂，拘其使人，晋之戍兵在燕者皆拘之，复以厚利诱晋之骁将，由是亡命者众矣。
现代文：武皇写信责备刘仁恭，刘仁恭看完书信便谩骂武皇，拘留了武皇送信的使者，晋地在幽、燕的戍兵都被刘仁恭拘押起来，刘仁恭又用厚利引诱晋军的骁勇将士，因此逃亡投奔刘仁恭的人很多。
English: Emperor Wu wrote a letter to reprimand Liu Rengong. After reading the letter, Liu Rengong scolded Emperor Wu and detained the emissary sent by Emperor Wu. Liu Rengong detained Jin Diyu, Yan's soldiers, and Liu Rengong lured the brave soldiers of Jin Army with a large sum of money. As a result, many people fled to Liu Rengong.

古文：八月，武皇讨仁恭。
现代文：八月，武皇讨伐刘仁恭。
English: In August, Emperor Wu led a crusade against Liu Rengong.

古文：九月五日，次安塞军。
现代文：九月五日，驻扎于安塞军中。
English: On September 5th, he was stationed in the Ansai army.

古文：九日，渡木瓜涧，大为燕军所败，死伤大半。
现代文：九日，渡过木瓜涧，被燕军大败，死伤了一大半。
English: On the 9th, after crossing the papaya raft, they were defeated by Yan's army, and most of them were killed or injured.

古文：既而仁恭告捷于梁祖，梁祖闻之喜，因表仁恭加平章事。
现代文：过后刘仁恭向后梁太祖朱温告捷，梁太祖听到后很高兴，因而上表推荐刘仁恭为平章事。
English: Afterward, Liu Rengong told Zhu Wen, Liang Taizu's great-great-grandfather, that he had been successful. Liang Taizu was very happy to hear this, and therefore recommended Liu Rengong to be awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：仁恭又遣使于武皇，自陈边将擅兴之罪，武皇以书报之。
现代文：刘仁恭又派遣使者到武皇那里，自己陈述边陲将领擅自兴兵的罪行，武皇用书信回答他。
English: Liu Rinkong also sent an envoy to Emperor Wu to personally report the crime of the frontier general raising troops without authorization, and Emperor Wu replied to him in a letter.

古文：仁恭既绝于晋，恆惧讨罚，募兵练众，常无虚月。
现代文：刘仁恭在与晋绝交之后，经常害怕讨伐，招募兵士训练部众，总没有空闲的日子。
English: After breaking off diplomatic relations with Jin, Liu Renkong was often afraid of the crusade and recruited soldiers for training. There was never a day off.

古文：光化元年三月，令其长子袭沦州，卢彦威委城而遁，遂兼有沧、景、德三郡，以守文为留后，请节钺于朝。
现代文：唐昭宗光化元年三月，刘仁恭命令他的长子袭击沧州，卢彦威弃城而逃，刘仁恭便兼有了沧、景、德三郡，以刘守文为留后，向朝廷请求符节斧钺。
English: In March of the first year of Tang Zhaozong's reign, Liu Rengong ordered his eldest son to attack Cangzhou, Lu Yanwei abandoned the city and fled. Liu Rengong then had Cangzhou, Jing and De counties. After staying with Liu Shouwen, he asked the imperial court for a rune festival axe.

古文：昭宗怒其擅兴，不时与之。
现代文：唐昭宗对刘仁恭擅自动兵感到愤怒，没有及时给与他。
English: Tang Zhaozong was angry with Liu Renkong's autopilot, and did not give him the lead in time.

古文：会中使至范阳，仁恭私之曰： 旄节吾自有，但要长安本色耳，何以累章见阻？
现代文：恰逢朝中使者来到范阳，刘仁恭私下对他说 ：旄尾做成的符节我自己也能制造，只是要有长安本色而已。为什么接连送上奏章而受阻不与？
English: Just as the North Korean and Chinese envoys came to Fanyang, Liu Renyong privately told him: I can also make the musical notation made of the appendix myself, but it must have the true nature of Chang'an. Why send the musical notation one after another and not be hindered?

古文：为吾言之。 
现代文：请为我解释这个原因。 
English: Please explain this to me.

古文：其悖戾如此。
现代文：他的悖逆不道竟然这样。
English: This is the result of his disobedience.

古文：仁恭兵锋益盛，每战多捷，以为天赞，遂有吞噬河朔之志。
现代文：刘仁恭军队更加强盛，每次作战多能获胜，他认为上天在帮助他，于是就有了吞并河朔一带的志向。
English: Liu Rengong's army was more powerful and could win every battle. He thought that the heavens were helping him, so he had the ambition to annex the area around Hexuo.

古文：二年正月，仁恭率幽、沧步骑十万，号三十万，将兼并魏博、镇定。
现代文：光化二年正月，刘仁恭率领幽州、沧州的步卒骑兵十万人，号称三十万，准备兼并魏博、镇定。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Guanghua era, Liu Rengong led 100,000 foot cavalry from Yuzhou and Cangzhou, known as 300,000 foot cavalry, to prepare for the annexation of Weibo and calm down.

古文：师次贝州，一鼓而拔，无少长皆屠之，清水为之不流。
现代文：部队到达贝州，一鼓作气攻下了贝州城，城中无论老幼全都被屠杀，清水被尸体堵塞不流。
English: The troops arrived in Bechu and stormed the city of Bechu. Everyone in the city, young and old, was slaughtered, and the bodies blocked the clean water from flowing.

古文：罗绍威求援于汴，汴将李思安、葛从周赴之，思安屯内黄。
现代文：罗绍威向汴州求援，汴军将领李思安、葛从周奔赴救援罗绍威，李思安驻军内黄。
English: Rossowe asked for help from Bozhou. The general of the Bozhou army, Li Sian and Ge Zhou, rushed to the rescue of Rossowe. Li Sian was stationed in Huang.

古文：仁恭兵围魏州，闻汴军在内黄，戒其子守文曰： 李思安怯懦，汝之智勇，比之十倍，当先殄此鼠辈，次掳绍威。 
现代文：刘仁恭领军包围了魏州，听到汴军驻扎在内黄，告诉他儿子刘守文说： 李思安胆怯懦弱，你的才智和勇力，要胜过他十倍，应先消灭这一鼠辈，然后活捉罗绍威。 
English: Liu Rengong led the army to encircle Weizhou, and when he heard that the Wei army was stationed in Neihuang, he told his son Liu Shouwen: Li Si'an is cowardly and weak, your talent and courage are ten times better than him, you should first eliminate this rat generation, and then capture Roshowe alive.

古文：守文与单可及率渔阳精甲五万，夹清水而上。
现代文：刘守文与单可及率领渔阳精壮甲士五万人，沿清水两岸而上。
English: Liu Shouwen and a single man could lead fifty thousand strong warriors of Yuyang, up along the two banks of Clear Water.

古文：思安设伏于内黄清水之左，袁象先设伏于清水之右。
现代文：李思安埋伏士兵于内黄境内清水的左岸，袁象先埋伏士兵于内黄境内清水的右岸。
English: Li Sian ambushed the soldiers on the left bank of the clear water in Neihuang, and Yuan Xiang first ambushed the soldiers on the right bank of the clear water in Neihuang.

古文：思安逆战于繁阳城，伪不胜，徐退，燕人追蹑，至于内黄，思安步兵成列，回击之。
现代文：李思安在繁阳城迎战，假装战败，慢慢撤退，燕军紧追而来，追到内黄，李思安步兵排成阵列，回击燕军。
English: Li Sian met the battle in the prosperous Yangcheng, pretended to be defeated, and slowly retreated. Yan's army followed closely, and chased them to Neihuang. Li Sian's infantry lined up in an array to strike back at Yan's army.

古文：燕人将引退，左右伏兵发，燕军大败，临阵斩单可及，守文单骑仅免，五万之众无生还者。
现代文：燕军大败。在阵地上杀死了单可及，刘守文仅单骑只身逃脱，五万大军没有活着回去的。
English: Yan's army suffered a crushing defeat. He killed as many as he could on the battlefield, Liu Shouwen only escaped on horseback, and the 50,000-strong army did not return alive.

古文：时葛从周率邢、洺之众入魏州，与贺德伦、李晖出击贼营。
现代文：这时葛从周率领邢州、氵名州的部队进入魏州，与贺德伦、李晖出击敌军营寨。
English: At this time, Ge Zhou led the troops from Bozhou and Yiming into Weizhou, and together with He Delun and Li Jun, they attacked the enemy camp.

古文：是夜，仁恭烧营遁走，汴人长驱追击，自魏至长河数百里，僵尸蔽地，败旗折戟，累累于路。
现代文：当夜，刘仁恭烧毁营寨逃跑，汴军长驱追击，从魏州到长河数百里，死尸遍地，破败的旗帜、折断的战戟，堆积在路上。
English: That night, Liu Rengong burned down the camp and fled, and the commander of the Wei army chased after him. Hundreds of miles from Weizhou to Changhe, dead bodies were everywhere, and broken flags and broken battle flags piled up on the road.

古文：镇人又邀击于东境，燕军复败。
现代文：镇州军队又在东边边境拦截攻击燕地败军，燕军再次被打败。
English: The Zhenzhou army intercepted and attacked the defeated Yan army on the eastern border, and the Yan army was defeated again.

古文：仁恭自是垂翅不振者累年。
现代文：刘仁恭从此多年委靡不振。
English: Since then, Liu Rengong has been languishing in the Communist Party for many years.

古文：汴人乘胜攻沧州，仁恭率师援之，营于乾宁军。
现代文：汴军乘胜进攻沧州，刘仁恭率领部队前往援救，安营于乾宁军中。
English: The Shan army took advantage of the victory to attack Cangzhou. Liu Renyong led the troops to rescue and camped in the middle of the Qianling army.

古文：汴将氏叔琮逆战，燕军逗挠，退保瓦桥，乃卑辞厚礼乞师于晋，武皇遣兵逼邢、洺以应之。
现代文：汴军将领氏叔琮迎战，燕军回避顾望，退过瓦桥，于是用谦卑的言辞隆厚的财礼向晋军请求救援，武皇于是派兵进逼邢州、氵名州以响应刘仁恭。
English: The general of the Shan army, Shizhu Shuxuan, faced the battle, the Yan army avoided Guwang and retreated across the tile bridge, so they used humble words and generous gifts to the Jin army to request rescue, and the Emperor Wu then sent troops to force Shanzhou and Yunnan to respond to Liu Rengong.

古文：十月，汴人陷瀛、鄚二州，晋将周德威将兵出飞狐，仁恭复修好于晋。
现代文：十月，汴军攻陷瀛、莫阝二州，晋军将领从飞狐领兵而出，刘仁恭又与晋人恢复友好。
English: In October, the Shan army invaded and occupied Shan, and the Jin army generals led the troops out of the Flying Fox. Liu Renkong and the Jin people resumed their friendship.

古文：天祐三年七月，梁祖自将兵攻沧州，营于长芦。
现代文：天祐三年七月，梁太祖亲自领兵进攻沧州，在长庐安营。
English: In July of the third year of Tianyu, Liang Taizu personally led the troops to attack Cangzhou and set up camp in Changyu.

古文：仁恭师徒屡丧，乃酷法尽发部内男子十五已上、七十已下，各自备兵粮以从军，闾里为之一空。
现代文：刘仁恭部下士兵屡次逃亡，于是刘仁恭施行酷法，全部征取辖区内十五岁以上、七十岁以下的男丁，各人自己准备粮食从军，里巷为之一空。
English: The soldiers under Liu Rengong's command repeatedly escaped, so Liu Rengong implemented a harsh law. He conscripted all males over the age of 15 and under the age of 70 in the area under his jurisdiction. Each man prepared his own grain to join the army, and the streets were empty.

古文：部内男子无贵践，并黥其面，文曰 定霸都 ，士人黥其臂，文曰 一心事主 。由是燕、蓟人民例多黥涅，或伏窜而免。
现代文：辖区内男子无论贵贱，全在面额上刻字涂墨，字叫 定霸都 ，士人在手臂上刻字涂墨，字叫 一心事主 ，因此燕、蓟一带的人民按例大多被刻字染墨，也有隐匿逃窜才得以避免的。
English: The men in the jurisdiction area, no matter how high or low, are all engraved and inked on the denomination, the word is called Dingbadu, and the scholars are engraved and inked on the arm, the word is One Mind. Therefore, the people in the area of Yan and Handan are mostly engraved and inked as usual, and there are also hidden escapes to avoid.

古文：仁恭阅众，得二十万，进至瓦桥，汴人深沟高垒以攻沧州，内外阻绝，仁恭不能合战，城中大饥，人相篡啖，析骸而爨，丸土而食，转死骨立者十之六七。
现代文：刘仁恭汇集部众，得到二十万，进到瓦桥，汴军深沟高垒以进攻沧州，沧州守军与外界阻绝，刘仁恭不能与他合兵而战，沧州城内大闹饥荒，人们互相烹食，劈开尸骨当柴烧，搓圆泥土当粮食，形销骨立奄奄待毙者有十分之六七。
English: Liu Rengong gathered his followers, got 200,000, entered the tile bridge, the Wei army attacked Cangzhou through the deep ditch, the Cangzhou defenders were cut off from the outside world, Liu Rengong could not fight with him, there was a famine in Cangzhou, people cooked for each other, split the bones to use as firewood, dug up the soil to use as grain, and there were 67 out of 10 people waiting to die.

古文：自七月至十月，仁恭遣使求援于晋，前后百余辈，武皇乃征兵于燕，仁恭遣都将李溥夏侯景、监军张居翰、书记马郁等，以兵三万来会。
现代文：从七月到十月，刘仁恭派遣使者向晋人求援，前后派出一百多人，武皇才向燕人调集兵力，刘仁恭都将李溥、夏侯景，监军张居翰，书记马郁等，领兵三人来与晋军相会。
English: From July to October, Liu Renkong sent envoys to the Jin people to ask for help, sending more than a hundred people back and forth. It was only when Emperor Wu mobilized troops to Yanren that Liu Renkong sent Li Qian, Xia Houjing, military supervisor Zhang Juhan, secretary Ma Yu, and other three soldiers to meet with the Jin army.

古文：十二月，合晋师以攻潞州，降丁会，乃解沧州之围。
现代文：十二月，会合晋军以进攻潞州，降服了丁会，才解脱了沧州之围。
English: In December, the Jin army attacked Zhangzhou and defeated the Ding army, only to be relieved of the siege of Cangzhou.

古文：是时，天子播迁，中原多故，仁恭啸傲蓟门，志意盈满，师道士王若讷，祈长生羽化之道。
现代文：这时，唐朝天子逃亡于道，中原地区战事频繁，刘仁恭啸傲蓟门，志得意满，拜道士王若讷为师，祈求长生不老羽化成仙的法术。
English: At this time, the Tang Dynasty's emperor fled to the Tao, the Central Plains region was at war frequently, Liu Rengong was proud of the gate, he was full of pride, he worshiped the Taoist Wang Rongna as a teacher, and prayed for the magic of immortality.

古文：幽州西有名山曰大安山，仁恭乃于其上盛饰馆宇，僭拟宫掖，聚室女艳妇，穷极侈丽。
现代文：幽州西部有座名山叫大安山，刘仁恭就在那山上修建装饰华丽的馆宇，超越本份仿照天子宫廷，收聚家室美女，极尽奢侈华丽。
English: There is a famous mountain in the western part of Yuzhou called Da'an Mountain. Liu Rengong built an ornately decorated museum on that mountain, exceeding his duty by imitating the Heavenly Mother's court, gathering beautiful women from his family, and being extremely luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：又招聚缁黄，合仙丹，讲求法要。又以瑾泥作钱，令部内行使，尽敛铜钱于大安山巅，凿穴以藏之，藏毕即杀匠石以灭其口。
现代文：又招聚和尚道士，配制仙丹，讲求法术要略，又用粘土做成钱，令在辖区内流通，而将铜钱全都收敛到大安山顶上，挖掘山洞来收藏它们，藏好后就杀死挖洞凿石的工匠以灭口。
English: He also gathered monks and Taoists to concoct amaryllis and teach them about magic. He also made money out of clay and ordered it to circulate in the area under his jurisdiction. Instead, he gathered all the copper money to the top of Mount Da'an, dug a cave to collect it, and after it was hidden, he killed the craftsman who dug the hole and chiseled the stone in order to silence him.

古文：又禁江表茶商，自撷山中草叶为茶，以邀厚利。
现代文：又禁止江南茶商入境，自己采摘大安山中的草叶当茶叶，以谋取厚利。
English: It also banned tea merchants from the south of the Yangtze River from entering the country, forcing them to pick their own tea leaves from the Da'an Mountains in order to make a profit.

古文：改山名为大恩山。
现代文：改山名为大恩山。
English: The name of the mountain was changed to Mount Dain.

古文：仁恭有嬖妾曰罗氏，美姿色，其子守光烝之，事泄，仁恭怒，笞守光，谪而不齿。
现代文：刘仁恭有位爱妾姓罗，姿色美丽，他的儿子刘守光与她通奸，事情被发觉，刘仁恭大怒，鞭打刘守光，贬谪而不任用他。
English: Liu Renkong had a beautiful concubine named Luo. His son Liu Shuguang committed adultery with her. When the affair was discovered, Liu Renkong flew into a rage, whipped Liu Shuguang, belittled him and did not appoint him.

古文：四年四月，汴将李思安以急兵攻幽州，营于石子河，仁恭在大安山，城中无备，守光自外帅兵来援，登城拒守。
现代文：天祐四年四月，汴军将领李思安率领士兵进攻幽州，在石子河安营，刘仁恭在大安山上，幽州城没有防备，刘守光便从外地统帅军队前来救援，登上幽州城墙抗兵固守。
English: In April of the 4th year of Tianyu, the general Li Sian led the soldiers to attack Yuzhou and set up camp in Shizihe. Liu Rengong was on the Da'an Mountain, and Yuzhou City was unprepared. Liu Shuguang then came to the rescue from the field to command the army and climbed the Yuzhou city wall to resist the soldiers and hold on.

古文：汴军既退，守光乃自为幽州节度，令其部将李小喜、元行钦将兵攻大安山。
现代文：汴军撤退后，刘守光就自任幽州节度使，命令部下将领李小喜、元行钦领兵进攻大安山。
English: After the Han army retreated, Liu Shouguang appointed himself as the Yuzhou Festival envoy and ordered his subordinate generals Li Xiaoxi and Yuan Xingqin to lead the troops to attack Mount Tai'an.

古文：仁恭遣兵拒战，为小喜所败，乃掳仁恭归幽州，囚于别室。
现代文：刘仁恭派兵抵抗作战，被李小喜打败，于是俘获刘仁恭回到幽州，囚禁在偏室中。
English: Liu Rengong sent soldiers to fight against Li Xiaoxi and was defeated. As a result, Liu Rengong was captured and returned to Yuzhou, where he was imprisoned in a separate room.

古文：仁恭左右，迨至婢媵，与守光不协者毕诛之。其兄守文在沧州，闻父被囚，聚兵大哭，谕之曰： 哀哀父母，生我劬劳。
现代文：刘仁恭身边的人，以至婢女媵妾，凡与刘守光不和的全都诛杀了他们，这时刘守光的兄长刘守文在沧州，听到父亲被囚禁，聚合兵士大声痛哭，告诉他们说： 可怜父母，生养我们劳苦。
English: The people around Liu Rengong, including his maids and concubines, all of whom were at odds with Liu Shuguang, killed them. At this time, Liu Shuguang's brother Liu Shouwen in Cangzhou, hearing that his father was imprisoned, gathered soldiers and cried loudly, telling them: "Poor parents, we were born and raised toil.

古文：自古岂有雠父者，吾家生此枭獍，吾生不如死！ 
现代文：自古以来哪有儿子仇恨父亲的人，我家出现这种凶禽恶兽的东西，我活着不如去死！ 
English: Since time immemorial, there has never been a son who hated his father. If such a beast appears in my family, I would rather die than live!

古文：即率沧、德之师讨之。
现代文：立即率领沧州和德州的军队讨伐刘守光。
English: He immediately led the troops from Cangzhou and Dezhou to fight against Liu Shouguang.

古文：守光逆战于鸡苏，为守文所败。
现代文：刘守光在鸡苏迎战，被刘守文打败。
English: Liu Shouguang fought in Jiangsu Province and was defeated by Liu Shouwen.

古文：既而守文诈悲，单马立于阵场，泣谕于众曰： 勿杀吾弟！ 
现代文：不久刘守文假装悲痛，单骑匹马立于阵地前，哭着告诫自己的部众说 ：请你们不要杀害了我的弟弟。 
English: Before long, Liu Shouwen pretended to be sad and stood alone on horseback in front of the position, crying and admonishing his men: "Please don't kill my brother."

古文：时守光骁将元行钦识之，被擒，沧兵失帅自溃。
现代文：这时刘守光的勇将元行钦认出了他，刘守文于是被元行钦抓获，沧州士兵失去统帅而自己溃散。
English: At this time, Liu Shouguang's brave general Yuan Xingqin recognized him, Liu Shouwen was then captured by Yuan Xingqin, Cangzhou soldiers lost their commander and dispersed.

古文：守光乃絷兄于别室，援以丛棘，乘胜进攻沧州。
现代文：刘守光于是把哥哥囚禁在别室，用丛生的棘刺围着，乘胜进攻沧州。
English: Liu Shuguang then imprisoned his brother in another room, surrounded him with thorns and took advantage of the victory to attack Cangzhou.

古文：沧州宾佐孙鹤、吕兗已推守文子延祚为帅，守光携守文于城下，攻围累月。
现代文：沧州宾佐孙鹤、吕兖已推举刘守文的儿子刘延祚为统帅，刘守光将刘守文带到沧州城下，攻打包围了几个月。
English: Cangzhou's leading generals, Sun He and Lv Ying, had appointed Liu Shouwen's son, Liu Yanjun, as commander-in-chief. Liu Shouguang took Liu Shouwen to the outskirts of Cangzhou and besieged him for several months.

古文：城中乏食，米斗直三万，人首一级亦直十千，军士食人，百姓食墐土，驴马相遇，食其鬃尾，士人出入，多为强者屠杀。
现代文：城中缺粮，一斗米价值三万，人首一级也值十千，军士吃人，百姓吃粘土，驴马相遇时，互相吃鬃毛和尾毛，士人出门，大多被骁勇的人屠杀。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the city. A barrel of rice was worth thirty thousand, and the head of a first-class person was also worth ten thousand. The soldiers ate people, the people ate clay, and when the donkeys and horses met, they ate each other's mane and tail hair. When the scholars went out, they were mostly slaughtered by the brave.

古文：久之，延祚力穷，以城降于守光，守文寻亦遇害。
现代文：很久，刘延祚势穷力竭，举全城向刘守光投降，刘守文旋即也被杀害。
English: For a long time, Liu Yanxuan exhausted his strength and called on the whole city to surrender to Liu Shouguang. Liu Shouwenxuan was also killed.

古文：守光性本庸昧，以父兄失势，谓天所助，淫虐滋甚。每刑人必以铁笼盛之，薪火四逼，又为铁刷劀剔人面。
现代文：刘守光本性平庸昏昧，把父亲兄长的失势，说成是上天在帮助他，因而荒淫暴虐更加厉害，每当杀人时一定要用铁笼子装着犯人，四周用柴火围拢，又用铁刷子挖刮人的脸。
English: Liu Shuguang was of a mediocre and dim nature. He described his father's brother's loss of power as if the heavens were helping him, which made the brutality even worse. Whenever he killed someone, he always put the prisoner in an iron cage, surrounded him with firewood, and scratched his face with an iron brush.

古文：尝衣赭黄袍，顾谓将吏曰： 当今海内四分五裂，吾欲南面以朝天下，诸君以为何如？ 
现代文：曾经穿着赭色黄袍，四顾将官佐吏们说： 当今海内四分五裂，我想南面称王而君临天下，诸君认为怎么样？ 
English: Once, wearing an ochre yellow robe, he looked around at the generals and officials and said, "Today, the country is torn apart. I want to be king in the south and reign over the world. What do you think?"

古文：宾佐有孙鹤者，骨鲠方略之士也，率先对曰： 王西有并、汾之患，北有契丹之虞，乘时观衅，专待薄人，彼若结党连衡，侵我疆场，地形虽险，势不可支，甲兵虽多，守恐不暇，纵能却敌，未免生忧。
现代文：宾佐中有位叫孙鹤的人，是位正直而有方略的谋士，首先应对说： 大王西面有并州、汾州的祸患，北面有契丹的忧虑，他们正乘机寻找破绽，虎视眈眈其势逼人，他们如果结为同党横向联合，侵犯我们的疆界，我们虽然地势险要，然而其势不可挡住敌人的进攻，铠甲兵器虽然很多，然而防守尚恐顾不上，即使能击退敌人，也未免产生忧患。
English: Sun He, an honest and tactful strategist, was the first to reply: "The Great King has the calamity of the annexation of Zhuhai and Zhangzhou in the west, and the worries of the Khitan in the north. They are taking the opportunity to look for loopholes, and they are waiting for the situation to be overwhelming. If they form a horizontal alliance with the party and encroach on our borders, although we are in a precarious situation, the situation cannot stop the enemy's attack. Although there are many armored weapons, the defense is still inadequate. Even if we can repel the enemy, it will inevitably cause worries.

古文：王但抚士爱民，补兵完赋，义声驰于天下，诸侯自然推戴。
现代文：大王只要安抚士卒爱护人民，修整兵备收全赋税，道义名声流传天下，诸侯就自然推举拥戴。
English: As long as the great king pacified the soldiers and loved the people, trained the soldiers and prepared to collect the full tax, and the moral reputation spread to the world, the lords would naturally support it.

古文：今若恃兵与险，未见良图。 
现代文：现在如果倚仗兵多地险，未见得就有好的前景。 
English: Now, if you rely on soldiers and take many risks, you may not necessarily have good prospects.

古文：守光不悦，及梁军据深、冀，王镕乞师于守光，孙鹤劝守光出援军以图霸业，守光不从。
现代文：刘守光不高兴。到梁军占据深州、冀州时，王向刘守光请求救兵，孙鹤劝刘守光派出援军以图取霸业，刘守光不听从。
English: Liu Shouguang was not happy. When Liang's army occupied Shenzhou and Jizhou, Wang asked Liu Shouguang to rescue the soldiers, Sun He advised Liu Shouguang to send reinforcements in an attempt to gain dominance, but Liu Shouguang did not listen.

古文：及庄宗有柏乡之捷，守光谋攻易、定，讽动镇人，欲为河朔元帅。
现代文：当后唐庄宗取得柏乡战役的胜利时，刘守光图谋攻打易州、定州，煽动镇州人，想做河朔地区的元帅。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong won the victory of the Battle of Baixiang, Liu Shuguang plotted to attack Yizhou and Dingzhou, incited the people of Zhenzhou, and wanted to be the marshal of the Hexuo region.

古文：庄宗乃与镇州节度使王镕、易定节度使王处直、昭义节度使李嗣昭、振武节度使周德威、天德军节度使宋瑶，同遣使奉册，推守光为尚父，以稔其恶。
现代文：庄宗于是与镇州节度使王、易定节度使王处直、昭义节度使李嗣昭、振武节度使周德威、天德军节度使宋瑶，一同派遣使者奉上册封文书，推刘守光为尚父，以促成他的罪恶。
English: Therefore, Zhuangzong, together with Zhenzhou Jiedu Jiedu Wang, Yi Ding Jiedu Wang Shanzhong, Zhao Yi Jiedu Li Shizhao, Zhenwu Jiedu Zhou Dewei, and Tian Dejun Jiedu Song Jie, sent envoys to submit the sealed document, and promoted Liu Shuguang as his father, so as to facilitate his crime.

古文：守光不悟，谓籓镇畏己，仍以诸镇状送梁祖，言： 臣被晋王等推臣为尚父，坚辞不获，又难推违。
现代文：刘守光不醒悟，还以为藩镇们害怕自己，仍旧将各蕃镇的状文送给梁太祖，说： 臣被晋王等推戴为尚父，坚决辞谢都不行，又难以抗拒违背。
English: Liu Shouguang did not wake up, he still thought that the towns of the domain were afraid of him, and still sent a letter from each town to Liang Taizu, saying: The minister was recommended by the King of Jin and others as Shang father, and it was not possible to firmly decline the thanks, and it was difficult to resist the violation.

古文：臣窃料所宜，不如陛下与臣河北道都统，则并、镇之叛，不足平殄矣。 
现代文：臣私下料想恰当的方式，不如陛下封臣为河北道都统，那么并州、镇州的叛逆，就能轻易地平定了。 
English: Privately, the vassal thought of an appropriate way. If his majesty's vassal were to unify all of Hebei Province, then the rebellion of unifying prefectures and townships could be easily settled.

古文：梁祖知其诈，优答之。
现代文：梁太祖知其有诈，好言答应他。
English: Liang Taizu knew that he was a fraud and promised him a good word.

古文：仍命阁门使王瞳、供奉官史彦璋等使于燕，册守光为河北道采访使。
现代文：又命阁门使王日童、供奉官史彦璋等人出使燕地，册封刘守光为河北道采访使。
English: He also ordered the palace gate to send Wang Nichido, the official in charge of paying tribute to Yan Di, and Liu Shuguang as the envoy to Hebei Province.

古文：六月，梁使至，守光令所司定尚父采访使仪注，所司取唐朝册太尉礼以示之。
现代文：六月，梁朝使者来到，刘守光命令有关官员议定尚父采访使的礼节。官员取出唐朝册封太尉礼节的记载给他看。
English: In June, the envoy from the Liang Dynasty arrived, and Liu Shouguang ordered the relevant officials to agree on the etiquette for his father's interview with the envoy. The officials took out the records of the etiquette for the Tang Dynasty's envoy to show him.

古文：守光曰： 此仪注中何无郊天改元之事？ 
现代文：刘守光说 ：这礼节中怎么没有在郊外祭天和改元的事？ 
English: Liu Shouguang said, "How come there is nothing in this etiquette about celebrating heaven and the founding of the country in the suburbs?"

古文：梁使曰： 尚父虽尊，犹是人臣。 
现代文：梁朝使者说 ：尚父虽然尊贵，但还是皇上的臣子。 
English: Liang Chao's emissary said, "Even though Shang Bao was a noble, he was still the emperor's vassal.

古文：守光怒，投于地，谓将吏曰： 方今天下鼎沸，英雄角逐。硃公创号于夷门，杨渭假名于淮海，王建自尊于巴蜀，茂贞矫制于岐阳，皆因茅土之封，自假帝王之制，然兵虚力寡，疆场多虞。
现代文：刘守光大怒，将礼书扔到地下，对将佐官吏说： 当今天下动荡，英雄角逐，朱公在夷门创立国号，杨渭在淮海僭称帝业，王建在巴蜀自尊为国主，李茂贞在岐阳伪行诏令，都依仗所封的土地，自己借用帝王的名号礼制，然而兵力虚弱、势力孤单、疆土边境诸多忧患。
English: Liu Shuguang was so angry that he threw the letter of commendation into the ground and said to the generals and officers: In today's turbulent times, heroes are competing. Zhu Gong founded the country's name in Yimen, Yang Jie proclaimed himself emperor in Huaihai, Wang Jian claimed to be the sovereign in Bashu, and Li Maozhen forged the imperial edict in Qiyang. They all relied on the land that was sealed by war and borrowed the name of the emperor. However, their military strength was weak, their power was lonely, and there were many troubles at the territorial border.

古文：我大燕地方二千里，带甲三十万，东有鱼盐之饶，北有塞马之利，我南面称帝，谁如我何！
现代文：我大燕有土地方圆二千里，带甲之士三十万，东边有富饶的鱼盐资源，北面有塞外骏马的利益，我南面称帝，又能把我怎样！
English: My Great Swallow has a land area of two thousand miles, with three hundred thousand A-class soldiers, rich fish and salt resources in the east, the interests of foreign horses in the north, and I am emperor in the south, what can I do!

古文：今为尚父，孰当帝者！
现代文：我都仅当尚父，谁该当皇帝？
English: I'm just a father. Who should be emperor?

古文：公等促具帝者之仪，予且为河朔天子。 
现代文：你们等人赶紧准备皇帝的礼仪，我将要当河朔的天子。 
English: You and others should quickly prepare the emperor's etiquette. I will be the emperor's son.

古文：燕之将吏窃议，以为不可。
现代文：燕地的将佐官吏窃窃私议，认为不行。
English: Yanzhi's generals and officers thought that it was not possible.

古文：守光置斧锧于庭，令将佐曰： 今三方协赞，予难重违，择日而帝矣。
现代文：刘守光将斧头和铁砧放在庭中，命令将吏们说： 现在有多方支持，我不能再次违抗，必须选择吉日称帝了。
English: Liu Shouguang placed the axe and spade in the courtyard and ordered the officials to say: Now there is support from many sides, I can't disobey again, I have to choose a good day to praise the emperor.

古文：从我者赏，横议者诛。
现代文：听从我的人就给予奖赏，从中阻挠不听的人格杀勿论。 
English: I will reward those who listen to me and punish those who don't.

古文：孙鹤对曰： 沧州破败，仆乃罪人，大王宽容，乃至今日，不敢阿旨，以误家国，苟听臣言，死且无侮。 
现代文：孙鹤应对说 ：沧州被攻破打败，我本是负罪之人，受大王宽容，我才活到今天，因此不敢阿护旨意以误了家国，如果听从我的话，我就是死也不后悔。 
English: Sun He replied, "Cangzhou was conquered and defeated. I was the one who was guilty, and I was tolerated by the great king, so I have lived until today. Therefore, I did not dare to mislead my home country with the intention of protecting it. If you listen to my words, I will not regret dying.

古文：守光大怒，推之伏锧，令军士割其肉生啖之。
现代文：刘守光大怒，把他推倒在铁砧板上，命令军士们割下他的肉生吃下去。
English: Outraged, Liu Shouguang pushed him down onto the iron cutting board and ordered the soldiers to cut off his flesh and eat it raw.

古文：鹤大呼曰： 百日之外，必有急兵矣！ 
现代文：孙鹤大叫道 ：百天之后，必将有急兵到来！ 
English: Sun He shouted loudly, "After 100 days, there will surely be an ambulance coming!"

古文：守光命窒其口，寸斩之，有识为之嗟惋。
现代文：刘守光命令堵上他的口，一寸寸斩割了他，有识之士都为之嗟叹惋惜。
English: Liu Shouguang ordered his mouth to be gagged and he was chopped up inch by inch. People with insight all lamented and regretted it.

古文：乃悉召部内官吏，教习朝仪，边人既非素习，举措失容，相顾诮笑。
现代文：刘守光于是全部召来手下官吏，教他们学习朝拜皇帝的礼节仪式，边远地方的人平素既没有见识过，举措之间没有仪容，互相看着调笑。
English: Liu Shouguang then summoned all of his subordinate officials and taught them to learn the etiquette and ritual of paying homage to the emperor, which people in outlying areas had never seen before. There was no pretense between the actions, and they looked at each other and laughed.

古文：八月十三日，守光僭号大燕皇帝，改年曰应天。
现代文：八月十三日，刘守光僭称大燕皇帝，改年号叫应天。
English: On August 13th, Liu Shou Guangya called himself Emperor Dayan, and changed his name to Ying Tian.

古文：以梁使王瞳、判官齐涉为宰相，史彦璋为御史大夫。
现代文：以梁朝使者王日童、判官齐涉为宰相，史彦璋为御史大夫。
English: With Liang dynasty emissary Wang Hidong, judge Qi Zhu as prime minister, and historian Yan Xun as chief historian.

古文：伪册之日，契丹陷平州。
现代文：称帝那一天，契丹人就攻陷了燕北平州。
English: On the day he was proclaimed emperor, the Khitan invaded and occupied Yanbei Pingzhou.

古文：庄宗闻之大笑，监军张承业曰： 恶不积不足以灭身，老氏所谓 将欲取之，必先与之 。今守光狂蹶，请遣使省问，以观其衅。 
现代文：庄宗闻讯后大笑，监军张承业说： 罪恶不累积得很多不足以亡命灭身，正所谓老子所说的 将要夺取他，必先送给他 ，现在刘守光猖獗一时，请派使者探问他，以观他的败兆。 
English: After hearing the news, Zhuang Zong laughed loudly, and Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the troops, said: "If the evil does not accumulate a lot, it is not enough to die. As the so-called old man said, if you want to seize him, you must first give him to him. Now that Liu Shuguang is rampant, please send an envoy to investigate him to watch his defeat.

古文：十月，庄宗令太原少尹李承勋往使。
现代文：十月，庄宗令太原少尹李承勋前往出使燕地。
English: In October, Zhuangzong ordered Taiyuan Minor Yin Li Chengxun to go on a mission to Yanji.

古文：承勋至，守光怒不称臣，械之于狱。
现代文：李承勋到燕地后，刘守光愤怒他不称臣，将他带上刑具关在监狱中。
English: After Li Chengxun arrived in Yanji, Liu Shouguang was angry that he did not show respect to the minister, and put him in prison with torture equipment.

古文：十二月，庄宗遣周德威出飞狐，会镇、定之师以讨之，德威攻围历年，属郡皆下。
现代文：十二月，庄宗派周德威从飞狐出师，会合镇州、定州的军队以讨伐刘守光。周德威进攻包围历经一年，燕地其他属郡都被攻下。
English: In December, Zhou Dewei, a member of the Zhuang sect, led a division from the Flying Fox and rallied the armies of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou to fight against Liu Shuguang. After a year of Zhou Dewei's attack and encirclement, all other counties in Yanji were conquered.

古文：守光坚保幽州，求援于梁，北诱契丹，救终不至。
现代文：刘守光固守幽州，向梁王求援，向北利诱契丹，但救兵始终不来。
English: Liu Shouguang held fast to Yuzhou, appealed to Liang Wang for help, and lured Qidan to Beili, but the rescuers never came.

古文：十年十月，守光遣使持币马见德威乞降，又乘城呼曰： 予俟晋王至即出城。 
现代文：十年十月，刘守光便派使者带着钱币马匹见周德威请求投降，又登上城墙高呼说 ：我等晋王来到就出城。 
English: In October of the tenth year, Liu Shouguang sent an envoy with coins and horses to see Zhou Dewei to ask for surrender, and climbed the city wall and shouted: "We will leave the city when the Jin king comes."

古文：十一月，庄宗亲征。
现代文：十一月，庄宗亲征。
English: In November, Zhuang Zong personally went to the front.

古文：二十三日，至幽州，单骑临城，召守光曰： 丈夫成败，须决所向，公将何如？ 
现代文：二十三日，到幽州，庄宗单骑来到幽州城下，召刘守光说： 大丈夫的成败，取决于他的背向，您将如何取舍？ 
English: On the 23rd, in Yuzhou, Zhuang Zong rode alone to the foot of Yuzhou Castle, summoned Liu Shouguang and said, "The success or failure of a good husband depends on his back. How will you choose?

古文：守光曰： 某俎上肉耳！ 
现代文：刘守光说 ：我不过是砧板上的肉罢了！ 
English: Liu Shuguang said: I'm just meat on the chopping block!

古文：庄宗愍之，折弓为盟，许其保全。
现代文：庄宗怜悯他，折断弓箭为他发誓，答应保全他的性命。
English: Zhuang Zong took pity on him, broke his bow and arrow and swore for him, promising to save his life.

古文：守光辞以他日，庄宗乃令诸军攻之。
现代文：刘守光又推辞在另外的日子投降，庄宗于是命令各军继续攻击他。
English: Liu Shuguang again refused to surrender on another day, so Zhuangzong ordered the armies to continue to attack him.

古文：二十四日，四面毕攻，庄宗登燕太子墓观之。
现代文：二十四日，四面全部进攻，庄宗登上燕太子墓观战。
English: On the 24th, all four sides attacked, and Zhuo Zong climbed onto the tomb of Prince Yan to watch the battle.

古文：俄而数骑执仁恭并其孥来献，檀州游奕将李彦晖于燕乐县获守光，并妻李氏、祝氏，男继珣、继方、继祚等来献。
现代文：一会儿几位骑兵抓着刘仁恭以及他的妻儿来献给庄宗，檀州游奕将领李彦晖也在燕乐县抓获刘守光，并将他的妻子李氏、祝氏，儿子刘继王旬、刘继方、刘继祚等人来献上。
English: After a while, several cavalrymen grabbed Liu Renkong and his wife and child to offer them to Zhuangzong. The general of Danzhou Youyi, Li Yanqi, also captured Liu Shuguang in Yanle County, and presented his wife Li Jie, Zhu Jie, his son Liu Jie Wangjun, Liu Jie Fang, Liu Jie Yao and others.

古文：初，守光城破后，携其妻子将走关内依刘守奇，沿路寒疮足踵，经日不食。
现代文：稍早以前，刘守光在幽州城被攻破后，携带他的妻儿逃到关南投靠刘守奇。沿路生了冻疮，双脚肿起，整天没有饭吃。
English: Earlier, after Liu Shouguang was defeated in Yuzhou City, he fled with his wife and child to Guannan to rely on Liu Shouqi. Along the way, he got frostbite, his feet swelled, and he did not eat all day.

古文：至燕乐县，匿于坑谷，令妻祝氏乞食于田父张师造家，怪妇人异状，诘之，遂俱擒焉。
现代文：到燕乐县，藏在山洞中，叫妻子祝氏到农户张师造家讨饭吃，张师造感到这妇人状貌怪异，盘问她，于是将他们全抓获了。
English: He went to Yanle County, hid in a cave, and asked his wife, Zhu, to go to the farmer Zhang Shizhuo's house to beg for food. Zhang Shizhuo found the woman's appearance strange, interrogated her, and then caught them all.

古文：庄宗方宴府第，引仁恭、守光至席，父子号泣谢罪，庄宗慰抚之曰： 往事不复言。人谁无过，改之为贵。 
现代文：庄宗正在府第宴饮部下，带刘仁恭、刘守光到席前，刘氏父子大哭谢罪，庄宗抚慰他们说： 以前的事不要再提了，谁人没过错，改了它就是可贵的。 
English: Zhuangzong was taking Liu Renqiong and Liu Shuguang to the banquet hall, Liu's father and son cried profusely, Zhuangzong soothed them and said, "Don't mention the previous matter again. If someone is not at fault, it is valuable to change it."

古文：乃归之传舍。
现代文：于是把他们带回驿传馆舍中。
English: So they brought them back to the Zou Museum.

古文：是月己卯，晋人执守光及仁恭，露布表其罪，驱以班师。
现代文：同月己卯日，晋军抓执刘守光及刘仁恭，在纪功报捷的露布上公布他们的罪行，然后驱赶俘虏凯旋班师。
English: On the same day of the same month, the Jin army arrested Liu Shuguang and Liu Rengong, announced their crimes in a public announcement of their achievements, and then drove away the prisoners of the victorious squadron.

古文：十一年正月，至晋阳，仁恭父子荷校于露布之下，父母唾面骂守光曰： 逆贼，破家如是！ 
现代文：天祐十一年正月，庄宗及军队到达晋阳，刘仁恭父子身披桎梏立于露布之下，父母唾骂刘守光说： 不肖逆贼，家败人亡到如此地步！ 
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of Tianyu, Zhuangzong and the army arrived in Jinyang. Liu Rengong and his father and son stood under the cloth. His parents swore at Liu Shouguang and said, "What a traitor, what a loser!

古文：守光俯首不顾。
现代文：刘守光低着头不敢看。
English: Liu Shuguang kept his head down, not daring to look.

古文：自范阳至晋阳，涉千余里，所在聚观，呼守光为 刘黑子 ，略无愧色。
现代文：从范阳到晋阳，跋涉一千多里，所到之处人们都围着看他们，叫刘守光为 刘黑子 ，而他却全无愧色。
English: From Fanyang to Jinyang, they traveled more than a thousand miles. Everywhere they went, people surrounded them, calling Liu Shuguang as Liu Heizi, but he was completely unworthy.

古文：庄守以仁恭、守光徇于都城，即告南宫七庙，礼毕，守光与李小喜、郑藏斐、刘延卿及其二妻皆伏诛。
现代文：庄宗将刘仁恭、刘守光在都城游街示众后，就到南宫七庙祭告祖宗，祭礼完毕、刘守光与李小喜、郑藏斐、刘延卿以及他的两个妻子都被诛杀。
English: After Zhuangzong paraded Liu Renkong and Liu Shouguang in the streets of the capital, he went to the seven temples of the Southern Palace to worship his ancestors. After the ceremony, Liu Shouguang and Li Xiaoxi, Zheng Zangfei, Liu Yanqing and his two wives were all killed.

古文：李小喜者，本晋之小校，先奔于燕，守光以为爱将。
现代文：李小喜本是晋军的小校，先前逃到燕地，刘守光把他当作爱将。
English: Li XiaoXi was originally a junior high school student of the Jin Army. He had previously fled to Yan'an, and Liu Shuguang regarded him as his favorite.

古文：守光虽凶淫出于天性，然而稔恶侈毒，抑亦小喜赞成。
现代文：刘守光虽然凶残淫乱出于天性，然而他的罪大恶极，未尝不是李小喜促成的。
English: Although Liu Shouguang's ferocious and lewd behavior was due to his nature, his crime was extremely heinous, and it was not facilitated by Li Xiaoxi.

古文：守光将败，前一日来降。
现代文：刘守光将败的前一日，李小喜来投降晋军。
English: The day before Liu Shouguang's defeat, Li Xiaoxi came to surrender to the Jin army.

古文：守光将死，大呼曰： 臣之误计，小喜荧惑故也，若罪人不死，臣必诉于地下。 
现代文：刘守光将死前，大叫道： 臣的荒谬行为，是李小喜蛊惑的缘故，如果他这罪人不死，臣一定到九泉之下申诉。 
English: Before Liu Shuguang was about to die, he shouted: "The absurd behavior of the minister is the result of Li Xiaoxi's deception. If this sinner does not die, the minister will definitely appeal to the Nine Springs.

古文：庄宗急召小喜至，令证辩。
现代文：庄宗急忙传召李小喜来到，让他证明辩解。
English: Zhuang Zong hurriedly summoned Li Xiaoxi to come and let him prove his defense.

古文：小喜瞋目叱守光曰： 囚父杀兄，烝淫骨肉，亦我教耶！ 
现代文：李小喜瞪着眼睛喝叱刘守光说 ：囚禁父亲杀死兄长，与父亲的爱妾通奸，也是我教你的吗？ 
English: Li Xiaoxi stared with his eyes and scolded Liu Shouguang, saying, "Did I also teach you to imprison your father, kill your brother, and commit adultery with your father's beloved concubine?

古文：庄宗怒小喜失礼，先斩之。
现代文：庄宗气愤李小喜的失礼，首先杀了他。
English: Zhuang Zong was angry at Li Xiaoxi's discourtesy and killed him first.

古文：守光恸哭曰： 王将定天下，臣精于骑，何不且留指使。 
现代文：刘守光痛哭说 ：大王将要平定天下，臣精于骑马，何不姑且留下我一命以供使唤。 
English: Liu Shuguang cried bitterly and said, "The great king is going to pacify the world, and the vassal is good at riding a horse. Why not leave my life to serve him?"

古文：二妻让之曰： 皇帝，事势及此，生不如死！ 
现代文：他的两位妻子责备他说： 皇帝，事情形势到这一地步，活着不如去死！ 
English: His two wives reproached him: "Emperor, things have come to such a pass that it is better to die than to live!"

古文：即延颈就戮。
现代文：于是他的两位妻子首先引颈就戮。
English: So his two wives were the first to be killed by the neck.

古文：守光犹哀诉不已。
现代文：刘守光还哀求不已。
English: Liu Shuguang also begged.

古文：既诛，命判官司马揆备轊椟祭醊，瘗于城西三里龙山下。
现代文：在诛杀刘守光后，庄宗命判官司马揆具办棺材祭品，将他们埋在城西三里外的龙山下面。
English: After killing Liu Shuguang, Zhuangzong ordered the judge Sima Ye to arrange coffin offerings and bury them under Longshan Mountain, three miles west of the city.

古文：令副使卢汝弼、李存霸拘送仁恭至代州，于武皇灵前刺心血以祭，诛于雁门山下。
现代文：又命副使卢汝弼、李存霸押送刘仁恭到代州，在武皇陵墓前用刘仁恭心血来祭祀，将他诛杀在雁门山下。
English: He also ordered his deputies Lu Ruchen and Li Cunha to escort Liu Renkong to Daizhou, sacrifice Liu Renkong's heart and blood in front of Emperor Wu's mausoleum, and kill him at the foot of the Ganmen Mountain.

古文：自仁恭乾宁二年春入幽州，至天祐十年，父子相承，十九年而灭。
现代文：从刘仁恭乾宁二年春天进入幽州，到天祐十年，父子相承，十九年而灭亡。
English: From the spring of the second year of Liu Renkong Qianning into Yuzhou, to the tenth year of Tianyu, the father and son succeeded each other, and died in nineteen years.

古文：刘陟，即刘纻，初名陟。
现代文：刘陟，即刘纻，初名陟。
English: Liu Ye, that is, Liu Ye, first name Ye.

古文：其先彭城人，祖仁安，仕唐为潮州长史，因家岭表。
现代文：祖先是彭城人，祖父刘仁安，在唐朝任潮州长史，于是迁家住到岭南。
English: His ancestor was from Pengcheng, and his grandfather, Liu Ren'an, was the governor of Chaozhou in the Tang Dynasty, so the family moved to Lingnan.

古文：父谦，素有才识。
现代文：父亲刘谦，素有才智见识。
English: His father, Liu Qian, was known for his wisdom and insight.

古文：唐咸通中，宰相韦宙出镇南海，谦时为牙校，职级甚卑，然气貌殊常，宙以犹女妻之。妻以非其类，坚止之，宙曰： 此人非常流也，他日我子孙或可依之。 
现代文：唐朝咸通年间，宰相韦宙出镇南海时，刘谦当时任牙校，职位级别很低，但神态相貌特别异常，韦宙便将侄女嫁给他，韦宙的妻子认为门户不配，坚决阻止，韦宙说： 这人不是一般常人，以后我的子孙或许还要依靠他呢！ 
English: During the Hamantong period of the Tang Dynasty, when Wei Chou, the prime minister, went to the South China Sea, Liu Qian, who was a dentist at the time, had a very low rank, but his appearance was particularly unusual. Wei Chou married his niece to him. Wei Chou's wife thought that the portal was not worthy and resolutely stopped it. Wei Chou said: This person is not an ordinary ordinary person, my grandchildren may have to rely on him in the future!

古文：谦后果以军功拜封州刺史兼贺水镇使，甚有称誉。
现代文：刘谦后来果然因军功而被封为封州刺史兼贺水镇使，很有名望声誉。
English: Liu Qian was later awarded the title of "Fengzhou Provincial Historian" and "Heshu Town Envoy" for his military exploits. He had a great reputation.

古文：谦之长子曰隐，即韦氏女所生也，幼而奇特。
现代文：刘谦的大儿子刘隐，即韦家女所生，小时就很奇特。
English: Liu Qian's eldest son, Liu Ying, who was born to the Wei family's daughter, was born at an unusually early age.

古文：及谦卒，贺水诸将有无赖者，幸变作乱，隐定计诛之。
现代文：当刘谦去世后，贺水的将领中有无赖之徒，想趁机作乱，刘隐定计诛杀了他们。
English: When Liu Qian died, there were rogues among the generals of Geshui who wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to make trouble, and Liu Ying determined to kill them.

古文：连帅刘崇龟闻其才，署为右都校，复领贺水镇，俄奏兼封州刺史，用法清肃，威望颇振。
现代文：连帅刘崇龟听到他的才干，任他为右都校，又统领贺水镇，不久奏请任为封州刺史，施法清廉严格，威望极高。
English: When the company commander Liu Chongkui heard of his talent, he appointed him as the right capital school, and also commanded the He Shui Town. Soon after, he was appointed as the fief of the state. He was strict in practicing the law, and his prestige was extremely high.

古文：唐昭宗以嗣薛王知柔石门扈跸功，授清海军节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗因嗣薛王知柔在石门护驾有功，授任青海军节度使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty conferred the title of "Seasonal Envoy of the Young Navy" to his heir, Xue Wang Zhirong, for his distinguished service in guarding the Stone Gate.

古文：诏下，有府之牙将卢琚、谭谋不禀朝命，隐举部兵诛琚、以闻，知柔至，深德之，辟为行军司马，委以兵赋。
现代文：诏令下达后，府中牙将卢琚、谭王巳想不遵守诏令，刘隐带部下士卒诛灭了卢琚、谭王巳。
English: After the edict was issued, the magistrate of the prefectural government ordered Lu Ye and Tan Wang Mi not to comply with the edict, and Liu Ying took his subordinates to exterminate Lu Ye and Tan Wang Mi.

古文：唐昭宗命宰相徐彦若代知柔复署前职。
现代文：上报朝廷。知柔到任后，深深感激他，征为行军司马，将兵权交给他。唐昭宗命宰相徐彦若代替知柔复任前职。
English: It was reported to the imperial court. After Chiro arrived at his post, Maro was deeply grateful to him and enlisted him as a field marshal, handing him military power. Emperor Zhaozong of Tang ordered Prime Minister Xu Yanruo to take Chiro's place and resume his previous position.

古文：彦若在镇二年，临薨，手表奏隐为两使留后，昭宗未之许，命宰相崔远为节度使。
现代文：徐彦若在藩镇二年，临死前，亲手写表奏推举刘隐为两使留后，昭宗不答应，命宰相崔远为节度使。
English: If Xu Yan, in the second year of his reign, before his death, personally wrote a list and nominated Liu Yin as the two envoys to stay, Zhaozong did not agree and appointed Prime Minister Cui Yuan as the festival envoy.

古文：远行及江陵，闻岭表多盗，惧隐违诏，迟留不进，会远复入相，乃诏以隐为留后，然久未即真。
现代文：崔远走到江陵，听说岭南强盗很多，怕刘隐违抗诏令，犹豫不前，马上又诏令他回京任相，朝廷以刘隐为留后，然而好久不予正式任命。
English: Cui Yuan walked to Jiangling, heard that there were many robbers in Lingnan, feared that Liu Yin would disobey the imperial edict, hesitated, and immediately ordered him to return to Beijing to serve as minister. The imperial court kept Liu Yin, but did not officially appoint him for a long time.

古文：及梁祖为元帅，隐遣使持重赂以求保荐，梁祖即表其事，遂降旄节。
现代文：到梁太祖任元帅，刘隐派使者送重贿求他保荐，梁太祖便上奏，才正式任刘隐为节度使。
English: When Liang Taizu was appointed marshal, Liu Ying sent an envoy to pay a heavy bribe and ask him for a recommendation. Liang Taizu then made a speech before officially appointing Liu Ying as a delegate to the festival.

古文：梁开平初，恩宠殊厚，迁检校太尉、兼侍中，封大彭郡王。
现代文：后梁开平初年，恩宠特别优厚，迁任检校太尉、兼侍中，封大彭郡王。
English: In the first year of Hou Liang Kaiping, his grace was particularly generous, and he was transferred to the position of school inspector first lieutenant, concurrently a chamberlain, and given the title of King of Peng County.

古文：梁祖郊禋，礼毕，加检校太师、兼中书令，又命兼领安南都护，充清海、静海两军节度使，进封南海王。开平四年三月卒。
现代文：梁太祖在郊外祭天，典礼完毕后，加封刘隐为检校太师、兼中书令，又命他兼任安南都护，充青海、静海两军节度使，进封南海王，开平四年三月去世。
English: Liang Taizu held a divine service in the suburbs, and after the ceremony was over, he appointed Liu Yin as the inspector of schools and the second-in-command of the Chinese army. He also ordered him to serve as the guardian of the capital of Annan, as well as the festival envoy of the Qinghai and Jinghai armies. He was appointed the king of the South Sea, and died in March of the fourth year of Kaiping.

古文：陟，隐之弟也，隐卒，代据其位。
现代文：刘陟是刘隐的弟弟，刘隐去世后，代替他的位置。
English: Liu Wei is Liu Ying's younger brother, who took his place after Liu Ying's death.

古文：及梁末帝嗣位，务行姑息之政，乃尽以隐之官爵授陟。
现代文：到梁末帝即位，励行怀柔姑息的政策，于是将刘隐的所有官爵都授给刘陟。
English: When Emperor Liang Moku ascended the throne, he pursued a policy of appeasement toward Huairou, and awarded all of Liu Yin's official titles to Liu Ye.

古文：先是，邕州叶广略、容州庞巨源，或自擅兵赋，数侵广之西鄙，陟举兵讨之，邕、容皆败，因附庸于陟。
现代文：此前，邕州叶广略、容州庞巨源，有时擅征兵赋，多次侵入广州西部边界，刘陟发兵讨伐他，邕州、容州兵败，便投靠刘陟作为附庸。
English: Previously, Zhangzhou Ye Guangli and Yongzhou Pang Jiuyuan had invaded the western border of Guangzhou several times, sometimes without conscription. Liu Bei sent soldiers to fight them, and when the soldiers from Zhangzhou and Yongzhou were defeated, they relied on Liu Bei as a vassal.

古文：又，交州土豪曲承美亦专据其地，送款于梁，因正授旄钺。
现代文：又，交州土豪曲承美也专霸一方，向梁朝求和，因而朝廷诏令授他为交州节度使。
English: In addition, the local strongman of Jiaozhou, Qu Chengmei, also dominated one side and sued for peace with the Liang Dynasty, so the Imperial Court issued a decree to award him as the Jiaozhou Festival envoy.

古文：陟不平之，遣将李知顺伐之，执承美以献，陟自是尽有岭表之地。
现代文：刘陟对此不平，派将领李知顺攻伐他，抓住了曲承美，刘陟从此全部拥有了岭南之地。
English: Liu Bei was not happy about this. He sent the general Li Zhishun to attack him and captured Qu Chengmei. From then on, Liu Bei owned all of Lingnan.

古文：及闻钱册封吴越王，陟耻称南海之号，乃叹曰： 中原多故，谁为真主，安能万里梯航而事伪庭乎！ 
现代文：当听到钱被册封为吴越王后，刘陟深以自己仅封为南海王为耻，于是感叹说： 中原多故，谁是真正君主？岂能遥遥万里梯山航海而事奉伪朝！ 
English: When he heard that Qian Qian was crowned the Queen of Wu Yue, Liu Yuxuan was ashamed that he was only crowned the King of the South China Sea, so he sighed and said: Zhongyuan, who is the real monarch? Can you serve a false dynasty while sailing thousands of miles away?

古文：梁贞明三年八月，陟乃僭号于广州，国号大汉，伪改元为乾亨。
现代文：梁贞明三年八月，刘陟便在广州僭称帝号，建立国家名叫大汉，改用乾亨年号纪年。
English: In August of the third year of Liang Zhenming's reign, Liu Bei called himself Emperor in Guangzhou, established a country called Dahan, and changed the name of the year to Qianheng.

古文：明年，僭行郊礼，赦其境内，及改名岩。
现代文：第二年，僭行郊外祭天仪式，赦免境内犯人，又改名叫刘岩。
English: The following year, he went to the suburb to hold a ceremony to worship the heavens, pardoned the prisoners inside the country, and changed his name to Liu Yan.

古文：陟僭位之后，广聚南海珠玑，西通黔、蜀，得其珍玩，穷奢极侈，娱僭一方，与岭北诸籓岁时交聘。
现代文：刘陟僭即帝位后，大量收聚南海的珠玑，向西与黔、蜀贸易，得到那里的珍玩，穷奢极欲，享乐一隅，与岭北各藩镇按时交往拜访。
English: After Liu Bei's accession to the throne, he gathered a large number of pearl mussels from the South China Sea, traded with Yunnan and Shushan to the west, obtained rare toys from there, had an extreme desire for luxury, enjoyed a corner, and regularly visited and interacted with various towns in the northern part of Lingnan.

古文：及闻庄宗平梁，遣伪宫苑使何词来聘，称 大汉国王致书上大唐皇帝 。庄守召见于鄴宫，问南海事状，且言本国已发使臣，大陈物贡，期今秋即至。
现代文：当听到唐庄宗平定后梁之后，便派伪宫苑使何词前来拜访，称 大汉国主致信于大唐皇帝 ，庄宗在邺宫召见何词，询问他南海的情况，何词又说本国已发使臣，运送大量贡物，将在今年秋天送到。
English: When he heard that Emperor Zhuangzong of Tang had subdued Houliang, he sent the pseudo-palace envoy He Jie to visit him, saying that the Great Han Emperor had sent a letter to the Great Tang Emperor. Zhuangzong summoned He Jie at the Summer Palace to inquire about the situation in the South China Sea. He Jie also said that his country had sent envoys to deliver a large amount of tributes, which would be delivered this autumn.

古文：初，陟闻庄宗兵威甚盛，故令何词来视虚实，时朝政已紊，庄宗亦不能以道制御远方，南海贡亦不至，自是与中国遂绝。
现代文：原先，刘陟听说庄宗武力强盛，所以派何词来探听虚实，当时后唐朝政已乱，庄宗也没有办法控制后方，南海的贡物也最终不送来了，从此与中原断绝往来。
English: Originally, Liu Bei heard that Zhuangzong had a strong military force, so he sent some words to find out the truth. At that time, the post-Tang Dynasty was in chaos, Zhuangzong had no way to control the rear, and the tribute from the South China Sea was eventually not sent, and the contact with the Central Plains was cut off.

古文：唐同光三年冬，白龙见于南海，改伪乾亨元年为白龙元年，陟又改名龚，以符龙之瑞也。
现代文：后唐同光三年，有白龙在南海出现，刘陟改伪乾亨元年为白龙元年，又改名为龚，以迎合白龙出现的祥瑞。
English: Three years after the Tang Dynasty, a white dragon appeared in the South China Sea, and Liu Bei changed the year of the pseudo-Qian Heng to the year of the white dragon, and changed his name to Zou, in order to meet the auspiciousness of the white dragon.

古文：白龙四年春，又改大有元年。
现代文：白龙四年春，又改元为大有元年。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the White Dragon, the era was changed to the first year of the Great Year.

古文：是岁，陟僭行耤田之礼。
现代文：这年，刘陟僭行天子亲自耕田以供祭祀的礼仪。
English: In this year, Liu Yingxing, the son of Heaven, personally ploughed the fields for the ritual.

古文：陟之季年，有梵僧善占算之术，谓陟不利名龚，他年虑有此姓败事，陟又改名纻。
现代文：刘陟在晚年时，有位梵僧精于占卜算命的方术，说刘陟改名为龚不利，他又联想到有姓龚而坏事的，于是刘陟又改名为繱。
English: In the later years of Liu Bei's life, a Sanskrit monk who was good at divination and fortune-telling said that it was not good for Liu Bei to change his name to Yao. He also thought that it was bad to have the surname Yao, so Liu Bei changed his name to Yao.

古文：纻读为俨，古文无此字，盖妄撰也。
现代文：繱读音同俨，古代没有这个字，大概是刘陟自己妄造的。
English: In ancient times, this character did not exist. It was probably invented by Liu Ye himself.

古文：陟性虽聪辩，然好行苛虐，至有砲烙、刳剔、截舌、灌鼻之刑，一方之民，若据炉炭。
现代文：刘陟生性虽然聪明能辩，但爱施行暴虐，以致有炮烙、刳剔、割舌头、灌鼻孔等酷刑，境内人民处于水深火热之中。
English: Although Liu Xingsheng is intelligent and can debate, he loves to carry out brutality, so that there are tortures such as branding, pinching, cutting the tongue, and rinsing the nostrils, and the people in the territory are in a deep heat.

古文：惟厚自奉养，广务华靡，末年起玉堂珠殿，饰以金碧翠羽，岭北行商或至其国，皆召而示之，夸其壮丽。
现代文：刘陟只想享受，追求华丽淫靡，晚年修起玉堂珠殿，用黄金碧玉翠羽装饰，岭北的商人，一到他的大汉国，就召来显示给他们看，夸耀它的壮丽。
English: Liu Wei only wanted to enjoy, pursued gorgeous and lascivious. In his later years, he built the Jade Hall and the Pearl Hall, decorated with gold, jasper and green feathers. When the merchants from Lingbei came to his Han Kingdom, he called them to show them and boast of its magnificence.

古文：每对北人自言家本咸秦，耻为蛮夷之主。
现代文：他常对北方人说他本为咸阳秦川之人，耻作蛮夷之主。
English: He often said to the northerners that he was originally from Qinchuan, Xianyang, and was the lord of the barbarians.

古文：又呼中国帝王为洛州刺史，其妄自尊大，皆此类也。
现代文：又称中原帝王为洛州刺史，其妄自尊大，都如此类。
English: Also known as the Emperor of the Central Plains for the history of Lozhou, his arrogance, are all like this.

古文：晋天福七年夏四月，陟以疾卒，凡僭号二十六年，年五十四。
现代文：后晋天福七年夏四月，刘陟因病去世，共僭称帝号二十六年，享年五十四岁。
English: In April of the summer of the seventh year of Emperor Jintianfu's reign, Liu Bei died of illness. He was fifty-four years old and had been emperor for twenty-six years.

古文：伪谥为天皇大帝，庙号高祖，陵曰康陵。
现代文：伪谥为天皇大帝，庙号叫高祖，陵墓叫康陵。
English: The pseudo urn is the Emperor, the temple is called Gaozu, and the mausoleum is called Kangling.

古文：子玢嗣。
现代文：儿子刘玢即位。
English: His son Liu Ye ascended to the throne.

古文：玢，陟长子也。
现代文：刘玢，是刘陟的大儿子。
English: Liu Wei is the eldest son of Liu Wei.

古文：初封宾王，又封秦王。
现代文：最初封为宾王，又封为秦王。
English: He was first named Bin Wang and then Qin Wang.

古文：陟卒，遂袭位，伪号光天。
现代文：刘陟去世后，承袭伪帝位，改伪年号为光天。
English: After Liu Bei's death, he inherited the pseudo-emperor's throne and changed his pseudo-year name to Guang Tian.

古文：玢性庸昧，僭位之后，大恣荒淫。
现代文：刘玢性情昏庸愚昧，即位后，大肆荒淫。
English: Liu Bei was dim-witted and stupid. After he ascended to the throne, he indulged in wanton fornication.

古文：寻为其弟晟等所弑，在位一年，伪谥为殇帝。
现代文：不久为他弟弟刘晟杀害，在位一年，伪谥为殇帝。
English: Soon after, he was killed by his brother Liu Bei, who ruled for one year, and the pseudo-emperor became the emperor.

古文：晟，陟第二子也。
现代文：刘晟，是刘陟的二儿子。
English: Liu Wei is the second son of Liu Wei.

古文：伪封勤王，又封晋王。
现代文：伪封为勤王，又封为晋王。
English: He was falsely awarded the title of "Kinwang" and "Jinwang."

古文：玢之立也，多行淫虐，人皆患之，晟因与其弟伪越王昌等同谋弑玢，自立为帝，改元为应乾，又改为乾和。
现代文：刘玢即位后，多行荒淫暴虐之事，大家都憎恶他，刘晟便与弟弟伪越王刘昌等人共同谋杀刘玢，自立为帝，改元为应乾，又改为乾和。
English: After Liu Bei's accession to the throne, he committed many barbarous and tyrannical things, and everyone hated him. Liu Bei then murdered Liu Bei together with his brother, the pseudo-Yue King Liu Chang, and others, established himself as emperor, changed his name to Ying Qian, and changed it to Qian He.

古文：晟率性荒暴，得志之后，专以威刑御下，多诛灭旧臣及其昆仲，数年之间，宗族殆尽。
现代文：刘晟率性同样荒淫暴虐，得志之后，专门用威势刑法统治下民，多诛灭旧臣以及自己的兄弟，数年之间，刘家被他差不多杀尽。
English: Liu Xuan led the same barbaric brutality. After he became famous, he specifically used the power of criminal law to rule the people, and killed many former ministers and his own brothers. Within a few years, Liu Jia was almost killed by him.

古文：又造生地狱，凡汤镬、铁床之类，无不备焉。
现代文：又修造活地狱，大凡开水锅、铁烙床之类，无不齐备。
English: They also built a living hell, a large pot of boiling water, an iron bed, and so on.

古文：人有小过，咸被其苦。
现代文：人们犯有小的过失，就备受其刑罚之苦。
English: When people commit minor offenses, they suffer the pain of punishment.

古文：及湖南马氏昆弟寻戈，晟因其衅，遣兵攻桂林管内诸郡及郴、连、梧、贺等州，皆克之，自此全有南越之地。
现代文：到湖南马家兄弟互动干戈时，刘晟趁此机会，派兵进攻桂林管区内各郡以及彬州、连州、梧州、贺州，都被攻克，从此全部拥有南越之地。
English: When the Hunan Ma brothers went to fight together, Liu Bei took the opportunity to send troops to attack the counties in the Guilin region, as well as Binshou, Lianzhou, Wuzhou, and Hezhou. They were all conquered, and from then on they all owned the land of South Vietnam.

古文：皇上赦而不诛，仍赐爵为恩赦侯，其后事具皇家日历。
现代文：周显德五年，刘晟因病去世，伪谥为文武光圣明孝皇帝，庙号叫中宗，陵墓叫昭陵。
English: In Zhou Xiande's fifth year, Liu Bei died of illness, the pseudo-emperor was Wenwu Guang Sheng Mingxiao, the temple was called Zhongzong, and the mausoleum was called Zhaoling.

古文：陟始自梁贞明三年僭号，右三世四主，至皇朝开宝四年，凡五十五年而亡。刘崇，太原人，汉高祖之从弟也。
现代文：这年，刘晟于六月在甘泉宫观天，当夜有月蚀，测在牛女之度，刘晟自看占星书，立即丢到地下，说： 自古以来有谁能不死吗！ 于是彻夜放纵饮酒，直到去世。刘崇，太原人，是后汉高祖刘知远的堂弟。
English: In June of that year, Liu Chong was observing the sky at Ganquan Palace. That night, there was a lunar eclipse, which was measured by the degree of the Cow Maiden. Liu Chong took out his horoscope book and immediately threw it into the ground, saying, "Since ancient times, who can not die?" He then indulged in drinking all night until he died. Liu Chong, a native of Taiyuan, was a cousin of Liu Zhiryuan, the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：少无赖，好陆博意钱之戏，弱冠隶河东军。
现代文：小时游手好闲，爱好陆博意钱的游戏。成年后参加河东军队。
English: Idle for hours at a time, fond of gambling. Joined the Hedong Army as an adult.

古文：唐长兴中，迁虢州军校。
现代文：后唐长兴年中，迁任虢州军校。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, in the middle of the Changxing Dynasty, it was transferred to the Zhangzhou Military Academy.

古文：汉祖镇并、汾，奏为河东步军都指挥使。
现代文：汉高祖镇守并州、汾州时，上奏章任刘崇为河东步军都指挥使。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty was in charge of Anhui Province and Zhangzhou Province, Liu Chong was appointed as the commander and envoy of the East Hedong marching army.

古文：逾年，授麟州刺史，复为河东马步军都指挥使兼三城巡检使，遥领泗州防御使。
现代文：一年后，授麟州刺史，又任河东马步军指挥使兼三城巡检使，遥任泗州防御使。
English: A year later, he made history in Linzhou and served as the commanding officer of the Horse Cavalry Corps of Hedong Province as well as the inspector of the three cities. He also served as the defense officer of Zhangzhou.

古文：汉祖起义于河东，以崇为特进、检校太尉、行太原尹。
现代文：汉高祖在河东起兵，以刘崇为特进、检校太尉，代理太原尹。
English: Han Gaozu raised an army in Hedong, with Liu Chong as a special envoy, inspecting officer, acting for Taiyuan Yin.

古文：是岁五月，汉祖南行，以崇为北京留守，寻加同平章事。
现代文：这年五月，汉高祖南行，以刘崇为北京留守，接着加封同平章事。
English: In May of that year, Henkel's founder traveled south, leaving Liu Chong behind in Beijing, after which he was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：隐帝嗣位，加检校太师、兼侍中。
现代文：汉隐帝即位，加封为检校太师、兼侍中。
English: After the enthronement of the Hidden Emperor, Gafon became a procurator, and also a chamberlain.

古文：乾祐二年九月，加兼中书令。
现代文：乾佑二年九月，加封兼中书令。
English: In September of the second year of Emperor Qianyu, the additional seal and the Chinese calligraphy were issued.

古文：时汉隐帝以幼年在位，政在大臣，崇亦招募亡命，缮完兵甲，为自全之计，朝廷命令，多不禀行，征敛一方，略无虚日，人甚苦之。
现代文：当时汉隐帝因为年小就即位，政权掌握在大臣手中，刘崇也招募亡命的党徒，修缮兵甲战具，作保全自身的打算，朝廷的命令，大多不奉行，征收聚敛于一方土地，全无放松宽闲的日子，人民以此感到非常痛苦。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Yingdi ascended the throne at a young age, the power was in the hands of ministers, Liu Chong also recruited exiled party members, repaired armor and war equipment, and planned to preserve himself. Most of the orders of the imperial court were not followed, the land was collected and concentrated on one side, and there was no day of relaxation and leisure, and the people were very distressed.

古文：三年十一月，隐帝遇害，朝廷议立崇之子徐州节度使赟为主，会周太祖为军众所推，降封赟为湘阴公。
现代文：三年十一月，隐帝遇难，朝廷商议拥立刘崇的儿子徐州节度使刘斌贝为国主，恰逢后周太祖郭威被军中士兵推举为帝，降封刘斌贝为湘阴公。
English: In November of the third year, Emperor Yin was killed, and the imperial court deliberated on the appointment of Liu Chong's son, Xuzhou Sedo, to make Liu Binbei the ruler of the country. It coincided with the time when Emperor Guo Wei, the founder of the Later Zhou Dynasty, was elected emperor by soldiers in the army, and Liu Binbei was demoted to Xiangyin Gong.

古文：崇乃遣牙将李奉书求赟归籓，会赟已死，唯以优辞答之。
现代文：刘崇于是派牙将李巩言奉书请求周太祖让刘斌贝回到藩镇，碰上刘斌贝已死了，周太祖只好用好言回答刘崇。
English: Liu Chong then sent Li Gongyan to ask Zhou Taizu to let Liu Binbei return to the town. When he found out that Liu Binbei was dead, Zhou Taizu had no choice but to reply to Liu Chong with kind words.

古文：周广顺元年正月，崇僭号于河东，称汉，改名旻，仍以乾祐为年号。署其子承钧为侍卫亲军都指挥使、太原尹，以判官郑拱、赵华为宰相，副使李瑰、代州刺史张晖为腹心，寻遣承钧率兵攻晋、隰二州，不克而退。
现代文：后周广顺元年正月，刘崇僭称帝号于河东，称国号为汉，自己改名叫，仍以乾佑作为年号，任他儿子刘承钧为侍卫亲军都指挥使、太原尹，以判官郑拱、赵华为宰相，以副使李瑰、代州刺史张晖为心腹大臣。旋即派刘承钧率领士兵攻打晋、隰二州，不能获胜而退回。
English: After Zhou Guangshun, in the first month of the first year of the first century, Liu Chongyi said that the emperor's name was in Hedong and the country's name was Han. He changed his name and still used Qianyou as the year's name. He appointed his son Liu Chengyi as the commander of the Imperial Guards, Taiyuan Yin as the commander of the Imperial Guards, Zheng Gong as the adjudicator, Zhao Hua as the prime minister, and Li Gui as the deputy envoy and Zhang Xi as the minister of the heart. He immediately sent Liu Chengyi to lead the soldiers to attack Jin and Shan two states, but could not win and returned

古文：九月，崇自领兵由阴地关寇晋州，乞师于契丹，契丹以五千骑助之，合兵以攻平阳，又分兵寇昭义。
现代文：九月，刘崇亲自领兵由阴地关侵犯晋州，又向契丹请求援军，契丹派出五千骑兵帮助他，刘崇会合契丹兵力以进攻平阳，又分出兵力进犯昭义。
English: In September, Liu Chong personally led an army from Yinji Pass to invade Jinzhou, and also requested reinforcements from the Khitan. The Khitan sent five thousand cavalry to help him. Liu Chong joined the Khitan forces to attack Pingyang, and also sent troops to attack Zhao Yi.

古文：周太祖遣枢密使王峻等率大军以援晋、绛，崇闻周师至，遂焚营而遁。
现代文：周太祖派枢密使王峻等率领大军以援助晋州、绛州，刘崇听到周朝王师来到，就焚烧营寨而逃。
English: When Liu Chong heard that the king of the Zhou Dynasty had arrived, he burned the camp and fled.

古文：是岁，晋、绛大雪，崇驻军六十余日，边民走险自固，兵无所掠，士有饥色，比至太原，十亡三四。
现代文：这一年，晋州、绛州下大雪，刘崇驻军六十多天，边民们逃到险要的地方保卫自己，兵士们无处掠抢，脸上已有饥饿之色，等到达太原时，逃亡的兵士已有十分之三四。
English: That year, heavy snows fell in Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and Liu Chong's garrison was besieged for more than 60 days. The frontiersmen fled to dangerous places to defend themselves. The soldiers had nowhere to plunder, and the color of hunger was already on their faces. By the time they reached Taiyuan, three-fourths of the soldiers had fled.

古文：二年二月，崇遣兵三千余众寇府州，为折德扆所破，其所部岢岚军为德扆所取。
现代文：二年二月，刘崇派遣士兵三千多人进犯府州，被折德打败，他所统率的岢岚军被折德夺取。
English: In February of the second year, Liu Chong sent more than three thousand soldiers to invade Fuzhou, and was defeated by Oride. The Shao army he led was captured by Oride.

古文：崇自僭称之后，以重币求援于契丹，仍称侄以事之，契丹伪册为英武皇帝。
现代文：刘崇自从僭号称帝之后，用重金向契丹求援，又向契丹国主自称侄儿以服事契丹国主，契丹册封刘崇为英武皇帝。
English: After Liu Chong claimed the title of emperor, he asked for help from Khitan with a large sum of money. He also claimed to be a nephew of the Khitan sovereign to serve the Khitan sovereign. Khitan crowned Liu Chong as Yingwu Emperor.

古文：及周世宗嗣位，崇复乞师于契丹，以图入寇，契丹遣将杨衮合势大举，来迫潞州。
现代文：到周世宗即位后，刘崇又向契丹请求军队，以图谋寇犯中原，契丹派遣将领杨衮会合刘崇兵力，大举进攻迫近潞州。
English: After Zhou Shizong ascended to the throne, Liu Chong also requested the Khitan army to attempt to invade the Central Plains. The Khitan dispatched General Yang Mi to gather Liu Chong's forces and launch a large-scale attack near Zhangzhou.

古文：显德元年三月，周世宗亲征，与崇战于高平，大败之。
现代文：周世宗显德元年三月，周世宗亲征，与刘崇在高平交战，大败刘崇。
English: In March of the first year of Zhou Shizong Xiande, Zhou Shizong personally led the expedition and fought with Liu Chong in Gaoping, defeating Liu Chong.

古文：崇与亲骑十数人逾山而遁，中夜迷懵，不知所适，劫村民使为乡导，误趋晋州路，行百余里方觉。
现代文：刘崇与亲信骑兵十多人翻山而逃，半夜迷了路，不知往哪里走，便劫持村民为他们做向导，误走上通往晋州的道路，走了百多里才发觉。
English: Liu Chong and more than a dozen of his trusted cavalrymen fled over the mountain. They lost their way in the middle of the night and did not know where to go. They kidnapped villagers to act as guides for them. They mistakenly took the road to Jinzhou and walked more than a hundred miles before they were discovered.

古文：崇怒，杀乡导者，得他路而去，乃易名号，被毛褐、张桦笠而行。
现代文：刘崇大怒，杀了做向导的人，找到其他的道路逃走，于是改名换姓，穿上带毛的短褐，戴着桦叶雨笠而逃。
English: Liu Chong flew into a rage, killed the guide, found other ways to escape, changed his name, put on a short brown coat with fur, and wore a maple leaf raincoat to escape.

古文：至沁州，与从者三五骑止于郊舍，寒馁尤甚，潜令告伪刺史李廷诲，廷诲馈盘餐、解衣裘而与之。
现代文：到沁州，与跟从他的三五位骑兵歇息在郊外的屋子里，十分饥寒，便偷偷派人告诉伪沁州刺史李廷诲，李廷诲馈赠他盘餐，解下衣裘送给他。
English: When he arrived in Zhangzhou, he and his three or five cavalrymen rested in a house in the suburbs. He was very hungry and cold, so he secretly sent someone to tell the pseudo Zhangzhou scribe Li Tingyun that Li Tingyun would give him a plate of food as a gift, and that he would take off his coat and give it to him.

古文：每至属邑，县吏奉食，匕箸未举，闻周师至，即苍黄而去。
现代文：每到沁州属下城邑，县吏们都奉上食物，而刘崇等人筷子都没拿好，一听到周朝军队来了，就仓皇逃命而去。
English: Every time they came to the cities and towns under Zhangzhou, the county officials offered them food, but Liu Chong and others did not take the chopsticks well. As soon as they heard that the Zhou army was coming, they ran away in a panic.

古文：崇年老力惫，伏于马上，日夜奔窜，仅能支持。
现代文：刘崇年老力衰，伏在马背上，日夜奔跑逃窜，仅能支持下来。
English: Liu Chong is old and feeble, lying on horseback, running and fleeing day and night, and can only support himself.

古文：距太原一舍，其子承钧夜以兵百人迎之而入。
现代文：距太原三十里，他的儿子刘承钧夜晚领一百士兵迎接他入城。
English: Thirty miles from Taiyuan, his son Liu Chengyao led a hundred soldiers to welcome him into the city at night.

古文：及周师临城下，崇气慑，自固闭垒不出。
现代文：到周朝军队兵临太原城下时，刘崇十分恐惧，固守城池不出来迎战。
English: When the soldiers of the Zhou Dynasty army were approaching Taiyuan Castle, Liu Chong was very afraid and could not come out to fight.

古文：月余，世宗乃旋军。
现代文：一个多月，周世宗才撤回军队。
English: It took more than a month for Zhou Shizong to withdraw the troops.

古文：显德二年十一月，崇以病死，其子承钧袭伪位。
现代文：显德二年十一月，刘崇因病去世，他的儿子刘承钧继承伪位。
English: In November of the second year of Xiande, Liu Chong died of illness, and his son Liu Chengyao succeeded to the pseudo-position.

