古文：万石君石奋，其父赵人也。
现代文：万石君，姓石名奋，他的父亲是赵国人。
English: Wan Shi Jun, surnamed Shi Mian Fen, his father was a native of Zhao.

古文：赵亡，徙温。
现代文：趟国灭亡后迁居到温县。
English: After the fall of Wugu, they moved to Wenzhou County.

古文：高祖东击项籍，过河内，时奋年十五，为小吏，侍高祖。
现代文：高祖束进攻打项籍，经过河内县，当时石奋才十五岁，做小官，侍奉高祖。
English: Gao Zu Dong attacked Duxiang Yu, passing through Hanoi County. At that time, Shi Fen was fifteen years old, working as a minor official and serving Gao Zu.

古文：高祖与语，爱其恭敬，问曰： 若何有？ 
现代文：高祖与他说话时很喜欢他的恭敬态度，便问： 你家中还有何人? 
English: Gaozu talked with him, liked his respectful and cautious attitude, and asked him: Who are some people in your family?

古文：对曰： 有母，不幸失明。
现代文：石奋回答说： 我衹有一个不幸失明的母亲。
English: Shi Fen replied, "I have an unfortunate mother who is blind.

古文：家贫。
现代文：家裹贫穷。
English: The family was very poor.

古文：有姊，能鼓瑟。 
现代文：还有一个姐姐，能弹琴。 
English: She also has an older sister who can play the piano.

古文：高祖曰： 若能从我乎？ 
现代文：高祖说： 你能跟从我吗? 
English: Gaozu also said, "Can you follow me?"

古文：曰： 愿尽力。 
现代文：他回答： 愿意尽自己的力量。 
English: He replied: I am willing to do my best.

古文：于是高祖召其姊为美人，以奋为中涓，受书谒。
现代文：于是高祖召他的姐姐作美人，任命石奋为内侍中涓，负责接受谒见名帖等事。
English: As a result, Gao Zu called his sister to be a beauty, and appointed Shi Fen as the maid of honor, responsible for accepting invitations to see famous people and other matters.

古文：徙其家长安中戚里，以姊为美人故也。
现代文：因为他姐姐是嫔妃的原因，把他的家迁到长安城中皇亲国戚居住的街巷。
English: Because his sister was a concubine, he moved his family to a street where relatives of the Chinese emperor lived in Chang'an City.

古文：奋积功劳，孝文时官至太中大夫。
现代文：到孝文帝时，石奋因功劳多而升为太中大夫。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, Shi Fen had been promoted to the position of Tai Zhong Dafu due to his many merits.

古文：无文学，恭谨，举无与比。
现代文：石奋不懂经学儒术，但为人极为恭敬谨慎，无人能比。
English: Shi Fen does not understand Confucianism, but he is extremely respectful and cautious, and no one can match him.

古文：东阳侯张相如为太子太傅，免。
现代文：束阳侯张相如作太子太傅，被罢免。
English: Zhang Xiangru, the lord of Sokyang, was removed from his post as crown prince.

古文：选可为傅者，皆推奋为太子太傅。
现代文：在选能做太傅的人时，都推举石奋任太子太傅。
English: In the selection of people who can be the daifu, they all nominate Shiteng to be the prince daifu.

古文：及孝景即位，以奋为九卿。
现代文：到景帝即位时，石奋官至九卿。
English: By the time Emperor Jing ascended the throne, Shifen officials had risen to the level of nine nobles.

古文：迫近，惮之，徙奋为诸侯相。
现代文：石奋在朝中，近在皇帝身边，景帝不堪其拘谨，让石奋做诸侯相。
English: Shi Fen was in the middle of the court, close to the emperor's side. Emperor Jing was unbearably prudish and let Shi Fen be the prince's consort.

古文：奋长子建，次甲，次乙，次庆，皆以驯行孝谨，官至二千石。
现代文：石奋的长子石建，二子某，三子某，四子石庆，都因为行为和顺、忠孝、谨慎而官至二千石。
English: The eldest son of Shi Fen, Shi Jian, the second son, the third son, and the fourth son, Shi Qing, were all promoted to 2,000 koku because of their behavior and obedience, filial piety, and prudence.

古文：于是景帝曰： 石君及四子皆二千石，人臣尊宠乃举集其门。 
现代文：于是景帝说： 石君和他的四个儿子都是二千石俸禄的官吏，人臣的尊宠都会集到他家了。 
English: Then Emperor Jing said: Shi Jun and his four sons were all officials with a stipend of two thousand koku, and the respect and admiration of the people would gather at his house.

古文：凡号奋为万石君。
现代文：因总其四子及石奋的俸禄共一万石，所以石奋号为万石君。
English: Because the total salary of his four sons and Shi Fen was 10,000 koku, Shi Fen's title was Wanseki Jun.

古文：孝景季年，万石君以上大夫禄归老于家，以岁时为朝臣。
现代文：孝景帝晚年，万石君拿着上大夫的俸禄告老还乡，每年定时上朝。
English: In the later years of Emperor Xiao Jing, Wanshi returned to his hometown with the salary of a senior doctor, and went to the imperial court regularly every year.

古文：过宫门阙必下车趋，见路马必轼焉。
现代文：每次经过宫门前必定要下车小步快走，在路上看见皇帝的车马必定要扶着车厢横木敬礼。
English: Every time you pass in front of the palace gate, you must get off the car and walk quickly. If you see the emperor's carriage on the road, you must hold the carriage crossbar and salute.

古文：子孙为小吏，来归谒，万石君必朝服见之，不名。
现代文：他的子孙有当小官的，回来看望他时，万石君一定会穿上朝服和他们见面，不叫名字。
English: His children and grandchildren are minor officials, and they come home to visit him. Banshikun must also wear a court dress to meet them, and not call them by their first names.

古文：子孙有过失，不诮让，为便坐，对案不食。
现代文：子孙犯了错误，他不责备，而是自己坐在一旁，对着饭桌不吃东西。
English: He does not rebuke his children when they make a mistake, but sits at the table and does not eat.

古文：然后诸子相责，因长老肉袒固谢罪，改之，乃许。
现代文：子孙们见到这种情况就互相指责，请族中的长辈做担保，自己不穿上衣来谢罪，子孙们答应改正错误，石奋便接受他们的赔罪。
English: After this, the other descendants blamed the person who made the mistake, and then asked for forgiveness through the elders of the tribe, and he admitted his mistake bare-chested and said that he would resolutely correct it before agreeing to their request.

古文：子孙胜冠者在侧，虽燕必冠，申申如也。
现代文：他的成年子女与他在一起时，也是穿戴整齐，彬彬有礼。
English: His adult children were also well-dressed and polite when they were with him.

古文：僮仆如也，唯谨。
现代文：佣人们也是一副毕恭毕敬的样子，十分谨慎。
English: His servants are also very respectful, especially discreet.

古文：上时赐食于家，必稽首俯伏而食，如在上前。
现代文：皇帝有时赐给他家食品，万石君一定要磕头俯身在地才吃，就好像在皇上面前一样。
English: The emperor sometimes gave food to his family, and Banshikun had to bow his head to the ground before eating it, just as if he were in front of the emperor.

古文：其执丧，哀戚甚。
现代文：家中亲戚死亡，他定要穿丧服，十分悲哀。
English: He was very sad because a relative in his family had died and he had to wear mourning clothes.

古文：子孙遵教，亦如之。
现代文：子孙们遵循他的教诲，向他学习。
English: His descendants followed his teachings and did as he did.

古文：万石君家以孝谨闻乎郡国，虽齐、鲁诸儒质行，皆自以为不及也。
现代文：万石君家以孝道恭谨而闻名于郡国，即使是齐鲁一带的品德高尚的文人也自叹不如。
English: The Banshikun family is famous for its filial piety and respect in the county, and even the virtuous literati in the Qilu area feel inferior to them.

古文：建元二年，郎中令王臧以文学获罪皇太后。
现代文：建元二年，郎中令王臧因为好儒术而触怒皇太后。
English: In the second year of the first year of the Jian era, Wang Yao, a vassal of the emperor, angered the empress dowager because he was fond of Confucianism.

古文：太后以为儒者文多质少，今万石君家不言而躬行，乃以长子建为郎中令，少子庆为内史。
现代文：皇太后认为儒人文多质少，不如万石君家，中不说但身体力行，所以将万石君的长子石建封为郎中令，四子石庆封为内史。
English: The empress dowager believed that Confucianism was inferior to the Banshikun family in terms of quality and quantity, and that one should not talk about it but actually practice it. Therefore, she appointed Banshikun's eldest son, Ishi Jianfeng, as the second-in-command, and his fourth son, Ishi Qingfeng, as the inner historian.

古文：建老白道，万石君尚无恙。
现代文：石建年老发白时，万石君仍然无病。
English: When Shi Jian aged and turned white, Wanshi Jun was still disease-free.

古文：每五日洗沐归谒亲，入子舍，窃问侍者，取亲中裙厕牏，身自浣洒，复与侍者，不敢令万石君知之，以为常。
现代文：石建每五天休假回去看望父亲，进入孩子的房间，私下询问仆人，并取走父亲的内衣内裤和便器，亲自洗濯，然后再给仆人，不敢让万石君知道，而且经常这样做。
English: Shi Jian went back to visit his father every five days of vacation, entered the child's room, asked the servant privately, and took away his father's underwear and toilet, washed it himself, and then gave it to the servant. He did not dare to let Wan Shijun know, and often did so.

古文：建奏事于上前，即有可言，屏人乃言极切；至廷见，如不能言者。上以是亲而礼之。
现代文：石建在皇上面前上奏时，即使有可上奏的也避开他人而独自向皇上畅所欲言，但在上朝时，他却像一个不善言谈的人，皇上由此亲近而礼待他。
English: When Shi Jian played in front of the emperor, even if there were players who could play, he avoided others and spoke freely to the emperor alone. However, when he went to the court, he was like a person who was not good at talking, so the emperor was close to him and treated him with respect.

古文：万石君徙居陵里。
现代文：万石君迁到陵里居住。
English: Manseki moved to Negri.

古文：内史庆醉归，入外门不下车。万石君闻之，不食。
现代文：任内史的石庆喝醉酒回家时，进大门而不下车，万石君听说了便不吃饭。
English: When Shi Qing Rong, who was in charge of internal history, came home drunk, he entered the gate without getting off the bus, and when Wanshi Jun heard about it, he didn't eat.

古文：庆恐，肉袒谢请罪，不许。
现代文：互庆害怕了，脱去上衣去谢罪，万石君仍不原谅他。
English: He was scared, took off his shirt to apologize, but Wanshi didn't forgive him.

古文：举宗及兄建肉袒，万石君让曰： 内史贵人，入闾里，里中长老皆走匿，而内史坐车中自如，固当！ 
现代文：石庆请全家族及石建一起脱去上衣罪，万石君责备道： 内史是权贵之人，进入乡里，乡里的长者都走开让路，而内史却坐在车中自在逍遥，真不应当! 
English: The whole family and his brother Shi Jian also bared their upper bodies to ask for forgiveness. Wanshi Juncai reproached him, saying: Neishi is an honorable person. When he entered the inner door, all the parents in the family hurriedly avoided him, but Neishi was still sitting in the car, so I, I don't know how to restrain myself, it should have been!

古文：乃谢罢庆。
现代文：于是让石庆离开。
English: After that, they shouted for Shi Qing to leave.

古文：庆及诸子入里门，趋至家。
现代文：从此石庆和其他孩子入里门后，就急走回家。
English: From then on, after Shi Qing and the other children went inside the gate, they hurriedly walked home.

古文：万石君元朔五年卒，建器泣哀思，杖乃能行。
现代文：万石君于元朔五年去世，石建悲哀哭泣，靠手杖才能行走。
English: Wan Shikun passed away in the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo era. Shi Jian cried with grief and had to rely on a cane to walk.

古文：岁余，建亦死。
现代文：一年多后石建也死了。
English: More than a year later, Shijian also died.

古文：诸子孙咸孝，然建最甚，甚于万石君。
现代文：万石君的子孙都很守孝道，而石建是最孝的，甚至超过万五星。
English: Manshikun's children and grandchildren are all very filial, and Shijian is the most filial, even more than Manshikun.

古文：建为郎中令，奏事下，建读之，惊恐曰： 书 马 者与尾而五，今乃四，不足一，获谴死矣！ 
现代文：石建任郎中令，向皇上上奏事情，奏书被报下时，石建便阅读，他惊恐地说： 写 马 字下面四点和尾共五，这裹把 马 字写成四点，少写一点，皇上会责怪死的。 
English: Shi Jian, the second-in-command, reported the matter to the emperor. When the report was published, Shi Jian read it. He said in horror: "Write four dots below the horse and a total of five dots at the end. The horse is written as four dots. If you write less, the emperor will blame you to death."

古文：其为谨慎，虽他皆如是。
现代文：他在处理其他事情时，态度也很谨慎。
English: He is also cautious when it comes to other matters.

古文：庆为太仆，御出，上问车中几马，庆以策数马毕，举手曰： 六马。 
现代文：石庆任太仆，给皇上驾马车出门，皇上问车中有几匹马，石庆用马鞭数过马后，举手说： 六匹马。 
English: Shi Qingren, the eunuch, drove the carriage for the emperor. The emperor asked how many horses were in the carriage. Shi Qingren counted the horses with a whip, then raised his hand and said, "Six horses."

古文：庆于兄弟最为简易矣，然犹如此。
现代文：石庆在几个兄弟中是最爽快简练的，还这么仔细。
English: Among several brothers, Shi Qing is the most brisk and concise, yet so careful.

古文：出为齐相，齐国慕其家行，不治而齐国大治，为立石相祠。
现代文：石庆出任齐国丞相，齐国人敬仰他的家德，在齐国他不采用惩罚的方式而治理好了齐国，于是齐国人为他立了一座石相祠。
English: Shi Qing served as the prime minister of Qi, and the people of Qi admired his family morals. In Qi, he did not use punishment to govern the country, so the people of Qi built a stone shrine for him.

古文：元狩元年，上立太子，选群臣可傅者，庆自沛守为太子太傅，七岁迁御史大夫。
现代文：元狩元年，皇上立了太子，在群臣中选择可以当太子老师的人。石庆从任沛郡太守升任为太子太傅，七年后又升为御史大夫。
English: In the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：元鼎五年，丞相赵周坐酎金免，制诏御史： 万石君先帝尊之，子孙至孝，其以御史大夫庆为丞相，封牧丘侯。 
现代文：元鼎五年，丞相赵周因祭祀用金不足而被罢免。皇上下韶御史大夫说： 万石君是先帝尊敬的人，子孙恪守孝道，因此任命御史大夫石庆作丞相，封为牧丘侯。 
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial minister Zhao Zhou was dismissed due to a lack of money for religious services. The imperial eunuch Dr. Shi said, "Manshikun was a respected person by the former emperor, and his children and grandchildren strictly followed the way of filial piety. Therefore, Dr. Shi Qing was appointed imperial minister and given the title of Mokuchuko.

古文：是时，汉方南诛两越，东击朝鲜，北逐匈奴，西伐大宛，中国多事。天子巡狩海内，修古神祠，封禅，兴礼乐。
现代文：这时汉正向南进攻两越，向东攻打朝鲜，向北驱逐匈奴，向西讨伐大宛，国中事务繁多，皇上在国内巡查，修建古代神祠，封禅，大兴礼乐。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty was attacking the two Vietnams to the south, attacking Korea to the east, expelling the Xiongnu to the north, and fighting against the Great Wan to the west. There were many affairs in the country, and the emperor was inspecting the country, building ancient shrines, fusing Zen, and celebrating ceremonial music.

古文：公家用少，桑弘羊等致利，王温舒之属峻法，皃宽等推文学，九卿更进用事，事不关决于庆，庆醇谨而已。
现代文：国内的用费缺少了，桑弘羊等大臣致力于增加财政收入，王温舒等大臣严厉执法，倪宽等大臣发展推广文学，九卿互相配合治理国家。但许多事都和石庆无关，他衹是唯唯诺诺，恭谨小心处事。
English: There was a shortage of domestic expenditure, ministers such as Kuang Hongyang were committed to increasing fiscal revenue, ministers such as Wang Wenshu strictly enforced the law, ministers such as Ni Guangjun developed and promoted literature, and the nine nobles cooperated with each other to govern the country. However, many things had nothing to do with Shi Qing. He was a good-natured person and handled things carefully.

古文：在位九岁，无能有所匡言。
现代文：石庆任丞相九年，没有任何关于时政的进谏。
English: In the nine years that Shi Qing has served as chancellor, there has been no progress on current affairs.

古文：尝欲请治上近臣所忠、九卿咸宣，不能服，反受其过，赎罪。
现代文：他曾经想惩治皇上亲近的大臣所忠、九卿咸宣，但不能治服，他反而因此而受到惩罚，最后只好自己赎罪。
English: He once wanted to punish the emperor's close ministers, Shorozhong and Jujing, but he couldn't bring himself to do it. Instead, he was punished for it, and in the end he had to atone for his sins.

古文：元封四年，关东流民二百万口，无名数者四十万，公卿议欲请徙流民于边以適之。
现代文：元封四年，关东的难民有二百万人，无户籍的流民有四十万，公卿们打算请皇上迁移流民到边境地区来安置他们。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan dynasty, there were two million refugees in the Kanto region and 400,000 displaced persons without household registration. The nobles planned to ask the emperor to relocate the displaced persons to the border region to resettle them.

古文：上以为庆老谨，不能与其议，乃赐丞相告归，而案御史大夫以下议为请者。
现代文：皇上认为丞相石庆年老谨慎，不能和他商议国事，于是便赐丞相告老还家，而对御史大夫以下的大臣中要迁徙流民的人查办治罪。
English: The emperor thought that the prime minister, Shi Qing, was too old and cautious to discuss state affairs with him, so he gave the prime minister to tell the old man to return home, and to investigate and punish those who wanted to relocate the displaced people among the ministers below the minister of history.

古文：庆惭不任职，上书曰： 臣幸得待罪丞相，疲驽无以辅治。
现代文：丞相对自己不能尽职而感到惭愧，向皇上上书说： 我受皇上宠幸当了一个无用的丞相，像一匹疲惫的马不能辅佐朝廷治理。
English: Feeling ashamed of not being able to fulfill his duties, Choei wrote a letter to the emperor saying, "I was favored by the emperor and became a useless chancellor. Like a tired horse, I can't support the governance of the imperial court."

古文：城郭仓廪空虚，民多流亡，罪当伏斧质，上不忍致法。愿归丞相侯印，乞骸骨归，避贤者路。 
现代文：城中仓库中没有粮食，百姓四处流亡，所犯之罪真应当被斩，皇上不忍心将我依法处治，我希望能够归还丞相的大印，讨回一副老骨头回家，以便给有才能的人让路。 
English: There is no grain in the storehouses of the city, the people are in exile everywhere, the crime committed should really be beheaded, the emperor can't bear to punish me according to the law, I hope to be able to return the great seal of the prime minister and get back a pair of old bones to go home, so as to make way for talented people.

古文：上报曰： 间者，河水滔陆，泛滥十余郡，堤防勤劳，弗能堙塞，朕甚忧之。
现代文：上报说： 前些时，黄河泛滥，淹没十余郡，防洪堤上的工作很辛苦，仍然不能堵塞，我很忧虑呀。
English: The report said: Some time ago, the Yellow River flooded and submerged more than ten counties. The work on the flood control dike was very hard, but it still could not be blocked. I am very worried.

古文：是故巡方州，礼嵩岳，通八神，以合宣房。
现代文：因此巡查全国，致礼嵩岳，通敬八神，在宣房堵住决口。
English: Therefore, they inspected the whole country, paid tribute to Songyue Mountain, paid tribute to the Eight Immortals, and blocked the cut-off at Xuanfang.

古文：济淮、江，历山滨海，问百年民所疾苦。
现代文：渡淮河、长江，历山沿海巡行，询问百姓的疾苦。
English: They crossed the Huaihe River, the Yangtze River, and the Leshan Coast to inquire about the sufferings of the people.

古文：惟吏多私，征求无已，去者便，居者扰，故为流民法，以禁重赋。
现代文：考虑到官吏徇私枉法，苛税无休止，离家出走的人则可以免去，而居住下来的人却非常担心，所以制定了流民法，以禁止重赋。
English: Taking into consideration that government officials abuse the law for their own benefit, that taxes are unceasingly harsh, that people who run away from home can be exempted, but that people who stay behind are very worried, the Law on Displaced Persons was formulated to prohibit re-assignment.

古文：乃者封泰山，皇天嘉况，神物并见。
现代文：前些曰到泰山祭天，皇天给予美好赏赐，显示了祥瑞神物。
English: A few days ago, at the Taishan Festival, the emperor gave a beautiful reward, showing the auspiciousness of the gods.

古文：朕方答气应，未能承意，是以切比闾里，知吏奸邪。
现代文：我答应修整朝政，以报瑞应，恐怕没有承顺上天的美意。我到民间调查，得知官吏奸诈邪恶。
English: I promised to rectify the imperial government and reward the Swiss, but I'm afraid I didn't follow God's good intentions. I went to investigate among the people and learned that the officials were treacherous and evil.

古文：委任有司，然则官旷民愁，盗贼公行。
现代文：委任的官吏却又不尽职守，百姓愁苦，盗贼无法无天。
English: Appointed officials are not fulfilling their duties, the people are miserable, and thieves are lawless.

古文：往车觐明堂，赦殊死，无禁锢，咸自新，与更始。
现代文：往年我在明堂，赦免死囚，没有被贬罚的官吏，他们全都改过自新，重新开始。
English: In previous years, I pardoned death row prisoners and officials who had not been demeaned, and they all reformed and started anew.

古文：今流民愈多，计文不改，君不绳责长吏，而请以兴徙四十万口，摇荡百姓，孤儿幼年未满十岁，无罪而坐率，朕失望焉。
现代文：现在流亡的百姓越来越多，但计户口的文书却不削减，大臣不严责长吏，却请求把四十万人迁走，使百姓动荡不安，没满十岁的孤儿、少年也无辜被带领迁走，对此我很失望呀。
English: More and more people are now living in exile, but the number of household registration documents has not been reduced. The minister did not strictly punish the officials, but requested that 400,000 people be moved away, causing unrest among the people. Orphans and boys under the age of ten were also innocently led away. I am very disappointed about this.

古文：今君上书言仓库城郭不充实，民多贫，盗贼众，请入粟为庶人。
现代文：现在你上书说城中粮仓空虚，百姓贫困，强盗窃贼猖獗，你位居丞相不能治理，请求交纳粮米来赎己罪，退而作平民。
English: Now you are writing to say that the granaries in the city are empty, the people are poor, robbers and thieves are rampant, you cannot govern while you are prime minister, and you are requesting to pay grain and rice to atone for your sins, and to return to being a commoner.

古文：夫怀知民贫而请益赋，动危之而辞位，欲安归难乎？
现代文：你深知百姓困苦却请求增加赋税，动摇百姓，如今百姓危难，你却要辞退官位，你把责任推给谁呢?
English: You are well aware of the hardships of the people, but you asked for an increase in taxes, shaking the people. Now the people are in danger, but you want to resign from office. Who do you blame?

古文：君其反室！ 
现代文：如果你自认为是理所当然的，就可还家! 
English: If you take it for granted, you can go home!

古文：庆素质，见诏报 反室 ，自以为得许，欲上印绶。
现代文：亘庆为人单纯，看见皇上诏书让他回家，便认为得到皇上的许可，想交还丞相印绶。
English: As a simple man, when he saw the Emperor's edict allowing him to return home, he thought he had the Emperor's permission and wanted to return the imperial seal.

古文：掾史以为见责甚深，而终以反室者，丑恶之辞也。或劝庆宜引决。
现代文：掾史认为被皇上严厉斥责而最后遣回家，是最严厉的批评，有人劝石庆自杀。
English: Zou Shi thought that being severely reprimanded by the emperor and finally sent home was the harshest criticism, and some people advised Shi Qing to commit suicide.

古文：庆甚惧，不知所出，遂复起视事。
现代文：石庆很惊恐，不知道如何是好，于是又再次到朝中治事。
English: Shi Qing was very alarmed and did not know what to do, so he went to the court again.

古文：庆为丞相，文深审谨，天他大略。
现代文：亘庆做丞相，工于心计而不露声色，没什么才干。
English: As a prime minister, Waku Qing is a man who works hard but does not show his true colors. He has no talent.

古文：后三岁余薨，谥曰恬侯。
现代文：三年多后死去，谧号恬侯。
English: He died more than three years later.

古文：中子德，庆爱之。
现代文：二子石德是石庆喜欢的。
English: The second son, Shi De, is Shi Qing's favorite.

古文：上以德嗣，后为太常，坐法免，国除。
现代文：皇上让石德继承爵位，后来任命为太常，因犯法而被罢免，封国废除。
English: The emperor allowed Shide to succeed to the title of nobility, and later he was appointed to the position of grand vizier, but he was dismissed for violating the law, and the state of siege was abolished.

古文：庆方为丞相时，诸子孙为小吏至二千石者十三人。
现代文：石庆做丞相时，在子孙中，当小官至二千石的有十三人。
English: When Shi Qing served as chancellor, there were 13 minor officials of up to 2,000 koku among his children and grandchildren.

古文：及庆死后，稍以罪去，孝谨衰矣。
现代文：到亘庆死后，有些人因为犯罪而被罢免，孝道恭谨的美德也衰落了。
English: By the time of his death, some people had been ousted for crimes, and the virtue of filial piety had also declined.

古文：卫绾，代人陵人也，以戏车为郎，事文帝，功次迁中郎将，醇谨无它。
现代文：卫绾，代人陵人，以出众的车技为郎，跟随塞童，因功而升为中郎将，淳厚谨慎没有其他的志向。
English: Wei Wei, the founder of the Mausoleum, with outstanding driving skills as his son, followed Saido, and was promoted to the middle son due to his merits. Junhou prudently had no other ambition.

古文：孝景为太子时，召上左右饮，而绾称病不行。
现代文：孝量查作太子时，召集皇上左右亲近的人喝酒，而逊推托生病未去。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, he invited close vassals around the emperor to a banquet, but Wei Xuan refused to go on the pretext of illness.

古文：文帝且崩时，属孝景曰： 绾长者，善遇之。 
现代文：塞查去世前，叮嘱孝景帝说： 卫绾是德高望重的人，好好对待他。 
English: When Emperor Wen was about to die, he instructed Emperor Jing to say, "Weihong is a loyal person, you should treat him well.

古文：及景帝立，岁余，不孰何绾，绾日以谨力。
现代文：到景帝即位，一年多不合不问卫绾的情况，卫绾每曰勉励自己谨慎。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, more than a year had passed, and no matter what the situation of Wei Xuan was, Wei Xuan encouraged himself to be cautious every day.

古文：景帝幸上林，诏中郎将参乘，还而问曰： 君知所以得参乘乎？ 
现代文：景帝到上林巡行，诏令中郎将为参乘，回来时间道： 你知道为什么能够让你为参乘吗? 
English: Once, Emperor Jing came to Shanglinyuan and ordered Zhong Lang to share a car with Wei Xuan. When he returned, he asked Wei Xuan, "Do you know why you can share a car with me?"

古文：绾曰： 臣代戏车士，幸得功次迁，待罪中郎将，不知也。 
现代文：卫绾说： 我是代国的的驾车人，侥幸因功而得到升迁，成为中郎将，不知为什么。 
English: Wei Wei said: I am the driver representing the country, and I was lucky to be promoted due to my performance, becoming the middle manager, I don't know why.

古文：上问曰： 吾为太子时召君，君不肯来，何也？ 
现代文：皇上问： 我当太子时召你，你为什么不肯来? 
English: Emperor Jing also asked: When I was crown prince, I invited you to a banquet, but you refused to come. Why?

古文：对曰： 死罪，病。 
现代文：他回答说： 这真是死罪，我病了。 
English: He replied: "It's a capital crime, I'm sick."

古文：上赐之剑，绾曰： 先帝赐臣剑凡六，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：皇上赐给他剑，卫绾说： 先帝赐给我六把剑，不敢再接受这赏赐。 
English: The emperor gave him a sword, and Wei Yao said, "The previous emperor gave me six swords, and I dare not accept this reward again."

古文：上曰： 剑，人之所施易，独至今乎？ 绾曰： 具在。 
现代文：皇上说： 剑，人们常用它交换，难道你还保存到现在? 卫绾说： 都在。 
English: Emperor Jing said, "The sword is a favorite of the people, and is often used to give to people or exchange for other things. Can you really keep it until now?" Wei Wei said, "It's all still there."

古文：上使取六剑，剑常盛，未尝服也。
现代文：皇上派人将六把剑取来，剑保存得都很好，不曾佩带过。
English: The emperor sent someone to retrieve the six swords. The swords were well preserved and had never been worn.

古文：郎官有谴，常蒙其罪，不与它将争；有功，常让它将。
现代文：郎官有过错遭谴责时，卫绾经常自己承受罪责，不和其他的将争辩，有军功常让给其他将军。
English: When a subordinate officer was blamed for a mistake, Wei Xuan often took the blame himself, did not argue with other generals, and often conceded military merits to other generals.

古文：上以为廉，忠实无它肠，乃拜绾为河间王太傅。
现代文：皇上认为他廉正，忠实坦荡，于是拜卫绾为河间王刘德的太傅。
English: The emperor thought that he was honest, faithful and straightforward, so Bai Weiyuan became the Taifu of Liu De, the king of Kawama.

古文：吴、楚反，诏绾为将，将河间兵击吴、楚有功，拜为中尉。
现代文：吴、楚诸侯国反叛时，皇上下诏任命卫绾为将，他率领河间的军队攻打吴、楚诸国，立下军功，皇上升他为中尉。
English: When the states of Wu and Chu rebelled, the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Wei Wei as general. He led the armies of the Middle Kingdom to attack the states of Wu and Chu, and achieved military success. The emperor promoted him to lieutenant.

古文：三岁，以军功封绾为建陵侯。
现代文：三年后，因为军功封卫绾为建陵侯。
English: Three years later, he was awarded the title of Jianling Hou (建陵侯) for his military exploits.

古文：明年，上废太子，诛栗卿之属。
现代文：到第二年，皇上废除太子，诛杀栗卿等人。
English: In the following year, the emperor abolished the position of crown prince and killed Kurikyo and others.

古文：上以绾为长者，不忍，乃赐绾告归，而使郅都治捕栗氏。
现代文：皇上认为卫绾年长厚道，不忍心派遣他去，便赐卫绾告老还乡，而派郅都负责逮捕栗卿等人。
English: The emperor thought that Wei Xuan was old and kind, and could not bear to send him, so he sent Wei Xuan to tell the old man to return to his hometown, and sent Xuan Du to be responsible for the arrest of Kuricheng and others.

古文：既已，上立胶东王为太子，召绾拜为太子太傅，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：事情结束后，皇上立胶束王作太子，命卫绾做太子的太傅。后来，又升他为御史大夫。
English: After the matter was over, the emperor made Kyokusuke no Okimi the crown prince and appointed Weizong as the crown prince's daifu. Later, he was promoted to goshi taifu.

古文：五岁，代桃侯舍为丞相，朝奏事如职所奏。
现代文：五年后，代替桃侯刘舍作丞相，卫绾衹上奏例行公事，不议别事。
English: Five years later, he replaced Liu She, the ruler of Taohou, as chancellor, and only reported matters within his position to the imperial court.

古文：然自初宦以至相，终无可言。
现代文：然而自从他作官直到升为丞相，一直不能有所兴建和废罢。
English: However, since he became an official until he was promoted to chancellor, he has not been able to build or scrap anything.

古文：上以为敦厚可相少主，尊宠之，赏赐甚多。
现代文：皇上认为卫绾为人敦厚，可以辅佐太子，对他很尊敬宠爱，赏赐他许多东西。
English: The emperor thought that Wei Xuan was a good-hearted person who could assist the crown prince. He respected and loved him very much, and rewarded him with many things.

古文：为丞相三岁，景帝崩，武帝立。
现代文：卫绾作丞相三年，景帝去世后，武帝即位。
English: Emperor Wei served as chancellor for three years, Emperor Jing died, and Emperor Wu ascended the throne.

古文：建元中，丞相以景帝病时诸官囚多坐不辜者，而君不任职，免之。
现代文：建元年中，因为景帝患病时官吏囚禁了许多无辜的人，而卫绾不为民申冤，于是罢免了他。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Jian era, because officials imprisoned many innocent people when Emperor Jing was ill, and Wei Xuan did not seek redress for the people, he was dismissed.

古文：后薨，谥曰哀侯。
现代文：卫绾去世后，谧号为哀侯。
English: After the death of Wei Xuan, his posthumous name was Mao Xuan.

古文：子信嗣，坐酎金，国除。
现代文：他的儿子卫信继承他的爵位，因供奉祭祀用的贡金不足而获罪，侯国废除。
English: His son, Ueshin, succeeded to his title, but he was found guilty of not paying enough tribute for the sacrificial rites, and the lordly state was abolished.

古文：直不疑，南阳人也。为郎，事文帝。
现代文：直不疑是南阳人。为郎官，侍奉文帝。
English: There is no doubt that he was from Nanyang. He was a vassal and served Emperor Wen.

古文：其同舍有告归，误持其同舍郎金去。
现代文：他的同舍郎官有人请假回家，误将同舍郎官的金子拿走。
English: One of his co-herdsmen asked for leave to go home and took away the co-herdsman's gold by mistake.

古文：已而同舍郎觉，亡意人疑，不疑谢有之，买金偿。
现代文：不久同舍郎发觉，无端猜测直不疑，直不疑谢罪说确实拿了金子，便买了金子赔偿了他。
English: Soon after, he and Sherang found out that the groundless speculation was true, and without any doubt Xie Sin said that he had indeed taken the gold, and he bought the gold to compensate him.

古文：后告归者至而归金，亡金郎大惭，以此称为长者。
现代文：后来请假的郎官返回，把金子还给丢金人，使这位以前丢金子的人大为惭愧，因此称直不疑为长者。
English: Later, the steward, who had taken a leave of absence, returned and gave the gold back to the person who had lost it. This made the person who had previously lost the gold very ashamed, so he was undoubtedly the elder.

古文：稍迁至中大夫。
现代文：不久，直不疑升为中大夫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to junior doctor.

古文：朝，廷见，人或毁不疑曰： 不疑状貌甚美，然特毋奈其善盗嫂何也！ 
现代文：上朝时拜见皇上，有人诋毁他说： 直不疑容貌英俊，可怎么和他的嫂子私通呢? 
English: When he visited the emperor during the last imperial court, someone slandered him by saying, "He is undoubtedly handsome, but how could he have an affair with his sister-in-law?"

古文：不疑闻，曰： 我乃无兄。 
现代文：直不疑听到此事后，说： 我没兄长。 
English: When he heard about it, he said, "I don't have an older brother.

古文：然终不自明也。
现代文：然而始终不去自我辩明。
English: After saying that, he finally stopped making any other excuses.

古文：吴、楚反时，不疑以二千石将击之。
现代文：吴、楚反叛时，直不疑以二千石率兵攻打反叛者。
English: When Wu and Chu rebelled, they undoubtedly attacked the rebels with two thousand soldiers.

古文：景帝后元年，拜为御史大夫。
现代文：景帝后元年，拜他为御史大夫。
English: In the first year after the reign of Emperor Jing, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：天子修吴、楚时功，封不疑为塞侯。
现代文：皇上在记载平定吴、楚叛乱的军功时，封直不疑为塞侯。
English: When the emperor recorded his military exploits in suppressing the rebellions in Wu and Chu, there was no doubt that his title was that of a feudal lord.

古文：武帝即位，与丞相绾俱以过免。
现代文：武帝即位，和丞相卫绾一起因为有过失而被罢免。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he and the chancellor, Emperor Wei, were both dismissed for negligence.

古文：不疑学《老子》言。
现代文：直不疑精通《老子》无为学说。
English: He is undoubtedly well-versed in the "Lao Zi" doctrine of non-action.

古文：其所临，为官如故，唯恐人之知其为吏迹也。
现代文：他作官，一切照前任制度办，惟恐人们知道他作官的政绩。
English: When he was in office, he did everything according to the system of his predecessor, for fear that people would find out about his achievements as an official.

古文：不好立名，称为长者。
现代文：他不喜欢树立名声，人们称他为长者。
English: He doesn't like to make a name for himself. People call him the Elder.

古文：薨，谥曰信侯。
现代文：直不疑去世后，谧号为信侯。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Nobuko.

古文：传子至孙彭祖，坐酎金，国除。
现代文：位传至其孙直彭祖，因所献助祭用金不足而获罪，封国被废除。
English: The title was passed down to his grandson, Zhaopeng Zu, who was found guilty of not donating enough money for the sacrificial offering, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：周仁，其先任城人也。
现代文：周仁，祖先是任城人。
English: Zhou Ren's ancestors were from Rencheng.

古文：以医见。
现代文：因为医术高明而被皇上召见。
English: By virtue of medical skills, we can see the Son of God.

古文：景帝为太子时，为舍人，积功迁至太中大夫。
现代文：景帝为太子时，他为舍人，积功升为太中大夫。
English: When Emperor Jing was the crown prince, he was a layman, and he was promoted to the post of Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：景帝初立，拜仁为郎中令。
现代文：景帝刚刚即位时，拜周仁为郎中令。
English: When Emperor Jing had just ascended the throne, Bai Zhou Ren was the second-in-command.

古文：仁为人阴重不泄。
现代文：周仁为人深沉稳重，不泄露别人的秘事。
English: Zhou Ren is a deep and stable person and does not divulge other people's secrets.

古文：常衣弊补衣溺裤，故为不洁清，以是得幸，入卧内。
现代文：他平时穿补缀肮脏的衣裤，故意外示不清洁，因此得到宠幸，进入皇宫卧室。
English: He usually wore dirty clothes and trousers, so he accidentally showed that he was not clean, so he was favored to enter the palace bedroom.

古文：于后宫秘戏，仁常在旁，终无所言。
现代文：皇帝和后宫妃子们嬉戏，周仁常在旁边，但始终不说话。
English: The emperor and the concubines of the harem play, Zhou Ren is often nearby, but never speaks.

古文：上时问人，仁曰： 上自察之。 
现代文：皇上有时问人的长短，周仁说： 皇上自己可观察到。 
English: The emperor sometimes inquired about other people's conditions, and Zhou Ren always said, "Let the emperor examine him in person."

古文：然亦无所毁，如此。
现代文：周仁虽知别人的缺点，但也不在皇上面前诋毁，如此而已。
English: Although Zhou Ren was aware of the shortcomings of others, he did not denigrate them in front of the emperor. That was all.

古文：景帝再自幸其家。
现代文：景帝两次亲自到他家。
English: Emperor Jing himself came to his home twice.

古文：家徙阳陵。
现代文：他家迁到阳陵居住。
English: His family moved to Yangling to live.

古文：上所赐甚多，然终常让，不敢受也。
现代文：皇上赏赐得很多，然而他常推让，不敢接受。
English: The emperor gave him many gifts, but he often refused to accept them.

古文：诸侯群臣赂遗，终无所受。
现代文：诸侯群臣的贿赂他也不接受。
English: He never accepted anything that was given to him by any of the hundreds of lords and officials.

古文：武帝立，为先帝臣重之。
现代文：武帝即位后，他作为先帝的大臣得到敬重。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was highly respected as a minister of the former emperor.

古文：仁乃病免，以二千石禄归老，子孙咸至大官。
现代文：周仁因病免职，带着二千石俸禄回家养老，他的子孙都作到了高官。
English: Zhou Ren was relieved of his duties due to illness and returned home to retire with a stipend of 2,000 koku. His children and grandchildren all became high-ranking officials.

古文：张欧字叔，高祖功臣安丘侯说少子也。
现代文：张匙，字赵，直趄的功臣安丘侯亟越的小儿子。
English: Zhang Key, also known as Zhao, is the youngest son of Anqiu Hou Yue, a meritorious vassal of Naosuke.

古文：欧孝文时以治刑名侍太子，然其人长者。
现代文：退压在孝文帝时以研究刑名之学辅佐太子，但是他为人却很厚道。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was in power, he used to study the names of criminals to help the crown prince, but he was a very kind person.

古文：景帝时尊重，常为九卿。
现代文：量童在位时对他很尊重，任为九卿。
English: Emperor Jing was highly respected and often ranked among the nine nobles.

古文：至武帝元朔中，代韩安国为御史大夫。
现代文：到!游五塑年间，他代替垄董国作御史大夫。
English: In the 5th year of Yu's reign, he replaced Ren Dongguo as the chief historian.

古文：殴为吏，未尝言按人，剸以诚长者处官。
现代文：张欧作官，从不曾惩治别人，衹以诚恳和善来作官。
English: Zhang Ou, as an official, has never punished others, and has always been a sincere and good official.

古文：官属以为长者，亦不敢大欺。
现代文：下属认为他是长者，也不敢太欺瞒他。
English: His subordinates all consider him to be a loyal person and do not dare to deceive him excessively.

古文：上具狱事，有可却，却之；不可者，不得已，为涕泣，面而封之。
现代文：上报案件，凡是能退回的就退回：不能退回的，他就为罪人流泪，不忍读文书而把文书封上。
English: If the case is reported and can be returned, it will be returned; if it cannot be returned, he will shed tears for the criminal and cannot bear to read the document, so he will seal it.

古文：其爱人如此。
现代文：他就像这样关心别人。
English: That's how caring he is.

古文：老笃，请免，天子亦宠以上大夫禄，归老于家。
现代文：张欧年老，请求退职，皇上仍优待他以上大夫的俸禄回家度晚年。
English: Zhang Ou was old and asked to retire, but the emperor still gave him preferential treatment and allowed him to take his doctor's salary and go home to spend his old age.

古文：家阳陵。
现代文：家住在阳陵。
English: He lives in Yangling.

古文：子孙咸至大官。
现代文：子孙都任高官。
English: His children and grandchildren are all high-ranking officials.

古文：赞曰：仲尼有言 君子欲讷于言而敏于行 ，其万石君、建陵侯、塞侯、张叔之谓与？
现代文：赞曰：孔王说 君子应当少说话而多做事 。堕五星、建陵侯、塞堡、退拯不就是这样的吗?
English: Zang said, "King Kong said that a gentleman should speak less and do more. Isn't this the case with the Five Star Movement, the construction of tombs, the establishment of fortresses, and the withdrawal of the Qing Dynasty?"

古文：是以其教不肃而成，不严而治。
现代文：因此教育别人不必严厉也能达到目的，为官态度不威严也可治理国家。
English: Therefore, they do things slowly but can make things successful, and the measures are not strict but can make the society stable.

古文：至石建之浣衣，周仁为垢污，君子讥之。
现代文：至于石建洗衣，周仁穿破衣尿裤，被君子耻笑。
English: As for Shi Jian's laundry, Zhou Ren wore torn clothes and diapers, and was ridiculed by the gentleman.

