古文：翟方进字子威，汝南上蔡人也。
现代文：翟方进字子威，是汝南上蔡人。
English: 方进字子威, is a member of the Ru Nan Shang Cai people.

古文：家世微贱，至方进父翟公，好学，为郡文学。
现代文：他家世代卑微贫贱，到方进的父亲翟公，爱好学问，任郡文学。
English: His family had been humble and poor for generations. Fangjin's father, Zeng Gong, was fond of learning and was in charge of the county's literature.

古文：方进年十二三，失父孤学，给事太守府为小史，号迟顿不及事，数为掾史所詈辱。
现代文：方进十二三岁的时候，死了父亲无法继续学习，在太守府供职为小史，被人认为迟钝做不好事，屡次被掾史责骂侮辱。
English: When Fangjin was 12 or 13 years old, his father died and he was unable to continue his studies. He worked as a junior historian at the Imperial Governor's Office. He was considered to be slow and unable to do things well. He was repeatedly scolded and insulted by Zou Shi.

古文：方进自伤，乃从汝南蔡父相问己能所宜。
现代文：方进很悲伤，于是去到汝南蔡父处相面，向他询问自己适合干的事情。
English: Fangjin was very sad, so he went to see Yunan Cai's father and asked him what he was suitable for.

古文：蔡父大奇其形貌，谓曰： 小史有封侯骨，当以经术进，努力为诸生学问。 
现代文：蔡父认为他的形貌与众不同，告诉他说： 你有封侯的骨象，应当凭经术进用，努力研习众儒生的学问吧。 
English: Cai's father thought his appearance was unusual and told him: You have the bones of a feudal lord, you should use the scriptures and study the Confucianism.

古文：方进既厌为小史，闻蔡父言，心喜，因病归家，辞其后母，欲西至京师受经。
现代文：方进已经厌倦了做小史，听了蔡父的话，心裹很高兴，因此称病回到家裹，向他的后母告别，想要西去京师学习经书。
English: Fang Jin was tired of being a minor historian. After listening to Father Cai's words, his heart was filled with joy. Therefore, he said that he was sick and returned home, bade farewell to his stepmother, and wanted to go west to Beijing to study scriptures.

古文：母怜其幼，随之长安，织屦以给。方进读经博士，受《春秋》。
现代文：他的母亲可怜方进年幼，跟他一起来到长安，织鞋来供给他读书，经博士教授他《春秋》。
English: His mother, poor Fang Jin, came to Chang'an with him at a young age, knitted shoes to provide him with books to read, and taught him "Spring and Autumn" by a doctor.

古文：积十余年，经学明习，徒众日广，诸儒称之。
现代文：如此积累学习十余年，通晓经术，徒众一天天多起来，诸儒都称赞他。
English: He has accumulated more than ten years of study in this way, is familiar with the scriptures, and the number of disciples is increasing day by day. All Confucian scholars have praised him.

古文：以射策甲科为郎。
现代文：以射策甲科为郎。
English: He is the son of Shochaku Koshina.

古文：二三岁，举明经，迁议郎。
现代文：二三年后，举为明经，迁任议郎。
English: Two or three years later, he was promoted to Mingjing and transferred to the position of Heiro.

古文：是时，宿儒有清河胡常，与方进同经。
现代文：这时候有个老成博学的读书人清河的胡常，和方进研究相同的经术。
English: At this time, there was an old and erudite reader, Hu Chang of Qinghe, who studied the same scripture as Fangjin.

古文：常为先进，名誉出方进下，心害其能，论议不右方进。
现代文：胡常是前辈，名誉却不如方进，心裹嫉妒方进的才能，议论时并不称重方进。
English: Hu is often a senior, but his reputation is not as good as Fangjin's. He is envious of Fangjin's talent, and he does not value Fangjin when discussing.

古文：方进知之，候伺常大都授时，遣门下诸生至常所问大义疑难，因记其说。
现代文：方进知道后，等候胡常集合学生讲授的时候，派遣门下的诸生到胡常那裹讨教经义的疑难之处，据此记录胡常的学说。
English: After learning this, Fangjin waited for Hu Chang to gather his students for a lecture, and then he sent his disciples to Hu Chang's place to investigate the difficulties surrounding the teachings of the sutras, and recorded Hu Chang's teachings accordingly.

古文：如是者久之，常知方进之宗让己，内不自得，其后居士大夫之间未尝不称述方进，遂相亲友。
现代文：如此很久后，胡常知道方进尊敬谦让自己，内心不安。以后，他在士大夫之间没有不称述方进的，于是彼此亲近为友。
English: After such a long time, Hu often knew that Fangjin respected and humbled himself, and felt uneasy. Later, he did not hesitate to call Fangjin between the officers, so they became close friends.

古文：河平中，方进转为博士。
现代文：河平年间，方进转为博士。
English: During the Kappira era, Fangjin became a doctor.

古文：数年，迁朔方刺史，居官不烦苛，所察应条辄举，甚有威名。
现代文：几年后，迁任朔方刺史。做官时不烦琐苛刻，所察有条辄举，很有威名。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to Shuo Fang Zashi. When he was an official, he was not tedious and demanding, and what he observed was orderly and dignified.

古文：再三奏事，迁为丞相司直。
现代文：多次向朝廷奏事，迁为丞相司直。
English: He repeatedly petitioned the imperial court and was transferred to the position of chancellor.

古文：从上甘泉，行驰道中，司隶校尉陈庆劾奏方进，没入车马。
现代文：他跟随成帝去甘泉，在驰道中行车，司隶校尉陈庆劾奏他，方进因此被没收了车马。
English: He followed Chengdi to Ganquan and drove in the middle of the road, Sili captain Chen Qing impeached him, and Fangjin was therefore confiscated the car and horse.

古文：既至甘泉宫，会殿中，庆与廷尉范延寿语，时庆有章劾，自道： 行事以赎论，今尚书持我事来，当于此决。
现代文：到了甘泉宫后，在殿内集会，陈庆和廷尉范延寿交谈。当时陈庆正被奏章弹劾，陈庆便自己说： 既往之事当以罪论处，现在尚书拿着劾奏我的奏章来，应该在这裹判决。
English: After arriving at Ganquan Palace, a meeting was held in the hall, and Chen Qing and the courtier Fan Yanshou had a conversation. At that time, Chen Qing was being impeached by the music chapter, and Chen Qing said to himself: The past should be punished with a crime, and now Shang Shu has come to play my music chapter with the impeachment, and the judgment should be wrapped up here.

古文：前我为尚书时，尝有所奏事，忽忘之，留月余。 
现代文：以前我做尚书的时候，曾经有所奏之事，我忽然忘了，搁置了一个多月。 
English: In the past, when I was working on a book, I once had something to play, but I suddenly forgot about it and put it on hold for more than a month.

古文：方进于是举劾庆曰： 案庆奉使刺举大臣，故为尚书，知机事周密一统，明主躬亲不解。
现代文：方进因此举劾陈庆说： 陈庆奉命侦视揭发大臣，因此做尚书，了解机密要事都是周密安排统一筹划的，明主亲自处理毫不懈怠。
English: As a result, Fangjin brought charges against Chen Qing, saying: Chen Qing was ordered to investigate and expose the minister, so he wrote a formal letter to understand that confidential and important matters were all carefully arranged and planned, and the owner personally dealt with them without slacking.

古文：庆有罪未伏诛，无恐惧心，豫自设不坐之比。
现代文：陈庆有罪却没有伏诛，没有恐惧之，事先自己预设不判罪的例子。
English: Chen Qing is guilty, but there is no ambush, there is no fear, and he has set an example of not convicting in advance.

古文：又暴扬尚书事，言迟疾无所在，亏损圣德之聪明，奉诏不谨，皆不敬，臣谨以劾。 
现代文：而且他泄露宣扬尚书的事情，说快慢没有什么关系，亏损了圣德的明智聪察，奉行诏命不谨严，这些都是不恭敬的表现，我谨以此举劾。 
English: Moreover, he leaked the matter of promoting Shangshu, saying that it does not matter whether it is fast or slow, losing the wisdom of sanctity, and not strictly following the edict. These are all manifestations of disrespect, and I would like to make an accusation.

古文：庆坐免官。
现代文：陈庆因此被免去了官职。
English: As a result, Chen Qing was removed from his post.

古文：会北地浩商为义渠长所捕，亡，长取其母，与豭猪连系都亭下。
现代文：适逢北地的浩商被义渠的县长所逮捕，后来逃亡，县长抓来他的母亲，和公猪一起拴绑在都亭下。
English: At the right time, a wealthy merchant from the North was arrested by the prefectural governor of Yichuan and later fled. The prefectural governor arrested his mother and tied her up with a boar under the capital pavilion.

古文：商兄弟会宾客，自称司隶掾、长安县尉，杀义渠长妻子六人，亡。
现代文：浩商兄弟大会宾客，自称是司隶掾、长安县尉，杀死了义渠县长的妻子儿女六人后逃跑。
English: A guest of the Great Merchants' Conference, who claimed to be Sijijie, the lieutenant of Chang'an County, killed the wife and six children of the head of Yiqu County and then fled.

古文：丞相、御史请遣掾史与司隶校尉、部刺史并力逐捕，察无状者，奏可。
现代文：丞相、御史请求派遣掾史和司隶校尉、部刺史合力追捕，察明罪大不可言状之人，批奏可行。
English: At the request of the Minister of Justice and the Minister of History, it is possible to dispatch the Minister of Justice, the Lieutenant of the Ministry of Justice and the Minister of History to jointly pursue and arrest the person whose crime is unspeakable.

古文：司隶校尉涓勋奏言： 《春秋》之义，王人微者序乎诸侯之上，尊王命也。
现代文：司隶校尉涓勋上奏说： 根据《春秋》的经义，王人卑官排在诸侯的官位之上，是尊崇王命的意思。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn" sutra, the king's low-ranking officials rank higher than the officials of the princes, which is the meaning of respecting the king's life.

古文：臣幸得奉使，以督察公卿以下为职，今丞相宣请遣掾史，以宰士督察天子奉使命大夫，甚悖逆顺之理。
现代文：我有幸得以接受使命，以监督视察公卿以下的官员为职责，现在丞相薛宣请求派遣掾史，让宰相的属官来监督视察天子的司隶，非常违背逆顺的道理。
English: I had the honor to accept the mission to supervise the inspection of officials below the rank of noblemen. Now, Prime Minister Xue Xuan requested to send Zou Shi to have the prime minister's subordinates supervise the inspection of the prince's subordinates, which is very contrary to the principle of reversal.

古文：宣本不师受经术，因事以立奸威，案浩商所犯，一家之祸耳，而宣欲专权作威，乃害于国，不可之大者。
现代文：薛宣本来没有师受经术，凭藉职事来树立他的淫威。考察浩商所做的事，不过是一家人的祸害，但是薛宣却想要因此专权作威，有害于我们国家，做了最不该做的事。
English: Originally, Xue Xuan did not have a teacher to learn the art of reading and writing, and he used his position to establish his arrogance. Looking into what the wealthy merchant did is nothing more than the scourge of a family man, but Xue Xuan wanted to use his authority to do so, which is harmful to our country, and he did the worst thing.

古文：愿下中朝特进列侯、将军以下，正国法度。 
现代文：希望把此事交由中朝、特进、列侯、将军以下官员裁断，以端正国家的法律制度。 
English: It is hoped that this matter will be left to the officials of the Central Government, the special envoy, the vassal, the general and other officials to adjudicate, so as to rectify the country's legal system.

古文：议者以为，丞相掾不宜移书皆趣司隶。
现代文：评议者认为丞相掾不适宜移送文书来督促司隶。
English: The reviewers believed that it was not appropriate for the prime minister to transfer the document to urge the secretary.

古文：会浩商捕得伏诛，家属徙合浦。
现代文：正逢浩商被捕伏诛。他的家属被迁徙去合浦。
English: At the same time, a wealthy merchant was arrested and his family was forced to move to Hapu.

古文：故事，司隶校尉位在司直下，初除，谒两府，其有所会，居中二千石前，与司直并迎丞相、御史。
现代文：按旧例，司隶校尉职位在司直下面，刚拜官授职时，谒见丞相和御史，在朝会的时候，司隶校尉位在中二千石前，和司直一起迎接丞相、御史。
English: According to the old practice, the position of the lieutenant of Sisli was below that of Sinao. When Sinao was awarded the post, he met with the prime minister and the prime minister. At the time of the imperial court, the lieutenant of Sisli was in front of the middle school of two thousand koku, and greeted the prime minister and the prime minister together with Sinao.

古文：初，方进新视事，而涓勋亦初拜为司隶，不肯谒丞相、御史大夫，后朝会相见，礼节又倨。
现代文：当初，方进刚刚任职，而涡勋也新近拜为司隶，不肯谒见丞相和御史大夫，后来朝会相见时，礼节又很傲慢。
English: At first, Fangjin had just taken office, and Turukun was also newly appointed as a subordinate, and refused to meet the prime minister and the chief historian. Later, when they met at the imperial court, the etiquette was very arrogant.

古文：方进阴察之，勋私过光禄勋辛庆忌，又出逢帝舅成都侯商道路，下车立，■过，乃就车。
现代文：方进暗暗伺察他，发现涓勋私自拜访光禄勋辛庆忌，又一次外出在道路上遇见帝舅成都侯商，下车站在一旁，等候王商过后，才上车。
English: Fang Jin secretly observed him and found that Gong Xun privately visited Guang Rukun Xin Qing Bo. Once again, he went out on the road and met the imperial uncle of Chengdu Hou Shang. He got off at the station and waited for Wang Shang to pass before getting on the train.

古文：于是方进举奏其状，因曰： 臣闻国家之兴，尊尊而敬长，爵位上下之礼，王道纲纪。
现代文：方进因此上奏涓勋的罪状，据此说： 臣听说国家的振兴，在于尊重恭敬尊长，遵守爵位上下的礼节，这是王道的法纪制度。
English: As a result, Fangjin reported the crime to the imperial court, saying: "I heard that the revitalization of the country lies in respecting and respecting the elders, and observing the etiquette of the nobility. This is the royal legal discipline system.

古文：《春秋》之义，尊上公谓之宰，海内无不统焉。
现代文：《春秋》的经义，尊敬上公称为宰，海内无不由其统领。
English: "Spring and Autumn" of the meaning, respectfully known as Zai, the leader of the country.

古文：丞相进见圣主，御坐为起，在舆为下。
现代文：丞相进见皇上，皇上在座位上要为此站起来；皇上在路途中，丞相拜见，皇上要下车。
English: When the prime minister comes to see the emperor, the emperor has to get up from his seat; when the emperor is on the way, the prime minister has to see the emperor, and the emperor has to get off the train.

古文：群臣宜皆承顺圣化，以视四方。
现代文：众臣应该都接受顺从圣朝的教化，来告示天下。
English: All ministers should accept the edification of obedience to the Holy Dynasty, and announce it to the world.

古文：勋吏二千石，幸得奉使，不遵礼仪，轻谩宰相，贱易上卿，而又诎节失度，邪谄无常，色厉内荏。
现代文：而涓勋为吏二千石，有幸得以奉命出使，却不遵守礼仪，对宰相轻视怠慢，又轻视上卿，而且还歪曲礼节丧失风度，奸邪谄媚没有常心，外貌矜严内心怯弱。
English: On the other hand, Gong Xun, an official of 2,000 koku, was fortunate enough to be ordered to go on a mission, but he did not observe the etiquette, despised the prime minister, and despised the nobles. He also distorted the etiquette and lost his demeanor. He did not have a steady heart, and his appearance was stern and his heart was weak.

古文：堕国体，乱朝廷之序，不宜处位。
现代文：毁坏国家的体统，扰乱朝廷的秩序，不应该担任官职。
English: Those who destroy the dignity of the country and disrupt the order of the imperial court should not hold official posts.

古文：臣请下丞相免勋。 
现代文：我请求下交丞相罢免涓动。 
English: I request that the prime minister be removed from office.

古文：时，太中大夫平当给事中奏言： 方进国之司直，不自敕正以先群下，前亲犯令行驰道中，司隶庆平心举劾，方进不自责悔而内挟私恨，伺记庆之从容语言，以诋欺成罪。
现代文：当时太中大夫平当任给事中，上奏说 方进是国家的司直，不首先饬正自己来做众人的表率，先前亲自违犯法令在驰道中行车，司隶陈庆用心公平上举劾奏，方进自己不感到自责后悔反而内挟私恨，伺察记录陈庆闲谈时的言语，以诋毁欺骗定罪。
English: At that time, in the case of the appointment of the Tai Zhong Doctor Ping Dang, the report said that Fang Jin is the country's straightness, not the first to correct himself to set an example for everyone. Previously, he personally violated the law and drove in the middle of the road. The subordinate Chen Qing made an impeachment report with fairness. Fang Jin himself did not feel self-reproach and regret, but instead harbored personal hatred. He investigated and recorded Chen Qing's words when he was chatting, and convicted him of slander and deception.

古文：后丞相宣以一不道贼，请遣掾督趣司隶校尉，司隶校尉勋自奏暴于朝廷，今方进复举奏勋。
现代文：后来丞相薛宣因为一个杀死无辜一家六人的坏人，请求派遣掾史督促司隶校尉，司隶校尉涓勋自己上奏显于朝廷，现在方进再次劾奏涓勋。
English: Later, the prime minister, Xue Xuan, because of a bad person who killed an innocent family of six, requested the dispatch of the dispatch of the inspector to urge the officer, the officer himself appeared at the court, and now Fangjin again impeached the officer.

古文：议者以为方进不以道德辅正丞相，苟阿助大臣，欲必胜立威，宜抑绝其原。
现代文：评议者认为方进不用道德来辅佐匡正丞相，一味偏袒帮助大臣，想要一定取胜树立威严，应该遏止断绝这个源头。
English: The reviewers believed that Fangjin did not use morality to assist Minister Kuanzheng, but only favored and helped the minister. If he wanted to win and establish authority, he should stop and cut off this source.

古文：勋素行公直，奸人所恶，可少宽假，使遂其功名。 
现代文：涓勋向来行事公道正直，是奸人所厌恶的，可以稍加宽容，让他成就他的功名。 
English: Gong Xun has always acted fairly and honestly, which is repugnant to the traitors. They can be a little tolerant and let him achieve his merits.

古文：上以方进所举应科，不得用逆诈废正法，遂贬勋为昌陵令。
现代文：皇上因为方进所举劾的适合法令，不能因事先就猜疑别人心存欺诈而废除了正法，于是把涓勋贬为昌陵令。
English: Because the Emperor could not suspect the fraud of others in advance, he abrogated the positive law and downgraded the Xunxun to the Changling Order.

古文：方进旬岁间免两司隶，朝廷由是惮之。
现代文：方进一年里罢免了两个司隶，朝廷上下因此都害怕他。
English: Fang Jin dismissed two subordinates in one year, so the imperial court was afraid of him.

古文：丞相宣甚器重焉，常诫掾史： 谨事司直，翟君必在相位，不久。 
现代文：丞相薛宣十分器重方进，时常告诫掾史说： 谨慎事奉司直，翟方进不久以后一定会在相位。 
English: The prime minister, Xue Xuan, was a great admirer of Shifang Jin, and often admonished Shifang Shi, saying: "Be careful to serve Shifang Jin. Shifang Jin will surely be in the position of Shifang in the near future."

古文：是时，起昌陵，营作陵邑，贵戚近臣子弟宾客多辜榷为奸利者，方进部掾史复案，发大奸赃数千万。
现代文：这时候修建昌陵，经营建造皇陵城邑，皇帝的内外亲戚和左右近臣的子弟宾客多有专权谋私利的，方进布置掾史查验，揭发了私藏脏物数千万。
English: At this time, the construction of Changling, the management of the construction of the imperial mausoleum towns, the emperor's relatives at home and abroad and the children of the right and left courtiers, the guests mostly have the exclusive right to seek their own interests.

古文：上以为任公卿，欲试以治民，徙方进为京兆尹，搏击豪强，京师畏之。
现代文：皇上认为他能够胜任公卿之职，想试用他来治理民众，调任他做京兆尹，方进打击豪强，京城的人都害怕他。
English: The emperor thought that he was capable of performing the duties of a nobleman, and wanted to try using him to govern the people. He appointed him to be Jing Zhaoyun. Fang Jin attacked Gao Qiang, and the people in Beijing were afraid of him.

古文：时，胡常为青州刺史，闻之，与方进书曰： 窃闻政令甚明，为京兆能，则恐有所不宜。 
现代文：当时胡常任青州刺史，听说了此事，写信给方进说： 私下里听说你的政令非常严明，有京兆尹的才能，就恐怕有所不适。 
English: At that time, Hu Chang, the chief historian of Qingzhou, heard about the matter and wrote to Fang Jin, saying: I have heard in private that your edicts are very strict and that you have the talent of Jing Zhaoyun, so I'm afraid I'm uncomfortable.

古文：方进心知所谓，其后少弛威严。
现代文：方进心裹知道胡常的所指，以后稍稍放松了威严。
English: Fang Jinxin knew what Hu Chang was referring to, and later slightly relaxed his majesty.

古文：居官三岁，永始二年迁御史大夫。
现代文：方进任京兆尹三年，永始二年升任御史大夫。
English: Fang Jin was appointed to the post of Jing Zhaoyin for three years, and was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian for two years.

古文：数月，会丞相薛宣坐广汉盗贼群起及太皇太后丧时三辅吏并征发为奸，免为庶人。
现代文：几个月后，适逢丞相薛宣因为广漠盗贼群起闹事和太皇太后丧葬时闸三辅官吏一起征发徭役犯科作奸被免为平民。
English: A few months later, the prime minister, Xue Xuan, was exonerated from being a commoner when he was found to have committed the crime of treason by recruiting and dispatching three auxiliary officials to serve as bodyguards at the funeral of the great empress dowager.

古文：方进亦坐为京兆尹时奉丧事烦扰百姓，左迁执金吾。
现代文：方进也因为任京兆尹时奉命办丧事烦扰百姓，贬为执金吾。
English: Fang Jin also annoyed the people because he was ordered to handle the funeral when he was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, and was relegated to the position of the executioner.

古文：二十余日，丞相官缺，群臣多举方进，上亦器其能，遂擢方进为丞相，封高陵侯，食邑千户。
现代文：二十几天后，丞相官位空缺，群臣大多举荐方进，皇上也器重方进的才能，于是提拔方进任丞相，封他做高陵侯，封地千户。
English: Twenty days later, the position of chancellor was vacant, and most of the courtiers recommended Fang Jin, and the emperor also valued Fang Jin's talent, so he promoted Fang Jin to the post of chancellor and made him the prince of Gaoling, with a fief of a thousand households.

古文：身既富贵，而后母尚在，方进内行修饰，供养甚笃。
现代文：方进已经富贵，而后母还在人世，他注重修养家居操行，供奉母亲非常虔诚丰厚。
English: Fangjin was already wealthy, but his stepmother was still alive. He paid attention to cultivating his home life, and was very pious and rich in his devotion to his mother.

古文：及后母终，既葬三十六日，除服起视事，以为身备汉相，不敢逾国家之制。
现代文：等到后母去世，下葬二十六天后，他除去丧礼之服开始办公，认为自己担任汉朝丞相，不敢逾越国家的制度。
English: Twenty-six days after the death and burial of his stepmother, he removed his funeral clothes and began to work, believing that he was the prime minister of the Han Dynasty and did not dare to go beyond the national system.

古文：为相公洁，请托不行郡国。
现代文：他担任丞相公正廉洁，不以私事请托四方郡国。
English: He served as a just and incorruptible chancellor, and did not use his private affairs to please Shifang County.

古文：持法刻深，举奏牧守九卿，峻文深诋，中伤者尤多。
现代文：持法严酷苛刻，上奏牧守九卿，法条苛细深有诋毁，阴谋诬陷的人很多。
English: There are many people who are strict and harsh in upholding the law, and they have slandered the Nine Patriarchs, the strictness of the law, and the conspiracy of framing.

古文：如陈咸、朱博、萧育、逢信、孙闳之属，皆京师世家，以材能少历牧守列卿，知名当世，而方进特立后起，十余年间至宰相，据法以弹咸等，皆罢退之。
现代文：如陈咸、朱博、萧育、逢信、孙闳这些人，都是京师的世家，因才能年轻时就历任牧守列卿，在当时很有名，然而方进因出众卓异后来居上，十几年裹升至宰相，根据法令来弹劾陈咸等人，都罢免辞退了他们。
English: For example, Chen Xian, Zhu Bo, Xiao Yu, Feng Xin, and Sun Ye, these people are all descendants of Beijing scholars. They were very famous at that time because of their ability to become pastors and lords when they were young. However, Fang Jin came up later because of his outstanding performance, and he was elevated to prime minister for more than ten years. Chen Xian and others were impeached according to the law, and they were dismissed.

古文：初，咸最先进，自元帝初为卿史中丞显名朝廷矣。
现代文：先前，陈咸最早做官，从元帝初年任御史大夫时已经名显朝廷了。
English: Previously, Chen Xian was the first to become an official, and was already famous in the imperial court from the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when he served as the imperial historian.

古文：成帝初即位，擢为部刺史，历楚国、北海、东郡太守。
现代文：成帝刚即位，他被提拔为部刺史，又历任楚国、北海、束郡太守。
English: As soon as Emperor Cheng took the throne, he was promoted to the Department of History, and successively served as the governor of Chu, the North Sea, and Sokun.

古文：阳朔中，京兆尹王章讥切大臣，而荐琅邪太守冯野王可代大将军王凤辅政，东郡太守陈咸可御史大夫。
现代文：阳朔年间，京兆尹王章深责大臣，而举荐琅邪太守冯野王适合代替大将军王凤辅政，束郡太守陈咸适合任御史大夫。
English: During the Yangshuo era, Jing Zhaoyin Wang Zhang was the minister with deep responsibility, while the recommendation of the wicked governor Feng Ye Wang was suitable to replace the great general Wang Fengyu, and the governor of Sok County, Chen Xian, was suitable to be the chief historian.

古文：是时，方进甫从博士为刺史云。
现代文：这时候方进才从博士任刺史。
English: It was at this time that Fang Jincai made history by becoming a doctor.

古文：后方进为京兆尹，咸从南阳太守入为少府，与方进厚善。
现代文：后来方进任京兆尹，陈咸从南阳太守进入朝廷任少府，和方进非常亲密。
English: Later, Fang Jin was appointed to the post of Jing Zhaoyun, while Chen Xian was appointed to the post of minor prefect from the position of Nanyang Dazhong. He and Fang Jin were very close.

古文：先是，逢信已从高第郡守历京兆、太仆为卫尉矣，官簿皆在方进之右。
现代文：此前逢信已从高第郡守历任京兆尹、太仆为卫尉了，做官的功绩和资历都在方进之上。
English: Previously, Fengxin had risen from the guard of Gaudi County to the successive posts of Jing Zhaoyun and Taimu to the guard lieutenant. The official's achievements and qualifications are above Fangjin.

古文：及御史大夫缺，三人皆名卿，俱在选中，而方进得之。
现代文：等到御史大夫的官职空缺，陈咸、方进、逢信三人都是名卿，全在被选之列，而方进得到了这个官职。
English: When the post of imperial historian became vacant, Chen Xian, Fang Jin and Feng Xin, three famous nobles, were all among the candidates, and Fang Jin won the post.

古文：会丞相宣有事与方进相连，上使五二千石杂问丞相、御史，咸诘责方进，冀得其处，方进心恨。
现代文：适逢丞相薛宣有事与方进相关联，皇上派了二千石五人共同审问丞相、御史，陈咸责问方进，想因此得到他御史大夫的职位，方进于是怀恨在心。
English: When the prime minister, Xue Xuan, had something to do with Fang Jin, the emperor sent five men of 2,000 koku to jointly interrogate the prime minister and the imperial historian, Chen Xian, to question Fang Jin. He wanted to get the position of imperial historian, so Fang Jin held a grudge.

古文：初，大将军凤奏除陈汤为中郎，与从事。
现代文：先前大将军王凤上奏请求任命陈汤为中郎，政事都要与陈汤商量后才去做。
English: The previous grand general Wang Feng made a request for the appointment of Chen Tang as the middle man. All political affairs should be discussed with Chen Tang before doing them.

古文：凤薨后，从弟车骑将军音代凤辅政，亦厚汤。
现代文：王凤去世后，他的堂弟车骑将军王音代替王凤辅政，也很看重陈汤。
English: After the death of Wang Feng, his cousin, the chariot and cavalry general Wang Yin, replaced Wang Feng, and also valued Chen Tang.

古文：逢信、陈咸皆与汤善，汤数称之于凤、音所。
现代文：逢信、陈咸都和陈汤相友善，陈汤也屡次在王凤、王音那裹称赞逢信和陈咸。
English: Both Fengxin and Chen Xian are friendly with Chen Tang, and Chen Tang has repeatedly praised Fengxin and Chen Xian in the presence of Wang Feng and Wang Yin.

古文：久之，音薨，凤弟成都侯商复为大司卫马将军，辅政。
现代文：很久以后，王音去世，王凤的弟弟成都侯商又任大司马卫将军辅政。
English: After a long time, Wang Yin passed away, and Wang Feng's younger brother, the Lord of Chengdu, also served as the general secretary of Mawei.

古文：商素憎陈汤，白其罪过，下有司案验，遂免汤，徙敦煌。
现代文：王商向来憎恨陈汤，便禀报他的罪过，皇上让有司查询证实，便罢免了陈汤，流放敦煌。
English: Wang Shang had always hated Chen Tang, so he reported his crime to the emperor. The emperor had a magistrate investigate and confirm, and then dismissed Chen Tang and exiled him to Dunhuang.

古文：时，方进新为丞相，陈咸内惧不安，乃令小冠杜子夏往观其意，微自解说。
现代文：当时方进新任丞相，陈咸内心恐惧不安，于是命令小冠杜子夏去探测一下方进的意图，暗暗替自己辩解。
English: At that time, Fang Jin was the newly appointed prime minister, Chen Ham was afraid and uneasy, so he ordered Xiao Guan Du Zixia to detect Fang Jin's intention and secretly justify himself.

古文：子夏既过方进，揣知其指，不敢发言。
现代文：子夏拜访了方进后，探明了方进的意图，不敢替陈咸说话。
English: After Zi Xia visited Fang Jin, he found out Fang Jin's intention and did not dare to speak for Chen Xian.

古文：居无何，方进奏咸与逢信： 邪枉贪污，营私多欲。
现代文：没过多久，方进上奏陈咸与逢信 邪僻贪污，营私多欲。
English: It didn't take long for Fang Jin to play the role of Chen Xian and Fuxin, evil and corrupt, selfish and greedy.

古文：皆知陈汤奸佞倾覆，利口不轨，而亲交赂遗，以求荐举。
现代文：他们都知道陈汤奸邪谄媚反覆无常，巧言善辩不合法度，却还和他亲密交往赠送财物，来求得举荐。
English: They all knew that Chen Tonghuai was charming and capricious, eloquent and illegitimate, but they still had intimate contact with him and gave him gifts of wealth to seek his recommendation.

古文：后为少府，数馈遗汤。
现代文：他们后来做了少府，屡次赠送财物给陈汤。
English: They later became minor officials and repeatedly gave gifts to Chen Tang.

古文：信、咸幸得备九卿，不思尽忠正身，内自知行辟亡功效，而官媚邪臣，欲以徼幸，苟得亡耻。
现代文：逢信、陈咸有幸能够身列九卿，不想着尽忠正身，自己内心也知道行为不正没有功效，却谄媚邪臣，想以此获得亲幸，苛且求得丧失廉耻。
English: Fengxin and Chen Xian are fortunate to be among the nine nobles. They do not want to be loyal and upright, and they know in their hearts that their actions are not right and have no effect, but they flatter evil ministers. They want to gain personal happiness in this way, and they are demanding and seeking to lose their shame.

古文：孔子曰： 鄙夫可与事君也与哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 这种人可以和他一起侍奉君王吗！ 
English: Confucius said, "Can such a man serve a king with him?"

古文：咸、信之谓也。
现代文：说的就是陈咸、逢信啊。
English: That's what Chen Xian and Feng Xin are saying.

古文：过恶暴见，不宜处位，臣请免以示天下。 
现代文：错误邪恶显露无遣，不适合再担任官职，臣请求罢免他们来昭示天下。 
English: The wrongs and evils have been exposed, they are no longer fit to hold public office, and their vassals have requested that they be removed from office to show the world.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇上同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：后二岁余，诏举方正直言之士，红阳侯立举咸对策，拜为光禄大夫给事中。
现代文：两年多后，皇上下诏举荐方正直言的人才，红阳侯立举荐陈咸应对策问，皇上授职陈咸为光禄大夫给事中。
English: More than two years later, the imperial edict recommended the most honest talents, the Hongyang Houli recommended Chen Xian to deal with the strategy, and the emperor appointed Chen Xian as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：方进复奏： 咸前为九卿，坐为贪邪免，自知罪恶暴陈，依托红阳侯立徼幸，有司莫敢举奏。
现代文：方进再次上奏： 陈咸以前身为九卿，因为行为贪邪不正被免。他自己知道罪恶显露明白，依托红阳侯立侥幸获职，有司没有敢上奏举报的。
English: Fang Jin played again: Chen Xianlu used to be the ninth lord, but he was pardoned because his behavior was corrupt. He himself knew that the crime was obvious, and relying on Hongyang Houli to get a job by chance, he did not dare to report it.

古文：冒浊苟容，不顾耻辱，不当蒙方正举，备内朝臣。 
现代文：陈咸贪蔽污浊苛且容生于世，不顾耻辱，不应当承受方正的举荐，徒占内朝的臣位。 
English: Chen Xian was born into a world of greed, corruption and cruelty. Regardless of the disgrace, he should not accept the recommendation of the Founder and occupy the position of a vassal of the Inner Court.

古文：并劾红阳侯立选举故不以实。
现代文：并且劾奏红阳侯立选拔举荐人才故意不依照实情。
English: Moreover, he accused the Hongyang Municipal People's Government of deliberately selecting and recommending talents not according to the facts.

古文：有诏免咸，勿劾立。
现代文：皇上下诏罢免了陈咸，但下令不要弹劾立。
English: The imperial edict dismissed Chen Xian, but ordered that he not be impeached.

古文：后数年，皇太后姊子侍中卫尉定陵侯淳于长有罪，上以太后故，免官勿治罪。
现代文：几年后，皇太后姐姐的儿子侍中卫尉定陵侯淳于长有罪，皇上因为皇太后的缘故，免去了淳于长的官位但没有治罪。
English: A few years later, the son of the empress dowager's sister, the courtier and lieutenant of the palace guard, Jingting Hou Chun Yuchang, was found guilty. The emperor, for the sake of the empress dowager, exempted Chun Yuchang from his official position, but did not punish him.

古文：有司奏请遣长就国，长以金钱与立，立上封事为长求留曰： 陛下既托文以皇太后故，诚不可更有它计。 
现代文：有司上奏请求遣送淳于长去他的郡国，淳于长用金钱赂贿立，立呈上密封奏章替淳于长请求留下说： 陛下已经因为皇太后的原因下达了韶书，实在不能另有其他的计策呀。 
English: There was a request from the superior to send Chun Yuchang to his county, and Chun Yuchang bribed the superior with money and left a sealed petition for Chun Yuchang's request, saying, "Your Majesty has issued an imperial edict because of the Empress Dowager. There is really no other way."

古文：后长阴事发，遂下狱。
现代文：后来淳于长因秘事被揭发，于是被捕入狱。
English: Later, Chun Yuchang was arrested and jailed after his secret was exposed.

古文：方进劾立： 怀奸邪，乱朝政，欲倾误要主上，狡猾不道，请下狱。 
现代文：方进劾奏立 内怀奸邪，扰乱朝政，想要颠覆妨害要挟皇上，狡猾不讲道义，请求皇上判他下狱。 
English: Fang Jin impeached and set up a treacherous plot, disrupted the imperial government, attempted to subvert and obstruct, threatened the emperor, was cunning and immoral, and asked the emperor to sentence him to prison.

古文：上曰： 红阳侯，朕之舅，不忍致法，遣就国。 
现代文：皇上说： 红阳侯是我的舅舅，我不忍心运用法律制裁，就遣送他去郡国。 
English: The emperor said: Hongyang Hou is my uncle, I cannot bear to apply legal sanctions, so I will send him to the county.

古文：于是方进复奏立党友曰： 立素行积为不善，众人所共知。
现代文：于是方进又上奏立的朋党说： 立向来行为多有不善，众人所共知。
English: As a result, Fangjin said to his friends: "You have been behaving badly for a long time, and everyone knows it.

古文：邪臣自结，附托为党，庶几立与政事，欲获其利。
现代文：邪臣自行去勾结他，攀附依托成为死党，他们希望立能参与政事，想要以此获得私利。
English: Unscrupulous ministers colluded with him on their own, clinging to him and relying on him to become a die-hard party member. They hoped to be able to participate in political affairs, hoping to gain self-interest in this way.

古文：今立斥还就国，所交结尤著者，不宜备大臣，为郡守。
现代文：现在立被斥逐去郡国，他所结交中那些关系特别密切的人，不适合身任大臣，郡守。
English: Now that he has been banished to the county, those people with whom he is particularly close are not fit to serve as ministers and county governors.

古文：案后将军朱博、巨鹿太守孙闳、故光禄大夫陈咸与立交通厚善，相与为腹心，有背公死党之信，欲相攀援，死而后已；皆内有不仁之性，而外有俊材，过绝人伦，勇猛果敢，处事不疑，所居皆尚残贼酷虐，苛刻惨毒以立威，而无纤介爱利之风。
现代文：考察后将军朱博、钜鹿太守孙闺、以前的光禄大夫陈咸和立交往亲密，相互成为心腹，有违背公义结成死党的信约，想要相互攀援，死而后已；他们都内怀不仁的品性，而外有卓越的才智，超越了众人，勇猛果敢，处事不犹豫，平曰都崇尚残忍狠毒严酷暴虐，凭残忍狠毒来树立威风，而没有一点仁爱利入之心。
English: After the inspection, the general Zhu Bo, the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter of the granddaughter

古文：天下所共知，愚者犹惑。
现代文：天下都知道，愚人都尚感疑惑。
English: All the world knows that fools are full of doubts.

古文：孔子曰： 人而不仁如礼何！
现代文：孔子说： 用人不仁礼怎么办啊！
English: Confucius said: "What should we do with those who do not show courtesy?"

古文：人而不仁如乐何！ 
现代文：用人不仁乐怎么办啊！
English: What do you do with someone who doesn't treat you well?

古文：言不仁之人，亡所施用；不仁而多材，国之患也。
现代文：这是说没有仁义的人，国家没有用得着的地方，没有仁义却很有才能，是国家的祸患啊。
English: This means that a person without benevolence and righteousness is of no use to the country, and a person without benevolence and righteousness is very talented and is a scourge to the country.

古文：此三人皆内怀奸猾，国之所患，而深相与结，信于贵戚奸臣，此国家大忧，大臣所宜没身而争也。昔季孙行父有害曰： 见有善于君者爱之，若孝子之养父母也；见不善者诛之，若鹰鹯之逐鸟爵也。 
现代文：这三人都内怀奸邪狡猾，是国家所担忧的，却彼此深深勾结，取信于贵戚奸臣，这是国家的大忧，是大臣们所应该舍身而谏静的，从前季孙行父曾说遇： 看见对君有好处的人便热爱他，就好像孝子奉养父母，看见有不利的人便讨伐他，就好像鹰驱逐鸟雀。 
English: All three of them harbor treachery and cunning, and are feared by the country, but they are deeply in collusion with each other, gaining the trust of noble relatives and treacherous ministers. This is a great worry for the country, and is something that ministers should give up and be quiet about. Former Prime Minister Sun Yat-sen once said: "If you see someone who is good for you, you will love him, just like a filial son obeys his parents. If you see someone who is unfavorable, you will fight against him, just like an eagle chases away a sparrow."

古文：翅翼虽伤，不避也。
现代文：鹰鸥的翅膀即使受伤了，也不逃避。
English: The eaglet's wings do not escape even if they are injured.

古文：贵戚强党之众诚难犯，犯之，众敌并怨，善恶相冒。
现代文：贵戚的死党众人诚然难以冲犯，如果冲犯了他们，众敌都会怨恨，善恶就相互覆蔽。
English: It is true that it is difficult to offend everyone who is a sworn enemy of a close relative. If you offend them, all enemies will be resentful, and good and evil will cover each other.

古文：臣幸得备宰相，不敢不尽死。
现代文：我有幸能够身任宰相，不敢不尽我死力。
English: I am fortunate to be able to serve as prime minister, and I dare not fail to do my best.

古文：请免博、闳、咸归故郡，以销奸雄之党，绝群邪之望。 
现代文：请求皇上罢免朱博、孙闳、陈咸回到他们以前的郡国，来消灭奸恶的群党，断绝群邪的希望。 
English: Ask the emperor to recall Zhu Bo, Sun Yat-sen, and Chen Xian to return to their former county to eliminate the treacherous group party and break the hope of group evil.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇上准奏。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：咸既废锢，复徙故郡，以忧死。
现代文：陈咸已被罢官禁止再任职，又被遣回故郡，因为忧愤生病而死。
English: Chen Xian, who had been removed from office and banned from holding office again, was sent back to his former county, where he died after falling ill from grief and anger.

古文：方进知能有余，兼通文法吏事，以儒雅缘饬法律，号为通明相，天子甚器重之，奏事亡不当意，内求人主微指以固其位。
现代文：方进富于知识才能，兼通法令吏事，以儒雅文饰法律，称为通明相，皇上非常器重他，方进上奏事情皇上没有不适合他心意下令的，在内又探求皇上的隐微的旨意来巩固他的职位。
English: Fang Jin is rich in knowledge and ability, and is also an official of laws and regulations, and uses Confucianism and elegant literature to decorate laws. He is called a clear-sighted person. The emperor attaches great importance to him. Fang Jin did not order things that were not suitable for his mind, and he also explored the subtle will of the emperor to consolidate his position.

古文：初，定陵侯淳于长虽外戚，然以能谋议为九卿，新用事，方进独与长交，称荐之。
现代文：先前，定陵侯淳于长虽然是外戚，然而因擅长谋略列为九卿，刚任职时，方进独独与淳于长交往，称赞举荐他。
English: Previously, although Dingling Hou Junyuchang was a relative, he was ranked as the ninth lord because he was good at strategizing. When he first took office, Fang Jin exclusively interacted with Junyuchang and praised and recommended him.

古文：及长坐大逆诛，诸所厚善皆坐长免，上以方进大臣，又素重之，为隐讳。
现代文：等到淳于长因为大逆罪被诛，所有和淳于长亲善的人都因他被免职，皇上因为方进是大臣，又向来看重他，替他隐瞒避讳。
English: By the time Chun Yuchang was arrested for high treason, all those who had been friendly with him had been removed from their posts because of him. Since Fang Jin was a minister, the emperor had always respected him and kept a low profile for him.

古文：方进内惭，上疏谢罪乞骸骨。
现代文：方进内心惭愧，上奏请罪要求退职归家。
English: Embarrassed, Fangjin pleaded guilty and asked to return home.

古文：上报曰： 定陵侯长已伏其辜，君虽交通，传不云乎？ 朝过夕改，君子与之 ，君何疑焉？
现代文：皇上答覆说： 定陵侯淳于长已伏罪，你虽然和他相交往，经传上不是这样说吗，早晨知道错误晚上就改正，君子赞许他，你还有什么疑虑呢？
English: The emperor replied, "Jingling Hou Chun Yuchang has already committed a crime. Although you are in contact with him, isn't it said in the scriptures that if you know a mistake in the morning, you can correct it in the evening? A gentleman approves of him. What doubts do you still have?

古文：其专心一意毋怠，近医药以自持。 
现代文：请你专心一意不要懈怠，看医用药来保重身体。 
English: Please concentrate on not slacking off, see a doctor and take medicine to take care of your body.

古文：方进乃起视事，条奏长所厚善京兆尹孙宝、右扶风萧育，刺史二千石以上免二十余人，其见任如此。
现代文：方进才起来办事，逐条陈奏淳于长所亲善的京兆尹孙宝、右扶风萧育，刺史二千石以上被免职的有二十余人，方进被皇上信任如此。
English: It was not until Fang Jin took up his duties that he was able to work his way up to the top. He played his cards close to his strengths and befriended Jing Zhao, Yin Sun Bao, and Zuo Fu Feng Xiao Yu. There were more than 20 people with a history of more than 2,000 koku who were dismissed, and Fang Jin was trusted by the emperor.

古文：方进虽受《穀梁》，然好《左氏传》、天文星历，其《左氏》则国师刘歆，星历则长安令田终术师也。
现代文：方进虽然学习遇《谷梁传》，然而爱好《左氏传》，天文星历，他的《左氏传》则传授给国师刘歆，星历则传授给长安令田终术。
English: Although Fangjin studied "Guliang Biography," he was fond of "Zao's Biography" and the astronomical star calendar. His "Zao's Biography" was taught to the national teacher Liu Wei, and the star calendar was taught to Chang'an Ling Tian Zheng.

古文：厚李寻，以为议曹。
现代文：方进看重李寻，任命他任议曹。
English: Fangjin valued Li Huan and appointed him as a councillor.

古文：为相九岁，绥和二年春荧惑守心，寻奏记言： 应变之权，君侯所自明。
现代文：方进做宰相有九年，绥和二年春火星进入心宿天区，李寻上奏记说： 对付变化的权术，您都自己清楚。
English: Fangjin has been the prime minister for nine years, and in the spring of the second year, Mars entered the heart of the heaven, Li Xun wrote: You know how to deal with changes.

古文：往者数白，三光垂象，变动见端，山川水泉，反理视患，民人讹谣，斥事感名。
现代文：过去多次禀告，营室宿、东井宿、火星显示征兆，变化动静露出端倪，山川水泉，违反常理显示灾患，人民流传谣言却有了应验。
English: There have been many obituaries in the past, but the rumours spread by the people have come to pass. The Camp Room Inn, the East Well Inn, and the Mars have shown signs, the changes in movement and stillness have shown signs, and the mountains and rivers and springs have shown signs of disaster in violation of common sense.

古文：三者既效，可为寒心。
现代文：这三件事已得应验，可说让人寒心。
English: These three things have come to pass, and it can be said that they are chilling.

古文：今提扬眉，矢贯中，狼奋角，弓且张，金历库，士逆度，辅湛没，火守舍，万岁之期，近慎朝暮。
现代文：今摄提星扬起芒角，枉矢星正中弧心，天狼星张起芒角，天弓星发出光芒，金星越过库，土星逆行，辅星沉没不见，火星守舍三十，死亡的日子，近在朝夕。
English: Pictured now, Titian's star is lifting its cusp, Virgo's star is in the middle of the arc, Sirius's star is lifting its cusp, the bow of the sky is shining, Venus has crossed the reservoir, Saturn is retrograde, the secondary star has sunk and is no longer visible, Mars is in the thirtieth house, the day of death, near morning and evening.

古文：上无恻怛济世之功，下无推让避贤之效，欲当大位，为具臣以全身，难矣！
现代文：您上无怀忧救助天下的功德，下无推辞谦让避让贤人的实效，想要身处高位，做无功德的臣子来保全自身，难啊！
English: You have no worries to save the world's merits, no excuses to be humble and avoid the practical effect of the wise, if you want to be in a high position, to be a meritless vassal to protect yourself, it is difficult!

古文：大责日加，安得但保斥逐之戮？
现代文：大责罚一天天加深，怎么能衹保证仅有被斥逐的结果？
English: As the great chastisement deepens day by day, how can we ensure that the only outcome is banishment?

古文：阖府三百余人，唯君侯择其中，与尽节转凶。 
现代文：你全府有三百余人，希望您选择那些合适的人，共同尽心竭力保全节操转凶为吉。 
English: There are more than 300 people in your entire prefecture. I hope you will choose the right people and work hard together to preserve the economy.

古文：方进忧之，不知所出。
现代文：方进很担忧这件事，不知该怎么办。
English: Fangjin is very worried about this and doesn't know what to do.

古文：会郎贲丽善为星，言大臣宜当之。
现代文：适逢郎贲丽擅长观测星相，说大臣应该承担此责任。
English: He said the minister should take on this responsibility, as Ms. Lang is good at observing the stars.

古文：上乃召见方进。
现代文：皇上于是召见方进。
English: The emperor then summoned Fangjin.

古文：还归，未及引决，上遂赐册曰： 皇帝问丞相：君孔子之虑，孟贲之勇，朕嘉与君同心一意，庶几有成。
现代文：方进回来后，没来得及自杀，皇上便赐文书说： 皇帝问丞相：您有孔子的心志，孟贲的勇力，我好心和您同心一意，希望有所成就。
English: After Fang came back, before he had time to commit suicide, the emperor gave him a document saying: The emperor asked the prime minister: You have the mind of Confucius, the courage of Meng Xuan, I am kind-hearted and like-minded with you, I hope to achieve something.

古文：惟君登位，于今十年，灾害并臻，民被饥饿，加以疾疫溺死，关门牡开，失国守备，盗贼党辈。
现代文：衹是你登位十年，灾害一起降临，人民遭受饥饿，加上疾病瘟疫淹死，关门的锁闩自行丢失，失去了国家的守卫，盗贼众多。
English: It has been ten years since you ascended to the throne. Disasters have come together, the people have suffered from hunger, coupled with diseases and plagues, they have drowned, the locks of the closed doors have been lost, the guards of the country have been lost, and there are many thieves.

古文：吏民残贼，殴杀良民，断狱岁岁多前。
现代文：官吏民众残忍凶暴，殴打杀害良民，审理和判决案件一年年比以前多。
English: Officials and the public are cruel and violent, beating and killing good people, and more cases are tried and sentenced every year than before.

古文：上书言事，交错道路，怀奸朋党，相为隐蔽，皆亡忠虑，群下凶凶，更相嫉妒，其咎安在？
现代文：上书言事，在道路上就互相交谈，内怀奸恶结为朋党，相互隐瞒藏匿，都丧失了忠诚的心志，众下臣骚动不安，互相嫉妒，这些过错的责任在哪裹？
English: Writing and speaking, conversing with each other on the road, befriending each other with evil intentions, concealing and hiding from each other, have all lost the spirit of loyalty, the subordinates are restless and jealous of each other, where is the responsibility for these mistakes?

古文：观君之治，无欲辅朕富民便安元元之念。
现代文：观察你的治国，没有想要帮助我使人民富裕安定的善念。
English: Observing your governance, there is no good intention to help me make the people rich and stable.

古文：间者郡国谷虽颇熟，百姓不足者尚众，前去城郭，未能尽还，夙夜未尝忘焉。
现代文：最近郡国的粮食虽然大多丰收，百姓不够吃的还有许多，去城郭守卫的人，没有能够全部返回，我早晚未曾忘记此事。
English: Recently, although most of the county's grain has been harvested, there are still many people who do not have enough to eat. The people who went to guard the castle were not all able to return. I have not forgotten this sooner or later.

古文：朕惟往时之用，与今一也，百僚用度各有数。
现代文：我希望以前的财用，能和现在一样，百姓的用度各有定数。
English: I hope that the use of money in the past can be the same as it is now, and that the people's use of money can have a fixed amount.

古文：君有量多少，一听群下言，用度不足，奏请一切增赋，税城郭堧及园田，过更，算马牛羊，增益盐铁，变更无常。
现代文：你不均衡多少，都听从下属的进言，用度不够，便上奏请求权宜增加赋税，征收城邑及旁地园田的税，以钱代役，按马牛羊的头数征税，增加盐铁的赋税，变化更改没有常理。
English: You listen to the suggestions of your subordinates, do not spend enough, and then make a request for an expedient increase in taxation, levy taxes on townships and adjacent gardens, substitute services with money, levy taxes according to the number of heads of horses, cattle and sheep, and increase taxes on salt and iron. Changes and changes are not common sense.

古文：朕既不明，随奏许可，后议者以为不便，制诏下君，君云卖酒醪。
现代文：我既然不清楚，根据上奏同意实行。后来评议的人认为不方便，诏令传达给你，你说卖酒糟，后来请求停止。
English: Since I don't know, it was carried out in accordance with the approval of the report. Later, the reviewers thought it was inconvenient, the edict was conveyed to you, you said to sell the lees, and then asked to stop.

古文：后请止，未尽月复奏议令卖酒醪。
现代文：没到一个月，你又上奏书要卖酒糟。
English: Less than a month later, you're back to selling booze.

古文：朕诚怪君，何持容容之计，无忠固意，将何以辅朕帅道群下？
现代文：我实在奇怪你，为什么总抱着随俗的计策，而没有忠诚坚固的心意，将要凭什么来辅佐我指挥众下臣呢？
English: I really wonder at you, why do you always have a worldly strategy, but do not have a loyal and firm mind, on what basis will you assist me in commanding my subordinates?

古文：而欲久蒙显尊之位，岂不难哉！
现代文：而你想要久占显赫尊贵的地位，难道不困难吗！
English: And if you want to occupy a prominent and honorable position for a long time, isn't it difficult?

古文：传曰： 高而不危，所以长守贵也。 
现代文：经传上说： 居高而没有凶险，是能长久保有尊贵的途径啊。 
English: According to legend, standing tall without danger is the way to keep one's dignity for a long time.

古文：欲退君位，尚未忍。
现代文：我想要撤去你的官职，还不忍心。
English: I can't bear the thought of removing you from office.

古文：君其孰念详计，塞绝奸原，忧国如家，务便百姓以辅朕。
现代文：你要仔细考虑周密的计策，杜绝奸恶的本源，忧国如忧家，致力于安定百姓来辅佐我。
English: You must carefully consider the detailed strategy, eliminate the source of evil, worry about the country as if you were worried about your family, and strive to stabilize the people to assist me.

古文：朕既已改，君其自思，强食慎职。
现代文：我既然已经悔改，你也要自己反思，努力进食尽心尽职。
English: Now that I have repented, you should also reflect on yourself and work hard to eat and fulfill your duties.

古文：使尚书令赐君上尊酒十石，养牛一，君审外焉。 
现代文：我派尚书令赏赐你十石好酒，一只牛，你仔细考虑吧。 
English: I've sent Shang Shuling to reward you with ten kilos of fine wine and a cow. Think about it carefully.

古文：方进即日自杀。
现代文：方进当天就自尽了。
English: Fangjin committed suicide the same day.

古文：上秘之，遣九卿册赠以丞相、高陵侯印绶，赐乘舆秘器，少府供张，柱槛皆衣素。
现代文：皇上隐瞒了赐信之事，派遣九卿把丞相高陵侯的印绶赠给方进，又赏赐车辆棺材，在少府内张设供具，屋柱门槛都包上白布。
English: The emperor concealed the granting of the letter, and sent nine nobles to present Fangjin with the seal of the chancellor Gao Linghou, and also rewarded the vehicle coffin, and set up the supplies in the shofu, and the doorposts were wrapped in white cloth.

古文：天子亲临吊者数至，礼赐异于它相故事。
现代文：皇上多次亲自前往吊唁，礼赐和其他宰相的旧例不同。
English: The Emperor went to pay his condolences in person many times, which was different from the old practice of presenting gifts to other prime ministers.

古文：谥曰恭侯。长子宣嗣。
现代文：皇上赐方进谧号为恭侯，方进的长子翟宣继承了他的职位。
English: The emperor gave Fang Jinsong the title of Gonghou, and Fang Jinsong's eldest son Juxuan inherited his position.

古文：宣字少伯，亦明经笃行，君子人也。
现代文：翟宣字太伯，也精通经术行为笃厚，是个君子。
English: Zou Xuan Zi Tai Bo, also proficient in the art of war, is a gentleman.

古文：及方进在，为关都尉、南郡太守。
现代文：方进还在世时，任关都尉、南郡太守。
English: When Fang Jin was still alive, he was appointed Guan captain and Nan County governor.

古文：少子曰义。
现代文：左进的小儿子名义。
English: It's in the name of his youngest son.

古文：义字文仲，少以父任为郎，稍迁诸曹，年二十出为南阳都尉。
现代文：翌盏字塞伸，年轻时因为父亲的关系任郎，慢慢地升为诸曹，二十岁时迁任直墨都尉。
English: The next character was Jie Sheng, when he was young, because of his father's relationship, he was slowly promoted to Zhu Cao, and at the age of twenty, he was transferred to the post of captain.

古文：宛令刘立与曲阳侯为婚，又素著名州郡，轻义年少。
现代文：洼噩令型立和曲阳侯联姻，叉向来在州郡裹很有名，轻视星旦盏年轻。
English: The marriage of Waugongling and Quyang marquis has always been famous in the state and county, despising the young star.

古文：义行太守事，行县至宛，丞相史在传舍。
现代文：墨邑盏代理太守，巡视属县到堑，丞相史在传舍休息住宿。
English: Mo Yuqin acted as the grand marshal, patrolling from county to county, and Joseph Smith rested and stayed at the mission.

古文：立持酒肴谒丞相史，对饮未讫，会义亦往，外吏白都尉方至，立语言身若。
现代文：刘立拿着酒肴拜见丞相史，对饮到一半，适逢翟义去传舍，外吏禀报都尉将来，刘立谈吐如故。
English: Liu Li took the wine and food to see the prime minister, and after drinking half of it, it was time for Zhai Yi to go to the monastery. The foreign officials reported that the captain would come, and Liu Li talked and talked as before.

古文：须臾义至，内谒径入，立乃走下。
现代文：一会儿翟义到了，通报名姓径自走入，刘立才避开。
English: After a while, Zhai Yiyi arrived. After announcing his name and surname, he walked in, and Liu Liguo avoided him.

古文：义既还，大怒，阳以他事召立至，以主守盗十金，贼杀不辜，部掾夏恢等收缚立，传送邓狱。
现代文：翟义回来后，大怒，假装因为别事召见刘立，因担任守令却盗窃十斤黄金，杀害无辜的人，派遣掾史夏恢等人捆绑了刘立，转送到邓的监狱裹。
English: After Zhai Yi returned, he was furious. He pretended to summon Liu Li for other reasons, but he stole ten catties of gold and killed innocent people because he was a guard. He sent Zou Shi Xiawei and others to tie up Liu Li and send him to Deng's prison.

古文：恢亦以宛大县，恐见篡夺，白义可因随后行县送邓。
现代文：夏恢也因为宛是大县，担心被篡夺人犯，上报翟义可以藉此随后巡视属县时亲自转送刘立去邓。
English: Xia Huai also feared that he would be usurped as a criminal because it was a large county, so he sent Liu Li to Deng personally when he inspected the county.

古文：义曰： 欲令都尉自送，则如勿收邪？ 
现代文：翟义说： 想让我亲自押送，那么还不如不收治他呢！ 
English: Zhai Yi said: "If you want me to personally escort him, then it's better not to treat him!

古文：载环宛市乃送，吏民不敢动，威震南阳。
现代文：便用囚车载着刘立绕宛市示众后才送走他，吏民不敢有所举动，翟义因此威震南阳。
English: Liu Li was then driven around the city in a prison van before being sent away. Officials and citizens did not dare to take any action, and as a result, Xinyi became a threat to Nanyang.

古文：立家轻骑驰从武关入语曲阳侯，曲阳侯白成帝，帝以问丞相。
现代文：刘立的家人派轻装快骑从武关进入告知曲阳侯，曲阳侯上奏成帝，成帝因此询问丞相。
English: Liu Li's family sent a lightly-dressed fast-rider from Wuguan to inform Qu Yang Hou, Qu Yang Hou played Emperor Chengdi, and Emperor Chengdi therefore inquired about the prime minister.

古文：方进遣吏敕义出宛令。
现代文：方进派遣官吏命令翟义释放宛的县令刘立。
English: Fangjin dispatched officials to order the release of Xingyi to the county magistrate Liu Li.

古文：宛令已出，吏还白状。
现代文：刘立出狱后，官吏回来上报情况。
English: After Liu Li was released from prison, officials returned to report the situation.

古文：方进曰： 小儿未知为吏也，其意以为入狱当辄死矣。 
现代文：方进说： 小儿不知怎么做官啊，他的心思认为祇要入狱一定就判死罪了。 
English: Fang Jin said: Xiaoer doesn't know how to become an official. His mind thinks that if he goes to prison, he will be sentenced to death.

古文：后义坐法免，起家而为弘农太守，迁河内太守、青州牧。
现代文：后来翟义因为犯法被免职，从家中被起用任弘农太守，迁任河内太守，青州牧。
English: Later, Xinyi was removed from his post for violating the law, and he was appointed as the deputy governor of Hongnong from his home, transferred to the position of the deputy governor of Hanoi, and moved to Qingzhou.

古文：所居著名，有父风烈。徙为东郡太守。
现代文：所任官之处很有名望，有他父亲的风范，升任东郡太守。
English: The position he was appointed to was very prestigious. Following his father's example, he was promoted to the position of East County Governor.

古文：数岁，平帝崩，王莽居摄，义心恶之，乃谓姊子上蔡陈丰曰： 新都侯摄天子位，号令天下，故择宗室幼稚者以为孺子，依托周公辅成王之义，且以观望，必代汉家，其渐可见。
现代文：几年后，平帝去世，王莽暂居皇帝之位，翟义心裹厌恶他，于是对姐姐的儿子上蔡陈丰说： 新都侯暂居天子之位，号令天下，故意选择皇室裹年幼的来做孺子，假藉周公辅佐成王的名义，暂且来试探天下的人心，他一定会替代汉家，他的心思渐渐可以看清。
English: A few years later, after the death of Emperor Ping, Wang Mang temporarily occupied the throne of the emperor, and he detested him with a righteous heart, so he said to his sister's son, Shang Cai Chenfeng: The new prince temporarily occupied the position of the son of heaven, commanded the world, deliberately chose the royal family to wrap the young to make pigtails, and temporarily tested the hearts of the world under the name of Zhou Gongfu Suo Cheng Wang. He will definitely replace the Han family, and his mind can gradually be seen clearly.

古文：方今宗室衰弱，外无强蕃，天下倾首服从，莫能亢扞国难。
现代文：现在皇室衰弱，对外没有强大的藩国，天下都低头顺从，没有能够捍卫国家拯救国难的。
English: Now the imperial family is weak, there is no powerful feudal state to the outside world, the whole world bows its head and obeys, and there is no one who can defend the country and save the nation.

古文：吾幸得备宰相子，身守大郡，父子受汉厚恩，义当为国讨贼，以安社稷。
现代文：我有幸能够身为宰相的儿子，亲自守卫大郡，父子都身受汉的深恩，在道义上应该为国家讨伐敌人，来安定国家。
English: As the son of the prime minister, I am fortunate to be able to personally guard the county. Both father and son are deeply indebted to Han. Morally, we should fight the enemy for the country and stabilize the country.

古文：欲举兵西诛不当摄者，选宗室子孙辅而立之。
现代文：我想要带领军队西行去诛减不应当摄位的，选皇室的子孙辅佐他登位。
English: I want to lead the army westward to reduce the number of people who should not be crowned, and select the royal family's descendants to assist him in his enthronement.

古文：设令时命不成，死国埋名，犹可以不渐于先帝。
现代文：假如命运不好没有成功，为国而死身埋名立，还可以在先帝面前不感到惭愧。
English: If the fate is not good and there is no success, and you die for the country and bury your reputation, you can still not feel ashamed in front of the former emperor.

古文：今欲发之，乃肯从我乎？ 
现代文：我现在想要起兵，你愿意跟随我吗？ 
English: I want to raise an army now. Will you follow me?

古文：丰年十八，勇壮，许诺。
现代文：陈丰年方十八，勇气雄盛，答应了翟义。
English: Chen Feng, 18 years old, with great courage, agreed.

古文：义遂与东郡都尉刘宇、严乡侯刘信、信弟武平侯刘璜结谋。
现代文：翟义于是和束郡都尉刘宇、严乡侯刘信、刘信的弟弟武平侯刘璜结盟谋划。
English: Therefore, Yan Yi planned to ally with Liu Yu, the governor of Sok County, Liu Xin, the mayor of Yan Township, and Liu Xin's younger brother, Wu Ping, the mayor of Liu Ye.

古文：及车郡王孙庆素有勇略，以明兵法，征在京师，义乃诈移书以重罪传逮庆。
现代文：等到东郡王孙庆因为向来很有勇气谋略，知晓兵法，被征召在京城，翟义于是假制文书以重罪的名义传令逮捕王孙庆。
English: When Wang Sunqing of Dong County was conscripted in Beijing because he had always been very courageous in strategizing and knew the laws of war, Yan Yi ordered the arrest of Wang Sunqing in the name of a serious crime with a forged document.

古文：于是以九月都试日斩观令，因勒其车骑材官士，募郡中勇敢，部署将帅。
现代文：因此在九月考试那天杀了观的县令，而统率了县令的骑兵步兵，招募郡县中勇敢的人，安排将领。
English: Therefore, on the day of the September examination, he killed the county magistrate, and led the cavalry infantry of the county magistrate, recruited the brave people in the county, and arranged the generals.

古文：严乡侯信者，东平王云子也。
现代文：严乡侯刘信，是东平王云的儿子。
English: Yan Xiang Hou Liu Xin is the son of Dongping Wangyun.

古文：云诛死，信兄开明嗣为王，薨，无子，而信子匡复立为王，故义举兵并东平，立信为天子。
现代文：刘云被杀死，刘信的哥哥开明继承为王，开明去世，没有儿子，而刘信的儿子刘匡再立为王，因此翟义带领军队兼并丁东平，立刘信为天子。
English: Liu Yun was killed, Liu Xin's brother Kaiming succeeded as king, Kaiming died without a son, and Liu Xin's son Liu Kuang was reinstated as king, so Zhai Yi led the army to annex Ding Dongping and establish Liu Xin as the son of heaven.

古文：义自号大司马柱天大将军，以东平王傅苏隆为丞相，中尉皋丹为御史大夫，移檄郡国，言莽鸩杀孝平皇帝，矫摄尊号，今天子已立，共行天罚。
现代文：翟义自号为大司马柱天大将军，任用柬平王的老师苏隆为丞相，中尉皋丹为御史大夫，传送文书到各个郡国，说王莽用鸩酒杀害了孝子皇帝，假托采用了皇帝的称号，现在刘信已登皇位，命令各郡国共同实行上天对王莽的惩罚。
English: Zhai Yi called himself the grand secretary Ma Zhu Tianda General, appointed Su Long, the teacher of the Cambodian King Ping, as the prime minister, and Lieutenant Cang Dan as the chief historian, and sent documents to various counties, saying that Wang Mang killed the emperor's son with wine, and assumed the title of emperor. Now Liu Xin has ascended to the throne, and ordered the counties to jointly implement God's punishment on Wang Mang.

古文：郡国皆震，比至山阳，众十余万。
现代文：郡国都为之震动，等翟义的军队到了山阳，人数多达十万余人。
English: The county and the country were shaken by it, and so the army of Jinyi came to Shanyang, numbering more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：莽闻之，大惧，乃拜其党亲轻车将军成武侯孙建为奋武将军，光禄勋成都侯王邑为虎牙将军，明义侯王骏为强弩将军，春王城门校尉王况为震威将军，宗伯忠孝侯刘宏为奋冲将军，中少府建威侯王昌为中坚将军，中郎将震羌侯窦兄为奋威将军，凡七人，自择除关西人为校尉军吏，将关东甲卒，发奔命以击义焉。
现代文：王莽听说了这件事情，非常惊慌，就封他的死党轻车将军成武侯孙建为奋武将军，光禄勋成都侯王邑为虎牙将军，明义侯王骏为强弩将军，春王城门校尉王况为震威将军，宗伯忠孝侯刘宏为奋冲将军，中少府建威侯王昌为中坚将军，中郎将震羌侯窦兄为奋威将军，总共七人，自己选择任命关西人为校尉军吏，带领关东的兵士，调动应急出战的军队去迎击翟义。
English: Wang Mang heard about this and was very alarmed, so he appointed his most loyal light-vehicle general Chengwu Hou Sun Jian as Tengwu General, Guangru Hon Chengdu Hou Wang Yu as Huya General, Mingyi Hou Wang Yu as Qiangyu General, Chunwangcheng Gate Captain Wang Zhou as Zhenwei General, Zombo Zhonghong Hou Liu Hong as Fenchong General, Zhongshao Fu Jianwei Hou Wang Chang as Zhongjian General, and Zhonglang will Zhenyi Hou Dou Brother as Fenway General. A total of seven people chose to appoint Kansai people as lieutenant officers, lead Kanto soldiers, and mobilize emergency troops to fight

古文：复以太仆武让为积弩将军屯函谷关，将作大匠蒙乡侯逯并为横野将军屯武关，羲和红休侯刘歆为扬武将军屯宛，太保后丞丞阳侯甄邯为大将军屯霸上，常乡侯王惲为车骑将军屯平乐馆，骑都尉王晏为建威将军屯城北，城门校尉赵恢为城门将军，皆勒兵自奋。
现代文：王莽又任命太仆武让为积弩将军驻守函谷关，将作大匠蒙乡侯逯并任横野将军驻守武关，羲和红休侯刘歆任扬武将军驻守宛，太保后丞丞阳侯甄邯任大将军驻守霸上，常乡侯王惮任车骑将军驻守平乐馆，骑都尉王晏任建威将军驻守城北，城门校尉趟恢任城门将军，都带兵白行防卫。
English: Wang Mang also appointed his servant Wuzhen as the general stationed at Hantan Pass, the great craftsman Mengxiang Houyi as the general stationed at Wuzhen, the general stationed at Wanzhou, the general stationed at Yanwu, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed at Bagan, the general stationed

古文：莽日抱孺子会群臣而称曰： 昔成王幼，周公摄政，而管、蔡挟禄父以畔，今翟义亦挟刘信而作乱。
现代文：王莽每天抱着孺子会见众臣并声称说： 从前成王年幼，周公摄政，而管蔡挟持禄父反叛，今天翟义也挟持刘信来作乱。
English: Wang Mang held a pair of pliers in his hand every day to meet with his subjects and claimed: Once upon a time, Cheng Wang was young and Zhou Gong was the regent, while Guan Cai held Luo father hostage to rebel. Today, Zhai Yi is also holding Liu Xin hostage to make trouble.

古文：自古大圣犹惧此，况臣莽之斗筲！ 
现代文：自古以来圣人尚且担心此事，何况我王莽才识短浅呢！ 
English: Since ancient times, sages have worried about this, and what's more, I am too short-sighted!

古文：群臣皆曰： 不遭此变，不章圣德。 
现代文：众臣都说： 不遭遇这场变化，不能够显示您的圣德呵。 
English: All the courtiers said, "Without this change, you will not be able to show your holiness."

古文：莽于是依《周书》作《大诰》，曰：
现代文：王莽因此仿照《周书》写了《大诰》，说：
English: Therefore, Wang Mang copied the "Weekly News" and wrote "Big Bang," saying:

古文：惟居摄二年十月甲子，摄皇帝若曰：大诰道诸侯王、三公、列侯于汝卿、大夫、元士御事。
现代文：居摄二年十月甲子，摄皇帝说：用大道告知于诸侯王、三公、列侯和汝卿大夫、元士御事。
English: In October of the second year of Jülich's reign, Emperor Jülich said, "Using the avenue to inform the princes and kings, the three princes, the vassals, the noblemen, the doctors, and the veterans of the war."

古文：不吊，天降丧于赵、傅、丁、董。
现代文：上天不怜悯，下降丧祸于趟、傅、丁、董。
English: Heaven has no mercy, and descends to wreak havoc on wade, fu, ding, and dong.

古文：洪惟我幼冲孺子，当承继嗣无疆大历服事，予未遭其明哲能道民于安，况其能往知天命！
现代文：我深思年幼的孺子，应当继承漠家还没有结束的历法服色，我没有碰上那些明智的人来辅佐自己引导百姓过上安乐的生活，更何况能够去知晓天命呢！唉！
English: I pondered over the fact that a young mule should inherit the calendars and clothes of the still unfinished nomadic family. I did not meet those wise people to help me guide the people to a happy life, let alone be able to know the fate of the heavens! Alas!

古文：熙！我念孺子，若涉渊水，予惟往求朕所济度，奔走以傅近奉承高皇帝所受命，予岂敢自比于前人乎！
现代文：我想到孺子，如果穿涉深潭，我希望去求得帮助他渡过的途径，奔走尽力来靠近接受高皇帝所授予的职责，我哪敢把自己和周公相比呢！
English: I thought of Zou Zi, if I were to wade into a deep pool, I would hope to find a way to help him cross it, and do my best to get closer to accepting the duties assigned by Emperor Gao. How dare I compare myself to Zhou Gong!

古文：天降威明，用宁帝室，遗我居摄宝龟。
现代文：上天降下显赫威灵，来安宁汉室，让我来摄理朝政。
English: May Heaven send down a great blessing to bring peace to the Han family, and let me be the regent of the Imperial Court.

古文：太皇太后以丹石之符，乃绍天明意，诏予即命居摄践祚，如周公故事。
现代文：太皇太后因为赤石的祥兆，于是接受了上天的神旨，下韶让我就任登位，如同周公的旧例。
English: Because of the auspicious sign of the red stone, the great empress dowager accepted the divine will of heaven and allowed me to ascend to the throne, just like the old example of Zhou Gong.

古文：反虏故东郡太守翟义擅兴师动众，曰 有大难于西土，西土人亦不靖。 
现代文：叛敌原东郡太守翟义擅自兴师动众，说 在京城有大难，京城人也不安定。 
English: The rebel, the former East County Governor, Shunyi, rallied the crowd without permission, saying that there was a great difficulty in the capital and that the people of the capital were not stable.

古文：于是动严乡侯信，诞敢犯祖乱宗之序。
现代文：于是煽动严乡侯信，大胆冒犯祖宗扰乱祖先定下的秩序。
English: Therefore, he incited Yan Xiang Houxin to boldly offend the ancestors and disrupt the order established by the ancestors.

古文：天降威遗我宝龟，固知我国有呰灾，使民不安，是天反复右我汉国也。
现代文：上天降威赠我宝龟，本已知道我们国家有此灾病，使人民不安宁，是上天一再保佑我汉国啊。
English: The heavens gave me the turtle as a gift. They already knew that our country had this disaster and disease, which made the people restless. It is the heavens that have repeatedly blessed my country, China.

古文：粤其闻日，宗室之俟有四百人，民献仪九万夫，予敬以终于此谋继嗣图功。
现代文：翟义谋反的事传闻朝廷之曰，刘氏宗室的俊杰有四百人，人民中贤德的有九万人，我便同这些人共谋国事，终于会成就功业。
English: It was rumored in the imperial court that there were four hundred outstanding people in Liu's family, and ninety thousand people of virtue among the people. I would then conspire with these people in state affairs and finally accomplish my mission.

古文：我有大事，休，予卜并吉，故我出大将告郡太守、诸侯相、令、长曰： 予得吉卜，予惟以汝于伐东郡严乡逋播臣。 
现代文：国家将有兵事，上天显示好的征兆，我又占卜也是吉兆，所以我派出大将告诉郡太守、诸侯相、令、长说： 我得到了吉卦，我希望和你们一起讨伐柬郡严乡的散亡的臣子。 
English: There will be a war in the country, the heavens will show good signs, and I also have good fortune in divination, so I sent a general to tell the county governor, the princes, the ministers, and the chiefs, saying: I have received good fortune, and I hope to fight together with you against the scattered vassals in Yanxiang County, Cambodia.

古文：尔国君或者无不反曰： 难大，民亦不静，亦惟在帝官诸侯宗室，于小子族父，敬不可征。 
现代文：你们这些郡国的君主也许会反对说： 祸害已经很大，人民也不得安静，刘信也是帝宫诸侯的亲族，是孺子的叔父，应当礼敬，不可征讨。 
English: Those of you who are princes of county-states may object, saying, "The calamity is already great, and the people must not be quiet. Liu Xin is also a relative of the princes of the imperial palace, and is the uncle of Xun Zi. He should be respected, but not solicited.

古文：帝不违卜，故予为冲人长思厥难曰： 呜呼！
现代文：做皇帝的不违背关于天命的占卜，所以我替幼童深深思考他的苦难说： 唉！
English: To be an emperor does not contradict the divination about the fate of heaven, so I thought deeply about his suffering for the sake of the child and said: Alas!

古文：义、信所犯，诚动鳏寡，哀哉！ 
现代文：翟义、刘信所造成的危害，实在是都惊动了无妻子无丈夫的人了，可怜啊！ 
English: The harm caused by Zhai Yi and Liu Xin has really alarmed those who have no wife or husband, poor things!

古文：予遭天役遗，大解难于予身，以为孺子，不身自恤。
现代文：我接受了上天留给我的汉家的役事，让我亲自去解除苦难，所以我讨伐翟义来替孺子除乱，不是担忧我自身啊。
English: I accepted the role of the Han family left to me by heaven, and let me personally relieve the suffering, so I fought for righteousness to remove the chaos for the mule, not worrying about myself.

古文：予义彼国君泉陵侯上书曰： 成王幼弱，周公践天子位以治天下，六年，朝诸侯于明堂，制礼乐，班度量，而天下大服。
现代文：我赞同那个国君泉陵侯的上书说： 成王年幼娇弱，周公处于天子的位置来治理天下，六年裹，在明堂朝见诸侯，制定礼乐，颁布度量衡，天下大服。
English: I agree with the petition of that sovereign Quanling Hou that said: Cheng Wang is young and delicate, Zhou Gong is in the position of the son of heaven to govern the world, six years old, in the Ming Hall to see the princes, to formulate the liturgy, to promulgate the weights and measures, and to dress the world.

古文：太皇太后承顺天心，成居摄之义。
现代文：太皇太后顺从上天的心意，同意了暂居皇位这个做法。
English: The Empress Dowager was obedient to Heaven's will and agreed to temporarily stay on the throne.

古文：皇太子为孝平皇帝子，年在襁褓，宜且为子，知为人子道，令皇太后得加慈母恩。
现代文：皇太子是孝平皇帝的儿子，年幼尚在襁褓之中，既是人子，应当知道为人之子的道理，使皇太后能够施加慈母的恩惠。
English: The crown prince is the son of Emperor Xiaoping. He is still in infancy. As a son of man, he should know the principle of being a son of man, so that the empress dowager can exert her motherly grace.

古文：畜养成就，加元服，然后复子明辟。 
现代文：养大成人，行加冠礼，然后还给他明君的位置 唉！
English: Raising an adult, crowning him, and then giving him the position of Mingjun Alas!

古文：熙！为我孺子之故，予惟赵、傅、丁、董之乱，遏绝继嗣，变剥適、庶，危乱汉国，以成三厄，队极厥命。
现代文：为了我孺子的原因，我想到趟、傅、丁、董的乱政，断绝了汉室的子孙，搞乱了嫡庶的分别，危害扰乱了汉朝，已有了许多灾难，几乎断送了汉朝天命的政权。唉！
English: For my son's sake, I think of the chaotic government of Wai, Fu, Ding, and Dong, which cut off the descendants of the Han family, disrupted the separation of the legitimate heirs, disrupted the Han Dynasty, caused many disasters, and almost destroyed the heavenly power of the Han Dynasty. Alas!

古文：呜呼！害其可不旅力同心戒之哉！
现代文：怎么能够不齐心协力防止此类事再发生呢！
English: How can there not be a concerted effort to prevent this from happening again!

古文：予不敢僣上帝命。
现代文：我不敢违背上天的天命。
English: I dare not go against Heaven's decree.

古文：天休于安帝室，兴我汉国，惟卜用克绥受兹命。
现代文：上天以帝室平安为美，重兴我汉国，所以我能够占卜为吉心安地接受这个任务。
English: Heaven regards the safety of the imperial family as the most important thing for the revival of our country, so I can accept this task with confidence.

古文：今天其相民，况亦惟卜用！
现代文：现在上天帮助他的人民，更何况用占卜也是吉利的呢？
English: Now heaven help his people, not to mention the use of divination is auspicious?

古文：太皇太后肇有元城沙鹿之右，阴精女主圣明之祥，配元生成，以兴我天下之符，遂获西王母之应，神灵之征，以祐我帝室，以安我大宗，以绍我后嗣，以继我汉功。
现代文：太皇太后起初有元城沙鹿那样的佑助，阴精女主圣明的吉祥，和元帝生下成帝，而产生天下的祥兆，于是获得西王母的感应，神囊的证明，来保佑我皇室，安定我嫡长子，繁衍我后代，继续我汉朝的功绩。
English: At the beginning, the great empress dowager had the same blessing as the Yuancheng Sand Deer, the auspicious blessing of the Yin Spirit Lady Shenming, and the auspicious sign of the world when the Yuan Emperor was born and became emperor. Therefore, she received the inspiration of the Western Queen Mother, the proof of the sacrament, to bless my royal family, stabilize my eldest son, propagate my descendants, and continue my Han Dynasty achievements.

古文：厥害適统不宗元绪者，辟不违亲，辜不避戚。
现代文：那些有害于国家的正统，不尊重嫡嗣的人，应速加治罪，不避亲戚。
English: Those who are harmful to the country's orthodoxy and do not respect the legitimate heirs should be quickly punished, and relatives should not be avoided.

古文：夫岂不爱？
现代文：我难道不爱这些人吗？
English: Don't I love these people?

古文：亦唯帝室。
现代文：衹是为了皇室的缘故呵。
English: It's for the sake of the royal family.

古文：是以广立王侯，并建曾玄，俾屏我京师，绥抚宇内；博征儒生，讲道于廷，论序乖缪，制礼作乐，同律度量，混一风俗；正天地之位，昭郊宗之礼，定五畤庙祧，咸秩亡文；建灵台，立明堂，设辟雍，张太学，尊中宗、高宗之号。
现代文：我因此广泛地分封诸侯，一起封立曾孙玄孙，保卫我京城，安抚国家；又广泛地征召儒生，在朝廷内讲学，编订修正错误不当的学说，制定礼乐，统一度量衡，统一风俗；摆正天地的位置，显示祭祀的礼仪，稳定五峙的祭庙，那些废弃的没有文籍记载的宗庙也都祭奠了；修建灵台，建立明堂，设立开张大学，尊崇中宗、高宗的名号。
English: For this reason, I made a wide-ranging division of vassals, appointing great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren together to defend our capital and pacify the country. I also widely recruited Confucian scholars to give lectures in the imperial court, compiled and revised erroneous and improper doctrines, formulated ceremonial music, unified weights and measures, and unified customs. I set the position of heaven and earth, showed the etiquette of sacrifice, stabilized five-faced temples, and those abandoned ancestral temples without literary records were also dedicated. I built a spiritual platform, established a Ming hall, established a university, and revered the names of the Middle and High Dynasties

古文：昔我高宗崇德建武，克绥西域，以受白虎威胜之瑞，天地判合，乾、坤序德。
现代文：以前我高宗崇尚美德建立武政，战胜并安抚了西域，因而授受了白虎威猛勇胜的吉兆，和太后是按天地乾坤夫妻之义相结合。
English: In the past, I Gaozong advocated virtue and established a military government, defeated and pacified the Western Regions, and thus received the auspicious omen of the White Tiger's mighty victory, and married the Empress Dowager according to the principles of heaven and earth.

古文：太皇太后临政，有龟、龙、麟、凤之应，五德嘉符，相因而备。
现代文：太皇太后执政后，有龟龙麟凤的吉祥，五德的吉兆，相互承袭完备不缺。
English: After the reign of the great empress dowager, there are auspicious signs of the turtle, dragon, rabbit and phoenix, and auspicious signs of the five virtues, and there is no shortage of mutual inheritance.

古文：河图、洛书远自昆仑，出于重野。
现代文：《河图》来自遥远的昆仑，《雒书》出自重壁。
English: "Hutu" comes from faraway Kunlun, and "Wu Shu" comes from Chongwen.

古文：古谶著言，肆今享实。
现代文：古时候预言家已写下了预言，所以今天得到了证实。
English: In ancient times, prophets had already written down their predictions, so today they have been confirmed.

古文：此乃皇天上帝所以安我帝室，俾我成就洪烈也。
现代文：这是上天要安定我皇室，使我成就大业的原因呵。唉！
English: This is the reason why heaven wants to stabilize my royal family and make me achieve a great career. Alas!

古文：呜呼！天明威辅汉始而大大矣。
现代文：上天展示威严帮助汉朝的困难开始更大了。
English: Heaven's display of majesty helped to make the Han Dynasty's difficulties even greater.

古文：尔有惟旧人泉陵侯之言，尔不克远省，尔岂知太皇太后若此勤哉！
现代文：你们应当思考老朋友泉陵侯的话，你们如果不能仔细地反省往事，你们又怎能知道太皇太后是如此辛苦呢？
English: You should think about the words of your old friend Quanling Hou. If you cannot carefully reflect on the past, how can you know that the Empress Dowager was so hard-working?

古文：天毖劳我成功所，予不敢不极卒安皇帝之所图事。
现代文：上天操心我汉国成功的方法，我便不敢不尽力完成祖宗的功业和安定皇室所谋划的事务。
English: Heaven is concerned about the means for the success of my country, so I dare not fail to do my best to complete the work of my ancestors and the affairs planned by the stable royal family.

古文：肆予告我诸侯王公、列侯、卿、大夫、元士御事：天辅诚辞，天其累我以民，予害敢不于祖宗安人图功所终？
现代文：我陈明道理告诉诸侯王公列卿大夫元士御事：上天帮助那些有至诚言辞的人，上天把人民托付给我，我哪敢不尽力完成祖宗安抚人民的功德？
English: I clearly stated the principle and told the princes, princes, lords, queens, doctors, and princes: Heaven helps those who have sincere words. Heaven entrusted the people to me. How dare I not do my best to fulfill the merits of my ancestors to appease the people?

古文：天亦惟劳我民，若有疾，予害敢不于祖宗所受休辅？
现代文：上天也安抚我的人民，如果他们遭受疾苦，我哪敢不顺从祖宗的意思让他们休息从而帮助他们？
English: Heaven also comforts my people, if they suffer, how dare I not obey the will of the ancestors to let them rest and thus help them?

古文：予闻孝子善继人之意，忠臣善成人之事。
现代文：我听说孝子善于体察父亲的心思，忠臣善于成人之美。
English: I have heard that a filial son is good at sensing his father's thoughts, and a loyal subject is good at adult beauty.

古文：予思若考作室，厥子堂而构之；厥父菑，厥子播而获之。
现代文：我想如果父亲要造房，那么儿子应该在室外捣土架木；父亲要耕地，儿子应该去播种收获。
English: I think that if the father wants to build a house, then the son should break the soil and erect trees outside; the father wants to cultivate the land, and the son should go to sow and harvest.

古文：予害敢不于身抚祖宗之所受大命？
现代文：我哪敢不亲自接受祖宗的大任安定百姓呢？
English: How dare I not personally accept the great and stable people of my ancestors?

古文：若祖宗乃有效汤、武伐厥子，民长其劝弗救。
现代文：就如祖宗效法汤武征伐逆子一样，以公义为重，不循私枉法。
English: Just as our ancestors followed the Tangwu method of conquering and defeating traitors, we place great importance on justice and do not follow the law of selfishness.

古文：呜呼肆哉！
现代文：要尽力啊！
English: Do your best!

古文：诸侯王公、列侯、卿、大夫、元士御事，其勉助国道明！亦惟宗室之俊，民之表仪，迪知上帝命。
现代文：诸侯王公列卿大夫元士御事，应该尽力辅助国家光大汉室，也希望你们这些宗室的人才，人民的表率，遵道知天命。
English: Princes, princes, kings, queens, doctors, and statesmen should do their best to assist the country's great Han dynasty. I also hope that you, the talented people of the dynasty, the people's role models, will follow the path and know the fate of heaven.

古文：粤天辅诚，尔不得易定！
现代文：上天帮助那些忠诚的人，你们不能改变上天的定命！
English: Heaven helps those who are faithful, you cannot change Heaven's decrees!

古文：况今天降定于汉国，惟大艰人翟义、刘信大逆，欲相伐于厥室，岂亦知命之不易乎？
现代文：何况现在上天要下降安定给汉国，衹有大恶人翟义、刘信大逆不道，想要互相诛伐他们的家族，难道他们也知道天命是不能更改的吗？
English: What's more, now that the heavens are about to descend and bring stability to China, there are still great evildoers, such as Zhai Yi and Liu Xin, who want to fight each other and their families. Do they also know that the fate of the heavens cannot be changed?

古文：予永念曰天惟丧翟义、刘信，若啬夫，予害敢不终予亩？
现代文：我长思道：上天要让翟义、刘信丧命就像田夫铲除杂草，我哪敢不完成我种田的任务？
English: I thought for a long time: If God wants to kill Zhai Yi and Liu Xin, it would be like a farmer removing weeds. How dare I not complete my farming task?

古文：天亦惟休于祖宗，予害其极卜，害敢不于从？
现代文：上天也赞美祖宗，我怎么能不完成占卜，义怎么能不遵从占卜的旨意？
English: Heaven also praises the ancestors, how can I not complete the divination, how can righteousness not follow the will of divination?

古文：率宁人有旨疆土，况今卜并吉！
现代文：我要遵循祖宗的功业，致力于安民定国，更何况现在占也是吉兆呢！
English: I want to follow the work of my ancestors and devote myself to stabilizing the people and fixing the country. What's more, it's a good omen that I'm in charge now!

古文：故予大以尔东征，命不僣差，卜陈惟若此。
现代文：所以我要带领你们束征，不敢有所错失，卜兆陈列便是这样。
English: That's why I want to lead you to collect all the signs, so that you don't dare to miss anything. This is how the omens are displayed.

古文：乃遣大夫桓谭等班行谕告当反立孺子之意。
现代文：于是王莽派遣大夫桓谭等人颁布发行告示阐明了要复皇位给孺子的心志。
English: As a result, Wang Mang sent Dr. Kuan Tan and others to issue a notice clarifying the intention to restore the throne to Shanzi.

古文：还，封谭为明告里附城。
现代文：桓谭回来后，王莽封他做明告里附城。
English: After Kuan Tan's return, Wang Mang ordered him to annex the city.

古文：诸将东至陈留菑，与义会战，破之，斩刘璜首。
现代文：众将领向东来到陈留茁，和翟义交战，打败了翟义，砍下了刘璜的脑袋。
English: The generals went east to Chen Ruzhu, fought with Zhai Yi, defeated Zhai Yi, and cut off Liu Bei's head.

古文：莽大喜，复下诏曰：
现代文：王莽非常高兴，又下韶说：
English: Wang Mang was very happy and said:

古文：太皇太后遭家不造，国统三绝，绝辄复续，恩莫厚焉，信莫立焉。
现代文： 太皇太后遇到家庭不幸，成帝、哀帝、平帝都没有儿子，现在使得绝嗣又接续上了，恩情没有比这更深的了，信义没有比这更坚定的了。
English: The great empress dowager encountered family misfortune. Emperor Cheng, Empress Pao, and Emperor Ping all had no sons, and now this has led to a succession of dead heirs. There can be no deeper feelings of gratitude, and no firmer loyalty.

古文：孝平皇帝短命蚤崩，幼嗣孺冲，诏予居摄。
现代文：孝平皇帝命短早死，他的小儿子年龄太小，下诏让我暂居皇位。
English: Emperor Xiaoping's life was cut short by an early death, and his youngest son was too young, so he issued an edict to let me temporarily stay on the throne.

古文：予承明诏，奉社稷之任，持大宗之重，养六尺之托，受天下之寄，战战兢兢，不敢安息。
现代文：我接受了英明的诏令，担负起国家的责任，掌管了教育嫡子的重任，接受了抚养他的委托，承担了天下人对我的厚望，恐惧谨慎，不敢享受安逸。
English: I accepted the wise imperial edict, shouldered the responsibility of the state, took charge of the important task of educating my eldest son, accepted the entrustment of raising him, assumed the high expectations of the people of the world, fear and caution, and dared not enjoy ease.

古文：伏念太皇太后惟经艺分析，王道离散，汉家制作之业独未成就，故博征儒士，大兴典制，备物致用，立功成器，以为天下利。
现代文：我想到太皇太后思虑经书失散，王道没落，汉家著述的功业还没有完成，所以我广泛地征召儒士，大兴典章制度，充实物品以备使用，制造精美的器物，来为天下人提供便利。
English: I thought of the empress dowager thinking about the loss of the scriptures, the decline of the royal road, and the work of the Han family's writing has not yet been completed, so I extensively conscripted Confucians, greatly promoted the award system, enriched items to prepare for use, and manufactured exquisite utensils to provide convenience for the people of the world.

古文：王道粲然，基业既著，千载之废，百世之遗，于今乃成，道德庶几于唐、虞，功烈比齐于殷、周。
现代文：王道证明，基业也巳建立，千年来所废弃的，百代中所丢失的，到了今天总算都完成了，道德和唐虞所差无几，功业也可以和殷周相提并论。
English: The royal road proves that the foundation has also been established. What has been abandoned for a thousand years and lost in a hundred generations has finally been completed today. Morality is almost the same as that of the Tang and Yu Dynasties, and achievements can also be compared with those of the Yin and Zhou Dynasties.

古文：今翟义、刘信等谋反大逆，流言惑众，欲以篡位，贼害我孺子，罪深于管、蔡，恶甚于禽兽。
现代文：现在翟义、刘信等人谋反犯上大逆不道，散布流言迷惑群众，想因此篡夺皇位，杀害我孺子，他们的罪行比管蔡还大，他们的凶狠比禽兽还厉害。
English: Now, Zhai Yi, Liu Xin and others are plotting to commit the crime of high treason, spreading rumors to confuse the masses, trying to usurp the imperial throne and kill my son. Their crime is greater than that of Guan Cai, and their ferocity is more powerful than that of animals.

古文：信父故东平王云，不孝不谨，亲毒杀其父思王，名曰巨鼠，后云竟坐大逆诛死。
现代文：刘信的父亲原东平王云，为人不孝顺不恭谨，亲自毒害了他的父亲思王，被称为大老鼠，后来刘云最终因为犯大逆罪而被杀死。
English: Liu Xin's father, the former Dongping Wangyun, was unfilial and disrespectful. He personally poisoned his father, Si Wang, and was called a big rat. Later, Liu Yun was eventually killed for committing high treason.

古文：义父故丞相方进，险波阴贼，兄宣静言令色，外巧内嫉，所杀乡邑汝南者数十人。
现代文：翟义的父亲原丞相方进，为人阴险谄媚狠毒，他的兄长宣善于用动听之言谄媚之态取悦于人，外表慈善内心嫉恨，杀了乡邑汝南的十余人。
English: Zhai Yi's father, Yuanzheng Fangjin, was a sinister, charming and vicious man. His brother, Xuan, was good at pleasing people with charming words and a charming attitude. Outwardly benevolent, inwardly jealous, he killed more than ten people in his hometown of Runan.

古文：今积恶二家，迷惑相得，此时命当殄。天所灭也。
现代文：这作恶多端的两家人，迷乱天下人的心意彼此相投，这是时命应当灭绝，上天所要消除的啊。
English: These two families of evil-doers, who have bewitched the hearts of the people of the world, are in agreement with each other. This is something that time and fate should destroy, and that Heaven should eliminate.

古文：义始发兵，上书言宇、信等与东平相辅谋反，执捕械系，欲以威民，先自相被以反逆大恶，转相捕械，此其破殄之明证也。
现代文：翟义刚发兵时，上书说宇、信等人和束平王相辅一起谋反，将其拘捕并加上脚镣手铐，想以此来威慑群众，自己先相互加上谋反不道的恶名，转而互相逮捕戴上械具，这正是他们要被打败灭绝的明证。
English: When Zou Yi first sent troops, he wrote that Yu, Xin and other people conspired with King Sokping to rebel, arrested him and added shackles to deter the masses. They first gave each other a bad name for conspiring to rebel, and then arrested each other and put on equipment. This was clear evidence that they were going to be defeated and exterminated.

古文：已捕斩断信二子穀乡侯章、德广侯鲔，义母练、兄宣、亲属二十四人皆磔暴于长安都市四通之衢。
现代文：现已逮捕并处死了刘信的两个儿子谷乡侯章、德广侯鲔，翟义的母亲练、兄长翟宣、亲戚二十四个人也都在长安都市裹四通八达的街道上陈尸示众。
English: The two sons of Liu Xin, Gu Xiang Hou Zhang and De Guang Hou Yao, who have now been arrested and executed, Zhai Yi's mother, Ren, his elder brother, Xuan Xuan, and twenty-four relatives are also displayed on the streets of Chang'an City.

古文：当其斩时，观者重叠，天气和清，可谓当矣。
现代文：在他们被杀时，观看的人非常多，天气清明，可以说是合乎天意呵。
English: When they were killed, there were a lot of people watching, and the weather was clear, which can be said to be in accordance with God's will.

古文：命遣大将军共行皇天之罚，讨诲内之仇，功效著焉，予甚嘉之。
现代文：天命派遣大将军恭敬地行使上天的惩罚，讨伐国家的仇人，功效非常明显，我非常满意。
English: I am very satisfied with the effect of sending a general by heaven's command to respectfully exercise heaven's punishment and fight the enemies of the country.

古文：《司马法》不云乎？ 赏不逾时 。
现代文：《司马法》不是说过吗？ 赏赐不该过了应有的时间。 
English: Isn't it said in the Sima Law that the reward should not take more time than it should?

古文：欲民速睹为善之利也。
现代文：这是想要让大家早些看见为善的好处呵。
English: This is to let everyone see the benefits of doing good sooner.

古文：今先封车骑都尉孙贤等五十五人皆为列侯，户邑之数别下。
现代文：现在先封车骑都尉孙贤等五十五人都为列侯，分封户邑的数目另外再发布。
English: Now, the first fifty-five people to be enfeoffed, such as the chariot and cavalry captain Sun Xian, are vassals, and the number of enfeoffed households will be released separately.

古文：遣使者持黄金印、赤绂縌、朱轮车，即军中拜授。
现代文：派遣使者拿着黄金印、红绶带、红轮车，到军队裹来授职。 
English: Send an envoy with a gold seal, a red ribbon, and a red cart to the army to receive the post.

古文：因大赦天下。
现代文：因此大赦天下。
English: That is why the amnesty was granted.

古文：于是吏士精锐遂功围义于圉城，破之，义与刘信弃军庸亡。
现代文：在这时候精良的兵吏在圉城攻打包围了翟义，攻破城池，翟义和刘信放弃了军队脱身逃跑。
English: At this time, the excellent military officers in Lucheng attacked and encircled Jinyi, broke through the city, and Jinyi and Liu Xin abandoned the army to escape.

古文：至固始界中捕得义，尸磔陈都市。
现代文：到了固始的边境上王莽的军队捉住了翟义，在都市裹陈尸示众。
English: When they reached the border of Gushi, Wang Mang's army captured Zhai Yi and paraded his dead body in the city.

古文：卒不得信。
现代文：但最终没有抓到刘信。
English: However, Liu Xin was not caught in the end.

古文：初，三辅闻翟义起，自茂陵以西至氵幵二十三县盗贼并发，赵明、霍鸿等自称将军，攻烧官寺，杀右辅都尉及斄令，劫略吏民，众十余万，火见未央宫前殿。
现代文：起初，三辅听说翟义起兵，从茂陵以西到汫的二十三个县的盗贼也一起叛乱，趟明、霍鸿等人自称将军，攻打烧毁官府，杀害右辅都尉和牦的县令，抢劫掠夺官民，人数多达十多万，大火一直烧到未央宫的前殿。
English: At first, Sanfu heard of the uprising of Zhai Yi. Thieves in 23 counties from west of Maolin to Gan also rebelled together. Wuming, Hohong and others called themselves generals, attacked and burned government offices, killed the right-hand lieutenant and the county magistrate of Gan, robbed and plundered officials and civilians, numbering more than one hundred thousand. The fire burned all the way to the front hall of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：莽昼夜抱孺子祷宗庙。
现代文：王莽从早到晚抱着孺子在宗庙裹祈祷。
English: Wang Mang prays in the ancestral temple from morning to night, holding his son in his arms.

古文：复拜卫尉王级为虎贲将军，大鸿胪望乡侯阎迁为折冲将军，与甄邯、王晏西击赵明等。
现代文：后来王莽又授职卫尉王级任虎贲将军，大鸿胪望乡侯阎迁任折冲将军，和甄邯、王晏一起西去攻打赵明等人。
English: Later, Wang Mang was also given the post of Lieutenant of the Royal Guards and was appointed as General of the Tiger Regiment, and Daxiong was appointed as General of the Fanchong Regiment, and Yanqian was appointed as General of the Yingchong Regiment. Together with Zhen Rong and Wang Rong, they went to the west to attack Zhao Ming and others.

古文：正月，虎牙将军王邑等自关东还，便引兵西。
现代文：正月裹，虎牙将军王邑等人从关东回来，便又带领军队向西征伐。
English: Around the first month of the year, Hu Ya's general Wang Yi and others returned from Kanto, and then led the army to march westward.

古文：强弩将军王骏以无功免，扬武将军刘歆归故官。
现代文：强弩将军王骏因为没有立功而被免职，扬武将军刘歆恢复旧职。
English: General Wang Qi of Qiangfan was removed from his post for failing to render meritorious service, and General Liu Qi of Yangwu was reinstated to his former post.

古文：复以邑弟侍中王奇为扬武将军，城门将军赵恢为强弩将军，中郎将李棽为厌难将军，复将兵西。
现代文：王莽又任命王邑的弟弟侍中王奇为扬武将军，城门将军趟恢为强弩将军，中郎将李琴为厌难将军，再次带军西征。
English: Wang Mang also appointed Wang Yi's younger brother Wang Qi as Yangwu General, Shingmen General Watanabe as Qiangshao General, and Zhonglang Li Qin as Tuanan General, and once again led the army to the West.

古文：二月，明等殄灭，诸县悉平，还师振旅。
现代文：二月，趟明等人被剿灭，各县也都平定下来，王莽的军队得胜班师回朝。
English: In February, Waming and his followers were annihilated, all counties were pacified, and Wang Mang's victorious army returned to the imperial court.

古文：莽乃置酒白虎殿，劳飨将帅，大封拜。
现代文：王莽于是在白虎殿大办酒席，犒劳将帅，大大地封官授爵了一番。
English: Wang Mang then held a grand banquet at the White Tiger Hall. He was rewarded for his hard work with the title of Generalissimo, and he was greatly honored with a knighthood.

古文：先是，益州蛮夷及金城塞外羌反畔，时州郡击破之。
现代文：此前益州的蛮夷和金城塞外的羌族反叛，当时州郡的军队打败了他们。
English: Previously, the barbarians of Yizhou and the Yao people outside Jincheng had rebelled, and the troops of the state and county had defeated them.

古文：莽乃并隶，以小大为差，封侯、伯、子、男凡三百九十五人，曰 皆以奋怒，东指西击，羌寇蛮盗，反虏逆贼，不得旋踵，应时殄灭，天下咸服 之功封云。
现代文：王莽于是一起记录下来，以功劳大小为差等，分封侯伯子男一共三百九十五人，说是因为 都是出于愤怒，束征西讨，羌寇蛮盗，反敌逆贼，片刻之间，及时消灭，让天下人都心服 的功劳分封的。
English: Wang Mang then recorded together that a total of three hundred and ninety-five Hou Bo Zi Men were divided according to the difference in the size of the merit, saying that it was because they were all out of anger, the Western Expedition, the barbarian bandits, and the traitors to the enemy, and they were destroyed in time in a moment, so that the world's people were convinced of the merits of the division.

古文：莽于是自谓大得天人之助，至其年十二月，遂即真矣。
现代文：王莽因此认为自己大大地获得了上天神人的帮助，到了那年十二月，就篡位称帝了。
English: Wang Mang therefore thought that he had greatly gained the help of the heavenly gods, and by December of that year, he usurped the throne.

古文：初，义所收宛令刘立闻义举兵，上书愿备军吏为国讨贼，内报私怨。
现代文：起初，翟义逮捕的宛的县令刘立听说翟义发动兵变，就上书说愿意做为军吏替国家讨伐乱臣，其实内心想报私怨。
English: At first, Liu Li, the county magistrate to whom Zhai Yi's arrest was addressed, heard that Zhai Yi had launched a mutiny and wrote a letter saying that he was willing to act as a military official to fight for the country against the rebellious minister. In fact, in his heart, he wanted to settle a personal grudge.

古文：莽擢立为陈留太守，封明德侯。
现代文：王莽提拔刘立为陈留太守，封为明德侯。
English: Wang Mang promoted Liu Li to the position of Chen Liu Taishu, and he was given the title of Ming De Hou.

古文：始，义兄宣居长安，先义未发，家数有怪，夜闻哭声，听之不知所在。
现代文：当初，翟义的兄长翟宣住在长安，先前翟义还没有起兵的时候，翟宣的家裹便屡次有怪异的现象，夜裹听到人的哭声，再仔细听又不知声音发自何处。
English: At the beginning, Zhai Yi's elder brother, Zhai Xuan, lived in Chang'an. When Zhai Yi had not yet raised an army, there were many strange phenomena in Zhai Xuan's home. At night, Zhai Yi heard people crying. After listening carefully, he did not know where the sound came from.

古文：宣教授诸生满堂，有狗从外入，啮其中庭群雁数十，比惊救之，已皆断头。
现代文：翟宣在给一屋子的学生上课，有一只狗从外面进来，狂咬翟宣家庭院裹的十几只鹅，等到翟宣惊觉去救它们时，它们都已经被狗咬断了头。
English: Yu Xuan was giving a lesson to a roomful of students when a dog came in from outside and savagely bit more than a dozen geese in the courtyard of Yu Xuan's home. By the time Yu Xuan panicked and went to save them, they had all been bitten off by the dog.

古文：狗走出门，求不知处。
现代文：狗跑出了门外，到处找它却不知在哪襄。
English: The dog ran out of the door, looked everywhere for it but didn't know where it was.

古文：宣大恶之，谓后母曰： 东郡太守文仲素俶傥，今数有恶怪，恐有妄为而大祸至也。
现代文：翟宣非常不高兴，对后母说： 柬郡太守文仲向来做事鲁莽不考虑后果，现在屡有怪异邪恶的事情，恐怕是他有所妄为而大祸就要降临了。
English: Yu Xuan was very unhappy and said to his stepmother: "Cambodia County Taizhong Wenzhong has always done things recklessly without considering the consequences. Now there are many strange and evil things. I am afraid that he has done something reckless and a great disaster is about to come.

古文：大夫人可归，为弃去宣家者以避害。 
现代文：您可以回到您的娘家，自绝于翟宣家来逃避祸害。 
English: You can go back to your daughter's home and renounce the Xuanxuan family to escape the scourge.

古文：母不肯去，后数月败。
现代文：后母不肯离开，几个月后果然祸败。
English: The stepmother refused to leave, and a few months later disaster struck.

古文：莽尽坏义第宅，污池之。
现代文：王莽全部毁坏了翟义的房屋，做成了蓄水的池子。
English: Wang Mang destroyed all the houses in Xingyi and turned them into reservoirs.

古文：发父方进及先祖冢在汝南者，烧其棺柩，夷灭三族，诛及种嗣，至皆同坑，以棘五毒并葬之。
现代文：掘出了翟义的父亲翟方进和先祖在汝南的坟墓，烧了他们的棺材，杀死了翟义三族的所有亲戚，包括族襄的后代，把他们都放进一个坑内，种上五毒草一起埋掉。
English: They dug up the graves of Zhai Yi's father, Zhou Fangjin, and his ancestors in the south of the country, burned their coffins, killed all the relatives of the three Zhai Yi clans, including the descendants of Zhao Yi, put them all into a pit, planted five poisonous weeds and buried them together.

古文：而下诏曰： 盖闻古者伐不敬，取其鲸鲵筑武军，封以为大戮，于是乎有京观以惩淫慝。
现代文：王莽又下韶说： 听说古时候讨伐不敬的人，要杀死那些敌人中特别凶恶的堆积起来表彰军功，封土为垒以大量陈尸，因此有做成像高丘城楼般的形状来警戒那些邪恶的人。
English: Wang Mang also said, "I heard that in ancient times, those who fought against the wicked would kill those who were particularly vicious among their enemies, and they would pile them up to commend their military exploits. A large number of corpses would be used to fortify the land. Therefore, they were shaped like high hills and towers to warn those evil people.

古文：乃者反虏刘信、翟义悖逆作乱于东，而芒竹群盗赵明、霍鸿造逆西土，遣武将征讨，咸伏其辜。
现代文：不久前叛敌刘信、翟义在束部犯上作乱，而芒竹群盗赵明、霍鸿在西面造，我派武将前去讨伐，全部让他们伏了罪。
English: Not long ago, the traitors Liu Xin and Xing Yi made trouble in Sokube, while the bandits Zhao Ming and Hohong made trouble in Ximen. I sent generals to fight them, and all of them were punished.

古文：惟信、义等始发自濮阳，结奸无盐，殄灭于圉。
现代文：刘信、翟义等人开始从濮阳发兵，又在无盐结成奸盟，最后在圉被杀掉。
English: Liu Xin, Zou Yi and others began to send troops from Fenyang, and formed a treacherous alliance in Wanshan, and were finally killed in Tonglu.

古文：赵明依阻槐里环堤，霍鸿负倚盩厔芒竹，咸用破碎，亡有余类。
现代文：赵明靠着槐里的环曲的土堤，霍鸿靠着整厘芒竹，都因此被打败，没有能够逃脱的。
English: Zhao Ming leaned against the ring-shaped earth embankment in Zouli, and Hohong leaned against the rectangular bamboo. Both were defeated, and neither was able to escape.

古文：其取反虏逆贼之鲸鲵，聚之通路之旁，濮阳、无盐、圉、槐里、盩厔凡五所，各方六丈，高六尺，筑为武军，封以为大戮，荐树之棘。
现代文：现在选取了叛敌乱臣中首领的尸首，聚集在大路的一边，在濮阳、无盐、圉、槐里、篮厘一共五个地方，各自建起了有五丈见方，高六尺的土垒，封闭起来以大量陈尸，又加上树木的刺。
English: Now, the corpses of the leaders of the rebellious and unruly vassals have been selected and gathered on the side of the highway, in a total of five places in Fenyang, Wuxi, Handan, Lili and Kambuli. Each has built a five-meter-square, six-foot-high earthwork, closed with a large number of old corpses, plus the thorns of trees.

古文：建表木，高丈六尺。
现代文：树起用以标明的木头，有一丈六尺高。
English: The tree from which the wood is marked is six feet tall.

古文：书曰 反虏逆贼鲸鲵 ，在所长吏常以秋循行，勿令坏败，以惩淫慝焉。 
现代文：上面写着 反虏逆贼鲸鱿，高丘所在地的长吏要经常在秋天来巡视一下，不要让它损坏破败，以此来警戒邪恶的人。 
English: On it was written: "Rebellious orca whale beak," and "the local magistrate of the place where the hill is located should often come to inspect it in the autumn, and not let it be damaged and ruined, in order to guard against evil people."

古文：初，汝南旧有鸿隙大陂，郡以为饶，成帝时，关东数水，陂溢为害。
现代文：先前，汝南原有鸿隙大池塘，郡县因它而富饶，成帝的时候，关东屡次闸水灾，鸿隙也水涨成害。
English: Previously, Ru Nan Yuan had a large pond with a gap, and the county was rich because of it. When he became emperor, Guandong was repeatedly flooded, and the gap was also damaged by rising water.

古文：方进为相，与御史大夫孔光共遣掾行视，以为决去陂水，其地肥美，省堤防费而无水忧，遂奏罢之。
现代文：方进做宰相时，和御史大夫孔光一起派遣掾史前去巡视，认为放走鸿隙的水后，那块土地很肥美，省去了筑堤设防的费用而没有水灾的隐患，于是便上奏废除筑堤。
English: When Fangjin was the prime minister, he and the chief historian Kong Guang together sent Zou Shi Yuan to inspect the land. They believed that after the water was released from the gap, the land was very fertile, and the cost of building dikes and fortifications was saved, and there was no hidden danger of flooding. Therefore, they appealed to abolish the building of dikes.

古文：及翟氏灭，乡里归恶，言方进请陂下良田不得而奏罢陂云。
现代文：等到翟氏被灭族后，乡里之人都归罪于方进，说他是因为请求把鸿隙这片良田赏给他却未获准许所以上奏不要在鸿隙筑堤的。
English: After the Huan clan was exterminated, the people in the village blamed Fangjin, saying that he was not allowed to build a dike in the gap because he had requested that the gap be awarded to him.

古文：王莽时常枯旱，郡中追怨方进，童谣曰： 坏陂谁？
现代文：王莽执政时那裹常常枯旱，郡裹的人都追怨方进，童谣说： 毁坏鸿隙的是谁？
English: When Wang Mang was in power, the country was often in drought, and the people in the county were pursuing their grievances. The nursery rhyme said: Who is it that destroys the gap?

古文：翟子威。
现代文：当然是翟子威。
English: Of course, it's Hanzi Wei.

古文：饭我豆食羹芋魁。
现代文：用什么来做饭，我衹有土豆可吃，用什么来做汤？
English: What do I use for cooking, do I have potatoes to eat, what do I use for soup?

古文：反乎覆，陂当复。
现代文：我衹有芋根可食。
English: I don't have any yam to eat.

古文：谁云者？两黄鹄。 
现代文：世事反复无常理，鸿隙总会重兴起，若问是谁说此话？两只黄鹄告诉你。 
English: The world is capricious, the gap will always re-emerge, if you ask who said this? Two yellow jackets will tell you.

古文：司徒掾班彪曰： 丞相方进以孤童携老母，羁旅入京师，身为儒宗，致位宰相，盛矣。
现代文：司徒掾班彪说： 丞相方进在孩提时便带着老母，到京城来寄居，身为儒士的宗师，最后官至宰相，很显赫了。
English: "When he was a child, he brought his mother to live with him in Beijing. As a Confucian master and the last official to become the prime minister, he was very prominent," said Ban Biao, a scholar of Confucianism.

古文：当莽之起，盖乘天威，虽有贲、育，奚益于敌？
现代文：当王莽起兵时。大概是藉着上天的威力，即使有孟贲夏育的英勇，又对抗敌有什么帮助呢？
English: When Wang Mang raised an army, it was probably by the power of heaven. Even if he had the courage of Meng Jiayu, what help would he be against the enemy?

古文：义不量力，怀忠愤发，以陨其宗，悲夫！ 
现代文：翟义不自量力，心怀忠诚发愤起事，却毁灭了整个家族，可悲呵！ 
English: It is a pity that Zou Yi did not measure up to his own strength, but with loyalty in his heart, he got angry and started a riot, which destroyed his entire family.

