古文：开平三年九月癸巳朔，御崇勋殿，宴群臣文武百官。
现代文：开平三年九月，太祖到崇勋殿，宴请群臣文武百官。
English: In September of the third year of the Heian period, the great-grandfather went to the Hall of Supreme Honor to host a banquet for hundreds of courtiers and military officials.

古文：制： 内外使臣复命，未见便归私第者，朝廷命使，臣下奉行，惟于辞见之仪，合守敬恭之道。
现代文：赐给张宗奭、杨师厚白绫各三百匹，以及银鞍马辔。颁发诏令说： 关于内外使臣出使回来复命，不上朝廷见面便先回家一事。朝廷任命使者，臣下奉旨出使，对于辞别和复命的礼仪，应守恭敬的常规。
English: Zhang Zongyao and Yang Shikou Baiyao were each given 300 horses, as well as a silver-saddled horse. The imperial decree issued said: "Regarding the matter of domestic and foreign envoys returning without meeting the imperial court, they should return home first. The imperial court appoints envoys, and vassals send envoys with orders, and they should respectfully observe the rules of etiquette for leaving and returning."

古文：近者凡差出使，往复皆越常规。
现代文：近来凡差臣出使，来去都违背常规。
English: In recent times, it is not normal for ministers to come and go.

古文：或已辞而尚在本家，或未见而先归私第，但从己便，莫禀王程。
现代文：有的出使虽已辞别朝廷却还呆在家里，有的归来尚未见面却先回自己家中，全依自己所欲，不遵守朝廷章程。
English: Although some envoys have resigned from the imperial court, they still stay at home, and some have not yet returned, but they return to their own homes first, according to their own wishes, and do not comply with the imperial court regulations.

古文：在礼敬而殊乖，置典章而私举。
现代文：特别违反礼仪恭敬之规，抛弃典章制度任意而为。
English: In particular, it violates the rules of etiquette and respect, abandons the award system and acts arbitrarily.

古文：宜令御史台别具条流事件具黜罚等奏闻。 
现代文：应令御史台另立规章制定处罚条例报上。 
English: The History Channel should be ordered to come up with separate rules and regulations to formulate punishment regulations.

古文：庚子，殿直王唐福自襄城走马，以天军胜捷逆将李洪归降事上闻。
现代文：八日，殿直王唐福从襄城驰马而来报告，天军胜捷，逆将李洪归降。
English: On the eighth day, Tang Fu, the king of the palace, came on horseback from Xiangcheng to report that the heavenly army was victorious and Li Hong, the rebel general, had surrendered.

古文：赐唐福绢银有加，宰臣百官上表称贺。
现代文：太祖赐给王唐福绢布银钱，宰臣百官上表称贺。
English: The great-great-grandfather gave Wang Tang Fu Xuan cloth and silver money, and hundreds of vice-ministers congratulated him on the table.

古文：壬寅，开封府虞候李继业赍襄州都指挥使程晖奏状，以今月五日，杀戮逆党千人，并生擒都指挥使傅霸以下节级共五百人，收复襄州人户归业事。
现代文：十日，开封府虞候李继业带来襄州都指挥使程晖的报告，在本月五日，杀戮逆党一千人，并活捉都指挥使傅霸以下官员共五百人，召回襄州民户各归旧业。
English: On the 10th, Li Jiye, the governor of Kaifeng, brought a report from Cheng Yao, the commanding officer of the capital of Xiangzhou. On the 5th of this month, a total of 500 officials including Fu Ba, the commanding officer of the capital, were killed and captured alive, and the residents of Xiangzhou were called back to their old jobs.

古文：《通鉴》：八月，陈晖军至襄州，李洪逆战，大败，王求死。
现代文：十一日，太祖登文明殿，因为收复了襄汉而接受宰臣的庆贺。十一月一日，太祖在内殿斋戒，不上朝视政。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great-grandfather ascended to the Hall of Civilization to receive the congratulations of the vice-ministers for having recovered Xianghan. On the 1st day of the 11th month, the great-grandfather fasted in the inner hall and did not attend the court to observe politics.

古文：己亥，以罗周韩为天雄军节度副使，知府事，从鄴王绍威病请也。辛丑，幸穀水。戊午，御文明殿，册太傅张宗奭太保韩建受册毕。金吾仗引升辂车，仪仗导谒太庙讫，赴尚书省上。
现代文：二日，冬至，五更一点太祖从皇宫出来，在文明殿接受宰臣以下官员的问候，再从五凤楼出来到南郊，左右金吾、太常、兵部等掌管天子车驾仪仗，左右内直控鹤等引导太祖登上圆丘祭祀苍天，太保韩建以下的文武百官排列侍候，太祖升坛告祭。司天台报告：冬至那天，从夜半后，祥风微拂，皇帝星座澄明，到天亮，有黄云捧日吉相。
English: On the second day, the winter solstice, at 5:00 a.m., Taizu came out of the Imperial Palace and received greetings from officials below the vice-minister in the Hall of Civilizations. He then came out of the Five-Phoenix Building to the southern suburbs. On the right and left, Kingu, Taizang, and the military department were in charge of the celestial chariot driving the ceremonial battle. On the right and left, the direct-control cranes guided Taizu to climb the round mound to worship heaven. Hundreds of civil and military officials below Taibo Hanjian lined up to wait, and Taizu ascended the altar to offer the sacrifice.

古文：幸榆林坡阅兵，教诸都马步兵。
现代文：七日，以司门郎中罗廷规兼任魏博节度副使，主持府事，又改名叫罗周翰。
English: On the seventh day, he also served as the vice-envoy of the Wei Bo Festival, presided over the affairs of the government, and changed his name to Luo Zhouhan.

古文：敕改乾文院为文思院，行殿为兴安殿，球场为兴安球场，又改弓箭库殿为宣武殿。
现代文：当时邺王罗绍威病情日益严重，担心后事，所以奏请太祖如此。十六日，上文明殿，金吾设仗导引太祖登上辂车，仪礼导引太祖拜谒太庙完毕，到尚书省。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong's illness was getting more and more serious, and he was worried about the aftermath, so he asked his great-grandfather to do so. On the 16th, when he went to the Palace of Civilization, King Wu set up a guide to guide the great-grandfather to board the carriage, and after the ceremony guide to the great-grandfather's temple, he went to Shangshu Province.

古文：以蒲州肇迹之地，且因经略鄜、延，于是巡幸数月。
现代文：灵州报告，凤翔府贼寇主将刘知俊率领、岐、秦、泾各州的军队迫近灵州州城。
English: Lingshou reported that Liu Zhijun, the leader of the bandits of Fengxiang Prefecture, led the troops of Qi, Qin, and Han states to approach Lingshou.

古文：暇日游豫至焦梨店，颇述前事，念王重荣旧功，下诏褒奖而封崇之。
现代文：太祖派陕州康怀英、华州寇彦卿领兵进攻逼近州、宁州，以缓解朔方的寇犯。十二月四日，太祖在甘泉驿比赛打猎。在闲暇时游玩到焦梨店，记述往事，追念王重荣的旧功，下诏褒扬而推崇他。
English: On December 4, the great-grandfather sent Kang Huaiying from Shaanxi Province and Guo Yanqing from Huazhou Province to lead the troops to attack and close in on Shuzhou and Ningzhou in order to alleviate the banditry of the Shuo side. On December 4, the great-grandfather went hunting at the Ganquan Badger Game. In his spare time, he visited the Jiao Li Store, recorded the past, remembered Wang Chong Rong's old exploits, and praised and respected him.

古文：国子监奏： 创造文宣王庙，仍请率在朝及天下现任官僚俸钱，每贯每月克一十五文，充土木之植。 
现代文：国子监上奏： 创建文宣王庙，又请在朝中以及天下现任官员的俸钱中，每一贯每月克扣十五文，充作建造工程之资。 
English: The son-in-law of the emperor supervised the construction of the Wen Xuan Wang Temple, and requested that the salaries of the current officials of the dynasty and the world be deducted by 15 yuan per month to fund the construction project.

古文：允之。
现代文：太祖应准。
English: The great-grandfather agreed.

古文：是岁，以所率官僚俸钱修文宣王庙。
现代文：这年，用官员的俸钱修起文宣王庙。
English: In the same year, the temple of King Munson was built with the money of the officials.

古文：福建节度使王审知奏，舍钱造寺一所，请赐寺额。
现代文：福建节度使王审知上奏，捐钱修建寺庙一所，请太祖赐给寺庙名称。
English: During the Fujian Festival, Wang Xunzhi was asked to donate money to build a temple, and asked the great-grandfather to give the temple a name.

古文：敕名大梁万岁之寺，仍许度僧四十九人。
现代文：太祖命名为大梁万岁之寺，又准许度脱僧尼四十九人。
English: The great-grandfather named the temple "Daliang Wanlian" and allowed forty-nine nuns and monks to leave the monastery.

古文：赠牢墙使王仁嗣司空，故同州押衙史肇右仆射，押衙王彦洪、高汉诠、丘奉言、仇琼并刑部尚书，王筠御史司宪。
现代文：追赠牢墙使王仁嗣为司空，前同州押衙史肇为右仆射，押衙王彦洪、高汉诠、丘奉言、仇琼均为刑部尚书，王筠为御史司宪。
English: After the gift of the prison wall, Wang Renzhe became the secretary of the sky, the former dongzhou Wang Xizhao became the right-hand man of the shooting, Wang Yanhong, Gao Han Yan, Yau Bongyan and Qiu Qiong were all the records of the criminal department, and Wang Yao was the secretary of the history.

古文：初，知俊将叛，谋会诸将询所宜，仁嗣等持正不挠，悉罹其酷，至是褒赠之。
现代文：当初，刘知俊将反叛时，与各将相聚而谋，商量怎样做，王仁嗣等人刚正不挠，全都遭受刘知俊的酷害，到现在褒扬追赠他们。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Zhijun rebelled, he gathered with the generals to plot and discuss what to do. Wang Renshi and others were upright and unyielding. They all suffered from Liu Zhijun's cruel harm, and they still praise and reward them.

古文：刘守光上言，于蓟州西与兄守文战，擒守文。
现代文：刘守光报告，在蓟州西边与他兄长刘守文战斗，活捉了刘守文。
English: Liu Shuguang reported that he fought with his brother Liu Shouwen on the west side of Zhangzhou and captured Liu Shouwen alive.

古文：开平四年正月壬辰朔，帝御朝元殿，受百官称贺，始用礼乐也。
现代文：开平四年正月一日，太祖上朝元殿，接受百官称贺，开始使用礼乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Heian period, the great-grandfather went to the Imperial Palace to receive congratulations from hundreds of officials, and began to use music.

古文：敕： 公事难于稽迟，居处悉皆遥远。
现代文：诏令说 ：公事不能滞留拖延，而官员住处都很遥远。
English: The edict said: "Business cannot be delayed, and officials' residences are far away.

古文：其逐日当直中书舍人及吏部司封知印郎官、少府监及篆印文兼书写告身人吏等，并宜轮次于中书侧近宿止。 
现代文：那些按日当班的中书舍人以及吏部掌管公文印信的郎官、少府监以及篆印文字兼书写奖札功牌的官员等，都应轮流在中书省附近住宿。 
English: Those Chinese calligraphers who are on duty on a daily basis, as well as the officials in charge of stamping official documents and letters in the personnel department, the junior prefectural inspector, and the officials who stamped letters and wrote awards and medals, should all take turns to stay near the Chinese Calligraphy Department.

古文：及湖南开元寺禅长老可复号惠光大师，仍赐紫衣。二月乙丑，幸甘水亭。
现代文：太祖从师子门出来，到榆林坡下检阅教练士兵。二月五日，驾临甘水亭。
English: The great-grandfather came out of the Shizi Gate and went to the foot of the Yulin slope to inspect the coach soldiers. On February 5th, he arrived at Gan Shui Pavilion.

古文：出师子门，幸榆林东北坡，教诸军兵事。
现代文：太祖出师子门，到榆林东北坡，教各军兵事。
English: The great-great-grandfather went to the northeast slope of Yulin to teach soldiers.

古文：其以刑部尚书致仕张策及三品、四品常参官二十二人先世，各追赠一等。 
现代文：二十九日，出光政门，到谷水视察麦苗长势。十四日，因为春闲无事，多次命宰臣及功勋亲戚在河南府池亭宴饮。二十一日，杨师厚赴陕州上任镇守。
English: On the 29th, he went to Gu Shui to inspect the growth of wheat seedlings. On the 14th, because there was nothing to do in the spring, he repeatedly ordered the prime minister and meritorious relatives to have a banquet in Henan Prefecture. On the 21st, Yang Shihou went to Shaanxi to take up the post of town guard.

古文：河南张昌孙及蒲、同主事吏赐物各有差。
现代文：四月十六日，在崇政院宴请。太祖在藩镇时以及登帝位后，励精图治，严禁逸乐，未曾在堂上欣赏歌舞。
English: On April 16th, a banquet was held at the Imperial Palace. When the great-grandfather was a feudal lord and after he ascended to the throne, he worked hard to rule, strictly forbade pleasure music, and never enjoyed singing and dancing in the hall.

古文：帝过朝邑，见镇将位在县令上，问左右，或对曰： 宿官秩高。 
现代文：这天只令宫内妓乐登堂，击鼓唱曲甚为欢娱，到午夜才停。太祖经过朝邑时，看见镇将的地位在县令之上，便询问身边的人，有人回答说： 镇将是老官，级别高些。 
English: On this day, only the court prostitutes were allowed to enter the hall, and the drumming and singing were very enjoyable until midnight. When the great-grandfather passed through the morning village, he saw the status of the town general above the county magistrate, he asked the people around him, and someone answered: The town will be an old official, higher level.

古文：帝曰： 令长字人也，镇使捕盗耳。
现代文：太祖说 ：令长是养育人民的，镇将不过是让他捕捉盗贼而已。
English: The great-grandfather said, "The mayor is to nurture the people, the town will only let him catch thieves."

古文：且镇将多是邑民，奈何得居民父母上，是无礼也。 
现代文：再说镇将大多是邑中的人民充当，怎么能居于人民父母之上？这是失礼。 
English: Besides, the town will mostly be served by the people in the town, so how can it be above the people's parents? This is disrespectful.

古文：自朔旦至癸巳，内外以午日奉献巨万，计马三千蹄，余称是，复相率助修内垒。甲辰，诏曰： 奇邪乱正，假伪夺真，既刑典之不容，宜违犯而勿赦。
现代文：此前，高澧据湖州反叛投靠淮南，所以诏令钱讨伐他。五月十六日，颁布诏令说： 奸邪扰乱方正，假伪夺去真实，既为刑法所难容，自应犯法就不可赦。
English: Previously, Gao Rong had defected to Huainan after rebelling in Huzhou, so the imperial edict ordered Qian to fight him. On May 16, the imperial edict was issued, saying: "If treachery disturbs Fang Zheng, and falsehood takes away the truth, it is difficult to be tolerated by the criminal law, and it is unforgivable to break the law.

古文：应东、西两京及诸道州府，创造假犀玉真珠腰带、璧珥并诸色售用等，一切禁断，不得更造作。
现代文：凡东、西两京以及各道州府，制造假犀玉珍珠腰带、璧珥以及各色货物，一律查禁，不准再制造。
English: The manufacturing of fake rhinestone and pearl belts, rhinestone bracelets and all kinds of goods in the eastern and western capitals, as well as in the provincial capitals, shall be prohibited and shall not be allowed to be manufactured again.

古文：如公私人家先已有者，所在送纳长吏，对面毁弃；如行敕后有人故违，必当极法。仍委所在州府差人检察收捕，明行处断。 
现代文：如公私人家先已有这种假货，要交给所在地的长官，当面销毁抛弃。如颁行诏令后仍有人故意违反，必严刑峻法处理，仍委托所在的州府派人检察收捕，查明后予以处置。 
English: If any public or private person already has such fake goods, they should hand them over to the local magistrate and destroy and discard them in person. If after the issuance of the edict, there are still people who deliberately violate it, they must be dealt with severely, and the state government in which they are still entrusted should send people to inspect and arrest them, and dispose of them after investigation.

古文：魏博节度使、守太师、兼中书令、鄴王罗绍威薨，帝哀恸曰： 天不使我一海内，何夺忠臣之速也！ 
现代文：魏博节度使、守太师、兼中书令、邺王罗绍威去世，太祖哀痛地说： 苍天不让我统一海内，为何如此急速夺走我的忠臣啊！ 
English: Wei Bo died, and his great-great-grandfather Luo Shaowei passed away. He said sadly, "Heaven did not allow me to unify China, so why did they take away my loyal vassal so quickly?"

古文：诏赠尚书令。
现代文：诏赠为尚书令。
English: The imperial edict is still in effect.

古文：九月丁亥朔，命宰臣于兢赴西都，祀昊天上帝于圆丘。甲午，至西京。
现代文：七月，刘知俊逼攻夏州。太祖以宣化军留后李思安为东北面行营都指挥使，陕州节度使杨师厚为西路行营招讨使。
English: In July, Liu Zhijun forced an attack on Xiazhou. After the great-grandfather stayed with the Xuanhua army, Li Sian was the commander of the northeastern campaign, and Yang Shihou was the envoy of the Shaanxi Festival for the western campaign.

古文：下诏曰：朕闻历代帝王，首推尧、舜；为人父母，孰比禹、汤。睿谋高出于古先，圣德普闻于天下，尚或卑躬待士，屈己求贤。
现代文：这时陈、许、汝、蔡、颍五州境内有未长成翅膀的幼蝗成灾，接着许州上报，有野鸟成群遮蔽天空，将幼蝗全吃光，这年才有秋季的大丰收。九月，颁发诏令说： 朕听说历代圣贤的帝王，首推尧、舜；作为百姓的父母，没有人比得上禹、汤。他们智谋高出于古代先哲，圣德遍闻于普天之下，尚且卑躬待士，屈己求贤。
English: At this time, Chen, Xu, Ru, Cai, and Zou five states had a plague of young locusts that had not grown wings, and then Huzhou reported that a flock of wild birds covered the sky and ate up all the young locusts, and this year was the autumn harvest. In September, a decree was issued saying: I heard that the emperors of the sages of all ages were the first to push the dragon and the dragonfly; as the parents of the people, no one was comparable to Yu and Tang. Their wisdom was high from the ancient sages, and their sanctity was known all over the world, yet they groveled and bowed to wait for

古文：俯仰星云，虑一民之遗逸；网罗岩穴，恐片善之韬藏。
现代文：朕仰察星云，担心有一贤人被遗漏；网罗岩穴，深怕有一善语被隐藏。
English: I gaze at the nebulae, fearing that a wise man has been omitted; I pore over the caves, deeply afraid that a kind word has been hidden.

古文：延爵禄以征求，设丹青而访召，使其为政，乐在进贤，盖由国有万几，朝称百揆，非才不治，得士则昌。
现代文：用爵禄来征求，写文章来访召，使其治理国家，乐在选拔贤才。因为国家日有万机，朝廷总揽百政，没有才能就无法治理，得到贤士就能昌盛。
English: Use peerage to solicit, write articles to visit and summon, make it govern the country, and enjoy selecting talents. Because the country has a lot of opportunities every day, the court has a lot of power, and without talent, it can not be governed. If you get a sage, you can prosper.

古文：自朕光宅中区，迄今三载，宵分辍寐，日旰忘餐，思共力于庙谋，庶永清于王道。
现代文：自朕登临帝位，至今三年，夜废寝，日忘食，考虑为国事尽职尽力，希望让王道永远清明。
English: Since I ascended the throne, for the past three years, I have lost sleep at night, forgotten to eat during the day, considered doing my best for national affairs, and hoped to make the royal road clear forever.

古文：而乃朝廷之内，或未尽于昌言；军旅之间，亦罕闻于奇策。
现代文：然而在朝廷之内，未有足够的高见；在军旅之间，也少闻奇妙的计策。
English: However, within the imperial court, there is not enough high-mindedness; among the military brigades, there are few strange strategies.

古文：眷言方岳，下及山林，岂无英奇，副我延伫。
现代文：因而思忖在四方大地、下及山林之间，难道就没有英雄奇士，以满足我的渴求？
English: So I thought, in the four directions of the earth, below and between the mountains and forests, are there no heroes and wonders to satisfy my longing?

古文：诸道都督、观察防御使等，或勋高翊世，或才号知人，必于途巷之贤，备察刍荛之士。
现代文：各道都督、观察使、防御使等，有的功高盖世，有的才学过人，一定要在穷途陋巷之间，细心查访砍柴割草的贤良。
English: The governors, observers, and defenders of various provinces, some of whom have made great contributions to the world, and some of whom have only learned from others, must carefully investigate the virtuous people who cut wood and mow grass in the midst of the rough and tumble.

古文：诏到，可精搜郡邑，博访贤良，喻之以千载一时，约之以高官美秩，谅无求备，惟在得人。
现代文：诏令下达后，可在郡邑精心搜寻，广访贤良，用盛世难逢的道理去劝说，用高官厚禄去招召，不要求全责备，只求得到人才。
English: After the imperial edict is issued, it is possible to search carefully in the counties and towns, make extensive visits to the virtuous, use the reason of prosperity to persuade, use the high rank and high salary to recruit, do not require full blame, only seek to get talent.

古文：先是，王师击贼，获马多上献，至是尽止之，盖欲邀其奋击之功也。乙巳，王师败蕃寇于夏州。初，刘知俊诱沙陀振武贼帅周德威、泾原贼帅李继鸾合步骑五万大举，欲俯拾夏台，节度使李仁福兵力俱乏，以急来告。先是，供奉官张汉玫宣谕在壁，国礼使杜廷隐赐币于夏，及石堡寨，闻贼至，以防卒三百人驰入州。
现代文：十九日，朝廷军队在夏州打败蕃寇。当初，刘知俊诱使沙陀振武贼帅周德威、泾原贼帅李继鸾汇合步卒骑兵五万人大举入侵，想拿下夏台，夏台节度使李仁福兵力疲乏，前来告急。在这以前，供奉官张汉玫到夏州城下宣读谕旨，国礼使杜廷隐到夏州赐与钱财，走到石堡寨时，听到贼寇杀来，便领着警卫三百人奔入夏州城。
English: On the 19th, the imperial army defeated the Qian Qiao in Xiazhou. At first, Liu Zhijun induced Zhou Dewei, the commander of the Thieves of Shatou, and Li Jixuan, the commander of the Thieves of Shandong, to gather 50,000 cavalrymen and cavalrymen in a large-scale invasion to take down Xatai. The Xatai Festival made Li Renfu's troops tired and come to an emergency. Before this, Zhang Hanmei, a court official, read an edict to the city of Xazhou, and the national ceremony made Du Tingyin go to Xazhou to give money. When he went to the

古文：既而大兵围合，廷隐、汉玫与指挥使张初、李君用率州民防卒，与仁福部分固守，昼夜戮力逾月。
现代文：接着贼寇大军包围了夏州城，杜廷隐、张汉玫与指挥使张初、李君用率领州民和警卫士兵，与李仁福分兵固守，昼夜竭力奋战，历一个多月。
English: Next, the army of thieves and robbers encircled the city of Xiazhou. Du Tingyin, Zhang Hanmei and the commanding officers Zhang Chou and Li Jun took the lead in leading the citizens of the state and the soldiers of the guard, and with the soldiers of Li Renfu, they fought hard day and night for more than a month.

古文：及鄜、延援至，大军奋击，败之。
现代文：州、延州救兵来到，大军奋力攻击，打败蕃寇。
English: State and Yanzhou rescuers came, and the army fought hard to attack and defeat the bandits.

古文：河东、邠、岐贼分路逃遁，夏州围解。
现代文：河东、州、岐下贼寇分路溃逃，夏州解围。
English: The bandits in Hedong, Zhouzhou and Qizhimen broke out and fled, and the siege of Xiazhou was lifted.

