古文：桓公为司徒，甚得周众与东土之人，问于史伯曰： 王室多故，余惧及焉，其何所可以逃死？ 
现代文：郑桓公任周幽王的司徒，很得西周民众和周土以东百姓的心，他问史伯说： 周王室多灾多难，我担心落在我身上，到哪里才可以逃避一死呢？ 
English: Zheng Huan, who served as the tutor of King Zhou Yu, greatly touched the hearts of the people of West Zhou and the people of East Zhou. He asked Shi Bo, "The Zhou royal family has suffered many disasters and hardships. I am worried that it will fall on me. Where can I escape death?

古文：史伯对曰： 王室将卑，戎、狄必昌，不可偪也。
现代文：史伯回答说： 周王室将要衰败，戎、狄肯定会昌盛起来，不能靠近它们。
English: Shi Bo replied, "The Zhou royal family will decline, while the Rong and Di royal families will surely prosper. You cannot get close to them."

古文：当成周者，南有荆蛮、申、吕、应、邓、陈、蔡、随、唐；北有卫、燕、狄、鲜虞、潞、洛、泉、徐、蒲；西有虞、虢、晋、隗、霍、杨、魏、芮；东有齐、鲁、曹、宋、滕、薛、邹、莒；是非王之支子母弟甥舅也，则皆蛮、荆、戎、狄之人也。
现代文：在周都洛邑，南面有楚蛮、申、吕、应、邓、陈、蔡、随、唐九国；北面有卫、燕、狄、鲜虞、潞、洛、泉、徐、蒲九国；西面有虞、虢、晋、隗、霍、杨、魏、芮八国；东面有齐、鲁、曹、宋、滕、薛、邹、莒八国；这些国家若不是周王的同姓支族、母弟甥舅之类的亲戚，就是蛮、夷、戎、狄之类的少数民族。
English: In Luoyang, the capital of Zhou, there are nine provinces in the south: Chu, Man, Shen, Lu, Ying, Deng, Chen, Cai, Sui, and Tang; nine provinces in the north: Wei, Yan, Di, Xiangyu, Yao, Luo, Quan, Xu, and Pu; eight provinces in the west: Yu, Zou, Jin, Yao, Huo, Yang, Wei, and Yao; eight provinces in the east: Qi, Lu, Cao, Song, Teng, Xue, Yao, and Yao; if these countries are not relatives of Zhou with the same family name, such as mother, brother,

古文：非亲则顽，不可入也。
现代文：不是亲属就是凶顽之民，不能到那里去。
English: No one can go there, whether he is a relative or a rebel.

古文：其济、洛、河、颍之间乎！
现代文：该去的应是在济水、洛水、黄河、颍水之间那一带吧！
English: The place to go should be in the area between Jishui, Luoshui, the Yellow River and Surabaya!

古文：是其子男之国，虢、郐为大，虢叔恃势，郐仲恃险，是皆有骄侈怠慢之心，而加之以贪冒。
现代文：这一地带都是封为子、男爵位的国家，其中虢国和郐国最大，虢叔凭仗着地势，郐仲依恃着险要，他们都有骄傲奢侈疏忽怠慢的思想，又加上很贪婪。
English: This area is made up of countries with titles of nobility and baronetcy. Of these, Shandong and Fujian are the largest. Shandong relies on its geographical location, while Fujian clings to its strategic location. They are proud, extravagant, negligent, and greedy.

古文：君若以周难之故，寄拏与贿焉，不敢不许。
现代文：您如果因为周王室遭难的缘故，想把妻子、财物寄放到那里，他们不敢不答应。
English: If you want to send your wife and belongings there because of the suffering of the Zhou royal family, they dare not refuse.

古文：周乱而弊，是骄而贪，必将背君，君若以成周之众，奉辞伐罪，无不克矣。
现代文：周王室混乱而衰败，这些人骄侈贪婪，必然会背叛您，您如果率领洛邑的民众，奉天子之命去讨伐他们的罪恶，没有不成功的。
English: The Zhou royal family is in chaos and decay. These arrogant and greedy people will inevitably betray you. If you lead the people of Luoyang and fight their evil by the order of the Son of Heaven, you will not be unsuccessful.

古文：若克二邑，邬、弊、补、舟、依、鞣、历、华，君之土也。若前华后河，右洛左济，主芣、騩而食溱。洧，修典刑以守之，是可以少固。 
现代文：如果攻克了两国，那么邬、弊、补、舟、依、鞣、历、华八邑，就都是您的国土了，如果前面有华邑，后面有黄河，右面有洛水，左面有济水，主祭芣山和騩山，饮溱、淆两河的水，遵循旧法来守卫这片土地，那就可以稍稍稳固了。 
English: If you have conquered the two countries, then the Eight Provinces of Huai, Weixi, Zhi, Zhou, Ying, Zheng, Lian and Huahai will be your land. If you have the Eight Provinces of Huai in front, the Yellow River behind, the Luoshui on the right, the Jishui on the left, the main temple of Shaoshan and Shaoshan, the water of the two rivers for drinking and bathing, and follow the old law to guard this land, then you can be a little more stable.

古文：公曰： 南方不可乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那南方不可以吗？ 
English: Zheng Huan Gong said, "Isn't it allowed to go to the south?"

古文：对曰： 夫荆子熊严生子四人：伯霜、仲雪、叔熊、季。
现代文：史伯回答说： 楚王熊严生了伯霜、仲雪、叔熊、季四个儿子。
English: Shi Bo replied, "Chu Wang Xiong Yan gave birth to four sons, Bo Xim, Zhong Xue, Xiong Xiong, and Qi Yao.

古文：叔熊逃难于濮而蛮，季是立，薳氏将起之，祸又不克。
现代文：叔熊逃难到了濮地随从了蛮俗，季被立为国君，氏打算重新立叔熊为君，又遭祸难没有成功。
English: Uncle Xiong fled to Shandong and followed the barbaric customs. Ji was appointed as the ruler of the country. He planned to re-appoint Uncle Xiong as the ruler, but the disaster did not succeed.

古文：是天启之心也，又甚聪明和协，盖其先王。
现代文：这是上天开导季的心啊，他又聪明，能团结和好臣民的心，功德超过了他的先王。
English: This is the heart of Heaven's Enlightened Guide Ji Yan. He is also clever and can unite the hearts of good subjects. His merits surpass those of his predecessor.

古文：臣闻之，天之所启，十世不替。
现代文：我听说，上天所开导的，十代也不能废。
English: I've heard it said that ten generations of enlightened people can't be wrong.

古文：夫其子孙必光启土，不可偪也。
现代文：他的子孙必然大大开拓疆土，不可以靠近。
English: His descendants are bound to greatly expand the territory and must not be approached.

古文：且重，黎之后也，夫黎为高辛氏火正，以淳耀敦大，天明地德，光照四海，故命之曰 祝融 ，其功大矣。
现代文：而且他们是重、黎的后代，黎是高辛氏的火官，因为他纯洁博大，有如日月的光明、大地的美德，光辉普照四海，所以命名为 祝融 ，他的功劳算是大了。
English: Moreover, they are the descendants of Chong and Li, Li is the fire officer of the Gaoxin clan, because he is pure and broad, like the light of the sun and the moon, the virtue of the earth, the brilliance shines all over the sea, so named Zhu Rong, his merit is great.

古文： 夫成天地之大功者，其子孙未尝不章，虞、夏、商、周是也。
现代文： 凡是帮助天地完成大功的人，他的子孙后代没有不显耀的，虞、夏、商、周都是这样。
English: For anyone who helps heaven and earth accomplish great feats, there is no one among his descendants who does not shine. This is the case for Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou.

古文：虞幕能听协风，以成乐物生者也。
现代文：虞幕能倾听和风，育成万物很好地生长。
English: The curtain can listen to the wind and nurture all things to grow well.

古文：夏禹能单平水土，以品处庶类者也。
现代文：夏禹能治理水土，使万物生长各得其所。
English: Xia Yu can control the water and soil, so that all things can grow in their own way.

古文：商契能和合五教，以保于百姓者也。周弃能播殖百谷蔬，以衣食民人者也。
现代文：商契能协和五教，教养安抚百姓。周弃能播种百谷、蔬菜，供给百姓衣食。
English: Trade agreements can harmonize the five religions, educate and pacify the people. Zhou Xuan can sow grains and vegetables, and supply the people with food and clothing.

古文：其后皆为王公侯伯。
现代文：他们的后代都成为王公侯伯。
English: Their descendants all became princes and dukes.

古文：祝融亦能昭显天地之光明，以生柔嘉材者也，其后八姓于周未有侯伯。
现代文：祝融也能显扬天地的光明，培育滋润嘉美的五谷材木，他的后代八姓在周朝没有做诸侯之长的。
English: Zhu Rong could also show the light of heaven and earth and cultivate moist and beautiful grain timber. His descendants, eight surnames, did not become princes in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：佐制物于前代者，昆吾为夏伯矣，大彭、豕韦为商伯矣。
现代文：在前代辅助治理国事的，昆吾是夏朝的诸侯之长，大彭、豕韦是商朝的诸侯之长。
English: In the previous generation of auxiliary governance of state affairs, Kunwu was the head of the princes of the Xia Dynasty, and Dapeng and Wei were the heads of the princes of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：当周未有。
现代文：在周朝还没有。
English: Not in the morning on a weekday.

古文：已姓昆吾、苏、顾、温、董，董姓鬷夷、豢龙，则夏灭之矣。
现代文：己姓的昆吾、苏、顾、温、董，董姓的鬷夷、豢龙，在夏代就灭亡了。
English: Kunwu, Su, Gu, Wen and Dong, surnamed Kunwu, Su, Gu, Wen and Dong, surnamed Gongyi and Gonglong, surnamed Dong, all perished in the Xia Dynasty.

古文：彭姓彭祖、豕韦、诸稽，则商灭之矣。
现代文：彭姓的彭祖、豕韦、诸稽，在商代就灭亡了。
English: The surnames of Peng, including Pengzu, Pengwei and Zhuqi, all died out in the Shang Dynasty.

古文：秃姓舟人，则周灭之矣。
现代文：秃姓的舟人，在周代就灭亡了。
English: The boatman with the surname Bald died out in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：妘姓邬、郐、路、偪阳，曹姓邹、莒，皆为采卫，或在王室，或在夷、狄，莫之数也。
现代文：妘姓的邬、郐、路、偪阳，曹姓的邹、莒，都属采服、卫服的边远地区，有的在王室附近，有的在夷、狄境内，统计不清楚。
English: The surnames Zou (), Zou (), Lu (路) and Zouyang (阳), and the surnames Cao (曹) Zou () and Zou () all belong to the outlying areas of military uniforms and uniforms, some near the royal family, some in the territory of Yi and Di, and the statistics are unclear.

古文：而又无令闻，必不兴矣。
现代文：而他们又没有美名显扬，肯定不能兴起了。
English: And they don't have a big name, so they certainly can't rise.

古文：斟姓无后。
现代文：斟姓没有后嗣。
English: Kazuchika has no heirs.

古文：融之兴者，其在芈姓乎？
现代文：祝融的后代能够兴起的，恐怕是在芈姓吧？
English: The descendants of Zhu Rong can arise, I am afraid it is in the family name?

古文：芈姓夔越不足命也。
现代文：芈姓的夔越不足以受命。
English: It is not enough for a person with the surname of Xing to receive an order.

古文：蛮芈蛮矣，唯荆实有昭德，若周衰，其必兴矣。
现代文：处在蛮地的芈姓已经蛮化了，只有楚国确实有明德，如果周朝衰亡，楚国必然会兴盛起来。
English: The barbaric Zhou Dynasty had already become barbaric, and only the State of Chu really had enlightened morality. If the Zhou Dynasty fell, the State of Chu would inevitably flourish.

古文：姜、嬴、荆芈，实与诸姬代相于也。
现代文：姜姓、嬴姓和楚国的芈姓，他们实与姬姓交相更替干犯。
English: The surnames of Jiang, Zou and Zou of the State of Chu, they are actually interchanged with the surnames of Hime.

古文：姜，伯夷之后也，嬴，伯翳之后也。
现代文：姜姓是伯夷的后代，嬴姓是伯益的后代。
English: The surname Jiang is a descendant of Bo Yi, and the surname Zou is a descendant of Bo Yi.

古文：伯夷能礼于神以佐尧者也，伯翳能议百物以佐舜者也。
现代文：伯夷能礼敬神灵来辅佐尧，伯益能使百物各得其宜来辅佐舜。
English: Bo Yi can worship the gods and spirits to assist him, and Bo Yi can make all things suitable to assist him.

古文：其后皆不失祀而未有兴者，周衰其将至矣。 
现代文：他们的后代都没有丢弃祭祀，却任然没有兴盛的，周朝即将衰亡了。 
English: Their descendants did not abandon the sacrificial rites, but they still did not prosper, and the Zhou Dynasty was about to decline.

古文：公曰： 谢西之九州，何如？ 
现代文：桓公说： 谢国西面的九州，怎么样？ 
English: Kan said, "How about Kyushu, west of Xie Guo?"

古文：对曰： 其民沓贪而忍，不可因也。
现代文：史伯回答说： 那里的百姓都贪婪且残忍，不能接近他们。
English: He replied, "The people there are greedy and cruel. You can't get close to them."

古文：唯谢、郏之间，其冢君侈骄，其民怠沓其君，而未必周德；若更君而周训之，是易取也，且可长用也。 
现代文：只有谢国和郏地之间的国家，那里的国君奢侈骄横，百姓怠慢他们的君王，还没有忠信的品德；如果换掉国君而用忠信来教导他们，那是容易获取的，而且可以长久住下去。 
English: Only the countries between Xie Guo and Handan, where the kings are extravagant and arrogant, and the people neglect their kings, do not have the character of loyalty; if you replace the king and teach them with loyalty, it is easy to obtain and can live for a long time.

古文：公曰： 周其弊乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 周朝将会衰败吗？ 
English: Huan Gong said: Will the Zhou Dynasty decline?

古文：对曰： 殆于必弊者也。
现代文：史伯回答说： 差不多一定要衰败了。
English: "It's almost certainly going to fail," Mr. Spoehr said.

古文：《泰誓》曰： 民之所欲，天必从之。 
现代文：《尚书·泰誓》上说： 老百姓所向往的，上天必定会遵从。 
English: "Shangshu·Taizhong" said: What the common people yearn for, heaven will surely obey.

古文：今王弃高明昭显，而好谗慝暗昧；恶角犀丰盈，而近顽童穷固。
现代文：现在周幽王抛弃光明正大有德行的人，喜欢挑拨是非、奸邪阴险的人，讨厌贤明政治的人，亲近愚顽鄙陋的人。
English: Now, Zhou Youwang abandons those who are righteous and virtuous, likes those who stir up trouble, those who are treacherous and insidious, those who hate wise politics, and is close to those who are stupid and despicable.

古文：去和而取同。夫和实生物，同则不继。
现代文：排斥与自己意见不一致的正确主张，采纳与自己一直的错误建议。其实和谐才能生成万物，同一就无法发展。
English: They reject the correct opinions that do not agree with their own opinions, and adopt the wrong suggestions that have always been with themselves. In fact, harmony can produce all things, and the same cannot be developed.

古文：以他平他谓之和，故能丰长而物归之；若以同裨同，尽乃弃矣。
现代文：把不同的东西加以协调平衡叫做和谐，所以能丰富发展而使万物归于统一；如果把相同的东西相加，用尽之后就完了。
English: The coordination and balance of different things is called harmony, so it can enrich development and make all things unified; if you add the same things, it will be finished after exhaustion.

古文：故先王以土与金木水火杂，以成百物，是以和五味以调口，刚四支以卫体，和六律以聪耳，正七体以役心，平八索以成人，建九纪以立纯德，合十数以训百体。
现代文：所以先王把土和金、木、水火相配合，而生成万物。因此调配五种滋味以适合人的口味，强健四肢来保卫身体，调和六种音律使它动听悦耳，端正七窍来为心服务，协调身体的八个部分使人完整，设置九脏以树立纯正的德行，合成十种等级来训导百官。
English: Therefore, the first king combined earth with gold, wood, water and fire to create all things. Therefore, he mixed five tastes to suit people's tastes, strengthened limbs to protect the body, harmonized six rhythms to make it pleasing to the ear, perfected seven kinks to serve the heart, coordinated eight parts of the body to make people complete, set up nine bowels to establish pure virtues, and synthesized ten grades to instruct a hundred officials.

古文：出千品，具万方，计亿事，材兆物，收经入，行姟极。
现代文：于是产生了千种品位，具备了上万方法，计算成亿的事物，经营万亿的财物，取得万兆的收入，采取无数的行动。
English: As a result, thousands of grades have been produced, tens of thousands of methods have been developed, billions of things have been calculated, trillions of assets have been managed, trillions of revenue has been obtained, and countless actions have been taken.

古文：故王者居九畡之田，收经入以食兆民，周训而能用之，和乐如一。
现代文：所以君王拥有九州辽阔的土地，取得收入来供养万民，用忠信来教化和使用他们，使他们协和安乐如一家人。
English: Therefore, the monarch owns the vast land of Kyushu, obtains income to provide for the people, educates and uses them with loyalty, and makes them harmonious and happy as a family.

古文：夫如是，和之至也。
现代文：这样的话，就是和谐的顶点了。
English: In this case, it is the culmination of harmony.

古文：于是乎先王聘后于异姓，求财于有方，择臣取谏工而讲以多物，务和同也。
现代文：于是先王从异姓的家族中聘娶王后，向四方各地求取财货，选择敢于直谏的人来做官吏，处理众多的事情，努力做到和谐而不是同一。
English: As a result, the former king hired and married a queen from a family with a different surname, solicited wealth and goods from all over the country, selected people who dared to be straightforward to be officials, dealt with many things, and strived to achieve harmony rather than uniformity.

古文：声一无听，物一无文，味一无果，物一不讲。
现代文：只是一种声音就没有听头，只是一种颜色就没有文采，只是一种味道就不成其为美味，只是一种事物就无法进行衡量比较。
English: Just a sound is not listened to, just a color is not literary, just a taste is not delicious, just a thing can not be measured and compared.

古文：王将弃是类也而与同，天夺之明，欲无弊，得乎？
现代文：周幽王却要抛弃这种和谐的法则，而专门喜欢同一。上天夺取了他的聪明，要想不衰败，可能吗？
English: Zhou Yu Wang, however, wants to discard this law of harmony and only likes the same. Heaven has seized his wisdom. Is it possible not to decline?

古文： 夫虢石父谗谄巧从之人也，而立以为卿士，与同也；弃聘后而立内妾，好穷固也；侏儒戚施，实御在侧，近顽童也；周法不昭，而妇言是行，用谗慝也；不建立卿士，而妖试幸措，行暗昧也。
现代文： 虢石父是个挑拨离间、巴结奉承、巧于媚从的人，幽王却立他为卿士，这是专门喜欢同一；抛弃了聘娶的王后而立内妾褒姒，是喜欢鄙陋无识的人；把侏儒、驼背置于身边取乐，这是亲近愚顽昏暗的人；使周朝的法制不明，却听信女人的话行事，这是任用挑拨是非、奸邪的人；不任用卿士，却宠信任用佞幸的人，是行为暗昧。
English: Zou Shi's father was a man who sowed discord, fawned and flattered, and was skilled at flattery. However, the king appointed him as a noble, which was a special liking for the same; he abandoned the queen he had hired and married, and appointed his concubine Bao Zi, which was a person who liked meanness and ignorance; he placed dwarfs and hunchbacks around him for fun, which was a person who was close to stupidity and darkness; he made the legal system of the Zhou Dynasty unclear, but he listened to women's words and acted according to them, which was a person who was appointed to stir up trouble and

古文：是物也，不可以久。
现代文：这些做法，都是不长久的。
English: These practices are short-lived.

古文：且宣王之时有童谣，曰： 檿弧箕服，实亡周国。 
现代文：而且周宣王时有一首童谣说： 山桑木弓，箕草箭袋，要灭亡周朝。 
English: Moreover, there was a nursery rhyme at the time of King Zhou Xuan that said: "The bow made of mountain mulberry wood and the quiver made of rushes want to destroy the Zhou Dynasty."

古文：于是宣王闻之，有夫妇鬻是器者，王使执而戮之。
现代文：那时宣王听了后，有一对夫妇在卖这种器物，就派人将他们抓来杀掉。
English: At that time, Xuan Wang heard that there was a couple selling such goods, and sent someone to catch and kill them.

古文：府之小妾生女而非王子也，惧而弃之。
现代文：王府里有小妾生了个女孩而不是周王的孩子，她因为害怕而抛弃了了女婴。
English: There was a concubine in the royal palace who gave birth to a girl instead of Zhou Wang's child. She abandoned the baby girl out of fear.

古文：此人也，收以奔褒。
现代文：那对夫妇捡到了女婴，逃亡到了褒国。
English: The couple picked up the baby girl and fled to Bao Province.

古文：天之命此久矣，其又何可为乎？
现代文：上天使这件事出现已经很久了，又怎么能够改变它呢？
English: It's been a long time since the angel appeared, so how can we change it?

古文：《训语》有之曰： 夏之衰也，褒人之神化为二龙，以同于王庭，而言曰： 余，褒之二君也。 
现代文：《周书·训语》上说： 夏朝衰亡的时候，褒国的神变成两条龙，聚居于王庭，说道： 我们是褒国的二位君王。 
English: "Zhoushu·xueyuan" said: When the Xia Dynasty fell, the gods of Bao Guo became two dragons and gathered in the royal court, saying: We are the two kings of Bao Guo.

古文：夏后卜杀之与去之与止之，莫吉。
现代文：夏王占卜问是杀掉，还是放走或是留下它们，都不吉利。
English: Xia Wang divination asked whether to kill them, or to let them go, or to keep them, all of which were unlucky.

古文：卜请其漦而藏之，吉。
现代文：占卜请把龙的唾液贮藏起来，结果吉利。
English: Please store the dragon's saliva for divination. The result is auspicious.

古文：乃布币焉而策告之，龙亡而漦在，椟而藏之，传郊之。 
现代文：于是就陈列玉帛，用简策书写告诉龙，龙跑了而唾液还在，就把它用柜子贮藏起来，在郊外祭祀它。 
English: So they displayed the jade cocoon and told the dragon in shorthand that the dragon had run away but the saliva was still there. They stored it in a cupboard and worshipped it in the suburbs.

古文：及殷、周，莫之发也。
现代文：到了商代、周代，都没有打开过。
English: It was not opened until the Shang and Zhou dynasties.

古文：及厉王之末，发而观之，漦流于庭，不可除也。
现代文：到周厉王末年，打开来看，唾液流到了庭前，清除不掉。
English: By the end of Zhou Li Wang's life, when opened, the saliva flowed to the front of the court and could not be removed.

古文：王使妇人不帏而譟之，化为玄鼋，以入于王府。
现代文：周王叫妇人不穿下衣欢叫呼喊，唾液变成了一只黑鼋，进入了王府。
English: Zhou Wang told the woman not to wear underwear and shouted with joy. The saliva turned into a black toad and entered the royal palace.

古文：府之童妾未既齓而遭之，既笄而孕，当宣王时而生。
现代文：王府里有一个童妾还未换牙，遇上了它，等她十五岁的时候就怀了孕，在宣王时生下了婴儿。
English: There was a concubine in the king's palace who had not yet changed her teeth. When she met him, she became pregnant at the age of fifteen and gave birth to a baby when he was proclaimed king.

古文：不夫而育，故惧而弃之。
现代文：没有丈夫却生了孩子，所以害怕而抛弃了婴儿。
English: She had a baby without a husband, so she was afraid and abandoned the baby.

古文：为弧服者方戮在路，夫妇哀其夜号也，而取之以逸，逃于褒。
现代文：卖弓和箭袋的一对夫妇正在路上受到迫杀，夫妇可怜那女婴夜里啼哭，就捡了她躲藏起来，逃亡到了褒国。
English: A couple selling bows and arrowheads were killed on the road. The couple took pity on the baby girl, who was crying in the night. They picked her up, hid her and fled to Bao Province.

古文：褒人褒姁有狱，而以为入于王，王遂置之，而嬖是女也，使至于为后而生伯服。
现代文：褒国国君褒的犯了罪，就把褒姒献给了周王，周王便赦免了褒姁，而十分宠爱褒姒，立她为王后生了伯服。
English: When Bo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo

古文：天之生此久矣，其为毒也大矣，将使候淫德而加之焉。
现代文：上天降生这个祸害已经很久了，它的毒害够大了，将要趁周王失德而留下这个女人。
English: It's been a long time since heaven gave birth to this scourge, and it's poisonous enough that it's going to take advantage of Zhou Wang's immorality to keep this woman.

古文：毒之酋腊者，其杀也滋速。
现代文：毒性厉害的醇酒，它害人也越快。
English: The more poisonous liquor is, the faster it will harm a person.

古文：申、缯、西戎方强，王室方骚，将以纵欲，不亦难乎？
现代文：申国、缯国和西戎正强盛，周王室正扰乱不安，幽王还要放纵私欲，要不衰败不是很难吗？
English: Sheng Guo, Sheng Guo and Xi Rong are flourishing, the Zhou royal family is disturbing and unsettling, and Yu Wang still wants to indulge his selfish desires. Isn't it difficult not to decline?

古文：王欲杀太子以成伯服，必求之申，申人弗畀，必伐之。
现代文：幽王想要杀掉太子宜臼，改立伯服，肯定要求申国交出太子，申国不交，幽王一定会去讨伐申国。
English: If Yu Wang wants to kill Prince Yisu and change the imperial robe, he will definitely ask Shen Guo to hand over the prince. If Shen Guo does not hand over the prince, Yu Wang will definitely go to fight Shen Guo.

古文：若伐申，而缯与西戎会以伐周，周不守矣！
现代文：如果讨伐申国，缯国与西戎就会联合起来攻打周幽王，周王朝就保不往了。
English: If they were to invade Shensi, Min and Xiong would unite to attack Zhou Yu, and the Zhou Dynasty would not be able to survive.

古文：缯与西戎方将德申，申、吕方强，其隩爱太子亦必可知也，王师若在，其救之亦必然矣。
现代文：缯国与西戎正要报答申国，申国、吕国正强盛，它们深爱太子也是可以预料的。幽王的军队如果攻打申国，它们去救授申国也是必然的。
English: Shan State and Xi Rong were just about to repay Sheng State, and Sheng State and Lv State were flourishing. It was to be expected that they loved the prince deeply. If Yu Wang's army attacked Sheng State, it was inevitable that they would go to rescue Sheng State.

古文：王心怒矣，虢公从矣，凡周存亡，不三稔矣！
现代文：幽王心中愤怒了，虢公顺从了，周朝的存亡，不出三年了。
English: Yu Wang was enraged in his heart, Shao Gong obeyed, and the Zhou Dynasty survived for less than three years.

古文：君若欲避其难，其速规所矣，时至而求用，恐无及也！ 
现代文：您如果想逃避这场灾难，要赶快考虑好逃亡的地方，到灾难来了才想办法，恐怕就来不及了！ 
English: If you want to escape this disaster, you must quickly think about a good place to escape. When the disaster comes, you will have to find a way, and I'm afraid it will be too late!

古文：公曰： 若周衰，诸姬其孰兴？ 
现代文：桓公说： 如果周朝衰败的话，各个姬姓的诸侯中哪个会兴盛？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "If the Zhou Dynasty were to fall, which of the various princes with the surname of Hime would prosper?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻之，武实昭文之功，文之祚尽，武其嗣乎！
现代文：史伯回答说： 我听说，周武王确实发扬了周文王的功德，文王的福祚完了，应该是武王继承吧！
English: Shi Bo replied: I have heard that King Zhou Wu has indeed carried forward the merits of King Zhou Wen. King Wen's good fortune is over, so King Wu should succeed him.

古文：武王之子，应、韩不在，其在晋乎！
现代文：武王的儿子，应侯和韩侯已经不在了，恐怕是晋国吧！
English: King Wu's sons, Ying Hou and Han Hou, are no longer with us. I'm afraid it's Jin Guowu!

古文：距险而邻于小，若加之以德，可以大启。 
现代文：晋国距守的地势险要，和它接邻都是小国，如果加上修行德政，可以大大开拓疆土。 
English: The distance between Jin and its neighbors is very short, and the neighbors are all small countries. If you add the practice of virtue, you can greatly expand the territory.

古文：公曰： 姜、嬴其孰兴？ 
现代文：桓公说： 姜姓和嬴姓诸侯中哪个会兴盛？ 
English: King Kan said: Which of the lords with the surnames of Jiang and Jie will prosper?

古文：对曰： 夫国大而有德者近兴，秦仲、齐侯，姜、嬴之隽也，且大，其将兴乎？ 
现代文：史伯回答说： 国土广大而且有德的国家差不多都能兴盛，秦仲和齐侯，是姜姓、嬴姓中的俊杰，又是大国，恐怕他们该兴盛吧？ 
English: Shi Bo replied, "Countries with a vast territory and virtue can almost all prosper. Qin Zhong and Qi Hou, surnamed Jiang and Junjie, surnamed Zou, are both great powers. I'm afraid they should prosper, right?

古文：公说，乃东寄帑与贿，虢、郐受之，十邑皆有寄地。
现代文：桓公听了很高兴，于是就向东寄放妻儿和财货，虢国、郐国接受了，十邑都有桓公寄放东西的地方。
English: Huan Gong was very pleased to hear this, so he sent his wife and children and goods to the east, which was accepted by the two countries. There were places in all ten counties for Huan Gong to send things.

