古文：仲尼燕居，子张、子贡、言游侍，纵言至于礼。
现代文：孔子坐着休息，子张、子贡、子游三人在一旁侍立，闲谈中谈到了礼。
English: Confucius sat down to rest, and three people, Zizhang, Zigong, and Ziyu, stood by and chatted about etiquette.

古文：子曰： 居！女三人者，吾语女礼，使女以礼周流无不遍也。 
现代文：孔子说： 你们三个人都坐下，我来跟你们说说礼，以便你们能够到处运用，无所不至。 
English: Confucius said, "Sit down, all three of you, and I will speak to you, so that you can use it everywhere and do everything."

古文：子贡越席而对曰： 敢问何如？ 
现代文：子责马上离开坐席应答道： 请问老师要讲的礼是怎样的呢？ 
English: Immediately leaving his seat, Zibo replied, "May I ask what kind of salute the teacher is going to give?

古文：子曰： 敬而不中礼，谓之野；恭而不中礼，谓之给；勇而不中礼，谓之逆。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 恭敬但却不合乎礼的要求，那叫粗野；虽然外表恭顺但却不合乎礼的要求，那叫花言巧语；虽然勇敢但却不合乎礼的要求，那叫乱来。 
English: Confucius replied: "If a request is respectful but impolite, it is called coarse; if a request is polite but impolite, it is called flowery; if a request is brave but impolite, it is called chaotic.

古文：子曰： 给夺慈仁。 
现代文：孔子又补充说道： 花言巧语只是给人以仁慈的假象。 
English: Confucius also said: Flattery confuses compassion and benevolence.

古文：子曰： 师，尔过；而商也不及。
现代文：孔子又说： 子张，你做事往往过火，而子夏则往往做得不够。
English: Confucius also said: Zizhang, you often overdo things, while Zixia often does not do enough.

古文：子产犹众人之母也，能食之不能教也。 
现代文：子产好像是百姓的慈母，他能让百姓吃饱，却不知怎么教育他们。 
English: He seems to be the people's loving mother. He can feed the people, but he doesn't know how to educate them.

古文：子贡越席而对曰： 敢问将何以为此中者也？ 子曰： 礼乎礼！
现代文：子贡又马上离开坐席回答说： 怎样才能做到恰到好处呢？ 孔子说： 只有礼呀！
English: Zigong immediately left the table and replied, "How can I do it just right?" Confucius said, "Only courtesy!"

古文：夫礼所以制中也。 
现代文：礼就是用来掌握火候使人做到恰到好处的。 
English: Etiquette is used to control the heat and make people do the right thing.

古文：子贡退，言游进曰： 敢问礼也者，领恶而全好者与？ 子曰： 然。 
现代文：子贡退下来，子游又上前问道： 请问礼的作用是不是就在于治理丑恶而保全美德吗？ 孔子说： 是的。 
English: Zigong stepped back, and Ziyou stepped forward again and asked, "Isn't the function of etiquette just to control evil and preserve virtue?" Confucius said, "Yes."

古文： 然则何如？ 
现代文：子游又接着问： 究竟怎样治理丑恶和保全美德呢？ 
English: Zoyu went on to ask: How can we control the ugliness and preserve virtue?

古文：子曰： 郊社之义，所以仁鬼神也；尝禘之礼，所以仁昭穆也；馈奠之礼，所以仁死丧也；射乡之礼，所以仁乡党也；食飨之礼，所以仁宾客也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 郊天祭地之礼，就是对鬼神表示仁爱；秋尝夏谛之礼，就在于对祖先表示仁爱；馈食祭奠之礼，就是对死者表示仁爱；乡射、乡饮酒之礼，就是对同乡邻里表示仁爱；招待宾客的食飨之礼，就在于对宾客表示仁爱。 
English: Confucius replied, "The gift of the suburban heaven festival is to show benevolence to the ghosts and gods; the gift of the autumn festival is to show benevolence to the ancestors; the gift of the food festival is to show benevolence to the dead; the gift of the town shooting and the town drinking is to show benevolence to the neighbors; the gift of the feast of the guests is to show benevolence to the guests.

古文：子曰： 明乎郊社之义、尝禘之礼，治国其如指诸掌而已乎！
现代文：孔子说: 如能明白郊天祭地的道理，懂得秋尝夏禘的意义，那么，对于治理国家的事就了如指掌了。
English: Confucius said, "If you can understand the principles of the Suburban Heaven Festival and understand the significance of the Autumn Festival and the Summer Festival, then you will know everything about governing the country.

古文：是故，以之居处有礼，故长幼辨也。以之闺门之内有礼，故三族和也。以之朝廷有礼，故官爵序也。以之田猎有礼，故戎事闲也。以之军旅有礼，故武功成也。
现代文：所以，日常起居有了礼，长幼就有了分辨；家庭内部有了礼，一家三代就能和睦；朝廷上有了礼，官职和爵位就有了秩序；田猎时有了礼，军事演习就能熟练；军队里有了礼，就能建立战功。
English: Therefore, if there is etiquette in daily life, there will be a distinction between elders and children; if there is etiquette within the family, the three generations of a family can be harmonious; if there is etiquette in the imperial court, there will be order in official posts and titles; if there is etiquette when hunting in the fields, there will be proficiency in military exercises; if there is etiquette in the army, there will be success in war.

古文：是故，宫室得其度，量鼎得其象，味得其时，乐得其节，车得其式，鬼神得其飨，丧纪得其哀，辨说得其党，官得其体，政事得其施；加于身而错于前，凡众之动得其宜。 
现代文：于是宫室都符合尺度，量具和祭器都符合法象，五味调和合于时节，音乐合于节拍，车辆合乎规范，鬼神各自得到享祀，丧葬的安排能表达适当的悲哀，辩论谈话有伦有类，百官各掌其职责，政事也能顺利施行。将礼运用于自身的行动和眼前一切事情，一切就都能做得恰到好处了。 
English: As a result, the palace rooms are all in accordance with the scale, the measuring instruments and the sacrificial vessels are all in accordance with the law, the five-part harmony is in accordance with the season, the music is in accordance with the rhythm, the vehicles are in accordance with the standard, the ghosts and gods are worshipped separately, the funeral arrangements can express the appropriate sorrow, the debate and conversation are consistent, the officials are in charge of their duties, and the government affairs can be implemented smoothly. Apply the ritual to your own actions and everything in front of you, and everything can be done just right.

古文：子曰： 礼者何也？
现代文：孔子说: 礼是什么呢？
English: Confucius said, "What is courtesy?

古文：即事之治也。
现代文：礼就是治理事情的方法。
English: Courtesy is the way to handle things.

古文：君子有其事，必有其治。
现代文：君子办事，一定要懂得治理的方法。
English: Whatever affairs a gentleman has, there must be a corresponding means of governance.

古文：治国而无礼，譬犹瞽之无相与？
现代文：治理国家而没有礼，就好像盲人没人扶助，茫然失去了方向，不知往哪儿走。
English: Governing the country without proper etiquette is like a blind man who has no one to help him, who has lost his way and doesn't know where to go.

古文：伥伥其何之？
现代文：又好比黑夜在暗室里摸索，没有蜡烛能看见什么呢？
English: It's like groping in a dark room at night. What can you see without a candle?

古文：譬如终夜有求于幽室之中，非烛何见？
现代文：如果没有礼，手脚就不知往哪儿放，耳目也不知怎么使用，进退揖让都没有规矩。
English: If there is no courtesy, they do not know where to put their hands and feet, they do not know how to use their eyes and ears, and there are no rules for entering or leaving.

古文：若无礼则手足无所错，耳目无所加，进退揖让无所制。是故，以之居处，长幼失其别；闺门，三族失其和；朝廷，官爵失其序；田猎，戎事失其策；军旅，武功失其制；宫室，失其度；量鼎，失其象；味，失其时；乐，失其节；车，失其式；鬼神，失其飨；丧纪，失其哀；辩说，失其党；官，失其体；政事，失其施；加于身而错于前，凡众之动，失其宜。
现代文：这样一来，日常起居就分不出长幼上下，家庭内部就会三代不和，朝廷之上官爵也乱了套，田猎练武失去了指挥，军队打仗失去了控制，宫室没有尺度，量具和祭器不符合法度，五味不能按时节调和，奏乐也不合节拍，车辆也不合规范，鬼神没有供品，服丧不能表达悲哀，谈话不伦不类，百官失职，政事不行，自身的举动和眼前的事情，一切都不适宜。
English: In this way, the daily living cannot be separated into the eldest and the youngest, there will be three generations of discord within the family, the upper officials and nobles of the imperial court are also out of order, the field hunting and martial arts have lost their command, the army has lost control of the war, the palace has no scale, the measuring instruments and the sacrificial instruments do not comply with the law, the five tastes cannot be reconciled according to the time, the music is not in tune, the vehicles are not up to standard, the ghosts and gods have no offerings, the mourning cannot express sadness, the conversation is not consistent, the officials are derelict in their duties, the government affairs are not

古文：如此，则无以祖洽于众也。 子曰： 慎听之！
现代文：像这样就没有办法领导民众协调一致地行动了。 孔子说： 你们三个人仔细听着！
English: As such, there is no way to lead the people to act in a coordinated manner.Confucius said, "Listen carefully, the three of you!

古文：女三人者，吾语女：礼犹有九焉，大飨有四焉。
现代文：我告诉你们，除了上面讲的礼以外，礼还有九个节目，而大飨之礼占了其中的四个。
English: Let me tell you that in addition to the above-mentioned feasts, there are nine feasts, and the Feast of Tabernacles accounts for four of them.

古文：茍知此矣，虽在畎亩之中事之，圣人已。
现代文：如果知道这些，即令是个种地的农夫，依礼而行，也可以说是圣人了。
English: If you know these, even if you are a farmer who cultivates the land and follows the rituals, you can be said to be a saint.

古文：两君相见，揖让而入门，入门而县兴；揖让而升堂，升堂而乐阕。
现代文：两国国君相见，宾主互相揖让而先后进入大门。进入大门以后，马上钟鼓齐鸣。宾主互相揖让而升堂，升堂以后，一献礼毕，钟鼓之声停止。
English: The sovereigns of the two countries met, and the guests entered the gate one after the other. After entering the gate, the bells and drums immediately rang in unison. The guests ascended the hall, and after ascending the hall, the bells and drums stopped once the ceremony was over.

古文：下管《象》、《武》，《夏》、《龠》序兴。
现代文：·这时堂下的管乐奏起《象》这首乐曲，而《大武》之舞、《大夏》之舞，一个接着一个地相继跳起。
English: At this time, the pipe band played the "Elephant" tune, and the "Great Warrior" dance and the "Great Summer" dance began one after another.

古文：陈其荐俎，序其礼乐，备其百官。
现代文：于是陈列美味佳肴，安排应有的礼仪和乐曲，执事人等一个不缺。
English: Peas and livestock were set up, ceremonial music was arranged in order, and all kinds of deacons were prepared.

古文：如此，而后君子知仁焉。
现代文：这样做了以后，客人就不难看出主人待客的深情厚意了。
English: After doing this, it is not difficult for the guests to see the owner's hospitality.

古文：行中规，还中矩，和鸾中采齐，客出以雍，彻以振羽。
现代文：此外，走路笔直，合乎曲尺的要求；旋转的弧度，合乎圆规的要求；车上的铃声，合着《采齐》乐曲的节奏；客人出门时，奏起《雍》这首送别曲；撤席之时，奏起《振羽》这首结束曲。
English: In addition, the straightness of the walk meets the requirements of the musical scale; the curvature of the rotation of the rim meets the requirements of the circular gauge; the bell on the car, in accordance with the rhythm of the "Zheqi" music; when the guests leave the house, the "Yong" farewell song is played; when the guests leave, the "Flat Wings" ending song is played.

古文：是故，君子无物而不在礼矣。
现代文：所以，君子做事，没有一件不合乎礼的要求。
English: Therefore, for a gentleman to do things, there is no requirement that is not proper.

古文：入门而金作，示情也。
现代文：客人刚一进门就钟鼓齐鸣，这是表示欢迎之情。
English: Guests are greeted by the chiming of bells and drums as soon as they enter the building.

古文：升歌《清庙》，示德也。下而管《象》，示事也。
现代文：歌工升堂合唱《清庙》之诗，这是表现文王的崇高德行；管乐队在堂下奏起《象》这首乐曲，这是表现武王的伟大功业。
English: The chorus of the "Qing Temple" poem, which is the expression of the lofty virtue of King Wen, is sung by the singers ascending the hall; the pipe band plays the "Elephant" music under the hall, which is the expression of the great achievements of King Wu.

古文：是故古之君子，不必亲相与言也，以礼乐相示而已。 子曰： 礼也者，理也；乐也者，节也。
现代文：所以古代的君子要互相沟通感情，根本就用不着说话，只要通过行礼奏乐就可以表达意思了。 孔子说： 所谓礼，就是道理；所谓乐，就是节制。
English: Therefore, the ancient gentlemen did not need to speak at all to communicate their feelings to each other, as long as they could express their meaning by performing rites and music.Confucius said: The so-called rite is reason; the so-called music is restraint.

古文：君子无理不动，无节不作。
现代文：没有道理的事君子不做，没有节制的事君子不做。
English: A gentleman does not do what is unreasonable, and a gentleman does not do what is immoderate.

古文：不能《诗》，于礼缪；不能乐，于礼素；薄于德，于礼虚。 
现代文：如果不能赋《诗》言志，在礼节上就会出现差错；能行礼而不能用乐来配合，礼就显得单调呆板。
English: If you can't imbue "Poetry" with the spirit of speech, there will be mistakes in etiquette; if you can perform a salute but can't match it with music, the salute will appear monotonous and dull.

古文：子曰： 制度在礼，文为在礼，行之，其在人乎！ 
现代文：如果道德浅薄，即便行礼也只是一个空架子。 孔子又说： 各种制度是由礼来规定的，各种文饰行为也是由礼来规定的，但要实行起来，却是非人不可呀！ 
English: If the morality is shallow, even the propriety is just an empty shell. Confucius also said: All kinds of systems are determined by propriety, and all kinds of ornamental behaviors are also determined by propriety, but if they are to be implemented, they must be carried out by people!

古文：子贡越席而对曰： 敢问：夔其穷与？ 
现代文：子贡又离席发言说： 请问夔这个人是不是只懂得乐而对礼却一窍不通呀？ 
English: Zigong also left the table and said: Excuse me, does this person only know how to have fun, but knows nothing about etiquette?

古文：子曰： 古之人与？
现代文：孔子回答说： 你问的是古代的那个夔吗？
English: Confucius said, "Weren't you an ancient man?

古文：古之人也。达于礼而不达于乐，谓之素；达于乐而不达于礼，谓之偏。
现代文：须知古代的人是把精于礼而不精于乐的人叫做素，把精于乐而不精于礼的人叫做偏。
English: It should be noted that people in ancient times called those who were good at etiquette but not good at pleasure as su, and those who were good at pleasure but not good at etiquette as bi.

古文：夫夔，达于乐而不达于礼，是以传此名也，古之人也。 
现代文：夔这个人只不过是在乐的方面的造诣比在礼的方面的造诣高一些罢了，所以只传下来一个精通音乐的名声，须知那是根据古人的标准来说的。 
English: The man was only a little more accomplished in music than in etiquette, so that only a reputation for musical proficiency has come down to us, and that according to the standards of the ancients.

古文：子张问政，子曰： 师乎！前，吾语女乎？
现代文：子张问到政治的事。孔子说: 子张，你上前来，我对你说。
English: Zi Zhang asked about politics. Confucius said: Zi Zhang, come forward, I will speak to you.

古文：君子明于礼乐，举而错之而已。 
现代文：君子如果懂得了礼乐，只需把它放到政治上去运用就行了。 
English: If a gentleman understands ceremonial music, all he has to do is apply it to politics.

古文：子张复问。
现代文：子张又向孔子提问。
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius another question.

古文：子曰： 师，尔以为必铺几筵，升降酌献酬酢，然后谓之礼乎？
现代文：孔子说: 子张，你以为必须摆下案几，铺下筵席，上下走动，献酒进馔，举杯酬酢，这样才算是礼吗？
English: Confucius said, "Son of Zhang, do you think that it is necessary to set the table, lay the table, walk up and down, pour wine into the bowl, and raise a cup of vinegar as a reward?

古文：尔以为必行缀兆。兴羽龠，作钟鼓，然后谓之乐乎？
现代文：你以为必须排下队列，挥舞羽籥，敲钟鸣鼓，这样才叫做乐吗？
English: Do you think you have to queue up, wave feathers, ring bells and beat drums to have fun?

古文：言而履之，礼也。行而乐之，乐也。
现代文：其实，说的话能切实施行，这就是礼；行的事能使人感到快乐，这就是乐。
English: In fact, if what is said can be put into practice, that is worship; if what is done can make people feel happy, that is joy.

古文：君子力此二者以南面而立，夫是以天下太平也。
现代文：君子努力做到这两点，那么只要在天子的位置上南面而立，就能使天下太平。
English: If a gentleman strives to achieve these two points, then as long as he stands in the position of the son of heaven, he will be able to make the world peaceful.

古文：诸侯朝，万物服体，而百官莫敢不承事矣。礼之所兴，众之所治也；礼之所废，众之所乱也。
现代文：诸侯都来朝拜，万事都很得体，百官没有人敢不忠于职守的。 礼教兴起，百姓就会服从治理；如礼教毁坏，民众就要犯上作乱。
English: Princes and lords come to pay homage, everything is done in a proper manner, and no one in authority dares to be unfaithful to his duties. When etiquette arises, the people will obey the government; if etiquette is destroyed, the people will commit disorder.

古文：目巧之室，则有奥阼，席则有上下，车则有左右，行则有随，立则有序，古之义也。
现代文：从前只凭眼力测量建造的房屋，也都有堂奥和台阶之分，坐席则要分上下，乘车则要分左右，走路则要前后相随，站立也要讲究次序。这都是古代就有的道理。
English: In the past, houses that were built only by eye measurement also had a hall depth and steps. For sitting, it should be up and down, for riding, it should be around, for walking, it should be back and forth, and for standing, it should also pay attention to the order. These are all reasons from ancient times.

古文：室而无奥阼，则乱于堂室也。席而无上下，则乱于席上也。车而无左右，则乱于车也。行而无随，则乱于涂也。立而无序，则乱于位也。
现代文：如房屋不分堂奥和台阶，堂屋就要混乱；坐席不分上下，坐次就要混乱；乘车不分左右，车上就要混乱；走路不分前后，路上就要混乱；站立不分次序，位置就要混乱。
English: If the house does not distinguish between the back of the hall and the steps, the hall will be chaotic; the seats will not distinguish between the top and the bottom, the seating will be chaotic; the car will not distinguish between the left and the right, the car will be chaotic; walking will not distinguish between the front and the back, the road will be chaotic; standing will not distinguish between the order, the position will be chaotic.

古文：昔圣帝明王诸侯，辨贵贱、长幼、远近、男女、外内，莫敢相逾越，皆由此涂出也。 
现代文：从前圣明的帝王和诸侯，都要分辨贵贱、长幼、远近、男女、内外的界限，不得互相超越，都是根据这个道理来的。 
English: In the past, the holy emperors and princes had to distinguish between high and low, old and young, near and far, male and female, and inner and outer boundaries, and they were not allowed to surpass each other. All of this was based on this principle.

古文：三子者，既得闻此言也于夫子，昭然若发蒙矣。
现代文：三位弟子听了孔子这一席话，心中豁然开朗，好像瞎子重见光明。
English: The three disciples listened to this speech by Confucius, and their hearts suddenly brightened, as if the blind had seen the light again.

