古文：昔者先王量地以制邑，度地以居民，因三才以节其务，敬四序以成其业，观其谣俗而正其纪纲。
现代文：过去先王以丈量土地来建造城邑，根据水土来安置人民，顺应天、地、人三方面的条件来规划他们的工作，尊重四季的特点来成就他们的事业，了解歌谣风俗以便纠正他们的纲纪制度。
English: In the past, the forefathers measured the land to build towns, settled the people according to the soil and water, planned their work according to the three conditions of heaven, earth and man, respected the characteristics of the four seasons to achieve their cause, and understood the songs and customs in order to correct their system of discipline.

古文：勖农桑之本，通鱼盐之利，登良山而采符玉，泛瀛海而罩珠玑。
现代文：勤勉致力于农业、蚕桑之类的根本事务，疏通水产、食盐等商贸渠道，登上宝山开采符玉，泛舟大海捞取珠玑。
English: They diligently devoted themselves to fundamental affairs such as agriculture and silkworms, dredged up trade channels such as aquatic products and salt, climbed the treasure mountain to mine gems, and fished for pearl mussels by rafting.

古文：日中为市，总天下之隶，先诸布帛，继以货泉，贸迁有无，各得其所。
现代文：太阳当顶时设置集市，汇总天下各类物品，起初用布帛，后来用货币，互通有无，各得其所。
English: When the sun was at its zenith, bazaars were set up to bring together all kinds of goods from all over the world. At first, cloth was used, and later, money was used.

古文：《周礼》，正月始和，乃布教于象魏。
现代文：根据《周礼》，正月开始和暖，于是在城阙门楼上发布教令。
English: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the first month of the year began to warm, so the edict was issued on the castle gate.

古文：若乃一夫之士，十亩之宅，三日之徭，九均之赋，施阳礼以兴其让，命春社以勖其耕。
现代文：于是就有那些一个成年男子，十亩大小的宅院地，三天的徭役，各种贡物赋税等，通过施行乡射饮酒之类的礼仪来提倡谦让，举行春耕前祭祀土神的仪式来勉励农民耕种。
English: As a result, there are those adult men, ten-acre courtyard plots, three-day corvee service, various tributes and taxes, etc. to promote modesty by performing rituals such as township shooting and drinking, and holding a ceremony to worship the soil god before spring plowing to encourage farmers to cultivate.

古文：天之所贵者人也，明之所求者学也，治《经》入官，则君子之道焉。《诗》曰： 三之日于，四之日举趾。 
现代文：天所看重的是人，智慧所追求的是学习，研读经籍而获得官职，就是君子的做法。《诗经》说： 三之曰于耜，四之日举趾。 
English: Heaven attaches importance to people, wisdom pursues learning, and studying scriptures to obtain a government post is the practice of a gentleman. "Song of Songs" says: The third day is at noon, and the fourth day is at dusk.

古文：是以农官泽虞，各有攸次，父兄之习，不玩而成，十五从务，始胜衣服，乡无游手，邑不废时，所谓厥初生民，各从其事者也。
现代文：因此负责农业生产的官员和负责水产沼泽管理的官员，各有自己的岗位，父亲兄长常做的事情，不用钻研就会了，十五岁就能跟着做事，开始穿起成人的衣服，乡里之间没有游手赋闲的人，村邑裹家家不误农时，正是所谓厥初生民，各从其事的景象。
English: Therefore, the officials in charge of agricultural production and the officials in charge of aquatic swamp management each have their own posts. The things that fathers and brothers often do can be done without study. At the age of fifteen, they can follow the work and begin to wear adult clothes. There are no idlers in the countryside. When the villages are full of farmers, it is exactly the so-called "first-born people" who do their own things.

古文：是以太公通市井之货，以致齐国之强；鸱夷善发敛之居，以盛中陶之业。
现代文：因此太公使市井之间货物流通，从而导致齐国的强盛；鸱夷子皮范蠡善于掌握抛出和屯积的时机，所以使他在陶的家业昌盛。
English: As a result, goods circulated between cities and towns, which led to the prosperity of Qin. Fan Ziqi was good at mastering the timing of throwing and stockpiling, so his family business in pottery flourished.

古文：昔在金天，勤于民事，命春鳸以耕稼，召夏鳸以耘锄，秋鳸所以收敛，冬鳸于焉盖藏。
现代文：以往在金天氏少昊帝的时代，对百姓的事情勤勉努力，吩咐春天的乌儿出现时要耕地播种，夏天的鸟儿出现时要耘禾锄草，秋天的乌儿到来时要收割敛藏，当冬天的鸟儿到来时就封盖储藏。
English: In the past, in the era of Emperor Xiaohao of the Jintian clan, he made diligent efforts in the affairs of the people. He ordered that when the spring birds appeared, the cultivated land should be sown, the summer birds should be sown, the autumn birds should be harvested and stored, and when the winter birds arrived, they should be sealed and stored.

古文：《书》曰： 历象日月星辰，敬授民时。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 根据天象曰月星辰的运行变化，认真地告知人们时令的变迁。 
English: "Shangshu" said, "According to the changes in the movement of celestial objects, such as the moon and stars, we should conscientiously inform people of the seasonal changes.

古文：传曰： 禹稷躬稼而有天下。 
现代文：史书上说： 大禹、后稷亲自耕种而拥有了天下。 
English: The history books say: Dayu and Houyi personally cultivated and owned the whole country.

古文：若乃九土既敷，四民承范，东吴有齿角之饶，西蜀有丹沙之富，兗豫漆丝之廥，燕齐怪石之府，秦邠旄羽，迥带琅玕，荆郢桂林，旁通竹箭，江干橘柚，河外舟车，辽西旃罽之乡，葱右蒲梢之骏，殖物怪错，于何不有。
现代文：至于九州土地都已经在管辖之下，四方人民秉承轨范制度，束吴有大量的象牙犀牛角，西蜀有丰富的丹沙，兖州、豫州就像是油漆和生丝的仓房，燕地、齐地就像是珍异石料的府库，秦地、耶地盛产可以装饰旌旗的羽毛，此外还有像玉一样的美石，荆州、郢地有很多桂树林，另外盛产细竹子，长江两岸的橘子袖子，黄河以南出产的船和车，辽西是毛毯的故乡，葱岭以西有名为蒲梢的骏马，物产奇异错杂，在哪裹没有。
English: As for the lands of Kyushu, they have all been under the jurisdiction. The people of the four directions adhere to the model system. Sokou has a large number of ivory rhinoceros horns, Xishu has rich sands, Bozhou and Yuzhou are like warehouses of paint and raw silk, Yangtze and Qiji are like prefectures of rare stone materials, Qin and Yadi are rich in feathers that can decorate the banner, and there are also beautiful stones like jade. Jingzhou and Bozhou have many guava forests, and they are also rich in fine bamboo. Tangerine sleeves on both sides of the Yangtze River,

古文：若乃上法星象，下料无外，因天地之利，而总山海之饶，百亩之田，十一而税，九年躬稼，而有三年之蓄，可以长孺齿，可以养耆年。
现代文：至于对上依从星辰历象，对下料事不遇到例外，顺应天时地利的好处，而汇总山林湖海的物产，百亩大的田地，十成取一的税收，连续九年亲自耕种，从而有三年的积蓄，就可以抚养孩子，供养老人。
English: As for the alignment of the stars, there is no exception to the alignment of the material things, and it conforms to the benefits of the time and place, but the property of the mountains, forests, lakes and seas, the hundred-acre fields, the tax of one-tenth, and the personal cultivation for nine consecutive years, so that there are three years of savings, you can raise children and provide for the elderly.

古文：因乎人民，用之邦国，宫室有度，旗章有序。
现代文：依靠人民，用到邦国大事上，宫室建筑有限度，旌旗装饰分等级。
English: Relying on the people, it is used in national events, the palace building is limited, and the flag decoration is divided into grades.

古文：朝聘自其仪，宴飨由其制，家殷国阜，远至迩安。
现代文：朝会访问依据有关的准则，宴会请客顺从有关的制度，百姓殷实国家昌盛，远方的人来归附、近处的人安居乐业。
English: The visit of the morning assembly is based on the relevant standards, the banquet invites guests to obey the relevant system, the people are prosperous and the country is prosperous, people from far away come to attach, and people in the vicinity live and work in peace.

古文：救水旱之灾，恤寰瀛之弊，然后王之常膳，乃间笙镛。
现代文：救助遭受水旱灾害的人，安抚普天下的困窘的人，然后大王的平常膳食，才时而有笙歌乐舞相伴。
English: The relief of the drought-stricken people, the pacification of the distressed people all over the world, and then the usual meal of the great king, only occasionally accompanied by a song and dance.

古文：商周之兴，用此道也。
现代文：商朝、周朝的兴盛，用的是这个方法。
English: This method was used for the prosperity of the Shang and Zhou dynasties.

古文：辛纣暴虐，玩其经费，金镂倾宫，广延百里，玉饰鹿台，崇高千仞，宫中九市，各有女司。
现代文：辛纣为人残暴肆虐，开支方面随意挥霍，用金子装饰巍峨的宫殿，绵延上百里，用玉石装饰鹿台，高达上千仞，宫中有九个市场，分别有女子官员掌管。
English: Hsin-tao was a man of brutality and extravagant spending, with gold decorating the towering palaces stretching for hundreds of miles, and jade decorating Deer Terrace, which was up to thousands of meters high. There were nine markets in the palace, each of which was run by female officials.

古文：厚赋以实鹿台之钱，大敛以增钜桥之粟，多发妖冶以充倾宫之丽，广收珍玩以备沙丘之游。
现代文：增加赋税来充实鹿台的钱财，大肆征敛来增加钜桥仓的粮食，征发大量妖冶女子来充当巍峨宫室裹的美色，广泛收集珍宝玩物放到沙丘宫以备游赏。
English: Increase taxes to enrich the money and wealth of Deer Terrace, aggressively collect money to increase the grain of the bridge warehouse, collect and distribute a large number of fairies to serve as the beauty of the Saga Palace, and widely collect precious toys to put in the Sand Dunes Palace to prepare for the tour.

古文：悬肉成林，积醪为沼，使男女裸体相逐于其间，伏诣酒池中牛饮者三千余人，宫中以锦绮为席，绫纨为荐。
现代文：悬挂的肉像树林一样，积聚的醪糟像沼泽一样，使男男女女在那裹面赤身裸体地互相追逐，趴到酒池裹俯身而饮的人达三千多，宫中用锦缎罗绮做席子，用绫罗白绢做垫子。
English: The hanging flesh was like a forest, and the accumulated filth like a swamp, so that men and women chased each other naked in the shroud, and more than three thousand people lay down to drink in the wine pool, and the palace used the brocade to make the mats and the brocade to make the cushions.

古文：及周王诛纣，肃拜殷墟，乃尽振鹿财，并颁桥粟，上天降休，殷人大喜。
现代文：直到周王诛杀了纣，庄严祭告了殷商的先祖，于是把鹿台的财产全部拿出来，和钜桥的粮食一起散发给大家，上天降福，殷商的百姓非常高兴。
English: Until King Zhou killed Yan and solemnly preached to the ancestors of the Yin merchants, then he took out all the property of Lutetia and distributed it to everyone together with the grain of Yingqiao. Heaven's blessing, the people of the Yin merchants were very happy.

古文：王赧云季，徙都西周，九鼎沦没，二南堙尽，贷于百姓，无以偿之，乃上层台以避其责，周人谓王所居为逃责台者也。
现代文：到王赧即位时可以说是末世，迁都到酉周王城，丧失了九鼎，周公、召公当年的故地荒废殆尽，向百姓借贷，没有用来偿还的，竟逃上高台去躲避他的债主，周人称周王所住的地方为逃债台。
English: It can be said that it was the end of the world when Wang Pi ascended to the throne. The capital was moved to the city of Zhou Wangcheng in Shantou, and Jiuding was lost. The land where Zhou Gong and Zhao Wangcheng were called to public service was deserted. He borrowed money from the people and did not have the means to repay it. He even fled to the hill to avoid his creditors. The people of Zhou called the place where King Zhou lived a debt-dodging hill.

古文：昔周姬公制以六典，职方陈其九贡，颁财内府，永为不刊。
现代文：过去周代的姬公用六典治理天下，各地奉献自己的各种贡品，将财物送到天于的仓库裹，作为一种永远不改变的制度。
English: In the past, the six dynasties of the Zhou Dynasty governed the world, and various regions offered their various tributes and sent their property to the heavenly warehouse, as a system that would never change.

古文：及刑政陵夷，菁茅罕至，鲁侯初践亩之税，秦君收太半之入，前王之范，靡有孑遗。
现代文：到了法制政令衰败的时候，菁茅之类的贡品很少被送来，鲁国的国君开始实行按田亩收税，秦国的国君收取大半的收入，前代帝王的规矩榜样，没有一点儿被保留。
English: By the time of the decline of the legal system, tributes such as jingmao were rarely sent, the princes of Lu began to collect taxes by mu, the princes of Qin collected most of the income, and none of the rules and examples of previous emperors were retained.

古文：史臣曰：班固为《殖货志》，自三代至王莽之诛，网罗前载，其文详悉。
现代文：史官说：班固写《食货志》，从上古三代到王莽被诛，包括前代各朝，他的记录详尽完备。
English: The historian said: Ben Gu wrote the "Food Chronicle," from the three generations of the ancients to Wang Mang, including the previous dynasties, his records are detailed and complete.

古文：光武宽仁，龚行天讨，王莽之后，赤眉新败，虽复三晖乃眷，而九服萧条，及得陇望蜀，黎民安堵，自此始行五铢之钱，田租三十税一，民有产子者复以三年之算。
现代文：光武帝宽厚仁慈，奉行天命讨伐有罪的，诛减王莽之后，接着打败赤眉，虽然一再予以关心，但全国各地一片萧条，直到平定甘肃控制四川，黎民百姓安居乐业，从此开始行用五铢的钱币，田租实行三十抽一的税制，百姓中有生儿子的免除三年的赋税。
English: Emperor Guangwu was generous and benevolent, pursuing the destiny of heaven to fight the guilty, reducing the king's recklessness, and then defeating the red eyebrows. Although he was repeatedly concerned, there was a depression throughout the country, until Gansu was pacified and controlled Sichuan, and the Li people lived and worked in peace. From then on, the five-baht coin was used, the land rent was implemented by the thirty-one-draw-one tax system, and the people who had sons were exempted from tax for three years.

古文：显宗即位，天下安宁，民无横徭，岁比登稔。
现代文：显宗即位的时候，天下安宁，人民没有额外的徭役，连年丰收。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended the throne, the country was at peace, the people had no extra laborers, and there was a bumper harvest year after year.

古文：永平五年作常满仓，立粟市于城东，粟斛直钱二十。
现代文：水平五年设立 常满仓 ，在城东设立粮食市场，一斛粟米值二十钱。
English: A grain market was set up in the east of the city, and a poppy seed rice was worth 20 yuan.

古文：草树殷阜，牛羊弥望，作贡尤轻，府廪还积，奸回不用，礼义专行。
现代文：草木繁茂，牛羊遍地，赋税特别少，府库仓廪还堆得满满的，人们没有坏心，专讲礼义。
English: Grass and trees are luxuriant, cattle and sheep are everywhere, taxes are extremely low, the government treasury is still full to the brim, people are not bad-hearted, and they are polite.

古文：于时东方既明，百官诣阙，戚里侯家，自相驰骛，车如流水，马若飞龙，照映轩庑，光华前载。
现代文：当时东方天一亮，百官就上朝，皇亲贵戚和各家王侯，互相往来，车如流水，马如飞龙，映照轩室廊廉，使先朝也光彩。
English: At that time, as soon as the sun rose in the east, hundreds of officials went to the imperial court, and the emperor's relatives and princes from various families interacted with each other. The chariots were like flowing water, the horses were like flying dragons, and the courtyards and corridors of the imperial court were reflected, making the imperial court also glorious.

古文：传曰： 三统之元，有阴阳之九焉 ，盖天地之恆数也。
现代文：文献上说： 三代的历法，包含有天地阴阳五行在裹面 ，正是天地之间恒常不变的道理。
English: According to the literature, the three-generation calendar contains the five elements of heaven, earth, yin and yang, which is the reason for the constancy between heaven and earth.

古文：安帝永初三年，天下水旱，人民相食。
现代文：安帝永初三年，天下遭水灾和旱灾，到了人吃人的地步。
English: In the first three years of Andi Yongchun, the whole country suffered from floods and droughts, to the point of people eating people.

古文：帝以鸿陂之地假与贫民。
现代文：皇帝把鸿陂的土地借给贫民。
English: The emperor lent the rich land to the poor.

古文：以用度不足，三公又奏请令吏民入钱谷得为关内侯云。
现代文：据说因为经费不足，三公又上奏请求让小吏百姓中交纳出足够钱粮的可以成为关内侯。
English: It is said that because of the lack of funds, the three princes made a request to let the petty officials among the people pay enough money and grain to become the Guanai Hou.

古文：桓帝永兴元年，郡国少半遭蝗，河泛数千里，流人十余万户，所在廪给。
现代文：桓帝永兴元年，全国近半敷地方遭受蝗灾，黄河泛滥几千里，流亡人口达十多万户，有流亡灾民的地方都开仓救济。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kantei Yongxing, nearly half of the country suffered from locust plagues, the Yellow River flooded thousands of miles, the exiled population reached more than one hundred thousand households, and the places with exiled victims all opened warehouses for relief.

古文：迨建宁永和之初，西羌反叛，二十余年兵连师老，军旅之费三百二十余亿，府帑空虚，延及内郡。
现代文：到建宁永和初年，西羌人造反谋叛，二十多年战事连绵军队疲敝，军费花了三百二十多亿，国库空虚，影响到内地各郡。
English: In the first year of the establishment of Ningyonghe, Xidi staged an artificial rebellion, the army was exhausted after more than 20 years of continuous warfare, the military expenditure was more than 32 billion yuan, and the national treasury was empty, affecting all counties in the mainland.

古文：冲质短祚，桓灵不轨。
现代文：汉冲帝、汉质帝在位期短，汉桓帝、汉灵帝没有法度。
English: Emperor Han Chong and Emperor Han Jie had a short reign, while Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Han Ling had no legal power.

古文：中平二年，南宫灾，延及北阙。
现代文：中平二年，南宫火灾，一直烧到北阙。
English: In the second year of the Middle Ages, the Southern Palace caught fire and burned all the way to Beilun.

古文：于是复收天下田亩十钱，用营宫宇。
现代文：于是天下田地每亩加收十钱，用来营造宫室。
English: As a result, the government levied an additional ten yuan per mu of farmland, which was used to build a palace.

古文：帝出自侯门，居贫即位，常曰： 桓帝不能作家，曾无私蓄。 
现代文：汉灵帝出身于侯爵之家，在贫困的时候即位，常常说： 桓帝不能持家，竟然没有私房积蓄。 
English: Born into a family of marquesses, Emperor Hanling ascended to the throne at a time of poverty. It was often said that Emperor Hanling was unable to maintain a household and had no private savings.

古文：故于西园造万金堂，以为私藏。
现代文：所以在西园建造万金堂，作为私人的库藏。
English: Therefore, he built Bankindo Hall in the west garden as a private treasury.

古文：复寄小黄门私钱，家至巨亿。
现代文：又让小黄门寄存私房钱，家产资金达到亿万之巨。
English: He also allowed Xiao Huangmen to deposit private money, and the family capital reached hundreds of millions.

古文：于是悬鸿都之，开卖官之路，公卿以降，悉有等差。
现代文：遣时候开始在鸿都门张榜，开辟了卖官的路子，从公卿往下，都有不同的差价。
English: When it was time to leave the capital, a list was posted on the Hongdu Gate, opening up a path for selling officials. From the nobles downwards, there were different price differences.

古文：廷尉崔烈入钱五百万以买司徒，刺史二千石迁除，皆责助治宫室钱，大郡至二千万钱，不毕者或至自杀。
现代文：担任廷尉的崔烈交钱五百万来买司徒之职，刺史二千石的任命，都要求资助修治宫室的钱，大的郡达到二千万钱，不能完成的人有的甚至自杀。
English: Cui Lie, who served as a courtier, paid five million yuan to buy the position of a steward, and the appointment of a steward of two thousand stone required the money to finance the repair of the palace. The large county reached twenty million yuan, and some people who could not complete it even committed suicide.

古文：献帝作五铢钱，而有四道连于边缘。
现代文：汉献帝时制作五铢钱，有四条直道连到边缘。
English: When Han Xian Di was making five-baht coins, there were four straight lines leading to the edge.

古文：有识者尤之曰： 岂京师破坏，此钱四出也。 
现代文：有见识的人指责说： 难道是京城要受到破坏，这种钱将流散到四方去? 
English: People with insight criticized: Is it possible that the capital city will be destroyed, and this money will be dispersed to the four directions?

古文：及董卓寻戈，火焚宫室，乃劫鸾驾，西幸长安，悉坏五铢钱，更铸小钱，尽收长安及洛阳铜人飞廉之属，以充鼓铸。
现代文：到董卓兴起刀兵，火烧宫室，竟劫持皇帝，西去长安，完全销毁五铢钱，改为铸造小钱，彻底没收长安和洛阳的铜人铜鸟之类的铜器，来充当铸钱的材料。
English: Until Dong Zhuo raised swordsmen and set fire to the palace room, he actually kidnapped the emperor, went west to Chang'an, completely destroyed the five-baht money, changed to minting small money, and completely confiscated the copperware such as the bronze man and the bronze bird from Chang'an and Luoyang to serve as the material for minting money.

古文：又钱无轮郭，文章不便。
现代文：而且钱没有边轮，也没有纹饰。
English: Moreover, the money has no rim and no decoration.

古文：时人以为秦始皇见长人于临洮，乃铸铜人。
现代文：当时人认为秦始皇在临洮见到高个的巨人，就铸造了铜人。
English: At that time, people thought that Qin Shi Huang saw a tall giant in Linyi and cast a bronze man.

古文：卓，临洮人也，兴毁不同，凶讹相类。
现代文：董卓，是临洮人，兴造和销毁虽然不同，凶暴谬误却相类似。
English: Dong Zhuo is a copycat. Although the creation and destruction are different, the violent fallacy is similar.

古文：及卓诛死，李傕、郭汜自相攻伐，于长安城中以为战地。
现代文：到董卓被诛杀，李催、郭汜互相攻伐，把长安城中作为战场。
English: By the time Dong Zhuo was killed, Li Xie and Guo Gan were fighting against each other, using the middle of Chang'an City as a battlefield.

古文：是时谷一斛五十万，豆麦二十万，人相食啖，白骨盈积，残骸余肉，臭秽道路。
现代文：当时一斛谷值五十万钱，一斛豆麦值二十万钱，人吃人，白骨堆积，残骸余肉，使道路上满是臭味和秽物。
English: At that time, a bushel of corn was worth half a million dollars, a pea of wheat was worth two hundred thousand dollars, people ate people, white bones piled up, and the remains of meat left, making the road full of stench and filth.

古文：帝使侍御史侯汶出太仓米豆，为饥民作糜，经日颁布而死者愈多。
现代文：皇帝派侍御史侯汶拿出太仓的米和豆，给饥民作粥，连日施行可是死的人更多。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Shuhouwen, to take out the rice and beans from Taicang and make porridge for the starving people. He did this for several days, but more people died.

古文：帝于是始疑有司盗其粮廪，乃亲于御前自加临给，饥者人皆泣曰： 今始得耳！ 
现代文：皇帝于是开始怀疑有关官员盗窃国家粮食，就亲自到衙门前自己动手施送，饥民人人都流泪说： 今天才得到了呀! 
English: The emperor then began to suspect that the officials concerned were stealing the country's grain, and he personally went to the front gate of the imperial palace to personally deliver it. The starving people were all in tears, saying: I just got it today!

古文：帝东归也，李傕、郭汜等追败乘舆于曹阳，夜潜渡河，六宫皆步。
现代文：皇帝回束都的时候，李催、郭汜等人追赶到曹阳打坏皇帝乘坐的车子，夜间悄悄渡过黄河，六宫随从的都步行。
English: When the emperor was returning to the capital, Li Xie, Guo Wei and others chased him to Cao Yang, broke the car the emperor was riding in, and quietly crossed the Yellow River at night. Liugong's followers were on foot.

古文：初出营栏，后手持缣数匹，董承使符节令孙徽以刃胁夺之，杀旁侍者，血溅后服。
现代文：开始走出营栏，皇后手中拿着几匹缣，董承让符节令孙徽用利刃胁迫夺走，杀死旁边的侍者，鲜血溅到皇后的衣服上。
English: She began to walk out of the barracks. The empress was holding several mules in her hands. Dong Chengzhang ordered Sun Hui to take away the horses with a sharp blade, kill the attendant next to her, and the blood spattered onto the empress's clothes.

古文：既至安邑，御衣穿败，唯以野枣园菜以为糇粮。
现代文：到达安邑以后，皇帝的衣服破了，衹能用野枣和园子裹的菜作为粮食。
English: After arriving in Anyi, the emperor's clothes were torn, and he could only use wild dates and vegetables from the garden as food.

古文：自此长安城中尽空，并皆四散，二三年间，关中无复行人。
现代文：从此长安城裹全空了，都四散离开，两三年裹，关中不再有行人。
English: Since then, Chang'an City has been completely empty. People have left in all directions. For two or three years, there were no pedestrians in the pass.

古文：建安元年，车驾至洛阳，宫闱荡涤，百官披荆棘而居焉。
现代文：建安元年，皇帝的车驾到达洛阳，宫殿建筑完全被毁掉了，百官除掉荆棘安身落脚。
English: In the first year of Jianan, the emperor's car arrived in Luoyang, the palace building was completely destroyed, and the officials removed the thorns and settled down.

古文：州郡各拥强兵，而委输不至，尚书郎官自出采稆，或不能自反，死于墟巷。
现代文：州郡长官各自拥有强大的军队，可是给朝廷的贡赋都不送到，尚书郎官们自己出去找野生庄稼，有的没有能力自己返回，死在废墟里巷中。
English: Each of the prefectural governors had a powerful army, but they did not send any tribute to the imperial court. Shang Shulang officials went out to look for wild crops on their own, and some were unable to return on their own and died in the ruins and alleys.

古文：魏武之初，九州云扰，攻城掠地，保此怀民，军旅之资，权时调给。
现代文：魏武帝的时候，九州动荡，攻占城池抢夺地盘，保护这些希望安定的人民，军队的经费，根据当睁晴况调剂供给。
English: During the reign of Emperor Weiwu, Kyushu was in turmoil. Cities were captured and territory seized in order to protect the people who wanted stability. The army's budget was adjusted according to the prevailing situation.

古文：于时袁绍军人皆资椹枣，袁术战士取给蠃蒲。
现代文：当时袁绍的军队人人都吃桑葚野枣，袁术的战士用赢蒲作为补给的粮食。
English: At that time, everyone in Yuan Shao's army ate mulberry jujube, and Yuan Shou's soldiers used yingpu as supplementary grain.

古文：魏武于是乃募良民屯田许下，又于州郡列置田官，岁有数千万斛，以充兵戎之用。
现代文：魏武帝于是就招募良民到许都附近屯田，又在州郡设置田官，每年收入有几千万斛，用来充当军费的开支。
English: Emperor Wei Wudi then recruited good people to build military camps near the capital, and set up field officers in prefectures and counties, with an annual income of tens of millions of baht, which was used as military expenditure.

古文：及初平袁氏，以定鄴都，令收田租亩粟四升，户绢二匹而绵二斤，余皆不得擅兴，藏强赋弱。
现代文：到初步平定了袁氏，从而确定了邺为都城，下令收取田租每亩四升粟，每户两匹绢和二斤绵，此外都不许擅自增加名目，庇护强者而向弱者抽税。
English: The Yuan clan was initially pacified, and thus the capital was determined to be Handan. It was ordered to collect four liters of millet per mu of land rent, two horses and two catties per household. In addition, it was forbidden to increase the nominal value without authorization. The strong were protected and taxes were levied on the weak.

古文：文帝黄初二年，以谷贵，始罢五铢钱。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年，因为谷子价格贵，于是停用五铢钱。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, because the price of millet was expensive, the five-baht coin was discontinued.

古文：于时天下未并，戎车岁动，孔子曰， 加之以师旅，因之以饥馑 ，此言兵凶之谋而沴气应之也。
现代文：当时天下还没有统一。兵车每年都要出动，孔子说， 加给他战争，接着给他饥荒 ，这话说的是战争方面的考虑而使灾害不祥之气会相应产生。
English: At that time, the world had not yet been unified. Confucius said, "Give him war, then give him famine," because the chariots of war had to be sent out every year. This was a war-related consideration, and the ominous atmosphere of disaster would arise accordingly.

古文：于时三方之人，志相吞灭，战胜攻取，耕夫释耒，江淮之乡，尤缺储峙。
现代文：那时候三个方面的人，一心想吞并消灭对方，战而能胜攻而能取，农夫放下锄头，红进一带，尤其缺少储备。
English: At that time, people on all three sides were bent on absorbing and eliminating the other side, the war could be won and won, the farmer put down the hoe, the red entered the area, especially the lack of reserves.

古文：吴上大将军陆逊抗疏，请令诸将各广其田。
现代文：吴国上大将军堕逼提出意见，请求让各处的将军分别扩大他们的耕地。
English: The fallen general of the State of Wu was forced to make a suggestion, asking the generals to expand their farmland separately.

古文：权报曰： 甚善。
现代文：孙权回答说： 很好。
English: Sun Quan replied, "Very good.

古文：今孤父子亲自受田，车中八牛，以为四耦。
现代文：如今我家父子亲自负责田地，驾车的八头牛，可以作为四组耕地的牛用。
English: Now my father and son are personally in charge of the fields. The eight cows that drive the car can be used as four groups of cows for the cultivated land.

古文：虽未及古人，亦欲与众均其劳也。 
现代文：虽然还赶不上古人，也算是和民众同样地劳作。 
English: Although they have not yet caught up with the ancients, they work just as hard as the common people.

古文：有吴之务农重谷，始于此焉。
现代文：呈国的务农重谷，从逭时候开始。
English: The country's heavy burden of agricultural work begins in the rainy season.

古文：魏明帝不恭，淫于宫籞，百僚编于手役，天下失其躬稼。
现代文：魏明帝不在乎这些，纵情于宫室禁苑，百官看重的是写文章，天下不再用心耕种。
English: Emperor Wei Ming did not care about these things. He indulged himself in the palace garden. The officials valued writing articles. The world no longer cultivated with heart.

古文：此后关东遇水，民亡产业，而兴师辽阳，坐甲江甸，皆以国乏经用，胡可胜言。
现代文：后来关东遭遇洪水，人民没有了家产，却要兴兵攻打辽堡，军队滞留在辽阳一带，都因为国家缺乏经费度用，怎能一一说尽。
English: Later, Kanto suffered a flood, the people lost their property, but they had to raise an army to attack Liaocheng, and the army was stranded in the Liaoyang area, all because of the country's lack of funds.

古文：世祖武皇帝太康元年，既平孙皓，纳百万而罄三吴之资，接千年而总西蜀之用，韬干戈于府库，破舟船于江壑，河滨海岸，三丘八薮，耒耨之所不至者，人皆受焉。
现代文：晋世祖武皇帝左尘元年，平定逐壁之后，收纳百万人民而统掌三呈的物资，承接千年基业而总括酉蜀的财物，收藏干戈到仓库襄，凿破战船在垦辽深谷，河边海岸，山丘湖泽，没有用犁锄开发的地方，人人都受到恩泽。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Zuo Wu, after subduing the country wall by wall, collected the material wealth of a million people, undertook a thousand-year-old foundation, and summarized the wealth of Shushan, collected the goods to the warehouse, and chiseled the warship in the deep valley of Liao, the riverside coast, the hills and lakes, and the places that were not developed with the plow. Everyone was blessed.

古文：农祥晨正，平秩东作，荷锸赢粮，有同云布。
现代文：农业发展风调雨顺，随着耕作的时令先后，扛着锄头带着干粮的农夫，像云一样布散开来。
English: Agricultural development follows the wind and rain, with the season of farming successively, the farmer carrying the hoe and carrying the dry grain spread out like a cloud.

古文：若夫因天而资五纬，因地而兴五材，世属升平，物流仓府，宫闱增饰，服玩相辉。
现代文：加上顺应天时而利用季节时令，顺应地利而开发各种物产，世道称得上繁荣太平，物资汇聚到仓廪府库，宫殿门窗增加装饰，服饰玩好互相辉映。
English: Coupled with the use of the season according to the time of day, and the development of various products according to the location, the world is said to be prosperous and peaceful. Materials are gathered in the warehouse of the government, the doors and windows of the palace are decorated, and the clothes are playful and reflect each other.

古文：于是王君夫、武子、石崇等更相夸尚，舆服鼎俎之盛，连衡帝室，布金埒之泉，粉珊瑚之树，物盛则衰，固其宜也。
现代文：因此王君夫、王亘迂、五塞等人争相夸耀推崇，车马服饰饮食的盛况，可以和皇帝家相比，用钱铺设界沟，击碎珊瑚实树，事物发展到极盛就会衰微，本来就是这个道理。
English: Therefore, Wang Junfu, Wang Wanyuan, Wusei and others compete for praise and admiration. The pomp of chariots and horses, clothing and food can be compared to the emperor's family. Money is used to pave the boundary ditch and break down the coral tree. When things reach their peak, they will decline. This is the reason.

古文：永宁之初，洛中尚有锦帛四百万，珠宝金银百余斛。
现代文：丞宁的初期，盗中还有锦帛四百万匹，珠宝金银一百多斛。
English: In the early days of Zhening, there were four million brocade horses and more than one hundred tons of jewelry, gold and silver stolen.

古文：惠后北征，荡阴反驾，寒桃在御，只鸡以给，其布衾两幅，囊钱三千，以为车驾之资焉。
现代文：惠帝北征成都王司马题，在菱渣被打败，用秋天才成熟的桃子充饥，仅有一只鸡做菜，当时衹有两条布被，囊中衹有三千钱，作为出行的费用。
English: Hui Di Bei Zheng Chengdu Wang Simatai, was defeated in Lingzhao, and used peaches that were not ripe until autumn to satisfy his hunger. There was only one chicken to cook. At that time, he had two quilts, and he had three thousand money in his pocket as travel expenses.

古文：怀帝为刘曜所围，王师累败，府帑既竭，百官饥甚，比屋不见火烟，饥人自相啖食。
现代文：晋怀帝被刘曜围困，王师屡次战败，仓库裹的财物已经用尽，百官饥饿过度，连片的房屋看不见炊烟，饥饿的人们自相啖食。
English: Emperor Jinhuai was besieged by Liu You, Wang Shi was repeatedly defeated, the goods wrapped in warehouses had been exhausted, the officials were excessively hungry, the connected houses could not see the smoke, and the hungry people were eating each other.

古文：愍皇西宅，馁馑弘多，斗米二金，死者太半。
现代文：晋愍帝即位后，饥荒更多，一斗米价值二两黄金，饿死的人遇半数。
English: After Emperor Jinshun ascended the throne, there were more famines. A barrel of rice was worth two ounces of gold, and half of the people died of starvation.

古文：刘曜陈兵，内外断绝，十之曲，屑而供帝，君臣相顾，莫不挥涕。
现代文：刘曜摆开军队，使城内外断绝联系，十个曲饼，弄成碎屑米供给皇帝，君臣相顾，没有不流泪的。
English: Liu You dispatched an army to break off communication between the city and the outside world, and made ten cakes of bread crumbs to supply the emperor. There was no prince or minister who did not shed tears.

古文：元后渡江，军事草创，蛮陬赕布，不有恆准，中府所储，数四千匹。
现代文：晋元帝渡江以后，军事方面从头开始，南方和东方的蛮夷部落上贡的财物，没有固定的准则，宫中仓库所储存的，约四千匹。
English: After Emperor Jin Yuan crossed the Yangtze River, the military started from scratch. There was no fixed standard for the property of the barbarian tribes in the south and east. The palace warehouse stored about four thousand animals.

古文：于时石勒勇锐，挻乱淮南，帝惧其侵逼，甚患之，乃诏方镇云，有斩石勒首者，赏布千匹云。
现代文：当时石勒勇悍而有锋芒，扰乱淮南一带，皇帝畏惧他的侵夺威逼，非常头痛他，就下韶给各个方镇说，有能斩得石勒首级的人，赏给布一千匹。
English: At that time, Shile was brave and sharp, disturbing the Huainan area. The emperor was afraid of his encroachment and intimidation, and he was very worried. He told the various towns that if anyone could cut off Shile's head, he would reward him with a thousand horses.

古文：汉自董卓之乱，百姓流离，谷石至五十余万，人多相食。
现代文：汉代自董卓作乱以来，百姓流离失所，一石谷子价格达到五十多万，人吃人的现象多有发生。
English: In the Han Dynasty, since the Dong Zhuo Rebellion, the people were displaced, the price of a stone of millet reached more than half a million, and the phenomenon of people eating people often occurred.

古文：魏武既破黄巾，欲经略四方，而苦军食不足，羽林监颍川枣祗建置屯田议。
现代文：魏武帝打败黄巾军以后，想要管理好国家，可是苦于军粮不足，担任羽林监的颖川人枣祗提出屯田的建议。
English: After Emperor Wei Wu defeated the Yellow Turban Army, he wanted to manage the country well, but suffered from a shortage of military rations. The Yingchuan man Zaozhuang, who served as the overseer of the forests, proposed the idea of setting up a garrison.

古文：魏武乃令曰： 夫定国之术在于强兵足食，秦人以急农兼天下，孝武以屯田定西域，此先世之良式也。 
现代文：魏武帝就下令说： 安定国家的办法在于使军队强大使粮食充足，秦国人因为重视农业而兼并天下，汉武帝因为屯田而平定西域，这些是先世的好榜样。 
English: Emperor Wu of Wei ordered: "The way to stabilize the country is to make the army strong and have enough grain. The Qin people annexed the whole country because they valued agriculture, and Emperor Wu of Han conquered the western region because of the military camps. These are good examples of the past.

古文：于是以任峻为典农中郎将，募百姓屯田许下，得谷百万斛。
现代文：于是任命任峻担任典农中郎将，招募百姓到许都附近屯田。得到粮食上百万斛。
English: As a result, Renjun was appointed to serve as the chief agronomist and recruited people to work in the fields near Xudu. He received more than one million baht in grain.

古文：郡国列置田官，数年之中，所在积粟，仓廪皆满。
现代文：各郡国都设置田官，几年之内，各个地方都积存了粮食，仓库都是满的。
English: All counties and states set up field officers, and within a few years, grain was accumulated in all places, and warehouses were full.

古文：祗死，魏武后追思其功，封爵其子。
现代文：枣祗死的时候，魏武帝后来追念他的功绩，封给他的儿子爵位。
English: When Zaozhuang died, Emperor Wu of Wei later remembered his achievements and gave his son a peerage.

古文：建安初，关中百姓流入荆州者十余万家，及闻本土安宁，皆企望思归，而无以自业。
现代文：建安初年，关中的百姓流亡到荆州的有十多万家，等到听说家乡安宁了，都盼望着想回去，但是没有用来谋生的家业。
English: In the first year of the construction of Jian'an, there were more than 100,000 families of Guanzhong people who had been exiled to Jingzhou. When they heard that their hometown was peaceful, they were all looking forward to going back, but they had no family business to earn a living.

古文：于是卫觊议为 盐者国之大宝，自丧乱以来放散，今宜如旧置使者监卖，以其直益市犁牛，百姓归者以供给之。
现代文：于是卫觊提议说 盐是国家最宝贵的，自从动乱发生以来就放任自流了，如今应该像过去那样设置使者监督贩卖，用它的收益购买农具和耕牛，供应给百姓中回来的人。
English: So Wei Wei proposed that salt, the most precious resource of the country, had been allowed to run wild since the turmoil, and now, as in the past, envoys should be set up to supervise the trade and use the proceeds to buy farm tools and oxen to supply the returning people.

古文：勤耕积粟，以丰殖关中，远者闻之，必多竞还。 
现代文：勤劳耕作积存粮食，从而使关中丰足，远方的人听说了这样的事，必定有很多人争相回来。 
English: People from far away heard about this, and there must have been a rush of people to come back.

古文：于是魏武遣谒者仆射监盐官，移司隶校尉居弘农。
现代文：于是魏武帝派遣谒者仆射担任监盐官，调司隶校尉到弘农。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu of Wei sent the eunuch Fuxia to serve as a salt inspector, and the inspector-commander-lieutenant to Hongnong.

古文：流人果还，关中丰实。
现代文：流亡的人果然回来了，关中一带丰足殷实。
English: The exiles have indeed returned, and the Guanzhong area is bountiful.

古文：既而又以沛国刘馥为扬州刺史，镇合肥，广屯田，修芍陂、茹陂、七门、吴塘诸堨，以溉稻田，公私有蓄，历代为利。
现代文：不久又任命沛国刘馥担任扬州刺史，镇守盒胆，广泛开展屯田，修整董腔、苞壁、置、县擅等地的堤堰，以便灌溉稻田，公私都有蓄积，使好几代受益。
English: Soon after, he appointed Pei Guo Liu Ye as Yangzhou's chief historian and town guard, and carried out extensive development of farmlands, and repaired dike weirs in Dong Cao, Jian Wei, Jie and Xian Xian, so as to irrigate rice paddies. Both public and private have accumulated, benefiting several generations.

古文：贾逵之为豫州，南与吴接，修守战之具，堨汝水，造新陂，又通运渠二百余里，所谓贾侯渠者也。
现代文：贾逵在豫州的时候，南边和吴地相邻，修整防守和作战的用具，为汝水筑堤堰，修造新陂，又开通运输水渠二百多里，人称贾侯渠。
English: When Jia Wei was in Yuzhou, the south side was adjacent to Wudi, and he repaired defensive and combat equipment, built dikes for water, built new dams, and opened more than two hundred miles of transportation canals, known as Jia Hou Canal.

古文：当黄初中，四方郡守恳田又加，以故国用不匮。
现代文：在黄初年间，四方各郡太守开垦的田地又有增加，因此国家的用度没有匮乏。
English: During the first half of the Yellow Emperor's reign, there was an increase in the amount of land reclaimed by governors in counties in all four directions, so there was no shortage of rice for the country's consumption.

古文：时济北颜斐为京兆太守，京兆自马超之乱，百姓不专农殖，乃无车牛。
现代文：当时济北人颜斐担任京兆太守，京兆一带自从马超作乱以来，百姓不专心于农耕种植，竟然没有车子和牛。
English: At that time, Yan Fei, a native of North Jibei, served as the governor of Jingzhao. Since Ma Chao's rebellion, the people in the Jingzhao area did not concentrate on farming and planting, and even did not have carts and cattle.

古文：斐又课百姓，令闲月取车材，转相教匠。
现代文：颜斐又督促百姓，下令在农闲时候准备造车的材料，辗转相互传授制造方法。
English: Yan Fei also urged the people, ordered to prepare the materials for building cars during the idle time, and taught each other the manufacturing methods.

古文：其无牛者令养猪，投贵卖以买牛。
现代文：让其中没有牛的人养猪，拿到市场上高价卖出再买牛。
English: Let those who do not have cattle raise pigs, sell them at a high price in the market and then buy cattle.

古文：始者皆以为烦，一二年中编户皆有车牛，于田役省赡，京兆遂以丰沃。
现代文：开始的时候都认为麻烦，一二年后在编的农户都有了车和牛，下地劳作时很省力，京兆一带于是因此而丰足起来。
English: At the beginning, they all thought it was troublesome, but after a year or two, the farmers in Henan all had cars and cattle, and it was very labor-saving when working in the fields. As a result, the Beijing-Zhao region became prosperous.

古文：郑浑为沛郡太守，郡居下湿，水涝为患，百姓饥乏。
现代文：郑浑担任沛郡太守，当地地势低下潮湿，水涝成灾，百姓饥饿贫困。
English: Zheng Hun served as the governor of Pei County. The local terrain was low and wet, floods were frequent, and the people were starving and poor.

古文：浑于萧、相二县兴陂堨，开稻田，郡人皆不以为便。
现代文：郑浑在萧、相这两个县兴造堤坝，开垦稻田，当地人都不认为有好处。
English: Zheng Hun built dams and developed rice paddies in Xiao and Xiang counties, but the local people did not think it was beneficial.

古文：浑以为终有经久之利，遂躬率百姓兴功，一冬皆成。
现代文：郑浑却认为最终会有长久的好处，于是亲自率领百姓动工，一个冬季就都完成了。
English: However, Zheng Hun thought that there would eventually be long-term benefits, so he personally led the people to start construction, and it was all completed in one winter.

古文：比年大收，顷亩岁增，租入倍常，郡中赖其利，刻石颂之，号曰郑陂。
现代文：第二年大丰收，土地亩产量连年递增，租税收入比往常翻了一番，郡中百姓托赖他的好处，刻石碑颂扬他，称为郑陂。
English: In the second year, there was a bumper harvest. The output per mu of land increased year after year. The tax revenue doubled compared to the usual. The people in the county trusted his benefits and carved stone monuments to praise him, known as Zheng Qi.

古文：魏明帝世徐邈为凉州，土地少雨，常苦乏谷。
现代文：魏明帝时代徐邈担任凉州太守，当地雨水少，常常苦于缺乏粮食。
English: During the Wei and Ming Dynasties, Xu Xi served as the governor of Liangzhou. The area had little rain and often suffered from a lack of grain.

古文：邈上修武威、酒泉盐池，以收虏谷。
现代文：徐邈修整武威、酒泉的盐池，用来收购胡人的粮食。
English: Xu Xi repaired the salt ponds of Wuwei and Jiuquan, which were used to purchase grain for the Hu people.

古文：又广开水田，募贫民佃之，家家丰足，仓库盈溢。
现代文：又广泛开垦水田，招募贫民佃耕，家家丰衣足食，仓库裹满满的。
English: They also extensively reclaimed rice paddies, recruited poor people to plough, provided food and clothing for every family, and filled warehouses to overflowing.

古文：及度支州界军用之余，以市金锦犬马，通供中国之费，西域人入贡，财货流通，皆邈之功也。
现代文：在供应当地边防军用开支之外。
English: In addition to the cost of supplying the local border guards.

古文：其后皇甫隆为敦煌太守，敦煌俗不作耧犁，及不知用水，人牛功力既费，而收谷更少。
现代文：还用来购买金锦犬马，供给内地。西域人来朝贡，使资财货物能够流通，都是徐邈的功劳。后来皇甫隆担任敦煌太守，敦煌的风俗是不用缕犁等农具，并且不懂得用水，耗费了人力物力，可是收获的粮食很少。
English: It was also used to buy gold brocade dogs and horses to supply the mainland. Westerners came to pay tribute, so that capital goods could circulate, all of which was the credit of Xu Xi. Later, Emperor Fulong served as the governor of Dunhuang. The custom of Dunhuang was not to use agricultural tools such as wicker baskets, and did not know how to use water. It consumed manpower and material resources, but harvested little grain.

古文：隆到，乃教作耧犁，又教使灌溉。
现代文：皇甫隆到了以后，就教当地人使用楼犁，又教他们掌握灌溉技术。
English: After Emperor Fulong arrived, he taught the local people how to use the mortar and taught them to master irrigation techniques.

古文：岁终率计，所省庸力过半，得谷加五，西方以丰。
现代文：年终核算下来，节省了一半的劳力，收获的粮食增加了五成，西部地区因此丰足。
English: According to the year-end accounting, half of the labor force was saved, and the grain harvest increased by 50%, making the western region plentiful.

古文：嘉平四年，关中饥，宣帝表徙冀州农夫五千人佃上邽，兴京兆、天水、南安盐池，以益军实。
现代文：魏太和四年，关中阐饥荒，宣帝司马懿上表迁移冀州的农民五千人到上邹种地，开发京兆、天水、南安的盐池，用来增加军费。
English: In the fourth year of the Wei and Taihe Dynasties, Guanzhong declared a famine, and Emperor Sima Qian moved five thousand farmers from Jizhou to Shangluo to develop salt ponds in Beijing, Tianshui and Nan'an, which was used to increase military spending.

古文：青龙元年，开成国渠自陈仓至槐里；筑临晋陂，引汧洛溉舄卤之地三千余顷，国以充实焉。
现代文：魏青龙元年，开造成国渠从陈仓到槐里；在临晋陂修筑堤防，引沂水、洛水的水灌溉三千多顷盐碱地，国库因此充实起来。
English: In the first year of the Qinglong Dynasty of the Wei Dynasty, the national canal from Chencang to Jiali was developed; a dike was built in Linjinwei, and the water from Jiali and Luo was used to irrigate more than 3,000 hectares of saline land, thereby enriching the national treasury.

古文：正始四年，宣帝又督诸军伐吴将诸葛恪，焚其积聚，恪弃城遁走。
现代文：魏正始四年，宣帝司马懿又统率各军讨伐吴国将领诸葛恪，焚烧他积聚的粮草，诸葛恪放弃城池悄悄逃走。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Sima Qian led the armies to fight against Zhuge Ke, the general of the State of Wu, and burned the grain and grass he had accumulated. Zhuge Ke abandoned the city and quietly fled.

古文：帝因欲广田积谷，为兼并之计，乃使邓艾行陈、项以东，至寿春地。
现代文：宣帝司马懿因此想扩大耕地积蓄粮食，作为兼并天下的准备，就派邓艾到陈、项以东，抵达寿春一带。
English: Therefore, Emperor Sima Qian wanted to expand the cultivated land to accumulate grain. As a preparation for the annexation of the world, he sent Deng Ai to the east of Chen and Xiang, and arrived in the Shuchun area.

古文：艾以为田良水少，不足以尽地利，宜开河渠，可以大积军粮，又通运漕之道。
现代文：邓艾认为田好而水少，不足以完全发挥地利，应该开挖河渠，才能够积蓄大量军粮，又疏通漕运的水道。
English: Deng Ai believed that good fields and little water were not enough to fully exploit the location. A canal should be dug to accumulate a large amount of military grain and clear the waterway for rowing.

古文：乃著《济河论》以喻其指。
现代文：于是写了《济河论》来阐明他的思想。
English: So he wrote "Jihe" to clarify his thoughts.

古文：又以为昔破黄巾，因为屯田，积谷许都，以制四方。
现代文：又认为过去打败黄巾军，是因为屯田，积蓄粮食在许都，用来控制四方。
English: He also believed that the reason for defeating the Yellow Turban Army in the past was because of the tunden, the accumulation of grain in the capital, which was used to control the four directions.

古文：今三隅已定，事在淮南。
现代文：如今三面都已平定，衹在淮南有战事。
English: Now all three sides have been pacified, but there is still fighting in Huainan.

古文：每大军征举，运兵过半，功费巨亿，以为大役。
现代文：每逢大军出征，运粮的兵丁超过半数，花费敷以亿计，是巨大的工程。
English: Every time a large army goes to war, more than half of the soldiers carry grain, costing hundreds of millions of dollars, which is a huge project.

古文：陈蔡之间，土下田良，可省许昌左右诸稻田，并水东下。
现代文：陈蔡一带，土地很好，可以省去许昌附近那些稻田，将水引向东。
English: In the Chen Cai area, the land is so good that the rice paddies near Xuchang can be omitted, and the water can be diverted to the east.

古文：令淮北二万人、淮南三万人分休，且佃且守。
现代文：命令淮北的二万人、淮南的三万人轮流休整，一边种地一边防守。
English: He ordered 20,000 people in northern Huaibei and 30,000 people in southern Huaibei to take turns to rest and cultivate land while defending themselves.

古文：水丰，常收三倍于西，计除众费，岁完五百万斛以为军资。
现代文：水源充足，平常的收获将是西边的三倍，算起来除去各种费用，每年上缴五百万斛作为军费。
English: Water is plentiful, and the usual harvest will be three times that of the west side. In total, five million baht will be paid as military expenses every year, excluding various expenses.

古文：六七年间，可积三千万余斛于淮北，此则十万之众五年食也。
现代文：六七年裹，可以在淮北积蓄起三千多万斛，这是十万大军五年的口粮。
English: In sixty-seven years, more than thirty million baht can be saved in Huaibei, which is five years of rations for a hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：以此乘敌，无不克矣。
现代文：凭藉这个攻打敌人，就没有不能战胜的了。
English: With this method of attacking the enemy, there is nothing that cannot be defeated.

古文：宣帝善之，皆如艾计施行。
现代文：宣帝司马懿认为很好，完全按照邓艾的计划施行。
English: Xuan Di Sima Yao thought it was very good and implemented it in full accordance with Deng Ai's plan.

古文：遂北临淮水，自钟离而南横石以西，尽沘水四百余里，五里置一营，营六十人，且佃且守。
现代文：于是北起淮水边，从钟离往南并从横石往西，直到沘水之间四百多里，每五里设置一个营，每个营六十人，一边种地一边防守。
English: Therefore, from the north to Huai Shui, from Zhongli to the south, and from Hengshi to the west, until more than four hundred miles between Lishui, every five miles set up a battalion, each battalion of sixty people, while farming and defending.

古文：兼修广淮阳、百尺二渠，上引河流，下通淮颍，大治诸陂于颍南、颍北，穿渠三百余里，溉田二万顷，淮南、淮北皆相连接。
现代文：同时修治扩大淮阳、百尺两个水渠，上引黄河流水，下通进回和垣塞，在题南、垄北大规模整修各个堤坝，开凿水渠三百多里，灌溉农田二万顷，淮南、淮北都互相连接起来。
English: At the same time, the two water channels of Huaiyang and 100 feet were repaired and expanded, the upstream water of the Yellow River was diverted, and the downstream water was blocked by the Wagaki dam. In the south of the subject and the north of the ridge, the various dams were renovated on a large scale, more than 300 miles of water channels were excavated, and 20,000 hectares of farmland were irrigated. Huainan and Huaibei were connected to each other.

古文：自寿春到京师，农官兵田，鸡犬之声，阡陌相属。
现代文：从寿春到京师，一路都是务农的官员和士兵耕种的田地，还有鶸犬的声音，田间小路连绵不断。
English: From Shuchun to Jingshi, all the way are fields cultivated by agricultural officials and soldiers, as well as the sound of yakitori dogs, and field paths are continuous.

古文：每东南有事，大军出征，泛舟而下，达于江淮，资食有储，而无水害，艾所建也。
现代文：每当东南方面有战事，大军出征，泛舟而下，直到江淮，物资粮食都有储备，而且没有水灾为害，都是邓艾所建树的。
English: Whenever there is a war in the southeast, a large army goes to war, and rafts go down to the Huai River. There are reserves of materials and grain, and there is no flood damage. They are all built by Deng Ai.

古文：及晋受命，武帝欲平一江表。
现代文：到晋朝承受天命，晋武帝想平定统一长江以南地区。
English: To the Jin Dynasty to bear the destiny of heaven, Emperor Jinwu wanted to pacify and unify the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：时谷贱而布帛贵，帝欲立平籴法，用布帛市谷，以为粮储。
现代文：当时粮食便宜而布匹丝帛很贵，晋武帝想设立平耀法，用布匹丝帛买粮食，作为粮食储备。
English: At that time, grain was cheap, but cloth-and-silk bags were very expensive. Emperor Jinwu wanted to establish the Pingyao Law and use cloth-and-silk bags to buy grain as a grain reserve.

古文：议者谓军资尚少，不宜以贵易贱。
现代文：提意见的认为军费还少，不应该用贵的换便宜的。
English: Those who made comments believed that military expenditure was still low and that it was not right to exchange the expensive for the cheap.

古文：泰始二年，帝乃下诏曰： 夫百姓年丰则用奢，凶荒则穷匮，是相报之理也。
现代文：泰始二年，晋武帝就下诏说： 百姓在收成好的时候就花费过度，在凶年荒年的时候就缺钱少粮，这是互相报应的缘故。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "The people spend too much when the harvest is good, and lack money and grain when the year is bad. This is due to mutual retaliation.

古文：故古人权量国用，取赢散滞，有轻重平籴之法。
现代文：所以古人权衡国家的用度，从有富余的地方取用而分散给欠缺的，形成了轻重平耀的制度。
English: Therefore, the ancients weighed the needs of the country, taking from the rich and distributing to the poor, forming a weighted system.

古文：理财钧施，惠而不费，政之善者也。
现代文：管理财政平均使用，有益而不浪费，是最好的治理。
English: It is the best governance to manage financial resources so that they are used efficiently and not wasted.

古文：然此事废久，天下希习其宜。
现代文：但是这样的事情被废弃了很久，天下人希望按照习惯了的做法行事。
English: But that sort of thing has long been abandoned, and the world wants to go back to business as usual.

古文：加以官蓄未广，言者异同，财货未能达通其制。
现代文：加上官府的积蓄还不充分，讨论时的意见不一致，还没有能够理顺财物流通的制度。
English: In addition, the savings of the government are still insufficient, the opinions in the discussion are inconsistent, and there is no system that can streamline the financial flow.

古文：更令国宝散于穰岁而上不收，贫弱困于荒年而国无备。
现代文：更加使得国家的宝物在丰年流散而皇帝收不到，贫穷羸弱的人在荒年遭困而国家没有储备。
English: Moreover, the treasures of the country were dispersed in the good years and the emperor could not collect them, and the poor and weak people were in trouble in the bad years and the country had no reserves.

古文：豪人富商，挟轻资，蕴重积，以管其利。
现代文：豪强的人和富裕的商人，带着轻便的资金，购藏大量物资屯积，来谋求他自己的利益。
English: The strong man and the rich merchant, with easy money, buys and hoards large quantities of goods to pursue his own interests.

古文：故农夫苦其业，而末作不可禁也。
现代文：所以农夫认为自己的工作很苦，而从商之类的事情不能禁止。
English: So the farmer thinks that his work is very hard, and things like doing business cannot be prohibited.

古文：今者省徭务本，并力垦殖，欲令农功益登，耕者益劝，而犹或腾踊，至于农人并伤。
现代文：如今减省徭役一心从事农业生产，努力开垦种植，希望让农业生产更加发展，耕种的人更加努力，可是还有人抬高物价，以至于农民们都受到伤害。
English: At present, the officials of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs are concentrating on agricultural production, working hard to cultivate and plant, hoping to make agricultural production more developed, and cultivators are working harder, but there are still people who raise prices, so that farmers are hurt.

古文：今宜通籴，以充俭乏。
现代文：现在应该买进谷物，以便弥补歉收年的不足。
English: It's a good time to buy grain to make up for a poor year.

古文：主者平议，具为条制。 
现代文：主管的人斟酌商定，具体地制订出条例制度。 
English: At their discretion, the persons in charge agreed to work out a regulation system in detail.

古文：然事竟未行。
现代文：但是事情最终没有实行。
English: But things didn't work out.

古文：是时江南未平，朝廷厉精于稼墙。
现代文：当时江南还没有平定，朝廷对农业种植投入大量精力。
English: At that time, the southern part of the Yangtze River had not yet been pacified, and the imperial court invested a lot of energy in agricultural cultivation.

古文：四年正月丁亥，帝亲耕藉田。
现代文：泰始四年正月丁亥日，皇帝亲自耕种责任田。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, on the day of Dinghai, the emperor personally cultivated the responsibility field.

古文：庚寅，诏曰： 使四海之内，弃末反本，竞农务功，能奉宣朕志，令百姓劝事乐业者，其唯郡县长吏乎！
现代文：庚寅日，下诏说： 让四海之内的人民，抛弃经商返回到农业上来，竞相从事农耕生产，并能够奉扬我的志向，让百姓努力劳动乐于务农的，那衹有郡县官员们了!
English: Geng Ying Rong said: Let the people of the four seas abandon business and return to agriculture, compete in agricultural production, and let the people work hard and be willing to work in agriculture, then there are county officials!

古文：先之劳之，在于不倦。
现代文：先之劳之，在于不倦。
English: The most important thing is not to get tired.

古文：每念其经营职事，亦为勤矣。
现代文：每当想到他们经营本职事务时，那也是很勤勉的啊。
English: It's also very diligent when you think about them running their own business.

古文：其以中左典牧种草马，赐县令长相及郡国丞各一匹。 
现代文：就把中典牧和左典牧的种母马，赐给县令的下属官员和在郡国任职的官员每人一匹。 
English: He gave the breeding mares of Zhongdianmu and Zuodianmu to the subordinate officials of the county magistrate and the officials serving in the county, one each.

古文：是岁，乃立常平仓，丰则籴，俭则粜，以利百姓。
现代文：这一年，开始建立常平仓，丰年就买进，歉收年就卖出，以便利百姓。
English: In this year, they began to set up regular closing warehouses, buying in good years and selling in bad years, in order to benefit the people.

古文：五年正月癸巳，敕戒郡国计吏、诸郡国守相令长，务尽地利，禁游食商贩。
现代文：泰始五年正月癸巳日，下敕令告诫各郡国的计吏、各郡国的太守、相等官员，务必尽量开发地利，禁止游食商贩。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, an imperial edict was issued to admonish the tax collectors of each county, the governor of each county, and the equivalent officials to do their best to develop the country and prohibit traveling food vendors.

古文：其休假者令与父兄同其勤劳，豪势不得侵役寡弱，私相置名。
现代文：让休假的官员和父兄一同勤勉劳作，豪强有势力的不可以侵害役使孤寡弱者，私下自相置换名义责任。
English: Let the officials on leave work diligently together with their parents. The strong and powerful should not encroach on the lonely and weak, and privately replace their nominal responsibilities.

古文：十月，诏以 司隶校尉石鉴所上汲郡太守王宏勤恤百姓，导化有方，督劝开荒五千余顷，遇年普饥而郡界独无匮乏，可谓能以劝教，时同功异者矣。
现代文：十月，下韶说 司隶校尉互鉴所上报的太守王塞勤勉安抚百姓，引导教化有方，督促鼓励开荒五千多顷，遇到年成普遍饥荒而郡界以内却独独没有缺粮的，可以说是能够凭藉鼓励教导，时令相同而成就不同的了。
English: In October, the lower court said that Wang Xie, the eunuch Wang Xie diligently appeased the people, guided and educated them, urged and encouraged the clearing of more than 5,000 hectares of wasteland, and encountered widespread famine in the year, but there was no shortage of grain within the county boundary. It can be said that by encouraging and teaching, the same season can achieve different results.

古文：其赐谷千斛，布告天下 。
现代文：特此赐给粮食一千斛，布告天下 。
English: I hereby grant one thousand mu of grain and announce it to the world.

古文：八年，司徒石苞奏： 州郡农桑未有殿最之制，宜增掾属令史，有所循行。 
现代文：泰蛆八年，司徒亘苞上奏说： 州郡的农桑方面还没有殿最考核的制度，应该增设有关官员，酌情施行。 
English: In the 8th year of the Thai year of the Rooster, Siddhartha Gautama said in his report: The state and county agricultural mulberry areas do not yet have the highest assessment system, and relevant officials should be added to implement it as appropriate.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：晋武帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：事见《石苞传》。
现代文：遣件事参见《石苞传》。
English: For the story of the expulsion, see "Shishizhu."

古文：苞既明于劝课，百姓安之。
现代文：互苞善于劝勉和督查，所以百姓能安心生活。
English: Both sides are good at exhortation and supervision, so the people can live with peace of mind.

古文：十年，光禄勋夏侯和上修新渠、富寿、游陂三渠，凡溉田千五百顷。
现代文：泰始十年，光禄勋夏侯和上奏修整新渠、富寿、游陂等三条水渠，共灌溉农田一千五百顷。
English: In the 10th year of the Taizhi era, Guanglu Xun, Xia Hou and Shangso repaired three canals, including the new canal, Fushou and Youyi, and irrigated a total of 1,500 hectares of farmland.

古文：咸宁元年十二月，诏曰： 出战入耕，虽自古之常，然事力未息，未尝不以战士为念也。
现代文：咸宁元年十二月，下诏说： 出去作战回来耕作，虽然是自古以来的常事，不过动用武力的事没有停止，从不曾不把战士放在心裹。
English: In December of the first year of Xianning, the following edict was issued: Although it has been a common practice since ancient times to go out to fight and return to farming, the use of force has not stopped, and soldiers have never been neglected.

古文：今以鄴奚官奴婢著新城，代田兵种稻，奴婢各五十人为一屯，屯置司马，使皆如屯田法。 
现代文：如今把邺城的马夫奴婢安置到新城，代替当兵的农民种植稻谷，奴婢各五十人为一屯，每一屯设置司马，使他们都仿照屯田的制度。 
English: Now, the groom's slaves and maidservants from Lucheng have been relocated to Xincheng, replacing the farmers who were soldiers to plant rice. Each of the fifty slaves and maidservants is a township, and each township is set up with a shima, so that they all follow the system of townships.

古文：三年，又诏曰： 今年霖雨过差，又有虫灾。
现代文：咸宁三年，又下韶说： 今年雨水过量，又有虫灾。
English: In the third year of Xianning, he said: This year, there is too much rain, and there are insect plagues.

古文：颍川、襄城自春以来，略不下种，深以为虑。
现代文：颖!、襄城自春季以来，大部分不能播种，为此深深感到忧虑。
English: Ying!, Xiangcheng, since the spring, most of them cannot be sown, which is deeply worrying.

古文：主者何以为百姓计，促处当之。 
现代文：当地负责人怎么替百姓考虑的，尽快提出意见来。 
English: How can the local leaders consider the interests of the people, and come up with opinions as soon as possible?

古文：杜预上疏曰：
现代文：杜预上疏说：
English: Du Yuanzhang said:

古文：臣辄思惟，今者水灾东南特剧，非但五稼不收，居业并损，下田所在停汙，高地皆多硗脊，此即百姓困穷方在来年。
现代文：臣经常想，如今东南一带水灾特别厉害，不仅五谷没有收获，家居产业也都被损害，低洼的田地到处积着污水，高处的土地又都多半坚硬瘠薄，像这样百姓的困苦穷愁一定会出现在来年。
English: The minister often thinks that the floods in the southeastern region are particularly severe now. Not only is there no harvest in the grain, but the household industry has also been damaged. Low-lying fields are full of sewage, and the land at high altitudes is mostly hard and thin. Such hardships and poverty of the people will certainly appear next year.

古文：虽诏书切告长吏二千石为之设计，而不廓开大制，定其趣舍之宜，恐徒文具，所益盖薄。
现代文：即使诏书谆谆告诫地方官员们就此想办法，而不改变根本大计，确定有关的正确方向，恐怕会徒然具备有文件，真正的益处很少。
English: Even if the edict warns local officials to find a solution to this, without changing the fundamental plan and determining the correct direction, it will probably be in vain to have a document, and there will be little real benefit.

古文：当今秋夏蔬食之时，而百姓已有不赡，前至冬春，野无青草，则必指仰官谷，以为生命。
现代文：现在正是秋夏蔬菜食物最多的时候，可是百姓已经有不够的了，往下到冬春两季，野外连青草都没有，就一定指望仰赖官家的救济粮，用来活命。
English: Now is the time when the autumn and summer vegetable food is the most abundant, but the people already have not enough. Down to the winter and spring seasons, there is not even green grass in the field, so they must rely on the official relief grain to survive.

古文：此乃一方之大事，不可不豫为思虑者也。
现代文：这才是一方的大事，不可不预先考虑的啊。
English: This is what is important to one side, and must be considered in advance.

古文：臣愚谓既以水为困，当恃鱼菜螺蜯，而洪波泛滥，贫弱者终不能得。
现代文：臣认为既然因为水而被困，应当依仗鱼菜螺蚌，而洪水泛滥，贫穷弱者始终无法得到它们。
English: The minister thought that since they were trapped by the water, they should rely on the fish and vegetable snails, but the floods were so severe that the poor and the weak could never get them.

古文：今者宜大坏兗、豫州东界诸陂，随其所归而宣导之。
现代文：如今应该大规模破坏兖州、豫州束部边界的所有堤坝，根据水流所向而加以疏导。
English: Now it is necessary to destroy all the dikes on the border between Zhangzhou and Sokube in Henan Province on a large scale, and divert the water according to the direction of the water flow.

古文：交令饥者尽得水产之饶，百姓不出境界之内，旦暮野食，此目下日给之益也。
现代文：使得饥民们全都能利用丰富的水产品，百姓不用走出本地边界，早晚都能在野外找到食物，造就是眼下每天供给的办法。
English: So that all the hungry people can take advantage of the rich aquatic products, the people do not have to go out of the local border, sooner or later they can find food in the open air, which is the current daily supply method.

古文：水去之后，填淤之田，亩收数钟。
现代文：洪水退去以后，填塞了淤泥的农田，每亩可以收获好几钟。
English: After the flood has receded, the farmland, which was filled with silt, can be harvested for several hours per mu.

古文：至春大种五谷，五谷必丰，此又明年益也。
现代文：到春季大量种植五谷，五谷必定丰收，这又是明年的收益了。
English: By the spring, a large amount of grain will be planted, and the grain will certainly be harvested, which will be the next year's income.

古文：臣前启，典牧种牛不供耕驾，至于老不穿鼻者，无益于用，而徒有吏士谷草之费，岁送任驾者甚少，尚复不调习，宜大出卖，以易谷及为赏直。
现代文：臣以前上奏说，典牧的种牛不供耕田套车用，直到老了也不穿鼻子，对于实用没有益处，而白白占用人力粮草的开支，每年送去驾车的很少，又不加调教训练，应该大量出售，用来换粮食和作为赏钱。
English: The minister previously reported that the breeding cattle of the classic herdsmen are not used for farmland carting, and they do not wear noses until they are old, which is not beneficial for practical use, but they take up manpower and grain and grass expenses in vain, and there are few drivers sent every year, and there is no adjustment and training. They should be sold in large quantities to exchange for grain and as reward money.

古文：诏曰： 孳育之物，不宜减散。 
现代文：下诏说： 孳生繁育用的，不应减少分散。 
English: The next edict said: "For the purpose of breeding twins, the dispersion should not be reduced."

古文：事遂停寝。
现代文：这事于是就作罢了。
English: So the matter was dropped.

古文：问主者，今典虞右典牧种产牛，大小相通，有四万五千余头。
现代文：问有关的官员，如今典虞右典牧的种产牛，大小通算在内，有四万五千多头。
English: According to the relevant officials, there are more than 45,000 head of breeding cattle, including large and small cattle, in the pastures of the Dangyuyu Dynasties.

古文：苟不益世用，头数虽多，其费日广。
现代文：如果不能有利于实际应用，头数虽然很多，开支也日益增加。
English: If it is not conducive to practical application, the initial number is large, and the expenses are increasing.

古文：古者匹马丘牛，居则以耕，出则以战，非如猪羊类也。
现代文：古时候成年的马和牛，平时用来耕种，出兵时用来作战，不是和猪羊同类的。
English: In ancient times, adult horses and cattle, which were used for farming in peacetime and for fighting in times of war, were not the same as pigs and sheep.

古文：今徒养宜用之牛，终为无用之费，甚失事宜。
现代文：如今白白养着可以用的牛，到底是没有用处的开支，完全不符合事物的道理。
English: Raising cattle that can be used for nothing these days is a useless expense in the end, and it is completely inconsistent with the principle of things.

古文：东南以水田为业，人无牛犊。
现代文：东南一带以水田为主，人们没有牛犊。
English: The southeastern region is dominated by rice paddies, and people do not have cattle.

古文：今既坏陂，可分种牛三万五千头，以付二州将吏士庶，使及春耕。
现代文：如今既然破坏了堤防，可以分发种牛三万五千头，交付给两个州的军民百姓，使他们赶得上春耕。
English: Now that the levees have been breached, we can distribute 35,000 head of breeding cattle to the military and civilians in the two states, so that they can get to spring farming.

古文：谷登之后，头责三百斛。
现代文：稻谷收获以后，每头牛交三百斛。
English: After the rice harvest, each head of cattle earns 300 baht.

古文：是为化无用之费，得运水次成谷七百万斛，此又数年后之益也。
现代文：这是花无用的开支，得到水灾后的稻谷七百万斛，这又是几年以后的收益。
English: It was a waste of money, but we got seven million baht worth of rice after the flood, and this will be our income in a few years.

古文：加以百姓降丘宅土，将来公私之饶乃不可计。
现代文：加上百姓下山到平地上居住，将来公私两方面的丰饶收益是数不过来的。
English: Coupled with the people going down the mountain to live on the plain, there will be countless public and private benefits in the future.

古文：其所留好种万头，可即令右典牧都尉官属养之。
现代文：对于留下的上万头良种牛，可以让右典牧都尉官等饲养。
English: As for the tens of thousands of well-bred cattle that remain, they can be raised by officials such as Uteni Maki.

古文：人多畜少，可并佃牧地，明其考课。
现代文：人多畜少，可以同时开垦牧场土地，明确有关的考核。
English: With more people and fewer animals, it is possible to reclaim pasture land at the same time and clarify the relevant assessment.

古文：此又三魏近甸，岁当复入数十万斛谷，牛又皆当调习，动可驾用，皆今日之可全者也。 
现代文：这又是京师附近的地方，每年理当又收入几十万斛粮食，牛又都经过调教，有事时就可以套车备用，都是现在就可以做好的。
English: This is also a place near Beijing Division. Every year, it should earn hundreds of thousands of baht of grain, and the cattle have been trained. In case of emergency, they can be used as a backup. Everything can be done now.

古文：预又言：
现代文：杜预又说：
English: Du Yu said:

古文：诸欲修水田者，皆以火耕水耨为便。
现代文：各种想要整修水田的人，都认为火耕水耨最便利。
English: All kinds of people who want to renovate paddy fields think that fire ploughing is the most convenient.

古文：非不尔也，然此事施于新田草莱，与百姓居相绝离者耳。
现代文：并非不是那样，不过这样的方法用在新开垦的田和荒地，和百姓居住的地方相隔离的情况下罢了。
English: Not that it isn't, but it's only used in newly reclaimed fields and wastelands, away from where people live.

古文：往者东南草创人稀，故得火田之利。
现代文：从前东南一带刚开发而人口稀少，所以拥有可以用火烧荒的便利。
English: In the past, the southeastern region was newly developed and sparsely populated, so it has the convenience of being able to use fire to burn the wasteland.

古文：自顷户口日增，而陂堨岁决，良田变生蒲苇，人居沮泽之际，水陆失宜，放牧绝种，树木立枯，皆陂之害也。
现代文：近来户口天天增加，可是蓄水塘每年决，良田裹长出蒲草芦苇，人们居住在水泽岸边，水陆失调，放牧绝种，树木枯死，都是堤陂为害。
English: Recently, the number of households has been increasing day by day, but the reservoir is overflowing every year, the good fields are covered with reeds, the people live on the banks of the water, the water and land are out of balance, the grazing is extinct, and the trees are dead, all of which are caused by the dike.

古文：陂多则土薄水浅，潦不下润。
现代文：堤陂多导致土层薄而水浅，积水不能往下渗掉。
English: The embankment often results in a thin soil layer and shallow water, and the accumulated water cannot seep down.

古文：故每有水雨，辄复横流，延及陆田。
现代文：所以每当有洪水大雨，就又泛滥横流，影响到旱田。
English: Therefore, whenever there is a flood or heavy rain, there will be flooding and cross-currents, affecting dry fields.

古文：言者不思其故，因云此土不可陆种。
现代文：议论的人不考虑其中的缘故，就说这样的土地不能种植旱地作物。
English: Irrespective of the reason, commentators say such land cannot grow dryland crops.

古文：臣计汉之户口，以验今之陂处，皆陆业也。
现代文：臣统计了汉代的户口，来核验现在有堤陂的地方，都是当年的陆地。
English: The minister counted the household registration of the Han Dynasty to verify that where there are dikes now, they are the land of that year.

古文：其或有旧陂旧堨，则坚完修固，非今所谓当为人害者也。
现代文：其中有的还有旧陂旧堰，都是坚固完好的，不是现在所说的危害人民的。
English: Some of them still have the old dikes and weirs, all of which are solid and intact, and are not what we now call harmful to the people.

古文：臣前见尚书胡威启宜坏陂，其言恳至。
现代文：臣以前见尚书胡威上奏说应当毁掉堤陂，他的话诚恳至极。
English: The minister had previously seen Shangshu Huwei's report that the dike should be destroyed, and his words were extremely sincere.

古文：臣中者又见宋侯相应遵上便宜，求坏泗陂，徙运道。
现代文：大臣中又见到宋侯相应遵上书提议，请求毁掉泗陂，改变运粮的路线。
English: The minister also saw Song Hou's proposal to comply with the letter, requesting the destruction of the raft and changing the route of grain transportation.

古文：时下都督度支共处当，各据所见，不从遵言。
现代文：眼下都督和度支共同处理，各自根据自己见到的，不听从应遵的意见。
English: At the moment, the governor and the governor jointly deal with each other, each according to what they see, and do not listen to the opinions that should be followed.

古文：臣案遵上事，运道东诣寿春，有旧渠，可不由泗陂。
现代文：臣考察了应遵上书说的事情，运粮路栈往东到寿春，有旧的水渠，可以不经由泗陂。
English: The minister inspected the things that should be done according to the letter. The grain transport road runs east to Shouchun, and there is an old water channel, which can be used without passing through the dike.

古文：泗陂在遵地界坏地凡万三千余顷，伤败成业。
现代文：泗陂在应遵管辖的地界内毁坏耕地共一万三千多顷，伤害破败了现成的基业。
English: The hailstorm destroyed a total of more than 13,000 hectares of cultivated land within the jurisdictional boundaries, and the damage ruined the existing foundation.

古文：遵县领应佃二千六百口，可谓至少，而犹患地狭，不足肆力，此皆水之为害也。
现代文：应遵的辖区裹管理的应有农户二千六百口，可以说非常少，却还担忧土地狭小，不足以尽力，这都是水害造成的。
English: There are 2,600 farmers in the jurisdiction to be managed, which can be said to be very few, but they are still worried that the land is too small to do their best, which is caused by floods.

古文：当所共恤，而都督度支方复执异，非所见之难，直以不同害理也。
现代文：应当共同关心这件事，可是都督和度支又各自意见不同，不是难以看出来，仅仅是因为认识不同妨碍了事理。
English: It should be a matter of common concern, but the governor and the governor have different opinions, which is not difficult to see, just because the difference in understanding hinders the cause.

古文：人心所见既不同，利害之情又有异。
现代文：人心所想到的既然有不同，利害关系的情况又有差异。
English: Since there is a difference in what the human mind thinks, there is also a difference in the situation of interests.

古文：军家之与郡县，士大夫之与百姓，其意莫有同者，此皆偏其利以忘其害者也。
现代文：军队方面和地方郡县，士大夫和老百姓，他们的认识没有一点相同的，这些都是因为偏重它的好处因而忘记了它的害处。
English: The military and the local counties and counties, the scholars and the common people, their understanding is not the same at all. These are all because of the emphasis on its benefits and forget its harms.

古文：此理之所以未尽，而事之所以多患也。
现代文：这正是事理之所以还不被了解，而实际中之所以有很多困难的原因。
English: This is the reason why the matter is not yet understood, and why there are many difficulties in practice.

古文：臣又案，豫州界二度支所领佃者，州郡大军杂士，凡用水田七千五百余顷耳，计三年之储，不过二万余顷。
现代文：臣又认为，豫州界内二处度支所管理的农户，都是州郡的大军杂士，共用水田七千五百多顷罢了，算起来三年的积累，不超过二万多顷。
English: The minister also believed that the farmers under the management of the two branch offices within the boundaries of Yuzhou were the great army of attendants in the county, with a total of more than seven thousand and five hundred hectares of paddy fields. Counting the three years of accumulation, it did not exceed more than twenty thousand hectares.

古文：以常理言之，无为多积无用之水，况于今者水涝湓溢，大为灾害。
现代文：根据常理来说，没有必要过多积存没有用处的水，何况如今洪水成涝，造成了大灾害。
English: According to common sense, there is no need to accumulate too much useless water, not to mention the fact that the flood has now turned into a flood and caused great disasters.

古文：臣以为与其失当，宁泻之不滀。
现代文：臣认为与其失当，不如泻掉它而不蓄积。
English: The vassal thought that it would be better to squander it rather than accumulate it.

古文：宜发明诏，敕刺史二千石，其汉氏旧陂旧堨及山谷私家小陂，皆当修缮以积水。
现代文：应该发布明文诏令，命令刺史二千石，凡是汉代的旧陂旧堰以及山谷裹的私家小陂，都应当修缮好以便积水。
English: A clear-cut edict should be issued, ordering that two thousand stones should be excavated, and all the old weirs of the Han Dynasty, as well as the private small weirs in the valley, should be repaired to allow water to accumulate.

古文：其诸魏氏以来所造立，及诸因雨决溢蒲苇马肠陂之类，皆决沥之。
现代文：凡是各代魏氏以来所建造的，以及各种因为雨水冲决后而建的蒲苇马肠之类的小陂，全都拆毁它。
English: All the ones built since the Wei Dynasty, as well as all kinds of small ones built after the rain, have all been demolished.

古文：长吏二千石躬亲劝功，诸食力之人并一时附功令，比及水冻，得粗枯涸，其所修功实之人皆以俾之。
现代文：长吏二千石亲自到现场鼓励作业，所有出力的人都集中听从号令，赶在水能冻结之前，能够大致枯涸，其中参加整修有实际功劳的人都加以鼓励。
English: The chief official of the 2,000-koku personally went to the site to encourage the work, and all the people who worked hard concentrated on obeying the order to make sure that the water could dry up before it could freeze, and those who participated in the renovation with actual merit were encouraged.

古文：其旧陂堨沟渠当有所补塞者，皆寻求微迹，一如汉时故事，豫为部分列上，须冬，东南休兵交代，各留一月以佐之。
现代文：凡是旧的水塘沟渠应当有所修补堵塞的，都查找出微小的迹象，一律按照漠代的做法，预先分类备案，到了冬季，东南一带休兵交接的时候，各自留出一个月来做遗件事。
English: All the old pond ditches that should be repaired or blocked should be checked for small signs, and all should be classified and filed in advance according to the practice of the desert era. In winter, when the southeast area is in a period of truce and handover, each side should set aside one month to do something.

古文：夫川渎有常流，地形有定体，汉氏居人众多，犹以无患，今因其所患而宣写之，迹古事以明近，大理显然，可坐论而得。
现代文：山川河渎有不变的流水，地势形貌有一定的样子，漠代居民众多，尚且没有问题，如今根据遇到的问题而把它宣泄掉，仿效古代的事例而了解眼前的问题，根本的道理是很明显的，可以很轻易地明白。
English: Mountains, rivers and streams have a constant flow of water, the topography has a certain appearance, there are many inhabitants in the desert, and there is no problem. Nowadays, according to the problems encountered, it is vented, and the current problems are understood by following the examples of ancient times. The fundamental reason is obvious and can be easily understood.

古文：臣不胜愚意，窃谓最是今日之实益也。
现代文：臣不胜愚意，窃以为实在是如今最大的现实利益所在。
English: Ministers are too stupid to believe that this is really where the greatest practical benefits lie today.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷听从了他的意见。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：及平吴之后，有司又奏： 诏书 王公以国为家，京城不宜复有田宅。
现代文：到平定吴国以后，有关官员又上奏说： 韶书说 王公以国为家，京城不应再有田地住宅。
English: After the pacification of Wuzhong, the relevant officials made another report: "The imperial edict says that the prince should make the country his home, and there should be no more field dwellings in the capital.

古文：今未暇作诸国邸，当使城中有往来处，近郊有刍藁之田 。
现代文：如今还没来得及建造各王国府邸，应当让他们在城内有往来的地方，近郊有供打柴草的田 。
English: Now is not the time to build the royal residences, they should have a place to come and go in the city, and there should be a field for firewood and grass in the suburbs.

古文：今可限之，国王公侯，京城得有一宅之处。
现代文：如今可以规定，王国的王爷和公爵侯爵们，在京城内可以有一所住宅的地方。
English: It can now be stipulated that the princes and dukes of the kingdom can have a place of residence in the capital.

古文：近郊田，大国田十五顷，次国十顷，小国七顷。
现代文：近郊的田地，大的王国给十五顷田，次一些的王国给十顷，小的王国给七顷。
English: For the fields in the suburbs, the larger kingdom will give 15 hectares of fields, the smaller kingdom will give 10 hectares, and the smaller kingdom will give 7 hectares.

古文：城内无宅城外有者，皆听留之。 
现代文：城内没有住宅而在城外有的，都允许保留。 
English: If there is no residence in the city but there is one outside the city, it is allowed to keep it.

古文：又制户调之式：丁男之户，岁输绢三匹，绵三斤，女及次丁男为户者半输。
现代文：又制订户调的规定：生男丁的人家，每年交纳绢三匹，绵三斤，生女或者生第二个男丁的交纳半敷。
English: In addition, the regulation of household transfer was formulated: the families of those who give birth to a male child shall pay three horseshoe crabs and three pounds of crabmeat every year, and the families of those who give birth to a female child or a second male child shall pay half of the rent.

古文：其诸边郡或三分之二，远者三分之一。
现代文：各边境的郡有些交三分之二，偏远的交三分之一。
English: Some border counties have two-thirds turnout, while outlying counties have one-third turnout.

古文：夷人输賨布，户一匹，远者或一丈。
现代文：夷人交纳责布，每户一匹，偏速的有些交一丈。
English: Each household is required to pay a tax, and some of the faster ones have to pay a higher tax.

古文：男子一人占田七十亩，女子三十亩。
现代文：一个男子占田七十亩，女子占三十亩。
English: A man occupies seventy mu of land, a woman occupies thirty mu.

古文：其外丁男课田五十亩，丁女二十亩，次丁男半之，女则不课。
现代文：此外丁男征收五十亩田的赋税，丁女征收二十亩，次丁男减半，次女就不收赋税。
English: In addition, the Ding man levied a tax of fifty mu of field, the Ding woman levied twenty mu, the second Ding man reduced by half, and the second woman did not collect tax.

古文：男女年十六已上至六十为正丁，十五已下至十三、六十一已上至六十五为次丁，十二已下六十六已上为老小，不事。
现代文：男女年满十六岁以上到六十岁为正丁，十五岁以下到十三岁、六十一岁以上到六十五岁为次丁，十二岁以下六十六岁以上为老小，不服役。
English: Men and women between the ages of 16 and 60 are referred to as "senior," those under the age of 15 are "junior," those over the age of 61 are "junior," and those under the age of 12 are "junior."

古文：远夷不课田者输义米，户三斛，远者五斗，极远者输算钱，人二十八文。
现代文：远方夷人不按田交赋税的交纳义米，每户三斛，偏远的交五斗，极其远的交纳算钱，每人二十八文。
English: The far-off barbarians did not pay tax according to their fields, but they paid yimi, three monme per household, the remote ones paid five do, and the extremely distant ones paid money, twenty-eight mon per person.

古文：其官品第一至于第九，各以贵贱占田，品第一者占五十顷，第二品四十五顷，第三品四十顷，第四品三十五顷，第五品三十顷，第六品二十五顷，第七品二十顷，第八品十五顷，第九品十顷。
现代文：官品从第一直到第九，分别根据贵贱占田，官品为第一品的占五十顷，第二品的四十五顷，第三品的四十顷，第四品的三十五顷，第五品的三十顷，第六品的二十五顷，第七品的二十顷，第八品的十五顷，第九品的十顷。
English: From the first to the ninth, the official goods occupied the fields according to the high and low, respectively. The official goods occupied 50 hectares for the first goods, 45 hectares for the second goods, 40 hectares for the third goods, 35 hectares for the fourth goods, 30 hectares for the fifth goods, 25 hectares for the sixth goods, 20 hectares for the seventh goods, 15 hectares for the eighth goods, and 10 hectares for the ninth goods.

古文：而又各以品之高卑廕其亲属，多者及九族，少者三世。
现代文：并且又各自根据官品的高低荫庇他的亲属，多的到九族，少的到三代关系。
English: Moreover, each of them patronized his relatives according to the level of official dignity, mostly up to nine families, and rarely up to three generations.

古文：宗室、国宾、先贤之后及士人子孙亦如之。
现代文：宗室、国宾、先贤的后代以及士人的子孙也按照这样施行。
English: Family members, state guests, descendants of sages, and descendants of nobles also follow this practice.

古文：而又得廕人以为衣食客及佃客，品第六已上得衣食客三人，第七第八品二人，第九品及举辇、迹禽、前驱、由基、强弩、司马、羽林郎、殿中冗从武贲、殿中武贲、持椎斧武骑武贲、持鈒冗从武贲、命中武贲武骑一人。
现代文：而且又可以荫庇人作为衣食客和佃客，官品在第六品以上可以有衣食客三人，第七第八品的两人，第九品的以及举辇、迹禽、前驱、由基、强弩、司马、羽林郎、殿中冗从武贲、殿中武贲、持椎斧武骑武贲、持级冗从武贲、命中武责武骑都是一人。
English: Moreover, the shadow of the eavesdropper can be used as a clothed diner and a diner, the official product can have three clothed diners in the sixth grade and above, two people in the seventh and eighth grade, and one person in the ninth grade, as well as the lifting of the shovel, the bird of prey, the forerunner, Yuki, the strong shovel, Sima, the feathered woodpecker, the hall of the hall of the warrior, the hall of the warrior, the warrior with the axe, the warrior with the rank of the warrior, and the warrior with the hit.

古文：其应有佃客者，官品第一第二者佃客无过五十户，第三品十户，第四品七户，第五品五户，第六品三户，第七品二户，第八品第九品一户。
现代文：其中应该有佃客的，官品在第一或第二的佃客不可以超过五十户，第三品的十户，第四品的七户，第五品的五户，第六品的三户，第七品的二户，第八品和第九品的一户。
English: Among them, there should be brokers, and the brokers with the first or second official grade should not exceed fifty households, the third grade ten households, the fourth grade seven households, the fifth grade five households, the sixth grade three households, the seventh grade two households, the eighth grade and the ninth grade one household.

古文：是时天下无事，赋税平均，人咸安其业而乐其事。
现代文：这个时期天下没有战事，赋税平均，人们都安心从业而乐于他们的工作。
English: During this period, there was no war in the world, taxes were average, people were employed with peace of mind and enjoyed their work.

古文：及惠帝之后，政教陵夷，至于永嘉，丧乱弥甚。
现代文：到晋惠帝以后，政治教化衰落，到了永嘉时期，丧乱更厉害。
English: After Emperor Jinhui, political indoctrination declined, and by the Yongjia period, the turmoil was even more severe.

古文：雍州以东，人多饥乏，更相鬻卖，奔迸流移，不可胜数。
现代文：雍州以东，人们多数饥饿乏困，相互变卖儿女，奔走逃亡流离迁移的，敷不过来。
English: East of Yongzhou, most of the people are starving and destitute, selling their children to each other, fleeing and migrating.

古文：幽、并、司、冀、秦、雍六州大蝗，草木及牛马毛皆尽。
现代文：幽、并、司、冀、秦、雍等六个州阑大蝗灾，草木以及牛马的毛都没有了。
English: Six prefectures including Yu, By, Si, Hebei, Qin, and Yong suffered from the locust plague, and grass, trees, and the hair of cattle and horses were all gone.

古文：又大疾疫，兼以饥馑。
现代文：又遇到大流行病，加上饥荒。
English: Epidemics were rampant, coupled with famine.

古文：百姓又为寇贼所杀，流尸满河，白骨蔽野。
现代文：百姓又被强盗杀害，漂流的尸体布满河面，白骨遮蔽了田野。
English: People were killed by bandits again, floating bodies covered the surface of the river, and white bones covered the fields.

古文：刘曜之逼，朝廷议欲迁都仓垣。
现代文：刘曜进逼，朝廷商议想迁都到仓垣。
English: Liu You was forced to move, and the imperial court discussed moving the capital to Kuragaki.

古文：人多相食，饥疫总至，百官流亡者十八九。
现代文：人吃人的现象多有发生，饥荒和瘟疫同时来到，百官流亡的十个裹有八九个。
English: The phenomenon of cannibalism often occurred, famine and plague came at the same time, and there were eight or nine out of ten officials in exile.

古文：元帝为晋王，课督农功，诏二千石长吏以入谷多少为殿最。
现代文：晋元帝身为晋王的时候，检查督促农业生产，下令二千石长吏们根据交纳粮食的多少来排座次。
English: When Emperor Jin Yuan was the king of Jin, he inspected and urged agricultural production, and ordered the 2,000-koku officials to line up according to the amount of grain paid.

古文：其非宿卫要任，皆宜赴农，使军各自佃作，即以为廪。
现代文：如果不是负责宿卫等重要任务，都要参加农业生产，让军队各自耕作，就把收成作为军粮。
English: If they are not in charge of important tasks such as night watch, they should all participate in agricultural production, let the army cultivate independently, and use the harvest as military food.

古文：太兴元年，诏曰： 徐、扬二州土宜三麦，可督令地，投秋下种，至夏而熟，继新故之交，于以周济，所益甚大。
现代文：太兴元年，下诏说： 徐、扬二州的土地适宜种植三麦之类，可以督促让土地干燥，趁秋天下种，到夏天就成熟了，赶在新旧交替的时候，用来周济，益处很大。
English: In the first year of Taixing, the following edict said: The land in the two prefectures of Xu and Yang is suitable for planting barley and the like. It is possible to urge the land to dry, take advantage of the autumn to plant, and mature in the summer. When the old and new alternate, it is used to provide aid, and the benefits are great.

古文：昔汉遣轻车使者氾胜之督三辅种麦，而关中遂穰。
现代文：过去汉代派遣轻车使者泛胜之督促三辅一带种植麦子，于是关中地区就丰足。
English: In the past, the Han Dynasty sent emissaries to urge the cultivation of wheat in the Sanfu area, so the Guanzhong area was plentiful.

古文：勿令后晚。 
现代文：不要使得迟误了。 
English: Don't be late.

古文：其后频年麦虽有旱蝗，而为益犹多。
现代文：从那以后连年的麦子虽然有旱灾蝗灾，可是得益还是很多。
English: Since then, although there have been droughts and locust plagues for years, the wheat has still benefited a lot.

古文：二年，三吴大饥，死者以百数，吴郡太守邓攸辄开仓廪赈之。
现代文：太兴二年，三吴地区有大饥荒，死的人有好几百，吴郡太守邓攸就打开仓廪赈济灾民。
English: In the second year of Taixing, there was a great famine in the Sanwu region, and several hundred people died. Deng You, the governor of Wuxi County, opened a granary to help the victims.

古文：元帝时使黄门侍郎虞斐、桓彝开仓廪振给，并省众役。
现代文：晋元帝当时派遣黄门侍郎虞骏、桓彝打开仓廪赈济，并减省众人的徭役。
English: At that time, Emperor Jin Yuan sent Huangmen's attendants, Yu Xi and Huan Xi, to open the granary and save money, and reduced the number of people to serve as guards.

古文：百官各上封事，后军将军应詹表曰： 夫一人不耕，天下必有受其饥者。
现代文：百官各自呈上秘密奏章，后军将军应詹上表说： 一个人不耕作，天下人中必定有因此挨饿的。
English: A hundred officials each submitted a secret report, and the general of the rear army said in response to Zhan's report: If a person does not cultivate, there must be people starving in the world.

古文：而军兴以来，征战运漕，朝廷宗庙，百官用度，既已殷广，下及工商流寓僮仆不亲农桑而游食者，以十万计。
现代文：而白军队兴兵以来，出征交战水陆转运，国家用度和宗庙祭祀用度，百官的开支用度，已经需要很多，下面那些工匠商人流民寓公僮仆等不直接从事农桑生产而游手白吃的人数，要十万十万地计算。
English: However, since the White Army raised an army, there has been a lot of demand for the transportation of goods by land and sea, the expenditure of the state, the expenditure of the ancestral temple, and the expenditure of hundreds of officials. The number of craftsmen, merchants, displaced people, public servants, etc. who are not directly engaged in the production of agricultural mulberry and eat for free should be counted in hundreds of thousands.

古文：不思开立美利，而望国足人给，岂不难哉！
现代文：不考虑开发建立获得大利的途径，而指望国家丰足人民有衣食，岂不是很难的吗!
English: Isn't it difficult to expect a country to have enough food and clothing for its people without considering the development and establishment of a way to obtain it!

古文：古人言曰，饥寒并至，虽尧舜不能使野无寇盗；贫富并兼，虽皋陶不能使强不陵弱。
现代文：古人说，饥饿和寒冷一起降临，即使是尧、舜也不能使山野裹没有强盗；贫穷和富有同时存在，即使是皋陶也不能使强者不欺凌弱者。
English: The ancients said that hunger and cold come together, even the plough and harrow cannot make the mountains and fields without robbers; poverty and wealth exist at the same time, even the potter cannot prevent the strong from bullying the weak.

古文：故有国有家者，何尝不务农重谷。
现代文：所以管理国家的人，什么时候不曾不抓农业重视粮食问题。
English: That is why the people who run the country have never failed to pay attention to agriculture and attach importance to the food problem.

古文：近魏武皇帝用枣祗、韩浩之议，广建屯田，又于征伐之中，分带甲之士，随宜开垦，故下不甚劳，而大功克举也。
现代文：近代魏武皇帝采用枣祗、韩浩的意见，广泛设立屯田，又从征伐的军队中，分出现役的士兵，因地制宜开垦荒地，所以人民不很辛劳，而大功得以完成。
English: In modern times, Emperor Weiwu adopted the opinions of Zaozhuang and Han Hao and established a wide range of military garrisons. He also assigned active soldiers from the conquering army to reclaim the wasteland according to local conditions, so the people did not have to work very hard, and the great work was completed.

古文：间者流人奔东吴，东吴今俭，皆已还反。
现代文：近来流亡的人投奔束吴，束吴如今歉收，都已经返回了。
English: The recent exiles who fled to Sok Wu, which is now suffering from poor harvests, have all returned.

古文：江西良田，旷废未久，火耕水耨，为功差易。
现代文：江西一带的良田，空闲废置不久，烧荒翻耕灌水播种，花费的劳力相对比较少。
English: The good fields in the Jiangxi region have been idle and abandoned for a long time. They have been burned, ploughed, watered and sown, and relatively little labor has been expended.

古文：宜简流人，兴复农官，功劳报赏，皆如魏氏故事。
现代文：应该挑选流亡的人，重新恢复管理农业的官署，按照功劳上报给以奖赏，一切按照魏朝的老例。
English: The exiles should be selected, the government office that manages agriculture should be restored, and rewards should be given according to merit, all in accordance with the old practice of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：一年中与百姓，二年分税，三年计赋税以使之，公私兼济，则仓盈庾亿，可计日而待也。 
现代文：一年之内的收获给百姓，第二年的收一部分税，第三年以后计算赋税来管理他们，公家与个人都得到好处，那么仓库裹存满大量粮食的时候，是可以数着日子等它到来的。 
English: In one year, the harvest is given to the people, in the second year, a part of the tax is collected, and after the third year, the tax is calculated to manage them. Both the public and individuals benefit. When the warehouse is filled with a large amount of grain, it is possible to count the days until it arrives.

古文：又曰： 昔高祖使萧何镇关中，光武令寇恂守河内，魏武委钟繇以西事，故能使八表夷荡，区内辑宁。
现代文：又说： 从前汉高祖派萧何镇守关中，光武帝命令寇恂镇守河内，魏武帝把西部事务委任给钟繇，所以能够使得所有相邻的地方不再动荡，统治下的地方和平安宁。
English: He also said: From the time the Han Emperor Gao Zu sent Xiao He to guard the town of Guanzhong, Emperor Guangwu ordered the town of Guanzhong to guard Hanoi, and Emperor Wei Wudi delegated the western affairs to Zhongyi, so he could make all the neighboring places no longer unstable, and the places under his rule were peaceful and tranquil.

古文：今中州萧条，未蒙疆理，此兆庶所以企望。
现代文：如今中原地区沦陷，还有待受到治理，这是亿万百姓所盼望的。
English: Now that the Central Plains region has fallen, it still needs to be governed, which is what hundreds of millions of people hope for.

古文：寿春一方之会，去此不远，宜选都督有文武经略者，远以振河洛之形势，近以为徐豫之籓镇，绥集流散，使人有攸依，专委农功，令事有所局。
现代文：寿春是一方之都会，距离这裹不远，应该挑选都督中有文才武略的人，远可以改变中原河洛的形势，近可以成为徐州、豫州的屏障，安抚聚集流亡分散的人，使得人们有所依靠，专心从事农业生产，使事情有所归属。
English: Shouchun is the capital of one side, and it is not far from here. It is necessary to select a person with literary talent and strategy among the governors, who can change the situation of Central Plains Hailo from far away, and can become a barrier for Xuzhou and Yuzhou from near, pacify the people who are gathered and scattered in exile, make people have something to rely on, concentrate on agricultural production, and make things belong.

古文：赵充国农于金城，以平西零；诸葛亮耕于渭滨，规抗上国。
现代文：趟充国在金城抓农业，从而平定西零羌人；诸葛亮在渭水流域开垦，对抗中原上国。
English: Watsuchogoku focused on agriculture in Kinjo, thereby subduing the people of West Zero; Zhuge Liang reclaimed land in the Surabaya watershed, opposing the Central Plains Shanguo.

古文：今诸军自不对敌，皆宜齐课。
现代文：如今各军已经不用对敌作战，都应该一致去做逭件事。 
English: Now that all armies no longer have to fight against the enemy, they should all work together to do the right thing.

古文：咸和五年，成帝始度百姓田，取十分之一，率亩税米三升。
现代文：咸和五年，晋成帝开始根据百姓的田地，取十分之一，每亩收三升米的税。
English: In the 5th year of Xianhe, Emperor Jincheng began to collect one-tenth of the people's fields and three liters of rice per mu.

古文：六年，以海贼寇抄，运漕不继，发王公以下余丁，各运米六斛。
现代文：咸和六年，由于海盗抢劫，水路转运中断，征发王公以下的没有服役的壮丁，每人运六斛米。
English: In the sixth year of Xianhe, due to pirate robberies, water transport was interrupted, and all able-bodied men below the prince who had not served in the military were conscripted to transport six cormorants per person.

古文：是后频年水灾旱蝗，田收不至。
现代文：此后连年水旱虫灾，田裹没有收获。
English: Since then, there have been successive years of floods, droughts and insect infestations, and the fields have not been harvested.

古文：咸康初，算度田税米，空悬五十余万斛，尚书褚裒以下免官。
现代文：咸康初年，统计计划内田地的税米，差额达五十多万斛，从尚书褚裒往下的官员都罢免了。
English: In the first year of Xiankang, the difference in tax rice from the fields within the statistical plan amounted to more than half a million baht. Officials from Shang Shuxuan down were dismissed.

古文：穆帝之世，频有大军，粮运不继，制王公以下十三户共借一人，助度支运。
现代文：晋穆帝的时候，频繁有大军行动，军粮运输接不上，规定王公以下每十三户共借一个人，援助调度运输。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinmu, there were frequent large-scale military operations, and the transportation of military food could not be connected. It was stipulated that every 13 households below the prince should borrow one person to assist in the scheduling of transportation.

古文：升平初，荀羡为北府都督，镇下邳，起田于东阳之石鳖，公私利之。
现代文：升平初年，荀羡担任北府都督，镇守下邳，在束阳的石艳开垦种田，公私都受益。
English: In the first year of Shangping, Zou En served as the governor of Beifu, the town guard of Xiamen, and cultivated rice fields in Shiyan, Sakuyang, benefiting both the public and private sectors.

古文：哀帝即位，乃减田租，亩收二升。
现代文：晋哀帝即位，于是减免田租，每亩收二升米的税。
English: When Emperor Jimmai ascended the throne, land rent was reduced and exempted, and a tax of two liters of rice per mu was collected.

古文：孝武太元二年，除度田收租之制，王公以下口税三斛，唯蠲在役之身。
现代文：孝武帝太元二年，废除按田亩收租税的制度，王公以下每人纳税三斛，衹蠲免正在服役的人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the system of collecting tax according to the number of mu of farmland was abolished. Everyone from the prince on down paid three baht in tax, with exemptions for those currently serving in the military.

古文：八年，又增税米，口五石。
现代文：太元八年，又增收税米，每人五石。
English: In the 8th year of the Taiyuan era, the tax rice was increased again, and each person received five stones.

古文：至于末年，天下无事，时和年丰，百姓乐业，谷帛殷阜，几乎家给人足矣。
现代文：直到太元末年，天下没有战事，风调雨顺连年丰收，百姓安居乐业，粮食布帛丰富，几乎是家家有余人人丰足了。
English: Until the end of the 19th century, there was no war in the world, the wind and rain brought good harvests year after year, the people lived and worked in peace, and the grain was plentiful. Almost everyone in the family had enough to eat.

古文：汉钱旧用五铢，自王莽改革，百姓皆不便之。
现代文：汉朝的钱原来用的是五铢，自从王莽改制革新，百姓都感到不方便。
English: The money of the Han Dynasty was originally five yuan, but since Wang Mang reformed and innovated, the people have felt inconvenient.

古文：及公孙述僭号于蜀，童谣曰： 黄牛白腹，五铢当复。 
现代文：到公孙述在蜀冒用帝王的称号，童谣说： 黄牛白腹，五铢当复。 
English: According to Gongsun, the title of emperor was used in Shu Rong, and the nursery rhyme said: "The yellow cow has a white belly, and the five-year-old is in charge."

古文：好事者窃言，王莽称黄，述欲继之，故称白帝。
现代文：好事的人私下裹说，王莽自称黄，公孙述想继承他，所以自称白帝。
English: Good-hearted people said privately that Wang Mang called himself Huang, and his son-in-law said that he wanted to succeed him, so he called himself Bai Di.

古文：五铢汉货，言汉当复并天下也。
现代文：五铢钱是汉代的货币，童谣说的是汉朝会恢复统一天下。
English: The five-baht coin was the currency of the Han Dynasty, and the nursery rhyme said that the Han Dynasty would restore unification.

古文：至光武中兴，除莽货泉。
现代文：到汉光武帝中兴，废除王莽的货币。
English: To the Han Emperor Guangwu Zhongxing, abolishing Wang Mang's currency.

古文：建武十六年，马援又上书曰： 富国之本，在于食货，宜如旧铸五铢钱。 
现代文：建武十六年，马援又上书说： 使国家富强的根本，在于经济，应该按从前的制度铸五铢钱。 
English: In the 16th year of Jianwu, Ma Yuan also wrote: The foundation of making the country rich and strong lies in the economy, and five-baht coins should be minted according to the previous system.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：于是复铸五铢钱，天下以为便。
现代文：于是恢复铸五铢钱，天下人认为很方便。
English: As a result, the minting of five-baht coins was resumed, which the people of the world thought was very convenient.

古文：及章帝时，谷帛价贵，县官经用不足，朝廷忧之。
现代文：到汉章帝时，粮食布帛价格很贵，地方官经费不足，朝廷忧虑逭件事。
English: By the time of Emperor Han Zhang, grain and cloth prices were very expensive, local officials were short of funds, and the imperial court was worried.

古文：尚书张林言： 今非但谷贵也，百物皆贵，此钱贱故尔。
现代文：尚书张林说： 如今不衹是粮食贵，什么东西都贵，这是因为钱贬值的缘故。
English: Shangshu Zhang Lin said: Nowadays, food is expensive, and everything is expensive. This is due to the devaluation of money.

古文：宜令天下悉以布帛为租，市买皆用之，封钱勿出，如此则钱少物皆贱矣。
现代文：应该命令天下人都用布帛作为租金，购买时都用它，封存钱币不要流通，这样的话钱币减少货物都会便宜起来。
English: The people of the world should be ordered to use cloth money as rent, use it when purchasing, and seal the coins not to circulate. In this case, the coins will be reduced and the goods will be cheaper.

古文：又，盐者食之急也，县官可自卖盐，武帝时施行之，名曰均输。 
现代文：另外，盐是食物中最急需的，地方官府可以自己卖盐，武帝的时候施行了这个办法，叫做均输。 
English: In addition, salt is the most urgently needed ingredient in food, and local governments can sell salt themselves. Emperor Wu implemented this method, which is called equal distribution.

古文：于是事下尚书通议。
现代文：于是把这件事批给尚书讨论。
English: So the matter was assigned to Shang Shu for discussion.

古文：尚书硃晖议曰： 王制，天子不言有无，诸侯不言多少，食禄者不与百姓争利。
现代文：尚书朱晖提意见说： 王道的制度，天子不谈有或没有，诸侯不论多还是少，拿俸禄的人不和老百姓争利。
English: Shangshu Zhu Xi pointed out: The system of the royal road, whether or not there is a heavenly son, whether there are more or fewer lords, those who receive salaries do not compete with the common people.

古文：均输之法，与贾贩无异。
现代文：均输的方法，和商贩没有不同。
English: The method of averaging losses is no different from that of merchants.

古文：以布帛为租，则吏多奸。
现代文：用布帛作为租税，那么官吏有很多作奸的机会。
English: If cloth money is used as taxes, then officials have many opportunities to commit treason.

古文：官自卖盐，与下争利，非明王所宜行。 
现代文：官府自己卖盐，和下面的百姓争利，不是明智的君王所应该做的。 
English: It is not what a wise king should do that the government sells salt itself and competes with the people below for profit.

古文：帝本以林言为是，得晖议，因发怒，遂用林言，少时复止。
现代文：皇帝本来就认为张林的话是对的，得知塞肿的意见，于是发了火，马上采用了张林的主意，过了一些时候又停止了。
English: The emperor originally thought that Zhang Lin's words were right, and when he learned of the opinion of Jie Yu, he became angry, immediately adopted Zhang Lin's idea, and stopped after some time.

古文：桓帝时有上书言： 人以货轻钱薄，故致贫困，宜改铸大钱。 
现代文：有人上书说： 人们认为货币轻铜钱薄，所以导致贫困，应该改铸大钱。 
English: Someone wrote: People think that money is light and thin, so it leads to poverty. It should be changed to big money.

古文：事下四府群僚及太学能言之士。
现代文：事情批给四府所有官员和太学裹善于议论的人。
English: The matter was assigned to all officials of the four prefectures and those who are good at talking.

古文：孝廉刘陶上议曰：
现代文：孝廉刘陶提出意见说：
English: Filial piety Liu Tao gave his opinion and said:

古文：臣伏读铸钱之诏，平轻重之义，访覃幽微，不遗穷贱，是以藿食之人，谬延逮及。
现代文：臣伏读了阗于铸钱的韶书，评断钱的轻重的问题，询问到很不起眼的人，不漏掉贫穷低贱的，因此吃粗粮的人，也能冒昧地赶上说说。
English: The courtiers read aloud the book of rules for minting money, judged the importance of money, and asked very humble people, not forgetting the poor and lowly, so that people who eat coarse grains can also dare to say it quickly.

古文：盖以当今之忧，不在于货，在乎人饥。
现代文：我认为当前的问题，不在货币上，在人民饥饿上。
English: I think the current problem is not about the currency, but about people's hunger.

古文：是以先王观象育物，敬授民时，使男不逋亩，女不下机，故君臣之道行，王路之教通。
现代文：因此先王观察天象繁育农作物，恭敬地告诉百姓耕作的时令，使男子不荒废耕种，女子不走下纺织机，所以君臣之间的道义得以实行，先王法度的内容得以贯彻。
English: Therefore, the late king observed the celestial bodies to breed crops, and respectfully told the people the time for farming, so that the men would not waste time in farming, and the women would not get off the loom, so that the morality between the monarchs and the subjects could be implemented, and the content of the late king's laws could be carried out.

古文：由是言之，食者乃有国之所宝，百姓之至贵也。
现代文：由此说来，粮食就是国家的宝贝，百姓最为看重的。
English: Therefore, grain is the treasure of the country and the most important thing for the people.

古文：窃以比年已来，良苗尽于蝗螟之口，杼柚空于公私之求。
现代文：窃以为连年来，很好的禾苗都进了蝗虫之类的嘴巴，纺织机上的产品都被公家私门索取光了。
English: Over the years, good seedlings have fallen into the mouths of locusts, and the products on the looms have been stolen by both public and private parties.

古文：所急朝夕之食，所患靡盬之事，岂谓钱之厚薄，铢两之轻重哉！
现代文：最着急的是每天的饭食，最犯愁的是无休止的公事，哪裹在乎钱币的厚薄，分量的轻重啊!
English: The most urgent is the daily meal, the most troublesome is the endless business. Who cares about the thickness of the coin, the weight!

古文：就使当今沙砾化为南金，瓦石变为和玉，使百姓渴无所饮，饥无所食，虽皇羲之纯德，唐虞之文明，犹不能以保萧墙之内也。
现代文：就算使当今的沙砾化为南方出产的铜，瓦石变成美玉，假如百姓渴了而没有喝的，饿了而没有吃的，即便是伏羲的纯粹明德，唐尧、虞舜之文教英明，仍然是不能够用来安定萧墙以内的地方的。
English: Even if the present-day gravel were to turn into copper produced in the south, and the pebbles into precious stones, if the people were thirsty but had nothing to drink, and hungry but had nothing to eat, even the pure wisdom of Fuxi, the literary and educational wisdom of Tang and Yu, would still not be able to be used to stabilize the places within the wall.

古文：盖百姓可百年无货，不可以一朝有饥，故食为至急也。
现代文：因为百姓可以一百年没有货币，不可以遭受一天的饥饿，所以粮食是最急需的。
English: Because the people can live without money for a hundred years and cannot suffer from hunger for a day, food is the most urgent need.

古文：议者不达农殖之本，多言铸冶之便，或欲因缘行诈，以贾国利。
现代文：议论的人不明白农业耕种这个根本，大多说的是铸钱的便利，有的想藉机会搞欺诈，来从国家身上谋取利益。
English: The people who are talking about it do not understand the fundamentals of agricultural cultivation. Most of them are talking about the convenience of making money, and some are trying to take advantage of the opportunity to engage in fraud to seek profits from the state.

古文：国利将尽，取者争竞，造铸之端，于是乎生。
现代文：国家的利益将要没有了，掠取的人互相竞争，造钱铸币的事情，于是就提出来了。
English: The interests of the state would be lost, plunderers would compete with each other, and the issue of minting money was raised.

古文：盖万人铸之，一人夺之，犹不能给，况今一人铸之则万人夺之乎！
现代文：其实一万个人铸钱，一个人夺钱，尚且不够，何况如今一个人铸钱而上万人来夺钱呢!
English: As a matter of fact, ten thousand people minting money and one person seizing money is not enough. What's more, nowadays one person mints money and tens of thousands of people come to seize money!

古文：虽以阴阳为炭，万物为铜，役不食之民，使不饥之士，犹不能足无厌之求也。
现代文：即使用阴阳作为炭，用万物作为铜，驱赶不需要吃饭的民众，役使不知道饥饿的人，还是不能满足没有止境的索求的。
English: Even if you use yin and yang as charcoal, use all things as copper, drive away the people who do not need to eat, and serve those who do not know hunger, you still cannot satisfy the endless demands.

古文：夫欲民财殷阜，要在止役禁夺，则百姓不劳而足。
现代文：凡是想要民众财产殷实富裕，关键在于停止劳役禁止掠夺，那么百姓不用劳累就够用了。
English: If you want the people's property to be rich and prosperous, the key is to stop labor service and prohibit plunder, then the people will be enough without labor.

古文：陛下圣德，愍海内之忧戚，伤天下之艰难，欲铸钱齐货，以救其弊，此犹养鱼沸鼎之中，栖鸟列火之上。
现代文：陛下有圣明的品德，怜悯海内的忧伤悲哀，感伤天下的艰苦困难，想要铸钱聚集资财，来拯救其中的弊病，这好比把鱼养在开水锅裹，让乌落在烈火上面。
English: Your Majesty has a saintly character, pitying the sadness of the sea, feeling the hardships of the world, and wanting to make money and gather resources to save the ills in it, which is like keeping a fish in a boiling pot and letting it fall on the flames.

古文：木水，本鱼鸟之所生也，用之不时，必至焦烂。
现代文：树木和水，本来是鱼和鸟生存的地方，使用不合时宜，必定导致焦烂。
English: Trees and water, originally a place for fish and birds to live, if used inappropriately, will inevitably lead to scorching.

古文：愿陛下宽锲薄之禁，后冶铸之议也。
现代文：希望陛下放宽刻薄的禁令，缓办铸钱的意见。
English: I hope that His Majesty will relax the harsh ban and postpone the idea of minting money.

古文：帝竟不铸钱。
现代文：皇帝最终没有铸钱。
English: In the end, the emperor did not mint money.

古文：及献帝初平中，董卓乃更铸小钱，由是货轻而物贵，谷一斛至钱数百万。
现代文：到献帝初平年间，董卓竟然又铸小钱，从此货币轻而物价贵，谷子一斛达到数百万钱。
English: During the early Heian period, Dong Zhuo actually minted small money again. From then on, the currency was light and expensive, and the grain reached millions of money at a time.

古文：至魏武为相，于是罢之，还用五铢。
现代文：到魏武帝担任了相，那时候才废止了，恢复使用五铢钱。
English: It was not until Emperor Wu of Wei became the prime minister that it was abolished and the five-baht coin was reintroduced.

古文：是时不铸钱既久，货本不多，又更无增益，故谷贱无已。
现代文：逭时已经很久不铸钱，货币本来不多，又再没有增加，所以谷子价钱跌个不停。
English: At that time, money had not been minted for a long time. There was not much money, and there was no increase, so the price of corn kept falling.

古文：及黄初二年，魏文帝罢五铢钱，使百姓以谷帛为市。
现代文：到黄初二年，魏文帝停用五铢钱，使百姓用粮食布帛直接交易。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wei Wen stopped using the five-baht coin, so that the people could trade directly with the grain cloth.

古文：至明帝世，钱废谷用既久，人间巧伪渐多，竞湿谷以要利，作薄绢以为市，虽处以严刑而不能禁也。
现代文：到明帝的时候，钱被废止谷子被使用已经很久，人间取巧做假的渐渐多起来，竞相用潮湿的谷子来谋利，制作很薄的绢来交换，即使用严刑处罚也不能禁止。
English: By the time of the Ming Dynasty, money had been abolished and grain had been used for a long time. There were more and more people who were clever and faked, competing to use wet grain to make profit and making very thin straw to exchange. Even the use of severe punishment could not be prohibited.

古文：司马芝等举朝大议，以为用钱非徒丰国，亦所以省刑。
现代文：司马芝等人举朝大议，认为用钱不衹是使国家丰足，也可以用来减省刑罚。
English: Sima Zhi and others held a general discussion, arguing that the use of money is to make the country rich, and can also be used to reduce criminal penalties.

古文：今若更铸五铢钱，则国丰刑省，于事为便。
现代文：现在如果再铸五铢钱，那么国家丰足刑罚减省，对于治理来说是方便的。
English: Now, if another 50 baht is minted, then the state's abundant penalty reduction is convenient for governance.

古文：魏明帝乃更立五铢钱，至晋用之，不闻有所改创。
现代文：魏明帝于是再次行用五铢钱，到晋代一直使用它，没有听说有什么改变更新。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei then reintroduced the five-baht coin and continued to use it until the Jin Dynasty, without hearing of any changes or updates.

古文：孙权嘉禾五年，铸大钱一当五百。
现代文：孙权嘉禾五年，铸大钱一个当五百个小钱。
English: In the five years of Sun Quan Jiahe, the minting of big money was worth five hundred small money.

古文：赤乌元年，又铸当千钱。
现代文：赤乌元年，又铸当一千个小钱的。
English: In the first year of the Red Emperor Wu, another thousand small coins were minted.

古文：故吕蒙定荆州，孙权赐钱一亿。
现代文：所以吕蒙平定荆州，孙权赐他一亿钱。
English: Therefore, Lv Meng pacified Jingzhou, and Sun Quan gave him 100 million yuan.

古文：钱既太贵，但有空名，人间患之。
现代文：钱既然太贵，衹有空名，人们犯愁它。
English: Since money is too expensive, there is no empty name, and people are worried about it.

古文：权闻百姓不以为便，省息之，铸为器物，官勿复出也。
现代文：孙权听说百姓不认为方便，就停用大钱，铸成器物，官府不许再拿出去流通。
English: When Sun Quan heard that the people did not think it was convenient, he stopped using large sums of money to cast objects, and the government was not allowed to take them out of circulation.

古文：私家有者，并以输藏，平卑其直，勿有所枉。
现代文：私家拥有的，都拿来上缴，按价值抵偿，不许有不合理的。
English: All privately-owned property shall be handed over, and compensation shall be made according to its value, and nothing unreasonable shall be allowed.

古文：晋自中原丧乱，元帝过江，用孙氏旧钱，轻重杂行，大者谓之比轮，中者谓之四文。
现代文：晋代自从中原丧失离乱，晋元帝遇江以后，用孙氏旧有的钱，轻的重的掺杂使用，大的叫做 比轮 ，中等的叫做 四文 。
English: After the Jin Dynasty lost its independence from the Central Plains and Emperor Jin Yuan encountered the Yangtze River, it used the Sun Dynasty's old money, using a mixture of heavy and light money. The large money was called Bi-Ren, and the medium money was called Si-Wen.

古文：吴兴沈充又铸小钱，谓之沈郎钱。
现代文：吴兴沈充又铸造小钱。叫做 选鹧钱 。
English: Wu Xing Shencong also minted small money. It was called "selection money."

古文：钱既不多，由是稍贵。
现代文：钱既然不多，因此渐渐贵起来。
English: Since money is scarce, it gradually becomes more expensive.

古文：孝武太元三年，诏曰： 钱，国之重宝，小人贪利，销坏无已，监司当以为意。
现代文：孝武帝太元三年，下韶说： 钱，是国家的重实，小人贪图谋利，不断销熔毁坏，有关部门应当加以注意。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign in the first year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the lower jaw said: Money is the real wealth of the country. The villain is greedy for profit and constantly sells and destroys. The relevant departments should pay attention to this.

古文：广州夷人宝贵铜鼓，而州境素不出铜，闻官私贾人皆于此下贪比轮钱斤两差重，以入广州，货与夷人，铸败作鼓。
现代文：广州的夷人把铜鼓看得很宝贵，可是州境之内素来不出产铜，听说官家私家商人都在这个时候贪求 比轮 钱的分量较重，带进广州，卖给夷人，化开来制作铜鼓。
English: The barbarians in Guangzhou regarded the copper drums as very valuable, but there was no way to produce copper within the borders of the state. I heard that government officials and private businessmen were eager at this time to take the heavier weight of the money, bring it to Guangzhou, sell it to the barbarians, and melt it down to make copper drums.

古文：其重为禁制，得者科罪。 
现代文：将严厉禁止，抓住的要按犯罪处罚。 
English: will be strictly prohibited, and those caught will be punished according to the crime.

古文：安帝元兴中，桓玄辅政，立议欲废钱用谷帛。
现代文：晋安帝元兴年间，桓玄辅佐朝政，提出意见想要废止钱币采用粮食布帛。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of Jin and An, Huan Xuan, an aide to the imperial court, proposed to abolish the use of grain cloth as money.

古文：孔琳之议曰：
现代文：孔琳之提意见说：
English: Kong Lin's opinion said:

古文：《洪范》八政，货为食次，岂不以交易所资，为用之至要者乎！
现代文：《洪范》裹说到 八政 ， 货 在 食 的后面，难道是不把交易时所用的钱，作为用品中最重要的吗!
English: "Hong Fan" mentioned the Eight Principles of Politics, and goods are behind food. Isn't the money used in the transaction the most important thing in the supplies?

古文：若使百姓用力于为钱，则是妨为生之业，禁之可也。
现代文：如果让老百姓致力在为了钱上，那么这是妨害了生存的基业，禁止它是可以的。
English: If ordinary people are made to work for money, then this is an impediment to the foundation of survival, and it is possible to ban it.

古文：今农自务谷，工自务器，各隶其业，何尝致勤于钱。
现代文：如今农民自己去生产粮食，工匠自己去生产器物，各自归于他们的行当，何曾为了钱而辛勤操劳。
English: Nowadays, farmers produce their own grain and craftsmen produce their own utensils, each of which belongs to their trade, and they have never worked hard for money.

古文：故圣王制无用之货，以通有用之财，既无毁败之费，又省难运之苦，此钱所以嗣功龟贝，历代不废者也。
现代文：所以圣王制作没有用的货币，来流通有用的财物，既避免了物资毁坏残败的费用，又省去难以运输的麻烦，这是钱之所以在龟甲贝壳之后发挥作用，历代不能废除的原因。
English: Therefore, the holy king made useless money to circulate useful property, which not only avoided the cost of material destruction and damage, but also saved the trouble of difficult transportation. This is the reason why money plays a role after the tortoise shell and cannot be abolished in all ages.

古文：谷帛为宝，本充衣食，分以为货，则致损甚多。
现代文：粮食布帛是宝贝，本来是满足吃穿的，分出来作为货币使用，就会导致很多的损失。
English: Grain cloth is a treasure. Originally, it was used for food and clothing. If it is distributed and used as currency, it will lead to a lot of losses.

古文：又劳毁于商贩之手，秏弃于割截之用，此之为弊，著自于曩。
现代文：又在商贩的手裹磨损毁坏，因为分割截取之类的使用方法而损耗废弃，这种情况成为弊病，在从前就很明显。
English: In addition, the hand wraps of merchants are worn and destroyed, and the loss is discarded due to the use of methods such as split intercept, which has become a malady, which was obvious in the past.

古文：故钟繇曰，巧伪之人，竞湿谷以要利，制薄绢以充资。
现代文：所以钟繇说，取巧造假的人，竞相把谷子弄成潮湿来谋取暴利，制作薄薄的绢来充当资本。
English: Therefore, Zhong Qi said, people who are skillful in counterfeiting are competing to make the grain wet to seek windfall profits and make thin stalks to serve as capital.

古文：魏世制以严刑，弗能禁也。
现代文：魏朝用严刑来限制，也不能禁止。
English: The Wei Dynasty used severe punishment to restrict it, but it could not be banned.

古文：是以司马芝以为用钱非徒丰国，亦所以省刑。
现代文：因此司马芝认为使用钱币不衹是使国家丰足，也能因此减省刑罚。
English: Therefore, Sima Zhi believed that the use of coins and money is to make the country rich, and it can also reduce the penalty.

古文：钱之不用，由于兵乱积久，自致于废，有由而然，汉末是也。
现代文：钱币之所以不再流通，由于兵乱积日持久，自己导致被废弃，有原因才这样的，汉代末期就是这样。
English: The reason why coins are no longer in circulation is due to the long-lasting military turmoil, which led to their abandonment. There is a reason for this, and this was the case at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今既用而废之，则百姓顿亡其利。
现代文：如今已经流通而又废弃它，那么老百姓顿时失去了钱币的有利之处。
English: Now that it has been circulated and abandoned, the people have suddenly lost the advantages of coins.

古文：今括囊天下之谷，以周天下之食，或仓廪充溢，或粮靡并储，以相资通，则贫者仰富。
现代文：现在掌握了天下所有的粮食，用来周济天下人的食物，有的仓库裹满满的，有的储粮不多，用钱来互相流通，那么贫穷的人有希望富起来。
English: Now that we have all the grain in the world, which is used to feed the world's people, some warehouses are full, some have little grain reserves, and money is used to circulate among each other, then the poor have hope of becoming rich.

古文：致富之道，实假于钱，一朝断之，便为弃物。
现代文：致富的途径，实际上要藉助于钱币，一旦禁断了它，就成为废物。
English: The way to get rich, in fact, is to make use of coins. Once it is banned, it will become waste.

古文：是有钱无粮之人，皆坐而饥困，以此断之，又立弊也。
现代文：这样有钱而没有粮食的人，都将一下子陷入饥饿困窘，由此看来，又将会造成弊病。
English: Such people, who have money but no food, will all of a sudden find themselves in the predicament of hunger, which, in turn, will cause illness.

古文：且据今用钱之处，不以为贫，用谷之处，不以为富。
现代文：况且可以看到如今用钱的地方，并不贫穷，用谷子的地方，并不富有。
English: Moreover, it can be seen that where money is used today, there is no poverty, and where grain is used, there is no wealth.

古文：又人习来久，革之必惑。
现代文：加上人们习用的由来已经很久，革除它必定感到迷惑。
English: In addition, people have been using it for a long time, and it must be confusing to get rid of it.

古文：语曰，利不百，不易业，况又钱便于谷邪！
现代文：老话说，好处没有一百条，不改行，何况又是钱币比谷子便利呢!
English: As the old saying goes, there aren't a hundred advantages to not changing careers, and what's more, coins are more convenient than grains!

古文：魏明帝时钱废，谷用既久，不以便于人，乃举朝大议。
现代文：魏明帝时钱被废止，谷子被使用已经很久，不认为便于人，才让满朝官员都来讨论。
English: At the time of Emperor Wei Ming, money was abolished completely, and grain was used for a long time. It was not considered convenient for people, so the officials of the Manchu Dynasty came to discuss it.

古文：精才达政之士莫不以宜复用钱，下无异情，朝无异论。
现代文：精明的才士通达政务的人没有不认为应该恢复使用钱币，下面没有不同的想法，朝堂上没有不同的意见。
English: There is not a shrewd and experienced statesman who does not think that the use of coins should be restored, there are no different ideas below, and there are no different opinions in the court.

古文：彼尚舍谷帛而用钱，足以明谷帛之弊著于已诫也。
现代文：他们尚且舍弃用谷子布帛而采用钱币，足以说明用谷子布帛的弊病已经明显地使他们有了教训。
English: The fact that they have even abandoned the use of corn cloth and adopted coins is enough to show that the evils of using corn cloth have clearly taught them a lesson.

古文：世或谓魏氏不用钱久，积累巨万，故欲行之，利公富国，斯殆不然。
现代文：世人有的说魏朝不使用钱币很久之后，积累了巨万财富，所以想要实行它，有利于公家而使国家富强，遣恐怕是不对的。
English: Some people in the world say that the Wei Dynasty did not use coins for a long time and accumulated huge wealth, so it would be wrong to try to implement it, which would benefit the public and make the country rich and strong.

古文：晋文后舅犯之谋，而先成季之信，以为虽有一时之勋，不如万世之益。
现代文：晋塞公搁置舅犯提出的谋略，而先用成季主张的诚信，认为即使有一时的功勋，赶不上有万世的益处。
English: Jin Saigong put aside the strategy proposed by his brother-in-law, and first used the integrity of the season, believing that even if there is a momentary merit, it cannot catch up with the benefit of the world.

古文：于时名贤在列，君子盈朝，大谋天下之利害，将定经国之要术。
现代文：当时有名的贤人就在官员中，有德的君子满朝都是，大家商讨天下形势的利弊，将要确定治理国家的基本方法。
English: At that time, famous sages were among the officials, virtuous gentlemen were all over the dynasty, everyone discussed the pros and cons of the world situation, and the basic method of governing the country would be determined.

古文：若谷实便钱，义不昧当时之近利，而废永用之通业，断可知矣。
现代文：如果谷子确实比钱币便利，按道理不会被当时的浅近小利所蒙蔽，而废止永远有用的东西，是明显可以了解的了。
English: If the grain is really more convenient than money, it is reasonable not to be blinded by the petty interests of the time, and the abolition of something that is always useful is clearly understandable.

古文：斯实由困而思革，改而更张耳。
现代文：遣实在是进入困境而想到变革，改弦更张罢了。
English: It's really just a case of getting into a difficult situation and thinking about change, changing things up.

古文：近孝武之末，天下无事，时和年丰，百姓乐业，谷帛殷阜，几乎家给人足，验之实事，钱又不妨人也。
现代文：近时晋孝武帝的末期，天下没有战事，时令和顺年成丰收，百姓安居乐业，谷子布帛充足，几乎家家充裕人人丰足，用实际事例来检验，钱也是不妨害人的。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, there was no war in the world, the season was good and the harvest was good year after year, the people lived and worked in peace, the grain cloth was sufficient, and almost every family was well-off. Using actual cases to test, money is not harmful to people.

古文：顷兵革屡兴，荒馑荐及，饥寒未振，实此之由。
现代文：不久战争多次发生，荒年饥馑接连到来，饥寒没有解决，实在是由此造成。
English: Soon, war broke out several times, famine came one after another, and cold and hunger were not resolved. This is the real cause.

古文：公既援而拯之，大革视听，弘敦本之教，明广农之科，敬授人时，各从其业，游荡知反，务末自休，同以南亩竞力，野无遗壤矣。
现代文：公既然帮助并拯救了世道，彻底改变人们的认识，弘扬注重根本的道理，彰明推广农耕的事项，认真地告知人们时令的变迁，各自从事他们的事业，游荡的人知道改正，不务正业的自行停止，共同在农田上争相出力，野地裹没有遗漏的耕地了。
English: Since the public has helped and saved the world, completely changed people's understanding, promoted the principle of paying attention to the fundamentals, highlighted the promotion of agriculture, conscientiously informed people of the seasonal changes, each engaged in their own business, wandering people know how to correct, do not stop their own business, and work together on farmland, there is no missing cultivated land in the field.

古文：于此以往，将升平必至，何衣食之足恤！
现代文：从此以后，升平景象将必定到来，哪裹值得为衣食发愁!
English: From now on, the rise and fall of the landscape will surely come, which is worth worrying about food and clothing!

古文：愚谓救弊之术，无取于废钱。
现代文：我认为拯救时弊的办法，从废除钱币裹是得不到的。
English: I do not think that the remedy for the evils of our time is to be found in the abolition of coinage.

古文：朝议多同琳之，故玄议不行。
现代文：朝堂上的意见多数同意琳之的，所以桓玄的意见没有实行。
English: Most of the opinions in the morning hall agreed with Lin Zhi, so Kuan Xuan's opinion was not implemented.

