古文：凡战，若彼为主、我为客，唯务深入。
现代文：凡是作战，如果敌方是在本土防守，而我方处于进攻位置时，就一定要深入敌国腹心地区。
English: In any battle, if the enemy is defending on the mainland and we are in an offensive position, we must go deep into the enemy's heartland.

古文：深入，则为主者不能胜也。
现代文：越是深入腹心地区，就会使敌人不能取得胜利。
English: The deeper you go into the heartland, the more you make it impossible for the enemy to win.

古文：谓客在重地，主在散地故耳。法曰： 深入则专。 
现代文：这就是通常所说的， 客军 深入敌国腹心地区，因无返顾之路，只能拚命进击；而 主军 处于本国作战，士兵思乡恋土，易于逃散致败的缘故。
English: This is what is commonly referred to as the reason why the guest army penetrates into the enemy's heartland, and because there is no way back, can only desperately attack; while the main army is fighting in its own country, the soldiers are homesick and nostalgic, and it is easy to scatter and cause defeat.

古文：汉，韩信、张耳以兵数万，欲东下井陉击赵。
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 深入敌人腹心地区作战，将士就会专心致志地去杀敌。 西汉初年，韩信同张耳奉刘邦之命率兵数万，企图东下井陉，攻打赵国。
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If you fight deep into the enemy's heartland, your soldiers will devote themselves to killing the enemy. In the first year of the Western Han Dynasty, Han Xin and Zhang Er led tens of thousands of soldiers under the orders of Liu Bang and attempted to go east to Jingyao and attack Zhao.

古文：赵王及成安君陈余聚兵井陉口，众号二十万。
现代文：赵王歇和辅佐他的成安君陈馀调集部队扼守井陉口，号称有二十万人之多。
English: Zhao Wangxie and Cheng'anjun Chen Yu, who assisted him, mobilized troops to guard the entrance to the well, claiming to have as many as two hundred thousand people.

古文：广武君李左车说成安君曰： 闻韩信涉西河，掳魏豹，擒夏悦，新喋血阏与。
现代文：广武君李左车劝成安君陈馀说： 听说汉将韩信从黄河西岸东渡，俘虏了魏王豹，活捉了夏悦，刚刚血洗了阏与。
English: Guangwu's son Li Zuo persuaded Cheng'an's son Chen Yu, saying, "I heard that Han Xin was taken by Han from the west bank of the Yellow River to the east, captured Wei Wangpan, captured Xia Yue alive, and just washed the blood with blood.

古文：今乃辅以张耳，议欲以下赵，此乘胜而去国远斗，其风声所及，足以夺人，其锋何可挡也。
现代文：如今又以张耳为辅佐，商议要攻占赵国，此是乘胜扩张战果而到远方的国家，他们的胜利消息不论传到何处，都令人丧胆。
English: Now, with Zhang Er as an assistant, they are discussing the conquest of Zhao, a faraway country that has benefited from the victory and expansion of the war. The news of their victory, no matter where it spreads, is discouraging.

古文：臣闻：千里馈粮，士有饥色，樵苏而爨，师不宿饱。
现代文：因为他们的战斗力无人可挡。但我听说，从千里以外运送军粮，士兵就会面有饥色；临时打柴割草而烧火做饭，士兵就常常吃不饱。
English: But I've heard that when army rations are transported from thousands of miles away, the soldiers are famished; when they have to chop wood, cut grass and cook on an open fire, the soldiers often don't have enough to eat.

古文：今井陉之道，车不得方轨，骑不得成列，其势粮食必在其后。
现代文：如今井陉这条道路，车辆无法并列通行，骑兵不能并排行走，汉军行进在数百里的狭长道路上，他们的运粮车势必落在部队之后。
English: Today, vehicles cannot travel side-by-side, cavalry cannot walk side-by-side, and the Chinese army marches on hundreds of miles of narrow roads. Their grain trucks are bound to fall behind the troops.

古文：愿足下假臣奇兵三万人，从间道绝其辎重，足下深沟高垒勿与战。
现代文：希望您暂且拨给我奇兵三万人，抄小路拦截他们的辎重粮草；而您就凭据深沟高垒，固守防御，不跟他们交战。
English: I hope that for the time being, you will assign 30,000 of my marvelous soldiers to intercept their heavy loads of grain and grass by taking back roads, and that you will adhere to defense and not engage them on the basis of deep ditches and high walls.

古文：彼前不能斗，退不能还，野无所掠，不至十日，两将之头可悬麾下。
现代文：这样，他们前进无法交战，后退无法返还，我用奇兵切断其后路，使他们在野外掠不到粮草，不出十天，韩、张两将之头就会悬挂在将军的指挥旗下。
English: In this way, they can't advance to fight, and they can't retreat to return. I cut off their rear path with a miracle soldier, so that they can't plunder grain and grass in the field. In less than ten days, the heads of Han and Zhang will be hanging on the general's command banner.

古文：愿君留意。否则，必为所擒。 
现代文：希望您能认真考虑我的计策，不然的话，必将被他们擒获。 
English: I hope you can seriously consider my strategy, otherwise, they will surely catch you.

古文：成安君自以为义兵，不听其策，果被杀。
现代文：成安君陈馀自以为正义之师不使用诈谋奇计，根本不采纳李左车的计策，其后果然被韩信部队所杀。
English: Cheng Anjun Chen Yu thought that the teacher of justice would not use deception and trickery, and did not adopt Li Zuoqi's strategy at all. As a result, he was killed by Han Xin's troops.

