古文：黄帝问曰：呜呼远哉，天之道也！
现代文：黄帝问道：天的规律非常远大呀！
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "The laws of heaven are very far-reaching!

古文：如迎浮云，若视深渊，视深渊尚可测，迎浮云莫知其极。
现代文：如仰望空中的浮云，又像看望深渊一样，渊虽深还可以被测知，仰望浮云则不知它的终极之处。
English: If you look up at the floating clouds in the sky, it is like looking into the abyss. Although the abyss is deep, it can still be detected. Looking up at the floating clouds, you do not know where it ends.

古文：夫子数言谨奉天道，予闻而藏之，心私异之，不知其所谓也。
现代文：先生多次谈到，要小心谨慎地尊奉气象变化的自然规律，我听到以后，都怀记不下来，但是心理独自有些疑惑，不明白说的是什么意思。
English: He repeatedly said that we should be careful to respect the natural laws of meteorological changes. After I heard this, I couldn't remember it, but I had some doubts in my mind and didn't understand what he meant.

古文：愿夫子溢志尽言其事，令终不灭，久而不绝，天之道可得闻乎？
现代文：请先生热情而详尽地讲讲其中的道理，使它永远地流传下去，久而不致灭绝。你可以把它的规律讲给我听吗？
English: Please, sir, enthusiastically and in detail explain the reason for it, so that it can be passed on forever, long before it becomes extinct. Can you tell me its rules?

古文：岐伯稽首再拜，对曰：明乎哉问天之道也！
现代文：岐伯拜了两拜回答说：你提的问题很高明啊！
English: Qibo bowed twice and replied, "Your question is very clever!

古文：此因天之序，盛衰之时也。
现代文：这是由于运气秩序的变更，表现为自然气象盛衰变化的时位。
English: This is due to a change in the order of luck, which manifests itself as the timing of changes in the rise and fall of natural weather.

古文：帝曰：愿闻天道六六之节盛衰何也？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听关于天道六六之节的盛衰情况是怎样的？
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to hear about the rise and fall of the Mid-Autumn Festival."

古文：岐伯曰：上下有位，左右有纪。故少阳之右，阳明治之；阳明之右，太阳治之；太阳之右，厥阴治之；厥阴之右，少阴治之；少阴之右，太阴治之；太阴之右，少阳治之。
现代文：岐伯说；六气司天在泉，有一定的位置，左右间气，是太阳主治；太阳的右间，是厥阴主治；厥阴的右间，是少阴主治；少阴的右间，是太阴主治；太阴的右间，是少阳主治。
English: Qi Bo said that the six airs that rule the sky in the spring have a certain position. The air between the left and right is ruled by the sun; between the sun's right, it is ruled by Jueyin; between Jueyin's right, it is ruled by Shaoyin; between Shaoyin's right, it is ruled by Taiyin; between Taiyin's right, it is ruled by Shaoyang.

古文：此所谓气之标，盖南面而待之也。
现代文：这就是所说的六气之标，是面向南方而定的位置。
English: This is the so-called six-gas mark, which is a fixed position facing south.

古文：故曰： 因天之序，盛衰之时，移光定位，正立而待之。 
现代文：所以说，要根据自然气象变化的顺序和盛衰的时间，即曰影移动的刻度，确定位置，南面正立以进行观察。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to determine the position according to the order of natural meteorological changes and the rise and fall time, that is, the scale of shadow movement, and stand upright on the south side for observation.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：这就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：少阳之上，火气治之，中见厥阴；阳明之上，燥气治之，中见太阴；太阳之上，寒气治之，中见少阴；厥阴之上，风气治之，中见少阳；少阴之上，热气治之，中见太阳；太阴之上，湿气治之，中见阳明。
现代文：少阳司天，火气主治，少阳与厥阴相表里，故厥阴为中见之气；阳明司天，燥气主治，阳明与太阴相表里，故太阴为中见之气；太阳司天，寒气主治，太阳与少阴相表里，故少阴为中见之气；厥阴司天，风气主治，厥阴与少阳相表里，故少阳为中见之气；少阴司天，热气主治，少阴与太阳相表里，故太阳为中见之气；太阴司天，湿气主治，太阴阳明相表里，故阳明为为中见之气。
English: The sun rules the day, coldness rules, the sun rules the day, coldness rules the day, the sun rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, coldness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day, coldness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day, coldness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day, hotness rules the day,

古文：所谓本也。本之下，中之见也。见之下，气之标也。本标不同，气应异象。
现代文：这就是所谓本元之气，本气之下，是中见之气，中见之下，是气之标，由于和标不同，应之于脉则有差异，而病形也就不一样。
English: This is the so-called original qi. Under the original qi, there is the middle qi. Under the middle qi, there is the standard of qi. Since they are different from the standard, they are different from the pulse, and the pathology is also different.

古文：帝曰：其有至而至，有至而不至，有至而太过，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：六气有时至而气亦至的，有时至而气不至的，有先时而气至太过的，这是为什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: Sometimes the six qi comes and the qi also comes, sometimes it comes and the qi does not come, sometimes it comes first and the qi is too much, why is this?

古文：岐伯曰：至而至者，和；至而不至，来气不及也；未至而至，来气有余也。
现代文：岐伯说：时至而气亦至的，为和平之年；有时至而气不至的，是应至之气有所不及；时未至而气已至，是应至之气有余。
English: Qibo said, "When the wind comes, it is a year of peace; when the wind does not come, it is not enough; when the wind does not come, it is more than enough."

古文：帝曰：至而不至，未至而至，何如？
现代文：黄帝说：时至而气不至，时未至而气已至的会怎样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "When the time comes, the breath does not come, and when the time does not come, the breath has already come, what will happen?

古文：岐伯曰：应则顺，否则逆，逆则变生，变生则病。
现代文：岐伯说：时与气相映的是顺，时与气不相应的是逆，逆就要发生反常的变化，反常的变化就是要生病。
English: Qi Bo said: when it is in harmony with the qi, it is smooth, when it is not in harmony with the qi, it is the opposite, and vice versa, abnormal changes will occur. Abnormal changes are to get sick.

古文：帝曰：善。请言其应。
现代文：黄帝说：好，请你再讲讲其相应的情况。
English: Huang Di said, "Good, please tell me more about the corresponding situation."

古文：岐伯曰：物，生其应也。
现代文：岐伯说：万物对六气的感应，表现其生长的情况。
English: Qi Bo said: All things respond to the six elements and show their growth.

古文：气，脉其应也。帝曰：善。
现代文：六气对于人体的影响，从脉象上可以反映出来。黄帝说：好。
English: The influence of the six qi on the human body can be reflected in the pulse. Huangdi said, "Good."

古文：愿闻地理之应六节气位何如？
现代文：我想听你讲讲六气之应于地理位置是怎样的呢？
English: I would like to hear from you about how the six qi correspond to the geographical location.

古文：岐伯曰：显明之右，君火之位也。君火之右，退行一步，相火治之；复行一步，土气治之；复行一步，金气治之；复行一步，水气治之；复行一步，木气治之；复行一步，君火治之。
现代文：岐伯说：显明正当春分之时，它的右边，为君火主治之位；君火的右边，再退行一步，为相火主治之位；再退行一步，为土气主治之位；再退行一步，为金气主治之位；再退行一步，为水气主治之位；再退行一步，为木气主治之位；再退行一步，为君火主治之位。
English: Qibo said, "When the vernal equinox appears, its right side is the reigning place of the king fire; the right side of the king fire, one step back, is the reigning place of the phase fire; one step back, is the reigning place of the earth gas; one step back, is the reigning place of the metal gas; one step back, is the reigning place of the water gas; one step back, is the reigning place of the wood gas; one step back, is the reigning place of the king fire.

古文：相火之下，水气承之；水位之下，土气承之；土位之下，风气承之；风位之下，金气承之；金位之下，火气承之；君火之下，阴精承之。
现代文：六气各有相克之气，承于其下，以制约之。水能制火，相火的下面，水气承之；土气承之；木能制土，土位的下面，风气承之；阴能制阳，君火的下面，阴精承之。
English: Each of the six qi has its own qi, which is subject to it and controlled by it. Water can produce fire, and below the fire phase, water qi; earth qi; wood can produce earth, and below the earth phase, wind qi; yin can produce yang, and below the king fire, yin essence.

古文：帝曰：何也？
现代文：黄帝说：这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：亢则害，承乃制，制则生化，外列盛衰；害则败乱，生化大病。
现代文：岐伯说：六气亢盛时就要为害，相承之气，可以制约它，递相制约才能维持正常的生化，在四时之气中表现为气盛者必衰，衰者必盛，若亢盛为害则生化之机毁败紊乱，必然发生大病。
English: Qi Bo said: When the six qi is in full bloom, it will cause harm. When the qi is interrelated, it can be controlled. In order to maintain normal biochemistry, it must be controlled by the next phase. In the four-phase qi, it is manifested that if the qi is in full bloom, it will decline. If the qi is in full bloom, it will be harmful. If the qi is harmful, the biochemical mechanism will be destroyed and disordered, and serious illness will inevitably occur.

古文：帝曰：盛衰何如？
现代文：黄帝说：气的盛衰是怎样的呢？
English: Yellow Emperor said: What is the rise and fall of qi?

古文：岐伯曰：非其位则邪，当其位则正。邪则变甚，正则微。
现代文：岐伯说：不当其位的是邪气，恰当其位的是正气，邪气则变化很严重，正气则变化很轻微。
English: Qi Bo said: the improper position is the evil spirit, the proper position is the righteous spirit, the evil spirit changes very seriously, and the righteous spirit changes very slightly.

古文：帝曰：何谓当位？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样叫作恰当其位呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What do you call taking the rightful place?"

古文：岐伯曰：木运临卯，火运临午，土运临四季，金运临酉，水运临子。所谓： 岁会 ，气之平也。
现代文：岐伯说：例如木运遇到卯年，火运遇到午年，土运遇到辰、戌、丑、末年，金运遇到酉年，水运遇到子年，乃是中运之气与年之方位五行之气相同。所说的 岁会 ，为运气和平之年。
English: Qibo said, "For example, if the Wood Festival is in the Year of the Rabbit, the Fire Festival is in the Year of the Goat, the Earth Festival is in the Year of the Rat, the Dragon, the Goat, and the Year of the Rat, the Gold Festival is in the Year of the Goat, and the Water Festival is in the Year of the Goat, the energy of the Mid-year Festival is the same as that of the Year of the Five Elements. The Year of the Goat is a year of luck and peace.

古文：帝曰：非其位何如？
现代文：黄帝说：不当其位是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is it like to be in an improper position?"

古文：岐伯曰：岁不与会也。
现代文：岐伯说：就是中运之气与年之方位五行之气相会。
English: Qi Bo said: It is the meeting of the qi of the Mid-Autumn Festival and the qi of the five directions of the year.

古文：帝曰：土运之岁，上见太阴；火运之岁，上见少阳、少阴；金运之岁，上见阳明；木运之岁，上见厥阴；水运之岁，上见太阳。
现代文：黄帝说：土运之年，遇到太阴司天；火运之年，遇到少阳、少阳司天；金运之年，遇到太阳司天；木运之年，遇到厥阴司天；水运之年，遇到太阳司天是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "In the year of earth movement, you will encounter the great yin and yang; in the year of fire movement, you will encounter the lesser yang and lesser yang; in the year of gold movement, you will encounter the great sun; in the year of wood movement, you will encounter the great yin and yang; and in the year of water movement, you will encounter the great sun."

古文：奈何？岐伯曰：天与之会也。故《天元册》曰： 天符 。
现代文：岐伯说：这是中运与司天相会。所以《天元册》中叫做 天符 。
English: Qibo said, "This is the meeting of Zhongyun and Siten. Therefore, it is called Tianfu in the "Tianyuan Book."

古文：帝曰：天符、岁会何如？
现代文：黄帝说：既是 天符 ，又是 岁会 的是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is it that is both a heavenly charm and a New Year's gift?"

古文：岐伯曰： 太一天符 之会也。
现代文：岐伯说：这叫做 太一天符 。
English: Qibo said, "It's called Taichinpu."

古文：帝曰：其贵贱何如？
现代文：黄帝说：它们有什么贵贱的不同吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Is there any difference between them?"

古文：岐伯曰：天符为执法，岁会为行令，太一天符为贵人。
现代文：岐伯说：天符好比执法，岁会好比行令，太一天符好比贵人。
English: Qi Bo said: Tianfu is similar to law enforcement, Shiyihui is similar to issuing orders, and Tai Dianfu is similar to nobles.

古文：帝曰：邪之中也奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：邪气中人发病时，三者有什么区别呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the difference between the three when a person with evil spirit falls ill?

古文：岐伯曰：中执法者，其病速而危；中行令者，其病徐而持；中贵人者，其病暴而死。
现代文：岐伯说：中于执法之邪，发病快速而危重；中于行令之邪，发病缓慢而持久；中于贵人之邪，发病急剧而多死。
English: Qi Bo said: in the evil of enforcing the law, the onset is rapid and critical; in the evil of issuing orders, the onset is slow and long-lasting; in the evil of nobles, the onset is rapid and many die.

古文：帝曰：位之易也何如？
现代文：黄帝说：主气客气位置互易时是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is it like when the master and the servant exchange positions?

古文：岐伯曰：君位臣则顺，臣位君则逆。
现代文：岐伯说：君位客气居于臣位主气之上的为顺，臣位客气，居于君位主气之上的为逆。
English: Qibo said: It is in accordance with the principle that the courtesy of a prince is superior to the courtesy of a subject, while the courtesy of a subject is superior to the courtesy of a prince.

古文：逆则其病近，其害速；顺则其病远，其害微。所谓二火也。帝曰：善。
现代文：逆者发病快而急，顺者发病慢而轻。这里主要是指君火的相火说的。黄帝说：好。
English: The inverse person has a fast and rapid onset, and the compliant person has a slow and light onset. Here, it mainly refers to the phase of the king's fire. The Yellow Emperor said: Good.

古文：愿闻其步何如？
现代文：我想听听关于六部的情况是怎样的？
English: I would like to hear what the situation is with regard to the six-part series?

古文：岐伯曰：所谓步者，六十度而有奇，故二十四步，积盈百刻而成日也。
现代文：岐伯说：所谓 步 ，就是指六十度有零的时间，每年是六步，所以在二十四步中，也就是四年内，积每年刻度的余数共为一百刻，就成为一日。
English: Qibo said: The so-called "step" refers to the time for sixty degrees to have a zero, which is six steps per year, so in twenty-four steps, that is, within four years, the balance of the annual scale is a total of one hundred hours, which becomes one day.

古文：帝曰：六气应五行之变何如？
现代文：黄帝说：六气应与五行的变化是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What are the changes between the six airs and the five elements?"

古文：岐伯曰：位有终始，气有初中上下不同，求之亦异也。
现代文：岐伯说：每一气所占的位置，是有始有终的，一气中又分为初气和中气，由于天气和地气的不同，所以推求起来，也就有了差异。
English: Qibo said: The position occupied by each gas has a beginning and an end. In one gas, it is divided into the initial gas and the middle gas. Due to the difference between the weather and the earth's atmosphere, there are also differences when inferred.

古文：帝曰：求之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样推求呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can I make supplication?

古文：岐伯曰：天气始于甲，地气始于子，子甲相合，命曰岁立，谨候其时，气可与期。
现代文：岐伯说：天气始于天干之甲，地气始于地支之子，子和甲交和起来，就叫 岁立 ，紧密地注意交气的时间，六气变化的情况，就可以推求出来。
English: Qi Bo said: The weather starts from the heavenly stem, and the earth's atmosphere starts from the son of the earth's branch. When the son and the branch intersect, it is called the year. Pay close attention to the time of the gas exchange, and the situation of the six gas changes can be deduced.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其岁，六气始终，早晏何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听关于每年六气的始终早晚是怎样的？
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to hear about how the annual Six Airs are always sooner or later?"

古文：岐伯曰：明乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你提的这个问题是很高明的啊！
English: Qibo said, "The question you raised is very clever!

古文：甲子之岁，初之气，天数始于水下一刻，终于八十七刻半；二之气，始于八十七刻六分，终于七十五刻；三之气，始于七十六刻，终于六十二刻半；四之气，始于六十二刻六分，终于五十刻；五之气，始于五十一刻，终于三十七刻半；六之气，始于三十七刻六分，终于二十五刻。
现代文：甲子之年，初之气，天时的刻数，开始漏水下一刻，终于八十七刻五分；二之气，开始于八十七刻六分，终止于七十五刻；三之气，开始于七十六刻，终止于六十二刻五分；四之气，开始于六十二刻六分，终止于五十刻；五之气，开始于五十一刻，终止于三十七刻五分；六之气，开始于三十七刻六分，终止于二十五刻。
English: In the year of the rooster, the first qi, the number of hours of the day, began to leak from the next moment and finally reached eighty-seven minutes and five minutes; the second qi, began at eighty-seven minutes and six minutes and ended at seventy-five minutes; the third qi, began at seventy-six minutes and ended at sixty-two minutes and five minutes; the fourth qi, began at sixty-two minutes and six minutes and ended at fifty minutes; the fifth qi, began at fifty-one minutes and ended at thirty-seven minutes and five minutes; the sixth qi, began at thirty-seven minutes and six minutes and ended at twenty-five minutes.

古文：所谓初六，天之数也。
现代文：这就是所说的第一个六步，天时终始的刻数。
English: This is the so-called first six steps, the number of hours at the beginning and end of the day.

古文：乙丑岁，初之气，天数始于二十六刻，终于一十二刻半；二之气，始于一十二刻六分，终于水下百刻；三之气，始于一刻，终于八十七刻半；四之气，始于八十七刻六分，终于七十五刻；五之气，始于七十六刻，终于六十二刻半；六之气，始于六十二刻六分，终于五十刻。
现代文：已丑之年，初之气，天时的刻数，开始于二十六刻，终止于十二刻五分；二之气，开始于十二刻六分，终止于漏水下至一百刻；三之气，开始于一刻，终止于八十七刻五分；四之气，开始于八十七刻六分，终止于七十五刻；五之气，开始于七十六刻，终止于六十二刻五分；六之气，开始于六十二刻六分，终止于五十刻。
English: In the Ugly Year, the first qi, the number of hours in a day, began at 26 and ended at 12:5; the second qi, began at 12:5 and ended at 100; the third qi, began at 1 and ended at 87:5; the fourth qi, began at 87:6 and ended at 75; the fifth qi, began at 76 and ended at 62:5; and the sixth qi, began at 62:6 and ended at 50.

古文：所谓六二，天之数也。
现代文：这就是所说的第二个六步，天时始终的刻数。
English: This is the so-called second six-step, the number of hours in a day.

古文：丙寅岁，初之气，天数始于五十一刻，终于三十七刻半；二之气，始于三十七刻六分，终于二十五刻；三之气，始于二十六刻，终于一十二刻半；四之气，始于一十二刻六分，终于水下百刻；五之气，始于一刻，终于八十七刻半；六之气，始于八十七刻六分，终于七十五刻。所谓六三，天之数也。
现代文：丙寅之年，初之气，天时的刻数开始于五十一刻，终止于三十七刻五分；二之气，开始于三十七刻六分，终止于二十五刻；三之气，开始于二十六刻，终止于十二刻五分；四之气，开始于十二刻六分，终止于漏水下至一百刻；五之气，开始于一刻，终止于八十七刻五分；六之气，开始于八十七刻六分，终止于七十五刻；这就是所说的第三个六步，天时终始的刻数。
English: In the year of Yin Yin, the first qi, the number of hours of the day, began at 51 hours and ended at 37 hours and 5 minutes; the second qi, began at 37 hours and 6 minutes and ended at 25 hours; the third qi, began at 26 hours and ended at 12 hours and 5 minutes; the fourth qi, began at 12 hours and 6 minutes and ended at 100 hours; the fifth qi, began at 1 hour and ended at 87 hours and 5 minutes; the sixth qi, began at 87 hours and 6 minutes and ended at 75 hours; this is the so-called third six-step, the number of hours from the beginning to the end of the day.

古文：丁卯岁，初之气，天数始于七十六刻，终于六十二刻半；二之气，始于六十二刻六分，终于五十刻；三之气，始于五十一刻，终于三十七刻半；四之气，始于三十七刻六分，终于二十五刻；五之气，始于二十六刻，终于一十二刻半；六之气，始于一十二刻六分，终于水下百刻。
现代文：丁卯之年，初之气，天时的刻数开始于七十六刻，终止于六十二刻五分；二之气，开始于六十二刻六分，终止于五十刻；三之气，开始于五十一刻，终止于三十七刻五分，四之气，开始于三十七刻六分，终止于二十五刻；五之气，开始于二十六刻，终止于十二刻五分；六之气，开始于十二刻六分，终止于漏水下至一百刻。
English: In the year of Dingwu, the first qi, the number of hours of the day, began at seventy-six hours and ended at sixty-two hours and five minutes; the second qi, began at sixty-two hours and six minutes and ended at fifty hours; the third qi, began at fifty-one hours and ended at thirty-seven hours and five minutes; the fourth qi, began at thirty-seven hours and six minutes and ended at twenty-five hours; the fifth qi, began at twenty-six hours and ended at twelve hours and five minutes; the sixth qi, began at twelve hours and six minutes and ended at one hundred hours.

古文：所谓六四，天之数也。
现代文：这就是所说的第四个六步，天时终始的刻数。
English: This is the so-called fourth six-step, the number of hours from the beginning to the end of the day.

古文：次戊辰岁，初之气，复始于一刻，常如是无已，周而复始。
现代文：依次相推便是戊辰年，初之气又开始于一刻，经常如此，没有终时，一周之后又重新开始。
English: Pushed in sequence, it is the year of the horse, the first breath begins again at the moment, often so, there is no end time, a week later it begins again.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其岁候何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听每年的计算方法？
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear the annual calculation method.

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问得很详尽啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：日行一周，天气始于一刻；日行再周，天气始于二十六刻；日行三周，天气始于五十一刻；日行四周，天气始于七十六刻；日行五周，天气复始于一刻，所谓一纪也。
现代文：太阳运行第一周时，天时开始于一刻；太阳运行于第二周时，天时开始于二十六刻；太阳运行于第三周时，天时开始于五十一刻；太阳运行于第四周时，天时开始于七十六刻；太阳运行于第五周时，天时又开始于一刻。天气四周大循环，就叫做 一纪 。
English: When the sun runs for the first week, the time of day begins at one o'clock; when the sun runs for the second week, the time of day begins at twenty-six o'clock; when the sun runs for the third week, the time of day begins at fifty-one o'clock; when the sun runs for the fourth week, the time of day begins at seventy-six o'clock; when the sun runs for the fifth week, the time of day begins at one o'clock.

古文：是故寅午戌岁气会同，卯未亥岁气会同，辰申子岁气会同，巳酉丑岁气会同，终而复始。
现代文：所以寅、午、戌三年，岁时与六气会同，卯、未、亥、三年，岁时与六气会同，辰、申、子三年，岁时与六气会同，巳、酉、丑三年，岁时与六气会同，周流不息，终而复始。
English: Therefore, in the year of the tiger, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster, the year of the rooster

古文：帝曰：愿闻其用也。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听六步的运用。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to hear about the role of the six qi."

古文：岐伯曰：言天者求之本，言地者求之位，言人者求之气交。
现代文：岐伯说：谈论天气的变化，当推求于六气的本元；谈论地气的变化，当推求于六气应五行之位；谈论人体的变化，当推求于气交。
English: Qibo said: When talking about changes in the weather, we should refer to the origin of the six elements; when talking about changes in the earth's atmosphere, we should refer to the position of the six elements corresponding to the five elements; when talking about changes in the human body, we should refer to the relationship between the elements.

古文：帝曰：何谓气交？
现代文：黄帝说：什么是气交呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is qi jiao?"

古文：岐伯曰：上下之位，气交之中，人之居也。
现代文：岐伯说：天气居于上位，地气居于下位，上下交互于气交之中，为人类所居之处。
English: Qi Bo said: the weather is at the top, the earth's air is at the bottom, and the up and down are interacting in the air exchange, which is where humans live.

古文：故曰： 天枢之上，天气主之；天枢之下，地气主之；气交之分，人气从之，万物由之。 
现代文：所以说：天枢以上，天气主之，天枢以下，地气主之；在气交之处，人气顺从天地之气的变化，万物由此而生。
English: Therefore, it is said: Above the celestial center, the weather is the master, below the celestial center, the earth is the master; in the place of air exchange, people's moods follow the changes in the atmosphere of heaven and earth, and all things are born from this.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：帝曰：何谓初中？
现代文：黄帝说：什么是初气中气呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the first breath and the middle breath?"

古文：岐伯曰：初凡三十度而有奇，中气同法。
现代文：岐伯说：初气占一气中的三十度有零。中气也是这样。
English: Qi Bo said: The initial air accounts for one of the thirty degrees of zero. The same is true for the middle air.

古文：帝曰：初中何也？
现代文：黄帝说：为什么要分初期和中气呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why should there be an initial period and a middle period?

古文：岐伯曰：所以分天地也。
现代文：岐伯说：是为了区别天气与地气用事的时间。
English: Qi Bo said: It is to distinguish the weather from the time of the earthquake.

古文：帝曰：愿卒闻之！
现代文：黄帝说：我想听你详尽地讲讲。
English: Huang Di: Please tell me in detail.

古文：岐伯曰：初者地气也，中者天气也。
现代文：岐伯说：初气为他气用事，中气为天气用事。
English: Qi Bo said: The first breath is for his breath, and the middle breath is for the weather.

古文：帝曰：其升降何如？
现代文：黄帝说：它们的升降是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "What is the reason for their rise and fall?"

古文：岐伯曰：气之升降，天地之更用也。
现代文：岐伯说：气的升降，是天气和地气互相作用的结果。
English: Qi Bo said: The rise and fall of qi is the result of the interaction between the weather and the earth's atmosphere.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其用何如？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听它们的互相作用是怎样的？
English: Huang Di said: I want to hear how they interact with each other.

古文：岐伯曰：升已而降，降者谓天；降已而升，升者谓地。天气下降，气流于地；地气上升，气腾于天。
现代文：岐伯说：地气可以上升，但升到极点就要下降，而下降乃是天气的作用；天气可以下降，但降到极点就要上升，而上升乃是地气的作用。天气下降，其气乃流荡于地；地气上升，其气乃蒸腾于天。
English: Qi Bo said: The earth's atmosphere can rise, but if it rises to the extreme, it will fall, and the fall is the effect of the weather; the weather can fall, but if it falls to the extreme, it will rise, and the rise is the effect of the earth's atmosphere. When the weather falls, its air is circulating on the ground; when the earth's atmosphere rises, its air is transpiring in the sky.

古文：故高下相召，升降相因，而变作矣。帝曰：善。
现代文：由于天气和地气的相互招引，上升和下降的相互为因，天气和地气才能不断地发生变化。黄帝说：好。
English: As a result of the mutual attraction of weather and the earth's atmosphere, the mutual cause of rising and falling, weather and the earth's atmosphere can continuously change. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：寒湿相遘，燥热相临，风火相值，其有间乎？
现代文：寒气与湿气相遇，燥气与热气相接，风气与火气相逢，会有一定的时间吗？
English: When cold and damp meet, when dry and hot meet, when tradition and fire meet, will there be a certain amount of time?

古文：岐伯曰：气有胜复，胜复之作，有德有化，有用有变，变则邪气居之。帝曰：何谓邪乎？
现代文：岐伯说：六气都有太过的胜气和胜极而复的复气，胜气和复气的不断发作，使气有正常的功用，有生化的性能，有一定的作用，有异常的变化，异常变化就要产生邪气。黄帝说：什么是邪气？
English: Qi Bo said: the six qi have too much superior qi and too much inferior qi, and the superior qi and inferior qi constantly occur, so that the qi has normal function, has biochemical properties, has a certain role, has abnormal changes, abnormal changes will produce evil qi. Huang Di said: What is evil qi?

古文：岐伯曰：夫物之生从于化，物之极由乎变，变化之相薄，成败之所由也。
现代文：岐伯说：物体的新生，是从化而来，物体到极点，是由变而成，变和化的互相斗争与转化，乃是成败的根本原因。
English: Qi Bo said: The rebirth of an object comes from its transformation. An object reaches its peak when it is transformed. The mutual struggle and transformation of transformation and harmonization is the fundamental reason for success or failure.

古文：故气有往复，用有迟速，四者之有，而化而变，风之来也。
现代文：由于气有往来进退，作用有缓慢与迅速，有进退迟速，就产生了化和变，并发生了六气的变化。
English: As the qi circulates back and forth, the action is slow and rapid, and there is a slow speed of advance and retreat, there is a change and change, and a change in the six qi.

古文：帝曰：迟速往复，风所由生，而化而变，故因盛衰之变耳。
现代文：黄帝说：气有迟速进退，所以发生六气变化，有化有变，是由于气的盛衰变化所致。
English: Huang Di said: Qi advances and retreats at a slow speed, so the six qi changes and changes are due to the rise and fall of qi.

古文：成败倚伏游乎中，何也？
现代文：成和败相互为因，潜处于事物之中，是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason why success and failure are mutual causes, latent in things?

古文：岐伯曰：成败倚伏生乎动，动而不已则变作矣。
现代文：岐伯说：成败互因的关键在于运动，不断的运动，就会发生不断的变化。
English: Qi Bo said: The key to the mutual success and failure is movement. Constant movement will lead to constant change.

古文：帝曰：有期乎？
现代文：黄帝说：运动有一定的时间吗？
English: Huang Di said: Is there a certain time for exercise?

古文：岐伯曰：不生不化，静之期也。
现代文：岐伯说：不生不化，乃是相对稳定的时期。
English: Qibo said: It is a period of relative stability.

古文：帝曰：不生化乎？
现代文：黄帝说：物有不生不化吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: Is there anything that can't be changed?

古文：岐伯曰：出入废则神机化灭，升降息则气立孤危。
现代文：岐伯说：物体的内部存有生生不息之机，名曰 神机 ，物体的外形依赖于气化的作用而存在，名曰 气立 。
English: Qi Bo said: the inside of the object has a perpetual motion machine, called the divine machine, the shape of the object depends on the role of gasification and exists, called the gas stand.

古文：故，非出入则无以生长壮老已，非升降则无以生长化收藏。
现代文：若出入的功能废止了，则 神机 毁灭，升降的作用停息了，则 气立 危亡。
English: If the function of entering and exiting is abolished, then the divine machine is destroyed, and if the function of ascending and descending is suspended, then the spirit is endangered.

古文：是以升降出入，无器不有。故器者，生化之宇，器散则分之，生化息矣。
现代文：因此，没有出入，也就不会有发生、成长、壮实、衰老与灭亡；没有升降，也就不会有发生、成长、变化、收敛与闭藏。
English: Therefore, if there is no appearance and disappearance, there will be no occurrence, growth, consolidation, aging and death; if there is no rise and fall, there will be no occurrence, growth, change, convergence and confinement.

古文：故无不出入，无不升降，化有小大，期有近远，四者之有，而贵常守，反常则灾害至矣。
现代文：所以升降出入，是没有一种物体不具备的。因而物体就象是生化之器，若器物的形体不存在了，则升降出入也就要，生化之机也就停止了。因此说，任何物体，无不存有出入升降之机。不过化有大小的不同，时间有远近的区别，不管大小远近，贵在保持正常，如果反常，就要发生灾害。
English: Therefore, there is no kind of object that does not have the ability to rise and fall. Therefore, the object is like a biochemical device. If the shape of the object does not exist, the rise and fall will also be necessary, and the biochemical machine will stop. Therefore, any object has the ability to rise and fall. However, there is a difference in size, and there is a difference in time. Regardless of size and distance, it is important to maintain normal, and if it is abnormal, it will cause disasters.

古文：故曰： 无形无患。 
现代文：所以说离开了物体的形态，也就无所谓灾害。
English: Therefore, if we leave the shape of the object, there will be no disasters.

古文：此之谓也。帝曰：善。
现代文：就是这个意思。黄帝说：好。
English: That's what it means. Huang Di said, "Good."

古文：有不生不化乎？
现代文：有没有不生不化的呢？
English: Is there anything that does not come into being and does not pass away?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问得很详尽啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：与道合同，惟真人也。帝曰：善。
现代文：能够结合自然规律而适应其变化的，只有 真人 。黄帝说：好。
English: Only a real person can combine the laws of nature and adapt to its changes. Huang Di said: Good.

