古文：范仲淹，字希文，唐宰相履冰之后。
现代文：范仲淹字希文，唐朝宰相范履冰的后代。
English: Fan Zhongtang (Chinese: 范仲淹; pinyin: Xiwen) was a descendant of the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, Fan Rubing.

古文：其先邠州人也，后徙家江南，遂为苏州吴县人。
现代文：他的祖先，原来是州人。后来全家迁徙到江南定居，于是成为了苏州吴县人。
English: His ancestors were originally from Suzhou. Later, the whole family migrated to the south of the Yangtze River to settle, and thus became the people of Suzhou's Wuxian County.

古文：仲淹二岁而孤，母更适长山朱氏，从其姓，名说。
现代文：范仲淹两岁时就失去了父亲，母亲改嫁到长山县一位姓朱的家里，他也就改姓朱，名说。
English: Fan Zhongyan lost his father when he was two years old. His mother remarried to a family with the surname Zhu in Changshan County, and he also changed his surname to Zhu.

古文：少有志操，既长，知其世家，乃感泣辞母，去之应天府，依戚同文学。
现代文：他少时就有志气，奉行操守。长大后，知道了自己的家世，感到很伤感，于是就流着眼泪辞别母亲，前往应天府，依从戚同文学习。
English: When he was young, he had ambition and followed ethics. When he grew up, he knew his family history and felt very sad, so he said goodbye to his mother with tears and went to Yingtianfu to study under Qi Tongwen.

古文：昼夜不息，冬月惫甚，以水沃面；食不给，至以糜粥继之，人不能堪，仲淹不苦也。
现代文：他昼夜不停地刻苦学习，冬天读书十分疲乏时，就用冷水浇脸；有时无东西吃，甚至不得不靠喝稀粥度日，一般人不能忍受的困苦生活，范仲淹却从不叫苦。
English: He studied hard day and night, and in winter, when he was too tired to read, he poured cold water on his face. Sometimes he had nothing to eat, and even had to rely on drinking gruel to get through the day. It was a hard life that ordinary people couldn't bear, but Fan Zhong didn't complain.

古文：举进士第，为广德军司理参军，迎其母归养。
现代文：他考中进士后，被任命为广德军司理参军，他把母亲接来奉养。
English: After he passed the junior high school entrance examination, he was appointed as the Guangde military secretary to join the army, and he brought his mother to support him.

古文：改集庆军节度推官，始还姓，更其名。
现代文：调任集庆军节度推官后，就恢复了原来的范姓，改名仲淹。
English: After he was transferred to be the commander of the Jiuqing Army Festival, he restored his original surname and changed his name to Zhongyan.

古文：监泰州西溪盐税，迁大理寺丞，徙监楚州粮料院，母丧去官。
现代文：监泰州西溪盐税，升为大理寺丞，移监楚州粮料院，因母亲去世离职。
English: Imprisoned in Taizhou Xixi Salt Tax, promoted to Dali Temple, transferred to the Chuzhou Grain Refinery, and left office due to his mother's death.

古文：晏殊知应天府，闻仲淹名，召寘府学。
现代文：晏殊知应天府时，听说范仲淹很有名，就召请他到府学任职。
English: When he heard that Fan Zhongyun was famous, he invited him to work at the prefectural school.

古文：上书请择郡守，举县令，斥游惰，去冗僣，慎选举，抚将帅，凡万余言。
现代文：在这期间，范仲淹上书皇帝请求选择郡守，举荐县令，斥逐游散懒惰之人，裁汰冗员和不安本位的人，慎重选举官员，安抚将帅，这封上书长达万余字。
English: During this period, Fan Zhongyan wrote to the emperor to request the selection of a county governor, recommend a county magistrate, expel idlers, lay off redundant workers and people who are not up to standard, carefully elect officials, and appease generals. This letter is more than ten thousand words long.

古文：服除，以殊荐，为秘阁校理。
现代文：服丧期满后，由于得到晏殊的举荐。担任秘阁校理。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, due to the special recommendation, he served as the secret cabinet proofreader.

古文：仲淹泛通《六经》，长于《易》，学者多从质问，为执经讲解，亡所倦。
现代文：范仲淹通晓《六经》，精通《易》学，学习经学的人大多向他请教，解决疑难，他手捧经典为有疑者答疑解难，不知疲倦。
English: Fan Zhongyun is familiar with the "Six Classics" and is proficient in the "Easy" study. Most people who study the classics ask him for advice and solve problems. He holds the classics in his hand to answer and solve problems for doubters, tirelessly.

古文：尝推其奉以食四方游士，诸子至易衣而出，仲淹晏如也。
现代文：他曾经用自己的俸禄供养四方游学之士，而自己的儿子却要轮换穿一件好衣服才能出门，范仲淹却始终泰然处之。
English: He once used his salary to support students from all over the country, while his own son had to wear a good dress in rotation before he could go out, but Fan Zhongyan always dealt with it calmly.

古文：每感激论天下事，奋不顾身，一时士大夫矫厉尚风节，自仲淹倡之。
现代文：每当他激动地谈论天下大事时，往往奋不顾身，当时士大夫矫正世风，严以律己，崇尚品德节操，就是从范仲淹倡导开始的。
English: Whenever he excitedly talked about the world's major events, he often did not care about himself. At that time, the scholar corrected the world style, strictly disciplined himself, and advocated moral discipline, which began with Fan Zhongyun's advocacy.

古文：天圣七年，章献太后将以冬至受朝，天子率百官上寿。
现代文：天圣七年，章献太后将在冬至日接受朝拜，仁宗皇帝也准备率领文武百官为太后上寿。
English: In the seventh year of Tian Sheng, Empress Dowager Zhang Jian will receive worship on the winter solstice. Emperor Renzong is also preparing to lead hundreds of officials to celebrate the birthday of the Empress Dowager.

古文：仲淹极言之，且曰： 奉亲于内，自有家人礼，顾与百官同列，南面而朝之，不可为后世法。 且上疏请太后还政，不报。
现代文：范仲淹上疏详细地论述了这件事，并且说： 在内宫事奉亲长，自当有家人礼仪，但在朝廷上皇帝与百官一起站立，来朝拜太后，不能够成为后世的轨范。 又上疏请求章献太后将朝政大权交还仁宗，但没有得到任何答复。
English: Fan Zhongyun Shangsuo discussed the matter in detail, and said: In the inner palace, serving relatives and elders, there should be family etiquette, but in the court, the emperor stood together with hundreds of officials, to worship the empress dowager, can not become a model for future generations. In addition, Shangsuo requested Zhang Xian the empress dowager to return the supreme power of the imperial government to Rinzong, but did not get any answer.

古文：寻通判河中府，徙陈州。
现代文：不久，范仲淹就调任河中府通判，后又调任陈州通判。
English: Soon after, Fan Zhongran was transferred to the position of the Henan Provincial Judge, and later he was transferred to the position of the Chenzhou Judge.

古文：时方建太一宫及洪福院，市材木陕西。
现代文：当时朝廷正在建筑太一宫和洪福院，并在陕西征购木材。
English: At that time, the imperial court was building the Grand Palace and the Hongfu Academy, and procuring timber in Shaanxi Province.

古文：仲淹言： 昭应、寿宁，天戒不远。
现代文：范仲淹见此情景说 ：昭应宫、寿宁宫已毁，上天的惩戒刚刚过去不久。
English: Seeing this scene, Fan Zhongran said: Zhaoying Palace and Shuning Palace have been destroyed, and Heaven's chastisement has just passed.

古文：今又侈土木，破民产，非所以顺人心、合天意也。
现代文：现在又大兴土木，浪费百姓财产，这不是顺乎人心、合乎天意的做法。
English: Now, they are once again carrying out large-scale civil engineering projects and wasting the people's property. This is not a practice that is in line with the will of the people or with the will of Heaven.

古文：宜罢修寺观，减常岁市木之数，以蠲除积负。 又言： 恩幸多以内降除官，非太平之政。 事虽不行，仁宗以为忠。
现代文：应该停止修建寺观，减少平常年份征购木材的数量，来蠲免百姓长期以来所承担的负担。 又说 ：受到恩宠的人大多是皇宫里直接降敕授官，这不是太平治世的政策。 这些建议虽未受纳，但仁宗皇帝认为范仲淹是一位忠诚之士。
English: The construction of temples and shrines should be stopped, and the amount of timber procured in a normal year should be reduced, so as to relieve the burden borne by the people for a long time. It was also said that most of the people who were favored by the imperial palace were directly demoted and promoted, which was not a policy of pacifism. Although these suggestions were not accepted, Emperor Renzong considered Fan Zhongyan to be a loyal person.

古文：太后崩，召为右司谏。
现代文：太后去世后，范仲淹被召回朝廷提任右司谏。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Fan Zhongran was recalled to the imperial court to be promoted to the post of right secretary.

古文：言事者多暴太后时事，仲淹曰： 太后受遗先帝，调护陛下者十余年，宜掩其小故，以全后德。 帝为诏中外，毋辄论太后时事。
现代文：这时议政的官僚们大多揭露章献太后听政时所干的事情，范仲淹却说 ：太后接受先帝的遗命，调养保护陛下十多年，应该饰掩她的小过，来成全太后的美德。 仁宗皇帝为此诏谕朝廷内外，不准擅自议论太后听政时的事情。
English: At this time, most of the bureaucrats who discussed politics revealed what Zhang Xian did when the empress dowager was listening to politics, but Fan Zhongyan said: the empress dowager accepted the last emperor's will and raised and protected her majesty for more than ten years, and should cover up her faults to perfect the empress dowager's virtue. Emperor Nanzong therefore issued an edict inside and outside the court, forbidding unauthorized discussion of the empress dowager's listening to politics.

古文：初，太后遗诰以太妃杨氏为皇太后，参决军国事。
现代文：当初，章献太后立下遗旨以太妃杨氏为皇太后，参与军国大事的决策。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Zhang Jian Rong made a last will and testament that Empress Dowager Yang should be the empress dowager and participate in the decision-making of military affairs.

古文：仲淹曰： 太后，母号也，自古无因保育而代立者。
现代文：范仲淹说 ：太后，是皇帝母亲的称号，自古以来没有因为保护抚育皇帝有功而代替皇帝立太后的。
English: Fan Zhongyun said: "Dowager Empress is the title of the emperor's mother. Since ancient times, the title of dowager empress has not been established in place of the emperor's title of empress dowager because of the protection and upbringing of the emperor.

古文：今一太后崩，又立一太后，天下且疑陛下不可一日无母后之助矣。 
现代文：于是就问仁宗说： 宫廷里的人如果半天不吃饭，情形会怎么样呢？ 
English: Then he asked Rinzong, "What would happen if the people in the court didn't eat for half a day?"

古文：岁大蝗旱，江、淮、京东滋甚。
现代文：仁宗皇帝显得十分难过，于是派遣范仲淹去安抚江、淮地区的灾民。
English: Emperor Renzong looked very sad, so he sent Fan Zhong to appease the victims of the disaster in the Huai and Yangtze River regions.

古文：仲淹请遣使循行，未报。乃请间曰： 宫掖中半日不食，当何如？ 帝侧然，乃命仲淹安抚江、淮，所至开仓振之，且禁民淫祀，奏蠲庐舒折役茶、江东丁口盐钱，且条上救敝十事。
现代文：范仲淹所到之处开仓济民，并且禁止灾区老百姓过多的祭祀活动，奏请朝廷免除庐州、舒州上供的折役茶，江东的丁口盐钱，并且向仁宗皇帝逐条陈述了救治朝政弊端的十件大事。
English: Fan Zhongwang opened warehouses to help the people wherever he went, and prohibited the excessive sacrificial activities of the people in the disaster area, petitioned the imperial court to exempt the tea provided by Zhangzhou and Shuzhou, and the dingkou salt money from the east of the river, and presented to Emperor Renzong ten major events to help the government of the dynasty.

古文：会郭皇后废，率谏官、御史伏阁争之，不能得。
现代文：恰巧郭皇后被废，范仲淹率领谏宦、御史跪伏在阁门前争谏此事，但没有得到皇上恩许。
English: It so happened that the empress Guo was dethroned, and Fan Zhongran led the eunuchs and the imperial historian knelt down in front of the pavilion gate to dispute the matter, but did not receive the emperor's approval.

古文：明日，将留百官揖宰相廷争，方至待漏院，有诏出知睦州。
现代文：第二天，范仲淹准备留下百官会集宰相在朝廷上再次谏争，当他刚走到待漏院时，朝廷下达诏书，命他出任睦州知州。
English: The next day, Fan Zhongran was preparing to leave the Hundred Officials' Meeting to gather prime ministers to fight again at the imperial court. When he had just arrived at the waiting hospital, the imperial court issued an edict ordering him to take up the post of Mutsu Chishu.

古文：岁余，徙苏州。
现代文：一年以后，调任苏州知州。
English: A year later, he was transferred from Suzhou to Chizhou.

古文：州大水，民田不得耕，仲淹疏五河，导太湖注之海，募人兴作，未就，寻徙明州，转运使奏留仲淹以毕其役，许之。
现代文：苏州发生水灾，百姓的田地无法耕种，范仲淹命令民众疏通五条河渠，导引太湖水流入大海，他招募民众兴修的水利工程，还没有完成，就被调任明州知州，转运使向朝廷上奏，暂时留下范仲淹完成水利工程，被得以批准。
English: Floods occurred in Suzhou, the people's fields could not be cultivated. Fan Zhongyan ordered the people to dredge five canals and guide the water of Taihu Lake into the sea. The water conservancy project he recruited the people to build was not yet completed, and he was transferred to Mingzhou Chizhou. The transfer agent appealed to the court, temporarily leaving Fan Zhongyan to complete the water conservancy project, which was approved.

古文：拜尚书礼部员外郎、天章阁待制，召还，判国子监，迁吏部员外郎、权知开封府。
现代文：朝廷提升范仲淹为尚书礼部员外郎、天章阁待制，召回京城，判国子监，又转升为吏部员外郎、权知开封府。
English: The imperial court promoted Fan Zhongran to the position of Shangshu etiquette department member, and Tianzhangge was put on hold. He was recalled to Beijing and sentenced to be the state's son-in-law. He was also promoted to the position of cadre member, and given the power to open the imperial palace.

古文：时吕夷简执政，进用者多出其门。
现代文：当时吕夷简执掌朝政，被任用和得到提拔的人大都出自他的门下。
English: At that time, Lü Yijian was in charge of the imperial government, and most of the people who were appointed and promoted were from his school.

古文：仲淹上《百官图》，指其次第曰： 如此为序迁，如此为不次，如此则公，如此则私。
现代文：范仲淹向仁宗呈上一份《百官图》，指着图上百官升迁的次序说： 像这样的是循序升迁，像这样的是不合次序的升迁，循序升迁是公正的，越序升迁是不合理的，完全是私意。
English: Fan Zhongyun showed the previous copy of "The Map of the Hundred Officials" to Ren Zong, pointing to the order of the promotion of the hundred officials on the map, saying: This is a step-by-step promotion, and this is a step-by-step promotion that is out of order, step-by-step promotion is fair, step-by-step promotion is unreasonable, and it is entirely personal.

古文：况进退近臣，凡超格者，不宜全委之宰相。 夷简不悦。
现代文：况且天子近臣的提拔和黜降，凡是超过一定限度的，也不应该全部委托宰相处理。 吕夷简很不高兴。
English: Moreover, the promotion and demotion of close vassals should not be entrusted to the prime minister if they exceed a certain limit. Lü Yizhen was very unhappy.

古文：他日，论建都之事，仲淹曰： 洛阳险固，而汴为四战之地，太平宜居汴，即有事必居洛阳。
现代文：有一天，在讨论建都之事时，范仲淹又说 ：洛阳地势险要，城池坚固，而汴京却是四面攻战之地，天下太平时皇上可以居住汴京，但一遇战事皇上必须居住洛阳。
English: One day, when discussing the construction of the capital, Fan Zhongran also said: Luoyang is in a precarious situation, the city is solid, but Beijing is a place of war on all sides. When the world is at peace, the emperor can live in Beijing, but in the event of war, the emperor must live in Luoyang.

古文：当渐广储蓄，缮宫室。 帝问夷简，夷简曰： 此仲淹迂阔之论也。 仲淹乃为四论以献，大抵讥切时政。
现代文：因此应当逐步地扩大洛阳的储备，修缮洛阳的宫室。 仁宗皇帝问吕夷简，吕夷简说 ：这是范仲淹迂腐空疏的言论。 范仲淹于是写了四论上呈仁宗，大都是指斥当时朝政的言论。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to gradually expand the reserves of Luoyang and renovate the palace of Luoyang. Emperor Renzong asked Lü Yizhan, and Lü Yizhan said: This is Fan Zhongyan's pedantic and empty speech. Fan Zhongyan then wrote four essays on the Renzong, most of which were criticisms of the government at that time.

古文：且曰： 汉成帝信张禹，不疑舅家，故有新莽之祸。
现代文：并且说 ：汉成帝相信张禹，不怀疑母舅家，因而导致了王莽篡国之祸。
English: He also said: Emperor Hancheng believed Zhang Yu and did not doubt his maternal uncle's family, which led to the disaster of Wang Mang's usurpation.

古文：臣恐今日亦有张禹，坏陛下家法。 夷简怒诉曰： 仲淹离间陛下君臣，所引用，皆朋党也。 仲淹对益切，由是罢知饶州。
现代文：我担心今天也有张禹这样的人，破坏陛下的家法。 吕夷简愤怒的向仁宗诉说 ：范仲淹离间陛下和我们的关系，他所任用的人，都是他的同党。 范仲淹对此极力反驳，言辞急切，因此被罢官而降任饶州知州。
English: I am worried that there are people like Zhang Yu today, who are undermining His Majesty's family law. Lyu Yijian angrily told Xiang Renzong: Fan Zhongran has severed the relationship between His Majesty and us, and the people he has appointed are all members of his own party. Fan Zhongran strenuously refuted this, and his words were eager, so he was dismissed from his post and relegated to Raozhou Zhizhou.

古文：殿中侍御史韩渎希宰相旨，请书仲淹朋党，揭之朝堂。
现代文：殿中侍御史韩渎迎合宰相旨意，奏请仁宗把范仲淹同党的姓名写出来，在朝廷上张贴公布。
English: Han Guo, the palace attendant, bowed to the prime minister's wishes and asked Rinzong to write down the names of Fan Zhongyan and his party and post them in the imperial court.

古文：于是秘书丞余靖上言曰： 仲淹以一言忤宰相，遽加贬窜，况前所言者在陛下母子夫妇之间乎？
现代文：于是秘书丞余靖上书说 ：范仲淹因为一句话得罪了宰相，就立即加以贬斥流窜，何况他前次所议论的是关于陛下母子夫妇间的事，陛下都已经宽容了他呢。
English: Then the secretary, Jo Yu Jing, wrote: "Because Fan Zhongyan offended the prime minister with a single word, he was immediately rebuked and banished. What's more, the previous discussion he had was about the relationship between His Majesty's mother and son, and His Majesty had already forgiven him.

古文：陛下既优容之矣，臣请追改前命。 太子中允尹洙自讼与仲淹师友，且尝荐己，愿从降黜。
现代文：我请求陛下追回并修改前道诏命。 太子中允尹洙上疏自讼和范仲淹是师友关系，而且范仲淹还曾经向朝廷推荐过自己，愿意和范仲淹一起降官贬黜。
English: I request Your Majesty to recover and revise the former imperial edict. Prince Zhong Yunqian and Fan Zhongran were mentors and friends, and Fan Zhongran had once recommended himself to the imperial court and was willing to be demoted together with Fan Zhongran.

古文：馆阁校勘欧阳修以高若讷在谏官，坐视而不言，移书责之。
现代文：馆阁校勘欧阳修因为高若讷身为谏官，但对范仲淹被贬之事一言不发，就写信责备他。
English: The pavilion school Kan Ouyang Xiu wrote a letter to Gao Rongna because he was a eunuch, but he did not say a word about Fan Zhongyan's demotion.

古文：由是，三人者偕坐贬。
现代文：因此，这三个人都因为范仲淹一案而遭贬。
English: Therefore, these three people were all demoted because of Fan Zhongyan's case.

古文：明年，夷简亦罢，自是朋党之论兴矣。
现代文：第二年，吕夷简也被免除了宰相之职，从此关于朋党的争论就开始了。
English: The following year, Lü Yizhen was also removed from the post of prime minister, and from then on, the debate about the henchmen began.

古文：仲淹既去，士大夫为论荐者不已。
现代文：范仲淹被贬离开朝廷，士大夫们接连不断地替他辩白举荐。
English: Fan Zhongran was banished from the imperial court, and the magistrates continued to defend and recommend him.

古文：仁宗谓宰相张士逊曰： 向贬仲淹，为其密请建立皇太弟故也。
现代文：仁宗对宰相张士逊说： 过去贬谪范仲淹，是因为他密奏请求立皇太弟的缘故。
English: Nenzong said to the prime minister Zhang Shisong: In the past, the reason why Fan Zhongyan was despised was because he secretly requested the establishment of the emperor's younger brother.

古文：今朋党称荐如此，奈何？ 再下诏戒敕。
现代文：现在他的同党这样称赞举荐他，怎么办？ 再次下诏警告不准互结朋党。
English: Now that his fellow party members are praising and recommending him in this way, what should we do? Once again, we issue a stern warning against fraternizing with the other party.

古文：仲淹在饶州岁余，徙润州，又徙越州。
现代文：范仲淹担任饶州知州一年多后，被调任润州知州，不久又调任越州知州。
English: After Fan Zhongran served as Raozhou chizhou for more than a year, he was transferred to Runzhou chizhou, and soon he was transferred to Yuezhou chizhou.

古文：元昊反，召为天章阁待制、知永兴军，改陕西都转运使。
现代文：元昊反叛，范仲淹被召回京，担任天章阁待制、出知永兴军，后又改任陕西都转运使。
English: When Yuan Hao rebelled, Fan Zhongran was called back to Beijing to serve as the Tianzhangge standby system and the Zhizhi Yongxing Army, and later he was appointed as the Shaanxi Capital Transfer Envoy.

古文：会夏竦为陕西经略安抚、招讨使，进仲淹龙图阁直学士以副之。
现代文：恰逢夏竦担任陕西经略安抚、招讨使，朝廷提升范仲淹为龙图阁直学士来担任夏竦的副手。
English: At the same time that Xia Jun served as the Shaanxi economic pacification and recruitment envoy, the imperial court promoted Fan Zhongran to the rank of Longtuge direct bachelor to serve as Xia Jun's deputy.

古文：夷简再入相，帝谕仲淹使释前憾。
现代文：吕夷简再次担任宰相，仁宗劝告范仲淹解除与吕夷简以前的怨恨。
English: Lyu Yijian once again served as prime minister, and Ren Zong advised Fan Zhongyan to resolve the previous grudge with Lyu Yijian.

古文：仲淹顿首谢曰： 臣乡论盖国家事，于夷简无憾也。 
现代文：范仲淹叩头回答说 ：我以前所议论的都是国家的公事，对吕夷简本人并没有怨恨。 
English: Fan Zhongyun replied: What I have discussed before is the state's business, and I have no grudge against Lü Yizhen himself.

古文：延州诸砦多失守，仲淹自请行，迁户部郎中兼知延州。
现代文：延州周围各要塞大多失守，范仲淹主动请求前往延州，被升为户部郎中兼任延州知州。
English: Most of the fortresses around Yanzhou were lost, Fan Zhongyan took the initiative to request to go to Yanzhou, and was promoted to the head of the household department and also served as the head of Yanzhou Zhizhou.

古文：先是，诏分边兵：总管领万人，钤辖领五千人，都监领三千人。
现代文：以前，朝廷诏令规定将领分别统辖边境驻军：总管统辖万人，钤辖统辖五千人，都监统辖三千人。
English: Previously, the imperial edict stipulated that generals should separately supervise the border garrisons: the commander-in-chief should supervise ten thousand people, the deputy commander-in-chief should supervise five thousand people, and the governor-in-chief should supervise three thousand people.

古文：寇至御之，则官卑者先出。
现代文：遇到敌人侵略而要抵御时，官品低的将领需首先出击。
English: When encountering enemy aggression and having to defend against it, low-ranking generals need to strike first.

古文：仲淹曰： 将不择人，以官为先后，取败之道也。 于是大阅州兵，得万八千人，分为六，各将三千人，分部教之，量贼众寡，使更出御贼。
现代文：范仲淹说 ：对战将不加以适当选择，而只以官品的高低来作为出阵的先后，这是自取失败的办法。 于是他普遍检阅本州军队，得到一万八千人，并分为六部，每位将领各自统领三千人，分部训练士兵，根据敌军的多少，派遣他们轮流出战抵御敌军。
English: Fan Zhongyun said: the battle will not be properly selected, but only based on the level of officialdom as the order of departure, which is a self-defeating method. So he generally reviewed the home state army, got 18,000 people, and divided into six departments, each general commanded 3,000 people, the division trained soldiers, and according to the number of enemy troops, sent them out to fight against the enemy troops.

古文：时塞门、承平诸砦既废，用种世衡策，城青涧以据贼冲，大兴营田，且听民得互市，以通有无。
现代文：当时塞门、承平各要塞已被废弃，范仲淹采纳种世衡的计策，修筑青润城来扼杀敌军进犯的要冲，大兴农田水利，并且开放民间贸易，以便边民互通有无。
English: At that time, the fortresses of Saimen and Chengping had been abandoned, and Fan Zhongnong adopted the tactics of Shihang to build Qingrun City to stifle the enemy's attack, greatly improve farmland and water conservancy, and open up non-governmental trade so that the border people could exchange goods and services.

古文：又以民远输劳苦，请建鄜城为军，以河中、同、华中下户税租就输之。
现代文：又因为老百姓远路输纳赋税过于劳苦，他上奏请求将城建成军事基地，让河中府同州、华州的中下户就近送缴税租。
English: In addition, because it was too hard for the common people to travel far and wide to pay taxes, he petitioned to build the city into a military base, so that the middle and lower households in Dongzhou and Huazhou in Henan Province could pay taxes nearby.

古文：春夏徙兵就食，可省籴十之三，他所减不与。
现代文：每年春夏两季调集军队就地取得给养，可以节省买粮开支十分之三，这还不包括其他开支节省的费用。
English: Every spring and summer, the mobilization of troops to obtain supplies locally can save three-tenths of grain purchase expenses, which does not include other expenses.

古文：诏以为康定军。
现代文：仁宗诏命这支军队为康定军。
English: Emperor Nanzong issued an edict ordering this army to become the Kangding Army.

古文：明年正月，诏诸路入讨，仲淹曰： 正月塞外大寒，我师暴露，不如俟春深入，贼马瘦人饥，势易制也。
现代文：第二年正月，仁宗皇帝诏命陕西各路讨伐西夏，范仲淹说： 正月塞外天气十分寒冷，我军露宿挨冻，不如等到春天深入敌境，敌军马瘦人饥，凭我军的势力容易制服敌军。
English: In the first month of the second year, Emperor Renzong issued an imperial edict ordering all roads in Shaanxi to fight against the Western Xia. Fan Zhongyan said: The weather outside of Shaanxi was very cold in the first month, and our army was stranded in the cold. It would be better to wait until spring to go deep into the enemy territory. The enemy army was thin and hungry, and it was easy to subdue the enemy army with the power of our army.

古文：况边备渐修，师出有纪，贼虽猖獗，固已慑其气矣。
现代文：况且我军边防守备逐渐加强，出师纪律严明，敌军虽然猖獗，必然会被我军的气势所震服。
English: Moreover, our military's border defense preparedness is gradually strengthening, the discipline of the division is strict, and although the enemy army is rampant, it will inevitably be shocked by the momentum of our army.

古文：鄜、延密迩灵、夏，西羌必由之地也。
现代文：州、延州与灵州、夏州十分接近，而这是西羌的必经之地。
English: Zhouzhou and Yanzhou are very close to Lingzhou and Xiazhou, and this is a must-visit place for Xidi.

古文：第按兵不动，以观其衅，许臣稍以恩信招来之。
现代文：我军只要按兵不动，观察他们的破绽，请皇上允许我用恩惠和诚信来招纳他们归附。
English: As long as our army remains motionless and observes their flaws, I ask the emperor to allow me to recruit them with grace and integrity.

古文：不然，情意阻绝，臣恐偃兵无期矣。
现代文：否则的话，情义断绝，我担心要罢兵休战就会遥遥无期。
English: Otherwise, the situation will be hopeless, and I'm afraid that a truce will be a long way off.

古文：若臣策不效，当举兵先取绥、宥，据要害，屯兵营田，为持久计，则茶山、横山之民，必挈族来归矣。
现代文：如果我的这个计策不能达到目的，也应当发兵先夺取绥州、宥州，占据险要之地，屯兵营田，作长久作战的打算，那么茶山、横山的老百姓，必然会带领全族前来归顺。
English: If this strategy of mine fails to achieve its goal, we should also send troops to seize Bozhou and Yuzhou first, occupy the critical areas, camp in the fields, and plan for a long-term war, then the people of Chashan and Hengshan will inevitably lead the whole nation to surrender.

古文：拓疆御寇，策之上也。 帝皆用其议。
现代文：要开拓疆界抵御侵略，这是上等的策略。 仁宗皇帝全部采纳了他的建议。
English: It is a superior strategy to expand the borders to resist aggression, and Emperor Nizong adopted all of his suggestions.

古文：仲淹又请修承平、永平等砦，稍招还流亡，定堡障，通斥候，城十二砦，于是羌汉之民，相踵归业。
现代文：范仲淹又上奏请求朝廷修筑承平、永平等要塞，逐渐招回流亡在外的百姓，加固堡寨的屏障，使敌情侦察畅通，把十二座旧要塞改建为城，于是羌族和汉族流亡在外的百姓，都一个接一个地回来，重操旧业。
English: Fan Zhongran also petitioned the imperial court to build the fortresses of Chengping and Yongping, gradually invite the exiled people back, strengthen the barrier of the fortress, make the reconnaissance of the enemy situation smooth, and convert the twelve old fortresses into a city. As a result, the Dong and Han exiled people all came back one by one to resume their old business.

古文：久之，元昊归陷将高延德，因与仲淹约和，仲淹为书戒喻之。
现代文：过了较长的一段时间，元昊遣还被俘的宋将高延德，用他来与范仲淹约和，范仲淹写信告诫西夏罢兵。
English: After a long period of time, Yuan Hao sent the Song general Gao Yande, who was also captured, to use him to make peace with Fan Zhongyan. Fan Zhongyan wrote a letter to warn Xi Xia to strike.

古文：会任福败于好水川，元昊答书语不逊，仲淹对来使焚之。
现代文：当时恰好任福在好水川被西夏打败，于是元昊给范仲淹的回信语气很不恭敬，范仲淹当着来使的面烧掉了它。
English: At that time, Renfu happened to be defeated by Xixia in Good Water River, so the tone of Yuan Hao's reply to Fan Zhongran was very disrespectful. Fan Zhongran burned it in front of the messenger.

古文：大臣以为不当辄通书，又不当辄焚之，宋庠请斩仲淹，帝不听。
现代文：朝中大臣认为不应擅自与西夏通信，又不应当擅自烧掉西夏来信，宋庠奏请处决范仲淹，仁宗皇帝没有同意。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas believed that they should not communicate with Xixia without authorization, nor should they burn Xixia's letters without authorization. Song Xuanxu requested the execution of Fan Zhongyun, but Emperor Renzong did not agree.

古文：降本曹员外郎、知耀州，徙庆州，迁左司郎中，为环庆路经略安抚、缘边招讨使。
现代文：而只是将范仲淹降为户部员外郎、耀州知州，调任庆州知州，后又升为左司郎中，任环庆路经略安抚，缘边招讨使。
English: However, he only demoted Fan Zhong to the position of a member of the household department, and to Yaozhou and Chizhou, and transferred him to the position of Gyeongju and Chizhou, and then promoted him to the position of a junior member of the left division, and appointed him as a pacifier of the Huanqing Road and a recruiting envoy.

古文：初，元昊反，阴诱属羌为助，而环庆酋长六百余人，约为乡道 事寻露。
现代文：当初，元昊叛乱时，暗中诱使归附宋朝的羌人帮助自己，而环庆路酋长六百多人，相约做元昊的向导，不久，事情就败露了。
English: At first, when Yuan Hao rebelled, he secretly enticed the Qiang people who had joined the Song Dynasty to help him, and more than six hundred Huanqing Road chiefs agreed to be Yuan Hao's guide. Soon, the matter was revealed.

古文：仲淹以其反复不常也，至部即奏行边，以诏书犒赏诸羌，阅其人马，为立条约： 若仇已和断，辄私报之及伤人者，罚羊百、马二，已杀者斩。
现代文：范仲淹因为羌人反复无常，一到达辖区就奏请到边境巡视，他以皇帝诏命的名义犒赏羌族各部，检阅他们的人马，与他们订立条约： 假如仇恨已经和解或了断，又擅自进行报复并伤人的，罚羊一百只，马两匹，已杀死人的要斩首。
English: Fan Zhongran, because of the capriciousness of the Yao people, as soon as he arrived at the jurisdiction area, he requested a border inspection. In the name of the emperor's edict, he rewarded the Yao people's various departments, inspected their people and horses, and concluded a treaty with them: If the hatred has been reconciled or broken, and if he retaliates and injures people without authorization, he will be fined one hundred sheep, two horses, and if he has killed people, he will be beheaded.

古文：负债争讼，听告官为理，辄质缚平人者，罚羊五十、马一。
现代文：因负债而引起纠纷的，应当到官府理断，擅自扣押捆绑无辜者，罚羊五十只、马一匹。
English: If a dispute arises due to indebtedness, one should go to the government office for adjudication, arbitrarily detain and tie up an innocent person, and fine fifty sheep and one horse.

古文：贼马入界，追集不赴随本族，每户罚羊二，质其首领。
现代文：西夏军马侵入边界时，集合时不随本族前往的，每户罚羊二只，扣押他们的首领。
English: When the Xixia army horses invaded the border, if they did not go with their own people when they gathered, they would be fined two sheep per household and their leaders would be detained.

古文：贼大入，老幼入保本砦，官为给食；即不入砦，本家罚羊二；全族不至，质其首领。 诸羌皆受命，自是始为汉用矣。
现代文：敌军大举入侵时，老少自外而入保卫本寨的，官府给他们供给食粮；到时不入寨的人家，每家罚羊两只；全族不进寨的，扣押他们的首领。 羌族各部都接受了这些条约，自此以后他们开始为宋朝效力。
English: In the event of a large-scale invasion by the enemy, the government would provide food to the old and the young who came to defend the village from the outside; if they did not enter the village at that time, each family would be fined two sheep; if the whole tribe did not enter the village, their leaders would be detained.

古文：改邠州观察使，仲淹表言： 观察使班待制下，臣守边数年，羌人颇亲爱臣，呼臣为 龙图老子 。今退而与王兴、朱观为伍，第恐为贼轻矣。 辞不拜。
现代文：范仲淹改任州观察使，在上表书中说 ：观察使位在待制之下，我守边多年，羌人很亲爱我，称我为 龙图老子 ，现在降官与王兴、朱观为伍，只恐怕被敌军轻蔑。 
English: Fan Zhongyun, who was appointed as a state observation envoy, said in the above table: "The observation envoy position is under suspension. I have been guarding the border for many years. The Xiong people are very dear to me and call me Longtu Lao Zi. Now that I have been demoted, I am in the company of Wang Xing and Zhu Guan, but I am afraid that I will be despised by the enemy.

古文：庆之西北马铺砦，当后桥川口，在贼腹中。
现代文：他辞谢而没有接受这一任命。庆州西北的马铺砦，正处在后桥川口，位于西夏腹地。
English: He declined and did not accept the appointment. Ma Pu Fort, northwest of Gyeongju, is located at the mouth of the Houqiao River, in the hinterland of Western Xia.

古文：仲淹欲城之，度贼必争，密遣子纯祐与蕃将赵明先据其地，引兵随之。
现代文：范仲淹想在此筑城，料想西夏军队一定会前来争夺，就暗中派遣他的儿子范纯佑和蕃将赵明首先占据这一地区，自己率领军队紧随其后。
English: Fan Zhongxun wanted to build a city here, and thought that the Western Xia army would certainly come to compete, so he secretly sent his sons Fan Chunyou and Zou Zhao Ming to occupy this area first, and he led the army closely behind.

古文：诸将不知所向，行至柔远，始号令之，版筑皆具，旬日而城成，即大顺城是也。
现代文：众将领不知道到底要到达什么地方，走到柔远，范仲淹才开始发布筑城的号令，各种筑城工具都已准备好，十天就将城筑完毕，这就是大顺城。
English: The generals didn't know where they were going, and it wasn't until they were far away that Fan Zhongyan began to issue the order to build the city. All kinds of tools for building the city were ready, and the city was completed in ten days. This is Dashun City.

古文：贼觉，以骑三万来战，佯北，仲淹戒勿追，已而果有伏。
现代文：敌军发现之后，派三万骑兵来攻打，并假装被宋军打败，范仲淹告诫将士们不要追击，后来知道敌军果然有埋伏。
English: After the discovery of the enemy, he sent thirty thousand cavalry to attack, and pretended to be defeated by the Song Army. Fan Zhongyuan warned the soldiers not to pursue, and later learned that the enemy had indeed ambushed.

古文：大顺既城，而白豹、金汤皆不敢犯，环庆自此寇益少。
现代文：大顺城建成后，白豹城、全汤城一带的敌军都不敢再度进犯，环庆路从此更少被敌人所侵犯了。
English: After the construction of Dashun Town, the enemy forces around White Leopard Town and Quentang Town did not dare to attack again, and Huanqing Road was rarely invaded by the enemy.

古文：明珠、灭臧劲兵数万，仲淹闻泾原欲袭讨之，上言曰： 二族道险，不可攻，前日高继嵩已丧师。
现代文：明珠、灭臧两部族拥有雄兵数万人，范仲淹听说泾原路宋军将要袭击讨伐他们，便给朝廷上奏说： 明珠、灭臧两部族居住的地方道路险要，不能够进攻他们，前不久高继嵩的进攻已经失败。
English: The two tribes of Mingzhu and Zhisheng had tens of thousands of soldiers. When Fan Zhongran heard that the Song Army of the Songwon Road was going to attack and fight them, he reported to the court that: the local roads where the two tribes of Mingzhu and Zhisheng lived were dangerous and could not attack them. Gao Jisong's attack had failed not long ago.

古文：平时且怀反侧，今讨之，必与贼表里，南入原州，西扰镇戎，东侵环州，边患未艾也。
现代文：这两个部族平时尚怀有二心，现在讨伐他们，一定会和西夏军队联合起来，向南入侵原州，向西骚扰镇戎，向东入侵环州，这样边患将永远不会停止。
English: These two tribes are usually of two minds, and if they fight against each other now, they will surely join forces with the Western Xia army to invade Yuanzhou to the south, harass Zhen Rong to the west, and invade Huanzhou to the east. This kind of border trouble will never stop.

古文：若北取细腰、胡芦众泉为堡障，以断贼路，则二族安，而环州、镇戎径道通彻，可无忧矣。 其后，遂筑细腰、胡芦诸砦。
现代文：如果能够北取细腰、胡芦泉等地筑起堡垒屏障，来切断敌军的通路，那么这两族就会安心归附，而环州、镇戎之间的小路近道也会畅通无阻，这样边患就不用担心了。 此后，便修筑起细腰、胡芦等军塞。
English: If fortress barriers could be built in places such as Huancheng, Hu Lucheng and other places in the north to cut off the passage of enemy troops, then the two tribes would be able to attach themselves with peace of mind, and the shortcuts between Huanzhou and Zhen Rong would be unimpeded, so there would be no need to worry about border problems.

古文：葛怀敏败于定川，贼大掠至潘原，关中震恐，民多窜山谷间。
现代文：葛怀敏在定川被敌军打败，敌军大肆抢掠至潘原，关中地区震动惊恐，老百姓大多躲藏到山谷中。
English: Ge Huimin was defeated by the enemy army in Dingchuan, the enemy army plundered Panyuan, the Guanzhong area was shocked and terrified, and most of the people hid in the valley.

古文：仲淹率众六千，由邠、泾援之，闻贼已出塞，乃还。
现代文：范仲淹率领六千军队，从州、泾州出发来进行援救，听说西夏军队已经撤出边塞，就率领军队返回。
English: Fan Zhongwen led six thousand troops and set out from Zhuzhou and Zhangzhou to carry out the rescue. When he heard that the Western Xia army had withdrawn from the border fortress, he led the army back.

古文：始，定川事闻，帝按图谓左右曰： 若仲淹出援，吾无忧矣。 奏至，帝大喜曰： 吾固知仲淹可用也。 进枢密直学士、右谏议大夫。
现代文：开始，定川战败的消息传到朝廷，仁宗皇帝手按地图对左右大臣说 ：如果范仲淹出兵救援，我就没有什么可以忧虑的了。 范仲淹的援兵的奏报一到，仁宗皇帝大喜说 ：我一直认为范仲淹是可以信用的。 于是就任命范仲淹为枢密直学士、右谏议大夫。
English: At the beginning, the news of the defeat in the Battle of Dingchuan reached the imperial court, and Emperor Renzong said to the ministers of the left and right with his hand on the map, "If Fan Zhongran sends soldiers to the rescue, I have nothing to worry about." As soon as the report of Fan Zhongran's reinforcements arrived, Emperor Renzong was overjoyed and said, "I have always thought that Fan Zhongran can be trusted." So he appointed Fan Zhongran as Privy Vice-Chancellor and Doctor of Right Speech.

古文：仲淹以军出无功，辞不敢受命，诏不听。
现代文：范仲淹因为这次军队出征没有立功，辞谢了皇帝的任命，仁宗皇帝没有接受他的辞呈。
English: Fan Zhongyun, because he did not do any meritorious service in this military expedition, declined the emperor's appointment. Emperor Renzong did not accept his resignation.

古文：时已命文彦博经略泾原，帝以泾原伤夷，欲对徙仲淹，遣王怀德喻之。
现代文：当时朝廷已经任命文彦博治理泾原路，仁宗皇帝认为泾原路所受战争创伤严重，准备让文彦博与范仲淹对调辖区，派遣王怀德去传达此事。
English: At that time, the imperial court had already appointed Wen Yanbo to govern Suwon Road. Emperor Renzong believed that Suwon Road had suffered serious war trauma, and was preparing to have Wen Yanbo and Fan Zhongran transfer jurisdiction to the area, and send Wang Huide to convey the matter.

古文：仲淹谢曰： 泾原地重，第恐臣不足当此路。
现代文：范仲淹辞谢说 ：泾原路地位重要，恐怕我不能胜任。
English: Fan Zhongdun declined, saying: "The status of Yuyuan Road is important, I'm afraid I can't do it.

古文：与韩琦同经略泾原，并驻泾州，琦兼秦凤、臣兼环庆。
现代文：请让我与韩琦共同治理泾原路，并且一起驻扎在泾州，韩琦兼管秦凤路，我兼管环庆路。
English: Please let me and Han Zheng jointly manage Yuyuan Road, and be stationed together in Zhangzhou. Han Zheng will also manage Qinfeng Road, and I will also manage Huanqing Road.

古文：泾原有警，臣与韩琦合秦凤，环庆之兵，掎角而进；若秦凤、环庆有警，亦可率泾原之师为援。
现代文：泾原路遇有敌情，我与韩琦联合秦凤、环庆两路的兵力，互成掎角之势进攻敌军；如果秦凤、环庆路遇到敌人侵袭，我也可以率领泾原路的军队作为援军。
English: If there is a hostile situation on the Yuyuan Road, I and Han Zheng will unite the forces of Qin Feng and Huan Qing Road to attack the enemy. If Qin Feng and Huan Qing Road are attacked by the enemy, I can also lead the army of Yuyuan Road as reinforcements.

古文：臣当与琦练兵选将，渐复横山，以断贼臂，不数年间，可期平定矣。
现代文：我应当和韩琦一起训练士兵，选拔将才，逐渐收复横山，来截断敌人的臂膀，不要几年时间，就可以期望平定边患了。
English: I should train soldiers together with Han Zheng, select generals, gradually recover Hengshan, cut off the enemy's arm, and in a few years, we can expect to pacify the border.

古文：愿诏庞籍兼领环庆，以成首尾之势。
现代文：我希望陛下颁布诏令让庞籍兼领环庆路统帅，以便形成首尾之势互相呼应的局面。
English: I hope that His Majesty will issue a royal decree to allow Pang to also lead the general of Huanqing Road, so as to form a situation in which the first and the last will echo each other.

古文：秦州委文彦博，庆州用滕宗谅总之。
现代文：秦州委派文彦博负责，庆州让滕宗谅全面负责。
English: The Qin State Committee appointed Wen Yanbo to be in charge, and Gyeongju put Teng Zongren in overall charge.

古文：孙沔亦可办集。
现代文：孙沔也可以参与会同作战。
English: Sun Yat-sen could also participate in joint operations.

古文：渭州，一武臣足矣。 帝采用其言，复置陕西路安抚、经略、招讨使，以仲淹、韩琦、庞籍分领之。
现代文：渭州，有一位武将就足够了。 仁宗皇帝采纳了他的建议，恢复设置陕西路安抚、经略、招讨使，让范仲淹、韩琦、庞籍分领职事。
English: Emperor Renzong accepted his suggestion and resumed the establishment of the Shaanxi Road to pacify, strategize, and recruit envoys, and let Fan Zhongran, Han Qi, and Pang Qi lead the duties.

古文：仲淹与琦开府泾州，而徙彦博帅秦，宗谅帅庆，张亢帅渭。
现代文：范仲淹与韩琦在泾州设置官第，将文彦博调到秦州做统帅，滕宗谅调到庆州做统帅，张亢担任渭州的统帅。
English: Fan Zhongran and Han Qi set up offices in Ganzhou, transferred Wen Yanbo to Qinzhou as commander, Teng Zongren to Gyeongju as commander, and Zhang Ye as commander of Ganzhou.

古文：仲淹为将，号令明白，爱抚士卒，诸羌来者，推心接之不疑，故贼亦不敢辄犯其境。
现代文：范仲淹作将领，号令清楚，爱护士兵，对于前来归附的各部羌人，诚恳接纳，信任不疑，因此西夏军队也不敢轻易侵犯他所统辖的地区。
English: As a general, Fan Zhongyun gave clear orders and loved soldiers. He sincerely accepted and trusted the soldiers from various provinces who came to join him. Therefore, the Western Xia army did not dare to easily invade the area under his control.

古文：元昊请和，召拜枢密副使。
现代文：元昊请求议和，范仲淹被朝廷召回，授予枢密副使之官。
English: Yuan Hao requested to discuss peace, Fan Zhongran was recalled by the imperial court and awarded the post of privy councilor.

古文：王举正懦默不任事，谏官欧阳修等言仲淹有相材，请罢举正用仲淹，遂改参知政事。
现代文：王举正性情胆怯不敢直言，不能胜任其事，谏官欧阳修等人说范仲淹有当宰相的能力，请求朝廷罢免王举正而任用范仲淹，于是范仲淹又改任参知政事。
English: Wang Juzheng was timid and did not dare to speak out, and was not competent to do so. The eunuch Ouyang Xiu and others said that Fan Zhongran had the ability to be prime minister, and asked the court to remove Wang Juzheng and appoint Fan Zhongran. Therefore, Fan Zhongran was reappointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：仲淹曰： 执政可由谏官而得乎？ 固辞不拜，愿与韩琦出行边。
现代文：范仲淹说 ：执政官可以由谏官的几句话就得到吗？ 他坚决辞谢不接受任命，并希望和韩琦一同出京巡视边防。
English: Fan Zhongyun said: Can a consul be made by a few words from a eunuch? He firmly declined to accept the appointment, and hoped to go to Beijing with Han Zheng to inspect the border defense.

古文：命为陕西宣抚使，未行，复除参知政事。
现代文：朝廷任命他为陕西宣抚使，还没有出发，朝廷又任命他为参知政事。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the Shaanxi envoy, but he had not yet set off. The imperial court also appointed him as a political advisor.

古文：会王伦寇淮南，州县官有不能守者，朝廷欲按诛之。
现代文：恰遇王伦进犯淮南，州县官吏中有不能坚守城池的人，朝廷准备调查核实后依法处决。
English: When Wang Lun invaded Huainan, some of the officials in the prefectures and counties were unable to defend the city, and the imperial court was ready to investigate and execute them in accordance with the law.

古文：仲淹曰： 平时讳言武备，寇至而专责守臣死事，可乎？ 守令皆得不诛。
现代文：范仲淹说： 平时忌讳讲完武备，遇到敌人进犯时却专门责令州县官员以死殉职，应该吗？ 
English: Fan Zhongyun said: In ordinary times, it is taboo to talk about military preparedness, but when encountering an enemy attack, it is specifically ordered that state and county officials should die in the line of duty, is that right?

古文：帝方锐意太平，数问当世事，仲淹语人曰： 上用我至矣，事有先后，久安之弊，非朝夕可革也。 帝再赐手诏，又为之开天章阁，召二府条对，仲淹皇恐，退而上十事：
现代文：因而这些不能坚守城池的人都没有被处决。仁宗皇帝当时正一意要实现天下太平，多次询问当前急需办理的大事，范仲淹对人说： 皇上对我信用至极，不过做事情总是有先有后的，长期安定局面带来的弊病，不是一朝一夕就可以完全消除的。 仁宗皇帝再次赐给他亲笔写的诏书，又为这件事打开天章阁，召集二府的大臣按条奏对，范仲淹惶恐不安，退朝后给皇帝上奏十件事：
English: As a result, these people who could not hold on to the castle were not executed. Emperor Nizong was determined to achieve world peace at that time, and repeatedly asked about the urgent matters that needed to be handled at the moment. Fan Zhongyan told people: The emperor has the utmost trust in me, but doing things always has its consequences, and the ills brought about by a long-term stable situation cannot be completely eliminated overnight. Emperor Nizong once again gave him a decree written in his own handwriting, and also opened Tianzhangge for this matter, convening the ministers of the two prefectures to play according to the rules. Fan Zhongyan was frightened and uneasy, and after retiring

古文：一曰明黜陟。
现代文：一是严明官吏升降制度。
English: The first is a strict promotion and demotion system for government officials.

古文：二府非有大功大善者不迁，内外须在职满三年，在京百司非选举而授，须通满五年，乃得磨勘，庶几考绩之法矣。
现代文：政府官员没有大的功劳和美好的品德不能升迁，朝廷内外官员必须在职任期满三年，在京城各部门任职的官员如果不是通过选任和保举而得官的人，必须累计任满五年，才能磨勘升迁，这大概算是考核官吏政绩的方法吧。
English: Government officials cannot be promoted without great merit and good moral character. Officials both inside and outside the Imperial Court must complete three years in office. Officials who serve in various departments in Beijing, if they are not elected and promoted, must serve a total of five years before they can be promoted. This is probably a method of assessing the performance of officials.

古文：二曰抑侥幸。
现代文：二是抑制侥幸。
English: The second is to curb chance.

古文：罢少卿、监以上乾元节恩泽；正郎以下若监司、边任，须在职满二年，始得荫子；大臣不得荐子弟任馆阁职，任子之法无冗滥矣。
现代文：取消乾元节给少卿、监以上官员任子的恩泽；正郎以下如监司、边远地区的官员，必须任职满二年，才可以享受恩荫任子；大臣不得荐举自己的子弟担任馆阁职务，这样任子制度就不会出现冗滥了。
English: The favor given by the Chinese New Year to officials above the rank of junior secretary and supervisor should be canceled; officials below the rank of senior secretary, such as supervisors and officials in remote areas, must serve for two years before they can enjoy the favor of being appointed; ministers should not recommend their children to serve as cabinet ministers, so that the appointment system will not be redundant.

古文：三曰精贡举。
现代文：三是严格贡举制度。
English: The third is a strict tribute system.

古文：进士、诸科请罢糊名法，参考履行无阙者，以名闻。
现代文：进士诸科考试时请取消试卷将姓名封起的糊名法，结合考察其操行，将姓名上报朝廷。
English: Please cancel the method of sealing the names on the examination papers when taking the entrance examinations in various disciplines, and report the names to the Imperial Court in conjunction with the examination of their conduct.

古文：进士先策论，后诗赋，诸科取兼通经义者。
现代文：进士先考策论，后考诗赋，各科录取兼通经义的人。
English: Candidates for admission should first pass the examination of policy theory, and then the examination of poetry, and those who are both proficient in theory and practice should be admitted to each department.

古文：赐第以上，皆取诏裁。
现代文：赐第以上的人，都由皇帝裁决宣布。
English: Those who were awarded the first place and above were announced by the emperor's ruling.

古文：余优等免选注官，次第人守本科选。
现代文：其余优等人免除吏部铨选，次一等的人发给凭证，等候选用。
English: The rest of the outstanding candidates are exempted from the selection of the cadre department, and the second-class candidates are issued certificates, etc. for candidates.

古文：进士之法，可以循名而责实矣。
现代文：这样进士考试的办法，就可以就其名而求其实了。
English: In this way, the method of the entrance examination can be based on its name.

古文：四曰择长官。
现代文：四是选拔地方长官。
English: The fourth is the selection of local governors.

古文：委中书、枢密院先选转运使、提点刑狱、大藩知州；次委两制、三司、御史台、开封府官、诸路监司举知州、通判；知州通判举知县、令。
现代文：委托中书省、枢密院首先选举转运使、提点刑狱、大藩知州；其次委任两制三司、御史台、开封知府、各路监司长官举荐知州、通判；知州、通判举荐知县、县令。
English: It was entrusted to the Central Book Ministry and the Privy Council to first elect the transfer envoy, the point of punishment prison, and the great domain of Chizhou; secondly, to appoint the two systems and three departments, the Imperial History Station, the opening of the prefectural government, and the chief inspectors of each road to recommend Chizhou and pass judgment; Chizhou and pass judgment to recommend Chishun and County.

古文：限其人数，以举主多者从中书选除。
现代文：限制官员举荐人数，被推荐者如果举荐者多的，由中书挑选授官。
English: Limit the number of officials to recommend. If there are many recommenders, the person to be recommended will be selected by the Central Government to be awarded the post.

古文：刺史、县令，可以得人矣。
现代文：这样刺史、县令就可以得到称职的人选了。
English: In this way, the history and the county magistrate can get a competent candidate.

古文：五曰均公田。
现代文：五是均公田。
English: On the fifth day, all the public fields are harvested.

古文：外官廪给不均，何以求其为善耶？
现代文：外官的廪食供给不均，又怎能希望他们施行善政呢？
English: How can we expect them to carry out good governance when their food rations are unequally distributed?

古文：请均其入，第给之，使有以自养，然后可以责廉节，而不法者可诛废矣。
现代文：请朝廷均衡他们的职田收入，按等级划给他们职田，以便让他们有足够的衣食养活自己，只有这样朝廷才能要求官员廉洁奉公，对贪赃枉法者才可以进行惩办和撤职。
English: Please ask the court to balance their income from their jobs and assign them jobs according to their ranks, so that they have enough food and clothing to feed themselves. Only in this way can the court require officials to serve the public with integrity, and those who are corrupt can be punished and dismissed.

古文：六曰厚农桑。
现代文：六是重视农业生产。
English: Sixth, attach importance to agricultural production.

古文：每岁预下诸路，风吏民言农田利害，堤堰渠塘，州县选官治之。定劝课之法以兴农利，减漕运。
现代文：每年预先给各路转运司下达诏书，要求他们激励官吏百姓陈说农田建设的好处和坏处，然后由州县选派官员来治理堤堰河渠、陂塘等，制定奖励和考核制度来大兴农田水利，减少漕运费用。
English: Every year, an edict is issued in advance to the departments of transportation of all roads, requiring them to encourage officials and people to present the advantages and disadvantages of farmland construction, and then the state and county elected officials are sent to control the dikes, canals, and ponds, etc., and to develop an incentive and assessment system to promote farmland water conservancy and reduce the cost of paddling.

古文：江南之圩田，浙西之河塘，隳废者可兴矣。
现代文：江南路的圩田，浙西的河塘，已经废弃或毁坏的就都可以得到恢复或兴修。
English: Putian of Jiangnan Road and Hetang of West Zhejiang, which have been abandoned or destroyed, can be restored or rebuilt.

古文：七曰修武备。
现代文：七是整顿军备。
English: The seventh is the rectification of armaments.

古文：约府兵法，募畿辅强壮为卫士，以助正兵。
现代文：大体上按照府兵法，招募京畿及其附近州郡的强壮男子充当卫士，用来辅助正规军。
English: Generally, in accordance with the prefectural law of war, strong men from Gyeonggi and its neighboring prefectures and counties were recruited to serve as guards to assist the regular army.

古文：三时务农，一时教战，省给赡之费。
现代文：一年中三季务农，一季训练作战，这样就可以节省国家供养军队的费用。
English: Three quarters of the year will be spent on farming, and one quarter will be spent on training for combat, which will save the state the cost of maintaining the army.

古文：畿辅有成法，则诸道皆可举行矣。
现代文：京畿及其附近州郡有了完备的制度，其他各路可以照此实行了。
English: Gyeonggi and its neighboring prefectures and counties have a complete system, and other roads can be implemented accordingly.

古文：八曰推恩信。
现代文：八是推行朝廷的恩泽和信义。
English: The eighth is to promote the benevolence and sincerity of the imperial court.

古文：赦令有所施行，主司稽违者，重置于法；别遣使按视其所当行者，所在无废格上恩者矣。
现代文：赦令内宣布的恩泽有所实行，但主管部门拖延或违反赦令施行的，要依法从重处理；另外还要派遣使臣到各州检查那些应当施行的恩泽是否得到了施行，如果这样的话，各地就没有弃置皇上恩泽的官员了。
English: The benefits announced in the pardon order have been implemented, but if the competent departments delay or violate the pardon order, they must be dealt with seriously according to law; in addition, envoys will be sent to the states to check whether the benefits that should be implemented have been implemented. If this is the case, there will be no officials in various regions who have abandoned the emperor's grace.

古文：九曰重命令。
现代文：九是谨慎地发布命令。
English: Nine is to issue orders cautiously.

古文：法度所以示信也，行之未几，旋即厘改。
现代文：法令制度是用来示信于民的，不要一项政令颁布不久，很快就更改变动了。
English: The system of decrees is used to demonstrate confidence in the people. No sooner is a decree promulgated than it is quickly changed.

古文：请政事之臣参议可以久行者，删去烦冗，裁为制敕行下，命令不至于数变更矣。
现代文：希望让掌管政事的大臣讨论出能够长久实行的法令，删去烦杂多余的部分，最后裁定作为皇帝的制书敕令，颁行天下，这样朝廷的命令就不会经常变动了。
English: It is hoped that the ministers in charge of political affairs will discuss the laws that can be implemented for a long time, delete the tedious and superfluous parts, and finally rule as the emperor's book-making edict and issue it to the world, so that the court's order will not change frequently.

古文：十曰减徭役。
现代文：十是减轻徭役。
English: The tenth is to lessen the role of the eunuch.

古文：户口耗少而供亿滋多，省县邑户少者为镇，并使、州两院为一，职官白直，给以州兵，其不应受役者悉归之农，民无重困之忧矣。
现代文：现在州县户口减少而对官府的供给却更加繁重，将户口少的县改为镇，把各州军的使院和州院合并为一院，职官白直，全部给予州兵冢，其他不应当服役的人全部放回农村，这样老百姓就没有重役困扰而产生的忧愁了。
English: At present, the number of hukou in counties and prefectures has been reduced, but the supply to the government is more burdensome. The counties with fewer hukou have been changed to towns, the legation and prefectural courts of the various prefectural armies have been merged into one court, the officials have been given to the state soldiers, and all other people who should not serve have been sent back to the countryside. In this way, the people will not have the sorrow caused by the troubles of heavy service.

古文：天子方信向仲淹，悉采用之，宜著令者，皆以诏书画一颁下；独府兵法，众以为不可而止。
现代文：仁宗皇帝正专意信任范仲淹，因而全部采纳了他的意见，凡适宜立为法令的，都用诏书统一颁布下去，只有府兵法，大家认为不能施行而最后作罢。
English: Emperor Nanzong was so intent on trusting Fan Zhongyan that he adopted all of his opinions. Anything that was suitable to be made into a law was uniformly promulgated in the form of an edict. Only the Military Law was considered to be unenforceable and was eventually abolished.

古文：又建言： 周制，三公分兼六官之职，汉以三公分部六卿，唐以宰相分判六曹。
现代文：范仲淹又建议说： 周代的制度，三公分别兼任六官的职务，汉代以三公分别管辖六卿之事，唐代以宰相分别兼判六曹事务。
English: Fan Zhongyun also suggested that: In the Zhou Dynasty system, the three princes concurrently held the posts of six officials respectively; in the Han Dynasty, the three princes separately administered the affairs of the six nobles; in the Tang Dynasty, the prime minister concurrently adjudicated the affairs of the six nobles respectively.

古文：今中书，古天官冢宰也，枢密院，古夏官司马也。四官散于群有司，无三公兼领之重。
现代文：现在的中书，就是古代的天官宰，枢密院，就是古代的夏官司马；四官分散于众多的官衙，已经失去了三分兼掌大权的重任了。
English: The present-day Zhongshu is the ancient Tianguanzhai, and the Privy Council is the ancient Xiaguanzima; the four departments are scattered in numerous government offices, and they have lost the heavy responsibility of holding power in three departments.

古文：而二府惟进擢差除，循资级，议赏罚，检用条例而已。
现代文：而现在二府的官员们只是在草拟授官文书时，依照资历级别，讨论赏罚时，检用现在条例罢了。
English: Now, the officials of the two prefectures only use the current regulations when drafting the awarding documents, according to the seniority level, and when discussing rewards and punishments.

古文：上非三公论道之任，下无六卿佐王之职，非治法也。
现代文：上没有三公讲论天下治道的重任，下没有六卿辅佐君王的职责，这不是治理国家的方法。
English: This is not the way to govern the country, as there are no three princes at the top to talk about the important task of governing the country, and no six nobles at the bottom to assist the king.

古文：臣请仿前代，以三司、司农、审官、流内铨、三班院、国子监、太常、刑部、审刑、大理、群牧、殿前马步军司，各委辅臣兼判其事。
现代文：我请求仿效前代的官吏制度，将三司、司农、审官、流内铨、三班院、国子监、太常、刑部、审刑、大理、群牧、殿前马步军司，分别委派辅助大臣兼管这些部门的职事。
English: I request that, following the example of the previous system of government officials, the Third Division, the Third Section of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section of the Ministry of Justice, the Third Section

古文：凡官吏黜陟、刑法重轻、事有利害者，并从辅臣予夺：其体大者，二府佥议奏裁。
现代文：凡是官吏的升降、刑法的轻重、事情的利弊这些事情，都由辅助大臣来处理；其中重大的事情，由二府大臣共同讨论，然后奏请皇帝裁定。
English: All matters relating to the promotion and demotion of officials, the importance of criminal law, and the pros and cons of a matter are handled by the auxiliary ministers. Among them, important matters are discussed jointly by the ministers of the two prefectures, and then submitted to the emperor for adjudication.

古文：臣请自领兵赋之职，如其无补，请先黜降。 章得象等皆曰不可。
现代文：我请求兼管军事和财赋方面的事情，如果对事情没有任何改进，请求先将我罢官免职。 宰相章得象等人都说范仲淹的建议不能实行。
English: I request to be in charge of both military and financial affairs, and if there is no improvement to the situation, I request that I be removed from office first.Prime Minister Zhang De, like others, said that Fan Zhongyan's suggestion could not be implemented.

古文：久之，乃命参知政事贾昌朝领农田，仲淹领刑法，然卒不果行。
现代文：很久以后，才任命参知政事贾昌朝兼管农田方面的事务，范仲淹兼管刑法方面的事务，但最后都没有实行。
English: It was not until much later that Jia Changchao, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, was appointed to be in charge of farmland affairs, and Fan Zhongyun was appointed to be in charge of criminal law affairs, but in the end they were not implemented.

古文：初，仲淹以忤吕夷简，放逐者数年，士大夫持二人曲直，交指为朋党。
现代文：当初，范仲淹因为触犯了吕夷简，被放逐在外多年，士大夫们各自坚持他们二人的是非曲直，互相指责对方是朋党。
English: At first, Fan Zhongyun was banished for many years for offending Lü Yizhen, and the scholars and officials each insisted on the rights and wrongs of the two of them, accusing each other of being partisans.

古文：及陕西用兵，天子以仲淹士望所属，拔用之。
现代文：等陕西一带发生了军情，仁宗皇帝因为范仲淹众望所归，便开始提拔重用他。
English: When war broke out in the Shaanxi region, Emperor Renzong began to promote and re-employ Fan Zhong because he was highly regarded.

古文：及夷简罢，召还，倚以为治，中外想望其功业。
现代文：等到吕夷简罢官免职，朝廷召回范仲淹，依靠他来治理朝政，朝廷内外都希望他能建功立业。
English: When Lü Yijian was dismissed from his post and the imperial court recalled Fan Zhongyan, relying on him to govern the imperial government, both inside and outside the imperial court hoped that he would be able to build a career.

古文：而仲淹以天下为己任，裁削幸滥，考覈官吏，日夜谋虑兴致太平。
现代文：范仲淹自己也以治理天下为己任，裁抑侥幸，削减冗滥，考核审查官吏，日夜谋划断虑实现天下太平。
English: Fan Zhongran himself also took the governance of the world as his own responsibility, reducing chance, reducing redundancy, assessing and reviewing officials, and planning and making decisions day and night to achieve world peace.

古文：然更张无渐，规摹阔大，论者以为不可行。
现代文：但是他的改革措施没有能够逐渐推行，改革涉及面太大，评论的人认为无法实行。
English: But his reform measures have not been able to be implemented gradually, and the reforms are too wide-ranging to be implemented, according to commentators.

古文：及按察使出，多所举劾，人心不悦。
现代文：到按察使出巡时，许多问题被检举出来，引起人心不悦。
English: By the time the inspectors went on patrol, many problems had been reported, causing public discontent.

古文：自任子之恩薄，磨勘之法密，侥幸者不便，于是谤毁稍行，而朋党之论浸闻上矣。
现代文：自从任子恩荫的减少，磨勘制度的严密，希图侥幸的人深感不便。这样，诽谤范仲淹的言论就逐渐多起来，而指责范仲淹等是朋党的议论也传到了仁宗皇帝的耳里。
English: Since the decline of favoritism, the strict grinding system, those who hope to get lucky are deeply inconvenienced. In this way, the slander of Fan Zhongyan gradually increased, and the accusation that Fan Zhongyan was a friend of the party also reached the ears of Emperor Renzong.

古文：会边陲有警，因与枢密副使富弼请行边。
现代文：刚好遇到边境有军情，范仲淹就和枢察副使富弼巡视边防。
English: Just when there was a military situation at the border, Fan Zhongran and the vice-envoy Fuxi inspected the border defense.

古文：于是，以仲淹为河东、陕西宣抚使，赐黄金百两，悉分遗边将。
现代文：这样，范仲淹被任命为河东、陕西宣抚使，赐给黄金百两，但范仲淹全部分赠给守边的将领。
English: In this way, Fan Zhongran was appointed as the envoy to Henan and Shaanxi, and was given one hundred taels of gold, but Fan Zhongran gave all of it to the generals guarding the border.

古文：麟州新罹大寇，言者多请弃之，仲淹为修故砦，招还流亡三千余户，蠲其税，罢榷酤予民。
现代文：麟州新近遭到了敌寇的大肆侵扰，进言的人多数主张放弃麟州，范仲淹却整修旧要塞，招回流亡百姓三千多户，免除他们的赋税，废除当地官府对酒类的专控权，允许百姓卖酒。
English: Linshou was recently invaded by invaders. Most of the speakers advocated abandoning Linshou, while Fan Zhong insisted on renovating the old fortress, bringing back more than three thousand exiled people, exempting them from taxes, abolishing the local government's monopoly on alcohol, and allowing people to sell alcohol.

古文：又奏免府州商税，河外遂安。
现代文：又上奏朝廷免除府州的商税，黄河以外的地区于是得以安定下来。
English: He also appealed to the imperial court to exempt the commercial tax of Fuzhou, and the areas outside the Yellow River were thus able to stabilize.

古文：比去。攻者益急，仲淹亦自请罢政事，乃以为资政殿学士、陕西四路宣抚使、知邠州。
现代文：范仲淹离开朝廷后，反对他的人更加激烈地攻击他，在这种情况下，范仲淹自己也请求免除参知政事之职，于是朝廷任命他为资政殿学士、陕西四路安抚使、州知州。
English: After Fan Zhongyun left the imperial court, his opponents attacked him even more fiercely. Under these circumstances, Fan Zhongyun himself also requested to be exempted from the post of political advisor. Therefore, the imperial court appointed him as the academician of the palace of senior statesmen, the four-way pacification envoy of Shaanxi, and the prefect of Zhouzhou.

古文：其在中书所施为，亦稍稍沮罢。
现代文：他任中书时所推行的政策，也就逐渐被废止了。
English: The policies he implemented when he was in charge of the Central Government were also gradually abolished.

古文：以疾请邓州，进给事中。
现代文：范仲淹因患病请求担任邓州知州，被升为给事中。
English: Due to illness, Fan Zhongyun requested to serve as Dengzhou Zhizhou and was promoted to the middle of the matter.

古文：徙荆南，邓人遮使者请留，仲淹亦愿留邓，许之。
现代文：当调任荆南时，邓州百姓拦住使者请求留任范仲淹，范仲淹本人也愿意留在邓州，朝廷答应了这一要求。
English: When Jing Nan was transferred, the people of Dengzhou stopped the envoy and asked Fan Zhongran to stay. Fan Zhongran himself was also willing to stay in Dengzhou, and the imperial court agreed to this request.

古文：寻徙杭州，再迁户部侍郎，徙青州。
现代文：不久调往杭州，又一次升为户部侍郎，调往青州。
English: He was soon transferred to Hangzhou, promoted again to the position of household attendant, and then transferred to Qingzhou.

古文：会病甚，请颍州，未至而卒，年六十四。
现代文：这时恰巧范仲淹病情更加严重，他请求调任颍州，还没有到任就死在路上，终年六十四岁。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Fan Zhongyun's illness became more serious. He requested to be transferred to Zhangzhou, but died on the way before he arrived, at the age of sixty-four.

古文：赠兵部尚书，谥文正。
现代文：朝廷赠他为兵部尚书，谥号 文正 。
English: The Imperial Court gave him the title of Heibu Shoshu and the posthumous name of Wenzheng.

古文：初，仲淹病，帝常遣使赐药存问，既卒，嗟悼久之。
现代文：开始，范仲淹生病时，仁宗皇帝经常派人送药、慰问，病逝后，仁宗皇帝嗟叹哀悼很长时间。
English: In the beginning, when Fan Zhongtang fell ill, Emperor Renzong often sent people to send medicine and condolences. After his death, Emperor Renzong lamented and mourned for a long time.

古文：又遣使就问其家，既葬，帝亲书其碑曰 褒贤之碑。 
现代文：又派人去慰问其家人，埋葬后，仁宗皇帝亲自题写了墓碑，叫 褒贤之碑 。
English: He also sent someone to offer condolences to his family. After the burial, Emperor Renzong personally inscribed the tombstone, which is called the Monument of Praising Virtue.

古文：仲淹内刚外和，性至孝，以母在时方贫，其后虽贵，非宾客不重肉。
现代文：范仲淹性情刚烈，但外表温和，本性十分孝敬，因为他母亲在时，家境正是贫困的时候，后来，范仲淹虽然做了大官，但不是家中来客也决不大吃大喝。
English: Fan Zhongyan's temperament is tough, but his appearance is mild, and his nature is very filial, because when his mother was alive, the family was in poverty. Later, although Fan Zhongyan became a high-ranking official, he was never a big eater when he was not at home.

古文：妻子衣食，仅能自充。
现代文：妻儿的衣服和饭食，仅仅只能自己充饥、御寒。
English: The wife and children's clothes and meals can only feed their own hunger and keep out the cold.

古文：而好施予，置义庄里中，以赡族人。
现代文：范仲淹对人好施予，在乡族中设置义庄，用以赡养族人。
English: Fan Zhongran gave generously to the people and set up Yizhuang in the township to support the people.

古文：泛爱乐善，士多出其门下，虽里巷之人，皆能道其名字。
现代文：博爱善施，士大夫大多出自其门下，即使是小巷之人，都能说出他的名字。
English: Boa Ai Shanshi, most of the scholars and magistrates are from his school, even the people in the alley can say his name.

古文：死之日，四方闻者，皆为叹息。
现代文：死的那天，四面八方凡是听到这一消息的，都替他叹惜。
English: On the day of his death, he was mourned by all who heard the news.

古文：为政尚忠厚，所至有恩，邠、庆二州之民与属羌，皆画像立生祠事之。
现代文：范仲淹治理国家崇尚忠厚，所至之处都恩爱百姓，州、庆州的老百姓和众多的羌部族，都画上他的像在其生前就来祭祀他。
English: Fan Zhongyun's governance of the country advocated loyalty, and he loved the people everywhere he went. The people of the prefecture, Gyeongju and many Yi tribes all painted his portrait and came to worship him before his death.

古文：及其卒也，羌酋数百人，哭之如父，斋三日而去。
现代文：等到他死时，羌部族的首领数百人，像失去父亲一样痛哭，并斋戒三日以后才离开。
English: When he died, hundreds of leaders of the Yao tribe wept as if they had lost their father and fasted for three days before leaving.

古文：四子：纯祐、纯仁、纯礼、纯粹。
现代文：范仲淹有四个儿子：范纯佑、范纯仁、范纯礼、范纯粹。
English: Fan Zhongran had four sons: Fan Chunyu, Fan Chunyin, Fan Chunyeli, and Fan Chunyuan.

古文：纯祐字天成，性英悟自得，尚节行。
现代文：范纯仁，字尧夫，苏州吴县人。
English: Fan Chunren, a wordsmith, hails from Wuxian County, Suzhou.

古文：方十岁，能读诸书；为文章，籍籍有称。
现代文：在他出生的那天晚上，他的母亲李氏梦见一小孩从月亮中坠下来，她以裙子接着，接而生下了范纯仁。
English: On the night of his birth, his mother, Ms. Li, dreamed of a child falling from the moon. She put on a dress and gave birth to Fan Chunren.

古文：父仲淹守苏州，首建郡学，聘胡瑗为师。
现代文：范纯仁天资警悟，八岁就能讲解所学的书。因其父范仲淹而被任命为太常寺太祝。
English: Fan Chunren was naturally alert, and at the age of eight he was able to explain the books he was studying. He was appointed as the chief priest of Taizho-ji Temple because of his father, Fan Zhongyan.

古文：瑗立学规良密，生徒数百，多不率教，仲淹患之。
现代文：中皇元年进士，调任武进县知县，但以远离双亲而不赴任。又改派为长葛县知县，仍然不前往。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, he was transferred to Wujin County, but he did not go because he was far away from his parents. He was also reassigned to Changge County, but he still did not go.

古文：纯祐尚未冠，辄白入学，齿诸生之末，尽行其规，诸生随之，遂不敢犯。
现代文：范仲淹对他说 ：你以前以远离双亲为理由不去赴任，现在长葛县离家不远，还有什么可说的哩？ 
English: Fan Zhongyun said to him, "Previously, you did not go to work because you were far away from your parents. Now, Changge County is not far from home. What else is there to say?"

古文：自是苏学为诸郡倡。
现代文：范纯仁说 ：我怎能以禄食为重，而轻易离开父母！
English: Fan Chunren said, "How can I take my livelihood as my priority and easily leave my parents?"

古文：宝元中，西夏叛，仲淹连官关陕，皆将兵。
现代文：长葛县虽离家近，但亦不能完全实现我的孝心。 
English: Although Changge County is close to home, I cannot fully realize my filial piety.

古文：纯祐与将卒错处，钩深擿隐，得其才否。由是仲淹任人无失，而屡有功。
现代文：范仲淹门下多贤士，像胡瑗、孙复、石介、李觏之类，纯仁都与他们有良好关系。
English: There are many sages under Fan Zhongyun's tutelage, such as Hu Yao, Sun Fu, Shi Jie, Li Yao, and others, and Junren has a good relationship with them.

古文：仲淹帅环庆，议城马铺砦，砦逼夏境，夏惧扼其冲，侵挠其役。
现代文：他自己也不分白天黑夜，努力学习；有时因学习到深夜，油灯的烟雾把帐顶都熏成了像墨水一样的颜色。范仲淹去世后，纯仁才开始出来做官，以著作佐郎身份担任襄城县知县。
English: He himself studied hard day and night; sometimes, because he studied late into the night, the smoke from the oil lamp turned the ceiling of the tent into an ink-like color. After Fan Zhongyan's death, Chun Ren only began to work as an official, serving as the chief magistrate of Xiangcheng County with the identity of a scholar.

古文：纯祐率兵驰据其地，夏众大至，且战且役，数日而成，一路恃之以安。纯祐事父母孝，未尝违左右，不应科第。
现代文：他的哥哥纯有心痛的毛病，纯仁侍奉他就像侍奉父亲一样。医药、饮食、居住、服饰，他都亲自按时安排。
English: His elder brother suffered from a heart disease. Pure benevolence served him just like he served his father. Medicine, food, housing, and clothing were all arranged by him on time.

古文：及仲淹以谗罢，纯祐不得已，荫守将作监主簿，又为司竹监，以非所好，即解去。
现代文：贾昌朝守北都，邀请纯仁参入幕府，纯仁因其哥哥的病而推辞。宋庠推荐他担任史馆之职，他辞谢说： 车马往来热闹非凡的地方，不适宜于我哥哥养病。 
English: Jia Chang, who was in charge of the northern capital, invited Junren to join the shogunate, but he declined due to his brother's illness. Song Xi recommended him for the position of the history museum, but he declined saying, "A place where there is a lot of traffic is not suitable for my brother to recover from his illness."

古文：从仲淹之邓，得疾昏废，卧许昌。
现代文：富弼责备他说 ：台阁的任职岂是容易得到的？何必如此。 
English: Togashi scolded him, saying, "Is it easy to get a cabinet post? Why is it so?

古文：富弼守淮西，过省之，犹能感慨道忠义，问弼之来公耶私耶，弼曰 公 。纯祐曰 公则可 。
现代文：但他仍是不去。襄城县百姓向来不养蚕织丝，纯仁劝使百姓种植桑树，有罪而情节较轻的，就看他植桑多少而减省其所受处罚。百姓从植桑中得到好处而更加种植，所植桑树后被称为 著作林 。纯仁的哥哥死后，葬于洛阳。
English: But he still did not go. The people of Xiangcheng County had never raised silkworms to weave silk. Chunren persuaded the people to plant mulberry trees. If the crime was minor, it depended on how much mulberry trees he planted to reduce his punishment. The people benefited from planting mulberry trees and planted more. The mulberry trees they planted were later called "Writing Forest." After Chunren's brother died, he was buried in Luoyang.

古文：凡病十九年卒，年四十九。
现代文：韩琦、富弼致书洛阳尹，使助其安葬。
English: Han Zheng and Fu Zheng wrote to Luo Yang Yin to help him bury him.

古文：子正臣，守太常寺太祝。
现代文：但安葬已经完毕，洛阳尹为事先没听说而感到惊讶。
English: But the burial was already over, and Luo Yangyin was surprised that he hadn't heard about it before.

古文：纯礼字彝叟，以父仲淹荫，为秘书省正字，签书河南府判官，知陵台令兼永安县。
现代文：纯仁说 ：我们自己家庭的财力足以办此葬礼，怎能打扰公家才办葬礼呢？ 签书许州观察判官、襄邑县知县。
English: Junren said: Our own family's financial resources are sufficient to hold this funeral, how can we disturb the public to hold a funeral? Signed by the observation magistrate of Xuzhou and the magistrate of Xiangyi County.

古文：永昭陵建，京西转运使配木石砖甓及工徒于一路，独永安不受令。使者以白陵使韩琦，琦曰： 范纯礼岂不知此？
现代文：县有牧地，卫士牧马，践踏了百姓庄稼，范纯仁逮捕一人并处以鞭杖。牧地起初不由县管辖，主管此事的官员生气说： 天子的宿卫，怎敢如此对待？ 
English: The county had a pasture, and the guardian horse trampled the people's crops. Fan Chunren arrested one person and punished him with a whip. At first, the pasture was not under the jurisdiction of the county, and the official in charge of the matter said angrily, "How dare you treat the guardian of the Son of Heaven like this?"

古文：将必有说。 他日，众质之，纯礼曰： 陵寝皆在邑境，岁时缮治无虚日，今乃与百县均赋，曷若置此，使之奉常时用乎。 琦是其对。
现代文：把此事报告到朝廷。
English: Report the matter to the Imperial Court.

古文：还朝，用为三司盐铁判官，以比部员外郎出知遂州。
现代文：朝廷派人纠察，甚为急迫。范纯仁说： 养兵的费用来于田税，若使毁坏百姓田亩而不能执法，田税从哪里来？ 
English: The imperial court sent people to picket, it was very urgent. Fan Chunren said: The cost of raising soldiers comes from the field tax. If you destroy the people's fields and cannot enforce the law, where does the field tax come from?

古文：沪南有边事，调度苛棘，纯礼一以静待之，辨其可具者，不取于民。
现代文：皇帝下诏免究此事，并听任牧地由县管辖。宋朝牧地为县管辖，自范纯仁开始。
English: The emperor issued an edict exempting himself from investigating the matter, and allowed the pastures to be governed by counties. The Song Dynasty pastures were governed by counties, starting with Fan Chunren.

古文：民图像于庐，而奉之如神，名曰 范公庵 。
现代文：当时天旱很久不下雨，范纯仁登记襄邑县境内商船，告诉他们说： 百姓将来没有饭吃，你们所贩五谷，贮藏在佛寺里，等到粮食缺少时，我为你们籴卖。 
English: At that time, the drought had not rained for a long time. Fan Chunren registered the merchant ships in Xiangyi County and told them: "The people will have no food in the future. The grain you sell is stored in Buddhist temples. When there is a shortage of grain, I will sell it for you."

古文：草场火，民情疑怖，守吏惕息俟诛。
现代文：商人们都服从命令，贮藏的粮食达十余万斛。
English: The merchants all obeyed the order, and the stored grain amounted to more than one hundred thousand mu.

古文：纯礼曰： 草湿则生火，何足怪！ 但使密偿之。库吏盗丝多罪至死，纯礼曰： 以棼然之丝而杀之，吾不忍也。 听其家趣买以赎，命释其株连者。
现代文：到春天，各县都受饥，只有襄邑县境内百姓不知道有饥馑这回事。治平年间，范纯仁被提升为江东转运判官，召为殿中侍御史，并升任侍御史。
English: By the spring, all counties were suffering from famine, and only the people in Xiangyi County did not know about the famine. During the Heian period, Fan Chunren was promoted to the East River Transportation Judge, called to the palace to serve as the imperial historian, and promoted to the position of the imperial historian.

古文：除户部郎中、京西转运副使。
现代文：历任京西提点刑狱、京西陕西转运副使。
English: Successive vice-envoy to Beijing, Xi'an and Shaanxi for transportation.

古文：元祐初，入为吏部郎中，迁左司。又迁太常少卿、江淮荆浙发运使。
现代文：神宗时，纯仁被召还朝廷。神宗问及陕西城郭、甲兵、粮储如何，纯仁回答说 ：城郭粗全、甲兵粗修、粮储粗备。 神宗惊讶地说： 你的才干是我所倚重的，怎么都说成粗？ 纯仁回答说 ：粗者是说未精，但如此也足够了。
English: At the time of Shenzong, Junren was called back to the imperial court. Shenzong asked how the city walls, armored soldiers, and grain reserves of Shaanxi were, and Junren replied: The city walls are complete, the armored soldiers are complete, and the grain reserves are complete. Shenzong said in surprise: Your talent is what I rely on, how can you say it is complete? Junren replied: The crude person says it is not refined, but that is enough.

古文：以光禄卿召，迁刑部侍郎，进给事中。
现代文：愿陛下不要留意边防，若边臣观望陛下之意，将来必有意外之患。 拜兵部员外郎，兼起居舍人，同知谏院。
English: May His Majesty not pay attention to the border guards, if the border guards watch His Majesty's will, there will be an accident in the future.

古文：纯礼凡所封驳，正名分纪纲，皆国体之大者。
现代文：呈奏说 ：王安石变更祖宗法度，聚敛财利，民心不安。《书经》说 ：怨岂在明，不见是图。 
English: The report said: Wang Anshi changed the Ancestor's Code, amassed wealth, and made the people uneasy. "The Book" said: The grievances are clear, but what is not clear is the picture.

古文：张耒除起居舍人，病未能朝，而令先供职。
现代文：但愿陛下考虑不能见到的埋怨。 神宗说 ：什么是不能见到的埋怨？ 纯仁回答道： 杜牧所谓 天下之人，不敢言而敢怒 即是。 
English: May His Majesty consider the complaints that cannot be seen. Shintsong said, "What are the complaints that cannot be seen?" Chunren replied, "The so-called people of Dumo dare not speak and dare not be angry."

古文：纯礼批敕曰： 臣僚未有以疾谒告，不赴朝参先视事者。
现代文：神宗赞许地采纳了，并说： 你很善于讨论大事，请为我举古今治乱可以引为借鉴的事。 纯仁于是作《尚书解》进呈，说： 《尚书》所言，皆尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之事也。
English: Shenzong accepted it with approval, and said, "You are very good at discussing important matters, please give me some examples of things that can be used as a reference for the past and present." Junren then wrote "Shang Shuxue" and submitted it, saying, "What "Shang Shuxue" says is true for all matters, including war, war, war, war, war, and war."

古文：耒能供职，岂不能见君？
现代文：治天下没有什么可以改变这些的，愿陛下深入研究而勉力实行。 
English: There is nothing under heaven that can change these things, so may His Majesty thoroughly study and diligently implement them.

古文：坏礼乱法，所不当为。 闻者皆悚动。
现代文：加官直集贤院，同修起居注。神宗急切地想达到大治天下的目的，多次接见疏远的小臣，咨询为政阙失。
English: Shinzō, eager to achieve his goal of ruling the world, met with his estranged vassal several times, and the consultations proved to be a political disaster.

古文：御史中丞击执政，将遂代其位，先以讽纯礼。
现代文：纯仁说： 小人之言，听起来好像可采纳，实行起来必有牵累。
English: Junren said: The words of a small person sound like they can be accepted, but they will be difficult to implement.

古文：纯礼曰： 论人而夺之位，宁不避嫌邪？
现代文：因为小人知小忘大，贪近昧远，希望陛下深加体察。 
English: I hope His Majesty will take a closer look at this, because small people tend to forget the big things and are greedy for the near and the far.

古文：命果下，吾必还之。 宰相即徙纯礼刑部侍郎，而后出命。
现代文：富弼时居相位，却引疾居在家里。纯仁说 ：富弼受三朝眷倚，应当自觉担任天下重任，但他怜恤自己比怜恤其他事情更加深切，忧虑自己的病情深过忧虑国家，为君主效力和为自己安身立命，二方面都有过错。
English: Junren said: Fuxi was favored by the three dynasties and should consciously assume the heavy responsibilities of the world, but he pitied himself more deeply than he pitied other things. He worried about his own illness more than he worried about the country. There are faults in both aspects of working for the monarch and settling down for himself.

古文：转吏部，改天章阁待制、枢密都承旨，去知亳州、提举明道宫。
现代文：富弼与我的父亲范仲淹交谊深厚，如今我在谏省，不能私下拜谒以致忠告，愿陛下把此奏章指给他看，使他自己反省。 
English: Fuxi and my father Fan Zhongyan have a deep friendship. Now that I am in Handan Province, I can't go to Fuxi in private to give him advice. May His Majesty show him this piece of music and make him reflect on himself.

古文：徽宗立，以龙图阁直学士知开封府。
现代文：范纯仁还论及吕诲不当罢御史中丞、李师中不可守边等事。
English: Fan Chunren also talked about Lyu Er improperly dismissing Shi Zhongzheng, Li Shizhong not being able to defend the border and other things.

古文：前尹以刻深为治，纯礼曰： 宽猛相济，圣人之训。
现代文：及薛向任发运使，行均输法于六路，纯仁说 ：我曾亲听皇帝您的教诲，欲修先王补助之政。
English: When Xue Xuan dispatched an envoy to the emperor, the trip was lost in six ways, and Junren said: I have personally listened to the emperor's teachings and want to improve the former king's subsidy policy.

古文：今处深文之后，若益以猛，是以火济火也。
现代文：如今却效桑弘羊均输之法，又使小人主持此事，聚敛百姓，只能集中怨愤而为祸基。
English: Nowadays, however, the method of losing both the mulberry tree and the sheep has been put into effect, and the villain has been made to preside over the matter and gather the people, which can only concentrate the resentment and become the cause of the disaster.

古文：方务去前之苛，犹虑未尽，岂有宽为患也。 由是一切以宽处之。
现代文：王安石以富国强兵之术，把皇上的心思导向于急功近利，忘记了他过去所学的。
English: Wang Anshi used the art of enriching the country and strengthening the army to direct the emperor's mind to quick success and forget what he had learned in the past.

古文：中旨鞫享泽村民谋逆，纯礼审其故，此民入戏场观优，归途见匠者作桶，取而戴于首曰： 与刘先生如何？ 遂为匠擒。
现代文：推尚法令则称商鞅，倡言财利则背离孟轲，鄙视老成之人认为因循守旧，背弃公论认为是流俗之见，不同于己者为不肖，与己相合者为贤人。刘琦、钱岂页等人，不过一言不合，就遭降职或罢黜。
English: The promotion of laws and decrees is called discussion, the advocacy of financial interests is deviating from Meng Xuan, the despising of the old people is considered to be following the old way, and the abandonment of public opinion is considered to be a popular opinion. Those who are different from themselves are ugly, and those who are compatible with themselves are wise. Liu Xuan, Qian Qian and others, but they do not agree with each other, are demoted or dismissed.

古文：明日入对，徽宗问何以处之，对曰： 愚人村野无所知，若以叛逆蔽罪，恐辜好生之德，以不应为杖之，足矣。 曰： 何以戒后人？ 曰： 正欲外间知陛下刑宪不滥，足以为训尔。 徽宗从之。
现代文：朝廷之臣，一大半趋炎附势，陛下又从而驱使，将来何所不至。
English: Most of the courtiers of the Imperial Court have been influenced by the fire, and thus driven by His Majesty, and will not go anywhere in the future.

古文：拜礼部尚书，擢尚书右丞。
现代文：道远者按理应当慢慢地招来，事大者不能一下取得成功，人材不能急求，积弊不可顿革。
English: Those who have a long way to go should be invited slowly, those who are great cannot succeed at once, human resources cannot be urgently sought, and accumulated disadvantages cannot be eliminated.

古文：侍御史陈次升乞除罢言官并自内批，不由三省进拟，右相曾布力争不能得，乞降黜次升。纯礼徐进曰： 次升何罪？
现代文：倘欲事功马上成就，一定会有奸诈之徒乘机坏事，应当立刻召还谏官而罢退王安石，以符朝廷内外之望。 神宗没有采纳。于是纯仁请求罢免谏官之职，改判国子监，离开朝廷之意更加坚定。执政使人告诉他说： 不要轻易离京，已经考虑你升任知制诰的官了。 纯仁说 ：这话怎么会说到我头上呢？
English: If he wanted his work to be accomplished immediately, there would surely be a treacherous person who would take advantage of the opportunity to do something bad. He should immediately recall the eunuch and depose Wang Anshi, to meet the expectations of both inside and outside the imperial court. Shenzong did not accept. Therefore, Chunren requested to remove the eunuch's post, to change the sentence of the son-in-law of the state, and to leave the imperial court more firmly. The ruler told him: Do not leave Beijing easily, you have been considered for promotion to the post of the eunuch. Chunren said: How can this be said to my head?

古文：不过防柄臣各引所亲，且去不附己者尔。 徽宗曰： 然。 乃寝布议。
现代文：我的言论得不到采纳，即使万钟俸禄也不是我所考虑的。 纯仁所上奏疏，言语大多激烈。神宗都留着不宣于外。
English: My words are not accepted, even if the reward of ten thousand bells and whistles is not what I have in mind. Pure benevolence is rarely mentioned, and most of the words are fierce. All the gods are kept secret.

古文：吕惠卿告老，徽宗问执政，执政欲许之。
现代文：但纯仁全部录下申呈中书省。王安石大怒，请求皇帝加重贬斥。神宗说： 他没有什么罪过，暂且给他一处好地吧。 
English: Wang Anshi was furious and asked the emperor to increase the reprimand. Shenzong said, "He has not done anything wrong, just give him a good place for the time being."

古文：纯礼曰： 惠卿尝辅政，其人固不足重，然当存国体。 曾布奏： 议者多忧财用不足，此非所急也，愿陛下勿以为虑。 纯礼曰： 古者无三年之蓄，曰国非其国。
现代文：命令他为河中府知府，改成都路转运使。
English: He was ordered to change his title from the prefectural governor of Kawakuchu Prefecture to the capital road transfer envoy.

古文：今大农告匮，帑庾枵空，而曰不足虑，非面谩邪？ 因从容谏曰： 迩者朝廷命令，莫不是元丰而非元祐。以臣观之，神宗立法之意固善，吏推行之，或有失当，以致病民。
现代文：纯仁认为新法不便，戒州县不要匆忙实行。王安石恼怒纯仁阻止，于是让说纯仁坏话的人派使者去收集纯仁的私事和过失，但得不到任何证据。使者于是以其他事情把传话的人鞭打了一顿。纯仁的属官高兴地对纯仁说： 这一件事足以堵塞对您的诽谤，请报告给朝廷。 纯仁既不奏使者之过，亦不反驳传言者之非。后来纯仁还是因为没有管治僚佐燕游，被降为和州知州，并徙邢州。
English: Chunren thought that the new law was inconvenient and should not be hastily implemented in Kaizhou County. Wang Anshi got angry and tried to stop Chunren, so he had the person who spoke ill of Chunren send an emissary to collect Chunren's private affairs and faults, but could not get any evidence. The emissary then whipped the messenger with other things. Chunren's subordinate officers said happily to Chunren: This matter is enough to block the slander against you, please report to the imperial court. Chunren neither played the fault of the messenger nor refuted the rumor. Later, Chunren was reduced to Wazhou

古文：宣仁听断，一时小有润色，盖大臣识见异同，非必尽怀邪为私也。
现代文：还没到任，加直龙图阁、知庆州。经过朝廷入对，神宗说： 你的父亲在庆州有威名，现在可以说是世职。你跟随你父亲很久，兵法一定精熟，边事也一定精熟。 
English: Before taking up the post, he went to Gyeongju to learn about Gyeongju. After being admitted to the imperial court, Shenzong said: Your father has a prestigious name in Gyeongju, and now it can be said to be a lifetime position. You have followed your father for a long time, you must be proficient in warfare, and you must be proficient in peripheral affairs.

古文：今议论之臣，有不得志，故挟此藉口。
现代文：纯仁揣慕神宗有功名之心，于是回答道 ：我是儒家，没有学过兵法，先父守边时，我还很年轻，也记不得什么，而且现在事势也有不同。
English: Junren guessed that Shenzong had a heart of merit, so he answered: I am a Confucian, I have not studied the art of war. When my father guarded the border, I was still very young and could not remember anything, and now things are different.

古文：以元丰为是，则欲贤元丰之人；以元祐为非，则欲斥元祐之士，其心岂恤国事？
现代文：陛下使臣下修治城垒，爱养百姓，不敢推辞。若开拓边疆，侵攘土地，希望跟帅臣商议。 
English: His Majesty's envoys repair the city walls, love to raise the people, and dare not refuse. If you open up the frontier and invade the land, I hope to discuss it with the handsome minister.

古文：直欲快私忿以售其奸，不可不深察也。 
现代文：神宗说 ：你的才干何所不能，只不过不肯为我尽心罢了。 
English: Shenzong said, "There is nothing your talent can't do, it's just that you aren't willing to devote yourself to me."

古文：又曰： 自古天下汨乱，系于用人。
现代文：于是赴任庆州知州。秦中正患饥荒，纯仁擅自发常平仓粟赈贷。
English: As a result, he was appointed to Gyeongju Chishu. The middle of the Qin Dynasty was suffering from famine, and Chunren spontaneously liquidated the warehouse of millet.

古文：祖宗于此，最得其要。太祖用吕余庆，太宗用王禹偁，真宗用张知白，皆从下列置诸要途。
现代文：他的僚属请示须呈请朝廷后才能如此，纯仁说： 若待批准则等不及了，我会独自承担责任的。 
English: His colleague's request must be submitted to the court before it can be so, Junren said: If it is pending approval, I can't wait, I will take the responsibility alone.

古文：人君欲得英杰之心，固当不次饬拔。
现代文：有人指责他发常平仓所保全的百姓人数不真实，有诏遣使核实。
English: Some people accused him of not telling the truth about the number of people saved by the regular liquidation of warehouses. An envoy was sent to verify this.

古文：必待荐而后用，则守正特立之士，将终身晦迹矣。 左司谏江公望论继述事当执中道，不可拘一偏。
现代文：正值秋天大丰收，老百姓高兴地说 ：范公实在使我等活了下来，怎么能忍心牵累范公呢？ 昼夜争着把粮粟输还。等到使者到来时，已经无所欠负。宁两地间有丛冢，使者说 ：所谓保全百姓人数不实之罪，在此得到证明。 
English: At the time of the autumn harvest, the common people said happily, "Fang Gong has really kept me alive, how can I bear to drag him down?" They fought day and night to return the corn. By the time the messenger arrived, they had already done everything. There was a thicket between the two places, and the messenger said, "The so-called crime of keeping the number of common people false has been proven here."

古文：徽宗出示其疏，纯礼赞之曰： 愿陛下以晓中外，使知圣意所向，亦足以革小人徇利之情。乞褒迁公望，以劝来者。 纯礼沉毅刚正，曾布惮之，激驸马都尉王诜曰： 上欲除君承旨，范右丞不可。 诜怒。
现代文：打开冢墓收集骸骨上报。
English: Open the skeleton grave to collect the skeleton and report it.

古文：会诜馆辽使，纯礼主宴，诜诬其辄斥御名，罢为端明殿学士、知颍昌府，提举崇福宫。
现代文：朝廷命本路监司根究，结果是前帅楚建中所封。朝廷究治楚建中之罪，纯仁上书说： 建中守法，申请救济的间隙难免有饿死的，已经因罪被罢。今由于究治臣下罪过而累及建中，是一罪受两次处罚。 
English: The imperial court ordered the inspector of this road to investigate the root cause, and the result was the former commander Chu Jianzhong was sealed. The imperial court investigated the crime of Chu Jianzhong, and Junren wrote: Jianzhong abided by the law, and the gap between applying for relief was inevitably starving to death, and had already been dismissed for the crime. Now, due to the investigation of the crime of the minister, Jianzhong is involved, and is punished twice for one crime.

古文：崇宁中，启党禁，贬试少府监，分司南京。
现代文：楚建中还是受了赎铜三十斤的处罚。环州种古逮捕熟羌判为盗，流放南方，经过庆州时呼叫冤枉，纯仁认为既是种古属下小吏，不应是盗贼。
English: Chu Jianzhong was still punished with a fine of 30 jin of copper. Huanzhou Zanggu arrested Juyi and sentenced him to be a thief. He was exiled to the south. When passing through Gyeongju, he called out unjustly. Chunren thought that since he was a petty official under Zanggu, he should not be a thief.

古文：又贬静江军节度副使，徐州安置，徙单州。
现代文：种古回避罪过而诉讼，诏令御史到宁州治理此事。
English: In order to avoid the crime of litigation, the Emperor ordered the Emperor to come to Ningzhou to deal with the matter.

古文：五年，复左朝议大夫，提举鸿庆宫。
现代文：纯仁被执，百姓万余人阻于路上，流着眼泪，以至不能成行，有的还自投河。
English: Chunren was detained, and more than 10,000 people were blocked on the road, shedding tears and unable to travel. Some even threw themselves into the river.

古文：卒，年七十六。纯粹字德孺，以荫迁至赞善大夫、检正中书刑房，与同列有争，出知滕县，迁提举成都诸路茶场。
现代文：狱定以后，种古以诬告被贬斥；而纯仁以其他过错，被黜为知信阳军。
English: After being sentenced to prison, Zanggu was reprimanded for making false accusations, while Chunren was punished for being a member of the Zhishin Yangjun due to other faults.

古文：元丰中，为陕西转运判官。
现代文：不久改移齐州。齐州民俗凶悍，人们以偷盗抢劫为常事。
English: Soon they moved to Qizhou. Qizhou folk customs are fierce, and people often resort to theft and robbery.

古文：时五路出师伐西夏：高遵裕出环庆，刘昌祚出泾原，李宪出熙河，种谔出鄜延，王中正出河东。
现代文：有人说 ：对此从严处治犹不能平定，你若宽大治理，恐怕会不胜其烦。 纯仁说： 宽出于性，若强而猛，则不能持久；猛而不久，去治理凶悍之民，这是采取玩耍的办法。 
English: Some people said, "If you deal with this matter strictly, you will not be able to pacify it, and if you deal with it leniently, you will probably be annoyed by it." Junren said, "If you are lenient by nature, if you are strong and fierce, you will not last long; if you are fierce and do not last long, if you want to govern a fierce people, you should take a playful approach."

古文：遵裕怒昌祚后期，欲按诛之，昌祚忧恚病卧，其麾下皆愤焉。纯粹恐两军不协，致生他变，劝遵裕往问昌祚疾，其难遂解。
现代文：有西司理院，械系的囚犯经常爆满，囚犯都是些屠贩盗窃而以入狱督促还债的人。纯仁说 ：这些人何不使保外而输纳呢？ 通判说 ：此类人释放了，又闹事，官司往往待他们犯病死在狱中，这是与百姓除害。 纯仁说 ：法律上不至于判死罪，却以情杀之，难道合理吗？ 
English: There is the Western Magistrate's Court, which is often overcrowded with prisoners from the mechanical engineering department. The prisoners are all butchers who steal and are sent to prison to force them to pay their debts. Junren said, "Why don't these people get out on bail and pay their debts?" The judge said, "When such people are released, they start trouble again, and the courts often let them get sick and die in prison. This is to prevent harm to the people." Junren said, "It is not legally possible to sentence them to death, but is it reasonable to kill them with mercy?"

古文：神宗责诸将无功，谋欲再举。
现代文：把他们都叫到庭下，教训他们自新，并释放了他们。
English: Called them all into court, taught them a lesson, and released them.

古文：纯粹奏： 关陕事力单竭，公私大困，若复加骚动，根本可忧。异时言者必职臣是咎，臣宁受尽言之罪于今日，不忍默默以贻后悔。 神宗纳之，进为副使。
现代文：一年之后，盗贼比前年减少了大半。请求罢职，被任为提举两京留司御史台，当时耆贤大多在洛阳，纯仁及司马光，都好客而家中贫困，相约为真率会。
English: A year later, the number of thieves had decreased by half compared to the previous year. He asked to be relieved of his duties and was appointed as the head of the two Beijing residences. At that time, most of the sages were in Luoyang. Chunren and Sima Guang were hospitable and poor at home, which was comparable to the truth-telling meeting.

古文：吴居厚为京东转运使，数献羡赋。
现代文：只吃脱粟一样饭，喝几杯酒，洛中以为美事。
English: Only eat poppy seeds as a meal, drink a few glasses of wine, Luo Zhong thought it was a beautiful thing.

古文：神宗将以徐州大钱二十万缗助陕西，纯粹语其僚曰： 吾部虽急，忍复取此膏血之余？ 即奏： 本路得钱诚为利，自徐至边，劳费甚矣。 恳辞弗受。
现代文：后来为河中知府，诸路看到保甲法妨碍农功，论救十分用力。
English: Later, as the prefectural governor of Kawachin, Zhu Lu saw that the guarantee method hindered agricultural skills, and he argued very hard for help.

古文：入为右司郎中。哲宗立，居厚败，命纯粹以直龙图阁往代之，尽革其苛政。
现代文：录事参军宋儋年突然死了，纯仁派子弟吊丧，小殓时，发现宋儋年口鼻有血流出。
English: Song Xiannian, who joined the army, died suddenly, and his younger brother, who was a disciple of Junren, was in mourning. When he was a child, Song Xiannian was found to have blood coming from his nose and mouth.

古文：时苏轼自登州召还，纯粹与轼同建募役之议，轼谓纯粹讲此事尤为精详。复代兄纯仁知庆州。
现代文：纯仁怀疑他死得不正常，调查后得知宋儋年之妾跟小吏通奸，趁宴会时把毒药放在鳖肉中毒死了宋儋年。纯仁追问食鳖肉在第几次喝酒时，并说： 哪里有已经中毒而能喝到终席的呢？ 
English: Chunren suspected that his death was not normal. After the investigation, it was learned that Song Junnian's concubine had committed adultery with a minor official, and took advantage of the banquet to put poison in the stew and poisoned Song Junnian. Chunren asked about eating the stew when drinking for the first time, and said: Where is the one who has been poisoned and can drink to the last seat?

古文：时与夏议分疆界，纯粹请弃所取夏地，曰： 争地未弃，则边隙无时可除。
现代文：经过再次拷问，才知宋儋年向来不吃鳖肉，所谓置毒药鳖肉中者，乃是其妾与小吏想为将来翻案打下伏笔，以逃避死罪。
English: After further interrogation, it was learned that Song Xuanren had never eaten horse meat, and that the so-called poisoned horse meat belonged to his concubine and a minor official who wanted to lay the groundwork for overturning the case in the future in order to escape the death penalty.

古文：如河东之葭芦、吴堡，鄜延之米脂、羲合、浮图，环庆之安疆，深在夏境，于汉界地利形势，略无所益。而兰、会之地，耗蠹尤深，不可不弃。 所言皆略施行。纯粹又言： 诸路策应，旧制也。
现代文：实际情况是宋儋年喝醉酒后回来，其妾置毒药于酒中而杀掉了他。
English: In fact, Song Jun'en came back drunk, and his concubine put poison in his drink and killed him.

古文：自徐禧罢策应，若夏兵大举，一路攻围，力有不胜，而邻路拱手坐观，其不拔者幸尔。
现代文：于是正治其罪。
English: As a result, he was punished for his crime.

古文：今宜修明战守救援之法。 朝廷是之。
现代文：哲宗登基，纯仁再次任直龙图阁，知庆州。
English: Zhezong ascended to the throne, and Chunren was re-appointed as Zhaolong Tu Ge, known as Qingzhou.

古文：及夏侵泾原，纯粹遣将曲珍救之，曰： 本道首建应援牵制之策，臣子之义，忘躯徇国，无谓邻路被寇，非我职也。 珍即日疾驰三百里，破之于曲律，捣横山，夏众遁去。元祐中，除宝文阁待制，再任，召为户部侍郎，又出知延州。绍圣初。
现代文：召为谏议大夫，因为避亲的嫌而辞却，改任天章阁待制兼侍讲，升为给事中。
English: He was called to be a doctor of consultation, but he resigned because he did not want to avoid his relatives. He was transferred to the Tianzhangge as a standby and assistant lecturer, and was promoted to the middle of the class.

古文：哲宗亲政，用事者欲开边衅，御史郭知章遂论纯粹元祐弃地事，降直龙图阁。
现代文：当时宣仁皇太后垂帘听政，司马光主持政事，将尽改熙宁、元丰法度。纯仁对司马光说 ：改掉其中过份者即可。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Xuanren was listening to politics, Sima Guang was presiding over politics, and he would do his best to reform the Xining and Yuanfeng laws. Chunren said to Sima Guang: It is enough to change those who have gone too far.

古文：明年，复以宝文阁待制知熙州。
现代文：至于差役一事，应当仔细讲究而慢慢实行。
English: As for the posting, it should be carried out carefully and slowly.

古文：章惇、蔡卞经略西夏，疑纯粹不与共事，改知邓州。
现代文：否则，更加成为老百姓的祸害。希望你虚心以接纳各种不同建议，不必谋自己出；谋自己出，则谄谀之人得以乘间而迎合。役法恐怕难以更改，可以先在一路实行，看结果到底怎样。 
English: Otherwise, it will become even more of a scourge for the common people. I hope that you will be open-minded enough to accept all kinds of different suggestions, without having to find your own way out; if you find your own way out, then the lazy people will be able to take advantage of it. I am afraid that it is difficult to change the method of service, you can implement it all the way first, and see what the result is.

古文：历河南府、滑州，旋以元祐党人夺职，知均州。
现代文：司马光不听，反而更加固执。纯仁说 ：这样的话就使得人不能说话了。
English: Sima Guang didn't listen, but instead became more stubborn. Chunren said, "If you do that, you won't be able to speak."

古文：徽宗立，起知信州，复故职，知太原，加龙图阁直学士，再临延州。
现代文：如果为了讨好你而得到你的喜欢，怎么不在年轻时迎合王安石以致富贵呢？ 又说： 熙宁按问自首之法，既已改了，有司立文太深，四方死者比较旧时有数倍之多，恐怕不符合先王宁失不经，也不枉杀无辜之意。 
English: If in order to please you and get your liking, why not pander to Wang Anshi when he was young so that he would become rich? He also said: Xining has changed the method of surrendering himself according to the question, there is too much division, and there are several times more dead people in the four directions than in the old days. I am afraid that it does not conform to the previous Wang Ning's erratic behavior, nor the intention of killing innocents.

古文：改知永兴军。寻以言者落职，知金州，提举鸿庆宫。
现代文：纯仁向来与司马光志向相同，等到临事规正，大致如此。以前，种古因诬告纯仁而被罢黜。
English: Chung-in has always had the same aspirations as Sima Guang, and until the situation is normalized, this is roughly the case. Previously, Chung-gu was dismissed for falsely accusing Chung-in.

古文：又责常州别驾，鄂州安置，锢子弟不得擅入都。
现代文：至此时，纯仁又推荐他为永兴军路钤辖，并推荐他知隰州。
English: At this time, Junren also recommended him to Yongxing Military Road, and recommended him to Zhisheng.

古文：会赦，复领祠。久之，以右文殿修撰提举太清宫。
现代文：每每自己反省道 ：先辈与种氏上世有很深情谊，纯仁不肖，引起种氏子孙讼告，哪用去讨论其中是非曲直。 元初年，升为吏部尚书，隔数天，又任同知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and a few days later, he was appointed to the post of Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：党禁解，复徽猷阁待制，致仕。
现代文：起先，纯仁参与了关于西夏的讨论，他主张罢兵弃地，让西夏归还所掠汉人，执政大臣考虑了很久没有决断。
English: At first, Junren took part in the discussion about Xixia. He advocated abandoning the troops and letting Xixia return the Han people it had plundered. The ruling minister deliberated for a long time without reaching a decision.

古文：卒，年七十余。
现代文：至此乃重新讨论，纯仁又请求归还一汉人即予西夏十缣。
English: At this point, the discussion was renewed, and Junren requested the return of a Han person, that is, Xixia ten baht.

古文：纯粹沉毅有干略，才应时须，尝论卖官之滥，以为： 国法固许进纳取官，然未尝听其理选。
现代文：事都照着办了。边境上把鬼章俘虏了并押到朝廷，纯仁请在边塞上诛杀以谢边民，没有被接受。议事者想把鬼章的儿子也招来，收复河南故地，因此赦免死罪而不杀。后来又欲加官，纯仁再次争论不能加官。
English: Everything was done according to plan. Ghosts were captured on the border and brought to the imperial court, and Chunren was asked to fight and kill them on the border to thank the border people, but this was not accepted. The councilor wanted to bring the son of the ghost and recover the ancestral land of Henan, so he pardoned the death penalty without killing. Later, he wanted to promote him, and Chunren again argued that he could not promote him.

古文：今西北三路，许纳三千二百缗买斋郎，四千六百缗买供奉职，并免试注官。夫天下士大夫服勤至于垂死，不沾世恩，其富民猾商，捐钱千万，则可任三子，切为朝廷惜之。 疏上，不听。
现代文：而鬼章之子也终究没有归附。
English: However, the son of the ghost chapter did not join after all.

古文：凡论事剀切类此。
现代文：元三年，拜尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Shangshu's right-hand man Shao also served as the junior secretary.

古文：纯仁字尧夫，其始生之夕，母李氏梦儿堕月中，承以衣裾，得之，遂生纯仁。
现代文：纯仁在位，专以博大开启皇帝心意，以忠笃改变士风。章得罪罢去，朝廷因其父亲年老，欲将他安置在比较方便的郡府，既而此事中止。
English: When Junren was on the throne, he opened the emperor's heart with generosity, and changed the style of the emperor with loyalty. Zhang was expelled for his crime, and the court wanted to place him in a more convenient county seat because of his father's old age, and the matter was discontinued.

古文：资警悟，八岁，能讲所授书。
现代文：纯仁请求避开其过往之罪而体恤其私情。
English: Chun-Ren asks that his past sins be avoided and his personal feelings be pitied.

古文：以父任为太常寺太祝。中皇祐元年进士第，调知武进县，以远亲不赴；易长葛，又不往。
现代文：邓绾为淮东帅，言官贬斥他没完没了，纯仁说 ：我曾被邓绾诬奏而被黜退，今日所陈说却是为邓绾说话，降职时不应把人家的过失记录得太深。 
English: Deng Xiao was Huai Dongshuai, and the spokesman criticized him endlessly. Chun Ren said, "I was falsely accused by Deng Xiao and forced to resign, but what I am saying today is speaking for Deng Xiao. When demoting, one should not record the faults of others too deeply."

古文：仲淹曰： 汝昔日以远为言，今近矣，复何辞？ 纯仁曰： 岂可重于禄食，而轻去父母邪？
现代文：宣仁皇太后赞许地采纳了。
English: Empress Dowager Nobuhito accepted it with approval.

古文：虽近，亦不能遂养焉。 仲淹门下多贤士，如胡瑗、孙复、石介、李覯之徙，纯仁皆与从游。昼夜肄业，至夜分不寝，置灯帐中，帐顶如墨色。
现代文：于是下诏： 前日希求附合之人，一并不予追究。 学士苏轼以发策问被言官围攻，韩维无故罢门下侍郎被调外职。纯仁奏言苏轼无罪，韩维尽心国家，不能因谮言罢黜他的官职。
English: Therefore, the following edict was issued: Those who wished to join the rally the day before would not be investigated. The scholar Su Shi was besieged by the speech officials for asking questions, Han Wei dismissed the waiter without reason and was transferred to a foreign post. Su Shi was not guilty, Han Wei was devoted to the country and could not dismiss his official post for slander.

古文：仲俺没，始出仕，以著作佐郎知襄城县。
现代文：待王觌议事不合皇帝之意，纯仁担心朋党将越来越严重，与文彦博、吕公著在皇太后帘前辩论，没有结果。
English: Wang Yao's deliberation was not in line with the emperor's intention, and Chun Ren was worried that the cronyism would become more and more serious. He debated with Wen Yanbo and Lü Gongzhu in front of the empress dowager's curtain, with no result.

古文：兄纯祐有心疾，奉之如父，药膳居服，皆躬亲时节之。
现代文：纯仁说： 朝臣本来无党，但善恶邪正，各以类分。
English: Chunin said: Originally, there was no party for the courtier, but good, evil, and right were divided into different categories.

古文：贾昌朝守北都，请参幕府，以兄辞。
现代文：彦博、公著都是历朝旧臣，怎能雷同欺上。
English: Hikohiro and Kousaku were both former retainers of successive dynasties. How could they have been deceived by Lei Tong?

古文：宋庠荐试馆职，谢曰： 辇毂之下，非兄养疾地也。 富弼责之曰： 台阁之任岂易得？
现代文：过去先父与韩琦、富弼同柄庆历之政，各举所知。当时谣传指为朋党，三人相继调外任职。造谤的人公开相互庆祝说 一网打尽 。
English: In the past, my forefather, Han Zheng, and Fuxi were all known to have been involved in the Qingli government. At that time, rumors pointed to the fact that they were friends of the party, and the three of them were successively transferred to other positions. The slanderers openly celebrated with each other and said that they would fight to the end.

古文：何庸如是。 卒不就。
现代文：这事离今天并不远，希望陛下引以为戒。 
English: This matter is not far from today, and I hope His Majesty will take warning.

古文：襄城民不蚕织，劝使植桑，有罪而情轻者，视所植多寡除其罚，民益赖慕，后呼为 著作林 。
现代文：并因此畅言前世朋党之祸，并录欧阳修《朋党论》进呈。汉阳军知军吴处厚傅致蔡确安州《车盖亭诗》，以为诽谤宣仁皇太后，报告朝廷。
English: As a result, he spoke openly about the evils of being a partisan in his previous life, and recorded Ouyang Xiu's "On Partisanship" for presentation. Hanyang's military leader Wu Duan Houfu sent Cai Juanzhou's "Car Covering Poem" to the imperial court to report it as slander against Empress Dowager Xuanren.

古文：兄死，葬洛阳。韩琦、富弼贻书洛尹，使助其葬，既葬，尹讶不先闻。
现代文：谏官欲把蔡确置于典宪而追究，执政大臣赞成谏官，只有纯仁与左丞王存认为不可。
English: The eunuchs wanted to put Cai Zhen in charge of the constitution, and the ruling ministers agreed with the eunuchs. Only Chun Ren and Zuo Wang Cun thought it was impossible.

古文：纯仁曰： 私室力足办，岂宜慁公为哉？ 签书许州观察判官、知襄邑县。
现代文：讨论来讨论去没作定论，听说太师文彦博欲贬之于岭峤，纯仁对左相吕大防说： 此路自乾兴以来，荆棘遍地几乎七十年，我等开启此路，恐怕将来自己也不免重蹈此辙。 
English: The discussion did not come to a conclusion. I heard that Grand Master Fumihiko wanted to reduce it to Lingnan, and Chunin said to Zuo Ludao: This road has been riddled with thorns for almost seventy years since it was opened. If we wait to open this road, I'm afraid I will have to repeat the same mistake in the future.

古文：县有牧地，卫士牧马，以践民稼，纯仁捕一人杖之。
现代文：吕大防遂不敢言。待蔡确贬新州的诏令下来，纯仁在宣仁皇太后帘前说： 圣朝应宽厚为怀，不可以言语文字之间暧昧不明之过，诛杀流窜大臣。
English: Lv Dago finally dared not to speak. When Cai Jizhen's edict to devalue Xinzhou came down, Chunren said in front of Empress Dowager Xuanren: The Holy Dynasty should be generous, and it is not allowed to be ambiguous between words and letters, and kill the minister.

古文：牧地初不隶县，主者怒曰： 天子宿卫，令敢尔邪？ 白其事于上，劾治甚急。
现代文：今天的举动应考虑到是将来的法度，此事不应开个不好的头。而且以重刑去恶，好比猛药治病，若太过份，难免有所损害。 
English: Today's move should be considered as a future law, and the matter should not get off to a bad start. Moreover, using severe punishment to eradicate evil is like using strong medicine to cure disease. If it is too excessive, it will inevitably cause damage.

古文：纯仁言： 养兵出于税亩，若使暴民田而不得问，税安所出？ 诏释之，且听牧地隶县。
现代文：又同王存对哲宗进行谏诫，回来后又上疏，大略说 ：就像父母有不听话的儿子，虽天地鬼神不能宽容，而父子至亲，处理起来应以恕为主。若使之处必死之地，则恐伤恩。 
English: Wang Cun also admonished Zhezong with Wang Cun, and after returning, he scolded Zhezong again, saying roughly: Just as parents have disobedient sons, although heaven and earth cannot tolerate ghosts and gods, but the father and son should be dealt with with forgiveness. If you make a place a place of death, you will be afraid of harming grace.

古文：凡牧地隶县，自纯仁始。
现代文：但蔡确终于还是贬谪新州。
English: However, Cai Jizhen finally came to despise Xinzhou.

古文：时旱久不雨，纯仁籍境内贾舟，谕之曰： 民将无食，尔所贩五谷，贮之佛寺，候食阙时吾为籴之。 众贾从命，所蓄十数万斛。至春，诸县皆饥，独境内民不知也。
现代文：吕大防奏蔡确党人甚盛，不可不追究。
English: The party of Lyu Daobosong Cai Jie is very prosperous, and it must be investigated.

古文：治平中，擢江东转运判官，召为殿中侍御史，迁侍御史。
现代文：纯仁当面进谏朋党难办，恐怕误及好人。遂上疏说： 朋党之起，大概因为趣向有同有异，同于我者谓之正人，异于我者谓之邪党。
English: It was difficult for Chun-Ren to admit to his friends that he was a member of the Party, for fear of offending a good person. Finally, Shang-Shao said, "The beginning of the Friends' Party was probably due to the fact that we have different interests. Those who are like us are called righteous, while those who are different from us are called evil.

古文：时方议濮王典礼，宰相韩琦、参知政事欧阳修等议尊崇之。
现代文：既厌恶其不同于我，则逆耳之言难至；既喜欢其同于我，则迎合的小人日亲。以致真伪莫辨，贤愚倒置，国家之患，大率由此而来。
English: As much as I detest those who are different from me, it is difficult to say anything against them; as much as I like those who are the same as me, it is difficult to say anything in favour of those who are inferior to me. As a result, truth and falsehood are indistinguishable, wisdom and folly are reversed, and the country suffers.

古文：翰林学士王珪等议，宜如先朝追赠期亲尊属故事。
现代文：至于王安石，就是因为喜同恶异，遂至黑白不分，至今风俗，还以察风观势为能事，后来的权臣，本应永远以此为鉴。
English: As for Wang Anshi, it was because he liked the same things and disliked different things that he became indifferent to black and white. To this day, the custom is to observe the customs and the situation as an ability. Later powerful ministers should always take this as a model.

古文：纯仁言： 陛下受命仁宗而为之子，与前代定策入继之主异，宜如王珪等议。 继与御史吕诲等更论奏，不听。纯仁还所授告敕，家居待罪。
现代文：今蔡确一事，不必推治党人，旁及枝叶。
English: Now that Tsai is confirmed, there is no need to promote party members, including branches.

古文：既而皇太后手书尊王为皇，夫人为后。
现代文：我听孔子有言： 举直错诸枉，能使枉者直。 
English: I have heard Confucius say: "To set right what is wrong is to set right what is wrong."

古文：纯仁复言： 陛下以长君临御，奈何使命出房闱，异日或为权臣矫托之地，非人主自安计。 寻诏罢追尊，起纯仁就职。
现代文：则是推举选拔正直的人，就可以使枉邪同化而为好人，不仁者自当摒迹不至。何用费神去分辨党人，只怕有伤仁化。 
English: On the other hand, if honest people are elected and selected, it will be possible to assimilate the wicked and evil and make them good people, and those who are not kind will not be able to get away with it. Why bother to distinguish between party members, only to be hurt and harmed.

古文：纯仁请出不已，遂通判安州，改知蕲州。
现代文：司谏吴安诗、正言刘安世互相攻击纯仁袒蔡确，纯仁亦极力请求罢官。第二年，以观文殿学士知颍昌府。过了一年，加大学士，知太原府。
English: Wu Anshi, the chief priest, and Liu Anshi, the chief orator, attacked each other, and Chun Ren, Cai Jizhi, and Chun Ren also strongly requested to be dismissed. The following year, Chun Changfu was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Academy of Confucianism. A year later, Chih Taiyuanfu was awarded a bachelor's degree from the University of Canada.

古文：历京西提点刑狱、京西陕西转运副使。
现代文：其境土地少而百姓多，爱惜土地不行埋葬。
English: In this situation, there is less land but more people. If you cherish the land, you can't bury it.

古文：召还，神宗问陕西城郭、甲兵、粮储如何，对曰： 城郭粗全，甲兵粗修，粮储粗备。 神宗愕然曰： 卿之才朕所倚信，何为皆言粗？ 对曰： 粗者未精之辞，如是足矣。
现代文：纯仁派遣僚属收集无主骨灰，分别男女，埋葬了三千多人。又把此法推行一路，埋葬的死者达万数。
English: Chunren dispatched his colleagues to collect the ashes of the dead, men and women separately, and buried more than three thousand people. He also promoted this method all the way, burying tens of thousands of dead.

古文：又推之一路，葬以万数计。夏人犯境，朝廷欲罪将吏。纯仁自引咎求贬。秋，有诏贬官一等，徙河南府，再徙颍昌。
现代文：夏人侵犯边境，朝廷欲治将吏罪，纯仁自己引咎求贬。秋天，有诏贬其官一等，徙河南府，再徙颍昌。召还后，又拜官右仆射。
English: Xia people violated the border, the court wanted to punish the officials, and Chunren himself blamed and asked to be demoted. In the autumn, there was a decree to demote his first-class official, and he was transferred to Henan Prefecture, and then to Fuchang. After being recalled, he again followed the official's orders.

古文：召还，复拜右仆射。因入谢，宣仁后帘中谕曰： 或谓卿必先引用王觌、彭汝砺，卿宜与吕大防一心。 对曰： 此二人实有士望，臣终不敢保位蔽贤，望陛下加察。 纯仁将再入也，杨畏不悦，尝有言，纯仁不知。
现代文：因入廷谢恩的机会，宣仁皇太后在帘中告谕说： 有人说你一定会先用王觌、彭汝砺，你应当与吕大防同心协力。 纯仁对答说： 王、彭二人实在为士人之望，我终不敢保位而蔽贤，望陛下深加考察。 纯仁将要入朝的关头，杨畏不高兴，曾经说了一些不好的话，纯仁不知道。
English: Because of the opportunity to enter the court thanks, Empress Dowager Xuanren announced in the curtain: Some people say that you will definitely use Wang Qian and Peng Rong first, you should work together with Lv Dadagong. Junren replied: The king and Peng are really the hope of the nobles, I finally dare not keep the throne and deceive the wise men, I hope Your Majesty will make a deep investigation. Junren is about to enter the court, Yang Diao is not happy, he once said some bad words, Junren does not know.

古文：至是，大防约畏为助，欲引为谏议大夫。
现代文：至是，大防约杨畏为佐助，想把他任为谏议大夫。
English: As a result, the Defense Ministry has appointed Yang Jie as a senior aide, and wants to appoint him as an adviser.

古文：纯仁曰： 谏官当用正人，畏不可用。 大防曰： 岂以畏尝言公邪？ 纯仁始知之。
现代文：纯仁说 ：谏官应该用正直的人，杨畏不可用。 大防说 ：是因为杨畏曾说你的坏话吗？ 
English: Chunren said, "Honest people should be used as eunuchs, and Yang Di should not be used." Dawo said, "Is it because Yang Di has said bad things about you?"

古文：后畏叛大防，凡有以害大防者，无所不至。
现代文：纯仁到此才知道杨畏说过他的坏话。后来杨畏背叛吕大防，凡有能用来陷害吕大防的事，无所不用其极。
English: It was only at this point that Chun-Ren learned that Yang Di had spoken ill of him. Later, Yang Di betrayed Ludao. Anything that could be used to frame Ludao was used.

古文：宣仁后寝疾，召纯仁曰： 卿父仲淹，可谓忠臣。
现代文：宣仁皇太后病重，召纯仁说： 你的父亲范仲淹，可谓忠臣。
English: When Empress Dowager Xuanren fell seriously ill, she summoned Junren and said, "Your father, Fan Zhongyan, is a loyal subject.

古文：在明肃皇后垂帘时，唯劝明肃尽母道；明肃上宾，唯劝仁宗尽子道。
现代文：在明肃皇后垂帘时，唯劝明肃尽母道；明肃死后，唯劝仁宗尽子道。
English: When the queen of Mingsu was dying, she urged Mingsu to follow her mother's path. After Mingsu's death, she urged Rinzong to follow his son's path.

古文：卿当似之。 纯仁泣曰： 敢不尽忠。
现代文：你应仿效。 纯仁哭着说 ：我一定尽忠。 
English: You should follow his example. Chun-Ren cried and said, "I will be loyal."

古文：宣仁后崩，哲宗亲政，纯仁乞避位。
现代文：宣仁皇太后死，哲宗亲政，纯仁请求避位。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Xuanren, Zhezong took over the government, and Chunren requested to abdicate.

古文：哲宗语吕大防曰： 纯仁有时望，不宜去，可为朕留之。 且趣入见，问： 先朝行青苗法如何？ 对曰： 先帝爱民之意本深，但王安石立法过甚，激以赏罚，故官吏急切，以致害民。 退而上疏，其要以为 青苗非所当行，行之终不免扰民也 。
现代文：哲宗对吕大防说： 纯仁有时望，不应该离去，你可为我挽留。 并且促使纯仁入见，问纯仁说： 先帝行青苗法到底怎样？ 纯仁回答说 ：先帝爱民之意本来很深，但王安石立法太过份，以赏罚激励，因此官吏急切，以致害民。 退而上疏，大要以为 青苗不能实行，实行终难免扰民 。
English: Zhezong said to Lv Dabao, "Chunren sometimes hopes, you should not leave, you can stay for me." and prompted Chunren's insight, asking Chunren, "What is the meaning of the previous emperor's implementation of the Young Seedlings Law?" Chunren replied, "The intention of the former emperor to love the people was originally very deep, but Wang Anshi's legislation was too excessive, with rewards and punishments to encourage, so officials were eager to harm the people.

古文：是时，用二三大臣，皆从中出，侍从、台谏官，亦多不由进拟。
现代文：当时，用重要大臣，都从廷中直接命令，侍从、台谏官，亦多不经过讨论晋升。
English: At that time, all important ministers were directly ordered from the court, and many attendants and eunuchs were promoted without discussion.

古文：纯仁言： 陛下初亲政，四方拭目以观，天下治乱，实本于此。
现代文：纯仁说 ：陛下刚开始亲政，四方都拭目以待，天下的治乱，也根本于此。
English: Chunin said: His Majesty has just begun his personal governance, and all four sides are waiting to see what happens. The governance of the world is also fundamentally based on this.

古文：舜举皋陶，汤举伊尹，不仁者远。
现代文：舜举皋陶、汤举伊尹，不仁者远去。
English: If you are not kind to others, you will go far away.

古文：纵未能如古人，亦须极天下之选。 又群小力排宣仁后垂帘时事，纯仁奏曰： 太皇保佑圣躬，功烈诚心，幽明共监，议者不恤国事，一何薄哉。 遂以仁宗禁言明肃垂帘事诏书上之。曰： 望陛下稽仿而行，以戒薄俗。 
现代文：纵使不能尽如古人，亦应考虑一下天下优秀的人才。 又有一些小人一个劲地攻击宣仁皇太后垂帘时事，纯仁奏曰： 太皇保佑天子身体，功绩和诚心，幽明共鉴，议论的人不体恤国事，是多么浅薄。 于是把仁宗禁止谈论明肃皇太后的垂帘事的诏书呈上，并说： 希望陛下仿照实行，以戒绝浅薄之俗。 
English: Although it is not possible to do as much as the ancients, we should also consider the world's outstanding talents. There are also some villains who vigorously attack the current affairs of Empress Dowager Xuanren's hanging curtain, and Chun Rinso said: The emperor blesses the body of the son of heaven, the merits and sincerity, the obscure and the common, and the people who discuss do not sympathize with the state affairs, how shallow. Therefore, he presented the edict of Rinzong prohibiting the discussion of the hanging curtain of Empress Dowager Mingsu, and said: I hope that His Majesty will follow suit to prevent the vulgarity.

古文：苏辙论殿试策问，引汉昭变武帝法度事。
现代文：苏辙论殿试策问，引用了汉昭帝改变武帝法度事。
English: The Su rut theory hall tried to find a solution, citing the Han Zhao Emperor's change of the Emperor Wu Law.

古文：哲宗震怒曰： 安得以汉武比先帝？ 辙下殿待罪，众不敢仰视。
现代文：哲宗大发雷霆，说： 怎么能以汉武比先帝？ 苏辙走到殿下待罪，众官不敢抬头。
English: Tetsuzong was furious and said, "How can Han Mu be compared to the previous emperor? All the officials dared not raise their heads when they walked up to His Imperial Highness to be punished.

古文：纯仁从容言： 武帝雄才大略，史无贬辞。
现代文：纯仁从容说道： 武帝雄才大略，史无贬辞。
English: Junren said calmly: Emperor Wu is a great talent, and there is nothing derogatory about his history.

古文：辙以比先帝，非谤也。
现代文：苏辙用他比先帝，不是诽谤。
English: It is not a slander to compare him to the former emperor.

古文：陛下亲事之始，进退大臣，不当如诃叱奴仆。 右丞邓润甫越次曰： 先帝法度，为司马光、苏辙坏尽。 纯仁曰： 不然，法本无弊，弊则当改。 哲宗曰： 人谓秦皇、汉武。 纯仁曰： 辙所论，事与时也，非人也。 哲宗为之少霁。
现代文：陛下亲政刚开始，进退大臣，不应如诃叱奴仆一样。 右丞邓润甫越次而说 ：先帝法度，被司马光、苏辙破坏殆尽。 纯仁说： 不是这样，法本没有弊端，有弊就当改。 哲宗说： 大家都说秦皇、汉武。 纯仁说： 苏辙所论，事与时而已，不是说人。 哲宗因此才稍微息怒。
English: At the very beginning of His Majesty's personal administration, the promotion and relegation of ministers should not be the same as the scolding of slaves. Ujo Deng Runfu said more and more: the former emperor's law was completely destroyed by Sima Guang and Sugo. Junren said: This is not so, the law has no drawbacks, and if there are drawbacks, it should be changed. Tetsuzo said: Everyone says Qin Emperor and Han Wu. Junren said: What Sugo is talking about is just a matter of time, not a person. Tetsuzo was a little angry because of this.

古文：辙平日与纯仁多异，至是乃服谢纯仁曰： 公佛地位中人也。 辙竟落职知汝州。
现代文：苏辙平日与纯仁观点大多不同，至是乃拜服和感谢纯仁说 ：您老人家是佛地位中人。 苏辙终于落职为汝州知州。
English: Su Rong's daily life and views were mostly different from those of Chun Ren, so he only bowed and thanked Chun Ren, saying, "Your old man is a person of Buddha's status."

古文：全台言苏轼行吕惠卿告词，讪谤先帝，黜知英州。
现代文：台省官员说苏轼发布吕惠卿告词，讪谤先帝，被黜官知英州。
English: Officials in Taiwan Province said that Su Xi issued a proclamation to Lyu Huiqing, slandering the former emperor, and was known as Yingzhou by eunuchs.

古文：纯仁上疏曰： 熙宁法度，皆惠卿附会王安石建议，不副先帝爱民求治之意。
现代文：纯仁上疏说： 熙宁法度，都是吕惠卿附会王安石建议，不符先帝爱民求志之意。
English: Chunren Shangsuo said: The Xi Ning Law was proposed by Wang Anshi of the Lyu Huiqing Association, which did not match the intention of the former emperor to love the people.

古文：至垂帘之际，始用言者，特行贬窜，今已八年矣。
现代文：至垂帘之际，才用言官，只不过是行贬窜，已经八年之久。
English: It has been eight years since he used the word "speaker" only as a pejorative when the curtain was about to come down.

古文：言者多当时御史，何故畏避不即纳忠，今乃有是奏，岂非观望邪？ 御史来之邵言高士敦任成都钤辖日不法事，及苏辙所谪太近。
现代文：言官多是当时御史，何能畏避不纳忠诚，今却有此奏，岂非察势观风吗？ 御史来之邵检举高士敦在成都铃辖职内不法之事，并论及苏辙所贬谪之地太近。
English: At that time, most of the officials in charge of speech were imperial historians. How could they shun loyalty and not accept it, but now there is such a play? Isn't it a case of observing the situation and watching the wind? The imperial historian Shao investigated the illegal activities of Gao Shidong in the jurisdiction of Chengdu, and discussed that the place where he was dethroned by the Soviet was too close.

古文：纯仁言： 之邵为成都监司，士敦有犯，自当按发。
现代文：纯仁说： 来之邵为成都监司，士敦有过失，自应按察纠发。
English: Chunren said: Xiao Lai is the supervisor of Chengdu, Stanton is at fault, and should be investigated and punished.

古文：辙与政累年，之邵已作御史，亦无纠正，今乃继有二奏，其情可知。 
现代文：苏辙参政多年，来之邵已当御史，当时亦无纠正，今乃继着有此二奏，其情可以推知。 
English: Su Rong has been in politics for many years, Lai Zhi Shao has been the imperial history, at that time there was no correction, now it is followed by this duo, its situation can be inferred.

古文：纯仁凡荐引人材，必以天下公议，其人不知自纯仁所出。
现代文：纯仁凡引荐人材，一定以天下公议为凭据，所引荐的人也不知是由纯仁所举。
English: When Chun Ren recommends talent, he always cites the world's public opinion as evidence. The person recommended is also known to have been recommended by Chun Ren.

古文：或曰： 为宰相，岂可不牢笼天下士，使知出于门下？ 纯仁曰： 但朝廷进用不失正人，何必知出于我邪？ 哲宗既召章惇为相，纯仁坚请去，遂以观文殿大学士加右正议大夫知颍昌府。
现代文：有人说： 当宰相，怎能不笼络天下士子，使他们知道出于自己门下？ 纯仁说 ：只要朝廷用人不失正直之人，何必使他们知道出于我的推举？ 哲宗既召章留相，纯仁请求辞职，于是以观文殿大学士加右正议大夫知颍昌府。
English: Some people said, "When you are the prime minister, how can you not entice the world's scholars, so that they know that you are from your own school?" Chunin said, "As long as the imperial court employs people who are honest, why should they know that they are from my selection?" Tetsuzo had already summoned the shogun to remain as the prime minister, and Chunin asked to resign, so he took a scholar from the University of the Palace of Literature and Science and a doctor from the Council of State to learn about the Changfu government.

古文：入辞，哲宗曰： 卿不肯为朕留，虽在外，于时政有见，宜悉以闻，毋事形迹。 徙河南府，又徙陈州。
现代文：入廷辞别，哲宗说： 你不肯为我留职京内，虽然在外任职，于时政有什么看法，应详悉报告，不要只说些表面的东西。 徙河南府，又徙陈州。
English: In his farewell speech at the court, Zhezong said: You are not willing to stay in Beijing for me, although you are working outside, what is your opinion on current politics, you should know the report in detail, don't just say some superficial things.

古文：初，哲宗尝言： 贬谪之人，殆似永废。 纯仁前贺曰： 陛下念及此，尧、舜用心也。 
现代文：初，哲宗曾说： 贬谪之人，大多像永遭废弃。 纯仁上前致贺说 ：陛下有念及此，是尧、舜的用心。 
English: At the beginning, Tetsuzo had said, "Most of the people who disparage me seem to have been abandoned forever." Junnin came forward to congratulate him and said, "Your Majesty has thought about this, it is my sincere intention."

古文：既而吕大防等窜岭表，会明堂肆赦，章惇先期言： 此数十人，当终身勿徙。 纯仁闻而忧愤，欲斋戒上疏申理之。
现代文：不久，吕大防等被流窜岭表，正值明堂大颁赦令，章在此以前就说： 吕大防等几十人，应终身不使迁徙。 纯仁听说后感到忧愤，想斋戒后上疏申辩。
English: Soon after, Lv Dafo and others were exiled to Yuling, just as the Ming court was issuing a general pardon. Zhang had previously said: Lv Dafo and dozens of others should not be forced to migrate for life. After hearing this, Junren felt sad and angry, and wanted to fast and then plead for leniency.

古文：所亲劝以勿为触怒，万一远斥，非高年所宜。
现代文：他的亲属劝止他不要触怒皇上，万一被远斥，也非年老之人所适宜。
English: His relatives tried to dissuade him from angering the emperor. In case he was banished far away, it was not suitable for an old man.

古文：纯仁曰： 事至于此，无一人敢言，若上心遂回，所系大矣。
现代文：纯仁说： 事至于此，没有一人敢说，假若皇上之心由此而有所回转关系就大了。
English: Chunin said, "As far as this matter is concerned, no one dares to say that if the Emperor's heart were to change as a result of this, the relationship would be great.

古文：不然，死亦何憾。 乃疏曰： 大防等年老疾病，不习水土，炎荒非久处之地，又忧虞不测，何以自存。
现代文：否则，即使我死了，又有什么遗憾的。 乃上疏说： 吕大防等年老又患病，不习水土，炎荒不是久处之地，又忧遭不测，何能自存？
English: Otherwise, even if I die, there is nothing to regret. Nao Jangso said: Ludao and others are old and sick, they are not accustomed to the land and water, the desert is not a place to stay for a long time, and they are plagued by unforeseen circumstances, how can they survive?

古文：臣曾与大防等共事，多被排斥，陛下之所亲见。
现代文：我曾与吕大防等共事，多被排斥，陛下也曾亲见。
English: I used to work with Lv Dago and others, and was mostly ostracized. Your Majesty has also met me in person.

古文：臣之激切，止是仰报圣德。
现代文：臣下之激切，只是仰报圣德。
English: The eagerness of a vassal is but a declaration of virtue.

古文：向来章惇、吕惠卿虽为贬谪，不出里居。
现代文：向来章、吕惠卿虽遭贬谪，不超出乡里居住。
English: Although Zhang and Lü Huiqing have been disgraced, they have always lived in the countryside.

古文：臣向曾有言，深蒙陛下开纳，陛下以一蔡确之故，常轸圣念。
现代文：我以前曾有建议，深蒙陛下开纳。陛下因一蔡确的缘故，经常引起内心悲痛。
English: In the past, I had a suggestion that was well received by His Majesty, who has often been pained at heart for the sake of I Caijing.

古文：今赴彦若已死贬所，将不止一蔡确矣。
现代文：如今赵彦若已死在贬所，将不止一蔡确。
English: Now, if Zhao Yan has died in the detention center, there will be more than one Cai Jie.

古文：愿陛下断自渊衷，将大防等引赦原放。 疏奏，忤惇意，诋为同罪，落职知随州。
现代文：希望陛下诚心裁断，把吕大防等引赦令之例予以释免。 奏疏上报，抵触章之意，诬为与吕大防同罪，罢职出知随州。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will make a sincere judgment and pardon the cases of pardoning orders such as Lv Dabao, who was dismissed from his post and exiled to Suzhou after being falsely accused of the same crime.

古文：明年，又贬武安军节度副使、永州安置。
现代文：第二年，又贬为武安军节度副使，安置在永州。
English: The following year, he was demoted to vice-envoy of the Wu'an Army and stationed in Yongzhou.

古文：时疾失明，闻命怡然就道。
现代文：当时患病失明，闻命后高兴地上路了。
English: At the time, he was suffering from an illness that left him blind. After his death, he was happy to get back on the road.

古文：或谓近名，纯仁曰： 七十之年，两目俱丧，万里之行，岂其欲哉？
现代文：有人说他是好名才至如此。纯仁说 ：七十之年，两目俱丧明，万里之行，岂是我所希望的？
English: Some people say that it is his good name that has brought him to this point. Chunin said, "Is this what I had hoped for, at the age of seventy, with my eyes wide open and having traveled thousands of miles?

古文：但区区之爱君，有怀不尽，若避好名之嫌，则无为善之路矣。 每戒子弟毋得小有不平，闻诸子怨章惇，纯仁必怒止之。
现代文：但我之爱君，若不尽忠，而避好名的嫌疑，那就没有为善之路了。 每每告诫子弟不要小有不平之心，听到诸子埋怨章，纯仁一定要发怒加以制止。
English: But my beloved, if you do not fulfill your loyalty, but avoid the suspicion of favoritism, then there is no way to do good. Every time you admonish your child not to be small and have a sense of grievance, when you hear your child complain, you must be angry and stop it.

古文：江行赴贬所，舟覆，扶纯仁出，衣尽湿。
现代文：从江水赴贬所，船翻了，诸子扶纯仁出，衣服都湿了。
English: From the river to the dumping site, the boat overturned, all the children helped Chunren out, and their clothes were wet.

古文：顾诸子曰： 此岂章惇为之哉？ 既至永，韩维责均州，其子诉维执政日与司马光不合，得免行。
现代文：纯仁回顾诸子说 ：这难道也是章所致吗？ 既到永州，韩维被责贬均州，韩维的儿子申诉韩维执政时与司马光多有不合，得以免行。
English: Chunren looked back at his sons and said, "Could this also have been caused by Zhang Quanzhong?" As soon as he arrived in Yongzhou, Han Wei was reprimanded to Junzhou. Han Wei's son complained that Han Wei had disagreements with Sima Guangduo when he was in power, and he was allowed to go.

古文：纯仁之子欲以纯仁与光议役法不同为请，纯仁曰： 吾用君实荐，以至宰相。
现代文：纯仁之子想以纯仁与司马光议役法不同为请，纯仁说： 我因为司马光推荐，以至宰相。
English: Chunin's son wanted to invite Chunin to be different from Sima Guang. Chunin said, "I became prime minister because of Sima Guang's recommendation."

古文：昔同朝论事不合则可，汝辈以为今日之言，则不可也。
现代文：过去同朝论事不合是可以的，你等以过去的言论作今日之事的借口，则不行。
English: It's okay to disagree with each other in the past, but you can't use past statements as an excuse for today's events.

古文：有愧心而生者，不若无愧心而死。 其子乃止。
现代文：有愧心而生存，不如无愧心而死。 其子这才停止求请。
English: It is better to live with a clear conscience than to die with no conscience.

古文：居三年，徽宗即位，钦圣显肃后同听政，即日授纯仁光禄卿，分司南京，邓州居住。
现代文：在永州居住三年，徽宗即位，钦圣显肃皇太后共同听政，当日就授纯仁光禄卿，分管南京，居邓州。
English: He lived in Yongzhou for three years, when Emperor Huizong ascended to the throne, and the Empress Dowager Qinshengxianxu jointly listened to the government. On the same day, he was awarded the title of Chunren Guangluqing, in charge of Nanjing, living in Dangzhou.

古文：遣中使至永赐茶药，谕曰： 皇帝在藩邸，太皇太后在宫中，知公先朝言事忠直，今虚相位以待，不知目疾如何，用何人医之。 纯仁顿首谢。
现代文：遣内监到永州赏赐茶药，谕示说： 皇帝在藩邸，太皇太后在宫中，知道公在先朝言事忠直，今虚相位以待，不知眼病如何，用什么人医治？ 范纯仁叩首谢恩。
English: The internal affairs inspector went to Yongzhou to present the tea medicine to Fan Chunren. He said, "The emperor is at the residence of the clan, and the great empress dowager is at the palace. I know that the emperor was faithful in his words and deeds in the past, but now I am in a false position. I don't know what kind of eye disease it is, and I don't know who to use to cure it. Fan Chunren bowed his head in gratitude."

古文：道除右正议大夫、提举崇福宫。
现代文：被升为右正议大夫、提举崇福宫。
English: He was promoted to the post of doctor of the right main council and promoted to the post of Chongfu Gong.

古文：不数月，以观文殿大学士、中太一宫使诏之。
现代文：不数月，以观文殿大学士、中太一宫使诏令回朝。
English: Over the course of several months, Emperor Taizong, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, sent the imperial edict back to the imperial court.

古文：有曰： 岂唯尊德尚齿，昭示宠优；庶几鲠论嘉谋，日闻忠告。 纯仁以疾，捧诏而泣曰： 上果用我矣，死有余责。 徽宗又遣中使赐茶药，促入觐，仍宣渴见之意。
现代文：诏令中说 ：岂唯尊德尚齿，昭示优宠；庶几鲠论嘉谋，日闻忠告。 纯仁因病捧诏而哭道 ：皇上果然要用我，我死有余责。 徽宗又遣内监赐茶药，催促他入京朝觐，并表示希望接见之意。
English: In the imperial edict, it was said, "Don't you know that reverence for virtue is a sign of high favor; in fact, there are several sermons on virtuous action, and daily reports of advice." Chunren, who was ill, held up the imperial edict and cried, "The emperor really wants to use me, and I have a responsibility to die." Huizong also sent the overseer to give him tea and medicine, urging him to go to the imperial court in Beijing, and expressed his wish to meet him.

古文：纯仁乞归许养疾，徽宗不得已许之。
现代文：纯仁乞归许州养病，徽宗只得应许了。
English: Chunren begged to return to Huzhou to recover from his illness, but Huizong only promised.

古文：每见辅臣问安否，乃曰： 范纯仁，得一识面足矣。 遂遣上医视疾。
现代文：每次接见辅臣，一定问纯仁近况，并说 ：范纯仁，能够见一面也足称心了。 并派御医看视纯仁之病。
English: Every time he met with a vassal, he would ask about Junren's current condition and say, "I'm so pleased to see Fan Junren, and I've sent my doctor to see about Junren's illness."

古文：疾小愈，丐以所得冠帔改服色酬医。
现代文：病情稍有好转，请求以所得冠帔改变一下颜色以酬谢医生。
English: After a slight improvement in his condition, he asked the doctor to change the colour of his wig with the money he received as a reward.

古文：诏赐医章服，令以冠帔与族侄。
现代文：诏令赐医生章服，并命纯仁以冠帔与其族侄。
English: The imperial edict gave the doctor a cap and gown, and ordered Chunin to crown his nephew with it.

古文：疾革，以宣仁后诬谤未明为恨。呼诸子口占遗表，命门生李之仪次第之。
现代文：病情恶化时，纯仁以宣仁后诬谤未明为恨，呼诸子口授遗表，命门生李之仪条理之。
English: When his condition worsened, Chun-Ren took the slander of the unknown after the death of Xuan-Ren as hatred, called his sons to dictate the will, and organized the ceremony of the death of his protégé Li.

古文：其略云： 盖尝先天下而忧，期不负圣人之学，此先臣所以教子，而微臣资以事君。 又云： 惟宣仁之诬谤未明，致保佑之忧勤不显。 又云： 未解疆埸之严，几空帑藏之积。
现代文：大略说 ：先天下之忧而忧，希望不违背圣人之学，这是先父用以教育儿子的，而我这微末之臣也以此侍事君主。 又说 ：只是宣仁后之诬谤未明，致使保之忧勤得不到显扬。 又说 ：没有缓解疆场之严峻形势，却几乎费空了帑藏的积蓄。
English: He said roughly, "The world was worried and worried, and I hoped that I would not go against the teachings of the sages, which my father used to educate his son, and which I, a lowly vassal, also used to serve the monarch." He also said, "It was just that the slander after Xuanren was not clear, so Bao's worries and hard work did not come to light." He also said, "It did not alleviate the grim situation on the battlefield, but it almost wasted the accumulated savings."

古文：有城必守，得地难耕。 凡八事。
现代文：有城必守，而得地难耕。 总共八事。
English: A city must be defended, but it is difficult to cultivate the land.

古文：建中靖国改元之旦，受家人贺。
现代文：建中靖国改元的早晨，接受家人之贺。
English: Jianzhong at Yasukuni receiving congratulations from his family on the morning of the new year.

古文：明日，熟寐而卒。年七十五。
现代文：第二天，熟睡而死，寿七十五。
English: The next day, he died in his sleep at the age of 75.

古文：诏赙白金三十两，敕许、洛官给其葬，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰忠宣，御书碑额曰： 世济忠直之碑 。
现代文：诏令助葬白金三十两，敕令许、洛官员供给其葬费，赠官开府仪同三司，谥曰 忠宣 ，御书碑额为 世济忠直之碑 。
English: The imperial edict provided 30 taels of platinum for his funeral, the imperial edict ordered officials from Xu and Luo to provide his funeral expenses, the imperial edict bestowed the official opening ceremony and the three offices, the imperial edict named him Zhongxuan, and the imperial edict inscribed him as the monument of Shiji Zhongzhong.

古文：纯仁性夷易宽简，不以声色加人，谊之所在，则挺然不少屈。
现代文：纯仁性情平易宽简，不以声色强加于人。正义所在，则挺立承担没有稍许屈折。
English: A pure and benevolent disposition is easy to be broad and concise, and does not impose itself on others with its tone and color. Where justice is concerned, it stands up and takes responsibility without the slightest inflection.

古文：自为布衣至宰相，廉俭如一，所得奉赐，皆以广义庄；前后任子恩，多先疏族。
现代文：自从布衣到宰相，廉俭一生，所得俸禄和赏赐，都用以扩大义庄。前后荫及子族，都是以比较疏远的族子为先。
English: From the cloth merchant to the prime minister, he lived a life of frugality, and used his salary and rewards to expand Yizhuang. His predecessors, successors, and descendants were all from more distant clans.

古文：没之日，幼子、五孙犹未官。
现代文：死时，他的幼子、五孙还没有官职。
English: At the time of his death, his youngest son and five grandchildren did not have official positions.

古文：尝曰： 吾平生所学，得之忠恕二字，一生用不尽。
现代文：他曾说 ：我平生所学，得之 忠恕 二字，一生用之不尽。
English: He once said: "What I have learned in my lifetime, the word "loyalty," is inexhaustible.

古文：以至立朝事君，接待僚友，亲睦宗族，未尝须臾离此也。 每戒子弟曰： 人虽至愚，责人则明；虽有聪明，恕己则昏。
现代文：以致立朝事君，接待僚友，亲睦宗族，未尝须臾离此二字。 每每训诫子弟说 ：人虽至愚，责备别人却是很高明的。
English: So he established the Imperial Household Agency, received colleagues and friends, and established a close relationship with the clan, and did not feel the need to deviate from these two words.Every disciple said: Although people are stupid, they are very clever at blaming others.

古文：苟能以责人之心责己，恕己之心恕人，不患不至圣贤地位也。 又戒曰： 《六经》，圣人之事也。
现代文：虽然十分聪明，但若原谅自己则导致昏蔽。若能以责人之心责己，恕己之心恕人，不怕不至于圣贤地位。 又告诫子弟说： 六经，是圣人的事迹。
English: Although he is very clever, if he forgives himself, it will lead to delusion. If he can blame himself with the heart of blaming others, and forgive others with the heart of forgiving himself, he will not be afraid of becoming a sage. He also admonished his son: "The Six Classics are the deeds of a saint."

古文：知一字则行一字。要须 造次颠沛必于是 ，则所谓 有为者亦若是 尔。
现代文：知道一字就实行一字，要使自己 造次颠沛必于是 ，则能做到所谓 有为者亦若是 的地步。
English: If you know one word and put it into practice, you will be able to become a so-called doer.

古文：岂不在人邪？ 弟纯粹在关陕，纯仁虑其于西夏有立功意。
现代文：难道不都是基于个人努力吗？ 纯仁之弟纯粹在关陕，纯仁担心他对西夏有立功的心思。
English: Isn't it all based on individual efforts? Junren's younger brother is purely in Guanzhen, and Junren is worried that he has a mind of meritorious service to Xixia.

古文：与之书曰： 大辂与柴车争逐，明珠与瓦砾相触，君子与小人斗力，中国与外邦校胜负，非唯不可胜，兼亦不足胜，不唯不足胜，虽胜亦非也。 亲族有请教者，纯仁曰： 惟俭可以助廉，惟恕可以成德。 其人书于坐隅。
现代文：给他写信说 ：大辂与柴车争逐，明珠与瓦砾相触，君子与小人斗力，中国与外邦较胜负，不但不可取胜，同时亦不值得取胜；不但不值得取胜，既使胜了也不对。 亲族中有请训道的，纯仁说： 只有节俭可以辅助廉德，惟有忠恕可以成就个人品行。 
English: I wrote to him, saying, "In the race between the great dragon and the chariot, between the pearl and the rubble, between the gentleman and the ruffian, between China and the heathen, not only is it impossible to win, but it is not worth winning; not only is it not worth winning, but it is not right to win.

古文：有文集五十卷，行于世。
现代文：这个人把此话写在座位旁边。范纯仁有文集五十卷，在世上流行。
English: The man wrote this beside his seat. Fan Chunren has a 50-volume anthology that is popular around the world.

古文：子正平、正思。
现代文：其儿子为范正平、范正思。
English: His sons are Fan Zhengping and Fan Zhengsi.

