古文：《齐民要术》：种柳：正月、二月中，取弱柳枝大如臂，长一尺半，烧下头二三寸，埋之令没。
现代文：《齐民要术》：种柳：正月到二月间，截取臂膀粗细的弱柳枝条，长一尺半，把下头二三寸长的一段用火烧过，全部埋入土中。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": planting willows: from the first month to February, cut off the weak willow branches with thick arms, one and a half feet long, burn the bottom two or three inches long, and bury them all in the soil.

古文：常足水以浇之。必数条俱生，留一根茂者，余悉掐去。
现代文：经常把水浇足，必然会有好几个枝条同时生长出来，将其中健壮的一根留下，其余的一律掐掉。
English: If you water regularly, you will inevitably have several branches growing at the same time. Leave one of them strong, and chop off the rest.

古文：别竖一柱以为依主，以绳拦之。
现代文：另外，竖立一根木柱作为依托，用绳拦系在柱上。
English: In addition, erect a wooden post as a support and tie it to the post with a rope.

古文：若不拦，必为风所摧，不能自立。
现代文：若不用绳拦住，必被风吹折，不能自己独立。
English: If you do not use a rope to stop, you will be blown by the wind and will not be able to stand on your own.

古文：一年中，即高一丈余。
现代文：一年以内，即可长到一丈多高。
English: Within a year, they can grow as tall as a tree.

古文：其旁生枝叶即掐去，令直耸上。
现代文：旁生的侧枝和叶子都要掐去，让它一直向上猛长。
English: Remove any side shoots and leaves that have grown alongside, and let it grow vigorously all the way up.

古文：高下任人，取足，便掐去正心，即四散下垂，婀娜可爱。
现代文：树的高低，完全听从人意，高度长足了，便可将正心掐去，新发出的侧枝便会向四面散开，自行下垂，柔弱细长的枝条十分可爱。
English: The height of the tree is completely up to the wishes of the people. When the height is high enough, it can be pruned away. The newly released side branches will spread out to the four sides and droop on their own. The tender and slender branches are very lovely.

古文：若不掐心，则枝不四散，或邪或曲，生亦不佳也。
现代文：如不掐掉正心，枝条便不会向四下散开，枝干有的斜有的歪，长出来的也都不好看。
English: If you do not prick off the core, the branches will not spread out to the four directions. Some branches are crooked, and the ones that grow out are not good-looking.

古文：六七月中，取春生少枝种，则长倍疾。
现代文：六七月间，伐取春天新生长出来的嫩枝条，埋种下去，会生长得加倍的快速。
English: Between June and July, the young shoots newly grown in the spring will be cut down and planted, and they will grow twice as fast.

古文：少枝叶青气壮，故长疾也。
现代文：新生的嫩枝和绿叶，长势正旺盛，所以长得特别快。
English: The new shoots and green leaves are growing vigorously, so they grow particularly fast.

古文：杨柳：下田停水之处，不得五谷者，可以种柳。
现代文：杨柳：低洼停水，不能种植五谷的地方，可以种植柳树。
English: Willow: Willow trees can be planted in low-lying areas where water supply is cut off and grain crops cannot be grown.

古文：八月、九月中水尽，燥湿得所时，急耕，则锔楱之。
现代文：八九月间，积水干涸后，干湿适宜时，赶紧翻耕，随时用铁齿耙耙过。
English: In August and September, after the accumulated water dries up, when the dry and wet conditions are suitable, quickly turn over the farmland and rake it with iron teeth at any time.

古文：至明年四月，又耕熟，勿令有块，即作墒垄。
现代文：到第二年四月，再次精耕，不要有土块，即时作好行垄。
English: By April of the following year, do intensive ploughing again, do not have soil clods, and immediately make good ridges.

古文：一亩三垄，一垄之中，逆顺各一到，墒中宽狭，正似葱垄。
现代文：一亩作三条垄，每垄来回各耕一遍，墒中的宽度，正和葱垄的宽度相同。
English: One mu is made into three ridges, and each ridge is ploughed back and forth. The width of the middle of the furrow is the same as the width of the green onion ridge.

古文：从五月初，尽七月末，每天雨时，即触雨折取春生少枝，长一尺已上者，插著垄中。
现代文：从五月初起到七月底止，每次遇上天下雨，便应冒雨折取春天新生长出来的嫩枝条，长度要在一尺以上的，插在垄中，二尺远插一根。
English: From the beginning of May to the end of July, every time it rains, the cucumbers should take the rain and take the young shoots newly grown in spring, with a length of more than one foot, and insert them in the ridge, two feet away.

古文：二尺一根，数日即生。
现代文：不用几天的时间，便会长出新芽。
English: It doesn't take a few days for new shoots to grow.

古文：少枝长疾，三岁成椽。比如余木，虽微脆，亦足堪事。
现代文：嫩枝长得很快，三年便可长成屋椽，比其他木料虽然稍微脆一些，但也可以应用。
English: The shoots grow quickly, and in three years they can grow into eaves. Although it is slightly more brittle than other wood, it can also be used.

古文：岁种三十亩，三年种九十亩；岁卖三十亩，终岁无穷。
现代文：每年种三十亩，三年便有九十亩；每年可依次出卖三十亩，便足够全年的开支了。
English: Plant thirty mu each year, and in three years you will have ninety mu; sell thirty mu each year in turn, and you will have enough for the whole year's expenses.

古文：凭柳：可以为楣、车辋、杂材及枕。
现代文：凭柳：可以作栏杆、车辋、杂用材料及木枕。
English: Willow willow: can be used for railings, turnouts, miscellaneous materials and wooden pillows.

古文：种箕柳法：山涧、河旁及下田不得五谷之处，水尽干时，熟耕数遍。
现代文：种箕柳法：在山间涧溪及河流旁边，以及低洼地不能种植五谷的地方，等水耗干后，精耕多次。
English: Planting willow willow method: in the mountains near streams and rivers, as well as in low-lying areas where cereals cannot be planted, wait for the water to dry, and then cultivate several times.

古文：至春冻释，于山陂、河坎之旁，刈取箕柳，三寸栽之。
现代文：到了来年春天，地冻消释时，在山脚河边，割取箕柳枝条，截成三寸长的小段，随时漫撒在地里，劳摩覆土。
English: In the spring of the following year, when the ground freezes and thaws, at the foot of the mountain near the river, prune the willow branches, cut them into three-inch-long segments, and scatter them in the ground at any time, covering the soil.

古文：漫散，即劳；劳讫，引水停之。
现代文：劳摩过后，引水停贮。
English: After the hard work, the water diversion is stopped.

古文：至秋，任为簸箕。
现代文：到秋后，便可用来作簸箕。
English: After the autumn, it can be used to make straw.

古文：山柳赤而脆，河柳白而肕。
现代文：山柳的木质色红而且脆，河柳的木质色白而且柔韧。
English: The wood of the mountain willow is red and brittle, while the wood of the river willow is white and flexible.

古文：《陶朱公术》曰：种柳千树，则足柴。
现代文：《陶朱公术》说：种上一千棵柳树，便会有足够的烧柴。
English: "Tao Zhu Gongshu" said: if one thousand willow trees are planted, there will be enough firewood.

古文：十年以后，髡一树得一载；岁髡二百树，五年一周。
现代文：十年过后，修剪一棵树，可以得到一车柴；每年修剪二百棵，五年修剪一遍。
English: After ten years, if you prune a tree, you can get a cartload of firewood; if you prune two hundred trees a year, you can prune them once every five years.

古文：《四时类要》引：种柳：取青嫩枝如臂，长六七尺，烧下头三二寸，埋二尺以上。
现代文：《四时类要》：种柳：选取又绿又嫩的像胳膊一样粗的枝条，长度要有六七尺，把下端二三寸长的一段用火烧过，埋入土中二尺以上深。
English: "Four-hour class essentials": planting willows: selecting green and tender branches as thick as arms, with a length of sixty-seven feet, burning the bottom two-three-inch-long section with fire, and burying it more than two feet deep in the soil.

古文：《博闻录》：杨柳根下，先种大蒜一枚，不生虫。
现代文：《博闻录》：杨柳树根下面，预先种上一颗大蒜瓣，树便不会生虫。
English: "Houwen Record": Under the roots of the willow tree, a garlic clove is planted in advance, and the tree will not produce insects.

