古文：起著雍敦牂，尽屠维协洽，凡二年。
现代文：起著雍敦牂，尽屠维协洽，一共二年。
English: It took a total of two years to complete the construction of the Yongdun Bridge and the construction of the Tuwei Bridge.

古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝下显德五年春，正月，乙酉，废匡国军。
现代文：后周纪五后周世宗显德五年春季正月，乙酉，后周撤销匡国军。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fifth year of Emperor Zhou's reign, Emperor Zongxian of the Zhou Dynasty revoked the Kuangguo Army.

古文：唐改元中兴。
现代文：南唐改年号为中兴。
English: Nantang changed its name to ZTE.

古文：丁亥，右龙武将军王汉璋奏克海州。
现代文：丁亥，后周右龙武将军王汉璋奏报攻克海州。
English: Dinghai, and later Zhou Rongwu's general Wang Hanzhong made a report to conquer Haizhou.

古文：己丑，以侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤权扬州军府事。
现代文：己丑，后周世宗任命侍卫马军都指挥使韩令坤代理扬州军府事务。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Han Lingkun as the deputy of Yangzhou Military Government.

古文：上欲引战舰自淮入江，阻北神堰，不得渡；欲凿楚州西北鹳水以通其道，遣使行视，还言地形不便，计功甚多。
现代文：后周世宗打算率领战舰从淮水进入长江，但受到北神堰阻挡，没法渡过，就打算开凿楚州西北的鹳水来通淮水、长江的河道。派遣使者巡视，回来说地形条件不便利，预计费工很多。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong planned to lead a warship from Huai Shui into the Yangtze River, but was blocked by the Beishen Weir and could not cross it. He planned to excavate the floodplain in northwest Chuzhou to pass through the river channels of Huai Shui and the Yangtze River. He sent an envoy to inspect, and he came back saying that the terrain conditions were not convenient and that a lot of labor was expected.

古文：上自往视之，授以规画，发楚州民夫浚之，旬日而成，用功甚省。巨舰百艘皆达于江，唐人大惊，以为神。
现代文：世宗亲自前往视察，口授工程规划，征发楚州民夫疏通河道，十天便完成，化费工日很少，数百艘巨大战舰都直接到达长江，南唐人大为惊讶，认为神奇。
English: Shizong personally went to inspect, dictated the project plan, solicited and dispatched Chuzhou civil servants to dredge the river channel, and completed it in ten days. The construction cost was very little, and hundreds of huge warships directly reached the Yangtze River. The people of southern Tang were very surprised and thought it was amazing.

古文：壬辰，拔静海军，始通吴越之路。
现代文：壬辰，后周攻取静海军，开始打通与吴越的陆路。
English: After conquering the Jing navy in Imjin, Zhou began to open a land route to Wuyue.

古文：先是帝遣左谏议大夫长安尹日就等使吴越，语之曰： 卿今去虽泛海，比还，淮南已平，当陆归耳。 
现代文：在这之前世宗派遣左谏议大夫长安人尹日就等人出使吴越，跟他们说： 爱卿此去虽然还要泛舟过海，但等到回来，淮南已经平定，必当从陆上返回了。 
English: Prior to this, Shizong had dispatched Zuo Yao's councilor, Chang'an's man, Yin's day, and others to send Wu Yue, and told them: Although Ai Qing still has to cross the sea by raft, when he returns, Huainan has been pacified, and he must return from the land.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：不久果真如此。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：甲辰，蜀右补阙章九龄见蜀主，言政事不治，由奸佞在朝。
现代文：甲辰，后蜀右补阙章九龄谒见后蜀主，说政事没有治理好，是由于奸人佞臣在朝廷专权。
English: Jia Chen, later Shu Yu Zi Zhang Jiuling, met with the later Shu lord and said that the political affairs were not well managed, due to the treacherous vassal's exclusive power in the imperial court.

古文：蜀主问奸佞为谁，指李昊、王昭远以对。
现代文：后蜀主问这奸人佞臣是谁，章九龄手指李昊、王昭远来回答。
English: After Lord Shu asked who the treacherous vassal was, Zhang Jiuling pointed his finger at Li Hao and Wang Zhaoyuan to answer.

古文：蜀主怒，以九龄为毁斥大臣，贬维州录事参军。
现代文：后蜀主发怒，认为章九龄是毁谤大臣，贬为维州录事参军。
English: Later, Lord Shu became angry and thought that Zhang Jiuling was slandering the minister, and demoted him to join the army of the Victoria Record.

古文：周兵攻楚州，逾四旬，唐楚州防御使张彦卿固守不下。乙巳，帝自督诸将攻之，宿于城下。丁未，克之。
现代文：后周军队进攻楚州，超过四十天，南唐楚州防御使张彦卿仍然坚守而无法攻下；乙巳，后周世宗亲自监督众将攻城，住宿在城下，丁未，攻克楚州。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong's army attacked Chuzhou. For more than forty days, the Southern Tang's defense of Chuzhou made Zhang Yanqing still hold out and could not be captured. At this time, Zhou Shizong personally supervised the generals to attack the city and stayed under the city. Ding Wei invaded Chuzhou.

古文：彦卿与都监郑昭业犹帅众拒战，矢刃皆尽，彦卿举绳床以斗而死，所部千馀人，至死无一人降者。
现代文：张彦卿与都监郑昭业仍率领部众抵抗战斗，弓箭刀剑都用光了，张彦卿举起绳床来搏斗而死去，所部一千多人，至死没有一人投降。
English: Zhang Yanqing and the governor of the capital, Zheng Zhaoye, still led the troops to resist the battle. They ran out of bows, arrows and swords. Zhang Yanqing raised the rope bed to fight and died. There were more than a thousand people in the headquarters, and no one surrendered until death.

古文：高保融遣指挥使魏璘将战船百艘东下会伐唐，至于鄂州。
现代文：荆南高保融派遣指挥使魏率领战船百艘顺长江东下会同后周征伐南唐，到达鄂州。
English: Jing Nan Gao Baorong dispatched a commander to send Wei to lead a hundred warships down the Yangtze River to the east, and together with Zhou to invade Southern Tang and reach Ezhou.

古文：庚戌，蜀置永宁军于果州，以通州隶之。
现代文：庚戌，后蜀在果州设置永宁军，将通州隶属永宁军。
English: After Gyeongbokgung and Shu set up the Yongning Army in Goju, Tongzhou was subordinated to the Yongning Army.

古文：唐以天长为雄州，以建武军使易文赟为刺史。
现代文：南唐将天长县改为雄州，任命建武军使易文为刺史。
English: Nantang changed Tianchang County to Xiongzhou, and appointed Jianwu military envoy Yi Wen as the chief historian.

古文：二月，甲寅，文赟举城降。
现代文：二月，甲寅，易文率城投降。
English: In February, Kuching, Yi Wen led the city to surrender.

古文：戊午，帝发楚州。丁卯，至扬州，命韩令坤发丁夫万馀，筑故城之东南隅为小城以治之。
现代文：戊午，后周世宗从楚州出发；丁卯，到达扬州，命令韩令坤征发民夫一万多，在原城东南角修筑小城来作为扬州治所。
English: In the afternoon, Zhou Shizong set off from Chuzhou; when he arrived in Yangzhou in the evening, he ordered Han Lingkun to recruit more than ten thousand people to build a small city in the southeast corner of the original city to serve as the Yangzhou government.

古文：乙亥，黄州刺史司超奏与控鹤右厢都指挥使王审琦攻唐舒州，擒其刺史施仁望。
现代文：乙亥，后周黄州刺史司超奏报与控鹤右厢都指挥使王审琦进攻南唐舒州，擒获舒州刺史施仁望。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, after the Zhou Dynasty, Huang Zhou sent Wang Xianqi to attack Southern Tang Dynasty Shuzhou, and captured Shuzhou Zhi Shi Renwang.

古文：丙子，建雄节度使真定杨廷璋奏败北汉兵于隰州城下。
现代文：丙子，后周建雄节度使真定人杨廷璋奏报在隰州城下击败北汉军队。
English: After Zhou Jianxiong's death, Zhending's son Yang Tingtao defeated the Northern Han army at the foot of Zhangzhou Castle.

古文：时隰州刺史孙议暴卒，廷璋谓都监、闲厩使李谦溥曰： 今大驾南征，泽州无守将，河东必生心。若奏请待报，则孤城危矣！ 
现代文：当时隰州刺史孙议突然死亡，杨廷璋对都监、闲厩使李谦溥说： 如今皇上南下征伐，隰州没有守将，河东北汉必生觊觎之心，倘若奏报请示等待回复，隰州孤城就危险了。 
English: At that time, the governor of Zhangzhou, Sun Zi, died suddenly. Yang Tingtao said to Li Qianyao, the governor of the capital and the leader of the idle stables, "Nowadays, the emperor is marching southward, Zhangzhou has no commander-in-chief, and the north-eastern Han Dynasty will have a hard heart. If the report is requested to wait for a reply, the lonely city of Zhangzhou will be in danger."

古文：即牒谦溥权隰州事，谦溥至则修守备。
现代文：立即签署书牒命李谦溥代理隰州军政，李谦溥到达后就进行守城准备。
English: He immediately signed a letter ordering Li Qianqian to act as the military governor of Zhangzhou. After Li Qianqian arrived, preparations were made to defend the city.

古文：未几，北汉兵果至，诸将请速救之。廷璋曰： 隰州城坚将良，未易克也。 
现代文：不久，北汉军队果然到来，众将请求迅速救援，杨廷璋说： 隰州城池坚固，守将杰出，不容易攻克。 
English: Soon, the Northern Han Army arrived, and the generals pleaded for speedy rescue. Yang Tingyao said: "Changzhou is a strong city, with outstanding defenders, and it is not easy to conquer.

古文：北汉攻城久不下，廷璋度其疲困无备，潜与谦溥约，各募死士百馀夜袭其营，北汉兵惊溃，斩首千馀级，北汉兵遂解去。
现代文：北汉军攻城久攻不下，杨廷璋估计他们疲惫困乏没有准备，暗中与李谦溥约定，各招募敢死士兵一百多人深夜偷袭敌营，北汉军队惊慌溃逃，斩首一千多级；北汉军队于是撤退离去。
English: The Northern Han Army was unable to attack the city for a long time. Yang Tingyao estimated that they were tired, poor and unprepared, and secretly agreed with Li Qianyao to recruit more than a hundred soldiers to sneak attack the enemy camp in the middle of the night. The Northern Han Army panicked and fled, beheading more than a thousand people. The Northern Han Army then withdrew.

古文：三月，壬午朔，帝如泰州。
现代文：三月，壬午朔，后周世宗前往泰州。
English: In March, at the crack of dawn, Zhou Shizong went to Taizhou.

古文：丁亥，唐大赦，改元交泰。
现代文：丁亥，南唐实行大赦，改年号为交泰。
English: Dinghai, Nantang implemented amnesty, and changed the year name to Jiaotai.

古文：唐太弟景遂前后凡十表辞位，且言： 今国危不能扶，请出就籓镇。
现代文：南唐皇太弟李景遂前后共十次上表请求辞去继承人地位，并且说： 如今国家危难不能匡扶，请求出宫就任一方藩镇。
English: Li Jingsui, the younger brother of the Emperor of the Southern Tang Dynasty, made a total of ten requests before and after the above table to resign from the position of heir, and said, "Nowadays, the country is in danger and cannot be helped. I request to leave the palace and take up the position of a provincial governor."

古文：燕王弘冀嫡长有军功，宜为嗣，谨奉上太弟宝册。 
现代文：燕王李弘冀是嫡长子又有军功，应该当继承人，谨奏奉上皇太弟的宝册。 
English: Yan Wang Li Hongji is the eldest legitimate son and has military merit. He should be the heir. I would like to present the treasure book of the last emperor's younger brother.

古文：齐王景达亦以败军辞元帅。
现代文：齐王李景达也因为军队溃败辞去元帅之职。
English: The king of Qi, Li Jingda, also resigned from the post of marshal because of the army's defeat.

古文：唐主乃立景遂为晋王，加天策上将军、江南西道兵马元帅、洪州大督都、太尉、尚书令，以景达为浙西道元帅、润州大都督。
现代文：南唐主于是封李景遂为晋王，加官天策上将军、江南西道兵马元帅、洪州大都督、太尉、尚书令，任命李景达为浙西道元帅、润州大都督。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then made Li Jing the King of Jin, promoted him to the post of Tianke Shangzheng, made him the Marshal of the Western Jiangnan Province, the Grand Governor of Hongzhou, the First Lieutenant, and the Grand Secretary, and appointed Li Jingda as the Marshal of the Western Zhejiang Province and the Grand Governor of Runzhou.

古文：景达以浙西方用兵，固辞，改抚州大都督。
现代文：李景达因浙西正在用兵，坚决推辞，改任抚州大都督。
English: Li Jingda, due to the fact that soldiers were being used in western Zhejiang, resolutely refused and was appointed the Grand Governor of Fuzhou.

古文：立弘冀为皇太子，参决庶政。
现代文：南唐主立李弘冀为皇太子，参预决定各种政务。
English: The ruler of Southern Tang established Li Hongzhi as the crown prince, and he participated in the preliminaries to decide various government affairs.

古文：弘冀为人猜忌严刻，景遂左右有未出东宫者，立斥逐之。
现代文：李弘冀为人多疑尖刻，李景遂手下人还有没出东宫的，立即斥退赶走。
English: Li Hongji was suspicious and sharp-tongued. As a result, Li Jing's subordinates, including those who had not left the East Palace, were immediately driven away.

古文：其弟安定公从嘉畏之，不敢预事，专以经籍自娱。
现代文：他弟弟安定公李从嘉畏惧李弘冀，不敢参预政事，专门以书籍作为自我娱乐。
English: His younger brother, Steady Gong Li Congjia, was afraid of Li Hongji and did not dare to participate in the pre-election political affairs, so he used books as self-entertainment.

古文：辛卯，上如迎銮镇，屡至江口，遣水军击唐兵，破之。
现代文：辛卯，后周世宗前往迎銮镇，屡次到达长江口，派遣水军攻击南唐军队，打败敌军。
English: After Xinwu, Zhou Shizong went to Yinglu Town, repeatedly reached the mouth of the Yangtze River, dispatched naval forces to attack the South Tang Army, and defeated the enemy forces.

古文：上闻唐战舰数百艘泊东氵布州，将趣海口扼苏、杭路，遣殿前都虞候慕容延钊将步骑，右神武统军宋延渥将水军，循江而下。
现代文：世宗听说南唐数百艘战舰停泊在东州，将要赶赴入海口扼守通往苏州、杭州的路，便派遣殿前都虞候慕容延钊带领步兵、骑兵，右神武统军宋延渥带领水军，沿江而下。
English: When King Sejong heard that hundreds of warships from Southern Tang were anchored in Dongzhou and were about to rush to the mouth of the sea to guard the road to Suzhou and Hangzhou, he dispatched the prefectural governor Murong Yanjun to lead the infantry and cavalry, and the Right Divine Military Commander Song Yanwoo to lead the navy down the river.

古文：甲午，延钊奏大破唐兵于东氵布州。上遣李重进将兵趣庐州。
现代文：甲午，慕容延钊奏报在东州大败南唐军队；世宗派遣李重进率领军队赶赴庐州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Murong Yanyuan reported that the Southern Tang army was defeated in Dongzhou; Shizong sent Li Chongjin to lead the army to rush to Ganzhou.

古文：唐主闻上在江上，恐遂南渡，又耻降号称籓，乃遣兵部侍郎陈觉奉表，请传位于太子弘冀，使听命于中国。
现代文：南唐主闻知世宗在长江岸畔，恐怕就要南下渡江，又耻于贬降帝号改称藩臣，于是派遣兵部侍郎陈觉奉持表章，请求传位给太子李弘冀，让他听从后周的命令。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, Wen Zhi Shizong, was on the banks of the Yangtze River, and was afraid that he would have to cross the river to the south, and was ashamed to demean the title of emperor and call himself a vassal of the domain, so he sent the attendant of the military department, Chen Jue, to hold the badge and request that the throne be passed to the prince Li Hongji, so that he would obey the order of the following week.

古文：时淮南惟庐、舒、蕲、黄未下。丙申，觉至迎銮，见周兵之盛，白上，请遣人度江取表，献四州之地，画江为境，以求息兵，辞指甚哀。
现代文：当时淮南只有庐州、舒州、蕲州、黄州没有攻下，丙申，陈觉到达迎銮镇，看到后周军队的强盛，向世宗禀报，请求派人渡过长江拿取表章，进献四州土地，划江为界，来要求休战，言辞旨意非常悲哀。
English: At that time, only Bozhou, Shuzhou, Bozhou and Huangzhou in Huainan had not been conquered. However, when Chen Jue arrived at Yinglu Town and saw the strength of Hou Zhou's army, he reported to Shizong and requested that someone be sent across the Yangtze River to take the badge, donate the land of the four states, and draw the river as the boundary to request a truce. His words were very sad.

古文：上曰： 朕本兴师止取江北，今尔主能举国内附，朕复何求！ 
现代文：世宗说： 朕兴师出兵本只为取得江北之地，你的君主能够率国归附，朕还要求什么呢！ 
English: Shizong said: I only sent troops to take the land north of the Yangtze River. If your monarch can lead the country to annexation, what more can I ask for!

古文：觉拜谢而退。
现代文：陈觉叩拜道谢而退下。
English: Chen Jue bowed, thanked him and left.

古文：丁酉，觉请遣其属閤门承旨刘承遇如金陵，上赐唐主书，称 皇帝恭问江南国主 ，慰纳之。
现代文：丁酉，陈觉请求派遣他的属官阁门承旨刘承遇前往金陵，世宗赐给南唐主书信，说： 皇帝恭问江南国主 ，安慰接纳他。
English: Ding Xuan, Chen Jue requested to send his subordinate official Liu Xiangyun to Jinling, and Shizong gave a letter to the Lord of Southern Tang, saying: The emperor respectfully asked the Lord of Jiangnan Province to comfort and accept him.

古文：戊戌，吴越奏遣上直都指挥使、处州刺史邵可迁、秀州刺史路彦铢以战舰四百艘、士卒万七千人屯通州南岸。
现代文：戊戌，吴越奏报派遣上直指挥使、处州刺史邵可迁和秀州刺史路彦铢率领四百艘战舰、一万七千士兵驻守通州南面江岸。
English: Wu Yue Song Pao dispatched Shang Zhi Envoy, Wenzhou Zhi Shi Shao Ke Qian and Xiuzhou Zhi Lu Yan Jie to garrison the south bank of the Tongzhou River with 400 warships and 17,000 soldiers.

古文：唐主复遣刘承遇奉表称唐国主，请献江北四州，岁输贡物数十万。
现代文：南唐主再派刘承遇奉送表章自称唐国主，请求献出长江北面庐、舒、蕲、黄等四州，每年献送贡品十万。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty sent Liu Chengyu to present the medal of the self-proclaimed Lord of Tang Dynasty, requesting the donation of the four states of the North Yangtze River, such as Min, Shu, Min and Huang, and the annual donation of 100,000 tributes.

古文：于是江北悉平，得州十四，县六十。
现代文：于是长江以北全部平定，得到十四个州、六十个县。
English: As a result, everything north of the Yangtze River was pacified, resulting in fourteen states and sixty counties.

古文：庚子，上赐唐主书，谕以： 缘江诸军及两浙、湖南、荆南兵并当罢归，其庐、蕲、黄三道，亦令敛兵近外。
现代文：庚子，世宗赐给南唐主书信，告以： 沿长江各支军队和在两浙、湖南、荆南的军队都当撤回，其中庐州、蕲州、黄州三路军队，也下令把军队收回到近郊以外。
English: Geng Zi, the founder of the dynasty, sent a letter to the lord of Southern Tang, telling him: All the armies along the Yangtze River and the armies of Zhejiang, Hunan and Jingnan should be withdrawn. Among them, the three-way armies of Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Huangzhou were also ordered to withdraw their troops outside the suburbs.

古文：俟彼将士及家属皆就道，可遣人召将校以城邑付之。
现代文：等到三州城中将吏士兵及其家属上路南归以后，可以派人召唤我军将校并将城市都邑交付给他们。
English: After the generals and soldiers of the three states and their families have returned to the south, they can send someone to summon our army officers and hand over the cities and towns to them.

古文：江中舟舰有须往来者，并令就北岸引之。 
现代文：长江的船只有需要来往的，一并让他们到北岸来拉走。 
English: The boats on the Yangtze only need to come and go, and at the same time let them come to the north bank to pull away.

古文：辛丑，陈觉辞行，又赐唐主书，谕以不必传位于子。
现代文：辛丑，陈觉告辞上路，世宗又赐给南唐主书信，告诉他不必把君位传给儿子。
English: Sin Ug, Chen Jue said goodbye and went on his way. Shizong also gave a letter to the Lord of Southern Tang, telling him that he did not have to pass the throne to his son.

古文：壬寅，上自迎銮复如扬州。
现代文：壬寅，世宗从迎銮镇再次前往扬州。
English: Ren Yin, Shizong went to Yangzhou again from Yinglu Town.

古文：癸卯，诏吴越、荆南军又归本道；赐钱弘亻叔犒军帛三万匹，高保融一万匹。
现代文：癸卯，后周世宗诏令吴越、荆南军队各自返回本地；赐给钱弘犒劳军队的绢帛三万匹，赐高保融一万匹。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict ordering the Wuyue and Jingnan armies to return to their home provinces respectively; he gave the Qianhong army 30,000 horses and the Gaoborong army 10,000 horses.

古文：甲辰，置保信军于庐州，以右龙武统军赵匡赞为节度使。
现代文：甲辰，在庐州设置保信军，任命右龙武统军赵匡赞为节度使。
English: Jia Chen set up the Guanxin Army in Zhangzhou and appointed Zhao Kuanzang of the Right Dragon Military Unification Army as the chief envoy.

古文：丙午，唐主遣冯延己献银、绢、钱、茶、谷共百万以犒军。
现代文：丙午，南唐主派遣冯延巳贡献银、绢、钱、茶、谷总共百万以犒劳军队。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the lord of Southern Tang dispatched Feng Yanmi to contribute silver, money, money, tea, and grain to a total of one million troops.

古文：己酉，命宋延渥将水军三千溯江巡警。
现代文：己酉，后周世宗命令宋延渥率领水军三千人沿江而上巡逻警戒。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered Song Yanwo to lead 3,000 sailors to patrol along the river.

古文：庚戌，敕故淮南节度使杨行密、故升府节度使徐温等墓并量给守户。其江南群臣墓在江北者，亦委长吏以时检校。
现代文：庚戌，敕令已故淮南节度使杨行密、已故升府节度使徐温等人的墓全都根据需要给予守墓民户；其余江南群臣有先人坟墓在长江以北的，也委托所在地方长官按时检查。
English: Geng Zheng, the late Huainan Emperor, Yang Xingmi, the late Shengfu Emperor, Xu Wen and other tombs were all given to tomb-guarding households according to their needs; the remaining Jiangnan emperors who had ancestors' tombs north of the Yangtze River also commissioned local governors to inspect them on time.

古文：辛亥，唐主遣其临汝公徐辽代己来上寿。
现代文：辛亥，南唐主派遣临汝公徐辽代表自己前来献送祝寿礼品。
English: Xinhai, the Lord of Southern Tang dispatched Lin Rukong and Xu Liao to come to present birthday gifts on his behalf.

古文：是月，浚汴口，导河流达于淮，于是江、淮舟楫始通。
现代文：当月，疏通汴口，引导黄河支流直达淮水，于是长江、淮水的船只开始通航。
English: That month, dredging the estuary and guiding the Yellow River tributary straight to Huai Shui, so the Yangtze River and Huai Shui ships began to sail.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，帝自扬州北还。
现代文：夏季四月，乙卯，后周世宗从扬州北上返回。
English: In the summer of April, Zhou Shizong returned from the north of Yangzhou.

古文：新作太庙成。
现代文：后周大梁新造太庙建成。
English: The newly-built Great Temple was completed a week later.

古文：庚申，神主入庙。
现代文：庚申，神主牌位放入太庙。
English: Koshin, the god card is placed in the temple.

古文：辛酉夜，钱唐城南火，延及内城，官府庐舍几尽。
现代文：辛酉夜晚，吴越钱塘城南起火，延及内城，官家府第百姓房舍几乎烧尽。
English: In the middle of the night, a fire broke out in the southern part of the city of Wuyue Qiantang, extending to the inner city. The houses of government officials and ordinary people were almost burnt out.

古文：壬戌旦，火将及镇国仓。吴越王弘亻叔久疾，自强出救火。
现代文：壬戌清晨，大火即将烧到镇国仓，吴越王钱弘长期患病，自己勉强支撑着出去救火。
English: Early in the morning, the fire was about to burn to the town of Guochang. Wu Yue Wang Qianhong, who had been ill for a long time, reluctantly supported himself to go out to fight the fire.

古文：火止，谓左右曰： 吾疾因灾而愈。 
现代文：大火止熄，钱弘对左右的人说： 我的病因这场火灾而痊愈。 
English: When the fire was extinguished, Qian Hong said to the people around him: My illness has been cured by this fire.

古文：众心稍安。
现代文：众人的心稍许得到安慰。
English: Everyone's hearts were soothed a little.

古文：帝之南征也，契丹乘虚入寇。
现代文：后周世宗南下征伐，契丹军队乘虚入侵。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong went south to conquer, and the Khitan army took advantage of the situation to invade.

古文：壬申，帝至大梁，命镇宁节度使张永德将兵备御北边。
现代文：壬申，世宗到达大梁，命令张永德领兵到北部边界防备御敌。
English: When Jinshin and Shizong arrived at Daliang, they ordered Zhang Yongde to lead the troops to the northern border to guard against the enemy.

古文：五月，辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月，辛巳朔，发生日食。
English: In May, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏赏劳南征士卒及淮南新附之民。
现代文：后周世宗颁诏赏赐南下征伐的士兵和淮南新近归附的百姓。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict to reward the soldiers who went to the south and the newly annexed people of Huainan.

古文：辛卯，以太祖皇帝领忠武节度使，徙安审琦为平卢节度使。
现代文：辛卯，后周世宗任命宋太祖皇帝兼领忠武节度使，调任安审琦为平卢节度使。
English: Xinwu, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Emperor Song Taizu to also lead the Zhongwu Festival Envoy, and transferred An Jiqi to be the Pinglu Festival Envoy.

古文：成德节度使郭崇攻契丹东城，拔之，以报其入寇也。
现代文：成德节度使郭崇进攻契丹束城，拔取，以此回报契丹军队的入侵。
English: In response to the invasion of the Khitan army, the Chengde Emperor ordered Guo Chong to attack and take the city of Sokcho from the Khitan.

古文：唐主避周讳，更名景，下令去帝号，称国主，凡天子仪制皆有降损，去年号，用周正朔，仍告于太庙。
现代文：南唐主为避后周世宗祖先名讳，改名为景。下令取消帝号，只称国主，所有原来的天子仪仗规制都有所降低贬损，取消交泰年号，改用后周年号历法，并向太庙报告。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, in order to avoid the name of the ancestor of the Zhou Dynasty, changed his name to Jing. He ordered the abolition of the imperial title, only called the Lord of the Country, and all the original rules of honor were reduced to derogatory, canceled the Thai year number, changed to the post-anniversary calendar, and reported to the Great Temple.

古文：左仆射、同平章事冯延己罢为太子太傅，门下侍郎、同平章事严续罢为少傅、枢密使，兵部侍郎陈觉罢守本官。
现代文：左仆射、同平章事冯延己免职后为太子太傅，门下侍郎、同平章事严续免职后为少傅，枢密使、兵部侍郎陈觉免去同平章事保留原来官职。
English: After the dismissal of the left-hand servant, Tongping Zhangji Feng Yanji, he became the prince's daifu, the under-waiter, Tongping Zhangji, was dismissed and became the junior waiter, and the privy councilor, the military secretary, Chen Jue, was dismissed by Tongping Zhangji and retained his original official position.

古文：初，冯延己以取中原之策说唐主，由是有宠。
现代文：当初，冯延己用夺取中原的策略来劝说南唐主，因此得到宠幸。
English: At first, Feng Yan used the strategy of seizing the Central Plains to persuade the Lord of Southern Tang, and thus gained favor.

古文：延己尝笑烈祖戢兵为龌龊，曰： 安陆所丧才数千兵，为之辍食咨嗟者旬日，此田舍翁识量耳，安足与成大事！
现代文：冯延己曾经嘲笑南唐烈祖息兵是心胸狭窄，说： 安陆所丧失的才几千士兵，就为之禁食叹息有十天，这是乡村田舍老翁的见识度量，怎么能与他成就大事！
English: Feng Yanji once ridiculed the narrow-mindedness of the Southern Tang Dynasty's martyrs and soldiers, saying: Anlu lost only a few thousand soldiers, so he fasted and sighed for ten days. This is a measure of the insight of the village homestead old man, how can he achieve great things!

古文：岂如今上暴师数万于外，而击球宴乐无异平日，真英主也！ 
现代文：哪像如今皇上几万大军风餐露宿在野外，而自己打球玩耍取乐与平日没有两样，真是英明的君主啊！ 
English: How like the emperor now, with tens of thousands of troops camped out in the open, and himself playing ball for fun, no different from his everyday life. What a wise monarch!

古文：延己与其党谈论，常以天下为己任，更相唱和。
现代文：冯延己与他的同党谈论时，总是把治理天下作为自己的责任，互相唱和呼应。
English: When discussing with his fellow party members, Feng Yanji always regards the governance of the world as his responsibility, singing and echoing each other.

古文：翰林学士常梦锡屡言延己等浮诞，不可信，唐主不听。梦锡曰： 奸言似忠，陛下不悟，国必亡矣！ 
现代文：翰林学士常梦锡多次上言说冯延己等人浮夸荒诞，不可信任；南唐主不听从，常梦锡说： 奸臣的话好似忠言，陛下如果再不觉悟，国家必定灭亡了！ 
English: Hanlin scholar Chang Mengxi repeatedly said that Feng Yanji and others were pompous and absurd, and could not be trusted; the Lord of Southern Tang did not listen, and Chang Mengxi said: The words of a traitor are like the words of a loyal adviser. If His Majesty does not wake up, the country will surely perish!

古文：及臣服于周，延己之党相与言，有谓周为大朝者，梦锡大笑曰： 诸公常欲致君尧、舜，何意今日自为小朝邪！ 
现代文：及至向后周臣服，冯延己党羽相互言谈，有称后周为大朝的，常梦锡大笑说： 诸位平常想引导国君成为统治天下的唐尧、虞舜，哪里想得到今日却自称小朝廷呢？ 
English: When it came to surrendering to Hou Zhou, Feng Yan and his party members began to talk to each other. Chang Mengxi, who was known as Hou Zhou's Great Emperor, laughed loudly and said: You usually want to guide the sovereign to become the ruler of the world, but where do you want to get today's self-proclaimed small court?

古文：众默然。
现代文：众人沉默无语。
English: The crowd fell silent.

古文：自唐主内附，帝止因其使者赐书，未尝遣使至其国。
现代文：自从南唐主归附中原，后周世宗只通过对方使者赐给书信，还未曾派遣使者到唐国。
English: Since the Southern Tang Dynasty was annexed by the Central Plains, Zhou Shizong only gave letters through the other side's envoys, and never sent envoys to Tang.

古文：己酉，始命太仆卿冯延鲁、卫尉少卿钟谟使于唐，赐以御衣、玉带等及犒军帛十万，并今年《钦天历》。
现代文：己酉，方始命令太仆卿冯延鲁、卫尉少卿钟谟出使到南唐，赐给御衣、玉带等物品以及犒劳军队的绢帛十万匹，并赐当年的《钦天历》。
English: Ji Yan, at the beginning, ordered the great servant Feng Yanlu and the guard lieutenant Zhong Miao to be sent to South Tang, and gave them the imperial robe, the jade belt and other items, as well as 100,000 horses of the labor army, and gave them the "Qing Calendar" of that year.

古文：刘承遇之还自金陵也，唐主使陈觉白帝，以江南无卤田，愿得海陵盐监南属以赡军。
现代文：刘承遇从金陵返回，南唐主派陈觉禀报世宗，因为江南地区没有盐卤之田，希望得到海陵监归属江南来供应军需。
English: When Liu Chengyu returned from Jinling, the master of Southern Tang dispatched Chen Juejun to report to Shizong, because there were no salt and brine fields in the southern region of the Yangtze River, and he hoped to obtain the control of Hailing, which belonged to the southern region of the Yangtze River, in order to supply military supplies.

古文：帝曰： 海陵在江北，难以交居，当别有处分。 
现代文：世宗说： 海陵在长江北岸，难以归属江南而使南、北官吏交错杂居，应当另有安排。 
English: Sejong said: Hailing is on the north bank of the Yangtze River, it is difficult to belong to the south of the river, and the officials from the south and the north are intermingled, so other arrangements should be made.

古文：至是，诏岁支盐三十万斛以给江南，所俘获江南士卒，稍稍归之。
现代文：到这时，诏令每年拨出三十万斛盐给江南地区，所俘获的江南士兵，渐渐地释放回国。
English: At this time, the imperial edict allocated 300,000 cesium salt to the south of the Yangtze River every year, and the captured soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River were gradually released back to the country.

古文：六月，壬子，昭义节度使李筠奏击北汉石会关，拔其六寨。
现代文：六月，壬子，后周昭义节度使李筠奏报出击北汉石会关，攻拔北汉六个寨子。
English: In June, after the Zhou Zhaoyi Festival in Renzi, Li Shuxiao led his troops to attack the Northern Han Dynasty's Shishi Huiguan, conquering six fortresses.

古文：乙卯，晋州奏都监李谦溥击北汉，破孝义。
现代文：乙卯，晋州奏报都监李谦溥出击北汉，攻破孝义。
English: At the same time, Li Qianyao, the superintendent of the Jinzhou Suo Bao, launched an attack on Northern Han and defeated Xiaoyi.

古文：高保融遣使劝蜀主称籓于周，蜀主报以前岁遣胡立致书于周而不答。
现代文：荆南高保融派遣使者劝说后蜀主向后周称臣，后蜀主回复说去年派胡立送致书信给后周而未予答复。
English: Jingnan Gao Baorong sent an emissary to persuade Hou Shu to become a minister to Hou Zhou. Hou Shu replied that he had sent Hu Li a letter to Hou Zhou last year, but received no reply.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，初行《大周刑统》。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙戌，后周开始实行《大周刑统》。
English: In the autumn, in July, in June, and the following week, the implementation of the "Big Week Penal Code" began.

古文：帝欲均田租，丁亥，以元稹《均田图》遍赐诸道。
现代文：后周世宗准备平均田租，丁亥，将元稹《均田图》普遍赐发各地。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong prepared the average field rent, and Dinghai issued the "average field map" of the Yuan Dynasty to all regions.

古文：闰月，唐清源节度使兼中书令留从效遣牙将蔡仲赟衣商人服，以绢表置革带中，间道来称籓。
现代文：闰月，南唐清源节度使兼中书令留从效派遣牙将蔡仲穿着商人服装，把绢帛表章夹放在皮带中间，从偏僻小路前来称臣。
English: During the leap month, the Southern Tang Dynasty Qingyuan Festival, Cai Zhong, the envoy of the Emperor and the second-in-command, was dispatched to report to the emperor. Cai Zhong, dressed in a merchant's attire, clipped his enamel watch badge in the middle of his belt, and came from a remote path to praise the emperor.

古文：唐江西元帅晋王景遂之赴洪州也，以时方用兵，启求大臣以自副，唐主以枢密副使、工部侍郎李征古为镇南节度副使。
现代文：南唐江西元帅晋王李景遂到洪州赴任，因当时正在用兵，奏请委派大臣作为自己的副手，南唐主任命枢密副使，工部侍郎李征古为镇南节度副使。
English: Li Jing, the marshal of the West Jiangxi Province of Southern Tang Dynasty, came to Hongzhou to take office. Since he was recruiting soldiers at that time, he requested to appoint a minister as his deputy. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty appointed a privy vice-envoy, and Li Zhenggu, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry, was the vice-envoy of Zhenan Festival.

古文：征古傲很专恣，景遂虽宽厚，久而不能堪，常欲斩征古，自拘于有司，左右谏而止，景遂忽忽不乐。
现代文：李徵古傲慢凶狠专横跋扈，李景遂虽然宽容仁厚，但时间长了也不堪忍受，经常想斩了李征古，然后到有关执法部门自首，被左右人劝谏而住手，李景遂惆怅恍惚闷闷不乐。
English: Li Zhenggu was arrogant, fierce, and domineering. Although Li Jingsu was tolerant and kind, the long time was unbearable. He often wanted to behead Li Zhenggu, and then surrendered to the relevant law enforcement department. He was persuaded by the right and left people to stop. Li Jingsu was depressed.

古文：太子弘冀在东宫多不法，唐主怒，尝以球杖击之曰： 吾当复召景遂。 
现代文：太子李弘冀住在东宫多有不法行为，南唐主发怒，曾经用马杖打他说： 我应当重新召回李景遂。 
English: Prince Li Hongji lived in the East Palace and often committed illegal acts. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty was angry and once beat him with a horse stick, saying, "I should recall Li Jingsui."

古文：昭庆宫使袁从范从景遂为洪州都押牙，或谮从范之子于景遂，景遂欲杀之，从范由是怨望。
现代文：昭庆宫使袁从范跟从李景遂为洪州都押牙，有人问李景遂说袁从范儿子的坏话，李景遂想杀他，袁从范因此产生怨恨。
English: The Zhaoqing Palace ordered Yuan Congfan to follow Li Jingfan, and the two became enemies of Hongzhou. When someone asked Li Jingfan, he said bad words about Yuan Congfan's son, and Li Jingfan wanted to kill him, which made Yuan Congfan resentful.

古文：弘冀闻之，密遣从范毒之。八月，庚辰，景遂击球渴甚，从范进浆，景遂饮之而卒。
现代文：李弘冀闻知，秘密支使袁从范毒杀李景遂；八月，庚辰，李景遂打马口渴得很，袁从范送上饮料，李景遂喝下而死去。
English: Li Hongji heard that the secret supporter Yuan Congfan poisoned Li Jingsui; in August, Gengchen, Li Jingsui was very thirsty, Yuan Congfan brought him a drink, Li Jingsui drank it and died.

古文：未殡，体已溃。
现代文：还没等到收殓，身体已经溃烂。
English: The body is already festering before it's even contracted.

古文：唐主不之知，赠皇太弟，谥曰文成。
现代文：南唐主不知详情，追赠皇太弟，谥号为文成。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty did not know the details, but he posthumously gave the crown prince a younger brother, whose posthumous name was Wencheng.

古文：辛巳，南汉中宗殂，长子卫王继兴即帝位，更名鋹，改元大宝。
现代文：辛巳，南汉中宗刘晟去世，长子刘继兴即皇帝位，改名为，改年号为大宝。
English: Soon after, the Southern Han Emperor Liu Bei died, and his eldest son Liu Jixing became emperor, changed his name, and changed his era name to Dabao.

古文：鋹年十六，国事皆决于宦官玉清宫使龚澄枢及女侍中卢琼仙等，台省官备位而已。
现代文：刘十六岁，国事全部由宦官玉清宫使龚澄枢和女侍中卢琼仙等人裁决，朝廷台、省各部官员只是虚有其名而已。
English: When Liu was 16 years old, all state affairs were decided by the eunuchs of the Jade Emperor's Palace, such as the eunuch Zou Chengzhu and the lady's maid Lu Qiongxian. The officials of the Imperial Court and the provincial ministries only had names.

古文：甲申，唐始置进奏院于大梁。
现代文：甲申，南唐开始在大梁设置进奏院。
English: In Jiaxing, Southern Tang Dynasty began to set up a marching band school in Daliang.

古文：壬辰，命西上阁门使灵寿曹彬使于吴越，赐吴越王弘亻叔骑军钢甲二百，步军甲五千及他兵器。
现代文：壬辰，后周世宗命令西上阁门使灵寿人曹彬出使吴越，赐给吴越王钱弘二百副骑兵钢铠甲、五百副步兵钢铠甲和其它兵器。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered Cao Bin, an envoy of Ling Shou from Xishanggakmen, to send an envoy to Wu Yue and give Wu Yue King Qian Hong two hundred cavalry steel armor, five hundred infantry steel armor and other weapons.

古文：彬事毕亟返，不受馈遗，吴越人以轻舟追与之，至于数四，彬曰： 吾终不受，是窃名也。
现代文：曹彬事情完毕即刻返回，不接受馈赠，吴越人划着轻便小船追送礼品，推辞再三，曹彬说： 我最终仍不接受，这是沽名钓誉啊。 
English: Cao Bin returned immediately after the event and did not accept the gift. Wu Yue people rowed a light boat to send gifts. Cao Bin repeatedly declined. Cao Bin said: I still do not accept it in the end. This is a bad fishing reputation.

古文：尽籍其数，归而献之。
现代文：全部登录礼品数量，返归后献上。
English: Record the total number of gifts and present them after returning.

古文：帝曰： 曏之奉使者，乞丐无厌，使四方轻朝命，卿能如是，甚善。然彼以遗卿，卿自取之。 
现代文：世宗说： 以前奉命出使的人，索求没个满足，使得四方之人轻视朝廷命令。爱卿能够如此，非常好；然而别人既已将此馈赠爱卿，爱卿自可取走。 
English: Sejong said, "In the past, those who were ordered to send envoys did not ask for any satisfaction, causing people in all directions to despise the imperial order. It is very good that Aikyo can do so; however, since others have given this gift to Aikyo, Aikyo can take it away.

古文：彬始拜受，悉以散于亲识，家无留者。
现代文：曹彬这才跪拜接受，全部散发给亲近熟人，家中一点没留。
English: Cao Bin kneeled down to accept it, and distributed it all to close acquaintances, leaving nothing at home.

古文：辛丑，冯延鲁、钟谟来自唐，唐主手表谢恩，其略曰： 天地之恩厚矣，父母之恩深矣，子不谢父，人何报天！
现代文：辛丑，冯延鲁、钟谟从南唐而来，南唐主亲书表章感谢皇恩，表章大致说： 天地的恩泽真厚啊，父母的恩泽真深啊，子女无法感谢父母，人们怎么报答天地，只有赤诚之心，可以回报大恩大德。 
English: Xinxiu, Feng Yanlu and Zhong Moo came from South Tang. The South Tang ruler wrote a personal epitaph to thank the imperial grace. The epitaph said roughly: The grace of heaven and earth is really thick, the grace of parents is really deep, children cannot thank their parents, how can people repay heaven and earth, only a sincere heart can repay the great grace.

古文：惟有赤心，可酬大造。 又乞比籓方，赐诏书。又称： 有情事令钟谟上奏，乞令早还。 
现代文：又请求与四方藩镇同列，降赐诏书。又说： 有情况让钟谟上奏，乞求让他早日返回。 
English: He also requested to be ranked with the four provinces and towns and to be granted the imperial rescript. He also said: There is a situation for Zhong Mu to play, and begged him to return as soon as possible.

古文：唐主复令谟白帝，欲传位太子。
现代文：南唐主又让钟谟禀报世宗，打算传位给太子。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang also asked Zhong Muxun to announce his succession to the throne, intending to pass the throne to the prince.

古文：九月，丁巳，以延鲁为刑部侍郎、谟为给事中。
现代文：九月，丁巳，后周世宗任命冯延鲁为刑部侍郎、钟谟为给事中。
English: In September, Ding Si, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Feng Yanlu as the attendant of the criminal department, and Zhong Moo as the assistant.

古文：己未，先遣谟还，赐书谕以 未可传位 之意。唐主复遣吏部尚书、知枢密院殷崇义来贺天清节。
现代文：南唐主又派遣吏部尚书、知枢密院殷崇义前来祝贺世宗生日天清节。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty also sent Shang Shu of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and Yin Chongyi of the Privy Council to congratulate Shizong on his birthday, Tianqing Festival.

古文：帝谋伐蜀，冬，十月，己卯，以户部侍郎高防为西南面水陆制置使，右赞善大夫李玉为判官。
现代文：后周世宗谋划伐后蜀，冬季，十月，己卯，任命户部侍郎高防为西南面水陆制置使、右赞善大夫李玉为判官。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong planned to conquer Honshu, and in the winter, in October, he appointed the head of the household, Gao Bao, as the southwestern water and land envoy, and the right-handed doctor Li Yu as the judge.

古文：甲午，帝归冯延鲁及左监门卫上将军许文稹、右千牛卫上将军边镐、卫尉卿周廷构于唐。
现代文：甲午，后周世宗将冯延鲁和左监门卫上将军许文镇、右千牛卫上将军边镐、卫尉卿周廷构送归给南唐。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Emperor Zhou Shizong sent Feng Yanlu and the left guard gate guard general Xu Wenzhen, the right guard guard general Bentham, and the guard captain Zhou Ting to South Tang.

古文：唐主以文稹等皆败军之俘，弃不复用。
现代文：南唐主因许文稹等人都是打败仗的俘虏，弃置不再任用。
English: Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty because Xu Wenyi and others were defeated prisoners of war, abandoned and no longer appointed.

古文：高保融再遗蜀主书，劝称臣于周，蜀主集将相议之，李昊曰： 从之则君父之辱，违之则周师必至，诸将能拒周乎？ 
现代文：荆南高保融再次给后蜀主去信，规劝他向后周投降称臣，后蜀主召集将相商议此事，李昊说： 听从他就是国君先父的耻辱，违背他周朝军队必定到达，众将能够抵御周军吗？ 
English: Jing Nan Gao Bao Rong once again sent a letter to Hou Shou, exhorting him to surrender to Hou Zhou and declare himself a vassal. Hou Shou called a meeting to discuss the matter. Li Hao said, "To listen to him is a disgrace to the father of the country. If you disobey him, the Zhou army will surely arrive. Will you be able to resist the Zhou army?"

古文：诸将皆曰： 以陛下圣明，江山险固，岂可望风屈服！
现代文：众将都说： 依靠陛下的圣明，江山的险固，岂能望风投降！
English: The generals all said: Relying on your majesty's holy light, with the country in peril, how can you surrender to the wind?

古文：秣马厉兵，正为今日。
现代文：秣马厉兵长期战备，正是为了今日抵御外敌。
English: It is precisely for the purpose of resisting the foreign enemy today that the soldiers of the Long March prepared for a long time.

古文：臣等请以死卫社稷！ 
现代文：我们请求用生命来保卫国家！ 
English: We ask you to defend the country with your lives!

古文：丁酉，蜀主命昊草书，极言拒绝之。
现代文：丁酉，后蜀主命令李昊起草回信，慷慨陈辞拒绝劝降。
English: After the death of Ding Xi, the Lord of Shu ordered Li Hao to draft a reply letter, and generously refused to persuade him to abdicate.

古文：诏左散骑常侍须城艾颍等三十四人分行诸州，均定田租。
现代文：后周世宗诏令左散骑常侍须城人艾颍等三十四人分别视察各州，按地多少均衡确定田租。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an imperial edict, and thirty-four people, including Zuo Zangjia, the regular attendant, and Ai Zhen, a resident of Shucheng, inspected each prefecture separately to determine the field rent in a more or less balanced manner according to the area.

古文：庚子，诏诸州并乡村，率以百户为团，团置耆长三人。
现代文：庚子，诏令各州合并乡村，一般以百户为一团，每团设置年老的团长三人。
English: Geng Zi issued an edict ordering all prefectures to amalgamate villages, generally with one hundred households as a group, each group having three elderly group leaders.

古文：帝留心农事，刻木为耕夫、蚕妇，置之殿庭。
现代文：世宗留意农事，用木头刻成耕田农夫、养蚕农妇，安放在宫殿庭院中。
English: Shizong paid attention to agricultural affairs, and carved a farmer and a farmer's wife who raised silkworms in wood, and placed them in the palace courtyard.

古文：命武胜节度使宋延渥以水军巡江。
现代文：后周世宗命令武胜节度使宋延渥率领水军巡视长江。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong ordered Wu Sheng to send Song Yanwo to lead the navy to patrol the Yangtze River.

古文：高保融奏，闻王师将伐蜀，请以水军趣三峡，诏褒之。
现代文：荆南高保融上奏，听说王师将要征伐后蜀，请求率领水军赶赴三峡，后周世宗诏令嘉奖他。
English: Jing Nan Gao Bao Rong, hearing that Wang Shi was going to conquer Hou Shu, asked him to lead the navy to the Three Gorges. Later, Zhou Shizong issued a decree to commend him.

古文：十一月，庚戌，敕窦俨编集《大周通礼》、《大周正乐》。
现代文：十一月，庚戌，后周世宗敕令窦俨编纂《大周通礼》、《大周正乐》。
English: In November, Geng Zheng, later Zhou Zongzhen, ordered Dou Zheng to compile "Dazhou Tongli" and "Dazhou Zhengle."

古文：辛亥，南汉葬文武光明孝皇帝于昭陵，庙号中宗。
现代文：辛亥，南汉将文武光明孝皇帝安葬在昭陵，庙号为中宗。
English: In Xinhai, the Southern Han Dynasty buried the Emperor Wenwu Guangmingxiao in Zhaoling, and the temple's name was Zhongzong.

古文：乙丑，唐主复遣礼部侍郎钟谟入见。
现代文：乙丑，南唐主又派遣礼部侍郎钟谟入朝谒见。
English: Second, the Lord of Southern Tang also sent the etiquette attendant Zhong Moo to the Imperial Court.

古文：李玉至长安，或言 蜀归安镇在长安南三百馀里，可袭取也。 
现代文：李玉到达长安，有人说： 蜀归安镇在长安南面三百多里，可以偷袭夺取。 
English: When Li Yu arrived in Chang'an, someone said: Shu Gui'an Town is more than three hundred miles south of Chang'an, and can be captured by sneak attack.

古文：玉信之，牒永兴节度使王彦超，索兵二百，彦超以为归安道阻隘难取，玉曰： 吾自奉密旨。 
现代文：李玉听信这话，投牒给永兴节度使王彦超，索求二百士兵，王彦超认为归安道路险恶狭窄难以攻取，李玉说： 我自奉有密旨。 
English: Li Yu believed this and sent an ultimatum to Wang Yanchao, Yongxing's commander, demanding two hundred soldiers. Wang Yanchao believed that the road to safety was dangerously narrow and difficult to capture. Li Yu said: I have a secret mission.

古文：彦超不得已与之。
现代文：王彦超不得已给他二百士兵。
English: Wang Yanchao had no choice but to give him 200 soldiers.

古文：玉将以往，十二月，蜀归安镇遏使李承勋据险邀之，斩玉，其众皆没。
现代文：李玉带领士兵前往，十二月，后蜀归安镇遏使李承勋占据险要地形拦击，斩杀李玉，他的士兵全部覆没。
English: In December, after Shu returned to Anzhen, he ordered Li Chengxun to occupy the dangerous terrain, intercept and kill Li Yu, and his soldiers were all wiped out.

古文：乙酉，蜀主以右卫圣步军都指使赵崇韬为北面招讨使，丙戌，以奉銮肃卫都指挥使、武信节度使兼中书令孟贻业为昭武、文州都招讨使，左卫圣马军都指挥使赵思进为东面招讨使，山南西道节度使韩保贞为北面都招讨使，将兵六万，分屯要害以备周。
现代文：乙酉，后蜀君主任命右卫圣步军都指挥使赵崇韬为北面招讨使，丙戌，任命奉銮肃卫都指挥使、武信节度使兼中书令孟贻业为昭武、文州都招讨使，左卫圣马都指挥使赵思进为东面招讨使，山南西道节度使韩保贞为北面都招讨使，领兵六万，分别驻守要害地段来防御后周。
English: In Yixing, after the Shu monarch, Zhao Chongyi was appointed the commander of the Right Division of the Sacred Foot Guards and the envoy to recruit soldiers for the north side; in Heping, the commander of the Fengyuan and Sui Divisions of the Sacred Foot Guards was appointed; in Wuxin, the commander of the Wuxin Division of the Sacred Foot Guards and the envoy to recruit soldiers for the west side was appointed; in Wenzhou, the commander of the Left Division of the Sacred Foot Guards and the envoy to recruit soldiers for the east side was appointed; in Shannan, the commander of the West Division of the Sacred Foot Guards and the envoy to recruit soldiers for

古文：丙戌，诏凡诸色课户及俸户并勒归州县，其幕职、州县官自今并支俸钱及米麦。
现代文：丙戌，后周世宗诏令所有各种课户和俸户一律统归州县管理，所有幕职官、州县官从今开始一律由州县开支俸钱和粮食。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong issued an edict that all school households and pension households of all kinds were to be managed by the prefectures, and all officials of the shogunate and prefectural officials were to receive their salaries and food from the prefectures.

古文：初，唐太傅兼中书令楚公宋齐丘多树朋党，欲以专固朝权，躁进之士争附之，推奖以为国之元老。
现代文：当初，南唐太傅兼中书令楚公宋齐丘大肆拉帮结伙、培植党羽，想以此垄断朝廷大权，浮躁急进之士争相攀附，推崇夸奖宋齐丘为国家元老。
English: At the beginning, Song Qiqiu, the Southern Tang Dynasty's Taifu and the second-in-command of the imperial rescript, promoted alliances and cultivated party members, hoping to monopolize the power of the imperial court. The impetuous and impetuous people clung to him, praising and praising Song Qiqiu as the national elder.

古文：枢密使陈觉、副使李征古恃齐丘之势，尤骄慢。
现代文：枢密使陈觉、副使李徵古倚仗宋齐丘的势力，尤其骄横傲慢。
English: Privy Councilor Chen Jue and Vice-Minister Li Zhenggu relied on the power of Song Qiqiu, and were particularly arrogant.

古文：及许文稹等败于紫金山，觉与齐丘、景达自濠州遁归，国人忷惧。
现代文：及至许文稹等在紫金山溃败，陈觉与宋齐丘、李景达从濠州逃跑回来，国中之人非常恐惧。
English: When Xu Wenzhong and others were defeated at Zijin Mountain, and Chen Jue, Song Qiqiu, and Li Jingtai returned from fleeing Zhangzhou, the people in the country were very afraid.

古文：唐主尝叹曰： 吾国家一朝至此！ 
现代文：南唐主曾经感叹说： 我的国家一刹时竟到了这个地步！ 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty once lamented, "My country has suddenly come to this!

古文：因泣下。
现代文：因而流下眼泪。
English: And cry.

古文：征古曰： 陛下当治兵以扞敌，涕泣何为！
现代文：李徵古说： 陛下应当整顿军队来抵抗敌人，流泪哭泣干什么！
English: Li Zhenggu said: Your Majesty should reorganize the army to resist the enemy, why shed tears and weep!

古文：岂饮酒过量邪，将乳母不至邪？ 
现代文：难道是喝酒过量了吗，还是奶妈没到呢？ 
English: Did you drink too much, or did the wet nurse not come?

古文：唐主色变，而征古举止自若。
现代文：南唐主脸色大变，而李征古言谈举止仍从容自如。
English: The face of the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty changed dramatically, but Li Zheng still spoke and behaved in a relaxed manner.

古文：会司天奏： 天文有变，人主宜避位禳灾。 
现代文：适逢司天奏报： 天象有大变，人主应该避位祈求消灾。 
English: It happened to coincide with the report of the State Councilor of the People's Republic of China: There is a big change in the weather, and people should pray for disaster relief.

古文：唐主乃曰： 祸难方殷，吾欲释去万机，栖心冲寂，谁可以托国者？ 
现代文：南唐主于是说： 祸乱灾难正频繁，我想放弃君位摆脱政务，让心境处于淡泊寂静之中，但可以将国家托付给谁呢？
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then said: Calamities and disasters are frequent. I want to give up the throne, get rid of government affairs, and let my mind be in a dull silence. But to whom can I entrust the country?

古文：征古曰： 宋公，造国手也，陛下如厌万机，何不举国授之！ 
现代文：李徵古说： 宋公是治理国家的高手，陛下如果讨厌政务，何不把国家交授给他！ 
English: Li Zhenggu said: Song Gong is a master of governing the country. If Your Majesty hates government affairs, why not hand over the country to him!

古文：觉曰： 陛下深居禁中，国事皆委宋公，先行后闻，臣等时入侍，谈释、老而已。 
现代文：陈觉说： 陛下深居在宫中，国家大事都委托给宋公，先处理后报告，我们时常入宫侍候，只谈释迦牟尼、老子罢了。 
English: Chen Jue said: His Majesty lives deep in the palace, the state affairs are all entrusted to Song Gong, we first deal with and then report, we often enter the palace to wait, we only talk about Sakyamuni and Lao Zi.

古文：唐主心愠，即命中书舍人豫章陈乔草诏行之。
现代文：南唐主心中怨恨，立即命令中书舍人豫章人陈乔起草诏书实行。
English: With resentment in his heart, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty immediately ordered Chen Qiao to draft and implement the edict.

古文：乔惶恐请见，曰： 陛下一署此诏，臣不复得见矣！ 
现代文：陈乔恐惧不安请求谒见，说： 陛下一旦签署这项诏令，我便不再能见陛下了。 
English: Chen Qiao asked for an audience with fear and anxiety, saying: Once Your Majesty signs this edict, I will no longer be able to see Your Majesty.

古文：因极言其不可。
现代文：就极力陈述不可如此的道理。
English: So I'm trying to make the case that it shouldn't be.

古文：唐主笑曰： 尔亦知其非邪？ 
现代文：南唐主笑着说： 你也知道那样不行吗？ 
English: The Lord of Southern Tang smiled and said: Do you also know that it is not possible?

古文：乃止。由是因晋王出镇，以征古为之副，觉自周还，亦罢近职。
现代文：于是作罢，因此借晋王出任藩镇之机，任命李徵古为他副手，陈觉从后周返回，也被撤销朝廷近臣之职。
English: Therefore, he took advantage of the opportunity of Jin Wang taking the position of the vassal and appointed Li Zhigu as his deputy. Chen Jie returned from the latter week and was also removed from the position of a close courtier of the imperial court.

古文：钟谟素与李德明善，以德明之死怨齐丘。及奉使归唐，言于唐主曰： 齐丘乘国之危，遽谋篡窃，陈觉、李征古为之羽翼，理不可容。 
现代文：钟谟平素与李德明要好，因为李德明的死而怨恨宋齐丘；及至奉命出使回归南唐，对南唐主进言道： 宋齐丘乘国家危难，便马上图谋篡国夺位，陈觉、李征古当他的帮手，天理不容。 
English: Zhong Muping and Li Deming were better, because he resented Song Qiqiu for the death of Li Deming; and when he was ordered to return to Southern Tang, he said to the Lord of Southern Tang: Song Qiqiu took advantage of the national crisis and immediately plotted to usurp the country and seize the throne, Chen Jue and Li Zhenggu were his helpers, which was unacceptable.

古文：陈觉之自周还，矫以帝命谓唐主曰： 闻江南连岁拒命，皆宰相严续之谋，当为我斩之。 
现代文：陈觉从后周回来，伪造后周世宗命令对南唐主说： 听说江南多年抗拒诏令，都是宰相严续的主意，必当替我斩了他。 
English: When Chen Jue returned from Hou Zhou, he forged the order of Hou Zhou Shizong and said to the lord of Southern Tang, "I heard that Jiangnan resisted the imperial edict for many years. It was all the prime minister's idea. I must have him beheaded for me."

古文：唐主知觉素与续有隙，固未之信。
现代文：南唐主明知陈觉素来与严续有矛盾，本来就不相信他的话。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang clearly knew that Chen Jue had always been in conflict with Yan Zheng, and did not believe his words.

古文：钟谟主覆之于周。唐主乃因谟复命，上言： 久拒王师，皆臣愚迷，非续之罪。 
现代文：钟谟请求到后周核对，南唐主于是通过钟谟回复命令，上言说： 长时间抗拒王师，都是我的愚昧糊涂，不是严续的罪过。 
English: Zhong Moo requested that the matter be checked the following week. The Lord of Southern Tang then replied through Zhong Moo with an order, saying: My long-term resistance to Wang Shi was due to my ignorance and confusion, not a serious sin.

古文：帝闻之，大惊曰： 审如此，则续乃忠臣，朕为天下主，岂教人杀忠臣乎！ 
现代文：后周世宗闻悉，大为惊讶，说： 确实如此的话，那严续乃是忠臣，朕为天下之主，岂能教唆人杀害忠臣呢！ 
English: When Zhou Shizong heard about this later, he was very surprised and said, "If this is true, then Yan Zheng is a loyal subject. I am the Lord of the world. How can I instigate someone to kill a loyal subject?"

古文：谟还，以白唐主。
现代文：钟谟回国，将情况禀报南唐主。
English: Zhong Mu returned to China and reported the situation to the Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：唐主欲诛齐丘等，复遣谟入禀于帝。
现代文：南唐主打算诛杀宋齐丘等人，又派遣钟谟入朝向后周世宗禀报。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty planned to kill Song Qiqiu and others, and sent Zhong Mu into the North to report to Zhou Shizong.

古文：帝以异国之臣，无所可否。
现代文：世宗因为是别国的臣子，不置可否。
English: Sejong, because he was a vassal of another country, did not say whether he could go.

古文：己亥，唐主命知枢密院殷崇义草诏暴齐丘、觉、征古罪恶，听齐丘归九华山旧隐，官爵悉如故；觉责授国子博士，宣州安置；征古削夺官爵，赐自尽；党与皆不问。
现代文：己亥，南唐主命令知枢密院殷崇义起草诏书公布宋齐丘、陈觉、李徵古的罪恶，允许宋齐丘返归九华山旧日隐居之地，官职爵位全部照旧；陈觉被贬谪授于国子博士，送往宣州安置；李徵古削夺官职爵位，赐命自杀；他们的党羽都不作追究。
English: At the same time, the Lord of Southern Tang ordered the Privy Council Yin Chongyi to draft an edict to publicize the crimes of Song Qiqiu, Chen Jue and Li Zhigu, allowing Song Qiqiu to return to the former place of seclusion on Mount Jiuhua, with all official titles and ranks as before; Chen Jue was awarded to Dr. Guozi and sent to Xuanzhou for resettlement; Li Zhigu lost his official title and rank and was sentenced to suicide; their party feathers were not investigated.

古文：遣使告于周。
现代文：派遣使者向后周报告。
English: Send an emissary to report back next week.

古文：丙午，蜀以峡路巡检制置使高彦俦为招讨使。
现代文：丙午，后蜀任命峡路巡检制置高彦俦为招讨使。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Gao Shu appointed Gao Road patrol system and appointed Gao Yanqi as the recruiting envoy.

古文：平卢节度使、太师、中书令陈王安审琦仆夫安友进与其嬖妾通，妾恐事泄，与友进谋杀审琦，友进不可，妾曰： 不然，我当反告汝。 
现代文：平卢节度使、太师、中书令陈王安审琦的车夫安友进同安审琦的爱妾私通，这个侍妾怕事情泄露，就与安友进密谋杀死安审琦，安友进认为不可，侍妾说： 不这样的话，我必定反过来告发你。 
English: The chauffeur An Youjin, who was the envoy of the Pinglu Emperor, the Grand Master, and the one who ordered Chen Wang An to be put on trial, had an affair with An Youjin's beloved concubine. This concubine was afraid that the affair would be revealed, so she conspired with An Youjin to kill An Youjin. An Youjin thought it was unacceptable, and the concubine said, "If this is not the case, I will certainly report you in turn."

古文：友进惧而从之。
现代文：安友进恐惧而听从她的主意。
English: Afraid, An You followed her advice.

古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝下显德六年
现代文：显德六年
English: Six years of Hende

古文：春，正月，癸丑，审琦醉熟寝，妾取审琦所枕剑授友进而杀之，仍尽杀侍婢在帐下者以灭口。
现代文：春季，正月，癸丑，安审琦喝醉酒熟睡，侍妾取出安审琦所枕的剑交给安友进而杀死他，并且将在帐下服侍的婢女全部杀死灭口。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, when Ugly was drunk and sleeping soundly, the concubine took out the sword on which Ugly was sleeping and gave it to An You to kill him. She also killed all the maidservants who were serving under her.

古文：后数日，其子守忠始知之，执友进等剐之。
现代文：事后数日，安审琦的儿子安守忠才知道真相，抓住安友进等人将他们凌迟处死。
English: A few days after the incident, it was not until the son of An Ziqi, An Shou Zhong, learned the truth that he caught An Youjin and others and executed them.

古文：初，有司将立正仗，宿设乐县于殿庭，帝观之，见钟磬有设而不击者，问乐工，皆不能对。
现代文：当初，有关官吏准备安放正月初一接受朝贺的仪仗礼器，前一天晚上在正殿厅堂上设置悬挂的钟磬，后周世宗前去观看，见到钟磬有挂设在那里却不敲打的，便询问乐工，都不能回答。
English: At first, the officials concerned were preparing to place the ceremonial instruments for receiving morning greetings on the first day of the first month of the year. The night before, they set up a hanging bell in the hall of the main hall. Later, Zhou Shizong went to watch. When he saw the bell hanging there but not striking, he asked the musicians, but they could not answer.

古文：乃命窦俨讨论古今，考正雅乐。
现代文：于是命令窦俨探讨研究古今有关制度，考定校正雅乐。
English: So he ordered Dou Yu to explore and study the relevant systems from ancient times to the present, and to calibrate and calibrate elegant music.

古文：王朴素音律，帝以乐事询之，朴上疏，以为： 礼以检形，乐以治心；形顺于外，心和于内，然而天下不治者未之有也。
现代文：王朴一向通晓音律，世宗询问他雅乐之事，王朴上书，认为： 礼仪是用来规范形体的，音乐是用来陶冶心灵的；形体在外表恭顺，心灵在内部平和，这样而天下还不太平的是没有的。
English: Wang Pu had always been familiar with musical rhythms. When the world asked him about elegant music, Wang Pu wrote a letter, saying: "Ritual is used to regulate the body, and music is used to cultivate the soul; the body is obedient on the outside, and the soul is peaceful on the inside. There is nothing in the world that is not peaceful."

古文：是以礼乐修于上，而万国化于下，圣人之教不肃而成，其政不严而治，用此道也。
现代文：所以礼乐在朝廷上修成实行，天下万国就会感化归服，圣人的教化不峻急而成功，圣人的政令不严厉而大治，就是由于这个道理。
English: For this reason, it is said that if the sacred music is perfected and implemented in the imperial court, all the nations of the world will be impressed into submission; if the saint's enlightenment is not precipitous, it will be successful; and if the saint's edicts are not harsh, they will be lenient.

古文：夫乐生于人心而声成于物，物声既成，复能感人之心。昔者黄帝吹九寸之管，得黄钟正声，半之为清声，倍之为缓声，三分损益之以生十二律。
现代文：那音乐产生于人的心灵而声音形成于物体的振动，物体的声音既已形成，又能反过来感化人的心灵。 从前黄帝吹九寸长的竹管，得到黄钟的正声，截去一半变为清声，加长一倍变为缓声，用增减三分之一长度的方法产生十二音律。
English: The music originates in the human mind and the sound is formed by the vibration of the object, the sound of the object has already been formed and can in turn influence the human mind. Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor blew a nine-inch-long bamboo pipe to get the positive sound of the yellow bell, cut off half to become a clear sound, doubled the length to become a muffled sound, and increased and decreased the length by one-third to produce twelve tones.

古文：十二律旋相为宫以生七调，为一均。
现代文：十二音律轮流作为宫音，都可产生七个调，成为一均。
English: The twelve-tone rhythms take turns as the palatal consonants, each of which can produce seven tones, making them equal.

古文：凡十二均，八十四调而大备。
现代文：总共有十二个均、八十四个调，从而均、调全部齐备。
English: In total, there are twelve equal temperament and eighty-four intonation, so all the equal temperament and intonation are ready.

古文：遭秦灭学，历代治乐者罕能用之。
现代文：但是遭到秦朝消灭学术的厄运，历代研习演奏音乐的人很少有能使用它的。
English: However, due to the bad luck of the Qin Dynasty's annihilation of academics, very few people who studied music performance in previous generations were able to use it.

古文：唐太宗之世，祖孝孙、张文收考正大乐，备八十四调。安、史之乱，器与工什亡八九；至于黄巢，荡尽无遗。
现代文：唐太宗的时代，祖孝孙、张文收考定校正雅乐，配齐八十四个调；安禄山、史思明作乱，乐器和乐师损失十分之八九，到了黄巢造反，便荡然无存。
English: In the era of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, An Lushan and Shi Siming made a riot, and the musical instruments and musicians were lost by eighty-nine to one-tenth. By the time of Huang Chao's rebellion, they were all gone.

古文：时有太常博士殷盈孙，按《考工记》，铸镈钟十二，编钟二百四十。处士萧承训校定石磬，今之在县者是也。
现代文：当时有太常博士殷盈孙，根据《考工记》，铸造钟十二枚、编钟二百四十枚，处士萧承训校定石磬，如今悬挂的就是。
English: At that time, there was Dr. Tai Chang Yin Ying Sun. According to "Kao Gong Ji," he cast twelve bells and chained 240 bells. The clerk Xiao Chengxun calibrated the stone coffin, which is now hanging.

古文：虽有钟磬之状，殊无相应之和，其镈钟不问音律，但循环而击，编钟、编磬徒悬而已。
现代文：虽然有钟、磬的形状，但一点都没有相应的和谐，那钟磬也不问是什么音律，只是循环敲打、编钟、编磬白白地挂着而已。
English: Although it has the shape of a bell and gong, there is no corresponding harmony at all. The gong does not care what kind of melody it is playing, it just keeps beating, chimes and chimes endlessly.

古文：丝、竹、匏、土仅有七声，名为黄钟之宫，其存者九曲。
现代文：丝、竹？土等各种质地的乐器也只有七个声音，称为黄钟之宫，保存下来的有九个曲子。
English: Silk, bamboo, clay and other musical instruments of various textures also have only seven sounds, known as the Yellow Bell Palace, with nine preserved melodies.

古文：考之三曲协律，六曲参涉诸调。盖乐之废缺，无甚于今。
现代文：校核九个曲子，三个曲子合符音律，六个曲子夹杂各种音调；音乐的旷废遗缺，没有比当今更严重的了。
English: Nine pieces of music are checked, three pieces are in tune, six pieces are mixed with various tones; the waste of music is no more serious than it is today.

古文： 陛下武功既著，垂意礼乐，以臣尝学律吕，宣示古今乐录，命臣讨论。
现代文： 陛下武功既已卓著，开始注意振兴礼乐，因为臣下曾经学过律吕之术，便公布古今音乐著录，命令臣下探讨研究。
English: His Majesty began to pay attention to the revitalization of ceremonial music since his military exploits had already been outstanding. Since his subjects had once learned the art of ryu, he published a record of ancient and modern music and ordered his subjects to explore and study it.

古文：臣谨如古法，以秬黍定尺，长九寸径三分为黄钟之管，与今黄钟之声相应，因而推之，得十二律。
现代文：臣下谨慎地按照古代的方法，用黑黍子粒来定出尺寸，长九寸、直径三分的作为黄钟律管，与当今黄钟的声音相互应合，以此推算，得出十二音律。
English: In accordance with the ancient method, the vassals carefully used the black hazelnut grain to determine the size, which was nine inches long and three minutes in diameter as the yellow bell rhythm, which corresponded to the sound of today's yellow bell. Based on this calculation, the twelve-tone rhythm was obtained.

古文：以为众管互吹，用声不便，乃作律准，十有三弦，其长九尺，皆应黄钟之声，以次设柱，为十一律，及黄钟清声，旋用七律以为一均。
现代文：因为做许多律管交替吹奏，使用听声不方便，于是制作律准，共有十三条弦，其长九尺，所有的音都应合黄钟的声音，依次设置架弦的码子，调成林钟、太簇、南吕、姑洗、应钟、蕤宾、大吕、夷则、夹钟、无射、中吕等十一音律和黄钟清声，轮番使用七个音律成为一均。
English: Because it is inconvenient to use the audible sound when playing many wind pipes alternately, a time scale was made. There are a total of thirteen strings, which are nine feet long, and all the notes should match the sound of the yellow bell. The strings are set in sequence, and they are tuned into eleven tones such as Lin bell, Tai tuft, Nan lu, Gu cai, Ying bell, Zibo bell, Big lu, Yizi bell, Pinch bell, No shot, Middle lu, etc. and the clear sound of the yellow bell. Seven tones are used in turn to make it equal.

古文：为均之主者，宫也，征、商、羽、角、变宫、变征次焉。
现代文：作为均的主音，首先是宫，其次是徵、商、羽、角、变宫、变徵。
English: As the homogeneous main tone, the first is the palace, followed by the sign, the merchant, the feather, the horn, the changing palace, the changing sign.

古文：发其均主之声，归于本音之律，迭应不乱，乃成其调，凡八十一调。
现代文：发出该均主音之声，最后回归到本音的音律，重迭应和而不杂乱，才能构成一调，总共八十一调。
English: The equal main tone is sounded, and finally the original tone is returned. The overlap should be harmonious and not chaotic, in order to form one tone, a total of eighty-one tones.

古文：此法久绝，出臣独见，乞集百官校其得失。 
现代文：这个方法长期失传，出于臣下独自见解，请求召集百官较考其得失正误。
English: This method has been lost for a long time, and out of the independent opinions of his subjects, he asked to convene a hundred officials to compare their mistakes.

古文：诏从之，百官皆以为然，乃行之。
现代文：世宗下诏采用王朴所奏旋宫之法。百官都认为是这样，于是实行。
English: Emperor Sejong issued an edict to adopt the method of playing twirling palace, which had been used by King Pak. All the officials agreed that this was the way to do it, so it was carried out.

古文：唐宋齐丘至九华山，唐主命锁其第，穴墙给饮食。
现代文：南唐宋齐丘到达九华山，南唐主下令锁上他宅第的全部门窗，在墙上挖洞供给饮食。
English: When Song Qiqiu of the Southern Tang Dynasty arrived at Jiuhua Mountain, the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty ordered to lock all the windows of his mansion and dig a hole in the wall to provide food.

古文：齐丘叹曰： 吾昔献谋幽让皇帝族于泰州，宜其及此！ 
现代文：宋齐丘叹息说： 我从前献计将吴让皇帝家族幽禁在泰州，所以今天应该到达这步田地！ 
English: Song Qiqiu sighed and said, "I used to devise a plan to imprison Emperor Wu Zhan's family in Taizhou, so I should reach this milestone today!

古文：乃缢而死。
现代文：于是上吊而死。
English: He then hanged himself.

古文：谥曰丑缪。
现代文：谥号为丑缪。
English: His nickname was Ugly.

古文：初，翰林学士常梦锡知宣政院，参预机政，深疾齐丘之党，数言于唐主曰： 不去此属，国必危亡。 
现代文：当初，翰林学士常梦锡主持宣政院事务，参预机要政务，深切痛恨宋齐丘一派，多次对南唐主说： 不除去这一帮，国家必定危险灭亡。 
English: At the beginning, Hanlin Scholar Chang Mengxi presided over the affairs of the Xuancheng Institute of Politics, and participated in important political affairs. He deeply hated the Song Qiqiu faction, and repeatedly said to the Lord of Southern Tang: If this group is not removed, the country will surely perish.

古文：与冯延己、魏岑之徒日有争论。
现代文：同冯延己、魏岑之徒每天都有争论。
English: There are daily arguments with Feng Yanji and Wei Xuan's followers.

古文：久之，罢宣政院，梦锡郁郁不得志，不复预事，日纵酒成疾而卒。
现代文：时间久了，被罢免宣政院职务，常梦锡心情忧郁不能实现抱负，不再参预朝政，纵酒狂饮成疾而去世。
English: After a long time, he was dismissed from the post of the Proclamation of the People's Republic of China, and he often dreamed that he was in a gloomy mood and could not achieve his ambition. He no longer participated in pre-diplomatic politics, and he died of alcoholism and drinking.

古文：及齐丘死，唐主曰： 常梦锡平生欲杀齐丘，恨不使见之！ 
现代文：到宋齐丘死时，南唐主说： 常梦锡生前总是想杀死宋齐丘，遗憾的是不能让他见到这一天。 
English: When Song Qiqiu died, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said: Chang Mengxi always wanted to kill Song Qiqiu when he was alive. Unfortunately, he could not see this day.

古文：赠梦锡左仆射。
现代文：追赠常梦锡为左仆射。
English: After the gift, Changmeng tin shoots with his left hand.

古文：二月，丙子朔，命王朴如河阴按行河堤，立斗门于汴口。
现代文：二月，丙子朔，后周世宗命令王朴前往河阴巡视黄河堤防，在汴水入河口建立放水闸门。
English: In February, Emperor Zhou Shizong ordered Wang Pu to go to Heyin to inspect the Yellow River embankment and establish a sluice gate at the mouth of the river.

古文：壬午，命侍卫都指挥使韩通、宣徽南院使吴廷祚，发徐、宿、宋、单等州丁夫数万浚汴水。
现代文：壬午，命令侍卫都指挥使韩通、宣徽南院使吴延祚，征发徐州、宿州、宋州、单州等地壮丁民夫数万人疏通汴水。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third month, he ordered the commander of the Imperial Guards to send Han Tong and the commander of the Southern Court of Xuanhui to send Wu Yanqi, and conscripted and dispatched tens of thousands of able-bodied men from Xuzhou, Suzhou, Songzhou, and Shanzhou to dredge the floodplain.

古文：甲申，命马军都指挥使韩令坤自大梁城东导汴水入于蔡水，以通陈、颍之漕，命步军都指挥使袁彦浚五丈渠东过曹、济、梁山泊，以通青、郓之漕，发畿内及滑、亳丁夫数千以供其役。
现代文：甲申，命令马军都指挥使韩令坤从大梁城东面引汴水流入蔡水，来打通陈州、颍州的运粮水道，命令步军都指挥使袁彦疏通五丈渠，向东经过曹州、济州、梁山泊，以打通青州、郓州的运粮水道，征发京城所辖地区之内和滑州、亳州壮丁民夫数千人来提供给这些工程。
English: Gao Shen ordered the commander of the Horse Army to make Han Lingkun divert the water from the eastern side of Dalian City into Cai Shui to open the grain transportation waterway of Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, and ordered the commander of the Foot Army to make Yuan Yan clear the Wuzhang Canal, pass eastward through Caozhou, Jeju and Liangshan to open the grain transportation waterway of Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, and solicit thousands of people in the areas under the jurisdiction of Beijing City and Zhuangzhou and Zhangzhou to provide these projects.

古文：丁亥，开封府奏田税旧一十万二千馀顷，今按行得羡田四万二千馀顷，敕减三万八千顷。
现代文：丁亥，开封府奏报征取租税的田地原为十万二千余顷，如今核查得到多出的田地有四万二千余顷，后周世宗敕令减免租税三万八千顷。
English: Dinghai, according to the report of the Kaifeng prefecture, the fields for which tax was originally levied amounted to more than 102,000 hectares. Now, more than 42,000 hectares of fields have been verified, and the tax reduction and exemption of 38,000 hectares has been ordered by Zhou Shizong.

古文：诸州行田使还，所奏羡田，减之仿此。
现代文：各州巡视苗田使者回来，所奏报多出的田地，减免租税的比例仿照开封府。
English: When the envoys returned from their inspection of the fields in Naida, they reported that the number of fields had increased, and the proportion of tax reductions and exemptions was similar to that of Kaifeng.

古文：淮南饥，上命以米贷之。
现代文：淮南闹饥荒，后周世宗命令把粮食借贷给百姓。
English: After the famine in Huainan, Zhou Shizong ordered to lend grain to the people.

古文：或曰： 民贫，恐不能偿。 
现代文：有人说： 百姓贫穷，恐怕不能偿还。 
English: Some people say: the people are poor, so I'm afraid they can't repay.

古文：上曰： 民吾子也，安有子倒悬而父不为之解哉！
现代文：世宗说： 百姓是我的子女啊，哪有子女倒悬在那里而父亲不为他解脱的道理呢！
English: Sejong said, "The people are my children. What child hangs there and the father does not free him?"

古文：安在责其必偿也！ 
现代文：哪个在要求百姓必定偿还呢！ 
English: Who is demanding that the people must be repaid?

古文：庚申，枢密使王朴卒。
现代文：三月，戊申，枢密使王朴去世。
English: In March, Wushin, the Privy Councilor Wang Pu passed away.

古文：上临其丧，以玉钺卓地，恸哭数四，不能自止。
现代文：后周世宗亲临他的丧礼，用玉钺击地，痛哭多次，不能自制。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong attended his funeral in person, hit the ground with a jade hammer, cried many times, and could not control himself.

古文：朴性刚而锐敏，智略过人，上以是惜之。
现代文：王朴生性刚强而敏锐，智谋韬略超过常人，后周世宗因此爱惜他。
English: Wang Paksheng was tough and keen, and his intelligence was slightly higher than that of ordinary people. Later, Zhou Shizong cherished him for this.

古文：甲子，诏以北鄙未复，将幸沧州，命义武节度使孙行友扞西山路，以宣徽南院使吴廷祚权东京留守、判开封府事，三司使张美权大内都部署。
现代文：甲子，后周世宗诏令因北部领土没有收复，将要亲临沧州，命令义武节度使孙行友捍卫西山路，任命宣徽南院使吴延祚代理东京留守、判开封府事，三司使张美代理大内都部署。
English: Gao Zi, after Zhou Shizong's edict because the northern territory had not been recovered, will personally visit Cangzhou, order the Yiwu Festival to make Sun Xingyong defend the West Mountain Road, appoint the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui to make Wu Yanjun stay in Tokyo as a representative, decide to seal the government affairs, and deploy the Three Divisional Envoys Zhang Mei as a representative of the Inner Capital.

古文：丁卯，命侍卫亲军都虞侯韩通等将水陆军先发。
现代文：丁卯，命令侍卫亲军都虞候韩通等人率领水路、陆路军队出先。
English: Dingwu ordered the bodyguards of the pro-army to wait for Han Tong and others to lead the waterway and land army to go first.

古文：甲戌，上发大梁。
现代文：甲戌，后周世宗从大梁出发。
English: Kuching, and later Zhou Shizong set out from Daliang.

古文：夏，四月，庚寅，韩通奏自沧州治水道入契丹境，栅于乾宁军南，补坏防，开游口三十六，遂通瀛、莫。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚寅，韩通奏报从沧州修治水道进入契丹国境，在乾宁军南面设置栅栏，修补损坏堤防，挖开排水口三十六个，于是直通瀛州、莫州。
English: In the summer, in April, Gyeong-in and Hantong Son Newspaper repaired the waterway from Cangzhou to enter the border of Khitan, set up a fence on the south side of the Qianning Army, repaired the damaged dike, dug 36 drainage outlets, and then went straight to Luzhou and Mozhou.

古文：辛卯，上至沧州，即日帅步骑数万发沧州，直趋契丹之境。
现代文：辛卯，世宗到达沧州，当日率领步兵、骑兵数万人从沧州出发，直奔契丹国境。
English: Xinwu and Shizong arrived in Cangzhou. On the same day, they led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry from Cangzhou and headed straight for the Khitan border.

古文：河北州县非车驾所过，民间皆不之知。
现代文：黄河以北的州县不是世宗车马所过之处，当地百姓都不知道皇帝出征。
English: The prefectures and counties north of the Yellow River were not places where Shizong's chariots and horses passed, and the local people did not know that the emperor had gone to war.

古文：壬辰，上至乾宁军，契丹宁州刺史王洪举城降。
现代文：壬辰，世宗到达乾宁军，契丹宁州刺使王洪率城投降。
English: In Imjin, Shizong arrived at the Qianling army, and the Qidan Ningzhou assassinated Wang Hong and led the city to surrender.

古文：乙未，大治水军，分命诸将水陆俱下，以韩通为陆路都部署，太祖皇帝为水路都部署。
现代文：乙未，世宗大力整治水军，分别命令众将水、陆两路同时而下，任命韩通为陆路都部署，宋太祖皇帝为水路都部署。
English: Bt Wei, Shizong vigorously rectified the navy, ordered the crowd to take the water and land routes at the same time, appointed Han Tong as the land route deployment, and Emperor Song Taizu as the water route deployment.

古文：丁酉，上御龙舟沿流而北，舳舻相连数十里。
现代文：丁酉，世宗乘坐龙船沿着水流北上，船只头尾相接长达数十里。
English: Ding Xuan and Shizong rode the dragon boat northward along the current, and the boats followed each other for dozens of miles.

古文：己亥，至独流口，溯流而西。
现代文：己亥，到达独流口，又沿水道向西。
English: Jihai, reached the mouth of the single stream, and then followed the waterway to the west.

古文：辛丑，至益津关，契丹守将终廷晖以城降。
现代文：辛丑，到达益津关，契丹守将终廷辉率城投降。
English: Sin ugly, arrived in Yetsuguan, the Khitan governor will eventually surrender the city led by Tinghui.

古文：自是以西，水路渐隘，不能胜巨舰，乃舍之。
现代文：自是以西，水路渐隘，不能胜巨舰，乃舍之。
English: Since it is in the west, the waterway is getting narrower and narrower, it cannot beat the giant ship, but it does not care.

古文：壬寅，上登陆而西，宿于野次，侍卫之士不及一旅，从官皆恐惧。
现代文：壬寅，上登陆而西，宿于野次，侍卫之士不及一旅，从官皆恐惧。
English: Minshin, landing on the west side, staying in Noji, the guards are less than a trip, and the officials are afraid.

古文：胡骑连群出其左右，不敢逼。
现代文：胡人骑兵成群结队在周围出没，但不敢靠近。
English: Hordes of wildebeest cavalry circled, but they dared not approach.

古文：癸卯，太祖皇帝先至瓦桥关，契丹守将姚内斌举城降，上入瓦桥关。
现代文：癸卯，宋太祖皇帝先到达瓦桥关，契丹守将姚内斌率城投降，世宗进入瓦桥关。
English: However, Emperor Song Taizu arrived at the tile bridge first, the Khitan commander Yao Neibin led the city to surrender, and Shizong entered the tile bridge.

古文：内斌，平州人也。
现代文：姚内斌是平州人。
English: Yao Neibin is from Pingzhou.

古文：甲辰，契丹莫州刺史刘楚信举城降。
现代文：甲辰，契丹莫州刺史刘楚信率城投降。
English: The city surrendered under the leadership of Liu Chuxin, the governor of Jiachen and Qidammo.

古文：正月，乙巳朔，侍卫亲军都挥使、天平节度使李重进等始引兵继至，契丹瀛州刺史高彦晖举城降。
现代文：五月，乙巳朔，侍卫亲军都指挥使、天平节度使李重进等人开始领兵陆续到达，契丹瀛州刺史高彦晖率城投降。
English: In May, at the dawn of the new year, Li Shujin and others began to arrive one after another to lead the troops, with the commanding envoys of the bodyguards and relatives of the troops, and with the rise of the balance of power, and the city surrendered under the leadership of the Khitan statesman, Gao Zhishi, and Gao Yanjun.

古文：彦晖，蓟州人也。
现代文：高彦晖是蓟州人。
English: Gao Yanjun is from Zhangzhou.

古文：于是关南悉平。
现代文：从此瓦桥关以南全部平定。
English: Since then, everything south of the tile bridge has been pacified.

古文：丙午，宴诸将于行宫，议取幽州。诸将以为： 陛下离京四十二日，兵不血刃，取燕南之地，此不世之功也，今虏骑皆聚幽州之北，未宜深入。 
现代文：丙午，世宗在行宫宴请众将，商议夺取幽州，众将认为： 陛下离开京城四十二天，兵不血刃，取得燕南之地，这是罕见的功绩。如今契丹骑兵都集结到幽州北面，不宜继续深入。 
English: In the afternoon of the third day, King Sejong invited the generals to a palace banquet to discuss the capture of Yuzhou. The generals thought: His Majesty left the capital for forty-two days, without bloodshed, and gained the land of Yan'nan, which is a rare achievement. Now the Khitan cavalry are gathered to the north of Yuzhou, it is not appropriate to continue to go deeper.

古文：上不悦。
现代文：世宗不高兴。
English: Wenzong was not happy with Chen Yigang's words.

古文：是日，趣先锋都指挥使刘重进先发，据固安。上自至安阳水，命作桥，会日暮，还宿瓦桥，是日，上不豫而止。
现代文：当天，世宗催促先锋都指挥使刘重进首先出发，占据固安；世宗亲自到达安阳水岸边，命令架桥，到天色已晚，返回瓦桥关住宿，当天，世宗身体不适而停止进军。
English: On the same day, Shizong urged the vanguard to command Liu Chongjin to go first and occupy Gu'an; Shizong personally arrived at the shore of Anyang Water, ordered the bridge to be built, and returned to Wapiao Pass to stay when it was too late. On the same day, Shizong was unwell and stopped marching.

古文：契丹主遣使者日驰七百里诣晋阳，命北汉主发兵挠周边，闻上南归，乃罢兵。
现代文：契丹主派遣使者日行七百里赶到晋阳，命令北汉主发兵骚扰后周边境，并说世宗南下返归，于是休兵。
English: The Khitan lord sent an envoy seven hundred miles a day to rush to Jinyang, ordered the North Han lord to send troops to harass the Hou Zhou border, and said that Shizong returned to the south, so he left the army.

古文：戊申，孙行友奏拔易州，擒契丹刺史李在钦，献之，斩于军市。
现代文：戊申，孙行友奏报拔取易州，擒获契丹刺史李在钦、献给皇上，在军营的市场中斩首。
English: In Wushan, Sun Xingyong reported that he captured Yizhou, captured the Qidan's assassin Li Zaiqin, presented him to the emperor, and beheaded him in the market of the military camp.

古文：己酉，以瓦桥关为雄州，割容城、归义二县隶之。以益津关为霸州，割文安、大城二县隶之。
现代文：己酉，将瓦桥关改为雄州，割出容城、归义二县隶属于它；将益津关改为霸州，割出文安、大城二县隶属于它。
English: In Jiwu, the tile bridge pass was changed to Xiongzhou, and the two counties of Rongcheng and Guiyi were attached to it; the Yizhong Pass was changed to Bazhou, and the two counties of Wen'an and Dacheng were attached to it.

古文：发滨、棣丁夫数千城霸州，命韩通董其役。
现代文：征发滨州、棣州壮丁民夫数千人修筑霸州城，命令韩通监督工程。
English: He conscripted and dispatched thousands of Binzhou and Zhangzhou Zhuangding Minfu to build Bazhou City, and ordered Hantong to supervise the project.

古文：庚戌，命李重进将兵出土门，击北汉。
现代文：庚戌，命令李重进领兵从土门而出，进攻北汉。
English: Geng Yao ordered Li Chongjin to lead the troops out of the gate and attack the Northern Han.

古文：辛亥，以侍卫马步都指挥使韩令坤为霸州都部署，义成节度留后陈思让为雄州都部署，各将部兵以戍之。
现代文：辛亥，任命侍卫马步都指挥使韩令坤为霸州都部署，义成节度使留后陈思让为雄州都部署，各自率领所部士兵守卫。
English: Xinhai, appointed guard Ma Budu commander Han Lingkun to deploy for the hegemony of the state, and Yicheng Jiedu to deploy Chen Sijian for the hegemony of the state, each leading the soldiers guarding the headquarters.

古文：壬子，上自雄州南还。
现代文：壬子，世宗从雄州南下返回。
English: Imoko, Sejong returned from the south of Yungju.

古文：己巳，李重进奏败北汉兵于北井，斩首二千馀级。
现代文：己巳，李重进奏报在百井击败北汉军队，斩首二千余级。
English: At that time, Li Chongjin defeated the Northern Han army in Baiji and beheaded more than two thousand people.

古文：甲戌，帝至大梁。
现代文：甲戌，世宗到达大梁。
English: Armor-clad, Sejong reaches the girders.

古文：六月，乙亥朔，昭义节度使李筠奏击北汉，拔辽州，获其刺史张丕。
现代文：六月，乙亥朔，昭义节度使李筠奏报进攻北汉，拔取辽州，擒获辽州刺史张丕。
English: In June, Yi Hai Shuo and Zhaoyi Jiedu led the Li Xi Song Pao to attack Northern Han, take Liaozhou, and win the Liaozhou Zhishi Zhang Xi.

古文：丙子，郑州奏河决原武，命宣徽南院使吴延祚发近县二万馀夫塞之。
现代文：丙子，郑州奏报黄河在原武决口，命令宣徽南院使吴延祚征发附近县二万多民夫堵塞决口。
English: According to the Zhengzhou report, the Yellow River was at the Huanwu cut-off, and the Southern Court of Xuanhui ordered Wu Yanxuan to conscript more than 20,000 people from nearby counties to block the cut-off.

古文：唐清源节度使留从效遣使入贡，请置进奏院于京师，直隶中朝。戊寅，诏报以 江南近服，方务绥怀，卿久奉金陵，未可改图。
现代文：南唐清源节度使留从效派遣使者入朝进贡，请求在京城设置进奏院，直接隶属中央朝廷，诏书回复说： 江南新近归服，正在设法安抚，爱卿长久侍奉金陵，不可改变注意。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's Qingyuan Festival sent an envoy to the North to pay tribute, requesting the establishment of a music hall in the capital, directly subordinated to the central court. The imperial decree replied: Jiangnan has recently surrendered and is trying to appease, Aiqing has long served Jinling, attention must not be changed.

古文：若置邸上都，与彼抗衡，受而有之，罪在于朕。
现代文：倘若在京城设置进奏院官邸，同金陵相抗衡，接受你而拥有了你的泉州，罪过就在朕身上。
English: If I set up the official residence of Shinsoin in Beijing to compete with Jinling, accept you and own your Quanzhou, the fault is on me.

古文：卿远修职贡，足表忠勤，勉事旧君，且宜如故。
现代文：爱卿远道而来进奉贡品，足以表示忠诚勤勉，努力事奉旧日君主，应该一切如故。
English: Aicheng came all the way to pay tribute, which is enough to show that he is loyal, diligent, and strives to serve the old monarch. Everything should be as it was.

古文：如此，则于卿笃始终之义，于朕尽柔远之宜，惟乃通方，谅达予意， 唐主遣其子纪公从善与钟谟俱入负，上问谟曰： 江南亦治兵，修守备乎？ 
现代文：这样的话，对于爱卿来说可以加深始终如一的情义，对于朕来说可以尽到安抚四方的义务，希望你通情达理，体谅明白朕的本意。 南唐主派遣他的儿子纪公李从善与钟谟一道入朝进贡，世宗问钟谟说： 江南也在操练军队进行战备吗？ 
English: In this way, for Aiqing, it is possible to deepen the consistent sentiment, and for me, it is possible to fulfill the obligation to appease the four parties. I hope you will be reasonable and understand my intention. The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent his son, Ji Gong Li Cong Son, together with Zhong Mu, to pay tribute to the North. Shizong asked Zhong Mu: Is the South of the Yangtze River also training troops for war?

古文：对曰： 既臣事大国，不敢复尔。 
现代文：回答说： 既已臣事大国，不敢再这样了。 
English: He replied, "Having been the vassal of a great power, I dare not do so again."

古文：上曰： 不然，曏时则为仇敌，今日则为一家，吾与汝国大义已定，保无它虞。然人生难期，至于后世，则事不可知。
现代文：世宗说： 不对。昔日是仇敌，今日已成一家，我朝同你们国家的名分大义已经确定，保证没有其它变故；然而人生难以预料，至于后世，则事情更不可知晓。
English: Sejong said, "That's not true. Formerly we were enemies, but today we have become a family. I and your country's destiny have been determined, and I guarantee that nothing else will change. However, life is unpredictable, and as for the future, things are even more unpredictable."

古文：归语汝主：可及吾时完城郭，缮甲兵，据守要害，为子孙计。 
现代文：回去对你家君主说：可以趁着我在的时候加固城郭，修缮武器，据守要塞，为子孙后代着想。 
English: Go and speak to your lord, saying, While I yet live, let it please my lord to fortify the city, to strengthen the weapons, and to keep the walls for the generations to come.

古文：谟归，以告唐主。
现代文：钟谟回国，将世宗的话禀告南唐主。
English: Zhong Mo returned to China and denounced Shizong's words to the Lord of Southern Tang.

古文：唐主乃城金陵，凡诸州城之不完者葺之，戍兵少者益之。
现代文：南唐主于是修建金陵城墙，凡是各州城池有不坚固的便整治修理，守卫士兵少的便补充增加。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then built the Jinling city wall. If any of the cities in the states were not solid, they were repaired, and if there were fewer soldiers guarding them, they were supplemented.

古文：臣光曰：或问臣：五代帝王，唐庄宗、周世宗皆称英武，二主孰贤？
现代文：臣司马光曰：有人问臣下，五代帝王之中，唐庄宗、周世宗都号称英武，两位君主中谁更贤明？
English: The subject Sima Guang said: Some people asked the subjects, among the five generations of emperors, Tang Zhuozong and Zhou Shizong are both known as Yingwu, who is wiser among the two monarchs?

古文：臣应之曰：夫天子所以统治万国，讨其不服，抚其微弱，行其号令，壹其法度，敦明信义，以兼爱兆民者也。
现代文：臣下回答说：天子统治万方国家，讨伐不肯降服者，安抚微小虚弱者，实行其号令，统一其法度，敦厚信用、昭明大义，是用以兼爱亿万百姓的。
English: The vassal replied: The Son of Heaven rules the nations of the world, fights those who refuse to surrender, pacifies the small and weak, carries out His decrees, unifies His laws, has strong credibility and clarifies the great justice, and is used to love hundreds of millions of people.

古文：庄宗既灭梁，海内震动，湖南马氏遣子希范入贡，庄宗曰： 比闻马氏之业，终为高郁所夺。
现代文：唐庄宗灭亡梁以后，天下震动，湖南马殷派遣儿子马希范入朝进贡，唐庄宗说： 近来听人说马氏的家业，终将被高郁所夺取。
English: After the death of Tangzhuangzong Liang, the whole world was shaken. Hunan Ma Yin sent his son Ma Xi Fan to the court to pay tribute. Tangzhuangzong said: Recently, I heard that Ma's family business would eventually be seized by Gao Yu.

古文：今有儿如此，郁岂能得之哉？ 
现代文：如今他有这样的儿子，高郁怎么能得到马氏家业呢？ 
English: Now that he has such a son, how can Gao Yu get the Ma family business?

古文：郁，马氏之良佐也。
现代文：高郁是马氏的优秀辅佐大臣。
English: Gao Yu is Ma's outstanding vice-minister.

古文：希范兄希声闻庄宗言，卒矫其父命而杀之，此乃市道商贾之所为，岂帝王之体哉！
现代文：马希范的哥哥马希声听说唐庄宗的话，结果假造他父亲的命令杀死了高郁。这只是街市中道路上的行商坐贾所干的事，哪里是帝王的风度啊！
English: Ma Xifan's brother, Ma Xisheng, heard of Tang Zhuangzong's words, and as a result, he forged his father's order to kill Gao Yu. This is just what the hawkers on the road in the street market did, what is the emperor's demeanor!

古文：盖庄宗善战者也，故能以弱晋胜强梁，既得之，曾不数年，外内离叛，置身无所。
现代文：唐庄宗是个善于打仗的人，所以能以弱小的晋国战胜强大的梁国，但是取得梁国以后，居然不出几年，众叛亲离，没有安身之处。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was good at war, so he was able to defeat the powerful Liang Province with the weak Jin Province. However, after the acquisition of Liang Province, in just a few years, all the relatives left and there was no place to settle down.

古文：诚由知用兵之术，不知为天下之道故也。
现代文：实在是因为只知用兵方术，而不知治理天下道理的缘故啊。
English: It's really because they only know how to use military tactics, but don't know how to govern the world.

古文：世宗以信令御群臣，以正义责诸国，王环以不降受赏，刘仁赡以坚守蒙褒，严续以尽忠获存，蜀兵以反覆就诛，冯道以失节被弃，张美以私恩见疏。江南未服，则亲犯矢石，期于必克，既服，则爱之如子，推诚尽言，为之远虑。
现代文：周世宗以信用驾驭群臣，以正义要求各国，王环因不投降而受奖赏，刘仁赡因坚守不屈而蒙褒扬，严续因尽忠报国获得生存，后蜀士兵因朝三暮四而被杀戮，冯道因丧失臣节被遗弃，张美因私人恩惠而被疏远；江南没有归服，就亲身冒着飞失流石，抱定必胜的信念，降服以后，便像对待子女那样地爱护，推心置腹地把话说尽，为之作长远考虑。
English: Zhou Shizong used his trust to control his vassals and demanded justice from all countries. Wang Huan was rewarded for not surrendering, Liu Renyi was praised for his unyielding adherence, and continued to survive for his loyalty to the country. Later Shu soldiers were killed because of the morning, afternoon, and evening. Feng Dao was abandoned because of the loss of vassalage, and Zhang Mei was alienated because of personal favors. When Jiangnan did not surrender, he personally braved the rapids and held the conviction of victory. After surrendering, he loved them as if they were his children, put his heart into his words, and made long-term considerations

古文：其宏规大度，岂得与庄宗同日语哉！
现代文：他的宏伟规制，博大襟怀，哪能与唐庄宗同日而语啊！
English: His magnificent regulation, broad-mindedness, how can he speak the same language as Tangzhuangzong!

古文：《书》曰： 无偏无党，王道荡荡。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 不要偏袒不要结党，为王之道浩浩荡荡。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Do not favoritism, do not form a party, for the king's way is vast.

古文：又曰： 大邦畏其力，小邦怀其德。 
现代文：又说： 大国畏惧它的实力，小国怀念他的恩德。 
English: He also said, "Great nations fear his strength, small nations remember his kindness."

古文：世宗近之矣！
现代文：周世宗可谓接近《尚书》上的话了。
English: Zhou Shizong is close to the words in the Shangshu.

古文：辛巳，建雄节度使杨廷璋奏出北汉，降堡寨一十三。
现代文：辛巳，后周建雄节度使杨廷璋奏报进攻北汉，降服十三个堡寨。
English: Soon after, Zhou Jianxiong ordered Yang Tingtao to attack Northern Han and subjugate thirteen fortresses.

古文：癸未，立皇后符氏，宣懿皇后之女弟也。
现代文：癸未，后周世宗立符氏为皇后，她是宣懿皇后的妹妹。
English: Later, Zhou Zongli Fu became the empress. She was the younger sister of Empress Xuan Zang.

古文：立皇子宗训为梁王，领左卫上将军，宗让为燕王，领左骁卫上将军。
现代文：后周世宗立皇子柴宗训为梁王，兼领左卫上将军，柴宗让为燕公，兼领左骁卫上将军。
English: Later, Zhou Zonglian's son, Chai Zongxun, became the Prince of Liang and the commander of the Left Division, while Chai Zongzhan became the Prince of Yan and the commander of the Left Division.

古文：上欲相枢密使魏仁浦，议者以仁浦不由科第，不可为相。
现代文：后周世宗打算任用枢密使魏仁浦为宰相，参预商议的人认为魏仁浦不从科举及第，不可以担任宰相。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong planned to appoint Wei Rimpu, a privy councilor, as prime minister. Those who participated in the preliminary discussions believed that Wei Rimpu did not pass the imperial examination and, therefore, could not serve as prime minister.

古文：上曰： 自古用文武才略为辅佐，岂尽由科第邪！ 
现代文：世宗说： 自古以来任用有文才武略的人作为辅佐，哪里全是从科举及第的呢！ 
English: Sejong said: Since ancient times, people with literary talent and strategy have been appointed as assistants. Where are all those who have passed the imperial examinations?

古文：己丑，加王溥门下侍郎，与范质皆参知枢密院事。
现代文：己丑，王溥加官门下侍郎，与范质都参预主持枢密使院事务。
English: He was an ugly man, a valet to the king's officials, and he presided over the affairs of the Privy Council together with his father.

古文：以仁浦为中书侍郎、同平章事，枢密使如故。
现代文：任命魏仁浦为中书侍郎、同平章事，枢密使之职照旧。
English: Wei Rimpu was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Tongping Zhangji, and the Privy Council continued his duties as before.

古文：仁浦虽处权要而能谦谨，上性严急，近职有忤旨者，仁浦多引罪归己以救之，所全活什七八。故虽起刀笔吏，致位宰相，时人不以为忝。
现代文：魏仁浦虽然处身权力要津而能谦虚谨慎，世宗性格严厉急躁，周围官员有违反旨意的，魏仁浦大多将罪过归于自己来拯救他们，所保全救活的占十分之七八，所以虽然出身于办理文书的小吏，官至宰相，但当时人们并不认为耻辱。
English: Although Wei Rimpu was born into a position of power, he was able to be modest and prudent. He was a stern and impatient man, and the officials around him were against his will. Wei Rimpu mostly took the blame on himself to save them. Seventy-eight out of ten were saved. Therefore, although he was born as a clerk, an official and a prime minister, people did not think it was a disgrace at the time.

古文：又以宣徽南院使吴延祚为左骁卫上将军，充枢密使。加归德节度使、侍卫亲军都虞候韩通、镇宁节度使兼殿前都点检张永德并同平章事，仍以通充侍卫亲军副都指挥使；以太祖皇帝兼殿前都点检。
现代文：又任命宣徽南院使吴延祚为左骁卫上将军，充任枢密使；归德节度使、侍卫亲军都虞候韩通和镇宁节度使兼殿前都点检张永德都加官同平章事，并任命韩通充任侍卫亲军副都指挥使；任命宋太祖皇帝兼任殿前都点检。
English: In addition, the Southern Court of the State Council of Hunan Province appointed Wu Yanqian as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards to serve as the envoy of the Privy Council; Han Tong and Zhan Ning as the envoys of the Festival of the Return to Germany and the Guards of the Imperial Guards; Zhang Yongde as the official of the same rank before the palace; Han Tong as the deputy commander of the Guards of the Imperial Guards; and Emperor Song Taizu as the envoy of the Imperial Guards before the palace.

古文：上尝问大臣可为相者于兵部尚书张昭，昭荐李涛。
现代文：世宗曾经问兵部尚书张昭，大臣中何人可为宰相，张昭举荐李涛。
English: Shizong once asked Zhang Zhao, the secretary of the military department, which of the ministers could be the prime minister, and Zhang Zhao recommended Li Tao.

古文：上愕然曰： 涛轻薄无大臣体，朕问相而卿首荐之，何也？ 
现代文：世宗惊愕地说： 李涛为人轻薄没有大臣的风度，朕问宰相人选而爱卿首先荐举他，为什么？ 
English: Surprised, Sejong said, "Li Tao is frivolous and does not have the demeanor of a minister. I asked for a prime minister candidate, but Aiqing recommended him first. Why?

古文：对曰： 陛下所责者细行也，臣所举者大节也。
现代文：回答说： 陛下所指责的是小事，臣下所荐举的是他的大节。
English: He replied, "What your majesty accuses me of is a small matter, but what your vassal recommends me to do is his great duty.

古文：昔晋高祖之世，张彦泽虐杀不辜，涛累疏请诛之，以为不杀必为国患；汉隐帝之世，涛亦上疏请解先帝兵权。
现代文：从前晋高祖之世，张彦泽滥杀无辜，李涛屡次上疏请求杀他，认为不杀必定成为国家祸患；到汉隐帝之世，李涛也上书请求解除先帝太祖的兵权。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, Zhang Yanzhe indiscriminately killed innocent people. Li Tao repeatedly petitioned Shang Su to kill him, believing that not to kill would surely become a national calamity. During the reign of Emperor Han, Li Tao also petitioned to remove Emperor Taizu's military power.

古文：夫国家安危未形而能见之，此真宰相器也，臣是以荐之。 
现代文：国家的安危还没有形成便能预见，这才是真正宰相的人材，臣下因此荐举他。 
English: The country's safety and security can be predicted before it is formed. This is the true prime minister's talent, and his subjects therefore recommend him.

古文：上曰： 卿言甚善且至公，然如涛者，终不可置之中书。 
现代文：世宗说： 爱卿之言很好而且极为公正，然而像李涛这样的人，终究无法安置在中书省。 
English: Sejong said, "Aicheng's words are very good and very fair, but people like Li Tao can't be resettled in the People's Republic of China after all.

古文：涛喜诙谐，不修边幅，与弟澣俱以文学著名，虽甚友爱，而多谑浪，无长幼体，上以是薄之。
现代文：李涛喜欢说笑逗乐，不拘小节，与弟弟李浣以文章博学而著名，虽然互相很友爱，却常常调笑放浪，没有长幼的规矩，世宗因此轻视他。
English: Li Tao likes to joke and amuse, regardless of the details. He and his brother Li Yao are famous for their erudite articles. Although they are very friendly with each other, they often joke and wander. There is no rule for growing up, so Shizong despised him.

古文：上以翰林学士单父王著幕府旧僚，屡欲相之，以其嗜酒无检而罢。
现代文：世宗因为翰林学士单父人王著是从前幕府的僚属，多次想用他为相，但又因他嗜好喝酒不检点而作罢。
English: Because King Sejong, the bachelor of Hanlin, was a former shogun's retainer, he wanted to use him as a pharaoh many times, but he had to give up because of his penchant for drinking.

古文：癸巳，大渐，召范质等入受顾命。
现代文：癸巳，世宗病情加剧恶化，召见范质等人入宫接受遗嘱。
English: Soon after, Sejong's condition worsened, and he summoned the prince and others to the palace to receive the will.

古文：上曰： 王著籓邸故人，朕若不起，当相之。 
现代文：世宗说： 王著是我在藩镇府第的老人，朕若一病不起，应当起用他为宰相。 
English: Sejong said, "Wang He is my old man in the town of the domain. If I become ill, I should appoint him as prime minister.

古文：质等出，相谓曰： 著终日游醉乡，岂堪为相！
现代文：范质等人出宫，相互说： 王著终日醉生梦死，哪配当宰相！
English: When the princes and others came out of the palace, they said to each other: "The king is drunk all day, living and dreaming, what is a prime minister!

古文：慎毋泄此言。 
现代文：千万不要泄露这话。 
English: Don't you dare leak this.

古文：是日，上殂。
现代文：当天，世宗去世。
English: On the same day, Sejong passed away.

古文：上在籓，多务韬晦，及即位，破高平之寇，人始服其英武。
现代文：世宗在藩镇时，很注意韬晦，及至即皇帝之位，在高平大破北汉入侵之敌，人们开始佩服他的英勇神武。
English: When Sejong was in the han town, he paid great attention to the ambiguity, and when he became the emperor, he defeated the enemy of the North Han invasion in Gaoping, and people began to admire his heroic martial arts.

古文：其御军，号令严明，人莫敢犯，攻城对敌，矢石落其左右，人皆失色，而上略不动容。应机决策，出人意表。
现代文：他统率军队，纪律严明，没有人敢违反，攻打城市面对敌寇，飞石流矢落在身边，别人都惊慌失色而世宗面不改色镇定自若；应付机变决定策略，出人意料之外。
English: He led the army, strict discipline, no one dares to violate, attacking the city in the face of the enemy, flying stones and arrows fall on the side, others are panicked and lose their color, but the world does not change color, calm and self-possessed; coping with change determines strategy, unexpected.

古文：又勤于为治，百司簿籍，过目无所忘。发奸擿伏，聪察如神。
现代文：又勤勉治国，各个部门的簿籍，过目不忘，发现奸人粉碎隐患，洞察秋毫犹如神明。
English: He is also diligent in governing the country. He keeps an eye on the books of all departments, discovers traitors and crushes hidden dangers. He is as insightful as a god.

古文：闲暇则召儒者读前史，商榷大义。
现代文：闲暇之时便召见儒生文人诵读前代史书，商榷其中主旨大义。
English: In their spare time, Confucian scholars are called upon to recite ancient history books, discussing the great meaning behind them.

古文：性不好丝竹珍玩之物，常言太祖养成王峻、王殷之恶，致君臣之分不终，故群臣有过则面质责之，服则赦之，有功则厚赏之。
现代文：生性不喜好乐器、珍宝一类东西。经常说先帝太祖姑息惯养酿成王峻、王殷的大恶，致使君臣的情分有始无终，所以百官群臣有过失就当面对质斥责，服罪改过就赦免他，有功就重赏他。
English: It is often said that the former emperors and great-grandfathers indulged in indulgence and nurture, resulting in the great evils of Wang Jun and Wang Yin, which caused the feelings of the monarchs and ministers to have no beginning and no end. Therefore, hundreds of officials and ministers confronted and rebuked him for his mistakes, pardoned him for his sins, and rewarded him for his merits.

古文：文武参用，各尽其能，人无不畏其明而怀其惠，故能破敌广地，所向无前。
现代文：文武人材一齐任用，各人发挥自己的才能，大家无不畏服他的严明而又怀念他的恩惠，所以能攻破敌国拓广领土，所向披靡，一往无前。
English: He appointed a team of literary and military personnel, each of whom gave full play to their talents. They all fearlessly obeyed his strictness and missed his grace. Therefore, they were able to break through the enemy's territory and expand it. They were invincible and never moved forward.

古文：然用法太严，群臣职事小有不举，往往置之极刑，虽素有才干声名，无所开宥，寻亦悔之，末年浸宽。
现代文：然而使用刑法过于严厉，百官群臣奉职办事稍有做得不好的，往往处以极刑，即使平素再有才干名望，也没有一点宽容，不久自己也觉后悔，最后几年逐渐放宽。
English: However, the use of criminal law was too severe, and hundreds of officials and ministers did not perform their duties well, and were often punished with capital punishment. Even if they had talent and reputation, they did not have a little tolerance. Soon they felt regret, and gradually relaxed in the last few years.

古文：登遐之日，远迩哀慕焉。
现代文：去世之日，四方远近都哀悼仰慕他。
English: On the day of his death, people from far and wide mourned and admired him.

古文：甲午，宣遗诏，命梁王宗训即皇帝位，生七年矣。
现代文：甲午，宣布遗诏，诏令梁王柴宗训即皇帝之位，柴宗训出生至此七岁了。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liang Wang Chai Zongxun, who was seven years old at the time of his birth, was proclaimed emperor.

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，以侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进领淮南节度使，副都指挥使韩通领天平节度使，太祖皇帝领归德节度使。
现代文：秋季七月，壬戌，后周恭帝任命侍卫亲军都指挥使李重进兼领淮南节度使，副都指挥使韩通兼领天平节度使，宋太祖皇帝兼领归德节度使。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Zhou Qian appointed Li Chongjin, the commander of the imperial guard, to lead the Huainan Festival, the deputy commander of the imperial guard, Han Tong, to lead the Tianping Festival, and Emperor Song Taizu, to lead the Gui De Festival.

古文：以山南东道节度使、同平章事向拱为西京留守。庚申，加拱兼侍中。
现代文：任命山南东道节度使、同平章事向拱为西京留守；庚申，向拱加官兼任侍中。
English: He appointed Shannan to be the host of the festival and Tongping Zhang to stay in Xijing for Xianggong; Goshun, Xianggong's second-in-command, also served as an attendant.

古文：拱，即向训也，避恭帝名改焉。
现代文：向拱就是向训，避恭帝名讳而改名。
English: Xiangqong is Xiangxun, who changed his name to avoid the reputation of Emperor Qianlong.

古文：丙寅，大赦。
现代文：丙寅，后周实行大赦。
English: Cui Yin, amnesty will be implemented next week.

古文：唐主以金陵去周境才隔一水，洪州险固居上游，集群臣议徙都之。
现代文：南唐主因金陵距后周国境只隔一长江之水，而洪州地势险要坚固，居于长江上游，便召集群臣商议迁都。
English: Due to the fact that only one Yangtze River water separates Jinling from the surrounding border, and Hongzhou is located in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, the lord of Southern Tang convened a group of ministers to discuss the relocation of the capital.

古文：群臣多不欲徙，惟枢密副使、给事中唐镐劝之，乃命经营豫章为都城之制。
现代文：群臣大多数不愿意迁都，只有枢密副使、给事中唐镐鼓励迁都，于是命令按照都城的体制来规划豫章。
English: Most of the courtiers did not want to move the capital, only the vice-minister of the privy council, Tang Xizhong, encouraged them to move the capital, so he ordered to plan Yuzhang according to the system of the capital.

古文：唐自淮上用兵及割江北，臣事于周，岁时贡献，府藏空竭，钱益少，物价腾贵。
现代文：南唐自从惟上动用军队和割让长江以北土地，向后周臣服以来，每年按时上贡进献，国库储备空虚耗尽，钱币越来越少，而物价猛涨。
English: Since the Southern Tang Dynasty used its army and ceded the land north of the Yangtze River to the Western Zhou Dynasty, it has paid tribute on time every year. The treasury reserves have been depleted, coins have become increasingly scarce, and prices have skyrocketed.

古文：礼部侍郎钟谟请铸大钱，一当五十。中书舍人韩熙载请铸铁钱。唐主始皆不从，谟陈请不已，乃从之。
现代文：礼部侍郎钟谟请求铸造大钱，一当五十，中书舍人韩熙载请求铸造铁钱；南唐主开始都不采纳，钟谟陈述请求不止，于是听从。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Zhong Moo, requested the minting of large money, and when he was fifty, the Chinese scholar Han Xizai requested the minting of iron money; the Southern Tang Dynasty did not accept it at first, Zhong Moo made more and more requests, so he obeyed.

古文：是月，始铸当十大钱，文曰 永通泉货 ，又铸当二钱，文曰 唐国通宝 ，与开元钱并行。
现代文：当月，开始铸造一当十的大钱，钱上文字为 永通泉货 ，又铸造一当二的钱，钱上文字为 唐国通宝 ，与唐开元钱同时通行。
English: In the same month, the minting of one-to-ten large money began, with the words "Yongtong Spring Goods" on the money, and the minting of one-to-two money, with the words "Tang Guotong Bao" on the money, and the passage of Tang Kaiyuan.

古文：八月，戊子，蜀主以李昊领武信节度使，右补阙李起上言： 故事，宰相无领方镇者。 
现代文：八月，戊子，后蜀主任命李昊兼领武信节度使，右补阙李起上奏说： 旧例，宰相没有兼领方镇的。 
English: In August, Wu Zi, after the appointment of Li Hao and the leader of Wuxin as the chief envoy, said: In the past, the prime minister did not have the leader of Fangzhen.

古文：蜀主曰： 昊家多冗费，以厚禄优之耳。 
现代文：后蜀主说： 李昊家有许多零碎化费，只是藉以增加俸禄优待他罢了。 
English: After the meeting, Master Shu said: Li Hao's family has a lot of piecemeal expenses, but it is just to treat him favorably by increasing his salary.

古文：起，邛州人，性婞直，李昊尝语之曰： 以子之才，苟能慎默，当为翰林学士。 
现代文：李起是邛州人，生性耿直，李昊曾经对他说道： 凭你的才能，如果能谨慎沉默，应当做翰林学士。 
English: Li Qi is a native of Zhangzhou, born with a straightforward nature. Li Hao once said to him: With your talent, if you can be discreet and silent, you should be a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：起曰： 俟无舌，乃不言耳。 
现代文：李起说： 只有等我没舌头了，才能不说话。 
English: Li Qi said, "I can't stop talking until I lose my tongue."

古文：庚寅，立皇弟宗让为曹王，更名熙让；熙谨为纪王，熙诲为蕲王。
现代文：庚寅，后周恭帝立皇弟柴宗让为曹王，改名为熙让；封柴熙谨为纪王，柴熙诲为蕲王。
English: Later, Emperor Zhou Enlai made the emperor's younger brother, Chai Zongzhang, the king of Cao and changed his name to Xizang; he made Chai Xizang the king of Ji and Chai Xizang the king of Yao.

古文：九月，丙午，唐太子弘冀卒，有司引浙西之功，谥曰武宣。
现代文：九月，丙午，南唐太子李弘冀去世，有关官员引举他浙西的战功，将谥号定为武宣。
English: In September, on the afternoon of the 3rd, Li Hongji, the prince of Southern Tang, died. The relevant officials cited his military exploits in western Zhejiang and designated his posthumous name as Wu Xuan.

古文：句容尉全椒张洎上言： 太子之德，主于孝敬，今谥以武功，非所以防微而慎德也。 
现代文：句容县尉全椒人张洎上奏说： 太子的德行，主要在于孝敬，如今却根据武功而定谥号，不符合防微杜渐而注重德行的原则。 
English: Zhang Xuanjun, a county official of Guorong County, said: The virtue of the prince is mainly in filial piety, but now it is determined according to martial arts, which is not in line with the principle of prevention and gradual improvement while focusing on virtue.

古文：乃更谥曰文献，擢洎为上元尉。
现代文：于是改谥号为文献；提升张洎为上元县尉。
English: As a result, his title was changed to literature, and he was promoted to Shangyuan County Lieutenant.

古文：唐礼部侍郎、知尚书省事钟谟数奉使入周，传世宗命于唐主，世宗及唐主皆厚待之，恃此骄横于其国，三省之事皆预焉。
现代文：南唐礼部侍郎、知尚书省事钟谟多次奉命出使进入后周，将后周世宗命令传达给南唐主，世宗和南唐主都厚待他，钟谟仗恃这些在国中骄横跋扈，尚书、中书、门下三省事务都加干预。
English: Zhong Mu, the attendant of the South Tang Rectification Department and the Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the

古文：文献太子总朝政，谟求兼东宫官不得，乃荐其所善阎式为司议郎，掌百司关启。
现代文：文献太子总理朝政时，钟谟请求兼任东宫官职没得到，于是荐举与他相好的阎式为司议郎，掌握各个部门奏报文书。
English: Literature When the Crown Prince and Prime Minister was in power, Zhong Moo's request to concurrently hold the official post of the East Palace was not granted, so Yan Shih, who was a good friend of him, was recommended as the chairman and mastered the documents of various departments.

古文：李德明之死也，唐镐预其谋，谟闻镐受赇，尝面诘之，镐甚惧。
现代文：李德明之死，唐镐参预其中阴谋，钟谟闻悉唐镐接受贿赂，曾经当面质问他，唐镐很恐惧。
English: Li Deming's death, Tang Xuan was involved in the conspiracy. Zhong Mu learned that Tang Xuan accepted bribes, and once questioned him face to face. Tang Xuan was very afraid.

古文：谟与天威都虞候张峦善，数于弘第屏人语至夜分，镐谮诸唐主曰： 谟与峦气类不同，而过相亲狎，谟屡使上国，峦北人，恐其有异谋。 
现代文：钟谟与天威都虞候张峦亲善，多次在私宅中屏避他人谈到半夜，唐镐对南唐主说他们的坏话： 钟谟与张峦的气质族类不同，但来往非常亲密，钟谟多次出使中原，张峦是北方人，恐怕他们有不同寻常的阴谋。 
English: Zhong Moo and Zhang Ye, the governor of Tianwei, were friendly with each other. They often avoided others in their private homes. When they talked about the middle of the night, Tang Ye spoke ill of them to the lord of Southern Tang. Zhong Moo and Zhang Ye were different in temperament and race, but they were very close. Zhong Moo had been sent to the Central Plains many times, and Zhang Ye was a northerner. I'm afraid they had an unusual plot.

古文：又言： 永通大钱民多盗铸，犯法者众。 
现代文：又说：  永通泉货 字样的大钱民间有很多人伪造，犯法的人不少。 
English: He also said: Many people forged the words "Yongtong Spring Goods" and broke the law.

古文：及文献太子卒，唐主欲方其母弟郑王从嘉，谟尝与纪公从善同奉使于周，相厚善，言于唐主曰： 从嘉德轻志懦，又酷信释氏，非人主才。
现代文：到文献太子去世，南唐主准备立他同母弟郑王李从嘉为继承人，钟谟曾经和纪公李从善一同奉命出使到后周，相互关系深厚友善，钟谟对南唐主说： 李从嘉德行轻浮志趣懦弱，又酷信佛教，不是当人主的材料。
English: At the time of the death of the Prince of Literature, the Lord of Southern Tang was preparing to appoint his maternal half-brother, Zheng Wang Li Cong Jia, as his successor. Zhong Mu and Ji Gong Li Cong Shan had been ordered to go on a mission together the following week. They had a deep and friendly relationship. Zhong Mu said to the Lord of Southern Tang: Li Cong Jia is frivolous and cowardly, and he is a strong believer in Buddhism. He is not fit to be the Lord.

古文：从善果敢凝重，宜为嗣。 
现代文：李从善果敢决断、凝炼持重，应该做继承人。 
English: Li Congzeng dared to be decisive, steadfast, and should be the successor.

古文：唐主由是怒。
现代文：南唐主因此发怒。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang therefore became angry.

古文：寻徙从嘉为吴王、尚书令、知政事，居东宫。
现代文：不久改封李从嘉为吴王，尚书令、知政事、居住东宫。
English: Soon after, Li Congjia was given the title of King of Wu, and he became the ruler, the governor, and the resident of the East Palace.

古文：冬，十月，谟请令张峦以所部兵巡徼都城。
现代文：冬季，十月，钟谟请求命令张峦率所部军队巡逻京城。
English: In the winter, in October, Zhong Mo requested to order Zhang Ye to lead the army of the headquarters to patrol the capital.

古文：唐主乃下诏暴谟侵官之罪，贬国子司业，流饶州，贬张峦为宣州副使，未几，皆杀之。
现代文：南唐主就下诏书披露钟谟越职侵权的罪状，将他贬谪为国子司业，流放饶州，贬谪张峦为宣州副使，不久，将他们都杀了。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty issued an edict to expose Zhong Mo as being guilty of abuse of power, demoted him to the position of secretary of state, exiled him to Raozhou, demoted Zhang Ye to vice-envoy to Xuanzhou, and soon killed them all.

古文：废永通钱。
现代文：废止永通钱。
English: Yongtong money will be abolished.

古文：十一月，壬寅朔，葬睿武孝文皇帝于庆陵，庙号世宗。
现代文：十一月，壬寅朔，后周在庆陵安葬睿武孝文皇帝，庙号为世宗。
English: November, Ren Yin Shuo, and the following week, Emperor Wu Xiaowen was buried in Qingling Mausoleum. The temple's name was Shizong.

古文：南汉主以中书舍人钟允章，籓府旧僚，擢为尚书右丞、参政事，甚委任之。
现代文：南汉主因中书舍人钟允章是藩镇府第的旧日幕僚。故提升他为尚书右丞、参政事，十分重用他。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty, Zhong Yunzhang, who was a schoolteacher in the Middle Han Dynasty, was a former Japanese staff member of the town government of the domain. Therefore, he was promoted to Shoshu Ujo and a member of the government, and he was highly valued.

古文：允章请诛乱法者数人以正纲纪，南汉主不能从，宦官闻而恶之。
现代文：钟允章请求诛杀扰乱法令者多人来肃正朝廷纲纪，南汉主不能听从，宦官听说后憎恨他。
English: Zhong Yunzhang requested that many people who disrupted the law be killed to rectify the discipline of the imperial court. The Southern Han ruler could not obey, and the eunuchs hated him after hearing about it.

古文：南汉主将祀圜丘，前三日，允章帅礼官登坛，四顾指挥设神位，内侍监许彦真望之曰： 此谋反也！ 
现代文：南汉主准备在圜丘祭天，祭祀前三日，钟允章带领礼官登上祭坛，四处观察指挥安设神主牌位，内侍监许彦真望见此情说： 这是阴谋造反啊！ 
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty was preparing to hold a festival of deities at Mengqiu, and on the third day before the sacrifice, Zhong Yunzhang led the etiquette officer to the altar, observed the commander placing the god's head plaque everywhere, and the chamberlain Xu Yanzang saw this situation and said: This is a conspiracy to rebel!

古文：即带剑登坛，允章叱之。
现代文：立即带着剑登上祭坛，钟允章叱责他。
English: He immediately climbed onto the altar with his sword, and Zhong Yunzhang scolded him.

古文：彦真驰入宫，告允章欲于郊祀日作乱。
现代文：许彦真飞驰入宫，报告钟允章准备在祭天的日子发动叛乱。
English: Xu Yanzhen flew into the palace and reported that Zhong Yunzhang was preparing to launch a rebellion on the day of the festival.

古文：南汉主曰： 朕待允章厚，岂有此邪！ 
现代文：南汉主说： 朕待钟允章优厚，岂能有这种事情！ 
English: The Southern Han lord said, "I am waiting for Zhong Yunzhang to be generous, how can such a thing happen!

古文：玉清宫使龚澄枢、内侍监李托等共证之，以彦真言为然，乃收允章，系含章楼下，命宦者与礼部尚书薛用丕杂治之。
现代文：玉清宫使龚澄枢、内侍监李托等人共同作证，认为许彦真的话是对的，南汉主就拘捕钟允章，关押在含章楼下，命令宦官和礼部尚书薛用丕共同审讯他。
English: The Jade Emperor's palace made Gong Cheng Zu, the chamberlain Li Tuo and others jointly testify that Xu Yan's true words were correct. The Southern Han lord arrested Zhong Yunzhang and detained him in the lower floor of the Hanzhang, and ordered the eunuch and the etiquette department Shang Shuxue to interrogate him together.

古文：用丕素与允章善，告以必不免，允章执用丕手泣曰： 老夫今日犹机上肉耳，分为仇人所烹。
现代文：薛用丕平素与钟允章友善，告诉他必定不能免死，钟允章抓住薛用丕的手流泪说： 老夫今日如同案板上的肉罢了，本该被仇人所宰割烹煮。
English: Xue was friendly with Zhong Yunzhang and told him that he must not be spared death. Zhong Yunzhang grabbed Xue's hand with tears and said: The old man is just like meat on the board today. He should have been slaughtered and cooked by the enemy.

古文：但恨邕、昌幼，不知吾冤，及其长也，公为我语之。 
现代文：只恨钟邕、钟昌年纪幼小，不知道我的冤屈，等到他们长大了，您替我告诉他们。 
English: I only hate that Zhong Rong and Zhong Chang are young and don't know about my grievances. When they grow up, you can tell them for me.

古文：彦真闻之，骂曰： 反贼欲使其子报仇邪！ 
现代文：许彦真听说这话，骂道： 反贼还想让他的儿子报仇呢！ 
English: When Xu Han Zhen heard this, he scolded: The rebel still wants his son to take revenge!

古文：复白南汉主曰： 允章与二子共登坛，潜有所祷。 
现代文：便又禀告南汉君主说： 钟允章同他两个儿子共同登上祭坛，暗中有别的祈祷。 
English: He then reported to the Southern Han Emperor: "Zhong Yunzhang and his two sons ascended the altar together, and there were other prayers in the background.

古文：俱斩之。
现代文：于是将他们全都斩首。
English: He then beheaded them all.

古文：自是宦官益横。
现代文：从此宦官益发骄横。
English: From then on, eunuchs became more and more arrogant.

古文：李托，封州人也，辛亥，南汉主祀圜丘，大赦。
现代文：李托是封州人。辛亥，南汉主在圜丘祭天，宣布大赦。
English: Lito was from Fuzhou. Xinhai, the Southern Han Emperor, proclaimed an amnesty at the Mengqiu Festival.

古文：未几，以龚澄枢为左龙虎观军容使、内太师，军国之事皆取决焉。
现代文：不久，任命龚澄枢为左龙虎观军容使、内太师，军队国家的事情全部取决于他。
English: Soon after, Gong Chenghu was appointed as the envoy of the Left Dragon and Tiger Army, the Inner Grand Master, and the affairs of the army and the country all depended on him.

古文：凡群臣有才能及进士状头或僧道可与谈者，皆先下蚕室，然后得进，亦有自宫以求进者，亦有免死而宫者，由是宦者近二万人。
现代文：凡是文武百官有才能的和进士第一名、或和尚道士谈得来的，都先下到施宫刑的蚕室，然后才能进用，也有自行阉割来请求进用的，也有赦免死罪而接受宫刑的，因此宦官接近二万人。
English: All the literati and military officials who had the talent to negotiate with the first-ranked eunuch, or the monks and Taoists, first went to the silkworm room of the palace punishment, and then they could use it. There were also self-castration to request the use, and there were also those who pardoned the death penalty and accepted the palace punishment. Therefore, there are nearly 20,000 eunuchs.

古文：贵显用事之人，大抵皆宦者也，谓士人为门外人，不得预事，卒以此亡国。
现代文：尊贵显赫当政的人，大多是宦官，称读书人为门外人，不得参预政事，结果南汉因此亡国。
English: Most of the dignified and prominent people in power were eunuchs, who called the readers outsiders and were not allowed to participate in pre-election politics. As a result, the Southern Han Dynasty fell.

古文：唐更命洪州曰南昌府，建南都，以武清节度使何敬洙为南都留守，以兵部尚书陈继善为南昌尹。
现代文：南唐将洪州改名叫做南昌府，建立南都，任命武清节度使何敬洙为南都留守，任命兵部尚书陈继善为南昌尹。
English: Nantang changed the name of Hongzhou to Nanchang Prefecture, established the southern capital, appointed Wu Qing Jiedu to make He Jingyi stay as the southern capital, and appointed the military secretary Chen Jishan as Nanchang Yin.

古文：周人之攻秦、凤也、蜀中忷惧。都官郎中徐及甫自负才略，仕不得志，阴结党与，谋奉前蜀高祖之孙少府少监王令仪为主以作乱，会周兵退而止。
现代文：后周人进攻秦州、凤州时，后蜀国中人心惶惶；都官郎中徐及甫以有雄才大略而自负，仕途坎坷不得志，便暗中勾结党羽，阴谋拥立前蜀高祖的孙子少府少监王令仪为君主来发动叛乱，适逢后周军队撤退而作罢。
English: Later, when the Zhou people attacked Qin and Fengzhou, the people of the Later Shu Kingdom were panicked. The officials Zhong Xu and Fu, who were arrogant and boasted of their great talents, had a bumpy career, so they secretly colluded with the party and plotted to set up the grandson of the former Shu Gaozu, Shao Fu and Shao Guan Wang Ling Yi, as the monarch to launch the rebellion. When the Later Shu army retreated, they abandoned the plan.

古文：至是，其党有告者，收捕之，及甫自杀。
现代文：到这时，他同党中有告发的，就拘捕了他，徐及甫自杀。
English: At this time, one of his party members reported him to the police, who arrested him, and Xu Ji Fu committed suicide.

古文：十二月，甲午，赐令仪死。
现代文：十二月，甲午，后蜀主赐王令仪自杀。
English: In December, in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Wang Lingyi committed suicide.

古文：端明殿学士、兵部侍郎窦仪使于唐，天雨雪，唐主欲受诏于庑下。
现代文：端名殿学士、兵部侍郎窦仪出使到南唐，天下大雪，南唐主准备在廊檐下接受诏书。
English: Duan Mingtian, a scholar, and Dou Yi, an attendant of the military department, were dispatched to Southern Tang. It was snowing heavily, and the ruler of Southern Tang was preparing to receive the imperial rescript under the eaves of the corridor.

古文：仪曰： 使者奉诏而来，不敢失旧礼。
现代文：窦仪说： 使者奉持诏书而来，不敢有失从前旧礼。
English: Dou Yi said: The envoys came with the imperial rescript and did not dare to break the old ritual.

古文：若雪沾服，请俟它日。 
现代文：倘若害怕雪花沾上衣服，请求等待他日。 
English: If you're worried about snow getting on your clothes, ask to wait another day.

古文：唐主乃拜诏于庭。
现代文：南唐主于是在殿前庭院拜受诏书。
English: The Emperor of Southern Tang then received the imperial decree in the courtyard in front of the palace.

古文：契丹主遣其舅使于唐，泰州团练使荆罕儒募刺客使杀之。
现代文：契丹主派遣他的舅舅出使到南唐，泰州团练使荆罕儒招募刺客杀他。
English: The Khitan lord sent his uncle on a mission to southern Tang, and the Taizhou regimental drill sent Jing Hanru to recruit assassins to kill him.

古文：唐人夜宴契丹使者于清风驿，酒酣，起更衣。久不返，视之，失其首矣。
现代文：南唐人夜晚在清风驿宴请契丹使者，酒喝到酣畅时，使者起身出去解手，许久不回，前往探视，使者已失去了头颅。
English: In the evening, the Southern Tang invited the Khitan envoy to a feast in the breeze. When the wine was drunk, the envoy got up and went out to relieve himself. He did not return for a long time and went to visit. The envoy had lost his head.

古文：自是契丹与唐绝。
现代文：从此契丹与南唐断绝关系。
English: From then on, Khitan cut off relations with Southern Tang.

古文：罕儒，冀州人也。
现代文：荆罕儒是冀州人。
English: Jing Hanru is from Jizhou.

