古文：陈仲举尝叹曰： 若周子居者，真治国之器。
现代文：陈仲举曾经赞叹说： 周子居这个人，在治理国家上面确实很有才能。
English: Chen Zhongzhu once said with admiration: Zhou Ziru, this person, is indeed very talented in governing the country.

古文：譬诸宝剑，则世之干将。 
现代文：用宝剑来打比方，他就是当代的干将。 
English: To use a sword as an analogy, he is a contemporary go-getter.

古文：世目李元礼： 谡谡如劲松下风。 
现代文：世人评论李元礼说： 像挺拔的松树下呼啸而过的疾风，肃肃有声。 
English: People around the world commented on Li Yuanli, saying, "Like the rushing wind whistling under the towering pine trees, there is a solemn sound.

古文：谢子微见许子将兄弟曰： 平舆之渊，有二龙焉。 
现代文：谢子微看见许子将兄弟俩，便说： 平舆县的深潭里有两条龙呢。 
English: Xie Ziwei saw Xu Ziying and the two brothers and said: There are two dragons in the deep lake of Pingwu County.

古文：见许子政弱冠之时，叹曰： 若许子政者，有干国之器。
现代文：他看见许子政年轻时的样子，赞叹说： 像许子政这个人，有治国的才能。
English: He saw the appearance of Xu Zicheng when he was young and said with admiration: Like Xu Zicheng, this person has the talent to govern the country.

古文：正色忠謇，则陈仲举之匹；伐恶退不肖，范孟博之风。 
现代文：态度严正，忠诚正直，这点和陈仲举相当；打击坏人，斥退品行不端的人，这又有范孟博的风度。 
English: Strict attitude, loyalty and honesty, this is comparable to Chen Zhongzhu; fight the bad guys, repel the bad guys, this has the style of Fan Mengbo.

古文：公孙度目邴原：所谓云中白鹤，非燕雀之网所能罗也。
现代文：公孙度评价邴原说： 他他就像空中的白鹤，不是用捕燕雀的网所能捕到的。 
English: "He's like a white crane in the sky, something you can't catch with a bird net," said Gong Sun Do, commenting on Hao Yuan.

古文：钟士季目王安丰：阿戎了了解人意。
现代文：钟士季评论安丰侯王戎说： 阿戎聪明伶俐，总是善解人意。 
English: Commenting on Anfeng Hou Wang Rong, Zhong Shiji said: A Rong is clever and always understanding.

古文：谓裴公之谈，经日不竭。
现代文：又评论说： 裴公善谈，一整天也谈不完。 
English: He also commented: "Pei Gong is a good talker, and he can talk all day long.

古文：吏部郎阙，文帝问其人于钟会。会曰： 裴楷清通，王戎简要，皆其选也。 于是用裴。
现代文：吏部郎这个职位空出来了，晋文帝司马昭问钟会谁是适当的人选，钟会回答说： 裴楷清廉通达，王戎能掌握要领而处事简约，都是适当的人选。 于是委任裴楷。
English: When the post of librarian became vacant, the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty, Sima Zhao, asked the Bell Association who would be a suitable candidate. The Bell Association replied, "Pei Kai, who is clean and honest, and Wang Rong, who can grasp the essentials and deal with simple matters, are both suitable candidates." Therefore, they appointed Pei Kai.

古文：王浚冲、裴叔则二人，总角诣钟士季。须臾去后，客问钟曰： 向二童何如？ 
现代文：王戎、裴楷两人童年时拜访钟士季，一会儿就走了，走后，有位客人间钟士季说： 刚才那两个小孩怎么样？ 
English: Wang Rong and Pei Kai visited Zhong Shiji when they were children. They left after a short while. After leaving, a guest said to Zhong Shiji, "How were those two children just now?

古文：钟曰： 裴楷清通，王戎简要。
现代文：钟说： 裴楷清廉通达，王戎简约扼要。
English: Zhong said: "Pei Kai is clear and transparent, and Wang Rong is concise.

古文：后二十年，此二贤当为吏部尚书，冀尔时天下无滞才。 
现代文：二十年以后，这两位贤才应该做吏部尚书。希望那时候天下没有被遗漏的人才。 
English: Twenty years later, these two geniuses should be the top officials of the Ministry of Education. I hope that at that time, there will be no missing talent in the world.

古文：谚曰： 后来领袖有裴秀。 
现代文：谚语说： 后起的领军人物是裴秀。 
English: A proverb says: The rising leader is Pei Xiu.

古文：裴令公目夏侯太初： 肃肃如入廊庙中，不修敬而人自敬。 
现代文：中书令裴楷评论夏侯太初说： 好像进入朝廷一样端庄严肃，人们无心加强敬意，就能让人自然的肃然起敬。 
English: Commenting on Xia Hou's ascension to the throne, Liangning Pei Kai said at the beginning of the year: As if entering the imperial court is as dignified and serious, people have no intention of strengthening respect, it can make people naturally respect.

古文：一曰： 如入宗庙，琅琅但见礼乐器。
现代文：另一种说法是： 就像进入宗庙之中，琳琅满目，只看见礼器和乐器。 
English: Another way of putting it is: It's like entering the ancestral temple, your eyes are flooded with beauty, and all you can see are the ritual objects and musical instruments.

古文：见钟士季，如观武库，但睹矛戟。
现代文：又评论说： 看见钟士季，好像参观武器库，矛戟森森，全是兵器。
English: He also commented, "Seeing Zhong Shijie is like visiting an arsenal, full of spears, full of weapons.

古文：见傅兰硕，江廧靡所不有。
现代文：看见傅兰硕，像是看见一片汪洋，浩浩荡荡，无所不有。
English: Seeing Furanso is like seeing a vast ocean, vast and tumultuous, everywhere.

古文：见山巨源，如登山临下，幽然深远。 
现代文：看见山巨源，好像登上山顶往下看，幽然深远。 
English: Seeing the source of the mountain is like climbing to the top of the mountain and looking down. It is so far away.

古文：羊公还洛，郭奕为野王令。羊至界，遣人要之。郭便自往。
现代文：羊祜回到洛阳去，郭奕担任野王县县令，羊祜到界的时候，派人邀请郭奕，郭奕就亲自前往。
English: When Guo Yi returned to Luoyang, Guo Yi became the county magistrate of Wild King County. When Guo Yi arrived at the border, he sent someone to invite Guo Yi, and Guo Yi went there in person.

古文：既见，叹曰： 羊叔子何必减郭太业！ 
现代文：见面后，郭奕赞叹说： 羊叔子何必要不如我郭太业呢！ 
English: After the meeting, Guo Yi said with admiration: "Why does Yang Shuzi need Guo Taiye as much as I do?

古文：复往羊许，小悉还，又叹曰： 羊叔子去人远矣！ 
现代文：过后再前往羊祜住所，不多久便回去，又赞叹道： 羊叔子远远超过一般人啊！ 
English: Afterward, he went to Sheep's residence, and soon returned, and praised: "Uncle Sheep is far more than an ordinary person!

古文：羊既去，郭送之弥日，一举数百里，遂以出境免官。
现代文：羊祜走了，郭奕整天都送他，一送就送了几百里，终于因为出了县境被免官。
English: After the shepherd had left, Guo Yi saw him off all day long, sending him hundreds of miles at a time, until he was finally relieved of his duties for leaving the county.

古文：复叹曰： 羊叔子何必减颜子！ 
现代文：他仍旧赞叹道： 羊叔子何必定比颜子差呢！ 
English: He still marveled and said, "Why is it that the son of a sheep must be worse than the son of a pig?"

古文：王戎目山巨源： 如璞玉浑金，人皆钦其宝，莫知名其器。 
现代文：王戎评论山巨源说： 他就像璞玉和金矿，人人都看重它是宝物，可是没有谁知道该给它取个什么名字。 
English: Wang Rong commented on Shan Jiuyuan: "It is like a precious stone and a gold mine. Everyone values it as a treasure, but no one knows what name to give it.

古文：羊长和父繇，与太傅祜同堂相善，仕至车骑掾。
现代文：羊羊忱的父亲羊繇和太傅羊祜是堂兄弟，彼此很友爱，羊繇做官做到车骑将军府的属官，很早就去世了。
English: Yang Yangzhen's father, Yang Xuan, and Tai Fu Yang Xuan were cousins, and they loved each other very much. Yang Xuan was an official of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and he died very early.

古文：蚤卒。长和兄弟五人，幼孤。
现代文：长和兄弟五人，年纪很小就成了孤儿。
English: He and his five brothers were orphaned at an early age.

古文：祜来哭，见长和哀容举止，宛若成人，乃叹曰： 从兄不亡矣！ 
现代文：羊祜来哭丧，看见长和那种悲痛的神情举止，像个成年人，便叹道： 堂兄没有死，后继有人了！ 
English: The shepherd came to mourn, and when he saw the long face and the sorrowful demeanor, like an adult, he sighed: My cousin is not dead, I have a successor!

古文：山公举阮咸为吏部郎，目曰： 清真寡欲，万物不能移也。 
现代文：山涛推荐阮咸出任吏部郎，他评价阮咸说： 他非常的真挚，没有多少私欲，任何事物都改变不了他的志向。 
English: He said of Nguyn Ánh: "He is very sincere, has few selfish desires, and nothing can change his aspiration.

古文：王戎目阮文业： 清伦有鉴识，汉元以来，未有此人。 
现代文：王戎评论阮文业说： 他清高，通伦理，有知人论世之明，从汉初以来还没有这样的人。 
English: Commenting on Nguyn Văn Nhn, Wang Rong said, "He is a man of high moral character, a man of ethics, a man of knowledge, and a man with a clear view of the world. There has not been such a man since the beginning of the Han Dynasty.

古文：武元夏目裴、王曰： 戎尚约，楷清通。 
现代文：武元夏评论裴楷、王戎两人说： 王戎注重简要，裴楷清廉通达。 
English: Commenting on Pei Kai and Wang Rong, Wu Yuanxia said: Wang Rong focuses on brevity, while Pei Kai is clear and thorough.

古文：庾子嵩目和峤： 森森如千丈松，虽磊砢有节目，施之大厦，有栋梁之用。 
现代文：庚子嵩评论和峤说： 他好像高耸入云的千丈青松，虽然圪节累累，如果用它来盖高楼，却是非常有用的栋梁之才。 
English: Commenting on Geng Zi Song, he said: "He is like a towering pine tree. Although he is tired, if you use him to build a tall building, he is a very useful talent.

古文：王戎云： 太尉神姿高彻，如瑶林琼树，自然是风尘外物。 
现代文：王戎说： 太尉的风度仪态高雅清澈，好象晶莹的玉树，自然是尘世之外的人物。 
English: Wang Rong said: The captain's demeanor is elegant and clear, like a crystal clear jade tree. Naturally, he is an otherworldly figure.

古文：王汝南既除所生服，遂停墓所。
现代文：汝南内史王湛守孝期满，脱下孝服后，便留在墓地结庐居住。
English: At the end of his term of filial piety, after taking off his filial piety robe, the historical king of southern China, Wang Zhan, remained in the cemetery and lived in a coffin.

古文：兄子济每来拜墓，略不过叔，叔亦不候。
现代文：他哥哥王浑的儿子王济每次来扫墓，大部下去看望叔叔，叔叔也不等待他来。
English: Every time his brother Wang Hun's son Wang Ji came to sweep the graves, most of them went down to visit their uncle, but the uncle did not wait for him to come.

古文：济脱时过，止寒温而已。
现代文：王济有时偶尔去看望一下，也只是寒暄几句罢了。
English: Wang Zi sometimes occasionally visits, but only to say a few words of greeting.

古文：后聊试问近事，答对甚有音辞，出济意外，济极惋愕。
现代文：后来姑且试着问问近来的事，答时起来言语辞致都很不错，出乎王济意料之外，王济非常惊愕；继续和他谈论，愈谈倒愈进入了精深的境界。
English: Later, he even tried to ask about recent events, and when he answered, his words and expressions were very good. Unexpectedly, Wang Ji was very surprised; he continued to talk with him, and the more he talked, the more he entered the realm of sophistication.

古文：仍与语，转造清微。济先略无子侄之敬，既闻其言，不觉懔然，心形俱肃。
现代文：王济原先对叔叔几乎没有一点晚辈的敬意，听了叔叔的谈论后，不觉肃然起敬，神情举止都变得严肃恭谨了。
English: Wang Ji originally had little respect for his uncle as a younger generation. After listening to his uncle's talk, he was unconsciously awestruck, and his demeanor became serious and respectful.

古文：遂留共语，弥日累夜。
现代文：便留下来和叔叔谈论，一连多日，没日没夜地谈。
English: He stayed and talked with his uncle, day and night, for days and days.

古文：济虽俊爽，自视缺然，乃喟然叹曰： 家有名士，三十年而不知！ 
现代文：王济虽然才华出众，性情豪爽，却也觉得自己缺少点什么，于是感慨地叹息说： 家中有名士，可是三十年来一直不知道！ 
English: Although Wang Ji's talent is outstanding and his temperament is magnificent, he also feels that he lacks something, so he sighed with emotion and said: There is a famous person in my family, but I haven't known him for thirty years!

古文：济去，叔送至门。
现代文：王济要走了，叔叔送他到门口。
English: Wang Jie was about to leave, and his uncle walked him to the door.

古文：济从骑有一马，绝难乘，少能骑者。
现代文：王济的随从中有一匹烈马，非常难驾驭，很少有人能骑它。
English: Wang Zi's entourage included a fierce horse, which was very difficult to control, and few people could ride it.

古文：济聊问叔： 好骑乘不？ 
现代文：王济姑且问他叔： 喜欢骑马吗？ 
English: Wang Jigu asked his uncle: Do you like riding horses?

古文：曰： 亦好尔。 
现代文：他叔叔说： 也喜欢呀。 
English: His uncle said: I like it too.

古文：济又使骑难乘马，叔姿形既妙，回策如萦，名骑无以过之。
现代文：王济又让叔叔骑那匹难驾驭的烈马，他叔父不但骑马的姿势美妙，而且甩动起鞭子来就像条带子似的回旋自如，就是著名的骑手也没法超过他。
English: Wang Zi also let his uncle ride the difficult-to-ride horse. His uncle not only has a wonderful riding posture, but also swings the whip like a belt. Even a famous rider can't beat him.

古文：济益叹其难测，非复一事。
现代文：王济更加赞叹叔叔难以估世，他的长处绝不只一种。
English: Wang Jie was even more impressed by the fact that his uncle was difficult to evaluate. He had more than one kind of strength.

古文：既还，浑问济： 何以暂行累日？ 济曰： 始得一叔。 
现代文：王济回家后，他父亲王浑问他： 为什么短时间外出案去了好几天？ 王济说： 我刚刚找到一个叔叔。 
English: After Wang Jie returned home, his father Wang Hun asked him, "Why did you go away for a few days for a short time?" Wang Jie said, "I just found an uncle."

古文：浑问其故？济具叹述如此。浑曰： 何如我？ 济曰： 济以上人。 
现代文：王浑问是什么意思，王济就一五一十地边赞叹边述说以上情况。王浑问： 和我相比怎么样？ 王济说： 是在我之上的人。 
English: Wang Hun asked what he meant, and Wang Jie said the above situation with admiration. Wang Hun asked: How is it compared to me? Wang Jie said: It is a person above me.

古文：武帝每见济，辄以湛调之曰： 卿家痴叔死未？ 
现代文：以前晋武帝每逢见到王济，总是拿王湛来跟他开玩笑，说道： 你家的傻子叔叔死了没有？ 
English: In the past, whenever Emperor Jinwu met Wang Zhiwu, he would always joke with him about Wang Zhan, saying: Is your stupid uncle dead?

古文：济常无以答。
现代文：王济常常没话回答。
English: Wang Jie often didn't have the words to answer.

古文：既而得叔，后武帝又问如前，济曰： 臣叔不痴。 
现代文：既而发现了这个叔叔，后来晋武帝又像以前那样问他，王济就说： 我叔叔不傻。 
English: Having discovered this uncle, Emperor Jinwu later asked him again, as he had done before, and Wang Zi said, "My uncle is not stupid."

古文：称其实美。
现代文：并且称赞叔叔美好的素质。
English: And he praised his uncle's wonderful qualities.

古文：帝曰： 谁比？ 
现代文：武帝问道： 可以和谁相比？ 
English: Wu Di asked: Who can I compare myself with?

古文：济曰： 山涛以下，魏舒以上。 
现代文：王济说： 在山涛之下，魏舒之上。 
English: Wang Ji said: Under the mountains, above the Wei Shu.

古文：于是显名。年二十八，始宦。
现代文：于是王湛的名声就传扬开来，在二十八岁那年才做官。
English: As a result, Wang Zhan's reputation spread far and wide, and he only became an official at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：裴仆射时人谓为言谈之林薮。
现代文：左仆射裴頠，当时的人认为他是清谈的府库。
English: At the time, people thought he was a smooth-talking government official.

古文：张华见褚陶，语陆平原曰： 君兄弟龙跃云津，顾彦先凤鸣朝阳。谓东南之宝已尽，不意复见褚生。 
现代文：张华见到褚陶以后，告诉平原内史陆机说： 您兄弟两人像在天河上腾跃的飞龙，顾彦先像迎着朝阳鸣叫的凤凰，我以为东南的人才已经全在这里了，想不到又见到褚生。 
English: After Zhang Hua saw Lintao, he told the history land machine in the plain: Your two brothers are like flying dragons leaping on the Tianhe River, Gu Yan is like a phoenix singing in the morning sun. I thought that the talents in Southeast Asia were all here, but I didn't expect to see Linsheng again.

古文：陆曰： 公未睹不鸣不跃者耳！ 
现代文：陆机说： 这是因为您没有看见过不鸣不跃的人才罢了！ 
English: The lander said, "That's because you haven't seen anyone who doesn't sing!"

古文：有问秀才： 吴旧姓何如？ 
现代文：有人问秀才蔡洪： 吴地的世家大族怎么样？ 
English: Someone asked the talented Cai Hong: How is the extended family of Wu Di?

古文：答曰： 吴府君圣王之老成，明时之俊乂。
现代文：洪回答说： 吴府君是圣明君主的贤臣，太平盛世的杰出人才。
English: Hong replied, "Wu Fookun is a wise retainer of Emperor Shengming, an outstanding talent in the Taiping era.

古文：朱永长理物之至德，清选之高望。
现代文：朱永长是执政大臣里面德行最高尚的人，公开选拔的官员中最有声望的人。
English: Zhu Yongchang is the most virtuous person among the ruling ministers, and the most prestigious person among the publicly selected officials.

古文：严仲弼九皋之鸣鹤，空谷之白驹。
现代文：严仲粥像深泽中引颈长鸣的白鹤，像潜处空旷深邃山谷中的白驹。
English: Yan Zhong gruel is like a white crane in the depths of the deep, like an egret in a deep valley.

古文：顾彦先八音之琴瑟，五色之龙章。张威伯岁寒之茂松，幽夜之逸光。
现代文：顾彦先像乐器中的琴瑟，花纹中的龙纹、张威伯是寒冬时茁壮的青松，黑夜里四射的光芒。
English: Gu Yanxian is like the lute in musical instruments, the dragon in the pattern, Zhang Weibo is the green pine that thrives in the cold winter, and the radiant light in the dark.

古文：陆士衡、士龙鸿鹄之裴回，悬鼓之待槌。
现代文：陆士衡、士龙兄弟是在高空盘旋的天鹅，是有待敲击的大鼓。
English: Lu Shiheng and the Shilong brothers are swans hovering in the sky, and are drums waiting to be beaten.

古文：凡此诸君：以洪笔为鉏耒，以纸札为良田。以玄默为稼穑，以义理为丰年。以谈论为英华，以忠恕为珍宝。著文章为锦绣，蕴五经为缯帛。坐谦虚为席荐，张义让为帷幕。行仁义为室宇，修道德为广宅。 
现代文：所有这些名士，把大笔当农具，拿纸张当良田，把清静无为当劳动，把掌握义理当丰收；把清谈当声誉，把忠恕当珍宝；把著述文章当做刺绣，把精通五经当做储藏丝绸；把坚持谦虚当做坐草席，把发扬道义礼让当做张挂帷幕；把推行仁义当做修造房屋，把加强道德修养当做构筑大厦。 
English: All these famous people regard a large pen as an agricultural tool, take paper as a good field, regard quietness and inactivity as labor, regard grasping the principles of righteousness as a good harvest, regard plain talk as reputation, regard loyalty as a precious treasure, regard writing articles as embroidery, regard mastery of the Five Classics as storing silk, regard upholding modesty as sitting on a straw mat, regard promoting morality and propriety as hanging a curtain, regard promoting benevolence and righteousness as building a house, and regard strengthening moral cultivation as constructing a building.

古文：人问王夷甫： 山巨源义理何如？
现代文：有人问王夷甫： 山巨源谈义理谈得怎么样？
English: Someone asked Wang Yifu: How do you feel about Shan Jiuyuan talking about righteousness?

古文：是谁辈？ 
现代文：是和谁相当的？ 
English: Comparable to whom?

古文：王曰： 此人初不肯以谈自居，然不读老、庄，时闻其咏，往往与其旨合。 
现代文：王夷甫说： 这个人从来不肯以清谈家自居，可是，他虽然不读《老子《庄子，常常听到他的谈论，倒是处处和老庄思想相合的。 
English: Wang Yifu said, "This man has never been willing to present himself as a clear talker, but although he does not read "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi," he often hears him talk, but everywhere he is in line with Lao Zhuang's thoughts.

古文：洛中雅雅有三嘏：刘粹字纯嘏，宏字终嘏，漠字冲嘏，是亲兄弟。王安丰甥，并是王安丰女婿。
现代文：洛阳众多风雅人士中有三嘏：刘粹，字纯嘏，刘宏，字终嘏，刘漠，字冲嘏，三人是亲兄弟，是安丰侯王戎的外甥，又都是王戎的女婿。
English: Among the many elegant people in Luoyang, there are three brothers: Liu Zi, surnamed Chun Rong, Liu Hong, surnamed Zheng Rong, Liu Ma, surnamed Chong Rong. The three are brothers, the nephew of Anfeng Prince Wang Rong, and the son-in-law of Wang Rong.

古文：宏，真长祖也。
现代文：刘宏就是刘真长的祖父。
English: Liu Hong is Liu Zhenlong's grandfather.

古文：洛中铮铮冯惠卿，名荪，是播子。
现代文：洛阳声名显赫的人士中有冯惠卿，名荪，是冯播的儿子。
English: Among the famous people in Luoyang is Feng Huiqing, the son of Feng Han.

古文：荪与邢乔俱司徒李胤外孙，及胤子顺并知名。
现代文：冯苏和邢乔都是司徒李胤的外孙，两人和李胤的儿子李顺都很有名。
English: Feng Su and Zou Qiao are the grandsons of the scholar Li Yin. Both of them and Li Yin's son Li Shun are very famous.

古文：时称： 冯才清，李才明，纯粹邢。 
现代文：当时的人称赞说： 冯氏才学清纯，李氏才识明达，纯正完美的是邢氏。 
English: At that time, people praised and said: Feng's learning is pure, Li's knowledge is clear, and the pure and perfect is Zou's.

古文：卫伯玉为尚书令，见乐广与中朝名士谈议，奇之曰： 自昔诸人没已来，常恐微言将绝。今乃复闻斯言于君矣！ 
现代文：卫伯玉任尚书令时，看见乐广和西晋的名士清谈，认为他不寻常，说道： 自从当年那些名士逝世到现在，常常怕清谈快要绝迹，今天竟然从您这里听到这种清谈了！ 
English: When Wei Bo Yu Ren Shang was writing, he saw Le Guang and the famous people of West Jin having a clear talk and thought it was unusual, saying: Since those famous people passed away until now, I often feared that clear talk was about to die out, but today I heard such a clear talk from you!

古文：命子弟造之曰： 此人，人之水镜也，见之若披云雾睹青天。 
现代文：便叫自己的子侄去拜访乐广，对子侄说： 这个人，是人们的镜子，观到他，就像拨开云雾看见青天一样。 
English: He called his nephew to visit LeGuang and said to his nephew, "This man is the mirror of the people. Looking at him is like peeling away the clouds to see the blue sky."

古文：王太尉曰： 见裴令公精明朗然，笼盖人上，非凡识也。
现代文：太尉王衍说： 我认为裴令公精明开朗，超越众人之上，那不是一般见识的人呀。
English: Captain Wang Yan said, "I think that Pei Ling Gong is shrewd and cheerful, and surpasses everyone. He is not a person with common sense.

古文：若死而可作，当与之同归。 
现代文：如果人死了还能再活，我要和他为同一宗旨努力。 
English: If a dead man can live again, I want to work with him for the same purpose.

古文：或云王戎语。
现代文：有人说这是王戎说的话。
English: Some say this is what Wang Rong said.

古文：王夷甫自叹： 我与乐令谈，未尝不觉我言为烦。 
现代文：王夷甫自己感叹说： 我和乐令清谈时，未尝不感到我的话太过于烦琐。 
English: Wang Yifu himself lamented, "When I was having a clear conversation with Le Ling, I couldn't help but feel that my words were too cumbersome.

古文：郭子玄有俊才，能言老、庄。庾敱尝称之，每曰： 郭子玄何必减庾子嵩！ 
现代文：郭子玄才智出众，很会谈论老庄思想，庾敳曾经称赞过他，常常说： 郭子玄为什么一定要在我庚子嵩之下！ 
English: Guo Zixuan is an outstanding intellect, very good at talking about Laozhuang thought. Zou once praised him and often said: "Why must Guo Zixuan be under my Geng Zixu?"

古文：王平子目太尉： 阿兄形似道，而神锋太俊。 
现代文：王平子评论太尉王衍说： 哥哥外貌好像很正直，可是锋芒太露了。 
English: Commenting on First Lieutenant Wang Yan, Wang Pingzi said: "His brother's appearance seems to be very honest, but his sharpness is too obvious.

古文：太尉答曰： 诚不如卿落落穆穆。 
现代文：王衍回答说： 确实比不上你那样豁达大度。仪表温和。 
English: Wang Yan replied, "It is true that I am not as open-minded and generous as you are. I have a gentle appearance.

古文：太傅有三才：刘庆孙长才，潘阳仲大才，裴景声清才。
现代文：太傅司马越府中有三个非常有才的人：刘舆是长才，潘滔是大才，裴邈是清才。
English: There are three very talented people in Ma Yuefu: Liu Ying is a long-term talent, Pan Tao is a great talent, and Pei Xuan is a high-level talent.

古文：林下诸贤，各有俊才子。籍子浑，器量弘旷。康子绍，清远雅正。涛子简，疏通高素。咸子瞻，虚夷有远志。瞻弟孚，爽朗多所遗。秀子纯、悌，并令淑有清流。戎子万子，有大成之风，苗而不秀。唯伶子无闻。
现代文：竹林下的这些贤人每个人的儿子也都有非常杰出的才华：阮籍的儿子阮浑，为人大度、豁达；嵇康的儿子嵇绍，志向高远、为人正直；山涛的儿子山简，通情达理，高雅朴实；阮咸的儿子阮瞻，谦虚、平易近人而志存高远；阮瞻的弟弟阮孚，直爽开朗，对于凡尘俗事早已超脱；向秀的儿子向纯、向悌，都心地善良而有高洁的德行；王戎的儿子王万子，很有成大事者的气度，可惜英年早逝；只有刘伶的儿子默默无闻。
English: The sons of each of these sages under the bamboo forest also have outstanding talents: Nguyen Quan's son, Nguyen Hun, is generous and open-minded; Quan Kang's son, Quan Shao, has high aspirations and is an honest person; Son of Mountain Tao, Shan Jian, is reasonable, elegant and simple; Son of Nguyen Han, Nguyen Chuan, is modest, approachable and has high aspirations; Nguyen Chuan's brother, Nguyen Phu, is straightforward and cheerful, and has long been detached from ordinary things; Son of Xiang Xiu, Xiang Chuan and Xiang Ye, are kind-hearted and have noble virtues;

古文：凡此诸子，唯瞻为冠，绍、简亦见重当世。
现代文：总括这些人的儿子，只有阮瞻居首位，嵇绍、山简也为当世人所钦佩。
English: Summing up the sons of these people, only Ruan Zhan ranks first, and Yu Shaowu and Shan Jian are also admired by the contemporary world.

古文：庾子躬有废疾，甚知名。
现代文：庾子躬虽然有残疾，但是很有名望。
English: Although he is handicapped, Hao Zi Mu is a famous singer.

古文：家在城西，号曰城西公府。
现代文：他住在城西，称人们称为城西公府。
English: He lives in the west of the city, which is known as the west of the city.

古文：王夷甫语乐令： 名士无多人，故当容平子知。 
现代文：王夷甫告诉尚书令乐广说： 人世间名士没有多少，所以应当等待王平子来识别。 
English: Wang Yifu told Shang Shuling Leguang: There are not many celebrities in the world, so you should wait for Wang Pingzi to identify.

古文：王太尉云： 郭子玄语议如悬河写水，注而不竭。 
现代文：太尉王衍说： 郭象的玄学谈论就好像是瀑布的水，滔滔不绝。 
English: Captain Wang Yan said: Guo Xiang's discussion of the occult is like the water of a waterfall, never ending.

古文：司马太傅府多名士，一时俊异。
现代文：司马越的府里名士很多，都是当时非常优秀的人才。
English: There were many famous people in Sima Yue's government, all of whom were outstanding talents at the time.

古文：庾文康云： 见子嵩在其中，常自神王。 
现代文：庾亮说： 我看到子嵩在这些人里面，就感到精神非常兴奋。 
English: Hao Liang said, "I felt very excited when I saw Zisao among these people.

古文：太傅东海王镇许昌，以王安期为记室参军，雅相知重。
现代文：太傅东海王司马越镇守许昌的时候，任用王安期做记室参军，并且非常赏识看重他。
English: When Wang Sima Yue, the governor of Donghai, was in charge of Xu Chang, he appointed Wang Anqi to be a recorder to join the army, and highly appreciated and valued him.

古文：敕世子毗曰： 夫学之所益者浅，体之所安者深。
现代文：东海王告诫自己的儿子司马毗说： 学习书本的效益浅，体验生活所保留的感受深。
English: Donghaewang admonished his son Sima Wei, saying: The benefits of studying books are shallow, and the feelings retained by experiencing life are deep.

古文：闲习礼度，不如式瞻仪形。讽味遗言，不如亲承音旨。
现代文：熟习礼制法度，就不如去好好观看礼节仪式；背诵并体味前人的遗训，就不如亲自接受贤人的教诲。
English: To become familiar with the rules of etiquette, it is better to watch the etiquette ceremony; to recite and experience the teachings of the predecessors, it is better to receive the teachings of the sages in person.

古文：王参军人伦之表，汝其师之！ 
现代文：王参军是人们的榜样，你要学习他。 
English: Wang Sanjun is a role model for people. You should learn from him.

古文：或曰： 王、赵、邓三参军，人伦之表，汝其师之！ 
现代文：有人以为是这样说的： 王。赵、邓三位参军是人们的榜样，你要学习他们。 
English: Some people thought it said: Wang, Zhao and Deng joining the army is an example for people, you should learn from them.

古文：谓安期、邓伯道、赵穆也。
现代文：所说的三位参军指王安期、邓伯道、赵穆。
English: The three soldiers mentioned are Wang Anji, Deng Baoduo and Zhao Mu.

古文：袁宏作名士传直云王参军。
现代文：袁宏写《名士传》的时候，只说到王参军。
English: When Yuan Hong wrote "Celebrity Biography," he only mentioned Wang's joining the army.

古文：或云赵家先犹有此本。
现代文：有人说赵穆家原先还有这个抄本。
English: Some people said that Zhao Mu's family still had this copy.

古文：庾太尉少为王眉子所知。
现代文：太尉瘦亮年轻时得到王眉子的赏识。
English: When he was young, captain Lean Liang won the appreciation of Wang Biao.

古文：庾过江，叹王曰： 庇其宇下，使人忘寒暑。 
现代文：后来庾亮避难过江，赞扬王眉子说： 在他的房檐下得到庇护，使人忘了冷暖。 
English: Later, Yan Liang took refuge across the river and praised Wang Meizi, saying, "Being sheltered under his eaves made people forget the cold and warm."

古文：谢幼舆曰： 友人王眉子清通简畅，嵇延祖弘雅劭长，董仲道卓荦有致度。 
现代文：谢幼舆说： 我的朋友王眉子清廉通达，简约舒畅；嵇延祖宽宏正直，德行高尚；董仲道见识卓越，很有风致、气度。 
English: Xie Yunmei said: My friend Wang Meizi is clean and straightforward, simple and comfortable; Yan Yanzu is broad and honest, with high moral standards; Dong Zhongdao has excellent insight, and is very elegant and graceful.

古文：王公目太尉： 岩岩清峙，壁立千仞。 
现代文：王导评论太尉王衍： 陡峭地肃静地耸立在那里，像千丈石壁一样屹立着。 
English: Wang Du commented on Lieutenant Wang Yan: He stood there steeply and quietly, standing like a thousand stone walls.

古文：庾太尉在洛下，问讯中郎。中郎留之云： 诸人当来。 
现代文：太尉庾亮在洛阳的时候，有一次，去探望中郎庾敳，庾敳挽留他稍候一下，说： 大家会来的。 
English: Once, when Second Lieutenant Zou Liang was in Luoyang, he went to visit Zhong Lang Zou. Zou asked him to wait for a moment and said, "Everyone will come."

古文：寻温元甫、刘王乔、裴叔则俱至，酬酢终日。
现代文：过了一会儿，温元甫、刘王乔、裴叔则都来了，大家清谈了一整天。
English: After a while, Wen Yuanfu, Liu Wangqiao, and Uncle Pei all came, and everyone had a clear talk for the whole day.

古文：庾公犹忆刘、裴之才俊，元甫之清中。
现代文：庾亮后来还能回忆起当时刘、裴两人的才华，元甫的恬静平和情状。
English: Later, Zou Liang could still recall the talent of Liu and Pei at that time, and the quiet and peaceful situation of Yuanfu.

古文：蔡司徒在洛，见陆机兄弟住参佐廨中，三间瓦屋，士龙住东头，士衡住西头。
现代文：司徒蔡谟在洛阳的时候，看见陆机、陆云兄弟住在僚属办公处里，有三间瓦屋，陆云住在东头，陆机住在西头。
English: When he was in Luoyang, he saw that the brothers Lu Jian and Lu Yun lived in the office of a colleague. There were three brick houses, with Lu Yun living in the east end and Lu Jian living in the west end.

古文：士龙为人，文弱可爱。士衡长七尺余，声作钟声，言多慷慨。
现代文：陆云为人，文雅纤弱得可爱；陆机身高七尺多，声音像钟声般洪亮，说话大多慷慨激昂。
English: Lu Yun is a person, gentle and weak but lovable; Lu Fu is more than seven feet tall, his voice is as loud as a bell, and most of his speech is impassioned.

古文：王长史是庾子躬外孙，丞相目子躬云： 入理泓然，我已上人。 
现代文：长史王檬是庾子躬的外孙，丞相王导评论厦子躬说： 深刻地领会了玄理，是在我以上的人。 
English: Changshi Wang Lim is the grandson of Xi Zimi, and the prime minister Wang Du commented on Xi Zimi, saying, "He has deeply understood the metaphysics, and is a person above me.

古文：庾太尉目庾中郎：家从谈谈之许。
现代文：太尉庚亮评论中郎庾敳说： 家叔深受人们的称赞。 
English: Commenting on this, Captain Geng Liang said, "My uncle is highly praised by the people.

古文：庾公目中郎： 神气融散，差如得上。 
现代文：庾亮评论中郎庾敳说： 他精神安适、疏散、大致还能算出众。 
English: Commenting on Luo Liang, Lang Hao said: He is mentally stable, easy to evacuate, and can roughly calculate the crowd.

古文：刘琨称祖车骑为朗诣，曰： 少为王敦所叹。 
现代文：刘琨称赞祖逖是开朗通达的人，说： 他年轻时受到王敦的赞赏。 
English: Liu Wei praised Zu Wei as a cheerful person, saying: When he was young, he was appreciated by Wang Dun.

古文：时人目庾中郎： 善于托大，长于自藏。 
现代文：当时人士评论中郎庾敳说： 善于托身高位，善于自我隐藏。 
English: At that time, people commented on Lang Hao saying: Good at holding oneself high, good at hiding oneself.

古文：王平子迈世有俊才，少所推服。
现代文：王平子有超世的卓越才华，很少有他椎重佩服的人。
English: Wang Pingzi has extraordinary talent, and there are very few people he admires.

古文：每闻卫玠言，辄叹息绝倒。
现代文：但是每当听到卫玠谈论，总不免赞叹、倾倒。
English: But whenever I hear Wei Xuan talk about it, I can't help but admire and be overwhelmed.

古文：王大将军与元皇表云： 舒风概简正，允作雅人，自多于邃。最是臣少所知拔。
现代文：大将军王敦呈送晋元帝的奏章说： 王舒很有风采节操，简约刚直，确实称得上高雅的人，自然胜过王邃，他是臣少有的很赏识并扶植的人。
English: The great general Wang Dun presented the musical score to Emperor Jin Yuan and said: Wang Shu Rong is very elegant and disciplined, simple and straightforward, and can truly be called an elegant person. Naturally, he is better than Wang Xi. He is a rare person who is highly appreciated and supported by his subjects.

古文：中间夷甫、澄见语： 卿知处明、茂弘。
现代文：在这期间王衍、王澄告诉我说： 你了解处明和茂弘。
English: During this time, Wang Yan and Wang Cheng told me, "You know about Chengming and Maohong.

古文：茂弘已有令名，真副卿清论；处明亲疏无知之者，吾常以卿言为意，殊未有得，恐已悔之？ 
现代文：茂弘已经有了美名，确实和你的高论相符；处明却是无论亲疏都没有人了解他。我常常把你的话放在心上，去了解处明，却毫无收获，恐怕你对自己说过的话已经感到后悔了吧！ 
English: Shigehiro already has a good reputation, which is indeed in line with your high opinion; however, no one knows him, whether they are relatives or strangers. I often put your words in my heart, to understand Shigehiro, but without any gain, I'm afraid you have already regretted what you said!

古文：臣慨然曰： 君以此试，顷来始乃有称之者。 言常人正自患知之使过，不知使负实。 
现代文：臣感慨他说： 您按我说的试着再看看。 近来方才有人赞扬处明，这说明一般人只是担心了解人过了头，而下担心对其实际才能了解不够。 
English: The minister sighed and said, "You should try to look at it again as I said. It is only recently that some people have praised the punishment, which shows that the average person is only worried about understanding people too much, and is worried about not knowing enough about their actual ability.

古文：周侯于荆州败绩，还，未得用。
现代文：武城侯周颚在荆州大败后，回到京都，未能得到委任。
English: After the great defeat in Jingzhou, Wucheng marquis Zhou Yi returned to Kyoto and failed to be appointed.

古文：王丞相与人书曰： 雅流弘器，何可得遗？ 
现代文：丞相王导给别人写信说： 周是高雅人士，有大才，怎么能把他抛弃呢！ 
English: The chancellor, Wang Tao, wrote to others saying: Zhou is an elegant person with great talent, how can you abandon him!

古文：时人欲题目高坐而未能。桓廷尉以问周侯，周侯曰： 可谓卓朗。 
现代文：当时人士想给高坐和尚下个评语，还没有想出恰当的，廷尉桓彝拿这事问武城侯周颚，周说： 可以说是卓越开朗。 
English: At that time, people wanted to give Gao Zizang the next comment, but they had not come up with an appropriate one. The courtier Huan Yan took this matter and asked Wucheng marquis Zhou Qi. Zhou said: It can be said that he is exceptionally cheerful.

古文：桓公曰： 精神渊箸。 
现代文：桓温说： 精神深沉而明澈。 
English: Kuan Wen said: His spirit is deep and clear.

古文：王大将军称其儿云： 其神候似欲可。 
现代文：大将军王敦称赞他的儿子说： 看他的神态好像还可心。 
English: Senior General Wang Dun praised his son, saying: "He seems to be in a good mood.

古文：卞令目叔向： 朗朗如百间屋。 
现代文：尚书令卞壼评论叔向说： 气度宽阔，好像有上百个敞亮房间的大屋。 
English: Shang Shuling commented on Uncle Xiang: It is spacious, as if there are hundreds of spacious and bright rooms.

古文：王敦为大将军，镇豫章。
现代文：王敦任大将军时，镇守豫章。
English: When Wang Dun was appointed general, the town guard was Yu Zhang.

古文：卫玠避乱，从洛投敦，相见欣然，谈话弥日。
现代文：卫玠为了躲避战乱，从洛阳来到豫章投奔王敦，两人一见面都很高兴，成天清谈。
English: In order to escape the turmoil of war, Wei Wei came from Luoyang to Yuzhang to invest in Wang Dun. The two were very happy to meet, and talked openly all day long.

古文：于时谢鲲为长史，敦谓鲲曰： 不意永嘉之中，复闻正始之音。
现代文：当时谢鲲在王敦手下任长史，王敦对谢鲲说： 想不到永嘉年间，又听到了正始年间那种清谈。
English: At that time, Xie Yao served as the chief historian under Wang Dun. Wang Dun said to Xie Yao: I didn't expect the Yongjia years, but I heard the kind of clear talk from the beginning of the year.

古文：阿平若在，当复绝倒。 
现代文：如果阿平在这里，就会佩服得五体投地。 
English: If Ah Ping were here, he would be overwhelmed with admiration.

古文：王平子与人书，称其儿： 风气日上，足散人怀。 
现代文：王平子给友人写信，称赞自己的儿子说： 他的风采和气量一天比一天长进，足以让人心怀舒畅。 
English: Wang Pingzi wrote a letter to a friend, praising his son, saying: His style and spirit are growing day by day, enough to make people feel comfortable.

古文：胡毋彦国吐佳言如屑，后进领袖。
现代文：胡毋彦国谈吐中的优美言辞就像锯木时的木屑一样连绵不断，他是后辈的领袖。
English: Hu is the leader of the younger generation, and the fine words in his speeches are as continuous as the sawdust in the wood.

古文：王丞相云： 刁玄亮之察察，戴若思之岩岩，卞望之之峰距。 
现代文：丞相王导说： 像刁玄亮那样明察秋毫，戴若思那样威严，卞望之那样刚直不阿。 
English: Wang Du, the chancellor, said, "It is not enough to be as clear-sighted as Zou Xuanliang, as dignified as Dai Raushi, and as upright as Xuanwang.

古文：大将军语右军： 汝是我佳子弟，当不减阮主簿。 
现代文：大将军王敦对右军将军王羲之说： 你是我家的优秀子弟，想必不会次于阮主簿。 
English: General Wang Dun said to General Wang Xizhu of the Right Army: You are an excellent son of my family, and will certainly not be second to Ruan Shoubu.

古文：世目周侯：嶷如断山。
现代文：世人评论武城侯周： 像悬崖绝壁一样陡峭。 
English: People comment on Wucheng Hou Zhou: It is as steep as a cliff.

古文：王丞相招祖约夜语，至晓不眠。
现代文：丞相王导邀祖约晚上来清谈，谈到天亮也没有睡觉。
English: The prime minister, Wang Shuo, invited Zu Rong to come for a clear talk in the evening, and when it came to the dawn, he did not sleep.

古文：明旦有客，公头鬓未理，亦小倦。客曰： 公昨如是，似失眠。 
现代文：第二天一早有客人来，王导出来见客时，还没有梳头，身体也有点困倦，客人问道： 您昨天夜里好像失眠了。 
English: The next morning, a guest arrived. When Wang Du came out to meet the guest, he had not yet combed his hair, and his body was a little sleepy. The guest asked: You seemed to have insomnia last night.

古文：公曰： 昨与士少语，遂使人忘疲。 
现代文：王导说： 昨晚和士少清谈，就让人忘了疲劳。 
English: Wang Du said: Last night's clear talk with Shisiao made people forget their fatigue.

古文：王大将军与丞相书，称杨朗曰： 世彦识器理致，才隐明断，既为国器，且是杨侯淮之子。
现代文：大将军王敦给丞相王导写信，称赞杨朗说： 世彦很有识见和气量，言谈深得事物之义理而有情趣，才学精微，论断高明。既是足以治国的人才，又是杨侯淮的儿子，可是地位和名望很是卑微。
English: The great general Wang Dun wrote a letter to the prime minister Wang Duan, praising Yang Lang, saying: Shihang is very insightful and spirited, speaks deeply about the truth of things and is interesting, has a fine learning ability, and is a good judge. He is both a talent enough to govern the country and the son of Yang Houhuai, but his status and reputation are very humble.

古文：位望殊为陵迟，卿亦足与之处。 何次道往丞相许，丞相以麈尾指坐呼何共坐曰： 来！来！此是君坐。 
现代文：你也可以和他相处。 何次道到丞相王导那里去，王导拿拂尘指着座位招呼他同坐，说： 来，来，这是您的座位。 
English: You can also get along with him. How many times did you go to the prime minister Wang Du, and Wang Du took a whisk and pointed to the seat and invited him to sit with him, saying: Come, come, this is your seat.

古文：丞相治杨州廨舍，按行而言曰： 我正为次道治此尔！ 
现代文：丞相王导修建扬州的官署，他在视察修建情况时说： 我只是替次道修建这个官署罢了！ 
English: When he inspected the construction of the government office in Yangzhou, which was built by Prime Minister Wang Dao, he said, "I'm just building this government office for the next province!"

古文：何少为王公所重，故屡发此叹。
现代文：何次道年轻时就受到王导的重视，所以王导屡次表示这样的赞叹。
English: How many times has the Tao been valued by Wang Du when he was young, so Wang Du has repeatedly expressed such admiration.

古文：王丞相拜司徒而叹曰： 刘王乔若过江，我不独拜公。 
现代文：丞相王导受任为司徒时叹道： 如果刘王乔能过江来，我不会一个人就任三公。 
English: When the chancellor Wang Du was appointed as a tutor, he lamented: If Liu Wang Qiao can cross the river, I will not be appointed as the three princes alone.

古文：王蓝田为人晚成，时人乃谓之痴。
现代文：蓝田侯王述为人处世，成就比较晚，当时人们竟认为他痴呆。
English: Lantian Hou Wang described his life as a man, his achievements were relatively late, and at that time people actually thought he was demented.

古文：王丞相以其东海子，辟为掾。
现代文：丞相王导因为他是东海太守王承的儿子，就召他做属官。
English: Because he was the son of the governor of the East Sea, Wang Cheng, the chancellor Wang Tao called him to be a subordinate official.

古文：常集聚，王公每发言，众人竞赞之。
现代文：有一次聚会，王导每次讲话，大家都争着赞美。
English: There was a gathering, and every time Wang Du gave a speech, everyone was vying for praise.

古文：述于末坐曰： 主非尧、舜，何得事事皆是？ 
现代文：坐在未座的王述说： 主公不是尧、舜，怎么能事事都对！ 
English: The king, who was not seated, said: "How can the lord be right in all things, when he is not the king?"

古文：丞相甚相叹赏。
现代文：王导非常赞赏他。
English: Wang Du appreciated him very much.

古文：世目杨朗： 沉审经断。 
现代文：世人评论杨朗： 深沉慎重，顺理而决断。 
English: The world's comment on Yang Lang: Deep and prudent, logical and decisive.

古文：蔡司徒云： 若使中朝不乱，杨氏作公方未已。 
现代文：司徒蔡谟说： 如果西晋不乱，杨氏任三公的将会接连不断。 
English: "If there is no turmoil in West Jin, Yang's three reigns will continue," said Szeto Zaimu.

古文：谢公云： 朗是大才。 
现代文：谢安说： 杨朗是大才。 
English: Xie An said: Yang Lang is a great talent.

古文：刘万安即道真从子。庾公所谓 灼然玉举 。
现代文：刘万安就是刘道真的侄儿，是庾琮所说的操守鲜明坚定的人物。
English: Liu Wan'an is Liu Daozhen's nephew. He is a person with a clear and firm moral code, as described by Zou.

古文：又云： 千人亦见，百人亦见。 
现代文：又说： 他在千人中也能显露出来，在百人中也能显露出来。 
English: And he said, "It is possible for him to be revealed to a thousand, and to a hundred."

古文：庾公为护军，属桓廷尉觅一佳吏，乃经年。
现代文：庾亮任护军将军的时候，托廷尉桓彝代找一个优秀的属官，过了一年竟然还没找到。
English: When Hao Liang was appointed as the general of the garrison, To Ting's lieutenant, Huan Ye, looked for an excellent subordinate officer on his behalf, but after a year he still hadn't found one.

古文：桓后遇见徐宁而知之，遂致于庾公曰： 人所应有，其不必有；人所应无，己不必无。
现代文：桓彝后来碰见徐宁，并且很赏识他，就把他推荐给庾亮，并介绍说： 人们应该有的，他不一定有；人们不应该有的，他不一定没有。
English: Later, when Huan Qi met Xu Ning and appreciated him very much, he recommended him to Huan Liang and said: People should have, he does not necessarily have; people should not have, he does not necessarily have.

古文：真海岱清士。 
现代文：他确实是海岱一带的清廉正直的人士。 
English: He is indeed a clean and honest person in the Haiyao area.

古文：桓茂伦云： 褚季野皮里阳秋。 
现代文：桓茂伦说： 诸季野是皮里春秋。 
English: KAMAMORON said: All seasons are like spring and autumn.

古文：谓其裁中也。
现代文：这指的是他心中有裁决。
English: It means he has a ruling in mind.

古文：何次道尝送东人，瞻望见贾宁在后轮中，曰： 此人不死，终为诸侯上客。 
现代文：何次道有一次送走从东来的客人，远远望去，看见贾宁在后面的车上，就说： 这个人如果不死，终归要做王侯的尊贵宾客。 
English: How many times has there been a time when he was seeing off a guest from the East, and when he looked off into the distance and saw Janin in the car behind him, he said: "If this man does not die, he will eventually become an honored guest of the prince."

古文：杜弘治墓崩，哀容不称。
现代文：社弘治家祖坟塌了，他的悲伤表情和这件事不相称。
English: His expression of sadness is not commensurate with the fact that the ancestral tomb of his family collapsed.

古文：庾公顾谓诸客曰： 弘治至羸，不可以致哀。 
现代文：庾亮环顾众宾客，对他们说： 弘治身体极弱，不可以太伤心。 
English: Hao Liang looked around at all the guests and said to them, "Hongzhi is very weak, you shouldn't be too sad.

古文：又曰： 弘治哭不可哀。 
现代文：又说： 弘治不能哭得太伤心。 
English: He also said: "Koji can't cry because he's too sad.

古文：世称 庾文康为丰年玉，稚恭为荒年谷 。
现代文：世人称颂庾亮像丰年的美玉，称颂庾稚恭像灾荒年头的粮食。
English: The world praises radiant radiance as the gem of a prosperous year, and praises youthful vigor as the grain of a disaster-stricken year.

古文：庾家论云是文康称 恭为荒年谷，庾长仁为丰年玉。 
现代文：庾家内部评论则说： 是庾亮称赞稚恭像灾荒年头的粮食，庾长仁像丰年的美玉。 
English: An internal commentary within the Xing family said: "It is Xing Liang who praised Zhi Gong as the grain of the year of disaster and famine, and Xing Changren as the gem of the year of plenty.

古文：世目 杜弘治标鲜，季野穆少 。
现代文：世人评论杜弘治风采俊秀照人，褚季野温和淡泊。
English: The world commented on Du Hongzhi's style of governance, saying that he was a brilliant and brilliant person, while Gong Qino was mild and indifferent.

古文：有人目杜弘治： 标鲜清令，盛德之风，可乐咏也。 
现代文：有人评论杜弘治： 风采俊秀照人，本性清高纯美，表现出大德的风范，是值得歌颂的。 
English: Some people commented on Du Hongzhi: He is handsome and handsome, his nature is clear and pure, and he shows a great moral demeanor, which is worthy of praise.

古文：庾公云： 逸少国举。 
现代文：庾亮说： 逸少是全国所推崇的人。 
English: Hao Liang said: Yixiao is a person who is respected by the whole country.

古文：故庾倪为碑文云： 拔萃国举。 
现代文：所以庾倪给他写碑文时就写上： 拔萃国举 。
English: Therefore, when Zou Ni wrote the inscription for him, he wrote: "Outstanding national champion."

古文：庾稚恭与桓温书，称 刘道生日夕在事，大小殊快。
现代文：庾稚恭写信给桓温，称赞说： 刘道生白天晚上都在处理政事，大小事情都处理得非常称心如意。
English: Zou Zhiqiong wrote a letter to Huan Wen, praising: Liu Daosheng has been dealing with political affairs both day and night, and has handled both large and small matters very satisfactorily.

古文：义怀通乐，既佳，且足作友，正实良器，推此与君，同济艰不者也。 
现代文：这个人胸怀仁义，豁达和乐，不但这方面很好，而且很值得结为良友，确实是优秀人才。现在把他推荐给您，和您一起度过艰难困苦的时日吧。 
English: This person is kind-hearted, open-minded and fun-loving, and not only is he good at this, but he is also worth making good friends with. He is truly an excellent talent. Now I recommend him to you, and let's spend the difficult time together.

古文：王蓝田拜扬州，主簿请讳，教云： 亡祖先君，名播海内，远近所知。
现代文：蓝田侯王述就任扬州刺史时，州府主簿向他请示要避忌的名讳。王述批示说： 先祖、先父，名声远播全国，是远远近近都知道的。
English: When Lantian Hou Wang Su assumed the post of Yangzhou chief historian, the main book of the state capital asked him for the name to be avoided. Wang Su instructed: Ancestors, forefathers, fame spread far and wide across the country, it is known far and near.

古文：内讳不出于外，余无所讳。 
现代文：妇女的名字不能向外人说出，此外没有要避忌的了。 
English: A woman's name cannot be revealed to outsiders, and there is nothing else to avoid.

古文：萧中郎，孙丞公妇父。刘尹在抚军坐，时拟为太常，刘尹云： 萧祖周不知便可作三公不？
现代文：中郎萧祖周是孙丞公的岳父，丹阳尹刘真长在抚军大将军那里做客时，商议提升萧祖周任太常。刘真长说： 萧祖周不知可以不可以就提为三公？
English: The middle brother, Xiao Zu Zhou, was the father-in-law of Sun Zheng. When Danyang Yin Liu Zhenchang was a guest of General Fuzun, they often discussed the promotion of Xiao Zu Zhou. Liu Zhenchang said, "I don't know if Xiao Zu Zhou can be promoted to the Third Prince."

古文：自此以还，无所不堪。 
现代文：从三公以下，他没有不能胜任的。 
English: From the Three Princes on down, he has not been incompetent.

古文：谢太傅未冠，始出西，诣王长史，清言良久。
现代文：太傅谢安还没有成年时，初到京都，到长史王濛家去拜访，清谈了很久。
English: When Taifu Xie'an was not yet an adult, he first came to Kyoto to visit the family of Choshi Wangye and had a long talk with him.

古文：去后，苟子问曰： 向客何如尊？ 
现代文：走了以后，王苟子问他父亲： 刚才那位客人和父亲相比怎么样？ 
English: After leaving, Wang Gouzi asked his father: How does that guest compare to my father?

古文：长史曰： 向客亹亹，为来逼人。 
现代文：王濛说： 刚才那位客人娓娓不倦，谈起来咄咄逼人。 
English: Wang Yao said: The guest just now is tireless and talks aggressively.

古文：王右军语刘尹： 故当共推安石。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之对丹阳尹刘惔说： 我们当然要一起推荐安石。 
English: Right-wing army general Wang Yanzhi said to Danyang Yin Liu Qi: Of course, we should recommend Anshi together.

古文：刘尹曰： 若安石东山志立，当与天下共推之。 
现代文：刘惔说： 如果安石志在隐居，我们应该和天下人一起推荐他。 
English: Liu Wei said: If An Shizhi is in seclusion, we should recommend him to the world.

古文：谢公称蓝田： 掇皮皆真。 
现代文：谢安称赞蓝田侯王述说： 剥去皮都是真率的。 
English: Xie An praised Lantian Hou Wang Shu and said: Peeling the skin is all true.

古文：桓温行经王敦墓边过，望之云： 可儿！
现代文：桓温出行，经过王敦墓边，望着王敦的坟墓说： 可意人儿！
English: On his journey, Kuan Wen passed by Wang Dun's grave, looked at Wang Dun's grave and said: What a nice man!

古文：可儿！ 
现代文：可意人儿！ 
English: What a man!

古文：殷中军道王右军云： 逸少清贵人。吾于之甚至，一时无所后。 
现代文：中军将军殷浩评论右军将军王羲之说： 逸少是个清高尊贵的人，我对他喜欢到极点，一时没有人能比得上他的。 
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao commented on the right-wing general Wang Xizhong, saying: "Yi Shao is a noble and honorable person. I like him very much. At one time, no one could match him.

古文：王仲祖称殷渊源： 非以长胜人，处长亦胜人。 
现代文：王仲祖称赞殷渊源说： 他不但凭自己的长处胜过别人，而且在对待长处上也胜过别人。 
English: Wang Zhongzu praised Yin Yuanyuan, saying, "He not only outperforms others with his own strengths, but also outperforms others in dealing with his strengths.

古文：王司州与殷中军语，叹云： 己之府奥，蚤已倾写而见，殷陈势浩汗，众源未可得测。 
现代文：司州刺史王胡之和中军将军殷浩清谈，王胡之后来赞叹说： 我自己的见解，早已倾吐净尽；殷浩摆开清谈的阵势浩浩荡荡，各个源头还没法估量。 
English: Wang Hu, the governor of Shizhou, had a clear talk with the Chinese general Yin Hao. Wang Hu later praised and said: My own opinion has already been poured out; Yin Hao's opening of a clear talk is huge, and the sources have not been able to estimate.

古文：王长史谓林公： 真长可谓金玉满堂。 
现代文：长史王濛对支道林说： 真长的言谈可以说是金玉满堂。 
English: Wang Yao, the chief historian, said to Shih Dorlin, "A really long speech can be said to be full of gold and jewels."

古文：林公曰： 金玉满堂，复何为简选？ 
现代文：支道林说： 既然是金玉满堂，为什么又要挑选言辞？ 
English: Shidolin said, "Since the hall is full of gold and jewels, why do we have to choose words?

古文：王曰： 非为简选，直致言处自寡耳。 
现代文：王濛说： 不是经过挑选，只是他应用言辞的地方本来就不多呀。 
English: Wang Yao said, "It's not that he was selected, but he doesn't have many places to use his words.

古文：王长史道江道群： 人可应有，乃不必有；人可应无，己必无。 
现代文：王濛评论江道群说： 人们应该有的，他却不一定有；人们应该没有的，他自己一走没有。 
English: Wang Yao commented on Jiang Daogun: People should have, but he doesn't necessarily have; people should not have, but he doesn't have.

古文：会稽孔沈、魏顗、虞球、虞存、谢奉，并是四族之俊，于时之桀。
现代文：会稽郡孔沈、魏、虞球、虞存、谢奉五人同是四个家族的英俊之才，当时的杰出人物。
English: Kong Shen, Wei, Yuqiu, Yu Cun and Xie Bong, the five members of the county party committee, were all handsome talents from four families, and were outstanding figures at that time.

古文：孙兴公目之曰： 沈为孔家金，顗为魏家玉，虞为长、琳宗，谢为弘道伏。 
现代文：孙兴公评论你们说： 孔沈是孔家的金子，魏是魏家的宝玉，至于虞家则应推崇道长、和琳的才识，谢家应敬佩弘道的美德。 
English: Commenting on you, Sun Xinggong said: Kong Shen is the gold of the Confucius family, Wei is the jewel of the Wei family, as for the Yu family, they should respect the talent of Daochang and He Lin, and the Xie family should admire the virtue of Hongdao.

古文：王仲祖、刘真长造殷中军谈，谈竟，俱载去。
现代文：王仲祖和刘真长到中军将军殷渊源家清谈，谈完了，就一起坐车走。
English: Wang Zhongzu and Liu Zhenlong went to the home of the Chinese general Yin Yuanyuan to have a clear talk. After the talk, they took a ride together.

古文：刘谓王曰： 渊源真可。 
现代文：刘真长对王仲祖说： 渊源的言论真可意。 
English: Liu Zhenchang said to Wang Zhongzu: Yuan Yuan's remarks are really meaningful.

古文：王曰： 卿故堕其云雾中。 
现代文：王仲祖说： 你原来掉进了他设下的迷雾中。 
English: Wang Zhongzu said: You fell into the fog he set up.

古文：刘尹每称王长史云： 性至通，而自然有节。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘真长常常称赞长史王檬说： 本性最为通达，而且自然有节制。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu Zhenchang often praised Changshi Wang Lim, saying: His nature is the most open-minded, and he is naturally restrained.

古文：王右军道谢万石 在林泽中，为自遒上 。叹林公 器朗神俊 。道祖士少 风领毛骨，恐没世不复见如此人 。道刘真长 标云柯而不扶疏 。
现代文：右罕将军王羲之评论谢万石说： 在山林湖泽这种隐居地里，自然会刚劲超群 ；赞叹支道林说： 胸襟开朗，精神俊逸 ；评论祖士少： 风度比容貌更动人，恐怕一辈子不会再见到这样的人 ；评论刘真长： 像高耸入云的大树，枝叶并不繁茂 。
English: Right-hand general Wang Xizhi commented on Xie Wanshi, saying: In such a secluded place as the mountains, forests and lakes, it is natural to be extremely strong; praised the branch forests, saying: Cheerful heart, handsome spirit; commented on the lack of ancestors: The demeanor is more attractive than the appearance, I am afraid I will never see such a person again; commented on Liu Zhenlong: Like a towering tree, the branches and leaves are not lush.

古文：简文目庾赤玉： 省率治除。 
现代文：简文帝评论庚赤玉： 明察，直率，有修养，洁身自好。 
English: Jian Wen Di commented on Geng Yingtao: clear-sighted, straightforward, cultivated, clean and self-respecting.

古文：谢仁祖云： 庾赤玉胸中无宿物。 
现代文：谢仁祖说： 庾赤玉心里不存芥蒂。 
English: Xie Renzu said: "There is no mustard seed in the heart of the Red Jade Emperor.

古文：殷中军道韩太常曰： 康伯少自标置，居然是出群器。
现代文：中军将军殷浩称道太常韩康伯说： 康伯年轻时就自视甚高，显然是超群出众的人才。
English: Chinese General Yin Hao praised the words of the great Han Kangbo, saying: When Kangbo was young, he had a very high opinion of himself and was clearly an outstanding talent.

古文：及其发言遣辞，往往有情致。 
现代文：当他发表意见时，他的言谈辞藻，处处都有情趣。 
English: When he does speak out, his words have a ring to them, and they're full of spice.

古文：简文道王怀祖： 才既不长，于荣利又不淡；直以真率少许，便足对人多多许。 
现代文：简文帝称道王怀祖说： 才能又不突出，对名利又很热心，可是只凭着他那一点真诚直率，就足以抵得上别人很多很多东西。 
English: Emperor Jianwen praised the Taoist King Huai Zu, saying: His talent is not outstanding, and he is very enthusiastic about fame and fortune, but with his sincerity and straightforwardness, it is enough to be worth many, many things to others.

古文：林公谓王右军云： 长史作数百语，无非德音，如恨不苦。 
现代文：支道林和尚对右军将军王羲之说： 王长史说上几百句，无非是一些合乎仁德的话，遗憾的是不能困住人家。 
English: Shidolin Monk said to Wang Xizhong, general of the Right Army: Wang Changshi said hundreds of sentences, nothing more than some words of benevolence. Unfortunately, he could not trap others.

古文：王曰： 长史自不欲苦物。 
现代文：王羲之说： 长史本来就不想困住人家。 
English: Wang Shanzhi said: "Changshi didn't want to trap people.

古文：殷中军与人书，道谢万 文理转遒，成殊不易 。
现代文：中军将军殷浩给友人写信，称道谢万 文辞和义理变得刚劲有力了，取得这样的成就也很不容易。 
English: Chinese General Yin Hao wrote to a friend, saying that Daowei Wan's words and principles had become strong and powerful, and it was not easy to achieve such an achievement.

古文：王长史云： 江思悛思怀所通，不翅儒域。 
现代文：长史王濛说： 江思悛思想所贯通的，不止是儒学。 
English: Wang Qi, the chief historian, said, "Jiang's thought is permeated by more than just Confucianism.

古文：许玄度送母，始出都，人问刘尹： 玄度定称所闻不？ 
现代文：许玄度为送他母亲，初到京都来，有人问丹阳尹刘真长： 玄度究竟和传闻相称不相称？ 
English: When Xu Xundu came to Kyoto for the first time to see his mother off, someone asked Danyang Yin Liu Zhenchang: Is Xundu commensurate with the rumors?

古文：刘曰： 才情过于所闻。 
现代文：刘真长说： 他的才华超过了传闻。 
English: Liu Zhenlong said: His talent exceeds the rumors.

古文：阮光禄云： 王家有三年少：右军、安期、长豫。 
现代文：光禄大夫阮裕说： 王家有三少年：逸少、安期、长豫。 
English: Guanglu doctor Ruan Yu said: There are three boys in the royal family: Yishao, Anji and Changyu.

古文：谢公道豫章： 若遇七贤，必自把臂入林。 
现代文：谢安称道豫章太守谢鲲说： 他如果遇到竹林七贤，一定会手拉手地进入竹林。 
English: Xie An said that if he met the seven sages of the bamboo forest, he would definitely enter the bamboo forest hand in hand.

古文：王长史叹林公： 寻微之功，不减辅嗣。 
现代文：长史王濛赞赏支道林说： 他探索玄理的功力，不亚于王辅嗣。 
English: Wang Yao, the chief historian, praised Shidolin, saying: His ability to explore the occult is no less than that of Wang Suoxi.

古文：殷渊源在墓所几十年。
现代文：殷渊源在陵园中住了将近十年。
English: Yin Yuanyuan lived in the cemetery for nearly ten years.

古文：于时朝野以拟管、葛，起不起，以卜江左兴亡。
现代文：在这期间，朝廷内外的人士都把他比做管仲和诸葛亮，看他出仕还是退隐，来预测东晋政权的兴衰存亡。
English: During this period, people inside and outside the imperial court compared him to Guanzhong and Zhuge Liang, whether he served or retired, to predict the rise and fall of the East Jin regime.

古文：殷中军道右军： 清鉴贵要。 
现代文：中军将军殷浩称道右军将军王羲之 清高，有精辟的见解，而且尊贵，能抓住要点。 
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao praised the right-wing general Wang Xizhimen for his clearness, incisive views, and dignity, and for being able to grasp the main points.

古文：谢太傅为桓公司马，桓诣谢，值谢梳头，遽取衣帻，桓公云： 何烦此。 
现代文：太傅谢安出任桓温手下的司马。有一次，桓温到谢安那里去，正碰上谢安在梳头，谢安就匆忙去取衣服、头巾来穿戴。桓温说： 何必为这事麻烦！ 
English: Taifu Xie'an served as the Sima under Kuanwen. Once, when Kuanwen went to Xie'an, he found Xie combing his hair. Xie'an hurried to get some clothes and a headscarf to put on. Kuanwen said, "Why go to all the trouble?"

古文：因下共语至暝。
现代文：便下堂去和他一直谈到晚。
English: I went downstairs and kept talking to him about the night.

古文：既去，谓左右曰： 颇曾见如此人不？ 
现代文：桓温出门后，问随从： 你们可曾见过这样的人吗？ 
English: After leaving the house, Kuan Wen asked his entourage: Have you ever seen such a person?

古文：谢公作宣武司马，属门生数十人于田曹中郎赵悦子。
现代文：谢安出任桓温的司马时，把几十个门生托付给田曹中郎赵悦子安排职位。
English: When Xie An served as Kanwen's Sima, he entrusted dozens of disciples to Tian Cao Zhong Lang Zhao Yuezi to arrange positions.

古文：悦子以告宣武，宣武云： 且为用半。 
现代文：悦子把这事告诉桓温，桓温说： 姑且用他一半人。 
English: Etsuko told this to Kanon, and Kanon said, "Let's use half of him."

古文：赵俄而悉用之，曰： 昔安石在东山，缙绅敦逼，恐不豫人事；况今自乡选，反违之邪？ 
现代文：赵悦子不久就把这些人全部录用了，他说： 过去安石在东山隐居时，郡县的官员敦促、逼迫他出仕，唯恐他不过问政事。况且现在是他自己从家乡选来的人，怎么反而不依从他呢？ 
English: Zhao Yuezi soon hired all these people. He said: In the past, when Anshi was living in seclusion in Dongshan, county officials urged and forced him to serve, lest he should become involved in politics. Moreover, he himself chose these people from his hometown, so why not obey him?

古文：桓宣武表云： 谢尚神怀挺率，少致民誉。 
现代文：桓温上奏章说： 谢尚胸怀正直坦率，年轻时就得到众人的赞誉。 
English: Kanwen Shangso Zhang said: Xie Shangru is honest and straightforward, and he was praised by many people when he was young.

古文：世目谢尚为令达，阮遥集云： 清畅似达。 
现代文：世人评论谢尚是美好旷达。阮遥集说他： 高尚通达，类似旷达。 
English: The world commented that Xie Shang was beautiful and open-minded. Ruan Yao Ji said of him: Noble and open-minded, similar to open-minded.

古文：或云： 尚自然令上。 
现代文：又有人说： 谢尚是不做作、美好，优异。 
English: Others said: Xie Shang is not artificial, beautiful and excellent.

古文：桓大司马病。谢公往省病，从东门入。
现代文：大司马桓温有病，谢安去探病，从东门进去。
English: Daishi Ma Kan-Wen is ill. Xie An goes to check on him and enters through the east gate.

古文：桓公遥望，叹曰： 吾门中久不见如此人！ 
现代文：桓温远远望见，叹息说： 我家里很久不见这样的人了！ 
English: Looking from afar, Kuan Wen sighed and said, "I haven't seen such a person in my family for a long time!"

古文：简文目敬豫为 朗豫 。
现代文：简文帝评王敬豫是开朗而且心气和悦。
English: Emperor Jianwen commented that King Jingyuan was cheerful and pleasant.

古文：孙兴公为庾公参军，共游白石山。
现代文：孙兴公任庚亮的参军时，和庾亮一起去游白石山，卫君长也在场。
English: When Sun Xingguo appointed Geng Liang to join the army, he and Zou Liang went to visit Baishi Mountain together. Wei Junlang was also present.

古文：卫君长在坐，孙曰： 此子神情都不关山水，而能作文。 
现代文：孙兴公说： 此君神情一点也不关心山水风景，却能做文章。 
English: Sun Xinggong said, "This gentleman does not care about the landscape at all, but he can write an article.

古文：庾公曰： 卫风韵虽不及卿诸人，倾倒处亦不近。 
现代文：庾亮说： 卫君长风度韵味虽然比不上你们这些人，可是令人心悦诚服的地方也很突出。 
English: Hao Liang said: Although Wei Jun's long demeanor and charm are not as good as those of you, he is also outstanding in terms of being pleasant and sincere.

古文：孙遂沐浴此言。
现代文：孙兴公于是就反复吟味这句话，深受教育。
English: Therefore, Sun Xinggong repeatedly examined this sentence and was deeply educated.

古文：王右军目陈玄伯： 垒块有正骨。 
现代文：右军将军王羲之评陈玄伯： 有愤慨，有骨气。 
English: Chen Xuanbo's review of the right-wing general Wang Xizhi: There is indignation, there is backbone.

古文：王长史云： 刘尹知我，胜我自知。 
现代文：长史王濛说： 刘尹了解我，胜过我对自己的了解。 
English: "Liu Yin knows me better than I know myself," said Wang Yao, the chief historian.

古文：王、刘听林公讲，王语刘曰： 向高坐者，故是凶物。 
现代文：王濛、刘惔听支道林和尚宣讲时，王濛对刘惔说： 在讲坛上的人，原来是个违背佛法的。 
English: When Wang Qian and Liu Qian were listening to the sermon of the Branch Daolin Monk, Wang Qian said to Liu Qian: The person on the pulpit was originally a person who violated Buddhism.

古文：复东听，王又曰： 自是釪后王、何人也。 
现代文：再听下去，王濛又说： 原来是佛门后世中的王弼、何晏啊。 
English: After listening further, Wang Yao said, "It turned out to be Wang Yao in the post-Buddhist world.

古文：许玄度言： 琴赋所谓 非至精者，不能与之析理 。刘尹其人； 非渊静者，不能与之闲止 ，简文其人。 
现代文：许玄度说： 《琴赋》里说的 不是最精通的人，不能同他一起辨析事理 ，刘尹就是这样的人； 不是沉静的人，不能同他一起安居 ，简文帝就是这样的人。 
English: Xu Xundu said: "In "Qin Fu," it is said that Liu Yun is not the most proficient person and cannot analyze matters with him, Liu Yin is such a person; he is not a quiet person and cannot live peacefully with him, Emperor Jianwen is such a person.

古文：魏隐兄弟，少有学义，总角诣谢奉。
现代文：魏隐兄弟年轻时就有学识。
English: The Wei Yin brothers had knowledge when they were young.

古文：奉与语，大说之，曰： 大宗虽衰，魏氏已复有人。 
现代文：小时候去拜见谢奉，谢奉和他们谈话，非常喜欢他们的谈吐，说： 魏氏宗族虽然已经衰微，但是又有了继承人了。 
English: When he was a child, he went to visit Xie Feng, and Xie Feng talked with them. He was very fond of their conversation, saying: Although the Wei clan has declined, it has an heir.

古文：简文云： 渊源语不超诣简至；然经纶思寻处，故有局陈。 
现代文：简文帝说： 殷渊源的清谈造诣不高，也不简练，可是他认真斟酌、思考过的话，的确也很有章法。 
English: Jian Wendi said: Yin Yuanyuan's ability to speak clearly is not high, nor is it concise, but if he has carefully considered and thought about it, he is indeed very methodical.

古文：初，法汰北来未知名，王领军供养之。
现代文：当初，法汰从北方来到南方的时候，还不出名，由中领军王洽供养。
English: At first, when Fata came from the north to the south, he was not famous, and was supported by the middle leader Wang Cha.

古文：每与周旋，行来往名胜许，辄与俱。
现代文：王洽常常和他应酬来往，到名胜地方出游，总是和他一起去。
English: Wang Cai often socialized with him and traveled to places of scenic beauty, always going with him.

古文：不得汰，便停车不行。
现代文：如果法汰没有来，王洽就停车不走。
English: If the legal action does not come, Wang Cai will stop and not go.

古文：因此名遂重。
现代文：因此法汰的声望便大起来了。
English: As a result, the reputation of Fata has grown.

古文：王长史与大司马书，道渊源 识致安处，足副时谈。 
现代文：长史王濛给大司马桓温一封信，评论殷渊源 有见识，有情致，又悠闲自得，足以符合当代的评论。 
English: Wang Xi, the chief historian, wrote a letter to the chief secretary Ma Huanwen, commenting that Yin Yuanyuan was insightful, affectionate, and leisurely, which is enough to meet contemporary comments.

古文：谢公云： 刘尹语审细。 
现代文：谢安说： 刘尹的谈论精密细致。 
English: Xie An said: Liu Yin's talk is precise and meticulous.

古文：桓公语嘉宾： 阿源有德有言，向使作令仆，足以仪刑百揆。
现代文：桓温对郗嘉宾说： 阿源德行高洁，善于清谈，当初如果让他做辅粥大臣，足以成为百官的榜样。
English: Kuan Wen said to Zou Jiabin: Ah Yuan is a virtuous and clean person, and is good at clear talk. If he had been made the Minister of Confectionery at the beginning, he would have been a role model for a hundred officials.

古文：朝廷用违其才耳。 
现代文：只是朝廷不按他的才能任用他啊！ 
English: It's just that the court doesn't appoint him according to his talent!

古文：简文语嘉宾： 刘尹语末后亦小异，回复其言，亦乃无过。 
现代文：简文帝对郗嘉宾说： 刘尹的清谈到后来也和以前稍有不同，但是反复回味他的话，却也没有错。 
English: Jian Wendi said to Zou Jiabin, "Liu Yin's talk about Qing later was also slightly different from before, but there is nothing wrong with repeatedly recalling his words.

古文：孙兴公、许玄度共在白楼亭，共商略先往名达。
现代文：孙兴公。许玄度一起在白楼亭上，共同品评先前的贤达。
English: Sun Xinggong. Xu Xundu together on the Bai Lou Pavilion, jointly evaluated the previous sages.

古文：林公既非所关，听讫云： 二贤故自有才情。 
现代文：既然不是支道林所关心的事，听完后，他只说： 两位贤才的确有才华。 
English: Since it was not a matter of concern to Shidolin, after listening, he only said: The two sages are indeed talented.

古文：王右军道东阳 我家阿林，章清太出 。
现代文：右军将军王羲之评论东阳太守王临之说： 我们家的阿临，显明，高洁，甚为突出。 
English: Wang Xizhi, the general of the Right Army, commented on Wang Lin, the eunuch of Dongyang, saying, "Our family's A Lin is conspicuous, noble, and outstanding.

古文：王长史与刘尹书，道渊源 触事长易 。
现代文：长史王濛给丹阳尹刘淡写信，评论殷渊源说： 他处事经常很平和。 
English: Wang Xi, the chief historian, wrote a letter to Danyang Yin Liu Tan, commenting on Yin Yuan Yuan, saying: He often handles things peacefully.

古文：谢中郎云： 王修载乐托之性，出自门风。 
现代文：从事中郎谢万说： 王脩载那种豪放不羁的性格，是来自他的家风。 
English: Wang Xizai's middle son, Xie Wan, said: "Wang Xizai's unruly personality comes from his family.

古文：林公云： 王敬仁是超悟人。 
现代文：支道林说： 王敬仁是个超脱、有悟性的人。 
English: Shidolin said: Wang Jingren is a detached and intelligent person.

古文：刘尹先推谢镇西，谢后雅重刘曰： 昔尝北面。 
现代文：将军谢尚；谢尚后来也很推重刘惔，说： 过去我曾经向他学习过。 
English: General Xie Shang; Xie Shang later also highly valued Liu Ye, saying: In the past, I used to learn from him.

古文：谢太傅称王修龄曰： 司州可与林泽游。 
现代文：太傅谢安称赞王脩龄说： 司州这个人，可以和他一起隐居，纵情山水之间。 
English: Tai Fu Xie An praised Wang Yuling, saying, "Sizhou, as a person, can live in seclusion with him and indulge in the scenery.

古文：谚曰： 杨州独步王文度，后来出人郤嘉宾。 
现代文：谚语说： 扬州的独特人才是王文度，超越常人的后起之秀是郗嘉宾。 
English: A proverb says: Yangzhou's unique talent is Wang Wenda, and the rising star who surpasses ordinary people is Zou Jiabin.

古文：人问王长史江虨兄弟群从，王答曰： 诸江皆复足自生活。 
现代文：有人问长史王濛关于江虨兄弟和堂兄弟的情况，王濛回答说： 江氏诸人都完全能够自立。 
English: When asked about the situation of the Jiang brothers and cousins, Wang Hui replied, "The Jiang family members are all completely self-reliant.

古文：谢太傅道安北： 见之乃不使人厌，然出户去，不复使人思。 
现代文：太傅谢安评论安北将军王坦之说： 见到他却也不让人生厌，可是走了以后也不再让人思念他。 
English: Commenting on General Wang Tianzhu of Anbei, Grand Master Xie An said: Seeing him does not bore people, but after he is gone, people will no longer miss him.

古文：谢公云： 司州造胜遍决。 
现代文：谢安说： 司州谈玄能到达胜境，遍决疑难。 
English: Xie An said, "Sizhou talks about the ability to reach the victory, but it is difficult to reach the victory.

古文：刘尹云： 见何次道饮酒，使人欲倾家酿。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔说： 看见何次道喝酒，让人想把家产都用来酿酒喝。 
English: Danyang Yin Liuqi said, "Seeing how many times Tao drinks makes people want to use their family's wealth to brew and drink.

古文：谢太傅语真长： 阿龄于此事，故欲太厉。 
现代文：太傅谢安告诉刘真长说： 阿龄对这件事好像太严肃了。 
English: Father Xie An told Liu Zhenlong: A-ling seems to be too serious about this matter.

古文：刘曰： 亦名士之高操者。 
现代文：刘真长说： 他也是名士里面有高尚操守的人。 
English: Liu Zhenchang said: He is also a person of high moral character among celebrities.

古文：王子猷说： 世目士少为朗，我家亦以为彻朗。 
现代文：王子猷解释说： 世人评论祖士少是开朗，我也认为是通达。开朗。 
English: Wang Zixuan explained: The world commented that Zushi Shao was cheerful, and I also thought that he was open-minded and cheerful.

古文：谢公云： 长史语甚不多，可谓有令音。 
现代文：谢安说： 长史的话很少，可以说是言辞优美。 
English: Xie An said: There are few words with a long history, and it can be said that the words are beautiful.

古文：谢镇西道敬仁 文学镞镞，无能不新 。
现代文：镇西将军谢尚评论王敬仁： 辞章才学，卓然不群，没有哪一种才能不是新奇的。 
English: Zhenxi General Xie Shang commented on Wang Jingren: It is only by learning to write that one stands out from the crowd. There is no talent that is not novel.

古文：刘尹道江道群 不能言而能不言 。
现代文：丹阳尹刘惔称道江道群： 虽不擅长言辞，却善于不发言。 
English: Danyang Yin Liuqi praised the Daojiang Daogun: Although they are not good at words, they are good at not speaking.

古文：林公云： 见司州警悟交至，使人不得住，亦终日忘疲。 
现代文：支道林说： 看到王司州的清谈机敏和悟性递相涌现的时候，真使人不愿停下来，听一整天也不觉得疲劳。 
English: Shidolin said, "When I saw Wang Shizhou's clear-talking, quick-wittedness and intelligence emerge one after another, I really didn't want to stop, and I didn't feel tired after listening for a whole day.

古文：世称： 苟子秀出，阿兴清和。 
现代文：世人称赞苟子优美杰出，阿兴清静平和。
English: The world praised Guozi for its beauty and excellence, and Axing for its tranquility and peace.

古文：简文云： 刘尹茗柯有实理。 
现代文：简文帝说： 刘尹外表像是湖涂、谈论起来却有根充分的道理。 
English: Jian Wendi said: Liu Yin looks like a lake, but there is a good reason to talk about it.

古文：谢胡儿作著作郎，尝作王堪传。
现代文：谢胡儿担任著作郎一职，曾经写过一篇《王堪传》。
English: Xie Huer served as a writer, and once wrote an article entitled "The Biography of Wang Kham."

古文：不谙堪是何似人，咨谢公。
现代文：他不知道王堪是什么样的人，就去问谢安。
English: He didn't know what kind of person Wang Kan was, so he went to ask Xie An.

古文：谢公答曰： 世胄亦被遇。
现代文：谢安回答说： 世胄也曾得到过君主的重用。
English: Xie'an replied, "The world's scepter has also been used by monarchs.

古文：堪，烈之子，阮千里姨兄弟，潘安仁中外。安仁诗所谓 子亲伊姑，我父唯舅 。
现代文：王堪是王烈的儿子，是阮千里的姨表兄弟，潘安仁的姑表兄弟，就是潘安仁诗里所说的 子亲伊姑，我父唯舅 。
English: Wang Kan is the son of Wang Lie, the cousin of Ruan Qianli's aunt, the cousin of Pan Anren's aunt, that is, the cousin of Pan Anren's poem, my father's uncle.

古文：是许允婿。 
现代文：他是许允的女婿。 
English: He is Xu Yun's son-in-law.

古文：谢太傅重邓仆射，常言 天地无知，使伯道无儿 。
现代文：太傅谢安很敬重左仆射邓伯道，曾说： 者天没长眼睛，竟使伯道绝后。 
English: Taifu Xie'an had great respect for Zuo Minzhao's disciple Deng Bo Dao. He once said, "Heavenly beings don't have long eyes, yet they made Deng Bo Dao die."

古文：谢公与王右军书曰： 敬和栖托好佳。 
现代文：谢安给右军将军王羲之的信中说： 敬和的寄托处很美妙。 
English: Xie An said in a letter to the right-wing general Wang Xizhong: The depository of respect and harmony is wonderful.

古文：吴四姓旧目云： 张文、朱武、陆忠、顾厚。 
现代文：从前评论吴郡四姓说： 张家出文人，朱家出武官，陆家忠诚，顾家敦厚。 
English: A former commentator on the four surnames of Wu County said: Zhang family is a writer, Zhu family is a military officer, Lu family is loyal, and Gu family is brave.

古文：谢公语王孝伯： 君家蓝田，举体无常人事。 
现代文：谢安对王孝伯说： 你们家的蓝田，所做的事全都和普通人不同。 
English: Xie An said to Wang Xiao Bo: Your family is from Lantian, and everything you do is different from ordinary people.

古文：许掾尝诣简文，尔夜风恬月朗，乃共作曲室中语。
现代文：许玄度曾经去见简文帝，那天晚上月明风静，两人就一起到屋子里作曲交谈，抒发胸怀。
English: Xu Xundu once went to see Emperor Jianwen. That evening, the moon was bright and the wind was calm. The two of them went to the house together to compose and talk, to express their hearts.

古文：襟怀之咏，偏是许之所长。
现代文：这是许玄度最擅长的方面。
English: This is what Xu Xundu is best at.

古文：辞寄清婉，有逾平日。
现代文：他的言辞和寄情托意都清新婉约，超过了平时的言论。
English: His words and sentiments are fresh and gentle, surpassing the usual remarks.

古文：简文虽契素，此遇尤相咨嗟。不觉造膝，共叉手语，达于将旦。
现代文：简文帝虽然一向和他情趣相投，这次会面却更加的赞赏他，言谈中两人不觉愈靠愈近，促膝相谈，一直谈到天都亮了。
English: Although Emperor Jianwen has always been sympathetic to him, this meeting was more appreciative of him. During the conversation, the two people got closer and closer, and they kept talking about the sky being bright.

古文：既而曰： 玄度才情，故未易多有许。 
现代文：事后简文帝说： 像玄度这样的才华，确实是不易多得啊！ 
English: After the event, Emperor Jianwen said, "It's really not easy to get more talent like Xundu!

古文：殷允出西，郗超与袁虎书云： 子思求良朋，托好足下，勿以开美求之。 
现代文：殷允到京都去，郗超给袁虎写信说： 子思要寻找好友，来和您结交，请不要用开美这样的标准来要求他。 
English: Yin Yun went to Kyoto, Zou Chao wrote to Yuan Hu and said: Zi Si wants to find a good friend to make friends with you, please don't use such a standard to ask him.

古文：世目袁为 开美 ，故子敬诗曰： 袁生开美度。 
现代文：世人评论袁虎为 开美 ，所以王子敬有诗说： 袁生开美度。 
English: The world commented that Yuan Hu was a beauty, so Prince Jing wrote a poem saying: Yuan Sheng is a beauty.

古文：谢车骑问谢公： 真长性至峭，何足乃重？ 
现代文：车骑将军谢玄问谢安道： 真长禀性最严厉，哪里值得如此敬重他？ 
English: The cavalry general Xie Xuan asked Xie An, "He is the toughest and most tenacious. What makes him worthy of so much respect?"

古文：答曰： 是不见耳！
现代文：谢安回答说； 你是没见过他罢了。
English: Xie An replied; You just haven't seen him.

古文：阿见子敬，尚使人不能已。 
现代文：我看见子敬，还使人情不自禁呢。 
English: When I see him, I can't help but be moved.

古文：谢公领中书监，王东亭有事应同上省，王后至，坐促，王、谢虽不通，太傅犹敛膝容之。
现代文：谢安兼任中书监的时候，东亭侯王珣有公事，应该一同去官署。王珣来得晚，座位狭窄，王、谢两家虽然不相往来，但谢安仍然收拢膝盖，腾出地方给他。
English: When Xie An concurrently served as the middle school's librarian, Dongting marquis Wang Qian had business and should go to the government office together. Wang Qian came late, the seats were narrow, and although the Wang and Xie families did not interact, Xie An still closed his knees to make room for him.

古文：王神意闲畅，谢公倾目。
现代文：王珣神情闲雅畅达，很吸引谢安。
English: Wang Yao's relaxed and elegant demeanor is very attractive to Xie An.

古文：还谓刘夫人曰： 向见阿瓜，故自未易有。虽不相关，正是使人不能已已。 
现代文：谢安回去后对刘夫人说： 刚才看到阿瓜，确实是少见的人物，虽然和我不相干，但还是使人不能自已啊。 
English: After returning home, Xie An said to Mrs. Liu: Just now, seeing Agua, she is indeed a rare person. Although she has nothing to do with me, she still makes people unable to control themselves.

古文：王子敬语谢公： 公故萧洒。 
现代文：王子敬对谢安说： 您确是风度潇洒。 
English: Prince Jing said to Xie An: You certainly have a dashing demeanor.

古文：谢曰： 身不萧洒。
现代文：谢安说： 我不潇洒。
English: Xie An said: I'm not chic.

古文：君道身最得，身正自调畅。 
现代文：您评论我是最合适的，我只是襟怀和适、舒畅。 
English: You commented that I am the most suitable, I am just warm-hearted and comfortable.

古文：谢车骑初见王文度曰： 见文度虽萧洒相遇，其复愔愔竟夕。 
现代文：车骑将军谢玄初次见到 王文度，对人说： 我觉得文度这人，虽然用潇洒的态度来对待他，他也仍旧整晚态度温和，举止安详。
English: When cavalry general Xie Xuan saw Wang Wendu for the first time, he said, "I think this man Wendu, although I treated him with a dashing attitude, he still had a gentle attitude and calm demeanor throughout the night.

古文：范豫章谓王荆州： 卿风流俊望，真后来之秀。 
现代文：豫章太守范宁对荆州刺史王忱说： 你很风雅，声望过人，真是后起之秀。 
English: Fanning, the governor of Yuzhang, said to Wang Zhen, the governor of Jingzhou, "You are very elegant, have an outstanding reputation, and are truly a rising star.

古文：王曰： 不有此舅，焉有此甥？ 
现代文：王忱说： 如果没有这样的舅舅，哪里会有这样的外甥！ 
English: Wang Zhen said: If there is no such uncle, where will there be such a nephew!

古文：子敬与子猷书，道 兄伯萧索寡会，遇酒则酣畅忘反，乃自可矜 。
现代文：王子敬给王子猷的信上说： 兄长为人淡泊，不随流俗，看到酒便尽兴痛饮，流连忘返，这确是值得骄傲的。 
English: The letter from the prince to the prince said: My elder brother is a light-hearted person, does not follow the fashion, and when he sees wine, he drinks it with pleasure and forgets about it. This is indeed something to be proud of.

古文：张天锡世雄凉州，以力弱诣京师，虽远方殊类，亦边人之桀也。
现代文：张天锡世代称雄凉州，后来因为势力衰微便投奔京都，他虽属远方异族，却也是边境上的杰出人物。
English: Zhang Tianxi's generation was called the majestic Liangzhou, and later, because of the decline of his power, he went to Kyoto. Although he belongs to a distant foreign race, he is also an outstanding figure on the border.

古文：闻皇京多才，钦羡弥至。
现代文：他听说京都人才很多，钦佩、羡慕到极点。
English: He heard that there are many talented people in Kyoto, and he admires and envies them to the extreme.

古文：犹在渚住，司马著作往诣之。言容鄙陋，无可观听。
现代文：到京都，还停留在江边码头上时，司马著作便去拜访他，司马氏言语粗鄙，容貌丑陋，既不中听，也不中看。
English: When he arrived in Kyoto and was still staying at the riverside pier, Sima Shengli went to visit him. Sima's speech was coarse, his appearance ugly, and he was neither good to listen to nor to look at.

古文：天锡心甚悔来，以遐外可以自固。
现代文：张天锡因此很后悔来这一趟，认为凭着凉州那样的边远地区还可以自己固守下去。
English: As a result, Zhang Tianxi regretted coming this time, believing that with a remote area like Liangzhou, he could still hold on.

古文：王弥有俊才美誉，当时闻而造焉。
现代文：王僧弥才能出众，名声很好，当时听说张天锡来，就去拜访他。
English: Wang Senya had outstanding talent and a good reputation. When he heard that Zhang Tianxi was coming, he went to visit him.

古文：既至，天锡见其风神清令，言话如流，陈说古今，无不贯悉。
现代文：到那里后，张天锡看见王僧弥风度高雅秀美，言谈敏捷，说古道今，无不通晓。
English: After arriving there, Zhang Tianxi saw Wang Senya's elegant and beautiful demeanor, quick speech, and knowledge of ancient and modern ways.

古文：又谙人物氏族，中来皆有证据。
现代文：又熟悉各方人士宗族和亲戚关系，都有真凭实据。
English: They are also familiar with the clan and relative relationships of all parties, and have real evidence.

古文：天锡讶服。
现代文：张天锡十分惊诧、叹服。
English: Zhang Tianxi was very surprised and sighed.

古文：王恭始与王建武甚有情，后遇袁悦之间，遂致疑隙。
现代文：王恭起初和建武将军王忱很交情很深，后来受到袁悦的挑拨，产生了嫌隙。
English: At first, Wang Qiong had a deep friendship with Jianwu General Wang Zhen. Later, he was provoked by Yuan Yue, resulting in a rift.

古文：然每至兴会，故有相思。
现代文：可是每到情之所至的时候，还是会想起对方。
English: But every time they are in love, they still think of the other person.

古文：时恭尝行散至京口谢堂，于时清露晨流，新桐初引，恭目之曰： 王大故自濯濯。 
现代文：那时王恭曾服药后行散走到京口的射堂，当时，清露在晨光中闪动，新桐初吐嫩芽，王恭触景生情，评论王忱说： 王大原本就是明朗而有光彩的。 
English: At that time, Wang Gong had taken medicine and walked to the shooting hall in Jingkou. At that time, the clear dew glistened in the morning light, the new paulownia began to sprout shoots, Wang Gong touched the scene, and commented on Wang Zhen: Wang Da was originally clear and brilliant.

古文：司马太傅为二王目曰： 孝伯亭亭直上，阿大罗罗清疏。 
现代文：太傅司马道子给王孝伯和王忱下评语说： 孝伯刚强正直，阿大清朗放达。 
English: Daifu Sima Daozi commented on Wang Xiaobo and Wang Zhengyi, saying, "Wang Xiaobo is strong and upright, and Ahda is clear and straightforward.

古文：王恭有清辞简旨，能叙说，而读书少，颇有重出。
现代文：王恭的谈论言辞清新，意思简明，善于畅谈，可是读书少，多有重复的地方。
English: Wang Qiong's speech is fresh, concise, and easy to talk about, but there is less reading and more repetition.

古文：有人道孝伯常有新意，不觉为烦。
现代文：有人说王恭常有新意，使人不觉得烦闷。
English: Some people say that Wang Qiong often has new ideas, so that people do not feel bored.

古文：殷仲堪丧后，桓玄问仲文： 卿家仲堪，定是何似人？ 
现代文：殷仲堪死后，桓玄问殷仲文： 你家仲堪，到底是个怎么样的人呢？ 
English: After the death of Yin Zhongkang, Huan Xuan asked Yin Zhongwen: What kind of person is your family's Zhongkang?

古文：仲文曰： 虽不能休明一世，足以映彻九泉。 
现代文：仲文回答说： 他虽然不能一辈子都德行完美光明，可是也足以光照九泉。 
English: Zhongwen replied: Although he can't be virtuous and perfect all his life, he is still enough to illuminate the Nine Springs.

