古文：东北海之外，大荒之中，河水之间，附禺之山，帝颛顼与九嫔葬焉。
现代文：东北海的外面，最荒远之地中，黄河岸边，有一座附禺山，帝颛顼和他的九位嫔妃葬在这里。
English: Outside the northeastern North Sea, in the most desolate land, on the banks of the Yellow River, there is a mountain, where Emperor Qianlong and his nine concubines are buried.

古文：爰有𩿨久、文贝、离俞、鸾鸟、皇鸟、大物、小物。
现代文：这里有鸲鹠、有花纹的贝、离朱、鸾鸟、凰及各种殉葬的大小物件。
English: There are dragonflies, flowered shells, scarlet ibises, ostriches, nymphs and all kinds of large and small objects.

古文：有青鸟、琅鸟、玄鸟、黄鸟、虎、豹、熊、罴、黄蛇、视肉？瑰、瑶碧，皆出卫于山。
现代文：这座山中还有青鸟、琅鸟、黑鸟、黄鸟、虎、豹、熊、罴、黄蛇、视肉、璇瑰、美玉和青绿色的玉石。
English: In this mountain, there are also bluebirds, ostriches, blackbirds, starlings, yellowbirds, tigers, leopards, bears, storks, yellow snakes, carrion crabs, dragonflies, jade and turquoise jade.

古文：丘方员三百里，丘南帝俊竹林在焉，大可为舟。
现代文：这座山旁边有一坐山丘，名叫卫丘，卫丘方圆三百里，丘的南边是帝俊的竹林，这里的竹子十分巨大，单根的竹子都可用来制成小船。
English: Next to this mountain there is a hill called Weiqiu. Weiqiu has a circumference of 300 miles. On the south side of the hill is the bamboo forest of Dijun. The bamboo here is so huge that a single bamboo can be used to make a small boat.

古文：竹南有赤泽水，名曰封渊。
现代文：竹林的南边有一个池泽，里面的水呈红色，名字叫封渊。
English: On the south side of the bamboo forest, there is a pond. The water inside is red, and its name is Fengyuan.

古文：有三桑无枝。
现代文：这里长着三棵没有树枝的桑树。
English: Here there are three mulberry trees without branches.

古文：丘西有沈渊，颛顼所浴。
现代文：丘的西边有一个沈渊，是颛顼沐浴的地方。
English: On the west side of the hill there is a sinkhole, a place for toads to bathe.

古文：有胡不与之国，烈姓，黍食。
现代文：有一个胡不与国，国中的人都姓烈，以黍为食物。
English: Once upon a time, there was a country where everyone had the surname of Lü, and they ate grasshoppers.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰不咸，有肃慎氏之国。
现代文：最荒远之地，有座山名叫不咸山。有个肃慎氏国。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Bukhansan. There is a country called Sushen.

古文：蜚蛭，四翼。
现代文：有一种能飞的蛭，长着四只翅膀。
English: There was a flying toad with four wings.

古文：有虫，兽身蛇身，名曰琴虫。
现代文：有一种蛇，是野兽的脑袋蛇的身子，名叫琴虫。
English: There is a kind of snake, which is the head of the beast and the body of the snake, called lycanthrope.

古文：有人名曰大人。
现代文：有一种人名叫大人。
English: There is a kind of person called a grown-up.

古文：有大人之国，厘姓，黍食。
现代文：有一个大人国，这里的人都姓厘，以黍为食物。
English: Once upon a time, there was an adult country. The people here were all surnamed Li, and they ate dragonflies.

古文：有大青蛇，黄头，食麈。
现代文：有一种大青蛇，黄色的脑袋，能吞食大鹿。
English: There is a large green snake with a yellow head that can devour a large deer.

古文：有榆山。
现代文：有一座榆山。
English: There is a mountain of straw.

古文：有鲧攻程州之山。
现代文：又有座鲧攻程州山。
English: There is also a dragonfly attacking Mount Shuzhou.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰衡天。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫衡天。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Heng Tian.

古文：有先民之山。
现代文：又有座先民山。
English: There is also a prehistoric mountain.

古文：有盘木千里。
现代文：有一棵盘旋弯曲一千里的大树。
English: There is a large tree that twists and turns for a thousand miles.

古文：有叔歜国，颛顼之子，黍食，使四鸟：虎、豹、熊、罴。
现代文：有一个叔歜国，这里的人都是颛顼的子孙后代，以黍为食物，能驯化驱使四种野兽：老虎、豹子、熊和罴。
English: There is a country called Shulun, where the people are descendants of camels. They use camels as food and can domesticate and drive four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears and donkeys.

古文：有黑虫如熊状，名曰猎猎。
现代文：有一种形状与熊相似的黑虫，名叫猎猎。
English: There is a black insect with a shape similar to that of a bear, called a huntsman.

古文：有北齐之国，姜姓，使虎、豹、熊、罴。
现代文：有一个北齐国，国中的人都姓姜，会驱使虎、豹、熊和罴。
English: There is a country in North Qi where everyone's surname is Jiang, and they will drive away tigers, leopards, bears and baboons.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰先槛大逢之山，河济所入，海北注焉。
现代文：最荒远之地，有座山名叫先槛大逢山，是黄河水和济水流入的地方，海水从北面灌注到这里。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Anzhuang Dafeng Mountain. It is the place where the Yellow River water and fresh water flow in, and the sea water is poured here from the north.

古文：其西有山，名曰禹所积石。
现代文：它的西边也有座山，名叫禹所积石山。
English: There is also a mountain on the west side of it, called the Yuzo Jishi Mountain.

古文：有阳山者。
现代文：有一座阳山。
English: There is a Yangshan.

古文：有顺山者，顺水出焉。
现代文：又有座顺山，顺水从这座山发源。
English: There is also a hillside, from which the stream originates.

古文：有始州之国，有丹山。
现代文：有个始州国，国中有座丹山。
English: There is a Jeju Province, and there is a Danzan Province.

古文：有大泽方千里，群鸟所解。
现代文：有一个大泽，方圆达千里，是群鸟脱换羽毛的地方。
English: There is a town called Osawa, thousands of miles in circumference, where birds change their feathers.

古文：有毛民之国，依姓，食黍，使四鸟。
现代文：有一个毛民国，国中之人姓依，以黍为食物，会驱使虎、豹、熊、罴四种野兽。
English: There was a country called Mao's Republic. The people of the country called themselves Yiyi, and they ate grasshoppers as food. They would drive away four kinds of beasts: tigers, leopards, bears, and baboons.

古文：禹生均国，均国生役采，役采生修鞛，修鞛杀绰人。
现代文：禹生了均国，均国生了役采，役采生了修鞈，修鞈杀了绰人。
English: Yu was born in the same country, the same country was born in the same place, the same country was born in the same place, the same country was born in the same place, the same country was born in the same place, the same country was born in the same place.

古文：帝念之，潜为之国，是此毛民。
现代文：帝怜念绰人，便暗中帮助绰人的后代建立了一个国家，就是这个毛民国。
English: The emperor had mercy on Chueh Tzu and secretly helped the descendants of Chueh Tzu to establish a country, the Republic of Mao.

古文：有儋耳之国，任姓禺号子，食谷。
现代文：有一个儋耳国，国中之人姓任，是禺号的后代，以谷物为食。
English: Once upon a time, there was a country in the Yunnan Province. The people in the country had the surname Ren, and they were descendants of the Yao, and they ate grain.

古文：北海之渚中，有神，人面鸟身，珥两青蛇，践两赤蛇，名曰禺强。
现代文：北海的岛中有一位神，长着人一样的脸，鸟一样的身子，以两条青蛇为耳饰，脚下踩着两条赤蛇，名字叫禺强。
English: There is a god on an island in the North Sea. He has a human-like face and a bird-like body, with two blue snakes as ear ornaments and two red snakes under his feet. His name is Stubborn.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰北极天柜，海水北注焉。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫北极天柜山，海水从北面灌注到这里。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called the Arctic Tianjian Mountain, where seawater pours in from the north.

古文：有神，九首人面鸟身，名曰九凤。
现代文：有一位神，长着九个脑袋，人一样的脸，鸟一样的身子，名字叫九凤。
English: There is a god with nine heads, a human-like face and a bird-like body. His name is Jiufeng.

古文：又有神衔蛇衔操蛇，其状虎首人身，四蹄长肘，名曰强良。
现代文：另外还有一位神，嘴里衔着蛇，手中握着蛇，长着虎一样的脑袋，人一样的身子，有四只蹄子，肘臂很长，名字叫强良。
English: In addition, there is a god with a snake in his mouth, holding a snake in his hand, with a tiger-like head, a human-like body, with four hooves, a long elbow, and a name called Qiangliang.

古文：大荒之中，有山名曰成都,载天。
现代文：最荒远之地，有一座山，名叫成都载天山。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Chengdu Jie Tianshan.

古文：有人,珥两黄蛇，把两黄蛇，名曰夸父。
现代文：有一个人的耳上穿挂着两条黄色蛇，手上拿着两条黄蛇，名叫夸父。
English: There was a man with two yellow snakes hanging from his ears and holding two yellow snakes in his hands. His name was Kuafu.

古文：后土生信，信生夸父。
现代文：后土生了信，信生了夸父。
English: The latter gave birth to faith, and faith gave birth to a great father.

古文：夸父不量力，欲追日景，逮之于禺谷。
现代文：而夸父不自量力，想要追赶太阳，追到禺谷终于追上了太阳。
English: But Kwafu did not measure up, he wanted to catch up with the sun, and he finally caught up with the sun in Shibuya.

古文：将饮河而不足也，将走大泽，未至，死于此。
现代文：他因口渴，想喝黄河中的水，又怕黄河水不够他喝，便想去喝大泽中的水，还没有赶到大泽，就死在了路上。
English: He was thirsty and wanted to drink water from the Yellow River, but he was afraid that the Yellow River water was not enough for him to drink, so he wanted to drink water from Osawa. He died on the way before reaching Osawa.

古文：应龙已杀蚩尤，又杀夸父，乃去南方处之，故南方多雨。
现代文：应龙杀了蚩尤以后，又杀了夸父，就跑到南方去居住，所以南方多雨水。
English: After Yinglong killed Qiuyou, he also killed Kuafu, so he ran to the south to live. That's why there is more rain in the south.

古文：又有无肠国，是任姓。
现代文：又有个无肠国，这里的人姓任。
English: There is also a gutless country, where people are surnamed Ren.

古文：无继子，食鱼。
现代文：他们是无继国人的子孙后代，吃鱼类。
English: They are the descendants of stateless people and eat fish.

古文：共工臣名曰相繇，九首蛇身，自环，食于九土。
现代文：共工有一位臣子名叫相繇，长了九个脑袋和蛇的身子，盘旋自绕成一团，贪婪地霸占九座神山而索取食物。
English: There was a co-worker, a courtier named Xiang Xuan, who grew up with nine heads and the body of a snake, circling and twisting himself into a ball, greedily occupying the nine sacred mountains and demanding food.

古文：其所歍所尼，即为源泽，不辛乃苦，百兽莫能处。
现代文：他所喷吐停留过的地方，立即变成大沼泽，而气味不是辛辣就是很苦，百兽中没有能居住这里的。
English: The place where his vomit stayed immediately turned into a huge swamp, and the smell was either pungent or bitter, and no animal could live there.

古文：禹湮洪水，杀相繇，其血腥臭，不可生谷；其地多水，不可居也。
现代文：大禹堵塞洪水，杀死了相繇，而相繇的血又腥又臭，使谷物不能生长；那地方又水涝成灾，使人不能居住。
English: And David stopped the waters of the flood, and slew the Amorites; and the blood of the Amorites became foul and bitter, so that no grain could grow; and the land was submerged, so that it could not be inhabited.

古文：禹湮之，三仞三沮，乃以为池，群帝是因以为台。
现代文：大禹填塞它，屡次填塞而屡次塌陷，于是把它挖成大池子，诸帝就利用挖出的泥土建造了几座高台。
English: Dayu filled it, repeatedly filled and repeatedly collapsed, so he dug it into a large pool, and the emperors used the excavated soil to build several high platforms.

古文：在昆仑之北。
现代文：诸帝台位于昆仑山的北面。
English: Zhudeidai is located on the north side of Mount Kunlun.

古文：有岳之山。寻竹生焉。
现代文：有一座岳山，一种高大的竹子生长在这座山上。
English: There is a mountain, a tall bamboo grows on this mountain.

古文：大荒之中，有名山曰不句，海水入焉。
现代文：最荒远之地，有座山名叫不句山，海水从北面灌注到这里。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Fukuyama, where seawater pours in from the north.

古文：有系昆之山者，有共工之台，射者不敢北射。
现代文：有座山叫系昆山，上面有共工台，射箭的人因敬畏共工的威灵而不敢朝北方拉弓射箭。
English: There is a mountain called Kunshan, with a co-working platform on it. Archers do not dare to shoot arrows to the north because they fear the power of co-working.

古文：有人衣青衣，名曰黄帝女魃。
现代文：有一个人穿着青色衣服，名叫黄帝女妭。
English: There was a person wearing a blue dress, named Huang Di Niu.

古文：蚩尤作兵伐黄帝，黄帝乃令应龙攻之冀州之野。
现代文：蚩尤制造了多种兵器用来攻击黄帝，黄帝便派应龙到冀州的原野去攻打蚩尤。
English: Puyou made a variety of weapons to attack the Yellow Emperor, and the Yellow Emperor sent Yinglong to the plains of Jizhou to attack Puyou.

古文：应龙畜水。蚩尤请风伯雨师，纵大风雨。
现代文：应龙积蓄了很多水，而蚩尤请来风伯和雨师，纵起一场大风雨。
English: Yinglong accumulated a lot of water, and Zhou You invited Fengbo and Yushi to stir up a big storm.

古文：黄帝乃下天女曰魃，雨止，遂杀蚩尤。
现代文：黄帝就降下名叫妭的天女助战，雨被止住，于是杀死蚩尤。
English: The Yellow Emperor sent down a celestial maiden named Yao to help in the battle, and the rain was stopped, so he killed Qiu You.

古文：魃不得复上，所居不雨。
现代文：女妭因神力耗尽而不能再回到天上，她居住的地方没有一点雨水。
English: The maiden was too exhausted to return to the sky, and there was no rain where she lived.

古文：叔均言之帝，后置之赤水之北。
现代文：叔均将此事禀报给黄帝，后来黄帝就把女妭安置在赤水的北面。
English: All the uncles reported the matter to the Yellow Emperor, and later the Yellow Emperor placed the maiden on the north side of the Red River.

古文：叔均乃为田祖。
现代文：叔均便做了田神。
English: My uncles all became rice field gods.

古文：魃时亡之，所欲逐之者，令曰： 神北行！ 
现代文：女妭常常逃亡而出现旱情，要想驱逐她，便祷告说： 神啊请向北去吧！ 
English: The maiden often fled when there was drought, and to drive her away she prayed, "God, please go to the north!"

古文：先除水道，决通沟渎。
现代文：事先清除水道，疏通大小沟渠。
English: Clear waterways in advance and dredge large and small ditches.

古文：有人方食鱼，名曰深目民之国，盼姓，食鱼。
现代文：有一群人正在吃鱼，名叫深目民国，这里的人姓朌，吃鱼类。
English: There is a group of people who are eating fish, they are called "Fukame Rokkoku" (深目民国), and the people here are surnamed "Kaku" (), and they are eating fish.

古文：有钟山者。
现代文：有一座钟山。
English: There is a bell tower.

古文：有女子衣青衣，名曰赤水女子献。
现代文：有一个穿青色衣服的女子，名叫赤水女子魃。
English: There was a woman in a blue dress, her name was Chakusui Shisetsu.

古文：大荒之中。有山名曰融父山，顺水入焉。
现代文：最荒远之地，有座山名叫融父山，顺水流入这座山。
English: In the most desolate place, there is a mountain called Yongfu Mountain, and the water flows into this mountain.

古文：有人名曰犬戎。
现代文：有一种人名叫犬戎。
English: There is a type of person called a dog.

古文：黄帝生苗龙，苗龙，苗龙生融吾，融吾生弄明，弄明生白犬，白犬有牝牡，是为犬戎，肉食。
现代文：黄帝生了苗龙，苗龙生了融吾，融吾生了弄明，弄明生了白犬，这白犬有一公一母而自相配偶，便生成犬戎族人，吃肉类食物。
English: The Yellow Emperor gave birth to Miao Long, Miao Long gave birth to Rong Mei, Rong Mei gave birth to Fang Ming, Fang Ming gave birth to Bai Can, this Bai Can has a male and a female and is a natural mate, then it becomes a dog of the Rong people and eats meat.

古文：有赤兽，马状无首，名曰戎宣王尸。
现代文：有一种红颜色的野兽，形状像普通的马却没有脑袋，名叫戎宣王尸。
English: There is a red-coloured beast, shaped like an ordinary horse but without a head, called the Eunseung Wangzang.

古文：有山名曰齐州之山、君山、鬵山、鲜野山、鱼山。
现代文：有几座山分别叫做齐州山、君山、鬵山、鲜野山、鱼山。
English: There are several mountains called Qizhou Mountain, Junshan, Lushan, Xianye Mountain and Yu Mountain.

古文：有人一目，当面中生。
现代文：有一种人只有一只眼睛，就长在脸的正中。
English: There is a type of person who has only one eye, which is located in the middle of the face.

古文：一曰是威姓，少昊之子，食黍。
现代文：一种说法认为他们姓威，是少昊的子孙后代，吃黄米。
English: One theory is that they are surnamed Wei, descendants of Shao Hao, and eat yellow rice.

古文：有继无民，继无民任姓，无骨子，食气、鱼。
现代文：有一种人称继无民，继无民姓任，是无骨民的子孙后代，他们以空气和鱼为食物。
English: There is a kind of person called "successor of no-people" and "successor of no-people surnamed Ren," who are the descendants of the spineless people. They eat air and fish.

古文：西北海外，流沙之东，有国曰中䡢，颛顼之子。
现代文：在西北方的海外，流沙的东面，有一个国家叫中䡢国，这里的人是颛顼的子孙后代，吃黄米。
English: Overseas in the northwest, to the east of the quicksand, there is a country called Zhongyuan. The people here are descendants of Yao, and they eat yellow rice.

古文：有国名曰赖丘。
现代文：有一个国家，名叫赖丘。
English: There is a country called Raichu.

古文：有犬戎国。
现代文：还有个犬戎国。
English: There is also a dog, Ebukoku.

古文：有神，人面兽身，名曰犬戎。
现代文：有一位神人，长着人的面孔兽的身子，名叫犬戎。
English: There was a god-man with the body of a beast with a human face, called Injun.

古文：西北海外，黑水之北，有人有翼，名曰苗民。
现代文：在西北方的海外，黑水的北岸，有一种人长着翅膀，名叫苗民。
English: In the northwest overseas, on the north shore of the Black Water, there is a kind of person with wings, named Miao Min.

古文：颛顼生驩头，驩头生苗民，苗民厘姓，食肉。
现代文：颛顼生了驩头，驩头生了苗民，苗民人姓厘，吃的是肉类食物。
English: gave birth to,  gave birth to 苗, 苗 gave birth to 苗, 苗 gave birth to 苗, 苗 gave birth to 苗, 苗 gave birth to 苗, 苗 gave birth to 苗.

古文：有山名曰章山。
现代文：还有一座山名叫章山。
English: There is also a mountain called Zhangshan.

古文：大荒之中，有衡石山、九阴山、洞野之山，上有赤树，青叶赤华，名曰若木。
现代文：最荒远之地，有衡石山，九阴山、灰野山，山上有一种红颜色的树木，青色的叶子红色的花朵，名叫若木。
English: In the most desolate places, there are Hengshi Mountain, Jiuyin Mountain and Huye Mountain. There is a kind of red-colored tree with blue leaves and red flowers on the mountain, which is called the young tree.

古文：有牛黎之国。
现代文：有一个牛黎国。
English: There is a cow named Liguo.

古文：有人无骨，儋耳之子。
现代文：有一种人，身上没有骨头，是儋耳的后代。
English: There is a kind of man who has no bones in his body. He is a descendant of the baboon.

古文：西北海之外，赤水之北，有章尾山。
现代文：西北海的外面，赤水的北边，有一座章尾山。
English: Outside the Northwest Sea, north of the Red Water, there is a mountain called Zhangwei Mountain.

古文：有神，人面蛇身而赤，直目正乘，其瞑乃晦，其视乃明，不食不寝不息，风雨是谒。是烛九阴，是烛龙。
现代文：有一位神，长着人一样的脸，蛇一样的身子，浑身红色，眼睛竖着长，它闭上眼睛，天下就变成了黑夜；睁开眼睛，天下就成了白天。它不吃东西，不睡觉，也不呼吸，能请来风雨。它能照亮幽渺之地，这就是烛龙。
English: There was a god with a face like a man and a body like a snake. His whole body was red and his eyes were long and erect. When he closed his eyes, the whole world became night; when he opened his eyes, the whole world became day. He did not eat, sleep, or breathe. He could bring wind and rain. He could illuminate the dark places. This was the Candle Dragon.

