古文：秦伐魏，陈轸合三晋而东谓齐王曰： 古之王者之伐也。欲以正天下而立功名，以为后世也。
现代文：秦国攻打魏国，陈轸联合韩、赵、魏之后往东去到齐国，对齐王说： 古代圣王兴兵征伐，都是为了匡正天下建立功名，是为了造福后世。
English: Qin attacked Wei, and Chen Pi, after uniting with Han, Zhao, and Wei, went east to Qi. He said to the king of Qi: The ancient holy king Xing's military conquests were all for the purpose of establishing a good name in the world, and for the benefit of future generations.

古文：今齐、楚、燕、赵、韩、梁六国之递甚也，不足以立功名，适足以强秦而自弱也，非山东之上计也。
现代文：如今齐、楚、燕、韩、魏等六国，彼此互相侵略征伐，不但不足以建立功名，而且会使秦国强大使本国走向衰弱，这绝对不是崤山以东各个诸侯国所应该采取的好计策。
English: Today, six countries, including Qi, Chu, Yan, Han and Wei, invade and conquer each other, which is not only not enough to build a reputation, but will also weaken Qin Guoqiang's country. This is definitely not a good strategy that should be adopted by all the principalities east of Lushan.

古文：能危山东者，强秦也。
现代文：能够灭亡崤山以东各个诸侯国的，只有强大的秦国。
English: Only the powerful Qin state could defeat all the vassal states east of Mount Lushan.

古文：不忧强秦，而递相罢弱，而两归其国于秦，此臣之所以为山东之患。
现代文：如今六国不但不联手抗拒强秦，反而互相削弱，到最后必然两败俱伤，最后被秦国吞并，这是我为崤山以东六国所忧虑的原因所在。
English: Today, the six countries not only do not join hands to resist the strong Qin, but instead weaken each other. In the end, they will inevitably lose both and be annexed by Qin. This is the reason why I am worried about the six countries east of Lushan.

古文：天下为秦相割，秦曾不出力；天下为秦相烹，秦曾不出薪。
现代文：秦国毫不费力，天下诸侯就互相割让土地给秦国；秦国连柴火都不必用，天下诸侯就自动替秦国烹煮自己，到时候就有上等佳肴等待秦国享用。
English: Without any effort on the part of Qin, all the princes in the world mutually ceded land to Qin; Qin did not even need to use firewood, and all the princes in the world automatically cooked themselves for Qin. At that time, there were first-class delicacies waiting for Qin to enjoy.

古文：何秦之智而山东之愚耶？愿大王之察也。
现代文：秦国多么聪明，而崤山以东的六国又是多么愚蠢啊，但愿大王能够清楚地认识到这一点！
English: How clever Qin is, and how stupid the six countries east of Mount Lushan are. I hope the great king can clearly recognize this!

古文： 古之五帝、三王、五伯之伐也，伐不道者。
现代文：古时候的五帝、三皇和五霸所进行的征伐，讨伐的都是无道的君王。
English: In ancient times, the five emperors, three emperors and five tyrants carried out the crusade, and the crusaders were all ruthless kings.

古文：今秦之伐天下不然，必欲反之，主必死辱，民必死虏。
现代文：但是如今秦国征伐天下却不是这样的，却和古时候恰恰相反，这样一来，亡国的国君必定死于屈辱，亡国的百姓必定死于俘虏。
English: However, this is not the case now that Qin has conquered the world, but it is the exact opposite of ancient times. As a result, the ruler of the defeated country must die of humiliation, and the people of the defeated country must die as captives.

古文：今韩、梁之目未尝干，而齐民独不也，非齐亲而韩、梁疏也，齐远秦而韩、梁近。
现代文：现在韩、魏两国百姓的眼泪还没有流干，只有齐国的百姓还没有惨遭秦国的掳掠，但这并不是因为齐国和秦国关系好，而韩、魏与秦国关系不好所造成的，只是因为齐国离秦国远，而韩、魏两国离秦国近。
English: At present, the tears of the people of Han and Wei have not yet dried up, and only the people of Qiu have not yet been cruelly abducted by Qin. However, this is not because the relationship between Qiu and Qin is good, and the relationship between Han and Wei and Qin is not good, but because Qiu is far from Qin, while Han and Wei are close to Qin.

古文：今齐将近矣！
现代文：如今齐国离遭遇战祸也已经越来越近了！
English: Now, Qi is getting closer and closer to encountering the disaster of war!

古文：今秦欲攻梁绛、安邑，秦得绛、安邑以东下河，必表里河而东攻齐，举齐属之海，南面而孤楚、韩、梁，北向而孤燕、赵，齐无所出其计矣，愿王熟虑之！
现代文：因为现在秦国正想要攻打魏国的绛邑和安邑，秦国攻取了绛邑和安邑，再继续沿黄河往东进兵，必定进攻齐国，占据齐国的土地直到东海边上，接着向南进兵，使韩、魏、楚三国陷于孤立，向北进兵使燕、赵两国陷于孤立，这样一来，齐国就无计可施了，希望大王慎重考虑这件事。
English: Because now Qin is trying to attack Wei's Pu'er and An'er. If Qin captures Pu'er and An'er and continues to march eastward along the Yellow River, it will certainly attack Qi, occupy the land of Qi up to the edge of the East Sea, then march south to isolate Han, Wei and Chu, and march north to isolate Yan and Zhao. As a result, there is nothing Qi can do. I hope the king will carefully consider this matter.

古文：今三晋已合矣，复为兄弟约，而出锐师以成梁绛、安邑，此万世之计也。
现代文：现在韩、魏、赵三国已经又联合在一起，再度成为兄弟之邦，而且相约共同出精兵去保卫魏国的绿县和安邑，这都是长远的计划。
English: Now, the three countries of Han, Wei, and Zhao have united again, once again become a brotherly country, and have agreed to jointly send elite soldiers to defend the Green County and Anyi of Wei, which are all long-term plans.

古文：齐非急以锐师合三晋，必有后忧。
现代文：齐国如果不赶紧出精兵联合韩、赵、魏三国，那齐国必将后患无穷。
English: If Qi did not quickly send its elite soldiers to unite with Han, Zhao, and Wei, then Qi would suffer a lot.

古文：三晋合，秦必不敢攻梁，必南攻楚。楚、秦构难，三晋怒齐不与己也，必东攻齐。
现代文：韩、赵、魏三国联合以后，秦国必然不敢攻打魏国，而是转过头往南攻打楚国，楚、秦既然兵连祸结，那时韩、赵、魏三国由于愤恨齐国的不肯支援，必然出兵去攻打齐。
English: After the unification of Han, Zhao, and Wei, Qin would not dare to attack Wei, but turned south to attack Chu. Since Chu and Qin were allied, Han, Zhao, and Wei, resentful of Qi's unwillingness to support them, would have to attack Qi.

古文：此臣之所谓齐必有大忧，不如急以兵合于三晋。 
现代文：这就是臣说的齐国必有的大后患，因此齐国应该赶紧出兵联合韩、赵、魏三国。 
English: This is what the vassal said was the inevitable big trouble for Qi, so Qi should quickly send troops to unite with South Korea, Zhao, and Wei.

