古文：东夷高丽，本扶馀别种也。
现代文：高丽，本是扶余的别种。
English: Goryeo, originally, was a different kind of Fuyu crane.

古文：地东跨海距新罗，南亦跨海距百济，西北度辽水与营州接，北靺鞨。
现代文：其地域：东边跨海可到新罗，南边渡海可到百济，西北渡辽水与营州接壤，北边是。
English: Its area: the east can cross the sea to Silla, the south can cross the sea to Baekje, the northwest to Liaoshui and Yingzhou border, and the north is.

古文：其君居平壤城，亦谓长安城，汉乐浪郡也，去京师五千里而赢，随山屈缭为郛，南涯浿水，王筑宫其左。
现代文：其国君住在平壤城，也称作长安城，即汉时的乐浪郡，距离京师有五千多里，顺山势环绕作为外郭，南边滨临氵贝水，王就在其左侧建筑宫室。
English: Its sovereign lived in Pyongyang City, also known as Chang'an City, that is, Lelang County in the Han Dynasty, more than five thousand miles away from Beijing, surrounded by mountains as an outer wall, with the South Coast of Linyi Beishui, and the king built a palace on its left side.

古文：又有国内城、汉城，号别都。
现代文：还有国内城、汉城，称之为别都。
English: There is also the domestic city, Seoul, which is called Beidou.

古文：水有大辽、少辽：大辽出靺鞨西南山，南历安市城；少辽出辽山西，亦南流，有梁水出塞外，西行与之合。
现代文：河流有大辽、少辽：大辽源于西南山中，南流经安市城；少辽源于辽山西，也南流，还有梁水源自塞外，西流与少辽会合。
English: The rivers are the Daliao and the Shao Liao: the Daliao originates in the mountains in the southwest and flows south through the city of An; the Shao Liao originates in the west of the Liao Mountains and also flows south; and the Liang Shui originates outside of Tibet, and the west stream joins the Shao Liao.

古文：有马訾水出靺鞨之白山，色若鸭头，号鸭渌水，历国内城西，与盐难水合，又西南至安市，入于海。而平壤在鸭渌东南，以巨舻济人，因恃以为堑。官凡十二级：曰大对庐，或曰吐捽；曰郁折，主图簿者；曰太大使者；曰帛衣头大兄，所谓帛衣者，先人也，秉国政，三岁一易，善职则否，凡代日，有不服则相攻，王为闭宫守，胜者听为之；曰大使者；曰大兄；曰上位使者；曰诸兄；曰小使者；曰过节；曰先人；曰古邹大加。
现代文：所谓帛衣，乃指先人。三年一换，若政绩卓著就不换。到交替之时，如有不服就互相攻击。王则关闭宫门守卫，听凭得胜者任该职。
English: The so-called yakitori refers to the predecessors. The post is changed every three years, but if the political performance is outstanding, it will not be changed. At the time of alternation, if there is any dissatisfaction, they will attack each other. The king closes the palace gate guard and lets the winner take the post.

古文：其州县六十。
现代文：州县共有六十个。
English: There are a total of sixty prefectures.

古文：大城置傉萨一，比都督；馀城置处闾近支，亦号道使，比刺史。
现代文：大城设置一亻辱萨，有如都督；其他的城设置处闾近支，也叫道使，有如刺史。
English: The setting up of a large city is like the rise of a governor; the setting up of other cities is like the rise of a governor, and the setting up of other cities is like the rise of a governor.

古文：有参佐，分干。
现代文：下有参佐，分掌各事。
English: There is a staff sergeant below, who is in charge of various matters.

古文：有大模达，比卫将军；末客，比中郎将。
现代文：还有大模达，有如卫将军；末客，有如中郎将。
English: There are also great models, such as Wei generals; and the last guest, such as Zhong Lang generals.

古文：分五部：曰内部，即汉桂娄部也，亦号黄部；曰北部，即绝奴部也，或号后部；曰东部，即顺奴部也，或号左部；曰南部，即灌奴部也，亦号前部；曰西部，即消奴部也。王服五采，以白罗制冠，革带皆金扣。
现代文：全国分五部：内部，即汉时的桂娄部，也叫黄部；北部，即绝奴部，或叫后部；东部，即顺奴部，或叫左部；南部，即灌奴部，也叫前部；西部，即消奴部。王穿五彩服，用白罗做冠，皮带都用金扣。
English: The whole country is divided into five parts: the interior, that is, the Guizhong part of the Han Dynasty, is also called the yellow part; the north, that is, the slave-free part, or the back part; the east, that is, the slave-free part, or the left part; the south, that is, the slave-free part, is also called the front part; the west, that is, the slave-free part. The king wears multicolored clothes, with Poirot as the crown, and the belts are buckled with gold.

古文：大臣青罗冠，次绛罗，珥两鸟羽，金银杂扣，衫筒袖，裤大口，白韦带，黄革履。
现代文：大臣戴青罗冠，次一级戴绛罗冠，插两根鸟羽，用金银杂色扣。衣服窄袖，裤子大脚口，用白皮带，穿黄皮鞋。
English: The minister wears the Qing Luo crown, the next level wears the Jiao Luo crown, inserts two bird feathers, uses gold and silver mixed color buckles. Clothes have narrow sleeves, pants have large foot openings, use white belts, and wear yellow leather shoes.

古文：庶人衣褐，戴弁。
现代文：百姓们则穿粗布衣，戴便帽。
English: The common people wear coarse cloth and caps.

古文：女子首巾帼。
现代文：妇女头上用巾帼装饰。
English: A woman's head is decorated with handkerchiefs.

古文：俗喜弈、投壶、蹴鞠。
现代文：民俗喜欢下围棋、投壶、踢球。
English: Folk customs like playing Go, throwing pots and kicking balls.

古文：食用笾、豆、簠、簋、罍、洗。
现代文：进餐时用笾、豆？簋？洗等用具。
English: Use tongs, beans, chopsticks, detergent and other utensils when eating.

古文：居依山谷，以草茨屋，惟王宫、官府、佛庐以瓦。
现代文：人们倚山谷而居，用茅草盖屋，只有王宫、官府、佛庐才用瓦。
English: People lived in the valley and covered their houses with thatch. Only the royal palace, government offices and Buddhist stupas were made of tiles.

古文：窭民盛冬作长坑，煴火以取暖。
现代文：贫民冬天都做一长坑，下面烧微火以取暖。
English: In winter, the poor would make a long pit and light a small fire underneath to keep warm.

古文：其治，峭法以绳下，故少犯。
现代文：其治国之道，用严刑峻法，所以很少有犯罪的。
English: Its way of governing the country is to use severe punishment and harsh laws, so there are few crimes.

古文：叛者丛炬灼体，乃斩之，籍入其家。降、败、杀人及剽劫者斩，盗者十倍取偿，杀牛马者没为奴婢，故道不掇遗。
现代文：如有叛国的，用许多火炬烧灼身体，然后斩首，没收财产；降敌、战败、杀人及抢劫的斩首；偷盗的赔偿十倍；杀牛马的没收为奴婢。所以能做到道不拾遗。
English: If there is treason, burn the body with many torches, then behead and confiscate the property; surrender, defeat, beheading of murder and robbery; tenfold compensation for theft; confiscation of cattle and horses as slaves. So it can be done.

古文：婚娶不用币，有受者耻之。
现代文：婚娶不用聘礼，有收聘礼的大家都认为可耻。
English: There is no bride price for marriage, and everyone who receives a bride price thinks it is shameful.

古文：服父母丧三年，兄弟逾月除。
现代文：父母死，服丧三年；兄弟死，丧期只一个月。
English: If a parent dies, the mourning period is three years; if a sibling dies, the mourning period is only one month.

古文：俗多淫祠，礼灵星及日、箕子、可汗等神。
现代文：民间有众多祭祠，祭祀灵星神、日神、箕子神、可汗神。
English: There are many folk shrines dedicated to the spirits of the star gods, the sun god, the dragon god, and the khan god.

古文：国左有大穴曰神隧，每十月，王皆自祭。
现代文：国城东有个大穴，叫作神隧，每年十月，王都要亲自祭奠。
English: There is a big hole in the east of the national capital, called the God Tunnel. Every October, the king must personally pay homage.

古文：人喜学，至穷里厮家，亦相矜勉，衢侧悉构严屋，号局堂，子弟未婚者曹处，诵经习射。
现代文：人民爱好学习，即使是穷家小户，也学习认真努力。通衢大道都建有大屋，称之为局堂。未婚的子弟都在此集中，读书习射。
English: People like to study, and even small poor families study hard. There are large houses on Tonglu Avenue, which are called local government offices. Unmarried children are concentrated here, studying and shooting.

古文：隋末，其王高元死，异母弟建武嗣。
现代文：隋朝末年，其王高元死，异母弟建武即位。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Wang Gao Yuan died and his half-brother Jian Wu ascended the throne.

古文：武德初，再遣使入朝。
现代文：武德初年，两次派使臣入朝献贡。
English: In the first year of Wude, he twice sent envoys to the court to pay tribute.

古文：高祖下书脩好，约高丽人在中国者护送，中国人在高丽者敕遣还。
现代文：高祖写信给王修好，约定高丽人因故留在中国的将护送他们回国，中国人因故留在高丽的也请让他们回国。
English: Gaozu wrote a letter to Wang Xiu, agreeing that the Koreans who stayed in China for some reason would be escorted back to their country, and that the Chinese who stayed in Korea for some reason should also be allowed to return.

古文：于是建武悉搜亡命归有司，且万人。
现代文：于是高建武搜寻全部留于此的亡命华人，将他们交还有司，前后将近万人。
English: As a result, Gao Jianwu searched for all the Chinese exiles who had stayed here, and handed them over to the authorities. Nearly 10,000 people were rounded up.

古文：后三年，遣使者拜为上柱国、辽东郡王、高丽王。
现代文：三年后，皇帝派使者去委任王为上柱国、辽东郡王、高丽王。
English: Three years later, the emperor sent an envoy to appoint Wang as Shangzhu Guo, Liaodong Guo, and Goryeo Guo.

古文：命道士以像法往，为讲《老子》。
现代文：还派道士带了天尊像及道法前去，为他们讲《老子》。
English: They also sent a Taoist monk to go there with a statue of Heaven and the Taoist teachings to teach them about "Lao Zi."

古文：建武大悦，率国人共听之，日数千人。
现代文：建武非常高兴，带领国人一起听讲，每日都有几千人。
English: Jianwu was very happy and led the Chinese people to listen to the lecture together. There are several thousand people every day.

古文：帝谓左右曰： 名实须相副。
现代文：皇帝对左右说 ：名实之间应该相符。
English: The emperor said to the left and right: the name should match the reality.

古文：高丽虽臣于隋，而终拒炀帝，何臣之为？
现代文：以前高丽虽然称臣于隋，但终于抗拒炀帝，哪里称得上是臣子呢？
English: In the past, although Goryeo claimed to be a vassal of the Sui Dynasty, it eventually resisted Emperor Gong. How can it be called a vassal?

古文：朕务安人，何必受其臣？ 
现代文：我的目的在于使人民安居乐业，何必一定要他们对我们称臣？ 
English: My aim is to enable the people to live and work in peace and contentment. Why should they have to be our vassals?

古文：裴矩、温彦博谏曰： 辽东本箕子国，魏晋时故封内，不可不臣。
现代文：侍中裴矩、中书侍郎温彦博劝谏说： 辽东，周时是箕子的封国，魏晋时犹在故封之内，不可以不称臣。
English: The Vice-Chamberlain Pei Rong and the Vice-Chamberlain Wen Yanbo advised him: "In Liaodong, Zhou Dynasty was a vassal state of Shanzi, and Wei and Jin Dynasties were within the former fief, so you must be a vassal.

古文：中国与夷狄，犹太阳于列星，不可以降。 
现代文：况且中国与夷狄，就好像太阳之与众星，不可以降尊。 
English: Moreover, China and Yidi, just like the sun and the stars, cannot be degraded.

古文：乃止。
现代文：高祖的想法作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：明年，新罗、百济上书，言建武闭道，使不得朝，且数侵入。
现代文：第二年，新罗、百济上书，说建武封闭道路，使他们不能入朝，且又多次侵扰他们。
English: The following year, Silla and Baekje sent a letter saying that Jianwu had closed the roads so that they could not enter the imperial court, and that Jianwu had repeatedly harassed them.

古文：有诏散骑侍郎硃子奢持节谕和，建武谢罪，乃请与二国平。
现代文：皇帝诏令散骑侍郎朱子奢持节前往调解。建武谢罪，请求与两国和好。
English: The emperor sent his equestrian attendant, Zhu Zi, to mediate. He pleaded for peace and reconciliation between the two countries.

古文：太宗已禽突厥颉利，建武遣使者贺，并上封域图。
现代文：太宗擒获突厥的颉利，建武派使者入朝庆贺，同时献上封域图。
English: Emperor Taizong won the Turkish victory, and Emperor Jianwu sent an envoy to celebrate, presenting a map of the conquered territory.

古文：帝诏广州司马长孙师临瘗隋士战胔，毁高丽所立京观。
现代文：皇帝诏令广州司马长孙师去收葬隋朝时战死者的骸骨，毁掉高丽所埋的大坟。
English: The emperor gave the order to Guangzhou Sima Changsun Shi to collect the skeletons of those who died in the war during the Sui Dynasty and destroy the tombs buried by Goryeo.

古文：建武惧，乃筑长城千里，东北首扶馀，西南属之海。
现代文：建武担心会打他，于是筑长城一千里。东北起自扶余城，西南迄于海。
English: Jianwu was worried that he would be beaten, so he built the Great Wall for a thousand miles, from the northeast to the self-supporting Yucheng, and from the southwest to the sea.

古文：久之，遣太子桓权入朝献方物，帝厚赐赍，诏使者陈大德持节答劳，且观亹。
现代文：后来，派太子桓权入朝献特产，皇帝赏赐甚厚。诏令陈大德持节前去答谢慰劳，同时暗察情况。
English: Later, he sent Prince Huanquan to the imperial court to present special products, and the emperor rewarded him very generously. He ordered Chen Daide to go to the festival to thank him for his hard work, and at the same time to inspect the situation.

古文：大德入其国，厚饷官守，悉得其纤曲。
现代文：大德到了高丽，对各官守都有厚赠，因此得以了解其国内的所有情况。
English: When Daede arrived in Goryeo, he made generous gifts to all officials, and thus was able to learn all about the situation in his country.

古文：见华人流客者，为道亲戚存亡，人人垂涕，故所至士女夹道观。
现代文：见到客居于此的华人，就一一告诉他们亲戚的存亡情况，以致人人感动得流泪。所以大德所到之处，士女们都夹道观看。
English: When they saw the Chinese people who were staying here, they told them one by one about the fate of their relatives, so that everyone was moved to tears. So wherever Daede went, the men and women all watched.

古文：建武盛陈兵见使者。
现代文：建武陈列大规模武装部队让大德观看。
English: Jianwu displayed large-scale armed forces for the German people to see.

古文：大德还奏，帝悦。
现代文：大德回来汇报情况，皇帝很高兴。
English: Dade returned to report on the situation, and the emperor was delighted.

古文：大德又言： 闻高昌灭，其大对庐三至馆，有加礼焉。 
现代文：大德又说： 听说高昌灭亡时，高丽的大对卢曾三次至馆，礼貌甚周。 
English: Daede also said, "I heard that when Gaochang was destroyed, the great rival of Goryeo, Lu, came to the museum three times and was very polite.

古文：帝曰： 高丽地止四郡，我发卒数万攻辽东，诸城必救，我以舟师自东莱帆海趋平壤，固易。
现代文：皇帝说： 高丽，地只有四郡，我发兵几万人攻辽东，各城一定来相救。我用水军从东莱泛海到平壤，是十分容易的事。
English: The emperor said, "Goryeo has only four counties. I sent tens of thousands of soldiers to attack Liaodong, and every city must come to the rescue. It is very easy for me to sail across the sea from Donglai to Pyongyang.

古文：然天下甫平，不欲劳人耳。 
现代文：只是天下刚刚太平，我不想再劳动人民。 
English: It's just that the world is at peace right now, and I don't want to scare working people anymore.

古文：有盖苏文者，或号盖金，姓泉氏，自云生水中以惑众。
现代文：有个叫盖苏文的人，或称作盖金，姓泉氏，自称是水里涌出来的，用以惑众。
English: There was a man named Gai Suwen, or Gai Jin, surnamed Quan, who claimed to have sprung from the water to deceive the public.

古文：性忍暴。父为东部大人、大对庐，死。
现代文：他生性凶猛残暴，他的父亲是东部的大人、大对卢。
English: He is ferocious and cruel by nature, and his father is a great man from the east, a great rival of Lu.

古文：盖苏文当嗣，国人恶之，不得立。
现代文：死后，其职位该由盖苏文继任，但是国内人民不喜欢他，因此不能任职。
English: After his death, his position should have been taken over by Gaisuwen, but the people of the country did not like him, so he could not serve.

古文：顿首谢众，请摄职，有不可，虽废无悔。
现代文：盖苏文向人民叩头道歉，请求让他暂代此职，如果有不称职的地方，再被大家罢免也不懊悔。
English: Gaisuwen apologized to the people for kowtowing, and asked him to temporarily take over this post. If there is any incompetence, he will not regret being dismissed by everyone.

古文：众哀之，遂嗣位。
现代文：人民同情了他，让他继任。
English: The people sympathized with him and allowed him to succeed.

古文：残凶不道，诸大臣与建武议诛之，盖苏文觉，悉召诸部，绐云大阅兵，列馔具请大臣临视，宾至尽杀之，凡百余人。
现代文：盖苏文任职后，依然凶残不讲人道。各位大臣与建武商议准备除掉他。盖苏文知道了，把各部的兵力都召集拢来，假称要大阅兵，还陈列丰盛的酒宴请大臣们来检阅。大臣们到了后，盖苏文把他们全杀了，共有一百多人。
English: After Gaisuwen took office, he continued to be cruel and inhumane. The ministers discussed with Jianwu to get rid of him. When Gaisuwen found out, he gathered the troops of all the ministries, pretended to have a large military parade, and also displayed a sumptuous wine banquet to invite the ministers to review. After the ministers arrived, Gaisuwen killed them all, a total of more than one hundred people.

古文：驰入宫杀建武，残其尸投诸沟。
现代文：接着就驰马入宫杀了建武，分其尸，丢在沟里。
English: He then galloped into the palace, killed Kenmu, divided his body and threw it into a ditch.

古文：更立建武弟之子藏为王，自为莫离支，专国，犹唐兵部尚书、中书令职云。
现代文：改立建武弟弟的儿子藏为王，自己任莫离支，掌管国事，有如唐朝的兵部尚书、中书令的职务。
English: He made the son of Jianwu's younger brother Zang the king. He himself did not leave the branch and was in charge of state affairs, which was similar to the position of the secretary of the military department and the secretary of the central government in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：貌魁秀，美须髯，冠服皆饰以金，佩五刀，左右莫敢仰视。
现代文：盖苏文的形象魁梧英俊，有一部漂亮的大胡须，他的衣服、帽子都用金子装饰，身佩五刀，雄赳赳的左右都不敢仰视。
English: Gaisuwen's image is burly and handsome, with a beautiful big beard. His clothes and hat are decorated with gold, and he wears five swords. Both men and women dare not look up to him.

古文：使贵人伏诸地，践以升马。
现代文：他要贵人跪伏在地上，踏着贵人的背上马。
English: He wants the noble to kneel on the ground and mount the horse on the noble's back.

古文：出入陈兵，长呼禁切，行人畏窜，至投坑谷。
现代文：出入都要陈列仪仗及军队，开路者大声呼喊驱赶闲人，行人们都因害怕而逃窜，甚至自投坑谷。
English: Ceremonial battles and troops are displayed at every entrance and exit, the road openers shout loudly to drive away idlers, pedestrians flee in fear, and even throw themselves into the valley.

古文：帝闻建武为下所杀，恻然遣使者持节吊祭。
现代文：皇帝听说建武被手下人所杀，为他难过，派使者持节前往吊祭。
English: The emperor heard that Jianwu had been killed by his subordinates, felt sorry for him, and sent an envoy to the hanging festival.

古文：或劝帝可遂讨之，帝不欲因丧伐罪，乃拜藏为辽东郡王、高丽王。
现代文：有人劝皇帝讨伐盖苏文，皇帝不想在丧事中出兵讨伐。乃委任藏为辽东郡王、高丽王。
English: Some people advised the emperor to fight Gaisuwen, but the emperor did not want to send troops to fight during the funeral. Instead, he appointed Zao as the king of Liaodong County and the king of Goryeo.

古文：帝曰： 盖苏文杀君攘国，朕取之易耳，不愿劳人，若何？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：盖苏文杀君窃国，我攻取他是很容易的。不过我不愿意辛苦人民，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "Since Gaisuwen killed the king and stole the country, it is easy for me to capture him. However, I don't want to make the people work hard. What should I do?"

古文：司空房玄龄曰： 陛下士勇而力有余，戢不用，所谓 止戈为武 者。 
现代文：司空房玄龄说： 陛下兵强力壮，藏而不用，是实践 止戈为武 的道理。 
English: Sifu Xuanling said, "Your Majesty's soldiers are strong and powerful, and hiding them instead of using them is the reason for practicing martial arts.

古文：司徒长孙无忌曰： 高丽无一介告难，宜赐书安尉之，隐其患，抚其存，彼当听命。 
现代文：司徒长孙无忌说： 高丽没一个人来告难，那就赐书安抚一下，不提他国内发生的问题，只抚恤活着的人。
English: "If no one in Goryeo comes to complain, then give them a book to appease them. Don't mention the problems that have occurred in other countries, but only help those who are still alive," said the eldest son of Sido.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：他们一定会感恩听命的。 皇帝说 ：好的。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：会新罗遣使者上书言： 高丽、百济联和，将见讨。谨归命天子。 
现代文：正好新罗派使者上书说： 高丽、百济正在联合，准备侵扰我国，希望能得天子的保护。 
English: Just then, Silla sent an envoy with a letter saying: Goryeo and Baekje are uniting and preparing to invade our country, hoping to receive protection from the Son of Heaven.

古文：帝问： 若何而免？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 怎么样才能免祸呢？ 
English: The emperor asked, "How can we avoid disaster?"

古文：使者曰： 计穷矣，惟陛下哀怜！ 
现代文：使者说： 我们毫无办法了，只求陛下怜悯我们。 
English: The messenger said, "There is nothing we can do. We only ask Your Majesty to have mercy on us."

古文：帝曰： 我以偏兵率契丹、靺鞨入辽东，而国可纾一岁，一策也。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我派一支队伍率领契丹、兵入辽东，你们国家可以缓和一年。
English: The emperor said: I will send a team led by Khitan and soldiers to Liaodong, and your country can relax for one year.

古文：我以绛袍丹帜数千赐而国，至，建以阵，二国见，谓我师至，必走，二策也。
现代文：这是一个办法。我赐给你国绛袍丹旗几千，装佩陈列起来。那两国见了，会认为我的军队到了，一定会退走。这是第二个办法。
English: This is one way. I will give you thousands of national robes and banners and display them. When the two countries see it, they will think that my army has arrived and will definitely retreat. This is the second way.

古文：百济恃海，不修戎械，我以舟师数万袭之；而国女君，故为邻侮，我以宗室主而国，待安则自守之，三策也。
现代文：百济自恃有海，所以军械准备不多。我用几万水军去打他；你国是女王，所以被邻国欺侮，我派宗室去主持你国，待国家安定了再交你们自己管理。
English: Baekje prides itself on having a sea, so its military equipment is not well prepared. I will use tens of thousands of sailors to fight him; your country is a queen, so it is bullied by its neighbors, I will send my family to preside over your country, and I will leave it to you to manage after the country is stable.

古文：使者计孰取？ 
现代文：这是第三个办法。
English: This is the third way.

古文：使者不能对。
现代文：你看用哪一种办法好呢？ 使者无法回答。
English: Which way do you think is best? The messenger couldn't answer.

古文：于是遣司农丞相里玄奖以玺书让高丽，且使止勿攻。
现代文：皇帝乃派司农丞相里玄奖带了玺书去责备高丽，要他们不去打新罗。
English: The emperor sent Li Xuan Rong, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, with an imperial edict to reprimand Goryeo and ask them not to attack Silla.

古文：使未至，而盖苏文已取新罗二城。
现代文：使者还没有到达，盖苏文已攻取了新罗的两个城。
English: Before the envoys arrived, Ghaisuvam had already captured two towns in Silla.

古文：玄奖谕帝旨，答曰： 往隋见侵，新罗乘邅夺我地五百里，今非尽反地，兵不止。 
现代文：玄奖宣谕皇帝的旨意，盖苏文回答说： 往日隋侵略我们时，新罗借机夺了我五百里地。今日不把地全部夺回来决不罢兵。 
English: When Xuan Xuan proclaimed the emperor's will, Gaisuwen replied: In the past, when the Sui Dynasty invaded us, Silla took advantage of the opportunity to seize my five hundred miles of land. Today, I will never leave the army without taking back all the land.

古文：玄奖曰： 往事乌足论邪？
现代文：玄奖说 ：过去的事不要再计较了。
English: Xuanzang said, "Don't worry about the past.

古文：辽东故中国郡县，天子且不取，高丽焉得违诏？ 
现代文：辽东原本是中国的郡县，现在天子尚且不取，高丽怎敢违抗旨意？ 
English: Liaodong was originally a county in China, but now it has been taken over by the emperor. How dare Goryeo defy his will?

古文：不从。
现代文：盖苏文不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：玄奖还奏，帝曰： 莫离支杀君，虐用其下如擭阱，怨痛溢道，我出师无名哉？ 
现代文：玄奖回来据实汇报，皇帝说： 莫离支杀了国君，残虐其下属如驱兽入坑阱，百姓怨声载道，我出师还怕无名吗？ 
English: When Xuanzang came back with a true report, the emperor said: Mo Liang killed the sovereign, brutalized his subordinates like driving an animal into a pit, and the people complained loudly. Am I still afraid of being unknown when I become a teacher?

古文：谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 陛下之兵度辽而克固善，万分一不得逞，且再用师，再用师，安危不可亿。 
现代文：谏议大夫褚遂良说 ：陛下发兵渡辽，一举成功固然很好；但万一不能速决，将会继续发兵，则安危不可臆测。 
English: Dr. Zou Suiliang said, "Your Majesty has sent troops to Liao, and it's great that it's been a success. However, if you can't make a quick decision and continue to send troops, your safety is at risk.

古文：兵部尚书李勣曰： 不然。曩薛延陀盗边，陛下欲追击，魏徵苦谏而止。
现代文：兵部尚书李责力说： 不，过去薛延陀侵扰边陲，陛下打算追击，魏征苦谏后作罢。
English: Shangshu Li Rongli of the Ministry of Military Affairs said: No, in the past, Xue Yanta invaded the borderlands, His Majesty intends to pursue, and after the Wei Conquest, it will be done.

古文：向若击之，一马不生返。
现代文：当初如果穷追下去，不让一马生还就好了。
English: At the beginning, if we kept chasing, it would have been better not to let a horse die.

古文：后复畔扰，至今为恨。 
现代文：后来他们又来骚扰，至今是一憾事。 
English: Later, they came to harass us again, which is still regrettable.

古文：帝曰： 诚然。
现代文：皇帝说 ：确实如此。
English: The emperor said, "That is true."

古文：但一虑之失而尤之，后谁为我计者？ 
现代文：不过因一念之失而埋怨，以后还有谁为我出主意了？ 
English: However, I complained because of a momentary lapse of concentration. Who else would come up with ideas for me?

古文：新罗数请援，乃下吴船四百柁输粮，诏营州都督张俭等发幽、营兵及契丹、奚、靺鞨等出讨。
现代文：新罗多次请求援助，于是发吴船四百艘运粮，诏令营州都督张俭等调幽州、营州的兵及契丹、奚、的兵出讨。
English: Shilla repeatedly requested assistance, so it sent four hundred grain-carrying vessels to Wuzhou, and ordered Zhang Jian, the governor of Yingzhou, to dispatch soldiers from Yuzhou, Yingzhou, and soldiers from Khitan, Yunnan, and other provinces.

古文：会辽溢，师还。
现代文：正遇辽水泛滥，撤军。
English: In the face of the Liao Shui flooding, the troops withdrew.

古文：莫离支惧，遣使者内金，帝不纳。
现代文：莫离支害怕了，派使者献金，皇帝不接受。
English: Mo Yizhi was afraid and sent an envoy to offer money, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：使者又言： 莫离支遣官五十入宿卫。 
现代文：使者又说 ：莫离支派官员五十人入朝宿卫。 
English: The envoy also said, "Fifty officials from the Morya tribe have joined the Imperial Palace guards.

古文：帝怒责使者曰： 而等委质高武，而不伏节死义，又为逆子谋，不可赦。 
现代文：皇帝怒责使者： 你等本献身高武，而不为他殉节死义；而今又与叛逆者同谋，罪不可恕。 
English: The emperor angrily rebuked the envoy: You were supposed to dedicate yourself to Gaowu, not to die for him; and now you have conspired with the rebels, a crime that cannot be forgiven.

古文：悉下之狱。
现代文：将他们全部下狱。
English: Throw them all in jail.

古文：于是帝欲自将讨之，召长安耆老劳曰： 辽东故中国地，而莫离支贼杀其主，朕将自行经略之，故与父老约：子若孙从我行者，我能拊循之，毋庸恤也。 
现代文：于是皇帝准备亲征，召长安的老人告慰说 ：辽东原是中国的疆域，而莫离支叛杀其主，我准备亲自去处理。现在向父老们保证：你们的子或孙跟我去的，我会照顾他们的，不用担心。 
English: So the emperor prepared to conscript them himself, and summoned the old man from Chang'an to console him, saying: "Eastern Liaoning used to be China's territory, and I am going to deal with it myself. Now I assure the fathers: If your sons or grandsons come with me, I will take care of them, don't worry.

古文：即厚赐布粟。
现代文：群臣都劝皇帝不要去。
English: All the courtiers advised the emperor not to go.

古文：群臣皆劝帝毋行，帝曰： 吾知之矣，去本而就末，舍高以取下，释近而之远，三者为不祥，伐高丽是也。
现代文：皇帝说： 你们的意思我知道。离本而就末，舍高而取下，弃近而去远，三者都是不祥之举，伐高丽就是这样的事。
English: The emperor said, "I know what you mean. To leave the source and go to the end, to give up the high and take it down, to abandon the near and go to the far, all three are ominous moves. This is what happened to the Vakaroli.

古文：然盖苏文弑君，又戮大臣以逞，一国之人延颈待救，议者顾未亮耳。 
现代文：不过，盖苏文杀他君王，又杀害大臣以逞己意。他一国之人都伸颈待救。劝我不去的人只是还不了解情况。 
English: However, Gai Suwen killed his king and his minister out of arrogance. Everyone in his country is waiting for help. Those who advise me not to go just don't understand the situation yet.

古文：于是北输粟营州，东储粟古大人城。
现代文：于是北运粮到营州，东储粮古大人城。
English: As a result, grain was transported from the north to Yingzhou, and grain from the east was stored in the ancient metropolis.

古文：帝幸洛阳，乃以张亮为平壤道行军大总管，常何、左难当副之，冉仁德、刘英行、张文干、庞孝泰、程名振为总管，帅江、吴、京、洛募兵凡四万，吴艘五百，泛海趋平壤。以李勣为辽东道行军大总管，江夏王道宗副之，张士贵、张俭、执失思力、契苾何力、阿史那弥射、姜德本、曲智盛、吴黑闼为行军总管隶之，帅骑士六万趋辽东。
现代文：皇帝到达洛阳，派张亮为平壤道行军大总管，常何、左难当做副总管，派冉仁德、刘英行、张文干、庞孝泰、程名振为总管，统率江、吴、京、洛等地召募之兵四万人，吴船五百艘，泛海去平壤；派李责力为辽东道行军大总管，江夏王道宗做副总管，张士贵、张俭、执失思力、契必艹何力、阿史那弥射、姜德本、麴智盛、吴黑闼为行军总管，统帅骑兵六万去辽东。
English: When the emperor arrived in Luoyang, he sent Zhang Liang as the general manager of the Pyongyang Road March, Chang He and Zuo Nan as deputy general managers, sent Ran Rende, Liu Yingxing, Zhang Wengan, Pang Xiaotai and Cheng Nanzhen as general managers, led 40,000 soldiers recruited from Jiang, Wu, Beijing and Luo, and 500 ships from Wu to sail to Pyongyang; sent Li Liuli as the general manager of the Liaodong Road March, Jiangxia Wang Daozong as the deputy general manager, Zhang Shigui, Zhang Jian, Jiaozhong, Jiaozhong, Qibing He Li, Ashina M

古文：诏曰： 朕所过，营顿毋饬，食毋丰怪，水可涉者勿作桥梁，行在非近州县不得令学生、耆老迎谒。
现代文：皇帝下诏： 我所过之处，行营安顿不要通告地方，饮食不需山珍海味，河水浅可以徒涉的不要架桥。行宫不是靠近州县的不得令学生、老人夹道迎接。
English: The emperor decreed: Do not announce the place where I passed, do not advertise the place where I camped and settled, do not need mountain and sea food, do not build a bridge if the river is shallow. If the palace is not close to the county, do not make students and the elderly meet.

古文：朕昔提戈拨乱，无盈月储，犹所响风靡。
现代文：往日我提剑平乱，当时百姓家无一月粮，所到之处尚极靡费。
English: In the past, I raised my sword to quell unrest. At that time, people did not have a month's supply of grain, and it was extremely expensive everywhere I went.

古文：今幸家给人足，只恐劳于转饷，故驱牛羊以饲军。
现代文：如今有幸家富人足，只怕更要为饷军操劳了，所以赶牛羊来以供军用。
English: Nowadays, there are lucky families with rich feet, but they are afraid that they will have to work harder for the Han army, so they drive cattle and sheep to supply the military.

古文：且朕必胜有五：以我大击彼小，以我顺讨彼逆，以我安乘彼乱，以我逸敌彼劳，以我悦当彼怨，渠忧不克邪！ 
现代文：我有必胜把握五个：以我大军击他小军，以我有道伐他无道，以我国安乘他国乱，以我逸军敌他疲军，以我民乐抵他众怨，还怕不能取胜吗？ 
English: I have five certainties of victory: I can defeat his small army with my great army, I can defeat his small army without a way with my way, I can take advantage of other countries' turmoil with our country's peace, I can defeat his exhausted army with my retreating army, and I can meet his public resentment with my people's joy. Are you still afraid that you can't win?

古文：又发契丹、奚、新罗、百济诸君长兵悉会。
现代文：又调拨契丹、奚、新罗各君长的兵会合。
English: In addition, the military councils of the kings of Khitan, Khotan, and Silla were assigned.

古文：十九年二月，帝自洛阳次定州，谓左右曰： 今天下大定，唯辽东未宾，后嗣因士马盛强，谋臣导以征讨，丧乱方始，朕故自取之，不遗后世忧也。 
现代文：贞观十九年二月，皇帝从洛阳到定州，对左右说： 现在天下大定，只有辽东尚未宾服。其后代因兵马强盛，又有谋臣诱劝出兵征讨，丧乱由此而起。这次我亲自征伐，决不留遗患给后代。 
English: In February of the 19th year of Zhenguan, the emperor went from Luoyang to Dingzhou and said to the left and right, "Nowadays, the world is greatly settled, only Liaodong has yet to be conquered. Its descendants, due to the strength of the soldiers and horses, and the persuasion of the advisers to send soldiers to fight, caused the turmoil. This time, I personally led the conquest, and I will never leave a legacy for future generations.

古文：帝坐城门，过兵，人人抚慰，疾病者亲视之，敕州县治疗，士大悦。
现代文：皇帝坐在城门口，军队走过时，对每一个人都加抚慰，有害病的，皇帝必定亲自去看望，下令州县治疗，士兵们十分欢欣。
English: The emperor sat at the gate of the city, and when the army passed by, he comforted everyone, and the soldiers were very happy.

古文：长孙无忌白奏： 天下符鱼悉从，而宫官止十人，天下以为轻神器。 
现代文：长孙无忌上奏 ：天下的符节鱼契均随陛下来此，而宫官只有十人，会使天下以神器为轻。 
English: The eldest grandson, Mubi, plays the harp: all the world's runes and fishes come here with His Majesty, and there are only ten palace officials, which makes the world light on sacred objects.

古文：帝曰： 士度辽十万，皆去家室。朕以十人从，尚恧其多，公止勿言！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：度辽水来此的士兵有十万，他们都抛家别亲，我有十个随从，还因多而有些惭愧呢。
English: The emperor said, "There are a hundred thousand soldiers who came here from Liao Shui, and they all left their families and relatives. I have ten attendants, and I'm a little ashamed because there are so many.

古文：帝身属橐房，结两箙于鞍。
现代文：你不要再说了。 皇帝亲佩弓箭，还结两箭袋在鞍后。
English: Don't say another word. The emperor wore a bow and arrow, and tied two quiver bags behind his saddle.

古文：四月，勣绩济辽水，高丽皆婴城守。帝大飨士，帐幽州之南，诏长孙无忌誓师，乃引而东。
现代文：四月，李责力渡过辽水，高丽都闭城坚守，皇帝发大量酒肉让士兵饱餐，于是结帐幽州之南，诏令长孙无忌誓师，引兵东进。
English: In April, Li Youli crossed the Liao Shui, Goryeo kept the city closed, and the emperor sent a large amount of wine and meat to keep the soldiers well-fed. Therefore, he settled the account in the south of Yuzhou, ordered the eldest grandson to swear an oath, and led the soldiers eastward.

古文：勣攻盖牟城，拔之，得户二万，粮十万石，以其地为盖州。
现代文：李责力攻克了盖牟城，得户二万，粮十万石，以其地列为盖州。
English: Li Ruili conquered Gaimu City, gained 20,000 households, 100,000 kilos of grain, and his land was listed as Gaizhou.

古文：程名振攻沙卑城，夜入其西，城溃，虏其口八千，游兵鸭渌上。
现代文：程名振攻沙卑城，夜攻入城西，全城溃败，俘虏八千人，并派兵在鸭绿江上游弋。
English: Cheng Ming Zhen attacked the city of Shabei, entered the west of the city at night, defeated the whole city, captured eight thousand people, and sent soldiers to swim in the upper reaches of the Yalu River.

古文：勣遂围辽东城。
现代文：李责力围困辽东城。
English: Li Ruili besieged Liaodong City.

古文：帝次辽泽，诏瘗隋战士露骼。
现代文：皇帝到达辽泽，诏令收葬隋时战死而未掩埋的骸骨。
English: When the emperor arrived in Liaoze, he issued a decree to bury the skeletons of those who died in the Sui Dynasty and were not buried.

古文：高丽发新城、国内城骑四万救辽东。
现代文：高丽集中新城、国内城的四万骑兵来救辽东。
English: Forty thousand cavalrymen from Goryeo concentrated in Sincheng and Zhongcheng to save Liaodong.

古文：道宗率张乂君逆战，君乂却。
现代文：道宗率领张君耣迎战，君耣退却，道宗带领骑兵猛杀过来，高丽兵败退。
English: Daozong led Zhang Junyao to fight, Junyao retreated, Daozong led the cavalry to kill, and the Korean soldiers retreated.

古文：道宗以骑驰之，虏兵辟易，夺其梁，收散卒，高以望，见高丽阵嚣，急击破之，斩首千馀级，诛君乂以徇。
现代文：道宗攻占桥梁，收集散兵，登高而望，见高丽兵阵中杂乱喧闹，急攻，一举而破，斩首一千多人，又诛杀君耣示众。
English: Dao Seong captured the bridge, gathered the scattered soldiers, climbed up and looked down, saw the disorderly and noisy among the Korean soldiers, made a sudden attack, broke through in one fell swoop, beheaded more than a thousand people, and killed the prince to show the public.

古文：帝度辽水，彻杠彴，坚士心。
现代文：皇帝渡过辽水，下令撤掉桥梁，以坚士兵之志，扎营马首山。
English: The emperor crossed the Liao Shui, ordered the bridge to be removed, and encamped on Mount Mashu with the determination of a soldier.

古文：营马首山，身到城下，见士填堑，分负之，重者马上持之 群臣震惧，争挟塊以进。
现代文：皇帝到城下，见士兵挑土填堑，为他们分担，对那些担得重的，皇帝亲自在马上为他们帮一把力。群臣都震惊而感奋，争先恐后地搬土块送去。
English: When the emperor arrived at the foot of the castle, he saw soldiers picking up soil to fill in the moat, and he shared it with them. For those who had heavy burdens, the emperor himself immediately helped them. The courtiers were shocked and excited, scrambling to carry the soil away.

古文：城有硃蒙祠，祠有锁甲、铦矛，妄言前燕世天所降。
现代文：辽东城内有个朱蒙祠，祠内有铠甲、利矛，胡说这是前燕世时天降之物。
English: There is a Zhu Meng ancestral hall in the city of Liaodong. There are armor and spears in the ancestral hall. It is nonsense to say that this was something that fell from the sky during the previous Yan Dynasty.

古文：方围急，饰美女以妇神，诬言硃蒙悦，城必完。
现代文：那时，围城正紧，城中用美女装扮成女神，说什么朱蒙心情好，城市必能受福完好。
English: At that time, the siege of the city was tight, and the city used beautiful women dressed as goddesses to say that Zhu Meng was in a good mood, and the city would be blessed and intact.

古文：勣列抛车，飞大石过三百步，所当辄溃，虏积木为楼，结絙罔，不能拒。
现代文：李责力将抛车排列城下，用车抛大石，可飞出三百步以外，石落处人物均被砸坏。高丽架木为战楼，结粗绳网，都无法抵御飞来的大石。
English: Li Li Li arranged the carts under the city, and used the carts to throw large stones, which could fly out more than three hundred paces. The people who were hit by the stones were all smashed. The Goryeo-style wooden battlements and thick rope nets could not resist the flying large stones.

古文：以冲车撞陴屋，碎之。
现代文：李责力又用冲车撞其楼阁，无不倾塌。
English: Li Baili also rammed his mansion with a car, causing it to collapse.

古文：时百济上金旐铠，又以玄金为山五文铠，士被以从。
现代文：这时，百济奉上漆金铠，又用玄金做山五文铠，让士兵披着随后。
English: At this time, Baekje was presented with a lacquered gold brooch, and also made a mountain five-monten brooch with base gold, and then let the soldiers wear it.

古文：帝与勣会，甲光炫日。
现代文：皇帝与李责力会合，铠甲在阳光下闪闪耀眼。
English: The emperor and Li Rongli meet, and their armor shines in the sun.

古文：会南风急，士纵火焚西南，熛延城中，屋几尽，人死于燎者万馀。
现代文：这时，南风紧吹，士兵纵火烧城西南。火势延入城中，房屋几乎烧尽，被烧死的人约有万余。
English: At this time, the south wind was blowing hard, and soldiers set fire to the southwest of the city. The fire spread into the city, the houses were almost burned out, and more than 10,000 people were burned to death.

古文：众登陴，虏蒙盾以拒，士举长矛舂之，蔺石如雨，城遂溃，获胜兵万，户四万，粮五十万石。
现代文：战士登城，高丽人蒙着盾抵御，士兵们用长矛捣，且用擂石抛击如雨。城破，俘获强兵一万人，百姓四万人，粮食五十万石。
English: The warriors entered the city, the Koreans defended themselves with shields, the soldiers beat them with spears and pelted them with flints. The city was destroyed, and ten thousand strong soldiers, forty thousand people, and five hundred thousand kilos of grain were captured.

古文：以其地为辽州。
现代文：列其地为辽州。
English: The place listed is Liaozhou.

古文：初，帝自太子所属行在，舍置一烽，约下辽东举烽，是日传燎入塞。
现代文：当初，皇帝从太子所居的行宫起，每三十里置一烽火台，并与太子约定：攻下辽东，点烽火通报。这一天，烽火直传入塞内。
English: At first, the emperor set up a bonfire platform every thirty miles from the prince's residence, the Xinggu, and agreed with the prince to capture Liaodong and announce the lighting of the bonfire. On this day, the bonfire was carried straight into Senai.

古文：进攻白崖城，城负山有厓水，险甚。
现代文：王师进攻白崖城，城背山临水，十分险峻。
English: Wang's division attacked Baiyao City. The hill behind the city faced the water and was very steep.

古文：帝壁西北。
现代文：皇帝扎营西北。
English: The emperor encamped in the northwest.

古文：虏酋孙伐音阴丐降，然城中不能一。
现代文：高丽酋长孙伐音暗中来请降，但城中尚意见不一。
English: Goryeo chieftain Sun Vaein secretly came to ask for a surrender, but there was still disagreement in the city.

古文：帝赐帜曰： 若降，建于堞以信。 
现代文：皇帝赐他一面旗，说： 如果全城能降，就把旗竖在城楼上。 
English: The emperor gave him a flag and said, "If the whole city can come down, then raise the flag on the tower."

古文：俄而举帜，城人皆以唐兵登矣，乃降。
现代文：不一会儿，旗子竖起来了，城内的人都以为唐兵已经登上城楼了，于是投降。
English: In a short time, the flag was raised, and the people in the city thought that the Tang soldiers had already ascended the city tower, so they surrendered.

古文：初，伐音中悔，帝怒，约以虏口畀诸将。
现代文：当初，伐音请降后曾经后悔。皇帝气他反复，乃与王师约：城破后城中人物都给各将。
English: At first, he regretted it after the battle was over. The emperor was angry with him repeatedly, but he made an agreement with Wang Shi: after the city was breached, the figures in the city would be given to each general.

古文：及是，李勣曰： 士奋而先，贪虏获也。
现代文：现在伐音降，李责力说： 战士所以奋勇向前，为的是想得到敌方的财物。
English: Now that the noise has died down, Li Rongli said, "That's why soldiers go forward, in order to get the enemy's property.

古文：今城危拔，不可许降以孤士心。 
现代文：现在城即将攻破，不能接受投降辜负了将士们。 
English: Now that the city is about to be breached, we cannot accept the surrender and have failed our soldiers.

古文：帝曰： 将军言是也。然纵兵杀戮，略人妻孥，朕不忍。
现代文：皇帝说 ：将军的话说得不错，不过，纵兵杀戮，抢人妻儿是我不忍见到的。
English: The emperor said, "The general's words are right, but I can't bear to see soldiers killing and robbing people of their wives and children."

古文：将军麾下有功者，朕能以库物赏之，庶因将军赎一城乎。 
现代文：将军麾下有功的，我用国库中东西赏赐他们，大概可以为你赎下这一城吧。 
English: If there are meritorious people under the command of the general, I will reward them with something from the national treasury. I can probably redeem this city for you.

古文：获男女凡万、兵二千。
现代文：受降后，获男女一万人，兵二千。
English: After the surrender, he received 10,000 men and women and 2,000 soldiers.

古文：以其地为岩州，拜伐音为刺史。
现代文：皇帝即以其地列为岩州，委任伐音为刺史。
English: The emperor listed his land as Iwashu and appointed Fawn to be the chief historian.

古文：莫离支以加尸人七百戍盖牟，勣俘之。
现代文：莫离支调加尸的人七百名戍守盖牟。李责力将他们全俘虏了。
English: Li Ruili took all of the seven hundred attendants who had been assigned to guard Gaimu captive.

古文：请自效，帝曰： 而家加尸，乃为我战，将尽戮矣。
现代文：这些人都要求随军效力。皇帝说 ：你们的家都在加尸，你们为我作战，他们都会被杀的。
English: The emperor said, "Your houses are full of corpses. If you fight for me, they will all be killed."

古文：夷一姓求一人力，不可。 
现代文：夷灭一家人而求得一个人之用，是不可以的。 
English: It is not right to destroy a whole family in order to make room for one.

古文：禀而纵之。
现代文：发给粮食让他们回家。
English: Give them food and let them go home.

古文：次安市。
现代文：皇帝进驻安市。
English: The emperor was stationed in An.

古文：于是高丽北部傉萨高延寿、南部傉萨高惠真引兵及靺鞨众十五万来援。
现代文：高丽北部亻辱萨高延寿、南部亻辱萨高惠真率高丽及的兵十五万来援救。
English: In the north of Korea, Sakao Yanshou and in the south of Korea, Sakao Huizhen led Korea and 150,000 soldiers to the rescue.

古文：帝曰： 彼若勒兵连安市而壁，据高山，取城中粟食之，纵靺鞨略吾牛马，攻之不可下，此上策也。拔城夜去，中策也。与吾争锋，则禽矣。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：他们如果将兵凭据高山，连接安市而坚守，取城中粮吃，纵兵抢掠我们的牛马，我们进攻将不能取胜，这是他们的上策；整个城乘夜色离去，这是他们的中策；如果要与我刀兵争锋，那就要成我的俘虏了。 
English: The emperor said, "If they take their soldiers to the foot of the high mountain that connects the city of An and hold on to it, take the grain from the city and eat it, and seize our cattle and horses, we will not be able to win the attack. This is their best strategy. The whole city will leave at night. This is their best strategy. If they want to fight with my sword and soldiers, they will become my prisoners."

古文：有大对庐为延寿计曰： 吾闻中国乱，豪雄并奋，秦王神武，敌无坚，战无前，遂定天下，南面而帝，北狄、西戎罔不臣。
现代文：有个大对卢为高延寿谋划 ：我听说前不久中国大乱，英雄并起，其中秦王最神武，所向无敌，遂平天下，南面称帝，北狄、西戎无不臣服。
English: There is a great rivalry between Lu and Gao Yanshou: I heard that not long ago, China was in turmoil, and heroes arose simultaneously. Among them, King Qin was the most powerful and invincible, so he was able to pacify the world. In the south, he was called the emperor, and in the north and west, he was subject to no one.

古文：今扫地而来，谋臣重将皆在，其锋不可校。
现代文：现在倾国而来，谋臣重将都集中在此，其锋锐不可当。
English: Now that he has come to the country, the most important advisors are concentrated here, and they are extremely sharp.

古文：今莫若顿兵旷日，阴遣奇兵绝其饷道，不旬月粮尽，欲战不得，归则无路，乃可取也。 
现代文：现在最好是屯兵不战，旷日持久，暗中派遣奇兵绝其粮道。不要十天半月他们粮尽，那时他们欲战不得，欲归无路，我们就可以取胜了。 
English: It would be better now if the garrison did not fight, and the war dragged on for a long time, and if we secretly dispatched a miracle soldier to cut off their food supply. Instead of them running out of food in ten and a half days, when they are unable to fight and have no way to return, we can win.

古文：延寿不从，引军距安市四十里而屯。
现代文：高延寿不听。领军在安西四十里外屯扎。
English: Gao Yanshou did not listen. The leading troops set up camp forty miles away in Anxi.

古文：帝曰： 虏堕吾策中矣。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：敌人落到我的计策里来了。 
English: The emperor said, "The enemy has fallen for my trick.

古文：命左卫大将军阿史那社尔以突厥千骑尝之，虏常以靺鞨锐兵居前，社尔兵接而北。
现代文：命左卫大将军阿史那社尔带突厥一千骑兵试与之交手。高丽人常将的尖兵打先锋，社尔的兵与之交手即败。
English: He ordered the General of the Left Guards, Ashinasir, to take a thousand Turkish cavalry and try to fight with them. The Koreans often put the top soldiers in the vanguard, and the soldiers of Sar were defeated immediately.

古文：延寿曰： 唐易与耳。 
现代文：延寿说： 唐兵容易打。 
English: Yan Shou said: Tang soldiers are easy to fight.

古文：进一舍，倚麓而阵。
现代文：前进三十里，挨着山麓列阵。
English: Advance thirty miles, line up next to the foot of the mountain.

古文：帝诏延寿曰： 我以尔有强臣贼杀其主，来问罪，即交战，非我意。 
现代文：皇帝下诏书给高延寿 ：我因为你们国内有悍臣杀害国君，所以来问罪。虽有交战，非我本意。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial decree to Gao Yanshou: I have come to ask for punishment because there is a Hun in your country who killed the sovereign. Although there was a battle, it was not my intention.

古文：延寿谓然，按甲俟。
现代文：延寿相信，按兵不进。
English: Yan Shou believes that it is better not to advance by force.

古文：帝夜召诸将，使李勣率步骑万五千阵西岭当贼，长孙无忌、牛进达精兵万人出虏背狭谷，帝以骑四千偃帜趋虏北山上，令诸军曰： 闻鼓声而纵。 
现代文：皇帝夜里召集各将，派李责力率领步兵骑兵一万五千人在城西岭列阵挡敌；长孙无忌、牛进达率精兵一万人从狭谷出击敌背；皇帝自己带四千骑兵偃旗息鼓到敌营北山上。与各军约定 ：听见鼓声同时举旗。 
English: The emperor summoned his generals in the night and sent Li Li Rongli (李责力) to lead 15,000 infantry and cavalry to block the enemy in the west of the city; the eldest grandson, Wu Jinda (牛进達) led 10,000 elite soldiers to attack the enemy's rear from the valley; the emperor himself took 4,000 cavalrymen to the north mountain of the enemy camp. With each army, they agreed to raise the flag at the same time as they heard the drums.

古文：张幄朝堂，曰： 明日日中，纳降虏于此。 
现代文：又命令在朝堂旁扎一大帐篷，说： 明天中午，在此地接纳降敌。 
English: He also ordered a large tent to be pitched next to the main hall, saying, "Tomorrow at noon, accept the surrender of the enemy here."

古文：是夜，流星堕延寿营。
现代文：当天夜里，流星堕落延寿军营。
English: On the night of the same day, the meteor fell on the Yeongju military camp.

古文：旦日，虏视勣军少，即战。
现代文：第二天早上，敌人看李责力人马不多，就出战。
English: The next morning, the enemy saw that Li Ruili was short of men and horses, so he went out to fight.

古文：帝望无忌军尘上，命鼓角作，兵帜四合，虏惶惑，将分兵御之，众已嚣。
现代文：皇帝望见长孙无忌那边尘土飞扬，就令鼓角并作，兵旗齐举。敌惶惑无措，准备分兵抵御，但队伍已经乱了。
English: When the emperor saw the dust flying in the direction of his eldest grandson, he ordered the horns of the drums to be sounded simultaneously and the banners to be raised. The enemy was bewildered and prepared to defend themselves, but the ranks were already in disarray.

古文：勣以步槊击败之，无忌乘其后，帝自山驰下，虏大乱，斩首二万级。
现代文：李责力用步兵长枪击败敌人，长孙无忌击其后背，皇帝则从山上驰下。贼人因之大乱，斩首二万。
English: Li Baili defeated the enemy with an infantry long gun, his eldest grandson shot him in the back, and the emperor raced down the mountain. As a result of the chaos, the thieves beheaded 20,000 people.

古文：延寿收馀众负山自固，无忌、勣合围之，彻川梁，断归路。
现代文：延寿收集余众背山坚守。无忌、责力合力包围。又拆掉桥梁，断他归路。
English: In order to prolong his life, he gathered all the people to hold fast to the mountains behind him. He had no choice but to encircle them with all his strength. He also tore down the bridge and cut off his way back.

古文：帝按辔观虏营垒曰： 高丽倾国来，一麾而破，天赞我也。 
现代文：皇帝在马上观察敌营垒，说： 高丽倾国而来，一战而败，是天助我也。 
English: The emperor immediately observed the enemy camp and said: Goryeo came to invade the country and was defeated in a battle. Heaven help me.

古文：下马再拜，谢氵兄于天。
现代文：于是下马再拜谢天。
English: So he dismounted and said his farewells.

古文：延寿等度势穷，即举众降。入辕门，膝而前，拜手请命。
现代文：高延寿等估计势穷，举众来降，入辕门后，跪着前行，拜手请命。
English: Gao Yanzhou and others estimated that they were powerless, and called for the crowd to come down. After entering the gate, they knelt down and begged for their lives.

古文：帝曰： 后敢与天子战乎？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：以后还敢与天子抗敌吗？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Will you dare to oppose the Son of Heaven in the future?"

古文：惶汗不得对。
现代文：延寿惶惧无法作答。
English: I can't answer for fear of prolonging my life.

古文：帝料酋长三千五百人，悉官之，许内徙，馀众三万纵还之，诛靺鞨三千馀人，获马牛十万，明光铠万领。
现代文：皇帝选拔了酋长三千五百人，全部授以官职，允许他们内迁。其余三万多人全部放还。诛杀三千多人，获马牛十万、明光铠一万件。
English: The emperor selected 3,500 chiefs, all of whom were given official positions, and allowed them to move inland. The remaining more than 30,000 people were all released. More than 3,000 people were killed, and 100,000 horses and cattle were obtained, and 10,000 bright light lanterns were obtained.

古文：高丽震骇，后黄、银二城自拔去，数百里无舍烟。
现代文：高丽全国震惊，后黄城和银城两城人民全部迁走，以致几百里内没有人烟。
English: The whole of Goryeo was shocked, and the people of the two cities of Huangcheng and Yincheng were all moved away, so that there was no one within a few hundred miles.

古文：乃驿报太子，并赐诸臣书曰： 朕自将若此，云何？ 
现代文：皇帝手书由驿使飞报太子及各臣： 朕为将如此，汝等以为如何？ 
English: The emperor's handwritten letter was sent by the messenger Fei to the crown prince and his ministers: I think this will be the case, what do you think?

古文：因号所幸山为驻跸山，图破阵状，勒石纪功。
现代文：因称皇帝所到的山为驻跸山，画破阵图，刻石纪功。
English: Because he said that the mountain where the emperor arrived was Zhushan Mountain, he drew a broken formation map and carved stone records.

古文：拜延寿鸿胪卿，惠真司农卿。
现代文：授官高延寿为鸿胪卿，高惠真为司农卿。
English: Gao Yanshou was awarded the title of Hongyuqing, and Gao Huizhen was awarded the title of Sino-nongjing.

古文：候骑获觇人，帝解其缚，自言不食且三日，命饲之，赐以屩，遣曰： 归语莫离支，若须军中进退，可遣人至吾所。 
现代文：巡守兵抓到个侦察人送来，皇帝为他解绑。那人说已有三天没吃东西了，皇帝命让他饱餐，赐他麻鞋，对他说： 回去告诉莫离支，若想知军中消息，可派人到我这里来。 
English: A scout was captured by the guards and sent to the emperor, who released him. The man said that he had not eaten for three days. The emperor ordered that he be given a full meal, gave him a pair of shoes, and said to him: "Go back and tell the Mo Yi branch. If you want to know what is going on in the army, you can send someone to me."

古文：帝每营不作堑垒，谨斥候而已，而士运粮，虽单骑，虏不敢钞。
现代文：皇帝每次扎营，都不挖堑筑垒，只是派巡逻而已，士兵们运粮，虽只单人匹马，高丽人也不敢掠夺。
English: Every time the emperor set up camp, he did not dig trenches to build fortifications, but only sent patrols. The soldiers carried grain, and although they were only one man and one horse, the Goryeo people did not dare to plunder.

古文：帝与勣议所攻，帝曰： 吾闻安市地险而众悍，莫离支击不能下，因与之。
现代文：皇帝与李责力商议下一步进攻方案，皇帝说 ：我听说安市地险而兵强，以前莫离支打他都不能胜，这才与他交好。
English: The emperor and Li Rongli discussed the next plan of attack. The emperor said, "I have heard that Anshi is dangerous and has a strong army. In the past, he could not win without a fight. This is why I became friends with him."

古文：建安恃险绝，粟多而士少，若出其不意攻之，不相救矣。
现代文：建安自恃地势险绝，粮多而兵少，若出其不意而攻之，必能胜。
English: Jian'an is in a precarious situation, with more grain and fewer soldiers. If it is attacked unexpectedly, it will be able to win.

古文：建安得，则安市在吾腹中。 
现代文：得到建安后，则安市在我掌握之中了。 
English: After getting Jian'an, the city of Jian'an is now under my control.

古文：勣曰： 不然。
现代文：李责力说： 不。
English: Li Rongli said: No.

古文：积粮辽东，而西击建安，贼将梗我归路，不如先攻安市。 
现代文：我们的粮食囤积在辽东，而却西去击建安。贼人将会堵住我们的归路，不如先攻安市。 
English: Our grain is stockpiled in the east of Liaoning, but we went west to attack Jian'an. Thieves will block our way back, it is better to attack Jian'an first.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：皇帝说： 好的！ 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：遂攻之，未能下。
现代文：乃攻安市，但不能攻下。
English: The city of An was attacked, but could not be taken.

古文：延寿、惠真谋曰： 乌骨城傉萨已耄，朝攻而夕可下。
现代文：高延寿、高惠真献计： 乌骨城的亻辱萨已年迈，一攻即得。
English: Gao Yanzhou, Gao Huizhen's plan: The humiliation of the Black Bone City is already old, and it can be achieved in one attack.

古文：乌骨拔，则平壤举矣。 
现代文：乌骨城攻克了，平壤城就易得了。 
English: After conquering the Ebony City, it will be easy to take Pyongyang City.

古文：群臣亦以张亮军在沙城，召之一昔至，若取乌骨，度鸭渌，迫其腹心，计之善者。
现代文：众臣也认为张亮军在沙城，召他一夜就能到。假若攻取乌骨，渡过鸭绿江，迫其腹心，确是好主意。
English: The courtiers also thought that Zhang Liang's army was in Shacheng, and that summoning him would allow him to arrive overnight. If he were to capture the Black Bone, cross the Yalu River, and force his confidant, it would indeed be a good idea.

古文：无忌曰： 天子行师不徼幸。
现代文：长孙无忌说： 天子亲征，不宜行险侥幸。
English: The eldest grandson said: It is not appropriate to take risks and chance.

古文：安市众十万在吾后，不如先破之，乃驱而南，万全势也。 
现代文：如果前去乌骨，安市有十万兵马在我背后。不如先破安市，再向南进军，这是万全之策。 
English: If I go to the Black Bone, there are 100,000 soldiers and horses in An City behind me. It is better to break through An City first and then march south. This is the best strategy.

古文：乃止。
现代文：此计作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：城中见帝旌麾，辄乘陴噪，帝怒。
现代文：安市城中见到皇帝的旗帜，就登城鼓噪谩骂。
English: When they saw the emperor's banner in the city of An, they stormed the city, shouting and cursing.

古文：勣请破日男子尽诛。
现代文：皇帝怒，李责力请求城破之日将男子杀尽。
English: Enraged by the emperor, Li Li Rongli requested that the men be killed on the day of the city's destruction.

古文：虏闻，故死战。江夏王道宗筑距闉攻东南，虏增陴以守。勣攻其西，撞车所坏，随辄串栅为楼。
现代文：敌人听说此事，人人死战，道宗筑土山攻城东南，敌人就将城加高；李责力攻城西，用撞车撞破的地方，高丽即刻就扎起木栅成楼。
English: When the enemy heard of this, everyone fought to the death. When Daozong built a hill to attack the southeast of the city, the enemy made the city higher. Li ordered his forces to attack the west of the city, and when they used a crashed car to break through, Goryeo immediately erected a wooden grate to form a building.

古文：帝闻城中鸡彘声，曰： 围久，突无黔烟。今鸡彘鸣，必杀以飨士，虏且夜出。 
现代文：皇帝听见城中鸡猪之声，说： 围城很久，烟囱里都不冒烟了，今日鸡啼猪叫，一定是杀了给士兵吃。他们将会夜里出城的。 
English: The emperor heard the voices of the chickens and pigs in the city and said, "It has been a long siege and there is no smoke in the chimneys. Today the chickens and pigs are crowing. They must have been killed for the soldiers to eat. They will leave the city at night."

古文：诏严兵。丙夜，虏数百人缒而下，悉禽之。
现代文：诏令严加警戒，到半夜，城中几百人缒出，全部被抓获。
English: Strict vigilance was ordered, and by midnight, several hundred people in the city came out and were all arrested.

古文：道宗以树枚裹土积之，距闉成，迫城不数丈，果毅都尉傅伏爱守之，自高而排其城，城且颓，伏爱私去所部，虏兵得自颓城出，据而堑断之，积火萦盾固守。
现代文：道宗用树枝裹土堆积起来，距城只几丈远，派果毅都尉傅伏爱守望。土山自高处倒压在城上，城塌。恰好伏爱私离所守，高丽兵从城缺处出来，占有了土山并将它堑断，聚火围盾固守。
English: Dao Seong wrapped branches around the earth and piled it up, just a few feet away from the city. He sent Captain Koga Fu Fu to keep watch. The earthen mound was pushed down on the city from a great height, and the city collapsed. Just as Fu Fu had left his guard, the Korean soldiers came out from the gap in the city, took possession of the earthen mound and tore it down. They gathered around the fire and held fast.

古文：帝怒，斩伏爱，敕诸将击之，三日不克。
现代文：皇帝极为生气，斩杀伏爱，命诸将攻扑，三天都不能攻下。
English: The emperor was extremely angry, killed Fui, and ordered his generals to attack, but they were unable to capture him for three days.

古文：有诏班师，拔辽、盖二州之人以归。
现代文：皇帝下令班师，将辽、盖两州的人全部内迁。
English: The emperor ordered a team to move all the people from Liao and Gai states to the interior.

古文：兵过城下，城中屏息偃旗，酋长登城再拜，帝嘉其守，赐绢百匹。
现代文：兵过安市城下，城中屏息偃旗，酋长登城拜辞。皇帝赞赏他能坚守，赐绢百匹。
English: The soldiers passed under the city of An, the flag was hoisted in the middle of the city with bated breath, and the chieftain went to the city to make a speech. The emperor appreciated that he could hold out and gave him a hundred horses.

古文：辽州粟尚十万斛，士取不能尽。
现代文：辽州尚有粮十万斛，士兵也不能全部取走。
English: Liaozhou still had 100,000 mu of grain, and the soldiers could not take it all.

古文：帝至渤错水，阻淖，八十里车骑不通。
现代文：皇帝行至渤错水，泥泞路断，八十里不通车马。
English: The emperor went to the wrong water, the muddy road was broken, and there was no traffic for eighty miles.

古文：长孙无忌、杨师道等率万人斩樵筑道，联车为梁，帝负薪马上助役。
现代文：长孙无忌、杨师道等率领一万人斫草填塘，连车作桥。皇帝也在马上背柴草帮助劳役。
English: The eldest grandson Mubi, Yang Shidao and others led ten thousand people to weed and fill the pond, and even made a bridge. The emperor also immediately carried firewood to help the laborers.

古文：十月，兵毕度，雪甚，诏属燎以待济。
现代文：到十月，才全部渡过来。天降大雪，诏令在道边燃火等待渡沼泽之人。
English: It took until October for all of them to cross. Heavy snow fell, and people who were waiting to cross the swamp were ordered to light fires on the side of the road.

古文：始行，士十万，马万匹；逮还，物故裁千余，马死十八。
现代文：启行时，士兵十万人，马一万匹，及归，人死了一千多，马匹死了十分之八。
English: When they set out, there were 100,000 soldiers and 10,000 horses. When they returned, more than a thousand people had died, and eight out of ten horses had died.

古文：船师七万，物故亦数百。
现代文：水师七万，死了也有几百人。
English: Seventy thousand sailors, and several hundred dead.

古文：诏集战骸葬柳城，祭以太牢，帝临哭，从臣皆流涕。
现代文：诏令集中战死者葬在柳城，用太牢祭奠。皇帝前往哭悼，众臣也都流泪。
English: The emperor ordered that the concentration of the war dead be buried in Liucheng, with a memorial service at Taiji. The emperor went to mourn, and all his ministers were in tears.

古文：帝总飞骑入临渝关，皇太子迎道左。
现代文：皇帝等人飞驰入临渝关，皇太子在道边恭迎。
English: The emperor and others galloped into Linyu Pass, and the crown prince greeted them on the side of the road.

古文：初，帝与太子别，御褐袍，曰： 俟见尔乃更。 
现代文：当初，皇帝与太子告别时，身穿褐袍，说： 待回来见你时，再换此袍。 
English: At first, when the emperor and the crown prince were saying goodbye, he was wearing a brown robe and said, "When I come back to see you, I will change this robe."

古文：袍历二时弗易，至穿穴。
现代文：这袍已是两季没换，有的地方已经破了。
English: This robe has not been changed for two seasons, and in some places it is already torn.

古文：群臣请更服，帝曰： 士皆敝衣，吾可新服邪？ 
现代文：群臣请皇帝换袍，皇帝说： 兵士们都衣服破烂，我能穿新衣服吗？ 
English: The courtiers asked the emperor to change his clothes. The emperor said, "The soldiers are all in rags. Can I wear new clothes?"

古文：及是，太子进洁衣，乃御。
现代文：到这时，太子送上干净衣服才换。
English: At this point, the prince gave her clean clothes to change into.

古文：辽降口万四千，当没为奴婢，前集幽州，将分赏士。
现代文：辽东城降众有一万四千人，该收为奴婢，先集中在幽州，准备分赏给战士。
English: There were 14,000 people who surrendered in Liaodong City. They were to be collected as slaves, and were first concentrated in Yuzhou, ready to be distributed to the soldiers.

古文：帝以父子夫妇离析，诏有司以布帛赎之，原为民，列拜欢舞，三日不息。
现代文：皇帝可怜他们父子夫妇离散，就命有司用布帛赎下，赦为百姓。降众列队拜谢欢呼，三天不止。
English: The emperor took pity on the father and son who were separated, and ordered a steward to redeem them with a cloth and forgive the people. The crowds lined up to offer thanks and cheers for more than three days.

古文：延寿既降，以忧死，独惠真至长安。
现代文：高延寿降后，因忧郁而死，只有高惠真到了长安。
English: After Gao Yanran's life expectancy dropped, he died of melancholy, and only Gao Huizhen reached Chang'an.

古文：明年春，藏遣使者上方物，且谢罪；献二姝口，帝敕还之，谓使者曰： 色者人所重，然愍其去亲戚以伤乃心，我不取也。 
现代文：第二年春天，高藏派使者来献土产谢罪，并献二美女。皇帝下令送还，对使者说 ：美色，是人所喜欢的，但我可怜她们离开父母兄弟而伤心。我不能留她们。 
English: In the spring of the following year, the Emperor of Tibet sent an envoy to Tibet to offer thanks for the local produce and to offer two beautiful women. The Emperor ordered that they be returned and said to the envoy: "Beauty is what people like, but I pity them for being sad to leave their parents and brothers. I cannot keep them."

古文：初，师还，帝以弓服赐盖苏文，受之，不遣使者谢，于是下诏削弃朝贡。
现代文：当初班师时，皇帝曾将弓服赐给盖苏文，他收下了，但没派使者来表谢，于是下令削弃朝贡。
English: At the time of the first division, the emperor had given the bow suit to Gai Suwen, he received it, but did not send an envoy to express his gratitude, so he ordered to abandon the tribute.

古文：又明年三月，诏左武卫大将军牛进达为青丘道行军大总管，右武卫将军李海岸副之，自莱州度海；李勣为辽东道行军大总管，右武卫将军孙贰朗、右屯卫大将军郑仁泰副之，率营州都督兵，繇新城道以进。
现代文：贞观二十一年三月，诏令左武卫大将军牛进达为青丘道行军大总管，右武卫将军李海岸做副总管，从莱州渡海；令李责力为辽东道行军大总管，右武卫将军孙贰朗、右屯卫大将军郑仁泰为副总管，率领营州都督兵，由新城道进军。
English: In March of the 21st year of Zhenguan, he ordered General Niu Jindao of the Left Division to be the general manager of the march on Qingqiu Road, General Li Kaigan of the Right Division to be the deputy general manager and cross the sea from Laizhou; Li Li Li Li Li Li was the general manager of the march on Liaodong Road, General Sun Yulang of the Right Division and General Zheng Rintai of the Right Division to be the deputy general manager and lead the soldiers of the governor of Yingzhou to march from Xincheng Road.

古文：次南苏、木底，虏兵战不胜，焚其郛。
现代文：驻军南苏、木底，高丽兵拒战不胜，李责力纵火烧毁其外城。
English: The garrisons of the South Soviet, Muxidi, and Korean soldiers refused to fight, and Li Ruili set fire to their outer city.

古文：七月，进达等取石城，进攻积利城，斩级数千，乃皆还。
现代文：七月，牛进达等攻克石城，进攻积利城，斩杀几千人。
English: In July, Niu Jinda and others conquered Shicheng, attacked Jili, and killed several thousand people.

古文：藏遣子莫离支高任武来朝，因谢罪。
现代文：水陆两军都回朝。高藏派儿子莫离支高任武来朝谢罪。
English: Both naval and land forces returned to the imperial court. The son of the high Tibetan faction, Mo Liang, was appointed as the viceroy of the Wu Lai Dynasty in gratitude.

古文：二十二年，诏右武卫大将军薛万彻为青丘道行军大总管，右卫将军裴行方副之，自海道入。
现代文：贞观二十二年，又派右武卫大将军薛万彻任青丘道行军大总管，右卫将军裴行方任副总管，从海道入高丽。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, he also sent the right guard general Xue Wanche to be the general manager of the march of the Qingqiu Road, and the right guard general Pei Hongfang to be the deputy general manager, and entered Goryeo from the highway.

古文：部将古神感与虏战曷山，虏溃；虏乘暝袭我舟，伏兵破之。
现代文：部将古神感与高丽兵战于曷山，高丽败；乃乘夜色偷袭王师的船，又被伏兵击败。
English: The commander, Gu Sheng Kan, fought against the Korean soldiers in Lushan, and the Korean soldiers were defeated. However, they took advantage of the darkness to sneak up on Wang Shi's ship, and were defeated by the ambush.

古文：万彻度鸭渌，次泊灼城，拒四十里而舍。
现代文：薛万彻渡鸭绿江，前往泊灼城，在距城四十里处扎营。
English: Xue Wanche crossed the Yalu River, went to the city of Poyu, and camped at a distance of forty miles from the city.

古文：虏惧，皆弃邑居去。
现代文：高丽人害怕，抛弃房舍城市而去。
English: Afraid, the Goryeo people abandoned their homes and fled the city.

古文：大酋所夫孙拒战，万彻击斩之，遂围城，破其援兵三万，乃还。
现代文：大酋所夫孙来迎战，万彻将他斩杀，于是围城，击破援兵三万，班师。
English: The great chieftain, Sun Shoufu, came to meet the battle, and Wancher killed him, so he besieged the city, defeated 30,000 reinforcements, and routed the division.

古文：帝与长孙无忌计曰： 高丽困吾师之入，户亡耗，田岁不收，盖苏文筑城增陴，下饥卧死沟壑，不胜敝矣。
现代文：皇帝与长孙无忌商议 ：高丽为阻挠王师入境，兵民死亡不少，田岁不收。盖苏文筑城墙建工事，手下饥饿劳累而死的不少，国家困窘至极了。
English: The emperor and his eldest grandson could not help but discuss: Goryeo obstructed Wang Shi's entry into Korea, many soldiers and civilians died, the fields were left unploughed, Ge Suwen was busy building the city wall, many of his subordinates died of starvation and exhaustion, and the country was in dire straits.

古文：明年以三十万众，公为大总管，一举可灭也。 
现代文：明年发三十万人马，你任大总管，一举就可歼灭了。 
English: Next year, 300,000 horses will be issued, and you will be appointed as the general manager, and you will be wiped out in one fell swoop.

古文：乃诏剑南大治船，蜀人愿输财江南，计直作舟，舟取缣千二百。
现代文：于是诏令剑南大力造船，蜀人愿给钱江南，请代为造船，每船用缣一千二百匹。
English: So the emperor ordered Jiannan to vigorously build ships, and the people of Shu were willing to give money to Jiangnan to build ships, with twelve hundred yakitori for each ship.

古文：巴、蜀大骚，邛、眉、雅三州獠皆反，发陇西、峡内兵二万击定之。
现代文：巴、蜀人民极为不安。邛、眉、雅三州的獠人起来造反，调发陇西、峡内的兵两万将叛乱平定。
English: The people of Ba and Shu were extremely uneasy. The people of Yunnan, Meizhou and Yashan rebelled, and twenty thousand soldiers from Shaanxi and the gorges were dispatched to quell the rebellion.

古文：始，帝决取虏，故诏陕州刺史孙伏伽、莱州刺史李道裕储粮械于三山浦、乌胡岛，越州都督治大艎偶舫以待。
现代文：当初，皇帝决定征讨高丽，所以诏令陕州刺史孙伏伽、莱州刺史李道裕在三山浦、乌胡岛存储粮食、军械，令越州都督制造大楼船战舰。
English: At first, the emperor decided to conquer Goryeo, so he issued an edict ordering the governor of Shaanxi Province, Sun Fugu, and the governor of Lai Province, Li Daoyu, to store grain and military equipment in Sanshanpu and Wuhu Island, and ordered the governor of Yue Province to build a large warship.

古文：会帝崩，乃皆罢。
现代文：皇帝崩，征高丽事作罢。
English: The emperor is dead, let's not invade Korea.

古文：藏遣使者奉慰。
现代文：高藏派使者来吊唁。
English: High Tibet sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：永徽五年，藏以靺鞨兵攻契丹，战新城。大风，矢皆还激，为契丹所乘，大败。
现代文：永徽五年，高藏用的兵攻契丹。战于新城，正遇大风，箭都被吹回来，契丹乘势反击，高丽大败。
English: In the fifth year of Yonghui, Gaozang's soldiers attacked Khitan. The battle was fought in Xincheng, the wind was blowing, the arrows were blown back, Khitan counterattacked, and Goryeo was defeated.

古文：契丹火野复战，人死相藉，积尸而冢之。
现代文：契丹纵火郊野再战，战死者相枕藉，集中掩埋处理。
English: Khitan set fire to the countryside and fought again. The war dead were buried together.

古文：遣使者告捷，高宗为露布于朝。
现代文：契丹派使者报捷，高宗为之发露布于朝。
English: Khitan sent an envoy to report the victory, and Gaozong made a public appeal to the emperor.

古文：六年，新罗诉高丽、靺鞨夺三十六城，惟天子哀救。
现代文：永徽六年，新罗来诉高丽、夺他三十六城，希望天子救援。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, Silla came to sue Goryeo and seized its 36 cities, hoping for divine rescue.

古文：有诏营州都督程名振、左卫中郎将苏定方率师讨之。
现代文：皇帝诏令营州都督程名振及左卫中郎将苏定方率师讨伐高丽。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the governor of Yingzhou Province, Cheng Na Zhen, and the governor of Zuoying Province, Zuo Wei Zhong Lang, to lead the army of Su Ding Fang to fight against the Koryo.

古文：至新城，败高丽兵，火外郛及墟落，引还。
现代文：到达新城，打败了高丽兵，纵火烧毁外城及村落后回朝。
English: They reached the new city, defeated the Korean soldiers, set fire to the outer city and the village, and returned to the North.

古文：显庆三年，复遣名振率薛仁贵攻之，未能克。
现代文：显庆三年，又派程名振率薛仁贵征高丽，未能取胜。
English: In the third year of Hsien Ching, Xue Rengui was sent to conquer Korea, but he failed to win.

古文：后二年，天子已平百济，乃以左骁卫大将军契苾力何、右武卫大将军苏定方、左骁卫将军刘伯英率诸将出浿江、辽东、平壤道讨之。
现代文：两年后，天子平定了百济，乃派左骁卫大将军契必艹何力、右武卫大将军苏定方、左骁卫将军刘伯英率众将出氵贝江、辽东、平壤道去讨伐高丽。
English: Two years later, the Son of Heaven leveled Baekje, and sent General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of the Left Division of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, General of

古文：龙朔元年，大募兵，拜置诸将，天子欲自行，蔚州刺史李君球建言： 高丽小丑，何至倾中国事之？
现代文：龙朔元年，广泛募兵，委任各将，天子准备亲征。蔚州刺史李君球建议 ：高丽不过是个小丑，何劳倾全国的兵力来对付？
English: In the first year of the Long Shuo era, soldiers were widely recruited, generals were appointed, and the emperor himself was ready to be conscripted. Ulshu scribe Li Junqiu suggested: Goryeo is just a clown, why bother pouring troops across the country to deal with it?

古文：有如高丽既灭，必发兵以守，少发则威不振，多发人不安，是天下疲于转戍。
现代文：即使把高丽灭了，必须派兵镇守。兵少了，声威不振；多派兵，则人不安。天下将为戍守事疲于奔命。
English: Even if Koryo is destroyed, it is necessary to send soldiers to guard the town. If there are few soldiers, the prestige will not be strong; if there are many soldiers, people will be uneasy. The world will be exhausted from defending the town.

古文：臣谓征之未如勿征，灭之未如勿灭。 
现代文：臣以为不如不去讨伐他们、消灭他们。 
English: The vassal thought it would be better not to fight them, but to destroy them.

古文：亦会武后苦邀，帝乃止。
现代文：正好武后也苦谏，亲征乃止。
English: As it happened, Wu Hou was also bitterly disappointed, and he himself did not go on the expedition.

古文：八月，定方破虏兵于浿江，夺马邑山，遂围平壤。
现代文：八月，苏定方在氵贝江大败高丽兵，夺得马邑山，进而围困平壤。
English: In August, the Su Ding side defeated the Korean soldiers in the Beibei River, captured Mount Maye, and then besieged Pyongyang.

古文：明年，庞孝泰以岭南兵壁蛇水，盖苏文攻之，举军没；定方解而归。
现代文：第二年，庞孝泰用岭南兵驻守蛇水，盖苏文去攻，全军覆没。苏定方撤围而归。
English: In the second year, Pang Xiaotai stationed Lingnan soldiers to guard the Snake River, and Gai Suwen attacked, and the whole army was wiped out. The Suding side withdrew and returned.

古文：乾封元年，藏遣子男福从天子封泰山，还而盖苏文死，子男生代为莫离支，有弟男建、男产相怨。男生据国内城，遣子献诚入朝求救，盖苏文弟净土亦请割地降。
现代文：乾封元年，高藏派儿子男福随从天子去封泰山。这一年盖苏文死，其子男生代为莫离支。他弟弟男建、男产与他不和，男生据守国内城，派儿子献诚入朝求救，盖苏文弟净土也请求割地入降。
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, Gaozang sent his son, Onfu, to follow Tianzi to Fengtaishan. In this year, Gai Suwen died, and his son, Onfu, became the second generation to leave the clan. His brother, Onjian, and Onfu did not get along with him, and Onfu kept to the inner city and sent his son to the North to seek help. On the other hand, Gai Suwen's younger brother, Pure Land, also requested to divide the land and surrender.

古文：乃诏契苾何力为辽东道安抚大使，左金吾卫将军庞同善、营州都督高偘为行军总管，左武卫将军薛仁贵、左监门将军李谨行殿而行。
现代文：于是诏令契必艹何力为辽东道安抚大使，令左金吾卫将军庞同善、营州都督高亻品为行军总管，左武卫将军薛仁贵、左监门将军李谨行随后而行。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered Qibin He Li to be the ambassador of pacification for Liaodong, and ordered the left King Wuwei General Pang Tongshen and the Yingzhou Governor Gao Yibin to be the general manager of the march, followed by the left King Wuwei General Xue Rengui and the left Jianmen General Li Zhengying.

古文：九月，同善破高丽兵，男生率师来会。
现代文：九月，庞同善击破高丽兵，男生率师来会。
English: In September, Pang Tong Son defeated the Korean soldiers, and the boys came to the meeting with their teacher.

古文：诏拜男生特进、辽东大都督兼平壤道安抚大使，封玄菟郡公。
现代文：诏令委任男生为特进、辽东大都督兼平壤道安抚大使，爵封玄菟郡公。
English: The imperial edict appointed the boy as the special envoy, the governor of Liaodong Province and the ambassador for pacification of Pyongyang Province, and the lord of Xuanzang County.

古文：又以李勣为辽东道行军大总管兼安抚大使，与契苾何力、庞同善并力。诏独孤卿云由鸭渌道，郭待封积利道，刘仁愿毕列道，金待问海谷道，并为行军总管，受勣节度；转燕、赵食廥辽东。
现代文：又派李责力为辽东道行军大总管兼安抚大使，与契必艹何力、庞同善合力，还诏令独孤卿云、郭待封、刘仁愿、金待问等人并为行军总管，听李责力指挥，又令将燕、赵的粮草转运辽东。
English: He also sent Li Rongli as the general manager of the march and the ambassador of pacification to Liaodong, and made joint efforts with Qi Bibo and Pang Tongshen. He also ordered Dukuqingyun, Guo Zhifeng, Liu Renzhan and Jin Zhifang to be the general manager of the march and listen to Li Rongli's command, and ordered the grain and grass of Yan and Zhao to be transported to Liaodong.

古文：明年正月，勣引道次新城，合诸将谋曰： 新城，贼西鄙，不先图，馀城未易下。 
现代文：第二年正月，李责力引军至新城，召诸将谋划： 新城，是高丽的西鄙，不先攻下，其他的城就难办了。 
English: In the first month of the second year, Li Li Rongli led the army to Xincheng and summoned the generals to plan: Xincheng is the west of Goryeo, if it is not conquered first, other cities will be difficult to manage.

古文：遂壁西南山临城，城人缚戍酋出降。
现代文：于是占据西南山，俯瞰城中。城中人将守将绑起来出降。
English: As a result, they occupied the southwest hill, overlooking the city. The people in the city tied up the guards and surrendered.

古文：勣进拔城十有六。
现代文：李责力进军，连拔十六城。
English: Li Li Li marched into the army and captured sixteen cities.

古文：郭待封以舟师济海，趋平壤。
现代文：郭待封用水军渡海，直趋平壤。
English: Guo Zhifeng crossed the sea with the navy and headed straight for Pyongyang.

古文：三年二月，勣率仁贵拔扶馀城，它城三十皆纳款。
现代文：乾封三年二月，李责力率领薛仁贵攻克扶余城，周围三十个城都望风请降。
English: In February of the third year of Qianfeng, Li Li Li Li led Xue Rengui to conquer Fuyu City, and the thirty surrounding cities were all waiting for the wind to fall.

古文：同善、偘守新城，男建遣兵袭之，仁贵救偘，战金山，不胜。高丽鼓而进，锐甚。
现代文：庞同善、高亻品、镇守新城，男建派兵来袭击，薛仁贵来救高亻品，战于金山，不能取胜，高丽兵鼓噪而进，锐不可当。
English: Pang Tong Son, Gao Yeon Pin, and the town guards of Sinseong were at the forefront. Nang Jian sent soldiers to attack, Xue Rengui came to save Gao Yeon Pin. They fought in Jinshan and could not win. The Korean soldiers advanced noisily and could not be stopped.

古文：仁贵横击，大破之，斩首五万级，拔南苏、木底、苍岩三城，引兵略地，与勣会。
现代文：薛仁贵拦腰攻击，大破高丽，斩首五万。进而捣破南苏、木礛、苍岩三城，引兵一路攻城，来与李责力会合。
English: Xue Rengui halted his attack, defeated Goryeo, beheaded fifty thousand, and then broke through the three cities of Nansu, Muxu, and Cangyan, leading his troops to attack the city all the way to meet Li Youli.

古文：侍御史贾言忠计事还，帝问军中云何。对曰： 必克。
现代文：侍御史贾言忠回朝汇报，皇帝问及军事，言忠说： 高丽必平。
English: The attendant, Shi Jia Yanzhong, reported back to the emperor. When the emperor asked about military affairs, Yanzhong said, "Gao Li Biping."

古文：昔先帝问罪，所以不得志者，虏未有邅也。
现代文：过去先帝发兵问罪，所以不能如意的原因是高丽无衅可乘。
English: In the past, the former emperor sent soldiers to ask for punishment, so the reason why it could not be carried out was that Goryeo could take advantage of it without provocation.

古文：谚曰： 军无媒，中道回 。
现代文：俗话说 军无媒、中道回 。
English: As the saying goes, there is no middle way.

古文：今男生兄弟阋很，为我乡导，虏之情伪，我尽知之，将忠士力，臣故曰必克。
现代文：如今男生兄弟相斗，男生当我的向导，国内虚实，我已尽知；再加上将帅忠心，士兵效力，所以臣说必平。
English: Nowadays, boys and brothers fight against each other. Boys are my guides. I know all about the truth and falsehood of the country. Coupled with the loyalty of the generals and the effectiveness of the soldiers, I say that it will be a draw.

古文：且高丽祕记曰： 不及九百年，当有八十大将灭之。 
现代文：再说，高丽秘记中说 ：不到九百年，定有八十大将倾灭高丽。 
English: Moreover, it is said in the Secret of Goryeo that in less than 900 years, there will be 80 major events that will destroy Goryeo.

古文：高氏自汉有国，今九百年，勣年八十矣。
现代文：高氏自汉朝立国，至今已九百年；李责力年已八十，也正应验。
English: It has been 900 years since the founding of the Han Dynasty by Gao Shi; Li Rongli is 80 years old and is also passing the examination.

古文：虏仍荐饥，人相掠卖，地震裂，狼狐入城，分穴于门，人心危骇，是行不再举矣。 
现代文：更兼高丽连年饥馑，卖人充饥，地震裂，狼狐入城、田鼠咬门各种怪异，人心惊惶，怎能不亡呢？ 
English: What's more, Koryo has been starving for years, people have been selling people to feed their hunger, the earth has been cracked, wolves and foxes have entered the city, and field mice have nibbled at doors, all kinds of strange things, people are frightened, how can they not die?

古文：男建以兵五万袭扶馀，勣破之萨贺水上，斩首五千级，俘口三万，器械牛马称之。进拔大行城。
现代文：男建将五万兵袭击扶余，李责力在萨贺水上将他击破，斩首五千，俘获三万人，器械牛马无数，进而攻下大行城。
English: A man named Jian led fifty thousand soldiers to attack Fuyu, and Li Rongli defeated him on the waters of Saha, beheaded five thousand, captured thirty thousand, and captured countless tools, cattle, and horses, and then captured Dagang City.

古文：刘仁愿与勣会，后期，召还当诛，赦流姚州。
现代文：刘仁愿领命与李责力会合，但误了期。召回朝本该斩首，赦罪改流放姚州。
English: Liu Ren was willing to receive the order to meet with Li Rongli, but he missed the deadline. He was recalled to North Korea, where he should have been beheaded. He was pardoned and exiled to Yaozhou.

古文：契苾何力会勣军于鸭渌，拔辱夷城，悉师围平壤。
现代文：契必艹何力于鸭绿江与李责力军会师，攻克辱夷城，全力围困平壤。
English: He joined forces with Li Rongli at the Yalu River to defeat Shushi and besiege Pyongyang.

古文：九月，藏遣男产率首领百人树素幡降，且请入朝，勣以礼见。
现代文：九月，高藏派男产率首领一百人竖白旗请降，且请入朝，李责力以礼与之相见。
English: In September, the leader of the 100 men of the High Tibet faction raised a white flag and requested to be allowed to enter the imperial court. Li Youli met him with courtesy.

古文：而男建犹固守，出战数北。
现代文：而男建还在固守，每战均败。
English: And the male Jian is still clinging on, losing every battle.

古文：大将浮屠信诚遣谍约内应。
现代文：大将僧人信诚派人来约，愿做内应。
English: General Monk Nobushige sent someone to make an appointment and is willing to do so.

古文：五日，阖启，兵噪而入，火其门，郁焰四兴，男建窘急，自刺不殊。
现代文：过了五天，打开城门，王师鼓噪而入，纵火烧城门，烈焰蔓延，男建计穷欲自杀，被捉未果。
English: After five days, he opened the city gate, Wang Shi entered noisily, set fire to the city gate, the flames spread, the man planned to commit suicide, and was caught unsuccessfully.

古文：执藏、男建等，收凡五部百七十六城，户六十九万。
现代文：高藏也被擒。总共收取高丽五部一百七十六城，六十九万户。
English: Gaozang was also captured. A total of 176 cities and 690,000 households in the five provinces of Korea were captured.

古文：诏勣便道献俘昭陵，凯而还。
现代文：诏令李责力顺道献俘昭陵，然后凯旋。
English: The imperial edict ordered Li to make a detour to pay homage to the Zhao Mausoleum, and then make a triumphant return.

古文：十二月，帝坐含元殿，引见勣等，数俘于廷。
现代文：十二月，皇帝在含元殿，引见李责力等人并斥责俘虏之罪。
English: In December, the emperor met Li Youli and others at the Hall of Han Yuan and reprimanded the captives.

古文：以藏素胁制，赦为司平太常伯，男产司宰少卿；投男建黔州，百济王扶馀隆岭外；以献诚为司卫卿，信诚为银青光禄大夫，男生右卫大将军，何力行左卫大将军，勣兼太子太师，仁贵威卫大将军。
现代文：因高藏政不由己，赦罪，任司平太常伯；男产先降，也赦罪，任司宰少卿；男建则流放黔州，百济王扶余隆流放岭外；任献诚为司卫卿，信诚为银青光禄大夫，男生右卫大将军；升任契必艹何力为行左卫大将军，李责力兼太子太师，薛仁贵为威卫大将军。
English: Due to the high Tibetan politics, he was pardoned and appointed as Siping Taizhongbo; he was also pardoned and appointed as Sizi Zai Shaoqing; he was exiled to Bozhou and Baekje King Fuyulong was exiled outside the ridge; he was appointed as Sibei Ching, as Yin Qing Guanglu Doctor, and as Male Uwei General; he was promoted as Ji Bijun He Li, as Xing Zuo Wei General, as Li You Li, as Prince and Grand Master, and as Xue Rengui, as Wei Wei General.

古文：剖其地为都督府者九，州四十二，县百。复置安东都护府，擢酋豪有功者授都督、刺史、令，与华官参治。仁贵为都护，总兵镇之。
现代文：分其地置都督九府、四十二州、一百县，再置安东都护府，选择酋长中有功劳的任都督、刺史及令等职，与华人参治百姓，薛仁贵为都护，统兵镇守。
English: He set up nine prefectures, forty-two prefectures and one hundred counties with their respective governors, and then set up the Andong Capital Protectorate. He selected the most meritorious of the chiefs to be appointed as the governor, chief historian and commander, and to join the Chinese in governing the people. Xue Rengui was appointed as the capital protector and the commander-in-chief.

古文：是岁郊祭，以高丽平，谢成于天。
现代文：这一年因平定高丽，行郊祭礼，感谢天助。
English: This year, due to the pacification of Korea, a suburban festival was held to thank heaven for its help.

古文：总章二年，徙高丽民三万于江淮、山南。
现代文：总章二年，迁徙高丽人民三万人到江淮、山南。
English: In the second year of the General Chapter, 30,000 Korean people migrated to Jianghuai and Shannan.

古文：大长钳牟岑率众反，立藏外孙安舜为主。
现代文：大长钳牟岑率众造反，立高藏的外孙安舜为王。
English: At the head of the rebellion was the great-grandson of Takakura, Amakusa, who became king.

古文：诏高偘东州道，李谨行燕山道，并为行军总管讨之，遣司平太常伯杨昉绥纳亡馀。
现代文：诏令高亻品、李谨行并为行军总管，率东州道、燕山道之兵讨伐，派司平太常伯杨日方安抚收纳逃亡离散之人。
English: He ordered Gao Yibin and Li Zhengying to march as the general manager, led the soldiers of Dongzhou Road and Yanshan Road to fight, and sent the Japanese side to pacify and accommodate the fugitive and dispersed people.

古文：舜杀钳牟岑走新罗。
现代文：安舜杀了钳牟岑逃到新罗。
English: An Xun killed Qimong and fled to Silla.

古文：偘徙都护府治辽东州，破叛兵于安市，又败之泉山，俘新罗援兵二千。
现代文：高亻品迁都护府到辽东州，在安市击破叛军，在泉山又胜一仗，俘虏新罗援兵二千人。
English: Gao Kunpin moved the capital to Liaodong Province, defeated the rebels in An City, won another battle in Quanshan, and captured two thousand Silla reinforcements.

古文：李谨行破之于发庐河，再战，俘馘万计。
现代文：李谨行在发卢河打败叛军，两次战役，杀、俘的达万人。
English: Li Zengxing defeated the rebels in the Falu River, fought two battles, and killed and captured tens of thousands of people.

古文：于是平壤痍残不能军，相率奔新罗，凡四年乃平。
现代文：这时，平壤荒残不堪，不能驻军，高丽兵相率奔新罗，前后共四年才平乱。
English: At this time, Pyongyang was in ruins and could not be garrisoned, and the Korean phalanx led the way to Silla. It took a total of four years to quell the unrest.

古文：始，谨行留妻刘守伐奴城，虏攻之，刘擐甲勒兵守，贼引去。帝嘉之，封燕郡夫人。
现代文：当初，李谨行将妻子刘氏留守伐奴城，高丽人攻来，刘氏披甲率兵坚守，高丽兵退，皇帝嘉奖她，封为燕郡夫人。
English: At the beginning, Li Jianxing left his wife Liu to defend Fanu City, the Goryeo people attacked, Liu put on armor and led the soldiers to hold out, the Goryeo soldiers retreated, the emperor commended her and named her the wife of Yan County.

古文：仪凤二年，授藏辽东都督，封朝鲜郡王，还辽东以安馀民，先编侨内州者皆原遣，徙安东都护府于新城。
现代文：仪凤二年，委任高藏为辽东都督，封爵朝鲜郡王。回到辽东，治理当地人民，原先迁来分居于各州的高丽人也都送归原地。将安东都护府迁到新城。
English: In the second year of Yifeng, Gaozang was appointed as the governor of Liaodong and was given the title of Count King of Korea. He returned to Liaodong to govern the local people, and the Goryeo people who had originally moved and lived separately in various states were also sent back to their original places. He moved the Anton Dufu to Xincheng.

古文：藏与靺鞨谋反，未及发，召还放邛州，厮其人于河南、陇右，弱窭者留安东。
现代文：高藏与合谋反叛，事泄露，被召回流放到邛州。将他的人分散迁到河南、陇右各州，贫弱者则留在安东。
English: Gaozang and conspired to rebel, the matter was leaked, and he was recalled and exiled to Ganzhou. His people were dispersed to Henan and Shandong provinces, while the poor and weak remained in Andong.

古文：藏以永淳初死，赠卫尉卿，葬颉利墓左，树碑其阡。
现代文：高藏在永淳初年死，追赠卫尉卿，葬在颉利墓东，墓前竖碑。
English: Gao Zang died in the first year of Yong Jun, posthumously awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Guards, and was buried in the east of the Xili Tomb, with a monument in front of the tomb.

古文：旧城往往入新罗，遗人散奔突厥、靺鞨，由是高氏君长皆绝。
现代文：不少旧城并入新罗，高丽旧户分散投奔突厥？从此，高氏君长绝代。
English: Many of the old cities were merged into Silla, and the old families of Goryeo scattered to Turkey? From then on, the Gao clan became extinct.

古文：垂拱中，以藏孙宝元为朝鲜郡王。
现代文：垂拱年间，封高藏的孙子宝元为朝鲜郡王。
English: During the Hanging Arch era, Fong Gaozang's grandson Bao Yuan became the King of Korea.

古文：圣历初，进左鹰扬卫大将军，更封忠诚国王，使统安东旧部，不行。
现代文：圣历初年，进任为左鹰扬卫大将军，封为忠诚国王，让他统率安东旧部，事竟不行。
English: In the first year of the sacred calendar, he was appointed as the General of the Left Eagle Yang Wei, named as a loyal king, and let him lead the old department of Anton.

古文：明年，以藏子德武为安东都督，后稍自国。
现代文：第二年，任高藏的儿子德武为安东都督，后渐渐自立成国。
English: In the second year, Takasago's son, Devu, was appointed as the governor of Andon, and gradually became independent.

古文：至元和末，遣使者献乐工云。
现代文：到元和末年，派使者来朝贡献乐工。
English: In the first and last years of the Yuan Dynasty, envoys were sent to North Korea to contribute music.

古文：百济，扶馀别种也。直京师东六千里而赢，滨海之阳，西界越州，南倭，北高丽，皆逾海乃至，其东，新罗也。
现代文：百济，原本也是扶余的别种，在京师东六千多里，大海之北，西是越州，南是倭国，北是高丽，都要渡海才得到，东边则是新罗。
English: Baekje, originally also a different kind of Fuyu, is more than six thousand miles east of Beijing, north of the sea, west of Yuezhou, south of Wa, north of Goryeo, and can only be reached by crossing the sea. To the east is Silla.

古文：王居东、西二城，官有内臣佐平者宣纳号令，内头佐平主帑聚，内法佐平主礼，卫士佐平典卫兵，朝廷佐平主狱，兵官佐平掌外兵。
现代文：王的居处有东西二城，官职有内臣佐平，掌管宣谕命令、接纳奏书；内头佐平，掌管库藏；内法佐平，掌管礼仪；卫士佐平，掌管军事；朝廷佐平，掌管刑狱；兵官佐平，掌管在外兵马事。
English: The residence of the king is divided into two parts, east and west. The highest-ranking officials are Naishin Sahei, who is in charge of issuing orders and receiving reports; Naito Sahei, who is in charge of the treasury; Naifo Sahei, who is in charge of etiquette; Keeper Sahei, who is in charge of military affairs; Imperial Court Sahei, who is in charge of prisons; and Military Officer Sahei, who is in charge of military affairs abroad.

古文：有六方，方统十郡。
现代文：还有六方，每方统领十郡。
English: There are also six parties, each of which controls ten counties.

古文：大姓有八：沙氏，燕氏，氏，解氏，贞氏，国氏，木氏，氏。
现代文：国内有八家大姓：沙氏、燕氏、碬氏、解氏、贞氏、国氏、木氏、日艹氏。
English: There are eight major families in China: the Sa, Yan, Xing, Ge, Zhen, Gu, Mu, and Nichi clans.

古文：其法：反逆者诛，籍其家；杀人者，输奴婢三赎罪；吏受赇及盗，三倍偿，锢终身。
现代文：其国法：叛逆者处死，抄没其家；杀人的，送三名奴婢可赎罪；官人受贿及偷盗者，赔偿三倍，还要终身监禁。
English: The law of his country: a traitor is put to death and his house is confiscated; a murderer can atone for his crime by sending three slaves; a government official who accepts bribes and steals has to pay three times the compensation and is also sentenced to life imprisonment.

古文：俗与高丽同。
现代文：风俗与高丽同。
English: The customs are the same as in Korea.

古文：有三岛，生黄漆，六月刺取沈，色若金。
现代文：有三个岛，产黄漆，六月割刺取汁，色泽如金。
English: There are three islands, producing yellow lacquer, cutting thorns in June to extract juice, and the color is like gold.

古文：王服大袖紫袍，青锦裤，素皮带，乌革履，乌罗冠饰以金花。
现代文：王穿大袖紫袍，青锦裤，素色皮带，黑皮鞋，乌罗冠用金花为饰。
English: Wang wore a large-sleeved purple robe, blue brocade trousers, a plain leather belt, black leather shoes, and a Uro crown decorated with gold flowers.

古文：群臣绛衣，饰冠以银花。禁民衣绛紫。
现代文：群臣穿绛色衣，冠用银花装饰，禁止百姓穿绛紫色衣。
English: The courtiers wore scarlet, the crowns were decorated with silver flowers, and the common people were forbidden to wear scarlet.

古文：有文籍，纪时月如华人。
现代文：有文字书籍，记时月之法与华人同。
English: There are written books, and the method of recording time and month is the same as that of the Chinese.

古文：武德四年，王扶馀璋始遣使献果下马，自是数朝贡。
现代文：武德四年，王扶余璋才派使者来献果下马，从此多次朝贡。
English: It was not until four years later that Wang Fuyu sent an envoy to present the fruits and dismount from his horse. Since then, he has paid tribute to the emperor many times.

古文：高祖册为带方郡王、百济王。
现代文：高祖册封他为带方郡王、百济王。
English: Gao Zu named him the King of Bifang County and the King of Baekje.

古文：后五年，献明光铠，且讼高丽梗贡道。
现代文：五年后，来献明光铠，同时控告高丽阻塞进贡道路。
English: Five years later, he came to present the Myeonggwang Pagoda, and at the same time sued Goryeo for blocking the tribute road.

古文：太宗贞观初，诏使者平其怨。
现代文：太宗贞观初年，诏派使者去调和其纠纷。
English: In the first year of Taizong Zhenguan, the emperor sent an envoy to mediate the dispute.

古文：又与新罗世仇，数相侵，帝赐玺书曰： 新罗，朕蕃臣，王之邻国。
现代文：百济又与新罗有世仇，多次相互侵伐。皇帝赐玺书给王 ：新罗，是我的蕃臣，是你的邻国。
English: Baekje also had a feud with Silla, repeatedly invading each other. The emperor gave an imperial edict to the king: Silla, my vassal, is your neighbor.

古文：闻数相侵暴，朕已诏高丽、新罗申和，王宜忘前怨，识朕本怀。 
现代文：听说你们多次相互侵扰。我已诏令高丽、新罗言和，你该捐弃前嫌，不辜负我的心意。 
English: I have heard that you have repeatedly interfered with each other. I have ordered Goryeo and Silla to make peace. You should give up your past grudges and live up to my heart.

古文：璋奉表谢，然兵亦不止。
现代文：扶余璋上书致谢，但争战仍然不止。
English: Fu Yu Yao wrote a letter of thanks, but the battle still continues.

古文：再遣使朝，上铁甲雕斧，帝优劳之，赐帛段三千。
现代文：再派使者来朝时，献铁甲雕斧，皇帝慰劳甚厚，赐彩帛三千段。
English: When he sent another envoy to the DPRK, he presented iron armor and carved axes, and the emperor was greatly consoled and gave him 3,000 pieces of colored enamel.

古文：十五年，璋死，使者素服奉表曰： 君外臣百济王扶馀璋卒。 
现代文：贞观十五年，扶余璋死，使者穿素服奉表告哀： 君之外臣百济王扶余璋卒。 
English: In the fifteenth year of Zhenguan, Fu Yuxuan died, and the envoy, wearing plain clothes, offered a condolence: Your foreign vassal Baiji Wang Fu Yuxuan died.

古文：帝为举哀玄武门，赠光禄大夫，赙赐甚厚。
现代文：皇帝为之在玄武门举哀，追赠光禄大夫，丧仪甚厚。
English: The emperor held a memorial service for him at the Xuanwu Gate and posthumously awarded him the title of Guanglu Doctor. The funeral ceremony was very elaborate.

古文：命祠部郎中郑文表册其子义慈为柱国，绍王。
现代文：命祠部郎中郑文表前往册封其子义慈为柱国。
English: Zheng Wenzhe, the steward of the ancestral hall, went to anoint his son Yizi as the pillar country.

古文：义慈事亲孝，与兄弟友，时号 海东曾子 。
现代文：继立为百济王。扶余义慈对父母孝顺，与兄弟和睦，当时称他为 海东曾子 。
English: Fuyue Yizi was dutiful to his parents and reconciled with his brothers. At that time, he was called the great-grandson of Haidong.

古文：明年，与高丽连和伐新罗，取四十馀城，发兵守之。
现代文：贞观十六年，与高丽连手伐新罗，攻取四十多城，派兵守卫。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, he and Goryeo jointly attacked Silla, captured more than forty cities, and sent soldiers to guard them.

古文：又谋取棠项城，绝贡道。
现代文：又打算攻取棠项城以绝新罗入朝之路。
English: He also planned to capture the city of Tangxiang and break into the imperial court with a completely new strategy.

古文：新罗告急，帝遣司农丞相里玄奖赍诏书谕解。
现代文：新罗来告急，皇帝派司农丞相里玄奖带了诏书去调解。
English: Xinluo was in a hurry, and the emperor sent the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Li Xuan Rong, to mediate with an edict.

古文：闻帝新讨高丽，乃间取新罗七城；久之，又夺十馀城，因不朝贡。
现代文：后来听说皇帝亲征高丽，就乘机攻取新罗七城；后来，又夺取了十几座城。就此不再朝贡。
English: Later, when he heard that the emperor was personally conquering Korea, he seized the opportunity to capture seven cities in Silla; later, he captured more than a dozen cities. As a result, he no longer paid tribute.

古文：高宗立，乃遣使者来，帝诏义慈曰： 海东三国，开基旧矣，地固犬牙。
现代文：高宗立，才又派使者来。皇帝下诏书给义慈 ：海东三国，建国都已很久，只是疆域犬牙交错。
English: It was Gao Zongli who sent another envoy. The emperor issued an edict to Yizi: The three countries in the East China Sea have been established for a long time, but the boundaries are intertwined.

古文：比者隙争侵校无宁岁，新罗高城重镇皆为王并，归穷于朕，丐王归地。
现代文：近来彼此纠纷争战不得安宁，新罗的高城重镇均被你吞并，以致窘困来我处，请你还地给他。
English: Recently, there has been no peace in the disputes and wars between each other. The major cities and towns in Silla have all been annexed by you, so that the embarrassment has come to me. Please return the land to him.

古文：昔齐桓一诸侯，尚存亡国，况朕万方主，可不恤其危邪？
现代文：古时齐桓为一诸侯，尚能存恤亡国；何况我乃万国之主，岂会不恤危难？
English: In ancient times, Zi Huan was a vassal, yet he was able to have compassion on a defeated country; moreover, I am the Lord of all nations, how can I not have compassion on danger?

古文：王所兼城宜还之，新罗所俘亦畀还王。
现代文：你所夺取的城镇应还他，新罗所俘你的人马也还给你。
English: The cities which thou hast taken shall he give again, and thy captives which Silla hath taken shall he restore unto thee.

古文：不如诏者，任王决战，朕将发契丹诸国，度辽深入。
现代文：你若不肯听命，那就听凭你与新罗决战，我将发契丹诸国之兵力，渡辽水深入。
English: If you refuse to obey my order, then I will let you fight a decisive battle with Silla. I will dispatch the armed forces of the Khitan countries to cross the Liao Shui and go deep into it.

古文：王可思之，无后悔！ 
现代文：你该深思，别再后悔。 
English: You should think about it and stop regretting.

古文：永徽六年，新罗诉百济、高丽、靺鞨取北境三十城。
现代文：永徽六年，新罗又诉百济、高丽、夺取他北境三十城。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, Silla sued Baekje and Goryeo and seized 30 cities in the northern border.

古文：显庆五年，乃诏左卫大将军苏定方为神丘道行军大总管，率左卫将军刘伯英、右武卫将军冯士贵、左骁卫将军庞孝泰发新罗兵讨之，自城山济海。
现代文：显庆五年，诏令左卫大将军苏定方任神丘道行军大总管，率领左卫将军刘伯英、右武卫将军冯士贵、左骁骑将军庞孝泰及新罗兵前往讨伐，从城山渡海，百济守住熊津口。
English: In the 5th year of Hsien Ching, he ordered General Su Dingfang of the Left Division to be the general manager of the march on Shenqiu Road. He led General Liu Bo Ying of the Left Division, General Feng Shigui of the Right Division, General Pang Xiaotai of the Left Division, and soldiers from Xinluo to go to the crusade. They crossed the sea from Chengshan, and Baekje guarded the entrance to Xiongjin.

古文：百济守熊津口，定方纵击，虏大败。王师乘潮帆以进，趋真都城一舍止。
现代文：苏定方猛击，百济大败，王师乘潮张帆进发，直至真都城三十里外止。
English: The Suding side struck hard, Baekje was defeated, and Wang Shi set sail on the tide, until he stopped 30 miles outside Zhendu City.

古文：虏悉众拒，复破之，斩首万馀级，拔其城。
现代文：百济倾军抗拒，又败。苏定方斩敌首一万多，攻克真都城。
English: The Baekje-leaning army resisted and was defeated again. The Suding side cut off more than ten thousand enemy heads and conquered Jindo City.

古文：义慈挟太子隆走北鄙，定方围之。
现代文：义慈带了太子隆逃至北郊，定方将兵包围。
English: Yi Ci fled to the northern suburbs with Prince Takashi, and Ding Fang encircled the soldiers.

古文：次子泰自立为王，率众固守，义慈孙文思曰： 王、太子固在，叔乃自王，若唐兵解去，如我父子何？ 
现代文：其次子泰自立为王，率众固守。义慈孙文思说： 王和太子都还在，叔叔自立为王，假如唐兵解围而去，将会拿我父子怎么办？ 
English: Next, his son Tai declared himself king and led his people to hold fast. Yizhi Sun Wensi said: The king and the prince are still there, and my uncle has declared himself king. If the Tang soldiers leave after the siege is lifted, what will they do with my father and son?

古文：与左右缒而出，民皆从之，泰不能止。
现代文：与左右缒城而出，百姓都随之离城，泰禁止不了。
English: With the left and right out of the city, the people are leaving the city, and Tai can't stop them.

古文：定方令士超堞立帜，泰开门降，定方执义慈、隆及小王孝演、酋长五十八人送京师，平其国五部、三十七郡、二百城，户七十六万。
现代文：苏定方令士兵把旗帜竖得高过城堞。泰开门降，定方擒得义慈、隆及小王孝演、酋长五十八人送京师，平定其国五部、三十七郡、二百城、七十六万户。
English: Su Dingfang ordered the soldiers to raise the flag higher than the city gate. Tai opened the door and lowered it, Dingfang defeated Yi Ci, Long and Xiao Wang Xiaoyan, and sent fifty-eight chiefs to Beijing division, and pacified five provinces, thirty-seven counties, two hundred cities and seven hundred and sixty thousand households in his country.

古文：乃析置熊津、马韩、东明、金涟、德安五都督府，擢酋渠长治之。命郎将刘仁愿守百济城，左卫郎将王文度为熊津都督。
现代文：将其地分置熊津、马韩、东明、金涟、德安五个都督府，选其大酋长们治理；命郎将刘仁愿守百济城，左卫郎将王文度为熊津都督。
English: He divided the land into five governorates, namely, Kumazu, Mahan, Dongming, Jincheng and De'an, and selected their great chiefs to govern; his son-in-law, Liu Renzhen, was appointed to defend Baekje City, and his son-in-law, Wang Wendu, was appointed governor of Kumazu.

古文：九月，定方以所俘见，诏释不诛。
现代文：九月，苏定方献俘虏，诏令释放。
English: In September, the Suding side presented the captives and ordered their release.

古文：义慈病死，赠卫尉卿，许旧臣赴临，诏葬孙皓、陈叔宝墓左，授隆司稼卿。
现代文：义慈病死，追赠卫尉卿，允许旧臣去祭吊，诏令葬在孙皓、陈叔宝墓之东，委任扶余隆为司稼卿。
English: When Yi Ci died of illness, he posthumously granted him the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, allowed his former vassals to go to the funeral, ordered that he be buried in the east of the tombs of Sun Yat-sen and Chen Shubao, and appointed Fu Yulong as Secretary of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：文度济海卒，以刘仁轨代之。
现代文：王文度渡海时溺死，派刘仁轨代为熊津都督。
English: Wang Wendu drowned while crossing the sea, and Liu Rincor was sent to replace him as governor of Kumazu.

古文：璋从子福信尝将兵，乃与浮屠道琛据周留城反，迎故王子扶馀丰于倭，立为王。西部皆应，引兵围仁愿。
现代文：扶余璋的侄子福信曾带过兵，与僧人道琛据守周留城反叛，到倭国接回原王子扶余丰立为王，其西部城都响应，引兵围攻刘仁愿。
English: Fuyuhun's nephew Fukushin once led a group of soldiers to rebel against the Zhouli Castle, which was held by the monk Zhuozhen. He went to Wa Province to take back the former prince Fuyuhun and establish himself as king. The western city responded by bringing in troops to besiege Liu Renzhen.

古文：龙朔元年，仁轨发新罗兵往救，道琛立二壁熊津江，仁轨与新罗兵夹击之，奔入壁，争梁堕溺者万人，新罗兵还。
现代文：龙朔元年，刘仁轨调新罗兵去救援，道琛在熊津江建两个壁垒。刘仁轨与新罗兵四面夹攻，百济兵逃入壁垒，争过桥落水溺死的有万人，新罗兵回去。
English: In the first year of the Long Shuo period, Liu Renlu transferred Xinluo soldiers to rescue, and Daojun built two barriers in the Kumajin River. Liu Renluo and Xinluo soldiers attacked on all sides, Baiji soldiers fled into the barriers, thousands of people drowned in the struggle to cross the bridge, and Xinluo soldiers went back.

古文：道琛保任孝城，自称领军将军，福信称霜岑将军，告仁轨曰： 闻唐与新罗约，破百济，无老孺皆杀之；畀以国。
现代文：道琛退守任孝城，自称领军将军，福信称霜岑将军。派使告刘仁轨 ：听说唐与新罗约定，攻破百济后，不论男女老少都杀掉，把国土送给新罗。
English: Daodejing retreated to the garrison of Xiaocheng, claiming to be the leading general, while Fukushin claimed to be the general of the Frost Dragon. He sent an envoy to Liu Renliao: I heard that Tang and Silla agreed that after conquering Baekje, they would kill all men, women, and children and give the land to Silla.

古文：我与受死，不若战。 
现代文：我们与其被杀，不如战死。 
English: We would rather die in battle than be killed.

古文：仁轨遣使赍书答说，道琛倨甚，馆使者于外，嫚报曰： 使人官小，我，国大将，礼不当见。 
现代文：刘仁轨派使者送信回答，说以利害，道琛十分倨傲，让使者居于外馆，扬言： 使者官卑，我是国家大将，按礼不能见他。 
English: Liu Renzhong sent an envoy to reply, saying that it was a matter of interest, and Daojun was very proud, so he let the envoy live in the foreign embassy, threatening: The envoy is of lower rank, I am a national general, and according to etiquette, I cannot see him.

古文：徒遣之。
现代文：打发使者回去而不作答。
English: He sent the envoy back without reply.

古文：仁轨以众少，乃休军养威，请合新罗图之。
现代文：刘仁轨因兵少，就休军养威，要新罗来合力攻打。
English: Due to the shortage of soldiers, Liu Renzhong withdrew his troops to bolster his morale and asked Silla to join forces to attack.

古文：福信俄杀道琛，并其兵，丰不能制。
现代文：不久，福信杀了道琛，收并其兵，扶余丰无力控制。
English: Soon after, Fukushin killed Daojun and absorbed his soldiers, leaving Fuyufeng powerless to control the situation.

古文：二年七月，仁愿等破之熊津，拔支罗城，夜薄真岘，比明入之，斩首八百级，新罗饷道乃开。
现代文：龙朔二年七月，刘仁愿等在熊津击破福信，攻克支罗城，夜里逼近真岘，天明入城，斩首八百，新罗运粮之路遂通。
English: In July of the second year of Long Shuo, Liu Renzhen and others defeated Fuxin in Xiongjin, conquered the city of Jila, approached Zhenya at night, entered the city at dawn, beheaded eight hundred, and the road of grain transportation in Silla was completed.

古文：仁愿请济师，诏右威卫将军孙仁师为熊津道行军总管，发齐兵七千往。
现代文：仁愿奏请增兵，诏令右威卫将军孙仁师任熊津道行军总管，发齐州兵七千人前往。
English: In response to Ren's request for additional troops, he ordered Yu Wei Wei General Sun Renshi to be appointed as the general manager of the march in Kumazu Province, and sent seven thousand soldiers from Qi Province to march.

古文：福信颛国，谋杀丰；丰率亲信斩福信，与高丽、倭连和。
现代文：福信专掌国事兵权，欲杀扶余丰。丰率亲信斩杀福信，与高丽、倭国联和。
English: Fukushin was in charge of military affairs and wanted to kill Fuyufeng. Fukushin was killed by Fukushin's close confidants, and a peace treaty was signed with Korea and Japan.

古文：仁愿已得齐兵，士气振，乃与新罗王金法敏率步骑，而遣刘仁轨率舟师，自熊津江偕进，趋周留城。丰众屯白江口，四遇皆克，火四百艘；丰走不知所在。
现代文：仁愿有了齐兵，士气大振，与新罗王金法敏率陆军，派刘仁轨率水军，从熊津江同时进军，直趋周留城，扶余丰率兵屯守白江口，四战四败，战船四百被烧，扶余丰逃走，不知去向。
English: With the arrival of the Qi soldiers, the morale of Ren Zheng was greatly boosted. He marched with the army led by King Jin Fomin of Silla and the navy led by Liu Renlu from the Kumazu River at the same time, and went straight to the city of Zhouli. Fu Yu Feng led the troops to guard the mouth of the Baijiang River, and suffered four defeats in four battles, and four hundred warships were burned. Fu Yu Feng fled, and his whereabouts are unknown.

古文：伪王子扶馀忠胜、忠志率残众及倭人请命，诸城皆复。
现代文：伪王子扶余忠胜、扶余忠志率领残兵及倭国人投降，各城也都归顺。
English: The pseudo-princes Fuyu Tadanobu and Fuyu Tadatsune led the remnants of the army and the people of Wakoku to surrender, and all the cities also surrendered.

古文：仁愿勒军还，留仁轨代守。
现代文：刘仁愿带军回朝，刘仁轨代为镇守。
English: Liu Ren was willing to lead the army back to the North, and Liu Ren served as the town guard.

古文：帝以扶馀隆为熊津都督，俾归国，平新罗故憾，招还遗人。
现代文：皇帝委派扶余隆为熊津都督，让他归国，抚平新罗的旧怨，招还流亡之人。
English: The emperor appointed Fuyulong as the new governor of Kumazu, let him return to the country, smooth out the old grievances of Silla, and recruit exiles.

古文：麟德二年，与新罗王会熊津城，刑白马以盟。
现代文：麟德二年，扶余隆与新罗王在熊津城相会，歃白马而盟。
English: In the second year of Lingde, Fuyulong met Shillao Wang in Kumazu Castle, and they became allies.

古文：仁轨为盟辞曰： 往百济先王，罔顾逆顺，不敦邻，不睦亲，与高丽、倭共侵削新罗，破邑屠城。
现代文：刘仁轨做盟辞： 以前，百济先王认不清逆顺，不与邻国友好，不与姻亲和睦，与高丽、倭国共同侵略新罗，攻破城县，杀戮人民。
English: Liu Renluo made a pledge: In the past, the former king of Baekje did not recognize the ups and downs, did not make friends with neighboring countries, did not make peace with in-laws, and jointly invaded Silla with Goryeo and Wa, broke through cities and counties, and killed people.

古文：天子怜百姓无辜，命行人脩好，先王负险恃遐，侮慢弗恭。
现代文：天子怜恤百姓无辜受灾，命使臣来修好，先王自恃险峻偏远，侮慢不恭。
English: The Son of Heaven took pity on the innocent people who were affected by the disaster and ordered the envoys to repair the damage. The former king considered himself to be in a remote and dangerous place and was arrogant.

古文：皇赫斯怒，是伐是夷。
现代文：天子震怒，发兵讨逆伐罪，一举而大定。
English: Enraged, the Son of Heaven sent an army to fight the crime of counter-logging, and the matter was settled once and for all.

古文：但兴亡继绝，王者通制，故立前太子隆为熊津都督，守其祭祀，附杖新罗，长为与国，结好除怨，恭天子命，永为籓服。
现代文：但振兴亡者扶续绝者，是王者的惯例，所以立前太子扶余隆为熊津都督，使能守其祭祀，依倚新罗，永为友国，结好和亲，消除宿怨。恭承天子之命，永为藩属。
English: However, it is the king's practice to revive the dead and continue to support the dead, so the former prince Fuyulong was appointed as the governor of Kumatsu, so that he could keep his sacrifice, rely on Silla, always be a friendly country, make friends and relatives, and eliminate old grudges.

古文：右威卫将军鲁城县公仁愿，亲临厥盟，有贰其德，兴兵动众，明神监之，百殃是降，子孙不育，社稷无守，世世毋敢犯。 
现代文：右威卫将军鲁城县公刘仁愿亲临此盟。若有背盟兴兵动众者，天神明察，将降百种灾难，子孙不育，社稷失守。世世代代无人敢犯。 
English: General Yu Weiwei and Lu Cheng County Governor Liu Ren would like to personally visit this alliance. If there is anyone who backs the alliance and mobilizes the troops, Tenjin will clearly see that there will be a hundred kinds of disasters, children and grandchildren will be infertile, and society will be lost. No one will dare to commit crimes for generations.

古文：乃作金书铁契，藏新罗庙中。
现代文：于是做金书铁契，藏在新罗庙中。
English: So he made a golden book and hid it in the Shilla Temple.

古文：仁愿等还，隆畏众携散，亦归京师。仪凤时，进带方郡王，遣归籓。
现代文：刘仁愿等回朝，扶余隆怕众散力薄，也归京师，仪凤年间，进封带方郡王，送归本藩。
English: Liu Ren was willing to wait until he returned to the imperial court, but Fu Yu Long, fearing that the power of the people would be weakened, also returned to Beijing, and in the years of Yi Feng, he was crowned the county king and sent back to his own domain.

古文：是时，新罗强，隆不敢入旧国，寄治高丽死。
现代文：这时，新罗强盛，扶余隆不敢归旧国，寄居高丽，死。
English: At this time, Xinluo Qiangsheng and Fuyulong did not dare to return to the old country, sojourned in Korea, and died.

古文：武后又以其孙敬袭王，而其地已为新罗、渤海靺鞨所分，百济遂绝。
现代文：武后又让其孙扶余敬继袭王位，而其国土已被新罗、渤海所瓜分，百济就此灭亡。
English: Empress Wu also allowed her grandson Fuyujing to succeed to the throne, and his land was divided between Silla and Bohai, resulting in the demise of Baekje.

古文：新罗，弁韩苗裔也。
现代文：新罗，是弁韩的后裔。
English: Shilla, is a descendant of Ben Han.

古文：居汉乐浪地，横千里，纵三千里，东拒长人，东南日本，西百济，南濒海，北高丽。
现代文：位于汉时的乐浪，东西有千里，南北三千里，东望长人，东南是日本，西接百济，南滨海，北连高丽。
English: Located in the Han Dynasty, Lelang has thousands of miles east to west, 3,000 miles north to south, Changren in the east, Japan in the southeast, Baekje in the west, Binhai in the south, and Goryeo in the north.

古文：而王居金城，环八里所，卫兵三千人。
现代文：王居于金城，周围长八里，有卫兵三千人。
English: The king's residence is in the city of Jin, surrounded by eight miles of land and guarded by three thousand soldiers.

古文：谓城为侵牟罗，邑在内曰喙评，外曰邑勒。
现代文：他们称城为 侵牟罗 ，内县为 喙评 ，外县为 邑勒 。
English: They called the city Rongmuro, the inner county Shanyuan, and the outer county Eule.

古文：有喙评六，邑勒五十二。
现代文：全国有喙评六个，邑勒五十二个。
English: Across the country, there are six gongs and fifty-two pinnacles.

古文：朝服尚白，好祠山神。
现代文：朝服崇尚白色，喜好祭祀山神。
English: The morning dress advocates white, and there is a preference for the worship of mountain gods.

古文：八月望日，大宴赍官吏，射。
现代文：每年八月十五，大设饮宴，赏赐众官吏，比赛射箭。
English: Every year on August 15, a grand banquet is held to reward all officials, and an archery competition is held.

古文：其建官，以亲属为上，其族名第一骨、第二骨以自别。
现代文：任用官吏，以亲属为上，其族名，用 第一骨 、 第二骨 来区别。
English: When appointing officials, relatives should be the top priority, and their family names should be distinguished by first and second names.

古文：兄弟女、姑、姨、从姊妹，皆聘为妻。
现代文：姑、姨、表姐妹、侄女都可以聘为妻子。
English: Mothers-in-law, aunts, cousins and nieces can all be hired as wives.

古文：王族为第一骨，妻亦其族，生子皆为第一骨，不娶第二骨女，虽娶，常为妾媵。
现代文：王族是第一骨，妻子也是同族人，生的子女也是第一骨，不娶第二骨的女子为妻，即使娶了，只能做妾。
English: The royal family is the first bone, the wife is also a member of the same family, and the children born are also the first bone. A woman who does not take the second bone as a wife, even if married, can only be a concubine.

古文：官有宰相、侍中、司农卿、太府令，凡十有七等，第二骨得为之。
现代文：官有宰相、侍中、司农卿、太府令等十七级，第二骨的人也可以担任。
English: There are 17 ranks of officials, including prime minister, chamberlain, secretary of agriculture, and grand magistrate, and second-tier officials can also serve.

古文：事必与众议，号 和白 ，一人异则罢。
现代文：有事定与大家商议，称之为 和白 ，如有一人不同意就作罢。
English: If there is something that needs to be discussed with everyone, call it a compromise, and if one person does not agree, stop.

古文：宰相家不绝禄，奴僮三千人，甲兵牛马猪称之。
现代文：宰相家不断俸禄，奴僮三千人，甲兵、牛、马、猪亦相当数量。
English: The prime minister's family received a steady stipend, and there were 3,000 slaves, as well as a considerable number of soldiers, cattle, horses and pigs.

古文：畜牧海中山，须食乃射。
现代文：在海中山上放牧，需要食用就去射杀。
English: They graze on the mountains in the middle of the sea, and if they need to eat, they shoot them.

古文：息谷米于人，偿不满，庸为奴婢。
现代文：贷谷米给人，到期偿还不足，就以奴婢之役偿还。
English: If the rice loaned to a person is not repaid by the due date, it will be repaid by slave labor.

古文：王姓金，贵人姓朴，民无氏有名。
现代文：王姓金，贵人姓朴，百姓有名无姓氏。
English: The king's family name is Jin, the nobles' family name is Pak, and the common people have no family name.

古文：食用柳杯若铜、瓦。
现代文：餐具用柳杯，也用铜及瓦制作。
English: The tableware is made of wicker cups, as well as copper and tiles.

古文：元日相庆，是日拜日月神。
现代文：元旦日互相庆贺，这一天要拜日月神。
English: New Year's Day is a day of mutual celebration, a day to worship the sun and moon.

古文：男子褐裤。妇长襦，见人必跪，则以手据地为恭。不粉黛，率美发以缭首，以珠彩饰之。
现代文：男子穿短衣及裤，妇女穿长袍，见人必跪，以手及地表示尊敬，不施粉黛，头发绕在头上，用珠彩做装饰。
English: Men wear shorts and trousers, women wear long gowns, kneel when they see people, show respect with their hands and feet, do not apply powder, hair around the head, decorated with beads.

古文：男子翦发鬻，冒以黑巾。
现代文：男子剪发，用黑巾包头。
English: The man cuts his hair and wraps his head in a black scarf.

古文：市皆妇女贸贩。
现代文：街市上售货的都是妇女。
English: All the vendors in the street market are women.

古文：冬则作灶堂中，夏以食置冰上。
现代文：冬天在堂屋中做灶坑，夏天则将食物放在冰上。
English: In winter, a cooking pit is made in the hall, and in summer, food is put on ice.

古文：畜无羊，少驴、■，多马。
现代文：牲畜没有羊，少有驴、骡，多马。
English: There are no sheep, but there are a few donkeys, mules and horses.

古文：马虽高大，不善行。
现代文：马虽高大，但不善驰骋。
English: Although the horse is tall, it is not good at galloping.

古文：长人者，人类长三丈，锯牙钩爪，黑毛覆身，不火食，噬禽兽，或搏人以食；得妇人，以治衣服。
现代文：所谓长人，人高三丈，牙齿锐利，手指如钩，满身黑毛，不吃熟食，啃禽兽为食，有时还抓人吃，抓到妇女，就要她们缝制衣服。
English: The so-called elders, who are three times as tall, have sharp teeth, hook-like fingers, and black hair all over their bodies, do not eat cooked food, eat animals, and sometimes catch people to eat. If they catch women, they ask them to sew clothes.

古文：其国连山数十里，有峡，固以铁阖，号关门，新罗常屯弩士数千守之。
现代文：其国境内连山几十里，有峡谷，用铁做门，称之为 关门 ，新罗常派几千弓箭手守卫。
English: Within its territory, there are tens of miles of mountains, canyons, and a gate made of iron, called the "Closed Gate." Silla often sent several thousand archers to guard it.

古文：初，百济伐高丽，来请救，悉兵往破之，自是相攻不置。
现代文：当初，百济攻打高丽，高丽来求援，新罗发全部兵力打败百济，从此两国相攻不止。
English: At first, Baekje attacked Koryo, Koryo came for help, Silla sent all its troops to defeat Baekje, and since then, the two countries have been attacking each other.

古文：后获百济王杀之，滋结怨。
现代文：后来擒获百济王，杀了，结怨更深。
English: Later, Baekje's king was captured and killed, and the resentment deepened.

古文：武德四年，王真平遣使者入朝，高祖诏通直散骑侍郎庾文素持节答赍。
现代文：武德四年，王金真平派使者入朝，高祖诏令通直散骑侍郎庾文素持节前往答礼并送礼物。
English: In the 4th year of King Wu De, King Jin Zhenping sent an envoy to the imperial court, and Emperor Gao Zuo ordered the attendants to go to the imperial court to give gifts.

古文：后三年，拜柱国，封乐浪郡王、新罗王。
现代文：三年后，委任金真平为柱国，封爵乐浪郡王、新罗王。
English: Three years later, he appointed Jin Zhenping as the pillar country, and knighted the King of Le Lang County and the King of Silla.

古文：贞观五年，献女乐二。太宗曰： 比林邑献鹦鹉，言思乡，丐还，况于人乎？ 
现代文：贞观五年，来朝献女乐两名，太宗说 ：近日林邑献鹦鹉，它说想家，恳请我让它回国，何况是人呢？ 
English: Zhenguan five years, came to the DPRK to offer two female singers, Taizong said: Recently, Linyi offered a parrot, it said it was homesick and implored me to let it return to the country, what is more, a human?

古文：付使者归之。
现代文：于是交付使者，让她们回家。
English: So they delivered the messengers and let them go home.

古文：是岁，真平死，无子，立女善德为王，大臣乙祭柄国。
现代文：这一年，金真平死，无子，立女儿善德为王，大臣乙祭掌国事。
English: In the same year, Kim Jong-nam died without a son, and his daughter Son Doong was appointed as the king, with Minister Etsai in charge of state affairs.

古文：诏赠真平左光禄大夫，赙物段二百。
现代文：诏令追赠真平为左光禄大夫，奠仪绸二百段。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded Zhenping the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, and the ceremonial silk was increased by two hundred dan.

古文：九年，遣使者册善德袭父封，国人号圣祖皇姑。
现代文：贞观九年，派使者册封善德继袭父亲爵位，国人称她为圣祖皇姑。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan's reign, she sent an envoy to succeed her father to the title of nobility, and the Chinese people called her the Holy Ancestor.

古文：十七年，为高丽、百济所攻，使者来乞师，亦会帝亲伐高丽，诏率兵以披虏势。
现代文：贞观十七年，遭到高丽、百济的攻打，派使者来讨救兵，正逢皇帝亲征高丽，诏令新罗率兵以分散高丽的兵力。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, he was attacked by Goryeo and Baekje and sent an envoy to rescue the soldiers. At the same time, the emperor personally conquered Goryeo and ordered Silla to lead the troops to disperse Goryeo's troops.

古文：善德使兵五万入高丽南鄙，拔水口城以闻。
现代文：善德派兵五万人进入高丽南郊，攻克水口城报告皇帝。
English: Zheng De sent fifty thousand soldiers into the southern suburb of Goryeo, conquered Shuikou City and reported to the emperor.

古文：二十一年，善德死，赠光禄大夫，而妹真德袭王。
现代文：贞观二十一年，金善德死，追赠光禄大夫，妹妹金真德继承王位。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, Kim Son De died and was posthumously given the title of Doctor of Guanglu, and his sister Kim Jin De succeeded to the throne.

古文：明年，遣子文王及弟伊赞子春秋来朝，拜文王左武卫将军，春秋特进。
现代文：第二年，派儿子文王及弟弟伊赞的儿子春秋入朝，皇帝委任文王为左武卫将军，任春秋为特进。
English: In the second year, he sent his son, King Wen, and his brother, Izan's son, Spring and Autumn, to the imperial court. The emperor appointed King Wen as Zuowei general, and appointed Spring and Autumn as special envoys.

古文：因请改章服，从中国制，内出珍服赐之。又诣国学观释奠、讲论，帝赐所制《晋书》。
现代文：就此请求更改制度、服饰，跟随中国的体制。皇帝拿出珍服赐他，又到国学参观祭奠先圣先师，听老师讲课。皇帝赐给所印制《晋书》。
English: In response to this request to change the system and clothing to follow the Chinese system, the emperor took out a precious robe and gave it to him. He also visited the Chinese University to pay homage to the forerunner and listen to the teacher's lectures. The emperor gave him the printed "Jin Shu."

古文：辞归，敕三品以上郊饯。
现代文：两人辞归时，皇帝令三品以上的官都来饯行于郊外。
English: When the two resigned, the emperor ordered officials with three or more court ranks to come and march in the suburbs.

古文：高宗永徽元年，攻百济，破之，遣春秋子法敏入朝。
现代文：高宗永徽元年，攻破百济，派春秋的儿子法敏入朝。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Gao Zong defeated Baekje and sent Chunqiu's son, Fa Min, to the imperial court.

古文：真德织锦为颂以献，曰： 巨唐开洪业，巍巍皇猷昌。
现代文：真德织锦做颂辞奉献。颂辞为： 大唐开创帝王业，谋策英明兴家邦。
English: Zhende brocade was dedicated as a eulogy. The eulogy was as follows: Great Tang initiated the imperial career, and made wise plans to revive the dynasty.

古文：止戈成大定，兴文继百王。
现代文：平息战争边陲定，文明教化继大纲。
English: The pacification of war, the stabilization of the border, and the civilization and enlightenment follow the outline.

古文：统天崇雨施，治物体含章。
现代文：统一天下崇恩义，治理人民有良方。
English: Unification leads to reverence for benevolence, and there is a good way to govern the people.

古文：深仁谐日月，抚运迈时康。
现代文：普施仁义同日月，循守气运时泰康。
English: If you practice benevolence on the same day and month, you will be healthy when you follow the qi fortune.

古文：幡旗既赫赫，钲鼓何锽锽。
现代文：帅旗赫赫威势雄，征鼓皇皇武力强。
English: The handsome banner is mighty and powerful, and the emperor is strong.

古文：外夷违命者，翦覆被天殃。
现代文：外夷无识违帝命，顷刻剪覆遭天殃。
English: The barbarians violated the emperor's order without any knowledge, and the shearers were instantly struck by a natural disaster.

古文：淳风凝幽显，遐迩竞呈祥。
现代文：幽显淳厚君子风，远近竞相呈瑞祥。
English: The gentleman's style is subtle and refined, and the rivalry between far and near is auspicious.

古文：四时和玉烛，七耀巡万方。
现代文：四时气和庆升平，日月五星耀万方。
English: The four seasons and the celebration rise and fall, and the sun, moon and stars shine in all directions.

古文：维岳降宰辅，维帝任忠良。
现代文：泰山赐降神宰辅，天子委任贤忠良。
English: Taishan bestowed the god Zhaisuke, and the son of heaven appointed Xian Zhongliang.

古文：三五成一德，昭我唐家唐。 
现代文：三老五更成一德，昭我唐家国运昌。 
English: The three olds and the five young people have become one, and the Tang Dynasty and the country have been prosperous.

古文：帝美其意，擢法敏太府卿。
现代文：皇帝赞赏她的心意，提拔法敏为太府卿。
English: The emperor appreciated her intention and promoted Fa Min to Dafuqing.

古文：五年，真德死，帝为举哀，赠开府仪同三司，赐彩段三百，命太常丞张文收持节吊祭，以春秋袭王。
现代文：永徽五年，真德死，皇帝为之举哀，追赠开府仪同三司，赐给彩缎三百。命太常丞张文收持节前往吊祭，由春秋继袭王位。
English: In the fifth year of Yonghui, Zhende died, and the emperor mourned for him, posthumously presented the Kaifu ceremony with the three divisions, and bestowed the 300 baubles. The life of Grand Prince Zhang Wen went to the hanging festival, and succeeded to the throne from the spring and autumn.

古文：明年，百济、高丽、靺鞨共伐取其三十城。
现代文：第二年，百济、高丽、合兵夺取了新罗三十城。
English: In the second year, Baekje, Goryeo, and the combined forces captured 30 cities in Silla.

古文：使者来请救，帝命苏定方讨之，以春秋为隅夷道行军总管，遂平百济。
现代文：春秋派使者前来求援，皇帝命苏定方讨伐百济，任春秋为山禺夷道行军总管，讨平了百济。
English: Chunqiu sent an envoy to ask for help. The emperor ordered Su Dingfang to fight against Baekje, and appointed Chunqiu as the general manager of the march on the Shanxi-Yi Road, and leveled Baekje.

古文：龙朔元年，死，法敏袭王。
现代文：龙朔元年，春秋死，法敏继立。
English: In the first year of Longshuo, Shunqiu died, and Fa Min succeeded him.

古文：以其国为鸡林州大都督府，授法敏都督。
现代文：皇帝以其国列为鸡林州大都督府，委任法敏为都督。
English: The emperor listed his country as the big governor's office of Jilin Province and appointed Fomin as the governor.

古文：咸亨五年，纳高丽叛众，略百济地守之。
现代文：咸亨五年，新罗接纳了高丽的叛逆者，又掠取百济的地据而有之。
English: In the fifth year of Xianheng, Silla accepted the rebels from Goryeo and plundered the land of Baekje.

古文：帝怒，诏削官爵，以其弟右骁卫员外大将军、临海郡公仁问为新罗王，自京师归国。
现代文：皇帝怒，诏令削法敏官爵，任其弟右骁卫员外大将军、临海郡公金仁问为新罗王，自京都归国。
English: Enraged by the emperor, the emperor decreed that the official title of Shilla should be abolished, and appointed his younger brother, the right-hand man of the palace guard, as the grand general, and the governor of Linhai County, Jinren, as the king of Shilla. He returned to China from Kyoto.

古文：诏刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，卫尉卿李弼、右领军大将军李谨行副之，发兵穷讨。
现代文：诏令刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，卫尉卿李弼、右领军大将军李谨行为副总管，发兵穷讨新罗。
English: The imperial edict appointed Liu Renzhong as the general manager of Qilin Road, Lieutenant-General of the Imperial Guard Li Jun and the right-wing army general Li Jian as the deputy general managers, and sent troops to fight against Silla.

古文：上元二年二月，仁轨破其众于七重城，以靺鞨兵浮海略南境，斩获甚众。
现代文：上元二年二月，刘仁轨在七重城大破新罗军，又派兵渡海攻打其南境，斩获甚多。
English: In February of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Renlu defeated the Silla army in Qizhe, and sent troops across the sea to attack its southern border, gaining a lot.

古文：诏李谨行为安东镇抚大使，屯买肖城，三战，虏皆北。
现代文：诏令任李谨行为安东镇抚大使，屯扎买肖城，三战新罗均败。
English: The imperial edict appointed Li Jian as the ambassador of Andong Zhenfu, bought Xiaocheng, and lost all three wars with Silla.

古文：法敏遣使入朝谢罪，贡篚相望，仁问乃还，辞王，诏复法敏官爵。
现代文：法敏派使者入朝谢罪，贡品一筐接一筐。金仁问反都，辞去王位，有诏令恢复法敏的官爵。
English: Fa Min sent an envoy to the court to apologize for the crime, and the tributes came one basket after another. Jin Ren asked the capital, resigned from the throne, and there was a decree to restore Fa Min's official title.

古文：然多取百济地，遂抵高丽南境矣。
现代文：不过，新罗夺取了不少百济的土地，于是国境挨着高丽的南境了。
English: However, Silla seized a lot of land from Baekje, so the border is now next to the southern border of Korea.

古文：置尚、良、康、熊、全、武、汉、朔、溟九州，州有都督，统郡十或二十，郡有大守，县有小守。
现代文：设置尚、良、康、熊、全、武、汉、朔、溟九州，州有都督，统辖十或二十个郡，郡有大守，县也有小守。
English: The provinces of Shang, Liang, Kang, Xiong, Quan, W, Han, Shuo, and Qian were set up in Kyushu. Each province had its own governor, who had overall jurisdiction over ten or twenty counties. Each county had its own grand governor, and each county had its own small governor.

古文：开耀元年，死，子政明袭王。
现代文：开耀元年，法敏死，子政明继立。
English: In the first year of the year, Fa Min died and his son, Zheng Ming, succeeded him.

古文：遣使者朝，丐唐礼及它文辞，武后赐《吉凶礼》并文词五十篇。
现代文：派使者入朝，请求赐给唐礼及其他文章。武后赐给《吉凶礼》及文词五十篇。
English: He sent an envoy to the imperial court to request the Tang Rites and other articles, and Empress Wu gave him the "Fortune and Disaster Rites" and 50 articles.

古文：死，子理洪袭王。
现代文：政明死后，子理洪即位。
English: After the death of Zheng Ming, his son Li Hong ascended to the throne.

古文：死，弟兴光袭王。
现代文：死后，弟兴光承袭王位。
English: After his death, his younger brother Xingguang succeeded to the throne.

古文：玄宗开元中，数入朝，献果下马、朝霞、鱼牙、海豹皮。
现代文：玄宗开元年间，多次入朝，献果下马。朝霞纟由、鱼牙纟由、海豹皮等。
English: During the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, he made several visits to the imperial court and presented gifts of fruit, including morning glories, fish gums, and seal skin.

古文：又献二女，帝曰： 女皆王姑姊妹，违本俗，别所亲，朕不忍留。 
现代文：又献二女。皇帝说： 姑娘们都是王姑姐妹，来此要改变原来的习俗，离别亲人。我不忍心留下她们。 
English: He also dedicated two daughters. The emperor said, "The girls are Wang Gu's sisters. They came here to change the original customs and to part from their relatives. I can't bear to leave them behind."

古文：厚赐还之。
现代文：于是赏赐甚厚，让她们回家。
English: They were rewarded handsomely and allowed to return home.

古文：又遣子弟入太学学经术。
现代文：兴光又派子弟入太学学习经术。
English: Xingguang also sent his son to Taiyue to study the classics.

古文：帝间赐兴光瑞文锦、五色罗、紫绣纹袍、金银精器。兴光亦上异狗马、黄金、美髢诸物。
现代文：皇帝间或赐给兴光瑞文锦，五色罗，紫绣纹袍，金银精器，兴光也奉献特异狗马、黄金、假发等物。
English: The emperor sometimes gave Xingguang the Rui brocade, the five-colored brocade, the purple embroidered robe, the gold and silver jewelry, and Xingguang also dedicated the special dog, horse, gold, wig and other things.

古文：初，渤海靺鞨掠登州，兴光击走之，帝进兴光宁海军大使，使攻靺鞨。
现代文：当初，渤海攻掠登州，兴光将他赶走。皇帝晋升兴光宁海军大使，派他攻。
English: At first, when the Bohai Sea attacked and plundered Danzhou, Xingguang drove him away. The emperor promoted Xingguangning to naval ambassador and sent him to attack.

古文：二十五年死，帝尤悼之，赠太子太保，命邢以鸿胪少卿吊祭。
现代文：开元二十五年，兴光死，皇帝十分哀悼，追赠太子太保，命邢王寿以鸿胪少卿的身份前往吊祭。
English: In the 25th year of the first month of the year, Xingguang died, the emperor mourned deeply, posthumously bestowed the title of crown prince, and ordered Wang Shou to go to the hanging ceremony in the capacity of Hongtao Shaoqing.

古文：子承庆袭王，诏曰： 新罗号君子国，知《诗》、《书》。
现代文：其子承庆即位。邢王寿行前，皇帝诏谕他： 新罗号称君子国，懂得《诗》、《书》。
English: His son, Chengqing, came to the throne. Before the death of the king, the emperor told him: Silla is known as a country of gentlemen, and they know "poetry" and "books."

古文：以卿惇儒，故持节往，宜演经谊，使知大国之盛。 
现代文：因你是位宿儒，所以派你持节前去。去后应多演讲经义，使他们知道大国之盛。 
English: Since you are a Confucian scholar, I have sent you ahead to celebrate the festival. When you leave, you should give many lectures on the sutras, so that they will know the prosperity of a great country.

古文：又以国人善棋，诏率府兵曹参军杨季鹰为副。
现代文：又因为新罗国人善于下棋，诏令率府兵曹参军杨季鹰为邢王寿的副手。
English: In addition, because the people of Silla were good at playing chess, Yang Jiyang, who led the prefectural soldiers to join the army, was the deputy of Wang Shou.

古文：国高弈皆出其下，于是厚遗使者金宝。
现代文：新罗的弈棋高手都不能胜过他，于是送使者很多金宝。
English: None of Silla's chess masters could beat him, so they sent him a lot of gold.

古文：俄册其妻朴为妃。
现代文：不久册封承庆妻朴氏为妃。
English: Soon after, his wife, Park, became empress.

古文：承庆死，诏使者临吊，以其弟宪英嗣王。帝在蜀，遣使溯江至成都朝正月。
现代文：承庆死，诏派使者前往吊唁，以承庆弟宪英即位，皇帝在四川时期，还派使者溯江而上到成都朝正月。
English: After the death of Chengqing, the emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences, and Chengqing's younger brother Xianying ascended to the throne. During the Sichuan period, the emperor also sent an envoy up the Yangtze River to Chengdu on the first day of the new year.

古文：大历初，宪英死，子乾运立，甫丱，遣金隐居入朝待命。
现代文：大历初年，宪英死，子乾运立，尚在幼年，派金隐居入朝待命。
English: In the first year of the great calendar, Xian Ying died, and his son Qian Yunli, still in his infancy, sent money to live in seclusion in the North to wait.

古文：诏仓部郎中归崇敬往吊，监察御史陆珽、顾愔为副册授之，并母金为太妃。
现代文：诏令仓部郎中归崇敬前往吊祭，监察御史陆王廷、顾忄音为副使前往册封乾运为新罗王、封其母金氏为太妃。
English: He ordered his son-in-law, Kurabe, to go to the hanging ceremony in reverence, to inspect the imperial court of King Lu, and Gu Xiying, as deputy envoy, to go to Silla to be crowned King of Silla, and to crown his mother, Kim Il, as Empress Dowager.

古文：会其宰相争权相攻，国大乱，三岁乃定。
现代文：正遇其国内宰相争权相攻，国内大乱，三年后才安定。
English: The country was in the midst of a power struggle between its prime ministers, which led to great turmoil in the country, and only stabilized three years later.

古文：于是，岁朝献。
现代文：以后年年入朝贡献。
English: From then on, he made contributions to the Imperial Court every year.

古文：建中四年死，无子，国人共立宰相金良相嗣。
现代文：建中四年，乾运死，无子，国人共立宰相金良相嗣位。
English: In the fourth year of Jianzhong, Qian Yun died without a son, and the people of the country jointly established the prime minister, Jin Liang, as the heir.

古文：贞元元年，遣户部郎中盖埙持节命之。
现代文：贞元元年，皇帝派户部郎中盖埙持节前往委任金良相为新罗王。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor sent the head of the household, Guizhong, to appoint Jin Liangxiang as the king of Silla.

古文：是年死，立良相从父弟敬信袭王。
现代文：这一年金良相死，立良相的表兄弟敬信承袭王位。
English: In this year, Jin Liangzhu died, and Li Liangzhu's cousin Qianxin succeeded to the throne.

古文：十四年，死，无子，立嫡孙俊邕。
现代文：建中十四年敬信死，无子，国人立敬信的嫡孙俊邕为王。
English: In the 14th year of Jianzhong, Jianxin died without a son, and the people of the country made Jianxin's legitimate grandson, Juncao, the king.

古文：明年，遣司封郎中韦丹持册，未至，俊邕死，丹还。
现代文：第二年，皇帝派司封郎中韦丹持册去封王，还未到达，俊邕死，韦丹回朝。
English: In the second year, the emperor sent Wei Dan, the second-in-command of the imperial seal, to seal the king, but he did not arrive. Junsu died, and Wei Dan returned to the imperial court.

古文：子重兴立，永贞元年，诏兵部郎中元季方册命。
现代文：俊邕子重兴即位，永贞元年，诏令兵部郎中元季方前往册封。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Hyobusho (Minister of the Ministry of War), Chung Won (Minister of the Ministry of War) and Kifang (Minister of the Ministry of War) to go to Zhanfeng.

古文：后三年，使者金力奇来谢，且言： 往岁册故主俊邕为主，母申太妃，妻叔妃，而俊邕不幸，册今留省中，臣请授以归。 
现代文：三年后，新罗使者金力奇来谢封，且说 ：以前天子册封先主俊邕为王，封其母申为太妃，封其妻叔为妃。但俊邕不幸早逝，那封册现仍留在省中，臣请求赐与带回。 
English: Three years later, Jin Liqi, the envoy of Silla, came to thank the seal, and said, "In the past, Heaven's messenger made Junsu the king, made his mother Shin the queen, and made his wife's uncle the queen. But unfortunately, Junsu died early, and the seal is still in the province. The minister asked for it to be given and brought back.

古文：又为其宰相金彦升、金仲恭、王之弟苏金添明丐门戟，诏皆可。
现代文：同时又为宰相金彦升、金仲恭，王之弟苏金添明请赐门戟，皇帝均同意。
English: At the same time, he also asked the emperor to grant concubines to the prime ministers, Kim Hyon-sung and Kim Jung-kyong, and the king's younger brother, So Kim Tae-myung. The emperor agreed.

古文：凡再朝贡。
现代文：以后两次朝贡。
English: The next two tributes were paid.

古文：七年死，彦升立，来告丧，命职方员外郎崔廷吊，且命新王，以妻贞为妃。
现代文：元和七年，重兴死，宰相彦升立，来朝告丧，诏令职方员外郎崔廷前往吊祭、册命新王，以其妻贞为妃。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan and Heian dynasties, Shuxing died, and the prime minister, Yan Shengli, came to the imperial court to announce the death, and ordered the staff member, Gaorang Cui Ting, to go to the hanging ceremony and be proclaimed the new king, with his wife, Zhen, as his wife.

古文：长庆、宝历间，再遣使者来朝，留宿卫。
现代文：长庆、宝历年间，两次派使者来朝，且留下宿卫。
English: In the years of Changqing and Baoli, he sent envoys to Korea twice, and left the guards behind.

古文：彦升死，子景徽立。
现代文：彦升死，子景徽即位。
English: Hikosho died and his son Jinghui ascended to the throne.

古文：大和五年，以太子左谕德源寂册吊如仪。
现代文：大和五年，派太子左谕德源寂持节吊唁册命。
English: In the 5th year of the Yamato era, he sent the Crown Prince Zuo to Deyuan for condolences on the Day of Mourning.

古文：开成初，遣子义琮谢，愿留卫，见听，明年遣之。
现代文：开成初年，景徽派儿子义琮入朝致谢，愿留下宿卫。皇帝同意，第二年让他回国。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, Jinghui sent his son, Yixuan, to the court to express his gratitude and his willingness to remain as a night watchman. The emperor agreed and allowed him to return to China the following year.

古文：五年，鸿胪寺籍质子及学生岁满者一百五人，皆还之。
现代文：开成五年，在鸿胪寺学习的质子及学生中学习期满的一百零五人全部遣返。
English: In the past five years, among the protons and students studying at Hongyu Temple, all 105 people who have completed their studies have been repatriated.

古文：有张保皋、郑年者，皆善斗战，工用枪。
现代文：张保皋、郑年两人都勇猛善战，长于用枪。
English: Zhang Baojun and Zheng Nian are both brave and good at fighting, and are good at using guns.

古文：年复能没海，履其地五十里不噎，角其勇健，保皋不及也。
现代文：郑年还能潜海，潜五十里不噎气。其勇健方面，张保皋比不上。
English: Zheng Nian could also dive into the sea, he could dive for fifty miles without getting out of breath. In terms of his bravery, Zhang Baojun was no match.

古文：年以兄呼保皋，保皋以齿，年以艺，常不相下。
现代文：郑年叫张保皋哥哥。两人中保皋以年岁长，而年以武艺强，不相上下。
English: Zheng Nian was the elder brother of Zhang Baoqian. Of the two, Baoqian was the older, but Zheng Nian was the better martial artist. They were almost the same age.

古文：自其国皆来为武宁军小将。
现代文：两人都从新罗来朝任武宁军小将。
English: Both of them came to Korea from Silla to serve as junior generals in the Korean People's Army.

古文：后保皋归新罗，谒其王曰： 遍中国以新罗人为奴婢，愿得镇清海，使贼不得掠人西去。 
现代文：后来张保皋回新罗，去见王说： 整个中国，所有人都把新罗人当奴婢。请求让我镇守清海，使贼人不能抢我们的人民去出卖。 
English: Later, Zhang Bo Rong returned to Silla and went to see the king and said, "The whole of China, all of them, treat the Silla people as slaves. I beg you to let me guard the Clear Sea so that the thieves cannot rob our people and sell them."

古文：清海，海路之要也。
现代文：清海，是海路上的要地。
English: Qinghai is an important place on the sea route.

古文：王与保皋万人守之。
现代文：王拨给张保皋一万人镇守。
English: The king assigned 10,000 town guards to Zhang Baojun.

古文：自大和后，海上无鬻新罗人者。
现代文：自大和年以后，海上再没有卖新罗人的了。
English: After Independence, there was no more selling of Silla people at sea.

古文：保皋既贵于其国，年饥寒客涟水，一日谓戍主冯元规曰： 我欲东归，乞食于张保皋。 
现代文：张保皋受到国家的重视，而郑年客居涟水饥寒交迫。一天他对戍主冯元规说： 我想回国，依靠张保皋。 
English: Zhang Baojun was highly valued by the state, while Zheng Nian, who was a guest in Xishui, suffered from hunger and cold. One day, he said to his host, Feng Yuanfei, "I want to return to China and rely on Zhang Baojun."

古文：元规曰： 若与保皋所负何如？奈何取死其手？ 
现代文：冯元规说： 你和张保皋现在是在敌对双方了，为什么要去死在他手中呢？ 
English: Feng Yuanfei said: You and Zhang Boao are now on opposing sides, why would you want to die at his hands?

古文：年曰： 饥寒死，不如兵死快，况死故乡邪！ 
现代文：郑年说： 饥寒而死，不如战死快当。何况是死在故乡呢。 
English: Zheng Nian said, "It is better to die of cold and hunger than to die in battle. Moreover, it is better to die in one's hometown."

古文：年遂去。至，谒保皋，饮之极欢。
现代文：郑年离开戍所，到清海，去见张保皋。两人畅饮甚欢。
English: Zheng Nian left the Confucius Institute and went to Qinghai to meet Zhang Baoqi. The two had a great time drinking.

古文：饮未卒，闻大臣杀其王，国乱无主。
现代文：宴饮未结束，传来国内大臣杀王，国乱无主的消息。
English: Before the banquet was over, news came that the Minister of the Interior had killed the king, and that the country was in chaos.

古文：保皋分兵五千人与年，持年泣曰： 非子不能平祸难。 
现代文：张保皋分五千兵给郑年，握着郑年的手流泪说： 除了你，没有人能平定祸乱。 
English: Zhang Baohui assigned five thousand soldiers to Zheng Nian, held Zheng Nian's hand and shed tears and said: Except for you, no one can quell the calamity.

古文：年至其国，诛反者，立王以报。
现代文：郑年回到国内，杀死叛逆者，扶王继立。
English: Zheng Nian returned to the country, killed the rebels, and helped Wang Jili rise to power.

古文：王遂召保皋为相，以年代守清海。
现代文：王于是召张保皋为相，由郑年代守清海。
English: The king then summoned Zhang Bo Rong as his consort, and Zheng became the guardian of Qinghai.

古文：会昌后，朝贡不复至。
现代文：会昌年后，没再来朝贡。
English: After Huichang, there was no more tribute.

古文：赞曰：杜牧称： 安思顺为朔方节度时，郭汾阳、李临淮俱为牙门都将，二人不相能，虽同盘饮食，常睇相视，不交一言。
现代文：评论：杜牧说： 安思顺为朔方节度使时，郭汾阳、李临淮同为牙门都将。两人不相容，虽同盘饮食，常斜眼相对，不说一句话。
English: Comment: Du Mu said: When An Shishun was the minister of the Shuo Fang Festival, Guo Peiyang and Li Linhuai were both dentists. The two are incompatible, although they eat the same food, they often look at each other cross-eyed and do not say a word.

古文：及汾阳代思顺，临淮欲亡去，计未决。
现代文：及至郭汾阳代替安思顺，李临淮打算离开，计划还没决定。
English: As far as Guo Bingyang replacing An Sishun, Li Linhuai plans to leave, but the plan has not yet been decided.

古文：旬日，诏临淮分汾阳半兵东出赵、魏，临淮入请曰： 一死固甘，乞免妻子。 
现代文：过了十天，诏令李临淮分郭汾阳一半兵东出赵、魏。李临淮入内向郭汾阳告别说 ：我死心甘情愿，请求能免我妻儿一死。 
English: Ten days later, Li Linhuai was ordered to divide half of Guo's soldiers into Zhao and Wei. Li Linhuai went inside to say goodbye to Guo and said, "I am willing to die, please spare the lives of my wife and children."

古文：汾阳趋下，持手上堂，曰： 今国乱主迁，非公不能东伐，岂怀私忿时邪？ 
现代文：郭汾阳下座，拉着李临淮的手上堂，说 ：如今国家有难，皇上西迁。除开你，没有人能东伐取胜。哪里是泄私怨的时候呢？ 
English: Guo Bingyang stepped down from the podium and, holding Li Linhuai's hand, said, "Nowadays, the country is in difficulty, and the emperor has moved to the west. Apart from you, no one can conquer the east. Where is the time to vent personal grudges?

古文：及别，执手泣涕，相勉以忠义，讫平剧盗，实二公之力。
现代文：分别时，两人握手涕泣，以忠义互勉。最后铲平大盗，实在是这二人之力。
English: When they parted, the two shook hands and wept, commending each other for their loyalty. In the end, it was the strength of these two men that brought down the robber.

古文：知其心不叛，知其心，难也；忿必见短，知其材，益难也。
现代文：因为汾阳知道临淮不会叛变。能知道他的心，不易啊；人有怨恨，必会见到对方的短处，而此时能知道对方的才干，那就更不易了。
English: Because Shenyang knows that Lin Huai will not rebel. It is not easy to know his heart; if people have resentment, they will see each other's shortcomings, and at this time it is even more difficult to know each other's talents.

古文：此保皋与汾阳之贤等耳。
现代文：这个新罗张保皋与郭汾阳同样贤能。
English: This Xinluo Zhang Baojun is as capable as Guo Bingyang.

古文：年投保皋必曰： 彼贵我贱，我降下之，不宜以旧忿杀我。 
现代文：郑年投奔张保皋时一定会想 ：他贵我贱，我恭顺对他，他不该因旧怨杀我。 
English: When Zheng Nian ran to Zhang Baohong, he must have thought: He is high and I am low, I am obedient to him, he should not kill me because of old grudges.

古文：保皋果不杀，人之常情也。
现代文：张保皋果然不杀他，这是人之常情。
English: Zhang Baohui did not kill him, which is human nature.

古文：临淮请死于汾阳，亦人之常情也。
现代文：临淮行前让汾阳杀自己，也是人之常情。
English: It is also common for people to let Shenyang kill themselves before leaving for Huaihai.

古文：保皋任年，事出于己，年且寒饥，易为感动。
现代文：张保皋任郑年以重任，出于自己的决定。郑年正在饥寒之中，易被感动。
English: Zhang Baoqin appointed Zheng Nian to the important task, out of his own decision. Zheng Nian is starving and cold, and is easily moved.

古文：汾阳、临淮，平生亢立，临淮之命，出于天子。
现代文：汾阳、临淮，平时就对立。任命临淮，出于天子。
English: Shenyang and Linhuai are usually opposed to each other. The appointment of Linhuai comes from heaven.

古文：榷于保皋，汾阳为优。
现代文：与张保皋相比，郭汾阳更难得。
English: Compared with Zhang Baojun, Guo Bingyang is more rare.

古文：此乃圣贤迟疑成败之际也。
现代文：这都是圣贤迟疑决断成败之际。
English: These are all occasions when sages and sages hesitate to decide on success or failure.

古文：世称周、邵为百代之师，周公拥孺子而邵公疑之，以周公之圣，邵公之贤，少事文王，老佐武王，能平天下，周公之心，邵公且不知之。
现代文：世人称周公、邵公为百代师表。周公代幼年成王摄政，邵公怀疑他有野心。以周公之圣、邵公之贤，年轻时共事文王，老年时又共助武王，平定天下。周公之心，邵公尚且不知。
English: The world calls Zhou Gong and Shao Gong the masters of a hundred generations. Zhou Gong became regent when he was a child, and Shao Gong suspected that he had ambitions. With Zhou Gong's holiness and Shao Gong's wisdom, he worked with King Wen when he was young, and helped King Wu when he was old, to pacify the world. Zhou Gong's heart, Shao Gong still does not know.

古文：苟有仁义之心，不资以明，虽邵公尚尔，况其下哉！ 
现代文：若心怀仁义，不能借事表明，即使贤如邵公，尚有疑心，何况不如邵公的人呢？ 
English: If you have benevolence and righteousness in your heart, can't you use something to show that even if you are as virtuous as Shao Gong, you still have doubts, let alone someone who is not as good as Shao Gong?

古文：嗟乎，不以怨毒相槊，而先国家之忧，晋有祁奚，唐有汾阳、保皋，孰谓夷无人哉！
现代文：啊，不因私怨而报复，能先国家之忧，晋有祁奚，唐有郭汾阳、张保皋，谁能说夷人中没有贤能之人呢？
English: Ah, if one does not take revenge for personal grudges, but can put the country's worries first, if Jin has Zhou, and Tang has Guo Zhouyang and Zhang Baodi, who can say that there is no capable person among the barbarians?

古文：日本，古倭奴也。
现代文：日本，即古时的倭奴。
English: Japan, that is, the ancient Wano.

古文：去京师万四千里，直新罗东南，在海中，岛而居，东西五月行，南北三月行。
现代文：距离京师有一万四千里，在新罗的东南。国在海中，人民居住在岛上。从东到西要走五个月，从南到北则是三个月的路程。
English: The distance from Beijing is 14,000 miles, southeast of Silla. The country is in the sea, the people live on the island. It takes five months to go from east to west, and three months to go from south to north.

古文：国无城郛，联木为栅落，以草茨屋。
现代文：国家没有城郭，编木为栅栏，盖草当屋顶。
English: The country does not have a castle, the fences are made of wood and the roof is made of grass.

古文：左右小岛五十余，皆自名国，而臣附之。
现代文：周围有小岛五十多个，都自有国名而臣附于日本。
English: There are more than fifty small islands around, all of which have their own country names and are attached to Japan.

古文：置本率一人，检察诸部。
现代文：设大帅一人，管理统率各属部。
English: There shall be one general manager to head each subordinate department.

古文：其俗多女少男，有文字，尚浮屠法。
现代文：民间多女少男。有文字，崇尚佛法。
English: There are many women and young men among the folk. They have letters, and they worship Buddhism.

古文：其官十有二等。
现代文：官吏分成十二等级。
English: Officials are divided into twelve grades.

古文：其王姓阿每氏，自言初主号天御中主，至彦潋，凡三十二世，皆以 尊 为号，居筑紫城。
现代文：王姓阿每氏，自称最初的王叫天御中主，到彦氵敛时共传三十二代，都以 尊 为号，住在筑紫城。
English: Wang's family name was Ahji, and he claimed to be the first king called Amaterasu. When he came to Hikone, there were a total of thirty-two generations, all with the name of Takeru, living in Tsukushi.

古文：彦潋子神武立，更以 天皇 为号，徙治大和州。
现代文：彦氵敛的儿子神武立，改称 天皇 ，迁到大和州。
English: Jimmu Ritsu, the son of Hikone Suwa, was renamed Emperor and moved to Yamato Province.

古文：次曰绥靖，次安宁，次懿德，次孝昭，次天安，次孝灵，次孝元，次开化，次崇神，次垂仁，次景行，次成务，次仲哀。
现代文：以后依次即位的是：绥靖、安宁、懿德、孝昭、天安、孝灵、孝元、开化、崇神、垂仁、景行、成务、仲哀。仲哀死，传位给开化的曾孙女神功。
English: After that, the following successively ascended the throne: Sui Jing, Anning, Sui De, Xiao Zhao, Tian An, Xiaoling, Xiao Yuan, Kaika, Sui Jin, Sui Ren, Jing Xing, Cheng Mu, Zhong A. Zhong A died and passed the throne to Kaika's great-grandson, Goddess Gong.

古文：仲哀死，以开化曾孙女神功为王。次应神，次仁德，次履中，次反正，次允恭，次安康，次雄略，次清宁，次显宗，次仁贤，次武烈，次继体，次安闲，次宣化，次钦明。
现代文：以后依次即位的是：应神、仁德、履中、反正、允恭、安康、雄略、清宁、显宗、仁贤、武烈、继体、安闲、宣化、钦明。
English: Those who ascended to the throne in the following order were: Ying Shen, Ren De, Luzhong, Banzheng, Ying Gong, Ankang, Yong Li, Qing Ning, Xian Zong, Ren Xian, Wu Rong, Jie Tie, An Jie, Xuan Hua, and Qin Ming.

古文：钦明之十一年，直梁承圣元年。
现代文：钦明十一年时正是梁承圣元年。
English: It was the first year of Liang Cheng Sheng when he was eleven years old.

古文：次海达。次用明，亦曰目多利思比孤，直隋开皇末，始与中国通。
现代文：钦明后传位给海达、用明，其时正是隋开皇末年，开始与中国往来。
English: After Qinming, the throne was passed on to Haida and Yiming. It was then, in the last years of the Sui Dynasty, that they began to have contact with China.

古文：次崇峻。崇峻死，钦明之孙女雄古立。次舒明，次皇极。
现代文：用明后传位给崇峻，崇峻死，钦明的孙女雄古即位，后传位给舒明、皇极。
English: After the Ming Dynasty, the throne was passed on to Soojun, Soojun died, Qinming's granddaughter Xionggu ascended the throne, and the throne was later passed on to Shuming and Wangji.

古文：其俗椎髻，无冠带，跣以行，幅巾蔽后，贵者冒锦；妇人衣纯色裙，长腰襦，结发于后。
现代文：国内习俗头发梳成椎髻，不戴帽，赤足，用整幅的布遮在身后，富贵者戴锦帽；妇女着纯色裙，长腰袄，头发束在脑后。
English: Domestic customs: hair combed into a topknot, no hat, bare feet, covered with a full-length cloth behind, rich people wear a brocade hat; women wear solid-colored skirts, long waists, hair tied behind the head.

古文：至炀帝，赐其民锦线冠，饰以金玉，文布为衣，左右佩银■长八寸，以多少明贵贱。
现代文：隋炀帝时，赐其民锦线冠，上饰金玉，用花布制衣，左右两边佩银花，每支长八寸，以花的多少分别贵贱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he was given a brocade crown, a golden bead as the top decoration, clothing made of flower cloth, and silver flowers on the left and right sides. Each flower was eight inches long, and the more flowers, the higher the price.

古文：太宗贞观五年，遣使者入朝。
现代文：太宗贞观五年，派使者入朝。
English: In the fifth year of Taizong Zhenguan's reign, he sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：帝矜其远，诏有司毋拘岁贡。
现代文：皇帝怜恤他们远道而来，诏令有司不要求每年纳贡。
English: The emperor took pity on them for coming all the way from afar, and issued a decree that Yushi would not demand annual tribute.

古文：遣新州刺史高仁表往谕，与王争礼不平，不肯宣天子命而还。
现代文：派新州刺史高仁表前往宣谕抚慰。高仁表与王争礼不得，不肯宣天子的诏令而回。
English: He sent Gao Renbo, the scribe of Xinzhou, to comfort the king. Gao Renbo was unable to compete with the king and refused to announce the emperor's edict and returned.

古文：久之，更附新罗使者上书。
现代文：很久以后，日本才附在新罗使者后上书朝廷。
English: It was not until much later that Japan followed Silla's envoy and sent a letter to the imperial court.

古文：永徽初，其王孝德即位，改元曰白雉，献虎魄大如斗，码硇若五升器。
现代文：永徽初年，孝德即王位，改年号为 白雉 ，进献的琥珀有斗一样大，玛瑙也有五升容器那么大。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, filial piety is the throne, and the year name was changed to Baiyao. The amber donated was as big as a bucket, and the agate was as big as a five-liter container.

古文：时新罗为高丽、百济所暴，高宗赐玺书，令出兵援新罗。
现代文：那时，新罗被高丽、百济欺凌。高宗赐孝德玺书，命他出兵援助新罗。
English: At that time, Silla was being bullied by Goryeo and Baekje. Gojong bestowed him with a letter of filial piety and ordered him to send troops to aid Silla.

古文：未几孝德死，其子天丰财立。死，子天智立。
现代文：不久，孝德死，其子天丰财立，死后，子天智立。
English: Soon after, Xiaode died, and his son, Tianfeng Cai Rong, and after his death, his son, Tianzhi Rong.

古文：明年，使者与虾蛦人偕朝。
现代文：第二年派使者与虾虫夷一人同入朝。
English: The following year, he sent an envoy to the imperial court together with Shōmokui.

古文：虾蛦亦居海岛中，其使者须长四尺许，珥箭于首，令人戴瓠立数十步，射无不中。
现代文：虾虫夷也居住在海岛上。他们的使者胡须长四尺多，头上插着箭，叫人顶着葫芦站在几十步远处，箭射出去没有不中的。
English: Shrimps and worms also live on the island. Their messengers have whiskers more than four feet long, have arrows stuck in their heads, and make people stand at a distance of several dozen paces with a gourd on their heads. The arrows never miss their target.

古文：天智死，子天武立。死，子总持立。
现代文：天智死后，子天武立；死后，子总持立。
English: After the death of Tian Zhi, his son Tian Wu Li; after his death, his son Zong Dizhi Li.

古文：咸亨元年，遣使贺平高丽。
现代文：咸亨元年，派使者入朝庆贺平定高丽。
English: In the first year of Xianheng, he sent an envoy to the morning to celebrate the victory of Pingding Goryeo.

古文：后稍习夏音，恶倭名，更号日本。
现代文：后来渐习汉语，不喜欢 倭 的名称，改名为 日本 。
English: Later, as he gradually learned Chinese, he disliked the name "Wa" and changed his name to "Nihon."

古文：使者自言，国近日所出，以为名。
现代文：使者说，国家靠近日出处，所以起这样的国名。
English: The envoy said that the country is close to the sunrise, hence the name.

古文：或云日本乃小国，为倭所并，故冒其号。
现代文：有人说，日本是个小国，被倭所并，倭就是顶用了他们的国名。
English: Some people say that Japan is a small country, which was annexed by Wa, and that Wa is a misappropriation of their country name.

古文：使者不以情，故疑焉。
现代文：使者不说实情，所以产生怀疑。
English: The messenger does not tell the truth, so suspicion arises.

古文：又妄夸其国都方数千里，南、西尽海，东、北限大山，其外即毛人云。
现代文：使者还妄夸其国方圆几千里，南面西面都是海，东面北面有大山为界，山外是毛人国。
English: The envoy also boasted that his country was thousands of miles in circumference, with the sea to the south and west, mountains to the north and east, and the Mao people beyond the mountains.

古文：长安元年，其王文武立，改元曰太宝，遣朝臣真人粟田贡方物。
现代文：长安元年，文武即位为王，改年号为太宝，派朝臣真人粟田贡献特产。
English: In the first year of the Chang'an era, King Wenwu ascended to the throne, changed his era name to Taiho, and sent courtier Mahin Awata to contribute special products.

古文：朝臣真人者，犹唐尚书也。冠进德冠，顶有华■四披，紫袍帛带。
现代文：朝臣真人，有如唐的尚书，头戴进德冠，顶上有花四枝，穿紫袍，系绸带。
English: Courtier Zhenren, like Tang's Shangshu, wore a virtuous crown on his head, with four flowers on the top, wore a purple robe, and wore a silk belt.

古文：真人好学，能属文，进止有容。
现代文：真人好学，会写文章，进退应酬均合礼仪有分寸。
English: Genuine people are eager to learn, can write articles, and have a good sense of etiquette.

古文：武后宴之麟德殿，授司膳卿，还之。
现代文：武后在麟德殿宴请他，任他为司膳卿，然后回国。
English: Empress Wu invited him to a banquet at the Lin De Palace, appointed him as the Lord of the Table, and then returned to China.

古文：文武死，子阿用立。死，子圣武立，改元曰白龟。
现代文：文武死，子阿用立，死后，子圣武立，改年号为 白龟 。
English: After the death of Wenwu, his son Ah Yilat, and after his death, his son Sheng Wulit, the year name was changed to White Turtle.

古文：开元初，粟田复朝，请从诸儒受经。
现代文：开元初年，粟田再次入朝，要求向儒者学经。
English: In the first year of the first century, Awata entered the imperial court again and demanded that Confucians study the sutras.

古文：诏四门助教赵玄默即鸿胪寺为师，献大幅布为贽，悉赏物贸书以归。
现代文：诏令四门助教赵玄默就在鸿胪寺教他。粟田献宽幅布为学费。后来将所得赏赐尽用来买书带回。
English: Zhao Xuanmo, a four-door assistant teacher, taught him at Hongye Temple. Awata donated a large amount of cloth as tuition. Later, he used all the reward money to buy books and bring them back.

古文：其副朝臣仲满慕华不肯去，易姓名曰朝衡，历左补阙，仪王友，多所该识，久乃还。
现代文：他的副朝臣仲满仰慕中华不肯走，改姓名叫朝衡，历任左补阙、仪王友，学得许多中华文化，很久才回国。
English: His vice-courtier, Zhongman, admired Zhonghua and refused to leave, and changed his name to Chaoheng. Successive left-hand complements, Yi Wangyou, learned a lot of Chinese culture, and returned to China for a long time.

古文：圣武死，女孝明立，改元曰天平胜宝。
现代文：圣武死，女儿孝明立，改年号为 天平胜宝 。
English: After the death of Shengwu, his daughter Xiao Mingli changed her name to Tianping Shengbao.

古文：天宝十二载，朝衡复入朝。
现代文：天宝十二年，朝衡再次入朝。
English: In the 12th year of the Tenpo era, Asahira re-entered the court.

古文：上元中，擢左散骑常侍、安南都护。
现代文：上元中，升任左散骑常侍、安南都护。
English: In the Shangyuan era, he was promoted to the position of Zuo Sanzhijie Changzhu and Annan Doushuo.

古文：新罗梗海道，更繇明、越州朝贡。
现代文：新罗阻梗了海道，改经明、越州来朝贡。
English: Silla blocked the sea route, and the Ming and Yue states came to pay tribute.

古文：孝明死，大炊立。死，以圣武女高野姬为王。死，白壁立。
现代文：孝明死，大炊立；死后，以圣武的女儿高野姬为王，死后白壁立。
English: After the death of Takaakira, the great hall was built. After his death, Takano Hie, the daughter of Shomu, became the king. After his death, the white wall was built.

古文：建中元年，使者真人兴能献方物。
现代文：建中元年，使者真人兴能入朝献特产。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, the emissary Zhenren Xingneng came to the imperial court to present special products.

古文：真人，盖因官而氏者也。
现代文：真人，是据官职而以之做氏的。
English: A real person is one who is named after an official position.

古文：兴能善书，其纸似茧而泽，人莫识。
现代文：兴能擅长书法，所用纸像茧而更润泽，没人知道其制法。
English: Xingneng is good at calligraphy. The paper he uses is smooth and shiny. No one knows how it is made.

古文：贞元末，其王曰桓武，遣使者朝。
现代文：贞元末年，其王桓武派使者入朝。
English: In the last years of the reign of King Sadamoto, King Kanmu sent an envoy to the court.

古文：其学子橘免势、浮屠空海愿留肄业，历二十余年。使者高阶真人来请免势等俱还，诏可。
现代文：学生橘免势、僧人空海愿留下学习。在华二十多年，后来使者高阶真人来，请求让免势等人一同回国，皇帝允许。
English: The students Tachibana Mimpoku and the monk Kukai were willing to stay and study. After more than twenty years in China, a high-ranking envoy came to request that Mimpoku and others be allowed to return to the country together, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：次诺乐立，次嵯峨，次浮和，次仁明。
现代文：后来为王者依次为诺乐、嵯峨、浮和、仁明。
English: Later, the king was followed by Nole, Saga, Uiwa, and Jinming.

古文：仁明直开成四年，复入贡。
现代文：仁明即位时正当开成四年，再度入贡。
English: At the time of Emperor Ninmyo's accession to the throne, it became four years, and tribute was paid again.

古文：次文德，次清和，次阳成。
现代文：后继者为文德、清和、阳成、光孝。
English: His successors were Wen De, Qing He, Yang Cheng and Guang Xiao.

古文：次光孝，直光启元年。
现代文：光孝即位时正当光启元年。
English: It was the first year of the reign of Emperor Guangxiao.

古文：其东海屿中又有邪古、波邪、多尼三小王，北距新罗，西北百济，西南直越州，有丝絮、怪珍云。
现代文：日本东海岛屿中又有邪古、波邪、多尼三个小国。北近新罗，西北是百济，西南挨着越州，产丝絮、珍怪。
English: In the islands of the East Sea of Japan, there are also three small countries, Yaku, Baza, and Doni. The north is near Shilla, the northwest is Baekje, and the southwest is next to Yuezhou. They produce silk and are rare.

