古文：采药民元柳二公
现代文：采药民元柳二公
English: Drug-picking Min Yuan and Liu Er Gong

古文：采药民
现代文：采药民
English: Pharmacists

古文：唐高宗显庆中，有蜀郡青城民，不得姓名。
现代文：唐高宗显庆年间，蜀郡青城有一个人，不知他叫什么名字。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, there was a man in Qingcheng, Shu County. I don't know his name.

古文：尝采药于青城山下，遇一大薯药，劚之深数丈，其根渐大如瓮。
现代文：这个人曾经在青城山下采药，遇到一棵大薯药，往下挖了几丈深，发现它的根渐渐粗大，像瓮那么粗。
English: This person once went to gather medicinal herbs at the foot of Qingcheng Mountain. He came across a large yam, dug down several feet and found that its roots were gradually growing thicker, as thick as a cocoon.

古文：此人劚之不已，渐深五六丈，而地陷不止，至十丈余。
现代文：这个人不停地往下挖，渐渐挖到五六丈深，土就不停地往下陷。
English: This man kept digging down, gradually digging to a depth of five or six feet, and the soil kept sinking.

古文：此人堕中，无由而出。
现代文：到十丈深的时候，这个人掉到坑里没有办法出来。
English: When it was ten feet deep, the man fell into the pit and couldn't get out.

古文：仰视穴口，大如星焉。
现代文：他仰视洞口，只像星星那么大。
English: He looked up at the mouth of the cave, which was only as big as a star.

古文：分必死矣。
现代文：按理说他非死不可了。
English: By rights, he should be dead.

古文：忽旁见一穴，既入，稍大，渐渐匍匐，可数十步，前视，如有明状。
现代文：忽然他发现旁边有一个洞，进去之后，见洞中逐渐宽敞。他渐渐地爬着往里走，走了几十步，往前看，好像有亮光。
English: Suddenly, he found a hole next to him. After entering, he saw that the hole gradually became spacious. He gradually crawled inside, walked dozens of steps, and looked forward as if there was light.

古文：寻之而行，一里余，此穴渐高。
现代文：他寻那亮光往前走，走了一里左右，这个洞穴渐渐变高。
English: He followed the light for a mile or so, and the cave grew higher.

古文：绕穴行可一里许，乃出一洞口。
现代文：在洞中又绕着走了一里多，就走出一个洞口。
English: After walking around the cave for more than a mile, they came out of a cave.

古文：洞上有水，阔数十步。
现代文：洞上边有一条河，几十步宽，岸上有一个几十户人家的村落。
English: There is a river on the edge of the cave, dozens of paces wide, and a village of dozens of homes on the shore.

古文：岸上见有数十人家村落，桑柘花物草木，如二三月中。
现代文：村落里有花草树木。
English: There are flowers and trees in the village.

古文：有人，男女衣服，不似今人。
现代文：景色像二三月的样子。村里有人，从男男女女的衣服上看，不像现在的人。
English: The scenery looks like February and March. There are people in the village, judging from the clothes of men and women, who do not look like people today.

古文：耕夫钓童，往往相遇。
现代文：耕地农夫和钓鱼的儿童，常常相遇。
English: Arable farmers and fishing children often meet.

古文：一人惊问得来之由，遂告所以。
现代文：有一个人吃惊地问他是怎么来的。于是他就告诉了那人。
English: Surprised, one man asked him how he got there, and he told the man.

古文：乃将小舠子渡之。
现代文：那人就用一条小船把他渡了过去。
English: And he made him to pass over in the little ship.

古文：民告之曰： 不食已经三日矣。 
现代文：他告诉那人，他已经三天没吃东西了。
English: He told the man he had not eaten for three days.

古文：遂食以胡麻饭柏子汤诸菹。
现代文：那人就把胡麻饭、柏子汤以及各种腌菜给他吃。
English: The man gave him sesame rice, cypress soup and various pickles to eat.

古文：止可数日，此民觉身渐轻。
现代文：住了几天，他觉得自己的身体渐渐地变轻，就问那人： 这是什么地方？ 
English: After staying there for a few days, he felt that his body was gradually getting lighter, so he asked the man, "What is this place?"

古文：问其主人，此是何所，兼求还蜀之路。其人相与笑曰： 汝世人，不知此仙镜。
现代文：他还向那人打听回蜀郡的道路。那人对他笑笑说： 你是人世间的人，不知道这是仙境。
English: He also asked the man for the way back to Shu County. The man smiled and said to him: You are a man of the world, you don't know that this is a fairyland.

古文：汝得至此，当是合有仙分。可且留此，吾当引汝谒玉皇。 
现代文：你能到这个地方来，应当说这是该着与神仙有缘分，可以暂且留在这里，我将领你去拜见玉皇。 
English: If you can come to this place, it should be said that you have a predestined relationship with the immortal. You can stay here for a while, and I will take you to see the Jade Emperor.

古文：又其中相呼云： 明日上已也，可往朝谒。 
现代文：村中又有人喊道： 明天是三月三，可以去拜谒玉皇。 
English: Someone else in the village shouted, "Tomorrow is March 3rd, you can go and worship the Jade Emperor."

古文：遂将此人往。
现代文：于是那人带着他前往。
English: So the man took him with him.

古文：其民或乘云气，或驾龙鹤。
现代文：他或者乘驾着云气，或者乘驾着龙鹤。
English: He either rides the clouds, or rides the cranes.

古文：此人亦在云中徒步。
现代文：那个人也在云中徒步走。
English: The man was also walking on foot in the clouds.

古文：须臾，至一城，皆金玉为饰。
现代文：不多时，来到一座城市，全都是用金玉装饰的。
English: It's not often that you come to a city where everything is decorated with gold.

古文：其中宫阙，皆是金宝。
现代文：其中的宫殿楼阁，全都是金银珠宝。
English: Among them, the palace pavilions are all made of gold and silver jewelry.

古文：诸人皆以次入谒。独留此人于宫门外。
现代文：人们都按照一定的次序进去拜谒，唯独把他留在宫门外。
English: People all went in to pay homage in a certain order, but he was left outside the palace gate.

古文：门侧有一大牛，赤色，形状甚异，闭目吐涎沫。
现代文：门边有一头赤红色的大牛，形状很奇特，正闭着眼睛吐涎沫。
English: Next to the door there is a large red cow with a strange shape. It is spitting foam with its eyes closed.

古文：主人令此民礼拜其牛，求乞仙道。如牛吐宝物，即便吞之。
现代文：那人让他去参拜这牛，乞求成仙之道，如果牛吐出什么宝物，立即把它吞下。
English: The man told him to go and worship the cow, to pray for immortality, and if the cow spit out any treasure, to swallow it immediately.

古文：此民如言拜乞。
现代文：他就去拜牛。
English: So he went to worship the cow.

古文：少顷，此牛吐一赤珠，大逾径寸。
现代文：不一会儿，这牛吐出一颗赤色珠子，直径超过一寸。
English: Moments later, the cow spits out a red bead more than an inch in diameter.

古文：民方欲捧接，忽有一赤衣童子拾之而去。
现代文：他刚要去捧接，忽然有一个穿红衣服的童子拾起宝珠就离开了。
English: He was just about to pick it up when a boy in red picked it up and left.

古文：民再求，得青珠，又为青衣童子所取。
现代文：他再讨要，得到一颗青色珍珠，又被一个穿青色衣服的童子取去。
English: He asked again and was given a blue pearl, which was taken away by a boy dressed in blue.

古文：又有黄者白者，皆有童子夺之。
现代文：再讨要，又有黄珍珠白珍珠，也都被童子夺去。
English: There was also a yellow pearl and a white pearl, both of which were snatched away by the boy.

古文：民遂急以手捧牛口，须臾得黑珠，遽自吞之。
现代文：他于是急忙用手捧住牛嘴，不一会儿接到一颗黑珠子，急忙吞了下去。
English: He then quickly cupped the cow's mouth with his hand, and soon received a black bead, which he quickly swallowed.

古文：黑衣童子至，无所见而空去。
现代文：黑衣童来到，没见到什么就空手回去了。
English: The boy in black came, saw nothing and went back empty-handed.

古文：主人遂引谒玉皇。
现代文：那人于是就领他去拜见玉皇。
English: The man then took him to see the Jade Emperor.

古文：玉皇居殿，如王者之像，侍者七人，冠剑列左右，玉女数百，侍卫殿庭。
现代文：玉皇坐在殿上，样子像国王。七个侍卫佩剑站在左右。几百名玉女，侍卫在庭院里。
English: The Jade Emperor sits in the hall, looking like a king. Seven attendants with swords stand to the right and left. Several hundred princesses and attendants are in the courtyard.

古文：奇异花果，馨香非世所有。
现代文：庭院里到处是奇花异果，那香气是人间所没有的。
English: The courtyard is full of exotic flowers and fruits, and the aroma is like nothing else on earth.

古文：玉皇遂问民。
现代文：玉皇就问他话，他都如实地回答。
English: The Jade Emperor asked him questions, and he answered truthfully.

古文：具以实对，而民贪顾左右玉女。玉皇曰： 汝既悦此侍卫之美乎。 
现代文：他贪婪地顾盼左右的玉女，玉皇说： 你很喜欢这些侍卫的美女吗？ 
English: He greedily gazed at the princesses on either side of him. The Jade Emperor said, "Do you like these beautiful guards very much?"

古文：民俯伏请罪。
现代文：他趴在地上请罪。
English: He fell to the ground and pleaded guilty.

古文：玉皇曰： 汝但勤心妙道，自有此等；但汝修行未到，须有功用，不可轻致。 
现代文：玉皇说： 只要你勤奋地用心修道，自然会有这些。只是你的修行还不到家。你必须努力用功，不可能轻易就得到。 
English: The Jade Emperor said, "As long as you diligently practice with all your heart, these things will naturally come to you. However, your practice has not yet reached home. You must work hard, and it is impossible to obtain them easily.

古文：敕左右，以玉盘盛仙果，其果绀赤，绝大如拳，状若世之林檎而芳香无比，以示民曰： 恣汝以手捧之，所得之数，即侍女之数也。
现代文：玉皇让左右端来一玉盘仙果。那果青红色，拳头那么大，样子像人世间的花红果，芳香无比。玉皇把仙果给他看，说道： 让你随便用手捧，捧几个果，就给你几个侍女。 
English: The Jade Emperor had a plate of fairy fruits brought to him from the right and left ends. The fruits were reddish-blue, and the fist was so large that it looked like a red fruit from the human world, with an incomparable aroma. The Jade Emperor showed the fairy fruits to him and said, "If you use your hand to pick up a few fruits, you will be given a few maids.

古文：自度尽拱可得十余。遂以手捧之，唯得三枚而已。
现代文：他自己估计最多能捧起十几个，就伸手去捧，只捧起三颗而已。
English: He estimated that he could pick up at most a dozen, so he reached out and picked up only three.

古文：玉皇曰： 此汝分也。 
现代文：玉皇说： 这就是你有缘分了。 
English: The Jade Emperor said, "This is your fate.

古文：初至未有位次。且令前主人领往彼处。敕令三女充侍，别给一屋居之。
现代文：因为他是刚来，宫中没有他的位置，暂时就让他随那人回到那人的村子，让三名侍女侍奉他，另外给他一所房子居住。
English: Since he had just arrived and there was no room for him in the palace, he was temporarily allowed to follow that man back to that man's village, where he was served by three maids and given a house to live in.

古文：令诸道侣，导以修行。
现代文：还让同伴们帮他修行。
English: He also asked his friends to help him train.

古文：此人遂却至前处，诸道流传授真经，服药用气，洗涤尘念。
现代文：于是他就跟着那人回到原处，道友们向他传授真经，帮他服药炼气，洗涤尘俗之念。
English: So he followed the man back to his original place, and his Taoist friends taught him the True Sutra, helped him take medicine, purify the air, and wash away the worldly thoughts.

古文：而三侍女亦授以道术。
现代文：三名侍女也向他传授道术。
English: Three maids also taught him Taoism.

古文：后数朝谒，每见玉皇，必勉甚至意。
现代文：后来又多次拜见玉皇，每次见到玉皇，玉皇一定会勉力他全心全意地修行。
English: Later, he visited the Jade Emperor many times. Every time he saw the Jade Emperor, the Jade Emperor would try his best to practice with all his heart.

古文：其地草木，常如三月中，无荣落寒暑之变。
现代文：那地方的草木，总像三月间，没有荣枯寒暑的变化。
English: The vegetation in that area is always like that in March, with no change from hot to cold.

古文：度如人间，可一岁余。民自谓仙道已成，忽中夜而叹。
现代文：估计就像人间过了一年多，他自己认为仙道已成，忽然半夜里叹气。
English: It was as if more than a year had passed in the human world, and he thought that the fairy tale had come to an end. Suddenly, in the middle of the night, he sighed.

古文：左右问。曰： 吾今虽得道，本偶来此耳。
现代文：左右问他为什么叹气，他说： 我现在虽然得道成仙，但是我本来是偶然来的，来的时候妻子生了一个女孩，才几天我就离开了。
English: When asked why he was sighing, he said, "Although I've become immortal now, I originally came here by chance. When I came, my wife gave birth to a girl, and I left after just a few days.

古文：来时妻产一女，才经数日，家贫，不知复如何，思往一省之。
现代文：我家里穷，不知现在又怎样了。
English: My family is poor and I don't know what's going on now.

古文：玉女曰： 君离世已久，妻子等已当亡，岂可复寻。
现代文：我想回去看看。 玉女说： 你离开人世已经很久了，妻子等应该已经死去，哪能再找到！
English: I want to go back and have a look. The lady said, "It's been a long time since you passed away, your wife and others should have died, how can I find them again!

古文：盖为尘念未祛，至此误想。 
现代文：大概因为你尘念未了，到现在还胡思乱想。 
English: Probably because you haven't thought about it, you're still thinking about it.

古文：民曰： 今可一岁矣，妻亦当无恙，要明其事耳。 
现代文：他说： 现在有一年了，妻子应该没什么变化，我只是想弄明白是怎么回事罢了。 
English: He said: "It's been a year now and my wife hasn't changed a bit, I just want to find out what's going on.

古文：玉女遂以告诸邻。诸邻共嗟叹之。
现代文：玉女于是告诉了邻居们，邻居们都感叹。
English: The young lady then told her neighbours, who were all shocked.

古文：复白玉皇。玉皇命遣归。
现代文：又告诉了玉皇，玉皇让人送他回去。
English: He told the Jade Emperor again, and the Jade Emperor sent someone to take him back.

古文：诸仙等于水上作歌乐饮馔以送之。
现代文：神仙们在水上作歌奏乐置办宴席为他送行。
English: The immortals sang and played music on the water and held a banquet to see him off.

古文：其三玉女又与之别，各遗以黄金一铤，曰： 恐至人世，归求无得，以此为费耳。 
现代文：那三名玉女又和他告别，每人送给他一锭黄金，说： 恐怕到了人世间，回家什么也找不到，用这些黄金作费用吧！ 
English: The three princesses bade him farewell again, and each gave him a heap of gold, saying, "I am afraid that when you come to the world, you will find nothing when you return home. Use this gold to pay your expenses."

古文：中女曰： 君至彼，倘无所见，思归，吾有药在金铤中，取而吞之，可以归矣。 
现代文：中玉女说： 你到了那里，如果什么也没见到，想回来，我有药放在金锭中，你取出来吞下去，就可以回来啦！ 
English: The lady in the middle said, "When you get there, if you see nothing and want to come back, I have some medicine in a pot of gold. Take it out and swallow it, and you can come back!"

古文：小女谓曰： 恐君为尘念侵，不复有仙，金中有药，恐有固耳。
现代文：小玉女说： 怕你被尘念侵害，不再有仙气，就在金锭里预备了药。
English: Little Jade said, "I am afraid that you will be affected by the dusty thoughts and will no longer have the fairy spirit, so I have prepared some medicine in the pot of gold.

古文：吾知君家已无处寻，唯舍东一擣练石尚在，吾已将药置石下。
现代文：又怕金锭中的药会保存不住，我知道你家已无处可寻，只有屋东头一块槌衣石还在，我已经把药放在那石头下边。
English: I'm also afraid that the medicine in the pot of gold may not be preserved. I know that your home is nowhere to be found. Only the stone at the end of the house is still there. I have placed the medicine under the stone.

古文：如金中无，但取此服可矣。 
现代文：如果不能从金锭中取药，只要到石下取药吃下也可以。 
English: If you can't get the medicine from the gold mine, just go under the stone to get the medicine and eat it.

古文：言讫，见一群鸿鹄，天际飞过。众谓民曰： 汝见此否，但从之而去。 
现代文：说完，有一群鸿鹄从天际飞过，大伙对他说： 你看到这些鸿鹄了吧？
English: After he had said this, a flock of great egrets flew across the sky, and they said to him, "Do you see these great egrets?

古文：众捧民举之，民亦腾身而上，便至鹄群，鹄亦不相惊扰，与飞空。
现代文：只要跟着它们飞去，就可以回去。 众人把他抬起来，他也腾身往上一跃，便来到鸿鹄群中。鸿鹄也不害怕，和他共同飞在空中。
English: As long as he followed them, he could go back. The people lifted him up, and he also leapt up into the air, and came into the midst of the great egrets. The great egrets were not afraid, and flew with him in the air.

古文：回顾，犹见岸上人挥手相送，可百来人。
现代文：他回头看，还能望见岸上的人们挥手送他，有一百来人。
English: Looking back, he could still see the people on the shore waving him off, about a hundred of them.

古文：乃至一城中，人物甚众。
现代文：于是他来到一座城中。城里人很多。
English: So he came to a city where there were many people.

古文：问其地，乃临海县也，去蜀已甚远矣。
现代文：他一打听，这地方是临海县，离蜀郡已经很远了。
English: When he inquired, he learned that this place is Linhai County, which is far away from Shu County.

古文：遂鬻其金资粮，经岁乃至蜀。
现代文：于是就卖掉那金锭作盘缠，经过一年才来到蜀地。
English: So he sold the gold ingot to make coils, and it took him a year to come to Shunde.

古文：时开元末年，问其家，无人知者。
现代文：那时是开元末年。他打听他的家，没有知道的。
English: At that time, it was the end of the first year of the year. He inquired about his home, but did not know anything.

古文：有一人年九十余，云： 吾祖父往年因采药，不知所之，至今九十年矣。 
现代文：有一个九十多岁的人说： 我祖父往年因为采药，不知哪儿去了，到现在九十年了。 
English: One man in his nineties said: "My grandfather has not been able to find his way for the past 90 years because he was taking medicine.

古文：乃民之孙也，相持而泣，云： 姑叔父皆已亡矣，时所生女适人身死，其孙已年五十余矣。 
现代文：孙子说： 姑、叔全都已经亡故了。他离家时生的那个女儿出嫁以后也死了，她的孙子都五十多岁了。 
English: The grandson said: My aunt and uncle have all passed away. The daughter he had when he left home also died after she got married. Her grandchildren are all over fifty years old.

古文：相寻故居，皆为瓦砾荒榛，唯故砧尚在。
现代文：祖孙俩去寻找故居，见故居都成了瓦砾和荒草，只有旧时的槌衣石还在。
English: The two grandfathers and grandsons went to look for the former residence, and saw that the former residence had become rubble and weeds, and only the old hammered stone was still there.

古文：民乃毁金求药，将吞之，忽失药所在。
现代文：于是他砸碎金锭找药。要吃药的时候，药忽然不见了。
English: So he smashed a pot of gold to find the medicine. When he was about to take the medicine, it suddenly disappeared.

古文：遂举石，得一玉合，有金丹在焉。
现代文：于是把槌衣石抬起来，从石下取出一个玉盒，盒中有丹药，他就把它吞下。
English: So he lifted up the hammered stone and took out a jade box from under the stone. The box contained elixir, and he swallowed it.

古文：即吞之，而心中明了，却记去路。
现代文：他心里很明白，还记得回去的路。
English: He was very clear in his mind and remembered the way back.

古文：此民虽仙洞得道，而本庸人，都不能详问其事。
现代文：他虽然在洞中成仙得道，但他本是平庸之人，却不能详细知道他成仙的事了。
English: Although he achieved immortality in the cave, he was a mediocre person, but he could not know the details of his immortality.

古文：时罗天师在蜀，见民说其去处。乃云： 是第五洞宝仙九室之天。
现代文：当时罗公远在蜀地，他听了这个人说的那去处，便说： 这是第五洞宝仙九室的天地。
English: At that time, Luo Gong was far away in Shu Di. When he heard this person's whereabouts, he said, "This is the world of the fifth hole, the nine chambers of the Immortal."

古文：玉皇即天皇也。
现代文：玉帝就是天皇。
English: The Jade Emperor is the Emperor.

古文：大牛乃驮龙也。
现代文：大牛就是驮龙。
English: The bull is the dragon.

古文：所吐珠，赤者吞之，寿与天地齐；青者五万岁；黄者三万岁；白者一万岁；黑者五千岁；此民吞黑者，虽不能学道，但于人世上亦得五千岁耳。
现代文：牛所吐的珠子，吞了红色的，寿命与天地一样；吞了青色的，能活五万岁；黄的三万岁；白的一万岁；黑的五千岁。这个人吞了黑的，虽然不能学道术，但是在人世上也能活五千年了。
English: If a person swallows a red bead spit out by a cow, his lifespan will be the same as that of a camel; if he swallows a blue bead, he can live for fifty thousand years; if he swallows a yellow bead, he can live for thirty thousand years; if he swallows a white bead, he can live for ten thousand years; and if he swallows a black bead, he can live for five thousand years in the human world, although he cannot learn Taoism.

古文：玉皇前立七人，北斗七星也。 
现代文：玉皇跟前站着的七个人，是北斗七星。 
English: The seven people standing in front of the Jade Emperor are the seven stars of the Big Dipper.

古文：民得药，服却入山，不知所之，盖去归洞天矣。
现代文：这个人找到药服下之后，就进了青城山，不知到哪儿去了。大概是回到洞天去了。
English: After this person found the medicine, he went into Qingcheng Mountain and I don't know where he went. He probably went back to Dongtian.

古文：元柳二公
现代文：元柳二公
English: Motoyanagi 2nd Prince

古文：元和初，有元彻、柳实者，居于衡山。
现代文：唐宪宗元和初年，元彻、柳实两个人居住在衡山上。
English: In the first year of Tang Xian Zong Yuanhe, two people, Yuan Che and Liu Si, lived on Hengshan.

古文：二公俱有从父为官浙右。
现代文：二人都有叔叔或大爷在浙东做官。
English: Both of them have uncles or grandfathers working as officials in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：李庶人连累，各窜于欢、爱州。
现代文：他们都受到李庶人的连累，各自流窜到欢州和爱州。
English: They were all entangled by Li Shizhen, and each of them fled to Huanzhou and Aizhou.

古文：二公共结行李而往省焉。
现代文：元柳二人便打点了行李，到浙东去省亲。
English: The two Yuanliu then packed their bags and went to East Zhejiang to visit relatives.

古文：至于廉州合浦县，登舟而欲越海，将抵交趾，舣舟于合浦岸。夜有村人飨神，箫鼓喧哗。舟人与二公仆吏齐往看焉。
现代文：走到廉州合浦县，登上船想要过海，要到交趾去。船停在合浦的岸边，夜里听到有村人祭神，鼓声箫声喧哗，摆船人和元柳二人以及其他仆从一齐去看。
English: He went to Hepu County, Lianzhou, and boarded a ship to cross the sea. He wanted to go to Jiaozuo. The ship stopped on the shore of Hepu. In the night, he heard the villagers worshiping the gods, the drums were beating loudly, and the boatmen and the two Yuanliu and other servants went to see.

古文：夜将午，俄飓风歘起，断缆漂舟，入于大海，莫知所适。
现代文：要到午夜的时候，突然起了大风，刮断了缆绳，把船漂进大海，不知漂到了什么地方。
English: Just before midnight, there was a sudden gale, which broke the cable, and the boat drifted out to sea, I don't know where.

古文：罥长鲸之鬐，抢巨鳌之背，浪浮雪峤，日涌火轮。
现代文：一会儿，船被挂到大鲸鱼的鬐须上；一会儿，船又被撞到大乌龟的背上。大浪起伏，像波动的雪山；红日涌动，像跃动的火球。
English: One moment the boat was hooked to the baleen of a great whale; the next moment it was rammed into the back of a large turtle. The waves rose and fell like undulating snow-capped mountains; the red sun surged like a leaping fireball.

古文：触蛟室而梭停，撞蜃楼而瓦解。
现代文：触到了居住在海底的蛟人的房屋，屋里的织布梭停了；撞到了海市蜃楼，海市蜃楼便消散了。
English: When it touched the house of a man who lived on the bottom of the sea, the shuttle stopped spinning; when it hit the mirage, the mirage disappeared.

古文：摆簸数四，几欲倾沉，然后抵孤岛而风止。
现代文：大船摆动颠簸多次，差一点儿就要沉没，然后抵达一个孤岛，而风也停了。
English: The great ship rocked and rolled several times, almost sinking, until it reached an isolated island and the wind died down.

古文：二公愁闷而陟焉，见天王尊像，莹然于岭所，有金炉香烬，而别无一物。
现代文：元柳二人愁闷地登上去，见了一座天王尊像，闪着光亮立在一个高岗上，有金香炉和香灰，再没有其它东西。
English: The two Yuans climbed up gloomily and saw a statue of the Heavenly King, shining brightly on a high hill, with a gold incense burner and incense ashes, and nothing else.

古文：二公周览之次，忽睹海面上有巨兽，出首四顾，若有察听，牙森剑戟，目闪电光，良久而没。
现代文：二人向周围巡视，忽然望见海面上有一个巨兽，探出头来向四处看，好像在察看倾听什么。那兽的牙齿像林立的剑戟，眼睛闪着电光。许久，那兽沉下去了。
English: The two of them looked around and suddenly saw a huge beast on the surface of the sea. It poked its head out and looked around, as if it was examining and listening to something. The beast's teeth were like swords, and its eyes flashed like lightning. After a long time, the beast sank.

古文：逡巡，复有紫云自海面涌出，漫衍数百步，中有五色大芙蓉，高百余丈，叶叶而绽，内有帐幄，若绣绮错杂，耀夺人眼。
现代文：不多时，又有紫云从海面上涌出来，弥漫了几百步的地方。其中有一棵五色大芙蓉，高一百多尺，每片叶子都是绽开的。叶内有帐幔，像绣锦那样丰富多采，耀眼夺目。
English: Not infrequently, there are purple clouds pouring out of the sea, filling the place of several hundred steps. Among them, there is a five-colored large hibiscus, more than a hundred feet high, each leaf is open. There is a curtain inside the leaf, as rich and colorful as embroidery, dazzling.

古文：又见虹桥忽展，直抵于岛上。俄有双鬟侍女，捧玉合，持金炉，自莲叶而来天尊所，易其残烬，炷以异香。
现代文：又见到有一座虹桥忽然展开，直伸到岛上来，不一会儿，有一位扎着双鬟的侍女，捧着玉盒，拿着金炉，从莲叶上来到立天尊像的地方，换掉那些香灰，燃上香。
English: He also saw a rainbow bridge suddenly spread out, stretching straight to the island, and in a short while, a maid with her hair tied back, holding a jade box and a golden stove, came from the lotus leaves to the place where the statue of the god of heaven stood, changed the ashes and burned incense.

古文：二公见之，前告叩头，辞理哀酸，求返人世。
现代文：元柳二人见了，上前去叩头，说得很可怜，求神仙帮他们返回人世间。
English: When the two Yuanlius saw them, they went forward to prostrate themselves, spoke very pitifully, and begged the gods to help them return to the world.

古文：双鬟不答。
现代文：双鬟侍女没有回答。
English: Shuangyao's maid did not answer.

古文：二公请益良久。
现代文：二人又请求了好久。
English: The two of them pleaded for a long time.

古文：女曰： 子是何人，而遽至此。 
现代文：侍女说： 你们是什么人？为什么忽然来到这里？ 
English: The maid said, "Who are you, and why have you come all of a sudden?"

古文：二公具以实白之。
现代文：二人详细地把实情告诉了侍女。
English: The two of them told the maid the whole story.

古文：女曰： 少顷有玉虚尊师当降此岛，与南溟夫人会约。子但坚请之，将有所遂。 
现代文：侍女说： 过一会儿有一位玉虚尊师降到这个岛上，他是来与南溟夫人约会的，你们只要坚决地向他请求，就能行。 
English: The maid said, "In a little while, a Jade Emperor's disciple will descend to this island. He has come to make an appointment with Lady Nan Xun. You only need to firmly ask him, and it will be done."

古文：言讫，有道士乘白鹿，驭彩霞，直降于岛上。
现代文：刚说完，有一位道士骑着一只白鹿，驾着彩霞，直接降到岛上。
English: Just after he finished speaking, a Taoist monk rode a white deer and drove Cai Xia directly to the island.

古文：二公并拜而泣告。尊师悯之曰： 子可随此女而谒南溟夫人，当有归期，可无碍矣。 
现代文：二人一齐上前参拜，哭着把事情说完，尊师可怜地说： 你二人可以跟着这位侍女去拜见南溟夫人，应有回去的时候，不会有什么障碍。 
English: The two of them went to pay their respects together, crying as they finished talking about the matter. Venerable Master said pitifully, "You two can follow this maid to visit Lady Nanzhao. When you return, there will be no obstacles."

古文：尊师语双鬟曰： 余暂修真毕，当诣彼。 
现代文：尊师对扎双鬟的侍女说： 我暂且在这里修炼，完毕之后，也到那去。 
English: The venerable master said to the maidservant who was wearing a pair of pigtails, "I will practice here for the time being, and after I finish, I will go there."

古文：二子受教，至帐前行拜谒之礼。
现代文：元柳二人受到指教，来到帐前行拜谒之礼，见到一位没有簪头的女子。
English: Motoyanagi and Motoyanagi were instructed and came to the register to pay homage, where they saw a woman without a headdress.

古文：见一女未笄，衣五色文彩，皓玉凝肌，红流腻艳，神澄沆瀣，气肃沧溟。
现代文：这女子穿着五色文采的衣服，肌肤洁白如玉，美艳无比。她的神气，能让流水澄清，能使大海肃静。
English: This woman is dressed in colorful clothes, her skin is as white as jade, and her beauty is beyond compare. Her aura can make running water clear and the sea calm.

古文：二子告以姓字。
现代文：二人把姓名告诉了她。
English: They told her their names.

古文：夫人哂之曰： 昔时天台有刘晨，今有柳实；昔有阮肇，今有元彻；昔时有刘阮，今有元柳：莫非天也。
现代文：她取笑说： 以前天台山有一个叫刘晨的，现在有一个柳实；以前有一个叫阮肇的，如今有一个元彻；以前有 刘阮 ，如今有 元柳 ，莫非这是天意吧？ 
English: She joked: "There used to be a man named Liu Chen in Tiantai Mountain, and now there is a man named Liu Si; there used to be a man named Ruan Zhao, and now there is a man named Yuan Che; there used to be a man named Liu Ruan, and now there is a man named Yuan Liu. Isn't this God's will?"

古文：设二榻而坐。
现代文：放了两个坐榻让二人坐下。
English: He put down two couches for the two to sit on.

古文：俄顷尊师至，夫人迎拜，遂还坐。
现代文：不多时尊师也来了，夫人上前迎拜。然后就回到坐位上。
English: Not long after, the venerable master also came, and his wife came forward to greet him. She then returned to her seat.

古文：有仙娥数辈，奏笙簧箫笛。旁列鸾凤之歌舞，雅合节奏。
现代文：有几个仙女，奏响了笙、簧、箫、笛等乐器，旁边排列着鸾凤的歌舞，很合节奏。
English: There are several fairies, playing gongs, springs, cymbals, flutes and other musical instruments, next to which are arranged the songs and dances of the phoenixes, very in tune with the rhythm.

古文：二子恍惚。
现代文：二人恍恍惚惚，像梦在中天。
English: The two of them were in a trance, like a dream in the middle of the sky.

古文：若梦于钧天，即人世罕闻见矣。
现代文：这是人世间很难听到的音乐和歌舞。于是南溟夫人令人摆酒传杯。
English: This is music and song and dance that is hard to hear in the real world. So Mrs. Nanzhao had people pass her a glass of wine.

古文：遂命飞觞。忽有玄鹤，衔彩牋自空而至曰： 安期生知尊师赴南溟会，暂请枉驾。 
现代文：忽然有一只黑色仙鹤，衔着一封书信从空中扔下来。信上说： 安期生知道尊师到南溟相会，暂请您委屈自己来一趟。 
English: Suddenly, a black crane dropped a letter from the sky, saying, "Anchisei-sensei, since you know that your teacher is coming to Nanlu, please take the trouble to come."

古文：尊师读之，谓玄鹤曰： 寻当至彼。 
现代文：尊师读后，对黑鹤说： 我一会就到那去！ 
English: After reading, the venerable master said to the black crane, "I'll be there in a minute!"

古文：尊师语夫人曰： 与安期生间阔千年，不值南游，无因访话。 
现代文：尊师对夫人说： 我和安期生阔别一千多年了，不遇上南游，也没有机会来访问他。 
English: His respected teacher said to his wife, "I have been separated from Ahn Ji-soo for more than a thousand years. I have never traveled to the south, nor have I had the opportunity to visit him.

古文：夫人遂促侍女进馔，玉器光洁。
现代文：夫人于是就催促侍女快把吃的东西端上来。
English: The lady then urged the maid to quickly bring up the food.

古文：夫人对食，而二子不得饷。
现代文：端上来的食品盛在光洁的玉器里。
English: The food is served in a polished jade bowl.

古文：尊师曰： 二子虽未合饷，然为求人间之食而饷之。 
现代文：夫人与尊师相对着吃饭。但是元柳二人没有得到吃的。
English: His wife was eating across from him, but the two men did not get any food.

古文：夫人曰： 然！ 即别进馔，乃人间味也。
现代文：尊师说： 这两个人虽然不应让他们和我们一起吃，但是应该找些人间的食物给他们吃。 夫人说： 说得是！ 
English: The venerable master said, "Although these two people should not be allowed to eat with us, we should find some human food for them to eat." The lady said, "That's right!

古文：尊师食毕，怀中出丹箓一卷而授夫人。
现代文：于是就另外给元柳二人端来了食物，是人间的味道。尊师吃完饭，从怀里取出一卷红色篆书交给夫人。
English: Therefore, food with a human taste was served to the two Motoyanagi. After the meal, the venerable master took out a red scroll from his arms and handed it to his wife.

古文：夫人拜而受之，遂告去。
现代文：夫人行礼接过来。于是尊师告辞要走。
English: His wife bowed and took over. Then the venerable teacher left.

古文：回顾二子曰： 子有道骨，归乃不难；然邂逅相遇，合有灵药相贶。
现代文：他回头看看元柳二人说： 你们二人有道骨，回去是不难的，但是不期而遇，是应该有灵药相赠的。
English: He looked back at the two of them and said, "You two have a backbone, it won't be hard to go back, but if you run into each other unexpectedly, you should have a gift of elixir.

古文：子但宿分自有师，吾不当为子师耳。 
现代文：你们由于有前缘，自然会有老师，我不适合作你们的老师罢了。 
English: Since you have a head start, you will naturally have teachers. I'm just not the right person to be your teacher.

古文：二子拜。
现代文：元柳二人一齐下拜。
English: The two Motoyanagi bowed together.

古文：尊师遂去。俄海上有武夫，长数丈，衣金甲，仗剑而进曰： 奉使天真清道不谨，法当显戮，今已行刑。 
现代文：他上前说： 奉使天真在路上警戒不谨慎，依法应该处决示众，现在已经处决完了。 于是就快步沉没下去。
English: He stepped forward and said, "It was imprudent of me to warn Naozhen on the road, according to the law, I should have executed the demonstrators, and now the execution is over," and then he sank at a fast pace.

古文：遂趋而没。夫人命侍女紫衣凤冠者曰： 可送客去。而所乘者何？ 
现代文：夫人对一个穿紫衣戴凤冠的侍女说： 可以送两位客人走了，可是让他乘坐什么东西呢？ 
English: His wife said to a maid in purple and a crown of phoenixes, "You can send two guests away, but what will you give him to ride in?"

古文：侍女曰： 有百花桥可驭二子。 
现代文：侍女说： 有一座百花桥可以驾御他们两个。 
English: The chambermaid said, "There is a bridge of a hundred flowers that can carry them both."

古文：二子感谢拜别。
现代文：元柳二人表示感谢，行礼告别。
English: The two Motoyanagi expressed their gratitude and bade farewell.

古文：夫人赠以玉壶一枚，高尺余。
现代文：夫人把一把玉壶赠给他们。壶高一尺多。
English: His wife gave them a jade jug. The jug is more than a foot high.

古文：夫人命笔题玉壶诗赠曰： 来从一叶舟中来，去向百花桥上去。
现代文：夫人拿起笔来在壶上题诗相赠说： 来从一叶舟中来，去向百花桥上去。
English: The lady took up a pen to write a poem on the pot and said: Come, come from the one-leaf boat, go to the hundred-flower bridge.

古文：若到人间扣玉壶。鸳鸯自解分明语。 
现代文：若到人间扣玉壶，鸳鸯自解分明语。 
English: If a jade jug is found in the world, it will be self-solved.

古文：俄有桥长数百步，栏槛之上，皆有异花。
现代文：顷刻间，有一座几百步长的桥出现在水面上，桥的栏杆上，全都是奇异的花草。
English: In an instant, a bridge several hundred paces long appeared on the surface of the water. On the railing of the bridge, there were all strange flowers and plants.

古文：二子于花间潜窥，见千龙万蛇，遽相交绕为桥之柱。
现代文：元柳二人从花草间偷偷地窥视，见千万条龙蛇，迅速地互相盘缠在一起成为桥的柱子。
English: Peeping furtively from among the flowers and plants, the two Yuan Liu saw tens of thousands of dragons and snakes, quickly entangled with each other to become the pillars of the bridge.

古文：又见昔海上兽，已身首异处，浮于波上。
现代文：又看见以前见到的那个海上巨兽，已被砍下脑袋，漂在水面上。
English: He also saw the sea monster he had seen before, its head cut off and floating on the water.

古文：二子因诘使者。
现代文：元柳二人就问使者这是怎么回事。
English: The two men asked the messenger what was going on.

古文：使者曰： 此兽为不知二君故也。 
现代文：使者说： 这兽是因为不知道你们二人来了才被杀的。 
English: The messenger said, "The beast was killed because it didn't know you two were coming."

古文：使者曰： 我不当为使而送子，盖有深意欲奉托，强为此行。 
现代文：使者又说： 我不应该作为使者来送你们，是有一种深切的心意要拜托你们，就硬来了。 
English: And the messenger said, It is not meet for me to send unto you: but I came beseeching you with my whole heart.

古文：遂襟带间解一琥珀合子，中有物隐隐若蜘蛛形状，谓二子曰： 吾辈水仙也。
现代文：于是使者从襟带之间解下一个琥珀盒子，盒子里有一个隐隐约约像蜘蛛的东西。使者对二人说： 我们是水仙。
English: So the messenger unfastened an amber box from between the straps, and in the box was something that vaguely resembled a spider. The messenger said to the two: We are Narcissus.

古文：水仙阴也，而无男子。
现代文：水仙都是阴性的，没有男的。
English: Daffodils are all female, there are no males.

古文：吾昔遇番禺少年，情之至而有子，未三岁，合弃之。夫人命与南岳神为子，其来久矣。
现代文：我以前遇见一位番禺县的青年，我们的感情极好，而且生了孩子。孩子长到三岁，应该扔掉，夫人让送给南岳神当儿子。这已经很久了。
English: I once met a young man from Panyu County. We had a great relationship and had a child together. The child was three years old and should have been thrown away, but my wife wanted to give him to Nanyue Shen as a son. This was a long time ago.

古文：闻南岳回雁峰使者，有事于水府。返日，凭寄吾子所弄玉环往，而使者隐之，吾颇为恨。
现代文：听说，南岳回雁峰的一个使者，有事到水府来，返回时，我求他把我儿子玩弄的一个玉环捎去，而他竟然把玉环昧下了。
English: I heard that a messenger from Nanyue back to Yanfeng came to Suifu for some reason. When he returned, I begged him to take away a jade ring that my son had been playing with, and he actually took the jade ring.

古文：望二君子为持此合子至回雁峰下，访使者庙而投之，当有异变。
现代文：我很怨恨。希望你们二位替我拿着这个盒子到回雁峰下，打听到使者庙，把这个盒子扔进去。
English: I am very resentful. I hope you two will take this box for me to go back to the foot of the Wild Goose Peak, find out about the Envoy Temple, and throw this box in.

古文：倘得玉环，为送吾子。
现代文：扔进去之后，应该有一个不寻常的变化。如果找到了那玉环，请代我送给儿子。
English: If you find the ring, please give it to my son for me.

古文：吾子亦自当有报效耳。
现代文：我儿子也自然会报答你们。
English: My son will naturally repay you.

古文：慎勿启之。 
现代文：千万不可打开这盒子！ 
English: Do not open this box!

古文：二子受之，谓使者曰： 夫人诗云： 若到人间扣玉壶，鸳鸯自解分明语。 
现代文：元柳二人接过盒子，问使者说： 夫人的诗说： 若到人间扣玉壶，鸳鸯自解分明语。 
English: The two Yuanlius took the box and asked the messenger, "My wife's poem says, 'If you come across a pot of jade, you must find out the meaning for yourself.'

古文：何也？ 
现代文：是什么意思？ 
English: What is it for?

古文：曰： 子归有事，但扣玉壶，当有鸳鸯应之，事无不从矣。 
现代文：使者说： 你们回去之后，如果有事，只要敲一下玉壶，就会有一对鸳鸯答应，叫它们干什么没有不顺从的。 
English: The messenger said, "After you go back, if you have any problems, just knock on the jade pot, and a pair of doves will agree to do whatever you tell them to do.

古文：又曰： 玉虚尊师云，吾辈自有师，师复是谁？ 
现代文：又说： 玉虚尊师说：我们自然会有老师，我们的老师又是谁呢？ 
English: He also said, "We naturally have teachers, but who are our teachers?"

古文：曰： 南岳太极先生耳。当自遇之。 
现代文：使者说： 是南岳的太极先生，你们会自己遇上的。 
English: The messenger said, "It is Mr. Taiji from Nanyue. You will meet him yourself."

古文：遂与使者告别。
现代文：于是元柳二人与使者告别。
English: As a result, the two Motoyanagi bid farewell to the messenger.

古文：桥之尽所，即昔日合浦之维舟处，回视已无桥矣。
现代文：桥的尽头，就是以前在合浦县海岸停船的地方。回头一看，已经没有桥了。
English: The end of the bridge is where boats used to stop on the coast of Hepu County. Looking back, there is no bridge anymore.

古文：二子询之，时已一十二年。
现代文：二人一打听，时间已经过去了十二年。
English: Twelve years have passed since the two of them last spoke.

古文：欢、爱二州亲属，已殒谢矣。
现代文：欢州、爱州的亲属，已经死去了。
English: Relatives from Hanzhou and Aizhou have died.

古文：问道将归衡山，中途因馁而扣壶，遂有鸳鸯语曰： 若欲饮食，前行自遇耳。 
现代文：他们打听道路，回到衡山去，半路上因为饿了就敲壶。于是就有鸳鸯说： 如果想得到饮食，往前走自然会遇上的。 
English: They asked for directions and went back to Hengshan. Halfway there, they knocked on the kettle because they were hungry. So there was a baboon saying: "If you want to get something to eat, you'll meet it as you go along."

古文：俄而道左有盘馔丰备，二子食之。
现代文：一会儿，道边有一桌丰盛的饭菜，二人便饱餐一顿。
English: After a while, there was a table full of food on the side of the road, and the two of them had a full meal.

古文：而数日不思他味。
现代文：几天里，他们再也不想吃东西。
English: For a few days, they didn't want to eat.

古文：寻即达家。
现代文：不久便回到家中。
English: He soon returned home.

古文：昔日童稚，已弱冠矣。
现代文：以前的儿童，如今已经长成大人了。
English: Former children have now grown into adults.

古文：然二子妻各谢世已三昼。家人辈悲喜不胜，曰： 人云郎君亡没大海，服阕已九秋矣。 
现代文：然而二人的妻子，分别死去已经三天了，家人们不胜悲喜，说： 人家说郎君死在大海里，服丧三年之后，又九年了。 
English: However, the wives of the two men, who died three days apart, the families were overcome with grief and joy, saying: People say that my husband died in the sea, after three years of mourning, another nine years.

古文：二子厌人世，体以清虚，睹妻子丧，不甚悲感，遂相与直抵回雁峰，访使者庙，以合子投之。
现代文：元柳二人因为体内清静虚无，对人世已经厌倦，见了妻子的丧事，也不怎么悲伤。于是他们一起来到回雁峰，打听使者庙，把盒子扔了进去。
English: Because of the stillness and emptiness in their bodies, the two Yuanlius were tired of the world, and when they saw their wife's funeral, they were not very sad. So they came to Huiyanfeng together, inquired about the Envoy Temple, and threw the box in.

古文：倏有黑龙长数丈，激风喷电，折树揭屋，霹雳一声而庙立碎。
现代文：倏地有一条几丈长的黑龙，激起大风，喷吐电光，折断树木，揭毁房屋，一声霹雳，庙立刻就碎了。
English: Suddenly, there was a black dragon several feet long, stirring up a gale, spewing lightning, snapping trees, demolishing houses, and with a single bang, the temple was immediately shattered.

古文：二子战栗，不敢熟视。
现代文：二人吓得浑身战栗，不敢睁眼看。
English: The two of them were so scared that they were trembling all over and did not dare to open their eyes.

古文：空中乃有掷玉环者。
现代文：空中果然有人将一只玉环扔了下来。
English: Someone did indeed throw a jade ring down from the sky.

古文：二子取之而送南岳庙。
现代文：二人拾起玉环，送到南岳庙。
English: The two picked up the jade ring and took it to Nangyue Temple.

古文：及归，有黄衣少年，持二金合子，各到二子家曰： 郎君令持此药，曰还魂膏，而报二君子。
现代文：等到回到家里的时候，有一个穿黄衣服的年轻人，拿着两个金盒子，分别到二人的家里说： 我家主人让我拿着这药，这药叫还魂膏，是来报答二位君子的。
English: When they got home, a young man in yellow robes, carrying two gold boxes, went to each of the two houses and said, "My master asked me to take this medicine, which is called spirit balm, to repay the two gentlemen.

古文：家有毙者，虽一甲子，犹能涂顶而活。 
现代文：家里有死了的人，即使是六十年了，也可以把药膏涂到头顶上把他救活。 
English: If someone in your family has been dead for sixty years, you can put ointment on the top of his head and bring him back to life.

古文：受之而使者不见。
现代文：接下药膏之后，使者就不见了。
English: After applying the ointment, the messenger disappeared.

古文：二子遂以活妻室，后共寻云水，访太极先生，而曾无影响，闷却归。
现代文：二人于是分别用药膏救活了妻子。后来又一起云游寻找太极先生，都没有找到太极先生的踪影，就闷闷不乐地回来了。
English: The two of them then separately used ointment to revive his wife. Later, they went on a journey together to look for Mr. Taiji. When they couldn't find any trace of Mr. Taiji, they returned sullenly.

古文：因大雪，见大叟负樵而鬻，二子哀其衰迈，饮之以酒，睹樵担上有太极字，遂礼之为师，以玉壶告之。
现代文：因为下大雪，二人见一位老汉担柴卖，很可怜老汉的衰弱和老迈，就把酒给老汉喝。看到柴担上有 太极 字样，二人便拜为老师，把玉壶的事告诉了他。
English: Because it was snowing heavily, the two of them saw an old man carrying firewood and selling it. They felt very sorry for the old man's weakness and old age, so they gave the old man some wine to drink. When they saw the word "Taichi" on the pile of firewood, the two of them worshipped him as a teacher and told him about the jade pot.

古文：叟曰： 吾贮玉液者，亡来数十甲子。甚喜再见。 
现代文：老汉说： 这是我用来装酒的壶，丢了几十个六十年了，又见到它很是高兴。 
English: The old man said, "This is the jug I used to fill with wine. I lost dozens of jugs over the past sixty years. I am very happy to see it again.

古文：二子因随诣祝融峰，自此而得道，不重见耳。
现代文：元柳二人于是跟随老汉到祝融峰去了。从此二人得道成仙，不再出现在人世间。
English: The two Motoyanagi then followed the old man to Zhurong Peak. From then on, the two became immortals and no longer appeared in the world.

