古文：徐广，字野民，东莞姑幕人也。父藻，都水使者。
现代文：徐广字野民，东莞姑幕人，父亲徐藻，官至都水使者。
English: Xu Guang is a wild man, Dongguan is his aunt, his father is Xu Zang, and he is an official water messenger.

古文：兄邈，太子前卫率。
现代文：兄长徐邈，官至太子前卫帅。
English: His elder brother, Xu Yao, rose through the ranks to become the prince's vanguard.

古文：家世好学，至广尤精，百家数术，无不研览。
现代文：徐广家世世代代都非常爱好读书。到徐广时尤其研究精深。诸子百家、阴阳术数，无不研究。
English: The generations of Xu Guang's family have been very fond of reading. When they came to Xu Guang, they were particularly keen on research. They have studied hundreds of schools, yin and yang operations, and so on.

古文：谢玄为州，辟广从事西曹。
现代文：谢玄当本州刺史，用徐广为从事西曹。
English: When Xie Xuan was a historian in Honshu, he used Xu Guang as his assistant.

古文：又谯王司马恬镇北参军。
现代文：他又当谯王司马恬镇北参军。
English: He also joined the army in the north of Simaqin Town.

古文：晋孝武帝以广博学，除为秘书郎，校书秘阁，增置职僚。
现代文：晋朝的孝武帝因为徐广博学多才，任他为秘书郎，在秘阁中校书，给他增加助手官员。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Jin Dynasty, because of Xu Guang's erudition and versatility, appointed him as a secretary, a teacher in the secret cabinet, and added assistant officials to him.

古文：转员外散骑侍郎，领校书如故。隆安中，尚书令王珣举为祠部郎。
现代文：他再转任员外散骑侍郎，校书还照旧，隆安年中，尚书令王王旬推荐他当祠部郎。
English: He was then transferred to the post of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and the school book was still as before. In the middle of the Heian period, Wang Wangjun recommended him to be an ancestral minister.

古文：李太后薨，广议服曰： 太皇太后名位允正，体同皇极，理制备尽，情礼弥申。《阳秋》之义，母以子贵。
现代文：李太后逝世，徐广谈论服丧说： 太皇太后名位中正，是皇帝的生父祖母，礼仪都要准备充分，情义要得以发扬。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Li, Xu Guang talked about the funeral and said: The Dowager Empress Dowager's name is Zhongzheng, and she is the emperor's great-grandmother. The etiquette should be well prepared, and the sentiment should be carried forward.

古文：既称夫人，礼服从正，故成风显夫人之号，文公服三年之丧。
现代文：《阳秋》认为，母亲因儿子尊贵自己也尊贵。既然称为夫人，礼服应完全按正式皇后待遇，所以《成风》大书夫人名号，文公为她服孝三年。
English: "Yangqiu" believes that the mother is also respected because her son is respected. Since she is called the wife, the dress should be completely in accordance with the official treatment of the queen, so "Chengfeng" is the name of the lady of the big book, and the scholar has served her for three years.

古文：子于父之所生，体尊义重。
现代文：孙子对于父亲的生母，血统亲近，情义深重。
English: For the biological parents of the father, the son is more important than the body.

古文：且礼祖不厌孙，固宜遂服无屈。
现代文：况且尊礼祖父母并不压迫孙子。本来应该守孝不亏，而因情势规定礼制。
English: Moreover, grandparents do not oppress their grandchildren. Originally, filial piety should not be lost, but because of the situation, the rules of etiquette prevail.

古文：而缘情立制，若嫌明文不存，则疑斯从重。
现代文：如果觉得以前没有明文规定，那么在怀疑两者之中，应该选择礼重的那一种。
English: However, the system was established due to human customs, and if there is no clear evidence, then it will be suspected that this is in accordance with the mourning dress.

古文：谓应同于为祖母后，齐衰三年。 
现代文：应该属于作为祖母后人看，为祖母服孝三年。 
English: It should be seen as a grandma's posterity, and it should be three years of filial piety for the grandmother.

古文：服从其议。
现代文：当时朝廷采用了他的提议。
English: At that time, the imperial court adopted his proposal.

古文：时会稽王世子元显录尚书，欲使百僚致敬，台内使广立议，由是内外并执下官礼，广常为愧恨焉。
现代文：当时会稽王的世子司马元显为录尚书事，想叫朝中百官向他致敬，官中叫徐广提议，由此内外大臣都要守部下礼仪致敬于司马元显。徐广常常愧恨不已。
English: At that time, Sima Yuanxian, the descendant of the king's censor, wanted to have hundreds of officials in the dynasty pay homage to him, and one of the officials, Xu Guang, proposed that the ministers at home and abroad should pay homage to Sima Yuanxian according to the etiquette of their subordinates. Xu Guang was often filled with regret.

古文：元显引为中军参军，迁领军长史。
现代文：元显荐他当中军参军，迁任领军长史。
English: Yuan Xian recommended him to join the Chinese army, and he became the leader of the army for a long time.

古文：桓玄辅政，以为大将军文学祭酒。
现代文：桓玄辅佐晋朝，用徐广当大将军文学祭酒。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Kuan Xuan's aide-de-camp, Xu Guang, was used to brew the General's Literary Festival Liquor.

古文：义熙初，高祖使撰车服仪注，乃除镇军咨议参军，领记室。
现代文：义熙初年，高祖叫他写《车服仪注》，于是任他为镇军谘仪参军兼记室官。
English: In the first year of Yixi, Gao Zu asked him to write "Car Clothing Etiquette Note," so he appointed him as a township army advisory officer, a member of the army and a recorder.

古文：封乐成县五等侯。
现代文：封他为乐成县五等侯。
English: He was given the title of Lecheng County 5th Mayor.

古文：转员外散骑常侍，领著作郎。
现代文：再转任员外散骑常侍兼著作郎。
English: He was then transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding aide-de-camp and writer.

古文：二年，尚书奏曰： 臣闻左史述言，右官书事，《乘》、《志》显于晋、郑，《阳秋》著乎鲁史。
现代文：二年尚书上奏说： 臣下听说左史官记述言语，右史官记叙事情。《乘》《志》等书在晋国、郑国显名，《阳秋》在鲁国著称。
English: In the second year of Shang's reign, he wrote: "My subjects have heard that the left historian records words, while the right historian records events. Books such as "Ji" and "Zhi" are famous in Jin and Zheng, and "Yangqiu" is famous in Lu.

古文：自皇代有造，中兴晋祀，道风帝典，焕乎史策。
现代文：从皇家缔造以来中兴晋朝，文道风气、帝王典籍，在史书中焕然可见。
English: Since the founding of the imperial dynasty, the culture and customs of the Jin Dynasty, as well as the imperial classics, can be clearly seen in the history books.

古文：而太和以降，世历三朝，玄风圣迹，倏为畴古。
现代文：而从太和以下，已经历三个皇帝，风流道韵圣贤事迹，差不多变成了古代历史。
English: But from Taihe and below, there have been three emperors, and the stories of the saints and sages have almost become ancient history.

古文：臣等参详，宜敕著作郎徐广撰成国史。 
现代文：我们这些人商议，应该叫著作佐郎徐广撰写国史。 
English: Those of us who are deliberating should ask the author, Sarang Xu Guang, to write a national history.

古文：诏曰： 先朝至德光被，未著方策，宜流风缅代，永贻将来者也。便敕撰集。 
现代文：诏书说： 先朝大德广布，没有写在史书上，应该把它们记下来，永远留给后人，可以叫徐广撰写。 
English: The edict said: The great deeds of the previous dynasty were not recorded in the history books. They should be written down and left to posterity forever. Xu Guang could be asked to write them down.

古文：六年，迁散骑常侍，又领徐州大中正，转正员常侍。
现代文：六年徐广任散骑常侍，又兼任徐州大中正，再转任正员常侍。
English: For six years, Xu Guang served as a horseback riding attendant, and also served as the president of Xuzhou University, and then became a regular attendant.

古文：时有风雹为灾，广献书高祖曰： 风雹变未必为灾，古之圣贤辄惧而修己，所以兴政化而隆德教也。
现代文：当时有大风冰雹为害。徐广上书高祖说： 大风冰雹未必是天灾，古代圣贤对此总是因恐惧而修德，这其实是一种振兴政治而兴旺朝廷的方法。
English: At that time, there was a great wind and hailstorm. Xu Guang Shangshu Gaozu said: The great wind and hailstorm is not necessarily a natural disaster. The ancient sages were always afraid of this and cultivated virtue. This is actually a way to revitalize politics and make the imperial court flourish.

古文：尝忝服事，宿眷未忘，思竭尘露，率诚于习。
现代文：我曾经在你的下属做事，你的深恩一直没忘，我希望竭尽智力，所以说话直率。
English: I used to work under you. I have never forgotten your deep kindness. I hope to exhaust my intelligence, so I speak frankly.

古文：明公初建义旗，匡复宗社，神武应运，信宿平夷。
现代文：明公刚起义时，神武超人，应天顺民，迅速平定叛逆。
English: At the time of the Ming Gonggang Uprising, Shenwu Superman, in response to the will of the people, quickly quelled the rebellion.

古文：且恭俭谦约，虚心匪懈，来苏之化，功用若神。
现代文：而且为人谦虚谨慎，节俭朴素，日夜操劳，所以使人民迅速得以恢复安定，效果卓著非凡。
English: Moreover, he was modest and prudent, frugal and simple, and worked hard day and night, so that the people could quickly restore stability, and the effect was extraordinary.

古文：顷事故既多，刑德并用，战功殷积，报叙难尽，万机繁凑，固应难速，且小细烦密，群下多惧。
现代文：近来事务很多，战功也很多，有些人的功劳不容易被记录，国政万千条，自然很难一下解决各种杂事。一些法令太过细密，朝中群臣很是害怕。
English: Recently, there have been a lot of affairs, a lot of war achievements, some people's achievements are not easy to be recorded, and there are thousands of national policies. Naturally, it is difficult to solve all kinds of miscellaneous matters at once. Some decrees are too detailed, and the courtiers in the central government are very afraid.

古文：又谷帛丰贱，而民情不劝；禁司互设，而劫盗多有，诚由俗弊未易整，而望深未易炳。
现代文：谷物很多，价格很低，但人民的性格没有变好。行政机构设置重叠，反而盗贼常常出现，抢劫不时发生。确实是因为风俗坏了不容易改变，而一些人的怨恨不容易消除。
English: There is a lot of grain, the price is very low, but the character of the people has not changed for the better. The administrative institutions are overlapping, but thieves often appear, and robberies occur from time to time. It is indeed because customs are not easy to change, and some people's grudges are not easy to eliminate.

古文：追思义熙之始，如有不同，何者？
现代文：回忆义熙初年，跟现在有些不同，为什么呢？
English: My recollection of the first year of Yixi is somewhat different from what it is now. Why?

古文：好安愿逸，万物之大趣，习旧骇新，凡识所不免。
现代文：爱好安定是百姓的天性，习惯传统，讨厌异端，是人性的共同点。
English: The love of stability is the nature of the people, the habit of tradition, hate heresy, is a common point of human nature.

古文：要当俯顺群情，抑扬随俗，则朝野欢泰，具瞻允康矣。
现代文：总之赏罚应当顺应民情，褒贬顺从人心。那么朝廷和民间就平安无事，且公的声望便更加崇高了。
English: In short, rewards and punishments should be in accordance with the people's feelings, and praise and criticism should be in accordance with the people's hearts. Then the imperial court and the people will be safe, and the public reputation will be more noble.

古文：言无可采，愿矜其愚款之志。 
现代文：我的意见没有很深的意义，只希望明公悄悄体会我的一点忠心。 
English: My opinion does not have a deep meaning, I only hope that Ming Gong will quietly experience a little of my loyalty.

古文：又转大司农，领著作郎皆如故。
现代文：徐广接着转任大司龙。兼任的著作佐郎还照旧。
English: Xu Guang was then transferred to the post of Daesirong. The concurrent post of Bokusakusaro remained unchanged.

古文：十二年，《晋纪》成，凡四十六卷，表上之。迁秘书监。
现代文：十二年，《晋记》成功，共四十六卷。徐广上献朝廷，他则迁任秘书监。
English: In the 12th year, "Jin Ji" was a success, a total of 46 volumes. Xu Guang presented it to the imperial court, and he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：初，桓玄篡位，安帝出宫，广陪列悲恸，哀动左右。
现代文：当初，桓玄篡夺皇位，安帝从皇宫搬出，徐广陪同时悲痛万分，深深地感动了左右的人。
English: At the beginning, Huan Xuan usurped the imperial throne, Emperor An moved out of the imperial palace, and Xu Guang accompanied him at the same time with great sorrow, which deeply moved people on both sides.

古文：及高祖受禅，恭帝逊位，广又哀感，涕泗交流。
现代文：到了高祖接受安帝的禅让，晋恭帝退位时，徐广又非常悲哀，泪流满面。
English: When Emperor Gaozu accepted Emperor An's abdication and Emperor Jinguang abdicated, Xu Guang was very sad and in tears.

古文：谢晦见之，谓之曰： 徐公将无小过？ 
现代文：谢晦见他这样，便说： 徐先生这样作稍稍过分了点吧！ 
English: Seeing him like this, Xie Wei said: Mr. Xu has gone a little too far!

古文：广收泪答曰： 身与君不同。君佐命兴王，逢千载嘉运；身世荷晋德，实眷恋故主。 
现代文：徐广收住眼泪回答说： 我和你不同，你是新皇帝的佐命功臣，遇到千年的好机会；我自己曾蒙受晋朝的厚恩，确实眷恋旧主人。 
English: Xu Guang held back his tears and replied, "I am different from you. You are a meritorious vassal of the new emperor, and you have a good opportunity of a thousand years. I myself once received the benevolence of the Jin Dynasty, and I am indeed attached to the old master.

古文：因更歔欷。
现代文：于是更加伤心感叹。
English: So I sighed even more sadly.

古文：永初元年，诏曰： 秘书监徐广，学优行谨，历位恭肃，可中散大夫。 
现代文：永初元年，高帝下诏书说： 秘书监徐广学识渊博，品德纯朴，在任上恭敬严肃，可任中散大夫。 
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, Emperor Gao issued an edict saying: Secretary-supervisor Xu Guang is well-educated, has a simple moral character, is respectful and serious in his duties, and can be appointed as a doctor of Zhongshan.

古文：广上表曰： 臣年时衰耄，朝敬永阙，端居都邑，徒增替怠。
现代文：徐广上表说： 我年老力衰，上朝朝拜总是缺席，在都城居住，只会更增加我的懈惰行为。
English: Xu Guang said on the table: I am old and weak, I am always absent from the last morning worship, and living in the capital will only increase my lazy behavior.

古文：臣坟墓在晋陵，臣又生长京口，恋旧怀远，每感暮心。
现代文：我家祖坟在晋陵，自己又在京口长大成人，我常恋忆故旧，回忆当年，每每使我暮年心绪深深感动。
English: My family's ancestral tomb is in Jinling, and I grew up in Jingkou. I often love to remember the old days, and the memories of that year have always deeply touched my old age.

古文：息道玄谬荷朝恩，忝宰此邑，乞相随之官，归终桑梓。
现代文：我儿子徐道玄才能不高，但蒙受皇恩，正在京口作县令，我请求随同他在那里，回到故乡养老。
English: My son, Xu Daoxuan, is not very talented, but he has received the grace of the emperor and is working as a county magistrate in Jingkou. I ask you to accompany him there and return to my hometown to retire.

古文：微志获申，殒没无恨。 
现代文：我的心意如果得以实现，即使是死了也没有怨恨。 
English: If my wish comes true, even if I die, I won't hold a grudge.

古文：许之，赠赐甚厚。
现代文：请求被高祖同意。赠他赐他物质非常丰厚。
English: The request was agreed to by Gao Zu, who gave him a very rich gift.

古文：性好读书，老犹不倦。
现代文：徐广一向好学，到老都手不释卷。
English: Xu Guang has always been eager to learn, and has never stopped learning.

古文：元嘉二年，卒，时年七十四。
现代文：元嘉二年，徐广逝世，享年七十四岁。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Xu Guang died at the age of seventy-four.

古文：《答礼问》百余条，用于今世。
现代文：他写的《答礼问》一百多条，在今日仍在被人运用。
English: He wrote more than a hundred "Antony Questions," which are still used by people today.

