古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻人之合于天地道也，内有五脏，以应五音、五色、五时、五味、五位也；外有六腑，以应六律。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我听说人体的组成是与天地万物相对应的。其在内，有属阴的五脏与自然界之五音、五色、五时、五味以及五方位等相对应；其在外，有属阳的六腑与六律相对应。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked Qibo, "I have heard that the composition of the human body corresponds to all things in heaven and earth. Among them, the five viscera belonging to the yin correspond to the five sounds, five colors, five times, five tastes and five directions in nature; outside of it, the six gills belonging to the yang correspond to the six laws.

古文：六律建阴阳诸经而合之十二月、十二辰、十二节、十二经水、十二时、十二经脉者，此五脏六腑之所以应天道。
现代文：六律有阴阳之分所以共有十二音律，故人体就与之相应而有阴阳共十二经脉；十二条经脉又与的十二月份、十二辰、十二节气、十二条河流以及十二时辰等相对应。以上就是人体之五脏六腑与自然界各种现象相对应的情况。
English: As there are yin and yang in the six laws, there are a total of twelve tones, so the human body has a corresponding yin and yang with a total of twelve meridians; the twelve meridians also correspond to the month of December, the twelve hours, the twelve solar terms, the twelve rivers, and the twelve hours, etc. The above is the situation in which the five viscera of the human body correspond to various phenomena in nature.

古文：夫十二经脉者，人之所以生，病之所以成，人之所以治，病之所以起。
现代文：十二经脉，人凭借它活着，疾病凭借它而生成，人凭借它来治疗，疾病也凭借它得以痊愈。
English: The twelve meridians, by virtue of which man lives, by virtue of which disease is produced, by virtue of which man is cured, and by virtue of which disease is cured.

古文：学之所始，工之所止也。
现代文：它是学习医道的开始，也是高明医生终极研习的目标。
English: It is the beginning of the study of medicine, and it is also the goal of the ultimate study of a skilled doctor.

古文：粗之所易，上之所难也。
现代文：粗粗地掌握它会很容易，而要深究其根本则很难。
English: It is easy to grasp it roughly, but it is difficult to get to the bottom of it.

古文：请问其离合、出入奈何？
现代文：现在，为了能更深入地研究它，我想请问你十二经脉之出入离合的情况是怎样的呢？
English: Now, in order to be able to study it more deeply, I would like to ask you what is the situation of the ingress and egress of the twelve meridians?

古文：岐伯稽首再拜曰：明乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯很恭谨地再三执拜说：您问得真是英明啊！
English: Qibo very respectfully and repeatedly said: Your question is really wise!

古文：此粗之所过，上之所息也，请卒言之。
现代文：这是医技粗率者最易忽略的问题，只有医技高明的人才会悉心地去研究它。下面，就让我来详细地说明一下吧。
English: This is a question which is most easily overlooked by the unskilled in medicine, and only the skilled in medicine study it with care. Let me explain it in detail below.

古文：足太阳之正，别入于腘中，其一道下尻五寸，别入于肛，属于膀胱，散之肾，循膂，当心入散；直者，从膂上出于项，复属于太阳，此为一经也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经别行的正经，一条别行进入于膝盖后面的腘窝之中，与足少阴肾经的经脉相合而上行；另一条上行到臀部下五寸处，再向上别行进入于肛门，并向内行于腹中，而联属于本经所属的脏腑膀胱，散行至肾脏，此后再沿着脊柱两旁肌肉的内部向上走行，到达心脏所在的部位，然后就进入于心并分散于心的内部；其直行的部分，从脊柱两旁的肌肉处向上走行并出于项部，此后再联属于足太阳膀胱经本经的经脉，从而使内外合为一经。
English: The solar plexus passes through the meridians of the other lines. One line enters the armpit behind the knee and goes up to meet the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the foot, anus, and kidney. The other line goes up to five inches below the buttocks, and then goes up to the anus, and goes into the abdomen, and is connected to the bladder belonging to the meridians, and goes to the kidney, and then travels up along the inside of the muscles on both sides of the spine to reach the part where the heart is, and then enters the heart and is dispersed inside the heart. The straight part of it,

古文：足少阴之正，至腘中，别走太阳而合，上至肾，当十四椎，出属带脉；直者，系舌本，复出于项，合于太阳，此为一合。
现代文：这就是足太阳膀胱经在本经之外别行的一条正经。足少阴肾经别行的正经，走行到膝盖后面的腘窝中，再别行走向足太阳膀胱经并与之相会合，继而向上走行到肾脏，并在第十四脊椎处向外走行而联属于带脉：其直行的部分，从肾脏上行而系于舌根部，然后再向外走行至头项部，而与足太阳膀胱经的经脉相会合。
English: This is a meridian that runs outside the meridian. The meridian that runs outside the meridian is the meridian that runs outside the meridian. The meridian that runs outside the meridian is the meridian that runs outside the meridian. The meridian that runs outside the meridian runs into the armpit behind the knee. The meridian that runs into the meridian runs into the meridian that runs into the kidney. The meridian that runs outside the meridian runs into the meridian that runs into the kidney. The meridian that runs outside the meridian runs into the meridian that runs into the kidney. The meridian that runs outside the meridian runs into the meridian that runs into

古文：成以诸阴之别，皆为正也。
现代文：这就是足太阳膀胱经与足少阴肾经这两条互为表里的经脉在六合之中所形成的第一合。
English: This is the first conjunction of the foot-sun-bladder meridian and the foot-sow-yin-kidney meridian, which are two meridians on the surface of each other.

古文：足少阳之正，绕髀，入毛际，合于厥阴，别者入季胁之间，循胸里，属胆，散之上肝，贯心，以上挟咽，出颐颌中，散于面，系目系，合少阳于外眦也。
现代文：这种表里两经相合的关系，都是由各条阴经之经别上行并联系于与其相表里之阳经的正经而形成的。所谓的经别，其实也都是正经，只不过是别道而行的正经罢了。足少阳胆经别行的正经，在绕行于大腿部之后，入于阴毛的边缘之中，而与足厥阴肝经相会合；其别行的分支，进入季胁之间，然后再沿着胸壁的内侧，入内联属于本经所属的脏腑胆，由此再散行至肝脏，并向上贯穿心部，此后再向上挟行于咽喉的两侧，出于腮部与颔部的中间，散于面部，联系于眼球内连于脑的脉络，最后与足少阴胆经的本经相合于外眼角处。
English: This relationship of the apparent conjunction of the two meridians is formed by the meridians of the yin meridians ascending and connecting with the meridians of the yang meridians on the opposite side of the meridians. The so-called meridians are actually meridians, but they are just meridians going in different directions. The meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the mer

古文：足厥阴之正，别跗上，上至毛际，合于少阳，与别俱行，此为二合也。
现代文：足厥阴肝经别行的正经，从足背部别行分出，上行到达阴毛的边缘，而与足少阳胆经的经脉相会合，此后它就与足少阳胆经之别行的正经一同向上走行。
English: The meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians of the meridians

古文：足阳明之正，上至髀，入于腹里，属胃，散之脾，上通于心，上循咽出于口，上頞䪼，还系目系，合于阳明也。
现代文：这就是足少阳胆经和足厥阴肝经这两条互为表里的经脉在六合之中所形成的第二合。足阳明胃经别行的正经，上行至大腿部，再向上进入腹中，而联属于本经所属的脏腑胃，由此再散行至脾脏，并上行连通于心，此后再沿着咽喉部向上走行，从口部出来，上行到鼻梁和眼眶部，环绕联系于眼球内连于脑的脉络，然后再与足阳明胃经的本经相会合。
English: This is the second of the six meridians formed by the two meridians of the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the greater yin, and the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang, the gall, and the foot, the lesser yang

古文：足太阴之正，上至髀，合于阳明，与别俱行，上结于咽，贯舌中，此为三合也。
现代文：足太阴脾经别行的正经，也上行至大腿部，而与足阳明胃经的经脉相会合，此后它就与足阳明胃经之别行的正经同向走行，并最终结络于咽喉部，贯穿于舌中。
English: The meridians of the meridians of the foot, yin, and spleen also travel up to the thigh, and meet with the meridians of the foot, yin, and stomach meridians. After that, it travels in the same direction as the meridians of the foot, yin, and stomach meridians, and finally connects in the throat, penetrating the tongue.

古文：手太阳之正，指地，别于肩解，入腋，走心，系小肠也。
现代文：这就是足阳明胃经和足太阴脾经这两条互为表里的经脉在六合之中所形成的第三合。
English: This is the third conjunction of the six conjunctions formed by the conjunction of the foot yang bright stomach meridian and the foot yin spleen meridian, both of which are meridians in the surface.

古文：手少阴之正，别入于渊腋两筋之间，属于心，上走喉咙，出于面，合目内眦，此为四合也。
现代文：手太阳小肠经别行的正经，是自上向下走行的，它从肩后的骨缝处别行分出，由此而进入腋下，走入心脏，并联系于本经所属的脏腑小肠。
English: The hand solar small intestine passes through another line of meridians and travels from top to bottom. It branches out from another line at the bone seam behind the shoulder, from which it enters the armpit, enters the heart, and connects to the small intestine, to which this meridian belongs.

古文：手少阳之正，指天，别于巅，入缺盆，下走三焦，散于胸中也。手心主之正，别下渊腋三寸，入胸中，别属三焦，出循喉咙，出耳后，合少阳完骨之下，此为五合也。
现代文：手少阴心经别行的正经，从本经别行分出之后，就走入到腋下三寸渊腋穴处的两筋之间，并联属于本经所属的脏腑心脏，由此再上行至喉咙，出于面部，而与手太阳小肠经的一条支脉会合于内眼角处。
English: The hand-less yin heart goes through the other line of the main line, and after being separated from the other line of the main line, it goes between the two lines to the three-inch abyss under the armpit, and is connected to the heart of the intestine, which belongs to the main line, and then goes up to the throat, out of the face, and joins a branch of the hand-sun small intestine line at the inner corner of the eye.

古文：手阳明之正，从手循膺乳，别于肩髃，入柱骨下，走大肠，属于肺，上循喉咙，出缺盆，合于阳明也。
现代文：手阳明大肠经别行的正经，从手部分出并向上走行，到达于胸部，之后再沿着侧胸与乳部的中间，别行出于肩髃穴所在的地方，由此再向上进入脊柱骨，其后再向下走行至本经所属的脏腑大肠，继而再折返向上，联属于肺脏，并沿着喉咙向上出于缺盆穴，而最终与手阳明大肠经的本经相会合。
English: The hand yangming large intestine passes through the other line of the main line, exits from the hand and travels up to the chest, then along the side of the chest and the middle of the breast, exits from the place where the scapula is located, and then up into the spine, and then travels down to the intestine and large intestine belonging to the main line, and then turns back up, connects to the lungs, and goes up along the throat from the pelvic cavity, and finally meets the main line of the hand yangming large intestine.

古文：手太阴之正，别入渊腋少阴之前，入走肺，散之大肠，上出缺盆，循喉咙，复合阳明，此六合也。
现代文：手太阴肺经别行的正经，从本经别行分出之后，就走行至渊腋穴处手少阴心经的前方，由此再进入体内并走行到本经所属的脏腑肺，进而再向下散行至大肠腑，此后它就折返上行，出于缺盆穴，并沿着喉咙走行，而与手阳明大肠经的经脉相会合。
English: The palmar-pancreatic meridian passes through the other meridians. After separating from the main meridians, it travels to the anterior part of the palmar-pancreatic meridian at the base of the pharyngeal fossa. From there, it enters the body and travels to the visceral-pancreatic meridians, which belong to the main meridians. It then travels down to the large intestine. After that, it turns back to the ascending direction, out of the pelvic cavity, and travels along the throat, where it meets the meridians of the palmar-pancreatic meridians.

