古文：苏代谓燕昭王白： 今有人于此，孝如曾参、孝己，信如尾生高，廉如鲍焦、史鰌，兼此三行以事王，奚如？ 
现代文：苏代对燕昭王说： 现在如果有这样一个入在此，像曾参，孝己那样孝顺，像尾生高那样守信，像鲍焦、史鳅那样廉洁，兼有这三种品行来侍奉大王，怎么样？ 
English: Su Dai said to Yan Zhao Wang: Now, if there is such a one who enters here, who is as filial as Zeng Zhan and Zeng Zhi, who is as faithful as Ousheng Gao, who is as incorruptible as Baojiao and Shi Yan, and who has these three qualities to serve the great king, how about it?

古文：王曰： 如是足矣。 
现代文：燕昭王说： 如此就够了。 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: That's enough.

古文：对曰： 足下以为足，则臣不事足下矣。
现代文：苏代回答说： 您认为这样就够了，那么臣下就不会侍奉您了。
English: Sudai replied, "If you think that this is enough, then your vassals will not serve you.

古文：臣且处无为之事，归耕乎周之上地，耕而食之，织而衣之。 
现代文：臣下就会做出无所作为的事，就会归耕于周朝的土地上，耕种吃饭，织布穿衣。 
English: The vassals would do nothing, and they would be farmed on the land of the Zhou Dynasty, farming and eating, weaving and dressing.

古文：王曰： 何故也？ 
现代文：燕昭王说： 这是什么缘故呢？ 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 孝如曾参、孝己，则不过养其亲其。
现代文：苏代回答说： 像曾参、孝己那样孝顺，那也不过是奉养双亲罢了。
English: Sudai replied, "Being as filial as Tsenzan and Takahito, that is nothing more than supporting their parents.

古文：信如尾生高，则不过不欺人耳。
现代文：像尾生高那样守信，那也不过是不欺骗别人罢了。
English: Keeping one's word, as Oosenga did, is no more than not deceiving others.

古文：廉如鲍焦、史鰌，则不过不窃人之财耳。
现代文：像鲍焦、史鳅那样廉洁，那也不过是不偷别人的钱财罢了。
English: To be as incorruptible as Bao Jiao and Shi Yan, it is nothing more than not stealing other people's money.

古文：今臣为进取者也。
现代文：如今臣下是一个有进取心的人。
English: Now my vassal is an enterprising person.

古文：臣以为廉不与身俱达，义不与生俱立。
现代文：臣下认为廉洁不会同自身一道显贵，信义不会同生命一起存在。
English: Subordinates believe that integrity will not be distinguished with themselves, and loyalty will not exist with life.

古文：仁义者，自完之道也，非进取之术也。 
现代文：仁义，不过是自我完善的法则，不是追求进取的手段。 
English: Righteousness is nothing more than the law of self-improvement, not a means of pursuing advancement.

古文：王曰： 自忧不足乎？ 
现代文：燕昭王说： 自我完善还不够吗？ 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: Is self-improvement not enough?

古文：对曰： 以臣忧为足，则秦不出殽塞，齐不出营丘，楚不出疏章。
现代文：苏代回答说： 如果认为自我完善就够了，那么秦国就不会从杀山的边塞出兵，齐国就不会从营丘出兵，楚国也不会兵出沮章河。
English: Su Dai replied: If you think that self-improvement is enough, then Qin will not send troops from the border fortress of Qishan, Qi will not send troops from Yingqiu, and Chu will not send troops from Dezhanghe.

古文：三王代位，五伯改政，皆以不臣忧故也。
现代文：三王更替，五霸轮换执政，都是因为不仅仅局限于自我完善的缘故。
English: The replacement of the three kings and the rotation of the five overlords in power are not limited to self-improvement.

古文：若自忧而足，则臣亦之周负笼耳，何为烦大王之廷耶？
现代文：如果仅是自我完善就够了，那么臣下也就回到周地的家乡去种地了，何必还讨扰大王的朝庭呢？
English: If only self-improvement is enough, then the vassals will also return to Zhou's hometown to farm, why bother the great king's court?

古文：昔者楚取章武，诸侯北面而朝。
现代文：从前，楚国攻取章武，诸侯们到北面去朝拜。
English: Once upon a time, when the State of Chu conquered Zhangwu, the princes went to the north to worship.

古文：秦取西山，诸侯西面而朝。
现代文：秦国攻占西山，诸侯们到西面去朝拜。
English: Qin conquered the West Mountain, and the princes went to the west to worship.

古文：曩者使燕毋去周室之上，则诸侯不为别马而朝矣。
现代文：当初，如果不让燕国军队从周朝的上地撤离，那么诸侯们就不会调转车辆去朝拜别国了。
English: At first, if Yan troops were not allowed to withdraw from Shangdi in the Zhou Dynasty, then the princes would not have diverted their vehicles to worship other countries.

古文：臣闻之，善为事者，先量其国之大小，而揆其兵之强弱，故功可成，而名可立也。
现代文：臣下听说，善于处理国事的人，先衡量一下自己国家的大小，再考虑一下自己兵力的强弱，因此可以功成名就。
English: Subordinates heard that a person who is good at handling state affairs should first measure the size of his country, and then consider the strength of his army, so that he can achieve success.

古文：不能为事者，不先量其国之大小，不揆其兵之强弱，故功不可成而名不可立也。
现代文：不善于处理政事的人，不能够先衡量自己国家的大小，也不去考虑自己兵力的强弱，所以不能功成名就。
English: Those who are not good at handling political affairs cannot measure the size of their country first, nor consider the strength of their military, so they cannot succeed.

古文：今王有东向伐齐之心，而愚臣知之。 
现代文：观在大玉有向东攻打齐目的想法，愚匝知道。 
English: Gu Gu has the idea of attacking the east in the big ball, and he knows it.

古文：王曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：燕昭王说： 您怎么知道的。 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: How did you know?

古文：对曰： 矜戟砥剑，登丘东向而叹，是以愚臣知之。
现代文：苏代回答说： 您常常手持长戟或磨砺宝锄，登上山丘向东叹息，因此愚臣就知道了。
English: Sudai replied, "You often hold a long scepter or a sharpened treasure scepter in your hand, climb the hills and sigh to the east, so the fools know it.

古文：今夫乌获举千钧之重，行年八十，而求扶持。
现代文：即使如今有乌获这样的力士，能举起千钧重量，年龄到了八十岁的时候也要人搀扶。
English: Even if today there is a wrestler like Wu Guo, who can lift thousands of pounds, when he reaches the age of eighty, he will still need help.

古文：故齐虽强国也，西劳于宋，南罢于楚，则齐军可败，而河间可取。 
现代文：所以齐国虽然是强国，由于在西面的宋国劳师动众，在南面的楚国使军队疲乏，那么齐国军队就可以被击败，齐国的河闯也可以被攻取。 
English: Therefore, although Qi is a powerful country, because the Song Dynasty in the west has mobilized the masses, and the Chu Dynasty in the south has exhausted the army, the Qi army can be defeated, and the river crossing of Qi can also be captured.

古文：燕王曰： 善。
现代文：燕昭王说： 太好了。
English: Yan Zhao Wang said: That's great.

古文：吾请拜子为上卿，奉子车百乘，子以此为寡人东游于齐，何如？ 
现代文：请允许我拜您为上卿，送给您马车百辆，您按照这种说法替寡人到东面的齐国去离间游说，怎么样？ 
English: Please allow me to bow to you as a noble and give you a hundred horse-drawn carriages. According to this statement, how about you lobby for a few people to go to the eastern country of Qi to separate?

古文：对曰： 足下以爱之故与，则何不与爱子与诸舅、叔父，负床之孙，不得，而乃以与无能之臣，何也？
现代文：苏代说： 您这是由于偏爱我的缘故才赏赐我，那么为什么不赏赐您的爱子及各位舅父、叔父、那些靠床而立还不会走路的孙子呢？他们得不到这些，却把这些赏赐给无能的臣下，为什么？
English: Sudai said, "You are rewarding me because you like me, so why don't you reward your beloved son and uncles, those grandchildren who can't stand up from their beds and can't walk? They don't get these things, but you give these rewards to your incompetent vassals. Why?"

古文：王之论臣，何如人哉？
现代文：大王评价臣下，是怎样一种人呢？
English: What kind of person is the great king who evaluates his vassals?

古文：今臣之所以事足下者，忠信也。
现代文：观在臣下所以侍奉您，是为尽忠守信。
English: I serve you because I am your vassal, and it is my duty to be faithful to you.

古文：恐以忠信之故，见罪于左右。 
现代文：臣下掇心因为尽忠守信的缘故，被大王左右的大臣怪罪。 
English: Because of his loyalty and faithfulness, his vassals were blamed by the ministers around the great king.

古文：王曰： 安有为人臣尽其力，竭其能，而得罪者乎？ 
现代文：燕昭王说： 哪有做人臣的用尽自己的力量，竭尽自己的才能，反而获罪的呢？ 
English: Yan Zhao Wang said, "Where is there a courtier who has exhausted his strength, exhausted his talent, but has been punished?

古文：对曰： 臣请为王譬。
现代文：苏代回答说： 臣下请求为大王打个比方。
English: Sudai replied, "The vassal asked me to make a metaphor for the great king.

古文：昔周之上地尝有之。
现代文：从前周朝的上地曾经有这样一件事。
English: There was such a thing in Shangdi in the previous Zhou Dynasty.

古文：其丈夫官三年不归，其妻爱人。
现代文：作丈夫的在外做官三年不归。他的妻子与人私通。
English: Her husband has been out of the country for three years, working as an official, and his wife is having an affair.

古文：其所爱者曰： 子之丈夫来，则且奈何乎？ 
现代文：和她私通的那个人说： 你的丈夫要回来了，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: And he that lay with her said, Behold, thy husband cometh: what shall I do?

古文：其妻曰： 勿忧也，吾已为药酒而待其来矣。 
现代文：他的妻子说， 不要担心，我已经猴备了毒药酒，就等他回来呢。 
English: His wife said, "Don't worry, I've got a bottle of poison waiting for him when he gets back."

古文：已而其丈夫果来，于是因令其妾酌药酒而进之。
现代文：不久，她的丈夫果然回来了，乎是她让侍妾斟上毒药酒给丈夫进去。
English: Soon after, her husband did indeed return, and it was she who had the concubine pour the poisoned wine into her husband.

古文：其妾知之，半道而立。虑曰： 吾以此饮吾主父，则杀吾主父；以此事告吾主父，则逐吾主母。
现代文：侍妾知道这件事，走到半路站住了，自己考虑： 我把这毒酒给男主人喝，就会杀死男主人把远件事告诉我的男主人，就会赶走我的女主人。
English: The concubine knew about this and stopped in the middle of the road, thinking to herself: If I give this poisoned wine to my husband, I will kill him. If I tell my husband about this faraway affair, he will drive my mistress away.

古文：与杀吾父、逐吾主母者，宁佯踬而覆之。 
现代文：与其杀死男主人、赶走女主人，我宁可假装跌倒弄翻酒杯。 
English: Rather than kill the host and drive away the hostess, I'd rather pretend to fall over and knock over a wine glass.

古文：于是因佯僵而仆之。
现代文：于是就假装跌倒弄洒药酒。
English: So he pretended to fall down and spill the medicinal wine.

古文：其妻曰： 为子之远行来之，故为美酒，今妾奉而仆之。 
现代文：他的妻子说： 为您远行归来，所以准备了美酒，现在侍蜜端酒跌倒洒掉了。 
English: His wife said, "We prepared good wine for your return from the journey, but the waiter dropped it and spilled it."

古文：其丈夫不知，缚其妾而笞之。
现代文：她的丈夫不知实情，就绑起侍妾鞭打。
English: Her husband, not knowing the truth, tied up the concubine and whipped her.

古文：故妾所以笞者，忠信也。
现代文：所以侍妾被鞭打的原因，就是为了尽忠守信。
English: Therefore, the reason why the concubine was whipped was to be faithful.

古文：今臣为足下使于齐，恐忠信不谕于左右也。
现代文：如今臣下为您到齐国出使，担心我尽忠守信不被大王的左右大臣所理解。
English: Now that your vassals have sent you to Qi, I am worried that my loyalty will not be understood by the great king's left and right ministers.

古文：臣闻之曰： 万乘之主，不制于人臣。
现代文：臣下听说：拥有万辆兵车的君王：不受臣子的挟制。
English: The vassals heard: the king who owns ten thousand chariots is not constrained by his vassals.

古文：十乘之家，不制于众人。
现代文：有十辆马车的家长，不受众人的控制。
English: Parents with ten carriages, uncontrollable by the masses.

古文：疋夫徒步之士，不制于妻妾。
现代文：一般无车可乘的士人，不受妻妾的限制。
English: Generally, taxi drivers who do not have a car are not subject to the restrictions of their wives and concubines.

古文：而又况于当世之贤主乎?
现代文：更何况是当代贤明的君王呢？
English: And what about the wise kings of our time?

古文：臣请行矣，愿足下之无制于群臣也。 
现代文：臣下请求出发了，希望您不要受群臣的挟制。 
English: Your vassals have requested your departure. I hope you will not be swayed by the vassals.

