古文：欲以敌国之民之所不安，正俗所难敌国兵之所长，耗兵也。
现代文：想利用敌国百姓所不能接受的东西，纠正该国的习俗去对付敌国军队的长处，只能是耗费兵力。
English: If you want to take advantage of what is unacceptable to the enemy's people and correct the country's customs to deal with the strengths of the enemy's army, you can only expend troops.

古文：欲强多国之所寡，以应敌国之所多，速屈之兵也。
现代文：想勉强用许多本国缺少的东西，去对付敌国所富有的东西，那只会使本国军队很快失败。
English: If you try to use what your country lacks against what your enemy has, your army will fail very quickly.

古文：备固，不能难敌之器用，陵兵也。
现代文：即使防御坚固，也抵挡不住敌军使用利器，敌军使用利器便使己方军队衰颓。
English: Even if the defense is solid, it cannot resist the enemy's use of sharp weapons, and the enemy's use of sharp weapons will cause its own army to decline.

古文：器用不利，敌之备固，挫兵也。
现代文：用不锋利的兵器去攻击敌军，一定不能攻破敌军坚固的防御，而只会使本国军队受挫。
English: Attacking the enemy with blunt weapons will certainly not break through the enemy's solid defense, but will only frustrate the national army.

古文：兵不明者也。善阵，知背向，知地形，而兵数困，不明于国胜、兵胜者也。
现代文：将领善于布阵，了解地势的背向，也懂得利用地形，但用兵却屡陷困境，这是因为不明白只有国家昌盛，用兵才能取胜的道理。
English: Generals are good at deploying troops, understand the reverse of the terrain, and know how to use the terrain, but the use of troops has repeatedly fallen into difficulties. This is because they do not understand that the use of troops can only win if the country is prosperous.

古文：民兵不能昌大功，不知会者也。
现代文：用兵不能立大功，是由于不懂得集中兵力作战。
English: It is because they do not know how to concentrate their forces in battle that they are unable to achieve great results with their troops.

古文：兵夫民，不知过者也。
现代文：用兵的人失去民心，是由于不能认识自己的错误。
English: Those who use soldiers lose the hearts of the people because they cannot recognize their own mistakes.

古文：兵用力多功少，不知时者也。
现代文：用兵的人使用很多兵力，而建的战功却很少，这是由于不会把握时机。
English: A man of war uses much force, but gains little, because he does not know when to use it.

古文：兵不能胜大患，不能合民心者也。
现代文：用兵的人不能避免大灾祸，是因为他的行动不合民心。
English: He who uses soldiers cannot avoid disaster, because his actions are not in accordance with the people's will.

古文：兵多悔，信疑者也。
现代文：用兵的人常常后悔，这是由于他轻信而多疑。
English: The recruiter often regrets it, because he was gullible and suspicious.

古文：兵不能见福祸于未形，不知备者也。
现代文：用兵的人在胜利和灾祸尚未出现之时不能预见，是由于不懂得要做好战前准备。
English: Those who employ soldiers cannot foresee victory and disaster before they occur, because they do not know how to prepare for war.

古文：兵见善而怠，时至而疑，去非而弗能居，止道也。
现代文：用兵的人见到有利条件就松懈，在有利时机到来时又迟疑不决，离开了不利境地仍然不能保持部队稳定，那只能走向灭亡了。
English: When the conditions are favorable, the soldiers are slack. When the time is favorable, they hesitate. When the situation is unfavorable, they still cannot maintain the stability of the troops, and they can only go to ruin.

古文：贪而廉，宠而敬，弱而强，柔而，起道也。行止道者，天地弗能兴也。
现代文：虽有贪心但能保持廉洁，虽得宠但能保持恭谨，虽然弱小但能图强，虽然性格软弱但能表现刚强，这是走向兴盛的途径。走灭亡道路的人，天和地都不能让他兴盛。
English: Although greedy, he can maintain integrity; although favored, he can maintain respect; although weak, he can be strong; although weak in character, he can show strength. This is the way to prosperity. Those who walk the road of perdition, heaven and earth cannot let him prosper.

古文：行起道者，天地
现代文：走兴盛道路的人，天地
English: Those who take the road of prosperity, heaven and earth will be prosperous.

