古文：姚仲孙，字茂宗，本曹南著姓，曾祖仁嗣，陈州商水令，因家焉。
现代文：姚仲孙，字茂宗。本出身于曹南地区大望族。曾祖父姚仁嗣，官任陈州商水县令，因而建家于此。
English: Yao Zhongsun, a.k.a. Maozong. Originally from Cao'nan, he was a member of a prominent family. His great-grandfather, Yao Renzhi, was the governor of Chenzhou's Shangshui County, which is why he founded his family here.

古文：父晔，举进士第一，官至著作佐郎。
现代文：父亲姚晔，举进士第一，官至著作佐郎。
English: His father, Yao Yao, was the first to be promoted to the rank of academician, and his official title was Saro.

古文：仲孙早孤，事母孝。
现代文：姚仲孙早年父亲就死了，侍奉母亲特别孝顺。
English: Yao Zhongsun's father died at an early age, and he served his mother with particular filial piety.

古文：擢进士第，补许州司理参军。
现代文：姚仲孙说 ：希望不要急于处决，等慢慢查清再说。 
English: Yao Zhongsun said, "I hope they don't rush to execute him, and wait for the investigation to be over."

古文：民妇马氏夫被杀，指里胥尝有求而其夫不应，以为里胥杀之，官捕系辞服。仲孙疑其枉，知州王嗣宗怒曰： 若敢以身任之耶？ 仲孙曰： 幸毋遽决，冀得徐辨。 后两月，果得杀人者。
现代文：两个月后，果然查得真凶。
English: Two months later, the real culprit was found.

古文：调邢州推官，徙资州。
现代文：调邢州推官，后调资州。
English: Transferring state officials, then transferring state funds.

古文：转运使檄仲孙诣富顺监按疑狱，全活数十人。
现代文：转运使向姚仲孙下达公文要他去富顺监调查疑案。数十人因此得活。
English: The transporter sent a document to Yao Zhongsun asking him to go to Fushun to investigate the suspicious case. Dozens of people were saved as a result.

古文：资州更二守，皆惽老，事多决于仲孙。
现代文：姚仲孙在任期间，资州更换了两名太守，但都是老朽之人，事情大多由姚仲孙决断。
English: During Yao Zhongsun's tenure, Zhizhou replaced two eunuchs, but they were old men, and most of the matters were decided by Yao Zhongsun.

古文：改大理寺丞、知建昌县。
现代文：后又改任大理寺丞，知建昌县。
English: Later, he was reappointed to the post of Dali Temple chancellor, Zhijianchang County.

古文：初，建昌运茶抵南康，或露积于道，间为霖潦所败，主吏至破产不能偿。
现代文：早先，建昌将出产的茶叶运到南康时，一路堆积于道，有的因日晒雨淋而腐烂。主管此事的官吏即使倾家荡产也不能赔偿腐烂茶叶的价值。
English: Earlier, when the tea produced by Jianchang was transported to Nankang, it was piled up along the way, and some rotted due to the sun and rain. The officials in charge of this matter could not compensate the value of the rotting tea even if they were bankrupt.

古文：仲孙为券，吏民输山木，即高阜为仓，邑人利之。
现代文：姚仲孙到建昌后，即与老百姓签订合同，让人民将山木送至高阜之地，建立仓库。邑人因此受益匪浅。
English: After Yao Zhongsun arrived in Jianchang, he signed a contract with the people to let the people send the mountain trees to the land of Gaofu to build a warehouse. The people of the town have benefited a lot.

古文：徙通判彭州。尝以天下久无事，不可以弛兵备，因上前世御戎料敌之策，名《防边龟鉴》。
现代文：迁彭州通判后，常常认为天下虽久无战事，但兵备之事不可废弛。故此向皇帝上前世御戎料敌之策，名叫《防边龟鉴》。
English: After the decision to move the capital to Pengzhou, it was often thought that although there had been no war in the world for a long time, military preparedness should not be neglected. Therefore, the strategy of supplying the enemy with troops to the emperor in the previous life was called "Border Guard."

古文：通判睦州，徙滁州。
现代文：再任睦州通判，调任滁州。
English: He was reappointed as Mutsuzhou magistrate and transferred to Ganzhou.

古文：岁旱饥，有诏发官粟以赈民，而主吏不时给。仲孙既至州，立劾主吏，夜索丁籍尽给之。
现代文：当年闹旱灾，皇帝曾下诏发官粮赈济百姓，但此地主管官吏却没有按时将救济粮发放下去，姚仲孙到任后，力主弹劾主管家吏，晚上即按照户籍名册全部将赈粮发了下去。
English: In that year's drought, the emperor had issued an edict to issue official grain to help the people, but the officials in charge here did not distribute the relief grain on time. After Yao Zhongsun took office, he urged the impeachment of the officials in charge, and in the evening, all the grain was distributed according to the household register.

古文：累迁尚书屯田员外郎。
现代文：又升尚书屯田员外郎。
English: He was also promoted to Shosho Tondenkidan Wairo.

古文：王鬷守益州，辟通判州事。
现代文：王当益州太守时，召姚仲孙为州通判。
English: When Wang Dang was the governor of Yizhou, he invited Yao Zhongsun to be the chief judge of the province.

古文：郭皇后暴薨，中外莫不疑文应置毒者。 出文应为泰州兵马钤辖，又称疾留，复论奏，乃亟去。
现代文：不久又被朝廷召回为右司谏。入内都知阎文应申请做都知，姚仲孙历数他的罪状，向皇帝说： 当皇上在太庙斋宿时，阎文应曾叱骂医官，声音传到行宫。郭皇后暴死，内外之人都怀疑是阎文应害死的。 皇帝于是将阎文应派出朝廷去做泰州兵马钤辖。但又以其有病为由将其留在宫中。姚仲孙再次上奏。
English: Soon after, he was recalled by the imperial court as the right secretary. After entering the imperial capital, Yan Wen Ying applied to be the imperial secretary. Yao Zhongsun enumerated his crimes and said to the emperor: When the emperor was staying at the temple, Yan Wen Ying had scolded the medical officer, and the sound reached the palace. The Guo empress died violently, and people at home and abroad suspected that Yan Wen Ying had killed her. The emperor then sent Yan Wen Ying to the imperial court to do the Taizhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses. But he left him in the palace on the grounds that he was ill. Yao Zhongsun played again.

古文：以起居舍人知谏院，管勾国子监，以尚书户部员外郎兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：阎文应终于立即出宫了。以起居舍人的身份任知谏院，管理国子监。又以尚书户部员外郎兼侍御史知杂事。
English: Yan Wen Ying finally left the palace immediately. He was appointed to Zhishuin as a resident, managing the state's child supervision. He was also appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Department and the attendant of the Imperial Historian.

古文：时谏议大夫十二员，仲孙曰： 谏议大夫盖朝廷之选，不宜以岁月序进。
现代文：当时朝中共有谏议大夫十二人。姚仲孙向皇帝建议说 ：谏议大夫都是朝廷选官，不应以年岁为序晋升提拔。
English: At that time, there were a total of twelve doctors in the imperial court. Yao Zhongsun suggested to the emperor that the doctors in the imperial court should not be promoted in order of age.

古文：请艰其选，以处材望之臣，余悉次补卿监。 乃诏当选者奏听旨。
现代文：只留那些有才望之臣。其余的都去替补卿监之位。 皇帝乃下诏将当选者上报朝廷并听候御旨。
English: Only the most talented vassals were to be retained, and the rest were to be promoted to the position of deputy chancellor. The emperor then issued an imperial edict to report the candidates to the imperial court and await the emperor's command.

古文：先是，诸路复提点刑狱，还朝多擢为省府官。
现代文：这之前，各路再任提点刑狱者，回朝之后大多被擢升为省府官。
English: Prior to this, every road was re-appointed with a certain number of prisoners, and after returning to the North, most of them were promoted to provincial officials.

古文：仲孙请第其课为三等升黜之，即诏仲孙司考课之法。
现代文：姚仲孙请考核他们的政绩，将结果分为三等以作为升黜标准。皇帝再下诏要姚仲孙制定考课办法。
English: Yao Zhongsun asked them to evaluate their political achievements and divide the results into three grades as a promotion standard. The emperor then ordered Yao Zhongsun to formulate an examination method.

古文：历三司户部、度支、盐铁副使，进天章阁待制、河北都转运使。
现代文：姚仲孙历任三司户部、度支、盐铁副使，再进天章阁待制、河北都转运使。
English: Yao Zhongsun successively served as deputy envoy of the Third Division of the Household Department, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Salt and Iron, and then entered the Tianzhangge standby system and was transferred to Hebei Province.

古文：大修城垒兵备，仁宗赐诏褒之。
现代文：在职期间，他大修城垒兵备。宋仁宗为此下诏对他进行褒奖。
English: During his tenure, he overhauled the city's fortifications, for which Song Renzong issued a decree to commend him.

古文：权知澶州，河坏明公埽，绝浮桥，仲孙亲总役堤上，埽一夕复完。
现代文：权知澶州时，黄河水害，冲坏了明公堤，浮桥亦被冲断。姚仲孙亲临堤上指挥，一夜努力又将堤修复了。
English: When Quanzhi was in Luzhou, the Yellow River flood damaged the Ming Gong embankment and the floating bridge was also broken. Yao Zhongsun personally went to the embankment to command, and worked hard overnight to repair the embankment.

古文：权知大名府，夜领禁兵塞金堤决河。
现代文：权知大名府时，又晚上率禁军堵塞黄河边的金堤决口。
English: In the evening, when he was the powerful daimyo, he led the forbidden army to block the break of the gold dike along the Yellow River.

古文：是岁，澶、魏虽大水，民不及患。
现代文：这年，澶州、魏州虽发大水，但老百姓并未受到洪水的威胁。
English: This year, although there was a lot of water in Zhangzhou and Weizhou, the people were not threatened by floods.

古文：进礼部郎中、龙图阁学士，徙陕西都转运使，未行，权三司使事。
现代文：再进礼部郎中、龙图阁学士。后又迁升陕西都转运使，但没有成行。代理三司使事。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and bachelor of Longtu Ge. Later, he was promoted to envoy to Shaanxi Province, but he did not go there. He acted as envoy to the three provinces.

古文：还，勾当三班院，知通进、银台司，最后知应天府，以刑部侍郎致仕，卒。
现代文：皇帝又将西北备边之事嘱托于他。招募军队，增加驻兵，以及赏赐、聘问等所需费用，多得不可计算，但这一切姚仲孙都能尽心经营。即使病了，也一点不耽误公事。后来是因为一个小吏伪造文符，姚仲孙受到株连。黜为蔡州知州。
English: The emperor also entrusted him with the preparation of the northwest border. The costs required for recruiting troops, increasing the number of soldiers stationed, as well as rewards and interviews, are too many to count, but Yao Zhongsun can do his best. Even if he is sick, he will not delay the business at all. Later, because a minor official forged a document, Yao Zhongsun was punished by the company. He was named Caizhou Zhizhou.

古文：陈从易，字简夫，泉州晋江人。
现代文：因母亲去世哭瞎了一只眼睛，不久即死去。陈从易，字简夫，泉州晋江人。
English: Because of his mother's death, he cried and lost an eye, and died soon after. Chen Zongyi, also known as Jianfu, was from Jinjiang, Quanzhou.

古文：进士及第，为岚州团练推官，再调彭州军事推官。
现代文：考中进士及第，任岚州团练推官，再调彭州军事推官。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle school entrance examination and the first, appointed as the commander of the Bozhou regimental drill, and then transferred to the military commander of Pengzhou.

古文：王均盗据成都，连陷绵、汉诸郡，彭人谋杀兵马都监以应之。
现代文：王均占据成都后，接连又攻陷绵、汉等郡，彭州人密谋杀死兵马都监来响应王均。
English: After Wang Jun occupied Chengdu, he successively invaded Mian, Han and other counties. The people of Pengzhou conspired to kill the military and equestrian inspector to respond to Wang Jun.

古文：时从易摄州事，斩其首谋者，召余党晓以祸福，贳之，众皆呼悦。
现代文：当时陈从易正辅助处理彭州事务。他斩杀了首谋，再招来余众向他们讲明祸福关系，并赦免了他们，使得他们心里都十分服气。
English: At that time, Chen Congyizheng assisted in handling the affairs of Pengzhou. He killed the mastermind, then invited the rest of the people to explain to them the relationship between good and evil, and pardoned them, so that they were fully convinced in their hearts.

古文：乃率厉将吏，修严守械，戒其家僮积薪舍后，曰： 吾力不足以守，当死于此。 贼闻其有备，不敢入境。
现代文：陈从易于是率领得力将吏，修理守械。又告诫自己的家仆在屋后堆满柴草，说： 我们的实力不足以守住彭州，就与此共存亡。 王均听闻彭州有了防备，遂不敢入境。
English: Chen Congyi then led his able generals to repair the defenses, and warned his servants to fill the back of the house with firewood, saying, "Our strength is not enough to defend Pengzhou, so we must live and die with it." Wang Jun heard that Pengzhou was prepared, so he did not dare to enter.

古文：贼平，安抚使王钦若以状闻，召为秘书省著作佐郎、大理寺详断官。
现代文：王均平定后安抚使王钦若上报了陈从易的表现，朝廷召他为秘书省著作佐郎、大理寺详断官。
English: After Wang Jianping was subdued, Wang Qinruo, the pacifying envoy, reported Chen Congyi's performance, and the imperial court called him to be the secretary of the provincial literary secretary and the detailed adjudicator of the Dali Temple.

古文：迁太常博士，出知邵武军。
现代文：升太常博士，出任邵武军知事。
English: Dr. Sheng Taizhong, served as Governor of Shaowujun.

古文：预修《册府元龟》，改监察御史。
现代文：参与《册府元龟》的修撰工作。再改任监察御史。
English: He participated in the work of compiling "Chofu Genkake" and was then reassigned to the position of inspector of history.

古文：真宗宴近臣崇和殿，召从易预，赋诗称旨。
现代文：宋真宗在崇和殿宴请近臣。陈从易亦在其列，并赋诗赞美皇帝。
English: Song Zhenzong invited his close vassals to a banquet at the Chonghe Hall. Chen Congyi was also among them, and composed a poem to praise the emperor.

古文：迁侍御史，改刑部员外郎、直史馆、知虔州。
现代文：升侍御史，改任刑部员外郎、直史馆、知虔州。
English: He was promoted to the position of imperial secretary of history, and was reassigned to the positions of criminal justice department member of Wairo, the Imperial History Museum, and Chigenshu.

古文：会岁大饥，有持杖盗取民谷者，请一切减死论，凡生者千余人。
现代文：当年大饥，有人持棍去盗抢别人的粮食。陈从易力请减免他们的死罪，因此获救者千余人。
English: At the time of the Great Famine, there were people who used sticks to steal other people's grain. Chen Congyi asked Chen Congyi to commute their death sentences. As a result, more than a thousand people were saved.

古文：天禧中，坐荐送别头进士失实，降工部员外郎。
现代文：宋真宗天禧中，陈从易因推荐别头进士失实，被降为工部员外郎。
English: In Song Zhenzong's jubilee year, Chen Congyi was demoted to the position of a member of the engineering department because his recommendation to be promoted to the position was untrue.

古文：以父老，求乡郡。
现代文：以父亲年老为由，请求回乡。
English: Citing his father's old age, he asked to return to his hometown.

古文：宰相寇准恶其疏己，除吉州，从易因对自言改福州。
现代文：宰相寇准报复他曾经向皇帝上疏说他的坏话，没有同意他的请求，却将其黜至吉州。陈从易后借与皇帝奏对机会自己申请改派福州知州。
English: In retaliation, Prime Minister Qozhun, who had spoken ill of him to the emperor, did not agree to his request, but sent him to Jizhou. Chen Congyi later took the opportunity to play against the emperor to apply for the reassignment of Fuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：未行，遭父丧，服除，纠察在京刑狱，出为湖南转运使，徙知荆南，擢太常少卿、直昭文馆、知广州。
现代文：还没成行，即遇父亲去世。
English: His father died before he could make the trip.

古文：又坐尝课校太清楼书字非伪误而从易妄判窜之，降直史馆。
现代文：服丧完毕，审理京城刑狱案件。出为湖南转运使，迁知荆南，升太常少卿、直昭文馆、知广州。又因在点校太清楼书字时妄加改窜并非错误的文字，被降到直史馆。
English: After the funeral, he was put on trial for the Beijing Capital Punishment Prison Case. He was promoted to Hunan Transfer Envoy, moved to Jingnan, promoted to Vice-Minister, Jiu Zhaobin Museum, and Guangzhou. He was also demoted to Jiu Zhaobin Museum for deliberately altering the words of the Taiching Building.

古文：明年复职。
现代文：第二年才官复原职。
English: He was only reinstated the following year.

古文：在广三年，以清德闻。
现代文：在广州三年，以清廉著称。
English: He has been in Guangzhou for three years and is known for his integrity.

古文：入为左司郎中、知制诰。初，景德后，文士以雕靡相尚，一时学者乡之，而从易独守不变。与杨大雅相厚善，皆好古笃行，时朝廷矫文章之弊，故并进二人，以风天下。兼史馆修撰，迁左谏议大夫。命使契丹，以年老，辞不行。
现代文：他们两人都好古笃行。当时朝廷纠正文章中的这种华而不实的弊端，所以皇帝将陈从易、杨大雅二人之文风推荐给文人，让他们的文风流于全国。后兼任史馆修撰，迁升左谏议大夫。皇帝命其出使契丹，陈从易以年老为由，辞差未去。
English: At that time, the imperial court corrected this glamorous defect in the article, so the emperor recommended the writing style of Chen Congyi and Yang Daya to writers, so that their writing style would flow throughout the country. Later, he also served as a reviewer for the history museum and was promoted to the doctor of left-hand speech. The emperor ordered him to send Khitan, but Chen Congyi did not resign on the grounds of old age.

古文：又辞职请补郡，进龙图阁直学士、知杭州，卒。
现代文：后又辞朝廷之职请补乡郡之官。进为龙图阁直学士，任杭州知州。
English: Later, he resigned from his post at the imperial court and asked to fill the post of the official of the township. He was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, and was appointed to Hangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：从易好学强记，为人激直少容，喜别白是非，多面折人，或尤其过，从易终不变。
现代文：有人向他指出这一毛病，但陈从易却始终没有改变。
English: This problem was pointed out to him, but Chen Congyi never changed.

古文：王钦若最善之，尝谓人曰： 数日不见简夫，辄忽忽不怿。 及废居南京，时丁谓方用事，人畏谓，无敢往见钦若者。
现代文：王钦若与他最友善。王钦若曾与人说： 数日不见简夫，即会感到惶惶不舒服。 当他废官居南京时，丁谓正管事。大家都因害怕丁谓，没有人敢去看王钦若。
English: If Wang Qin had been the friendliest with him. If Wang Qin had said to Wang Qinru: "If I don't see Jianfu for a few days, I will feel uneasy and uncomfortable." When he retired and lived in Nanjing, Ding Zuo was in charge. Everyone was afraid of Ding Zuo, and no one dared to see Wang Qinruo.

古文：从易将使湖南，欲过之，遇汴水旱涸，遂告谓曰： 从易愿使湖外者，非独为贫也，亦以王公在宋，故就省之尔。
现代文：陈从易正准备出任湖南转运使，遇汴水旱涸，于是对丁谓说 ：从易愿意出使湖南，并非只因为那里贫困，也是因为王钦若在宋地，我想借此机会去看望他。
English: Chen Congyi was preparing to serve as a transfer envoy to Hunan, but when the floods dried up, he said to Ding: "Congyi is willing to send an envoy to Hunan, not only because of the poverty there, but also because if Wang Qin is in the Song Dynasty, I would like to take this opportunity to visit him."

古文：今汴涸，义不可从他道进，幸公许少留。 谓即大喜曰： 王公之门，独君为知我者。 留权纠察刑狱，从易不敢当，乃听归馆，须汴通乃行。
现代文：现在汴河干涸，又没办法走别的路线，希望丁公你能允许我暂留一段时间，等汴水涨了再走。 丁谓听后十分高兴，说： 王公门下，唯独你是了解我的人。 遂将其暂留帮助审理刑狱。陈从易不敢接受，于是由他自行决定回史馆。
English: Now that the Li River has dried up, and there is no way to take another route, I hope you can allow me to stay for a while until the water rises again. Ding was very happy after listening, saying: "Wang Gongmen, you are the only one who understands me." So he temporarily left it to help with the trial of the prison. Chen Zongyi did not dare to accept, so he decided to return to the history museum on his own.

古文：时寇准贬道州，谓又谓从易曰： 庐陵之事，可以释憾矣。 从易对曰： 当以故相事之尔。 谓有愧色。
现代文：不久汴水通行陈从易就走了。当时寇准被贬在道州，丁谓对陈从易说： 庐陵之事，可以不遗憾了。 陈从易对答说 ：应当将其当成旧宰相侍奉。 丁谓听说后面有愧色。
English: Not long after, Chen Congyi passed through Surabaya and left. At that time, Kojun was banished to Daozhou. Ding Zuan said to Chen Congyi, "Don't be sorry about the matter of Fuling." Chen Congyi replied, "You should treat him as a former prime minister." Ding Zuan heard that there was a sense of shame behind it.

古文：其行志多类此。
现代文：陈从易的言行大多就是这样。
English: Most of Chen Congyi's words and deeds are like this.

古文：所著《泉山集》二十卷，《中书制稿》五卷，《西清奏议》三卷。
现代文：其著作有《泉山集》二十卷、《中书制稿》五卷、《西清奏议》三卷。
English: His works include "Spring Mountain Collection" of 20 volumes, "Chinese Calligraphy Manuscript" of 5 volumes, "West Qing Recital" of 3 volumes.

