古文：果下樱桃檽枣柿底栎树实柿盘融峰梨六斤梨紫花梨胡榛子酸枣
现代文：果下樱桃檽枣柿底栎树实柿盘融峰梨六斤梨紫花梨胡榛子酸枣
English: Cherry jujube under the fruit, persimmon base, eucalyptus fruit, persimmon plate, melting peak, pear six catty, pear, purple flower, pear, hickory seed, acid jujube

古文：蒲萄王母蒲萄侯骚子蔓胡桃仙树实橄榄子东荒栗猴栗
现代文：蒲萄王母蒲萄侯骚子蔓胡桃仙树实橄榄子东荒栗猴栗
English: Blackcurrant King Mother Blackcurrant Hawthorn Vine Walnut Fairy Tree Nut Olive East Chestnut Monkey Chestnut

古文：瓜五色瓜瓜恶香
现代文：瓜五色瓜瓜恶香
English: Five-colored melon, foul-smelling melon

古文：菜蔓菁越蒜三蔬菠薐芥菹芥末水韭茄子树昆仑紫瓜茄子故事
现代文：菜蔓菁越蒜三蔬菠薐芥菹芥末水韭茄子树昆仑紫瓜茄子故事
English: Cucumber vinegar garlic three vegetables spinach mustard mustard mustard water lettuce eggplant tree Kunlun purple melon eggplant story

古文：儋崖瓠
现代文：儋崖瓠
English: 崖

古文：果下
现代文：果下
English: Goshita

古文：樱桃
现代文：樱桃
English: Cherry cider

古文：唐时新进士，尤重樱桃宴。
现代文：唐朝的时候，新中第的进士，非常重视樱桃宴。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the new middle-class scholars attached great importance to the cherry feast.

古文：乾符四年，刘邺第三子覃及第。
现代文：乾符四年，刘邺的三儿子刘覃及第。
English: In the fourth year of the Qianfu era, Liu Yao's third son, Liu Yao, became the first.

古文：时邺以故相镇淮南。
现代文：当时刘邺依仗故相镇守淮南。
English: At that time, Liu Bei relied on tradition to defend Huainan.

古文：敕邸吏曰： 以银一锭资醵置。 而覃所费往往数倍。
现代文：刘邺嘱咐在京城为他管理家园的小官说，可以出一锭银子让刘覃与其他新进士凑钱办樱桃宴。但是刘覃的花费往往是其父规定的几倍。
English: Liu Wei instructed the minor official who managed his home in Beijing to say that he could give out a pile of silver so that Liu Wei and other newcomers could pool their money to hold a cherry banquet. However, Liu Wei's expenses were often several times that of his father.

古文：邸吏以闻，邺命取足而已。
现代文：管家园的小官把这事儿说给刘邺知道，刘邺让他给取足就是。
English: The minor official in charge of the homestead told Liu Yao about this, and Liu Yao let him have it.

古文：会时及荐新，状头已下，方议醵率。覃潜遣人，厚以金帛，预购数十树矣。
现代文：正赶上荐新的时令，状元以下的人们正在商议凑钱的比率，刘覃便暗中派人，花了大量银两，预购了几十树樱桃。
English: Just in time for the new season, when people below the rank of vice-premier were discussing the ratio of collecting money, Liu Wei secretly sent someone, spent a lot of money, and pre-purchased dozens of cherry trees.

古文：于是独置是宴，大会公卿。
现代文：于是，由他独办了樱桃宴，大量邀请公侯卿相。
English: As a result, he held a cherry banquet on his own and invited a large number of princes and ministers.

古文：时京国樱桃初出，虽贵达未适口。
现代文：当时，京城里的樱桃刚刚上市，虽然价格昂贵，但是并不怎么好吃。
English: At that time, the cherry trees in the capital had just been put on the market. Although they were expensive, they didn't taste very good.

古文：而覃山积铺席，复和以糖酪。
现代文：刘覃却在席间堆积如山，加上其它糖果菜肴，真可谓丰盛。
English: Liu Ye, on the other hand, piled up like a mountain between the tables. Together with the other confectionery dishes, it was truly sumptuous.

古文：用享人蛮献一小盘，亦不啻数升。
现代文：随便让下人送人一小盘，送出去的也不下数升。
English: Just let the next person give away a small plate, and the one who gives it away will also get a few liters.

古文：以至参御辈，靡不沾足。
现代文：凡跟从人驾车人，没有一个不沾光的。
English: None of the drivers and attendants are clean.

古文：檽枣
现代文：檽枣
English: Jujube

古文：晋赵莹家，庭有檽枣树，婆娑异常，四远俱见。
现代文：晋代有个赵莹，他家院子里有一棵檽枣树。这棵枣树挺拔高大，枝叶婆娑，非同寻常。四处都可以远远就望见它。
English: There was a Zhao Ying in the Jin Dynasty. In the courtyard of his house, there was a jujube tree. This jujube tree was tall and straight, with unusual branches and leaves. It could be seen from far and wide.

古文：有望气者，访其邻里，问人云： 此家合有登宰辅者。 
现代文：有一位会看地气的术士打听赵莹的一个邻居说： 这一家应该有做宰相一类大官的，可有吗？ 邻居老头说： 没有。
English: A sorcerer who knows how to read the mood of the land asked a neighbor of Zhao Ying: Is it possible that this family should have a high-ranking official like the prime minister? The old neighbor said: No.

古文：里叟曰： 无之。然主人小字相儿，得非此乎？ 
现代文：但是这家主人的小名叫 相儿 ，该不会是此人要发迹了？ 
English: But the owner's nickname is Soner, could it be that this person is about to make a fortune?

古文：术士曰： 王气方盛，不在其身，当在其子孙。 
现代文：术士说： 这地方王气正盛，不体现在他本人身上，也应该体现在他的子孙身上。 
English: The sorcerer said: This is a place where the king's spirit is in full bloom. If it is not reflected in him, it should be reflected in his descendants.

古文：其后莹由太原判官大拜，出将入相。
现代文：这以后，赵莹由太原判官开始升了大官，出将入相，显赫一时。
English: After this, Zhao Ying began to rise from the Taiyuan judge to a high-ranking official, and became famous for a while.

古文：柿
现代文：柿
English: Persimmons

古文：俗谓柿树有七德：一寿，二多阴，三无鸟窠，四无虫，五霜叶可玩，六嘉实，七落叶肥大。
现代文：俗话说柿子树有 七德 ：一、活得时间长；二、树荫多；三、树上没有鸟窝；四、不遭虫害；五、霜叶可供玩赏；六、果子好吃；七、落叶肥大。
English: As the saying goes, persimmon trees have seven virtues: 1. They live a long time; 2. They have a lot of shade; 3. There are no bird's nests on the trees; 4. They are not affected by insects; 5. Frost leaves can be enjoyed; 6. The fruit is delicious; 7. Deciduous leaves are thick.

古文：底栎树实
现代文：底栎树实
English: ground birch sap

古文：阿驿，波斯呼为阿驿，拂林呼为底栎。
现代文：阿驿，波斯国叫它 阿驿 ，拂林国叫它 底栎 。
English: The country of Persia calls it Amun, and the country of the Amorites calls it Debir.

古文：树长丈四五。
现代文：树高一丈四五。
English: The tree is four and a half meters tall.

古文：枝叶繁茂。
现代文：枝叶繁密茂盛。
English: The branches and leaves are dense and luxuriant.

古文：叶有五出，似蜱麻。
现代文：叶有的五出，像蜱麻叶。
English: Some leaves have five petals, like nettle leaves.

古文：无花而实。
现代文：没有花而结果。
English: Without flowers, there is no result.

古文：实赤色，类蜱子。
现代文：果实是红色的，类似蜱麻籽。
English: The fruit is red, resembling castor seeds.

古文：味似干柿，而一年一熟。
现代文：果实的味道像干柿子，一年一熟。
English: The fruit tastes like dried persimmons and ripens once a year.

古文：柿盘
现代文：柿盘
English: Persimmon dish

古文：木中根固，柿为最，俗谓之柿盘。
现代文：树木当中要论扎根牢固，柿树是最牢固的，一般人都叫它 柿盘 。
English: Among trees, it is important to have firm roots. The persimmon tree is the most solid, and is commonly called "persimmon plate."

古文：融峰梨
现代文：融峰梨
English: Yongfeng pear

古文：仙梨。
现代文：仙梨。
English: Senri.

古文：融峰上有青坛，方五丈。
现代文：融峰上有一个青坛，坛是五丈方坛。
English: There is a youth altar on the melting peak, and the altar is a five-story square altar.

古文：有烧香行道处。
现代文：那上面有烧香行道的地方。
English: There's an incense-burning path up there.

古文：古形铜器数种。有梨树。
现代文：有几种古典样式的铜器，还有一棵梨树。
English: There are several classical-style bronzes, and a pear tree.

古文：高三十丈，子如斗。
现代文：这棵梨树高三十丈，所结的梨有斗那么大。
English: This pear tree is thirty meters tall, and the pears it produces are as big as a dipper.

古文：至摇落时，但见其汁核，无得味者。
现代文：等到梨从树上被摇下来，人们只能看到果汁和梨籽儿，却没有尝到它的味道的。
English: When the pear is shaken from the tree, people can only see the juice and pear seeds, but they can't taste it.

古文：六斤梨
现代文：六斤梨
English: Six pounds of pears

古文：洛阳报国寺梨，重六斤。
现代文：洛阳报国寺的一棵梨树结的梨，六斤重一个。
English: A pear from a pear tree at the Hokkoku-ji Temple in Luoyang weighs six pounds.

古文：紫花梨
现代文：紫花梨
English: Purple-flowered pear

古文：清泰中，薄游京辇。曾与卢泳巡官、郑扆博士、僧季雅，及三五知友，夜会与越波隄僧院。
现代文：清泰年中，我在京城小住，有一次和卢泳巡官、郑扆博士、和尚季雅，以及其他三五位要好的朋友，夜间相聚在越波提僧院。
English: In the middle of the Qing and Thai dynasties, I lived in Beijing for a short time. On one occasion, I gathered with Inspector Lu Yong, Dr. Zheng Qi, Monk Ji Ya, and three or five other close friends at the night at the Yue Bo Thi Monastery.

古文：是时清秋欲杪，明月方高。
现代文：这时正是晚秋季节。秋风夜凉，明月高悬。
English: At this time, it is the late autumn season. The autumn wind is cool at night, and the bright moon hangs high.

古文：句联五字之奇，酒饮八仙之美。
现代文：席间有句联五字之奇，也有酒饮八仙之美。
English: Between the tables, there is the wonder of five-character phrases, as well as the beauty of drinking alcohol.

古文：柿新红脯，茗醶绿芽。
现代文：菜肴丰盛，觥筹交错。
English: The dishes are sumptuous, and the courses are staggered.

古文：一咏一觞，或醒或醉。
现代文：一个个半醒半醉，或吟或叹，或喜或悲。
English: One by one, half-awake and half-drunk, they chanted or sighed, rejoiced or mourned.

古文：座上因相与征引古今，遂及果实之事。
现代文：话随酒增，越说越来劲。于是大家一起广征博引，谈论古今，谈着谈着，竟谈到果实这方面的事上来了。
English: As the conversation increased with the wine, the more we talked, the more vigorous it became. So we all went on a broad search for references, talked about the past and the present, talked and talked, and even talked about the fruits of this matter.

古文：有叙及紫花梨者。众云： 真定有之。 
现代文：有人谈到了紫花梨，大家说： 真定那地方就有！ 
English: Someone spoke about the purple pear, and everyone said: There really is a cactus in that place!

古文：雅公独颦蹙而言曰： 此微僧先祖之遗恨。 
现代文：不知为什么，季雅听了这话之后，却皱着眉头说： 这是贫僧先祖的遗恨啊！ 
English: For some reason, after hearing this, Ziya frowned and said: This is the hatred of the poor monk's ancestors!

古文：众惊而问之。
现代文：众人吃惊非小，忙问是怎么回事。
English: Everyone was surprised and asked what was going on.

古文：雅曰： 昔武宗皇帝御天下之五载，万国事殷，圣情不怿。
现代文：季雅说： 从前，武宗皇帝登基五年，日理万机，劳累过度，常常是龙体欠安，圣情不悦。
English: Ji Ya said: Once upon a time, Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne for five years. He had a lot of opportunities and was overworked. He was often unhealthy and unhappy.

古文：忽患心热之疾，名医进药，厥疾罔瘳。
现代文：忽然有一天他就得了个心发烧的毛病。名医纷纷进药，但就是治不了他的病。
English: All of a sudden, one day, he came down with a heart fever. Renowned doctors tried all kinds of medications, but they couldn't cure his illness.

古文：遂博诏良能，遐徵和、缓。
现代文：于是就下诏书，广泛地征求能医良方，迎请远方名家高手。
English: Therefore, he issued an imperial edict, extensively solicited good doctors and welcomed masters from far away.

古文：时有言青城山邢道士者，妙于方药。帝即召见之。
现代文：当时有人说青城山有个邢道士对医药验方很有研究，皇帝立即就召见了他。
English: At that time, it was said that there was a Taoist monk in Qingcheng Mountain who was very good at studying medical tests, and the emperor immediately summoned him.

古文：道士以肘后绿囊中青丹两粒，及取梨数枚，绞汁而进之。帝疾寻愈。
现代文：这位邢道士从肘后的绿色布囊里取出青色丹丸两粒，又取出几个梨，绞出梨汁，让皇上用梨汁把丹丸送服，皇帝的病不久就好了。
English: The Taoist monk took two blue pills from a green cloth bag behind his elbow, took out a few pears, squeezed out the pear juice, and asked the emperor to use the pear juice to dress the pills. The emperor's illness would soon be over.

古文：旬日之内。所赐万金，仍加广济先生之号。
现代文：十来天之内，皇帝就赐给邢道士万金表示感谢，还加封他 广济先生 的称号。
English: Within ten days, the emperor gave the Taoist monk ten thousand gold coins to express his gratitude, and also awarded him the title of Mr. Guangji.

古文：帝从容问其丹为何物，先生曰： 赤城山顶，有青芝两株。太白南溪，有紫花梨一树。
现代文：皇帝从容地问他那丹丸是何物。邢道士说： 赤城山顶上，有两棵青灵芝，太白山的南溪，有一棵紫花梨树。
English: The emperor calmly asked him what that Danmaru was. The Taoist monk said, "On the top of Akagi Mountain, there are two green reishi mushrooms, and in the South Stream of Mount Taihaku, there is a purple pear tree.

古文：臣之昔岁，曾游二山，偶获两宝，合炼成丹。
现代文：我从前曾经游过此二山，偶然弄到了青灵芝和紫花梨，把它们合炼成丹。
English: I had swum these two mountains before, and by chance I got some green reishi and purple pears, which I combined to make dan.

古文：五十年来，服食殆尽，唯余两粒，幸逢陛下服之。
现代文：五十年来，全都用光。只剩下这两粒，万幸让陛下服用了。
English: For fifty years, they were all used up. Only these two were left, and fortunately His Majesty took them.

古文：更欲此丹，须求二物也。 
现代文：还想要这样的丹药，必须弄到那两种宝物才行。 
English: If you still want this elixir, you have to get those two treasures.

古文：经数月，邢生辞帝归山。
现代文：几个月之后，邢道士辞别皇帝回山去了。
English: A few months later, Gong Daoist bid farewell to the emperor and went back to the mountains.

古文：后疾复作，再诏邢先生于青城，则不知何适也。
现代文：后来皇帝的病又发作了，再下诏到青城山去请邢道士，却不知邢道士哪里去了。
English: Later, the emperor's illness flared up again, and he issued another edict to go to Qingcheng Mountain to invite the Taoist priest, but he did not know where the Taoist priest had gone.

古文：帝遂诏示天下，有紫花梨，即时奏上。
现代文：皇帝于是就诏示天下，有紫花梨的，要立刻奏上。
English: The emperor then announced to the world that if there were purple pears, they should be played immediately.

古文：时恒州节度太尉公王达，尚寿春公主，即会昌之女弟。
现代文：那时候恒州节度大尉公王达，娶寿春公主为妻。寿春公主就是会昌公主的妹妹。
English: At that time, Prince Wang Da, the captain of the Hengzhou Festival, married Princess Shuchun, the younger sister of Princess Heichang.

古文：闻真定李令，种梨数株，其一紫花梨，即遣寺人，就加封检，剪其旁树，匝以朱栏。
现代文：她听说真定的李令种了几棵梨树；其中一棵是紫花梨，就立刻派人，就地封锁盘查，剪除旁边的树木，围上朱红栏杆。
English: When she heard that the determined Li Ling had planted several pear trees, one of which was a purple-flowered pear, she immediately sent someone to make an on-site inspection, cut down the trees next to it, and surround it with vermilion railings.

古文：宝惜纤枝，有同月桂。
现代文：珍惜每一个纤细的树枝，不亚于月中之桂。
English: Cherish every slender branch, no less than the cinnamon in the middle of the month.

古文：当花发之时，防蜂蝶之窥耗，每以轻绡纱縠，远加笼罩焉。
现代文：正当花开的时候，为了防止蜜蜂和蝴蝶的窥探和骚扰，整棵树都被用轻细的绢纱远远地笼罩起来。
English: Just as the flowers are opening, the entire tree is covered with a light cocoon in order to prevent bees and butterflies from spying and harassing.

古文：守树者不胜艰苦。
现代文：看守此树的人不胜艰苦。
English: The people who look after this tree have a tough job.

古文：洎及秋实，公主必手选而进之。
现代文：等到秋天果子成熟，公主亲自动手，一个一个地挑选，然后送进宫中。
English: When the fruits ripen in the autumn, the princess picks them by hand, one by one, and then brings them to the palace.

古文：此达帝庭，十得其六七。
现代文：送到宫里的，大约十分之六七。
English: About six or seven out of ten were sent to the Imperial Palace.

古文：帝多食此梨，虽不及邢氏者，亦粗解其烦躁耳。
现代文：皇帝多半都是吃这种梨。这梨虽然不如邢道士的丹药，却也能粗略地解除心中的烦躁。
English: Emperors mostly ate this kind of pear. Although this pear is not as good as the elixir of Taoists, it can also roughly relieve the irritability of the heart.

古文：是时有李遵来侍御，任恒州记室，作《进梨表》云： 紫花开处，擅美春林。缥蒂悬时，迥光秋景。离离玉润，落落珠圆。甘不待尝，脆难胜口。 
现代文：这时候有个叫李遵的来到皇帝身边，任恒州记室。他作了《进梨表》说： 紫花梨开花的地方，独占了春林的美；紫花梨悬挂在树上，却远离秋天的好风光；一个个玉一样润，珠一样圆，却不能尝它的甜美和脆爽。 
English: At this time, a man named Li Zun came to the emperor's side and was appointed to the Hengzhou office. He made a "Pear Watch" and said: Where the purple pears bloom, they monopolize the beauty of the spring forest; purple pears hang on the trees, but are far from the beautiful scenery of autumn; one by one, they are as moist as jade and as round as beads, but they cannot taste its sweetness and crispness.

古文：表达阙下，公卿见者，多大笑之曰： 常山公何用进残梨于天府也？
现代文：表送到宫中，凡是读过此表的，多数都大笑说： 常山公为什么把些残梨送进宫啊？ 
English: The watch was sent to the palace. Everyone who read the watch laughed loudly and said, "Why did Lord Changshan send some leftover pears to the palace?"

古文：盖以其表有脆难胜口之字。 
现代文：大概因为表中有 脆难胜口 的字样。
English: Probably because there is the word "brittle" in the table.

古文：明年，武宗崩，公主亦相次逝。此梨自后以为贡赋之常物。
现代文：第二年。武宗皇帝驾崩，公主也接着下世，这梨从此以后便成为贡赋中的平常之物。
English: The following year, Emperor Wuzong passed away, and the princess followed suit. From then on, the pear became a regular item in the tribute.

古文：县官岁久，亦渐怠于宝守焉。
现代文：县官因为年头久了，也渐渐对珍视宝守那梨树产生厌倦情绪。
English: The prefectural officials, because it has been a long time, have gradually grown tired of cherishing the pear tree.

古文：至天祐末焉，赵王为德明之所篡弑。
现代文：到了天祐末年，赵王被德明篡杀。
English: At the end of Tenyu's life, Zhao Wang was assassinated by Deming.

古文：其后县邑公署，多历兵戎。紫花之梨，亦已枯朽。
现代文：这以后，县邑公署多半遭受过兵戎之扰，紫花梨也就枯朽无存。
English: After that, most of the county and town public offices were disturbed by the military, and the purple pear withered away.

古文：今之真定，无复继种者焉。
现代文：现在的真定，没有人继续种它了。
English: Now it's true that no one continues to grow it.

古文：当武宗时，县宰李公，名尚，即雅之祖也，尝以守树不谨，曾风折一枝，降为冀州典午。
现代文：武宗那个时候，县令李公，单名叫尚，他就是我的祖父。他曾经因为守树不谨慎，被风吹折一个树枝，降职为冀州典午。
English: At the time of Emperor Wuzong, the county magistrate Li Gong, whose single name was Shang Wu, was my grandfather. He was once demoted to Jizhou Tenyo because he was not careful in protecting trees, and the wind broke a branch of a tree.

古文：由是追感而颦蹙也。 
现代文：因此，我追感往事而皱眉啊！ 
English: That's why I'm frowning with nostalgia!

古文：胡榛子
现代文：胡榛子
English: Wu Xi Zi

古文：阿月生西国。
现代文：阿月生在西域之国。
English: Ah Yat-sen was born in a country in the western region.

古文：蕃人言与胡榛子同树，一年榛子，二年阿月。
现代文：蕃人说阿月和胡榛子是同一种树的两种果实，这一年结的是榛子，下一年就结阿月。
English: The man said that the moon and the honeysuckle are two kinds of fruit from the same tree. This year's fruit is the honeysuckle, and the next year's is the moon.

古文：酸枣
现代文：酸枣
English: Sour dates

古文：耆旧说，周秦时，河南雨酸枣，遂生野酸枣。
现代文：老年人传说，周秦之时，河南下过酸枣雨，无数的酸枣就像雨点那样从天上洒下来，于是大地上就长出来许多野酸枣。
English: Elderly people say that at the time of Zhou Qin, Henan had acid jujube rain, and countless acid jujube fell from the sky like raindrops, so many wild acid jujube grew on the ground.

古文：今酸枣县是也。
现代文：现在的酸枣县就是这样形成的。
English: This is how the current Acid Jujube County was formed.

古文：酸枣之甚小者，为野酸枣。
现代文：酸枣当中，那些特别小的品种是野酸枣。
English: Among the jujubes, the particularly small varieties are the wild jujube.

古文：蒲萄
现代文：蒲萄
English: Grapefruit

古文：俗言蒲萄蔓好引于西南。
现代文：一般人说葡萄蔓是从西南引入。
English: It is generally said that the vine was introduced from the southwest.

古文：庾信谓魏使尉瑾曰： 我在邺，遂大得蒲萄，奇有滋味。 
现代文：庾信对魏使尉瑾说： 我在邺地，就得到大量的葡萄，特别有滋味。 
English: Xuan Xin said to Wei Zhi Rong: I get a lot of grapes in Xuan Di, which is particularly delicious.

古文：陈招曰： 作何形状？ 
现代文：陈招问道： 葡萄是什么样子？ 
English: Chen Zhao asked: What do grapes look like?

古文：徐君房曰： 有类软枣。 
现代文：徐君房说： 有点类似软枣子。 
English: Xu Junfang said: It is a bit similar to soft jujube.

古文：信曰： 君殊不体物，何得不言似生荔枝？ 
现代文：庾信说： 你太不熟悉生物了，咋能不说它像生荔枝？ 
English: Zou Xin said: You are so unfamiliar with living things, how can you not say that it looks like raw lychee?

古文：魏肇师曰： 魏武有言， 末夏涉秋，尚有余暑，酒醉宿醒，掩露而食，甘而不饴，酸而不酢。 
现代文：魏肇师说： 魏武曹操说过， 夏末秋初，天气仍有点热，酒醉一宿忽然醒来，带着露水吃葡萄，甜而不是糖，酸而不是醋。 
English: Wei Zhao Shi said: Wei Wu Cao Cao said: At the end of summer and the beginning of autumn, the weather is still a little hot, drunk one night suddenly woke up, with dew to eat grapes, sweet rather than sugar, sour rather than vinegar.

古文：道之固以流沫称奇，况亲食之者？ 
现代文：这样说一说都让人流口水，何况是亲自吃呢！ 
English: It's enough to make your mouth water, let alone eat it yourself!

古文：瑾曰： 此物出自大宛，张骞所致。有黄白黑三种。
现代文：尉瑾说： 这东西出自大宛，是张骞弄回来的，有黄、白、黑三种。
English: Fei Yao said, "This thing came from Dawan and was brought back by Zhang Yao. It comes in yellow, white, and black.

古文：成熟之时，子实逼侧，星编珠聚。
现代文：成熟的时候，一串一串地垂挂下来，像星星编在一起，像珍珠聚在一起。
English: When ripe, they hang down in strings, like stars woven together, like pearls gathered together.

古文：西域多酿以为酒，每来岁贡。
现代文：西域各国多半把它做成酒，每年都来进贡。
English: Most of the countries in the Western Hemisphere make it into wine and pay tribute to it every year.

古文：在汉西京，似亦不少。
现代文：在汉代的西京，好像也有不少。
English: It seems that there were quite a few cows in Western Kyoto during the Han Dynasty.

古文：杜陵田五十亩中，有蒲萄百树。
现代文：杜陵那地方，每五十亩田地，就有一百棵葡萄。
English: In Durin's place, there are a hundred vines for every fifty mu of field.

古文：今在京邑，非直止禁林也。 
现代文：就是在现在的京城，也不只是皇家的禁苑里才有。 
English: Even in the present-day capital, tsuma is not only found in the imperial gardens.

古文：信曰： 乃园种户植，接荫连架。 
现代文：庾信说： 居然已经园种户植，接荫连架，家家户户到处都有了。 
English: Zou Xin said: The garden has been planted and planted, the shade has been connected, and there are houses everywhere.

古文：昭曰： 其味何如桔柚？ 
现代文：陈招说： 葡萄味和桔柚相比，怎么样呢？ 
English: Chen Zhao said: How does the grape flavor compare to the orange-peach flavor?

古文：信曰： 津液胜奇，芬芳减之。 
现代文：庾信说： 葡萄的汁液胜奇，但是芬芳不如桔柚。 
English: Zou Xin said: The juice of grapes is amazing, but the fragrance is not as good as that of grapefruit.

古文：瑾曰： 金衣素里，见苞作贡，向齿自消，良应不及。 
现代文：尉瑾说： 桔柚金衣素里，被包起来当作贡品，但是要讲入口就化，它还是不如葡萄。 
English: Fei Yao said, "Orange, yuzu, and cinnamon are wrapped up as tributes, but when it comes to entrance, they are not as good as grapes.

古文：王母蒲萄
现代文：王母蒲萄
English: Queen Mother Gooseberry

古文：具丘之南，有蒲萄谷。
现代文：具丘之南，有一个葡萄谷。
English: South of the hill, there is a vine valley.

古文：谷中蒲萄，可就其所食之。
现代文：谷中的葡萄，可以就地吃它，但是不能拿走。
English: The grapes of the valley may be eaten in their place, but they may not be taken away.

古文：或有取归者，即失道。
现代文：有的人想把葡萄带回来，就会迷失道路。
English: Some people want to bring the grapes back, but they get lost.

古文：世言王母蒲萄也。
现代文：世人都说这是王母葡萄。
English: The world says that this is the queen mother grape.

古文：天宝中，沙门昙霄，因游诸岳，至此谷，得蒲萄食之。
现代文：天宝年间，僧人昙霄因为周游诸岳来到此谷，好一顿吃葡萄。
English: During the Tenpo era, the monk Juxiao came to this valley because he was traveling around the mountains, and had a good meal of grapes.

古文：又见枯蔓堪为杖，大如指，五尺余。持还本寺，植之遂活。
现代文：又见枯干的葡萄蔓可以做拐杖，就将一根粗如手指，五尺多长的葡萄蔓拿回本寺栽上，居然栽活了。
English: He also saw that dried grape vines could be used as crutches, so he took a grape vine that was as thick as a finger and more than five feet long back to the temple and planted it, and it actually came to life.

古文：长高数仞，荫地幅员十丈，仰观若帷盖焉。
现代文：不几年，它便长高数仞，荫地幅员十余丈。在架下看它，它就像帷盖一样。
English: In just a few years, it has grown several feet tall, with a shade area of more than ten feet. Looking at it under the frame, it looks like a curtain.

古文：其旁实磊落，紫莹如坠。
现代文：一串串葡萄垂挂下来，紫莹莹的，就像帷盖上的饰坠儿。
English: A bunch of grapes hanging down, purple, like a pendant on the curtain.

古文：时人号为草龙珠帐焉。
现代文：当时人们称之为 草龙珠帐 。
English: At that time, people called it the straw dragon bead account.

古文：侯骚子
现代文：侯骚子
English: Hou Shouzi

古文：侯骚蔓生，如鸡卵，既甘且冷，轻身消酒。
现代文：侯骚是蔓生植物，其果实像鸡蛋，味甜性冷，吃它可以减轻体重，可以解酒。
English: Houxao is a creeping plant. Its fruit is like an egg, sweet and cold. Eating it can help you lose weight and detoxify.

古文：《广志》言因王太仆所献。
现代文：《广志》上说是由王太仆献的。
English: "Guangzhi" said that it was presented by Wang Taifu.

古文：蔓胡桃
现代文：蔓胡桃
English: Walnuts

古文：蔓胡桃出南诏，大如扁螺，两隔，味似胡桃。
现代文：蔓胡桃出在南诏，大小有如扁海螺，两个隔，味道和胡桃相似。
English: Cranberry walnut comes from Nanzhao, the size of which is like a flat conch, with two compartments, and the taste is similar to that of walnuts.

古文：或言蛮中藤子也。
现代文：有的人叫它 蛮中藤子 。
English: Some people call it the Wild Middle Child.

古文：仙树实
现代文：仙树实
English: Immortal Tree

古文：祁连山上有仙树实，行旅得之，止饥渴。
现代文：祁连山上有仙树实，行旅之人得到它，可用它止饥解渴。
English: In Qilian Mountain, there is a fairy tree seed. Travelers can get it and use it to quench their thirst.

古文：一名四味木。
现代文：另有一名 四味木 。
English: There is also a Shimiki.

古文：其实如枣。
现代文：它的果实像枣。
English: Its fruit resembles a jujube.

古文：以竹刀剖则甘，铁刀剖则苦，木刀剖则酸，芦刀剖则辛。
现代文：用竹刀剖开它，它就是甜的；用铁刀剖开它，它就是苦的；用木刀则酸；用芦刀则辣。
English: Cut it with a bamboo knife and it is sweet; cut it with an iron knife and it is bitter; cut it with a wooden knife and it is sour; cut it with a reed knife and it is spicy.

古文：橄榄子
现代文：橄榄子
English: Olives with cream

古文：独根树，东向枝曰木威；南向枝曰橄榄。
现代文：木威和橄榄都是独根树。枝干朝东的独根树叫木威；朝南的叫橄榄。
English: Both the willow and the olive are single-rooted trees. The single-rooted tree with branches facing east is called the willow; the one facing south is called the olive.

古文：东荒栗
现代文：东荒栗
English: East Araguri

古文：东方荒中有木，名曰栗。
现代文：东方大荒中有一种树木，名字叫做 栗 。
English: In the wastelands of the East, there is a tree called the chestnut tree.

古文：有壳，径三尺三寸。
现代文：栗子有壳，壳的直径长三尺三寸。
English: Chestnuts have a shell, the diameter of the shell is three feet and three inches long.

古文：壳刺长丈余。
现代文：壳刺长一丈多。
English: The shell spines are much longer.

古文：实径三尺。壳亦黄，其味甜，食之，令人短气而渴。
现代文：壳中的果实也就是栗黄，直径长三尺，味道甜美，吃了之后，令人气短而干渴。
English: The fruit in the shell is chestnut yellow, three feet in diameter, with a sweet taste. After eating, it makes people short of breath and thirsty.

古文：猴栗
现代文：猴栗
English: Monkey chestnut

古文：唐卫公李德裕，一夕甘子园会客。盘中有猴栗，无味。
现代文：唐卫公李德裕，有一次在甘子园中会客，盘子里有猴栗。
English: Tang Weigong Li Deyu once had a dish of monkey chestnuts on a plate when he was entertaining guests in the sweet bean garden.

古文：陈坚处士云： 虔州南有渐栗，形如素核。 
现代文：猴栗，吃起来没什么味道。隐士陈坚说： 虔州之南有一种 渐栗 ，样子像素核。 
English: Monkey chestnuts don't taste very good to eat. Chen Jian, a hermit, said: There is a type of cranberry in the south of Kenzhou that looks like a pixel core.

古文：瓜
现代文：瓜
English: Melon

古文：汉明帝阴贵人，梦食瓜，甚美。
现代文：汉明帝时的阴贵人，做梦梦见吃瓜，特别好吃。
English: In the time of Emperor Han Ming, the Yin nobles dreamed of eating melon, which was particularly delicious.

古文：帝使求诸方国。
现代文：汉明帝就派人到各国去寻求。
English: Han Mingdi sent people to various countries to look for it.

古文：时有敦煌献异瓜种，常山献巨桃核。
现代文：当时有个敦煌国献来了奇异的瓜种，常山献来了一个大桃核。
English: At that time, a Dunhuang country presented a strange melon seed, and Changshan presented a large peach kernel.

古文：名穹窿，长三尺而形屈，其味臭如粨。
现代文：那瓜叫 穹窿 ，长三尺而形弯曲。它的味道闻起来像粥。
English: The gourd is called "Dongfu" (穹), it is three feet long and curved. It smells like porridge.

古文：父老云： 昔道士从蓬莱山得此瓜，云是空洞灵瓜。四劫一实。东王公、西王母遗种于地，世代遐绝，其实颇存。 
现代文：老人们说，从前有一个道士从蓬莱山上得到这种瓜，说是 空洞灵瓜 ，要经过四个周期才结一次果，当年东王公和西王母在大地上洒下了瓜种，久远的世代之后，瓜种稍微留下一些。
English: The old people said that once upon a time, a Taoist monk obtained this melon from the Penglai Mountains. It was said to be a hollow spirit melon. It would take four cycles to bear fruit. That year, the East King and the West Queen Mother sprinkled melon seeds on the earth. After a long generation, some melon seeds remained.

古文：又说： 此桃霜下始花，隆冬可熟。 
现代文：又说，这种桃子在霜下才开花，到了隆冬才能成熟。
English: He also said that this kind of peach only blooms when there is frost, and only matures in midwinter.

古文：亦云： 仙人所食，常使植于霜林园。
现代文：也说，这种桃是仙人吃的，常把它种植在霜林园。
English: It is also said that this peach is eaten by fairies and is often planted in frost gardens.

古文：此园皆植寒果，积冰之节，百果方盛。
现代文：霜林园里种植的全是寒果，积冰的季节，各种水果正旺盛。
English: The plants in the frost forest garden are all cold fruits. In the season of ice accumulation, various fruits are in full bloom.

古文：俗为相陵瓜。故 霜园 之声讹也。 
现代文：一般人称 相陵瓜 ，可能是 霜园 之声的讹传。
English: Commonly known as the gourd, it may be the transmission of the voice of the frost garden.

古文：后曰： 王母之桃，王公之瓜，可得而食，五万岁矣。 
现代文：后来又说： 王母的桃，王公的瓜，谁能吃到，可以活五万岁。 
English: Later, he said, "Whoever can eat the Queen Mother's peach and the Prince's melon can live for fifty thousand years."

古文：安可食乎？
现代文：哪里能吃得到！
English: Where can I get some!

古文：后崩，内侍者见镜奁中有瓜桃之核，视之涕零，疑其非数。
现代文：后来阴贵人死了，宫中侍奉她的人见她镜奁中有瓜籽和桃核。看了之后潸然泪下，疑惑地说她不该有这种命运呵。
English: Later, when Yin Guiren died, the person who served her in the palace saw that she had melon seeds and peach kernels in her mirror. After looking at it, she burst into tears and said doubtfully that she should not have this fate.

古文：五色瓜
现代文：五色瓜
English: Five-coloured melon

古文：吴桓王时，会稽生五色瓜。
现代文：吴桓王的时候，会稽生有五色瓜。
English: In the time of King Wu Huan, there was a five-coloured melon.

古文：今吴中有五色瓜，岁充贡赋。
现代文：现在吴中也生有五色瓜，年年充当贡赋。
English: Nowadays, there are also five-colored melons in Wu, which serve as tribute every year.

古文：瓜恶香
现代文：瓜恶香
English: Melon evil incense

古文：瓜恶香，中尤忌麝。
现代文：瓜厌恶香气，尤其忌怕麝香。
English: Melons detest fragrance, and are especially afraid of musk.

古文：唐郑注，太和初，赴职河中。
现代文：唐时的郑注，太和年初，到河中去赴职。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Zhu, the Empress Dowager, went to the river to go to work.

古文：姬妾百余，尽骑，香气数里，逆于人鼻。
现代文：他有姬妾一百多人，全都骑着马，香气飘出数里，呛人的鼻子。
English: He had more than a hundred concubines, all of whom rode horses, and their fragrance wafted for miles, tickling the human nose.

古文：是岁，自京至河中，所过路，瓜尽死，一蒂不获。
现代文：这一年，从京都到河中他所走过的路上，种的瓜全死了，一个瓜也没收获。
English: This year, on his way from Kyoto to Kawachinaka, all the melons he planted died, and not a single melon was harvested.

古文：菜
现代文：菜
English: Dishes

古文：蔓菁
现代文：蔓菁
English: Horse radish

古文：诸葛所止，令兵士独种蔓菁者，取其才出甲可生啖，一也；叶舒可煮食，二也；久居则随以滋长，三也；弃不令惜，四也；回则易寻而采之。五也。冬有根可斸食，六也。
现代文：诸葛亮命令兵士在驻地专种蔓菁的原因，取它刚长出来的嫩甲可以生吃，这是其一；叶子长大之后，可以煮着吃，这是其二；如果在此久住，它就继续生长，这是其三；扔掉也不让人感到可惜，这是其四；回来的时候容易找到，继续食用，这是其五；冬天可以食用它的根，这是其六。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered the soldiers to grow special cranberries in the garrison for the following reasons. Take the tender scales that have just sprouted and you can eat them raw, which is the first; after the leaves have grown, you can cook and eat them, which is the second; if you live here for a long time, it will continue to grow, which is the third; it is not a pity to throw it away, which is the fourth; it is easy to find when you return, and you can continue to eat it, which is the fifth; you can eat its root in winter, which is the sixth.

古文：比诸蔬属，其利不亦博哉？刘禹锡曰： 信矣。 
现代文：与其它蔬类相比，它的好处不也是很多的吗？刘禹锡说： 的确是这样。 
English: Compared with other vegetables, aren't its benefits also many? Liu Yuxi said: Indeed it is.

古文：三蜀之人也，今呼蔓菁为诸葛菜。
现代文：三蜀的人现在叫蔓菁是 诸葛菜 。
English: The people of Sanshu now call cranberry vinegar as Zhuge cabbage.

古文：江陵亦然。
现代文：江陵也是这样。
English: It's the same in Gangneung.

古文：越蒜
现代文：越蒜
English: Garlic soup

古文：《异苑》曰：晋安平有越王余蒜菜，长尺许，白者似骨，黑者如角。
现代文：《异苑》上记载，晋时安平一带有一种菜叫 越王余蒜 。这种蒜，长一尺左右，白的像骨，黑的像角。
English: It is recorded in the "Historical Garden" that in Anping, Jin Dynasty, there was a dish called "Yue Wang Yu Garlic." This garlic, about one foot long, is white like bone and black like horn.

古文：古云：越王曾于舟中作筹算，有余者，弃之水而生焉。
现代文：古人说，越王曾经坐在船上用竹筹进行计算，把多余的扔到水里，生长出来就是这种蒜。
English: The ancients said that King Yue once sat on a boat and used a bamboo rake to make calculations. He threw the excess into the water, and the result was this garlic.

古文：三蔬
现代文：三蔬
English: The Three Vegetables

古文：晋咸宁四年，立芳圃于金墉城东，多种异菜，名曰云薇。
现代文：晋朝的咸宁四年，在金墉城东修建了一个芳圃，多半用来种一种很奇特的菜。菜的名字叫 云薇 。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a rose garden was built in the east of Jinli City, which was mostly used to grow a very peculiar dish. The name of the dish is Yunwei.

古文：类有三种。
现代文：云薇有三种。
English: There are three types of cloud vine.

古文：紫色者最繁滋。
现代文：紫色的繁衍滋生最好。
English: Purple reproduces and grows best.

古文：其根烂漫。
现代文：它的根烂漫多彩。
English: Its roots are multi-coloured.

古文：春敷夏密，秋荣冬馥。
现代文：春天铺陈枝叶，夏季葱茏茂密，秋天繁荣旺盛，冬天气味芳香。
English: The spring is covered with old branches and leaves, the summer is lush with green onions, the autumn is prosperous, and the winter is fragrant.

古文：其实若珠，五色，随时而盛。
现代文：它的果实像五色的珍珠，随时而盛。
English: Its fruits are like five-colored pearls, blooming at any time.

古文：一名云芝。
现代文：它的另一个名称叫 云芝 。
English: It is also known as yunzhi.

古文：其紫色者为上蔬，而味辛；其黄色者为中蔬，而味甘；其青色者为下蔬，而味咸。
现代文：其中紫色的是上等蔬菜，味辣；黄色的是中等蔬菜，味甜；青色的是下等蔬菜，味咸。
English: Among them, the purple ones are high-grade vegetables with spicy taste; the yellow ones are medium-grade vegetables with sweet taste; and the blue ones are low-grade vegetables with salty taste.

古文：常以此蔬充御，其叶可以藉饮食，以供宗庙祭祀。亦止人饥渴。
现代文：人们常把这种菜进献到宫中，它的叶在宗庙祭祀时可用作供品的辅垫，也能使人止饥消渴。
English: People often offer this dish to the imperial court. Its leaves can be used as a cushion for offerings during ancestral temple rituals, and can also quench one's thirst.

古文：宫中掐其茎叶者，历月不歇。
现代文：宫中负责掐它枝叶的人，整月整月不能闲着。
English: The person in charge of pruning its branches and leaves in the palace cannot be idle for the whole month.

古文：菠薐
现代文：菠薐
English: Spinach stew

古文：菜之菠薐者，本西国中有僧，自彼将其子来，如苜蓿、蒲萄，因张骞而至也。
现代文：蔬菜中的菠薐，本来是有一个西域某国的僧人，从他们那里把它的种子带来的，就像苜蓿和葡萄是张骞从西域带种回来一样。
English: The spinach in vegetables was originally brought by a monk from a certain country in the Western Regions, just as the lettuce and grapes were brought back by Zhang Ye from the Western Regions.

古文：菠薐本是颇陵国将来，语讹耳，多不知也。
现代文：菠薐本来是从颇陵国弄来的，叫它 菠薐 是因误传而走音。
English: The spinach was originally brought from Poling. The name "spinach" is a misnomer.

古文：芥菹
现代文：芥菹
English: Mustard seeds

古文：广州人以巨芥为咸菹，埋地中，有三十年者。
现代文：广州人用大芥菜做腌菜，埋在地里，有埋三十多年的。
English: People in Guangzhou use large mustard greens to make stew. They have been buried in the ground for more than 30 years.

古文：贵尚，亲宾以相饷遗。
现代文：这种腌菜受到人们的普遍重视和崇尚，亲戚朋友之间把它当做礼品互相馈赠。
English: This kind of stew is generally valued and revered by people, and relatives and friends give it to each other as gifts.

古文：芥末
现代文：芥末
English: Mustard

古文：掌中芥末多国出也。
现代文：掌中芥末许多国家都有。
English: Mustard in the palm of the hand is found in many countries.

古文：取子置掌中，吹之，一吹一长，长三尺，乃植于地。
现代文：把它的种子放到手掌上，用口吹它，一吹一长，长到三尺，才栽到地上。
English: Put its seed in the palm of your hand, blow on it with your mouth, and it will grow up to three feet before it is planted in the ground.

古文：水韭
现代文：水韭
English: Water hyacinth

古文：水韭生于水湄，状如韭而叶细长。
现代文：水韭生长在水边，样子像韭菜但是叶比韭菜叶细长。
English: Water hyacinth grows by the water's edge. It looks like a leek but its leaves are longer and thinner than those of a leek.

古文：可食。
现代文：可以吃。
English: You can eat it.

古文：茄子树
现代文：茄子树
English: Eggplant tree

古文：南中草菜，经冬不衰，故蔬圃之中，栽种茄子，宿根有三二年者，渐长枝干，乃为大树。
现代文：南方的草木蔬菜，经冬不衰，所以菜园之中栽种的茄子，宿根有三两年的，渐渐长出枝干，就长成了大树。
English: The herbs and vegetables of the south do not wither in winter, so the eggplants grown in the vegetable garden have three-year-old roots, gradually sprouting branches and trunks, and growing into large trees.

古文：每夏秋熟，则梯树摘之。
现代文：每年夏秋之季，树上结了茄子，就要登梯子到树上把它摘下来。
English: Every year in the summer and autumn, when there are eggplants on the tree, it is necessary to climb a ladder to the tree to pick them off.

古文：三年后，渐树老子稀，即伐去，别栽嫩者。
现代文：三年后，树渐渐老了，茄子结得少了，就砍掉它，另栽嫩的。
English: Three years later, when the tree was getting old and producing fewer eggplants, they cut it down and planted a new one.

古文：昆仑紫瓜
现代文：昆仑紫瓜
English: Kunlun purple gourd

古文：隋炀帝大业末。改茄子为昆仑紫瓜。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年末，改称茄子是 昆仑紫瓜 。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the eggplant was renamed "Kunlun Purple Melon."

古文：茄子故事
现代文：茄子故事
English: The Eggplant Story

古文：茄子。茄字连茎名，革遐反。
现代文：茄子的 茄 字，连带它的枝茎的名称在内。革遐反切。
English: The Chinese character for eggplant, including the name of its stem and branches.

古文：今呼伽，未知所自。
现代文：现在读作 伽 ，不知从何而来。
English: Now pronounced 伽, I don't know where it came from.

古文：昔段成式因就廊下食茄子数蒂，偶问工部员外张周封茄子故事。
现代文：从前段成式因为在廊下吃了几个茄子，偶然间向工部员外张周封打听茄子的故事。
English: Because he had eaten a few eggplants in the corridor, he happened to inquire about the story of the eggplant from the foreman, Zhang Zhoufeng.

古文：张云，一名落苏。事具《食料本草》。
现代文：张说，茄子一名 落苏 ，有关的情况都写在《食料本草》里。
English: Zhang said that the name of eggplant is "losu," and the relevant information is written in "Foods of the Grass."

古文：成式记得隐侯《行园》诗云： 寒瓜方卧垄，秋瓜正满陂。
现代文：段成式记得隐侯的《行园诗》写道： 寒瓜方卧垄，秋瓜正满坡。
English: "Gardening Poem" written by Duan Chengshie, who remembers his past life, says: "The cold melon is lying on the ridge, and the cucumber is on the slope."

古文：紫茄纷烂漫，绿芋郁参差。 
现代文：紫茄纷烂漫，绿芋郁参差。 
English: The purple tomatoes are in profusion, and the green potatoes are uneven.

古文：又一名昆仑瓜。
现代文：茄子的又一名称叫 昆仑瓜 。
English: Another name for eggplant is Kunlun melon.

古文：岭南茄子，宿根成树，高五六尺。
现代文：岭南的茄子，因为多年生宿根成树，高五六尺。
English: Lingnan's eggplant, because of perennial roots, grows into a tree, five or six feet high.

古文：姚向曾为南选使，亲见之。
现代文：姚向曾做过南选使，亲眼见过。
English: Yao Xiang had been a Southern Envoy and had seen it with his own eyes.

古文：故《本草》记广州有慎火树，树大三四围。
现代文：所以《本草》记载说广州有慎火树，树高三四围。
English: Therefore, "Hengcao" records that there are fire-resistant trees in Guangzhou, and the trees are three or four times higher.

古文：慎火即景天也，俗呼为护火草。
现代文：慎火就是 景天 ，一般叫做 护火草 。
English: The cautious fire is the Jing Tian, generally called the fire protection grass.

古文：茄子熟者，食之厚肠胃，动气发疾。
现代文：成熟的茄子，吃了能增强胃肠功能，理气治病。
English: Eating ripe eggplant can enhance gastrointestinal function and cure diseases.

古文：根能理龟瘃。
现代文：茄子根能治冻疮。
English: Eggplant root can cure frostbite.

古文：欲其子繁，候其花时，取叶布于过路，以灰规之，人践之，子必繁也。俗谓嫁茄子。
现代文：想要让它多结茄子，等到它开花时，摘一些茄子叶放到过道处，用草木灰圈起来，让人践踏它，这样茄子就能多产，一般叫做 嫁茄子 。
English: If you want to make it produce more eggplants, wait until it blooms, pick some eggplant leaves and put them in the aisle, circle them with grass and wood ash, and let people trample on it, so that the eggplant can be more productive, generally called "married eggplant."

古文：曾火炙之，甚美。
现代文：曾经有人用火烤着吃，味道特别好。
English: Some people used to eat it roasted over a fire, and it tasted particularly good.

古文：有新罗种者，色稍白，形如鸡卵。
现代文：有一种新罗茄子，颜色稍白，形如鸡蛋。
English: There is a kind of Shilla eggplant, slightly white in color, shaped like an egg.

古文：西明寺僧造玄院中，有其种。
现代文：西明寺的和尚造玄院中，就有这种茄子。
English: This kind of eggplant can be found in the Monk-built Convent of Ximing Temple.

古文：《水经》云： 石头西对蔡浦，长百里，上有大荻荻浦，下有茄浦。 
现代文：《水经》上说： 石头城西面对蔡浦，长百里，上边有大荻荻浦，下边有茄浦。
English: "Water Sutra" said: "The west side of Stone Town faces Cai Pu, a hundred miles long, with Dafu Pu on the upper side and Kaya Pu on the lower side.

古文：儋崖种瓠成实，率皆石余。
现代文：在儋崖种葫芦，让它结出成熟的葫芦来，大都有上石重左右。
English: Grow gourds on the cliff and let it produce mature gourds, most of which are about a stone in weight.

古文：芥，高者亦五六尺。
现代文：芥菜，高的也五六尺。
English: Mustard greens, also five or six feet high.

古文：子大如鸡卵。
现代文：果实大如鸡蛋。
English: The fruit is the size of an egg.

