古文：孙子曰：凡用兵之法，驰车千驷，革车千乘，带甲十万，千里馈粮，则内外之费，宾客之用，胶漆之材，车甲之奉，日费千金，然后十万之师举矣。
现代文：孙子说：用兵作战，一般要出动战车千乘，运输车千辆，集结士兵十万，沿途千里转运粮草。这样国内外的各种费用开支，招待使节、策士的用度，维修作战器械的胶、漆等材料费用，保养战车、甲胄的支出等，每天都要耗费数额巨大的资金。作好了这些准备后，十万大军才能出动啊！
English: Sun Tzu said: To fight with soldiers, it is generally necessary to dispatch a thousand chariots, a thousand transport vehicles, gather a hundred thousand soldiers, and transport grain and grass thousands of miles along the way. In this way, various expenses at home and abroad, the cost of inviting envoys and strategists, the cost of materials such as glue and paint for repairing combat equipment, the cost of maintaining chariots and armor, etc., will consume a huge amount of money every day. After making these preparations, the hundred thousand army can be dispatched!

古文：其用战也胜，久则钝兵挫锐，攻城则力屈，久暴师则国用不足。
现代文：所以，军队作战就要力争快速胜利，如果长久僵持，兵锋折损、锐气被挫，攻城就力竭，长期在外作战还必然导致国家财用不足。
English: Therefore, it is necessary for the army to strive for quick victory in battle. If it is stalemated for a long time, the front will be broken, the spirit will be frustrated, the siege will be exhausted, and the long-term battle outside the country will inevitably lead to the shortage of national financial resources.

古文：夫钝兵挫锐，屈力殚货，则诸侯乘其弊而起，虽有智者，不能善其后矣。
现代文：如果军队因久战疲惫不堪，锐气受挫，军事实力耗尽，国内物资枯竭，那么，其他诸侯国就会趁这个困顿局面举兵进攻，即使睿智高明的人也难以收拾好这个局面。
English: If the army is exhausted due to the long war, the spirit is frustrated, the military strength is exhausted, and the domestic materials are exhausted, then other vassal states will take advantage of this difficult situation to raise troops and attack, and even the wise and clever people will find it difficult to clean up this situation.

古文：故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也。
现代文：用兵打仗，只听说计谋不足但靠神速取胜的，没有见过有计谋却要长久作战的。
English: Those who fight with soldiers have only heard about the lack of strategy but rely on speed to win, and have not seen those who have a strategy but want to fight for a long time.

古文：夫兵久而国利者，未之有也。
现代文：战争旷日持久而对国家有利这种事，从来就没有过。
English: There has never been such a thing as a protracted war that was good for the country.

古文：故不尽知用兵之害者，则不能尽知用兵之利也。
现代文：因此，不能完全了解战弊处的人，也就不能真正懂得战争的有利之处。
English: Therefore, those who do not fully understand the disadvantages of war cannot truly understand the advantages of war.

古文：善用兵者，役不再籍，粮不三载，取用于国，因粮于敌，故军食可足也。
现代文：善于用兵打仗的人，兵员不再次征调，粮饷也不用多次转运。各项军用从国内征取后，粮草补给在敌国就地解决，这样兵员粮草都可得到满足了。
English: For those who are good at using soldiers to fight, the soldiers will not be conscripted again, and the grain sacks will not need to be transferred multiple times. After the various military forces are conscripted from within the country, the grain and grass supply will be resolved on the spot in the enemy country, so that the soldiers' grain and grass can be satisfied.

古文：国之贫于师者远输，远输则百姓贫；近师者贵卖，贵卖则百姓财竭，财竭则急于丘役。
现代文：国家之所以因为打仗而贫困，是由于军队远征，物资不得不进行长途运输。长途转运百姓就会贫困。军队经过的地方物价必然飞涨，物价上涨就会使百姓财物枯竭，财物枯竭就更加难以应付赋役。
English: The reason why the country is impoverished due to the war is because of the military expedition, and the materials have to be transported over long distances. The people will be impoverished if they are transported over long distances. Where the military passes, prices will inevitably soar, and rising prices will deplete the people's wealth, and the depletion of wealth will make it more difficult to cope with the forced labor.

古文：力屈财殚，中原内虚于家，百姓之费，十去其七；公家之费，破军罢马，甲胄矢弩，戟楯蔽橹，丘牛大车，十去其六。
现代文：民力耗尽，财物枯竭，国内财政空虚，百姓的资财耗去了十分之七。国家的资财，由于战车破损了，战马疲病了，盔甲、矢弩、矛盾、牛、车之类的损失，耗去了十分之六。
English: Depleted of manpower, depleted of wealth and materials, the domestic finance is empty, the people's wealth and resources have been depleted by seven tenths, and the national wealth and resources have been depleted by six tenths due to the damage of the chariot, the tiredness of the war horse, the loss of armor, arrowheads, contradictions, cattle and cars.

古文：故智将务食于敌，食敌一钟，当吾二十钟；萁秆一石，当吾二十石。
现代文：因而，明智的将领总是力求从敌方夺取粮草，从敌方夺取一钟的粮食，就相当于从本国启运时的二十钟；就地夺取敌人饲草一石，相当于从本国启运时的二十石。
English: Therefore, wise generals always strive to seize grain and grass from the enemy. To seize one hour of grain from the enemy is equivalent to twenty hours of transportation from the home country; to seize one stone of enemy fodder grass on the spot is equivalent to twenty stones of transportation from the home country.

古文：故杀敌者，怒也；取敌之利者，货也。
现代文：要让战士勇敢杀敌，就要激发他们对敌人的愤怒，激励他们；要让战士夺取敌人资财，就要善于奖赏他们。
English: For soldiers to bravely kill the enemy, it is necessary to arouse their anger against the enemy and motivate them; for soldiers to seize the enemy's assets, it is necessary to be good at rewarding them.

古文：车战得车十乘以上，赏其先得者，而更其旌旗，车杂而乘之，卒善而养之，是谓胜敌而益强。
现代文：因此在车战中，凡缴获战车十辆以上的，就奖赏最先夺得战车的士卒，并且更换敌战车上的旌旗，将其混合编入自己的车阵之中；对于俘虏，要优待他们，使他们有归顺之心，这就是所谓战胜敌人而使自己日益强大的方法。
English: Therefore, in chariot battles, anyone who captures more than ten chariots will reward the soldier who first captures the chariot, and change the banner on the enemy chariot to mix it into his own chariot array; for prisoners, they should be treated favorably to make them have a sense of submission, which is the so-called way to defeat the enemy and make themselves increasingly powerful.

古文：故兵贵胜，不贵久。
现代文：所以，作战最重要、最有利的是速胜，最不宜的是旷日持久。
English: Therefore, the most important and most advantageous thing in combat is a quick victory, and the most unsuitable thing is a protracted one.

古文：故知兵之将，生民之司命，国家安危之主也。
现代文：真正懂得用兵之道、深知用兵利害的将帅，掌握着民众的生死，主宰着国家的安危。
English: A general who truly understands the way of using troops and is well aware of the interests of using troops controls the life and death of the people and presides over the safety and security of the country.

