古文：明君之所以立功成名者四：一曰天时，二曰人心，三曰技能，四曰势位。
现代文：明君立功成名的条件有四个：一是天时，二是人心，三是技能，四是势位。
English: There are four conditions for Ming Jun to become famous: one is the time, the second is the people, the third is the skills, and the fourth is the potential.

古文：非天时，虽十尧不能冬生一穗；逆人心，虽贲、育不能尽人力。
现代文：不顺应天时，即使十个尧也不能让庄稼在冬天里结成一个穗子；违背人心，即使孟贲、夏育也不肯多出力气。
English: If you don't follow the weather, even if you have ten ploughs, you can't make the crops produce an ear of corn in winter; if you go against the people's will, even if you have Meng Yao and Xia Yu, you won't be willing to exert more energy.

古文：故得天时则不务而自生，得人心，则不趣而自劝；因技能则不急而自疾；得势位则不推进而名成。
现代文：所以顺应了天时，即使不很努力，庄稼也会自然生长；得到了人心，就是不用督促，民众也能自我勉励；凭借技能。即便不急于求成，事情也会很快完成；得到了势位，即使不进取，名声也会大振。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the weather, even if it is not very hard, the crops will grow naturally; if the people's hearts are won, even if there is no supervision, the people can encourage themselves; by virtue of skills, even if they are not eager to achieve, things will be completed quickly; if the position is obtained, even if it is not aggressive, the reputation will be greatly shaken.

古文：若水之流，若船之浮。守自然之道，行毋穷之令，故曰明主。
现代文：好像水的流动，好像船的飘浮，把握自然之道，推行畅通无阻的法令，所以称为明君。
English: Like the flow of water, like the floating of the ship, grasp the natural way, and promote the smooth passage of the law, so it is called Ming Jun.

古文：夫有材而无势，虽贤不能制不肖。
现代文：有才能而没有权势，即使是贤人，也不能制服不贤的人。
English: Talented but not powerful, even a sage cannot subdue a non-sage.

古文：故立尺材于高山之上，下则临千仞之谷，材非长也，位高也。
现代文：所以在高山上树立一尺长的木头，就能俯临千仞深的峡谷，木头并不长，而是位置高。
English: Therefore, if you set up a one-foot-long log on a high mountain, you will be able to plunge into a thousand-foot-deep canyon. The log is not long, but it is high.

古文：桀为天子，能制天下，非贤也，势重也；尧为匹夫，不能正三家，非不肖也，位卑也。
现代文：夏桀作天子，能控制天下，不是因为他贤，而是因为他权势重；尧作普通人，不能管理好三户人家，不是因为他不贤，而是因为他地位卑贱。
English: Xia Yao, as the son of Heaven, can control the world, not because he is wise, but because he is powerful; as an ordinary person, he cannot manage three households, not because he is unwise, but because of his lowly status.

古文：千钧得船则浮，锱铢失船则沉，非千钧轻锱铢重也，有势之与无势也。
现代文：千钧重物依靠船就能浮起来，销株轻物没有船就沉下去，不是因为千钧轻而销铢重，而是因为有没有依靠船的浮力这种势的差别。
English: A heavy object can float up by relying on a boat, but a light object can sink without a boat. This is not because the object is light but heavy, but because of the difference in momentum between relying on the buoyancy of a boat and not.

古文：故短之临高也以位，不肖之制贤也以势。
现代文：所以短木居高临下凭借的是位置，不贤者制服贤人凭借的是权势。
English: Therefore, the short tree is superior to the inferior by virtue of its position, and the unwise subdue the wise by virtue of their power.

古文：人主者，天下一力以共载之，故安；众同心以共立之，故尊。
现代文：做君主的，天下合力来共同拥戴他，所以稳定；天下齐心来共同推举他，所以尊贵。
English: As a monarch, the heavens and earth work together to support him, so he is stable; the heavens and earth work together to elect him, so he is honorable.

古文：人臣守所长，尽所能，故忠。
现代文：臣下发挥特长，竭尽所能，所以忠诚。
English: A vassal is loyal to the best of his ability.

古文：以尊主御忠臣，则长乐生而功名成。
现代文：用尊贵的君主驱使忠诚的臣子，就会出现长治久安的局面，建立起功业和名望。
English: With a noble monarch driving loyal subjects, there will be a situation of long-term peace and stability, and achievements and fame will be established.

古文：名实相持而成，形影相应而立，故臣主同欲而异使。
现代文：名、实相依赖而成立，形、影相对应而出现，所以君臣愿望相同而各自要做的事情不同。
English: The name and the reality depend on each other, and the form and the shadow appear accordingly. Therefore, the monarchs and the subjects have the same wishes, but the things they want to do are different.

古文：人主之患在莫之应，故曰，一手独拍，虽疾无声。
现代文：君主的祸患在于没有人响应，所以说，一只手单独来拍，虽然很快，但发不出声音来。
English: The monarch's misfortune is that no one responds, so when he claps with one hand alone, although it is fast, it does not make a sound.

古文：人臣之忧在不得一，故曰，右手画圆，左手画方，不能两成。
现代文：臣子的忧患在于不能专职，所以说，右手画圆的，左手画方的，不能同时成功。
English: The trouble with being a courtier is that you can't do it full-time, so you can't draw a circle with your right hand and a square with your left hand at the same time.

古文：故曰，至治之国，君若桴，臣若鼓，技若车，事若马。
现代文：所以说，治理得最好的国家，君主如同鼓槌，臣子如同鼓，技能如同车，事情如同马。
English: Therefore, the country that is best governed, the monarch is like a drumstick, the courtiers are like drums, the skills are like cars, and the things are like horses.

古文：故人有余力易于应，而技有余巧便于事。
现代文：所以人有余力容易响应召唤，技巧高超容易办成事情。
English: Therefore, people have enough energy to easily respond to the call, and it is easy to accomplish things with high skills.

古文：立功者不足于力，亲近者不足于信，成名者不足于势。近者不亲，而远者不结，则名不称实者也。
现代文：建立功业的人力量不够，亲近的人忠诚不够，成就名望的人权势不够，贴身的人不贴心，远方的人不交结，那就是名不符实了。
English: People who build their careers are not strong enough, people who are close to them are not loyal enough, people who achieve fame are not powerful enough, people who are close to them are not intimate, and people who are far away are not friends, that is, the name does not match the reality.

古文：圣人德若尧、舜，行若伯夷，而位不载于世，则功不立，名不遂。
现代文：圣人的道德如同尧舜，行为如同伯夷，但势位不为世人所拥护、就会功不成，名不立。
English: The morality of a saint is like that of a baboon, and his behavior is like that of a beggar, but if his position is not supported by the world, he will not succeed and his name will not be established.

古文：故古之能致功名者，众人助之以力，近者结之以成，远者誉之以名，尊者载之以势。如此，故太山之功长立于国家，而日月之名久著于天地。
现代文：所以古代能够成就功名的人，众人用力帮助他，身边的人真心交结他，远处的人用美名赞誉他，位尊的人用权势拥戴他，正因如此，所以君主的丰功伟绩就如同泰山一样长期在国家之中建立了起来，君主的盛名威望就如同日月一样在天地之间永放光芒。
English: That is why, in ancient times, people who were able to accomplish great feats were helped by others, people around them sincerely befriended them, people far away praised them with a beautiful name, and people of high rank supported them with power. It is for this reason that the great feats of the monarch were established in the country for a long time, just like Mount Tai, and the prestige of the monarch was like the sun and the moon, forever shining between heaven and earth.

古文：此尧之所以南面而守名，舜之所以北面而效功也。
现代文：这就是尧所以能南面称王而保持名位，舜所以要北面称臣而献功效忠的原因。
English: This is the reason why we can maintain our prestige by praising the king in the south, and why we must praise the vassal in the north and offer loyalty.

