古文：元虞集，仁宗时拜祭酒，讲罢，因言京师恃东南海运，而实竭民力以航不测，乃进曰： 京东濒海数千里，皆萑苇之场，北极辽海，南滨青、齐，海潮日至，淤为沃壤久矣，苟用浙人之法，筑堤捍水为田，听富民欲得官者，分授其地而官为之限，能以万夫耕者，授以万夫之田，为万夫长；千夫、百夫亦如之。
现代文：原文元朝人虞集在元仁宗时官拜祭酒，曾在为仁宗讲学的课余时间，谈起京师仰仗东南一带以海运输送粮食而从事危险无比的航行，实在是严重耗损民力，于是进言道： 京师东方滨海数千里之地，都是芦苇丛生的荒地，北从辽海，南到青州、齐州，潮每日冲积，长期已来以淤积为可供耕种的肥沃之地。如果用浙江人的方法，筑堤挡住潮水使成为耕地，让想做官的富翁分别配领这些田地，由官府加以规定，有办法找到一万人耕田的，就给他一万人份的田地，让他做这一万人的首长；以下一千人，一百人也如此办理。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, when the Yuan Emperor Renzong was in power, the officials worshiped the sacrificial wine. In the after-school hours, when he was lecturing for Renzong, he talked about the extremely dangerous voyage of the Beijing Division, which relied on the southeast to transport grain by sea, which was a serious drain on the people's power. He then said: The thousands of miles of the eastern coast of the Beijing Division are all reed-studded wastelands. From the Liao Sea in the north to Qingzhou and Qizhou in the south, the tides are daily alluvial. For a long time, the silt has been used as a fertile land for

古文：三年视其成，则以地之高下，定额于朝，而以次征之。五虞集年有积蓄，乃命以官，就所储给以禄。
现代文：三年之内看他的结果，由朝廷依土地的肥瘠程度定额课税，依等级征收，五年之后能有积蓄，就任命他做官，就所积蓄的作为俸禄，十年后赐给他符节印信，使他能流传给子孙。
English: Within three years, according to his results, the imperial court levied a fixed amount of tax according to the degree of fertility of the land, and levied according to the level. After five years, if he could save, he was appointed as an official, and the savings were used as a salary. After ten years, he was given a seal letter so that he could pass it on to his children and grandchildren.

古文：十年则佩之符印，俾得以传子孙，则东南民兵数万，可以近卫京师，外御岛夷，远宽东南海运之力，内获富民得官之用，淤食之民得有所归，自然不至为盗矣。 
现代文：这么一来，便可得到数万民兵来对内保卫京师，对外防御海贼，而且又能不必仰赖东南海运，使人民得以休息，又可借着富人求官的心理，让京师得到充足的粮食供应，四处游食的人民能有正当的归宿，自然不会做海贼了。 
English: In this way, tens of thousands of militiamen can be obtained to defend the Beijing Division internally and to defend the pirates externally. Moreover, the people can rest without having to rely on the Southeastern Sea Transportation, and the Beijing Division can be adequately supplied with grain through the psychology of the rich seeking office. The people who travel around to eat can have a legitimate home, and naturally will not be pirates.

古文：说者不一，事遂寝。
现代文：但因评议的人意见不一致，于是遂不了了之。
English: However, due to the fact that the opinions of the reviewers did not coincide, it could not be done.

古文：其后脱脱言：京畿近水地，利召募江南人耕种，岁可收粟麦百余万石，不烦海运，京师足食。
现代文：后来脱脱曾说京师近海，深得地利，招募江南人来耕种，每年可收成一百多万石米麦，不必仰赖海运，京师也可以足食。
English: Later, Liutang said that the Beijing Division was offshore, deep in the country, and recruited people from the south of the Yangtze River to cultivate. It could harvest more than one million kilos of rice and wheat every year. It did not have to rely on shipping, and the Beijing Division could also eat on foot.

古文：元主从之，于是立分司农司，以右丞悟良哈台、左丞乌古孙良祯兼大司农卿，给分司农司印，西自西山，南至保定、河间，北抵檀顺，东及迁民镇，凡官地及元管各处屯田，悉从分司农司立法佃种，合用工价、牛具、农器、谷种，给钞五百万锭。
现代文：元主依此而行，于是设立分司农司，以右丞悟良哈台、左丞乌古孙良祯兼任大司农卿，给分司农司印，西自西山，南至保定、河间，北到檀顺，东到迁民镇，凡是官地及元朝朝廷所掌握的各处屯田，都听从分司农司立法办理租佃，合用工价、牛具、农器、谷种，由朝廷先投资五百万锭银子。
English: The founder acted in accordance with this, so he set up a division of the Department of Agriculture, with the right-hand man, Gou Lianghatai, and the left-hand man, Wu Gu Sun Liang, concurrently serving as the Secretary of Agriculture, and gave the division of the Department of Agriculture a seal, from the west to the west, from the south to Baoding and Hema, from the north to Danshun, and from the east to Qianmin Town, all government-owned land and all areas occupied by the former imperial court were subject to the legislation of the division of the Department of Agriculture for lease, and the price of labor, cattle tools, agricultural tools, and cere

古文：又略仿前集贤学士虞集议，于江、淮召募能种水田及修筑圃堰之人各千人，为农师。降空名添设职事敕牒十二道，募农民百人者授正九品。二百人者正八，三百人者从七，就令管领所募之人。所募农夫每人给钞十锭，期年散归，遂大稔。
现代文：脱脱又大略模仿前集贤学士虞集的建议，在江淮之间招募能种水田及修筑园圃、堤防的人各一千，担任农师，又设一些有名无实的官职，以十二道令牌宣称：能招募一百个农民的人，就授予正九品官，二百人的正八品官，三百人的正七品官，由招募者自行领导管理自己所招募的人，所招募的农夫，每人给十锭银子，一年后放他们回去，于是大丰收。
English: He detached himself from and roughly imitated the suggestion of the previous collection of scholars and scholars, the Yu Collection, to recruit a thousand people who can grow paddy fields and build gardens and dykes between the Jianghuai and Huai, to serve as farmers, and also set up some fictitious official positions, and declared with twelve tokens: Those who can recruit a hundred farmers will be awarded the official of the ninth grade, the official of the eighth grade for two hundred people, and the official of the seventh grade for three hundred people. The recruiter will manage the recruited people and the recruited farmers under his own leadership. Each person will be given ten shekels of silver, and they will be allowed to

古文：何孟春《余冬序录》云： 明朝叶文庄公盛巡抚宣府时，修复官牛、官田之法，垦地日广，积粮日多，以其余岁易战马千八百余匹。
现代文：何孟春在《余冬序录》里说： 明朝叶文庄公巡抚宣府时，重新建立官牛官田的法令，开垦的土地日渐广大，积存粮食日益增多，用每年节余的钱购买八千多匹战马，残缺不全的城堡也都加以修复。
English: He Mengchun said in the "Introduction to the Remains of Winter": When Ye Wenzhuang's public inspector Xuanfu took office in the morning, the decree to re-establish the official cattle and official fields was issued. The land reclaimed was becoming more and more extensive, the accumulated grain was increasing, and more than eight thousand war horses were purchased with the money saved each year. The incomplete castle was also repaired.

古文：其屯堡废缺者，咸修复之，不数月，完七百余所。
现代文：不到几个月，就整修好七百多个城堡。
English: Within a few months, more than seven hundred castles were renovated.

古文：今边兵受役权门，终岁劳苦，曾不得占寸地以自衣食，军储一切仰给内帑，战马之费于太仆者不资，屯堡尚谁修筑？
现代文：如今边境的士兵受权贵之门的役使，整年劳苦，还得不到一点土地来供给自己的衣食，军中所需的一切费用，都依靠中央的供应，养战马的费用由太仆支给的多得无法估计，至于城堡的修筑又能仰靠哪里的费用。
English: Now the soldiers on the frontier are in the service of the rich and powerful, they toil all year round, they do not get a bit of land to feed and clothe themselves, all the expenses required in the army depend on the central supply, the cost of raising war horses is too much to be estimated by the servants, and as for the construction of the castle, where can it rely on the cost.

古文：悠悠岁月，恐将来之夷祸难支也! 
现代文：长期下来，恐怕将来外患一起就很难应付了。 
English: In the long run, I am afraid that it will be difficult to cope with external diseases in the future.

古文：樊升之曰： 贾生之治安，晁错之兵事，江统之徙戎，是万世之至画也，李邺侯之屯田，虞伯生之垦墅，平江伯之漕运。
现代文：樊升之说： 贾谊上汉文帝的治安策，晁错的用兵之计，江统的徙戎论，都是万世最佳的计划，李邺侯的屯田，虞集的开垦荒地，平江伯的漕运，则是当代最佳的计划。
English: Gao Shengzhi said: Emperor Jia's security policy, the erroneous strategy of using troops, and the theory of migrating troops of Jiangtong are all the best plans in the world. Li Shihou's tunden, Yu Ji's reclamation of wasteland, and Pingjiang Bo's rowing transport are the best plans of our time.

古文：李允则之筑圃起浮屠，范文正、富郑公之救荒，是一时之至画也。
现代文：李允则筑园圃、造浮屠、佛塔，范文正、富弼的救济饥荒，也是当时最佳的计划。
English: Li Yun, on the other hand, built a garden, a floating mortuary and a pagoda, and Fan Wenzheng and Fuxi provided famine relief, which was also the best plan at that time.

古文：画极其至，则人情允协，法成若天造，令出如流水矣。 
现代文：计划能达到尽善尽美，则人情必诚信协和，因此好的计划往往有如天成，命令一出，执行起来便有如流水般的顺畅。
English: If the plan can achieve perfection, then the people must be honest and harmonious. Therefore, good plans are often like made in heaven. Once the order is issued, the execution will be as smooth as running water.

