古文：西山经华山之首，曰钱来之山，其上多松，其下多洗石。
现代文：西方第一列山系是华山山系，其中第一座山叫做钱来山，山上有许多松树，山下有很多洗石。
English: The first mountain range in the west is the Huashan Mountain Range, of which the first mountain is called Qianlaishan. There are many pine trees on the mountain, and there are many washed stones under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如羊而马尾，名曰羬羊，其脂可以已腊。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像羊却长着马一样的尾巴，名叫羬羊，羬羊的油脂可以护理治疗干裂的皮肤。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like a sheep but has a horse-like tail. It is called the yakitori sheep. The oil from the yakitori sheep can be used to treat cracked skin.

古文：西四十五里，曰松果之山。
现代文：从钱来山往西四十五里，有一座松果山。
English: Forty-five miles west of Qianlaishan, there is a mountain of pine cones.

古文：濩水出焉，北流注于渭，其中多铜。
现代文：濩水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水，水中蕴藏着丰富的铜。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows north into Surabaya. The water is rich in copper.

古文：有鸟焉，其名曰䳋渠，其状如山鸡，黑身赤足，可以已。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，名叫䳋渠，外形像一般的野鸡，黑色的身子和红色的爪子，可以用来治疗皮肤干皱。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, called the pheasant, which is shaped like an ordinary pheasant, with a black body and red claws, and can be used to treat dry skin wrinkles.

古文：又西六十里，曰太华之山，削成而四方，其高五千仞，其广十里，鸟兽莫居。
现代文：再往西六十里，有一座太华山，山崖陡峭像刀削而呈现四方形，高五千仞，宽十余里，禽鸟野兽根本无法在此栖身。
English: Another sixty miles to the west, there is a Taihua Mountain. The cliff is as steep as a knife and is square-shaped. It is five thousand meters high and more than ten miles wide. Birds and beasts cannot live here at all.

古文：有蛇焉，名曰肥，六足四翼，见则天下大旱。
现代文：山中有一种蛇，名称是肥遗，长着六只脚和四只翅膀，一出现天下就会大旱。
English: There is a kind of snake in the mountains. Its name is Huiyi. It has six legs and four wings. If it appears, there will be a drought.

古文：又西八十里，曰小华之山，其木多荆杞，其兽多㸲牛，其阴多磬石，其阳多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：再往西八十里，有一座小华山，山上的树木大多是牡荆树和枸杞树，山中的野兽大多是？牛，山的北面盛产磬石，山的南面盛产？琈玉。
English: Eighty miles further west, there is a small Huashan. The trees on the mountain are mostly oaks and eucalyptus, the beasts in the mountains are mostly cattle, the north side of the mountain is rich in ocher, and the south side of the mountain is rich in emeralds.

古文：鸟多赤鷩，可以御火。
现代文：山里有许多赤鷩鸟，饲养它就可以避免火灾。
English: There are many red starlings in the mountains, and raising them can help prevent fires.

古文：其草有萆荔，状如乌韭，而生于石上，亦缘木而生，食之已心痛。
现代文：山中还有一种叫做萆荔的草，形外形像乌韭，但生长在石头上面，也攀缘树木而生长，人如果吃了它就能治愈心痛病。
English: In the mountains, there is also a kind of grass, called "Qili," which is shaped like a cucumber, but it grows on stones, and it also grows by climbing trees. If you eat it, you can cure heart disease.

古文：又西八十里，曰符禺之山，其阳多铜，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往西八十里，有一座符禺山，山的南面盛产铜，山的北面蕴藏着铁矿。
English: Eighty miles further west, there is a mountain called Fuxi Mountain. The southern side of the mountain is rich in copper, and the northern side of the mountain contains iron ore.

古文：其上有木焉，名曰文茎，其实如枣，可以已聋。
现代文：山上有一种树木，名叫文茎，结的果实像枣子，可以用来治疗耳聋。
English: There is a tree on the mountain, called the ginseng tree, which bears fruit like dates and can be used to treat deafness.

古文：其草多条，其状如葵，而赤华黄实，如婴儿舌，食之使人不惑。
现代文：山中生长的草大多是条草，外形与葵菜相似，开的是红色花朵而结的是黄色果实，果实的样子像婴儿的舌头，吃了它就可使人不受迷惑。
English: Most of the grass growing in the mountains is strip grass, similar in shape to sunflower, with red flowers and yellow fruit. The fruit looks like a baby's tongue, and eating it can prevent people from being confused.

古文：符禺之水出焉，而北流注于渭。
现代文：符禺水从这座山发源，然后向北流入渭水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Fushun River, which flows north into the Yishui River.

古文：其兽多葱聋，其状如羊而赤鬣。
现代文：山中的野兽大多是葱聋，外形像羊却长有红色的鬣毛。
English: Most of the beasts in the mountains are green-eyed and deaf. They look like sheep but have red manes.

古文：其鸟多鴖，其状如翠而赤喙，可以御火。
现代文：山中的禽鸟大多是鴖鸟，外形像一般的翠鸟却是红色的嘴巴，饲养它可以辟火。
English: Most of the birds in the mountains are ostriches. They look like the common kingfisher, but they have red beaks and can be kept away from fire.

古文：又西六十里，曰石脆之山，其木多棕枬，其草多条，其状如韭，而白华黑实，食之已疥。
现代文：再往西六十里，有一座石脆山，山上有许多棕树和楠木树，而草大多是条草，形状与韭菜相似，但是开的是白色花朵而结的是黑色果实，人吃了这种果实就可以治愈疥疮。
English: Sixty miles further west, there is a rocky mountain. There are many palm trees and camphor trees on the mountain, and the grass is mostly strips of grass, similar in shape to leeks, but it has white flowers and black fruits. People can cure scabies by eating this fruit.

古文：其阳多㻬琈之玉，其阴多铜。
现代文：山的南面盛产？琈玉，而山的北面盛产铜。
English: The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, while the north side of the mountain is rich in copper.

古文：灌水出焉，而北流注于禺水。
现代文：灌水从这座山发源，然后向北流入禺水。
English: Irrigation water springs from this mountain and then flows north to Surabaya.

古文：其中有流赭，以涂牛马无病。
现代文：水中蕴藏着丰富的硫黄和赭黄，将这种水涂洒在牛马的身上就可以让牛马健壮不生病。
English: The water is rich in sulfur and ammonia, and sprinkling this water on the body of a cow or horse can keep the animal strong and healthy.

古文：又西七十里，曰英山，其上多杻檀，其阴多铁，其阳多赤金。
现代文：再往西七十里，有一座英山，山上到处是杻树和橿树，山的北面盛产铁，而山的南面盛产黄金。
English: Seventy miles to the west, there is a Ying Mountain. The mountain is full of camphor and eucalyptus trees. The north side of the mountain is rich in iron, while the south side of the mountain is rich in gold.

古文：禺水出焉，北流注于招水，其中多鳢鱼，其状如鳖，其音如羊。
现代文：禺水从这座山发源，向北流入招水，水中有很多鳢鱼，外形像一般的鳖，发出的声音如同羊叫。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain to the north into the water, and there are many eels in the water, which are shaped like ordinary eels and make a sound like sheep.

古文：其阳多箭䉋，兽多㸲牛、羬羊。
现代文：山南面还生长有很多箭竹和？竹，野兽大多是？牛、羬羊。
English: In the southern part of the mountain, there are still a lot of arrow bamboo and bamboo, and most of the wild animals are cattle and sheep.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鹑，黄身而赤喙，其名曰肥遗，食之已疠，可以杀虫。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的鹌鹑鸟，是黄身子而红嘴巴，名称是肥遗，人吃了它的肉就能治愈麻风病，还能杀死体内寄生虫。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, shaped like a common ostrich, with a yellow body and red mouth. Its name is Huiyu. If you eat its meat, you can cure leprosy and kill parasites in the body.

古文：又西五十二里，曰竹山，其上多乔木，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往西五十二里，有一座竹山，山上到处是高大的树木，山的北面盛产铁。
English: Fifty-two miles to the west, there is a bamboo mountain, the mountain is full of tall trees, the north side of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：有草焉，其名曰黄雚，其状如樗，其叶如麻，白华而赤实，其状如赭，浴之已疥，又可以已胕。
现代文：山中有一种草，名叫黄雚，外形像樗树，但叶子像麻叶，开白色的花朵而结红色的果实，果实外表的颜色像赭色，用它洗浴就可治愈疥疮，又可以治疗浮肿病。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, called Huang Qi, which is shaped like an eucalyptus tree, but its leaves are like hemp leaves. It has white flowers and red fruits, and the fruit looks like indigo. Bathing with it can cure acne and treat edema.

古文：竹水出焉，北流注于渭，其阳多竹箭，多苍玉。
现代文：竹水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水，竹水的北岸有很多的小竹丛，还有许多青色的玉石。
English: Bamboo water flows from the source of this mountain to the north into Surabaya. The northern bank of bamboo water has many small bamboo bushes, as well as many blue cobbles.

古文：丹水出焉，东南流注于洛水，其中多水玉，多人鱼。
现代文：丹水也发源于这座山，向东南流入洛水，水中多出产水晶石，又有很多人鱼。
English: The Dan River also originates from this mountain and flows southeast into the Luo River. The water produces more crystal stones and has many mermaids.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豚而白毛，大如筓而黑端，名曰豪彘。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像小猪却长着白色的毛，毛如簪子粗细而尖端呈黑色，名称是豪彘。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a small pig but has white fur. The hair is as thick as satin and has a black tip. Its name is the giant salamander.

古文：又西百二十里，曰浮山，多盼木，枳叶而无伤，木虫居之。
现代文：再往西一百二十里，有一座浮山，山上到处是盼木，长着枳树一样的叶子却没有刺，树木上的虫子寄生于此。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further west, there is a floating mountain, the mountain is full of pine trees, with eucalyptus-like leaves but no thorns, and tree worms parasitize here.

古文：有草焉，名曰薰草，麻叶而方茎，赤华而黑实，臭如蘼芜，佩之可以已疠。
现代文：山中有一种草，名叫熏草，叶子像麻叶却长着方方的茎干，开红色的花朵而结黑色的果实，气味像蘼芜，把它插在身上就可以治疗麻疯病。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains, called smoked grass, the leaves are like hemp leaves but with square stems, red flowers and black fruits, the smell is like earthworms. If you stick it on your body, you can cure leprosy.

古文：又西七十里，曰羭次之山，漆水出焉，北流注于渭。
现代文：再往西七十里，有一座羭次山。漆水发源于此，向北流入渭水。
English: Seventy miles further to the west, there is a mountain called Neiji. Lacquer water originates here and flows north into the Neiji River.

古文：其上多棫橿，其下多竹箭，其阴多赤铜，其阳多婴垣之玉。
现代文：山上有茂密的棫树和橿树，山下有茂密的小竹丛，山北阴面有丰富的赤铜，而山南阳面有丰富的婴垣玉。
English: There are dense eucalyptus and eucalyptus trees on the mountain, dense small bamboo thickets at the bottom of the mountain, rich red copper on the north side of the mountain, and rich jade on the south side of the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如禺而长臂，善投，其名曰嚣。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像猿猴而双臂很长，擅长投掷，名称是嚻。
English: In the mountains there is a beast with the appearance of an ape and long arms, which is good at throwing, and its name is the baboon.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如枭，人面而一足，曰橐𩇯，冬见夏蛰，服之不畏雷。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的猫头鹰，长着人一样的面孔而只有一只脚，叫做橐𩇯，常常是冬天出现而夏天蛰伏，把它的羽毛插在身上就使人不怕打雷。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary owl, with a human-like face and only one foot, called a kite, often appearing in winter and hovering in summer, sticking its feathers into the body makes people not afraid of thunder.

古文：又西百五十里，曰时山，无草木。
现代文：再往西一百五十里，有一座时山，山上没有花草树木。
English: A hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a time mountain, but there are no flowers or trees on the mountain.

古文：逐水出焉，北流注于渭，其中多水玉。
现代文：逐水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水。水中有很多水晶石。
English: From the source of this mountain, the water flows northward into the Surabaya River. There are many crystal stones in the water.

古文：又西百七十里，曰南山，上多丹粟。
现代文：再往西一百七十里，有一座南山，山上到处是粟粒大小的丹砂。
English: A hundred and seventy miles further west, there is a mountain called Nanshan. The mountain is covered with millet-sized silt.

古文：丹水出焉，北流注于渭。
现代文：丹水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Dan River, which flows northward into the Surabaya River.

古文：兽多猛豹，鸟多尸鸠。
现代文：山中的野兽大多是猛豹，而禽鸟大多是布谷鸟。
English: Most of the wild animals in the mountains are leopards, and most of the birds are cuckoos.

古文：又西四百八十里，曰大时之山，上多楮柞，下多杻橿，阴多银，阳多白玉。
现代文：再往西一百八十里，有一座大时山，山上有很多构树和柞树，山下有很多杻树和橿树，山的北面多出产银，而山的南面有丰富的白色玉石。
English: One hundred and eighty miles to the west, there is a mountain called Dazhi Mountain. On the mountain, there are many conifers and eucalyptus trees. Below the mountain, there are many eucalyptus and birch trees. The northern side of the mountain produces more silver, while the southern side of the mountain is rich in white jade.

古文：涔水出焉，北流注于渭。
现代文：涔水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows north into Surabaya.

古文：清水出焉，南流注于汉水。
现代文：清水也从这座山发源，却向南流入汉水。
English: Clear water also originates from this mountain, but flows south into the Han River.

古文：又西三百二十里，曰嶓冢之山，汉水出焉，而东南流注于沔；嚣水出焉，北流注于汤水。
现代文：再往西三百二十里，有一座嶓冢山，汉水发源于此，然后向东南流入沔水；嚣水也发源于此，向北流入汤水。
English: Another 320 miles to the west, there is a Lushan Mountain. The Han River originates from here, and then flows southeast into the Lushan River; the Han River also originates from here, and flows north into the Tang River.

古文：其上多桃枝钩端，兽多犀兕熊罴，鸟多白翰赤鷩。
现代文：山上到处是葱茏的桃枝竹和钩端竹，野兽以犀牛、兕、熊、罴最多，禽鸟却以白翰和赤鷩最多。
English: The mountains are full of green peach-branch bamboo and hook-end bamboo. The most numerous wild animals are rhinoceros, roe deer, bear, and marten, while the most numerous birds are white hen and red kite.

古文：有草焉，其叶如蕙，其本如桔梗，黑华而不实，名曰蓇蓉。食之使人无子。
现代文：山中有一种草，叶子长得像蕙草叶，茎干却像桔梗，开黑色花朵但不结果实，名称是蓇蓉，吃了它就会使人不生育孩子。
English: There is a kind of grass in the mountains. The leaves grow like eucalyptus leaves, but the stem is like an orange stem. It has black flowers but no fruit. It is called ginger. If you eat it, you will not have children.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰天帝之山，多棕枬；下多菅蕙。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座天帝山，山上是茂密的棕树和楠木树，山下主要生长茅草和蕙草。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a mountain called Mount Tiantai. On the top of the mountain, there are lush palm trees and camphor trees. At the bottom of the mountain, there are mainly thatch and eucalyptus.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狗，名曰溪边，席其皮者不蛊。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的狗，名称是溪边，人坐卧时铺垫上溪边兽的皮就不会中妖邪毒气。
English: There is a kind of beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary dog, and its name is creekside. When a person sits and sleeps, the skin of the creekside beast will not be poisoned by the evil gas.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鹑，黑文而赤翁，名曰栎，食之已痔。
现代文：山中又有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的鹌鹑鸟，但长着黑色的花纹和红色的颈毛，名称是栎，人吃了它的肉可以治愈痔疮。
English: There is another bird in the mountains, shaped like a common ostrich, but with black markings and red neck feathers. Its name is the quail, and eating its meat can cure hemorrhoids.

古文：有草焉，其状如共葵，共其臭如蘼芜，名曰杜衡，可以走马，食之已瘿。
现代文：山中还有一种草，形状像葵菜，散发出和蘼芜一样的气味，名称是杜衡，给马插戴上它就可以使马跑得很快，而人吃了它就可以治愈脖子上的赘瘤病。
English: There is also a kind of grass in the mountains. It is shaped like a sunflower and emits the same smell as camphor. Its name is Duheng. If you put it on a horse, it can make the horse run fast, and if you eat it, you can cure the scabies on the neck.

古文：西南三百八十里，曰臯涂之山，蔷水出焉，西流注于诸资之水；涂水出焉，南流注于集获之水。
现代文：往西南三百八十里，有一座皋涂山，蔷水发源于此，向西流入诸资水；涂水也发源于此，向南流入集获水。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles to the southwest, there is a mountain of Tu Tu. The water of Tu Tu originates from here and flows westward into the water of Zhu Zi; the water of Tu Tu also originates from here and flows southward into the water of Shu.

古文：其阳多丹粟，其阴多银、黄金，其上多桂木。
现代文：山的南面到处是粟粒大小的丹砂，山的北面盛产银、黄金，山上到处是桂树。
English: The south side of the mountain is full of millet-sized siltstone, the north side of the mountain is rich in silver and gold, and the mountain is full of osmanthus.

古文：有白石焉，其名曰囗，可以毒鼠。
现代文：山中有一种白色的石头，名叫礜，可以用来毒死老鼠。
English: There is a kind of white stone in the mountain, called gourd, which can be used to poison rats.

古文：有草焉，其状如稿芨，其叶如葵赤背，名曰无条，可以毒鼠。
现代文：山中又有一种草，形状像藁茇，叶子像葵菜的叶子而背面是红色的，名叫无条，可以用来毒死老鼠。
English: There is another kind of grass in the mountains, shaped like a grasshopper, with leaves like sunflower leaves and a red back, called Mujo, which can be used to poison mice.

古文：有兽焉，其状如鹿而白尾，马足人手而四角，名曰玃如。
现代文：山中还有一种野兽，外形像鹿却长着白色的尾巴，马一样的脚蹄、人一样的手又有四只角，名叫玃如。
English: There is also a beast in the mountains that looks like a deer but has a white tail, horse-like hooves, human-like hands, and four horns. It's name is Xunru.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸱而人足，名曰数斯，食之已瘿。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像鹞鹰却长着人一样的脚，名叫数斯，吃了它的肉就能治愈人脖子上的赘瘤病。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a vulture but with human-like feet, called the jux. Eating its meat can cure the scabies on a person's neck.

古文：又西百八十里，曰黄山，无草木，多竹箭。
现代文：再往西一百八十里，有一座黄山，山上没有花草树木，到处是郁郁葱葱的竹丛。
English: One hundred and eighty miles to the west, there is a Huangshan Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, and lush bamboo thickets are everywhere.

古文：盼水出焉，西流注于赤水，其中多玉。
现代文：盼水从这座山发源，向西流入赤水，水中有很多玉石。
English: This mountain is the source of the Pan River, which flows westward into the Red River. There are many jade stones in the water.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛，而苍黑大目，其状曰。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像牛，却长着苍黑色的皮毛、大大的眼睛，名称是。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a cow, but with long dark fur and large eyes. Its name is.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸮，青羽赤喙，人舌能言，名曰鹦鹉。
现代文：山中又有一种禽鸟，外形像一般的猫头鹰，却长着青色的羽毛和红色的嘴，像人一样的舌头能学人说话，名称是鹦鹉。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains. It looks like an ordinary owl, but it has blue feathers and a red mouth. It has a human-like tongue and can learn to speak. It is called a parrot.

古文：又西二百里，曰翠山，其上多㯶枏，其下多竹箭，其阳多黄金、玉，其阴多牦牛、麢、麝，其多鸓，其状如鹊，赤黑而两首四足，可以御火。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座翠山，山上是茂密的棕树和楠木树，山下到处是竹丛，山的南面盛产黄金、玉，山的北面有很多牦牛、羚羊、香獐。山中的禽鸟大多是鸓鸟，外形像一般的喜鹊，却长着红黑色羽毛和两个脑袋、四只脚，人养着它可以避免火灾。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a verdant mountain. The top of the mountain is covered with dense palm trees and camphor trees, and the bottom of the mountain is full of bamboo thickets. The south side of the mountain is rich in gold and jade, and the north side of the mountain has many snails, antelopes, and cormorants. Most of the birds in the mountain are ostriches. They look like ordinary magpies, but they have red and black feathers and two heads and four feet. People can keep it to avoid fire.

古文：又西二百五十里，曰騩山，是錞于西海，无草木，多玉。
现代文：再往西二百五十里，有一座騩山，它坐落在西海边上，这里没有花草树木，却有很多玉石。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles further west, there is Lushan Mountain, which is located on the edge of the West Sea. There are no flowers and trees here, but there are many jade stones.

古文：凄水出焉，西流注于海，其中多采石、黄金，多丹粟。
现代文：凄水从这座山发源，向西流入大海，水中有许多采石、黄金，还有很多粟粒大小的丹砂。
English: The water flows from the source of the mountain to the west into the sea, and there is a lot of quarried stone, gold, and a lot of millet-sized loess in the water.

古文：凡西经之首，自钱来之山至于騩山，凡十九山，二千九百五十七里。
现代文：总计西方第一列山系之首尾，从钱来山起到騩山止，一共十九座山，途经二千九百五十七里。
English: The total length of the first line of mountains in the west, from Qianlaishan to Lushan, is nineteen mountains and 2957 li.

古文：华山冢也，其祠之礼：太牢。
现代文：华山神是诸山神的宗主，祭祀华山山神的典礼：用猪、牛、羊齐全的三牲作祭品。
English: Huashan God is the ancestor of all the mountain gods, and the ceremony of sacrificing Huashan God: using pigs, cattle, and sheep to make sacrifices.

古文：羭山神也，祠之用烛，斋百日以百牺，瘗用百瑜，汤其酒百樽，婴以百珪百壁。
现代文：羭山神是神奇威灵的，祭祀羭山山神用烛火，斋戒一百天后用一百只毛色纯正的牲畜，随一百块瑜埋入地下，再烫上一百樽美酒，祀神的玉器用一百块玉珪和一百块玉璧。
English: The god of Lushan is miraculously benevolent. To worship the god of Lushan, candles are used. After a hundred days of fasting, a hundred pure-colored cattle are used. With a hundred yu buried in the ground, a hundred barrels of wine are brewed, and a hundred pieces of jade and a hundred pieces of jade are used to worship the god.

古文：其余十七山之属，皆毛牷用一羊祠之。
现代文：祭祀其余十七座山山神的典礼相同，都是用一只完整的羊作祭品。
English: The ceremonies for the worship of the remaining seventeen mountain deities are the same, with a whole sheep used as the sacrificial offering.

古文：烛者，百草之未灰，白席采等纯之。
现代文：所谓的烛，就是用百草制作的火把但未烧成灰的时候，而祀神的席是用各种颜色等差有序地将边缘装饰起来的白茅草席。
English: The so-called candle is a torch made of hyacinth but not burned to ashes, while the table for worshiping the gods is a white thatch table with the edges decorated in an orderly manner with various color differences.

古文：西次二经之首，曰钤山，其上多铜，其下多玉，其木多杻橿。
现代文：西方第二列山系的第一座山，叫做钤山，山上盛产铜，山下盛产玉，山中的树大多是杻树和橿树。
English: The first mountain of the second mountain range in the west is called Shaoshan. The top of the mountain is rich in copper, and the bottom of the mountain is rich in jade. The trees in the mountain are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus.

古文：西二百里，曰泰冒之山，其阳多玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：向西二百里，有一座泰冒山，山的的南面多出产金，山北面多出产铁。
English: Two hundred miles to the west, there is a towering mountain. The southern side of the mountain produces more gold, while the northern side produces more iron.

古文：浴水出焉，东流注于河，其中多藻玉，多白蛇。
现代文：洛水从这座山发源，向东流入黄河，水中有很多藻玉，还有很多白色的水蛇。
English: Luo water flows from the source of this mountain to the east into the Yellow River. There are many algae balls in the water, as well as many white water snakes.

古文：又西一百七十里，曰数历之山，其上多黄金，其下多银，其木多杻橿，其鸟多鹦鹉。
现代文：再往西一百七十里，有一座数历山，山上盛产黄金，山下盛产银，山中的树木大多是杻树和橿树，而禽鸟大多是鹦鹉。
English: A hundred and seventy miles to the west, there is a Qilian Mountain. The mountain is rich in gold, and the mountain is rich in silver. The trees in the mountain are mostly eucalyptus and eucalyptus, and the birds are mostly parrots.

古文：楚水出焉，而南流注于渭，其中多白珠。
现代文：楚水从这座山发源，然后向南流入渭水，水中有很多白色的珍珠。
English: Chushui originates from this mountain, and then flows south into Surabaya. There are many white pearls in the water.

古文：又西百五十里高山，其上多银，其下多青碧、雄黄，其木多棕，其草多竹。
现代文：再往西北五十里，有一座高山，山上有丰富的白银，山下到处是青碧、雄黄，山中的树木大多是棕树，而草大多是小竹丛。
English: Another fifty miles to the northwest, there is a high mountain. There is abundant silver on the mountain, and everywhere below the mountain is blue and yellow. The trees in the mountain are mostly palm trees, and the grass is mostly small bamboo bushes.

古文：泾水出焉，而东流注于渭，其中多馨石、青碧。
现代文：泾水从这座山发源，然后向东流入渭水，水中有很多磬石、青碧。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain, and then flows eastward into Surabaya. There are a lot of ocher and blue in the water.

古文：西南三百里，曰女床之山，其阳多赤铜，其阴多石涅，其兽多虎豹犀兕。
现代文：往西南三百里，有一座女床山，山的南面多出产黄铜，山的北面多出产石涅，山中的野兽以老虎、豹子、犀牛和兕居多。
English: Three hundred miles to the southwest, there is a bedrock mountain. The south side of the mountain produces more brass, and the north side of the mountain produces more stone. The wild animals in the mountain are mostly tigers, leopards, rhinos and baboons.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如翟而五彩文，名曰鸾鸟，见则天下安宁。
现代文：山里还有一种禽鸟，形状像野鸡却长着色彩斑斓的羽毛，名称是鸾鸟，一出现天下就会安宁。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a pheasant but with brightly coloured feathers. It is called the ostrich, and when it appears there is peace in the world.

古文：又西二百里，曰龙首之山，其阳多黄金，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座龙首山，山的南面盛产黄金，山的北面盛产铁。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a Longshou Mountain. The south side of the mountain is rich in gold, and the north side of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：苕水出焉，东南流注于泾水，其中多美玉。
现代文：苕水从这座山发源，向东南流入泾水，水中有很多美玉。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain to the southeast into Surabaya, and there are many gems in the water.

古文：又西二百里，曰鹿台之山，其上多白玉，其下多银，其兽多㸲牛、羬羊、白豪。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座鹿台山，山上多出产白玉，山下多出产银，山中的野兽以㸲牛、羬羊、白豪居多。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a Ludaishan Mountain. On the mountain, more white jade is produced, and more silver is produced at the bottom of the mountain. Most of the wild animals in the mountain are yaks, yaks, and white giants.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如雄鸡而人面，名曰凫徯，其鸣自叫也，见则有兵。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，外形像雄鸡却长着人一样的脸面，名称是凫徯，它的叫声就是自身名称的读音 凫徯 ，一出现天下就会有战争。
English: There is a bird in the mountains that looks like a rooster but has a human-like face. Its name is the rooster, and its call is the pronunciation of its name,. If it appears, there will be war in the world.

古文：西南二百里，曰鸟危之山，其阳多馨石，其阴多檀楮，其中多女床。
现代文：往西南二百里，有一座鸟危山，山的南面多出产磬石，山的北面到处是檀树和构树，山中生长着很多女床草。
English: Two hundred miles to the southwest, there is a bird-endangered mountain. The south side of the mountain produces more flint, the north side of the mountain is full of sandalwood and conifers, and many bedding plants grow in the mountains.

古文：鸟危之水出焉，西流注于赤水，其中多丹粟。
现代文：鸟危水从这座山发源，向西流入赤水，水中有许多粟粒大小的丹砂。
English: From the source of this mountain, the Vogel Water flows westward into the Red Water, and there are many millet-sized sands in the water.

古文：又西四百里，曰小次之山，其上多白玉，其下多赤铜。
现代文：再往西四百里，有一座小次山，山上盛产白玉，山下有丰富的铜矿。
English: Four hundred miles further west, there is a small sub-mountain, the mountain is rich in white jade, and there is a rich copper mine under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉其状如猿，而白首赤足，名曰朱厌，见则大兵。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像猿猴，但头是白色的，脚是红色的，名叫朱厌，一出现就会发生大的战争。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like an ape, but its head is white and its feet are red. It is called Zhu Xuan, and whenever it appears, there is a big war.

古文：又西三百里，曰大次之山，其阳多垩，其阴多碧，其兽多㸲牛、麢羊。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座大次山，山的南面多出产垩土，山的北面多出产碧玉，山中的野兽以㸲牛、羚羊居多。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a large mountain. The southern side of the mountain produces more rammed earth, the northern side of the mountain produces more jasper, and the animals in the mountain are mostly yaks and antelopes.

古文：又西四百里，曰薰吴之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往西四百里，有一座熏吴山，山上没有花草树木，但是有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Four hundred miles to the west, there is a smoky Wu Mountain. There are no flowers and trees on the mountain, but it is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：又西四百里，曰厎阳之山，其木多稷、枬、豫章，其兽多犀、兕、虎、犳、㸲牛。
现代文：再往西四百里，有一座厎阳山，山中的树木大多是水松树、楠木树、樟树，而野兽大多是犀牛、兕、老虎、犳、㸲牛。
English: Four hundred miles to the west, there is a Poyang Mountain. The trees in the mountain are mostly water pines, camphor trees, and eucalyptus trees, and the beasts are mostly rhinoceroses, tapirs, tigers, lynxes, and yaks.

古文：又西二百五十里，曰众兽之山，其上多㻬琈之玉，其下多檀楮，多黄金，其兽多犀兕。
现代文：再往西二百五十里，有一座众兽山，山上遍布㻬琈玉，山下到处是檀树和构树，有丰富的黄金，山中的野兽以犀牛、兕居多。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a mountain of beasts. The mountain is covered with jade, the mountain is full of sandalwood and coniferous trees, there is abundant gold, and the beasts in the mountains are mostly rhinoceroses and lynxes.

古文：又西五百里，曰皇人之山，其上多金玉，其下多青雄黄。
现代文：再往西五百里，有一座皇人山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下有丰富的石青、雄黄。
English: Five hundred miles to the west, there is a mountain called the Emperor's Mountain. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, while the lower part of the mountain is rich in stalactites and stalagmites.

古文：皇水出焉，西流注于赤水，其中多丹粟。
现代文：皇水从这座山发源，向西流入赤水，水中有很多粟粒大小的丹砂。
English: The imperial water flows from the source of this mountain to the west into the red water, and there is a lot of millet-sized red sand in the water.

古文：又西三百里，曰中皇之山，其上多黄金，其下多蕙、棠。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座中皇山，山上多出产黄金，山下长满了蕙草、棠梨树。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a mountain called Zhonghuangshan. On the top of the mountain, gold is mostly produced, while the bottom of the mountain is full of reeds and pear trees.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰西皇之山，其阳多黄金，其阴多铁，其兽多麋、鹿、㸲牛。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座西皇山，山的南面多出产金，山的北面多出产铁，山中的野兽以麋、鹿、麋牛居多。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a West Imperial Mountain. The southern side of the mountain produces more gold, the northern side of the mountain produces more iron, and the beasts in the mountain are mostly yakitori, deer and yakitori.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰莱山，其木多檀楮，其鸟多罗罗，是食人。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座莱山，山中的树木大多是檀树和构树，而禽鸟大多是罗罗鸟，会吃人。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a Lai Mountain. The trees in the mountain are mostly sandalwood and coniferous trees, and the birds are mostly lorikeets, which can eat people.

古文：凡西次二经之首，自钤山至于莱山，凡十七山，四千一百四十里。
现代文：总计西方第二列山系的首尾，自钤山起到莱山止，一共十七座山，途经四千一百四十里。
English: In total, there are seventeen mountains at the end of the second line of mountains in the west, from Mount Lushan to Mount Laishan, a total of 4,140 miles.

古文：其十神者，皆人面而马身。
现代文：其中十座山的山神，都是人面马身。
English: Among them, the deities of ten mountains are both human and horse.

古文：其七神皆人面而牛身，四足而一臂，操杖以行，是为飞兽之神。
现代文：另外七座山的山神都是人面牛身，四只脚和一条手臂，扶着拐杖行走，这就是所谓的飞兽之神。
English: The deities of the other seven mountains are cow-like creatures with human faces, four legs and one arm, who walk on crutches. These are the so-called flying animal deities.

古文：其祠之，毛用少牢，白菅为席。
现代文：祭祀这七位山神，是在有毛的动物中用猪、羊作祭品，将其放在白茅草席上。
English: The seven mountain gods are worshipped by making offerings of pigs and sheep, among other furry animals, and placing them on a white thatched mat.

古文：其十辈神者，其祠之毛一雄鸡，钤而不糈：毛采。
现代文：另外那十位山神，祭祀的典礼，是在有毛的动物中用一只公鸡，祭祀神时不用米作祭品；毛物的颜色要杂而不必纯一。
English: In addition, the ten mountain gods, the ceremony of sacrifice, is to use a rooster among the furry animals, and no rice is used as a sacrifice when worshiping the gods; the color of the wool must be mixed, but not necessarily pure.

古文：西次三经之首，曰崇吾之山，在河之南，北望冢遂，南望䍃之泽，西望帝之捕兽之丘，东望䗡渊。
现代文：西方第三列山系的第一座山，叫做崇吾山，它雄踞于黄河的南岸，在山上向北可以望见冢遂山，向南可以望见泑泽，向西可以望见天帝的搏兽山，向东可以望见䗡渊。
English: The first mountain of the third row of mountains in the west is called Chongwushan. It dominates the south bank of the Yellow River. On the mountain, you can see Lusuishan to the north, Heze to the south, Tiandi's Animal Fighting Mountain to the west, and Qianyuan to the east.

古文：有木焉，员叶而白柎，赤华而黑理，其实如枳，食之宜子孙。
现代文：山中有一种树木，圆圆的叶子白色的花萼，红色的花朵上有黑色的纹理，结的果实与枳实相似，人吃了它可以多子多孙。
English: There is a kind of tree in the mountains. The round leaves are white calyxes, the red flowers have a black texture, and the fruits are similar to ramps. If you eat it, you can have more children and grandchildren.

古文：有兽焉，其状如禺而文臂。豹尾而善投，名曰举父。
现代文：山中还有一种野兽，外形像猿猴而臂上却有斑纹，有豹子一样的尾巴而擅长投掷，名叫举父。
English: There is also a beast in the mountains, which looks like an ape but has stripes on its arms, a leopard-like tail and is good at throwing. It is called Hotei.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如凫，而一翼一目，相得乃飞，名曰蛮蛮，见则天下大水。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像野鸭子，却只长了一只翅膀和一只眼睛，要两只鸟合起来才能飞翔，名叫蛮蛮，它一出现天下就会发生水灾。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains. It looks like a wild duck, but it only has one wing and one eye. It takes two birds together to fly. It is called the wild boar. Whenever it appears in the world, there will be floods.

古文：西北三百里，曰长沙之山。
现代文：往西北三百里，有一座长沙山。
English: Three hundred miles to the northwest, there is Changsha Mountain.

古文：泚水出焉，北流注于泑水，无草木，多青雄黄。
现代文：泚水从这里发源，向北流入泑水，山上没有花草树木，有许多的石青、雄黄。
English: Surabaya originates from here and flows northward into Surabaya. There are no flowers and trees on the mountain, but there are many stalactites and stalagmites.

古文：又西北三百七十里，曰不周之山。
现代文：再往北三百七十里，有一座不周山。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles further north, there is a mountain.

古文：北望诸䗡之山，临彼岳崇之山，东望泑泽，河水所潜也，其原浑浑泡泡。
现代文：在山上向北可以望见诸䗡山，它高高的居于岳崇山之上，向东可以望见泑泽，是黄河源头所在的地方，那源头之水喷涌而发出巨大的响声。
English: On the mountain, Zhushanshan can be seen to the north, which is high above Yuezhongshan, and Heze can be seen to the east. It is the place where the source of the Yellow River is located, and the water of the source gushes out and emits a huge sound.

古文：爰有嘉果，其实如桃，其叶如枣，黄华而赤柎，食之不劳。
现代文：这里有一种特别珍贵的果树，结出的果实与桃子很相似，叶子却很像枣树叶，开着黄色的花朵而花萼却是红红的，人如果吃了它可以解除烦恼忧愁。
English: There is a particularly precious fruit tree here. The fruit is very similar to a peach, but the leaves are very similar to the leaves of a jujube tree. The flowers are yellow, but the calyx is reddish-red. If you eat it, it can relieve your worries and sorrows.

古文：又西北四百二十里，曰峚山，其上多丹木，员叶而赤茎，黄华而赤实，其味如饴，食之不饥。
现代文：再往西北四百二十里，有一座峚山，山上到处是丹木，红红的茎干上长着圆形的叶子，开黄色的花朵而结红色的果实，味道甘甜，人吃了它就不感觉饥饿。
English: Four hundred and twenty miles to the northwest, there is a mountain of camphor trees. The mountain is full of camphor trees. The red stems have round leaves, yellow flowers and red fruits. The taste is sweet, and people don't feel hungry after eating it.

古文：丹水出焉，西流注于稷泽，其中多白玉。
现代文：丹水从这座山发源，向西流入稷泽，水中有很多白色玉石。
English: The mountain is the source of the Dan River, which flows westward into Heze. The water contains a lot of white jade.

古文：是有玉膏，其原沸沸汤汤，黄帝是食是飨。
现代文：这里有玉膏，玉膏之源涌出时一片沸沸腾腾的景象，黄帝常常服食享用这种玉膏。
English: There is jade ointment here. When the source of jade ointment gushes out, it is a seething scene. The Yellow Emperor often ate and enjoyed this jade ointment.

古文：是生玄玉。
现代文：这里还出产一种黑色玉石。
English: It also produces a kind of black jade.

古文：玉膏所出，以灌丹木，丹木五岁，五色乃清，五味乃馨。
现代文：用这涌出的玉膏，去浇灌丹木，丹木再经过五年的生长，便会开出光艳美丽的五色花朵，结下味道香甜的五色果实。
English: Use the emergent jade paste to water the alder tree. After five years of growth, the alder tree will open bright and beautiful five-colored flowers and produce sweet-tasting five-colored fruits.

古文：黄帝乃取峚山之玉荣，而投之钟山之阳。
现代文：黄帝于是就采撷峚山中玉石的精华，而投种在钟山向阳的南面。
English: The Yellow Emperor then harvested the essence of the jade from the Jinshan Mountains and planted it in the south of the Zhongshan Mountains facing the sun.

古文：瑾瑜之玉为良，坚粟精密，浊泽有而光。
现代文：后来便生出瑾和瑜这类美玉，坚硬而精密，润厚而有光泽。
English: Later, gems such as Zouheyu were born, hard and precise, rich and shiny.

古文：五色发作，以和柔刚。
现代文：五种颜色的符彩一同散发出来相互辉映，那就有刚有柔而非常和美。
English: The five colors of the charms are emitted together and reflect each other, which is just soft and very beautiful.

古文：天地鬼神，是食是飨；君子服之，以御为祥。
现代文：无论是天神还是地鬼，都来服食享用；君子佩带它，能抵御妖邪不祥之气的侵袭。
English: Both gods and demons come to eat and enjoy it. Wearing it, a gentleman can resist the invasion of evil spirits.

古文：自峚山至于钟山，四百六十里，其间尽泽也。
现代文：从峚山到钟山，长四百六十里，其间全部是水泽。
English: From Lushan to Zhongshan, a distance of four hundred and sixty miles, all of which is Mizawa.

古文：是多奇鸟、怪兽、奇鱼，皆异物焉。
现代文：在这里生长着许许多多奇怪的禽鸟、怪异的野兽、神奇的鱼类，都是些罕见的怪物。
English: There are a lot of strange birds, strange beasts, magical fish, and rare monsters growing here.

古文：又西北四百二十里，曰钟山。
现代文：再往西北四百二十里，有一座钟山。
English: Four hundred and twenty miles to the northwest, there is a bell mountain.

古文：其子曰鼓，其状如人面而龙身，是与钦䲹杀葆江于昆仑之阳，帝乃戮之钟山之东曰鳐崖。
现代文：钟山山神的儿子叫做鼓，鼓的形貌是人面龙身，他曾和钦䲹神联手在昆仑山的南面杀死天神葆江，天帝因此将鼓与钦䲹诛杀在钟山东面一个叫鳐崖的地方。
English: The son of the god of the mountains of Zhongshan is called Drum. The shape of the drum is that of a human face. He once joined forces with the god of Yin and Yang to kill the god of heaven, Lijiang, in the south of Mount Kunlun. As a result, the god of heaven killed Drum and Yin and Yang in the east of the mountains of Zhongshan, in a place called Lijiang Cliff.

古文：钦䲹化为大鹗，其状如雕而墨文白首，赤喙而虎爪，其音如晨鹄，见则有大兵；鼓亦化为鵕鸟，其状如鸱，赤足而直喙，黄文而白首，其音如鹄，见即其邑大旱。
现代文：钦䲹化为一只大鹗，外形像普通的雕鹰却长有黑色的斑纹和白色的脑袋，红色的嘴巴和老虎一样的爪子，发出的声音如同晨鹄鸣叫，它一出现就会有大的战争；鼓也化为鵕鸟，外形像一般的鹞鹰，但长着红色的脚和直直的嘴，身上是黄色的斑纹而头却是白色的，发出的声音与鸿鹄的鸣叫很相似，在哪个地方出现那里就会有旱灾。
English: The eagle-owl was transformed into a great vulture. It looked like an ordinary eagle-owl, but it had black stripes and a white head. Its red mouth and tiger-like claws made a sound like the chirping of a morning heron. Whenever it appeared, there would be a big war. The drum was also transformed into an ostrich. It looked like an ordinary vulture, but it had red feet and a straight beak. It had yellow stripes on its body, but its head was white. The sound it made was very similar to the chirping of a boar. Wherever it appeared, there would be a drought.

古文：又西百八十里，曰泰器之山。观水出焉，西流注于流沙。
现代文：再往西一百八十里，有一座泰器山，观水从这里发源，向西流入流沙。
English: A hundred and eighty miles further west, there is a mountain called Taiji, from which the source of Guan Shui flows westward into the quicksand.

古文：是多文鳐鱼，状如鲤里，鱼身而鸟翼，苍文而白首赤喙，常行西海，游于东海，以夜飞。
现代文：这观水中有很多文鳐鱼，外形像普通的鲤鱼，长着鱼一样的身子和鸟一样的翅膀，浑身是苍色的斑纹却是白脑袋和红嘴巴，常常在西海行走，在东海畅游，在夜间飞行。
English: There were many paddlefish in the water. They looked like ordinary paddlefish, with a fish-like body and bird-like wings. They were covered with pale stripes, but they had white heads and red mouths. They often walked in the West Sea, swam in the East Sea, and flew at night.

古文：其音如鸾鸡，其味酸甘，食之已狂，见则天下大穰。
现代文：它发出的声音如同鸾鸡鸟啼叫，它的肉是酸中带甜，人如果吃了它的肉就可治好癫狂病，它一出现天下就会五谷丰登。
English: The sound it makes is like the crowing of a pheasant. Its meat is sweet and sour. If you eat its meat, you can cure epilepsy. As soon as it appears, there will be plenty of food in the world.

古文：又西三百二十里，曰槐江之山。
现代文：再往西三百二十里，有一座槐江山。
English: Another 320 miles to the west, there is a Lijiang Mountain.

古文：丘时之水出焉，而北流注于泑水。
现代文：丘时水从这座山发源，然后向北流入泑水。
English: Water flows from the mountain at the source of the hill, and then flows north to Surabaya.

古文：其中多蠃其上金青雄黄，多藏琅玕、黄金、玉，其阳多丹粟。其了有多采黄金银。
现代文：水中有很多蠃螺，山上蕴藏着丰富的石青、雄黄，还有很多的琅玕、黄金、玉石，山的南面到处是粟粒大小的丹砂，而山的北面多产带符彩的黄金白银。
English: There are a lot of snails in the water, and the mountains are rich in stalactites and stalagmites, and there are a lot of stalagmites, gold, and jade. The south side of the mountain is full of millet-sized sands, and the north side of the mountain is rich in gold and silver with charms.

古文：实惟帝之平圃，神英招司之，其状马身而人面，虎文而鸟翼，徇于四海，其音如榴。
现代文：这槐江山确实可以说是天帝悬在半空的园圃，由天神英招主管着，天神英招外形是人面马身，身上长有老虎的斑纹和禽鸟的翅膀，巡行四海传布天帝的旨命，发出的声音如同用辘轳抽水。
English: This Qijiangshan can truly be said to be the garden where the Heavenly Emperor hangs in mid-air. It is presided over by the Heavenly God Yingzhao. The Heavenly God Yingzhao is human-faced and horse-shaped, with tiger stripes and bird wings on his body. He patrols the four seas to spread the heavenly emperor's will. The sound he makes is like pumping water with a gong.

古文：南望昆仑，其光熊熊，其气魂魂。
现代文：在山上向南可以望见昆仑山，那里火光熊熊，气势恢宏。
English: On the mountain, Kunlun Mountain can be seen to the south, where the fire is blazing and the momentum is magnificent.

古文：西望大泽，后稷所潜也。
现代文：向西可以望见大泽，那里是后稷死后埋葬之地。
English: To the west, Osawa can be seen, which is the place where Hou Yi was buried after his death.

古文：其中多玉，其阴多榣木之有若。
现代文：大泽中有很多玉石，大泽的南面有许多榣木，而在它上面又有若木。
English: There is a lot of jade in Osawa. On the south side of Osawa, there are a lot of camphor trees, and there are young trees on top of it.

古文：北望诸龇，槐鬼离仑居之，鹰鸇之所宅也。
现代文：向北可以望见诸龇山，是叫做槐鬼离仑的神仙所居住的地方，也是鹰鸇等飞禽的栖息地。
English: To the north, you can see the Zhushan Mountains. It is a place inhabited by the immortals known as the ghosts, and it is also a habitat for birds such as the eagle owl.

古文：东望恒山四成，有穷鬼居之，各在一搏。
现代文：向东可以望见那四重高的桓山，有穷鬼居住在那里，各自分类聚集于一起。
English: To the east, you can see the four-storey Kansan Mountain. There are poor devils living there, each of their own kind gathered together.

古文：爰有淫水，其清洛洛。
现代文：这里有大水下泻，清清冷冷而汩汩流淌。
English: There is a large underwater waterfall here, and the water is cold and clear.

古文：有天神焉，其状如牛，而八足二首马尾，其音如勃皇，见则其邑有兵。
现代文：有个天神住在山中，他的外形像牛，但却长着八只脚、两个脑袋并拖着一条马的尾巴，啼叫声如同人在吹奏乐器时薄膜发出的声音，出现在哪里哪里就有战争。
English: There is a sky god who lives in the mountains. He looks like a cow, but he has eight legs, two heads and a horse's tail. His howling is like the sound made by a thin film when a person plays a musical instrument. Wherever he appears, there is war.

古文：西南四百里，曰昆仑之丘，是实惟帝之下都，神陆吾司之。
现代文：往西南四百里，有一座昆仑山，这里是天帝在下界的都邑，天神陆吾主管它。
English: Four hundred miles to the southwest, there is a Kunlun Mountain. This is the capital city of the Heavenly Emperor in the netherworld, and it is governed by Tenjin Luwu.

古文：其神状虎身而九尾，人面而虎爪；是神也，司天之九部及帝之囿时，有兽焉，其状如羊而四角，名曰土蝼，是食人。
现代文：这位天神的形貌是老虎的身子却有九条尾巴，一副人的面孔可长着老虎的爪子；这位神，主管天上的九部和天帝苑圃的时节。山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的羊却长着四只角，名称是土蝼，是能吃人的。
English: The shape of this god is the body of a tiger but with nine tails, a pair of human faces can grow the claws of a tiger; this god, in charge of the nine parts of the sky and the seasons of the heavenly garden. There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary sheep but with four horns, the name is the mound, it can eat people.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如蜂，大如鸳鸯，名曰钦原，蠚鸟兽则死，蠚木则枯，有鸟焉，其名曰鹑鸟，是司帝之百服。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，外形像一般的蜜蜂，大小与鸳鸯差不多，名称是钦原，这种钦原鸟刺螫其它鸟兽就会使它们死去，刺螫树木就会使树木枯死。山中还有另一种禽鸟，名叫鹑鸟，它主管天帝日常生活中各种器用服饰。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, the shape of which is like an ordinary bee, the size is similar to a cricket, and the name is Qin Yuan. This Qin Yuan bird will make other birds and beasts die, and the hedgehog trees will make the trees die. There is another bird in the mountains, called the ostrich, which is responsible for various instrumental costumes in the daily life of the emperor.

古文：有木焉，其状如棠，黄华赤实，其味如李而无核，名曰沙棠，可以御水，食之使人不溺。
现代文：山中又有一种树木，形状像普通的棠梨树，却开着黄色的花朵并结出红色的果实，味道像李子却没有核，名叫沙棠，可以用来辟水，人吃了它就能漂浮不沉。
English: There is another kind of tree in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary pear tree, but with yellow flowers and red fruits. It tastes like a plum but has no core. It is called a sandalwood, which can be used to repel water. If you eat it, you can float without sinking.

古文：有草焉，名曰薲草，其状如葵，其味如葱，食之已劳。
现代文：山中还有一种草，名叫薲草，外形很像葵菜，但味道与葱相似，吃了它就能使人解除烦恼忧愁。
English: There is also a kind of grass in the mountains, called eelgrass. Its shape is very similar to sunflower, but its taste is similar to onion. Eating it can relieve people's troubles and sorrows.

古文：河水出焉，而南流注于无达。
现代文：黄河水从这座山发源，然后向南流而东转注入无达山。
English: The water of the Yellow River originates from this mountain, and then flows southward and eastward into the Muda Mountain.

古文：赤水出焉，而东南流注于泛天之水。
现代文：赤水也发源于这座山，然后向东南流入汜天水。
English: The red water also originates from this mountain, and then flows southeast into the Luo Tianshui.

古文：洋水出焉，而西南流注于丑涂之水。
现代文：洋水也发源于这座山，然后向西南流入丑涂水。
English: Fresh water also originates from this mountain, and then flows southwest into the Ugutu River.

古文：墨水出焉，而四海流注于大杆。
现代文：黑水也发源于这座山，然后向西流到大杆山。
English: Black water also originates from this mountain and then flows westward to Mount Taijia.

古文：是多怪鸟兽。
现代文：这座山中有许多奇怪的鸟兽。
English: There are many strange animals and birds in this mountain.

古文：又西三百七十里，曰乐游之山。
现代文：再往西三百七十里，有一座乐游山。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles further west, there is a mountain called Leyou Mountain.

古文：桃水出焉，西流注于稷泽，是多白玉，其中多䱻鱼，其状如蛇而四足，是食鱼。
现代文：桃水从这座山发源，向西流入稷泽，这里到处有白色玉石，水中还有很多䱻鱼，外形像普通的蛇却长着四只脚，是能吃鱼类的。
English: Peach water flows from the source of this mountain to the west into Heze. There are white cobbles everywhere, and there are many eels in the water. They look like ordinary snakes but have four legs and can eat fish.

古文：西水行四百里，曰流沙，二百里至于嬴母之山，神长乘司之，是天之九德也。
现代文：往西行四百里水路，就是流沙，再行二百里便到蠃母山，天神长乘主管这里，他是天的九德之气所生。
English: The four-hundred-mile waterway to the west is quicksand, and the two-hundred-mile waterway to the west is the mother mountain, where Tenjin Nagae is in charge. He was born from the nine virtues of heaven.

古文：其神状如人而豹尾。
现代文：这个天神的形貌像人却长着犳的尾巴。
English: This celestial deity looks like a man but has a dragonfly's tail.

古文：其上多玉，其下多青石而无水。
现代文：山上到处是玉石，山下到处是青石而没有水。
English: On the top of the mountain there is jade everywhere, under the mountain there is bluestone everywhere, but no water.

古文：又西北三百五十里，曰玉山，是西王母所居也。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座玉山，这是西王母居住的地方。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a jade mountain, which is the place where the West Queen Mother lived.

古文：西王母其状如人，豹尾虎齿而善啸，蓬发戴胜，是司天之厉及五残。
现代文：西王母的形貌与人一样，却长着豹子一样的尾巴和老虎一样的牙齿而且喜好啸叫，蓬松的头发上戴着玉胜，是主管上天灾厉和五刑残杀之气的。
English: The shape of the Queen Mother of the West is the same as that of a human, but she has a leopard-like tail and tiger-like teeth and likes to roar. She wears a crown of jewels in her fluffy hair, and she is the one in charge of heaven and earth and the five punishments.

古文：有兽焉，其状如犬而豹文，其角如牛，其名曰狡，其音如吠犬，见则其国大穰。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像狗却长着豹子的斑纹，头上的角与牛角相似，名叫狡，发出的声音如同狗叫，在哪个国家出现哪个国家就会五谷丰登。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a dog, but has the stripes of a leopard. The horns on its head are similar to the horns of a cow. It is called Qiu. It makes a sound like a dog barking. If it appears in any country, there will be plenty of food.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如翟而赤，名曰胜遇，是食鱼，其音如录，见则其国大水。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像野鸡却通身是红色，名称是胜遇，是能吃鱼类的，发出的声音如同鹿在鸣叫，在哪个国家出现就会使那个国家发生水灾。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains that looks like a pheasant but is red all over. Its name means "lucky" and it can eat fish. The sound it makes is like a deer braying. If it appears in any country, it will cause floods in that country.

古文：又西四百八十里，曰轩辕之丘，无草木。
现代文：往西四百八十里，有一座轩辕丘，山中没有花草树木。
English: Four hundred and eighty miles to the west, there is a hill called Xuanqiu, but there are no flowers or trees on the mountain.

古文：洵水出焉，南流注于黑水，其中多丹粟，多青雄黄。
现代文：洵水从轩辕丘发源，向南流入黑水，水中有很多粟粒大小的丹砂，还有很多石青、雄黄。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Xuanqiu Hill and flows south into the Black Water. The water contains a lot of millet-sized siltstone, and there are also a lot of stone cyanobacteria.

古文：又西三百里，曰积石之山，其下有石门，河水冒以西流，是山也，万物无不有焉。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座积石山，山下有一个石门，黄河水漫过石门向西南流去。这座山上，世间万物应有尽有。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a craggy mountain with a stone gate at the bottom of the mountain. The Yellow River flows through the stone gate to the southwest. On this mountain, everything in the world can be found.

古文：又西二百里，曰长留之山，其神白帝少昊居之。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座长留山，天神白帝少昊居住在这里。
English: Two hundred miles to the west, there is a mountain called Choryu, where the god Baidi Shaohao lives.

古文：其兽皆文尾，其鸟皆文首。
现代文：山中的野兽都是花尾巴，禽鸟头上也都有花纹。
English: The beasts in the mountains all have flower tails, and the birds also have patterns on their heads.

古文：是多文玉石。
现代文：山上盛产彩色花纹的玉石。
English: The mountain is rich in jade with colorful patterns.

古文：实惟员神磈氏之宫。
现代文：它实是员神磈氏的宫殿。
English: It's actually the palace of a member of the Shinran clan.

古文：是神也，主司反景。
现代文：这个神，主要负责太阳西沉时把影子反拨向东方。
English: This god is mainly responsible for reversing the shadow to the east when the sun sets.

古文：又西二百八十里，曰章莪之山，无草木，多瑶碧。
现代文：再往西二百八十里，有一座章莪山，山上没有花草树木，到处是瑶、碧一类的美玉。
English: Two hundred and eighty miles further west, there is a Zhangye Mountain. There are no flowers, plants or trees on the mountain, but there are beautiful things such as dragonflies and caterpillars everywhere.

古文：所为甚怪。
现代文：山里常常出现十分怪异的物象。
English: Very strange things often appear in the mountains.

古文：有兽焉，其状如赤豹，五尾一角，其音如击石，其名如狰。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像赤豹，长着五条尾巴和一只角，发出的声音如同敲击石头的响声，名叫狰。
English: In the mountains there is a beast that looks like a red leopard, with five tails and one horn, and it makes a sound like the sound of a stone being struck. It is called a snipe.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鹤，一足，赤文青质而白喙，名曰毕方，其鸣自叫也，见则其邑有譌火。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的鹤，但只有一只脚，红色的斑纹和青色的身子而有一张白嘴巴，名叫毕方，它鸣叫的声音就是自身名称的读音，在哪个地方出现那里就会发生怪火。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary crane, but with only one foot, red stripes and a blue body and a white mouth, named Bifang. The sound of its chirping is the pronunciation of its own name. Wherever it appears, there will be a strange fire.

古文：又西三百里，曰阴山。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座阴山。
English: Three hundred miles further west, there is a dark mountain.

古文：浊浴之水出焉，而南流注于番泽，其中多文贝。
现代文：浊浴水从这座山发源，然后向南流入蕃泽，水中有很多五彩斑斓的贝壳。
English: This mountain is the source of the water for bathing the cormorants, which then flows south into the cormorant pond. The water is full of multicoloured shells.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狸而白首，名曰天狗，其音如榴榴，可以御凶。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像野猫脑袋却是白色的，名称是天狗，它发出的叫声与 榴榴 的读音相似，人饲养它可以辟凶邪之气。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a wildcat, but its head is white. Its name is Tengu. Its call is similar to the pronunciation of the word "pomegranate." People raise it to ward off evil spirits.

古文：又西二百里，曰符惕之山，其上多棕枬，下多金玉。
现代文：再往西二百里，有一座符惕山，山上到处是棕树和楠木树，山下有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Two hundred miles further west, there is a mountain called Wutai Mountain. The mountain is full of palm trees and camphor trees, and the mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：神江疑居之。
现代文：一个叫江疑的神居住在这里。
English: A deity named Jiang Qi lives here.

古文：是山也，多怪雨，风云之所出也。
现代文：这座符惕山，常常落下怪异之雨，风和云也从这里兴起。
English: Strange rain often falls on this mountain, and wind and clouds also rise from here.

古文：又西二百二十里，曰三危之山，三青鸟居之。
现代文：再往西二百二十里，有一座三危山，三青鸟栖息在这里。
English: Two hundred and twenty miles further west, there is a three-peaked mountain, where the three blue birds live.

古文：是山也，广员百里。
现代文：这座三危山，方圆上百里。
English: This Three Dangers Mountain has a radius of more than a hundred miles.

古文：其上有兽焉，其状如牛，白身四角，其豪如披蓑，其名曰𢕟𢓨，是食有。
现代文：山上有一种野兽，外形像牛，却长着白色的身子和四只角，身上的硬毛又长又密好像披着蓑衣，名称是𢕟𢓨，会吃人。
English: There is a beast on the mountain that looks like a cow, but it has a white body and four horns. It has long, thick, coarse hair that looks like it's covered in a cocoon. It's called a baboon, and it eats people.

古文：有鸟焉，一首而三身，其状如𪇱，其名曰鸱。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，长着一个脑袋却有三个身子，形状与𪇱鸟很相似，名叫鸱。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains. It has one head but three bodies, and its shape is very similar to that of an ostrich. It is called a cormorant.

古文：又西一百九十里，曰騩山，其上多玉而无石。
现代文：再往西一百九十里，有一座騩山，山上遍布美玉而没有石头。
English: One hundred and ninety miles to the west, there is a mountain called Lushan. The mountain is covered with gems, but there is no stone.

古文：神耆童居之，其音常如钟磬。
现代文：天神耆童居住在这里，他发出的声音常常像是敲钟击磬的响声。
English: Tenjin Hayato lives here, and the sound he makes is often like the ringing of a bell.

古文：其下多积蛇。
现代文：此山的山下到处都是蛇。
English: There are snakes all over the lower part of this mountain.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰天山，多金玉，有青雄黄。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座天山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，也出产石青、雄黄。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a Tianshan Mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade, and also produces stone blue and male yellow.

古文：英水出焉，而西南流注于汤谷。
现代文：英水从这座山发源，然后向西南流入汤谷。
English: The mountain is the source of the Yingshui River, which flows southwest into Tanggu.

古文：有神焉，基状如黄囊，赤如丹水，六足四翼，浑敦无而目，是识歌舞，实为帝江也。
现代文：山里住着一个神，外形像黄色口袋，发出的精光红如火，长着六只脚和四只翅膀，浑浑沌沌没有面目，他却知道唱歌跳舞，原本是帝江。
English: There lived a god in the mountains. His appearance resembled a yellow bag, and his radiance was red as fire. He had six feet and four wings. He was shapeless and faceless, but he knew how to sing and dance. He was originally called Emperor Jiang.

古文：又西二百九十里，曰泑山，神蓐收居之。
现代文：再往西二百九十里，有一座泑山，天神蓐收居住在这里。
English: Two hundred and ninety miles further west, there is a mountain called Lushan, where the sky god Lushan lives.

古文：其上多婴短之玉，其阳多瑾瑜之玉，其阴多青雄黄。
现代文：山上盛产一种可用作颈饰的玉石，山南面到处是瑾、瑜一类美玉，而山北面到处是石青、雄黄。
English: A kind of jade that can be used as a necklace is abundantly produced on the mountain. The south side of the mountain is full of beautiful jade such as jade and jade, while the north side of the mountain is full of stone blue and yellow.

古文：是山也，西望日之所入，其气员，神红光之所司也。
现代文：站在这座山上，向西可以望见太阳落山的情景，那种气象浑圆，由天神红光所主管。
English: Standing on this mountain, you can see the setting sun to the west, the weather is round and round, presided over by the Tenjin Red Light.

古文：西水行百里，至于翼望之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往西行一百里水路，便到了翼望山，山上没有花草树木，到处是金属矿物和玉石。
English: A hundred miles further west along the waterway, they reached Yingwang Mountain. There were no flowers or trees on the mountain, and it was full of metal minerals and jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如狸，一日而三尾，名曰讙，其音如夺百声，是可以御凶，服之已瘅。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的野猫，只长着一只眼睛却是三条尾巴，名称是讙，发出的声音好像能赛过一百种动物的鸣叫，饲养它可以辟凶邪之气，人吃了它的肉就能治好黄疸病。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary wild cat, with only one eye, but three tails. Its name is the baboon. The sound it makes seems to be able to compete with the chirping of a hundred animals. Keeping it can ward off evil spirits. People can cure jaundice by eating its meat.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌，三首六尾而善笑，名曰鵸䳜，服之使人不厌，又可以御凶。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像普通的乌鸦，却长着三个脑袋、六条尾巴并且喜欢嘻笑，名称是鵸■，吃了它的肉就能使人不做恶梦，还可以辟凶邪之气。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary crow, but with three heads, six tails and a fondness for laughter. It is called the cormorant. Eating its meat can prevent people from having nightmares and ward off evil spirits.

古文：凡西次三经之首，崇吾之山至于翼望之山，凡二十三山，六千七百四十四里。
现代文：总计西方第三列山系之首尾，从崇吾山起到翼望山止，一共二十三座山，途经六千七百四十四里。
English: The total length of the third line of mountains in the west, from Mount Chongwu to Mount Yingwang, is a total of 23 mountains, covering a distance of 6,744 miles.

古文：其神状皆羊身人面。
现代文：诸山山神的形貌都是羊的身子人的面孔。
English: The shapes of all the mountain deities are sheep's bodies with human faces.

古文：其祠之礼，用一吉玉瘗，糈用稷米。
现代文：祭祀山神的典礼，是把祀神的一块吉玉埋入地下，祀神的米用稷米。
English: The ceremony of worshiping mountain gods is to bury a piece of auspicious gem into the ground, and the rice used to worship the gods is glutinous rice.

古文：西次四经之首，曰阴山，上多楮，无石，其草多茆、蕃。
现代文：西方第四列山系的第一座山，叫做阴山，山上生长着茂密的构树，但没有石头，这里的草以莼菜、蕃草居多。
English: The first mountain of the Western Fourth Mountain Range is called Mount Yin. There are dense trees growing on the mountain, but there are no stones. The grass here is mostly amaranth and eelgrass.

古文：阴水出焉，西流注于洛。
现代文：阴水从这座山发源，向西流入洛水。
English: The mountain is the source of the cloudy water that flows westward into the Luoshui River.

古文：北五十里，曰劳山，多茈草。
现代文：往北五十里，有一座劳山，这里有茂盛的紫草。
English: Fifty miles to the north, there is a mountain called Laozhan, where there is lush purple grass.

古文：弱水出焉，而西流注于洛。
现代文：弱水从这座山发源，然后向西流入洛水。
English: The weak water originates from this mountain and then flows westward into the Luoshui River.

古文：西五十里，曰罢父之山，洱水出焉，而西流注于洛，其中多茈、碧。
现代文：往西五十里，有一座罢谷山，洱水从这里发源，然后向西流入洛水，水中多出产紫色美石、碧色玉石。
English: Fifty miles to the west, there is a mountain called Zagaya, from which the Surabaya River originates, and then flows westward into the Luoshui River. The water produces more purple gemstones and turquoise jade.

古文：北七十里，曰申山，其上多楮柞，其下多杻橿，其阳多金玉。
现代文：往北一百七十里，有一座申山，山上有很多的构树和柞树，山下是茂密的杻树和橿树，山的南面还有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: One hundred and seventy miles to the north, there is a Shen Mountain. On the mountain, there are many camphor trees and eucalyptus trees. Below the mountain, there are lush eucalyptus trees and eucalyptus trees. On the south side of the mountain, there are also abundant metal minerals and jade.

古文：区水出焉，而江流注于河。
现代文：区水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: The region's water originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：北二百里，曰鸟山，其上多桑，其焉多楮，其阴多铁，其阳多玉。
现代文：往北二百里，有一座鸟山，山上到处是桑树，山下到处是构树，山的北面盛产铁，而山的南面盛产玉石。
English: Two hundred miles to the north, there is a bird mountain. The top of the mountain is full of mulberry trees, and the bottom of the mountain is full of trees. The north side of the mountain is rich in iron, and the south side of the mountain is rich in jade.

古文：辱水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：辱水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the Shibei River, which flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又北百二里，曰上申之山，上无草木，而多硌石，下多榛楛，兽多白鹿。
现代文：再往北二十里，有一座上申山，山上没有花草树木，但到处是大石头，山上是茂密的榛树和楛树，野兽以白鹿居多。
English: Twenty miles further north, there is a mountain called Shangshin Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but there are large stones everywhere. The mountain is covered with lush eucalyptus and birch trees. The majority of wild animals are white deer.

古文：其鸟多当扈，其状如雉，以其髯飞，食之不眴目。
现代文：山里最多的禽鸟是当扈鸟，外形像野鸡，却用髯毛当翅膀来奋起高飞，吃了它的肉就能使人不眨眼睛。
English: The most numerous bird in the mountains is the ostrich, which looks like a pheasant, but uses its feathers as wings to fly high. Eating its meat can make people not blink an eye.

古文：汤水出焉，东流注于河。
现代文：汤水从这座山发源，向东流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the brackish water that flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又北百八十里，曰诸次之山，诸次之水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：再往北八十里，有一座诸次山，诸次水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: Eighty miles further north, there is a mountain called Zhuji, from which the water of Zhuji originates, and then flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：是山也，多木无草，鸟兽莫居，是多众蛇。
现代文：这座诸次山，到处生长着树木却不生长花草，也没有禽鸟野兽栖居，但有许多蛇聚集在山中。
English: There are trees growing all over this mountain, but no flowers or plants. There are no birds or beasts living there, but there are many snakes gathered in the mountains.

古文：又北百八十里，曰号山，其木多漆、棕，其草多药、芎䓖。
现代文：再往北一百八十里，有一座号山，山里的树木大多是漆树、棕树，而草以白芷草、虈草、芎草居多。
English: One hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a mountain. The trees in the mountain are mostly lacquer trees and palm trees, and the grass is mostly white eucalyptus, eucalyptus and eucalyptus.

古文：多冷石。
现代文：山中蕴藏着丰富的汵石。
English: The mountains are rich in ocher.

古文：端水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：端水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: The water flows from the source of the mountain and then flows into the Yellow River to the east.

古文：又北二百二十里，曰盂山，其阴多铁，其阳多铜，其兽多白狼白虎，其鸟多白雉白翟。
现代文：再往北二百二十里，有一座盂山，山的北面盛产铁，山的南面盛产铜，山中的野兽大多是白色的狼和白色的虎，禽鸟也大多是白色的野鸡和白色的翠鸟。
English: Two hundred and twenty miles further north, there is a Lushan Mountain. The northern side of the mountain is rich in iron, and the southern side of the mountain is rich in copper. The beasts in the mountains are mostly white wolves and white tigers, and the birds are mostly white pheasants and white kingfishers.

古文：生水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：生水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: Raw water springs from this mountain and then flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：西二百五十里，曰白於之山，上多松柏，下多栎檀，其兽多㸲牛、羬羊，其鸟多鸮。
现代文：往西二百五十里，有一座白於山，山上生长着很多的松树和柏树，山下是茂密的栎树和檀树，山中的野兽大多是㸲牛、羬羊，而禽鸟以猫头鹰之类的居多。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles to the west, there is a white-capped mountain. On the mountain, many pine and cypress trees grow. Below the mountain, there are lush eucalyptus and sandalwood trees. The wild animals in the mountains are mostly snails and sheep, while the birds are mostly owls and the like.

古文：洛水出于其阳，而东流注于渭；夹水出于其阴，东流注于生水。
现代文：洛水发源于这座山的南面，然后向东流入渭水；夹水发源于这座山的北面，向东流入生水。
English: Luo water originates from the south side of the mountain and then flows to the east into Luo water; Jian water originates from the north side of the mountain and flows to the east into fresh water.

古文：西北三百里，曰申首之山，无草木，冬夏雪。
现代文：往西北三百里，有一座申首山，没有花草树木，冬季夏季都有积雪。
English: Three hundred miles to the northwest, there is a mountain called Shenshou Mountain. There are no flowers or trees, and there is snow in winter and summer.

古文：申水出于其上。潜于其下，是多白玉。
现代文：申水从这座山上发源，潜流到山下，水中有很多白色玉石。
English: Shenshui originates from this mountain and flows under the mountain. There are many white cobbles in the water.

古文：又西五十五里，曰泾谷之山。
现代文：再往西五十五里，有一座泾谷山。
English: Fifty-five miles further west, there is a Shibuya mountain.

古文：泾水出焉，东南流注于渭，是多白金白玉。
现代文：泾水从这座山发源，向东南流入渭水，这里多出产白银和白玉。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and flows to the southeast into Surabaya, where more silver and white jade are produced.

古文：又西百二十里，曰刚山，多柒木，多㻬琈之玉。
现代文：再往西一百二十里，有一座刚山，到处都是茂密的漆树，多出产㻬琈玉。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further west, there is a mountain called Gangshan. It is full of lush sumac trees, which produce more emeralds.

古文：刚水出焉，北流注于渭。
现代文：刚水从这座山发源，向北流入渭水。
English: The brackish water originates from this mountain and flows north into the Surabaya.

古文：是多神𩳁，其状人面兽身，一足一手，其音如钦。
现代文：这里有很多神𩳁，外形是人的面孔野兽的身子，长着一只脚一只手，发出的声音像人呻吟。
English: There are many shrines here, the shape of which is a human face and the body of a beast, with one foot and one hand, emitting a sound like a human moan.

古文：又西二百里，至刚山之尾。
现代文：再往西二百里，便到了刚山的尾端。
English: Two hundred miles further west, we reached the tail end of Mount Gang.

古文：洛水出焉，而北流注于河。
现代文：洛水就发源于此，然后向北流入黄河。
English: Luoshui originates here, and then flows north into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多蛮蛮，其状鼠身而鳖首，其音如吠犬。
现代文：这里有很多的蛮蛮兽，外形像普通的老鼠却长着甲鱼的脑袋，发出的声音如同狗叫。
English: There are a lot of savage beasts here, shaped like ordinary mice but with the head of a turtle, making sounds like dogs barking.

古文：又西三百五十里，曰英鞮之山，上多漆木，下多金玉，鸟兽尽白。
现代文：再往西三百五十里，有一座英鞮山，山上生长着茂密的漆树，山下蕴藏着丰富的金属矿物和玉石，禽鸟野兽都是白色的。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further west, there is a mountain called Yinglu Mountain. On the mountain, there are lush sumac trees. Beneath the mountain, there are rich metal minerals and jade. The birds and beasts are all white.

古文：靼涴水出焉，而北流注于陵羊之泽。
现代文：涴水从这座山发源，然后向北流入陵羊泽。
English: Surabaya's water springs from this mountain and then flows north into Neung Yang Chak.

古文：是多冉遗之鱼，鱼身蛇首六足，其目如观耳，食之使人不眯，可以御凶。
现代文：水里有很多冉遗鱼，长着鱼的身子蛇的头和六只脚，眼睛长长的像马的耳朵，人如果吃了它的肉睡觉就不做恶梦，也可以辟凶邪之气。
English: There are a lot of dead fish in the water, with the body of a fish, the head of a snake and six feet, the eyes are long like the ears of a horse. If you eat its meat, you will not have nightmares when you sleep, and you can also ward off evil spirits.

古文：又西三百里，曰中曲之山，其阳多玉，其阴多雄黄、白玉及金。
现代文：再往西三百里，有一座中曲山，山的南面盛产玉石，山的北面盛产雄黄、白玉和金属矿物。
English: Three hundred miles to the west, there is a mid-shaped mountain. The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain is rich in agate, white jade and metal minerals.

古文：有兽焉，其状如马而白身黑尾，一角，虎牙爪，音如鼓音，其名曰驳，是食虎豹，可以御兵。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像普通的马却长着白身子和黑尾巴，一只角，老虎的牙齿和爪子，发出的声音如同击鼓的响声，名叫驳，是能吃老虎和豹子的，饲养它可以辟兵器。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like an ordinary horse but has a white body and a black tail, a horn, tiger's teeth and claws, and makes a sound like a drumming sound. It is called a barge. It can eat tigers and leopards. If it is raised, it can repel weapons.

古文：有木焉，其状如棠，而员叶赤实，实大如木瓜，名曰杯木，食之多力。
现代文：山中还有一种树木，形状像棠梨，但叶子是圆的并结红色的果实，果实像木瓜大小，名叫櫰木，人如果吃了它就能增添气力。
English: There is another kind of tree in the mountains, shaped like a crabapple, but the leaves are round and bear red fruit, the fruit is the size of a papaya, called a camphor tree. If you eat it, you can increase your strength.

古文：又西二百六十里，曰邽山。
现代文：再往西二百六十里，有一座邽山。
English: Two hundred and sixty miles to the west, there is a mountain called Lushan.

古文：其上有兽焉，其状如牛，蝟毛，名曰穷奇，音如獆狗，是食人。
现代文：山上有一种野兽，外形像牛，但全身长着刺猬毛，名叫穷奇，发出的声音如同狗叫，会吃人。
English: There is a beast on the mountain that looks like a cow but has a bristle-like mane. It's name is Kinchi, and it makes a sound like a dog barking. It can eat people.

古文：蒙水出焉，南流注于洋水，其中多黄贝；嬴鱼，鱼身而鸟翼，音如鸳鸯，见则其邑大水。
现代文：蒙水从这座山发源，向南流入洋水，水中有很多黄贝；还有一种蠃鱼，长着鱼的身子却有鸟的翅膀，发出的声音像鸳鸯鸟鸣叫，出现在哪里哪里就会有水灾。
English: Water flows from the source of this mountain to the south into the ocean, and there are many yellow mussels in the water; there is also an eel, which has the body of a fish but the wings of a bird, and the sound it makes is like an ostrich singing. Wherever it appears, there will be flooding.

古文：又西二百二十里，曰鸟鼠同穴之山，其上多白虎、白玉。
现代文：再往西二百二十里，有一座鸟鼠同穴山，山上有很多白色的虎、洁白的玉。
English: Two hundred and twenty miles further west, there is a mountain full of birds and mice. On the mountain, there are many white tigers and pure white jade.

古文：渭水出焉，而东流注于河。其中多鳋鱼，其状如鳣鱼，动则其邑有大兵。
现代文：渭水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河，水中生长着许多鳋鱼，形状像一般的鳣鱼，在哪个地方出没那里就会有大战发生。
English: Surabaya water flows from the source of this mountain and then flows into the Yellow River to the east. Many eels grow in the water, shaped like ordinary eels. Wherever they appear, there will be a big war.

古文：滥水出于其西，西流注于汉水，多魮之鱼，其状如覆铫，鸟首而鱼翼，音如磬石之声，是生珠玉。
现代文：滥水从鸟鼠同穴山的西面发源，向西流入汉水，水中有很多魮鱼，外形像反转过来的铫，但长着鸟的脑袋而鱼一样的鳍和尾巴，叫声就像敲击磬石发出的响声，能吐出珠玉的。
English: The polluted water flows westward into the Han River from the western source of the Bird and Mouse Mountain. There are many eels in the water. The shape is like an inverted beak, but it has a bird's head and a fish-like beak and tail. The call is like the sound made by striking a flint. It can spit out jewels.

古文：西南三百六十里，曰崦嵫之山，其上多丹木，其叶如楮，其实大如瓜，赤符而黑理，食之已瘅，可以御火。
现代文：西南三百六十里，有一座崦嵫山，山上有很多的丹树，叶子像构树叶，结出的果实像瓜大小，红色的花萼却带着黑色的斑纹，人如果吃了它就可以治愈黄疸病，还可以辟火。
English: Three hundred and sixty miles to the southwest, there is a hazel mountain. There are many hazel trees on the mountain. The leaves are like tree leaves, and the fruits are like the size of melons. The red calyx has black markings. If you eat it, you can cure jaundice, and you can also repel fire.

古文：其阳多龟，其阴多玉。
现代文：山南面有很多乌龟，而山北阴面到处是玉石。
English: There are many turtles on the south side of the mountain, while the north side of the mountain is covered with jade.

古文：苕水出焉，而西流注于海，其中多砥励。
现代文：苕水从这座山发源，然后向西流入大海，水中有很多磨石。
English: The mountain is the source of brackish water, which flows westward into the sea. The water contains a lot of millstones.

古文：有兽焉，其状马身而鸟翼，入面蛇尾，是好举人，名曰孰湖。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形是马的身子而鸟的翅膀，人的面孔而蛇的尾巴，是很喜欢把人抱着举起的，名叫孰湖。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, the shape of which is the body of a horse and the wings of a bird, the face of a man and the tail of a snake. It likes to lift people up in its arms. It is called Wuhu.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如鸮而人面，蜼身犬尾，其名自号也，见则其邑大旱。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像一般的猫头鹰而长着人的面孔，蜼一样的身子却拖着一条狗尾巴，它发出的叫声就是自己的名字，在哪个地方出现那里就会有大旱灾。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains. It looks like an ordinary owl and has a human face. Its body is like a beak, but it drags a dog's tail. The call it makes is its name. Wherever it appears, there will be a major drought.

古文：凡西次四经自阴山以下，至于崦嵫之山，凡十九山，三千六百八十里。
现代文：总计西方第四列山系，从阴山开始，直到崦嵫山为止，一共十九座山，途经三千六百八十里。
English: In total, the fourth line of mountains in the west, from Yin Mountain to Lushan Mountain, has a total of nineteen mountains and covers a distance of 3,680 miles.

古文：其神祠礼，皆用一白鸡祈，糈以稻米，白菅为席。
现代文：祭祀诸山山神的典礼，都是用一只白色鸡献祭，祀神的米用稻米，拿白茅草来做神的座席。
English: In the ceremonies to worship the gods of the mountains, a white chicken is used as a sacrifice, the rice used to worship the gods is rice, and white thatch is used to make seats for the gods.

古文：右西经之山，凡七十七山，一万七千五百一十七里。
现代文：以上就是西方经历之山的记录，总共七十七座山，途径一万七千五百一十七里。
English: The above is the record of the mountains experienced by the West, a total of seventy-seven mountains, a route of seventeen thousand five hundred and seventeen miles.

