古文：周惠达冯景杨宽兄穆俭柳庆子机周惠达字怀文，章武文安人也。
现代文：周惠达字怀文，章武文安人。
English: Zhou Huida's name is "Waiwen" and Zhang Wu's name is "Wenanren."

古文：父信，少仕州郡，历乐乡、平舒、平成三县令，皆以廉能称。
现代文：父亲周信，少年时在州郡当官，历任乐乡、平舒、平成三县县令，都以清廉能干出名。
English: His father, Zhou Xin, was an official in Zhoushu County when he was a boy, and successively served as the county magistrate of Lexiang, Pingshu, and Heisei three counties, and was famous for his integrity and ability.

古文：惠达幼有志操，好读书，美容貌，进退可观，见者莫不重之。
现代文：周惠达自幼就有志向操守，好读书，容貌漂亮，举止有节，见到他的人没有不看重他的。
English: Since his childhood, Zhou Huida had ambition and integrity, was good at reading, good-looking, and had a dignified demeanor. People who saw him did not underestimate him.

古文：魏齐王萧宝夤为瀛州刺史，召惠达及河间冯景同在合中，甚礼之。
现代文：魏国的齐王萧宝夤任瀛州刺史时，征召周惠达及河间人冯景同在署中，对他很尊重。
English: When Xiao Baozhen, the Wei king of Qi, was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, he recruited Zhou Huida and Feng Jing, a person from Hema, to be with him in the department, and he had great respect for him.

古文：及宝夤还朝，惠达随入洛阳。
现代文：萧宝夤回朝时，周惠达随着到了洛阳。
English: When Xiao Baodi returned to China, Zhou Huida followed him to Luoyang.

古文：领军元釜势倾海内，惠达尝因宝夤与釜言论，釜叹重之，于座遗惠达衣物。
现代文：领军元义权势最大，周惠达曾经因萧宝夤的关系与元义交谈，元义叹服尊重，在座上赠送给他衣物。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Yi, was the most powerful. Zhou Huida once had a conversation with Yuan Yi because of Xiao Baojun's relationship. Yuan Yi expressed his respect and presented him with clothes.

古文：孝昌初，魏临淮王彧北讨，以惠达为府长流参军。
现代文：孝昌初年，魏国临淮王元北伐，任命周惠达为府长流参军。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, Wei Guo appointed Zhou Huida as the governor to join the army during the Northern Expedition of Huai Wangyuan.

古文：及万俟丑奴等构乱，萧宝夤西征，惠达复随入关。
现代文：万俟丑奴作乱时，萧宝夤西征，周惠达又随着进入函谷关。
English: When the ugly villains made trouble, Xiao Baojun went to the West, and Zhou Huida followed him to enter the Hakodate Pass.

古文：宝夤后与贼战不利，退还，仍除雍州刺史，令惠达使洛阳。
现代文：后来，萧宝夤与贼军作战，失利退回，仍任雍州刺史，命令周惠达出使洛阳。
English: Later, Xiao Baojun fought against the invading army, was defeated and retreated, and was still appointed as the governor of Yongzhou. He ordered Zhou Huida to send an envoy to Luoyang.

古文：未还，而宝夤反谋闻于京师。
现代文：周惠达尚未返回，而萧宝夤谋反的消息已经传到京师。
English: Zhou Huida had not yet returned, but the news of Xiao Baozhen's rebellion had already reached the capital.

古文：有司以惠达是其行人，将执之。
现代文：由于周惠达是萧宝夤派来的使者，官府准备捉拿他。
English: Since Zhou Huida was an envoy sent by Xiao Baojun, the government prepared to capture him.

古文：乃私驰还，至潼关，遇大使杨侃。
现代文：于是骑马悄悄返回，到潼关时，遇上大使杨侃。
English: So he rode back quietly, and when he arrived at Shaoguan, he met the ambassador Yang Kan.

古文：侃谓惠达曰： 萧氏逆谋已成，何为故入兽口？ 
现代文：杨侃对他说： 萧氏谋反已成定局，为什么还要自投虎口？ 
English: Yang Kan said to him: It is a foregone conclusion that Mr. Xiao is plotting a rebellion. Why should he throw himself into the fray?

古文：惠达曰： 萧王为左右所误，今往，庶其改图。 
现代文：周惠达答道： 萧王被身边之人迷惑，今日前去，希望能使他改变想法。 
English: Zhou Huida replied: Xiao Wang is confused by the people around him, and I'm going there today, hoping to make him change his mind.

古文：及至，宝夤反形已露，不可弥缝，遂用惠达为光禄勋、中书舍人。
现代文：周惠达赶到时，萧宝夤反叛已趋明显，无法劝说，被任命为光禄勋、中书舍人。
English: By the time Zhou Huida arrived, Xiao Baojun's rebellion had become obvious and he could not be persuaded. He was appointed as a Guanglu Honour and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：宝夤既败，人悉逃散，唯惠达等数人从之。
现代文：萧宝夤失败后，部属全都逃散，只有周惠达等几个人跟随他。
English: After Xiao Baojun's defeat, all his subordinates fled. Only Zhou Huida and a few others followed him.

古文：宝夤语惠达曰： 人生富贵，左右咸言尽节，及遭厄难，乃知岁寒也。 
现代文：萧宝夤对他说： 人当富贵之时，身边的人都说要赴义捐生，等到遭遇危难，才知道困境中忠心难得。 
English: Xiao Baojun said to him: When a person is rich, people around him say that they want to go to charity, and when they encounter a crisis, they know that loyalty is rare in a predicament.

古文：贺拔岳获宝夤送洛，留惠达为府祭酒，给其衣马，即与参议。
现代文：贺拔岳捉住萧宝夤送到洛阳，留下周惠达担任府祭酒，给他衣服马匹，与他商议政事。
English: He Batyue captured Xiao Baojun and sent him to Luoyang, leaving Zhou Huida to serve as the prefectural sacrificial wine, give him clothes and horses, and discuss political affairs with him.

古文：岳为关中大行台，以惠达为从事中郎。
现代文：贺拔岳任关中大行台时，任命周惠达为从事中郎。
English: When He Batyue was appointed to Guan Zhongda Gangtai, he appointed Zhou Huida to be the middle-man.

古文：尝使至洛，魏孝武与惠达语及世难。
现代文：曾经出使洛阳，魏孝武帝与周惠达谈到世上艰难。
English: Once sent to Luoyang, Emperor Wei Xiaowu and Zhou Huida talked about the hardships in the world.

古文：惠达陈天下事势，述岳有诚节，唯以忧国定乱为事。
现代文：周惠达陈述天下形势，说贺拔岳诚心尽忠，只考虑平定叛乱，为国担忧。
English: Zhou Huida stated the situation of the world, saying that He Batyue was sincere and loyal, only considering the suppression of the rebellion, and worried about the country.

古文：言辞激切，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：言词激动真切，皇帝十分嘉许。
English: The words were truly stirring, and the emperor was very appreciative.

古文：及还，具以白岳。
现代文：回来以后，把情况详细报告给贺拔岳。
English: After returning, report the situation in detail to He Batyue.

古文：岳曰： 人生于天，受命于君，岂有利人荣禄，而不忧其祸难？
现代文：贺拔岳说： 我受君王的任命，难道只会享受荣华富贵，而不为帝王的艰难担忧吗？
English: He Batyue said: I have been appointed by the king, will I only enjoy the glory and wealth, and not worry about the hardships of the emperor?

古文：卿之所奏，实获吾心。 
现代文：你上奏的话，实在合我的心意。 
English: When you play it, it really suits my mood.

古文：自是更被亲礼。
现代文：从此更被亲近重用。
English: Since then, it has been used more frequently.

古文：岳每征讨，恒命惠达居守。
现代文：贺拔岳每次出征，总是命令周惠达留守。
English: Every time He Baturake went on a campaign, he always ordered Zhou Huida to stay behind.

古文：又转岳府属。
现代文：又转任贺拔岳府属官。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of a subordinate official of Hebajue Prefecture.

古文：岳为侯莫陈悦所害，悦得惠达，欲官之。
现代文：贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害以后，侯莫陈悦得到周惠达，想让他当官。
English: After He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, Hou Mo Chen Yue got hold of Zhou Huida and wanted to make him an official.

古文：惠达辞以疾，不见许，乃遁入汉阳之麦积崖。
现代文：周惠达以有病推辞，不被允许，就逃入汉阳的麦积崖。
English: Zhou Huida was not allowed to leave because he was ill, so he fled into the wheat cliffs of Hanyang.

古文：悦平，惠达归于太祖，即用秦州司马，安辑陇右。
现代文：侯莫陈悦被平定以后，周惠达归附太祖，立即被任命为秦州司马，安定陇西。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue was subdued, Zhou Huida was attached to the ancestor, and was immediately appointed as the Qin State Sima, and stabilized the west of Shaanxi.

古文：及太祖为大都督总管兵起雍，复以惠达为府司马，便委任焉。
现代文：太祖任大都督，率兵前往雍州时，又任命周惠达为府司马。
English: The great ancestor served as the great governor, and when he led the troops to Yongzhou, he also appointed Zhou Huida as the prefectural secretary.

古文：魏孝武诏太祖尚冯翊长公主，以惠达为长史，赴洛阳奉迎。
现代文：魏孝武帝诏命太祖娶冯翊长公主，任命周惠达为长史，赴洛阳奉迎。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu decreed that his great-grandfather should marry Princess Feng Yu Chang, and appointed Zhou Huida as Changshi, and went to Luoyang to welcome him.

古文：至潼关，遇孝武已西，即令惠达先。
现代文：到潼关时，魏孝武帝已经西迁，就命令周惠达先行。
English: When he arrived at Shaoguan, Emperor Wei Xiaowu had already moved west, so he ordered Zhou Huida to go first.

古文：太祖谓惠达曰： 昔周之东迁，晋郑是依。
现代文：太祖对周惠达说： 从前周室东迁，依靠的是晋国、郑国。
English: The great-grandfather said to Zhou Huida: Since the previous Zhou family moved to the east, it has relied on Jin and Zheng.

古文：今乘舆播越，降临关右，吾虽猥当其任，而才愧昔人。
现代文：如今君王西迁，驾临关西，我虽然身当重任，而才能不如古人。
English: Now that the emperor has moved to the west and is coming to Kansai, although I have a heavy responsibility, my ability is not as good as the ancients.

古文：卿宜戮力，共成功业，以取富贵也。 
现代文：你应当尽力，共同完成功业，以博取富贵。 
English: You should try your best to complete the career together to get rich.

古文：对曰： 惠达宦游有年，属明公一匡之运，富贵之事，非所敢望。
现代文：周惠达答道： 我在外作官多年，遇上您匡复国家的机会，富贵之事，不是我敢希望的。
English: Zhou Huida replied: I have been a foreign official for many years, and the opportunity to restore the country to you is not something I dare to hope for.

古文：但愿明公威德加于天下，惠达得效其尺寸，则志愿毕矣。 
现代文：只希望您威名德政传遍天下，我能够为此效点微薄之力，也就心满意足了。 
English: I only hope that your prestige and virtue will spread all over the world. If I can contribute a little to this, I will be satisfied.

古文：太祖为大将军、大行台，以惠达为行台尚书、大将军府司马，封文安县子，邑三百户。
现代文：太祖任大将军、大行台，任命周惠达为行台尚书、大将军府司马，封文安县子，食邑三百户。
English: The great-great-grandfather was appointed as the grand general and the grand governor of Xingtai, and appointed Zhou Huida as the grand secretary of Xingtai and the grand governor of Xingtai, the county seat of Wen'an County, and the food village of 300 households.

古文：太祖出镇华州，留惠达知后事。
现代文：太祖前去镇守华州，留下周惠达治理后方。
English: The great-grandfather went to defend Huazhou, leaving Zhou Huida to govern the rear.

古文：于时既承丧乱，庶事多阙。
现代文：当时正值战乱，许多事情都需要料理。
English: It was a time of war and many things needed cooking.

古文：惠达营造戎仗，储积食粮，简阅士马，以济军国之务，时甚赖焉。
现代文：周惠达营造兵器，储备粮食，考察兵马，接济军国，当时对他十分依赖。
English: Zhou Huida built weapons, stored grain, inspected soldiers and horses, and supported the military. At that time, he was very dependent on him.

古文：为安东将军，拜太子少傅，进爵为伯，增邑三百户。
现代文：任武安将军，授太子少傅，晋封伯爵，食邑增加三百户。
English: He was appointed General of Wu'an, conferred the title of Crown Prince, and promoted to the rank of Count. The number of food villages increased by 300.

古文：寻除中书令，进爵为公，增邑通前九百户，加卫大将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：随即升中书令，晋封公爵，食邑增至九百户。加卫大将军、左光禄大夫衔。
English: He was immediately promoted to the rank of Chushiro, promoted to the rank of duke, and the number of restaurants increased to 900. He was promoted to the rank of General Gawei and Doctor Sakoroku.

古文：四年，兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：大统四年，兼任尚书右仆射。
English: In the fourth year of unification, he also served as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：其年，太祖与魏文帝东征，惠达辅魏太子居守，总留台事。
现代文：当年，太祖与魏文帝东征，周惠达辅佐魏太子留守，总管后方政务。
English: In that year, Emperor Taizu and Emperor Wei Wen were on an eastward expedition, and Zhou Huida, who was in charge of government affairs in the rear, stayed behind to assist Emperor Wei.

古文：惠达前后辞让，帝手诏答曰： 西顾无忧，唯公是属。
现代文：周惠达多次推辞。皇帝亲写诏书回答说： 此去无后顾之忧，只有委托你了。
English: Zhou Huida repeatedly declined. The emperor personally wrote an edict and replied: There is nothing to worry about, I only entrusted you.

古文：萧、寇之重，深所寄怀。 
现代文：你身负萧何、寇恂那样的重任，是我的诚心寄托。 
English: It is my sincere hope that you will shoulder the same heavy responsibilities as Xiao He and Kou Ye.

古文：及邙山失律，人情骇动。
现代文：邙山失利后，人心震惊。
English: After the defeat of Lushan, people were shocked.

古文：赵青雀率东人据长安子城反，惠达奉太子出渭桥北以御之。
现代文：赵青雀率领东部居民占据长安子城反叛，周惠达奉护魏太子居渭桥以北，进行抵抗。
English: Zhao Qingzhao led the eastern residents to occupy Chang'an City in a rebellion, while Zhou Huida stayed north of the Wei Taizi Bridge to resist.

古文：军还，青雀等伏诛。
现代文：大军返回，赵青雀等人被处死。
English: The large army returned, and Zhao Qingzhao and others were executed.

古文：拜吏部尚书。
现代文：授吏部尚书。
English: He is still a member of the Board of Regents.

古文：久之，复为右仆射。
现代文：很久以后，又担任右仆射。
English: Much later, he served as a right-handed shooter.

古文：自关右草创，礼乐缺然。
现代文：当初关西草创基业，来不及制定礼乐。
English: At the beginning, Kansai was a pioneer, and it was too late to develop a ceremonial music.

古文：惠达与礼官损益旧章，至是仪轨稍备。
现代文：周惠达与礼官斟酌原有典章，到这时礼法规矩才基本完备。
English: Zhou Huida and the etiquette officer considered the original regulations, and by this time the etiquette regulations were basically complete.

古文：魏文帝因朝奏乐，顾谓惠达曰： 此卿之功也。 
现代文：魏文帝在听朝堂奏乐时，回头对周惠达说： 这是你的功劳。 
English: When Wei Wendi was listening to the morning hall music, he turned back to Zhou Huida and said: This is your achievement.

古文：寻拜仪同三司。
现代文：随即授仪同三司。
English: The ceremony was then held with the three divisions.

古文：惠达虽居显职，性谦退，善下人，尽心勤公，进拔良士。
现代文：周惠达虽然身居显要职务，但是为人谦虚退让，善待部下，尽心奉公，提拔贤能。
English: Although Zhou Huida is in a prominent position, he is a humble and conceding person, treats his subordinates well, devotes himself to public service, and promotes merit.

古文：以此人皆敬而附之。
现代文：人们都因此而敬服他。
English: People admire him for that.

古文：十年，薨。
现代文：十年去世。
English: He died ten years later.

古文：子题嗣。
现代文：儿子周题承袭爵位。
English: His son Zhou Qi inherited the title.

古文：隋开皇初，以惠达着绩前代，追封萧国公。
现代文：隋开皇初年，由于周惠达在前代功绩卓著，追封为萧国公。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Zhou Huida was posthumously awarded the title of Xiao Guogong due to his outstanding achievements in the previous generation.

古文：冯景字长明，少与惠达同志相友。
现代文：冯景字长明，年轻时和周惠达志向相同互相友好。
English: Feng Jingzhe Changming, when he was young, and Zhou Huida had the same aspirations and were friendly with each other.

古文：延中，梁人寇抄徐、扬，景谓萧宝夤曰： 今梁寇凭凌，朝廷思靖边之将。
现代文：延昌年间，梁朝人劫掠徐、扬二州，冯景对萧宝夤说： 现在梁朝贼寇横行，朝廷思念能平定边境的将领。
English: During the Yanchang period, the Liang Dynasty plundered the two states of Xu and Yang. Feng Jing said to Xiao Baojun: Now that the Liang Dynasty is rampant with bandits, the imperial court yearns for a general who can pacify the border.

古文：王若能先驱效命，非唯雪家国之耻，亦是保身之长策也。 宝夤深然之。
现代文：大王如果能率先为国效命，不仅能洗刷家国的耻辱，也是保全自身的长远策略。 萧实夤很同意他的话。
English: If the great king can take the lead in serving the country, it will not only wash away the shame of his country, but also be a long-term strategy to preserve himself. Xiao Shijun agreed with his words.

古文：及宝夤为大都督，以景为功曹参军。
现代文：萧实夤任大都督，任命冯景为功曹参军。
English: Xiao Shizhen was appointed as the grand governor and appointed Feng Jing as a meritorious soldier to join the army.

古文：后为右仆射，引景入省，领尚书都令史。
现代文：后来又任右仆射，引荐冯景入尚书省，兼任尚书都令史。
English: Later, he also served as the right-hand man, introduced Feng Jing into the Ministry of Education, and also served as the Minister of Education.

古文：正光中，宝夤为关西大行台，又假景陵江将军，领大行台都令史，从宝夤征讨。
现代文：正光年间，萧宝夤任关西大行台，又任冯景代理陵江将军，兼任大行台都令史，跟从萧宝夤征讨。
English: During the Zhengguang years, Xiao Baojun served as the Kansai Grand Marshal, and also as Feng Jing's acting general of the Lingjiang River, and also served as the Grand Marshal of the Capital, following Xiao Baojun.

古文：宝夤将举兵反，景固谏，不从。
现代文：萧实夤将要起兵谋反，冯景坚决劝谏，但萧宾夤不听。
English: Xiao Shizhen was going to rebel, Feng Jing strongly advised him, but Xiao Bin did not listen.

古文：宝夤败后，景还洛。
现代文：萧宝夤战败后，冯景回到洛阳。
English: After Xiao Baojun's defeat, Feng Jing returned to Luoyang.

古文：朝廷先闻景有谏言，故免之。
现代文：朝廷事先已得知冯景曾经进谏，所以赦免了他。
English: The imperial court had learned in advance that Feng Jing had been imprisoned, so he was pardoned.

古文：除奉车都尉。
现代文：任命他为奉车都尉。
English: He was appointed lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：汝阳王元叔昭为陇右大行台，启景为行台郎中。
现代文：汝阳王元叔昭任陇右大行台，任用冯景为行台郎中。
English: Ruyang Wang Yuan's uncle Zhao was appointed as the right-hand high-ranking official, and Feng Jing was appointed as the middle-ranking official.

古文：贺拔岳为大都督，又以景为从事中郎。
现代文：贺拔岳任大都督，又任命冯景为从事中郎。
English: He Batyue was appointed as the grand governor, and Feng Jing was appointed as the middle-ranking official.

古文：太祖平侯莫陈悦，除景洛阳郡守，寻兼行台左丞，留守原州。
现代文：太祖平定侯莫陈悦，授任冯景为洛阳郡守，不久兼任行台左丞，留守原州。
English: The great-grandfather subdued Hou Mo Chen Yue, appointed Feng Jing as Luoyang County Governor, and soon also served as Gangtai Zuo, remaining in Wonju.

古文：魏孝武西迁，封高阳县伯，邑三百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁的时候，封冯景为高阳县伯，封地三百户。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, Feng Jing's fief was Goyang County, with 300 households.

古文：迁散骑常侍、行台尚书，加瀛州刺史。
现代文：后来又升任散骑常侍、行台尚书，加任瀛州刺史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of straggler and attendant, and was appointed to the post of Gangtai Shangshu. He was also appointed to the post of Zhangzhou Shishi.

古文：大统初，行泾州事。
现代文：大统初年，兼摄泾州的官职。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he also held the official post of Regent of Gyeongju.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来冯景因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：杨宽字景仁，弘农华阴人也。
现代文：杨宽字景仁，弘农华阴人。
English: Yang Guang character Jing Ren, Hongnong Hua Yin people.

古文：祖恩，魏镇远将军、河间内史。
现代文：祖父杨恩，在魏国任镇远将军、河间内史。
English: His grandfather Yang En was a general of Zhenyuan in Wei and a historian of Kham.

古文：父钧，博学强识，举秀才，拜大理平，转廷尉正。
现代文：父亲杨钧，知识渊博，被推举为秀才，授大理平，转任廷尉正。
English: His father, Yang Jie, was very knowledgeable and was selected as an outstanding scholar, awarded the title of Dai Li Ping, and transferred to the post of imperial lieutenant.

古文：累迁，历洛阳令、左中郎将、华州大中正、河南尹、廷尉卿、安北将军、七兵尚书、北道大行台、恒州刺史、怀朔镇将，卒于镇。
现代文：多次升迁，历任洛阳令、左中郎将、华州大中正、河南尹、廷尉卿、安北将军、七兵尚书、北道大行台、恒州刺史、怀朔镇将等职，在镇将任上去世。
English: He was promoted many times, and successively held the posts of Luoyang commander, Zuo Zhonglang commander, Huazhou Daizhongzheng, Henan Yin, Tingfeiqing, Anbei general, Qibing Shangshu, Beidou Dagangdai, Hengzhou Zhishi, and Waishuo town commander, and died in the position of town commander.

古文：赠侍中、司空公，追封临贞县伯，谥曰恭。
现代文：追赠侍中、司空公，追封临贞县伯，谥号为 恭 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain and Empress Dowager, and was posthumously awarded the title of Count of Linzhen County. His posthumous name was Chong.

古文：宽少有大志，每与诸儿童游处，必择高大之物而坐之，见者咸异焉。
现代文：杨宽从小就有远大抱负，每当与儿童们游玩，他总是选择高大之物，坐在上面，见到的人都感到惊异。
English: Yang Guang has had lofty ambitions since he was a child. Whenever he plays with children, he always chooses a tall object and sits on it, surprising everyone he meets.

古文：及长，颇解属文，尤尚武艺。
现代文：长大后，很能悟解文章，特别喜好武艺。
English: When he grew up, he was very good at writing articles, and especially liked martial arts.

古文：弱冠，除奉朝请。
现代文：二十岁时，授奉朝请。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed to the post of chancellor.

古文：属钧出镇恒州，请从展效，乃改授将军、高阙戍主。
现代文：当时杨钧镇守恒州，请求跟随效力，于是改授将军、高阙戍主。
English: At that time, Yang Kunzhen was in charge of the defense of Hengzhou, and he requested to follow the effect, so he was awarded the title of general and master of Gaozhou.

古文：时茹茹既乱，其主阿那瑰来奔，魏帝遣使纳之，诏钧率兵卫送。
现代文：蠕蠕内乱，其首领阿那前来投奔，魏帝派使者接纳，诏命杨钧率兵护送。
English: When the civil war broke out, its leader, Ana, came to take refuge. Emperor Wei sent an envoy to receive him and ordered Yang Pi to escort him with his soldiers.

古文：宽亦从，以功拜行台郎中。
现代文：杨宽也跟随前往，因功授行台郎中。
English: Yang Kuan also followed, and was awarded the title of Gang Tai Lang Junior High School.

古文：时北边贼攻围镇城，钧卒，城民等推宽守御。
现代文：当时北部贼众围攻怀朔，杨钧去世，城中百姓推举杨宽守城。
English: At that time, the northern bandits besieged Wai Shuo, Yang Hui died, and the people in the city elected Yang Kuan to defend the city.

古文：寻而城陷，宽乃北走茹茹。
现代文：不久，怀朔陷落，杨宽向北逃到蠕蠕。
English: Soon after, Huai Shuo fell and Yang Guang fled north to Demu Demu.

古文：后讨镇贼，破之，宽始得还朝。
现代文：后来讨伐贼众，将其击败，杨宽才得以返回。
English: Later, Yang Guang was able to return after fighting and defeating the bandits.

古文：魏广阳王深与宽素相委昵，深犯法得罪，宽被逮捕。
现代文：魏广阳王元深与杨宽的关系一向十分亲密，元深犯法治罪，杨宽也被逮捕。
English: The relationship between Wei Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng and Yang Guang has always been very close. Yuan Sheng committed a crime against the rule of law, and Yang Guang was also arrested.

古文：魏孝庄时为侍中，与宽有旧，藏之于宅，遇赦得免。
现代文：魏孝庄帝当时担任侍中，同杨宽有交情，把他藏在自己家里，后被赦免。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang was a chamberlain at the time and had a friendship with Yang Guang. He hid him in his home and was later pardoned.

古文：除宗正丞。
现代文：授宗正丞。
English: He was given the title of Jusong Shojo.

古文：北海王颢少相器重，时为大行台，北征葛荣，欲启宽为左右丞，与参谋议。
现代文：北海王元颢很早就器重杨宽。元颢当时任大行台，北征葛荣，想启用杨宽任左丞，参与谋划。
English: The king of the North Sea, Yuan Shao, placed great importance on Yang Guang early on. At that time, Yuan Shao was in charge of the Northern Expedition, and Ge Rong wanted to appoint Yang Guang as the Left Wing Commander, and participated in the planning.

古文：宽辞以孝庄厚恩未报，义不见利而动。
现代文：杨宽推辞说尚未报答魏孝庄帝的厚恩，不能见利而动。
English: Yang Kuan did not repay the kindness of Emperor Xiaozhuang because he could not see the benefit of forgetting the truth, so he declined.

古文：颢未之许。
现代文：元颢不答应。
English: Yuan Shao did not agree.

古文：颢妹婿李神轨谓颢曰： 杨宽义士也，匹夫犹不可夺志，况义士乎。
现代文：元颢的妹夫李神轨对元颢说： 杨宽是位义士，一般的人尚且不可改变志向，何况义士呢？
English: Li Shenluo, the brother-in-law of Yuan Qi, said to Yuan Qi, "Yang Guang is a righteous man. An ordinary person cannot change his aspiration. How about a righteous man?

古文：王今强之以行，亦恐不为人用。 
现代文：大王今天强迫他随军，恐怕他也不会效力。 
English: The Great King forced him to join the army today, and I'm afraid he won't be able to serve.

古文：颢乃止。
现代文：元颢才打消了这个念头。
English: It was not until the Yuan Dynasty that this idea was dispelled.

古文：孝庄践阼，拜通直散骑侍郎，领河南尹丞，行洛阳令。
现代文：魏孝庄帝登基，授通直散骑侍郎，兼任河南尹丞，代理洛阳县令。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, bestowed upon him the title of Zhengsanzhijian, concurrently served as Henan Yinzheng, acting Luoyang County magistrate.

古文：邢杲反，宽以都督从太宰、上党王元天穆讨平之。
现代文：邢杲反叛，杨宽以都督身份跟随太宰、上党王元天穆将其平定。
English: After the rebellion, Yang Kuan, as the governor of the capital, followed the Dazai and the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, to suppress it.

古文：就拜通直散骑常侍。
现代文：就地授通直散骑常侍。
English: He was awarded the rank of samurai for riding horseback on the spot.

古文：师未还，属元颢自梁入洛，孝庄出居河内。
现代文：军队尚未返回，元颢从梁国入据洛阳，孝庄帝出居河内。
English: Before the troops returned, Yuan Shao entered Luoyang from Liang Province, and Emperor Xiaozhuang left for Hanoi.

古文：天穆惧，计无所出，集诸将谋之。
现代文：元天穆害怕，想不出对策，召集众将商议。
English: Yuan Tianmu was afraid and could not think of a countermeasure, so he called the generals together for discussion.

古文：宽曰： 吴人轻跳，非王之敌。
现代文：杨宽说： 吴人轻率，不是大王的对手。
English: Yang Kuan said: Wu people are reckless and are no match for the great king.

古文：况悬军深入，师老兵疲，强弩之末，何能为也。
现代文：何况孤军深入，军队疲惫，如同强弓射出的箭即将落地，再也难有作为。
English: Moreover, the lonely army is deep, the army is tired, like the arrow shot by the strong bow is about to fall to the ground, and it is difficult to do anything.

古文：愿径取成皋，会兵伊洛，戮带定襄，于是乎在。
现代文：希望直取成皋，会师伊、洛，平定带、襄，在此一举。
English: It is hoped that the direct acquisition will be successful, and the unification of Shiyi, Luo, Pingding Belt, and Xiang will be achieved in one fell swoop.

古文：此事易同摧朽，王何疑焉。 
现代文：此事如同摧枯拉朽，大王还有什么怀疑？ 
English: This thing is like dragging and dropping, what doubts does the great king still have?

古文：天穆然之，乃引军趣成皋，令宽与尔朱能为后拒。
现代文：元天穆赞同他的建议，于是率军前往成皋，命令杨宽、尔朱能担任后卫。
English: Yuan Tianmu agreed with his suggestion, so he led the army to Chengdu and ordered Yang Guang and Er Zhuneng to serve as guards.

古文：寻以众议不可，乃回赴石济。
现代文：由于大家不同意，随即又返回石济。
English: As everyone disagreed, he immediately returned to Ishiji.

古文：宽夜行失道，后期。
现代文：杨宽在夜里迷失道路，误了约定期限。
English: Yang Guang lost his way at night and missed the deadline.

古文：诸将咸言： 宽少与北海周旋，今不来矣。 
现代文：众将都说： 杨宽从小就与北海王交好，今天不会再回来了。 
English: The generals all said: Yang Guang has been friends with Beihai Wang since childhood, and he will not come back today.

古文：天穆答曰： 杨宽非轻于去就者也，其所逗留，必有他故。
现代文：元天穆答道： 杨宽不是那样去留轻率的人，他耽误了行程，一定有其他原因。
English: Yuan Tianmu replied, "Yang Guang is not the kind of person who would leave without thinking. If he delayed his trip, there must have been other reasons.

古文：吾当为诸君保明之。 
现代文：我可以为各位担保他。 
English: I can vouch for him.

古文：语讫，候骑白宽至。
现代文：话刚说完，巡逻骑兵报告杨宽到。
English: As soon as he finished speaking, the patrol cavalry reported that Yang Guang had arrived.

古文：天穆抚髀而笑曰： 吾固知其必来。 
现代文：元天穆拍着大腿笑道： 我本来就知道他必定回来。 
English: Tianmu patted his thigh and said with a smile, "I knew he would come."

古文：遽出帐迎之，握其手曰： 是所望也。 
现代文：急忙出帐迎接，握着他的手说： 我正盼望着你呢！ 
English: She hurried out to meet him, shook his hand and said, "I've been looking forward to meeting you!"

古文：即给牛三十头、车五乘、绵绢一十五车、羊五十口。
现代文：当即赏给牛三十头、车五辆、丝织品十五车、羊三十头。
English: He was immediately rewarded with thirty head of cattle, five carts, fifteen carts of silk goods, and thirty sheep.

古文：与天穆俱谒孝庄于太行，拜散骑常侍、安东将军。
现代文：同元天穆到太行朝见孝庄帝，授散骑常侍、安东将军。
English: In the same year, Emperor Tenmu went to Taihang to see Emperor Xiaozhuang in the morning, and dispatched his equerry, General Andong.

古文：仍为都督，从平河内，进围北中。
现代文：又担任都督，参与平定河内，围攻北中。
English: The imperial court still appointed him as the governor-general to pacify Hanoi and besiege Beizhong.

古文：时梁将陈庆之为颢兵守北门，天穆驻马围外，遣宽至城下说庆之。
现代文：当时梁国将领陈庆之为元颢率军把守北门。元天穆在包围圈外停住马，派杨宽到城下劝说陈庆之。
English: At that time, the general of Liang Province, Chen Qingzhi, led the army to guard the north gate. Yuan Tianmu stopped his horse outside the encirclement and sent Yang Guang to the city to persuade Chen Qingzhi.

古文：宽先自称姓名，然后与语，备陈利害，劝令早降。
现代文：杨宽先自报姓名，然后同陈庆之交谈，晓以利害，劝他及早投降。
English: Yang Guang first reported his name, and then talked with Chen Qingzhi, and advised him to surrender as soon as possible.

古文：庆之不答。
现代文：陈庆之不回答。
English: Chen Qingzhi did not answer.

古文：久之，乃曰： 贤兄抚军在此，颇欲相见。 
现代文：停了很久，才说： 您的兄长在此领兵，很想同您见面。 
English: He paused for a long time before saying, "Your brother is leading an army here and would like to meet you."

古文：宽答曰： 仆兄既力屈威，迹沦逆党，人臣之理，何烦相见。
现代文：杨宽答道： 我兄既然屈服于大王的威严，沦为叛党，失去做臣子的道理，还有什么必要见面？
English: Yang Kuan replied: Since my brother has succumbed to the majesty of the great king, fallen into a rebel party, and lost the principle of being a vassal, what is the need to meet?

古文：向所以先申姓名者，岂不知兄在彼乎。
现代文：刚才我先报姓名，难道不知道我哥哥在这里吗？
English: Just now, I gave my name first. Don't you know that my brother is here?

古文：直以信不见疑，忠为令德耳。
现代文：只是由于讲信用就不必起疑，忠诚才是美德罢了。
English: It's just that by talking about trust, there's no need to raise suspicions. Loyalty is a virtue.

古文：仆之昆季，幸不待言。
现代文：我们兄弟之事，这里不用再说。
English: There is no need to say anything more about our brothers.

古文：但当议良图，自求多福。 
现代文：只希望将军考虑良策，自求多福。 
English: I only hope that the general will consider good policies and seek his own good fortune.

古文：天穆闻之，谓左右曰： 杨宽大异人，何至不惜形便如此。 
现代文：元天穆听说这件事，对身边的人说： 杨宽与一般人大有不同，为什么如此不爱惜骨肉？ 
English: When Yuan Tianmu heard about this, he said to the people around him: Yang Guang is very different from ordinary people, why is he so generous?

古文：自是弥敬重之。
现代文：从此更加敬重他。
English: I respect him even more now.

古文：孝庄反正，拜中军将军、太府卿、华州大中正，封澄城县伯，邑三百户。
现代文：魏孝庄帝回到京师后，授他为中军将军、太府卿、华州大中正，封澄城县伯，食邑三百户。
English: After Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang returned to Beijing, he gave him the titles of General of the Chinese Army, Grand Prefect, Senior Vice President of Huazhou University, and the title of Count of Chengcheng County, with 300 households.

古文：尔朱荣被诛，其从弟世隆等拥部曲烧城门，出据河桥，还逼京师。
现代文：尔朱荣被处死后，他的堂弟尔朱世隆等人率领部下烧毁城门，出城据守河桥，又回军进逼京师。
English: After Er Zhu Rong was executed, his cousin Er Zhu Shilong and others led their subordinates to burn down the city gate, leave the city to guard the river bridge, and return to the army to force the Beijing division.

古文：进宽镇北将军、使持节、大都督，随机扞御。
现代文：杨宽升任镇北将军、使持节、大都督，相机防卫京师。
English: Yang Guang was promoted to the position of Zhenbei General, Envoy, Grand Governor, Camera Defense Beijing Division.

古文：世隆谓宽曰： 岂忘太宰相知之深也？ 
现代文：尔朱世隆对杨宽说： 你难道忘了太宰的大恩？ 
English: Le Zhu Shilong said to Yang Guang: Have you forgotten Dazai's great favor?

古文：宽答曰： 太宰见爱以礼，人臣之交耳。
现代文：杨宽答道： 太宰厚爱，待我以礼，但那是臣子之间的交情。
English: Yang Kuan replied, "Dazai is affectionate and treats me with courtesy, but that is the friendship between courtiers.

古文：今日之事，事君常节。 
现代文：今天的事，是我侍奉君王应有的节操。 
English: Today's event is the culmination of my service to the sovereign.

古文：世隆北走，宽追至河内。
现代文：尔朱世隆向北逃跑，杨宽追到河内。
English: Le Zhu Shilong fled to the north, Yang Guang chased him to Hanoi.

古文：俄而尔朱兆陷洛阳，囚执孝庄帝。
现代文：不久，尔朱兆攻陷洛阳，囚禁孝庄帝。
English: Soon after, Zhu Zhao invaded Luoyang and imprisoned Emperor Xiaozhuang.

古文：宽还洛不可，遂自成皋奔梁。
现代文：杨宽无法返回洛阳，只得从成皋投奔梁国。
English: Unable to return to Luoyang, Yang Guang had to flee from Chengdu to Liang Province.

古文：至建业，闻孝庄帝弒崩，宽发哀尽礼。
现代文：到了建业，听说孝庄帝被害，杨宽守丧尽礼。
English: When I arrived in Jianye, I heard that Emperor Xiaozhuang had been killed and Yang Guangshu was mourning.

古文：梁武义之，待之甚厚。
现代文：梁武帝认为他很有义气，待他十分优厚。
English: Emperor Liangwu considered him to be very loyal and treated him very generously.

古文：寻而礼送还朝。
现代文：不久，以礼送他回朝。
English: Soon, he was sent home with a gift.

古文：至下邳，尔朱仲远启复宽官爵，留为大行台吏部尚书。
现代文：抵达下邳时，尔朱仲远上奏恢复杨宽官职，留下他担任大行台吏部尚书。
English: When he arrived at the Lower Yangtze River, Er Zhu Zhongyuan played the role of restoring Yang Guang's official position, leaving him to serve as the leader of the Taihangtai Liaison Department.

古文：孝武初，改授散骑常侍、骠骑将军、给事黄门侍郎，监内典书事。
现代文：孝武帝初年，改授散骑常侍、骠骑将军、给事黄门侍郎，监理佛经书事。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu, he was re-assigned to the position of straggling equerry, general of cavalry, attendant of the Yellow Gate, and supervisor of Buddhist scriptures.

古文：时夏州戍兵数千人据兖州反，诏宽兼侍中，节度诸军讨平之。
现代文：当时夏州守兵数千人占据兖州反叛，诏命杨宽兼任侍中，指挥各军讨平夏州。
English: At that time, thousands of soldiers from the Xiazhou garrison occupied Zhangzhou and rebelled. The emperor ordered Yang Guang to also serve as an aide-de-camp, commanding the armies to pacify Xiazhou.

古文：中尉綦俊与宽有宿憾，诬以他罪，劾之。
现代文：中尉綦繧与杨宽有旧怨，诬告他有其他罪名，揭发杨宽。
English: Lieutenant Zou had an old grudge against Yang Guang. He falsely accused him of other crimes and exposed Yang Guang.

古文：孝武谓侍臣等曰： 杨宽清直，朕极知其无罪，但不能杜法官之奏耳。 
现代文：孝武帝对近臣说： 杨宽清廉正直，我最清楚他无罪，只是不能杜绝法官的上奏。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said to his vassal: Yang Guang is honest, I know best that he is not guilty, but I can't stop the judge's appeal.

古文：事下廷尉，寻得申释。
现代文：把这件事交给廷尉去办，随即得以洗去冤屈，获得释放。
English: He put the matter in the hands of a courtier and was immediately released without charge.

古文：又除黄门侍郎，兼武卫将军。
现代文：又授黄门侍郎，兼任武卫将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of Huangmen Zhi Rong and concurrently served as the General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：孝武与齐神武有隙，遂召募骑勇，广增宿卫。
现代文：孝武帝与齐神武不和，于是召募骑马勇士，大大扩充宿卫人数。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not get along with Qi Shenwu, so he called for horseback warriors and greatly expanded the number of guards.

古文：以宽为合内大都督，专总禁旅。
现代文：任命杨宽为阁内大都督，专门总领禁军。
English: Yang Guang was appointed as the grand governor of the cabinet, specifically as the leader of the forbidden army.

古文：从孝武入关，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：跟随孝武帝入函谷关，兼任吏部尚书。
English: He followed Emperor Xiaowu into Hantian Pass and concurrently held the post of secretary.

古文：录从驾勋，进爵华山郡公，邑一千二百户。
现代文：总计随从护驾之功，晋封华山郡公，食邑一千二百户。
English: In total, 1,200 households in Huashan County were promoted to county governorship thanks to the efforts of the escort.

古文：大统初，迁车骑大将军、太子太傅、仪同三司。
现代文：大统元年，升任车骑大将军、太子太傅、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Prince Taifu, and the Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：三年，使茹茹，迎魏文悼后。
现代文：三年，出使蠕蠕，奉迎魏文悼后。
English: Three years later, he was sent to Chongqing to attend Wei Wen's memorial service.

古文：还，拜侍中、都督泾州诸军事、泾州刺史。
现代文：回来后，授侍中、都督泾州诸军事、泾州刺史。
English: After returning, he was awarded the title of "Junior Chamberlain" and became the military governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：五年，除骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督东雍州诸军事、东雍州刺史，即本州也。
现代文：五年，任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督东雍州诸军事、东雍州刺史。十年，转任河州刺史。
English: In five years, he was appointed as the General of the Horse Cavalry, the Kefu Rites and Three Departments, the Military Governor of Dongyang Province, and the Historian of Dongyang Province. In ten years, he was transferred to the Historian of Hezhou Province.

古文：十年，转河州刺史。十六年，兼大丞相府司马。
现代文：十六年，兼任大丞相府司马。
English: For 16 years, he also served as the secretary of the chancellor's office.

古文：朝议欲经略汉川，而梁宜丰侯萧循固守南郑。
现代文：朝廷议论，打算经营汉川，但梁国的宜丰侯萧循在南郑固守。
English: The imperial court discussed and planned to manage Hanchuan, but Xiao Xun, the Yi Feng Hou of Liang Province, remained firmly in Nan Zheng.

古文：十七年，宽从大将军达奚武讨之。
现代文：十七年，杨宽跟随大将军达奚武前去讨伐。
English: In the seventeenth year, Yang Kuan followed the great general Dagong Wuxing to go to the crusade.

古文：梁武陵王萧纪遣将杨干运率兵万余人救循，武令宽督开府王杰、贺兰愿德等邀击之。
现代文：梁国武陵王萧纪派将领杨乾运率兵一万余人救援萧循，达奚武命令杨宽督率开府王杰、贺兰愿德等人中途截击。
English: King Xiao Ji of Wuling of Liang Province sent general Yang Qianjun with more than 10,000 soldiers to rescue Xiao Xun, and Daguangwu ordered Yang Guangdu with Wang Jie of Kaifu, He Lan Jiande and others to intercept halfway.

古文：军至白马，与干运合战，破之，俘斩数千人。
现代文：军队到白马时，与杨乾运交战，将其打败，俘虏、杀死数千人。
English: When the army arrived at Baima, they fought with Yang Qianyun, defeated him, captured and killed thousands of people.

古文：军还，除南豳州刺史。
现代文：回来以后，授南豳州刺史。
English: After returning, he was awarded the South Luzhou History Prize.

古文：魏废帝初，入为尚书左仆射、将作大监，坐事免。
现代文：魏废帝初年，入朝任尚书左仆射、将作大监，因罪免官。
English: In the first year of the Wei Emperor, he entered the imperial court as the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu, and was to serve as the grand inspector, but he was dismissed for his crime.

古文：魏恭帝二年，除廷尉卿。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，任廷尉卿。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was appointed as a court lieutenant.

古文：世宗初，拜大将军，增邑一千二百户。
现代文：世宗初年，授大将军，食邑增加一千二百户。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was awarded the rank of general, and the number of food villages increased by 1200.

古文：从贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，破之，别封宜阳县公，邑一千户。
现代文：跟随贺兰祥讨伐吐谷浑，将其击败，另封宜阳县公，食邑一千户。
English: He followed He Lanxiang to fight against Tu Guhun, defeated him, and was made the governor of Yiyang County, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：除小冢宰，转御正中大夫。
现代文：授小冢宰，转任御正中大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Junior Vice-President and transferred to the post of Senior Middle School Doctor.

古文：武成二年，诏宽与麟趾学士参定经籍。
现代文：武成二年，诏命杨宽与麟趾殿学士校定经籍。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, the emperor ordered Yang Guang and Lin Zi Dian Baccalaureate School to be registered.

古文：宽性通敏，有器识。
现代文：杨宽为人通达机敏，有器量见识。
English: Yang Guang is an astute and astute person.

古文：频牧数州，号为清简。
现代文：接连治理数州，以清平简切著称。
English: He successively governed several prefectures and was known for his clear and concise style.

古文：历居台阁，有当官之誉。
现代文：历任内阁要职，也有美名。
English: Successive cabinet ministers have held important positions and have a good reputation.

古文：然与柳庆不协，欲按成其罪，时论颇以此讥之。
现代文：可是与柳庆不和，企图故意治柳庆的罪，时论因此对他颇有讽刺。
English: However, he did not get along with Liu Qing, and attempted to purposely punish Liu Qing's crime. Therefore, the chronology is quite ironic to him.

古文：保定元年，除总管梁兴等十九州诸军事、梁州刺史。
现代文：保定元年，授总管梁兴等十九州诸军事、梁州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, Liang Xing, the general manager, and other nineteen states of the military and Liangzhou stabbed history.

古文：其年，薨于州。
现代文：当年在梁州去世。
English: He died in Liangzhou that year.

古文：赠华陕虞上潞五州刺史。
现代文：追赠华、陕、虞、上、潞五州刺史。
English: The five states of Hua, Shaanxi, Yu, Shang and Handan were also awarded.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谥号为 元 。
English: 号元.

古文：子纪嗣。
现代文：儿子杨纪承袭爵位。
English: His son Yang Ji will inherit the title.

古文：大象末，官至上仪同大将军、虞部下大夫。
现代文：大象末年，官至上仪同大将军、虞部下大夫。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, the official's highest honor, the same as the general, and the doctor under the State Council.

古文：宽二兄，穆、俭。
现代文：杨宽有两个哥哥：杨穆、杨俭。
English: Yang Guang has two brothers: Yang Mu and Yang Jian.

古文：穆字绍叔。
现代文：杨穆字绍叔。
English: Yang Mu Zi Shao Shuang.

古文：魏永安中，除华州别驾。
现代文：北魏永安年间，杨穆任华州别驾。
English: During the Northern Wei Yong'an period, Yang Mu was the leader of Huazhou Beibei.

古文：孝武末，宽请以澄城县伯让穆，诏许之。
现代文：孝武末年，杨宽请求朝廷把澄城县伯的爵位转让给杨穆，皇上下诏书同意。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaowu, Yang Guang requested the imperial court to transfer the title of Count of Chengcheng County to Yang Mu, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：仍拜中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，除车骑将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史。
现代文：随后朝廷任杨穆为中军将军、金紫光禄大夫，后又任车骑将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史。
English: Subsequently, the imperial court appointed Yang Mu as the general of the Chinese army, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and later as the general of chariot and cavalry, the governor and the military of the state, and the history of the state.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：最后在家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、华州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、华州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the titles of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kefu Yi Tong San Shi, and Huazhou Jishi.

古文：俭字景则。
现代文：杨俭字景则。
English: Yang Jian's calligraphy is the best.

古文：伟容仪，有才行。
现代文：仪容壮美，有才干德行。
English: She is beautiful, talented and virtuous.

古文：魏正始中，起家侍御史，加奉朝请，迁员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：北魏正始年间，杨俭从家中被征召出来任侍御史，加任奉朝请，后又升任员外散骑侍郎。
English: During the early years of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yang Jian was conscripted from his family to serve as an attendant to the emperor, and later he was promoted to the position of a non-commissioned officer.

古文：孝昌中，除镇远将军、顿丘太守。
现代文：孝昌年间，杨俭任镇远将军、顿丘太守。
English: During the reign of Xiaochang, Yang Jian served as Zhenyuan general and Dongqiu governor.

古文：未及述职，元颢启请随军。
现代文：还没有来得及述职，元颢启奏皇上请求让杨俭随军。
English: Before he had time to report for duty, the Yuan Shikai appealed to the emperor to let Yang Jian follow the army.

古文：建义初，兼给事黄门侍郎、左将军、太府少卿。
现代文：建义初年，杨俭兼任给事黄门侍郎、左将军、太府少卿。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, Yang Jian concurrently served as the Yellow Gate Attendant, the Left General, and the Taifu Minor Lord.

古文：元颢入洛，授抚军将军。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，杨俭被授任抚军将军。
English: Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, and Yang Jian was appointed the general of the Fuxun army.

古文：孝庄反正，废于家。
现代文：孝庄帝复位，杨俭被废黜在家。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was restored to the throne, and Yang Jian was deposed at home.

古文：寻拜散骑常侍、都督颍州诸军事、颍州刺史。
现代文：不久他又被授任散骑常侍、都督颖州诸军事、颖州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as a knight errant, the military governor of Yingzhou, and the historian of Yingzhou.

古文：建明中，加征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：建明年间，杨俭加任征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: During the construction of the next year, Yang Jian was appointed as the Southern Expeditionary General and Jin Zi Guanglu as the doctor.

古文：孝武初，除卫将军、北雍州刺史。
现代文：孝武初年，杨俭任卫将军、北雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xiaowu, Yang Jian was appointed as the general of Wei and the governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：政尚宽惠，夷夏安之。
现代文：在任期间施政宽厚仁惠，各族百姓都安定。
English: During his term of office, his policies were generous and benevolent, and the people of all ethnic groups were stable.

古文：孝武西迁，除侍中、骠骑将军。
现代文：孝武西迁，杨俭任侍中、骠骑将军。
English: Xiao Wu moved to the west, and Yang Jian served as an aide-de-camp and cavalry general.

古文：大统初，以本官行东秦州事，加使持节、当州大都督。
现代文：大统初年，以本官职身份兼摄东秦州职务，加任使持节、当州大都督。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he concurrently held the post of East Qin State as his official position, and was also appointed as the envoy of the festival and the governor of the state.

古文：从破齐神武于沙苑，封夏阳县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：接着又在沙苑打败齐神武帝，被封为夏阳县侯，封地八百户。
English: Next, he defeated Emperor Qishenwu in Shayuan, and was made the lord of Xiayang County, with 800 fiefs.

古文：七年，领大丞相府谘议参军，出为都督东雍华二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、华州刺史。
现代文：大统七年，杨俭兼任大丞相府谘议参军，出任都督束雍华二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、华州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Reunification, Yang Jian concurrently served as the grand secretary of the Prime Minister's Office for consultation and participation in the army, and served as the governor of the Yonghua two states of the military, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and the Huazhou stabbing history.

古文：八年，卒于家。
现代文：大统八年，杨俭在家中去世。
English: Eight years after unification, Yang Jian died at home.

古文：赠本官，谥曰静。
现代文：朝廷追赠他原任官职，谧号是静。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously awarded him his former official post, and his nickname was Shizuka.

古文：柳庆字更兴，解人也。
现代文：柳庆字更兴，是解县人。
English: Liu Qing Zi is more cheerful and is a native of Xie County.

古文：五世祖恭，仕后赵，为河东郡守。
现代文：他的五世祖柳恭，在后赵做官，任河东郡守。
English: His fifth-generation ancestor, Liu Gong, became an official after Zhao and served as the governor of Hedong County.

古文：后以秦、赵丧乱，乃率民南徙，居于汝、颍之间，故世仕江表。
现代文：后来因为前秦、后赵战乱，于是带着百姓往南迁徙，住在汝水、颖水之间，因此世代在江南做官。
English: Later, because of the Qin and Zhao wars, he migrated to the south with his people, living between Jushui and Yingshui. As a result, generations of officials worked in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：祖縃，宋同州别驾，宋安郡守。
现代文：祖父柳缙，刘宋的同州别驾，宋安郡守。
English: Liu Song's grandfather, Liu Xuan, was the governor of Song'an County, the same county as Liu Song.

古文：父僧习，齐奉朝请。
现代文：父亲柳僧习，齐朝的奉朝请。
English: Father Liu Zengxi, please serve the Qing Dynasty.

古文：魏景明中，与豫州刺史裴叔业据州归魏。
现代文：北魏景明年间，与豫州刺史裴叔业占据豫州归魏。
English: Between the Northern Wei Dynasty and the next year, with the Yuzhou scribe Pei Shuye occupying the lead, Yuzhou returned to Wei.

古文：历北地、颍川二郡守、扬州大中正。
现代文：柳僧习历任北地、颖两郡守、扬州大中正。
English: Liu Zengxu served as the governor of the North, the governor of Ying County, and the vice-president of Yangzhou University.

古文：庆幼聪敏，有器量。
现代文：柳庆小时候就聪明机敏，有器量。
English: As a child, Liu Qing was smart and resourceful.

古文：博涉群书，不治章句。
现代文：他博览群书，但并不剖章析句。
English: He is well read, but he does not dissect sentences.

古文：好饮酒，闲于占对。
现代文：喜欢喝酒，善于应答。
English: Likes to drink and is good at answering questions.

古文：年十三，因曝书，僧习谓庆曰： 汝虽聪敏，吾未经特试。 
现代文：他十三岁时有一天，父亲柳僧习趁他晒书的时候对他说： 你虽然聪明，我还没有专门对你测试。 
English: One day when he was thirteen years old, his father, Liu Zengxiu, took the opportunity to say to him while he was reading a book: Although you are smart, I haven't tested you specifically.

古文：乃令庆于杂赋集中取赋一篇，千有余言，庆立读三遍，便即诵之,无所遗漏。
现代文：于是让柳庆从杂赋集中取出一篇赋，有一千多字，柳庆立刻读了三遍，当即背诵，一字不漏。
English: So he asked Liu Qing to take out a fu from the miscellaneous fu collection, which had more than a thousand words. Liu Qing immediately read it three times and immediately recited it, without missing a word.

古文：时僧习为颍川郡,地接都畿，民多豪右。
现代文：当时柳僧习任颖!郡守，该处与京城接壤，住在这裹的多是豪门大族。
English: At that time, the willow monk Xi Ren Ying! was the county governor, and the area bordered the capital. Most of the people who lived here were members of powerful families.

古文：将选乡官，皆依倚贵势，竞来请托。
现代文：到了将要选拔乡官的时候，他们都依仗权贵势力，争先恐后托人打通关节。
English: When it came time to select the township officials, they all relied on the power of the nobility, scrambling to get someone to open the joint.

古文：选用未定。
现代文：乡官的选用还没有确定。
English: The selection of township officials has not yet been determined.

古文：僧习谓诸子曰： 权贵请托，吾并不用。
现代文：柳僧习对自己的几个儿子说： 权贵请入托情的，我全都不任用。
English: Liu Zengxi said to his several sons, "If the powerful and the nobility ask me to be their guardian, I will not appoint anyone.

古文：其使欲还，皆须有答。
现代文：但他们派来的人将要返回，我也应该有个答覆。
English: But the people they sent are coming back, and I should have an answer.

古文：汝等各以意为吾作书也。 庆乃具书草云： 下官受委大邦，选吏之日，有能者进，不肖者退。
现代文：你们各人按照自己的看法替我写封信。 柳庆于是草拟了一封，信中说： 下官受朝廷委托，选拔官吏的时候，有能力的进荐，没有才干的黜退。
English: Each of you write a letter for me according to your own opinion. Liu Qing then drafted one, saying in the letter: Subordinate officers are commissioned by the imperial court, when selecting officials, those with ability are recommended, and those without talent are rejected.

古文：此乃朝廷恒典。 僧习读书，叹曰： 此儿有意气，丈夫理当如是。 即依庆所草以报。
现代文：这是朝廷永恒的制度。 柳僧习读完信后感叹地说： 这儿子有志气，有作为的人应该是这样的。 随即按柳庆所草拟的信分报各家。
English: This is the eternal system of the imperial court.After reading the letter, Liu Zengzhu said with a sigh: This son has ambition, and this is how a person who has done something should be.Then, the letter drafted by Liu Qing was distributed to all families.

古文：起家奉朝请。
现代文：后来柳庆从家中被征召出来任奉朝请。
English: If you'd like to serve the Emperor, go ahead.

古文：庆出后第四叔，及遭父忧，议者不许为服重。
现代文：柳庆过继给第四叔，到他父亲去世的时候，家族中的人商议不同意柳庆服重丧。
English: Liu Qing was passed down to his fourth uncle, and when his father died, the family members discussed and disagreed on the reburial of Liu Qing.

古文：庆泣而言曰： 礼者盖缘人情，若于出后之家，更有苴斩之服，可夺此从彼。
现代文：柳庆哭着说： 礼应该顺着人情，如果在过继的人家。另有更大的丧事，那可以舍弃这裹而顺从那裹。
English: Liu Qing cried and said, "Rituals should be in accordance with human feelings. If you are in the family of someone who has passed away, and there is a greater tragedy, then you can give up one and follow the other.

古文：今四叔薨背已久，情事不追。
现代文：现在四叔去世已久，事情已过去了。
English: Now that my fourth uncle has long passed away, it's all over.

古文：岂容夺礼，乖违天性！ 时论不能抑，遂以苫块终丧。
现代文：哪能改变礼制，违背天性呢! 当时人们都不能说服他，柳庆就拿草垫当席子，拿土块作枕头，替生父服满丧期。
English: At that time, people couldn't convince him, so Liu Qing used a straw mat as a mat, a piece of soil as a pillow, and served his father for the entire mourning period.

古文：既葬,乃与诸兄负土成坟。
现代文：父亲下葬以后，柳庆就和几个哥哥一起背土垒成坟墓。
English: After his father was buried, Liu Qing, together with several brothers, dug a grave.

古文：服阕，除中坚将军。
现代文：服丧期满，柳庆被任命为中坚将军
English: At the end of the period of mourning, Liu Qing was appointed as a key general

古文：魏孝武将西迁，除庆散骑侍郎，驰传入关。
现代文：魏孝武帝将要西迁，任命柳庆为散骑侍郎，堑哩奉命乘驿车飞驰进阗。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu was about to move to the west, and appointed Liu Qing as a horseback riding attendant. Qili was ordered to ride a carriage to the capital.

古文：庆至高平见太祖，共论时事。
现代文：他到达高干见到太祖，共同商议当时朝政大事。
English: When he arrived at Gaogan, he met with Taizu and jointly discussed the major political events of the time.

古文：太祖即请奉迎舆驾，仍命庆先还复命。
现代文：太祖立即请求恭迎皇上，又命令柳庆先回洛阳覆命。
English: The great-great-grandfather immediately requested to greet the emperor, and ordered Liu Qing to return to Luoyang to die.

古文：时贺拔胜在荆州，帝屏左右谓庆曰： 高欢已屯河北，关中兵既未至，朕欲往荆州，卿意何如？ 
现代文：当时贺拔胜在趔业，孝武帝屏退左右的人，然后对柳庆说： 宣麸已驻扎在回北，阖中军队还没到，我想到型州，你意见如何? 柳庆回答说： 关中城池固若金汤。
English: At that time, He Bi Sheng was in Handan, and the people around Emperor Xiaowu retreated to Ping. He then said to Liu Qing: "Xuan Xuan has been stationed in Hubei, and the Chinese army has not yet arrived. I think of Kenzhou. What is your opinion?" Liu Qing replied: Guanzhong is as solid as gold.

古文：庆对曰： 关中金城千里，天下之强国也。宇文泰忠诚奋发，朝廷之良臣也。
现代文：纵横千里，是天下强盛的地方。宇文泰忠诚奋发，是朝廷的良臣。
English: Thousands of miles in length and breadth, it is a place where the world is strong. Uwentai is a loyal and hard-working leader, and a good vassal of the imperial court.

古文：以陛下之圣明，仗宇文泰之力用，进可以东向而制群雄，退可以闭关而固天府。
现代文：凭着陛下的圣明，依仗宇文泰的作用，进可以向东控制群雄，退可以闭阗而巩固天府。
English: By virtue of His Majesty's holy light and relying on the role of Yu Wentei, we can advance to the east to control the invaders, and retreat to the west to close the gap and consolidate Tianfu.

古文：此万全之计也。
现代文：这是万全之计。
English: It's the only way.

古文：荆州地非要害，众又寡弱，外迫梁寇，内拒欢党，斯乃危亡是惧，宁足以固鸿基？
现代文：荆州不是险要的地方，民众又弱少，外受梁朝强盗逼迫，内受直麸贼党抵抗，这样恐怕衹会危亡，哪能巩固帝王宏大的基业呢?
English: Jingzhou is not a dangerous place, the people are few and weak, externally persecuted by the robbers of the Liang Dynasty, and internally resisted by the direct thieves of the Kuomintang, so I am afraid that the Kuomintang will be in danger, how can the emperor's grand heritage be consolidated?

古文：以臣断之，未见其可。 帝深纳之。
现代文：按照微臣的判断，并不见得那样做是行得通的。 皇帝完全采纳了他的意见。
English: According to the opinion of the minor vassal, it is not necessarily feasible to do so, and the emperor fully adopted his opinion.

古文：及帝西迁，庆以母老不从。
现代文：到皇帝西迁的时候，柳庆因为母亲年老而没有跟从。
English: When the emperor moved to the west, Liu Qing did not follow because his mother was old.

古文：独孤信之镇洛阳，乃得入关。
现代文：直到独巫信镇守盗屋的时候，翅庆才得以进入题中。
English: It wasn't until the time when Dokwushin was guarding the thief's house that Wing Ching was able to enter the puzzle.

古文：除相府东合祭酒，领记室，转户曹参军。
现代文：朝廷任命他为相府束合祭酒，兼任记室，后来又转任户曹参军。
English: The imperial court appointed him as a prefect of the Sokai Festival, and he also served as a registrar. Later, he was transferred to the position of Household Cao and joined the army.

古文：八年，迁大行台郎中，领北华州长史。
现代文：大统八年，柳庆升任大行台郎中，兼任北华州长史。
English: In the eighth year of the Great Reunification, Liu Qing was promoted to the middle of the Taihang Taira, and also served as the governor of North China.

古文：十年，除尚书都兵，郎中如故，并领记室。
现代文：大统十年，柳庆任尚书都兵，郎中一职如故，并兼任记室。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Reunification, Liu Qing was appointed as a soldier of the Capital of Calligraphy, and his position as a disciple remained the same, and he also served as a secretary.

古文：时北雍州献白鹿,群臣欲草表陈贺。
现代文：当时北雍州进献白鹿，群臣都想草拟奏表表示祝贺。
English: At that time, Beiyongzhou presented white deer, and the ministers all wanted to draft a playlist to express their congratulations.

古文：尚书苏绰谓庆曰： 近代以来，文章华靡，逮于江左，弥复轻薄。
现代文：尚书苏绰对柳庆说： 近代以来，文章追求华丽，到了江束，更加轻浮。
English: Shangshu Suqiao said to Liu Qing: Since modern times, articles have pursued gorgeousness, and when it comes to Jiangzhuang, they are more frivolous.

古文：洛阳后进，祖述不已。
现代文：洛阳方面后来者，还在不停地效法。
English: The latecomers in Luoyang are still following suit.

古文：相公柄民轨物，君职典文房，宜制此表，以革前弊。 庆操笔立成，辞兼文质。
现代文：宇文丞相统率百姓，创立制度，你的职务是负责文书工作，应当撰写这道贺表，来革除前代文风的弊病。 柳庆拿起笔马上就写好了，文辞既质朴又有文采。
English: Your duty is to be in charge of paperwork, and you should write this congratulatory letter to eliminate the ills of the previous generation's style of writing.Yu Qing picked up the pen and immediately wrote it, the wording is both simple and elegant.

古文：绰读而笑曰： 枳橘犹自可移，况才子也。 寻以本官兼雍州别驾。
现代文：苏绰读完以后笑着说： 枳和橘尚且可以改变自己的特性，何况才子呢。 不久柳庆以本官都兵郎中的身份兼任雍州别驾。
English: After Su Qiao finished reading, he said with a smile: "Dragonflies and tangerines can still change their characteristics, not to mention their talents." Soon, Liu Qing also served as the Yongzhou Distinguished Officer in his capacity as one of the officers and soldiers.

古文：广陵王元欣，魏之懿亲。
现代文：广陵王元欣是西魏皇帝的至亲。
English: Guangling Wang Yuanxin was a close relative of the Western Wei Emperor.

古文：其甥孟氏，屡为匈横。
现代文：他的外甥孟氏多次为非作歹，横行霸道。
English: His nephew, Mr. Meng, has repeatedly committed crimes and behaved in a domineering manner.

古文：或有告其盗牛。
现代文：有人告他偷牛。
English: He was accused of stealing a cow.

古文：庆捕推得实，趣令就禁。
现代文：柳庆把孟氏捉拿归案，审问清楚实情，立即下令把他关押起来。
English: Liu Qing arrested Meng, interrogated him to clarify the facts, and immediately ordered him to be detained.

古文：孟氏殊无惧容,乃谓庆曰： 今若加以桎梏，后复何以脱之？ 欣亦遣使辨其无罪。
现代文：孟氏完全没有一点害怕的神情，竟然对柳庆说： 现在如果给我加上脚镣手铐，以后再怎样把它脱下来? 元欣也派人来向柳庆申辩说孟氏无罪。
English: Meng didn't look scared at all, and even said to Liu Qing, "If you add shackles and handcuffs to me now, how can I take them off later?" Yuanxin also sent someone to argue with Liu Qing that Meng was not guilty.

古文：孟氏由此益骄。
现代文：盂氏因此更加骄横。
English: As a result, Mr. Zou became even more arrogant.

古文：庆于是大集僚吏，盛言孟氏依倚权戚，侵虐之状。
现代文：柳庆于是召集所有官员，充分揭露孟氏依仗权贵亲戚的关系欺压残害百姓的罪状。
English: Liu Qing then called together all officials to fully expose the Meng family's crimes of oppressing and brutalizing the people by relying on the relationship of powerful relatives.

古文：言毕，便令笞杀之。
现代文：说完以后，就下令用竹板把孟氏打死。
English: After saying this, he gave the order to beat Mr. Meng to death with a bamboo board.

古文：此后贵戚敛手，不敢侵暴。
现代文：从此以后权贵的亲属都有所收敛，不敢侵害百姓了。
English: Since then, the relatives of the powerful have been restrained and do not dare to infringe on the people.

古文：有贾人持金二十斤，诣京师交易，寄人停止。
现代文：有一个商人带着二十斤黄金，到京城做买卖，寄居在别人家中。
English: There was a merchant who took twenty kilos of gold to the capital to do business, and lived in other people's homes.

古文：每欲出行，常自执管钥。
现代文：他每次将要外出，常常自己拿着钥匙在身边。
English: Whenever he wants to go out, he often carries his keys with him.

古文：无何，缄闭不异而失之。
现代文：没多久，房门还像平常那样锁着而黄金却不翼而失了。
English: It wasn't long before the door was locked as usual and the gold was gone.

古文：谓主人所窃，郡县讯问，主人遂自诬服。
现代文：商人认为是房东偷的，郡县丰管官员刑讯查问，房东最终被迫招认服罪。
English: The merchant thought that the landlord had stolen it, and the county Fengguan officials interrogated him under torture. The landlord was eventually forced to confess and plead guilty.

古文：庆闻而叹之，乃召问贾人曰： 卿钥恒置何处？ 对曰： 恒自带之。 庆曰： 颇与人同宿乎？ 
现代文：柳庆听说这个案情后为之叹息，就把商人召来询问： 你的钥匙通常放在什么地方? 商人回答说： 常常自己带在身边。 柳庆问： 你曾经和别人一起住吗? 商人说： 没有。 
English: When Liu Qing heard about the case, he was saddened and called the merchant to inquire: Where do you usually keep your keys? The merchant replied: I always keep them with me. Liu Qing asked: Have you ever lived with someone else? The merchant said: No.

古文：曰： 无。  与人同饮乎？ 曰： 日者曾与一沙门再度酣宴，醉而昼寝。 
现代文： 和别人一起喝酒吗? 商人说： 那天曾经跟一个和尚两次痛饮，喝醉以后大白天就睡觉了。 柳庆说：
English: A businessman said, "I had two drinks with a monk that day. After getting drunk, I fell asleep in broad daylight." Liu Qing said,

古文：庆曰： 主人特以痛自诬，非盗也。
现代文： 房东衹是因为忍受不住刑讯的痛楚才屈打成招的，并非小偷。
English: It was not the thief, but the landlord, who could not bear the pain of the torture.

古文：彼沙门乃真盗耳。 即遣吏逮捕沙门，乃怀金逃匿。
现代文：那个和尚才是真正的盗贼。 柳庆立即派人逮捕那个和尚，和尚竟带着金子逃跑并躲起来。
English: The monk was the real thief. Liu Qing immediately sent someone to arrest the monk, but the monk ran away with the gold and hid.

古文：后捕得，尽获所失之金。
现代文：后来还是把那和尚捉拿归案，尽数查获商人所失的黄金。
English: Later, the monk was caught and brought to justice, and the lost gold of the merchant was recovered as much as possible.

古文：十二年，改三十六曹为十二部，诏以庆为计部郎中，别驾如故。
现代文：大统十二年，朝廷把三十六曹改为十二部，皇帝下韶任柳庆为计部郎中，仍旧担任别驾。
English: In the twelfth year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court changed the Thirty-six Caos to the Twelve Departments, and the emperor appointed Liu Qing as the second-in-command of the Department of Strategy. He still served as the second-in-command.

古文：有胡家被劫，郡县按察，莫知贼所，邻近被囚系者甚多。
现代文：有一胡人家被劫，郡县官员审问追查，没有谁知道贼人的踪迹，邻居被囚禁的很多。
English: A Hu family was robbed, county officials interrogated and investigated, no one knew the thief's tracks, and many neighbors were imprisoned.

古文：庆以贼徒既众，似是乌合，既非旧交，必相疑阻，可以诈求之。
现代文：柳庆认为贼人既多，好像是乌合之众，既然不是故交，必定互相猜疑，可以骗诱他们透露真情找出罪犯。
English: Liu Qing believes that since there are many thieves, they seem to be a mob. Since they are not cronies, they must be suspicious of each other, and they can be tricked into revealing the truth and finding the criminals.

古文：乃作匿名书多牓官门曰： 我等共劫胡家，徒侣混杂，终恐泄露。
现代文：于是他写了一些匿名信分贴在官府门上，信中说： 我们合伙抢劫胡家，人员混杂，最终恐怕都要泄露出来。
English: So he wrote some anonymous letters and posted them on the gate of the government office, saying in the letter: We robbed the Hu family together, the people are mixed, and eventually I'm afraid it will all come out.

古文：今欲首，惧不免诛。
现代文：现在想自首，又怕不能免于杀头。
English: Now I want to turn myself in, but I'm afraid I won't be able to avoid being beheaded.

古文：若听先首免罪，便欲来告。 庆乃复施免罪之牓。
现代文：如果允许先自首的免罪，我就前来告发。 柳庆接着又再贴出一道免罪的告示。
English: If the self-surrender exoneration is allowed first, I will come to report it.Liu Qing then posted another exoneration notice.

古文：居二日，广王欣家奴面缚自告牓下。
现代文：过了两天，广陵王元欣的一个家奴反绑双手到告示前自首。
English: Two days later, one of Guangling Wang Yuanxin's slaves tied his hands behind his back and surrendered before the announcement.

古文：因此推穷，尽获党与。
现代文：柳庆通过他推究到底，终于把抢劫的团伙一纲打尽。
English: Through his investigation, Liu Qing finally defeated the robbery gang.

古文：庆之守正明察，皆此类也。
现代文：柳庆主持公道，明察秋毫的事迹，都如此类。
English: Liu Qing presided over justice, observed the deeds of the autumn, and so on.

古文：每叹曰： 昔于公断狱无私，辟高门可以待封。
现代文：他每每感叹说： 往昔于公审理案件铁面无私，开了一道高门可以用来等待子孙封高官时使用。
English: He sighed and said: In the past, he was selfless in the public trial of cases, and opened a high door that could be used to wait for his children and grandchildren to become high-ranking officials.

古文：傥斯言有验，吾其庶几乎。 十三年，封清河县男，邑二百户，兼尚书右丞，摄计部。
现代文：倘若这番话有灵验，我大概也和他差不多吧! 大统十三年，柳庆被封为清河县男，食邑二百户，兼任尚书右丞，代理计部。
English: If these words prove to be true, I'll probably be just like him! In the 13th year of the Great Reunification, Liu Qing was appointed as the man of Qinghe County, serving 200 households, concurrently serving as the deputy secretary of the accounting department.

古文：十四年，正右丞。
现代文：大统十四年，任正右丞。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed to the post of Seijo.

古文：太祖尝怒安定国臣王茂，将杀之，而非其罪。
现代文：太祖曾经被安定国的大臣王茂激怒，打算把他杀掉，而其实并非王茂的罪过。
English: The great-grandfather was once enraged by Wang Mao, the minister of the stable country, and planned to kill him, but it was not Wang Mao's fault.

古文：朝臣咸知，而莫敢谏。
现代文：朝廷的大臣都很清楚，但没有谁敢劝谏。
English: The ministers of the imperial court were well aware of this, but no one dared to persuade him.

古文：庆乃进曰： 王茂无罪，奈何杀之？ 太祖愈怒，声色甚厉，谓庆曰： 王茂当死，卿若明其无罪，亦须坐之。 乃执庆于前。
现代文：柳庆就进谏说： 王茂没有罪，为什么要杀他呢? 太祖更加生气，声色俱厉，对柳庆说： 王茂该判死罪，你如果要辩明他无罪，也须一同治罪。 于是把柳庆捉到面前。
English: Liu Qing said, "Wang Mao is not guilty, so why kill him?" The grandfather became even more angry and said to Liu Qing, "Wang Mao should be sentenced to death. If you want to prove that he is not guilty, you must also punish him." So he caught Liu Qing in front of him.

古文：庆辞气不挠，抗声曰： 窃闻君有不达者为不明，臣有不争者为不忠。
现代文：柳庆脸不改色，语气不屈，高声说： 我私下听说君王如有不通达事理的就是不明，臣子如见错不争的就是不忠。
English: Liu Qing's face did not change color, his tone was unyielding, and he said in a loud voice: I have heard in private that if a monarch is uninformed, it is unknown, and if a courtier sees a mistake and does not dispute it, it is disloyal.

古文：庆谨竭愚诚，实不敢爱死，但惧公为不明之君耳。
现代文：我愿竭尽愚忠，实在不敢吝惜一死，衹怕您会成为不明智的君主罢了。
English: I am willing to do my utmost to be loyal, and I really dare not begrudge a single death, for fear that you will become an unwise monarch.

古文：愿深察之。 太祖乃悟而赦茂，已不及矣。
现代文：希望您认真地考虑清楚。 太祖遣才醒悟过来而赦免王茂，但已来不及了。
English: I hope you will think about it carefully. It is too late to pardon Wang Shao, but it is too late to come to your senses.

古文：太祖默然。
现代文：太祖默然无语。
English: The great-grandfather does not make a sound.

古文：明日，谓庆曰： 吾不用卿言，遂令王茂冤死。
现代文：第二天，太祖对柳庆说： 我不采纳你的意见，最终让王茂含冤而死。
English: The next day, the great-grandfather said to Liu Qing: I will not accept your opinion, and finally let Wang Mao die unjustly.

古文：可赐茂家钱帛，以旌吾过。 寻进爵为子，增邑三百户。
现代文：可赏赐钱财绸缎给王茂家，来表明他的冤死是由于我的过失造成的。 不久，柳庆被进封爵位为子，增加封地三百户。
English: He could reward the Wangmao family with money, money and silk to show that his wrongful death was caused by my fault.Soon, Liu Qing was ennobled and his fiefdom increased by 300 households.

古文：十五年，加平南将军。
现代文：大统十五年，加授平南将军。
English: In the fifteenth year of unification, he was additionally awarded the title of General Pingnan.

古文：十六年，太祖东讨，以庆为大行台右丞，加抚军将军。
现代文：大统十六年，太祖束征，任命柳庆为大行台右丞，加授抚军将军。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, Grandfather Sokzheng appointed Liu Qing as the Grand Commander of the Taihang and the General of the General Staff.

古文：还转尚书右丞，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：大军回师后他转任尚书右丞，加任通直散骑常侍。
English: After the return of the large army, he was transferred to the post of Shangshu Rongcheng, and he was also assigned to the post of Tongzhi Sanzhi Changzhi.

古文：魏废帝初，除民部尚书。
现代文：魏废帝初年，柳庆任民部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Liu Qing was appointed to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：庆威仪端肃，枢机明辨。
现代文：柳庆仪容举止庄重严肃，言语明辨。
English: Liu Qing's appearance and demeanor are solemn and serious, and his speech is clear.

古文：太祖每发号令，常使庆宣之。
现代文：太祖每次发号施令，常常让柳庆宣读。
English: Whenever Taizu gave an order, he often had Liu Qing read it out.

古文：天性抗直，无所回避。
现代文：他天性刚强正直，什么也不回避。
English: He has a strong and honest nature and doesn't shy away from anything.

古文：太祖亦以此深委仗焉。
现代文：太祖也因此非常依靠他。
English: As a result, my great-grandfather was very dependent on him.

古文：二年，授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：魏废帝二年，柳庆任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, Liu Qing was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry and the third secretary of ceremony.

古文：魏恭帝初，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射，转左仆射，领著作。
现代文：魏恭帝初年，官位提升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射，后转任左仆射，兼任著作。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the post of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Shang Shu Right Footman, and later transferred to Left Footman, and also served as a writer.

古文：六官建，拜司会中大夫。
现代文：六官建立后，授任司会中大夫。
English: After the establishment of the six departments, he was appointed as the secretary of the Central Medical Commission.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，赐姓宇文氏，进爵平齐县公，增邑通前一千五百户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，柳庆被赐姓宇文氏，进封爵位为平齐县公，增加封地连原来的一共一千五百户。
English: Emperor Xiaohui ascended to the throne, and Liu Qing was given the surname of Uwen and the title of Pingqi County official, increasing the number of fiefs to a total of 1,500.

古文：晋公护初摄政，欲引为腹心。
现代文：晋公宇文护初摄政，想引用柳庆作为心腹。
English: Jin Gongyu Wengu, the first regent, wanted to use Liu Qing as a confidant.

古文：庆辞之，颇忤旨。
现代文：柳庆推辞了，因此与宇文护的心意大为抵触。
English: Liu Qing refused, thus contradicting the intention of Wu Wenguo.

古文：又与杨宽有隙，及宽参知政事，庆遂见疏忌，出为万州刺史。
现代文：柳庆又和杨宽有矛盾，到杨宽参与主持政事的时候，柳庆就被疏远疑忌，调出京城任万州刺史。
English: Liu Qing also had a conflict with Yang Guang. When Yang Guang took part in presiding over political affairs, Liu Qing was alienated and suspicious, and was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Wanzhou.

古文：世宗寻悟，留为雍州别驾，领京兆尹。
现代文：不久周世宗醒悟过来，又把柳庆留下任雍州别驾，兼任京兆尹。
English: Soon Zhou Shizong came to his senses and left Liu Qing in charge of Yongzhou and concurrently held the post of Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：武成二年，除宜州刺史。
现代文：武成二年，柳庆任宜州刺史。
English: In the second year of Wu Cheng, Liu Qing was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：庆自为郎，迄于司会，府库仓储，并其职也。
现代文：柳庆自从任郎官，直到担任司会，仓库的物品储备，都是他职务所管的范围。
English: Liu Qing has been in charge of the goods reserve of the warehouse since he was appointed as a steward until he served as a moderator.

古文：及在宜州，宽为小冢宰，乃囚庆故吏，求其罪失。
现代文：等到在宜州的时候，杨宽任小冢宰，就把柳庆原来的属吏囚禁起来，想找柳庆的罪过。
English: When he was in Yizhou, Yang Kuan, who was a minor official, imprisoned Liu Qing's former subordinate officials and tried to find Liu Qing's crime.

古文：按验积六十余日，吏或有死于狱者，终无所言，唯得剩锦数匹。
现代文：一共审查了六十多天，那些官吏有的已死在狱中，但始终没有说出什么，仓库中衹能找到剩余的锦缎几匹。
English: A total of more than sixty days have been reviewed. Some of those officials have died in prison, but they have never said anything. You can find a few remaining brocade horses in the warehouse.

古文：时人服其廉慎。
现代文：当时人们都佩服他的廉洁谨慎。
English: At the time, people admired his integrity and prudence.

古文：保定三年，又入为司会。
现代文：保定三年，柳庆又被召入任司会。
English: Three years after Baoding, Liu Qing was once again called into the presiding committee.

古文：先是，庆兄桧为魏兴郡守，为贼黄宝所害。
现代文：先前，柳庆的哥哥柳桧任魏兴郡守，被贼寇黄宝杀害。
English: Previously, Liu Qing's brother, Liu Ye, was the governor of Weixing County, and was killed by the bandit Huang Bao.

古文：桧子三人，皆幼弱，庆抚养甚笃。
现代文：柳桧的三个儿子都年幼弱小，柳庆抚养他们，非常厚道。
English: Liu Yao's three sons are all very young, and Liu Qing has raised them with great kindness.

古文：后宝率众归朝，朝廷待以优礼。
现代文：后来黄宝率领部下归顺朝廷，朝廷用优厚的礼节对待他。
English: Later, Huang Bao led his subordinates to submit to the imperial court, which treated him with great courtesy.

古文：居数年，桧次子雄亮白日手刃宝于长安城中。
现代文：过了几年，柳桧的次子柳雄亮在大白天亲手把黄实杀死在长安城中。
English: A few years later, Liu Xiongliang, the second son of Liu Bei, killed Huang Si in Chang'an City with his own hands in broad daylight.

古文：晋公护闻而大怒，执庆及诸子侄皆囚之。
现代文：晋公宇文护听说以后勃然大怒，捉拿柳庆和他的儿子侄子，并把他们囚禁起来。
English: Hearing of this, Jin Gong Uwen Guo flew into a rage, seized Liu Qing and his son and nephew, and imprisoned them.

古文：让庆曰： 国家宪纲，皆君等所为。
现代文：宇文护责怪柳庆说： 国家的法纪都是你们制定出来的。
English: Uwen Guo blamed Liu Qing Rong and said: The country's laws and regulations are all formulated by you.

古文：虽有私怨，宁得擅杀人也！ 对曰： 庆闻父母之雠不同天，昆弟之雠不同国。
现代文：即使有私怨，难道就能够擅自杀人吗! 柳庆回答说： 我听说父母之仇不共戴天，兄弟之仇不同处一国。
English: Even if there is a personal grudge, is it possible to commit suicide without permission? Liu Qing replied: I have heard that the hatred of parents is not common, and the hatred of brothers is different in different countries.

古文：明公以孝治天下，何乃责于此乎。 护愈怒，庆辞色无所屈，卒以此免。
现代文：您用孝道治理天下，为什么竟拿造件事来责怪我呢。 宇文护更加生气，但柳庆的言辞神色仍一点也不屈服，他们最终因此获得赦免。
English: You govern the world with filial piety, so why did you accuse me of fabricating the incident?Uwenbao was even more angry, but Liu Qing's expression did not give in at all, and they were eventually pardoned.

古文：天和元年十二月薨。
现代文：天和元年十二月柳庆去世，终年五十岁。
English: Liu Qing died in December of the same year, at the age of fifty.

古文：时年五十，赠鄜绥丹三州刺史，谥曰景。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为鄘绥丹三州刺史，谧号是景。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of 丹三州刺史, and his posthumous nickname was "Ming."

古文：子机嗣。
现代文：他的儿子柳机继承了爵位。
English: His son, Liu Ji, inherited the title.

古文：机字匡时，少有令誉，风仪辞令，为当世所推。
现代文：柳机字匡时，年轻时就有好名声，风度仪容辞令都被当时人们推崇。
English: When he was a young man, Liu Ji Zi Kuang had a good reputation, and his manners, appearance and speech were highly respected by the people at that time.

古文：历小纳言、开府仪同三司、司宗中大夫。
现代文：他历任小纳言、开府仪同三司、司宗中大夫。
English: He successively held the posts of Minor Councilor of State, Keifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Shizong Zhong Daifu.

古文：大象中，御正上大夫、华州刺史。
现代文：主叁年间，堑继任御正上大夫、茎业刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zeng, Zeng succeeded to the post of Imperial Chief Physician, and Zhuye was appointed to the post of Historian.

古文：机弟弘，字匡道，少聪颖，亦善草隶，博涉群书，辞彩雅赡。
现代文：柳机的弟弟柳弘，字匡道，年轻时很聪明，也擅长草隶书法，博览群书，文辞典雅、富丽。
English: Yanagi's younger brother, Yanagihiro, was very clever when he was young. He was also good at cursive calligraphy, read a lot of books, and had an elegant and rich vocabulary.

古文：与弘农杨素为莫逆之交。
现代文：他和弘农杨素结为莫逆之交。
English: He and Hongnong Yang Su are inseparable friends.

古文：解巾中外府记室参军。
现代文：柳弘最初任中外府记室参军。
English: Yanagihiro was initially assigned to the Chugai Prefectural Records Office before joining the army.

古文：建德初，除内史上士，历小宫尹、御正上士。
现代文：建德初年，任内史上士，后历任小宫尹、御正上士。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was appointed as a staff sergeant of history, and later successively as a staff sergeant of Komiya Yin and Goseong.

古文：陈遣王偃民来聘，高祖令弘劳之。
现代文：陈朝派遣王偃民前来聘问，高祖命令柳弘慰劳他们。
English: The Chen Dynasty sent Wang Ximin to come and ask questions, and Gaozu ordered Liu Hong to comfort them.

古文：偃民谓弘曰： 来日，至于蓝田，正逢滋水暴长，所赍国信，溺而从流。
现代文：王偃民对柳弘说： 我来的时候，走到蓝田，正遇上滋水猛涨，所带的国家信物掉入水中随水流走了。
English: Wang Yimin said to Liu Hong: When I came here, I walked to Lantian, and just as the floodwaters were rising, the national treasures I brought with me fell into the water and went away with the current.

古文：今所进者，假之从吏。
现代文：现在进献的是向属吏借来的。
English: What is being donated now is borrowed from subordinate officials.

古文：请勒下流人，见为追寻此物也。 弘曰： 昔淳于之献空笼，前史称以为美。
现代文：请布置下游的百姓，替我追寻这些东西。 柳弘说： 从前淳于献上空笼，前代史官称之为美。
English: Yanagihiro said, "Once upon a time, Jun was presented with an empty cage, and the previous historian called it beauty.

古文：足下假物而进，讵是陈君之命乎。 偃民惭不能对。
现代文：先生现在借东西来进献，难道这是陈朝国君的命令吗。 王偃民满面羞惭不能回答。
English: Mr. Chen is now borrowing things to donate, is this an order from the Chen dynasty sovereign? Wang Ximin couldn't answer, his face full of shame.

古文：高祖闻而嘉之，尽以偃民所进之物赐弘，令报聘。
现代文：高祖听说以后很赞赏柳弘，把王偃民进献的东西全部赐给柳弘，又让他作为使臣回访陈朝。
English: After hearing this, Gaozu was very appreciative of Yanagihiro, and gave him everything that Wang Ximin had donated, and also allowed him to return to the Chen dynasty as an envoy.

古文：占对详敏，见称于时。
现代文：柳弘在陈朝应对详尽机敏，被人们称道。
English: During the Chen dynasty, Yanagihiro was praised for his detailed and astute handling of the situation.

古文：使还，拜内史都上士，迁御正下大夫。
现代文：回到北周，朝廷授柳弘为内史都上士，又升任御正下大夫。
English: Back in Northern Zhou, the imperial court awarded Yanagihiro the title of Inner History Senior Sergeant, and he was also promoted to Imperial Chief Physician.

古文：寻卒于官，时年三十一。
现代文：不久在任职期间去世，终年三十一岁。
English: He died shortly after taking office, at the age of 31.

古文：高祖甚惜之。
现代文：高祖感到很愈阶。
English: Gaozu felt very superior.

古文：赠晋州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为晋州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of "Jinzhou sashimi master."

古文：杨素诔之曰： 山阳王弼，风流长逝。
现代文：杨素为他作祭文，文中说： 山阳王弼，风流人物溘然长逝。
English: Yang Su wrote an offering for him, saying in the text: "Sanyang Wang Yao, a charming person, has passed away.

古文：颍川荀粲，零落无时。
现代文：颖川荀粲，不遇时机猝然殒命。
English: Yingchuan Zou, who suddenly took his own life when he didn't get the chance.

古文：修竹夹池，永绝梁园之赋；长杨映沼，无复洛川之文。 其为士友所痛惜如此。
现代文：修竹夹池，梁园的辞赋长久断绝；长杨映沼，不再有洛川的文笔。 柳弘的早逝是如此被他的士人朋友所痛惜。
English: Yanagihiro's early death was deeply regretted by his scholar friends, as the bamboo pond had to be repaired, the garden of beams had to be abandoned for a long time, and the Changyang Yingnuma no longer had the Luochuan pens.

古文：有文集行于世。
现代文：他有文集流传于世。
English: He has a collection of essays that are popular around the world.

古文：庆三兄，鷟、虬、桧，虬、桧并自有传。
现代文：翅庆有三个哥哥：柳鹭、柳纠、柳桧。其中堑幽和挝抢都另外独自有传。
English: Wing Ching had three older brothers: Liu Ye, Liu Guo, and Liu Ye. Of these, only Zou Yu and Lao Bao are independently recorded.

古文：鷟好学，善属文。
现代文：堑巉喜欢学习，善于写文章。
English: He likes to study and is good at writing articles.

古文：魏临淮王记室参军事。
现代文：任魏临淮王记室参军事。
English: Ren Wei Lin Huai Wang Ji's wife was a military officer.

古文：早卒。
现代文：堑嘘早年就去世了。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：子带韦，字孝孙。
现代文：堑嘘的儿子柳荧皇，宇耋瑟。
English: Yu Xiu's son Liu Huo, Yu Xiu's son.

古文：深沉有度量，少好学。
现代文：性格深沉，有度量，从小就好学。
English: He has a deep and measured personality and has been eager to learn since he was a child.

古文：身长八尺三寸，美风仪，善占对。
现代文：身高八尺三寸，仪容俊美，风度翩翩，善于应对。
English: He is eight feet three inches tall, handsome, personable, and good at coping.

古文：韩贤素为洛州刺史，召为主簿。
现代文：韩贤素任洛州刺史时，把翅鳖韦召来任主簿。
English: When Han Xian Su was appointed as the head of the history of Luozhou, he summoned Ying Zhenwei to serve as the chief accountant.

古文：后与诸父归朝，太祖辟为参军。
现代文：后来跟各位叔父一起归顺朝廷，太祖征用为参军。
English: Later, together with his uncles, he submitted to the imperial court, and his great-grandfather was conscripted into the army.

古文：时侯景作乱江右，太祖令带韦使江、郢二州，与梁邵陵、南平二王通好。
现代文：当时堡量在辽西作乱，塞担命令翅鞑出使辽蛆、呈泌，与梁塑旦昵、直垩往来结交。
English: At that time, there was a disturbance in the western part of Liao, and the commander of the garrison ordered the commander of the wing to send out the envoys of Liao, Zhen, and Liang, Shou, and Zhi.

古文：行至安州，值假宝等反，带韦乃矫为太祖书以抚安之，并即降附。
现代文：柳带韦走到安州，正值假宝等人谋反，柳带韦就假传太祖书信来安抚他们，他们当即投降归附。
English: Liu Zhewei went to Anzhou, at the time when the fake treasure and others were plotting to rebel, Liu Zhewei falsified the great-grandfather's letter to appease them, and they immediately surrendered.

古文：既至郢，见邵陵，具申太祖意。
现代文：到郢州后，柳带韦见到邵陵王，一一申明太祖的心意。
English: After arriving in Zhangzhou, Liu took Wei to see King Shao Ling, and they affirmed the great-grandfather's will one by one.

古文：邵陵即随带韦报命。
现代文：邵陵王派使者跟随柳带韦到朝廷覆命。
English: King Shao Ling sent an envoy to follow Liu Zhewei to the imperial court to ask for his life.

古文：以奉使称旨，授转辅国将军、中散大夫。
现代文：因为柳带韦奉命出使符合皇上的心愿，因此被改任辅国将军、中散大夫。
English: Because Liu Ziwei was ordered to send an envoy in accordance with the emperor's wishes, he was reassigned to the position of Vice-Governor General and Zhongshan Doctor.

古文：十七年，太祖遣大将军达奚武经略汉川，以带韦为治行台左丞，从军南讨。
现代文：大统十七年，太祖派遣大将军达奚武谋取汉川，任柳带韦为治行台左丞，跟随军队南征。
English: In the 17th year of the Great Reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Taizu dispatched General Dajin Wu to capture Hanchuan, and appointed Liu Ziwei as Zhi Xing Tai Zuo, who followed the army to the south.

古文：时梁宜丰侯萧循守南郑，武攻之未拔。
现代文：当时梁朝宜丰侯萧循镇守南郑，达奚武不能攻取。
English: At that time, Liang Dynasty's Feng Hou Xiao Xun was garrisoning Nan Zheng, and Dabangwu could not capture it.

古文：乃令带韦入城说循曰： 足下所固者险，所恃者援，所守者民。
现代文：他就让柳带韦进城劝说萧循。柳带韦见了萧循就说： 先生固守的是天险，依仗的是援兵，保卫的是百姓。
English: He asked Liu Zhewei to go to the city to persuade Xiao Xun to leave. When Liu Zhewei saw Xiao Xun, he said: "What you are holding on to is the natural danger, what you are relying on is the reinforcements, and what you are defending is the people."

古文：今王师深入栈道，长驱汉川，此则所凭之险不足固也；武兴陷没于前，白马破亡于后，自余川谷酋豪，路阻而不敢进，此则所望之援不可恃也；夫顾亲戚，惧诛夷，贪荣慕利，此生人常也，今大兵总至，长围四合，戮逃亡以劝安居，赏先降以招后服，人人怀转祸之计，家家图安堵之谋，此则所部之民不可守也。
现代文：现在朝廷大军深入栈道，长驱直入汉川，造就是所凭藉的天险不足以固守；武兴陷落于前，白马破亡在后，其余的部落首领是山野草寇，路途阻隔不敢前进，造就是所盼望的援兵不可依仗；再说顾念亲人，害怕诛戮，贪慕虚荣，追求小利，这是百姓的常情。现在朝廷大军会集前来，四面包围，诛戮逃亡来鼓励安居，奖赏先降来招抚后服，人人想着转祸为福的计策，家家考虑安居的良谋，造就是管辖的百姓不能保住的道理。
English: Now the imperial army is deep into the causeway, driving straight into the Han River. The heavenly peril is not enough to hold on to; Wuxing fell in front, the White Horse was destroyed behind. The remaining tribal leaders are wild grasshoppers. The road is blocked and they dare not advance. The hoped-for reinforcements cannot rely on war. Moreover, it is common for the people to be concerned about their relatives, afraid of slaughter, covet vanity, and pursue small profits. Now the imperial army will gather, surround the four loaves of bread, slaughter the fugitives to encourage safe residence, reward the first to appease the second. Everyone is thinking about the strategy of turning misfortune into

古文：且足下本朝丧乱，社稷无主，尽忠将何所托，死节不足成名，窃为足下不取也。
现代文：况且先生所处的本朝动乱，国家无主，即使要尽忠又有何寄托，死节也不能成名，我私下认为先生这样做不可取。
English: Moreover, the country is in turmoil, the country is leaderless, and even if you want to be loyal and have something to rely on, you can't become famous when you die. Privately, I think it's not advisable for you to do so.

古文：仆闻贤者相时而动，智者因变立功。
现代文：鄙人听说贤明的人善于观察时机行动，聪明的人顺应时变而立功。
English: I have heard that wise people are good at observing the timing of actions, and clever people make meritorious deeds in accordance with the times.

古文：当今为足下计者，莫若肉袒军门，归命下吏，免生民于涂炭，全发肤于孝道。
现代文：当今为先生考虑，不如到军营门前请罪，归顺下官，以免百姓陷于涂炭，又可保全性命以尽孝道。
English: Today, for the sake of the teacher, it is better to go to the gate of the military camp to plead guilty and submit to the subordinate officers, so that the people will not be trapped in the charcoal, and they can preserve their lives to fulfill their filial duty.

古文：必当纡青拖紫，裂土分珪，名重当时，业光后嗣。
现代文：这样做的话，先生必定能封官赐爵，地位尊贵，名声显赫于当世，功业光照后代。
English: If you do this, you will surely be able to be given a knighthood, an honorable position, a prominent reputation in the present world, and your work will shine for generations to come.

古文：岂若进退无据，身名俱灭者哉。 循然之，后乃降。
现代文：哪能像现在这样进退都失去依靠，身体名声都会磨灭呢。 萧循认为他说得对，后来就归降了。
English: How can he advance and retreat like this without reliance, and his physical reputation will be destroyed.Xiaoxuan thought he was right, and later he surrendered.

古文：魏废帝元年，出为解县令。
现代文：魏废帝元年，柳带韦出任解县县令。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Liu Ziwei served as the county magistrate.

古文：二年，加授骠骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：废帝二年，加任骠骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: Two years after the dethronement of the emperor, he was promoted to the posts of general of cavalry and doctor of medicine.

古文：明年，转汾阴令。
现代文：第二年，转任汾阴令。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the Shanyin Regiment.

古文：发摘奸伏，百姓畏而怀之。
现代文：任职期间他揭发隐伏的坏人坏事，百姓都敬畏他怀念他。
English: During his tenure, he exposed the hidden bad people and bad things, and the people were in awe of him and missed him.

古文：世宗初，入为地官上士。
现代文：世宗初年，柳带韦被召入任地官上士。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Liu Zhewei was called to the post of local officer sergeant.

古文：武成元年，授帅都督、治御伯下大夫，迁武藏下大夫。
现代文：武成元年，授任帅都督、治御伯下大夫，后升任武藏下大夫。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was appointed as the governor of the capital and the doctor of the imperial household, and later he was promoted to the doctor of the imperial household.

古文：保定三年，授大都督。
现代文：保定三年，授大都督。
English: After three years in Baoding, he was given the title of grand governor.

古文：四年，加仪同三司、中外府掾。
现代文：四年，加任仪同三司、中外府掾。
English: Four years later, he was appointed to the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and to the Central and Foreign Prefectural Offices.

古文：天和年，封康城县男，邑五百户，转职方中大夫。
现代文：天和二年，封爵康城县男，封地五百户，又转任职方中大夫。
English: In 1902, he was knighted as the man of Kangcheng County, with 500 fiefs, and was promoted to the position of Middle Doctor.

古文：三年，授兵部中大夫。
现代文：玉面三年，授兵部中大夫。
English: He was a junior doctor in the military training department for three years.

古文：虽频徙职，仍领武藏。
现代文：虽然柳带韦频频调动官职，仍兼任武藏。
English: Although Liu Ziwei was frequently transferred to other posts, he continued to hold the post of Musashi.

古文：寻丁母忧。
现代文：不久他的母亲去世。
English: His mother died soon after.

古文：起为职方中大夫。
现代文：服丧期间柳带韦被征召任职方中大夫。
English: During the period of mourning, Liu Ziwei was conscripted to serve as a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：五年，转武藏中大夫。
现代文：天和五年，转任武藏中大夫。
English: Ten and five years later, he was transferred to the post of Musashi junior doctor.

古文：俄迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久就升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of general of cavalry and the post of the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：凡居剧职，十有余年，处断无滞，官曹清肃。
现代文：他身居要职十多年，处理决断事情毫不拖延，官府各办事部门都清正严明。
English: He has been in an important position for more than ten years, dealing with decisive matters without delay, and all government departments are clean and strict.

古文：时谯王俭为益州总管，汉王赞为益州刺史。
现代文：当时谯王宇文俭任益州总管，汉王宇文赞任益州刺史。
English: At that time, Gong Wang Yu Wenzhong was appointed as the general manager of Yizhou, and Han Wang Yu Wenzan was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：高祖乃以带韦为益州总管府长史，领益州别驾，辅弼二王，总知军民事。
现代文：高祖就任命柳带韦为益州总管府长史，兼任益州别驾，辅佐谯王、汉王，总管军民事务。
English: Gaozu appointed Liu Ziwei as the governor-general of Yizhou, and he also served as the governor of Yizhou, the assistant of the King of Wei and the King of Han, and the general manager of military and civil affairs.

古文：建德中，大军东讨，征带韦为前军总管齐王宪府长史。
现代文：建德年间，朝廷大军束征，征召柳带韦任前军总管齐王宇文宪府长史。
English: During the Jiande era, the imperial army was conscripted, and Liu Zhewei was appointed as the former army chief Qi Wang Yuwen Xianfu Changshi.

古文：齐平，以功授上开府仪同大将军，进爵为公，增邑一千户。
现代文：齐地平定以后，因功授柳带韦任上开府仪同大将军，进封爵位为公，增加封地一千户。
English: After the settlement was made, Liu Zhewei was awarded the title of Kaifu and the title of grand general for his achievements, and he was granted a title of nobility, increasing the number of fiefs by one thousand.

古文：陈王纯出并州，以带韦为并州司会、并州总管府长史。
现代文：陈王宇文纯出任并州，任命柳带韦为并州司会、并州总管府长史。
English: Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong took office as the governor of the merged state, and appointed Liu Zhewei as the secretary of the merged state and the governor of the merged state.

古文：六年，卒于位，时年五十五。
现代文：天和六年，在任职期间去世，终年五十五岁。
English: Days and six years, died while in office, aged fifty-five.

古文：谥曰恺。
现代文：谧号是恺。
English: His posthumous name is Tsou.

古文：子祚嗣。
现代文：柳带韦的儿子柳祚继承了爵位。
English: Liu Zhewei's son Liu Xuan inherited the title.

古文：少有名誉。
现代文：年轻时就有名声。
English: He became famous at a young age.

古文：大象末，宣纳上士。
现代文：大象末年，宣韶召入任上士。
English: At the end of his life, he was promoted to the rank of staff sergeant.

古文：史臣曰：周惠达见礼于宝夤，杨宽荷恩于晋泰。
现代文：史臣曰：周惠达被萧宝夤礼遇，杨宽蒙受恩遇于晋泰。
English: Shichen said: Zhou Huida was treated with courtesy by Xiao Baojun, and Yang Guang was graciously received in Jintai.

古文：既而萧氏获罪，庄帝出居，遂能契阔寇戎，不以兴革虑；崎岖危难，不以夷险易心。
现代文：不久萧氏获罪，庄帝迁居，他们于是能在敌军来犯时为国事辛劳，而不因兴亡消除顾虑；面对崎岖危难，也不因艰险而改变心志。
English: Soon after, the Xiao clan was found guilty, and the Zhuang emperor moved in. They were able to work hard for the national affairs when the enemy army came to attack, without eliminating their concerns due to the rise and fall; in the face of rugged dangers, they did not change their minds due to hardships.

古文：斯固笃终之士。
现代文：这些人本来就是感情专一不变的人士。
English: These people are by nature emotionally rigid.

古文：柳庆束带立朝，怀匪躬之节；莅官从政，着清白之美。
现代文：柳庆束带站在朝堂上，心怀忠心耿耿的气节，不顾自身利益；莅临官府处理政事，显露清白的美德。
English: Standing in the morning hall, Liu Qingzhu stood with a loyal spirit, regardless of his own interests; he came to the government to deal with political affairs, revealing the virtue of innocence.

古文：并遭逢兴运，各展志能，誉重搢绅，望隆端揆，非虚云也。
现代文：他们都遭逢兴隆的国运，各自施展自己的志向才干，声誉被官员敬重，威望高如相位，并非徒有虚名。
English: All of them have been swept up in the flourishing national movement, each of them has demonstrated their own aspirations and talents, their reputations have been respected by officials, and their prestige is as high as the phase, which is not an empty name.

古文：然庆畏避权宠，违忤宰臣，虽取诎于一时，实获申于千载矣。
现代文：然而柳庆使权贵畏惧逃避，违抗朝廷重臣，虽然受委屈于一时，实际上他的忠心却得以表露千年了。
English: However, Liu Qing made the powerful fear to escape and defied the court officials. Although he was wronged for a moment, in fact, his loyalty has been revealed for thousands of years.

