古文：版法者，法天地之位，象四时之行，以治天下。
现代文：法，就是效法天地的方位，模拟四时的运行，来治理天下的。
English: Law is to follow the position of heaven and earth, simulate the operation of four o'clock, and govern the world.

古文：四时之行，有寒有暑，圣人法之，故有文有武。
现代文：四时的运行，有寒有暑，圣人效法它，所以有文有武。
English: Running at four o'clock, there is cold and heat, the sage imitated it, so there is literature and martial arts.

古文：天地之位，有前有后，有左有右，圣人法之，以建经纪。
现代文：天地的方位，有前有后，有左有右，圣人效法它，建立国家纲纪。
English: The position of heaven and earth has a front and a back, a left and a right. The sages emulated it and established a national discipline.

古文：春生于左，秋杀于右；夏长于前，冬藏于后。
现代文：春生在左，秋杀在又；夏长在前，冬藏在后。
English: Spring shoots on the left, autumn shoots on the right; summer shoots on the front, winter shoots on the back.

古文：生长之事，文也；收藏之事，武也。
现代文：属于生长之事，是文；属于收藏之事，是武。
English: To grow is to write; to collect is to fight.

古文：是故文事在左，武事在右，圣人法之，以行法令，以治事理。
现代文：因此，文事在左，武事在右。圣人模仿这些，来实行法令，来判断事理。
English: Therefore, literature is on the left, and martial arts are on the right, and sages imitate these to enforce laws and judge matters.

古文：凡法事者，操持不可以不正，操持不正则听治不公；听治不公则治不尽理，事不尽应。
现代文：凡有关法度之事，掌握不可以不正。掌握不正则判断不公，判断不公则治狱不完全合理，办事不完全得当。
English: In all matters concerning laws and regulations, it is impermissible to handle them improperly. If you handle them improperly, your judgment will be unfair, if you judge them unfairly, your imprisonment will not be completely reasonable, and your actions will not be completely proper.

古文：治不尽理，则疏远微贱者无所告；事不尽应，则功利不尽举。
现代文：治狱不完全合理，疏远微贱的人们就无法申诉；办事不完全得当，功利事业就不能充分举办。
English: If the imprisonment is not completely reasonable, the alienated people will not be able to appeal; if the work is not completely proper, the utilitarian cause cannot be fully carried out.

古文：功利不尽举则国贫，疏远微贱者无所告则下饶。
现代文：功利事业不充分举办则国家贫穷，疏远微贱者无法申冤则民间扰乱。
English: If the utilitarian undertakings are inadequately organized, the country will be impoverished, and if the alienated and lowly people are unable to redress their grievances, there will be civil disturbance.

古文：故曰： 凡将立事，正彼天植。 
现代文：所以说： 凡将立事，正彼天植。 
English: Therefore it is said, "He who wills a thing, plants it."

古文：天植者，心也。
现代文：天植，就是心。
English: The heart is the tree of heaven.

古文：天植正，则不私近亲，不孽疏远。
现代文：心正，就不会偏厚于近亲，也不会加害于疏远。
English: If one's heart is upright, one will not be partial to close relatives, and will not harm estrangement.

古文：不私近亲，不孽疏远，则无遗利，无隐治。
现代文：不偏厚于近亲，不加害于疏远，则国财没有流失，民间没有冤案。
English: If it does not favor close relatives and does not harm estrangement, then there will be no loss of national wealth, and there will be no unjust cases among the people.

古文：无遗利，无隐治，则事无不举，物无遗者。
现代文：国无失财，民无冤案，则事业没有不兴办起来的，财物也没有被弃置了的。
English: If the country has no loss of wealth, and the people have no grievances, then the cause will not fail to be carried out, and the property will not be abandoned.

古文：欲见天心，明以风雨。
现代文：要想了解天心，需要在风雨的情况上判明。
English: If you want to know the will of the heavens, you need to know about the wind and rain.

古文：故曰： 风雨无违，远近高下，各得其嗣。 
现代文：所以说： 风雨无违，远近高下，各得其嗣。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "No matter what the weather, people from near and far, high and low, all have their own heirs."

古文：万物尊天而贵风雨。
现代文：万物都尊祟天而贵风雨。
English: All things are precious in God's sight.

古文：所以尊天者，为其莫不受命焉也；所以贵风雨者，为其莫不待风而动待雨而濡也。
现代文：所以尊崇天，是因为万物没有不接受天的旨意的；所以贵风雨，是因为万物没有不靠风吹动、靠雨滋润的。
English: Therefore, to respect the heavens is because there is nothing that does not accept the will of the heavens; to respect the wind and rain is because there is nothing that is not moved by the wind and moistened by the rain.

古文：若使万物释天而更有所受命，释风而更有所仰动，释雨而更有所仰濡，则无为尊天而贵风雨矣。
现代文：若使万物离开天而接受另外什么东西的意旨，离开风而仰赖另外什么东西的吹动，离开雨而仰赖另外什么东西的滋润，那就无需尊天而贵风雨了。
English: If all things were to leave the sky and accept the will of something else, leave the wind and rely on the blowing of something else, leave the rain and rely on the moisture of something else, then there would be no need to respect the sky and respect the wind and rain.

古文：今人君之所尊安者，为其威立而令行也。
现代文：现在人君之所以位尊而身安，就是因为他树立了权势并且推行了政令。
English: It is because he has established power and implemented government decrees that he is now dignified and secure.

古文：其所以能立威行令者，为其威利之操莫不在君也。
现代文：其所以能树立权势和推行政令，就是因为权势和财利两者的掌握没有不在君主手里的。
English: The reason why they are able to establish power and push through executive orders is because the control of both power and financial interests is not entirely in the hands of the monarch.

古文：若使威利之操不专在君，而有所分散，则君日益轻而威利日衰，侵暴之道也。
现代文：若使权势和财利的掌握不专在君主之手，而有所分散，君主的地位就将日益轻贱，而权势财利也将日益衰减，这是一条发生侵夺暴乱的道路。
English: If the control of power and wealth is not exclusively in the hands of the monarch, but is dispersed, the position of the monarch will become increasingly inferior, and power, wealth and profit will also decline. This is a way for usurpation and rebellion to occur.

古文：故曰： 三经既饬，君乃有国。 
现代文：所以说： 三经既饬，君乃有国。 
English: Therefore, he said, "The Three Classics have been fulfilled, and you now have a country."

古文：乘夏方长，审治刑赏，必明经纪，陈义设法。
现代文：乘夏天白日方长，要审理刑赏大事。这必须宣明纲纪，公布仪法、制度，依理断事。
English: It is necessary to clarify the outline of discipline, announce the etiquette and system, and judge things according to reason.

古文：断事以理，虚气平心，乃去怒喜。
现代文：这要求虚气平心，而排除个人喜怒。
English: This requires a level-headedness that excludes personal emotions.

古文：若倍法弃令而行怒喜，祸乱乃生，上位乃殆。
现代文：如果背弃法令而按照个人喜怒行事，祸乱便会发生，君位就会危险。
English: If you disobey the law and act according to your personal likes and dislikes, disaster will occur and the monarchy will be in danger.

古文：故曰： 喜无以赏，怒无以杀。
现代文：所以说： 喜无以赏，怒无以杀。
English: Therefore, he said, "There is no reward for joy, and no death for anger."

古文：喜以赏，怒以杀，怨乃起，令乃废。
现代文：喜以赏，怒以杀，怨乃起，今乃废。
English: Rejoice in appreciation, anger in killing, grudge in starting, but now it is useless.

古文：骤令而不行，民心乃外，外之有徒，祸乃始牙。
现代文：骤令而不行，民心乃外，外之有徒，祸乃始牙。
English: Sudden orders will not work, the people's hearts are outside, there are followers outside, and the disaster is the beginning of the teeth.

古文：众之所忿，寡不能图。 
现代文：众之所忿，寡不能图。 
English: What the public disapproves of, few can do anything about.

古文：冬既闭藏，百事尽止，往事毕登，来事未起。
现代文：冬天万物收闭，百事尽止，过去一年的事情全部完成，来年的事情尚未开始。
English: In winter, everything is closed, everything is over, the things of the past year are all completed, and the things of the next year have not yet begun.

古文：方冬无事，慎观终始，审察事理。
现代文：乘此冬日无事，就来慎重考察国事的全部过程，详察事物发展的道理。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that nothing happened on this winter's day, I carefully examined the entire process of state affairs and scrutinized the reason for the development of things.

古文：事有先易而后难者，有始不足见而终不可及者；此常利之所以不举，事之所以困者也。
现代文：有的工作，开头感到容易而后来才发现困难；有的工作，开头不被注意而后来却无法补救。这往往是利途不能开发，国事遇到困难的原因。
English: Some work is easy at the beginning and difficult later; some work is not noticed at the beginning and cannot be remedied later. This is often the reason why the benefits cannot be developed and national affairs encounter difficulties.

古文：事之先易者，人轻行之，人轻行之，则必困难成之事；始不足见者，人轻弃之，人轻弃之，则必失不可及之功。
现代文：开头感到容易的，人们就轻易对待它，轻易对待，就一定办不到难成的大事；开头不被注意的，人们就轻易放弃它，轻易放弃，就一定丧失无法补救的成果。
English: If it is easy at the beginning, people will treat it easily, and if it is easily treated, it will definitely not be able to accomplish difficult things; if it is not noticed at the beginning, people will easily give it up, and if it is easily given up, it will definitely lose irreparable results.

古文：夫数困难成之事，而时失不可及之功，衰耗之道也。
现代文：经常办不到难成的大事，经常丧失无法补救的成果，这便是衰耗事业的道路。
English: Often unable to do difficult things, often losing irreparable results, this is the path of the waning cause.

古文：是故明君审察事理，慎观终始，为必知其所成，成必知其所用，用必知其所利害。
现代文：因此，英明君主详察事物发展的道理，慎重考察国事的全过程，办事情一定预知它的成就，有成就一定预知它的作用，有作用一定预知它的利害后果。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch should carefully observe the development of things, carefully examine the whole process of state affairs, and do things to predict its achievements, have achievements to predict its role, and have a role to predict its interests and consequences.

古文：为而不知所成，成而不知所用，用而不知所利害，谓之妄举。
现代文：办事而不预知其成就，有成就而不预知其作用，有作用而不预知其利害后果，叫作轻举妄动。
English: To act without foreknowledge of the result, to have the result without foreknowledge of the effect, and to have the effect without foreknowledge of the consequences, is to act rashly.

古文：妄举者，其事不成，其功不立。
现代文：轻举妄动者，其事不成，其功不立。
English: Those who act rashly will not succeed, and their efforts will not bear fruit.

古文：故曰： 举所美必观其所终，废所恶必计其所穷。 
现代文：所以说： 举所美必观其所终，废所恶必计其所穷。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "What is beautiful must look at its end, and what is evil must consider its poverty."

古文：凡人君者，欲民之有礼义也。
现代文：凡是人君，都愿意百姓遵行礼义。
English: Every human ruler wants his people to follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：夫民无礼义，则上下乱而贵贱争。
现代文：人民若无礼义，则上下混乱而贵贱争夺。
English: If the people are impolite, there will be chaos and competition between the high and the low.

古文：故曰： 庆勉敦敬以显之，富禄有功以劝之，爵贵有名以休之。 
现代文：所以说： 庆勉敦敬以显之、富禄有功以劝之，爵贵有名以休之。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Celebration and reverence are more important than appearance, wealth and merit are more important than persuasion, and nobility and fame are more important than rest."

古文：凡人君者，欲众之亲上乡意也，欲其从事之胜任也。
现代文：凡是人君，都希望百姓亲近君主而顺从君意，希望百姓为国办事而办事胜任。
English: All human rulers hope that the people will be close to the monarch and obey the monarch's will, and hope that the people will work for the country and work competently.

古文：而众者，不爱则不亲，不亲则不明，不教顺则不乡意。
现代文：就民众来说，不爱护他们就不来亲近，不教训他们就不顺从君意。
English: As far as the people are concerned, if you don't love them, you won't get close to them, and if you don't teach them, they won't obey you.

古文：是故明君兼爱以亲之，明教顺以道之，便其势，利其备，爱其力，而勿夺其时以利之。
现代文：因此，英明君主总普遍施爱来亲近他们，宣明教训来引导他们，顺应他们力量，促进他们富足，爱惜他们的劳力，而不侵夺他们的农时，用这些为他们谋福利。
English: Therefore, a wise prince should always approach them with universal love, instruct and guide them, yield to their strength, promote their prosperity, cherish their labor, and not encroach on their farming time, and use it for their benefit.

古文：如此则众亲上乡意，从事胜任矣。
现代文：这样，民众就亲近君主而顺从君意，为国家办事就胜任了。
English: In this way, the people are close to the monarch and obey the monarch's will, and they are competent to do things for the country.

古文：故曰： 兼爱无遗，是谓君心。
现代文：所以说： 兼爱无遗，是谓君心。
English: Therefore, it is said that "comprehensive love" is the essence of Junshin.

古文：必先顺教，万民乡风。
现代文：必先顺教，万民乡风。
English: We must first teach a lesson, so that all people will become better mannered.

古文：旦暮利之，众乃胜任。 
现代文：旦暮利之，众乃胜任。 
English: Give benefits regularly, and the people will successfully complete their duties.

古文：治之本二：一曰人，二曰事。
现代文：治国的根本有两条：一曰人，二曰事。
English: There are two fundamental rules for governing a country: the first is people, the second is things.

古文：人欲必用，事欲必工。
现代文：治人要求他一定效力，治事要求它一定完善。
English: Governance requires him to be effective, and governance requires him to be perfect.

古文：人有逆顺，事有称量。
现代文：人有逆有顺，事情有分量尺度。
English: People have ups and downs, things have a weight scale.

古文：人心逆则人不用，事失称量则事不工。
现代文：人心逆就不肯效力，事不合分量尺度就不可能完善。
English: The human mind, on the contrary, is not willing to be effective, and it is impossible to perfect things that do not fit the weight scale.

古文：事不工则伤，人不用则怨。
现代文：事情不完善意味着有伤，人不肯效力意味着有怨。
English: If things are not perfect, it means that there are injuries, and if people refuse to work, it means that there are grudges.

古文：故曰： 取人以己，成事以质。 
现代文：所以说： 取人以己，成事以质。 
English: Therefore, he said: Take people as yourself, and accomplish things with quality.

古文：成事以质者，用称量也。取人以己者，度恕而行也。
现代文：所谓成事以质，就是要根据实际分量尺度行事；所谓取人以己，就是要考虑按 恕 道行事。
English: The so-called quality of accomplishment is to act according to the actual weight scale; the so-called self-reliance is to consider acting according to the path of forgiveness.

古文：度恕者，度之于己也，己之所不安，勿施于人。
现代文：考虑恕道，就是想着比照自己，自己所不接受的，不要施加于他人。
English: To consider the way of forgiveness is to think that what you do not accept, do not impose on others.

古文：故曰： 审用财，慎施报，察称量。
现代文：所以说： 审用财，慎施报，察称量。
English: Therefore, it is said: "Examine the use of money, be prudent in giving rewards, and observe the amount."

古文：故用财不可以啬，用力不可以苦。用财啬则费，用力苦则劳矣。 
现代文：故用财不可以啬，用力不可以苦，用财啬则费，用力苦则劳矣。 
English: Therefore, with money you cannot be stingy, with effort you cannot be hard, with thrift you will spend, with effort you will work hard.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：为什么是这样呢?
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：用力苦则事不工，事不工而数复之，故曰劳矣。
现代文：因为使用民力过头，事情就不会做得完善。不完善而不断返工，所以叫作 劳 。
English: Because the use of people's power is excessive, things will not be done perfectly. Imperfect and constantly reworked, so it is called labor.

古文：用财啬则不当人心，不当人心则怨起。
现代文：君主用财吝啬，就不得人心，不得人心则发生怨恨。
English: Monarchs who are miserly with money are unpopular, and when they are unpopular, resentment arises.

古文：用财而生怨，故曰费。
现代文：用财而造怨，所以叫作 费 。
English: Using money to stir up resentment, that's why it's called a grudge.

古文：怨起而不复反，众劳而不得息，则必有崩阤堵坏之心。
现代文：民众怨起而不得平复，疲劳而不得休息，就一定产生摧毁破坏的想法。
English: When the people are enraged and cannot be calmed down, when they are tired and cannot rest, they are bound to have destructive thoughts.

古文：故曰： 民不足，令乃辱；民苦殃，令不行。
现代文：所以说： 民不足，令乃辱；民苦殃，令不行。
English: Therefore he said, "It is not right to humiliate the people because they are too few, or to make the people suffer.

古文：施报不得，祸乃始昌；祸昌而不悟，民乃自图。 
现代文：施报不得，祸乃始昌；祸昌而不悟，民乃自图。 
English: If there is no reward, it is the beginning of misfortune; if there is misfortune, but no understanding, it is the people's own doing.

古文：凡国无法则众不知所为，无度则事无机，有法不正，有度不直，则治辟。
现代文：凡国家没有法律，民众就不知道怎样行事；没有制度，行事就没有一个准则。但有法律而不公正，有制度而不明确，则行政管理不灵。
English: Where there is no law in a country, the people do not know how to act; where there is no system, there is no standard for action. However, where there is a law that is not fair and a system that is not clear, the administrative management is not effective.

古文：治辟则国乱。
现代文：行政管理不灵则国家混乱。
English: If the administration is dysfunctional, the country will be in chaos.

古文：故曰： 正法直度，罪杀不赦。杀僇必信，民畏而惧。武威既明，令不再行。 
现代文：所以说： 正法直度，罪杀不赦，杀必信，民畏而惧，武威既明，令不再行。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: the righteous law is straightforward, the crime is unforgivable, the murder must be believed, the people are afraid and afraid, the military power is clear, and the order is no longer possible.

古文：凡民者，莫不恶罚而畏罪。
现代文：凡是人民，没有不恶刑而畏罪的。
English: There is no nation that does not fear the punishment of sin.

古文：是以人君严教以示之，明刑罚以致之。
现代文：所以，人君要严加教训来告示他们，申明刑罚来做戒他们。
English: Wherefore the prince of this people shall take up a taunt against them, and shall speak unto them the words of chastisement.

古文：故曰： 顿卒怠倦以辱之，罚罪有过以惩之，杀僇犯禁以振之。 
现代文：所以说： 顿卒怠倦以辱之，罚罪有过以惩之，杀戮犯禁以振之。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "Immediately weary with humiliation, punish with punishment, and kill with ban."

古文：治国有三器，乱国有六攻。
现代文：治国有 三器 ，乱国有 六攻 。
English: There are three tools for running a country, and six for running a chaotic country.

古文：明君能胜六攻而立三器，则国治；不肖之君不能胜六攻而立三器，故国不治。
现代文：明君能克制六攻而设置三器，则国家称治；昏君不能克制六攻而设置三器，故国家不治。
English: If the Ming emperor can restrain six attacks and set up three weapons, the country will be praised; if the Western emperor cannot restrain six attacks and set up three weapons, the country will not be governed.

古文：三器者何也？曰：号令也、斧钺也、禄赏也。
现代文：什么是三器呢?就是：号令、刑杀、禄赏。
English: What are the three weapons? They are: command, punishment, and reward.

古文：六攻者何也？
现代文：什么是六攻呢?
English: What are the six attacks?

古文：亲也、贵也、货也、色也、巧佞也、玩好也。
现代文：就是：亲者、贵者、财货、女色、巧佞之臣、玩好之物。
English: That is: relatives, nobles, wealth, women, clever vassals, and playthings.

古文：三器之用何也？
现代文：三器的用途是什么呢?
English: What is the use of the three instruments?

古文：曰：非号令无以使下，非斧钺无以畏众，非禄赏无以劝民。
现代文：回答说：没有号令就无法使役臣下，没有刑杀就无法威服民众，没有禄赏就无法鼓励人民。
English: He replied: Without orders, there is no way to motivate subordinates, without executions, there is no way to intimidate the people, and without rewards, there is no way to encourage the people.

古文：六攻之败何也？
现代文：六攻的坏处是什么呢?
English: What is the corrosive effect of the six destructive factors?

古文：曰：虽不听而可以得存，虽犯禁而可以得免，虽无功而可以得富。
现代文：回答说：虽不听法令而可以安然存在，虽违犯禁律而可以豁免罪刑，虽没有立功而可以发财致富。
English: He replied, "Although you don't obey the law, you can exist safely; although you violate the prohibitions, you can be exempted from criminal punishment; although you don't do any meritorious deeds, you can get rich.

古文：夫国有不听而可以得存者，则号令不足以使下；有犯禁而可以得免者，则斧钺不足以畏众；有无功而可以得富者，则禄赏不足以劝民。
现代文：国家有不听法令而安然存在的情况，号令就不能推动臣下；有违犯禁律而免于刑罪的情况，刑杀就不能威慑民众；有无功而发财致富的情况，禄赏就不能鼓励百姓；号令不能推动臣下，刑杀不能威慑民众。
English: If the state does not obey the law and exists safely, the order cannot promote the vassals; if it violates the prohibition and is exempt from the criminal law, the killing cannot deter the people; if it is rich without merit, the reward cannot encourage the people; the order cannot promote the vassals, and the killing cannot deter the people.

古文：号令不足以使下，斧钺不足以畏众，禄赏不足以劝民，则人君无以自守也。
现代文：禄赏不能鼓励百姓，人君就没有可以保全自己地位的东西了。那么，英明君主应该怎么办呢?
English: Reward and reward cannot encourage the people, and the ruler has nothing to preserve his position. So, what should a wise ruler do?

古文：然则明君奈何？明君不为六者变更号令，不为六者疑错斧钺，不为六者益损禄赏。
现代文：英明君主是不为这六者变更号令，不为这六者疑止或施加刑杀，也不为这六者增加或减少禄赏的。
English: The wise sovereign does not issue orders for the six to be changed, does not suspend or impose capital punishment for the six, and does not increase or decrease the reward for the six.

古文：故曰： 植固而不动，奇邪乃恐。
现代文：所以说： 植固不动，奇邪乃恐。
English: Therefore, it is said, "If you plant firmly and do not move, you will not be afraid of strange and evil things."

古文：奇革邪化，令往民移。 
现代文：奇革邪化，令往民移。 
English: Miraculously, the leather degenerated, leading to a migration to the people.

古文：凡人君者，覆载万民而兼有之，烛临万族而事使之。
现代文：凡是人君，都保护着亿万民众而占有他们，督察着亿万部族而使役他们。
English: All human princes protect hundreds of millions of people and possess them, supervise hundreds of millions of tribes and make them serve them.

古文：是故以天地、日月、四时为主、为质，以治天下。
现代文：因此，他运用天地、日月、四时，作为主宰，作为根据，来治理天下。
English: Therefore, he used heaven and earth, the sun, the moon, and the four seasons as the master, as the basis, to govern the world.

古文：天覆而无外也，其德无所不在；地载而无弃也，安固而不动，故莫不生殖。
现代文：天覆万物而没有例外，其恩惠无所不在；地载万物而没有遗弃，稳定而不动。故无不生长繁育。
English: The sky covers all things without exception, and its bounty is omnipresent; the earth supports all things without abandoning them, and is stable without moving. Therefore, all things grow and reproduce.

古文：圣人法之以覆载万民，故莫不得其职姓，得其职姓，则莫不为用。
现代文：圣人效法它们来保护万民，所以，万民没有不得到经常生计的。得到经常生计，就没有不为君主效力的了。
English: The saints imitated them to protect the people, so the people did not get a regular livelihood, and if they got a regular livelihood, they would not work for the monarch.

古文：故曰： 法天合德，象地无亲。 
现代文：所以说： 法天合德，象地无亲。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Law, Heaven, and Virtue are like having no relatives on earth.

古文：日月之明无私，故莫不得光。圣人法之，以烛万民，故能审察，则无遗善，无隐奸。
现代文：日月的光明没有偏私，所以没有得不到光照的地方；圣人效法它们，来烛照万民，所以能够明察，这就没有看不到的善良行为，也没有隐蔽得住的恶事。
English: The light of the sun and the moon is not partial, so there is no place that does not receive light; the saints imitate them and come to light the people, so they can see clearly, there are no invisible good deeds, and there are no hidden evil deeds.

古文：无遗善，无隐奸，则刑赏信必。
现代文：没有看不到的善行和没有隐蔽着的恶事，就可以做到赏罚准确而坚定。
English: If there are no invisible good deeds and no hidden evil deeds, the rewards and punishments can be accurate and firm.

古文：刑赏信必，则善劝而奸止。故曰： 参于日月。 
现代文：赏罚准确坚定，则好事得到鼓励，坏事得到禁止。所以说： 参于日月。 
English: If rewards and punishments are accurate and firm, then good deeds will be encouraged and bad deeds will be prohibited. Therefore, it is said: "Observe the sun and the moon."

古文：四时之行，信必而著明。
现代文：四时的运行，准确、固定而明显。
English: Four o'clock operation, accurate, fixed and obvious.

古文：圣人法之，以事万民，故不失时功。
现代文：圣人效法它，使用万民，所以事情总是不失时效。
English: The sages have imitated it and used it for the benefit of all people, so it is always up to date.

古文：故曰： 伍于四时。 
现代文：所以说： 伍于四时。 
English: So he said, "Be ready at four o'clock."

古文：凡众者，爱之则亲，利之则至。
现代文：凡是民众，对他们爱护，他们就亲近；为他们谋利益，他们就归附。
English: If the people love them, they are near to them; if they benefit them, they are near to them.

古文：是故明君设利以致之，明爱以亲之。
现代文：因此，明君实行福利措施来招引他们，表明爱护之意来亲近他们。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun implemented welfare measures to attract them and showed affection to get close to them.

古文：徒利而不爱，则众至而不亲；徒爱而不利，则众亲而不至。
现代文：只谋利而不爱护，民众就归附而不亲近；只爱护而不谋利，民众就亲近而不肯归附。
English: Seeking only profit and not love, the people are attached and not close; loving only and not seeking profit, the people are close and do not want to be attached.

古文：爱施俱行，则说君臣、说朋友、说兄弟、说父子。
现代文：爱与利兼而行之，那就君臣喜悦，朋友喜悦，兄弟喜悦，父子喜悦了。
English: If love and benefit go hand in hand, then princes and ministers will be pleased, friends will be pleased, brothers will be pleased, and fathers and sons will be pleased.

古文：爱施所设，四固不能守。
现代文：爱、利兼行的结果，在战时，敌国的四境虽固都不能据守。
English: As a result of the simultaneous pursuit of love and profit, in wartime, the four borders of the enemy country cannot be defended, although they are firm.

古文：故曰： 说在爱施。 
现代文：所以说： 悦众在爱施。 
English: Therefore, he said: Pleasing the public comes from love.

古文：凡君所以有众者，爱施之德也。
现代文：凡国君之所以能赢得民众拥护，是因为有爱民和施利于民的德惠。
English: The reason why all sovereigns can win the support of the people is because they love the people and provide benefits to the people.

古文：爱有所移，利有所并，则不能尽有。故曰： 有众在废私。 
现代文：爱民之心若是有了改变，对于财利若是有所吞并，就不能完全赢得民从了。所以说： 有众在废私。 
English: If there is a change in the heart of love for the people, if there is an annexation of financial interests, it will not be possible to fully win the people's obedience. Therefore, it is said: There are many people who are doing away with selfishness.

古文：爱施之德虽行而无私，内行不修，则不能朝远方之君。
现代文：君主虽有爱民和施利的德惠，并且也没有偏私之处，但君主的个人操行不好，也是不配朝会远方君主的。
English: Although the monarch has the virtues of loving the people and benevolence, and there is no favoritism, the monarch's personal behavior is not good, and it is not worthy of the distant monarch of the dynasty.

古文：是故正君臣上下之义，饰父子兄弟夫妻之义，饰男女之别，别疏数之差，使君德臣忠，父慈子孝，兄爱弟敬，礼义章明。如此则近者亲之，远者归之。
现代文：因此要端正君臣上下的名分，整顿家庭之间的名分，整饬男女的分别，区别亲疏远近的不同，使君德臣忠，父慈子孝，兄爱弟敬，礼义彰明显著，这样，近处的民众都来亲近，远国的民众也来归附。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to rectify the names of princes and ministers, rectify the names of families, rectify the differences between men and women, and distinguish the difference between close and distant relatives, so that the loyalty of princes and ministers, the filial piety of fathers and sons, the love of brothers and sisters, and the promotion of courtesy and righteousness are obvious. In this way, the people in the vicinity are close, and the people in distant countries are also attached.

古文：故曰： 召远在修近。 
现代文：所以说： 召远在修近。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Calling from afar is repairing near.

古文：闭祸在除怨，非有怨乃除之，所事之地常无怨也。
现代文：关于 闭祸在除怨 ，不是说有了怨才去清除，而是要保持所在之地经常不发生人怨。
English: Regarding the elimination of grievances, it is not to say that there is a grievance to be eliminated, but to maintain the place where there is often no human grievance.

古文：凡祸乱之所生，生于怨咎；怨咎所生，生于非理。
现代文：凡是祸乱的发生，乃生于怨咎；怨咎所生，生于非理。
English: All calamities are born out of grievances, and grievances are born out of injustice.

古文：是以明君之事众也必经，使之必道，施报必当，出言必得，刑罚必理。
现代文：因此，明君管理民众一定要有原则，使役他们一定要有道德，施予报酬一定要恰当，说话一定要正确，刑罚一定要合理。
English: Therefore, the Ming ruler must have principles to manage the people, they must have morals to serve, the remuneration must be appropriate, the speech must be correct, and the punishment must be reasonable.

古文：如此则众无郁怨之心，无憾恨之意，如此则祸乱不生，上位不殆。
现代文：这样，民众就没有郁怨之心，也没有憾恨之意了。这样祸乱就不会发生，君主地位也不至陷于危险。
English: In this way, the people will not have a sense of grievance, and there will be no sense of regret and hatred. In this way, disasters will not occur, and the position of the monarch will not be in danger.

古文：故曰： 闭祸在除怨也。 
现代文：所以说： 闭祸在除怨。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Closing one's eyes to one's misfortune is the way to eliminate one's grievances."

古文：凡人君所以尊安者，贤佐也。
现代文：凡人君所以能保持尊严而安定，在于有贤的佐臣。
English: The reason why an ordinary person can maintain dignity and stability is because of the virtuous Sassoons.

古文：佐贤则君尊、国安、民治，无佐则君卑、国危、民乱。
现代文：佐臣贤，则君主尊严，国家安定，人民得治；得不到贤的佐臣，则君主卑辱，国家危殆，人民叛乱。
English: If the statesmen are virtuous, then the dignity of the monarch, the stability of the country, and the people will prevail; if the statesmen are not virtuous, then the monarch will be humiliated, the country will be in danger, and the people will rebel.

古文：故曰： 备长存乎任贤。 
现代文：所以说： 备长在乎任贤 。
English: Therefore, he said, "Preparation for the post of chief is a matter for Ren Xian."

古文：凡人者，莫不欲利而恶害，是故与天下同利者，天下持之；擅天下之利者，天下谋之。
现代文：人，没有不爱利恶害的。因此，与天下人同利的，天下人就拥护他；独占天下利益的，天下人就图谋他。
English: There is no one who does not love gain and evil. Therefore, if he is of the same interest as the people of the world, the people of the world will support him; if he monopolizes the interests of the world, the people of the world will plot against him.

古文：天下所谋，虽立必隳；天下所持，虽高不危。
现代文：天下人所图谋的，地位虽然确立也必然倒台；天下人所拥护的，地位虽然尊高也没有危险。
English: What the people of the world conspire, although the status is established, will inevitably fall; what the people of the world support, although the status is lofty, there is no danger.

古文：故曰： 安高在乎同利。 
现代文：所以说： 安高在乎同利。 
English: Therefore, he said: Angao cares about the same profit.

