古文：帝以宋孝武大明八年岁次甲辰生于秣陵县同夏里三桥宅。
现代文：梁高祖武皇帝名叫衍，字叔达，小字练儿，南兰陵中都里人，姓萧氏，与齐朝皇家同是承继淮阴令萧整。武帝在宋朝的孝武帝大明八年生于秣陵县同夏里三桥家中。
English: Emperor Liang Gao's ancestor, Emperor Wu, was named Yan, Shu Da, Xiao Zi Ren Er. He was from Zhongduli, South Lanling, and surnamed Xiao. He was the successor of Huaiyin Emperor Xiao Ding, as well as the royal family of the Qi Dynasty. Emperor Wu was born in the eighth year of the Song Dynasty to Emperor Xiaowu in Daming, Tongxiali and Sanqiao, Fuling County.

古文：初，皇妣张氏尝梦抱日，已而有娠，遂産帝。
现代文：起初，皇上已故的母亲张氏曾梦见自己怀抱太阳，随后就有了身孕，于是生了高帝。
English: At first, the emperor's late mother, Zhang, dreamed of embracing the sun, and then became pregnant, giving birth to Gao Di.

古文：帝生而有异光，状貌殊特，日角龙顔，重岳虎顾，舌文八字，项有浮光，身映日无影，两骻骈骨，项上隆起，有文在右手曰 武 。
现代文：高帝生下来就有一种异常的光，相貌特殊，额骨中央隆起，形状如日，面部如龙，回头有如虎望重山，舌纹为八字形，颈部有浮光，身体映着太阳却没有影子，两髋骨都是双骨并生，脖颈上部隆起，右手有文为 武 字。
English: Gao Di was born with an unusual light, with a special appearance. The central frontal bone is raised, shaped like the sun, the face is like a dragon, the back is like a tiger looking at a heavy mountain, the tongue is octagonal, the neck has floating light, the body reflects the sun but there is no shadow, both cheekbones are double bones, the upper part of the neck is raised, and the right hand has the word "Wu" written on it.

古文：帝爲儿时，能蹈空而行。
现代文：高帝小时候，能蹈空行走。
English: When Gaudi was a child, he could walk on air.

古文：及长，博学多通，好筹略，有文武才干。
现代文：长大后，博学多通，喜爱谋略，有文武才干。
English: When he grew up, he was well-read, fond of strategy, and talented in literature and martial arts.

古文：所居室中，常若云气，人或遇者，体辄肃然。
现代文：他所住的房子中，常常像是有云气，别人有时遇着，身上会觉得十分清净。
English: The house he lives in often seems to have a cloudy atmosphere, and others sometimes encounter it and feel very clean.

古文：初爲卫军王俭东合祭酒，俭一见深相器异，请爲户曹属。
现代文：开始他曾担任卫军王俭的东祭酒，王俭一见深感诧异，十分器重，把他聘为户曹属。
English: At the beginning, he served as the East Sacrificial Wine of Wang Jian of the Guards. Wang Jian was deeply surprised at first sight, very valuable, and hired him as a household Cao.

古文：谓庐江何宪曰： 此萧郎三十内当作侍中，出此则贵不可言。 
现代文：他曾对庐江的何宪说： 这位萧郎三十岁以内一定会做侍中，如果更高则贵不可言。 
English: He once said to He Xian of Lijiang River: This Xiao Lang will definitely be a chamberlain within thirty years of age, and if he is more senior, he will be very valuable.

古文：竟陵王子良开西邸，招文学，帝与沈约、谢朓、王融、萧琛、范云、任昉、陆倕等并游焉，号曰 八友 。
现代文：竟陵王萧子良开设了西邸，招揽文学人才，武帝和沈约、谢緿、王融、萧琛、范云、任窻、陆翺等人一起交游，号称 八友 。
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, opened the West Residence to recruit literary talents. Emperor Wu and Shen Yao, Xie Yao, Wang Rong, Xiao Yao, Fan Yun, Ren Yao, Lu Yao and others traveled together, known as the Eight Friends.

古文：融俊爽，识鉴过人，尤敬异帝，每谓所亲曰： 宰制天下，必在此人。 
现代文：王融俊爽，见识过人，尤其敬佩和特重武帝，常常对他亲近的人说： 主宰天下，必是此人。 
English: Wang Rong Junshuang, who knew people, especially admired and valued Emperor Wu, often said to those close to him: "He must be the one to rule the world."

古文：累迁随王镇西谘议参军。
现代文：武帝逐步升迁为随王镇西咨议参军。
English: Emperor Wu was gradually promoted to join the army after consulting with Wang Zhenxi.

古文：行经牛渚，逢风，入泊龙渎，有一老人谓帝曰： 君龙行虎步，相不可言，天下方乱，安之者其在君乎？ 
现代文：有一次路过牛渚，遇上了大风，便把船驶入龙渎停泊，有一个老人对武帝说： 您龙行虎步，相貌不可言说，天下正在大乱，能使它安定的恐怕就是您了吧！ 
English: Once, when passing through Ushizuchi and encountering a strong wind, he pulled the ship into a rough anchorage. An old man said to Emperor Wu, "You walk like a dragon, your appearance is indescribable. The world is in great turmoil. I'm afraid it's you who can make it stable!"

古文：问其名氏，忽然不见。
现代文：问他的姓名，却忽然不见了。
English: I asked him his name, but he suddenly disappeared.

古文：寻以皇考艰去职，归建邺。
现代文：不久武帝因为父亲去世而离职，回到了建邺。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu resigned from his post due to his father's death and returned to Jianye.

古文：及齐武帝不豫，竟陵王子良以帝及兄懿、王融、刘绘、王思远、顾暠之、范云等爲帐内军主。
现代文：后来齐武帝生了病，竟陵王萧子良任命武帝和兄长萧懿、王融、刘绘、王思远、顾詗之、范云等为军帐内的主将。
English: Later, Emperor Qiwu fell ill, and King Xiao Ziliang appointed Emperor Qiwu and his elder brothers Xiao Qi, Wang Rong, Liu Bei, Wang Siyuan, Gu Yaozhi, Fan Yun, etc. as commanders of the army.

古文：融欲因帝晏驾立子良，帝曰： 夫立非常之事，必待非常之人，融才非负图，视其败也。 范云曰： 忧国家者，惟有王中书。 
现代文：王融打算在皇帝逝世后立萧子良为皇帝。武帝说： 立萧子良这是一件不平常的事，一定要靠不平常的人，王融的才能不足以实现他的企图，人们将看到他的失败。 范云说： 忧虑国家的，惟有王中书。 
English: Wang Rong planned to install Xiao Ziliang as emperor after the emperor's death. Emperor Wu said: the installation of Xiao Ziliang is an unusual event, it must rely on unusual people, Wang Rong's talent is not enough to realize his intention, people will see his failure. Fan Yun said: only Wang Zhongshu is worried about the country.

古文：帝曰： 忧国欲爲周、召？欲爲竖、刁邪？ 
现代文：武帝说： 忧虑国家是要做周、召，还是要做竖、刁呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Should a worried country do Zhou and Zhao, or should it do Zhe and Zhao?

古文：懿曰： 直哉史鱼，何其木强也！ 
现代文：萧懿说： 真是正直啊，史鱼，多么质朴而倔强啊！ 
English: Xiao Yao said: What honesty, Shi Yu, how simple and stubborn!

古文：初，皇考之薨，不得志，事见齐鱼复侯传。
现代文：起初，父亲逝世，武帝很不得志，有关事情见《齐鱼复侯传》。
English: At first, Emperor Wu was very disappointed when his father passed away. For related events, see "Biography of Qi Yu Fu Hou."

古文：至是，郁林失德，齐明帝作辅，将爲废立计，帝欲助齐明，倾齐武之嗣，以雪心耻，齐明亦知之，每与帝谋。
现代文：到了现在，郁林王失德，齐明帝辅政，打算要进行皇帝的废立，武帝准备帮助齐明帝，推翻齐武帝的后代，以洗雪心中的耻辱，齐明帝也知道他的这种心情，常常和武帝密谋。
English: Up to now, King Yulin lost his virtue, Emperor Qiming supported the government, and planned to overthrow the emperor. Emperor Wu was ready to help Emperor Qiming, overthrow the descendants of Emperor Qiming, and wash the shame in Snow's heart. Emperor Qiming also knew this feeling of his, and often conspired with Emperor Wu.

古文：时齐明将追随王，恐不从，又以王敬则在会稽，恐爲变，以问帝。
现代文：当时齐明帝打算拉拢随王，恐怕他不肯答应，又因为有王敬则在会稽，恐怕制造变乱，便向武帝询问。
English: At that time, Emperor Qiming planned to woo Su Wang, but he was afraid that he would not agree, and because Wang Jing was in the audience, he was afraid of creating turmoil, so he asked Emperor Wu.

古文：帝曰： 随王虽有美名，其实庸劣，既无智谋之士，爪牙惟仗司马垣历生、武陵太守卞白龙耳。
现代文：武帝说： 随王虽然享有美名，其实平庸而又拙劣，既没有智谋之士，爪牙也只是倚仗司马垣历生、武陵太守卞白龙罢了。
English: Emperor Wu said: Although Su Wang enjoyed a good reputation, he was actually mediocre and clumsy. He was not a man of wisdom, and his minions only relied on Sima Qigong and Wuling Taishu and Bai Long.

古文：此并惟利是与，若啖以显职，无不载驰。
现代文：这些人全都惟利是图，如果送给他们一个显要的职位，无不奔走效劳。
English: These people are all opportunists, if they are given a prominent position, they will run to serve.

古文：随王止须折简耳。
现代文：随王只须以平常的态度对待就行了。
English: You just have to treat the king with a normal attitude.

古文：敬则志安江东，穷其富贵，宜选美女以娱其心。 
现代文：王敬则志在安定江东，极享富贵，应该挑选美女去使他心中快乐。 
English: Wang Jing is determined to live in a stable Jiangdong and enjoy great wealth. He should choose a beautiful woman to make his heart happy.

古文：齐明曰： 亦吾意也。 
现代文：齐明帝说： 这也是我的心意。 
English: Emperor Qiming said, "This is also my heart's desire.

古文：即征历生爲太子左卫率，白龙游击将军，并至。
现代文：随即就征垣历生担任太子左卫率、卞白龙为游击将军，都来上任了。
English: He immediately took up the posts of Prince Zuo Wei, who had been in charge of the expeditionary force, and Zou Bailong, who was a guerrilla general.

古文：续召随王至都，赐自尽。
现代文：接着又召随王到京，赐他自尽。
English: He then summoned him to follow the king to the capital and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：豫州刺史崔慧景既齐武旧臣，不自安，齐明忧之，乃起帝镇寿阳，外声备魏，实防慧景。
现代文：豫州刺史崔慧景是齐武帝的旧臣，不太安分，齐明帝很担心，于是起用武帝镇守寿阳，对外声称是防备魏国，实际上是防范崔慧景。
English: Emperor Qiming was very worried, so he appointed Emperor Wu to guard Shouyang, claiming that it was to guard against Wei, but it was actually to guard against Cui Huijing.

古文：师次长濑，慧景惧罪，白服来迎，帝抚而宥之。
现代文：军队驻扎在长濑，崔慧景对自己的罪行十分恐惧，身穿白衣服前来迎接，武帝加以抚慰并且原谅了他。
English: The army was stationed in Nagatoro. Cui Huijing was very afraid of his crime and came to meet him dressed in white. Emperor Wu comforted him and forgave him.

古文：将军房伯玉、徐玄庆并曰： 慧景反迹既彰，实是见贼，我曹武将，譬如韝上鹰，将军一言见命，便即制之。 
现代文：将军房伯玉、徐玄庆都说： 崔慧景谋反的迹象既然暴露，实际上就是现行贼寇，我们武将，就是衣袖上的鹰，将军一句话给我们下道命令，立即就能打垮他。 
English: Generals Bo Yu and Xu Xuanqing both said: Since the signs of Cui Hui Jing's rebellion have been exposed, he is actually a current bandit. We generals are the eagle on his sleeve. If the general gives us a word of command, we can immediately defeat him.

古文：帝笑曰： 其如掌中婴儿，杀之不武。 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 他就像是手掌中的婴儿，杀死他算不得武勇。 
English: Emperor Wu smiled and said, "He is like a baby in the palm of one's hand. Killing him is not courageous.

古文：于是曲意和释之，慧景遂安。
现代文：便曲意与他和解，慧景于是安定下来。
English: Then she reconciled with him, and Huiqing settled down.

古文：隆昌元年，拜中书侍郎，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：隆昌元年武帝被任命为中书侍郎，改任黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Emperor Wu was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese book and the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：建武二年，魏将王肃、刘昶攻司州刺史萧诞甚急，齐明遣左卫将军王广之赴救，帝爲偏帅隶广之。
现代文：建武二年，魏国将领王肃、刘昶进攻司州刺史萧诞十分猛烈，齐明帝派遣左卫将军王广之前往救援，武帝为偏帅隶属于王广之。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the Wei generals Wang Su and Liu Bei attacked the Sizhou general Shi Shaoqing very violently. Emperor Qiming sent the left guard general Wang Guang to the rescue. Emperor Wu was a partial commander under Wang Guangzhi.

古文：行次熨斗洲，有人长八尺馀，容貌衣冠皓然皆白，缘江呼曰： 萧王大贵。 
现代文：行军驻扎在熨斗洲，有一个人身高八尺多，容貌衣冠全部是洁白的，顺着江边喊道： 萧王大贵。 
English: The marching troops were stationed in Nidushu. There was a person who was more than eight feet tall, his face and clothes were all white, and he shouted along the river: Xiao Wang Daki.

古文：帝既屡有征祥，心益自负。
现代文：武帝既然屡次遇到吉祥的征兆，心里越发自信。
English: Since Emperor Wu has repeatedly encountered auspicious signs, he has become more and more confident.

古文：时去诞百里，衆军以魏军盛，莫敢前。
现代文：当时离萧诞有一百里，众军因为魏军太强盛，都不敢前进。
English: At that time, it was a hundred miles away from Xiao Zheng, and the troops did not dare to advance because the Wei army was too strong.

古文：帝欲大振威略，谓诸将曰： 今屯下梁之城，塞凿岘之险，守雉脚之路，据贤首之山，以通西关，以临贼垒，三方掎角，出其不备，破贼必矣。 
现代文：武帝打算大振军威，便对诸位将官说： 现在屯驻在下梁城，把守着凿岘天险，保卫着雉脚道路，占据着贤首高山，可以通往西关，下临贼营，三方犄角，攻其不备，战败敌军是必定无疑的。 
English: Emperor Wu planned to boost his military prestige, so he said to the generals: Now stationed in Xi'an Liangcheng, guarding the Jianye natural hazard, guarding the bad road, occupying the Jianshou high mountain, can lead to Xiguan, down to the thief camp, and the three-way angle, if it is not prepared, the defeated enemy army is certain.

古文：广之等不从。
现代文：王广之等人不肯听从。
English: Wang Guangzhi and others refused to obey.

古文：后遣徐玄庆进据贤首山，魏绝其粮道，衆惧，莫敢援之，惟帝独奋请先进。
现代文：后来派遣徐玄庆前往占据贤首山，魏军断绝了他的粮道，众人害怕，都不敢前去援助他，只有武帝独自奋勇请求首先进军。
English: Later, Xu Xuanqing was sent to occupy Xianshou Mountain. The Wei army cut off his food supply. Everyone was afraid and did not dare to go to help him. Only Emperor Wu bravely requested to march first.

古文：于是广之益帝精甲，衔枚夜前。
现代文：于是王广之增加武帝的精兵人数，衔枚夜行，急速前进。
English: As a result, Wang Guangzhi increased the number of Emperor Wu's elite soldiers, marched at night, and advanced rapidly.

古文：失道，望见如持两炬者，随之果得道，径上贤首山，广之军因得前。
现代文：后来迷失了道路，远远望见好像有人手持两支火炬，随着前进果然找到了道路，直上贤首山，王广之的军队从而才得以前进。
English: Later, the road was lost. From a distance, it looked as if someone was holding two torches. As they advanced, they found the road and went straight to the top of Mount Xianshou. Wang Guangzhi's army was thus able to advance.

古文：魏军来胁，帝坚壁不进。
现代文：魏军前来威胁，武帝坚守壁垒，拒不前进。
English: The Wei army came to threaten, Emperor Wu held fast to the barriers and refused to advance.

古文：时王肃自攻城，一鼓而退，刘昶有疑心，帝因与书，间成其隙。
现代文：当时王肃独自攻城，第一次击鼓就退了回来，刘昶有了疑心，武帝于是又给他写信，造成他们之间的矛盾。
English: At that time, Wang Su attacked the city on his own. The first time he beat the drum, he retreated back. Liu Bei became suspicious, and Emperor Wu then wrote to him again, causing a conflict between them.

古文：一旦，有风从西北起，阵云随之来，当肃营，寻而风回云转，还向西北，帝曰： 此所谓归气，魏师遁矣。 
现代文：一天，有风从西北刮起，黑云随着压来，走到王肃军营的上空，一会儿又风回云转，返回西北，武帝说： 这就是所谓归气，魏军就要败退了。 
English: One day, a wind was blowing from the northwest, and the black clouds came along with the pressure, reaching the sky over Wang Su's military camp. A moment later, the wind turned back to the clouds and returned to the northwest. Emperor Wu said: This is the so-called return to the air, the Wei army is about to be defeated and retreat.

古文：令军中曰： 望麾而进，听鼓而动。 
现代文：便对军中下令说： 望旗而进，听鼓而动。 
English: He then issued an order to the troops, saying, "March forward while watching the flag, and move forward while listening to the drum."

古文：肃乃倾壁十万，阵于水北，帝扬麾鼓噪，响振山谷，敢死之士，执短兵先登，长戟翼之。
现代文：王肃把十万军队全部排成人墙，在江北列阵，武帝挥舞旗帜，军士鼓噪，响震山谷，敢死的兵士，拿着短刀首先冲锋，大刀长矛掩护两翼。
English: Wang Su lined up all the 100,000 troops into a human wall, lined up in the north of the river, Emperor Wu waved the flag, the sergeants drummed, the valley shook, and the soldiers dared to die. They charged first with their short swords, and covered their two wings with their long swords and spears.

古文：城中见援至，因出军攻魏栅，魏军表里受敌，因大崩。
现代文：城中见援兵到来，于是也出兵攻击魏军的栅栏，魏军表里受敌，因而全军崩溃。
English: The city saw reinforcements arriving, so it also sent troops to attack the Wei army's fence. The Wei army suffered from the enemy, and the whole army collapsed.

古文：肃、昶单骑走，斩获千计，流血绛野。
现代文：王肃、刘昶单骑逃走，斩杀、俘虏数以千计，流血染红了田野。
English: Wang Su and Liu Ye rode away alone, slaughtering and capturing thousands of people, turning the fields red with bloodshed.

古文：得肃、昶巾箱中魏帝敕曰： 闻萧衍善用兵，勿与争锋，待吾至；若能禽此人，则江东吾有也。 
现代文：在王肃、刘昶的衣箱中找到了魏帝的敕令，其中说： 听说萧衍善于用兵，不要与他争锋，等我到达，如果能捉到此人，则江东就归我所有了。 
English: Emperor Wei's imperial edict was found in the trunks of Wang Su and Liu Ye, which said: I heard that Xiao Yan is good at using soldiers, don't fight with him, wait for me to arrive, if I can catch this person, then the East River will be mine.

古文：以功封建阳县男。
现代文：武帝因为战功被封为建阳县男。
English: Emperor Wu was given the title of "the man of Jianyang County" for his war exploits.

古文：寻爲司州刺史。
现代文：不久做了司州刺史。
English: He soon made history in Shizuoka Prefecture.

古文：有沙门自称僧恽，谓帝曰： 君项有伏龙，非人臣也。 
现代文：有个和尚自称叫僧恽，对武帝说： 您的脖颈上有一条卧龙，不是别人的臣子啊。 
English: There was a monk who claimed to be a monk and said to Emperor Wu, "You have a dragon around your neck. You are not someone else's vassal."

古文：复求，莫知所之。
现代文：又去找他，却不知去处了。
English: I went looking for him again, but I couldn't find him.

古文：帝在州，甚有威名。
现代文：武帝在州内，威名很大。
English: Emperor Wu has a great reputation in the state.

古文：尝有人饷马，帝不受，饷者密以马系斋柱而去。
现代文：曾有人赠送一匹马，武帝不接受，赠马的人秘密地把马拴在斋房的柱子上走了。
English: Once, someone gave a horse as a gift, but Emperor Wu did not accept it. The person who gave the horse secretly tied the horse to the pillar of the stable and left.

古文：帝出见马，答书殷勤，缚之马首，令人驱出城外，马自还。
现代文：武帝出来看见了马，写了一封情意恳切的答谢信，系在马头上，让人把马赶出城外，马又自己回到家中。
English: Emperor Wu came out and saw the horse, wrote a heartfelt letter of thanks, tied it to the horse's head, had the horse driven out of the city, and the horse returned home on its own.

古文：还都爲太子中庶子，领四厢直。
现代文：他回到京城担任太子中庶子，兼任四厢直。
English: He returned to the capital to serve as the prince's middle child and concurrently served as the fourth chamberlain.

古文：出镇石头。
现代文：出京镇守石头城。
English: The town of Debyeong guarded Stone Town.

古文：齐明性猜忌，帝避时嫌，解遣部曲，常乘折角小牛车。
现代文：齐明帝性格猜忌，武帝避开当时社会上的疑惑，遣散了部下，常常乘一辆折角小牛车。
English: Emperor Wu avoided the doubts of the society at that time, dismissed his subordinates, and often rode in a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：齐明每称帝清俭，勖励朝臣。
现代文：齐明帝常常称赞武帝清素俭朴，用以勉励朝臣。
English: Emperor Qiming often praised Emperor Wu for his purity and frugality to encourage his courtiers.

古文：四年，魏孝文帝自率大衆逼雍州，刺史曹武度沔守樊城，武旧齐武腹心，齐明忌之，欲使后弟刘暄爲雍州，暄不愿出外，因江祏得留。
现代文：建武四年，魏国的孝文帝亲自率领大军逼近雍州，刺史曹武渡过沔水据守樊城，曹武是旧时齐武帝的心腹，齐明帝猜忌他，想让皇后的弟弟刘暄主管雍州，刘暄不愿意出外，借助于江礻石而得以留下。
English: In the 4th year of the Jianwu era, Emperor Xiaowen of Wei personally led a large army to approach Yongzhou. Cao Wu crossed the Surabaya River to defend the city of Surabaya. Cao Wu was the confidant of Emperor Qiwu in the old days. Emperor Qiming was suspicious of him and wanted the queen's brother Liu Bei to be in charge of Yongzhou. Liu Bei did not want to go abroad, but was able to stay with the help of the river rock.

古文：齐明帝拟帝雍州，受密旨出顿，声爲军事发遣。
现代文：齐明帝打算让武帝去雍州，接受了密旨出兵，声称为军事派遣。
English: Emperor Qiming intended to let Emperor Wu go to Yongzhou, and accepted the secret dispatch of troops, claiming that it was a military dispatch.

古文：又命五兵尚书崔慧景、征南将军陈显达相续援襄阳。
现代文：又命令五兵尚书崔慧景、征南将军陈显达相续援助襄阳。
English: He also ordered the five soldiers of Shangshu Cui Huijing and the general of the Southern Expedition Chen Xianda to continuously aid Xiangyang.

古文：慧景与帝进行邓城，魏孝文帅十余万骑奄至，慧景引退，帝止之，不从，于是大败。
现代文：崔慧景与武帝进军行至邓城，魏国孝文帝率领十余万骑兵忽然到达，崔慧景引兵撤退，武帝制止他，不听从，于是大败。
English: Cui Huiqing and Emperor Wu marched to Dengcheng. Emperor Xiaowen of Wei suddenly arrived with more than 100,000 cavalry. Cui Huiqing led the troops to retreat. Emperor Wu stopped him and disobeyed, resulting in a crushing defeat.

古文：帝帅衆拒战，独得全军。
现代文：武帝率领兵众拒敌迎战，独自得以保全部队。
English: Emperor Wu led the troops to resist the enemy and was able to save the entire team.

古文：及魏军退，以帝爲辅国将军，监雍州事。
现代文：后来魏军撤退，任命武帝为辅国将军，监管雍州政务。
English: Later, the Wei army retreated, and Emperor Wu was appointed as an auxiliary general to supervise the government affairs of Yongzhou.

古文：先是，雍州相传樊城有王气，至是谣言更甚。
现代文：以前，雍州相传樊城有王气，到现在谣言更厉害。
English: In the past, Yongzhou was rumored to have royal power, and now the rumors are even stronger.

古文：及齐明崩，遗诏以帝爲都督、雍州刺史。
现代文：后来齐明帝逝世，遗诏以武帝为都督、雍州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Qiming died, and the imperial edict named Emperor Wu as the governor and Yongzhou as the capital.

古文：时扬州刺史始安王遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射江祏、右将军萧坦之、侍中江祀、卫尉刘暄更直内省，分日帖敕，世所谓 六贵 。
现代文：当时扬州刺史始安王萧遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射江礻石、右将军萧坦之、侍中江祀、卫尉刘暄轮流在内省值勤，分日批发敕令，世人称为 六贵 。
English: At that time, Yangzhou's King Xiao Yaoguang, Yangshuo's Prince Xu Xiaozhi, Yangshuo's Right Servant Shaojiang Shishi, Yangshuo's Right General Xiaotan Zhi, Yangshuo's Attendant Zhongjiang Shi, and Yangshuo's Guardsman Liu Hui took turns to be on duty within the province, and distributed the imperial edicts on a daily basis. They were known to the world as the "six precious ones."

古文：又有御刀茹法珍、梅虫儿、丰勇之等八人，号爲 八要 ，及舍人王咺之等四十馀人，皆口擅王言，权行国宪。
现代文：又有御刀茹法珍、梅虫儿、丰勇之等八人，号称 八要 ，以及舍人王口亘之等四十余人，全都出口便是王言，行权便是宪法。
English: In addition, there are eight people, such as Otouruhajin, Meimushi, and Fengyong, who are known as the Eight Necessities, and more than forty people, such as Wangkou, who renounce the people. All of them are the King's words, and the exercise of power is the Constitution.

古文：帝谓张弘策曰： 政出多门，乱其阶矣。
现代文：武帝对张弘策说： 国政出自多门，这就是致乱的阶梯。
English: Emperor Wu said to Zhang Hongze: National politics comes from many sources, and this is the ladder that leads to chaos.

古文：当今避祸，惟有此地，勤行仁义，可坐作西伯；但诸弟在都，恐离时患，须与益州图之耳。 
现代文：当今避祸，只有此地，多行仁义，可以安坐而成为西伯，只是几位弟弟都在京城，恐怕遭到时代的祸患，需要和益州方面共同商量。 
English: Today, it is the only place to avoid disaster, to do a lot of benevolence and righteousness, to be able to sit quietly and become Xibe. However, several brothers are in Beijing, and I am afraid that they will be affected by the scourge of the times, and need to discuss with the Yizhou side.

古文：时上长兄懿罢益州还，仍行郢州事，乃使弘策诣郢，陈计于懿，语在懿传。
现代文：当时皇上的长兄萧懿免去了益州的职务回来，仍然负责郢州的工作，武帝就派张弘策到郢州去，向萧懿说明自己的计策，具体话记在萧懿的传中。
English: At that time, the emperor's eldest brother Xiao Yao was relieved of his duties in Yizhou and returned, still in charge of the work in Zhangzhou. Emperor Wu sent Zhang Hongze to Zhangzhou to explain his strategy to Xiao Yao, the specific words are recorded in Xiao Yao's biography.

古文：言既不从，弘策还，帝乃召弟伟及憺，是岁至襄阳。
现代文：他的话未被听从，张弘策回来了，武帝便招呼弟弟萧伟和萧辵，当年到了襄阳。
English: His words were not heeded, Zhang Hongze returned, and Emperor Wu then summoned his younger brothers Xiao Wei and Xiao Wei, who arrived in Yangyang that year.

古文：乃潜造器械，多伐竹木，沈于檀溪，密爲舟装之备。
现代文：于是暗中制造器械，大量砍竹子和木材，沉在檀溪中，秘密地作为舟舰和装备的原料。
English: So they secretly made tools, cut a lot of bamboo and wood, sank in the sand dunes, and secretly used them as raw materials for boats and equipment.

古文：时帝所住斋常有气，五色回转，状若蟠龙。
现代文：当时武帝所住的斋房常常有一种气，五色转换，形状好像蟠龙。
English: At that time, the room where Emperor Wu lived often had an aura, a five-color transformation, and a shape like a dragon.

古文：季秋出九日台，忽暴风起，烟尘四合，帝所居独白日清朗，其上紫云腾起，形如伞盖，望者莫不异焉。
现代文：晚秋外出到九日台，忽然起了暴风，烟尘四面包围，惟独武帝所在的地方白日晴朗，上部紫云腾起，形状如同华盖，望见的人无不诧异。
English: In late autumn, I went out to Jiuyantai. Suddenly, there was a storm, and smoke and dust were all around. However, the place where Emperor Wu was located was sunny, and the upper part of the purple cloud was rising. It was shaped like a flower canopy, and everyone who saw it was surprised.

古文：寻而大臣相次诛戮。
现代文：不久大臣被相继诛杀。
English: Soon after, the ministers were killed one after the other.

古文：永元二年冬，懿又被害。
现代文：永元二年冬天，萧懿又被害。
English: In the winter of Yongyuan 2nd year, Xiao Yao was injured again.

古文：信至，帝密召长史王茂、中兵吕僧珍、别驾柳庆远、功曹史吉士瞻等谋之。
现代文：信息传来后，武帝秘密地召来长史王茂、中兵吕僧珍、别驾刘庆远、功曹史吉士瞻等谋划。
English: After receiving the information, Emperor Wu secretly summoned the warlord Shi Wangmao, the middle-ranking soldier Lu Sozhen, Liu Qingyuan, and the meritorious scholar Shi Jishizhan to plan.

古文：既定，以十一月乙巳召僚佐集于听事，告以举兵。
现代文：决定以后，于十一月九日在厅堂召集下属，告诉大家就要起兵。
English: After the decision was made, he called his subordinates together in the hall on November 9th and told them to raise an army.

古文：是日建牙，出檀溪竹木装舸舰，旬日大办。
现代文：当天树起大旗，取出檀溪的竹子和木料做成舰船，十天之内大举兴办。
English: On the same day, they hoisted a big flag, took out the bamboo and wood from Danxi to make a ship, and launched it in a big way within ten days.

古文：百姓愿从者，得铁马五千匹，甲士三万人。
现代文：许多百姓愿意随从，共得战马五千匹，甲士三万人。
English: Many people were willing to follow, and a total of five thousand horses and thirty thousand horsemen were obtained.

古文：先是，东昏以刘山阳爲巴西太守，使过荆州就行事萧颖胄以袭襄阳。
现代文：先前，东昏侯任命刘山阳为巴西太守，派他到荆州去见长官萧颖胄袭击襄阳。
English: Previously, the Dongwu marquis appointed Liu Shanyang as the governor of Brazil and sent him to Jingzhou to meet the governor Xiao Yingyao to attack Xiangyang.

古文：帝知其谋，乃遣参军王天武、庞庆国诣江陵，遍与州府人书论军事。
现代文：武帝知道他的计谋，便派参军王天武、庞爱国去江陵，普遍地给州府的人写信讨论军事问题。
English: Emperor Wu knew of his stratagem, so he sent Wang Tianwu and Pang Aiguo to Gangneung to join the army, and they generally wrote letters to people in the prefectures to discuss military issues.

古文：天武既发，帝谓谘议参军张弘策曰： 今日天武坐收天下矣。
现代文：王天武出发以后，武帝对咨议参军张弘策说： 今日天武可以坐收天下了。
English: After the departure of Wang Tianwu, Emperor Wu said to Zhang Hongze, who was present at the consultation: Today, Tianwu can take over the world.

古文：荆州得天武至，必回遑无计，若不见同，取之如拾地芥耳。
现代文：荆州见天武到来一定是踌躇不定、没有主意，如果不同意，夺取它就像在地上拾一棵小草。
English: When Jingzhou saw Tianwu coming, it must have hesitated and had no idea. If it did not agree, seizing it would be like picking up a blade of grass on the ground.

古文：断三峡，据巴、蜀，分兵定湘中，便全有上流。
现代文：截断三峡，占据巴蜀，分兵平定湘中，便全部掌握了上游。
English: After cutting off the Three Gorges, occupying Bashu, and subduing Hunan Province, they all controlled the upstream.

古文：以此威声，临九派，断彭蠡，传檄江南，风之靡草，不足比也，政小引日月耳。
现代文：凭借这样的声威，面对九派，隔断彭蠡，传檄江南，风靡弱草，也不能与此相比，不过是稍待日月罢了。
English: With such a reputation, in the face of the nine factions, separating Penghu, passing the south of the Yangtze River, and sweeping the weak grass, can not be compared with this, but it is just a matter of time.

古文：江陵本惮襄阳人，加唇亡齿寒，必不孤立，宁得不闇见同邪。
现代文：江陵本来就害怕襄阳人，加上唇亡齿寒，必然不能独存，难道还会不与我们偕同吗？
English: Gangneung has always been afraid of Xiangyang people, coupled with cold lips and teeth, it is inevitable that it cannot exist alone, will it not be with us?

古文：挟荆、雍之兵，扫定东夏，韩、白重出，不能爲计，况以无算之昏主，役御刀应敕之徒哉。 
现代文：率领荆、雍二州兵马，扫定东夏，韩信、白起重出，也无计可施，况且是一个无能的昏庸君主，役使着仪仗卫士一类兵卒呢！ 
English: There is nothing to be done if Jing and Yong Erzhou lead the troops and horses to sweep away the Eastern Xia, or if Han Xin and Bai lead the troops and horses to rise again. Moreover, he is an incompetent and mediocre monarch, and he is using soldiers of the same class as the guards of honor!

古文：及山阳至巴陵，帝复令天武齎书与颖胄兄弟。
现代文：等刘山阳到了巴陵，武帝又让王天武送信给萧颖胄兄弟。
English: When Liu Shanyang arrived in Baling, Emperor Wu asked Wang Tianwu to send a letter to Xiao Yingyao's brothers.

古文：去后，帝谓张弘策曰： 用兵之道，攻心爲上，攻城次之；心战爲上，兵战次之，今日是也。
现代文：走后，武帝对张弘策说： 用兵之道，攻心为上，攻城次之；心战为上，兵战次之，今天就是这样。
English: After he left, Emperor Wu said to Zhang Hongze, "In the way of using soldiers, attack the heart first, then attack the city; fight the heart first, then fight the soldiers. That's how it is today."

古文：近遣天武往州府，人皆有书，今段止有两封，与行事兄弟，云 一二天武口具 。
现代文：近来派遣天武前往州府，人人都有书信，这次只有两封，给行事兄弟，说是 情况由天武口述 。
English: Recently, they sent Tianwu to the state capital, and everyone had letters, but this time there were only two, addressed to the acting brothers, saying that the situation was dictated by Tianwu.

古文：及问天武，口无所说。
现代文：等他问天武时，并无口信可说。
English: When he asked Tianwu, there was no message to say.

古文：天武是行事心膂，彼闻必谓行事与天武共隐其事，则人人生疑。
现代文：天武是行事的亲信，那里的人一定认为行事和天武共同隐瞒了实情，于是人人产生疑惑。
English: Tianwu was a close confidant of Xing, and the people there must have thought that Xing and Tianwu were concealing the truth together, so everyone was suspicious.

古文：山阳惑于衆口，判相嫌贰，则行事进退无以自明，是驰两空函定一州矣。 
现代文：刘山阳被众人的传言所迷惑，便会互不信任，行事就进退都无法表白自己，这样就是送两封空信而平定了一州。 
English: Liu Shanyang was confused by the rumors of many people, they would not trust each other, and they could not express themselves when they acted. In this way, they sent two air letters and pacified a state.

古文：山阳至江安，闻之，果疑不上。
现代文：刘山阳到达江安，听说后，果然疑惑不进。
English: When Sanyang arrived in Jiang'an and learned of this situation, his suspicions were confirmed.

古文：柳忱劝斩天武，送首山阳，颖胄乃谓天武曰： 天下之事，县之在卿，今就卿借头，以诈山阳；昔樊于期亦以头借荆轲。 
现代文：柳忱建议把王天武斩首，把人头送给刘山阳，萧颖胄于是对王天武说： 天下的事情，悬在您的身上，现在向您借头，好来欺骗刘山阳，从前樊於期也曾经把头借给荆轲。 
English: Liu Zhen suggested beheading Wang Tianwu and giving the head to Liu Shanyang. Xiao Yingyao then said to Wang Tianwu, "The world's affairs are hanging on you, so I'm borrowing your head to deceive Liu Shanyang. Previously, I also lent my head to Jingyao."

古文：于是斩之，送首山阳，山阳信之，驰入城，将踰阈，县门发，折其车辕，投车而走，中兵参军陈秀拔戟逐之，斩于门外，传首于帝。
现代文：于是把他斩了，送头给刘山阳，刘山阳相信了他，骑马入城，将要越过门槛时，悬门闸板落下，砸折了他的车辕，他扔下车子逃去，中兵参军陈秀拔戟追去，把他杀死在门外，将人头传送给武帝。
English: So he beheaded him and sent his head to Liu Shanyang. Liu Shanyang believed him and rode into the city. As he was about to cross the threshold, the gate gate fell down and broke his chariot. He threw the chariot down and fled. Chen Xiubai, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, chased after him and killed him outside the gate and sent his head to Emperor Wu.

古文：仍以南康王尊号之议来告，且曰： 时有未利，当须来年二月。
现代文：又以立南康王为帝的意见来相告，并且说： 时机有些不利，应当等来年二月。
English: He also informed them of his opinion that King Nankang should be made emperor, and said, "The timing is somewhat unfavorable, we should wait until next February."

古文：遽便进兵，恐非庙算。 
现代文：马上进兵，恐怕不是朝廷的制胜谋略。 
English: I'm afraid the imperial court's winning strategy is not to send in the troops right away.

古文：帝答曰： 今坐甲十万，粮用自竭，若顿兵十旬，必生悔吝。
现代文：武帝回答说： 现在让甲兵十万坐等，粮食用品自然耗尽，如果驻兵百日，必然后悔。
English: Emperor Wu replied: Now let the hundred thousand armored soldiers wait, the grain supplies will naturally run out, if the soldiers stay for a hundred days, they will regret it.

古文：且太白出西方，仗义而动，天时人谋，有何不利？
现代文：而且太白星出现在西方，依仗正义而行动，天时人谋，有什么不利？
English: Moreover, it's too late to appear in the West, to act on the basis of justice, to make plans for the future, what's the downside?

古文：昔武王伐纣，行逆太岁，复须待年月乎？ 
现代文：从前武王伐纣王，行动忤逆太岁星，难道也要等待年月么？ 
English: In the past, King Wu fought against Yin Xi, and the action was too old, do you still need to wait for what years?

古文：竟陵太守曹景宗遣杜思冲劝帝迎南康，都襄阳，待正尊号，帝不从。
现代文：竟陵太守曹景宗派杜思冲劝武帝迎立南康王，建都襄阳，等待正式获得尊号，武帝不答应。
English: Du Si Chong, the abbot of the Cao Jing sect, advised Emperor Wu to welcome King Nankang and build the capital city of Yangyang, waiting to officially receive the honorific title, but Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：王茂又私于张弘策曰： 今以南康置人手中，彼挟天子以令诸侯，节下前去爲人所使，此岂岁寒之计。 
现代文：王茂又私下对张弘策说： 现在把南康王置于别人的手中，他们挟制天子以命令诸侯，将军前去被别人所驱使，这哪是艰难时代的上策？ 
English: Wang Mao also privately said to Zhang Hongtao: "Now that King Nankang has been placed in the hands of others, they have blackmailed the emperor to order the princes, and the general has been driven by others, what is the best strategy in difficult times?

古文：弘策言之于帝，帝曰： 若前途大事不捷，故自兰艾同焚；若功业克建，谁敢不从？
现代文：张弘策把这话说给武帝，武帝说： 如果未来大事不能成功，那么就只好兰、艾一同焚毁；如果功业建成，谁还敢不听从？
English: Zhang Hongze said this to Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wu said: If the future great event cannot be successful, then Lan and Ai will have to be burned together; if the work is completed, who would dare not to obey?

古文：岂是碌碌受人处分！ 于沔南立新野郡，以集新附。
现代文：哪里是庸庸碌碌受别人支配！ 接着在沔南设立了新野郡，以招集新的兵马。
English: Where is the mediocrity to be dominated by others! Next, Niiro County was established in southern Gyeongsang to recruit new soldiers.

古文：三年二月，南康王爲相国，以帝爲征东将军。
现代文：永元三年二月，南康王担任相国，任命武帝为征东将军。
English: In February of the third year of the Yongyuan era, King Nankang became the emperor's son-in-law and appointed Emperor Wu as the general to conquer the East.

古文：戊申，帝发襄阳。
现代文：戊申日，武帝从襄阳出发。
English: On the day of Wushen, Emperor Wu set out from Yangyang.

古文：自冬积霰，至是开霁，士卒咸悦。
现代文：自冬天以来大雪下了很久，到现在出现了晴天，士卒都很高兴。
English: It has been snowing heavily for a long time since the winter, and now there is a sunny day, the soldiers are very happy.

古文：帝遂留弟伟守襄阳城，谓曰： 当置心于襄阳人腹中，推诚信之，勿有疑也。
现代文：武帝便留下弟弟萧伟守卫襄阳城，对他说： 一定要把心放在襄阳人的肚里，推诚相信，不要疑惑。
English: Emperor Wu then left his brother Xiao Wei to guard the city of Xiangyang, and said to him: "Be sure to put your heart in the belly of the people of Xiangyang, sincerely believe, and do not doubt.

古文：天下一家，乃当相见。 
现代文：天下一家，一定会相见。 
English: One family under the sun, sure to meet again.

古文：遂移檄建邺，阐扬威武。
现代文：随即便把檄文发向建邺，阐扬大军的威武。
English: He even sent a message to Jianye, extolling the might of the great army.

古文：及至竟陵，命长史王茂与太守曹景宗爲前军，中兵参军张法安守竟陵城。
现代文：等到了竟陵，命令长史王茂和太守曹景宗为前军，中兵参军张法安守卫竟陵城。
English: When he arrived at Jingling, he ordered the warden Shi Wangmao and the governor Cao Jingzong to be the vanguard, while the middle-ranking soldiers joined Zhang Fa'an to guard Jingling.

古文：茂、景宗帅衆济岸，进顿九里。
现代文：王茂、曹景宗率领军队渡水登岸，进驻在九里。
English: Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong led the army across the water to the shore and stationed in Jiuli.

古文：其日，郢州刺史张冲迎战，茂等大破之。
现代文：当天，郢州刺史张冲迎战，王茂等人把他打得大败。
English: On the same day, Zhang Chong, a Zhangzhou thorn, took on the battle, and Wang Mao and others defeated him.

古文：荆州遣冠军将军邓元起、军主王世兴、田安等会大军于夏口。
现代文：荆州派冠军将军邓元起、军中主将王世兴、田安等人集结大军于夏口。
English: Deng Yuanqi, the champion general of the Jingzhou faction, Wang Shixing, the commander-in-chief of the army, Tian An and others gathered a large army in Xiakou.

古文：帝筑汉口城以守鲁山，命水军主张惠绍、朱思远等游遏中江，绝郢、鲁二城信使。
现代文：武帝建筑汉口城以守卫鲁山，命令水军主将张惠绍、朱思远等游动阻遏长江中游，切断郢、鲁二城的通信往来。
English: Emperor Wu built Hankou Castle to guard Mount Lu, and ordered the naval commanders Zhang Huishao and Zhu Siyuan to swim to block the middle reaches of the Yangtze River and cut off communications between the cities of Handan and Lushan.

古文：时张冲死，其衆推军主薛元嗣及冲长史程茂爲主。
现代文：当时张冲死去，他的兵众推举军中主将薛元嗣和张冲的长史程茂为主帅。
English: At that time, Zhang Chong died, and his soldiers elected the commander of the army, Xue Yuan Ci, and Zhang Chong's long history Cheng Mao as the commander.

古文：三月乙巳，南康王即帝位于江陵。
现代文：三月十一日，南康王在江陵即皇帝位。
English: On March 11, King Nankang ascended the throne in Gangneung.

古文：遥废东昏爲涪陵王，以帝爲尚书左仆射，加征东大将军、都督征讨诸军，假黄钺。
现代文：遥废东昏侯为涪陵王，任命武帝为尚书左仆射，兼任征东大将军、都督征讨诸军、假黄钺。
English: He appointed Emperor Wu as his right-hand man, concurrently serving as the General of the Eastern Expeditionary Army, the Governor of the Eastern Expeditionary Army, and the False Yellow Emperor.

古文：西台又遣冠军将军萧颖达领兵来会。
现代文：西台又派冠军将军萧颖达领兵前来会合。
English: West Taiwan also sent champion general Xiao Yingda to lead the troops to come to the meeting.

古文：四月，帝出沔，命王茂、萧颖达等逼郢城。
现代文：四月，武帝出沔水，命令王茂、萧颖达等进逼郢城。
English: In April, Emperor Wu came out of Surabaya and ordered Wang Mao and Xiao Yingda to march into Surabaya.

古文：五月己酉，帝移屯汉南。
现代文：五月十六日，武帝转移屯兵在汉水南岸。
English: On May 16, Emperor Wu transferred the garrison to the south bank of the Han River.

古文：是日，有紫云如盖，荫于垒幕。
现代文：这一天，有一片紫云像华盖一样，遮盖在营垒和幕府上空。
English: On this day, a purple cloud covered the camp and the shogunate like a canopy.

古文：甲寅，东昏遣甯朔将军吴子阳、光子衿等十三军救郢州，进据巴口。
现代文：二十一日，东昏侯派遣宁朔将军吴子阳、光子衿等十三军援救郢州，进军占据巴口。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Dongdimou sent Ningshuo generals Wu Ziyang, Guang Ziyang, and other thirteen armies to rescue Zhangzhou and march to occupy Bakou.

古文：七月，帝命王茂帅军主曹仲宗、康绚、武会超等潜师袭加湖，将逼子阳。
现代文：七月，武帝命令王茂率领军主曹仲宗、康绚、武会超等暗中出兵偷袭加湖，将要进逼吴子阳。
English: In July, Emperor Wu ordered Wang Mao to secretly attack Jiahu with the army led by Cao Zhongzong, Kang Hua and Wu Hui Chao, and they were going to force Wu Ziyang.

古文：水涸不通舰，子衿喜。
现代文：江水干涸不能通船，光子衿很高兴。
English: When the river dried up, it was not possible to sail the boat. Photon Toad was very happy.

古文：其夜流星坠其城，四更中无雨而水暴长，衆军乘流齐进，鼓噪攻之，俄而大溃，子阳等窜走，衆尽溺于江，王茂虏其馀而旋。
现代文：当天夜里流星落在他们的城里，四更的时候无雨而江水暴涨，众军乘着流水一齐前进，大声鼓噪着向加湖攻击，守军很快就大败溃退，吴子阳等逃窜，军众都淹死在江里，王茂俘虏了其余的残兵，凯旋而归。
English: On the night of the same day, a meteorite fell on their city. When there was no rain for more than four days, the river water surged. The troops marched together on the flowing water, loudly attacking the lake. The defenders were soon defeated and fled. Wu Ziyang and others fled. The troops drowned in the river. Wang Mao captured the remaining soldiers and returned in triumph.

古文：郢、鲁二城相视夺气。
现代文：郢、鲁二城互相对视，丧失了元气。
English: The two cities of Handan and Lucheng looked at each other and lost their vitality.

古文：先是，东昏遣冠军将军陈伯之镇江州，爲子阳等声援。
现代文：在此以前，东昏派遣冠军将军陈伯之镇守江州，为吴子阳等人进行声援。
English: Prior to this, the Eastern Committee of the Communist Party of China sent the champion general Chen Bozhi to guard Jiangzhou and support Wu Ziyang and others.

古文：帝谓诸将曰： 夫征讨未必须实力，所听威声耳。
现代文：武帝对诸将说： 征讨不一定需要实力，所听的只是他的威势名声。
English: Emperor Wu said to the generals: It doesn't necessarily require strength to be a conqueror. All they heard was his reputation as a powerful man.

古文：今加湖之败，谁不讋服。
现代文：现在加湖的失败，谁不慑服。
English: Now add the failure of the lake, who does not deter clothing.

古文：陈武牙即伯之之子，狼狈奔归，彼间人情，理当凶惧。
现代文：陈武牙就是陈伯之的儿子，狼狈逃归，那里的人情，理当十分恐惧。
English: Chen Wuya is the son of Chen Bozhong. He ran away and came back. The people there should be very afraid.

古文：我谓九江传檄可定也。 
现代文：我说九江传送檄文就可以平定。 
English: I said that Jiujiang's transmission of the imperial edict can be pacified.

古文：因命搜所获俘囚，得伯之幢主苏隆之，厚加赏赐，使致命焉。
现代文：于是命令搜查所抓到的俘虏，找到了陈伯之所管辖的禁军主将苏隆之，厚厚地加以赏赐，让他去传达命令。
English: He then ordered a search for the captured prisoners, and received a reward from Sulong Zhi, the owner of Bo Zhi, who asked him to convey a message to Chen Bo Zhi.

古文：戊午，鲁山城主孙乐祖降。
现代文：二十六日，鲁山城主孙乐祖投降。
English: On the 26th, Sun Lezu, the lord of Lushan Castle, surrendered.

古文：己未夜，郢城有数百毛人踰堞且泣，因投黄鹄矶，盖城之精也。
现代文：二十七日夜，郢城有数百个毛人跳过了城墙，而且在哭泣，于是投入黄鹤矶，大概是本城的精灵。
English: On the evening of the 27th, hundreds of Mao people in Handan jumped over the city wall, and they were crying, so they threw themselves into the Yellow Crane Rock, probably the spirit of the city.

古文：及旦，其城主程茂、薛元嗣遣参军朱晓求降。
现代文：等到天明，该城城主程茂、薛元嗣派参军朱晓请求投降。
English: At dawn, the lord of the city, Cheng Mao and Xue Yuanxi, sent Zhu Xiao to join the army to request surrender.

古文：帝谓曰： 城中自可不识天命，何意恒骂？ 晓曰： 明公未之思耳，桀犬何尝不吠尧。 
现代文：武帝对他说： 城中自然可以不知天命，为什么总是在骂？ 朱晓说： 明公没有细想，夏桀的狗何尝不对唐尧狂吠呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to him, "In a city, it is natural to be ignorant of one's fate, so why are you always cursing?" Zhu Xiao said, "Ming didn't give it much thought. Why shouldn't Xia Yao's dog bark like mad at Tang Yao?"

古文：初，郢城之闭，将佐文武男女口十余万人，疾疫流肿死者十七八。
现代文：起初，郢城关闭，将官文武男女人口十余万人，疾病流行死去的人有十之七八。
English: At the beginning, the city of Handan was closed. The population of officials, men and women of the armed forces was more than one hundred thousand. Seventy-eight out of ten people died from the epidemic.

古文：及城开，帝并加隐恤，其死者命给棺槥。
现代文：等到城门打开，武帝都加以抚恤，命令发给那些死者棺材。
English: When the gates of the city were opened, Emperor Wu pardoned them and ordered that coffins be sent to the dead.

古文：东昏闻郢城没，乃爲城守计，简二尚方二冶囚徒以配军。
现代文：东昏侯听说郢城丢失，为了守城考虑，挑选了左右二尚方和二冶的囚徒充实军队。
English: Dongdimou heard that Lucheng was lost, and in order to protect the city, he selected two prisoners from the left and right and two prisoners from the right to replenish the army.

古文：其不可活者，于朱雀门内日斩百馀人。
现代文：那些不可活命的，在朱雀门内每天斩首一百多人。
English: Those who were not allowed to live beheaded more than a hundred people a day inside the Suzaku Gate.

古文：尚书令王亮苦谏，不从。
现代文：尚书令王亮苦苦劝谏，也不听从。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Liang to persuade him, but he did not listen.

古文：陈伯之遣苏隆之反命，求未便进军。
现代文：陈伯之派遣苏隆之回复命令，请求不要马上进军。
English: Chen Bo dispatched Sulong to cover the order, and requested inconvenience to march in.

古文：帝曰： 伯之此言，意怀首鼠，可及其犹豫逼之。 
现代文：武帝说： 听陈伯之这话，心里首鼠两端，可以在他犹豫的时候进一步逼迫他。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Listening to Chen Bo's words, the two sides of my heart can further persecute him when he hesitates.

古文：乃命邓元起即日沿流。
现代文：于是命令邓元起当天沿江而下。
English: So he ordered Deng Yuan to sail down the river the same day.

古文：八月，天子遣兼黄门郎苏回劳军。
现代文：八月，天子派遣黄门侍郎慰劳军队。
English: In August, the Emperor dispatched the Yellow Gate soldiers as a consolation army.

古文：帝登舟，命诸军以次进路，留上庸太守韦叡守郢城，行州事。
现代文：武帝登上舰船，命令各路军将依次登陆，留上庸太守韦睿守卫郢城，主管州中政事。
English: Emperor Wu boarded the ship and ordered all the armies to land in turn, leaving the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, Wei Rui, in charge of the political affairs of the state.

古文：邓元起将至寻阳，陈伯之犹惧，乃收兵退保湖口，留其子武牙守盆城。
现代文：邓元起将要到达寻阳，陈伯之很害怕，便收兵退保湖口，留下他的儿子陈武牙守卫盆城。
English: When Deng Yuanzhi was about to arrive at Xuanyang, Chen Bozhi was very afraid, so he withdrew his troops from Hukou, leaving his son Chen Wuya to guard the basin city.

古文：及帝至，乃束甲请罪。
现代文：等武帝到达，才放弃抵抗，主动请罪。
English: It was not until Emperor Wu arrived that they gave up resistance and took the initiative to plead guilty.

古文：九月，天子诏帝平定东夏，以便宜从事。
现代文：九月，天子诏令武帝平定东夏，可以根据情况行事。
English: In September, Emperor Wudi issued an imperial edict to pacify the Eastern Xia, and he could act according to the situation.

古文：前军之次芜湖，南豫州刺史申胄弃姑孰走，至是大军进据之。
现代文：前方军队屯驻在芜湖，南豫州刺史申胄抛弃姑熟逃走，到现在大军进占了这座城市。
English: The front-line troops were stationed in Wuhu, and the Southern Henan Province troops fled, and now the army has occupied the city.

古文：自发雍州，帝所乘舰恒有两龙导引，左右莫不见者。
现代文：自从由雍州出发，武帝所乘的舰船一直有两条龙在导引，左右的人没有看不到的。
English: Since setting out from Yongzhou, Emperor Wu's ship has always been guided by two dragons. People on both sides did not fail to see this.

古文：缘道奉迎百姓，皆如挟纩。
现代文：沿路欢迎的百姓，都像披着棉衣一样温暖。
English: The people who greeted us along the way were as warm as if they were wearing cotton coats.

古文：仍遣曹景宗、萧颖达领马步进顿江宁。
现代文：便派曹景宗、萧颖达率领骑兵和步兵进屯江宁。
English: He then sent Cao Jingzong and Xiao Yingda to lead the cavalry and infantry into Tunjiangning.

古文：东昏遣征虏将军李居士迎战，景宗击走之。
现代文：东昏侯派遣征虏将军李居士迎战，曹景宗把他击溃。
English: Dongdimou sent the conscript general Li Jushi to fight, and Cao Jingzong defeated him.

古文：于是王茂、邓元起、吕僧珍进据赤鼻逻，曹景宗、陈伯之爲游兵。
现代文：于是王茂、邓元起、吕僧珍进占赤鼻逻，曹景宗、陈伯之作为流动部队。
English: As a result, Wang Mao, Deng Yuanqi, Lu Sozhen, Jin Zhan, Cao Jingzong, and Chen Bozhi were mobilized as mobile troops.

古文：是日，新亭城主江道林率兵出战，衆军禽之于阵。
现代文：这一天，新亭城主江道林率兵出战，众军在阵地上把他捉住。
English: On this day, the lord of Xinting City, Jiang Daolin, led his troops into battle, and the troops caught him at the position.

古文：大军次新林，建康士庶倾都而至，送款或以血爲书。
现代文：大军驻扎在新林，建康城的士人平民倾城而至，送款或者用血写信。
English: A large army was stationed in Xinlin. Civilians from Jiankang City flocked to the city to send money or write letters in blood.

古文：命王茂进据越城，曹景宗据皁荚桥，邓元起据道士墩，陈伯之据篱门。
现代文：武帝命令王茂进占越城，曹景宗占领皂荚桥，邓元起占领道士墩，陈伯之占领篱门。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Wang Maojin to occupy Yuecheng, Cao Jingzong to occupy Sofen Bridge, Deng Yuanqi to occupy Taoist Monastery, and Chen Bozhi to occupy Heimen Gate.

古文：道林馀衆退屯航南，迫之，因复散走，退保朱雀，凭淮自固。
现代文：江道林的残兵退到大航以南，对他进行追击，于是重又溃散逃走，退保朱雀，凭借淮河固守。
English: The remnants of the soldiers of Jiangdolin retreated to the south of Dahang and pursued him, so they broke up and fled again, leaving Zhu Zhai to defend himself with the help of the Huaihe River.

古文：时李居士犹据新亭垒，请东昏烧南岸邑屋，以开战场。
现代文：当时李居士还占据着新亭垒，请求东昏侯烧掉南岸村镇的房屋，以开辟战场。
English: At that time, Li Jushi was still occupying Xin Ting Rong, and he asked Dong Dou Hou to burn the houses of Nan'an village and town to open up a battlefield.

古文：自大航以西，新亭以北，荡然矣。
现代文：从大航以西，新亭以北，都荡然无存了。
English: To the west of Dahang and to the north of Xinting, nothing remains.

古文：十月，东昏石头军主朱僧勇归降。
现代文：十月，东昏侯石头城的军主朱僧勇归降。
English: In October, Zhu Xiangyong, the military commander of Dongdimou Stone Town, surrendered.

古文：东昏又遣征虏将军王珍国列阵于航南大路，悉配精手利器，尚十余万，阉人王伥子持白虎幡督诸军。
现代文：东昏侯又派遣征虏将军王珍国在航南大路列阵，全部配备精兵和锐利的武器，尚有十余万人，太监王伥子手持白虎幡监督各路军队。
English: Dongdimou also dispatched the conscript general Wang Zhenguo to line up on Hangnan Road, all equipped with elite soldiers and sharp weapons, with more than one hundred thousand people, and the eunuch Wang Xizi holding a white tiger flag to supervise the troops along the road.

古文：王茂、曹景宗等掎角奔之，珍国之衆，一时土崩。
现代文：王茂、曹景宗等成犄角形式向他们进攻，王珍国的军队，一时间土崩瓦解。
English: Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong and others attacked them at an angle, and Wang Zhenguo's army collapsed in an instant.

古文：衆军追至宣阳门，李居士以新亭垒，徐元瑜以东府城降，石头、白下诸军并宵溃。
现代文：众军追击他到宣阳门，李居士献出新亭垒，徐元瑜献出东府城投降，石头城、白下各军一并夜间溃退。
English: The army chased him to Xuanyang Gate, Li Jushi surrendered Xin Ting Rong, Xu Yuan Yu surrendered Dongfucheng, and the armies of Shicheng and Baixia all retreated at night.

古文：壬午，帝镇石头，命衆军围六门。
现代文：二十一日，武帝兵镇石头城，命令众军围攻六门。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Emperor Wu marched to the military town of Stone Town and ordered the troops to besiege the Six Gates.

古文：东昏悉焚门内，驱逼营署官府并入城，有衆二十万。
现代文：东昏侯把门内一切全部烧掉，驱赶营署官府都进入城内，有兵二十万。
English: Dongdimou burned everything inside the gate, drove the camp authorities into the city, and there were 200,000 soldiers.

古文：青州刺史桓和紿东昏出战，因降。
现代文：青州刺史桓和欺骗东昏侯出战，从而投降。
English: Qingzhou stabbed Shiquan and tricked Dongdimou into going to war, thus surrendering.

古文：先是，俗语谓密相欺变者爲 和欺 。
现代文：在此以前，俗语称暗中互相欺骗的人为 和欺 。
English: Before this, people who secretly cheated on each other were called cheats and cheats.

古文：于是虫儿、法珍等曰： 今日败于桓和，可谓和欺矣。 
现代文：现在梅虫儿、茹法珍等人说： 今天败在桓和的手里，可以称作是和欺了。 
English: Now Meizuer, RuFazhen and others say: Today's defeat at the hands of Kuanhe can be called a defeat.

古文：帝命诸军筑长围。
现代文：武帝命令各军筑起长围。
English: Emperor Wu ordered all the armies to build a long perimeter.

古文：初，衆军既逼，东昏遣军主左僧庆镇京口，常僧景镇广陵，李叔献屯瓜步。
现代文：起初，众军逼近，东昏侯派遣军主左僧虔镇守京口、常僧景镇守广陵、李叔献屯驻在瓜步。
English: At first, the army was approaching, and Dongdimou sent the commander Zuo Jianzhen to guard Jingkou, the senior monk Jingzhen to guard Guangling, and Li Xiantun to be stationed in Guapu.

古文：及申胄自姑孰奔归，又使屯破墩，以爲东北声援。
现代文：等申胄从姑熟逃归，又派他屯驻破墩，作为东北的声援。
English: After Shen Yi fled from Gu Rui, he sent him to live in Hailu, as a show of solidarity with Northeast China.

古文：至是帝遣晓喻，并降。
现代文：到了现在武帝派人劝导，都已经投降。
English: Now that Emperor Wu has sent people to persuade them, they have all surrendered.

古文：帝乃遣弟辅国将军秀镇京口，辅国将军恢屯破墩，从弟甯朔将军景镇广陵。
现代文：武帝便派弟弟辅国将军萧秀镇守京口，辅国将军萧恢屯驻破墩，堂弟宁朔将军萧景镇守广陵。
English: Emperor Wu then sent his younger brother, General Xiao Xiuzhen of the Auxiliary State, to guard the capital, General Xiao Hui of the Auxiliary State stationed in Hailu, and his cousin, General Xiao Jingzhen of Ningshuo, to guard Guangling.

古文：吴郡太守蔡夤弃郡赴降。
现代文：吴郡太守蔡夤弃郡投降。
English: The governor of Wu County, Cai Yuxuan, surrendered.

古文：十二月丙寅，兼卫尉张稷、北徐州刺史王珍国斩东昏，其夜以黄油裹首送军。
现代文：十二月初六，兼卫尉张稷、北徐州刺史王珍国杀掉了东昏侯，当天夜里就用黄油裹着人头送到了军中。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month of the year, Wang Zhenguo, who was also a lieutenant of Zhang Xuan and the Northern Xuzhou Assassin, killed Dongdimou, and on the night of the same day he was sent to the army with his head wrapped in butter.

古文：帝命吕僧珍、张弥勒兵封府库及图籍。
现代文：武帝命令吕僧珍、张弥统率军队封存仓库和图书。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the army led by Lü Sozhen and Zhang Yiming to seal the warehouses and books.

古文：帝乃入，收嬖妾潘妃诛之，及凶党王咺之以下四十八人属吏，以宫女二千人，分赉将士。
现代文：武帝于是进入京城，拘捕了宠妾潘妃，把她处死，同时处死了凶党王口亘之以下的四十八名属官，把宫女二千人，分别赏给将士。
English: Emperor Wu then entered the capital, arrested his favorite concubine, Pan Fei, and put her to death. At the same time, he executed forty-eight subordinate officials of the murderous party Wang Quanzhong and below, and separately rewarded the soldiers with two thousand concubines.

古文：宣德皇后令追废涪陵王爲东昏侯，授帝中书监、大司马、录尚书、骠骑大将军、都督、扬州刺史，封建安郡公，食邑万户，给班剑四十人，黄钺、侍中、征讨诸军事并如故。
现代文：宣德皇后命令追废涪陵王为东昏侯，任命武帝为中书监、大司马、录尚书、骠骑大将军、都督、扬州刺史，封建安郡公，食邑一万户，配给仪仗四十人，黄钺、侍中、征讨诸军事的职务依然不变。
English: Empress Xuande ordered the dethronement of King Fuling as Dongdimou, and appointed Emperor Wu as the chief librarian, grand steward, record keeper, cavalry general, governor, Yangzhou chief historian, feudal governor of An County, 10,000 households in food villages, 40 people in ceremonial duties, and the positions of Huang Qi, waiter, and conscript remained unchanged.

古文：依晋武陵王遵承制故事，百僚致敬。
现代文：依照晋朝的武陵王司马遵秉承皇帝意旨的先例，百官向他致敬。
English: In accordance with the precedent of Wuling Wang Sima adhering to the emperor's will in the Jin Dynasty, hundreds of officials paid tribute to him.

古文：己卯，帝入屯阅武堂，下令大赦。
现代文：十九日，武帝屯驻阅武堂，下令大赦。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu stationed himself in the Great Hall of the People and ordered an amnesty.

古文：丙戌，入镇殿内。
现代文：二十六日，进入殿内镇守。
English: On the 26th, he became the town guard of Tonouchi.

古文：是日，凤皇集建邺。
现代文：这一天，凤凰聚集在建邺。
English: On this day, phoenixes gathered in Jianye.

古文：又下令： 凡昏制谬赋、淫刑滥役，外可详检前源，悉皆除荡。
现代文：又下令： 凡是昏庸的诏令、荒谬的赋税、淫刑滥役，外官可以详细检查以前的来源，全部荡除。
English: He also decreed: Foreign officials may scrutinize the previous sources of all draconian decrees, absurd taxes, obscene punishments, and abusive labor, and eliminate them all.

古文：其主守散失，诸所损耗，精立科条，咸从原例。 
现代文：那些主管者散失，各处损耗的，要精细地建立条例，一律按照原来的章程。 
English: Those who are responsible for the loss of guardians, the various losses, the precise establishment of subjects, all follow the original law.

古文：丁亥，遣豫州刺史李元履以兵五千慰劳东方十二郡。
现代文：二十七日，派遣豫州刺史李元履率兵五千人慰劳东部十二郡。
English: On the 27th, Li Yuanlu, the governor of Yuzhou, dispatched five thousand soldiers to comfort twelve counties in the east.

古文：二年正月辛卯，下令： 通检尚书衆曹东昏时诸诤讼失理及主者淹停不时施行者，精加讯辩，依事议奏。
现代文：中兴二年正月初二，下令： 系统检查尚书等部门在东昏侯时期各种诉讼案件不合理的和主管者停留不及时施行的，详加审辨，依照事理上奏。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of the first month of the second year of the second year of ZTE, it was ordered that: the various lawsuits of the departments such as the system inspection of Shangshu were unreasonable and the supervisors did not stay in time during the Eastern Dynasties period, and the cases should be examined in detail and reported in accordance with the facts.

古文：其义师临阵致命，疾病死亡者，并加葬敛，收恤遗孤。 
现代文：那些义军中临阵牺牲、疾病死亡的，都要加以安葬，收养他们的遗孤。 
English: Those rebels who died in battle or from disease should be buried and their orphans should be adopted.

古文：甲午，天子遣兼侍中席阐文、兼黄门侍郎乐法才慰劳都下。
现代文：初五，天子派遣兼侍中席阐文、兼黄门侍郎乐法才慰劳京城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the divine son dispatched the attendant of the middle seat to explain the text, and the attendant of the yellow gate to play the Dharma to comfort the laborers in the capital.

古文：追赠皇祖散骑常侍、左光禄大夫，皇考侍中、丞相。
现代文：追赠武帝的祖父为散骑常侍、左光禄大夫，武帝的父亲为侍中、丞相。
English: Emperor Wudi's grandfather posthumously became a knight-errant, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Emperor Wudi's father was a chamberlain and chancellor.

古文：乙未，下令： 朱雀之捷，逆徒送死者，特许家人殡葬；若无亲属，或有贫苦，二县长尉即爲埋掩。
现代文：初六，下令： 朱雀之捷，那些送死的逆徒，特别准许家人给予装殓埋葬；如果没有亲属，或者家庭贫困，两县的长官就替他们埋葬。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, it was ordered that the families of those rebels who had been sent to their deaths, the Suzaku no Jie, should be specially allowed to give them a decorative burial; if there were no relatives, or if the family was poor, the governors of the two counties would bury them for them.

古文：建康城内不达天命，自取沦灭，亦同此科。 
现代文：建康城内那些不知天命、自取灭亡的人，也同样用这种办法处理。 
English: Those people in Jiankang City who do not know the fate of heaven and self-destruct are also dealt with in the same way.

古文：又下令减损浮费，自非奉粢盛，修绂冕，习礼乐之容，缮甲兵之备，此外一皆禁绝。
现代文：又下令减少虚浮费用，除非奉献祭品，制作冠冕，练习礼乐的仪式，修造军用物资，此外一概禁绝。
English: He also ordered the reduction of false expenses, except for the offering of sacrifices, the making of crowns, the practice of ritual music, the construction of military supplies, and all other prohibitions.

古文：御府中署，量宜罢省，命外详爲条格。
现代文：皇宫中的官署，要酌情撤销和精简，命令之外详细地作出具体安排。
English: The government offices in the palace should be abolished and streamlined as appropriate, and specific arrangements should be made in detail in addition to the order.

古文：戊戌，宣德皇后临朝，入居内殿，拜帝大司马，解承制，百僚致敬如前。
现代文：初九，宣德皇后临朝听政，进入内殿中任命武帝为大司马，解除秉承皇帝意旨的安排，百官仍然像以前一样向他致敬。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Empress Xuande came to the imperial court to listen to the government, entered the inner hall and appointed Emperor Wu as the grand steward, and cancelled the arrangement of adhering to the emperor's will. The officials still paid tribute to him as before.

古文：而惑甚盗锺，功疑不赏，皇天后土，不胜其酷。是以玉马骏奔，表微子之去，金板出地，告龙逄之冤。
现代文：十三日，诏令晋升武帝为都督中外诸军事，可以带剑穿麻鞋上殿，入朝不必趋步，赞拜不用报名，增设前后部羽葆、乐队，设置左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人，并且依旧聘用士人，其余的都如同以前。二十五日，齐帝晋升武帝的职位为相国，总管百官，封给他十个郡为梁公，具备九锡之礼，赠给远游冠，绿绶带，地位在诸王以上。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict promoted Emperor Wu to the position of the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces. He could take a sword and wear hemp shoes to enter the palace. He did not have to walk to enter the court, and he did not have to sign up for praise and worship. The front and back wings and bands were added, and four people were assigned to each of the left and right long history, Sima, engaged in the middle, and Shao, and the rest were still hired. The rest were the same as before. On the 25th, Emperor Qi promoted Emperor Wu to the position of the father of the country, the head of the hundred officials, and assigned him ten

古文：明公据鞍辍哭，厉三军之志，独居掩涕，激义士之心，故能使海若登只，罄图效祉，山戎、孤竹，束马景从，伐罪吊人，一匡静乱，匪叨天功，实勤濡足。龟玉不毁，谁之功欤，独爲君子，将使伊、周何地。 
现代文：武帝坚持推辞，府中官员们劝他接受，他不答应。
English: Emperor Wu insisted on withdrawing his resignation, the officials in the government office urged him to accept, but he did not agree.

古文：于是始受相国、梁公之命。
现代文：二月初二，府中众官重又请求，于是才接受了担任相国、梁公的命令。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, all the officials in the government came to request again, so they accepted the order to serve as the sister country and Liang Gong.

古文：命焚东昏淫奢异服六十二种于都街。
现代文：他命令在京城的大街上烧毁东昏侯的淫奢异服六十二种。
English: He ordered the burning of sixty-two kinds of extravagant and unusual clothing belonging to Dongdimou in the streets of the capital.

古文：齐帝追赠梁公夫人爲梁国妃。
现代文：齐帝追赠梁公夫人为梁国妃。
English: Emperor Qi posthumously gave Princess Liang the title of Princess of Liang.

古文：乙丑，南兖州队主陈文兴于宣武城内凿井，得玉镂骐驎、金镂玉璧、水精环各二。
现代文：初六，南兖州的队主陈文兴在宣武城内凿井，得到玉雕麒麟、金雕玉璧、水晶环各两个。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Chen Wenxing, the team leader from South Luzhou, dug a well in the city of Xuanwu and obtained two jade carvings of unicorns, gold carvings of jade, and crystal rings.

古文：又凤凰见建康县桐下里。
现代文：又有凤凰出现在建康县桐下里。
English: Another phoenix appeared in Tongxiao Village, Jiankang County.

古文：宣德皇后称美符瑞，归于相国府。
现代文：宣德皇后称赞祥瑞的征兆，把它交给了相国府。
English: Empress Xuande praised the auspicious omen and handed it over to the State Council.

古文：丙寅，诏梁国依旧选诸要职，悉依天朝之制。
现代文：初七，诏令梁国仍旧选用各种要职，全部依照天朝的规定。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liang Guo still chose various important posts, all in accordance with the provisions of the Heavenly Court.

古文：帝上表，以 前代选官，皆立选簿，请自今选曹，精加隐括，依旧立簿，使冠履无爽，名实不违，庶人识涯涘，造请自息。
现代文：武帝上表，认为： 前代选官，都设立选簿，请求自今天起，选官部门精心挑选，依照旧制设立选簿，使选人无误，名实相符，普通人知道了界限，拜访请求自然也就停息了。
English: Wu Di, the above table, believes that: the previous election officials have all set up election books, and requests that from today, the election department carefully selects and sets up election books according to the old system, so that the candidates are accurate, the names match the facts, the ordinary people know the boundaries, and the visit request will naturally stop.

古文：且闻中间立格，甲族以二十登仕，后门以过立试吏，岂所以弘奖风流，希向后进。
现代文：而且听说中间立有标准，世家大族满二十岁可以做官，一般家庭超过三十可以开始做吏，这难道是奖励精英、培养青年的办法吗？
English: Moreover, I heard that there is a standard in the middle, that members of the extended family can become officials at the age of twenty, and ordinary families over thirty can begin to work as officials. Is this a way to reward the elite and train young people?

古文：此实巨蠹，尤宜刊革 。
现代文：这实在是一大弊端，尤其应当改革。 
English: This is really a big drawback, and should be reformed in particular.

古文：诏依表施行。
现代文：诏令依照这份上表执行。
English: The edict is implemented in accordance with the above table.

古文：丙戌，诏进梁公爵爲王，以豫州之南谯庐江、江州之寻阳、郢州之武昌西阳、南徐州之南琅邪南东海晋陵、扬州之临海永嘉十郡益梁国，并前爲二十郡。
现代文：二十七日，诏令晋升梁公的爵位为王，以豫州的南谯和庐江、江州的寻阳、郢州的武昌和西阳、南徐州的南琅笽南东海和晋陵、扬州的临海和永嘉十郡增拨给梁国，和以前的一起共为二十郡。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict promoted the title of Liang Gong to the king, and added 10 counties to Liang Guo, including Nanluo and Liangjiang in Yuzhou, Xingyang in Jiangzhou, Wuchang and Xiyang in Zhangzhou, Nandonghai and Jinling in Nanluo, and Linhai and Yongjia in Yangzhou, making a total of 20 counties.

古文：其相国、扬州牧、骠骑大将军如故。帝固辞，有诏断表。
现代文：他的相国、扬州牧、骠骑大将军职位依然和先前一样。
English: His position as Yangzhou pastoral and equestrian general remains the same as before.

古文：相国左长史王莹等率百僚敦请。
现代文：武帝坚持推辞，有诏书拒绝他的上表。相国左长史王莹等率领众僚属敦促请求。
English: There was an imperial edict refusing to accept the charter of the above-mentioned resignation. A hundred officials including Shi Wang Ying, the left minister of the same country, implored him.

古文：三月癸巳，受梁王之命。
现代文：三月初五，接受了让他做梁王的命令。
English: On March 5th, he accepted the order to be the king of the beam.

古文：大祚告穷，天禄永终。于戏，王允执其中，式遵前典，以副昊天之望，禋上帝而临亿兆，格文祖而膺大业，以传无疆之祚，岂不盛与。并命玺书，遣兼太保、中书监、兼尚书令王亮，兼太尉、中书令王志奉皇帝玺绂，受终之礼，一依唐、虞故事。帝抗表陈让，表不获通。
现代文：下令赦免国内死刑以下的罪犯，鳏寡孤独不能自力生活的人，赐给谷物五斛，府州所管的征调也都免除。十八日，齐帝命令武帝的冕冠戴十二个玉串，建立和天子一样的旌旗，出入警戒清道，乘坐金根车，驾车用六匹马，常备五时副车，设置旄头旌旗，乐舞用八佾，设置钟架悬在宫中，王妃、王子、王女爵位的称号，完全和旧时相同。二十八日，齐帝下诏书禅让帝位，去姑熟安居。武帝上表推让，没有被批准。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Qi ordered Emperor Wu's crown to be crowned with twelve jade beads, to set up a banner similar to that of the heavenly son, to have a clear path for entering and leaving, to ride a golden chariot, to use six horses for driving, to have a five o'clock carriage at the ready, to set up a flagpole, to use eight cymbals for music and dance, and to set up a belfry to hang in the palace. The titles of princess, prince, and queen were completely the same as in the old days. On the 28th, Emperor Qi issued a decree to abdicate the throne and go to live with his

古文：于是齐百官豫章王元琳等八百一十九人，及梁台侍中范云等一百一十七人，并上表劝进，帝谦让不受。
现代文：于是齐朝的百官豫章王萧元琳等八百一十九人，以及梁台侍中范云等一百一十七人，一齐上表劝进，武帝谦让不肯接受。
English: As a result, eight hundred and nineteen officials of the Qi Dynasty, including Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Yuanlin, and one hundred and seventeen people, including Liang Tai's attendant Fan Yun, all went to the table to persuade, but Emperor Wu Jian refused to accept.

古文：敬简元辰，恭兹大礼，升坛受禅，告类上帝，克播休祉，以弘盛烈，式传厥后，用永保于我有梁，惟明灵是飨。礼毕，有诏放观。
现代文：当天，太史令蒋道秀陈述了天文符谶六十四条，事情都很明显，群臣重复上表坚持请求，武帝才听从了。天监元年夏季的四月初八，皇帝在南郊即位，设立祭坛烧起柴火对天祷告。祭礼结束，有诏令放百姓观看。
English: On the same day, the Taishi ordered Jiang Daoxiu to state the 64th article of the Astronomical Symbols. The matter was very obvious. The ministers repeated the above table and insisted on the request, and Emperor Wu only obeyed. On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer of the first year of the Heavenly Guardians, the emperor ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs, set up an altar, burned firewood and prayed to the heavens. The festival ended, and there was a decree to let the people watch.

古文：乃备法驾还建康宫，临太极前殿，大赦，改元，赐人爵二级，文武位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人谷五斛；逋布、口钱、宿责勿复收；其犯乡论清议、赃汙淫盗，一皆荡涤，洗除前注，与之更始。
现代文：于是命令车驾返回建康宫，登临太极前殿，实行大赦，改换年号，赐给人们爵位二级，文武官员职位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自己生活的，每人发给谷物五斛；拖欠的税布、口钱、旧债不再收缴；那些因为议论乡人和国政而犯罪的人、贪污窝赃奸淫盗窃罪犯，一律免罪，勾销以前的登记，让他们重新开始。
English: He then ordered the carriage to return to the Jiankang Palace, ascended to the front hall of the Taiji Temple, implemented an amnesty, changed the year, and gave people second-class titles and second-class positions of civil and military officials; widows and widowers who could not live on their own were each given five baht of grain; arrears of taxes, bribes, and old debts were no longer collected; those who committed crimes because of talking about villagers and national politics, and those who committed corruption, adultery, and theft were all absolved, and the previous registration was canceled, so that they could start anew.

古文：封齐帝爲巴陵王，全食一郡，载天子旌旗，乘五时副车，行齐正朔，郊祀天地，礼乐制度，皆用齐典。
现代文：封齐帝为巴陵王，一郡全部作为食邑，树天子的旌旗，乘坐五时副车，执行齐朝的历法，可以在城郊祭祀天地，礼乐制度，全用齐的典章。
English: The Emperor of Qi was the king of Baling, and the whole county was used as a food town, the banner of the son of the tree, the five o'clock train, the implementation of the calendar of the Qi Dynasty, the sacrifice of heaven and earth on the outskirts of the city, the ritual music system, and the full use of the Qi ceremony.

古文：以齐宣德皇后爲齐文帝妃，齐帝后王氏爲巴陵王妃，齐代王侯封爵，悉皆降省，其效着艰难者，别有后命。
现代文：以齐宣德皇后为齐文帝妃，齐帝的皇后王氏为巴陵王妃，齐代的王侯封爵，全部去除，那些在艰难时期效力显著的，以后另有加封。
English: The Empress of Qi Xuande as the Empress of Emperor Qibin, the Empress of Emperor Qibin as the Empress of Baling, and the Princes and Dukes of the Qidian Dynasty were all removed. Those who were effective in difficult times were later added.

古文：惟宋汝阴王不在除例。
现代文：只有宋汝阴王不在去除的范围。
English: There is only the example of King Song Ryu Yin not being demoted.

古文：劫贼馀口没在台府者，悉皆蠲放。
现代文：劫贼的家人被拘捕入官的，全都免罪释放。
English: The robber's family members who were taken into custody were all released without charge.

古文：诸流徙之家，并听还本。
现代文：各个流徙的家庭，一并允许归回本土。
English: Home of the exiles, all have been allowed to return to the mainland.

古文：以兼尚书令王亮爲尚书令，兼尚书右仆射沈约爲尚书仆射。
现代文：任命兼尚书令王亮为尚书令，兼尚书右仆射沈约为尚书仆射。
English: Wang Liang, concurrently appointed as Shang Shuling, was also appointed as Shang Shuling, and Shao Shen, concurrently appointed as Shang Shuling's right-hand man, was also appointed as Shang Shuling's right-hand man.

古文：封皇弟中护军宏爲临川王，南徐州刺史秀爲安成王，雍州刺史伟爲建安王，左卫将军恢爲鄱阳王，荆州刺史憺爲始兴王。
现代文：封皇弟中护军萧宏为临川王，南徐州刺史萧秀为安成王，雍州刺史萧伟为建安王，左卫将军萧恢为鄱阳王，荆州刺史萧辵为始兴王。
English: Xiao Hong, the prince's younger brother, was the king of Linchuan, Xiao Xiu, the prince of South Xuzhou, was the king of Ancheng, Xiao Wei, the prince of Yongzhou, was the king of Jian'an, Xiao Hui, the general of the Left Guards, was the king of Shenyang, and Xiao Wei, the prince of Jingzhou, was the king of Shixing.

古文：自郡王以下，列爵爲县六等。
现代文：自郡王以下，列爵位为不同的六个等级。
English: There are six different levels of knighthood, from the County King downwards.

古文：皇弟、皇子封郡王，二千户；王之庶子爲县侯，五百户，谓之诸侯；功臣爵邑无定科。
现代文：皇弟、皇子封为郡王，食邑二千户；王的庶子为县侯，食邑五百户，叫做诸侯；功臣的爵位和食邑没有固定的标准。
English: The emperor's younger brothers and sons were given the title of county king, and they ruled over 2,000 households in the county; the king's illegitimate son was the county governor, and he ruled over 500 households in the county, and they were called vassals; there was no fixed standard for the titles and counties of meritorious subjects.

古文：凤凰集南兰陵。
现代文：凤凰聚集在南兰陵。
English: The phoenixes gather at Nanlanling.

古文：丁卯，诏凡后宫、乐府、西解、暴室诸如此例被幽逼者，一皆放遣。
现代文：初九，诏令凡是后宫、乐府、西解、暴室诸如此类被幽禁和逼迫的，一律放还。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the emperor issued an edict that all those who had been imprisoned and persecuted, such as the harem, the music palace, the western liberation, and the violent house, should be released.

古文：若衰老不能自存者，官给廪食。
现代文：如果是衰老不能自己生活的，官府发给食物。
English: If they are too old to live on their own, the government will give them food.

古文：戊辰，遗巴陵王钱二百万，绢布各千疋，绵二千斤。
现代文：初十，赠给巴陵王钱二百万，绢、布各一千疋，绵二千斤。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he gave the king of Baling two million yuan in money, one thousand yuan each in money and cloth, and two thousand jin in cloth.

古文：车骑将军高丽王高云进号车骑大将军，镇东大将军百济王馀太进号征东大将军，镇东大将军倭王武进号征东大将军。
现代文：车骑将军高丽王高云晋升封号为车骑大将军，镇东大将军百济王余太晋升封号为征东大将军，镇东大将军倭王萧武晋升封号为征东大将军。
English: Chariot and cavalry general Goryeo King Gaoyun was promoted to chariot and cavalry general, Zhendong general Baekje King Yuta was promoted to Zhendong general, Zhendong general Wao King Xiaowu was promoted to Zhendong general.

古文：己巳，巴陵王殂于姑孰，追諡爲齐和帝，终礼一依故事。
现代文：十一日，巴陵王在姑熟逝世，追谥为齐和帝，葬礼完全依照以前的规制。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the king of Baling died in his aunt's house, and the funeral was held in accordance with the previous regulations.

古文：庚午，诏分遣内侍，周省四方，观政听谣，访贤举滞。
现代文：十二日，诏令分别派遣宫内的侍从，到四方各地巡视，观看政治，听取民谣，访察贤能，举荐逸才。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict separately dispatched the palace attendants to inspect all over the country, watch politics, listen to folk songs, inspect talents, and recommend talents.

古文：其有田野不辟，狱讼无章，忘公徇私，侵渔是务者，悉随事以闻。
现代文：当地如果有田野未被开垦、诉讼没有章程、忘公徇私、一味侵夺的，都要据实上报。
English: If there are fields in the local area that have not been reclaimed, lawsuits without bylaws, neglect of public and private interests, and indiscriminate encroachment, they must be reported truthfully.

古文：若怀宝迷邦，蕴奇待价，蓄响藏真，不求闻达，各依名腾奏，罔或遗隐。
现代文：如果是有人怀念宝物迷恋乡土，储藏奇珍待价而沽，蓄积声响隐匿真象，不去追求闻名发达，要分别按照姓名上奏，不可遗漏隐瞒。
English: If someone is nostalgic for treasures and is enamored of the local area, stores curiosities while waiting for the price to rise, accumulates sound and hides the truth, and does not pursue the famous and developed, it should be played according to the name separately, and should not be omitted.

古文：又诏曰： 金作赎刑，有闻自昔，入缣以免，施于中代。
现代文：又下诏令说： 以金钱赎免刑罚，从前就曾听说，拿丝缣用来抵罪，中世就曾实行。
English: The edict also said: "The use of money to buy one's way out of punishment has been heard of in the past, and the use of silk stockings to atone for one's sins was practiced in the Middle Ages.

古文：永言叔季，偷薄成风，婴愆入罪，厥涂匪一。
现代文：时间长久到了末代，轻薄成风，沦落犯罪，途径不一。
English: The time has long come to the last generation, frivolity has become a fashion, falling into crime, and the ways are different.

古文：死者不可复生，刑者无因自反，由此而望滋实，庸可致乎。
现代文：已死的不能复生，受刑的无法返回，由此而希望培植朴实之风，难道可以达到吗？
English: The dead cannot be brought back to life, and those who have been punished cannot return, so they hope to cultivate a style of simplicity. Can this be achieved?

古文：可依周、汉旧典，有罪入赎，外详爲条格，以时奏闻。 
现代文：可以依照周朝、汉朝的旧典章，有罪的可以缴纳钱物赎罪，此外要制定详细的条例，及时上奏。 
English: In accordance with the old ordinances of the Zhou and Han dynasties, the guilty can pay money and goods to atone for their sins. In addition, detailed regulations should be formulated and timely promulgated.

古文：辛未，以新除谢沐公萧宝义爲巴陵王，以奉齐祀。
现代文：十三日，以新任命的谢沐公萧宝义为巴陵王，来继承齐朝的祭祀。
English: On the 13th, the newly appointed Xie Mucong Xiao Baoyi was appointed as the king of Baling to inherit the sacrificial rites of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：复南兰陵武进县，依前代之科。
现代文：恢复南兰陵的武进县，依照前代的等级。
English: Nanlanying Wujin County was restored in accordance with the previous regulation.

古文：征新除相国军谘祭酒谢朏爲侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：征调新任命的相国军咨祭酒谢紻为侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: The newly-appointed conscript, Xie Jun, was appointed as the attendant, the doctor of the left light, the keeper of the ceremony and the three officers.

古文：改南东海爲兰陵郡，土断南徐州诸侨郡县。
现代文：改南东海为兰陵郡，在南徐州各个侨居郡县实行统一编定户口，统一纳税服役。
English: The South East China Sea was changed to Lanling County, and unified household registration, unified tax payment, and unified service were implemented in all overseas counties in South Xuzhou.

古文：癸酉，诏 于公车府谤木、肺石傍各置一函。
现代文：十五日，诏令 在公车府的谤木、肺石旁边各设置一个木箱。
English: On the 15th, a decree was issued to place a wooden box next to each of the chopping block and the lung stone at the bus depot.

古文：若肉食莫言，山阿欲有横议，投谤木函。
现代文：如果是官员不讲，而百姓想尽情发表议论，可以把言论投在木箱中。
English: If the government officials do not speak up, the people of the mountains and the countryside will find it difficult to blame them. The criticism can be directed at Mukan.

古文：若从我江、汉，功在可策，犀兕徒弊，龙蛇方县；次身才高妙，摈压莫通，怀傅、吕之术，抱屈、贾之叹，其理有皦然，受困包匦；夫大政侵小，豪门陵贱，百姓已穷，九重莫达，若欲自申，并可投肺石函 。
现代文：如果跟随我转战江、汉，功劳应该登记在册，盔甲破旧，刀剑空悬；其次才能高超，遭受压抑，心怀傅说、吕尚的奇术，抱有屈原、贾谊的慨叹，他的道理十分明显，却遭受拘限；以权势欺负弱小，豪门凌辱贱民，百姓已经绝路，皇帝无法告知，如果愿意自己申诉，都可以投在肺石的木箱中。 
English: If you follow me to the Warring States and the Han Dynasty, your achievements should be registered. Your armor is worn out and your sword is hanging in the air. Second, your talent is superior and you are oppressed. Your heart says, "Lushang's magic, he has Qu Yuan and Jia Youi's sighs. His reason is very obvious, but he is subject to detention. He bullies the weak with his power. The rich men abuse the untouchables. The people are at a dead end. The emperor can't tell them. If you want to appeal, you can put it in a wooden box of lung stone.

古文：甲戌，诏断远近上庆礼。
现代文：十六日，诏令禁止远近各地来献庆礼。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict forbade people from far and near to come to the celebration.

古文：闰月丁酉，以行宕昌王梁弥邕爲安西将军、河凉二州刺史，正封宕昌王。
现代文：闰四月初十，以行宕昌王梁弥邕为安西将军、河凉二州刺史，正式封为宕昌王。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the 4th lunar month, Liang Miao, the king of the Tang Dynasty, was appointed as the general of Anxi Province, and He Liang, the ruler of Erzhou Province, was officially named the king of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：壬寅，诏以宪纲日弛，渐以爲俗，令端右以风闻奏事，依元熙旧制。
现代文：十五日，发出诏书指出大法日益松弛，渐渐成为习俗，命令尚书省长官依照元熙时代的旧制度，以传闻上奏。
English: On the 15th, an imperial edict was issued, pointing out that the Great Law had become increasingly slack and had gradually become a custom, and ordering the governor of Shangshu Province to follow the old system of the Yuan Xi era and play up rumors.

古文：有司奏，追尊皇考爲文皇帝，庙号太祖，皇妣张氏爲献皇后，陵曰建陵，郗氏爲德皇后，陵曰修陵。
现代文：有关部门奏请，追尊皇上死去的父亲为文皇帝，庙号太祖，死去的母亲张氏为献皇后，陵墓叫建陵，郗氏为德皇后，陵墓叫修陵。
English: Relevant departments have requested that the deceased father of the revered emperor should be called Emperor Wen, the temple should be called Taizu, the deceased mother Zhang should be called Xian Qiong, the mausoleum should be called Jian Qiong, and the mausoleum should be called Xiu Qiong.

古文：五月乙亥夜，盗入南北掖，烧神武门、总章观，害卫尉卿张弘策。
现代文：五月十八日夜，盗贼进入南北掖，烧神武门、总章观，害死卫尉卿张弘策。
English: On the evening of May 18th, thieves broke into the North and South Gates, set fire to the Shinmu Gate and the General Chapter, and killed Zhang Hongze, the Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

古文：戊子，江州刺史陈伯之举兵反。
现代文：戊子日，江州刺史陈伯之起兵造反。
English: On the day of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Chen Bo, the governor of Jiangsu Province, led a mutiny.

古文：以领军将军王茂爲征南将军、江州刺史，率衆讨之。
现代文：任命领军将军王茂为征南将军、江州刺史，率兵讨伐。
English: He appointed the leading general, Wang Mao, as the general to conquer the south and the governor of Jiangzhou, and led the troops in the crusade.

古文：六月庚戌，封北秦州刺史杨绍先爲武都王。
现代文：六月二十四日，封北秦州刺史杨绍先为武都王。
English: On June 24th, Yang Shao, the ruler of the Northern Qin State, was crowned the King of Wudang.

古文：是月陈伯之奔魏，江州平。
现代文：这个月陈伯之逃往魏国。江州平定。
English: This month, Chen Bozhi fled to Wei. Jiangzhou was pacified.

古文：前益州刺史刘季连据成都反。
现代文：前益州刺史刘季连占据成都造反。
English: Liu Jilian, the former governor of Yizhou, supported the rebellion in Chengdu.

古文：秋七月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋季的七月初一，发生日蚀。
English: On the first day of July in autumn, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：八月戊戌，置建康三官。
现代文：八月十三日，设置了建康三官。
English: In August, the Three Departments of Jiankang were established.

古文：癸卯，鸾鸟见乐游苑。
现代文：十八日，鸾鸟出现在乐游苑。
English: On the 18th, ostriches appeared in Le Youyuan.

古文：乙巳，平北将军、西凉州刺史象舒彭进号安西将军，封邓至王。
现代文：二十日，平北将军、西凉州刺史象舒彭进封号为安西将军，封为邓至王。
English: At this time, the general of North Pyongan Province and the general of West Liangzhou Province, Shupeng, were promoted to the rank of the general of Anxi Province, and were given the title of Deng Zi Wang.

古文：丁未，命中书监王莹等八人参定律令。
现代文：二十二日，命令中书监王莹等八人参加制定法律条令。
English: On the 22nd, eight people, including the book supervisor Wang Ying, were ordered to participate in the formulation of laws and regulations.

古文：诏尚书郎依昔奏事。
现代文：诏令尚书郎依照从前的规章上书奏事。
English: Shang Shuro was ordered to file a report in accordance with the previous regulations.

古文：交州献能歌鹦鹉，诏不纳。
现代文：交州奉献能唱歌的鹦鹉，诏令不予接受。
English: The Emperor's edict does not accept the gift of a singing parrot from Jiaozhou.

古文：林邑、干陀利国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：林邑、干利国各自派遣使者朝贡。
English: Lin County and Ganli Province each sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：冬十一月己未，立小庙。
现代文：冬季的十一月初五，建立小庙。
English: In November of the winter, a temple was built for his stepmother.

古文：甲子，立皇子统爲皇太子，赐天下爲父后者爵一级。
现代文：初十，立皇子萧统为皇太子，赐给天下做父亲较晚的人爵位一级。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Xiao Tong, the prince, was made the crown prince, and his late father was given a first-class knighthood.

古文：十二月，大雪，深三尺。
现代文：十二月，下了大雪，深三尺。
English: In December, it snowed heavily, up to three feet deep.

