古文：景宗即位，释其罪，封宁王，竟如其言。
现代文：孔子称 礼乐以外的小技艺也必有它的有用之处 ，医术和卜筮便是。
English: Confucius said that minor skills other than ritual music must also have their usefulness, such as medicine and divination.

古文：凡决祸福多此类。保宁中，历彰武、兴国二军节度使。
现代文：医术用来救免人们因染疫病而早夭，卜筮用来帮助犹豫不决的人下决断，二者均于国事有补益，于百姓有惠济。
English: Medicine is used to save people from dying early due to the plague, and divination is used to help those who are hesitant to make a decision. Both have complementary benefits in national affairs and benefit the people.

古文：撰《百中歌》行于世。
现代文：从前的史书录其名而不传其事，所以我为之做传。
English: In the past, history books recorded people's names without telling their stories, so I decided to tell their stories.

古文：魏璘，不知何郡人，以卜名世，太宗得于汴。
现代文：魏璘，不知何郡人士，因为善于卜筮闻名于世，太宗从汴京得到了他。
English: Wei Xuan, who hails from I don't know how many counties, is world-renowned for being good at divination, and Taizong got him from Beijing.

古文：天禄元年，上命驰马较迟疾，以为胜负。
现代文：天禄元年，世宗命众人赛马比较出快慢，从而定胜负。
English: In the first year of the Tenroku era, all the members of the Sejong clan compared the speed of the horses, thus determining the outcome of the race.

古文：问王白及璘孰胜，白奏曰： 赤者胜。 
现代文：皇上问王白及魏璘哪匹马会获胜。王白奏道 ：赤马会获胜。 
English: The emperor asked Wang Bai and Wei Wei which horse would win. Wang Bai replied, "The red horse will win."

古文：璘曰： 臣所见，骢马当胜。 
现代文：魏璘说： 依我看来，青鬃马将获胜。 
English: Wei Wei said: In my opinion, the young horse will win.

古文：既驰，竟如璘言。
现代文：驰逐结束，最终结果如魏璘所说。
English: The race is over, and the final result is as Wei Wei said.

古文：上异而问之，白曰： 今日火王，故知赤者胜。 
现代文：皇上觉得奇异便发问，王白说： 今日火气当旺，所说我认为赤色马获胜。 
English: The emperor thought it was strange and asked Wang Bai about it. Wang Bai said, "I am very excited today. I think the red horse won."

古文：璘曰： 不然，火虽王，而上有烟。
现代文：魏璘说 ：不是这样，火气虽旺，然而火上有烟。
English: Wei Wei said, "That's not true. Although the fire is strong, there is smoke on the fire."

古文：以烟察之，青者必胜。 
现代文：以烟色看来，青色马必胜。 
English: Judging by the smoke, the blue horse is bound to win.

古文：上嘉之。
现代文：皇上大为赞赏。
English: The Emperor was very appreciative.

古文：五年，察割谋逆，私卜于璘。
现代文：五年，察割谋反，私下里向魏璘求卜。
English: Five years later, he plotted a rebellion and secretly begged Wei Wei for help.

古文：璘始卜，谓曰： 大王之数，得一日矣，宜慎之！ 
现代文：魏璘开始卜卦，对他说： 大王的卦数，卜得一日了，应该小心为是！ 
English: Wei Wei began to guess, and said to him, "Great King's guess, you have been able to guess for one day, you should be careful!

古文：及乱，果败。
现代文：及至乱发，察割最终落败。
English: The match went to a tie-breaker, and Cheka finally lost.

古文：应历中，周兵犯燕，上以胜败问璘。
现代文：应历年间，周兵侵犯燕京，穆宗皇上向魏璘问胜负情况。
English: During the following years, Zhou soldiers invaded Yanjing, and Emperor Mu Zong asked Wei Zang about the situation of victory and defeat.

古文：璘曰： 周姓柴也，燕分火也。
现代文：魏璘说： 周主姓柴，燕之分野为火曜。
English: Wei Wei said: Zhou's surname is Chai, and Yan's field is Tuesday.

古文：柴入火，必焚。 
现代文：柴入火中，必自焚。 
English: If you put wood on the fire, you will burn yourself.

古文：其言果验。
现代文：其言果然应验了。
English: What he said came true.

古文：璘尝为太平王罨撒葛卜僣立事，上闻之，免死，流乌古部。
现代文：魏璘曾经替太平王罨撒葛预卜僭立成败之事，皇上知道后，免其死罪，流放于乌古部。
English: Wei Wei once predicted the success or failure of the Taiping King, Caesar Ge. After the emperor knew, he was exempted from the death penalty and exiled to Ugube.

古文：一日，节度使召璘，适有献双鲤者，戏曰： 君卜此鱼何时得食？ 
现代文：一日，节度使征召魏璘，正好有人来献双鲤鱼，节度使开玩笑说： 您卜算一下此鱼何时可以吃？ 
English: One day, Wei Wei was summoned to the festival, just as someone came to offer a pair of eels, the festival official joked: "Can you calculate when this fish can be eaten?"

古文：璘良久答曰： 公与仆不出今日，有不测祸，奚暇食鱼？ 
现代文：魏璘过了很久才答道： 您与我都活不过今天，有意外之祸事，哪里还有时间吃鱼？ 
English: Wei Wei replied after a long time: You and I will both die today, but if there is an unexpected disaster, where will there be time to eat fish?

古文：亟命烹之。
现代文：赶紧命人烹煮之。
English: Quickly order someone to cook it.

古文：未及食，寇至，俱遇害。
现代文：还没来得及吃，盗匪来了，两人同时被杀害。
English: Before they could eat, the robbers arrived and they were both killed.

