古文：黄帝问曰：风之伤人也，或为寒热，或为热中，或为寒中，或为疠风，或为偏枯，或为风也。
现代文：黄帝问道：风邪侵犯人体，或引起 寒热 ，或成为 热中 ，或成为 寒中 ，或引起 疠风 ，或引起 偏枯 ，或成为其他风证。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: the wind evil invades the human body, or causes cold and fever, or becomes hot, or becomes cold, or causes wind, or causes drought, or becomes other wind signs.

古文：其病各异，其名不同。或内至五脏六腑，不知其解，愿闻其说。
现代文：由于病变表现不同，所以病名也不一样，甚至侵入到五脏六腑，我不知如何解释，愿听你谈谈其中的道理。
English: Due to the different manifestations of the lesions, the names of the diseases are also different, and they even invade the internal organs. I do not know how to explain this, but I would like to hear your reasoning.

古文：岐伯对曰：风气藏于皮肤之间，内不得通，外不得泄。风者，善行而数变，腠理开则洒然寒，闭则热而闷。其寒也则衰食饮，其热也则消肌肉，故使人怢栗而不能食，名曰寒热。
现代文：岐伯说：风邪侵犯人体常常留滞于皮肤腠理之间，向内不能进一步侵入，向外不能宣泄排出，然而风邪行动迅速且变化多端，若使腠理开泄则阳气外泄而恶寒，若使腠理闭塞则阳气内郁而身热烦闷，恶寒则引起饮食减少，发热则会使肌肉消瘦，所以使人猝然寒颤而不能饮食，这种病称为 寒热 。
English: Qi Bo said: The cold invading the human body often stays between the skin and pores. It cannot further invade inwardly and cannot be excreted outwardly. However, the cold acts quickly and varies widely. If the pores are opened, the yang will be released and the body will be cold. If the pores are blocked, the yang will be depressed and the body will be hot and uncomfortable. The cold will cause a decrease in diet. The fever will cause muscle wasting, so people will suddenly shiver and not be able to eat. This disease is called cold fever.

古文：风气与阳明入胃，循脉而上至目内眦，其人肥，则风气不得外泄，则为热中而目黄；人瘦，则外泄而寒，则为寒中而泣出。
现代文：风邪由足阳明胃经入胃，循经脉上行到目内眦，假如病人身体肥胖，腠理致密，则风邪不能向外发泄，稽留体内郁而化热，形成 热中 ，症见目珠发黄。假如病人身体瘦弱，腠理疏松，则阳气外泄而感到畏寒，形成 寒中 ，症见眼泪自出。
English: If the patient is obese and has a dense pharynx, the cold can not be released to the outside, leaving the body depressed and feverish, forming a "heat stroke," the symptoms are yellowing of the eyes. If the patient is thin and has loose pharynx, the yang is released and feels cold, forming a "cold stroke," the symptoms are tears.

古文：风气与太阳俱入，行诸脉俞，散于分肉之间，与卫气相干，其道不利，故使肌肉愤䐜而有疡；卫气有所凝而不行，故其肉有不仁也。
现代文：风邪由足太阳膀胱经侵入，循行到各经脉中及其腧穴，散布在肌肉中间，与卫气相搏结，使卫气运行的道路不通利，所以邪气充胀肌肉而产生疮疡。若卫气凝涩而不能运行，则肌肤麻木不知痛痒，继续发展下去即为半身不遂的 偏枯 。
English: Cold sores invade through the solar plexus from the feet, travel to the meridians and their acupoints, and spread to the middle of the muscles. They fight with the qi, making the qi's path unprofitable, so the evil qi swells the muscles and causes sores. If the qi is stiff and cannot move, the skin is numb and itchy, and if it continues to develop, it is a partial body withering.

古文：疠者有荣气热胕，其气不清，故使其鼻柱坏而色败，皮肤疡溃。
现代文：疠风病是因风伤荣气，搏而为热，热出于皮肤和肉之间，则肌脉外内之气不清，所以使鼻柱蚀坏而面色衰败，皮肤生疮疡溃烂。
English: Rheumatoid arthritis is caused by wind injury, which causes heat. The heat comes from between the skin and the flesh, while the air outside and inside the muscle vein is unclear. As a result, the nasal column is corroded and the complexion deteriorates, and the skin ulcerates.

古文：风寒客于脉而不去，名曰疠风，或名曰寒热。
现代文：病因是风寒之邪侵入经脉稽留不去，病名叫 疠风 ，如有寒热症状的则叫 寒热 。
English: The cause of the disease is that the evil of wind and cold invades the meridians and cannot be retained. The disease is called leprosy, and if there are cold and fever symptoms, it is called chills.

古文：以春甲乙伤于风者为肝风，以夏丙丁伤于风者为心风，以季夏戊己伤于邪者为脾风，以秋庚辛中于邪者为肺风，以冬壬癸中于邪者为肾风。
现代文：在春季或甲日、乙日感受风邪的，形成 肝风 ；在夏季或丙日、丁日感受风邪的，形成 心风 ；在长夏或戊日、己日感受风邪的，形成 脾风 ；在秋季或庚日、辛日感受风邪的，形成 肺风 ；在冬季或壬日、癸日感受风邪的，形成 肾风 。
English: In spring, or on days A and B, if you feel a cold, you will develop liver wind; in summer, or on days C and D, you will develop heart wind; in summer, or on days E and G, you will develop spleen wind; in autumn, or on days G and H, you will develop lung wind; in winter, or on days J and K, you will develop kidney wind.

古文：风中五脏六腑之俞，亦为脏府之风，各入其门户所中，则为偏风。
现代文：风邪侵入五脏六腑的俞穴，沿经脉内传，也可成为五脏六腑的风病，各俞穴是脏腑与外界相通的门户，若风邪从其血气衰弱场所入侵，则成为 偏风 。
English: Colds invade the sinuses of the internal organs, and are transmitted along the internal meridians. They can also become rheumatic diseases of the internal organs. Each sinus is a portal for the internal organs to communicate with the outside world. If the colds invade from the places where the blood and gas are weak, it will become "partial wind."

古文：风气循风府而上，则为脑风。风入系头，则为目风，眼寒。饮酒中风，则为漏风。入房，汗出中风，则为内风。新沐中风，则为首风。久风入中，则为肠风，飧泄。外在腠理，则为泄风。
现代文：风邪由风府穴上行入脑，就成为 脑风 ；风邪侵入头部累及目系，就成为 目风 ，两眼畏惧风寒；饮酒之后感受风邪，成为 漏风 ；行房汗出时感受风邪，成为 内风 ；刚洗过头时感受风邪成为 首风 ；风邪久留不去，内犯肠胃，则形成 肠风 或 飧泄 ；风邪停留于腠理，则成为 泄风 。
English: When a cold enters the brain from the wind hole, it becomes "brain wind"; when a cold invades the head and affects the eye system, it becomes "eye wind," and both eyes are afraid of the wind chill; when a cold is felt after drinking alcohol, it becomes "leakage wind"; when a cold is felt when sweating in the house, it becomes "inner wind"; when a cold is felt just after washing the head, it becomes "first wind"; when a cold persists for a long time, and the stomach is offended, it forms "intestinal wind" or "leakage wind"; when a cold persists in the body, it becomes "leakage wind."

古文：故风者，百病之长也，至其变化，乃为他病也，无常方，然致有风气也。
现代文：综上所述，风邪是引起各种疾病的首要因素，风邪侵入人体薄弱的地方就会发生变化，能够引起其它各种疾病，风邪致病没有一定常规，但其病因都是因为有风邪的入侵。
English: In summary, the common cold is the primary factor causing various diseases. When the common cold invades the weak places of the human body, it will change and can cause various other diseases. There is no certain routine for the pathogenesis of the common cold, but its etiology is all due to the invasion of the common cold.

古文：帝曰：五脏风之形状不同者何？
现代文：黄帝问道：五脏风证的临床表现有何不同呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What are the differences in the clinical manifestations of the five viscera?

古文：愿闻其诊，及其病能。
现代文：希望你讲讲诊断要点和病态表现。
English: I'd like you to explain the key points of the diagnosis and the pathological manifestations.

古文：岐伯曰：肺风之状，多汗恶风，色皏然白，时咳短气，昼日则差，暮则甚，诊在眉上，其色白。
现代文：岐伯回答道：肺风的症状，是多汗恶风，面色淡白，不时咳嗽气短，白天减轻，傍晚加重，诊察时要注意眉上部位，往往眉间可出现白色。
English: Qi Bo answered: The symptoms of pneumonic wind are sweating and bad wind, pale complexion, shortness of breath from time to time, decreased during the day and increased in the evening. When examining, pay attention to the upper eyebrow area, often white can appear between the eyebrows.

古文：心风之状，多汗恶风，焦绝善怒吓，赤色，病甚则言不可快，诊在口，其色赤。
现代文：心风的症状，是多汗恶风，唇舌焦躁，容易发怒，面色发红，病重则言语困难，诊察时要注意舌部，往往舌质可呈现红色。
English: The symptoms of heart wind are sweaty bad wind, lips and tongue are anxious, easy to get angry, red face, severe illness is speech difficulties, pay attention to the tongue during diagnosis, often the tongue can appear red.

古文：肝风之状，多汗恶风，善悲，色微苍，嗌干，善怒，时憎女子，诊在目下，其色青。
现代文：肝风的症状，是多汗恶风，常悲伤，面色微青，喉咙干燥，易发怒，有时厌恶女性，诊察时要注意目下，往往眼圈可发青色。
English: The symptoms of hepatic wind are excessive sweating, bad wind, often sad, bluish complexion, dry throat, easy to anger, sometimes misogynistic, pay attention to the present time during the examination, often the eye circles can turn blue.

古文：脾风之状，多汗恶风，身体怠堕，四肢不欲动，色薄微黄，不嗜食，诊在鼻上，其色黄。
现代文：脾风的症状，是多汗恶风，身体疲倦，四肢懒于活动，面色微微发黄，食欲不振，诊察时要注意鼻尖部，往往鼻尖可出现黄色。
English: The symptoms of splenic attack are excessive sweating, bad wind, tired body, laziness of the limbs, slightly yellow complexion, loss of appetite. When examining, pay attention to the tip of the nose, often the tip of the nose can appear yellow.

古文：肾风之状，多汗恶风，面痝然浮肿，脊痛不能正立，其色炲，隐曲不利，诊在肌上，其色黑。
现代文：肾风的症状，是多汗恶风，面部浮肿，腰脊痛不能直立，面色灰黑如煤烟，小便不利，诊察时要注意面部两侧颧骨的部位，往往可出现黑色。
English: The symptoms of nephritis are excessive sweating, swelling of the face, lumbosacral pain, inability to stand upright, ashen complexion, unfavorable urination. When examining, pay attention to the cheekbones on both sides of the face, which can often appear black.

古文：胃风之状，颈多汗，恶风，食饮不下，鬲塞不通，腹善满，失衣则䐜胀，食寒则泄，诊形瘦而腹大。
现代文：胃风的症状，是颈部多汗，恶风，吞咽饮食困难，隔塞不通，腹部易胀满，受外寒则胃脘胀，吃了寒凉的食物则泄泻，诊察时可见形体瘦削而腹部胀大。
English: The symptoms of gastric wind are excessive sweating in the neck, bad wind, difficulty swallowing and eating, obstruction of the septum, the abdomen is easily distended, the stomach is distended by external cold, and when eating cold food, diarrhea occurs. At the time of diagnosis, the body is thin and the abdomen is distended.

古文：首风之状，头面多汗，恶风，当先风一日则病甚，头痛不可以出内，至其风日，则病少愈。漏风之状，或多汗，常不可单衣，食则汗出，甚则身汗，喘息，恶风，衣常濡，口干，善渴，不能劳事。泄风之状，多汗，汗出泄衣上，口中干，上渍其风，不能劳事，身体尽痛，则寒。
现代文： 首风 的症状，是头痛，面部多汗，恶风，每当起风的前一日病情就加重，以至头痛得不敢离开室内，待到起风的当日，则头痛稍轻。 漏风 的症状，是汗多，经常需要多穿衣服，进食后立即出汗，甚至是自汗，喘息恶风，衣服常被汗浸湿，口干易渴，不能劳动。 泄风 的症状，是多汗，汗出湿衣，口中干燥，上半身汗出如水渍一样，不耐劳动，周身疼痛，感觉寒冷。
English: The symptoms of the first wind are headache, perspiration on the face, bad wind, whenever the condition worsens the day before the wind, so that the headache does not dare to leave the room, until the day of the wind, the headache is slightly light.The symptoms of leaking wind are sweating a lot, often need to wear more clothes, sweating immediately after eating, even self-sweating, wheezing bad wind, clothes are often soaked in sweat, dry mouth and thirst, can not work.The symptoms of the wind are sweating a lot, sweating wet clothes, dry mouth, upper body sweating like water stains, intolerance to work, pain all over the body,

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

