古文：凡世主之患，用兵者不量力，治草莱者不度地。
现代文：一般国君犯的弊病是：用兵作战时不衡量自己的实力，开垦荒地时不计算好土地。
English: The common vices of emperors are: they do not measure their strength when they use soldiers to fight, and they do not calculate the land well when reclaiming wasteland.

古文：故有地狭而民众者，民胜其地；地广而民少者，地胜其民。
现代文：因此有的地方狭小而人口众多，人口的数量超过了其拥有的土地；有的土地宽广而人口稀少，是土地面积超过人口数量。
English: Therefore, some places are narrow and have a large population, and the number of people exceeds the land they own; some are wide and sparsely populated, and the land area exceeds the number of people.

古文：民胜其地，务开；地胜其民者，事徕。
现代文：人口数量超过国家拥有的土地，就一点要致力开垦荒地；土地面积超过人口，就要想办法招来人口开荒。
English: If the population exceeds the land owned by the state, it is necessary to make efforts to reclaim wasteland; if the land area exceeds the population, it is necessary to find ways to attract people to reclaim wasteland.

古文：开，则行倍。
现代文：开垦荒地招徕外民，国力将成倍地增长。
English: By reclaiming the wasteland and attracting foreigners, the national strength will increase exponentially.

古文：民过地，则国功寡而兵力少；地过民，则山泽财物不为用。
现代文：人口超过了其拥有的土地，那么国家取得的功绩就少而且兵力不足；土地面积超过人口数量，那么国家的山林、湖泽的财力物力就不会得到充分利用。
English: If the population exceeds the land owned by it, then the achievements made by the country will be few and the military strength will be insufficient; if the land area exceeds the population, then the financial and material resources of the country's mountains, forests and lakes will not be fully utilized.

古文：夫弃天物、遂民淫者，世主之务过也，而上下事之，故民众而兵弱，地大而力小。
现代文：放弃自然资源，任民众放荡，游手好闲，这是君主在事业上的过失，可是现在从君主到臣民都这么做，因此，人口虽多而军队的实力却很弱，土地虽广而国家的实力却很少。
English: Abandoning natural resources and allowing the people to be dissolute and idle is the fault of the monarch in the cause, but now from the monarch to the subjects they all do it, so although the population is large, the strength of the army is weak, and although the land is vast, the strength of the country is small.

古文：故为国任地者：山林居什一，薮泽居什一，薮谷流水居什一，都邑蹊道居什四，此先王之正律也。
现代文：过去君主统治国家使用土地的比例是：山、森林占国土面积的十分之一，水少而草木繁茂的湖泊沼泽占国土面积的十分之一，山谷、河流占国土面积的十分之一，城市、道路占国土面积的十分之四，这是前代帝王的正确规定。
English: In the past, the proportion of land used by countries ruled by monarchs was: mountains and forests accounted for one-tenth of the land area, lakes and marshes with little water and lush vegetation accounted for one-tenth of the land area, valleys and rivers accounted for one-tenth of the land area, and cities and roads accounted for four-tenths of the land area. This was the correct provision of the previous emperor.

古文：故为国分田数：小亩五百，足待一役，此地不任也；方土百里，出战卒万人者，数小也。
现代文：所以治理国家给民众分配耕地使人数少于耕地数。每个农民分得五百亩，国家得到的税收不足以养活一个士兵，这是因为土地不足以完成这样的任务。土地方圆百里，派出兵士一万人，人数少于土地数。
English: Therefore, the management of the country allocates cultivated land to the people so that the number of people is less than the number of cultivated land. Each farmer is divided into five hundred mu, and the tax revenue received by the country is not enough to feed one soldier, because the land is not enough to complete such a task. The land is a hundred miles round, and ten thousand soldiers are sent, and the number is less than the number of land.

古文：此其垦田足以食其民，都邑遂路足以处其民，山林、薮泽、谿谷足以供其利，薮泽堤防足以畜。
现代文：最好的办法是，让国家可耕种的土地足以养活那里的民众，山地、森林、湖泊、沼泽、山谷足够供应民众各种生活资料，湖泊、沼泽的堤坝足够积蓄水源。
English: The best way is to make the country's arable land sufficient to feed the people there, the mountains, forests, lakes, marshes, and valleys sufficient to supply the people with various livelihoods, and the dams of lakes and marshes sufficient to accumulate water resources.

古文：故兵出，粮给而财有余；兵休，民作而畜长足。此所谓任地待役之律也。
现代文：因此，军队出征作战，粮食的供应充足而财力有余；军队休息时，民众都从事农耕，而积存经常富足，这就叫利用土地备战的规则。
English: Therefore, when the army goes out to fight, the supply of grain is sufficient and the financial resources are more than enough; when the army rests, the people are engaged in farming, and the accumulation is often rich, which is called the rule of using land to prepare for war.

古文：今世主有地方数千里，食不足以待役实仓，而兵为邻敌，臣故为世主患之。
现代文：现在君主拥有方圆几千里的土地，而粮食还不够用来准备打仗，装满粮仓，可军队却与邻国为敌，所以我为君主担忧这件事。
English: Now that the sovereign owns land thousands of miles around, and there is not enough grain to prepare for war and fill the granaries, but the army is at war with its neighbors, so I am worried about this for the sovereign.

古文：夫地大而不垦者，与无地同；民众而不用者，与无民同。
现代文：土地广大却不去开垦，同没有土地相同，关键在于开垦荒地；用兵的办法关键在于实行统一的奖赏。
English: The key to reclaiming vast tracts of land without reclaiming it is the same as having no land. The key to employing soldiers is to implement a unified reward system.

古文：故为国之数，务在垦草；用兵之道，务在壹赏。私利塞于外，则民务属于农；属于农，则朴；朴，则畏令。
现代文：堵塞民众从耕战之外获得私利的途径，那么民众就一定会归属到农耕上；民众归属到农业上，就一定淳朴。民众淳朴，就一定害怕法令。
English: If you block the people's way of gaining self-interest outside of farming and warfare, then the people will definitely belong to farming; if the people belong to agriculture, they must be simple-minded; if the people are simple-minded, they must be afraid of the law.

古文：私赏禁于下，则民力抟于敌；抟于敌，则胜。
现代文：禁止臣子在下面私自搞奖赏。那么民众的力量就会凝聚在对敌国打仗上，如此就定能获胜。
English: Then the power of the people will be concentrated on the war against the enemy country, and thus they will be able to win.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：根据什么知道会这样呢？
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：夫民之情，朴则生劳而易力，穷则生知而权利。
现代文：那就是人之常情。民众朴实，就会造就勤劳的品质而不吝惜自己的力气，人贫穷了就会产生智谋而衡量个人得失。
English: That is human nature. If people are simple, they will cultivate the quality of hard work and not be stingy with their energy. If people are poor, they will have the wisdom to measure their personal gains and losses.

古文：易力则轻死而乐用，权利则畏罚而易苦。
现代文：凡国君，能有效利用土地使民众为国誓死效命，是民众名和利都得到的结果。
English: For all sovereigns, the ability to effectively use the land to make the people swear to die for the country is the result of the people's fame and profit.

古文：易苦则地力尽，乐用则兵力尽。
现代文：人天生的本性，饿了就要寻找食物，劳累了就寻求安逸，痛苦了就寻找欢乐，屈辱了就追求荣耀，这是人之常情。
English: It is human nature to seek food when hungry, comfort when tired, joy when in pain, and glory when humiliated.

古文：夫治国者，能尽地力而致民死者，名与利交至。
现代文：人追求个人私利时，就会违背礼制的规定；追求名誉时就会丧失人性的特征。
English: When people pursue personal self-interest, they will violate the rules of etiquette; when they pursue honor, they will lose the characteristics of humanity.

古文：民之性：饥而求食，劳而求佚，苦则索乐，辱则求荣，此民之情也。民之求利，失礼之法；求名，失性之常。奚以论其然也？
现代文：根据什么说他们这样呢？现在盗贼向上违反了君主的禁令，而在下面丢失了臣子的礼仪，因此他们的名声受到耻辱而生命有危险，他们仍然不想停止，这是因为利益关系。
English: On what basis do they say this? Now that the thieves have violated the monarch's injunction from above, and have lost the etiquette of the courtiers below, so that their reputation is disgraced and their lives are in danger, they still do not want to stop, this is because of the interests.

古文：今夫盗贼上犯君上之所禁，而下失臣民之礼，故名辱而身危，犹不止者，利也。其上世之士，衣不煖肤，食不满肠，苦其志意，劳其四肢，伤其五脏，而益裕广耳，非性之常也，而为之者，名也。
现代文：那些古代的士人，穿的衣服不能温暖皮肤，吃的不能填饱胃肠，为的是磨练自己的意志，辛劳自己的四肢，从伤害自己的五脏，可自己的心胸更加宽广，这不是人性的普遍规律，他们这样做的原因是为名利。
English: Those ancient scholars wore clothes that could not warm their skin and ate food that could not fill their stomachs and intestines, in order to hone their will, toil their limbs, and not hurt their internal organs, but their hearts were more broad-minded. This is not a universal law of human nature. The reason they did this was for fame and fortune.

古文：故曰：名利之所凑，则民道之。
现代文：所以说名和利聚集到一块，那么民众就会顺从它。
English: So if fame and profit come together, then people will follow it.

古文：主操名利之柄而能致功名者，数也。
现代文：君主掌握着给民众名和利的大权，而能获得功绩和名声的根本是依靠统治方法。
English: The monarch wields the power to bestow fame and fortune on his subjects, but it is the method of rule that confers merit and renown.

古文：圣人审权以操柄，审数以使民。
现代文：圣明的君主弄清权力的情况而掌权，弄明白统治方略再役使民众。
English: A saintly ruler grasps the situation of power and takes power, grasps the ruling strategy and then serves the people.

古文：数者，臣主之术，而国之要也。
现代文：统治方法，是君主治国的关键。
English: The method of rule is the key to monarchy.

古文：故万乘失数而不危、臣主失术而不乱者，未之有也。
现代文：所以，拥有一万辆兵车的大国丧失了统治政策却不危险，君主没有统治方法而国家不混乱的情况从严也没有过。
English: Therefore, it is not dangerous for a large country with ten thousand chariots to lose its ruling policy, and the situation where the monarch has no ruling method and the country is not chaotic has never been stricter.

古文：今世主欲辟地治民而不审数，臣欲尽其事而不立术，故国有不服之民，主有不令之臣。
现代文：现在君主想要开辟土地，统治民众却不明白统治政策，想让大臣各尽职尽责而不确立治国方法，所以国家有不服从的民众，君主有不听命的大臣。
English: Now the monarch wants to open up the land, but the ruling people do not understand the ruling policy, and want to let the ministers do their duties without establishing the method of governing the country. Therefore, the country has disobedient people, and the monarch has disobedient ministers.

古文：故圣人之为国也，入令民以属农，出令民以计战。
现代文：因此圣明的君主治理国家，在国内让民众来隶属于农业，对外让民众考虑对敌作战。
English: Therefore, the holy monarch governs the country, at home, the people are subordinated to agriculture, and abroad, the people are allowed to consider fighting against the enemy.

古文：夫农，民之所苦；而战，民之所危也。
现代文：从事农耕，是民众认为痛苦的事，而打仗，是民众认为最危险的事。
English: To engage in agriculture is considered by the people to be painful, and to fight is considered by the people to be the most dangerous thing.

古文：犯其所苦、行其所危者，计也。
现代文：民众做自己信为痛苦的事，干自己认为危险的事，这是出于一种打算。
English: People do what they believe to be painful, and what they believe to be dangerous, for a reason.

古文：故民生则计利，死则虑名。
现代文：所以民众活着就要考虑自己的利益，死就会考虑自己身后的名望。
English: Therefore, when people are alive, they must consider their own interests, and when they die, they will consider the reputation behind them.

古文：名利之所出，不可不审也。
现代文：对民众所追求的名和利的来源，不能不考察。
English: It is necessary to examine the source of fame and profit that people pursue.

古文：利出于地，则民尽力；名出于战，则民致死。
现代文：利益的来源是土地，那么民众就会竭力耕地；名誉来源于对外作战，那么民众就会拼死打仗。
English: If the source of profit is land, then the people will do their best to cultivate the land; if the source of reputation is foreign wars, then the people will fight to the death.

古文：入使民尽力，则草不荒；出使民致死，则胜敌。
现代文：对内让民众竭力种地，那么荒地就不会荒芜；对外让民众拼死作战，就能战胜敌国。
English: Internally, let the people work hard to cultivate the land, then the wasteland will not be deserted; externally, let the people fight to the death, and they will be able to defeat the enemy country.

古文：胜敌而草不荒，富强之功可坐而致也。
现代文：能战胜敌国而荒地又不荒芜，富强的便可以唾手可得了。
English: If you can defeat the enemy country and the wasteland is not desolate, then you can get rich and strong.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：现在不是这样。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：世主之所以加务者，皆非国之急也。
现代文：国君更加卖力做的事情都不是国家的当务之急。
English: The things that the president is working harder to do are not the country's top priorities.

古文：身有尧、舜之行，而功不及汤、武之略者，此执柄之罪也。
现代文：他们身上有尧舜一样的品德，但他们所建立的功绩却赶不上商汤和周武王。这是因为他们掌握权柄的过错。
English: They have the same virtues as a dragonfly, but their achievements are not as good as those of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu. This is because they are guilty of holding power.

古文：臣请语其过。
现代文：请让臣说说他们的过错。
English: Please let the minister say what they did wrong.

古文：夫治国舍势而任说说，则身剽而功寡。
现代文：治理国家假如放弃权力而任用喜欢空谈的人，那么虽然自身品德好可功绩却少。
English: If you give up the power to govern the country and appoint people who like to talk, then although they have good moral character, they will have little merit.

古文：故事《诗》、《书》谈说之士，则民游而轻其君；事处士，则民远而非其上；事勇士，则民竞而轻其禁；技艺之士用，则民剽而易徙；商贾之士佚且利，则民缘而议其上。
现代文：因为使用《诗》、《书》的空谈游说之士，那么民众就会四处游荡轻视君主；作用那些隐逸之士，那么民众就会疏远君主并且诽谤君主；作用勇士，民众就会争强好胜不重视君主的禁令；手工业者被任用，那么民众就轻浮好动而喜欢迁移；有钱的商人生活安逸而且赢利，那么民众就会依靠他们而议论君主。
English: For the use of "poetry," "book" empty talk lobbyists, then the people will roam around and despise the monarch; the role of those who are secluded, then the people will alienate the monarch and slander the monarch; the role of warriors, the people will compete and not pay attention to the monarch's ban; craftsmen are appointed, then the people are flighty and like to move; rich merchants live comfortably and profitably, then the people will rely on them and talk about the monarch.

古文：故五民加于国用，则田荒而兵弱。
现代文：如果这五种人被国家选用，那田地就会荒芜而军队的战斗力会削弱。
English: If these five kinds of people are selected by the state, the fields will be deserted and the combat effectiveness of the army will be weakened.

古文：谈说之士资在于口，处士资在于意勇士资在于气，技艺之士资在于手，商贾之士资在于身。
现代文：喜欢空谈的人的资本在于巧言善辩，隐士的资本在于他的高洁心志，勇士的资本在于勇气，手工业者的资本在于一双巧手，商人的资本在于他自身。
English: The talkative man's capital is his eloquence, the hermit's is his purity of heart, the warrior's is his courage, the craftsman's is his skill, the merchant's is himself.

古文：故天下一宅，而圜身资。民资重于身，而偏托势于外。挟重资，归偏家，尧、舜之所难也。
现代文：所以，这些人以四海为家，资本随身携带，民众把自己谋生的资本看得比生命还重要，而且到了国外都投靠外国挟带借以安身立命的本事归附私门，就是像尧、舜这样的贤明君主也难以将国家治理好。
English: Therefore, these people take the four seas as their home and carry capital with them. The people regard the capital they earn for a living as more important than their lives. Moreover, when they go abroad, they rely on foreign countries and take advantage of the ability to secure their lives. Even a wise monarch such as Yu and Zou would find it difficult to govern the country well.

古文：故汤、武禁之，则功立而名成。
现代文：因此商汤和周武王下令禁止这种情况，就能建立功业。
English: Therefore, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu ordered to prohibit this situation, so that they could establish the cause.

古文：圣人非能以世之所易胜其所难也，必以其所难胜其所易。
现代文：圣明的君主不用世上容易得到的东西胜过他们难以拥有的东西，必须用他们难以具备的东西来超过容易获得的东西。
English: The holy princes must not prefer what is easy in the world to what is difficult for them; they must use what is difficult for them to surpass what is easy.

古文：故民愚，则知可以胜之；世知，则力可以胜之。
现代文：如果人们愚昧，那便可以用智慧战胜他们，世上的人有智慧，就可以用力量战胜他们。
English: If the people of the world are foolish, they can be overcome by wisdom. If the people of the world are wise, they can be overcome by power.

古文：臣愚，则易力而难巧；世巧，则易知而难力。
现代文：由于人们愚昧，那么他们就不会吝惜自己的力气而难以有技巧；世人有技巧，就容易有智慧而不愿出力气。
English: Because people are stupid, they will not spare their strength and are difficult to have skills; if people have skills, it is easy to have wisdom and do not want to exert energy.

古文：故神农教耕而王天下，师其知也；汤、武致强而征诸侯，服其力也。
现代文：古代神农教会人们耕田而成为天下帝王，这是因为人们要学习他的智慧。商汤和周武王创造了强大的军队而征服一天下诸侯，这是因为诸侯们屈服于他们的强力。
English: Ancient Shennong taught people to cultivate the fields and became the emperor of the world, because people wanted to learn from his wisdom. Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu created a powerful army and conquered the princes one day, because the princes succumbed to their power.

古文：今世巧而民淫，方效汤、武之时，而行神农之事，以随世禁。
现代文：现在世人多机巧而且民众多放荡，正是仿效商汤和周武王的时候，可是君主们却做神农当年做的事，顺从世俗的禁忌，放弃了法治。
English: Now the world is more cunning and the people are more debauched. It is time to imitate Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, but the monarchs have done what Shennong did in the past, obeying worldly taboos and abandoning the rule of law.

古文：故千乘惑乱，此其所加务者过也。
现代文：所以拥有一千辆兵车的大国也混乱，这是因为他们特别认真去做的事情都错误的结果啊！
English: That's why a big country with a thousand chariots is also in chaos, because the things they are particularly serious about are all the result of mistakes!

古文：民之生：度而取长，称而取重，权而索利。
现代文：人的常情：用尺量东西的时候就会取长弃短，用称来称东西的时候就会取重弃轻。衡量个人得失的时候就会选择对自己有利的。
English: Human nature: When measuring something with a ruler, you will take the long and discard the short. When weighing something with a scale, you will take the heavy and discard the light. When measuring personal gains and losses, you will choose what is beneficial to yourself.

古文：明君慎观三者，则国治可立，而民能可得。
现代文：英明的君主认真观察这三种情况，那么治理国家的原则就能确立，而民众的才能就可以得到利用了。
English: If a wise prince attends to these three things, the principles of government will be established, and the talents of the people will be put to use.

古文：国之所以求民者少，而民之所以避求者多，入使民属于农，出使民壹于战，故圣人之治也，多禁以止能，任力以穷诈。
现代文：国家对民众的要求不多，可民众躲避国君约束的办法很多。对内役使民众归属农业，对外让民众专心于作战，所以圣明的君主治理国家，多制定禁令，用来限制民众对农战不利才能的发挥，喜欢利用实力来断决民众的欺诈行为。
English: The state does not have many demands on the people, but there are many ways for the people to evade the constraints of the sovereign. For internal service, the people are assigned to agriculture, and for the outside world, the people are allowed to concentrate on the war. Therefore, the holy monarch governs the country, and more prohibitions are made to limit the people's ability to play against the agricultural war, and they like to use their power to resolve the people's fraudulent behavior.

古文：两者偏用，则境内之民壹；民壹，则农；农，则朴；朴，则安居而恶出。
现代文：这两个办法普遍使用，那国内的民众就会一心了，同众一心，就会专心务农；专心务农，那么就会淳朴，民众淳朴，就会安心住在家乡而讨厌外出了。
English: If these two methods are widely used, then the people in the country will be one-hearted, and if they are one-hearted, they will concentrate on farming; if they concentrate on farming, they will be simple, and if the people are simple, they will live in their hometown with peace of mind and hate to go out.

古文：故圣人之为国也，民资藏于地，而偏托危于外。
现代文：所以圣明的君主治理国家，让民众将资本寄托到土地里，而很少去托身外国危险之地。
English: That is why the saintly monarch governs the country and lets the people invest their capital in the land, and rarely go to foreign dangerous places.

古文：资藏于地则朴，托危于外则惑。
现代文：民众将资本寄托到土地里就会淳朴，托身外国危险之地就会迷惑。
English: If people invest their capital in land, they will be naive, but if they invest in foreign dangerous places, they will be confused.

古文：民入则朴，出则惑，故其农勉而战戢也。
现代文：民众在国内朴实，在外国迷惑，所以他们从事农业生产尽力而作战积极。
English: The people are simple at home and puzzled abroad, so they engage in agricultural production as much as possible and fight actively.

古文：民之农勉则资重，战戢则邻危。
现代文：民众努力从事农业生产资本就会增多，作战积极邻国就会危险。
English: If the people work hard to engage in agricultural production, the capital will increase, and the neighbors who are active in the war will be dangerous.

古文：资重则不可负而逃，邻危则不归。
现代文：民众资本多就不容易带着出逃，邻国危险就不会去投靠。
English: It is not easy to run away with a lot of people's capital, and neighboring countries will not go to the safe haven.

古文：于无资、归危外托，狂夫之所不为也。
现代文：没有资本，投身外国危险之地，就是疯子也不会这么做。
English: Even a madman would not invest in a dangerous foreign country without capital.

古文：故圣人之为国也，观俗立法则治，察国事本则宜。
现代文：所以圣明的君主治理国家，观察风俗，确立法规，就能把国家治理好。
English: Therefore, a saintly monarch governs the country, observes customs, and establishes laws and regulations, and is able to govern the country well.

古文：不观时俗，不察国本，则其法立而民乱，事剧而功寡。此臣之所谓过也。
现代文：弄清国家的根本在耕战，就能制定适当的国策。不观察当时的风俗，不考察国家的根本，那么国家法令就是制定了民众也会混乱。政务繁忙而功绩少，这就是我所说的过失啊。
English: If you understand that the foundation of the country is cultivating war, you can formulate an appropriate national policy. If you do not observe the customs of the time, do not examine the foundation of the country, then the people will be confused even if the national decree is formulated. The government is busy and there are few achievements, this is what I call a mistake.

古文：夫刑者，所以禁邪也；而赏者，所以助禁也。
现代文：刑罚是禁止奸邪的工具。赏赐是辅助刑罚的工具。
English: Punishment is a tool to prohibit adultery. Reward is a tool to supplement punishment.

古文：羞辱劳苦者，民之所恶也；显荣佚乐者，民之所务也。
现代文：羞耻、侮辱、疲劳、痛苦是人民憎恶的对象。显贵、光荣、安逸、快乐是人民追求的对象。
English: Shame, humiliation, fatigue and pain are the objects of the people's hatred, while dignity, glory, comfort and happiness are the objects of the people's pursuit.

古文：故其国刑不可恶而爵禄不足务也，此亡国之兆也。
现代文：如果国家的刑罚不是可以憎恶的东西，官爵、俸禄不是值得追求的东西，这就是亡国的预兆了。
English: If punishment by the state is not something to be abhorred, if titles and salaries are not something to be pursued, this is a harbinger of the country's downfall.

古文：刑人复漏，则小人辟淫而不苦刑，则徼倖于民、上；徼于民、上以利。
现代文：如果该受刑罚的人隐藏漏网，那么百姓就邪僻游荡，不以刑罚为苦，对于君上存着侥幸的心理，而去追求私利。
English: If the person who is to be punished hides the leak, then the people will wander erratically, do not suffer from punishment, have a lucky mentality towards the prince, and pursue self-interest.

古文：求显荣之门不一，则君子事势以成名。
现代文：如果显贵、光荣不出于一个门路，那么官吏就要追求势力、巧取名誉。
English: If grandeur and glory do not come from a single source, then officials must pursue power and cleverly gain fame.

古文：小人不避其禁，故刑烦。君子不设其令，则罚行。
现代文：百姓不怕犯法，刑罚就要频繁；官吏不执行法令，刑罚就要错乱。
English: If the people are not afraid of breaking the law, the punishments will be frequent; if the officials do not enforce the laws, the punishments will be chaotic.

古文：刑烦而罚行者，国多奸，则富者不能守其财，而贫者不能事其业，田荒而国贫。
现代文：刑罚频繁而又错乱，国家的奸人就会多起来。这样，富人就不能保有他们的财产，穷人就不得从事他们的职业，土地就因而荒废，国家就因而贫穷。
English: If punishments are frequent and indiscriminate, the number of traitors to the state will increase, so that the rich will not be able to keep their property, the poor will not be able to carry on their occupations, the land will become waste and the state impoverished.

古文：田荒，则民诈生；国贫，则上匮赏。
现代文：土地荒废，人民就要诈骗。国家贫穷，国君就缺少财物进行赏赐。
English: When the land lies waste, the people resort to fraud; when the country is poor, the ruler rewards the poor for their lack of wealth.

古文：故圣人之为治也，刑人无国位，戮人无官任。
现代文：所以圣人治国，受过刑的人在社会上没有地位，犯过罪的人在朝廷上没有官做。
English: Therefore, saints governed the country, those who had been punished had no status in society, and those who had committed crimes had no official position in the imperial court.

古文：刑人有列，则君子下其位；衣锦食肉，则小人冀其利。
现代文：如果受过刑的人还有地位，官吏就会看不起自己的地位。如果犯过罪的人还穿着锦衣，吃着肉，百姓就会贪图非分的利益。
English: If people who have been punished still have status, officials will look down on their own status. If people who have committed crimes still wear fine clothes and eat meat, the people will covet undivided interests.

古文：君子下其位，则羞功；小人冀其利，则伐奸。
现代文：官吏看不起自己的职位，就会以自己有功为可耻。百姓贪图非分的利益，就会夸示自己的奸巧。
English: If officials despise their posts, they will be ashamed of their merits. If the people covet ill-gotten gains, they will boast of their treachery.

古文：故刑戮者，所以止奸也；而官爵者，所以劝功也。
现代文：本来，刑罚是禁止人们作奸的工具。官爵是鼓励人们立功的工具。
English: Originally, punishment was a tool to prohibit people from committing treason, while peerage was a tool to encourage people to perform meritorious deeds.

古文：今国立爵而民羞之，设刑而民乐之，此盖法术之患也。
现代文：现在国家设置官爵，而人们认为可耻；制定刑罚，而人们认为可乐。这就是法度和方法上有错误了。
English: Now the state sets up titles of nobility, and people think it's shameful; it sets up punishments, and people think it's coke. That's where the laws and methods are wrong.

古文：故君子操权一正以立术，立官贵爵以称之，论荣举功以任之，则是上下之称平。
现代文：因此，国君必须掌握大权，统一政策，而制定方法。设置官吏，授予爵位，要轻重相当。任用群臣，要讨论劳绩，根据功勋。这样，衡量上级下级的秤就会平衡了。
English: Therefore, the sovereign must grasp the power, unify the policies, and formulate the methods. The establishment of officials and the awarding of titles should be of equal weight. The appointment of ministers should be discussed on the basis of merit. In this way, the balance of the superior and inferior will be balanced.

古文：上下之称平，则臣得尽其力，而主得专其柄。
现代文：衡量上级下级的秤平衡了，臣民就能用尽他们的力量，国君也就能掌握自己的权力了。
English: When the scales for measuring superiors and inferiors are balanced, the subjects will be able to exhaust their strength, and the sovereign will be able to control his power.

