古文：突厥阿史那氏，盖古匈奴北部也。
现代文：突厥阿史那氏，是古匈奴的北部。
English: Turkic Ashina, is the north of the ancient Xiongnu.

古文：居金山之阳，臣于蠕蠕，种裔繁衍。
现代文：居于金山之南，臣服于蠕蠕，种族繁衍。
English: Living in the south of Jinshan, subject to creep and creep, the race multiplies.

古文：至吐门，遂强大，更号可汗，犹单于也，妻曰可敦。
现代文：至吐门时，才强大，改称可汗，就如称单于一样，其妻称可敦。
English: When he became powerful, he changed his name to Khan, just as he was called Shanyu, and his wife was called Kedon.

古文：其地三垂薄海，南抵大漠。
现代文：其地三面近海，南接大漠。
English: It is surrounded on three sides by the sea, with the desert to the south.

古文：其别部典兵者曰设，子弟曰特勒，大臣曰叶护，曰屈律啜、曰阿波、曰俟利发、曰吐屯、曰俟斤、曰阎洪达、曰颉利发、曰达干，凡二十八等，皆世其官而无员限。
现代文：别部领兵者称为设，子弟称特勒，大臣有叶护、屈律啜、阿波、俟利发、吐屯、俟斤、阎洪达、颉利发、达干等二十八级，世代为官而无员限。卫士称附离。
English: The leader of the soldiers of the other department is called Shie, his son is called Telle, and the ministers are Ye Zhou, Qu Ruzhu, Abo, Qili Fa, Tutun, Xing Jin, Yan Hongda, Qili Fa, Dagan and so on at 28 levels, and the generations are officials without limit. The guards are called attached and detached.

古文：卫士曰附离。可汗建廷都斤山，牙门树金狼头纛，坐常东向。
现代文：可汗建王廷于都斤山，牙门前竖金狼头大旗，坐以面向东为尊。
English: The khan built the royal court on Dujin Mountain, erected a large golden wolf's head flag in front of the gate, and sat facing east.

古文：隋大业之乱，始毕可汗咄吉嗣立，华人多往依之，契丹、室韦、吐谷浑、高昌皆役属，窦建德、薛举、刘武周、梁师都、李轨、王世充等倔起虎视，悉臣尊之。
现代文：隋朝大业之乱时，始毕可汗咄吉即位。华人中很多都去依附。其时契丹、室韦、吐谷浑、高昌等国都臣属于他。窦建德、薛举、刘武周、梁师都、李轨、王世充等人揭竿起事，都尊崇始毕可汗。
English: At the time of the Sui Dynasty's Taie Rebellion, Shi Bi Khan ascended to the throne. Many Chinese people followed him. At that time, Qi Dan, Murowe, Tu Guhun, Gaochang and other countries belonged to him. Dou Jiande, Xue Qiu, Liu Wuzhou, Liang Shidu, Li Luo, Wang Shichong and others all respected Shi Bi Khan.

古文：控弦且百万，戎狄炽强，古未有也。
现代文：突厥有精兵近百万，戎狄之强盛实为空前。
English: The Turks had nearly a million elite soldiers, and the strength of the army was unprecedented.

古文：高祖起太原，遣府司马刘文静往聘，与连和，始毕使特勒康稍利献马二千、兵五百来会。
现代文：高祖起义太原，派府司马刘文静前往与之联合，始毕派特勒康稍利献马二千，并率五百兵来，随高祖平定京师。
English: Gaozhu rebelled against Taiyuan, and sent Liu Wenzhing, the prefectural governor, to unite with him. At first, he sent Delekang to donate two thousand horses and lead five hundred soldiers to follow Gaozhu to subdue the Beijing division.

古文：帝平京师，遂恃功，使者每来多横骄。武德元年，骨咄禄特勒来朝，帝宴太极殿，为奏九部乐，引升御坐。
现代文：于是恃功，每次派使者来颇为骄横。武德元年，骨咄禄特勒来朝，皇帝在太极殿宴请，为他奏九部乐，引他登御坐侧。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Emperor Wu sent an envoy to the court of Emperor Wu, and the emperor invited him to a banquet at the Taiji Hall, where he played nine pieces of music for him and invited him to sit at the emperor's side.

古文：是岁，始毕牙帐自破，帝问内史令萧瑀，瑀曰： 魏文帝幸许，城门无故坏，是年文帝崩，岂其类耶？ 
现代文：这一年始毕的牙帐自己破了，皇帝向内史令萧蠫问吉凶，萧蠫说： 以前魏文帝到许都去，城门无故倒塌，这一年文帝驾崩，可能是同类事吧。 
English: At the end of the year, the emperor broke his own dental records and asked Xiao Zhen, the emperor's internal history commander, about the fortunes of the year. Xiao Zhen said: In the past, Wei Wendi went to Xudu, and the city gate collapsed for no reason. This year, Emperor Wen passed away. It may be the same kind of thing.

古文：二年，始毕自将度河，至夏州，与贼梁师都合，又佐刘武周以五百骑入句注，将侵太原。
现代文：武德二年始毕率兵渡黄河到夏州，与贼帅梁师都会合，又派了五百骑兵助刘武周入句注，准备侵扰太原。
English: At the beginning of the second year, Wu De led his troops across the Yellow River to Xiazhou, and met with the thief Liang Shi, and sent five hundred cavalry to help Liu Wu Zhou, preparing to invade Taiyuan.

古文：会病死，帝为发哀长乐门，诏群臣即馆吊其使，遣使者持段物三万赙之。
现代文：此刻病死。皇帝在长乐门为之发哀，诏令群臣向其使者致哀，派使者送去奠仪帛三万段。
English: At this moment, he died of illness. The emperor mourned for him at the Changle Gate, and ordered the courtiers to mourn for his envoy, and sent the envoy to send a memorial ceremony of 30,000 baht.

古文：子什钵苾幼，不克立，以为泥步设，使居东偏，立其弟俟利弗设，是为处罗可汗。
现代文：始毕子什钵絆年幼，不能即位，立为泥步设，居位东郊，立其弟俟利弗设，是为处罗可汗。
English: At the beginning, Bi's son Shifu was too young to succeed to the throne, so he was installed as a mud pawn and stayed in the eastern suburb, and his brother Li Fu was installed as a rook khan.

古文：处罗复妻隋义成公主，遣使来告，则又潜通王世充，潞州总管李袭誉击斩其使，取牛羊万馀。
现代文：处罗仍以隋义成公主为妻，派使者来告。但又暗中与王世充联系，潞州总管李袭誉斩杀其使者，夺取牛羊一万多。
English: Shen Luo still took Princess Sui Yicheng as his wife and sent an envoy to complain. However, he also secretly contacted Wang Shichong, and the general manager of Zhangzhou, Li Haiyong, killed his envoy and seized more than ten thousand cattle and sheep.

古文：处罗迎隋萧皇后及齐王暕之子正道于窦建德所，因立正道为隋王，奉隋后，隋人没者隶之，行其正朔，置百官，居定襄，众万人。
现代文：处罗从窦建德处迎来隋的萧皇后及齐王日柬的儿子正道，并立正道为隋王。继隋业在突厥的汉人都隶属于他，行隋的正朔纪年，设置百官，居于定襄城，人口达一万。
English: From Dou Jiande, Zhenluo welcomed Queen Xiao of the Sui Dynasty and Zheng Dao, the son of King Qi of Japan and Cambodia, and established Zheng Dao as the king of the Sui Dynasty. Following the Sui Dynasty, the Han people in Turkey were all subordinate to him, and the Sui Dynasty was in the Zhengshuo era. He set up a hundred officials and lived in Dingxiang City, with a population of ten thousand.

古文：秦王讨武周也，处罗以弟步利设骑二千会并州三日，多掠城中妇人女子去，总管李仲文不能制，以俱俭特勒助屯。
现代文：其时秦王李世民讨伐刘武周，派弟弟步利设率骑兵二千人到并州与官军相会。在并州三天，掳掠走了许多妇女，总管李仲文无力制止。派俱俭特勒助守。
English: At that time, Qin King Li Shimin fought against Liu Wuzhou and sent his younger brother Bu Li to lead 2,000 cavalrymen to meet the government army in Bianzhou. During the three days in Bianzhou, many women were abducted and pillaged, and the general manager, Li Zhongwen, was powerless to stop it. He sent Cujun to help guard.

古文：明年，谋取并州置杨正道，卜之，不吉，左右谏止，处罗曰： 我先人失国，赖隋以存，今忘之，不祥。
现代文：第二年打算夺取并州安置杨正道，占卜，不吉，左右劝阻，处罗说： 我的祖先失国，赖隋得以保存。今若不助他，不祥。
English: In the second year, he planned to seize and place Yang Zhengdao in the state, divination, bad luck, and dissuasion, said Luo: My ancestor lost the country, and Lai Sui was saved. If you do not help him now, it is ominous.

古文：卜不吉，神讵无知乎？
现代文：占卜不吉，神难道无知吗？
English: Is God ignorant of the ill fortune of divination?

古文：我自决之。 
现代文：我自己做决断。 
English: I make my own decisions.

古文：会天雨血三日，国中犬夜群号，求之不见，遂有疾，公主饵以五石，俄疽发死。
现代文：此时连下三天血雨，夜里群狗同时嚎叫等种种怪异。处罗病，公主让他服用五石，不久疽疮发作而死。
English: At this time, it rained blood for three days in a row, dogs howled at the same time in the night, and other strange things happened. When Luo fell ill, the princess had him take five stones, and he soon died of gangrene.

古文：主以子奥射设陋弱，弃不立，更取其弟咄苾嗣，是为颉利可汗。
现代文：公主因其子奥射设丑而弱，不立他为可汗而立其弟咄絆，是为颉利可汗。
English: The princess was weak because her son was ugly, so she did not appoint him as khan, but appointed his younger brother as khan.

古文：颉利始为莫贺咄设，牙直五原北。
现代文：颉利可汗，当初是莫贺咄设，牙廷在五原之北。
English: Qili Khan was originally based in Moga, and his court was in the north of the Five Plains.

古文：薛举陷平凉，与连和，帝患之，遣光禄卿宇文歆赂颉利，使与举绝；隋五原太守张长逊以所部五城附虏，歆并说还五原地。
现代文：薛举攻陷平凉，与颉利联合。高祖不安，派光禄卿宇文歆贿赂颉利，要他与薛举断绝关系；隋朝的五原太守张长逊在隋乱时将他所属的五城都依附突厥。宇文歆劝说颉利并归还五原地。
English: Xueju attacked and conquered Pingliang, and united with Meli. Gaozu was uneasy, and sent Guangluqing Uwenqi to bribe Meli, asking him to break off relations with Xueju; Zhang Changsun, the Fifth Prime Minister of the Sui Dynasty, attached the five cities he belonged to to the Turks during the Sui Rebellion. Uwenqi persuaded Meli and returned the five original places.

古文：皆见听，且发兵举长逊所部会秦王军。
现代文：要求被接纳，于是发兵，以及张长逊的全部人马来与秦王军相合。
English: The request was accepted, so he sent troops, as well as all of Zhang Changsun's men and horses, to join Qin Wang's army.

古文：太子建成议废丰州，并割榆中地。
现代文：太子建成建议废除丰州，并割榆中地。
English: Prince Jiancheng proposed to abolish Fuzhou and cut off the middle land.

古文：于是处罗子郁射设以所部万帐入处河南，以灵州为塞。
现代文：于是，处罗之子郁射设将他所辖一万帐人处河之南，以灵州为要塞。
English: As a result, Yu Zhaishi, the son of Zhenluo, placed the ten thousand people under his jurisdiction in the south of the river, using Lingzhou as a fortress.

古文：颉利又妻义成，以始毕子什钵苾为突利可汗，使居东。
现代文：颉利又以义成公主为妻，以始毕之子什钵絆为突利可汗。仍居东。
English: He also took Princess Yicheng as his wife, and Shigekizuna, the son of Shibi, as Turi khan. He remained in the East.

古文：义成，杨谐女也，其弟善经亦依突厥，与王世充使者王文素共说颉利曰： 往启民兄弟争国，赖隋得复位，子孙有国。
现代文：义成公主，是杨谐之女。其弟弟善经也依附突厥，与王世充的使者王文素共同劝说颉利 ：过去启民兄弟争国，依赖隋得以复位，子孙有国。
English: Princess Yicheng was the daughter of Yang Jie. Her brother Zeng Jing also adhered to the Turks, and together with Wang Wen Su, an emissary of Wang Shichong, persuaded Xili: In the past, the brothers of the Qimin fought for the country, and they were able to restore the throne by relying on the Sui Dynasty, and their descendants had a country.

古文：今天子非文帝后，宜立正道以报隋厚德。 
现代文：现在的天子不是隋文帝的后代，应该扶立正道以报答隋的厚恩。 
English: Today's heavenly son is not a descendant of the Sui Emperor, and we should help him stand on the right path to repay the Sui's kindness.

古文：颉利然之，故岁入寇。
现代文：颉利听从，所以每年都来侵扰。
English: Hao Li obeyed, so he came to intrude every year.

古文：然倚父兄馀资，兵锐马多，然骄气，直出百蛮上，视中国为不足与，书辞悖嫚，多须求。
现代文：他倚仗父兄的余荫，兵强马多，十分骄横，轻视中国。
English: He relies on the shadow of his father and brother, has a large number of soldiers, is very arrogant, and despises China.

古文：帝方经略天下，故屈礼，多所舍贷，赠赍不赀，然而不厌无厓之求也。
现代文：书信中用词傲慢，求请无厌。皇帝因天下初定，所以委曲求全，多多赐与。然而不能使其满足。
English: In the letter, he used the words "arrogant" and "insatiable" to ask for favors. The emperor, because the world was predetermined, asked for everything and gave as much as he could. However, he could not satisfy them.

古文：四年，颉利率万骑与苑君璋合寇雁门，定襄王李大恩击却之。
现代文：武德四年，颉利率一万人马与苑君璋联合入侵雁门，定襄王李大恩将其击退。
English: In the fourth year of Wudeh, the 10,000-strong army and the Yuanjun army jointly invaded the Wild Goose Gate, and King Dingxiang and Li Daen repulsed them.

古文：颉利执我使者汉阳公瑰、太常卿郑元、左骁卫大将军长孙顺德，帝亦囚其使与相当。
现代文：颉利捉住我使者汉阳公瑰、太常卿郑元王寿、左骁卫大将军长孙顺德，皇帝也扣留了他相当数量的使者。
English: The emperor also detained a considerable number of his envoys, including Hanyang Gonggui, Grand Admiral Zheng Yuan Wangshou, and General Sun Shunde.

古文：由是寇代州，败行军总管王孝基，略河东，犯原州，穿延州塞，诸将与战，不能有所俘。
现代文：由此又入侵代州，打败行军总管王孝基，略取河东，侵犯原州，穿越延州要塞，诸将与之战，不能有所俘。
English: As a result, they invaded Daizhou, defeated the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, Wang Xiaoji, captured the eastern part of the river, invaded Yuanzhou, and passed through the fortress of Yanzhou. They would fight against them, and they could not take any prisoners.

古文：明年，还顺德等，且请和，贽鱼胶，绐云： 固二国之好也。 
现代文：第二年，送还长孙顺德等人请和，献鱼胶为礼，说是用来黏固两国的和好。
English: The following year, he sent his eldest grandson Shunde and others back to ask for peace, offering fish glue as a gift, saying that it would be used to cement the peace between the two countries.

古文：帝虽未情，释其使特勒热寒等，厚与金还之。
现代文：皇帝放了他们的使者特勒热寒等，且赐与厚赏。
English: The emperor released their emissary, Teller, and rewarded him handsomely.

古文：大恩上言： 突厥饥，马邑可图也。 
现代文：李大恩上奏： 突厥饥荒，可夺取马邑。 
English: Li Dain played the following tune: The Turks are starving, so we can take Ma'e.

古文：诏殿中少监独孤晟共击之。
现代文：诏命殿中少监独孤晟与大恩共同袭击。
English: The imperial edict ordered the junior high school vice-principal to single-handedly attack together with Daen.

古文：晟后约，大恩不敢进，屯新城，颉利自将数万骑与刘黑闼合围之，大恩没，士死者数千人。
现代文：独孤晟误期，李大恩不敢进军，屯兵新城。颉利亲自带领几万人马与刘黑闼共同包围新城。李大恩战死，士兵死了几千。
English: Alone and out of time, Li Daen did not dare to march into the army and set up a garrison in Xincheng. Guili personally led tens of thousands of people to jointly encircle Xincheng with Liu Heyao. Li Daen died in battle, and several thousand soldiers died.

古文：进击忻州，为李高迁所破。
现代文：颉利等又进击忻州，被李高迁打败。
English: Gong Li and others attacked Ganzhou again and were defeated by Li Gaoqian.

古文：黑闼以突厥万人扰山东，又残定州。
现代文：刘黑闼用突厥一万人马骚扰山东，又践踏定州。
English: Liu Heixuan harassed Shandong with 10,000 Turkic horsemen and trampled on Dingzhou.

古文：颉利未得志，乃率十五万骑入雁门，围并州，深钞汾、潞，取男女五千，分数千骑转掠原、灵间。
现代文：颉利打得不顺心，又率十五万人马入雁门，围并州，抄掠汾、潞等州，掠取男女五千多人，又分几千人马转掠原、灵等州之间。
English: He led 150,000 horsemen into the Wild Goose Gate, encircled and annexed the prefectures, plundered the counties of Yunnan and Shandong, captured more than 5,000 men and women, and divided several thousand horsemen between the counties of Yuan and Ling.

古文：于是太子建成将兵出豳州道，秦王将兵出蒲州道击之；李子和以兵趋云中，掩可汗后；段德操出夏州，狙其归。
现代文：这时，太子建成率兵出豳州道，秦王率兵出蒲州道来迎击；李子和领兵去云中，掩杀可汗后部；段德超带兵出夏州，断他的归路。
English: At this time, Prince Jiancheng led his troops out of Bozhou Road, and King Qin led his troops out of Bozhou Road to meet the attack; Li Zi and his troops went into the clouds to cover the rear of the khan; Duan Dechao led his troops out of Xiazhou to cut off his way back.

古文：并州总管襄邑王神符战汾东，斩虏五百首，取马二千；汾州刺史萧顗献俘五千。
现代文：并州总管襄邑王神符在汾东一战，斩杀俘获五百人，取马二千匹，汾州刺史萧岂页献俘五千。
English: And Xiangyi Wang Shenfu, the head of the prefecture, fought in the First World War in the east of Luzhou, killing and capturing five hundred people, taking two thousand horses, and sacrificing five thousand prisoners in Luzhou.

古文：虏陷大震关，纵兵掠弘州，总管宇文歆、灵州杨师道拒之，获马、橐它数千。
现代文：颉利攻陷大震关，纵兵掳掠弘州，总管宇文歆及灵州杨师道迎战，获马、骆驼几千。
English: The Great Seismic Barrier was conquered by Goryeo, the Longitudinal Army captured and plundered Hongzhou, and the general manager, Uwen Hui, and Yang Shidao of Lingzhou met the battle, gaining several thousand horses and camels.

古文：颉利闻秦王且至，引出塞，王师还。
现代文：颉利听说秦王将来，就引兵出塞，王师回。
English: When he heard that King Qin was coming, he led his troops out of the citadel, and Wang Shifu returned.

古文：又明年，与黑闼、君璋等小小入寇定、匡、原、朔等州，与屯将相胜负。
现代文：武德六年，颉利连同黑闼、君璋等又来骚扰定、匡、原、朔等州，与守将互有胜负。
English: In the sixth year of Wude, Hao Li, together with Hei Yao, Jun Yao and others, harassed Ding, Kuang, Yuan and Shuo and other states, and won and lost with the defenders.

古文：帝遣太子建成复屯北边、秦王屯并州备虏，久乃罢。
现代文：皇帝派太子建成再度屯守北边陲，秦王屯守并州，防备突厥入侵。
English: The emperor sent the crown prince Jiancheng to garrison the northern border of Yunnan again, and the Qin king to garrison the annexed provinces to prevent the Turkish invasion.

古文：俄又破代地一屯，进击渭、豳二州，取马邑，不有也，复请和，归我马邑。
现代文：很久后才撤。不久，突厥又攻破代州的一屯，进击渭、豳二州，攻取了马邑。又来请和，还我马邑。
English: It was a long time before they withdrew. Soon, the Turks broke through a town in Daizhou, invaded Shandong and Fujian, and captured Ma'ei. They came to invite peace, and returned Ma'ei to me.

古文：七年，攻原、朔二州，入代地，不胜，更与君璋合攻陇州及阴般城，分击并地，秦王与齐王元吉屯豳州道以备胡。
现代文：武德七年，突厥又攻原、朔二州，入代地，不胜。又与君璋合攻陇州及阴城，又分攻并州，秦王世民与齐王元吉屯兵豳州道备战。
English: In the 7th year of Wudeh, the Turks attacked the Yuan and Shuo states, and entered the territory of the Yuan dynasty, but were defeated. They also joined with the princes to attack Bozhou and Yincheng, and attacked and annexed the states separately. The Qin King Shimin and the Qi King Yuanji stationed soldiers along the Bozhou Road to prepare for battle.

古文：君璋与虏出入原、朔、忻、并地，剽系骚然，数为诸将驱逐。
现代文：君璋与突厥兵出入原、朔、忻、并州等地，掳掠骚扰，多次被各将驱逐。
English: Junyi and the Turkic soldiers went in and out of Yuan, Shuo, Yao, and Bozhou and other places, plundered and harassed, and were expelled by the generals many times.

古文：其八月，颉利与突利兵悉起，自原州连营而南，所在震恐，秦王、齐王拒之。
现代文：八月，颉利与突厥举国入寇，从原州连营南下，所到之处都极震恐，秦王、齐王前往讨伐。
English: In August, the Qin and the Turk invaded the whole country. They marched south from Lianying, Yuanzhou. Everywhere they went, they were terrified. King Qin and King Qi went to fight them.

古文：初，关中霖潦，饷道绝，军次豳州，可汗万骑奄至，阵五龙坂，以数百骑挑战，举军失色。
现代文：当初，关中雨涝，粮运阻绝，秦王等扎营豳州，可汗率万余骑兵掩杀过来，列阵五龙坂，派几百骑兵出来挑战，王师大恐。
English: At first, Guanzhong was flooded with rain, the grain transport was blocked, Qin Wang and others camped in Bozhou, the Khan led more than 10,000 cavalry to cover up, lined up on Wulongzhan, sent several hundred cavalry to challenge, and Wang Shida was terrified.

古文：秦王驰百骑掠阵，大言曰： 国家于突厥无负，何为深入？
现代文：秦王带领一百多人马驰往可汗阵前，大声说： 国家没有背负突厥的地方，为什么背约深入我国？
English: King Qin led more than a hundred people on horseback to the Khan's front, saying loudly: The country has no place to carry the Turks, why break the agreement and go deep into our country?

古文：我，秦王也，故来自与可汗决，若固战，我才百骑耳，徒广杀伤，无益也。 
现代文：我，就是秦王，来与可汗单独一决雌雄。假若一定要以兵马相攻，我才一百多人，白白增加战死者，于事无益。 
English: I, the king of Qin, have come to fight the khan single-handed. If I had to fight with soldiers and horses, there would be more than a hundred of me, and it would be useless to increase the number of dead in vain.

古文：颉利笑不答。
现代文：颉利笑而不答。
English: She laughs and doesn't answer.

古文：又驰骑语突利曰： 尔往与我盟，急难相助，今无香火情邪？
现代文：秦王又驰到突利处说： 你过去曾与我有盟约，有急难，相互助。今日不念当日的香火之情了吗？
English: Qin Wang also rushed to the Turkish side and said, "In the past, you had a covenant with me, there were emergencies, and you helped each other. Don't you remember today's incense?

古文：能一决乎？ 
现代文：能出来与我一决胜负吗？ 
English: Can you come to a showdown with me?

古文：突利亦不对。
现代文：突利也不回答。
English: Turi did not answer either.

古文：王将绝水前，颉利见兵少，又闻与突利语，阴相忌，即遣使者来曰： 王毋苦，我固不战，将与王议事耳。 
现代文：秦王将渡沟水，颉利见他兵少，又听见他香火之情的话，暗中疑忌突利，于是派使者来说： 秦王别恼，我本不打算交战，只是想与王商议事情罢了。 
English: King Qin wanted to cross the ditch, but Qin Li saw that he was short of soldiers and heard his passionate words. He secretly suspected Turi, so he sent an envoy to say: King Qin, don't worry, I didn't intend to fight, I just wanted to discuss things with the king.

古文：于是引却。
现代文：说后退兵。
English: He said he was withdrawing.

古文：秦王纵反间，突利乃归心，不欲战，颉利亦无以强之，乃遣突利及夹毕特勒思摩请和，帝许之。
现代文：秦王用离间计，突利心向秦王，不愿再战。颉利也失去强力不能战，就派突利和夹毕特勒思摩入朝请和，皇帝同意。
English: The Qin king used a distraction, and the Turks approached the Qin king, unwilling to fight again. When the Turks lost their strength and were unable to fight, they sent the Turks and the Byzantines to the court to sue for peace, and the emperor agreed.

古文：突利遂自托于王为昆弟。
现代文：突利依附秦王愿结为兄弟。
English: Turi adhered to the will of the Qin King and became his brother.

古文：帝见思摩，引升御榻，思摩顿首辞，帝曰： 我见若犹颉利也。 
现代文：皇帝见思摩，叫人引他上御座。思摩跪拜辞谢，皇帝说： 我见你，就像见到了颉利。 
English: When the emperor saw Sima, he asked someone to bring him to the throne. Sima knelt down to thank him, and the emperor said, "When I see you, it's like I'm seeing the emperor."

古文：乃听命。
现代文：思摩才就座。
English: It took a while for Shima to sit down.

古文：突厥既岁盗边，或说帝曰： 虏数内寇者，以府库子女所在，我能去长安，则戎心止矣。 
现代文：突厥年年侵扰边陲，有人劝说皇帝： 突厥多次入寇，是因为这里有府库及好女子。如果我们离开长安，那好战之心就会停止了。 
English: The Turks had been intruding into the borderlands year after year, and someone persuaded the emperor: The Turks have invaded many times because there are treasuries and good women here. If we leave Chang'an, that bellicose spirit will cease.

古文：帝使中书侍郎宇文士及逾南山，按行樊、邓，将徙都焉。
现代文：皇帝派中书侍郎宇文士及翻越南山，到樊、邓一带去巡察，准备迁都。
English: The emperor sent the Chinese scribe Lang Yu Wenshi and over the South Mountain, to inspect the areas of Handan and Deng, to prepare for the relocation of the capital.

古文：群臣赞迁，秦王独曰： 夷狄自古为中国患，未闻周、汉为迁也。
现代文：众大臣均赞成迁都，独秦王说： 夷狄自古就是中国的边患，没听说过周、汉因此而迁都的。
English: All the ministers were in favor of moving the capital, and King Qin of Germany said, "Ethnics have always been a border problem for China. I have never heard of Zhou or Han moving the capital for this reason.

古文：愿假数年，请取可汗以报。 
现代文：希望能给我几年的时间，我一定将可汗擒来。 
English: I hope I can be given a few years, and I will definitely bring Khan back.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：皇帝这才打消迁都的念头。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：颉利已和，亦会甚雨，弓矢皆弛恶，遂解而还。
现代文：颉利已言和，又因雨多，弓箭都松弛坏了，也就解围而去。
English: Keli had already made peace, and because of the rain, the bows and arrows had become loose and broken, so he broke the siege and left.

古文：帝会群臣问所以备边者，将作大匠于筠请五原、灵武置舟师于河，扼其入。中书侍郎温彦博曰： 魏为长堑遏匈奴，今可用。 
现代文：皇帝召集群臣询问备边的办法，将作大匠于筠提出在五原、灵武黄河边设置水军防守，中书侍郎温彦博说 ：魏曾筑长堑遏止匈奴，此法现也可用。 
English: The emperor summoned a group of ministers to inquire about the method of preparing the border, and the great master Yu Xi proposed to set up a naval defense on the edge of the Five Plains and the Lingwu Yellow River. Wen Yanbo, the scribe, said: Wei had built a long pier to deter the Xiongnu, and this method is now also available.

古文：帝使桑显和堑边大道，召江南船工大发卒治战舰。
现代文：皇帝派桑显和去边境大道外挖堑，又召江南船工大造战舰。
English: The emperor sent Sang Hsien Ho to excavate rafts outside the border avenue, and called on Jiangnan shipbuilders to build warships.

古文：颉利遣使来，愿款北楼关请互市，帝不能拒。
现代文：颉利派使者来，希望能开放北楼关便于贸易，皇帝不能拒绝。
English: Geli sent an envoy, hoping to open the north gate to facilitate trade. The emperor could not refuse.

古文：帝始兼天下，罢十二军，尚文治，至是以虏患方张，乃复置之，以练卒搜骑。
现代文：当初皇帝统领天下伊始，撤消十二军，崇尚文治。至此，因为突厥之患，重新置军操练。
English: At the beginning of the emperor's reign, he abolished the 12th army and advocated civil government. At this point, because of the Turkic plague, he reinstated the army drill.

古文：八年，颉利攻灵、朔，与代州都督蔺战新城，败绩。
现代文：武德八年，颉利侵略灵州、朔州，与代州都督蔺在新城交战，蔺败。
English: In the 8th year of Wude, Goryeo invaded Lingzhou and Shuozhou, and fought with the Daizhou governor Goryeo in Xincheng, but was defeated.

古文：于是张瑾兵屯石岭，李高迁屯大谷，秦王屯蒲州道。
现代文：那时，派张瑾兵驻石岭，李高迁兵驻大谷，秦王兵驻蒲州道。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye's soldiers were stationed in Shiling, Li Gao's soldiers were stationed in Datan, and Qin Wang's soldiers were stationed in Puzhou Road.

古文：初，帝待突厥用敌国礼，及是，怒曰： 往吾以天下未定，厚于虏以纾吾边。
现代文：当初，皇帝对突厥用平等国礼。此时，怒说： 以前我因天下未定，厚待突厥为纾患。
English: At first, the emperor used the equality national rite to the Turks. At this time, he said angrily: "In the past, I treated the Turks with kindness because the world was uncertain.

古文：今卒败约，朕将击灭之，毋须姑息。 
现代文：现他背约，我定要歼灭他，决不姑息。 
English: Now that he has reneged on the agreement, I am determined to annihilate him and will not tolerate it.

古文：命有司更所与书为诏若敕。
现代文：命有司将给突厥的书信全改为诏或敕。
English: All letters to the Turks were to be changed to either 诏 or.

古文：瑾未至屯，虏已逾石岭，围并州，攻灵州，转扰潞、沁。
现代文：张瑾还未到达驻地，突厥兵已越过石岭，既而围并州，攻灵州，转而侵扰潞、沁二州。
English: Zhang Ye had not yet arrived at the garrison, but the Turkish soldiers had already crossed the Shiling Mountains, and after encircling and annexing Zhoushou and attacking Lingzhou, they turned to encroach upon Zhoushou and Shoushou.

古文：李靖以兵出潞州道，行军总管任瑰屯太行。
现代文：李靖率兵出潞州道，行军总管任瑰驻太行。
English: Li Jing led the troops out of Bozhou Road, and the commander-in-chief of the troops, Ren Rui, was stationed in Taihang.

古文：瑾战大谷，败绩，中书侍郎温彦博陷于贼，郓州都督张德政死之。
现代文：张瑾在大谷迎战，败，中书侍郎温彦博陷于贼手；郓州都督张德政战死。
English: Zhang Ye fought in Otani, but was defeated. Wen Yanbo, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, fell into the hands of thieves; Zhang Dezheng, the governor of Zhangzhou, died in the battle.

古文：遂攻广武，为任城王道宗破。
现代文：接着突厥攻广武，败于任城王道宗之手。
English: Next, the Turks attacked Guangwu and were defeated by the city's ruler, Emperor Daozong.

古文：其欲谷设掠绥州，请和去。
现代文：突厥欲谷设掳掠绥州后，请和而去。
English: After the Turks plundered Luzhou, please leave peacefully.

古文：败并州数县，入兰、鄯、彭州诸屯，或小胜，不能制。
现代文：突厥兵又打败并州几县，进入兰、鄯、彭州等地。有时小胜，但不能尽制。
English: The Turkic soldiers also defeated several counties in Nianzhou and entered Lan, Handan, Pengzhou and other places. Sometimes they won small victories, but they could not control everything.

古文：俄寇原州，折威将军杨屯击之，且发士屯大谷。
现代文：不久，又侵犯原州，折威将军杨屯将他击败，且发兵屯守大谷。
English: Soon, he invaded Wonju again, and General Yang Tun defeated him and sent troops to defend Otani.

古文：九年，攻原、灵，又围凉州，进犯泾、原，李靖与战灵州，虏引去。
现代文：武德九年，颉利攻打原、灵，又围凉州，进而侵犯泾、原，李靖在灵州与之战，突厥兵退。
English: In the ninth year of Wu De, the Qili attacked the Yuan and the Ling, and encircled the Liangzhou, and then invaded the Yu and the Yuan. Li Jing fought with them in the Lingzhou, and the Turkish soldiers retreated.

古文：寇西会州，围乌城，翔徉陇、渭间，平道将军柴绍破之于秦州，斩一特勒、三大将，虏千级。
现代文：又去侵犯西会州，围乌城，徘徊陇、渭之间，平道将军在秦州与之一战，斩特勒一，大将三，俘虏千人。
English: He also invaded Western Hebei Province, besieged Wucheng, and wandered between Yunnan and Shandong Provinces. General Pingdao fought one battle in Qin Province, killed one general and three generals, and captured a thousand people.

古文：大抵虏得志则深入，负则请和，不耻也。
现代文：突厥一般都是打赢了就再深入，吃败仗就请和，不以为耻。
English: The Turks are generally not ashamed to win and then go deeper, or to lose and then make peace.

古文：其七月，颉利自将十万骑袭武功，京师戒严。
现代文：这年七月，颉利自率十万人马袭击武功，京师戒严。
English: In July of that year, Xingli led a hundred thousand people to attack Wugong, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：攻高陵，尉迟敬德与战泾阳，获俟斤乌没啜，斩首千余级。
现代文：颉利兵攻高陵，尉迟敬德在泾阳迎战，擒获俟斤乌没啜，杀死一千多人。
English: The Qili soldiers attacked Gaoling, and the lieutenant Jingde met the battle in Fenyang. He was captured and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：颉利遣谋臣执失思力入朝以觇我，因夸说曰： 二可汗兵百万，今至矣！ 
现代文：颉利派谋臣执失思力入朝来窥测虚实，夸耀说： 二位可汗有百万大军，现已来了。 
English: He sent his advisers to spy out the truth and boasted: "The two khans have a million-strong army, which has now arrived.

古文：太宗曰： 我与可汗尝面约和，尔则背之。
现代文：太宗说： 我与可汗曾当面约和，你今日负约。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I had a face-to-face peace treaty with the Khan, but you broke the treaty today.

古文：且义师之初，尔父子身从我，遗赐玉帛多至不可计，何妄以兵入我都畿，自夸盛强耶？
现代文：当初义军入京，你父子都跟在我手下，馈赠你们的玉帛多得不可计数。现在竟然敢派兵入我京畿，还自夸强盛。
English: When the rebels entered Beijing, your father and son were both under my command, and I gave you countless jade ornaments. Now you dare to send troops into my Gyeonggi Province, and boast of your strength.

古文：今我当先戮尔矣！ 
现代文：今天我先杀了你。 
English: Today, I'll kill you first.

古文：思力惧，请命，萧瑀、封德彝谏帝，不如礼遣之，帝不许，系于门下省。乃与侍中高士廉、中书令房玄龄、将军周范等驰六骑出玄武门，幸渭上，与可汗隔水语，且责其负约。
现代文：执失思力害怕了，请罪。萧蠫、封德彝劝皇帝以礼送他回去，皇帝不许，将他囚禁在门下省，接着与侍中高士廉、中书令房玄龄、将军周范等六人驰马出玄武门到达渭水，与颉利可汗隔水说话，斥责他负约。
English: Xiao Yan and Feng Dejun persuaded the emperor to send him back with a gift, but the emperor did not allow it, and imprisoned him in the province under the gate. Then, with the attendant Gao Shillian, the Chinese secretary Fang Xuanling, the general Zhou Fan and six others, they rode out of the Xuanwu Gate to Surabaya, spoke with the Qili Khan across the water, and rebuked him for breaking the contract.

古文：群酋见帝，皆惊，下马拜。
现代文：众酋将大惊，都下马拜。
English: All the chiefs will be shocked and fall down in worship.

古文：俄而众军至，旗铠光明，部队静严，虏大骇。
现代文：随即王师大队人马到达，旌旗鲜亮，兵甲闪耀，部队整肃。突厥兵大惊。
English: Immediately after, Wang Shih's brigade arrived, the banner was bright, the armor was shining, and the troops were cleaned up. The Turkish soldiers were shocked.

古文：帝与颉利按辔，即麾军却而阵焉。
现代文：皇帝指挥大军退而列阵，单独与颉利按辔而言。萧蠫认为皇帝轻敌，拉着马劝谏。
English: The emperor commanded the army to fall back into line, and spoke with Xing Li alone. Xiao Yu thought that the emperor was a minor enemy, and pulled his horse to persuade Xing.

古文：萧瑀以帝轻敌，叩马谏，帝曰： 我思熟矣，非尔所知也。夫突厥扫地入寇，以我新有内难，谓不能师。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我已想好了，非你所知。突厥所以举国入侵，是以为我大唐刚有内难不可能出兵。我若关城门，他一定会大侵。
English: The emperor said: I have thought about it, but you don't know. The Turks invaded the whole country because they thought that I, the Great Tang, had just had internal difficulties and could not send troops. If I closed the city gates, he would certainly invade.

古文：我若阖城，彼且大掠吾境，故我独出，示无所畏，又盛兵使知必战，不意我能沮其始谋。
现代文：所以我单骑出见，表示我不怕；又耀军容，让他知道我准备交战。他没有料到我能破他原意。
English: So I rode out alone to show him I wasn't afraid, and made a show of arms to let him know I was ready to fight. He didn't expect me to go against his wishes.

古文：彼入吾地既深，惧不能返，故与战则克，和则固，制贼之命，在此举矣！ 
现代文：他们深入我地，当会害怕没有退路。所以与他交战定能取胜，与他言和也必牢固。制服突厥，在此一举。 
English: They have penetrated deep into our country, and they must fear that there is no way out. Therefore, war with him is certain to be victorious, and peace with him will also be firm. Subdue the Turks in one fell swoop.

古文：是日，颉利果请和，许之。
现代文：这天，颉利果然请和。
English: On this day, Keli did indeed ask for a reconciliation.

古文：翌日，刑白马，与颉利盟便桥上，突厥引还。
现代文：第二天，杀白马，与颉利在便桥盟誓，颉利引兵退走。
English: The next day, kill the white horse, and swear with Meli at the bridge, Meli withdraws.

古文：萧瑀曰： 颉利之来，诸将多请与战，陛下不听，既而虏自退，其策奈何？ 
现代文：萧蠫说 ：颉利当初入侵，各将大多请战，而陛下不听。后来他们自退，是什么道理？ 
English: Xiao Yao said, "At the beginning of the Han Dynasty invasion, most of the generals wanted to fight, but His Majesty did not listen. Later, they retreated, what is the reason?

古文：帝曰： 突厥众而不整，君臣惟利是视，可汗在水西，而酋帅皆来谒我，我醉而缚之，其势易甚。
现代文：皇帝说 ：突厥兵多，但不整肃，君臣之间惟利是视。可汗在水西而酋帅们都来见我，我若将他们灌醉后拿下，易如反掌。
English: The emperor said, "There are many Turkish soldiers, but they are not disciplined, and only the interests of princes and ministers are considered. The khan is west of the water, and the chieftains have all come to see me. If I get them drunk and take them down, it will be as easy as pie."

古文：然我新即位，为国者要在安静，一与虏校，杀伤必多，彼败未及亡，惧而脩德，与我为怨，其可当耶？
现代文：我又命长孙无忌、李靖悄悄率兵去幽州待战。假若让大军在后追赶，伏军在前阻击，稳操胜券，不过，我新即位，为国之道，安定平静是首要之务，一与突厥战，杀伤必多。他们败了但未灭亡，因害怕而来修好，与我结怨，为患不浅。
English: I also ordered my eldest grandson, Li Jing, to quietly lead his troops to Yuzhou to await the battle. If I had let the large army chase behind, and the ambush army block the front, I would have won the victory. However, my new enthronement, for the sake of the country, stability and tranquility are the first priority. In a war with the Turks, there will be many casualties. They were defeated but not destroyed, because they were afraid, they came to make amends, and they complained to me, which was not a small problem.

古文：今仆械卷铠，啖以玉帛，虏志必骄，骄则亡之端也，故曰 将欲取之，必固与之 。
现代文：我现在收兵不战，赂以玉帛，他们定会骄慢，骄，是亡灭的开端。这就是 要想得必先给 的道理。 
English: I am now recruiting soldiers without fighting, and bribing them with jade ingots. They will surely be proud, and pride is the beginning of ruin. This is the reason why you must think before you give.

古文：瑀再拜曰： 非臣愚所逮也！ 
现代文：萧蠫再拜说： 这真非愚臣所能想到的。 
English: Xiao Wei said again: This is really not something that a fool can think of.

古文：乃诏殿中监豆卢宽、将军赵绰护送突厥，颉利献马三千匹、羊万头，帝不纳，诏归所俘于我。
现代文：于是诏令殿中监豆卢宽、将军赵绰护送突厥。颉利献马三千匹、羊万头，皇帝不接受，只诏令将所掠的中国人都放回来。
English: So the emperor ordered the palace overseer, Zuo Lukang, and the general, Zhao Zuo, to escort the Turks. Guili offered three thousand horses and ten thousand sheep, but the emperor did not accept. He only ordered the Chinese people who had been robbed to be returned.

古文：贞观元年，薛延陀、回纥、拔野古诸部皆叛，使突利讨之，不胜，轻骑走，颉利怒，囚之，突利由是怨望。
现代文：贞观元年，原臣服突厥的薛延陀、回纥、拔野古等部落均起而叛突厥，颉利派突利前去讨伐，未能取胜。叛军盛，突利轻骑逃回。颉利怒，将他监禁。突利因此生怨心。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, tribes such as the Xueyendao, Huiqi, and Bainogu, which had previously been subject to the Turks, all rebelled against the Turks. Geli sent Turi to fight and failed to win. The rebels were in full strength, and Turi fled back on horseback. Geli was angry and imprisoned him. Turi was resentful because of this.

古文：是岁大雪，羊马多冻死，人饥，惧王师乘其敝，即引兵入朔州地，声言会猎。
现代文：这一年大雪，羊马冻死很多，人也遭灾。突厥害怕王师乘危来攻，于是领兵入朔州，扬言是会猎。
English: This year, there was heavy snowfall, many sheep and horses froze to death, and people were also affected. The Turks were afraid that Wang Shih would take advantage of the danger to attack, so he led his troops into Shuozhou, threatening to hunt.

古文：议者请责其败约，因伐之，帝曰： 匹夫不可为不信，况国乎？
现代文：有议臣建议责备他背约入我疆境，就此讨伐。皇帝说： 匹夫都不可以不讲信用，何况一个国家？
English: A councillor suggested that he should be reprimanded for breaking his promise to enter our territory, and so a crusade ensued. The emperor said: No one can be trusted, let alone a country.

古文：我既与之盟，岂利其灾，邀险以取之耶？
现代文：我既与他们有盟约，怎么可以乘人之危呢？
English: And how can I save myself, seeing I have a covenant with them?

古文：须其无礼于我，乃伐之。 
现代文：一定要他对我无礼后才可讨伐他。 
English: He must be rude to me before I can fight him.

古文：明年，突利自陈为颉利所攻，求救。
现代文：第二年，突利陈述遭到颉利的攻击，请求援助。
English: The following year, the Turkish statement was attacked by the Gulenists and called for assistance.

古文：帝曰： 朕与颉利盟，又与突利有昆弟约，不可不救，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 我与颉利有盟约，又与突利结拜为兄弟，兄弟有难不可不救，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "I have a covenant with Kili, and I am a brother of Turi. How can I help my brother when he is in trouble?

古文：兵部尚书杜如晦曰： 夷狄无信，我虽如约，彼常负之，今乱而击之，侮亡之道也。 
现代文：兵部尚书杜如晦说： 夷狄不讲信义。我虽守约，但他们常背盟。今他内乱而击之，是他自讨灭亡。 
English: Shang Shudu Rugao of the Military Department said: "The Yidi do not believe in loyalty. Although I keep my promise, they often renege on the agreement. Now that he is hit by civil unrest, he is seeking his own destruction."

古文：乃诏将军周范壁太原经略之，颉利亦拥兵窥边。
现代文：于是诏令将军周范驻守太原备战，颉利也拥兵窥视。
English: So he ordered General Zhou Fan to be stationed in Taiyuan to prepare for war, and Xili also watched the soldiers.

古文：或请筑古长城，发民乘塞。
现代文：有人建议修筑古长城，再调人民充实要塞。
English: Some people suggested that the ancient Great Wall should be rebuilt, and the people should be redeployed to reinforce the fortress.

古文：帝曰： 突厥盛夏而霜，五日并出，三月连明，赤气满野，彼见灾而不务德，不畏天也。迁徙无常，六畜多死，不用地也。俗死则焚，今葬皆起墓，背父祖命，谩鬼神也。与突利不睦，内相攻残，不和于亲也。
现代文：皇帝说： 突厥盛夏而飞霜，五个太阳同出，三个月亮并明，瘴气满野。他们见如此灾异还不修德，是不怕天；他们迁徙无定规，六畜多死，是不用地；其俗人死火焚，现人死均墓葬，违背祖宗的传统，是侮鬼神；与突利不睦，互相攻杀，是与亲不和。
English: The emperor said, "The Turks have midsummer and flying frosts, five suns rise at the same time, three moons rise at the same time, and the sky is full of clouds. They see such a disaster and still do not cultivate virtue, they are not afraid of the sky; they migrate irregularly, more than six animals die, they do not use the land; their secular people are dead and buried, and now everyone is buried, contrary to the tradition of their ancestors, it is to insult ghosts and gods; they are not in harmony with the Turks, they attack and kill each other, and they are at odds with relatives.

古文：有是四者，将亡矣，当为公等取之，安在筑障塞乎？ 
现代文：有这样四条，必将亡。我即将歼灭他们，哪里需要筑障实塞呢？ 
English: There are four of them, and they will surely die. I am about to destroy them. Where is the need to build a strong barrier?

古文：突厥俗素质略，颉利得华士赵德言，才其人，委信之，稍专国；又委政诸胡，斥远宗族不用，兴师岁入边，下不堪苦。
现代文：突厥人粗疏少谋略，颉利曾得到华人赵德言，赏识其才能，十分信任他，赵德言渐掌国政；颉利又将某些政权交给各胡人部族，却不用自己宗室中人。每年兴师入侵我边境，其下属不堪其苦。
English: The Turks are rough-hewn and lacking in strategy. Goryeo once received the Chinese Zhao Deyan, appreciated his talent, and trusted him very much. Zhao Deyan gradually took control of state affairs. Goryeo also handed over certain powers to various Hu tribes, but did not use his own family members. Every year, the rebels invaded our border, and their subordinates were unbearable.

古文：胡性冒沓，数翻覆不信，号令无常。
现代文：胡人秉性鲁莽，多次言而无信，号令常变。
English: Hu people are reckless by nature, and many times do not believe what they say, and their orders are constantly changing.

古文：岁大饥，裒敛苛重，诸部愈贰。
现代文：此时灾荒，征收苛重，各部落均生二心。
English: At this time, due to the famine and heavy taxation, each tribe was torn in two.

古文：又明年，属部薛延陀自称可汗，以使来。
现代文：贞观三年，突厥属部薛延陀自称可汗，派使者来告。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, the Turkic subordinate, Xue Yanta, claimed to be a khan and sent an envoy to complain.

古文：诏兵部尚书李靖击虏马邑，颉利走，九俟斤以众降，拔野古、仆骨、同罗诸部、习奚渠长皆来朝。
现代文：诏令兵部尚书李靖攻击马邑，颉利逃走，九个俟斤带兵降，拔野古、仆骨、同罗各部以及靅、奚的君长都入朝。
English: Shangshu Li Jing, the commander of the Imperial General Headquarters, issued an imperial edict ordering the military to attack Ma'e, and Geli fled. Nine generals led the troops to surrender, and the princes of Bago, Buyeo, Tongluo, and Shao and Shao all entered the imperial court.

古文：于是诏并州都督李世勣出通漠道，李靖出定襄道，左武卫大将军柴绍出金河道，灵州大都督任城王道宗出大同道，幽州都督卫孝节出恒安道，营州都督薛万淑出畅武道，凡六总管，师十余万，皆授靖节度以讨之。
现代文：于是诏令并州都督李世责力从通漠道出兵，李靖从定襄道出兵，左武卫大将军柴绍从金河道出兵，灵州大都督任城王道宗从大同道出兵，幽州都督卫孝节从恒安道出兵，营州都督薛万淑从畅武道出兵，共六总管兵十多万，均由李靖指挥讨突厥。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was issued, and the provincial governor, Li Shili, dispatched troops from Tongmo Road, Li Jing dispatched troops from Dingxiang Road, the general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, Chai Shao, dispatched troops from Jinhe Road, the provincial governor of Lingzhou, Rencheng Wang Daozong, dispatched troops from Datong Road, the provincial governor of Yuzhou, Wei Xiao Jie, dispatched troops from Heng'an Road, and the provincial governor of Yingzhou, Xue Wanshu, dispatched troops from Changwu Road. A total of more than 100,000 soldiers were dispatched, all of which were commanded by

古文：道宗战灵州，俘人畜万计，突利及郁射设、廕奈特勒帅所部来奔，捷书日夜至，帝谓群臣曰： 往国家初定，太上皇以百姓故，奉突厥，诡而臣之，朕常痛心病首，思一刷耻于天下，今天诱诸将，所向辄克，朕其遂有成功乎！ 
现代文：道宗在灵州与突厥接战，俘获人畜以万计。突利及郁射设、荫奈特勒率所属来投诚。每日均有捷报，皇帝对群臣说： 过去国家初定，太上皇为了百姓的平安，屈事突厥。我常为之痛心疾首，总想能雪耻于天下。今日依靠各位，所向必胜，我的心愿大概可成功了吧。 
English: In Lingshou, the Taoist sect fought with the Turks and captured tens of thousands of men and animals. The Turks and their vassals, led by Yu Shixian and Yin Neitel, came to surrender. There were daily reports of success. The emperor said to his courtiers: In the past, the country was initially determined, and the emperor bowed to the Turks for the sake of the people's peace. I often grieved for it and always wanted to be ashamed in the world. Today, I rely on you all, I will win, and my wish will probably succeed.

古文：四年正月，靖进屯恶阳岭，夜袭颉利，颉利惊，退牙碛口，大酋康苏蜜等以隋萧皇后、杨正道降。
现代文：四年正月，李靖屯驻恶阳岭，夜袭颉利，颉利惊，迁牙廷至碛口。大酋康苏蜜等人带了隋的萧皇后及杨正道来降。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Li Jingtun was stationed in the evil Yangling, the night attack on Huli, Huli surprised, moved the court to Hekou. The great chief Kang Sumi and others brought the Sui Empress Xiao and Yang Zhengdao to descend.

古文：或言中国人尝密通书于后，中书舍人阳文瓘请劾治。
现代文：有人说曾有中国人秘密与萧皇后通信，中书舍人阳文馞建议惩治。
English: Some people said that there were Chinese people who secretly corresponded with Empress Xiao, and Yang Wenzhong, a Chinese scholar, suggested punishment.

古文：帝曰： 天下未一，人或当思隋，今反侧既安，何足治耶？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 天下未定之时，当然会有人思念隋朝的。现在国内已经安定了，不需要再惩治了。 
English: The emperor said: When the world is uncertain, of course, some people will miss the Sui Dynasty. Now that the country has stabilized, there is no need to punish it.

古文：置勿劾。颉利窘，走保铁山，兵犹数万，令执失思力来，阳为哀言谢罪，请内属，帝诏鸿胪卿唐俭、将军安脩仁等持节慰抚。
现代文：颉利困窘，退守铁山，兵还有好几万。派执失思力来，假装谢罪，请求归降。皇帝诏令鸿胪卿唐俭、将军安修仁等持节前往抚慰。
English: The Emperor was embarrassed and retreated to the Iron Mountain, leaving tens of thousands of soldiers behind. Some of them lost their minds and came to him, pretending to apologize and begging for his surrender. The Emperor ordered Hongwu Sir Tang Zhen, General An Xiu Ren, and others to go to comfort him on the festival day.

古文：靖知俭在虏所，虏必安，乃袭击之，尽获其众，颉利得千里马，独奔沙钵罗，行军副总管张宝相禽之。
现代文：李靖知道唐俭等人在突厥，颉利定松于戒备，乃乘机袭击，大胜。颉利乘千里马，独身逃奔沙钵罗，被行军副总管张宝相擒获。
English: Li Jing knew that Tang Jian and others were in Turku, and Gong Li was not on the alert, but took the opportunity to attack, and won a great victory. Gong Li took a thousand horses, fled to Shajiao Luo alone, and was captured by Zhang Baoxiang, the deputy commander of the march.

古文：沙钵罗设、苏尼失以众降，其国遂亡，复定襄、恒安地，斥境至大漠矣。
现代文：沙钵罗设苏尼失率众降，其国亡，收复定襄、恒安地。开拓国境直至大漠。
English: Shah Rukh set Sunni failure rate to fall, his country died, recovered Dingxiang, Heng'an, and opened up the border to the desert.

古文：颉利至京师，告俘太庙，帝御顺天楼，陈仗卫，士民纵观，吏执可汗至，帝曰： 而罪有五：而父国破，赖隋以安，不以一镞力助之，使其庙社不血食，一也；与我邻而弃信扰边，二也；恃兵不戢，部落携怨，三也；贼华民，暴禾稼，四也；许和亲而迁延自遁，五也。
现代文：颉利送到京师，向太庙祭告俘获。皇帝到顺天楼，陈列仪仗侍卫，士民都涌来观看。吏押可汗来。皇帝说 ：你有五罪：过去你父亲国破，依赖隋得以存立。但当隋有难时，你却一兵之力都不帮助，以致隋覆灭，此其一；与我为邻而背信侵边，此其二；连年征战不止，致使部落生怨，此其三；掠夺我中国人，践踏我庄稼，此其四；许你和亲而迁延逃走，此其五。
English: The emperor went to Shun Tian Lou, displayed the ceremonial guards, and the scholars and people flocked to watch. The officials sent the khan. The emperor said: You have five sins: In the past, your father broke the country and relied on the Sui Dynasty to survive. But when the Sui Dynasty was in trouble, you did not help a single soldier, so that the Sui Dynasty was destroyed, this is one; with me as a neighbor, you betrayed the trust and invaded the border, this is two; you have not fought for years, causing the tribe to have a grudge, this is three; you plundered my Chinese people and trampled on my crops, this is four;

古文：朕杀尔非无名，顾渭上盟未之忘，故不穷责也。 
现代文：我要杀你并非没有理由，只是渭上的盟约未忘，所以不想苛责。 
English: It is not without reason that I want to kill you, but I have not forgotten the oath I swore, so I do not want to be harsh.

古文：乃悉还其家属，馆于太仆，禀食之。
现代文：于是归还他的家属，让他住在太仆，官家供应食用。
English: So they returned him to his family, let him live with a servant, and the officials supplied him with food.

古文：思结俟斤以四万众降，可汗弟欲谷设奔高昌，既而亦来降。
现代文：思结俟斤带了四万人来降，可汗的弟欲谷设逃奔高昌，后来也来降。
English: Shijie Shujin brought forty thousand people to descend, Khan's brother Zhi Gu Xie fled to Gaochang, and later also came to descend.

古文：伊吾城之长素臣突厥，举七城以献，因其地为西伊州。
现代文：伊吾城之君长一向臣服突厥，将其七城入献。即以其地列为西伊州。
English: The monarchs of Igu Castle had always been submissive to the Turks, and seven of their castles were presented to them. In other words, their land was listed as West Iguazu.

古文：制诏：突厥往逢疠疫，长城之南，暴骨如丘，有司其以酒脯祭，为瘗藏之。
现代文：诏令：突厥过去曾遭逢瘟疫，长城以南，尸骨堆积如山。有司先以酒肉祭奠，然后埋葬。
English: Emperor's edict: The Turks had suffered a plague in the past, and south of the Great Wall, the bones of the dead piled up like a mountain. The dead were first sacrificed with meat and wine, and then buried.

古文：又诏：隋乱，华民多没于虏，遣使者以金帛赎男女八万口，还为平民。
现代文：又有诏：隋乱时很多华人沦落突厥，派使者用金帛赎回男女共八万人，均还为平民。
English: There was also an edict: During the Sui Rebellion, many Chinese fell to the Turks, and an envoy was sent to redeem a total of 80,000 men and women, all of whom were civilians, with gold ingots.

古文：颉利不室处，常设穹庐廷中，久郁郁不自憀，与家人悲歌相泣下，状貌羸省。
现代文：颉利不习惯住房子，常在廷中设置穹庐居住，且郁郁寡欢，常与家人悲歌对泣，形体消瘦。
English: Hao Li was not used to living in a house. He often set up a dome to live in the court, and was depressed and unhappy. He often cried with his family, and his body was emaciated.

古文：帝见怜之，以虢州负山多麕麋，有射猎之娱，乃拜为刺史，辞不往，遂授右卫大将军，赐美田宅。
现代文：皇帝怜惜，委任他为虢州刺史，因为虢州靠山，多獐鹿等野兽，可以射猎自娱。颉利推辞不去。于是任他为右卫大将军，赐给良田美宅。
English: The emperor took pity on him and appointed him as the governor of Luzhou, because Luzhou's mainstay, many elk and other beasts, can be shot for fun. He did not want to resign. So he was appointed as the right guard general and given to Ryota Miyake.

古文：帝曰： 昔启民失国，隋文帝不■粟帛，兴士众，营护而存立之，至始毕稍强，则以兵围炀帝雁门，今其灭者，殆背德忘义致然耶？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 过去启民亡国，隋文帝不惜粟帛，大兴士众，营卫安护使之存立，到始毕时渐强，却起兵在雁门围困炀帝，如今颉利的败亡，大概是他背德忘义的报应吧。 
English: The emperor said, "In the past, when the Qin Dynasty was overthrown, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty spared no effort to protect and safeguard the people of Daxing, but in the end, when he was getting stronger and stronger, he started an army to besiege the Qin Dynasty at the Gate of the Wild Goose. The defeat of Qin Dynasty today is probably the retribution of his betrayal.

古文：颉利子叠罗支，有至性，既舍京师，诸妇得品供，罗支预焉；其母最后至，不得给，罗支不敢尝品肉。
现代文：颉利的儿子叠罗支，天性纯真。住在京师时，颉利家的妇女们都有按级别的供应，罗支也享用；他的生母最后才来，没有供应，罗支就不再吃肉。
English: When he was living in Beijing, the women in his family were all provided with food according to their ranks, and Luo Zhi also enjoyed it; his birth mother only came at the end, and without food, Luo Zhi no longer ate meat.

古文：帝闻，叹曰： 天禀仁孝，讵限华夷哉！ 
现代文：皇帝听说，感叹到 ：仁孝是天赐的人性，是没有华夷之分的。 
English: Upon hearing this, the emperor sighed: "Renko (benevolence and filial piety) is a God-given human trait, and there is no such thing as a Chinese or a barbarian.

古文：厚赐之，遂给母肉。
现代文：乃厚赐罗支，以供应他生母肉食。
English: but generously gave it to Lot, to be used as food for his family.

古文：八年，颉利死，赠归义王，谥曰荒，诏国人葬之，从其礼，火尸，起冢灞东。
现代文：贞观八年，颉利死，追赠为归义王，谥号荒，诏令其国人来葬，按照他们的礼节，焚尸，葬于灞水之东。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Gong Li died and was posthumously given the title of Guiyi Wang. He was given a posthumous name of Han and ordered his countrymen to come and bury him. In accordance with their etiquette, his body was burned and buried in the east of Surabaya.

古文：其臣胡禄达官吐谷浑邪者，颉利母婆施之媵臣也，颉利始生，以授浑邪，至是哀恸，乃自杀。
现代文：其旧臣胡禄达官吐谷浑邪，是颉利之母婆施陪嫁过来的臣子。颉利一出世，就交给浑邪。颉利死，哀痛至极，自刎而殉。
English: His former vassal, Huluda official, Tukiya Hanzaku, was a vassal who had been married off by Hari's mother-in-law, Shiro. As soon as Hari was born, he was handed over to Hanzaku. Hari died in great grief, hanged himself and died.

古文：帝异之，赠中郎将，命葬颉利冢旁，诏中书侍郎岑文本刻其事于颉利、浑邪之墓碑。
现代文：皇帝赞赏其忠义，追赠为中郎将，命葬颉利墓侧。诏令中书侍郎岑文本将其事刻在颉利、浑邪的墓碑上。
English: The emperor appreciated his loyalty, posthumously bestowed him with the title of middle vassal, and ordered him to be buried next to the tomb of Goryeo. The text of the imperial edict was engraved on the tombstone of Goryeo and Goryeo.

古文：俄苏尼失亦以死殉。
现代文：不久，苏尼失也自杀以殉。
English: Soon after, Suni also committed suicide.

古文：尼失者，启民可汗弟也。
现代文：尼失，是启民可汗的弟弟。
English: Ni Lu, is the younger brother of the Qimin Khan.

古文：始毕以为沙钵罗设，帐部五万，牙直灵州西北，姿雄趫，以仁惠御下，人多归之；颉利政乱，其部独不贰。
现代文：始毕任他为沙钵罗设，有帐部五万人，牙廷在灵州西北，身材雄健，待下属以仁惠，所以很多人愿归附他。颉利政乱时，他的部属却没有二心。
English: At the beginning of his term of office, he set up a branch office for 50,000 people in Sagara, and a palace in the northwest of Lingzhou. He was strong and healthy, and treated his subordinates with benevolence, so many people were willing to join him. When there was a political turmoil in Bali, his subordinates did not have a second thought.

古文：突利降，颉利以为小可汗。
现代文：突利降，颉利即封他为小可汗。
English: When Turi was demoted, Keli immediately made him a minor khan.

古文：颉利已败，乃举众来，漠南地遂空，授北宁州都督、右卫大将军，封怀德王云。
现代文：颉利败，苏尼失举国来降，漠南地遂空，皇帝任他为北宁州都督、右卫大将军，封爵怀德王。
English: Sunni was defeated, Sunni lost the country and came down, the south of the country was emptied, the emperor appointed him as the governor of Bie Ningshou, the right guard general, and the knighted King Huai De.

古文：颉利之亡，其下或走薛延陀，或入西域，而来降者尚十余万，诏议所宜，咸言： 突厥扰中国久，今天丧之，非慕义自归，请悉籍降俘，内兗、豫闲处，使习耕织，百万之虏，可化为齐人，是中国有加户，而漠北遂空也。 
现代文：颉利亡后，其下属有的投奔薛延陀，有的入西域，来降者有十多万。诏令商议如何安置他们。大家都说 ：突厥侵扰中国很久了，今天才丧国，他们并非慕义而自动来归附的，应该编入降俘籍，安置在兖、豫的空旷处，让他们学习耕田织布。百万突厥人，可化为庶民。这样中国增加了人口，而漠北就空而无患了。 
English: After the death of Keli, some of his subordinates went to Xueyantuo, some went to the western region, and there were more than a hundred thousand people who came down. The imperial edict discussed how to resettle them. Everyone said: The Turks have been invading China for a long time, and today they lost their country. They did not come to attach themselves automatically. They should be enrolled as surrendered prisoners of war and resettled in the open spaces of Yao and Hen, and let them learn to farm and weave cloth. A million Turks can be turned into ordinary people. In this way, China has increased its population, and the desert north is empty and safe.

古文：中书令温彦博请： 如汉建武时，置降匈奴留五原塞，全其部落，以为捍蔽，不革其俗，因而抚之，实空虚之地，且示无所猜。
现代文：中书令温彦博则建议说 ：可效法汉建武时的做法，将已降匈奴留在五原塞，保全其部落，作为我们的藩屏。不改变他们的习俗，就此而抚慰。充实空虚之地，表示对他们无所猜忌。
English: On the other hand, Wen Yanbo, a member of the Central Committee, suggested that we should follow the example of Han Jianwu, and keep the defeated Huns in the Five Great Plains, preserve their tribes, and use them as our bannermen. We should not change their customs, and comfort them with this. We should fill the empty space, and show that we have no suspicion of them.

古文：若内兗、豫，则乖本性，非函育之道。 
现代文：假如放他们在兖、豫，拗逆了他们的本性，不是我宽容教化之道。 
English: If we let them run wild and go against their nature, this is not my way of tolerance and enlightenment.

古文：秘书监魏征建言： 突厥世为中国仇，今其来降，不即诛灭，当遣还河北。
现代文：秘书监魏征建议 ：突厥世代为中国仇敌，如今来降。不全部诛灭就应让他们回到黄河以北。
English: Secretary Guan Wei Zheng suggested: The Turkic generation is the enemy of China, and now they are coming down. If they are not completely annihilated, they should be allowed to return to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：彼鸟兽野心，非我族类，弱则伏，强则叛，其天性也。
现代文：他们是禽兽心，不是我同类人，小弱时驯服，强盛了就叛变，其天性如此。
English: They are animal-minded, not my kind of people, tame when small and weak, and rebel when strong, this is their nature.

古文：且秦、汉以锐师猛将击取河南地为郡县者，以不欲使近中国也。
现代文：秦汉时以锐师猛将攻取黄河以南之地设立郡县，是不想让他们靠近中国。
English: The Qin and Han dynasties set up counties by conquering the land south of the Yellow River with their sharp divisions. They did not want to let them get close to China.

古文：陛下奈何以河南居之？
现代文：陛下为什么让他们居于黄河之南？
English: Your Majesty, why do you let them live south of the Yellow River?

古文：且降者十万，若令数年，孳息略倍，而近在畿甸，心腹疾也。 
现代文：况且他们有十万之众，再过几年，繁衍近倍，又靠近京畿，是心腹之患。 
English: Moreover, they have a hundred thousand people, and in a few years, they will multiply nearly double, and they are close to Gyeonggi, which is a problem for their relatives.

古文：彦博曰： 不然，天子于四夷，若天地养万物，覆载全安之，今突厥破灭，余种归命，不加哀怜而弃之，非天地蒙覆之义，而有阻四夷之嫌。
现代文：温彦博说 ：不，天子对于四夷，就像天地养育万物一样爱护保养。现突厥破灭，其人民来归顺，我们不加哀怜而弃之不顾，失去天覆地载的大义，而有阻隘四夷的恶嫌。
English: Wen Yanbo said, "No, the Son of Heaven cherishes and maintains the Shi'i people just as heaven and earth nurture all things. Now that the Turkic Empire has collapsed and its people have come to submit, we have no pity for them and have abandoned them. We have lost the great righteousness that covers the heavens and the earth, and we have the disgust of obstructing the Shi'i people."

古文：臣谓处以河南，盖死而生之，亡而存之，彼世将怀德，何叛之为？ 
现代文：臣说让他们居河之南，是让他们处死地而复生，国虽亡而人存。他们将会世代感德，怎么会叛呢？ 
English: The vassal said that to let them live south of the river was to let them die and come back to life. Although the country is dead, the people still exist. They will feel virtuous for generations. How could they rebel?

古文：徵曰： 魏时有胡落分处近郡，晋已平吴，郭钦、江统劝武帝逐出之，不能用。
现代文：魏征说： 魏时有胡人部落散处近郡，晋已平了吴，郭钦、江统劝武帝将他们驱逐出境，武帝不采纳。
English: Wei Zheng said: In the Wei Dynasty, there were Hu tribes scattered in the vicinity of the county, and the Jin Dynasty had already leveled Wu. Guo Qin and Jiang Tong persuaded Emperor Wu to expel them from the country, but Emperor Wu did not accept.

古文：刘、石之乱，卒倾中夏。
现代文：后来刘、石之乱，终于倾覆中夏。
English: Later, Liu, the Stone Rebellion, and finally the overthrow of Zhongxia.

古文：陛下必欲引突厥居河南，所谓养虎自遗患者也。 
现代文：陛下若一定要让突厥处居河南，这是养虎遗患啊。 
English: If His Majesty must allow the Turkic Office to stay in Henan, this is the legacy of raising tigers.

古文：彦博曰： 圣人之道无不通，故曰 有教无类 。
现代文：温彦博说 ：圣人之道无处不通，所以说 有教无类 。
English: Wen Yanbo said, "The path of a sage leads nowhere, so there is no such thing as a learned person."

古文：彼创残之余，以穷归我，我援护之，收处内地，将教以礼法，职以耕农，又选酋良入宿卫，何患之恤？
现代文：他们劫后余生来投奔。我帮助爱护他们，收他们留在内地，教以礼法，让他们耕织自给，再选择好酋领入宿卫，哪会生什么祸患？
English: They fled for the rest of their lives after the abduction. I helped to love and care for them, kept them in the inland, taught them etiquette, let them cultivate and weave for self-sufficiency, and then choose a good chief to lead them to the innkeeper. What kind of disaster will happen?

古文：且光武置南单于，卒无叛亡。 
现代文：且汉光武帝置南单于于内郡，从无叛逆之事。 
English: Moreover, Emperor Han Guangwu placed Nan Shan in Yuni County, and there was never any rebellion.

古文：于是中书侍郎颜师古、给事中杜楚客、礼部侍郎李百药等皆劝帝不如使处河北，树首长，俾统部落，视地多少，令不相臣，国小权分，终不得亢衡中国，长辔远驭之道也。
现代文：那时，中书侍郎颜师古、给事中杜楚客、礼部侍郎李百药等人都劝皇帝让突厥安顿在黄河之北，树立酋长让他统率部落，彼此平等，这样国小权分，不可能与中国相抗衡，这就是长辔远驭之道。
English: At that time, Yan Shigu, the attendant of the Chinese book, Du Chu, the attendant of the ceremony, and Li Baiyao, the attendant of the ceremony, all advised the emperor to let the Turks settle in the north of the Yellow River, establish a chief and let him lead the tribe, and be equal to each other. Such a small power is impossible to compete with China. This is the way of long-distance control.

古文：帝主彦博语，卒度朔方地，自幽州属灵州，建顺、祐、化、长四州为都督府，剖颉利故地，左置定襄都督、右置云中都督二府统之。
现代文：皇帝同意温彦博的意见，在朔方自幽州至灵州，设置顺？化、长四州都督府；又分颉利的旧地为六州，左置定襄都督，右设云中都督二府统辖。
English: The emperor agreed with the opinion of Wen Yanbo, and set up the Shunhua and Changshu four prefectural governorates in the Shuo side from Yuzhou to Lingzhou; and the old place of division was six prefectures, with the Dingxiang governorate on the left and the Yunzhong governorate on the right.

古文：擢酋豪为将军、郎将者五百人，奉朝请者且百员，入长安自籍者数千户。
现代文：提拔酋豪为将军、郎将的有五百人，布列朝廷奉朝请的有百多人，因而入长安籍的有几千户。
English: There are five hundred people who have promoted chiefs to generals and lieutenants, and more than a hundred people have been invited by the Bure court to serve the court, so there are several thousand households registered in Chang'an.

古文：乃以突利可汗为顺州都督，令率其下就部。
现代文：委任突利可汗为顺州都督，率其下属就其部落。
English: Appointed Turi Khan as the governor of Shunzhou, and led his subordinates to their tribes.

古文：突利初为泥步设，得隋淮南公主以为妻。
现代文：突利，起初是泥步设，得隋淮南公主为妻。
English: Turi, originally a mud-walker, married the princess of Sui and Huainan.

古文：颉利之立，用次弟为延陀设，主延陀部，步利设主部，统特勒主胡部，斛特勒主斛薛部，以突利可汗主契丹、靺鞨部，树牙南直幽州，东方之众皆属焉。
现代文：颉利即位后，用兄弟为延陀设，主管延陀部，步利设主管靅部，统特勒主管胡部，斛特勒主管斛薛部，派突利可汗统契丹、部，其牙廷南接幽州。东方之众皆来归属。
English: After the enthronement of Khari, the brothers were set up as Yandu, in charge of the Yandu Department, Bu Li was set up in charge of the Shun Department, the ruler was in charge of the Hu Department, the ruler was in charge of the Xue Department, the Turi Khan was in charge of the Khitan and Xue Departments, and his court was south of Yuzhou. Everyone in the East came to belong.

古文：突利敛取无法，下不附，故薛延陀、奚、等皆内属，颉利遣击之，又大败，众骚离，颉利囚捶之，久乃赦。
现代文：突利征税无定规，下属有怨心。所以薛延陀、奚、靅等都来归附。颉利派突利去讨伐，突利大败。兵众骚乱离散，颉利将他囚禁鞭打，很久才放他。
English: There was no fixed rule for the taxation of Turi, and his subordinates were resentful. Therefore, Xue Yanta, Zou, Zou, etc. all came to join. Zou sent Turi to fight, and Turi was defeated. The soldiers rioted and dispersed, and Zou kept him in prison and whipped him, before releasing him for a long time.

古文：突利尝自结于太宗，及颉利衰，骤追兵于突利，不肯从，因起相攻。
现代文：突利曾自己与太宗结好，及至颉利势衰，骤然向突利征兵，突利不从，于是两人相攻。
English: Turi had once been friendly with Taizong, and when Turi's power waned, he suddenly conscripted soldiers from Turi. Turi did not comply, so the two attacked each other.

古文：突利请入朝，帝谓左右曰： 古为国者劳己以忧人，则系祚长；役人以奉己，则亡。
现代文：突利要求入朝。皇帝对左右说 ：古代的国君劳己而为百姓，国运就长；奴役他人自己享受的，国家就亡，现在突厥内乱，是因可汗不行君职所致。
English: The emperor said to the right and left, "In ancient times, the sovereign worked hard for the people, and the nation prospered; when he enslaved others for his own enjoyment, the nation perished. The current turmoil in Turkey is caused by the khan's failure to perform his duties as monarch.

古文：夷狄弱则边境安，然观彼亡，我不可以无惧，有不逮者，祸可纾乎！ 
现代文：突利是他至亲，不能自保而前来。虽夷狄弱则边境安。但看他的败亡，我不能不警惕，担心自己有做得不好的地方也会引起祸变。 
English: Turkey is his closest relative, and he cannot come to protect himself. Although he is weak, the border is safe. But looking at his defeat, I cannot but be on my guard, fearing that if I do something badly, it will cause a disaster.

古文：突利至，礼见良厚，辍膳以赐之，拜右卫大将军，封北平郡王，食户七百。
现代文：突利来后，太宗厚礼相待，赐以御膳，授官右卫大将军，封爵北平郡王，食户七百。
English: After Turi's arrival, Emperor Taizong treated him with great courtesy, bestowed him with imperial meals, conferred him the title of Udaidaijin (Major General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards), knighted him as the King of Beiping County, and provided him with seven hundred eateries.

古文：及为都督，太宗敕曰： 而祖启民破亡，隋则复之，弃德不报，而父始毕反为隋敌。
现代文：及至任突利为顺州都督，皇帝对他说 ：以前你的祖父启民亡失兵马，隋扶助复立。受恩不报，你的父亲始毕反为隋敌。
English: When Turi was appointed as the governor of Shunzhou, the emperor said to him, "In the past, your grandfather, Qimin, was killed and his army was defeated, and Sui Dynasty helped him to be restored to power. However, your father became an enemy of Sui Dynasty.

古文：尔今穷来归我，所以不立尔为可汗，鉴前败也。
现代文：你今日困窘来归顺我。我所以不立你为可汗，正因为前车之鉴。
English: You have humbled yourself today and submitted to me. That is why I did not appoint you as khan, precisely because of the precedent.

古文：我欲中国安，尔宗族不亡，故授尔都督，毋相侵掠，长为我北籓。 
现代文：我希望中国久安，你宗族也不会灭亡。所以任你都督，不得再相互侵掠，永为我北方的藩屏。 
English: I hope that China will be stable for a long time, and your clan will not perish. Therefore, I will let you be the governor of the capital, and you will no longer be able to invade and plunder each other, and you will always be my northern Han screen.

古文：突利顿首听命。
现代文：突利跪拜听命。
English: Turi kneeled and obeyed.

古文：后入朝，死并州道中，年二十九，帝为举哀，亦诏文本文其墓，子贺逻鹘嗣。帝幸九成宫，突利弟结社率以郎将宿卫，阴结种人谋反，劫贺逻鹘北还，谓其党曰： 我闻晋王丁夜得辟仗出，我乘间突进，可犯行在。 是夕，大风冥，王不出，结社率恐谋漏，即射中营，噪而杀人，卫十等共击之，乃走，杀厩人盗马，欲度渭，徼逻禽斩之，赦贺逻鹘，投岭外。
现代文：我可乘开门之机突进宫内。 这夜，大风，晋王不出宫。结社率怕谋反事泄露，即以箭射中营，呐喊着杀入。卫士们奋击，结社率逃出，杀了养马人盗马欲渡渭水，被追上斩杀。赦贺逻鹘死罪，流放岭外。
English: I can take advantage of the opportunity to open the door and rush into the palace. On this night, there was a strong wind, and the king of Jin did not leave the palace. The leaders of the association were afraid that the plot would leak out, so they shot arrows into the camp and shouted to kill. The guards fought hard, the leaders of the association escaped, killed the horse breeder who wanted to steal the horse to cross the water, and was chased and killed. He Luo was pardoned for the crime of death and exiled outside the ridge.

古文：于是群臣更言处突厥中国非是，帝亦患之，乃立阿史那思摩为乙弥泥孰俟利苾可汗，赐氏李，树牙河北，悉徙突厥还故地。
现代文：于是群臣都改口说把突厥安置在中国不对，皇帝也以之为患，乃立阿史那思摩为乙弥泥孰俟利絆可汗，赐姓李，建牙廷在河之北。又将全部突厥人迁回故地。
English: As a result, the ministers changed their minds and said that it was not right to settle the Turks in China, and the emperor also took it as a misfortune. He made Ashina Sima a khan, gave him the surname Li, and built a palace in the north of the river. He also moved all the Turks back to their homeland.

古文：思摩，颉利族人也，父曰咄六设。
现代文：思摩，颉利的族人，父亲叫咄六设。
English: Sima, a member of the Guili ethnic group, has a father named Zhu Ruxie.

古文：始，启民奔隋，碛北诸部奉思摩为可汗，启民归国，乃去可汗号。
现代文：当初，启民投奔隋，碛北的各部拥戴思摩为可汗。启民归国，就去掉可汗的称号。
English: At first, Qimin went to the Sui Dynasty, and various departments in northern Shandong Province supported Sima as khan. When Qimin returned to China, the title of khan was removed.

古文：性开敏，善占对，始毕、处罗皆爱之。
现代文：他性格开朗思维敏捷，善于占对，始毕、处罗都很喜欢他。
English: His personality is cheerful, his thinking is quick, he is good at guessing right, and I like him from the beginning to the end.

古文：然以貌似胡，疑非阿史那种，故但为夹毕特勒，而不得为设。
现代文：但因他的相貌很像胡人，怀疑他不是阿史那的族类，所以只能当夹毕特勒而不能当设。
English: However, because his appearance is very similar to that of the Hu people, it is suspected that he is not a member of the Ashina tribe, so he can only be a Bittler and cannot be set up.

古文：武德初，数以使者来，高祖嘉其诚，封和顺郡王。
现代文：武德初年，多次任使者入朝。高祖赞赏他的诚朴，封他为和顺郡王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wude's reign, he repeatedly sent envoys to the imperial court. Emperor Gaozhu appreciated his sincerity and named him the King of Heshun County.

古文：及诸部纳款，思摩独留，与颉利俱禽，太宗以为忠，授右武候大将军、化州都督，统颉利故部居河南，徙怀化郡王。
现代文：及至各部都归顺中国，思摩却留在颉利身边，与颉利同时被擒。太宗赏识他的忠心，委任他为右武侯大将军、化州都督，管辖颉利的旧部居于河南，改封怀化郡王。
English: When all the provinces had surrendered to China, Sima remained with Keli and was executed at the same time as Keli. Taizong appreciated his loyalty and appointed him as the grand marshal of the Right Wu and the governor of Huazhou. He governed Keli's former province in Henan and was given the title of King of Huaihua County.

古文：及是将徙，内畏薛延陀，不敢出塞。
现代文：当部落将迁徙时，思摩害怕薛延陀，不敢出塞。
English: When the tribe is about to migrate, Sima is afraid of Xue Yantuo and does not dare to leave the village.

古文：帝诏司农卿郭嗣本持节赐延陀书，言： 中国礼义，未始灭人国，以颉利暴残，伐而取之，非贪其地与人也。
现代文：皇帝诏令司农卿郭嗣本持节去赐薛延陀信 ：中国是礼义之邦，从不灭人之国。只是因为颉利残暴，才伐而取之，并非贪得他的土地与人民。
English: The emperor ordered the Secretary of Agriculture, Guo Zhi, to give Xue Yan Duan a letter on this auspicious day: China is a country of courtesy and justice, a country that never exterminates people. It was only because of the brutality of Han Li that he was able to take it, not because he was greedy for his land and people.

古文：故处降部于河南，荐草美泉，利其畜牧，众日孳蕃，今复以思摩为可汗，还其故疆。
现代文：之所以要把降部安顿在河南，是因为那里草茂水美，便于放牧。现在他们人口牛羊日渐增多，再立思摩为可汗，还他故土。
English: The reason why they want to settle the descendants in Henan is because the grass is lush and the water is beautiful there, making it easy to graze. Now their population of cattle and sheep is increasing day by day, and they have re-appointed Sima as khan and returned him to his native land.

古文：延陀受命在前，长于突厥，举碛以北，延陀主之；其南，突厥保之。
现代文：延陀受命在前，大于突厥。整个碛北，由你们统辖；碛南，则由突厥守护。
English: The whole of northern Gansu is under your control, while southern Gansu is under the protection of the Turks.

古文：各守而境，无相钞犯，有负约，我自以兵诛之。 
现代文：今后各守其境，不得相互侵犯。如有负约的，我将以兵问罪。 
English: From now on, each side will keep to its own borders and must not encroach on the other side. If there is a breach of contract, I will hold the soldiers responsible.

古文：思摩乃行，帝为置酒，引思摩前曰： 莳一草一木，见其溺庑以为喜，况我养尔部人，息尔马羊，不减昔乎！
现代文：思摩这才出发。皇帝为他饯行，把思摩叫到跟前说 ：莳弄一草一木，见它繁茂就心中高兴，何况我对你们部落育人养畜，见不少于往昔，能不高兴吗？
English: Then Sima set out. The emperor walked behind him and called Sima forward and said, "I have been tending to every blade of grass and tree, and when I see it flourishing, I feel happy. Moreover, I see your tribes raising people and livestock no less than in the past. Can I not be happy?"

古文：尔父母坟墓在河北，今复旧廷，故宴以慰行。 
现代文：你父母的坟墓在黄河北，现在恢复你的旧国，为你送行。 
English: Your parents' graves are in the north of the Yellow River, now restore your old country and see you off.

古文：思摩泣下，奉觞上万岁寿，且言： 破亡之余，陛下使存骨旧乡，愿子孙世世事唐，以报厚德。 
现代文：思摩泪下，敬酒说： 我们亡国之余，陛下能让我们回到家乡。愿子孙世代都臣服于唐，以报厚德。 
English: With tears in her eyes, Shima said in a toast, "Even though we have lost our country, Your Majesty can let us return to our hometown. May all future generations submit to the Tang Dynasty and repay its kindness."

古文：于是赵郡王孝恭、鸿胪卿刘善就思摩部，筑坛场河上，拜受册，赐鼓纛，又诏左屯卫将军阿史那忠为左贤王，左武卫将军阿史那泥孰为右贤王，相之。
现代文：于是赵郡王孝恭、鸿胪卿刘善就思摩部，在河上筑坛场册封思摩，并赐鼓旗。又诏令左屯卫将军阿史那忠为左贤王，左武卫将军阿史那泥孰为右贤王，任思摩可汗之相。
English: As a result, Zhao Gu Wang Xiaogong and Honglu Jing Liu Shan made Shima a member of the imperial family, and built an altar on the river to enshrine Shima, and gave him a drum banner. They also made Zuo Tunwei General Ashina Zhong the Zuo Xian Wang, and Zuo Wuwei General Ashina Mudan the Zuo Xian Wang, and appointed Shima the Khan's consort.

古文：薛延陀闻突厥之北，恐其众奔亡度碛，勒兵以待。
现代文：薛延陀听说突厥北上，担心他的人马会渡碛而北，整兵以待。
English: When Xue Yantuo heard that the Turks were heading north, he was worried that his men would cross the river and head north.

古文：及使者至，乃谢曰： 天子诏毋相侵，谨顿首奉诏。
现代文：及至使者到达见了天子的信，说： 天子诏令我们不得相互侵扰，我们一定守约。
English: When the messenger arrived, he saw a letter from the Son of Heaven, saying: The Son of Heaven has ordered that we must not interfere with each other, and we must keep the covenant.

古文：然突厥酣乱翻覆，其未亡时杀中国人如麻，陛下灭其国，谓宜收种落皆为奴婢，以偿唐人。
现代文：只是突厥反复难信，在他们灭亡前，杀中国人如麻。陛下歼灭其国，应该将他们收作奴婢偿唐人。
English: However, the Turks repeatedly refused to believe it, and before their demise, they killed as many Chinese as they could. His Majesty annihilated their country, and they should be collected as slaves to repay the Tang people.

古文：乃养之如子，而结社率竟反，此不可信明甚。
现代文：现养之如子而结社率竟反叛，正说明他们的不可信任。
English: The fact that the leaders of the association rebelled against the current leader shows that they cannot be trusted.

古文：后有乱，请终为陛下诛之。 
现代文：以后有乱，我愿为陛下除害。 
English: If there is any trouble in the future, I am willing to do my best for His Majesty.

古文：十五年，思摩帅众十余万、胜兵四万、马九万匹始度河，牙于故定襄城，其地南大河，北白道，畜牧广衍，龙荒之最壤，故突厥争利之。
现代文：贞观十五年，思摩带领十多万人民、精兵四万、马九万匹渡黄河，建牙廷于旧定襄城。其地南为大河，北是白道，土地广袤，水草肥沃。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Sima led more than 100,000 people, 40,000 elite soldiers and 90,000 horses to cross the Yellow River and built a palace in the old Dingxiang City. Its south is the big river, the north is the white road, the land is vast, and the aquatic plants are fertile.

古文：思摩遣使谢曰： 蒙恩立为落长，实望世世为国一犬，守吠天子北门，有如延陀侵逼，愿入保长城。 
现代文：思摩派使者入谢说： 蒙恩立为部落长，切望世世为国家的狗，守卫天子的北门。如果延陀来侵犯逼迫，希望能入关保长城。 
English: Sima sent an envoy to thank him, saying, "I have been favored with the position of tribal chief, and I long to be the dog of the country, guarding the northern gate of the Son of Heaven. If Yenda comes to invade and persecute, I hope to enter and protect the Great Wall."

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇帝允许。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：居三年，不能得其众，下多携背，思摩惭，因入朝愿留宿卫，更拜右武卫将军。
现代文：三年中，思摩不能服众，下属多有二心。思摩很惭愧，要求入朝留宿卫，乃改任右武卫将军。
English: During the three years, Sima was unable to obey the public, and his subordinates were mostly of two minds. Sima was very ashamed and asked to enter the imperial palace to stay as a night watchman, but he was changed to the general of the right guard.

古文：从伐辽，中流矢，帝为吮血，其顾厚类此。
现代文：后随从去伐辽，被流矢击中，皇帝亲自替他吮血。
English: After that, he went to Liao, was hit by a stray arrow, and the emperor personally drew blood for him.

古文：还，卒京师，赠兵部尚书、夏州都督，陪葬昭陵，筑坟象白道山，为刊其劳，碑于化州。
现代文：班师，死于京师，追赠兵部尚书、夏州都督，陪葬昭陵，筑坟像白道山，将其功劳刻碑立于化州。
English: Banshi, died in Beijing Division, posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu of the Military Department, the governor of Xiazhou, accompanied the funeral of Zhaoling, built a tomb like Baidu Mountain, and erected a monument to his merits in Huazhou.

古文：右贤王阿史那泥孰，苏尼失子也。
现代文：右贤王阿史那泥孰，是苏尼失的儿子。
English: Ashina Mudra, the Right-Handed Sage, is the lost son of Sunni.

古文：始归国，妻以宗女，赐名忠。
现代文：刚归附时，曾将宗室女嫁他，赐名为忠。
English: When he first became a vassal, he married his daughter-in-law and gave her the name of Tadazane.

古文：及从思摩出塞，思慕中国，见使者必流涕求入侍，许之。
现代文：后来随思摩出塞，常思念中国，每见使者必流泪请求入朝侍卫，皇帝同意。
English: Later, he often thought about China, and whenever he saw an envoy, he would tearfully request to join the imperial bodyguard, and the emperor agreed.

古文：思摩既不能国，残众稍稍南度河，分处胜、夏二州。
现代文：思摩不能治国，其部众渐渐渡河而南，分居于胜、夏二州。
English: Sima could not govern the country, and his followers gradually moved south across the river, living separately in Sheng and Xia Erzhou.

古文：帝伐辽，或言突厥处河南，迩京师，请帝无东。
现代文：皇帝伐辽，有人说突厥居于河南，靠近京师，请求皇帝不要东去。
English: Some people say that the Turk lived in Henan, near Beijing, and asked the emperor not to go to the East.

古文：帝曰： 夫为君者，岂有猜贰哉！
现代文：皇帝说： 作为一个国君，怎么能对人猜疑呢！
English: The emperor said, "As a sovereign, how can you be suspicious of others?

古文：汤、武化桀、纣之民，无不迁善，有隋无道，举天下皆叛，非止夷狄也。
现代文：汤、武教化桀、纣的人民，没一个不变好了的；有隋无道，全天下都叛，不光是夷狄。
English: The people of Tang, Wushu, and Qin, none of them are unchanging and good; there are Sui and non-Sui, and the whole world is rebellious, not just the Yidi.

古文：朕闵突厥之亡，内河南以振赡之，彼不近走延陀而远归我，怀我深矣，朕策五十年中国无突厥患。 
现代文：我怜恤突厥之亡，收容他们在河南赈济之。他们不就近去投奔延陀而远来归附我，是感我之恩。我的政策能使中国五十年不会有突厥之患。 
English: I pity the death of the Turks, I shelter them in Henan and provide for them. I am grateful that they do not go as far as Yanda to join me. My policy can keep China free of the Turkic plague for fifty years.

古文：思摩众既南，车鼻可汗乃盗有其地。
现代文：思摩的部众南来后，车鼻可汗就窃据了其地。
English: After the southward migration of the followers of Sima, the Khitan Khan took possession of the land.

古文：车鼻，亦阿史那族，而突利部人也，名斛勃，世为小可汗。
现代文：车鼻，也是阿史那族，是突利部的人，名斛勃，世为小可汗。
English: Che Xuan, also of the Ashina tribe, was a member of the Turi clan, famous for being a minor khan.

古文：颉利败，诸部欲共君长之，会薛延陀称可汗，乃往归焉。
现代文：颉利败，诸部想推他为君长。其时薛延陀称可汗，于是去归附延陀。
English: He was defeated, and various departments wanted to promote him as the ruler. At that time, Xue Yanta was called Khan, so he went to attach himself to Yanta.

古文：其为人沈果有智数，众颇便附，延陀畏逼，将杀之，乃率所部遯去，骑数千尾追，不胜。
现代文：他为人沉稳果毅有谋略，颇得众人信赖。延陀畏忌，想杀他。
English: He was a calm, resolute, and resourceful person, and was trusted by many people. Yan Tuo was afraid of him and wanted to kill him.

古文：窜金山之北，三垂斗绝，惟一面可容车骑，壤土夷博，即据之，胜兵三万，自称乙注车鼻可汗，距长安万里，西葛逻禄，北结骨，皆并统之，时时出掠延陀人畜。
现代文：于是带领旧部逃走。延陀几千人马追杀过来，不胜。车鼻窜入金山之北，三面都是绝壁，只一面可通行车马，那里平坦宽广就据而有之，自称乙注车鼻可汗，有精兵三万。离长安有万里，西是葛逻禄，北有结骨，他一并统管了，常常出来掠夺延陀的人畜。
English: So he led the old group to escape. Several thousand people and horses from Yenda chased and killed him, but they were not able to defeat him. The bridgehead plunged into the north of Jinshan Mountain. The three sides were cliffs, and only one side was passable for horses and carts. It was flat and wide, so he called himself the Khan of the Bridgehead. He had 30,000 elite soldiers. He was thousands of miles away from Chang'an. To the west was Ge Lu Lu, and to the north was Keng Jian. He controlled everything, and often came out to plunder the people and animals of Yenda.

古文：延陀后衰，车鼻势益张。
现代文：后来延陀衰微，车鼻势力渐张。
English: Later, Yanda waned, and the influence of the chariot nose gradually expanded.

古文：二十一年，遣子沙钵罗特勒献方物，且请身入朝。
现代文：贞观二十一年，派儿子沙钵罗特勒来献土产，要求亲自入朝。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, he sent his son, Shaju Rottler, to present the local produce and asked to enter the imperial court in person.

古文：帝遣云麾将军安调遮、右屯卫郎将韩华往迎之，至则车鼻偃然无入朝意，华谋与葛逻禄共劫之，车鼻觉，华与车鼻子陟苾特勒斗死，调遮被杀。
现代文：皇帝派云麾将军安调遮、右屯卫郎将韩华前往迎接。到了而车鼻却没有入朝的意思。韩华打算与葛逻禄共同胁持他来朝。车鼻发觉了，韩华与车鼻的儿子陟絆特勒斗而死，安调遮被杀。
English: The emperor sent General Yunjong An and Utonweiro to meet Han Hua. When they arrived, Che Niu had no intention of going to the North. Han Hua planned to coerce him to come to the North together with Ge Lulu. Che Niu found out, and Han Hua and Che Niu's son, Hao Kuntler, fought to the death, and An was killed.

古文：帝怒，遣右骁卫郎将高偘发回纥、仆骨兵击之，其大酋长歌逻禄泥孰阙俟利发、处木昆莫贺咄俟斤等以次降。
现代文：皇帝怒，派右骁卫郎将高亻品调拨回纥、仆骨的兵去讨伐。车鼻的大酋长歌逻禄泥孰阙俟利发、处木昆莫贺咄俟斤等人相继来降。
English: Enraged, the emperor sent Yu Xianwei to send Gao Xianpin back to the capital, and his subordinate soldiers to fight. The great chieftain Gaoluo Luo, the muddler Li Fa, the wood cutter Kunmo He, and others came down one after another.

古文：偘师攻阿息山，部落不肯战，车鼻携爱妾，从数百骑走；追至金山，获之，献京师。
现代文：高亻品率师攻阿息山，部落不肯战，车鼻带了妻妾及几百人马逃走。高亻品追到金山将他拿获，传送京师。
English: Gao Yuxin led his division to attack Mount Aixi, but the tribe refused to fight. He fled with his wife and concubine and several hundred people. Gao Yuxin chased him to Jinshan, captured him, and sent him to the capital.

古文：高宗责曰： 颉利败，尔不辅，无亲也；延陀破，尔遯亡，不忠也。
现代文：高宗责备他说： 颉利败，你不帮助，是无亲；延陀破，你逃跑，是不忠。
English: Gaozong reproached him, saying: "If you do not help, you are not a relative; if you run away, you are disloyal.

古文：而罪当死，然朕见先帝所获酋长必宥之，今原而死。 
现代文：你罪该死。但我看见先帝擒获酋长后都赦免了他们，我今天也免你死罪。 
English: Your crime deserves death. But I saw that the former emperor pardoned all the chiefs after they were captured, and today I will also spare you the death penalty.

古文：乃释缚，数俘社庙，又见昭陵。
现代文：替他解缚，告祭社庙，又去昭陵拜谒。
English: They freed him, offered sacrifice to the shrine and temple, and went to the Shoryo Mausoleum to pay homage.

古文：拜左武卫将军，赐居第，处其众郁督军山，诏建狼山都督府统之。
现代文：任车鼻为左武卫将军，赐给宅第。将其部属安顿在郁督军山，建狼山都督府统辖。
English: He appointed Che Hna as General Zuo Wuwei and gave him a mansion. He settled his subordinates in Ikutoku Army Hill and established the Wolf Mountain Governor's Office.

古文：初，其子羯漫陀泣谏车鼻，请归国，不听。乃遣子庵铄入朝，后来降，拜左屯卫将军，建新黎州，使领其众。
现代文：当初，车鼻的儿子羯漫陀曾哭着劝谏过他，请他归附，他不听，于是派儿子庵铄入朝，后归附，授左屯卫将军，设置新黎州，由他统率其众。
English: At first, Chehana's son, Jomanda, had pleaded with him in tears, begging him to return, but he did not listen, so he sent his son, Han Xuan, to the court, and then to return, to be awarded the title of General of Zuotunwei, to establish Xinli Prefecture, and for him to lead his people.

古文：于是突厥尽为封疆臣矣。
现代文：至此突厥酋领均为封疆臣了。
English: At this point, the Turkic chieftains were all feudal vassals.

古文：始置单于都护府领狼山云中桑乾三都督、苏农等二十四州，瀚海都护府领金微新黎等七都督、仙萼贺兰等八州。
现代文：于是置单于都护府，统领狼山、云中、桑乾三都督以及苏农等二十四州；置瀚海都护府，统领金微、新黎等七都督以及仙萼、贺兰等八州。
English: As a result, he placed Shan in the Capital Protectorate, leading the three capitals of Wolf Mountain, Yunzhong, and Kuangqian, as well as 24 states such as Sunon; and placed Hanhai in the Capital Protectorate, leading seven capitals such as Jinwei and Xinli, and eight states such as Xiancai and Helan.

古文：即擢领酋为都督、刺史。
现代文：各以其酋领为都督、刺史。
English: Each with its own chieftain as governor and chief historian.

古文：麟德初，改燕然为瀚海都护府，领回纥，徙故瀚海都护府于古云中城，号云中都护府，碛以北蕃州悉隶瀚海，南隶云中。
现代文：麟德初年，改燕然为瀚海都护府，回纥属之。将原瀚海都护府迁到云中城，称为云中都护府。大碛以北的蕃州全隶属瀚海，碛以南的则隶属云中。
English: In the first year of Lin De, Yan Ran was changed to Hanhai Capital Protectorate, which belonged to Yunnan. The original Hanhai Capital Protectorate was moved to Yunzhong City, known as Yunzhong Capital Protectorate. The whole of Luzhou to the north of Dalat belongs to Hanhai, and the south of Luzhou belongs to Yunzhong.

古文：云中者，义成公主所居也，颉利灭，李靖徙突厥羸破数百帐居之，以阿史德为之长，众稍盛，即建言愿以诸王为可汗，遥统之。
现代文：云中，是义成公主的居地。颉利破灭后，李靖将突厥破弱的几百帐迁到此地，派阿史德为酋长。以后渐盛，建议请诸王为可汗遥控。
English: Yunzhong is the residence of Princess Yicheng. After the collapse of the Han Dynasty, Li Jing moved several hundred weakened Turkic tribes to this place and appointed Ashide as the chieftain. After the gradual prosperity, it was suggested to ask the kings to remotely control the khan.

古文：帝曰： 今可汗，古单于也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 今日的可汗，就是古代的单于。 
English: The emperor said, "Today's khan is the same as the ancient Shanyu.

古文：乃改云中府为单于大都护府，以殷王旭轮为单于都护。
现代文：于是改云中府为单于大都护府，派殷王旭轮为单于都护。
English: Therefore, he changed Yunzhongfu to Daduofu and sent Yin Wangxulan to Duduo.

古文：帝封禅，都督葛逻禄叱利等三十余人皆从至泰山下，已封，诏勒名于封禅碑云。
现代文：皇帝封禅泰山，都督葛逻禄叱利等三十多人都随从到泰山下。封禅毕，诏令刻名字在封禅碑上。
English: More than 30 people, including the emperor, the Fuzhen Taishan, and the governor, Ge Luo Luo Shengli, followed him to the foot of Mount Tai. After the Fuzhen, the imperial edict engraved his name on the Fuzhen monument.

古文：凡三十年北方无戎马警。
现代文：以后三十年北方无事。
English: Nothing happened in the north for the next thirty years.

古文：调露初，单于府大酋温傅、奉职二部反，立阿史那泥孰匐为可汗，二十四州酋长皆叛应之。
现代文：调露初年，单于府大酋温傅、奉职二部反叛，立阿史那泥孰匐为可汗，二十四州酋长都叛应。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, only the prefectural grand chieftain Wenfu rebelled, and two subordinate officials rebelled. Ashina Mudan was appointed khan, and the twenty-four provincial chieftains all rebelled.

古文：乃以鸿胪卿单于大都护府长史萧嗣业、左领军卫将军苑大智、右千牛卫将军李景嘉讨之，恃胜不设备，会雨雪，士皲寒，反为虏袭，大败，杀略万余人，大智等收余卒，行且战，乃免。
现代文：于是派鸿胪卿单于大都护府长史萧嗣业、左领军卫将军苑大智、右千牛卫将军李景嘉合力讨伐。众人自恃兵马强盛，不设备。正遇下雪，士兵苦于寒冷，反被突厥偷袭，大败，被杀一万多人。苑大智收聚余众且行且战，得免。
English: As a result, Hong Jieqing sent a single crusade to the governor of Datu-fu, Shi Xiao Zi Ye, the left leader of the army, General Yuan Dazhi, and the right leader of the army, General Li Jing Jia. Everyone thought that the soldiers and horses were strong, but they were not equipped. It was snowing, the soldiers were suffering from the cold, but they were attacked by the Turks, defeated, and more than 10,000 people were killed. Yuan Dazhi gathered the rest of the people and fought, and was spared.

古文：于是嗣业流桂州，余坐免官。
现代文：事后萧嗣业流放桂州，其余的罢官。
English: After the incident, Xiao Ziye was exiled to Guizhou, and the rest were dismissed.

古文：更拜礼部尚书裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管，率太仆少卿李思文、营州都督周道务、西军程务挺、东军李文暕，士无虑三十万，捕击反者。
现代文：另任礼部尚书裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管，率太仆少卿李思文、营州都督周道务、西军程务挺、东军李文日柬，统兵三十万捕击反叛者。
English: In addition, Shangshu Pei Xingjian of the Ministry of Ceremonies was the general manager of the military march of Dingxiang Road, led by the great servant Li Siwen, the governor of Yingzhou, Zhou Daowu, the western army, Cheng Mu Ting, the eastern army, Li Wen, and the Japanese-Cambodian army, with 300,000 soldiers to capture the rebels.

古文：诏右金吾将军曹怀舜屯井陉，右武卫将军崔献屯绛、龙门。
现代文：诏令右金吾将军曹怀舜驻守井陉，右武卫将军崔献驻守绛及龙门。
English: He ordered the Right Kingu General Cao Huaiqi to garrison Jingshan, and the Right Wuwei General Cui Xian to garrison Jinshan and Longmen.

古文：明年，行俭战黑山，大破之，其下斩泥孰匐，以首降，禽温傅、奉职以还，余众保狼山。
现代文：第二年，裴行俭战于黑山，大破叛军。泥孰匐的手下杀他后来降，温傅、奉职也被擒。余众保守狼山。
English: The following year, Pei Xingnian fought in Montenegro, defeating the rebels. Mudai's men killed him and he was later demoted, while Wenfu and Bongyu were also executed. The rest of the people kept Wolf Mountain.

古文：始虏未叛，鸣群飞入塞，吏曰： 所谓突厥雀者，南飞，胡必至。 
现代文：当初，突厥未叛前，有沙鸡群飞入塞。吏说： 这是突厥雀，南飞，胡人必来。 
English: At first, the Turks did not rebel, and flocks of sand grouse flew into the fortress. The officials said: This is the Turk's sparrow, flying south, the Hu people will come.

古文：比春还，悉堕灵、夏间，率无首，泥孰果亡。
现代文：到春天飞回，都在灵、夏之间坠落，且都没了头。泥孰果然丧命。
English: Flying back to the spring, they all fell between the spirit and the summer, and they all lost their heads. Mudra died as a result.

古文：狼山众掠云州，都督窦怀哲、右领军中郎将程务挺逐出之。
现代文：狼山的突厥掠夺云州，都督窦怀哲、右领军中郎将程务挺将他们赶走。
English: The Turks of the Wolf Mountain plundered Yunnan, and the governor Dou Huai Zhe and the right-hand man of the leading army, Cheng Mu Ting, drove them away.

古文：永隆中，温傅部又迎颉利族子伏念于夏州，走度河，立为可汗，诸部响应。
现代文：永隆年间，温傅部在夏州接来颉利的族子伏念，渡河立为可汗，各部都响应。
English: During the Yonglong Dynasty, the Wenfu Department in Xiazhou received Fu Nian, the son of Guili, who crossed the river to become a khan, and all departments responded.

古文：明年，遂寇原、庆二州。
现代文：第二年入侵原、庆二州。
English: In the second year, they invaded Hara and Keiji.

古文：复诏行俭为大总管，以右武卫将军曹怀舜、幽州都督李文暕副之。
现代文：又诏令裴行俭为大总管，右武卫将军曹怀舜、幽州都督李文日柬为副总管。
English: He also decreed that Pei Xingjian should be the general manager, and Cao Huaiqi, the general of the Right Division of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and Li Wenri, the governor of Yuzhou, should be the deputy general managers.

古文：谍者绐言伏念、温傅保黑沙，饥甚，可轻骑取也。
现代文：有奸细骗他们说伏念、温傅驻军黑沙，粮少饥甚，轻骑即可取胜。
English: Some spies lied to them and told them that they could win if they rode lightly, as the troops stationed in the Black Sand had little food and were very hungry.

古文：怀舜独信之，轻兵倍道至黑沙，乃不见虏，得薛延陀余部，降之；引还至长城，遇温傅与战，所杀相当。
现代文：曹怀舜相信了，轻兵速行军到黑沙，不见突厥，遇见薛延陀的余部，收降了他们。回军到长城，遇温傅兵交战，杀伤彼此相当。
English: Cao Huaiya believed it, and marched at light speed to the Black Sand without seeing the Turks. He met the remnants of Xueyantuo and defeated them. When he returned to the Great Wall and encountered the Wenfu soldiers, they fought and killed each other.

古文：行俭兵壁代之陉口，纵反间，故伏念、温傅相贰，因遣兵击伏念，败之。
现代文：裴行俭坚守代州的陉口，派人反间，因此伏念、温傅相互猜疑。于是派兵打败伏念。
English: Pei Xingjian insisted on defending the Daizhou pass, and sent people to oppose each other. As a result, Fucheng and Wenfu were suspicious of each other. So he sent soldiers to defeat Fucheng.

古文：伏念走，与怀舜遇，行且战一日，为伏念所破，弃军奔云中，士为虏所乘，死不可算，皆南首仆。
现代文：伏念逃走，与曹怀舜相遇，边走边战，曹怀舜败，弃军逃奔云中。士兵被杀不计其数。怀舜杀牲与伏念结盟，得不死。
English: Fuxiong fled, met Cao Huaiyao, fought while walking, Cao Huaiyao was defeated, abandoned the army and fled into the clouds. Countless soldiers were killed. Huaiyao killed and allied with Fuxiong, and did not die.

古文：怀舜杀牲与伏念盟，乃免。伏念益北，留辎重妻子保金牙山，以轻骑将袭怀舜，会行俭遣部将掩得其辎重，比还，无所归，乃北走保细沙。
现代文：伏念再北进，留下妻儿及辎重坚守金牙山，准备轻骑袭怀舜，而此时裴行俭部将夺得其辎重。伏念无处可归，乃北走保细沙。裴行俭派单于府的镇兵尾随其后。
English: Fu Nian marched north again, leaving his wife and children and his baggage behind to hold on to Jinya Mountain and prepare to ride lightly to attack Huaiyi. At this time, Pei Xingnian would capture his baggage. Fu Nian had nowhere to return to, but to walk north to Baosha. Pei Xingnian sent soldiers from the town of Zhanyu to follow him.

古文：行俭纵单于镇兵蹑之，伏念意王师不能远，不设备，及兵至，惶骇不得战，遂遣使间道诣行俭，执温傅降，行俭虏之，送京师，斩东市。
现代文：伏念想着王师不能远来，不设备，及至兵到跟前，惶骇不能作战。于是派使者从小路到裴行俭处，擒住温傅来降。行俭将他拿下，送到京师，斩于东市。
English: Fuxian thought that Wang Shi could not come far without equipment, and when the soldiers arrived, they would not be able to fight. So he sent an envoy from the lane to Pei Xiangyan's place to capture Wen Fu and bring him down. Xiangyan took him down, sent him to Beijing Shi, and beheaded him in Dongshi.

古文：永淳元年，骨咄禄又反。
现代文：永淳元年，骨咄禄又反。
English: In the first year of the Yongjun era, the fortunes were reversed.

古文：骨咄禄，颉利族人也，云中都督舍利元英之部酋，世袭吐屯。
现代文：骨咄禄，颉利的族人，是云中都督舍利元英的部酋，世袭吐屯。
English: Bone Gu Lu, a member of the Guili tribe, was the hereditary chief of Tutun, the provincial capital of Yunnan Province.

古文：伏念败，乃啸亡散，保总材山，又治黑沙城，有众五千，盗九姓畜马，稍强大，乃自立为可汗，以弟默啜为杀，咄悉匐为叶护。
现代文：伏念败，乃收集亡散，据守总材山，又整治黑沙城。有五千多人，盗得九姓的畜马，渐渐强大起来，乃自立为可汗，任弟弟默啜为杀，任咄悉匐为叶护。
English: There are more than five thousand people, who have stolen the cattle and horses of nine surnames, and gradually become strong, but they are self-reliant as khans, their brothers are silent as killers, and their brothers are silent as protectors.

古文：时单于府检校降户部落阿史德元珍者，为长史王本立所囚。
现代文：那时，单于府检校降户部落的阿史德元珍被长史王本立所囚。
English: At that time, Ashide Motozane, who was the only member of the tribe to be demoted from the prefectural inspection school, was imprisoned by Choshi Wang Benry.

古文：会骨咄禄来寇，元珍请谕还诸部赎罪，许之。
现代文：正遇骨咄禄入侵，元珍要求回旧部落赎罪，得到允许，他便去降骨咄禄，为他设谋。
English: During the invasion of the Bone Clan, Yuan Zhen asked to return to the old tribe to atone for his sins. When he was allowed to do so, he went to the Bone Clan and plotted against them.

古文：至即降骨咄禄，与为谋，遂以为阿波达干，悉属以兵。
现代文：骨咄禄即任他为阿波达干，把兵都交给他。
English: As a result, he was appointed as Abodagan, and all the soldiers were handed over to him.

古文：乃寇单于府北鄙，遂攻并州，杀岚州刺史王德茂，分掠定州，北平刺史霍王元轨击却之。
现代文：于是侵攻单于府北郊，攻并州，杀了岚州刺史王德茂，又分掠定州，北平刺史霍王元轨将他们击退。
English: Therefore, they invaded the northern suburbs of the prefecture, invaded and annexed the prefecture, killed the prefectural governor Wang Demao, and captured the prefectural governor Dingzhou. The prefectural governor of Beiping, the prefectural governor Huo Wangyuanlu, repulsed them.

古文：又攻妫州，围单于都护府，杀司马张行师，攻蔚州，杀刺史李思俭，执丰州都督崔知辩。
现代文：他们又去攻妫州，围单于都护府，杀司马张行师，攻蔚州，杀刺史李思俭，擒丰州都督崔知辩。
English: They also went to attack Bozhou, besieged and besieged Duofu, killed Sima Zhang Xingshi, attacked Wuzhou, assassinated Shi Li Sijian, and besieged Fongzhou Governor Cui Zhibei.

古文：诏右武卫将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使备边。
现代文：皇帝令右武卫将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使守边。
English: The emperor ordered Ubuwei General Cheng Mu Ting to be the sole guardian of the pacification ambassador in the province.

古文：嗣圣、垂拱间，连寇朔、代，掠吏士。
现代文：嗣圣、垂拱年间，连续侵扰朔州、代州，杀掠人吏。
English: During the Tsushin and Dangg years, they continuously invaded Shuozhou and Dayozhou, and killed and plundered officials.

古文：左玉铃卫中郎将淳于处平为阳曲道总管，将击贼总材山，至忻州与贼遇，鏖战不利，死者五千人。
现代文：武后诏令左玉钤卫中郎将淳于处平为阳曲道总管，将赴总材山讨贼。到忻州与贼军遇，大败，死者五千人。
English: Emperor Wu decreed that Sadamasa Weizhongro would become the general manager of the Yang Curve Road and go to the general mountain to fight the bandits. He met the bandits in Zhangzhou and suffered a crushing defeat, with five thousand dead.

古文：更以天官尚书韦待价为燕然道大总管讨之。
现代文：乃改派天官尚书韦待价为燕然道大总管去讨贼。
English: However, he reassigned the heavenly official Shang Shuwei, who was waiting to be appointed as the head of Yanran Road University, to hunt down the thieves.

古文：明年，入昌平，右鹰扬卫大将军黑齿常之击却之。
现代文：第二年骨咄禄又入昌平，右鹰扬卫大将军黑齿常之将他们打败。
English: In the second year, Bone and Bone entered Changping again, and they were defeated by the right eagle, Yang Wei's general, Black Tooth Changzhi.

古文：复入朔州地，常之与战黄花堆，虏败，追奔四十里，遯过碛。
现代文：他们又侵朔州，常之在黄花堆拦击，贼败，常之兵追赶四十里，骨咄禄逃过大沙碛。
English: They also invaded Shuozhou, but were often stopped at Huanghua Heap. The bandits were defeated, and the soldiers chased them for forty miles, barely escaping the Great Sandstorm.

古文：右监门卫中郎将宝璧当追，意虏即破，欲幸取功，乃募谍出塞二千里，间虏无备，趋袭之。
现代文：右监门卫中郎将爨宝璧认为突厥即将破亡，应该穷追取功，于是召募谍兵出塞外二千里，欲伺贼人不备时偷袭。
English: The Right Supervisor and Doorman, Zhong Lang, thought that the Turks were about to be destroyed and that they should make every effort to gain merit, so he called for spies from two thousand miles away to sneak up on them when they were unprepared.

古文：将至，漏言于军，虏得整众出，皆死战，大败，宝璧跳还，举军没。
现代文：将到贼营，计划泄漏，骨咄禄整军出战，人均死战，王师全军覆没，爨宝璧单骑逃回。
English: He will go to the thief camp, the plan will be leaked, the bones of the whole army will go to war, every man will die, Wang Shi's whole army will be destroyed, and Zou Bao Bi will flee back alone.

古文：武后怒，诛宝璧，改骨咄禄曰不卒禄。
现代文：武后怒，杀了宝璧，改称骨咄禄为不卒禄。
English: Angered by Wu Hou, he killed Bao Bi, and changed his name from Bone Lu to Non-Piece Lu.

古文：俄而元珍攻突骑施，战死。
现代文：不久阿史德元珍攻突骑施，战死。
English: Not long after, Ashide Yuanzhen attacked and defeated Shih and died in battle.

古文：天授初，骨咄禄死，其子幼，不得立。
现代文：天授初年，骨咄禄死。其子尚幼，不能立为可汗。
English: In the first year of Tianju, Bonglu died. His son was too young to become khan.

古文：默啜自立为可汗，篡位数年，始攻灵州，多杀略士民。
现代文：默啜自立为可汗，篡位多年。长寿三年入侵灵州，杀掠人吏。
English: He silently established himself as khan and usurped the throne for many years. Longevity invaded Lingzhou for three years, killing and plundering officials.

古文：武后以薛怀义为朔方道行军大总管，内史李昭德为行军长史，凤阁鸾台平章事苏味道为司马，率朔方道总管契苾明、雁门道总管王孝杰、威化道总管李多祚、丰安道总管陈令英、瀚海道总管田扬名等凡十八将军兵出塞，杂华蕃步骑击之，不见虏，还。
现代文：武后派薛怀义为朔方道行军大总管，派内史李昭德为行军长史，派凤阁鸾台平章事苏味道为司马，率朔方道总管契絆明、雁门道总管王孝杰、威化道总管李多祚、丰安道总管陈令英、瀚海道总管田扬名等十八大将带兵出塞讨伐。没有遇见默啜兵，班师。
English: Wu Guo sent Xue Huaiyi as the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road, sent Li Zhaode as the long-term manager of the march, sent Feng Guo Xuan Tai Ping Zhang Zhishui as the general manager of the march, and led the eighteen generals including Shuo Fang Road general manager Kizunming, Ganmen Road general manager Wang Xiaojie, Weihua Road general manager Li Duojun, Feng'an Road general manager Chen Lingying, and Hanzhong Road general manager Tian Yangmei to lead the soldiers out of the encampment. They did not meet the silent soldiers, the teachers.

古文：俄诏孝杰为朔方道行军总管备边。
现代文：接着诏令王孝杰为朔方道行军总管驻边备战。
English: Next, the emperor ordered Wang Xiaojie to stay at the border to prepare for the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road.

古文：契丹李尽忠等反，默啜请击贼自效，诏可。授左卫大将军、归国公，以左豹韬卫将军阎知微即部册拜迁善可汗。
现代文：万岁通天元年，契丹的李尽忠等反叛，默啜请求效力讨伐契丹，武后同意，任默啜为左卫大将军，封归国公，并派左豹韬卫将军阎知微去默啜部册封他为迁善可汗。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Li Jianzhong of Khitan rebelled and silently asked for the power to fight against Khitan, and Wu Hou agreed to appoint him as the General of the Left Guard and return him to the country, and sent the General of the Left Guard Yan Zhiyi to the Ministry of Silence to appoint him as Qianzhan Khan.

古文：默啜乃引兵击契丹，会尽忠死，袭松漠部落，尽得孙万荣妻子辎重，酋长崩溃。
现代文：默啜率兵击契丹，正遇上李尽忠死，默啜进袭松漠部落，尽得孙万荣的妻儿及辎重，酋长崩溃。
English: He silently led the soldiers to fight against the Khitan, just as Li Jianzhong was about to die, he silently attacked the Songpan tribe, killed Sun Wanrong's wife, son and daughter-in-law, and the chief collapsed.

古文：后美其攻，复诏知微持节册默啜为特进、颉跌利施大单于、立功报国可汗。
现代文：武后赞扬默啜，又诏令阎知微去册封他为特进、颉跌利施大单于、立功报国可汗。
English: Empress Wu praised him, and ordered Yan Zhiwei to record him as a khan who had made great contributions to the country.

古文：未及命，俄攻灵、胜二州，纵杀略，为屯将所败。
现代文：知微还未到达，默啜又侵灵、胜二州，纵兵杀掠，被屯将打败。
English: Wisdom and subtlety have not yet arrived, silence and invade the spirit, win two states, kill and plunder, and will be defeated by the camp.

古文：又遣使者谢，请为后子，复言有女，愿女诸王，且求六州降户。
现代文：默啜派使者入朝谢罪，要求做武后的义子，又说自己有女儿，愿意嫁给王，还要求发还六州的降户。
English: He sent an envoy to the court to apologize, asking to become the queen's son-in-law. He also said that he had a daughter and was willing to marry the king. He also asked for the return of the families of the six states that had surrendered.

古文：初，突厥内属者分处丰、胜、灵、夏、朔、代间，谓之河曲六州降人。
现代文：当初，突厥来归降的人分居在丰、胜、灵、夏、朔、代几州，称之为河曲六州降户。
English: At first, the Turkic returnees lived separately in Fong, Sheng, Ling, Xia, Shuo and Dai provinces, which was called the Six Provinces of Hequ.

古文：默啜又请粟田种十万斛，农器三千具，铁数万斤，后不许，宰相李峤亦言不可。
现代文：默啜又要求粟种十万斛、农器三千具、铁几万斤，武后不许，宰相李峤也说不可以。
English: He also silently asked for 100,000 stalks of millet seeds, 3,000 pieces of farm implements, and several thousand pounds of iron. Wu Hou was not allowed to do this, and the Prime Minister Li Xi also said that it was not allowed.

古文：默啜怨，为慢言，执使者司宾卿田归道。
现代文：默啜不乐意，言辞傲慢，还拘留使者司宾卿田归道。
English: He was not happy with the silence, his words were arrogant, and he also detained the envoy, the chief secretary, Tian Guido.

古文：于是纳言姚等建请与之，乃归粟、器、降人数千帐，繇是突厥遂强。
现代文：于是纳言姚王寿等人建议答应他的要求，给了他们粟、农具以及降户几千帐。从此突厥强盛起来。
English: As a result, Nagan Yao Wang Shou and others proposed to grant his request, giving them millet, agricultural tools and several thousand accounts. From then on, the Turks prospered.

古文：诏淮阳王武延秀聘其女为妃，诏知微摄春官尚书，与司宾卿杨鸾庄持节护送。
现代文：这年，武后诏令淮阳王武延秀娶默啜女儿为王妃，令阎知微代理春官尚书，与司宾卿杨鸾庄持节护送。
English: In this year, Empress Wu decreed that Huaiyang King Wu Yanxiu marry his silent daughter as a princess, and appointed Yan Zhiwei to act as the official of the Spring Festival, and escorted him to the festival with the chief guest Yang Shuzhuang.

古文：默啜猥曰： 我以女嫁唐天子子，今乃后家子乎！
现代文：默啜却说： 我是把女儿嫁给唐天子的儿子的，如今来的却是武家的儿子。
English: But he murmured, "I married my daughter to the son of Tang Tianzi, but now it is the son of a samurai family who has come.

古文：且我世附唐，今闻其子孙独二人在，我当立之。 
现代文：我世世代代降附李家，听说李家子孙现在只有两人了，我一定要扶立他们。 
English: I have been attached to the Li family for generations. I heard that there are only two descendants of the Li family now. I must support them.

古文：即囚延秀等，妄号知微为可汗，自将十万骑南向击静难、平狄、清夷等军，静难军使慕容玄崱以兵五千降。
现代文：于是拘囚延秀等人，妄加阎知微可汗的称号，自率十万人马南下袭击静难、平狄、清夷等军。静难军使慕容玄山则带五千兵投降。
English: As a result, the prisoner Yan Xiu and others, arrogantly claiming the title of Yan Zhiwei Khan, led 100,000 men south to attack the Jingnan, Ping Di, Qingyi and other armies. The Jingnan army ordered Murong Xuanshan to surrender with five thousand soldiers.

古文：虏入围妫、檀，后诏司属卿武重规为天兵中道大总管，右武威卫将军沙吒忠义为天兵西道总管，幽州都督张仁亶为天兵东道总管，兵凡三十万击之；右羽林大将军阎敬容、李多祚为天兵西道后军总管，兵亦十五万。
现代文：突厥兵入围妫、檀州，武后诏令司属卿武重规任天兵中道大总管，右武威卫将军沙吒忠义为天兵西道总管，幽州都督张仁为天兵东道总管，共三十万兵马去还击；右羽林大将军阎敬容、李多祚为天兵西道后军总管，带十五万兵做后援。
English: The Turkish soldiers entered the besieged Danzhou and Handan, and Wu Wu Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei

古文：默啜破蔚州飞狐，进残定州，杀刺史孙彦高，焚庐舍，乡聚为空。
现代文：默啜击破蔚州飞狐，攻进定州，杀刺史孙彦高，焚毁房屋，杀尽居民。
English: He defeated the Ulshu Flying Fox, invaded Dingzhou, assassinated Sun Yangtze, burned houses, and killed all the residents.

古文：后怒，下诏购斩默啜者王之，更号曰斩啜。
现代文：武后怒，下诏云能斩杀默啜的赏他为王，并改称之为斩啜。
English: Embarrassed by Wu Hou, the emperor rewarded him with the title of "king" and changed the name to "Chop Suey."

古文：虏围赵州，长史唐波若应之，入杀刺史高睿，进攻相州。
现代文：默啜兵围赵州，长史唐波若做内应，杀了刺史高睿又，进攻相州。
English: The silent soldiers encircled Zhaozhou, and Changshi Tangbo, if he made a secret request, killed the assassin Gao Rui and attacked Xiangzhou.

古文：诏沙吒忠义为河北道前军总管，李多祚为后军总管，将军嵎夷公福富顺为奇兵总管，击虏。
现代文：诏令沙吒忠义任河北道前军总管，李多祚为后军总管，将军山禺夷公福富顺为奇兵总管前往讨伐。
English: The edict ordered Sha Jun Zhongyi to be the commander-in-chief of the front army of Hebei Province, Li Duojun to be the commander-in-chief of the rear army, and General Shan Yigong Fu Fu Shun to be the commander-in-chief of the special forces to go to the crusade.

古文：时中宗还自房陵，为皇太子，拜行军大元帅，以纳言狄仁杰为副，文昌右丞宋玄爽为长史，左肃政台御史中丞霍献可为司马，右肃政台御史中丞吉顼为监军使，将军扶余文宣等六人为子总管。
现代文：当时，庐陵王李显从房陵回来，立为皇太子，被委任为行军大元帅，命纳言狄仁杰为副元帅，文昌右丞宋玄爽为长史，左肃政台御史中丞霍献可为司马，右肃政台御史中丞吉顼为监军使，将军扶余文宣等六人为子总管。
English: At that time, Li Xian, the king of Fuling, returned from the mausoleum and became the crown prince. He was appointed as the grand marshal of the marching army, with Di Renjie as the deputy marshal, Wenchang Yu Rong Song Xuan Shuang as the chief historian, Zuo Zhengdao Guo Shi Zhongzheng Huo Xian Ke as the secretary, Zuo Zhengdao Guo Shi Zhongzheng Ji Yao as the supervising military envoy, and General Fu Yu Wenzhen as the deputy chief administrator.

古文：未行，默啜闻之，取赵、定所掠男女八九万悉坑之，出五回道去，所过人畜、金币、子女尽剽有之，诸将皆顾望不敢战，独狄仁杰以兵追之，不及。
现代文：队伍还未动身，默啜听说了，就将在赵、定等州所掠的男女八九万人全部坑杀，出五回道而去，沿途剽夺子女、财币、牲畜殆尽，诸将都与贼相望而不敢战，只有狄仁杰带兵追赶，没追上。
English: Before the team had even set off, he silently heard that they would kill all 890,000 men and women who had been robbed in Zhao, Ding and other provinces. They went out five times, robbing children, money and livestock along the way. All the generals were afraid to fight the thieves. Only Di Renjie and his soldiers chased after them, but did not catch up.

古文：默啜负胜轻中国，有骄志，大抵兵与颉利时略等，地纵广万里，诸蕃悉往听命。
现代文：默啜恃胜轻视中国，生骄志。其时他的兵力与颉利时差不多，地域纵广有万里，各蕃都臣服听命。
English: At that time, his military strength was almost the same as that of Goryeo, and there were tens of thousands of miles of territory, all of which were subject to his orders.

古文：复立咄悉匐为左察，骨咄禄子默矩为右察，皆统兵二万；子匐俱为小可汗，位两察上，典处木昆等十姓兵四万，号拓西可汗。
现代文：再立咄悉匐为左察，骨咄禄之子默矩为右察，各统兵二万；立子匐俱为小可汗，位在两察之上，统帅处木昆等十姓的兵四万，号称拓西可汗。
English: The next to be set up was the left chakra, followed by the right chakra, which was the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra, the son of the bone chakra

古文：岁入边，戍兵不得休，乃高选魏元忠检校并州长史为天兵军大总管，娄师德副之，按屯以待。又徙元忠灵武道行军大总管，备虏。
现代文：每年骚扰，戍边之兵不得休息。武后命魏元忠检校并州长史为天兵军大总管，娄师德为副总管驻守备战，后又任魏元忠为灵武道行军大总管防御突厥。
English: Wu Hou ordered Wei Yuanzhong to inspect the school and appointed Governor Shi as the general manager of the Heavenly Army, Zou Shide as the deputy general manager stationed to prepare for war, and later appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the general manager of the martial arts march to defend against the Turks.

古文：默啜剽陇右牧马万匹去，俄复盗边，诏安北大都护相王为天兵道大元帅，率并州长史武攸宜、夏州都督薛讷与元忠击虏，兵未出，默啜去。
现代文：默啜剽夺陇右的牧马一万匹，不久又侵犯边境。诏令安北大都护相王为天兵道大元帅，率并州长史武攸宜、夏州都督薛讷与魏元忠共同迎战突厥，兵还未出，默啜退兵。
English: He ordered An Bei Dadu to take 10,000 herdsmen and soon invaded the border again. He made An Bei Dadu's Protector Wang the Grand Marshal of the Heavenly Military Road, led by Governor Shi Wuyongi, Xia Zhou's Governor Xue Ne and Wei Yuanzhong to fight against the Turks. The soldiers had not yet come out, but quietly withdrew.

古文：明年，寇盐、夏，掠羊马十万，攻石岭，遂围并州。
现代文：第二年，入侵盐、夏州，掠夺羊马十万，攻石岭，围并州。
English: In the second year, the invasion of salt, Xiazhou, plundered 100,000 sheep and horses, attacked Shiling, and surrounded and annexed the state.

古文：以雍州长史薛季昶为持节山东防御大使，节度沧、瀛、幽、易、恒、定、妫、檀、平等九州之军，以瀛州都督张仁亶统诸州及清夷、障塞军之兵，与季昶掎角，又以相王为安北道行军元帅，监诸将，王留不行。
现代文：乃派雍州长史薛季昶为持节山东防御大使，指挥沧、瀛、幽、易、恒、定、妫、檀、平等九州的军队，派瀛州都督张仁统率各州及清夷、障塞军之兵，与薛季昶成掎角，又任相王为安北道行军元帅，监督诸将。
English: He sent Shi Xuejian, the governor of Yongzheng, as the defense ambassador of Shandong during the Jixi Festival, to command the armies of Cang, Zhou, Yu, Yi, Heng, Ding, Fan, Dan, and Ping in Kyushu. He also sent Zhang Ren, the governor of Zhangzhou, to lead the soldiers of all the states and the Qingyi and the Blockade Army, and to come into conflict with Xuejian. He also appointed So Wang as the marshal of the march in the Anbei Province to supervise the generals.

古文：虏入代、忻，仍杀略。
现代文：相王留京未行，突厥入代州、忻州，仍有杀掠。
English: Prince Aioi did not stay in Beijing, and the Turks entered Daizhou and Zhangzhou, and there was still killing and plundering.

古文：长安三年，遣使者莫贺达干请进女女皇太子子，后使平恩郡王重俊、义兴郡王重明盛服立诸朝。
现代文：长安三年，默啜派使者莫贺达干来要求将女儿许配给皇太子之子，武后要皇太子的儿子平恩郡王重俊、义兴郡王重明盛服立于朝。
English: In the third year of the Chang'an era, Emperor Wu silently sent an envoy, Moga Dagan, to request that his daughter be betrothed to the son of the crown prince. Empress Wu asked the sons of the crown prince, Ping'an County's Wang Chongjun and Yixing County's Wang Chongming, to solemnly serve the imperial court.

古文：默啜更遣大酋移力贪汗献马千匹，谢许婚，后渥礼其使。
现代文：默啜派大酋移力贪汗献马千匹，感谢许婚，武后优礼待其使者。
English: The great chieftain silently and with great effort and sweat offered a thousand horses in thanks for the promise of marriage, and the empress dowager treated his envoy with great courtesy.

古文：中宗始即位，入攻呜沙，于是灵武军大总管沙吒忠义与战，不胜，死者几万人，虏遂入原、会，多取牧马。
现代文：中宗刚即位，默啜又入攻鸣沙。灵武军大总管沙吒忠义迎战，不胜，死几万人，突厥乃进犯原、会等州，夺大量牧马。
English: Just after the enthronement of the Chinese emperor, the Ming dynasty silently attacked the Ming dynasty. The general manager of the Lingwu army, Shajian Zhongyi, fought a losing battle, tens of thousands of people died, the Turks invaded the Yuan, Hui and other states, and captured a large number of herdsmen.

古文：帝诏绝昏，购斩默啜者王以国、官诸卫大将军。
现代文：皇帝下诏断绝婚姻，悬赏能斩获默啜的人封国王、任诸卫大将军。
English: The emperor issued an edict to break off the marriage, and offered a reward to anyone who could break the silence.

古文：默啜杀我行人鸿胪卿臧思言，诏左屯卫大将军张仁亶为朔方道大总管屯边。
现代文：默啜杀死使者鸿胪卿臧思言，诏令左屯卫大将军张仁为朔方道大总管驻守边陲。
English: He ordered General Zhang Ren of the Left Tun Guards to be stationed at the border post as the chief administrator of Shuofang Road.

古文：明年，始筑三受降城于河外，障绝寇路。
现代文：第二年，开始在黄河外筑三个受降城，阻绝入寇之路。
English: In the second year, they began to build three capitals outside the Yellow River to block the way of the invaders.

古文：久之，以唐休璟代屯。
现代文：后来，派唐休瞡去替换驻守。
English: Later, he sent Tang Xiuqi to replace the garrison.

古文：睿宗初立，又请和亲，诏取宋王成器女为金山公主下嫁。
现代文：睿宗初立，默啜又来要求和亲，诏令封宋王成器的女儿为金山公主下嫁。
English: Ruizong stood up at first, then silently asked for reconciliation, and issued a decree to marry off the daughter of Song Wangcheng to the princess of Jinshan.

古文：会左羽林大将军孙佺等与奚战冷陉，为奚所执，献诸默啜，默啜杀之，更以刑部尚书郭元振代休璟。
现代文：正遇左羽林大将军孙亻全等在冷陉与奚交战被擒，奚将他献给默啜，默啜杀了他。诏令刑部尚书郭元振替下唐休瞡。
English: General Sun Yucheng of the Left Uhlin Army was captured in a battle between the Long March and the Cold March. The Long March sacrificed him to the Silent March and killed him in silence. The Long March ordered the Department of Justice to replace Guo Yuan with Tang Xiuyuan.

古文：玄宗立，绝和亲。
现代文：玄宗立，拒绝和亲。
English: Xuanzong stood firm and refused to be reconciled.

古文：默啜乃遣子杨我支特勒入宿卫，固求昏，以蜀王女南和县主妻之，下书谕尉可汗。
现代文：默啜派儿子杨我支特勒入宿卫，坚持求婚，乃以蜀王女儿南和县主嫁他。下书告谕可汗。
English: He sent his son, Yang Ia Shitler, to the palace guard and insisted on proposing marriage, but to the daughter of King Shu, Nanhe, the head of the county. He wrote to the khan.

古文：明年，使子移涅可汗引同俄特勒、火拔颉利发石失毕精骑攻北庭，都护郭虔瓘击之，斩同俄城下，虏奔解。
现代文：第二年，又派儿子移涅可汗带领同俄特勒、妹夫火拔颉利发石失毕率精骑攻北庭，都护郭虔馞迎击，将同俄斩于城下，突厥退兵。
English: In the second year, he also sent his son, Emne Khan, to lead Otterer and his brother-in-law, Hibatagiri, on horseback to attack the Northern Court, where they were met by the tutelary Guo Qianqian, who beheaded Otterer under the castle, and the Turks retreated.

古文：火拔不敢归，携妻子来奔，拜左武卫大将军、燕山郡王，号其妻为金山公主，赐赍优缛。
现代文：火拔不敢回去，带了妻子归附。任他为左武卫大将军，封燕山郡王，称其妻为金山公主，赏赐甚优。
English: Heba did not dare to go back and brought his wife to join him. He was given the title of General Zuo Wuwei, the title of King of Yanshan County, and his wife was called Princess Jinshan, which was a very good reward.

古文：杨我支死，诏宗亲三等以上吊其家。
现代文：杨我支死，诏令宗亲三等以上的均去他家祭奠。
English: After Yang Iashi's death, the emperor ordered all the third- and higher-ranking family members to go to his house to pay their respects.

古文：是时突厥再上书求昏，帝未报。
现代文：这时，突厥再上书求婚，皇帝不答。
English: At this time, the Turk wrote again to propose marriage, but the emperor did not reply.

古文：初，景云中，默啜西灭娑葛，遂役属契丹、奚，因虐用其下。
现代文：当初，景云年间，默啜西灭娑葛，控制了契丹、奚，曾残暴征用其人。
English: At first, during the reign of King Jingyun, the West silently exterminated the Khitan and Qiang, controlled the Khitan and Qiang, and brutally requisitioned their people.

古文：既年老，愈昏暴，部落怨畔。十姓左五咄陆、右五弩失毕俟斤皆请降。葛逻禄、胡屋、鼠尼施三姓，大漠都督特进硃斯，阴山都督谋落匐鸡，玄池都督蹋实力胡鼻率众内附；诏处其众于金山。
现代文：现在年老了，更加暴虐昏聩，部落多半不服，十姓中左五咄陆、右五弩失毕俟斤都请降，葛逻禄、胡屋、鼠尼施三姓，大漠都督特进朱斯、阴山都督谋落匐鸡、玄池都督蹋实力胡鼻亦率众来归附。诏令安顿其人众于金山。
English: Now he is old, more tyrannical and dim-witted, and most of the tribes are not satisfied. Of the ten surnames, the left-hand fifth, the left-hand fifth, and the right-hand fifth have all been lost. The three surnames of Ge Lu Lu, Hu Ya, and Ru Nishi, the great desert governor, Zhu Si, the gloomy mountain governor, and the powerful Genchi governor, Hu Nian, also led the people to return. He ordered his people to settle in Jinshan.

古文：以右羽林军大将军薛讷为凉州镇军大总管，节度赤水、建康、河源等军，屯凉州，以都督杨执一副之：右卫大将军郭虔瓘为朔州镇军大总管，节度和戎、大武、并州之北等军，屯并州，以长史王晙副之。
现代文：派右羽林军大将军薛讷为凉州镇军大总管，指挥赤水、建康、河源等军，屯驻凉州，派都督杨执一为副总管；派右卫大将军郭虔馞为朔州镇军大总管，指挥和戎、大武、并州之北等军，屯驻并州，派长史王睃为副总管。
English: General Xue Ne of the Right Uhlin Army was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Liangzhou Town Army, commanding the Chishui, Jiankang, Heyuan and other armies, stationed in Liangzhou, and the governor Yang Jieyi was appointed as the deputy commander-in-chief; General Guo Jianyong of the Right Wei Army was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Shuozhou Town Army, commanding the Wa Rong, Da Wu, and Bei Zhou North armies, stationed in Bei Zhou, and the commander Shi Wangyong was appointed as the deputy commander-in-chief.

古文：抚新附，检钞暴。
现代文：由他们安抚新近归附的，打击残暴入侵的。
English: It is up to them to pacify the newly-annexed, to fight the brutal invaders.

古文：默啜屡击葛逻禄等，诏在所都护、总管掎角应援。
现代文：默啜多次攻打葛逻禄等，皇帝诏令所在的都护、总管成掎角援应他们。
English: They silently attacked Ge Lu Lu and so on many times, and the capital guard and the general manager Cheng Ying Kok, where the emperor's edict was located, came to their aid.

古文：虏势浸削。
现代文：默啜势力渐弱。
English: The power of silence is waning.

古文：其婿高丽莫离支高文简，与跌都督思太，吐谷浑大酋慕容道奴，郁射施大酋鹘屈颉斤、苾悉颉力，高丽大酋高拱毅，合万余帐相踵款边，诏内之河南；引拜文简左卫大将军、辽西郡王，思太特进、右卫大将军兼跌都督、楼烦郡公，道奴左武卫将军兼刺史、云中郡公，鹘屈颉斤左骁卫将军兼刺史、阴山郡公，苾悉颉力左武卫将军兼刺史、雁门郡公，拱毅左领军卫将军兼刺史、平城郡公，将军皆员外置，赐各有差。
现代文：其女婿高丽莫离支高文简，与跌都督思太、吐谷浑大酋慕容道奴、郁射施大酋鹘屈颉斤、絆悉颉力、高丽大酋高拱毅共有万余帐相继来归。诏令收容在黄河南。委任高文简左卫大将军，封辽西郡王；任思太为特进、右卫大将军兼跌都督，封楼烦郡公；任慕容道奴为左武卫将军兼刺史，封云中郡公，任鹘屈颉斤为左骁卫将军兼刺史，封阴山郡公，任絆悉颉力为左武卫将军兼刺史，封雁门郡公，任高拱毅为左领军卫将军兼刺史，封平城郡公。各将军均为员外，分级各有赏赐。
English: Gao Wenjian, his son-in-law, was detained in the south of the Yellow River. Gao Wenjian was appointed as the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and the King of West Liao County; Ren Sita was appointed as the Special Envoy, the General of the Right Division of the Guards, and the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and the King of Yin Shan County; Ren Murong Daun was appointed as the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and the President of Yin Shan County; Ren Murong Daun was appointed as the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and the President of Yin Shan County;

古文：默啜讨九姓，战碛北，九姓溃，人畜皆死，思结等部来降，帝悉官之。
现代文：默啜讨伐九姓，战于碛北，九姓败，人畜皆死，思结等部来降，皇帝都任他们为官。
English: They fought in the north of Shandong Province. They were defeated, and all the people and animals died. The emperor appointed them as officials.

古文：拜薛讷朔方道行军大总管，太仆卿吕延祚、灵州刺史杜宾客佐之，备边。
现代文：任薛讷朔方道行军大总管，太仆卿吕延祚、灵州刺史杜宾客辅佐，备战边陲。
English: He served as the general manager of the march of Xue Ne-shuo Fangdao, and the assistant of the Great Servant Lord Lv Yan-tao, Lingzhou Shishi Du Binke, preparing for the battle.

古文：诏金山、大漠、阴山、玄池都督等共图取默啜，班赏格，赐物谕之。
现代文：诏令金山、大漠、阴山、玄池等都督共同谋取默啜，颁布悬赏内容。
English: He ordered the governors of Jinshan, Dashi, Yinshan and Xuanchi to jointly seek silence, and announced the contents of the reward.

古文：默啜又讨九姓拔野古，战独乐河，拔野古大败，默啜轻归不为备，道大林中，拔曳固残众突出，击默啜，斩之，乃与入蕃使郝灵佺传首京师。
现代文：默啜又去征讨九姓拔野古，战于独乐河，拔野古大败，默啜怛然而归，不戒备。走到大林里，拔曳固散兵突然出击，斩杀默啜。乃与入蕃使郝灵亻全传送首级到京师。
English: He silently went to enlist the nine families of the Battanogu, fought in the Dole River, defeated the Battanogu, silently returned, unprepared. When he went to the forest, he suddenly attacked the scattered soldiers and killed them silently. However, he sent the head to the Beijing division.

古文：骨咄禄子阙特勒合故部，攻杀小可汗及宗族略尽，立其兄默棘连，是为毘伽可汗。
现代文：骨咄禄之子阙特勒集合旧部，攻杀小可汗及其宗族殆尽，立其兄默棘连，是为毗伽可汗。
English: Zettler, the son of Bongiroku, gathered the old group, attacked and killed the small khan and his clan, and set up his brother Mochitsoren, who was the Viga khan.

古文：突厥下毘伽可汗默棘连，本谓 小杀 者，性仁友，自以立非己功，让于阙特勒，特勒不敢受，遂嗣位，实开元四年。
现代文：毗伽可汗默棘连，本来叫小杀，生性仁爱友善，自以为得国不是自己的功劳，要让位给阙特勒，特勒不敢接受，才嗣位为可汗。这是开元四年的事。
English: Viga Khan, who was originally called Xiaoshan, had a benevolent and friendly nature. He thought that it was not his own merit that he won the kingdom. He had to give up his position to Zettler. Zettler did not dare to accept, and only then did he succeed to the throne as Khan. This happened in the fourth year of the first century.

古文：以特勒为左贤王，专制其兵。
现代文：任特勒为左贤王，专掌兵马。
English: Ren Teller is the king of the left-handers, specializing in horses.

古文：初，默啜死，阙特勒尽杀其用事臣，惟暾欲谷者以女婆匐为默棘连可敦，独免，废归其部。
现代文：当初，默啜死，阙特勒将默啜的用事之臣全杀了，只有暾欲谷的女儿婆匐是默棘连的可敦，才得免死，废官归部落。
English: At first, when Misuzu died, Zettler killed all of Misuzu's meddlesome vassals. Only the daughter of the Valley of Desire, Po Yan, who was a close kinsman of Misuzu's, was spared from death, and the officials were returned to the tribe.

古文：后突骑施苏禄自为可汗，突厥部种多贰，默棘连乃召暾欲谷与谋国，年七十余，众尊畏之。
现代文：后来突骑施的苏禄自为可汗，突厥部种多半有二心，默棘连乃召暾欲谷谋划国事，时年已七十多岁，部族中人都敬畏他。
English: Later, Sulu, who suddenly rode Shi, declared himself khan. Most of the Turkic tribes were of two minds, and Mochitoren was summoned to the Valley of Desire to plan state affairs. He was more than seventy years old at the time, and everyone in the tribe feared him.

古文：俄而跌思太等自河曲归之。
现代文：不久，跌思太等自河曲来归附。
English: Not long after, Doushida and others joined the chorus.

古文：始，降户之南也，单于副都护张知运尽敛其兵，戎人怨怒；及姜晦为巡边使，遮诉禁弓矢无以射猎为生，晦悉还之。
现代文：当初，降户南来，单于副都护张知运没收了全部兵械，致使戎人怨恨；及至姜晦任巡边使，戎人诉说没有弓箭不能射猎，姜晦就将收缴的发还。
English: At the beginning, when he came to the south, Zhang Zhiming, the vice-governor of the capital, confiscated all the weapons, causing resentment among the soldiers; and when Jiang Yu served as a patrol envoy, the soldiers told him that he could not shoot without a bow and arrow, and Jiang Yu would return the confiscated weapons.

古文：乃共击张知运，禽之，将送突厥；朔方行军总管薛讷、将军郭知运追之，众溃，释知运去。
现代文：降户们共击张知运，将他擒获，准备送往突厥；朔方行军总管薛讷、将军郭知运得知后追来，降户溃败，放了张知运。
English: Zhang Zhiming was captured and sent to Turkey; Xuene, the commander-in-chief of the Shuo army, and General Guo Zhiming chased Zhang Zhiming after learning of this. Zhang Zhiming was defeated and released.

古文：思太等分为二队北走，王晙又破其左队。
现代文：跌思太等分成两队北上，王睃又攻破其左队。
English: Du Si and others split into two teams to go north, and Wang Xi broke through their left team.

古文：默棘连既得降胡，欲南盗塞，暾欲谷曰： 不可，天子英武，人和岁丰，未有间，且我兵新集，不可动也。 
现代文：默棘连收纳降户后，想南下侵边，暾欲谷说 ：不可。唐天子英武，人和年丰，未有缺漏，况且我兵新近才集合，不可动。 
English: After Mochitsura and his retainers were forced to give up their homes, they wanted to invade the south, but Shibuya said, "No. Tang Tianzi is a great warrior, he is a man of many years, and there is no flaw in him. Moreover, our soldiers have only recently assembled, and they cannot be moved."

古文：默棘连又欲城所都，起佛、老庙，暾欲谷曰： 突厥众不敌唐百分一，所能与抗者，随水草射猎，居处无常，习于武事，强则进取，弱则遁伏，唐兵虽多，无所用也。
现代文：默棘连又打算修筑城堡，造立寺庙，暾欲谷说： 突厥人少，还不到唐的百分之一，所以能常与之抗拒，是因为我们逐水草而射猎，居处不定，习于武事。强则进兵侵掠，弱则窜伏山林，唐兵虽多，无用武之地。
English: Mochitsura also planned to build a castle and a temple, and Shibuya said, "There are few Turks, less than one percent of the Tang Dynasty, so we can often resist them, because we shoot at random, live in different places, and are used to martial arts. The strong are invading and plundering, the weak are hiding in the mountains, and although there are many Tang soldiers, they are useless.

古文：若城而居，战一败，必为彼禽。
现代文：假如筑城而居，一旦战败，必被他们所擒。
English: If you build a city and live in it, once you are defeated, you will be captured by them.

古文：且佛、老教人仁弱，非武强术。 
现代文：且佛、道教人仁弱，不是用武争强之道。 
English: Moreover, Buddhists and Taoists are benevolent and weak, and it is not the way to be strong by fighting.

古文：默棘连当其策，即遣使者请和。
现代文：默棘连采用他的策略，派使者入朝请和。
English: Mochitsubo adopted his strategy and sent an envoy to Korea to sue for peace.

古文：帝以不情，答而不许。
现代文：皇帝因不谙实情，答而未许和。
English: The emperor refused to make peace because he did not know the truth.

古文：俄下诏伐之，乃以拔悉蜜右骁卫大将军金山道总管处木昆执米啜、坚昆都督右武卫大将军骨笃禄毘伽可汗、契丹都督李失活、奚都督李大酺、突厥默啜子左贤王墨特勒、左威卫将军右贤王阿史那毘伽特勒、燕山郡王火拔石失毕等蕃汉士悉发，凡三十万，以御史大夫、朔方道大总管王晙统之，期八年秋并集稽落水上，使拔悉蜜、奚、契丹分道掩其牙，捕默棘连。
现代文：不久，下诏讨伐他，派拔悉蜜右骁卫大将军金山道总管处木昆执米啜、坚昆都督右武卫大将军骨笃禄毗伽可汗、契丹都督李失活、奚都督李大辅、突厥默啜之子左贤王墨特勒、左威卫将军右贤王阿史那毗伽特勒、燕山郡王火拔石失毕等人率领蕃汉兵士三十万，由御史大夫、朔方道大总管王睃统帅，约定开元八年秋到稽落水上集合，派拔悉蜜、奚、契丹分道掩袭其牙廷，捕捉默棘连。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict cracked down on him and dispatched three hundred thousand Han soldiers led by the general of Jinshan Dao, Mu Kun, the general of Jinshan Dao, Jian Kun, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general of Jinshan Dao, the general

古文：默棘连大恐，暾欲谷曰： 拔悉蜜在北庭，与二蕃相距远，必不合。
现代文：默棘连大骇，暾欲谷说： 拔悉蜜在北庭，与契丹及奚相距远，必不能联合。
English: With the thorn in his side, Zou Zigu said: "Pluck Shimei is in the North Garden, far away from Khitan and Zou, and they cannot unite.

古文：晙与张嘉贞有隙，必相执异，亦必不能来。
现代文：王睃与张嘉贞不睦，必定各有看法，也一定不能来。
English: Wang Yao and Zhang Jiazhen are not on good terms, they must have their own opinions, and they must not come.

古文：即皆能来，我当前三日悉众北徙，彼粮竭自去。
现代文：即使都能来，我们在他们来前三天全部北迁，他们粮尽自会回去。
English: Even if they could all come, we all moved north three days before they came, and they will go back as soon as they run out of food.

古文：拔悉蜜轻而好利，当先至，击之可取也。 
现代文：拔悉蜜轻率好利，一定先到，即刻攻他，易于取胜。 
English: Pull out the honey rashly, be sure to arrive first, immediately attack him, easy to win.

古文：俄而拔悉蜜果引众逼突厥牙，知晙等不至，乃引却，突厥欲击之，暾欲谷曰： 兵千里远出，士殊死斗，锋不可当也。
现代文：不久，拔悉蜜果然率众逼近突厥牙廷，当得知王睃等没有来，就退兵。
English: Not long after, Buxi Honey led the crowd to approach the Turkish court. When he learned that Wang Qian and others had not come, he withdrew.

古文：不如蹑之，邀近而取之。 
现代文：突厥准备袭击他。暾欲谷说 ：兵士千里而来，必将死战，其锋锐不可当。
English: The Turks were preparing to attack him. Zou Zigu said, "When soldiers come from thousands of miles away, they are sure to fight to the death. Their sharpness is incredible."

古文：距北庭二百里，乃分兵由它道袭拔其城，即急击拔悉蜜，众走趋北庭，无所归，悉禽之。
现代文：不如跟在他们后面寻机而击。 到离北庭二百里，暾欲谷分兵由小路袭击并攻克北庭，再猛攻拔悉蜜。拔悉蜜的人马被击散投往北庭，不得入，悉数被擒。
English: It would be better to follow them to find an opportunity to attack. Two hundred miles away from Beiting, the soldiers of Xiangyou Valley attacked from a small road and conquered Beiting, then stormed and captured Sisimi. Sisimi's men were dispersed and thrown into Beiting, were not allowed to enter, and were all captured.

古文：还出赤亭，掠凉州，都督杨敬述使官属卢公利、元澄等勒兵讨捕，暾欲谷曰： 敬述若城守，当与和。如兵出，吾且决战，必有功。 
现代文：回归时出赤亭，掠凉州，都督杨敬述派属官卢公利，元澄出兵追捕。暾欲谷说： 杨敬述如果守城自固，就与他讲和；如果出兵来追，我们就与之决战，定能有功。 
English: When they returned, they went to Chakding and raided Liangzhou. Yang Jingshu, the governor of the capital, sent his subordinate officer Lu Gongli, and Yuancheng sent soldiers to chase them. Zou Wuya said: If Yang Jingshu defends the city, he will make peace with him; if he sends troops to chase, we will fight with him in a decisive battle, and we will surely succeed.

古文：澄令于军曰： 裸臂持满外注。 
现代文：元澄下令军中： 捋起袖子，拉满弓向外射！ 
English: Motosumi ordered the troops: roll up your sleeves, draw your bows and shoot!

古文：会大寒裂肤，士手不能张弓矢，由是大败，元澄走，敬述坐以白衣检校凉州事，突厥遂大振，尽有默啜余众。
现代文：那时极冷，皮肤皲裂，士兵手无法拉弓，因此大败。元澄逃走，杨敬述削除官爵，以白衣检校凉州事。突厥大振，尽收默啜的余众。
English: At that time, it was extremely cold, the skin was cracked, and the soldiers' hands could not draw the bow, resulting in a big defeat. Yuancheng fled, Yang Jing recounted the removal of officials and nobles, and inspected the affairs of Liangzhou in a white coat. Turkic tremors shook the silent crowd.

古文：明年，固乞和，请父事天子，许之。
现代文：第二年，默棘连又派使来乞和，求认天子为父，皇帝同意。
English: In the second year, Mochitsura sent another envoy to beg for peace, asking to be recognized as the son of Heaven, and the emperor agreed.

古文：又连岁遣使献方物求婚。
现代文：后又连年派使贡献土产求婚。
English: After that, he sent an envoy to contribute local products to propose marriage for several years.

古文：是时天子东巡泰山，中书令张说谋益屯以备突厥，兵部郎中裴光庭曰： 封禅以告成功，若复调发，不可谓成功者。 
现代文：这时，天子要东巡泰山，中书令张说准备加兵屯守以防备突厥，兵部郎中裴光庭说 ：封禅是向神告成功之事，若再调遣兵力，就不能说是成功。 
English: At this time, the Son of Heaven wanted to make an eastern tour of Mount Tai. The imperial edict ordered Zhang to prepare to increase the number of soldiers to guard against the Turks. Pei Guangting, the head of the military department, said, "Fu Zhen is a matter of announcing success to the gods. If you redeploy troops, it cannot be said to be a success."

古文：说曰： 突厥虽请和，难以信结也。
现代文：张说说： 突厥虽然来请和，但难以信任。
English: Zhang said: Although the Turks came to invite peace, it is difficult to trust them.

古文：且其可汗仁而爱人，下为之用，阙特勒善战，暾欲谷沈雄，愈老而智，李靖、世勣流也，三虏方协，知我举国东巡，有如乘间，何以御之？ 
现代文：况且可汗仁而爱人，众人乐于听命。阙特勒善战，暾欲谷深沉，老而益智，是李靖、世责力之流的人物。他们三人齐心合力，知道我们举国东巡，万一乘机而入，用什么来抵御？ 
English: Moreover, the Khan was kind and loved people, and everyone was happy to obey his orders. He was good at war, deep in the valley of desire, old and wise. He was a figure of the Li Jing and the world's responsibility. The three of them worked together, knowing that we were on a nationwide eastward tour. If we took the opportunity to enter, what would we use to resist?

古文：光庭即请以使召其大臣入卫，乃遣鸿胪卿袁振往谕帝意。
现代文：裴光庭建议派使召突厥大臣入卫扈从。于是派鸿胪卿袁振去宣谕天子之意。
English: Pei Guangting proposed to send an envoy to summon the Turkic minister to the imperial court. So he sent Hongyu Sir Yuan Zhen to proclaim the will of the Son of Heaven.

古文：默棘连置酒与可敦、阙特勒、暾欲谷坐帐中，谓振曰： 吐蕃，犬出也，唐与为昏；奚、契丹，我奴而役也，亦尚主；独突厥前后请，不许，云何？ 
现代文：默棘连置酒与可敦、阙特勒、暾欲谷坐在帐中对袁振说： 吐蕃是狗种，唐与之婚姻；奚、契丹是我的奴仆，也娶公主；独突厥先后多次请婚，都不允许，是为什么？ 
English: Sitting in the accounts, Mei Xuan, who had been drinking wine with Ke Tun, Zhaotler and Xiang Zhi Gu, said to Yuan Zhen: "Tu Xuan is a dog breed, and Tang married him; Yu and Qidan are my servants, and they also married princesses; German Turks have repeatedly proposed marriage, but they are not allowed, why is that?

古文：振曰： 可汗，天子子也，子而昏，可乎？ 
现代文：袁振答： 可汗，是天子之子，父子而婚配，可以吗？ 
English: Yuan Zhen replied, "Khan is the son of the Son of Heaven. Can a father and son get married?

古文：默棘连曰： 不然，二蕃皆赐姓，而得尚主，何不可云？
现代文：默棘连说 ：不能这样说。奚、契丹二蕃也蒙赐姓，还可以娶公主，依此则，有何不可的？
English: Mei Xianlian said, "You can't say that. Zhai and Qidan II were also given surnames, and they can also marry princesses. According to this principle, why can't they?"

古文：且公主亦非帝女，我不敢有所择，但屡请不得，为诸国笑。 
现代文：何况公主也不是皇帝的女儿。我不敢有所选择，但多次求婚不得，被各国笑话。 
English: What's more, the princess is not the emperor's daughter. I didn't dare to make a choice, but I couldn't resist proposing marriage several times and was ridiculed by all countries.

古文：振许为请，默棘连遣大臣阿史德颉利发入献，遂从封禅。
现代文：袁振答应代为请婚，默棘连派大臣阿史德颉利发入朝贡献，随从封禅。
English: Yuan Zhen agreed to propose marriage on his behalf, and Mei Xianlian sent Minister Ashide Qili to make a contribution to the DPRK and follow the Fuzhen.

古文：有诏四夷诸酋皆入仗佩弓矢，会兔起帝马前，帝一发毙之，颉利发奉兔顿首贺曰： 陛下神武超绝，若天上则臣不知，人间无有也。 
现代文：皇帝诏令四夷各酋加入仪仗队，佩带弓箭，正巧有兔子在皇帝马前跳出，皇帝一箭即中。颉利发捧着兔子叩头祝贺： 陛下神武超绝。天上情况不得而知，人间则无人可比。 
English: Emperor Zhao ordered the four emperors to join the honor guard, wearing bows and arrows. A rabbit jumped out in front of the emperor's horse, and the emperor was hit by the arrow. Gong Li Fa held the rabbit and bowed his head in congratulation: His Majesty is the most powerful. The situation in heaven is unknown, but there is no one comparable on earth.

古文：诏问： 饥欲食乎？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：你饿了想吃东西吗？ 
English: The emperor asked: Are you hungry and want to eat?

古文：对曰： 仰观弧矢之威，使十日不食犹为饱。 
现代文：颉利发回答 ：仰观圣武之威，即使十天不吃也觉得饱呢。 
English: Hao Lifa replied, "Looking up to the might of the holy warriors, I feel full even if I don't eat for ten days."

古文：因令仗内驰射。
现代文：于是令他在仪卫队中驰射。
English: As a result, he was made to ride shotgun in the ceremonial guard.

古文：扈封毕，厚宴赐遣之，然卒不许和亲。
现代文：封禅毕，厚宴赐颉利发，让他回去，但终于不许和亲。
English: After the ceremony, a lavish banquet was given to the bridegroom, and he was allowed to return home, but he was not allowed to be with his bride.

古文：自是比年遣大臣入朝，吐蕃以书约与连和钞边，默棘连不敢从，封上其书，天子嘉之，引使者梅录啜宴紫宸殿，诏朔方西受降城许互市，岁赐帛数十万。
现代文：从此，默棘连每年派大臣入朝。吐蕃送信与他相约联合犯边，默棘连不敢，就将此信送交皇帝，皇帝嘉奖他忠诚，领使者梅录啜在紫宸殿宴饮。诏令将朔方的西受降城开放做贸易城，每年赐帛数十万。
English: From then on, Mochitsura sent a minister to the imperial court every year. Tubo sent a letter to make an appointment with him to jointly violate the border. Mochitsura did not dare to do so, so he sent this letter to the emperor. The emperor commended him for his loyalty and led the envoy, Meiroku, to a banquet at the Palace of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress

古文：十九年，阙特勒死，使金吾将军张去逸、都官郎中吕向奉玺诏吊祭，帝为刻辞于碑，仍立庙像，四垣图战阵状，诏高手工六人往，绘写精肖，其国以为未尝有，默棘连视之，必悲梗。
现代文：开元十九年，阙特勒死，诏令金吾将军张去逸、都官郎中吕向带了玺诏前往吊祭，皇帝亲自写碑文刻石，立祠庙，刻像，四壁画战争场面。诏令高手工人六人前去办理，刻绘维妙维肖，是突厥国内从未有过的。默棘连看了，悲哽不已。
English: In the 19th year of the first century, Zettler died, and the emperor ordered General Kingo Zhang to leave, and Lu Xiang, the governor's son-in-law, took Zettler to the hanging ceremony. The emperor personally wrote inscriptions, erected temples, carved statues, and painted four murals of war scenes. Zettler ordered six skilled workers to go and handle it, and carved the dimensional vision, which had never been seen in Turkey. I watched the silence, and was saddened.

古文：默棘连请昏既勤，帝许可，于是遣哥解栗必来谢，请昏期。
现代文：默棘连求婚不止，皇帝同意了。于是派哥解栗必来谢，并问婚期。
English: The Emperor consented to the marriage, after Mochizane had repeatedly proposed marriage. So, he sent a messenger to the Emperor to thank him and inquire about the time of the marriage.

古文：俄为梅录啜所毒，忍死杀梅录啜，夷其种，乃卒。
现代文：不久被梅录啜下毒，死前乃杀梅录啜，尽灭其族。
English: Soon after, he was poisoned by Mei Luo, and before he died, he killed Mei Luo and wiped out his entire clan.

古文：帝为发哀，诏宗正卿李佺吊祭，因立庙，诏史官李融文其碑。
现代文：皇帝为之举哀，诏令宗正卿李亻全前去吊祭。为他立庙，令史官李融写碑文。
English: The emperor mourned for him, and ordered Zong Zhengqing Li Yuquan to go to the hanging ceremony. He built a temple for him, and ordered the historian Li Rong to write an inscription.

古文：国人共立其子为伊然可汗。
现代文：其国人共立其子为伊然可汗。
English: The people of his country jointly established his son as Khan.

古文：伊然可汗立八年，卒。凡遣使三入朝。
现代文：伊然可汗在位八年，三次派使者入朝。
English: In the eight years of his reign, Khan sent envoys to the North three times.

古文：其弟嗣立，是为苾星伽骨咄禄可汗，使右金吾卫将军李质持册为登利可汗。
现代文：死，其弟即位，是为絆伽骨咄禄可汗。诏令右金吾卫将军李质前去册封为登利可汗。
English: After his death, his younger brother ascended to the throne and became the Kizunagakure Ulu Khan. He ordered the right-hand king, General Li Jianwei, to be crowned as the Dangli Khan.

古文：明年，遣使伊难如朝正月，献方物，曰 礼天可汗如礼天，今新岁献月，愿以万寿献天子 云。
现代文：第二年，派使者伊难如朝正月，献土产，说 ：对天可汗礼敬就如对天礼敬。现在新年来贡献，愿以万寿献天子。 
English: In the second year, he sent an envoy, Inan, as if it were the first day of the new year, to offer the local produce, saying, "To pay homage to the khan is to pay homage to the heavens. Now that the new year has arrived, I would like to offer my life to the Son of Heaven."

古文：可汗幼，其母婆匐与小臣饫斯达干乱，遂预政，诸部不协。
现代文：其时可汗年幼，其母婆匐与小臣饫斯达干相好，并干预国政，各部落不服。
English: At that time, the khan was young, and his mother, Bao Bao, was friendly with his junior minister, Bao Dagan, and interfered in state affairs, which the various tribes did not accept.

古文：登利从父分掌东西兵，号左右杀，士之精劲皆属。
现代文：登利的两个叔父分掌东西兵，号称左右杀，精锐部队皆属两杀。
English: Two of Denley's uncles split the Eastern and Western soldiers, known as the left and right kill, the elite troops are all two kill.

古文：可汗与母诱斩西杀，夺其兵，左杀惧，即攻登利可汗，杀之。
现代文：可汗与母亲诱杀了右杀，夺其兵，左杀害怕祸及自己，用兵攻登利可汗，杀了他。
English: The khan and his mother enticed the right-hand man to kill and capture his soldiers, and the left-hand man, fearing harm to himself, attacked the Dengli khan with his soldiers and killed him.

古文：左杀者，判阙特勒也，遂立毘伽可汗子，俄为骨咄叶护所杀，立其弟，旋又杀之，叶护乃自为可汗。
现代文：左杀，是判阙特勒，拥立毗伽阙可汗之子。不久，被骨咄叶护所杀，立其弟，不久又被杀，叶护自立为可汗。
English: Zuozhi was the son of Zhan Yutler, who supported and established the Vijayanagar Khanate. Shortly after, he was killed by his half-brother, established his brother, was killed again soon after, and established himself as the khan.

古文：天宝初，其大部回纥、葛逻禄、拔悉蜜并起攻叶护，杀之，尊拔悉蜜之长为颉跌伊施可汗，于是回纥、葛逻禄自为左右叶护，亦遣使者来告。
现代文：天宝初年，其大部回纥、葛逻禄、拔悉蜜联合攻叶护，杀了他，拥戴拔悉蜜的君长为颉跌伊施可汗。此时回纥、葛逻禄自为左右叶护，也派使者来告。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Ugyen, Geroglu, and Batshimmi united to attack and protect Ye, and killed him, and the ruler who supported Batshimmi was Ugyen Ishi Khan. At this time, Ugyen and Geroglu were left and right protectors, and also sent an envoy to report.

古文：国人奉判阙特勒子为乌苏米施可汗，以其子葛腊哆为西杀。
现代文：国人拥立判阙特勒之子为乌苏米施可汗，又以其子葛腊哆为右杀。
English: The Chinese people supported the ruling that the son of Juntelaer was Usumish Khan, and that his son, Gracchus, was Uxmal.

古文：帝使使者谕令内附，乌苏不听，其下不与，拔悉蜜等三部共攻乌苏米施，米施遁亡。
现代文：皇帝派使者晓谕他们来内附，乌苏不听，其下属不服，拔悉蜜等三部联合攻乌苏米施，米施逃跑。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to tell them to come inside, but Usu did not listen, and his subordinates were not satisfied, so they plucked honey and other three departments to jointly attack Usumish, and Meish fled.

古文：其西叶护阿布思及葛腊哆率五千帐降，以葛腊哆为怀恩王。
现代文：西叶护阿布思及葛腊哆率五千帐来降，封葛腊哆为怀恩王。
English: The West Leaf Protector Abu Si and Grameen were reduced by five thousand accounts, and Grameen was crowned as the King of Wine.

古文：三载，拔悉蜜等杀乌苏米施，传首京师，献太庙。
现代文：天宝三年，拔悉蜜等杀乌苏米施，传头到京师，献于太庙。
English: In the third year of Tianbao, he plucked out all the honey and killed Uzumishi, and sent the head to Beijing to be dedicated to the Imperial Temple.

古文：其弟白眉特勒鹘陇匐立，是为白眉可汗。
现代文：其弟白眉特勒鹘陇匐立，是为白眉可汗。
English: His younger brother, Bai Mei Telle, is also known as Bai Mei Khan.

古文：于是突厥大乱，国人推拔悉蜜酋为可汗，诏朔方节度使王忠嗣以兵乘其乱，抵萨河内山，击其左阿波达干十一部，破之，独其右未下，而回纥、葛逻禄杀拔悉蜜可汗，奉回纥骨力裴罗定其国，是为骨咄禄毘伽阙可汗。
现代文：那时，突厥大乱，国人推拔悉蜜酋长为可汗。诏令朔方节度使王忠嗣乘乱讨伐。到达萨河内山，攻击其左阿波达干十一部，得胜。其右部则未破，而回纥、葛逻禄杀了拔悉蜜可汗，拥戴回纥骨力裴罗定国，是为骨咄禄毗伽阙可汗。
English: At that time, there was the Turkish War of Independence, and the people of the country promoted the chief of the Semei clan to the position of khan. The emperor issued the edict of Suo Fang Jiedu, ordering Wang Zhongzhi to take part in the crusade. He arrived at the Sahanei Mountain, attacked the eleventh part of the left Abodakan, and won. The right part was not broken, but Hui Xuan and Ge Luo killed the Semei Khan, and supported Hui Xuan Li Pei Luo Ding Guo, which was the bone of the Semei Khan.

古文：明年，杀白眉可汗，传首献。
现代文：第二年，杀了白眉可汗，传首京都。
English: The following year, he killed the White-Eyed Khan and beheaded him in Kyoto.

古文：毘伽可汗妻骨咄禄婆匐可敦率众自归，天子御花萼楼宴群臣，赋诗美其事，封可敦为宾国夫人，岁给粉直二十万。
现代文：毗伽阙可汗之妻骨咄禄婆匐可敦率众来归附。天子在花萼楼宴群臣，赋诗赞扬此事，封可敦为宾国夫人，每年给脂粉费二十万。
English: Vijayanagara khan's wife, Bokuroprabha, invited Kedon to come and join them. The heavenly son held a banquet for the courtiers in the Calyx Building, praised the event in a poem, and made Kedon the wife of the guest of honor, and gave him 200,000 rupees in powdered milk every year.

古文：始突厥国于后魏大统时，至是灭。
现代文：突厥国始立于后魏大统时，至此灭。
English: The Turkic state was founded in the time of the Great Reunification of China after the Wei Dynasty, and it is now extinct.

古文：后或朝贡，皆旧部九姓云，其地尽入回纥。
现代文：以后有人来朝贡，都是旧部的九姓，其地全并入回纥。
English: Later, people came to pay tribute to the imperial court, all of them were the nine surnames of the old part, and all of them were incorporated into Hui Zang.

古文：始其族分国于西者，曰西突厥。
现代文：当初，其族人分国于西部的，称为西突厥。
English: At first, the people of his ethnic group living in the western part of the country were called West Turks.

古文：西突厥，其先讷都陆之孙吐务，号大叶护。
现代文：西突厥，其祖先是讷都陆之孙吐务，称为大叶护。
English: Western Turkic, whose ancestor was Nadu Lu's grandson Tu Mu, known as Oyezu.

古文：长子曰土门伊利可汗，次子曰室点蜜，亦曰瑟帝米。
现代文：长子叫土门伊利可汗，次子叫室点蜜，也叫瑟帝米。
English: The eldest son is called Domen Ilykhan, the second son is called Murotomi, also called Sertimi.

古文：瑟帝米之子曰达头可汗，亦曰步迦可汗。
现代文：瑟帝米之子叫达头可汗，也叫步迦可汗。
English: The son of Sudhimi is called Dadu Khan, also known as Buga Khan.

古文：始与东突厥分乌孙故地有之，东即突厥，西雷翥海，南疏勒，北瀚海，直京师北七千里，由焉耆西北七日行得南庭，北八日行得北庭，与都陆、弩失毕、歌逻禄、处月、处蜜、伊吾诸种杂。
现代文：开始时与东突厥分占乌孙的旧地。东边是突厥，西是雷翥海，南为疏勒，北为瀚海，距京师北七千里，由焉耆西北行七日可到其南廷，北行八日可到其北廷。与都陆、弩失毕、歌逻禄、处月、处蜜、伊吾等种族杂居。
English: At the beginning, it was divided from the East Turkic into the former lands of the Ussun. To the east is the Turkic, to the west is the Lei Erhai, to the south is the Shule, and to the north is the Great Sea. It is seven thousand miles north of Beijing, and it takes seven days to travel from the northwest to the south, and eight days to travel from the northwest to the north. It is mixed with ethnic groups such as the Tulu, the Shushi Bi, the Ge Lu Lu, the Zhengyue, the Zhenmi, and the Igu.

古文：其风俗大抵突厥也，言语少异。
现代文：风俗大致与突厥相同，只语言略不同。
English: The customs are roughly the same as the Turks, only the language is slightly different.

古文：初，东突厥木杆可汗死，舍其子大逻便，而立弟佗钵可汗。
现代文：当初，东突厥木杆可汗死，不立儿子大逻便，而立弟弟为佗钵可汗。
English: At first, after the death of the East Turkistan Muxu Khan, his son, Dai Luo Ben, was not appointed, but his brother, Zou Khan, was.

古文：佗钵死，先令戒其子庵罗必立大逻便，国人以其母贱，不肯立，而卒立庵罗。
现代文：佗钵死，先是戒其子庵罗必须立大逻便为可汗。但国人因大逻便之母卑贱，不肯立他，终究立了庵罗。
English: After his death, the first thing he did was to tell his son, An Luo, that it was necessary to set up a Great Luo, and then he would become khan. However, the people of the country did not want to set up a Great Luo because his mother was lowly, so he finally set up a Great Luo.

古文：庵罗后以让木杆兄子摄图，是为沙钵略可汗。
现代文：庵罗后来又让位给木杆哥哥之子摄图，是为沙钵略可汗。
English: An Luo later gave way to the son of the brother of the wooden pole to take a picture, it was the Khan of Shaanxi.

古文：而大逻便别为阿波可汗，自臣所部，沙钵略袭击之，杀其母，阿波西走达头。
现代文：而大逻便另为阿波可汗，统辖自己的部落。沙钵略袭击他，杀了他的母亲。阿波西投达头。
English: On the other hand, Dai Luo was Apo Khan, who ruled over his own tribe. Shanyu attacked him and killed his mother. Apo Si became the leader.

古文：当是时，达头为西面可汗，即授阿波兵十万，使与东突厥战。
现代文：当时，达头是西面可汗，就拨兵十万给阿波，让他去与东突厥战。
English: At that time, the western khan was the leader, and he sent a hundred thousand soldiers to Awa to fight against the East Turks.

古文：而阿波竟为沙钵略所禽。
现代文：但阿波竟被沙钵略所擒。
English: However, Apo was actually abducted by the sandpiper.

古文：及启民可汗时，达头可汗岁以兵相加，而隋常助启民，故达头败奔吐谷浑。
现代文：到启民可汗时，达头可汗每年都出兵来打，而隋朝常帮助启民。所以达头败后投奔吐谷浑。
English: When it came to the Qimin Khan, the Datou Khan sent troops to fight every year, while the Sui Dynasty often helped the Qimin. Therefore, after the defeat of the Datou Khan, he rushed to Tugugun.

古文：始，阿波既禽，国人立鞅素特勒子，是为泥利可汗。
现代文：当初，阿波被擒，国人拥立鞅素特勒之子，是为泥利可汗。
English: At the beginning, Abo was imprisoned, and the son of Suutler, who was supported by the people of the country, was Muiri Khan.

古文：达头之奔，泥利亦败，及死，其子达漫立，是为泥橛处罗可汗，政苛察多忌。
现代文：达头败逃时，泥利也败。死后，其子达漫继立，是为泥橛处罗可汗，其政苛繁，对人多忌。
English: When Dadu was defeated and fled, Muduli was also defeated. After his death, his son, Daman, succeeded him as Luo Khan in the muddy place. His politics were harsh, and he feared many people.

古文：大业中，从炀帝征高丽，赐号曷萨那可汗，妻以宗女，留其弟阙达度设畜牧于会宁郡，即自称阙可汗。
现代文：隋大业年间，随炀帝去征高丽，赐号为曷萨那可汗，并将宗室女嫁给他。曷萨那的弟弟阙达度设在会宁郡放牧，自称阙可汗。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he went to conquer Korea with Emperor Gong and was given the title of Gongsana Khan and married his stepdaughter to him. Gongsana's younger brother Gong Dadu set up a herding station in Hoeryong County and called himself Gongsana Khan.

古文：江都乱，曷萨那从宇文化及至黎阳，遁归长安，高祖降榻与共坐，封归义王，以大珠献帝，帝不受，曰： 朕所重者王之赤心，是无用也。 
现代文：江都乱起，曷萨那随宇文化及到黎阳。偷偷归附长安，高祖降榻与之共坐，封爵归义王。曷萨那献大珠，皇帝不收，说： 我所看重的，是王的赤心，这种东西没有用。 
English: Jiangdu was in turmoil, and Zhoushan followed the world culture to Liyang. He secretly returned to attach to Chang'an, Gao Zu descended and sat with him, and the knighthood was given to King Yi. Zhoushan offered the pearl, but the emperor did not accept it, saying: What I value is the king's red heart, this kind of thing is useless.

古文：阙可汗有马三，武德元年内属，赐号吐乌过拔阙可汗，与李轨连和。
现代文：阙可汗有马三千，武德元年归附，赐号吐乌过拔阙可汗，与李轨连和。
English: Wu Khan had 3,000 horses, Wu De annexed it in the first year of the year, gave the title of Tu Wu to Bajie Khan, and made peace with Li Rail.

古文：隋西戎使者曹琼据甘州诱之，俄与琼合，共击轨，兵不胜，走达斗拔谷，与吐谷浑相辅车，为轨所灭。
现代文：隋的西戎使者曹琼据守甘州，诱拔阙可汗与己联手，共击李轨，不胜，逃到达斗拔谷，与吐谷浑相唇齿，后被轨所灭。
English: Cao Qiong, the emissary of the Western Rong Dynasty of the Sui Dynasty, was stationed in Ganzhou. He lured the Qian Khan to join forces with him, and together they attacked Li Rail, but were defeated. They fled to the Battle Valley, and had a close relationship with Tu Valley. They were later destroyed by Rail.

古文：初，曷萨那朝隋，国人皆不欲，既被留不遣，乃共立达头孙，号射匮可汗，建廷龟兹北之三弥山，玉门以西诸国多役属，与东突厥亢。
现代文：先前曷萨那朝时，国人都不乐意。后曷萨那留在隋都，国人共立达头的孙子，称射匮可汗，建廷于龟兹北之三弥山。玉门以西的各国多依附，与东突厥抗衡。
English: In the past, when the Sasanian dynasty ruled, the Chinese people were not happy. Later, Sasanian remained in the Sui capital, and the Chinese people jointly established the grandson of the leader, called Shaka Khan, and built the court on Mount Samji in the north of Kuez. Countries west of the Yumen mostly adhered to and competed with East Turkistan.

古文：射匮死，其弟统叶护嗣，是为统叶护可汗。
现代文：射匮死，其弟统叶护继立，是为统叶护可汗。
English: He died of starvation, and his younger brother, Tongye Omo, succeeded him as Tongye Omo khan.

古文：统叶护可汗勇而有谋，战辄胜，因并铁勒，下波斯、罽宾，控弦数十万，徙廷石国北之千泉，遂霸西域诸国，悉授以颉利发，而命一吐屯监统，以督赋入。
现代文：统叶护可汗勇而有谋，每战均胜，于是吞并铁勒，攻克波斯、宾，有兵马几十万。将牙廷迁至石国北之千泉，称霸于西域诸国。他将这些国全交给颉利发，并派吐屯一人监统，督促征赋。
English: Tongyeogu Khan was brave and resourceful, winning every battle, so he annexed Tiele, conquered Persia and Bin, with hundreds of thousands of soldiers and horses. He moved the court to Qianquan in the north of Shikoku, and dominated the countries in the western region. He handed all these countries over to Xilifa, and sent a person from Tutun to supervise Tongyeogu and urge conscription.

古文：明年，射匮使使来，以曷萨那有世憾，请杀之，帝不许。
现代文：武德二年，始毕派使者来，说与曷萨那有世仇，请皇帝杀他。
English: In the second year of Wudeh, Zibi sent an envoy to the emperor, saying that he had a life-long grudge against Uzana, and asked the emperor to kill him.

古文：群臣曰： 存一人，失一国，后且为患。 
现代文：皇帝不同意，群臣说 ：保护了一个人，将会失掉一个国，而且将成后患。 
English: The emperor disagreed, and his courtiers said: "If you protect one person, you will lose a country, and you will become a hindrance."

古文：秦王曰： 不然，人来归我，我杀之不祥。 
现代文：秦王世民说： 不，人家来归附我们，杀了他不吉利。 
English: Qin King Shimin said, "No, someone came to join us and killed him, which is unlucky.

古文：帝又不听。宴禁中，酒酣，至中书省，纵使者戕之，不宣也。
现代文：皇帝又不采纳，乃召曷萨那到内宫饮宴，饮至尽兴，送他到中书省，听任始毕的使者杀了他。
English: The emperor did not accept the offer, but invited Ussana to a banquet in the inner palace, where he drank to his heart's content. He then sent him to the Ministry of Literature, where he was killed by the emperor's messenger.

古文：射匮亦连年系贡条支巨卵、师子革等，帝厚申抚结，约与并力讨东突厥。
现代文：武德三年，统叶护派使者贡献条支巨卵、师子革等，皇帝厚加抚结，相约并力讨伐东突厥。
English: In the third year of Wudeh, the envoys of the Unification Protection faction contributed a giant egg, a teacher and a leather, etc. The emperor thickly added a knot, and made an agreement to fight against the East Turk.

古文：统叶护可汗请期，颉利大惧，乃与和，约毋相伐也。
现代文：统叶护可汗来约定时间，颉利大骇，与统叶护言和，约定不相攻伐。
English: When the tutelary khan arrived at the appointed time, he was greatly impressed and agreed not to attack.

古文：统叶护可汗来请昏，帝与群臣谋： 西突厥去我远，缓急不可杖，可与昏乎？ 
现代文：统叶护可汗来求婚，皇帝与群臣商议 ：西突厥离我远，如有缓急不可倚仗，能与他们联姻么？ 
English: Tong Ye Gu Khan came to propose marriage, the emperor and his ministers discussed: West Turkistan is far away from me, if there is a delay, can I marry them?

古文：封德彝曰： 计今之便，莫若远交而近攻，请听昏以怖北狄，待我既定，而后图之。 
现代文：待我国定兵强，再来设法。 
English: Wait until our country has a strong army, and then try again.

古文：帝乃许昏，诏高平王道立至其国，统叶护可汗喜，遣真珠统俟斤与道立还，献万钉宝钿金带、马五千匹以藉约。
现代文：皇帝乃许婚，令高平王道立去他的国家。统叶护可汗很高兴，派真珠统俟斤与道立一同来朝，献万钉宝钿金带及马五千匹。
English: The emperor was engaged to be married, and ordered King Gaoping Dao Li to go to his country. Tongye Oo Khan was very happy, and sent the pearl and the jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade jade j

古文：会东突厥岁犯边，西道梗涩，又颉利遣谓曰： 若迎唐公主，必假我道，我且留之。 
现代文：其时东突厥每年犯边，西道阻涩，又颉利派人对统叶护说： 你若迎唐公主，一定得经我的国中过，我定把她留下。 
English: At that time, the East Turks broke the border every year, the West Road was blocked, and the Qili sent people to Tongye Bao to say: If you welcome the Tang Princess, you must pass through my country, I will definitely leave her.

古文：统叶护可汗病之，未克昏。
现代文：统叶护没办法，未能成婚。
English: There was nothing she could do, she couldn't get married.

古文：方负其强，不以恩结下，众怨，多叛去，其诸父莫贺咄杀之，帝欲赍玉帛焚祭其国，会乱，不果至。
现代文：统叶护可汗此时正自恃其强，对下属少恩，众人甚怨，很多都叛离。
English: At this time, the tutelary Ipoh Khan was trying to make himself stronger. He was not very kind to his subordinates, and they resented him greatly. Many of them defected.

古文：莫贺咄立，是为屈利俟毘可汗，遣使者来献。
现代文：其伯父莫贺咄杀了他。皇帝正准备带了奠仪去他国祭奠，正遇他国内乱，未去成。莫贺咄立，是为屈利俟毗可汗。派使者来贡献。
English: His uncle, Moga, killed him. The emperor was preparing to take the memorial service to another country to pay tribute, and was experiencing civil strife in his country, which did not go well. Moga stood up for the Quli Shubi Khan. He sent an envoy to contribute.

古文：俟毘可汗初分统突厥为小可汗，既称大可汗，国人不附。
现代文：俟毗可汗原先分统突厥族为小可汗。既自称大可汗，国人不服。
English: Shubikhan was originally a minor khan for the Turkic people. He called himself a great khan, but the local people did not accept it.

古文：弩失毕部自推泥孰莫贺设为可汗，泥孰辞不受。
现代文：弩失毕部自推泥孰莫贺设为可汗，泥孰推辞不就。
English: After the loss of the last part of the self-promotion, Moga was set up as a khan, and it was not enough to make excuses.

古文：会统叶护可汗子力特勒避莫贺咄乱，亡在康居，泥孰迎立之，为乙毘钵罗肆叶护可汗，与俟毘可汗分王其国，挐斗不解，各遣使朝献。
现代文：其时统叶护可汗之子力特勒为避莫贺咄之乱，逃在康居。泥孰迎他回来立为可汗，是为乙毗钵罗肆叶护可汗，与俟毗可汗分统其国，争斗不止，各人派使者入朝。
English: At that time, Ritler, the son of Ye Gu Khan, fled to Kangju in order to avoid the Mogao Rebellion. Muddy welcomed him back and became the khan. It was for Yipi Luo to become Ye Gu Khan, and for Zou Pi Khan to rule his country separately. There was constant fighting, and each sent envoys to the imperial court.

古文：太宗追怜曷萨那死非罪，为赠上柱国，具礼以葬。
现代文：太宗即位哀怜曷萨那死于无罪，追赠为上柱国，循礼改葬。
English: Emperor Taizong, who was enthroned at the time, mourned the innocent death of Xansana, posthumously awarded him the title of Shangzhuangguo, and had him reburied according to the rites.

古文：贞观四年，俟毘可汗请昏，不许，诏曰： 突厥方乱，君臣未定，何遽昏为？
现代文：贞观四年，俟毗可汗来求婚，不同意，说 ：突厥正内乱，君臣未定，怎么谈得上婚姻。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Zou Bi Khan came to propose marriage, but he did not agree, saying: The Turks are in civil strife, the monarchs and ministers are undecided, how can we talk about marriage.

古文：各敕其部毋相侵。 
现代文：现令你们各部自保，不得相攻。 
English: All your departments are now ordered to protect themselves and not to attack each other.

古文：由是西域诸国悉叛之，国大虚耗，众悉附肆叶护可汗，虽俟毘之部亦稍稍去，共以兵击俟毘，俟毘走保金山，为泥孰所杀，奉肆叶护为大可汗。
现代文：此后，西域各国均叛离，国内虚耗。众人都依附肆叶护可汗，虽是俟毗的部众也渐渐离去。大家共同发兵攻俟毗，俟毗退守金山，被泥孰所杀。乃奉肆叶护为大可汗。
English: After that, all the countries in the western region rebelled, and the country was wasted. Everyone was attached to Wabi Yago Khan, although the subordinates of Sui gradually left. Everyone jointly sent troops to attack Sui, Sui retreated to the Jinshan Mountain, and was killed by mud. However, Sui Yago was honored as the great khan.

古文：肆叶护已立，即北讨铁勒、薛延陀，为延陀所败。
现代文：肆叶护可汗立，大发兵北征铁勒、薛延陀，被延陀击败。
English: He sent troops to the north to conquer Tiele and Xue Yanta, but was defeated by Yanta.

古文：性猜愎，狭于统下。
现代文：肆叶护性情刚愎好猜忌，没有统治下属的方略。
English: They are stubborn and suspicious, and have no strategy to rule their subordinates.

古文：小可汗乙利者，于国最有功，肆叶护听谗，种夷之，众皆沮骇。
现代文：小可汗乙利，对国功最大，肆叶护听信谗言，杀了他全族。全国震骇。
English: The little khan Bitli, the greatest contributor to the national cause, killed his entire family. The whole country was shocked.

古文：又忌泥孰，阴图杀之，泥孰亡入焉耆。
现代文：他还忌恨泥孰，打算杀了他，泥孰逃入焉耆。
English: He also hated Muddy and wanted to kill him, so Muddy ran away.

古文：未几，没卑达干与弩失毕部诸豪谋执废肆叶护，叶护轻骑走康居，忧死。
现代文：不久，没卑达干与弩失毕部的豪帅们打算抓住并废弃肆叶护，叶护轻骑逃至康居，不久郁闷而死。
English: Not long after, the great generals who had not been able to defeat and defeat the enemy planned to capture and discard the cowardly Ye Guo. Ye Guo escaped on horseback to Kangju, and soon died of depression.

古文：国人迎泥孰于焉耆，立之，是为咄陆可汗。
现代文：国人到焉耆迎回泥孰立为可汗，是为咄陆可汗。
English: The Chinese people go to Yan'an and welcome back the mud and stand up as khans, as khans of the land.

古文：可汗父莫贺设，本隶统叶护者，武德时来朝，太宗与之盟，约为昆弟。
现代文：可汗的父亲莫贺设，本隶属统叶护，武德时来朝，当时太宗还是秦王，与之约盟，结为兄弟。
English: The khan's father, Moga Setsu, originally belonged to the Imperial Yegu, but when Wu De came to the imperial court, when Taizong was still the king of Qin, he made an alliance with him and they became brothers.

古文：死而泥孰代之，或曰伽那设。
现代文：他死后由泥孰代其职，称为伽那设。
English: After his death, his position was taken over by Mudra, known as Ganesha.

古文：既立，遣使诣阙，不敢当可汗号。
现代文：现立为可汗，派使者入朝，不敢称号可汗。
English: He is now established as a khan, sends emissaries to the imperial court, and does not dare to use the title of khan.

古文：帝诏鸿胪少卿刘善因持节册号吞阿娄拔利邲咄陆可汗，赐鼓纛，段彩巨万。
现代文：皇帝诏鸿胪卿刘善因持节前往册封为吞阿娄拔利必阝咄陆可汗，赐给鼓旗，彩帛万段。
English: Emperor Zhao Hongzhi and Liu Shan went to be canonized as Tong Aba, Li Bi and Lu Khan on the occasion of the festival, and gave him a drum and flag with ten thousand colors.

古文：泥孰遣使谢。
现代文：泥孰派使者来谢。
English: Muddy sent an emissary to thank him.

古文：它日，太上皇宴使者两仪殿，谓长孙无忌曰： 今蛮夷率服，古亦有乎？ 
现代文：过了一天，太上皇在两仪殿宴请使者，对长孙无忌说： 如今蛮夷全都臣服了，古代也有过这样的事吗？ 
English: A day later, the Emperor held a banquet for the envoys at the Two Ceremonial Halls and said to his eldest grandson, "Nowadays, the barbarians have all been subjugated. Was there ever such a thing in ancient times?"

古文：无忌上千万岁寿，太上皇喜，以酒属帝，帝顿首谢，亦奉觞上太上皇寿。
现代文：无忌敬酒祝千万岁，太上皇很高兴，给酒皇帝，皇帝拜谢，也敬酒祝太上皇万岁。
English: There's no reason not to drink a toast to ten million years of age. The Emperor is very pleased. Give a toast to the Emperor, the Emperor thanks you, and also a toast to the Emperor.

古文：咄陆可汗死，弟同俄设立，是为沙钵罗咥利失可汗，赠三遣使奉方物，遂请昏，帝慰而不俞。
现代文：咄陆可汗死，弟同俄设即位，是为沙钵罗利失可汗，一年中三次派使者贡献土产，并求婚。皇帝抚慰而未许婚。
English: After the death of Lu Khan, his brother Tong Ruxi ascended to the throne. It was for the sake of Shajaroli, the lost khan, that he sent emissaries three times a year to contribute to local production and to propose marriage. The emperor consoled but did not promise marriage.

古文：可汗分其国为十部，部以一人统之，人授一箭，号十设，亦曰十箭。
现代文：可汗将其国分为十部，每部令一人统辖，每人授箭一支，称之为十设，也叫十箭。
English: The khan divided his country into ten parts, each of which was under the control of one person, and each person was given one arrow, which was called ten sets, also called ten arrows.

古文：为左、右：右五咄陆部，置五大啜，居碎叶东；右五弩失毕部，置五大俟斤，居碎叶西。
现代文：又分十设为左、右；左为五咄陆部，置五大啜，居碎叶以东；右为五弩失毕部，置五大俟斤，居碎叶以西。
English: It is also divided into ten parts: the left and right parts; the left part is the five-thousand-year-old part, the five-thousand-year-old part is east of the broken leaf; the right part is the five-thousand-year-old part, the five-thousand-year-old part is west of the broken leaf.

古文：其下称一箭曰一部落，号十姓部落云。
现代文：其下称一箭为一部落，称之为十姓部落。
English: One arrow is called a tribe, and the next is called a tribe of ten families.

古文：然不为众悦赖，其部统吐屯以兵袭之，咥利失率左右战，统吐屯不胜去。
现代文：但国人不喜欢利失，其部属统吐屯发兵攻他，利失率左右迎战，统叶屯不胜而去。
English: However, the Chinese people do not like profit and loss. His subordinates all sent troops to attack him. The profit and loss ratio was about the same.

古文：咥利失与其弟步利设奔焉耆。
现代文：利失则与其弟步利设奔焉耆。
English: Profit and loss is in line with its younger brother.

古文：阿悉吉阙俟斤与统吐屯召国人谋立欲谷设为大可汗，以咥利失为小可汗。
现代文：阿悉吉阙俟斤与统吐屯召集国人准备拥立欲谷设为大可汗，让利失为小可汗。
English: Aserji Shujin and Tongtutun gathered the people of the country to prepare to support the establishment of Zhigu as a big khan, and let profit and loss become a small khan.

古文：会统吐屯被杀，欲谷设又为其俟斤所破，咥利失乃复得故地。
现代文：恰统吐屯被杀，欲谷设又被俟斤击破。利失复得旧地。
English: Jia Tong Tutun was killed, and Zhi Gu Shie was defeated again. The old land was regained.

古文：后西部卒自立欲谷设为乙毘咄陆可汗，而与咥利失交战，杀伤不可计，乃因伊列河约诸部：河以西受令于咄陆，其东咥利失主之。
现代文：后来西部终于自立欲谷设为乙毗咄陆可汗，与利失交战，死伤不可计数。于是就以伊列河为界，河以西属咄陆，河以东则听命利失。
English: Later, the western part of the country finally became independent, and the Valley of Desire was set up as the Khan of the East, and fought with the profit and loss, and the deaths and injuries were incalculable. Therefore, the Ile River was used as the boundary, and the west of the river was the land, and the east of the river was the profit and loss.

古文：自是西突厥又分二国矣。
现代文：从此西突厥又分为两国了。
English: Since then, West Turkistan has been divided into two countries.

古文：咄陆可汗建廷镞曷山西，谓之 北庭 ，驳马、结骨诸国悉附臣之，阴与咥利失部吐屯俟列发以兵攻咥利失。咥利失援穷，奔拔汗那而死。
现代文：咄陆可汗在镞曷山西建廷，称为北庭。驳马、结骨等国均来臣附。暗中与利失部的吐屯俟列发联手发兵攻利失，利失窘困无援，奔拔汗那而死。
English: Gu Lu Khan built a palace in the west of Lushan Mountain, known as the North Palace. Horses, bones and other countries all came to attach themselves to him. Secretly, he sent troops to attack the lost city of Lushan together with the lost city of Tucun. Lushan was in dire straits and had no help, so he died there.

古文：国人立其子，是为乙屈利失乙毘可汗，逾年死。
现代文：国人拥立其子，是为乙屈利失乙毗可汗。
English: The Chinese people supported his son, and it was for the benefit of Yitcu and the loss of Yivi Khan.

古文：弩失毕大酋迎伽那设之子毕贺咄叶护立之，是为乙毘沙钵罗叶护可汗。
现代文：一年后死，弩失毕大酋迎伽那设之子毕贺咄叶护立为可汗，是为乙毗沙钵罗叶护可汗。
English: He died a year later, and the son of the lost great chieftain Bi Yingganashti, Bi Hagatipo, became the khan, and the khan of Epi Sadroepo.

古文：太宗诏左领军将军张大师持节册命，赐鼓纛，建庭虽合水北，谓之 南庭 ，东薄伊列河，龟兹、鄯善、且末、吐火罗、焉耆、石、史、何、穆、康等国皆隶属。
现代文：太宗诏令左领军将军张大师持节前去册命，赐鼓旗，建廷于虽合水之北，称为南庭。东接伊列河，龟兹、鄯善、且末、吐火罗、焉耆、石、史、何、穆、康等国都隶属于他。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict ordering the left-leading general, Zhang Daoyi, to go to the front to record his orders, and gave him a drum banner. The court was built in the north of the Yangtze River, called the South Court. To the east of the Ili River, the provinces of Guizi, Shanshan, Qimai, Tuhuaro, Yanlu, Shi, Shi, Ho, Mu, and Kang were all subordinate to him.

古文：是时咄陆兵浸浸盛，与沙钵罗叶护数交战。
现代文：这时，咄陆兵渐盛，与沙钵罗叶护多次交战。
English: At this time, the army gradually flourished, and fought against Shajialo Yegu many times.

古文：会二可汗使者皆来，帝敕以敦睦，令各罢兵，咄陆不肯听，遣石国吐屯攻叶护可汗，杀之，并其国。
现代文：两可汗都派使者入朝，皇帝赐书要他们和睦，令各自罢兵。咄陆不肯听，派石国的吐屯攻叶护可汗，叶护被杀，国亦被吞并。
English: Both khans sent envoys to the imperial court, and the emperor gave them a letter asking them to make peace and order their respective armies to disband. But the land refused to listen, and sent the stone kingdom of Tutun to attack the khan of Yegu. Yegu was killed, and the country was also annexed.

古文：弩失毕不服，叛去。
现代文：弩失毕不服，叛离。
English: Unhappy with the loss, he defected.

古文：咄陆又击吐火罗，取之，乃入寇伊州。
现代文：咄陆又去攻吐火罗，攻克后进而入侵伊州。
English: They also went to attack Tu Hulao on the mainland, and then invaded Izhou.

古文：安西都护郭孝恪以轻骑二千，自乌骨狙击，败之。
现代文：安西都护郭孝恪率两千轻骑自乌骨狙击，取胜。
English: Anxi Metropolitan Protector Guo Xiao led two thousand light cavalry to snipe from the black bones and win.

古文：咄陆以处月、处蜜兵围天山而不克，孝恪追北，拔处月俟斤之城，抵遏索山，斩千余级，降处蜜部而归。
现代文：咄陆用处月处蜜的兵围天山，又败。郭孝恪乘胜进而攻取处月俟斤所居之城，直追到遏索山，斩杀千余人，收降处蜜部后归。
English: Guo Xiaoke took advantage of the victory and went on to capture the city where Guo Yuanzhong lived. He chased him all the way to Jiezhao Mountain, where he killed more than a thousand people. He then returned to Jiezhang.

古文：咄陆可汗性很傲，留使者元孝友等不遣，妄曰： 我闻唐天子才武，我今讨康居，尔视我与天子等否？ 
现代文：咄陆可汗性狠傲，拘留使者元孝友等人，妄言： 我听说唐天子文武双全。现在我去讨伐康居，你等看我的能力与天子相同不？ 
English: Qilu Khan was fiercely proud, detained the envoy Yuan Xiaotong and others, and said: I have heard that Tang Tianzi is both a man and a warrior. Now I am going to fight Kangju, wait and see if my ability is the same as that of Tianzi.

古文：遂与共攻康居，道米国，即袭破之，系虏其人，取赀口不以与下，其将泥孰啜怒，夺取之，咄陆斩以徇。
现代文：于是发兵攻康居，经过米国，即将它攻下，俘获其人，夺取财物牲畜不分给下属。其将泥孰啜怒，自行夺取，咄陆将他斩首示众。
English: So he sent an army to attack Kangju, passing through the United States, to capture it, capture its people, seize property and livestock without distributing them to subordinates. He was furious, seized them on his own, and beheaded him in public.

古文：泥孰啜之将胡禄屋举兵袭咄陆可汗，多杀士，国大乱，将归保吐火罗，大臣劝其返国，不从，率众去，度叶水，及石国，左右亡去略尽，乃保可贺敦城。
现代文：泥孰啜的副将胡禄举兵攻咄陆，伤亡甚多，国大乱。咄陆准备归而守吐火罗，大臣劝他回国，不听。率领众人渡叶水，到石国，左右几乎失散尽。乃坚守可贺敦城。
English: The mud-caked vice-commander Hu Lu raised an army to attack Shigu, there were many casualties, and the country was in turmoil. Shigu was ready to return to defend Tu Huo Luo, the minister advised him to return to China, but he did not listen. He led the people to Wataribe Shui, to Shigu, and they were almost dispersed. But they held on to Koha Town.

古文：自轻出招叛亡，阿悉吉阙俟斤逆击之，咄陆败，袭取白水胡城以居。
现代文：又轻率地亲自出来召集叛亡者，阿悉吉阙俟斤迎击，咄陆败，袭取白水胡城而居。
English: He also rashly came out in person to summon the traitors, and Aserji went out to meet the attack, but was defeated, and attacked Baishuiwucheng.

古文：弩失毕不欲咄陆为可汗，遣使者至阙下，请所立。
现代文：弩失毕不愿要咄陆当可汗，派使者入朝请立可汗。
English: Unwilling to accept the position of khan, he sent an envoy to the court to request the establishment of a khan.

古文：帝遣通事舍人温无隐持玺诏与国大臣择突厥可汗子孙贤者授之，乃立乙屈利失乙毘可汗之子，是为乙毘射匮可汗。
现代文：皇帝派通事舍人温无隐带玺诏与他国内大臣选突厥可汗子孙中贤能者立为可汗，选中乙屈利失乙毗可汗之子，是为乙毗射匮可汗。
English: The emperor sent his emissary, Emperor Wenwu, to select from among the descendants of the Turkic khans a capable person to be the khan, and to select the son of the lost khan, the son of the lost khan, the son of the lost khan.

古文：乙毘射匮既立，改馆使者，悉还之长安，使弩失毕将兵攻白水胡城。咄陆勒兵自城出，鸣鼓角薄斗，弩失毕不能军，杀获甚多。
现代文：乙毗射匮立，将前拘使者全部以礼送归长安。派弩失毕率兵攻白水胡城，咄陆率兵出城，鸣鼓角力战，弩失毕不能敌，被杀、获甚多。
English: Bibi sent all the former emissaries back to Chang'an with a gift. He sent his lost soldiers to attack Baishuigu City, led his troops out of the city, and fought with drums. He was defeated, killed, and gained a lot.

古文：咄陆因其胜招徠旧部，皆曰： 战千人，存一人，我犹不从也。 
现代文：咄陆乘胜招揽旧部。旧部说 ：用千人战死，为保存一人，我不干。 
English: The old ministry said, "If a thousand men die in battle, to save one, I will not do it."

古文：咄陆自知众怨，乃走吐火罗。
现代文：咄陆知道众人怨恨，于是奔吐火罗。
English: Gu Lu knew people's resentment, so he ran to spit fire.

古文：乙毘射匮遣使贡方物，且请昏，帝令割龟兹、于阗、疏勒、硃俱波、葱岭五国为聘礼，不克昏。
现代文：乙毗射匮可汗派使者贡献，且求婚。皇帝命他割龟兹、于阗、疏勒、朱俱波、葱岭五国为聘礼。婚事不成。
English: Bibi Shah Khan sent an envoy to make a contribution and proposed marriage. The emperor ordered him to cut five countries as a betrothal gift. The marriage did not take place.

古文：于是阿史那贺鲁反，尽得可汗部落。
现代文：那时，又有阿史那贺鲁反，射匮部落被他吞并。
English: At that time, Ashina Horuko rebelled, and the Sakya tribe was annexed by him.

古文：贺鲁者，室点蜜可汗五世孙，曳步利设射匮特勒劫越子也。
现代文：贺鲁，是室点蜜可汗的五世孙，曳步利设射匮特勒劫越之子。
English: Horu is the fifth-generation grandson of Murodotsumi Khan, the son of Hitori, the son of Hitori, the son of Hitori.

古文：始，阿史那步真来归国，咄陆可汗以贺鲁为叶护，代步真，居多逻斯川，直西州北千五百里，统处月、处蜜、姑苏、歌逻禄、弩失毕五姓之众。
现代文：当初，阿史那步真来归附，咄陆可汗派贺鲁为叶护，替代步真，居于多逻斯川，在西州北一千五百里，统辖处月、处蜜、姑苏、歌逻禄、弩失毕五姓。
English: At first, Ashina Buzhen came to attach, and then the Lu Khan sent Horu to protect the leaf, replacing Buzhen, living in the Doluos River, 1,500 miles north of Xizhou, and controlling the five surnames of Yue, Zhenmei, Gusu, Goloru, and Zou.

古文：咄陆之走吐火罗也，乙毘射匮以兵迫逐，贺鲁无常居，部多散亡。
现代文：咄陆逃奔吐火罗时，乙毗射匮派兵追逐。贺鲁没有固定的居处，其所部也都散处。
English: When fleeing across the land to escape the fire, Bibi sent soldiers to chase after him. Heru had no fixed place of residence, and his headquarters were scattered.

古文：有执舍地、处木昆、婆鼻三种者，以贺鲁无罪，往请可汗，可汗怒，欲诛执舍地等，三种乃举所部数千帐，与贺鲁皆内属，帝优抚之。
现代文：有执舍地、处木昆、婆鼻三族人认为贺鲁无罪，去要求可汗不要攻击他。可汗怒，要诛杀执舍地等人。这三族就带领全部人众几千帐与贺鲁一起归附，皇帝抚慰厚待。
English: The three tribesmen, Uesochi, Wamukun, and Bonan, thought that Horu was not guilty, and went to ask the Khan not to attack him. The Khan was angry and wanted to kill Uesochi and others. These three tribes led the entire population of several thousand to join Horu, and the emperor treated them kindly.

古文：会讨龟兹，请先驰为向导，诏授昆丘道行军总管，宴嘉寿殿，厚赐予，解衣衣之。
现代文：当时正讨伐龟兹，就要他们先行作为向导，任贺鲁为昆丘道行军总管，宴饮于嘉寿殿，赏赐优厚，还脱下自己的袍子披在他身上。
English: At that time, he was campaigning against the turtles, and he asked them to take the lead as guides. He appointed Horu as the general manager of the march on Kunqiu Road, had a banquet at the Jia Shou Hall, gave him a generous reward, and even took off his robe and draped it over him.

古文：擢累左骁卫将军、瑶池都督，处其部于庭州莫贺城，密招携散，庐幕益众。
现代文：后来提拔为左骁卫将军、瑶池都督，将他的部众安顿在庭州莫贺城。贺鲁秘密招徕散众，庐帐也越来越多。
English: Later, he was promoted to General Zuo Wei and Governor of Dianchi, and settled his subordinates in Moga City, Niigata Prefecture. Horu secretly recruited followers, and the number of followers increased.

古文：方帝崩，即谋取西、庭二州，刺史骆弘义以闻，高宗遣通事舍人乔宝明驰抚，因令贺鲁遣子咥运入宿卫。
现代文：太宗崩，贺鲁想攻取西州及庭州，刺史骆弘义报告皇帝，高宗派通事舍人乔宝明前去抚慰，要贺鲁派儿子运入朝宿卫。
English: When Emperor Taizong died, Horus wanted to capture Xizhou and Tingzhou. He sent Shih Luo Hongyi to report to the emperor. Qiao Baoming, a high-ranking religious official, went to comfort him and asked Horus to send his son to Asashubei.

古文：咥运中悔，劫于势，不得去，拜右骁卫中郎将。
现代文：运后来懊悔来朝廷，但迫于形势，不能回去。皇帝任他为右骁卫中郎将。
English: Yun later repented and came to the imperial court, but due to the situation, he could not go back. The emperor appointed him as the middle captain of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：帝遣还，咥运即劝贺鲁引而西，取咄陆可汗故地，建牙于千泉，自号沙钵罗可汗，遂统咄陆、弩失毕十姓。
现代文：及至让他回去，他就劝贺鲁西去击取咄陆可汗的旧地，建牙廷在千泉，自称沙钵罗可汗，统摄咄陆、弩失毕等十姓。
English: When he was allowed to return, he advised Horus to attack the old land of the Qilu khan, build a palace in Qianquan, call himself Shaju Luo khan, and take control of the Qilu, Shushi Bi and other ten surnames.

古文：咄陆有五啜，曰处木昆律啜、胡禄屋阙啜、摄舍提暾啜、突骑施贺逻施啜、鼠尼施处半啜。
现代文：咄陆有五啜：处木昆律啜、胡禄阙啜、摄舍提暾啜、突骑施贺逻施啜、鼠尼施处半啜。
English: There are five sips: the first sip, the second sip, the third sip, the fourth sip, the fifth sip, the fifth sip, the sixth sip, the sixth sip, the seventh sip, the seventh sip, the eighth sip, the ninth sip, the tenth sip, and the tenth sip.

古文：弩失毕有五俟斤，曰阿悉结阙俟斤、哥舒阙俟斤、拔塞干暾沙钵俟斤、阿悉结泥孰俟斤、哥舒处半俟斤。
现代文：弩失毕有五俟斤：阿悉结阙俟斤、哥舒阙俟斤、拔塞干暾沙钵俟斤、阿悉结泥孰俟斤、哥舍处半俟斤。
English: Five cranes have been lost: the Asir crane, the Koshu crane, the unplugged sand crane, the Asir crane, and half a crane at the brother's house.

古文：而胡禄屋阙，贺鲁婿也。阿悉结阙俟斤最盛强，胜兵至数十万。
现代文：胡禄啜阙，是贺鲁的女婿，阿悉结阙俟斤最强盛，有几十万精兵。
English: Hulú, son-in-law of Horú, was the most powerful, with hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers.

古文：以咥运为莫贺咄叶护。遂寇庭州，败数县，杀掠数千人去。
现代文：贺鲁立运为莫贺咄叶护，入侵庭州，打败几县，杀掠几千人而去。
English: The Helu Liyun was the protector of Moga, invaded Tingzhou, defeated several counties, killed and plundered several thousand people and left.

古文：诏左武卫大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契苾何力为弓月道行军总管，右骁卫将军高德逸、右武卫将军萨孤吴仁副之，发府兵三万，合回纥骑五万击之。
现代文：于是诏令左武卫大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契絆何力为弓月道行军总管，右骁卫将军高德逸、右武卫将军萨孤吴仁为副总管，拨府兵三万，再加回纥兵共五万人迎击。
English: Therefore, he ordered the left guard general Liang Jianfang and the right guard general Qigong He Li to be the general manager of the march of the bow and moon, the right guard general Gao Deyi and the right guard general Sako Wu Ren to be the deputy general manager, and sent 30,000 soldiers from the capital and a total of 50,000 soldiers back to the capital to meet the attack.

古文：骆弘义献计曰： 安中国以信，驭夷狄以权，理有变通也。
现代文：骆弘义献计： 安抚中国要用信，驭使夷狄则要用权。贺鲁坚守一城。
English: Luo Hongyi's plan: To pacify China, use letters; to control the barbarians, use power. Horu held on to one city.

古文：贺鲁保一城，方寒积雪，谓唐兵必不来，宜乘此一举灭之。
现代文：此刻正严寒大雪，他们一定以为唐兵不会来。我们应乘此一举歼灭之。
English: It is very cold and snowy at the moment. They must have thought that the Tang soldiers would not come. We should take this opportunity to annihilate them.

古文：迁延及春，且生变，纵不率连诸国，必远迹遁去。
现代文：如果迁延到春天，将会有变，即令他不联合其他各国，也会逃往远处。
English: If it is delayed until the spring, there will be changes, and even if he does not unite with other countries, he will flee far away.

古文：且兵本诛贺鲁，而处蜜、处木昆等亦各欲自免，若留不进，彼与贺鲁复合矣。
现代文：况且我发兵是为了诛灭贺鲁，处蜜、处木昆等部也各愿自保。如果现在不打，他们将会与贺鲁联手。
English: Moreover, I sent troops to annihilate Horu, and the departments such as Dechimitsu and Dechimukun are also willing to protect themselves. If they do not fight now, they will join hands with Horu.

古文：今虽严冬风劲，兵苦皲堕，又不可久留费边粮，使贼得坚党附、赊死期也。
现代文：虽然现在天寒地冻，会有冻伤，又不能久留耗费边粮，让贼人乘虚牢结党羽苟延残喘。
English: Although it is now freezing cold, there will be frostbite, and it is not possible to stay for a long time to consume grain, so that the thieves can take advantage of the void to unite the party feathers and prolong their lives.

古文：请宽处月、处蜜等罪，专诛贺鲁，除祸务本，不可先治枝叶也。
现代文：建议宽恕处月、处蜜等部，专诛灭贺鲁。除祸要除根，不可先斫枝叶。
English: It is recommended to forgive the moon, honey and other parts, and focus on exterminating Horu. In order to eliminate the evil, it is necessary to eliminate the root, and it is not possible to prune the branches and leaves first.

古文：愿发射脾、处月、处蜜、契苾等兵，赍一月食，急趋之，大军住凭洛水上为之景助，此驱戎狄攻豺狼也。
现代文：请调发射脾、处月、处蜜、契絆等部之兵，带足一个月粮草，急速进军攻贺鲁。我大军则据凭洛水上为之援救响应。这是驱戎狄攻豺狼。
English: Please dispatch the soldiers of the firing spleen, the moon, the honey, and the bond of the bond, carry the grain and grass for a month, and rapidly march to attack Heru. Our army is based on Luo water to rescue and respond. This is to drive the army to attack the jackal.

古文：且戎人藉唐兵为羽翼，今胡骑出前，唐兵蹑后，贺鲁穷矣。 
现代文：况且戎人借唐兵为羽翼，使胡骑在前，唐兵断后，贺鲁就无处可逃了。 
English: Moreover, the eunuchs took the Tang soldiers as their wings, so that Hu rode in front, and after the Tang soldiers broke off, Horu had nowhere to escape.

古文：天子然其奏，诏弘义佐建方等经略之。
现代文：天子同意他的办法，诏令骆弘义帮助梁建方策划指挥。
English: Tianzi agreed to his plan, and ordered Luo Hongyi to help Liang Jianfang plan and command.

古文：处月硃邪孤注者，引兵附贼，据牢山，建方等攻之，众溃，追行五百里，斩孤注，上首九千级，虏其帅六十，不如弘义所计。
现代文：处月的朱邪孤注，带兵附贺鲁，据守牢山。梁建方等攻击，孤注溃退，追赶五百里，斩杀孤注，共斩杀五千人，俘大帅六十人。事实不如骆弘义设计的那样。
English: Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong, Zhu Yanzhong led by Zhu Yanzhong.

古文：永徽四年，罢瑶池都督府，即处月置金满州，又遣左屯卫大将军程知节为葱山道行军大总管，率诸将进讨。
现代文：永徽四年，撤瑶池都督府，就处月之地置金满州，又派左屯卫大将军程知节为葱山道行军大总管，率诸将进讨。
English: In the fourth year of Yonghui, the Yuanyi Lake Governor's Office was withdrawn, and Jinmanzhou was set up in the place of the moon, and the General of the Left Tun Guards, Cheng Zhisong, was sent to be the general manager of the march on the Qianshan Road, and he led the generals to discuss.

古文：是岁，咄陆可汗死，其子真珠叶护请讨贺鲁自效，为贺鲁所拒，不得前。
现代文：这年，咄陆可汗死，其子真珠叶护请求去讨伐贺鲁以效力。诏令丰州都督元礼臣持节去册封真珠叶护为可汗，半途被贺鲁所阻，不得去。
English: In the same year, Ulu Khan died, and his son, Pearl Yegorov, requested to go and fight against Horus in order to be effective. He ordered the Fuzhou governor, a former courtier, to go and register Pearl Yegorov as a khan. However, he was blocked by Horus and was not allowed to go.

古文：明年，知节击歌逻禄、处月，斩千级，收马万计。
现代文：第二年，程知节击败歌逻禄及处月，斩杀千人，获马万匹。
English: The following year, on Chengzhi Festival, he defeated Gua LuLu and Zhengyue, killed a thousand people, and won ten thousand horses.

古文：副将周智度击处木昆城，拔之，斩馘三万。
现代文：副将周智度攻克处木昆城，斩杀三万。
English: Vice-commander Zhou Zhidu conquered Mukun City, killing 30,000 people.

古文：前军苏定方击贺鲁别帐鼠尼施于鹰娑川，斩首虏获马甚众，贼弃铠仗弥野。
现代文：前军苏定方在鹰娑川攻克贺鲁的别帐鼠尼施，斩首及虏获马甚多，贼人丢弃的兵械满野都是。
English: The former army, the Soviet Dingfang, conquered Horu's pet rat, Nishi, in Yinglu River, beheaded and captured many horses, and the military equipment discarded by the thieves was all over the field.

古文：会副总管王文度不肯战，降怛笃城，取其财，屠之，知节不能制。
现代文：当时副总管王文度不肯再战。后来怛笃城降，王文度又纵兵屠城，掠取财物，程知节无法制止。
English: At that time, the vice-governor, Wang Wenda, refused to fight again. Later, the city of Zhengtu surrendered, and Wang Wenda led his troops to massacre the city, plundered property, and could not stop the Chengzhi Festival.

古文：显庆初，擢定方伊丽道行军大总管，率燕然都护任雅相、副都护萧嗣业、左骁卫大将军瀚海都督回纥婆闰等穷讨。
现代文：显庆初年，提升苏定方为伊丽道行军大总管，率领燕然都护任雅相、副都护萧嗣业、左骁卫大将军瀚海都督回纥婆闰等穷讨贺鲁。
English: In the first year of Xianqing, Su Dingfang was promoted to the general manager of the march of the Ili Road, and led Yan Ran to be the guardian of Yaxiang, the deputy guardian of Xiao Ziyi, and the left guard general Hanhai Tudou to return to Shibahie, etc. to fight against Horu.

古文：诏右屯卫大将军阿史那弥射、左屯卫大将军阿史那步真为流沙道安抚大使，分出金山道，俟斤嫩独禄等万余帐迎降。
现代文：诏令右屯卫大将军阿史那弥射、左屯卫大将军阿史那步真为流沙道安抚大使，分头出金山道。俟斤嫩独禄等万余帐来降。
English: The edict ordered the right-wing garrison commander, General Ashinami, to fire, and the left-wing garrison commander, General Ashinami, to step forward as the ambassador of pacification on the sand road, and head out on the mountain road.

古文：定方以精骑至曳咥河西，击处木昆，破之。
现代文：苏定方率精骑到曳河西，攻击处木昆，胜。
English: Su Dingfang led a fine ride to the west of Hikikawa, attacked Mokun, and won.

古文：贺鲁举十姓兵十万骑来拒，定方以万人当之，虏见兵少，以骑绕唐军。
现代文：贺鲁将十姓的兵十万骑来拒战，苏定方以一万人来抵敌。贺鲁见王师兵少，就派骑兵包围。
English: Horu brought 100,000 soldiers of ten families to oppose the war, and the Suding side fought back with 10,000 soldiers. When Horu saw that Wang Shih's soldiers were few, he sent cavalry to surround them.

古文：定方令步卒据原，欑槊外注，自以骑阵于北。
现代文：苏定方令步兵据守南原，将枪尖朝外密集排列，自己带骑兵列阵北原。
English: Su Dingfang ordered the infantry to guard the Southern Plains, and they lined up the gun-tips facing outwards, while he led the cavalry to line up the Northern Plains.

古文：贺鲁先击原上军，三犯，军不动。定方纵骑乘之，虏大溃，追奔数十里，俘斩三万人，杀其大酋都搭达干等二百人。
现代文：定方追奔几十里，杀、俘三万人，获杀大酋都搭达干第二百人。
English: Dingfang chased them for dozens of miles, killed and captured 30,000 people, and killed and captured as many as 200 people.

古文：明日蹑北，五弩失毕皆降。
现代文：第二天再来追赶，五弩失毕都降。
English: The next day, they came back to catch up, but lost all five points and were relegated.

古文：五咄陆闻贺鲁败，趋南道降步真。
现代文：五咄陆听说贺鲁败，去南道向阿史那步真投降。
English: After hearing that Horus had been defeated, the five provinces went to the south to surrender to Ashina Bokuju.

古文：定方命嗣业、婆闰趋邪罗斯川追虏，任雅相提降兵踵后。
现代文：苏定方命萧嗣业、回纥婆闰去邪罗斯川追贺鲁，任雅相则带降兵随后。
English: Su Dingfang ordered Xiao Ziye and Huibao Li to go to the Yalose River to pursue Helu, followed by Ren Yaxiang and his troops.

古文：会大雪，军中请须霁，定方曰： 今雰晦风冽，虏谓我不能师，掩其不虞可也，缓则远矣，省日兼功，上策也。 
现代文：正遇天降大雪，诸将请求待天晴后进军。定方说： 现在雪密风冷，贺鲁一定估计我军不能前进，我可以掩击其不备。若缓几天，他就逃远了。现在追可以事半功倍，是上策。
English: Heavy snow was falling, and the generals requested to wait for the weather to clear before marching. Dingfang said: Now the snow is dense and the wind is cold, Heru must have estimated that our army cannot advance, I can cover it. If I wait a few days, he will run away. Now the pursuit can be done with half the effort, it is the best strategy.

古文：于是昼夜进，收所过人畜，至双河，与弥射、步真会，军饱气张，距贺鲁牙二百里，阵而行，抵金牙山。
现代文：乃昼夜兼程，沿途收降人畜。到双河，与阿史那弥射、阿史那步真会合，部队食饱气盛，只离贺鲁二百里时，列阵而进，抵达金牙山。
English: It was a day-and-night journey, and along the way, they had to subdue people and animals. At Shuanghe, they met with Ashina Misha and Ashina Buzhong. The troops were well-fed and full of energy, and when they were only two hundred miles from Helu, they marched in formation and arrived at Jinya Mountain.

古文：贺鲁众适猎，定方兵纵破其牙，俘数万人，获鼓纛器械，贺鲁跳度伊丽水。
现代文：贺鲁的人正在打猎，定方的兵直破其牙帐，俘几万人，获鼓旗兵械等不计其数。贺鲁脱逃，渡伊丽水。
English: Horu's men were hunting, and the soldiers of the appointed side broke their teeth, captured tens of thousands of people, and received countless weapons. Horu escaped and crossed the Ili River.

古文：嗣业次千泉，弥射至伊丽，处月、处蜜诸部皆下。
现代文：萧嗣业到达千泉，阿史那弥射到达伊丽，处月、处蜜各部全都攻克。
English: Xiao Ziyan reached Qianquan, Ashina Miya reached Yili, and conquered all the provinces of Zhizhong and Zhiming.

古文：次双河，贺鲁先以步失达干据栅战，弥射攻之，溃，定方追贺鲁至碎叶水，尽夺其众。
现代文：弥射又进军双河。贺鲁先让步失达干据栅而战，弥射猛攻，步失达干溃败。苏定方又追贺鲁直至碎叶水，尽夺其众。
English: Misha also marched into Shuanghe. Horus first conceded and failed to reach the dry base and fought, Misha stormed, failed to reach the dry base and was routed. The Suding side also chased Horus until the water of broken leaves, and took all of its people.

古文：贺鲁、咥运将奔鼠耨设，至石国苏咄城，马不进，众饥，赍宝入城，且市马，城主伊涅达干迎之，既入，拘送石国。
现代文：贺鲁、运准备奔鼠耨设，到石国苏咄城时，马不肯进，众人也饿，就带了宝物入城，准备买马。城主伊涅达干出来迎接。进了城，却将贺鲁拘住，解送石国。
English: When Horus and his army arrived at the city of Sugi in Shikoku, the horse refused to go in and the people were hungry. So they took the treasure into the city and prepared to buy a horse. The lord of the city, Ineda, came out to meet them. However, when he entered the city, he detained Horus and sent him to Shikoku.

古文：会弥射子元爽与嗣业兵至，取之。
现代文：正好弥射的儿子元爽与萧嗣业的兵到了，收取贺鲁。
English: Just at that time, the soldiers of Misha's sons, Yuan Shuang and Xiao Congye, arrived to collect Horu.

古文：乃悉散诸部兵，开道置驿，收露，问人疾苦，贺鲁所掠悉还之民，西域平。
现代文：于是全部遣回各部的人马，通道路，置驿站，埋骸骨，问疾苦。以前被贺鲁掠夺的一律发还。西域乃平。
English: As a result, all the men and horses of various departments were sent back, roads were opened, stations were set up, skeletons were buried, and hardships were asked. All those who had previously been plundered by Horu were sent back. The western region was Naiping.

古文：贺鲁谓嗣业曰： 我，亡虏也，先帝厚我，我则背之，今天降怒罚，尚何道？
现代文：贺鲁对萧嗣业说： 我本是亡虏，先帝待我厚，而我背叛了他。现在天怒降罚，我还说什么？
English: Horu said to Xiao Ziyi: I was originally a captive, the former emperor treated me well, but I betrayed him. Now, the wrath of heaven has reduced the punishment, what else can I say?

古文：且闻汉法杀人必都市，我愿就死昭陵，谢罪于先帝也。 
现代文：听说汉时法，杀人必在都市。我愿在昭陵就死，能向先帝谢罪。 
English: I heard that according to the Han Dynasty law, murder must take place in the city. I would like to die in Zhaoling so that I can thank the former emperor for my sins.

古文：帝曰： 先帝赐贺鲁二千帐主之，今罪人既得，献昭陵其可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝知道后说 ：先帝赐二千帐给贺鲁统辖。现在已得罪人，能献给昭陵吗？ 
English: After learning of this, the emperor said, "The former emperor gave two thousand accounts to Horu to govern. Now that he has sinned, can he give it to Shoryo?"

古文：许敬宗曰： 古者，军凯还则饮至于庙。
现代文：许敬宗说 ：古代军队凯旋都到宗庙祭告。
English: Xu Jingzong said: The ancient army's triumphant return was announced at the ancestral temple.

古文：若诸侯，献馘天子，未闻献于陵。然陛下奉园寝与宗庙等，可行不疑。 
现代文：诸侯献俘及敌首则献天子，没听说献于陵墓的，不过陛下奉于园寝，是与奉于宗庙一样的。可以这样。 
English: Princes and lords offer up captives and the heads of their enemies offer up the Son of God. I haven't heard of anyone offering him up in a mausoleum, but His Majesty offering him up in a garden is the same as offering him up in a family temple. It can be done that way.

古文：于是执而献昭陵，赦不诛。
现代文：于是将贺鲁押到昭陵，祭告以后赦而未诛。
English: As a result, Horu was sent to Shoryo, but he was pardoned after a memorial service.

古文：贺鲁已灭，裂其地为州县，以处诸部。
现代文：贺鲁灭后，剖其地为州县安置各部。
English: After the death of Heru, it was divided into prefectural and county resettlement departments.

古文：木昆部为匐延都督府，突骑施索葛莫贺部为鹿都督府，突骑施阿利施部为絜山都督府，胡禄屋阙部为盐泊都督府，摄舍提暾部为双河都督府，鼠尼施处半部为鹰娑都督府，又置昆陵、濛池二都护府以统之。
现代文：木昆部为匐延都督府，突骑施索葛莫贺部为鹿都督府，突骑施阿利施部为薭山都督府，胡禄屋阙部为盐泊都督府，摄舍提暾部为双河都督府，鼠尼施处半部为鹰娑都督府，又置昆陵、氵蒙池二都护府统辖。
English: Mokun Branch is the Guiyang Governor's Office, Tujia Shisogmo Branch is the Deer Governor's Office, Tujia Shiali Branch is the Lushan Governor's Office, Hulunyu Branch is the Yanbo Governor's Office, Zhezhi Branch is the Shuanghe Governor's Office, Ruini Branch is half of Yingbo Governor's Office, and Kunling and Yimengchi are also under the jurisdiction of the two capital protection offices.

古文：其所役属诸国皆置州，西尽波斯，并隶安西都护府。以阿史那弥射为兴昔亡可汗，兼骠骑大将军、昆陵都护，领五咄陆部，阿史那步真为继往绝可汗，兼骠骑大将军、濛池都护，领五弩失毕部，各赐帛十万，以光禄卿卢承庆持册命之。
现代文：所役属的各国都置州府，西边直抵波斯，均隶属安西都护府，封阿史那弥射为兴昔亡可汗，兼骠骑大将军、昆陵都护，统辖五个咄陆部；封阿史那步真为继往绝可汗，兼骠骑大将军、氵蒙池都护，统辖五个弩失毕部。各赐帛十万，派光禄卿卢承庆持节去册封。
English: All the countries he served were placed in prefectures, and as far west as Persia, they all belonged to the Anxi Capital Protectorate, and Ashina Misha was awarded the title of "Khan who revived the dead" as well as the title of "Grand General of Cavalry" and the title of "Capital Protector of Kunling," with control over five provinces; Ashina Buzhen was awarded the title of "Successor to the Great Khan" as well as the title of "Grand General of Cavalry" and the title of "Capital Protector of Yimengchi," with control over five provinces. They were each given 100,000 yuan, and sent to Guanglu

古文：贺鲁死，诏葬颉利冢旁，纪其概于石。
现代文：贺鲁死，诏令葬颉利墓旁，刻石记其事。
English: When Horu died, it was decreed that he be buried next to the tomb of Hari, and his death was recorded in stone.

古文：阿史那弥射，亦室点蜜可汗五世孙，世为莫贺咄叶护。
现代文：阿史那弥射，也是室点蜜可汗的五世孙，世代为莫贺咄叶护。
English: Ashina Misha, also the fifth-generation grandson of Murotsumi Khan, was a descendant of Moga Uchiha.

古文：贞观中，遣使者持节立弥射为奚利邲咄陆可汗，赐鼓纛。
现代文：贞观年间曾诏遣使者持节立弥射为奚利必阝咄陆可汗，赐鼓旗。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, the emperor sent an envoy to hold a festival and give a drum banner to the Khan.

古文：族兄步真谋杀弥射，欲自立，弥射不能国，即举所部处月、处蜜等入朝，拜右监门卫大将军。
现代文：其族兄步真谋杀他自立。弥射不能立足，乃率所部的处月、处蜜等入朝，被任为右监门卫大将军。
English: His elder brother, Bu Zhen, murdered him and became independent. Misha could not stand on his own feet, but he entered the imperial court at the head of Shobu, Shuchu, Shumei, and others, and was appointed to the position of General of the Right Guard.

古文：而步真遂自为咄陆叶护，众不厌，去之，亦与族人来朝，拜左屯卫大将军。
现代文：步真则自立为咄陆叶护。众人不服，罢了他。步真就也与族人入朝，被任为左屯卫大将军。
English: Buzhen, on the other hand, stood up for himself as the protector of the land and the people. People were not satisfied with him, so he was ousted. Buzhen also entered the imperial court with his people and was appointed as the General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：弥射从帝征高丽有功，封平壤县伯，迁右武卫大将军。
现代文：弥射随皇帝征高丽有功，封平襄县伯，升任右武卫大将军。
English: Misha was awarded the title of Pingxiang County magistrate and promoted to the rank of Right Division of the Imperial Guard for his meritorious service in the Emperor's conquest of Korea.

古文：及平贺鲁，乃与步真皆为可汗，得补所部刺史以下。
现代文：及平定贺鲁，乃与步真同为可汗，其所部都得补官刺史以下。
English: and Hepingding Heru, who was the same khan as Bu Zhen, and his subordinates had to make up for the lack of officials.

古文：是岁，弥射击真珠叶护于双河，斩之，杀阙啜二人。
现代文：这一年，弥射在双河袭击真珠叶护并杀之，又杀阙啜二人。
English: In the same year, Misha attacked and killed Pearl Yegu in Shuanghe, and also killed two cormorants.

古文：弥射、步真无绥御材，下多怨，于是思结都曼率疏勒、硃俱波、喝陀三国叛，击破于阗，诏左骁卫大将军苏定方讨之，都曼兵保马头川。
现代文：弥射、步真缺乏领导才能，下面多怨恨。思结都曼率疏勒、朱俱波、喝陀三国反叛，击破于阗。诏令左骁卫大将军苏定方讨伐。都曼的兵坚守马头川。
English: Misha and Bu Zhen lacked leadership ability, and there was a lot of resentment below. Thinking about it, Du Man led Shule, Zhu Qubo, and Baida to rebel against the three countries and defeated them. He ordered General Zuo Wei to fight against Suding. Du Man's soldiers held fast to the Ma Tou River.

古文：五年，定方傅其城，击降之。
现代文：显庆五年，定方包围其城，都曼降。
English: In the fifth year of Xianqing, Dingfang besieged the city, and the capital fell.

古文：龙朔二年，弥射、步真以兵从海道总管苏海政讨龟兹，步真怨弥射，且欲并其部，乃诬以谋反。
现代文：龙朔二年，弥射、步真带兵随耤海道总管苏海政讨伐龟兹，步真恨弥射，想并吞他的部属，于是诬告他谋反。
English: In the second year of Long Shuo, Misha and Bu Zhen led soldiers to follow the general manager of the Minhai Highway, Su Haizheng, to fight against the turtles. Bu Zhen hated Misha and wanted to annex his subordinates, so he falsely accused him of plotting a rebellion.

古文：海政不能察，即集军吏计议先发诛之，因称诏发所赍赐可汗首领，弥射以麾下至，悉收斩之。
现代文：苏海政不加调查，就召集官军商议先发制人，乃假称有诏要赐物给可汗及各首领。弥射带麾下来，海政全杀了他们。
English: Without investigation, Su Haizheng called together the government army to discuss a preemptive strike, pretending that there was an edict to give gifts to the khan and the leaders. When the firing belt came down, Haizheng killed them all.

古文：其部鼠尼施、拔塞干叛走，海政追平之。
现代文：其部鼠尼施、拔塞干叛走，海政又追上悉数斩杀。
English: Some of his subordinates, such as Neishi and Banseki, defected, and Kaimasa caught up with them and killed them all.

古文：步真死干封时。
现代文：步真死于乾封年间。
English: Bu Zhen died during the dry sealing period.

古文：咸亨二年，以西突厥部酋阿史那都支为左骁卫大将军兼匐延都督，以安辑其众。
现代文：咸亨二年，任西突厥部酋阿史那都支为左骁卫大将军兼匐延都督，用以安抚其众。
English: In the second year of Xianheng, the Western Turkic chieftain, Ashenadu, was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and Governor of Yan, in order to pacify his people.

古文：仪凤中，都支自号十姓可汗，与吐蕃连和，寇安西，诏吏部侍郎裴行俭讨之。
现代文：仪凤年间，都支自称十姓可汗，与吐蕃联和，入侵安西。诏令吏部侍郎裴行俭讨伐。
English: During the Yi and Feng dynasties, Du Zhi claimed to be the Khan of Ten Surnames, allied with Tubo, and invaded Anxi. He ordered the clerk's servant, Pei Xingran, to fight.

古文：行俭请毋发兵，可以计取。
现代文：裴行俭要求不发兵而以计取。
English: Pei Xingjian asked not to send troops, but to take advantage of the situation.

古文：即诏行俭册送波斯王子，并安抚大食，若道两蕃者。
现代文：于是诏令裴行俭册送波斯王子，并安抚大食，好像只是经过两蕃的样子。
English: So the emperor sent the Persian prince to Bae, and appeased the glutton, as if it was just a passing phase.

古文：都支果不疑，率子弟止谒，遂禽之，召执诸部渠长，降别帅李遮匐以归，调露元年也。
现代文：都支果然不疑，率子弟来谒见，于是将他擒获，召来各部酋长一并擒获，又招降了别帅李遮匐而归。这已是调露元年了。
English: There is no doubt that Du Zhi led his sons and brothers to see him, and then captured him, summoned the chiefs of all departments to capture him together, and invited the second-in-command, Li Shiaqi, to return. This was the first year of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：西姓自是益衰，其后二部人日离散。
现代文：西姓从此日益衰微，后来二部人众日渐离散。
English: From then on, the Western surnames gradually declined, and later the two groups of people gradually dispersed.

古文：遂擢弥射子元庆为左玉钤卫将军，步真子步利设斛瑟罗为右玉钤卫将军，尽袭父所领及可汗号。
现代文：乃提拔弥射之子元庆为左玉钤卫将军，步真之子步利设斛瑟罗为右玉钤将军，继袭其父所领之部及可汗称号。
English: Instead, the son of Misha, Yuan Qing, was promoted to General of the Left Jade Guard, and the son of Bu Jin, Bu Li, was promoted to General of the Right Jade Guard, inheriting his father's position and the title of Khan.

古文：元庆累拜镇国大将军、行左威卫大将军。
现代文：元庆后任镇国大将军、行左威卫大将军。
English: After Yuanqing, he served as Zhenguodao general and Xingzaoweiweidao general.

古文：武后擅命，率诸蕃长请赐睿宗氏曰武，更号斛瑟罗曰竭忠事主可汗。
现代文：武后掌国后，斛瑟罗率诸蕃长来请求赐睿宗姓武，于是将他继往绝可汗改名为竭忠事主可汗。
English: After Emperor Wu took over the country, Emperor Xulong and his officials came to request that Emperor Ruizong be given the surname of Emperor Wu, so Emperor Ruizong changed the name of Emperor Wu to Emperor Zizhong.

古文：长寿中，元庆坐谒皇嗣，为来俊臣所诬，要斩，流其子献于振州。
现代文：长寿年间，元庆被来俊臣诬与私谒皇嗣罪有关，被腰斩，其子献被流放振州。
English: During his long life, Yuan Qing was beheaded and his son Jian was exiled to Zhenzhou.

古文：其明年，西突厥部立阿史那俀子为可汗，与吐蕃寇，武威道大总管王孝杰与战冷泉、大领谷，破之；碎叶镇守使韩思忠又破泥熟俟斤及突厥施质汗、胡禄等，因拔吐蕃泥熟没斯城。
现代文：第二年，西突厥部立阿史那亻妥子为可汗，与吐蕃联手入寇，武威道大总管王孝杰与之战于冷泉及大领谷，胜；碎叶镇守使韩思忠又击破泥熟俟斤及突厥施质汗、胡禄等，攻克吐蕃泥熟没斯城。
English: In the second year, the West Turkic Department appointed Ashina Zhengtouzi as khan, and he joined hands with Tuyi to invade. Wang Xiaojie, the general manager of Wuwei Road, fought with him in Lengquan and Dalian Valley, and won; the broken leaf town guard made Han Sizhong break the mud-soaked Jiaojin and the Turkic Shixian sweat, Hulu, etc., and conquered the mud-soaked city of Tuyi.

古文：圣历二年，以斛瑟罗为左卫大将军兼平西军大总管，令抚镇国人。
现代文：圣历二年，任斛瑟罗为左卫大将军兼平西军大总管，令他去抚镇国人。
English: In the second year of the Gregorian calendar, he was appointed as the General of the Left Division and the General Manager of the Western Pacific Army, and he was ordered to help the townspeople.

古文：是时乌质勒兵张甚，斛瑟罗不敢归，与其部人六七万内迁，死长安，擢子怀道为右武卫将军。
现代文：这时，乌质勒的兵多且强，斛瑟罗不敢回去，与其部人六七万内迁，后死于长安。提升其子怀道为右武卫将军。
English: At this time, Ujile's soldiers were numerous and strong, and Uthero did not dare to go back. He and his subordinates relocated to Chang'an with sixty to seventy thousand soldiers, and then he died. His son, Huai Dao, was promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：长安中，以阿史那献为右骁卫大将军，袭兴昔亡可汗、安抚招慰十姓大使、北庭大都护。
现代文：长安年间，任阿史那献为右骁卫大将军，继袭兴昔亡可汗、安抚招慰十姓大使、北庭大都护。
English: During the Chang'an era, Ashina was appointed as the right guard general, succeeding the deceased khan, pacifying and consoling the ambassadors of ten surnames, and protecting the northern court.

古文：四年，以怀道为十姓可汗兼濛池都护。
现代文：长安四年，任怀道为十姓可汗，兼氵蒙池都护。
English: In the fourth year of Chang'an, he was appointed by Huai Dao as the tenth khan and the first guardian of Mengchi.

古文：未几，擢献碛西节度使。
现代文：不久，升任献碛西节度使。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Xinglong West Festival envoy.

古文：十姓部落都担叛，献击斩之，传首阙下，收碎叶以西帐落三万内属，玺书嘉慰。
现代文：十姓部落都反叛，献将其斩杀，传送朝廷，又收碎叶以西帐落三万来归附。武后下玺书嘉勉。
English: The ten clans all rebelled, and she had them all beheaded and sent to the imperial court. She also collected 30,000 pieces of wood from the west side of Ye County to be returned to the imperial court. She was given the title of Empress Dowager.

古文：葛逻禄、胡屋、鼠尼施三姓已内属，为默啜侵掠，以献为定远道大总管，与北庭都护汤嘉惠等掎角。
现代文：葛逻禄、胡屋、鼠尼施三姓都已归附，遭默啜侵掠，诏令献为定远道大总管，与北庭都护汤嘉惠等成掎角。
English: The three surnames of Ge Lu Lu, Hu Ya, and Ru Nishi have all been annexed and silently invaded and plundered. The imperial edict dedicates them to the general manager of Dingyuan Road, and they are at loggerheads with the northern palace guard Tang Jiahui.

古文：于是突骑施阴幸边隙，故献乞益师，身入朝，玄宗不许。
现代文：此时突骑施暗中利用边界的矛盾扩大势力，所以阿史那献请求增加兵力，他亲自入朝，但玄宗不许。
English: At this time, Shu secretly used the border conflict to expand his power, so Ashina asked for more troops. He personally entered the imperial court, but Xuanzong would not allow it.

古文：诏左武卫中郎将王惠持节安慰。
现代文：诏令左武卫中郎将王惠持节去安慰。
English: He ordered the middle brother of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards to comfort Wang Huizhong.

古文：方册拜突骑施都督车鼻施啜苏禄为顺国公，而突骑施已围拨换、大石城，将取四镇。
现代文：朝廷正册封突骑施都督、车鼻施啜苏禄为顺国公时，突骑施已围拨换、大石城，将要攻取四镇。
English: When the imperial court officially announced that the governor of Shizuoka and the capital of Shizuoka Prefecture, Shizuoka and Sulu, were Shun Guo Gong, Shizuoka and Shizuoka had been surrounded and exchanged, and the city of Daishi was about to capture four towns.

古文：会嘉惠拜安西副大都护，即发三姓葛逻禄兵与献共击之。
现代文：其时嘉惠受任为安西副大都护，就调发三姓葛逻禄的兵与阿史那献共同出击。
English: At that time, Jia Hui was appointed as the vice-governor of Anxi, and sent three soldiers named Ge Luo Luo to attack together with Ashinaken.

古文：帝将诏王惠与相经略，宰相臣璟、臣颋曰： 突骑施叛，葛逻禄攻之，此夷狄自相残，非朝廷出也。大者伤，小者灭，皆我之利。
现代文：皇帝准备诏令王惠与他们共同指挥，宰相宋瞡、苏耮说 ：突骑施叛，葛逻禄攻之，这是夷狄自相残杀，其结果不论是大者伤还是小者灭，都对我有利。
English: The emperor was preparing to issue a decree ordering Wang Hui to jointly command with them, and the prime ministers Song Xi and Su Xi said: "The sudden attack and rebellion, and Ge Luo Luo's attack, this is the barbarians killing each other. Whether the result is the injury of the big or the destruction of the small, it is beneficial to me."

古文：方王惠往抚慰，不可参以兵事。 
现代文：王惠是前往抚慰的，不可参与战事。 
English: Wang Hui went to comfort, not to participate in the war.

古文：乃止。
现代文：打算作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：献终以娑葛强狠不能制，亦归死长安。
现代文：阿史那献终究因娑葛强狠制不服，归来后死于长安。
English: After all, Ashina Ken was eventually dissatisfied with the strong control of Gan Ge, and died in Chang'an after returning.

古文：突骑施吐火仙之败，始以怀道子昕为十姓可汗、开府仪同三司、濛池都护，册其妻凉国夫人李为交河公主，遣兵护送。
现代文：突骑施吐火仙败后，先让怀道之子昕为十姓可汗、开府仪同三司、氵蒙池都护，封其妻凉国夫人李氏为交河公主，遣兵护送回国。
English: After the sudden defeat of Shih Tzu the Fire Immortal, he first made Huai Dao's son Yan the 10th khan, Kaifu Yi the 3rd, and Yao Mengchi the guardian of the capital, and made his wife Liang Guo's wife Li the princess of Jiaohe, and sent soldiers to escort her back to China.

古文：昕至碎叶西俱兰城，为突骑施莫贺达干所杀，交河公主与其子忠孝亡归，授左领军卫员外将军，西突厥遂亡。
现代文：昕到碎叶西俱兰城时，被突骑施莫贺达干所杀，交河公主与其子忠孝逃归，任忠孝为左领军卫员外将军，西突厥乃亡。
English: When she arrived at the city of West Clubland in the Broken Leaves, she was killed by the Tujia rider Shimo Hodakan. Princess Jiahe and her son, Zhong Xiao, fled back, and Zhong Xiao was appointed as the left leader of the army, the guard, and the general. West Turk was killed.

古文：突骑施乌质勒，西突厥别部也。
现代文：突骑施乌质勒，是西突厥的别部。
English: The Tujia Shiwugule is another part of West Turkistan.

古文：自贺鲁破灭，二部可汗皆先入侍，虏无的君。
现代文：自贺鲁破灭后，二部的可汗都先后入朝，突厥没有实际的君主。
English: Since the downfall of Horus, two khans have successively ascended to the throne, leaving the Turks without an actual monarch.

古文：乌质勒隶斛瑟罗，为莫贺达干。
现代文：乌质勒隶属斛瑟罗，是莫贺达干。
English: Ujjwala belongs to Kasero and is a Moha Dagan.

古文：斛瑟罗政残，众不悦，而乌质勒能抚下，有威信，诸胡顺附，帐落浸盛，乃置二十都督，督兵各七千，屯碎叶西北。
现代文：斛瑟罗用政严酷，众人不喜欢，而乌质勒能关心属下，有威信，各部都来依附，帐落渐渐增多。设都督二十人，各统七千兵，屯聚碎叶西北。
English: Xerxes was a harsh ruler who was disliked by the people, but Uxel, who was able to care for his subordinates, had authority, and all the ministries came to depend on him. The number of provinces gradually increased. There were twenty governors, each with seven thousand soldiers, and they gathered in the northwest of the Broken Leaves.

古文：稍攻得碎叶，即徙其牙居之，谓碎叶川为大牙，弓月城、伊丽水为小牙，其地东邻北突厥，西诸胡，东直西、庭州，尽并斛瑟罗地。
现代文：后渐渐攻陷碎叶，即将其牙帐迁到此处，称碎叶川为大牙，弓月城、伊丽水为小牙。其地东邻北突厥，西接各胡部，东连西州、庭州，合并了斛瑟图的全部土地。
English: After that, he gradually conquered the Broken Leaves, and moved his tally to this place, calling the Broken Leaves River a big tooth, and the Bow Moon City and the Ili Water a small tooth. His land was adjacent to North Turku in the east, connected to the Hubei Province in the west, and connected to Xizhou and Tingzhou in the east, merging the entire land of Fuxetu.

古文：圣历二年，遣子遮弩来朝，武后厚加慰抚。
现代文：圣历二年，乌质勒派儿子遮弩来朝，武后厚加抚慰。
English: In the second year of the sacred calendar, Ujitra sent his son, Chakravarthy, to the north, and Wu Hou comforted him.

古文：神龙中，封怀德郡王。
现代文：神龙年间，受封为怀德郡王。
English: In the year of the dragon, he was named the king of Wyde County.

古文：是岁，乌质勒死，其子鹿州都督娑葛为左骁卫大将军，袭封爵。
现代文：这一年，乌质勒死，其长子鹿州都督娑葛任左骁卫大将军，继承封爵。
English: In the same year, Ujie was strangled to death, and his eldest son, the governor of Luchu, Zou Ge, was appointed General of the Left Division of the National Guard, inheriting the title of knight.

古文：是时胜兵三十万，诏十姓可汗阿史那怀道持节册命，赐宫人四。
现代文：此时有精兵三十万。诏令十姓可汗阿史那怀道持节去册封，并赐四位宫人。
English: At this time, there were 300,000 elite soldiers. The emperor ordered the 10 surnames of Khan Ashina to be registered and given to four courtiers.

古文：景龙中，遣使者入谢，中宗为御前殿，列万骑羽林二仗，引见劳赐。
现代文：景龙年间，娑葛曾派使者入朝致谢。中宗到前殿，排列左右羽林军等二仪仗队，引见乌质勒，慰劳且赐物。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong, Zangge once sent an envoy to the imperial court to express his gratitude. Emperor Zhongzong went to the front hall and arranged two honor guards, including the Ulin Army, on the left and right, to present Wu Jule with consolation and gifts.

古文：俄与其将厥啜忠节交怨，兵相加暴。
现代文：不久，娑葛与其将阙啜忠节不和，相互争战。
English: Before long, Zangge and his brother-in-law were at odds and fighting each other.

古文：娑葛讼忠节罪，请内之京师。
现代文：娑葛控告忠节有罪，要求召他进京。
English: Zangge accused Zhongjie of being guilty and demanded that he be summoned to Beijing.

古文：忠节以千金赂宰相宗楚客等，愿无入朝，请导吐蕃击娑葛以报。
现代文：忠节用重币贿赂宰相宗楚客等，请求不进京。并要求引吐蕃兵打击娑葛。
English: Zhongjie bribed the prime minister Zong Chu and others with heavy coins, asking them not to go to Beijing. He also asked them to send their soldiers to fight the Geumgang.

古文：楚客方专国，即以御史中丞冯嘉宾持节经制。
现代文：宗楚客时正专权，就派御史丞冯嘉宾持节去处理。
English: When Zong Chu was in power, he sent the Grand Historian Feng Jiabin to deal with the festival.

古文：嘉宾与忠节书疏反复，娑葛逻得之，遂杀嘉宾，使弟遮弩率兵盗塞。
现代文：嘉宾与忠节书信往来，被娑葛的巡逻获得，于是杀了嘉宾，派弟弟遮弩率兵入攻关塞。
English: The guest's correspondence with Zhongjie was intercepted by the patrol of Zengge, so he killed the guest and sent his brother Zhaojun to lead the troops to attack the pass.

古文：安西都护牛师奖与战火烧城，师奖败，死之，表索楚客头以徇。
现代文：安西都护牛师奖在火烧城迎战，师奖兵败，战死。娑葛乃上表索要宗楚客之头示众。
English: In the Anxi Capital, Cowherd Shih Sheng fought in the burning city, was defeated and died in the battle. Zou Ge Nao went to the front to show the public that he wanted to be the head of the Chu guest.

古文：大都护郭元振表娑葛状直，当见赦，诏许，西土遂定。
现代文：大都护郭元振上表细述其渊源，认为当赦娑葛。皇帝同意，西疆遂安。
English: The protector of the capital, Guo Yuan Zhen, described its origin in detail in the above table, and believed that it should be pardoned. The emperor agreed, and Xijiang was safe.

古文：既而与遮弩分治其部，遮弩恨众少，叛归默啜，请为乡导反攻其兄。
现代文：后来，娑葛与遮弩分治其部，遮弩怨人少，叛兄归默啜，要求当向导去打哥哥。
English: Later, Xingge and Zhaozhuang divided and ruled their own territories. Zhaozhuang had few enemies. The traitor brother kept silent and asked to be the guide to fight his brother.

古文：默啜留遮弩，自以兵二万击娑葛，禽之。
现代文：默啜留下遮弩，自己率兵两万袭击娑葛，擒住娑葛。
English: He silently left the shade, and led twenty thousand soldiers to attack the honeysuckle and capture the honeysuckle.

古文：默啜归语遮弩曰： 汝兄弟不相协，能尽心事我乎？ 
现代文：默啜回来后对遮弩说： 你对兄弟尚不能相协助，能尽心对我吗？ 
English: When he came back from his nap, he said to the stork, "You are not yet able to help your brother. Can you do your best for me?

古文：两杀之。
现代文：把两人都杀了。
English: Kill them both.

古文：突骑施别种车鼻施啜苏禄者，裒拾余众，自为可汗。
现代文：突骑施的别种车鼻施啜苏禄，召聚余众，自为可汗。
English: Surprisingly riding a different kind of chariot, Shi Su Sulu, gathers the rest of the crowd and calls himself Khan.

古文：苏禄善抚循其下，部种稍合，众至二十万，于是复雄西域。
现代文：苏禄善于绥抚，部落渐渐合拢，达到二十万人，于是又称雄西域。
English: Sulu is good at caressing, the tribe gradually closed, reaching two hundred thousand people, so it is also known as the male western region.

古文：开元五年，始来朝，授右武卫大将军、突骑施都督，却所献不受。
现代文：开元五年，入朝，授官右武卫大将军、突骑施都督，退还他所献物。
English: In the fifth year of the first year of the Heian period, when he entered the imperial court, he was awarded the position of General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards and Governor of Shizuoka Prefecture, and his offering was returned to him.

古文：以武卫中郎将王惠持节拜苏禄左羽林大将军、顺国公，赐锦袍、钿带、鱼袋七事，为金方道经略大使。
现代文：派武卫中郎将王惠持节去授官苏禄为左羽林大将军，封爵顺国公，赐给锦袍、钿带、鱼袋等七物，委任为金方道经略大使。
English: He sent Wuwei Zhongro to send Wang Hui Jie to promote Sulu to the rank of General of the Left Feather Forest, to knight him as the Prince of Shun, to give him seven items including a brocade robe, a sash, and a fish bag, and to appoint him as the ambassador of the Five Elements Strategy.

古文：然诡猾，不纯臣于唐，天子羁系之，进号忠顺可汗。
现代文：不过苏禄很狡猾，并不单纯臣于唐。天子为了羁縻他，册立他为忠顺可汗。
English: However, Sulu was very cunning and was not simply a vassal of Tang. In order to protect him, Heaven's Son appointed him as the Loyal Khan.

古文：其后阅一二岁，使者纳贽，帝以阿史那怀道女为交河公主妻之。
现代文：以后过一两年，就派使者来贡献。皇帝封阿史那怀道的女儿为交河公主嫁他。
English: After a year or two, an emissary was sent to make a contribution. The emperor gave the daughter of Ashina Khaido the title of Princess Koga to marry him.

古文：是岁，突骑施鬻马于安西，使者致公主教于都护杜暹，暹怒曰： 阿史那女敢宣教邪？ 
现代文：这一年，突骑施在安西卖马。使者将公主的意见告诉安西都护杜暹，杜暹生气地说 ：阿史那的女儿哪配对我宣教。 
English: That year, Tujishi was selling horses in Anxi. The messenger told the princess's opinion to the governor of Anxi, Du Siem. Du Siem angrily said, "Which of Ashina's daughters is fit to preach to me?"

古文：笞其使，不报。
现代文：鞭打使者，不上报。
English: Whip the messenger, not the message.

古文：苏禄怒，阴结吐蕃举兵掠四镇，围安西城。
现代文：苏禄怒，暗中勾结吐蕃发兵掠夺四镇，围安西城。
English: Sulu was furious and secretly colluded with Tubo to send troops to plunder four towns and besiege Anxi City.

古文：暹方入当国，而赵颐贞代为都护，乘城久之，出战又败。
现代文：杜暹正入朝知政事，都护由赵颐贞代任。城守既久，出战又败。
English: Du Siam was about to enter the government as the imperial governor, and the protector of the capital was replaced by Zhao Yuzhen. He had been a castle guard for a long time, and had fought and been defeated.

古文：苏禄略人畜，发囷贮，徐闻暹已宰相，乃引去；即遣首领叶支阿布思来朝，玄宗召见，飨之。
现代文：苏禄掠夺人畜，抢仓储。后来听说杜暹已任宰相，乃退兵，派首领叶支阿布思来朝，玄宗召见，设宴招待。
English: Sulu plundered people and animals, robbed warehouses. Later, hearing that Du Siam had been appointed prime minister, but had retired, he sent the leader Ye Zhi Abu Si to the North, summoned Xuanzong, and held a banquet.

古文：会东突厥使者亦来，与争长曰： 突骑施国小，且突厥臣，不宜居上。 
现代文：此时东突厥使者也来，与苏禄使者争长说： 突骑施国小，且是突厥之臣，不该居上位。 
English: At this time, the East Turkic emissary also came and argued with the Sulu emissary, saying: "The Turkic emissary is a minor, and is a Turkic vassal, and should not be in a higher position."

古文：苏禄使者曰： 宴乃为我，不可下。 
现代文：苏禄使者说： 此宴是为我而设，不可居下位。 
English: The emissary of Sulu said, "This feast is for me, do not take a back seat.

古文：遂设东西幄，而苏禄使者西席，乃克宴。
现代文：于是设东西两帐，苏禄使者居西席，这才安稳。
English: As a result, the two accounts were set up, east and west, and the Sulu emissary sat in the west seat. This was the beginning of stability.

古文：始，苏禄爱治其人，性勤约，每战有所得，尽以予下，故诸族附悦之，为尽力，又交通吐蕃、突厥，二国皆以女妻之，遂立三国女并为可敦，以数子为叶护。
现代文：起先，苏禄很爱护他的人众，生性俭约，每次作战有所得，全部分给下属，所以各部都愿意依附他，愿为他效力。又与吐蕃、突厥相往来，两国都把女儿嫁给他。于是立三国之女并为可敦，又立几个儿子为叶护。
English: At first, Sulu was very protective of his people. He was frugal by nature. He gained something from every battle, and gave all of it to his subordinates. Therefore, all departments were willing to rely on him and work for him. He also had dealings with the Tubo and the Turks, and both countries married their daughters to him. Therefore, he set up the daughter of the three countries as Kedon, and set up several sons as Yegu.

古文：费日广而无素储，晚年愁窭不聊，故卤获稍留不分，下始贰矣；又病风，一支挛，不事事。
现代文：国内费用日增而无积贮，晚年害怕贫穷，所以掠夺所得渐留而不分，下属渐生二心。又得了风病，一肢挛缩，不能做事。
English: Domestic expenses increase day by day without accumulation, and fear of poverty arises in later years, so the plundered income is gradually retained without being divided, and subordinates gradually have two hearts. He also got wind disease, one limb contracted, unable to do things.

古文：于是大首领莫贺达干、都摩支二部方盛，而种人自谓娑葛后者为 黄姓 ，苏禄部为 黑姓 ，更相猜雠。
现代文：大首领莫贺达干、都摩支二部正盛。部落中人自称娑葛部的后代为黄姓，苏禄部的为黑姓，互相猜忌。
English: The great leader, Moga Dagan, and the two branches of the Toma branch are in their prime. People in the tribe call themselves the descendants of the Ge Ge Ge branch with the surname Huang, and the Sulu branch with the surname Hei, and they are suspicious of each other.

古文：俄而莫贺达干、都摩支夜攻苏禄，杀之。
现代文：不久，莫贺达干、都摩支夜袭苏禄，杀了他。
English: Soon after, Moga Dagan and Tomoichi attacked Sulu at night and killed him.

古文：都摩支又背达干立苏禄子吐火仙骨啜为可汗，居碎叶城，引黑姓可汗尔微特勒保怛逻斯城，共击达干。
现代文：都摩支又背着达干立苏禄之子吐火仙骨啜为可汗，居于碎叶城，引黑姓可汗尔微特勒坚守怛逻斯城，共击达干。
English: The capital city of Mochi also carried Dagan, the son of Sulu, on his back, and made him the khan. He lived in the City of Broken Leaves, and the dark-skinned khan, whose family name was Khanr Wytler, held fast to the city of Pelusium and fought against Dagan.

古文：帝使碛西节度使盖嘉运和抚突骑施、拔汗那西方诸国。
现代文：皇帝派碛西节度使盖嘉运去调和慰抚突骑施、拔汗那西方各国。
English: The emperor sent the Shaanxi Grand Duke to ask Ge Jia Rong to reconcile and appease the Western countries.

古文：莫贺达干与嘉运率石王莫贺咄吐屯、史王斯谨提共击苏禄子，破之碎叶城。
现代文：莫贺达干与盖嘉运率石王莫贺咄吐屯、史王斯谨提共同袭击苏禄之子，攻破碎叶城。
English: Moga Dagan and Gai Jia led the troops of Shi Wang, Moga Cui Tutun and Shi Wang Si Zhenti to jointly attack the son of Sulu and attack and destroy Yecheng.

古文：吐火仙弃旗走，禽之，并其弟叶护顿阿波。
现代文：吐火仙弃旗逃走，被擒，其弟叶护顿阿波也被擒。
English: The fire-breather abandoned his banner and fled, and was captured. His younger brother Ye Guodongbo was also captured.

古文：疏勒镇守使夫蒙灵詧挟锐兵与拔汗那王掩怛逻斯城，斩黑姓可汗与其弟拨斯，入曳建城，收交河公主及苏禄可敦、尔微可敦而还，又料西国散亡数万人，悉与拔汗那王。
现代文：疏勒镇守使夫蒙灵鮞发精兵与拔汗那王共袭击怛逻斯城，斩杀黑姓可汗与其弟拨斯，攻入曳建城，收俘交河公主及苏禄可敦、尔微可敦后回。又召聚西国流散的几万人，全都给了拔汗那王。
English: The governor of the town of Shule, with the inspiration of his husband, sent out his best soldiers to attack the city of Talos together with the king of Baha'u'llah. They killed the Black Khan and his brother, Darius, entered the city of Hijaz, captured the princess of Koga, as well as Suluqodun and Erweiqodun, and then returned. They also gathered tens of thousands of people who had been dispersed in the West, and all of them were given to the king of Baha'u'llah.

古文：诸国皆降。
现代文：各国都降。
English: Every country is down.

古文：处木昆匐延阙律啜等诸部皆上书谢曰： 生于荒裔，国乱王薨，更相攻屠。
现代文：处木昆、匐延、阙律啜等部均上书致谢 ：我等生于蛮荒，国乱王逝，再加相互攻杀，全仗天子派嘉运将兵诛杀暴虐，拯救危难。
English: Departments such as the First Division, the Second Division, and the Third Division all wrote letters of thanks: "We were born in a barbaric land, the king of the country died, and we fought and killed each other. Throughout the war, the Son of Heaven sent Jiayun to brutally kill the soldiers and save us from danger.

古文：赖天子遣嘉运将兵诛暴拯危，愿得稽首圣颜，以部落附安西，永为外臣。 许之。
现代文：我们情愿将部落依附安西，永世为天子之外臣。 
English: We are willing to attach the tribe to Anxi, and forever be the son of heaven and foreign minister.

古文：明年，擢阙律啜为右骁卫大将军，册石王为顺义王，加拜史王为特进，显醻其功。
现代文：诏许。第二年，提拔阙律啜为右骁卫大将军，册封石王为顺义王，加拜史王为特进，褒奖其功。
English: The following year, he was promoted to General of the Right Division of the National Guard, Shih Wang was awarded the title of Shunyi Wang, and Gabai Shi Wang was awarded the title of Special Envoy, in recognition of his achievements.

古文：嘉运俘吐火仙骨啜献太庙，天子赦以为左金吾卫员外大将军、脩义王，顿阿波为右武卫员外将军。
现代文：盖嘉运俘吐火仙骨啜献太庙，天子赦死，任他为左金吾员外大将军，封修义王；任其弟顿阿波为右武卫员外将军。
English: Gai Jiayun, a prisoner of war, spit fire immortals' bones and offered them to the imperial temple. The emperor pardoned his death and appointed him as the general of the left wing of the imperial guard and the king of the right wing of the imperial guard. His younger brother Dong Abo was appointed as the general of the right wing of the imperial guard.

古文：以阿史那怀道子昕为十姓可汗，领突骑施所部，莫贺达干怒曰： 平苏禄，我功也。今立昕，谓何？ 
现代文：立阿史那怀道之子昕为十姓可汗，统辖突骑施所部。莫贺达干怒 ：平定苏禄是我的功劳，现在立阿史那昕为可汗，为什么？ 
English: The son of Ashi Nahai-do, Shun, was made the tenth khan and took control of the Department of Horse Chariots and Armies. Moga Dagan Rage: It was my achievement to pacify Sulu. Now, Ashina Shun is the khan. Why?

古文：即诱诸落叛。
现代文：即诱各部落叛。
English: That is, to entice the tribes to rebel.

古文：诏嘉运招谕，乃率妻子及纛官首领降，遂命统其众。
现代文：诏令盖嘉运去安抚宣谕，这才率妻儿及旗官首领降，就命他统辖。
English: The emperor ordered Gai Jiayun to pacify the proclamation, and he led his wife and children and flag officers to surrender, and ordered him to take control.

古文：后数年，复以昕为可汗，遣兵护送。
现代文：几年后，仍立昕为可汗，派兵护送回国。
English: A few years later, he was still crowned Khan and sent soldiers to escort him back to China.

古文：昕至俱阑城，为莫贺咄所杀。
现代文：昕到俱阑城，被莫贺咄杀害。
English: He was killed by Moga when he arrived at the club's city.

古文：莫贺咄自为可汗，安西节度使夫蒙灵詧诛斩之，以大纛官都摩支阙颉斤为三姓叶护。
现代文：莫贺咄就自为可汗，安西节度使夫蒙灵鮞将他诛斩，立大纛官都摩支阙颉斤为三姓叶护。
English: Mogao declared himself khan, Anxi Jiedu sent his envoy Meng Lingyi to have him beheaded, and appointed the grand eunuch Du Mashiqin as the third Yegu.

古文：天宝元年，突骑施部更以黑姓伊里底蜜施骨咄禄毘伽为可汗，数通使贡。
现代文：天宝元年，突骑施部立黑姓皆均伊里底密施骨咄禄毗伽为可汗，多次派使贡献。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the head of the imperial cavalry, Shi Bu, and the leader of the imperial cavalry, Guan Jun Eri Di, both of whom had the surname of Hei, made a great contribution by sending envoys many times to make sure that Guan Jun Eri Di became the khan.

古文：十二载，黑姓部立登里伊罗蜜施为可汗，亦赐诏册。
现代文：天宝十二年，黑姓部立登里伊罗蜜施为可汗，朝廷也赐诏册。
English: In the 12th year of Tianbao, the Black Nobility established Dengli Iromishi as khan, and the imperial court also issued an imperial edict.

古文：至德后，突骑施衰，黄、黑姓皆立可汗相攻，中国方多故，不暇治也。
现代文：至德年以后，突骑施衰，黄、黑姓立可汗相攻，中国国内也多事，无暇顾及。
English: After the Year of the Horse, Huang and Hei Khan attacked each other. There were also many events in China, and there was no time to take care of them.

古文：乾元中，黑姓可汗阿多裴罗犹能遣使者入朝。
现代文：乾元年间，黑姓可汗阿多裴罗还派使者入朝。
English: During the year of Qianyuan, the Black Khan Adopelo also sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：大历后，葛逻禄盛，徙居碎叶川，二姓微，至臣役于葛禄，斛瑟罗余部附回鹘。
现代文：大历以后葛逻禄盛，迁居碎叶川，黄、黑两姓衰微终于臣服葛禄，斛瑟罗余部归附回鹘。
English: After the Great Calendar, Ge Luo Lu prospered and moved to Chibihe River, and the two surnames Huang and Hei waned and finally submitted to Ge Luo, and the rest of Xiluo was annexed back to Shandong.

古文：及其破灭，有特勒居焉耆城，称叶护，余部保金莎领，众至二十万。
现代文：及其破灭，特勒居焉耆城，称叶护，余部保守金莎领，人众有二十万。
English: and its collapse, Teller lived in the city of Yancheng, known as Ye Zhou, and the rest of the conservative Jin Sha collar, with a population of two hundred thousand.

古文：赞曰：隋季世，虚内以攻外，生者罢道路，死者暴原野，天下盗贼共攻而亡之。
现代文：评论：隋朝末年，虚内而攻外，生者疲于道路，死者暴露原野，所以天下蜂起共攻而亡隋。
English: Comment: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the country was attacked from the inside and from the outside, the living were exhausted from the road, and the dead were exposed to the wilderness. Therefore, the whole world rose up to attack and defeat the Sui Dynasty.

古文：当此时，四夷侵，中国微，而突厥最强，控弦者号百万，华人之失职不逞皆往从之，槊之谋，导之入边，故颉利自以为强大古无有也。
现代文：那时，四夷入侵，中国微弱，突厥最强，号称精兵百万。华人中被贬谪或不得志的都去投奔，帮他们谋划，引他们入边陲。所以颉利自以为强大得从古未有。
English: At that time, when the four barbarians invaded, China was weak, the Turks were the strongest, and they claimed to have a million elite soldiers. The Chinese who were demeaned or disheartened all rushed to help them plan and lead them to the border. Therefore, Geli thought he was stronger than ever before.

古文：高祖初即位，与和，因数出军助讨贼，故诡臣之，赠予不可计。
现代文：高祖初即位，与他联合，还多次出兵帮他讨贼，对他优容，馈赠不可计数。
English: Gaozu ascended the throne at the beginning of his reign, allied with him, and sent troops to help him catch thieves many times. He was favored with countless gifts.

古文：虏见利而动，又与贼连和，杀掠吏民，于是扫国入寇，薄渭桥，骑壒蒙京师。
现代文：虏人见利而动，又与贼人联合，杀掠吏民，并倾巢入侵，迫近渭桥，尘嚣蒙京师。
English: The robbers saw an opportunity and moved. They also joined forces with the thieves to kill and plunder the officials and people. They also rushed to invade, approaching the Qianqiao Bridge. The Beijing Division was in full swing.

古文：太宗身勒兵，显责而阴间之，戎始内阻。
现代文：太宗亲自率兵，在斥责的同时进行分化，这才阻其入侵。
English: Taizong personally led the troops, and while reprimanding them, differentiated them, which prevented their invasion.

古文：不三年，缚颉利献北阙下，霆扫风除，其国遂墟。
现代文：不到三年，终于将颉利俘献宗庙，战火消弭，其国也废。
English: Less than three years later, he finally dedicated his son to the temple, the war was over, and his country was no more.

古文：自《诗》、《书》以来，伐暴取乱，蔑如帝神且速也，秦汉比之，陋矣。
现代文：自《诗》、《书》以来，讨伐残暴，攻取贼乱，没有如太宗这般神速的。秦、汉与之相比，差远了。
English: Since "Poetry" and "Book," there has been no one as swift as Taizong to fight brutality and conquer banditry. Compared to him, Qin and Han were far behind.

古文：然帝数暴师不告劳，料敌无遁情，善任将，必其功，盖黄帝之兵也。
现代文：太宗皇帝多次亲征不觉劳，料敌情无细不准，善于用将，定然建功，实在是黄帝之兵啊。
English: Emperor Taizong personally recruited soldiers many times and did not feel any fatigue. He was able to use the enemy situation to his advantage. He was good at making use of the enemy's resources and made steady contributions. He was truly a soldier of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：而突厥乃以失德抗有道，浸衰当始兴，虽运之盛衰属于天，而其亡信有由矣！
现代文：而突厥以失德来与有道抗衡，其衰微的苗头是在他最兴旺时就出现了。虽然气运的盛衰在于天，但其亡实在是有原因的啊。
English: The Turk, on the other hand, used his lack of virtue to compete with Taoism, and the seeds of his decline appeared when he was at his most prosperous. Although the rise and fall of fortune is in the heavens, there is a reason for his death.

