古文：褚承亮，字茂先，真定人。
现代文：褚承亮，字茂先，真定县人。
English: Zou Chengliang, also known as Maoxian, was from Jinding County.

古文：宋苏轼自定武谪官过真定，承亮以文谒之，大为称赏。
现代文：宋朝的苏轼在定武被贬谪官职，路过真定的时候，褚承亮拿了文章来拜见，苏轼对他大加称赞。
English: Su Shi of the Song Dynasty was demoted to eunuch when Dingwu was demoted to eunuch. When he passed by Dingwu, Zou Chengliang took an article to meet him. Su Shi praised him greatly.

古文：宣和五年秋，应乡试，同试者八百人，承亮为第一。
现代文：宋宣和五年秋，褚承亮参加乡试，一同应试的有八百人，而他名列第一。
English: In the autumn of Song Xuanhe's fifth year, Gong Chengliang took part in the township examination. There were eight hundred people who took the examination together, and he ranked first.

古文：明年，登第。
现代文：第二年，考中了进士，被调任易州户曹。
English: In the second year, he passed the entrance examination and was transferred to Yizhou Household Cao.

古文：调易州户曹，未赴，会金兵南下。
现代文：褚承亮还没去赴任，便遇上了金兵南下。
English: Before Hao Chengliang took office, he met Jinbei Nanxing.

古文：天会六年，斡离不既破真定，拘籍境内进士试安国寺，承亮名亦在籍中，匿而不出。
现代文：天会六年，干离不攻下了真定，把名册上是真定的进士都拘禁到安国寺考试，褚承亮的名字也列在名册中，却躲藏起来不露面。
English: For six years, the Heaven's Association has been trying to capture Zhending. They have detained all the Zhending scholars on the roster until the Anguo Temple examination. Zou Chengliang's name is also listed in the roster, but he hides and does not show up.

古文：军中知其才，严令押赴，与诸生对策。
现代文：军营里知道他的才华，下严令把他押来，与各进士一起答对策问。
English: The military camp knew of his talent and issued strict orders to bring him in to answer questions together with the other conscripts.

古文：策问 上皇无道、少帝失信。 
现代文：策问道： 上皇无道，少帝失信。 
English: Zhao asked: The emperor had no way out, and the young emperor was untrustworthy.

古文：举人承风旨，极口诋毁。
现代文：举人顺承讽谏的旨意，极力对朝廷进行诋毁。
English: In obedience to the will of the emperor, they tried their best to defame the imperial court.

古文：承亮诣主文刘侍中曰： 君父之罪，岂臣子所得言耶？ 
现代文：褚承亮则对主考官刘侍中说 ：君父的过错哪里是臣子能够议论的呢？ 
English: On the other hand, Gong Chengliang said to the chief examiner Liu Zhi: Where is the fault of your father that a vassal can discuss?

古文：长揖而出。
现代文：然后深深作了个揖便离去了。
English: Then he took a deep breath and left.

古文：刘为之动容。
现代文：刘侍中很受感动。
English: Liu Samizhong was very moved.

古文：余悉放第，凡七十二人，遂号七十二贤榜。
现代文：其余的举子都被录取，共计七十二人，于是号称七十二贤榜。
English: The rest of the candidates were admitted, a total of seventy-two, and thus became known as the Seventy-two Virtues List.

古文：状元许必仕为郎官，一日出左掖门，堕马，首中阃石死，余皆无显者。
现代文：状元许必被任命为郎官，有一天他走出左掖门的时候，从马上摔下来，头碰在门槛的石头上而死。
English: One day, when he went out of the left gate, he fell off his horse, hit his head on the stone of the threshold and died.

古文：况圣明在上，可不容巢、由为外臣乎。 
现代文：这样，其他举人都没什么知名的了。刘侍中非常看重和褚承亮的交情，举荐他做藁城县知县。
English: In this way, the other nominators are not well-known. Liu Zhizhong attaches great importance to the friendship with Zou Chengliang and recommends him to be the prefect of Fucheng County.

古文：上益奇之，赐田亩千，复之终身。泰和二年卒，年八十五。
现代文：褚承亮随便答应下来，但不久就弃职而去。他七十岁时逝世，门人们私下称他为 玄贞先生 。
English: Gong Chengliang casually agreed, but soon resigned and left. He died at the age of seventy, and his disciples privately called him Mr. Xuanzhen.

古文：杜时升，字进之，霸州信安人。
现代文：褚承亮的儿子褚席珍，于正隆二年中了进士，在州县做官颇有声誉。杜时升，字进之，是霸州信安人。
English: Zou Xingliang's son, Zou Xizhen, became an officer in the second year of Zhenglong, and had a good reputation as an official in the prefecture. Du Shisheng, also known as Jin Zhi, was from Baju Xinyan.

古文：博学知天文，不肯仕进。
现代文：时升博学，通晓天文，只是不肯进入仕途。
English: Shi Sheng was well-educated and knew a lot about astronomy, but he did not want to pursue a career in astronomy.

古文：承安、泰和间，宰相数荐时升可大用。
现代文：承安年间和泰和年间，宰相屡次举荐时升，说是对他可以重用。
English: During the years of Cheng'an and Taihe, the prime minister repeatedly recommended Shi Sheng, saying that he could be reused.

古文：时升谓所亲曰： 吾观正北赤气如血，东西亘天，天下当大乱，乱而南北当合为一。
现代文：时升对所亲近的人说 ：我观察正北方赤气如血，东西横贯天空，天下应当大乱，大乱之后南北应该合成一统。
English: Shi Sheng said to the people close to him: I observe that the north is as red as blood, the east and west are across the sky, the world should be in chaos, and after the chaos, the north and south should be unified.

古文：消息盈虚，循环无端，察往考来，孰能违之。 
现代文：消息是实是虚，循环往复没有头绪，考察往来变化，谁能违背天意呢？ 
English: Whether the news is true or false, whether the cycle is repeated or not, who can go against the will of heaven?

古文：是时，风俗侈靡，纪纲大坏，世宗之业遂衰。
现代文：在那时候，社会风俗奢侈萎靡，朝廷纪纲遭大破坏，世宗的基业已经衰败。
English: At that time, the social custom of extravagance was in decline, the imperial syllabus was destroyed, and the foundation of the dynasty had decayed.

古文：时升乃南渡河，隐居嵩、洛山中，从学者甚众。
现代文：时升于是南渡黄河，隐居在嵩、洛山中，跟他学习的人很多。
English: Jisheng then traveled south to the Yellow River and lived in seclusion in the mountains of Song and Luo. Many people studied with him.

古文：大抵以 伊洛之学 教人自时升始。
现代文：用 伊洛之学 的理论教人大抵是从时升开始的。
English: Most of the time, teaching using the theory of Iroh's learning begins with Jisheng.

古文：正大间，大元兵攻潼关，拒守甚坚，众皆相贺，时升曰： 大兵皆在秦、巩间，若假道于宋，出襄、汉入宛、叶，铁骑长驱势如风雨，无高山大川为之阻，土崩之势也。 
现代文：正大年间，蒙古军进攻潼关，金军抗敌守关很是坚强，大家都争相祝贺，时升说 ：蒙古大军都在秦、巩之间，如果借道从宋国进发，出襄、汉进入宛、叶，铁骑长驱势如风雨，没有高山大川阻挡他们，那么金国就成为土崩瓦解之势了。 
English: During the Zhengda period, the Mongolian army attacked Shaoguan, and the Chinese army was very strong in resisting the enemy and defending the pass. Everyone congratulated each other. Shi Sheng said: The Mongolian army is between Qin and Gong. If they go from Song to Xiang, and from Han to Wan and Ye, and if there is no Gaoshan River to block them, then China will collapse.

古文：顷之，大元兵果自饶峰关涉襄阳出南阳，金人败绩于三峰山，汴京不守，皆如时升所料云。
现代文：很快，蒙古军果然从饶峰关涉襄阳出南阳，金兵战败于三峰山，汴京失守，一切都像时升所预料的那样。
English: Soon, the Mongolian army did indeed march from Raofeng Pass to Xiangyang and out of Nanyang, the Golden Army was defeated at Sanfeng Mountain, and Beijing was lost, all as Shi Sheng had expected.

古文：后不知所终。
现代文：正大末年，时升逝世。
English: I don't know what will happen next.

古文：宋可，字予之，武陟人。
现代文：宋可，字予之，是武陟县人。
English: Song Ke, also known as Yu Zhi, is from Wuxi County.

古文：其姑适大族槁氏，贞祐之兵，夫及子皆死於难。
现代文：他的姑母嫁给了大族槁氏，在贞年间的战争中，丈夫和儿子都死于战乱。
English: His aunt was married to a member of the large Yi clan, and both her husband and son died in the war during the Zhen years.

古文：姑以白金五十笏遗可，可受不辞。
现代文：姑母把五十笏白金赠给宋可，宋可并不推辞，接受下来。
English: His aunt gave Song Ke fifty pieces of white gold. Song Ke did not refuse, but accepted it.

古文：其后姑得槁氏疏族立为后，挈之省外家。
现代文：后来，姑母继领了槁氏远族的一个孩子，带他回来探访娘家。
English: Later, my aunt adopted a child from a distant clan of the Min clan and brought him back to visit her daughter's family.

古文：可乃置酒会乡邻，谓姑曰： 姑往时遗可以金，可以槁氏无子故受之。
现代文：宋可就摆了酒席聚会乡邻，对姑母说： 姑母以前赠金于我，我因为槁氏无子才接受下来。
English: Song Ke set up a banquet to gather the villagers and said to his aunt: My aunt used to give me money, but I only accepted it because the Xing family had no children.

古文：今有子矣，此金槁氏物，非姑物也，可何名取之。 
现代文：现在槁氏有了孩子，这金钱是槁氏的财产，而不是姑母您的，我有什么理由拿它呢？ 
English: Now that Mr. Zou has a child, this money is Mr. Zou's property, not your aunt's. What reason do I have to take it?

古文：因呼妻子舁金归之，乡里用是重之。
现代文：于是，宋可叫妻儿抬出五十笏白金归还给姑母，乡里人因此十分敬重他。
English: As a result, Song Kegui asked his wife and son to carry out fifty ounces of platinum and return it to his aunt, so the villagers respected him very much.

古文：有诗数千首，常贮竹橐中。正大末，殁洛下。
现代文：没过多久，北国的军队进驻山阳，军中有人听说过宋可的声名，就探访到他的住处，把他的儿子抓走做人质，派人叫他去，说： 如果顺从我们，可以祸福同享。
English: It didn't take long before the army of the northern country was stationed in Shanyang. Someone in the army who had heard of Song Ke's fame visited his residence, took his son away as a hostage, and sent someone to summon him, saying, "If you obey us, you can share the good and bad fortune."

古文：其诗有云： 黄绮暂来为汉友，巢由终不是唐臣。 
现代文：如果不从，你的儿子就得死掉了。 亲友们都劝宋可去，他全部谢绝，并说： 我有没有儿子，我儿子是死是活，这都是命中注定。
English: Relatives and friends all urged Song to go, but he refused them all, saying, "Whether I have a son or not, whether my son lives or dies, it's all predetermined by fate.

古文：真处士语也。王予可，字南云，河东吉州人。
现代文：我怎么能因为一个儿子，就放弃一生所奉守的信条呢！ 以后，宋可终于因此没有了儿子。王予可，字南云，是河东吉州人。
English: How can I give up the creed I have been following all my life just because I have a son! Later, Song Keh finally did not have a son because of this. Wang Yoke, also known as Nan Yun, was from Jizhou in the east of the river.

古文：父本军校，予可亦尝隶籍。
现代文：他的父亲本来是一名军校，所以予可也曾经在军队注册。
English: His father was originally a military school, so he was also enrolled in the army.

古文：年三十许，大病后忽发狂，久之能把笔作诗文，及说世外恍惚事。
现代文：王予可三十岁左右的时候，大病一场后忽然发狂，时间长了能拿起笔写诗文，并且说些世外的恍恍惚惚、令人费解的事。
English: When Wang Youke was about thirty years old, he suddenly went mad after a serious illness. It took him a long time to be able to pick up a pen and write poetry, and to say some otherworldly, trance-like, puzzling things.

古文：南渡后，居上蔡、遂平、郾城之间，遇文士则称 大成将军 ，于佛前则称 谛摩龙什 ，于道则称 驺天玄俊 ，于贵游则称 威锦堂主人 。
现代文：南渡以后，他家居住在上蔡、遂平、郾城之间，遇到文人学士，他就称人家是 大成将军 ，在佛前他则称呼 谛摩龙什 ，对道士就称呼 驺天玄俊 ，对贵族游人则称呼 威锦堂主人 。
English: After traveling south, his family lived between Shangcai, Suiping, and Lucheng. When he met a literati scholar, he called him General Dacheng. In front of the Buddha, he called him Morongshi. For a Taoist, he called him Shantian Xuanjun. For an aristocratic tourist, he called him the owner of Weijing Hall.

古文：为人躯干雄伟，貌奇古，戴青葛巾，项后垂双带若牛耳，一金镂环在顶额之间，两颊以青涅之为翠靥。
现代文：王予可这个人体形雄伟，相貌奇古，戴的是青色葛巾，脖子后面垂着像牛耳似的两根带子，顶额中间佩一个金镂环。
English: Wang Yu Ke, a man with a majestic figure and an ancient appearance, was wearing a blue cloth, with two straps hanging from the back of his neck like cow's ears, and a gold hoop in the middle of his forehead.

古文：衣长不能掩胫。落魄嗜酒，每入城，市人争以酒食遗之。
现代文：他的两颊用青颜色点搽成翠色的微涡，他的衣服长短盖不住小腿。落魄嗜酒，每次入城，市场上的人争着拿酒食给他。
English: His cheeks are dotted with cyan dots to form emerald swirls, his clothes are too short to cover his shins. He is a hopeless alcoholic, and every time he enters the city, people in the market compete to give him food and drink.

古文：夜宿土室中，夏月或尸秽在傍、蛆虫狼籍不恤也。
现代文：夜间，他睡在土屋里，夏天有时污秽的尸体在旁边，蛆虫狼藉，他对此也不恐惧。
English: At night, he sleeps in a mud hut, in the summer sometimes next to filthy corpses, infested with maggots, and he is not afraid of this.

古文：人与之纸，落笔数百言，或诗或文，散漫碎杂，无句读、无首尾，多六经中语及韵学家古文奇字，字画峭劲，遇宋讳亦时避之。
现代文：有人给他纸，他落笔就是几百字，或者是诗，或者是文，散漫碎杂，没有断句，没头没尾，但大多是六经中的句子以及韵学家的古文奇字，笔划锋利有劲，遇到宋讳也知道回避。
English: Someone gives him a piece of paper, and he writes down a few hundred words, either a poem or a text, scattered and fragmented, without a broken sentence, without a beginning or an end, but mostly sentences from the Six Classics and ancient rhymes of rhyme scholars. The strokes are sharp and vigorous, and he knows to avoid Song Zhan.

古文：或问以故事，其应如响，诸所引书，皆世所未见。谈说之际稍若有条贯，则又以诞幻语乱之。
现代文：有的人问他一些典故，他对答声音宏亮，引用的书都是当世所不曾见过的，谈说之间稍微像是有条理，可是又用一些荒诞的幻语把条理搞乱了。
English: Some people asked him about some allusions, and he answered in a booming voice, quoting books that the world had never seen before. The conversation seemed to be somewhat organized, but he used some absurd fantasy words to mess up the order.

古文：麻九畴、张珏与之游最狎，言其诗以百分为率，可晓者才二三耳。
现代文：麻九畴、张和他交往最亲密，说他的诗用百分作为比率，可以读懂的才百分之二、三罢了。
English: Ma Jiuzhen, with whom Zhang has the closest relationship, said that his poems use one hundred percent as a ratio, and only two or three percent can be read.

古文：壬辰兵乱，为顺天将领所得，知其名，窃议欲挈之北归，馆于州之瑞云观。
现代文：壬辰战乱中，王予可被顺天将领所收容，知道他的名字，顺天将领暗中商议要带着他北归，让他住在州里的瑞云观。
English: During the Imjin War, Wang Yu was taken in by Shuntian, who knew his name. Shuntian secretly negotiated to take him back to the north and let him live in the state of Ruiyun.

古文：予可明日见将领自言曰： 我不能住君家瑞云观也。 
现代文：予可第二天去见将领，自己说： 我不能住在君家瑞云观。 
English: I could go to see the general the next day and say to myself, "I can't live in your house, Rui Yunqun.

古文：不数日卒。
现代文：不几天，予可就死了。
English: Within a few days, he was dead.

古文：后复有见于淮上者。
现代文：后来又有人说在淮上见到过他。
English: Later, some people said they had seen him on Huai Mountain.

