古文：司马相如谢朓沈约庾信王勃卢照邻崔融张说崔曙王维李翰顾况卢渥唐德宗戎昱李端韩翃杨凭符载王建裴度白居易元和沙门
现代文：司马相如谢朓沈约庾信王勃卢照邻崔融张说崔曙王维李翰顾况卢渥唐德宗戎昱李端韩翃杨凭符载王建裴度白居易元和沙门
English: Sima is similar to Xie, Shen, Yao, Xin, Wang, Bulu, Zhao, Neighbors, Cui, Rong, Zhang, Say, Cui, Shu, Wang, Wei, Li, Han, Gu, Lu, Wu, Tang, De, Zong, Rong, Li, Duan, Han, Yang, Zhao, Wang, Jian, Pei, Du, Bai, Ju, Yi, Yuan and Shamen.

古文：司马相如
现代文：司马相如
English: Sima Xiangru

古文：汉司马相如赋诗，时人皆称典而丽，虽诗人之作，不能加也。
现代文：西汉时，司马相如作的赋，受到人们的称赞，他的赋典雅、富丽。其他诗人的作品，都不如他。
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, Sima Xianglu's fu was praised by people. His fu was elegant and rich. The works of other poets were not as good as his.

古文：杨子云曰：长卿赋不似从人间来，其神化所至耶？
现代文：他的文友杨子云说：长卿作的赋，不似从人间来的，简直是神仙点化而成的。
English: His literary friend, Yang Ziyun, said: "The fu created by Changqing does not seem to have come from the human world, it is simply made from the points of the gods.

古文：子云学相如之赋而弗迨也，故雅服焉。
现代文：扬子云学司马相如的赋，但是赶不上司马相如，所以他很佩服司马相如。
English: Yang Ziyun learned from Sima Xiangru, but he couldn't catch up with his boss, so he admired Sima Xiangru.

古文：相如为上林赋，意思萧散，不复与外物相关。控引天地，错综古今。
现代文：相如写的《上林赋》，文章潇洒，内涵深广，控引天地，涉古及今。
English: Similar to the "Shanglin Fu" written, the article is dashing, the connotation is deep and wide, the heaven and earth are controlled, and it is related to ancient times and now.

古文：忽然而睡，跃然而兴。几百日而后成。
现代文：有时睡卧构思，灵感来时便跃然而起，挥笔为文，深思熟虑，精雕细刻，几百天后才写成。
English: Sometimes I sleep and think about it, and when inspiration comes, I jump up, write it down with a pen, think about it, carve it out, and write it hundreds of days later.

古文：其友人盛览字长卿。牦柯名士，尝问以作赋。相如曰：合篡组以成文，列锦绣而为质，一经一纬，一宫一商，此赋之迹也。
现代文：他的友人盛览，也是牦柯一带的名士，曾问司马相如作赋的方法，相如说：要想写好一篇文章，要有好的形式，一字一句，一辙一韵，都要认真推敲。
English: His friend Shengxuan, who was also a famous person in the Shijiazhuang-Ke area, once asked Sima Xiangru how to make fu. Xiangru said: "If you want to write a good article, you must have a good form. Every word and every rhyme must be carefully considered.

古文：赋家必包括宇宙，总览人物，斯乃得之于内，不可得而博览。
现代文：还要有丰富的内容，作者要有广阔的胸怀，总览世间众生相，这样，你的文章才能内涵深广，而不只是罗列一些表面现象。
English: You should also have rich content, and the author should have a broad mind, an overview of the living beings in the world. In this way, your article can have a deep and broad connotation, rather than just listing some superficial phenomena.

古文：乃作合组歌列锦赋而退。终身不敢言作赋之心矣。
现代文：盛览写完了《列锦赋》后，便退出了文化圈子，终身不敢谈作赋的想法。
English: After he had finished writing "Fu" he withdrew from the cultural circle and never dared to talk about the idea of creating fu.

古文：谢朓
现代文：谢朓
English: Xie Yao

古文：梁高祖重陈郡谢朓诗。常曰：不读谢诗三日，觉口臭。
现代文：梁高祖非常喜欢和推崇陈郡人谢朓的诗，他常说，三天不读谢朓的诗，觉得口中无味。
English: Liang Gaozu was very fond of and respected the poems of Chen County native Xie Qian. He often said that if he didn't read Xie Qian's poems for three days, he would find them tasteless.

古文：沈约
现代文：沈约
English: Shen You

古文：梁奉朝请吴均有才器，常为剑骑诗云：何当见天子，画地取关西。
现代文：梁时，奉朝请吴均有才华、有器度。他曾写过一首《剑骑诗》，诗中有这样的句子：何当见天子，画地取关西。
English: When he was a young man, Wu Jun, who was invited to the imperial court, was talented and resourceful. He once wrote a "sword riding poem," in which there is such a sentence: "What should I see the son of heaven, draw Kansai."

古文：高祖谓曰：天子今见，关西安在焉？
现代文：梁高祖对他说：你诗中说的天子我已经看见了，那么关西在哪？
English: Liang Gaozu said to him, "I have already seen the son of heaven mentioned in your poem, so where is Kansai?"

古文：均默然无答。
现代文：吴均沉默，没有回答。
English: Wu Jun was silent and did not answer.

古文：均又为诗曰：秋风泷白水，雁足印黄沙。
现代文：吴均另一首诗中有：秋风泷白水，雁足印黄沙。
English: In another poem by Wu Jun, there is: the autumn wind splashes white water, the goose's footprints are yellow sand.

古文：沈隐侯约语之曰：印黄沙语太险。
现代文：沈约说：印黄沙，用语太奇。
English: Shen Yu said, "The words are too strange.

古文：均曰：亦见公诗云，山樱发欲然。
现代文：吴均说：我也在你的诗中读过这样的句子：山樱发欲然。
English: Wu Jun said, "I have also read such a sentence in your poem: "The mountain cherry blossoms are in full bloom."

古文：约曰：我始欲然，即已印讫。
现代文：沈约风趣地说：我开始用的 欲然 ，现在已经 印 完了。
English: Shen Yoyo said humorously: "I started to use it, and now it's finished.

古文：庾信
现代文：庾信
English: 信

古文：梁庾信从南朝初至，北方文士多轻之。
现代文：梁时，庾信从南朝出使北朝西魏长安，刚去的时候，北方的文人很看不起他。
English: At the time of Liang, Yuxin sent an envoy from the Southern Dynasty to the Northern Dynasty, Western Wei and Chang'an. When he first went there, the northern literati looked down on him.

古文：信将枯树赋以示之，于后无敢言者。
现代文：他把他作的《枯树赋》给他们看，读过之后，便不敢再轻视他了。
English: He showed them his work "Withered Tree Gift," and after reading it, they dared not despise him any more.

古文：时温子升作韩陵山寺碑，信读而写其本。
现代文：当时，西魏文学家温子升作《韩陵山寺碑》碑文，庾信读后很欣赏，并为他书写了碑文。
English: At that time, Wen Zi, a West Wei literati, wrote the inscription of "Hanling Mountain Temple Monument." He was very appreciative after reading the letter and wrote an inscription for him.

古文：南人问信曰：北方文士何如？
现代文：南朝的人问庾信：北方的文人怎么样？
English: The people of the Southern Dynasty asked Yu Xin: What about the literati in the North?

古文：信曰：唯有韩陵山一片石堪共语。薛道衡、卢思道少解把笔。自余驴鸣狗吠，聒耳而已。
现代文：庾信说：唯有《韩陵山寺碑》的碑文还可以，薛道衡、卢思道多少懂点文墨，其余的都是驴鸣狗叫，喧扰嘈杂而已。
English: Yu Xin said: Only the inscription of "Hanling Mountain Temple Monument" is still good. Xue Daoheng and Lu Sidao know a little bit of writing, the rest are donkeys barking and noisy.

古文：王勃
现代文：王勃
English: Wang Bo

古文：唐王勃每为碑颂，先磨墨数升，引被覆面而卧；忽起，一笔书之，初不点窜。
现代文：唐时，大文学家王勃每当书写碑颂时，先磨很多墨，他却盖被蒙头躺卧，忽然起来，提笔书写，一气呵成，也不涂改。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, whenever the great writer Wang Bo wrote a poem, he first rubbed a lot of ink. However, he was lying down with his head covered, and suddenly got up, picked up a pen and wrote. It was done in one go, and he did not change it.

古文：时人谓之腹稿。
现代文：当时人们把这叫做腹稿。
English: At the time, people called it gut writing.

古文：卢照邻
现代文：卢照邻
English: Luzhao Neighborhood

古文：唐卢照邻字升之，范阳人。
现代文：唐朝的卢照邻，字升之，范阳人。
English: The Lu Zhao neighbor of the Tang Dynasty, the word Sheng Zhi, the Fan Yang people.

古文：弱冠，拜邓王府典签，王府书记，一以委之。
现代文：他二十左右岁的时候，在邓王府任过：典签、书记等职。
English: When he was about twenty years old, he served in Deng Wangfu's government as a signer, secretary, and other positions.

古文：王有书十二车，照邻总披览，略能记忆。
现代文：邓王府内有很多书籍，照邻读了很多，而且还能记住一些。
English: There were many books in Deng Wangfu's residence. He read a lot according to his neighbors, and he could remember some of them.

古文：后为益州新都县尉。
现代文：后来他升任益州新都县县尉。
English: Later, he was promoted to County Lieutenant of Xindu County, Yizhou.

古文：秩满，婆娑于蜀中，放旷诗酒。故世称王、杨、卢、骆。
现代文：任期满后，他到四川去远游、盘桓，终日饮酒、赋诗，生活的很豪放、开朗。所以人们称王、杨、卢、骆。
English: After his term of office was over, he went to Sichuan to travel far and wide, drinking all day, writing poetry, and living a very free and cheerful life. So people called him Wang, Yang, Lu, and Luo.

古文：照邻闻之曰：喜居王后，耻在骆前。
现代文：卢照邻听后说：在王勃之后我很高兴，可是在骆宾王之前，我感觉很耻辱。
English: After listening to his neighbor, Lu said, "I was happy after Wang Bo, but I felt very humiliated before King Camel.

古文：时杨之为文，好以古人姓名连用，如张平子之略谈，陆士衡之所记，潘安仁宜其陋矣，仲长统何足知之，号为点鬼簿。
现代文：当时，杨炯的诗，喜欢把古人姓名连用，如：张平子之略谈、陆士衡之所记；潘安仁宜其陋矣、仲长统何足知之。人们称这是点鬼簿。
English: At that time, Yang Xuan's poems liked to use the names of the ancients together, such as: Zhang Ping Zi's summary, Lu Shihai's record; Pan An Renyi's history, and Zhong Chang Du's history. People said that this was a ghost book.

古文：骆宾王文好以数对，如秦地重关一百二，汉家离宫三十六。
现代文：骆宾王的诗文好用数字，如：秦地重关一百二、汉家离宫三十六。
English: Luo Bin Wang's poems are good at using numbers, such as: the Qin Dynasty closed one hundred and two gates, and the Han Dynasty left thirty-six gates.

古文：时人号为算博士。
现代文：人们称他为算博士。
English: People call him the maths doctor.

古文：如卢生之文，时人莫能评其得失矣。
现代文：卢照邻的文章，当时人们没有评论他的得失。
English: Lu Zhaoqing's article, at that time people did not comment on his gains and losses.

古文：惜哉，不幸有冉畊之疾，著《幽忧子》以释愤焉。文集二十卷。
现代文：很可惜，他得了风痹症，他著有《幽忧子集》，用来发泄自己的忧愤情绪，文集共二十卷。
English: It's a shame that he got a bad case of impetigo. He wrote "The Subset of Sadness," which he used to vent his feelings of sadness and anger. The anthology consists of twenty volumes.

古文：崔融
现代文：崔融
English: Choe Ryong

古文：唐国子司业崔融作武后册文，因发疾而卒。
现代文：唐朝国子司业崔融，因为撰写《则天哀册文》精思劳苦而患病死亡。
English: Cui Rong, the imperial secretary of the Tang Dynasty, died of illness as a result of his hard work in writing the "Zetianmo Book."

古文：时人以为二百年来无此文。
现代文：人们认为，二百年来没有过这样的好文章。
English: It was thought that there had not been such a good article in two hundred years.

古文：张说
现代文：张说
English: Zhang said.

古文：唐张说、徐坚同为集贤学士十余年，好尚颇同，情契相得。
现代文：唐时，张说和徐坚同在集贤院当学士十多年，两人爱好一致，感情相投。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang said that he and Xu Jian were both bachelors at Jixian Academy for more than ten years. The two had the same hobbies and shared the same feelings.

古文：时诸学士凋落者众，说、坚二人存焉。
现代文：当时和他们共事的学士们，已经衰落的很多，独有张、徐二人还留在集学院。
English: At that time, many of the undergraduates who worked with them had already declined, and only Zhang and Xu remained at the Institute.

古文：说手疏诸人名，与坚同观之。
现代文：张说把当年的学士名字都一一写出来，和徐坚一起观看。
English: Zhang said that he wrote down all the names of the year's baccalaureates and watched them with Xu Jian.

古文：坚谓说曰：诸公昔年皆擅一时之美，敢问艺之先后？
现代文：徐坚对张说说；诸位当年都是各有专长，各领风骚啊，请问文章方面，谁先谁后？
English: Xu Jian said to Zhang Rong; You all had your own specialties back then, and you all had your own quirks. In terms of writing, who was ahead of whom?

古文：说曰：李峤、崔融、薛稷、宋之问之文，皆如良金美玉，无施不可。
现代文：张说说：李峤、崔融、薛稷、宋之问的文章，都是良金美玉，无可挑剔。
English: Zhang said, "The articles written by Li Qian, Cui Rong, Xue Qian, and Song Zhiwen are all excellent, impeccable.

古文：富嘉谟之文，如孤峰绝岸，壁立万仞，丛云郁兴，震雷俱发，诚可异乎？
现代文：富嘉谟的文章，严峻峭拔，雄奇豪放，别具一格，他这种言论，若是用在议论朝政的地方，必然引起大乱子。
English: Fu Jia Meng's article is unique in its stern elevation and bold boldness. His remarks, if used in discussing the government of the dynasty, will inevitably cause great turmoil.

古文：若施之于廊庙，则为骇矣。阎朝隐之文，则如丽色靓妆，衣之绮绣，燕歌赵舞，观者忘忧。然类之风雅，则为俳矣。
现代文：阎朝隐的文章，浓妆艳抹，词藻华丽，轻歌曼舞，读后令读者愉悦，虽然有些风流儒雅，但是有点过于幽默诙谐。
English: Yan Chaoying's article, heavily made-up, flowery words, light song and dance, makes the reader happy after reading. Although it is somewhat elegant, it is a bit too humorous and witty.

古文：坚又曰：今之后进，文词孰贤？
现代文：徐坚又问：现在的后起之秀，谁的文章好？
English: Xu Jian also asked: the current rising star, whose article is good?

古文：说曰：韩休之文，有如大羹玄酒，虽雅有典则，而薄于滋味。
现代文：张说说：韩休的文章，有如美酒佳肴，词语典雅，但缺少韵味。
English: Zhang said: Han Xiu's article is like fine food and wine. The words are elegant, but lack charm.

古文：许景先之文，有如丰肌腻体，虽秾华可爱，而乏风骨。
现代文：许景先的文章，虽然肌肤丰满，华丽可爱，但缺少风骨。
English: Xu Jingsen's article, although the skin is plump, gorgeous and lovely, but the lack of style.

古文：张九龄之文，有如轻缣素练，实济时用，而窘于边幅。
现代文：张九龄的文章，有如淡妆素裹，应时实用，但缺少润饰。
English: Zhang Jiuling's article, like a light make-up cream, should be practical, but lack of embellishment.

古文：王翰之文，有如琼林玉斝，虽烂然可珍，而多有玷缺。
现代文：王翰的文章，像华美的玉器，灿烂珍贵，但多有瑕疵。
English: Wang Han's articles are like ornate jade, splendid and precious, but with many flaws.

古文：若能箴其所短，济其所长，亦一时之秀也。
现代文：若能去其所短，扬其所长，也是一时之秀啊！
English: If you can cut to the chase and improve on your strengths, you'll be a hit!

古文：崔曙
现代文：崔曙
English: Choi Akebono

古文：唐崔曙应进士举，作明堂火珠诗，续有佳句曰：夜来双月满，曙后一星孤。
现代文：唐朝，崔曙应进士举，他作了一首《明堂火珠诗》，续作中有佳句：夜来双月满，曙后一星孤。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Shugu should be promoted as a scholar. He composed a "Mingtang Fireball Poem," and there is a good line in the sequel: The night comes with a double moon, and after the dawn there is a lonely star.

古文：其言深为工文士推服。
现代文：诗中的措词深为文人们推崇和叹服。
English: The wording in the poem is deeply respected and admired by writers.

古文：既夭殁，一女名星星而无男。
现代文：崔曙死后，只留下一女，名星星，没有男孩。
English: After Choi Akebono's death, only one woman, Meisei, was left, and there was no boy.

古文：当时咸异之。王维
现代文：他留下的后人和他诗中写的一样，当时人们认为很奇异。王维
English: The descendants he left behind are the same as those written in his poem, which was considered very strange at the time.

古文：唐王维好释氏，故字摩诘。
现代文：唐时，王维信仰佛教，所以他的字叫摩洁，性情很清高。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wang Wei believed in Buddhism, so his character was called "Mojie" and his temperament was very pure and high.

古文：性高致，得宋之问辋川别业，山水胜绝，今清凉寺是也。
现代文：他得到了宋之问在兰田辋川的一套居所，风景很美，就是现在的清凉寺。
English: He got Song Zhiwen's residence in Lantian Yingchuan, with a beautiful landscape, which is now the Qingliang Temple.

古文：维有诗名，然好取人章句。如行到水穷处，坐看云起时，人以为含英集中诗也。
现代文：王维的诗享有盛名，他写诗时好摘取别人的章句，如：行到水穷处，坐看云起时。人们认为这是《含英集》中的诗句。
English: Wang Wei's poems enjoy a high reputation. When he writes poems, he likes to pick up other people's passages, such as: go to the water-poor place, sit and watch the clouds rise. People think that this is a poem in the "English Collection."

古文：漠漠水田飞白鹭，阴阴夏木啭黄鹂，乃李嘉佑诗也。
现代文：漠漠水田飞白鹭，阴阴夏木啭黄鹂。这两句诗是李嘉佑的诗。
English: The rice paddies in the desert are white, and the trees in the summer are yellow. These two poems are the poems of Li Jia You.

古文：李翰
现代文：李翰
English: Li Han

古文：唐李翰文虽宏畅，而思甚苦涩。
现代文：唐时的李翰，文章的气势虽然宏伟畅达，而他的内心却很苦闷。
English: Li Han in the Tang Dynasty, although the momentum of the article was magnificent and smooth, his heart was very distressed.

古文：晚居阳翟，常从邑令皇甫曾求音乐。思涸则奏乐，神全则缀文。
现代文：晚年时居住在阳翟邑，常常从阳翟邑令皇甫曾那里借用乐器，文思枯竭时就演奏乐器，精神饱满时则写文章。
English: In his later years, he lived in Yangshuo and often borrowed musical instruments from Emperor Fu Zeng of Yangshuo. When he was exhausted, he would play musical instruments, and when he was full of energy, he would write articles.

古文：顾况
现代文：顾况
English: Status Quo

古文：唐顾况在洛，乘间与一二诗友游于苑中。流水上得大梧叶，上题诗曰：一入深宫里，年年不见春。
现代文：唐时，诗人顾况住在洛阳，在闲暇时和一两个诗友在宫墙外边的园林中游玩，在从宫墙内流出的水上，拾到一枚大梧桐树叶，叶上有一首题诗：一入深宫里，年年不见春。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the poet Gu Fu lived in Luoyang. In his leisure time, he and one or two poet friends played in the gardens outside the palace walls. On the water flowing out of the palace walls, he picked up a large sycamore leaf. On the leaf there was a poem: Once you enter the deep palace, you will not see spring every year.

古文：聊题一片叶，寄与有情人。
现代文：聊题一片叶，寄与有情人。
English: Talk about a leaf, send and have a lover.

古文：况明日于上游，亦题叶上，泛于波中。诗曰：愁见莺啼柳絮飞，上阳宫女断肠时。君恩不禁东流水，叶上题诗寄与谁。
现代文：顾况第二天在流水的上游，也在树叶题了一首诗，放在水中，诗是：愁见莺啼柳絮飞，上阳宫女断肠时，君恩不断东流水，叶上题诗寄与谁。
English: On the second day, in the upper reaches of the flowing water, there was also a poem inscribed on the leaves and placed in the water. The poem was: Sad to see the egrets flying, when the Shangyang palace maiden broke her bowels, the gentleman continued to flow eastward. Who was the poem inscribed on the leaves sent to?

古文：后十日余，有客来苑中寻春，又于叶上得一诗，故以示况。诗曰：一叶题诗出禁城，谁人愁和独含情。
现代文：十多天以后，又有人在园林游春，又在一片树叶上得了首诗，拿给顾况看，诗是：一叶题诗出禁城，谁人愁和独含情。
English: More than ten days later, another person was wandering in the garden in the spring and found a poem on a leaf. Judging by the circumstances, the poem was: A leaf-themed poem out of the Forbidden City, who is sad and lonely.

古文：自嗟不及波中叶，荡漾乘风取次行。
现代文：自嗟不及波中叶，荡漾乘风取次行。
English: Self-flagellation falls short of the wave in the middle, and the ripples ride the wind to take the next line.

古文：卢渥
现代文：卢渥
English: Rouvois

古文：中书舍人卢渥应举之岁，偶临御沟，见一红叶，命仆搴来。叶上及有一绝句，置于巾箱。
现代文：中书舍人卢渥应举那年，偶然走过宫墙的御沟，看水上有一枚红叶，他叫仆人拿过来，一看，红叶上题了一首绝句，把它放在装衣帽的小箱中，有时拿出来给朋友们看看。
English: That year, Luwo Yingqiu, the scribe, happened to walk across the ditch of the palace wall and saw a red leaf on the water. He asked his servant to fetch it. At a glance, the red leaf was inscribed with a poem. He put it in a small box containing clothes and hats, and sometimes took it out to show his friends.

古文：或呈于同志。及宣宗既省宫人，初不诏，许从百官司吏，独不许贡举人。
现代文：到唐宣宗李忱的时候，裁减宫女，皇帝下诏书，准许宫女嫁百官司吏，独不允许嫁给举人。
English: By the time of Emperor Xuanzong Li Zhen of the Tang Dynasty, the number of concubines had been reduced, and the emperor issued an edict allowing concubines to marry officials, but they were not allowed to marry nobles.

古文：渥后亦一任范阳，独获其退宫人，睹红叶而吁怨久之曰：当时偶题随流，不谓郎君收藏巾箧。
现代文：卢渥后来到范阳任职，恰巧得到了一个从宫中退出来的宫女，看到了红叶，感慨万千。过了一会儿宫女说：当时只是偶然题诗放在水中，没曾想却在郎君的箱子中收藏着。
English: Luwo then came to Fanyang to work, and he happened to get a concubine who had retired from the palace. She saw the red leaves and was filled with emotion. After a while, the concubine said: At that time, I just accidentally put the poem in the water. I didn't think about it, but I collected it in my husband's box.

古文：验其书迹，无不讶焉。诗曰：流水何太急，深宫尽日闲。殷勤谢红叶，好去到人间。
现代文：一看笔迹，果然是她写的，两人都为此事奇巧而惊讶。那红叶上的诗是：流水何太急，深宫尽日闲，殷勤谢红叶，好去到人间。
English: At a glance at the handwriting, it was indeed written by her, and both of them were surprised at the strangeness of the matter. The poem on the red leaf was: How swift the running water is, the deep palace is idle all day long, thank the red leaf diligently, in order to go to the human world.

古文：唐德宗
现代文：唐德宗
English: Tang Dezong

古文：唐德宗每临朝，多令征四方丘园才能，学术直言极谏之士。
现代文：唐德宗李适每次上朝时，多次下令征召四方隐居的能人，学术有成，敢于直言谏议的人士。
English: Every time Li Shih, the Tang Dezong, ascended to the throne, he repeatedly ordered the enlistment of talented people who lived in seclusion in the four directions, accomplished scholars, and those who dared to speak out.

古文：由是题笔献艺者满于阙下。
现代文：因此，宫殿门前聚集了很多被举荐来参加考试的人。
English: As a result, many people who had been recommended to take the exam gathered in front of the palace.

古文：上多亲自考试，故绝请托之门。
现代文：皇上亲自主考，杜绝了旁门左道、托人说情等不正之风。
English: The emperor personally administered the examinations, and put an end to the unfair practices such as favoritism, favoritism, and so on.

古文：是时文学相高，公道大振，得路者咸以推贤进善为意。
现代文：儒生的地位被提高了，平等竞争，公道大振。知情者都为推荐贤士而尽心尽力。
English: The status of Confucianism has been improved, competition is equal, and fairness has been greatly improved. Those in the know are doing their best to recommend sages.

古文：上试制科于宣政殿，或有乖谬者即浓点笔抹之，或称旨者翘足朗吟。
现代文：皇上在宣政殿设立考场，遇有错谬之处浓笔点抹，遇有称心的文章，则翘足吟诵。
English: The emperor set up an examination room in the Xuanzheng Hall. In the event of an error, he would write it down, and in the event of a satisfactory article, he would recite it aloud.

古文：翌日，即遍示宰臣学士曰：此皆脱门生也。
现代文：第二天，便把考试的文章给宰臣和学士们看说：这都是我的门生。
English: The next day, he showed the exam papers to the vice-ministers and bachelors and said, "These are all my students.

古文：公卿大夫已下，无不服上藻鉴。
现代文：满朝的官员，都很叹服皇上的英明。
English: All the officials of the dynasty were in awe of the emperor's wisdom.

古文：宏词独孤绶试《放驯象赋》。及进其本，上览，称叹久之。因吟其词云：化之式孚，则必爱乎来献；物或违性，斯用感于至仁。
现代文：参加宏词科考试的独孤绶作了一篇《驯象赋》，皇上读过之后，赞叹很久，还吟诵着赋中的句子：化之式孚，则必爱乎来献，物或违性，斯用感于至仁。
English: A lone woman who took part in the grand lexicon examination wrote an essay on "Elephant Training Fu." After the emperor read it, he admired it for a long time, and also recited the sentence in Fu: "If you want to change your style, then you must love to present it. Whether it is a thing or a vice, you must use it to be kind to others."

古文：上甚嘉之，故特书第三等。
现代文：皇上特别赞赏这些句子。所以皇上在他的名下写了第三等。
English: The Emperor particularly appreciated these sentences, so he wrote the third grade under his name.

古文：先是代宗朝，文单国累进驯象三十有二，上悉令放于荆山之南。
现代文：早在代宗朝时，文单国进贡驯象三十二头，皇上命令放到荆山南部。
English: As early as during the reign of Emperor Taizong, the emperor ordered that 32 elephants from Wenshan Province be brought to the southern part of Mount Jing.

古文：而绶不斥受献，不伤放弃，上赏为知去就也。
现代文：独孤绶在赋中既没有说接受进贡不对，又没说把驯象放回山中不好，皇上很欣赏他很理解皇上的心意。
English: In the play, the lone donkey did not say that it was wrong to accept the tribute, nor did he say that it was not good to put the tamed elephant back into the mountains. The emperor appreciated that he understood the emperor's intentions.

古文：贞元五年，初置中和节，御制诗，朝臣奉和。诏写本赐戴叔伦于容州。
现代文：唐德宗贞元五年，初设中和节，皇上作了一首诗，众朝臣唱和，皇上下诏把这些诗的写本赐给客州的戴叔伦。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, the Chinese New Year festival was first established. The emperor composed a poem, all the courtiers sang it, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to give a copy of these poems to Di Shulun of Hakka.

古文：天下荣之。
现代文：国人为戴叔伦而荣耀。
English: The Chinese people are proud of Dai Shulun.

古文：戎昱
现代文：戎昱
English: 戎

古文：唐宪宗皇帝朝，以北狄频侵边境，大臣奏议：古者和亲，有五利而无千金之费。
现代文：唐宪宗李纯当皇帝的时候，北方的少数民族经常搔扰唐朝的边境。大臣们奏议，有人主张用过去的和亲办法，并说和亲有五项好处而又不用破费金钱。
English: When Emperor Li Chun of the Tang Dynasty was in power, the ethnic minorities in the north often encroached on the borders of the Tang Dynasty. The ministers made a petition. Some people advocated using the past method of reconciliation, and said that reconciliation had five benefits without costing money.

古文：帝曰：比闻有一卿，能为诗而姓氏稍僻，是谁？
现代文：皇帝说：近来听说有一位臣能写诗，但他的姓氏很少见，不知是谁？
English: The emperor said, "Recently, I heard that there is a minister who can write poetry, but his surname is rare. Who is he?

古文：宰相对曰：恐是包子虚、冷朝阳。
现代文：宰相回答说，恐怕是包子虚、冷朝阳吧？
English: The Prime Minister replied, "I'm afraid it's the buns and cold morning sun, isn't it?"

古文：皆不是也。
现代文：都不是。
English: Not all of them.

古文：帝遂吟曰：山上青松陌上尘，云泥岂合得相亲。世路尽嫌良马瘦，唯君不弃卧龙贫。
现代文：皇帝便吟诵了这首诗：山上青松陌上尘，云泥岂合得相亲，世路尽嫌良马瘦，唯君不弃卧龙贫。
English: The emperor then recited this poem: The mountain is covered with green pines, but the mountain is covered with dust. The clouds and mud are inseparable. The world is full of good horses and thin horses, but the emperor does not abandon the poverty of Wolong.

古文：千金未必能移姓，一诺从来许杀身。
现代文：千金未必能移姓，一诺从来许杀身。
English: Chikin may not be able to change his surname, but he has never promised to commit suicide.

古文：莫道书生无感激，寸心还是报恩人。
现代文：莫道书生无感激，寸心还是报恩人。
English: If students are not grateful, they will not be able to return the favor.

古文：侍臣对曰：此是戎昱诗也。
现代文：侍臣们回答说，这是戎昱的诗。
English: The courtiers replied that it was a poem by Eunsoo.

古文：京兆尹李銮瞿拟以女嫁昱，令其改姓，昱固辞焉。
现代文：京兆尹李銮曾经要把女儿嫁给他，叫他改姓，戎坚决辞绝了。
English: Jingzhao Yin Lijuan once wanted to marry his daughter to him and asked him to change his surname, but Eun resolutely refused.

古文：帝悦曰：朕又记得咏史一篇，此人若在，便与朗州刺史。武陵桃源，足称诗人之兴咏。
现代文：皇帝高兴地说：我还记得他和一首《咏史》诗，此人若是在的话，我一定叫他去任朗州刺史，朗州所辖武陵县的桃源，是一个风景优美的好地方，诗人到那里一定会写出很多的诗作。
English: The emperor said happily, "I still remember him and a poem from "The Tale of the Dragonfly." If this person were here, I would definitely ask him to go to Lanzhou to be a poet. Taoyuan in Wuling County, which is under the jurisdiction of Lanzhou, is a good place with beautiful scenery. When a poet goes there, he will surely write a lot of poems."

古文：圣旨如此稠叠，士林之荣也。其咏史诗云：汉家青史内，计拙是和亲。
现代文：皇帝日理万机，在议政时，又能引用这些诗词来表达自己的意思，这实在是读书人的荣幸。这首《咏史》诗是：汉家青史上，计拙是和亲。
English: It is indeed an honor for readers to be able to quote these poems to express their own thoughts when the emperor is in political deliberation. This poem from "History of the Han Dynasty" is: In the history of Han Dynasty youth, cunning is a relative.

古文：社稷依明主，安危托妇人。
现代文：社稷依明主，安危托夫人。
English: The company is headed by Mr. Yiming, Mrs. Angtuo.

古文：岂能将玉貌，便欲静胡尘。
现代文：岂能将玉貌，便拟静胡尘。
English: If you can't change your appearance, you'll end up like Jing Hu.

古文：地下千年骨，谁为辅佐臣。
现代文：地下千年骨，谁为辅佐臣。
English: Underground millennium bones, who is the assistant vassal.

古文：帝笑曰：魏绛之功，何其懦也？
现代文：皇帝笑说：魏绛春秋时晋国大夫，力主和戎，当年用和亲的办法，也太懦弱了。
English: The emperor said with a smile, "During the Spring and Autumn Period of Wei and Qin, the doctor of the Jin Dynasty, the leader and the leader, was too cowardly to use the method of reconciliation.

古文：大臣公卿，遂息和戎之论者矣。
现代文：于是，大臣公卿们便不再议论和亲的办法了。
English: As a result, ministers and nobles no longer discussed the possibility of reconciliation.

古文：李端
现代文：李端
English: Li Duan

古文：唐郭暧尚升平公主，盛集文士，即席赋诗。公主帷而观之。
现代文：唐朝，郭暖娶了升平公主，当了驸马。有一次他宴请了很多文士，即席赋诗，升平公主在帷帐后面观看。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Guo Nuan married Princess Shengping and became a brood mare. Once he invited many scribes to a banquet, improvised a poem, and Princess Shengping watched from behind the curtain.

古文：李端中宴诗成，有荀令何郎之句，众称绝妙。
现代文：李端在宴会正在进行中写完了诗，有荀令何郎之句，众人称赞句子绝妙。
English: While the banquet was in progress, Li Duan finished writing a poem. It was a poem of praise, and everyone praised the wonderful sentence.

古文：或谓宿构。
现代文：有人说他事前就构思好了。
English: Some say he planned it all out in advance.

古文：端曰：愿赋一韵。
现代文：李端说：换一韵我再赋一首。
English: Li Duan said, "I'll give you another rhyme.

古文：钱起曰：请以起姓为韵。
现代文：钱起说：就用我的姓为韵。
English: Qianqi said: Just use my surname as a rhyme.

古文：复有金埒铜山之句。
现代文：李端又有金埒铜山之句。
English: Li Duan also has the words of Jinyu Copper Mountain.

古文：暧大喜，出名马金帛为赠。
现代文：郭暧非常高兴。赠给他名马、金银、布匹。
English: Guo Gan was very happy. He was presented with a famous horse, gold and silver, and cloth.

古文：是会也，端擅场；送丞相王缙之镇幽朔，韩翃擅场；送丞相刘晏之巡江淮，钱起擅场。
现代文：这次宴会，李端出类拔萃。在送丞相王缙去镇守幽朔的宴会上，韩翃出众。在送丞相刘晏去江淮巡视的宴会上，钱起超群。
English: At this banquet, Li Duan stood out from the crowd. At the banquet to send the Prime Minister Wang Hui to the town of Zhenshuyu, Han Hui was outstanding. At the banquet to send the Prime Minister Liu Hui to inspect the Jianghuai River, Qian Qi was outstanding.

古文：韩翃
现代文：韩翃
English: Han Zheng

古文：唐韩翃少负才名。
现代文：唐朝，韩翃年轻时很有才华，很有名气。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Han Xuan was very talented and famous when he was young.

古文：侯希逸镇青淄，翃为从事。
现代文：侯希逸镇守青淄时，韩翃在他手下当从事。
English: When Hou Xiyi was in charge of the Youth League, Han Xiyi was a player under him.

古文：后罢府，闲居十年。
现代文：后来被罢官，在家闲居十年。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post and spent the next ten years idling at home.

古文：李勉镇夷门，又署为幕吏。时韩已迟暮，同职皆新进后生，不能知韩。
现代文：李勉去镇守夷门时，被启用为幕僚，当时韩翃已经到了晚年，和他一起任职的都是些年轻人，对他不了解，看不起他写的诗。
English: When Li Mian went to the town of Shouyi Gate, he was appointed as a staff member. At that time, Han Zheng was already in his old age, and the people who served with him were all young people who did not understand him and looked down on the poems he wrote.

古文：共目为恶诗韩翃。翃殊不得意，多辞疾在家。
现代文：韩翃很不得意，多称病在家。
English: Han Zheng was very disappointed and said that he was sick at home.

古文：唯末职韦巡官者，亦知名士，与韩独善。
现代文：唯有一个职务不高的韦巡官，他也是一个知名人士，和韩翃相处的很好。
English: There is only one Inspector Wei, who is not high-ranking, but he is also a well-known person, and he gets along very well with Han Yu.

古文：一日夜将半，韦扣门急。韩出见之，贺曰：员外除驾部郎中，知制诰。
现代文：一天半夜时，韦巡官扣门声很急，韩翃出来见他，他祝贺说：你升任驾部郎中了，让你主持制诰。
English: In the middle of the night one day, Inspector Wei's doorbell rang very urgently. Han Wei came out to see him. He congratulated him and said, "You have been promoted to the middle of the driver's department, let you preside over the inspection."

古文：韩大愕然曰：必无此事，定误矣。
现代文：韩翃很吃惊说：不可能有这种事，一定是错了。
English: Han Yu was very surprised and said, "There is no way this could have happened, it must be a mistake."

古文：韦就座曰：留底状报，制诰缺人，中书两进名，御笔不点出。
现代文：韦巡官坐下后说，皇帝的文告、命令，缺少起草的人，中书省两次提名，皇帝没批。
English: After sitting down, Inspector Wei said that the emperor's proclamation and order lacked a draftsman. The People's Republic of China nominated him twice, but the emperor did not approve him.

古文：又请之，德宗批曰，与韩翃。
现代文：又请示，德宗批示：用韩翃。
English: Also, please follow the instructions of the German sect: use Korean ginger.

古文：时有与翃同姓名者，为江淮刺史。
现代文：当时还有一个同韩翃同名同姓的人，任江淮刺史。
English: At that time, there was another person with the same name and surname as Han Zheng, Ren Jianghuai.

古文：又具二人同进。御笔复批曰，春城无处不飞花，寒食东风御柳斜。
现代文：又把他两人上报皇帝，皇帝批示说：春城无处不飞花，寒食东风御柳斜。
English: He also reported the two of them to the emperor, and the emperor issued an order saying: Spring City is full of flying flowers, and the cold easterly wind is blowing.

古文：日暮汉宫传蜡烛，轻烟散入五侯家。
现代文：日暮汉宫传蜡烛，轻烟散入五侯家。
English: At nightfall, candles are lit at the Imperial Palace, and the light smoke wafts into the Wuhou family home.

古文：又批云，与此韩翃。
现代文：就用写这首诗的韩翃。
English: He used the poem's author, Han Yan.

古文：韦又贺曰：此非员外诗也？
现代文：韦巡官又祝贺说：这不是你写的诗吗？
English: Inspector Wei congratulated him and said, "Isn't this a poem you wrote?

古文：韩曰：是也。是知不误矣。
现代文：韩翃说是。他才知道没有错。
English: Han Ye said yes. Only then did he know there was no mistake.

古文：质明而李与僚属皆至。
现代文：天亮时，李勉和同僚们都来祝贺。
English: At dawn, Mr. Li and his colleagues came to congratulate him.

古文：时建中初也。
现代文：这时正是唐德宗建中初年。
English: It was the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School.

古文：杨凭
现代文：杨凭
English: Yang Biao

古文：唐京兆尹杨凭，兄弟三人皆能文，为学甚苦。
现代文：唐朝时京兆尹杨凭，兄弟三人的文章都很好。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the three brothers, Jing Zhao, Yin, and Yang Biao, wrote very well.

古文：或同赋一篇，共坐庭石，霜积襟袖，课成乃已。
现代文：他们在学习时，都很刻苦。为了写一篇文章，三人同坐在院中的大石上，不怕霜露打湿了衣服，直到把文章写完。
English: When they were studying, they all worked hard. In order to write an article, the three of them sat together on a large rock in the courtyard, not afraid of frost and dew wetting their clothes, until they finished writing the article.

古文：符载
现代文：符载
English: Signed and dated

古文：唐符载字厚之，蜀郡人，有奇才。
现代文：唐朝时四川人符载，字厚之。有奇才。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, Sichuanese people were loaded with characters, and their characters were thick. There were wizards.

古文：始与杨衡、宋济栖青城山习业。
现代文：他曾和杨衡、宋济在青城山学习。
English: He studied with Yang Heng and Song Ji in Qingcheng Mountain.

古文：杨衡擢第，宋济先死，无成。
现代文：杨衡及第，宋济先死，一事无成。
English: Yang Heng came in second, Song Jie died first, and nothing was accomplished.

古文：于时陪饮于摩诃池，载离席盥漱，命小吏十二人捧砚，人分两题。
现代文：唯有符载自恃有才，非常傲慢。韦皋镇守四川时，把他用为管理军中给养的支使、虽然是知遇之恩，他仍然很骄傲。
English: He was very arrogant. When Wei Gan Zhengu was in charge of Sichuan, he used him as an envoy to manage the supply of the army. Although it was a blessing, he was still very proud.

古文：缓步池间，各授口占。其敏速也如此。刘辟时为金吾仓曹参军，始依皋焉。载与撰真赞云：矫矫化初，气杰文雄。
现代文：韦皋在二十四化设道场，请他写斋词，韦皋在摩诃池旁陪他喝酒，符载离开席位洗了洗手，命十二个小吏捧砚台，分列两旁，他缓步池间，口授斋词，才思敏捷，速度很快。刘辟依附韦皋任金吾仓曹参军，符载给刘辟题画像的诗是：矫矫化为，气杰文雄。
English: Wei Wei set up a dojo in the 24th CPC National Congress and asked him to write a sermon. Wei Wei accompanied him for a drink at the side of the Mahjong Pool. He left his seat and washed his hands. He ordered twelve minor officials to hold the sermon platform and line up on both sides. He walked slowly between the pools and dictated the sermon. He was quick-witted and fast. Liu Bei adhered to Wei Wei and appointed Jingu Cang Cao to join the army. The poem inscribed to Liu Bei's picture is: "Jiao Jiao Chuan Chuan, Qi Jie Wen Xiong."

古文：灵螭出水，秋鹗乘风。
现代文：灵螭出水，秋鹗乘风。
English: The coffin floats out of the water, and the coffin rides the wind.

古文：行义则固，辅仁乃通。
现代文：行义则固，辅仁乃通。
English: Good deeds are solid, but benevolence is not.

古文：他年良觌，麟阁之中。
现代文：他年良觌，麟阁之中。
English: He's a good-looking, middle-aged man.

古文：及皋卒，辟总留务，载亦在幕中。及辟败，载亦免祸。
现代文：韦皋死后，刘辟统领留下的事务，符载也在幕府中，刘辟失败时，符载并没受牵连。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, Liu Bei was left in charge of the affairs of the shogunate. When Liu Bei failed, he was not implicated.

古文：王建
现代文：王建
English: Wang Jian

古文：唐王建初为渭南县尉，值内官王枢密者，尽宗人之分。然彼我不均，复怀轻谤之色。
现代文：唐朝诗人王建，开始时在渭南任县尉，和宫中宦宫王枢密是同宗，由于他们的职务不一样，王建很轻视王枢密。
English: The Tang Dynasty poet Wang Jian, who was initially a county official in southern Fujian, was from the same family as the court eunuch and palace privy councilor Wang Jian. Due to their different positions, Wang Jian despised the privy councilor.

古文：故元稹以尝有宫词，诏令隐其文。朝廷以为孔光不言温树者，慎之至也。
现代文：有一次因饮酒过量，王建说起了东汉时桓帝刘志、灵帝刘宏由于重用了宦官，使朝中正直之士被杀被禁之事，王枢密认为是讥讽他。他责问王建：兄弟所有的宫词，天下人都在传诵，宫廷禁卫森严，怎么都传到了外面？王建没法回答。
English: Once, due to excessive drinking, Wang Jian mentioned the Eastern Han Dynasty, when Emperor Hunzhi Liu Zhi and Emperor Lingdi Liu Hong killed and banned the eunuchs due to their heavy use of eunuchs, which Wang Zuimi thought was a mockery of him. He asked Wang Jian: brothers, all the palace words, the whole world is reciting, the palace is strictly guarded, how did it all get out? Wang Jian could not answer.

古文：及王建将被奏劾，因为诗以让之，乃脱其祸也。
现代文：元稹所作的宫词，也曾有被下诏禁止的。朝廷中认为西汉时的孔光终日清谈，不论政事，是非常谨慎的。后来有人上奏弹劾王建，因为他写的诗，却脱过了灾祸。
English: There was also a palace speech made by the Yuan Shao that was banned by imperial edict. The imperial court believed that Kong Guang, who lived in the Western Han Dynasty, was very careful to speak clearly all day long, regardless of political affairs. Later, someone tried to impeach Wang Jian because he wrote poetry, but he escaped the disaster.

古文：建诗曰：先朝行坐镇相随，今上春宫见长时。
现代文：他的这首诗是：先朝行坐镇相随，今上春宫见长时。
English: His poem is as follows: First, he traveled to the Imperial Court, then he stayed in the town, and now he is in the Spring Palace.

古文：脱下御衣偏得著，进来龙马每交骑。
现代文：脱下御衣偏得著，进来友马每交骑。
English: Take off your robe and come riding with your horse.

古文：常承密旨还家少，独奏边情出殿迟。
现代文：常承密旨还家少，独奏边情出殿迟。
English: He often keeps secrets and returns home late, and he is a latecomer to the court when he performs a solo.

古文：不是当家频向说，九重争遣外人知。
现代文：不是当家频向说，九重争遣外人知。
English: It is not the case that the authorities often say that the nine layers are fighting for the knowledge of foreigners.

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：唐宪宗以玉带赐裴度，临薨却进。门人作表，皆不如意。
现代文：唐宪宗李纯曾赐给诗人裴度一条玉带，他在临死前，想把玉带再献给皇上，他的门人给皇上写奏表，都不如他的意。
English: Li Chun, the Tang Dynasty Emperor Xianzong, once gave a jade belt to the poet Pei Du. Before his death, he wanted to give the jade belt to the emperor again. His servants did not write a musical score for the emperor as he wished.

古文：公令子弟执笔，口占曰：内府之珍，先朝所赐。既不敢将归地下，又不合留在人间。
现代文：他又叫他的弟子执笔，他口授：内府之珍，先朝所赐，既不敢将归地下，又不合留在人间。
English: He also asked his disciple to write, and he dictated: "The treasure of Nefu, given by the previous government, neither dares to return to the earth, nor does it belong to the human world.

古文：闻者叹其简切而不乱。
现代文：听到的人都叹服他的文词简洁、贴切而不乱。
English: All who heard him were impressed by the conciseness, pertinence and orderliness of his words.

古文：白居易
现代文：白居易
English: Bai Juyi

古文：唐白居易有妓樊素善歌，小蛮善舞。
现代文：唐朝，白居易有一姬善歌，名樊素；另一姬善舞，名小蛮。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Bai Juyi had a good song, famous for its melody, and a good dance, famous for its acrobatics.

古文：尝为诗曰：樱桃樊素口，杨柳小蛮腰。
现代文：他曾在诗中写道：樱桃樊素口。杨柳小蛮腰。
English: He once wrote in a poem: "Cherry blossom has a plain mouth, willow has a small waist."

古文：年即高迈，而小蛮方丰艳，因杨柳词以托意曰：一树春风万万枝，嫩于金色软于丝。
现代文：后来，白居易年高体迈，而小蛮却正值青春年少，丰腴艳丽。他写了一首《杨柳词》，用以抒发他的惆帐心情。这首诗是：一树春风千万枝，嫩于金色软如丝。
English: Later, Bai Juyi was a tall and slender man, while Xiaoman was young and beautiful. He wrote a poem "Yang Liu Zhi" to express his sentiments. This poem is: One tree, spring breeze, ten million branches, tender as gold, soft as silk.

古文：永丰坊里东南角，尽日无人属阿谁。
现代文：永丰西角荒园里，尽日无人属阿谁。
English: In the wasteland of West Point, Yongfeng, no one belongs to anyone.

古文：及宣宗朝，国乐唱是词，上问谁词？
现代文：到了唐宣宗李忱时，宫中常演唱这首词。皇上问：谁写的词？
English: When Emperor Xuan Zong of Tang Dynasty came to Li Zhen, the palace often sang this song. The emperor asked: Who wrote this song?

古文：永丰在何处？
现代文：永丰在什么地方？
English: Where is Yongfeng?

古文：左右具以对。
现代文：左右大臣一一回答了他。
English: The left and right ministers answered him one by one.

古文：遂因东使，命取永丰柳两枝，植于禁中。
现代文：他便派人东去洛阳，取来两枝永丰柳，栽植在宫禁中。
English: He then sent someone east to Luoyang to fetch two yongfeng willows and plant them in the palace.

古文：自感上知其名，且好尚风雅，又为诗一章，其末句云：定知此后天文里，柳宿光中添两星。
现代文：白居易知道皇上知道了他的姓名，皇上又有那么大的兴致，他又写了一首诗，最后两句是：定知此后天文里，柳宿光中添两星。
English: Bai Juyi knew that the emperor knew his name, and the emperor was so interested that he wrote another poem, the last two sentences of which were: I am sure that from now on, in astronomy, two stars will be added to Liu Sukuang.

古文：后除苏州刺史，自峡沿流赴郡。时秭归县繁知一，闻居易将过巫山，先于神女祠粉壁大署之曰：苏州刺史今才子，行到巫山必有诗。
现代文：白居易调任苏州刺史时，他过三峡沿江而下去赴任，当时秭归县的繁知一，听说白居易要过巫山，他事先在神女祠的粉墙上用大字书写了一首诗：苏州刺史今才子，行到巫山必有诗。
English: When Bai Juyi was transferred to the post of Suzhou chief historian, he crossed the Three Gorges and went down the river to take up the post. At that time, it was widely known in Guigui County that Bai Juyi was going to cross Wushan. He wrote a poem in large characters on the powder wall of the shrine in advance: "Suzhou chief historian is a talented person, there must be a poem when you go to Wushan."

古文：此四章者，乃古今之绝唱也，而人造次不合为之。沈佺期诗曰：巫山高不极，合沓状奇新。
现代文：他离开这里的时候，认真读了一千多首写巫山的诗，他认为只有四首最好，这四首诗，确实古今绝唱啊！一般的人是不敢轻易再写了。沈佺期的诗：巫山高不极，合沓状奇新。
English: When he left here, he carefully read more than a thousand poems about Wushan. He thought that only four were the best, and these four poems were indeed the best of all time! Ordinary people would not dare to write them again so easily. Poems from the waning period: Wushan is not very high, and the folds are strangely new.

古文：暗谷疑风雨，幽崖若鬼神。
现代文：暗谷疑风雨，幽崖若鬼神。
English: The dark valley doubts the wind and rain, the cliff is like a ghost god.

古文：月明三峡曙，潮满九江春。
现代文：月明三峡曙，潮满九江春。
English: The Three Gorges at dawn, the Jiujiang Spring at high tide.

古文：为问阳台客，应知入梦人。
现代文：为问阳台客，应知入梦人。
English: To ask a balcony guest, you should know the dreamer.

古文：王无兢诗曰：神女向高唐，巫山下夕阳。
现代文：王无兢的诗：神女向高唐，巫山不夕阳。
English: Wang Wujin's poem: Goddesses go to Gaotang, Wushan does not go to the sunset.

古文：徘徊作行雨，婉娈逐荆王。
现代文：徘徊作行雨，婉娈逐荆王。
English: Wandering in the rain, Wan Xuan followed Jing Wang.

古文：电影江前落，雷声峡外长。
现代文：电影江前落，雷声峡外长。
English: In the movie, the river falls in front of the river, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Thunder Gorge is involved.

古文：霁云无处所，台馆晓苍苍。
现代文：霁云无处所，台馆晓苍苍。
English: There is no place for clouds, and the pavilion shines brightly.

古文：李端诗曰：巫山十二重，皆在碧空中。
现代文：李端的诗：巫山十三重，皆在碧空中。
English: Li Duan's poem: Wushan thirteen layers, all in the blue sky.

古文：回合云藏日，霏微雨带风。
现代文：回合云藏日，霏微而带风。
English: The day is cloudy and overcast, with light rain and wind.

古文：猿声寒渡水，树色暮连空。
现代文：猿声寒渡水，树色暮连空。
English: The sound of frogs crossing the cold water, trees twinkling in the twilight.

古文：愁向高唐去，千秋见楚宫。
现代文：愁向高唐去，千秋见楚宫。
English: If you go to Gaotang, you will see Chu Palace in the autumn.

古文：皇甫冉诗曰：巫峡见巴东，迢迢出半空。
现代文：皇甫冉的诗：巫峡见巴东，迢迢出半空。
English: The poem of Emperor Fu Ran: Wuxia sees Badong, and the sky appears.

古文：云藏神女馆，雨到楚王宫。
现代文：云藏神女馆，雨到楚王宫。
English: Yunzo Shrine, rain to King Chu's Palace.

古文：朝暮泉声落，寒暄树色同。
现代文：朝暮泉声落，寒暄树色同。
English: Morning twilight, the sound of the spring falls, and the color of the camphor tree is the same.

古文：清猿不可听，偏在九秋中。
现代文：清猿不可听，偏在九秋中。
English: You can't listen to the Qing monkey, it's in the middle of autumn.

古文：白居易吟四篇诗，与繁生同济，而竟不为。
现代文：白居易吟咏完这四首诗，便和繁知一乘船而去，而没有在此题写诗篇。
English: After Bai Juyi recited the four poems, he and Fanchih took a boat and left without inscribing the poems.

古文：元和沙门
现代文：元和沙门
English: Yuan and Shamen

古文：唐元和中，长安有沙门，善病人文章，尤能捉语意相合之处。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，长安有一个僧人，非常喜欢挑剔别人文章的毛病，尤其能捕捉文章的语言、内容和前人相似的地方。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk in Chang'an who was very fond of finding faults in other people's writings. He was especially good at catching similarities between the language and content of the writings and those of his predecessors.

古文：张籍颇恚之，冥搜愈切。
现代文：诗人张藉很恼怒他这种做法。
English: The poet Zhang Rong was very angry with him for doing this.

古文：思得句曰：长因送人处，忆得别家时。
现代文：于是搜寻了两句：长因送人处，忆得别家时。
English: So I searched for two sentences: Long because of sending someone away, remember when I was away from home.

古文：径往夸扬。乃曰：此应不合前辈意也。僧笑曰：此有人道了也。籍曰：向有何人？
现代文：便去找那僧人夸耀说，我这两句的意思没有和前辈一样吧？僧人笑说，这意思也有人写过。张藉说，以前有谁写过？
English: Then he went to the monk and boasted, "The meaning of these two sentences of mine is not the same as that of my predecessors, is it?" The monk laughed and said, "Someone has also written this meaning. Zhang Ye said, "Who has written it before?"

古文：僧冷吟曰：见他挑李发，思忆后园春。
现代文：僧人冷冷的吟诵道：见他桃李发，思忆后园春。
English: The monk chanted coldly, "See his peach-and-plum hair, and think of the Spring Festival."

古文：籍因抚掌大笑。
现代文：张藉听完后拍掌大笑。
English: After listening, Zhang Rong clapped his hands and laughed loudly.

