古文：孝文皇帝七男。
现代文：孝文皇帝有七个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaowen had seven sons.

古文：林皇后生废太子恂。
现代文：林皇后生废太子五询。
English: Five questions on the birth of Empress Lin's illegitimate son.

古文：文昭皇后生宣武皇帝、广平文穆王怀。
现代文：文昭皇后生宣武皇帝、广平武穆王元堡。
English: Empress Wen Zhao gave birth to Emperor Xuanwu and Guangping Wu Mu Wang Yuanbao.

古文：袁贵人生京兆王愉。
现代文：袁贵人生京兆王五愉。
English: Yuan Gui's life is full of joy.

古文：罗夫人生清河文献王怿、汝南文宣王悦。
现代文：罗夫人生清河文献王五堡、汝南文宣王亘坦。
English: Luo's life is Qinghe Literature King Five Fort, Ru Nan Literature King Wotan.

古文：郑充华生皇子恌，未封，早夭。
现代文：郑充华生皇子五挑，没有受封，早逝。
English: Zheng Chongwason, the fifth son of the prince, did not receive a title and died early.

古文：废太子庶人恂，字元道。
现代文：被废黜的太子庶人元恂，字元道。
English: The dethroned crown prince, the commoner Yuan Shao, is called Yuan Dao.

古文：生而母死，文明太后抚视之，常置左右。
现代文：出生时母亲死去，文明太后抚养照料他，时常放在身边。
English: His mother died when he was born, and he was brought up by the Queen of Civilisation herself, and was often with her.

古文：年四岁，太皇太后亲为立名恂，字元道，于是大赦。
现代文：四岁时，太皇太后亲自为他起名为元恂，字元道，在这时大赦天下。
English: At the age of four, the empress dowager personally named him Geng Yao and Zhi Yuan Dao. At this time, he was granted amnesty.

古文：太和十七年七月癸丑，立恂为皇太子。
现代文：太和十七年七月癸丑，立盈囱为皇太子。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the 17th year of the Taihe era, he was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：及冠恂于庙，高祖临光极东堂，引恂入见，诫以冠义曰： 夫冠礼表之百代，所以正容体，齐颜色，顺辞令。
现代文：到盈咆在宗庙行冠礼时，直担到光极束堂，召盈囱进见，用行冠礼的意义告诫他： 冠礼显扬于百代，是用来端正容貌，严肃脸色，和谐言辞的。
English: When Kuan Yin Roo was performing the coronation rite at his ancestral temple, he went straight to the Hall of the Rays of Light, summoned Kuan Yin to see him, and admonished him with the meaning of performing the coronation rite: The coronation rite has been famous for hundreds of generations, and is used to straighten the appearance, serious face, and harmonious speech.

古文：容体正，颜色齐，辞令顺，故能正君臣，亲父子，和长幼。
现代文：容貌端正，脸色严肃，言辞和谐，就能整肃君臣关系，亲近父子感情，和睦长幼次序。
English: With a proper appearance, a serious face, and a harmonious speech, it is possible to rectify the relationship between the monarch and the minister, to be close to the feelings of the father and son, and to harmonize the order of the elder and younger.

古文：然母见必拜，兄弟必敬，责以成人之礼。
现代文：然后母亲见面一定叩拜，兄弟一定尊敬，是用成人的礼节来要求。
English: Then, when they meet, the mother must bow, the brother must respect, and the adult etiquette is required.

古文：字汝元道，所寄不轻。
现代文：给你起表字为元道，寄托的希望不轻。
English: I give you the watchword as the original way, the hope is not light.

古文：汝当寻名求义，以顺吾旨。 
现代文：你应该循名而求义，来顺从我的心意。 
English: You should seek the truth from the name and follow my will.

古文：二十年，改字宣道。
现代文：二十年，改表字为宣道。
English: Twenty years later, the word was changed to "evangelism."

古文：迁洛，诏恂诣代都。
现代文：迁都到洛阳，诏令五询前往伐都。
English: The capital was moved to Luoyang, and five enquiries were sent to the capital.

古文：其进止仪礼，高祖皆为定。
现代文：他的进退礼仪，高祖都为他规定了。
English: His entrance and exit etiquette were all prescribed for him by his ancestors.

古文：及恂入辞，高祖曰： 今汝不应向代，但太师薨于恆壤，朕既居皇极之重，不容轻赴舅氏之丧，欲使汝展哀舅氏，拜汝母墓，一写为子之情。
现代文：等到元恂入宫告辞，直担说： 现在你不应到代都，衹是太师在恒州逝世，我处于皇帝地位上，不能轻意奔赴舅家的丧事，欲派你到舅家表示哀伤，拜谒你母亲的坟墓，竭尽做儿子的感情。
English: When Yuan Xuan entered the palace to bid farewell, Zhitang said, "Now you should not go to the capital. It is because the Grand Master died in Hengzhou. I am in the position of the emperor. I cannot go to my uncle's funeral. I want to send you to my uncle's house to express my sorrow, visit your mother's grave, and do my best to be a son.

古文：汝至彼，太师事毕后日，宜一拜山陵。
现代文：你到了那裹，太师丧事结束以后的日子，应拜谒皇室陵园。
English: When you get there, the day after the funeral of the Grand Master, you should visit the imperial mausoleum.

古文：拜讫，汝族祖南安可一就问讯。
现代文：拜谒后，可到你的族祖南安王家问候一下。
English: Bye, say hello to your grandfather, King Nan'an.

古文：在途，当温读经籍。今日亲见吾也。 
现代文：在途中，应当温习阅读经书，就如同今天见到我一样。 
English: Along the way, you should review your Bible reading, just as you did when you saw me today.

古文：后高祖每岁征幸，恂常留守，主执庙祀。
现代文：后来高祖每年出征巡视，元恂时常留守，主持宗庙祭祀。
English: Later, Gaozu went on military patrols every year, and Geng Yao often stayed behind to preside over the ancestral temple's rituals.

古文：恂不好书学，体貌肥大，深忌河洛暑热，意每追乐北方。
现代文：元恂不喜好读书学习，身体肥胖高大，十分害怕黄河洛阳一带的炎热，心中每每追恋北方。
English: Yuan Qi did not like reading and studying, his body was fat and tall, he was very afraid of the heat around Luoyang on the Yellow River, and his heart yearned for the north.

古文：中庶子高道悦数苦言致谏，恂甚衔之。
现代文：中庶子高道悦多次苦口婆心地规劝，元恂十分怨恨他。
English: The middle child, Gao Daoyue, repeatedly and bitterly insulted him, which annoyed him very much.

古文：高祖幸崧岳，恂留守金墉，于西掖门内与左右谋，欲召牧马轻骑奔代，手刃道悦于禁中。
现代文：高祖前往崧山，元恂留守金墉城，在西掖门内和左右的人谋划，想征召牧马的轻装骑兵奔向代都，在宫中亲手杀了道悦。
English: Gaozu went to Lushan, and Yuancheng stayed behind in Jinyuan City. He plotted with people in and around the West Gate, wanted to conscript light cavalry of wranglers to run to the capital, and killed Daoyue with his own hands in the palace.

古文：领军元俨勒门防遏，夜得宁静。
现代文：领军元俨关住门防守阻止，夜间才得以宁静。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Xuan, closed the door to prevent the defense, and the night was able to be quiet.

古文：厥明，尚书陆琇驰启高祖于南，高祖闻之骇惋，外寝其事，仍至汴口而还。
现代文：天亮，尚书陆璘乘马到南面禀报高祖，高祖听到后惊讶惋惜，对外不说这件事，又到了汴口才返回。
English: At dawn, Shang Shulun rode to the south to inform Gaozu. Gaozu was surprised and sorry to hear this, but did not say anything about it to the outside world, and only returned to the Hekou.

古文：引恂数罪，与咸阳王禧等亲杖恂，又令禧等更代，百余下，扶曳出外，不起者月余。
现代文：召唤元恂指责他的罪过，和咸阳王元禧等人亲自责打元恂，又命元禧等人替换，打了一百多棒，扶着拖他出去，一个多月不能起床。
English: He summoned Yuan Xuan to accuse him of his sins, and together with Xianyang King Yuan Xiu and others, he personally beat Yuan Xuan, and ordered Yuan Xiu and others to replace him, beat him with more than a hundred sticks, and dragged him out. He could not get out of bed for more than a month.

古文：拘于城西别馆。
现代文：囚禁在城西另外的房屋中。
English: He is being held in a separate house in the west of the city.

古文：引见群臣于清徽堂，议废之。
现代文：高祖在清徽堂接见群臣，商议废黜元恂。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also brought a group of ministers to Qinghui Hall to discuss his dethronement.

古文：司空、太子太傅穆亮，尚书仆射、少保李冲，并免冠稽首而谢。
现代文：司空、太子太傅穆亮，尚书仆射、少保李冲，都取下帽子叩头道歉。
English: Siku, Prince Taifu Mu Liang, Shang Shufu, and Shao Bao Li Chong all took off their imperial crowns and bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：高祖曰： 卿所谢者私也，我所议者国也。
现代文：高祖说： 你们所道歉的是私事，我所商议的是国家大事。
English: Gaozu said, "What you are apologizing for is a private matter, but what I am discussing is a national matter.

古文：古人有言，大义灭亲。
现代文：古人说过，大义灭亲。
English: The ancients said that it is a great act of righteousness to kill one's relatives.

古文：今恂欲违父背尊，跨据恆朔。
现代文：现在元恂想违犯父令背弃尊严，奔往恒州朔方。
English: Now, Yuan Xuan wants to violate his father's order, abandon his dignity, and rush to Hengzhou.

古文：天下未有无父国，何其包藏，心与身俱。
现代文：天下没有无视父亲的国家，他是什么居心，使我身心伤痛。
English: There is no country in the world that ignores my father, and it pains me both physically and mentally to see what he is up to.

古文：此小兒今日不灭，乃是国家之大祸，脱待我无后，恐有永嘉之乱。 
现代文：这个小孩今日不除掉，就是国家的大祸患，如果等待我死以后，恐怕有永嘉年间那样的祸乱。 
English: If this child is not eliminated today, it will be a great calamity for the country. If I wait until after my death, I am afraid that there will be a calamity like the Yongjia years.

古文：乃废为庶人，置之河阳，以兵守之，服食所供，粗免饥寒而已。
现代文：就废黜元恂为庶人，安置在河阳，用兵士守卫，供给的衣服食物，大致上免除饥寒而已。
English: He was deposed as a commoner and resettled in Heyang, guarded by soldiers, provided with clothes and food, and was only largely spared from cold and hunger.

古文：恂在困踬，颇知咎悔，恆读佛经，礼拜归心于善。
现代文：元恂在困顿中，颇知后悔，总是阅读佛经，叩拜佛像一心向善。
English: In the midst of difficulties, Yuan Xuan regretted a lot, always read Buddhist scriptures, worshiped Buddha statues, and had a heart for good.

古文：高祖幸代，遂如长安。
现代文：高祖前往代都，于是到长安。
English: Gao Zu went to the capital, and then to Chang'an.

古文：中尉李彪承间密表，告恂复与左右谋逆。
现代文：中尉李彪利用机会秘密上奏疏，告发元恂又和左右的人密谋作乱。
English: Lieutenant Li Biao took advantage of the opportunity to secretly report to the shogunate and denounce Yuan Shao for conspiring with people on both sides to create turmoil.

古文：高祖在长安，使中书侍郎邢峦与咸阳王禧，奉诏赍椒酒诣河阳，赐恂死，时年十五。
现代文：高祖在长安，派遣中书侍郎邢峦和咸阳王元禧，奉诏令带毒酒前往河阳，赐令元恂自杀，遣年元恂十五岁。
English: In Chang'an, Gao Zu dispatched the Chinese scribes Lang Xi and Xianyang Wang Yuanxi. He was ordered by the emperor to take poisoned wine to Kawayan, ordered Yuan Xi to commit suicide, and decreed that he would die at the age of fifteen.

古文：殓以粗棺常服，瘗于河阳城。
现代文：用粗糙的棺材平常的衣服收殓，埋葬在河阳城。
English: He was buried in a coarse coffin, dressed in his usual clothes, in the city of Hayang.

古文：二十二年冬，御史台令史龙文观坐法当死，告廷尉，称恂前被摄左右之日，有手书自理不知状，而中尉李彪、侍御史贾尚寝不为闻。
现代文：二十二年冬，御史台令史龙文观因犯法判处死刑，上告廷尉，称说元恂以前被拘捕在京城附近时，有亲笔信自己申诉不知道谋反事情，而中尉李彪、侍御史买尚扣压不报告。
English: In the winter of 1922, Shilong Wenzhong was sentenced to death for violating the law by the Imperial Historian's Office, and appealed to the Court Lieutenant, saying that when Yuan Li was arrested near the capital before, he had a personal letter to complain that he did not know about the rebellion, but Lieutenant Li Biao and the Imperial Historian's Office did not report it.

古文：贾坐系廷尉。
现代文：贾尚获罪关押在廷尉。
English: Jia Shang was convicted and detained in the courtroom.

古文：时彪免归，高祖在鄴，尚书表收彪赴洛，会赦，遂不穷其本末。
现代文：这时李彪免职回家，高祖在邺城，尚书上奏收捕李彪到洛阳，遇上大赦，就不穷查事情始末。
English: At this time, Li Biao returned home after being relieved of duty, Gao Zu was in Shicheng, Shang Shu reported the arrest of Li Biao to Luoyang, and in the event of an amnesty, he would not stop investigating the matter.

古文：贾尚出系，暴病数日死。
现代文：贾尚被放出来，突然得病几天就死了。
English: Just a few days after his release from prison, Jashan died of a violent illness.

古文：初，高祖将为恂娶司徒冯诞长女，以女幼，待年长。
现代文：当初，高祖将要为元恂娶司徒冯诞的大女儿，因女孩年幼，等待她长大。
English: At first, Gao Zu was going to marry the eldest daughter of Siu Feng Zhao to Yuan Xuan. Since the girl was young, Gao Zu waited for her to grow up.

古文：先为娉彭城刘长文、荥阳郑懿女为左右孺子，时恂年十三四。
现代文：先为元恂娶了彭城人刘长文、荣阳人郑懿的女儿为左右孺子，这时元恂十三四岁。
English: First, he married the daughter of Liu Changwen from Pengcheng and Zheng Yao from Rongyang. At that time, Yuan Yao was thirteen or fourteen years old.

古文：高祖泛舟天渊池，谓郭祚、崔光、宋弁曰： 人生须自放，不可终朝读书。
现代文：高祖在天渊池乘船游玩，对郭柞、崔光、宋弁说： 人生应自然开放，不可整日读书。
English: Gao Zu took a boat ride on the Tianyuan Pond and said to Guo Jun, Cui Guang and Song Ben: Life should be naturally open, you can't study all day.

古文：我欲使恂旦出省经传，食后还内，晡时复出，日夕为罢。
现代文：我想使元恂早晨出房读经传，吃饭后回房中，下午再出房，到日落结束。
English: I want him to go out in the morning to read the sutras, come back after dinner, go out again in the afternoon, and finish at sunset.

古文：卿等以为何如？ 
现代文：你们以为怎么样? 
English: What do you think?

古文：光曰： 孔子称 血气未定，戒之在色 ，《传》曰： 昼以访事，夜以安身 。
现代文：崔光说： 孔子说 血气没稳定，戒备的束醍女色，《春秋传》说 白天用来访求事务，夜晚用来安稳身子 。
English: Cui Guang said: Confucius said that the blood gas is not stable, the alert bundle is a woman, "Spring and Autumn Legend" said that the day is used to visit affairs, and the night is used to stabilize the body.

古文：太子以幼年涉学之日，不宜于正昼之时，舍书御内，又非所以安柔弱之体，固永年之命。 
现代文：太子在幼年开始求学的时候，不应在白天的时候，舍弃书本到内室去，而且这不是保全柔弱身体，稳固长久寿命的做法。 
English: When the prince began to study at an early age, he should not abandon his books to go to the inner room during the day, and this is not a way to preserve the delicate body, stable and long life.

古文：高祖以光言为然，乃不令恂昼入内。
现代文：高祖认为崔光的话是对的，就不让元恂白天进内室。
English: Gaozu thought that Cui Guang's words were right, so he did not allow Yuan Xuan to enter the inner room during the day.

古文：无子。
现代文：元恂没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：京兆王愉，字宣德。
现代文：京兆王元愉，字宣德。
English: Jing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu, Zha Xuan De.

古文：太和二十一年封。
现代文：太和二十一年封。
English: He became king at the age of twenty-one.

古文：拜都督、徐州刺史，以彭城王中军府长史卢阳乌兼长史，州事巨细，委之阳乌。
现代文：被任命为都督、徐州刺史，委任彭城王中军府长史卢阳乌兼任长史，州中事务不分大小，都委托给阳乌。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, the governor of Xuzhou, and the military governor of Pengcheng Wangzhong, Shilu Yangwu, was also appointed as the governor of Xuzhou. The affairs of the state, regardless of size, were entrusted to Yangwu.

古文：世宗初，为护军将军。
现代文：世宗初年，担任护军将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he served as a military escort general.

古文：世宗留爱诸弟，愉等常出入宫掖，晨昏寝处，若家人焉。
现代文：世宗留恋喜爱几个弟弟，元愉等人时常出入宫廷，早晚睡眠停留，如同家人。
English: Shizong Lingering Love loved several younger brothers, Yuan Yu and others often went in and out of the court, staying in bed in the morning and evening, just like family members.

古文：世宗每日华林戏射，衣衫骑从，往来无间。
现代文：世宗每天在华林园游玩射箭，元愉穿单衣骑马跟随，来往密切。
English: Sejong plays archery in Hualin Garden every day, and Yuan Yue follows him on horseback wearing a singlet, and they have a close relationship.

古文：迁中书监。
现代文：升为中书监。
English: Reassigned to the position of middle school librarian.

古文：世宗为纳顺皇后妹为妃，而不见礼荅。
现代文：世宗为元愉娶顺皇后的妹妹为妃子，而不受厚待。
English: Sejong married the younger sister of Empress Shun as his concubine for the pleasure of the emperor, but he was not treated well.

古文：愉在徐州，纳妾李氏，本姓杨，东郡人，夜闻其歌，悦之，遂被宠嬖。
现代文：元愉在徐州，娶侍妾李氏，李氏本来姓杨，是东郡人，元愉夜间听到她的歌声，喜爱她，她就得到宠幸嬖爱。
English: In Xuzhou, Yuan Yu married his concubine Li. Li's original surname was Yang and she was from Dong County. When Yuan Yu heard her singing at night and fell in love with her, she became a favorite.

古文：罢州还京，欲进贵之，托右中郎将赵郡李恃显为之养父，就之礼逆，产子宝月。
现代文：罢州职回京城，元愉想提升尊崇她，托右中郎将赵郡人李恃显做她的养父，从恃显家以礼迎娶，生下儿子宝月。
English: After returning to Beijing from state retirement, Yuan Yu wanted to promote and respect her, so he asked Li Yuxian, a native of Zhao County, to be her adoptive father. She married into the Yuxian family and gave birth to her son Bao Yue.

古文：顺皇后召李入宫，毁击之，强令为尼于内，以子付妃养之。
现代文：顺皇后召李氏进宫，诽谤打击她，强迫命令她在宫内为尼姑，把儿子交给妃子哺育。
English: Empress Shun called Li into the palace, slandered and attacked her, and forced her to be a nun in the palace and give her son to her concubine to nurse.

古文：岁余，后父于劲，以后久无所诞，乃上表劝广嫔侍。
现代文：一年多后，皇后的父亲于劲，因皇后很久没有生育，就上奏劝说增加嫔妃侍妾。
English: More than a year later, the queen's father Yu Jin, because the queen had not given birth for a long time, persuaded her to increase the number of concubines.

古文：因令后归李于愉，旧爱更甚。
现代文：并让皇后把李氏归还给元愉，元愉与李氏旧曰的情爱更为深厚。
English: And let the empress return Mr. Li to Yuan Yu. The love between Yuan Yu and Mr. Li is even deeper than before.

古文：愉好文章，颇著诗赋。
现代文：元愉喜爱写文章，撰写了不少诗赋。
English: Yuan Yu likes to write articles and is also good at writing poems.

古文：时引才人宋世景、李神俊、祖莹、邢晏、王遵业、张始均等共申宴喜，招四方儒学宾客严怀真等数十人，馆而礼之。
现代文：时常召集文人宋世景、李神俊、祖莹、邢晏、王遵业、张始均等一起饮宴欢乐，招揽各地儒学宾客严怀真等几十人，设馆舍礼敬他们。
English: From time to time, literati such as Song Shijing, Li Shenjun, Zu Ying, Zou, Wang Zunye and Zhang Shi were gathered together for banquets and fun, and dozens of Confucian guests from all over the country, such as Yan Huizhen, were invited, and a hall was set up to pay tribute to them.

古文：所得谷帛，率多散施。
现代文：所得到的谷帛，大多施舍。
English: Most of the cereal straw received is distributed.

古文：又崇信佛道，用度常至不接。
现代文：又崇拜信仰佛教，用度常常接应不上。
English: He is also a great admirer and believer in Buddhism, so much so that he often cannot afford the fees.

古文：与弟广平王怀颇相夸尚，竞慕奢丽，贪纵不法。
现代文：和弟弟广平王元怀互相夸耀，竞相攀比奢华，贪婪放纵不守法。
English: He and his younger brother Guangping Wang Yuanhuai boasted of each other, competed for luxury, and were greedy, indulgent, and lawless.

古文：于是世宗摄愉禁中推案，杖愉五十，出为冀州刺史。
现代文：于是世宗在宫中拘捕元愉加以审查，打了元愉五十棒，调出去任冀州刺史。
English: As a result, Shizong arrested Yuan Rong in the palace for examination, beat him with 50 batons, and transferred him to Jizhou to write history.

古文：始愉自以职求侍要，既势劣二弟，潜怀愧恨，颇见言色。
现代文：开始元愉自己求取侍从要职，而权势低于两个弟弟，暗中怀有惭愧遗憾，逐渐显现在言语神色上。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Yu sought an important position as an attendant, but his power was lower than that of his two younger brothers. He secretly harbored shame and regret, which gradually appeared in his facial expression.

古文：又以幸妾屡被顿辱，内外离抑。
现代文：又因爱妾屡次遭到侮辱，内外受压抑。
English: In addition, because his favorite concubine repeatedly suffered humiliation, he felt depressed both inside and outside.

古文：及在州谋逆，愉遂杀长史羊灵引及司马李遵，称得清河王密疏，云高肇谋杀害主上。
现代文：等到在州中谋反，元愉就杀死长史羊灵引和司马李遵，自称接到清河王的密报，说高肇谋划杀害主上。
English: When it came to plotting a rebellion in the middle of the state, Yuan Yu killed Changshi Yang Lingyin and Sima Lizun, claiming to have received a secret report from the King of Qinghe, saying that Gao Zhao was plotting to kill the Lord.

古文：于是遂为坛于信都之南，柴燎告天，即皇帝位。
现代文：于是就在信都的南面设立祭坛，烧柴祭告上天，登上皇帝位。
English: So he set up an altar on the south side of the capital city of Xinyi, and announced the wood-burning festival to the heavens, and ascended to the emperor's throne.

古文：赦天下，号建平元年，立李氏为皇后。
现代文：赦免天下囚犯，称建平元年，立李氏为皇后。
English: He pardoned all the prisoners in the world, proclaimed the first year of Jianping, and made the Li clan the empress.

古文：世宗诏尚书李平讨愉。
现代文：世宗诏令尚书李平讨伐元愉。
English: Emperor Zedong issued the edict of Shangshu Li Ping to fight against the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：愉出拒王师，频败，遂婴城自守。
现代文：元愉出城抗御国家军队，接连失败，就环城固守。
English: Yuan Yu sent out soldiers to fight against the imperial soldiers and horses, and after repeated failures, he closed the city gates to defend himself.

古文：愉知事穷，携李及四子数十骑出门，诸军追之，见执以送。
现代文：元愉知道大势已去，携带李氏和四个儿子数十个骑兵逃出城门，各军追击他，被捉住后押送到京城。
English: Knowing that the tide had already turned, Yuan Yu rode out of the city gate with the Li clan and his four sons. After the army caught up with them, they were tied up and sent to the imperial court.

古文：诏徵赴京师，申以家人之训。
现代文：下诏征召他赶往京城，用家人的规矩加以教训。
English: The next edict summoned him to rush to the capital and teach him the rules of the family.

古文：愉每止宿亭传，必携李手，尽其私情。
现代文：元愉每当住宿在驿站时，一定握住李氏的手，竭力表达爱意。
English: Every time Yuan Yu stayed at the pavilion, she was sure to take Li's hand and make the most of her love.

古文：虽锁絷之中，饮食自若，略无愧惧之色。
现代文：虽然在捆绑之中，饮食同往日一样，毫无惭愧畏惧的神色。
English: Even though he was tied up, he ate the same food as before, showing no fear or shame.

古文：至野王，愉语人曰： 虽主上慈深，不忍杀我，吾亦何面目见于至尊！ 
现代文：到达野王，元愉对别人说： 虽然主上仁慈深情，不忍心杀我，我还有什么面目见到皇帝! 
English: Arriving at the Wild King, Yuan Yu said to others: Although the Lord is kind and affectionate, and does not have the heart to kill me, what kind of face do I have when I see the emperor!

古文：于是歔欷流涕，绝气而死，年二十一。
现代文：于是叹息流泪，断气而死，时年二十一岁。
English: So he wept bitterly and tearfully without ceasing, and died of exhaustion, only twenty-one years old.

古文：或云高肇令人杀之。
现代文：有人说是高肇派人杀了他。
English: Others say Gao Zhao sent someone to kill him.

古文：敛以小棺，瘗之。
现代文：用小棺材收殓，埋葬了他。
English: They wrapped him in a small coffin and buried him.

古文：诸子至洛，皆赦之。
现代文：几个儿子到达洛阳，都赦免了他们。
English: Several sons were pardoned after arriving in Luoyang.

古文：后灵太后令愉之四子皆附属籍，追封愉临洮王。
现代文：后来灵太后命元愉的四个儿子都附注名籍，追封元愉为临洮王。
English: Later, the four sons of Empress Dowager Jing Yuan Rong were all included in the royal family, and Yuan Rong was crowned King of Linyi.

古文：子宝月袭。
现代文：儿子实月继承爵位。
English: His son, Sazuki, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：乃改葬父母，追服三年。
现代文：就改葬父母，追穿丧服三年。
English: He changed the funeral for his parents and wore the same clothes for the next three years.

古文：宝月弟宝炬，轻躁薄行，耽淫酒色。
现代文：宝月的弟弟实炬，轻浮急躁品行浅薄，沉溺于酒色。
English: Hozuki's younger brother, Real Torch, is a frivolous, hasty, shallow character, addicted to alcohol.

古文：孝庄时，特封南阳王。
现代文：孝庄帝时，特地封他为南阳王。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was specially named the King of Nanyang.

古文：从出帝没于关西。
现代文：跟随出帝陷落于函谷关以西。
English: He died in Kansai after becoming emperor.

古文：宇文黑獭害出帝，宝炬乃僭大号。
现代文：宇文黑獭杀害出帝，宝炬于是僭越称帝。
English: Uwen Heihei killed the emperor, and Baotong became emperor.

古文：清河王怿，字宣仁。
现代文：清河王元惮，字宣仁。
English: King Yuanxiu of Qinghe, surnamed Xuanren.

古文：幼而敏惠，美姿貌，高祖爱之。
现代文：自幼机敏聪慧，容貌秀美，高祖喜爱他。
English: Since childhood, he has been quick-witted, intelligent and good-looking. Gaozu loved him.

古文：彭城王勰甚器异之，并曰： 此兒风神外伟，黄中内润，若天假之年，比《二南》矣。 
现代文：彭城王元勰十分器重他，并且说： 这孩子有风度神韵外表魁梧，带中和之色德行充备，如果上天假藉他年岁，可与《二南》媲美。 
English: Pengcheng Wangyuanqian valued him highly, and said: This child has the demeanor and charm of the appearance of the burly, with the neutralization of the color and full of virtues, if the heavens take advantage of his age, can be comparable to the "two South."

古文：博涉经史，兼综群言，有文才，善谈理，宽仁容裕，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：元恽博览经史，兼习各家学说，有文学才能，善于谈论道理，宽厚仁爱有气度，喜怒不表现在脸上。
English: Yuan Xuan was well-versed in the history of the classics, studied the doctrines of various schools at the same time, had literary talent, was good at talking about the truth, had a generous and benevolent demeanor, and his emotions did not show on his face.

古文：太和二十一年封。
现代文：太和二十一年封王爵。
English: He became king at the age of twenty-one.

古文：世宗初，拜侍中，转尚书仆射。
现代文：世宗初年，被任命为侍中，改任尚书仆射。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as a chamberlain, and later he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：怿才长从政，明于断决，割判众务，甚有声名。
现代文：元惮才能长于从政，明于决断，分析各种事务，十分有名声。
English: It is well-known that the founder of the discipline is good at politics, good at making decisions, and good at analyzing various affairs.

古文：司空高肇以帝舅宠任，既擅威权，谋去良宗，屡谮怿及愉等。
现代文：司空高肇以皇帝舅父的身份受宠信，专擅权势后，谋划除去皇室中有才能的人，屡次诬陷元惮和元愉等人。
English: Siku Gaozhao was favored because he was the uncle of the emperor. He took dictatorial powers, plotted to remove talented princes from the imperial family, and repeatedly spoke ill of people such as Yuan Shao and Yuan You.

古文：愉不胜其忿怒，遂举逆冀州。
现代文：元愉忍受不住愤怒，就在冀州起兵作乱。
English: Unable to restrain his resentment, Yuan Yu plotted a rebellion in Jizhou.

古文：因愉之逆，又构杀勰。
现代文：高肇利用元逾的叛逆，又诬陷杀害元勰。
English: As a result of Yuan Yu's rebellion, he was blamed for the murder of Yuan Shao.

古文：怿恐不免。
现代文：元惮恐惧不能免除祸患。
English: Geng Yao feared that he would also be killed.

古文：肇又录囚徒，以立私惠。
现代文：高肇又放免囚徒，来树立私人的恩惠。
English: Gao Zhao also released prisoners to establish a personal favor.

古文：怿因侍宴酒酣，乃谓肇曰： 天子兄弟，讵有几人，而炎炎不息。
现代文：元惮利用侍奉世宗饮酒到酣畅时，就对高肇说： 天子的兄弟，还有几个人，而你苦苦相逼不止?
English: When Yuan Shuo drank to his heart's content, he said to Gao Zhao, "Son of Heaven, how many people are there, and how hard are you pushing each other?

古文：昔王莽头秃，亦藉渭阳之资，遂纂汉室，今君曲形见矣，恐复终成乱阶。 
现代文：从前王莽头发秃顶，也凭藉渭阳的资本，就篡夺汉室，现在你的奸邪形状显现出来了，恐怕又终将成为祸乱的根源。 
English: Once upon a time, Wang Mang had a bald head, and he usurped the Han Dynasty with the help of Shanyang's capital. Now, the shape of your treachery has emerged, and I'm afraid it will eventually become the root of evil.

古文：又言于世宗曰： 臣闻唯器与名，不可以假人。
现代文：又对世宗说： 臣下听说衹有器物和名分，不可以借给别人。
English: He also said to Shizong, "It is said that a vassal must not lend his property and prestige to others.

古文：是故季氏旅泰，宣尼以为深讥；仲叔轩悬，丘明以为至诫。
现代文：所以季氏旅行到泰山，加以深深的讥讽；仲叔滥用车悬之物，左丘明引以为重大的告诫。
English: Therefore, Ji traveled to Mount Tai and made a deep sarcasm; Uncle Zhong abused the things hanging from the car, which Zuo Qiuming took as a serious warning.

古文：谅以天尊地卑，君臣道别，宜杜渐防萌，无相僭越。
现代文：这是因为天尊地卑，君臣的道理有分别，应该防微杜渐，不互相僭越。
English: This is because Heaven is exalted and earth is humbled, and there is a difference in the principles of kings and ministers. It is necessary to guard against pettiness, and not to covet one another's possessions.

古文：至于减膳录囚，人君之事，今乃司徒行之，讵是人臣之义？
现代文：至于减膳食放囚徒，是君主的事情，现在竟让司徒去做，哪是做臣属的道理?
English: As for practices such as reducing meals and recording prisoners, these are matters for the sovereign, but now they are letting the courtiers do it. What is the reason for the courtiers?

古文：且陛下修政教，解狱讼，则时雨可降，玉烛知和，何使明君失之于上，奸臣窃之于下？
现代文：而且陛下修明政教，听讼断案，则时雨降落，气候和顺，为什么使明君在上面失职，奸臣在下面窃取权力呢?
English: Moreover, His Majesty makes political and religious reforms, hears cases, and makes decisions according to the time of the year, the weather, and the weather. Why did the Ming ruler fail in his duties above and the treacherous vassal steal power below?

古文：长乱之基，于此在矣。 
现代文：助长祸乱的根基，就在遣裹。 
English: Herein lies the root of the trouble.

古文：世宗笑而不应。
现代文：世宗笑而不答。
English: Sejong laughed and did not answer.

古文：肃宗初，迁太尉，侍中如故。
现代文：肃宗初年，元惮升为太尉，侍中之职照旧。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Suzong, Yuan Shuo was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and his position as chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：诏怿裁门下之事。
现代文：诏令元惮裁决门下省的事务。
English: The dairei-genshu adjudicates the affairs of subordinate provinces.

古文：又典经义注。
现代文：又掌管经典义理的注释。
English: He is also in charge of the commentary on the classic syllogism.

古文：时有沙门惠怜者，自云呪水饮人，能差诸病。
现代文：当时有个叫惠怜的僧人，自称用念过咒语的水给人喝，能治愈各种病。
English: At that time, there was a monk named Huirong, who claimed to be able to cure all kinds of diseases by giving people water to drink after reciting spells.

古文：病人就之者，日有千数。
现代文：病人到他那裹去的，每天有一千人以上。
English: More than a thousand patients come to him every day.

古文：灵太后诏给衣食，事力优重，使于城西之南，治疗百姓病。
现代文：灵太后下诏赐给衣服食物，差役从优配备，使他在城西的南面，治疗百姓的疾病。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling decreed that clothing and food should be given to Rong, and that the guards should be well-equipped, so that he could treat the people's diseases in the south of the city.

古文：怿表谏曰： 臣闻律深惑众之科，礼绝妖淫之禁，皆所以大明居正，防遏奸邪。
现代文：元恽上奏疏规劝说： 臣下听说法律有严防妖言惑众的科条，礼制有杜绝妖冶淫乱的禁令，都是用来使光明居于正位，防治遏止奸邪的。
English: Yuan Zheng said at the top of the table: I heard that the law strictly prevents demonic words from deceiving the public, and the etiquette prevents devils from committing adultery. This is because it is necessary to be above board and prevent adultery.

古文：昔在汉末，有张角者，亦以此术荧惑当时。
现代文：从前在汉朝末年，有个叫张角的，也用这个方法迷惑当时人。
English: Once upon a time, at the end of the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Zhang Jiao who also used this method to confuse people at the time.

古文：论其所行，与今不异，遂能詃诱生人，致黄巾之祸，天下涂炭数十年间，角之由也。
现代文：论他的行为，和现在没有不同。于是能诳骗诱惑民众，导致黄巾军的祸难，天下灾难困苦几十年，都是张角的缘故。
English: As far as his behavior is concerned, it is no different from now. So he can deceive and tempt the people, leading to the calamity of the Yellow Turban Army, and the world's calamity and hardship for decades, all because of Zhang Jiao.

古文：昔新垣奸，不登于明堂；五利侥，终婴于显戮。 
现代文：从前新垣平奸猾，不能登明堂；五利将军侥幸，终于遭诛杀。 
English: Once upon a time, the treacherous Arakaki Taira couldn't get into the hall of fame; fortunately, General Goryo was finally killed.

古文：灵太后以怿肃宗懿叔，德先具瞻，委以朝政，事拟周霍。
现代文：灵太后因元惮是肃宗的亲叔父，德行为众人景仰，把朝政委托给他，事情如同周公霍光一样。
English: Empress Dowager Ling, because Yuan Shuo was Su Zong's uncle, was admired by everyone for his moral conduct, and entrusted the imperial government to him, just like Zhou Gong Huoguang.

古文：怿竭力匡辅，以天下为己任。
现代文：元恽竭力辅佐，把治理天下作为自己的职责。
English: Yuan Shao also tried his best to support and supplement the imperial court, taking the world as his own responsibility.

古文：领军元叉，太后之妹夫也，恃宠骄盈。
现代文：领军元叉，是太后的妹夫，仗恃宠信骄傲自满。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Zha, was the sister-in-law of the empress dowager. He was proud and complacent.

古文：怿裁之以法，每抑黜之，为叉所疾。
现代文：元惮依法裁断，时常抑制他，遭元叉怨恨。
English: Yuan Shuo adjudicated according to the law, often restrained him, and was resented by Yuan Fork.

古文：叉党人通直郎宋维希叉旨，告怿谋反，禁怿门下。讯问左右及朝贵，贵人分明，乃得雪释焉。
现代文：元叉的党羽通直郎宋维迎合元叉的旨意，告发元惮密谋反叛，囚禁元惮在门下省，审问元悍左右的入和朝廷显要官员，显要官员替元悍分辩，元恽才得到昭雪予以释放。
English: Song Wei, a leading member of Yuan Xuan's party, pandered to Yuan Xuan's will, denounced Yuan Xuan for plotting to rebel, imprisoned Yuan Xuan in the province under his control, interrogated prominent officials of the Imperial Court around Yuan Xuan, and prominent officials argued on behalf of Yuan Xuan. It was not until Yuan Xuan was released that Yuan Xuan was released.

古文：怿以忠而获谤，乃鸠集昔忠烈之士，为《显忠录》二十卷，以见意焉。
现代文：元恽因忠诚而受诽谤，就搜集从前忠诚义烈人士的事迹，编撰《显忠录》二十卷，来表达自己的心意。
English: When Yuan Shao was slandered for his loyalty, he collected the deeds of former loyal and virtuous people and compiled the "Record of Loyalty" in 20 volumes to express his thoughts.

古文：正光元年七月，叉与刘腾逼肃宗于显阳殿，闭灵太后于后宫，囚怿于门下省。诬怿罪状，遂害之，时年三十四。
现代文：正光元年七月，元叉和刘腾在显阳殿逼迫肃宗，关闭灵太后在后宫，囚禁元惮在门下省，诬陷元择有罪行，就杀害了他，元惮时年三十四岁。
English: In July of the first year of Zhengguang, Yuan Zha and Liu Teng persecuted Su Zong in the Xianyang Palace, closed the Empress Dowager in the harem, imprisoned Yuan Shuo in the subordinate province, framed Yuan Zhao for a crime, and killed him. Yuan Shuo was thirty-four years old.

古文：朝野贵贱，知与不知，含悲丧气，惊振远近。
现代文：朝野不分贵贱，了解和不了解的人，都满怀悲伤垂头丧气，远近震惊。
English: People of all ranks, high and low, those who knew and those who didn't, were saddened, dejected, and shocked.

古文：夷人在京及归，闻怿之丧，为之劈面者数百人。
现代文：在京城和返回的夷人，听说元恽的丧事，为之以刀划脸的有几百人
English: In the capital and among the returning barbarians, when they heard of the funeral of Yuan Xuan, several hundred people cut their faces with swords

古文：广平王怀。
现代文：广平王元怀。
English: Guangping Wang Yuanhuai.

古文：囗有魏诸王。
现代文：阙直魏诸王。
English: 直魏诸王.

古文：召入华林别馆，禁其出入，令四门博士董徵，授以经传。
现代文：征召进入华林别馆，禁止出进，命四门博士董徵，传授经传给他。
English: He was conscripted to enter the Waring Museum and forbidden to leave. He was ordered to recruit four Ph.D. directors to teach the sutras to him.

古文：世宗崩，乃得归。
现代文：世宗逝世，才得以返回。
English: It was only after Sejong's death that he was able to return.

古文：汝南王悦，好读佛经，览书史。
现代文：汝南王元悦，喜爱读佛经，阅览经史书籍。
English: King Yuan Rong loved to read Buddhist scriptures and books on history.

古文：为性不伦，俶傥难测。
现代文：性格不同常人，卓异难以揣测。
English: Personality different from ordinary people, extraordinary and difficult to predict.

古文：悦妃闾氏，即东海公之女也，生一子，不见礼荅。
现代文：元悦的妃子闾氏，是束海公的女儿，生有一个儿子，不受厚待。
English: Yuan Yue's concubine, Lady Zou, was the daughter of Prince Zou Haigong and had a son, who was not treated well.

古文：有崔延夏者，以左道与悦游，合服仙药松术之属。
现代文：有个叫做崔延夏的人，用旁门左道和元悦交游，为他调配仙药松子白术之类。
English: There was a man named Cui Yanxia, who used the side door to cross paths with Yuan Yue, and prepared for him things like the magical medicine pine nut white magic.

古文：时轻与出采芝，宿于城外小人之所。
现代文：时常随意外出采芝草，住在城外平民的家中。
English: He often went out to gather grass and lived in the homes of civilians outside the city.

古文：遂断酒肉粟稻，唯食麦饭。
现代文：于是断绝酒肉粟稻，仅吃麦饭。
English: As a result, he no longer eats wine, meat, millet, rice or rice, but only wheat.

古文：又绝房中而更好男色。
现代文：又断绝房事转而喜好男色。
English: She also stopped having sex with men in favour of men.

古文：轻忿妃妾，至加捶挞，同之婢使。
现代文：随便向妃妾发脾气，以至加以捶打，如同对待婢女差役。
English: Slightly displeased, he turned his anger on his concubines, even cursing them, as if they were slaves.

古文：悦之出也，妃住于别第。
现代文：盈隘出去后，妃子住在另外的房屋中。
English: After Yingji went out, the concubine lived in another house.

古文：灵太后敕检问之，引入，穷悦事故。
现代文：灵太后下令查问，带她进宫，穷究元悦的事情。
English: Empress Dowager Ling ordered an investigation, took her into the palace, and thoroughly investigated the matter of Yuan Yue.

古文：妃病杖伏床蓐，疮尚未愈。
现代文：妃子因受杖卧病在床，疮伤还没痊愈。
English: Concubine is sick in bed due to the cane, and the wound has not yet healed.

古文：太后因悦之杖妃，乃下令禁断。
现代文：太后因为元悦棒打妃子，就下令禁止这种行为。
English: The empress dowager, because Yuan Yue had beaten his concubine with a stick, issued an order prohibiting this behavior.

古文：令诸亲王及三蕃，有其正妃疾患百日已上，皆遣奏闻。
现代文：命令各亲王和三藩王，凡有正妃患病一百天以上的，都派人上奏。
English: He ordered all princes and kings of San Francisco to send someone to play for the princess if she had been ill for more than a hundred days.

古文：若有犹行捶挞，就削封位。
现代文：如果还有棒打妃子的，就削夺封爵。
English: If there is still a stick to beat the concubine, it will reduce the knighthood.

古文：及清河王怿为元叉所害，悦了无仇恨之意，乃以桑落酒候伺之，尽其私佞。
现代文：等到清河王元恽被元叉杀害，元悦全无仇恨的意思，竟然用桑落酒送给元叉，竭尽私人的逢迎。
English: When the King of Qinghe, Yuan Shao, was killed by Yuan Zha, Yuan Yue did not have a bit of hatred in his heart. Instead, he gave Yuan Zha mulberry wine and tried his best to be a traitor.

古文：叉大喜，以悦为侍中、太尉。
现代文：元旦大喜，任命盈区为侍中、太尉。
English: Motoyoshi was so pleased that he appointed Motoyoshi as a chamberlain and second lieutenant.

古文：临拜日，就怿子亶求怿服玩之物，不时称旨。
现代文：临近任命时，元悦向元恽的儿子元直求取元恽的服饰珍玩，元宜没马上满足要求。
English: When the appointment was about to be made, Yuan Yue asked Yuan Xi's son, Yuan Zhi, to obtain Yuan Xi's precious clothing. Yuan Yi did not immediately meet the request.

古文：乃召亶，杖之百下。
现代文：元悦就召唤元宜，打了他一百棒。
English: Yuan Yue summoned Yuan Yi and beat him a hundred times.

古文：亶居庐未葬，形气羸弱，暴加威挞，殆至不济。
现代文：元会守丧还没安葬父亲，身体瘦弱，突然遭到毒打，几乎活不过来。
English: At that time, Yuan Zucao was in mourning, and Yuan Zucao had not yet been buried. His body was very weak, and he would not be able to endure the severe beating from Yuan Yue anytime soon.

古文：囗仍呼阿兒，亲自循抚。
现代文：阙元悦不断呼唤阿儿，亲自抚摸。
English: Yu Yuanyue kept calling for A'er and stroking her.

古文：囗悦为大剉碓置于州门，盗者便欲斩其手。
现代文：阙元悦制作大判碓放置在州衙门口，有盗窃者就要砍他的手。
English: Yu Yuanyue made a large-sized banner and placed it at the entrance of the State Council, and anyone who stole it would have his hand cut off.

古文：时人惧其无常，能行异事，奸偷畏之而暂息。
现代文：当时人畏惧他不循常规，能做出格的事，奸猾偷盗的人畏惧他而暂且罢手。
English: At that time, people were afraid that he did not follow the rules and could do extraordinary things, and those who were crafty and thieving were afraid of him and temporarily stopped.

古文：及尔朱荣举兵向洛，既忆入间疑。
现代文：等到尔朱荣起兵向洛阳进发。既忆入间。
English: Wait until Er Zhu Rong raises an army to march to Luoyang.

古文：俄而闻荣肆毒于河阴，遂南奔萧衍。
现代文：疑不久听说尔朱荣在河阴残酷杀人，就向南投奔萧衍。
English: Suspicion soon heard that Le Zhu Rong brutally killed people in Hebei, he went to the south to join Xiao Yan.

古文：衍立为魏主，号年更兴。
现代文：萧衍立他为魏主，年号为更兴。
English: Xiao Yan designated him as the ruler of Wei, and his era name was Shangxing.

古文：衍遣其将军王辩送置于境上，以觊侵逼。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的将军王辩送元悦安置在边境上，来伺机侵犯。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his general Wang Yanzhong to place Yuan Yue on the border to wait for an opportunity to invade.

古文：及齐献武王既诛荣，以悦高祖子，宜承大业，乃令人示意。
现代文：等到齐献武王诛杀尔朱荣，认为元悦是高祖的儿子，应该继承大业，就派人表达自己的意愿。
English: When Qi Xianwu killed Zhu Rong, he thought that Yuan Yue was the son of Gao Zu and should inherit the great cause, so he sent someone to express his wishes.

古文：悦既至，清狂如故，动为罪失，不可扶持，乃止。
现代文：元悦到达后，照旧轻浮狂放，动不动就有罪行过失，不能够扶立，就作罢了。
English: After Yuan Yue arrived, he continued to be frivolous and reckless, committing crimes and making mistakes at every turn. If he couldn't stand up, he should stop.

古文：出帝初，除大司马。
现代文：出帝初年，授任他为大司马。
English: In the first year after the emperor's abdication, he was given the post of grand steward.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

