古文：孔子观于乡射，喟然叹曰： 射之以乐也。何以射？何以听？
现代文：孔子观看乡射礼，长叹一声说： 射箭时配上礼仪和音乐，射箭的人怎能一边射，一边听？
English: Confucius watched the town's archery ceremony and said with a long sigh: When archery is accompanied by etiquette and music, how can an archer shoot and listen at the same time?

古文：循声而发，不失正鹄者，其唯贤者乎！
现代文：努力修养身心而发出的箭，并能射中目标，只有贤德的人才能做到。
English: Only a virtuous person is able to shoot arrows that are sent in an effort to cultivate the mind and body and hit the target.

古文：若夫不肖之人，则将安能以求饮。
现代文：如果是不肖之人，他怎能射中而罚别人喝酒呢？
English: If he is a bad person, how can he shoot someone and make them drink?

古文：《诗》云： 发彼有的，以祈尔爵。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 发射你的箭射中目标，祈求你免受罚酒。 
English: The Book of Psalms says, "Shoot your arrows at the mark, and pray that you may not be punished with wine."

古文：祈、求也，求所中以辞爵。
现代文：祈，就是求。祈求射中而免受罚酒。
English: To pray is to ask. To ask to be shot and not to be punished with alcohol.

古文：酒者、所以养老，所以养病也。
现代文：酒，是用来养老和养病的。
English: Wine is used to support the elderly and the sick.

古文：求中以辞爵，辞其养也。
现代文：祈求射中而辞谢罚酒就是推辞别人的奉养。
English: Praying to be shot and refusing to accept the punishment of drinking is to refuse the support of others.

古文：是故士使之射而弗能，则辞以病，悬弧之义。 
现代文：所以如果让士人射箭，假如他不会，就应当以有病来辞谢，因为男子生来就应该会射箭。 
English: So if you ask a gentleman to shoot arrows, if he doesn't, you should thank him by saying he is ill, because men should be able to shoot arrows from birth.

古文：于是退而与门人习射于矍相之圃，盖观者如墙堵焉。
现代文：于是回来后和弟子们在矍相的园圃中学习射箭，观看的人们好像一堵围墙。
English: So after returning, he and his disciples learned archery in the garden of Yuxiang, and the people watching were like a wall.

古文：试射至于司马，使子路执弓矢，出列，延谓射之者曰： 奔军之将，亡国之大夫，与为人后，不得入。其馀皆入。 
现代文：当射礼行至子路时，孔子让子路手执弓箭出来邀请比射的人，说： 败军之将、丧失国土的大夫、求做别人后嗣的人，一律不准入场，其余的人进来。 
English: When the archers were on their way, Confucius asked the archers to come out with their bows and arrows and invite the competitors, saying: "The general of the defeated army, the doctor who lost his land, and the one who seeks to be someone else's heir are not allowed to enter, but the rest of the people are allowed to enter.

古文：盖去者半。
现代文：听到这话，人走了一半。
English: As a result, half of it was lost again.

古文：又使公罔之裘序点扬觯而语曰： 幼壮孝弟，耆老好礼，不从流俗，修身以俟死，者？在此位。 
现代文：孔子又让公罔之裘、序点举起酒杯说： 幼年壮年时能孝敬父母，友爱兄弟，到老年还爱好礼仪，不随流俗，修身以待终年的人，请留在这个地方。 
English: Confucius also asked Gongjun Zhi Qiao and Xuan Dang to raise their glasses and said: If you are able to honor and respect your parents and love your brothers and sisters when you are young and middle-aged, if you are still fond of etiquette when you are old, if you don't follow the mainstream, and if you are able to cultivate your body so that you can stay healthy all year round, please stay in this place.

古文：盖去者半。
现代文：结果又走掉一半。
English: As a result, half of it was lost again.

古文：序点又扬觯而语曰： 好学不倦，好礼不变，耄期称道而不乱者，则在此位。 
现代文：序点又举杯说： 好学不倦，好礼不变，到老还言行不乱的人，请留在这里。 
English: The preamble also raised a glass and said: Those who are eager to learn and never get tired, those whose manners never change, and those who are never out of order, please stay here.

古文：盖仅有存焉。
现代文：结果只有几个人留下没走。
English: As a result, only a few people stayed.

古文：射既阕，子路进曰： 由与二三子者之为司马，何如？ 孔子曰： 能用命矣。 
现代文：射箭结束后，子路走上前对孔子说： 我和序点他们这些人做司马，如何？ 孔子回答说： 可以胜任了。 
English: After the archery was over, Zi Lu stepped forward and said to Confucius, "How about I order these people to act as stewards?" Confucius replied, "I can do it."

古文：孔子曰： 吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。
现代文：孔子说： 我观看乡饮酒礼，知道推行王道是很容易的事。
English: Confucius said, "I have seen the drinking ceremony in my hometown, and I know that it is easy to carry out the royal road.

古文：主人亲速宾及介，而众宾皆从之，至于正门之外，主人拜宾及介，而众宾自入，贵贱之义别矣。
现代文：主人亲自邀请宾客和陪客，其他宾客跟随在后。到了主人的正门之外，主人拜迎宾客和陪客，而其他宾客自己跟随进入。
English: The host personally invites the guest and the accompanying guest, and the other guests follow. After arriving outside the host's front door, the host greets the guest and the accompanying guest, and the other guests enter on their own.

古文：三揖至于阶，三让，以宾升，拜至，献、酬辞让之节繁；及介升，则省矣。
现代文：这样尊贵的客人和一般的客人就有差别了。三次揖让后走到堂阶前，又三次谦让，主人引导宾客来到厅堂。然后拜谢宾客的到来，斟酒献给宾客，宾客又回敬主人，酬谢辞让的礼节繁多。等到陪客来到厅堂，礼节就减少了很多。
English: There is a difference between such distinguished guests and ordinary guests. After three concessions, they go to the front of the hall, and after three more concessions, the host guides the guests to the hall. Then they thank the guests for their arrival, pour wine for the guests, and the guests return the favor to the host. There are many etiquettes for giving thanks. When the guests come to the hall, the etiquette is much reduced.

古文：至于众宾，升而受爵、坐祭、立饮，不酢而降，隆杀之义辨矣。
现代文：至于其他宾客，到了厅堂接受献酒，坐着祭酒，站立饮酒，不回敬主人就可以下阶，礼节的隆重与简单就很清楚了。
English: As for the other guests, when they arrive at the hall, they can accept the offering of wine, drink the sacrificial wine while sitting, and drink the wine while standing. They can step down without returning respect to the host. The solemnity and simplicity of the etiquette are very clear.

古文：工入，升歌三终，主人献宾；笙入三终，主人又献之。
现代文：乐工进来，奏登堂《鹿鸣》《四牡》《皇皇者华》三首，于是主人给宾客献酒。
English: The musicians came in and played three pieces for the audience, "Deer Song," "Four Horses" and "Imperial Beauty," whereupon the host offered the guests wine.

古文：间歌三终，合乐三阕，工告 乐备 而遂出。
现代文：吹笙人进来又吹奏了三首乐曲，这时主人又给宾客献酒。
English: The piper came in and played three more tunes, at which point the host offered the guests more wine.

古文：一人扬觯，乃立司正焉，知其能和乐而不流也。
现代文：乐工与吹笙人转流演奏，乐工歌《鱼丽》，笙人吹《由庚》；乐工歌《南有嘉鱼》，笙人吹《崇丘》；乐工歌《南山有台》，笙人吹《由仪》。
English: Musicians and trumpeters played in rotation. Musicians sang the song "Fish," and trumpeters played "Yu Geng." Musicians sang the song "Nan Yijia Yu," and trumpeters played "Chongqiu." Musicians sang the song "Nanshan Yudai," and trumpeters played "Yu Yi."

古文：宾酬主人，主人酬介，介酬众宾，少长以齿，终于沃、洗者焉，知其能弟长而无遗矣。
现代文：接着乐工和吹笙人合奏《周南》《召南》中的三首乐曲，乐工报告说乐曲已演奏完毕，就退下堂去。
English: Next, the musicians and trumpeters played three pieces of music from "Zhou Nan" and "Call of the South." The musicians reported that the music had finished and left the hall.

古文：降，脱履升座，修爵无算。饮酒之节，旰不废朝，暮不废夕。宾出，主人迎送，节文终遂焉，知其能安燕而不乱也。贵贱既明，降杀既辨，和乐而不流，弟长而无遗，安燕而不乱。此五者，足以正身安国矣。彼国安而天下安矣。
现代文：这样就能知道乡饮酒礼能使大家安乐而不混乱了。尊卑贵贱能够分明，礼节隆重简单区别清楚，和谐欢乐而不失礼，年长年少的都不会遗漏，快乐地宴饮而不混乱。此五种行为，足以正身安国，国家安定，天下就安定了。
English: In this way, it can be known that the township drinking ceremony can make everyone happy without confusion. The honorable and the lowly can be clearly distinguished, the etiquette is grand and simple, the difference is clear, the harmony is joyful without being rude, the elderly and the young will not be missed, and the feasting is happy without being chaotic. These five behaviors are enough to secure the country, the country is stable, and the world is stable.

古文：故曰：吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。 
现代文：所以我说： 我观看乡饮酒礼，就知道推行王道是很容易的事。  
English: So I said: I watched the town drinking ceremony and knew that it was easy to promote the royal way.

古文：子贡观于蜡。
现代文：子贡观看年终蜡祭。
English: Zigong watching the year-end wax festival.

古文：孔子曰： 赐也乐乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 端木赐，你快乐吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Given the chance, are you happy?

古文：对曰： 一国之人皆若狂，赐未知其为乐也。 
现代文：子贡回答说： 一国的人都像疯了一样，我不知这有什么可快乐的。 
English: Zigong replied, "A whole nation has gone mad. I don't know what there is to be happy about.

古文：孔子曰： 百日之劳，一日之乐，一日之泽，非尔所知也。张而不弛，文武弗能；弛而不张，文武弗为；一张一弛，文武之道也。 
现代文：孔子说： 辛苦劳累了一年，才得以享受一天的快乐，这一天快乐的福泽，不是你能理解的，只是紧张而不松弛，文王武王都做不到；只是松弛而不紧张，文王武王也不会这样做。一张一弛，有劳有逸，这才是文王武王治理天下的办法。 
English: Confucius said, "It takes a year of hard work to enjoy one day of happiness. This day of happiness is not a blessing that you can understand. If you are tense but not relaxed, you cannot do it. If you are relaxed but not tense, you cannot do it. If you are relaxed, you can do it. If you are tired, you can do it. This is the way of governing the world.

