古文：沙门静生释昙邃释慧庆费氏赵泰释慧进沙门法尚释弘明释志湛五侯寺僧释智聪昙韵禅师李山龙苏长尼法信李氏彻师悟真寺僧释道俗史阿誓石壁寺僧
现代文：沙门静生释昙邃释慧庆费氏赵泰释慧进沙门法尚释弘明释志湛五侯寺僧释智聪昙韵禅师李山龙苏长尼法信李氏彻师悟真寺僧释道俗史阿誓石壁寺僧
English: Shaman Jing Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng, Shih Sheng

古文：沙门静生
现代文：沙门静生
English: Shamen Jing Sheng

古文：西晋蜀郡沙门静生，出家以苦行致称，为蜀三贤寺主，诵法华经。
现代文：西晋时蜀郡的沙门静生，出家后以苦行著称，做了蜀地的三贤寺主，诵读法华经。
English: At the time of the Western Jin Dynasty, Shamen Jing Sheng of Shu County was famous for his asceticism after becoming a monk. He became the head of the Three Wise Men Temple in Shu and recited the Lotus Sutra.

古文：每诵经时，常感虎来蹲前听，诵讫乃去。
现代文：每当诵经时，常感动老虎前来倾听，等读完之后才走。
English: Whenever the sutra is chanted, the tigers often come to listen, and only leave when they have finished reading.

古文：又恒见左右有四人为侍。
现代文：又常常看见左右四个人侍候着他。
English: He often saw four people on either side of him serving him.

古文：年虽衰老，而精勤弥励，遂终其业云。
现代文：年纪虽然衰老了，但更加努力精心读经书。一直到死。
English: And though he was now very old, he read the Scriptures more diligently until the day of his death.

古文：释昙邃
现代文：释昙邃
English: Xie Yao

古文：晋有释昙邃，未详何许人。少出家，止河阴白马寺。
现代文：晋代有个和尚昙邃，不知道他是哪里人，年少出家，住河阴的白马寺。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a monk named Yao, I don't know who he was, but he became a monk at a young age and lived at the White Horse Temple in Heyin.

古文：蔬食布衣，诵法华经，又释达经旨，亦为人解说。
现代文：吃粗粮穿布衣，诵读法华经，又能解释领会经书的宗旨，也常为别人讲解。
English: They eat coarse grains, wear cloth clothes, recite the Lotus Sutra, and can also explain the purpose of understanding the scriptures, and often explain to others.

古文：常于夜中，忽闻扣户云： 欲请法师九旬说法。 邃不许。
现代文：忽然在夜里听到敲门的声音说： 要请法师去讲经九十天。 昙邃不答应。
English: Suddenly, in the middle of the night, he heard a knock at the door and a voice said, "We want to invite the sorcerer to give a sermon for ninety days.

古文：固清，乃赴之。
现代文：坚决请求，就跟他去了。
English: I begged him and went with him.

古文：而犹是睡中，觉己身已在白马岛神祠中，并一弟子，日日密往，余无知者。
现代文：而还象是在睡梦中，觉得自己身在白马岛神祠中，并且有一个弟子，每天都和他一起前往，其余没有人知道。
English: But, as if in a dream, he felt that he was in the White Horse Island Shrine, and there was a disciple who went with him every day, and no one knew the rest.

古文：后寺僧经祠前过，见有两高座，邃在北，弟子在南，如有讲说声。
现代文：后寺的和尚从祠前走过看见有两个高座，邃坐在北面，弟子坐在南面，就象有讲说经书的声音。
English: A monk from Hou Temple walked past the ancestral hall and saw two high seats, the gong sitting on the north side and the disciple sitting on the south side. It was like the sound of someone reciting scriptures.

古文：又闻有奇香之气，于是道俗共传神异。
现代文：又闻到有奇香的气味，于是道俗的人们都作为神异事传说。
English: They also smelled the smell of a strange incense, so the people of the Taoism all became legends as supernatural things.

古文：至夏竟神送白马一疋，白羊五头，绢九十疋。咒愿毕，于是遂绝。
现代文：一直到了夏天，神送给他白马一匹，白羊五头，绢九十匹，祝愿完毕，一切都消失了。
English: All the way to the summer, God gave him a white horse, five white sheep, and ninety donkeys. When the wish was fulfilled, everything disappeared.

古文：释慧庆
现代文：释慧庆
English: Xie Huiqing

古文：宋释慧庆，广陵人，出家止庐山寺。
现代文：宋朝的释慧庆，是广陵人，出家在庐山寺。
English: Xie Huiqing of the Song Dynasty was from Guangling and became a monk at Lushan Temple.

古文：学通经律，清洁有戒行，诵法华经十地思、益维摩，每夜吟诵，常闻空中有弹指赞叹之声。
现代文：精通经书，清正廉洁而遵守佛教的戒律，诵读法华经中的十地思、益维摩，常常听到空中有弹指赞叹的声音。
English: He is well-versed in the scriptures, is clean and upright, and observes the precepts of Buddhism. He recites the ten thoughts and the yidam in the Lotus Sutra. He often hears the sound of tapping fingers in the air.

古文：曾于大雷遇风涛，船将覆没，庆惟诵经不辍。觉船在浪中，如有人牵之，倏忽至岸。
现代文：曾在大雷雨天遇到风暴，船将要覆灭，慧庆只是读经不止，就觉得船好象是在浪中，有人拉着似的，很快地到了岸。
English: Hui Qing had encountered a storm on a thunderstorm day, and the ship was about to capsize. He just kept reading the Bible, and he felt as if the ship was in the waves, as if someone was pulling it, and it quickly reached the shore.

古文：于是笃励，弥复精勤矣。
现代文：于是读经也就更加精心勤勉了。
English: As a result, they read the Bible more carefully and diligently.

古文：费氏
现代文：费氏
English: Mr. Fei

古文：宋罗玙妻费氏者，宁蜀人，父悦为宁州刺史。
现代文：宋朝的罗玙的妻子费氏，宁蜀人，她的父亲做了宁州刺史。
English: Luo Wei's wife Fei, a native of Ningshu in the Song Dynasty, and her father, a historian of Ningzhou.

古文：费少而敬信，诵法华经数年，勤至不倦。
现代文：费氏年少就敬信诵读法华经，几年勤奋不倦。
English: At a young age, Fei read the Lotus Sutra faithfully and diligently for several years.

古文：后得病，忽苦心痛，阖门惶惧，属纩待时。
现代文：后来得了病，忽然感到心痛，全家人都非常害怕，只等咽气下葬。
English: Later, she fell ill and suddenly felt heartache. The whole family was very scared and just waited for her to die.

古文：费心念：我诵经勤苦，宜有善祐，庶不遂致死也。
现代文：费氏心念：我诵读经书勤奋，应当有保祐，大概不至于马上就死吧。
English: Fei's thought: I am diligent in reciting scriptures, I should have a guarantor, I probably won't die right away.

古文：既而睡卧，食顷而寤，乃梦见佛于窗中援手，以摩其心，应时都愈。
现代文：接着就入睡了，一顿饭的工夫她醒了。梦中看见佛在窗中过来拉她的手，抚摸她的心。过了一会就不疼了。
English: Then she fell asleep, and woke up during a meal. In her dream, she saw the Buddha coming to her through the window, taking her hand and stroking her heart. After a while, the pain was gone.

古文：一堂男女婢仆，悉睹金光，亦闻香气。
现代文：一屋子里的男女婢仆，都看见了金光，也闻到了香味。
English: All the male and female servants in the house saw the golden light and smelled the fragrance.

古文：玙从妹于时省疾床前，亦具闻见。
现代文：罗玙的堂妹在床前探望她的时候，也都看见和闻到。
English: Luo Yao's cousins also saw and smelled it when they visited her at her bedside.

古文：于是大兴信悟，虔戒至终，每以此端进化子侄焉。
现代文：于是就大兴信悟，虔诚也守戒规到最后，也常常用这些来教化他们的子侄等人。
English: As a result, they became very religious and pious and kept the precepts to the end, often using them to educate their children and grandchildren.

古文：赵泰
现代文：赵泰
English: Zhao Tai

古文：赵泰字文和，清河贝丘人。
现代文：赵泰字文和，清河贝丘人。
English: Zhao Tai character Wen He, Qinghe Beqiu people.

古文：公府辟不就，精进典籍，乡党称名，年三十五。
现代文：官府征召不去就职。精心钻研典籍，在乡党中闻名，年龄三十五岁。
English: He was conscripted by the government, but did not take up his post. He studied classic books meticulously, and was well-known in the township party. He was thirty-five years old.

古文：宋太始五年七月十三日夜半，忽心痛而死，心上微暖。身体屈伸。停尸十日，气从咽喉如雷鸣，眼开，索水饮，饮讫便起。
现代文：太始五年七月十三日半夜，忽然心痛而死，心上稍温，身体能屈能伸，尸体放了十天突然喘气声象雷鸣一样从咽喉中发出。眼睛睁开，要水喝，喝完就起来了。
English: In the middle of the night of July 13th, the first year of the fifth lunar month, he suddenly died of heartache. His heart was slightly warm, his body was able to bend and stretch. After the corpse had been dead for ten days, a sudden gasp sounded from his throat like thunder. His eyes opened, he asked for water, and when he had finished drinking, he got up.

古文：说初死时，有二人乘黄马，从兵二人，但言捉将去。
现代文：他说他刚死的时候，有两个乘黄马的人，两个兵士跟着，只是说要抓他去。
English: He said that when he had just died, there were two men on a yellow horse, followed by two soldiers, who only said that they wanted to capture him.

古文：二人扶两腋东行，不知几里，便见大城，如锡铁崔嵬。
现代文：两个人就扶着赵泰的胳膊向东走，不知走了几里，便看见一座大城。城高大雄伟庄严。
English: The two of them supported Zhao Tai's arm and walked eastward. After walking for a few miles, they saw a large city. The city was tall, majestic and solemn.

古文：从城西门入，见官府舍，有二重黑门，数十梁瓦屋，男女当五六十。
现代文：从城的西门进去。看见官府的房舍，有两重黑门，几十间房屋。男女有五六十人。
English: Entering from the west gate of the city, I saw the government building, with its double black doors and dozens of rooms. There were fifty or sixty men and women.

古文：主吏著皂单衫，将泰名在第三十。
现代文：主官穿着黑色的单衣，把赵泰的名排在第三十上。
English: The chief officer, dressed in a black singlet, ranked Zhao Tai's name 30th.

古文：须臾将入，府君西坐，断勘姓名。
现代文：等一会被叫进去。官员面向西坐着，核对姓名。
English: After a moment, they were called in. The officers sat facing west, checking names.

古文：复将南入黑门，一人绛衣，坐大屋下，以次呼名前，问生时所行事，有何罪过；行功德，作何善行。
现代文：又从南面进入黑门。一人穿着深红色的衣服，坐在大堂下，按顺序喊名，问活着时干过什么，有什么罪过，建立那些功德，作了哪些好事。
English: Another man, dressed in crimson, sat at the bottom of the lobby, calling out names in order, asking what he had done in his life, what sins he had committed, what merits he had built up, and what good deeds he had done.

古文：言者各各不同。
现代文：说的人各个都说的不同。
English: Everyone who says it says it differently.

古文：主者言： 许汝等辞。
现代文：主管说允许你们陈述。
English: The superintendent said you're allowed to make a statement.

古文：恒遣六师督录使者，常在人间，疏记人所作善恶，以相检校。
现代文：往常派六师督录使者，在人间，记载各自所作的善行恶事，来检查验证。
English: In the past, the six divisions would send envoys to the human world to record the good deeds and evil deeds that they had done, and to check and verify them.

古文：人死有三恶道，杀生祷祠最重。
现代文：人死有三条险恶的路，以杀生酬神祭祀最重。
English: There are three sinister ways to die, and the most serious is to sacrifice to the god of killing.

古文：奉佛持五戒十善，慈心布施，生在福舍，安稳无为。 
现代文：应当对信佛遵守僧之五戒十善者，广发善心，生在福中，安稳而无为。
English: For those who believe in Buddha and abide by the Five Precepts and Ten Virtues of a monk, they should cultivate a good heart, be born with good fortune, and be stable without doing anything.

古文：泰答一无所为，上不犯恶。
现代文：赵泰答道自己一点也没做什么恶事。
English: Zhao Tai replied that he had not done anything wrong.

古文：断问都竟，使为水官监作吏，将千余人，接沙著岸上，昼夜勤苦啼泣，悔言生时不作善，今堕在此处。
现代文：讯问完之后，就让他做水官监作吏，统帅一千多人，往江岸上运沙筑堤，他们整天劳苦而悲伤。后悔自己在世时没做善事，现在落到这种地步。
English: After the interrogation was over, he was made the supervisor of the water officials, the commander of more than a thousand people, carrying sand to the riverbank to build a dike. They worked hard all day and were sad. They regretted that they did not do good deeds when they were alive, and now they are in this situation.

古文：后转水官都督，总知诸狱事，给马，东到地狱按行。
现代文：以后又转为水官都督，总管牢狱中的事，送给他一匹马，到东面地狱去巡视。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of naval officer-governor, in charge of prison affairs. He was given a horse and went to inspect the Eastern Hell.

古文：复到泥犁地狱，男子六千人，有火树，纵广五十余步，高千丈，四边皆有剑，树上然火，其下十十五五，堕火剑上，贯其身体。
现代文：又到泥犁地狱，有男子六千多人，有火树，周围五十多步，高千丈，四边都有剑，树上着火，从顶上落下一十一五的人落到火剑上，穿透了他的身体。
English: Then to the muddy hell, there are more than six thousand men, there is a fire tree, there are more than fifty steps around it, it is very high, there are swords on all sides, the tree is on fire, and one-fifteenth of the people who fall from the top fall onto the fire sword, penetrating his body.

古文：云： 此人咒诅骂詈，夺人财物，假伤良善。 
现代文：并说： 这些人咒骂犯罪，抢夺别人的财物，伤害良善。 
English: He also said: "These people curse and commit crimes, rob others of their property, and harm the good.

古文：泰见父母及一弟，在此狱中涕泣。见二人赍文书来，敕狱吏，言有三人，其家事佛，为有寺中悬幡盖烧香，转法华经咒愿，救解生时罪过。
现代文：赵泰看见父母和一个弟弟也在这狱中哭泣，又看见两个人拿来文书，下令给狱吏，说有三个人，他家供佛，因在寺中悬挂旗子虔诚烧香，念法华经的咒语，免除他们生时的罪过。
English: Zhao Tai saw that his parents and a younger brother were also crying in this prison. He also saw two people bring a document and ordered the prison officers to say that there were three people in his family who had made offerings to the Buddha, and because they hung a flag in the temple, they piously burned incense and recited mantras from the Lotus Sutra to absolve their sins in life.

古文：出就福舍，已见自然衣服，往诣一门，云开光大舍，有三重黑门，皆白壁赤柱，此三人即入门。
现代文：就走出福舍，已看见还是穿着平常的衣服，又到了一门，据说是开光大殿，有三重黑门，都是白壁红柱。这三个人就进去了。
English: They walked out of Fu She, saw that they were still wearing their usual clothes, and arrived at another gate, said to be the Kaiko Great Hall, which has three black doors, all with white walls and red pillars. The three men went in.

古文：见大殿，珍宝耀日，堂前有二狮子并伏，负一金玉床，云名狮子之座。
现代文：看见一大殿，珍宝映日，堂前有两个狮子，并排趴在那驼着金玉床，说是叫狮子之座。
English: He saw a large hall, with precious treasures reflecting the sun, and two lions in front of the hall, lying side by side on a bed of gold and jewels, which he said was called the Lion's Seat.

古文：见一大人，身可长丈余，姿颜金色，项有日光，坐此床上。
现代文：又看见一个大人身高一丈多，满面金色，脖子上有日光，坐在这个床上。
English: He also saw an adult, much taller, with a golden complexion and sunlight on his neck, sitting on the bed.

古文：沙门立侍甚众，四坐名真人菩萨，见泰山府君来作礼。泰问吏何人，吏曰： 此名佛，天上天下度人之师。 
现代文：站立侍候的和尚很多，周围的人叫他真人菩萨。看到泰山府君来拜礼，赵泰问官吏他是什么人，官吏说： 这是名佛，天上天下解救人的法师。 
English: There were many monks standing around waiting for him, and the people around him called him a real-life bodhisattva. When Zhao Tai saw Taishanfujun coming to worship, he asked the officials who he was. The officials said, "This is a famous Buddha, a magician who can save people all over the world."

古文：便闻佛言： 今欲度此恶道中及诸地狱人皆令出。 
现代文：于是就听到佛说： 现在想要度这些恶道上的人和那些地狱的人都出去。 
English: Then I heard the Buddha say, "Now I want to help these people on the evil path and those in hell to get out."

古文：应时云有万九千人，一时得出，地狱即空。
现代文：时辰一到，就有一万九千多人，一下子出去了，地狱便空了。
English: When the time came, more than 19,000 people left at once, and hell was empty.

古文：见呼十人，当上生天，有车马迎之，升虚空而去。
现代文：又看见喊十个人，应当升上天，有车马迎接他们，于是他们升空而去。
English: And I saw ten men which cried out, and ascended up into heaven; and there was given unto them a chariot and horses; and they went up into the heaven.

古文：复见一城，云： 纵广二百余里，名为受变形城。 
现代文：又看见一城，吏说：周围有二百多里，名叫受变形城。 
English: And there was a city about two hundred leagues off, which is called the City of the Transfiguration.

古文：云： 生来不闻道法，而地狱考治已毕者，当于此城，受更变报。 
现代文：又说： 从来不学道法，而地狱考查已经完毕的人，应当到这座城，重新听从安排。
English: He also said, "For those who have never studied Daoism and have completed the hell examination, they should come to this city and re-obey the arrangement."

古文：入北门，见数千百土屋，中央有大瓦屋，广五十余步。
现代文：于是进入北门，看见几千几百间土房子，中间有个大瓦房，宽五十多步。
English: So he entered the north gate and saw thousands and hundreds of mud houses, with a large tile house in the middle, more than fifty paces wide.

古文：下有五百余吏，对录人名，作善恶事状，受是变身形之路，从其所趋去。
现代文：下面有五百多个官吏，对录人名，作好事坏事的情况。摆在面前的是变身形的路。于是就跟着他去的地方走。
English: Below there are more than five hundred officials, recording the names of people, the situation of doing good and bad things. In front of him is the path of transformation. So follow where he goes.

古文：杀者云当作蜉蝣虫，朝生夕死；若为人，常短命。
现代文：杀人的说是当做蜉蝣虫，早上生晚上死。若变成人，常常是短命的。
English: It is said that the killer is like a tapeworm, born in the morning and dies in the evening. If it turns into a human, it is often short-lived.

古文：偷盗者作猪羊身，屠肉偿人。
现代文：偷盗的变作猪羊，杀了肉让人尝。
English: The thief turned into a pig or a sheep and killed the meat for people to taste.

古文：淫逸者作鹄鹜蛇身。
现代文：淫逸的人变作鹄鹜蛇身。
English: The lascivious man is changed into the body of a serpent.

古文：恶舌者作鸱鴸鸺鹠，恶声，人闻皆咒令死。
现代文：坏人的人变作鸱鴸、鸺鹠，讨厌它们的声音，人听到都诅咒让它们死。
English: Evil-doers turn into crickets, crickets, hate their sound, and when people hear them, they curse them to death.

古文：抵债者为驴马牛鱼鳖之属。
现代文：抵债的作驴马牛鱼鳖之类。
English: Debt-paying donkeys, horses, cows, fish, and the like.

古文：大屋下有地房北向，一户南向，呼从北户，又出南户者，皆变身形作鸟兽。
现代文：大屋子下面有地房朝向北面，一门朝南。叫他跟着从北门进去，又从南门走出来的，都变身形为鸟兽。
English: Under the great house there were chambers facing north, and one facing south, and he made him go in by the north gate and come out by the south gate, and they were turned into birds and beasts.

古文：又见一城，纵广百里，其瓦屋安居快乐，云： 生时不作恶，亦不为善，当在鬼趣千岁，得出为人。
现代文：又看见一城，纵横百里，那里居的人安居乐业，说： 在世时不作恶事，也不做好事，应当在鬼住的地方度过一千年，才能出去变成人。
English: And he saw a city a hundred miles long and a hundred miles wide, and the people living in it were peaceful and happy. And he said to them, "Do no evil, neither do any good, while you live. It is necessary for you to live a thousand years in the land where the devils live, and then you can go out and become human."

古文：又见一城，广有五千余步，名为地中。
现代文：又看见一城，宽有五千余步，名叫地中，惩罚被贬谪的人，不能忍受痛苦。
English: And I saw a city of five thousand furlongs in breadth, which is called the midst of the earth: and he that chastiseth the poor cannot bear his affliction.

古文：罚谪者，不堪苦痛，男女五六万，皆裸形无服，饥困相扶，见泰叩头啼哭。
现代文：男女有五六万，都是裸体没有穿衣服。饥饿困乏互相搀扶，看见赵泰叩头啼哭。
English: There are fifty or sixty thousand men and women, all naked and without clothes. Hungry and weary, they help each other, and they see Zhao Tai kowtowing and crying.

古文：泰按行毕还，主者问： 地狱如法否？卿无罪，故相挽为水官都督。不尔，与狱中人无异。 
现代文：赵泰巡查完毕回来。主管的人问： 地狱的法律如何，你没罪，所以让你作水官都督，不然就和狱中的人没有什么不同的。 
English: Zhao Tai returned after the inspection. The person in charge asked: What is the law of hell? You are not guilty, so let you be the governor of the navy, otherwise you are no different from the people in prison.

古文：泰问人生何以为乐，主者言： 唯奉佛弟子，精进不犯禁戒为乐耳。 
现代文：赵泰问人在世上以什么为乐事呢？主管的人说： 唯独信奉佛教做佛的弟子。精心念经不违犯佛教的禁戒为乐事。 
English: Zhao Tai asked, "What do people do for fun in the world?" The person in charge said, "Only those who believe in Buddhism and are disciples of the Buddha. Studying the sutras carefully without violating the Buddhist precepts is fun."

古文：又问： 未奉佛时，罪过山积；今奉佛法，其过得除否？ 
现代文：又问： 没奉佛教时，罪恶如山；现在信奉佛法，他的罪过能解除吗？ 
English: He also asked: When he did not practice Buddhism, his sins were like a mountain; now that he practices Buddhism, can his sins be absolved?

古文：曰： 皆除。 
现代文：回答说： 都能解除。 
English: He replied: "They can all be removed."

古文：主者又召都录使者，问赵泰何故死来。
现代文：主管的人又召都录使者，问赵泰什么原因死的。
English: The person in charge also summoned the messenger and asked Zhao Tai what the cause of death was.

古文：使开滕检年纪之籍，云： 有算三十年，横为恶鬼所取，今遣还家。 
现代文：使者打开滕检年纪的册子，说： 算寿命还有三十年，意外地被恶鬼所缠，现在打发他回家。 
English: The messenger opened Teng Jian's age book and said, "He has thirty years left to live. He was unexpectedly possessed by an evil spirit. Now send him home."

古文：由是大小发意奉佛，为祖及弟，悬幡葢，诵法华经作福也。
现代文：从此大大小小都发誓信奉佛教，从祖辈到子弟，都悬挂幡葢，诵读法华经作福事。
English: Since then, people of all ages have sworn to believe in Buddhism. From ancestors to children, they all hang banners and recite the Lotus Sutra to do good deeds.

古文：释慧进
现代文：释慧进
English: Shieh Huijin

古文：前齐永明中，杨都高座寺释慧进者，少雄勇游侠。
现代文：前齐永明年中，杨都高座寺的和尚慧进，年少英勇有义侠精神。
English: In the middle of the previous Qiyong year, the monk Huijin of Yangdu Gaoza Temple was young and brave and had the spirit of a knight.

古文：年四十，忽悟非常，因出家，蔬食布衣，誓诵法华，用心劳苦，执卷便病。
现代文：年纪四十岁时，忽然间明白过来，于是就出家。食粗粮穿布衣，发誓诵读法华经，用心苦诵，积劳成病。
English: At the age of forty, he suddenly came to understand, so he became a monk. He ate coarse grains, wore cloth clothes, swore to recite the Lotus Sutra, recited it diligently, and became ill from overwork.

古文：乃发愿造百部以悔先障，始聚得一千六百文。贼来索物，进示经钱，贼惭而退。
现代文：发誓要造百部经书来赎先前的罪孽，开始攒了一千六百文，贼来抢财物，慧进向贼说这是买经书的钱，贼惭愧而退。
English: He swore to make a hundred books of sutras to atone for his previous sins, and began to save sixteen hundred mon. A thief came to rob the property, and Hui Jin told the thief that this was the money to buy the books. The thief was ashamed and retreated.

古文：尔后遂成百部，故病亦愈。
现代文：以后就造成了一百部经书，因此病也就好了。
English: Since then, he has created a hundred scriptures, and his illness has been cured.

古文：诵经既广，情愿又满，回此诵业，愿生安养。
现代文：经书读得多，又满足了自己的心愿，从此一心诵经，愿平生安乐。
English: He read a lot of scriptures and satisfied his heart's desire. Since then, he has been chanting the sutras with all his heart. May he live a happy life.

古文：闻空中告曰： 法愿已足，必得往生。 
现代文：忽听空中告诉他说： 法愿已足，一定能够延寿。 
English: He suddenly heard the air telling him: "Dharma willing is enough, I will definitely be able to prolong my life."

古文：无病而卒，八十余矣。
现代文：一直活到八十多岁无病而死。
English: He lived until he was in his eighties and died without any illness.

古文：沙门法尚
现代文：沙门法尚
English: Shamen Fashang

古文：齐武帝时，东山人握土见一物，状如两唇，其中舌，鲜红赤色。
现代文：齐武帝时，东山人挖土看见一个东西，形状象两个嘴唇，中间有舌头，颜色鲜红。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiwu, a man from Dongshan was digging in the dirt when he saw something. It was shaped like two lips, with a tongue in the middle, and was bright red in color.

古文：以事奏闻，帝问道俗。
现代文：皇帝闻奏问道俗两界。
English: Emperor Wensong asked the secular two sectors.

古文：沙门法尚曰： 此持法华者亡相不坏也。
现代文：和尚法尚说： 这是念法华经的人死亡之后不腐坏。
English: Monk Fa Shang said: This is because people who recite the Lotus Sutra do not rot after death.

古文：诵满千遍，其验征矣。 
现代文：诵完一千遍后，它的灵验必显。 
English: After reciting it a thousand times, its efficacy will be obvious.

古文：乃集持法华者，围绕诵经，才发声，其唇舌一时鼓动。
现代文：于是就召集念法华经的人，围绕着它诵读经书，才发声，该唇舌一齐鼓动。
English: So he gathered the people who recited the Lotus Sutra and read the scripture around it. Only then did they speak out, their lips and tongues beating in unison.

古文：见者毛竖，以事奏闻。
现代文：看到的人惊得毛发竖立。又把此景上奏。
English: Those who saw it were so shocked that their hair stood on end. The scene was played again.

古文：诏石函缄之。
现代文：于是下诏书用石匣子封上它。
English: So the emperor sealed it with a stone box.

古文：释弘明
现代文：释弘明
English: Shaku Hiroaki

古文：齐释弘明，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：南齐时和尚弘明，是会稽山阴人。
English: At the time of the Southern Qi Dynasty, the monk Hongming was a member of the Shanyin sect.

古文：少出家，贞苦有戒节，止山阴云门寺。
现代文：少年出家，贞忠吃苦守戒律，在山阴云门寺。
English: The boy became a monk, and Zhenzhong painstakingly kept the precepts at the Mountain Cloud Gate Temple.

古文：诵法华，习禅定，精勤礼忏，六时不辍。
现代文：每天诵读法华经，学习佛法，精心勤恳读诵，整日不停。
English: Read the Lotus Sutra every day, study Buddhism, diligently read and recite, all day long.

古文：每旦则水瓶自满实，感诸天童子，以为给使也。
现代文：每天早晨水瓶自然而满，感动了天童子给做的。
English: The water bottle is naturally full every morning, which moved Tian Tongzi to make it.

古文：每明坐禅，虎常伏于室内。
现代文：每天天亮坐禅，老虎常常趴在室内。
English: He meditates at dawn every day, and the tiger often lounges indoors.

古文：释志湛
现代文：释志湛
English: Xie Zhitang

古文：后魏末，齐州释志湛者，住太山北邃谷中衔草寺。
现代文：后魏末期，齐州的和尚志湛，住在泰山北边深谷的衔草寺中。
English: At the end of the late Wei Dynasty, the monk Zhizhan of Qizhou lived in the Lingcao Temple in the deep valley north of Mount Tai.

古文：省事少言，人鸟不乱，恒诵法华。
现代文：通情达理，少言寡语，四面太平，常年诵读法华经。
English: He is reasonable, speaks little, is peaceful in all respects, and recites the Lotus Sutra all year round.

古文：将终时，神僧宝志谓梁武帝曰： 北方衔草寺须陁洹圣僧，今日灭度。 
现代文：将死的时候，神僧宝志对梁武帝说： 北方衔草寺须陁洹圣僧，今日灭度了。 
English: When he was about to die, the god-monk Baozhi said to Emperor Liangwu: "The holy monk Su Shi of Beifang Lingcao Temple passed away today.

古文：湛之亡也。无恼而化。
现代文：释志湛死时，没有烦恼而终，两手各伸着一指。
English: When Shih Zhitang died, he died without any worries, with one finger on each hand.

古文：两手各舒一指，有梵僧云： 斯初果人也。 
现代文：有一个梵僧说： 这是初果人。 
English: A guru said, "This is the first-fruits man."

古文：还葬山中。后发看之，唯舌如故。
现代文：埋葬在山中，以后挖掘出来一看，只有舌头象以前一样。
English: Buried in the mountain, later excavated, only the tongue is the same as before.

古文：众为立塔表焉。
现代文：大家为他立了塔赞颂他的功德。
English: They built a tower in his honour and praised his merits.

古文：五侯寺僧
现代文：五侯寺僧
English: Monks of the Five Temples

古文：后魏范阳五侯寺僧，失其名，诵法华为常业。
现代文：后魏范阳五侯寺和尚，不知他的姓名，以诵法华经为常业。
English: After Wei, Fanyang Wuhou Temple monk, I do not know his name, to recite the Lotus Sutra as a regular business.

古文：初死，权殓堤下，后改葬，骸骨并枯，唯舌不坏。
现代文：当初死的时候，暂时埋在堤下，后改葬，发现尸骨已枯萎，唯独舌头不坏。
English: When he died, he was temporarily buried under an embankment, but when he was reburied, it was found that his bones had withered, except for his tongue.

古文：雍州有僧诵法华，隐白鹿山，感一童子供给。
现代文：雍州有个和尚诵读法华经，隐居于白鹿山中，感动了一个童子每天给他送衣服。
English: There is a monk in Yongzhou who chants the Lotus Sutra and lives in seclusion in the Bailu Mountain. A boy was moved to send him clothes every day.

古文：及死，置尸岩下，余骸并枯，唯舌不朽。
现代文：一直到死他的尸体放在岩石下，尸骨都已枯干，只是舌头不烂。
English: His body was placed under a rock until he died. The bones of the corpse were dry, but the tongue did not rot.

古文：释智聪
现代文：释智聪
English: 释智聪

古文：唐润州摄山栖霞寺释智聪，尝住扬州安乐寺。
现代文：唐朝润州摄山栖霞寺和尚智聪，曾经住在扬州的安业寺。
English: Shang Zhicong, a monk of the Jingshan Qixia Temple in Rongzhou in the Tang Dynasty, once lived in Yangzhou's Anye Temple.

古文：大业之乱，思归无计，隐江荻中，诵法华经，七日不食。
现代文：大业之乱时，没有办法回老家。暂隐居在江边芦荻中，诵读法华经，七天不吃不喝。
English: During the Taie Rebellion, unable to return to his hometown, he temporarily lived in seclusion in the reeds along the river, reciting the Lotus Sutra and not eating or drinking for seven days.

古文：恒有虎绕之，聪曰： 吾命须臾，卿须可食。 
现代文：常常有老虎围绕着他。智聪说： 我的命快完了，你不久就可以吃我的肉了。 
English: Often surrounded by tigers, Zhicong said, "My life is almost over, you will soon be able to eat my flesh."

古文：虎忽发言曰： 造天立地，无有此理。 
现代文：老虎忽然说到： 天地间没有这个道理。 
English: The tiger suddenly said, "There is no such reason between heaven and earth."

古文：忽有一老翁，榜舟而至，翁曰： 师欲渡江至栖霞寺，可即上船。 
现代文：忽然有一个老翁，划着船过来，老翁说： 你想渡江至栖霞寺，就可以上船了。 
English: Suddenly, an old man rowing a boat came by. The old man said, "If you want to cross the river to Xixia Temple, you can get on the boat."

古文：四虎一时泪流，聪曰： 尔与我有缘也。 
现代文：四只虎一起流泪。智聪说： 你们和我有缘。 
English: The four tigers shed tears together. Zhicong said: You and I have a predestined relationship.

古文：于是挟四虎利涉，既达南岸，船及老人，不知所在。
现代文：于是带上四只虎奋力涉渡，到达南岸时，船和老人都不知去处。
English: So he took four tigers with him and waded across the water. When they reached the south shore, the boat and the old man didn't know where to go.

古文：聪领四虎往栖霞舍利塔西，经行坐禅，众徒八十，咸不出院，若有所事，一虎入寺鸣号，以为恒式。
现代文：智聪领着四虎去栖霞寺舍利塔西，坐禅念经。弟子八十人都不出院门，如果有事，一只虎就进入寺内鸣叫，形成规律。
English: Zhicong led the four tigers to the west wing of the Xixia Temple, where they sat in meditation and chanted sutras. None of the eighty disciples would leave the hospital, but if there was a problem, a tiger would enter the temple and chirp, forming a pattern.

古文：聪至贞观中迁化，年九十九矣。
现代文：智聪到贞观年中死去，年龄九十九岁。
English: Zhizong died in the middle of the Zhenguan year at the age of ninety-nine.

古文：昙韵禅师
现代文：昙韵禅师
English: by the Zen master Gong Yun

古文：唐昙韵禅师，定州人。
现代文：唐朝昙韵神师是定州人。
English: The Tang Dynasty priest Shen Yun was from Dingzhou.

古文：隋末丧乱，隐于离石北山。
现代文：隋末战乱，隐居在离石北山。
English: During the war at the end of the Sui Dynasty, he lived in seclusion on Mount Shibei.

古文：常诵法华，欲写其经，无人同志，如此积年。
现代文：常诵法华经，想要写下那些经，没有人和他一起做，如此多年。
English: He often recited the Lotus Sutra and wanted to write down those sutras, but no one would do it with him for so many years.

古文：忽有书生来诣之，仍以写经为请。
现代文：忽然有个书生来拜见他，竟然请求为他写经。
English: Suddenly, a scholar came to see him and asked him to write a sutra for him.

古文：明复如初，曾不告倦。及缮写毕，乃至装褫，一如正法。
现代文：禅师非常高兴，书生清晨吃完饭，洗了澡，穿上净衣，入净室，受八戒，口含着旃檀，烧香挂幡，寂寂地抄写，到了晚上才出来。第二天又是那样，不知疲倦，等到写完，才脱去衣服。一切都很符合法规。
English: The Zen master was very pleased. In the morning, the student finished his meal, took a shower, put on clean clothes, went into the purification room, received the eight precepts, held a mandala in his mouth, burned incense and a hanging banner, copied in solitude, and only came out in the evening. The next day, he did the same, tirelessly, and only took off his clothes when he had finished writing. Everything was in accordance with the regulations.

古文：书生告去，送至门，忽失所在。
现代文：书生告辞而去，送到门口，忽然不见了。
English: The student bade farewell and left, was taken to the door, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：禅师持诵，曾无暂废。
现代文：禅师诵读经书，丝毫不废。
English: The Zen master recited scriptures without missing a beat.

古文：后遭胡贼，仓卒逃避，方箱盛其经，置高岩上。
现代文：以后僧遭到胡贼的劫难，仓猝逃避，箱子里装着那个经书，就把它放在高岩上。
English: Afterward, the monk was attacked by the bandits and made a hasty escape. He put the box containing the scripture on a high rock.

古文：经年贼败，乃寻经，于岩下获之。
现代文：过一年后贼败退，于是寻找经书，在岩石下找到了。
English: After a year, the thieves retreated, so they looked for scriptures and found them under a rock.

古文：中箱糜烂，应手灰灭，拨朽见经，如旧鲜好。
现代文：巾箱已腐烂，用手一碰便变成灰，拨开灰看见经书，象先前一样完好。
English: The towel box had rotted and turned to ashes at the touch of a hand. When the ashes were removed, the sutra was found, intact as before.

古文：李山龙
现代文：李山龙
English: Li Shanlong

古文：唐李山龙，冯翊人，左监门校尉。
现代文：唐代的李山龙是冯翊人，为左监门校尉。
English: Li Shanlong of the Tang Dynasty was a follower of Feng Xuan. He was a left guard captain.

古文：武德中，暴亡而心不冷，家人未忍殡殓。
现代文：武德年中，突然死去而心还不凉。家里人不忍心入殓。
English: In the middle of his middle school years, he died suddenly and his heart was not yet cold. His family could not bear to bury him.

古文：至七日而苏。
现代文：到了七天而苏醒过来。
English: Seven days later, he woke up.

古文：自说云：当死时，见被收录，至一官署，甚广大。
现代文：自己说，他刚死的时候，看见被收录到一个官署。
English: He said that when he had just died, he saw that he had been taken to a government office.

古文：庭前有数千囚人，枷锁杻械，皆北面立。
现代文：官署很宽大，庭前有几千个囚犯，都带着枷锁刑械，都面向北立着。
English: The office is very spacious. There are several thousand prisoners in front of the court, all with shackles and instruments of punishment, all facing north.

古文：吏将山龙至庭，厅上大官坐高床，侍卫如王者，寻呼山龙至阶。
现代文：官吏将山龙带到庭前。厅上的高座上坐着一个大官，侍卫大王的人，喊山龙到阶前。
English: The officials brought the dragon to the front of the court. On a high seat in the hall sat a high-ranking official, one of the king's guards, who called the dragon to the steps.

古文：王问汝平生作何福业，山龙对曰： 乡人每设斋，恒请施物助之。 
现代文：王问： 你生平作过什么福事？ 山龙回答说： 乡人每当设斋时，我常常把礼物送去资助他们。 
English: The king asked, "What good deeds have you done in your life?" The dragon replied, "Whenever the villagers have a feast, I often send gifts to help them.

古文：王曰： 汝身作何善业？ 
现代文：王说： 你自己做了哪些好事？ 
English: Wang said: What good things have you done yourself?

古文：山龙曰： 诵法华经，日两卷。 
现代文：山龙曰； 诵读法华经，每天两卷。 
English: Shanlong said, "I recite the Lotus Sutra, two volumes a day.

古文：王曰： 大善，可升阶来。 
现代文：大王说： 太好了，可以让他到阶上来。 
English: The great king said, "That's great, you can let him come up the stairs."

古文：北间有高座，王曰： 可升座诵经。 
现代文：北面有一个高座，王说： 可登座诵经。 
English: There was a high seat on the north side, and the king said, "Take your seat and chant."

古文：王即起立，山龙坐讫，王乃向之而坐。
现代文：王就立即站起，山龙坐下，王就对着他而坐下。
English: Immediately the king stood up, the dragon sat down, and the king sat opposite him.

古文：山龙开经曰： 妙法莲华经序品第一。 
现代文：山龙打开经书念道： 妙法莲华经序品第一。 
English: Shanlong opened the sutra book and read: "The Lotus Sutra is the first in the series.

古文：王曰： 请法师下。 
现代文：王说： 请法师下去。 
English: And the king said, Let the magician come down.

古文：山龙复立阶下，顾庭前囚，已尽去矣。
现代文：山龙又站在阶下。看庭前的囚犯，早已没有了。
English: The mountain dragon stood at the foot of the steps again. The prisoners who had been watching the court were long gone.

古文：王曰： 君诵经之福，非唯自利，众因闻经，皆已获免，岂不善哉！
现代文：王说： 你诵读经书的福气，并不是只对你自己有利。那些人因为听到念经，都已获免了，难道不是好事吗？
English: And the king said, The blessing of thy reading is not good for thee only, but also for them which hear the words of this book; and now are they not all free?

古文：今放君还。 
现代文：今天放你回去。 
English: They're letting you go home today.

古文：谓吏曰： 可将此人历观诸狱。 
现代文：王对官吏说： 可领这个人去看看各处地狱。 
English: The king said to the officers, "Take this man away and show him the gates of hell.

古文：吏即引东行百余步，见一铁城，甚广大，城旁多小窗，见诸男女，从地飞入窗中，即不复出。
现代文：官吏就领山龙向东走了一百多步，看见一座铁城，很宽大。城旁边有许多小窗，看见许多男女从地上飞进窗中，就不再出来了。
English: The official led the dragon up the mountain and walked more than a hundred paces to the east, where he saw a large iron city with many small windows. He saw many men and women fly into the windows from the ground and never come out again.

古文：山龙怪问之，吏曰： 此是大地狱，中有分隔，罪计各随本业，赴狱受罪耳。 
现代文：山龙奇怪地问吏，官吏说： 这是大地狱。中间都分隔开，定的罪都根据各自不同的表现，到地狱受罪罢了。 
English: The mountain dragon asked the magistrate in a strange way. The magistrate said, "This is the great hell. They are all separated in the middle, and they are all condemned to hell according to their different performances.

古文：山龙闻之悲惧，称南无佛，请吏求出院。见有大镬，火猛汤沸，旁有二人坐卧。
现代文：山龙听说之后感到悲痛害怕，口诵 南无佛 ，请求走出去，又看见有一大锅，火猛汤沸。旁边坐卧着两个人，山龙问他们。
English: After hearing this, the mountain dragon felt sad and afraid, recited "There is no Buddha in the south" and asked to go out, and then saw a large pot with a raging fire. There were two people sitting next to it, and the mountain dragon asked them.

古文：山龙问之，二人曰： 我罪报入此镬汤，蒙贤者称南无佛，故狱中诸罪人，皆得一日休息疲睡耳。 
现代文：二人说： 我们的罪是入这汤镬之刑。承蒙你诵 南无佛 。所以狱中所有的罪人，都能得到一天的休息睡觉罢了。 
English: The two said, "Our crime is that we are sentenced to this stew. Thank you for reciting Namu Buthe, so all the sinners in prison can have a day of rest and sleep."

古文：山龙又称南无佛。吏谓山龙曰： 官府数移改，今王放君去，可白王请抄。
现代文：山龙又诵 南无佛 ，官吏对山龙说： 官府多次移改，今天放你回去，可请求大王给写 符 字。
English: Shanlong also recited Nanmufo, and the official said to Shanlong: The government has changed many times, today you can go back, you can ask the king to write the characters.

古文：若不尔，恐他官不知，更复追录。 
现代文：如果不这样，恐怕其他的官也不知道，再被追录。 
English: If not, I'm afraid other officials won't know about it, and they'll be tracked down.

古文：山龙即谒王请抄，王书一行字付吏，曰： 为取五道等署。 
现代文：山龙就拜见大王请求写字。大王写了一行字交给官吏说： 让他去五道等署。 
English: Shanlong went to see the king and asked him to write. The king wrote a line of characters and handed it to the official, saying: Let him go to the Five-District Administration Office.

古文：吏受命，将山龙更历两曹，各厅事侍卫亦如此，吏皆请其官署，各书一行讫，付山龙。
现代文：官吏领命。带山龙再看两个曹衙。各个厅事侍卫也都这样，官吏都请他们的官署，各写完一行给山龙。
English: The officials led the order. Take the dragon to see the two Cao Cao. The attendants of each office also did the same. The officials asked their offices to each write a line to the dragon.

古文：出门，有三人谓之曰： 王放君去，各希多少见遗。 
现代文：走出门去，看见有三个人对他说： 大王放你回去，我们都希望你多少能赠送点东西。 
English: When he went out the door, he saw three people who said to him, "Great King, let us let you go back. We all hope you can give us something."

古文：吏谓山龙曰： 彼三人者，是前收录使人。一人以赤绳缚君者，一人以棒击君头者，一人以袋吸君气者，今见君还，故来求乞。 
现代文：官吏对山龙说： 那三个人是先前收录你的使者，一个人用红绳绑你的；一个人是用棒子打你头的；一个人是用口袋装你的气的。现在看见你要回去，特意来请求你。 
English: The official said to the mountain dragon, "Those three men were the messengers who had previously arrested you, one tied you up with a red rope, one hit you on the head with a club, and one put your breath in a bag. Now, seeing that you want to go back, they have come specifically to ask for you."

古文：山龙惶惧谢曰： 愚不识公，请至家备物，但不知何处送之。 
现代文：山龙惊慌拜谢说： 我不认识你们，请让我到家之后给你们准备礼物，只是不知往何处送呢？ 
English: The mountain dragon panicked and said, "I don't know you. Please let me prepare a gift for you when I get home, but I don't know where to send it."

古文：三人曰： 于水边古树下烧之。 
现代文：三个人说： 送到水边古树下烧了它。 
English: Three people said, "Take it to the water's edge and burn it under an old tree."

古文：山龙诺。
现代文：山龙答应了。
English: The mountain dragon agreed.

古文：吏送归家，见亲眷哀哭，经营殡具，山龙至尸旁即苏，曰： 以纸钱束帛并酒食，自于水边烧之。 
现代文：官吏便送他回家，看见亲属恸哭。准备棺材，山龙到了尸体旁便苏醒了说： 用纸钱捆着布帛和酒饭，到水边烧了。 
English: The officials sent him home and saw his relatives crying. They prepared a coffin, and when the dragon came to the corpse, it woke up and said, "I bundled cloth and rice and wine with paper money and burned them at the water's edge."

古文：忽见三人来谢曰： 愧君不失信，重相赠遗。 
现代文：忽然看见三个人来谢道： 感谢你不失信，赠送这么多的礼物。 
English: Suddenly, he saw three people coming to thank him and said, "Thank you for not betraying your trust and giving me so many gifts.

古文：言毕不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：苏长
现代文：苏长
English: Su Chang

古文：苏长，武德中，为巴州刺史。
现代文：苏长，武德年间做了巴州刺史。
English: Su Chang, Wude years, did the Bazhou stabbing history.

古文：赴任，至嘉陵江，风浪覆舟，溺其家六十余人。
现代文：赴任，到嘉陵江，风浪暴起全船覆灭，淹死他家六十多口人。
English: After taking up the post, he went to the Jialing River, where a storm destroyed the entire ship, drowning more than 60 members of his family.

古文：唯一妾常读法华经，水入船中，妾头戴经函，誓与俱溺，随波泛滥。
现代文：唯独他的一妾常读法华经，水入到船中，妾头戴经函，决心和它一起淹死。
English: However, one of his concubines, who often read the Lotus Sutra, drowned in the boat. The concubine wore a sutra on her head and was determined to drown with it.

古文：顷之著岸。逐经函而出，开视其经，了无湿污。
现代文：随水漂流，不一会就靠了岸，随着经匣子上岸，打开匣子一看，经书一点没有湿。
English: Drifting with the water, he soon came ashore. As the scripture box came ashore, he opened the box and saw that the scripture book was not wet at all.

古文：独存其命。
现代文：那些人中，只有她保全了性命。
English: Of those, she was the only one to survive.

古文：尼法信
现代文：尼法信
English: Nifasin

古文：唐武德时，河东有练行尼法信，常读法华经。
现代文：唐朝武德年间，河东有个练行尼名法信，常常诵读法华经。
English: During the Wude period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a nun in Hedong who practiced the Dharma and often recited the Lotus Sutra.

古文：访工书者一人，数倍酬直，特为净室，令写此经。
现代文：她求访了一个擅长写字的人，加数倍的酬谢价值，并特意为他准备了一净室，让他写这部经书。
English: She paid a visit to a person who was good at writing, multiplied the value of the reward, and specially prepared a clean room for him to write this scripture.

古文：一起一浴，然香更衣，仍于写经之室，凿壁通，加一竹筒，令写经人每欲出息，径含竹筒，吐气壁外。
现代文：每天起来，沐浴更衣，点燃香烛就在写经的室内。又在墙上凿开一孔，加上一个竹筒，让写经的人每次想要呼吸，就对准竹筒，出气于墙外，一共写了七卷，八年才写完。
English: He got up every day, took a bath, changed clothes, and lit a scented candle in the room where he wrote the sutras. He also chiseled a hole in the wall and added a bamboo tube, so that every time the scribe wanted to breathe, he aimed at the bamboo tube and breathed outside the wall. He wrote a total of seven volumes, and it took him eight years to finish.

古文：写经七卷，八年乃毕，供养殷重，尽其恭敬。龙门僧法端尝集大众讲法华经，以此尼经本精定，遣入请之，尼固辞不许。
现代文：法信对他侍候周到殷勤，对他毕恭毕敬。龙门僧法端尝召集众僧讲法华经，也因此尼经本为典范，就去请借，尼坚持不答应。
English: The Dharma messenger waited on him thoughtfully and diligently, and treated him with great respect. Longmen monk Fa Duan tried to gather all the monks to recite the Lotus Sutra, and for this reason, he asked to borrow the text of the Lotus Sutra as a model, but she insisted that she would not agree.

古文：法端责让之，尼不得已，乃自送付。
现代文：法端责备她，尼法信不得已，才自己送去。
English: Ha Duan scolded her, and Nifaxin had no choice but to go himself.

古文：法端等开读，唯见黄纸，了无文字。
现代文：法端等人打开经书，只看黄纸，无一文字。
English: Haoduan and the others opened the scriptures, only saw the yellow paper, without a single word.

古文：更开余卷，悉皆如此。
现代文：再打开其它的经卷，全都一样。
English: Then he opened the other books, and they were all the same.

古文：法端等惭惧，即送还尼。
现代文：法端等感到惭愧害怕，立即送给尼法信。
English: Feeling ashamed and afraid, they immediately sent a letter to Nifa.

古文：尼悲泣受，以香水洗函，沐浴顶戴，绕佛行道，七日夜不暂休息。
现代文：她非常悲痛地接受了，并用香水洗匣子，沐浴更衣，围着经书行道，七天七夜不休息一下。
English: She accepted with great sorrow, and spent seven days and seven nights without a break, washing her box with perfume, bathing and changing her clothes, and walking around the book aisles.

古文：既而开视，文字如初。
现代文：等打开一看，文字和先前一样。
English: When I opened it, the text was the same as before.

古文：故知抄写深加洁净，比来无验，只为不勤敬也。
现代文：所以知道抄写经书深加洁净，法端拿去没有灵验，只是因为不勤奋又不恭敬的原因。
English: Therefore, I know that copying the scriptures is more profound and purer, and taking away the Dharma end is not effective, just because it is not diligent and not respectful.

古文：李氏
现代文：李氏
English: Mr. Li

古文：唐冀州封丘县，有老母姓李，年七十，无子孤老，唯有奴婢两人。
现代文：唐朝冀州的封丘县，有一个老母姓李，年纪七十，孤苦一人，只有两个奴婢。
English: In Fengqiu County, Jizhou of the Tang Dynasty, there was an old woman surnamed Li, seventy years old, lonely and alone, with only two slaves.

古文：家镇沽酒，添灰少量，分毫经纪。
现代文：家在镇上卖酒，酒中掺假，付酒量又少，分毫都不相让。
English: My family sells liquor in town, adulterated liquor, with a small amount of liquor, and they don't compromise at all.

古文：贞观年中，因病死，经两日，凶器已具，但以心上少温，及苏说云：初有两人，并著赤衣，门前召出，云有上符遣追，便即随去。
现代文：在贞观年中，因病而死。
English: In the middle of the chengguan year, he died of illness.

古文：行至一城，有若州郭，引到侧院，见一官人，衣冠大袖，凭案而坐，左右甚多，阶下大有著枷锁人，防守如生。
现代文：过了两天，埋葬她的器具已准备好了，只因她的心口稍微温热，未曾入敛。等到她苏醒过来后说：当初有两个人，都穿着红衣服，在门前叫她出去，说有上符派遣追拿，就跟着他们去了。到了一座城，很象州城。引她到侧院，看见一官人，穿着宽衣大袖，凭着几案而坐着，他手下人很多。阶下有很多带枷锁的人，防守得很严。
English: Two days later, the utensils for her burial were ready, but because her heart was a little warm, she did not stop. When she woke up, she said: At first, there were two people, both dressed in red, who called her out in front of the door and said that they had been sent to chase her, so she followed them. She arrived at a city, very much like a state capital. She was led to a side courtyard, where she saw a government official, dressed in a broad robe with large sleeves, sitting with several cases, and he had many subordinates. There were many people with shackles under his feet, and they were very tightly guarded.

古文：官府者遣问老母： 何因行滥沽酒，多取他物？
现代文：官府的人责问老母： 为什么行骗卖酒，夺取别人许多的财物？
English: The people from the government asked the old lady: "Why did you sell liquor by deception and take a lot of other people's property?

古文：拟作法华经，已向十年，何为不造？ 
现代文：打算写法华经，已十年了，为什么不写。 
English: It's been ten years since I planned to write about the Lotus Sutra. Why not write about it?

古文：老母具言： 酒使婢作，量亦是婢。
现代文：老母就说： 酒让奴婢作，量也是让奴婢量。
English: The old mother said: "Let the slaves make the wine, and let the slaves measure the wine."

古文：经已付钱一千文与隐师。 
现代文：写经的钱已付了一千给了隐师了。 
English: The money for writing the sutra has been paid one thousand to the hermit.

古文：即遣追婢，须臾婢至，即笞四十放还。
现代文：就派人追拿奴婢，不一会奴婢带到，就打四十杖放回。
English: And they sent and fetched the bondmen and the bondwomen, and presently the bondmen and the bondwomen brought them, and they beat them with forty stripes and sent them away.

古文：遣问隐师，报云是实。
现代文：又派人问隐师。回答说： 都是实情。 
English: They also sent someone to ask the hermit. He replied, "It's all true.

古文：乃语老母云： 放汝七日去，经了当来，得生善处，遂尔得活。 
现代文：于是对老母说： 放你七日先回去，经写完了再来，因为你有善念，才能得活 。
English: So she said to her mother, "Let you go back seven days first, and when you have finished writing, come back, because you have good thoughts, and only then can you live."

古文：勘校老母初死之时，婢得恶逆，久而始苏，腹皆青肿，盖是四十杖迹。
现代文：验证一下老母刚死的时候，奴婢得了重病，很久才苏醒过来，腹部都青肿，大概是打了四十棒的痕迹。
English: To verify, when my mother had just died, my husband and I fell seriously ill and took a long time to wake up. My abdomen was all bruised and swollen, with about forty bruises on it.

古文：隐禅师者，本是客僧，配寺顿丘，年向六七十，自从出家，即头陀乞食，常一食斋，未尝暂辍，远近大德，并皆敬慕。
现代文：那个隐禅师，本来是客僧，住在顿丘寺，年纪近六七十岁，自从出家后，就定斋念佛，行脚乞食，不曾停止，是远近闻名的有功德的人，大家都很敬重他。
English: That hidden Zen master, originally a guest monk, lived in Dongqiu Temple. He was nearly sixty or seventy years old. Since he became a monk, he had never stopped praying to Buddha, walking and begging. He was a well-known person with merits far and wide. Everyone respected him.

古文：老母病死之夜，隐师梦有赤衣人来问，梦中答云： 造经是实。 
现代文：老母病死的那个夜晚，隐师梦见有个穿红衣的人来问，梦中他答道： 造经书是事实。 
English: On the night of her mother's death, the hermit dreamt of a man in a red robe who asked her a question. In the dream, he answered, "The sutras are true.

古文：老母乃屈乡闾眷属及隐禅师行道，顾诸经生，众手写经了，正当七日。还见往者二人来前，母曰： 使人已来，并皆好住。 
现代文：老母就召集乡间亲属以及隐禅师行道，看着各经生写经书。正好是七天，又看见来过的两个人，老母便说： 使者来了，你等好好活着。 
English: The old mother gathered her relatives from the countryside as well as the Hidden Zen Master and watched the scribes write. Exactly seven days later, she saw two more people who had come, and the old mother said: The messenger has come, wait and live well.

古文：声绝即死。
现代文：声断而死。
English: He died without uttering a word.

古文：隐师见存，道俗钦敬。
现代文：隐师等还活着，道俗都很钦敬他。
English: The Hidden Teacher and others are still alive, and people of all sects and denominations revere him.

古文：彻师
现代文：彻师
English: Chorus:

古文：唐绛州南孤山隐泉寺沙门彻禅师，曾行，遇癞人在穴中。
现代文：唐朝绛州南孤山隐泉寺和尚彻禅师，曾出行，遇见一个生癞的人在洞穴中。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Shanzhou Nanluoshan Hidden Spring Temple monk Shangche, a Zen master, was traveling and met a man with a rusty shovel in a cave.

古文：彻师引出山中，为凿穴给食，念诵法华经。
现代文：彻师把他领出山中，也凿了个山洞给他送吃的，常常念法华经。
English: Teacher Che led him out of the mountains, and also dug a cave to send him food. He often recited the Lotus Sutra.

古文：素不识字，加又顽鄙，句句授之，终不辞倦。
现代文：癞人一向不识字，又加上性格固执孤僻，彻禅便一句一句地教他，始终坚持不懈。
English: He has always been illiterate, and his character is stubborn and withdrawn. He teaches him every word of Zen, and always perseveres.

古文：诵经向半，梦有教者，后稍聪悟，已得五六卷。
现代文：诵读经书将近一半时，便梦有教他的人。以后渐渐地聪明起来，已学了五六卷了。
English: When he was about halfway through reading the scriptures, he had a dream about someone who was teaching him. After that, he gradually became wiser and had already studied five or six volumes.

古文：疮渐觉愈，一部了，须眉平复，容色如故。
现代文：疮也渐渐感到好了，一部经书读完了，须眉都恢复原来的样子，面容脸色都和原来一样。
English: The sores also gradually felt better, after reading a part of the scripture, the eyebrows all returned to their original appearance, and the complexion of the face was the same as before.

古文：经云： 病之良药。 
现代文：经中说： 经是有病的良药。 
English: The sutra says, "The sutra is good medicine for illness."

古文：斯言验矣。
现代文：这话真灵验啊。
English: That really works.

古文：悟真寺僧
现代文：悟真寺僧
English: Monks of Gozhin-ji Temple

古文：唐贞观中，有王顺山悟真寺僧，夜如蓝溪。忽闻有诵法华经者。其声纤远。
现代文：唐朝贞观年中，有个王顺山悟真寺和尚。有一天夜里到蓝溪去，忽然听到有诵读法华经的，那个声音很细很远。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Wang Shunshan of Wujin Temple. One night, he went to the Blue River and suddenly heard someone reciting the Lotus Sutra. The voice was very faint and far away.

古文：时星月回临，四望数十里，阒然无睹。
现代文：当时的星月已没了，四下里望，寂静而看不清。
English: The stars and moon of that time have disappeared. Looking around, it's quiet and I can't see clearly.

古文：其僧惨然有惧，及至寺，且白其事于群僧。
现代文：那个和尚凄惨而恐惧，等到了寺内，就把这些事告诉了和尚们。
English: Miserable and terrified, the monk waited until he was inside the temple and told the monks.

古文：明夕，俱于蓝溪听之，乃闻经声自地中发，于是以标表其所。
现代文：第二天晚上，都在蓝溪听诵经声，于是就听到读经的声音从地中发出。
English: The next evening, they were all listening to the sutras at the Blue Creek, when they heard the sound of chanting coming from the ground.

古文：明日穷表下，得一颅骨，在积壤中，其骨槁然，独唇吻与舌，鲜而且润，遂持归寺，乃以石函置于千佛殿西轩下。
现代文：于是就在那个地方做上标记，第二天一早挖开地表层，下面有一颅骨，埋在土中，他的骨头已枯干了，唯独唇与舌鲜红而滋润，于是就拿回寺中，用石匣子装上放在千佛殿的西殿下。
English: So he marked the spot, and early the next morning he dug up the surface layer, and underneath there was a skull, buried in the earth. His bones were dry, but his lips and tongue were red and moist. So he took it back to the temple and placed it in a stone box in the west hall of the Thousand Buddha Hall.

古文：自是每夕，常有诵法华经声在石函中，长安士女，观者千数。
现代文：从此每天晚上，总有诵读法华经的声音从石匣中发出。长安的男女，来看的人以千数。
English: Since then, every evening, the sound of the recitation of the Lotus Sutra has been emitted from the stone box. Thousands of men and women in Chang'an come to see it.

古文：后新罗僧客于寺，仅岁余，一日寺僧尽下山，独新罗僧在，遂窃石函而去。
现代文：后来新罗和尚客居于寺，过了一年多，一天寺里的和尚都下山去了，只有新罗和尚在寺，就偷走了石匣子。
English: Later, a Shilla monk stayed at the temple as a guest. After more than a year, all the monks in the temple went down the mountain one day. Only the Shilla monk stayed at the temple and stole the stone box.

古文：寺僧迹其往，已归海东矣，时开元末年也。
现代文：寺里和尚们追查他的行踪，他已回海东去了。当时是开元末年。
English: Monks in the temple traced his whereabouts, and he had already returned to Haidong. It was the end of the first year of the year.

古文：释道俗
现代文：释道俗
English: Interpretation of Taoist customs

古文：唐释道俗者，不测所由，止醴泉山原，诵法华经为业，乃至遍数千。
现代文：唐朝和尚道俗，不知道他是从哪里来的，住在醴泉山原，以诵读法华经为业，竟达到几千遍。
English: A Taoist monk in the Tang Dynasty, I don't know where he came from, lived in Lianquan Mountain, and made it his business to recite the Lotus Sutra thousands of times.

古文：贞观中，因疾将终，告友人慧廓禅师曰： 此虽诵经，意望有验。
现代文：贞观年中，因病将死，告诉他的友人慧廓禅师说： 虽然如此诵读经书，也只希望能有效验。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan year, when he was about to die of illness, he told his friend Hui Kuo, a Zen master, "Even though I recite the sutras like this, I only hope that they will be effective.

古文：吾死之后，当以十年为限，试发视之。若舌朽灭，知诵无功，若舌如初，为起一塔，庶生俗信。 
现代文：我死之后，应当以十年为限，挖开坟墓看，如果舌已朽烂，那是我诵经无功；如果舌和先前一样，为我建立一塔，这也是我一生的信念。 
English: After my death, it should be limited to ten years to dig up the grave and see. If the tongue has decayed, it is useless for me to recite the sutras; if the tongue, as before, builds a tower for me, this is also my life-long belief.

古文：言讫而终。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：至十一年，依言发之，身肉都尽，唯舌不朽。
现代文：到了第十一年，按他的话挖开他的坟看，身体的肌肉都已烂尽，只有舌头不烂。
English: In the eleventh year, according to his words, they dug up his grave and found that all the muscles of his body had rotted away, except for his tongue.

古文：一县士女，咸共赞叹，乃函盛舌本，起塔于甘谷岸上。
现代文：一县的男女，都来观看赞叹。于是就用匣子把舌头装上，在甘谷岸上筑起一塔。
English: Men and women from all over the prefecture came to watch and marvel, so they put the tongue in a box and built a tower on the bank of the Gangu River.

古文：史阿誓
现代文：史阿誓
English: Shi Aze

古文：唐郊南福水之阴有史村，史阿誓者，诵法华经，职充令史，往还步涉，未尝乘骑，以依经云， 哀愍一切 故也。
现代文：唐朝郊南福水的北面有个史村，有个叫史阿誓的，诵读法华经，做了令史，来回走步，从不乘车骑马。都按经书说的那样，是致哀怜悯一切的缘故。
English: On the northern side of Nanfushui, a suburb of Tang Dynasty, there was a historical village. There was a man named Shi Awei, who recited the Lotus Sutra, made history, walked back and forth, and never rode a horse. According to the scriptures, it was all for the sake of pity and compassion.

古文：病终本邑，香气充村，道俗惊怪，而莫测其缘。
现代文：病死在本地。香气充满了全村，道俗之人都很惊讶，而不知道什么原因。
English: He died of illness in the local area. The aroma filled the whole village, and the people of Taoism were surprised, but they didn't know why.

古文：终后十年，其妻死，乃发冢合葬。
现代文：死后十年，他的妻子死了。就挖开坟墓合葬。
English: Ten years after his death, his wife died. He dug up the grave and buried her.

古文：见其舌根，如本生肉，斯诚转诵法华经之灵验也。
现代文：看见他的舌头象生前那样。这的确是诵读法华经的灵验。
English: Seeing his tongue as it was when he was alive. This is indeed the effect of reciting the Lotus Sutra.

古文：石壁寺僧
现代文：石壁寺僧
English: Monks of Stone Wall Temple

古文：唐并州石壁寺，有一老僧，禅诵为业，精进练行。
现代文：唐朝并州石壁寺。有一个老和尚，以禅诵为职业，精心修炼。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was an old monk who made meditation his profession.

古文：贞观末，有鹆巢其房楹上，哺养二雏。
现代文：贞观年中，有一个八哥在他的房檐下筑巢，哺养了两只雏。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan year, a mynah built a nest under his eaves and nursed two chicks.

古文：法师每有余食，恒就巢哺之。
现代文：法师每当有剩余的饭，总是送到巢穴里喂它们，八哥的雏鸟虽然渐渐地长大，但羽翼还没长成。
English: Whenever the sorcerer has leftover rice, he always sends it to the nest to feed them. Although the starling's chicks gradually grow up, their wings have not yet grown.

古文：鹆雏后虽渐长，羽翼未成，因学飞，俱坠地死，僧收瘗之。
现代文：因而学飞时，都落地而死。
English: As a result, when they learn to fly, they all fall to the ground and die.

古文：经旬后，僧夜梦二小儿曰：某等为先有小罪，遂受鹆身，比来日闻法师诵法华，既闻妙法，得受人身，儿等今于此寺侧十余里某村姓名家，托生为男，十月之外，当即诞育。
现代文：和尚收埋了它们。十天后，和尚梦见两个小孩说： 我等因为先前犯了小罪，就受到变鹆的惩罚，等来到这里听到法师诵读法华经，已听到了妙法，所以又能够变为人身，我们现在已投生在寺侧十几里某村某姓家，托生为男儿，十个月之后，就应当出生。 
English: The monk buried them. Ten days later, the monk dreamed of two children and said: I waited because I had previously committed a petty crime, I was punished by being turned into a cocoon, so I came here to hear the mage recite the Lotus Sutra, I have heard the miraculous method, so I can turn into a human body again, we have now been born in a village with a family name more than ten miles away from the temple, I was born a boy, ten months later, I should be born.

古文：僧乃依期往视之，见此家妇，果同时诞育二子。
现代文：和尚便按期去看，这家的妇女，果然同时生育两个男孩。
English: The monk duly went to see, and sure enough, the woman of the family gave birth to two boys at the same time.

古文：因为作满月，僧呼为鹆儿，并应之曰： 唯 。
现代文：于是为他们作满月。和尚就叫它们为鹆儿，他们并答应： 是 。
English: So he made a full moon for them, and the monk called them the children of the moon, and they said yes.

