古文：平阳侯曹参者，沛人也。
现代文：平阳侯曹参，沛县人。
English: Pingyang Hou Cao San, from Peixian County.

古文：秦时为沛狱掾，而萧何为主吏，居县为豪吏矣。
现代文：秦朝时曹参担任沛县的狱掾，萧何是主吏，他们在县里已是有名望的官吏了。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, Cao San served as the warden of Pei County, and Xiao He was the chief warden. They were already well-known officials in the county.

古文：高祖为沛公而初起也，参以中涓从。
现代文：汉高祖做沛公刚刚开始起事的时候，曹参以中涓的身份跟随高祖。
English: When Han Gao Zu Do Pei Gong was just beginning to rise up, Cao San followed Gao Zu as a middle-ranking official.

古文：将击胡陵、方与，攻秦监公军，大破之。
现代文：曹参率军进击胡陵、方与，攻打秦朝郡监的军队，大破敌兵。
English: Cao Zhan led the army to attack Huling, Fangye, and the army of the Qin Dynasty County Supervisor, and defeated the enemy soldiers.

古文：东下薛，击泗水守军薛郭西。
现代文：他向东拿下薛县，在薛县外城的西面攻打泗水郡郡守的军队。
English: He took Xue County to the east, and attacked the army of the county governor of Lishui County on the west side of the outer city of Xue County.

古文：复攻胡陵，取之。
现代文：然后又攻打胡陵，并成功夺取了它。
English: Then they attacked Huling again and successfully captured it.

古文：徙守方与。
现代文：曹参率军转移去守卫方与。
English: Cao Shan led the army to move to the guard side.

古文：方与反为魏，击之。
现代文：方与已经反叛，投降了魏王，曹参就进击方与。
English: Fang You had already rebelled and surrendered to Wei Wang, so Cao San attacked Fang You.

古文：丰反为魏，攻之。
现代文：丰邑也反叛投降魏王，曹参又去攻打丰邑。
English: Fengyi also rebelled and surrendered to the Wei king, and Cao San went to attack Fengyi.

古文：赐爵七大夫。
现代文：沛公赐给曹参七大夫的爵位。
English: Pei Gong gave Cao San the title of the seventh doctor.

古文：击秦司马枿军砀东，破之，取砀、狐父、祁善置。
现代文：曹参在砀县东面进击秦朝司马ｙí的军队，并打败了他，夺取了砀县、狐父和祁县的善置驿。
English: Cao San attacked the army of Qin Dynasty Secretary Ma Junyi in the east of Jixian County and defeated him, capturing Jixian County, Foxtel County and Zhanji County of Jixian County.

古文：又攻下邑以西，至虞，击章邯车骑。
现代文：曹参又攻打下邑以西的地方，一直到虞县，进击章邯的军队。
English: Cao San also attacked the area west of the next town, all the way to Yu County, and attacked Zhang Ye's army.

古文：攻爰戚及亢父，先登。
现代文：攻打爰戚和亢父时，曹参最先登上城楼。
English: When attacking his uncle and uncle's father, Cao San was the first to climb the tower.

古文：迁为五大夫。
现代文：曹参官职升为五大夫。
English: Cao Sangguan was promoted to be the fifth husband.

古文：北救阿，击章邯军，陷陈，追至濮阳。
现代文：他向北救援东阿，进击章邯的军队，攻陷陈县，追击到濮阳。
English: He went north to rescue Dong'a, attacked Zhang Ye's army, captured Chen County, and pursued it to Fenyang.

古文：攻定陶，取临济。
现代文：他攻打定陶，夺取临济。
English: He attacked Dingtao and captured Linji.

古文：南救雍丘。击李由军，破之，杀李由，虏秦候一人。
现代文：他往南救援雍丘，进击李由的军队，打败了它，杀掉李由，俘虏秦朝军候一人。
English: He went south to rescue Yongqiu, attacked Li Yu's army, defeated it, killed Li Yu, and captured a member of the Qin Dynasty army.

古文：秦将章邯破杀项梁也，沛公与项羽引而东。
现代文：这时秦将章邯打败项梁的军队，杀死项梁，沛公与项羽率军东归。
English: At this time, Qin general Zhang Ye defeated Xiang Liang's army, killed Xiang Liang, and Pei Gong and Xiang Yu led the army back east.

古文：楚怀王以沛公为砀郡长，将砀郡兵。
现代文：楚怀王任命沛公为砀郡长，统领砀郡的军队。
English: King Chuhuai appointed Pei Gong as the governor of Jixian County and led the army of Jixian County.

古文：於是乃封参为执帛，号曰建成君。
现代文：沛公封曹参为执帛，号称建成君。
English: Pei publicly appointed Cao San as his successor, who was known as Jiancheng Jun.

古文：迁为戚公，属砀郡。
现代文：后曹参升为爰戚县县令，隶属砀郡。
English: Later, Cao San was promoted to be the county magistrate of Qiji County, which was under Qiji County.

古文：其後从攻东郡尉军，破之成武南。
现代文：从那儿以后，曹参跟随沛公攻打东郡郡尉的军队，在成武南面打败了敌军。
English: From there, Cao San followed Pei Gong to attack the army of Dong County Lieutenant and defeated the enemy army in the south of Chengwu.

古文：击王离军成阳南，复攻之杠里，大破之。
现代文：在成阳南面进击王离的军队，在杠里又跟王离军队交锋，把它打得大败。
English: In the south of Chengyang, he attacked Wang Li's army, and in Liuli, he fought with Wang Li's army and defeated it.

古文：追北，西至开封，击赵贲军，破之，围赵贲开封城中。
现代文：追击败逃的敌军，向西到了开封，进击赵贲的军队，打败了它，把赵贲围在开封城中。
English: He chased and defeated the fleeing enemy army, went west to Kaifeng, attacked Zhao Yu's army, defeated it, and surrounded Zhao Yu in Kaifeng.

古文：西击将杨熊军於曲遇，破之，虏秦司马及御史各一人。
现代文：向西在曲遇进击秦朝将领杨熊的军队，打败了它，俘虏了秦朝的司马及御史各一人。
English: Xiangxi marched into the army of Qin Dynasty general Yang Xiong, defeated it, and captured one Sima and one Mishi of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：迁为执珪。从攻阳武，下轘辕、缑氏，绝河津，还击赵贲军尸北，破之。
现代文：曹参升为执珪跟随沛公攻打阳武，拿下辕、缑氏，封锁黄河渡口，回军进击赵贲的军队，在尸乡的北面打败了它。
English: Cao San Sheng followed Pei Gong to attack Yangwu for the purpose of holding Zhai, won the Zhai and Zhai clans, blocked the Yellow River ferry, returned to the army to attack Zhao Zhai's army, and defeated it on the north side of the dead village.

古文：从南攻犨，与南阳守齮战阳城郭东，陷陈，取宛，虏齮，尽定南阳郡。
现代文：跟随沛公向南攻打犨邑，在阳城外城以东与南阳郡郡守吕交战，攻破了吕军队的阵列，夺取了宛县，俘虏了吕，完全平定了南阳郡。
English: He followed Peigong to the south to attack Fenyi, and fought with the county guard of Nanyang County, Lvun, in the east of the outer city of Yangcheng. He broke through the array of Lvun's army, captured Wan County, captured Lvun, and completely leveled Nanyang County.

古文：从西攻武关、峣关，取之。
现代文：跟随沛公向西攻打武关、峣关，夺取了这两个关口。
English: He followed Pei Gong to the west to attack Wuguan and Shaoguan, and captured these two gates.

古文：前攻秦军蓝田南，又夜击其北，秦军大破，遂至咸阳，灭秦。
现代文：先在蓝田的南面攻打秦朝的军队，又在夜间攻打蓝田的北面，大败秦军，随即到达咸阳，灭亡了秦朝。
English: He first attacked the army of the Qin Dynasty in the south of Lantian, and then attacked the north side of Lantian at night, defeated the Qin Army, and then reached Xianyang, and destroyed the Qin Dynasty.

古文：项羽至，以沛公为汉王。
现代文：项羽来到关中后，封刘邦为汉王。
English: After Cao Yu arrived in Xianyang, he made Pei Gong the king of Han.

古文：汉王封参为建成侯。
现代文：汉王封曹参为建成侯。
English: The Han King appointed Cao San as a Jiancheng Hou.

古文：从至汉中，迁为将军。
现代文：曹参跟随汉王到了关中，升为将军。
English: Cao San followed Han Wang to Guanzhong and was promoted to general.

古文：从还定三秦，初攻下辩、故道、雍、斄。
现代文：又跟随汉王回军平定三秦，起初攻打下辩、故道、雍县、县。
English: He also followed the Han Emperor Hui's army to subdue Sanqin. At first, he attacked the following counties: Hefei, Guodu, Yongxian and Qianxian.

古文：击章平军於好畤南，破之，围好畤，取壤乡。
现代文：在好畤的南面进击章平的军队，打败了章平，包围好畤，夺取了壤乡。
English: He attacked Zhang Ping's army in the south of Houyi, defeated Zhang Ping, encircled Houyi, and captured Heungxiang.

古文：击三秦军壤东及高栎，破之。
现代文：在壤乡东面和高栎一带进击三秦的军队，将他们全部打败。
English: The troops of the Three Qin Dynasty attacked the troops of the Three Qin Dynasty in the eastern part of Liao Township and the Gaozhuang area, and defeated all of them.

古文：复围章平，章平出好畤走。
现代文：又包围了章平，章平从好畤突围逃跑。
English: They encircled Zhang Ping again, and Zhang Ping escaped from the encirclement.

古文：因击赵贲、内史保军，破之。
现代文：于是进击赵贲和内史保的军队，打败了它。
English: So Zhao Zhe and Neishi Bao's army attacked and defeated it.

古文：东取咸阳，更名曰新城。
现代文：向东夺取了咸阳，把咸阳改名叫新城。
English: He captured Xianyang to the east and renamed it Xincheng.

古文：参将兵守景陵二十日，三秦使章平等攻参，参出击，大破之。
现代文：曹参率兵守卫景陵二十天，三秦派章平等人进攻曹参，曹参出兵迎击，大败敌军。
English: Cao San led the soldiers to guard the Jingling Tomb for twenty days. The Three Qin Dynasties sent Zhang Peiwen to attack Cao San. Cao San sent troops to counterattack and defeated the enemy army.

古文：赐食邑於宁秦。
现代文：汉王把宁秦赐给曹参作食邑。
English: The Han king gave Ning Qin to Cao San to make food.

古文：参以将军引兵围章邯於废丘。以中尉从汉王出临晋关。
现代文：曹参以将军的身份领兵在废丘包围了章邯，以中尉的身份跟随汉王出临晋关。
English: As a general, Cao San led an army to encircle Zhang Ye in the waste hill, and as a lieutenant, he followed Han Wang out of Jin Pass.

古文：至河内，下脩武，渡围津，东击龙且、项他定陶，破之。
现代文：到了河内，拿下脩武，从围津渡过黄河，向东在定陶进击龙且、项他的军队，打败了它。
English: When he arrived in Hanoi, he took Xiangwu, crossed the Yellow River from Waijin, and went east to Dingtao to attack the dragon and defeat his army.

古文：东取砀、萧、彭城。
现代文：向东攻取了砀县、萧县、彭城。
English: To the east, they captured Wuchang County, Xiao County, and Pengcheng.

古文：击项籍军，汉军大败走。
现代文：进击项籍的军队，汉军大败逃跑。
English: Attacking the troops of Shan nationality, the Chinese army was defeated and fled.

古文：参以中尉围取雍丘。
现代文：曹参以中尉的身份包围夺取了雍丘。
English: Cao San, as a lieutenant, besieged and captured Yongqiu.

古文：王武反於黄，程处反於燕，往击，尽破之。
现代文：汉将王武在外黄反叛，程处在燕县反叛，曹参率军前往进击，都打败了他们。
English: Han general Wang Wu rebelled in Waigaoqiao, Cheng Zuo rebelled in Yan County, and Cao San led the army to attack, all of which defeated them.

古文：柱天侯反於衍氏，又进破取衍氏。
现代文：柱天侯在衍氏反叛，曹参又击败叛军，夺回了衍氏。
English: Zhu Tianhou rebelled against the Yan clan, and Cao San defeated the rebels and recaptured the Yan clan.

古文：击羽婴於昆阳，追至叶。
现代文：在昆阳攻打羽婴，追击到叶邑。
English: They attacked Feather Infant in Kunyang and chased it to Ye'eup.

古文：还攻武彊，因至荥阳。
现代文：回军攻打武强，随即又打到荥阳。
English: The Hui army attacked Wuqiang, and then went on to Poyang.

古文：参自汉中为将军中尉，从击诸侯，及项羽败，还至荥阳，凡二岁。
现代文：曹参从汉中做将军、中尉，跟随汉王扫荡诸侯，到项羽战败，回到荥阳，前后总共两年时间。
English: Cao San served as a general and lieutenant in the Han Dynasty, followed the Han King to sweep the provinces, was defeated in Xiang Yu, and returned to Shenyang, a total of two years.

古文：高祖年，拜为假左丞相，入屯兵关中。
现代文：高祖二年，任命曹参代理左丞相，领兵进驻关中。
English: In the second year of Gaozu's reign, Cao San was appointed acting left minister and led the troops into Guanzhong.

古文：月馀，魏王豹反，以假左丞相别与韩信东攻魏将军孙军东张，大破之。
现代文：过了一个多月，魏王豹反叛，曹参以代理左丞相的身份分别与韩信率军向东在东张攻打魏将军孙遫的军队，大败孙遫的军队。
English: After more than a month, the Wei Wangbao rebelled, and Cao San, in his capacity as acting left minister, and Han Xin led the army to the east in Dongzhang to attack the army of Wei general Sun Yat-sen, and defeated Sun Yat-sen's army.

古文：因攻安邑，得魏将王襄。
现代文：曹参乘势进攻安邑，活捉魏将王襄。
English: Cao San took advantage of the situation to attack Anyi and captured the Wei general Wang Xiang alive.

古文：击魏王於曲阳，追至武垣，生得魏王豹。
现代文：在曲阳进击魏王，追到武垣，活捉了魏王豹。
English: He attacked Wei Wang in Quyang, chased him to Wuyaki, and captured Wei Wang Leopard alive.

古文：取平阳，得魏王母妻子，尽定魏地，凡五十二城。
现代文：夺取了平阳，活捉魏王的母亲、妻子、儿女，将魏地全部占取，共得五十二座城邑。
English: He captured Pingyang, captured the Wei king's mother, wife, and children alive, occupied all of Wei, and gained a total of fifty-two cities.

古文：赐食邑平阳。
现代文：汉王把平阳赐给曹参作食邑。
English: The Han king gave Pingyang to Cao San to make oysters.

古文：因从韩信击赵相国夏说军於邬东，大破之，斩夏说。
现代文：曹参后来又跟随韩信在邬县东面进击赵国相国夏说的军队，大败夏说的军队，斩杀了夏说。
English: Cao San later followed Han Xin in the east of Handan County to attack the army of Zhao Guoxiang Guoxia, defeated the army of Xia, and killed Xia.

古文：韩信与故常山王张耳引兵下井陉，击成安君，而令参还围赵别将戚将军於邬城中。
现代文：韩信与原常山王张耳率兵至井陉，攻打成安君陈馀，同时命令曹参回军把赵国的别将戚将军围困在邬县城中。
English: Han Xin and Zhang Er, the former King of Changshan, led their troops to Jingshan and attacked Cheng Anjun Chen Yu. At the same time, they ordered Cao Sang Hui's army to besiege Zhao Guo's General Bei Shouqi in the city of Jixian.

古文：戚将军出走，追斩之。
现代文：戚将军突围逃跑，曹参追击并斩杀了他。
English: General Qi broke out of the encirclement and ran away. Cao San chased and killed him.

古文：乃引兵诣敖仓汉王之所。
现代文：于是曹参率兵到敖仓汉王的营地。
English: So Cao San led his soldiers to the camp of Hanzhong Han Wang.

古文：韩信已破赵，为相国，东击齐。
现代文：这时韩信已经打垮了赵国，做了相国，向东攻打齐国。
English: At this time, Han Xin had already defeated Zhao, made it a sister state, and attacked Qi to the east.

古文：参以右丞相属韩信，攻破齐历下军，遂取临菑。
现代文：曹参以左丞相的身份隶属韩信，击溃了齐国历下的军队，于是夺取了临菑。
English: Cao San, who was subordinate to Han Xin as the Left Minister, defeated the armies of Qi, and then captured Linyi.

古文：还定济北郡，攻著、漯阴、平原、鬲、卢。
现代文：回军平定济北郡，攻打著县、漯阴、平原、鬲县、卢县。
English: The returning troops pacified Jibei County, and attacked the counties, Suyin, Pingyuan, Min County, and Lu County.

古文：已而从韩信击龙且军於上假密，大破之，斩龙且，虏其将军周兰。
现代文：不久跟随韩信在上假密进击龙且的军队，大败敌军，斩了龙且，俘虏了他的部将周兰。
English: Soon after, he followed Han Xin to attack Long Qi's army in Shangfu, defeated the enemy army, beheaded Long Qi, and captured his subordinate Zhou Lan.

古文：定齐，凡得七十馀县。
现代文：平定了齐国，总共得到七十余县。
English: He conquered Qi Province and gained a total of more than 70 counties.

古文：得故齐王田广相田光，其守相许章，及故齐胶东将军田既。
现代文：捕获了原齐王田广的丞相田光、代替丞相留守的许章和原齐国的胶东将军田既。
English: The former Qi king Tian Guang was captured by the chancellor Tian Guang, and Xu Zhang, who stayed behind to replace the chancellor, and the former Qi general Jiaodong were both captured.

古文：韩信为齐王，引兵诣陈，与汉王共破项羽，而参留平齐未服者。
现代文：韩信做了齐王，领兵到了陈县，与汉王会合，共同打败了项羽，而曹参留下来平定齐国尚未降服的地方。
English: Han Xin became the king of Qi, led the army to Chen County, met with the king of Han, and defeated Xiang Yu together, while Cao Zhan stayed behind to pacify the places where Qi had not yet surrendered.

古文：项籍已死，天下定，汉王为皇帝，韩信徙为楚王，齐为郡。
现代文：项羽已死，天下平定，汉王做了皇帝，韩信被改封为楚王，齐国划为郡。
English: Xiang Yu was dead, the world was pacified, Han Wang became emperor, Han Xin was changed to King of Chu, and Qi was divided into counties.

古文：参归汉相印。
现代文：曹参归还了汉丞相印。
English: Cao San returned the imperial seal.

古文：高帝以长子肥为齐王，而以参为齐相国。
现代文：高帝把长子刘肥封为齐王，任命曹参为齐国相国。
English: Emperor Gao designated his eldest son Liu Huifeng as the King of Qi and appointed Cao San as the Minister of Qi.

古文：以高祖六年赐爵列侯，与诸侯剖符，世世勿绝。
现代文：高祖六年时，分封列侯的爵位，朝廷与诸侯剖符为凭，使被分封者的爵位世代相传而不断绝。
English: When Gaozu was six years old, he was awarded the title of feudal lord, and the imperial court and the feudal lords used it as evidence to ensure that the titles of those who were awarded the title would be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：食邑平阳万六百三十户，号曰平阳侯，除前所食邑。
现代文：高祖把平阳的一万零六百三十户封给曹参作为食邑，封号叫平阳侯，收回以前以前分封给曹参的食邑。
English: Gao Zu assigned 10,630 households in Pingyang to Cao Zhan as food villages. The name of the assignment was Pingyang Hou, and the food villages previously assigned to Cao Zhan were taken back.

古文：以齐相国击陈豨将张春军，破之。
现代文：曹参以齐国相国的身份领兵攻打陈豨的部将张春的军队，打败了敌军。
English: Cao San led the troops to attack the army of Chen Qi's subordinate Zhang Chun, defeating the enemy army.

古文：黥布反，参以齐相国从悼惠王将兵车骑十二万人，与高祖会击黥布军，大破之。
现代文：黥布反叛，曹参以齐国相国的身份跟从齐悼惠王刘肥率领十二万人马，与高祖合攻黥布的军队，大败敌军。
English: During the Zibo Rebellion, Cao San, as the leader of the Qi country, followed the Qi mourning Hui King Liu Fei and led 120,000 people to attack the Zibo army together with Gao Zu, defeating the enemy army.

古文：南至蕲，还定竹邑、相、萧、留。
现代文：向南打到蕲县，又回军平定了竹邑、相县、萧县、留县。
English: They marched south to Lixian County, and then returned to pacify Zhuyi, Xiang County, Xiao County, and Liusian County.

古文：参功：凡下二国，县一百二十二；得王二人，相三人，将军六人，大莫敖、郡守、司马、候、御史各一人。
现代文：曹参的功绩：一共打下了两个诸侯国，一百二十二个县；俘获诸侯王二人，诸侯国丞相三人，将军六人，郡守、司马、军候、御史各一人。
English: Cao San's achievements: a total of two vassal states, one hundred and twenty-two counties were defeated; two vassal kings, three vassal ministers, six generals, one county governor, one secretary, one military officer and one historian were captured.

古文：孝惠帝元年，除诸侯相国法，更以参为齐丞相。
现代文：孝惠帝元年，废除了诸侯国设相国的法令，改命曹参为齐国丞相。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, he abolished the law that states should set up a sister state, and changed Cao San's name to the prime minister of Qi.

古文：参之相齐，齐七十城。
现代文：曹参做齐国丞相时，齐国有七十座城邑。
English: When Cao San was the prime minister of Qi, there were 70 cities and towns in Qi.

古文：天下初定，悼惠王富於春秋，参尽召长老诸生，问所以安集百姓，如齐故诸儒以百数，言人人殊，参未知所定。
现代文：当时天下刚刚平定，悼惠王年纪很轻，曹参把老年人、读书人都召来，询问安抚百姓的办法。但齐国原有的那些读书人数以百计，众说纷纭，曹参不知如何决定。
English: At that time, the country had just been pacified, and Miao Hui Wang was very young. Cao San called the elderly and readers to inquire about ways to appease the people. However, there were hundreds of readers in Qi Province, and opinions were divergent. Cao San did not know how to decide.

古文：闻胶西有盖公，善治黄老言，使人厚币请之。
现代文：他听说胶西有位盖公，精研黄老学说，就派人带着厚礼把他请来。
English: He heard that there was a Gaigong in Jiaoxi who studied the teachings of Huang Lao, so he sent someone to invite him with a gift.

古文：既见盖公，盖公为言治道贵清静而民自定，推此类具言之。
现代文：见到盖公后，盖公对曹参说，治理国家的办法贵在清净无为，让百姓们自行安定，并推举出这方面的同类事情，全部向曹参陈述。
English: After seeing Gaikong, Gaikong said to Cao San that the way to govern the country is to be pure and inactive, let the people stabilize themselves, and put forward similar things in this regard, all of which were presented to Cao San.

古文：参於是避正堂，舍盖公焉。
现代文：曹参于是让出自己的正堂，让盖公住在里面。
English: Cao San then gave up his main hall and let Gao Gong live in it.

古文：其治要用黄老术，故相齐九年，齐国安集，大称贤相。
现代文：此后，曹参治理国家的要领就是采用黄老的学说，所以他当齐国丞相九年，齐国安定，人们大大地称赞他是贤明的丞相。
English: After that, Cao San's key to governing the country was to adopt Huang Lao's doctrine, so he was the prime minister of Qi for nine years, Qi was stable, and people greatly praised him as a wise prime minister.

古文：惠帝二年，萧何卒。
现代文：惠帝二年，萧何去世。
English: In the second year of Hui Di, Xiao He passed away.

古文：参闻之，告舍人趣治行， 吾将入相 。
现代文：曹参听到这个消息，就告诉他的门客赶快整理行装，说： 我将要入朝当相国去了。 
English: When Cao San heard the news, he told his concubine to quickly pack her things and said, "I'm going to the Imperial Palace to become the consort of the emperor."

古文：居无何，使者果召参。
现代文：过了不久，朝廷派来的人果然来召曹参。
English: Not long after, the person sent by the imperial court actually came to summon Cao San.

古文：参去，属其後相曰： 以齐狱市为寄，慎勿扰也。 
现代文：曹参离开时，嘱咐后任齐国丞相说： 要把齐国的狱讼与集市作为某些人行为的寄托，要慎重对待这些行为，不要轻易干涉。 
English: When Cao San left, he instructed the later Qi Guojing Minister to say: It is necessary to regard the prison litigation and bazaar in Qi as the trust of certain people's actions, and to treat these actions carefully and not to interfere easily.

古文：後相曰： 治无大於此者乎？ 参曰： 不然。
现代文：后任丞相说： 治理国家没有比这件事更重要的吗？ 曹参说： 不是这样。
English: The future prime minister said, "Isn't governing the country more important than this?" Cao San said, "Not so."

古文：夫狱市者，所以并容也，今君扰之，奸人安所容也？
现代文：狱讼与集市，是善恶并容的，如果您严加干涉，坏人在哪里容身呢？
English: If you strictly interfere, where will the bad people hide?

古文：吾是以先之。 
现代文：这就是我为何将这件事告诉您的原因。 
English: That's why I'm telling you this.

古文：参始微时，与萧何善；及为将相，有卻。
现代文：曹参起初卑贱的时候，跟萧何关系很好；等到各自做了将军、相国，便有了隔阂。
English: When Cao San was lowly at the beginning, he had a good relationship with Xiao He; when they became generals and partners, there was a rift.

古文：至何且死，所推贤唯参。
现代文：到萧何临终时，萧何向孝惠皇帝刘盈推荐的贤臣只有曹参。
English: When Xiao He was on his deathbed, Cao San was the only sage recommended by Xiao He to Emperor Liu Ying.

古文：参代何为汉相国，举事无所变更，一遵萧何约束。
现代文：曹参接替萧何做了汉朝的相国，做事情没有任何变更，一概遵循萧何制定的法度。
English: Cao San succeeded Xiao He as the Han Dynasty's consort, and did things without any changes, always following Xiao He's regulations.

古文：择郡国吏木诎於文辞，重厚长者，即召除为丞相史。
现代文：曹参从各郡和诸侯国中挑选那些不善于言辞，行事稳重的长者，找到后立即召来任命为丞相的属官。
English: Cao San selected elders from counties and principalities who were not good at words and were steady in their actions. Once he found them, he immediately summoned them and appointed them as subordinate officers of the prime minister.

古文：吏之言文刻深，欲务声名者，辄斥去之。
现代文：对官吏中那些言语文字苛求细微末节，想一味追求声誉的人，就斥退撵走他们。
English: As for those officials who are pernickety in speech and writing and want to pursue fame, they should be rejected and expelled.

古文：日夜饮醇酒。
现代文：曹参自己整天痛饮美酒。
English: Cao San himself drank wine all day long.

古文：卿大夫已下吏及宾客见参不事事，来者皆欲有言。
现代文：卿大夫以下的官吏和宾客们见曹参不理政事，上门来的人都想有言相劝。
English: Government officials and guests below the rank of doctor saw that Cao San did not care about politics, and everyone who came to the door wanted to have a word of advice.

古文：至者，参辄饮以醇酒，间之，欲有所言，复饮之，醉而後去，终莫得开说，以为常。
现代文：可是这些人一到，曹参就立即拿美酒给他们喝，过了一会儿，有的人想说些什么，曹参又让他们喝酒，直到喝醉后离去，始终没能够开口劝谏，如此习以为常。
English: However, as soon as these people arrived, Cao San immediately gave them fine wine to drink. After a while, some people wanted to say something, and Cao San let them drink again, until they got drunk and left. He was never able to speak to them, so he took it for granted.

古文：相舍後园近吏舍，吏舍日饮歌呼。
现代文：相国住宅的后园靠近官吏的房舍，官吏的房舍里整天饮酒歌唱，大呼小叫。
English: The back garden of the partner's country residence is close to the official's house. In the official's house they drink, sing and shout all day long.

古文：从吏恶之，无如之何，乃请参游园中，闻吏醉歌呼，从吏幸相国召按之。
现代文：曹参的随从官员们很厌恶这件事，但对此也无可奈何，于是就请曹参到后园中游玩，一起听到了那些官吏们醉酒高歌、狂呼乱叫的声音，随从官员们希望相国把他们召来加以制止。
English: Cao San's officials were disgusted by this, but there was nothing they could do about it, so they invited Cao San to play in the backyard. Together, they heard the voices of those officials drunkenly singing and shouting wildly. The officials hoped that their country would call them to stop them.

古文：乃反取酒张坐饮，亦歌呼与相应和。
现代文：曹参反而叫人取酒陈设座席痛饮起来，并且也高歌呼叫，与那些官吏们相应和。
English: On the contrary, Cao San ordered people to take wine, set up seats and drink hard, and also sang and shouted loudly, corresponding with those officials.

古文：参见人之有细过，专掩匿覆盖之，府中无事。
现代文：曹参见别人有细小的过失，总是隐瞒遮盖，因此相府中平安无事。
English: Cao can see that others have minor faults and always conceal and cover them up, so there is no problem in the cabinet.

古文：参子窋为中大夫。
现代文：曹参的儿子曹窋做中大夫。
English: Cao San's son, Cao Wei, became a junior doctor.

古文：惠帝怪相国不治事，以为 岂少朕与 ？乃谓窋曰： 若归，试私从容问而父曰： 高帝新弃群臣，帝富於春秋，君为相，日饮，无所请事，何以忧天下乎？ 
现代文：汉惠帝埋怨曹相国不理政事，觉得相国是否看不起自己，于是对曹窋说： 你回家后，试着私下随便问问你父亲说： 高帝刚刚驾崩，皇上又很年轻，您身为相国，整天饮酒作乐，遇事也不向皇上请示报告，如何治理国家大事呢？ 
English: Emperor Han Hui complained that Cao Xianguo did not care about politics, and wondered if Cao Xianguo looked down on him, so he said to Cao Pi: When you get home, try to ask your father in private: Emperor Gao has just passed away, the emperor is very young, and you, as the emperor's son-in-law, spend all day drinking and having fun, and do not ask the emperor for a report in the event of a problem. How do you manage the affairs of state?

古文：然无言吾告若也。 
现代文：但这些话不要说是我告诉你的。 
English: But don't say I told you so.

古文：窋既洗沐归，间侍，自从其所谏参。
现代文：曹窋假日休息时回家，闲暇时陪着父亲，把惠帝的意思变成自己的话规劝曹参。
English: Cao Gan went home during the holiday break, accompanied his father during leisure time, and persuaded Cao San to turn Hui Di's meaning into his own words.

古文：参怒，而笞窋二百，曰： 趣入侍，天下事非若所当言也。 
现代文：曹参听了大怒，打了曹窋二百板子，说： 快点儿进宫侍奉皇上去，国家大事不是你应该说的。 
English: Cao San listened to the anger and slapped Cao Pi with two hundred boards, saying: "Hurry up and enter the palace to serve the emperor. You should not talk about national affairs.

古文：至朝时，惠帝让参曰： 与窋胡治乎？
现代文：到上朝的时候，惠帝责备曹参说： 为什么要惩治曹窋？
English: When he arrived at the Shang court, Emperor Hui rebuked Cao San and said, "Why punish Cao Pi?

古文：乃者我使谏君也。 
现代文：上次是我让他规劝您的。 
English: Last time I asked him to advise you.

古文：参免冠谢曰： 陛下自察圣武孰与高帝？ 
现代文：曹参脱帽谢罪说： 请陛下自己仔细考虑一下，您和高帝相比谁更加圣明英武？ 
English: Cao San took off his hat and said, "Your Majesty, please think about it carefully. Compared to Gao Di, who is more holy, wise and mighty?"

古文：上曰： 朕乃安敢望先帝乎！ 
现代文：惠帝说： 我怎么敢跟先帝相比呢！ 
English: Hui Di said: How dare I compare myself to the former emperor!

古文：曰： 陛下观臣能孰与萧何贤？ 
现代文：曹参说： 陛下看我和萧何的才能相比更胜一筹呢？ 惠帝说： 您大概不如萧何。 
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty, do you think my talent is better than Xiao He's?" Hui Di said, "You are probably not as good as Xiao He."

古文：上曰： 君似不及也。 
现代文：曹参说： 陛下说的这番话很对。
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty's words are right.

古文：参曰： 陛下言之是也。且高帝与萧何定天下，法令既明，今陛下垂拱，参等守职，遵而勿失，不亦可乎？ 惠帝曰： 善。
现代文：高帝与萧何平定了天下，法令已经明确，如今陛下垂衣拱手，我等谨守各自的职责，遵循原有的法度而不随意更改，不就行了吗？ 惠帝说： 好。
English: Gao Di and Xiao He have leveled the world, the decrees have been made clear, and now His Majesty has abdicated. Can't we just stick to our respective duties, follow the original laws and regulations, and not change them at will? Hui Di said: Good.

古文：君休矣！ 
现代文：您休息休息吧！ 
English: You rest, rest!

古文：参为汉相国，出入三年。
现代文：曹参做汉朝相国，前后有三年时间。
English: Cao San has been a partner country of the Han Dynasty for three years.

古文：卒，谥懿侯。
现代文：他死了以后，被谥为懿侯。
English: After his death, he was made a vassal lord.

古文：子窋代侯。
现代文：曹参之子曹窋接替了他父亲的侯位。
English: Cao San's son, Cao Pi, succeeded his father as prince.

古文：百姓歌之曰： 萧何为法，顜若画一。曹参代之，守而勿失。
现代文：百姓们歌颂曹参的事迹说： 萧何制定法令，明确划一；曹参接替萧何为相，遵守萧何制定的法度而不改变。
English: The people sang the praises of Cao San's deeds, saying: Xiao He made laws and decrees, and made them clear and uniform; Cao San succeeded Xiao He, and obeyed the laws and regulations made by Xiao He without changing.

古文：载其清靖，民以宁一。 
现代文：曹参施行他那清净无为的做法，百姓因而安宁不乱。 
English: Cao San carried out his clean and do-nothing approach, and the people were not disturbed.

古文：平阳侯窋，高后时为御史大夫。
现代文：平阳侯曹窋，高后时任御史大夫。
English: Cao Yao, a peasant from Pingyang, was appointed as a professor of history after high school.

古文：孝文帝立，免为侯。
现代文：孝文帝即位，免职为侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne and was dismissed from his post.

古文：立二十九年卒，谥为静侯。
现代文：曹窋为侯二十九年后去世，谥号为静侯。
English: Cao Wei Hou died 29 years later, his posthumous name was Jing Hou.

古文：子奇代侯，立七年卒，谥为简侯。
现代文：曹窋的儿子曹奇接替侯位，为侯七年去世，谥号为简侯。
English: Cao Pi's son, Cao Qi, succeeded him as marquess. He died seven years after he became marquess, and his posthumous name was Jian Hou.

古文：子时代侯。
现代文：曹奇的儿子曹时接替侯位。
English: Cao Qi's son, Cao Shi, succeeded him as marquess.

古文：时尚平阳公主，生子襄。
现代文：曹时娶了平阳公主，生儿子曹襄。
English: Cao Shi married Princess Pingyang and had a son, Cao Xiang.

古文：时病疠，归国。
现代文：曹时得了疫病，回到封国。
English: Cao Shi fell ill with the plague and returned to his fiefdom.

古文：立二十三年卒，谥夷侯。
现代文：曹时为侯二十三年去世，谥号为夷侯。
English: Cao Shihong died in the 23rd year of his reign, and his posthumous name was Shihong.

古文：子襄代侯。
现代文：曹时的儿子曹襄接替侯位。
English: Cao Cao's son Cao Xiang succeeds him.

古文：襄尚卫长公主，生子宗。
现代文：曹襄娶了卫长公主，生儿子曹宗。
English: Cao Xiang married Princess Wei Chang and had a son, Cao Zong.

古文：立十六年卒，谥为共侯。
现代文：曹襄为侯十六年去世，谥号为共侯。
English: Cao Xiang passed away in the 16th year of his reign, and his posthumous name was Gonghou.

古文：子宗代侯。
现代文：曹襄的儿子曹宗接替侯位。
English: Cao Xiang's son, Cao Zong, succeeded him as marquess.

古文：征和二年中，宗坐太子死，国除。
现代文：征和二年时，曹宗因受武帝太子发动兵变一事的牵连，获罪被处死，封国被废除。
English: In the second year of the Conquest, Cao Zong was implicated in a mutiny instigated by Prince Wu, was found guilty and executed, and the state of siege was abolished.

古文：太史公曰：曹相国参攻城野战之功所以能多若此者，以与淮阴侯俱。
现代文：太史公说：曹相国曹参的战功之所以能如此多，是因为他跟淮阴侯韩信一起共事的缘故。
English: Taishigong said: Cao Xiang Guo Cao San's war exploits were so great because he worked with Huaiyin Hou Hanxin.

古文：及信已灭，而列侯成功，唯独参擅其名。
现代文：等到韩信被消灭，列侯成就的战功，唯独曹参据有其名。
English: By the time Han Xin was eliminated, only Cao San could be credited with the war exploits of the feudal lords.

古文：参为汉相国，清静极言合道。
现代文：曹参作为汉朝相国，极力主张清净无为，这完全合于道家的学说。
English: Cao San, as a relative of the Han Dynasty, strongly advocated purity and inaction, which is fully consistent with the doctrine of Taoism.

古文：然百姓离秦之酷後，参与休息无为，故天下俱称其美矣。
现代文：百姓遭受秦朝的酷政统治以后，曹参给予他们休养生息的时机，所以天下的人都称颂他的美德。
English: After the people suffered from the harsh political rule of the Qin Dynasty, Cao San gave them the opportunity to recuperate and live, so people all over the world praised his virtues.

