古文：吴王夫差汉武帝丁媛淋池霍光妻韩嫣袁广汉霄游宫沙棠舟赵飞燕郭况后汉灵帝石崇王敦魏高阳王雍元琛隋炀帝则天后许敬宗张易之宗楚客安乐公主杨慎交唐睿宗玄宗虢国夫人
现代文：吴王夫差汉武帝丁媛淋池霍光妻韩嫣袁广汉霄游宫沙棠舟赵飞燕郭况后汉灵帝石崇王敦魏高阳王雍元琛隋炀帝则天后许敬宗张易之宗楚客安乐公主杨慎交唐睿宗玄宗虢国夫人
English: Emperor Wu of Han, Emperor Wudi of Han, Emperor Ding of Yuan, Emperor Lianchi of Lu, Emperor Huoguang of Han, Emperor Yuan of Guang, Emperor Xiaoyu of Han, Emperor Xiaoyu of Han, Emperor Shishi of Han, Emperor Chong of Shandong, Emperor Gaoyang of Wei, Emperor Yong of Yuan, Emperor Sui of Sui, Empress Dowager, Emperor Xu of Jing, Emperor Zhang of Yi, Emperor Chu of Gu, Empress Yang of Sheng, Emperor Tang of Tang, Emperor Rui of Tang, Emperor Xuanzong of Xuan, Empress Dowager of Gu

古文：吴王夫差
现代文：吴王夫差
English: Wu Wangfu poor

古文：吴王夫差筑姑苏台，三年乃成。
现代文：吴王夫差修造姑苏台，历时三年才修造成。
English: It took three years for Wu Wangfu to complete the construction of Gusudai.

古文：周环洁屈，横亘五里。崇饰土木，殚耗人力。
现代文：姑苏台曲折环绕，方圆五里，整个建筑都有豪华的装饰，耗费许多人力，里面蓄有宫妓千余人。
English: Surrounded by the twists and turns of Gusudai, with a radius of five miles, the entire building has luxurious decoration, consumes a lot of manpower, and contains more than a thousand courtesans.

古文：宫妓千人，又别立春霄宫。为长夜饮，造千石酒盅。
现代文：夫差又另外建造一座春宵宫，供他在里面通宵饮宴，逍遥作乐。又制作能盛一千石酒的巨大酒杯。
English: In addition, he built a spring festival palace for all-night feasting and merry-making, and made a huge wine glass that could hold a thousand koku of wine.

古文：又作大池，池中造青龙舟，陈妓乐，日与西施为水戏。
现代文：修建了一个巨大的水池，池中停放一只青龙舟，上面置放歌舞妓与乐队，整日跟西施一块儿在水上玩耍嬉戏。
English: A huge pool was built. A blue dragon boat was parked in the pool, and a showgirl and a band were placed on it. They played and frolicked on the water with Xishi all day long.

古文：又于宫中作灵馆馆娃阁，铜铺玉槛，宫之栏楯，皆珠玉饰之。
现代文：夫差又在宫中修造一座灵馆馆娃阁，馆中置放铜床，门槛是玉石的，周围的栏杆都用珠宝、玉石作装饰物。
English: Her husband also built a shrine in the palace. A bronze bed was placed in the hall, the threshold was made of jade, and the railings around it were decorated with jewels and jade.

古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：汉武帝时，身毒国献连环羁，皆以白玉作之，玛瑙石为勒，白光琉璃为鞍。
现代文：汉武帝时，身毒国派使臣进献给他一付连环马笼头，都是用白玉石作成的。玛瑙石作的马爵子，白光琉璃作的马鞍。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was ill, the country sent envoys to present him with a set of horse-cage heads, all made of white jade, a horse saddle made of agate, and a saddle made of white glaze.

古文：在暗室中，常照十余丈，如昼焉。
现代文：将它们置放在暗室中，常常能照出去十多丈远，象白天一样。
English: If they are placed in a dark room, they can often shine more than ten feet away, just like during the day.

古文：自是长安始盛饰鞍马，竟加雕镂。
现代文：从这以后，京城长安开始盛行装饰鞍马。
English: Since then, the decoration of the pommel horse has become popular in the capital Chang'an.

古文：或一马之饰直百金，皆以南海白蜃为珂，紫金为花，以饰其上，犹以不鸣为患。或加铃镊，饰以流苏，走如钟磬，动若飞幡。后得二师天马，常以玫瑰石为鞍，镂以金银鍮石，以绿地五色锦为蔽泥。
现代文：这样，马一走动铃声叮咚如石磬，流苏及饰簪随风飘动象飞卷着的幡旗。后来，汉武帝又得到两匹师天宝马，经常给它们配上玫瑰石的马鞍，上面饰以金、银、鍮石的镂刻装饰，用绿地五色彩锦做障泥用以蔽尘。
English: Later, Emperor Hanwu got two more Shidun BMW horses, often equipping them with rose stone saddles, decorated with gold, silver, and brass stone engravings on the top, and using green five-color brocade to make a barrier mud to cover the dust.

古文：后稍以熊罴皮为之，熊毛有绿光，皆长三尺者，直百金。
现代文：稍后一些时候，又改用熊皮做障泥。熊皮上的毛，长三尺，发绿光的，价值黄金百两。
English: Some time later, they switched to using bear skins to make the mud. The fur on the bear skin, which is three feet long and glows green, is worth a hundred taels of gold.

古文：卓王孙□□□□□百余双，诏使献二十枚。
现代文：卓王孙一个人就让工匠制做了一百多双，汉武帝下诏书让他献上二十枚。
English: Zhuo Wangsun alone had more than a hundred pairs made by craftsmen, and Emperor Hanwu issued an edict for him to present twenty pairs.

古文：丁媛
现代文：丁媛
English: Dingyuan

古文：长安巧工丁媛者，为恒满灯，七龙五凤，杂以芙蓉莲耦之属。
现代文：长安有一位手艺奇巧的工匠叫丁媛，他制作的恒满灯，上面雕有七条龙五只凤凰，中间还雕有芙蓉莲藕等，特别精美。
English: In Chang'an, there is a skilled craftsman called Ding Yuan. The Hengman lamp he made is particularly exquisite, with seven dragons and five phoenixes carved on the top, and a hibiscus lotus in the middle.

古文：又作卧褥香炉，又一名被中香炉。
现代文：他还制作了卧褥香炉，又叫被中香炉。
English: He also made a bedside incense burner, also known as a bedside incense burner.

古文：本出房风，其法后绝，至媛始更为之。
现代文：这种香炉原本出自房风，它的制作方法后来失传了。到了丁媛这里，他又重新制作出来了。
English: This kind of incense burner was originally made by the house style, but its production method was later lost. When he came to Dingyuan, he made it anew.

古文：设机环，转运四周，而炉体常平，可置之被褥，故取被褥以为名。
现代文：香炉上安装上机关，不论它怎样翻转，炉身始终是平放着的。可以将它放在被褥中间。因此，名字叫卧褥香炉，或者叫被中香炉。
English: The incense burner is equipped with an upper mechanism. No matter how it is turned over, the burner is always flat. It can be placed in the middle of the bedclothes. Therefore, it is called a bedside incense burner or a middle-of-the-bed incense burner.

古文：又作九层山香炉，镂刻为奇禽怪兽，穷诸灵异，皆能自然运动。
现代文：丁媛还制作过一只九层博山香炉，上面镂刻着奇禽怪兽，没有比这些奇禽怪兽更奇异的了。
English: Ding Yuan also made a nine-tiered Boshan incense burner with strange bird monsters engraved on it. There is nothing more bizarre than these strange bird monsters.

古文：又作七轮扇，其轮大皆径尺，递相连续，一人运之，满堂皆寒凛焉。
现代文：而且，这些奇禽怪兽在香炉上面都能活动。丁媛又制作过一只七轮宝扇，它的轮子的直径都有一尺那么大，按照次序相继着转动。一个人操作运转，满屋子里都凉风习习。
English: Moreover, these strange birds and monsters can move on top of the incense burner. Ding Yuan also made a seven-wheeled fan, whose wheels are one foot in diameter and rotate in sequence. A person operates it, and the whole house is cool and windy.

古文：淋池
现代文：淋池
English: Lye pond

古文：汉昭帝元始之年，穿淋池，广千步。
现代文：汉昭帝元始元年，修造一座淋池，有一千步那么宽阔。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, a bathing pool was built that was a thousand paces wide.

古文：中植分枝荷，一茎四叶。
现代文：池中栽植分枝荷，一支茎上长着四茎叶，形状象两两相对的伞盖。
English: Branches are planted in the pond. One stem has four stems and leaves, shaped like two opposite umbrella covers.

古文：状如骈盖，日照则叶低荫根，若葵之卫足也，名曰低光荷。
现代文：太阳光一照，叶片就垂到茎根，象葵花低头向着根部一样，这种荷花叫低光荷。
English: As soon as the sun shines, the leaves hang down to the stem, like sunflowers bowing towards the root. This kind of lotus is called low light load.

古文：实如玄珠，可以饰珮。
现代文：它结出的莲籽象水晶珠那么大，可以当装饰物佩戴在身上。
English: The seeds of the meadow poppy look like black pearls and can be made into ornaments.

古文：花叶杂萎，芬芳之气彻十余里。
现代文：这种低光荷花与叶子参杂着，散发出来的芬芳香气香彻十几里地以外。
English: This low-light lotus is intermingled with leaves, emitting a fragrant aroma that can be smelled more than a dozen miles away.

古文：食之令人口气常香，益人肌理。
现代文：吃了它使你很长时间里都觉得芳香满口，还能滋润你的肌肤。
English: After eating it, you will feel the fragrance filling your mouth for a long time, and it will also moisturize your skin.

古文：宫人贵之，每游宴出入，皆含咀，或剪以为衣，或折以蔽日，相为戏。
现代文：宫中的人都视低光荷结出的莲粒为宝贝似的，外出宴游或出入宫中，嘴里都含有低光荷结出来的莲籽。同时，或者剪下来荷叶缝制衣裳；或者折下叶子遮挡太阳光；或者互相嬉戏。
English: People in the palace regarded the lotus seeds produced by the low-glow lotus as precious. When they went out for a party or entered the palace, their mouths contained the lotus seeds produced by the low-glow lotus. At the same time, they either cut the lotus leaves and sewed clothes; or folded the leaves to block the sun; or played with each other.

古文：《楚辞》谓折芰荷以为衣，意在斯也。
现代文：《楚辞》里说的折下芰荷的叶子当做衣裳，就是这个意思。
English: This is what is meant in the "Analects of Confucius" when it says that the leaves of the broken bamboo shoots can be used as clothing.

古文：又有倒生菱。茎如乱丝，一花十叶，根浮水上，实沉泥里，没如紫色，谓之紫泥菱。
现代文：池中还生长着一种叫倒生菱的植物，一朵花下面长着十支叶片，花茎象乱麻一样，根浮在水面上，结出的果实落入池底淤泥中。池底的泥是紫色，称为紫泥菱。
English: Also growing in the pool is a plant called the upside-down loquat, a flower with ten leaves growing underneath, the flower stem like a jumble of hemp, the roots floating on the surface of the water, and the fruit falling into the mud at the bottom of the pool. The mud at the bottom of the pool is purple, called the purple loquat.

古文：食之令人不老。
现代文：吃了它可以令人不衰老。
English: Eating it can make you ageless.

古文：时命水戏，游宴永日。工人进一巨槽，帝曰：栝楫松舟，嫌其重朴，况乎此槽，岂可得而乘也。
现代文：于是，汉昭帝经常让人陪他一块乘船在池水中嬉戏，几乎每天都在这里从早晨一直宴游到晚上。工匠们进献一只独木舟给汉昭帝。昭帝说：用栝木作桨，松木作舟，我都嫌弃它笨重朴拙。何况这只独木舟，怎么能乘坐它呢？
English: As a result, Emperor Han Zhao often had people accompany him on a boat to play in the pond water, and almost every day there was a banquet from morning to evening. The craftsmen presented a canoe to Emperor Han Zhao. Emperor Zhao said: I hate it because it is bulky and simple, with birch for the oars and pine for the boat. Besides, how can this canoe be used?

古文：乃命文梓为舟，木兰为枻。
现代文：于是命令下属用文梓木作船，木兰为船舷。
English: So he ordered his subordinates to make a boat out of wood, with magnolia as the side.

古文：刻飞鸾翔鷁，饰其船首。
现代文：在船头雕刻上飞翔着的鸾鸟与鷁鸟。
English: An ostrich and an ostrich flying over a carving on the bow.

古文：随风轻荡，毕景忘归，乃至通夜。
现代文：梓木小船，随风在池水上轻轻地漂荡，赏遍了一切美景而忘了归去，一直玩到第二天早晨。
English: The small wooden boat drifted gently on the water of the pool with the wind, enjoyed all the beautiful scenery and forgot to go back, playing until the next morning.

古文：使宫人为歌，歌曰：商秋素景泛洪波，谁云好手折芰荷。
现代文：并且让宫中的嫔妃们唱歌，歌词的大意是这样的：商秋素景泛洪波，谁云好手折芰荷。
English: And let the concubines in the palace sing, the meaning of the lyrics is as follows: Shangqiu Sujing flood wave, who knows how to handle the heavy load.

古文：凉凉凄凄揭棹歌，云光开曙月低河，万岁为乐岂为多。
现代文：凉凉凄凄揭棹歌，云光开曙月低河，万岁为乐岂为多。
English: Is it too much to say that coolness, coolness, and bleakness unveil waka, clouds and light open the dawn, the moon lowers the river, and longevity is joy?

古文：帝大悦，起游商台于池上。
现代文：汉昭帝非常高兴，并在池中又建造了一座游商台。
English: Emperor Han Zhao was very pleased and built another tourist platform in the pond.

古文：及乎末岁，谏者多。
现代文：到了这年岁尾，许多大臣都上表谏阻皇帝再不要大兴土木修造宫殿了。
English: By the end of the year, many ministers were openly discouraging the emperor from building the palace.

古文：遂省游荡奢侈，堙毁台池，鸾舟荷芰，随时废灭。
现代文：于是汉昭帝立即接纳了朝臣们的规劝，再也不搞这种奢侈的娱乐与享受了。台池堵塞毁坏，鸾舟荷芰也随着时间的流失而朽烂湮灭。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Zhao immediately accepted the advice of his courtiers and no longer engaged in such extravagant entertainment and enjoyment. The pool was blocked and destroyed, and the boat and raft also decayed and perished with the passage of time.

古文：今台址无遗，池亦平焉。
现代文：现在，亭台都已荡然无存，连它的遗迹都找不到了；淋池也淤平了，重新变成大地。
English: Now, the pavilion has all but disappeared, not even its remains can be found; the bathing pool has also silted up and turned back into the earth.

古文：霍光妻
现代文：霍光妻
English: Huo Guang's wife

古文：汉霍光妻遗淳于衍蒲桃锦二十匹，散花绫二十五匹。
现代文：汉朝时大将霍光的妻子，一次就送给淳于衍葡萄锦二十匹，散花绫二十五匹。
English: The wife of the Han Dynasty's General Huo Guang once gave Jun Yu 20 bunches of raisins and 25 bunches of daisies.

古文：绫出钜鹿陈宝光，妻传其法。
现代文：这种散花绫只有钜鹿陈宝光家能织，陈的妻子得到这种家传织绫的方法。
English: Only Chen Baoguang's elk family can weave this kind of embroidery, and Chen's wife got this method of weaving embroidery from her family.

古文：霍显召入第，使作之。
现代文：霍家将她召入府内，让她给织散绫。
English: The Huo family called her into the mansion and asked her to weave.

古文：机用一百二十蹑，六十日成一匹，直万钱。
现代文：用一百二十登织机，织六十天才能织成一匹散绫，价值一万钱。
English: With a hundred and twenty looms, it takes sixty days to weave a straw horse, worth ten thousand dollars.

古文：又与越珠一斛琲，绿绫七百端，直钱百万，黄金百两。
现代文：又送给淳于衍越地产的珍珠一斛，绿绫三百五十匹，价值百万钱，黄金一百两。
English: He also gave a bunch of pearls, three hundred and fifty green gourds, worth one million dollars, and one hundred and two ounces of gold to Cucao, a property of Chun Yu Yan Yue.

古文：又为起第宅，奴婢不可胜数。
现代文：又给淳于衍修造住宅，给他奴仆、使女无其数。
English: He also built a house for Chun Yu Yan and gave him countless slaves and maids.

古文：衍犹怨薄曰：吾为若何成功，而报我若是哉。
现代文：淳于衍还嫌赏赐的不多，说：我做出这样大的功业，却给我这样的赏赐？
English: Jun Yuyan also disliked the fact that the rewards were not much, saying, "I did such a great deed, yet they give me such a reward?

古文：韩嫣
现代文：韩嫣
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩嫣好弹，常以金为丸，一日所失者十余。
现代文：有个叫韩嫣的人喜爱玩弹丸。她经常用金做成丸，一天弹丢十多只金丸。
English: There is a person named Han Qi who likes to play marbles. She often makes marbles out of gold and throws more than ten gold marbles a day.

古文：长安为之语曰：苦饥寒，逐金丸。
现代文：长安为她编成两句童谣大街小巷地传唱：苦饥寒，逐金丸。
English: Chang'an compiled two nursery rhymes for her to sing in the streets and alleys: Bitter, Hungry and Cold, Gold by Gold.

古文：京师儿童每闻嫣出弹，辄随逐之。
现代文：京城中的儿童，每次听到韩嫣出来弹丸玩，都争相跟随追逐她。
English: Every time children in the capital hear Han Min come out to play marbles, they all scramble to follow her.

古文：望丸之所落，而竞拾取焉。袁广汉
现代文：看到金丸弹落的地方，争先恐后地去拾取。袁广汉
English: Seeing where the gold ball had landed, they scrambled to pick it up. Yuan Guanghan

古文：茂陵富人袁广汉藏镪巨万，家童八九百人。
现代文：茂陵富豪袁广汉家中钱多得数不清，养着八九百名丫环童仆。
English: The family of Yuan Guanghan, a wealthy man in Maoling, has more money than they can count, and they keep eight or nine hundred maidservants.

古文：于北芒山下筑园，东西四里，南北三里。
现代文：袁广汉在北芒山下修造一座豪华的庄园。这座庄园东西长四里，南北宽三里，开渠将附近的河水引入庄园里。
English: Yuan Guanghan built a luxurious manor at the foot of Beimang Mountain. The manor is four miles long from east to west and three miles wide from north to south. A canal was opened to bring the nearby river water into the manor.

古文：引流注其内，构石为山，高十余丈，连延数里。
现代文：垒石做成假山，高十多丈，连绵延续好几里地。
English: The foundation stone is made into a rockery, more than ten meters high, and continues for several miles.

古文：养白鹦鹉紫鸳鸯，旄牛青兔，奇禽怪兽，积委其间。
现代文：园中养着白鹦鹉，紫鸳鸯，牦牛，青兔等奇禽怪兽，分布在假山园林之间。
English: The park is home to white parrots, egrets, snails, rabbits and other exotic birds and beasts, which are distributed among the rockery gardens.

古文：移沙为洲屿，激水为波潮。
现代文：并且用移来的沙石布成河滩洲屿，将引进来的河水筑坝升高形成激流浪潮。
English: Moreover, the imported sand and stone was used to form the river beach island, and the imported river water was dammed up to form a raging tidal wave.

古文：其中育江鸥海鹤，孕雏产鷇，延漫林池。
现代文：在洲屿河滩上养着许多江鸥海鹤，让它们产卵育雏。园中树林与池塘参差错落，植着各种奇树异草。
English: Many sea cranes are raised on the beach of Zhulou River to lay eggs and raise chicks. The woods and ponds in the park are jagged and jumbled, planted with all kinds of strange trees and grasses.

古文：奇树异草，靡不具植。
现代文：房屋馆舍回环重叠，中间用回廊连成一体，行走一天也不能全都走遍了。
English: The buildings of the museum overlap and are connected by a corridor in the middle. It would take more than a day to walk through all of them.

古文：屋徘徊重属，间以修廊。行之移晷，不能遍也。
现代文：后来，袁广汉获罪被杀，整个庄园没收充官。
English: Later, Yuan Guanghan was convicted and killed, and the entire manor was confiscated and confiscated.

古文：袁广汉后得罪诛，没入官。其园鸟兽草木，皆移植于上苑中矣。
现代文：园中的珍禽怪兽，奇树异草，都尽数移到皇家的上苑中去了。
English: All the rare birds and beasts in the garden, as well as the strange trees and grasses, were moved to the royal upper garden.

古文：霄游宫
现代文：霄游宫
English: Xiaoyu Palace

古文：汉成帝好微行。
现代文：汉成帝喜欢易服扮成一般的人外出。
English: Han Chengdi likes to go out dressed as an ordinary person.

古文：于太液池旁起霄游宫，以漆为柱，铺黑缔之幕，器服乘舆，皆尚黑色。
现代文：他下令在太液池旁边修造一座霄游宫，用黑漆把柱子漆成黑色，铺挂黑色的线绨帷幕。所用的器具，所穿的服装，以及车马，一律都用黑色。
English: He ordered the construction of a roller coaster palace next to the Taiyue Pool, painted the pillars black with black paint, and hung a black wire curtain. The utensils used, the clothes worn, and the chariots and horses were all black.

古文：悦于暗行，憎灯烛之照。
现代文：汉成帝喜欢在黑暗中行走，厌恶有灯烛等照亮。
English: Han Chengdi liked to walk in the dark, and disliked being illuminated by candles.

古文：宫中之美御，皆服皂衣。
现代文：宫中的一切宫娥彩女，都一律身穿黑色衣服。
English: All the court beauties in the palace were dressed in black.

古文：自班姬以下，咸带玄绶。
现代文：从班倢伃以下，都身着玄色的绶带。
English: From the bottom of the class to the top, they are all wearing black ribbons.

古文：衣珮虽加锦绣，更以木兰纱绡罩之。
现代文：衣服佩带虽然都是花团锦绣，但是外面都用木兰纱绡罩上。
English: Although the clothes worn are all embroidered with flowers, the outside is covered with magnolia yarn.

古文：至霄游宫，方秉炬烛。
现代文：来到霄游宫中，方允许点燃灯烛。
English: When they arrived at the roller coaster palace, they were allowed to light a candle.

古文：宴幸既罢，静鼓息罩，而步不扬尘。
现代文：饮宴结束后，鼓乐都静下来，灯烛等都媳灭了，脚步轻轻落地悄悄地离去，不允许踏起一点灰尘。
English: After the banquet was over, the drum music had quieted down, the lights and candles had been extinguished, and the guests left quietly, without stepping on a speck of dust.

古文：好夕出游，造飞行殿方一丈，如今之辇。
现代文：汉成帝还喜欢晚间出去游赏。为了供他夜间出游的便利，特意制造了一驾飞行殿，一丈见方，跟现在皇帝用的辇车相类似。
English: Han Chengdi also liked to go out at night to admire the horses. In order to make it convenient for him to travel at night, he specially made a flying hall, which was square, similar to the carriage used by the emperor now.

古文：选期门羽林之士，负之以趋。
现代文：从宫中羽林军护卫中挑选身强力壮的人，拉着飞行殿奔走如飞。
English: Strong-bodied people were selected from the guards of the palace's feathered forest army, and they ran like flies while pulling the flight hall.

古文：帝于辇上坐，但觉耳中若闻风雷之声。
现代文：汉成帝坐在飞行殿中，只觉得耳边呼呼风响如同听到风雷的声音，这是说飞行殿行走得极为疾速。
English: Sitting in the flight hall, Han Chengdi only felt the wind whistling in his ears as if he were hearing the sound of wind and thunder, which meant that the flight hall was moving extremely fast.

古文：以其疾也，一名云雷宫。
现代文：飞行殿，又叫雷云宫。它所经过的道上都用毡缔铺地。
English: The Hall of Flight, also known as the Thundercloud Palace, is paved with mortar and pestle wherever it passes.

古文：所行之处，咸以毡缔藉地，恶车辙马迹之喧也。虽惑于微行暱宴，民无劳怨。
现代文：汉成帝讨厌车轮、马蹄踏地发出的喧嚣。虽然人们对汉成帝乔装游乐持怀疑态度，但是并没有什么怨言。
English: Emperor Han Chengdu hated the noise of the wheels and the trampling of horses. Although people are skeptical about Emperor Han Chengdu's disguised amusement, there are no complaints.

古文：每乘舆返驾，以爱幸之姬，宝衣珍食。
现代文：汉成帝每次乘坐飞行殿出游回宫，都将他宠爱的嫔妃们的宝贵的衣服、珍馐食品，沿途抛舍。
English: Every time Han Chengdi took the flight hall to travel back to the palace, he threw away the precious clothes and precious food of his favorite concubines along the way.

古文：舍于道旁。国之穷老，皆呼万岁。
现代文：京城里的穷苦老人，一边拣拾这些东西一边山呼万岁。
English: Poor old people in the capital, picking up these things while shouting "long live the mountain."

古文：是以鸿嘉永始之间，国富家丰，兵戈长戟。
现代文：汉成帝鸿嘉、永始年间，国家富强，百姓生活也丰足，军械武器长年藏放在库房中，天下太平无事。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Han Zheng, Emperor Hongjia and Emperor Yongxi, the country was prosperous and strong, and the people's lives were rich and full. Armaments and weapons were stored in warehouses for many years, and the world was peaceful.

古文：故刘向、谷永窃言指谏，于是焚霄游、飞行之殿，罢宴逸之乐。
现代文：因此，刘向、谷永私下议论后，向汉成帝指陈进谏废出微行暱宴。于是汉成帝焚毁了霄游宫，飞行殿，停止了饮宴玩乐。
English: Therefore, after Liu Xiang and Gu Yong had a private discussion, they pointed out to Han Chengdi that Chen Jinzhao had thrown away the banquet. Therefore, Han Chengdi burned the Xiaoyu Palace and the Flight Hall and stopped the banquet and entertainment.

古文：所谓从绳则直，如转丸焉。
现代文：这就是遵从墨绳就直，改正的迅速就向弹丸转动一样快啊！
English: This is to follow the ink rope to straighten, correct quickly to the projectile rotation as fast ah!

古文：沙棠舟
现代文：沙棠舟
English: Shatangzhou

古文：汉成帝常以三秋暇日，与飞燕游戏太液池。
现代文：汉成帝常常在三秋闲暇时节，和爱妃赵飞燕在太液池中游戏玩耍。
English: Han Chengdi often played games with his love Zhao Feiyan in the pond during the autumn leisure time.

古文：以沙棠为舟，贵其不沉也。以云母饰于鷁首，一名云舟。
现代文：他们乘坐用沙棠木作的龙舟，这种木轻不沉，船头用云母饰成鷁首。这种沙棠舟，又叫云舟。
English: They rode in a dragon boat made of sandalwood, which is light and unsinkable, and the bow is decorated with mica into a dagger. This sandalwood boat is also called a cloud boat.

古文：又刻大桐木为虬龙，雕饰如真象，以夹云舟而行，以紫文桂为柂枻。
现代文：同时，用硕大的桐木刻成虬龙舟，象真的虬龙一样，在左右两边陪伴着皇上的云舟在水上行走。用紫色的文桂木作舵与桨。
English: At the same time, a dragon boat was carved out of huge paulownia wood. Like a real dragon, it accompanied the emperor's cloud boat on the water on both sides. Purple cedar wood was used for the rudder and oars.

古文：每观云棹水，玩撷菱渠，则忧轻荡以惊飞燕。
现代文：每次成帝与飞燕同舟在太液池中游赏，看天上的白云，观桂棹击水，有时悄悄轻荡沙舟惊吓一下飞燕。
English: Every time Chengdi and Feiyan are in the same boat, they swim in the Taiye pool, look at the white clouds in the sky, watch the cinnamon ripple on the water, and sometimes quietly swing the sand boat to scare Feiyan.

古文：命佽飞之士，乃以金锁缆云舟，使佽飞于水底引之。
现代文：有时让会潜水的勇士用金锁牵引沙棠舟，潜入水底曳着船行走。
English: Sometimes, they let the brave divers tow the sable boat with a golden lock, and they go underwater to tow the boat.

古文：值轻风时至，飞燕殆以风飘摇，随风入水。帝以翠缨结飞燕之裾，游倦乃返。
现代文：这时，恰有轻风徐徐吹来，赵飞燕站起听任风将她吹落水中，汉成帝用翡翠色的彩带系在她的裙裾上在舟上拉着她。
English: At this time, a light breeze was blowing. Zhao Feiyan stood up and let the wind blow her down into the water. Han Chengdi tied an emerald colored ribbon around her skirt and pulled her on the boat.

古文：赵飞燕赵飞燕为皇后。其女弟昭仪在昭阳殿遗飞燕书曰：今日佳晨，贵姊懋膺洪册。
现代文：赵飞燕被册封为皇后，她的妹妹昭仪在昭阳宫派人给她送来书信和丰厚的礼物，表示祝贺。信上说：今天是姊姊最美好的一天。
English: When Zhao Feiyan was crowned empress, her sister Zhao Yi sent a letter and a generous gift to congratulate her at the Zhao Yang Palace. The letter said: "Today is my sister's best day.

古文：上贡三十五条，以陈踊跃之至，金花紫纶帽、金花紫罗面衣、织成下裾、同心七宝钗、七宝綦履、玉环、五色文绶、鸳鸯褥、云母屏风、琉璃屏风、云母七宝扇、琥珀枕、龟文枕、金错绣裆、琉璃玛瑙彄、珊瑚玦、黄金步摇、金博山炉、七支灯、回风席，茆叶席、金蒲圆珰、孔雀扇、五明扇、九华扇、同心梅、合枝李、三清木香、螺扈、麝香、沉水香、九真黄、鸳鸯襦及被。
现代文：在今天，姊姊被册封为皇后，这是姊姊最大的殊荣。听到这一佳音后，妹妹仅献给姊姊三十五样礼物，来表示妹妹欢欣喜悦之情。礼物有：金花紫纶帽、金花紫罗面衣、织成下裾、同心七宝钗、七宝綦履、玉环、五色文绶、鸳鸯褥、云母屏风、琉璃屏风、云母七宝扇、琥珀枕、龟文枕、金错绣裆、琉璃玛瑙彄、珊瑚玦、黄金步摇、金博山炉、七支灯、回风席，茆叶席、金蒲圆珰、孔雀扇、五明扇、九华扇、同心梅、合枝李、三清木香、螺扈、麝香、沉水香、九真黄、鸳鸯襦及被等。
English: Today, her sister was crowned as empress, which is her greatest honor. After hearing this good news, her sister only gave her sister thirty-five gifts to express her joy and joy. The gifts included: gold flower and violet satin hat, gold flower and violet shirt, woven bottom hem, concentric cloisonne, cloisonne shoes, jade ring, five-colored satin, enamel, mica screen, glazed screen, mica cloisonne fan, amber pillow, tortoise pillow, gold embroidered satin, glazed agate pillow, coral pillow, golden step shake, Jinbo mountain stove, seven lamps, echo wind seat, maple leaf seat

古文：郭况
现代文：郭况
English: General condition

古文：汉郭况，光武皇后之弟也。
现代文：汉朝时的郭况，是汉光武帝皇后的弟弟。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Guo Quanzhong was the younger brother of the Empress Dowager of the Han Emperor Guangwu.

古文：累金数亿，家童四百人。
现代文：家中积蓄有几亿钱，有童仆四百人。
English: The family has hundreds of millions in savings and 400 servants.

古文：以金为器皿，铸冶之声，彻于都鄙。
现代文：他家里使用金制的器皿，冶炼铸制金器的声音响彻整个京都和市郊。
English: He uses goldware in his home, and the sound of smelting cast metal resonates throughout Kyoto and its suburbs.

古文：时人谓郭氏之室，不雨而雷，言铸冶之声盛也。
现代文：当时人说：郭家府上，不下雨也打雷。这是说他家冶炼打制金器的声音太大太长久了。
English: People said at the time: "In the Guo family, even if it doesn't rain, there is thunder. This is because the sound of smelting and hammering tools in his family is too loud and too long.

古文：于庭中起高阁，厝衡石于其上，以称量。
现代文：郭况又在他家庭院中建造一座高阁，上面放着衡石，用以称量物品。
English: Guo Jian also built a high pavilion in his courtyard, with a weighing stone on top to weigh things.

古文：下有藏金窟，列武士卫之。
现代文：高阁的下面有地窖，里面放着金子，整日有武士在旁边站岗守卫。
English: Beneath the pavilion there is a cellar, in which gold is kept, guarded all day long by samurai.

古文：错杂宝以饰台榭，悬明珠于梁栋间。
现代文：郭况还用各种珍宝镶嵌装饰庭院中的楼台亭榭，将明珠悬挂在梁栋上。
English: Guo Jian also decorated the pavilion in the courtyard with various precious stones inlaid, and hung the pearl on the beam.

古文：光彩射目，昼视如星，夜望如月。
现代文：明珠发出的光彩耀人眼目。白天看这些悬挂着的明珠象一颗颗星星，晚上看它们就如月亮。
English: The brilliance emitted by the pearls is dazzling. During the day, these hanging pearls look like stars, and at night they look like the moon.

古文：里语曰：洛阳多钱郭氏室，夜月昼星富难匹。
现代文：街巷中的歌谣说：京城洛阳钱最多的是郭家，他家梁栋上悬挂的明珠白天象星星晚上象月亮，没有人能跟郭家比富。
English: The ballads in the streets say: the Guo family has the most money in Luoyang, Beijing. The pearl hanging on the beam of his house is like a star during the day and a moon at night. No one can match the wealth of the Guo family.

古文：其内宠者，皆以玉器盛食。
现代文：在郭家受宠爱的人，都用玉制的器皿盛食物。
English: The Guo family's favourites all use jade utensils to serve food.

古文：故东京谓郭氏家为琼厨金窟。
现代文：因此京都人都称郭家为琼厨金窟。
English: For this reason, people in Kyoto call the Guo family the "Golden Grotto of Qiong Cuisine."

古文：况小心畏慎，虽居富势，闭门优游，未曾干世，为一时所知也。
现代文：虽然位居京城首富，却从来都是闭门而居，过着闲适的生活，从不干预外界的事情。当时京城上下都知道他的这种为人。
English: Although he was the richest man in the capital, he always lived behind closed doors, led a leisurely life, and never interfered in outside affairs. At that time, everyone in the capital knew what kind of person he was.

古文：后汉灵帝
现代文：后汉灵帝
English: Post-Han Emperor Ling

古文：灵帝初平三年，于西园起裸游馆十间。
现代文：汉灵帝初平三年，在西园建造一座裸游馆，共十间。
English: In the first three years of the Heian period, Han Lingdi built a nude amusement park in the West Park, with a total of ten rooms.

古文：采绿苔以被阶，引渠水以绕砌。周流澄沏，乘小舟以游漾。
现代文：让人采来绿色的苔藓将它覆盖在台阶上面，引来渠水绕着各个门槛，环流过整个裸游馆。渠水澄沏见底，乘坐小船沿渠游漾。
English: Green moss is harvested to cover it on the steps, and canal water is drawn around each threshold, circulating through the entire naked tour hall. The canal water is clear to the bottom, and you can travel along the canal in a small boat.

古文：宫人乘之，选玉色轻体者以执篙楫，摇荡于渠中。
现代文：船上坐着妃嫔们，挑选肤色如玉，身体轻捷的宫娥，手执竹篱、船桨驾驶着游船，在渠水中荡漾游乐。
English: The concubines are sitting on the boat, selecting the skin color like jade, the body of the light palace, holding the bamboo fence, the paddle driving the cruise ship, and the rippling amusement in the canal water.

古文：其水清浅，以盛暑之时。使舟覆没，视宫人玉色。奏招商七言之歌，以来凉气也。
现代文：渠水清浅，在盛夏酷暑，将船沉没水中，看落在水中的裸体宫娥们玉一般华艳的肌肤，再演奏《招商七言》的歌曲，用以招来凉气。
English: The canal water is clear and shallow, and in the heat of midsummer, the boat is sunk in the water, and the naked empresses who fall into the water are generally gorgeous skin, and then the song of "Seven Words of Investment" is played to attract cool air.

古文：其歌曰：凉风起兮日照渠，青荷昼偃叶夜舒。
现代文：这首《招商七言》歌是这样唱的：凉风起兮日照渠，青荷昼偃叶夜舒。
English: This "Seven Words for Attracting Merchants" song is sung like this: The cool wind blows, the sun shines, and the leaves of the Qinghai-Hai Mountains rustle at night.

古文：唯日不足乐有余，清弦流管歌玉凫，千年万岁喜难渝。
现代文：唯日不足乐有余，清弦流管歌玉凫，千年万岁喜难渝。
English: There is more than enough music for the day, the clear string stream pipe song is beautiful, and it is difficult to be happy for a thousand years.

古文：渠中植莲大如盖，枝长一丈，南国所献也。
现代文：渠水中栽植莲荷，荷叶象锅盖那么大，荷枝有一丈那么长。这种莲荷是南方进献来的。
English: Lotus plants are planted in the canal water. The lotus leaves are as big as the lid of a pot, and the lotus sprigs are as long as a yard. This lotus was brought from the south.

古文：其叶夜舒昼卷，一茎有四莲丛生，名曰夜舒荷。
现代文：它的叶子白天卷起来到了夜间才舒展开。每一根茎上丛生着四枝莲花，叫夜舒荷。
English: Its leaves curl up during the day and open only at night. On each stem there are four lotus flowers, called yasuhaku.

古文：亦言月出见叶舒，亦名望舒荷。
现代文：又因为这种莲荷在月亮出来后叶子才舒展开，又叫它望舒荷。
English: Also, because the leaves of this lotus bloom only after the moon comes out, it is also called the moon lotus.

古文：帝乃盛夏避暑于裸游宫，长夜饮宴。
现代文：汉灵帝每到盛夏都在裸游馆避暑，和宫人通宵饮宴。
English: Every midsummer, Han Lingdi would spend the summer at the naked pavilion and have an all-night banquet with his palace attendants.

古文：帝叹曰：使万年如此，则为上仙矣。
现代文：他感叹地说：要一万年都过着这样游乐的生活，就会成为天上的神仙啊！
English: He sighed and said, "If you live a life of amusement like this for ten thousand years, you will become a heavenly immortal!"

古文：宫人年二七以上，三六以下，皆靓妆而解上衣，或共裸浴。
现代文：裸游馆里挑选的宫娥彩女年龄都在十四岁以上，十八岁以下，一律化妆并脱去上衣，有的全身裸体跟皇上一块儿洗浴。
English: In the nude bathhouse, all the court beauties were over the age of fourteen and under the age of eighteen. They all put on makeup and took off their tops, and some of them bathed naked with the emperor.

古文：西域所献茵墀香，煮为浴汤，宫人以之沐浴。浴毕，余汁入渠，名曰流香渠。
现代文：洗浴的浴汤，是用西域进献的茵墀香煮制的。宫娥们洗浴完了，将浴汤放入渠中，名叫流香渠。
English: The bath broth used for bathing is made from Incense, which was brought in from the western regions. After bathing, the empresses put the bath broth into a channel, which is called the Flowing Incense Channel.

古文：又欲内监为鸡鸣，于馆北起鸡鸣堂，多畜鸡。
现代文：汉灵帝又让宫内的太监学鸡叫，在裸游馆北侧修建一座鸡鸣堂，里面放养许多鸡。
English: Han Lingdi also asked the eunuchs in the palace to learn how chickens crow, and built a chicken crowing hall on the north side of the naked tour hall, where many chickens were kept.

古文：每醉乐，迷于天晓，内阉竞作鸡鸣，以乱真声也。
现代文：灵帝每当玩乐饮宴醉了后，到天亮了还在醉梦中。于是太监们争相学鸡叫，以假乱真。
English: Whenever Lingdi was drunk after a fun drinking party, he was still in a drunken dream at dawn. So the eunuchs scrambled to learn how to crow, and confused truth with falsehood.

古文：仍以炬烛投于殿下，帝乃惊寤。
现代文：然后，将燃烧的火炬、蜡烛投掷在大殿下面，灵帝才惊惶地醒过来。
English: Then, the flaming torches and candles were thrown below the main hall, and Emperor Ling woke up in a panic.

古文：及董卓破京师，收其美人，焚其堂馆。
现代文：待到董卓攻破京城后，将宫中的宫娥彩女收到董府，将裸游馆焚毁化为灰烬。
English: After Dong Zhuo conquered the capital, he sent the courtesan of the palace to Dongfu and burned the naked tour hall to ashes.

古文：至魏咸熙中，于先帝投烛处，溟溟有光如星，后人以为神光。于此地建屋，名曰余光祠，以祈福。
现代文：到了曹魏咸熙年间，在汉灵帝当年投掷蜡烛的地方，还于幽暗中隐约有光亮如星星。后人以为是神光，并在有光亮的地方修造一座房屋，起名叫余光祠，用它来向上天祈福。
English: During the reign of Cao Wei and Han Xi, in the place where Han Lingdi once threw a candle, there was still a faint light like a star in the dark. Later generations thought it was divine light, and built a house in the place where there was light, called Yu Guang Temple, and used it to pray to heaven.

古文：至魏明之末，乃扫除焉。
现代文：一直到曹魏末年，才将这座祠堂拆毁除掉。
English: It was not until the last years of Cao Wei that the ancestral hall was finally demolished.

古文：石崇
现代文：石崇
English: Ishitaka

古文：晋石崇与王恺争豪。
现代文：晋朝的石崇跟王恺斗富。
English: Shi Chong of the Jin Dynasty fought for wealth with Wang Xi.

古文：晋武帝，恺甥也，尝以一珊瑚树与恺，高二尺许，枝柯扶疏，世间罕比。
现代文：王恺是晋武帝的亲娘舅，曾经得到武帝赏给他的一株珊瑚树，高约二尺多，枝干参差扶疏，人世间很难再找到能跟这株相比的珊瑚树。
English: Wang Yao was the maternal uncle of Emperor Jinwu. Once, Emperor Wu gave him a gift of a coral tree. It was more than two feet tall, with sparsely spaced branches. It would be difficult to find another coral tree in the world that could compare to this one.

古文：恺以示崇。
现代文：王恺将这株珊瑚树拿出来给石崇看。
English: Wang Yao took out the coral tree to show it to Shi Chong.

古文：崇视讫，举铁如意击碎之，应手丸裂。
现代文：王恺特别惋惜，认为石崇是嫉妒自己的这株珊瑚宝树，于是很是生气。
English: Wang Yao was particularly sorry, thinking that Shi Chong was jealous of his precious coral tree, so he was very angry.

古文：恺甚惋惜，又以为嫉己之宝，声色方厉。崇曰：不足恨，今还卿。
现代文：但是，王恺刚刚大发雷霆，石崇劝说道：我砸碎你的一株珊瑚树，一点也不值得你发脾气。现在，我还你一株就得了嘛。
English: However, Wang Yao had just lost his temper, and Shi Chong advised him: "I smashed one of your coral trees, and it wasn't worth losing your temper at all. Now, I'll just get one of your trees."

古文：乃命左右，悉取珊瑚树。
现代文：说着，命令左右的仆人们，将家中的珊瑚树都取出来。
English: Saying that, he ordered the servants around him to take out all the coral trees in the house.

古文：有高三尺，条干绝俗，光彩溢目者六七枚。
现代文：其中高约三尺，枝干生长得绝对超尘脱俗，发出的光彩耀人眼目的，有六七株。
English: Among them, there are six or seven that are about three feet tall, with branches and trunks that grow absolutely extraordinary, emitting a dazzling brilliance.

古文：如恺比者甚众。
现代文：象王恺拿出来给石崇看的那样的珊瑚树，还有许多。
English: There are many more coral trees like the one that Zhao Wangyao took out to show Shi Chong.

古文：恺怅然自失。
现代文：王恺看到石崇家有这么多精美无比的珊瑚树，立时若有所失地泄下气来。
English: When Wang Yao saw that there were so many exquisite and incomparable coral trees in Shi Chongjia, he was immediately disappointed.

古文：王敦
现代文：王敦
English: Wang Dong

古文：王敦初尚主，如厕，见漆箱盛乾枣。
现代文：王敦刚刚被招为驸马，上厕所去，看见漆箱里装着干枣。
English: Wang Dun had just been recruited as a mule, went to the toilet and saw a lacquer box containing dried dates.

古文：本以塞鼻，王谓上厕果，食至尽。
现代文：这种干枣是用来塞鼻子防止闻到臭味儿的，王敦却称它为上厕果，拿过来全都吃光了。
English: This dried jujube is used to plug the nose to prevent smelling the stench, but Wang Dun called it a toilet fruit, took it and ate it all.

古文：既还，婢擎金盆贮水，琉璃碗盛澡豆。
现代文：从厕所回来后，婢女端着金盆盛水，用琉璃碗装洗澡用的香皂。
English: After returning from the toilet, the maid carried a golden basin with water and filled a glass bowl with soap for bathing.

古文：因倒置水中而饮之，群婢莫不掩口。
现代文：王敦不知道是洗澡用品，接过来倒入水中就喝。众婢女看了都掩口而笑。
English: Wang Dun did not know that it was a bath product, so he poured it into the water and drank it. All the maids hid their mouths and laughed when they saw it.

古文：魏高阳王雍
现代文：魏高阳王雍
English: Wei Gaoyang Wang Yong

古文：后魏高阳王雍居近清阳门外数里，御道西旁，洛中之甲第也。
现代文：后魏高阳人王雍，居住在京都洛阳清阳门外几里的地方，在御道的西侧。王雍的府第，是洛阳城中数一流的。
English: Wang Yong, a post-Wei Gaoyang man, lived a few miles outside the Luoyang-Qingyang Gate in Kyoto, on the west side of the main road. Wang Yong's residence was one of the best in Luoyang.

古文：正光中，雍为丞相。
现代文：北魏孝明帝正光年间，王雍官至丞相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengguang of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaoming, Wang Yong rose to the position of chancellor.

古文：给羽葆鼓吹，虎贲班剑百人。
现代文：皇上赏赐给他以鸟羽为饰的华盖仪仗、乐队、佩带斑纹宝剑的警卫人员共一百人。
English: The emperor presented him with a ceremonial cape decorated with bird feathers, an orchestra, and a total of one hundred guards armed with speckled swords.

古文：贵极人臣，富兼山海。居第匹于帝宫，白壁丹槛，窈窕连亘，飞檐华宇，胶葛周通。
现代文：而且飞翘的屋檐，华丽的房舍，布局参差错落、深远广大，房与房之间有迥廊相通。
English: Moreover, there are soaring eaves, gorgeous buildings, the layout is jumbled and far-reaching, and there are corridors between the rooms.

古文：僮仆六千，妓女五百。
现代文：府中有僮仆六千人，歌舞艺妓五百人。
English: There were six thousand servants and five hundred singing and dancing geishas in the palace.

古文：隋珠照日，罗绮从风。
现代文：最珍贵的隋珠可以映照太阳，华丽的罗绮随风舞动。
English: The most precious Sui Zhu can reflect the sun, and the gorgeous Luo Zhu can dance with the wind.

古文：自汉晋以来，诸王豪侈，未之有也。
现代文：自两汉魏晋以来，最奢侈的王公大臣，也没达到这种地步。
English: The most extravagant prince ministers since the Han and Wei dynasties have not reached this level.

古文：出则鸣驺御道，文物成行，铙吹响发，笳声哀啭；入则歌姬舞女击筑吹笙，而丝管迭奏，连宵尽日。
现代文：出行则有骑马的侍从在前鸣锣开遁，后面紧跟着各种车服旌旗仪仗，并有军乐为他伴行、胡笳声哀啭苍凉。回到府中则有歌姬舞女为他唱歌起舞，击筑吹笙，丝竹管弦接连演奏，通宵达旦不歇息。
English: On the way out, there were attendants on horseback in front of him, chanting and playing drums, followed closely by various uniforms and flags, with military music accompanying him and the sound of bagpipes lamenting the desolation. Back in the palace, there was a singer-dancer singing and dancing for him, blowing gongs, and a silk-bamboo orchestra playing in succession, all night long without rest.

古文：竹林鱼池，侔于禁苑。
现代文：至于府中花园里的茂林、修篁、鱼池亭榭，皇家御苑也不过如此。
English: As for the forest, reed beds and fish pond pavilions in the garden of the central government building, the same is true of the Royal Garden.

古文：芳草如积，珍木连阴。
现代文：翠绿的芳草连片，珍木奇树成荫。
English: Sequins of emerald green grass, shaded by rare trees.

古文：及雍薨后，诸妓女悉令入道，或有出家者。
现代文：清雅幽静，直如地上仙境。王雍死后，五百名歌姬舞妓都让她们遁入空门，为僧及道姑。
English: After Wang Yong's death, five hundred geisha prostitutes were allowed to enter the empty gate to become monks and nuns.

古文：美人徐月华善箜篌，能为明妃出塞之歌。
现代文：美人徐月华擅长演奏箜篌，最拿手的是演奏《昭君出塞》。
English: Beauty Xu Yuehua is good at playing gongs, and her best performance is "Zhaojun's Departure."

古文：闻者莫不动容。
现代文：听她演奏此曲的人，没有不被感动得流下眼泪来的。
English: No one who has heard her play this piece has failed to be moved to tears.

古文：永安中，与卫将军原士康为侧室。
现代文：孝庄皇帝永安年间，徐月华下嫁给卫原将军做姨太太。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongan of Xiaozhuang, Xu Yuehua married General Wei Yuan to become his aunt.

古文：士康宅亦近清阳外，徐鼓箜篌而歌，哀声入云。
现代文：卫将军的府第也在清阳门外。徐月华经常边鼓箜篌边歌唱，凄婉的歌声传入云霄。
English: General Wei's residence was also outside the Qingyang Gate. Xu Yuehua often sang while playing the drums, and her melancholy singing voice reached the sky.

古文：行路听者，俄而成市。
现代文：走路的人走到这儿，听到歌声就停下来。
English: Walkers come here and stop when they hear the singing.

古文：徐常语士康云：王有二美姬，一名修容，一名艳姿。
现代文：不多一会儿，停下听歌的人如同闹市一样的多。徐月华曾经对卫将军说：王丞相生前有两位美姬，一位名叫修容，一位名叫艳姿。
English: Before long, the number of people who had stopped to listen to the song was as large as that of a busy city. Xu Yuehua once said to General Wei: Before Wang Rongxi was born, there were two Meiji, one named Shourong and one named Yan Zi.

古文：并蛾眉皓齿，洁貌倾城。
现代文：两位美姬都长得蛾眉皓齿，容貌洁雅端丽倾城倾国。
English: Both of the two beauties have moth-like brows and sharp teeth, and their clean and elegant looks have attracted people from all over the country.

古文：修容能为绿水歌。艳姿善为逐凤舞。
现代文：修容最擅长唱《绿水之歌》，艳姿最擅长跳《逐凤之舞》。
English: Grooming is best at singing "The Song of Green Water," and beauty is best at dancing "The Dance of the Phoenix."

古文：并爱倾后室，宠冠诸姬。
现代文：在众多的后室姬妾中，王雍最宠爱的就是她们二人。
English: Among the many concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines of the concubines.

古文：士康闻此，常令徐歌绿水、文凤之曲焉。
现代文：卫将军听到这事之后，经常让徐月华给他演唱《绿水》、《文风》两支曲子。
English: After hearing this, General Wei often asked Xu Yuehua to sing "Green Water" and "Wenfeng" to him.

古文：元琛
现代文：元琛
English: Yuanxuan

古文：后魏王侯外戚公王，擅山海之富，居川林之饶。
现代文：后魏时期，王侯、皇家外姓亲戚以及皇室出嫁的公主，都富得占有山海，居住的都是平川有树木的富饶的地方。
English: In the post-Wei period, princes, relatives of the royal family, and princesses who married into the royal family were all rich enough to own the mountains and seas, and they all lived in the rich places with trees in Hirakawa.

古文：争修园宅，互相夸竞。
现代文：这些王侯贵戚攀比着修造营建房宅园林，互相夸耀竞赛。
English: These princes and noblemen competed with each other in building houses and gardens, boasting of the competition.

古文：崇门丰室，阿户连房，飞馆生风，重楼起雾。
现代文：他们居住的府第都是高高的门楼、富丽的居室。家家都有连片的高屋，饰有飞檐的堂馆，一座挨一座的高楼，各种高台、亭榭。
English: The prefectures where they live are all high gate towers and rich living rooms. Every family has a high-rise building with a connecting piece, a hall decorated with cornices, a high-rise building next to each other, and various platforms and pavilions.

古文：高台芳树，家家而筑。花林曲池，园园而有。
现代文：至于花木、林树、曲径、幽地，每座庭园都有。
English: As for flowers, trees, winding paths and secluded spots, every garden has them.

古文：莫不桃李夏绿，竹柏冬青。
现代文：而且都是夏有桃李润绿，冬有竹柏常青。
English: Moreover, all of them have peach, plum and green in summer, and evergreen bamboo and cypress in winter.

古文：而河间王琛最为豪首，常与高阳争衡。
现代文：但是，其中最富有的还是河间的王琛。王琛曾经跟身为宰相的天下第一豪富王雍相抗争比富。
English: However, the richest of them is still Wang Yao of Kawama. Wang Yao used to compete with Wang Yong, the richest man in the world, who was the prime minister.

古文：造文柏堂如徽音殿。
现代文：建造的文柏堂就象皇家的徽音殿。
English: The newly built Wenpo Hall is just like the Imperial Hall of the Imperial Family.

古文：置玉井金罐，以五色丝为绳。
现代文：堂内设置玉石砌作的井，金铸的提水罐，罐上系着用五色丝结成的绳索。
English: Inside the hall, there is a well made of jade masonry, a gold-cast water tank, and a rope made of five-colored silk tied to the tank.

古文：妓女三百人尽皆国色，有婢朝云善吹篪，能为团扇歌陇上声。
现代文：王琛家养有三百名歌姬舞妓，个个都天生丽质是国中最娇美的丽人。其中有一个婢女名叫朝云擅长吹芦竹，还能手挥团扇载歌载舞，专唱陇上的民歌。
English: Wang Qian's family has 300 geisha maiko, all of whom are naturally beautiful and are the most beautiful beauties in the country. Among them, there is a maid named Asayun who is good at blowing bamboo shoots, can also wave a hand fan to sing and dance, and specializes in singing folk songs on the gong.

古文：琛为秦州刺史，诸羌外叛，屡讨之不降。
现代文：王琛任秦州刺史时，当时羌族的各个部落多有叛乱外逃为寇的人，他多次带兵讨伐，都降服不了这些叛乱的羌人。
English: When Wang Qian served as the governor of Qin State, there were many rebels among the various tribes of the Yao people at that time. He led the army to fight many times, but could not subdue these rebellious Yao people.

古文：琛令朝云假为贫妪，吹篪而乞。
现代文：后来，王琛让朝云扮成一位老年妇女，深入到羌人叛乱的地方，用吹芦竹的办法讨饭。
English: Later, Wang Yao had Chaoyun dress up as an old woman, go deep into the place where the Xiong people were rebelling, and beg for food by blowing bamboo shoots.

古文：诸羌闻亡，悉皆流涕，迭相谓曰：何为弃坟井，在山谷为寇耶？
现代文：这些叛乱的羌人听到他们熟悉的芦竹声后，都泪流满面，互相述说：我们为什么要背井离乡，躲在这深山恶谷中为贼寇呢？
English: After hearing the familiar sound of rushing reeds and bamboo, these rebellious villagers burst into tears and said to each other: "Why did we leave our hometown and hide in this deep mountain valley as thieves and robbers?

古文：相率归降。
现代文：于是，相继归降。
English: As a result, they surrendered one after another.

古文：秦民语曰：快马健儿，不如老妪吹篪。
现代文：秦人说：快马健儿，不知老妪吹芦。
English: Qin people said: "Hurry up, Ma Jian'er, I don't know how long you've been blowing the horn.

古文：琛在秦中，多无政绩。
现代文：王琛在秦州刺史任上，多数时候没有什么政绩。
English: Wang Hui was appointed to the post of Qin State Historian, but most of the time he did not have any political achievements.

古文：遣使向西域求名马，远至波斯国。得千里马，号曰追风赤。
现代文：他曾派出使臣向西域各国索求名马，最远的时候到达波斯国，求得一匹千里马，名叫追风赤。
English: He once sent an envoy to the countries of the western region to request a famous horse, and at the furthest point he reached Persia to obtain a horse of a thousand li, named Chasing the Wind.

古文：次有七百里者十余，皆有名字。
现代文：还求得日行七百的马十多匹，都有名字。
English: He has also acquired more than ten horses, all of which have names.

古文：以银为槽，金为环锁。
现代文：喂养这些马的食槽是用银作的，环领都是金的。
English: The feeding troughs for the horses were made of silver, and the collars were of gold.

古文：诸王服其豪富。
现代文：诸位王姓富豪都佩服他的富有。
English: All of you rich people with the surname Wang admire his wealth.

古文：琛尝语人云：晋室石崇，乃是庶姓，犹能鸡头狐腋，画卵雕薪。
现代文：王琛曾经跟人说：晋朝时的石崇，乃是一个平民百姓，还能载饰有雉翎的豪华的帽子，穿着用狐腋拼成的昂贵的裘皮大衣，在鸡蛋、薪木上雕画图形。
English: Wang Yao once said: "During the Jin Dynasty, Shi Chong was a commoner. He could also carry a luxurious hat decorated with a skull, wear an expensive fur coat made of fox feathers, and carve figures on eggs and firewood.

古文：况我大魏天王，不为华侈。
现代文：何况我这位堂堂的大魏国的一方之王呢。我这样做一点也不算豪华奢侈。
English: What's more, I, the king of the one side of the Great Wei Dynasty, do not consider this to be a luxury at all.

古文：造迎风馆于后园。
现代文：王琛在后园建造一座迎风馆。
English: Wang Yao is building a windward pavilion in the back garden.

古文：窗户之上，列钱青琐，玉凤衔铃，金龙吐旆。
现代文：窗户上用青钱连环成装饰图案，玉石雕成的凤凰啄中衔着响铃，金铸的龙嘴里吐着垂旒。
English: On the windows, blue money is used to create a decorative pattern, a phoenix cocoon carved from jade holds a bell, and a gold dragon spits saliva from its beak.

古文：素柰朱李，枝条入檐。妓女楼上坐而摘食。
现代文：结着白奈果、红李子的枝条伸进屋檐来，歌舞艺妓们坐在楼上窗边伸手可以摘食。
English: Branches of sycamore and red plum poke through the eaves, and singing and dancing geishas sit upstairs by the window, reaching out for food.

古文：琛尝会宗室，陈诸宝器。
现代文：王琛有一次将同宗的人都请到他府上，将他收藏的各种珍宝器皿展示给他们看。
English: Wang Yao once invited members of the same family to his mansion to show them his collection of precious utensils.

古文：金瓶银瓮百余口，瓯擎盘合称是。
现代文：有金瓶、银瓮一百多口。盆、盘、盒、擎灯等器皿，也都非金既银。
English: There are more than a hundred gold and silver vessels, pots, plates, boxes, lanterns and other utensils, all of which are neither gold nor silver.

古文：其余酒器，有水晶钵、玛瑙琉璃碗、赤玉卮数十枚。
现代文：余下的还有各种酒具：有水晶钵，玛琅琉璃碗，赤玉酒杯几十只。
English: There are also various wine utensils left over: there are dozens of crystal goblets, marble glazed bowls, and red jade wine glasses.

古文：作工奇妙，中土所无，皆从西来。
现代文：这些酒具作工都奇妙无比，是中国所没有的，都是从西方进口来的。
English: The workmanship of these wine utensils is incomparable. There is nothing like them in China. They are all imported from the West.

古文：又陈女乐及诸名马。
现代文：又展看女艺妓和他饲养的那些名马。
English: He also shows a female geisha and the famous horses he has bred.

古文：复引诸王按行库藏，锦罽珠玑，冰罗雾合，充积其内。
现代文：之后，带领这些人逐个观看他家库房中收藏的珍贵物品，有华丽的毛织品，名贵的珠宝，精美的绉纱、白绸，装满一座座库房。
English: After that, he led these people one by one to see the precious items collected in his family's storeroom, including gorgeous woolen fabrics, precious jewels, exquisite satin and white silk, filling one storeroom after another.

古文：琛谓章武王融曰：不恨我不见石崇，恨石崇不见我。
现代文：王琛对章武的王融说：我一点也不以见不到石崇而感到遗憾，遗憾的是石崇他看不到我是这样的富有。
English: Wang Yao said to Wang Rong of Zhangwu: "I am not at all sorry that I can't see Shi Chong, but I am sorry that Shi Chong can't see that I am so rich."

古文：融立性贪暴，志欲无厌。
现代文：王融为人贪婪残暴，贪得无厌。
English: Wang Rong is a greedy and cruel person. He is insatiably greedy.

古文：见之叹惋，不觉成疾。还家，卧三日不能起。
现代文：他看到王琛有这么多的稀世至宝和财物后，非常为自己还没有达到王琛这样豪富而感到惋惜和叹息，不觉间酿成疾病。回到章武家中后，三天卧床不起。
English: After he saw that Wang Hui had so many rare treasures and possessions, he felt very sorry and sighed that he had not yet reached such a wealth as Wang Hui. Unconsciously, he developed an illness. After returning to Zhang Wu's home, he was bedridden for three days.

古文：江阳王继来省疾，谕之曰：卿之财产，应得抗衡，何为羡叹，以至于此？
现代文：江阳王继来探病，劝慰他说：你的财产，完全可以和他人相匹敌，为什么羡慕惋惜到得病的地步？
English: Jiangyang Wang came to see him and comforted him, saying, "Your wealth is completely comparable to that of others. Why are you so envious and regretful to the point of illness?

古文：融曰：常谓高阳一人，宝货多于融。谁知河间，瞻之在前。
现代文：王融说：曾经有人说高阳王雍珍宝比我王融多，谁知道河间又出了个王琛，他的珍宝也远远地超过我，令人敬仰。
English: Wang Rong said, "Someone once said that Gaoyang Wang Yong treasures more than I do. Who knows, there is another Wang Rong in the river. His treasures are far more than I am, which is admirable."

古文：继曰：卿欲作袁术之在淮南，不知世间复有刘备也。
现代文：王继说：你呀，是想作淮南的袁术，不知道人世间还有个刘备呢。
English: Wang Ji said, "You, who want to be the Yuan Shu of Huainan, do not know that there is still a Liu Bei in the world.

古文：及尔朱氏乱后，王侯第宅，多题为寺宇。
现代文：待到朱氏作乱后，王侯的宅第许多都变成了寺庙。
English: After the Zhu clan's rebellion, many of the prince's residences were turned into temples.

古文：寿丘里闾，列刹相望。
现代文：寿丘的街市里，寺庙林立，互相可以看得见。
English: In the streets and markets of Shoukyou, temples are lined up, and you can see each other.

古文：祗洹郁起，宝塔高壮。
现代文：又新建不少祗园佛寺，和高大壮伟的佛塔。
English: In addition, many Gion Buddhist temples have been newly built, including tall and magnificent stupas.

古文：四月八日，京都士女，多至河间寺。
现代文：每到四月初八赶庙会，京城里的夫人小姐，许多人都到河间寺去游玩。
English: On the eighth day of every April, when the temple fair is held, many ladies in the capital go to visit Kawama-dera Temple.

古文：观其堂庑绮丽，无不叹息。
现代文：看到华丽的殿堂廊屋，没有人不赞叹的。
English: No one could fail to be impressed by the magnificent hall of fame gallery.

古文：以为蓬莱仙室，亦不是过也。
现代文：认为将它们比作传说中的蓬莱仙人住的仙室，一点也不过分啊！
English: I don't think it's too much to compare them to the fairy house where the legendary Penglai immortals live!

古文：隋炀帝
现代文：隋炀帝
English: Sui and Qian Dynasties

古文：炀帝巡狩北边，作大行殿七宝帐。容数百人，饰以珍宝，光辉洞彻。
现代文：隋炀帝巡行视察北方边境地区时，特意制作了一座大行殿七宝帐，里面可以容纳几百人，镶嵌装饰着各种珍珠、宝石。
English: When the Sui and Qian emperors were on a tour to inspect the northern border areas, they specially made a large seven-treasure ledger, which could accommodate several hundred people and was inlaid with various pearls and precious stones.

古文：引匈奴启民可汗，宴会其中。
现代文：这些珍宝发出的光亮可以照遍整个帐内。
English: The light emitted by these treasures can illuminate the entire account.

古文：可汗恍然，疑非人世之有。识者云：大行殿者，不祥之兆也。
现代文：隋炀帝引请匈奴可汗启民在大行殿内饮宴，启民可汗神情恍然，怀疑人世间不可能有这样豪华阔大的帐房。有远见卓识的人说：隋炀帝造大行殿是一种不吉祥的预兆。
English: Emperor Sui and Empress Dowager Cixi invited the Xiongnu khan Qimin to a banquet in the Great Hall of the Empress Dowager Cixi. Qimin and Khan looked puzzled and doubted that there could be such a luxurious and spacious counting house in the world. People with foresight said: Emperor Sui and Empress Dowager Cixi's construction of the Great Hall of the Empress Dowager Cixi is an unlucky omen.

古文：是非王莽轻车之比。此实天心，非关人事也。
现代文：它的错误好比王莽当年听从太傅虞唐尊的话，让人穿短衣小袖，坐我马紫车一样。这实在是上天的旨意，而不是人力所能改变的啊！
English: Its mistake is like Wang Mang listening to the words of Tai Fu Yu Tang Zun back in the day, letting people wear shorts and short sleeves, and riding in a horse-drawn carriage. This is truly God's will, and not something that can be changed by human power!

古文：又唐贞观初，天下乂安，百姓富赡，公私少事。
现代文：又：唐太宗贞观初年，天下太平安定，人民富裕充足。
English: Also: In the first year of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, the world was peaceful and stable, and the people were well-off.

古文：时属除夜，太宗盛饰宫掖，明设灯烛，殿内诸房莫不绮丽。
现代文：不论是国家还是百姓，都很少有棘手的事情。
English: Whether it is the country or the people, there are few thorny issues.

古文：后妃嫔御皆盛衣服，金翠焕烂。
现代文：这年大年除夕，唐太宗下令将皇宫及嫔妃们居住的旁舍装饰布置一新，各处置设点燃的灯烛，宫殿里的各个厅、堂、屋、室都布置得豪华绮丽，皇后、嫔妃们都身着华丽的盛服、佩戴各种珠宝首饰，真是耀金映翠，璀璨煌丽。
English: On this year's New Year's Eve, Emperor Taizong ordered the decoration of the imperial palace and the ancillary rooms where the empresses lived to be newly arranged. Each room was equipped with lighted candles, and each hall, hall, room, and room in the palace was luxuriously decorated. The empresses and empresses were all dressed in gorgeous costumes and wore various jewelry. They really shone with gold and were resplendent.

古文：设庭燎于阶下，其明如昼。
现代文：在宫中庭院阶下设置火炬，照耀得宫中如同白天一样明亮。
English: A torch was set up at the foot of the steps in the courtyard, illuminating the palace as brightly as day.

古文：盛奏歌乐。乃延萧后，与同观之。
现代文：又命令宫中乐工一曲接一曲地演奏乐曲，好不热闹。唐太宗命人将隋炀帝的皇后萧后请来，一同观赏这空前的盛景。
English: He also ordered the palace musicians to play one piece of music after another, so as not to be noisy. Emperor Taizong ordered the Empress Xiao Hou of the Sui Dynasty to come and watch this unprecedented spectacle.

古文：乐阕，帝谓萧曰：朕施设孰与隋主。
现代文：一曲演奏完了，太宗问萧后：我今天晚上的这些陈设布置跟隋炀帝当年比较，哪个更盛大豪华？
English: After a piece of music was played, Emperor Taizong asked Empress Xiao, "Compared to the Sui and Qian dynasties, which one is more grand and luxurious?"

古文：萧后笑而不答。
现代文：萧后只是微笑并不回答这个问题。
English: Xiao Hou just smiled and did not answer the question.

古文：固问之，后曰：彼乃亡国之君，陛下开基之主，奢俭之事，固不同矣。
现代文：太宗再三问她，萧后回答说：隋炀帝是个使国家灭亡的国君，陛下是开创基业的皇帝，因此哪位奢侈、哪位节俭，当然不一样啦。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly asked her, and Xiao Hou replied: Emperor Sui was a sovereign who brought about the downfall of the country, and His Majesty was an emperor who founded a foundation. Therefore, it is of course different who is extravagant and who is frugal.

古文：帝曰：隋主何如？
现代文：太宗问：隋炀帝当年是怎样的？
English: Taizong asked: What was the Sui Dynasty like?

古文：后曰：隋主享国十有余年，妾常侍从。
现代文：萧后说：隋炀帝在位十多年，我一向在他身边侍奉他。
English: Xiao Hou said: Emperor Sui and Qin has been on the throne for more than ten years. I have always been at his side to serve him.

古文：见其淫侈。
现代文：他的那些奢华淫逸的事情我见得太多了。
English: I've seen too much of his debauchery.

古文：隋主每当除夜，殿前诸院，设火山数十，尽沉香木根也，每一山焚沉香数车。
现代文：隋炀帝每到大年除夕的夜晚，便在大殿前边的各个院庭中架设几十座火山，用的都是沉香木根，每一座火山都要焚烧好几车沉香木根。
English: Every New Year's Eve, the Sui and Qian Dynasties erected dozens of volcanoes in the courtyards in front of the Great Hall, all of which used agarwood roots. Each volcano had to burn several carts of agarwood roots.

古文：火光暗，则以甲煎沃之，焰起数丈。
现代文：如果嫌火光暗，就再往上添加香料甲煎，火焰立时高达好几丈。
English: If you don't like the fire to be too bright, then add the spice jiaoren to the top, and the flame will immediately reach several feet high.

古文：沉香甲煎之香，旁闻数十里。
现代文：沉香、甲煎燃烧散发出来的香味儿，京城附近几十里地以内都能闻得到。
English: The fragrance emitted by the burning of agarwood and cinnamon can be smelled for dozens of miles around the capital.

古文：一夜之中，则用沉香二百余乘，甲煎二百石。
现代文：除夕这一个晚上，就要烧掉沉香木二百多车，甲煎二百石。
English: On New Year's Eve, it is necessary to burn more than 200 cartloads of agarwood and 200 stone coals.

古文：又殿内房中，不燃膏火，悬大珠一百二十以照之，光比白日。
现代文：同时，殿内各屋不点灯烛，而是悬挂一百二十枚巨大的珍珠照明。
English: At the same time, each room in the hall does not light candles, but hangs one hundred and twenty huge pearl lights.

古文：又有明月宝夜光珠，大者六七寸，小者犹三寸。
现代文：这些珍珠发出的光亮，照耀得殿堂象白天一样亮堂。还有名叫明月宝的夜光珠，大的六七寸，小的也有三寸。
English: The light emitted by these pearls illuminates the hall as brightly as during the day. There are also luminous beads called bright moon treasure, the largest is sixty-seven centimeters, and the smallest is three centimeters.

古文：一珠之价，直数千万。
现代文：一枚夜光珠就价值几千万钱。
English: A luminous bead is worth tens of millions of dollars.

古文：妾观陛下所施，都无此物。
现代文：我看陛下今晚的陈设布置，都没有这些东西。
English: I don't think His Majesty's table setting tonight has any of those things.

古文：殿前所焚，尽是柴木。
现代文：殿前所烧的，不过是些柴木罢了。
English: What was burned in front of the palace was nothing more than firewood.

古文：殿内所烛，皆是膏油。
现代文：殿内点燃的，也是一膏油蜡烛。
English: The one lit in the hall is also a wax candle.

古文：但乍觉烟气薰人，实未见其华丽。
现代文：只是一开始让人觉得烟气太薰人，实在是看不出有什么华丽来。
English: It's just that at first you feel the smoke is too intoxicating, and you really can't see what's so gorgeous about it.

古文：然亡国之事，亦愿陛下远之。
现代文：然而，穷奢极欲则会亡国的啊，还望陛下离它远一些好。
English: However, extravagance will destroy the country, and it is better for His Majesty to stay away from it.

古文：太宗良久不言。
现代文：唐太宗听了萧后这一席话，很长时间没说一句话。
English: Tang Taizong listened to Xiao Hou's speech and did not say a word for a long time.

古文：口刺其奢，而心服其盛。则天后
现代文：后来，口里指斥隋炀帝这样做太奢华了，心中却暗暗地佩服当年隋宫除夕夜布置得真豪华盛大啊！则天后
English: Later, the mouth rebuked the Sui and Qian Dynasties for being too luxurious, but secretly admired the Sui Palace's New Year's Eve decoration.

古文：则天造明堂。
现代文：武则天建造明堂。
English: Bu Zetian started to build Myeongdong.

古文：于顶上铸銕为鸑鷟，高二丈，以金饰之，轩轩若飞。
现代文：在明堂顶上铸造一只铁凤凰，高二丈，用黄金装饰它，展翅欲飞。
English: On the top of the Ming Hall, cast an iron phoenix, two-story high, decorate it with gold, and spread its wings to fly.

古文：数年，大风吹动，犹存其址。
现代文：历时好几年，经历过狂风吹刮，这只铁凤凰依然存在。
English: After several years and a lot of wind, this iron phoenix still exists.

古文：更铸铜为大火珠，饰以黄金，煌煌耀日，今见存焉。
现代文：武则天还用铜铸造一只大火珠，上面饰以黄金，光彩夺目可以照耀太阳，现在依然还有。
English: Wu Zetian also used copper to cast a large bead, which was decorated with gold and was so dazzling that it could outshine the sun. It still exists today.

古文：又造天枢于定鼎门，并番客胡商聚钱百万亿所成。
现代文：武则天又在定鼎门建造一座天枢，是用向外国和少数民族的商贾集资百万亿钱才建造成的。
English: Wu Zetian also built a heavenly center in Dingdingmen, which was built by collecting hundreds of billions of money from foreign and ethnic minority merchants.

古文：其高九十尺，下以铁山为脚，铸铜为二麒麟，以镇四方。
现代文：天枢高九十尺，下面铸有铁山作柱脚，铸造两只铜麒麟，用它来镇守四方。
English: Heaven's core is ninety feet high, with an iron mountain cast below as a pillar foot, and two bronze unicorns cast, which are used to guard the four directions.

古文：上有铜盘，经三丈。
现代文：天枢上面置有一只巨形铜盘，直径三丈阔。
English: On top of the heavenly pivot there is a huge copper disk, three times as wide in diameter.

古文：蛟龙人立，两足捧大火珠，望之如日初出。
现代文：并铸有蛟龙象人一样立在那儿，两足捧着一只大火珠，望去象太阳刚刚升起来。
English: And a cast dragon stood there like a man, holding a big ball of fire in its paws, looking like the sun had just risen.

古文：镌文于柱曰：大周万国述德天枢。
现代文：并在柱子上铭刻文字：大周万国述德天枢。
English: And inscribed on the pillar are the words: 大周万国述德天枢.

古文：后开元中推倒，铜入上方。
现代文：后来，在唐玄宗开元年间，这座天枢被玄宗皇上命人推倒，所有的铜物、铜饰都没收送入皇宫库府。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong in the first year of the Tang Dynasty, this heavenly center was demolished by the order of Emperor Xuanzong, and all copper objects and copper ornaments were confiscated and sent to the Imperial Treasury.

古文：许敬宗
现代文：许敬宗
English: Xu Jingzong

古文：唐许敬宗奢豪。
现代文：唐朝时许敬宗非常豪华奢侈。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Xu Jingzong was very luxurious.

古文：尝造飞楼七十间，令妓女走马于其上，以为戏乐。
现代文：曾经建造飞楼七十间，让艺妓们骑马在楼上面奔走，以此作为一种游戏与娱乐。
English: There was a time when they built a 70-room flying castle and let geishas run around on horseback on top of the building as a form of play and entertainment.

古文：张易之
现代文：张易之
English: Zhang Yizhi

古文：张易之为母阿臧造七宝帐，金银珠玉宝贝之类，罔不毕萃。
现代文：张易之，是唐朝武则天时期的宠臣。张易之为他母亲阿臧建造一座七宝帐，金、银、珠、玉等各种珍宝，没有不汇集在这座宝帐上的。
English: Zhang Yizhi was a favorite of Wu Zetian during the Tang Dynasty. Zhang Yizhi built a seven treasure account for his mother, grandma. All kinds of precious treasures such as gold, silver, beads and jade were collected in this treasure account.

古文：旷古以来，未曾闻见。
现代文：从远古到如今，从未有听到过、从未有见到过这样奢华的帐幔。
English: From ancient times to the present day, no one has ever heard, no one has ever seen such a luxurious curtain.

古文：铺象牙床，织犀角簟，鼲貂之褥，蛩蟁之耗，汾晋之龙顺、临河之凤翮以为席。
现代文：帐幔里面置放的用象牙制作的床，床上铺的是犀角簟席，鼲貂皮做的褥子，蛩蟁毛和蚊毫所制做的毡褥，汾晋的龙须和临河的凤翮编织的床席。
English: Inside the curtain, there is a bed made of ivory. The bed is covered with rhinoceros horn mats, satin made of mink skin, felt made of human hair and mosquito hair, dragon's whiskers from Jurchen and feather bedding woven by phoenixes from the riverside.

古文：阿臧与凤阁侍郎李迥秀私通，逼之也。
现代文：阿臧跟凤阁侍郎李迥秀私下通奸。
English: Grandma secretly committed adultery with Fengge waiter Li Yuxiu.

古文：以鸳鸯盏一双共饮，取其常相逐。
现代文：是她靠儿子的权势逼迫李迥秀这样做的。并且，用一对鸳鸯酒杯跟李迥秀饮酒，取其长相依伴、永以为好的寓意。
English: It was she who forced Li Yuxiu to do so by relying on her son's power. Moreover, she drank alcohol with Li Yuxiu with a pair of gourd wine glasses, taking the meaning of their long-term companionship.

古文：迥秀畏其盛，嫌其老，乃荒饮无度，昏醉是务，常频唤不觉。
现代文：李迥秀畏惧她家权盛一时，又嫌弃她年老色衰，于是颓唐地饮酒浇愁没有止境，直到醉得酩酊大醉为止，经常是阿臧怎么招呼他也不醒过来。
English: Li Yuxiu was afraid of her family's power for a while, and disliked her old age, so he drank and worried endlessly until he was very drunk. He often did not wake up no matter how grandma greeted him.

古文：出为恒州刺史。
现代文：后来，李迥秀出任恒州刺史。
English: Later, Li Yuxiu served as the chief historian of Hengzhou.

古文：易之败，阿臧入官。迥秀被坐，降为卫州长史。
现代文：待到神龙元年，唐中宗恢复帝位后，张易之被张柬之等人所杀，家道也败落了。他母亲阿臧没入官府充奴仆。跟他母亲通奸的李迥秀也被牵连，降职为卫州长史。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, after Tang Zhongzong restored the imperial throne, Zhang Yizhi was killed by Zhang Kamzhi and others, and the family was defeated. His mother, Aya, was enslaved by the government. Li Yuxiu, who had committed adultery with his mother, was also implicated and demoted to the governor of Wei Province.

古文：宗楚客
现代文：宗楚客
English: Dzongchuk

古文：宗楚客造一宅新成，皆是文柏为梁，沉香和红粉以泥壁，开门则香气蓬勃。
现代文：宗楚客新建造一座宅院，一律用文柏木为屋梁，墙壁是用沉香和红粉抹的，一打开门马上香气四溢。
English: Zong Chuk newly built a mansion, all of which use cedar wood as the roof beam, the walls are plastered with agarwood and red powder, and the aroma overflows as soon as the door is opened.

古文：磨文石为阶砌及地，着吉莫靴者，行则仰仆。
现代文：台阶和屋里的地面，都是用磨文石砌的，穿着用同州产的吉莫皮制的靴子的人，走在这样光滑的地面上，抬脚就要滑倒的。
English: Both the steps and the floor of the house are made of marble, and a person wearing boots made of local Jimoh leather would slip when walking on such a smooth floor.

古文：楚客被建昌王推得赃万余贯，兄弟配流。
现代文：宗楚客被建昌王李推查出赃款一万多贯，他们兄弟被发配流放。
English: Zongchu guest was found to have embezzled more than ten thousand yuan by Jianchang Wang Li, and their brothers were exiled.

古文：太平公主就其宅看，叹曰：观其行坐处，我等虚生浪死！
现代文：太平公主到宗楚客住的宅院去察看，看到他起居、行坐都是那样的奢华，不由得感叹地说：和宗楚客比，我们这些皇帝家中的公主，王孙，都枉得虚名、白活这一生啦！
English: Princess Taiping went to inspect the mansion where Prince Zong Chu lived and saw the luxury with which he lived, walked and sat. She couldn't help but sigh and say, "Compared to Prince Zong Chu, we, the princesses of the emperor's family, the Wangsun, have all gained a false reputation and lived this life in vain!"

古文：一年，追入为凤阁侍郎。
现代文：一年后，宗楚客又被诏回京城任凤阁侍郎。
English: A year later, Zong Chuk was sent back to Beijing as a Fengge waiter.

古文：景龙中，为中书令。
现代文：到了唐中宗景龙年间，他又出任中书令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong of the Tang Dynasty, he served as the second-ranking official.

古文：韦民之败被诛。
现代文：韦氏图谋叛乱政变失败后，宗楚客也被杀死。
English: After Wei's failed coup attempt, Zong Chuk was also killed.

古文：安乐公主
现代文：安乐公主
English: Princess Anle

古文：洛州昭成佛寺，有安乐公主造百宝香炉。
现代文：洛州昭成佛寺里，有安乐公主制造的百宝香炉一只。
English: In the Buddhist temple of Zhaozheng in Luozhou, there is a Baibao incense burner made by Princess Anle.

古文：高三尺，开四门。
现代文：香炉高三尺，开有四个门。
English: The incense burner is three feet high and has four doors.

古文：绛桥勾栏，花草飞禽走兽，诸天妓乐，麒麟鸾凤，白鹤飞仙。
现代文：紫红色的横梁，栏杆，上面饰有花、草、飞禽、走兽，诸位天女乐妓、麒麟鸾凤、白鹤飞仙。
English: Violet-red beams, railings, decorated with flowers, grasses, birds, and beasts, all of you heavenly prostitutes, unicorns, unicorns, and cranes.

古文：丝来线去，鬼出神入。
现代文：都是用金线、银线，隐起镂刻成的。
English: They are all engraved with gold and silver thread and hidden enamel.

古文：隐起钑镂，窈窕便娟。
现代文：每个人物都轻盈娇好，真乃是鬼斧神工。
English: Each figure is light and delicate, truly a work of art.

古文：真珠玛瑙，琉璃琥珀，颇梨珊瑚，车渠琬琰，一切宝贝，用钱三万，库藏之物，尽于是矣。
现代文：而且香炉上面还镶嵌着珍珠玛瑙，琉璃琥珀、玻璃珊瑚、车渠琬琰等美玉，什么宝物都有。制造这座百宝香炉光手工用了三万钱，安乐公主家中库府中所珍藏的宝物全都拿出来，用在这上面了。
English: Moreover, the top of the incense burner is also inlaid with precious stones such as pearl agate, glazed amber, glass coral, and canal reed, all of which are treasures. It took 30,000 yuan to make this one hundred treasure incense burner by hand, and all of the treasures in the treasure house of Princess Anle's family were taken out and used on it.

古文：又安乐公主改为悖逆庶人，夺百姓庄田，造定昆池四十九里，直抵南山，拟昆明池。
现代文：又安乐公主因为犯了忤逆罪被贬为普通百姓后，夺取侵占老百姓的庄田，修造了一座定昆池，周围四十九里，一直到南山，仿效昆明池。
English: Also, after Princess Anle was relegated to the common people for committing treason, she seized the shoen that had been occupied by the common people and built a Dingkun Pond, with a circumference of forty-nine miles, all the way to Nanshan, to imitate Kunming Pond.

古文：累石为山，以象华岳。
现代文：在池边用石头堆砌成一座假山，仿效华山。
English: At the edge of the pond, stones are piled up to form a rockery, imitating Mount Hua.

古文：引水为涧，以象天津。
现代文：引来河水成为溪涧。仿效天津。
English: The river water is diverted to form a stream channel, following the example of Tianjin.

古文：飞阁步檐，斜墙磴道，被以锦绣，画以丹青，饰以金银，莹以珠玉。
现代文：围着池边建造了许多楼、台、亭、榭，座座都是翘盖如翼、步檐出廊。池周围依山砌有斜墙，铺上登山的石道。而且，到处都披锦挂绣、绘画上各种花鸟图案、壁画，镶嵌装饰着金、银、珠、玉，绮丽奢华、溢光流彩。
English: Around the pond, many buildings, platforms, pavilions, and piers have been built, and the seats are covered like wings, and the walkways are corridors. Around the pond, there are sloping walls built against the mountain, and stone paths for climbing are paved. Moreover, there are embroidered brocades, paintings with various flower and bird patterns, murals, and mosaics decorated with gold, silver, beads, and jade, beautiful luxury, overflowing color.

古文：又为九曲流杯池，作石莲花台，泉于台中流出。
现代文：安乐公主又修造一座九曲流杯池，在池中修建石莲花台，引泉水从石台中流出来。
English: Princess Anle also built a nine-curve cup pool, built a stone lotus flower stand in the pool, and induced spring water to flow out of the stone stand.

古文：穷天下之壮丽，言之难尽。
现代文：每天都有许多官宦人家与平民百姓来到这里游玩观赏，经常是车马堵塞。
English: Every day, many government officials and ordinary people come here to play and watch, and they are often blocked by cars and horses.

古文：悖逆之败，配入司农。每日士女游观，车马填咽。奉敕，辄到者，它人解见任，凡人决一顿，乃止。
现代文：后来，奉皇上敕令，凡是擅自来到这里的人，是国家的官员则解除你的现任职务，一般百姓就责打你一顿，这才没有人再去游赏了。
English: Later, by order of the emperor, anyone who came here without permission was dismissed from his current position by state officials, and ordinary people would beat you up, so no one would go to enjoy it anymore.

古文：又安乐公主造百鸟毛裙，以后百官百姓家效之。
现代文：又安乐公主用百鸟毛编织一条裙子。后来，官宦人家和普通百姓都争相效仿。
English: In addition, Princess Anle knitted a dress from the feathers of a hundred birds. Later, government officials and ordinary people competed to follow suit.

古文：山林奇禽异兽，搜山荡谷，扫地无遗。
现代文：于是，搜寻山林，扫荡山谷，见到奇禽异兽就捕获，几乎都捕尽了。
English: As a result, they searched the mountains and forests, swept the valleys, and when they saw strange birds and beasts, they caught them, and almost all of them were caught.

古文：至于网罗，杀获无数。
现代文：至于张布罗网，更是捕获到无其数的鸟兽。
English: As for Zhang Bro net, it is to capture countless birds and beasts.

古文：开元中，焚宝器于殿前，禁人服珠玉金银罗绮之属，于是采捕乃止。
现代文：直到唐玄宗开元年间，皇上在大殿前将这些百鸟毛裙被尽数焚毁掉，禁止有人再服用金、银、罗绮之类的衣服，这才制止住了朱采奇禽异兽的风气。
English: It wasn't until the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty that the emperor had all of these bird-hair skirts burned in front of the Great Hall, forbidding anyone from wearing gold, silver, and embroidered clothing. This put a stop to the Zhu Tse culture of exotic birds and beasts.

古文：杨慎交
现代文：杨慎交
English: Yang Shengkao

古文：景龙中，妃主家竞为奢侈。
现代文：唐中宗景龙年间，妃主家争相竞赛谁家更奢侈豪华。
English: During the reign of King Jinglong of the Tang Dynasty, the royal families competed to see who could be the most luxurious.

古文：驸马杨慎交、武崇训至以油洒地，筑球场。
现代文：驸马杨慎交、武崇训竟然用油洒地，修筑球场。
English: Yang Shengkang and Wu Chongxun, both of them, even poured oil on the ground to build the stadium.

古文：唐睿宗
现代文：唐睿宗
English: Tang Ruizong

古文：唐睿宗先天二年正月十四、十五、十六夜，于京师安福门外，作灯轮高二十丈。
现代文：唐睿宗先天二年正月十四、十五、十六三个晚上，在京都长安安福门外，修造一座大型彩灯，有二十丈那么高。
English: On the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth nights of the first day of the second month of the previous year, Tang Ruizong built a large lantern, twenty stories high, outside the Chang'an Anfu Gate in Kyoto.

古文：被以锦绮，饰以金银。
现代文：彩灯是用锦绮等丝织品制作的，上面装饰着金银等饰物。
English: The lanterns are made of brocade and other silk fabrics, and are decorated with gold and silver ornaments.

古文：燃五万盏灯，俱竖之如花树。
现代文：并且同时在这儿点燃五万盏彩灯，都高高地悬挂起来，远望如同花树。
English: And at the same time, fifty thousand colored lanterns are lit here, all hanging high, looking like flowers and trees.

古文：宫女千数，衣绮罗，曳锦绣，耀珠翠。施香粉。
现代文：下面还有千余名宫女，身穿绮罗，肩披锦绣，头戴珠翠，脸施脂粉，个个打扮得华丽妖娆可人。
English: Below, there are also more than a thousand princesses, dressed in brocade, with brocade embroidered on their shoulders, pearls on their heads, and face powdered, all of whom are dressed gorgeously.

古文：一花冠，一巾帔，皆至万钱。
现代文：而且一条披巾，一只花冠，都价值万钱。
English: Moreover, a shawl and a wreath are worth thousands of dollars.

古文：装束一妓女，皆至三百贯。
现代文：装束一个女艺人，都得用上三百贯钱。
English: It costs more than 300 yuan to dress up a female entertainer.

古文：妙简长安万年县年少妇女千余人，衣服花钗媚子亦称是。
现代文：又从长安万年县精心挑选出青年妇女一千多人，这些人的衣服、花饰、首饰，跟宫女们一样。
English: In addition, more than a thousand young women were carefully selected from Chang'an Wannian County. These people's clothes, flowers, and jewelry are the same as the palace maids.

古文：于灯下踏歌三日夜。
现代文：她们一同在彩灯下载歌载舞，三天三夜不散。
English: They sang and danced together under the lanterns for three days and three nights.

古文：观乐之极，未始有之。
现代文：象这样盛大的元宵灯会，有始以来从未有过的。
English: There has never been such a grand Lantern Festival since the beginning.

古文：玄宗
现代文：玄宗
English: Hyunjong

古文：玄宗幸华清宫。
现代文：唐玄宗圣驾移住在骊山的华清宫。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty moved to the Huaqing Palace in Lushan.

古文：新广汤池，制作宏丽。
现代文：那儿有新修造的温泉浴池，修造得宏丽堂煌。
English: There is a newly built hot spring bath there, which has been magnificently restored.

古文：安禄山于范阳，以白玉石为鱼龙凫雁，仍为石梁及石莲花以献。
现代文：安禄山在范阳听说玄宗皇上新修一座浴池后，召集知名工匠用白玉雕刻成石鱼、石龙、凫雁，又制作了石梁、石莲花，一并进献给玄宗。
English: After Anlu Mountain in Fanyang heard that Emperor Xuanzong had newly built a bath, it summoned famous craftsmen to use white jade to carve stone fish, stone dragons, and stone geese, and also made stone beams and stone lotuses, all of which were dedicated to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：雕镌巧妙，殆非人功。上大悦，命陈于汤中，又以石梁横亘汤上，而莲花才出于水际。
现代文：玄宗皇帝特别高兴，立即命人将这些东西放进浴池中，又命人将石梁横阵在浴池上面，石莲花刚刚露出水面。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was particularly pleased, and immediately ordered someone to put these things into the bath. He also ordered someone to place a stone beam across the bath, and the stone lotus flower just emerged from the water.

古文：上因幸华清宫。
现代文：放置好了后，玄宗皇帝高高兴兴地来到浴池洗浴。
English: After it was placed, Emperor Xuanzong happily came to the bath to take a bath.

古文：至其所，解衣将入。
现代文：他脱去衣服刚要下到池水中。
English: He had just taken off his clothes and was about to get into the water.

古文：而鱼龙凫雁，皆若奋鳞举翼，状欲飞动。
现代文：忽然觉得放置在池水中的石鱼、石龙、石凫雁，都象抖动鳞片、振起翅膀要动要飞的样子。
English: Suddenly, I felt that the stone fish, stone dragon and stone goose placed in the pool water were all like shaking scales and waving wings to move and fly.

古文：上甚恐，遽命撤去，其莲花至今犹存。
现代文：玄宗皇帝大为惶恐，立即命人将这些鱼、龙、凫雁统统搬走，只有石莲花直到今天还存留在浴池中。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was so alarmed that he immediately ordered the removal of all the fish, dragons, and geese. Only the stone lotus flower remains in the bath to this day.

古文：又尝于宫中置长汤屋数十间，环回甃以文石。
现代文：玄宗皇帝又在华清宫中建造长形浴屋几十间。环绕的屋墙都砌上玛瑙或带纹理的石头。
English: Emperor Xuanzong also built dozens of long baths in the Huaqing Palace. The surrounding walls were built with onyx or textured stone.

古文：为银镂漆船及白香木船，置于其中。
现代文：又作银镂漆船和白香木船，放在温汤浴池中。
English: He also made a silver enamel lacquer boat and a white incense wooden boat, and placed them in a warm bath.

古文：至于楫橹，皆饰以珠玉。
现代文：至于船桨、船橹，都用珍珠、玉石作装饰物。
English: As for the oars and anchors, they are decorated with pearls and jade.

古文：又于汤中，垒瑟瑟及沉香为山，以状瀛洲方丈。
现代文：又在池水中用碧绿色的宝石和沉香木垒成两座假山，形状象传说中的瀛洲、方丈二座仙山。
English: In addition, the pool water was used to make two rock gardens with turquoise gemstones and agarwood, shaped like the legendary Zhouzhou and Hojo Two Immortal Mountains.

古文：上将幸华清宫，贵妃姊妹竞饰车服。
现代文：玄宗皇帝将上华清宫，杨贵妃的姐妹们，争相比赛着置办豪华的车服。
English: Emperor Xuanzong will go to China's Qing Palace, and Yang Guifei's sisters will compete to buy luxury car clothes.

古文：为一犊车，饰以金翠，间以珠玉。
现代文：一辆牛车，用黄金翡翠作装饰，还有珍珠、美玉。
English: a chariot of oxen, decked with gold and emeralds, with pearls and jewels.

古文：一车之费，不啻数十万贯。
现代文：装饰一辆牛车的费用，何止几十万贯。
English: The cost of decorating a cattle wagon is hundreds of thousands of yuan.

古文：既而重甚，牛不能引。
现代文：过不多时，牛车太重了，牛拉不动。
English: Before long, the cart is too heavy for the oxen to pull.

古文：因复上闻，请各乘马。
现代文：因此又向皇上呈报，请求各自换乘马车。
English: Therefore, he also reported to the emperor, requesting that they each transfer to a carriage.

古文：于是竞购名马，以黄金为衔蹶，组绣为障泥。
现代文：于是又竞相购买名马，用黄金打制马嚼子，用华丽的组锈作障泥垂在马腹两侧。
English: As a result, they competed to buy famous horses, used gold to make horse chewing gum, and used gorgeous group rust to make a barrier of mud hanging on both sides of the horse's belly.

古文：共会于国忠宅，将同入禁中。
现代文：她们会集在身为丞相的哥哥杨国忠府上，一同前往宫内。
English: They would gather at the residence of his elder brother Yang Guozhong, who was the prime minister, and go to the palace together.

古文：炳炳照烛，观者如堵。
现代文：车马人行，上面的各种饰物光彩耀眼，围观的人象墙一样将她们围起来。
English: Horse-drawn carriages and carriages, above the various ornaments shine brightly, and the onlookers surround them like a wall.

古文：自国忠宅至于城东南隅，仆御车马，纷纭其间。
现代文：从杨国忠的府第到京城东南角，仆夫、车马排成了一长流。
English: From Yang Guozhong's prefecture to the southeast corner of Beijing, servants, chariots and horses lined up in a long stream.

古文：国忠方与客坐于门下，指而谓客曰：某家起于细微，因缘椒房之亲，以至于是。
现代文：杨国忠和宾客坐在府门下，指着这长长的车队说：我家出身寒微，因为贵妃跟当今皇上结为亲家，以至于富贵显赫到这种程度。
English: Yang Guozhong and his guests sat under the palace gate, pointing to the long motorcade and saying, "My family is from a humble background, because Guifei is related to the current emperor, so rich and prominent to such an extent.

古文：吾今未知税驾之所，念终不能致令名，要当取乐于富贵耳。
现代文：我现在也不知道将来的归宿在哪里。但是考虑到象我们这样靠跟皇上结亲而显赫的人家，终归不能在史书上留下什么美好的声誉，还不如尽一时之富贵享乐呢！
English: I don't know where I'll end up in the future, but considering that a family like ours, which became famous by being related to the emperor, can't leave a good reputation in the history books, I might as well enjoy the moment!

古文：由是骄奢僭侈之态纷然，而昧处满持盈之道矣。
现代文：从此之后，杨家兄妹更加骄奢淫逸，恣情享乐，而对处满则损、持盈则亏的道理一点也不知晓，这才招致后来的安史之乱与马嵬之变啊！
English: From then on, the brothers and sisters of the Yang family were more proud of luxury and luxury, indulged in pleasure, and did not know anything about the principle that fullness is a loss, and holding profit is a loss. This led to the later Anshi Rebellion and the transformation of the horse!

古文：太平公主玉叶冠，虢国夫人夜光枕，杨国忠锁子帐，皆稀代之宝，不能计其直。
现代文：在当时，太平公主的玉叶冠，虢国夫人的夜光枕，与丞相杨国忠的锁子帐，都是稀世之宝，它们的价值是无法计算出来的。
English: At that time, the jade leaf crown of Princess Taiping, the glow-in-the-dark pillow of Lady Yan Guo, and the lock account of Prime Minister Yang Guozhong were all rare treasures, and their value could not be calculated.

古文：虢国夫人
现代文：虢国夫人
English: Mrs. Minokuni is crying.

古文：杨贵妃姊虢国夫人，恩宠一时。
现代文：杨贵妃的姐姐虢国夫人，曾获得到盛极一时的恩宠。
English: Yang Guifei's sister, Lady Zangguo, once received the grace of the moment.

古文：大治第宅，栋宇之盛，举无与比。
现代文：虢国夫人大修府第住宅，房屋修筑的宏伟高大，整个高城长安没有能相比的。
English: Lady Min Guo overhauled the first residence of the government. The grandeur of the house construction is so high that the entire high-rise city of Chang'an cannot be compared.

古文：所居韦嗣立旧宅。
现代文：她新修造的府第原是韦家的旧宅院。
English: Her newly built residence was originally the old residence of the Wei family.

古文：韦氏诸子方午偃息于堂庑间，忽见妇人衣黄罗帔衫，降自步辇。
现代文：一天中午，韦家一家人正在屋中睡午觉。忽然看见一位贵妇人身着黄罗披衫，从步辇上走出来。
English: One day at noon, the Wei family was taking a nap in the middle of the house. Suddenly, they saw a noblewoman wearing a yellow robe come out of the closet.

古文：有侍婢数十人，笑语自若。
现代文：她身旁左右围着几十个侍女丫环，说笑自若如入无人之境。
English: She is surrounded on all sides by dozens of maidservants, and she speaks and laughs as if she were in a no-man's land.

古文：谓韦氏诸子曰：闻此宅欲货，其价几何？
现代文：少许，对韦家的几个儿子说：听说这所宅院要卖，售价多少啊？
English: Xiaoxu said to several sons of the Wei family: I heard that this house is for sale, how much will it cost?

古文：韦氏降阶曰：先人旧庐，所未忍舍。
现代文：韦家人说：这宅院是先人留给我们的，我们不能将它卖了。
English: The Wei family said: This house was left to us by our ancestors, we can't sell it.

古文：语未毕，有工数百人，登东西厢，撤其瓦木。
现代文：这话还未说完，韦家人就看见院中涌进来好几百工人，登上东、西厢房掀瓦拆房。
English: Before they had finished saying this, the Wei family saw hundreds of workers pouring into the hospital, climbing on the east and west wing to lift the tiles and demolish the building.

古文：韦氏诸子乃率家童，挈其琴书，委于路中。
现代文：没法儿，韦家全家人和童仆只好拿着琴、书等日常使用的东西器具，站在路中间眼睁睁地看着他们拆扒自己的房屋。
English: Unable to do anything, the entire Wei family and their servants had to stand in the middle of the road with their harps, books, and other daily necessities, watching them tear down their own house.

古文：而授韦氏隙池十数亩，其宅一无所酧。
现代文：最后，虢国夫人只留下十几亩的一小块地方给韦家，还且没给一分钱的买房钱。
English: In the end, Mrs. Zhang Guo only left a small piece of land of more than ten mu to the Wei family, and did not give a penny to buy a house.

古文：虢国中堂既成，召匠汙镘。
现代文：虢国夫人新宅的中堂建好后，召来工匠进行粉刷墙壁。
English: After the middle hall of Mrs. Shingoku's new house was completed, craftsmen were called in to paint the walls.

古文：授二百万赏其值，而复以金盏瑟瑟三斗为赏。
现代文：起初说好给工钱二百万钱。待到粉刷完毕后，虢国夫人一高兴用金盏盛碧色宝石三斗，做为工钱赏给工匠们。
English: At first, it was agreed to pay two million yuan for the work. After the painting was completed, Mrs. Min Guo was happy to use a gold ingot to hold three buckets of turquoise gems to reward the craftsmen for their work.

古文：后曾有暴风拔树，委其堂上。
现代文：后来，有一次刮暴风将一株大树连根拔起来，落在虢国夫人新宅的堂屋房上。
English: Later, there was a time when a storm uprooted a large tree, which landed on the hall of the new house of Mrs. Shingoku.

古文：已而视之，略无所伤。既撤瓦以观之，皆乘以木瓦。
现代文：风住后上到堂房顶上看看，基本上没有什么损坏。原来，房上覆盖的是精制的木瓦。
English: After the wind died down, I went up to the roof of the hall to have a look, and there was basically no damage. Originally, the hall was covered with refined wooden tiles.

古文：其制作精致，皆此类也。
现代文：整座宅院处处修造的精致程度，都跟这差不多。
English: The level of refinement in the construction of the entire courtyard is almost the same.

古文：虢国每入禁中，常乘骢马，使小黄门御。
现代文：虢国夫人每次进入皇宫，经常骑着一匹紫骢宝马，旁边有一个小太监为她牵马。
English: Every time Lady Min Guo enters the palace, she often rides a purple BMW, with a small eunuch holding the horse for her.

古文：紫骢之俊健，黄门之端秀，皆冠绝一时。
现代文：紫骢宝马的高大健美，小太监的端庄俊秀，都为当时首屈一指的。
English: The tall and well-built Zijie BMW and the dignified and handsome young eunuch were the best-known stars at the time.

