古文：王瞻，字思范，琅邪临沂人，宋太保弘从孙也。
现代文：王瞻字思范，琅邪临沂人，是宋朝太保王弘的堂孙。
English: Wang Zhan Zi Zi Fan, also known as Wang Zhaoyuan, was a great-great-grandson of the Song Dynasty's Taibo Wang Hong.

古文：祖柳，光禄大夫、东亭侯。
现代文：祖父王柳，担任光禄大夫、东亭侯。
English: Grandfather Wang Liu, served as Guanglu doctor, Dongting marquis.

古文：父猷，廷尉卿。
现代文：父亲王猷，担任廷尉卿。
English: His father, Wang Yao, was a courtier.

古文：瞻年数岁，尝从师受业，时有伎经其门，同学皆出观，瞻独不视，习诵如初。
现代文：王瞻几岁时，曾拜师读书，当时有艺人经过门，同学都出去观看，惟独王瞻不看，如起初一样温习诵读。
English: When Wang Zhan was a few years old, he used to study with a teacher. At that time, an artist passed by the door, and his classmates all went out to watch. However, Wang Zhan did not watch, and continued to study and recite as he had in the beginning.

古文：从父尚书仆射僧达闻而异之，谓瞻父曰： 吾宗不衰，寄之此子。 
现代文：伯父尚书仆射僧达听说后而另眼看待他，对王瞻的父亲说： 我们家族不衰微，希望寄托在这孩子身上。 
English: After hearing about Uncle Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Zongda, he looked at him with different eyes and said to Wang Zhan's father: Our family will not decline. Our hopes are pinned on this child.

古文：年十二，居父忧，以孝闻。
现代文：王瞻十二岁，为父亲服丧，以孝道闻名。
English: Wang Zhan was 12 years old. He was mourning for his father and was known for his filial piety.

古文：服阕，袭封东亭侯。
现代文：服丧期满，继承封爵束亭侯。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he succeeded to the title of Duke of Sokutei.

古文：瞻幼时轻薄，好逸游，为闾里所患。
现代文：王瞻年幼时轻浮刻薄，喜好放纵游玩，为乡里所憎恶。
English: When Wang Zhan was young, he was frivolous and mean. He liked to indulge in play and was hated by the villagers.

古文：及长，颇折节有士操，涉猎书记，于棋射尤善。
现代文：等到成人，便强自克制而有读书人的操守，涉猎群书，对下棋射箭尤为擅长。
English: When they become adults, they have strong self-restraint and have the ethics of readers, dabble in books, and are particularly good at playing chess and archery.

古文：起家著作佐郎，累迁太子舍人、太尉主簿、太子洗马。
现代文：出仕为著作佐郎，屡经升迁为太子舍人、太尉主簿、太子洗马。
English: He was sent to work as a writing clerk, and was repeatedly promoted to become a prince's page, a captain's chief clerk, and a prince's groom.

古文：顷之，出为鄱阳内史，秩满，授太子中舍人。
现代文：不久，外出任鄱阳内史，任职期满，授任太子中舍人。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Inner Historian of Shenyang, and at the end of his term of office, he was awarded the post of Crown Prince.

古文：又为齐南海王友，寻转司徒竟陵王从事中郎，王甚相宾礼。
现代文：又任齐南海王友，不久改任司徒竟陵王从事中郎，竟陵王对他十分尊敬。
English: He was also appointed as the friend of the king of the South China Sea, and soon he was appointed as the tutor of the king of the South China Sea to engage in the middle, and the king of the South China Sea respected him very much.

古文：南海王为护军将军，瞻为长史。
现代文：南海王担任护军将军，王瞻任长史。
English: Nanhai Wang served as the escort general, and Wang Zhan served as the long history.

古文：又出补徐州别驾从事史，迁骠骑将军王晏长史。
现代文：又外出任徐州别驾从事史，调任骠骑将军王晏的长史。
English: He also went out to serve as the Xuzhou governor to make history, and the long history of the transfer of the commander of the cavalry to the general Wang Yao.

古文：晏诛，出为晋陵太守。
现代文：王晏被杀，王瞻外出任晋陵太守。
English: Wang Qian was killed, and Wang Zhan was appointed as the governor of Jin Mausoleum.

古文：瞻洁己为政，妻子不免饥寒。
现代文：王瞻廉洁行政，妻子儿女也不能免除饥寒。
English: Wang Zhan's administration is incorruptible, but his wife and children are not exempt from hunger and cold.

古文：时大司马王敬则举兵作乱，路经晋陵，郡民多附敬则。军败，台军讨贼党，瞻言于朝曰： 愚人易动，不足穷法。 
现代文：当时大司马王敬则起兵作乱，途经晋陵，郡中民众很多人依附敬则，后军队失败，朝廷军队要讨伐贼党，王瞻上报朝廷说： 愚蠢的人容易骚动，不值得追根求源去处治。 
English: At that time, the general secretary Ma Wang Jing then raised an army to make a disturbance, passing through Jinling, many people in the county adhered to Jing Zet, after the army failed, the court army wanted to fight the thief party, Wang Zhan reported to the court and said: Stupid people are easy to agitate, it is not worth pursuing the source to deal with.

古文：明帝许之，所全活者万数。
现代文：明帝准许他的意见，所保全的人以万计数。
English: Emperor Ming allowed his opinion, and the number of people saved was counted in the tens of thousands.

古文：征拜给事黄门侍郎，抚军建安王长史，御史中丞。
现代文：征召王瞻任命为给事黄门侍郎，抚军建安王长史，御史中丞。
English: Wang Zhan was conscripted and appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and Wang Changshi, the general of the Jian'an army, was appointed as the vice-commander of the army.

古文：高祖霸府开，以瞻为大司马相国谘议参军，领录事。
现代文：直狙的藩王府邸设立，任命王瞻为大司马相国谘议参军，兼录事参军。
English: The residence of the direct target of the king of the domain was established, and Wang Zhan was appointed as the chief secretary of Ma Xiangguo to consult and join the army, and also to record and join the army.

古文：梁台建，为侍中，迁左民尚书，俄转吏部尚书。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，王瞻任侍中，调任左民尚书，不久改任吏部尚书。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was built, Wang Zhan served as a chamberlain, was transferred to the Left Minster of Letters, and soon became the Secretary of the Ministry of Letters.

古文：瞻性率亮，居选部，所举多行其意。
现代文：王堕性格直率，处于任免官员的部门，所推举多按自己的心意行事。
English: Wang Pu is a forthright character. He is in the department of appointing and dismissing officials, and the elected officials mostly act according to their own wishes.

古文：颇嗜酒，每饮或竟日，而精神益朗赡，不废簿领。
现代文：很爱饮酒，常常饮酒一整日，而精神更加开朗充足，不耽误文书事务。
English: Very fond of drinking, often drinking all day, but the spirit is more cheerful and adequate, do not delay paperwork.

古文：高祖每称瞻有三术，射、棋、酒也。
现代文：高祖经常称说王堕有三种技术，就是射击、下棋、饮酒。
English: Gao Zu often said that Wang Pu Rong had three skills: shooting, playing chess, and drinking.

古文：寻加左军将军，以疾不拜，仍为侍中，领骁骑将军，未拜，卒，时年四十九。
现代文：不久加授左军将军，因患病不就任，仍旧任侍中，兼骁骑将军，没就任，去世，造年四十九岁。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Left Army, but did not take up the post due to illness. He still served as an aide-de-camp, and also as a cavalry general. He did not take up the post, and passed away at the age of 49.

古文：谥康侯。
现代文：谧号尘堡。
English: It's called the Dust Castle.

古文：子长玄，著作佐郎，早卒。
现代文：儿子旦室，担任著作佐郎，去世早。
English: His son Tanshitsu, who served as Shososakusaro, died early.

古文：王志，字次道，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王尽字鲢，型墨堕亚人。
English: Wang Jian is a Chinese-Indian.

古文：祖昙首，宋左光禄大夫、豫宁文侯；父僧虔，齐司空、简穆公：并有重名。
现代文：祖父昙直，是塞左光禄大夫、豫宁文侯；父亲遭卢，是查司空、简穆公，都有大名声。
English: His grandfather, Jianzhong, was a doctor of Xie Zaganglu and Yu Ningwen; his father, Xiang Lu, was a Chasikong and Jian Mukong, both of whom had great fame.

古文：志年九岁，居所生母忧，哀容毁瘠，为中表所异。
现代文：王尽九岁时，为生母服丧，面容哀伤身体消瘦，为同服的兄弟姐妹所惊异。
English: When Wang Duan was nine years old, he was mourning for his birth mother. His face was sad and his body was thin. He was surprised by his brothers and sisters who were also mourning.

古文：弱冠，选尚孝武女安固公主，拜驸马都尉、秘书郎。
现代文：成人后，被挑选娶宋孝武帝的女儿安固公主，任命为驸马都尉、秘书郎。
English: After he became an adult, he was chosen to marry Princess Angu, the daughter of Emperor Song Xiaowu, and was appointed as the captain of the imperial horse and secretary.

古文：累迁太尉行参军，太子舍人，武陵王文学。
现代文：屡经升迁任太尉行参军，太子舍人，武医王文学。
English: He was promoted many times to the rank of captain and joined the army. He was a prince's son and a military doctor.

古文：褚渊为司徒，引志为主簿。
现代文：龃担任司徒，延聘王志为主簿。
English: He served as a tutor, and Wang Zhi was appointed as the main book.

古文：渊谓僧虔曰： 朝廷之恩，本为殊特，所可光荣，在屈贤子。 
现代文：褚赵对灯卢说： 朝廷的恩典，本来特殊，可值得荣耀，就委屈贤公子了。 
English: Zhai Zhao said to Lu Lu: The grace of the imperial court, originally special and worthy of glory, has been wronged by the virtuous young man.

古文：累迁镇北竟陵王功曹史、安陆南郡二王友。
现代文：王志屡经升迁任镇北童堕王功曹史、窒壁、直郡二王友。
English: Wang Zhi has been promoted and demoted many times, and has been appointed to Zhenbei Tong, Wang Gong Cao Shi, Niu Qiao, and Zhi County two Wang You.

古文：入为中书侍郎。
现代文：入京任中书侍郎。
English: He entered the capital as a junior secretary.

古文：寻除宣城内史，清谨有恩惠。
现代文：不久授任宣越内史，清廉谨慎有恩德。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of proclamation of Vietnam's internal history. He was a man of integrity and prudence.

古文：郡民张倪、吴庆争田，经年不决。
现代文：郡中民众张坦、昱庆争夺田地，多年不能判决。
English: Zhang Tan and Zou Qing, residents of the county, have been competing for land for many years.

古文：志到官，父老乃相谓曰： 王府君有德政，吾曹乡里乃有此争。 
现代文：王尽到任后，父老就互相对他们说： 王府君施行德政，我们乡里却有这样的争夺。 
English: After Wangyin took office, his father and grandfather said to each other: Wangfujun practices moral government, but there is such a struggle in our village.

古文：倪、庆因相携请罪，所讼地遂为闲田。
现代文：张倪、吴庆于是一道前往请求治罪，所争讼的田地就成为荒地。
English: Zhang Ni and Wu Qing then went together to plead for punishment, and the disputed fields became wasteland.

古文：征拜黄门侍郎，寻迁吏部侍郎。
现代文：征召王尽任命为黄门侍郎，不久调任吏部侍郎。
English: Wang Jin was conscripted and appointed as Huangmen waiter, and was soon transferred to the position of the leader's waiter.

古文：出为宁朔将军、东阳太守。
现代文：外出任宁朔将军、塞坠太守。
English: He also served as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Saikang.

古文：郡狱有重囚十余人，冬至日悉遣还家，过节皆返，惟一人失期，狱司以为言。
现代文：郡中监狱有重大罪犯十多人，在冬至那一天都放他们回家，过了节日返回，仅一人延误时间，监狱官员报告这件事。
English: The county jail, which houses more than a dozen serious offenders, let them all go home for the winter solstice and return after the holiday, but only one was late, jail officials said.

古文：志曰： 此自太守事，主者勿忧。 
现代文：王尽说： 这自然是太守的责任，主管官员不要担忧。 
English: Wang Yan said: This is naturally the responsibility of the grand marshal, and the responsible officials should not worry.

古文：明旦，果自诣狱，辞以妇孕，吏民益叹服之。
现代文：第二天早晨，那人果然自己前往监狱，称说是因妻子有孕，官吏民众更加佩服王尽。
English: The next morning, the man did indeed go to the prison on his own, saying that because his wife was pregnant, officials and the public admired Wangyin even more.

古文：视事三年，齐永明二年，入为侍中，未拜，转吏部尚书，在选以和理称。
现代文：在任三年，蛮丞朋二年，入京为侍中，未就任，改任吏部尚书，在选拔官吏中以平和合理被称道。
English: He was in office for three years, for two years he was a barbarian, and he entered Beijing as an attendant, but he did not take office, he was changed to the official, and he was praised for his peace and reasonableness in the selection of officials.

古文：崔慧景平，以例加右军将军，封临汝侯，固让不受，改领右卫将军。
现代文：崔差盏基被平定后，王尽依条例加授右军将军，封堕这堡，王查坚决推让不接受，改兼右卫将军。
English: After Cui Zhaojing was subdued, Wang Jian, in accordance with the regulations, was awarded the right army general and the fort was sealed. Wang Cha resolutely refused to accept the concession and changed it to the right guard general.

古文：义师至，城内害东昏，百僚署名送其首。
现代文：起义军队到达，城内人杀了东昏侯，百官署名送上东昏侯的首级。
English: The insurgent army arrived, the people in the city killed Dongdowon, and the signatures of hundreds of officials were sent to the head of Dongdowon.

古文：志闻而叹曰： 冠虽弊，可加足乎？ 
现代文：王志听说后而叹息说： 帽子虽然破，难道可戴在脚上吗? 
English: After hearing this, Wang Zhi sighed and said: Although the hat is broken, can it really be worn on the feet?

古文：因取庭中树叶挪服之，伪闷，不署名。
现代文：于是取用庭院中的树叶揉搓吞下，假装气闷，不署名。
English: So he took some leaves from the courtyard, rubbed them together, swallowed them, pretended to be depressed, and didn't sign.

古文：高祖览笺无志署，心嘉之，弗以让也。
现代文：高祖读文书见没有王志的署名，心中嘉许他，不加以责备。
English: Gao Zu read the document without Wang Zhi's signature, and praised him in his heart without reproaching him.

古文：霸府开，以志为右军将军、骠骑大将军长史。
现代文：藩王府邸设立，任命王志为右军将军、骠骑大将军长史。
English: The residence of the king of the domain was established, and Wang Zhi was appointed as the general of the right army and the commander of the cavalry.

古文：梁台建，迁散骑常侍、中书令。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，王志调任散骑常侍、中书令。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was built, and Wang Zhi was transferred to the position of straggler, regular attendant, and secretary.

古文：天监元年，以本官领前军将军。
现代文：天监元年，以本来官职兼任前军将军。
English: In the first year of Tensho, he became a former army general in addition to his official position.

古文：其年，迁冠军将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：这年，调任冠军将军、丹阳尹。
English: This year, the champion general, Danyang Yin, was transferred.

古文：为政清静，去烦苛。
现代文：行政清简而奉行无为而治，去掉烦琐苛刻的政令。
English: The administration is simple and pursues a laissez-faire policy, eliminating cumbersome and harsh decrees.

古文：京师有寡妇无子，姑亡，举债以敛葬，既葬而无以还之。志愍其义，以俸钱偿焉。
现代文：京城有个寡妇没有儿子，婆婆死后，借债加以收殓安葬，安葬后无法还钱，王志同情她的道义，用俸禄替她偿还。
English: There was a widow in Beijing who had no son. After her mother-in-law died, she borrowed money to pay off her debts and buried her. After she was buried, she was unable to pay back the money. Wang Zhi sympathized with her morality and used his salary to repay her.

古文：时年饥，每旦为粥于郡门，以赋百姓，民称之不容口。
现代文：这年发生饥荒，每天早晨在郡府门前摆稀粥，来布施百姓，民众称赞王志不绝口。
English: This year, a famine occurred. Every morning, thin gruel was placed in front of the county government to distribute to the people. The people praised Wang Zhiran incessantly.

古文：三年，为散骑常侍、中书令，领游击将军。
现代文：三年，担任散骑常侍、中书令，兼游击将军。
English: For three years, he served as a straggler's equerry, a chancellery clerk, and a guerrilla general.

古文：志为中书令，及居京尹，便怀止足。
现代文：王志担任中书令，居职任京城长官，就认为很知足了。
English: Wang Zhi served as the middle-ranking official in charge of official documents and as the governor of Beijing during his tenure, which he considered to be quite enough.

古文：常谓诸子侄曰： 谢庄在宋孝武世，位止中书令，吾自视岂可以过之。 
现代文：时常对子侄们说： 谢庄在宋孝武帝时，地位仅中书令，我自认为不能够超过他。 
English: He often said to his nephews: When Xie Zhuang was Emperor Song Xiaowu, his status was only that of a letter carrier. I don't think I can surpass him.

古文：因多谢病，简通宾客。
现代文：于是多次称病，少和宾客来往。
English: As a result, he called in sick several times and had fewer interactions with guests.

古文：迁前将军、太常卿。
现代文：调任前将军、太常卿。
English: He was transferred to the post of former general, and became Taijo-kyo.

古文：六年，出为云麾将军、安西始兴王长史、南郡太守。
现代文：六年，外出任云麾将军、安西始兴王长史、南郡太守。
English: In six years, he served as the general of Yunnan Province, Wang Changshi of Anxi Province, and the governor of Nan County.

古文：明年，迁军师将军、平西鄱阳郡王长史、江夏太守，并加秩中二千石。
现代文：次年，调任军师将军、平西鄱阳郡王长史、江夏太守，都加授中二千石的品级。
English: In the following year, he was transferred to the position of General of the Division of the Army, Wang Changshi of Pingxi and Shiyang County, and the Governor of Jiangxia, all of whom were awarded the grade of 2,000 koku.

古文：九年，迁为散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：九年，调任散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Nine years later, he was transferred to the post of Sangi (free rider) regular attendant and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：十二年，卒，时年五十四。
现代文：十二年，去世，这年五十四岁。
English: He died twelve years later, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：志善草隶，当时以为楷法。
现代文：王志擅长草书隶书，当时作为楷模。
English: Wang Zhi excelled at cursive script and was a role model at the time.

古文：齐游击将军徐希秀亦号能书，常谓志为 书圣 。
现代文：齐朝游击将军徐希秀也号称能书写，常称王志为 书圣 。
English: The Qi Dynasty guerrilla general Xu Xixiu also claimed to be able to write, often calling Wang Zhi a book saint.

古文：志家世居建康禁中里马蕃巷，父僧虔以来，门风多宽恕，志尤惇厚。
现代文：王志的家庭世代居住在建康禁中里马蕃巷，从父亲僧虔以来，家风多宽容，王志尤为淳朴厚道。
English: For generations, Wang Zhi's family has lived in Jiankang Forbidden City's Maru Alley. Since his father was a monk, the family has been tolerant, and Wang Zhi is particularly simple and kind.

古文：所历职，不以罪咎劾人。
现代文：在所历任的职位上，从不以罪遇弹劾别人。
English: He has never been impeached for a crime in any of his previous positions.

古文：门下客尝盗脱志车宪卖之，志知而不问，待之如初。
现代文：门下宾客曾经偷盗王志车辆上的帷幔出卖，王志知道后也不追究，对待那人如当时一样。
English: A guest of Wang Zhi's once stole the curtains on his car and sold them. Wang Zhi did not investigate after he found out, and treated the man as he did at the time.

古文：宾客游其门者，专覆其过而称其善。
现代文：宾客到他家游玩，他专门掩饰别人的过失而称赞他们的善处。
English: When guests came to stay with him, he made a point of glossing over their faults and praising their virtues.

古文：兄弟子侄皆笃实谦和，时人号马蕃诸王为长者。
现代文：兄弟子侄都笃厚诚实谦虚和顺，当时人称马蕃各位王姓家族有长者风范。
English: His brothers, nephews and nieces were all honest, modest and obedient. At that time, they were known as Ma Xuan. The Wang family had the demeanor of the elderly.

古文：普通四年，志改葬，高祖厚赙赐之。追谥曰安。
现代文：普通四年，王志改葬，高祖丰厚地赠送赏赐，追加谧号为安。
English: In the past four years, Wang Zhi was reburied, Gao Zu generously presented a reward, and an additional nickname was given.

古文：有五子缉、休、、操、素，并知名。
现代文：王志有五个儿子，叫王缉、王休、王锤、王操、王塞，都有名声。
English: Wang Zhi has five sons, named Wang Zhi, Wang Xiu, Wang Hammer, Wang Cao, and Wang Sai, all of whom are famous.

古文：王峻，字茂远，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王些字茎远，王困堕巫人。
English: The king of these characters is far away, and the king of the fallen sorcerers is far away.

古文：曾祖敬弘，有重名于宋世，位至左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：曾祖父敬丛，在塞曲时有大名声，官位至左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: His great-grandfather, Keisetsu, had a great reputation as a composer, and rose to the ranks of Sakoroku-dokufu, Kaifu-gi, and Sanji.

古文：祖瓒之，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父瓒之，官位至金紫光禄大夫。
English: Grandfather Yu Zhi was promoted to the official rank of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：父秀之，吴兴太守。
现代文：父亲秀之，官位至吴兴太守。
English: His father, Hideyuki, rose to the rank of Wu Xing Taishu.

古文：峻少美风姿，善举止。
现代文：王些年轻时风度优美，举止适宜。
English: When Wang Zi was young, he had a graceful demeanor and appropriate manners.

古文：起家著作佐郎，不拜，累迁中军庐陵王法曹行参军，太子舍人，邵陵王文学，太傅主簿。
现代文：出仕为着作佐郎，不就任，屡经升迁为中军庐陵王法曹行参军，太子舍人，邵陵王文学，太傅主簿。
English: He served as a servant for the sake of Salo, but did not take office. After being promoted many times, he joined the army as a legal officer of the Chinese army, the Prince of Shaolin, the Shaolin King of Literature, and the Taifu Master.

古文：府主齐竟陵王子良甚相赏遇。
现代文：府主变竟陵王王垦对他十分赏识厚待。
English: The governor-turned-king of the mausoleum, Wang Yao, treated him very well.

古文：迁司徒主簿，以父忧去职。
现代文：升为司徒主簿，因父亲去世离职。
English: He was promoted to the position of the main bookkeeper and left the position due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，除太子洗马，建安王友。
现代文：服丧期满，授任太子洗马，建安王友。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Prince Saima and Prince Jianan were appointed.

古文：出为宁远将军、桂阳内史。
现代文：外出任宁远将军、桂阳内史。
English: He served as the general of Ningyuan and the historian of Guiyang.

古文：会义师起，上流诸郡多相惊扰，峻闭门静坐，一郡帖然，百姓赖之。
现代文：遇义军兴起，上游各郡多惊慌骚动，王峻关门静坐，一郡安定，百姓仰赖他。
English: With the rise of the rebel army, the upstream counties were mostly panicked and agitated, Wang Jun closed the door and sat down, one county was stable, and the people relied on him.

古文：天监初，还，除中书侍郎。
现代文：玉监初年，回京授任中书侍郎。
English: In his first year as a gyokusen, he returned to Kyoto and was appointed junior secretary.

古文：高祖甚悦其风采，与陈郡谢览同见赏擢。
现代文：高祖十分喜爱他的风度，和速登人趔堑一同受到赏识擢升。
English: Gaozu was very fond of his demeanor, and he was appreciated and promoted along with the speed climbers.

古文：俄迁吏部，当官不称职，转征虏安成王长史，又为太子中庶子、游击将军。
现代文：不久调任吏部，在位不称职，改任征虏安成王长史，又担任太子中庶子、游击将军。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the cadre department, and because he was incompetent during his reign, he was reassigned as the conscript Ancheng Wang Changshi, and he also served as the prince's middle son and son-in-law, and a guerrilla general.

古文：出为宣城太守，为政清和，吏民安之。
现代文：外出任宣城太守，行政清廉平和，官吏民众安定。
English: Xuancheng was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng, the administration was clean and peaceful, and the officials and people were stable.

古文：视事三年，征拜侍中，迁度支尚书。
现代文：任职三年，征召入京任命为侍中，调任度支尚书。
English: He served for three years, was called to Beijing and appointed as a chamberlain, and his transfer status is still pending.

古文：又以本官兼起部尚书，监起太极殿。
现代文：又以本来官职兼任起部尚书，监督修建太极殿。
English: In addition, he also assumed his original official position as the head of the Ministry of Education and supervised the construction of the Taiji Temple.

古文：事毕，出为征远将军、平西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：事情结束，外出任征远将军、平西长史、南郡太守。
English: When the matter was over, General Zhaoyuan, Pingxi Changshi, and the governor of Nan County were appointed.

古文：寻为智武将军、镇西长史、蜀郡太守。
现代文：不久担任智武将军、镇西长史、蜀郡太守。
English: He soon served as General Zhimu, Zhenxi Changshi, and Shu County Governor.

古文：还为左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：回京担任左民尚书，兼步兵校尉。
English: He returned to Beijing to serve as Zuo Min Shang Shu, and also as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：迁吏部尚书，处选甚得名誉。
现代文：调任吏部尚书，在选拔官吏的职位上很受称赞。
English: Shang Shu, who was transferred to the personnel department, was highly praised in the position of selecting officials.

古文：峻性详雅，无趋竞心。
现代文：型蜜性情安详高雅，没有趋附争竞的心意。
English: They have a calm and elegant temperament and do not tend to be competitive.

古文：尝与谢览约，官至侍中，不复谋进仕。
现代文：曾经和谢篓约定，官位到侍中，不再谋求升任。
English: There was an agreement with Xie Qi that he would be promoted to the position of chamberlain and would no longer seek promotion.

古文：览自吏部尚书出为吴兴郡，平心不畏强御，亦由处世之情既薄故也。
现代文：谢堕从吏部尚书任上外出任吴兴郡太守，用心公平不畏惧豪强，也是由于处世的心情淡泊的缘故。
English: Xie Pu was appointed as the governor of Wuxing County by Shang Shu from the Ministry of Personnel. He was fair-minded and not afraid of bravery. This was also due to his light-hearted attitude towards life.

古文：峻为侍中以后，虽不退身，亦淡然自守，无所营务。
现代文：王些担任侍中以后，虽然不退职，也操守淡泊，没有什么钻营行为。
English: After Wang Zi served as an attendant, although he did not resign, he also kept a low profile and did not engage in any bullying behavior.

古文：久之，以疾表解职，迁金紫光禄大夫，未拜。
现代文：很久以后，因患病上奏表请求解除职位，调任金紫光禄大夫，没就任。
English: After a long time, due to illness, he submitted a request to be relieved of his position and transferred to Dr. Jin Ziguanglu, but did not take office.

古文：普通二年，卒。时年五十六，谥惠子。
现代文：萱通二年，去世，逭年五十六岁，谧号为惠子。
English: She passed away two years later, at the age of fifty-six. Her nickname was Keiko.

古文：子琮，玩。
现代文：儿子王签。
English: His son, Wang Jie, was born.

古文：琮为国子生，尚始兴王女繁昌县主，不慧，为学生所嗤，遂离婚。
现代文：王羞为国子学生员，娶始兴王的女儿繁昌县主，因不聪明，为学生们所嗤笑，于是离婚。
English: Wang Shiyi, a student of Guozhong, married the daughter of Shi Xing Wang, the head of Fanchang County. The students laughed at him because he was not smart, so they divorced.

古文：峻谢王，王曰： 此自上意，仆极不愿如此。 
现代文：王些向盘罢工道歉，王说： 这本是皇上的意思，我极不愿意这样。 
English: Wang Zi apologized to Pan for the strike. Wang said, "This was the emperor's intention, and I am very reluctant to do this.

古文：峻曰： 臣太祖是谢仁祖外孙，亦不藉殿下姻媾为门户。 
现代文：王峻说： 臣下的太祖是谢仁塑的外孙，也不凭藉殿下的婚姻来确立门户。 
English: Wang Jun said: The great-grandfather of the subjects is the grandson of Xie Renpu, and it does not rely on the marriage of His Royal Highness to establish a portal.

古文：王暕，字思晦，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王陈字思晦，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang ChenZi thinks obscurely, and is an evil copyist.

古文：父俭，齐太尉，南昌文宪公。
现代文：父亲王俭，是齐朝太尉、南昌文宪公。
English: His father, Wang Jian, was a lieutenant of the Qi Dynasty and the Prince of Nanchang.

古文：暕年数岁，而风神警拔，有成人之度。
现代文：王陈几岁时，便风度出众，有成人的器量。
English: When Wang Chen was just a few years old, he had an outstanding demeanor and the poise of an adult.

古文：时文宪作宰，宾客盈门，见暕相谓曰： 公才公望，复在此矣。 
现代文：当时文宪公做宰相，宾客满门，见到王陈后互相说： 三公的才华名望，再现于此了。 
English: At that time, Wen Xiangong was the prime minister, the guests were full, and when they saw Wang Chen, they said to each other: The talent and fame of the three princes have reappeared here.

古文：弱冠，选尚淮南长公主，拜驸马都尉，除员外散骑侍郎，不拜，改授晋安王文学，迁庐陵王友、秘书丞。
现代文：成人后，被挑选娶淮南长公主，任命为驸马都尉，授任员外散骑侍郎，没就任，改授晋安王文学，调任庐医王友、秘书丞。
English: After he became an adult, he was selected to marry the eldest princess of Huainan Province, and was appointed as the captain of the cavalry. He was also awarded the title of non-commissioned cavalry officer, but he did not take up the post. Instead, he was awarded the title of Jinan King of Literature, and he was transferred to the post of imperial physician Wang You and secretary Zheng.

古文：明帝诏求异士，始安王遥光表荐暕及东海王僧孺曰： 臣闻求贤暂劳，垂拱永逸，方之疏壤，取类导川。
现代文：旦眯下韶访求优异人才，盘圭王遥光上奏表推荐王陈和东海人王僧孺说： 臣下听说访求贤人一时辛劳，但可垂衣拱手而治永久安逸，比之于疏通土壤，又类似于疏导河流。
English: Wang Chen, a disciple of Pan Gui Wang Yaoguang, and Wang Sangye, a man from the East China Sea, said: "Vassals have heard that it takes a lot of hard work to visit sages, but it can be done with ease. It is similar to channeling a river as opposed to channeling soil.

古文：伏惟陛下道隐旒纩，信充符玺，白驹空谷，振鹭在庭；犹惧隐鳞卜祝，藏器屠保，物色关下，委裘河上。
现代文：陛下道德潜藏于头脑中，信义展示在符命中，山谷中已空无能人，操行纯洁的贤人已在朝廷中；还恐怕有能人隐匿才能于占卜人士中，暗藏智慧于屠夫佣工中，访求于函谷关下，委任于黄河边。
English: Your Majesty, morality lurks in the mind, trustworthiness is displayed in the fate, the valley is already empty of incompetents, and the sage who practices purity is already in the court; I am afraid that there are also capable people hiding their talents in diviners, hiding their wisdom in butchers' helpers, visiting Hakodate, and delegating to the Yellow River.

古文：非取制于一狐，谅求味于兼采。
现代文：制作裘服不取自于一只狐狸，推想是寻求各种色彩。
English: The idea of making a fur coat did not come from a fox, but from the search for different colours.

古文：而五声倦响，九工是询；寝议庙堂，借听舆皁。
现代文：五声令人厌倦，询问九工；搁置朝堂中的议论，且听仆人之言。
English: Five voices are tiring, inquire nine workmen; put aside the discussion in the morning hall, and listen to the words of the servants.

古文：臣位任隆重，义兼邦家，实欲使名实不违，侥幸路绝。
现代文：臣下地位高职责重，按道义维护国家，实在想使名声舆实际才能不违背，侥幸为官的道路断绝。
English: Subordinates have a high status and heavy responsibilities, uphold the country according to morality, really want to make their reputation and practical ability not violate, and break the road of being an official by chance.

古文：势门上品，犹当格以清谈；英俊下僚，不可限以位貌。
现代文：权势之家上等品第，还应当以社会舆论相衡量；有杰出才能的下层吏员，不可以地位形貌加以限制。
English: The prestige of a powerful family should also be measured by public opinion; lower-level officials with outstanding talents should not be limited by their status and appearance.

古文：窃见秘书丞琅邪王暕，年二十一，七叶重光，海内冠冕，神清气茂，允迪中和。
现代文：私下见到秘书丞至鳄人型塞，二十一岁，七代相继，是海内大族，神清气爽，可用以启迪中正平和。
English: Privately, I saw the secretary Jo to the crocodile-shaped Ce, twenty-one years old, seven generations in a row, is a large family in the sea, with a clear spirit, and can be used to enlighten the world.

古文：叔宝理遣之谈，彦辅名教之乐，故以晖映先达，领袖后进。
现代文：卫叔宝以玄理遣时的谈论，乐彦辅所言名教的乐趣，本已辉映先辈，统率后人。
English: Wei Shubao's discussion of the use of metaphysics, and the fun of famous teachings mentioned by Le Yan Su, have already reflected the forefathers and led the descendants.

古文：居无尘杂，家有赐书；辞赋清新，属言玄远；室迩人旷，物疏道亲。
现代文：居处没有灰尘杂物，家中有赐板的书；辞赋清爽新颖，言谈玄妙高速；房舍近而人空缺，世事疏而道德亲。
English: The place of residence is free of dust and debris, and there is a book on the board at home; the speech is fresh and novel, the speech is mysterious and high-speed; the house is close and the person is vacant, the world is sparse and the moral is close.

古文：养素丘园，台阶虚位；庠序公朝，万夫倾首。
现代文：在丘墟培育隐居之心，台阶上席位空设；学校朝廷，万人翘首以待。
English: Cultivate the heart of seclusion in the hills, empty seats on the steps; school court, everyone is waiting.

古文：岂徒荀令可想，李公不亡而已哉！
现代文：岂仅荀令可以想望，李公不死而已呢!
English: Is it only the imperial edict that we can hope that Li Gong will not die?

古文：乃东序之秘宝，瑚琏之茂器。 
现代文：实在是学校的绝秘宝贝，治理国家的优秀人才。 
English: They really are the school's best-kept secret, the outstanding talent for governing the country.

古文：除骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：授任王味为骠骑从事中郎。
English: Wang Mi was appointed as a middle-ranked horseman.

古文：高祖霸府开，引为户曹属，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：产祖的藩王府邸设立，延聘王味为户曹掾属，升为司徒左长史。
English: The residence of the king of the domain, who was the progenitor of the clan, was established, and Wang Wei was appointed as the head of the Cao Yu clan, and promoted to the position of the chief historian of the Stuzha clan.

古文：天监元年，除太子中庶子，领骁骑将军，入为侍中。
现代文：天监元年，授任太子中庶子，兼骁骑将军，入宫任侍中。
English: In the first year of Tensho, he was appointed the prince's illegitimate son, concurrently serving as a cavalry general, and he entered the palace as a chamberlain.

古文：出为宁朔将军、中军长史。
现代文：外出任宁朔将军、中军长史。
English: He served as the general of Ningshuo and the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：又为侍中，领射声校尉，迁五兵尚书，加给事中，出为晋陵太守。
现代文：又担任侍中，兼射声校尉，调任五兵尚书，加授给事中。外出任晋陵太守。
English: He also served as a chamberlain, and also as a firing sound lieutenant, was transferred to the five soldiers of the Imperial Guard, and was awarded an additional award. He also served as the Jin Mausoleum's grand steward.

古文：征为吏部尚书，俄领国子祭酒。
现代文：征入任吏部尚书，不久兼国子祭酒。
English: He was conscripted into the Imperial General Staff, and was soon promoted to Kuniko no Matsuri no Sake.

古文：暕名公子，少致美称，及居选曹，职事修理；然世贵显，与物多隔，不能留心寒素，众颇谓为刻薄。
现代文：王陈是名公之子，年轻时得到美好名声，等到处于选拔官吏的部门，职责事务井井有条；然而世代尊贵显赫，和他人多有隔阂，不能留心出身低微的人，众人颇认为他冷酷无情。
English: Wang Chen was the son of a great nobleman. When he was young, he gained a good reputation. When he was in the department of selecting officials, his duties and affairs were well organized. However, the generation of dignitaries was distinguished, and there were many differences with others. He could not pay attention to people of low birth, and everyone thought he was cold and ruthless.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，寻加侍中。
现代文：升尚书右仆射，不久加授侍中。
English: He was promoted to Shushi-Utsubo-Sho, and was soon promoted to Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：复迁左仆射，以母忧去官。
现代文：又升为左仆射，因母亲去世离职。
English: He was promoted to the position of left-handed archer, but left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：起为云麾将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：复出后任云麾将军、吴郡太守。
English: After his comeback, he served as the general of Yunnan Province and the governor of Wu County.

古文：还为侍中、尚书左仆射，领国子祭酒。
现代文：回京任侍中、尚书左仆射，兼国子祭酒。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was appointed as a chamberlain, Sho Shusha's second-in-command, and also served as the master of the Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：普通四年冬，暴疾卒，时年四十七。
现代文：普通四年冬，因急病去世，遣年四十七岁。
English: He passed away due to sudden illness in the winter of 2004, at the age of 47.

古文：诏赠侍中、中书令、中军将军，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：韶令追赠侍中、中书令、中军将军，赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套，钱十万，布一百匹。
English: The imperial edict posthumously bestowed upon a chamberlain, a secretary, and a general of the Chinese army, giving them a coffin, a set of ceremonial robes, a set of clothes, 100,000 yuan in money, and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：谥曰靖。
现代文：谧号为靖。
English: His posthumous name was Jing.

古文：有四子，训、承、穉、訏，并通显。
现代文：有四个儿子，叫王训、王丞、王历、王赶，都仕途顺畅显要。
English: They had four sons, named Wang Xun, Wang Zheng, Wang Lih, and Wang Hui, all of whom had smooth and distinguished careers.

古文：训字怀范，幼聪警有识量，征士何胤见而奇之。
现代文：玉剀字怀整，幼年聪明机警有见识器量，隐士坦凰看见后而认为他奇特。
English: Tamakazuchi is well-balanced, young, clever, alert, and knowledgeable. When the hermit Tanno saw him, he thought he was strange.

古文：年十三，暕亡忧毁，家人莫之识。
现代文：十三岁时，王陈去世而他哀伤消瘦，到了家人莫识的地步。
English: At the age of thirteen, Wang Chen passed away and he wasted away, to the point that his family was at a loss.

古文：十六，召见文德殿，应对爽彻。
现代文：十六岁，被在塞垄屘召见，对答爽朗透彻。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was summoned to a meeting in Serendib, where he gave a clear and lucid answer.

古文：上目送久之，顾谓硃异曰： 可谓相门有相矣。 
现代文：皇帝目送他出去良久，回头对朱异说： 可以说是宰相之家有宰相了。 
English: The emperor watched him go out for a long time, and turned back to Zhu Yiyi and said: It can be said that there is a prime minister in the prime minister's family.

古文：补国子生，射策高第，除秘书郎，迁太子舍人、秘书丞。
现代文：增补为国子生，考试为上等，授任秘书郎，调任太子舍人、秘书丞。
English: He was upgraded to Kuniko student, passed the examination with the highest grade, was appointed secretary, and was transferred to the position of prince's assistant and secretary.

古文：转宣城王文学、友、太子中庶子，掌管记。
现代文：改任宣城王文学、友、太子中庶子，掌管记录。
English: He was reassigned to be in charge of the records of the Prince of Xuancheng's literature, friends, and the Prince's middle child.

古文：俄迁侍中，既拜入见，高祖从容问何敬容曰： 褚彦回年几为宰相？ 
现代文：不久升为侍中，任命后入宫叩见，直担舒缓地询问包壹堕说： 褚彦回多少岁做宰相? 
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain, and after his appointment, he went to the palace for an audience. He asked Pao Yibing, who was directly in charge, "How old was Yan Yan when he became prime minister?"

古文：敬容对曰： 少过三十。 
现代文：茎堕回答说： 刚遇三十岁。 
English: "I've just turned 30," replied Tsukuda.

古文：上曰： 今之王训，无谢彦回。 
现代文：皇帝说： 现在的王训，不差于彦回。 
English: The emperor said, "The current imperial edict is no worse than the Hikone edict.

古文：训美容仪，善进止，文章之美，为后进领袖。
现代文：容貌美观有风度，善于进退，文章写得好，是后辈中的领头人。
English: Good-looking and personable, good at advancing and retreating, good at writing articles, he is the leader among the younger generation.

古文：在春宫特被恩礼。
现代文：在太子宫中特别受恩遇礼敬。
English: In the womb of the crown prince, she was treated with special courtesy.

古文：以疾终于位，时年二十六。
现代文：因病在侍中任上去世，这年二十六岁。
English: Due to illness, he died in the position of chamberlain, at the age of twenty-six.

古文：赠本官。
现代文：追赠本身官职。
English: He posthumously received his own government post.

古文：谥温子。
现代文：谧号为温子。
English: His posthumous name was Wanzi.

古文：王泰，字仲通，志长兄慈之子也。
现代文：玉台字住逼，是王尽长兄玉慈的儿子。
English: Yutai Zhihuan is the son of Wang Jin's eldest brother, Yuci.

古文：慈，齐时历侍中、吴郡，知名在志右。
现代文：王茎，在壹翘时历任侍中、县郡太守，名声在王志之上。
English: Wang Zi, who served as an attendant in the past and the county governor in the past, has a reputation above Wang Zhi.

古文：泰幼敏悟，年数岁时，祖母集诸孙侄，散枣栗于床上，群儿皆竞之，泰独不取。
现代文：王台年幼时聪明有悟性，几岁时，祖母召集所有孙子侄儿，撒枣子栗子在床上，小孩子都争相去拿，惟独玉壶不拿。
English: When Wang Tai was young, he was clever and insightful. When he was a few years old, his grandmother called all her grandchildren and nephews together and sprinkled dates and chestnuts on the bed. The children all scrambled to get them, but they did not take the jade pot.

古文：问其故，对曰： 不取，自当得赐。 
现代文：询问其中原因，他回答说： 不拿，自然将受到赏赐。 
English: Asked why, he replied: "If you don't take it, you will be rewarded."

古文：由是中表异之。
现代文：因此同服的兄弟姐妹都另眼看他。
English: As a result, his brothers and sisters who wear the same uniform look at him differently.

古文：既长，通和温雅，人不见其喜愠之色。
现代文：成人后，通达平和温柔雅致。人们看不到他喜怒的神色。
English: As an adult, Tongda is peaceful, gentle and elegant. People can't see his angry and happy expression.

古文：起家为著作郎，不拜，改除秘书郎，迁前将军、法曹行参军、司徒东阁祭酒、车骑主簿。
现代文：出仕为著作郎，不就任，改授秘书郎，调任前将军法曹行参军、司徒束合祭酒、车骑主簿。
English: He was promoted to Shoseki-ro, but did not take up the post, and was reclassified as a secretary-ro. He was transferred to the position of a former general and joined the army as a legal officer.

古文：高祖霸府建，以泰为骠骑功曹史。
现代文：高祖的藩王府邸建立，任命王泰为骠骑功曹史。
English: The residence of the lord of the domain, Gao Zu, was built, and Wang Tai was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：天监元年，迁秘书丞。
现代文：天监元年，调任秘书丞。
English: In 1981, he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：齐永元末，后宫火，延烧秘书，图书散乱殆尽。
现代文：齐永元末年，后宫起火，蔓延烧毁宫中藏书，图书差不多全部散失杂乱。
English: At the end of the first year of the Qiyong Dynasty, a fire broke out in the harem, which spread and destroyed the palace's collection of books. Almost all the books were lost in the chaos.

古文：泰为丞，表校定缮写，高祖从之。
现代文：王泰任秘书丞，上奏表要求加以校订缮写，高祖听从他的建议。
English: Wang Tai served as secretary-general. He asked Gao Zu to revise and rewrite the report form, and Gao Zu followed his suggestion.

古文：顷之，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：不久，调任中书侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：出为南徐州别驾从事史，居职有能名。
现代文：外出任亩徐州别驾从事史，任职有能干的名声。
English: Mu Xuzhou has a distinguished career history and has a reputation for competence.

古文：复征中书侍郎，敕掌吏部郎事。
现代文：又征召为中书侍郎，下令掌管吏部郎事务。
English: He was also conscripted to serve as a chushojiro and ordered to be in charge of the affairs of the ritsuburo.

古文：累迁给事黄门侍郎、员外散骑常侍，并掌吏部如故，俄即真。
现代文：屡经升迁任给事黄门侍郎，员外散骑常侍，并且照旧掌管吏部郎事务，不久正式担任。
English: After many promotions, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate Attendant, the Non-Commissioned Officer and the Non-Commissioned Officer, and was still in charge of the affairs of the cadres, and soon officially assumed the post.

古文：自过江，吏部郎不复典大选，令史以下，小人求竞者辐凑，前后少能称职。
现代文：自从渡过长江以来，吏部郎不再掌管大官的选拔，令史以下，小人争相求取的接连不断，前后很少有人能够称职。
English: Since crossing the Yangtze River, the bureaucrats no longer control the selection of high-ranking officials, which has led to a continuous succession of villains vying for power, and very few people are able to perform their duties.

古文：泰为之不通关求，吏先至者即补，不为贵贱请嘱易意，天下称平。
现代文：王台担当后不搞关系请托，吏员先到的就任用，不因任何人请托说情而改变意见，天下都称赞公平。
English: After Wang Tai took charge, he did not engage in relationships, but asked for help. The clerk arrived first to take office, and did not change his opinion because of anyone's intercession. The world praised the fairness.

古文：累迁为廷尉，司徒左长史。
现代文：屡经升迁任廷尉，司徒左长史。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the rank of court lieutenant, and his career as a magistrate was short-lived.

古文：出为明威将军、新安太守，在郡和理得民心。
现代文：外出任明威将军、塞瞳太守，在郡中平和治理得到民心。
English: Outside, he served as General Mingwei and Grand Prince Saehito, and won the people's hearts through peaceful governance in the county.

古文：征为宁远将军，安右长史，俄迁侍中。
现代文：征入任宁远将军，安右长史，不久升为侍中。
English: He was conscripted into the Ningyuan general, An Yu Changshi, and soon became a chamberlain.

古文：寻为太子庶子、领步兵校尉，复为侍中。
现代文：随之担任太子庶子、兼步兵校尉，又担任侍中。
English: He subsequently served as the prince's illegitimate son, as an infantry lieutenant, and as a chamberlain.

古文：仍迁仁威长史、南兰陵太守，行南康王府、州、国事。
现代文：不久调任仁威长史、南兰陵太守，代理南康王府、州、封国事务。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Ren Wei Changshi, the governor of South Lanling, and was in charge of the affairs of the Nankang royal palace, prefecture and fiefdom.

古文：王迁职，复为北中郎长史、行豫章王府、州、国事，太守如故。
现代文：台康王调任职位，王泰又担任北中郎长史，代理豫章王府、州、封国事务，太守职位照旧。
English: King Taikang was transferred to a new position, while Wang Tai assumed the position of Northern Vice-Regent, acting on behalf of Emperor Yezhang in matters concerning the royal palace, provinces, and fiefdoms, while retaining his position as governor-general.

古文：入为都官尚书。
现代文：入京担任都官尚书。
English: Entered the capital to serve as a magistrate.

古文：泰能接人士，士多怀泰，每愿其居选官。
现代文：王泰能够接纳人士，士人多怀念王泰，常常希望他位居选拔官员的职位。
English: Wang Tai is able to accept people, and many people miss Wang Tai and often hope that he will be in the position of a selection officer.

古文：顷之，为吏部尚书，衣冠属望，未及选举，仍疾，改除散骑常侍、左骁骑将军，未拜，卒，时年四十五。
现代文：不久，王泰担任吏部尚书，高门大户寄希望于他，没有等到任命官员，王泰便患病，改授散骑常侍、左骁骑将军。没就任，去世，这年四十五岁。
English: Soon, Wang Tai assumed the post of secretary of the cadre department, and the high-ranking officials pinned their hopes on him. Without waiting for the appointment of officials, Wang Tai fell ill and was reclassified as a cavalryman and left-handed cavalry general. He did not take office and died at the age of forty-five.

古文：王份，字季文，琅邪人也。
现代文：谧号为夷子。起初王台没有儿子，过继哥哥的儿子王祁，很久以后生下儿子王廓。艳字麸，是曲人。
English: At first, Wang Tai did not have a son. He adopted his brother's son, Wang Yao, and a long time later, he gave birth to his son, Wang Kuo Ma. Yan Zi Yao was a conjurer.

古文：祖僧朗，宋开府仪同三司、元公。父粹，黄门侍郎。
现代文：祖父翅，是塞开府仪、丞公。父亲王控，官至黄门侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Tsubasa Tsubasa, was a Saikaifu-gi, a chancellor, and his father, Wang Keng, was a high-ranking official and a steward of the Yellow Gate.

古文：份十四而孤，解褐车骑主簿。
现代文：型殳十四岁失去父母，出仕为车骑主簿。
English: The 14-year-old lost his parents and became a cyclist.

古文：出为宁远将军、始安内史。
现代文：外出任宁远将军、童瞳内史。
English: General Ningyuan is in charge of external affairs, while Tong Hitomi is in charge of internal affairs.

古文：袁粲之诛，亲故无敢视者，份独往致恸，由是显名。
现代文：尽塞被杀，亲戚朋友没有敢去看的，王俭独自前往致以哀悼，因此而闻名。
English: Even though he was killed, his relatives and friends did not dare to go to see him. Wang Jian went alone to offer his condolences, which is why he is famous.

古文：迁太子中舍人，太尉属。
现代文：调任太子中舍人，太尉掾属。
English: Prince Nakaishi was transferred to the position of prince, and Taiyo Shigenobu was transferred to the position of taifu.

古文：出为晋安内史。
现代文：外出任置塞内史。
English: He was appointed to the position of outside historian and appointed to that of inside historian.

古文：累迁中书侍郎，转大司农。
现代文：屡经升迁任中书侍郎，改任大司农。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of junior secretary and finally to the position of senior secretary of agriculture.

古文：份兄奂于雍州被诛，奂子肃奔于魏，份自拘请罪，齐世祖知其诚款，喻而遣之。
现代文：王份的哥哥王奂在雍州被杀，王奂的儿子王肃逃奔到魏国，王份自我囚禁请求治罪，齐世祖知道他依附的诚心，开导他而放他回去。
English: Wangfen's elder brother, Wang Yao, was killed in Yongzhou. Wang Yao's son, Wang Su Lan, fled to Wei. Wangfen self-imprisoned and asked to be punished. Qi Shizuo knew the sincerity of his attachment, enlightened him and let him go back.

古文：属肃屡引魏人来侵疆埸，世祖尝因侍坐，从容谓份曰： 比有北信不？ 
现代文：正逢王肃接连带领魏国军队前来侵犯边境，曾利用王份陪伴的机会，从容地问王份说： 近来有北方的消息吗? 
English: Just as Wang Su successively led the Wei army to invade the border, he took advantage of the opportunity to accompany Wang Quan and calmly asked Wang Quan: "Has there been any news from the north recently?"

古文：份敛容对曰： 肃既近忘坟柏，宁远忆有臣。 
现代文：王份严肃地回答说： 王肃既然近忘家族，哪裹还速远记得有臣下逭个人。 
English: Wangfen replied solemnly, "Since Wang Su has almost forgotten his family, how could he remember his subordinates?

古文：帝亦以此亮焉。
现代文：皇帝也因此而信任王份。
English: For this reason, the emperor also trusted the crown.

古文：寻除宁朔将军、零陵内史。
现代文：不久授任宁朔将军、零陵内史。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of Ningshuo, and the history of the tomb began.

古文：征为黄门侍郎，以父终于此职，固辞不拜，迁秘书监。
现代文：征入任黄门侍郎，因父亲在这个职位上去世，坚决推辞不就任，调任秘书监。
English: He was conscripted to the post of Huangmen waiter, but because his father died in this position, he resolutely refused to take up the post and was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：天监初，除散骑常侍、领步兵校尉、兼起部尚书。
现代文：天监初年，授任散骑常侍、领步兵校尉、兼起部尚书。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, he was awarded the rank of horseback riding attendant, leading infantry lieutenant, and starting the department.

古文：高祖尝于宴席问群臣曰： 朕为有为无？ 
现代文：高祖曾在宴席上询问群臣说： 我是有为呢还是无为呢? 
English: Gaozu once asked his ministers at a banquet: "Should I do something or should I do nothing?"

古文：份对曰： 陛下应万物为有，体至理为无。 
现代文：王份回答说： 陛下顺应万物是有为，体会最高境界是无为。 
English: Wangfen replied, "Your majesty, you should accept that everything is action, and realize that the highest realm is inaction.

古文：高祖称善。
现代文：高祖称赞回答得好。
English: Gao Zu replied well, to his credit.

古文：出为宣城太守，转吴郡太守，迁宁朔将军、北中郎豫章王长史、兰陵太守，行南徐府州事。
现代文：外出任宣城太守，改任吴郡太守，调任宁朔将军、北中郎豫章王长史、兰陵太守，代理空徐府州事务。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng, the governor of Wu County, the governor of Ningshuo, the governor of Beizhonglang, Yuzhang Wangchangshi, and the governor of Lanling, and acted as the acting governor of Xufu.

古文：迁太常卿、太子右率、散骑常侍，侍东宫，除金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：调任太常卿、太子右率、散骑常侍，在束宫侍奉，授任金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing, the Prince's right-hand man, and the Sanzhi's regular attendant, served at the Sok Palace, and was awarded the position of Jin Shiguanglu Dafu.

古文：复为智武将军、南康王长史，秩中二千石。
现代文：又担任智武将军、南康王长史，品级为中二千石。
English: He also served as Chibu Shogun and Nankang Wangchongshi, with a rank of middle two thousand koku.

古文：复入为散骑常侍、金紫光禄、南徐州大中正，给亲信二十人。
现代文：再入京任散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫、南徐州大中正，赐给亲信二十人。
English: He re-entered Beijing as a knight errant, a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and a vice-president of the South Xuzhou University, and gave twenty people to his close friends.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，寻加侍中。
现代文：升为尚书左仆射，不久加授侍中。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuzha, and was soon promoted to Maozhong.

古文：时修建二郊，份以本官领大匠卿，迁散骑常侍、右光禄大夫，加亲信为四十人。
现代文：当时修建南北二郊祭坛，王份以本身职位兼任大匠卿，调任散骑常侍、右光禄大夫，加授亲信共为四十人。
English: At that time, the North and South Suburbs altars were built, and Wangfen concurrently served as the Grand Master of Craftsmen in his own position, transferred to the position of straggler, Uguanglu doctor, and awarded a total of forty cronies.

古文：迁侍中、特进、左光禄，复以本官监丹阳尹。
现代文：升为侍中、特进、左光禄大夫，又以本身职位兼丹阳尹。
English: He was promoted to attendant, special promotion, doctor of the left light, and also took his own position as Danyang Yin.

古文：普通五年三月，卒，时年七十九。
现代文：普通五年三月，去世，遣年七十九岁。
English: He died in March of the same year, at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：诏赠本官，赙钱四十万，布四百匹，蜡四百斤，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：诏令追赠本来的职位，赠钱四十万文，布四百匹，蜡四百斤，赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套。
English: He was posthumously awarded his former position, given 400,000 yuan in cash, 400 pieces of cloth, 400 catties of wax, a coffin, a gown and a suit of clothes.

古文：谥胡子。
现代文：谧号为胡子。
English: His nickname is Mustache.

古文：长子琳，字孝璋，举南徐州秀才，释褐征虏建安王法曹、司徒东阁祭酒，南平王文学。
现代文：长子王壁，字耋堕，被推举为直涂业秀才，出仕为征虏建塞王法曹参军，司徒束合祭酒，尘里王文学。
English: The eldest son, Wang Qibai, fell into a coma, and was promoted to be an outstanding talent in the direct coating industry. He served as a conscript for the conscription of Jiansai Wang Fa Cao to join the army, Sittou Sokai Festival Wine, and Dengli Wang Literature.

古文：尚义兴公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶义兴公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Yixing and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：累迁中书侍郎，卫军谢朏长史，员外散骑常侍。
现代文：屡经升迁为中书侍郎，卫军谢脑长史，员外散骑常侍。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro (chamberlain of the Imperial Household Agency), to the position of Seijun-no-chōshi (guardian of the Imperial Household Agency), and to the position of Sanzhōi-no-chōji (chamberlain of the Imperial Household Agency).

古文：出为明威将军、东阳太守，征司徒左长史。
现代文：外出任明威将军、塞盐太守，征入任司徒左长史。
English: Outside, he served as the Mingwei general and the Sayan governor, and was conscripted into the post of Stutsu Sakanagao.

古文：锡字公嘏，琳之第二子也。
现代文：王锡字公嘏，是王琳的第二个儿子。
English: Wang Xizhong is Wang Lin's second son.

古文：幼而警悟，与兄弟受业，至应休散，常独留不起。
现代文：年幼机警有悟性，和兄弟拜师读书，到应休息散开时，常常独自留下不起身。
English: The young policemen are intelligent and study with their brothers. When it's time to break up, they often don't want to be left alone.

古文：年七八岁，犹随公主入宫，高祖嘉其聪敏，常为朝士说之。
现代文：七八岁时，还跟随公主进宫，高祖嘉许他的聪明敏捷，经常对朝中官员谈起他。
English: At the age of seven or eight, he also followed the princess into the palace, Gaozu praised his cleverness and agility, and often talked about him to officials in the DPRK and China.

古文：精力不倦，致损右目。
现代文：王锡读书用精力不顾疲倦，以致损伤右眼。
English: Wang Xi used his energy to read despite being tired, resulting in damage to his right eye.

古文：公主每节其业，为饰居宇。
现代文：公主时常限制他的学业，为他装饰住房。
English: The princess often restricted his studies and decorated his house for him.

古文：虽童稚之中，一无所好。
现代文：虽然是儿童时代，却没有一点其他爱好。
English: Despite being a child, he had no other hobbies.

古文：十二，为国子生。
现代文：十二岁时，做国子生。
English: At the age of twelve, he became a son of the country.

古文：十四，举清茂，除秘书郎，与范阳张伯绪齐名，俱为太子舍人。
现代文：十四岁时，被推举为秀才，授任秘书郎，和范阳人张伯绪名声相等，都担任太子舍人。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was selected as a talented person and appointed as a secretary. His fame was equal to that of Zhang Buxu, the Fanyang people, and he served as a prince's son.

古文：丁父忧，居丧尽礼。
现代文：遇父亲去世，服丧恪尽礼仪。
English: When my father died, I did my best to follow the etiquette of mourning.

古文：服阕，除太子洗马。
现代文：服丧期满，授任太子洗马。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed Crown Prince Saima.

古文：时昭明尚幼，未与臣僚相接。
现代文：当时昭明太子还幼小，没有和臣属相交往。
English: At that time, Prince Akimei was still young and did not interact with his subjects.

古文：高祖敕： 太子洗马王锡、秘书郎张缵，亲表英华，朝中髦俊，可以师友事之。 
现代文：高祖下令： 太子洗马王锡、秘书郎张缆，是亲戚中的精英，朝廷中的良才，可如师友一样敬奉他们。 
English: Gaozu ordered: Prince Zima Wangxi and secretary Lang Zhanghan are the elite among relatives and the best talents in the imperial court, and they should be revered as teachers and friends.

古文：以戚属封永安侯，除晋安王友，称疾不行，敕许受诏停都。
现代文：因是亲戚获封永安侯，授任晋安王友，推说患病不赴任，直担下令准许他接受韶命而停留在京城。
English: Because it was a relative who was given the title of Yongan Hou and the post of Jinan Wangyou, he was allowed to stay in Beijing after the direct superior ordered him not to take up the post on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：王冠日，以府僚摄事。
现代文：晋安王行加冠礼的时候，王锡以府中僚属身份代掌事务。
English: When King Jinan performed the coronation ceremony, Wang Xi was in charge of affairs as a subordinate of the prefectural vice-premier.

古文：普通初，魏始连和，使刘善明来聘，敕使中书舍人硃异接之，预宴者皆归化北人。
现代文：普通初年，魏国开始联络求和，派刘善明前来通问修好，高祖下令派中书舍人朱异接待他，参与宴会的都是归附的北方人。
English: In the first year of the common era, Wei began to contact and ask for peace, sent Liu Shanming to come to inquire and make amends, Gao Zu ordered to send Zhu Ying, a Chinese scholar, to receive him, and all northerners who were annexed participated in the banquet.

古文：善明负其才气，酒酣谓异曰： 南国辩学如中书者几人？ 
现代文：善明仗恃自己的才气，饮酒尽兴后对朱异说： 南方国家中如中书舍人您这样雄辩有学问的有几个人? 
English: After drinking to his heart's content, he said to Zhu Yiren, "How many eloquent and learned people in the southern countries are like you?

古文：异对曰： 异所以得接宾宴者，乃分职是司。
现代文：朱异回答说： 我之所以得以接待宾客，是履行职责。
English: Zhu Ying replied, "The reason why I was able to receive guests was to perform my duties.

古文：二国通和，所敦亲好；若以才辩相尚，则不容见使。 
现代文：二国和平交往，所贵重的是亲近友好；如果以才华论辩相推崇，我则不当被指派。 
English: In the peaceful exchanges between the two countries, what is precious is closeness and friendship; if talent and argument are respected, I will be improperly appointed.

古文：善明乃曰： 王锡、张缵，北间所闻，云何可见？ 
现代文：善明于是说： 王望、退堂，在北方听说过，如何可见到他们? 
English: Zhenming then said: Wangwang and Taedong have been heard of in the north, how can they be seen?

古文：异具启，敕即使于南苑设宴，锡与张缵、硃异四人而已。
现代文：塞昱详细启奏，产担下令当即在卢苑设宴，仅王锡和张缵、朱异四人而已。
English: After the detailed introduction, the production manager ordered a banquet to be held immediately in Luyuan. Only Wang Xi, Zhang Jun and Zhu Yi were present.

古文：善明造席，遍论经史，兼以嘲谑，锡、缵随方酬对，无所稽疑，未尝访彼一事，善明甚相叹挹。
现代文：善明到了席上，遍论经书史籍，同时加以嘲讽戏诘，王锡、张缆依其谈论应对，没有停顿疑难，不曾询问对方一件事，善明很相叹赏。
English: When Zen Ming arrived at the table, he discussed the scriptures and historical books, and mocked them at the same time. Wang Xi and Zhang Kan talked about how to deal with them. There was no pause for doubts and difficulties, and he did not ask the other party a single thing. Zen Ming was very impressed.

古文：佗日谓异曰： 一日见二贤，实副所期，不有君子，安能为国！ 
现代文：另一天对朱异说： 一天见到两位贤人，实在满足我的期望，没有君子，怎么能成为国家! 
English: On another day, he said to Zhu Yiyi: Seeing two sages in one day really meets my expectations. Without a gentleman, how can we become a country?

古文：转中书郎，迁给事黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎中，时年二十四。
现代文：改任中书郎，调任给事黄门侍郎、尚书吏部郎中，这年二十四岁。
English: He was reassigned to the position of chushiro (junior secretary) and transferred to the post of hwangmen waiter and junior secretary of the official secretary department. He was 24 years old at the time.

古文：谓亲友曰： 吾以外戚，谬被时知，多叨人爵，本非其志；兼比羸病，庶务难拥，安能舍其所好而徇所不能。 
现代文：王锡对亲友说： 我因是外戚，受到当今皇上的知遇，蒙受爵位，这本不是我的志向；加上近来体弱多病，各种事务难以承受，怎么能舍弃爱好而曲从所不能的事呢? 
English: Wang Xi said to his relatives and friends: Because I am a foreign relative, I have been treated well by the current emperor and received a knighthood. This is not my ambition; coupled with my recent infirmity, all kinds of affairs are unbearable. How can I give up my hobbies and do what is impossible?

古文：乃称疾不拜。
现代文：于是推称患病不就任。
English: As a result, it was assumed that he was ill and would not take up the post.

古文：便谢遣胥徒，拒绝宾客，掩扉覃思，室宇萧然。
现代文：便遣回差役，谢绝宾客，掩门深思，房内寂寥。
English: He then sent the attendant back, declined the guest, closed the door to think, and the room was lonely.

古文：中大通六年正月，卒，时年三十六。
现代文：中大通六年正月，去世，这年三十六岁。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of his junior high school career, he passed away at the age of 36.

古文：赠侍中，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：追赠侍中，赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套。
English: He gave the coffin, a gown, and a suit of clothes to the attendant.

古文：谥贞子。
现代文：追赠谧号为贞子。
English: She was posthumously given the name Sadako.

古文：子泛、湜。
现代文：有儿子王泛、王堡。
English: They have two sons, Wang Pan and Wang Bo.

古文：佥字公会，锡第五弟也。
现代文：王余字公会，是王锡的第五个弟弟。
English: Wang Yu Zi Gu Keng Kai is Wang Xi's fifth younger brother.

古文：八岁丁父忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：八岁遇父亲去世，哀伤消瘦超过礼仪。
English: When his father died when he was eight years old, his grief and emaciation went beyond etiquette.

古文：服阕，召补国子生，祭酒袁昂称为通理。
现代文：服丧期满，征召补为国子生，祭酒袁昂称赞他通达事理。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was conscripted as a national student, and Yuan Ang praised him for his knowledge.

古文：策高第，除长史兼秘书郎中，历尚书殿中郎，太子中舍人，与吴郡陆襄对掌东宫管记。
现代文：考试列在上等，授任长兼秘书郎中，历任尚书殿中郎，太子中舍人，和吴郡人陆襄轮流掌管束宫文牍。
English: The examination was listed in the upper class, and the bestowed chief and secretary, the middle son, the successive middle son of Shang Shudun, the prince's middle son, and Lu Xiang, a person from Wuxi County, took turns in charge of the palace.

古文：出为建安太守。
现代文：外出任建安太守。
English: He also served as the Jianan governor.

古文：山酋方善、谢稀聚徒依险，屡为民患，佥潜设方略，率众平之，有诏褒美，颁示州郡。
现代文：山民首领方善、谢稀聚集部众依仗险要，屡次劫略成为民众的祸患，王仑暗中设下计谋，率领军队平定他们，韶令对王愈加以褒扬，颁布到州郡。
English: The leaders of the mountain people, Fang Zhen and Xie Xian, gathered their followers according to their own interests, and repeatedly became the scourge of the people. Wang Lun secretly set up a strategy, led the army to pacify them, and issued an order to praise Wang Yu and promulgated it to the counties.

古文：除武威将军、始兴内史，丁所生母忧，固辞不拜。
现代文：授任武威将军、始兴内史，遭生母去世，坚决推辞不就任。
English: Awarded the post of General Wu Wei, Shi Xing, after the death of his mother, resolutely refused to take up the post.

古文：又除宁远将军、南康内史，属卢循作乱，复转佥为安成内史，以镇抚之。
现代文：又授任宁远将军、南康内史，遇循墟作乱，又改任王愈为安成内史，来平定安抚他们。
English: He also appointed Ningyuan General and Nan Kang Naishi to quell and pacify them when they caused turmoil, and changed Wang Yu to Ancheng Naishi.

古文：还除黄门侍郎，寻为安西武陵王长史、蜀郡太守。
现代文：返回授任黄门侍郎，不久担任安西武陵王长史、蜀郡太守。
English: He was awarded the post of Huangmen waiter upon his return, and soon assumed the posts of Anxi Wuling Wang Changshi and Shu County Governor.

古文：佥惮岨嶮，固以疾辞，因以黜免。
现代文：王仓畏惧险阻，坚决地以患病加以推辞，朝廷因之罢黜他。
English: Wang Cang was afraid of the danger and resolutely declined the offer, saying that he was ill. As a result, the imperial court dismissed him.

古文：久之，除戎昭将军、尚书左丞，复补黄门侍郎，迁太子中庶子，掌东宫管记。
现代文：很久以后，授任戎昭将军、尚书左丞，又任命为黄门侍郎，调任太子中庶子，掌管东宫文牍。
English: After a long time, he was given the positions of General of the Army, General of the Left, and also appointed as the Yellow Gate Attendant, transferred to the position of the Prince's middle child, and in charge of the East Palace.

古文：太清二年十二月，卒，时年四十五。
现代文：太遣二年十二月，去世，这年四十五岁。
English: Taiyuan died in December of the second year of exile, at the age of forty-five.

古文：赠侍中，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：追赠侍中，赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套。
English: He gave the coffin, a gown, and a suit of clothes to the attendant.

古文：承圣三年，世祖追诏曰： 贤而不伐曰恭，谥恭子。 
现代文：承圣三年，世祖追加诏令说： 贤明而不自夸为恭，定王余谧号为恭子。 
English: In the third year of his consecration, the patriarch issued an additional edict saying, "Be wise, but do not boast, and be reverent. The name of the king, Yu Xi, shall be revered."

古文：张充，字延符，吴郡人。
现代文：退立字亘蜡，昱邓人。
English: The words "Wang Wax" and "Dang Deng Ren" stand out.

古文：父绪，齐特进、金紫光禄大夫，有名前代。
现代文：父亲张钟，是蛮塑特进、金紫光禄大夫，闻名于前朝。
English: His father, Zhang Zhong, was a barbaric plastic surgeon and gold and purple doctor, famous in the former dynasty.

古文：充少时，不持操行，好逸游。
现代文：张充年轻时，不秉持操守，喜好安逸游乐。
English: When Zhang Chong was young, he did not uphold ethics and preferred to have fun.

古文：绪尝请假还吴，始入西郭，值充出猎，左手臂鹰，右手牵狗，遇绪船至，便放绁脱，拜于水次。
现代文：张绪曾经请假回到昱塑，刚进入西城，遇张充出去打猎，左手架着鹰，右手牵着狗，遇上张钟的船到达，张充便放下绳索解开袖套，在水边叩拜。
English: Zhang Xu had once asked for leave to return to Zibo. He had just entered the West City when he met Zhang Chong, who went out hunting with an eagle in his left hand and a dog in his right hand. When Zhang Zhong's boat arrived, Zhang Chong put down the rope, untied his sleeves, and bowed at the water's edge.

古文：绪曰： 一身两役，无乃劳乎？ 
现代文：张绪说： 一人而做两种事，不是太劳累了吗? 
English: Zhang Xu said: Isn't it too tiring to do two things alone?

古文：充跪对曰： 充闻三十而立，今二十九矣，请至来岁而敬易之。 
现代文：张充跪着回答说： 我听说三十岁而能自立，现在我二十九岁了，请等到来年再恭敬改变。 
English: Zhang Cheng kneeled down and replied, "I heard that I could stand on my own at the age of thirty, but now I am twenty-nine. Please wait until next year before you respectfully change."

古文：绪曰： 过而能改，颜氏子有焉。 
现代文：张绪说： 有过错而能改正，颜氏子有这种美德。 
English: Zhang Xu said: Yan Shi Zi has this virtue of being able to correct his mistakes.

古文：及明年，便修身改节。
现代文：到次年，便修养自身改变节操。
English: By the following year, he had cultivated himself to change his temper.

古文：学不盈载，多所该览，尤明《老》、《易》，能清言，与从叔稷俱有令誉。
现代文：学习不满一年，涉览多种书籍，尤其通晓《老子》、《周易》，能够清雅地谈论玄理，和堂叔张稷都有好名声。
English: He has been studying for less than a year. He has read a variety of books, especially "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi," and can talk about metaphysics elegantly. He has a good reputation with his uncle Zhang Ye.

古文：起家抚军行参军，迁太子舍人、尚书殿中郎、武陵王友。
现代文：出仕为抚军行参军，调任太子舍人、尚书殿中郎、武陵王友。
English: He went to join the army as an attendant, and was transferred to the positions of the Prince's attendant, the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household, and the Prince's friend.

古文：时尚书令王俭当朝用事，武帝皆取决焉。
现代文：当时尚书令王俭当权理事，武帝所有事都取决于他的意见。
English: At that time, it was written that Wang Jian was the director of power, and all things of Emperor Wu depended on his opinion.

古文：武帝尝欲以充父绪为尚书仆射，访于俭，俭对曰： 张绪少有清望，诚美选也；然东士比无所执，绪诸子又多薄行，臣谓此宜详择。 
现代文：武帝曾经想委任张充的父亲张绪为尚书仆射，征求王俭的意见，王俭回答说： 张绪年轻时有清高的声望，的确是好的人选；然而东方的士人近来不坚持操守，张绪的几个儿子又多行为轻浮，臣下以为逭事应该认真挑选。 
English: Emperor Wu once wanted to appoint Zhang Shu, the father of Zhang Chong, as Shang Shu's subordinate, and asked Wang Jian for his opinion. Wang Jian replied: Zhang Shu had a high reputation when he was young, and he was indeed a good candidate; however, the Eastern scholars have not adhered to ethics recently, and several of Zhang Shu's sons are often frivolous, and his subjects think that anecdotes should be carefully selected.

古文：帝遂止。
现代文：皇帝于是作罢。
English: So the emperor gave up.

古文：先是充兄弟皆轻侠，充少时又不护细行，故俭言之。
现代文：在遣之前张充兄弟都轻佻任侠，张充年轻时又不顾小节，所以王俭那样说。
English: Before he was dispatched, both Zhangzhuang brothers were light-hearted and careless. When Zhangzhuang was young, he didn't care about the score, so Wang Jian said that.

古文：充闻而愠，因与俭书曰：吴国男子张充致书于琅邪王君侯侍者：顷日路长，愁霖韬晦，凉暑未平，想无亏摄。
现代文：张充听说后感到恼怒，于是给王俭写信说：吴国百姓张充写信给琅邪王君侯：近日路途遥远，久雨阴暗，炎凉不均衡，想来不会亏损摄养。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Chong felt irritated, so he wrote a letter to Wang Jian saying: Zhang Chong, a citizen of Wu, wrote a letter to the evil prince: Recently, the journey is far away, the rain is long and dark, and the heat is uneven. I don't think I will lose money.

古文：充幸以鱼钓之闲，镰采之暇，时复以卷轴自娱，逍遥前史。
现代文：我有幸享以垂钓的闲暇，耕种的空余，时而以书籍自我娱乐，从前代史册中浮想联翩。
English: I am fortunate to enjoy the leisure of fishing, the spare time of farming, and sometimes the self-entertainment of books, imagining stories from the annals of the past.

古文：从横万古，动默之路多端；纷纶百年，升降之途不一。
现代文：纵横于远古，运动与寂静的路有很多条；纷扰的一百年，升降的途径不一样。
English: Throughout the ages, there have been many paths of movement and silence; in a hundred years of turmoil, the paths of ascent and descent are not the same.

古文：故以圆行方止，器之异也；金刚水柔，性之别也。
现代文：所以圆形利于滚动方形益于搁置静止，是器物用处的不同；金刚强而水柔弱，是品性的差别。
English: Therefore, a round shape is good for rolling, and a square shape is good for standing still, which is the difference in the use of utensils; the difference between strong and weak is the difference in character.

古文：善御性者，不违金水之质；善为器者，不易方圆之用。
现代文：善于驾驭品性的，不违背金舆水的本质；善于制作器物的，不改变方与圆的用途。
English: Those who are good at controlling their character do not violate the essence of gold and water; those who are good at making utensils do not change the use of square and circle.

古文：所以北海挂簪带之高，河南降玺书之贵。
现代文：所以北海人挂着高高的簪带，河南人使高贵的玺书颁发。
English: Therefore, the people of the North Sea wear high ribbons, and the people of Henan issue noble imperial edicts.

古文：充生平少偶，不以利欲干怀，三十六年，差得以栖贫自澹。
现代文：我生平少交往，不把利益欲望放在心上，三十六年，稍微能以俭约自足。
English: I have had few contacts in my life, do not put the desire for profit in my heart, and for thirty-six years, I have been able to be self-sufficient with frugality.

古文：介然之志，峭耸霜崖；确乎之情，峰横海岸。
现代文：专一的志向，如峭壁耸立在带霜的悬崖；不变的情怀，如山峰横列在海岸边。
English: Dedication, like a crag, stands on a frosty cliff; constancy, like a mountain range on the shore.

古文：彯缨天阁，既谢廊庙之华；缀组云台，终惭衣冠之秀。
现代文：在天阁飘动缨带，已经谢绝朝廷的荣华；在云台装饰丝带，终感惭愧于大族的英才。
English: Fluttering ribbons at Tiange have already renounced the glory of the imperial court; decorating ribbons at Yuntai, finally feeling ashamed of the great talent of the clan.

古文：所以摈迹江皋，阳狂陇畔者，实由气岸疏凝，情涂狷隔。
现代文：之所以落迹于江畔，在田间假装发狂，实在是因气质懒散而呆板，性情拘谨阻隔。
English: The reason why he ended up on the banks of the river, pretending to be mad in the fields, was really due to his lazy and dull temperament, and his restrained nature.

古文：独师怀抱，不见许于俗人；孤秀神崖，每邅回于在世。
现代文：独自依据心意行事，不受世俗人士的推许；超群出众于精神境界，时常为世俗生活而周旋不进。
English: To act independently according to one's heart, without being recommended by worldly people; to be superior to others in the spiritual realm, and often to be superior in worldly life.

古文：故君山直上，蹙压于当年；叔阳夐举，甚禀乎千载。
现代文：所以君山直上九天，在当年受压抑；叔阳飞升，在一千年前不得志。
English: Therefore, Junshan ascended nine days straight, and was suppressed in that year; Shuyang soared, and was discouraged a thousand years ago.

古文：充所以长群鱼鸟，毕影松阿。
现代文：我因此长久和鱼乌为友，留影在松林。
English: That's why I've been friends with Uso for a long time, and why I've left my image in the pine forest.

古文：半顷之田，足以输税；五亩之宅，树以桑麻。
现代文：半顷的田地，足以交纳税租；五亩的住宅，种上桑麻。
English: Half a hectare of fields, enough to pay tax and rent; five mu of houses, planted with mulberry.

古文：啸歌于川泽之间，讽味于渑池之上，泛滥于渔父之游，偃息于卜居之下。
现代文：在泽之间吹奏歌唱，在渑池之上诵读品味，在渔父游动之处泛舟，在房间之下休息。
English: Blow and sing between the lakes, recite the taste above the reed pond, raft where the fisherman swims, and rest under the room.

古文：如此而已，充何谢焉。
现代文：如此而已，我有什么可致歉的呢。
English: It is what it is and I have nothing to apologise for.

古文：若夫惊岩罩日，壮海逢天；竦石崩寻，分危落仞。
现代文：高大的山岩罩住太阳，壮阔的海洋挡住苍天；耸立的石头一段段地崩裂，高大的悬崖一段段地落下。
English: High mountain rocks cover the sun, the magnificent ocean blocks the sky; towering stones collapse in sections, and high cliffs fall in sections.

古文：桂兰绮靡，丛杂于山幽；松柏森阴，相缭于涧曲。
现代文：桂树兰花华丽，在幽深的山谷杂乱丛生；松树柏树阴森，在山涧曲流中互相围绕。
English: The orchids of the cinnamon tree are magnificent, clustering in the deep valley; the pines and cypresses are gloomy, surrounding each other in the winding mountain stream.

古文：元卿于是乎不归，伯休亦以兹长往。
现代文：元卿于是不回家，伯休也因此长久离去。
English: As a result, Yuanqing did not return home, and Bo Xiu also left for a long time.

古文：若乃飞竿钓渚，濯足沧洲；独浪烟霞，高卧风月。
现代文：挥动鱼竿在水边垂钓，在沧浪的岛上洗脚；在云气中独自流浪，在清风明月中高枕而卧。
English: Wave the fishing rod to fish at the water's edge, wash your feet on the island of the waves; wander alone in the clouds, and lie on your back in the clear wind in the middle of the month.

古文：悠悠琴酒，岫远谁来？灼灼文谈，空罢方寸。
现代文：悠远的琴瑟酒食，山路遥遥有谁来；鲜明的文章言谈，徒然疲惫了内心。
English: Long-distance music, wine and food, mountain roads far away, who will come; vivid articles and speeches, vainly exhausted the heart.

古文：不觉郁然千里，路阻江川。
现代文：不觉千里相隔，路途上满是川流。
English: Thousands of miles apart, the road is full of river currents.

古文：每至西风，何尝不眷？
现代文：每到刮西风时，何曾不眷顾?
English: Whenever the west wind blows, why do you not pay attention to it?

古文：聊因疾隙，略举诸襟；持此片言，轻枉高听。
现代文：姑且利用患病的空隙，略微抒发胸怀；用遣只言片语，轻率地委屈了高人的听闻。
English: Let's just say that he took advantage of the gap left by his illness to slightly express his thoughts; he used a few words to carelessly misrepresent what he had heard from Gao.

古文：丈人岁路未强，学优而仕；道佐苍生，功横海望。
现代文：大丈夫您年岁不大，学业优异而为官；道义佐助百姓，功勋陈列如隔海相望。
English: It's okay, you're young, your academic performance is excellent, and you're an official; your morals help the people, and your achievements are on display as if you're across the sea.

古文：入朝则协长倩之诚，出议则抗仲子之节。
现代文：入朝则协和长倩的忠诚，出廷议论便具备仲子的节操。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he was loyal to Nagatoro, and when he appeared in court, he had the discipline of a vassal.

古文：可谓盛德维时，孤松独秀者也。
现代文：可以说是大德维持时政，是如孤独的松柏一样出众的人。
English: It can be said that the great virtue maintains the current government, and it is an outstanding person like a lonely pine tree.

古文：素履未详，斯旅尚眇。
现代文：而我一向履历不被详知，这些阅历还很少。
English: And my CV has never been known in detail, these experiences are still few.

古文：茂陵之彦，望冠盖而长怀；霸山之氓，伫衣车而耸叹。
现代文：茂陵的英才，望着车乘服饰而长久怀想；霸山的平民，停下车马而耸肩叹息。
English: The talented people of Muryeong look at the cars and clothes and long to remember; the common people of Baoshan stop the cars and horses and shrug their shoulders and sigh.

古文：得无惜乎？
现代文：能不可惜吗?
English: Can it not be a pity?

古文：若鸿装撰御，鹤驾轩空，则岸不辞枯，山被其润。
现代文：至于控御天鹅，驾黄鹤而凌空，就河岸不离干枯，山野受到滋润。
English: As for the control of the swan, driving the yellow crane and flying in the air, the river bank will not be dry, and the mountains and fields will be moisturized.

古文：奇禽异羽，或岩际而逢迎；弱雾轻烟，乍林端而奄蔼。
现代文：奇禽异鸟，有的到山岩边相迎接；轻微的烟雾，乍现林间而蒸腾。
English: Strange birds and birds, some to the edge of the mountain rock to meet; slight smoke, transpiring in the woods.

古文：东都不足奇，南山岂为贵。
现代文：束都不值得珍奇，南山哪能算贵重。
English: None of the bunches are rare, but Nanshan wax can be considered valuable.

古文：充昆西之百姓，岱表之一民。
现代文：我是昆山西面的百姓，岱山外的一介平民。
English: I am a commoner in the west of Kunshan, and a commoner outside Lushan.

古文：蚕而衣，耕且食，不能事王侯，觅知己，造时人，骋游说，蓬转于屠博之间，其欢甚矣。
现代文：养蚕而穿衣，耕种而进食，不能够侍奉王侯，寻找知己，造访当代官员，奔驰游说，蓬头来往于屠夫赌徒之间，欢快极了。
English: Raising silkworms and dressing them, cultivating and eating them, not being able to serve princes, looking for confidants, visiting contemporary officials, lobbying with a Mercedes, going back and forth between butchers and gamblers, it's a lot of fun.

古文：丈人早遇承华，中逢崇礼。
现代文：大丈夫您早先遇上承华，后来遇上崇礼。
English: It's okay. You met Cheng Hua earlier, and then you met Chong Lei.

古文：肆上之眷，望溢于早辰；乡下之言，谬延于造次。
现代文：无尚的器重，使您早年声望横溢；乡下人的言论，则因仓促问谬误绵延。
English: In your early years, your reputation overflowed due to your impeccable manners; the remarks of the villagers were prolonged due to the fallacy of hasty questions.

古文：然举世皆谓充为狂，充亦何能与诸君道之哉？
现代文：然而一世的人都说我为颠狂，我也如何能和各位君子论说呢?
English: But all my life people have called me mad, so how can I argue with you gentlemen?

古文：是以披闻见，扫心胸，述平生，论语默，所以通梦交魂，推衿送抱者，其惟丈人而已。
现代文：所以披露见闻，敞开心胸，叙述生平，谈论出处，之所以沟通梦境交往魂魄，推诚以言，衹是因大丈夫您而已。
English: Therefore, disclosing what you have seen and heard, opening your heart, describing your life, talking about the source, communicating your dreams, communicating your soul, in other words, it is because you are okay.

古文：关山夐隔，书罢莫因，傥遇樵者，妄尘执事。
现代文：关口山路阻隔，写完无法送上，倘若遇上打柴的人，冀盼送呈管事的人。
English: The mountain road in Sekiguchi is blocked, so I can't send it to you after I've written it. If I meet someone who is collecting firewood, I hope to send it to the person in charge.

古文：俭言之武帝，免充官，废处久之。
现代文：王俭报告给堕，免除垂直的官职，废黜了很长时间。
English: Wang Jian reported to the fallen, exempted from vertical official posts, and deposed for a long time.

古文：后为司徒谘议参军，与琅邪王思远、同郡陆慧晓等，并为司徒竟陵王宾客。
现代文：后来担任司徒谘议参军，和琅邪人王墨逗、同郡人陆慧晓等，都是司徒直堕王的宾客。
English: Later, he served as an advisor to the king's advisors on joining the army, and was a guest of the wicked Wang Moqi and fellow county resident Lu Huixiao.

古文：入为中书侍郎，寻转给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：入京担任中书侍郎，不久改任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He entered the capital as a chusho-sajiro (chamberlain), and was soon reappointed as a ryo-sajiro (chamberlain).

古文：明帝作相，以充为镇军长史。
现代文：明帝做宰相，任命张充为镇军长史。
English: Emperor Ming became the prime minister and appointed Zhang Chong as the town's military commander.

古文：出为义兴太守，为政清静，民吏便之。
现代文：外出任羞璺太守，行政清明而奉行无为而治，民众官吏感到便利。
English: Shy and timid governors-general are appointed from outside, the administration is clear and follows a laissez-faire approach, which is convenient for civil servants.

古文：寻以母忧去职，服阕，除太子中庶子，迁侍中。
现代文：不久因母亲去世离职，服丧期满，授任太子中庶子，升侍中。
English: Soon after, he left the post due to his mother's death, and when the mourning period was over, he was given the title of crown prince's middle child, and promoted to middle attendant.

古文：义师近次，东昏召百官入宫省，朝士虑祸，或往来酣宴，充独居侍中省，不出阁。
现代文：起义军队停驻在京城附近时，束昏侯召集百官进入宫省，朝廷官员担心祸患，有的来往酣饮欢宴，亟童独自住在侍中省，不出阀门。
English: When the insurgent army was stationed near the capital, the drowsy prince summoned hundreds of officials to enter the palace province. The court officials were worried about the calamity. Some came and went drinking and feasting. The eldest son lived alone in the servant province and did not open the valve.

古文：城内既害东昏，百官集西钟下，召充不至。
现代文：城内害死束昏侯，百官聚集在西钟下，召唤张充而不到场。
English: The city was stunned, and hundreds of officials gathered under the western clock to summon Zhang Chong, but he was not present.

古文：高祖霸府开，以充为大司马谘议参军，迁梁王国郎中令、祠部尚书、领屯骑校尉，转冠军将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：直担的藩王府邸建立，任命张充为大司马谘议参军，调任延国郎中令、祠部尚书、兼屯骑校尉，改任冠军将军、司徒左长史。
English: The residence of the king of the domain, which he was directly responsible for, was built, and Zhang Chong was appointed as the chief steward to advise on joining the army. He was transferred to the position of Enkoku Rongzhongling, Shibu Shoshu, and Tuen Kieg Captain. He was also transferred to the position of Champion General, Shituzo Changshi.

古文：天监初，除大常卿。
现代文：天监初年，授任太常卿。
English: In his first year as overseer of heaven, he was given the title of grand secretary.

古文：寻迁吏部尚书，居选称为平允。
现代文：不久调任吏部尚书，处于选拔官吏的部门有公平的称誉。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the personnel department of Shangshu. He was in the department of selecting officials and had a fair reputation.

古文：俄为散骑常侍、云骑将军。
现代文：不久担任散骑常侍、云骑将军。
English: He soon served as a straggler's aide-de-camp and a cloud-riding general.

古文：寻除晋陵太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：继而授任置堕太守，品级为中二千石。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed to the position of the Fallen Empress Dowager, with a rank of middle-ranking and 2,000 koku.

古文：征拜散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
现代文：征入任散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
English: He was conscripted as a samurai in charge of horseback riding, and the Kuniko Matsuri Sake was brewed.

古文：充长于义理，登堂讲说，皇太子以下皆至。
现代文：张充擅长义理，登堂讲授，皇太子以下都到来。
English: Zhang Cheng is good at giri, teaching in the classroom, and the crown prince and below are coming.

古文：时王侯多在学，执经以拜，充朝服而立，不敢当也。
现代文：当时王侯多在学校中，手执经书叩拜，张充穿着公服而站立，不敢接受。
English: At that time, Wang Houduo was in school, holding a scripture book and bowing, and Zhang Chong was wearing a public uniform and standing up, afraid to accept.

古文：转左卫将军，祭酒如故。
现代文：改任左卫将军，祭酒照旧。
English: He was reassigned to the post of General of the Left Division, but the sacrificial wine was still drunk.

古文：入为尚书仆射，顷之，除云麾将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：召入任尚书仆射，不久，授任云麾将军、吴郡太守。
English: He was called to the post of Shangshu minion, and soon after, he was awarded the post of Yunqi general and Wu County governor.

古文：下车恤贫老，故旧莫不欣悦。
现代文：到任便抚恤贫困老人，旧日朋友无不欢欣喜悦。
English: When he took office, he gave pensions to poor elderly people, and his old friends were overjoyed.

古文：以疾自陈，征为散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫，未及还朝，十三年，卒于吴，时年六十六。
现代文：因患病自己陈述要求，被征入任散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫，没来得及回到朝廷，天监十三年，在吴郡去世，这年六十六岁。
English: Due to his illness, he was conscripted to serve as a knight errant, Dr. Jin Ziguanglu, before he could return to the imperial court. In the thirteenth year of Tianjing, he died in Wuxian, this year he was sixty-six years old.

古文：诏赠侍中、护军将军。
现代文：诏令追赠侍中、护军将军。
English: The Imperial Edict posthumously awarded him the titles of Samurai Junior Officer and Escort General.

古文：谥穆子。
现代文：谧号为穆子。
English: His nickname was Mu Zi.

古文：子最嗣。
现代文：儿子张最继嗣。
English: His son Zhang is the heir apparent.

古文：柳恽，字文畅，河东解人也。少有志行，好学，善尺牍。
现代文：踅屿字主蝗，是鲤逊人。年轻时有志向节操，爱好学习，擅长写文牍。
English: Locust, the main character of Lantau, is a Jinsun people. When he was young, he was ambitious, loved to study, and was good at writing essays.

古文：与陈郡谢邻居，深所友爱。
现代文：和建郡人比邻而居，邀遭对他深加友爱。
English: He was invited to live next door to the county's founder and developed a deep friendship with him.

古文：初，宋世有嵇元荣、羊盖，并善弹琴，云传戴安道之法，恽幼从之学，特穷其妙。
现代文：当初，塞世有嵇元荣、圭盖，都善于弹琴，说是传承戴安道的师法，堑嘘自幼跟他们学，极尽弹奏的妙趣。
English: At the beginning, the world's most famous pianists, Gong Yuan Rong and Guigai, were both good at playing the piano. It was said that they had inherited the teaching methods of Dian Dao, and that he had learned from them since he was a child, and enjoyed playing to the fullest.

古文：齐竟陵王闻而引之，以为法曹行参军，雅被赏狎。
现代文：蛮竟陵王听说后召唤他，任用为法曹行参军，堑屿很受赏识亲近。
English: In fact, King Ling summoned him after hearing about it and appointed him as a legal officer to join the army. Lantau is very close to him.

古文：王尝置酒后园，有晋相谢安鸣琴在侧，以授恽，恽弹为雅弄。
现代文：竟陵王曾在后园设酒席，有置朝宰相谢圭弹过的琴在旁边，授予柳惮，柳惮弹出雅致的曲调。
English: In fact, King Ling once set up a banquet in the backyard, with a piano that had been played by the prime minister of the dynasty, Xie Gui, next to it. He awarded it to Liu Shuo, and Liu Shuo played an elegant tune.

古文：子良曰： 卿巧越嵇心，妙臻羊体，良质美手，信在今辰。
现代文：子良说： 你的精巧超越嵇元荣的心，玄妙达到羊盖的法式，优良的质地美妙的手法，的确都出现在今天。
English: Ziliang said: Your ingenuity surpasses the heart of Yu Yuan Rong, the mystery reaches the French style of sheep cover, the fine texture and wonderful technique, indeed, all appear today.

古文：岂止当世称奇，足可追踪古烈。 
现代文：岂祇是当代可称奇异，足以能追踪古代名人。 
English: Only the modern world is weird enough to be able to track down ancient celebrities.

古文：累迁太子洗马，父忧去官。
现代文：屡经升迁任太子洗马，因父亲去世离职。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the post of Crown Prince Saima, but left the post due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，试守鄱阳相，听吏属，得尽三年丧礼，署之文教，百姓称焉。
现代文：服丧期满，试任鄱阳相，他准许吏员可服完三年的丧礼，代理当地的文教事物，百姓称赞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the trial minister of Shenyang. He allowed the officials to complete the three-year funeral, acting as the local cultural and educational affairs, which was praised by the people.

古文：还除骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：回京授任骠骑从事中郎。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was assigned to be a middle-ranked horseman.

古文：高祖至京邑，恽候谒石头，以为冠军将军、征东府司马。
现代文：高祖到达京城，柳惮到石头城迎候拜见，被任命为冠军将军、征东府司马。
English: Gaozu arrived in Beijing, Liu Shuo went to Stone Town to meet him, and was appointed as the champion general and the champion of the eastern provinces.

古文：时东昏未平，士犹苦战，恽上笺陈便宜，请城平之日，先收图籍，及遵汉祖宽大爱民之义，高祖从之。
现代文：当时东昏侯还没平定，士兵还在苦战，柳惮上书陈述应做的事，请求在城池平定的时候，先收取图书文籍，以及遵循漠高祖宽宏大量爱护民众的义理，高祖听从他的建议。
English: At that time, Dongwu was not yet pacified, the soldiers were still fighting hard, Liu Shao wrote a letter stating what should be done, requesting that when the city was pacified, books and literature should be collected first, and following the magnanimous and generous love of the people, Gao Zu followed his advice.

古文：会萧颖胄薨于江陵，使恽西上迎和帝，仍除给事黄门侍郎，领步兵校尉，迁相国右司马。
现代文：遇萧颖胄在江陵逝世，派柳伡西上去迎接和帝，随之授任给事黄门侍郎，兼步兵校尉，调任相国右司马。
English: When Xiao Yingtao died in Gangneung, he sent Liu Ye to the west to meet the emperor, and then he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, as well as the infantry captain, and was transferred to the position of the right secretary of the neighboring country.

古文：天监元年，除长史、兼侍中，与仆射沈约等共定新律。
现代文：天监元年，授任长兼侍中，和仆射沈约等人共同制定新的法律。
English: In the first year of Tianjing, he was awarded the post of chief and chamberlain, and he and others such as Zhu Ya and Shen You jointly formulated a new law.

古文：恽立行贞素，以贵公子早有令名，少工篇什。
现代文：柳惮做人品行贞洁朴素，在贵公之子中很早有好名声，年轻时工于诗赋。
English: Liu Shao's character was chaste and simple, and he had a good reputation among the sons of nobles at an early age. When he was young, he worked on poetry.

古文：始为诗曰： 亭皋本叶下，陇首秋云飞。 
现代文：开始写诗说： 河流湖沼木叶下，陇山之首秋云飞。 
English: He began to write poetry, saying: "Under the leaves of the rivers, lakes and marshes, the autumn clouds fly over the top of the mountains.

古文：琅邪王元长见而嗟赏，因书斋壁。
现代文：琅邪人王元长见到后嗟叹赞赏，因之书写在书房墙壁上。
English: Wang Yuanchang, the evil person, sighed with admiration after seeing it, and the writing was written on the wall of the study.

古文：至是预曲宴，必被诏赋诗。
现代文：到现在参与乐曲宴会，柳惮必受诏赋诗。
English: To participate in the music banquet now, Liu Shuo must receive the imperial edict.

古文：尝奉和高祖《登景阳楼》中篇云： 太液沧波起，长杨高树秋。
现代文：曾经奉命和高祖《登景阳楼》的中篇说： 太液沧茫波浪起，长杨高树已见秋。
English: I was once ordered to say to Gao Zu in the middle of "Climbing to the Top of the World" that: "When the turbulent waters of the Great East China Sea rise, the tall poplar trees have already seen the autumn.

古文：翠华承汉远，雕辇逐风游。 
现代文：皇上仪仗承汉代，雕镂车辆随风游。 
English: The emperor's ceremonial war follows the Han Dynasty, and the carved vehicles follow the wind.

古文：深为高祖所美。
现代文：深受高祖的赞美。
English: He was highly praised by Gao Zu.

古文：当时咸共称传。
现代文：当时都共同称赞传扬。
English: At that time, they all praised and propagated it.

古文：恽善奕棋，帝每敕侍坐，仍令定棋谱，第其优劣。
现代文：柳惮善于下棋，皇帝经常下令他陪伴，又命他确定棋谱，评定高下。
English: Liu Shao was good at playing chess, and the emperor often ordered him to accompany him, and ordered him to determine the chess score and evaluate the high game.

古文：二年，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：二年，外出任吴兴太守。
English: Two years later, Wu Xing became the acting governor-general.

古文：六年。征为散骑常侍，迁左民尚书。
现代文：六年，征入任散骑常侍，调任左民尚书。
English: Six years later, he was conscripted as a samurai in charge of horseback riding and transferred to the post of Shoshu, a leftist.

古文：八年，除持节、都督广、交、桂、越四州诸军事、仁武将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。征为秘书监，领左军将军。
现代文：八年，授任持节、都督广交桂越四州诸军事、仁武将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。征入任秘书监，兼左军将军。
English: In the eighth year, he was awarded the title of Jisai, the military governor of Guanzhong and Guiyue four states, the general of Renwu, the general of Pingyue, and the general of Guangzhou. He was conscripted as the secretary supervisor and the general of the left army.

古文：复为吴兴太守六年，为政清静，民吏怀之。
现代文：又担任吴兴太守六年，行政清明奉行无为而治，民众官吏怀念他。
English: He also served as Wu Xing Taishu for six years, the administration was clear and pursued inaction, and the people and officials remembered him.

古文：于郡感疾，自陈解任，父老千余人拜表陈请，事未施行。
现代文：在郡中患病，自己陈述要求解除职位，父老一千多人上奏表请求他留任，事情没有施行。
English: When he fell ill in the county, he made a statement demanding to be relieved of his post. More than a thousand parents and elders petitioned him to remain in office, but the matter was not enforced.

古文：天监十六年，卒，时年五十三。
现代文：天监十六年，去世，这年五十三岁。
English: He died in the sixteenth year of Tianjing, at the age of fifty-three.

古文：赠侍中、中护军。
现代文：追赠侍中、中护军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Protector.

古文：恽既善琴，尝以今声转弃古法，乃著《清调论》，具有条流。
现代文：堑惶已然善于弹琴，曾经用当时声调转而抛弃古代法式，于是写作《清调论》，列有条例。
English: Zou Pan was already good at playing the piano. He once used the tone of the time to abandon the ancient French style, so he wrote "Clear Tone Theory," which included regulations.

古文：少子偃，字彦游。
现代文：小儿子柳偃，字彦游。
English: The youngest son, Yanagisaki, is called Hikoyu.

古文：年十二引见。
现代文：十二岁时被召见。
English: He was called to the bar at the age of twelve.

古文：诏问读何书，对曰《尚书》。
现代文：皇帝问他读什么书，他回答说是《尚书》。
English: The emperor asked him what book he read, and he replied that it was "Shang Shu."

古文：又曰： 有何美句？ 
现代文：又问他说： 有什么好句子? 
English: He also asked him: What are some good sentences?

古文：对曰： 德惟善政，政在养民。 
现代文：他回答说： 德行衹为美好的政治，政治在于养育民众。 
English: He replied: Morality is good politics, politics is educating the people.

古文：众咸异之。
现代文：众人都对他感到惊异。
English: Everyone was amazed by him.

古文：诏尚长城公主，拜驸马都尉，都亭侯，太子舍人，洗马，庐陵、鄱阳内史。
现代文：诏令他娶长城公主，任命他为驸马都尉，都亭侯，太子舍人，洗马，庐陵、鄱阳内史。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to marry the Great Wall Princess, and appointed him the lieutenant of the imperial horse, the prince of the capital, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince, the prince of the prince.

古文：大宝元年，卒。
现代文：大宝元年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of the Taiho era.

古文：蔡撙，字景节，济阳考城人。
现代文：蔡撙字景节，济阳考城人。
English: Caijing Festival, Jiyang test city people.

古文：父兴宗，宋左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，有重名前代。
现代文：父亲兴宗，是宋朝左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，在前代有大名声。
English: His father, Xingzong, was a doctor of the Song Dynasty Zuoguanglu, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and had a great reputation in the previous generation.

古文：撙少方雅退默，与兄寅俱知名。
现代文：蔡撙年轻时正直儒雅谦退冷静，和哥哥蔡寅都闻名。
English: When she was young, Cai Wei was honest, elegant, modest and calm. She and her brother Cai Yin are both famous.

古文：选补国子生，举高第，为司徒法曹行参军。
现代文：被挑选补为国子生，考试在上等，担任司徒法曹行参军。
English: He was selected to be a national student, passed the examination, and served as a magistrate to join the army.

古文：齐左卫将军王俭高选府僚，以撙为主簿。
现代文：齐左卫将军王俭严格挑选府中僚属，委任蔡撙为主簿。
English: Qi Zuwei General Wang Jian strictly selected the subordinates of the central government and appointed Cai Jian as the main book.

古文：累迁建安王文学，司徒主簿、左西属。
现代文：屡经升迁任建安王文学，司徒主簿、左西属。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and appointed to the posts of Jian'an Wang Literature, the main book of Sito, and Zuoxi.

古文：明帝为镇军将军，引为从事中郎，迁中书侍郎，中军长史，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：明帝担任镇军将军时，延聘为从事中郎，调任中书侍郎，中军长史，给事黄门侍郎。
English: When Emperor Ming served as the general of the town army, Yan was hired as a middle-ranking official, transferred to the position of the middle-ranking official, the middle-ranking official, the middle-ranking official, and transferred to the position of the high-ranking official.

古文：丁母忧，庐于墓侧。
现代文：遇母亲去世，在墓旁搭棚子居住守丧。
English: When his mother died, he built a shed next to the grave and lived there in mourning.

古文：齐末多难，服阕，因居墓所。
现代文：齐末祸难多，服丧期满，便住在墓地。
English: At the end of the year, when the mourning period is over, they live in the graveyard.

古文：除太子中庶子，太尉长史，并不就。
现代文：授任太子中庶子，太尉长史，都不就任。
English: Neither the prince's middle son, nor his son-in-law, nor his son-in-law, nor his son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-in-law, nor his son-in-law's son-

古文：梁台建，为侍中，迁临海太守，坐公事左迁太子中庶子。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，蔡撙担任侍中，调任临海太守，因公事获罪贬降为太子中庶子。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was established, Cai Qi served as an attendant, transferred to Linhai Dazhong, and was demoted to the prince's middle son due to a crime committed in the line of duty.

古文：复为侍中，吴兴太守。
现代文：又担任侍中，吴兴太守。
English: He also served as an aide-de-camp to Wu Xing, the Empress Dowager.

古文：天监九年，宣城郡吏吴承伯挟祅道聚众攻宣城，杀太守硃僧勇。因转屠旁县，逾山寇吴兴，所过皆残破，众有二万，奄袭郡城。
现代文：玉监九年，宣城郡吏员吴承伯倚仗妖道聚集徒众攻打宣城，杀死太守朱僧勇，随之转而屠减周围的县，越山侵犯吴兴，所经过之处都毁灭破坏，军队有二万人，偷袭郡城。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of the Jade Emperor, Wu Chengbo, the magistrate of Xuancheng County, relied on war and demonism to gather followers to attack Xuancheng, kill the governor Zhu Sengyong, and then slaughter the surrounding counties, invade Wu Xing across the mountains, destroy and destroy everywhere he passed, with an army of 20,000 people, and secretly attack the county seat.

古文：东道不习兵革，吏民恇扰奔散，并请撙避之。
现代文：东方的人不熟悉战事，官吏民众畏惧纷扰而四散逃奔，都请蔡撙躲避。
English: People in the East were not familiar with the war, and the officials and people were afraid of disturbances and fled in all directions. They all asked Cai Xuan to hide.

古文：撙坚守不动，募勇敢固郡。
现代文：蔡撙坚决守卫不动摇，招募勇敢的人加固郡城。
English: Cai Ye resolutely defended and recruited brave people to strengthen the county seat.

古文：承伯尽锐攻撙，撙命众出拒，战于门，应手摧破，临阵斩承伯，余党悉平。
现代文：承伯用尽精锐兵士攻打蔡撙，蔡撙命令军队出城抵御，在城门交战，一交手就打败承伯，在军阵中斩杀承伯，残余党羽全部平定。
English: Cheng Bo exhausted his elite soldiers to attack Cai Xuan, Cai Xuan ordered the army to go out of the city to resist, fight at the city gate, defeat Cheng Bo in a duel, kill Cheng Bo in the army, and the remnants of the party were all pacified.

古文：加信武将军。
现代文：被加授信武将军。
English: He was awarded the additional rank of General Shinbu.

古文：征度支尚书，迁中书令。
现代文：征召任度支尚书，调任中书令。
English: The letter of appointment shall be supported by the letter of appointment, and the letter of transfer shall be issued.

古文：复为信武将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：又为信武将军、晋陵太守。
English: He was also the general Nobutake and the governor of the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：还，除通直散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
现代文：返回朝廷授任通直散骑常侍、国子祭酒。
English: Returning to the Imperial Court, he was appointed to the post of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi, and was awarded the Kokushi Matsuri Sake.

古文：迁吏部尚书，居选，弘简有名称。
现代文：调任吏部尚书，任职选拔官吏的部门，宽宏简易有名声。
English: He was transferred to the personnel department of Shangshu, and served in the department of selecting officials. He was known for his magnanimity and simplicity.

古文：又为侍中，领秘书监，转中书令，侍中如故。
现代文：又担任侍中，兼秘书监，改任中书令，侍中照旧。
English: He also served as a chamberlain and superintendent of secretaries, and was reassigned to the position of chushiro, but remained a chamberlain.

古文：普通二年，出为宣毅将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：普通二年，外出任宣毅将军、吴郡太守。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as General Xuan Yi and Governor of Wu County.

古文：四年，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：四年，去世，这年五十七岁。
English: He died four years later, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：追赠侍中、金紫光禄大夫、宣惠将军。
现代文：追赠为侍中、金紫光禄大夫、宣惠将军。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and Xuan Hui General.

古文：谥康子。
现代文：谧号为尘王。
English: His nickname is Dust King.

古文：子彦熙，历官中书郎，宣城内史。
现代文：儿子彦熙，历任中书郎，宣城内史。
English: His son, Hikohi, successively served as Chushiro, and wrote the history of the castle.

古文：江蒨，字彦标，济阳考城人。
现代文：江蓓字彦标，济阳考城人。
English: Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi, Jiangxi.

古文：曾祖湛，宋左光禄、仪同三司；父斅，齐太常卿：并有重名于前世。
现代文：曾祖江湛，宋朝左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司；父亲江敩，齐朝太常卿：都在前代有大名声。
English: Zeng Zu Jiang Zhan, Song Dynasty Zuoguanglu Doctor, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi; father Jiang Zang, Qi Dynasty Taizongqing: all have a great reputation in the previous generation.

古文：蒨幼聪警，读书过目便能讽诵。
现代文：江蓓幼年聪明机警，读书看过一遍就能背诵。
English: Jiang Yu is a clever and alert child. He can recite everything after reading it once.

古文：选为国子生，通《尚书》，举高第。
现代文：被挑选为国子生，通晓《尚书》，考试在上等。
English: He was selected as a national student, he is familiar with "Shang Shu" and passed the examination.

古文：起家秘书郎，累迁司徒东阁祭酒、庐陵王主簿。
现代文：出仕为秘书郎，屡经升迁为司徒东合祭酒、庐陵王主簿。
English: He served as a secretary, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of the master of the Shuto Higashiai Sake Festival and the main book of the King of Goryeo.

古文：居父忧以孝闻，庐于墓侧，明帝敕遣齐仗二十人防墓所。
现代文：为父亲服丧以孝道闻名，在墓旁搭棚子居住，明帝下令派遣武士二十人守护墓地。
English: He was known for his filial piety in mourning for his father and lived in a shed next to the grave. Emperor Ming ordered twenty samurai to be sent to guard the cemetery.

古文：服阕，除太子洗马，累迁司徒左南属，太子中舍人，秘书丞。
现代文：服丧期满，授任太子洗马，屡经升迁任司徒左西属，太子中舍人，秘书丞。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was given the post of Prince Saima, and was repeatedly promoted to the post of Sito Zuoxi, Prince Chusei, and Secretary Jo.

古文：出为建安内史，视事期月，义师下次江州，遣宁朔将军刘諓之为郡，蒨帅吏民据郡拒之。
现代文：外出任建安内史，任职一年，起义军队束下停驻江州，派遣宁朔将军刘残之为郡守，江蓓率领官吏民众占据郡城抗拒他。
English: He was in charge of the internal history of Jian'an. He served for one year. The insurgent army was stationed in Jiangzhou, dispatching Ningshuo General Liu Zan as the county governor. Jiang Wei led the officials and people to occupy the county seat to resist him.

古文：及建康城平，蒨坐禁锢。俄被原，起为后军临川王外兵参军。
现代文：等到建康城平定，江蓓获罪不得为官，不久被宽恕，起用为后军临川王外兵参军。
English: When Jiankang City was pacified, Jiang Jie was not allowed to serve as an official, and was soon pardoned and appointed to join the army as a foreign soldier of the Linchuan King's army.

古文：累迁临川王友，中书侍郎，太子家令，黄门侍郎，领南兗州大中正。
现代文：屡经升迁为临川王友，中书侍郎，太子家令，黄门侍郎，兼南兖州大中正。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Linchuan Wangyou, Chusho jirao, Taizi keirei, Huangmen jirao, and Nanluozhou Daizhongzheng.

古文：迁太子中庶子，中正如故。
现代文：调任太子中庶子，中正照旧。
English: He was transferred to the position of prince's younger illegitimate son, and became chujo as before.

古文：转中权始兴王长史。
现代文：改任中权始兴王长史。
English: Shixing Wang Changshi was appointed as the central power.

古文：出为伏波将军、晋安内史。
现代文：外出任伏波将军、晋安内史。
English: He held the posts of General Fubo on the outside and Jinan on the inside.

古文：在政清约，务在宽惠，吏民便之。
现代文：在任清廉节俭，专意宽大施惠，使下属官吏、民众感到便利。
English: He was clean and frugal in office, and was dedicated to generous benefits, which made subordinate officials and the public feel convenient.

古文：诏征为宁朔将军、南康王长史，行府、州、国事。
现代文：韶令征召为宁朔将军、南康王长史，代理府、州、封国事务。
English: He was summoned by imperial order to serve as Ningshuo General and Nankang Wangchongshi, acting for the government, state, and fief affairs.

古文：顷之，迁太尉临川王长史，转尚书吏部郎，右将军。
现代文：不久，调任太尉临川王长史，改任尚书吏部郎，右将军。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant Linchuan Wang Changshi, and was reappointed to the position of Shangshuriburo, General of the Right.

古文：蒨方雅有风格。
现代文：江蓓正直儒雅有风骨。
English: Jiang Wei is honest, refined and elegant.

古文：仆射徐勉以权重自遇，在位者并宿士敬之，惟蒨及王规与抗礼，不为之屈。
现代文：仆射徐勉因权势重而自傲，在位的人都把他作为前辈尊敬，惟独江蓓和王规和他行对等礼节，不为他所屈尊。
English: His servant, Xu Mian, was proud of his power, and all those in power respected him as an elder. However, Jiang Chen and Wang Gui did not deign to meet him, as they had the same courtesy.

古文：勉因蒨门客翟景为第七儿繇求蒨女婚，蒨不答，景再言之，乃杖景四十，由此与勉有忤。
现代文：徐勉通过江荷的门客翟景为自己的第七个儿子徐繇求娶江蓿的女儿，江蓿不答应，翟景第二次说这事，江蓓于是责打翟景四十棒，因此和徐勉有矛盾。
English: Through Jiang Ho's concubine, Yan Jing, Xu Yan asked Jiang Ho's daughter to marry his seventh son, Xu Yao. Jiang Ho did not agree, Yan Jing said this for the second time, and Jiang Yao then beat Yan Jing with forty rods. Therefore, there was a contradiction with Xu Yan.

古文：除散骑常侍，不拜。
现代文：授任散骑常侍，不就任。
English: He was appointed as a samurai, but did not take up the post.

古文：是时勉又为子求蒨弟葺及王泰女，二人并拒之。
现代文：这时徐勉又为儿子求娶江宿的弟弟江茸的女儿和王泰的女儿，二人都拒绝他。
English: At this time, Xu also asked his son to marry the daughter of Jiangshu, the younger brother of Jiangshu, and the daughter of Wang Tai. Both of them refused him.

古文：葺为吏部郎，坐杖曹中干免官，泰以疾假出宅，乃迁散骑常侍，皆勉意也。
现代文：江葺担任吏部郎，因责打官署中差役而获罪免官，王泰因患病请假回家，于是调任散骑常侍，都是徐勉的意思。
English: Jiang Fu served as a secretary, was punished for beating a middle-ranking official and was removed from office, Wang Tai went home on leave due to illness, and was then transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, all of which were meant by Xu Tsun.

古文：初，天监六年，诏以侍中、常侍并侍帷幄，分门下二局入集书，其官品视侍中，而非华胄所悦，故勉斥泰为之。
现代文：当初，天监六年，下诏任用侍中、常侍都在宫内侍奉，分门下二局到秘书监，官品比照侍中，而这些不是大族人士所喜悦的，所以徐勉贬降王泰去担任。
English: At first, after six years of the celestial governor, under the edict of appointment, the chamberlains and the regular attendants all served in the palace, and they were divided into two offices under the gate to the secretary supervisors, and the official ranks were compared to the chamberlains, and these were not pleasing to the people of the big tribe, so Xu Mian demoted Wang Tai to serve.

古文：蒨寻迁司徒左长史。
现代文：江蓓不久调任司徒左长史。
English: Jiang Zang was soon transferred to the post of Stuzha Changshi.

古文：初，王泰出阁，高祖谓勉云： 江蒨资历，应居选部。 
现代文：起初，王泰出台阁，高祖对徐勉说： 江蓓的资历高，应该处于选拔官吏的部门。 
English: At the beginning of Wang Tai's cabinet, Gao Zu said to Xu Mian, "Jiang Chen is highly qualified, he should be in the department of selecting officials."

古文：勉对曰： 蒨有眼患，又不悉人物。 
现代文：徐勉回答说： 赵有眼病，又不熟悉人物。 
English: Xu replied, "Zhao has an eye disease and is not familiar with the characters.

古文：高祖乃止。
现代文：产担于是作罢。
English: As a result, the burden of childbearing was abandoned.

古文：迁光禄大夫。
现代文：被调任光禄大夫。
English: He was transferred to the post of Guanglu doctor.

古文：大通元年，卒，时年五十三。
现代文：主通元年，去世，这年五十三岁。
English: He died in the first year of the year, at the age of fifty-three.

古文：诏赠本官。
现代文：诏令追赠本来的官职。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded him his original post.

古文：谥肃子。
现代文：谧号为肃王。
English: His posthumous name was Su Wang.

古文：蒨好学，尤悉朝仪故事，撰《江左遗典》三十卷，未就，卒。
现代文：江蓓爱好学习，尤为熟悉朝廷礼仪旧例，撰作《江左遣典》三十卷，没有完成，去世。
English: Jiang Zang loved to study and was particularly familiar with the old imperial court etiquette. He wrote the 30-volume "Jiang Zangyuan Classic," which he did not complete before his death.

古文：文集十五卷。
现代文：有文集十五卷。
English: He Shizhen has a collection of fifteen volumes.

古文：子紑、经，在《孝行传》。
现代文：儿子，编写在《孝行传》。
English: son, compiled in the "Biography of Filial Piety."

古文：史臣曰：王氏自姬姓已降，及乎秦汉，继有英哲。
现代文：史臣曰：王氏自从周朝以后，直到秦、漠，接连有杰出人物。
English: The historian said, "From the Zhou Dynasty to the Qin Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, the Wang Dynasty has had a succession of outstanding figures.

古文：洎东晋王茂弘经纶江左，时人方之管仲。
现代文：到束晋时王茂弘治理江左，当时人把他比作笪仲。
English: When Wang Maohong governed Jiangzu at the time of the arrival of the Shogunate, he was likened to Shizhong.

古文：其后蝉冕交映，台衮相袭，勒名帝籍，庆流子孙，斯为盛族矣。
现代文：其后貂蝉冠冕交相辉映，三公辅臣互相沿袭，刻写姓名于帝王图籍，吉庆流传到子孙，这是盛大的家族啊。
English: After that, the crown of cicadas intertwined with each other, the three princes and their attendants followed each other, inscribed their names in the imperial records, and the auspicious celebration was passed down to their children and grandchildren. This is a grand family.

古文：王瞻等承藉兹基，国华是贵，子有才行，可得而称。
现代文：王瞻等人继承这个根基，是贵重的国家精华，子嗣有才能操行，可加称道。
English: Wang Zhan and others who have inherited this foundation are the precious essence of the country, and their children have the ability to act, which is commendable.

古文：张充少不持操，晚乃折节，在于典选，实号廉平。
现代文：垂童年轻时不秉持操守，后来便强自抑制，在主管选拔中，有廉洁公平之称。
English: When he was young, Tiantong did not uphold ethics, but later he had strong self-restraint. In the selection of supervisors, he was known for his integrity and fairness.

古文：柳恽以多艺称，蔡撙以方雅著，江蒨以风格显，俱为梁室名士焉。
现代文：柳惮以多才多艺而著称，蔡撙以正直儒雅而闻名，江蓓以风度骨气而显要，都是梁室的名士。
English: Liu Shuo is famous for his versatility, Cai Wei is famous for his honesty and gentleness, and Jiang Wei is distinguished for his demeanor and backbone. They are all famous people in Liangshu.

