古文：邵伯温，字子文，洛阳人，康节处士雍之子也。
现代文：邵伯温字子文，河南洛阳人，是康节处士邵雍之子。
English: Shao Bowen Ziwen, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province, is the son of the Kangjie official Shao Yong.

古文：雍名重一时，如司马光、韩维、吕公著、程颐兄弟皆交其门。
现代文：邵雍生前颇有名望，与司马光、韩维、吕公著、程颐、程颢等皆有密切交往。
English: Shao Yong was quite famous in his lifetime, and he had close contacts with Sima Guang, Han Wei, Lü Gongzhu, Cheng Yao, Cheng Yao and others.

古文：伯温入闻父教，出则事司马光等，而光等亦屈名位辈行，与伯温为再世交，故所闻日博，而尤熟当世之务。
现代文：邵伯温在家聆听父亲教诲，在外则以司马光等为师。司马光等人不讲资格辈份，与邵伯温结成忘年之交。邵伯温因此而获益良多，知识更加渊博，且特别能明察时务。
English: At home, Shao Bowen listened to his father's teachings, and outside, he was taught by Sima Guang and others. Sima Guang and others, regardless of their qualifications, formed an unforgettable friendship with Shao Bowen. As a result, Shao Bowen benefited a lot, his knowledge was more profound, and he was particularly able to observe current affairs.

古文：光入相，尝欲荐伯温，未果而薨。
现代文：司马光任宰相时，曾打算荐举邵伯温，可惜尚未荐举便因病去世了。
English: When Sima Guang was appointed prime minister, he had planned to recommend Shao Bowen, but he died of illness before he could do so.

古文：后以河南尹与部使者荐，特授大名府助教，调潞州长子县尉。
现代文：后因受到河南尹及其他官员的推荐，邵伯温被特授大名府助教，调任潞州长子县县尉。
English: Later, because he was recommended by Yin of Henan Province and other officials, Shao Bowen was specially awarded the title of assistant professor of Daming Prefecture, and was transferred to the position of county lieutenant of Zhengzhou County, Henan Province.

古文：初，蔡确之相也，神宗崩，哲宗立，邢恕自襄州移河阳，诣确谋造定策事。
现代文：起初，蔡确为相，神宗驾崩，哲宗即位，邢恕从襄州迁往河阳，并拜谒蔡确，称蔡确有定策拥立哲宗之功。
English: At first, Cai Jizhen was the emperor, Shenzong died, Zhezong ascended to the throne, and Gongshu moved from Xiangzhou to Heyang, and paid homage to Cai Jizhen, saying that Cai Jizhen had the merit of supporting and establishing Zhezong.

古文：及司马光子康诣阙，恕召康诣河阳，伯温谓康曰： 公休除丧未见君，不宜枉道先见朋友。 康曰： 已诺之。 伯温曰： 恕倾巧，或以事要公休，若从之，必为异日之悔。 康竟往。
现代文：当司马光之子司马康应召入朝时，邢恕请司马康先到河阳，邵伯温对司马康说： 你服丧期满，应先去晋见皇帝，不宜绕道河阳先见朋友。 司马康说 ：可我已经答应了邢恕。 邵伯温又说： 邢恕这个人颇有心机，一定有事相求于你，你若从之，将来定会后悔的。 
English: When Sima Guang's son, Sima Kang, was summoned to the imperial court, he asked Sima Kang to go to Kheyang first. Shao Bowen said to Sima Kang: When your mourning period is over, you should first go to Jin to see the emperor, it is not appropriate to bypass Kheyang to see friends first. Sima Kang said: But I have already agreed to forgive you. Shao Bowen also said: I'm sorry, this person is quite resourceful, he must have something to ask of you, if you follow him, you will surely regret it in the future.

古文：恕果劝康作书称确，以为他日全身保家计。
现代文：司马康未听劝阻，坚持前往邢恕住地。邢恕果然劝司马康写文章称颂宰相蔡确，以为今后保全身家性命做打算。
English: Sima Kang did not listen to the dissuasion and insisted on going to the residence of Gong Som. Gong Som finally persuaded Sima Kang to write an article praising Prime Minister Cai Ji, thinking that he would save his own life in the future.

古文：康、恕同年登科，恕又出光门下，康遂作书如恕言。
现代文：司马康与邢恕为同年登科，且邢恕又出自司马康门下，出于友情等因素的考虑，司马康遂听从邢恕的意见，做文称颂蔡确。
English: Sima Kang and Zou Shou entered the university in the same year, and Zou Shou was a student of Sima Kang. Out of consideration for friendship and other factors, Sima Kang listened to Zou Shou's opinion and wrote a text praising Cai Ji.

古文：恕盖以康为光子，言确有定策功，世必见信。
现代文：邢恕以为，司马康为司马光之子，他写文章称蔡确有拥立哲宗的定策之功，世人必然相信。
English: I thought that Sima Kang was the son of Sima Guangyu. He wrote an article saying that Cai indeed had the decisive role of supporting Zhezong, and the world would certainly believe it.

古文：既而梁焘以谏议召，恕亦要焘至河阳，连日夜论确功不休，且以康书为证，焘不悦。
现代文：稍后，梁焘以谏议之名为皇帝召见，邢恕又依法炮制，要梁焘到河阳，并喋喋不休地向梁焘陈说蔡确的功劳，且以司马康之文做辅证，梁焘极不高兴。
English: Later, Liang Yi was summoned by the emperor under the name of Zi Yan, and Zi Yan was concocted in accordance with the law, asking Liang Yi to go to Heyang, and chattering to Liang Yi about Cai Ji's merits, and using Sima Kang's text as supporting evidence. Liang Yi was extremely unhappy.

古文：会吴处厚奏确诗谤朝政，焘与刘安世共请诛确，且论恕罪，亦命康分折，康始悔之。康卒，子植幼。宣仁后悯之。吕大防谓康素以伯温可托，请以伯温为西京教授以教植。伯温既至官，则诲植曰： 温公之孙，大谏之子，贤愚在天下，可畏也。 植闻之，力学不懈，卒有立。
现代文：不久，司马康去世，留下年幼的儿子司马植，为宣仁皇后所怜悯。吕大防对宣仁皇后说，司马康生前与邵伯温友好，原将其子托付给邵伯温，可以邵伯温为西京教授，便于教育司马植。邵伯温做西京教授后对司马植说： 你是司马光之孙，司马康之子，是贤是愚皆为天下人所关注，你当以此为勉，负起自己的责任。 司马植听后，发奋学习，毫不懈怠，终于取得了成绩。
English: Soon after, Sima Kang died, leaving behind his young son Sima Zhi, who was pitied by Empress Xuanren. Lu Dabao said to Empress Xuanren that Sima Kang was friendly with Shao Bowen during his lifetime, and originally entrusted his son to Shao Bowen. Shao Bowen could be a professor in West Beijing to facilitate the education of Sima Zhi. After Shao Bowen became a professor in West Beijing, he said to Sima Zhi: You are the grandson of Sima Guang, the son of Sima Kang. Whether you are wise or foolish is the concern of the world. You should take this as an encouragement and shoulder your responsibility.

古文：绍圣初，章惇为相。
现代文：绍圣初年，章任宰相。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Zhang was appointed prime minister.

古文：惇尝事康节，欲用伯温，伯温不往。
现代文：章曾经事从邵雍，故任相后，打算起用邵伯温，然邵伯温不愿趋炎附势。
English: Zhang once had an affair with Shao Yong, so after he was appointed as the minister, he planned to appoint Shao Bowen, but Shao Bowen was reluctant to become inflamed.

古文：会法当赴吏部铨，程颐为伯温曰： 吾危子之行也。 伯温曰： 岂不欲见先公于地下耶？ 至则先就部拟官，而后见宰相。
现代文：按惯例，邵伯温当赴吏部听候铨选，程颐对邵伯温说 ：我担心你此次的吏部之行。 
English: According to the usual practice, Shao Bowen should go to the personnel department to listen to the selection. Cheng Yu said to Shao Bowen: I am worried about your trip to the personnel department this time.

古文：惇论及康节之学，曰： 嗟乎，吾于先生不能卒业也。 伯温曰： 先君先天之学，论天地万物未有不尽者。
现代文：邵伯温说 ：有什么担心呢？难道不打算见先公于地下吗？ 于是，邵伯温先到了吏部听候差遣，然后才去见章。章与邵伯温谈起邵雍的象数学时感叹道： 唉，我没有深究先天之学，实在有愧于先生。 邵伯温说： 我父亲的先天之学，论天地万物事理，可谓无所不包，无所不尽，如能信奉他的学说，就不会计较人世间的仇怨反复。 
English: Shao Bowen said: What are you worried about? Aren't you going to see the underground first? So, Shao Bowen went to the personnel department first to wait for instructions, and then went to see Zhang. When Zhang and Shao Bowen talked about Shao Yong's elephant mathematics, he lamented: Alas, I haven't studied the innate learning, I really deserve my teacher. Shao Bowen said: My father's innate learning, on the principles of heaven and earth, can be described as all-encompassing, all-encompassing, if you can believe in his doctrine, you won't have to deal with the repeated grudges of the

古文：其信也，则人之仇怨反覆者可忘矣。 时惇方兴党狱，故以是动之。
现代文：邵伯温之所以这样说，是因为章大兴党狱，力排元党人，报复仇怨。
English: The reason why Shao Bowen said this was because Zhang Daxing was in prison for being a member of the Communist Party, he was trying to expel former members of the Party, and he was taking revenge for his grudge.

古文：惇悚然。
现代文：邵伯温想以此来劝诫章。
English: Shao Bowen wanted to use this as a way of exhorting the chapter.

古文：犹荐之于朝，而伯温愿补郡县吏，惇不悦，遂得监永兴军铸钱监。
现代文：章听后，有惶惶然之感。但章还是将邵伯温举荐给朝廷，而邵伯温不愿在朝廷做官，而愿在郡县做事。章为此极不高兴。邵伯温遂得监永兴军铸铁监。
English: After listening to Zhang, there was a sense of panic. But Zhang still recommended Shao Bowen to the imperial court, and Shao Bowen did not want to be an official in the imperial court, but wanted to work in the county. Zhang was very unhappy about this. Shao Bowen was then awarded the title of Yongxing Army Cast Iron Supervisor.

古文：时元祐诸贤方南迁，士鲜访之者。
现代文：此时，元党人大多南迁，且许多人都不敢去拜访他们。
English: By this time, most of the former party members had moved south, and many people were afraid to visit them.

古文：伯温见范祖禹于咸平，见范纯仁于颍昌，或为之恐，不顾也。
现代文：但邵伯温不怕，他在咸平拜见了范祖禹，在颍昌拜访了范纯仁。
English: But Shao Bowen was not afraid. He met Fan Zuyu in Xianping and visited Fan Chunren in Fuchang.

古文：会西边用兵，复夏人故地，从军者得累数阶，伯温当行，辄推同列。
现代文：后来，西夏挑起战端，欲收复西夏故地，宋廷许诺凡参加对西夏作战的将领可连升数级，邵伯温本当参加，但他将机会让给了同事。
English: Later, Western Xia provoked the war and wanted to recover Western Xia's hometown. Song Ting promised that the generals who participated in the war against Western Xia could be promoted several levels. Shao Bowen really participated, but he gave the opportunity to his colleagues.

古文：秩满，惇犹在相位。伯温义不至京师，从外台辟环庆路帅幕，实避惇也。徽宗即位，以日食求言。
现代文：邵伯温任监永兴军铸铁监期满后，章依然在朝廷任宰相，为了避免与章共事，邵伯温执意不去京师做官，而选外任为环庆路帅府幕僚。徽宗即位后，就日食现象寻求解释。
English: In order to avoid working with Zhang, Shao Bowen insisted on not going to Beijing to work as an official, and was elected as a staff member of the Huanqing Road General Headquarters. After Huizong ascended the throne, he sought an explanation for the solar eclipse phenomenon.

古文：伯温上书累数千言，大要欲复祖宗制度，辨宣仁诬谤，解元祐党锢，分君子小人，戒劳民用兵，语极恳至。
现代文：邵伯温上书达数千言，大意是要皇帝恢复祖宗制度，澄清对宣仁太后的诬谤，解除元党锢，分辨君子与小人，力戒劳民伤财，兴兵动武等，言语十分恳切。
English: Shao Bowen wrote thousands of words, saying that he wanted the emperor to restore the ancestral system, clarify the slander against Empress Dowager Xuanren, lift the former party discipline, distinguish between a gentleman and a villain, prevent the people from working and hurting their wealth, and raise an army. The words were very earnest.

古文：宣仁太后之谤，伯温既辨之，又著书名《辨诬》。后崇宁、大观间，以元符上书人分邪正等，伯温在邪等中，以此书也。
现代文：关于对宣仁太后的诽谤，邵伯温在上书中进行了辩解，又专门为此著有《辩诬》一书，此书写了崇宁、大观年间，除为宣仁太后辩诬外，还为邵伯温自己正了名。
English: Regarding the slander against Empress Dowager Xuanren, Shao Bowen defended himself in the above book, and specially wrote a book "Defending the Defenders" for this purpose. This book was written during the years of Chongning and Daguan. In addition to defending Empress Dowager Xuanren, it also justified Shao Bowen himself.

古文：出监华州西岳庙，久之，知陕州灵宝县，徙芮城县。
现代文：不久，邵伯温出监华州的西岳庙，之后，又先后任知陕州灵宝县和黄城县。
English: Soon, Shao Bowen was sent to supervise the Xiyue Temple in Huazhou. Later, he was successively appointed to Lingbao County and Huangcheng County in Shaanxi Province.

古文：丁母忧，服除，主管永兴军耀州三白渠公事。
现代文：服母丧期满后，主管永兴军耀州三白渠公事。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was in charge of the Yongxing Army's public affairs in Yaozhou Sanbai Canal.

古文：童贯为宣抚使，士大夫争出其门，伯温闻其来，出他州避之。
现代文：此时，童贯任该区域宣抚使，许多士大夫争相登门巴结讨好，可邵伯温听说童贯要来，赶紧出走他州以避童贯。
English: At this time, Tong Rong served as the region's envoy, and many judges and magistrates tried to make friends with Tong Rong, but Shao Bowen heard that Tong Rong was coming and hurriedly fled to another state to avoid Tong Rong.

古文：除知果州，请罢岁输泸南诸州绫绢、丝绵数十万以宽民力。
现代文：邵伯温在知果州期间，上书请罢岁输泸南诸州绫绢、丝绵数十万以宽民力。
English: During Shao Bowen's stay in Zhiguozhou, hundreds of thousands of people were sent to the southern provinces of Guizhou, with broad popular support.

古文：除知兴元府、遂宁府、邠州，皆不赴。
现代文：后被命知兴元府、遂宁府、州，皆托辞不赴任，最后被擢升为提点成都路刑狱。
English: Later, he was ordered to visit Xingyuanfu, Suiningfu, and Zhouzhou, but all of them made excuses not to go to the post. Finally, he was promoted to the Chengdu Road Penitentiary.

古文：擢提点成都路刑狱，贼史斌破武休，入汉、利，窥剑门，伯温与成都帅臣卢法原合谋守剑门，贼竟不能入，蜀人德之。
现代文：时农民起义首领史斌率部攻破武休，进入汉中、利路，并打算夺取剑门关，邵伯温与成都帅臣卢清原合谋守剑门，致使斌不能过关，蜀人因此对邵伯温十分感激。
English: At that time, Shi Bin, the leader of the peasant uprising, led his troops to break through Wu Xiu, enter Hanzhong and Lilu, and intended to seize Jianmen Pass. Shao Bowen conspired with Lu Qingyuan, a handsome minister from Chengdu, to guard Jianmen, resulting in Bin being unable to pass the pass. The people of Shu were therefore very grateful to Shao Bowen.

古文：除利路转运副使，提举太平观。
现代文：邵伯温后任利路转运副使，提举太平观。
English: Shao Bowen later served as deputy envoy of Li Road Transportation, and promoted Taiping Guan.

古文：绍兴四年，卒，年七十八。
现代文：绍兴四年，邵伯温去世，时年七十八岁。
English: Shaoxing four years, Shao Bowen died, at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：初，邵雍尝曰： 世行乱，蜀安，可避居。 及宣和末，伯温载家使蜀，故免于难。
现代文：邵雍曾经说： 世道很乱，而川蜀安定，可避居。 在宣和末年，邵伯温举家迁往四川，因此避免了北宋末年的战乱之灾。
English: Shao Yong once said: The world is in turmoil, but Sichuan and Shuxiu are stable, so you can avoid living there. In the last years of the declaration of peace, Shao Bowen moved his whole family to Sichuan, thus avoiding the disaster of war in the last years of the Northern Song Dynasty.

古文：伯温尝论元祐、绍圣之政曰： 公卿大夫，当知国体，以蔡确奸邪，投之死地，何足惜！
现代文：邵伯温曾论元、绍圣年间的政治说： 公卿大夫，应当识国体，按理对蔡确等奸邪之徒，纵然置之于死地，也不足为惜。
English: Shao Bowen once said about the politics during the Yuan and Shao Sheng years: "Dr. Kugyeong, you should know the national body, and it is reasonable to pity the traitors such as Cai Jizhen, even if they are put to death.

古文：然尝为宰相，当以宰相待之。
现代文：然而，既然蔡确曾为宰相，就应以宰相之礼待之。
English: However, since Tsai was indeed the prime minister, she should be treated with the courtesy of the prime minister.

古文：范忠宣有文正余风，知国体者也，故欲薄确之罪，言既不用，退而行确词命，然后求去，君子长者仁人用心也。
现代文：范忠宣有文正之余风，可谓知国体者，所以他想尽量淡化蔡确之罪。当他的意见被拒绝后，只得退而行蔡确词命，然后请求辞官，这就体现了君子长者仁人之用心。
English: Fan Zhongxuan had a bit of a reputation for being a scholar, so he wanted to downplay Cai Jizhi's crime as much as possible. When his opinion was rejected, he had to retreat to Cai Jizhi's words and then ask the dictionary officer. This reflected the gentleman's and elder's benevolent intentions.

古文：确死南荒，岂独有伤国体哉！
现代文：蔡确死于南方荒蛮之地，难道仅仅只是有伤国体吗？
English: Did Cai Zhengyi die in the wild land of the south, or was it just because she had injured the national team?

古文：刘挚、梁焘、王岩叟、刘安世忠直有余，然疾恶已甚，不知国体，以贻后日缙绅之祸，不能无过也。 
现代文：刘挚、梁焘、王严叟、刘安世等人忠直有余，然又疾恶之心太甚，不识礼统，这就为后日的士大夫之祸开了先河，因而不能不说他们没有过错。 
English: Liu Zhiqi, Liang Qi, Wang Yanqi, Liu Anshi and others were more than loyal and upright, but their evil hearts were too much, and they did not know the etiquette. This set the precedent for the calamity of officials in the future, so it cannot be said that they did not make mistakes.

古文：赵鼎少从伯温游，及当相，乞行追录，始赠秘阁修撰。
现代文：赵鼎年青时跟从邵伯温学习，后来赵鼎做了宰相，上表请求追封邵伯温，朝廷遂追赠邵伯温为秘书阁修撰。
English: When Zhao Ding was young, he studied under Shao Bowen. Later, when Zhao Ding became the prime minister, he requested that Shao Bowen be given a posthumous title. The court then posthumously awarded Shao Bowen the title of secretary of the Cabinet of Ministers.

古文：初，樗二女方择配，富人交请婚，不许。及见汪洋、张孝祥，乃曰 佳婿也。 遂以妻之。
现代文：赵鼎为邵伯温做墓志铭说 ：邵伯温以学识行起于元年间，以名节居处于绍圣年间，以言论受贬于崇宁年间。 世人皆认为赵鼎这三句话概括了邵伯温一生的历程。邵伯温所著之书有《河南集》、《闻见录》、《皇极系述》、《辩诬》、《辨惑》、《皇极经世序》、《观物内外篇解》等近百卷。
English: Zhao Ding made an epitaph for Shao Bowen, saying: Shao Bowen started his academic career in the first year of the year, lived in the year of Shao Sheng in the name of fame, and was belittled by speech in the year of Chongning. People all over the world believe that these three sentences of Zhao Ding summarize the course of Shao Bowen's life. The books written by Shao Bowen include "Henan Collection," "Historical Records," "Imperial System Description," "Dispute," "Dispute," "Imperial System Sequence," "Inside and Outside Interpretation" and nearly 100 volumes.

古文：洪兴祖，字庆善，镇江丹阳人。
现代文：他有三个儿子，分别名为邵薄、邵博、邵傅。洪兴祖字庆善，镇江丹阳人。
English: He has three sons, respectively named Shao Bo, Shao Bo and Shao Fu. Hong Xingzu, surnamed Qing Shan, is from Danyang, Zhenjiang.

古文：少读《礼》至《中庸》，顿悟性命之理，绩文日进。
现代文：他年少时读《礼》到《中庸》篇，顿时领悟到性命学的原理，学习成绩和文思日益进步。
English: When he was young, he read "Li" to "Zhongyong" and suddenly realized the principle of life science, and his academic performance and literary thoughts were improving day by day.

古文：登政和上舍第，为湖州士曹，改宣教郎。
现代文：宋徽宗政和年间，他考取太学上舍进士，委任为湖州士曹官，改任宣教郎。
English: During the Song and Zong dynasties, he was awarded the title of "Taigaku Shang She Jin Shi" and appointed as a sergeant in Huzhou, and later as a missionary.

古文：高宗时在扬州，庶事草创，选人改秩军头司引见，自兴祖始。
现代文：高宗这时在扬州，一切草创，选人改秩由军头司引见，自洪兴祖开始。
English: At that time, Gao Zong was in Yangzhou, and all the initiatives, the selection of people to change the rank were introduced by the commander-in-chief, starting with Hong Xingzu.

古文：召试，授秘书省正字，后为太常博士。
现代文：洪兴祖被召面试，授秘书省正字官，后升太常博士。
English: Hong Xingzu was called for an interview, awarded the post of secretary of the provincial orthographic officer, and later promoted to the post of doctor.

古文：上疏乞收人心，纳谋策，安民情，壮国威。
现代文：洪兴祖上书高宗，建议朝廷收揽人心，采纳臣下的策略计谋，安定民情，宏扬国威。
English: Hong Xingzu wrote to Gaozong, suggesting that the imperial court win the hearts and minds of the people, adopt the strategies and tactics of the subjects, stabilize the people's feelings, and enhance national prestige.

古文：又论国家再造，一宜以艺祖为法。
现代文：又议论说，国家重建，一切应该效法宋太祖。
English: It was also argued that everything should follow the example of Song Taizu in rebuilding the country.

古文：绍兴四年，苏、湖地震。
现代文：高宗绍兴四年，苏州和湖州发生了地震。
English: In Gaozong Shaoxing's fourth year, an earthquake occurred in Suzhou and Huzhou.

古文：兴祖时为驾部郎官，应诏上疏，具言朝廷纪纲之失，为时宰所恶，主管太平观。
现代文：洪兴祖当时为驾部郎官，应皇帝的诏令上书，明确地指陈朝廷的纪纲失误，为宰相所忌恨，被贬斥主管太平观。
English: At that time, Hong Xingzu was the chauffeur, and in response to the emperor's edict, he wrote a letter, clearly pointing out the mistakes in the discipline of the Chen dynasty. He was hated by the prime minister and was denounced by the head of the Taiping.

古文：起知广德军，视水原为陂塘六百余所，民无旱忧。
现代文：后起用为广德军知军，他考察水源修建陂塘六百多处，使老百姓无旱灾之忧。
English: Later, he was employed as a military adviser to the Guangde Army. He inspected water sources and built more than 600 Qutang, so that the people would not have to worry about drought.

古文：一新学舍，因定从祀：自十哲曾子而下七十有一人，又列先儒左丘明而下二十有六人。
现代文：又把学舍修建一新，并编定配祀孔子的先贤牌位，自十哲曾子以下列七十一人，又列先儒左丘明以下二十六人。
English: In addition, the schoolhouse was rebuilt, and the ranks of the sages who were assigned to worship Confucius were compiled, with the following seventy-one people from the ten great-grandsons of Confucius, and the following twenty-six people from Zhu Zuoqumin.

古文：擢提点江东刑狱。
现代文：由于政绩可观，洪兴祖被提拔为提点江东刑狱。
English: Due to his remarkable political achievements, Hong Xingzu was promoted to be the head of the Jiangdong Penitentiary.

古文：知真州。
现代文：后又为真州知州。
English: Later, it was changed to Zhengzhou Chizhou.

古文：州当兵冲，疮痍未瘳。
现代文：真州当军事要冲，遭到金军的严重破坏犹未恢复。
English: Zhenzhou, once a military stronghold, was severely damaged by the Golden Army and has yet to recover.

古文：兴祖始至，请复一年租，从之。
现代文：洪兴祖上任一开始，便请求朝廷免除一年的租税，得到批准。
English: As soon as Hong Xingzu took office, he asked the imperial court for a one-year tax exemption, which was approved.

古文：明年再请，又从之。
现代文：明年请求免租，又得到批准。
English: Next year, he applied for a rent exemption, which was also approved.

古文：自是流民复业，垦辟荒田至七万余亩。
现代文：从此，流民得到安置，生产恢复发展，开辟荒田达七万多亩。
English: Since then, the displaced people have been resettled, production has resumed development, and more than 70,000 mu of wasteland have been opened up.

古文：徙知饶州，先梦持六刀，觉曰： 三刀为益，今倍之，其饶乎？ 已而果然。
现代文：后洪兴祖调任饶州知州。调任前，他先做了个梦，梦到自己手里拿着六把刀，醒了后说： 三把刀为益州，今增加一倍，该是饶州吧！ 不久果然如此。
English: Later, Hong Xingzu was transferred to Raozhou and Zhizhou. Before the transfer, he first had a dream that he was holding six swords in his hand. When he woke up, he said, "Three swords are for Yizhou, now double it, it should be for Raozhou!" This was soon true.

古文：是时秦桧当国，谏官多桧门下，争弹劾以媚桧。
现代文：是时秦桧掌权，谏官大多数出自秦桧门下，他们争着弹劾忠良，以讨好秦桧。
English: When Qin Shi Huang was in power, most of the eunuchs were from Qin Shi Huang's entourage. They vied to impeach Zhong Liang in order to please Qin Shi Huang.

古文：兴祖坐尝作故龙图阁学士程瑀《论语解序》，语涉怨望，编管昭州，卒，年六十有六。
现代文：洪兴祖曾为已故的龙图阁学士程王禹的《论语解》做《序》，被指控为语言中涉及到怨望朝廷，被除名编管昭州。不久逝世，终年六十六岁。
English: Hong Xingzu once wrote the "Preface" to "On the Interpretation of Language" by the late Longtu Ge scholar Cheng Wang Yu. He was accused of using language that involved resentment of the imperial court, and was removed from his position as editor-in-chief of Zhaozhou. He died soon after, at the age of 66.

古文：明年，诏复其官，直敷文阁。
现代文：第二年，皇帝下令恢复他的官，直敷文阁。
English: The following year, the emperor ordered the reinstatement of his official, Jikishiki Bunkaku.

古文：兴祖好古博学，自少至老，未尝一日去书。
现代文：洪兴祖好古博学，自少至老，未尝一日离书。
English: Hong Xingzu was fond of ancient erudition. From young to old, he never left his books for a single day.

古文：著《老庄本旨》、《周易通义》、《系辞要旨》、《古文孝经序赞》、《离骚楚词考异》行于世。
现代文：他撰写的《老庄本旨》、《周易通义》、《系辞要旨》、《古文孝经序赞》、《离骚楚辞考异》都流行于世。
English: His works "Lao Zhuang Hong Zi," "Zhou Yi Tong Yi," "Zhuang Zi Jie Zi," "Kowen Xiao Jing Zi Zi Zi Zi," "Laoshuang Hong Zi," "Zhou Yi Tong Yi," "Kowen Xiao Zi Zi Zi," "Kowen Xiao Jing Zi Zi Zi Zi," "Laoshuang Hong Zi Zi Zi," "Kowen Xiao Zi Zi Zi Zi Zi," "Kowen Xiao Zi Zi Zi Zi Zi," "Kowen Xiao Zi Zi Z

古文：高闶，字抑崇，明州鄞县人。
现代文：杨万里字廷秀，吉州吉水人。
English: Yang Wanli (Chinese: 杨万里; pinyin: Tingxiu) is a singer from Jishu.

古文：绍兴元年，以上舍选赐进士第。
现代文：考取宋高宗绍兴二十四年进士，任赣州司户官，又调任永州零陵县县丞。
English: Song Gaozong Shaoxing was promoted to a scholar in the 24th year of the Song Gaozong Shaoxing. He was appointed as a household official of Zhangzhou, and was also transferred to the county magistrate of Yongzhou Liling County.

古文：执政荐之，召为秘书省正字。时将赐新进士《儒行》、《中庸》篇，闶奏《儒行》词说不醇，请止赐《中庸》，庶几学者得知圣学渊源，而不惑于他说，从之。
现代文：这时张浚贬谪到永州，闭门谢客，杨万里三次拜访都没有见到，便写了一封信极力请求，张浚才见他，并以 正心诚意 之学相勉励，杨万里终身信服其教导，并把自己读书的房子取名为 诚斋 。
English: At this time, Zhang Junjun went to Yongzhou to thank guests behind closed doors. Yang Wanli did not see him after three visits, so he wrote a letter to strongly request that Zhang Junjun see him, and encouraged him to study with sincerity. Yang Wanli was convinced of his teaching for life, and named his reading house "Sincere."

古文：权礼部员外郎兼史馆校勘。
现代文：张浚入相，将杨万里荐于朝廷。
English: Zhang Jianrui recommended Yang Wanli to the imperial court.

古文：面对，言： 《春秋》之法，莫大于正名。
现代文：杨万里被升任为临安府教授，未赴任，父亲死居丧。
English: Yang Wanli was promoted to professor of Lin'an Prefecture, but he did not take up the post, and his father passed away.

古文：今枢密院号本兵柄，而诸路军马尽属都督，是朝廷兵柄自分为二。
现代文：后改任隆兴府奉新县知县，他不准催讨赋税的官吏下乡扰民，老百姓有逃避赋税的只把他的名字张贴集市中，老百姓都高兴地缴税，不扰民赋税就交清，县里因而大治。
English: Later, he was assigned to Longxingfu, Fengxin County, Zhixian County. He was not allowed to urge the tax officials to go to the countryside to disturb the people. The common people only posted his name in the market to evade the tax. The common people were happy to pay the tax. They paid the tax without disturbing the people. As a result, the county was in turmoil.

古文：又周六卿，其大事则从其长，小事官属犹得专达。
现代文：时值陈俊卿、虞允文做宰相，两人交相推荐杨万里，杨万里被征召为国子博士。
English: At that time, Chen Junqing and Yu Yunwen were the prime ministers, and the two recommended Yang Wanli to each other, and Yang Wanli was called up as a national doctor.

古文：今一切拘以文法，虽利害灼然可见，官长且不敢自决，必请于朝，故庙堂之事益繁，而省曹官属乃与胥吏无异。
现代文：翰林侍讲学士张木式因论说唐朝宰相张说被谪守袁州，杨万里上疏抗争，要求留张木式在朝，又致书虞允文，用和同之说劝说他，张木式虽然没有留住，但大家公认杨万里人格高尚。后杨万里迁太常博士，不久升太常寺丞兼吏部侍右郎官，又转将作少监，出任漳州知州，后改知常州，不久提举广东常平茶盐。盗贼沈师进犯南粤，杨万里亲自率兵讨平。
English: Hanlin attendant and lecturer Zhang Muxi, because of the argument that Zhang, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, said that he was held captive in Yuanzhou, Yang Wanli went to Soso to protest and asked Zhang Muxi to stay in the court. He also sent a letter to Yu Yunwen, using the same argument to persuade him. Although Zhang Muxi did not retain, it was recognized that Yang Muxi had a high character. Later, Yang Muxi was transferred to Taizhang Doctor, and soon he was promoted to Taizhang Temple Junior Secretary and Correspondent of the Personnel Department, and then he was transferred to be a junior inspector, and he was appointed

古文：又政事之行，给、舍得缴驳，台谏得论列，若给、舍以为然，台谏以为不然，则不容不改。
现代文：宋高宗称他为 仁者之勇 ，遂有重用他的意思，于是提升为提点刑狱。杨万里请求在潮、惠二州的外围修筑寨堡，在潮州用来镇慑盗贼的巢穴，在惠州用来扼住盗贼的道路，但不久杨万里以居丧去官。
English: Song Gaozong called him "the courage of a benevolent person," and had the idea of reusing him, so he was promoted to the post of penal prison. Yang Wanli requested to build a fortification on the outskirts of Chaozhou and Huizhou, a den used to deter thieves in Chaozhou, and a road used to strangle thieves in Huizhou, but soon Yang Wanli passed away.

古文：祖宗时有缴驳台谏章疏不以为嫌者，恐其得于风闻，致朝廷之有过举。
现代文：服丧期满，被征召为尚左郎官。孝宗淳熙十二年五月，因发生地震，杨万里应皇帝诏命上书说： 臣听说在没有事的时候说有事，不影响其为忠臣；在有事的时候说没有事，其奸佞之心就严重了。
English: In May of the twelfth year of Emperor Xiaozong's reign, due to an earthquake, Yang Wanli sent a letter to the emperor in response to the emperor's edict, saying: "If a vassal hears that there is something when there is nothing, it does not affect his loyalty; if he hears that there is nothing when there is something, his treachery becomes serious."

古文：然此风不见久矣，臣恐朝廷之权反在台谏。
现代文：现在宋金两国南北和好已超过二十年，一旦使者断绝来往，敌情就会变化莫测。
English: Now that more than 20 years have passed since the Song and Jin dynasties brought peace to North Korea and South Korea, once the envoys cut off contacts, the hostile situation will change unpredictably.

古文：且祖宗时，监察御史许言事，靖康中尝行之。
现代文：可是却有人说，金人有当年匈奴 五单于争立 的祸乱，又有人说，金人有当年匈奴被东胡族围困的灾难，后来都不确实。
English: However, some people say that Jin people suffered from the calamity of the Huns being besieged by the Eastern Hu people, but this is not true.

古文：今则名为台官，实无言责，此皆名之未正也。 
现代文：道途纷纷传说，金人修缮汴京城池，开凿海州漕渠，又在河南、河北征调民兵，增加驿骑，赶制马槽，疏通井泉，我们的间谍却根本没有办法混进去，这究竟是要干什么呀？
English: There were many legends along the way. The Jin people repaired the Beijing Castle Pool, dug the Haizhou Canal, recruited and transferred militia in Henan and Hebei, increased the number of cavalry, drove the horse troughs, and dredged the wells, but our spies had no way to get in. What was this all about?

古文：寻迁著作佐郎，以言者论罢，主管崇道观。
现代文：臣所说的在无事的时候说有事，此其一。 有人说金主回北方，可为大宋庆贺。
English: What the minister said about saying something when there is nothing, this is the first. Some people say that the return of the emperor to the north can be a celebration of the Great Song Dynasty.

古文：召为国子司业。
现代文：臣以为大宋的忧患，正在这里。
English: The vassal thought that the troubles of the Great Song Dynasty stemmed from here.

古文：万里精于诗，尝著《易传》行于世。
现代文：杨万里精于诗歌，著有《易传》流行于世。
English: Yang Wanli is good at poetry. He is the author of "I Chuan" which is popular in the world.

古文：光宗尝为书 诚斋 二字，学者称诚斋先生，赐谥文节。
现代文：光宗曾为他写 诚斋 二字，学者称他为 诚斋先生 ，死后赐谥 文节 。
English: Guangzong once wrote the two characters "Seizai" for him, and scholars called him "Mr. Seizai," after his death.

古文：子长孺。
现代文：其子名长孺。
English: His son's name was Nagase.

