古文：俗有大讳四：一曰讳西益宅。
现代文：世间有四大忌讳。一是忌讳在住宅西边扩建住房。
English: There are four major taboos in the world. First, it is taboo to expand housing on the west side of the house.

古文：西益宅谓之不祥，不祥必有死亡。
现代文：在住宅西边扩建住房就叫做不吉利。不吉利必定会有死亡。
English: It is said to be unlucky to expand a house on the west side of a house. If it is unlucky, there will be death.

古文：相惧以此，故世莫敢西益宅。
现代文：人们以此互相恐吓，所以世间没有谁敢在住宅西边扩建住房。
English: People use this to intimidate each other, so no one in the world dares to expand housing on the west side of the house.

古文：防禁所从来者远矣。
现代文：这种禁忌由来很久远了。
English: This taboo goes back a long way.

古文：传曰：鲁哀公欲西益宅，史争以为不祥。
现代文：传上说： 鲁哀公打算在住宅西边扩建住房，吏官直言规劝认为这样做会不吉利。
English: Legend has it that: Lu Aigong planned to expand his house on the west side of the house, and the officials bluntly persuaded him that doing so would be unlucky.

古文：哀公作色而怒，左右数谏而弗听，以问其傅宰质睢曰： 吾欲西益宅，史以为不祥，何如？ 
现代文：哀公脸色一变而发怒，左右的人屡次劝谏他都不听从。他将这件事询问太傅宰质睢说： 我打算在住宅西边扩建住房，史官认为不吉利，你认为怎样？ 
English: Aiko's face changed and he became angry. The people around him repeatedly tried to persuade him, but he did not listen. He asked Taifu Zai Jie about this matter and said: I plan to expand the house on the west side of the house. Historians think it is unlucky. What do you think?

古文：宰质睢曰： 天下有三不祥，西益宅不与焉。 
现代文：宰质睢说： 天下有三种不吉利的事，在住宅西边扩建住房不在其中。 
English: "There are three kinds of unlucky things in the world, and building an extension on the west side of a house is not one of them," said Zhaizhong.

古文：哀公大说。
现代文：哀公听了很高兴。
English: Aigong was very happy to hear this.

古文：有顷，复问曰： 何谓三不祥？ 
现代文：一会儿，他又问： 什么叫三不吉利？ 
English: After a while, he asked again: What are the three unlucky things?

古文：对曰： 不行礼义，一不祥也。嗜欲无止，二不祥也。不听规谏，三不祥也。 
现代文：宰质睢回答说： 不施行礼义，一不吉利；嗜好欲望无止境，二不吉利；不听直言规劝，三不吉利。 
English: Zai Qiao replied: "If you don't practice etiquette, one is unlucky; if you indulge in endless desires, two is unlucky; if you don't listen to straightforward advice, three is unlucky.

古文：哀公缪然深惟，慨然自反，遂不益宅。
现代文：鲁哀公默默地深思，感慨地自我反省，于是就不扩建住房了。 
English: Lu Aigong silently pondered and self-reflected with emotion, so he did not expand the house.

古文：令史与宰质睢止其益宅，徒为烦扰，则西益宅祥与不祥未可知也。
现代文：假如史官与宰质睢劝止鲁哀公扩建住房，仅仅是因为怕烦扰多事，那么向西扩建住房吉利不吉利就不可能知道了。
English: If the historian and the prime minister advised Lu Aikong to stop the expansion of housing, simply because of the fear of disturbing many things, then it is impossible to know whether the westward expansion of housing is auspicious or unlucky.

古文：令史、质睢以为西益宅审不祥，则史与质睢与今俗人等也。
现代文：假如史官、宰质睢认为在住宅西边扩建住房确实不吉利，那么史官与宰质睢就与今天的寻常人一样了。
English: If the historian, Zaizho Yan, thought that the expansion of housing on the west side of the house was really unlucky, then the historian and Zaizho Yan would be the same as today's ordinary people.

古文：夫宅之四面皆地也，三面不谓之凶，益西面独谓不祥，何哉？
现代文：住宅的四面都是空地，扩三面都不称之为凶，扩西面独称为不吉利，是什么缘故呢？
English: The four sides of the house are open space, and the expansion of the three sides is not called evil, and the expansion of the west side is called unlucky, what is the reason?

古文：西益宅，何伤於地体？
现代文：向西面扩建住房，对地体有什么伤害呢？
English: What is the damage to the land caused by expanding housing to the west?

古文：何害於宅神？
现代文：对宅神有什么伤害呢？
English: What harm would it do to the god of the house?

古文：西益不祥，损之能善乎？西益不祥，东益能吉乎？
现代文：向西面扩建不吉利，拆掉西面的住宅就能吉利吗？
English: Is it unlucky to expand to the west, and will it be lucky to demolish the houses in the west?

古文：夫不祥必有祥者，犹不吉必有吉矣。
现代文：向西面扩建不吉利，向东面扩建就吉利吗？有不吉祥就必定有吉祥，好比有不吉利就必定有吉利一样。
English: Is expansion to the west unlucky, and expansion to the east lucky? If there is bad luck, there must be good luck, just as if there is bad luck, there must be good luck.

古文：宅有形体，神有吉凶，动德致福，犯刑起祸。
现代文：住宅有各种形体，宅神有吉有凶，行为符合道德就招来福佑，触犯刑律就会引起灾祸。
English: Dwellings come in all shapes and sizes, the deities of the house bring good luck and bad luck, moral behavior brings good luck, and breaking the law brings bad luck.

古文：今言西益宅谓之不祥，何益而祥者？
现代文：现在说向西面扩建住房称之为不吉祥，向哪个方向扩建才吉祥呢？
English: Now that the westward expansion of housing is called unlucky, in which direction is it lucky to expand?

古文：且恶人西益宅者谁也？
现代文：而且憎恨人们向西面扩建住房的是谁呢？
English: And who hates people expanding their homes to the west?

古文：如地恶之，益东家之西，损西家之东，何伤於地？
现代文：如果是土地憎恨这件事，在东家的西面扩建住房，拆除西家东面的住房，对土地有什么伤害呢？
English: If it is a matter of land hatred, how will the expansion of housing on the west side of the owner's house and the demolition of housing on the east side of the west house harm the land?

古文：如以宅神不欲西益，神犹人也，人这处宅，欲得广大，何故恶之？
现代文：如果认为是宅神不允许向西扩建，神也如人一样，人们居住房屋总想宽敞一些，宅神为什么要憎恨扩建呢？
English: If it is believed that the god of the house does not allow expansion to the west, and gods are like people, people always want to live in more spacious houses, why does the god of the house hate expansion?

古文：而以宅神恶烦扰，则四面益宅，皆当不祥。
现代文：如果认为是宅神厌烦搅扰，那么向四面扩建住房，应当都不吉祥。
English: If it is considered that the god of the house is bored and disturbs, then the expansion of housing in all directions should not be auspicious.

古文：诸工技之家，说吉凶之占，皆有事状。
现代文：各种预测吉凶的人，解释吉凶的征兆，都有一套说法。
English: All kinds of people who predict good or bad luck and explain the signs of good or bad luck have a set of sayings.

古文：宅家言治宅犯凶神，移徙言忌岁月，祭祀言触血忌，丧葬言犯刚柔，皆有鬼神凶恶之禁，人不忌避，有病死之祸。
现代文：推测住宅吉凶的人说修建房屋讲究忌犯凶神，搬迁讲究触犯岁月禁忌，祭祀讲究避开 血忌日 ，埋葬死人要讲究选择 刚柔日 ，这些都有鬼神凶恶方面的禁忌。人们不忌讳避让，就有病死的灾祸。
English: People who speculate on the fortunes of houses say that building houses should be careful not to offend evil spirits, relocating should be careful not to offend the taboos of the times, sacrificing should be careful to avoid the day of bloodshed, and burying the dead should be careful to choose the day of gongju, all of which have taboos on the evil aspects of ghosts and gods. If people do not refrain from making concessions, there will be the scourge of illness and death.

古文：至於西益宅何害而谓之不祥？
现代文：至于向西扩建住房，有什么灾害而称之为不吉祥呢？
English: As for the westward expansion of housing, what disasters are there to call it unlucky?

古文：不祥之祸，何以为败？
现代文：不吉祥的灾祸，凭什么带来损害呢？
English: An unlucky calamity, how can it bring harm?

古文：实说其义， 不祥 者义理之禁，非吉凶之忌也。
现代文：依据事实解释它的道理，所谓不吉利，是礼义方面的禁忌，而不是吉凶方面的忌讳。
English: According to the facts, explaining its reason, the so-called unlucky, is a taboo in terms of etiquette, rather than a taboo in terms of fortune.

古文：夫西方，长老之地，尊者之位也。
现代文：西方，是年长者和辈分高的人的位子。
English: The West is the place for the elderly and the well-heeled.

古文：尊长在西，卑幼在东。
现代文：年老者和辈分高的人坐西方，晚辈和小孩坐东方。
English: The elderly and senior citizens sit in the west, while the younger generation and children sit in the east.

古文：尊长，主也；卑幼，助也。
现代文：年长者和辈分高的人是主，晚辈和小孩是从。
English: Elders and seniors are the main, juniors and children are from.

古文：主少而助多，尊无二上，卑有百下也。
现代文：尊长者少而晚辈多，尊长者不能有两个，晚辈可以有很多。
English: There are fewer elders but more juniors. There cannot be two elders, but there can be many juniors.

古文：西益主益，主不增助，二上不百下也，於义不善，故谓不祥。
现代文：向西扩建住宅，增加了尊长者而没有增加晚辈，上面出现两个尊长者而下面晚辈却很少，从礼义上说是不妥当的，所以称之为不吉利。
English: To expand the residence to the west, to increase the number of revered elders without increasing the number of younger generations, to have two revered elders at the top and few younger generations at the bottom, is inappropriate from the point of view of etiquette, so it is called unlucky.

古文：不祥者，不宜也，於义不宜，未有凶也。
现代文：不吉利，就是不适宜。对于礼义不适宜，并没有什么凶险。
English: If it is not auspicious, it is not suitable. If it is not suitable for etiquette, there is no danger.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明它呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫墓，死人所藏；田，人所饮食；宅，人所居处。
现代文：坟墓，是埋葬死人的地方；田地，是人们获取饮食的地方；住宅，是人们居住的地方。
English: The grave is where the dead are buried; the field is where people get their food; the house is where people live.

古文：三者於人，吉凶宜等。
现代文：三方面对于人来说，吉凶应该相等。
English: In three respects, for human beings, good and evil should be equal.

古文：西益宅不祥，西益墓与田，不言不祥。
现代文：向西扩建住房不吉利，向西扩建坟墓和田地，却不讲不吉利。
English: It is unlucky to expand houses to the west, but it is not unlucky to expand tombs and fields to the west.

古文：夫墓，死人所居，因忽不慎。
现代文：坟墓，是死人居住的地方，因而忽略不予重视。
English: The grave, being the abode of the dead, is neglected.

古文：田，非人所处，不设尊卑。
现代文：田地，不是人居住的地方，所以不设立尊卑次序。
English: The field is not a place where people live, so there is no hierarchy.

古文：宅者，长幼所共，加慎致意者，何可不之讳？
现代文：住宅，是老少共同居住的地方，是应该特别重视和格外留意的，怎么可以不忌讳它呢？
English: A home is a place where people of all ages live together. It should be given special attention and special care. How can it not be taboo?

古文：义详於宅，略於墓与田也。
现代文：因此礼义上对住宅规定得很周详，对于田地和坟墓就规定得比较简略了。
English: Therefore, in terms of etiquette, the rules for residences are very detailed, while the rules for fields and tombs are relatively simple.

古文：二曰讳被刑为徒，不上丘墓。
现代文：二是忌讳曾受过肉刑罚作苦役的人，不得上坟墓扫祭。
English: Second, it is taboo for a person who has been subjected to corporal punishment to perform hard labor to go to the grave to sweep the offerings.

古文：但知不可，不能知其不可之意。
现代文：只知道不能这样做，却不明白不能这样做的道理。
English: They only know that they can't do it, but they don't understand why they can't do it.

古文：问其禁之者，不能知其讳，受禁行者，亦不要其忌。
现代文：问那些禁止这样做的人，也不明白其中的忌讳；被禁止这样做的人，也不明白其中的忌讳。
English: Ask those who forbid it, and they do not know what it is, and those who are forbidden it, and they do not know what it is.

古文：连相放效，至或於被刑，父母死，不送葬；若至墓侧，不敢临葬；甚失至於不行吊伤、见佗之人柩。
现代文：一个个相互仿效，甚至有的儿子受了刑罚，父母死了，不能送葬，或者到了墓傍，也不敢面临下葬。这种错误甚至发展到不去吊丧，不敢见别人的灵柩。
English: One by one, they imitated each other, and even some sons were punished, their parents died and could not be buried, or they went to the grave and did not dare to face burial. This mistake even developed into not going to the funeral and not daring to see other people's caskets.

古文：夫徒，人也，被刑谓之徒。
现代文：囚徒，是罪人，受过肉刑以后才称他为 徒 。
English: A prisoner is a sinner, and he is called a prisoner only after he has undergone corporal punishment.

古文：丘墓之上，二亲也，死亡谓之先。
现代文：坟墓里面埋葬的是父母，父母死亡就称为 先 。
English: It is the parents who are buried in the grave, and the death of the parents is called the first death.

古文：宅与墓何别？
现代文：住宅和坟墓有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between a house and a tomb?

古文：亲与先何异？
现代文：活着的双亲与死去的双亲有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between living parents and dead parents?

古文：如以徒被刑，先人责之，则不宜入宅与亲相见；如徒不得与死人相见，则亲死在堂，不得哭柩；如以徒不得升丘墓，则徒不得上山陵，世俗禁之，执据何义？
现代文：如果因为囚犯受过肉刑，祖先责怪他，那么就不适宜进入住宅与父母相见。如果因为刑徒不允许与死人相见，那么父母死在堂上，就不允许在灵柩边哭泣。如果因为刑徒不允许上坟墓祭扫，那么刑徒也不允许修筑陵墓。世间习俗禁止这样做，依据什么道理呢？
English: If a prisoner's ancestors blame him because he was physically tortured, then it is not appropriate for him to enter a house to meet his parents. If a prisoner is not allowed to meet the dead, then his parents will die in the hall and he will not be allowed to cry next to the coffin. If a prisoner is not allowed to go to the grave and sweep it, then the prisoner will not be allowed to build a mausoleum. On what basis does the world's custom prohibit this?

古文：实说其意，徒不上丘墓有二义，义理之讳，非凶恶之忌也。
现代文：依据事实解释它的道理，刑徒不能上坟墓有两层含义，是出于礼义道理方面的禁忌，而不是吉凶方面的忌避。
English: According to the facts, there are two meanings of the reason why the convict cannot go to the grave. It is a taboo in terms of etiquette and reason, rather than an avoidance in terms of fortune and misfortune.

古文：徒用心以为先祖全而生之，子孙亦当全而归之。
现代文：刑徒这样做的用意是认为祖先完整无缺地把子孙生下来，子孙也应当完整无缺地回到祖先那儿去。
English: The intention of the torturers was that the ancestors had given birth to their children in an unbroken line, and that the children should return to their ancestors in an unbroken line.

古文：故曾子有疾，召门弟子曰： 开予足，开予手，而今而後，吾知免夫。小子！ 
现代文：所以曾子有病，就召集他的门徒说： 掀开被子看看我的脚，看看我的手，从今以后，我知道我的身体可以免于毁坏损伤了，弟子们！ 
English: Therefore, when Zeng Zi was ill, he called together his disciples and said: "Take off the quilt and look at my feet, look at my hands. From now on, I know that my body can be saved from destruction and injury, disciples!

古文：曾子重慎，临绝效全，喜免毁伤之祸也。
现代文：曾子特别慎重，临死时仍要检查身体是否完整，很高兴避免了毁坏损伤身体的祸殃。
English: Zeng Zi was particularly cautious. When he was about to die, he still had to check whether his body was complete. He was glad to have avoided the scourge of destroying and injuring his body.

古文：孔子曰： 身体发肤，受之父母，弗敢毁伤。 
现代文：孔子说： 身体，毛发，肌肤，是父母授予的，不能够有一点毁坏损伤。 
English: Confucius said: The body, hair, and skin are bestowed by parents, and cannot be damaged.

古文：孝者怕入刑辟，刻画身体，毁伤发肤，少德泊行，不戒慎之所致也。
现代文：讲孝道的人被迫遭受刑罚，身体被刻画，毛发肌肤被毁坏损伤，这是由于道德差，行为恶劣，不谨慎所造成的。
English: Those who preach filial piety are forced to suffer punishment, their bodies are depicted, their hair and skin are destroyed and damaged, which is caused by bad morals, bad behavior, and carelessness.

古文：愧负刑辱，深自刻责，故不升墓祀於先。
现代文：惭愧受到刑罚侮辱，深深地责备自己，所以不上坟墓在先考先妣面前祭祀。
English: Ashamed of being humiliated by the punishment, he deeply reproached himself, so he did not go to the grave to offer sacrifice in front of the first-come-first-served.

古文：古礼庙祭，今俗墓祀，故不升墓。惭负先人，一义也。
现代文：古代的礼仪是在祖庙中祭祀，现在的习俗是在坟墓上祭祀，所以刑徒不上坟墓，是内心感到惭愧对不起死去的父母，这是一层含义。
English: The ancient etiquette was to sacrifice in the ancestral temple, but the current custom is to sacrifice on the grave, so the prisoner does not go to the grave, but is ashamed of the dead parents, which is a layer of meaning.

古文：墓者，鬼神所在，祭祀之处。
现代文：坟墓，是鬼神居住的地方，也是鬼神接受祭祀的地方。
English: The grave is the place where ghosts and gods live, and it is also the place where ghosts and gods receive sacrifices.

古文：祭祀之礼，齐戒洁清，重之至也。
现代文：祭祀的礼仪规定，要斋戒沐浴洁身，极为郑重其事。
English: According to the etiquette of the ritual, it is very important to fast, bathe and cleanse oneself.

古文：今已被刑，刑残之人，不宜与祭供侍先人，卑谦谨敬，退让自贱之意也。
现代文：现在已经受刑，受刑而伤残的人，不适宜参与祭祀侍奉死去的父母，谦逊恭敬，退让于后是自认为卑贱的意思。
English: People who have already been punished and are disabled as a result of the punishment are not suitable to participate in the sacrificial rites and serve their dead parents. They are humble and respectful, and they think of themselves as lowly if they give in.

古文：缘先祖之意，见子孙被刑，恻怛惨伤，恐其临祀，不忍歆享，故不上墓。二义也。
现代文：推想先祖的心意，见到子孙受刑，悲伤心痛，担心自己来到祭祀之地，先祖不忍心享受祭供之物，所以刑徒不上坟墓，这是第二层含义。
English: The second layer of meaning is inferring the intentions of the ancestors, seeing the descendants being tortured, feeling sad and heartbroken, fearing that they have come to the place of sacrifice, the ancestors cannot bear to enjoy the sacrificial offerings, so the prisoners do not go to the grave.

古文：昔太伯见王季有圣子文王，知太王意欲立之，入吴采药，断发文身，以随吴俗。
现代文：过去太伯见到王季有个圣明的儿子文王，知道太王想立王季为继承人，因此他便到吴地去采药，剪断自己的头发在身上刺上花纹，以便适应吴地的风俗。
English: In the past, the eunuch saw that Wang Ji had a son named Wen Wang, and knew that the king wanted to make Wang Ji the heir. Therefore, he went to Wu to collect medicine, cut his hair and embroidered his body with patterns in order to adapt to the customs of Wu.

古文：太王薨，太伯还，王季辟主。
现代文：太王死后，太伯归来，王季就避开祭祀宗庙社稷的主位。
English: After the death of the great king, when the great grandfather returned, Wang Ji avoided the position of the head of the sacrificial temple.

古文：太伯再让，王季不听，三让，曰： 吾之吴越，吴越之俗，断发文身，吾刑余之人，不可为宗庙社稷之主。 
现代文：太伯两次谦让，王季不听从。太伯第三次谦让说： 我到吴越两地去，吴越两地的风俗，是断发文身，我如受过肉刑残伤肢体的人，不可做主祭宗庙社稷的人。 
English: The third time, the abbot said, "I am going to the two regions of Wuyue. The custom of the two regions of Wuyue is to cut off the tattoo. If I am a person who has been subjected to corporal punishment and my limbs are mutilated, I am not allowed to serve as the chief priest of the ancestral temple."

古文：王季知不可，权而受之。
现代文：王季知道无法推辞，就权变常礼，接受了王位。
English: Wang Ji knew that he could not refuse, so he changed his power and accepted the throne.

古文：夫徒不上丘墓，太伯不为主之义也。
现代文：刑徒不能上丘墓，是太伯不做祭主的含义。
English: The fact that the condemned could not go to the grave on the hill meant that the priest did not have to be a priest.

古文：是谓祭祀不可，非谓柩当葬，身不送也。
现代文：这只是说不能主持祭祀，并不是说棺材入土时刑徒不该亲自去送葬。
English: This only means that they cannot preside over a religious service, and does not mean that the convict should not personally accompany the coffin as it is lowered into the ground.

古文：葬死人，先祖痛；见刑人，先祖哀。
现代文：埋葬死人，先祖沉痛；见到受过刑的人，先祖悲哀。
English: To bury the dead, the ancestors grieve; to see the tortured, the ancestors mourn.

古文：权可哀之身，送可痛之尸，使先祖有知，痛尸哀形，何愧之有？
现代文：暂且让受过刑的人去埋葬那使先祖悲痛的死尸，假使先祖有知觉，痛惜死人悲哀受刑人残缺的身躯，受过刑的人有什么可惭愧的呢？
English: For the time being, let those who have been punished bury the dead bodies that have grieved their ancestors. If the ancestors are aware, pity the dead, mourn the tortured and mutilated bodies, what should those who have been punished be ashamed of?

古文：如使无知，丘墓，田野也，何惭之有？
现代文：假使先祖没有知觉，丘墓，同田野一样，受过刑的人有什么可惭愧的呢？
English: If the forefathers were not aware, the mounds and tombs, like the fields, what would the tortured have to be ashamed of?

古文：惭愧先者，谓身体刑残，与人异也。
现代文：对不起祖先的原因，是说身体受刑致残，与别人的躯体不同。
English: The reason why I feel sorry for my ancestors is that their bodies were mutilated by torture and are different from other people's bodies.

古文：古者用刑，形毁不全，乃不可耳。
现代文：古代用肉刑，使肢体残缺不全，这才不可以去送葬。
English: In ancient times, corporal punishment was used to mutilate the body, which is why it is not allowed to be buried.

古文：方今象刑，象刑重者，髡钳之法也。
现代文：当今使用象刑，象刑判得最重的，不过是髡钳的刑罚。
English: Today, elephant torture is used, and the heaviest punishment for elephant torture is nothing more than a whipping.

古文：若完城旦以下，施刑彩衣系躬，冠带与俗人殊，何为不可？
现代文：如果是完刑城旦刑以下的，则免除刑罚，让他穿上彩衣，帽子和腰带与一般人不同，有什么不可以去送葬呢？
English: If the punishment is less than the death penalty, the punishment will be exempted. Let him wear a colorful coat, hat and belt, which is different from the average person. What is not allowed to go to the funeral?

古文：世俗信而谓之皆凶，其失至於不吊乡党尸，不升佗人之丘，感也。
现代文：世间习俗迷信而说这些都是凶象，这种错误甚至发展到不去吊唁亲友的死尸，不上别人的坟墓，太糊涂了。
English: Worldly customs and superstitions say that these are evil elephants, and this error has even developed into not mourning the dead bodies of relatives and friends, not going to other people's graves, too confused.

古文：三曰讳妇人乳子，以为不吉。
现代文：三是忌讳妇人生孩子，认为不吉利。
English: Third, it is taboo for a woman to give birth to a child, which is considered unlucky.

古文：将举吉事，入山林，远行，度川泽者，皆不与之交通。
现代文：将要举办吉利的事情，出门远行，横渡大河大湖的人，都不与产妇接触。
English: People who are going to hold auspicious events, travel far and wide, and cross great rivers and lakes do not come into contact with mothers.

古文：乳子之家，亦忌恶之。丘墓庐道畔，逾月乃入，恶之甚也。
现代文：产妇的家里，也忌讳厌恶产妇，让产妇住在墓侧或路旁的茅舍里，满月才能回家，厌恶产妇厉害之极。
English: In the home of a pregnant woman, it is also taboo to detest a pregnant woman. Let the pregnant woman live in a cottage on the side of the grave or on the side of the road. She can only return home when the moon is full. The loathing of a pregnant woman is extreme.

古文：暂卒见若为不吉，极原其事，何以为恶？
现代文：突然见到产妇好像会带来不吉利，彻底追究这件事的根源，有什么可厌恶的呢？
English: Suddenly seeing a pregnant woman seems to bring bad luck. What is there to dislike about thoroughly investigating the root of the matter?

古文：夫妇人之乳子也，子含元气而出。
现代文：妇人生育孩子，孩子体内含有元气而出生。
English: When a woman gives birth to a child, the child is born with vitality.

古文：元气，天地之精微也，何凶而恶之？
现代文：元气，是天地间最精微的东西，怎么会又凶又恶呢？
English: Vital energy is the most delicate thing in the world. How can it be both fierce and evil?

古文：人，物也；子，亦物也。
现代文：人是物，孩子也是物。
English: People are things, children are things.

古文：子生与万物之生何以异？
现代文：孩子的出生与万物的产生有什么不同之处呢？
English: What is the difference between the birth of a child and the creation of all things?

古文：讳人之生谓之恶，万物之生又恶之乎？
现代文：忌讳妇人的生育称之为恶，万物的产生也同样恶吗？
English: Do you call the birth of a woman an evil, and the birth of all things an evil?

古文：生与胞俱出，如以胞为不吉，人之有胞，犹木实之有核也，包兒身，因与俱出，若鸟卵之有壳，何妨谓之恶？
现代文：婴儿出生时胎衣也随之而出，如果认为胎衣为不吉利，人有胎衣，如同树木的果实有花萼一样。胎衣包裹婴儿的身体，随着婴儿一起出来，就像鸟蛋有壳一样，有什么妨害而认为它恶呢？
English: When a baby is born, the placenta also comes out. If the placenta is considered to be unlucky, and a person has a placenta, just like the fruit of a tree has calyxes. The placenta wraps around the baby's body and comes out with the baby, just like a bird's egg has a shell. What is the obstacle that makes it evil?

古文：如恶以为不吉，则诸生物有核壳者，宜皆恶之。
现代文：如果恶就认为不吉利，那么各种生物有枎壳的，应该都是恶的了。
English: If evil is considered unlucky, then all kinds of creatures with shells should be evil.

古文：万物广多，难以验事。
现代文：万物又广又多，难以一一列举出来验证一下事实。
English: Everything is so vast and numerous that it is difficult to enumerate and verify the facts.

古文：人生何以异於六畜？
现代文：人的出生与六畜的出生有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between the birth of a human being and the birth of six animals?

古文：皆含血气怀子，子生与人无异，独恶人而不憎畜，岂以人体大，气血盛乎？
现代文：都因含有血气而怀上它们的仔，仔的出生与人没有什么不同。偏偏厌恶人而不恨牲畜，难道是由于人的躯体大、气血旺盛吗？
English: They are all pregnant with their young because they have blood, and the birth of their young is no different from that of humans. Is it because of the large size of the human body and the vigor of its blood that they loathe humans but do not hate animals?

古文：则夫牛马体大於人。
现代文：那么，牛马的躯体比人更大。
English: Well, a horse's body is bigger than a human's.

古文：凡可恶之事，无与钧等，独有一物，不见比类，乃可疑也。
现代文：凡属可恶的事物，没有同它均等的，只有这一种事物有这种情况，找不出可以类比的事物，这才是可疑的。
English: All things that are abominable have no equal; this alone is so, and it is doubtful whether anything comparable can be found.

古文：今六畜与人无异，其乳皆同一状。
现代文：现在六畜和人没有什么不同，它们的生育都是同一种状态。
English: At present, the six animals are no different from humans, and their fertility is in the same state.

古文：六畜与人无异，讳人不讳六畜，不晓其故也。
现代文：既然六畜和人没有不同，忌讳人生育而不忌讳六畜生育，不明白这是什么缘故。
English: Since there is no difference between the six animals and human beings, it is taboo for human beings to give birth, but not for the six animals to give birth. I don't understand why.

古文：世能别人之产与六畜之乳，吾将听其讳；如不能别，则吾谓世俗所讳妄矣。
现代文：世人如果能区别开人的生产与六畜的生产，那么我将相信他们的忌讳；如果不能区别，那么我说世俗所忌讳的事情太荒唐了。
English: If the world can distinguish between the production of people and the production of the six animals, then I will believe in their taboo; if it cannot be distinguished, then I say that the things that are taboo in the world are too absurd.

古文：且凡人所恶，莫有腐臭。腐臭之气，败伤人心。故鼻闻臭，口食腐，心损口恶，霍乱呕吐。
现代文：况且人们所厌恶的东西，没有像腐臭的东西那么可憎的了，腐鼻的气味，损害人心，所以鼻子闻到臭气，口吃到腐败的东西，内心受到损伤口里也很厌恶，腹痛呕吐不止。
English: Moreover, the things that people detest are not as disgusting as rancid things, the smell of rancid nose, damage the human heart, so the nose smells the stench, stutters to corrupt things, the heart is damaged, the mouth is also disgusted, and the abdominal pain and vomiting continue.

古文：夫更衣之室，可谓臭矣；鲍鱼之肉，可谓腐矣。
现代文：厕所里面，可说是很臭的了；腌鱼的肉，可说是很腐败的了。
English: The inside of the toilet is said to be very smelly; the flesh of the eel is said to be very rotten.

古文：然而有甘之更衣之室，不以为忌；肴食腐鱼之肉，不以为讳。
现代文：然而，却有人自愿上厕所去，并不认为有什么忌讳；把腐鱼的肉当好菜吃，也不认为有什么忌讳。
English: However, some people voluntarily go to the toilet and do not think there is any taboo; they do not think there is any taboo to eat the meat of rotten fish as a good dish.

古文：意不存以为恶，故不计其可与不也。
现代文：心里不认为那是坏东西，所以就不计较可去不可去，可吃不可吃了。
English: I don't think it's bad in my heart, so I don't care whether I can go or not, whether I can eat or not.

古文：凡可憎恶者，若溅墨漆，附著人身。
现代文：大凡可憎恶的东西，就像溅出的墨漆沾在人的身上一样。
English: A great abomination, like splattered paint on a human body.

古文：今目见鼻闻，一过则已，忽亡辄去，何故恶之？
现代文：现在眼睛看到鼻子闻到，一过也就完了，很快就消逝了，为什么要厌恶它呢？
English: Now, the eyes see, the nose smells, and it's all over in no time, it's gone in no time, so why dislike it?

古文：出见负豕於涂，腐澌於沟，不以为凶者，洿辱自在彼人，不著己之身也。
现代文：出门在路上碰见有人背着猪，水沟里有腐烂的尸体，不认为是凶，因为污秽自在别人，并没有沾在自己身上的缘故。
English: If you go out on the road and come across someone with a pig on their back, or a rotting corpse in the gutter, you don't think it's evil, because the filth is on someone else, not on you.

古文：今妇人乳子，自在其身，斋戒之人，何故忌之？
现代文：现在妇人生孩子，事情自在妇人的身上，斋戒的人，为什么要忌讳它呢？
English: Now that a woman is giving birth to a child, and the matter is in her own hands, why should a fasting person shun it?

古文：江北乳子，不出房室，知其无恶也。
现代文：江北人生孩子，不离开房间卧室，因为他们知道这件事不恶。
English: Jiangbei gave birth to a child and did not leave the room, the bedroom, because they knew it was not evil.

古文：至於犬乳，置之宅外，此复惑也。
现代文：至于母狗产子，要放母狗到房子外面，这又让人迷惑了。
English: As for bitches giving birth, it's confusing to have to let the bitch out of the house.

古文：江北讳犬不讳人，江南讳人不讳犬，谣俗防恶，各不同也。
现代文：江北地区忌讳狗生育不忌讳人生育，江南地区忌讳人生育不忌讳狗生育，风俗嫌恶，各地都不相同。
English: In the north of the Yangtze River, it is taboo to have a dog, but it is not taboo to have a human child. In the south of the Yangtze River, it is taboo to have a human child, but it is not taboo to have a dog.

古文：夫人与犬何以异？
现代文：人和狗的生育有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between human and canine reproduction?

古文：房室宅外何以殊，或恶或不恶，或讳或不讳，世俗防禁，竟无经也。
现代文：房室、宅外又有什么不同呢？有的认为恶有的认为不恶，有的忌讳有的不忌讳，世俗间的防禁，竟然是没有固定标准的。
English: What is the difference between the room and the outside of the house? Some think it is evil, some think it is not evil, some are taboo, some are not taboo, and there is no fixed standard for the prevention and prohibition of the secular world.

古文：月之晦也，日月合宿，纪为一月，犹八日，月中分谓之弦；十五日，日月相望谓之望；三十日，日月合宿谓之晦。
现代文：月光晦的那一天，日月合宿，记为一个月。如同初八那一天，月亮呈半圆形称为弦月；十五那天，日月相望的日子就称为望；三十日那天，日月合宿就称为晦。
English: The day of the waning moon, the sun and moon training camp, is recorded as one month. Just as the day of the eighth day of the first month, when the moon is semicircular, is called the crescent moon; the fifteenth day, when the sun and moon look at each other, is called the lookout; the thirtieth day, when the sun and moon training camp is called the waning.

古文：晦与弦望一实也，非月晦日月光气与月朔异也，何故逾月谓之吉乎？
现代文：晦月与弦月、望月实际上是一回事，并不是月底那一天的太阳和月亮的光气与初一那天的有什么不同。为什么说产妇满了月就算吉利呢？
English: The last day of the month is actually the same as the first day of the month, and it is not that the light of the sun and the moon on the last day of the month is different from that on the first day of the month.

古文：如实凶，逾月未可谓吉；如实吉，虽未逾月，犹为可也。
现代文：如果真是凶，满了月也不能说是吉利；如果真是吉，即使没有满月，仍然可以说是吉利的。
English: If it is really bad, the full moon cannot be said to be lucky; if it is really good, even if there is no full moon, it can still be said to be lucky.

古文：实说讳忌产子、乳犬者，欲使人常自洁清，不欲使人被污辱也。
现代文：据实说来，讳忌生孩子、生狗仔，只是想让人们经常自行清洁，不想让人们被脏东西所污染。
English: To tell the truth, the taboo against having children and puppies is just to let people clean themselves frequently, and not to let people be polluted by dirty things.

古文：夫自洁清则意精，意精则行清，行清而贞廉之节立矣。
现代文：自行清洁则意念思想纯一，思想纯一则行为高尚，行为高尚则忠正廉洁的节操就树立起来了。
English: If one's self is clean, then one's thoughts are pure, if one's thoughts are pure, then one's behavior is noble, and if one's behavior is noble, then one's integrity is established.

古文：四曰讳举正月、五月子。
现代文：四是忌讳抚养正月和五月出生的孩子。
English: Fourth, it is taboo to raise children born in the first month of the year and in May.

古文：以为正月、五月子杀父与母，不得也举已举之，父母祸死，则信而谓之真矣。夫正月、五月子何故杀父与母？
现代文：认为正月和五月出生的孩子会杀害父母亲，所以不能抚养。已经抚养了的，他的父母偶然死亡，就相信而说杀父母的事是真的，正月和五月出生的孩子为什么会杀害父母亲呢？
English: They think that children born in the first month of the year and in May will kill their parents, so they cannot raise them. If they have already been raised and their parents die by accident, they believe and say that the killing of parents is true. Why do children born in the first month of the year and in May kill their parents?

古文：人之含气在腹肠之内，其生，十月而产，共一元气也。
现代文：人体含有元气，在腹肠之内，逐渐生长，经十个月而生下来，同样都共有一种元气。
English: The human body contains qi, which gradually grows in the abdomen and is born after ten months. They also all share a qi.

古文：正与二月何殊？五与六月何异？而谓之凶也？
现代文：正月与二月有什么不同，五月与六月有什么不同，而认为正月和五月凶呢？
English: What is the difference between the first month of the year and February, and what is the difference between May and June, and why are the first month of the year and May considered unlucky?

古文：世传此言久，拘数之人，莫敢犯之。
现代文：世间流传这种说法很久远了，拘泥于术数的人，没有谁敢去触犯它。
English: This saying has been circulating in the world for a long time, and no one who is fixated on the number of operations dares to violate it.

古文：弘识大材，实核事理，深睹吉凶之分者，然後见之。
现代文：见多识广的人，据实考察事情的道理，看透了吉凶的区别，这样做以后才能完全认识它。
English: A well-informed person can fully understand the difference between good luck and bad luck only after he has thoroughly examined the truth of the matter.

古文：昔齐相田婴贱妾有子，名之曰文。
现代文：从前齐相田婴的贱妾生了个儿子，给他取名叫 文 。
English: Once upon a time, the vile concubine of Qi Xi Tian Yu gave birth to a son and named him Wen.

古文：文以五月生，婴告其母勿举也，其母窃举生之。
现代文：田文在五月出生，田婴警告田文的母亲不要抚养他，他的母亲偷偷地抚养他，使他活了下来。
English: Tianwen was born in May. Tianying warned Tianwen's mother not to raise him. His mother secretly raised him and kept him alive.

古文：及长，其母因兄弟而见其子文於婴，婴怒曰： 吾令女去此子，而敢生之，何也？ 
现代文：等到田文长大了，他的母亲通过兄弟把田文引见给田婴。田婴生气地说： 我叫你抛弃这个孩子，你竟敢让他活了下来，这是为什么呢？ 
English: When Tianwen grew up, his mother introduced Tianwen to Tianying through his brother. Tianying said angrily: I told you to abandon this child, how dare you let him live, why is that?

古文：文顿首，因曰： 君所以不举五月子者，何故？ 
现代文：田文磕头并趁机说： 您不抚养五月生的孩子，原因在什么地方呢？ 
English: Tianwen's mother had not yet answered, and Tianwen immediately bowed down and worshiped, and then asked Tianying: What is the reason for not letting you raise a child born in May?

古文：婴曰： 五月子者，长至户，将不利其父母。 
现代文：田婴说： 五月生的孩子，长到和门一样高，将对他的父母不利。 
English: Tianying said: A child born in May who grows to be as tall as a door will be unfavorable to his parents.

古文：文曰： 人生受命於天乎？将受命於户邪？ 
现代文：田文问： 人是受命于天呢，还是受命于门户呢？ 
English: Tian Wen asked: Are people commanded by heaven, or are they commanded by the portal?

古文：婴嘿然。
现代文：田婴沉默不语。
English: Tianying was silent.

古文：文曰： 必受命於天，君何忧焉。
现代文：田文又说： 如果肯定是受命于天，您有什么可忧虑的呢？
English: Tianwen continued, "If it is bestowed by heaven, why should you worry?

古文：如受命於户，即高其户，谁能至者？ 
现代文：如果受命予门户，那就增加门的高度，谁还能达到呢？ 
English: If you are commanded to make a doorway, then increase the height of the doorway. Who can reach it?

古文：婴善其言，曰： 子休矣！ 
现代文：田婴很赞赏他的话，说： 你不用说了！ 
English: Tianying appreciated his words and said, "You don't have to say it!

古文：其後使文主家，待宾客，宾客日进，名闻诸侯。
现代文：以后，让田文主持家政，接待宾客，宾客一天天增多，田文因此闻名于诸侯之中。
English: After that, Tianwen was allowed to preside over housekeeping and receive guests. The number of guests increased day by day, and Tianwen became famous among the princes.

古文：文长过户而婴不死。
现代文：田文长高超过了门，而田婴并没有死。
English: Tian Wen Chang Gao passed the gate, but Tian Yu did not die.

古文：以田文之说言之，以田婴不死效之，世俗所讳，虚妄之言也。
现代文：以田文所讲的话来说，以田婴没有死来证明，世间所忌讳的，都是虚妄的传言。
English: In terms of Tianwen's words, the fact that Tian's baby did not die proves that all the taboos in the world are false rumors.

古文：夫田婴俗父，而田文雅子也。
现代文：田婴是个庸俗的父亲，而田文是个高雅的儿子。
English: Tian Rong is a vulgar father, while Tian Wen is an elegant son.

古文：婴信忌不实义，文信命不辟讳。
现代文：田婴迷信忌讳而不考究道理，田文相信天命而不避忌讳。
English: Tian Rong believed in superstitions and taboos, but did not seek the truth. Tian Wen believed in the Mandate of Heaven, but did not avoid taboos.

古文：雅俗异材，举措殊操，故婴名暗而不明，文声驰而不灭。
现代文：高雅与庸俗才智不一样，举止表现出不同的品行，所以田婴名望不显著，田文名声远扬而久传不绝。
English: High elegance is not the same as vulgar talent, and manners show different behaviors. Therefore, Tianyu's fame is not significant, and Tianwen's fame is far-reaching and long-lasting.

古文：实说世俗讳之，亦有缘也。
现代文：据实说来，世俗中忌讳的事，也是有所根据的。
English: To tell the truth, the taboo in the secular world is also well-founded.

古文：夫正月岁始，五月盛阳，子以生，精炽热烈，厌胜父母，父母不堪，将受其患。
现代文：正月是一年的开始，五月是阳气最旺盛的时候，孩子在这种月份出生，精气旺盛热烈，压过了父母，父母经受不起，将会受到他的伤害。
English: The first month of the year is the beginning of the year, and May is the time when the yang is the most vigorous. A child born in this month, full of vigor and enthusiasm, has overwhelmed his parents, and his parents can't stand it and will be hurt by him.

古文：传相放效，莫谓不然。
现代文：这种看法互相流传仿效，没有人说不是这样。
English: It's a cliché, and no one's saying otherwise.

古文：有空讳之言，无实凶之效，世俗惑之，误非之甚也。
现代文：只有空洞的忌讳说法，没有实际凶祸的证明，社会上的人迷信它，谬误得太厉害了。
English: There is only an empty taboo saying, there is no proof of actual evil, people in society are superstitious about it, the fallacy is too great.

古文：夫忌讳非一，必托之神怪，若设以死亡，然後世人信用畏避。
现代文：忌讳不止一种，一定要假托神怪之名，或者搬出死人的亡灵，这样做以后让世上的人迷信它畏惧回避它。
English: There is more than one kind of taboo. One must pretend to be a god or a monster, or bring out the souls of the dead. After doing so, people in the world will be superstitious about it and afraid to avoid it.

古文：忌讳之语，四方不同，略举通语，令世观览。
现代文：关于忌讳的说法，各个地方都不相同，简略地列举一些流行的说法，让世人看一看。
English: As for taboos, they vary from place to place. Let's take a brief look at some of the most popular ones.

古文：若夫曲俗微小之讳，众多非一，咸劝人为善，使人重慎，无鬼神之害，凶丑之祸。
现代文：如像那些地区性风俗中的微小的忌讳，很多很多不止一种，全都是劝告人们行善，让人们郑重谨慎，并没什么鬼神的灾害、凶恶怪异之物的祸害。
English: Like those tiny taboos in regional customs, many, many more than one, all of them are to advise people to do good, to make people solemnly cautious, and there is no disaster of ghosts and gods, the scourge of vicious and strange things.

古文：世讳作豆酱恶闻雷，一人不食，欲使人急作，不欲积家逾至春也。
现代文：社会上忌讳制作豆酱时厌恶听到雷声，听了雷声制作的豆酱没有一个吃它，这是想督促人们快点做好，不想让人们把豆子储存在家中超过春季。
English: There is a social taboo against hearing thunder when making bean paste, and no one eats bean paste made after hearing thunder. This is to urge people to hurry up and make it, and not to let people store beans at home beyond the spring.

古文：讳厉刀井上，恐刀堕井中也；或说以为刑之字，井与刀也，厉刀井上，井刀相见，恐被刑也。
现代文：社会忌讳在井上磨刀，是担心刀落入井中；有的说 刑 字是由 井 、 刀 两字组成的，在井上磨刀，井与刀相遇在一起，担心会受刑罚。
English: The social taboo of sharpening a knife in a well is the fear of the knife falling into the well; some people say that the word "sentence" is composed of two words, "well" and "knife," and sharpening a knife in a well, where the well and the knife meet, is the fear of being punished.

古文：毋承屋檐而坐，恐瓦堕击人首也。
现代文：不要坐在屋檐下，是担心瓦落下来打在头上。
English: Don't sit under the eaves for fear of falling tiles hitting you on the head.

古文：毋反悬冠，为似死人服；或说恶其反而承尘溜也。
现代文：不要倒挂帽子，因为它像死人的服饰；有的说讨厌帽子倒挂是它会承受房上落下的灰尘和水滴。
English: Don't hang your hat upside down, because it looks like a dead man's robe; some people say they hate hanging the hat upside down because it can withstand the dust and water droplets falling on the room.

古文：毋偃寝，为其象尸也。
现代文：不要仰卧，因为那样像停尸一样。
English: Don't lie on your back, because you'll look like a corpse.

古文：毋以箸相受，为其不固也。
现代文：不要用筷子互相递送食物，因为那样不牢靠。
English: Don't use chopsticks to pass food to each other, because it's not safe.

古文：毋相代扫，为修冢之人，冀人来代己也。
现代文：不要互相替代去扫墓，因为修筑陵墓的人希望有人来代替自己作苦役。
English: Do not take each other's place to sweep the tombs, because the mausoleum builders want someone to do the hard work instead of them.

古文：诸言毋者，教人重慎，勉人为善。
现代文：以上种种说 不要 的，是教育人郑重谨慎从事，勉励人们行善。
English: To say that the above-mentioned things are not necessary is to educate people to earnestly and cautiously engage in and encourage people to do good.

古文：礼曰： 毋抟饭，毋流歠。 
现代文：《礼记》说： 不要成块地盛饭，不要不停地大口喝汤。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: Don't serve food in chunks, and don't keep gulping down soup.

古文：礼义之禁，未必吉凶之言也。
现代文：这是礼义方面的禁忌，不一定是有关吉凶的说法。
English: This is a taboo in terms of etiquette, and is not necessarily a reference to good or bad luck.

