古文：造化赋形，支体必双，神理为用，事不孤立。
现代文：大自然赋予万物的形体，必然是成双成对；这种自然规律所起的作用，使事物不可能孤独形成。
English: The shapes that nature gives to all things are necessarily paired; this law of nature makes it impossible for things to form alone.

古文：夫心生文辞，运裁百虑，高下相须，自然成对。
现代文：经由人心产生的作品，作者对各种思虑的安排处理，要使得前后上下配置适当，自然就形成了对句。
English: In the works produced by the human mind, the author's arrangement and treatment of various thoughts should be appropriately arranged in front and behind, and naturally a couplet is formed.

古文：唐虞之世，辞未极文，而皋陶赞云∶ 罪疑惟轻，功疑惟重 。
现代文：唐尧虞舜时期的作品，虽然还未充分讲究文采，可是皋陶在赞助舜帝的话中就讲到： 罪过有疑问要从轻处理，功劳有疑问应从重奖励。 
English: Although the literature of the works of the Tang Dynasty was not yet fully studied, Zou Tao said in the words of Emperor Zou: "If there is any doubt about the crime, it should be dealt with lightly, and if there is any doubt about the merit, it should be rewarded more heavily."

古文：益陈谟云∶ 满招损，谦受益。 
现代文：益向舜陈说谋议中也讲到： 自满必带来损害，谦虚必受到益处。 
English: Yi Xiangfan also said in the deliberation: Complacency will bring harm, modesty will benefit.

古文：岂营丽辞，率然对尔。
现代文：这岂是有意制造对偶？
English: Is this a deliberate attempt to create a duality?

古文：《易》之《文》、《系》，圣人之妙思也。
现代文：只是随意讲出，自然成对。《周易》中的《文言》、《系辞》，是经圣人精思写成的。
English: The "words" and "rhymes" in "Zhou Yi" were written by the sage.

古文：序《乾》四德，则句句相衔；龙虎类感，则字字相俪；乾坤易简，则宛转相承；日月往来，则隔行悬合；虽句字或殊，而偶意一也。
现代文：《乾卦》中讲 元、亨、利、贞 的一段，是句句排偶；讲 云从龙、风从虎 等同类相感的话，则字字相对；讲乾易坤简的道理，就婉转曲折相对；讲 日往则月来 等，便和 寒往则暑来 等遥相对应：这些论述的字句变化虽然有所不同，但意思相对是一致的。
English: In "Kenga," the passage of Yuan, Heng, Li and Zhen is a pair of sentences; the words of clouds from dragons, winds from tigers and other similar words are opposite; the words of Qian Yi Kun Jian are opposite to gentle twists and turns; the words of day to day, month to month and so on correspond to cold to cold, summer to summer and so on. Although the changes of these words are different, the meaning is relatively consistent.

古文：至于诗人偶章，大夫联辞，奇偶适变，不劳经营。
现代文：至于《诗经》中的诗篇，春秋时期各国大夫的应对辞令，其对句和散句都是随着不同的内容在变化，并非可以安排。
English: As for the poems in the "Book of Songs," the corresponding words of doctors in various countries during the Spring and Autumn Period, their sentences and prose are changing with different contents, and it is not possible to arrange.

古文：自扬马张蔡，崇盛丽辞，如宋画吴冶，刻形镂法，丽句与深采并流，偶意共逸韵俱发。
现代文：到汉代扬雄、司马相如、张衡、蔡邕等杰出的作者，特别爱好骈俪；他们的作品，有如古代宋国的绘画，吴国的冶铸，在作品上精雕细刻，使骈偶句子和丰富的文采交相辉映，相对的意义和高雅的韵味并驾齐驱。
English: To the Han Dynasty, Yang Xiong, Sima Xiangru, Zhang Heng, Cai Xuan and other outstanding authors were particularly fond of Yu; their works, such as the paintings of the ancient Song Dynasty and the metallurgy of the State of Wu, were elaborately carved on the works, so that the sentences of the couple and the richness of the literature reflected each other, and the relative meaning and elegant charm went hand in hand.

古文：至魏晋群才，析句弥密，联字合趣，剖毫析厘。
现代文：到魏晋时期的作者们，造句更为精密，对字偶意，推敲得细致入微。
English: By the time of the Wei and Jin dynasties, the authors had made more precise sentences and elaborated on the meaning of the characters.

古文：然契机者入巧，浮假者无功。
现代文：但对偶得当者达于精巧，滥凑浮华者便无成效。
English: However, those who are well matched will achieve sophistication, while those who are flashy will not be effective.

古文：故丽辞之体，凡有四对∶言对为易，事对为难；反对为优，正对为劣。
现代文：对偶的格式，约有四种：言对是易对的，事对是难对的，反对是好对，正对是劣对。
English: There are about four forms of duality: words are easy to match, things are difficult to match, oppositions are good matches, and positive matches are inferior matches.

古文：言对者，双比空辞者也；事对者，并举人验者也；反对者，理殊趣合者也；正对者，事异义同者也。
现代文：所谓 言对 ，只是文辞上的对偶；所谓 事对 ，是用两种前人故实组成的对偶；所谓 反对 ，是事理相反而旨趣相合的对偶；所谓 正对 ，是事虽有异而意义相同的对偶。
English: The so-called word pair is just a pair of words; the so-called thing pair is a pair composed of two predecessors; the so-called objection is a pair that is contrary to reason but has the same intention; the so-called positive pair is a pair that has the same meaning although it is different.

古文：长卿《上林赋》云： 修容乎礼园，翱翔乎书圃。 
现代文：如司马相如《上林赋》中所说： 应用《礼》来修饰容仪，在《书》中遨游学习。 
English: As Sima Xiangru said in "Shanglin Fu": Use "Rite" to decorate your face, and study in "Book."

古文：此言对之类也。
现代文：这就属于言对一类。
English: This falls into the category of a truism.

古文：宋玉《神女赋》云∶ 毛嫱鄣袂，不足程式；西施掩面，比之无色。 
现代文：宋玉《神女赋》中所说： 毛嫱遮上衣袖，不足法式；西施掩住面容，比之逊色。 
English: Song Yu said in "Shen Niang Fu" (Divine Maiden): "Fur coat hides the upper sleeves, which is not French style; Western style hides the face, which is inferior to it."

古文：此事对之类也。
现代文：这就属于事对一类。
English: This falls into the category of being right.

古文：仲宣《登楼》云∶ 钟仪幽而楚奏，庄舄显而越吟。 
现代文：王粲《登楼赋》中所说： 钟仪被囚禁在晋国，仍然弹奏楚声；庄易做高官于楚国，病中仍发出越吟。 
English: Wang Yao said in "Floor-to-Floor": Zhong Yi was imprisoned in Jin Province and still played the Chu sound; Zhuo Yi was a high-ranking official in Chu Province and still issued the Yue Jing during his illness.

古文：此反对之类也。
现代文：这就属于反对一类。
English: This falls into the category of objections.

古文：孟阳《七哀》云∶ 汉祖想枌榆，光武思白水。 
现代文：张载在《七哀》诗中所说： 汉高祖怀念家乡枌榆，光武帝思念家乡白水。 
English: Zhang Zai said in the "Seven Lamentations" poem: "Hang Gao Zu misses his hometown Xing, Guangwu Di misses his hometown Baishui."

古文：此正对之类也。
现代文：这就属于正对一类。
English: This belongs to the category of positive cranes.

古文：凡偶辞胸臆，言对所以为易也；征人资学，事对所以为难也；幽显同志，反对所以为优也；并贵共心，正对所以为劣也。
现代文：这几种对偶中，司马相如的对句只由内心组辞而成，所以言对比较易作；宋玉是征引前人故实成对，所以事对比较难作；王粲是用被囚和官显两种相反的人来说明 人情同于怀土 ，所以反对是较好的；张载的出句和对句都是说帝王怀乡，所以正对是较差的。
English: In these kinds of pairs, Sima's similar couplet is only made up of inner group words, so it is relatively easy to make a word pair; Song Yu's is a pair made by the previous person, so it is relatively difficult to make a thing pair; Wang Yao uses the prisoner and the official to show the two opposite people that human feelings are the same as the homeland, so the opposition is better; Zhang Zai's sentence and sentence are both said to be the emperor's homeland, so the positive pair is poor.

古文：又以事对，各有反正，指类而求，万条自昭然矣。
现代文：无论言对事对，都各有反正两种，照此推究，各种对偶的类型就很清楚了。
English: Regardless of whether it is a pair of words or a pair of things, there are always two types of pairs. According to this, the types of pairs are very clear.

古文：张华诗称∶ 游雁比翼翔，归鸿知接翮。 
现代文：张华的《杂诗》中说： 远游的雁并翅飞翔，归来的鸿连翼而飞。 
English: Zhang Hua's "Miscellaneous Poems" says: The migrating geese fly together, and the returning birds fly together.

古文：刘琨诗言： 宣尼悲获麟，西狩泣孔丘。 
现代文：刘琨的《重赠卢谌》诗中说： 孔子听说获麟而悲伤，孔丘因鲁国打猎获麟而哭泣。 
English: Liu Bei's poem "The Re-Gift of Lu Yao" says: Confucius was sad to hear that he had won a unicorn, and Confucius cried because he had won a unicorn while hunting in Lu.

古文：若斯重出，即对句之骈枝也。
现代文：这种重复，就是对偶中多余的枝指了。
English: This repetition is the extra branch in the pair.

古文：是以言对为美，贵在精巧；事对所先，务在允当。
现代文：因此，真正美好的言对，以精巧为贵；高明的事对，必求其恰当。
English: Therefore, a truly beautiful speech must be exquisite; a clever speech must be appropriate.

古文：若两言相配，而优劣不均，是骥在左骖，驽为右服也。
现代文：如以两事相对，而优劣不相称，就如驾车，左边是良马而右边是劣马。
English: If two things are compared, and the merits and demerits are not commensurate, it is like driving, the left side is a good horse and the right side is a bad horse.

古文：若夫事或孤立，莫与相偶，是夔之一足，趻踔而行也。
现代文：若所写事物是孤立的，没有什么和它相对，就像只有一足的夔跳着走路了。
English: If what is written is isolated, with nothing to oppose it, it is like walking with only one foot.

古文：若气无奇类，文乏异采，碌碌丽辞，则昏睡耳目。
现代文：即使有了对偶，但没有奇异的同类，缺乏特殊的文采，写得平平常常，就会让读的人昏昏欲睡。
English: Even if there is a pair, but there is no strange congeners, lack of special literary style, write normally, it will make the reader drowsy.

古文：必使理圆事密，联璧其章。迭用奇偶，节以杂佩，乃其贵耳。
现代文：所以，必须做到事理圆合，对偶精密，有如双双璧玉的章采；并交错运用偶句和散句，就像用各种不同的佩玉加以调节，这就是完美的俪辞了。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to make the matter complete and precise, like the chapter of the double-double jade; and the interlaced use of even sentences and prose sentences is like using various different jade beads to adjust, which is the perfect eulogy.

古文：类此而思，理斯见也。
现代文：按照这种要求来思考，运用对偶的道理自然就清楚了。总结：
English: According to this requirement to think, the use of the principle of duality is naturally clear.

古文：赞曰∶体植必两，辞动有配。
现代文：事物本身自然成双，文辞也往往俱有对偶。
English: Things themselves are naturally paired, and words are often paired.

古文：左提右挈，精味兼载。
现代文：创作中能上下左右兼顾，偶辞的精巧及其所含意味就能同时得到表现。
English: In creation, it is possible to take into account both the left and the right, and the subtlety of the parallelism and its connotation can be expressed at the same time.

古文：炳烁联华，镜静含态。
现代文：这种对偶像光彩的并蒂鲜花，具有明净的千姿百态。
English: This kind of parallel flower, which is resplendent to the idol, has a clear and varied appearance.

古文：玉润双流，如彼珩珮。
现代文：对偶句和单句都加润饰，就如那兼有各色玉器的杂佩。
English: Both the couplet and the single sentence are embellished, just like the miscellany of colored beads.

