古文：北山经之首，曰单狐之山，多机木，其上多华草。
现代文：北方第一列山系的第一座山叫做单狐山，山上有茂密的桤木树，也有茂盛的华草。
English: The first mountain of the first line of mountains in the north is called the single fox mountain. There are dense eucalyptus trees on the mountain, as well as lush grass.

古文：逢漨水出焉，而西流注于泑水，其中多芘石文石。
现代文：漨水从这座山发源，然后向西流入泑水，水中有很多紫石、文石。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into Surabaya. There are many purple stones and aragonite in the water.

古文：又北二百五十里，曰求如之山，其上多玉，无草木。
现代文：再往北二百五十里，有一座求如山，山上蕴藏着丰富的铜，山下有丰富的玉石，但没有花草树木。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles to the north, there is a mountain of copper. The top of the mountain is rich in copper and the bottom is rich in jade, but there are no flowers and trees.

古文：滑水出焉，而西流注于诸𣬈之水。
现代文：滑水从这座山发源，然后向西流入诸毗水。
English: The waterslide originates from this mountain and then flows westward into the Zhubi River.

古文：其中多滑鱼。其状如鱓，赤背，其音如梧，食之已疣。
现代文：水中有很多滑鱼，外形像一般的鱓鱼，却是红色的脊背，发出的声音像人支支吾吾的话语，吃了它的肉就能治好人的疣赘病。
English: In the water, there are a lot of gliding fish. It looks like an ordinary carp, but it has a red back. The sound it makes is like a person's speech. Eating its meat can cure people's rickets.

古文：其中多水马，其状如马，文臂牛尾，其音如呼。
现代文：水中还生长着很多水马，外形与一般的马相似，但前腿上长有花纹，并拖着一条牛尾巴，发出的声音像人呼喊。
English: There are also a lot of water horses growing in the water. The shape is similar to that of an ordinary horse, but they have patterns on their front legs and drag a cow's tail. The sound they make is like a human scream.

古文：又北三百里，曰带山，其上多玉，其下多青碧。
现代文：再往北三百里，有一座带山，山上盛产玉石，山下盛产青石碧玉。
English: Three hundred miles further north, there is a mountain with a rich supply of jade on the top and lapis lazuli and jasper at the bottom.

古文：有兽焉，其状如马，一角有错，其名曰灌疏，可以辟火。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像马，长的一只角有如粗硬的磨石，名称是臞疏，人饲养它可以辟火。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a horse, with a long horn like a coarse grindstone. Its name is Zou Zou. People keep it to ward off fire.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌，五采而赤文，名曰鵸鵌，是自为牝牡，食之不疽。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像普通的乌鸦，但浑身是带着红色斑纹的五彩羽毛，名叫鹌鹩，这种鹌鹩鸟自身有雌雄二种性器官，吃了它的肉就能使人不患痈疽病。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary crow, but covered with multicolored feathers with red stripes. It is called the stork. This stork has both male and female sexual organs, and eating its meat can prevent people from getting gangrene.

古文：彭水出焉，而西流注于芘湖之水，中多鯈鱼，其状如鸡而赤毛，三尾六足四首，其音如鹊，食之可以已忧。
现代文：彭水从这座山发源，然后向西流入芘湖水，水中有很多儵鱼，外形像一般的鸡却长着红色的羽毛，还长着三条尾巴、六只脚、四只眼睛，它的叫声与喜鹊的鸣叫相似，吃了它的肉就能使人无忧无虑。
English: Pengshui originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into the waters of Lugu Lake. There are many eels in the water. It looks like an ordinary chicken but has red feathers. It also has three tails, six feet, and four eyes. Its call is similar to that of a magpie, and eating its meat can make people carefree.

古文：又北四百里，曰谯明之山。
现代文：再往北四百里，有一座谯明山。
English: Four hundred miles further north, there is a mountain called Juming Mountain.

古文：谯水出焉，西流注于河。
现代文：谯明水从这座山发源，向西流入黄河。
English: This mountain is the source of the bright water that flows westward into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多何罗之鱼，一首而十身，其音如吠犬，食之已痈。
现代文：水中生长着很多何罗鱼，长着一个脑袋却有十个身子，发出的声音像狗叫，人如果吃了它的肉就可以治愈痈肿病。
English: In the water there are a lot of goliath fishes. They have one head but ten bodies. The sound they make is like a dog barking. If you eat its meat, you can cure abscesses.

古文：有兽焉，其状如貆而赤毫，其音如榴榴，名曰孟槐，可以御凶。
现代文：山中有一种兽，外形像豪猪却长着柔软的红毛，叫声如同用辘轳抽水的响声，名叫孟槐，人饲养它可以辟凶邪之气。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a porcupine but with soft red fur, and its call is like the sound of pumping water with a hoe. It is called Meng Yao, and people raise it to ward off evil spirits.

古文：是山也，无草木，多青雄黄。
现代文：这座谯明山，没有花草树木，到处是石青、雄黄。
English: There are no flowers, plants or trees on this Luminous Mountain, and the stone is blue and yellow all over.

古文：又北三百五十里，曰涿光之山。
现代文：再往北三百五十里，有一座涿光山。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further north, there is a shining mountain.

古文：嚣水出焉，而西流注于河。
现代文：嚻水从这座山发源，然后向西流入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows westward into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多鳛鳛之鱼，其状如鹊而十翼，鳞皆在羽端，其音如鹊，可以御火，食之不瘅。
现代文：水中生长着很多鳛鳛鱼，外形像喜鹊却长有十只翅膀，鳞甲全长在羽翅的尖端，发出的声音与喜鹊的鸣叫相似，人饲养它可以辟火，人如果吃了它的肉就能治好黄疸病。
English: There are many eels growing in the water. They look like magpies but have ten wings. The scales are fully grown at the tips of the wings, and the sound they make is similar to the song of a magpie. If you keep it, it can ward off fire. If you eat its meat, you can cure jaundice.

古文：其上多松柏，其下多棕橿，其兽多鹿霝羊，其鸟多蕃。
现代文：山上到处是松树和柏树，而山下到处是棕树和橿树，山中的野兽以羚羊居多，禽鸟以蕃鸟居多。
English: Pine and cypress trees are everywhere on the mountain, while palm trees and eucalyptus trees are everywhere under the mountain. The animals in the mountains are mostly antelopes, and the birds are mostly ostriches.

古文：又北三百八十里，曰虢山，其上多漆，其下多桐椐。其阳多玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往北三百八十里，有一座虢山，山上是茂密的漆树，山下生长着很多的梧桐树和椐树，山的南面盛产玉石，山的北面盛产铁。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a Lushan Mountain. On the top of the mountain, there are lush sumac trees. Under the mountain, there are many plane trees and eucalyptus trees. The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：伊水出焉，西流注于河。
现代文：伊水从这座山发源，向西流入黄河。
English: This mountain is the source of the Yishui River, which flows westward into the Yellow River.

古文：其兽多橐驼，其鸟多窝，状如鼠而鸟翼，其音如羊，可以御兵。
现代文：山中的野兽以橐驼最多，而禽鸟大多是寓鸟，外形与老鼠相似却长着鸟一样的翅膀，发出的声音像羊叫，人饲养它可以躲避刀刃之灾。
English: Most of the wild animals in the mountains are camels, and most of the birds are mockingbirds. Their appearance is similar to that of mice, but they have bird-like wings, and they make sounds like sheep. People raise them to avoid the scourge of the blade.

古文：又北四百里，至于虢山之尾，其上多玉而无石。
现代文：再往北四百里，便到了虢山的尾端，山上到处是美玉而没有石头。
English: Four hundred miles further north, we arrived at the end of Lushan Mountain, where there were gems everywhere, but no stones.

古文：鱼水出焉，西流注于河，其中多文贝。
现代文：鱼水从这里发源，向西流入黄河，水中有很多花纹斑斓的贝。
English: Fish water originates from here and flows westward into the Yellow River. There are many patterned shells in the water.

古文：又北二百里，曰丹熏之山，其上多樗柏，其草多韭韭，多丹获。
现代文：再往北二百里，有一座丹熏山，山上生长着茂密的臭椿树和柏树，在众草中以野韭菜和野薤菜最多，还盛产丹雘。
English: Two hundred miles further north, there is a Dan Xuan Mountain, where dense camellia and cypress trees grow. Among the grasses, wild amaranth and wild amaranth are the most abundant, and also produce a lot of amaranth.

古文：熏水出焉，而西流注于棠水。
现代文：熏水从这座山发源，然后向西流入棠水。
English: The mountain is the source of the fumigated water, which then flows westward into the Tongshui River.

古文：有兽焉，其状如鼠，而菟首麋身，其音如獆犬，以其尾飞，名曰耳鼠，食之不䐆，又可以御百毒。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像老鼠，却长着兔子的脑袋和麋鹿的耳朵，它发出的声音好似狗嗥叫，用尾巴飞行，名叫耳鼠，人吃了它的肉就不会生膨胀病，还可以辟百毒之害。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like a mouse, but has the head of a rabbit and the ears of a moose. It makes a sound like a dog howling and flies with its tail. It is called the ear mouse. If you eat its meat, you will not get swelling disease, and you can also avoid the harm of hundreds of poisons.

古文：又北二百八十里，曰石者之山，其上无草木，多瑶碧。
现代文：再往北二百八十里，有一座石者山，山上没有花草树木，但到处是瑶、碧之类的美玉。
English: Two hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a mountain called Shijiazhuang. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but there are beautiful gems like jade and jasper everywhere.

古文：泚水出焉，西流注于河。
现代文：泚水从这座山发源，向西流入黄河。
English: Surabaya water flows westward into the Yellow River from the source of this mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豹，而文题白身，名曰孟极，是善伏，其鸣自呼。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像豹子，额头上有花纹，身体是白色的，名叫孟极，善于伏身隐藏，它叫的声音便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a leopard, with a pattern on its forehead and a white body. It is called Mengji and is good at hiding. The sound of its call is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又北百一十里，曰边春之山，多葱、葵、韭、桃、李。
现代文：再往北一百一十里，有一座边春山，山上到处是野葱、葵菜、韭菜、野桃树、李树。
English: A hundred and ten miles further north, there is a mountain called Bianchun Mountain. The mountain is full of wild onions, sunflowers, amaranth, peach trees and plum trees.

古文：杠水出焉，而西流注于泑泽。
现代文：杠水从这座山发源，然后向西流入泑泽。
English: The spring water originates from this mountain and then flows westward into Heze.

古文：有兽焉，其状如禺而文身，善笑，见人则卧，名曰幽鴳，其鸣自呼。
现代文：山里有一种野兽，外形像猿猴，身上满是花纹，喜欢嘻笑，一看见人就假装睡着，名叫幽鴳，它叫的声音便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like an ape, its body is full of patterns, it likes to giggle, and it pretends to be asleep as soon as it sees a person. Its name is Yuxuan, and the sound it makes is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又北二百里，曰蔓联之山，其上无草木，有兽焉，其状如禺而有鬣，牛尾、文臂、马蹏，见人则呼，名曰足訾，其鸣自呼。
现代文：再往北二百里，有一座蔓联山，山上没有花草树木。山里有一种野兽，外形像猿猴却长着鬣毛，有牛一样的尾巴，长满花纹的双臂和马一样的蹄子，一看见人就呼叫，名叫足訾，它叫的声音便是自身名称的读音。
English: Two hundred miles further north, there is a vine-covered mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain. There is a beast in the mountain. It looks like a monkey, but it has mane hair, a tail like a cow, patterned arms and hooves like a horse. When it sees a person, it calls out. It's name is "foot beak." The sound it makes is the pronunciation of its own name.

古文：有鸟焉，群居而朋飞，其毛如雌雉，名曰，其鸣自呼，食之已风。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，喜欢群居和结对飞行，尾巴与雌野鸡相似，名叫鵁。它叫的声音便是自身名称的读音，人如果吃了它的肉就能治好风痹病。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains that likes to live in groups and fly in pairs. Its tail is similar to that of a female pheasant, and it is called a quail. The sound of its call is the pronunciation of its own name. If you eat its meat, you can cure rheumatism.

古文：又北八百里，曰单张之山，其上无草木。
现代文：再往北一百八十里，有一座单张山，山上没有花草树木。
English: One hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a single mountain, on which there are no flowers or trees.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豹而长尾，人首而牛耳，一目，名曰诸犍，善吒，行则衔其尾。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像豹子却拖着一条长长的尾巴，还长着人一样的脑袋和牛一样的耳朵，一只眼睛，名叫诸犍，喜欢吼叫，行走时就用嘴衔着尾巴，卧睡时就将尾巴盘蜷起来。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It looks like a leopard, but it has a long tail. It also has a human-like head and cow-like ears. It has one eye, named Zhu Yao. It likes to roar. When it walks, it holds its tail in its mouth. When it sleeps, it curls up its tail.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如雉，而文首、白翼、黄足，名曰白鵺，食之已嗌痛，可以已痸。
现代文：山中又有一种禽鸟，外形像野鸡，脑袋上有花纹，白色翅膀，黄色脚，名叫白鵺，人如果吃了它的肉就能治好咽喉疼痛，还可以治愈疯癫病。
English: There is another kind of bird in the mountains, shaped like a pheasant, with a pattern on its head, white wings, and yellow feet, called the egret. If you eat its meat, you can cure your sore throat, and you can also cure insanity.

古文：栎水出焉，在而南流注于杠水。
现代文：栎水从这座山发源，然后向南流入杠水。
English: Surabaya water springs from this mountain, and then flows south into the Ganges.

古文：又北三百二十里，曰灌题之山，其上多樗柘，其下多流沙，多砥。
现代文：再往北三百二十里，有一座灌题山，山上生长着茂密的臭椿树和柘树，山下到处是流沙，还蕴藏着丰富磨石。
English: Three hundred and twenty miles further north, there is a mountain called Guanzhi Mountain, with thick camellia and eucalyptus trees growing on the mountain, and quicksand everywhere under the mountain, as well as abundant grinding stones.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛而白尾，其音如詨，名曰那父。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像牛却拖着一条白色的尾巴，发出的声音如同人在高声呼唤，名叫那父。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like a cow but has a white tail and makes a high-pitched, human-sounding call. It is called the Father.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如雌雉而人面，见人则跃，名曰竦斯，其鸣自呼也。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，外形像一般的雌野鸡却长着人的面孔，一看见人就跳跃，名叫竦斯，它叫的声音就是自身名称的读音。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, a female pheasant that looks like an ordinary pheasant but has a human face. It jumps when it sees a person. It is called a pheasant, and the sound it makes is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：匠韩之水出焉，而西流注于泑泽，其中多磁石。
现代文：匠韩水从这座山发源，然后向西流入泑泽，水中有很多磁铁石。
English: This mountain is the source of the Korean water, which flows westward into Heze. There are many magnetites in the water.

古文：又北二百里，曰潘侯之山，其上多松柏，其下多榛楛，其阳多玉，其阴多铁。
现代文：再往北二百里，有一座潘侯山，山上生长着茂密的松树和柏树，山下是茂密的榛树和楛树，山的南面蕴藏着丰富的玉石，山食物北面蕴藏着丰富的铁。
English: Two hundred miles further north, there is a Panhoushan. On the top of the mountain, there are lush pine and cypress trees, and under the mountain, there are lush eucalyptus and birch trees. The south side of the mountain is rich in jade, and the north side of the mountain is rich in iron.

古文：有兽焉，基状如牛，而四节生毛，或曰旄牛。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，外形像牛，但四肢关节上都有长长的毛，名叫牦牛。
English: There is a beast in the mountains that looks like a cow, but has long hair on the joints of its limbs. It is called a yakitori.

古文：边水出焉，而南流注于栎泽。
现代文：边水从这座山发源，然后向南流入栎泽。
English: Boundary waters originate from this mountain, and then flow southward into Heze.

古文：又北二百三十里，曰小咸之山，无草木，冬夏有雪。
现代文：再往北二百三十里，有一座小咸山，没有花草树木，冬天和夏天都有积雪。
English: Two hundred and thirty miles further north, there is a small salt mountain, no flowers or trees, and snow in winter and summer.

古文：北二百八十里，曰大咸之山，无草木，其下多玉。
现代文：往北二百八十里，有一座大咸山，没有花草树木，山下盛产玉石。
English: Two hundred and eighty miles to the north, there is a large salty mountain, without flowers and trees, rich in jade under the mountain.

古文：是山也，四方，不可以上。
现代文：这座大咸山，四四方方，人不能攀登上去。
English: This big salty mountain is very square, and people can't climb it.

古文：有蛇名曰长蛇，其毛如彘豪，其音如鼓柝。
现代文：山中有一种蛇叫做长蛇，身上的毛与猪脖子上的硬毛相似，发出的声音像是人在敲击木梆子。
English: There is a kind of snake in the mountains called the long snake, the hair on its body is similar to the stiff hair on the neck of a pig, and the sound it makes is like someone is tapping a wooden mallet.

古文：又北三百二十里，曰敦薨之山，其上多棕枬，其下多茈草。
现代文：再往北三百二十里，有一座敦薨山，山上是茂密的棕树和楠木树，山下是大片的紫草。
English: Three hundred and twenty miles further north, there is a hill called Dunlu Mountain. On the top of the mountain, there are lush palm trees and camphor trees, and at the bottom of the mountain, there is a large area of purple grass.

古文：敦薨之水出焉，而西流注于泑泽。
现代文：敦薨水从这座山发源，然后向西流入泑泽。
English: The water of Dunhuang originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into Heze.

古文：出于昆仑之东北隅，实惟河原。
现代文：这泑泽位于昆仑山的东北角，确实就是黄河的源头。
English: This Heze is located in the northeast corner of the Kunlun Mountains and is indeed the source of the Yellow River.

古文：其中多赤鲑，其兽多兕，旄牛，其鸟多柝鸠。
现代文：水中有很多赤鲑。那里的野兽以兕、牦牛最多，而禽鸟大多是布谷鸟。
English: There are a lot of sockeye salmon in the water, and the largest animals there are cormorants and snails, while the birds are mostly cuckoos.

古文：又北二百里，曰少咸之山，无草木，多青碧。
现代文：再往北二百里，有一座少咸山，山上没有花草树木，到处是青石碧玉。
English: Two hundred miles further north, there is a less salty mountain, there are no flowers and trees on the mountain, everywhere is bluestone and jasper.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛，而赤身、人面、马足，名曰窥窳，其音如婴儿，是食人。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的牛，却长着红色的身子、人的面孔、马的蹄子，名称是窫窳，发出的声音如同婴儿啼哭，是能吃人的。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow, but with a red body, a human face, and horse hooves. It is called a baboon, and it makes a sound like a baby crying. It can eat people.

古文：敦水出焉，东流注于雁门之水，其中多魳魳之鱼。
现代文：敦水从这座山发源，向东流入雁门水，水中生长着很多鱼，人吃了它的肉就会中毒而死。
English: From the source of this mountain, the Dongshui flows eastward into the Yamen Water. There are many fish in the water, and if you eat its meat, you will be poisoned and die.

古文：食之杀人。又北二百里，曰狱法之山。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座狱法山。
English: Two hundred miles further north is the prison town of Fa Shan.

古文：瀼泽之出焉，而东北流注于泰泽。
现代文：瀤泽水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入泰泽。
English: This mountain is the source of the water of Lake Biwa, which then flows northeast into Lake Taizé.

古文：其中多䲃鱼，其状如鲤而鸡足，食之已疣。
现代文：水中生长着很多鱼，形状像一般的鲤鱼却长着鸡爪子，人吃了它的肉就能治好赘瘤病。
English: There are many fish growing in the water. It is shaped like a common eel, but it has chicken feet. People can cure scabies by eating its meat.

古文：有兽焉，其状如犬而人面，善投，见人则笑，其名山，其行如风，见则天下大风。
现代文：山中还有一种野兽，形状像普通的狗却长着人的面孔，擅长投掷，一看见人就嘻笑，名称是山，它走起来就像刮风，一出现天下就会起大风。
English: There is also a beast in the mountains. It is shaped like an ordinary dog but has a human face. It is good at throwing and smiles when it sees a person. Its name is Mountain. It walks like a wind, and when it appears in the sky, it causes a strong wind.

古文：又北二百里，曰北岳之山，多枳棘刚木。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座北岳山，山上到处是枳树酸枣树和檀、柘一类的树木。
English: Two hundred miles further north is Mount Beidake, which is dotted with eucalyptus and date trees, as well as trees such as sandalwood and neem.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛，而四角、人、耳、彘耳，其名曰诸怀，基音如鸣雁，是食人。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的牛，却长着四只角、人的眼睛、猪的耳朵，名称是诸怀，发出的声音如同大雁鸣叫，是能吃人的。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow, but with four horns, human eyes and pig's ears. Its name is Zhu Huai, and the sound it makes is like a geese singing. It can eat people.

古文：诸怀之水出焉，而西流注于嚣水，水中多鮨鱼，鱼身而犬首，其音如婴儿，食之已狂。
现代文：诸怀水从这座山发源，然后向西流入嚻水，水中有很多鮨鱼，长着鱼的身子而狗的脑袋，发出的声音像婴儿啼哭，人吃了它的肉就能治愈疯狂病。
English: Zhuhuai Water originates from this mountain, and then flows westward into the Xun Water. There are many eels in the water, with the body of a fish and the head of a dog, and the sound they make is like a baby crying. If you eat its meat, you can cure madness.

古文：又北百八十里，曰浑夕之山，无草木，多铜玉。
现代文：再往北一百八十里，是座浑夕山，山上没有花草树木，盛产铜和玉石。
English: Further north, one hundred and eighty miles away, is Mount Hunyu. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, which is rich in copper and jade.

古文：嚣水出焉，而西流注于海。
现代文：嚻水从这座山发源，然后向西北流入大海。
English: Surabaya's water springs from the mountain and flows northwest into the sea.

古文：有蛇一首两身，名曰肥遗，见则其国大旱。
现代文：这里有一种长着一个头两个身子的蛇，名称是肥遗，在哪个国家出现那个国家就会发生大旱灾。
English: There is a kind of snake with one head and two bodies, the name of which is phytophthora, and in whichever country it appears, there will be a major drought.

古文：又北五十里，曰北单之山，无草木，多葱韭。
现代文：再往北五十里，是座北单山，山上没有花草树木，却生长着茂盛的野葱和野韭菜。
English: Fifty miles further north, there is a solitary mountain to the north. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but lush wild onions and wild leeks grow.

古文：又北百里，曰罴差之山，无草木，多马。
现代文：再往北一百里，是座罴差山，没有花草树木，却有很多小个头的野马。
English: A hundred miles further north, there is the Zaozhuang Mountains. There are no flowers or trees, but there are many small wild horses.

古文：又北百八十里，曰北鲜之山，是多马，鲜水出焉，而西北流注于涂吾之水。
现代文：再往北一百八十里，是座北鲜山，这里有很多小个头的野马。鲜水从这里发源，然后向西北流入涂吾水。
English: One hundred and eighty miles further north is the Northern Fresh Mountain, where there are many small wild horses. Fresh water originates from here, and then flows northwest into Tuwoshui.

古文：又北百七十里，曰堤山，多马。
现代文：再往北一百七十里，是座堤山，有许多小个头的野马。
English: A hundred and seventy miles further north is the site of the Dyke Mountains, home to many small wild horses.

古文：有兽焉，其状如豹而文首，名曰狕。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的豹子而脑袋上有花纹，名称是狕。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a common leopard with a pattern on its head, called a baboon.

古文：堤水出焉，而东流注于泰泽，其中多龙龟。
现代文：堤水从这座山发源，然后向东流入泰泽，水中有很多龙和龟。
English: There are many dragons and turtles in the water of the dike, which originates from the mountain and flows eastward into the Taizé River.

古文：凡北山经之首，自单狐之山至于堤山，凡二十五山，五千四百九十里，其神皆人面蛇身。
现代文：总计北方第一列山系之首尾，自单狐山起到堤山止，一共二十五座山，途经五千四百九十里，诸山山神都是人的面孔蛇的身子。
English: In total, the first line of mountains in the north, from Shanfooshan to Jishan, has a total of 25 mountains, with a total distance of 5,490 miles. All the mountains and gods are the faces of humans and the bodies of snakes.

古文：其祠之，毛用一雄鸡彘瘗，吉玉用一珪，瘗而为不糈。
现代文：祭祀山神：把毛物中用作祭品的一只公鸡和一头猪埋入地下，在祀神的美好玉器中用一块玉珪，只是埋入地下而不需要用米来祭祀。
English: To worship the mountain gods: bury a rooster and a pig in the ground as a sacrifice, and use a piece of jade in a beautiful jade vessel to worship the gods. They are just buried in the ground and do not need to be sacrificed with rice.

古文：其山北人，皆生食不火之物。
现代文：住在诸山北面的人，都生吃未经火烤的食物。
English: People who live north of the mountains eat uncooked food.

古文：北次二经之首，在河之东，其首枕汾，其名曰管涔之山。
现代文：北方第二列山系之首座山，坐落在黄河的东岸，山的首端枕着汾水，这座山叫管涔山。
English: The first mountain of the second line of mountains in the north is located on the east bank of the Yellow River. The head of the mountain is surrounded by water. This mountain is called Guanlishan.

古文：其上无木而多草，其下多玉。
现代文：山上没有树木却到处是茂密的花草，山下盛产玉石。
English: There are no trees on the mountain, but there are lush flowers and plants everywhere. The lower part of the mountain is rich in jade.

古文：汾水出焉，而西流注于河。
现代文：汾水从这座山发源，然后向西流入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows westward into the Yellow River.

古文：又西二百五十里，曰少阳之山，其上多玉，其下多赤银。
现代文：再往北二百五十里，是座少阳山，山上盛产玉石，山下盛产赤银。
English: Two hundred and fifty miles further north is Mount Shao Yang. The top of the mountain is rich in jade and the bottom of the mountain is rich in red and silver.

古文：酸水出焉，而东流注于汾水，其中多美赭。
现代文：酸水从这座山发源，然后向东流入汾水，水中有很多优良赭石。
English: Acidic water springs from this mountain and then flows eastward into the Surabaya River, which contains many fine ocher stones.

古文：又北五十里，曰县雍之山，其上多玉，其下多铜，其兽多闾麋，其鸟多白翟白。
现代文：再往北五十里，是座县雍山，山上蕴藏着丰富的玉石，山下蕴藏着丰富的铜，山中的野兽大多是山驴和麋鹿；而禽鸟以白色野鸡和白翰鸟居多。
English: Fifty miles further north is Za County's Yongshan Mountain. The mountain is rich in jade and copper. The animals in the mountains are mostly mountain donkeys and elk, while the birds are mostly white pheasants and white hummingbirds.

古文：晋水出焉，而东南流注于汾水。
现代文：晋水从这座山发源，然后向东南流入汾水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Jin River, which flows southeast into the Bohai River.

古文：其中多鮆鱼，其状如鯈而赤麟，其音如叱，食之不骄。
现代文：水中生长着很多鱽鱼，形状像小儵鱼却长着红色的鳞甲，发出的声音如同人的斥责声，吃了它的肉就使人没有狐骚臭。
English: There are many eels growing in the water. They are shaped like small eels but have red scales. The sound they make is like a human's scolding voice. If you eat their meat, you won't smell like a fox.

古文：又北二百里，曰狐岐之山，无草木，多青碧。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座狐岐山，山上没有花草树木，到处是青石碧玉。
English: Two hundred miles further north, there is the Fox Mountain. There are no flowers, plants or trees on the mountain, only bluestone and jasper everywhere.

古文：胜水出焉，而东北流注于汾水，其中多苍玉。
现代文：胜水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入汾水，水中有很多苍玉。
English: The source of the Kosei River originates from this mountain, and then flows northeast into the Surabaya River. There are a lot of corals in the water.

古文：又北三百五十里，曰白沙山，广员三百里，尽沙也，无草木鸟兽。
现代文：再往北三百五十里，是座白沙山，方圆三百里大小，到处是沙子，没有花草树木和禽鸟野兽。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further north, there is a white sand mountain, with a circumference of three hundred miles. There is sand everywhere, and there are no flowers, plants, trees, birds or beasts.

古文：鲔水出于其上，潜于其下，是多白玉。
现代文：鲔水从这座山的山顶发源，然后潜流到山下，水中有很多白玉。
English: Surabaya water originates from the top of this mountain, and then flows under the mountain. There are a lot of white beads in the water.

古文：又北四百里，曰尔是之山，无草木，无水。
现代文：再往北四百里，是座尔是山，没有花草树木，也没有水。
English: Four hundred miles further north, there are no mountains, no flowers, no trees, and no water.

古文：又北三百八十里，曰狂山，无草木，是山也，冬夏有雪。
现代文：再往北三百八十里，是座狂山，没有花草树木。这座狂山，冬天和夏天都有雪。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a wild mountain with no plants or trees. This wild mountain has snow in winter and summer.

古文：狂水出焉，而西流注于浮水，其中多美玉。
现代文：狂水从这座山发源，然后向西流入浮水，水中有很多优良玉石。
English: The torrential water originates from this mountain and then flows west into the floating water, in which there is a lot of fine jade.

古文：又北三百八十里，曰诸余之山，其上多铜玉，其下多松柏。
现代文：再往北三百八十里，是座诸余山，山上蕴藏着丰富的铜和玉石，山下到处是茂密的松树和柏树。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles to the north, there are the Yu Mountains. The mountains are rich in copper and jade, and there are dense pine and cypress trees everywhere.

古文：诸余之水出焉，而东流注于旄水。
现代文：诸余水从这座山发源，然后向东流入旄水。
English: The mountain is the source of the remaining water, which then flows east into the Surabaya River.

古文：又北三百五十里，曰敦头之山，其上多金玉，无草木。
现代文：再往北三百五十里，是座敦头山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，但不生长花草树木。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further north is Mount Dun Tou. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, but does not grow flowers and trees.

古文：旄水出焉，而东流注于印泽。
现代文：旄水从这座山发源，然后向东流入邛泽。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into the city of Surabaya.

古文：其中多马，牛尾而白身，一角，其音如呼。
现代文：山中有很多马，长着牛一样的尾巴和白色身子，一只角，发出的声音如同人呼唤。
English: There are many horses in the mountains, with a cow-like tail and a white body, a horn, and a voice that sounds like a human calling.

古文：又北三百五十里，曰钩吾之山，其上多玉，其下多铜。
现代文：再往北三百五十里，是座钩吾山，山上盛产玉石，山下盛产铜。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further north is Mount Zahoogu. The top of the mountain is rich in jade and the bottom of the mountain is rich in copper.

古文：有兽焉，其状如羊身人面，其目在腋下，虎齿人爪，其音如婴儿，名曰狍鸮，是食人。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状是羊的身子人的面孔。眼睛长在腋窝下，有着老虎一样的牙齿和人一样的指甲，发出的声音如同婴儿哭啼，名称是饕餮，食人，贪恋美食，在怪兽中担任厨师。
English: In the mountains there is a beast in the shape of a sheep with a human face, with eyes under its armpits, with tiger-like teeth and human fingernails, which makes a sound like a baby crying. It is called a baboon. It is a man-eater and has an affinity for food. It is the cook of the monsters.

古文：又北三百里，曰北嚻之山，无石，其阳多玉。
现代文：往北三百里，是座北嚻山，没有石头，山南阳面多出产碧玉，山北阴面多出产玉石。
English: Three hundred miles to the north, there is Beilun Mountain, with no stones. The sunny side of Shannan produces more jasper, while the shady side of Beilun produces more jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如虎，而白身犬首，马尾彘鬣，名曰独𤞞。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的老虎，却长着白色身子狗脑袋，马的尾巴猪脖子上的硬毛，名称是独。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary tiger, but with a white body, a dog's head, a horse's tail, and stiff hair on a pig's neck. Its name is Doku.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌，人面，名曰𪄀𪃑，宵飞而昼伏，食之已暍。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的乌鸦，却长着人的面孔，名称是，在夜里飞行而在白天隐伏，吃了它的肉就能使人不中暑。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a common crow, but with a human face. Its name means that it flies at night and hides during the day. Eating its meat can prevent heatstroke.

古文：涔水出焉，而东流注于邛泽。
现代文：涔水从这座山发源，然后向东流入邛泽。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into the city of Surabaya.

古文：又北三百五十里，曰梁渠之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往北三百五十里，是座梁渠山，不生长花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，脩水从这座山发源，然后向东流入雁门水。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further north, there is the Liangqiu Mountain, where flowers, plants and trees do not grow. It is rich in metal minerals and jade. Surge water originates from this mountain and then flows east into the Yamen Water.

古文：修水出焉，而东流注于雁门，其兽多居暨，其状如汇而赤毛，其音如豚。
现代文：山中的野兽大多是居暨兽，形状像汇却浑身长着红色的毛，发出的声音如同小猪叫。
English: Most of the beasts in the mountains are yakitori beasts, shaped like a hive but with red fur all over their bodies, making a sound like a piglet.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如夸父，四翼、一目、犬尾，名曰嚣，其音如鹊，食之已腹痛，可以止衕。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像夸父，长着四只翅膀、一只眼睛、狗一样的尾巴，名称是嚻，它的叫声与喜鹊的鸣叫相似，人吃了它的肉就可以止住肚子痛，还可以治好腹泻病。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a rooster, with four wings, one eye, and a dog-like tail. Its name is the quail. Its call is similar to the song of the magpie. If you eat its meat, you can stop your stomachache and cure diarrhea.

古文：又北四百里，曰姑灌之山，无草木。
现代文：再往北四百里，是座姑灌山，没有花草树木。
English: Four hundred miles further north, there is a mountain without flowers or trees.

古文：是山也，科夏有雪。
现代文：在这座姑灌山上，冬天夏天都有雪。
English: On this mountain, there is snow in both winter and summer.

古文：又北三百八十里，曰湖灌之山，其阳多玉，其阴多碧，多马，湖灌之水出焉，而东流注于海，其中多䱇。
现代文：再往北三百八十里，是座湖灌山，山南阳面盛产玉石，山北阴面盛产碧玉，并有许多个头小的野马。湖灌水从这座山发源，然后向东流入大海，水中有很多鳝鱼。
English: Three hundred and eighty miles further north, there is a lake-fed mountain. The sunny side of the south of the mountain is rich in jade, the shady side of the north of the mountain is rich in jasper, and there are many small wild horses. The lake-fed water originates from this mountain, and then flows east into the sea. There are many eels in the water.

古文：有木器厂焉，其叶如柳而赤理。
现代文：山里生长着一种树木，叶子像柳树叶而有红色的纹理。
English: In the mountains grows a tree with red-textured willow-like leaves.

古文：又北水行五百里，流沙三百里，至于洹山，其上多金玉。
现代文：再往北行五百里水路，然后经过三百里流沙，便到了洹山，山上蕴藏着丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Further north, a five-hundred-mile waterway, then three hundred miles of quicksand, leads to Lushan Mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：三桑生之，其树皆无枝，其高百仞。
现代文：山中生长着一种三桑树，这种树都不长枝条，树干高达一百仞，还生长着各种果树。
English: There is a kind of mulberry tree growing in the mountains, this tree does not grow branches, the trunk is up to a hundred branches, and there are also various fruit trees.

古文：百果树生之。
现代文：山下有很多怪蛇。
English: There are a lot of snakes under the mountain.

古文：其下多怪蛇。又北三百里，曰敦题之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座敦题山，这里不长花草树木，但蕴藏有丰富的金矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further north is Mount Dunjie, where flowers and trees do not grow, but there is an abundance of gold, minerals and jade.

古文：是錞于北海。
现代文：这座山座落在北海的岸边。
English: The mountain sits on the shore of the North Sea.

古文：凡北次二经之首，自管涔之山至于敦题之山，凡十七山，五千六百九十里。
现代文：总计北方第二列山系之首尾，自管涔山起到敦题山止，一共十七座山，途经五千六百九十里。
English: The total length of the second line of mountains in the north, from Shaoshan to Dunzhi Mountain, is 17 mountains, covering 5,690 miles.

古文：其神皆蛇身人面。
现代文：诸山山神都是蛇的身子人的面孔。
English: All the gods and goddesses of the mountains are snakes with human faces.

古文：其祠；毛用一雄鸡彘瘗；用一璧一珪，投而不糈。
现代文：祭祀山神：把毛物中用作祭品的一只公鸡、一头猪一起埋入地下；在祀神的玉器中用一块玉璧和一块玉珪，一起投向山中而不用米祀神。
English: To worship a mountain deity: bury a rooster and a pig, which are used as offerings, into the ground together; use a piece of jade and a piece of jade in a jade bowl to worship the deity, and throw them into the mountain together, instead of using rice to worship the deity.

古文：北次三经之首，曰太行之山。
现代文：北方第三列山系之首座山，叫做太行山。
English: The first mountain in the third row of mountains in the north is called Taihang Mountain.

古文：其首曰归山，其上有金玉，其下有碧。
现代文：太行山的首端叫归山，山上出产金属矿物和玉石，山下出产碧玉。
English: The first end of Taihang Mountain is called Guishan. Metal minerals and jade are produced on the mountain, and jasper is produced below the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如麢羊而四角，马尾而有距，其名曰，善还，其名自詨有鸟焉，其状台鹊，白身、赤尾、六足，其名曰䴅，是善惊，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的羚羊却有四只角，长着马一样的尾巴和鸡一样的爪子，名称是，善于旋转起舞，它发出的叫声就是自身名称的读音。山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的喜鹊，长着白身子、红尾巴、六只脚，名称是，这种鸟十分惊觉，它发出的叫声就是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary antelope but with four horns, with a horse-like tail and chicken-like claws, its name is, good at spinning and dancing, the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name. There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary magpie, with a white body, red tail and six feet, the name is, this bird is very startled, the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又东北二百里，曰龙侯之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往东北二百里，是座龙侯山，不生长花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Another two hundred miles to the northeast is Longhou Mountain, which does not grow flowers and trees, but is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：决决之水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：决水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the breakwater, which then flows east into the Yellow River.

古文：其中多人鱼，其状如䱱鱼，四足，其音如婴儿，食之无痴疾。
现代文：水中有很多人鱼，形状像一般的鱼，长有四只脚，发出的声音像婴儿哭啼，吃了它的肉就能使人不得疯癫病。
English: There are many mermaids in the water. They are shaped like ordinary fish, have four legs, and make a sound like a baby crying. Eating its flesh can make people go crazy.

古文：又东北二百里，曰马成之山，其上多文石，其阴多金玉。
现代文：再往东北二百里，是座马成山，山上多出产有纹理的美石，山北阴面有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Another two hundred miles to the northeast is Mount Zama Chengshan. The mountain produces more beautiful textured stones, and the north side of the mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade.

古文：有兽焉，其状如白犬而黑头，见人则飞，其名曰天马，其鸣自詨，有鸟焉，其状如乌，首白而身青、足黄，是名曰鶌鶋。其名自詨，食之不饥，可以已寓。
现代文：山里有一种野兽，形状像普通的白狗却长着黑脑袋，一看见人就腾空飞起，名称是天马，它的叫声就是自身名称的读音。山里还有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的乌鸦，却长着白色的脑袋和青色的身子、黄色的足爪，名称是鶌鶋，它的叫声便是自身名称的读音，吃了它的肉使人不感觉饥饿，还可以医治老年健忘症。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary white dog, but with a black head. When it sees a person, it takes off and flies. Its name is Tianma, and its cry is the pronunciation of its name. There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary crow, but with a white head and a blue body, yellow claws. Its name is dragonfly, and its cry is the pronunciation of its name. Eating its meat makes people not feel hungry, and can also cure senile amnesia.

古文：又东北七十里，曰咸山，其上有玉，其下多铜，是多松柏，草多茈草。
现代文：再往东北七十里，是座咸山，山上盛产玉石，山下盛产铜，这里到处是松树和柏树，在所生长的草中以紫草最多。
English: Seventy miles further to the northeast is a salt mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in jade, and the bottom of the mountain is rich in copper. There are pine and cypress trees everywhere, and the most common grass is comfrey.

古文：条菅之水出焉，而西南流注于长泽。
现代文：条菅水从这座山发源，然后向西南流入长泽。
English: Streams of water originate from this mountain and then flow south-west into Nagasawa.

古文：其中多器酸，三岁一成，食之已疠。
现代文：水中多出产器酸，这种器酸三年才能收成一次，吃了它就能治愈人的麻疯病。
English: More organic acids are produced in the water. This organic acid can only be harvested once every three years, and eating it can cure people's leprosy.

古文：又东北二百里，曰天池之山，其上无草木，多文石。
现代文：再往东北二百里，是座天池山，山上没有花草树木，到处是带有花纹的美石。
English: Two hundred miles to the northeast, there is a mountain called Tianchi Mountain. There are no flowers or trees on the mountain, but there are beautiful stones with patterns everywhere.

古文：有兽焉，其状如兔而鼠首，以其背飞，其名曰飞鼠。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像一般的兔子却长着老鼠的头，借助它背上的毛飞行，名称是飞鼠。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a common rabbit but with the head of a mouse, which uses the hair on its back to fly. It is called the flying mouse.

古文：渑水出焉，潜于其下，其中多黄垩。
现代文：渑水从这座山发源，然后潜流到山下，水中有很多黄色垩土。
English: Brackish water originates from this mountain and then flows under the mountain. There is a lot of yellow brackish soil in the water.

古文：又东三百里，曰阳山，其上多玉，其下多金铜。
现代文：再往东三百里，是座阳山，山上有丰富的玉石，山下有丰富的金铜。
English: Three hundred miles further east is Mount Zayang, rich in jade on the mountain and rich in gold and copper under the mountain.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛而尾，其颈肾，其状如句瞿，其名曰领胡，其鸣自詨，食之已狂。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的牛而长着红尾巴，脖子上有肉瘤，像斗的形状，名称是领胡，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音，人吃了它的肉就能治愈癫狂症。
English: There is a beast in the mountains. It is shaped like an ordinary cow and has a red tail. It has a sarcoma on its neck, shaped like a bucket. Its name is a whisker. The cry it emits is the pronunciation of its name. If you eat its meat, you can cure epilepsy.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如赤雉，而五采以文，是自为牝牡，名曰象蛇，其名自詨。
现代文：山中还有一种禽鸟，形状像雌性野鸡，而羽毛上有五彩斑斓的花纹，这种鸟一身兼有雄雌二种性器官，名称是象蛇，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is also a bird in the mountains, shaped like a female pheasant, and the feathers have multicolored patterns. This bird has both male and female sex organs. Its name is elephant snake, and the call it emits is the pronunciation of its own name.

古文：留水出焉，而南流注于河。
现代文：留水从这座山发源，然后向南流入黄河。
English: The remaining water originates from this mountain and then flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：其中有䱤父之鱼，其状如鲋鱼，鱼首而彘身，食之已呕。
现代文：水中生长着父鱼，形状像一般的鲫鱼，长着鱼的头而猪的身子，人吃了它的肉可以治愈呕吐。
English: A parent fish grows in the water, shaped like a common carp, with a fish's head and a pig's body. Eating its meat can cure vomiting.

古文：又东三百五十里，曰贲闻之山，其上多苍玉，其下多黄垩，多涅石。
现代文：再往东三百五十里，是座贲闻山，山上盛产苍玉，山下盛产黄色垩土，也有许多涅石。
English: Three hundred and fifty miles further to the east, there is a place called Gwanghwamun Mountain. The top of the mountain is rich in agate, the bottom of the mountain is rich in yellow rammed earth, and there are also many Nirvana stones.

古文：又北百里，曰王屋之山，是多石。
现代文：再往北一百里，是座王屋山，这里到处是石头。
English: A hundred miles further north, there is Wangya Mountain, which is full of stones.

古文：𣾍水出焉，而西北流注于泰泽。
现代文：水从这座山发源，然后向西北流入泰泽。
English: Water springs from the mountain and flows northwest into the Taizé.

古文：又东北三百里，曰教山，其上多玉而无石。
现代文：再往东北三百里，是座教山，山上有丰富的玉石而没有石头。
English: Three hundred miles further north-east is Mount Zao, a mountain rich in jade but devoid of stone.

古文：教水出焉，西流注于河，是水冬干而夏流，实惟干河。
现代文：教水从这座山发源，向西流入黄河，这条河水到了冬季干枯而在夏季流水，确实可说是干河。
English: This mountain is the source of fresh water that flows westward into the Yellow River, which dries up in winter and flows in summer. It can truly be said to be a dry river.

古文：其中有两山。是山也，广员三百步，其名曰发丸之山，其上有金玉。
现代文：教水的河道中有两座小山，方圆各三百步，名称是发丸山，小山上蕴藏着金属矿物和玉石。
English: There are two small hills in the course of the river, each with a radius of three hundred paces. The name of the hills is "Farmaruyama." The hills are rich in metallic minerals and jade.

古文：又南三百里，曰景山，南望盐贩之泽，北望少泽。
现代文：再往南三百里，是座景山，在山上向南可以望见盐贩泽，向北可以望见少泽。
English: Three hundred miles further south is Mount Zake. On the mountain, you can see Saltmonger's Lake to the south and Ruwa Lake to the north.

古文：其上多草、藷藇，其草多秦椒，其阴多赭，其阳多玉。
现代文：山上生长着茂密的丛草、薯，这里的草以秦椒最多，山北阴面多出产赭石，山南阳面多出产玉石。
English: Dense clumps of grass and yams grow on the mountain. The grass here produces the most Qin pepper, the north of the mountain produces more vermiculite, and the south of the mountain produces more jade.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如蛇，而四翼、六目、六足，名曰酸与，其鸣自詨，见则其邑有恐。
现代文：山里有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的蛇，却长有四只翅膀、六只眼睛、三只脚，名称是酸与，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音，在哪个地方出现那里就会发生使人惊恐的事情。
English: There is a bird in the mountains, shaped like a common snake, but with four wings, six eyes and three feet. Its name is Acid and its cry is the pronunciation of its name. Wherever it appears, something frightening will happen.

古文：又东南三百二十里，曰孟门之山，其上多苍玉，多金，其下多黄垩，多涅石。
现代文：再往东南三百二十里，是座孟门山，山上蕴藏有丰富的苍玉，还盛产金属矿物，山下到处是黄色垩土，还有许多涅石。
English: Another 320 miles to the southeast is Mengmen Mountain. The mountain is rich in celadon, and is also rich in metal minerals. The mountain is full of yellow rammed earth, and there are many neolithic stones.

古文：又东南三百二十里，曰平山。
现代文：再往东南三百二十里，是座平山。
English: Another 320 miles to the southeast is a flat mountain.

古文：平水出于其上，潜于其下，是多美玉。
现代文：平水从这座山的顶上发源，然后潜流到山下，水中有很多优良玉石。
English: The flat water originates from the top of the mountain and then flows under the mountain. There are many fine jade stones in the water.

古文：又东二百里，曰京山，有美玉，多漆木，多竹，其阳有赤铜，其阴有玄䃤。
现代文：再往东二百里，是座京山，盛产美玉，到处有漆树，遍山是竹林，在这座山的阳面出产黄铜，山北阴面出产黑色磨石。
English: Two hundred miles further east is Mount Jing, which is rich in jade. There are lacquer trees everywhere, and bamboo forests all over the mountain. On the sunny side of this mountain, brass is produced, and on the north side of the mountain, black grinding stones are produced.

古文：高水出焉，南流注于河。
现代文：高水从这座山发源，向南流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the high water that flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：又东二百里，曰虫尾之山，其上多金玉，其下多竹，多青碧。
现代文：再往东二百里，是座虫尾山，山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下到处是竹丛，还有很多青石碧玉。
English: Another two hundred miles to the east is Mount Wuwei. The mountain is rich in metal minerals and jade, and there are bamboo thickets everywhere under the mountain, as well as a lot of bluestone and jasper.

古文：丹水出焉，南流注于河；薄水出焉，而东南流注于黄泽。
现代文：丹水从这座山发源，向南流入黄河。薄水也从这座山发源，向东南流入黄泽。
English: The Dan River originates from this mountain and flows south into the Yellow River. Thin water also originates from this mountain and flows southeast into the Yellow River.

古文：又东三百里，曰彭𣬈之山，其上无草木，多金玉，其下多水。
现代文：再往东三百里，是座彭山，山上不生长花草树木，有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下到处流水。
English: Three hundred miles further east is Mount Penghu. No flowers, plants or trees grow on the mountain, which is rich in metal minerals and jade. Water flows everywhere below the mountain.

古文：蚤林之水出焉，东南流注于河。
现代文：蚤林水从这座山发源，向东南流入黄河。
English: The water of the flea forest originates from this mountain and flows into the Yellow River to the southeast.

古文：肥水出焉，而南流注于床水，其中多肥遗之蛇。
现代文：肥水也从这座山发源，然后向南流入床水，水中有很多叫做肥遗的蛇。
English: Fertile water also originates from this mountain, and then flows south into the bed water, in which there are many snakes called fertilizer.

古文：又东百八十里，曰小侯之山。
现代文：再往东一百八十里，是座小侯山。
English: A hundred and eighty leagues further east, there is the small Hou Mountain.

古文：明漳之水出焉，南流注于黄泽。
现代文：明漳水从这座山发源，向南流入黄泽。
English: Alum water flows from the source of this mountain and flows south into Huangze.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌而白文，名曰鸪𪄶，食之不灂。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的乌鸦却有白色斑纹，名称是鸪，吃了它的肉就能使人的眼睛明亮而不昏花。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains. It is shaped like a common crow but has white markings. Its name is the cormorant. Eating its meat can make people's eyes bright and not dull.

古文：又东三百七十里，曰泰头之山。
现代文：再往东三百七十里，是座泰头山。
English: Three hundred and seventy miles further east is Mount Taitou.

古文：共水出焉，南流注于池。
现代文：共水从这座山发源，向南流入虖池水。
English: The common water originates from this mountain and flows south into the water of Dianchi Lake.

古文：其上多金玉，其下多竹箭。
现代文：山上有丰富的金属矿物和玉石，山下到处是小竹丛。
English: The mountain is rich in metallic minerals and jade, and the lower part of the mountain is full of small bamboo thickets.

古文：又东北二百里，曰轩辕之山，其上多铜，其下多竹。
现代文：再往东北二百里，是座轩辕山。山上多出产铜，山下到处是竹子。
English: Two hundred miles further to the northeast is Mount Xuanliao. Copper is mostly produced on the mountain, and bamboo grows everywhere below.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如枭白首，其名曰黄鸟，其鸣自詨，食之不妒。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状是一般的猫头鹰却长着白脑袋，名称是黄鸟，发出的叫声便是它自身名称的读音，吃了它的肉就能使人不生妒嫉心。
English: There is a bird in the mountains. Its shape is that of an ordinary owl, but it has a white head. Its name is the yellow bird. The call it emits is the pronunciation of its own name. Eating its meat can make people not feel jealous.

古文：又北二百里，曰谒戾之山，其上多松柏，有金玉。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座谒戾山，山上到处是松树和柏树，还蕴藏着金属矿物和玉石。
English: Two hundred miles further north is Mount Lushan, which is full of pine and cypress trees, and also contains metallic minerals and jade.

古文：沁水出焉，南流注于河。
现代文：沁水从这座山发源，向南流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the Huangshui River, which flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：其东有林焉，名曰丹林。
现代文：在这座山的东面有一片树林，叫做丹林。
English: On the east side of the mountain there is a grove of trees called Danlin.

古文：丹林之水出焉，南流注于河。
现代文：丹林水便从这里发源，向南流入黄河。
English: The Danlin Water originates from here and flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：婴侯之水出焉，北流注于汜水。
现代文：婴侯水也从这里发源，向北流入汜水。
English: The Infant Water also originates from here and flows northward into the Surabaya Water.

古文：东三百里，曰沮洳之山，无草木，有金玉。
现代文：往东三百里，是座沮洳山，不生长花草树木，有金属矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred miles to the east, there is a desolate mountain, where flowers and trees do not grow, but there are metal minerals and jade.

古文：濝水出焉，南流注于河。
现代文：濝水从这座山发源，向南流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the Huangshui River, which flows south into the Yellow River.

古文：又北三百里，曰神囷之山，具上有文石，其下有白蛇，有飞虫。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座神囷山，山上是带有花纹的漂亮石头，山下有白蛇，还有飞虫。
English: Three hundred miles further north, there is Shenshan Mountain. On the mountain, there are beautiful stones with patterns. At the foot of the mountain, there are white snakes and flying insects.

古文：黄水出焉，而东流注于洹；滏水出焉，而东流注于欧水。
现代文：黄水从这座山发源，然后向东流入洹水。滏水也从这座山发源，向东流入欧水。
English: The yellow water originates from this mountain and then flows east into the brackish water. The brackish water also originates from this mountain and flows east into the European water.

古文：又北二百里，曰发鸠之山，其上多柘木。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座发鸠山，山上生长着茂密的柘树。
English: Further north, two hundred miles away, is Mount Hatsushiro, where thick eucalyptus trees grow.

古文：有鸟焉，其状如乌，文首、白喙、赤足，名曰精卫，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种禽鸟，形状像一般的乌鸦，却长着花脑袋、白嘴巴、红足爪，名称是精卫，它发出的叫声就是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a kind of bird in the mountains, shaped like a common crow, but with a flower head, white mouth, and red feet. Its name is Jingwei, and the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its own name.

古文：是炎帝之少女名曰女娃，女娃游于东海，溺而不返，故为精卫。常衔西山之木石，以堙于东海。
现代文：精卫鸟原是炎帝的小女儿，名叫女娃。女娃到东海游玩。淹死在东海里没有返回，就变成了精卫鸟，常常衔着西山的树枝和石子，用来填塞东海。
English: Originally, the Jingwei bird was the small daughter of Emperor Yan, named Nuwa. Nuwa went to the East Sea to play. Drowned in the East Sea and did not return, she became the Jingwei bird, often carrying the branches and stones of the West Mountain to fill the East Sea.

古文：漳水出焉，东流注于河。
现代文：漳水从这座山发源，向东流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of the Huangshui River, which flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又东北百二十里，曰少山，其上有金玉，其下有铜。
现代文：再往东北一百二十里，是座少山，山上出产金属矿物和玉石，山下出产铜。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further to the northeast, there is a small mountain, the mountain produces metal minerals and jade, and the mountain produces copper.

古文：清漳之水出焉，东流注于浊漳之水。
现代文：清漳水从这座山发源，向东流入浊漳水。
English: The mountain is the source of the clear Surabaya water, which flows eastward into Surabaya.

古文：又东北二百里，曰锡山，其上多玉，其下有砥。
现代文：再往东北二百里，是座锡山，山上有丰富的玉石，山下出产磨石。
English: Two hundred miles further to the northeast is Mount Xishan. The mountain is rich in jade, and the lower part of the mountain produces grinding stones.

古文：牛首之水出焉，而东流注于滏水。
现代文：牛首水从这座山发源，然后向东流入滏水。
English: Niu Shou Shui originates from this mountain, and then flows eastward into the Yanshui River.

古文：又北二百里，曰景山，有美玉。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座景山，山上出产优良玉石。
English: Two hundred miles further north is Mount Zaqing, which produces fine jade.

古文：景水出焉，东南流注于海泽。
现代文：景水从这座山发源，向东南流入海泽。
English: The scenic waters originate from this mountain and flow southeast into the lake.

古文：又北百里，曰题首之山，有玉焉，多石，无水。
现代文：再往北一百里，是座题首山，这里出产玉石，也有许多石头，但没有水。
English: A hundred miles further north is the first mountain in the range, where jade is produced, and there are also many stones, but no water.

古文：又北百里，曰绣山，其上有玉、青碧，其木多栒，其草多芍药、芎藭。
现代文：再往北一百里，是座绣山，山上有玉石、青色碧玉，山中的树木大多是栒树，而草以芍药、芎最多。
English: A hundred miles further north, there is a embroidered mountain. There are jade and blue jasper on the mountain. Most of the trees in the mountain are eucalyptus trees, and the grasses are mostly eucalyptus and loquat.

古文：洧水出焉，而东流注于河，其中有鳠、黾。
现代文：洧水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河，水中有鳠鱼和黾蛙。
English: The mountain is the source of the brackish water that flows eastward into the Yellow River. The water is teeming with eels and frogs.

古文：又北百二十里，曰松山。
现代文：再往北一百二十里，是座松山。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further north is Mount Matsu.

古文：阳水出焉，东北流注于河。
现代文：阳水从这座山发源，向东北流入黄河。
English: Yangshui originates from this mountain and flows into the Yellow River in the northeast.

古文：又北百二十里，曰敦与之山，其上无草木，有金玉。
现代文：再往北一百二十里，是座敦与山，山上不生长花草树木、蕴藏有金属矿物和玉石。
English: A hundred and twenty miles further north, there are hills and mountains. There are no flowers or trees on the mountains, but there are metal minerals and jade.

古文：溹水出于其阳，而东流注于泰陆之水；泜水出于其阴，而东流注于彭水；槐水出焉，而东流注于泜泽。
现代文：溹水从敦与山的南面山脚流出，然后向东流入泰陆水；泜水从敦与山的北面山脚流出，然后向东流入彭水；槐水也从这座山发源，然后向东流入泜泽。
English: Surabaya water flows from the foot of the south face of Dun and Shan, and then flows eastward into Tai Lu Shui; Surabaya water flows from the foot of the north face of Dun and Shan, and then flows eastward into Peng Shui; Surabaya water also originates from this mountain, and then flows eastward into Heze.

古文：又北百七十里，曰柘山，其阳有金玉，其阴有铁。
现代文：再往北一百七十里，是座柘山，山南阳面出产金属矿物和玉石，山北阴面出产铁。
English: A hundred and seventy miles further north is Mount Lushan. The sunny side of the mountain produces metal minerals and jade, while the shady side of the mountain produces iron.

古文：历聚之水出焉，而北流注于洧水。
现代文：历聚水从这座山发源，然后向北流入洧水。
English: The source of the Lijiu River originates from this mountain, and then flows north into the Surabaya River.

古文：又北二百里，曰维龙之山，其上有碧玉，其阳有金，其阴有铁。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座维龙山，山上出产碧玉，山南阳面有金，山北阴面有铁。
English: Three hundred miles further north is Mount Veyron. The mountain produces jasper, the south of the mountain has gold in the sun and the north of the mountain has iron in the shade.

古文：肥水出焉，而东流注于皋泽，其中多礨石。
现代文：肥水从这座山发源，然后向东流入皋泽，水中有很多高耸的大石头。
English: Fertile water originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into Heze. There are many towering boulders in the water.

古文：敞铁之水出焉，而北于大泽。
现代文：敞铁水也从这座山发源，然后向北流入大泽。
English: Open water also originates from this mountain, and then flows north into Osawa.

古文：又北百八十里，曰白马之山，其阳多石玉，其阴多铁，多赤铜。
现代文：再往北一百八十里，是座白马山，山南阳面有很多石头和玉石，山北阴面有丰富的铁，还多出产黄铜。
English: A hundred and eighty miles further north is Mount Paima. The south side of the mountain has a lot of stone and jade in the sun, while the north side of the mountain is rich in iron and produces more brass.

古文：木马之水了出焉，而东北流注于虖沱。
现代文：木马水从这座山发源，然后向东北流入虖沱水。
English: The water of the Trojan Horse originates from this mountain, and then flows northeast into the Surabaya.

古文：又北二百里，曰空桑之山，无草木，冬夏有雪。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座空桑山，没有花草树木，冬天夏天都有雪。
English: Two hundred miles further north is the empty Mulberry Mountain, with no flowers or trees, and snow in winter and summer.

古文：空桑空桑之水出焉，东流注于虖沱。
现代文：空桑水从这座山发源，向东流入虖沱水。
English: Empty mulberry water flows from the source of this mountain and flows eastward into Surabaya.

古文：又北三百里，曰泰戏之山，无草木，多金玉。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座泰戏山，不生长花草树木，到处有金属矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further north, there is Mount Taixing, where flowers and trees do not grow, and there are metal minerals and jade everywhere.

古文：有兽焉，其状如羊，一角一目，目在耳后，其名曰䍶䍶，其鸣自訆。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的羊，却长着一只角一只眼睛，眼睛在耳朵的背后，名称是，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary sheep, but with a horn and an eye, the eye is behind the ear, the name is, the cry it emits is the pronunciation of its own name.

古文：虖沱之水出焉，而东流注于溇水。
现代文：虖沱水从这座山发源，然后向东流入溇水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into Surabaya.

古文：液女之水出于其阳，南流注于沁水。
现代文：液女水发源于这座山的南面，向南流入沁水。
English: The water originates from the southern side of the mountain and flows south into the Surabaya.

古文：又北三百里，曰石山，多藏金玉。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座石山，山中有丰富的金属矿物和玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further north is a rocky mountain, rich in metallic minerals and jade.

古文：濩濩之水出焉，而东流注于虖沱；鲜于之水出焉，而南流注于虖沱。
现代文：濩濩水从这座山发源，然后向东流入虖沱水；鲜于水也从这座山发源，然后向南流入虖沱水。
English: Surabaya water originates from this mountain and then flows east into Surabaya; fresh water also originates from this mountain and then flows south into Surabaya.

古文：又北二百里，曰童戎之山。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座童戎山。
English: Two hundred miles further north is Mount Za Tong Rong.

古文：皋涂之水出焉，而东流注于溇液水。
现代文：皋涂水从这座山发源，然后向东流入溇液水。
English: The mountain is the source of the cocoon-coated water, which then flows eastward into the cocoon water.

古文：又北三百里，曰高是之山。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座高是山。
English: Three hundred miles further north, there is a high mountain.

古文：滋水出焉，而南流注于虖沱。
现代文：滋水从这座山发源，然后向南流入虖沱水。
English: The mountain is the source of the Bishui River, which flows south into the Surabaya River.

古文：其木多棕，其草多条。
现代文：山中的树木大多是棕树，草大多是条草。
English: The trees in the mountains are mostly palm trees, and the grass is mostly grass.

古文：滱水出焉，东流注于河。
现代文：滱水也从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: Surabaya's water also originates from this mountain and then flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又北三百里，曰陆山，多美玉。
现代文：再往北三百里，是座陆山，有很多优良玉石。
English: Three hundred miles further north, there is a land mountain with a lot of fine jade.

古文：水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: Water springs from the mountain and flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又北二百里，曰沂山般水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：再往北二百里，是座沂山。般水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: Two hundred miles further north is Mount Lushan, from which the source of the sacred water flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：北百二十里，曰燕山，多婴石。
现代文：往北一百二十里，是座燕山，出产很多的婴石。
English: One hundred and twenty miles to the north is Yanshan Mountain, which produces a lot of baby rocks.

古文：燕水出焉，东流注于河。
现代文：燕水从这座山发源，向东流入黄河。
English: The mountain is the source of swallow water, which flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：又北山行五百里，水行五百里，至于饶山。
现代文：再往北走五百里山路，又走五百里水路，便到了饶山。
English: Further north, he walked five hundred miles on mountain roads and another five hundred miles on waterways to reach Mount Rao.

古文：是无草木，多瑶碧，其兽多橐駞，其鸟多鹠。
现代文：这座山不生长花草树木，到处是瑶、碧一类的美玉，山中的野兽大多是骆驼，而禽鸟大多是鸺鹠鸟。
English: This mountain does not grow flowers and trees, but is full of beautiful creatures such as dragonflies and peacocks. Most of the wild animals in the mountain are camels, and most of the birds are ostriches.

古文：历虢之水出焉，而东流注于河，其中有师鱼，食之杀人。
现代文：历虢水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河，水中有师鱼，人吃了它的肉就会中毒而死。
English: The Lishui River originates from this mountain, and then flows east into the Yellow River. There is a fish in the water, and if you eat its meat, you will be poisoned and die.

古文：又北四百里，曰乾山，无草木，其阳有金玉，其阴有铁而无水。
现代文：再往北四百里，是座乾山，没有花草树木，山南阳面蕴藏着金属矿物和玉石，山北阴面蕴藏着铁，但没有水流。
English: Four hundred miles further north, there is a dry mountain, without flowers, plants or trees. The sunny side of the south side of the mountain contains metal minerals and jade, and the shady side of the north side of the mountain contains iron, but there is no water flow.

古文：有兽焉，其状如牛而三足，其名曰獂，其鸣自詨。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像普通的牛却长着三只脚，名称是豲，它发出的叫声便是自身名称的读音。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like an ordinary cow but with three legs. Its name is the baboon, and the call it emits is the pronunciation of its name.

古文：又北五百里，曰伦山。
现代文：再往北五百里，是座伦山。
English: Five hundred miles further north is Mount Zalun.

古文：伦水出焉，而东流注于河。
现代文：伦水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河。
English: The Yellow River originates from this mountain and flows eastward into the Yellow River.

古文：有兽焉，其状如麋，其川在尾上，其名曰罴。
现代文：山中有一种野兽，形状像麋鹿，肛门却长在尾巴上面，名称是罴九。
English: There is a beast in the mountains, shaped like a moose, but with an anus on top of its tail. It's called the Nine-Eyed Raven.

古文：又北五百里，曰碣石之山。
现代文：再往北五百里，是座碣石山。
English: Five hundred miles further north is Mount Zao.

古文：绳水出焉，而东流注于河，其中多蒲夷之鱼。
现代文：绳水从这座山发源，然后向东流入黄河，水中有很多蒲夷鱼。
English: The water of the rope originates from this mountain, and then flows into the Yellow River to the east. There are a lot of fish in the water.

古文：基上有玉，其下多青碧。
现代文：这座山上出产玉石，山下还有很多青石碧玉。
English: This mountain produces jade, and there are many bluestone jasper under the mountain.

古文：又北水行五百里，至于雁门之山，无草木。
现代文：再往北行五百里水路，便到了雁门山，这里没有花草树木。
English: Further north along the five-hundred-mile waterway, they came to Yanmen Mountain, where there are no flowers or trees.

古文：又北水行四百里，至于泰泽。
现代文：再往北行四百里水路，便到了泰泽。
English: Four hundred miles further north along the waterway, we arrived at Taizé.

古文：其中有山焉，曰帝都之山，广员百里，无草木，有金玉。
现代文：在泰泽中屹立着一座山，叫做帝都山，方圆一百里，不生长花草树木，有金属矿物和玉石。
English: In the middle of Taizé, there is a mountain called Mount Dedusan. It is a hundred miles in circumference and does not grow flowers, plants or trees. It has metal, minerals and jade.

古文：又北五百里，曰錞于毋逢之山，北望鸡号之山，其风如䬅。
现代文：再往北五百里，是座錞于毋逢山，从山上向北可以望见鸡号山，从那里吹出的风如强劲的风。
English: Five hundred miles further north, is the seat of the Bifan Mountain. From the mountain to the north, you can see the Jiguo Mountain, from where the wind blows like a strong wind.

古文：西望幽都之山，浴水出焉。
现代文：从錞于毋逢山向西可以望见幽都山，浴水从那里流出。
English: From the west side of the mountain, Yudu Mountain can be seen, and the bath water flows from there.

古文：是有朋蛇，赤首白身，其音如牛，见则其邑大旱。
现代文：这座幽都山中有一种大蛇，红色的脑袋白色的身子，发出的声音如同牛叫，在哪个地方出现那里就会有大旱灾。
English: There is a kind of big snake in this quiet mountain, with a red head and a white body, and the sound it makes is like a cow mooing. Wherever it appears, there will be a major drought.

古文：凡北次三经之首，自太行之山以至于无逢之山，凡四十六山，万二千三百五十里。
现代文：总计北方第三列山系之首尾，自太行山起到无逢山止，一共四十六座山，途经一万二千三百五十里。
English: The total length of the third line of mountains in the north, from Taihang Mountain to the end of the mountain range, is a total of 46 mountains, covering 12,350 miles.

古文：其神状皆马身而人面者廿神。
现代文：其中有二十座山山神的形状都是马一样的身子而人一样的面孔。
English: Among them, there are twenty deities with horse-like bodies and human-like faces.

古文：其祠之，皆用一藻茝瘗之。
现代文：祭祀这些山神：都是把用作祭品的藻和茝之类的香草埋入地下。
English: Sacrifices are made to these mountain deities: algae and herbs such as reeds are buried in the ground as offerings.

古文：其十四神状皆彘身而载玉。
现代文：另外十四座山山神的形状是猪一样的身子却佩戴着玉制饰品。
English: Another fourteen deities have the shape of a pig, but wear jade ornaments.

古文：其祠之，皆玉，不瘗。
现代文：祭祀这些山神：都用祀神的玉器，不埋入地下。
English: Sacrifices to these mountain gods: they are all made with jade vessels to worship the gods, and are not buried underground.

古文：其十神状皆彘身而八足蛇尾。其祠之，皆用一壁瘗之。
现代文：还有十座山山神的形状都是猪一样的身子却长着八只脚和蛇一样的尾巴，祭祀这些山神：用一块玉壁祭祀后埋入地下。
English: There are also ten mountain deities in the shape of a pig with eight legs and a snake-like tail. These deities are worshipped by sacrificing a piece of jade wall and burying it underground.

古文：大凡四十四神，皆用稌糈米祠之。
现代文：总共四十四个山神，都要用精米来祭祀。
English: A total of forty-four mountain gods are to be sacrificed with polished rice.

古文：此皆不火食。右北经之山志，凡八十七山，二万三千二百三十里。
现代文：以上是北方经历之山的记录，总共八十七座山，二万三千二百三十里。
English: The above is a record of the mountains experienced in the north, a total of eighty-seven mountains, twenty-three thousand two hundred thirty miles.

