古文：万历戊子，杭郡北门外有居民，年望六而丧妻。二子妇皆美，而事翁皆孝敬。
现代文：原文明朝万历戊子年间，杭州北门外有个老头，年纪快六十岁，老伴已经去世，两个儿子都已经娶妻，媳妇们不仅貌美，而且对他也非常孝顺。
English: During the Wanli and Wuzi Dynasties, there was an old man outside the North Gate of Hangzhou. He was nearly sixty years old. His wife had passed away, his two sons had married, and his daughters-in-law were not only beautiful, but also very filial to him.

古文：一日忽有老妪立于门，自晨至午，若有期待而不至者。
现代文：一天，有位老太太站在他家门口，从早晨一直站到中午，好像在等什么人，而对方好像一直没有来。
English: One day, an old lady stood in front of his house from morning until noon, as if she was waiting for someone, but he never came.

古文：翁出入数次。怜其久立，命二子妇询其故，妇曰： 吾子忤逆，将诉之官，期姐子同往，久候不来，腹且枵矣。 
现代文：老头出入门口好多次，可怜老太太站立太久，于是就让两个儿媳妇去问问老太太怎么回事。老太太说： 我儿子不孝顺，我要到官府告他，我是在这里等我姐姐的孩子和我一起去官府，没有想到他一直没有来，我的肚子都有些饿了。 
English: The old man went in and out of the doorway several times, and felt sorry for the old lady for standing there for so long. So he asked his two daughters-in-law to ask the old lady what was going on. The old lady said, "My son is not being dutiful, I want to go to the government office to report him. I'm here waiting for my sister's child to go with me to the government office. I didn't expect him not to come. My stomach is a little hungry."

古文：子妇怜而饭之，言论甚相惬，至暮，期者不来，因留之宿，一住旬日。
现代文：媳妇们同情老太太，就请她进屋吃饭，彼此交谈得十分愉快，一直到晚上，等待的人一直没有来，于是媳妇们就留老太太在家中过夜。
English: The daughters-in-law took pity on the old lady and invited her into the house for dinner. They had a very pleasant conversation and waited until the evening, when no one came. So the daughters-in-law left the old lady at home to spend the night.

古文：凡子妇操作，悉代其劳，而女工尤精。子妇唯恐其去也，谓妪无夫而子不孝，茕茕无归，力劝翁娶之，翁乃与合。
现代文：老太太住了十天，凡是日常家务，都是老太太一手料理，女工尤其精巧，老头的两位媳妇都害怕老太太离去，她们认为老太太既然老伴过世，儿子又不孝顺，一个人孤苦无依，于是极力劝公公娶这个老太太为妻。
English: The old lady stayed for ten days. All the daily housework was done by the old lady, and the maid was especially skillful. The old man's two daughters-in-law were afraid that the old lady would leave. They thought that since the old lady's wife had passed away and her son was not a filial son, she was all alone, so they tried their best to persuade the grandfather-in-law to marry the old lady.

古文：又旬余，妪之子与姐子始寻觅而来，拜跪告罪，妪犹厉詈不已，翁解之，乃留饮。其人即拜翁为继父，喜母有所托也。
现代文：于是两个人成婚。又过了十多天，才看到老太太的儿子和姐姐的孩子寻来，见了老太太之后就跪在地上认罪，老太太仍然不停地大声怒骂，老头劝慰老太太，于是邀请老太太的儿子留下来喝酒，老太太的儿子拜老头为继父，庆幸母亲往后日子有了个依靠。
English: So the two got married. It took more than ten days to find the old lady's son and her sister's child. After seeing the old lady, he knelt on the ground and confessed. The old lady still kept shouting and cursing. The old man consoled the old lady and invited the old lady's son to stay and drink. The old lady's son called the old man his stepfather and was glad that his mother had someone to rely on in the future.

古文：如此往来三月，一日妪之孙来，请翁一门，云已行聘，妪曰： 子妇来何容易，吾与翁及两郎君来耳。 
现代文：两家往来三个月之后，一天，老太太的孙子来邀请老头一家去喝订婚酒，老太太说： 两个媳妇哪能随便走开呢，我和老伴儿还有他两个儿子去吧。 
English: After the two families had been in contact for three months, one day, the old lady's grandson came to invite the old man's family to drink the betrothal wine. The old lady said, "Two daughters-in-law can't just walk away. I'll go with my wife and her two sons."

古文：往则醉而返。
现代文：一行人喝得醉醺醺地才回来。
English: The group came back very drunk.

古文：又月余，其孙复来请云： 某日毕姻，必求二姆同降。 
现代文：又过了一个多月，老太太的孙子又前来邀请说： 某日是我完婚的大喜日子，二位婶婶务必要来喝杯喜酒。 
English: More than a month later, the old lady's grandson came to invite her again, saying, "One day, it will be a great day for me to get married. The two aunts must come and have a celebratory drink."

古文：子妇允其请，且多贷衣饰，盛妆而往，妪子妇出迎，面黄如病者，日将晡，妪子请二姆迎亲，且曰： 乡间风俗若是耳。 
现代文：老头的媳妇笑着答应了。等到大喜之日，老头的媳妇们向亲友借了很多首饰，盛妆前往，老太太的儿媳妇站在门口迎接她们，面色青黄好像生病一样。快傍晚，老太太的儿子请两位媳妇去迎接新妇，并且说： 这是我们这里的习俗。 
English: The old man's daughter-in-law smiled and agreed. On the day of the big day, the old man's daughters-in-law borrowed a lot of jewelry from relatives and friends and went to the wedding with a lot of makeup. The old woman's daughter-in-law stood at the door to meet them, looking pale and yellow as if she were ill. Towards evening, the old woman's son invited the two daughters-in-law to meet the bride and said: "This is our custom here."

古文：妪佯曰： 汝妻虽病，今日称姑矣，何以不自往迎，而烦二位乎？ 
现代文：旁边的老太太故意对儿子说： 你的媳妇儿虽然有病在身，但是今天要做婆婆了，怎么能不亲自迎接新嫁娘过门，而要烦劳你这两位弟妹呢？ 
English: The old lady next to her deliberately said to her son: Although your daughter-in-law is ill, she is going to be a mother-in-law today. How could she not greet the bride-to-be in person, but bother you two brothers and sisters?

古文：其子曰： 规模不雅，无以取重。既来此，何惜一往？ 
现代文：老太太的儿子说： 她病恹恹的样子实在难看，怕亲家看了笑话，两位弟妹既然已经来了，怎么会吝惜前往呢？ 
English: The old lady's son said, "Her sickly appearance is really ugly. I'm afraid my family will see the joke. Since her two younger brothers and sisters have already come, why would they begrudge going?

古文：妪乃许之，于是妪与病妇及二子妇俱下船去，更余不返，妪子假出觇，孙又继之，皆去矣。
现代文：老太太才故作勉强地答应了。于是老太太和生病的媳妇再加上老头的两位媳妇，一同下船迎娶新嫁娘。等候多时仍然看不到她们回来，老太太的儿子又假装下船打探，接着老太太的孙子也借口查探，都走了。
English: The old lady reluctantly agreed. So the old lady and her sick daughter-in-law, together with the old man's two daughters-in-law, got off the ship to marry the bride. After waiting for a long time, they still did not see them return. The old lady's son pretended to get off the ship to investigate, and then the old lady's grandson also went under the pretext of investigating.

古文：及天明，遍觅无踪，访之房主，则云： 五六月前来租房住，不知其故。 
现代文：第二天天亮后，老头父子四处寻找，也没有看到他们的踪影，询问屋主，屋主说： 他们在五六个月前搬来租下这所屋子，但是不清楚他们的来历。 
English: After the dawn of the next day, the old man and his son searched everywhere, but did not see any trace of them. They asked the owner of the house, who said: They moved in and rented this house five or six months ago, but I don't know where they came from.

古文：翁父子怅怅而归，亲友来取衣饰，倾囊偿之，而二妇家来觅女不得，讼之官，翁与子恨极，因自尽。
现代文：老头父子只好怅然回去了，过了几天，亲友们纷纷来索要被借走的衣服、首饰，老头父子只好拿出所有的积蓄来偿还，而两个媳妇的娘家，也因为女儿失踪，到官府去控告老头父子，老头悔恨不已，三个人竟然因此自杀身亡。
English: The old man and his son had no choice but to go back immediately. A few days later, relatives and friends came to demand the borrowed clothes and jewelry. The old man and his son had to take out all their savings to repay them, and the daughters of the two daughters-in-law also went to the government office to sue the old man and his son because their daughter was missing. The old man was full of remorse, and three people actually committed suicide because of this.

