古文：《元城先生语录》云：东坡御史狱，张安道致仕在南京，上书救之，欲附南京递进，府官不敢受，乃令其子恕至登闻鼓院投进。
现代文：原文《元城先生语录》中说：苏轼被御史弹劾下狱以后，张安道退休闲居在南京，想要为苏东坡上书求情，本来想要就近在南京呈递奏折，可是南京官府不敢受理，于是张安道就让儿子张恕到登闻鼓院递奏本。
English: The original "Quotation of Mr. Yuancheng" said: After Su Shi was impeached and sent to prison, Zhang Ando retired and lived idly in Nanjing. He wanted to write a letter to intercede for Su Dongpo. Originally, he wanted to submit a transcript in Nanjing, but the Nanjing government did not dare to accept it. So Zhang Ando asked his son Zhang Shun to submit a transcript to the Dengwen Drum School.

古文：恕徘徊不敢投。
现代文：但是张恕在登闻鼓院门口徘徊了很久后，仍然不敢投递。
English: But Zhang Shou still did not dare to deliver it after lingering for a long time at the entrance of the Dengwen Drum School.

古文：久之，东坡出狱。其后东坡见其副本，因吐舌色动。人问其故，东坡不答。
现代文：过了一段时间，苏东坡出狱，当他看到当年张安道为他求情的奏章副本时，不禁吐着舌头脸色大变，众人问他，他不回答。
English: After a period of time, Su Dongpo was released from prison. When he saw the copy of the transcript of Zhang Andao's plea for him that year, he couldn't help but spit out his tongue and his face changed dramatically. People asked him, but he didn't answer.

古文：后子由见之，曰： 宜召兄之吐舌也，此事正得张恕力! 
现代文：直到苏辙也看了副本才说： 难怪哥哥要吐舌头了。他能够平安出狱，实在要感谢张恕的胆小。 
English: It wasn't until Su Ruz saw the copy that he said, "No wonder my brother is spitting out his tongue. He was able to get out of prison safely, and I really have to thank Zhang Xuan's cowardice."

古文：仆曰： 何谓也？ 子由曰： 独不见郑昌之救盖宽饶乎？
现代文：我问他原因，子由说： 你难道没有听说过郑昌为了营救盖宽饶而获罪的事吗？
English: I asked him why, and Ziyu said, "Haven't you heard that Zheng Chang was convicted in order to rescue Gaidong?"

古文：疏云： 上无许、史之属，下无金、张之托 ，此语正是激宣帝之怒耳!且宽饶何罪？
现代文：郑昌在给汉宣帝上奏本中说： 盖宽饶在朝堂上没有许姓、史姓的皇戚，在野也没有金、张等有力权贵。 这些话正激怒了宣帝，盖宽饶有什么罪呢？
English: In his report to Emperor Xuan of Han, Zheng Chang said: Gai Guangrao did not have any imperial relatives with surnames such as Xu or Shi in the imperial court, nor did he have any powerful dignitaries such as Jin or Zhang in the field. These words enraged Emperor Xuan, so what was Gai Guangrao's crime?

古文：正以犯许、史辈得祸，今再讦之，是益其怒也。
现代文：他的罪就是冒犯了许、史等人，郑昌再对许、史等人的恃贵骄纵进行讥讽，不是更加火上加油了吗？
English: His crime was to offend Xu, Shi and others. Zheng Chang then ridiculed the arrogance of Xu, Shi and others. Didn't he add more fuel to the fire?

古文：今东坡亦无罪，独以名太高，与朝廷争胜耳。
现代文：今天东坡获罪下狱就是因为他名气太大了，甚至超过了朝廷，而张安道却说： 东坡确实是个天下奇才! 
English: Today, Dongpo was sentenced to prison because his fame was too great, even surpassing that of the imperial court, but Zhang Andao said: Dongpo is indeed a world-class genius!

古文：仆曰： 然则尔时救东坡者，宜为何说？ 
现代文：这怎么能不再次激怒皇上呢？ 我说： 那当时如果想要救东坡先生应该如何说呢？ 
English: How could this not provoke the Emperor's anger again? I said: What should I have said at that time if I wanted to save Mr. Dongpo?

古文：子由曰： 但言本朝未尝杀士大夫，今乃是陛下开端，后世子孙必援陛下以为例，神宗好名而畏义，疑可以止之。 
现代文：苏辙说： 只能说大宋自从立朝以来，从来没有杀过士大夫，而今陛下如果杀了东坡就会开此恶例了，日后子孙万代必会援此例。神宗看重好名声而且怕后人议论，或许会因此而改变心意。 
English: Su Rong said: It can only be said that the Great Song Dynasty has never killed a scholar-doctor since the founding of the dynasty, and now if His Majesty kills Dongpo, it will set a bad example, and future generations will certainly support this example. Shenzong values good reputation and is afraid of discussion by future generations, and may change his mind because of this.

古文：苏辙此条正堪为李纲荐张所于黄潜善语参看。
现代文：这段故事可以和前篇的李纲说服黄潜善任用张所的说辞相互对照起来看。
English: This part of the story can be contrasted with the story of Li Gangru persuading Huang Qianzen to appoint Zhang So in the previous chapter.

