古文：孝灵皇帝讳宏，肃宗玄孙也。
现代文：孝灵皇帝刘宏，肃宗玄孙。
English: Xiaoling Emperor Liu Hong, Su Zong's great-great-grandson.

古文：曾祖河间孝王开，祖淑，父苌。
现代文：曾祖河间孝王刘开，祖父刘淑，父亲刘苌。
English: Liu Kai, the great-great-grandfather, Liu Shu, the grandfather, and Liu Yao, the father.

古文：世封解渎亭侯，帝袭侯爵。
现代文：祖父、父亲都封解渎亭侯，刘宏袭侯爵。
English: His grandfather and father were both given the title of marquis, and Liu Hongyi became a marquis.

古文：母董夫人。
现代文：母董夫人。
English: My mother, Mrs. Dong.

古文：桓帝崩，无子，皇太后与父城门校尉窦武定策禁中，使守光禄大夫刘儵持节，将左右羽林至河间奉迎。
现代文：桓帝死后，无子，皇太后窦氏与其父城门校尉窦武定策宫中，使代理光禄大夫刘矹持符节，率领左右羽林军至河间迎接刘宏。
English: After the death of Emperor Huan, there was no son, so the Empress Dowager Dou and her father, the castle gate captain Dou Wuding, went to the palace to have Liu Hong, the acting doctor of Guanglu, hold the festival and lead the left and right Uebayashi troops to meet Liu Hong.

古文：建宁元年春正月壬午，城门校尉窦武为大将军。
现代文：建宁元年春正月初三，任城门校尉窦武为大将军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jianning, Dou Wu, the captain of the castle gate, became the general.

古文：己亥，帝到夏门亭，使窦武持节，以王青盖车迎入殿中。
现代文：二十日，刘宏来到洛阳夏门亭，派窦武持符节，用王青盖车迎自己入殿中。
English: On the 20th, Liu Hong came to Luoyang Summer Gate Pavilion, sent Dou Wu to hold the festival, and welcomed himself into the hall with Wang Qingge car.

古文：庚子，即皇帝位，年十二。
现代文：二十一日，即皇帝位，年十二。
English: On the twenty-first day of the twelfth year of his reign.

古文：改元建宁。
现代文：改元建宁。
English: Renamed to Jianning.

古文：以前太尉陈蕃为太傅，与窦武及司徒胡广参录尚书事。
现代文：任前太尉陈蕃为太傅，与窦武及司徒胡广参与总领尚书事。
English: Former First Lieutenant Chen Hao was the Taifu, and he and Dou Wu and Sitoru Hu Guang participated in the general leadership of Shang Shuxi.

古文：使护羌校尉段颎讨先零羌。
现代文：派护羌校尉段赹讨伐先零羌。
English: He sent his bodyguard, Lieutenant Duan, to fight the attackers.

古文：二月辛酉，葬孝桓皇帝于宣陵，庙曰威宗。
现代文：二月十三日，葬孝桓皇帝于宣陵，庙号为威宗。
English: On February 13th, Emperor Xiaokuan was buried in the Xuanling Mausoleum, and the temple's name was changed to Weizong.

古文：庚午，谒高庙。
现代文：二十二日，拜谒高庙。
English: On the 22nd, he paid homage to the Gao Temple.

古文：辛未，谒世祖庙。
现代文：二十三日，拜谒世祖庙。
English: On the 23rd, the ancestral temple was built.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：赐民爵及帛各有差。
现代文：赐民爵位及帛分别不等。
English: The conferral of knighthoods and damehoods varied.

古文：段颎大破先零羌于逢义山。
现代文：段颎在逢义山大败先零羌。
English: Duan Yu was defeated in Fengyi Mountain.

古文：闰月甲午，追尊皇祖为孝元皇，夫人夏氏为孝元皇后，考为孝仁皇，夫人董氏为慎园贵人。
现代文：闰三月甲午，追尊皇祖为孝元皇，夫人夏氏为孝元皇后，父为孝仁皇，夫人董氏为慎园贵人。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the third month of the leap year, the emperor's ancestor was Emperor Xia, his wife, Empress Xia, was Empress Xia, his father was Emperor Xiaoren, and his wife, Lady Dong, was Lady Shanyuan.

古文：夏四月戊辰，大尉周景薨。
现代文：夏季四月戊辰，太尉周景逝世。
English: In the summer of April, Lieutenant Zhou Jing passed away.

古文：司空宣酆免，长乐卫尉王畅为司空。
现代文：司空宣邦免职，任长乐卫尉为司空。
English: Sifu Xuanbang was relieved of his duties, and Chao Le Wei was appointed as Sifu.

古文：五月丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：诏公卿以下各上封事，及郡国守、相举有道之士各一人；又故刺史、二千石清高有遗惠、为众所归者，皆诣公车。
现代文：诏令公卿以下各秘密上书对国政提出批评建议，检举揭发，及郡国守相举荐有道人士各一人；又以前的刺史、二千石清高有遗惠，为群众所拥护的，都到公车门。
English: Following the edict of the emperor, the court nobles secretly submitted a letter to criticize and suggest the national politics, and the county governors recommended one person each; and the previous history, the 2,000-koku Qing Gao, had a legacy, and those who were supported by the masses went to the bus gate.

古文：太中大夫刘矩为太尉。
现代文：任太中大夫刘矩为太尉。
English: Liu Rui, who was appointed as the Second Lieutenant, was promoted to the rank of First Lieutenant.

古文：六月，京师雨水。
现代文：六月，京师雨水多。
English: In June, there is a lot of rain in Kyoto.

古文：秋七月，破羌将军段颎复破先零羌于泾阳。
现代文：秋季七月，破羌将军段赹在泾阳再度打败先零羌。
English: In the autumn of July, the defeated general Duan Yu rose up in Fenyang and once again defeated Zizhi Yu.

古文：八月，司空王畅免，宗正刘宠为司空。
现代文：八月，司空王畅免职，任宗正刘宠为司空。
English: In August, Sikyong Wang Chang was relieved of his duties, and Zongzheng Liu Jie was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：九月辛亥，中常侍曹节矫诏诛太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武及尚书令尹勋、侍中刘瑜、屯骑校尉冯述，皆夷其族。
现代文：九月初七，中常侍曹节诈称皇帝诏令诛杀太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武及尚书令尹勋、侍中刘瑜、屯骑校尉冯述，他们的家族都遭到诛灭。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Cao Jie, a regular attendant of the Central Military Commission, falsely claimed that the emperor had ordered the assassination of Grand Master Chen Xi, General Dou Wu, General Yin Xun, Vice Admiral Liu Yu, and Colonel Feng Shu, and that their families had all been exterminated.

古文：皇太后迁于南宫。
现代文：皇太后迁于南宫。
English: The Empress Dowager moved to the South Palace.

古文：司徒胡广为太傅，隶尚书事。
现代文：任司徒胡广为太傅，总领尚书事。
English: He appointed the scholar Hu Guang as Taifu, and Shang Shujie as the leader.

古文：司空刘宠为司徒，大鸿胪许栩为司空。
现代文：任司空刘宠为司徒，任大鸿胪许栩为司空。
English: Liu Jie, the Secretary of the Air Force, was appointed as the instructor, and Taihong Xuchang was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：冬十月甲辰晦，日有食之。令天下系囚罪未决入缣赎，各有差。
现代文：冬季十月三十日，日蚀。命令天下在押囚犯还没有判决的入缣赎罪，缣数分别不等。
English: On the 30th day of the 10th month in winter, the sun eclipsed, and the world's prisoners who had not yet been sentenced were ordered to enter the grave to atone for their sins. The number of graves varied.

古文：十一月，太尉刘矩免，太仆沛国闻人袭为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉刘矩免职，任沛国闻人袭为太尉。
English: In November, Lieutenant Liu Rui was relieved of his duties, and Lieutenant Pei Guowen was appointed as his successor.

古文：十二月，鲜卑及濊貊寇幽、并二州。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑及濊貊寇掠幽并二州。
English: In December, the Xianbei and the Qianqiao invaded and annexed the two states.

古文：二年春正月丁丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春季正月丁丑，大赦天下。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the second year of spring, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：三月乙巳，尊慎园董贵人为孝仁皇后。
现代文：三月初三，尊慎园董贵人为孝仁皇后。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Zonshenyuan Dong Gui was crowned as the Empress of Xiaojin.

古文：夏四月癸巳，大风，雨雹。
现代文：夏季四月二十二日，刮大风，落冰雹。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, there was a strong wind and hail.

古文：诏公卿以下各上封事。
现代文：诏令公卿以下各秘密上书对国事批评建议，检举揭发。
English: The Emperor ordered the court nobles and their subordinates to secretly submit criticisms and suggestions on state affairs, and to report and expose them.

古文：五月，大尉闻人袭罢，司空许栩免。
现代文：五月，太尉闻人袭罢去，司空许栩免职。
English: In May, Taifu Wen was ousted, and Sikuo Xu was relieved of his duties.

古文：六月，司徒刘宠为太尉，太常许训为司徒，太仆长沙刘嚣为司空。
现代文：六月，任司徒刘宠为太尉，任太常许训为司徒，任太仆长沙刘嚣为司空。
English: In June, Liu Jie, who had been appointed as a tutor, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and Changsha Liu Han, who had been appointed as a servant, was promoted to the rank of sous-lieutenant.

古文：秋七月，破羌将军段颎大破先零羌于射虎塞外谷。
现代文：秋季七月，破羌将军段赹在射虎塞外谷大败先零羌，东羌全部平息。
English: In the autumn of July, the defeated general Duan Yu suffered a crushing defeat in the valley outside Shigose, and the Eastern Wei was completely subdued.

古文：东羌悉平。九月，江夏蛮叛，州郡讨平之。
现代文：九月，江夏蛮叛，州郡讨伐平息。
English: In September, Jiangxia rebelled violently, and the state and county campaigns subsided.

古文：丹阳山越贼围太守陈夤，夤击破之。
现代文：丹阳山越贼围太守陈夤，陈夤把他们打败。
English: The bandits of Danyang Mountain encircled Chen Yao, and Chen Yao defeated them.

古文：冬十月丁亥，中常侍侯览讽有司奏前司空虞放、太仆杜密、长乐少府李膺、司隶校尉朱宇、颍川太守巴肃、沛相荀昱、河内太守魏朗、山阳太守翟超皆为钩党，下狱，死者百余人，妻子徙边，诸附从者锢及五属。
现代文：冬季十月十九日，中常侍侯览指使管事人参奏前司空虞放、太仆杜密、长乐少府李膺、司隶校尉朱寓、颍川太守巴肃、沛相荀昱、河内太守魏朗、山阳太守翟超都是相互牵引的党羽，逮捕下狱，死者百余人，妻子遣送到边远地区，凡是有附带从属关系的，五服以内的亲人都被监禁。
English: In the winter of October 19th, the middle-ranking attendant, Hou Xiang, ordered the steward to attend the former Sikyu Fang, the eunuch Du Mi, the Changle minor prefect Li Yao, the sergeant-major Zhu Yue, the Shichuan eunuch Baxu, Pei Xiang Yao, the Hanoi eunuch Wei Lang, and the Sanyang eunuch Juchao, all of whom were party members who were pulling each other. They were arrested and sent to prison. More than a hundred people died, and their wives were sent to remote areas. Anyone who had an incidental affiliation, and their relatives within five

古文：制诏州郡大举钩党，于是天下豪桀及儒学行义者，一切结为党人。
现代文：皇帝诏令州郡大规模地检举揭发党羽，于是天下豪杰及儒学行义的人，一概被纠结成了党人。
English: The emperor ordered the prefectures and counties to carry out large-scale investigations to expose party members, so the world's heroes and those who practiced Confucianism were all entangled as party members.

古文：戊戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，出现了日食。
English: On the 30th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月，太尉刘宠免，太仆郭禧为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉刘宠免职，任太仆郭禧为太尉。
English: In November, Second Lieutenant Liu Cai was relieved of his duties, and his manservant Guo Xie was appointed Second Lieutenant.

古文：鲜卑寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠并州。
English: The newly conquered provinces were annexed by the Berber raiders.

古文：是岁，长乐太仆曹节为车骑将军，百余日罢。
现代文：这一年，长乐太仆曹节为车骑将军，百余日罢去。
English: In this year, Cao Jie, a servant of Changle Taifu, became the general of chariot and cavalry for more than a hundred days.

古文：三年春正月，河内人妇食夫，河南人夫食妇。
现代文：三年春正月，河内有妻子吃丈夫，河南有丈夫吃妻子。
English: In the first month of the third year of Spring, a wife ate her husband in Hanoi, and a husband ate his wife in Henan.

古文：三月丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：三月三十日，出现了日食。
English: On March 30th, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏四月，太尉郭禧罢，太中大夫闻人袭为太尉。
现代文：夏季四月，太尉郭禧罢免，任太中大夫闻人袭为太尉。
English: In the summer of April, Lieutenant Guo Xiyi was removed from his post and appointed as the Second Lieutenant.

古文：秋七月，司空刘嚣罢。
现代文：秋季七月，司空刘嚣罢免。
English: In the autumn of July, Liu Ren, Secretary of the Communist Party of China, was dismissed.

古文：八月，大鸿胪桥玄为司空。
现代文：八月，任大鸿胪桥玄为司空。
English: In August, he was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：九月，执金吾董宠下狱死。
现代文：九月，执金吾董宠监死狱中。
English: In September, the executor of the money, Dong Zhaojun, died in prison.

古文：冬，济南贼起，攻东平陵。
现代文：冬季，济南出现贼寇，攻打东平陵。
English: In winter, bandits appeared in Jinan and attacked Dongpingling Mausoleum.

古文：郁林乌浒民相率内属。
现代文：郁林乌浒民众先后互相偕同归附内地。
English: The people of Yulin and Wuxi have successively supported each other to join the mainland.

古文：四年春正月甲子，帝加元服，大赦天下。
现代文：四年春季正月初三，帝加冠于首，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, Diga crowned his head and pardoned the world.

古文：赐公卿以下各有差，唯党人不赦。
现代文：赐公卿以下分别不等，只有党人不赦。
English: The bestowal of the title of court noble and below varies, and only party members are not pardoned.

古文：二月癸卯，地震，海水溢，河水清。
现代文：二月十三日，发生地震，海水漫溢，黄河水清。
English: On February 13, an earthquake occurred, seawater overflowed, and the Yellow River became clear.

古文：三月辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月辛酉朔日，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs on the first day of spring in March.

古文：太尉闻人袭免，太仆李咸为太尉。
现代文：太尉闻人袭免职，任太仆李咸为太尉。
English: The captain, Wen, was dismissed, and his manservant, Li Xian, was appointed captain.

古文：诏公卿至六百石各上封事。
现代文：诏令公卿至六百石各秘密上书，提批评建议，检举揭发。
English: The emperor ordered the court nobles of up to 600 koku each to secretly submit a letter, make criticism and suggestions, and report and expose.

古文：大疫，使中谒者巡行致医药。
现代文：大发病疫，使中谒者巡视送医药。
English: A large-scale epidemic has caused the sick to send medicine.

古文：司徒许训免，司空桥玄为司徒。
现代文：司徒许训免，任司空桥玄为司徒。
English: He was relieved of his duties as an instructor, and was replaced as an instructor by Kuo Qiao Xuan.

古文：夏四月，太常来艳为司空。
现代文：夏季四月，任太常来艳为司空。
English: In the summer of April, Ren Taojian came to perform as Siku.

古文：五月，河东地裂，雨雹，山水暴出。
现代文：五月，河东地裂，落下冰雹，山水暴出。
English: In May, the ground cracked in Hedong, hailstones fell, and landslides occurred.

古文：秋七月，司空来艳免。
现代文：秋季七月，司空来艳免职。
English: In the autumn of July, Sifu Laiyan was relieved of duty.

古文：癸丑，立贵人宋氏为皇后。
现代文：癸丑，立贵人宋氏为皇后。
English: Ugly as it is, the noble Song clan was made the empress.

古文：司徒桥玄免。
现代文：司徒桥玄被罢免。
English: Sutohashi Hyon was removed from office.

古文：太常宗俱为司空，前司空许栩为司徒。
现代文：任太常宗俱为司空，任前司空许栩为司徒。
English: Ren Taizhong Zongqu was the steward, and the former steward Xu Luchu was the steward.

古文：冬，鲜卑寇并州。
现代文：冬季，鲜卑寇劫掠并州。
English: In winter, the Xianbei bandits pillaged and annexed the prefecture.

古文：熹平元年春三月壬戌，太傅胡广薨。
现代文：熹平元年春三月初八，太傅胡广逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the third month in the spring of the first year of Xingping, Tai Fu Hu Guang passed away.

古文：夏五月己巳，大赦天下，改元熹平。
现代文：夏季五月十六日，大赦天下，改元熹平。
English: On the 16th day of the 5th month of the summer, the country was amnestied and the era was changed to Heping.

古文：长乐太仆侯览有罪，自杀。
现代文：长乐太仆侯览有罪，自杀。
English: Changle servant Houchen was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：六月，京师雨水。
现代文：六月，京师雨水多。
English: In June, there is a lot of rain in Kyoto.

古文：癸巳，皇太后窦氏崩。
现代文：初十，皇太后窦氏逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Empress Dowager Dou died.

古文：秋七月甲寅，葬桓思皇后。
现代文：秋季七月初二，葬桓思皇后。
English: In autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, Empress Kansei was buried.

古文：宦官讽司隶校尉段颎捕系太学诸生千余人。
现代文：宦官指使司隶校尉段赹逮捕太学诸生千余人。
English: The eunuch ordered the captain of the Sili school to arrest more than a thousand people from Taigaku.

古文：冬十月，渤海王悝被诬谋反，丁亥，悝及妻子皆自杀。
现代文：冬季十月，勃海王刘悝被诬谋反，初六，刘悝及妻子都自杀。
English: In the winter of October, Bo Hai King Liu Ye was falsely plotted against. On the sixth day of the first month, Liu Ye and his wife both committed suicide.

古文：十一月，会稽人许生自称 越王 ，寇郡县，遣杨州刺史臧旻、丹阳太守陈夤讨破之。
现代文：十一月，会稽人许生自称 越王 ，寇扰郡县，派扬州刺史臧旻、丹阳太守陈寅讨伐打败他们。
English: In November, the auditor of the association, Xu Sheng, called himself "King of Yue" and "Disturber of Counties and Counties," and sent Yangzhou Zhishuo and Danyang Governor Chen Yin to fight and defeat them.

古文：十二月，司徒许栩罢，大鸿胪袁隗为司徒。
现代文：十二月，司徒许栩罢免，任大鸿胪袁隗为司徒。
English: In December, Master Xu Xu was removed from his post and Grandmaster Yuan Qi was appointed as Master.

古文：鲜卑寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠并州。
English: The newly conquered provinces were annexed by the Berber raiders.

古文：是岁，甘陵王恢薨。
现代文：这一年，甘陵王刘恢去世。
English: In the same year, Liu Hui, the king of Ganling, died.

古文：二年春正月，大疫，使使者巡行致医药。
现代文：二年春正月，大发病疫，派使者巡视送医药。
English: In the first month of spring of the second year, a major epidemic broke out, and envoys were sent to inspect and deliver medicine.

古文：丁丑，司空宗俱薨。
现代文：二十七日，司空宗俱逝世。
English: On the 27th, Siku Zonggu passed away.

古文：二月壬午，大赦天下。
现代文：二月初三，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the second month, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：以光禄勋杨赐为司空。
现代文：任光禄勋杨赐为司空。
English: Ren Guanglu Xun Yang was given the title of Siku.

古文：三月，太尉李咸免。
现代文：三月，太尉李咸免职。
English: In March, Lieutenant Li Xian was relieved of duty.

古文：夏五月，以司隶校尉段颎为太尉。
现代文：夏季五月，以司隶校尉段赹为太尉。
English: In the summer of May, Sisli's lieutenant Duan Qi was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：沛相师迁坐诬罔国王，下狱死。
现代文：沛相师迁因诬枉欺骗国王，监死狱中。
English: Pei Xiang Shiqian was sentenced to death in prison for falsely deceiving the king.

古文：六月，北海地震。
现代文：六月，北海地震。
English: In June, the North Sea earthquake.

古文：东莱、北海海水溢。
现代文：东莱、北海海水漫溢。
English: Donglai, the North Sea water is overflowing.

古文：秋七月，司空杨赐免，太常颍川唐珍为司空。
现代文：秋季七月，司空杨赐免，任太常颍川唐珍为司空。
English: In the autumn of July, Yang, the secretary of the Air Force, was pardoned, and Tang Zhen, the minister of the Air Force, was appointed as the secretary of the Air Force.

古文：冬十二月，日南徼外国重译贡献。
现代文：冬季十二月，日南边外国辗转通译语言，进行献礼。
English: In the winter of December, the foreign residents in the southern part of Japan translate and interpret the language, and offer gifts.

古文：太尉段颎罢。
现代文：太尉段赹罢免。
English: Captain Duan Qi was dismissed.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠幽并二州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：癸酉晦，日有食之。三年春正月，夫馀国遣使贡献。
现代文：二十九日，日蚀。三年春正月，夫余国遣使献礼。
English: On the 29th, there was a solar eclipse. On the first day of spring in the third year, Emperor Yu sent an envoy to present gifts.

古文：二月己巳，大赦天下。
现代文：二月二十六日，大赦天下。
English: On February 26, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：太常陈耽为太尉。
现代文：任太常陈耽为太尉。
English: Ren Taizhong Chen Tan was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：三月，中山王畅薨，无子，国除。
现代文：三月，中山王刘畅逝世，无子，封国撤除。
English: In March, the King of Zhongshan, Liu Chang, died childless, and the state of siege was lifted.

古文：夏六月，封河间王利子康为济南王，奉孝仁皇祀。
现代文：夏季六月，封河间王刘利子刘康为济南王，奉孝仁皇祠。
English: In the summer of June, the enthronement of Liu Lizi Liu Kang as the King of Jinan and the dedication of the Xiaojin Imperial Shrine took place.

古文：秋，洛水溢。
现代文：秋，洛水漫溢。
English: In autumn, Luo Shui is overflowing.

古文：冬十月癸丑，令天下系囚罪未决，入缣赎。
现代文：冬季十月十四日，命令天下在押囚犯没有判决的，入缣赎罪。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, it was ordered that all prisoners in custody who had not been sentenced should be imprisoned to atone for their sins.

古文：十一月，杨州刺史臧旻率丹阳太守陈寅，大破许生于会稽，斩之。
现代文：十一月，扬州刺史臧旻率丹阳太守陈夤，在会稽大败许生并把他杀掉。
English: In November, Yangzhou assassin Shi Tong led Danyang governor Chen Qi to defeat Xu Sheng and kill him.

古文：任城王博薨。
现代文：任城王刘博逝世。
English: The king of the city, Liu Bo, passed away.

古文：十二月，鲜卑寇北地，北地太守夏育追击破之。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑寇掠北地，北地太守夏育追击打败他们。
English: In December, the Xianbei Cossacks raided the North, and the governor of the North, Xia Yu, pursued and defeated them.

古文：鲜卑又寇并州。
现代文：鲜卑又寇掠并州。
English: Newly humiliated and plundered and annexed the state.

古文：司空唐珍罢，永乐少府许训为司空。
现代文：司空唐珍罢去，任永乐少府许训为司空。
English: Sifu Tang Zhen retired and appointed Yongle Shofu Xu Xun as Sifu.

古文：四年春三月，诏诸儒正《五经》文字，刻石立于太学门外。
现代文：四年春三月，诏令诸儒校正《五经》文字，刻成石碑立于太学门外。
English: In the spring and March of the fourth year, the emperor ordered the Confucianists to correct the text of the "Five Classics" and carve it into a stone monument outside the Taigaku Gate.

古文：封河间王建子佗为任城王。
现代文：封河间王刘建子刘佗为任城王。
English: He appointed Liu Jianzhi, the king of Hechuan, as the acting king of the city.

古文：夏四月，郡国七大水。
现代文：夏季四月，郡国七处大水。
English: In the summer, in April, seven major floods occurred in the county.

古文：五月丁卯，大赦天下。
现代文：五月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of May, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：延陵园灾，遣使者持节告祠延陵。
现代文：延陵园遭火灾，派使者持符节告祠延陵。
English: After the fire at the Yanling Garden, an envoy was sent to the Yanling Shrine to announce the festival.

古文：鲜卑寇幽州。
现代文：鲜卑寇劫掠幽州。
English: The Xianbei Cossacks plundered Yuzhou.

古文：六月，弘农、三辅螟。
现代文：六月，弘农、三辅螟灾。
English: In June, Gongnong and Sanfu were devastated by floods.

古文：遣守宫令之盐监，穿渠为民兴利。
现代文：派守宫令到盐监，穿贯水渠为民兴利。
English: The palace guard was sent to the salt inspector to penetrate the water channels for the benefit of the people.

古文：令郡国遇灾者，减田租之半；其伤害十四以上，勿收责。
现代文：令郡国遭受灾害的，减田租的一半；受伤害十分之四以上的，不收取所欠钱财。
English: If the county suffers a disaster, half of the farm rent will be reduced; if more than four-tenths of the damage is suffered, the money owed will not be collected.

古文：冬十月丁巳，令天下系囚罪未决，入缣赎。
现代文：冬季十月二十三日，命令天下在押囚犯没有判决的，入缣赎罪。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, it was ordered that all prisoners in custody who had not been sentenced should be imprisoned to atone for their sins.

古文：拜冲帝母虞美人为宪园贵人，质帝母陈夫人为勃海孝王妃。
现代文：拜冲帝母虞美人为宪园贵人，质帝母陈夫人为渤海孝王妃。
English: Emperor Baizhong's mother, Lady Yubi, was a noblewoman of the gendarmerie, while Empress Chen, the mother of the emperor, was Princess Erhai Xiao.

古文：改平准为中准，使宦者为令，列于内署。
现代文：改平准为中准，使宦者为令，列于内署。
English: Change the level to the medium level, and make it an order, and it will be listed in the dispatch.

古文：自是诸署悉以阉人为丞、令。
现代文：自是诸署都以阉人为丞、令。
English: Since then, all of the stations have been operating under the principle of 人丞、令.

古文：五年夏四月癸亥，大赦天下。
现代文：五年夏四月癸亥，大赦天下。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, in April, the boar was released into the world.

古文：益州郡夷叛，太守李颙讨平之。
现代文：益州郡夷人叛乱，太守李颙讨伐平息了他们的叛乱。
English: Yi people in Yizhou County rebelled, and the Tai Shou Li Ye fought to quell their rebellion.

古文：复崇高山名为嵩高山。
现代文：恢复崇高山名为嵩高山。
English: The restored lofty mountain is named Song Gaoshan.

古文：大雩。
现代文：举行大雩之祭以求雨。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：使侍御史行诏狱亭部，理冤枉，原轻系，休囚徒。
现代文：派侍御史巡视奉诏令关押犯人的牢狱，及掌管逐捕盗贼的亭卒，清理冤枉的案件，对犯轻罪在押的犯人，量情而宽赦其罪，对在服苦役的囚犯，让他们得到休息。
English: He sent his attendants to inspect the jails where prisoners were held by imperial decree, and the pavilions in charge of catching thieves, to clear up unjust cases, to pardon prisoners who committed minor crimes, and to give prisoners who were serving hard labor a rest.

古文：五月，太尉陈耽罢，司空许训为太尉。
现代文：五月，太尉陈耽罢去，任司空许训为太尉。
English: In May, First Lieutenant Chen Tan retired and was replaced by Second Lieutenant Siku Xu Xun.

古文：闰月，永昌太守曹鸾坐讼党人，弃市。
现代文：闰五月，永昌太守曹鸾因为替党人申理，在槐里狱被杀。
English: In May, Cao Pi, the Yongchang governor, was killed in the Baili prison for acting as a mediator for party members.

古文：诏党人门生、故吏、父兄、子弟在位者，皆免官禁锢。
现代文：诏令凡党人的门生故吏父兄子弟在职的，一律撤职，永不录用。
English: The edict decreed that all the disciples of the party members, and the fathers, brothers and children of the deceased officials who were in office, would be dismissed and would never be hired.

古文：六月壬戌，太常南阳刘逸为司空。
现代文：六月初三，任太常南阳刘逸为司空。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, Liu Yizhong of Nanyang was appointed as the first secretary.

古文：秋七月，太尉许训罢，光禄勋刘宽为太尉。
现代文：秋季七月，太尉许训罢去，任光禄勋刘宽为太尉。
English: In the autumn of July, Taijun Xu Xun was dismissed, and Ren Guanglu Xun Liu Kuan was promoted to Taijun.

古文：冬十月壬午，御殿后槐树自拔倒竖。
现代文：冬季十月二十四日，御殿后面的槐树自行拔起倒竖起来。
English: On the 24th day of October in winter, the elm tree behind the palace was uprooted and turned upside down.

古文：司徒袁隗罢。
现代文：司徒袁隗罢去。
English: Sitoru Yuen Yat-sen was dismissed.

古文：十一月丙戌，光禄大夫杨赐为司徒。
现代文：十一月丙戌，光禄大夫杨赐为司徒。
English: In November, Guanglu Doctor Yang Zi was appointed as a disciple.

古文：十二月，甘陵王定薨。
现代文：十二月，甘陵王刘定逝世。
English: In December, Liu Ding, the king of Ganling, passed away.

古文：试太学生年六十以上百余人，除郎中、太子舍人至王家郎、郡国文学吏。
现代文：考试太学生六十以上的百余人，任为郎中、太子舍人至王家郎、郡国文学吏。
English: More than a hundred of the sixty-plus examination students were appointed as junior vassals, princes, princes, and literary officials of the county.

古文：是岁，鲜卑寇幽州。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑寇掠幽州。
English: In that year, the Xianbei corsair raided Yuzhou.

古文：沛国言黄龙见谯。
现代文：沛国上报黄龙出现于谯。
English: Pei Guo reported that Huanglong was seen in Zhai.

古文：六年春正月辛丑，大赦天下。
现代文：六年春正月十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：二月，南宫平城门及武库东垣屋自坏。
现代文：二月，南宫平城门及武库东垣屋自然坏圮。
English: In February, the Nan-gu Heijo-mon Gate and the East-gakiya Arsenal were destroyed.

古文：夏四月，大旱，七州蝗。
现代文：夏季四月，发生大的旱灾，七州出现蝗灾。
English: In the summer of April, a major drought occurred, and locust plagues occurred in seven states.

古文：鲜卑寇三边。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠东、西、北三边。
English: The fresh pied curlew raids the east, west, and north.

古文：市贾民为宣陵孝子者数十人，皆除太子舍人。
现代文：市贾民为宣陵孝子者数十人，都任为太子舍人。
English: There are dozens of Jia Min citizens who are filial sons of Xuanling, and they have all been appointed as princes.

古文：秋七月，司空刘逸免，卫尉陈球为司空。
现代文：秋季七月，司空刘逸免职，任卫尉陈球为司空。
English: In the autumn of July, Liu Ying, the flight attendant, was relieved of his duties, and Lieutenant Chen Ku was appointed as the flight attendant.

古文：八月，遣破鲜卑中郎将田晏出云中，使匈奴中郎将臧旻与南单于出雁门，护乌桓校尉夏育出高柳，并伐鲜卑，晏等大败。
现代文：八月，遣破鲜卑中郎将田晏出兵云中，使匈奴中郎将臧旻与南单于出兵雁门，护乌桓校尉夏育出兵高柳，并伐鲜卑，田晏等大败。
English: In August, the defeated Xiongnu middle-captain Xia Yu sent his troops to Gaoliu, while the defeated Xiongnu middle-captain sent his troops to Ganmen, and the defeated Xiongnu middle-captain Xia Yu sent his troops to Gaoliu, and the defeated Xiongnu middle-captain sent his troops to Gaoliu.

古文：冬十月癸丑朔，日有食之。太尉刘宽免。
现代文：冬十月初一，出现日食。太尉刘宽免职。
English: On the first day of October in winter, there was a solar eclipse. Lieutenant Liu Kuan was relieved of his duties.

古文：帝临辟雍。
现代文：皇帝驾临辟雍。
English: The emperor arrived in Bifiyang.

古文：辛丑，京师地震。
现代文：辛丑，京师发生地震。
English: October 22nd, Beijing earthquake.

古文：辛亥，令天下系囚罪未决，入缣赎。
现代文：辛亥，令天下在押囚犯罪行尚未判决的，可以入缣赎罪。
English: Xinhai, let the world know that prisoners who have not yet been sentenced for crimes can be imprisoned to atone for their sins.

古文：十一月，司空陈球免。
现代文：十一月，司空陈球免职。
English: In November, Siku Chenqiu was relieved of his duties.

古文：十二月甲寅，太常河南孟〈有彧〉为太尉。
现代文：十二月初三，太常河南孟有彧为太尉。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Meng Yuxuan of Taichang, Henan Province, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：庚辰，司徒杨赐免。
现代文：二十九日，司徒杨赐免职。
English: On the 29th, Szu Yang was relieved of his duties.

古文：太常陈耽为司空。
现代文：任太常陈耽为司空。
English: Ren Taizhong and Chen Tan were promoted to the position of air steward.

古文：鲜卑寇辽西。
现代文：鲜卑贼寇劫掠辽西。
English: Despicable bandits plunder western Liaoning.

古文：永安太仆王旻下狱死。
现代文：永安宫太仆王旻被下狱去世。
English: Wang Yao, the Great Footman of the Yongan Palace, died after being released from prison.

古文：光和元年春正月，合浦、交阯乌浒蛮叛，招引九真、日南民攻没郡县。
现代文：光和元年春正月，合浦、交阝止乌浒蛮叛乱，招引九真、日南民攻没郡县。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Guanghe era, the Hui-Pu, Jia-Ji and Wu-Ji barbarian rebellions attracted the Jiuzhen and Nichinan people to invade the counties.

古文：太尉孟〈有彧〉罢。
现代文：太尉孟〈有彧〉被罢免。
English: Second Lieutenant Meng (有) was dismissed.

古文：二月辛亥朔，日有食之。癸丑，光禄勋陈国袁滂为司徒。己未，地震。
现代文：二月初一，日蚀。初三，任光禄勋陈国袁滂为司徒。初九，发生地震。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse. On the third day of the first month of the year, Ren Guanglu Hun Chen Guo Yuanqi became a monk. On the ninth day of the first month of the year, there was an earthquake.

古文：始置鸿都门学生。
现代文：开始设置鸿都门学生。
English: Hongdu Gate students began to be set up.

古文：三月辛丑，大赦天下，改元光和。
现代文：三月辛丑日，大赦天下，改号光和。
English: March Xin Ugly Day, the world is amnestied, and the name is changed to Guanghe.

古文：太常常山张颢为太尉。
现代文：任太常常山张颢为太尉。
English: He was often promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：夏四月丙辰，地震。
现代文：夏季四月初七，地震。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month of summer, an earthquake.

古文：侍中寺雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：侍中寺雌鸡化为雄鸡。
English: Samurai Nakadera's hen turns into a rooster.

古文：司空陈耽免，太常来艳为司空。
现代文：司空陈耽免职，任太常来艳为司空。
English: Sifu Chen was relieved of his duties, and Ren too often came to Yan as Sifu.

古文：五月壬午，有白衣人入德阳殿门，亡去不获。
现代文：五月初三，有白衣人入德阳殿门，逃去没有捕获。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, a man in white entered the gate of Deyang Palace and fled without being caught.

古文：六月丁丑，有黑气堕所御温德殿庭中。
现代文：六月二十九日，有黑气坠落于帝所住的温德殿庭中。
English: On the 29th of June, a black cloud descended on the palace of Emperor Wende.

古文：秋七月壬子，青虹见御坐玉堂后殿庭中。
现代文：秋季七月壬子，青虹出现于帝所坐玉堂后殿庭中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Qinghong appeared in the courtyard behind the Imperial Throne Hall.

古文：八月，有星孛于天市。
现代文：八月彗星出现于天市星。
English: The August Comet appears in the sky.

古文：九月，太尉张颢罢，太常陈球为太尉。司空来艳薨。
现代文：九月，太尉张颢罢去，任太常陈球为太尉，司空来艳逝世。
English: In September, First Lieutenant Zhang Xuan retired, Ren Taichang Chenqiu became First Lieutenant, and Sikuo Laiyan passed away.

古文：冬十月，屯骑校尉袁逢为司空。
现代文：冬季十月，屯骑校尉袁逢为司空。
English: In the winter of October, the cavalry captain Yuan Feng became the deputy commander.

古文：皇后宋氏废，后父执金吾酆下狱死。
现代文：皇后宋氏被废，皇后父亲执金吾宋邦监死狱中。
English: Empress Song was deposed, and her father, Emperor Song, died in prison.

古文：丙子晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，出现日食。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：十一月，太尉陈球免。
现代文：十一月，太尉陈球被罢免。
English: In November, Lieutenant Chen Qiu was dismissed.

古文：十二月丁巳，光禄大夫桥玄为太尉。
现代文：十二月十二日，任光禄大夫桥玄为太尉。
English: On December 12, Ren Guanglu's doctor, Qiao Xuan, was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：是岁，鲜卑寇酒泉。
现代文：这一年，鲜卑侵犯酒泉。
English: This year, Xianbei invaded Jiuquan.

古文：京师马生人。
现代文：京师妖马生人。
English: He is a native of Kyoto.

古文：初开西邸卖官，自关内侯、虎贲、羽林，入钱各有差。
现代文：初次开放西邸卖官，从关内侯、虎贲、羽林出卖分别入钱各不等。
English: For the first time, the West Residence sales clerk was opened, and the proceeds from the sales of Guan Nei Hou, Tigress, and Hailin varied.

古文：私令左右卖公卿，公千万，卿五百万。
现代文：私下命左右卖公卿，公爵千万，卿爵五百万。
English: Privately he ordered the sale of nobles, dukes for ten million crowns and lords for five million crowns.

古文：二年春，大疫，使常侍、中谒者巡行致医药。
现代文：二年春，大疫流行，使常侍、中谒者巡行视察，致医送药。
English: In the spring of the second year, there was a major epidemic, so the regular attendants and middle-ranking officials went on a tour to inspect and send medicine to the doctors.

古文：三月，司徒袁滂免，大鸿胪刘郃为司徒。
现代文：三月，司徒袁滂免职，任大鸿胪刘郃为司徒。
English: In March, the tutor Yuan Qi was relieved of his duties, and the great scholar Liu Qi was appointed as the tutor.

古文：乙丑，太尉桥玄罢，太中大夫段颎为太尉。
现代文：二十二日，太尉桥玄罢去，任太中大夫段赹为太尉。
English: On the 22nd, Taiyi Qiao Xuan retired and was replaced by Taizhong Daifu Duanzhang as Taiyi.

古文：京兆地震。
现代文：京兆发生地震。
English: The Keicho earthquake.

古文：司空袁逢罢，太常张济为司空。
现代文：司空袁逢被罢免，任太常张济为司空。
English: Siku Yuan Feng was removed from his post, and Zhang Jie was appointed as Siku.

古文：夏四月甲戌朔，日有食之。辛巳，中常侍王甫及太尉段颎并下狱死。
现代文：夏季四月初一，日蚀。初八，中常侍王甫及太尉段赹一并监死狱中。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the sun eclipsed. On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the middle-ranking attendant Wang Fu and the captain Duan Xi were imprisoned together.

古文：丁酉，大赦天下，诸党人禁锢小功以下皆除之。
现代文：二十四日，大赦天下，诸党人被牵连的亲族小幼以下的都解除禁锢。
English: On the 24th, the country was amnestied, and all the relatives of the party members who were implicated were released from imprisonment.

古文：东平王端薨。
现代文：东平王刘端逝世。
English: Dongping King Liu Duan passed away.

古文：五月，卫尉刘宽为太尉。
现代文：五月，任卫尉刘宽为太尉。
English: In May, Liu Guang was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：秋七月，使匈奴中郎将张脩有罪，下狱死。
现代文：秋季七月，匈奴中郎将张脩有罪，下狱后死在狱中。
English: In the autumn of July, Xiongnu Zhonglang found Zhang Ye guilty, and he died in prison after being released.

古文：冬十月甲申，司徒刘郃、永乐少府陈球、卫尉阳球、步兵校尉刘纳谋诛宦者，事泄，皆下狱死。
现代文：冬十月十四日，司徒刘郃、永乐少府陈球、卫尉阳球、步兵校尉刘纳图谋诛除宦官，事机泄漏，都监死狱中。
English: On the 14th day of winter in October, Liu Zhen, Liu Natu, Yongle Major Chen Qiu, Yang Qiu, and Liu Natu, who plotted to remove the eunuch, were all sentenced to death in prison.

古文：巴郡板楯蛮叛，遣御史中丞萧瑗督益州刺史讨之，不克。
现代文：巴郡板循蛮叛乱，派御史中丞萧瑗督促益州刺史去讨伐，没有取胜。
English: In Ba County, Ban Xun rebelled violently, and sent the imperial historian, the middle-ranked general Xiao Bingduo, to urge the governor of Yizhou to fight, but he did not win.

古文：十二月，光禄勋杨赐为司徒。
现代文：十二月，任光禄勋杨赐为司徒。
English: In December, Ren Guanglu was awarded the Yang Zi Star as an apprentice.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠幽、并二州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：是岁，河间王利薨。
现代文：这一年，河间王刘利逝世。
English: In the same year, Kawama Wang Liu Li passed away.

古文：洛阳女子生儿，两头四臂。
现代文：洛阳有女子生一儿，两头四臂。
English: In Luoyang, a girl was born with four arms and two heads.

古文：三年春正月癸酉，大赦天下。
现代文：三年春正月癸酉，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of spring, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：二月，公府驻驾庑自坏。
现代文：二月，三公府停车处廊屋自行坏圮。
English: In February, the corridors of the three public parking lots were demolished by themselves.

古文：三月，梁王元薨。
现代文：三月，梁王刘元逝世。
English: In March, Liang Wang Liu Yuan passed away.

古文：夏四月，江夏蛮叛。
现代文：夏季四月，江夏蛮人叛乱。
English: In the summer of April, the Jiangxia barbarians rebelled.

古文：六月，诏公卿举能通《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《左氏》、《穀梁春秋》各一人，悉除议郎。
现代文：六月，诏令公卿举荐能通晓《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《左氏》、《谷梁春秋》各一人，都任为议郎。
English: In June, by imperial edict, the court nobles recommended one person each who could read "Kobun Shosho," "Mao Shi," "Zao Shi" and "Guliang Chunqiu," and they were all appointed as hirarō.

古文：秋，表是地震，涌水出。
现代文：秋季，表是地震，涌水冒出。
English: In autumn, the table is an earthquake, gushing out.

古文：八月，令系囚罪未决，入缣赎，各有差。
现代文：八月，令在押囚犯罪行尚未判决的，可入缣赎罪，缣数分别不等。
English: In August, it was ordered that prisoners who have committed crimes and have not yet been sentenced may enter the coffin to atone for their sins. The number of coffins varies.

古文：冬闰月，有星孛于狼、弧。
现代文：冬季闰月，彗星现于狼、弧二星。
English: In the winter intercalary month, the comet appears in the constellation of the wolf and the arc.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑寇扰幽、并二州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：十二月己巳，立贵人何氏为皇后。
现代文：十二月初五，立贵人何氏为皇后。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, the noblewoman Ho became the empress.

古文：是岁，作毕圭、灵昆苑。
现代文：这一年，作四毕圭苑、灵昆苑。
English: In this year, Shibigui-en and Lingkun-en were built.

古文：四年春正月，初置騄骥厩丞，领受郡国调马。
现代文：四年春正月，开始设置马录骥厩丞，领受郡国征发来的马匹。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, he began to set up horse records and stables to receive horses sent by the county government.

古文：豪右辜榷，马一匹至二百万。
现代文：豪强大族进行垄断，一匹马价格高达二百万。
English: Powerful families monopolize, and the price of a horse is as high as two million.

古文：二月，郡国上芝英草。
现代文：二月，郡国上芝英草。
English: In February, the county of Shangzhi Yingcao was founded.

古文：夏四月庚子，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月庚子，大赦天下。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zi was granted amnesty.

古文：交阯刺史朱俊讨交阯、合浦乌浒蛮，破之。
现代文：交阝止刺史朱俊讨攻交阯、合浦乌浒蛮人，将他们打败。
English: Zhu Jun discussed attacking the barbarians of Jiaotong and Wuxi, and defeated them.

古文：六月庚辰，雨雹。
现代文：六月十九日，下冰雹。
English: Hail fell on 19 June.

古文：秋七月，河南言凤皇见新城，群鸟随之；赐新城令及三老、力田帛，各有差。
现代文：秋七月，河南报告凤凰在新城出现，群鸟跟在后面；赏赐新城令及三老、力田布帛，分别数量不等。
English: In the autumn of July, Henan reported that the phoenix appeared in the new city, followed by a flock of birds; the new city order and the three old men and the field cloth were awarded, with the number varying.

古文：九月庚寅朔，日有食之。太尉刘宽免，卫尉许〈有彧〉为太尉。
现代文：九月初一，日蚀。太尉刘宽免职，卫尉许〈有彧〉为太尉。
English: On the first day of September, the sun eclipsed. Lieutenant Liu Kuan was relieved of his duties, and Lieutenant Xu (also known as Yuxuan) was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：闰月辛酉，北宫东掖庭永巷署灾。
现代文：闰九月初二，北宫东掖庭永巷署起火。
English: On the second day of the second month of September, the fire broke out in the courtyard of the Yongxiang Township of Beigu East County.

古文：司徒杨赐罢。
现代文：司徒杨赐罢去。
English: Shtu Yang was dismissed.

古文：冬十月，太常陈耽为司徒。
现代文：冬十月，任太常陈耽为司徒。
English: In the winter of October, Ren Taizang Chen Tang became a disciple.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑贼寇劫掠幽、并二州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：是岁，帝作列肆于后宫，使诸采女贩卖，更相盗窃争斗。
现代文：这一年，帝作成列的店铺于妃嫔所居的内宫，让众多彩女做买卖生意，她们互相偷盗窃取争夺斗殴。
English: In this year, the shops listed by the emperor were located in the inner palace where the concubines lived, and many entertainers were allowed to do business. They stole from each other and fought.

古文：帝著商估服，饮宴为乐。
现代文：帝穿着生意买卖人的服装，设宴饮酒作乐。
English: The emperor dressed in the clothes of a merchant and set up a banquet to drink and make merry.

古文：又于西园弄狗，著进贤冠，带绶。
现代文：又于西园耍狗，让狗戴着文官用的进贤冠，悬着绶带。
English: He also played with a dog in the West Park, making the dog wear a civil servant's crown of merit and dangling a ribbon.

古文：又驾四驴，帝躬自操辔，驱驰周旋，京师转相放效。
现代文：又把车驾套四匹驴子，帝亲自驱策操辔，奔驰周转，京师辗转竞相仿效。
English: He also drove four donkeys, and the emperor himself drove a donkey, a Mercedes turnaround, and a Beijing teacher turnaround.

古文：五年春正月辛未，大赦天下。
现代文：五年春正月十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the fourteenth day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月，大疫。
现代文：二月，出现大的疫病流行。
English: In February, a major epidemic broke out.

古文：三月，司徒陈耽免。
现代文：三月，司徒陈耽免职。
English: In March, Szeto Chen was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：夏季四月，出现旱灾。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：太常袁隗为司徒。
现代文：任太常袁隗为司徒。
English: Ren Taizang Yuan Qi as a disciple.

古文：五月庚申，永乐宫署灾。
现代文：五月初五，永乐宫署灾。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, the Yongle Palace Department suffered a disaster.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于太微。
现代文：秋季七月，彗星出现在太微星垣。
English: In the autumn of July, a comet appeared in the faint star field.

古文：巴郡板楯蛮诣太守曹谦降。
现代文：巴郡板循蛮人到太守曹谦处投降。
English: The barbarians of Banxun, Ba County, surrendered to the governor Cao Qian.

古文：癸酉，令系囚罪未决，入缣赎。
现代文：癸酉，命令在押囚犯还没有判决的，可入缣赎罪。
English: , ordering that prisoners who have not yet been sentenced may be imprisoned to atone for their sins.

古文：八月，起四百尺观于阿亭道。
现代文：八月，起四百尺观于阿亭道。
English: In August, it was observed from a height of 400 meters on Ating Road.

古文：冬十月，太尉许〈有彧〉罢，太常杨赐为太尉。
现代文：冬十月，太尉许〈有彧〉免职，任太常杨赐为太尉。
English: In the winter of October, Taijun Xu (有) was relieved of his duties, and Taijun Yang was appointed as Taijun.

古文：校猎上林苑，历函谷关，遂巡狩于广成苑。
现代文：帝围猎上林苑，历函谷关，并巡行于广成苑。
English: The emperor hunted in Shanglinyuan, the calendars in Hanzhongguan, and the parade in Guangchengyuan.

古文：十二月，还，幸太学。
现代文：十二月，还京，到太学视察。
English: In December, he returned to Beijing and inspected Taigaku.

古文：六年春正月，日南徼外国重译贡献。
现代文：六年春正月，日南边境外国辗转翻译通晓语言，贡献礼物。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, a foreign translator on the southern border of Japan was fluent in the language and contributed gifts.

古文：二月，复长陵县，比丰、沛。
现代文：二月，复置长陵县，犹如丰、沛。
English: In February, the resettlement of Changling County was completed, just like Feng and Pei.

古文：三月辛未，大赦天下。
现代文：三月二十一日，大赦天下。
English: On March 21st, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏季，出现大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：秋，金城河水溢。
现代文：秋季，金城河水漫溢。
English: In autumn, the Jincheng River overflows.

古文：五原山岸崩。
现代文：五原山岸崩裂。
English: The coast of the Wuhara Mountains is cracking.

古文：始置圃囿署，以宦者为令。
现代文：开始设置圃囿署，以宦官为令。
English: The establishment of the Eunuchs' Office began, and eunuchs were appointed.

古文：冬，东海、东莱、琅邪井中冰厚尺余。
现代文：冬季，东海、东莱、琅笽井中冰厚尺余。
English: In winter, the ice in the East China Sea, Donglai and Shujing is more than a foot thick.

古文：大有年。
现代文：这年是大丰收年。
English: There was a bumper harvest in Gotani this year.

古文：中平元年春二月，巨鹿人张角自称 黄天 ，其部帅有三十六方，皆著黄巾，同日反叛。
现代文：中平元年春二月，巨鹿人张角自称 黄天 ，其部帅有三十六方，都配著黄巾，同日反叛。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of the Middle Kingdom, Zhang Qiao, a giant deer, called himself Huang Tian, and there were thirty-six parties under his command, all wearing yellow scarves, and they rebelled on the same day.

古文：安平、甘陵人各执其王以应之。
现代文：安平、甘陵人各挟持其王刘续、刘忠起来响应。
English: The people of Anping and Ganling each held their kings Liu Zhai and Liu Zhong in their arms to respond.

古文：三月戊申，以河南尹何进为大将军，将兵屯都亭。
现代文：三月初三，任河南尹何进为大将军，率兵屯驻都亭。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Yin Hejin of Henan Province was appointed general and stationed in Du Ting with his army.

古文：置八关都尉官。壬子，大赦天下党人，还诸徙者，唯张角不赦。
现代文：设置函谷、广城、伊阙、大谷、頧辕、旋门、小平津、孟津八关都尉官。初七，大赦天下党人，流放遣徙的都召还原籍，惟有张角不赦罪。
English: In the seventh year of the Heian period, the world's party members were pardoned, and those who had been exiled were called back to their hometowns, except for Zhang Qiao, who was not pardoned.

古文：诏公卿出马、弩，举列将子孙及吏民有明战阵之略者，诣公车。
现代文：诏令公卿献出马匹、弓弩，荐举列将子孙及官员百姓有精明于战争谋略的，都到公车门。
English: The imperial edict ordered the court nobles to offer their horses, bows and arrows, and to recommend and enumerate the descendants of generals and officials, as well as the people who were shrewd in war strategy, all to the bus gate.

古文：遣北中郎将卢植讨张角，左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将朱俊讨颍川黄巾。
现代文：派北中郎将卢植讨伐张角，左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将朱俊讨伐颍川黄巾。
English: The north middle brother sent Lu Zhi to attack Zhang Ke, the left middle brother sent Wang Fusong, and the right middle brother sent Zhu Jun to attack Shichuan Huanghan.

古文：庚子，南阳黄巾张曼成攻杀郡守褚贡。
现代文：庚子，南阳黄巾张曼成攻打并杀死郡守褚贡。
English: Geng Zi, Nanyang Yellow Turban Zhang Mengcheng attacked and killed the county governor Xigong.

古文：夏四月，太尉杨赐免，太仆弘农邓盛为太尉。
现代文：夏季四月，太尉杨赐免职，任太仆弘农邓盛为太尉。
English: In the summer of April, Yang Jie, the first lieutenant, was relieved of his duties, and the second lieutenant, Hongong Deng Sheng, was appointed as the second lieutenant.

古文：司空张济罢，大司农张温为司空。
现代文：司空张济罢去，任大司农张温为司空。
English: Zhang Jie, the deputy director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, resigned, and Zhang Wen, the director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, was appointed deputy director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

古文：朱俊为黄巾波才所败。
现代文：朱俊被黄巾波才所打败。
English: Zhu Jun was defeated by Huangyan Bocai.

古文：侍中向栩、张钧坐言宦者，下狱死。
现代文：侍中向栩、张钧因说了宦官的闲话，监死狱中。
English: The chamberlains, Xiang Tuo and Zhang Ye, were sentenced to death in prison for gossiping about eunuchs.

古文：汝南黄巾败太守赵谦于邵陵。
现代文：汝南黄巾在邵陵打败太守赵谦。
English: Runan Huanghan defeated the imperial governor Zhao Qian in Shaoling.

古文：广阳黄巾杀幽州刺史郭勋及太守刘卫。
现代文：广阳黄巾杀幽州刺史郭勋及太守刘卫。
English: Guangyang Huangyan killed Yuzhou assassin Guo Xun and Governor Liu Wei.

古文：五月，皇甫嵩、朱俊复与波才等战于长社，大破之。
现代文：五月，皇甫嵩、朱俊再度在长社与波才战斗，大败波才。
English: In May, Emperor Fusang and Zhu Jun once again fought with Baci in Chosha, and defeated Baci.

古文：六月，南阳太守秦颉击张曼成，斩之。
现代文：六月，南阳太守秦颉进击张曼成，把他杀掉。
English: In June, the governor of Nanyang, Qin Hui, attacked Zhang Mancheng and killed him.

古文：交阯屯兵执刺史及合浦太守来达，自称 柱天将军 ，遣交阯刺史贾琮讨平之。
现代文：交阝止屯兵抓住刺史及合浦太守来达，自称 柱天将军 ，遣交阝止刺史贾琮讨伐平定了他们的叛乱。
English: The troops of Jiaotong halted the rebellion after they captured Zhishi and Hepu Taishou, who claimed to be the general Zhutian, and sent them to fight against Jiaqi of Jiaotong halt.

古文：皇甫嵩、朱俊大破汝南黄巾于西华。
现代文：皇甫嵩、朱俊在西华大败汝南黄巾。
English: Wang Fusong and Zhu Jun were soundly defeated by Runan Huangyan in West China.

古文：诏嵩讨东郡，朱俊讨南阳。
现代文：诏令皇甫嵩讨伐东郡，朱俊讨伐南阳。
English: He ordered Emperor Fusong to attack Dong County and Zhu Jun to attack Nanyang.

古文：卢植破黄巾，围张角于广宗。
现代文：卢植破黄巾，围张角于广宗。
English: Lu Zhi broke the yellow scarf, and the angle of the scarf was in Guangzong.

古文：宦官诬奏植，抵罪。
现代文：宦官诬奏卢植，抵罪。
English: The eunuch falsely accused Lu Zhi and pleaded guilty.

古文：遣中郎将董卓攻张角，不克。
现代文：遣中郎将董卓进攻张角，没有攻下。
English: Yan Zhongro attacked Dong Zhuo at Zhangjiao, but failed to capture him.

古文：洛阳女子生儿，两头共身。
现代文：洛阳有女生儿子，两头共身。
English: Luoyang has a female son, conjoined at both ends.

古文：秋七月，巴郡妖巫张脩反，寇郡县。
现代文：秋七月，巴郡妖巫张脩反叛，寇掠郡县。
English: In autumn and July, the Ba County witch Zhang Ye rebelled and invaded the county.

古文：河南尹徐灌下狱死。
现代文：河南尹徐灌监死狱中。
English: Henan's Yin Xugan is in prison awaiting death.

古文：八月，皇甫嵩与黄巾战于仓亭，获其帅。
现代文：八月，皇甫嵩在仓亭与黄巾战斗，抓获其帅卜已。
English: In August, Emperor Fusang fought with Huang Yan in Kuratei and captured him.

古文：乙巳，诏皇甫嵩北讨张角。
现代文：初三，诏令皇甫嵩北讨张角。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizong ordered the emperor to go to the north to discuss Zhangjiajie.

古文：九月，安平王续有罪诛，国除。
现代文：九月，安平王刘续有罪被诛，封国撤销。
English: In September, Anping King Liu Cui was convicted and imprisoned, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：冬十月，皇甫嵩与黄巾贼战于广宗，获张角弟梁。
现代文：冬季十月，皇甫嵩在广宗与张角战斗，抓获张角弟张梁。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Fusang fought with Zhang Jiao in Guangzong and captured Zhang Jiao's younger brother Zhang Liang.

古文：角先死，乃戮其尸。
现代文：张角先已死，发棺戮其尸。
English: Zhang Kuanxian is dead, and the coffin bears his corpse.

古文：以皇甫嵩为左车骑将军。
现代文：任皇甫嵩为左车骑将军。
English: Emperor Ren Fusong rode on the left.

古文：十一月，皇甫嵩又破黄巾于下曲阳，斩张角弟宝。
现代文：十一月，皇甫嵩在下曲阳又打败黄巾，斩张角弟张宝。
English: In November, Wang Fusong defeated Huang Yan again in the next Quyang and killed Zhang Bao, Zhang Zhang's younger brother.

古文：湟中义从胡北宫伯玉与先零羌叛，以金城人边章、韩遂为军帅，攻杀护羌校尉伶征、金城太守陈懿。
现代文：湟中义从胡北宫伯玉与先零羌叛乱，以金城人边章、韩遂为军帅，攻杀护羌校尉伶征、金城太守陈懿。
English: Zou Zhongyi led the rebellion from Hu Bei's palace to Baoju and the first few counties of Jincheng, with Jincheng's people Bianzhang and Han Sui as commanders, and attacked and killed Zou's lieutenant Zou Zheng and Jincheng's governor Chen Zheng.

古文：癸巳，朱俊拔宛城，斩黄巾别帅孙夏。
现代文：二十二日，朱俊拔宛城，斩黄巾别帅孙夏。
English: On the 22nd, Zhu Jun pulled out of the city and beheaded the handsome Sun Xia.

古文：诏减太官珍羞，御食一肉；厩马非郊祭之用，悉出给军。
现代文：诏令减少太官贵重的菜肴，御食一肉；厩马不是作郊祭时使用的，一律拿出作军马。
English: The imperial edict reduced the dignitary's precious dishes, and only meat was eaten; the stable horses were not used for the suburban festival, but were all used as war horses.

古文：十二月己巳，大赦天下，改元中平。
现代文：十二月二十九日，大赦天下，改元中平。
English: On December 29th, the nation was amnestied and the era name was changed to Zhongping.

古文：是岁，下邳王意薨，无子，国除。
现代文：这一年，下邳王刘意逝世，无子，封国撤销。
English: In the same year, Liu Yi, the king of Hebei, died without a son, and the state was revoked.

古文：郡国生异草，备龙蛇鸟兽之形。
现代文：郡国生长异草，具备龙蛇鸟兽的形态。
English: The county grows strange grass, with the form of dragon, snake, bird and beast.

古文：二年春正月，大疫。
现代文：二年春正月，疾疫大流行。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, a major epidemic broke out.

古文：琅邪王据薨。
现代文：琅琊王刘据去世。
English: Liu Zhenwang passed away.

古文：二月己酉，南宫大灾，火半月乃灭。
现代文：二月初十，南宫大火灾，火半月才灭。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, there was a big fire in the Southern Palace. It took half a month for the fire to be extinguished.

古文：癸亥，广阳门外屋自坏。
现代文：二十四日，广阳门外屋自行坏圯。
English: On the 24th, the guangyangmen outhouse self-destructed.

古文：税天下田，亩十钱。
现代文：于常税以外，按田亩数抽税，每亩十钱，用修宫室。
English: In addition to the regular tax, the tax is levied according to the number of mu of fields, up to ten yuan per mu, and the palace repair room is used.

古文：黑山贼张牛角等十余辈并起，所在寇钞。
现代文：黑山贼张牛角等十余辈一齐起来，到处寇扰，抄掠财物。
English: More than ten generations of Montenegrin thieves, such as Zhang Niuquan, got together to harass everywhere and plunder property.

古文：司徒袁隗免。
现代文：司徒袁隗被罢免。
English: Sidu Yuanjun was removed from office.

古文：三月，廷尉崔烈为司徒。
现代文：三月，任廷尉崔烈为司徒。
English: In March, he was appointed as courtier Choirei's apprentice.

古文：北宫伯玉等寇三辅，遣左车骑将军皇甫嵩讨之，不克。
现代文：北宫伯玉等寇掠三辅，派左车骑将军皇甫嵩讨伐，没有取胜。
English: Bei Gong, Hakuyu, and other raiders, including Sanfu, sent the left chariot and cavalry general, Hwangfusong, to fight, but they did not win.

古文：夏四月庚戌，大风，雨雹。
现代文：夏季四月十二日，刮大风，下冰雹。
English: On the twelfth day of the fourth month of summer, there was a great wind and hail.

古文：五月，太尉邓盛罢，太仆河内张延为太尉。
现代文：五月，太尉邓盛罢去，任太仆河内张延为太尉。
English: In May, the first lieutenant Deng Sheng retired, and the eunuch Hanoi Zhang Yan was appointed as the second lieutenant.

古文：秋七月，三辅螟。
现代文：秋季七月，三辅螟灾。
English: In the autumn of July, the three auxiliary disasters occurred.

古文：左车骑将军皇甫嵩免。
现代文：左车骑将军皇甫嵩免职。
English: The left-hand carriage driver, General Wang Fusong, has been relieved of his duties.

古文：八月，以司空张温为车骑将军，讨北宫伯玉。
现代文：八月，任司空张温为车骑将军，讨伐北宫伯玉。
English: In August, Zhang Wen, who was appointed as the general of cavalry and cavalry, campaigned against the Northern Palace.

古文：九月，特进杨赐为司空。
现代文：九月，特进杨赐为司空。
English: In September, Yang Jie, a special envoy, was promoted to the position of Secretary for Space Affairs.

古文：冬十月庚寅，司空杨赐薨，光禄大夫许相为司空。
现代文：冬季十月庚寅，司空杨赐逝世，任光禄大夫许相为司空。
English: In the winter of October, Geng Yin and Yang Qi, the secretary of the sky, passed away, and Ren Guanglu's doctor Xu Xiang became the secretary of the sky.

古文：前司徒陈耽、谏议大夫刘陶坐直言，下狱死。
现代文：前司徒陈耽、谏议大夫刘陶因说直话，监死狱中。
English: The former magistrate Chen Tan and the doctor Liu Tao were sentenced to death in prison for being outspoken.

古文：十一月，张温破北宫伯玉于美阳，因遣荡寇将军周慎追击之，围榆中；又遣中郎将董卓讨先零羌。慎、卓并不克。
现代文：十一月，张温破北宫伯玉于美阳，且派荡寇将军周慎进行追击，围榆中；又派中郎将董卓讨伐先零羌；周慎、董卓都没有取胜。
English: In November, Zhang Wen broke through the Northern Palace of Hebei in Miyang, and sent the roving general Zhou Sheng to pursue and encircle; he also sent Zhong Lang to fight Dong Zhuo first; Zhou Sheng and Dong Zhuo did not win.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠幽、并二州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：是岁，造万金堂于西园。
现代文：这一年，造万金堂于西园。
English: In the same year, Zou Mankintang was built in the West Park.

古文：洛阳民生儿，两头四臂。
现代文：洛阳民生儿，两头四臂。
English: Luoyang citizen's son, with two heads and four arms.

古文：三年春二月，江夏兵赵慈反，杀南阳太守秦颉。
现代文：三年春二月，江夏兵赵慈反叛，杀南阳太守秦颉。
English: In the spring and February of the third year, the Jiangxia soldier Zhao Ci rebelled and killed the Nanyang governor Qin Yu.

古文：庚戌，大赦天下。
现代文：十六日，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：大尉张延罢。
现代文：太尉张延罢去。
English: Lieutenant Zhang Yan is dismissed.

古文：车骑将军张温为太尉，中常侍赵忠为车骑将军。
现代文：任车骑将军张温为太尉，中常侍赵忠为车骑将军。
English: Zhang Wen, the general in charge of the chariot and cavalry, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and Zhao Zhong, the vice-chamberlain, was promoted to general in charge of the chariot and cavalry.

古文：复修玉堂殿，铸铜人四，黄钟四，及天禄、虾蟆，又铸四出文钱。
现代文：复修玉堂殿，铸铜人四尊，黄钟四座，以及天禄兽，虾蟆等，又铸四出文钱。
English: Restoration of the Jade Hall, casting four bronze statues, four yellow bells, as well as Tianlu animals, shrimps, etc., and casting four coins.

古文：五月壬辰晦，日有食之。六月，荆州刺史王敏讨赵慈，斩之。
现代文：五月三十日，日蚀。六月，荆州刺史王敏讨伐赵慈，把他杀了。
English: On the 30th of May, there was a solar eclipse. In June, Jingzhou assassin Wang Min attacked Zhao Ci and killed him.

古文：车骑将军赵忠罢。
现代文：车骑将军赵忠罢去。
English: Chariot and cavalry general Zhao Zhong was dismissed.

古文：秋八月，怀陵上有雀万数，悲鸣，因斗相杀。
现代文：秋季八月，冲帝怀陵上有雀数万只，相聚悲鸣，相互啄斗相杀。
English: In the autumn of August, there were tens of thousands of finches on the tomb of Emperor Chong, gathering together to mourn and fight each other.

古文：冬十月，武陵蛮叛，寇郡界，郡兵讨破之。
现代文：冬季十月，武陵蛮叛乱，寇掠郡界，郡兵讨伐，打败他们。
English: In the winter of October, Wuling rebelled violently, plundered the county border, and the county soldiers fought and defeated them.

古文：前太尉张延为宦人所谮，下狱死。
现代文：前太尉张延被宦官所诬陷，监死狱中。
English: Zhang Yan, a former captain, was framed by eunuchs and died in prison.

古文：十二月，鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑寇掠幽、并二州。
English: In December, the Xianbei Cossacks raided and occupied two states.

古文：四年春正月己卯，大赦天下。
现代文：四年春正月二十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月，荥阳贼杀中牟令。
现代文：二月，荥阳贼杀中牟令。
English: In February, a thief from Shenyang killed Zhongmou.

古文：己亥，南宫内殿罘罳自坏。
现代文：十一日，南宫内殿连阙曲阁自行坏圯。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the inner hall of the southern palace, together with the music pavilion, self-destructed.

古文：三月，河南尹何苗讨荥阳贼，破之，拜苗为车骑将军。
现代文：三月，河南尹何苗讨伐荥阳贼，把贼打败，授何苗为车骑将军。
English: In March, Yin He Miao of Henan Province fought against the bandits of Shenyang, defeated the bandits, and promoted He Miao to general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：夏四月，凉州刺史耿鄙讨金城贼韩遂，鄙兵大败，遂寇汉阳，汉阳太守傅燮战没。
现代文：夏季四月，凉州刺史耿鄙讨伐金城寇贼韩遂，耿鄙兵大败。韩遂进寇汉阳，汉阳太守傅燮战死。
English: In the summer of April, Liangzhou assassin Geng Xian led a crusade against Jincheng bandit Han Sui, and was soundly defeated by Geng Xian's soldiers. Han Sui invaded Hanyang, and Hanyang's grand marshal Fu Xi died in the battle.

古文：扶风人马腾、汉阳人王国并叛，寇三辅。
现代文：扶风人马腾、汉阳人王国同时叛乱，寇掠三辅。
English: The windmaker Ma Teng and the kingdom of the Hanyang people rebelled at the same time, pillaging Sanfu.

古文：太尉张温免，司徒崔烈为太尉。
现代文：太尉张温免职，任司徒崔烈为太尉。
English: Captain Zhang Wen was relieved of his duties, and Sittu Cui Rong was appointed captain.

古文：五月，司空许相为司徒，光禄勋沛国丁宫为司空。
现代文：五月，任司空许相为司徒，任光禄勋沛国丁宫为司空。
English: In May, Sikyong Xu Xiang was appointed as the disciple of Sikyong, and Sikyong Guanglu Xuanpei Guoding Gong was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：六月，洛阳民生男，两头共身。
现代文：六月，洛阳民生男，两头共一身。
English: In June, a man was born in Luoyang. He had two heads and one body.

古文：渔阳人张纯与同郡张举举兵叛，攻杀右北平太守刘政、辽东太守杨终、护乌桓校尉公綦稠等。
现代文：渔阳人张纯与同郡张举起兵叛乱，进攻杀害右北平太守刘政、辽东太守杨终、护乌桓校尉公綦稠等。
English: Zhang Chun of Yuyang and Zhang of the same county raised an army and rebelled, attacking and killing Liu Zheng, the governor of North Pyongan Province, Yang Zhan, the governor of East Liaoning Province, and Guohuan Colonel Gong Yuzhuo.

古文：举自称天子，寇幽、冀二州。
现代文：张举自称天子，寇掠幽、冀二州。
English: Zhang Jue claimed to be the son of heaven, and Guo Zhaoyu and Ji Erzhou followed.

古文：秋九月丁酉，令天下系囚罪未决，入缣赎。
现代文：秋季九月十三日，命令天下在押囚犯尚未判决的，可入缣赎罪。
English: On the 13th of September in the autumn, it was ordered that prisoners who have not yet been sentenced may enter the coffin to atone for their sins.

古文：冬十月，零陵人观鹄自称 平天将军 ，寇桂阳，长沙太守孙坚击斩之。
现代文：冬季十月，零陵人观鹄自称 平天将军 ，寇掠桂阳，长沙太守孙坚进击并杀掉了他。
English: In the winter of October, Guan Yu, a man from Luling who called himself General Ping Tian, raided Guiyang. Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, attacked and killed him.

古文：十一月，太尉崔烈罢，大司农曹嵩为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉崔烈罢去，任大司农曹嵩为太尉。
English: In November, First Lieutenant Cui Rong was dismissed, and Chief Superintendent Nong Cao Song was appointed First Lieutenant.

古文：十二月，休屠各胡叛。
现代文：十二月，休屠各胡叛乱。
English: In December, the rebellion was put to rest.

古文：是岁，卖关内侯，假金印紫绶，传世，入钱五百万。
现代文：这一年，卖关内侯，给予金印紫绶，可以传之世代子孙，入钱五百万。
English: In this year, selling Guan Nei Hou, giving gold seal purple ribbon, can be passed down to generations of descendants, cashed in five million.

古文：五年春正月，休屠各胡寇西河，杀郡守邢纪。
现代文：五年春正月，休屠各胡寇掠西河，杀害郡守邢纪。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the Huko raided the West River and killed the county governor, Yan Ji.

古文：丁酉，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：二月，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：二月彗星现于紫宫星座。
English: The February Comet is now in the constellation of Ursa Major.

古文：黄巾余贼郭太等起于西河白波谷，寇太原、河东。
现代文：黄巾余贼郭太等起于西河白波谷，寇掠太原、河东。
English: The Yellow Scarf Remnant Thief Guo Tai is located in the West River Baibo Valley, and the Thief Remnant Guo Taiyuan is located in the East of the West River.

古文：三月，休屠各胡攻杀并州刺史张懿，遂与南匈奴左部胡合，杀其单于。
现代文：三月，休屠各胡进攻杀害并州刺史张懿，并与南匈奴左部胡人相合，杀南匈奴单于。
English: In March, Xiu Tu Guo attacked and killed Zhang Qian, a member of the Southern Xiongnu, and joined forces with the Southern Xiongnu to kill the Southern Xiongnu.

古文：夏四月，汝南葛陂黄巾攻没郡县。
现代文：夏季四月，汝南葛陂黄巾攻没郡县。
English: In the summer of April, the Southern Gexiang Yellow Turban Army invaded the county.

古文：太尉曹嵩罢。
现代文：太尉曹嵩罢去。
English: Captain Cao Song is dismissed.

古文：五月，永乐少府樊陵为太尉。
现代文：五月，任永乐少府樊陵为太尉。
English: In May, he was appointed as Yongle Shofu Goryo and promoted to the rank of Lieutenant.

古文：六月丙寅，大风。
现代文：六月十六日，大风。
English: On the 16th of June, there was a strong wind.

古文：太尉樊陵罢。
现代文：太尉樊陵罢去。
English: Captain Huling, go away.

古文：益州黄巾马相攻杀刺史郗俭，自称天子，又寇巴郡，杀郡守赵部，益州从事贾龙击相，斩之。
现代文：益州黄巾马相，进攻杀害刺史希阝俭，自称天子，又寇掠巴郡，杀害郡守赵部，益州从事贾龙进击马相，把他杀了。
English: In Yizhou, Huangzhan Ma Xiang attacked and killed Zhang Shixin Jian, who claimed to be the son of heaven. He also invaded Ba County and killed the county governor Zhao Bu. In Yizhou, Jia Long attacked Ma Xiang and killed him.

古文：郡国七大水。
现代文：郡国七处发大水。
English: Seven places in the county have been affected by the floods.

古文：秋七月，射声校尉马日磾为太尉。
现代文：秋季七月，任射声校尉马日石单为太尉。
English: In the autumn of July, Ma Rishizan, who had been appointed as captain of the firing squad, was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：八月，初置西园八校尉。
现代文：八月，开始设置西园上军、中军、下军、典军、左、右、助军左、助军右八校尉。
English: In August, eight lieutenants were assigned to the West Park, including the first, middle, second, third, left, right, left auxiliary, and right auxiliary.

古文：司徒许相罢，司空丁宫为司徒。
现代文：司徒许相罢去，任司空丁宫为司徒。
English: Xu Xiang, the head monk, retired, leaving the second monk, Kong Dinggu, as the head monk.

古文：光禄勋南阳刘弘为司空。
现代文：任光禄勋南阳刘弘为司空。
English: Nanyang Liu Hong, a member of the Nanyang Guanglu Honor Society, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：卫尉董重为票骑将军。
现代文：任卫尉董重为骠骑将军。
English: Appointed Lieutenant of the Guards Dong Chong as the cavalry general.

古文：九月，南单于叛，与白波贼寇河东。
现代文：九月，南单于叛乱，与白波贼寇掠河东。
English: In September, Nan Shan rebelled and plundered the eastern part of He Dong with the Baibo bandits.

古文：遣中郎将孟益率骑都尉公孙瓒讨渔阳贼张纯等。
现代文：派中郎将孟益率骑都尉公孙瓒讨伐渔阳寇贼张纯等。
English: He sent Zhong Lang to lead Meng Mas to ride on the horse of the captain Gong Sun Ye to fight the Yoyang bandit Zhang Chun.

古文：冬十月，青、徐黄巾复起，寇郡县。
现代文：冬季十月，青州、徐州黄巾复起，寇掠郡县。
English: In the winter of October, the Qingzhou and Xuzhou yellow scarves were revived, and Guozhuang County was in the forefront.

古文：甲子，帝自称 无上将军 ，燿兵于平乐观。
现代文：十六日，帝自称 无上将军 ，在平乐观检阅军队。
English: On the 16th, the emperor, who claimed to be the supreme general, reviewed the army in an optimistic manner.

古文：十一月，凉州贼王国围陈仓，右将军皇甫嵩救之。
现代文：十一月，凉州贼王国围陈仓，右将军皇甫嵩去援助。
English: In November, the Liangzhou Thieves' Kingdom besieged Chen Cang, and the right general, Wang Fusong, came to its aid.

古文：遣下军校尉鲍鸿讨葛陂黄巾。
现代文：派下军校尉鲍鸿讨伐葛陂黄巾。
English: He sent Lieutenant Colonel Bao Hong to fight Gezi Yellow Turban.

古文：巴郡板楯蛮叛，遣上军别部司马赵瑾讨平之。
现代文：巴郡板楯蛮人叛乱，派上军别部司马赵瑾讨伐平息了叛乱。
English: Ba County Bandung barbarian rebellion, sent to the military department Sima Zhao Wei to quell the rebellion.

古文：公孙瓒与张纯战于石门，大破之。
现代文：公孙瓒在石门与张纯战斗，张纯大败。
English: Gongsun Yao fought against Zhang Chun in Shimen, and Zhang Chun suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：是岁，改刺史，新置牧。
现代文：这一年，改刺史，新设置牧。
English: This year, the history was changed and a new herd was set up.

古文：六年春二月，左将军皇甫嵩大破王国于陈仓。
现代文：六年春二月，左将军皇甫嵩在陈仓大败王国。
English: In the spring and February of the sixth year, the left general, Emperor Fusong, defeated the kingdom in Chencang.

古文：三月，幽州牧刘虞购斩渔阳贼张纯。
现代文：二月，幽州牧刘虞悬赏斩杀渔阳贼寇张纯。
English: In February, Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu offered a reward for the killing of the thief Zhang Chun.

古文：下军校尉鲍鸿下狱死。
现代文：下军校尉鲍鸿监死狱中。
English: Retired army lieutenant Bao Hong was sentenced to death in prison.

古文：夏四月丙午朔，日有食之。太尉马日磾免，幽州牧刘虞为太尉。
现代文：夏季四月初一，日蚀。太尉马日石单免职，任幽州牧刘虞为太尉。
English: On the first day of April in summer, there was a solar eclipse. The Taiyi Ma Rishi Shan was relieved of his duties, and the Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu was appointed as Taiyi.

古文：丙辰，帝崩于南宫嘉德殿，年三十四。
现代文：十一日，帝逝世于南宫嘉德殿。年三十四。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor died at the South Palace, Jiade Hall, at the age of 34.

古文：戊午，皇子辩即皇帝位，年十七。
现代文：十三日，皇子辩即皇帝位，年十七。
English: On the thirteenth day, the prince became emperor, in the seventeenth year.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，太后临朝。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager, and the empress dowager rules the imperial court.

古文：大赦天下，改元为光熹。
现代文：大赦天下，改元为光熹。
English: The country was amnestied, and the era name was changed to Guangxu.

古文：封皇弟协为渤海王。
现代文：封皇弟刘协为渤海王。
English: Liu Xie, the younger brother of the emperor, was named the king of the Bohai Sea.

古文：后将军袁隗为太傅，与大将军何进参录尚书事。
现代文：任后将军袁隗为太傅，与大将军何进参与总领尚书事。
English: After his appointment, General Yuan Qi became the Taifu, and he and General He Jin took part in the General Shang's bookkeeping.

古文：上军校尉蹇硕下狱死。
现代文：上军校尉蹇硕监死狱中。
English: Colonel-in-Chief Shen Shuo died in prison.

古文：五月辛巳，票骑将军董重下狱死。
现代文：五月初六，骠骑将军董重监死狱中。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, the general of the imperial cavalry, Dong Chong, was sentenced to death.

古文：六月辛亥，孝仁皇后董氏崩。
现代文：六月初七，孝仁皇后董氏逝世。
English: On June 7th, Empress Dowager Xiaojin passed away.

古文：辛酉，葬孝灵皇帝于文陵。
现代文：十七日，葬孝灵皇帝于文陵。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Xiaoling was buried in the Wenling Mausoleum.

古文：雨水。
现代文：雨水多。
English: There is a lot of rain.

古文：秋七月，甘陵王忠薨。
现代文：秋七月，甘陵王刘忠逝世。
English: In autumn and July, Liu Zhong, King of Ganling, passed away.

古文：庚寅，孝仁皇后归葬河间慎陵。
现代文：十六日，孝仁皇后归葬河间慎陵。
English: On the 16th, Empress Takahito was buried in the Mausoleum of Kawama Shinshiro.

古文：徙渤海王协为陈留王。
现代文：调徙渤海王刘协为陈留王。
English: Liu Xie, the relocated king of the Bohai Sea, became the king of Chenliu.

古文：司徒丁宫罢。
现代文：司徒丁宫罢去。
English: Let's go to the Stouting Palace.

古文：八月戊辰，中常侍张让、段珪杀大将军何进，于是虎贲中郎将袁术烧东西宫，攻诸宦者。
现代文：八月二十五日，中常侍张让、段王圭等杀大将军何进，于是虎贲中郎将袁术烧东西宫，攻击宦官。
English: On August 25, Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui, and other middle-ranking attendants killed the great general He Jin, so the middle-ranking eunuch, Tigress, burned Yuan Shu's East and West Palaces and attacked the eunuch.

古文：庚午，张让、段珪等劫少帝及陈留王幸北宫德阳殿。
现代文：二十七日，张让、段王圭等劫持少帝及陈留王刘协到北宫德阳殿。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others abducted the young emperor and Chen Rui Wang Liu Xie to the Northern Palace Deyang Hall.

古文：何进部曲将吴匡与车骑将军何苗战于朱雀阙下，苗败，斩之。
现代文：何进部曲将吴匡与车骑将军何苗战于朱雀阙下，何苗打败斩杀了吴匡。
English: He Jinbu Qu led Wu Kuang and the chariot and cavalry general He Miao into battle under the command of Zhu Yao, and He Miao defeated and killed Wu Kuang.

古文：辛末，司隶校尉袁绍勒后收伪司隶校尉樊陵、河南尹许相及诸阉人，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：二十八日，司隶校尉袁绍统率军队拘捕伪司隶校尉樊陵、河南尹许相及诸多宦官，不分少长都杀掉。
English: On the 28th, Sili Lieutenant Yuan Shao Tong led the army to arrest the fake Sili Lieutenant Fuling, Henan Yin Xuxiang and many eunuchs, and killed them all.

古文：让、珪等复劫少帝、陈留王走小平津。
现代文：张让、段王圭等又把少帝、及陈留王刘协劫持到小平津。
English: Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others also abducted the young emperor and Chen Rui Wang Liu Xie to Xiaopingjin.

古文：尚书卢植追让、珪等，斩数人，其余投河而死。
现代文：尚书卢植追张让、段王圭等，斩掉数人，其余投黄河淹死。
English: Shangshu Lu Zhi chased Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others, beheaded several people, and drowned the rest in the Yellow River.

古文：帝与陈留王协夜步逐荧光行数里，得民家露车，共乘之。
现代文：帝与陈留王刘协黑夜步行跟着微弱的萤光走好几里，得一上无巾盖、四旁无帷裳、民家用以载物的露车，两人共同乘坐了。
English: The emperor and Chen Liu Wang walked for several miles in the dark, following the faint fluorescence. They got a trolley without a cover, without curtains on all sides, and used by private houses to carry things. The two of them rode together.

古文：辛未，还宫。
现代文：二十八日，帝还宫。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：大赦天下，改光熹为昭宁。
现代文：大赦天下，改光熹为昭宁。
English: The country was amnestied, and Akinobu became the new shogun.

古文：并州牧董卓杀执金吾丁原。
现代文：并州牧董卓杀执金吾丁原。
English: And the State Pastoral Director Zhuo killed Kingu Dingyuan.

古文：司空刘弘免，董卓自为司空。
现代文：司空刘弘免职，董卓自为司空。
English: Liu Hong, the flight attendant, was relieved of duty, and Dong Zhuo became the flight attendant.

古文：九月甲戌，董卓废帝为弘农王。
现代文：九月初一，董卓废帝为弘农王。
English: On the first day of September, Emperor Dongzhuo became the King of Hongnong.

古文：自六月雨，至于是月。
现代文：自六月下雨起，直至这个月。
English: It rained from June until this month.

