古文：钱淯阳童子文德皇后岑文本王清建安村人徐仲宝邢氏林氏曹真
现代文：钱淯阳童子文德皇后岑文本王清建安村人徐仲宝邢氏林氏曹真
English: Qian Qian Yang Doji, Wen De Qian, Wang Qing, Jian An villagers, Xu Zhong, Baoji Lin Clan, Cao Zhen

古文：奇物徐景中牟铁锥毒槊集翠裘谢灵运须开元渔者杨妃袜紫米
现代文：奇物徐景中牟铁锥毒槊集翠裘谢灵运须开元渔者杨妃袜紫米
English: Curiosities Xu Jing Middle Mou Iron Cone Poisonous Toad Set Cui Qiu Xie Spiritual Fortune Must Open Yuan Fisherman Yangfei Socks Purple Rice

古文：嘉陵江巨木江淮市人桃核玉龙膏段成式李德裕夏侯孜严遵仙槎钱
现代文：嘉陵江巨木江淮市人桃核玉龙膏段成式李德裕夏侯孜严遵仙槎钱
English: Jialing River giant tree Jianghuai City human peach kernel jade dragon paste segment formed Li Deyu Xia Hou Zi Yan Zunxian money

古文：淯阳童子
现代文：淯阳童子
English: Shinyang Doji

古文：晋义熙十二载，淯阳县群童子，浴于淯水。忽见侧有钱出，如流沙，因竞取之。
现代文：晋安帝义熙十二年，淯阳县的一群儿童，在淯河里洗澡，忽然发现身边有钱涌出，像流沙一样。
English: In the 12th year of Emperor Andei of Jin Dynasty, a group of children in Fenyang County, taking a bath in the Fenhe River, suddenly found money gushing out around them, like quicksand.

古文：手满，放随流去。
现代文：于是孩子们就争抢着捞取那些钱，手捞满之后，许多钱顺流而去。
English: So the kids scrambled to get their hands on the money, and when they were full, a lot of it went down the drain.

古文：又以衣盛裹，各有所得。
现代文：他们又用衣服裹钱，各有所得。
English: They also wrapped money in their clothes and each took a piece.

古文：又见流线中有一铜车，小牛牵之，势甚奔迅。
现代文：又看到流钱中有一辆小铜车，由一头小牛拉着，在水中跑得很快。
English: He also saw a small copper cart in the stream, pulled by a calf, running fast in the water.

古文：儿等奔逐，掣得一轮。
现代文：孩子们追赶上去，拽下来一个车轮。
English: The children run after it and pull down one of its wheels.

古文：径可五寸，猪鼻，毂有六辐，通然青色。
现代文：车轮的直径有五寸，猪形鼻，毂上装有六根辐条，全是青色。
English: The diameter of the wheel is five inches, the nose is pig-shaped, and there are six spokes on the hub, all of which are blue.

古文：缸内黄脱，状如恒运。
现代文：从插轴的圆孔看，像是长久运转的样子。
English: From the round hole of the plug shaft, it looks like it has been running for a long time.

古文：于时沈敞守南阳，求得此物，然莫测之。
现代文：当时沈敞是南阳太守。他弄到此物，但是没有弄清究竟是个什么东西。
English: At that time, Shen Cang was the governor of Nanyang. He got this thing, but he didn't figure out what it was.

古文：文德皇后
现代文：文德皇后
English: Empress Wente

古文：钱有文如甲迹者，因文德皇后也。
现代文：有一种钱的图案像指甲掐出的痕迹似的，那是因为文德皇后而形成的。
English: There is a kind of money pattern like fingernail scratches, which was formed because of Empress Wende.

古文：武德中，废五铢钱，行开通元宝钱。
现代文：武德年间，废止五铢钱的流通，开始使用 开元通宝 钱。
English: During the Wude era, the circulation of 50 baht coins was abolished, and the use of Kaiyuan Tongbao coins began.

古文：此四字及书，皆欧阳洵所为也。
现代文：这四字的书写，是欧阳洵完成的。
English: The writing of these four characters was completed by Ouyang Zang.

古文：初进样日，后掐一甲迹，因是有之。
现代文：当初将设计图样送给皇帝审查时，文德皇后在那上面掐出了一道指甲印儿，因此铸钱的时候把指甲印儿也铸出来了。
English: When the design was initially sent to the emperor for review, Empress Wende stamped a thumbnail on it, so the thumbnail was also stamped when the money was minted.

古文：岑文本
现代文：岑文本
English: Text from

古文：唐贞观中，岑文本下朝，多于山亭避暑。
现代文：唐贞观年间，岑文本下了朝多半都在山亭避暑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, most of the emperors stayed in mountain pavilions during the summer.

古文：日午时，寤初觉，忽有扣山亭院门者。
现代文：一日午时，刚睡醒，忽听得有人在山亭院门外敲门。
English: One afternoon, just after waking up, I suddenly heard someone knocking on the door outside the pavilion.

古文：药竖报云，上清童子元宝，故此参奉。文本性素慕道，束带命入。
现代文：药童报告说，是上清童子元宝求见。岑文本平素喜欢道教，一听是道士求见，就急忙束带让他进来。
English: The medicine boy reported that it was the Upper Qing Dynasty boy Yuan Bao who asked to see him. Yan Wenbin normally liked Taoism, and when he heard that it was a Taoist who asked to see him, he hurriedly tied him up and let him in.

古文：乃年二十已下道士，仪质爽迈，衣服纤异。
现代文：进来的居然是一个不满二十岁的小道士，仪态气质超凡脱俗，真可谓仙风道骨，衣服也与众不同。
English: What came in was actually a minor Taoist under the age of twenty, with an unearthly demeanor and temperament, truly a fairy tale, and his clothes were also unique.

古文：冠浅青圆角冠，衣浅青圆用帔，履青圆头履。
现代文：戴浅青色圆角道士帽，披浅青色圆角帔，穿青色圆头鞋。
English: He wears a light blue round-cornered Taoist cap, a light blue round-cornered cassock, and blue round-toed shoes.

古文：衣服轻细如雾，非齐绔鲁缟之比。
现代文：小道士的衣服轻细如雾，有名的齐绔鲁缟也不能与它相比。
English: The clothing of a minor Taoist is as light as fog, and the famous Qi Gong Luwu can't be compared to it.

古文：文本与语。
现代文：岑文本和他说话。
English: The text speaks to him.

古文：乃曰： 仆上清童子，自汉朝而果成。
现代文：他便说： 我是上清童子，从汉朝时就修成正果。
English: He said, "I am a boy from the Upper Qing Dynasty, and I have been cultivating since the Han Dynasty.

古文：本生于吴，已得不凝滞之道，遂为吴王进入，见汉帝。
现代文：本来生于吴地，修得不凝滞之道之后，就被吴王送进京城，见到汉帝。
English: Originally born in Wudi, he was sent by the King of Wu to the capital to meet the Han Emperor after he had learned the way of not being stagnant.

古文：汉帝有事，拥遏教化，不得者无不相问。
现代文：汉帝有私心，阻塞教化，困惑不解的都求教于我。
English: The Han emperor had selfishness, obstructed enlightenment, and those who were puzzled asked me for advice.

古文：仆尝与方圆行下，皆得通畅。
现代文：我尝与方圆走下去，全能够通畅。
English: If I try to walk with the square, everything can go smoothly.

古文：由是自著，文、武二帝，迄至哀帝，皆相眷。王莽作乱，方出外方，所至皆沐人怜爱。
现代文：所以自文武二帝，直到哀帝，都喜欢我。王莽作乱，我才到了外地，到哪里都受到人们的喜爱。
English: Therefore, from Emperor Wenwu II to Emperor Paidei, they all liked me. Wang Mang made a mess, so I went to other places, and I was loved by people everywhere.

古文：自汉成帝时，遂厌人间，乃尸解而去。或秦或楚，不常厥居。
现代文：从汉成帝时起，我就开始讨厌人间了，就尸解而去，或秦地或楚地，不一定在哪落脚。
English: From the time of Emperor Han, I began to hate the human world, and I left, either to Qin or Chu, not necessarily where to settle down.

古文：闻公好道，故此相谒耳。 
现代文：听说你好道教，所以来拜见你。 
English: I heard that you are a Taoist, so I came to see you.

古文：文本诘以汉魏齐梁间君王社稷之事，了了如目睹。
现代文：岑文本向道士问些汉魏齐梁之间君王社稷的事，道士有问必答，对答如流，事事都像他亲眼见过。
English: The text asks the Taoist about the kings and emperors between the Han and Wei dynasties. The Taoist has questions to answer, and the answers are flowing, and everything is like he has seen with his own eyes.

古文：因言史传间，屈者虚者亦甚多。
现代文：他对岑文本说，史传之中，受委屈被冤枉了的以及虚有个好名声其实并不好的很多。
English: He told Xinwen that in history, there are a lot of wronged people who have been wronged and who have a false good reputation.

古文：文本曰： 吾人冠帔，何制度之异？ 
现代文：岑文本说： 人的穿戴为什么不同呢？ 
English: The transcript said: "Why are people's clothes different?

古文：对曰： 夫道在于方圆之中，仆外服圆而心方正，相时之仪也。 
现代文：道士回答说： 道就在方圆之中。我的外形是圆的，但是心是方正的。这是相时的准则呀！ 
English: The Taoist replied, "The way is in the square. My appearance is round, but my mind is square. This is the principle of phase time!"

古文：又问曰： 衣服皆轻细，何土所出？ 
现代文：岑文本又问： 你身上穿的衣服都很轻细，是什么地方出产的？ 
English: The message also asked: The clothes you are wearing are very light. Where are they made?

古文：对曰： 此是上清五铢服。 
现代文：道士回答说： 这是上清五铢服。 
English: The Taoist replied, "This is the dress of the Upper Qing Dynasty.

古文：又问曰： 比闻六铢者天人衣，何五铢之异？ 
现代文：岑文本又问： 听说六铢服是天上人穿的衣服，它和五铢服有什么不同？ 
English: The text also asked: It is said that the six-branched robe is the robe worn by celestial beings. How is it different from the five-branched robe?

古文：对曰： 尤细者则五铢也。 
现代文：道士回答说： 更轻细的就是五铢服。 
English: The Taoist replied, "The lighter one is the five-layered robe."

古文：谈论不觉日晚，乃别去。
现代文：他们谈着谈着，不觉很快谈到日晚，道士就告别回去了。
English: They talked and talked, and before they knew it, they were talking about the day and night, and the Taoist said goodbye and went home.

古文：才出门而忽不见。文本知是异人。
现代文：他刚出门就忽然不见了，岑文本便知道他不是个平常人。
English: He had just left the house when he suddenly disappeared, and the police knew he was not an ordinary person.

古文：乃每下朝，即令伺之，到则话论移时。
现代文：每次下朝，岑文本都让人等候那道士，道士一来，他们就谈论个没完没了。
English: Every morning, the sutras make people wait for the Taoist, and when the Taoist comes, they talk endlessly.

古文：后令人潜送，诣其所止。
现代文：后来又让人暗中跟踪他，看他究竟到什么地方去。
English: Later, he was secretly followed to see where he was going.

古文：出山亭门，东行数步，于院墙下瞥然而没。
现代文：结果是他出山亭门，往东走不几步，在墙下就眼睁睁地不见了。
English: The result was that he went out of the gate of the pavilion, walked a few steps to the east, and disappeared under the wall.

古文：文本命工力掘之，三尺至一古墓。
现代文：岑文本让人就地挖掘，挖三尺挖到一个古坟墓。
English: Text lets people dig in place, dig three feet into an ancient grave.

古文：墓中无余物，惟得古钱一枚。
现代文：墓中没有别的东西，只有一枚古钱。
English: There was nothing else in the grave but an old coin.

古文：文本方悟，上青童子是青铜；名元宝，钱之文也；外圆心方，钱之状也；青衣铜衣也；五铢服亦钱之文也；汉时生于吴，是汉朝铸五铢钱子吴王也。
现代文：岑文本顿然大悟。 上清童子 是 青铜 的意思；名 元宝 是钱上的字； 外圆心方 是钱的形状；青衣就铜衣； 五铢 服也是钱上的文字； 汉时生于吴 是汉朝在吴王那里铸了五铢一枚的钱。
English: I suddenly understood the meaning of the Chinese characters: "上清童子" means "bronze"; "名元宝" is the character on the money; "外圆心方" is the shape of the money; "青衣" means "bronze"; "五服" is also the character on the money; "汉时于吴" means "born in Wuxi" in the Han Dynasty.

古文：文本虽知之，而钱帛日盛，至中书令。
现代文：岑文本虽然知道这些，但他自己的钱财还是越来越多，官做到中书令。
English: Although he knows all this, he still has more and more money of his own, and the officials do as they are told.

古文：十年，忽失古钱所在，文本遂薨。
现代文：十年之后，忽然失去了那枚古钱，岑文本便死了。
English: Ten years later, he suddenly lost the old money, and 文本 passed away.

古文：王清
现代文：王清
English: Wang Qing

古文：元和初，洛阳村百姓王清，佣力得钱五锾，因买田畔一枯栗树，将为薪以求利。
现代文：元和初年，洛阳村百姓王清，卖苦力赚了五锾钱，就买了地边上的一棵枯死的栗子树，要把它加工成木柴出卖，赚几个钱花。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Heian period, Wang Qing, a villager in Luoyang village, earned five hundred yuan by selling coolies. He bought a dead chestnut tree on the edge of the land and wanted to process it into firewood and sell it to make a few bucks.

古文：经宿，为邻人盗斫。
现代文：夜里，有一个邻人去偷砍这棵栗树。
English: During the night, a neighbour went to cut down the chestnut tree.

古文：创及腹，忽有黑蛇，举首如臂。语人曰： 我王清本也，汝勿斫！ 
现代文：砍入树身，忽然有一条黑蛇，抬起像人的手臂那么粗的头来，对偷砍树的人说： 我是王清的树干，你不要砍！ 
English: After cutting into the tree, a black snake suddenly raised its head, which was as thick as a man's arm, and said to the person who was secretly cutting down the tree, "I am Wang Qing's trunk. Don't cut it down!"

古文：其人惊惧，失斤而走。
现代文：那人吓得魂飞魄散，丢下斧子就跑。
English: The man was so scared that he dropped the axe and ran.

古文：及明，王清率子孙薪之，复掘其根下，得大瓮二，散钱实之。
现代文：等到天明，王清率领子孙把枯树砍倒，又往树根底下挖，挖出来两口大瓮，里面装满了零散的钱。
English: At dawn, Wang Qing led his children and grandchildren to cut down the dead tree, and then dug under the root of the tree, digging out two large bags, which were filled with scattered money.

古文：王清因是获利如归，十余年巨富。
现代文：王清因此获利而归，十几年之后成为巨富。
English: As a result, Wang Qing made a profit and became a millionaire ten years later.

古文：遂甃钱成形龙，号王清本。
现代文：那事之后，瓮里的钱就化作龙形，这钱称作 王清本 。
English: After that, the money in the bowl turned into a dragon, and this money is called Wang Qingben.

古文：建安村人
现代文：建安村人
English: Jian'an villagers

古文：建安有村人，乘小舟往来建溪中，卖薪为业。
现代文：建安有个村人，撑着小船往返于建溪之上，卖柴为生。
English: There is a villager in Jian'an who makes a living selling firewood by sailing small boats up and down Jian'an Creek.

古文：尝泊舟登岸，将伐薪。忽见山上有数钱流下，稍上寻之，累获数十。
现代文：有一天，他把船靠了岸，上山砍柴，忽然看见山上有几枚钱滚下来。他往上寻找，一共拾到几十枚。
English: One day, he put the boat ashore, went up the mountain to cut wood, and suddenly saw a few coins rolling down the mountain. He looked up and picked up dozens of coins.

古文：可及山半，有大树。下有大瓮。高五六尺，钱满其中。
现代文：寻到山半腰，他看到一棵大树，大树下有一口大瓮，瓮高五六尺，里边装满了钱。
English: When he got halfway up the mountain, he saw a large tree. Under the tree was a large jar, five or six feet high, which was filled with money.

古文：而瓮小欹，故钱流出。
现代文：但是瓮稍微歪斜一点，所以钱能流出来。
English: But the yoke is a bit more crooked, so money can flow out.

古文：子是推而正之，以石搘之。
现代文：于是他去把瓮推正，用石头支住。
English: So he went and propped it up on a rock.

古文：以衣襟贮五百余而归。
现代文：然后他脱下衣服，包了五百多拿回家。
English: Then he took off his clothes, packed more than five hundred and took them home.

古文：尽率家人复往，将尽取。
现代文：他马上就领着全家人返回去，要把那些钱全弄回来。
English: He immediately returned with his whole family to get all the money back.

古文：既至，得旧路，见大树而亡其瓮。
现代文：来到山上，找到原先那条路，很快就又来到那棵大树下。但是那口大瓮却不知哪里去了。
English: I came to the mountain, found the original path, and soon came under the big tree again. But the big otter did not know where to go.

古文：村人徘徊，数日不能去。
现代文：那人悔恨得要死，徘徊了好几天也不肯离开。
English: The man was mortified and lingered for days, refusing to leave.

古文：夜梦人告之曰： 此钱有主。
现代文：一天夜里他做了一个梦，梦中有人告诉他说： 那些钱是有主的。
English: One night he had a dream in which someone told him: That money belongs to God.

古文：向为瓮欹，以五百顾尔正之。余不可妄想也。 
现代文：几天前因为瓮歪了，用五百钱雇你把瓮弄正罢了，其余的钱不可妄想。 
English: A few days ago, because the beak was crooked, I hired you for five hundred dollars to straighten the beak. The rest of the money can't be imagined.

古文：徐仲宝
现代文：徐仲宝
English: Xu Zhongbao

古文：徐仲宝者，长沙人。
现代文：徐仲宝是长沙人。
English: Xu Zhongbao is from Changsha.

古文：所居道南有大枯树，合数大抱。
现代文：他家道南有一棵大枯树，好几抱粗。
English: There is a large dead tree in the south of his family's road, with several thick branches.

古文：有仆夫洒扫其下，沙中获钱百余，以告仲宝。
现代文：一个仆人洒扫树下，从沙土中拾到一百多钱。
English: A servant swept under the tree and found more than a hundred coins in the sand.

古文：仲宝自往，亦获数百。
现代文：仆人把这事告诉了徐仲宝，徐仲宝亲自前往，也拾到几百钱。
English: The servant told Xu Zhongbao about this. Xu Zhongbao went there in person and also picked up a few hundred yuan.

古文：自尔每须钱，即往扫其下，必有所得。
现代文：从此以后，每当需要钱花，他就到树下洒扫，总有不小的收获。
English: From then on, whenever he needed to spend money, he would sweep under the tree, and there was always a good harvest.

古文：如是积年，凡得数十万。
现代文：如此累计一年，共得钱好几十万。
English: Cumulatively, over the course of a year, the total amount of money earned was several hundred thousand.

古文：仲宝后至扬都，选授舒城令。
现代文：徐仲宝后来到了扬都，被选授为舒城县令。
English: Xu Zhongbao later came to Yangdu and was elected as the Shucheng County magistrate.

古文：暇日，与家人共坐地中，忽有白气甚劲烈，斜飞向外而去。
现代文：一天无事，与家人共同坐在院子里闲谈，忽然有一股猛烈的白色气体向外斜飞而去，气中好像有什么东西。
English: One day, while sitting and chatting with his family in the yard, suddenly a violent white gas billowed out. There seemed to be something in the gas.

古文：中若有物，其妻以手攫之，得一玉蛱蝶。制作精妙，人莫能测。
现代文：他的妻子伸手一抓，抓到一个玉蛱蝶。玉蛱蝶的做工十分精巧，谁也不能解释这是怎么回事。
English: His wife reached out and grabbed one of the butterflies, which are so delicately made that no one can explain what it is.

古文：后为乐平令，家人复往，于厨侧鼠穴中，得钱甚多。
现代文：后来他又调任乐平令，家人又要跟着前往，搬家时在厨房旁边的耗子洞中发现了不少钱。
English: Later, he was transferred to Leping, and his family had to move with him. When they moved, they found a lot of money in the rat hole next to the kitchen.

古文：仲宝即率人掘之，深数尺，有一白雀飞出，止于庭树。
现代文：于是徐仲宝率领人往下挖掘，挖了几尺深的时候，有一只白色小鸟飞出来，落到院子里的一棵树上。
English: So Xu Zhongbao led the people to dig down. When they dug a few feet deep, a white bird flew out and landed on a tree in the yard.

古文：其下获钱至百万，钱尽，白雀乃去，不知所之。
现代文：于是在树下得钱一百多万。钱收完之后，小鸟飞去，不知飞向何方。
English: So he got more than a million dollars under the tree. After collecting the money, the bird flew away, I don't know where it went.

古文：邢氏
现代文：邢氏
English: Tsukuda clan

古文：建业有库子姓邢，家贫。
现代文：建业有个管库的人姓邢，他家里很穷。
English: Jianye has a warehouse manager surnamed Zou, and his family is very poor.

古文：聚钱满二千，辄病，或失去。
现代文：他攒钱攒到两千就生病。他的钱有的就丢失了。
English: He had saved up to two thousand when he fell ill. Some of his money was lost.

古文：其妻窃聚钱，埋于地中。
现代文：他的妻子偷偷地攒钱，埋到地下。
English: His wife secretly saved money and buried it underground.

古文：一夕，忽闻有声如虫飞，自地出，穿窗户而去，有触墙壁坠地者。明日视之，皆钱。
现代文：一天夜里，忽然听到有一种声音象小虫在飞，是从地里钻出来的，穿过窗户飞去。有撞到墙上然后落到地上的，天亮一看，竟然都是钱。
English: One night, I suddenly heard a sound like a small insect flying. It came out of the ground and flew through the window. It hit the wall and fell to the ground. When I looked up in the morning, it was all money.

古文：其妻乃告埋瘗之处，发视皆亡矣。
现代文：他的妻就把埋钱的地方告诉他，挖开一看，钱全没了。
English: His wife told him where the money was buried, and when she dug it up, the money was gone.

古文：邢后得一自然石龟，其状如真，置庭中石榴树下。
现代文：姓邢的后来得到一个自然生成的石龟，形状和真龟一样。他把石龟放在院子里的石榴树下。
English: Zou later obtained a naturally occurring stone turtle, the same shape as a real turtle, and placed it under a pomegranate tree in his yard.

古文：或见之曰： 此宝物也。 
现代文：有的人看到了就说这是宝物。
English: Some people see it and say it's a treasure.

古文：因收置筐箧中。
现代文：于是就把石龟收放到筐箧之中。
English: So they put the tortoise in a basket.

古文：自尔稍充足，后颇富矣。
现代文：从此，他家稍稍充足了些，后来居然过得很富了。
English: From then on, his family was a little more well-off, and later he became very rich.

古文：林氏
现代文：林氏
English: Mr. Lin

古文：汀州有林氏，其先尝为郡守，罢任家居。
现代文：汀州有个姓林的人，他的先人曾经做过郡守，罢任以后一直在家里闲居。
English: There is a man surnamed Lin in Tingzhou. His ancestors once served as county governors and have been idling at home ever since.

古文：一日，天忽雨钱，充积其家。
现代文：一天，天下的是钱雨，满地是钱。
English: One day, it was raining money all over the world.

古文：林氏乃整衣冠，仰天而祝曰： 非常之事，必将为祸。
现代文：全家老老少少都往家里收钱，钱把家装满了。姓林的就整整衣冠仰天祷告说： 这是不正常的事，一定会带来灾祸的。
English: The whole family, young and old, went to the house to collect money, and the money filled the house. The family member surnamed Lin put on a full set of clothes and prayed to the heavens, saying, "This is not normal, and it will surely bring disaster."

古文：于此速止，林氏之福也。 
现代文：现在赶快停止，就是林氏家族的福气啊！ 
English: Now hurry up and stop, it's the Lin family's good fortune!

古文：应声则止。
现代文：钱雨应声而止。
English: The rain of money stopped.

古文：所收已钜万，至今为富人云。曹真
现代文：而他家收取的做已经巨万，至今还是富人。曹真
English: But what his family received was already huge, and they are still rich. Cao Zhen

古文：寿春人曹真。出行野外。忽见坡下有数十钱。自远而来，飞声如铃。
现代文：寿春人曹真，正在野外行走，忽然看到坡下有几千钱从远处飞来，发出铃响一般的声音。
English: Cao Zhen, a Shouchun resident, was walking in the field when he suddenly saw thousands of money flying down the slope from a distance, making a sound like a bell ringing.

古文：真逐之。
现代文：曹真就去追赶那些钱。
English: Cao Zhen chased after the money.

古文：入一小穴。
现代文：那些钱落入一个小小的地洞中。
English: The money fell into a small hole in the ground.

古文：以手掬之。
现代文：他用手往外抠钱，只弄到几十枚。
English: He shoveled money out with his hands, but only got a few dozen coins.

古文：以衣襟贮之。
现代文：另外，舒州桐城县双戌港，发生过旋风卷钱的事。
English: In addition, Shuangyuan Port, Tongcheng County, Shuzhou, had a cyclone rolling money.

古文：风入古墓荆棘中。人不能入而止。所得钱。
现代文：风卷着钱从市场上掠过，市场上的人一齐跟着抓取风中之钱，用衣襟兜着。旋风进入古墓荆棘之中，人不能再追了，便停下来。
English: The wind swept the money from the market, and the people in the market all followed, grabbing the money in the wind and carrying it in their lapels. The whirlwind entered the thorns of the ancient tomb, and people could no longer chase it and stopped.

古文：归家视之。与常钱无异。
现代文：回家一看，得到的钱与平常的钱没什么两样。
English: When I got home, I saw that the money I received was no different from ordinary money.

古文：而皆言亡八九矣。
现代文：但是大家都说钱少了百分之八九十。
English: But everyone says they have lost eighty or ninety percent of their money.

古文：奇物
现代文：奇物
English: A strange thing

古文：徐景
现代文：徐景
English: Xu Jing

古文：晋时有徐景，于宣阳门外得一锦麝袱。至家开视，有虫如蝉。五色，后两足各缀一五铢钱。
现代文：晋朝时有一个叫徐景的人。他在宣阳门外拾到一个绣有花样喷有香气的小包袱，回家打开一看，里边包着一个蝉一样的小虫，五色，后边的两条腿各缀有一枚五铢钱。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Jing. He picked up a small package embroidered with patterns and sprayed with fragrance outside the Xuanyang Gate, went home and opened it. Inside was a small insect like a cicada, five colors, and each of the two legs on the back was decorated with a 50 baht coin.

古文：中牟铁锥
现代文：中牟铁锥
English: Chumut Iron Cone

古文：中牟县魏任城王台下池中，有汉时铁锥，长六尺，入地三尺，头西南指，不可动。
现代文：中牟县魏任城王台下池中，有一把汉朝那时候留下来的大铁锥，长六尺，埋在地里三尺，锥头指向西南，不能动。
English: In the lower pond of Wei Rencheng Wang Tai in Zhongmou County, there is a large iron cone left by the Han Dynasty. It is six feet long and buried three feet underground. The cone head points to the southwest and cannot be moved.

古文：毒槊
现代文：毒槊
English: Drug lord

古文：南蛮有毒槊，无刃，状如朽铁。
现代文：南方有一杆有毒的长矛，没有开刃，样子就像朽烂的铁。
English: To the south is a poisoned spear, without a blade, looking like rotting iron.

古文：中人无血而死。
现代文：人如果被它刺中，不出血就死。
English: If you get stung by it, you'll die without bleeding.

古文：言从天雨下，入地丈余，祭地方掘入。蛮中呼为铎刃。
现代文：人们说这长矛是从天上掉下来的，扎进地里一丈多深，举行过祭祀的仪式才挖出来。当地少数民族称它为 铎刃 。
English: People say that this spear fell from the sky, plunged deep into the ground, and was dug out after a sacrificial ceremony. Local ethnic minorities call it the blade.

古文：集翠裘
现代文：集翠裘
English: Shu Cui Qiu

古文：则天时，南海郡献集翠裘。
现代文：武则天的时候，南海郡献来一件集翠裘。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian, Nanhai County presented a collection of poems to the emperor.

古文：珍丽异常。
现代文：此裘非常珍贵富丽。
English: This qiu is very precious and rich.

古文：张昌宗侍侧，则天因以赐之。
现代文：张昌宗侍奉在左右，武则天就把这件集翠裘赐给了他。
English: Zhang Changzong's attendants were on his right and left, and Wu Zetian gave him this set of Cui Qiu.

古文：遂命披裘，供奉双陆。
现代文：然后就让他当面穿上，和她玩一种叫做 双陆 的赌博游戏。
English: She then made him put it on in front of her and play a gambling game called double land with her.

古文：宰相狄仁杰，时入奏事。则天令升坐，因命仁杰与昌宗双陆。
现代文：正赶上这时候宰相狄仁杰进来奏事，武则天就让狄仁杰和张昌宗玩一玩 双陆 。
English: Just in time for this, Prime Minister Di Renjie came in to make a report, and Wu Zetian let Di Renjie and Zhang Changzong play a game of double land.

古文：狄拜恩就局。
现代文：狄仁杰拜恩就座。
English: Dijenjebein takes his seat.

古文：则天曰： 卿二人赌何物？ 
现代文：武则天说： 你们两小赌什么东西？ 
English: Wu Zetian said, "What are you two kids gambling for?

古文：狄对曰： 争三筹，赌昌宗所衣毛裘。 
现代文：狄仁杰回答说： 三局两胜，赌昌宗身上穿的这件皮袍子。 
English: Di Renjie replied, "I won two out of three games by betting on this leather robe worn by Changzong.

古文：则天谓曰： 卿以何物为对。 
现代文：武则天又说： 你用什么东西相抵呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian also said: What do you use to compete?

古文：狄曰，指所衣紫絁袍曰： 臣以此敌。 
现代文：狄仁杰指了指自己身上穿的紫袍说： 我用这个。 
English: Di Renjie pointed to the purple robe he was wearing and said: I'll use this one.

古文：则天笑曰，卿未知。此裘价逾千金。
现代文：武则天笑道： 你还不知道，他身上这件皮袍子价钱超过千金呢！
English: Wu Zetian smiled, "You still don't know that this leather robe on his body is worth more than a thousand dollars!"

古文：卿之所指，为不等矣。 
现代文：可你那件，和它没法对等！ 
English: But yours, it doesn't compare!

古文：狄起曰： 臣此袍，乃大臣朝见奏对之衣；昌宗所衣，乃嬖幸宠遇之服。
现代文：狄仁杰站起来说： 我这件袍子，是大臣朝对天子的衣服，高贵无价；而张昌宗的这件，只不过是受到宠幸的衣服。
English: Di Renjie stood up and said, "This robe of mine is the robe of a minister to the Son of Heaven, noble and priceless; but this robe of Zhang Changzong is just a favored robe.

古文：对臣此袍，臣犹怏怏。 
现代文：两件相对，我还不服气呢！ 
English: Two things against each other, I'm still not convinced!

古文：则天业已处分，遂依其说。
现代文：武则天因为已经把衣服给出去了，也就只好依他说。
English: Since Wu Zetian had already given out the clothes, he had no choice but to do as he said.

古文：而昌宗心赧神沮，气势索寞，累局连北。
现代文：但是张昌宗却感到羞赧沮丧。所以他的气势不振，沉默无语，连连败北。
English: But Zhang Changzong felt ashamed and depressed. Therefore, his momentum was weak, silent and speechless, and he suffered defeat after defeat.

古文：狄对御，就脱其裘，拜恩而出。
现代文：到头来只好乖乖地脱下集翠裘交给狄仁杰。
English: In the end, Di Renjie had to obediently take off the crown and give it to Di Renjie.

古文：至光范门，遂付家奴衣之，促马而去。
现代文：狄仁杰拜谢武则天离去。走到光范门，狄仁杰把集翠裘送给一个家奴穿上，策马而去。
English: Di Renjie bade farewell to Xie Wuzetian and left. When he reached the Guangfan Gate, Di Renjie put on the set Cui Qiu that he had given to a family slave and rode away.

古文：谢灵运须
现代文：谢灵运须
English: Xie Ling Yunzu

古文：晋谢灵运须美，临刑，施于南海祇洹寺，为维摩诘须。
现代文：晋代的谢灵运，胡须很好看，被杀临刑的时候，他把它施舍给南海郡的祇洹寺。祇洹寺把它做成了维摩诘的胡须。
English: Xie Lingyun of the Jin Dynasty had a beautiful beard. When he was executed, he donated it to the Giyu Temple in Nanhai County. The Giyu Temple made it into a beard for Vimalakirti.

古文：寺人宝惜，初不亏损。
现代文：寺中人一直很珍惜这胡须，当初并不曾有所破损。
English: The people at the temple have always treasured this beard, and it was not damaged at first.

古文：中宗乐安公主，五月斗百草，欲广其物色，令驰取之。
现代文：到了唐朝，中宗的乐安公主五月斗百草，为了使物品种类繁多，就派人飞马去取那胡须。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, in order to have a wide variety of goods, the Chinese Princess Le'an sent Fei Ma to get the beard.

古文：又恐他人所得，因剪弃其余。
现代文：又怕别人也弄到这东西，就把多余的全剪掉扔了。
English: Fearing that others might also get hold of it, he cut off all the excess and threw it away.

古文：今遂绝。
现代文：所以如今就一根也不复存在了。
English: So now there's not a single crane left.

古文：开元渔者
现代文：开元渔者
English: Kaiyuan fisherman

古文：开元末，登州渔者，负担行海边。遥见近水烟雾朦胧，人众填杂，若市里者。
现代文：开元末年，登州有个打鱼人，挑着担子走在海边上，远远望见近水处烟雾朦胧，乱哄哄地有许多人，就像一个市集似的。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, there was a fisherman in Danzhou, walking on the seashore with a burden. From far away, the smoke near the water was hazy, and there were many people in a chaotic manner, like a market.

古文：遂前。见多卖药物，僧道尤众。
现代文：于是他就走上前去，看到那里多数都是卖药的，和尚道士特别多。
English: So he walked forward and saw that most of the people there were selling medicine, and there were especially many monks and Taoists.

古文：良久呻，悉无所睹。唯拾得青黛数十，斗许大。
现代文：其余他什么也没看到，只拾到几十块青黛，都像斗那么大。
English: He didn't see anything else, only picked up a few dozen lilies of the valley, each as big as a bucket.

古文：亦不敢他用，而施之浮图人矣。
现代文：他也不敢做别的用，都施舍给和尚道士了。
English: He didn't dare to use it for anything else, and gave it all to the Buddhist monk.

古文：杨妃袜
现代文：杨妃袜
English: Yangfei Socks

古文：玄宗至马嵬驿，令高力士缢贵妃于佛堂梨树之前。
现代文：唐玄宗率兵马来到马嵬坡，命高力士在佛堂梨树前把杨贵妃勒死了。
English: Tang Xuan Zong led troops and horses to Malangpo and ordered Gao Lixi to strangle Yang Guifei in front of the pear tree in the Buddha hall.

古文：马嵬媪得袜一只。
现代文：事后马嵬坡的一位老妇人拾到一只袜子，说是杨贵妃的袜子。
English: Afterwards, an old woman in Malampo found a sock, which she said was Yang Guifei's sock.

古文：过客求而玩之，百钱一观，获钱无数。
现代文：打此路过的人都要求看看这只袜子，老女人就收费，一百钱一人次，赚钱无数。
English: Many passers-by asked to see the sock, and the old woman charged them one hundred yuan per person, making countless money.

古文：紫米
现代文：紫米
English: Purple rice

古文：元和八年，大轸国贡碧麦紫米。
现代文：元和八年，大轸国进贡进的是碧麦和紫米。
English: In the 8th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bimai and purple rice were donated to Daxing.

古文：上异之，翼日，出示术士白元佐、李元戢。
现代文：皇上觉得奇怪，第二天就拿出来给术士白元佐和李元戢看。
English: The emperor thought it was strange, and the next day he took it out to show it to the sorcerers Bai Yuanzuo and Li Yuanqi.

古文：碧麦粒大于中华之麦，表里皆碧，香气如粳米。食之令人体轻，久则可以御风。
现代文：碧麦的颗粒比中国麦粒大些，里外全是碧色，香味和粳米差不多，食用之后可以减轻人的体重，长时间食用可以御风。
English: The granules of glutinous barley are larger than those of Chinese barley. They are all blue inside and out, and the fragrance is similar to that of glutinous rice. After eating, it can reduce a person's weight, and it can keep the wind away for a long time.

古文：紫米有类巨胜，炊一升，得饭一斗。食之令人髭发缜黑，颜色不老。
现代文：紫米有些像胡麻，一升米可以做出十升饭，食用之后可以令人须发又密又黑，青春长驻，颜色不老。
English: Purple rice is somewhat like sesame. One liter of rice can make ten liters of rice. After eating, it can make people have thick and dark hair. Youth is long-lasting, and the color is ageless.

古文：嘉陵江巨木
现代文：嘉陵江巨木
English: Jialing River giant trees

古文：阆州城临嘉陵江。
现代文：阆州城靠近嘉陵江。
English: Luzhou City is close to the Jialing River.

古文：江之浒有乌阳巨木，长百余尺，围将半焉。
现代文：江的边上有一根乌阳大木头。大木头长一百多尺，粗细将近总长的一半。
English: On the edge of the river, there is a big wuyang tree. The big tree is more than a hundred feet long, and the thickness is nearly half of the total length.

古文：漂泊摇撼于江波者，久矣，而莫知奚自。
现代文：这木头在水上漂荡冲撞已经多年了，谁也不知它是哪里来的。
English: This wood has been drifting and crashing on the water for years, and no one knows where it came from.

古文：阆之耆旧相传云：尧时泛洪水而至。
现代文：阆州的老年人相传说，是尧帝的时候发大水，把这根木头冲到这里来的。
English: According to the legend of the elderly people in Zhangzhou, the tree was washed here by a large amount of water during the reign of Emperor Zhang.

古文：亦靡据焉。
现代文：也没有什么根据的。
English: There's no basis for it.

古文：襄汉节度使勃海高元裕，大和九年，自中书舍人牧阆中。下车未几，亦尝见之，固以为异矣。
现代文：襄汉节度使渤海人高元裕，大和九年从中书舍人迁任阆州牧，来到不久就见过这根大木头，觉得很稀罕。
English: The Xianghan Festival made Gao Yuanyu, a person from Bohai Sea, famous. In the ninth year of the Yamato era, a person from Zhongshusheshe moved to Bozhou, and soon after arriving, he saw this big tree and thought it was very rare.

古文：忽一日，津吏启事曰： 江中巨木，由来东首。去夜无端，翻然西顾。 
现代文：忽然有一天，江边的官吏又来报告说，那江中的大木头，从来都是头向东，昨夜无缘无故地翻然向西了，高元裕便更加惊奇。
English: Suddenly one day, officials from the riverside came to report that the large tree in the river, which had always faced east, suddenly turned west last night for no reason. Gao Yuanyu was even more surprised.

古文：高益奇之，即与宾僚径往观焉。
现代文：他立即就和同僚们径直赶到江边观看。
English: He and his colleagues immediately drove straight to the edge of the river to watch.

古文：因广召舟子，洎军吏群民辈，则以大索羁而出之。
现代文：于是就广泛召集摆船的，再吸收一些军吏群民，用大绳子挂住那大木头往岸上拽。
English: So they called in a large number of boatswain's mates, together with a number of military officers and civilians, and used large ropes to hang onto the large piece of wood and drag it ashore.

古文：初无艰阻，随拖登岸。
现代文：一开始还没什么阻碍，随着大伙的一拖，那木头就出水登岸了。
English: At first there was nothing to stop them, but as they dragged the log out of the water, it landed on the shore.

古文：太半之后，屹而不前，虽千夫百牛。莫能引之。
现代文：但是出水大半以后，它就屹立在那里不动了。即使是一千个人一百头牛，也不能拽动它。
English: But halfway out of the water, it just stood there, unmoving, and not even a thousand men and a hundred oxen could move it.

古文：人力既竭，复如前时。
现代文：人们的力气竭尽之后，它就又恢复原样了。
English: After people's efforts were exhausted, it returned to its original state.

古文：自是日曝风吹，僵然沙上。
现代文：从此，它便在风吹日晒之下，僵卧在沙滩上。
English: Since then, it has been lying on the beach, exposed to the wind and sun.

古文：或则寺僧欲以为窣堵波之独柱，或则州吏请支分剞劂，以备众材。
现代文：有的和尚想要把这根大木头做成大柱子，有的州吏想把大木头锯开，做木雕的原材料。
English: Some monks want to make this big tree into a big pillar, some state officials want to saw the big tree into raw materials for wood carving.

古文：高以奇伟异常，皆莫之许。
现代文：高元裕因为此木奇伟异常，所以全没同意。
English: Takamoto Yu did not agree because this tree was unusual.

古文：每拟还之于江，但虑劳人，逡巡未果。
现代文：他常打算把大木头送还到江里去。但是考虑到要许多劳力，就犹犹豫豫一直没有定下来。
English: He often planned to return the logs to the river, but hesitated to do so because of the amount of labor involved.

古文：开成三年上元日，高准式行香于开元观，僚吏毕至。高欲因众力，得共牵复其木焉。
现代文：开成三年正月十五日，高元裕依照先例到开元观烧香，同僚官吏全部到了，高元裕想趁人多力众共同拉动那木头。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the third year, Gao Yuan Yu, in accordance with the precedent, went to the opening ceremony to watch and burn incense. All of his colleagues and officials arrived, and Gao Yuan Yu wanted to take advantage of the many people to pull the wood together.

古文：及至，则又广备縻索，多聚勇力。
现代文：于是就又弄来不少大绳子，召集了不少有力气的人，准备把大木头送还江中。
English: So they got a lot of big ropes and gathered a lot of powerful people to prepare to send the logs back to the river.

古文：将作气引拽之际，而巨木因依假籍，若自转移，轻然已复于江矣。
现代文：就在大家将一鼓作气拉它的时候，它却借着众人的声势，好像自己转移，很轻易地就又回到水里去了。
English: Just when everyone was trying to pull it out, it moved back into the water with the help of everyone's voices, as if it had moved by itself.

古文：拒江尚余尺许，歘然惊迸。百支巨索，皆如斩截。
现代文：在它离江水还有一尺来远的时候，轰然一声巨响，上百条大绳子全都迸断，像斩断一样。
English: When it was still a foot away from the river, there was a loud bang, and all the hundreds of large ropes snapped, as if they had been cut.

古文：其木则沿洄汨没，径去绝江。
现代文：那大木头则沿着漩涡沉没了。
English: The log sank down the whirlpool.

古文：上及中流，寂然遂隐。
现代文：江面上立刻出现了从来没有过的寂静。
English: There was an instant silence on the river like never before.

古文：高遣善泅者数辈，遽往观之。
现代文：高元裕派了几个善潜水的人下到水底观瞧。
English: Gao Yuanyu sent several good divers down to the bottom of the water to watch.

古文：江水清澈，毫发可见。
现代文：江水很清澈，一根头发也看得清。
English: The water of the river is so clear that you can see a single hair.

古文：善游者熟视而回，皆曰： 水中别有东西二木，巨细与斯木无异。适自岸而至者，则南北丛焉。 
现代文：善潜水的人们在水底观察了许久才出来，都说： 水里另有东西方向两根木头，大小和刚才下去的那根没什么两样，刚才下去的那根南北向摞在那两根木头上。
English: People who are good at diving observed the cormorants for a long time under water before they came out, and they all said: There are two other logs in the water in the east-west direction, the size is no different from the one that just went down, and the one that just went down sticks to the two logs in the north-south direction.

古文：高顾坐客，靡不骇愕。
现代文：高元裕环视在座的人们，没有不惊骇的。
English: Gao Mengyu looks around at the people present, and cannot help but be shocked.

古文：自是则不复得而见矣。有顷，高除谏议大夫。
现代文：从此那木头再也没人看见。过了些日子，高元裕出任谏议大夫。
English: Since then, no one has seen the piece of wood again. A few days later, Takamoto Yu took up the post of chief adviser.

古文：制到，详其授官之日，即高役功之辰也。
现代文：皇命送到之日，就是高元裕动身赴任之时。
English: The day the imperial command was delivered was the time when Takamoto Hiroshi left for his new post.

古文：向使斯旬朔未获移徙，高之新命既至，则那复留意乎转迁，俾之仍旧。
现代文：如果前几天那大木头没有被弄回江中，高元裕的新命令送到之后，他就会留意于自己的升迁，使那大木头仍然躺在那里。
English: If the big log had not been returned to the river a few days ago, after Gao Yuanyu's new order was delivered, he would pay attention to his promotion, so that the big log would still lie there.

古文：江淮市人桃核
现代文：江淮市人桃核
English: Ren Taohu, Jianghuai City

古文：水部员外郎杜涉，尝见江淮市人，桃核扇量米，止容一升。言于九嶷山溪中得。
现代文：水部员外郎杜涉，曾经看到一个江淮一带的买卖人，用桃核的半张壳量米，正好能装一升，说是从九嶷山的山溪中拾到的。
English: Wai Lang Du, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, once saw a merchant in the Jianghuai area measure rice with half a peach kernel shell, which can hold exactly one liter, and said that it was picked up from the mountain streams of Jiulong Mountain.

古文：玉龙膏
现代文：玉龙膏
English: Jade Dragon Balm

古文：安南有玉龙膏，南人用之，能化银液。
现代文：安南有一种叫做玉龙膏的东西，南方人使用它，能把银子化成液体。
English: Annan has something called jade dragon paste, which is used by people in the south to turn silver into liquid.

古文：说者曰： 此膏不可持北来。
现代文：说这事的人说： 这种药膏不可拿到北方来。
English: And they said, This ointment may not be brought into the land of the north.

古文：苟有犯者，则祸且及矣。 
现代文：如果有人违犯了，那么祸事就要发生了。 
English: If someone disobeys, then a disaster is about to happen.

古文：大和中，韩约都护安南，得其膏。
现代文：大和年间，韩约在安南做都护，得到了这种药膏。
English: During the Yamato era, Hanjo worked as a tutor in Annan and obtained this ointment.

古文：及还，遂持以归。
现代文：等到他任满要回去的时候，就要把这种药膏带回去。
English: When he comes back at the end of his term, he must take this ointment back with him.

古文：人有谓曰： 南人传此膏不可持以北，而公持去。得无有悔于后耶？ 
现代文：有人对他说： 南方人传说这种药膏不能拿到北方去，而你拿回去，只怕以后会后悔吧？ 
English: Someone said to him, "People in the south say that this ointment cannot be taken to the north, and if you take it back, you may regret it later, right?"

古文：约不听，卒以归焉。
现代文：韩约不听，到底把药膏带回去了。
English: Han didn't listen and took the ointment back after all.

古文：后约为执金吾。
现代文：后来韩约做了执金吾。
English: Later, Han Yoo became Kim Goo.

古文：是岁京师乱，约以附会郑注，竟赤其族。
现代文：这一年京城里发生了叛乱，韩约因为和郑注牵连到一起，竟被灭了族。
English: This year, there was a rebellion in the capital, and Han You was actually exterminated because he was involved with Zheng Shu.

古文：岂玉龙膏之所归祸乎？
现代文：敢情是玉龙膏给他带来的灾祸吧？
English: Is it the misfortune brought to him by Jade Dragon Balm?

古文：由士南去者不敢持以北也。
现代文：从此以后，所有到南方去的人都不敢把玉龙膏带回北方来了。
English: From then on, no one who went to the south dared to bring Jade Dragon Balm back to the north.

古文：段成式
现代文：段成式
English: Sectional staircase

古文：段成式群从有言，少时尝毁鸟巢，得一黑石，大如雀卵，圆滑可爱。
现代文：段成式的众随从讲过，段成式小时候曾经毁掉一个鸟巢，从中得到一块黑色石头，像鸟蛋那么大，又圆又滑，很是可爱。
English: Duan Chengxing's followers said that when Duan Chengxing was a child, he once destroyed a bird's nest and got a black stone from it. It was as big as a bird's egg, round and smooth, and very lovely.

古文：后偶置醋器中，忽觉石动。
现代文：后来偶然把这块小石子儿扔到装醋的坛子里，忽然发觉那石子儿会动。
English: Later, he accidentally dropped the small stone into a jar of vinegar and suddenly discovered that the stone would move.

古文：徐之，见有四足如綖。
现代文：慢慢地，见它长出四条像皇冠飘带一样的腿来。
English: Slowly, it sprouted four legs like crown streamers.

古文：举之，足亦随缩。
现代文：把它举起来，四条腿也随之缩回去。
English: Lift it up and the four legs retract.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕在文宗武宗朝。
现代文：李德裕是唐文宗唐武宗时候的人。
English: Li Deyu was a member of the Tang Wenshu sect during the Tang Wushu period.

古文：方秉相权，威势与恩泽无比。
现代文：在他正执掌相时，威势和恩泽无比。
English: When he is at the helm of the state, his power and grace are incomparable.

古文：每好搜掇殊异，朝野归附者，多求宝玩献之。
现代文：他喜欢搜求奇珍异宝。不管是当朝的还是在野的，凡是给他送礼的，多半都是搜求宝玩献给他。
English: He likes to search for rare and unusual treasures. Whether it's in the past or in the wild, anyone who gives him a gift is most likely searching for treasures dedicated to him.

古文：常因暇日休浣，邀同列宰辅及朝士晏语。
现代文：他常常借着休假的日子，邀请同朝的宰辅及朝士宴聚。
English: He often took advantage of his days off to invite the imperial aides and courtiers of the same dynasty to a banquet.

古文：时畏景爀曦，咸有郁蒸之苦。轩盖候门，已及亭午，缙绅名士，交扇不暇。
现代文：当时正是酷暑，烈日当头，晒得大地宛如蒸笼，一近中午，缙绅名士就只顾扇扇子了。
English: At that time, it was the heat of the day, the scorching sun, the earth was as hot as a steamer, and as soon as it was noon, the famous gentleman only cared about the fan.

古文：时共思憩息于清凉之所。
现代文：这时候，人们都在思求一个凉爽的去处。
English: At this time, people are looking for a cool place to go.

古文：既延入小斋，不觉宽敞。
现代文：等人们被迎入小斋，立时感到宽敞。
English: When people are welcomed into the restaurant, they immediately feel spacious.

古文：四壁施设，皆有古书名画，而炎铄之患未已。
现代文：四壁悬有古书名画。但是炎热之患未除。
English: Old books and famous paintings hang on the four walls, but the heat is still a problem.

古文：及列坐开樽，烦暑都尽。
现代文：等到开樽痛饮，就不知闷也不知热了。
English: Wait until you open the barrel and drink it, you will not feel bored or hot.

古文：良久，觉清飚凛冽，如涉高秋。
现代文：喝上一会儿，便觉得清风凛冽，如同进入深秋。
English: After drinking it for a while, you will feel the refreshing breeze, as if you have entered the late autumn.

古文：备设酒肴，及昏而罢。
现代文：酒肴很丰盛，直喝到日近黄昏才罢。
English: The food and drinks are plentiful, and you can drink until dusk.

古文：出户则火云烈日，熇然焦灼。
现代文：但是一出门又觉得风如火云如烟，焦灼难当。
English: But as soon as I leave the house, I feel like the wind is blowing like smoke, and it's hard to be anxious.

古文：有好事者，求亲信察问之。
现代文：有好事的人就求亲信之人打听这是怎么回事。
English: When something good happens, people ask their close friends to find out what it is all about.

古文：云。此日以金盆贮水。浸白龙皮。
现代文：回答说，是因为用金盆装满水，把一张白龙皮浸泡在里边，放到了座位上。
English: He replied that it was because he had filled a golden basin with water, soaked a piece of white dragon skin in it, and placed it on the seat.

古文：长二丈五尺八其上刻云，会昌二年，海州送到初德裕之营平泉也，远方之人，多以土产异物奉之，求数年之间，无所不有。
现代文：东都的平泉庄，离洛城三十里。这里的花卉草木，舞榭歌台，仙境一般。前引的泉水潆回曲折，就像巴峡洞庭的十二峰和九川那样的山河景象。竹间曲径上有一块平石，用手摸去，全是隐隐的云霞龙凤草木之形。还有一条巨大的鱼肋骨，长两丈五尺，那上面刻道： 会昌二年，海州送到。 李德裕营驻平泉的时候，因为他是远方之人，当地人多半都把一些土产异物赠送给他。所以数年之间，他无所不有。
English: Hiraizumi village in the eastern capital, 30 miles from Los Angeles. The flowers and plants here, the dance and song stage, are like a fairyland. The spring water in the foreground twists and turns, just like the twelve peaks of the Ba Gorge Cave and the scenery of mountains and rivers like the nine rivers. There is a flat stone on the curved path between the bamboo, touched by hand, all of which is the shape of the looming clouds, dragons and phoenixes. There is also a huge fish rib, two feet high and five feet long, which is inscribed with the words: Hichang two years, sent to Haizhou. When Li Deyuying was stationed

古文：时文人有题平泉诗者，陇右诸侯供语鸟，日南太守送名花。
现代文：当时有的文人题了这样的诗： 陇右诸侯供语鸟，日南太守送名花！ 
English: At that time, some writers wrote such a poem:  Right princes offer a speech bird, Nichinan daimyo sends famous flowers!

古文：威势之使人也。
现代文：是李德裕的威势太大才使人们这样啊！
English: It's because Li Deyu's power is too great that people are like this!

古文：夏侯孜
现代文：夏侯孜
English: Xia Houzhi

古文：夏侯孜为宣宗山陵使。
现代文：夏侯孜是宣宗朝的山陵使。
English: Xia Houzé was a mountain envoy of the Xuan Zong Dynasty.

古文：开真陵，用功尤至。
现代文：他负责开掘真陵的施工，工程浩大。
English: He is in charge of excavating the construction of the Mausoleum, which is a huge project.

古文：凿皇堂，深及袤丈，于坚石中，得折金钗半股。
现代文：凿皇堂凿到一丈多深的时候，从坚石缝中，得到半股折断的金钗，一巴掌那么长。
English: When he chiseled the imperial hall to a depth of more than a meter, he got a half-broken gold ingot, as long as a palm, from a crack in the hard stone.

古文：其长如掌，余尚衔石中。
现代文：其余的半股还衔在石缝中。
English: The remaining half-share still lies in the stone gap.

古文：工乃扶取以献孜。
现代文：石工就将它取出来交给夏侯孜。
English: The mason took it out and gave it to Xia Houzhe.

古文：孜以寝园方近，其事稍异，因隐而不奏。
现代文：夏侯孜因为寝园离得很近，他觉得这事不大正常，就隐瞒下来，没有向皇上奏明。
English: As the summer palace was very close to the emperor's bedchamber, he felt that this was not normal, so he concealed it and did not inform the emperor.

古文：严遵仙槎
现代文：严遵仙槎
English: by Yan Zunxian

古文：严遵仙槎，唐置之于麟德殿。
现代文：严遵仙槎，唐朝时放在麟德殿。
English: Strictly following the rules of the Immaculate Conception, it was placed in the Lin De Hall during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：长五十余尺，声如铜铁，坚而不蠹。
现代文：全长五十多尺，敲击出声有如铜铁，质地坚硬，不怕蛀虫侵害。
English: With a total length of more than fifty feet, it produces a sound like copper and iron when struck, and has a hard texture. It is not afraid of mites.

古文：李德裕截细枝尺余，刻为道像，往往飞去复来。
现代文：李德裕截下细枝一尺多，刻成道士像。这道士像往往飞去又飞回。
English: Li Deyu cut a thin branch more than a foot long and carved it into a Taoist statue. This Taoist statue often flies back and forth.

古文：广明以来失之，槎亦飞走。
现代文：广明以后这道士像失去了，严遵仙槎也相继飞去。
English: After Guangming, this Taoist statue was lost, and Yan Zun Xianqi also flew away one after another.

