古文：惠公即位，出共世子而改葬之，臭达于外。
现代文：晋惠公回国即位后，为申生改葬，而尸臭发散到外面来。
English: After Jin Hui returned to China and ascended to the throne, he changed the funeral for Shen Sheng, and the smell of the corpse spread to the outside.

古文：国人诵之曰： 贞之无报也。孰是人斯，而有是臭也？
现代文：国人朗诵道： 想按正式的礼节改葬却得不到好报哩，是谁使这股臭气逸出？
English: Chinese people recited: If you want to change the funeral according to formal etiquette but do not get a good report, who caused this stench to escape?

古文：贞为不听，信为不诚。
现代文：虽要纠正葬礼却无人听从，虽想标榜信义却不见真诚。
English: Although they want to correct the funeral, no one listens, although they want to flaunt their sincerity, they are not sincere.

古文：国斯无刑，偷居倖生。
现代文：国家没有这样的法则，让盗窃君位的人侥幸生存。
English: The country does not have such a law, so that those who steal the throne are lucky to survive.

古文：不更厥贞，大命其倾。
现代文：不改变他的弊政，晋国的命运将会沉沦。
English: Without changing his misrule, the fate of Jin will be doomed.

古文：威兮怀兮，各聚尔有，以待所归兮。
现代文：畏惧伪君啊怀念重耳，等待重耳的归来，是大家共同的愿望。
English: Fear of hypocrites, nostalgia for heavy ears, waiting for the return of heavy ears, is a common desire of everyone.

古文：猗兮违兮，心之哀兮。
现代文：想摆脱伪君啊远走他乡，又难舍故土而内心哀伤。
English: I want to get rid of the hypocrite and go far away from my hometown, and it is difficult to give up my hometown and my heart is sad.

古文：岁之二七，其靡有微兮。若狄公子，吾是之依兮。
现代文：二七一十四年以后，伪君和他的儿子将要灭亡。远在狄国的公子啊，他是我们的依傍。
English: In the year 2714, the hypocrite and his son will perish, but he is with us, O son of David.

古文：镇抚国家，为王妃兮。 
现代文：他将镇抚国家啊，作天子的辅佐最理想。 
English: He will pacify the country. He is the ideal assistant to the Son of Heaven.

古文：郭偃曰： 甚哉，善之难也！
现代文：大夫郭偃说： 厉害极了，好事真难做！
English: Dr. Guo Wei said, "It's terrible, it's really hard to do something good!

古文：君改葬共君以为荣也，而恶滋章。
现代文：国君改葬申生原想借此显示荣耀，却使自己的罪恶更加昭著。
English: Shinsei, who wanted to show his glory by changing the emperor's funeral, made his sin more obvious.

古文：夫人美于中，必播于外，而越于民，民实戴之；恶亦如之。
现代文：一个人内心美好，必定会表现于外，并且传扬于民间，受到民众的爱戴。
English: If a person is beautiful inside, it will surely show on the outside, and spread to the people, and be loved by the people.

古文：故行不可不慎也。
现代文：反过来一个人内心丑恶也一样。所以行动时不可不慎重啊。
English: On the other hand, a person's inner ugliness is the same. Therefore, one must not be careless when acting.

古文：必或知之，十四年，君之冢嗣其替乎？
现代文：一定有人会知道，十四年后国君的儿子将被诛戮吗？
English: Surely someone must have known that fourteen years later the son of the sovereign would be executed?

古文：其数告于民矣。
现代文：十四这个数字已经为民众所知了。
English: The number fourteen is already known to the public.

古文：公子重耳其入乎？
现代文：公子重耳会回国吗？
English: Will the prince return to his homeland?

古文：其魄兆于民矣。
现代文：民众已经看到迹象了。
English: People are already seeing the signs.

古文：若入，必伯诸侯以见天子，其光耿于民矣。
现代文：他如果回国，一定会称霸诸侯而朝见天子，他的光辉已经照耀于民众了。
English: If he returns to China, he will surely dominate the princes and ascend to heaven. His glory has already shone on the people.

古文：数，言之纪也。魄，意之术也。光，明之曜也。
现代文：数字是预言的记录，迹象是民意的先导，光辉是贤明品格的闪耀。
English: Numbers are the record of prophecy, signs are the heralds of public opinion, and radiance is the splendor of a virtuous character.

古文：纪言以叙之，述意以导之，明曜以昭之。
现代文：用记录预言来表述，用阐发民意来引导，用闪耀的光辉来昭示。
English: It is expressed by recording prophecies, guided by clarifying public opinion, and revealed by shining brilliance.

古文：不至何待？
现代文：重耳不回国还等待什么？
English: If you do not return to your country, what are you waiting for?

古文：欲先导者行乎？将至矣！ 
现代文：打算为他作先导的人可以行动了，他将要到了！ 
English: Those who want to be his guide can go ahead, he's coming!

