古文：○孝宗一孝宗绍统同道冠德昭功哲文神武明圣成孝皇帝，讳昚，字元永，太祖七世孙也。
现代文：孝宗绍统同道冠德昭功哲文神武明圣成孝皇帝，名砚，字元永，宋太祖七世孙。
English: Xiaozong Shao Tong Tong Dao Guan De Zhaogong Zhewen Shenwu Ming Shengcheng Emperor Xiaozong, the great-great-grandson, Zi Yuan Yong, the seventh-generation grandson of Song Taizu.

古文：初，太祖少子秦王德芳生英国公惟宪，惟宪生新兴侯从郁，从郁生华阴侯世将，世将生庆国公令譮，令譮生子偁，是为秀王。
现代文：原来，太祖少子秦王赵德芳的儿子是英国公赵惟宪，赵惟宪的儿子是新兴侯赵从郁，赵从郁的儿子是华阴侯赵世将，赵世将的儿子是庆国公赵令侩，赵令侩的儿子赵子翱，就是秀王。
English: Originally, the son of Zhao Defang, the youngest son of the great-grandfather Qin Wang, was the British prince Zhao Weixian, the son of Zhao Weixian was the emerging prince Zhao Congyu, the son of Zhao Congyu was the Huayin prince Zhao Shijiao, the son of Zhao Shijiao was the Qing governor Zhao Lingyao, and the son of Zhao Lingyao was Zhao Zijiao, that is, the show king.

古文：王夫人张氏梦人拥一羊遗之曰： 以此为识。 
现代文：秀王夫人张氏梦到有人抱来一只羊给她说： 以此为识。 
English: Mrs. Zhang, the wife of King Xiu, dreamed that someone brought a sheep to her and said, "Take this as a sign."

古文：已而有娠，以建炎元年十月戊寅生帝于秀州青杉闸之官舍，红光满室，如日正中。
现代文：不久怀孕，于建炎元年十月二十二日，在秀州青杉闸官舍生下孝宗，当时红光满室，如日正中。
English: She soon became pregnant, and on October 22, 1861, she gave birth to her second son, Takamune, in the castle official's house in Aosugi, Shushu. At the time, the room was filled with red light, as it was in the middle of the day.

古文：少长，命名伯琮。
现代文：长大一些后，起名为伯琼。
English: When she was a little older, she changed her name to Berchon.

古文：及元懿太子薨，高宗未有后，而昭慈圣献皇后亦自江西还行在，后尝感异梦，密为高宗言之，高宗大寤。
现代文：到元爵太子逝世，高宗没有后代，而昭慈圣献皇后也从江西回到行在，皇后曾做过一个奇异的梦，秘密说给高宗听，高宗大为感悟。
English: By the time the prince died, Gao Zong had no descendants, and the Empress Zhaozi Shengjian also returned from Jiangxi. The Empress had a strange dream, and told Gao Zong the secret. Gao Zong was greatly impressed.

古文：会右仆射范宗尹亦造膝以请，高宗曰： 太祖以神武定天下，子孙不得享之，遭时多艰，零落可悯。
现代文：适逢右仆射范尹请求立亲近之人，高宗说： 太祖以神武定天下，子孙不得享有它，时运艰难，流落可悯。
English: When Gaozong's right-hand man, Fan Yin, asked Gaozong to appoint someone close to him, Gaozong said, "The great-grandfather set up the world with divine power, and his descendants cannot enjoy it. Times are difficult, and it would be a pity for them to be exiled.

古文：朕若不法仁宗，为天下计，何以慰在天之灵！ 于是诏选太祖之后。
现代文：肤如果不效法仁宗，为天下计谋，拿什么来告慰祖宗在天之灵呢亨于是下诏选立太祖的后代。
English: If you do not follow the example of the Honen sect and plot for the world, what can you use to comfort your ancestors in the spirit of heaven?

古文：同知枢密院事李回曰： 艺祖不以大位私其子，发于至诚。
现代文：同知枢密院事李回说： 太祖不以皇位传其子，是出于至诚。
English: A confidant of the Privy Council, Li replied: It was out of sincerity that the great-grandfather did not pass on the imperial throne to his son.

古文：陛下为天下远虑，合于艺祖，可以昭格天命。 
现代文：陛下为天下长远之计考虑，符合太祖的意愿，可以昭格天命。 
English: Considering the long-term plan for the world, His Majesty can declare the Mandate of Heaven in accordance with the wishes of the great-grandfather.

古文：参知政事张守曰： 艺祖诸子，不闻失德，而传位太宗，过尧、舜远甚。 
现代文：参知政事张守说： 太祖各子，没听说有失德的，而传皇位给太宗，超过尧、舜很远。 
English: Zhang Shou, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, said, "I have never heard of any of my great-grandfather's sons being immoral, but to hand over the imperial throne to Taizong is far beyond the bounds of morality.

古文：高宗曰： 此事不难行，朕于 伯 字行中选择，庶几昭穆顺序。 
现代文：高宗说： 此事不难实行，肤于 伯 字行中选择，大概按昭穆顺序。 
English: Gao Zong said, "This is not difficult to do. It is just a matter of choosing from among the characters, roughly in the order of Shomu.

古文：而上虞丞娄寅亮亦上书言： 昌陵之后，寂寥无闻，仅同民庶。
现代文：而上虞承娄寅亮也上书说： 太祖之后，寂寥无闻，仅同民庶。
English: On the other hand, Shangyu Chengyu Yin Liang also wrote: After the great-grandfather, there was no one to be heard, only commoners.

古文：艺祖在上，莫肯顾歆，此金人所以未悔祸也。
现代文：太祖在上，莫肯顾散，此金人所以未悔祸也。
English: The great-grandfather was on the top, and he could not be scattered, so this gold person did not regret the misfortune.

古文：望陛下于 伯 字行内选太祖诸孙有贤德者。 
现代文：希望陛下在 伯 字行内选立太祖孙子中有贤德的人。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will choose a virtuous person among the great-grandchildren in the line of succession.

古文：高宗读之，大感叹。
现代文：高宗读后大为感叹。
English: Gao Zong was very impressed after reading it.

古文：绍兴二年五月，选帝育于禁中。
现代文：绍兴二年五月，选择孝宗养在宫中。
English: In May of the second year of Shaoxing, he chose Xiaozongye in the palace.

古文：三年二月，除和州防御使，赐名瑗。
现代文：绍兴三年二月，授为和州防御使，赐名缓。
English: In February of the third year of Shaoxing, he was awarded the title of Wazhou Defense Envoy.

古文：壬寅，改贵州。
现代文：十六日，改为贵州防御史。
English: On the 16th, it was changed to Guizhou Defense History.

古文：五年五月，用左仆射赵鼎议，立书院宫中教之，既成，遂以为资善堂。
现代文：绍兴五年五月，采纳左仆射赵鼎的意见，在宫中立书院教育孝宗，书院建成后，于是把它作为资善堂。
English: In May of the fifth year of Shaoxing, he adopted the opinion of his left-hand man, Zhao Ding, and educated Xiaozong at Gongzhonglian Academy. After the academy was completed, he used it as a goodwill hall.

古文：帝读书强记，天资特异。
现代文：孝宗读书很聪明，天资特异。
English: Xiaozong is very clever at reading and has a special talent.

古文：己亥，制授保庆军节度使，封建国公。
现代文：二十六日，授为保庆军节度使，封为建国公。
English: On the 26th, he was awarded the title of Festival Envoy of the Guoqing Army and given the title of Founding Prince.

古文：六月己酉，听读资善堂，以徽猷阁待制范冲兼诩善，起居郎朱震兼赞读，高宗命帝见冲、震皆拜。
现代文：六月初七，到资善堂听读，任命徽酞阁待制范冲兼诩善，起居郎朱震兼赞读，高宗命令孝宗见到范冲、朱震都要行拜礼。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, he went to Shisen-do Hall to listen to the reading, and appointed Fan Chong and Yu Sheng, who were waiting to be ordained at Huiyang Pavilion, to read, and Zhu Zhen, who was staying there, to praise the reading. Gao Zong ordered Xiaozong to worship when he saw Fan Chong and Zhu Zhen.

古文：十二年正月丁酉，加检校少保，封普安郡王。
现代文：绍兴十二年正月初三，加衔为检校少保，封为普安郡王。
English: On the third day of the first month of the twelfth year of Shaoxing, he was promoted to the rank of junior guard of the inspection school and was named the king of Pu'an County.

古文：三月壬寅，出阁就外第。
现代文：三月初九，出间住进宫外府第。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, I went to live in a place outside the palace.

古文：十三年九月，秀王殁于秀州。
现代文：绍兴十三年九月，秀王死在秀州。
English: In September of the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, King Xiu died in Xiuzhou.

古文：十四年正月庚辰，用廷臣议，听解官行服。
现代文：绍兴十四年正月二十八日，采纳大臣的意见，允许解官服丧。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 14th year of Shaoxing, the minister's opinion was adopted and the dismissal was allowed.

古文：十六年四月乙巳，免丧，还旧官。
现代文：绍兴十六年四月初六，免丧还为旧官。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the 16th year of Shaoxing, the old official was also exempted from death.

古文：十七年六月戊午，改常德军节度使。
现代文：绍兴十七年六月二十六日，改为常德军节度使。
English: On June 26 of the 17th year of Shaoxing, it was changed to the Changde Army Festival Envoy.

古文：二十四年，衢州盗起，秦桧遣殿前司将官辛立将千人捕之，不以闻。
现代文：绍兴二十四年，瞥州盗贼兴起，秦桧派遣殿前司将官辛立率领一千人捕捉，不报告朝廷。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Shaoxing, with the rise of thieves in Gansu Province, Qin Hui dispatched the former secretary of the palace, General Xin Li, to capture a thousand people, but did not report to the imperial court.

古文：帝入侍言之，高宗大惊。
现代文：孝宗趁人侍的机会说了这件事，高宗大惊。
English: Takamune took advantage of the opportunity to say this, and Takamune was taken aback.

古文：明日，以问桧，桧谓不足烦圣虑，故不敢闻，俟朝夕盗平则奏矣。
现代文：第二天质问秦桧，秦桧说不值得报告皇上，所以没有上报请示，等盗贼平定后再上奏。
English: The next day, he questioned Qin Yu. Qin Yu said that it was not worth reporting to the emperor, so he did not report to the emperor, and waited for the thieves to be subdued before reporting.

古文：桧退，知为帝言，忌之。
现代文：秦桧退朝，知道是孝宗报告的，忌恨孝宗。
English: Qin Hui retreated to the dynasty, knowing that it was reported by Xiaozong, he hated Xiaozong.

古文：及桧疾笃，其家秘不以闻，谋以子熺代相，帝又密启高宗破其奸。
现代文：等到秦桧病情加重，他的家属又秘而不宣，阴谋用他的儿子秦嬉代替为相，孝宗又秘密致信高宗，识破了秦桧的奸计。
English: When Qin Yao's illness worsened, his family kept it a secret, plotting to replace him with his son Qin Qixi. Xiaozong also secretly sent a letter to Gaozong, and saw through Qin Yao's treachery.

古文：三十年二月癸酉，立为皇子，更名玮。
现代文：绍兴三十年二月二十四日，孝宗被立为皇子，改名玮。
English: On February 24th, 30 years after the founding of Shaoxing, Xiaozong was enthroned as the prince and changed his name to Yao.

古文：甲戌，诏下。
现代文：二十五日，下诏。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：丙子，制授宁国军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封建王。
现代文：二十七日，授为宁国军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封为建王。
English: On the 27th, he was awarded the title of Ning Guojun Festival Envoy, the title of Kaifu Yi and three other titles, and the title of Jianwang.

古文：制出，中外大悦。
现代文：制书颁布，中外大悦。
English: The book-making system was promulgated, and both China and foreign countries were delighted.

古文：四月，赐字元瑰。
现代文：四月，赐字元瑰。
English: In April, it is time to bestow the character of Genki.

古文：三十一年十月壬子，以明堂恩，改镇南军节度使。
现代文：绍兴三十一年十月十三日，因明堂祭祀之恩，改为镇南军节度使。
English: On October 13th, 31st, in Shaoxing, due to the grace of the Ming Hall's sacrifice, it was changed to the Jinan Army's festival envoy.

古文：先是，金人犯边，高宗下诏亲征，而两淮失守，朝臣多陈退避之计，帝不胜其愤，请率师为前驱。
现代文：先是，金军侵犯边界，高宗下诏亲征，而两淮失守，朝臣多献退避之计，孝宗非常气愤，请率军为前锋。
English: First of all, the Chinese army invaded the border, Gao Zong issued an edict to personally lead the troops, but the two armies lost the defense, and the courtiers mostly offered retreating strategies. Xiaozong was very angry, and asked Gao Zong to lead the army as a striker.

古文：直讲史浩以疾在告，闻之亟入，为帝言，太子不宜将兵，乃为草奏，因中宫以进，请卫从以共子职。
现代文：直讲史浩以疾听说后，赶忙人朝对高宗说，太子不适合率领军队，于是草奏，通过中宫递上草奏，请卫从以共子职。
English: After hearing that Shi Hao was ill, he hurried to tell Gao Zong that the prince was not fit to lead the army, so he played a straw, passed the middle court to play a straw, and asked Wei to be his son-in-law.

古文：高宗因亦欲帝遍识诸将，十二月，遂扈跸如金陵。
现代文：高宗因也想要孝宗遍识诸将，十二月于是启哗到金陵。
English: Gao Zongyin also wanted Xiaozong to know all the generals, so he went to Jinling in December.

古文：三十二年五月甲子，立为皇太子，改名昚。
现代文：绍兴三十二年五月二十八日，立为皇太子，改名玮。
English: On May 28th, 32nd year of Shaoxing, he became crown prince and changed his name.

古文：初，高宗久有禅位之意，尝以谕帝，帝流涕固辞，会有边事不果。
现代文：初，高宗很久就有禅位之意，曾经告诉过孝宗，孝宗流着泪坚决一再推辞，适逢边事没有结果。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zong had long had the intention of Zen, and had once told Xiao Zong, but Xiao Zong repeatedly and resolutely declined with tears, and there was no result when it came to side issues.

古文：及归自金陵，陈康伯求去，高宗复以倦勤谕之。
现代文：等到从建康回朝，陈康伯请求离去，高宗又以倦勤告谕。
English: After waiting for Jiankang to return to the imperial court, Chen Kangbo asked to leave, and Gao Zong announced that he was tired.

古文：中书舍人唐文若闻而请对，言不宜急遽，故先下建储之诏，赐名烨。
现代文：中书舍人唐文若闻而请对，说不宜迅速禅位，故先下建储之诏，赐名烨。
English: If you are familiar with Chinese literature, you may have heard that it is not appropriate to meditate quickly. Therefore, it is better to build and store the dharma first, and then give it a name.

古文：监察御史周必大密与康伯言，与唐昭宗名同音，不可。
现代文：监察御史周必大与陈康伯秘密议论，与唐昭宗名同音，不可。
English: Supervisor of Imperial Historian Zhou Bida and Chen Kangbo had a secret discussion. It is not possible to have the same name as Tang Zhaozong.

古文：诏别拟进，乃定今名。
现代文：诏别拟进，乃定今名。
English: Don't try to push it through, it's a done deal.

古文：既又命学士承旨洪遵为太子择字，遵拟四字以进，皆不称旨。
现代文：不久又命令学士承旨洪遵为太子择字，洪遵拟四字进呈，都不符合皇上意旨。
English: Soon after, he ordered the scholar Zongzhi Hongzong to choose a word for the prince, and Hongzong proposed four words, neither of which was in line with the emperor's intention.

古文：六月甲戌，御笔赐字元永。
现代文：六月初九，御笔赐字元永。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, the letter "元永" was given by the emperor.

古文：乙亥，内降御札： 皇太子可即皇帝位。
现代文：初十，内降御札： 皇太子可即皇帝位。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the imperial edict was issued: the crown prince could become emperor.

古文：朕称太上皇帝，退处德寿宫；皇后称太上皇后。 
现代文：肤称太上皇帝，退居德寿宫，皇后称太上皇后。 
English: His skin was called "Emperor," he retired to Deoksugung Palace, and his empress was called "Empress."

古文：丙子，遣中使召帝入禁中，面谕之，帝又推逊不受，即趋侧殿门，欲还东宫，高宗勉谕再三，乃止。
现代文：十一日，派遣中使召孝宗到宫廷中面谕，孝宗又推辞不受，即趋侧殿门，想回东宫，高宗再三劝谕，孝宗才停止回东宫。
English: On the 11th day, during the dispatch, the envoy summoned Takamune to the middle of the court and made an appeal. Takamune was not rebuffed, so he approached the side gate of the palace and wanted to return to the East Palace. Takamune repeatedly advised him, and only then did Takamune stop returning to the East Palace.

古文：于是高宗出御紫宸殿，辅臣奏事毕，高宗还宫。
现代文：于是高宗出御紫哀殿，辅臣奏事完毕，高宗回宫。
English: As a result, Gao Zong went to the Imperial Purple Shrine, the vassal's report was completed, and Gao Zong returned to the palace.

古文：百官移班殿门外，拜诏毕，复入班殿庭。
现代文：百官移班殿门外，拜诏完毕，又人班殿廷。
English: Hundreds of officials were transferred outside the palace gate, and after the prayer, they were transferred to the palace.

古文：顷之，内侍掖帝至御榻前，侧立不坐，内侍扶掖至七八，乃略就坐。
现代文：不久，内侍扶孝宗到御榻前，侧立不坐，内侍扶了七八次，才稍就座。
English: Before long, the lady-in-waiting, Fu Xiaozong, arrived at the Imperial bedside. She did not sit down, but stood sideways. The lady-in-waiting helped her seven or eight times before she finally sat down.

古文：宰相率百僚称贺，帝遽兴。
现代文：宰相率百官称庆拜贺，孝宗邃兴。
English: The Prime Minister led hundreds of officials to celebrate and congratulate, and Xiaozong hailed the occasion.

古文：辅臣升殿固请，帝愀然曰： 君父之命，出于独断。
现代文：辅臣升殿一再请求，孝宗不愉快地说： 君父之命，出于独断。
English: After repeated requests from the vassal to be elevated to the court, Takamune said unhappily, "Your father's order is arbitrary.

古文：然此大位，惧不克当。 
现代文：然此大位，惧不克当。 
English: Such a high-ranking official should not be intimidated.

古文：班退，太上皇帝即驾之德寿宫，帝服袍履，步出祥曦殿门，冒雨掖辇以行，及宫门弗止。
现代文：班退，太上皇帝即退到德寿宫，孝宗穿上衣服，走出样曦殿门，冒雨扶举送行，到宫门仍不停止。
English: After the class retreats, the empress dowager retreats to the Deoksugung Palace, and Takamune puts on his clothes, walks out of the gate of the Imperial Palace, braves the rain, and is escorted away. He still does not stop at the palace gate.

古文：上皇麾谢再三，且令左右扶掖以还，顾曰： 吾付托得人，吾无憾矣。 
现代文：太上皇帝挥谢再三，且令左右扶掖回朝，回头说： 我托付得人，没有遗憾。 
English: Empress Dowager repeatedly expressed her thanks, and ordered the left and right palanquins to be returned to the imperial court. She looked back and said, "I have no regrets about entrusting this to someone.

古文：左右皆呼万岁。
现代文：左右都呼万岁。
English: After listening to it, people on both sides shouted "long live."

古文：是日，诏有司议太上皇帝、太上皇后尊号以闻，在内诸司日轮官吏应奉德寿宫，增置，朝德寿宫提点、干办等官，德寿宫宿卫依皇城及宫门法。
现代文：这天，诏令有关部门议论太上皇帝、太上皇后尊号报告朝廷，在内诸司日轮官吏应奉德寿宫，增置德寿宫提点、干办等官，德寿宫的宿卫依照皇城及宫门办法实施。
English: On this day, the relevant departments discussed the honorary titles of the Emperor and Empress, and reported to the imperial court. Among them, the officials of the day-to-day officials should serve the Deoksugung Palace, and the officials of the Deoksugung Palace should be added. The guards of the Deoksugung Palace should be implemented in accordance with the measures of the imperial city and the palace gate.

古文：戊寅，大赦。
现代文：十二日，孝宗朝拜德寿宫。十三日，大赦。
English: On the 12th, Xiaozong paid a visit to DeShou Palace. On the 13th, he was pardoned.

古文：诏宰相率百官月两朝德寿宫。
现代文：诏令宰相率百官每月朝拜德寿宫两次。
English: The emperor ordered the prime minister and hundreds of officials to visit Deoksugung Palace twice a month.

古文：己卯，以即位告于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十四日，以即位告天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 14th, the enthronement was announced to the world, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：庚辰，诏五日一朝德寿宫。
现代文：十五日，诏令五日一朝德寿宫。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the imperial edict decreed that the palace would be demolished on the fifth day.

古文：以左武大夫龙大渊为枢密副都承旨，武翼郎曾觌带御器械。
现代文：任命左武大夫龙大渊为枢密副都承旨，武翼郎曾规带御器械。
English: The appointment of Dr. Zawu Long Dayuan as the Privy Vice-Governor, Wu Yulang once carried the instrument.

古文：癸未，始御后殿。
现代文：十八日，始到后殿。
English: On the 18th, it started in the rear hall.

古文：甲申，诏中外士庶陈时政阙失。
现代文：十九日，诏令中外士庶陈说时政缺失。
English: On the 19th, the Foreign Correspondent Chen Zhaorong said that there was a lack of current politics.

古文：丙戌，诏进宰执官二等。
现代文：二十一日，诏进宰执官二等。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was promoted to the second-class vice-governor.

古文：丁亥，诏以太上皇不许五日一朝，自今月四朝。
现代文：二十二日，下诏因太上皇不许五日一朝，从今以后改为一月四朝。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor issued an edict stating that since the emperor did not allow the 5th day to be the first day of the month, it would henceforth be the 4th day of the month.

古文：复除名勒停人胡铨官、知饶州。
现代文：恢复除名勒停人胡锉官职，任命为饶州知州。
English: He reinstated Hu Yaobang, who had been removed from his post, and appointed him as the governor of Raozhou.

古文：己丑，诏有司月奉德寿宫缗钱十万。
现代文：二十四日，诏令有关部门每月供给德寿宫络钱十万。
English: On the 24th, the relevant departments were ordered to provide 100,000 rupees per month to Deoksugung Palace.

古文：辛卯，诏罢四川市马。
现代文：二十六日，诏令罢除四川买马。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict revoked Sichuan's right to buy horses.

古文：壬辰，诏百官日一人入对。
现代文：二十七日，诏令文武百官每天一人人对。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that one person per day from each of the 100 civil and military officials should attend.

古文：癸巳，蝗。
现代文：二十八日，蝗灾。
English: On the 28th, the plague of locusts began.

古文：甲午，上太上皇帝尊号曰光尧寿圣太上皇帝，太上皇后曰寿圣太上皇后。
现代文：二十九日，敬上太上皇帝尊号为光尧寿圣太上皇帝，太上皇后为寿圣太上皇后。
English: On the 29th, the honorific title of the revered empress dowager was Guangyao Shousheng Empress Dowager, and the revered empress dowager was Shousheng Empress Dowager.

古文：乙未晦，金人屠原州。
现代文：三十日，天空昏暗，金军屠杀原州城。
English: On the 30th, with the sky darkening, the Golden Army massacred the city of Wonju.

古文：秋七月戊戌，兴州中军统制吴挺复巩州。
现代文：秋七月初三，兴州中军统制吴挺收复巩州。
English: In autumn, on the third day of July, the Xingzhou Central Army led by Wu Ting regained Gongzhou.

古文：庚子，判建康府张浚入见。
现代文：初五，判建康府张浚人朝拜见皇上。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Junren of Jiankangfu was ordered to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：以雨水、飞蝗，令侍从、台谏条上民间利害。
现代文：因降雨、飞蝗，命令侍从、台谏官陈述民间利害。
English: Due to rain and flying locusts, he ordered his attendants and eunuchs to present the interests of the people.

古文：壬寅，诏戒饬诸郡守臣。
现代文：初七，诏令戒伤各郡守臣。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial edict was issued to restrain and injure all county retainers.

古文：癸卯，以张浚为少傅、江淮宣抚使，封魏国公。
现代文：初八，任命张浚为少傅、江淮宣抚使，封为魏国公。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jun was appointed as the minor Fu and the envoy of the Jianghuai Emperor, and was given the title of Wei Guogong.

古文：甲辰，以参知政事汪澈视师湖北、京西。
现代文：初十，任命参知政事汪澈视察湖北、京西。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Wang Chie, a politician who was appointed to the post of prefectural governor, inspected Hubei and West Beijing.

古文：遣刘珙等使金告即位。
现代文：派遣刘琪等出使金国，报告孝宗即位。
English: Liu Qi and others were dispatched to Jin Province to report the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：戊申，以四川宣抚使吴璘兼陕西河东路宣抚、招讨使。
现代文：十四日，任命四川宣抚使吴瞒兼陕西河东路宣抚、招讨使。
English: On the 14th, Wu Zhen, the Sichuan Proclamation Envoy, and the Shaanxi He Donglu Proclamation Envoy and Summoning Envoy were appointed.

古文：追复岳飞元官，以礼改葬。
现代文：追复岳飞原官，以礼改葬。
English: Yue Fei was restored to his former position and was given a ceremonial funeral.

古文：是夜，地震，大风拔木。
现代文：这天晚上，发生地震，大风拔木。
English: That evening, there was an earthquake, and the trees were uprooted by high winds.

古文：己酉，有事于太庙、别庙。
现代文：十五日，在太庙、别庙举行祭祀。
English: On the fifteenth day, a ritual was held in the main temple and another temple.

古文：癸丑，马军司中军统制赵撙、忠义军统领皇甫倜复光州。
现代文：十九日，马军司中军统制赵搏、忠义军统领皇甫调收复光州。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese army under the command of Zhao Bo, the commander of the Horse Army, and the Loyalist Army under the command of Wang Fu transferred and conquered Fuguangzhou.

古文：甲寅，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 20th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：诏淮南诸州存恤淮北来归之民，权免税役。
现代文：诏令淮南各州慰问抚恤淮北来归之民，暂时免除税役。
English: The imperial edict ordered the states of Huainan to pay a condolence allowance to the people returning from Huaibei and temporarily exempt them from taxes.

古文：丙辰，以少保、保康军节度使吴益为少傅，太尉、宁武军节度使吴盖为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十二日，任命少保、保康军节度使吴益为少傅，太尉、武宁军节度使吴盖为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Yi was appointed to the position of Shao Fu by the Shao Bao and Hokang Army Council, and Wu Gai was appointed to the position of Kaifu Yi and San Si by the Taifu and Wu Ning Army Council.

古文：丁巳，罢李宝措置海道。
现代文：二十三日，罢除李宝措置海道。
English: On the 23rd, Li Bao was removed from the position of director of the State Administration of Water Resources.

古文：戊午，恩平郡王璩入见。
现代文：二十四日，恩平郡王赵朦朝见孝宗。
English: On the 24th, King Zhao of Enping County went to see Xiaozong.

古文：庚申，以御前军器所仍隶工部。
现代文：二十六日，御前军器所仍旧归属工部。
English: On the 26th, the Imperial Armoury still belonged to the Ministry of Works.

古文：辛酉，诏后省看详中外上书，有可采者以闻。
现代文：二十七日，诏令后省看详中外上书，有可以采纳者报告朝廷。
English: On the 27th, after the imperial edict was issued, the provincial government looked at the details of the petition and reported to the imperial court whether it could be accepted.

古文：壬戌，以黄祖舜兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十八日，任命黄祖舜兼任参知政事。
English: On the 28th, Huang Zuyao was appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：罢诸路圣节进奉。
现代文：罢除各路圣节进奉物品。
English: Eliminate items that are offered on all the holy days of the year.

古文：诏李显忠军马听张浚节制。
现代文：诏令李显忠军马听从张浚调遣管理。
English: The edict ordered Li Hsien Chung's army horses to obey Zhang Jun's dispatch management.

古文：癸亥，增将士战伤死者推恩格。
现代文：二十九日，增加将士战伤战死者推恩给赏标准。
English: On the 29th, the standard for awarding rewards to soldiers wounded in battle and those killed in action was raised.

古文：诏蠲四川积年逋负。
现代文：诏令免除四川积年拖欠的债务。
English: The imperial edict exempted Sichuan from its long-term debt arrears.

古文：八月乙丑朔，四川马军统制高师中与金人战于摧沙，败死。
现代文：八月初一，四川马军统制高师中与金军战于摧沙，失败而死。
English: On the first day of August, the middle school of the Sichuan Horse Army Commanding High School fought against the Golden Army in the desert, and died in defeat.

古文：丙寅，吴璘与金人战于德顺军。
现代文：初二，吴瞒与金军战于德顺军。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Wu Zhe fought against the Jin army in the Deshun army.

古文：己巳，以翰林学士史浩为参知政事。
现代文：初五，任命翰林学士史浩为参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Hanlin Scholar Shi Hao was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：戊寅，率群臣诣德寿宫，奉上太上皇帝、太上皇后尊号册宝。
现代文：十四日，孝宗率大臣到德寿宫，奉上太上皇帝、太上皇后尊号册宝。
English: On the 14th, Takamune and his ministers went to Deoksugung Palace to present the Emperor and Empress to the Emperor.

古文：于亥，班宽恤事十八条。
现代文：二十三日，颁布宽恤事件十八条。
English: On the 23rd, the 18th article of the leniency event was promulgated.

古文：起居舍人洪迈、知阁门事张抡坐奉使辱命罢。
现代文：起居舍人洪迈、知间门事张抡因奉使辱命被罢免。
English: Hongmai, the resident of the house, and Zhang Xuan, the gatekeeper of the house, were removed from their posts for insubordination.

古文：甲申，吴璘败金人于北山。
现代文：甲申日，吴瞒在北山打败金军。
English: On Jiaxun Day, Wu Zhe defeated the Jin army in Beishan.

古文：戊子，追复李光资政殿学土，赵鼎、范冲并还合得恩数。
现代文：二十四日，追复李光为资政殿学士，赵鼎、范冲都被恢复他们应得到的恩赏。
English: On the 24th, Li Guang was reinstated as a scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, and Zhao Ding and Fan Chong were restored to their due rewards.

古文：庚寅，以生日为会庆节。
现代文：二十六日，以孝宗的生日为会庆节。
English: On the 26th, the birthday of Takamune was celebrated as a festival.

古文：追册故妃郭氏为皇后。
现代文：追册故妃郭氏为皇后。
English: The late Princess Guo became empress.

古文：九月甲午，以子愭为少保、永兴军节度使，进封邓王；恺为雄武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封庆王；惇为镇洮军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封恭王。
现代文：九月初一，任命儿子赵嗜为少保、永兴军节度使，进封为邓王；赵恺为雄武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封为庆王；赵为镇姚军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封为恭王。
English: On the first day of September, he appointed his son Zhao Jiong to be the Minor Protector, Yongxing Army Festival Envoy, and was given the title of Deng Wang; Zhao Jiong to be the Xiongwu Army Festival Envoy, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and was given the title of Qing Wang; Zhao Jiong to be the Zhenyao Army Festival Envoy, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and was given the title of Gong Wang.

古文：甲午，金人攻德顺军东山堡，中军将李庠战死。
现代文：金军进攻德顺军东山堡，中军将李库战死。
English: The Gold Army attacked the Dongshan Fort of the Deshun Army, and the Chinese Army killed Li Ku.

古文：丁酉，诏开讲日召辅臣观讲。
现代文：初四，诏令开讲日召集辅臣观讲。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict to summon the vassals to watch the lecture on the first day.

古文：川、陕宣谕使虞允文以论边事不合罢。
现代文：川陕宣谕使虞允文因论边事不合被罢免。
English: The Sichuan-Shaanxi Proclamation ordered that Yu Yunwen be removed from his post due to disagreements on peripheral issues.

古文：己亥，诏侍从、台谏举知四川利害可为都转运使者。
现代文：初六，诏令侍从、台谏官举荐知晓四川利害可以担任都转运使者。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the attendants and the Taiwanese eunuchs to recommend those who knew the interests of Sichuan and could serve as envoys.

古文：庚子，以金人来索旧礼，诏宰执、侍从、台谏各陈应敌定论以闻。
现代文：初七，因金国派人来索旧礼，诏令宰执、侍从、台谏官各自陈说应敌定论上报朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, because the state of Jin sent someone to retrieve the old ritual, the emperor ordered the chief priest, his attendants, and the eunuchs to each make a report to the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，诏吴璘审度措置，保全川蜀。
现代文：初八，诏令吴瞒审度措置，保全川蜀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Wu Zhe to take measures to protect Sichuan Shu.

古文：乙巳，诏纂录勋臣名次。
现代文：十二日，诏令记录勋臣名次。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict recorded the ranks of the honored vassals.

古文：丙午，转补朱震、范冲子孙官。
现代文：十三日，转补朱震、范冲子孙官职。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Zhen and Fan Chong's sons and grandsons were promoted to official posts.

古文：庚戌，谥皇后郭氏曰恭怀。
现代文：十七日，赠皇后郭氏溢号为恭怀。
English: On the 17th, the Queen Guo family crest was presented as a token of respect.

古文：辛亥，振淮东义兵及归正人。
现代文：十八日，贩济淮东义兵和归正人。
English: On the 18th, the merchants gave money to Huaidong soldiers and reformers.

古文：以总领四川财赋军马钱粮王之望为户部侍郎、川陕宣谕使，仍命将调兵同防守兴州川口。
现代文：任命总领四川财赋军马钱粮王之望为户部侍郎、川陕宣谕使，并且命令将领调兵共同防守兴州川口。
English: He appointed the commander-in-chief of the Sichuan-funded army, Ma Qian Rong Wang, as the head of the household and the envoy of the Sichuan-Shaanxi envoy, and ordered the general to jointly defend the Xingzhou-Kawaguchi.

古文：乙卯，诏虞允文赴吴璘军议事。
现代文：二十二日，诏令虞允文到吴瞒军中议事。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial command sent Yu Yunwen to Wu Zhejun Middle School for deliberation.

古文：辛酉，以吴璘为少师。
现代文：二十八日，任命吴目漪为少师。
English: On the 28th, Wu Muxuan was appointed as a junior teacher.

古文：冬十月丙寅，诏朝臣举堪监司、郡守者，戊辰，以岳阳军节度使居广开府仪同三司，史浩兼权知枢密院事。
现代文：冬十月初三，诏令朝臣举荐可以担任监司、郡守的人。初五，任命岳阳军节度使居广为开府仪同三司，史浩兼代理知枢密院事。
English: On the third day of the third month of winter in October, the imperial edict ordered the courtier to recommend people who could serve as supervisors and county governors. On the fifth day of the first month, he appointed the Yueyang Army's ceremonial envoy Jiu Guang as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and Shi Hao as the deputy of the Privy Council.

古文：己巳，叶义问罢。
现代文：初六，叶义问被罢免。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Ip Yee Man was removed from his post.

古文：诏登闻鼓院毋沮抑进状。
现代文：诏令登闻鼓院不要沮抑进状。
English: Do not be discouraged by the edict from the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：庚午，以恩平郡王璩为少保。
现代文：初七，任命恩平郡王赵朦为少保。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Zhao Mei, the king of Enping County, was appointed as a minor protector.

古文：诏会庆节权免上寿。
现代文：诏令会庆节暂且免除祝寿。
English: The Imperial Edict temporarily exempts the celebration of birthdays and anniversaries.

古文：戊寅，诏张浚、陈俊卿覆实诸将所陈功赏。
现代文：十五日，诏令张浚、陈俊卿核实诸将所陈功赏。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Jun and Chen Junqing verified the merits of the generals.

古文：改谥皇后郭氏曰安穆。
现代文：改溢皇后郭氏为安穆。
English: Empress Guo's replacement is Anmu.

古文：壬午，官岳飞孙六人。
现代文：十九日，任命岳飞孙六人为官。
English: On the 19th, Yue Feisun appointed six new officials.

古文：甲申，契丹招讨萧鹧巴来奔。
现代文：二十一日，契丹招讨萧鹤巴来降。
English: On the twenty-first day, Khitan invited Xiao Heba to come down.

古文：金人攻德顺城，吴璘击走之，复遣兵追袭，遂为所败。
现代文：金军进攻德顺城，吴瞒击退金军，又派兵追袭，遂为所败。
English: The gold army attacked Deshun City, Wu Zhen repulsed the gold army, and sent troops to pursue, and was defeated.

古文：乙酉，升建州为建宁府。
现代文：二十二日，升建州为建宁府。
English: On the 22nd, it was upgraded to Jianning Prefecture.

古文：戊子，以资政殿学士张焘同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十五日，任命资政殿学士张煮为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Ni, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：己丑，安南都护、南平王同李天祚、阇婆国王悉里地茶兰固野、占城国王邹时巴兰并加食邑实封。
现代文：二十六日，安南都护南平王李天柞、婆国王悉里地茶兰固野、占城国王邹时巴兰都增加食邑实封。
English: On the 26th, the Annamese tutelary Nanping King Li Tianyao, the Sri Lankan King Selangor, and the Zhancheng King Shushi Balan all increased the amount of food sealed.

古文：十一月庚子，以萧鹧巴为忠州团练使。
现代文：十一月初七，任命萧鹤巴为忠州团练使。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Xiao Heba was appointed as the training envoy of the Chungju Reunion.

古文：乙巳，金人攻水洛城。
现代文：十二日，金军进攻水洛城。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army attacked Shuilao City.

古文：丙午，赐忠义军统制皇甫倜军帛五千匹、绵万两。
现代文：十三日，赐给忠义军统制皇甫调军帛五千匹、绵一万两。
English: On the 13th, the loyalist army was given 5,000 horses and 10,000 yams by the emperor.

古文：戊申，诏改明年为隆兴元年。
现代文：十五日，诏令改明年为隆兴元年。
English: On the 15th, the imperial decree changed the next year to the first year of prosperity.

古文：辛亥，免杨存中所献酒坊逋负钱四十万缗。
现代文：十八日，免除杨存中所献纳酒坊拖欠钱四十万络。
English: On the 18th, the liquor store in Yangcun was exempted from paying 400,000 rmb in arrears.

古文：甲寅，定内侍官额。
现代文：二十一日，定内侍官额。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the position of regular chamberlain was abolished.

古文：辛酉，史浩免权知枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，史浩免除代理知枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Shi Hao exempted the deputy secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：裁定文武臣宫观、岳庙员数。
现代文：确定文武臣僚宫观、岳庙人数。
English: Determine the number of literati and warrior-vassals who have a view of the palace and the mountain temple.

古文：立措置京西营田司。
现代文：设立措置京西营田司。
English: The establishment of the West Beijing Yingtan Division is a step forward.

古文：十二月乙丑，诏宰臣复兼枢密使。
现代文：十二月初三，诏令宰臣重新兼任枢密使。
English: On the third day of the twelfth month, the Emperor ordered Zai Chen to resume his position as Privy Councilor.

古文：金人攻陇城县，官军拒却之，丙寅，诏帅臣、监司具部内知州治行臧否以闻。
现代文：金军进攻陇城县，官军打退金军。初四，诏令帅臣、监司陈述管辖地区知州治绩好坏上报朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the grand vizier and supervisors to report to the imperial court on the good or bad performance of the administration of Zhizhou in the areas under their jurisdiction.

古文：诏弃德顺城，徙兵民于秦州以里屯住。
现代文：诏令放弃德顺城。迁兵民到秦州以里屯住。
English: The imperial edict ordered the abandonment of Deshun Town. The relocated soldiers settled in Qinzhou Yili.

古文：丁卯，以陈康伯兼枢密使。
现代文：初五，任命陈康伯兼枢密使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Chen Kangbo was also appointed as a Privy Councilor.

古文：令江、淮宣抚司增招武勇效用军。
现代文：命令江、淮宣抚司增招武勇效用军。
English: Jiang and Huai ordered the Propaganda and Guidance Department to recruit more valiant and effective troops.

古文：戊辰，诏侍从、台谏集议当今弊事，仍命尽率其属，使极言无隐。
现代文：初六，诏令侍从、台谏官集体商议当今弊事，并且命令他们率部属官吏极言无隐。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered his attendants and officials to collectively discuss the current problems, and ordered them to lead their subordinate officials to speak their minds.

古文：辛未，刘珙、张说还自盱眙。
现代文：初九，刘琪和张说从盯胎回来。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Liu Qi and Zhang said that they had come back from fetal monitoring.

古文：戊寅，蠲四川登极赦前带白契税钱。
现代文：十六日，免除四川即位大赦前带白契税钱。
English: On the 16th, the pre-amnesty of the enthronement of Sichuan was exempted from the white deed tax.

古文：丙戌，诏观察使已上各举所知三人，三省、枢密院详议立格以闻。
现代文：二十四日，诏观察使以上官员各自推举所知三人，三省和枢密院详议立格报告朝廷。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor's observation caused the above-mentioned officials to each nominate three known persons, and the three provinces and the Privy Council discussed in detail the report to the Imperial Court.

古文：庚寅，罢建康、镇江营田官兵。
现代文：二十八日，罢除建康和镇江营田官兵。
English: On the 28th, Jiankang and Zhenjiang Yingtan officers and soldiers were dismissed.

古文：辛卯，广西贼王宣破藤州，守臣廖颙弃城遁。
现代文：二十九日，广西贼王宣攻破藤州，守臣廖弃城逃走。
English: On the 29th, the Guangxi Thief King proclaimed that he would invade and destroy Fujian, and the guardian Liao abandoned the city and fled.

古文：是岁，诸路断大辟四十一人。
现代文：这年，各路判死刑者共四十一人。
English: This year, a total of forty-one people were sentenced to death.

古文：隆兴元年春正月壬辰朔，群臣朝于文德殿。
现代文：隆兴元年春正月初一，大臣在文德殿朝拜孝宗皇上。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Longxing, the minister paid homage to Emperor Xiaozong in the Winter Palace.

古文：帝朝德寿宫。
现代文：孝宗朝拜德寿宫。
English: The Emperor Xiaozong visits the De Shou Palace.

古文：立武臣荐举格。
现代文：确立武臣荐举标准。
English: Establish a standard for recommending candidates to the samurai class.

古文：甲午，四川宣抚司奉诏班师。
现代文：初三，四川宣抚司奉命班师。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Sichuan Propaganda Department was ordered to become a teacher.

古文：庚子，以史浩为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，张浚进枢密使、都督江淮东西路军马。
现代文：初九，任命史浩为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，张浚进升为枢密使、都督江淮东西路军马。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Shi Hao was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu, the subordinate of Ping Zhang and the privy councilor of Shang Shu, and Zhang Junjin was promoted to the privy councilor and the governor of the East-West Military Road of Jianghuai.

古文：丙午，诛殿前司后军谋变者。
现代文：十五日，诛杀殿前司后军阴谋反叛的人。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he killed those who had plotted to rebel against him.

古文：戊申，诏礼部贡院试额增一百人。
现代文：十七日，诏令礼部贡院考试额增加一百人。
English: On the 17th, it was decreed that the number of examinations for the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies Tribute Academy would be increased by one hundred.

古文：丁巳，诏吴璘军进退可从便宜。
现代文：二十六日，诏令吴瞒军队进退可以自行决定。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Wu decreed that Wu Zhe's army could advance and retreat at its own discretion.

古文：璘已弃德顺，道为金人所邀，将士死者数万计。
现代文：吴瞒已经放弃德顺，道路又被金军阻拦，将士死者数以万计。
English: Wu Zhen had already abandoned Deshun, the road was blocked by the Chinese army, and tens of thousands of soldiers were killed.

古文：二月壬戌朔，用史浩策，以布衣李信为兵部员外郎，赍蜡书间道往中原，招豪杰之据有州郡者，许以封王世袭。
现代文：二月初一，采用史浩的策略，任命布衣李信甫为兵部员外郎，带着蜡书从小道前往中原，招募占据州郡的豪杰们，答应封王世袭。
English: On the first day of February, using Shi Hao's strategy, he appointed the cloth-clad Li Xinfu as the warlord's son-in-law, and went to the Central Plains from the trail with a wax book to recruit the heroes who occupied the prefectures and counties, and promised to seal the king's succession.

古文：安庆军节度使士篯乞减奉赐之半，以助军用。
现代文：安庆军节度使赵士请减去棒禄的一半，用以补助军用。
English: The Anqing Army Festival caused Zhao Shizhi to subtract half of the stick to subsidize the military.

古文：自是，诸宗室有请，悉从之。
现代文：从此宗室成员有此请求的全部批准。
English: The request has since been fully approved by the members of the family.

古文：戊辰，宰执陈康伯等乞再减奉，止存旧格之半，许之。
现代文：初七，宰执陈康伯等请求再次减免棒禄，只保存旧标准的一半，答应了这个请求。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the leader Chen Kangbo and others requested that the bonus be reduced again, and only half of the old standard was saved, and the request was granted.

古文：己卯，振两淮流民及山东归正忠义军。
现代文：十八日，贩济两淮流民和山东归正忠义军。
English: On the 18th, the two Huai and Shandong Huizhong refugees and the Shandong Guizhong loyalist army came together.

古文：癸未，黄祖舜罢。
现代文：二十二日，黄祖舜被罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Huang Zuyao was removed from office.

古文：庚寅，逐秦桧党人，仍禁辄至行在。
现代文：二十九日，驱逐秦桧党羽，并且禁止他们擅自到行在。
English: On the 29th, he expelled Qin Hui's followers and forbade them to travel there without permission.

古文：三月壬辰朔，金左副元帅纥石烈志宁以书取侵地。
现代文：三月初一，金军左副元帅给石烈志宁以书取侵地。
English: On the first day of March, the Left Deputy Marshal of the Chinese People's Liberation Army gave Shi Liezhining a letter to invade the land.

古文：癸巳，以张焘为参知政事，御史中丞辛次膺同知枢密院事，叶义问落端明殿学士、饶州居住。
现代文：初二，任命张煮为参知政事，御史中承辛次膺为同知枢密院事，叶义问被罢免端明殿学士，饶州居住。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Zhang Gui was appointed as a member of the Council of State, Zhou Zhongcheng was appointed as a member of the Council of Privy Councillors, Ye Yimin was removed as a member of the Council of State, and he lived in Raozhou.

古文：丙申，雨雹。
现代文：初五，降冰雹。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：丁酉，诏户部置局，议节浮费。
现代文：初六，诏令户部置局，商议节约浮费。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed the establishment of the household department, and the discussion on saving floating expenses ended.

古文：己亥，杨存中等乞减半奉如宰执例，许之。
现代文：初八，杨存中等请求像宰执一样减掉一半的棒禄，批准了这个请求。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yang Cunzhong requested to reduce half of the bonus like the leader, and approved this request.

古文：庚子，以龙大渊知阁门事，曾觌同知阁门事。
现代文：初九，任命龙大渊知阎门事，曾规为同知阎门事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Long Dayuan was appointed to know the gate of hell, and Zeng Gui was appointed to know the gate of hell.

古文：壬寅，陈康伯上钦宗陵名曰永献。
现代文：十一日，陈康伯献上钦宗陵墓名为永献。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Chen Kangbo dedicated the tomb of Emperor Qinzong, which was named Yongxian.

古文：乙巳，诏求遗逸。
现代文：十四日，诏求遗逸。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：丁未，诏修《太上皇帝圣政》。
现代文：十六日，诏令修撰汰上皇帝圣班。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict was revised and Emperor Shengban was enthroned.

古文：罢龙大渊，别与差遣。
现代文：罢免龙大渊，另外差遣。
English: Long Dayuan was removed from office and sent on another errand.

古文：曾觌复带御器械。
现代文：曾规恢复带御器械。
English: There was a rule about bringing back instruments.

古文：召张浚。
现代文：召张浚。
English: Call Zhang Jun.

古文：己酉，张焘罢。
现代文：十八日，张煮被罢免。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Ni was dismissed.

古文：立选人减举主法。
现代文：确立选人减少举荐者的办法。
English: Establish a method for selecting candidates to reduce the number of recommenders.

古文：甲寅，复龙大渊知閤门事。曾觌同阁门事，给事中、中书舍人留黄不行。
现代文：二十三日，恢复龙大渊为知阎门事，曾规为同知阎门事，给事中、中书舍人留黄不行。
English: On the 23rd, it was restored that Long Dayuan was a matter of knowledge, and Zeng Gu was a matter of knowledge, and it was not possible to leave yellow for those who did not have knowledge in the middle of the matter.

古文：乙卯，诏饬郡县吏。
现代文：二十四日，诏令整治郡县吏。
English: On the 24th, an imperial edict was issued to rectify county officials.

古文：庚申，以久雨，命有司振灾伤，察刑禁。
现代文：二十九日，因久雨不晴，命令有关部门贩济灾伤，考察刑禁。
English: On the 29th, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the relevant departments were ordered to raise funds for the victims of the disaster and examine the criminal ban.

古文：夏四月乙丑，定选人改官岁额。
现代文：夏四月初五，确定选人改官岁额。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, the number of years for selecting and changing officials will be determined.

古文：戊辰，张浚入见，议出师渡淮，三省、枢密院不预闻。
现代文：初八，张浚朝见孝宗，商议出兵渡淮，三省、枢密院没有参与。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jun met with Xiaozong and discussed sending troops to Wudu and Huai. The three provinces and the Privy Council did not participate.

古文：壬申，赐礼部进士木待问以下五百三十八人及第、出身。
现代文：十二日，赐礼部进士木待问以下五百三十八人及第、出身。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following 538 people were selected to join the Ceremonial Department.

古文：乙亥，王之望罢。
现代文：十五日，王之望被罢免。
English: On the 15th, Wang Zhimang was dismissed.

古文：壬午，诏户部、台谏议节浮费。
现代文：二十二日，诏令户部、台谏官员商议节省浮费。
English: On the 22nd, officials from the Imperial Household Ministry and the Taiwan Provincial Government held a meeting to discuss ways to save on shipping costs.

古文：癸未，诏以白金二十五万两给江、淮都督府军费。戊子，张浚命邵宏渊帅师次盱眙。
现代文：二十三日，诏令给江淮都督府白金二十五万两为军费。二十八日，张浚命令邵宏渊率军驻扎盯胎。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict gave 250,000 taels of platinum to the Jianghuai prefectural government for military expenses. On the 28th, Zhang Jun ordered Shao Hongyuan and his army to stay and monitor the situation.

古文：己丑，又命李显忠帅师次定远。
现代文：二十九日，又命令李显忠率军驻扎定远。
English: On the 29th, he also ordered Lee Hsien Loong to lead the army to be stationed in Dingyuan.

古文：是月，金人拔环州，守臣强霓及其弟震死之。
现代文：这个月，金军攻取环州，守臣强霓及其弟强震战死。
English: This month, the Golden Army captured Huanzhou, and the guarding vassal Qiang Yu and his brother Qiang Zhen were killed in battle.

古文：五月壬辰，申严铺翠销金及神祠僭拟之禁。
现代文：五月初二，申严铺翠销金和神祠僧拟之禁。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, it was declared that it was strictly forbidden to sell gold and statues of deities.

古文：丁酉，李显忠复灵壁县。
现代文：初七，李显忠收复灵壁县。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Hsien Chung recaptured Lingbi County.

古文：邵宏渊次虹县，金人拒之。
现代文：邵宏渊驻扎虹县，金军抵御。
English: Shao Hongyuan stationed in Hongxian, resisted by the Golden Army.

古文：戊戌，显忠东趋虹县。
现代文：初八，李显忠东趋虹县。
English: At the age of eight, Lee Hsien Chung moved to Dongcheng County.

古文：庚子，复虹县，金知泗州蒲察徒穆及同知泗州大周仁降。
现代文：初十，收复虹县，金国知泅州蒲察徒穆和同知泅州大周仁投降。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Hongxian County was recovered, and Jin Guozhizhou's Pu Zhaotmu and Jin Guozhizhou's Dai Zhou Ren surrendered.

古文：辛丑，命左右史日更立前殿。
现代文：十一日，命令左右史每日更替立前殿。
English: On the 11th day, the order was given to replace the left and right stories with the front hall on a daily basis.

古文：壬寅，张浚渡江视师。
现代文：十二日，张浚渡江视师。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Jun went to the river to see the division.

古文：癸卯，金右翼军都统萧琦降于李显忠。
现代文：十三日，金右翼军都统萧琦向李显忠投降。
English: On the 13th, Kim's right wing army, Du Tong Xiao Wei, surrendered to Lee Hsien Chung.

古文：甲辰，显忠及宏渊败金人于宿州。乙己，史浩罢。
现代文：十四日，李显忠和邵宏渊在宿州打败金军。十五日，史浩被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Lee Hsien Chung and Shao Hong Yuan defeated the Golden Army in Cangzhou. On the 15th, Shi Hao was dismissed.

古文：追复司马康右谏议大夫。
现代文：追复司马康为右谏议大夫。
English: Sima Kang, the second-in-command, is the right-hand doctor.

古文：丙午，复宿州，戮金兵数千人。
现代文：十六日，收复宿州，诛杀金兵数千人。
English: On the 16th, he recaptured Shuzhou and killed thousands of Jin soldiers.

古文：建康前军统领官王珙巷战，死之。
现代文：建康前军统领官王琪与金军巷战而死。
English: Wang Qi, the commander-in-chief of Jiankang's former army, died in a street battle with the Jin army.

古文：丁未，以辛次膺为参知政事，翰林学士承旨洪遵同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命辛次膺为参知政事，翰林学士承旨洪遵为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Xin Jizhe was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Hanlin Scholar Chengzhi Hongzong was appointed as a member of the Council of Privy Council.

古文：督诸路开营田。
现代文：督促各路开辟营田。
English: Urge all roads to open up campgrounds.

古文：辛亥，诣德寿宫贺天申节。
现代文：二十二日，孝宗到德寿宫祝贺天申节。
English: On the 22nd, Takamune went to Deoksugung Palace to congratulate the Tenshin Festival.

古文：金纥石烈志宁自睢阳引兵至宿州，李显忠击却之。
现代文：金给石烈志宁从雅阳引兵至宿州，李显忠击退金军。
English: The gold gave Shi Liizhining to lead troops from Yayang to Suzhou, and Li Hsien Chung repelled the gold army.

古文：壬子，钦宗大祥，帝服衰服诣几筵，易祥服行祥祭礼。
现代文：二十三日，钦宗逝世两周年，孝宗着丧服到几筵，换样服行样祭礼。
English: On the 23rd, the second anniversary of the death of Emperor Qinzong, Emperor Xiaozong wore several layers of mourning clothes and held a ceremonial changing of clothes.

古文：显忠与金人战于宿州，邵宏渊不援，显忠失利。
现代文：李显忠在宿州与金军作战，邵宏渊不援助，李显忠失利。
English: Lee Hsien Chung fought against the Golden Army in Cangzhou, Shao Hongyuan did not help, and Lee Hsien Chung lost.

古文：是夜，建康中军统制周宏及邵宏渊之子世雄、殿前司统制官左士渊逃归。
现代文：这天夜里，建康中军统制周宏和邵宏渊之子邵世雄、殿前司统制官左士渊逃回。
English: On this night, Zhou Hong and Shao Shixiong, the son of Shao Hongyuan, the military leader of Jiankang, and Zushi Yuan, the former military leader of the palace, fled back.

古文：癸丑，进李显忠开府仪同三司、淮南京畿京东河北招讨使，邵宏渊检校少保、宁远军节度使、招讨副使。
现代文：二十四日，李显忠升为开府仪同三司、淮南京瓷京东河北招讨使。邵宏渊为检校少保、宁远军节度使、招讨副使。
English: On the 24th, Li Xianzhong was promoted to the Third Division of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, Huainan Jingye Jingdong Hebei Recruitment Envoy, Shao Hongyuan was the Junior Security Officer, Ningyuan Military Festival Envoy, and Recruitment Envoy Deputy.

古文：金人攻宿州城，显忠大败之。
现代文：金军进攻宿州城，李显忠大败之。
English: The gold army attacked Shuzhou City, and Lee Hsien Chung suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：殿前司统制官张训通等七人、统领官十二人，以二将不叶而遁。
现代文：殿前司统制官张训通等七人、统领官十二人，因二将领不和而逃跑。
English: Because of the discord between the two generals, seven people, including Zhang Xuntong, the former commander-in-chief of the palace, and twelve leading officials fled.

古文：甲寅，李显忠、邵宏渊军大溃于符离。
现代文：二十五日，李显忠、邵宏渊在符离大败。
English: On the 25th, Lee Hsien Chung and Shao Hongyuan suffered a crushing defeat in Fuxi.

古文：乙卯，下诏亲征。
现代文：二十六日，孝宗下诏亲征。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict to personally lead the expedition.

古文：丙辰，召汪澈。
现代文：二十七日，召汪澈。
English: On the 27th, Wang Che was summoned.

古文：以张浚兼都督荆、襄军马。
现代文：任命张浚兼都督荆襄军马。
English: Appointed Zhang Jun and the governor Jing Xiang Junma.

古文：李显忠、邵宏渊至濠州。
现代文：李显忠、邵宏渊至壕州。
English: Lee Hsien Chung, Shao Hongyuan to Ho Chau.

古文：张浚以刘宝为镇江诸军都统制。
现代文：张浚任命刘宝为镇江诸军都统制。
English: Zhang Jun appointed Liu Bao as the commander of the Zhenjiang troops.

古文：丁巳，以蒲察徒穆、大周仁、萧琦并为节度使，徒穆大同军、周仁彰国军、琦威塞军。
现代文：二十八日，任命蒲察徒穆、大周仁、萧琦都为节度使，分别为大同军、彰国军、威塞军节度使。
English: On the 28th, Pu Zhaotumu, Dai Zhou Ren and Xiao Wei were all appointed as festival envoys, respectively for the Datong Army, the Zhangguo Army and the Wuxi Army.

古文：遣御前忠勇军赴都督府。
现代文：派遣御前忠勇军前往都督府。
English: Send loyal and brave troops to the governor's office.

古文：是月，成都地震三。
现代文：这个月，成都三次发生地震。
English: This month, Chengdu was hit by three earthquakes.

古文：六月庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：遣内侍趣上淮东将士功赏。
现代文：派遣内侍督促献上淮东将士功赏。
English: Dispatching the Naishi no kami to urge the presentation of rewards to the soldiers of Huaidong.

古文：癸亥，汪澈罢。
现代文：初四，汪澈被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, Wang Che was dismissed.

古文：张浚乞致仕，且请通好，皆不许。
现代文：张浚请求退休，并且请求通好金国，都没批准。
English: Neither Zhang Jun's request to retire nor his request to be treated well by the Chinese government were approved.

古文：丁卯，以观文殿大学士汤思退为醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：初八，任命观文殿大学士汤思退为醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: In his eighth year of junior high school, he was appointed a scholar of the University of Kunming as a dean and attendant.

古文：戊辰，召虞允文。
现代文：初九，召虞允文。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the lunar calendar, Zogu Yosufumi was summoned.

古文：以兵部侍郎周葵为参知政事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎周葵为参知政事。
English: He appointed Zhou Aoi, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, to the post of councillor.

古文：汪澈落资政殿学士、台州居住。
现代文：汪澈罢除资政殿学士职，台州居住。
English: Wang Chie was removed from the post of academician of the House of Councillors and lived in Taizhou.

古文：庚午，张浚自盱眙还扬州。
现代文：十一日，张浚从盯胎回到扬州。
English: On the 11th day, Zhang Jun returned to Yangzhou from tracking.

古文：辛未，李显忠罢军职。
现代文：十二日，李显忠罢除军职。
English: On the 12th, Lee Hsien Loong was dismissed from the military.

古文：壬申，以太傅、同安郡王杨存中为御营使、节制殿前司军马。
现代文：十三日，任命太傅、同安郡王杨存中为御营使，管理调遣殿前司军马。
English: On the 13th, Tai Fu and Wang Yang Cunzhong of Tong'an County were appointed as imperial envoys to manage the dispatch of the former imperial horses.

古文：癸酉，下诏罪己。
现代文：十四日，孝宗下诏罪己。
English: On the 14th, Takamune issued an edict condemning himself.

古文：张浚降授特进，仍前枢密使、江淮东西路宣抚使，官属各夺二官。
现代文：张浚降授特进，仍为前枢密使、江淮东西路宣抚使，官属分别削夺二官。
English: Zhang Junjun was given a special promotion, but he was still the former Privy Envoy and the Jianghuai East-West Road Envoy, and his subordinates won two posts respectively.

古文：邵宏渊降武义大夫，职仍旧。
现代文：邵宏渊降武义大夫，职仍旧。
English: Shao Hongyuan demoted to Dr. Wuyi, but his position remains the same.

古文：诏杨存中先诣建康措置营砦，检视沿江守备。
现代文：诏令杨存中先到建康措置营寨，检查沿江守备情况。
English: The edict ordered Yang Cunzhong to go to Jiankang measures camp first and check the defense situation along the river.

古文：戊寅，诏展巡幸之期。
现代文：二十日，诏令延长巡视时间。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict extended the inspection time.

古文：辛次膺罢。
现代文：辛次膺被罢免。
English: Xin Jizhe was removed from office.

古文：己卯，李显忠责授清远军节度副使、筠州安置。
现代文：二十一日，李显忠被贬为清远军节度副使，箔州安置。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Xianzhong was demoted to deputy envoy of the Qingyuan Army and placed in Huzhou.

古文：辛巳，命浙西副都总管李宝兼御营统制官、措置浙西海道。
现代文：二十三日，命令浙西副都总管李宝兼御营统制官，措置浙西海道。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered Li Bao, the deputy head of the western Zhejiang capital and the commanding officer, to take measures on the western Zhejiang highway.

古文：甲申，右谏议大夫王大宝入封，论移跸。
现代文：二十六日，右谏议大夫王大宝人对，论说移哗。
English: On the 26th, Wang Dabao, a doctor of right-wing politics, made a speech.

古文：以敷文阁学士虞允文为兵部尚书兼湖北、京西宣谕使。
现代文：任命敷文阁学士虞允文为兵部尚书兼湖北、京西宣谕使。
English: Yu Yunwen, a scholar of Shibunkaku, was appointed as the military secretary and envoy to Hubei and West Beijing.

古文：戊子，放宫人三十人。
现代文：三十日，释放宫人三十名。
English: On the 30th, 30 palace staff were released.

古文：以萧琦为检校少保、河北招抚使。
现代文：任命萧琦为检校少保、河北招抚使。
English: Xiao Wei was appointed as the school inspector and the Hebei recruiting officer.

古文：秋七月庚寅朔，以虞允文为湖北、京西制置使。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命虞允文为湖北、京西制置使。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, Yu Yunwen was appointed as the Hubei and West Beijing system envoy.

古文：癸巳，以汤思退为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：初四，任命汤思退为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, Tang Sijie was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the right-hand man of Ping Zhang and the privy councilor of Shang Shu.

古文：李显忠再责授果州团练副使、潭州安置。
现代文：李显忠又降为果州团练副使，潭州安置。
English: Lee Hsien Chung was relegated to the position of deputy envoy of the Cangzhou Rehearsal Team, and resettled in Tan Zhou.

古文：乙未，诏宿州弃军将佐夺官、贬窜有差。
现代文：初六，诏令宿州弃军将领夺官贬窜不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that the general who abandoned the army in Shukushu would lose his position and be demoted.

古文：丙申，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：初七，太白星白天出现，历经一天。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the white star appeared in the daytime and lasted for one day.

古文：罢江、淮宣抚司便宜行事。
现代文：罢除江淮宣抚司自行处理有关事宜。
English: The Jianghuai Publicity Department will deal with the relevant matters on its own.

古文：乙巳，以旱蝗、星变，诏侍从、台谏、两省官条上时政阙失。
现代文：十六日，因早蝗、星变，诏令侍从、台谏、两省官陈说时政缺失。
English: On the 16th, due to the early locusts and the change of the stars, the Emperor ordered the attendants, the eunuchs, and the two provincial officials to say that the current government was lacking.

古文：丁未，诏征李显忠侵欺官钱金银，免籍其家。
现代文：十八日，诏令收回李显忠侵欺官钱金银，免籍其家。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict took back the money, gold and silver that Li Xianzhong embezzled from officials, and his family was expelled from the country.

古文：乙卯，裁减省、部、寺、监官吏。
现代文：二十六日，裁减省、部、侍、监官吏。
English: On the 26th, the number of provincial, departmental, attendant and supervisory officials was reduced.

古文：戊午，给还岳飞田宅。
现代文：二十九日，给还岳飞田宅。
English: On the 29th, Yue Feida's house was returned to him.

古文：八月丙寅，张浚复都督江、淮军马。
现代文：八月初八，张浚又都督江淮军马。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Zhang Jun became the governor of Jianghuai Military Region.

古文：庚午，以刘宝兼淮东招抚使。
现代文：十二日，任命刘宝兼淮东招抚使。
English: On the 12th, Liu Bao was appointed as the special envoy of Huadong Province.

古文：丙子，以飞蝗、风水为灾，避殿减膳。
现代文：十八日，因飞蝗和风水为灾，孝宗不上殿处理政事并且减少饮食。
English: On the 18th day, due to the plague of flying locusts and wind and water, Xiaozong did not go to the palace to deal with political affairs and reduced his diet.

古文：罢借诸路职田之令。
现代文：罢除借诸路职田之令。
English: The order to remove the vassals was rescinded.

古文：戊寅，金纥石烈志宁又以书求海、泗、唐、邓四州地及岁币。
现代文：二十日，金给石烈志宁又致书索要海、泅、唐、邓四州土地和岁币。
English: On the 20th, Jin also sent a letter to Shi Liezhining to request land in the four prefectures of Hai, Min, Tang, and Deng, as well as a year's money.

古文：癸未，复以龙大渊知阁门事，曾觌同知阁门事。
现代文：二十五日，又任命龙大渊为知阎门事，曾规为同知阁门事。
English: On the 25th, Long Dayuan was also appointed as the gatekeeper of Zhiyan, and Zeng Jie as the gatekeeper of Tongzhigou.

古文：丙戌，遣淮西安抚司干办公事卢仲贤等赍书至金帅府，戒勿许四州，差减岁币。
现代文：二十八日，派遣淮西安抚司干办公事卢仲贤等带着书信到金元帅府，告诫不答应割让四州，要减少岁币。
English: On the 28th, Lu Zhongxian, the head of the Huaixi Pacification Division, and other officials were sent to the Kim Marshal's Palace with a letter, warning that they would not agree to cede the four prefectures and would reduce the annual currency.

古文：仍命诸将毋遣兵人出境。
现代文：命令各将领不要派兵出境。
English: Order the generals not to send troops abroad.

古文：九月己酉，杨存中罢。冬十月戊午朔，大臣奏金帅书言四事，帝曰： 四州地、岁币可与，名分、归正人不可从。 
现代文：冬十月初一，大臣奏金帅书言四事，孝宗说： 四州土地、岁币可以给，名分、归正人这两点不能遵命。 初四，上殿复膳。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the minister read four things from Jin Shuai's sermon, and Xiaozong said: The land of the four states and the annual money can be given, but the two points of the name and the person returning to the right cannot comply with the order.

古文：辛酉，御殿复膳。己巳，遣护圣军戍江南。
现代文：十二日，派遣护圣军戍守江南。
English: On the 12th, the Holy Protection Force was dispatched to guard the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：丙子，诏庆上皇后教旨改称圣旨。
现代文：十九日，诏令太上皇后教旨改称圣旨。
English: On the 19th, the Empress Dowager issued a decree to rename the imperial edict as the imperial edict.

古文：立贤妃夏氏为皇后。
现代文：立贤妃夏氏为皇后。
English: Princess Xia became the empress.

古文：丁丑，地震。
现代文：二十日，地震。
English: On the 22nd, an earthquake.

古文：辛巳，升洪州为隆兴府。
现代文：二十四日，升洪州为隆兴府。
English: On the 24th, Shengong Prefecture became Longxing Prefecture.

古文：诏： 江、淮军马调发应援，从都督府取旨，余事悉以闻。 
现代文：下诏： 江淮军马调遣应援，听从都督府命令，其他事全部上奏。 
English: The following edict was issued: The Jianghuai and Huai armies and horses were dispatched to provide assistance, obey the orders of the prefectural government, and all other matters were to be reported to the emperor.

古文：十一月己丑，卢仲贤自宿州以金都元帅仆散忠义遗三省、枢密院书来。
现代文：十一月初二，卢仲贤从宿州带回金都元帅仆散忠义给三省和枢密院的信。
English: On early November 2, Lu Zhongxian brought back from Suizhou a letter to the three provinces and the Privy Council from Jindu Marshal's manservant, San Zhongyi.

古文：庚子，遣王子望等为金国通问使。
现代文：十三日，派遣王之望等为金国通问使。
English: On the 13th, Wang Zhibang and others were dispatched as envoys to inquire about the situation in China.

古文：辛丑，诏侍从、台谏于后省集议讲和、遣使、礼数、土贡四事，仍各荐可备小使者。
现代文：十四日，诏令侍从、台谏在后省集体商议讲和、遣使、礼数、土贡四个问题，并且各自推荐可以担任为使的人。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor ordered the attendants and courtiers to collectively discuss the four issues of peace, envoy, number of courtesies, and tribute in Hou Province, and each recommended a person who could serve as an envoy.

古文：丙午，卢仲贤擅许四州，下大理寺，夺三官。
现代文：十九日，卢仲贤擅自答应割让四州土地，下大理寺狱，削夺三官。
English: On the 19th, Lu Zhongxian unilaterally agreed to cede land in four prefectures, go to Dali Prison, and reduce the number of officials.

古文：召张浚。
现代文：召张浚。
English: Call Zhang Jun.

古文：癸丑，以胡昉、杨由义为使金通问国信所审议官。
现代文：二十六日，任命胡意、杨由义为使金通问国信所审议官。
English: On the 26th, Hu Yi and Yang Yiyi were appointed as examiners of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange.

古文：十二月己未，陈康伯罢。
现代文：十二月初三，陈康伯被罢免。
English: On the third day of December, Chen Kangbo was dismissed.

古文：乙丑，张浚入见。
现代文：初九，张浚朝见孝宗。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Jun met with Xiaozong.

古文：丁丑，以汤思退为尚书左仆射，张浚为右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：二十一日，任命汤思退为尚书左仆射，张浚为右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the twenty-first day, he appointed Tang Sijie as the left footman of Shang Shu and Zhang Jun as the right footman of Shang Shu, and together with Zhong Shumen, he served as the lower level official and the confidential envoy.

古文：浚仍都督江、淮东西路军马。
现代文：张浚仍旧都督江淮东西路军马。
English: Zhang Jun is still the governor of Jianghuai East-West Road.

古文：壬午，西南方有白气。
现代文：二十六日，西南方向有白气。
English: On the 26th, there was white gas in the southwest.

古文：是岁，以两浙大水、旱蝗，江东大水，悉蠲其租。
现代文：这一年，因两浙大水、早蝗，江东大水，都免除田租。
English: This year, due to the floods in Zhejiang, the locusts, and the floods in the east of the Yangtze River, the land rent was exempted.

古文：二年春正月辛卯，诏增德寿宫车辇仪卫。
现代文：隆兴二年春正月初五，诏令增加德寿宫车举仪卫。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Longxing, the imperial edict increased the number of chariots and guards at the Dezhou Palace.

古文：壬辰，御文德殿，册皇后。
现代文：初六，到文德殿，册封皇后。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, she was enthroned as empress at the Winter Palace.

古文：癸巳，修三省法。
现代文：初七，修三省法。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the Three Provinces Law was amended.

古文：乙未，及皇后朝德寿宫。
现代文：初九，与皇后一起朝拜德寿宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, he and the empress went to visit Deoksugung Palace.

古文：丙申，命虞允文调兵讨广西诸盗。
现代文：初十，命令虞允文调兵讨伐广西盗贼。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered Yu Yunwen to send troops to fight the Guangxi thieves.

古文：庚子，罢诸州招军。
现代文：十四日，罢废各州招军。
English: On the 14th, the states abolished the call-up of troops.

古文：丙午，金仆散忠义复以书来。
现代文：二十日，金国仆散忠义又送来书信。
English: On the 20th, Jin's lackey, San Zhongyi, sent another letter.

古文：庚戌，申严卿监、郎官更出迭入之制。
现代文：二十四日，申严卿监、郎官更出迭人之制。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the superintendent of Shen Yanqing and his vassals were removed from their posts.

古文：壬子，振归正人。
现代文：二十六日，贩济归正人。
English: On the 26th, the peddler returned to his rightful place.

古文：甲寅，白气亘天。
现代文：二十八日，白气横贯天空。
English: On the 28th, white gas streaked across the sky.

古文：是月，福建诸州地震。
现代文：这个月，福建各州发生地震。
English: This month, earthquakes occurred in every prefecture of Fujian.

古文：二月辛未，蠲秀州贫民逋租。
现代文：二月十六日，免除秀州贫民拖欠的田租。
English: On February 16, the land rent arrears of the poor in Xiuzhou were exempted.

古文：壬申，容州妖贼李云作乱。
现代文：十七日，容州妖贼李云作乱。
English: On the 17th, Yeongju thief Lee Yun started a riot.

古文：癸酉，复王权武义大夫，命权广西路都钤辖，专一措置盗贼。
现代文：十八日，恢复王权为武义大夫，命令代理广西路铃辖，专门处理镇压盗贼。
English: On the 18th, the royal power was restored to Dr. Wuyi, and he ordered the acting governor of Guangxi Luling to deal specifically with the suppression of thieves.

古文：丙子，诏饬将帅减文武官及百司吏郊赐之半。
现代文：二十一日，诏令整治将帅，减文武官和百司吏人效赐的一半。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Emperor issued an edict to rectify the generals and reduce the military attachés and the hundred officials by half.

古文：罢两浙、福建、江西、湖南、夔州路参议官。
现代文：废罢两浙、福建、江西、湖南、夔州路参议官。
English: The senators of Zhejiang, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan and Luzhou provinces were abolished.

古文：丁丑，雨雹及雪。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹和雪。
English: On the 22nd, hail and snow fell.

古文：获李云，其党悉平。
现代文：俘获李云，党羽全部平定。
English: Li Yun was captured, and all the rebels were subdued.

古文：乙酉，胡昉自宿州还。
现代文：三十日，胡意从宿州回朝。
English: On the 30th, Hu Yi returned to China from Shuzhou.

古文：初，金帅以昉等不许四郡，械系之，昉等不屈，金主命归之。
现代文：当初，金帅因胡意不答应割让四州土地，将他们关押，胡意等不屈服，金主命令他们回国。
English: At first, Jin Shuai did not agree to cede the land of Shizhou to Hu and imprisoned them. However, Hu did not give in and ordered them to return to China.

古文：三月丙戌朔，诏张浚视师于淮。
现代文：三月初一，诏令张浚到淮上视师。
English: On the first day of March, the emperor ordered Zhang Jun to go to Huai High School.

古文：又诏王之望等以币还。
现代文：又诏令王之望等以币还。
English: He also ordered Wang Zhobang and others to return the money.

古文：丁亥，诏荆襄、川陕帅臣严边备，毋先事妄举。
现代文：初二，诏令荆襄、川陕帅臣严密边备，不要先用兵侵犯金军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Jing Xiang and Chuan Shensai ordered their vassals to keep a close watch on the border and not to invade the Jin army first.

古文：卢仲贤除名，械送郴州编管。
现代文：卢仲贤被除名，押送郴州编管。
English: Lu Zhongxian was removed from the list and escorted to Zhangzhou.

古文：壬寅。诏知光州皇甫倜毋招纳归正人。
现代文：十七日，诏令光州知州皇甫调不要招纳归正人。
English: On the 17th, Gwangju Chizhou Hwangbokje ordered not to recruit those who had been reformed.

古文：丙午，王宣等降。
现代文：二十一日，王宣等投降。
English: On the 21st, Wang Xuan and others surrendered.

古文：诏三衙戍兵归司，建康、镇江大军更番归砦。
现代文：诏令三衙戍兵归营，建康、镇江大军更番归寨。
English: The emperor ordered the three soldiers to return to the camp, and the Jiankang and Zhenjiang armies returned to the village.

古文：庚戌，芝生德寿宫。
现代文：二十五日，德寿宫生出芝草。
English: On the 25th, grass sprouted in Deoksugung.

古文：以户部侍郎钱端礼为淮东宣谕使，吏部侍郎王之望为淮西宣谕使。
现代文：任命户部侍郎钱端礼为淮东宣谕使，吏部侍郎王之望为淮西宣谕使。
English: He appointed Qian Duanli, the chamberlain of the Household Department, as the envoy of the East Huai Dynasty, and Wang Zhubang, the chamberlain of the General Staff Department, as the envoy of the West Huai Dynasty.

古文：诏抚谕两淮军民。
现代文：诏令他们抚谕两淮军民。
English: The emperor ordered them to treat the two Huai armies and civilians alike.

古文：壬子，以广西贼平，诏减高、藤、雷、容四州杂犯死罪囚，释杖以下，蠲夏秋税赋。
现代文：二十七日，因广西盗贼平定，诏令减轻高、藤、雷、容四州杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，杖刑以下释放，免除夏秋税赋。
English: On the 27th, due to the suppression of thieves in Guangxi, Gao, Wisteria, Lei and Rong of the four states of miscellaneous criminals were released from the death penalty, and were exempted from summer and autumn taxes.

古文：以忠勇军隶步军司，神劲右军隶镇江都统司。
现代文：把忠勇军隶属步军司，神劲右军隶属镇江都统司。
English: The loyal and brave troops were subordinated to the Division of Foot Troops, and the right wing troops were subordinated to the Division of Zhenjiang.

古文：癸丑，以王彦为建康诸军都统制兼淮西招抚使。
现代文：二十八日，任命王彦为建康诸军都统制兼淮西招抚使。
English: On the 28th, Wang Yan was appointed as the military governor of Jiankang and the envoy to the west of Huai.

古文：夏四月庚申，召张浚还朝。
现代文：夏四月初六，召张浚回朝。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month in summer, Zhang Jun was summoned back to the imperial court.

古文：甲子，以李显忠侵欺官钱给还诸军。
现代文：初十，把李显忠侵吞的官钱发还给各军。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the government money embezzled by Lee Hsien Loong was returned to the armed forces.

古文：丁卯，以建康归正人为忠毅军，镇江为忠顺军，命萧琦、萧鹧巴分领之。
现代文：十三日，以建康归正人为忠毅军，镇江的为忠顺军，命令萧琦、萧鹤巴分别统领。
English: On the 13th, with Jiankang Guizheng as the loyal army and Zhenjiang as the loyal army, he ordered Xiao Yu and Xiao Heba to lead the army separately.

古文：戊辰，罢江、淮都督府。
现代文：十四日，罢废江淮都督府。
English: On the 14th, the Jianghuai Governor's Office was abolished.

古文：高丽入贡。
现代文：高丽来进贡。
English: Goryeo pays tribute.

古文：丁丑，张浚罢。
现代文：二十三日，张浚被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Jun was dismissed.

古文：癸未，言者论宰相、执政徇欺之弊，命书寘政事堂。
现代文：二十九日，言者论宰相、执政询私舞弊，命令把上书置于政事堂。
English: On the 29th, the speaker criticized the prime minister and the government for the corruption of the inquiry, and ordered the letter to be placed in the government hall.

古文：五月壬辰，复置环卫官。
现代文：五月初八，又设置环卫官。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth lunar month, an environmental protection officer was also set up.

古文：丙申，诏吴璘毋招纳归正人。
现代文：十二日，诏令吴瞒不要招纳归正人。
English: On the 12th, the emperor ordered Wu Zhe not to recruit reformers.

古文：辛丑，诏刘宝量度泗州轻重取舍事宜以闻。
现代文：十七日，诏令刘宝审度泅州轻重取舍事宜上报朝廷。
English: On the 17th, Liu Bao was ordered to report to the imperial court on the matter of giving priority to Zhangzhou.

古文：江西总管邵宏渊责授靖州团练副使、南安军安置，仍征其盗用库钱。
现代文：江西总管邵宏渊被降为靖州团练副使，南安军安置，并且没收他盗用的库钱。
English: Jiangxi Governor Shao Hongyuan was demoted to deputy envoy of the Jingzhou Reunification Exercise, resettled by the Nan'an Army, and his embezzled treasury money was confiscated.

古文：乙巳，率群臣诣德寿宫贺天申节，始用乐。
现代文：二十一日，孝宗率领大臣到德寿宫祝贺天申节，开始用乐。
English: On the twenty-first day, Takamune led the minister to the Deoksugung Palace to congratulate the Tenshin Festival and began to have fun.

古文：丁未，蝗。
现代文：二十三日，蝗灾。
English: On the 23rd, the plague of locusts began.

古文：诏内外赃私不法官吏，尚书省置籍检勘。
现代文：诏令内外贪赃枉法官吏由尚书省置籍检查。
English: The edict ordered the registration inspection of corrupt judges at home and abroad by the Ministry of Justice.

古文：庚戌，罢招神劲效用军。
现代文：二十六日，罢除招募神劲效用军。
English: On the 26th, the recruitment of the Shenren Utility Army was cancelled.

古文：辛亥，鬻两淮所招户马。
现代文：二十七日，警卖两淮所括户马。
English: On the 27th, the police sold the two Huai'an houses and rounded up the horses.

古文：六月甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On June 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛酉，以淫雨，诏州县理滞囚。
现代文：初八，因阴雨连绵，诏令州县处理滞囚。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, due to the continuous rain, the prefectural government ordered the county to deal with the prisoners.

古文：戊辰，太白昼见。
现代文：十五日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 15th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬申，命虞允文弃唐、邓，允文不奉诏。
现代文：十九日，命令虞允文放弃唐、邓二州，虞允文不奉命。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Yu Yunwen to give up Tang and Deng two states, but Yu Yunwen did not follow the order.

古文：丁丑，振江东、两淮被水贫民。
现代文：二十四日，贩济江东、两淮受水灾贫民。
English: On the 24th, the poor people affected by floods in the east of the Jijiang River and the two Huai Rivers.

古文：秋七月乙酉，召虞允文。
现代文：秋七月初二，召虞允文。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, Zouyu Yunwen was summoned.

古文：以户部尚书韩仲通为湖北、京西制置使。
现代文：任命户部尚书韩仲通为湖北、京西制置使。
English: Han Zhongtong, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as the Hubei, Beijing and West China system envoy.

古文：丁亥，洪遵罢。
现代文：初四，洪遵被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Hong Zun was dismissed.

古文：己丑，以周葵兼权知枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命周葵兼代理知枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, Zhou Aoi was appointed as the Acting Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：遣主管马军司公事张守忠以兵诣淮西，措置边备。
现代文：派遣主管马军司公事张守忠率兵到淮西，措置边备。
English: He dispatched Zhang Shuzhong, director of the Civil Affairs Department of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army of China, to lead the troops to Huaxi to prepare for the measures.

古文：庚子，太白经天。
现代文：十七日，太白星整天显现。
English: On the 17th, the white star appeared all day.

古文：诏内外文武官年七十不请致仕者，遇郊毋得荫补。
现代文：诏令内外文武官员年满七十岁不请求退休的人，遇到郊祭不得享受荫补恩赏。
English: The imperial edict decreed that those civil and military officials at home and abroad who have reached the age of 70 and do not request retirement shall not be entitled to the shadow compensation reward in the event of a suburban festival.

古文：乙巳。命海、泗州彻戍。
现代文：二十二日，命令海、泅州撤除戍兵。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Hai and Zhangzhou to withdraw their troops.

古文：丁未，雨雹。
现代文：二十四日，降冰雹。
English: On the 24th, hail fell.

古文：戊申，蠲淮东内库坊场钱一年。
现代文：二十五日，免除淮东内库坊场钱一年。
English: On the 25th, exempt Huadong's internal warehouse and market fees for one year.

古文：庚戌，洪遵落端明殿学士。
现代文：二十七日，洪遵被罢除端明殿学士职衔。
English: On the 27th, Hong Zun was deprived of the title of Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate.

古文：癸丑，以江东、浙西大水，诏侍从、台谏、卿监、郎官、馆职陈阙失及当今急务。
现代文：三十日，因江东、浙西大水，诏令侍从、台谏、卿监、郎官、馆职陈说缺失和当今急务。
English: On the 30th, due to the heavy water in eastern Jiangsu and western Zhejiang, the attendants of the imperial edict, the imperial eunuchs, the imperial supervisors, the eunuchs, and the librarians were absent and the urgent tasks of the day.

古文：是月，罢内侍押班梁珂为在外宫观。
现代文：这个月，罢除内侍押班梁坷为在外宫观。
English: This month, the ousting of chambermaid and overseer Liang Bumpy was seen in the outer palace.

古文：移广西提刑司于容州。
现代文：广西提刑司移到容州。
English: Guangxi Criminal Division moved to Yongzhou.

古文：八月甲寅朔，以灾异，避殿减膳。
现代文：八月初一，因灾异孝宗不上殿并减少饮食。
English: On the first day of August, due to the disaster, Takamune did not go to the temple and reduced his diet.

古文：戊午，南丹州莫延廪为诸蛮所逐来归，诏补修武郎。
现代文：初五，南丹州莫延凛被诸蛮驱逐前来归附，诏令补为修武郎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Nantan Province's Mo Yanrin was expelled by the barbarians and came to attach himself, and the imperial edict added him as Shouwuro.

古文：命江东、浙西守臣措置开决围田。
现代文：命令江东、浙西守臣措置开决围田。
English: He ordered the governors of Jiangdong and West Zhejiang to decide on measures to encircle the fields.

古文：甲子，秦国大长公主薨。
现代文：十一日，秦国大长公主逝世。
English: On the 11th day, the eldest princess of Qin passed away.

古文：以久雨，决系囚。
现代文：因久雨不晴处决关押的囚犯。
English: Due to persistent rain and bad weather, the execution of prisoners in custody was delayed.

古文：庚辰，以资政殿大学士贺允中为知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，任命资政殿大学士贺允中为知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: On the 27th, He Yunzhong, a scholar of the University of the House of Councillors, was appointed a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State.

古文：辛巳，诏振淮东被水州县。
现代文：二十八日，诏令贩济淮东受水灾的州县。
English: On the 28th, Zhaoling Wang visited the counties and prefectures affected by the floods in Huaidong.

古文：张浚薨。
现代文：张浚逝世。
English: Zhang Jun passed away.

古文：壬午，遣魏杞等为金国通问使。
现代文：二十九日，派遣魏祀等为金国通问使。
English: On the 29th, Wei Wei and others were dispatched as envoys to inquire about the situation in China.

古文：九月甲申。罢内侍李珂赐谥。
现代文：九月初二，罢除内侍李坷赐溢。
English: On the second day of September, the dismissal of the chambermaid, Li Buqi, was carried out.

古文：甲午，诏江东、浙西监司、守臣讲明措置田事。
现代文：十二日，诏令江东浙西监司、守臣讲明措置田事。
English: On the 12th, the Jiangdong, Zhejiang and West Supervision Division and the provincial governors were ordered to clarify the measures for the fields.

古文：乙未，交阯入贡。
现代文：十三日，交趾来进贡。
English: On the thirteenth day, Koji came to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，严脏吏法。
现代文：十五日，严格赃吏法。
English: On the fifteenth day, the strict punishment of officials came into force.

古文：辛丑，以王之望为参知政事，权刑部侍郎吴芾为给事中兼淮西宣谕使。
现代文：十九日，任命王之望为参知政事、代理刑部侍郎，吴莆为给事中兼淮西宣谕使。
English: On the 19th, Wang Zhwang was appointed as the assistant governor for political affairs, acting as the assistant of the criminal department, and Wu Gan was appointed as the vice-governor and the envoy of the proclamation of Huaixi.

古文：金人犯边。
现代文：金军侵犯边境。
English: The Chinese army has violated the border.

古文：以久雨，出内库白金四十万两，籴米赈贫民。
现代文：因久雨不晴，拿出内库白金四十万两、来米贩济贫民。
English: Due to the long rain and cloudy weather, 400,000 taels of platinum were taken out of the treasury, and rice traders came to help the poor.

古文：壬寅，王彦帅师济江，军昭关。
现代文：二十日，王彦率军渡江，驻扎昭关。
English: On the 20th, Wang Yan led the army across the river and stationed in Shouguan.

古文：癸卯。命汤思退都督江、淮东西路军马，辞不行。
现代文：二十一日，命令汤思退都督江淮东西路军马，推辞不行。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tang Si was ordered to withdraw from the military horse of the East-West Road of the Jianghuai, and he could not refuse.

古文：乙巳，复命杨存中为同都督，钱端礼、吴芾并为都督府参赞军事。
现代文：二十三日，又命令杨存中为同都督，钱端礼、吴莆并为都督府参赞军事。
English: On the 23rd, he also ordered Yang Cunzhong to be the same as the governor, Qian Duanli, Wu Gan and the military counselor of the governor's office.

古文：罢宣谕司。
现代文：罢废宣谕司。
English: The proclamation office was abolished.

古文：仍易国书以付魏杞。
现代文：仍易国书交给魏祀。
English: The imperial edict was still handed over to Wei.

古文：少保、崇信军节度使赵密落致仕，权领殿前司职事。
现代文：少保、崇信军节度使赵密复出任职，权领殿前司职事。
English: Shao Bao and Chong Xinjun made Zhao Mi return to his post at the festival, and he served as the former secretary of the imperial court.

古文：冬十月甲寅，魏杞至盱眙，金帅以国书未如式，弗受，欲得商、秦地及俘获人，且邀岁币三十万，杞未得进。
现代文：冬十月初二，魏祀至盯胎，金帅以国书没有按其要求写不接受，想得到商、秦地和俘获人，并且要岁币二十万，魏祀没有答应。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in winter, Wei Zhi came to check the baby, and he did not accept that Jin Shuai did not write the state book according to his request. He wanted to get merchants, Qin land and captives, and wanted 200,000 yuan, but Wei Zhi did not agree.

古文：丁卯，贺允中罢为资政殿大学士致仕。
现代文：十五日，贺允中罢为资政殿大学士，退休。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, He Yun was promoted from junior high school to senior high school student, and retired.

古文：己巳，以周葵兼权知枢密院事，王之望兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命周葵兼权知枢密院事，王之望兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Kwai was also appointed to the Privy Council, and Wang Zhimang was also appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：庚午，诏辅臣夕对便殿。
现代文：十八日，诏令辅臣夕对便殿。
English: On the 18th, the emperor ordered the assistant vassals to leave the palace in the evening.

古文：丙子，大风。
现代文：二十四日，大风。
English: On the 24th, the wind picked up.

古文：庚辰，蠲京西、湖北运粮所经州县秋税之半。
现代文：二十八日，免除京西、湖北运粮所经过州县一半的秋税。
English: On the 28th, the autumn tax of half of the counties passed by the Beijing West and Hubei Grain Transport Station was exempted.

古文：以靖海军节度使李宝为沿海驻扎御前水军都统制。
现代文：任命靖海军节度使李宝为沿海驻扎御前水军都统制。
English: The appointment of Jing as naval governor allowed Li Bao to take control of the imperial navy stationed along the coast.

古文：辛巳，金人分道渡淮，刘宝弃楚州遁。
现代文：二十九日，金军分道渡淮，刘宝放弃楚州逃跑。
English: On the 29th, the Jin army split and went to Huai, and Liu Bao abandoned Chuzhou and fled.

古文：十一月乙酉，知楚州魏胜与金人战，死之，州遂陷，濠州亦陷。
现代文：十一月初四，楚州知州魏胜与金军交战，战死，州城被攻陷，壕州也被攻陷。
English: At the beginning of November 4th, Chuzhou Zhizhou Weisheng fought with the Golden Army and died in battle. The state capital was captured, and Jiezhou was also captured.

古文：王彦弃昭关遁，滁州又陷，丙戌，诏谕沿边将士。
现代文：王彦放弃昭关逃跑，滁州又被攻陷。初五，诏谕沿边将士。
English: Wang Yan abandoned Shoguan and fled, and Zhangzhou was invaded again. On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the edict was issued to soldiers along the border.

古文：丁亥，诏魏祀等以所赍礼币犒军。杞弗从，命留镇江侯旨。
现代文：初六，诏令魏记等以所带礼币搞军，魏祀不从命，留在镇江等候圣旨。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Wei Ji and others to raise an army with the gift money they brought with them. Wei Shi did not follow his orders and remained in Zhenjiang to await the emperor's command.

古文：复命王之望督视江、淮军马。
现代文：又命令王之望督视江淮军马。
English: He also ordered Wang Zhowang to supervise Jianghuai's army.

古文：戊子，以金人侵扰，诏郊杞改用明年。
现代文：初七，因金军侵扰，诏令郊祀改在明年。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, because of the intrusion of the Chinese army, the imperial edict changed the suburb worship to next year.

古文：又诏谕归正官民军士。
现代文：又诏谕归正官民军士。
English: He was also ordered to return to his official position as a civilian sergeant.

古文：命王之望同都督江、淮军马。
现代文：命令王之望为同都督江淮军马。
English: He ordered Wang Zhubang to be the military horse of the same governor, Jianghuai.

古文：汤思退罢都督。
现代文：汤思退罢除都督职务。
English: Tong Si retired and was removed from the post of governor.

古文：召陈康伯。
现代文：召陈康伯。
English: Call Chen Kangbo.

古文：巳丑，王之望罢同都督。
现代文：初八，王之望罢除同都督职务。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Zhobang was removed from his post as governor-general.

古文：庚寅，命杨存中都督江、淮军马。
现代文：初九，命令杨存中都督江淮军马。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he ordered Yang Cunzhong, the governor of Jianghuai, to lead the army.

古文：辛卯，汤思退罢，寻以尹穑、晁公武论之，落观文殿大学士、永州居住，未至而卒。
现代文：初十，汤思退被罢免，不久因尹墙、晃公武论勃，被免除观文殿大学士职衔，永州居住，未至而卒。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Tang Siyi was dismissed, and soon after, he was exempted from the bachelor's degree of Guanwenden University because of Yin Wai and Xiang Gongwu's argument. He lived in Yongzhou and died before he could graduate.

古文：甲午，以黄榜禁太学生伏阙。
现代文：十三日，用黄榜严禁太学生伏网上书。
English: On the 13th, it was strictly forbidden for too many students to read online books using the yellow list.

古文：是日，太学生张观等七十二人上书，请斩汤思退、王之望、尹穑，窜其党洪适、晁公武而用陈康伯、胡铨等，以济大计。
现代文：这天，太学生张观等七十二人上书，请斩汤思退、王之望、尹墙，贬窜其党洪适、晃公武而任用陈康伯、胡锉等，以济大计。
English: On this day, 72 people, including Zhang Guan, a student of Taiyuan University, submitted a letter, requesting that Tang Siwei, Wang Zhifang, and Yin Wan be eliminated, and that Chen Kangbo and Hu Yao be appointed instead of their party members Hong Shi and Wang Gongwu, in order to save money.

古文：丙申，遣国信所大通事王抃持周葵书如金帅府，请正皇帝号，为叔侄之国；易岁贡为岁币，减十万；割商、秦地；归被俘人，惟叛亡者不与；誓目大略与绍兴同。
现代文：十五日，派遣国信所大通事王林持周葵书到金帅府，请求皇帝号，为叔侄之国；岁贡改为岁币，减十万；割让商、秦土地；归还被俘人，只是叛亡者不归还；誓约大略与绍兴同。
English: On the 15th, Wang Lin holding Zhou Kwai Shu, the chief secretary of the Guoxin Institute, was sent to Jinshaifu to request that the emperor's name be changed to the country of the uncle and nephew; the annual tribute be changed to the annual currency and reduced by 100,000; the merchants and Qin land be ceded; the captives be returned, but not the traitors; and the oath be roughly the same as that of Shaoxing.

古文：以金人犯淮南，诏避殿减膳。
现代文：因金军侵犯淮南，诏令不上殿处理政事，减少饮食。
English: Due to the invasion of Huainan by the Jin army, the emperor ordered not to go to the palace to deal with political affairs, and to reduce the diet.

古文：丁酉，诏择日视师。
现代文：十六日，诏令择日视师。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict was issued to choose a date for the inspection.

古文：戊戌，以少保、观文殿大学士陈康伯为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：十七日，任命少保、观文殿大学士陈康伯为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Chen Kangbo, a minor official and a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, was appointed as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, and Ping Zhangji and Privy Envoy under Shang Shumen.

古文：庚子，遣兵部侍郎胡铨、右谏议大夫尹穑分诣两浙措置海道。
现代文：十九日，派遣兵部侍郎胡锉、右谏议大夫尹墙分别到两浙措置海道。
English: On the 19th, Hu Yao, the secretary of the military department, and Yin Wu, the right-hand man, were sent to the two Zhejiang measures.

古文：赠魏胜宁国军节度使，谥忠壮。
现代文：赠魏胜为宁国军节度使，溢号为忠壮。
English: Wei Sheng was given the title of Ning Guo Jun's military envoy, and the exclamation mark stood for "loyal and strong."

古文：辛丑，兵部尚书钱端礼赐出身，签书枢密院事兼提领德寿宫。
现代文：二十日，兵部尚书钱端礼被赐给出身，签书枢密院事兼提领德寿宫。
English: On the 20th day of the month, he was presented with a gift of money and gifts from the Ministry of Military Affairs, signed a letter to the Privy Councillor, and was given the palace of Dezhou.

古文：壬寅，诏侍从、两省官日一至都堂议事，有关台谏者亦听会议。
现代文：二十一日，诏令侍从、两省官每天一次到都堂议事，有关台谏者也听会议。
English: On the twenty-first day, the attendants of the imperial edict and the two provincial officials went to the capital hall once a day for deliberation, and the relevant officials also listened to the meeting.

古文：以显谟阁学士虞允文同签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命显漠阁学士虞允文为同签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed Hsien Mokgak bachelor Yu Yung Man as the co-signatory privy councillor.

古文：癸卯，遣王之望劳师江上。
现代文：二十二日，派遣王之望到江上慰问军队。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Zhimang was sent to the river to console the troops.

古文：甲辰，金人犯六合县，步军司统制崔皋击却之。
现代文：二十三日，金军侵犯六合县，步军司统崔皋击退金军。
English: On the 23rd, the Chinese army invaded Liuhe County, and the commander of the marching army, Cui Wei, repulsed the Chinese army.

古文：乙巳，以钱端礼兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十四日，任命钱端礼兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Qian Duanli and Acting Vice-governor.

古文：丁未，以显谟阁直学士沈介为沿江制置使。
现代文：二十六日，任命显漠阁直学士沈介为沿江制置使。
English: On the 26th, Shen Jiu, a direct graduate of Xianba Academy, was appointed as a riverine envoy.

古文：命沿江诸州调保甲分守渡口。
现代文：命令沿江各州调遣保甲分守渡口。
English: He ordered all the states along the Yangtze River to dispatch troops to guard the Yangtze River ports.

古文：己酉，刘宝落节钺，为武泰军承宣使，王彦落龙神卫四厢都指挥使。
现代文：二十八日，刘宝被罢除军职，为武泰军承宣使；王彦罢除龙、神、卫四厢都指挥使职务。
English: On the 28th, Liu Bao was removed from his military post and became the military envoy of the Thai army; Wang Yan removed the dragon, the god, and the four guards to command the envoy.

古文：闰月甲寅，陈康伯入见，诏康伯间日一朝，肩舆至殿门，给扶升殿。
现代文：闰十一月初三，陈康伯朝见孝宗，诏令他隔日朝见一次，用轿子抬到殿门，扶着升殿。
English: On the third day of the eleventh month, Chen Kangbo went to see Xiaozong in the morning. He was ordered to see him once in the morning the next day. He was carried to the palace gate in a palanquin and carried up the stairs.

古文：丙辰，周葵罢。
现代文：初五，周葵被罢免。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhou Aoi was dismissed.

古文：王抃见金二帅，皆得其报书以归。
现代文：王林与金帅见面，得到金帅答书回国。
English: Wang Lin met with Jin Shuai and received Jin Shuai's reply letter before returning to China.

古文：戊午，萧琦卒。
现代文：初七，萧琦去世。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Xiao Yao passed away.

古文：壬戌。诏罢胡铨、尹穑。
现代文：十一日，诏令罢免胡锉、尹墙。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hu Yao and Yin Wu were dismissed by imperial edict.

古文：丙寅，召韩仲通。
现代文：十五日，召韩仲通。
English: On the 15th, Han Zhongtong was summoned.

古文：以沈介为兵部尚书、湖北京西制置使。
现代文：任命沈介为兵部尚书、湖北京西制置使。
English: Shen Jie was appointed as the military secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the commander of the Western Military District of Beijing.

古文：戊辰，以金人且退，诏督府择利击之，王之望执不可。
现代文：十七日，因金军将退兵，诏令督府择利袭击，王之望认为不可。
English: On the seventeenth day, because the gold army was about to retreat, the emperor ordered the governor's palace to be attacked for profit, and Wang Zhifang thought it was impossible.

古文：乙亥。之望罢。
现代文：二十四日，王之望被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Wang Zhimang was dismissed.

古文：丙子，以王抃为奉使金国通问国信所参议官，持陈康伯报书以行。
现代文：二十五日，任命王打为奉使金国通问国信所参议官，带上陈康伯的答书前行。
English: On the 25th, Wang De was appointed as the envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China to inquire into the Institute of State Administration of the People's Republic of China, and went ahead with Chen Kangbo's reply.

古文：丁丑。金遣张恭愈来迓使者。
现代文：二十六日，金派遣张恭愈来迎接使者。
English: On the 26th, Kim sent Zhang Qiong to meet the envoy.

古文：诏台谏、侍从、两省官举楚、庐、滁、濠四州守臣。
现代文：诏令台谏、侍从、两省官员推举楚、庐、滁、壕四州守臣。
English: The edict ordered the Taiwans, attendants, and officials of the two provinces to nominate the four provincial governors of Chu, Chu, Chu, and Ho.

古文：十二月甲申，罢陕西路转运司。
现代文：十二月初四，罢除陕西路转运使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Shaanxi Road Transfer Envoy was dismissed.

古文：戊子，魏杞始渡淮。
现代文：初八，魏祀开始渡淮。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wei Wei began to cross the Huai River.

古文：诏郊祀大礼遵至道典故，改用来年正月一日上辛。
现代文：诏令郊祀大礼遵循至道成例实行，改用来年正月一日上辛。
English: According to the edict, the suburb worship grand ceremony was implemented in accordance with the precedent, and it was changed to the first day of the first month of the year.

古文：辛卯，以钱端礼为参知政事兼知枢密院事，虞允文同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，礼部尚书王刚中签书枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命钱端礼为参知政事兼知枢密院事，虞允文为同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，礼部尚书王刚中为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Qian Duanli was appointed as a member of the Privy Council and the Privy Council, Yu Yunwen was appointed as a member of the Privy Council and the Privy Council, and Wang Gang, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丙申，制曰： 比遣王抃，远抵颍滨，得其要约。
现代文：十六日，制曰： 近遣王林，远抵颖滨，得其要约。
English: On the 16th, the system said: Send Wang Lin nearby, reach Yingbin far away, and get his offer.

古文：寻澶渊盟誓之信，仿大辽书题之仪，正皇帝之称，为叔侄之国，岁币减十万之数，地界如绍兴之时。
现代文：寻擅渊盟誓之信，仿大辽书题之仪，正皇帝之称，为叔侄之国，岁币减少十万，地界如绍兴和议之时。
English: Looking for the letter of the oath, imitating the ceremony of the great Liao book title, the name of the emperor, the country of the uncle and nephew, the annual currency reduced by 100,000, and the territorial boundaries such as Shaoxing at the time of the peace conference.

古文：怜彼此之无辜，约叛亡之不遣，可使归正之士咸起宁居之心。
现代文：怜悯双方百姓，约叛亡不遣还，可以使归正之士都能安居。
English: Compassion for the people on both sides, and the agreement not to repatriate traitors, can enable those who have been reformed to live in peace.

古文：重念数州之民，罹此一时之难，老稚有荡析之灾，丁壮有系累之苦，宜推荡涤之宥，少慰凋残之情。应沿边被兵州军，除逃遁官吏不赦外，杂犯死罪情轻者减一等，余并放遣。 
现代文：又考虑到数州百姓，遭此一时之难，老幼离析，丁壮系累，应该予以抚恤，稍慰凋残之情。凡是沿边遭受兵祸的州军，除逃跑官吏不予赦免外，杂犯死罪情节较轻者减刑一等，其余都释放。 
English: In consideration of the fact that the people of several prefectures suffered from the difficulties of the moment, the old and the young were separated, and the young and the strong were tired, it was necessary to give them alms to relieve their suffering. All the state troops along the border who suffered from the military disaster, except for the fleeing officials, were not pardoned, and the minor offenders who committed the crime of death were commuted to the first class, and the rest were released.

古文：遣洪适等贺金主生辰。
现代文：派遣洪适等祝贺金主生日。
English: Hong Shih and others were sent to congratulate Kim on his birthday.

古文：诏吴挺市马赴行在。
现代文：诏令吴挺买马前往行在。
English: Wu Ting was ordered to buy a horse and ride to the capital.

古文：己亥，雨雹。
现代文：十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 19th, hail fell.

古文：壬寅，罢三衙、江上、荆襄诸军招军。
现代文：二十二日，罢废三衙、江上、荆府各军招军。
English: On the 22nd, the troops of Sanxing, Jiangshang and Jingfu were called up.

古文：甲辰，遣沿海水军还屯。
现代文：二十四日，调遣沿海水军还屯。
English: On the 24th, the Coastal Naval Forces were dispatched to restore order.

古文：己酉，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十九日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：庚戌，朝飨太庙。
现代文：三十日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：乾道元年春正月辛亥朔，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦，改元。
现代文：乾道元年春正月初一，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦，改元。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15

古文：丁巳，淮西安抚韩璡勒停、贺州编管。
现代文：初七，淮西安抚韩被停职，贺州编管。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Huaxi Anfu Han was suspended from duty, and Hezhou Pengguan was taken over.

古文：庚申，以钱端礼兼德寿宫使。
现代文：初十，任命钱端礼兼德寿宫使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Qian Duanli and De Shou palace envoy were appointed.

古文：辛酉，召杨存中。
现代文：十一日，召杨存中。
English: On the 11th day, Yang Cunzhong was summoned.

古文：通问使魏杞至燕山。
现代文：通问使魏祀到达燕山。
English: The inquiry brought Wei Wei to Yanshan.

古文：丁卯，以王抃使金有劳，进五官。
现代文：十七日，因王林出使金国有功劳，进升五官。
English: On the 17th, because of Wang Lin's contribution to the state of Jin, he was promoted to the fifth rank.

古文：庚午，西北方有白气。
现代文：二十日，西北方向出现白气。
English: On the 20th, white clouds appeared in the northwest.

古文：诏馆职更迭补外。
现代文：诏令馆职更迭补外。
English: This is in addition to the change of posts in the Imperial Edict.

古文：辛未，立两淮守令劝民种桑赏。
现代文：二十一日，确立两淮守令劝民种桑奖赏标准。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the reward standard for persuading people to plant mulberry was established.

古文：壬申，诏两浙振流民。
现代文：二十二日，诏令两浙贩济流民。
English: On the 22nd, two Zhejiang merchants were ordered to help the displaced people.

古文：以绍兴流民多死，罢守臣徐嚞及两县令。
现代文：因绍兴流民多死亡，罢除守臣徐哲和两县令。
English: As a result of the deaths of many Shaoxing exiles, Xu Zhe and the two county magistrates were dismissed.

古文：癸酉，蠲沿边残破州军官赋一年。
现代文：二十三日，免除沿边遭受残破地区官赋一年。
English: On the 23rd, it exempted the areas along the border that suffered from damage from one year.

古文：甲戌，刘宝责果州团练副使、琼州安置。
现代文：二十四日，刘宝被降为果州团练副使，琼州安置。
English: On the 24th, Liu Bao was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Gozhou Rehearsal Team, and was resettled in Qiongzhou.

古文：乙亥，罢两淮招抚司及陕西、河东宣抚、招讨司。
现代文：二十五日，废罢两淮招抚司和陕西河东宣抚、招讨司。
English: On the 25th, the Zhaofu Division of Huaihuai and the Xuanfu Division of Shaanxi Hedong and the Zhaotong Division were abolished.

古文：丙子，淮西守将孔福以遇敌弃城伏诛，顿遇夺官，刺面配吉阳军牢城。
现代文：二十六日，淮西守将孔福因遇敌弃城被处死；顿遇被削夺官职，刺面发配到吉阳军牢城。
English: On the 26th, the governor of Huaixi Province, Confucius, was executed for abandoning the city to the enemy; he was stripped of his official position and sent to Jiyang Military Prison.

古文：二月庚辰朔，朝德寿宫，从太上皇、太上皇后幸四圣观。
现代文：二月初一，朝拜德寿宫，随从太上皇、太上皇后到四圣观。
English: On the first day of February, they paid their respects at Deoksugung Palace, and followed the Retired Emperor and Empress Dowager to the Four Noble Truths.

古文：乙酉，罢江、淮都督府。
现代文：初六，罢除江淮都督府。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Jianghuai Provincial Government was abolished.

古文：遣官检察两淮州县，振济饥民。
现代文：派遣官员检察两浙州县，贩济饥民。
English: Dispatching officials to inspect two counties in Zhejiang Province, and selling food to the hungry.

古文：庚寅，雨雹。
现代文：十一日，降冰雹。
English: On the 11th, hail fell.

古文：癸巳，移濠州戍兵于藕塘。
现代文：十四日，壕州戍兵移到藕塘。
English: On the 14th, the soldiers from Neozhou were moved to Shantang.

古文：庚子，以杨存中为宁远、昭庆军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，任命杨存中为宁远、昭庆军节度使。
English: On the 21st, Yang Cunzhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Ningyuan and Zhaoqing armies.

古文：甲辰，以久雨，避殿减膳，蠲两淮灾伤州县身丁钱绢，决系囚。
现代文：二十五日，因久雨不上殿减膳，免除两浙灾伤州县身丁钱绢，处理关押囚犯。
English: On the 25th, due to the long rain, he did not go to the hall to reduce the meal, exempted the two Zhejiang disaster-stricken counties from the body of Ding Qian, and dealt with the prisoners.

古文：丁未，陈康伯薨，谥文恭。
现代文：二十八日，陈康伯逝世，溢号为文恭。
English: On the 28th, Chen Kangbo passed away, and his posthumous name was Wen Qiong.

古文：三月甲寅，太白昼见。
现代文：三月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fifth day of March, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：己未，御殿复膳。
现代文：初十，御殿复膳。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Imperial Palace resumed the meal.

古文：庚申，以虞允文为参知政事兼同知枢密院事，王刚中同知枢密院事。
现代文：十一日，任命虞允文为参知政事兼同知枢密院事，王刚中为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yu Yunwen was appointed as Sangchi Politician and Tongchi Privy Councillor, and Wang Gangzhong as Tongchi Privy Councillor.

古文：命淮西、湖北、荆襄帅臣措置屯田，复置榷场。
现代文：命令淮西、湖北、荆襄帅臣措置屯田，重新设置榷场。
English: Huaxi, Hubei and Jingxiang were ordered to set up garrisons and re-establish markets.

古文：癸亥，黄祖舜薨。
现代文：十四日，黄祖舜逝世。
English: On the 14th, Huang Zuyao passed away.

古文：戊辰，白气亘天。
现代文：十九日，白气横盖天空。
English: On the 19th, white clouds covered the sky.

古文：己巳，罢诸军额外制领将佐。
现代文：二十日，罢除各军额外制领将佐。
English: On the 20th, the additional commander-in-chief of each army was dismissed.

古文：乙亥，太白经天。
现代文：二十六日，太白星一天没有消失。
English: On the 23rd, Venus moves across the sky.

古文：是春，湖南盗起，入广东焚掠州县，官军讨平之。
现代文：这年春，湖南盗贼兴起，进人广东焚掠州县，官军讨平盗贼。
English: In the spring of this year, Hunan thieves rose up and entered Guangdong to burn and plunder Zhoushu County, and the government army fought the thieves.

古文：夏四月庚子，金报问使完颜仲等入见。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，金国报问使完颜仲等人朝见孝宗。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, Yan Zhong, and others went to see Xiaozong in the morning.

古文：乙巳，吴璘入见。
现代文：二十七日，吴瞒朝见皇上。
English: On the 27th, Wu Zetian went to see the emperor.

古文：五月庚戌，以璘为太傅，封新安郡王。
现代文：五月初二，任命吴瞒为太傅，封为新安郡王。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Wu Zhen was appointed Taifu and crowned the King of Xin'an County.

古文：丙辰，诏有司治皇后家庙。
现代文：初八，诏令有关部门修治皇后家庙。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the relevant departments were ordered to repair the Empress's family temple.

古文：壬戌，诏监司、帅守讲究弊事以闻。
现代文：十四日，诏令监司、帅守议论研究弊事上报朝廷。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict ordered the superintendent and the marshal to discuss the matter and report it to the imperial court.

古文：合广南东、西路监事为一司。
现代文：广南东、西路盐事合为一司。
English: Guangdong East and West Road Salt Works merged into one company.

古文：癸亥，诏总领、帅、漕臣、诸军都统制并兼提领措置屯田，沿边守臣兼管屯田事。
现代文：十五日，诏令总领、帅槽臣、诸军都统制并兼任提领措置屯田，沿边守臣兼管屯田事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the commander-in-chief, the commander-in-chief's vassals, and all the troops were ordered to take control of the situation and also to take charge of the settlement of the military cantonments, and the border guards also took charge of the military cantonments.

古文：丁卯，诏吴璘措置马纲、水路。
现代文：十九日，诏令吴瞒措置马纲、水路。
English: On the 19th, Wu Zhe ordered Wu Zhe to take measures to improve the horse platform and waterway.

古文：壬申，蠲四川州县虚额钱。
现代文：二十四日，免除四川虚额钱。
English: On the 24th, Sichuan fake money will be exempted.

古文：吴璘改判兴元府。
现代文：吴瞒改判兴元府。
English: Wu Zhe commuted the sentence of Xingyuanfu.

古文：乙亥，诏未铨试人毋得堂除。
现代文：二十七日，诏令没有经过诊试者不得由政事堂直接奏注差遣。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that those who had not undergone a medical examination could not be dispatched directly from the government office.

古文：丙子，遣李若川等使金贺上尊号。
现代文：二十八日，派遣李若川等出使金国贺上尊号。
English: On the 28th, Li Ruochuan and others were dispatched to convey the message of congratulating Kim Guo on his accession to the throne.

古文：增置诸路钤辖、都监。
现代文：增置诸路铃辖、都监。
English: Additional bells and whistles jurisdiction, city supervisor.

古文：郴州盗李金等复作乱，遣兵讨捕之。
现代文：郴州盗贼李金等又叛乱，派兵讨捕。
English: Zhangzhou thief Li Jin and others rebelled and sent troops to arrest them.

古文：六月癸未，王刚中薨。
现代文：六月初六，王刚中逝世。
English: On June 6, Wang Gangzhong passed away.

古文：乙酉，诏恭王府直讲王淮倾邪不正，有违礼经，可与外任。
现代文：初八，诏令恭王府直讲王淮倾邪不正，有违礼经，可与外任。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict instructing King Gong's palace to tell Wang Huai directly that he had committed evil and injustice, violated the etiquette, and could be removed from his post.

古文：丙戌，以翰林学士洪适签书枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命翰林学士洪适为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Hanlin Scholar Hong Shi was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor.

古文：戊子，步军司统制官崔皋坐奏功冒滥，夺所迁观察使，止进横行三官，令本军自效。
现代文：十一日，步军司统制官崔皋因奏功冒充获罪，削夺迁升的观察使，只进横行三官，令本军自效。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the commander-in-chief of the marching army, Cui Wei, was punished for pretending to perform feats, and the observers who had been promoted and demoted were only promoted to the third rank, making the army ineffective.

古文：辛卯，以武经郎令德为安定郡王。
现代文：十五日，任命武经郎赵令德为安定郡王。
English: On the fifteenth day, he appointed Zhao Linde, the son of Wu Jing, as the king of the county.

古文：壬辰，以淮南转运判官姚岳言境内飞蝗自死，夺一官罢之。
现代文：十六日，因淮南转运判官姚岳报告境内飞蝗自己死掉，夺一官罢免。
English: On the 16th, because the Huainan transshipment adjudicator Yao Yue reported that the domestic flying locusts died themselves, one official was removed.

古文：丙申，以两淮守令劳徕安集无效，下诏戒饬之，仍以诏置守令治所。
现代文：二十日，因两淮守令慰劳安集流民不见成效，下诏整治，仍按诏令置守令治所。
English: On the 20th, due to the fact that the two Huai Shou decrees to comfort and collect the displaced people did not have any effect, the rectification was carried out according to the edict, and the detention center was still set up according to the edict.

古文：壬寅，蠲广东残破郡县税赋。
现代文：二十六日，免除广东遭受残破州县税赋。
English: On the 26th, Guangdong was exempted from the remaining state and county taxes.

古文：甲辰，罢湖北、京西制置司。
现代文：二十八日，罢除湖北、京西制置司。
English: On the 28th, the departments of Hubei and West Beijing were abolished.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏知州年七十以上者与宫观。
现代文：秋七月初四，诏令知州年七十以上者任命为宫观。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Emperor decreed that anyone over the age of 70 in Zhizhou would be appointed as a Gongguan.

古文：癸丑。辅臣晚对选德殿，御坐后有大屏，记注诸道监司、郡守姓名，因令都堂视此书之。
现代文：初六，辅臣在选德殿晚对，皇帝宝座后有大屏，记注各道监司、郡守姓名，于是命令政事堂按此书写。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Vice-Chamberlain stood in front of the Zhengde Hall in the evening, and there was a large screen behind the emperor's throne, noting the names of the supervisors and county governors of each province, so he ordered the government office to write according to this.

古文：甲寅，借职田租二年，以裨经费。
现代文：初七，借职田租二年，用来补助经费。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the loan of farmland for two years was used to subsidize funds.

古文：己未，铸当二钱。
现代文：十二日，铸造当二钱。
English: On the twelfth day, two coins were minted.

古文：己巳，蠲关外四州民今年租税及湖南贼蹂郡县夏税。
现代文：二十二日，免除关外四少百姓今年租赋和湖南遭受盗贼践踏郡县夏税。
English: On the 22nd, the four young people from Guanzhou were exempted from the county and county summer tax this year.

古文：八月己卯，以永丰圩田赐建康都统司。
现代文：八月初三，把永丰好田赐给建康都统司。
English: On the third day of August, Yongfeng Yoshida was given to Jiankangdu.

古文：癸未，获李金。
现代文：初七，俘获李金。
English: Junior seven, captured Li Jin.

古文：乙酉，诏立子愭为皇太子。
现代文：初九，诏令立儿子赵嗜为皇太子。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the imperial edict named his son, Zhao Xuan, as crown prince.

古文：丁亥，虞允文罢。
现代文：十一日，虞允文被罢免。
English: On the 11th, Yu Yunwen was removed from his post.

古文：戊子，大赦。
现代文：十二日，大赦。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：己丑，以洪适为参知政事兼权知枢密院事，吏部侍郎叶颙签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十三日，任命洪适为参知政事兼代理知枢密院事，吏部侍郎叶为签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
English: On the 13th, Hong Shih was appointed as a member of the Privy Council with the powers of a councillor of state and acting member of the Privy Council, and Ye, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council with the powers of a councillor of state.

古文：庚寅，立知州军、诸路总管钤辖都监辞见法。
现代文：十四日，立知州军、诸路总管铃辖都监辞见法。
English: On the 14th, the Chizhou Army and the provincial governors of various provinces all signed their names to the law.

古文：癸巳，钱端礼以避东宫亲嫌，罢为资政殿大学士、提举万寿观。
现代文：十七日，钱端礼因避东宫亲嫌，罢为资政殿大学士、提举万寿观。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Qian Duanli, because he did not want to be close to the East Palace, resigned as a scholar of the House of Councillors and raised the concept of longevity.

古文：戊戌，吏部侍郎章服以论虞允文阿附罢，谪居汀州。
现代文：二十二日，吏部侍郎章服因论虞允文阿附被罢免，滴居汀州。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the secretary of the personnel department, Zhang Fu, was dismissed for discussing Yu Yunwen and was transferred to Tingzhou.

古文：九月乙卯，立广国夫人钱氏为皇太子妃。
现代文：九月初九，立广国夫人钱氏为皇太子妃。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Guangguo's wife Qian became the crown princess.

古文：丁巳，申严百司官出入局之制。
现代文：十一日，申严百司官出人局之制。
English: On the 11th day of the month, hundreds of officials were removed from their posts.

古文：丁卯，升鼎州为常德府。
现代文：二十一日，升鼎州为常德府。
English: On the 21st, Shending Prefecture became Changde Prefecture.

古文：甲戌，以端明殿学士汪澈知枢密院事，洪适兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，任命端明殿学士汪澈为知枢密院事，洪适兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Wang Chie, a scholar of Duanming Palace, was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Hong Shih was also appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：乙亥，置沿淮诸州都巡检。
现代文：二十九日，设置沿淮各州都巡检。
English: On the 29th, patrols were set up in all the states along the Huai River.

古文：冬十月己卯，遣方滋等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月初三，派遣方滋等人出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: On the third day of October in winter, Fang Zhi and others were dispatched to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：戊子，增头子钱。
现代文：十二日，增头子钱。
English: On the twelfth day, Zeng first son money.

古文：归正人右通直郎刘蕴古坐以军器法式送北境，伏诛。
现代文：归正人右通直郎刘蕴古因把军器制造样式送给金军，被处死。
English: The reformed person, Utsu Naoro Liu Yungu, was executed for giving military equipment manufacturing models to the Golden Army.

古文：壬辰，御大庆殿，册皇太子。
现代文：十六日，到大庆殿，册封皇太子。
English: On the 16th, he went to Daqing Palace to be crowned crown prince.

古文：癸巳，诣德寿宫称谢。
现代文：十七日，到德寿宫拜谢。
English: On the 17th, he went to Deoksugung Palace to offer his thanks.

古文：乙未，诏侍从各举所知宗室一二人。
现代文：十九日，诏令侍从官各自推举所知宗室一二人。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict ordered the attendants to each nominate one or two known family members.

古文：丁酉，金遣高衎等来贺会庆节。
现代文：二十一日，金国派遣高蛔等来祝贺会庆节。
English: On the 21st, China sent high-ranking envoys to congratulate the festival.

古文：乙巳，淮北红巾贼逾淮劫掠，立赏讨捕之，已而知楚州胡明遣巡尉击杀其首萧荣。
现代文：二十九日，淮北红巾贼跨淮抢劫，立赏捕捉。不久知楚州胡明派遣巡尉击杀他的首领萧荣。
English: On the 29th, Huaibei Red Scarf Thieves robbed across Huaihuai and were caught. Soon after, Chuzhou Huming dispatched a lieutenant to kill his leader Xiao Rong.

古文：十一月辛亥，招收两淮流散忠义人。
现代文：十一月初六，招收两淮流散忠义人。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the year, two Huaiyuan scattered loyal and righteous people were recruited.

古文：丙寅，白气亘天。
现代文：二十一日，白气横盖天空。
English: On the 21st, white clouds covered the sky.

古文：辛未，遣龙大渊抚谕两淮，措置屯田，督捕盗贼。
现代文：二十六日，派遣龙大渊抚谕两淮，措置屯田，督捕盗贼。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Long Dayuan was dispatched to advise the two Huai, take measures to occupy the field, and catch the thief.

古文：十二月戊寅，以洪适为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，汪澈为枢密使。
现代文：十二月初三，任命洪适为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼枢密使，汪澈为枢密使。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Hong Shi was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu, the subordinate of Ping Zhang and the privy envoy of Shang Shu, and Wang Chie was appointed as the privy envoy.

古文：命广东提刑司招安李金余党。
现代文：命令广东提刑司招安李金余党。
English: Ordered the Guangdong Criminal Investigation Department to recruit the An Li Jin Yu Party.

古文：癸未，遣王严等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初八，派遣王严等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Yan and others were dispatched to congratulate the gold master on his birthday.

古文：康寅，以叶颙为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命叶为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Ye was appointed to be a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：辛卯，诏侍从、台谏、两省举堪监司、郡守者各一人，三衙、知阁举材武可守边者一人。
现代文：十六日，诏令侍从、台谏、两省官员推举可以担任监司、郡守者各一人，三衙、知阎推举文武可以担任守边重任者一人。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict decreed that one of each of the attendants, the Taiwu, and the officials of the two provinces could be elected as the supervisor and the county guard, and one of the Sanqi and Zhiyan could be elected as the border guard.

古文：庚子，罢两淮诸州权摄官。
现代文：二十五日，罢除两淮各州权摄官。
English: On the 25th, the procurators of the two Huai states were removed.

古文：壬寅，金遣乌古论忠弼等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣乌古论忠弼等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the State of Kim sent Uguon Zhongyong and others to congratulate the coming year's new spring.

古文：癸卯。诏枢密院文书依三省式，经中书门下画黄书读至正。
现代文：二十八日，诏令枢密院文书依照三省格式，经中书门下画黄书读。
English: On the 28th, the Imperial Edict ordered that the documents of the Privy Council should be read in accordance with the format of the three provinces, and should be read with yellow ink under the Chinese door.

古文：二年春正月辛酉，省六合戍兵，以所垦田给还复业之民。
现代文：乾道二年春正月十六日，省除六合戍兵，把其所垦田给还复业的百姓。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Heian period, the provincial government removed the soldiers of the 6th year of the Heian period and gave the farmland to the people who had been reinstated.

古文：辛未，命湖南监司存恤寇盗残破郡县。
现代文：二十六日，命令湖南监司慰问抚恤寇盗残破州郡县。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the Hunan Supervision Division to give condolences and compensation to the robber remnants in other counties.

古文：二月丁丑，罢盱眙屯田，振两浙、江东饥。
现代文：二月初三，罢除盯胎屯田，贩济两浙、江东饥民。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 3rd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：戊寅，幸玉津园宴射，遂幸龙井。
现代文：初四，到玉津园设宴射箭，于是到龙井。
English: On the fourth day of junior high school, I went to a banquet in Tamatsuen Park to shoot arrows, and then I went to Longjing.

古文：三月乙巳，禁京西、利州路科役保胜义士。
现代文：三月初二，禁止京西、利州路科役保胜义士。
English: On the second day of March, it was forbidden for the Beijing West and Lizhou roads to play a role in the victory of the righteous.

古文：壬子，诏戒饬刑狱官。
现代文：初九，诏令整顿刑狱官。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to rectify the correctional officers.

古文：戊午，殿中侍御史王伯庠请裁定奏荐，诏三省、台谏集议，具条式以闻。
现代文：十五日，殿中侍御史王伯库请裁定奏荐，诏三省、台谏官一起讨论，定好格式上报。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the palace attendant Shi Wang Boku asked for a ruling and recommendation, and the three provinces and the Taiwanese eunuchs discussed it together and set up a format for reporting.

古文：诏县令非两任，毋除监察御史；非任守臣，毋除郎官。
现代文：诏令： 县令若没有两任，不得授为监察御史；没有担任守臣，不得授为郎官。
English: Imperial edict: If a prefectural governor did not hold two posts, he could not be awarded the title of inspector-general of history; if he did not serve as a retainer, he could not be awarded the title of vassal.

古文：著为令。
现代文：著为令。 
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：丁卯，赐礼部进土萧国梁以下四百九十有三人及第、出身。
现代文：二十四日，赐礼部进士萧国梁以下四百九十三人及第、出身。
English: On the 24th, 493 people from Xiao Guoliang and below who were promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies were conferred the title.

古文：戊辰，再增诸州军离军添差员阙。
现代文：二十五日，再次增加各州军离军添差员缺。
English: On the 25th, the number of soldiers from each state army was increased again.

古文：辛未，罢洪适右仆射。
现代文：二十八日，罢免洪适右仆射职务。
English: On the 28th, Hong Shiyu was removed from his post.

古文：癸酉，以给事中、权吏部尚书魏杞同知枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十九日，任命给事中、权吏部尚书魏祀为同知枢密院事兼权参知政事。
English: On the 29th, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State.

古文：丁丑，罢和籴。
现代文：三十日，废罢和来。
English: On the thirtieth day, the contract is cancelled.

古文：夏四月戊寅，以久雨，命侍从、台谏议刑政所宜以闻。
现代文：夏四月初五，因久雨不晴，命令侍从、台谏议论刑政所应该采取的措施上报朝廷。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, because it had not rained for a long time, he ordered his attendants and the court eunuchs to discuss the measures that should be taken by the Criminal Administration Bureau and report to the imperial court.

古文：减大理、三衙、临安府及浙西州县杂犯死罪以下囚一等，释杖以下。
现代文：大理、三衙、临安府和浙西州县杂犯死罪以下囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: In Dali, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture and Zhejiang Xizhou County, the death penalty for minor offenders was reduced to the first degree, and those sentenced to caning or less were released.

古文：庚辰，诏两浙漕臣王炎开平江、湖、秀围田。
现代文：初七，诏令两浙槽臣王炎开辟平江、湖、秀等地围田。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he issued an imperial edict ordering two of his subordinates from Zhejiang Province, Wang Yan, to open up enclosing fields in the Pingjiang River, Lake Xiu and other places.

古文：辛巳，避殿减膳。
现代文：初八，避殿减少饮食。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, avoid going to the temple and eat less.

古文：甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：十一日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, a very white star appeared during the day, and on the 6th day of the first month, it appeared again.

古文：癸巳，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十日，御殿恢复饮食。
English: On the 20th, the emperor resumed eating and drinking.

古文：乙未，汪澈罢。
现代文：二十二日，汪澈被罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Wangchuk was removed from office.

古文：丁酉，以知荆南府李道凭恃戚里妄作，罢之。
现代文：二十四日，荆南知府李道凭借戚里之亲胡作非为，被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Li Dao of Jingnan prefecture was removed from office on the grounds that a relative of his had committed a crime.

古文：五月戊申，张焘薨。
现代文：五月初六，张煮逝世。
English: On the 6th of May, Zhang Ni passed away.

古文：己酉，罢权借职田。
现代文：初七，罢除暂借职田。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the temporary loan of rice fields will be abolished.

古文：庚戌，叶颙罢。
现代文：初八，叶被罢免。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Ye was dismissed.

古文：以魏巳为参知政事，右谏议大夫林安宅同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，中书舍人蒋芾签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命魏祀为参知政事，右谏议大夫林安宅为同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，中书舍人蒋莆为签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed Wei Shi as a member of the Privy Council, the Right Rev. Lin Anzhu as a member of the Privy Council and acting member of the Privy Council, and Chiang Kai-shek as a member of the Privy Council for signing documents.

古文：癸丑，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：十一日，太白星白天出现，经历一天没有消失。
English: On the 11th day, the white star appeared in the daytime and did not disappear for a day.

古文：禁浙西修筑围田。
现代文：禁止浙西修筑围田。
English: It is forbidden to build enclosing fields in western Zhejiang.

古文：罢修建康行宫。
现代文：废罢修建建康行宫。
English: The construction of the Jiankang Palace was cancelled.

古文：丁卯，命监司、守臣预备水旱。
现代文：二十五日，命令监司守令预先做好防备水早工作。
English: On the 25th, the supervisors were ordered to abide by the order to prepare for flood prevention in advance.

古文：六月甲戌，罢两浙路提举市舶司。
现代文：六月初三，废除两浙路提举市舶司。
English: On the third day of June, the Municipal Bureau of Shipping was abolished.

古文：诏诸路监司、帅臣各察守令臧否以闻。
现代文：诏令各路监司、帅臣各自考察守令好坏上报朝廷。
English: The imperial edict ordered the supervisors of each road and the courtiers to investigate and report to the imperial court whether the guard order was good or bad.

古文：丙子，刑部上《乾道新编特旨断例》。
现代文：初五，刑部呈上乾道新编特旨断但。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Criminal Investigation Department submitted a new special order on the dry road, but it was rejected.

古文：戊寅，诏制科权罢注疏出题，守臣、监司亦许解送。
现代文：初七，诏令制科权罢注疏出题，守臣、监司也许解送。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial decree on the right to establish a science system was issued, and the guards and supervisors may be dismissed.

古文：庚辰，封孙挺为福州观察使、荣国公，摅为左千牛卫大将军。
现代文：初九，封孙子赵挺为福州观察使、荣国公，赵挺为左千牛卫大将军。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Fong's grandson Zhao Ting was the Fuzhou observation envoy, Rongguogong, and Zhao Ting was General Zuo Qianyu Weidai.

古文：癸未，诏使相毋奏补文资，七色补官人毋任子，堂吏迁朝议大夫以五员为额。
现代文：十二日，诏令使相不要奏补文资，七色补官人不得任子，堂吏迁升朝议大夫以五名为限额。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the Emperor issued an edict ordering the envoys not to submit supplementary materials, the seven-color supplementary officials were not allowed to be appointed, and there was a limit of five courtiers to be promoted to the doctor of the Imperial Court.

古文：乙酉，申严内外牒式法，裁其额。
现代文：十四日，申严内外碟式法，裁减其额。
English: On the 14th, the internal and external disk method was strictly enforced, and the amount was reduced.

古文：丙戌，废永丰圩。
现代文：十五日，废罢永丰好。
English: On the 15th, the cancellation of Yongfeng is good.

古文：戊戌，诏改官人实历知县一任，方许关升。
现代文：二十七日，诏令： 改官人实历知县一任，方许关升。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict was issued: the new officials would be appointed to positions in Shilichi County, and Fang Xu Guan would be promoted.

古文：著为定式。
现代文：著为定式。 
English: The author is the formula.

古文：秋七月己酉，调泉州左翼军二千人屯许浦镇。
现代文：秋七月初八，调泉州左翼军二千人屯驻许浦镇。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Quanzhou Leftist Army was transferred to Xupu Town with 2,000 soldiers.

古文：甲寅，以镇江都统制戚方为武当军节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命镇江都统制戚方为武当军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Zhenjiang's prefectural governor Qi Fang was appointed as the Wudang Army's chief envoy.

古文：八月辛未朔，诏两淮行铁钱，铜钱毋过江北。
现代文：八月初一，诏令两淮通行铁钱，铜钱不得过江北。
English: On the first day of August, the emperor decreed that iron money and copper money must not pass through the northern part of the river.

古文：癸酉，以武锋军隶步军司。
现代文：初三，以武锋军隶属步军司。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Wu Feng Army was subordinated to the Infantry Division.

古文：甲戌。罢任子年三十得免试参选之令。
现代文：初四，罢除任子年三十得以免试参选之令。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he was removed from his post, and in his thirtieth year, he was allowed to run for election without a trial.

古文：丁丑，蠲淮南放归万弩手差役二年。
现代文：初七，免除淮南放归万弩手差役二年。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he was exempted from Huainan's banishment for two years.

古文：壬午，诏诸州守臣兼训练禁军。
现代文：十二日，诏令各州守臣兼练禁军。
English: On the 12th, the emperor ordered all states to exercise military discipline.

古文：癸未，降会子、交子于镇江、建康务场，令江、淮之人对换。
现代文：十三日，降会子、交子到镇江、建康务场，命令江淮地区百姓对换。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the people of the Jianghuai region to exchange their money with the people of Zhenjiang and Jiankang.

古文：丙戌，林安宅劾叶颙之子受金失实，罢之。
现代文：十六日，林安宅弹勃叶儿子受金失实被罢免。
English: On the 16th, Lin An's son, Bo Ye, was removed from his post for accepting bribes.

古文：丁亥，诏安宅筠州居住，温州大水。
现代文：十七日，诏令林安宅箔州居住。温州发大水。
English: On the 17th, Lin An's family was ordered to live in Wenzhou. Wenzhou was flooded.

古文：戊子，以魏杞兼同知枢密院事，蒋芾权参知政事。
现代文：十八日，任命魏祀兼同知枢密院事，蒋莆权参知政事。
English: On the 18th, Wei Shi and Tongzhi were appointed to the Privy Council, and Jiang Yu Quan was appointed to the Council of State.

古文：召叶颙。
现代文：召叶。
English: Call the leaves.

古文：庚寅，少保、新兴郡王吴盖薨。
现代文：二十日，少保、新兴郡王吴盖逝世。
English: On the 20th, Wu Gai, a minor official and emerging county king, passed away.

古文：甲午，立中兴以来十三处战功格目。
现代文：二十四日，立中兴以来十三处战功数目。
English: On the 24th, the number of achievements since the establishment of ZTE has increased to 13.

古文：乙未，诏吴璘复判兴州。
现代文：二十五日，诏令吴瞒重新判兴州。
English: On the 25th, Wu Zhe was ordered to re-sentence Xingzhou.

古文：丙申，升宣州为宁国府。
现代文：二十六日，升宣州为宁国府。
English: On the 26th, Shengxuanzhou became the capital of Ningguo.

古文：罢户部诸路岁籴一年。
现代文：罢废户部各路岁来一年。
English: It's been a year since all branches of the household department were abolished.

古文：九月甲辰，知上元县李允升犯脏贷死，杖脊刺面，配惠州牢城，籍其赀。
现代文：九月初四，上元知县李允升犯贪赃罪免除死罪，杖脊刺面，发配惠州牢城，没收资产。
English: On the fourth day of September, Li Yunsheng of Shangyuanchi County was exonerated of the crime of corruption and sentenced to death. He was sentenced to Huizhou Prison and his assets were confiscated.

古文：丙午，建康守臣王佐坐纵允升去官，夺三官勒停、建昌军居住。
现代文：初六，建康守臣王佐因纵容李允升去官，被削夺三官，勒令停职，建昌军居住。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Jiankang warden Wang Zuo was removed from his post for conniving at Li Yun's promotion. He was stripped of his three posts and ordered to suspend his duties. Jianchang troops lived there.

古文：余失按官吏及荐举官夺官有差。
现代文：其余者按官吏及荐举官夺官不等。
English: The rest varied according to officials and recommendations.

古文：辛亥，遣官按视温州水灾，振贫民，决系囚。
现代文：十一日，派遣官员视察温州水灾，贩济贫民，处决关押囚犯。
English: On the 11th, officials were dispatched to inspect the floods in Wenzhou, distribute food to the poor, and execute prisoners.

古文：乙卯，诏改造大历。
现代文：十五日，诏令改造大历。
English: On the 15th, the Great Calendar was reformed by imperial decree.

古文：辛酉，追封子恪为邵王，谥曰悼肃。
现代文：二十一日，追封儿子赵烙为邵王，溢号为悼肃。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhao Yao, the son of Zhao Feng, was named King Shao, and the exclamation mark was used for mourning.

古文：甲子，诏监司各举部内知县、县令二三人，守臣各举属县一二人。
现代文：二十四日，诏令监司各自推举部内知县、县令二三人，守臣各举荐属县一二人。
English: On the 24th, the supervisors of the imperial edict each recommended two or three chishens and county magistrates within the department, and the retainers each recommended one or two subordinate counties.

古文：己巳，魏巳等上神宗、哲宗、徽宗三朝《帝纪》、《太上皇圣政》。太白昼见。
现代文：二十九日，魏祀等呈上神宗哲宗徽宗三朝帝重己、汰上皇圣班。太白星白天出现。
English: On the 29th, Wei worshipers and others presented themselves to the Shenzong Zhezong Huizong Three Dynasties Emperor, and were given the title of imperial saint. Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：是月，诏举将帅，置章奏簿。
现代文：这个月，诏令推举将帅，设置章奏簿。
English: This month, the edict was issued to promote generals and set up a record book.

古文：冬十月癸酉，上《太上皇圣政》于德寿宫。乙亥，遣薛良朋等使金贺正旦。
现代文：冬十月初三，到德寿宫呈上汰上皇圣班。初五，派遣薛良朋等出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor's holy class was presented to Dezhou Palace. On the 5th day of the first month, Xue Liangbo and other emissaries were sent to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：己卯，减饶州岁贡金三之一，蠲诸路洒坊逋赋。
现代文：初九，减去饶州岁贡金三分之一，免除各路酒坊拖欠赋税。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, one-third of the Raozhou year tribute will be deducted, and all wineries will be exempted from tax arrears.

古文：戊子，知峡州吕令问坐纵脏吏知夷陵县韩贽胄去官，夺二官、鄂州居住。
现代文：十八日，知峡州吕令问因纵容赃吏夷陵知县韩赞青去官，削夺三官，鄂州居住。
English: On the 18th, Han Zanqing from Yiling County, Zhixia County, was asked by Luling from Zhixia County to resign from his post because of his connivance with the corrupt officials. He was stripped of his three posts and resided in Ezhou.

古文：辛卯，雨雹。
现代文：二十一日，降冰雹。
English: On the 21st, hail fell.

古文：金遣魏子平等来贺会庆节。
现代文：金国派遣魏子平等来祝贺会庆节。
English: Jin Guo sent Wei Zi Ping to congratulate the festival.

古文：十一月丙午，杨存中薨。
现代文：十一月初六，杨存中逝世。
English: On early November 6, Yang Cunzhong passed away.

古文：己酉，尽出内藏及南库银以易会子，官司并以钱银支遣，民间从便。
现代文：初九，调出内藏库和南库所有的银子易换会子，官司都以钱银支遣，民间听便。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, all the silver in the inner and southern storehouses was transferred to exchange for money. All lawsuits were supported by money and silver, which was convenient for the people.

古文：两淮总领所许自造会子。
现代文：允许两淮总领所自造会子。
English: The two Huai and Huai general territorial offices are allowed to create their own associations.

古文：鬻诸路营田。
现代文：警卖各路营田。
English: The police sold all the yakitori.

古文：壬子，诏修祥曦殿记注。
现代文：十二日，诏令修样曦殿记注。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an edict to amend the imperial edict.

古文：乙卯，密诏四川制置使汪应辰：如吴璘不起，收其宣抚使牌印，权行主管职事。
现代文：十五日，秘密诏令四川制置使汪应辰，如果吴瞒不起，就没收他的宣抚使牌印，暂且行使主管职事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Wang Yingchen was secretly ordered to set up an envoy to Sichuan, and if Wu could not conceal it, he would confiscate his envoy's seal and temporarily exercise his duties.

古文：甲子，大阅。
现代文：二十四日，举行大阅。
English: On the 24th, a grand reading was held.

古文：戊辰，筑郢州城。
现代文：二十八日，修筑郑州城。
English: On the 28th, Zhengzhou City was built.

古文：是月，诏汰冗兵。
现代文：这个月，诏令裁汰冗兵。
English: This month, the imperial edict of redundancy ended.

古文：十二月庚午朔，白气亘天。
现代文：十二月初一，白气横盖天空。
English: On the first day of December, white clouds covered the sky.

古文：癸酉，诏三省、侍从、台谏、两淮漕臣、郡守，条具两淮铁钱、交子利害以闻。
现代文：初四，诏令三省、侍从、台谏、两淮槽臣、郡守，分别陈述两淮铁钱、交子利害报告朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the imperial edict ordered the three provinces, the attendants, the provincial governors, the two vice-governors, and the county governors to separately report to the imperial court on the interests of the two vice-governors, the iron money, and the trade.

古文：乙亥，遣梁克家等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初六，派遣梁克家等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, Liang Ke's family and others were sent to congratulate the birthday of the benefactor.

古文：己卯，以资政殿学士叶颙知枢密院事。
现代文：初十，任命资政殿学士叶为知枢密院事。
English: At the age of ten, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：辛巳，诏免进呈《钦宗日历》，送国史院修纂实录。
现代文：十二日，下诏暂免进呈钦宗日厉，送国史院修撰实录。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict temporarily pardoned Jin Zongri, and sent him to the National Academy of History to write a record.

古文：壬午，追封杨存中为和王。
现代文：十三日，追封杨存中为和王。
English: On the 13th, Yang Cunzhong was posthumously crowned as the Prince of Peace.

古文：甲申，以叶颙为尚书左仆射，魏杞右仆射，并同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
现代文：十五日，任命叶为尚书左仆射，魏祀为右仆射，并为同中书门下平章事兼枢密使。
English: On the 15th, Ye was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand retainer and Wei Shi as his right-hand retainer, as well as the second-highest-ranking official and privy councilor under Shangshu.

古文：蒋芾参知政事，吏部尚书陈俊卿同知枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：蒋莆为参知政事，吏部尚书陈俊卿为同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: Chiang Kai-shek was a member of the Council of State, and the Secretary of the General Staff, Chen Junqing, was a member of the Council of Privy Councillors and acting member of the Council of State.

古文：庚寅，诏宰相领兼制国用使，参知政事同知国用事。
现代文：二十一日，诏令宰相兼制国用使，参知政事同知国用事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, it was decreed that the prime minister would also serve as the envoy of the state, and participate in the political affairs and the affairs of the state.

古文：癸巳，诏监司、守臣举廉吏。
现代文：二十四日，下诏监司、守臣举荐廉吏。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the overseer and the guarding vassal came down to recommend the corrupt officials.

古文：丙申，金遣乌古论元忠等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣乌古论元忠等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the State of Kim sent Uguon Yuanzhong and others to congratulate the coming year's new spring.

古文：以江东兵马钤辖王抃为带御器械。
现代文：任命江东兵马铃辖王打为带御器械。
English: Jiangdong Terracotta Army was appointed as the official instrument.

古文：是岁，裁定内外军额。
现代文：这一年，裁定内外军额。
English: This year, the number of troops at home and abroad was increased.

