古文：凡与敌战，不可恃己胜而放佚，当益加严厉以待敌，佚而犹劳。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，不可依仗自己取得了胜利，就放纵部队失去了警惕心，应当越发严加戒备以等待敌人的再次进攻，做到在安逸的环境下，仍像在劳困的环境中那样毫不松懈。
English: In any war against the enemy, we must not rely on our own victory, let the troops lose their vigilance, and should be more and more alert to wait for the enemy to attack again, so that in a comfortable environment, it is still as relentless as in a laborious environment.

古文：法曰： 有备无患。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 有了充分的战争准备，才能避免祸患发生。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Only with sufficient preparation for war can we avoid disaster.

古文：秦王翦将兵六十万代李信击荆。
现代文：战国时期，秦国将领王翦奉命率领六十万大军取代李信去攻打楚国。
English: During the Warring States period, Wang Qian, the general of Qin, was ordered to lead 600,000 troops to replace Li Xin to attack Chu.

古文：荆闻王翦益军而来，乃悉国中兵以拒秦。
现代文：楚国获悉王翦增加了兵力来进攻，就调集全国军队对付秦军。
English: When King Chu learned that Wang Pi had increased the number of troops, he mobilized the entire national army to resist the Qin soldiers.

古文：王翦至，坚壁而守之，不肯战。
现代文：可是，王翦到了与楚军对阵的地方，却坚壁守营，不肯交战。
English: When Wang Hui arrived at the battlefield, he built a strong camp to take a defensive position and refused to send troops to fight.

古文：荆兵数出挑战，终不出。
现代文：楚军多次出兵挑战，秦军始终不出兵应战。
English: The Chu army repeatedly challenged, but the Qin army was always unable to hold out.

古文：王翦日休士，洗沐而善饮食抚循之，亲与士卒同食。
现代文：王翦每天让士卒休养沐浴，改善伙食，给予他们多方关怀，并且亲自同士卒一道用餐。
English: Wang Yao allowed the soldiers to rest and bathe every day, improved their diet, gave them many kinds of care, and personally dined with them.

古文：久之，王翦使人问： 军中戏乎？ 
现代文：这样过了很久，王翦便派人去询问： 军营中在作游戏活动吗？ 
English: After this had been going on for a long time, Wang Yao sent someone to inquire: Are there any gaming activities going on in the military camp?

古文：对曰： 方投石超距。 
现代文：回报说： 部队正在作投掷石弹和跳越障碍等活动。 
English: He came back with a report: They are throwing stones to see who can throw the farthest.

古文：于是，王翦曰： 士卒可用。 
现代文：听此报告后，王翦高兴地说： 这样的士兵可以用来对楚军作战了。 
English: After listening to this report, Wang Yao said happily: Such soldiers can be used to fight against the Chu army.

古文：荆数挑战而秦不出，乃引而东。
现代文：楚军因为屡次出兵挑战而秦军并不出兵应战，无奈只得向东撤退。
English: The Chu army repeatedly challenged the Qin army, but the Qin army did not want to fight, so they led the army to the east.

古文：翦因举兵追之，令壮士出击，大破荆军。
现代文：王翦趁机下令追击，让精锐的秦军士兵进攻，大败楚军。
English: Wang Yao took the opportunity to order a pursuit, allowing the elite Qin soldiers to attack and defeat the Chu army.

