古文：○真宗一真宗应符稽古神功让德文明武定章圣元孝皇帝，讳恒，太宗第三子也。母曰元德皇后李氏。
现代文：真宗应符稽古神功让德文明武定章圣元孝皇帝，名恒，太宗第三个儿子，母亲是元德皇后李氏。
English: Emperor Sheng Yuanxiao, named Heng, was the third son of Emperor Taizong, and his mother was Empress Li of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：初，乾德五年，五星从镇星聚奎。
现代文：起初，乾德五年，五星与镇星一起聚于奎宿。
English: At the beginning, in the fifth year of Qiande, the five stars and the town stars gathered together in Kui.

古文：明年正月，后梦以裾承日，有娠，十二月二日生于开封府第，赤光照室，左足指有文成 天 字。
现代文：第二年正月，元德皇后梦到衣服的大襟托住了太阳，于是怀孕，十二月二日生真宗皇帝于开封府邸宅，当时红光照耀居室，他的左脚指上有一个 天 字。
English: In the first month of the second year, Empress Yuan De had a dream that the sun was being held back by the collar of her dress. As a result, she became pregnant. On December 2, Emperor Zhenzong was born in the Kaifeng Mansion. At the time, red light was shining in the living room, and there was a heavenly character on his left toe.

古文：初名德昌，太平兴国八年，授检校太保、同中书门下平章事，封韩王，改名元休。
现代文：真宗从小聪明，外表漂亮奇异，同诸王一起玩，喜欢游戏打仗，自称元帅。宋太祖喜欢他，把他养在宫中。曾经登万岁殿，坐上皇帝宝座，太祖十分惊奇，摸着他的头问： 天子好做吗了回答说： 听从天命罢了。 
English: Shinsong was clever from a young age, beautiful and strange in appearance, played with kings, liked games and war, and called himself a marshal. Song Taizu liked him and raised him in the palace. Once he ascended to the Hall of Long Life and sat on the emperor's throne, Taizu was very surprised and touched his head and asked, "Is it good for a son of heaven to do this?" He replied, "I'm just following my destiny."

古文：端拱元年，封襄王，改元侃。
现代文：不久，就接受经学教育，他看一遍就能背诵。真宗起初名德昌，太平兴国八年，封为襄王，改名元侃。
English: Soon, he received education in the study of scripture, and he could recite everything after reading it once. At first, the True Sect was called Dechang, and in the eighth year of the Taiping Restoration, it was named Xiangwang, and changed its name to Yuan Kan.

古文：淳化五年九月进封寿王，加检校太傅、开封尹。
现代文：淳化五年九月，进封为寿王，加为检校太傅、开封尹。
English: In September of the fifth year of the Chunhua era, he was promoted to Shouwang in Jinfu, and was also promoted to Kengyo Taifu and Kaifeng Yin.

古文：至道元年八月立为皇太子，改今讳，仍判府事。
现代文：至道元年八月，立为皇太子，改今名，仍判开封府事。
English: In August of the first year of the Dao, he became crown prince and changed his name to his current one, but he was still awarded the title of prefect.

古文：故事，殿庐幄次在宰相上，宫僚称臣，皆推让弗受。
现代文：按照惯例，作为皇太子真宗在上殿时的位次在宰相之上，宫僚称臣，真宗都推让不接受。
English: According to the usual practice, as Crown Prince Jinsong, when he entered the palace, his rank was higher than that of the prime minister. The palace staff called him a vassal, but Jinsong did not accept this.

古文：见宾客李至、李沆，必先拜，迎送降阶及门。
现代文：看到宾客李至、李杭，一定先行拜礼，迎来送往都要到宫门外的台阶。
English: Seeing the guests Li Zhi and Li Hang, they must first worship, and they must go to the steps outside the palace gate to welcome and send them.

古文：开封政务填委，帝留心狱讼，裁决轻重，靡不称惬，故京狱屡空，太宗屡诏嘉美。
现代文：开封府政事纷繁，真宗留心狱讼，裁决轻重，没有不称快的，所以京城监狱多次空了，太宗多次下诏表扬。
English: The political affairs of Kaifeng prefecture were numerous and complicated. Shinshong paid attention to the prison lawsuits, and the rulings were weighty and not hasty. Therefore, the Beijing prison was empty many times, and Taizong praised it many times.

古文：三年三月，太宗崩，奉遗制即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：至道三年三月，太宗逝世，真宗奉遗命在灵枢前即皇帝位。
English: In March of the third year of his reign, Emperor Taizong passed away, and Emperor Zhenzong ascended to the throne in front of the spiritual center.

古文：夏四月乙未，尊皇后为皇太后，赦天下，常赦所不原者咸除之。
现代文：夏四月初一，尊皇后为皇太后，大赦天下，常大赦时得不到原谅的人都被赦免。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, when the revered empress became the empress dowager, she granted a general amnesty to the whole country, and those who could not be pardoned during the general amnesty were pardoned.

古文：丙申，群臣请听政，表三上，从之。
现代文：初二，大臣请求处理国事，三次上表，才同意。
English: On the second day of the first month, the minister requested to deal with state affairs, and three times the table was raised before agreeing.

古文：戊戌，始见群臣于崇政殿西序，寻赐器币。
现代文：初四，在崇政殿西室首次会见大臣，不久赐给器币。
English: On his fourth day of junior high school, he met with a minister for the first time in the west room of the Palace of Supreme State Power, and was soon given a vase of coins.

古文：癸卯，门下侍郎兼兵部尚书、平章事吕端加右仆射。弟越王元份进封雍王，吴王元杰进封兖王，并兼中书令。徐国公元偓进封彭城郡王，泾国公元偁进封安定郡王，并同平章事。元俨封曹国公。侄阆州观察使惟吉为武信军节度使。侍卫马步军都虞候傅潜、殿前都指挥使王超、侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆、侍卫步军都指挥使高琼并领诸军节度。驸马都尉王承衍、石保吉、魏咸信并为诸军节度使。
现代文：初九，门下侍郎兼兵部尚书、平章事吕端加官右仆射；弟越王赵元份进封为雍王，吴王赵元杰进封为充王，都兼中书令；徐国公赵元握进封为彭城郡王，径国公赵元翱进封为安定郡王，都为同平章事；赵元俨封为曹国公；侄间州观察使赵惟吉为武信军节度使；侍卫马步军都虞候傅潜、殿前都指挥使王超、侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆、侍卫步军都指挥使高琼都领诸军节度；驹马都尉王承衍、石保吉、魏咸信为各军节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, his subordinate attendant and commander of the military department Shang Shu and Ping Zhang Jie Lu Duan Ga Guan Yu Shu; his younger brother Yue Wang Zhao Yuanfen was assigned to the Yong Wang, Wu King Zhao Yuanjie was assigned to the Chong Wang, and the capital was assigned to the Zhong Shuling; Xu Guogong Zhao Yuanjie was assigned to the Pengcheng County King, and Qi Guogong Zhao Yuanqi was assigned to the Stable County King, and both were assigned to the Tongping Chapter; Zhao Yuanjie was assigned to the Cao Guogong; Zhao

古文：甲辰，宣徽北院使、知枢密院事赵镕加南院使，左丞李至、礼部侍郎李沆并参知政事。
现代文：初十，宣徽北院使、知枢密院事赵加为南院使，左承李至、礼部侍郎李杭为参知政事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Jia, the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui and the secretary of the Privy Council, became the envoy of the Southern Yuan, while Zuo Cheng Li Zhi and Li Hang, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, became the co-chairs of the political affairs.

古文：丁未，中外群臣进秩一等。
现代文：十三日，中外大臣升官一级。
English: On the 13th, the Minister of Foreign Affairs was promoted to the first level.

古文：罢盐铁、度支、户部副使。
现代文：废除盐铁、度支、户部副使。
English: Abolish the Salt and Iron Ministry, the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the Vice-Minister of the Household.

古文：癸丑，置镇戎军。
现代文：十九日，设置镇戎军。
English: On the 19th, the town army was set up.

古文：乙卯，静海军节度使、交阯郡王黎桓加兼侍中，进封南平王。
现代文：二十一日，静海军节度使、交趾郡王黎桓加兼侍中，进封为南平王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jing naval festival envoy, King of Jiaozi County, Li Huanjia, also a chamberlain, was enthroned as King of Nanping.

古文：五月丁卯，诏求直言。
现代文：五月初四，诏求直言。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, it is time to speak up.

古文：庚午，命两制议丰盈之术以闻。
现代文：初七，命令两制官员讨论丰盈之术上报。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the officials of the two systems to discuss and report on the technique of abundance.

古文：甲戌，户部侍郎、参知政事李昌龄责授忠武行军司马。
现代文：十一日，户部侍郎、参知政事李昌龄贬为忠武行军司马。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Changling, a chamberlain of the household and a member of the Council of State, was demoted to the position of a loyal marching army steward.

古文：甲申，放宫人给事岁久者。
现代文：二十一日，放出侍奉长久的宫人。
English: On the twenty-first day, long-serving palace officials were released.

古文：丙戌，以镇安军节度使李继隆同平章事。
现代文：二十三日，任命镇安军节度使李继隆同平章事。
English: On the 23rd, Zhenanjun Festival was appointed to make Li Jilong a peer.

古文：封姊秦国、晋国二公主并为长公主，齐国公主改许国长公主，妹宣慈、贤懿、寿昌、万寿四公主并为长公主。
现代文：封姐秦国、晋国二公主都为长公主，齐国公主改为许国长公主，妹宣慈、贤爵、寿昌、万寿四公主都为长公主。
English: The two princesses of Qin and Jin were the eldest princesses, the princess of Qi was changed to the eldest princess of Xu, and the four princesses of Xuan Ci, Xian Jie, Shuchang and Wan Shou were the eldest princesses.

古文：丁亥，立秦国夫人郭氏为皇后。
现代文：二十四日，立秦国夫人郭氏为皇后。
English: On the 24th, the wife of Qin State, Guo, became the empress.

古文：六月乙未，以太宗墨迹赐天下名山。
现代文：六月初二，赐给全国名山太宗墨迹。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Taizong ink was given to the national famous mountain.

古文：戊戌，追复涪王廷美西京留守兼中书令、秦王，赠兄魏王德昭太傅、岐王德芳太保。
现代文：初五，追复涪陵王赵廷美为西京留守兼中书令、秦王，赠给兄魏王赵德昭为太傅，岐王赵德芳为太保。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Tingmei, the king of Fuling, was restored to the throne of the Western Capital, and he also served as the chancellor and the king of Qin. Zhao Dezhao, the king of Wei, was given to his brother as taifu, and Zhao Defang, the king of Qi, was given to his brother as taibo.

古文：己亥，上大行皇帝谥曰神功圣德文武皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：初六，上太宗皇帝溢号为神功圣德文武皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the year, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and his posthumous name became Emperor Shengong Dewenwu, and his temple name became Taizong.

古文：辛丑，诏罢献祥瑞。
现代文：初八，下诏废罢进献样瑞。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor abolished the imperial edict.

古文：甲辰，复封兄元佐为楚王。
现代文：十一日，又封兄赵元佐为楚王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, his brother, Zhao Yuanzuo, was also named King of Chu.

古文：乙巳，追册莒国夫人潘氏为皇后，谥庄怀。
现代文：十二日，追册营国夫人潘氏为皇后，溢号为庄怀。
English: On the 12th, Yingguo's wife, Pan, was registered as empress, and the exclamation mark was Zhuanghuai.

古文：以工部侍郎、同知枢密院事钱若水为集贤院学士。
现代文：任命工部侍郎、同知枢密院事钱若水为集贤院学士。
English: He appointed the chamberlain of the engineering department and the scholar of the Privy Council, Jichien Wakamizu, as the scholar of the Jixian Academy.

古文：赠弟元亿为代国公。
现代文：赠弟赵元亿为代国公。
English: His brother-in-law, Zhao Yuanlian, became the acting sovereign.

古文：秋七月乙丑，诏转运使更迭赴阙，访以民事。
现代文：秋七月初三，下诏转运使陆续到朝廷，询问民事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, envoys arrived at the imperial court one after another to inquire about civil matters.

古文：癸酉，诏访孔子嫡孙。
现代文：十一日，下诏访求孔子嫡孙。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he issued an edict to visit Confucius's legitimate grandson.

古文：乙亥，以殿前都虞候范廷召领河西军节度使，葛霸保顺军节度使，王汉忠威塞军节度使，康保裔彰国军节度使，王昭远保静军节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命殿前都虞候范廷召领河西军节度使，葛霸为保顺军节度使，王汉忠为威塞军节度使，康保裔为彰国军节度使，王昭远为保静军节度使。
English: On the 13th, the prefectural governor in front of the palace, Fan Ting, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Western Hebei Army, Ge Ba was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hoshun Army, Wang Hanzhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wessai Army, Kang Bao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Chang Guo Army, and Wang Zhaoyuan was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hoshun Army.

古文：甲申，以范廷召、葛霸为定州、镇州驻泊都部署，王汉忠为高阳关行营都部署，康保裔为并、代州都部署。
现代文：二十二日，任命范廷召、葛霸为定州、镇州驻泊都部署，王汉忠为高阳关行营都部署，康保裔为并州、代州都部署。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Fan Tingzhao and Ge Ba to be stationed in Dingzhou and Zhenzhou, Wang Hanzhong to be stationed in Gaoyang and Guanzhong, and Kangbo descendants to be deployed in Bianzhou and Daizhou.

古文：八月丙申，罢盐井役。
现代文：八月初四，废除盐井役。
English: On the 4th of August, the salt mine work was abolished.

古文：己亥，以镇海军节度使曹彬为枢密使，知枢密院事赵镕为寿州观察使，同知枢密院事李惟清为御史中丞，户部侍郎向敏中、给事中夏侯峤并为枢密副使。
现代文：初七，任命镇海军节度使曹彬为枢密使，知枢密院事赵为寿州观察使，同知枢密院事李惟清为御史中承，户部侍郎向敏中、给事中夏侯娇为枢密副使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Cao Bin, the commander of the naval festival of the town, was appointed as the privy envoy, Zhao, the secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed as the observer of Shoushou, Li Weiqing, the secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed as the secretary of the imperial history, Xiang Min, the chamberlain of the household, and Xia Houjiao, the secretary of the imperial history, were appointed as the deputy secret envoys.

古文：庚子，命以十二月二日为承天节。
现代文：初八，命令以十二月二日为承天节。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, it was decreed that December 2nd would be the Choten Festival.

古文：戊申，太白犯太微。
现代文：十六日，太白星侵犯太微垣。
English: On the 16th, Taibaixing invaded Taibaijing.

古文：己酉，封乳母齐国夫人刘氏为秦国延寿保圣夫人。
现代文：十七日，封乳母齐国夫人刘氏为秦国延寿保圣夫人。
English: On the 17th, Liu, the nanny of Lady Qi, became the wife of Qin Guo's saint of longevity.

古文：先是，帝以汉、唐封乳母为夫人县君故事付中书，已乃有是命。
现代文：起初，真宗把汉、唐封乳母为夫人、县君的惯例交给中书省，不久便有这项命令。
English: At first, Shinsong gave the custom of Han and Tang nannies as wives and prefectures to the Ministry of Literature, and soon there was this order.

古文：戊午，荧惑入东井。
现代文：二十六日，荧惑星进人东井宿。
English: On the 26th, the fluorescent planet entered Higashii-juku.

古文：庚申，西川广武卒刘旴逐巡检使韩景祐，掠蜀、汉等州，招安使上官正、钤辖马知节讨平之。
现代文：二十八日，西川广武卒刘牙驱逐巡检使韩景，劫掠蜀州、汉州等地，招安使上官正、铃辖马知节讨平广武卒。
English: On the 28th, Liu Jia, the Guangwu general of Xichuan, drove out the patrol envoy Han Jing, plundered Shuzhou, Hanzhou and other places, and recruited Shangguan Zheng, the Shangguan Zheng, and Ma Zhijie, the Ma Zhijie, to fight against the Guangwu general.

古文：九月丁丑，二星陨西南。
现代文：九月十五日，二星在西南方向坠落。
English: On September 15, two stars fell in the southwest direction.

古文：戊寅，以孔子四十五世孙延世为曲阜县令，袭封文宣公。
现代文：十六日，任命孔子四十五世孙孔延世为曲阜县令，袭封为文宣公。
English: On the 16th, the 45th generation of Confucius's grandson, Kong Yonsei, was appointed the magistrate of Qufu County, succeeding Wen Xuan Gu.

古文：冬十月，夏人寇灵州，合河都部署杨琼击走之。
现代文：冬十月，夏军攻打灵州，合河都部署杨琼将其击退。
English: In the winter of October, Xia's army attacked Lingzhou, and Hefei deployed Yang Qiong to repel it.

古文：己酉，葬太宗于永熙陵。
现代文：十八日，葬太宗于永熙陵。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong was buried in Yongxi Mausoleum.

古文：丁巳，赐山陵使而下银帛有差。
现代文：二十六日，赐给山陵使以下银帛不等。
English: On the 26th, the following silver ingots were given to the mausoleum.

古文：岁星入氐。
现代文：岁星进人氏宿。
English: New Year's Eve at Jinjin's Inn.

古文：十一月甲子，祔太宗神主于太庙，以懿德皇后配，祔庄怀皇后于别庙。
现代文：十一月初三，在太庙撇祭太宗神主，配以靓德皇后，在别庙撇祭庄怀皇后。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, in the temple skimming festival, the Taizong God was accompanied by the Empress Shunde, and in the other temple skimming festival, the Empress Zhuanghuai.

古文：丙寅，诏两京死罪以下递减一等，缘山陵役民赐租有差。
现代文：初五，下诏两京死罪以下依次减罪一等，因山陵服役的百姓免租不等。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following two capital offenses were reduced to the first degree, and the people who served in the mountains were exempt from rent.

古文：己巳，诏工部侍郎钱若水修《太宗实录》。
现代文：初八，诏令工部侍郎钱若水修撰汰宗实录。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Qian Ruoshui, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, to compile a record of the Taizong.

古文：己卯，赐帛西鄙餫饷士卒。
现代文：十八日，赐给西部边境运送军晌士卒布帛。
English: On the 18th, the order was given to transport soldiers to the western border.

古文：阅骑射，擢精锐者十人迁职。
现代文：检阅骑射，十名武艺精锐者得到升迁。
English: Ten martial arts masters were promoted after the inspection of horse archery.

古文：乙酉，废理检院。
现代文：二十四日，废除理检院。
English: On the 24th, the Geological Survey Institute was abolished.

古文：十二月癸巳，承天节，群臣上寿于崇德殿。
现代文：十二月初二，承天节，众臣在崇德殿为真宗祝寿。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, the Jotian Festival, all the courtiers gathered at the Chongde Hall to celebrate the birthday of the True Sect.

古文：丙申，追尊母贤妃李氏为皇太后。
现代文：初五，追尊母贤妃李氏为皇太后。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, she became empress dowager, succeeding her mother, Empress Dowager Yi.

古文：辛丑，诏诸路转运使申饬令长劝农。
现代文：初十，下诏各路转运使告诫各级主管官员劝农。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the transportation envoys of all routes issued a warning to the competent officials at all levels to persuade the farmers.

古文：甲辰，以银州观察使赵保吉为定难军节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命银州观察使赵保吉为定难军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Baoji was appointed as Yinzhou Observation Envoy of the Dingan Army.

古文：咸平元年春正月辛酉，诏改元。
现代文：咸平元年春正月初一，下诏改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Xianping, the following edict changed the era.

古文：丙寅，上皇太后李氏谥曰元德。
现代文：初六，上皇太后溢号为元德。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the former empress dowager's posthumous name was changed to Yuan De.

古文：丁丑，召学官崔颐正讲《书》，因命宰臣选明经术者以闻。
现代文：十七日，召学官崔颐正讲解书，于是命令宰臣挑选精通经术的人上报。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the summoning officer, Cui Yao, was lecturing on the commentary, so he ordered the vice-minister to select a person who was proficient in the sutra to report to him.

古文：戊寅，阅御龙直。
现代文：十八日，阅试御龙直武艺。
English: On the 18th, he tried his hand at dragon fighting.

古文：辛巳，僧你尾尼等自西天来朝，称七年始达。
现代文：二十一日，僧人你尾尼等从西天来朝，称七年才到达。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the monks, including You Taili, arrived in the morning from the west, saying that it had taken them seven years to get here.

古文：甲申，彗出营室北。
现代文：二十四日，彗星出现在室宿。
English: On the 24th, the comet appeared in Murojuku.

古文：二月癸巳，吕端等言彗出之应当在齐、鲁分。
现代文：二月初四，吕端等人说彗星出现的变乱，应当在齐、鲁之地。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Lü Duan and others said that the disturbance caused by the comet should be in Qi and Lu.

古文：帝曰： 朕以天下为忧，岂直一方耶？ 甲午，诏求直言，避殿减膳。
现代文：真宗说： 肤以天下为忧，难道只一方吗了初五，诏求直言，避殿减膳。
English: Shingzong said: "I am worried about the world. Is it only one side that has made the first five points, issued an edict to speak frankly, and avoided the palace and reduced the meal?

古文：乙未，虑囚，老幼疾病，流以下听赎，杖以下释之。
现代文：初六，讯问记录囚犯罪状，老幼疾病，流刑以下允许赎罪，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, the interrogation records the criminal status of the prisoner, the diseases of the old and the young, the expatriation is allowed to atone for the crime, and the caning is released.

古文：丁酉，彗灭。
现代文：初八，彗星消失。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the comet disappeared.

古文：三月己巳，置太平州。
现代文：三月初十，设置太平州。
English: On the 10th day of March, Taiping Prefecture was established.

古文：壬申，赐进士孙仅等宴琼林。
现代文：十三日，赐进士孙仅等宴于琼林。
English: On the 13th day, Ji Jin Shisun only waited for the banquet in Qionglin.

古文：辛巳，以赵保吉归顺，遣使谕陕西，纵绥、银流民还乡，家给米一斛。
现代文：二十二日，因赵保吉归顺，派遣使臣告谕陕西，遣送绥、银州流民回乡，每家供给一解米。
English: On the 22nd, because of Zhao Baoji's surrender, an envoy was dispatched to Shaanxi to tell the people to return to their hometowns, and each family was provided with a loaf of rice.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：夏四月，早灾。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：五月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：甲子，幸大相国寺祈雨，升殿而雨。
现代文：初七，到大相国寺祈祷降雨，登殿即降雨。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, I went to Daisho Koku-ji Temple to pray for rain. When I entered the temple, it rained.

古文：六月辛卯，诏近臣举常参官才堪转运使者。
现代文：六月初四，下诏近臣举荐可以担任转运使的常参官。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, it was decreed that a close vassal could be recommended to serve as a regular staff officer of the transit envoy.

古文：丙辰，以旱，免开封二十五州军田租。
现代文：二十九日，因早灾免除开封府和二十五州军田税。
English: On the 29th, due to the early disaster, Kaifeng Prefecture and 25 states were exempted from military field tax.

古文：秋七月甲子，诏民供亿山陵者赐租什二。
现代文：秋七月初八，下诏免除供应山陵所需的百姓十分之二的租税。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month in autumn, the emperor decreed that two-tenths of the taxes of the people needed to supply the mausoleum would be exempted.

古文：己巳，诏沿淮诸州藏瘗遗骸。
现代文：十三日，下诏沿淮水各州掩埋暴露的尸体。
English: On the 13th, all the provinces along the Huai River were ordered to bury the exposed bodies.

古文：八月癸卯，禁新小钱。
现代文：八月十七日，禁止新小钱。
English: On August 17th, new coins were banned.

古文：己酉，幸诸王宫。
现代文：二十三日，到诸王宫。
English: On the 23rd, they went to the royal palaces.

古文：九月己巳，诏吕端、钱若水重修《太祖实录》。
现代文：九月十三日，下诏吕端、钱若水重修汰祖实录。
English: On September 13th, the following is a true story of the founding fathers, Lu Duan and Qian Ruoshui.

古文：壬申，赐终南隐士种放粟帛缗钱。
现代文：十六日，赐终南山隐士种放粟帛络钱。
English: On the 16th, he gave money to the last hermit of Nanshan Mountain for planting poppy seeds.

古文：己卯，以左卫上将军张永德为太子太师。
现代文：二十三日，任命左卫上将军张永德为太子太师。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Yongde, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, was appointed Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：冬十月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊子，吕端为太子太保，户部尚书张齐贤、参知政事李沆并平章事，李至为武胜军节度使。
现代文：初三，吕端为太子太保，户部尚书张齐贤、参知政事李杭为平章事，李至为武胜军节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Lü Duan was the prince's eunuch, Shang Shu Zhang Qixian was the head of the household, Li Hang, the political advisor to the governor, was the military attaché, and Li Zhi was the military attaché of the victorious army.

古文：己丑，参知政事温仲舒罢为礼部尚书，枢密副使夏侯峤罢为户部侍郎、翰林侍读学士，以枢密副使向敏中为兵部侍郎、参知政事，翰林学士杨砺、宋湜并为枢密副使。
现代文：初四，参知政事温仲舒罢为礼部尚书，枢密副使夏侯娇罢为户部侍郎和翰林侍读学士，任命枢密副使向敏中为兵部侍郎、参知政事，翰林学士杨砺、宋为枢密副使。
English: On the fourth day of the junior high school year, Wen Zhongshu, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary, Xia Houjiao, the vice-minister of the privy council, was appointed as the chamberlain of the household department and Hanlin as the bachelor of the chamberlain department, and the vice-minister of the privy council, Xiang Minzhong, was appointed as the chamberlain of the military department, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, and the bachelor of the chamberlain department, Yang Hui, and Song were appointed as the vice-ministers of the privy council.

古文：丙午，许群臣著述诣阁献，令两制铨简。
现代文：二十一日，允许大臣到阎门呈献著述，命令两制检阅。
English: On the twenty-first day, the minister was allowed to go to Yanmen to present his work, and ordered the two systems to be reviewed.

古文：十一月丙辰，龙钵贡马二千骑。
现代文：十一月初一，龙钵贡马二千匹。
English: On the first day of November, there were two thousand Longyu tribute horses.

古文：甲子，诏葺历代帝王陵庙。
现代文：初九，下诏修缮历代帝王陵庙。
English: In the ninth month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to renovate the imperial mausoleums of all times.

古文：十二月庚寅，幸许国长公主第视疾。
现代文：十二月初五，到许国长公主府第探视病情。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month of the year, he went to visit the sick at Princess Hsu's residence.

古文：癸卯，令三司判官举才堪知州者各一人。
现代文：十八日，命令三司判官推举才能可以胜任知州者各一名。
English: On the 18th, the three judges were ordered to nominate one person each from Chizhou who could be qualified.

古文：是岁，溪峒、吐蕃诸族、勒浪十六府大首领、甘州回鹘、西南蕃黎州山后蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，溪酮、吐蕃各族、勒浪十六府大首领、甘州回鹊、西南蕃黎州山后蛮族来进贡。
English: In that year, tributes were brought by the various ethnic groups of Khi Son and Tubo, the grand chiefs of the 16 prefectures of Le Lang, the Uighurs of Gansu, and the barbarians of Shan Hou in southwestern Shan Li Prefecture.

古文：定州苞伤稼，遣使振恤，除是年租。
现代文：定州降冰雹伤害庄稼，派遣使臣予以贩济和抚恤，免除当年租税。
English: Dingzhou hailstorm damaged crops, dispatched envoys to sell money and pensions, and exempted from the tax of the year.

古文：二年春正月甲子，诏尚书丞、郎、给、舍，举升朝官可守大郡者各一人。
现代文：咸平二年春正月初十，下诏：尚书承、郎、给、舍官，各自推举可以担任大郡郡守的朝官一人。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Heian period, the following edict was issued: Shang Shucheng, his son-in-law, son-in-law, and son-in-law, may each nominate one person to serve as grand county governor.

古文：丙子，定诸司使以下至三班使臣有罪比品听赎。
现代文：二十二日，定诸司使以下至三班使臣有罪按照品级允许赎罪。
English: On the 22nd, it was decided that the officers and envoys from the lowest to the third class of envoys were guilty according to their rank, allowing them to atone for their sins.

古文：二月丙申，以赵普配飨太祖庙庭。
现代文：二月十二日，以赵普配祭太祖庙庭。
English: On February 12th, the Zhao Pu Pu Festival was held in the Great Ancestor's Temple.

古文：诏群臣迎养父母，蠲天下逋负，释系囚。
现代文：下诏大臣迎养父母，免除全国拖欠的钱物，释放关押囚犯。
English: Under the edict, the minister will adopt parents, exempt the country from arrears of money and goods, and release prisoners.

古文：己酉，戒百官比周奔竞，有弗率者，御史台纠之。
现代文：二十五日，警告百官不要结党为私，希求速进，有不听警告者由御史台纠察。
English: On the 25th, he warned hundreds of officials not to form a party for me, and hoped for speedy progress. If they did not heed the warning, they would be picketed by the History Channel.

古文：三月丙辰，江、浙发廪振饥。
现代文：三月初三，江、浙开仓贩济饥民。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Jiangsu and Zhejiang opened warehouses to help the hungry.

古文：戊辰，置荆湖南路转运使。
现代文：十五日，设置荆湖南路转运使。
English: On the 15th, the Jinghu South Road Transfer Station was set up.

古文：壬申，王汉忠为泾、原、邠、宁、灵、环都部署。
现代文：十九日，王汉忠为径、原？宁、灵、环都部署。
English: On the 19th, Wang Hanzhong was deployed for the path, the original Ning, the spirit, and the ring.

古文：闰月丁亥，以久不雨，帝谕宰相曰： 凡政有阙失，宜相规以道，毋惜直言。 
现代文：闰三月初四，因长久没有降雨，真宗告谕宰相说： 凡是政治有缺失，应该以道规谏，直言相劝。 
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the leap year, due to the long absence of rain, Jianzong admonished the prime minister and said: Whenever there is a deficiency in politics, it should be dealt with by moral standards and straight talk.

古文：诏天下系囚非十恶、枉法及己杀人者，死以下减一等。
现代文：下诏天下关押囚犯除非十恶不赦、枉法和杀人者外，死罪以下减轻一等处置。
English: It was decreed that all prisoners in the world, except those who committed the ten unpardonable evils, illegal acts, and homicide, would be given a first-class punishment less severe than the death penalty.

古文：幸许国长公主第视疾，又幸北宅视德愿疾。
现代文：到许国长公主家探视病情，又到北宅探视赵德愿的病情。
English: They went to the home of Princess Xu Guofeng to check on her condition, and to the North House to check on Zhao Deyan's condition.

古文：诏两京诸路收瘗暴骸，营塞破冢。
现代文：下诏两京各路收埋暴露尸体，营塞破家。
English: The following edict ordered that all roads in the two capitals were to be buried with the bodies exposed, and homes were to be destroyed.

古文：戊子，幸太一宫、天清寺祈雨。
现代文：初五，到太一宫、天清寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I went to Taichung Palace and Tianqing Temple to pray for rain.

古文：己丑，上皇太后宫名曰万安。
现代文：初六，上皇太后宫名为万安。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the palace of the former empress dowager was called Wan'an.

古文：庚寅，罢有司营缮之不急者。
现代文：初七，废除有关部门营造修缮工程中不急的项目。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the relevant departments will abolish the construction and repair projects that are not urgent.

古文：诏中外臣直言极谏。
现代文：下诏中外臣僚直言极谏。
English: In the following edict, the foreign ministers were extremely outspoken.

古文：从弟德愿卒。
现代文：从弟赵德愿去世。
English: His younger brother Zhao Deyan passed away.

古文：壬辰，雨。
现代文：初九，降雨。
English: Early September, rain.

古文：辛丑，江南转运使言宣、歙竹生米，民采食之。
现代文：十八日，江南转运使报告说宣、款州竹生米，百姓采来吃。
English: On the 18th, the South Yangtze River Transportation Envoy reported that the Xuan and Jingshou bamboo rice was harvested and eaten by the people.

古文：丙午，诏江、浙饥民入城池采勿禁。
现代文：二十三日，下诏江、浙饥民进人城池捕鱼不禁止。
English: On the 23rd, it was not prohibited for the hungry people of the Lower Yangtze River and Zhejiang Province to fish in the man-made pond.

古文：夏四月丙寅，许国长公主薨。
现代文：夏四月十四日，许国长公主逝世。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, Princess Xu Guofeng passed away.

古文：五月丁亥，严服用之制。
现代文：五月初六，严格服用制度。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the strict regimen was resumed.

古文：乙巳，幸曹彬第视疾。
现代文：二十四日，到曹彬家探视病情。
English: On the 24th, he went to Cao Bin's home to check on his condition.

古文：六月丁巳，宰臣进《重修太祖实录》。戊午，曹彬薨。
现代文：六月初六，宰臣进呈重修太祖实录。初七，曹彬逝世。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：庚辰，大食国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十九日，大食国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 29th, the big-eating country sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：七月甲申，以傅潜为镇、定、高阳关行营都部署，张昭允为都钤辖。
现代文：七月初四，任命傅潜为镇州、定州、高阳关行营都部署，张昭允为都铃辖。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, Fu Qian was appointed as the commander of Zhenzhou, Dingzhou and Gaoyang, and Zhang Zhaoyun was appointed as the commander of Zhenzhou.

古文：给外任官职田。
现代文：授给外任官员职田。
English: Assigned to the foreign official, Uchida.

古文：己丑，以横海军节度使王显为枢密使。
现代文：初九，任命横海军节度使王显为枢密使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, Wang Xian was appointed as a privy envoy at the naval festival.

古文：壬寅，制《圣教序》赐传法院。
现代文：二十二日，作怪教序赐给传法院。
English: On the 22nd, the order to make a monster was given to the court.

古文：甲辰，幸国子监，召学官崔偓佺讲《尚书·大禹谟》。
现代文：二十四日，到国子监，召学官崔握佳讲解淌书&;;大禹澎。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he went to the State Children's Supervisor and summoned the academic official, Cui Jiajia, to explain the book "Da Yu Peng."

古文：还，幸崇文院，赐秘书监、祭酒以下器币。
现代文：回时到崇文院，赐给秘书监、祭酒以下器币。
English: When he returned to Chongwen Academy, he gave the secretary and the sacrificial wine to the superintendent.

古文：丙午，置翰林侍读学士，以兵部侍郎杨徽之等为之；置翰林侍讲学士，以国子祭酒邢昺为之。
现代文：二十六日，设置翰林侍读学士，任命兵部侍郎杨徽之等担任；设置翰林侍讲学士，任命国子祭酒邢簌担任。
English: On the 26th, Hanlin Attendance Bachelor was set up, and Yang Hui, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the attendant; Hanlin Attendance Lecturer was set up, and Kuniko Festival Sake Cup was appointed as the attendant.

古文：八月辛亥，御文德殿，文武百官入阁。
现代文：八月初一，到文德殿，文武百官人门合。
English: On the first day of August, hundreds of civil and military officials gathered at the Winter Palace.

古文：乙卯，群臣上尊号曰崇文广武圣明仁孝皇帝。
现代文：初五，大臣上尊号为崇文广武圣明仁孝皇帝。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the minister's honorific title was Chongwen Guangwu Shengming Renxiao Emperor.

古文：丁巳，大宴崇德殿，始作乐。
现代文：初七，大宴崇德殿，开始作乐。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he began to make music at the grand banquet at the Chungdeokgung Palace.

古文：戊午，社，宴近臣于中书。
现代文：初八，在中书省宴饮近臣。十六日，在东北郊大阅军队。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, a banquet was held for close vassals in Zhongshu. On the 16th day, a grand military parade was held in the northeastern suburbs.

古文：丙寅，大阅于东北郊。
现代文：二十三日，谕厉去世。
English: He died on the 23rd.

古文：癸酉，杨砺卒。乙亥，以太师赠济阳郡王曹彬配飨太祖庙庭，司空赠太尉中书令薛居正、忠武军节度使赠中书令潘美、右仆射赠侍中石熙载配飨太宗庙庭。
现代文：二十五日，追赠济阳郡王曹彬为太师，配祭太祖庙，追赠太尉中书令薛居正为司空、中书令潘美为忠武军节度使、侍中石熙载为右仆射，三人配祭太宗庙。
English: On the 25th, Wang Cao Bin of Jiyang County was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and a matching offering was made to the Grand Ancestor's Temple, while the following were also posthumously awarded: First Lieutenant of the Middle Shogunate, Xue Jizheng, was awarded the title of Sikyong, the Middle Shogunate, Pan Mei, was awarded the title of Festival Delegate of the Loyal Military, and the Servant of the Middle Shogunate, Shi Xizhe, was awarded the title of Right Footman, and three people were awarded the matching offering to the Grand Ancestor's Temple.

古文：九月庚辰朔，日有食之。戊子，召宗室宴射后苑。
现代文：九月初一，日食。初九，召宗室宴射后苑。
English: On the first day of September, the solar eclipse. On the ninth day of the first month, the family reunion banquet was held in the backyard.

古文：甲午，奉安太宗圣容于启圣院新殿，帝拜而恸，左右皆掩泣。
现代文：十五日，恭敬安置太宗遗像于启圣院新殿，真宗拜而哭，左右大臣都流下了眼泪。
English: On the fifteenth day, the remains of Emperor Taizong were respectfully placed in the new hall of the Kai Sheng Yuan. Zhen Zong bowed and wept, and the ministers on both sides shed tears.

古文：赐修殿内侍缗钱。
现代文：赐给修殿内侍络钱。
English: Give money to the attendants in the sanctuary.

古文：癸卯，幸骐骥院，赐从官马，还，宴射后苑。
现代文：二十四日，到琪骥院，赐给从官马，回来时在后苑设宴射箭。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he went to Kichijoji-in, and was given a horse from the government, and when he came back, he held a banquet in the backyard for archery.

古文：镇、定都部署言败契丹兵于廉良路，杀获甚众。
现代文：镇州、定州都部署报告说在廉良路打败契丹军队，杀死俘获甚多。
English: Zhenzhou and Dingzhou are deployed to report that they defeated the Khitan army in Lianliang Road, killing and capturing a lot.

古文：冬十月壬子，宜州执溪峒蛮酋三十余人诣阙，诏释其罪，遣还。
现代文：冬十月初三，宜州捕获溪酮蛮酋长三十多人送到朝廷，下诏释放他们，遣送回家。
English: On the third day of October in winter, more than thirty Kiketone barbarian chiefs captured in Yizhou were sent to the imperial court, and they were ordered to be released and sent home.

古文：癸丑，放澧州蛮界归业民租。
现代文：初四，免除遭州蛮境内归业百姓租税。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, the people who returned to work in the state were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：戊午，置福建路惠民仓。
现代文：初九，设置福建路惠民仓。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, the Fujian Road Benefit Warehouse was set up.

古文：十一月壬午，诏亲王领大都督府节镇者勿兼长史。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏亲王领大都督府节镇者不得兼长史。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, it was decreed that the prince who led the great prefectural festival must not have a long history.

古文：乙酉，飨太庙。
现代文：初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：丙戌，祀天地于圜丘，以太祖、太宗配，大赦天下，录功臣子孙之无禄者。
现代文：初七，在圆丘祭祀天地，配以太祖、太宗，大赦天下，录用功臣子孙之无棒禄者。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, in the round mound, the heavens and the earth are sacrificed, with the ancestors and the great patriarchs, the world is pardoned, and the sons and grandsons of the heroes are recruited.

古文：御朝元殿，受尊号册。
现代文：到朝元殿接受尊号册。
English: They went to the Chogen-den to receive the honor roll.

古文：丁亥，赐群臣带服、鞍马、器币有差。
现代文：初八，赐给大臣带服、鞍马、器币不等。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the minister was given a suit of clothes, a pommel horse, and money.

古文：庚寅，大宴含光殿。
现代文：十一日，大宴于含光殿。
English: On the 11th day, a grand banquet was held at the Hall of Illumination.

古文：壬辰，张齐贤加门下侍郎，李沆加中书侍郎，中外臣悉加恩。
现代文：十三日，张齐贤加官门下侍郎，李杭加官中书侍郎，中外臣僚都加恩赏。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Qixian was promoted to the official's footman, Li Hang was promoted to the official's secretary, and both Chinese and foreign ministers were rewarded.

古文：甲午，以左神武军大将军德恭为左卫大将军，左卫大将军德彝为左神武军大将军。
现代文：十五日，任命左神武军大将军赵德恭为左卫大将军，左卫大将军赵德彝为左神武军大将军。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Deqong, General of the Left Shenwu Army, was appointed General of the Left Guard, and General of the Left Guard, Zhao Dejun, was appointed General of the Left Shenwu Army.

古文：乙未，诏：幸河北，所次顿舍给用，毋泛及州县。
现代文：十六日，下诏：到河北，所到之地费用开支，不要让州县出。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: If you go to Hebei, do not leave the prefectures and counties out of your travel expenses.

古文：以周莹为驾前军都部署，石保吉为行营先锋都部署。
现代文：任命周莹为驾前军都部署，石保吉为行营先锋都部署。
English: Zhou Ying was appointed as the vanguard of the deployment, and Shi Baoji as the vanguard of the deployment.

古文：己亥，狩近郊。
现代文：二十日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 20th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：辛丑，赐京城父老衣帛。
现代文：二十二日，赐给京城父老衣帛。
English: On the twenty-second day, he gave clothing and shoes to the elderly people of Beijing.

古文：戊申，以魏咸信为贝、冀行营都部署。
现代文：二十九日，任命魏咸信为贝州冀州行营都部署。
English: On the 29th, Wei Xianxin was appointed to be deployed to Beizhou and Jizhou.

古文：己酉，以李沆为东京留守。
现代文：三十日，任命李杭为东京留守。
English: On the 30th, Li Hang was appointed to stay in Tokyo.

古文：十二月辛亥，赐近臣戎服、厩马。
现代文：十二月初二，赐给近臣戎服和战马。
English: On the second day of the twelfth month, he gave his closest vassals military uniforms and horses.

古文：甲寅，驾发京师，次陈桥。
现代文：初五，真宗从京城出发，到达陈桥。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shinshu departed from Kyoto and arrived at Chenqiao.

古文：王昭远卒。
现代文：王昭远去世。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan passed away.

古文：戊午，驻跸澶州。
现代文：初九，到达擅州，停留于此。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, he arrived in Gwangju and stayed there.

古文：冀州言败契丹兵于城南，杀千余人，夺马百余匹。
现代文：冀州报告说在城南打败契丹军，杀死一千多人，夺得马百余匹。
English: Jizhou reported that it had defeated the Khitan army in the south of the city, killing more than a thousand people and capturing more than a hundred horses.

古文：辛酉，宴从臣于行宫。以王超等督先锋，仍示以阵图，俾识部分。
现代文：十二日，在行宫宴饮从臣。任命王超等督率先锋，并出示给他阵图，使之认清所部。
English: On the twelfth day, he invited his vassals to a banquet at the palace. He appointed Wang Chao and other governors to take the lead, and showed him the line of battle so that he could recognize his position.

古文：壬戌，赐近臣甲胄、弓剑。
现代文：十三日，赐给近臣甲青弓剑。
English: On the thirteenth day, he gave his close vassal, Jiaqing, a bow and sword.

古文：幸浮桥，登临河亭，赐澶州父老锦袍、茶帛。
现代文：到浮桥，登临河亭，赐给擅州父老锦袍、茶帛。
English: To the pontoon bridge, boarded the river pavilion, and gave the old brocade robe and tea caddy to the old man.

古文：甲子，次大名，躬御铠甲于中军。
现代文：十五日，到达大名，真宗在中军披上恺甲。
English: On the fifteenth day, arriving at Daimyo, Shinsong put on armor in the Chinese army.

古文：契丹攻威虏军，本军击败之，杀其酋帅。
现代文：契丹军进攻威虏军，被中军击败，杀死契丹将帅。
English: The Khitan army attacked the Tyrian army, was defeated by the Chinese army, and killed the Khitan general.

古文：府州言官军入契丹五合川，拔黄太尉砦，歼其众，焚其车帐，获马牛万计。
现代文：府州报告说官军进人契丹五合川，攻取黄太尉碧，歼灭其众，焚其车帐，俘获马牛以万计。
English: Fuzhou reported that the government army marched into the Wuhe River in Qidan, captured Huang Taiyi Bi, annihilated his people, burned his wagons, and captured tens of thousands of horses and cattle.

古文：丁卯，召见大名府父老，劳赐之。
现代文：十八日，召见大名府父老，慰劳赏赐。
English: On the 18th, Daimyo (feudal lords) were summoned and rewarded for their hard work.

古文：是岁，沙州蕃族首领、邛部川蛮、西南蕃、占城、大食国来贡。
现代文：这一年，沙州蕃族首领、邓部川蛮、西南蕃、占城、大食国来进贡。
English: In this year, the leaders of the Shan ethnic group in Shazhou, Dengbe Chuanman, Xuanxi Shan, Zhancheng and Daxi Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：江、浙、广南、荆湖旱，岚州春霜害稼，分使发粟振之。
现代文：江、浙、广南、荆湖早灾，岚州春霜损害庄稼，分别派人开仓贩济。
English: Early disasters in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Guangnan and Jinghu, and spring frost damage to crops in Ganzhou, respectively, sent people to open warehouses to sell.

古文：三年春正月己卯朔，驻跸大名府。
现代文：咸平三年春正月初一，停留大名府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Xianping, he stayed at Damingfu.

古文：诏并、代都部署高琼等分屯冀州、邢州。
现代文：下诏并代都部署高琼等分屯冀州、邢州。
English: The following edict also deployed Gao Qiong and other sub-districts to Jizhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：辛巳，临视枢密副使宋湜疾。
现代文：初三，亲自探视枢密副使宋的病情。
English: On the third day of the first month, he personally visited the illness of Song, the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：癸未，以葛霸为贝、冀、高阳关前军行营都部署。
现代文：初五，任命葛霸为贝州、冀州、高阳关前军行营都部署。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Ge Ba was appointed as the commander of Beizhou, Jizhou and Gaoyangguan.

古文：莱州防御使田绍斌凡十人以功进秩。
现代文：莱州防御使田绍斌共十人因功得到升迁。
English: The defense of Laizhou made Tian Shaobin a total of ten people get promoted for their merits.

古文：契丹犯河间，高阳关都部署康保裔死之。
现代文：契丹侵犯河间，高阳关都部署康保裔战死。
English: Khitan invade Kawama, Kanyakumari are deployed to Goyang Pass, and Kanyakumari die in battle.

古文：乙酉，流忠武军节度使傅潜于房州、都钤辖张昭允于通州，并削夺官爵。
现代文：初七，忠武军节度使傅潜流放到房州，都铃辖张昭允流放通州，都被削夺官爵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Fu Xian was exiled to Fangzhou, and Zhang Zhaoyun was exiled to Tongzhou, both of which were stripped of their titles.

古文：丁亥，幸紫极宫，还，登子城阅骑射。
现代文：初九，到紫极宫，回来时登上小城检阅骑射。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, I went to the Purple Palace, and when I came back, I boarded the small city to inspect the riding and shooting.

古文：高阳关、贝、冀路都部署范廷召等追契丹至莫州，斩首万余级。
现代文：高阳关、贝冀路都部署范廷召等追契丹到莫州，斩首万余级。
English: Gaoyang Pass and Beiji Road have deployed Fan Ting Zhao and others to pursue Qidan to Mozhou, beheading more than 10,000 people.

古文：庚寅，赦河北及淄、齐州罪人，非持杖劫盗、谋故杀、枉法赃、十恶至死者并释之。
现代文：十二日，赦免河北和淄州、齐州罪人，除持杖劫盗、故意谋杀、贪赃枉法、十恶至死者外，都予以释放。
English: On the 12th, the criminals of Hebei, Zhangzhou and Qi were pardoned, and they were all released except those who committed robbery with a cane, intentional murder, bribery, the ten evils and the dead.

古文：录将吏死事者子孙，民被焚掠者复其租。
现代文：录用将吏战死者子孙，百姓遭焚掠者免除租税。
English: The sons and daughters of generals and officers who died in the war will be hired, and the people who were burned and plundered will be exempt from tax.

古文：罢缘边二十三州军榷酤。
现代文：废除沿边二十三州军榷酣。
English: The military conscription of 23 states along the border will be abolished.

古文：令诸州举吏民有武艺及材力过人者。
现代文：命令各州推举吏民有武艺和才力过人者。
English: Ordered the states to nominate officials with superior martial arts skills and abilities.

古文：壬辰，宋湜卒。
现代文：十四日，宋去世。
English: Song passed away on the 14th.

古文：甲午，发大名府。
现代文：十六日，从大名府出发。
English: On the 16th, they set out from Daimyo-fu.

古文：益州军变，害钤辖符昭寿，逐知州牛冕等，推都虞候王均为首作乱。
现代文：益州发生军变，杀害铃辖符昭寿，驱逐知州牛冕等，推举都虞候王均为叛乱首领。
English: There was a military coup in Yizhou, and the rebel leaders were the ringmaster Zhaozhou, who was killed, and the governor of Zhizhou, Niu Guorong, who was expelled, and the governor of the capital, Guo Wang, who was elected.

古文：诏户部使雷有终为庐州观察使，帅师会李惠等讨之，均闭城门固守。
现代文：下诏户部使雷有终为沪州观察使，率军会同李惠等讨伐，王均关闭城门坚守。
English: In the following edict, Lei You, the envoy of the household department, finally became the observer of Huzhou, and led the army to join the crusade with Li Hui and others. Wang Jun closed the city gate and stood firm.

古文：庚子，至自大名府。
现代文：二十二日，从大名府回到京城。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to Kyoto from Daimyo-fu.

古文：戊申，幸吕端第视疾。
现代文：三十日，到吕端家探视病情。
English: On the 30th, he went to Lydan's home to check on his condition.

古文：二月庚申，宴含光殿。
现代文：二月十二日，宴饮含光殿。
English: On February 12th, the banquet at the Hall of Light was over.

古文：辛酉，诏： 近臣并知杂御史、尚书省五品及带馆阁三司职者，各举升朝官有武干堪边任一人。 
现代文：十三日，下诏： 近臣并知杂御史、尚书省五品官及带馆阁三司职者，推举升朝官有武艺可以担任边境地区官职者一人。 
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: Those who are close vassals and know miscellaneous history, those who are five grade officials of Shangshu Province and those who are in charge of the three departments of the cabinet, and those who have martial arts can serve as officials in the border area.

古文：癸亥，以周莹为宣徽南院使，王继英为北院使，并知枢密院事。王旦为给事中，同知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命周莹为宣徽南院使，王继英为北院使，都为知枢密院事；王旦为给事中，同知枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, Zhou Ying was appointed as the envoy to the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui, and Wang Jieying was appointed as the envoy to the Northern Yuan, both of which were the official of the Privy Council; Wang Dan was appointed as the official of the Privy Council of Tongzhi.

古文：乙丑，以王显为定州路行营都部署，王超为镇州路行营都部署。
现代文：十七日，任命王显为定州路行营都部署，王超为镇州路行营都部署。
English: On the 17th, Wang Xian was appointed as the commander of Dingzhou Road, and Wang Chao was appointed as the commander of Zhenzhou Road.

古文：丁卯，益州王均开城伪遁，雷有终等入城，为所败，退保汉州，李惠死之。
现代文：十九日，益州王均开城佯装逃跑，雷有终等人城被他打败，退保汉州，李惠战死。
English: On the 19th, Yizhou Wang Jun opened the city and pretended to run away. Lei You finally defeated the city and withdrew to Hanzhou. Li Hui died in the battle.

古文：戊辰，京畿旱，虑囚。
现代文：二十日，京瓷早灾，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 20th, Kyocera suffered an early disaster, and the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：癸酉，大雨。
现代文：二十五日，降大雨。
English: On the 25th, it rained heavily.

古文：甲戌，置静乐军。
现代文：二十六日，设置静乐军。
English: On the 26th, the Jingle Army was set up.

古文：丙子，赏花苑中，召从臣宴射。
现代文：二十八日，在苑中观赏花卉，召从臣设宴射箭。
English: On the 28th, he watched the flowers in the garden and invited his vassals to a feast of archery.

古文：三月戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲午，御崇政殿试礼部贡举人。
现代文：十七日，到崇政殿策试礼部贡举人。
English: On the 17th, people came to pay their respects at the ceremonial section of the Great Hall of the People.

古文：夏四月戊申朔，赐进士陈尧咨等袍笏。庚戌，吕端薨。
现代文：夏四月初一，赐进士陈尧咨等袍易。初三，吕端去世。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Chen Xizhe was given a robe. On the third day of the first month, Lü Duan passed away.

古文：甲寅，阅河北防城举人康克勤等击射。
现代文：初七，检阅河北防城举人康克勤等击射。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the inspection of the Hebei Defense City was held.

古文：乙卯，葬元德皇太后。
现代文：初八，葬元德皇太后。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, the German Empress Dowager was buried.

古文：丁巳，以葛霸为邠、宁、环、庆都部署。
现代文：初十，任命葛霸为宁环庆都部署。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Ge Ba was appointed as the leader of Ninghu Qingdu deployment.

古文：壬申，前知益州牛冕、西川转运使张适并削籍，冕流儋州，适为连州参军。
现代文：二十五日，前知益州牛冕、西川转运使张适都被削籍，牛冕流放澹州，张适为连州参军。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the former Zhiyizhou Cattle Crown and the West River Transshipment Envoy Zhang Shiyi were both deregistered, the Cattle Crown was exiled to Ganzhou, and Zhang Shiyi joined the army in Lianzhou.

古文：五月丁卯，诏天下死罪减一等，流以下释之，十恶至死、谋故劫杀、坐赃枉法者论如律。
现代文：五月丁卯日，下诏天下死罪囚犯减罪一等，流刑以下释放，十恶至死、故意谋杀、贪赃枉法者按律论处。
English: On May 18th, it was decreed that the death penalty prisoners in the world would have their crimes reduced to the first degree, and they would be exiled or released. Those who committed the ten evils up to death, intentional murder, and corruption would be dealt with according to the law.

古文：幸玉津园观刈麦。
现代文：到玉津园观赏割麦。
English: Come to Tamatsuen Garden to watch the cutting of the barley.

古文：己丑，幸金明池观水嬉，遂幸琼林苑宴射。
现代文：十三日，到金明池观赏水嬉，于是到琼林苑设宴射箭。
English: On the 13th, they went to Jinming Pond to enjoy the water, and then went to Qionglin Garden to have an archery banquet.

古文：壬寅，御试河北举人。
现代文：二十六日，亲自策试河北举人。
English: On the 26th, he personally tried to raise people from Hebei Province.

古文：河决郓州，诏徙州城。
现代文：黄河在邪州决口，下诏迁徙州城。
English: The Yellow River breaks at the mouth of Yanzhou and flows down to the city of Yanzhou.

古文：六月己未，太白昼见。
现代文：六月十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On June 14th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁卯，以向敏中为河北、河东宣抚使，按巡郡国，存慰士民。
现代文：二十二日，任命向敏中为河北、河东宣抚使，视察郡国，慰问士民。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Xiang Minzhong as the envoy of Hebei and Hedong, inspected the county, and consoled the people.

古文：秋七月己亥，以翰林侍读学士夏侯峤、侍讲邢昺为江、浙巡抚使。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，任命翰林侍读学士夏侯娇、侍讲邢簌为江、浙巡抚使。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, Hanlin was appointed as the attendant of the bachelor Xia Houjiao, the attendant of the lecturer Yu Weijiang, and the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：八月辛亥，京东水灾，遣使安抚。
现代文：八月初七，京东水灾，派官吏视察安抚。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, officials were sent to inspect and pacify the floods in Jingdong.

古文：九月庚辰，赐契丹降人萧肯头名怀忠，为右领军卫将军、严州刺史；招鹘名从化，为右监门卫将军；虫哥名从顺，为千牛卫将军。
现代文：九月初六，赐给契丹投降宋朝的萧肯头名怀忠，为右领军卫将军、严州刺史；招鹊名从化，为右监门卫将军；虫哥名从顺，为千牛卫将军。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, Xiao Ken, who surrendered to the Khitan and Song dynasties, was given the names of Huazhong, the right leader of the military guard, and Yan Zhou, the right leader of the military guard; Zhaoyuan, the right leader of the military guard, was given the name of Zonghua, the right leader of the military guard; Zhugego, the right leader of the military guard, was given the name of Zongshun, the right leader of the military guard; and Zhugego, the right leader of the military guard, was given the name of Zongshun, the right leader of

古文：壬辰，幸大相国寺，遂宴射玉津园。
现代文：十八日，到大相国寺，于是到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 18th, he went to the Daisho Koku-ji Temple, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden to hold a banquet and shoot arrows.

古文：壬寅，卫国公张永德薨。
现代文：二十八日，卫国公张永德逝世。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Yongde passed away.

古文：冬十月甲辰，雷有终大败贼党，复益州，杀三千余人。
现代文：冬十月初一，雷有终大败叛党，收复益州，杀死叛兵三千多人。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Lei You finally defeated the rebel party, recovered Yizhou, and killed more than three thousand rebels.

古文：壬子，绵、汉都巡检、澄州刺史张思钧削籍流封州。
现代文：初九，绵、汉都巡检、澄州刺史张思钧削籍流放封州。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Mian, the Han capital inspection, and Zhang Siyuan, the chief historian of Chengdu, were expelled and exiled to Fuzhou.

古文：乙卯，幸元份宫视疾。
现代文：十二日，到赵元份宫探视病情。
English: On the 12th, he went to Zhao Yuanpeng's palace to check on his condition.

古文：令诸州兼群牧。
现代文：命令各州长官兼群牧使。
English: He ordered the governors and herdsmen to leave.

古文：己未，滨州防御使王荣削籍流均州。
现代文：十六日，滨州防御史王荣削籍流放均州。
English: On the 16th, Shi Wang Rong, who defended Binzhou, was stripped of his citizenship and exiled to Junzhou.

古文：己丑，雷有终追斩王均于富顺监，禽其党六千余人。
现代文：二十六日，雷有终在富顺监追斩王均，俘获党羽六千多人。
English: On the 26th, Lei You finally chased and beheaded Wang Jun in Fushun Prison, capturing more than six thousand party members.

古文：诏原川峡路系囚杂犯死罪以下。
现代文：下诏赦免川峡路死罪以下囚犯。
English: The following edict pardons the following prisoners of the death penalty in Chuanxia Road.

古文：雷有终等以功进秩有差。
现代文：雷有终等因战功升迁不等。
English: Lei was promoted to the final grade due to his war service.

古文：丙寅，以翰林学士王钦若、知制诰梁颢分为川、峡安抚使。
现代文：丙寅日，任命翰林学士王钦若、知制浩梁颖分别为川、峡安抚使。
English: On Hsin Yin Day, Hanlin Baccalaureate Wang Qin Ruo and Zhizhe Hao Liang Ying were appointed as the river and gorge pacification envoys respectively.

古文：延州言破大卢、小卢等十族，获人畜二十万。
现代文：延州报告说攻破大卢、小卢等十族，俘获人畜二十万。
English: Yanzhou reported that it had defeated ten tribes, including the Greater Lu and Lesser Lu, and captured 200,000 people and animals.

古文：十一月甲戌，环、庆副部署徐兴削籍配郢州。
现代文：十一月初一，环庆副部署徐兴削籍流放即州。
English: On the first day of November, Xu Xing, vice-delegate of Huanqing, was demoted and exiled to Zhoushou.

古文：乙亥，灵州副部署孙进责授复州团练副使。
现代文：初二，灵州副部署孙进贬降为复州团练副使。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Sun Jin, the vice-delegate from Lingzhou, was demoted to vice-envoy of the Fuzhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：郓州决河塞。
现代文：军仔州黄河决口堵住。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River in Junzi County has been blocked.

古文：戊寅，均畿内田税。
现代文：初五，京瓷均田税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Kyocera's field tax is due.

古文：壬午，诏群臣尽言无讳，常参官转对如故事，未预次对者听封事以闻。
现代文：初九，下诏大臣直言无讳，常参官如往常一样到殿堂陈述意见，没有在朝廷上陈述意见的官员允许密封奏章上报。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, the minister of the imperial rescript was outspoken, and the senior officials went to the hall of fame to state their opinions as usual. Officials who did not state their opinions in the imperial court were allowed to report the report under seal.

古文：辛卯，日南至，御朝元殿受朝。
现代文：十八日，冬至，到朝元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the 18th, the winter solstice, he went to the Asamoto-den to receive morning greetings.

古文：丙申，张齐贤罢为兵部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，张齐贤罢为兵部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Qixian resigned from the military.

古文：十二月戊申，狩近郊，以亲获禽献太庙。
现代文：十二月初五，在近郊狩猎，用亲自获得的猎物献享太庙。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, he hunted in the suburbs and used the prey he personally obtained to offer to the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲寅，大宴含光殿。
现代文：十一日，大宴含光殿。
English: On the 11th day, a grand banquet was held at the Hall of Illumination.

古文：乙卯，幸元份宫视疾。
现代文：十二日，到赵元份宫探视病情。
English: On the 12th, he went to Zhao Yuanpeng's palace to check on his condition.

古文：丁巳，阅武艺，遂宴射苑中。
现代文：十四日，阅试武艺，于是在苑中设宴射箭。
English: On the 14th, the martial arts were tested, so a banquet was held in the garden for archery.

古文：庚申，罢京畿均田税。
现代文：十七日，废罢京瓷均田税。
English: On the 17th, Kyocera's per capita tax was abolished.

古文：育吾蕃部贡嫠牛。
现代文：育吾蕃部贡献神牛。
English: The sacred cow that gave birth to me.

古文：甲子，契丹税木监使黄颙等率属内附，赐冠带。
现代文：二十一日，契丹税木监使黄颐等率所属内附朝廷，赐给冠带。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Khitan tax inspector Huang Qi, who belonged to the imperial court, gave the crown belt.

古文：丙寅，开封府奏狱空，诏嘉之。
现代文：二十三日，开封府上奏狱空，下诏表扬。
English: On the 23rd, the government of Kaifeng was declared vacant, and the following edict was issued commending it.

古文：丁卯，诏河东、北缘边吏民斩边寇首一级支钱五千，禽者倍之，获马者给帛二十匹。
现代文：二十四日，下诏河东、北沿边吏民斩杀边寇首级一只将给钱五千，俘获加倍，俘获马匹者给帛二十匹。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued to the border officials and people along the east and north of the river to behead and kill the first-class border robber, and they would be paid 5,000 yuan, the capture would be doubled, and those who captured horses would be given 20 donkeys.

古文：是岁，高丽、大食国、高州蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、大食国、高州蛮来进贡。
English: This year, Goryeo, Taekwondo, and Gaozhou were the first to pay tribute.

古文：畿内、江南、荆湖旱，果、阆州水，并振之。
现代文：瓷内、江南、荆湖早灾，果州、间州水灾，都予以贩济。
English: The early disasters in China, the south of the Yangtze River and Jinghu Lake, and the floods in Gansu and inter-provincial areas were all caused by trafficking.

古文：四年春正月甲戌朔，诏天下系囚死罪己下减一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：咸平四年春正月初一，下诏天下囚犯死罪以下减罪一等，杖刑释放。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Xianping, it was decreed that the prisoners in the world would be given a first-class reduction of crime below the death penalty, and the cane sentence would be released.

古文：辛巳，幸范廷召第视疾。
现代文：初八，到范廷召家探视病情。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he was summoned to Fan Ting's home to check on his condition.

古文：甲申，命枢密直学士冯拯、陈尧叟详中外封事。
现代文：十一日，命令枢密直学士冯拯、陈尧雯详细审阅中外官员的密封章奏。
English: On the 11th, he ordered Feng Zheng and Chen Yuwen, both Privy Secretaries, to review the sealed transcripts of Chinese and foreign officials in detail.

古文：诏应益州军民因城乱杀伤劫盗，除官吏外，皆释不问。
现代文：下诏益州军民因城中混乱杀伤劫盗，除官吏外都予以释放，不追究。
English: According to the following edict, due to the chaos in the city, the soldiers and civilians of Yizhou were killed and robbed, and all of them except the officials were released without being investigated.

古文：乙酉，命收瘗西川遗骸。
现代文：十二日，命令收埋西川残留尸骸。
English: On the 12th, the order was given to bury the remaining bodies in Saikawa.

古文：丁亥，幸开宝寺，还，御乾天门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到开宝寺，回时到乾天门观灯。
English: On the 14th, I went to Kaiboji Temple and then went back to Kentenmon Gate to see the lanterns.

古文：庚子，谒启圣院太宗神御殿。
现代文：二十七日，朝拜启圣院太宗神御殿。
English: On the 27th, the morning worship began at the Imperial Palace of the Taisho-in Temple.

古文：二月丁未，祈雨。
现代文：二月初五，祈祷降雨。
English: On the fifth day of the second lunar month, pray for rain.

古文：戊申，交州黎桓贡驯犀象。
现代文：初六，交州黎桓进贡驯犀驯象。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, Jiaozhou Li Huan paid tribute to train rhinoceroses and elephants.

古文：癸丑，决天下狱。
现代文：十一日，处理天下狱案。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the world prison case was dealt with.

古文：丁巳，幸大相国寺、上清宫祈雨。
现代文：十五日，到大相国寺、上清宫祈祷降雨。
English: On the fifteenth day, I went to the Daisho Koku-ji Temple and the Upper Qing Palace to pray for rain.

古文：戊午，雨，帝方临轩决事，沾服不御盖。
现代文：十六日，降雨，真宗正临轩决事，雨水淋湿了衣服，不打伞。
English: On the 16th day of the month, it rained, and Shinsong was in the middle of a meeting. His clothes were wet from the rain, so he didn't take an umbrella.

古文：壬戌，诏群臣子弟奏补京官者试一经。
现代文：二十日，下诏大臣子弟奏补京官者考试一经。
English: On the 20th day of the following month, the minister's son passed the exam to become a Beijing official.

古文：甲子，释逋负官物者二千六百余人，蠲逋负物二百六十余万。已纳而非理者以内府钱还之，没者给其家。
现代文：二十二日，释放拖欠官物者二千六百多人，免除他们拖欠的钱物二百六十余万；已经督纳而非理者，用内库钱归还，身段者给其家。
English: On the 22nd, more than 2,600 people who were in arrears of public property were released, and more than 2.6 million yuan of money and goods were exempted from their arrears; those who had been punished and unreasonable were returned with the money in the treasury, and those who were in debt were given to their families.

古文：丙寅，诏学士、两省御史台五品、尚书省诸司四品以上，举贤良方正直言敢谏一人。
现代文：二十四日，下诏学士、两省御史台五品以上、尚书省各司四品以上官员，推举贤良方正直言敢谏一人。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the academicians of the Lower Zhao, the officials of the two provinces with more than five prizes of the Imperial History Station, and the officials of the four departments of the Shangshu Province with more than four prizes of the Imperial History Station were elected.

古文：己巳，置永利监。
现代文：二十七日，设置永利监。
English: On the 27th, Yongli Supervisor was set up.

古文：三月甲戌，抚水州蛮酋蒙瑛等来纳兵器、毒药箭，誓不复犯边。
现代文：三月初二，抚水州蛮首领蒙瑛等来缴纳兵器和毒药箭，发誓不再侵犯边境。
English: On the second day of March, Meng Ying, the leader of the Fushui State barbarians, came to pay weapons and poison arrows, and vowed not to violate the border again.

古文：乙亥，诏史馆韩瑗等举御史台推勘官。
现代文：初三，下诏史馆韩缓等推举御史台推勘官。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Han Xuan of the Zhao History Museum and others were elected as inspectors of the Imperial History Museum.

古文：丁丑，风雪，帝谓宰相曰： 霾曀颇甚，卿等思阙政，以佐予治。 
现代文：初五，刮风下雪，真宗对宰相说： 天气很不正常，你们考虑一下朝政弊端，帮助我治理国家。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month, when the wind was blowing and snow was falling, Zhenzong said to the prime minister: "The weather is very abnormal, you should consider the shortcomings of the government and help me govern the country."

古文：李沆等乞免官，不许。
现代文：李杭等请求免官没有得到同意。
English: Li Hang and others' request to be relieved of duty was not approved.

古文：辛巳，分川峡转运使为益、利、梓、夔四路。
现代文：初九，分川峡转运使为益、利、梓、夔四路。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the diversion of the Wenchuan Gorge will benefit, benefit, benefit and benefit the four roads.

古文：召终南隐士种放，辞疾不至。
现代文：召终南山隐士种放，以疾病推辞不至。
English: Calling the last Nanshan hermit to seed release, illness is not an excuse.

古文：庚寅，左仆射吕蒙正、兵部侍郎向敏中并平章事，中书侍郎、平章事李沆加门下侍郎。高琼为殿前都指挥使，葛霸为侍卫马军都指挥使，王汉忠为殿前副都指挥使，并领节度。
现代文：十八日，左仆射吕蒙正、兵部侍郎向敏中为平章事，中书侍郎、平章事李杭加官门下侍郎；高琼为殿前都指挥使，葛霸为侍卫马军都指挥使，王汉忠为殿前副都指挥使，并领节度。
English: On the 18th, the left-hand servant Sho Lyu Mengzheng, the attendant of the military department, Xiang Minzhong, were the attendants of the Taira chapter, the attendant of the Chinese book, the attendant of the Taira chapter, Li Hangjia, and the attendant of the official; Gao Qiong was the commander of the palace, Ge Ba was the commander of the guards and the horse army, and Wang Hanzhong was the deputy commander of the palace, and led the festival.

古文：司天监进《仪天历》。
现代文：司天监进呈农天厉。
English: The chief overseer of heaven and earth presented an agrarian plan.

古文：辛卯，以参知政事王化基为工部尚书，同知枢密院事王旦为工部侍郎、参知政事，枢密直学士冯拯、陈尧叟并为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
现代文：十九日，任命参知政事王化基为工部尚书，同知枢密院事王旦为工部侍郎、参知政事，枢密直学士冯拯、陈尧雯为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事。
English: On the 19th, Wang Huaji, the political secretary of the governor, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, Wang Dan, the secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed as the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and the political secretary of the governor, Feng Zheng, the direct bachelor of the Privy Council, and Chen Yuwen was appointed as the doctor of the right leg and the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：夏四月丙午，葛霸为并、代行营都部署。
现代文：夏四月初五，葛霸为并代行营都部署。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Geba was deployed as a parallel camp.

古文：壬子，诏亲老无兼侍者特与近任。
现代文：十一日，下诏京朝官和吏部选人，家里双亲年老没有人照顾者特就近任职。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict was issued to select officials and cadres for the imperial court in Beijing. Elderly people with no one to take care of them at home were especially encouraged to work nearby.

古文：回鹘可汗禄胜贡玉勒鞍、名马、宝器，愿以兵助讨继迁。
现代文：回鹊可汗禄胜进贡玉勒鞍、名马、宝器，愿意出兵帮助朝廷讨伐李继迁。
English: Lu Xun, the Khan of Guizhou, won the tribute of a jade saddle, a famous horse, and a treasure, and was willing to send troops to help the imperial court fight against Li Jiji.

古文：丙辰，审官院引对京朝官，阅殿最而黜陟之。
现代文：十五日，审官院引对京朝官，考察其好坏而予以升降。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Inquisitor's Court brought the officials from Beijing to examine their qualities and promoted and demoted them.

古文：己未，以王钦若为左谏议大夫、参知政事。
现代文：十八日，任命王钦若为左谏议大夫、参知政事。
English: On the 18th, Wang Qinruo was appointed as the doctor of the Left Consultative Council and the political advisor.

古文：庚申，幸元份宫视疾，遂幸诸王宫。
现代文：十九日，到赵元份宫探视病情，于是到诸王宫。
English: On the 19th, he went to Zhao Yuanpeng's palace to check on his condition, and then went to Zhuo Wang's palace.

古文：辛未，御试制科举人。
现代文：三十日，京自策试制科举人。
English: On the 30th, Beijing's self-imposed trial system for selecting candidates for the exam began.

古文：五月壬申朔，御乾元殿受朝。
现代文：五月初一，到乾元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of May, he came to Kogen-den to receive morning greetings.

古文：京畿系囚罪流以下递减一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：京瓷囚犯流罪以下递减一等，杖刑释放。
English: The crime of expelling prisoners from Kyocera will be reduced by one grade, and they will be released with a cane.

古文：癸酉，以元俨为平海军节度使。
现代文：初二，任命赵元俨为平海军节度使。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Zhao Yuanjun was appointed as the chief of staff of the PLA Navy.

古文：甲申，工部侍郎致仕朱昂对便殿，赐器币。
现代文：十三日，工部侍郎退休的朱昂在便殿回答真宗询问，赐给器币。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Ang, a retired attendant of the Ministry of Industry, answered the inquiry of the True Sect in the toilet hall and gave the coins.

古文：戊子，亳州贡白兔，还之。
现代文：十七日，毫州进贡白兔，还给毫州。
English: On the 17th, Baizhou paid tribute to Baiyan and returned it to Baizhou.

古文：乙未，大同军留后桑赞为侍卫步军副都指挥使，领河西军节度。
现代文：二十四日，大同军留后桑赞为侍卫步军副都指挥使，领河西军节度。
English: On the 24th, after the Datong Army left, Sanzan became the deputy commander of the bodyguard and infantry army, leading the West River Army to the festival.

古文：六月癸卯，有司言减天下冗吏凡十九万五千余人。
现代文：六月初三，有关部门报告说减天下冗吏十九万五千余人。
English: At the beginning of June 3, the relevant departments reported that more than 195,000 redundant officials had been reduced.

古文：丁巳，诏东川民田先为江水所害者除其租。
现代文：十七日，下诏原来被江水浸害的东川民田免除其租税。
English: On the 17th, it was announced that the Dongchuan people's field, which was originally flooded by the river, would be exempted from tax.

古文：丁卯，诏州县学校及聚徒讲诵之所，并赐《九经》。
现代文：二十七日，下诏赐给州县学校和聚徒讲授之所九经。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued to the state and county schools and congregations teaching the Nine Classics.

古文：戊申，出阵图示宰相，命督将练士，以备北边。
现代文：戊申日，向宰相出示阵图，命令督促将领训练士兵，防备北部边境。
English: On Boxing Day, he showed the map to the Prime Minister and ordered him to urge the generals to train soldiers to guard the northern border.

古文：秋七月庚午，以河朔馈运劳民，诏转运使减徭役存恤。
现代文：秋七月初一，因河朔运粮劳累百姓，下诏转运使减摇役，慰问抚恤。
English: On the first day of the first month of the autumn and the first day of the seventh month, because the people were exhausted by the grain transportation in Hexuo, the next edict was issued to reduce the work of transportation, and the condolence allowance was increased.

古文：己卯，边臣言契丹谋入寇。
现代文：初十，边臣报告说契丹想南侵。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the border guard reported that the Khitan wanted to invade the south.

古文：以王显为镇、定、高阳关三路都部署，王超为副都部署，王汉忠为都排阵使。
现代文：任命王显为镇州、定州、高阳关三路都部署，王超为副都部署，王汉忠为都排阵使。
English: Appointed Wang Xian as Zhenzhou, Dingzhou, and Gaoyanggu three-way deployment, Wang Chao as deputy deployment, and Wang Hanzhong as capital formation envoy.

古文：八月辛丑，张齐贤为泾、原等州安抚经略使。
现代文：八月初二，张齐贤为径、原等州安抚经略使。
English: On the second day of August, Zhang Qixian became the path, and the original and other states pacified the situation.

古文：戊申，出环庆至灵州地图险要示宰相，议战守方略。
现代文：初九，向宰相出示环庆至灵州地图险要，讨论战守方略。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, he showed the prime minister the map of Huanqing to Lingshou, and discussed the defense strategy.

古文：己酉，御试制科举人。
现代文：初十，亲自策试制科举人。
English: He was in his early teens when he decided to try out for the examination.

古文：壬子，幸开宝寺。
现代文：十三日，到开宝寺。
English: On the 28th, he went to Kaiboji Temple.

古文：又幸御龙营阅武艺，赐缗钱有差。
现代文：又到御龙营阅试武艺，赐给士卒络钱不等。
English: He also went to the Dragon Camp to read and try martial arts, and gave money to the soldiers.

古文：遂观稼北郊，宴射于含芳园。
现代文：然后到北郊观赏庄稼，在含芳园设宴射箭。
English: Then they went to the northern suburbs to see the crops, and had a banquet and played archery in the Ganfangyuan.

古文：丁卯，遣使巴蜀，廉察风俗、官吏能否。
现代文：二十八日，派人到巴蜀，查访风俗、官吏贤能与否。
English: On the 28th, someone was sent to Bashu to investigate the customs and the ability of the officials.

古文：戊辰，社，宴宰相于中书。九月，庆州地震。
现代文：二十九日，在中书省宴宰相。九月，庆州地震。
English: On the 29th, the Prime Minister of the People's Republic of China held a banquet in Gyeongju. In September, the Gyeongju earthquake occurred.

古文：李继迁陷清远军。
现代文：李继迁攻陷清远军。
English: Li Jiquan led the Qingyuan army to defeat.

古文：冬十月，曹璨以蕃兵邀李继迁辎重于唐龙镇。
现代文：冬十月，曹璨率领蕃兵在唐龙镇截获李继迁瑙重。
English: In the winter of October, Cao Jun led his soldiers to intercept Li Jiqian in Tanglong Town.

古文：己未，张斌破契丹于长城口。
现代文：二十一日，张斌在长城口打败契丹军。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Bin defeated the Khitan army at the mouth of the Great Wall.

古文：十一月壬申，知阶州窦玭献白鹰，还之。
现代文：十一月初五，知阶州窦比进贡白鹰，还给他。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the White Eagle paid tribute to Zhoshu Doubi, and returned it to him.

古文：王显奏破契丹，戮二万人，获统军铁林等。
现代文：王显打败契丹，杀二万人，俘获统军铁林等。
English: Wang Hsien defeated Khitan, killed twenty thousand people, captured the United Army Tielin and so on.

古文：癸未，京城民获金牌，有 赵为君万年 字。
现代文：十六日，京城百姓得到金牌，上面写有 赵为君万年 字样。
English: On the 16th, the people of Beijing won a gold medal with the words "Zhao Weijun 10000 Years" written on it.

古文：庚寅，畋近郊。
现代文：二十三日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 23rd, he went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：甲午，龟兹国来贡。
现代文：二十七日，龟兹国来进贡。
English: On the 27th, tribute came from Kamezi Province.

古文：十二月丁未，诏蜀贼王均既平，除追捕亡命，余诖误之民并释不问。
现代文：十二月初十，下诏：蜀贼王均已经平定，除追捕亡命外，其余连累的百姓都释放不追究。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of December, the following edict was issued: The Shu bandit kings had all been subdued, and except for those who were persecuted to death, the rest of the people who were implicated were released without being investigated.

古文：讹言动众者，有司斩以闻。
现代文：讹言鼓动百姓的，有关部门斩杀后上报。
English: The relevant departments will cut off and report those who are slandering and agitating the people.

古文：丙寅，太白昼见南斗。
现代文：二十九日，太白星白天出现在南斗。
English: On the 29th, Taibai Xing appeared in Nandou during the day.

古文：丁卯，诏罢三路都部署兼河北转运使。
现代文：三十日，下诏废罢三路都部署兼河北转运使。
English: On the 30th, all three routes of the cancelled strike were deployed and transferred to Hebei.

古文：闰月己巳，幸大相国寺。
现代文：闰十二月，到大相国寺。
English: On leap December, I went to Daisho Koku-ji Temple.

古文：丁丑，邠、宁副都部署杨琼等七将流岭南。
现代文：初十，宁副都部署杨琼等七将流放岭南。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Yang Qiong, the vice-premier of Ningdu, and seven others will be exiled to Lingnan.

古文：戊寅，李继迁蕃族讹遇等归顺。
现代文：十一日，李继迁蕃族讹遇等归顺朝廷。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Jiji and other members of the Qiang ethnic group surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：己卯，以兵部尚书张齐贤为右仆射。
现代文：十二日，任命兵部尚书张齐贤为右仆射。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Zhang Qixian as his right-hand man.

古文：壬午，灵州言河外砦主李琼等以城降西夏。
现代文：十五日，灵州报告说河外寨主李琼等率城投降西夏。
English: On the 15th, Lingzhou reported that Li Qiong, the lord of the Hebei Walled City, and others led the city to surrender to Xixia.

古文：上念其力屈就禽，特释其亲属。
现代文：真宗考虑到他力屈被擒，特地释放他的亲属。
English: Taking into account that he had yielded to his captors, Masamune specifically released his relatives.

古文：乙酉，李继迁部族讹猪等率属来附。
现代文：十八日，李继迁部族讹猪率领部属来归附。
English: On the 18th, Li Jiji's tribe, the Warthogs, led by their leader, came to annex the territory.

古文：庚寅，河北饥，蠲赋减役，发廪振之。
现代文：二十三日，河北饥荒，免税减役，开仓贩济。
English: On the 23rd, Hebei suffered from famine, tax exemption and reduction of service, and the opening of warehouses for trading.

古文：是岁，龟兹、丹眉流、宜高上溪抚水州蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，龟兹、丹眉流、宜高上溪抚水州蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Guizi, Danmei Stream, and Yigao Shangxi Fuzhuizhou came to pay tribute.

古文：梓州水，遣使振恤。
现代文：梓州水灾，派遣使臣贩恤。
English: Zizhou floods, sending envoys to peddle shirts.

古文：五年春正月壬寅，李继迁部将卧浪己等内附，给田宅。
现代文：咸平五年春正月初六，李继迁部将卧浪己等内附朝廷，授给田宅。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the spring of the 5th year of the Xianping Emperor, Li Jiji's resettlement department granted the imperial court, including Guolanami, to Tianyao.

古文：壬戌，环、庆部署张凝袭诸蕃，焚族帐二百余，斩首五千级，降九百余人。
现代文：二十六日，环庆部署张凝袭击诸蕃，焚烧帐篷二百余，斩首五千级，九百多人投降。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Jian attacked Zhuye, burned more than 200 tents, beheaded 5,000 people, and more than 900 people surrendered.

古文：二月乙酉，诏边士疾病战没者，冬春衣听给其家。
现代文：二月十九日，下诏边防将士疾病战死者，冬春衣服发给他们的家属。
English: On February 19th, it was announced that the winter and spring clothes of the soldiers who died in the war due to illness would be distributed to their families.

古文：己丑，幸上清宫。
现代文：二十三日，到上清宫。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived at the Shangqing Palace.

古文：以王汉忠为邠宁、环、庆路都部署。
现代文：任命王汉忠为宁环庆路都部署。
English: Wang Hanzhong was appointed as the head of Ninghuangqing Road.

古文：三月丁酉，李继迁陷灵州，知州裴济死之。
现代文：三月初一，李继迁攻陷灵州，知州裴济战死。
English: On the first day of March, Li Jiquan invaded and occupied Lingshou, and Chizhou Peiji died in battle.

古文：庚戌，比部员外郎洪湛削籍流儋州，工部尚书赵昌言责授安远军司马，知杂御史范正辞滁州团练副使。
现代文：十四日，比部员外郎洪湛削籍流放澹州，工部尚书赵昌言贬降为安远军司马，知杂御史范正辞贬降为滁州团练副使。
English: On the 14th, Hong Zhan, a member of the Foreign Affairs Department, was exiled to Bozhou, Zhao Changyan, a member of the Engineering Department, was demoted to the position of Anyuan Army Sima, and Zhizhong Yishi Fan Zhengji was demoted to the position of Bozhou Rehearsal Vice-Envoy.

古文：己未，御试礼部举人。
现代文：二十三日，亲自策试礼部举人。
English: On the 23rd, he personally organized the ceremonial parade.

古文：夏四月壬申，诏陕西民輓送缘边刍粮者，赐租之半。
现代文：夏四月初七，下诏陕西百姓运送北方边境粮草者，免税一半。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of summer, Shaanxi people who transport grain and grass across the northern border will be exempted from half of the tax.

古文：壬午，命三司岁较户口。
现代文：十七日，命令三司每年考核户口。
English: On the 17th, it ordered the three departments to conduct an annual assessment of the account.

古文：丙戌，赐深、霸九州民租有差。
现代文：二十一日，免深州、霸州等九州百姓租税。
English: On the 21st, the people of Shenzhou, Bozhou and other cities in Kyushu were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：癸巳，复雄州榷场。
现代文：二十八日，恢复雄州榷场。
English: On the 28th, the Xiongzhou market resumed.

古文：五月庚子，减河北冗官。
现代文：五月初五，减除河北冗官。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, the redundant officials in Hebei Province were removed.

古文：壬寅，知荣州褚德臻坐盗取官银，弃市。
现代文：初七，荣州知州褚德臻因盗取官银被处斩于闹市。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Rongzhou Chizhou Baidezhen was executed in downtown for stealing government money.

古文：癸卯，置宪州。
现代文：初八，设置宪州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the constitutional state was established.

古文：代州进士李光辅善击剑，诣阙。帝曰： 若奖用之，民悉好剑矣。 
现代文：代州进士李光辅擅长击剑，到朝廷，真宗说： 如果奖励录用，那么百姓都好剑。 送回。
English: Lee Kwang-soo, a candidate for the State Council, was good at fencing, and when he went to the Imperial Court, he said, "If I am hired as a reward, then the people are good at fencing.

古文：遣还。甲辰，诏申明内侍养一子制。
现代文：初九，下诏申明内侍养一子制度。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, the emperor issued an edict stating that the one-child policy would be abolished.

古文：乙巳，蠲天下逋负。
现代文：初十，免除全国拖欠的钱物。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, money and goods in arrears throughout the country will be exempted.

古文：丙午，以王显为河阳三城节度使。
现代文：十一日，任命王显为河阳三城节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Xian was appointed as the festival envoy of the three cities of Hebei and Yangzhou.

古文：六月癸酉，继迁围麟州，曹璨请济师，诏发并、代、石、隰州兵援之。
现代文：六月初九，李继迁围攻麟州，曹璨请求增兵，下诏发并、代、石、曝四州兵援助。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, Li Jiqian besieged and attacked Linzhou. Cao Pi asked for more troops, and issued the following edict: "Assist the Four National Guardsmen, on behalf of, on behalf of, on behalf of."

古文：乙亥，以侍卫马军都虞候王超为定州路驻泊行营都部署。
现代文：十一日，任命侍卫马军都虞候王超为定州路驻泊行营都部署。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Chao, the appointed bodyguard of the horse army, was deployed to the camp on Dingzhou Road.

古文：己卯，以宣徽南院使、知枢密院事周莹为永清军节度使。
现代文：十五日，任命宣徽南院使、知枢密院事周莹为永清军节度使。
English: On the 15th, Zhou Ying, the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui and the Secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed as the chief envoy of the Yongqing Army.

古文：己酉，诏益兵八千分屯环庆、泾原。
现代文：己酉日，下诏增兵八千，分屯环庆、径原。
English: On the day of Jiwu, the following edict was issued to increase the number of soldiers by eight thousand, and the towns of Huanqing and Jianyuan were divided.

古文：知麟州卫居实言继迁以众二万来攻城，兵出击走之，杀伤过半。
现代文：麟州知州卫居实报告说李继迁率兵二万来进攻，城兵出击，杀伤夏军过半。
English: Linshou Chizhou Wei Jiushi reported that Li Jijian led 20,000 soldiers to attack, city soldiers attacked, and more than half of Xia's army was killed.

古文：是月，都城大雨，坏庐舍，民有压死者，振恤其家。
现代文：这个月，都城降大雨，毁坏庐舍，百姓有压死者，贩济抚恤其家。
English: This month, heavy rain fell in the capital, destroying houses, crushing people to death, and forcing vendors to support their families.

古文：秋七月甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊戌，幸启圣院、太平兴国寺、上清宫致祷，雨霁，遂幸龙卫营视所坏垣室，劳赐有差。
现代文：初五，到启圣院、太平兴国寺、上清宫祈祷。雨停天晴，于是到龙卫营视察毁坏了的墙壁和居室，慰劳赏赐不等。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, they went to pray at Kai Sheng Yuan, Taiping Xingguo Temple, and Shangqing Palace. The rain stopped and the weather cleared, so they went to Longwei Camp to inspect the destroyed walls and rooms. The rewards for their hard work varied.

古文：乙巳，召终南隐士种放。疏丁冈河。
现代文：十二日，召终南山隐士种放，疏浚丁冈河。
English: On the 12th, the Nanshan hermit was summoned to dredge the Dinggang River.

古文：癸丑，诏许高州蛮田彦伊子承宝等入朝，赐器帛、冠带。
现代文：二十日，下诏允许高州蛮田彦伊的儿子田承宝来朝见，赐给器帛、冠带。
English: On the 20th, the emperor allowed Tian Cheng Bao, the son of Gaozhou barbarian Tian Yan Yi, to come to see the emperor, and gave him a bowl and a crown.

古文：乙卯，募河北丁壮。
现代文：二十二日，召募河北丁壮。
English: On the 22nd, Ding Zhuang of Hebei Province was conscripted.

古文：壬戌，契丹大林砦使王昭敏等来降。
现代文：二十九日，契丹大林寨使王昭敏等来投降。
English: On the 29th, the Khitan Dalinzhai sent Wang Zhaomin and others to surrender.

古文：戎人寇洪德砦，守将击走之。
现代文：戎人攻打洪德寨，守将击退他们。
English: The army attacked Hong Dezhai, but the defenders repulsed them.

古文：癸亥，增川峡官奉钱。
现代文：三十日，增加川峡官棒禄。
English: On the 30th, the salary of officials in Kawakyo was increased.

古文：八月，群臣三表上尊号，不允。
现代文：八月，大臣三次奏表上尊号，没允许。
English: In August, the minister submitted his resignation for the third time, which was not allowed.

古文：丙子，沙州曹宗寿遣使入贡，以宗寿为归义军节度使。
现代文：十三日，沙州曹宗寿派遣使臣来进贡，任命曹宗寿为归义军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Cao Zongshou of Shazhou dispatched an envoy to pay tribute and appointed Cao Zongshou as the envoy to pay tribute to the rebels.

古文：乙酉，石、隰部署言河西蕃族拽浪南山等四百人来归。
现代文：二十二日，石曝部署报告说河西蕃族拽浪南山等四百人来归附。
English: On the 22nd, the stone-exposure deployment report said that the Hexi Yi people dragged 400 people such as Nanshan to attach.

古文：九月戊申，种放对于便殿，授左司谏、直昭文馆。
现代文：九月十六日，种放在便殿回答真宗的询问，授给左司谏、直昭文馆。
English: On September 16th, the seeds were placed in the toilet hall to answer inquiries from the True Sect, and were given to Zuo Jian and Naoaki Library.

古文：乙卯，赐种放第宅。
现代文：二十三日，赐给种放宅第。
English: On the 23rd, he was given the position of a farmer.

古文：冬十月己巳，遣使赍药赐镇戎军将士。
现代文：冬十月初七，派遣使臣带着药品赐给镇戎军将士。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the envoys were sent with medicines to give to the soldiers of the town army.

古文：戊寅，诏河西戎人归顺者，给内地闲田处之。
现代文：十六日，下诏归顺的河西戎人，授给内地空闲土地安置他们。
English: On the 16th, he issued an edict to the submissive people of Hexi Rong, awarding them vacant land in the inland to resettle them.

古文：又诏诸州长吏与佐职官同录问大辟罪人。
现代文：又下诏各州长吏与辅佐官员一起讯问记录死罪囚犯罪状。
English: In addition, governors and assistant governors jointly interrogated and recorded the criminal status of death-row prisoners.

古文：辛巳，泾原部署系内属蕃族数叛者九十一人，请诛之，诏释其罪。
现代文：十九日，径原部署系内属蕃族叛者九十一人，请求诛杀，下诏免其罪。
English: On the 19th, ninety-one traitors belonging to the Yi ethnic group in the original deployment system came forward and requested to fight and kill, and were pardoned.

古文：丁亥，平章事向敏中罢为户部侍郎，右仆射张齐贤为太常卿。
现代文：二十五日，平章事向敏中罢为户部侍郎，右仆射张齐贤为太常卿。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Taira no Shosho promoted Zhixiang Min to the position of Household Attendant, and appointed his right-hand man Zhang Qixian as Grand Steward.

古文：庚寅，修丰州城。
现代文：二十八日，修丰州城。
English: On the 28th, Fengzhou City was repaired.

古文：十一月壬辰，诏麟州给复一年。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏免除麟州赋役一年。
English: On the first day of November, the following edict exempted Linzhou from military service for one year.

古文：甲午，六谷首领潘罗支等贡马，第给其直。
现代文：初三，六谷首领潘罗支等贡马，依照等级付给络钱。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the leader of Rokkoku, Penro branch, and other tributes are paid according to rank.

古文：辛丑，享太庙。
现代文：初十，祭祀太庙。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：壬寅，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the eleventh day, at the round mound, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：丁未，白州民黄受百余岁，赐粟帛。
现代文：十六日，白州百姓黄受一百多岁，赐给粟帛。
English: On the 16th, Huang Rong, a citizen of Baizhou who was over 100 years old, was given a millet bowl.

古文：己酉，封子玄祐为信国公。
现代文：十八日，封儿子赵玄为信国公。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Xuan, the son of Fu, became the Prince of Xin.

古文：庚戌，吕蒙正加司空，李沆加右仆射，楚王元佐为右羽林军上将军，雍王元份守太傅，兖王元杰守太保，曹国公元俨同平章事。
现代文：十九日，吕蒙正加为司空，李杭加为右仆射，楚王赵元佐为右羽林军上将军，雍王赵元份守太傅，充王赵元杰守太保，曹国公赵元俨同平章事。
English: On the 19th, Lv Meng Zheng Jia was appointed as the second-in-command, Li Hang Jia was appointed as the right-hand man, King Chu Zhao Yuan Zuo was appointed as the right-hand general, King Yong Zhao Yuan Ren was appointed as the commander-in-chief, King Zhou Zhao Yuan Jie was appointed as the commander-in-chief, and King Cao Guogong was appointed as the general-in-chief.

古文：十二月壬午，赐京城百岁老人祝道岩爵一级。
现代文：十二月二十一日，赐京城百岁老人祝道嚣爵一级。
English: On December 21st, the capital's centenarians were awarded a first-class honor.

古文：癸未，迁麟州内属人于楼烦。
现代文：二十二日，麟州内属人迁到楼烦。
English: On the 22nd, the relatives in Linzhou moved to the building.

古文：是岁，河北、郑、曹、滑州饥，振之。
现代文：这一年，河北和郑州、曹州、滑州饥荒，贩济饥民。
English: In this year, Hebei and Zhengzhou, Caozhou, and Leshou suffered from famine and had to sell food to the starving.

