古文：文艺下李华，字遐叔，赵州赞皇人。
现代文：李华字遐叔，赵州赞皇县人。
English: Li Huazhong, a native of Zhanhuang County, Zhao Province.

古文：曾祖太冲，名冠宗族间，乡人语曰： 太冲无兄。 
现代文：曾祖李太冲在宗族间声名最著，乡人谚语说： 同辈中没有超过他的。 
English: Zengzu Li Taichong is the most famous among the clans, and the villagers' proverb says: No one among his peers surpasses him.

古文：太宗时，擢祠部郎中。
现代文：太宗时，选拔为祠部郎中。
English: At the time of Taizong, he was selected to be a junior member of the ancestral hall.

古文：华少旷达，外若坦荡，内谨重，尚然许，每慕汲黯为人。
现代文：李华少年时就胸怀开阔举止无拘，外表看若坦率，内心谨慎持重，重信诺，常常羡慕汲黯的为人。
English: When Li Hua was a young boy, he was open-minded and unrestrained in his behavior. Outwardly, he was frank, but inwardly he was cautious and dignified. He kept his promises and was often envied as a person with a gloomy outlook.

古文：累中进士、宏辞科。
现代文：接连考中进士与宏辞科。
English: Successive examinations for junior high school students and macro-dictionaries.

古文：天宝十一载，迁监察御史。
现代文：天宝十一年，升为监察御史。
English: In the eleventh year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to inspector general of history.

古文：宰相杨国忠支娅所在横猾，华出使，劾按不桡，州县肃然。
现代文：宰相杨国忠亲戚处处横行狡诈，李华出巡，坚决揭发审讯，州县敬重。
English: Prime Minister Yang Guozhong's relatives are devious everywhere, Li Hua is on a tour, resolutely exposing the trial, and the state and county are respected.

古文：为权幸见疾，徙右补阙。
现代文：被权贵憎恨，降为右补阙。
English: Hated by the aristocracy, he was demoted to the Right Auxiliary Bishop.

古文：安禄山反，上诛守之策，皆留不服。
现代文：安禄山反叛，向玄宗上书言讨伐防守之策，都被压下不上报。
English: The rebellion in Anlu Mountain and the defensive strategy of writing to Emperor Xuanzong were suppressed and not reported.

古文：玄宗入蜀，百官解窜，华母在鄴，欲间行辇母以逃，为盗所得，伪署凤阁舍人。
现代文：玄宗入川，百官散逃，李华之母在邺，想走小道用车载母逃走，被贼兵抓住，授伪职为代理凤阁舍人。
English: Xuanzong entered the river, hundreds of officials scattered and fled, Li Hua's mother was in the cocoon, she wanted to take the trail to escape with the car carrier, she was caught by the thief soldiers, and she was awarded the fake position as the agent of Fengge.

古文：贼平，贬杭州司户参军。
现代文：贼乱平定，贬为杭州司户参军。
English: The banditry was put down, and it was relegated to the status of Hangzhou steward joining the army.

古文：华自伤践危乱，不能完节，又不能安亲，欲终养而母亡，遂屏居江南。
现代文：李华悲伤自己经历危难，不能保全臣节，又不能使母亲安居，想养老送终而母亲又已逝世。于是隐居江南。
English: Li Hua was saddened by his own experience of danger, unable to preserve his vassalage, and unable to make his mother live in peace. He wanted to live to a ripe old age, but his mother had passed away. So he went into seclusion in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：上元中，以左补阙、司封员外郎召之。
现代文：上元年间，朝廷以左补阙、司封员外郎官职召他赴京。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the Imperial Court called him to go to Kyoto as Zuo Buyeo and Sifuken Gairo.

古文：华喟然曰： 乌有隳节危亲，欲荷天子宠乎？ 
现代文：李华叹息说 ：哪有毁坏节操、危及母亲的人，能承受天子恩宠的呢？ 
English: Li Hua sighed and said, "Who can bear the grace of the Son of Heaven if he destroys the discipline and endangers his mother?"

古文：称疾不拜。
现代文：托病不受任命。
English: Nursing homes are not subject to appointment.

古文：李岘领选江南，表置幕府，擢检校吏部员外郎。
现代文：李岘治理江南时，奏请安排为自己的幕僚，升检校吏部员外郎。
English: When Li Xi governed the southern part of the Yangtze River, he requested to be appointed as his own staff member, and promoted Gairo, a member of the school's administration department.

古文：苦风痹，去官，客隐山阳，勒子弟力农，安于穷槁。
现代文：苦于风湿病，免除官职，作客隐居于山阳，令子弟致力于农作，安于穷困。
English: Suffering from rheumatism, he was exempted from official duties and lived in seclusion in the mountains as a guest. He made his children devote themselves to farming and lived in poverty.

古文：晚事浮图法，不甚著书，惟天下士大夫家传、墓版及州县碑颂，时时赍金帛往请，乃强为应。
现代文：晚年遵奉佛学，不多写文章，只是各地官宦人家的家传、墓志及州县的颂德碑文，常常有人带着钱帛去请求，也就勉强答应。
English: In his later years, he followed Buddhist teachings and did not write many articles. He only wrote biographies, epitaphs, and state and county eulogies of officials and dignitaries from all over the country. People often brought money to ask for his help, and he reluctantly agreed.

古文：大历初，卒。
现代文：大历初年逝世。
English: He died in the first year of the calendar.

古文：初，华作《含元殿赋》成，以示萧颖士，颖士曰： 《景福》之上，《灵光》之下。 
现代文：当初，李华写成《含元殿赋》，给萧颖士看，颖士说： 此文在《景福殿赋》之上，《鲁灵光殿赋》之下。 
English: At first, Li Hua wrote "Hangyuan Hall Fu" and showed it to Xiao Yingzhi. Yingzhi said: "This text is above "Gingfu Hall Fu" and below "Lu Lingguang Hall Fu."

古文：华文辞绵丽，少宏杰气，颖士健爽自肆，时谓不及颖士，而华自疑过之。
现代文：李华文辞婉柔华丽，缺少恢宏阳刚之气。而萧颖士文风则刚健爽利挥洒自如，时人认为李华不及萧颖士，但李华自认为超过萧颖士。
English: Li Hua's words are gentle and gorgeous, lacking the grandeur of masculinity. But Xiao Ying's writing style is robust, vigorous and free-flowing. At that time, people thought that Li Hua was not as good as Xiao Ying, but Li Hua thought that he was better than Xiao Ying.

古文：因著《吊古战场文》，极思研扌隺，已成，污为故书，杂置梵书之庋。
现代文：因而写了《吊古战场文》，精心构思，反复推敲。写成后，假称是篇旧文章，与佛书夹杂在一起放在书架上。
English: As a result, he wrote "Hanging Ancient Battlefield Text," carefully conceived and repeatedly elaborated. After it was written, it was put on the bookshelf together with Buddhist books, pretending to be an old article.

古文：它日，与颖士读之，称工，华问： 今谁可及？ 
现代文：另一天，给萧颖士阅读，颖士说好，李华问 ：如今谁的文章可以比得上？ 
English: On another day, reading to Xiao Yingzhu, Yingzhu said yes, Li Hua asked: Who's article can match it now?

古文：颖士曰： 君加精思，便能至矣。 
现代文：萧颖士说 ：您精密构思，便能达到。 
English: Xiao Yingshi said: If you have a precise idea, you can achieve it.

古文：华愕然而服。
现代文：李华惊讶佩服。
English: Li Hua was surprised and impressed.

古文：华爱奖士类，名随以重，若独孤及、韩云卿、韩会、李纾、柳识、崔祐甫、皇甫冉、谢良弼、硃巨川，后至执政显官。
现代文：李华喜欢奖掖读书人。被推重者的名声随之而重，如独孤及、韩云卿、韩会、李纾、柳识、崔甫、皇甫冉、谢良弼、朱巨川等，后来成为执政大官。
English: Li Hua liked to reward scholars, and the reputation of those who were promoted increased accordingly, such as Du Guoji, Han Yunqing, Han Hui, Li Qian, Liu Zhi, Cui Fu, Huang Fu Ran, Xie Liangyao, Zhu Juchuan, and so on, and later became the chief executive.

古文：华触祸衔悔，及为元德秀、权皋铭、《四皓赞》，称道深婉，读者怜其志。
现代文：李华遭祸含悔，及至为元德秀、权皋做墓志铭，写《四皓赞》，叙述称赞深切委婉，读者都同情他的心意。
English: Li Hua felt remorse for the misfortune, and even wrote an epitaph for Yuan Dexiu and Quanzhang, writing "Four Praises," the description was deeply euphemistic, and readers sympathized with his heart.

古文：宗子翰，从子观，皆有名。
现代文：长子李翰、侄儿李观，都有名于世。
English: His eldest son, Li Han, and his nephew, Li Guan, are both famous in the world.

古文：翰擢进士第，调卫尉。
现代文：李翰登进士第，任卫县县尉。
English: Li Han was promoted to be a scholar, and was appointed as a county lieutenant of Wei County.

古文：天宝末，房琯、韦陟俱荐为史官，宰相不肯拟。
现代文：天宝末年，房、韦陟都举荐他为史官，宰相置之不议。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, both Fang and Wei Wei recommended him as a historian, but the prime minister did not consider it.

古文：翰所善张巡死节睢阳，人媢其功，以为降贼，肃宗未及知。翰传巡功状，表上之，曰：臣闻圣主褒死难之士，养死事之孤，或亲推轜车，或追建邑封，厚死以慰生，抚存以答亡，君不遗于臣，臣亦不背其君也。
现代文：李翰好友张巡守节死于睢阳，有人嫉妒他的功劳，说他投降了叛贼，肃宗尚未知道真象，李翰宣扬张巡建功情状，上表于玄宗，说： 臣听说圣君褒奖死于国难之士，恤养殉国者的遗孤，有的亲推灵车，有的追封食邑，厚待死者以安慰生者，抚恤活着的人以回报死去的人，君王不忘臣子，臣子也不背离君王。
English: Li Han's close friend Zhang Junshu died in Fenyang on the National Day. Some people were jealous of his merits, saying that he surrendered to the traitors, Su Zong did not know the truth yet. Li Han preached Zhang Junjian's merits, which were shown to Xuanzong, saying: The vassal heard that the saint praised those who died in the national tragedy, supported the orphans of the martyrs, some relatives pushed the hearse, some chased after the food, treated the dead with kindness to comfort the living, and supported the living to repay the dead. The king does not forget the vassal, and the vassal does not turn away from the king

古文：自逆胡构乱，据雒阳，引幽、朔以吞河南，故御史中丞、赠扬州大都督张巡，忠谊奋发，率乌合，守雍丘，溃贼心腹。
现代文：自从逆胡作乱，占据洛阳，领幽州、朔州之兵以吞并河南。已故御史中丞、赠扬州大都督张巡，奋发忠义之心，率仓猝集合的军队，坚守雍丘，在心腹要地击溃贼军。
English: Since wreaking havoc, occupying Luoyang, and leading the soldiers of Youzhou and Shuozhou to annex Henan, the late Imperial Historian Zhongzheng, who was given the title of Yangzhou Governor Zhang Jun, exerted his loyalty, led the army that was suddenly assembled, held fast to Yongqiu, and defeated the enemy army wholeheartedly.

古文：及鲁炅弃甲宛、叶，哥舒翰败绩潼关，贼送盗神器，鸱峙二京，南临汉、江，西逼岐、雍，群帅列城，望风出奔，巡守孤城不为却。
现代文：及至鲁炅失利于宛、叶，哥舒翰兵败于潼关，安贼才窃取了帝位，奸邪占据了两京，南迫汉、江一带，西逼岐、雍等地，众多将领州县长官，望风出逃，张巡固守孤城毫不退却。
English: It was not until the defeat of Lushan in Wan and Ye, and the defeat of Goshukhan's soldiers in Shaoguan, that the usurpers stole the imperial throne, and the traitors occupied the two capitals. In the south, Han and Jiang regions, and in the west, Qi and Yong, many generals and prefectural governors fled at the sight of the wind, and Zhang Jun firmly defended the lonely city without retreating.

古文：贼欲绕出巡后以扰江淮，巡退军睢阳，扼东南咽领。
现代文：贼兵想绕道出张巡之后去骚扰江淮，张巡退兵于睢阳，扼守东南咽喉。
English: The bandits wanted to make a detour to harass Jianghuai after the Zhang patrol, but the Zhang patrol retreated to Fenyang, holding the southeastern throat.

古文：自春讫冬，大战数十，小战数百，以弱制强，出奇无穷，杀馘凶丑凡十余万，贼不敢越睢阳取江淮，江淮以完，巡之力也。
现代文：自春到冬，大战数十，小战数百，以弱制强，出奇制胜，计谋无穷，消灭贼兵共十余万人，贼兵不敢越过睢阳攻占江淮，江淮得以保全，是张巡的功劳。
English: From spring to winter, there were dozens of big wars and hundreds of small wars, with the weak controlling the strong, surprising victories, and endless strategies. A total of more than one hundred thousand people were eliminated by the bandits. The bandits did not dare to cross the Poyang River to capture the Huai River, and the Huai River was preserved, which was the merit of Zhang Xun.

古文：城孤粮尽，外救不至，犹奋羸起病，摧锋陷坚，三军啖肤而食，知死不叛。
现代文：在孤城粮尽，援兵不到的情况下，还能鼓励病弱之兵奋起，挫敌锋芒，毁敌坚垒，三军杀人而食，明知必死也不背叛。
English: In the situation of running out of food and reinforcements in a lonely city, it can also encourage the sick and weak soldiers to rise up, frustrate the enemy's front, destroy the enemy's stronghold, the three armies kill and eat, and do not betray knowing that they will die.

古文：城陷见执，卒无桡词，慢叱凶徒，精贯白日，虽古忠烈无以加焉。
现代文：城破被俘，始终无屈从之词，鄙视痛斥凶徒，精忠贯日，即使古代忠烈之士也没有超过他的。
English: After the city was destroyed and he was captured, he was always unyielding, despised and rebuked the criminals, and remained loyal to the end. Even the ancient loyalists did not surpass him.

古文：议者罪巡以食人，愚巡以守死，臣窃痛之。
现代文： 议事者以张巡杀人而食为罪，以死守城为愚，臣深为痛心。
English: The councillors considered it a crime to kill Zhang Zong for food, foolish to defend the city to the death, and the vassals were deeply pained.

古文：夫忠者，臣之教；恕者，法之情。
现代文：忠君，乃为臣之道；恕道，言执法要合情。
English: To be loyal to one's lord is the way to be a vassal; to be tolerant is the way to be, and to speak and enforce the law is to be sympathetic.

古文：巡握节而死，非亏教也；析骸以爨，非本情也。
现代文：张巡守节而死，无亏于忠君之道；杀人而食，并非本意。
English: Zhang Junshou died on the festival, without losing the way of loyalty; killing and eating is not the intention.

古文：《春秋》以功覆过，《书》赦过宥刑，在《易》遏恶扬善，为国者录用弃瑕。
现代文：《春秋》以功掩过，《尚书》赦过宽刑，《易经》则主张止丑扬善，治国者录用有才之人而不究其曾有过失。
English: "Spring and Autumn" covered it up with merit, "Shang Shu" pardoned lenient punishment, and "I Ching" advocated stopping ugliness and promoting goodness. The rulers of the country hired talented people without investigating their past mistakes.

古文：今者乃欲议巡之罪，是废教绌节，不以功掩过，不以刑恕情，善可遏，恶可扬，瑕录而用弃，非所以奖人伦，明劝戒也。
现代文：现在却想追究张巡的罪过，这是废名教、贬气节；不以功掩过，不讲恕论刑，善可以遏抑，恶可以宣扬，有瑕疵的人可录用、有才能的人反遭弃置，这不是奖倡伦常，严明劝诫啊。
English: Now, however, they want to investigate Zhang Zhan's crime. This is the festival of abolishing fame and demeaning one's character. One should not cover up one's faults with one's merits, nor should one discuss punishment with one's forgiveness. Good can be restrained, evil can be preached, flawed people can be hired, and talented people, on the other hand, can be discarded. This is not a reward for morality, but a stern admonition.

古文：且禄山背德，大臣将相比肩从贼，巡官不朝，宴不坐，无一伍之士，一节之权，徒奋身死节，以动义旅，不谓忠乎？
现代文：而且安禄山背叛，大臣将相接连降贼，张巡官不在朝，宴不在座，没有一伍之兵，无朝廷授节之权，只是以奋身殉国的精神，来感召正义之师，这不叫忠吗？
English: Moreover, An Lushan betrayed, the minister will successively surrender to the thief, the inspector Zhang is not in the court, the banquet is not present, there is no group of soldiers, there is no power of the court to confer the title, but with the spirit of martyrdom, to inspire the teacher of justice, is not it called loyalty?

古文：以数千卒横挫贼锋，若无巡则无睢阳，无睢阳则无江淮。
现代文：以几千士兵阻挡贼军挫其锋芒，如果没有张巡就没有睢阳，没有睢阳就没有江淮。
English: With several thousand soldiers to block the invaders and frustrate their edge, if there is no Zhang patrol, there will be no Shenyang, and without Shenyang, there will be no Jianghuai.

古文：有如贼因江淮之资，兵广而财积，根结盘据，西向以拒，虽终歼灭，其旷日持久必矣。
现代文：设若贼依靠江淮的供给，兵员增多，财用积聚，扎根据守，西抗王师，虽然终究要被消灭，但旷日持久是必然的。
English: Assuming that the bandits rely on the supply of the Yangtze River and the Huai River, the number of soldiers will increase, the financial resources will be accumulated, the base will be protected, and the West will resist the king. Although they will eventually be eliminated, it is inevitable that it will take a long time.

古文：今陕、鄢一战，犬羊骇北，王师震其西，巡扼其东，此天使巡举江淮以待陛下，师至而巡死，不谓功乎？
现代文：今陕、鄢一战，贼兵如犬羊惊骇败逃，王师如雷霆震击其西，张巡在东面扼守，这是上天使张巡以整个江南等待陛下，援兵到而张巡已死，这不叫功吗？
English: Now, in the First Sino-Japanese War, the robber soldiers fled in panic like dogs and sheep, Wang Shih shook the west like thunder, and Zhang Jun held out in the east. This is the angel Zhang Jun waiting for his majesty with the entire south of the Yangtze River. Reinforcements arrived and Zhang Jun was dead. Isn't this called gong?

古文：古者列国侵伐，犹分灾救患，诸将同受国恩，奉辞伐罪，巡固守亦待外援，援不至而食尽，食尽而及人，则巡之情可求矣。
现代文：古时诸侯各国发生侵犯讨伐，有的国家还分担灾祸、救助患难，现在各路将领同受国家恩典，奉正义之词伐有罪之逆，张巡固守又在等待外援，援兵未到而粮尽，粮尽而食人，那么张巡的不得已之情是可以理解的。
English: In ancient times, there were invasions and invasions by various states, and some countries also shared the calamity and the relief of the suffering. Now, all countries will receive the grace of the state, and will fight against the guilty with the words of justice. Zhang Jun is still waiting for foreign aid. If the reinforcements do not arrive and the food runs out, and if the food runs out and the people are eaten, then Zhang Jun's feelings of desperation are understandable.

古文：假巡守城之初，已计食人，损数百众以全天下，臣尚谓功过相掩，况非素志乎？
现代文：假设张巡守城之初，已打算吃人，损伤数百人之众以保全天下，臣尚且以为可以功过相抵，何况这并非他的本意呢？
English: Suppose that at the beginning of Zhang's patrol of the city, he had already planned to eat people and injure hundreds of people to preserve the world, and the vassal even thought that he could match his achievements, and what's more, this was not his intention?

古文：夫子制《春秋》，明褒贬，齐桓公将封禅，略不书；晋文公召王河阳，书而讳之。
现代文：孔夫子做《春秋》，以明褒贬。齐桓公将行帝王祭天地的封禅之礼，《春秋》略而不载；晋文公接纳周襄王于河阳，《春秋》虽有记功却较隐讳。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" with clear praise and criticism. Prince Qi Kuan will perform the emperor's ritual of fusing heaven and earth, "Spring and Autumn" is omitted; Prince Jinwen received King Zhou Xiang in Heyang, "Spring and Autumn" is more secretive, although there is a credit.

古文：巡苍黄之罪，轻于僭禅；兴复之功，重于纠合。
现代文：张巡危急中的罪过，比齐桓公的僭越封禅要轻；而兴复社稷之功，比晋文公联合诸侯以安周室之功要重。
English: Zhang Jun's sin in the critical situation is lighter than that of Qi Kuan Gong's Yue Yue Fuzhen; and the achievement of reviving the society is more important than that of Jinwen Gong and the princes' alliance with An Zhou's family.

古文：今巡子亚夫虽得官，不免饥寒，江淮既巡所保，户口充完，宜割百户俾食其子。
现代文： 现在张巡之子张亚夫虽已得官，仍不免有饥寒之虞，江淮既然凭张巡所保全，户口充实完好，应该赐给百户的赋税使其子获得衣食之资。
English: Now, although Zhang Yafu, the son of Zhang Xun, has been appointed to the post, there is still a risk of hunger and cold. Since Jianghuai has been preserved by Zhang Xun and the household registration is complete and intact, the tax should be given to one hundred households so that their sons can get food and clothing.

古文：且强死为厉，有所归则不为灾。
现代文：而且不屈而死者为厉鬼，死有所归就不会成为灾害。
English: Moreover, if the deceased is unyielding and a fierce ghost, the death will not become a disaster.

古文：巡身首分裂，将士骸骼不掩，宜于睢阳相择高原，起大冢，招魂而葬，旌善之义也。
现代文：张巡身首分裂，将士尸骨未埋，应在睢阳卜择一块高地，修建一座大墓，收集骸骨或衣冠而葬，这是表彰忠良的义举。
English: Zhang Jun's head was split, leaving the warrior's bones unburied. He should choose a highland in Fenyangbu, build a large tomb, collect the skeletons or clothing crowns and bury them. This is a good deed to commend Zhongliang.

古文：臣少与巡游，哀巡死难，不睹休明，唯令名其荣禄也。
现代文：臣青年时与张巡交游，悲伤张巡的死难，没看到今天圣朝的清明，只有获得美名才是他身后的荣耀。
English: When he was a young man, he had a friendship with Zhang Jun, and was saddened by Zhang Jun's death. He did not see the clarity of today's Holy Spirit, and the only glory behind him was to get a good name.

古文：若不时纪录，日月浸悠，或掩而不传，或传而不实，巡生死不遇，诚可悲悼。
现代文：若不及时记录，年深日久，或者泯灭而不传，或传而不真实，那么张巡生死均未获知遇，实在值得悲悼。
English: If it is not recorded in time, it will take a long time, or it will be destroyed and not passed on, or it will be passed on and not true, then Zhang Qiu's birth and death will not be known, which is really worth mourning.

古文：谨撰传一篇，昧死上，傥得列于史官，死骨不朽。
现代文：谨撰写张巡传一篇，冒死奏呈，倘若能列入史册，则张巡白骨不朽。 
English: I have the honor to write a biography of Zhang Xuan, and if it can be included in the annals of history, then Zhang Xuan will be immortalized.

古文：帝繇是感悟，而巡大节白于世，义士多之。
现代文：帝由此感动醒悟，而张巡的忠贞大节才昭然于世，李翰为张巡辩白，得到义士们的赞许。
English: The emperor was moved and enlightened by this, and the great festival of Zhang Xuan's loyalty became apparent to the world. Li Han defended Zhang Xuan and received the praise of the righteous.

古文：翰累迁左补阙、翰林学士。
现代文：李翰几次升迁为左补阙、翰林学士。
English: Li Han was promoted several times to left assistant professor and Hanlin bachelor.

古文：大历中，病免，客阳翟，卒。
现代文：大历年间，因病免官，客居阳翟，后死去。
English: During the calendar year, he was removed from office due to illness, became impotent, and later died.

古文：翰为文精密而思迟，常从令皇甫曾求音乐，思涸则奏之，神逸乃属文。
现代文：李翰写文章精确细密而思维迟缓，常从皇甫曾处求乐人乐器，思维枯竭时奏乐，待神思飞逸时才写作。
English: Li Han wrote precise and detailed articles, but his thinking was slow. He often asked for musical instruments from the emperor, played music when his thinking was exhausted, and only wrote when his thoughts were scattered.

古文：族弟纾，自有传。
现代文：族弟李纾，另有传。
English: His younger brother, Li Yao, is also said to have played the role.

古文：观，字元宾。
现代文：李观字元宾。
English: Li Guanzhong is the guest of honor.

古文：贞元中，举进士、宏辞，连中，授太子校书郎。
现代文：贞元年间，接连考中进士与宏辞科，被任命为太子校书郎。
English: During the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and the macro-dictionary examination in succession, and was appointed as the prince's school scribe.

古文：卒，年二十九。
现代文：死年仅二十九岁。
English: He was only 29 when he died.

古文：观属文，不袭沿前人，时谓与韩愈相上下。
现代文：李观写文章，不依照沿袭前人，当时人们认为他与韩愈不相上下。
English: Li Guan wrote articles, not according to the lineage of predecessors, at that time people thought he was on a par with Han Yu.

古文：及观少夭，而愈后文益工，议者以观文未极，愈老不休，故卒擅名。
现代文：及至李观早逝，而韩愈以后的文章越写越好，评论者认为李观文章未到极致，而韩愈不停地写作到老，所以终于负有盛名。
English: When Li Guan died early, and Han Yu's subsequent articles were better and better, commentators thought that Li Guan's articles were not extreme, and Han Yu kept writing until he was old, so he finally had a reputation.

古文：陆希声以为 观尚辞，故辞胜理；愈尚质，故理胜辞。
现代文：陆希声以为 ：李观崇尚文辞，所以文辞胜过道理；韩愈崇尚质朴，所以道理胜过文辞。
English: Lu Xisheng thought: Li Qun advocated literature, so literature is better than reason; Han Yu advocated simplicity, so reason is better than literature.

古文：虽愈穷老，终不能加观之辞；观后愈死，亦不能逮愈之质 云。
现代文：韩愈虽然终老，终究不能超过李观的文辞；假如李观死于韩愈之后，也不能赶上韩愈之质朴。 
English: Although Han Yu is old, he can't surpass Li Guan's words; if Li Guan dies after Han Yu, he can't catch up with Han Yu's simplicity.

古文：孟浩然，字浩然，襄州襄阳人。少好节义，喜振人患难，隐鹿门山。
现代文：孟浩然字浩然，襄州襄阳人，年少时讲义气，喜欢助人解困，隐居鹿门山。
English: Meng Haoran, surnamed Haoran, was born in Xiangyang, Xiangzhou. When he was young, he was generous and liked to help others. He lived in seclusion in Lumen Mountain.

古文：年四十，乃游京师。
现代文：四十岁才去京师。
English: He didn't go to the capital until he was forty.

古文：尝于太学赋诗，一座嗟伏，无敢抗。
现代文：曾在太学赋诗，满座的人都叹服，没人敢与之抗衡。
English: He once composed a poem in Taishu, and everyone in the auditorium was impressed. No one dared to compete with him.

古文：张九龄、王维雅称道之。
现代文：张九龄、王维十分称道他。
English: Zhang Jiuling and Wang Wei highly praised him.

古文：维私邀入内署，俄而玄宗至，浩然匿床下，维以实对，帝喜曰： 朕闻其人而未见也，何惧而匿？ 
现代文：王维私下邀他入内署，一会儿玄宗来了，浩然躲到床下。维据实报告，皇帝高兴地说： 我只听说这个人但没见过，为什么要躲起来？ 
English: Wang Wei privately invited him to enter the imperial office. A moment later, Xuanzong came and hid under the bed. According to Wei's report, the emperor said happily, "I have only heard of this man, but I have never seen him. Why should I hide?"

古文：诏浩然出。
现代文：叫浩然出来，皇帝问他的诗。
English: The emperor asked him what his poem was about.

古文：帝问其诗，浩然再拜，自诵所为，至 不才明主弃 之句，帝曰： 卿不求仕，而朕未尝弃卿，奈何诬我？ 
现代文：浩然再次跪拜，自诵己诗。念到 不才明主弃 一句，皇帝说 ：你不求官，而我并未不要你，为什么诬我？ 
English: Once again, he bowed down and recited his poem. After reading, "It is not enough to renounce one's master," the emperor said, "You do not seek office, but I do not want you. Why do you slander me?"

古文：因放还。
现代文：因而让他回家。
English: So they let him go home.

古文：采访使韩朝宗约浩然偕至京师，欲荐诸朝。
现代文：采访使韩朝宗约浩然一同去京师，想推荐他入朝。
English: The interview made Han Chao Zongyo eager to go to Beijing to study with him and wanted to recommend him to enter the North.

古文：会故人至，剧饮欢甚，或曰： 君与韩公有期。 
现代文：正好老朋友来了，畅饮甚欢。有人提醒他： 您与韩公有约会。 
English: Just then, an old friend arrived, drinking heartily. Someone reminded him: You have a date with Han Gong.

古文：浩然叱曰： 业已饮，遑恤他！ 
现代文：浩然叱责说： 正喝着酒，哪管别的。 
English: He scolded loudly, "You're drinking wine, what do you care?

古文：卒不赴。
现代文：终于没赴约。
English: Finally I didn't go to the appointment.

古文：朝宗怒，辞行，浩然不悔也。
现代文：朝宗生气了，与他告别，浩然坦然不悔。
English: Chozong got angry and said goodbye to him, and he did not regret it.

古文：张九龄为荆州，辟置于府，府罢。
现代文：张九龄镇荆州时，召他置于府中。
English: When Zhang Jiu Ling was in Jingzhou Town, he was called to be stationed in the capital.

古文：开元末，病疽背卒。
现代文：后来幕府撤销。开元末，背生毒疮而死。
English: Later, the bakufu revoked it. At the end of the first year of the new year, he died of a poisonous ulcer on his back.

古文：后樊泽为节度使，时浩然墓庳坏，符载以笺叩泽曰： 故处士孟浩然，文质杰美，殒落岁久，门裔陵迟，丘陇颓没，永怀若人，行路慨然。
现代文：后来樊泽任节度使。当时浩然的墓败坏不堪，符载写信给樊泽说： 已故处士孟浩然，文章人品均超卓。谢世已久，其门族衰落，坟墓颓没。怀念此人，行路之人也觉感慨万千。
English: Later, Heze served as the festival delegate. At that time, the tomb of Meng Haoran was badly damaged, and the bearer wrote a letter to Heze saying: The deceased official Meng Haoran, the articles and the person were all excellent. It has been a long time since his death, his family has declined, and the tomb has disappeared. People who miss this person also feel a lot of emotion.

古文：前公欲更筑大墓，阖州搢绅，闻风竦动。
现代文：以前公欲为之改筑大墓，全州缙绅都闻风而动。
English: In the past, there was a public desire to rebuild a large tomb for it, and all the gentry in the state were moved by the wind.

古文：而今外迫军旅，内劳宾客，牵耗岁时，或有未遑。诚令好事者乘而有之，负公夙志矣。 
现代文：如今外有军旅之迫，内有宾客之劳，延宕许多时日，一直没有空闲，会让好事者有机可乘，辜负了公的夙志。 
English: Nowadays, there is the pressure of military travel on the outside, the labor of guests on the inside, the delay of many days, and there has been no free time, which will make the good-doers have something to take advantage of, and live up to the public aspiration.

古文：泽乃更为刻碑凤林山南，封宠其墓。
现代文：于是樊泽重新为他在凤林山南刻碑，培土成一大墓。
English: As a result, Heze re-engraved a monument for him in the south of Fenglin Mountain and turned the soil into a large tomb.

古文：初，王维过郢州，画浩然像于刺史亭，因曰浩然亭。
现代文：当初，王维经过郢州，曾画浩然的像于刺史亭，因而名亭为浩然亭。
English: At the beginning, Wang Wei passed through Zhangzhou and once painted a magnificent image in Shishi Pavilion. Therefore, the famous pavilion is the magnificent pavilion.

古文：咸通中，刺史郑諴谓贤者名不可斥，更署曰孟亭。
现代文：咸通年间，刺史郑讠咸认为贤者的名字不可随便指称，乃改为孟亭。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hamzong, the scribe Zheng Binghan thought that the name of the sage should not be referred to casually, but was changed to Meng Ting.

古文：开元、天宝间，同知名者王昌龄、崔颢，皆位不显。
现代文：开元、天宝间同知名的王昌龄、崔颢，都官位不显赫。
English: Kaiyuan and Tianbao, along with the well-known Wang Changling and Cui Wei, were all low-ranking officials.

