古文：圣宗二四年春正月甲戌，观渔土河。
现代文：统和四年春正月初五，在土河观看捕鱼。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Heian period, I watched the cranes fishing in the Tu River.

古文：林牙耶律谋鲁姑、彰德军节度使萧闼览上东征俘获，赐诏奖谕。
现代文：林牙耶律谋鲁姑、彰德军节度使萧闼览献上东征所获的俘虏及缴获物，皇上诏令褒奖表彰。
English: Lin Ya Ye Li Mu Lu Gu and Zhang De Jun's festival made Xiao Jian present the captives and captured goods won in the Eastern Expedition, and was commended by the Emperor's edict.

古文：丙子，枢密使耶律斜轸、林牙勤德等上讨女直所获生口十馀万、马二十馀万及诸物。
现代文：初七，枢密使耶律斜轸、林牙勤德等献上征讨女真俘获的生口十余万、马二十余万匹和各种物品。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council sent Ye Lu Xizhao, Lin Ya Qinde and others to present more than 100,000 live cattle, more than 200,000 horses and various items captured by Nien Zhen.

古文：己卯，朝皇太后。
现代文：初十，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Emperor went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：决滞讼。
现代文：审理积压案件。
English: Clear the backlog of cases.

古文：壬午，枢密使斜轸、林牙勤德、谋鲁姑、节度使闼览、统军使室罗、侍中抹只、奚王府监军迪烈与安吉等克女直还军，遣近侍泥里吉诏旌其功，仍执手抚谕，赐酒果劳之。
现代文：十三日，枢密使斜轸、林牙勤德、谋鲁姑、节度使闼览、统军使室罗、侍中抹只、奚王府监军迪烈与安吉等攻克女真回师。皇上派近侍泥里吉下诏表彰其军功，又执手安抚晓谕，赐给酒浆果脯慰劳他们。
English: On the 13th day, the imperial envoys, Xie Xuan, Lin Ya Qin De, Meng Lugu, Jie Du, Min Xuan, the envoy for the unification of the armies, Shuro, the chamberlain, Matada, and the overseer of the king's palace, Di Lie, and Anji, defeated Nien Zhen Hui. The emperor sent his close attendants to commend their military exploits, and also held out his hand to appease the envoys, giving them wine and berries to comfort them.

古文：甲午，幸长泺。
现代文：二十五日，临幸长泊。
English: On the 25th, I stayed in Linxing for a long time.

古文：二月壬寅，以四番都统军李继忠为检校司徒、上柱国。
现代文：二月初三，以四番都统军李继忠为检校司徒、上柱国。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Li Jizhong, the fourth-in-command of the Unified Army, was appointed as the inspector of the school and the head of the state.

古文：癸卯，西夏李继迁叛宋来降，以为定难军节度使、银夏绥宥等州观察处置等使、特进检校太师、都督夏州诸军事。
现代文：初四，西夏李继迁叛宋前来降附，封他为定难军节度使、银夏绥宥等州观察处置等使，特进检校太师、都督夏州诸军事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Western Xia Li followed the relocation of the rebellion against the Song Dynasty and came to annex it. He was appointed as the envoy of the Redoubtable Army, the envoy of the observation and disposition of Yin Xia and other states, the special inspector, and the military governor of Xiazhou.

古文：西番酋帅瓦泥乞移为保大军节度使、鄜坊等州观察处置等使。
现代文：以西番酋帅瓦泥乞移为保大军节度使、坊等州观察处置等使。
English: To the west of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief of the chief.

古文：甲寅，耶律斜轸、萧闼览、谋鲁姑等族帅来朝，行饮至之礼，赏赉有差。
现代文：十五日，耶律斜轸、萧闼览、谋鲁姑等族帅前来朝见，行饮至之礼，得赏赐各若干。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the chieftains of the clans, such as Yelu Xizhang, Xiao Yizhang, and Menglu Gu, came to see the emperor. They drank and bowed to him, and were each rewarded with a certain amount of money.

古文：丙寅，行次袅里井。
现代文：二十七日，出行驻于袅里井。
English: On the 27th, the trip stopped in Bali.

古文：三月甲戌，于越休哥奏宋遣曹彬、崔彦进、米信由雄州道，田重进飞狐道，潘美、杨继业雁门道来侵，岐沟、涿州、固安、新城皆陷。
现代文：三月初六，于越休哥报告宋派曹彬、崔彦进、米信出雄州道，田重进出飞狐道，潘美、杨继业出雁门道前来进犯，岐沟、涿州、固安、新城均已陷落。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, Songpa Cao Bin, Cui Yanjin, Meixin, Tian Chong, Pan Mei and Yang Jiye came to attack from Xiongzhou Road, Feixu Road, Ganmen Road, and Gifu, Zhangzhou, Gu'an and Xincheng had all fallen.

古文：诏宣徽使蒲领驰赴燕南，与休哥议军事；分遣使者征诸部兵益休哥以击之；复遣东京留守耶律抹只以大军继进，赐剑专杀。
现代文：皇上诏令宣徽使蒲领赶赴燕南，与休哥商议军事；并分派使者征发诸部兵马增援休哥抵御宋兵；复又派东京留守耶律抹只带领大军随后进发，赐剑使他能够擅专杀之权。
English: The Emperor's edict, the Imperial Rescript, sent Pu Liang to Yannan to discuss military matters with Xiu Ge; he also dispatched an envoy to recruit soldiers and horses from various departments to reinforce Xiu Ge against the Song soldiers; he also sent Yerut Matsuo, who was staying in Tokyo, to lead the large army and then set out, and gave him the sword so that he could kill at will.

古文：乙亥，以亲征告陵庙、山川。
现代文：初七，以领兵亲征之事祭告陵庙、山川。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he announced to the mausoleum, temple, mountain and river that he would personally lead the soldiers.

古文：丙子，统军使耶律颇德败宋军于固安，休哥绝其粮饷，擒将吏，获马牛、器仗甚众。
现代文：初八，统军使耶律颇德在固安击败宋军，休哥截断宋兵粮饷供应，生擒其将吏，俘获牛马、器械辎重甚多。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the unified army sent Yelupo De to defeat the Song army in Gu'an. Xiu Ge cut off the supply of food and supplies to the Song soldiers, captured their officers, and captured a large number of cattle, horses, and equipment.

古文：庚辰，寰州刺史赵彦章以城叛，附于宋。
现代文：十二日，寰州刺史赵彦章举城反叛，降附归宋。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Yanzhang, the governor of Zhangzhou, rebelled and the city was annexed to Song.

古文：辛巳，宋兵入涿州。
现代文：十三日，宋兵进入涿州。
English: On the 13th, Song Bing entered Zhangzhou.

古文：顺义军节度副使赵希赞以朔州叛，附于宋。
现代文：顺义军节度副使赵希赞在朔州叛变，降附于宋。
English: Zhao Xizan, the vice-envoy of the Shunyi Army, mutinied in Shuozhou and joined the Song Dynasty.

古文：时上与皇太后驻兵驼罗口，诏趣东征兵马以为应援。
现代文：此时皇上与皇太后驻兵于驼罗口，下诏催促东征兵马前往接应援助。
English: At this time, the emperor and the empress dowager stationed soldiers at the camel's mouth, and issued an edict urging the east to recruit soldiers and horses to go to receive assistance.

古文：壬午，诏林牙勤德以兵守平州之海岸以备宋。
现代文：十四日，诏令林牙勤德用兵防守平州之海岸防御宋兵。
English: On the 14th, Lin ordered Lingya Qinde to use soldiers to defend the coastal defense of Pingzhou against Song soldiers.

古文：仍报平州节度使迪里姑，若勤德未至，遣人趣行；马乏则括民马；铠甲阙，则取于显州之甲坊。
现代文：又告知平州节度使迪里姑，若德勤兵马没到，就派人催促；马匹缺乏就到民间征发；铠甲不足，则到显州甲坊去领取。
English: He also told Dirigu, the commander of the Pingzhou Festival, that if the soldiers and horses did not arrive, he would send someone to urge them; if there were not enough horses, they would be sent to the people for requisition; if there were not enough armor, they would be sent to Xianzhou Jiafang for collection.

古文：癸未，辽军与宋田重进战于飞狐，不利，冀州防御使大鹏翼、康州刺史马赟、马军指挥使何万通陷焉。
现代文：十五日，我军与宋田重进军交战于飞狐，失利，冀州防御使大鹏翼、康州刺史马、马军指挥使何万通均被俘。
English: On the 15th, our army and Songtian's re-invaded army clashed at the Flying Fox, and were defeated. The defense of Jizhou resulted in the capture of tens of thousands of Dapeng Ying, Kangzhou Zhishima, and the commander of the Horse Army.

古文：丁亥，以北院枢密使耶律斜轸为山西兵马都统，以北院宣徽使蒲领为南征都统，以副于越休哥。
现代文：十九日，任命北院枢密使耶律斜轸为山西兵马都统，北院宣徽使蒲领为南征都统，协助于越休哥。
English: On the 19th, the Northern Yuan Privy Council appointed the envoy of the Northern Yuan, Yerut Shantou, to the Shanxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the Northern Yuan proclaimed the envoy of the Northern Yuan, Pu Lian, to the Southern Expedition, to assist the Yue Xiu Ge.

古文：彰国军节度使艾正、观察判官宋雄以应州叛，附于宋。
现代文：彰国军节度使艾正、观察判官宋雄在应州叛变，举州附宋。
English: The Zhangguo Army's retreat caused Ai Zheng and the observation judge Song Xiong to mutiny in Yingzhou, and Yingzhou was annexed by Song.

古文：庚寅，遣飞龙使亚剌、文班吏亚达哥阅马以给先发诸军，诏驸马都尉萧继远领之。
现代文：二十二日，派飞龙使亚剌、文班吏亚达哥挑选马匹供应先锋诸军，诏令驸马都尉萧继远前去领取。
English: On the 22nd, he sent a flying dragon to Aachen and the clerk of the class, Adago, to select horses to supply the vanguard of the army, and ordered Lieutenant Xiao Jie to go far and wide to collect the horses.

古文：辛卯，武定军马步军都指挥使、郢州防御使吕行德、副都指挥使张继从、马军都指挥使刘知进等以飞狐叛，附于宋。
现代文：二十三日，武定军马步军都指挥使、郢州防御使吕行德、副都指挥使张继从、马军都指挥使刘知进等在飞狐叛变，归附于宋。
English: On the 23rd, the commanding officers of the Wuding Army and the Ma Bu Army, the defense minister of Zhangzhou, Lv Xingde, the deputy commanding officer, Zhang Jizong, and the commanding officer of the Ma Army, Liu Zhijin, all mutinied in Feihu and joined the Song Dynasty.

古文：癸巳，赐林牙谋鲁姑旗鼓四、剑一，率禁军之骁锐者南助休哥。
现代文：二十五日，赐给林牙谋鲁姑旗鼓四副，剑一柄，率领禁军精锐南助休哥。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he gave four pairs of banners and drums and a sword to Lingya Menglu Gu, and led the elite of the Imperial Army, Nanzhu Xiu Ge.

古文：丙申，步军都指挥使穆超以灵丘叛，附于宋。
现代文：二十八日，步军都指挥使穆超在灵丘叛变，归附于宋。
English: On the 28th, the commander of the infantry ordered Mu Chao to mutiny in Lingqiu and join Song.

古文：诏遣使赐枢密使斜轸密旨及彰国军节度使杓窊印以趣征讨。
现代文：皇上下诏令派遣使者赐给枢密使斜轸密旨及彰国军节度使杓纞印以督促征讨。
English: The Emperor sent emissaries by imperial edict to the Privy Council to issue the imperial edict and to the Changkuo Army to issue the imperial seal to urge the requisition.

古文：夏四月己亥朔，次南京北郊。
现代文：夏四月初一，皇上驻于南京北郊。
English: On the first day of April in summer, the emperor was stationed in the northern suburbs of Nanjing.

古文：庚子，惕隐瑶升、西南面招讨使韩德威以捷报。
现代文：初二，惕隐瑶升、西南面招讨使韩德威送上捷报。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Han Dewei received a favorable report from the southwestern side of the southwestern side.

古文：辛丑，宋潘美陷云州。
现代文：初三，宋将潘美攻陷云州。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Song invaded Panmei into Yunnan.

古文：壬寅，遣抹只、谋鲁姑、勤德等领偏师以助休哥，仍赐旗鼓、杓窊印抚谕将校。
现代文：初四，派抹只、谋鲁姑、勤德等率领偏师增援休哥，并赐给旗鼓、杓纞印抚谕将士。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, he sent Maduo, Morugu, Qin De and other leaders to reinforce Xiu Ge, and gave him a fan drum and a seal.

古文：癸卯，休哥复以捷报，上以酒脯祭天地。率群臣贺于皇太后。
现代文：初五，休哥又奏捷报，皇上用酒脯祭祀天地，率领群臣向皇太后祝贺胜利。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Shogo also reported a victory, and the emperor used sake lees to sacrifice heaven and earth, leading a group of courtiers to congratulate the empress dowager on her victory.

古文：诏勤德还军。
现代文：诏令勤德回师。
English: The edict of diligence returns to the teacher.

古文：丙午，颇德上所获铠仗数。
现代文：初八，颇德献上俘获的铠甲器仗。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he generously offered the captured armor.

古文：戊申，监军、宣徽使蒲领奏敌军引退，而奚王筹宁、北大王蒲奴宁、统军使颇德等以兵追蹑，皆胜之。
现代文：初十，监军、宣徽使蒲领奏报敌军已经撤退，吴王筹宁，北大王蒲奴宁、统军使颇德等率兵跟踪其后，均获胜。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Pu Liao, the overseer of the army and the envoy of Xuan Hui, reported that the enemy army had retreated. Wu Wang Qiaoning, the king of the North, Banuning, and the envoy of the United Front, Bao De, led the soldiers to follow, and all of them won.

古文：遣敞史勤德持诏褒美，及诏侍中抹只统诸军赴行在所。
现代文：皇上派敞史勤德等持诏前去褒奖，并诏令侍中抹只统率诸军赶赴皇上行宫。
English: The emperor sent Shih Ching-te and others to present the award, and ordered the chamberlain to lead the troops to the imperial palace.

古文：频不部节度使和卢睹、黄皮室详稳解里等各上所获兵甲。
现代文：频不部节度使和卢睹、黄皮室详稳解里等各自献上俘获宋之兵甲。
English: Song's captured armor was presented by the commander of the imperial troops, Lu Gan, and Huang Bishu, respectively.

古文：又诏两部突骑赴蔚州，以助闼览。
现代文：又下诏令两部冲锋陷阵的精骑兵赶赴蔚州援助闼览。
English: He also ordered two elite cavalry to rush to Ulsan to help.

古文：横帐郎君老君奴率诸郎君巡徼居庸之北。
现代文：横帐郎君老君奴率领各位郎君在居庸北面巡行视察。
English: The yokozukurakun led by the old yokozukurakun inspected the yokozukurakun in the north of Juyeong.

古文：将军化哥统平州兵马，横帐郎君奴哥为黄皮室都监，郎君谒里为北府都监，各以步兵赴蔚州以助斜轸。
现代文：命将军化哥统率平州兵马，横帐郎君奴哥为黄皮室都监，郎君谒里为北府都监，各自率步兵赶赴蔚州援助斜轸。
English: The general-in-charge, Brother Tong Tong, led the Pingzhou soldiers and horses, the sidekick, Brother Junnu, was the Yellow Leather Office's governor, and the brother-in-charge, Brother Yunli, was the North Prefecture's governor, and they each led the infantry to rush to Ulju to aid the Shantou.

古文：庚戌，以斜轸为诸路兵马都统，闼览兵马副部署，迪子都监。以代善补、韩德威。
现代文：十二日，任命斜轸为诸路兵马都统，闼览为兵马副部署，迪子为都监，以代替善补、韩德威。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Shi Yan was appointed as the leader of all the soldiers and horses in the capital, Mian Zhan as the deputy commander of the soldiers and horses, and Di Zi as the inspector of the capital to replace Zhen Shu and Han Dewei.

古文：癸丑，以艾正、赵希赞及应州、朔州节度副使奚军小校隘离辖、渤海小校贯海等叛入于宋，籍其家属，分赐有功将校。
现代文：十五日，因艾正、赵希赞及应、朔州节度副使、奚军小校隘离辖、渤海小校贯海等叛变附宋，籍没其家产并分赐给有功将校。
English: On the 15th, because of the rebellion of Ai Zheng, Zhao Xizan, and Ying, vice-envoy of the Shuozhou Festival, the small school of the Song Army, the small school of the Bohai Army, and the small school of the Bohai Army, they were deprived of their family property and distributed to meritorious officers.

古文：宋将曹彬、米信北渡拒马河，与于越休哥对垒，挑战，南北列营长六七里。
现代文：宋将曹彬、米信北渡拒马河，与于越休哥对垒，宋兵挑战，从南到北列营六、七里。
English: Song sent Cao Bin and Yixin to the north to block the Mahe River, and confronted Yu Yuexiu's brother. Song's soldiers challenged him, marching six or seven miles from the south to the north.

古文：时上次涿州东五十里。
现代文：此时皇上驻扎在涿州以东五十里处。
English: At this time, the emperor was stationed 50 miles east of Zhangzhou.

古文：甲寅，诏于越休哥、奚王筹宁、宣徽使蒲领、南北二王等严备水道，无使敌兵得潜至涿州。
现代文：十六日，诏令于越休哥、奚王筹宁、宣徽使蒲领、南北二王严密监视水道，不要让敌军得以借水道潜至涿州。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict was issued to Yue Xiu Ge, Shao Wang Qiong, Xuan Hui, Pu Lian and the two kings of the north and south to closely monitor the waterway, and not to allow the enemy to use the waterway to sneak into Zhangzhou.

古文：乙卯，休哥等败宋军，献所获器甲、货财，赐诏褒美。
现代文：十七日，休哥等击败宋军，献上所获器仗铠甲及财物，皇上赐诏褒奖称美。
English: On the seventeenth day, Xiu Ge and others defeated the Song army, presented the weapons, armor and property they had won, and the emperor gave them a reward.

古文：蔚州左右都押衙李存璋、许彦钦等杀节度使萧啜里、执监城使、铜州节度使耿绍忠，以城叛，附于宋。
现代文：蔚州左右都押衙李存璋、许彦钦等杀死节度使萧啜里，拘执监城使、铜州节度使耿绍忠，叛变附宋。
English: Around Ulshu, Li Cunxu, Xu Yanqin, and others were arrested for killing the regent Xiao Zuoli, detaining the regent of the city, the regent of Tongzhou, Geng Shaozhong, and defecting to the Song Dynasty.

古文：丙辰，复涿州，告天地。
现代文：十八日，我军克复涿州，皇上祭告天地。
English: On the 18th, our army recaptured Bozhou, and the emperor made an offering to heaven and earth.

古文：戊午，上次沙姑河之北淀，召林牙勤德议军事。
现代文：二十日，皇上驻于沙姑河之北淀，召林牙勤德等商议军事。
English: On the 20th, the emperor was stationed in North Yodo of Shagu River, and summoned Lin Yaqin De and others to discuss military affairs.

古文：诸将校各以所俘获来上。
现代文：诸将均献上俘虏及缴获物。
English: The generals presented the captives and the captured goods.

古文：奚王筹宁、南北二王率所部将校来朝。
现代文：奚王筹宁，南、北二王率领所部将校前来朝见。
English: Shao Wang Chongning, the south and north two kings led the officers of the headquarters to come to see the morning.

古文：以近侍粘米里所进自落鸨祭天地。
现代文：用近侍粘米里所进献的自行止息的鸨鸟祭祀天地。
English: Heaven and earth are worshipped with the self-extinguishing ostriches offered by the attendant, the sticky rice.

古文：己未，休哥、蒲领来朝，诏三司给军前夏衣布。
现代文：二十一日，休哥、蒲领前来朝见，皇上诏令三司发给部队战时夏衣及布匹。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shyuko and Pu Rong came to see the emperor, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to the three divisions to distribute summer clothes and cloth to the troops.

古文：庚申，上朝皇太后。
现代文：二十二日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛酉，大军次固安。
现代文：二十三日，大军驻扎于固安。
English: On the 23rd, a large army was stationed in Gu'an.

古文：壬戌，围固安城，统军使颇德先登，城遂破，大纵俘获。
现代文：二十四日，包围固安城，统军使颇德率先登城，固安城被一举攻破，城破后放纵士兵大肆俘掳抢掠。
English: On the 24th, they besieged Gu'an City, and the unified army sent the general Bao De to take the lead in climbing the city. Gu'an City was breached in one fell swoop, and after the city was breached, the soldiers indulged in extensive capture and looting.

古文：居民先被俘者，命以官物赎之。
现代文：被俘居民命其家属用官物赎回。
English: Captured residents' lives were ransomed by their families using official gifts.

古文：甲子，赏攻城将士有差。
现代文：二十六日，赏给攻城将士财物各若干。
English: On the 26th, several items of property were awarded to each of the soldiers who attacked the city.

古文：五月庚午，辽师与曹彬、米信战于歧沟关，大败之，追至拒马河，溺死者不可胜纪。
现代文：五月初三，辽军与曹彬、米信在岐沟关交战，大败宋军，追击至拒马河，宋军溺死者不可胜数。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the Liao army fought with Cao Bin and Yixin at the crossroads, defeated the Song army, pursued it to the Yaoma River, and the Song army drowned countless people.

古文：馀众奔高阳，又为辽师冲击，死者数万，弃戈甲若丘陵。
现代文：剩余部队逃奔高阳，又被辽军冲杀攻击，死者数万，丢弃的戈甲堆积如山。
English: The remaining troops fled to Goyang, but were attacked and killed by the Liao army. Tens of thousands died, and mountains of discarded Goga rifles piled up.

古文：輓漕数万人匿歧沟空城中，围之。
现代文：漕运粮食的数万人藏匿于岐沟空城中，也被包围。
English: Tens of thousands of people who were transporting grain by rowing hid in the Gap airfield and were also surrounded.

古文：壬申，以皇太后生辰，纵还。
现代文：初五，是皇太后生日，放他们回国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the birthday of the Empress Dowager, they were allowed to return home.

古文：癸酉，班师，还次新城。
现代文：初六，班师，回师驻扎于新城。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, the class division and the home division were stationed in Xincheng.

古文：休哥、蒲领奏宋兵奔逃者皆杀之。
现代文：休哥、蒲领奏称溃败逃生的宋兵均已杀之。
English: Xiu Ge and Pu Liao So said that the defeated and escaped Song soldiers had all been killed.

古文：甲戌，以军捷，遣使分谕诸路京镇。
现代文：初七，因为出师大捷，派使者分头晓谕诸路京镇。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, because of the great success of the division, the envoys were sent to the capital cities.

古文：丁丑，诏诸将校，谕功行赏，无有不实。
现代文：初十，诏令各位将领要论功行赏，不要虚报军功。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the emperor ordered the generals to discuss and reward merit, and not to falsely report military merit.

古文：己卯，次固安南，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：十二日，皇上驻于固安之南，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor stayed in the south of Gu'an and sacrificed heaven and earth with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：庚辰，以所俘宋人射鬼箭。
现代文：十三日，用鬼箭射杀被俘虏的宋人。
English: On the 13th, he used a ghost arrow to shoot the captive Song people.

古文：诏遣详稳排亚率弘义官兵及南北皮室、郎君、拽剌四军赴应、朔二州界，与惕隐瑶升、招讨韩德威等同御宋兵在山西之未退者。
现代文：皇上下诏派遣详稳排亚率领弘义宫兵及南、北皮室、郎君拽剌四支军队赴应、朔二州边界，与惕隐瑶升、招讨韩德威等一起抵御在山西未退的宋兵。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to dispatch four armies, led by the soldiers of the Imperial Palace of Guangyi, the soldiers of the Southern Palace, the Northern Palace, and the soldiers of the Southern Palace, to the border of the two states, and to resist the Song soldiers who had not retreated in Shanxi, together with the soldiers of the Imperial Palace and the soldiers of the Southern Palace.

古文：辛巳，以瑶升军赴山西。
现代文：十四日，命瑶升军奔赴山西。
English: On the 14th, the desperate army rushed to Shanxi.

古文：壬午，还次南京。
现代文：十五日，皇上回师驻于南京。
English: On the 15th, the imperial envoy arrived in Nanjing.

古文：癸未，休哥、筹宁、蒲奴宁进俘获。
现代文：十六日，休哥、筹宁、蒲奴宁进献俘虏及缴获物品。
English: On the 16th, Xiu Ge, Qiaoning and Panuning marched to offer the captives and the captured goods.

古文：斜轸遣判官蒲奴奏复蔚州，斩首二万馀级，乘胜攻下灵丘、飞狐，赐蒲奴酒及银器。
现代文：斜轸派判官蒲姑奏称克复蔚州，斩首二万余级，并乘胜攻下了灵丘、飞狐，皇上赐给蒲姑酒和银器。
English: The judge of the deviant faction, Pu Gu, said that he was able to recover Ulsan, beheaded more than 20,000 people, and conquered the spirit mound and flying fox. The emperor gave Pu Gu wine and silverware.

古文：丙戌，御元和殿，大宴从军将校，封休哥为宋国王，加蒲领、筹宁、蒲奴宁及诸有功将校爵赏有差。
现代文：十九日，御临元和殿，大宴随军将校，封休哥为宋国王，加赏蒲领、筹宁、蒲奴宁及各位有功将士官爵财物各有等差。
English: On the 19th, the Imperial Palace held a grand banquet for the officers who accompanied the army, and named King Xiu as the King of Song, and awarded Pu Collar, Cao Ning, Pununing and all the meritorious officers with the rank of non-commissioned officers and their property.

古文：丁亥，发南京，诏休哥备器甲，储粟，侍秋大举南征。
现代文：二十日，皇上从南京出发，诏令休哥准备器甲、储存粮米，以备秋天大举南征。
English: On the 20th, the emperor set out from Nanjing, and issued an imperial edict ordering the emperor to prepare and store grain and rice in preparation for a large-scale southern expedition in the autumn.

古文：戊子，斜轸奏宋军复围蔚州，击破之。
现代文：二十一日，斜轸奏称宋军再次围攻蔚州，被击退。
English: On the twenty-first day, the oblique report said that the Song Army once again besieged Ulshu and was repulsed.

古文：诏以兵授瑶升、韩德威等。
现代文：下诏将军队交付瑶升、韩德威等人。
English: He ordered the army to be handed over to Xing Sheng, Han Dewei and others.

古文：壬辰，以宋兵至平州，瑶升、韩德威不尽追杀，降诏诘责。仍谕，据城未降者，必尽掩杀，无使遁逃。
现代文：二十五日，因宋兵至平州，瑶升、韩德威没有尽力追杀，降旨诘问责备，又晓谕他们，凡遇宋兵据城不降者，格杀勿论，不要让他们逃走。
English: On the 25th, because the Song soldiers had reached Pingzhou, Gao Sheng and Han Dewei did not try their best to chase and kill them, and they were ordered to be prepared for accountability. They were also told that if the Song soldiers did not surrender, they should be killed, and they should not let them escape.

古文：癸巳，以军前降卒分赐扈从。
现代文：二十六日，将交战中所得降卒分赐给扈从。
English: On the 26th, the surrender points gained in the battle were given to the subordinates.

古文：乙未，赏颇德诸将校士卒。
现代文：二十八日，赏赐颇德等诸将及士卒。
English: On the 28th, all the generals and soldiers were rewarded for their virtues.

古文：六月戊戌朔，诏韩德威赴阙，加统军使颇德检校太师。
现代文：六月初一，诏令韩德威赴阙觐见，加封统军使颇德检校太师之职。
English: On the first day of June, Han Dewei was ordered to go to Xi'an, and the envoy of the United Front was given the post of inspector.

古文：甲辰，诏南京留守休哥遣炮手西助斜轸。
现代文：初七，诏令南京留守休哥派炮手到西边协助斜轸。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Xiaoguo, who was staying in Nanjing, sent gunners to the west to help with the crossbow.

古文：乙巳，以夷离毕侄里古部送辎重行宫，暑行日五十里，人马疲乏，遣使让之。
现代文：初八，因夷离毕侄里古部送辎重到行宫，在酷暑天气里每天走五十里，造成人马疲乏，派使者前去责备。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he sent an envoy to reprimand the emperor for leaving his nephew, Li Gubu, to escort the imperial carriage to the imperial palace, walking fifty miles a day in the sweltering heat, which caused the men and horses to become tired.

古文：丁未，度居庸关。
现代文：初十，越过居庸关。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I crossed the Juyang Pass.

古文：壬子，南京留守奏百姓岁输三司盐铁钱，折绢不如直，诏增之。
现代文：十五日，南京留守奏称百姓每年向三司输纳盐铁钱，所交纳绢帛折价低于实际价值。
English: On the 15th, a report from Nanjing said that the people lost salt and iron money to the three companies every year, and the discount price paid was lower than the actual value.

古文：甲寅，斜轸奏复寰州。
现代文：下诏提高绢帛价格。十七日，斜轸奏称克复寰州。
English: On the 17th, the oblique report said that it was time to recover Ganzhou.

古文：乙卯，皇太妃、诸王、公主迎上岭表，设御幄道傍，置景宗御容，率从臣进酒，陈俘获于前，遂大宴。
现代文：十八日，皇太妃、诸王、公主在岭南迎接皇上，在道路两侧设立御帐，皇上在景宗御像前率领群臣给景宗进酒，并献上战利品，然后大宴群臣。
English: On the 18th, the Empress Dowager, the kings, and the princesses met the Emperor in Lingnan and set up a table on both sides of the road. In front of the statue of King Gyeongjong, the Emperor led his ministers to pour wine for King Gyeongjong and presented the spoils of war, followed by a grand banquet for the ministers.

古文：戊午，幸凉陉。
现代文：二十一日，临幸凉陉。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Linxing is cool.

古文：以所俘分赐皇族及乳母。
现代文：将俘虏分赐给皇族和乳母。
English: The captives were given to the royal family and the nanny.

古文：己未，闻所遣宣谕回鹘、核列哿国度里、亚里等为术不姑邀留，诏速撒赐木不姑货币，谕以朝廷来远之意，使者由是乃得行。
现代文：二十二日，闻知派去宣谕回鹘、核烈哿国度里、亚里等处的使臣为术不姑拦截，下诏让速撒赐给术不姑财物金钱，向他说明朝廷招抚远方各国之意，使者才得以被放行。
English: On the 22nd, Wen Zhi sent envoys to Huizhou, Jilin, Yali and other parts of the country to announce that they were intercepted by Jiu Wu, and ordered Hosa to give Jiu Wu wealth and money to him, explaining to him the intention of the imperial court to attract distant countries, and the envoys were released.

古文：癸亥，以节度使韩毗哥、翰林学士邢抱朴等充云州宣谕招抚使。
现代文：二十六日，以节度使韩毗哥、翰林学士邢抱朴等充任云州宣谕招抚使。
English: On the 26th, Han Feige, Hanlin Scholar Zou Baopu and others were appointed as envoys by proclamation of Yunnan Province.

古文：丙寅，以太尉王八所俘生口分赐赵妃及于越迪辇乙里婉。
现代文：二十九日，将太尉王八所俘生口分别赐给赵妃及于越迪辇乙里婉。
English: On the 29th, the captives of the Taiyi Wangbashi were given to Zhao Fei and Yu Yue Diqian Biliwan respectively.

古文：秋七月丙子，枢密使斜轸遣侍御涅里底、干勤哥奏复朔州，擒宋将杨继业，及上所获将校印绶、诰敕，赐涅里底等酒及银器。
现代文：秋七月初九，枢密使斜轸派侍御涅里底、干勤哥向朝廷奏报克复朔州，活捉宋将杨继业，并献上所获将校印绶、诰敕，皇上赐给涅里底等酒和银器。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the privy council sent the ambassadresses to attend Niridi and Ganqin to report to the imperial court on how to recover Shuozhou, capture Song general Yang Jianye alive, and present the officer's seal and badge, and the emperor gave Niridi wine and silverware.

古文：辛巳，以捷告天地。
现代文：十四日，以胜利之事祭告天地。
English: On the 14th, the victory was announced to the world.

古文：以宋归命者二百四十人分赐从臣。
现代文：将宋降兵二百四十人分赐给臣下。
English: He gave 240 soldiers to his vassals.

古文：又以杀敌多，诏上京开龙寺建佛事一月，饭僧万人。
现代文：又因为杀敌太多，诏令上京开龙寺连续一个月举行佛事，斋僧万人。
English: Also, because there were too many enemies killed, the emperor ordered the Buddhist service to be held at the Kailong Temple in Beijing for one month in a row, attracting tens of thousands of devotees.

古文：辛卯，斜轸奏大军至蔚州，营于州左。得谍报，敌兵且至，乃设伏以待。
现代文：二十四日，斜轸奏报：大军到达蔚州在州东设营，得到谍报，敌军将至，于是设下埋伏。
English: On the 24th, the obituary reported: A large army arrived in Ulsan and set up camp in the east of the state. They received intelligence that the enemy was approaching, so they set up an ambush.

古文：敌至，纵兵逆击，追奔逐北，至飞狐口。
现代文：待敌人进入包围圈，纵兵伏击，追亡逐北，直至飞狐。
English: Wait for the enemy to enter the encirclement, set up an ambush, chase and drive north until the flying fox.

古文：遂乘胜鼓行而西。入寰州，杀守城吏卒千馀人。
现代文：于是乘胜击鼓向西行进，入寰州，杀守城吏卒一千多人。
English: So, taking advantage of the victory, they marched westward, entered Zhangzhou, and killed more than a thousand city officials.

古文：宋将杨继业初以骁勇自负，号杨无敌，北据云、朔数州，至是，引兵南出朔州三十里，至狼牙村，恶其名，不进；左右固请，乃行。
现代文：宋将杨继业以骁勇自负，号称杨无敌，北据云、朔数州。这时率兵南出朔州三十里，到达狼牙村，觉得此村名称可厌，不肯再前进；左右再三请求，这才继续领兵前行。
English: At this time, Song led his soldiers 30 miles south from Shuozhou to Wolga Village. He found the name of the village repugnant and refused to advance any further. After repeated requests, he continued to lead his soldiers forward.

古文：遇斜轸，伏四起，中流矢，堕马被擒。
现代文：遭遇斜轸部队，伏兵四起，杨继业身中流箭，坠马被俘。
English: Encountering ambushed troops, Yang Jiyuan was caught in the crossfire and was captured.

古文：疮发不食，三日死。
现代文：由于箭伤发作和绝食，他被擒三日而死。
English: Suffering from an arrow wound and on a hunger strike, he was beaten for three days and died.

古文：遂函其首以献。
现代文：于是用匣子盛其头颅进献。
English: So they presented his head in a box.

古文：诏详稳辖麦室传其首于越休哥，以示诸军，仍以朔州之捷宣谕南京、平州将吏。
现代文：诏令详稳辖麦室传其首级给于越休哥，在诸军前示众。又以朔州之捷宣谕南京、平州将吏。
English: The imperial edict detailed the stable governance of Baishu, and its head was given to Yue Xiu Ge, who displayed it in front of the troops. It was also announced to the generals of Nanjing and Pingzhou with the swift proclamation of Shuozhou.

古文：自是宋守云、应诸州者，闻继业死，皆弃城遁。
现代文：宋守云、应诸州将领，在听到杨继业死讯后，均弃城逃走。
English: Song Shouyun and Ying Zhuzhou generals, after hearing the news of Yang Jiye's death, all abandoned the city and fled.

古文：八月丁酉朔，置先离闼览官六员，领于骨里、女直、迪烈于等诸部人之隶官籍者。
现代文：八月初一，设置先离闼览官员六名，管辖于骨里、女真、迪烈于等诸部人之隶属于宫籍者。
English: On the first day of August, the first six officials to leave the inspection were set up, under the jurisdiction of the palace officials such as Yu Binli, Niang Zhen, Di Lie Yu and so on.

古文：以北王蒲奴宁为山后五州都管。
现代文：以北大王蒲奴宁为山后五州都管。
English: With the Great King of the North, Pununing, as the governor of the five states behind the mountain.

古文：乙巳，韩德让奏宋兵所掠州郡，其逃民禾稼，宜募人收获，以其半给收者，从之。
现代文：初九，韩德让奏称，在宋兵掳掠过的州郡，应募人收割逃亡民户的庄稼，其收成之一半归收割者所有，皇上听从其建议。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Handejang reported that in the prefectures and counties that had been plundered by the Song soldiers, people should be recruited to harvest the crops of the fleeing households, and one half of the harvest would be owned by the harvesters. The emperor followed his advice.

古文：乙卯，斜轸还自军，献俘。
现代文：十九日，斜轸从军中回到京城，献上俘虏。
English: On the 19th, Yan Xuan returned to Beijing from the army and presented the captives.

古文：己未，用室昉、韩德让言，复山西今年租赋。
现代文：二十三日，听从室日方、韩德让建议，蠲免山西当年的租赋。
English: On the 23rd, heeded the suggestion of Muro Nihon and Han Dejang to waive the rent in Shanxi that year.

古文：诏第山西诸将校功过而赏罚之。
现代文：下诏品评山西诸将功过以定赏罚。
English: Shanxi generals will be given rewards and punishments according to their merits.

古文：乙室帐宰相安宁以功过相当，追告身一通；谛居部节度使佛奴笞五十。
现代文：乙室帐宰相安宁功过相当，追回授官文告一份；谛居部节度使佛奴被笞击五十。
English: Prime Minister Anning's contribution to the Second Chamber of Accounts was considerable, and he recovered a copy of the official award announcement; Buddha's Buddha's Buddha was beaten fifty times by the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：惕隐瑶升、拽剌欻烈、朔州节度使慎思、应州节度使骨只、云州节度使化哥、军校李元迪、蔚州节度使佛留、都监崔其、刘继琛，皆以闻敌逃遁夺官；欻烈仍配隶本贯；领国舅军王六笞五十。
现代文：惕隐瑶升、拽剌焱欠烈、朔州节度使慎思、应州节度使骨只、云州节度使化哥、军校李元迪、蔚州节度使佛留、都监崔其、刘继琛，都因听到敌军到来消息即逃遁而被削夺官职。焱欠烈被发配回原籍；领国舅军王六被笞六十。
English: Dignity, discretion, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, modesty, mod

古文：壬戌，以斜轸所部将校前破女直，后有宋捷，第功加赏。
现代文：二十六日，因斜轸所率军队将校前有破女真之功，后有败宋军之捷，论功行赏。
English: On the 26th, due to the fact that the army officers led by Xie Jun had the merit of defeating Jianzhen before, and the victory of defeating the Song Army after, they were awarded.

古文：癸亥，加斜轸守太保。
现代文：二十七日，加封斜轸为守太保。
English: On the 27th, he was given the additional title of Shitaiho.

古文：九月丙寅朔，皇太妃以上纳后，进衣物、驼马，以助会亲颁赐。
现代文：九月初一，皇太妃因皇上纳皇后，进献衣物、驼马以资助会亲时颁发赏赐费用。
English: On the first day of September, the Empress Dowager issued a reward fee when she donated clothes and a camel to support the wedding.

古文：甲戌，次黑河，以重九登高于高水南阜，祭天。
现代文：初九，皇上驻扎于黑河，因是重九，于高水南阜登高，祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the emperor was stationed in Heihe. Because it was the ninth month of the year, he ascended to Gaoshu Nanfu to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：赐从臣命妇菊花酒。
现代文：赐给从臣命妇菊花酒。
English: He gave chrysanthemum flower wine to a female vassal.

古文：丁丑，次河阳北。
现代文：十二日，驻于河阳北。
English: On the 12th, it was stationed in Heyang North.

古文：戊寅，内外命妇进会亲礼物。
现代文：十三日，内外朝廷命妇进献皇上会亲礼物。
English: On the 13th, the imperial court ordered the women inside and outside the palace to go in and present the gift to the emperor.

古文：辛巳，纳皇后萧氏。
现代文：十六日，娶纳皇后萧氏。
English: On the 16th, he married the Empress Xiao.

古文：丙戌，次儒州，以大军将南征，诏遣皮室详稳乞的、郎君拽剌先赴本军缮甲兵。
现代文：二十一日，停驻儒州，因为大军即将南征，诏令皮室详稳乞的、郎君拽剌先到自己的部队中修缮器甲兵械。
English: On the twenty-first day, he stopped in Confucius, because a large army was about to march to the south, he ordered the leather room to be detailed and stable, and the lord dragged the donkey to his troops to repair the armor and ordnance.

古文：己丑，召北大王蒲奴宁赴行在所。
现代文：二十四日，召北大王蒲奴宁到行宫觐见皇上。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the king of Hokkedai, Bununing, was summoned to the palace to see the emperor.

古文：甲午，皇太后行再生礼。
现代文：二十九日，皇太后举行再生礼。
English: On the 29th, the Empress Dowager held a rebirth ceremony.

古文：冬十月丙申朔，党项、阻卜遣使来贡。
现代文：冬十月初一，党项、阻卜派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of October in winter, envoys from the party and the resistance came to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，皇太后复行再生礼，为帝祭神祈福。
现代文：初二，皇太后再次举行再生礼，为皇上祭神祈福。
English: On the second day of the new year, the empress dowager once again held a rebirth ceremony to pray for good fortune for the emperor's deity.

古文：己亥，以乙室王帐郎君吴留为御史大夫。
现代文：初四，任命乙室王帐郎君吴留为御史大夫。
English: On the fourth day of his freshman year, he appointed his second wife, Wang Zhe Langjun Wu Rong, as a goshi taifu.

古文：政事令室昉奏山西四州自宋兵后，人民转徙，盗贼弃斥，乞下有司禁止。
现代文：政事令室日方上奏说山西四州自从遭到宋兵侵扰之后，人民流离失所，盗贼遍布，请求有司禁止这种现象持续下去。
English: The Japanese side reported that since the four prefectures of Shanxi had been invaded by Song soldiers, people had been displaced, and thieves were everywhere. They requested the division to prohibit this phenomenon from continuing.

古文：命新州节度使蒲打里选人分道巡检。
现代文：皇上命新州节度使蒲打里选派官员去分道巡查，整肃风纪。
English: The emperor ordered the Xinzhou Festival to send officials to Pudali to inspect the roads and rectify the etiquette.

古文：北大王帐郎君曷葛只里言本府王蒲奴宁十七罪，诏横帐太保核国底鞫之。
现代文：北大王帐郎君曷葛只里奏上本府王蒲奴宁十七条罪状，皇上下诏命横帐太保核国底审讯蒲奴宁。
English: The king of the North, Tetsuro-kun, sent a 17-article indictment against the king of the capital, Pununing, and the emperor ordered the trial of Pununing under the pretext of national security.

古文：蒲奴宁伏其罪十一，笞二十释之。
现代文：蒲奴宁招认了其中的十一条罪状，被笞击二十后得到释放。
English: Pununing confessed to 11 of the charges and was released after being beaten 20 times.

古文：曷葛只里亦伏诬告六事，命详酌罪之。
现代文：曷葛只里也因为犯下诬告六条罪状之事，皇上命官员严加审讯并斟酌定罪。
English: Emperor-appointed officials also severely interrogated and convicted Gong Gedali for committing six counts of false accusation.

古文：知事勤德连坐，杖一百，免官。
现代文：知事勤德受到株连，笞杖一百，被免官。
English: Governor Qin De was punished with a company of stocks and a hundred strokes of the cane, and was dismissed from office.

古文：甲辰，出居庸关。
现代文：初九，皇上出居庸关。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the emperor left for Yongguan.

古文：乙巳，诏诸京镇相次军行，诸细务权停理问。
现代文：初十，下诏令各京镇相继出兵，各种细琐之事暂停处理。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict ordering all Beijing towns to send troops one after another, and suspended the handling of all kinds of trivial matters.

古文：庚戌，分遣拽剌沿边侦候。
现代文：十五日，分头派遣拽剌在边境侦探敌情。
English: On the 15th, the detachment dispatched a tugboat to the border to investigate the hostile situation.

古文：辛亥，命皇族庐帐驻东京延芳淀。
现代文：十六日，命令皇族的庐帐设驻在东京延芳淀。
English: On the 16th, an order was issued for the imperial family's bank account to be stationed in Tokyo's Noboyodo.

古文：壬子，诏以敕榜付于越休哥，以南征谕拒马河南六州。
现代文：十七日，下诏将皇上手书文告赐给于越休哥，晓谕拒马河以南六州准备南征。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict was issued to Yue Xiu Ge, instructing him to withdraw from the six states south of the Mahe River and prepare for the southern expedition.

古文：乙卯，幸南京。
现代文：二十日，临幸南京。
English: On the 20th, I visited Nanjing.

古文：戊午，以南院大王留宁言，复南院部民今年租赋。
现代文：二十三日，听从南院大王留宁建议，蠲免南院部民当年应缴纳的租赋。
English: On the 23rd, heeding the suggestion of Liu Ning, the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, he exempted the people of the Southern Yuan Dynasty from paying the rent that year.

古文：壬戌，以银鼠、青鼠及诸物赐京官、僧道、耆老。
现代文：二十七日，将银鼠、青鼠和其他的物品赐给京官、僧人道士和老人。
English: On the 27th, silver mice, green mice and other items were given to Beijing officials, monks, humanitarians and the elderly.

古文：甲子，上与大臣分朋击鞠。
现代文：二十九日，皇上与大臣分组击鞠球。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor and his ministers went out in groups to play bowls.

古文：十一月丙寅朔，党项来贡。
现代文：十一月初一，党项前来进贡。
English: On the first day of November, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，以政事令韩德让守司徒。
现代文：初五，任命政事令韩德让为守司徒。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Han Dejan was appointed as the guardian.

古文：壬申，以古北、松亭、榆关征税不法，致阻商旅，遣使鞫之。
现代文：初七，因古北、松亭、榆关违法征税，致使商旅之事受到阻隔，派使者前往讯问。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, due to the illegal taxation of Gubei, Songting and Shaoguan, the business trip was blocked, and an envoy was sent for questioning.

古文：女直请以兵从征，许之。
现代文：女真请求出兵随军南征，得到允许。
English: Nyoshen requested to send troops to accompany the army's southern expedition and was allowed to do so.

古文：癸酉，御正殿，大劳南征将校。
现代文：初八，皇上御临正殿，大宴南征将校。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a grand banquet was held at the Imperial Palace for the officers of the Southern Expedition.

古文：丙子，南伐，次狭底埚，皇太后新阅辎重兵甲。
现代文：十一日，南征，驻于狭底埚，皇太后亲自检查辎重兵甲。
English: On the 11th day of the Southern Expedition, the Empress Dowager personally inspected the heavy armor stationed in Sanzhida.

古文：丁丑，以休哥为先锋都统。
现代文：十二日，任命休哥为先锋都统。
English: On the 12th, he was appointed as the vanguard of the party.

古文：戊寅，日南至，上率从臣祭酒景宗御容。
现代文：十三日，日南使者至，皇上带领臣下以酒祭祀景宗遗像。
English: On the 13th, the Japanese envoy to the south arrived, and the emperor led his subjects in a wine-sacrifice to venerate the remains of Kagesune.

古文：辛巳，诏以北大王蒲奴宁居奉圣州，山西五州公事，并听与节度使蒲打里共裁决之。
现代文：十六日，诏令北大王蒲奴宁居住于奉圣州，山西五州的公事，听任他与节度使蒲打里共同裁决。
English: On the 16th, the emperor ordered the king of the North, Pununing, to reside in Fengshan Prefecture, Shanxi Province, and let him jointly adjudicate with the governor of the festival, Pudari.

古文：癸未，祭日月，为驸马都尉勤德祈福。
现代文：十八日，祭祀日月，为驸马都尉勤德祈求福佑。
English: On the 18th day, the sun and the moon were worshipped, and blessings were invoked for the diligence of the captain of the horse.

古文：乙酉，置诸部监，勒所部各守营伍，毋相镇杂。
现代文：二十日，设置诸部监，统率其部下各自把守自己的营伍，不得互相混杂。
English: On the 20th, supervisors were set up to lead their subordinates to guard their own battalions, and they were not allowed to mix with each other.

古文：丙戌，遣谋鲁姑、萧继远沿边巡徼。
现代文：二十一日，派谋鲁姑、萧继远在边境巡行视察。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, they sent Mogao Lugu and Xiao Jiyuan to patrol and inspect the border.

古文：以所获宋卒射鬼箭。
现代文：在被俘的宋兵身上射鬼箭。
English: Shoot arrows at the captured Song soldiers.

古文：丁亥，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十二日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 22nd, the heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：辛卯，次白佛塔川，获自落驯狐，以为吉征，祭天地。
现代文：二十六日，皇上驻于白佛塔川，捕获自行跟来的驯狐，认为是吉兆，于是祭祀天地。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the emperor was stationed at the White Buddha Pagoda River, and he caught a tamed fox that he had brought with him. He thought it was a good omen, so he sacrificed heaven and earth.

古文：诏驸马都尉萧继远、林牙谋鲁姑、太尉林八等固守封疆，毋漏间谍。
现代文：诏令驸马都尉萧继远、林牙谋鲁姑、太尉林八等固守边疆，不要让间谍漏网。
English: He ordered Lieutenant Xiao Jiyuan of the Horse Guards, Lieutenant Lin Zhaomuglu and Lieutenant Lin Baha to firmly guard the border and not let the spies slip through the net.

古文：军中无故不得驰马，及纵诸军残南境桑果。
现代文：令军中无故不得纵马飞奔，以及放纵诸军毁坏南境宋国的桑果。
English: He ordered the army not to gallop horses without reason, and allowed the army to destroy the mulberry orchards in the southern Song Dynasty.

古文：壬辰，至唐兴县。
现代文：二十七日，皇上到唐兴县。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to Tangxing County.

古文：时宋军屯滹沱桥北，选将乱射之，桥不能守，进焚其桥。
现代文：此时宋军屯驻于滹沱桥之北，于是选派将领用乱箭射宋军营地，使宋兵不能守桥，然后派人焚毁了这座桥。
English: At this time, the Song army was stationed to the north of the Fen Bridge. Therefore, the general sent a general to shoot the Song army camp with random arrows, so that the Song soldiers could not guard the bridge, and then sent someone to burn the bridge.

古文：癸巳，涉沙河，休哥来议事。
现代文：二十八日，渡过沙河，休哥前来议事。
English: On the 28th, after crossing the Sand River, Xiu Ge came to the meeting.

古文：北皮室详稳排亚献所获宋谍二人，上赐衣物，令还招谕泰州。
现代文：北皮室详稳排亚献上俘获的两名宋间谍，皇上赐给他衣物，让他回去招抚晓谕泰州。
English: Bei Liguo carefully and steadily lined up the two captured Song spies and presented them to the emperor. The emperor gave him clothes and let him go back to Taizhou.

古文：楮特部节度使卢补古、都监耶律盼与宋战于泰州，不利。
现代文：楮特部节度使卢补古、都监耶律目兮与宋兵交战于泰州，失利。
English: Lu Zhigu, Yerimuxi and Song soldiers fought in Taizhou and lost.

古文：甲午，祭麃鹿神。
现代文：二十九日，祭祀鹿神。
English: On the 29th, the deer god was no longer worshipped.

古文：以卢补古临阵遁逃，夺告身一通；其判官、都监各杖之。
现代文：因卢补古临阵脱逃，褫夺其授官文书一份，其属下判官、都监都受到杖责。
English: Due to Lu Zhigu's escape from the front line, one of his official documents was stolen, and his subordinate judges and supervisors were all punished with the cane.

古文：郎君拽剌双骨里遇宋先锋于望都，擒其士卒九人，获甲马十一，赐酒及银器。
现代文：郎君拽剌双骨里在望郡遭遇宋先头部队，活捉九个宋兵，获取十一匹马；皇上赐给他酒和银器。
English: The Emperor gave him wine and silverware after he caught nine Song soldiers alive and captured eleven horses.

古文：乙未，以卢补古等罪诏谕诸军。
现代文：三十日，将卢补古等人的罪状在各军中张布。
English: On the 30th, the charges against Lu Shigu and others were made public among the troops.

古文：以御盏郎君化哥权楮特部节度使，横帐郎君佛留为都监，代卢补古。
现代文：任命御盏郎君化哥暂时代理楮特部节度使之职，横帐郎君佛留任都监以代替卢补古。
English: Appointed Guozhen Langjunhua brother to temporarily hold the position of the special department of the Political and Legal Affairs Bureau, and appointed Guozhen Langjunhua to remain as the capital supervisor to replace Lu Zhigu.

古文：权领国舅军桃畏请置二校领散卒，诏以郎君世音、颇德等充。
现代文：权领国舅军桃畏请设置两个校官统领散兵，皇上下诏命郎君世音、颇德等充任此职。
English: Emperor Taobao, the sovereign ruler of the country, requested the establishment of two school officials to lead the scattered soldiers, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint Rong Jun Shiyin, Po De and others to serve in this position.

古文：命彰德军节度使萧闼览、将军迪子略地东路。
现代文：命令彰德军节度使萧闼览、将军迪子在东路攻城略地。
English: He ordered the German troops to advance to the east, so that General Xiao Jizhang and General Di Zi attacked the city on the east road.

古文：诏休哥、排亚等议军事。
现代文：诏命休哥、排亚等商议军事。
English: The imperial edict ordered Kyuko and the exclusion of Asia to discuss military affairs.

古文：十二月己亥，休哥败宋军于望都，遣人献俘。
现代文：十二月初五，休哥在望都击败宋军，派人献上俘虏。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Xiu Ge defeated the Song army in Wangdu and sent someone to present the captives.

古文：壬寅，营于滹沱北，诏休哥以骑兵绝宋兵，毋令入邢州；命太师王六谨侦候。
现代文：初八，皇上在滹沱北面安营，诏令休哥带领骑兵隔断宋兵，不要让他们进入邢州；命令太师王六注意侦察宋兵动向。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the emperor set up camp in the north of Anhui, and issued an imperial edict ordering Xiu Ge to lead the cavalry to cut off the Song soldiers and not let them enter Anhui; he ordered the Grand Master Wang Li to pay attention to the reconnaissance of the Song soldiers.

古文：癸卯，小校曷主遇宋辎重，引兵杀获甚众，并焚其刍粟。
现代文：初九，小校曷主与宋辎重队相遇，带兵杀死俘虏许多宋兵，并烧掉了宋军的粮草。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the first year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th

古文：甲辰，诏南大王与休哥合势进讨，宰相安宁领迪离部及三克军殿。
现代文：初十，诏令南大王与休哥联兵进讨，宰相安宁率领迪离部及三克军殿后。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Emperor Dahal ordered King Nanda and King Xiu Ge to advance with a joint army, and Prime Minister Anning led Di Liibu and the Three Kingdoms Army.

古文：上率大军与宋将刘廷让、李敬源战于莫州，败之。
现代文：皇上亲率大军与宋将刘廷让、李敬源在莫州交战，击败宋军。
English: The emperor's relatives led a large army to fight Song generals Liu Tingzhang and Li Jingyuan in Mozhou, defeating the Song army.

古文：乙巳，擒宋将贺令图、杨重进等。国舅详稳挞烈哥、宫使萧打里死之。
现代文：十一日，活捉宋将贺令图、杨重进等人；国舅详稳挞烈哥、宫使萧打里战死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Song general He Lingtu, Yang Chongjin and others were captured alive; Guo Jingwen's brother and palace official Xiao Daili died in the battle.

古文：丙午，诏休哥以下入内殿，赐酒劳之。
现代文：十二日，诏令休哥以下将领到内殿，赐酒慰劳他们。
English: On the twelfth day, he ordered the generals, including Shugo, to go to the inner hall, and gave them wine to console them.

古文：丁未，筑京观。
现代文：十三日，用宋兵尸体筑成京观。
English: On the 13th, the corpses of Song soldiers were used to build the Great Wall.

古文：复以南京禁军击杨团城，守将以城降。
现代文：又派南京禁军进攻杨团城，守城将领投降。
English: He also sent the Nanjing Forbidden Army to attack Yangtuan City, and the garrison commander surrendered.

古文：诏禁侵掠。
现代文：皇上下诏严禁士兵掳掠。
English: The Emperor's edict strictly forbade soldiers to kidnap and plunder.

古文：己酉，营神榆村，诏上杨团城粟麦、兵甲之数。
现代文：十五日，设营于神榆村，诏令奏上杨团城的粮食及兵器数目。
English: On the 15th, the camp was set up in Shenshan Village, and the number of grain and weapons in Yangtuan Town was reported by imperial edict.

古文：辛亥，以黑白二牲祭天地。
现代文：十七日，用黑白两种牲口祭祀天地。
English: On the 17th, black and white animals were used to worship heaven and earth.

古文：癸丑，拔冯母镇，大纵俘掠。
现代文：十九日，攻克冯母镇，纵容士兵大肆抢掠。
English: On the 19th, Fengmu Town was conquered, and soldiers were allowed to loot and pillage.

古文：丙辰，邢州降。
现代文：二十二日，邢州投降。
English: On the 22nd, Zhangzhou surrendered.

古文：丁巳，拔深州，以不即降，诛守将以下，纵兵大掠。
现代文：二十三日，攻克深州，因为深州投降不及时，诛杀守将以下官员，放纵士兵大肆抢掠。
English: On the 23rd, Shenzhou was conquered. Because Shenzhou's surrender was not timely, the following officials fought and killed the defenders, and allowed the soldiers to loot and plunder.

古文：李继迁引五百骑款塞，愿婚大国，永作藩辅。
现代文：李继迁带领五百骑兵前来通好，愿意与大国结为姻亲，永远作为辅佐藩国。
English: Li Jiquan led five hundred cavalrymen to come and make goodwill, and was willing to become in-laws with a big country, forever as a vassal state.

古文：诏以王子帐节度使耶律襄之女汀封义成公主下嫁，赐马三千匹。
现代文：下诏封王子帐节度使耶律襄之女汀为义成公主，将她下嫁李继迁，并赐给他三千匹马。
English: He made the daughter of Ye Lu Xiang the princess of Yicheng, married her to Li Jiji, and gave him three thousand horses.

