古文：邢卲，字子才，河间鄚人，魏太常贞之后。
现代文：邢邵，字子才，河间莫阝地人氏，魏太常贞的后代。
English: Xiao Shao, Zi Zi Cai, the descendants of Wei Tai Chang Zhen.

古文：父□，魏光禄卿。
现代文：父虬，魏光禄卿。
English: His father, Wei Guanglu.

古文：卲小字吉，少时有避，遂不行名。
现代文：邵小字吉，年轻时有所避忌，遂不行名。
English: Shao Xiao Zeki, when he was young, had some scruples, so he couldn't be famous.

古文：年五岁，魏吏部郎清河崔亮见而奇之，曰： 此子后当大成，位望通显。 
现代文：年五岁，魏吏部郎清河人崔亮见到他后很是怪异，说： 这孩子成人后一定大有作为，官位名声会是显达的。 
English: When he was five years old, Cui Liang, the head of Wei's cadre division and a native of Qinghe, was very surprised to see him. He said, "This child will surely do great things when he grows up, and his official position and reputation will be outstanding."

古文：十岁，便能属文，雅有才思，聪明强记，日诵万余言。
现代文：十岁，便能作文，雅有才思，聪明强记，日诵万余言。
English: At the age of ten, he was able to write composition, had elegant talent, was clever and strong in memory, and recited more than ten thousand words every day.

古文：族兄峦，有人伦鉴，谓子弟曰： 宗室中有此儿，非常人也。 
现代文：族兄峦，有识人之鉴，对子弟们说： 宗族有此儿，是大家的荣耀。 
English: The elder brother of the clan, Zou, who was a man of discernment, said to his sons: "It is an honor for all of us that our clan is here.

古文：少在洛阳，会天下无事，与时名胜专以山水游宴为娱，不暇勤业。
现代文：年轻时在洛阳，适逢天下太平，同名流们一道，专以游山玩水为乐，不顾及学业。
English: When he was young in Luoyang, when the world was at peace, together with celebrities, he enjoyed hiking in the mountains and playing in the water, regardless of his studies.

古文：尝因霖雨，乃读汉书，五日，略能遍记之。
现代文：曾因为连降大雨，无法出门，便静心于《汉书》，五天，就可以记诵。
English: Once, unable to go out because of continuous heavy rain, he meditated on the "Chinese Classics" and was able to recite it in five days.

古文：后因饮谑倦，方广寻经史，五行俱下，一览便记，无所遗忘。
现代文：后来由于饮酒谑戏过度，而觉乏味，广寻经史，五行俱下，一览就能记住，却无遗漏。
English: Later, due to excessive drinking and gambling, he felt bored and searched the sutras extensively. He could memorize all five sutras at a glance, but there were no omissions.

古文：文章典丽，既赡且速。
现代文：撰写文章很是典雅华丽，既丰富也很快捷。
English: The article is elegantly and beautifully written, both informative and quick.

古文：年未二十，名动衣冠。
现代文：年未二十，在衣冠之士中就很有影响了。
English: Less than twenty years old, he is well known among dignitaries and celebrities.

古文：尝与右北平阳固、河东裴伯茂、从兄罘、河南陆道晖等至北海王昕舍宿饮，相与赋诗、凡数十首，皆在主人奴处。
现代文：他曾同右北平阳固、河东裴伯茂、从兄罘、河南陆道晖等人到北海王昕家中留宿饮酒，一同赋诗，共有几十首，都由主人的奴仆保管。
English: He used to stay and drink at the home of Beihai Wang Yao with the Right North Pingyanggu, Hedong Pei Bo Mao, from the elder brother, Henan Lu Dao Yao and others, and together they composed dozens of poems, all of which were kept by the master's servants.

古文：旦日奴行，诸人求诗不得，卲皆为诵之，诸人有不认诗者，奴还得本，不误一字。
现代文：第二天早晨，奴出门去了，人们找诗不到，十分着急，邵便一首首地背了出来，有人不承认某诗为自己所作，奴归，拿出诗本对照，不错一字。
English: The next morning, he went out of the house. People couldn't find the poems and were very anxious. Shao recited them one by one. Some people didn't recognize that a certain poem was their own work. He took out his poetry book and compared it. It was a good poem.

古文：诸人方之王粲。
现代文：主人把他比作王粲。
English: These people compare him to a king.

古文：吏部尚书陇西李神□大相钦重，引为忘年之交。
现代文：吏部尚书陇西人李神俊极其敬重他，同他结成了忘年之交。
English: Li Shenjun, a Westerner from Shangshu County, respected him very much and formed a long-lasting friendship with him.

古文：释巾为魏宣武挽郎，除奉朝请，迁著作佐郎。
现代文：释褐为魏宣武帝的挽郎，除奉朝请，迁著作佐郎。
English: Shih-huang was the groom of Emperor Xuanwu of the Wei Dynasty. In addition to being invited to the imperial court, he was transferred to the imperial palace.

古文：深为领军元叉所礼，叉新除尚书令，神□与陈郡袁翻在席，叉令卲作谢表，须臾便成，以示诸宾。
现代文：深得领军元叉礼遇，叉刚任尚书令，神俊与陈郡人袁翻在座，叉请邵代作谢表，只一会儿就写成了。
English: Yuan Xuan, the leader of the army, was treated with great courtesy. Xuan Gang was appointed as Shang Shuling, and Shen Jun and Chen County people Yuan Fu were present. Xuan asked Shao Dai to make a thank-you list, and it was written in just a moment.

古文：神□曰： 邢卲此表，足使袁公变色。 
现代文：叉请客人们过目。神俊说： 邢邵此表，的确可以让袁公变脸色。 
English: Shen Jun said: "This watch can really make Yuan Gong change his face.

古文：孝昌初，与黄门侍郎李琰之对典朝仪。
现代文：孝昌初，同黄门侍郎李琰之执掌朝仪。
English: It was the first time for Xiao Chang to hold the morning ceremony together with the Yellow Gate's chamberlain Li Xizhi.

古文：自孝明之后，文雅大盛，卲雕虫之美，独步当时，每一文初出，京师为之纸贵，读诵俄遍远近。
现代文：从孝明帝开始，文雅大盛，邵则是雕虫之美，独步当时，每一篇文章问世，京师便为之纸贵，读诵很快遍及远近。
English: From the beginning of Xiao Mingdi, gentleness was in full bloom, and Shao was the beauty of carving insects. At that time, every article came out, and the Beijing division was expensive. Reading and reciting quickly spread far and wide.

古文：于时袁翻与范阳祖莹位望通显，文笔之美，见称先达，以卲藻思华赡，深共嫉之。
现代文：这个时期，袁翻与范阳祖莹名望显达，文笔华美，被称之为先达。由于邵藻思华美，两人很是嫉妒他。
English: During this period, Yuan Rong and Fan Yang Zu Ying were famous and famous, and their writings were beautiful, and they were called "pioneers." Because Shaoso thought about beauty, the two were very jealous of him.

古文：每洛中贵人拜职，多凭卲为谢表。
现代文：每当洛中贵人得到官职，多请邵作谢表。
English: Whenever a high-ranking person in Luo gets an official post, please ask Shao to make a thank-you list.

古文：尝有一贵胜初受官，大集宾食，翻与卲俱在坐。
现代文：曾经有一贵胜初次受到官爵，大肆聚会客宾，设宴庆贺，翻与邵都应邀在坐。
English: Once upon a time, there was a nobleman who received a peerage for the first time. He had a large gathering of guests, set up a banquet to celebrate, and invited both Tuo and Shao to attend.

古文：翻意主人托其为让表。
现代文：翻心里暗想主人会请自己作谢表的。
English: I thought to myself that my host would ask me to write a thank-you note.

古文：遂命卲作之。
现代文：但主人却命邵制作。
English: But the owner ordered it to be made.

古文：翻甚不悦，每告人云： 邢家小儿尝客作章表，自买黄纸，写而送之。 
现代文：翻很不高兴，常常对人说： 邢家小儿常受人雇佣造章表，自己买来黄纸，写完之后再给人送去。 
English: He was very unhappy, and often said to people: The children of the Xing family are often hired to make a chart, buy yellow paper themselves, and then send it to people after they have finished writing.

古文：卲恐为翻所害，乃辞以疾。
现代文：邵担心遭受翻的陷害，便托病辞掉了官职。
English: Fearing that he was being set up for a coup, Shao resigned from his post on the pretext of illness.

古文：属尚书令元罗出镇青州，启为府司马。
现代文：正好遇上尚书令元罗出镇青州，朝廷同意邵做他的府司马。
English: Just as Shang Shuling ordered Yuan Luo out of the town of Qingzhou, the imperial court agreed to make Shao his prefectural secretary.

古文：遂在青土，终日酣赏，尽山泉之致。
现代文：入青州后，整日沉醉于游山玩水之中，几乎走遍了所有的名胜古迹。
English: After entering Qingzhou, he spent the whole day indulging in hiking and playing in the water, and almost visited all the places of interest.

古文：永安初，累迁中书侍郎，所作诏诰，文体宏丽。
现代文：永安初，迁中书侍郎，其所制作的诏诰，文体宏丽。
English: At the beginning of the Yong'an era, he was a calligrapher in the middle of the relocation, and the imperial rescript he produced was magnificent in style.

古文：及尒朱荣入洛，京师扰乱，卲与弘农杨愔避地嵩高山。
现代文：尔朱荣占据洛阳，京师动乱，邵便与弘农人杨忄音避乱嵩高山中。
English: Zhu Rong occupied Luoyang, the capital was in turmoil, and Shao Bin and Hong farmer Yang Xuanying fled the turmoil to the high mountains.

古文：普泰中，兼给事黄门侍郎，寻为散骑常侍。
现代文：普泰中，兼给事黄门侍郎，不久为散骑常侍。
English: In Putai's time, he was appointed as Huangmen waiter, and soon after, he was appointed as Sanzhi's regular attendant.

古文： 灵太后令曰： 配飨大礼，为国之本，比以戎马在郊，未遑修缮。
现代文：太昌初，敕令长期在内省当值，供给饭食，命复按尚书门下事，凡朝廷准备除拜高官，都要先来征求邵的意见，然后再作处理。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, the imperial command was on duty for a long time in introspection, provided meals, and issued orders according to Shang Shumen. Whenever the court was preparing to remove high-ranking officials, they had to first solicit Shao's opinion, and then deal with it.

古文：今四表晏宁，当□有司，别议经始。 
现代文：除卫将军、国子祭酒。因双亲年迈返家照护，帝诏所在州郡拨给邵兵力五人，并请他一岁入朝一次，以备顾问。
English: In order to take care of his aging parents who had returned home, the emperor assigned five soldiers to Shao in Zhouzhou County and asked him to come to the imperial court once a year as an adviser.

古文： 累迁太常卿、中书监，摄国子祭酒。
现代文：母亲去世，哀毁骨立，守孝超过了礼仪的规定。
English: When his mother died, he grieved and grieved, and his filial piety exceeded the rules of etiquette.

古文：是时朝臣多守一职，带领二官甚少，卲顿居三职，并是文学之首，当世荣之。
现代文：后来杨忄音、魏收以及邵请求朝廷批准设置学堂。累迁太常卿、中书监，摄国子祭酒。是时朝臣多为一职，带领二官的人很少，邵一下子身兼三职，并是文学之首，所以受到了时论的称颂。
English: Later, Yang Xuanying, Wei Jie and Shao requested the approval of the imperial court to set up a school. He was successively relocated to Taizhongqing, the Chinese book supervisor, and the photographer of the national son's sacrificial wine. At that time, the courtier was mostly a post, and there were few people who led the two officials. Shao simultaneously held three posts, and was the head of literature, so he was praised by the theory of time.

古文：文宣幸晋阳，路中频有甘露之瑞，朝臣皆作甘露颂，尚书符令卲为之序。
现代文：文宣巡幸晋阳，途中几次见到甘露的瑞兆，故朝臣都作《甘露颂》，尚书下令请邵为这些颂作序。
English: When Wen Xuan visited Jinyang, he saw the auspicious signs of nectar several times on the way, so the courtiers all made "Ode to Nectar." Shangshu ordered Shao to make these odes as a prelude.

古文：及文宣皇帝崩，凶礼多见讯访，□撰哀策。
现代文：文宣皇帝驾崩时，朝廷多向其咨询访问凶礼，受敕撰制哀策。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan passed away, the imperial court mostly consulted him about the funeral rites, and he was asked to prepare a condolence plan.

古文：后授特进，卒。
现代文：后授特进，卒。
English: Later, the Imperial Court awarded him a special promotion. He died.

古文：卲率情简素，内行修谨，兄弟亲姻之间，称为雍睦。
现代文：邵性情简素，内行修谨，兄弟亲姻之间，均能和睦相处。
English: Shao's nature is simple, he is a scholar and a gentleman, and he and his brother can get along well with each other.

古文：博览坟籍，无不通晓，晚年尤以五经章句为意，穷其指要。
现代文：博览坟籍，无不通晓。晚年尤其留意《五经》章句，努力穷尽指要。
English: In his later years, he paid particular attention to the chapters of the "Five Classics" and tried his best to learn the essentials.

古文：吉凶礼仪，公私谘禀，质疑去惑，为世指南。
现代文：吉凶礼仪，公私咨询，质疑去惑，为世人的指南。
English: The etiquette of marriage, whether public or private, as long as he is consulted, will immediately release doubts, thus becoming a guide for the world.

古文：每公卿会议，事关典故，卲援笔立成，证引该洽，帝命朝章，取定俄顷。
现代文：每当公卿会议，事关旧典之时，邵援笔即成，证引合适。帝请其制定朝章，俄顷而毕。
English: Whenever there is a meeting of court nobles, when it comes to ancient texts, Shao Yuan's pen is ready, and the citation is appropriate. The emperor asked him to formulate the morning chapter, and it was over in an instant.

古文：词致宏远，独步当时，与济阴温子升为文士之冠，世论谓之温、邢。
现代文：词藻宏远，独占鳌头。与济阴人温子升为文士之冠，时论称之为 温、邢 。
English: His vocabulary is vast, and he is the only one to have mastered the art of writing. He was crowned as the best scribe together with Atsuko, a native of Jilin. Historians call them Atsuko and On.

古文：巨鹿魏收，虽天才艳发，而年事在二人之后，故子升死后，方称邢、魏焉。
现代文：巨鹿魏收，虽天才勃发，但年龄在二人之下，只是在子升去世之后，才称 邢、魏 。
English: The giant deer Wei Jie, although a genius, was under the age of two. It was only after Zisheng's death that he was called Wei.

古文：虽望实兼重，不以才位傲物。
现代文：虽名望贵重，却不以才位处世傲物。
English: Although his name is true, he doesn't cling to his position and belittles others.

古文：脱略简易，不修威仪，车服器用，充事而已。
现代文：脱易简单，不修威仪。车服器用，要求极低。
English: He lives a simple, unadorned life. The clothes worn by officials, the carriages they ride in, and the utensils they use, he only has them refilled and does not use them often.

古文：有斋不居，坐卧恒在一小屋。
现代文：不居斋室，坐卧经常在一小屋之中。
English: They do not live in a house, but often sleep in a hut.

古文：果饵之属，或置之梁上，宾至，下而共噉。
现代文：果饼等食物，常置放梁下，客人到来，便取下来共同分享。
English: Fruit cakes and other food are often placed under the beam. When guests arrive, they can take them down and share them.

古文：天姿质素，特安异同，士无贤愚，皆能顾接，对客或解衣觅虱，且与剧谈。
现代文：天资质朴，平易近人，士无贤愚，皆能平等对待。与客人谈话时甚至会解开衣服寻觅虱子，不停手，不住口。
English: He is simple by nature, approachable, and can treat everyone equally. When talking to guests, he will even undo his clothes to look for socks. He never stops talking.

古文：有书甚多，而不甚校。
现代文：藏书甚丰，却不喜校对文字。
English: He has a large collection of books, but he doesn't like to proofread.

古文：见人校书，常笑曰： 何愚之甚，天下书至死读不可遍，焉能始复校此。
现代文：看见他人校勘，就会戏笑道： 为何这般愚蠢？天下的书一辈子都读不完，怎么可以把时间花在校勘之上。
English: When he sees someone else's proofreading, he would teasingly say, "Why is it so stupid? You can't read all the books in the world in a lifetime, so how can you spend time on proofreading?"

古文：且误书思之，更是一适。 
现代文：再说思虑误书，更是一种快乐。 
English: Not to mention the thought of misreading a book, it's even more of a joy.

古文：妻弟李季节，才学之士，谓子才曰： 世间人多不聪明，思误书何由能得。 
现代文：妻弟李季节，亦为才学之士，他对子才说： 世上的人很多不聪明，思考误书能够得到什么？ 
English: His brother-in-law Li Xizhe, also a man of learning, said to his son: Many people in the world are not smart. What can you get by thinking about the wrong book?

古文：子才曰： 若思不能得，便不劳读书。 
现代文：子才说： 如果思考都得不到知识，那就不花精力读书了。 
English: Zicai said: If you can't get knowledge without thinking, then you don't need to spend energy reading.

古文：与妇甚疏，未尝内宿。
现代文：邵与妻关系甚是疏远，很少与她呆在一起。
English: Shao is estranged from his wife and rarely spends time with her.

古文：自云尝昼入内合，为狗所吠，言毕便抚掌大笑。
现代文：自称有一次白天进内阁当值，遭狗威胁，说完便拍掌大笑。
English: He said that he was once on duty in the cabinet during the day, was threatened by a dog, and then clapped his hands and laughed.

古文：性好谈赏，不能闲独，公事归休，恒须宾客自伴。
现代文：性好剧谈，不能独处，公事完毕，常须宾客陪伴。
English: He loves to talk about dramas, can't be left alone, and often has to be accompanied by guests after work.

古文：事寡嫂甚谨，养孤子恕，慈爱特深。
现代文：服事寡嫂极其殷勤。豢养孤儿恕，慈爱特深。
English: She served her widowed mother-in-law very diligently. She raised orphans and was very compassionate.

古文：在兖州，有都信云恕疾，便忧之，废寝食，颜色贬损。
现代文：在兖州的时候，有人向其报告说恕病重，邵就为他忧愁，废寝忘食，身体憔悴。
English: When he was in Zhangzhou, someone reported to him that he was seriously ill, and Shao was worried about him, losing sleep and forgetting to eat, and his body was exhausted.

古文：及卒，人士为之伤心，痛悼虽甚，竟不再哭，宾客吊慰，抆泪而已。
现代文：儿子大宝死，人们很是伤心，邵悲痛极盛，竟哭不出声来，宾客前来吊唁慰问，他只能揩拭眼泪。
English: When his son Dabao died, people were very sad. Shao was so grief-stricken that he couldn't even cry. When guests came to offer condolences, he could only wipe away his tears.

古文：其高情达识，开遣滞累，东门吴以还，所未有也。
现代文：其文雅情趣，高博见识，开导启发，排疑解难，东门吴以来，还没有过。
English: It's fun to have time to think about books that have mistakes in them.

古文：有集三十卷，见行于世。
现代文：有集三十卷，流行于世。
English: There are thirty volumes in the collection, which is popular in the world.

古文：子大宝，有文情。
现代文：子大宝，亦有文情。
English: Zi Dabao, also has a poem.

古文：孽子大德、大道，略不识字焉。
现代文：庶子大德、大道，却识字不多。
English: His son-in-law is a great scholar and a great man, but he is not very literate.

