古文：张承业，字继元，本姓康，同州人。
现代文：张承业，字继元，本姓康，同州人。
English: Zhang Chengye, alias Jiyuan, real surname Kang, from Tongzhou.

古文：咸通中，内常侍张泰畜为假子。
现代文：咸通年中，内常侍张泰养为义子。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Xian, Zhang Taiyang, the imperial equerry, became his adopted son.

古文：光启中，主郃阳军事，赐紫，入为内供奉。
现代文：光启年中，主持阳军事，赐紫衣，入朝廷为内供奉。
English: In the mid-year of Guangqi, he presided over the Yang military, bestowed a purple robe, and entered the imperial court for internal worship.

古文：武皇之讨王行瑜，承业累奉使渭北，因留监武皇军事，贼平，改酒坊使。
现代文：武皇讨伐王行瑜时，张承业多次奉使渭北，因而留下监守武皇军事，贼寇平定，改任酒坊使。
English: When Emperor Wu was fighting against Wang Xingyu, Zhang Chengye was sent to the north of Shandong several times. As a result, he was left in charge of guarding Emperor Wu's military, suppressing thieves and robbers, and was reassigned as a wine steward.

古文：三年，昭宗将幸太原，以承业与武皇善，用除为河东监军，密令迎驾。
现代文：三年，昭宗将到太原，因为张承业与武皇关系密切，便任为河东监军，密令迎驾。
English: Three years later, Akimune was going to Taiyuan, and since Zhang Chengye had a close relationship with Emperor Wu, he was appointed as the inspector of troops in Hedong and secretly ordered to meet him.

古文：既而昭宗幸华州，就加左监门卫将军。
现代文：不久昭宗到华州，就加封为左监门卫将军。
English: Soon after, Zhaozong went to Huazhou and was given the additional title of General of the Left Guard.

古文：驾在凤翔，承业屡请出师晋、绛，以为岐人掎角。
现代文：御驾在凤翔时，张承业屡次请出兵晋、绛二地，以作为岐人的掎角牵制敌人。
English: When he was on his way to Fengxiang, Zhang Chengye repeatedly sent troops to Jin and Qin to act as a buffer against the enemy.

古文：崔魏公之诛宦官也，武皇伪戮罪人首级以奉诏，匿承业于斛律寺，昭宗遇弑，乃复请为监军。
现代文：崔魏公诛杀宦官时，武皇以被杀罪人的首级敷衍诏命，把张承业藏在斛律寺，昭宗被杀，便又请任为监军。
English: When Cui Wei Gong killed the eunuch, Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict with the head of the slain criminal at the top, hiding Zhang Chengye in the Jialu Temple. When Zhaozong was killed, he was appointed as the supervisor of the army.

古文：夹城之役，遣承业求援于凤翔。
现代文：夹城战役中，派张承业向凤翔求援。
English: During the Battle of Jiancheng, Zhang Chengye was sent to Fengxiang to ask for help.

古文：时河中阻绝，自离石渡河，春冰方泮，凌澌奔蹙，舣舟不得渡，因祷河神。是夜，梦神人谓曰： 子但渡，流冰无患。 
现代文：此时河中阻绝，从离石渡过黄河，春冰刚解冻，冰凌奔腾，小船不能渡，因而向河神祈祷，这一夜梦见神人对他说： 你只管渡河，流冰不会妨害你。 
English: At this time, the river was blocked, from the stone to cross the Yellow River, the spring ice had just thawed, the ice was rushing, the boat could not cross, so he prayed to the river god. That night, he dreamed of the godman saying to him: You just cross the river, the ice will not hinder you.

古文：既寤，津吏报曰： 河冰合矣。 
现代文：醒来后，渡口小吏报告： 黄河冰合在一起了。 
English: After waking up, Watariguchi Xiaoli reported: The Yellow River ice has melted.

古文：凌晨，蹑冰而济，旋踵冰解。
现代文：凌晨，踩着冰过河，不一会冰又化开。
English: In the early morning, I crossed the river on the ice, and the ice melted again.

古文：使还，武皇病笃，启手之夕，召承业属之曰： 吾兒孤弱，群臣纵横，后事公善筹之。 
现代文：出使回来，武皇病重，临终之夜，召张承业嘱咐说 ：我儿子孤单力弱，群臣骄横难制，后事您善为筹划。 
English: After returning from the expedition, Emperor Wu was seriously ill, and on the night of his death, he summoned Zhang Chengye and instructed him, "My son is weak and alone, and his retainers are arrogant and difficult to control. You are good at planning for the future.

古文：承业奉遗顾，爰立嗣王，平内难，策略居多。
现代文：张承业奉武皇遗命，于是立嗣王，平内乱，策略居多。
English: Zhang Chengye obeyed the Emperor Wu's last order, so he set up a successor king, quelled the civil war, and made most of the strategies.

古文：既终易月之制，即请出师救潞，破贼夹城。
现代文：守丧之日结束后，便请出兵救潞州，在外城消灭贼兵。
English: After the end of the day of mourning, please send troops to rescue Zhangzhou and eliminate the bandits in the outer city.

古文：庄宗深感其意，兄事之，亲幸承业私第，升堂拜母，赐遗优厚。
现代文：庄宗深深感激他的心意，视为兄长，亲自到张承业私第，升堂拜见他母亲，赏赐优厚。
English: Zhuangzong was deeply grateful for his kindness, and regarded him as his elder brother. He personally went to Zhang Chengye's private residence to visit his mother, and received a generous reward.

古文：时庄宗初行墨制，凡除拜之命，皆成于卢汝弼之手。
现代文：此时庄宗刚开始发布命令，凡是授职之令，全出自卢汝弼之手。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong had just begun to issue orders, and all the orders for conferring positions came from Lu Ruxuan's hand.

古文：汝弼既自为户部侍郎，乃请与承业改官及开国邑，承业拒而不受。
现代文：卢汝弼既以自己为户部侍郎，便请给张承业改官和开国邑，张承业拒而不受。
English: Since Lu Ruchen considered himself to be the steward of the household, he asked Zhang Chengye to change his post and open a country town, but Zhang Chengye refused.

古文：其后，但称本朝旧官而已。
现代文：以后只称呼他为本朝旧官而已。
English: From then on, he was only referred to as an old official of the imperial court.

古文：天祐中，幽州刘守光败，其府掾冯道归太原，承业辟为本院巡官。承业重其文章履行，甚见待遇。
现代文：天祐年中，幽州刘守光失败，其府掾冯道归顺太原，张承业授他为本院巡官，张承业看重他的文章行事，待遇很优。
English: In the middle of the reign of Heaven and Earth, Liu Shuguang of Yuzhou failed, and his prefect, Feng Dao, fell to Shun Taiyuan. Zhang Chengye awarded him as the inspector of this hospital. Zhang Chengye valued his articles and acted, and the treatment was excellent.

古文：时有周元豹者，善人伦鉴，与道不合，谓承业曰： 冯生无前程，公不可过用。 
现代文：当时有周玄豹，善于给人看相，与冯道不合，对张承业说： 冯生没有前程，您不可过分重用。 
English: At that time, Zhou Xuanbao, who was good at giving people a look, disagreed with Feng Dao and said to Zhang Chengye: Feng Sheng has no future, you should not overuse him.

古文：管书记卢质闻之曰： 我曾见杜黄裳司空写真图，道之状貌酷类焉，将来必副大用，元豹之言，不足信也。 
现代文：掌管文书的卢质听了后说： 我曾见杜黄裳司空的写真图，冯道的像貌很像他，将来必有大用，周玄豹的话，不足信。 
English: Lu Qian, who was in charge of the paperwork, said after listening: I once saw a photo of Du Huang Shoshi Kuang. Feng Dao's appearance is very similar to him, which will be of great use in the future. Zhou Xuanbao's words are not credible.

古文：承业荐为霸府从事焉。
现代文：张承业荐举为霸府从事。
English: Zhang Chengye is engaged in the recommendation of the prefectural government.

古文：柏乡之役，王师既逼汴营，周德威虑其奔冲，坚请退舍。
现代文：柏乡之战，庄宗军队已逼近汴军营垒，周德威担心他们冲锋，坚请撤退。
English: In the Battle of Baoxiang, Zhuangzong's army was already approaching the camp of Shao's army. Zhou Dewei was worried that they would charge, and insisted that they withdraw.

古文：庄宗怒其懦，不听，垂帐而寝，诸将不敢言事，咸诣监军请白。
现代文：庄宗怒其懦弱，不理他，放下帐子睡觉，诸将不敢言事，都找监军请他去说。
English: Zhuang Zong was angry at his cowardice, ignored him, put down the curtain and went to sleep. The generals did not dare to say anything. They all asked the inspector to go and speak to him.

古文：承业遽至牙门，褰帐而入，抚庄宗曰： 此非王安寝时，周德威老将，洞识兵势，姑务万全，言不可忽。 
现代文：张承业立即到牙门，掀开帐子进入，抚摸庄宗说 ：现在不是王安寝的时候，周德威是老将，洞察兵势，务求万全之策，说的话不可忽视。 
English: Zhang Chengye immediately went to the gate, opened the curtain to enter, stroked Zhuangzong and said: Now is not the time for Wang An to sleep. Zhou Dewei is a veteran, insight into the military situation, and strive for a perfect solution. What he said should not be ignored.

古文：庄宗蹶然而兴曰： 予方思之。 
现代文：庄宗站起来说 ：我正在想此事。 
English: Zhuangzong stood up and said, "I'm thinking about it."

古文：其夕，收军保鄗邑。
现代文：这一夜，撤军保高阝邑。
English: That night, the withdrawal of troops from Baogao County began.

古文：德威讨刘守光，令承业往视贼势，因请庄宗自行，果成大捷。
现代文：周德威讨伐刘守光，命张承业前去探视敌兵情况，因而请庄宗亲自行进，果然获得大胜。
English: Zhou Dewei fought against Liu Shouguang, and ordered Chengye to go to visit the enemy soldiers, so he asked Zhuangzong to go in person, and he won a great victory.

古文：承业感武皇厚遇，自庄宗在魏州垂十年，太原军国政事，一委承业；而积聚庾帑，收兵市马，招怀流散，劝课农桑，成是霸基者，承业之忠力也。
现代文：张承业感念武皇厚遇，自庄宗在魏州近十年，太原军国政事，都委托给张承业，而积聚仓储，收兵马，招怀流亡散民，劝耕农桑，促成霸业基础的，是张承业的忠心和努力。
English: Zhang Chengye was impressed by Emperor Wu's generous treatment. Since Zhuangzong had been in Weizhou for nearly ten years, Taiyuan's military and political affairs had all been entrusted to Zhang Chengye. It was Zhang Chengye's loyalty and efforts that accumulated warehouses, collected soldiers and horses, attracted exiles and scattered people, advised farmers to cultivate mulberry, and promoted the foundation of hegemony.

古文：时贞简太后，韩德妃、伊淑妃、诸宅王之贵，洎王之介弟在晋阳宫，或不以其道干于承业，悉不听，逾法禁者必惩，由是贵戚敛手，民俗丕变。
现代文：此时贞简太后、韩德妃、伊淑妃、诸宅王之贵以及王的弟弟在晋阳宫居住的，若不以正当方式求于张承业的，都不答应，违犯法禁的必定予以惩罚，因此贵戚收敛威风，民俗大变。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Zhengjian, Han Defei, Yi Shu Fei, Zhuzhu Wangzhi and Wang's younger brother, who lived in Jinyang Palace, would not agree if they did not legitimately ask Zhang to undertake the business, and those who violated the law would be punished. Therefore, the nobles restrained their arrogance and the folk customs changed dramatically.

古文：或有中伤承业于庄宗者，言专弄威柄，广纳赂遗。
现代文：有人在庄宗跟前中伤张承业，说他专弄权柄，广收贿赂。
English: Someone slandered Zhang Chengye in front of Zhuangzong, saying that he monopolized power and accepted bribes.

古文：庄宗岁时还晋阳宫省太后，须钱蒱博、给伶官，尝置酒于泉府，庄宗酣饮，命兴圣宫使李继岌为承业起舞，既竟，承业出宝带币马奉之。
现代文：庄宗每年多次到晋阳宫看望太后，需要钱赌博、赏给伶官，曾在泉府设酒宴，庄宗酣饮，命兴圣宫使李继岌为张承业起舞，结束后，张承业拿出宝带币马献上。
English: Zhuangzong visited the Empress Dowager at the Jinyang Palace several times a year. He needed money to gamble and reward eunuchs. He once held a wine banquet in Quanfu, Zhuangzong drank, and ordered the Holy Palace to make Li Jizhe dance for Zhang Chengye. After the event, Zhang Chengye presented him with a treasure belt and a horse.

古文：庄宗指钱积谓承业曰： 和哥无钱使，七哥与此一积，宝马非殊惠也。 
现代文：庄宗指着钱堆对张承业说 ：和哥正没钱用，七哥给这一堆，宝马就不是特殊的恩惠了。 
English: Zhuang Zong pointed to the pile of money and said to Zhang Chengye: "Wang Zheng has no money to spend, the seven brothers gave this pile, so the BMW is not a special favor."

古文：承业谢曰： 郎君哥劳，承业自出己俸钱。
现代文：张承业道歉说： 郎君歌舞，我拿出自己的俸钱。
English: Zhang Chengye apologized and said, "Brother-in-law, I've come up with my own salary.

古文：此钱是大王库物，准拟支赡三军，不敢以公物为私礼也。 
现代文：这钱是大王仓库里的，准备支付三军费用，不敢拿公物做私礼。 
English: This money is in the warehouse of the king, ready to pay the expenses of the three armies, and dare not take public property as a personal gift.

古文：庄宗不悦，使酒侵承业。承业曰： 臣老敕使。非为子孙之谋，惜钱为大王基业，王若自要散施，何妨老夫，不过财尽兵散，一事无成。 
现代文：庄宗不高兴，使酒性欺负张承业，张承业说： 我是一个遵循王命的老使者，不是为子孙打算，是可惜这些作为大王基业的钱，王如自己想散施，我老头子也没什么妨碍，不过财尽兵散，将一事无成。 
English: Zhuangzong was not happy, so he bullied Zhang Chengye with alcohol. Zhang Chengye said: I am an old messenger who follows the king's orders. I did not plan for my children and grandchildren. It is a pity that these are the king's inheritance money. If the king wants to give it away, there is nothing to stop my old man. However, if the wealth is dispersed, nothing will be accomplished.

古文：案：《通鉴》作王自取用之，何问仆为！庄宗怒，顾元行钦曰： 取剑来！ 
现代文：庄宗大怒，对元行钦说： 拿剑来！ 
English: Zhuang Zong was furious and said to Yuan Xingqin: "Bring a sword!

古文：承业引庄宗衣，泣而言曰： 仆荷先王遗顾，誓为本朝诛汴贼，为王惜库物，斩承业首，死亦无愧于先王，今日请死！ 
现代文：张承业拉着庄宗的衣服，哭着说： 我受先王遗言，誓为本朝诛杀汴州贼寇，为王爱惜仓库物品，斩我的头，我死也无愧于先王，今日请死！ 
English: Zhang Chengye tugged at Zhuangzong's clothes, crying and said: I accept the last words of the former king, swear to fight and kill Zhangzhou bandits for this dynasty, cherish warehouse items for the king, and cut off my head. My death is also worthy of the former king. Please die today!

古文：阎宝解承业手，令退。
现代文：阎宝拉开张承业的手，令他退下。
English: Yan Bao pulled open Zhang Chengye's hand to make him back down.

古文：承业诟宝曰： 党硃温逆贼，未尝有一言效忠，而敢依阿谄附。 
现代文：张承业骂阎宝说 ：依附朱温的逆贼，不曾有一言效忠诚，却敢阿谀谄附。 
English: Zhang Chengye scolded Yan Bao, saying, "The traitors who have attached themselves to Zhu Wen have never been loyal, but they dare to attach themselves to him."

古文：挥拳踣之。
现代文：挥拳把他打倒。
English: Take him down with a swing of your fist.

古文：太后闻庄宗酒失，急召入。
现代文：太后听说庄宗喝酒出事，急忙召入。
English: When the empress dowager heard that Zhuangzong had had a drinking accident, she hurriedly summoned him.

古文：庄宗性至孝，闻太后召，叩头谢阿业曰： 吾杯酒之间，忤于七哥，太后必怪吾。
现代文：庄宗极孝顺，听说太后召见，叩头向张承业道歉说： 我杯酒之间，顶撞了七哥，太后一定怪罪我。
English: Zhuang Zong was extremely filial, and when he heard that the empress dowager had summoned him, he bowed to Zhang Chengye and apologized, saying, "I bumped into the seventh brother between drinks, and the empress must have blamed me.

古文：七哥为痛饮两卮分谤，可乎？ 
现代文：七哥为我痛饮两杯，替我分担一下指责好吗？ 
English: Brother Seven, drink two cups for me. Can you share the blame for me?

古文：庄宗连饮四钟，劝承业，竟不饮。
现代文：庄宗连饮四杯，劝张承业，竟然不饮。
English: Zhuang Zong drank four cups in a row, and tried to persuade Zhang Chengye not to drink.

古文：庄宗归宫，太后使人谓承业曰： 小兒忤特进，已笞矣，可归第。 
现代文：庄宗回宫，太后使人对张承业说： 小儿冒犯特进，已打了他，可回家。 
English: When Zhuangzong returned to the palace, the empress dowager had someone say to Zhang Chengye: "If your child offends you, you can go home. You have already beaten him."

古文：翌日，太后与庄宗俱幸其第，慰劳之。
现代文：第二天，太后与庄宗都到张承业家，慰劳他。
English: The next day, the empress dowager and Zhuangzong went to Zhang Chengyuan's home to console him.

古文：自是私谒几绝。
现代文：从此私下进见几乎断绝。
English: Since then, private visits have almost ceased.

古文：十四年，承制授开府仪同三司、左卫上将军、燕国公，固辞不受。
现代文：十四年，承制授开府仪同三司、左卫上将军、燕国公，张承业坚决推辞不接受。
English: Fourteen years later, Zhang Chengye resolutely refused to accept the invitation to hold the ceremony of opening the prefectural government with the three divisions, General of the Left Division, and Yan Guoguo.

古文：是时，卢质在庄宗幕下，嗜酒轻傲，尝呼庄宗诸弟为豚犬，庄宗深衔之。
现代文：此时，卢质在庄宗幕下，嗜酒轻傲，曾叫庄宗的几个弟弟为猪狗，庄宗深为记恨。
English: At this time, Lu Qing was under the guise of Zhuangzong, drunk and proud. He once called several of Zhuangzong's younger brothers "pig dogs," which Zhuangzong deeply resented.

古文：承业虑质被祸，因乘间谓庄宗曰： 卢质多行无礼，臣请为大王杀之，可乎？ 
现代文：张承业担心卢质遭祸，便找机会对庄宗说： 卢质多行无礼之事，我请为大王杀掉他，可以吗？ 
English: Zhang Chengye was worried that Lu Qian was in trouble, so he looked for an opportunity to say to Zhuang Zong: Lu Qian often does impolite things, can I please kill him for the great king?

古文：庄宗曰： 予方招礼贤士，以开霸业，七哥何言之过也！ 
现代文：庄宗说： 我正在招引礼遇贤士，以开霸业，七哥怎么说这么错误的话。 
English: Zhuangzong said, "I am trying to attract virtuous and wise men in order to start a domineering business. How can the seventh brother say such a wrong thing?"

古文：承业因耸立而言曰： 大王若能如此，何忧不得天下！ 
现代文：张承业便站立说道 ：大王如能这样，何愁不能得天下。 
English: Zhang Chengye then stood up and said: "If the great king can do this, he will not be able to conquer the world."

古文：其后卢质虽成纵诞，庄宗终能容之，盖承业为之藻藉也。
现代文：以后，卢质虽然有时还会放纵狂妄，庄宗终于能容忍他，这是张承业维护他的缘故。
English: Later, although Lu Qian sometimes indulged in arrogance, Zhuang Zong was finally able to tolerate him, which was the reason why Zhang Chengye defended him.

古文：十八年，庄宗受诸道劝进，将纂帝位。承业以为晋王三代有功于国，先人怒硃氏弑逆，将复旧邦，雠既未平，不宜轻受推戴。
现代文：十八年，庄宗受各地劝进，将继承皇帝位，张承业认为晋王三代人对唐朝有功，先人武皇恨朱氏弑帝叛逆，将恢复唐朝旧邦，仇敌还没平定，不宜轻易接受推戴。
English: In the 18th year, Zhuangzong was persuaded by various regions that he would succeed to the emperor's throne. Zhang Chengye believed that the three generations of Jin kings had made great contributions to the Tang dynasty, and that the ancestors of Emperor Wu hated the Zhu clan's rebellion against Emperor Zhao and would restore the old state of the Tang dynasty. The enemy had not yet been subdued, and it was not appropriate to accept the promotion easily.

古文：方疾作，肩舆之鄴宫，见庄宗曰： 王父子血战三十余年，盖言报国仇雠，复唐宗社。
现代文：这时张承业正生着病，靠人抬着到邺宫，见庄宗说： 大王父子血战三十多年，是因为说要为国家报仇，复兴唐朝宗社。
English: At this time, Zhang Chengye was ill and was carried by someone to the Imperial Palace. See Zhuangzong said: The great king and his son fought a bloody war for more than thirty years because they said they wanted to take revenge for the country and revive the Tang Dynasty Soshe.

古文：今元凶未灭，民赋已殚，而遽先大号，蠹耗财力，臣以为不可一也。
现代文：现在元凶未灭，民财用尽，而突然先立国号，耗费财力，我认为这是第一点不可以的。
English: Now the culprit has not been eliminated, the people's wealth has been exhausted, and suddenly the country has been established first, consuming financial resources. I think this is the first point that should not be allowed.

古文：设使高祖再生，太宗复出，又胡为哉！今大王一旦自立，顿失从前仗义征伐之旨，人情怠矣。
现代文：我自咸通以来，为宫廷服务，每见国家册命大礼，仪仗法物，各部门杂事，要一年多才初步准备好，临到进行正事时仍有不充分的。
English: Since I came to Hamdang, I have been serving the court. Whenever I see the state appointment ceremony, ceremonial and legal matters, and miscellaneous matters in various departments, it takes more than a year to make initial preparations, and when it comes to carrying out the main business, it is still insufficient.

古文：老夫是阉官，不爱大王官职富贵，直以受先王付属之重，欲为大王立万年之基尔。 庄宗曰： 奈诸将何？ 
现代文：王如化家为国，新立宗庙朝廷，不可违背制度，制定礼乐的没见到合适的人，这是我认为第二点不可以的。做事要量力而行，不可听信虚浮的言谈。 庄宗说： 可各位将军要这样，我也奈何不得！ 
English: The second point that I think is unacceptable is that a king cannot change his family into a country and establish a new imperial court with a grand temple without violating the system, and that no suitable person should be found to develop the ritual music. You should do things to the best of your ability and not listen to empty talk. Zhuangzong said, "But if you generals want to do this, I can't help it!

古文：承业知庄宗不从，因号泣而言之。
现代文：张承业知道庄宗不听自己的，因而大哭着谏劝他。
English: Zhang Chengye knew that Zhuangzong did not listen to him, so he cried and tried to persuade him.

古文：臣谨按：《庄宗实录》叙承业谏即位事甚详，惟 吾王自取 之言不书，史官讳之也。张居翰，字德卿。
现代文：十九年十一月二日，因病死于晋阳的家中，享年七十七岁。贞简太后听说死讯，立即到他家里致哀，为他穿丧服，像儿侄一样行礼。同光初年，赠左武卫上将军，谥号是贞宪。张居翰，字德卿。
English: On November 2, 1919, he died of illness at his home in Jinyang at the age of 77. Upon hearing the news of his death, Empress Dowager Zhengjian immediately went to his home to pay her respects, dressed in mourning clothes for him, and bowed like a nephew. In the first year of his reign, he was given the title of General Zuo Wei, and his posthumous name was Zhengjian. Zhang Juhan, known as Deqing.

古文：咸通初，掖庭令张从玫养之为子，以廕入仕。
现代文：咸通初年，掖廷令张从玫收养为子，以荫庇当官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiantong, Emperor Qianling ordered Zhang to be adopted from Mei as his son.

古文：中和三年，自容管监军判官入为学士院判官，迁枢密承旨、内府令，赐绯。
现代文：中和三年，从容管监军判官入朝廷任学士院判官，迁任枢密承旨、内府令，赐绯色衣。
English: In the middle and third years, he was transferred from the judge of the army to the imperial court as a judge of the Academy of Sciences, transferred to the Privy Council, the inner government, and given a colorful dress.

古文：昭宗在华下，超授内常侍，出监幽州军事，秩满诏归，节度使刘仁恭表留之。
现代文：唐昭宗在华下，越级任命为内常侍，外出监察幽州军事，任期满后下诏召回，节度使刘仁恭上表留下他。
English: When Tang Zhaozong was in China, he was appointed to the position of Inner Chamberlain, and went out to supervise the military in Yuzhou. After his term of office was over, he was recalled by imperial edict, and Liu Rengong kept him at the top table.

古文：天复中，诏诛宦官，仁恭绐奏杀之，匿于大安山之北溪。
现代文：天复年中，诏令诛杀宦官，刘仁恭上奏骗说杀了张居翰，把他藏在大安山的北溪。
English: In the middle of the second month of the year, when the imperial edict ordered the killing of eunuchs, Liu Rengong lied and said that he had killed Zhang Juhan and hid him in the Beixi of the Da'an Mountain.

古文：天祐三年，汴人攻沧州，仁恭求援于武皇，乃遣居翰与书记马郁等率兵助武皇同攻潞州，武皇因留之不遣。
现代文：天祐三年，汴军进攻沧州，武皇向刘仁恭求援，刘仁恭于是派张居翰和书记马郁等人率兵援助武皇一同进攻潞州，武皇因而留下张居翰。
English: In the third year of Tianyu, the Wu army attacked Cangzhou, and the Emperor Wu asked Liu Rengong for help. Liu Rengong then sent Zhang Juhan and Secretary Ma Yu and others to lead the troops to help the Emperor Wu attack Cangzhou. The Emperor Wu therefore left Zhang Juhan behind.

古文：李嗣昭节制昭义，以居翰监其军，以燕军三千为部下。
现代文：李嗣昭节制昭义军时，以张居翰监管其军事，以燕军三千为部下。
English: When Li Zhi Zhaojie controlled the Zhaoyi army, he had Zhang Juhan supervise his military, with the Yan army of three thousand as his subordinates.

古文：俄而汴将李思安筑夹城以围潞州，居翰与嗣昭登城保守，以至解围。
现代文：不久汴将李思安筑外城来包围潞州，张居翰和李嗣昭登城保卫，终于解围。
English: Soon after, Zou ordered Li Si'an to build an outer city to encircle Zhangzhou, while Zhang Juhan and Li Zhaodeng defended the city, and the siege was finally lifted.

古文：自是嗣昭每出征，令居翰知留后事。
现代文：从此李嗣昭每次出征时，令张居翰主管留后事务。
English: From then on, every time Li Shizhao went to the front, he ordered Zhang Juhan to be in charge of post-deployment affairs.

古文：同光元年夏四月，召为枢密使，加特进，与郭崇韬对掌机务。十月，庄宗将渡河，留居翰与李绍宏同守魏州。
现代文：同光元年四月，召为枢密使。十月，庄宗将渡黄河，留张居翰与李绍宏同守魏州。
English: In October, Zhuang Zong will cross the Yellow River, leaving Zhang Juhan and Li Shaohong to defend Weizhou.

古文：庄宗入汴，加骠骑大将军，知内侍省事，依前充枢密使。
现代文：庄宗进入汴州后，加封为骠骑大将军，掌管内侍省事务，依前充枢密使。
English: After Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou, he was given the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, in charge of the internal affairs of the province, and appointed as a Privy Envoy.

古文：同光时，宦官干政，邦家之务皆出于郭崇韬。
现代文：同光年间，宦官干预朝政，国家事务都由郭崇韬办理。
English: During the Tongguang era, eunuchs intervened in court politics, and state affairs were handled by Guo Chongyao.

古文：居翰自以羁旅乘时，擢居重地，每于宣授，不敢有所是非，承颜免过而已，以此脱季年之祸。
现代文：张居翰自认为是漂泊流浪的人而乘着时运，提拔到重要位置，所以每次宣告任命之事，不敢有所建议是非，只是看别人脸色免除过错而已，因此也逃脱了末年之祸。
English: Zhang Juhan thought of himself as a wanderer who took advantage of the current situation and was promoted to an important position. Therefore, every time he announced his appointment, he did not dare to make any suggestions, but just looked at other people's faces to avoid mistakes. Therefore, he also escaped the disaster of the last years.

古文：四年三月，伪蜀王衍既降，诏迁其族于洛阳。行及秦川，时关东已乱，庄宗虑衍为变，遣中官向延嗣驰骑赍诏杀之。
现代文：四年三月，伪蜀王衍投降，下诏迁其族人到洛阳，走到秦川，这时关东已乱，庄宗担心王衍变乱，派中官向延嗣骑马带诏书下令杀掉他。
English: In March of the fourth year, the pseudo-Shu Wangyan surrendered and moved his people to Luoyang and Qinchuan. At this time, Guandong was in turmoil. Zhuozong was worried about Wangyan's turmoil and sent a lieutenant-general to Yanji on horseback with an edict to kill him.

古文：诏云： 王衍一行，并宜杀戮。 
现代文：诏书写着： 王衍一行，应一并杀掉。 
English: The edict read: Wang Yan and his entourage should be killed together.

古文：其诏已经印画，时居翰在密地，覆视其诏，即就殿柱揩云 行 字，改书 家 字。
现代文：诏书已经盖印，此时张居翰在密地，又看了诏书，立即就着殿柱揩去 行 字，改写 家 字。
English: The imperial edict had already been stamped. At this time, Zhang Juhan was in a secret place. He read the imperial edict again and immediately went to the hall pillar to write and rewrite the family name.

古文：及衍就戮于秦川驿，止族其近属而已，其伪官及从行者尚千余人，皆免其枉滥，居翰之力也。
现代文：等到王衍在秦川驿被杀时，只杀了他的近属而已，其伪官以及随行者还有一千多人，都免于冤死，这是张居翰的功德。
English: When Wang Yan was killed in Qinchuan County, only his close relatives were killed. His pseudo-officials and more than a thousand people who accompanied him were spared from unjust death. This is the merit of Zhang Juhan.

古文：明宗入洛，居翰谒见于至德宫，待罪雪涕，乞归田里，诏许之，乃辞归长安。
现代文：明宗进入洛阳，张居翰在至德宫进见，流泪请罪，求放归乡里，诏令答应，于是回到长安。
English: Mingzong entered Luoyang, Zhang Juhan went to the German Palace, pleaded guilty with tears, asked to be released and returned to his hometown, the imperial edict agreed, so he returned to Chang'an.

古文：仍以其子延贵为西京职事，以供侍养。
现代文：又以他儿子张延贵为西京职事，以供侍养张居翰。
English: He also made his son, Zhang Yangui, an official of the Western Capital in order to provide Zhang Juhan with servants.

古文：天成三年四月，以疾卒于长安，时年七十一。
现代文：天成三年四月，因病死于长安，时年七十一岁。
English: Tiancheng died of illness in Chang'an in April of the same year, at the age of 71.

古文：居翰性和而静，谙悉旧事。
现代文：张居翰性格和静，熟悉旧事。
English: Zhang Juhan has a calm personality and is familiar with the past.

古文：在潞州累年，每春课人育蔬种树，敦本惠农，有仁者之心焉。
现代文：在潞州多年，每年春天督促人民种菜植树，务本惠农，有仁者之心。
English: In Luzhou for many years, every spring he urged the people to plant vegetables and trees, to benefit farmers, and to have a benevolent heart.

