古文：十年春，王正月庚申，曹伯终生卒。
现代文：十年春季，周历正月，庚申日，曹桓公终生逝世。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, on the day of the Hexin, Cao Huan Gong passed away.

古文：夏五月，葬曹桓公。
现代文：夏季五月，曹桓公下葬。
English: In the summer of May, Cao Huan was buried.

古文：秋，公会卫侯于桃丘，弗遇。
现代文：秋天，鲁桓公到桃丘与卫侯见面，没有见到卫侯。
English: In autumn, Prince Lu Huan went to Taoku to meet with Wei Hou, but did not see Wei Hou.

古文：冬十有二月丙午，齐侯、卫侯、郑伯来战于郎。
现代文：冬季十二月，丙午日，齐侯、卫侯、郑伯率领军队到鲁国在郎交战。
English: In the winter of December, on the afternoon of the third day, Qi Hou, Wei Hou, and Zheng Bo led the army to fight in Lu Province.

古文：十年春，曹桓公卒。
现代文：十年春季，曹桓公逝世。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Cao Huan died.

古文：虢仲谮其大夫詹父于王。
现代文：虢仲在周桓王那里进谗言诬陷大夫詹父。
English: Xingzhong slandered Dr. Zhan's father in front of King Zhou Kan.

古文：詹父有辞，以王师伐虢。
现代文：詹父有理，带领周天子的军队进攻虢国。
English: Zhan's father had reason to lead Zhou Tianzi's army to attack Shandong.

古文：夏，虢公出奔虞。
现代文：夏季，虢公逃亡到虞国。
English: In the summer, Shoko fled to Yugo Province.

古文：秋，秦人纳芮伯万于芮。
现代文：秋季，秦国人把芮伯万送回芮国。
English: In the autumn, the people of Qin sent Zibo Wan back to Shandong.

古文：初，虞叔有玉，虞公求旃，弗献。
现代文：当初，虞公的兄弟虞叔藏有宝玉，虞公向他索求玉。
English: At first, Yu Gong's brother, Uncle Yu, had a treasure of gems, and Yu Gong asked him for the gems.

古文：既而悔之，曰： 周谚有之： 匹夫无罪，怀璧其罪。 
现代文：虞叔没有进献，不久又后悔这件事，说： 周朝的谚语说： 百姓没有罪，怀藏玉璧就有了罪。 
English: Uncle Yu did not make the offering, but soon regretted it, saying: A Zhou dynasty proverb says: "The people are not guilty, but those who hoard gems are guilty."

古文：吾焉用此，其以贾害也。 
现代文：我哪用得着美玉，难道要用它买来祸害？ 
English: What use do I have for the precious stone, do I want to use it to buy evil?

古文：乃献之。
现代文：于是就把玉璧献给了虞公。
English: So he dedicated the gem to Yu Gong.

古文：又求其宝剑。
现代文：虞公又向虞叔索求宝剑。
English: Yu Gong also asked Yu Shuang for a sword.

古文：叔曰： 是无厌也。
现代文：虞叔说： 这是没有满足了。
English: Uncle Yu said, "This is not enough.

古文：无厌，将及我。 
现代文：满足不了，祸害会连累到我身上。 
English: If I'm not satisfied, I'll be plagued by misfortune.

古文：遂伐虞公，故虞公出奔共池。
现代文：于是就攻打虞公，所以虞公逃亡到共池。
English: So they attacked Yugong, and Yugong fled to Tongchi.

古文：冬，齐、卫、郑来战于郎，我有辞也。
现代文：冬季，齐国、卫国、郑国联军前来和我军在郎地作战，我国是有理的。
English: In the winter, the allied forces of Qi, Wei, and Zheng came to fight against our army in the countryside. Our country is justified.

古文：初，北戎病齐，诸侯救之，郑公子忽有功焉。
现代文：当初，北戎多次骚扰齐国，使它困疲，诸侯救援齐国，郑国的公子忽有功劳。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Army harassed Qi many times and exhausted it, the princes rescued Qi, and the noblemen of Zheng suddenly had merits.

古文：齐人饩诸侯，使鲁次之。
现代文：齐国人给诸侯的军队馈送食物，让鲁国确定馈送的次序。
English: The people of Qi fed the armies of the princes with food, and let Lu determine the order of feeding.

古文：鲁以周班后郑。
现代文：鲁国按周室封爵的次序把郑国排在后面。
English: According to the order of Zhou's knighthood, the State of Lu ranked the State of Zheng last.

古文：郑人怒，请师于齐。
现代文：郑国人发怒，请求齐国出兵。
English: The Zheng people became angry and asked Qi to send troops.

古文：齐人以卫师助之，故不称侵伐。
现代文：齐国人率领卫国军队帮助郑国，所以《春秋》不称这次战争为 侵伐 。
English: The people of Qi led the national defense army to help Zheng, so "Spring and Autumn" did not call this war "invasion."

古文：先书齐、卫，王爵也。
现代文：先记载齐国和卫国，是按照周室封爵的次序。
English: The first to be recorded are the states of Qi and Wei, according to the order of Zhou's knighthood.

