古文：昔在颛顼，命南正重以司天，北正黎以司地。
现代文：从前颛顼统治天下时，任命南正重掌管天文，北正黎掌管地理。
English: Formerly, when the Zhou Dynasty ruled the world, Nan Zheng Rong was appointed to be in charge of astronomy, and Bei Zheng Rong was appointed to be in charge of geography.

古文：唐虞之际，绍重黎之後，使复典之，至于夏商，故重黎氏世序天地。
现代文：唐虞之际，又让重、黎的后代继续掌管天文、地理，直到夏商时期，所以，重黎氏世代掌管天文地理。
English: At the time of the Tang and Yu Dynasties, the descendants of Chong and Lai continued to control astronomy and geography until the Xia Shang period, so the Chong Lai generation controlled astronomy and geography.

古文：其在周，程伯休甫其後也。
现代文：周朝时候，程伯休甫就是他们的后裔。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, Cheng Bo Xiu Fu was their descendant.

古文：当周宣王时，失其守而为司马氏。
现代文：当周宣王时，重黎氏因失去官守而成为司马氏。
English: When Zhou Xuan was king, the Chongli clan became the Sima clan because they lost their official position.

古文：司马氏世典周史。
现代文：司马氏世代掌管周史。
English: Sima's generation is in charge of Zhou history.

古文：惠襄之间，司马氏去周適晋。
现代文：周惠王和周襄王统治时期，司马氏离开周都，到了晋国。
English: During the reigns of King Zhou Hui and King Zhou Xiang, the Sima clan left Zhou and went to Jin.

古文：晋中军随会奔秦，而司马氏入少梁。
现代文：后来，晋国中军元帅随会逃奔秦国，司马氏也迁居少梁。
English: Later, the Marshal of the Jin Dynasty fled to Qin, and the Sima clan also moved to Shaoliang.

古文：自司马氏去周适晋，分散，或在卫，或在赵，或在秦。
现代文：自从司马氏离周到晋之后，族人分散各地，有的在卫国，有的在赵国，有的在秦国。
English: After the Sima clan moved from Zhou to Jin, the tribesmen were scattered all over the country, some in the State of Wei, some in the State of Zhao and some in the State of Qin.

古文：其在卫者，相中山。
现代文：在卫国的，做了中山国的相。
English: In the defense of the country, it has become the face of the country in the mountains.

古文：在赵者，以传剑论显，蒯聩其後也。
现代文：在赵国的，以传授剑术理论而显扬于世，蒯聩就是他们的后代。
English: In Zhao's country, they were famous for teaching the theory of swordsmanship, and Zou is their descendant.

古文：在秦者名错，与张仪争论，於是惠王使错将伐蜀，遂拔，因而守之。
现代文：在秦国的名叫司马错，曾与张仪发生争论，于是秦惠王派司马错率军攻打蜀国，攻取后，又让他做了蜀地郡守。
English: In Qin's name Sima Zhe, there was a dispute with Zhang Yi, so Qin Hui Wang sent Sima Zhe to lead the army to attack Shu. After the attack, he made him the governor of Shu County.

古文：错孙靳，事武安君白起。
现代文：司马错之孙司马靳，奉事武信君白起。
English: Sima Er's grandson, Sima Yao, became a servant of Wu Xin.

古文：而少梁更名曰夏阳。
现代文：而少梁已更名为夏阳。
English: But Shaoliang has changed its name to Xiayang.

古文：靳与武安君阬赵长平军，还而与之俱赐死杜邮，葬於华池。
现代文：司马靳与武信君坑杀赵国长平军，回来后与武信君一起被赐死于杜邮，埋葬在华池。
English: Sima Wei and Wu Xinjun killed the Zhao governor Ping Jun, and after returning, they were sentenced to death together with Wu Xinjun in Du Po and buried in Hua Chi.

古文：靳孙昌，昌为秦主铁官，当始皇之时。
现代文：司马靳之孙司马昌，是秦国主管冶铸铁器的官员，生活在秦始皇时代。
English: Sima Chang, the grandson of Sima Yao, was an official in charge of smelting cast iron in the State of Qin and lived during the reign of Qin Shi Huangdi.

古文：蒯聩玄孙卬为武安君将而徇朝歌。
现代文：蒯聩玄孙司马卬，曾为武信君部将并带兵攻占朝歌。
English: His great-great-great-grandson, Sima Zang, was once the general of the Wuxin Kingdom and led the troops to capture the morning song.

古文：诸侯之相王，王卬於殷。
现代文：诸侯争相为王时，司马卬在殷地称王。
English: When the princes were vying for the throne, Sima Ye enthusiastically proclaimed himself king.

古文：汉之伐楚，卬归汉，以其地为河内郡。
现代文：汉王刘邦攻打楚霸王项羽之际，司马卬归降汉王，汉以殷地为河内郡。
English: When the Han king Liu Bang attacked the Chuba king Xiang Yu, Sima Yi was relegated to the Han king, and Han Yingdi became Hanoi County.

古文：昌生无泽，无泽为汉巿长。
现代文：司马昌生司马无泽，司马无泽担任汉朝市长之职。
English: Sima Chang was born Sima Muzawa, Sima Muzawa served as the mayor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：无泽生喜，喜为五大夫，卒，皆葬高门。
现代文：无泽生司马喜，司马喜封爵五大夫，死后都埋葬在高门。
English: Sima Xi, the son of a commoner, and Sima Xi, the fifth husband of a knight, were both buried in Gaomen after their deaths.

古文：喜生谈，谈为太史公。
现代文：司马喜生司马谈，司马谈做了太史公。
English: Sima Xisheng talked about Sima, and Sima talked about doing too much history.

古文：太史公学天官於唐都，受易於杨何，习道论於黄子。
现代文：太史公从师唐都学习天文，从师杨何学习《易经》，从师黄子学习道家理论。
English: Taishi studied astronomy with his teacher Tang Du, "I Ching" with his teacher Yang He, and Taoist theory with his teacher Huang Zi.

古文：太史公仕於建元元封之间，愍学者之不达其意而师悖，乃论六家之要指曰：
现代文：太史公在建元至元封年间做官，他忧虑学者不能通晓各学派的要义而所学悖谬，于是论述阴阳、儒、墨、名、法和道德六家的要旨说：
English: When Tai Shikong was an official between the Jianyuan and Yuanfei dynasties, he was worried that scholars could not understand the essentials of each school and that what they learned was absurd, so he discussed the essence of the six schools of yin and yang, Confucianism, ink, name, law and morality and said:

古文：易大传： 天下一致而百虑，同归而殊涂。 
现代文：《周易·系辞传》说： 天下人追求相同，而具体谋虑却多种多样；达到的目的相同，而采取的途径却不一样。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: People all over the world pursue the same, but the specific considerations are diverse; the goals to be achieved are the same, but the paths taken are different.

古文：夫阴阳、儒、墨、名、法、道德，此务为治者也，直所从言之异路，有省不省耳。
现代文：阴阳家、儒家、墨家、名家、法家和道家都是致力于如何达到太平治世的学派，只是他们所遵循依从的学说不是一个路子，有的显明，有的不显明罢了。
English: The Yin and Yang school, the Confucianism school, the Mo school, the Meike school, the Law school and the Taoist school are all schools dedicated to how to achieve a peaceful reign. However, the doctrines they follow are not one path, some are obvious and some are not.

古文：尝窃观阴阳之术，大祥而众忌讳，使人拘而多所畏；然其序四时之大顺，不可失也。
现代文：我曾经在私下里研究过阴阳之术，发现它注重吉凶祸福的预兆，禁忌避讳很多，使人受到束缚并多有所畏惧，但阴阳家关于一年四季运行顺序的道理，是不可丢弃的。
English: I once privately studied the art of yin and yang, and found that it focuses on the omens of good luck, bad luck, and good fortune, and there are many taboos to avoid, which makes people bound and afraid, but the principle of yin and yang about the order of the four seasons cannot be discarded.

古文：儒者博而寡要，劳而少功，是以其事难尽从；然其序君臣父子之礼，列夫妇长幼之别，不可易也。
现代文：儒家学说广博但殊少抓住要领，花费了气力却很少功效，因此该学派的主张难以完全遵从；然而它所序列君臣父子之礼，夫妇长幼之别则是不可改变的。
English: The Confucian doctrine is extensive but rarely grasps the essentials, has expended effort but little effect, so it is difficult to fully comply with the school's claims; however, it is a sequence of father-son gifts, and the difference between husband and wife is immutable.

古文：墨者俭而难遵，是以其事不可遍循；然其彊本节用，不可废也。
现代文：墨家俭啬而难以依遵，因此该派的主张不能全部遵循，但它关于强本节用的主张，则是不可废弃的。
English: The Mo family is frugal and difficult to comply with, so the school's claim cannot be followed in full, but its claim to strengthen the use of this section is irrevocable.

古文：法家严而少恩；然其正君臣上下之分，不可改矣。
现代文：法家主张严刑峻法却刻薄寡恩，但它辨正君臣上下名分的主张，则是不可更改的。
English: Legalists advocate severe punishment and harsh laws, but they are mean and ungrateful, but their claim to distinguish between the right and the left, is unchangeable.

古文：名家使人俭而善失真；然其正名实，不可不察也。
现代文：名家使人受约束而容易失去真实性；但它辩正名与实的关系，则是不能不认真察考的。
English: The famous family makes people constrained and easy to lose their authenticity; however, it is necessary to carefully examine the relationship between the name and the reality.

古文：道家使人精神专一，动合无形，赡足万物。
现代文：道家使人精神专一，行动合乎无形之 道 ，使万物丰足。
English: The Taoists make people single-minded, act in accordance with the invisible way, and make all things abundant.

古文：其为术也，因阴阳之大顺，采儒墨之善，撮名法之要，与时迁移，应物变化，立俗施事，无所不宜，指约而易操，事少而功多。
现代文：道家之术是依据阴阳家关于四时运行顺序之说，吸收儒墨两家之长，撮取名、法两家之精要，随着时势的发展而发展，顺应事物的变化，树立良好风俗，应用于人事，无不适宜，意旨简约扼要而容易掌握，用力少而功效多。
English: The Taoist art is based on the Yin and Yang school's theory of the four-hour running order, absorbing the strengths of the two schools of Confucianism and Buddhism, capturing the essence of the two schools of name and law, developing with the development of the times, adapting to changes in things, establishing good customs, applied to personnel, nothing is inappropriate, the meaning is concise and easy to grasp, less effort and more effective.

古文：儒者则不然。
现代文：儒家则不是这样。
English: This is not the case with Confucianism.

古文：以为人主天下之仪表也，主倡而臣和，主先而臣随。
现代文：他们认为君主是天下人的表率，君主倡导，臣下应和，君主先行，臣下随从。
English: They believe that the monarch is the leader of the world, the monarch advocates, the vassals should follow, the monarch precedes, and the vassals follow.

古文：如此则主劳而臣逸。
现代文：这样一来，君主劳累而臣下却得安逸。
English: As a result, the monarch was exhausted, but his subjects were at ease.

古文：至於大道之要，去健羡，绌聪明，释此而任术。
现代文：至于大道的要旨，是舍弃刚强与贪欲，去掉聪明智慧，将这些放置一边而用智术治理天下。
English: As for the essence of the Great Way, it is to abandon strength and greed, to remove cleverness and wisdom, to put these aside and to govern the world with wisdom.

古文：夫神大用则竭，形大劳则敝。形神骚动，欲与天地长久，非所闻也。
现代文：精神过度使用就会衰竭，身体过度劳累就会疲惫，身体和精神受到扰乱，不得安宁，却想要与天地共长久，则是从未听说过的事。
English: It is unheard of to want to be with heaven and earth for a long time, when mental overuse leads to exhaustion, physical overwork leads to fatigue, and body and mind are disturbed and cannot be at peace.

古文：夫阴阳四时、八位、十二度、二十四节各有教令，顺之者昌，逆之者不死则亡，未必然也，故曰 使人拘而多畏 。
现代文：阴阳家认为四时、八位、十二度和二十四节气各有一套宜、忌规定，顺应它就会昌盛，违背它不死则亡。这未必是对的，所以说阴阳家 使人受束缚而多所畏惧 。
English: The yin and yang people believe that the 4th, 8th, 12th, and 24th solar terms each have a set of appropriate and taboo regulations. If you follow it, you will prosper, and if you violate it, you will die. This is not necessarily true, so the yin and yang people are bound and feared.

古文：夫春生夏长，秋收冬藏，此天道之大经也，弗顺则无以为天下纲纪，故曰 四时之大顺，不可失也 。
现代文：春生、夏长、秋收、冬藏，这是自然界的重要规律，不顺应它就无法制定天下纲纪，所以说 四时的运行是不能舍弃的 。
English: Spring, summer, autumn harvest, winter storage, this is an important law of nature. If it does not conform to it, it is impossible to formulate the world's discipline. Therefore, the four-hour operation cannot be abandoned.

古文：夫儒者以六艺为法。六艺经传以千万数，累世不能通其学，当年不能究其礼，故曰 博而寡要，劳而少功 。
现代文：儒家以《诗》《书》《易》《礼》《春秋》《乐》等《六艺》为法式，而《六艺》的本文和释传以千万计，几代相继不能弄通其学问，有生之年不能穷究其礼仪，所以说儒家 学说广博但殊少抓住要领，花费了力气却很少功效 。
English: Confucianism takes the "Six Arts" such as "Poetry," "Book," "Ease," "Rite," "Spring and Autumn," and "Music" as its formula. However, there are tens of thousands of texts and interpretations of the "Six Arts," and several generations in a row cannot fathom its knowledge, and one cannot exhaust its etiquette in one's lifetime. Therefore, Confucianism is said to have a wide range of teachings, but rarely grasps the essentials, and has expended energy but has little effect.

古文：若夫列君臣父子之礼，序夫妇长幼之别，虽百家弗能易也。
现代文：至于序列君臣父子之礼，夫妇长幼之别，即使是其余百家学说也不能取代它的贡献。
English: As for the succession of kings, ministers, father and son, and the distinction between husband and wife, even the other hundred doctrines cannot replace its contribution.

古文：墨者亦尚尧舜道，言其德行曰： 堂高三尺，土阶三等，茅茨不翦，采椽不刮。
现代文：墨家也崇尚尧舜之道，谈论他们的品德行为说： 堂口三尺高，堂下土阶只有三层，用茅草搭盖屋顶而不加修剪，用栎木做椽子而不经刮削。
English: The Mo family also advocated the way of the yakitori, and said about their moral behavior: the entrance of the hall is three feet high, the steps below the hall are only three layers, the roof is made of thatch without trimming, and the rafters are made of birch without scraping.

古文：食土簋，啜土刑，粝粱之食，藜霍之羹。
现代文：用陶簋吃饭，用陶铏喝汤，吃的是糙米粗饭和藜藿做的野菜羹。
English: They eat with clay pots, drink soup with clay pots, and eat brown rice and vegetable soup made from clams.

古文：夏日葛衣，冬日鹿裘。 
现代文：夏天穿葛布衣，冬天穿鹿皮裘 。
English: In summer, they wear georgette, and in winter, deerskin.

古文：其送死，桐棺三寸，举音不尽其哀。
现代文：墨家为死者送葬只做一副厚仅三寸的桐木棺材，送葬者恸哭而不能尽诉其哀痛。
English: The Mo family only made a pair of paulownia coffins, only three inches thick, to bury the dead. The mourners cried and could not fully express their grief.

古文：教丧礼，必以此为万民之率。
现代文：教民丧礼，必须以此为万民的统一标准。
English: To teach people funeral rites, we must use this as a unified standard for all people.

古文：使天下法若此，则尊卑无别也。
现代文：假使天下都照此法去做。那贵尊卑就没有区别了。
English: If the whole world followed this law, there would be no difference between the high and the low.

古文：夫世异时移，事业不必同，故曰 俭而难遵 。
现代文：世代不同，时势变化，人们所做的事业不一定相同，所以说墨家 俭啬而难以遵从。 
English: Different generations, changing times, people do not necessarily have the same career, so it is said that the Mo family is frugal and difficult to follow.

古文：要曰彊本节用，则人给家足之道也。
现代文：墨家学说的要旨强本节用，则是人人丰足，家家富裕之道。
English: The essence of the teachings of the Mo family, as used in this section, is the way of abundance for everyone and prosperity for every family.

古文：此墨子之所长，虽百家弗能废也。
现代文：这是墨子学说的长处，即使百家学说也是不能废弃它的。
English: This is the strength of Mozi's theory. Even if there are hundreds of theories, it cannot be abandoned.

古文：法家不别亲疏，不殊贵贱，一断於法，则亲亲尊尊之恩绝矣。
现代文：法家不区别亲疏远近，不区分贵尊卑，一律依据法令来决断，那么亲亲属、尊长上的恩爱关系就断绝了。
English: Legalists do not distinguish between close and distant relatives, do not distinguish between high and low, and all are decided according to the law, so the relationship of love and affection between relatives and superiors is broken.

古文：可以行一时之计，而不可长用也，故曰 严而少恩 。
现代文：这些可作为一时之计来施行，却不可长用，所以说法家 严酷而刻薄寡恩 。
English: These can be implemented as a temporary measure, but cannot be used for a long time, so the sayers are harsh and mean-spirited.

古文：若尊主卑臣，明分职不得相逾越，虽百家弗能改也。
现代文：至于说到法家使君主尊贵，使臣下卑下，使上下名分、职分明确，不得相互逾越的主张，即使百家之说也是不能更改的。
English: As for the idea that legal scholars should make the monarch noble and subordinate subjects humble, and that their titles and positions should be clear and should not exceed each other, even if there are hundreds of legal scholars, it cannot be changed.

古文：名家苛察缴绕，使人不得反其意，专决於名而失人情，故曰 使人俭而善失真 。
现代文：名家刻细烦琐，纠缠不清，使人不能反求其意，一切决取于概念名称却失弃了一般常理，所以说它 使人受约束而容易丧失真实性 。
English: The names of famous people are detailed, complicated and entangled, which makes people unable to reverse the meaning. Everything depends on the concept of the name, but it has lost the general common sense. Therefore, it is said that it makes people constrained and easy to lose authenticity.

古文：若夫控名责实，参伍不失，此不可不察也。
现代文：至于循名责实，要求名称与实际进行比较验证，这是不可不予以认真考察的。
English: As for the name-based responsibility, it is required to compare the name with the actual verification, which must be carefully examined.

古文：道家无为，又曰无不为，其实易行，其辞难知。
现代文：道家讲 无为 ，又说 无不为 ，其实际主张容易施行，其文辞则幽深微妙，难以明白通晓。
English: Taoists talk about "doing nothing" and "doing nothing but doing nothing," and their practical propositions are easy to implement, while their words are subtle and difficult to understand.

古文：其术以虚无为本，以因循为用。
现代文：其学说以虚无为理论基础，以顺应自然为实用原则。
English: Its theory is based on nothingness, and its practical principle is to conform to nature.

古文：无成埶，无常形，故能究万物之情。
现代文：道家认为事物没有既成不变之势，没有常存不变之形，所以能够探求万物的情理。
English: Taoists believe that things do not have the potential to become immutable, there is no permanent and unchanging form, so they can explore the reason for all things.

古文：不为物先，不为物後，故能为万物主。
现代文：不做超越物情的事，也不做落后物情的事，所以能够成为万物的主宰。
English: It does not transcend material conditions, nor does it do things that are backward, so it can become the master of all things.

古文：有法无法，因时为业；有度无度，因物与合。
现代文：有法而不任法以为法，要顺应时势以成其业；有度而不恃度以为度，要根据万物之形各成其度而与之相合。
English: There is a law, but do not allow the law to be the law, we should conform to the times and make the best of it; there is a degree, but do not take the degree as the degree, we should make the degree according to the shape of all things and match it.

古文：故曰 圣人不朽，时变是守。
现代文：所以说 圣人的思想和业绩之所以不可磨灭，就在于能够顺应时势的变化。
English: Therefore, the reason why the thoughts and achievements of the sage are indelible is that they can adapt to the changes of the times.

古文：虚者道之常也，因者君之纲 也。
现代文：虚无是道的永恒规律，顺天应人是国君治国理民的纲要 。
English: Nothingness is the eternal law of the Tao, and man should be in accordance with heaven is the outline of the government of the country and the people.

古文：群臣并至，使各自明也。
现代文：群臣一齐来到面前，君主应让他们各自明确自己的职分。
English: When a group of courtiers come before you, the sovereign should let each of them clarify his or her position.

古文：其实中其声者谓之端，实不中其声者谓之窾。
现代文：其实际情况符合其言论名声者，叫做 端 ；实际情况不符合其言论声名者，叫做 窾 。
English: Those whose actual conditions are consistent with their reputations are called 端; those whose actual conditions are inconsistent with their reputations are called.

古文：窾言不听，奸乃不生，贤不肖自分，白黑乃形。
现代文：不听信 窾言 即空话，邪就不会产生，贤与不肖自然分清，黑白也就分明。
English: If you don't listen to gossip, that is, empty talk, evil will not arise. Virtue and vice are naturally distinct, and black and white are also distinct.

古文：在所欲用耳，何事不成。
现代文：问题在于想不想运用，只要肯运用，什么事办不成呢。
English: The question is whether you want to use it or not. As long as you are willing to use it, what can't be done?

古文：乃合大道，混混冥冥。
现代文：这样才会合乎大道，一派混混冥冥的境界。
English: Only in this way will it fit into the mainstream, the realm of a gang of hoodlums.

古文：光翟天下，复反无名。
现代文：光辉照耀天下，重又返归于无名。
English: Shine bright and return to obscurity.

古文：凡人所生者神也，所讬者形也。
现代文：大凡人活着是因为有精神，而精神又寄托于形体。
English: The great mortal lives because he has a spirit, and the spirit is entrusted to the body.

古文：神大用则竭，形大劳则敝，形神离则死。
现代文：精神过度使用就会衰竭，形体过度劳累就会疲惫，形、神分离就会死亡。
English: If the spirit is overused, it will be exhausted, if the body is overworked, it will be exhausted, and if the form and God are separated, it will die.

古文：死者不可复生，离者不可复反，故圣人重之。
现代文：死去的人不能复生，神、形分离便不能重新结合在一起，所以圣人重视这个问题。
English: The dead cannot be resurrected, and gods and forms cannot be reunited if they are separated, so sages attach great importance to this issue.

古文：由是观之，神者生之本也，形者生之具也。
现代文：由此看来，精神是人生命的根本，形体是生命的依托。
English: From this perspective, the spirit is the foundation of human life, and the body is the support of life.

古文：不先定其神，而曰 我有以治天下 ，何由哉？
现代文：不先安定自己的精神和身体，却侈谈 我有办法治理天下 ，凭借的又是什么呢？
English: Without first stabilizing one's spirit and body, they talk about "I have the means to rule the world," but by what means?

古文：太史公既掌天官，不治民。
现代文：太史公职掌天文，不管民事。
English: Too much history of public officials in charge of astronomy, regardless of civil.

古文：有子曰迁。
现代文：太史公有子名迁。
English: Taishi's son's name was changed.

古文：迁生龙门，耕牧河山之阳。
现代文：司马迁生于龙门，在黄河之北、龙门山之南过着耕种畜牧生活。
English: Sima Qian was born in Longmen and lived a life of farming and animal husbandry in the north of the Yellow River and the south of Longmen Mountain.

古文：年十岁则诵古文。
现代文：年仅十岁便已习诵古文。
English: At only ten years old, he had already learned to recite ancient texts.

古文：二十而南游江、淮，上会稽，探禹穴，闚九疑，浮於沅、湘；北涉汶、泗，讲业齐、鲁之都，观孔子之遗风，乡射邹、峄；戹困鄱、薛、彭城，过梁、楚以归。
现代文：二十岁开始南游江、淮地区，登会稽山，探察禹穴，观览九疑山，泛舟于沅水湘水之上；北渡汶水、泗水，在齐、鲁两地的都会研讨学问，考察孔子的遗风，在邹县、峄山行乡射之礼；困厄于鄱、薛、彭城，经过梁、楚之地回到家乡。
English: At the age of twenty, he began to travel to the southern regions of the Yangtze River and Huai River, ascended the Qingshi Mountain, explored the Yuhan, observed the Nine Doubts Mountain, and went rafting on the Xiangshui River of the Yishui River; in the north, he went to the Wensui River and the Yishui River, studied the culture in the cities of Qi and Lu, investigated the legacy of Confucius, and went to the townships of Yishui County and Yishui Mountain; he was trapped in the cities of Handan, Xue and Pengcheng, and returned to his hometown through Liang and Chu.

古文：於是迁仕为郎中，奉使西征巴、蜀以南，南略邛、笮、昆明，还报命。
现代文：于是司马迁出仕为郎中，奉命出使西征巴蜀以南，往南经略邛、笮、昆明，归来向朝廷复命。
English: As a result, Sima moved out of the palace to become a vassal, and was ordered to send an envoy to the south of Bashu to conquer the west, and then to the south via Liaocheng, Zhuhai, and Kunming, before returning to the imperial court.

古文：是岁天子始建汉家之封，而太史公留滞周南，不得与从事，故发愤且卒。
现代文：这一年，天子开始举行汉朝的封禅典礼，而太史公被滞留在周南，不能参与其事，所以心中愤懑，致病将死。
English: In this year, the emperor began to hold the Han Dynasty's Feudal Zen ceremony, and Taishi was detained in Zhounan, unable to participate in the event, so his heart was angry, causing illness and death.

古文：而子迁適使反，见父於河洛之间。
现代文：其子司马迁适逢出使归来，在黄河、洛水之间拜见了父亲。
English: His son Sima Qian met his father between the Yellow River and the Luoshui River when the envoy returned.

古文：太史公执迁手而泣曰： 余先周室之太史也。
现代文：太史公握着司马迁的手哭着说： 我们的先祖是周朝的太史。
English: Tai Shi Gong held Sima Qian's hand and wept and said: Our ancestors are the Tai Shi of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：自上世尝显功名於虞夏，典天官事。
现代文：远在上古虞夏之世便显扬功名，职掌天文之事。
English: As far back as the era of the ancient Emperor Yuxia, he was famous for his achievements in the field of astronomy.

古文：後世中衰，绝於予乎？
现代文：后世衰落，今天会断绝在我手里吗？
English: Will the decline of future generations be broken off in my hands today?

古文：汝复为太史，则续吾祖矣。
现代文：你继做太史，就会接续我们祖先的事业了。
English: After you have made history, you will carry on the work of our ancestors.

古文：今天子接千岁之统，封泰山，而余不得从行，是命也夫，命也夫！
现代文：现在天子继承汉朝千年一统的大业，在泰山举行封禅典礼，而我不能随行，这是命啊，是命啊！
English: Now, the Son of Heaven is inheriting the great cause of unifying the Han Dynasty for a thousand years and holding the enthronement ceremony on Mount Tai, but I cannot accompany him. This is my life, my life!

古文：余死，汝必为太史；为太史，无忘吾所欲论著矣。
现代文：我死之后，你必定要做太史；做了太史，不要忘记我想要撰写的著述啊。
English: When I'm dead, you must make history; and when you've made history, don't forget the book I want to write.

古文：且夫孝始於事亲，中於事君，终於立身。
现代文：再说孝道始于奉养双亲，进而侍奉君主，最终在于立身扬名。
English: Moreover, filial piety begins with nurturing one's parents, then serving the monarch, and finally rising to prominence.

古文：扬名於後世，以显父母，此孝之大者。
现代文：扬名后世来显耀父母，这是最大的孝道。
English: It is the greatest filial duty to glorify one's parents for posterity.

古文：夫天下称诵周公，言其能论歌文武之德，宣周邵之风，达太王王季之思虑，爰及公刘，以尊后稷也。
现代文：天下称道歌诵周公，说他能够论述歌颂文王、武王的功德，宣扬周、邵的风尚，通晓太王、王季的思虑，乃至于公刘的功业，并尊崇始祖后稷。
English: The world praises Zhou Gong's recitation of Taoist songs, saying that he can discuss the merits of King Wen and King Wu, promote the customs of Zhou and Shao, understand the thoughts of King Tai and King Ji, as well as the work of King Liu, and respect the ancestor Hou Yi.

古文：幽厉之後，王道缺，礼乐衰，孔子脩旧起废，论诗书，作春秋，则学者至今则之。
现代文：周幽王、厉王以后，王道衰败，礼乐衰颓，孔子研究整理旧有的典籍，修复振兴被废弃破坏的礼乐，论述《诗经》、《书经》，写作《春秋》，学者至今以之为准则。
English: After Zhou Yu Wang and Li Wang, the royal way decayed, the ritual music decayed, Confucius studied and sorted out the old classics, restored and revitalized the abandoned and destroyed ritual music, discussed the "Shijing" and "Shuijing" and wrote "Spring and Autumn," which scholars still use as a standard.

古文：自获麟以来四百有馀岁，而诸侯相兼，史记放绝。
现代文：自孔子作春秋封笔以来四百余年，诸侯相互兼并，史书丢弃殆尽。
English: More than four hundred years have passed since Confucius penned the Spring and Autumn Annals. Princes have merged with each other, and history books have been discarded.

古文：今汉兴，海内一统，明主贤君忠臣死义之士，余为太史而弗论载，废天下之史文，余甚惧焉，汝其念哉！ 
现代文：如今汉朝兴起，海内统一，明主贤君忠臣死义之士，我作为太史都未能予以论评载录，断绝了天下的修史传统，对此我甚感惶恐，你可要记在心上啊！ 
English: Today, with the rise of the Han Dynasty, the unification of China, and the emergence of masters, sages, kings, and loyal subjects, I, as the great historian, have not been able to review and record them, and I have broken the world's history-making tradition. I am very afraid of this. You should bear it in mind!

古文：迁俯首流涕曰： 小子不敏，请悉论先人所次旧闻，弗敢阙。 
现代文：司马迁低下头流着眼泪说： 儿子虽然驽笨，但我会详述先人所整理的历史旧闻，不敢稍有缺漏。 
English: Sima Qian bowed his head and said with tears streaming down his face, "Although my son is stupid, I will detail the history and old news compiled by my predecessors. I dare not leave anything out.

古文：卒三岁而迁为太史令，史记石室金匮之书。
现代文：司马谈去世三年后司马迁任太史令，开始缀集历史书籍及国家收藏的档案文献。
English: Three years after the death of Sima Dan, Sima Qian was appointed as the Tai Shi Ling and began to collect historical books and archival documents from the national collection.

古文：五年而当太初元年，十一月甲子朔旦冬至，天历始改，建於明堂，诸神受纪。
现代文：司马迁任太史令五年正当汉太初元年，十一月甲子朔旦冬至，汉朝的历法开始改用夏正，即以农历一月为正月，天子在明堂举行实施新历法的仪式，诸神皆受瑞纪。
English: In the fifth year of Sima Qianren's Taishi Decree, the first year of the Han Dynasty, November Jia Zi Shuo Dan winter solstice, the calendar of the Han Dynasty began to change to Xia Zheng, that is, January of the lunar calendar was the first month, Tian Zi held a ceremony to implement the new calendar in the Ming Hall, and all the gods were subject to the auspicious discipline.

古文：太史公曰： 先人有言： 自周公卒五百岁而有孔子。
现代文：太史公说： 先人说过： 自周公死后五百年而有孔子。
English: Tai Shikong said: The ancients said: Confucius was born 500 years after the death of Zhou Gong.

古文：孔子卒後至於今五百岁，有能绍明世，正易传，继春秋，本诗书礼乐之际？ 
现代文：孔子死后到现在五百年，有能继承清明之世，正定《易传》，接续《春秋》，意本《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》的人吗？ 
English: Five hundred years after the death of Confucius, is there anyone who can inherit the world of clarity, correctly identify "I Chuan," continue "Spring and Autumn," and interpret "Poetry," "Book," "Rite," and "Music"?

古文：意在斯乎！
现代文：其用意就在于此，在于此吧！
English: How dare I refuse?

古文：意在斯乎！
现代文：我又怎敢推辞呢。 
English: How dare I refuse?

古文：小子何敢让焉。 
现代文：上大夫壶遂问： 从前孔子为什么要作《春秋》呢？ 
English: Shangdafu Jug then asked: Why did Confucius write "Spring and Autumn" in the past?

古文：上大夫壶遂曰： 昔孔子何为而作春秋哉？ 
现代文：太史公说： 我听董生讲： 周朝王道衰败废弛，孔子担任鲁国司寇，诸侯嫉害他，卿大夫阻挠他。
English: Taishi Gong said: I heard Dong Sheng say: the Zhou Dynasty's royal road was decadent and wasteful, Confucius served as the Secretary of State of Lu, the princes were jealous of him, and the noble doctors obstructed him.

古文：太史公曰： 余闻董生曰： 周道衰废，孔子为鲁司寇，诸侯害之，大夫壅之。孔子知言之不用，道之不行也，是非二百四十二年之中，以为天下仪表，贬天子，退诸侯，讨大夫，以达王事而已矣。 
现代文：孔子知道自己的意见不被采纳，政治主张无法实行，便褒贬评定二百四十二年间的是非，作为天下评判是非的标准，贬抑无道的天子，斥责为非的诸侯，声讨乱政的大夫，为使国家政事通达而已 。
English: Confucius knew that his opinions would not be accepted and that his political propositions could not be put into practice, so he evaluated the rights and wrongs of the past 242 years as the standard by which the world would judge right and wrong, belittled the wicked emperor, rebuked the wicked princes, and denounced the doctors of political chaos, in order to make the country's political affairs transparent.

古文：子曰： 我欲载之空言，不如见之於行事之深切著明也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我与其载述空洞的说教，不如举出在位者所做所为以见其是非美恶，这样就更加深切显明了。 
English: Confucius said: "Instead of writing down empty sermons, I would rather point out the deeds of the incumbent to see whether they are good or evil, so that they are more deeply revealed."

古文：夫春秋，上明三王之道，下辨人事之纪，别嫌疑，明是非，定犹豫，善善恶恶，贤贤贱不肖，存亡国，继绝世，补敝起废，王道之大者也。
现代文：《春秋》这部书，上阐明三王的治道，下辨别人事的纪纲，辨别嫌疑，判明是非，论定犹豫不决之事，褒善怨恶，尊重贤能，视不肖，使灭亡的国家存在下去，断绝了的世系继续下去，补救衰敝之事，振兴废弛之业，这是最大的王道。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is a book that expounds on the governance of the three kings, outlines the rules for judging others, discerns suspicions, determines right and wrong, resolves indecision, praises good and evil, respects virtue and ability, and treats them as equals. It is the greatest royal road to keep a dying country alive, continue a lineage that has been cut off, remedy decline, and revitalize waste.

古文：易著天地阴阳四时五行，故长於变；礼经纪人伦，故长於行；书记先王之事，故长於政；诗记山川谿谷禽兽草木牝牡雌雄，故长於风；乐乐所以立，故长於和；春秋辩是非，故长於治人。
现代文：《易》载述天地、阴阳、四时、五行，所以在说明变化方面见长；《礼》规范人伦，所以在行事方面见长；《书》记述先王事迹，所以在政治方面见长；《诗》记山川溪谷、禽兽草木，牝牡雌雄，所以在风土人情方面见长；《乐》是论述音乐立人的经典，所以在和谐方面见长；《春秋》论辨是非，所以在治人方面见长。
English: "Yi" describes heaven and earth, yin and yang, the four seasons, and the five elements, so it is good at explaining changes; "Li" regulates people's ethics, so it is good at doing things; "Shu" records the deeds of past kings, so it is good at politics; "Poem" records mountains, rivers, valleys, animals, plants, men, women, and men, so it is good at customs; "Le" is a classic that discusses music and people, so it is good at harmony; "Spring and Autumn" discusses right and wrong, so it is good at governing people.

古文：是故礼以节人，乐以发和，书以道事，诗以达意，易以道化，春秋以道义。
现代文：由此可见《礼》是用来节制约束人的，《乐》是用来诱发人心平和的，《书》是来述说政事的，《诗》是用来表达情意的，《易》是用来讲变化的，《春秋》是用来论述道义的。
English: From this, it can be seen that "Li" is used to restrain and restrict people, "Chu" is used to induce peace of mind, "Shu" is used to describe political affairs, "Poem" is used to express feelings, "Yi" is used to talk about changes, and "Chunqiu" is used to discuss morality.

古文：拨乱世反之正，莫近於春秋。
现代文：平定乱世，使之复归正道，没有什么著作比《春秋》更切近有效。
English: No work is more relevant and effective than "Spring and Autumn" in bringing order to the chaotic world and returning it to the right path.

古文：春秋文成数万，其指数千。
现代文：《春秋》不过数万字，而其要旨就有数千条。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is only tens of thousands of words, but its gist has thousands of articles.

古文：万物之散聚皆在春秋。
现代文：万物的离散聚合都在《春秋》之中。
English: The discrete aggregation of all things is in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：春秋之中，弑君三十六，亡国五十二，诸侯奔走不得保其社稷者不可胜数。
现代文：在《春秋》一书中，记载弑君事件三十六起，被灭亡的国家五十二个，诸侯出奔逃亡不能保其国家的数不胜数。
English: In the book "Spring and Autumn," it is recorded that there were thirty-six cases of Shunjun events, fifty-two countries were destroyed, and countless numbers of princes could not save their countries by fleeing.

古文：察其所以，皆失其本已。
现代文：考察其变乱败亡的原因，都是丢掉了作为立国立身根本的春秋大义。
English: Examining the reasons for its chaotic downfall, they all lost the Spring and Autumn Great Righteousness as the foundation of the state.

古文：故易曰 失之豪釐，差以千里 。
现代文：所以《易》中讲 失之毫厘，差以千里。 
English: Therefore, "Yi" said that a millimeter of loss is better than a thousand miles.

古文：故曰 臣弑君，子弑父，非一旦一夕之故也，其渐久矣 。
现代文：说 臣弑君，子弑父，并非一朝一夕的缘故，其发展渐进已是很久了 。
English: He said that the rise of Zeng Rongjun, the father of Zeng Rongjun, did not happen overnight. It has been developing gradually for a long time.

古文：故有国者不可以不知春秋，前有谗而弗见，後有贼而不知。
现代文：因此，做国君的不可以不知《春秋》，否则就是谗佞之徒站在面前也看不见，贼之臣紧跟在后面也不会发觉。
English: Therefore, a sovereign should not be unaware of "Spring and Autumn"; otherwise, even a scoundrel standing in front of him would not be able to see it, and a thief would not be able to find it if he followed closely behind.

古文：为人臣者不可以不知春秋，守经事而不知其宜，遭变事而不知其权。
现代文：做人臣者不可以不知《春秋》，否则就只会株守常规之事却不懂得因事制宜，遇到突发事件则不知如何灵活对待。
English: A statesman should not be unaware of "Spring and Autumn," otherwise he will only stick to the routine but will not know how to adapt to circumstances, and will not know how to be flexible in the face of emergencies.

古文：为人君父而不通於春秋之义者，必蒙首恶之名。
现代文：做人君、人父若不通晓《春秋》的要义，必定会蒙受首恶之名。
English: If you are a man and a father and do not understand the essence of "Spring and Autumn," you will certainly be called the chief evil.

古文：为人臣子而不通於春秋之义者，必陷篡弑之诛，死罪之名。
现代文：做人臣、人子如不通晓《春秋》要义，必定会陷于篡位杀上而被诛伐的境地，并蒙死罪之名。
English: If a minister or a son of man is not familiar with the essentials of "Spring and Autumn," he will certainly fall into the position of being usurped and killed, and will be given the name of capital crime.

古文：其实皆以为善，为之不知其义，被之空言而不敢辞。
现代文：其实他们都认为是好事而去做，只因为不懂得《春秋》大义，而蒙受史家口诛笔伐的不实之言却不敢推卸罪名。
English: In fact, they all think that it is a good thing to do, just because they do not understand the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," but they do not dare to shirk the blame for the untrue words that have been criticized by historians.

古文：夫不通礼义之旨，至於君不君，臣不臣，父不父，子不子。
现代文：如不明了礼义的要旨，就会弄到君不象君，臣不象臣，父不象父，子不象子的地步。
English: If you do not know the essence of etiquette, you will get to the point where you are not like you, the minister is not like the minister, the father is not like the father, and the son is not like the son.

古文：夫君不君则犯，臣不臣则诛，父不父则无道，子不子则不孝。
现代文：君不象君，就会被臣下干犯，臣不象臣就会被诛杀，父不象父就会昏聩无道，子不象子就会忤逆不孝。
English: If you are not like you, you will be punished by your vassals, if you are not like your vassals, you will be killed, if you are not like your father, you will be lost, and if you are not like your son, you will be disloyal.

古文：此四行者，天下之大过也。
现代文：这四种恶行，是天下最大的罪过。
English: These four kinds of evil deeds are the greatest sins in the world.

古文：以天下之大过予之，则受而弗敢辞。
现代文：把天下最大的罪过加在他身上，也只得接受而不敢推卸。
English: The world's greatest sin was inflicted on him, and he had to accept it rather than shirk it.

古文：故春秋者，礼义之大宗也。
现代文：所以《春秋》这部经典是礼义根本之所在。
English: Therefore, the classic "Spring and Autumn" is the essence of etiquette.

古文：夫礼禁未然之前，法施已然之後；法之所为用者易见，而礼之所为禁者难知。 
现代文：礼是禁绝坏事于发生之前，法规施行于坏事发生之后；法施行的作用显而易见，而礼禁绝的作用却隐而难知。 
English: Etiquette is the prohibition of bad things before they happen, and the enforcement of laws after they happen; the role of law enforcement is obvious, but the role of etiquette is difficult to know.

古文：壶遂曰： 孔子之时，上无明君，下不得任用，故作春秋，垂空文以断礼义，当一王之法。
现代文：壶遂说： 孔子时候，上没有圣明君主，他处在下面又得不到任用，所以撰写《春秋》，留下一部空洞的史文来裁断礼义，当作一代帝王的法典。
English: Kettle then said: At the time of Confucius, there was no holy emperor above, and he could not be appointed when he was below, so he wrote "Spring and Autumn," leaving an empty historical text to judge the etiquette, as the code of a generation of emperors.

古文：今夫子上遇明天子，下得守职，万事既具，咸各序其宜，夫子所论，欲以何明？ 
现代文：现在先生上遇圣明天子，下能当官供职，万事已经具备，而且全部各得其所，井然相宜，先生所要撰述的想要阐明的是什么呢？ 
English: Now that you have met the Holy Son of God, now that you are able to serve as an official, everything is ready, and everything is in its place and appropriate, what is it that you want to write about?

古文：太史公曰： 唯唯，否否，不然。
现代文：太史公说： 是，是啊，不不，不完全是这么回事。
English: "Yes, yes, no, no, it's not exactly like that," Mr. Tai said.

古文：余闻之先人曰： 伏羲至纯厚，作易八卦。
现代文：我听先人说过： 伏羲最为纯厚，作《易》八卦。
English: I have heard the ancients say: Fuxing is the most pure and thick, making "Yi" gossip.

古文：尧舜之盛，尚书载之，礼乐作焉。
现代文：尧舜的强盛，《尚书》做了记载，礼乐在那时兴起。
English: "Shangshu" made a record of the flourishing of the gongs, and the ceremonial music arose at that time.

古文：汤武之隆，诗人歌之。
现代文：商汤周武时代的隆盛，诗人予以歌颂。
English: The poet sang the praises of the prosperity of the Shang Tang Zhouwu era.

古文：春秋采善贬恶，推三代之德，襃周室，非独刺讥而已也。 
现代文：《春秋》扬善贬恶，推崇夏、商、周三代盛德，褒扬周王室，并非仅仅讽刺讥斥呀 。
English: "Spring and Autumn" not only satirizes and mocks, but also praises Xia, Shang and the third generation of the Zhou dynasty.

古文：汉兴以来，至明天子，获符瑞，封禅，改正朔，易服色，受命於穆清，泽流罔极，海外殊俗，重译款塞，请来献见者，不可胜道。
现代文：汉朝兴建以来，至当今英明天子，获见符瑞，举行封禅大典，改订历法，变换服色，受命于上天，恩泽流布无边，海外不同习俗的国家，辗转几重翻译到中国边关来，请求进献朝见的不可胜数。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, to the present day, Emperor Mingzong's descendants have been awarded the title of Fu Rui, held a grand ceremony of Feng Zen, revised the calendar, changed the color of clothing, and received orders from heaven. The blessings of the Emperor have spread far and wide, and countries with different customs overseas have made several translations to the Chinese border and requested countless gifts of the Emperor's gift.

古文：臣下百官力诵圣德，犹不能宣尽其意。
现代文：臣下百官竭力颂扬天子的功德，仍不能完全表达出他们的心意。
English: The hundreds of officials under his command tried their best to praise the merits of the heavenly son, but still could not fully express their thoughts.

古文：且士贤能而不用，有国者之耻；主上明圣而德不布闻，有司之过也。
现代文：再说士贤能而不被任用，是做国君的耻辱；君主明圣而功德不能广泛传扬使大家都知道，是有关官员的罪过。
English: Moreover, it is a disgrace for a prince to be a virtuous man and not to be appointed; it is the fault of the relevant officials to make everyone know that the monarch is sacred and his merits cannot be widely spread.

古文：且余尝掌其官，废明圣盛德不载，灭功臣世家贤大夫之业不述，堕先人所言，罪莫大焉。
现代文：况且我曾担任太史令的职务，若弃置天子圣明盛德而不予记载，埋没功臣、世家、贤大夫的功业而不予载述，违背先父的临终遗言，罪过就实在太大了。
English: Moreover, I once held the position of Tai Shi Ling. If you abandon the heavenly son, Sheng Ming Shengde, and do not record it, if you bury the exploits of heroes, families, and wise doctors and do not record them, if you violate the last words of your father, the sin is too great.

古文：余所谓述故事，整齐其世传，非所谓作也，而君比之於春秋，谬矣。 
现代文：我所说的缀述旧事，整理有关人物的家世传记，并非所谓著作呀，而您拿它与《春秋》相比，那就错了。 
English: What I said about embellishing old stories and arranging the family biographies of relevant figures is not a so-called work, and you are wrong to compare it to "Spring and Autumn."

古文：於是论次其文。
现代文：于是开始论述编次所得文献和材料。
English: Then he began to discuss the literature and materials obtained from the series.

古文：七年而太史公遭李陵之祸，幽於縲绁。
现代文：到了第七年，太史公遭逢李陵之祸，被囚禁狱中。
English: In the seventh year, Taishigong suffered the calamity of Li Ling and was imprisoned.

古文：乃喟然而叹曰： 是余之罪也夫！
现代文：于是喟然而叹道： 这是我的罪过啊！
English: Then she sighed, "It's my own fault!"

古文：是余之罪也夫！
现代文：这是我的罪过啊！
English: It's my fault!

古文：身毁不用矣。 
现代文：身体残毁没有用了。 
English: It's no use getting maimed.

古文：退而深惟曰： 夫诗书隐约者，欲遂其志之思也。
现代文：退而深思道： 《诗》《书》含义隐微而言辞简约，是作者想要表达他们的心志和情绪。
English: She paused and reflected: "The meanings of "poem" and "book" are subtle and simple, and the authors want to express their hearts and emotions.

古文：昔西伯拘羑里，演周易；孔子戹陈蔡，作春秋；屈原放逐，著离骚；左丘失明，厥有国语；孙子膑脚，而论兵法；不韦迁蜀，世传吕览；韩非囚秦，说难、孤愤；诗三百篇，大抵贤圣发愤之所为作也。
现代文：从前周文王被拘禁羑里，推演了《周易》；孔子遭遇陈蔡的困厄，作有《春秋》；屈原被放逐，著了《离骚》；左丘明双目失明，才编撰了《国语》，孙子的腿受了膑刑，却论述兵法；吕不韦被贬徙蜀郡，世上才流传《吕览》；韩非被囚禁在秦国，才写有《说难》《孤愤》；《诗》三百篇，大都是圣人贤士抒发愤懑而作的。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Wen was detained in Shuli and deduced "Zhou Yi"; Confucius encountered the hardships of Chen Cai and wrote "Spring and Autumn"; Qu Yuan was exiled and wrote "Leaving Soao"; Zuo Quming was blinded before compiling "National Language"; Sun Zi's leg was beaten, but he discussed military tactics; Lü Buwei was exiled to Shu County, and "Lu Zhan" was circulated in the world; Han Fei was imprisoned in Qin State, and wrote "Difficult to Say" and "Lonely Anger"; "Poems" are three hundred, most of which were written by saints and sag

古文：此人皆意有所郁结，不得通其道也，故述往事，思来者。 
现代文：这些人都是心中聚集郁闷忧愁，理想主张不得实现，因而追述往事，考虑未来。 
English: These people are all depressed and melancholy in their hearts, and their ideals cannot be realized, so they pursue the past and consider the future.

古文：於是卒述陶唐以来，至于麟止，自黄帝始。
现代文：于是终于下定决心记述陶唐以来直到武帝获麟那一年的历史，而始自黄帝。
English: Therefore, he finally made up his mind to record the history of the year from the Tang Dynasty to Emperor Wu's accession to the throne, starting with the Yellow Emperor.

古文：维昔黄帝，法天则地，四圣遵序，各成法度；唐尧逊位，虞舜不台；厥美帝功，万世载之。
现代文：从前黄帝以天为法，以地为则，颛顼、帝喾、尧、舜四位圣明帝王先后相继，各建成一定法度；唐尧让位于虞舜，虞舜因觉自己不能胜其任而不悦；这些帝王的美德丰功，万世流传。
English: In the past, the Yellow Emperor took heaven as the law and the earth as the principle. The four holy Ming emperors, Zhou, Di, Zhou and Zhou, successively ascended the throne, and each built a certain law; Tang Xi gave way to Yu Xi, and Yu Xi was displeased because he felt that he was not up to the task; the virtues and feats of these emperors have been passed down for generations.

古文：作五帝本纪第一。
现代文：作《五帝本纪》第一。
English: He was the first to write "The Five Immortals."

古文：维禹之功，九州攸同，光唐虞际，德流苗裔；夏桀淫骄，乃放鸣条。
现代文：大禹治水之功，九州同享其成，光耀唐虞之际，恩德流传后世；夏桀荒淫骄横，于是被放逐鸣条。
English: Kyushu shared the credit for Dayu's achievements in water control, and when the Tang dynasty was at its peak, his benevolence was passed down to future generations. As opposed to Xia Yao's arrogance, he was banished to the Ming dynasty.

古文：作夏本纪第二。
现代文：作《夏本纪》第二。
English: It is the second work of "Summer Chronicle."

古文：维契作商，爰及成汤；太甲居桐，德盛阿衡；武丁得说，乃称高宗；帝辛湛湎，诸侯不享。
现代文：契建立商国，传到成汤；太甲被放逐居桐地改过反善，阿衡功德隆盛；武丁得有傅说辅佐，才被称为高宗；帝辛沉湎无道，诸侯不再进贡。
English: Taiga was exiled to Tongdian and reformed, while Aheng became prosperous; Wuding was assisted by Fu and became known as Gaozong; Emperor Xin was doomed, and the lords no longer paid tribute.

古文：作殷本纪第三。
现代文：作《殷本纪》第三。
English: It is the third work of "Yin Benji."

古文：维弃作稷，德盛西伯；武王牧野，实抚天下；幽厉昏乱，既丧酆镐；陵迟至赧；洛邑不祀。
现代文：弃发明种谷，西伯姬昌时功德隆盛；武王在牧野伐纣，安抚天下百姓；幽王、厉王昏暴乱，丧失了丰、镐二京；王室衰败直至赧王，洛邑断绝了周室宗庙的祭祀。
English: After abandoning the invention of planting grain, Xibe Qichang achieved great success; King Wu cut straw in the pasture to appease the people of the world; King You and King Li were confused by the riots and lost Feng and Shou Erjing; the royal family declined until Shou Wang, and Luoyang cut off the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple of Zhou Mu.

古文：作周本纪第四。
现代文：作《周本纪》第四。
English: It is the fourth work in the "Weekly Chronicle."

古文：维秦之先，伯翳佐禹；穆公思义，悼豪之旅；以人为殉，诗歌黄鸟；昭襄业帝。
现代文：秦的祖先伯翳，曾经辅佐大禹；秦穆公思及君义，祭悼秦国在殽战死的将士；穆公死后以活人殉葬，《黄鸟》一诗诉其哀伤；昭襄王开创了帝业。
English: Qin's ancestor Bo Xun, once assisted Dayu; Qin Mu Gongsi and Jun Yi, to mourn the soldiers of Qin who died in the war; after Mu Gong's death, he was buried alive, "Yellow Bird" is a poem about his grief; King Zhaoxiang created the empire.

古文：作秦本纪第五。
现代文：作《秦本纪》第五。
English: It is the fifth work of the "Qin Dynasty."

古文：始皇既立，并兼六国，销锋铸鐻，维偃干革，尊号称帝，矜武任力；二世受运，子婴降虏。
现代文：秦始皇即位，兼并了六国，销毁兵器，铸为钟鐻，希望干戈止息，尊号称为皇帝，耀武扬威，专凭暴力，秦二世承受国运，子婴投降做了俘虏。
English: Qin Shihuang ascended to the throne, annexed six countries, destroyed weapons, cast as a bell, hoped to stop fighting, called himself emperor, displayed military prowess, relied on violence, Qin II suffered national misfortune, and his infant son surrendered and became a prisoner.

古文：作始皇本纪第六。
现代文：作《始皇本纪》第六。
English: It is the sixth work in the "Historical Chronicle of the First Emperor."

古文：秦失其道，豪桀并扰；项梁业之，子羽接之；杀庆救赵，诸侯立之；诛婴背怀，天下非之。
现代文：秦朝丧失王道，豪杰并起造反；项梁开创反秦大业，项羽接续；项羽杀了庆子冠军宋义，解救了赵国，诸侯拥立他；可他诛杀子婴，背弃义帝怀王，天下都责难他。
English: The Qin Dynasty lost the royal road, and the heroes rebelled; Xiang Liang initiated the anti-Qin cause, and Xiang Yu followed suit; Xiang Yu killed the champion of Keizi, Song Yi, saved Zhao Province, and the princes supported him; but he did not kill the baby, and betrayed the Emperor of Yi, and the whole world blamed him.

古文：作项羽本纪第七。
现代文：作《项羽本纪》第七。
English: It is the seventh chapter of the "Xiang Yu Hong Ji."

古文：子羽暴虐，汉行功德；愤发蜀汉，还定三秦；诛籍业帝，天下惟宁，改制易俗。
现代文：项羽残酷暴虐，汉王建功施德；发愤于蜀、汉，率军北还平定三秦；诛灭项羽建立帝业，天下安定，又改革制度，更易风俗。
English: Xiang Yu was cruel and tyrannical, and the Han king made contributions and promoted virtue; he was angry at Shu and Han, and led the army to the north to pacify the Three Qin Dynasties; he destroyed Xiang Yu to establish an empire, stabilize the world, and reform the system to make customs easier.

古文：作高祖本纪第八。
现代文：作《高祖本纪》第八。
English: It is the eighth work of "Gao Zu Benji."

古文：惠之早霣，诸吕不台；崇彊禄、产，诸侯谋之；杀隐幽友，大臣洞疑，遂及宗祸。
现代文：惠帝早逝，诸吕用事使百姓不悦；吕后提高吕禄、吕产的地位，加强他们的权力，诸侯图谋剪除他们；吕后杀害赵隐王，又囚杀赵幽王刘友，朝中大臣疑惧，终于导致吕氏宗族覆灭之祸。
English: Emperor Hui died at an early age, and the princes of Lu did things to displease the people; the empress of Lu raised the status of Lu Lu and Lu Sheng, strengthened their power, and the princes plotted to eliminate them; the empress of Lu killed King Zhao Yin, and also imprisoned King Zhao Yu and Liu You, which was suspected by the ministers of the Middle Kingdom, and finally led to the destruction of the Lu clan.

古文：作吕太后本纪第九。
现代文：作《吕太后本纪》第九。
English: This is the ninth volume of "The Chronicle of Empress Dowager Lyu."

古文：汉既初兴，继嗣不明，迎王践祚，天下归心；蠲除肉刑，开通关梁，广恩博施，厥称太宗。
现代文：汉朝初建，惠帝死后帝位继承人不明，众臣迎立代王刘恒即位，天下心服；文帝废除肉刑，开通水陆要道，博施恩惠，死后被称为太宗。
English: It was built at the beginning of the Han Dynasty. After the death of Emperor Hui, the heir to the throne was unknown. All the courtiers welcomed the reigning king, Liu Heng, to the throne, and the whole world was satisfied. Emperor Wen abolished corporal punishment, opened important water and land routes, and bestowed favors. After his death, he was known as Taizong.

古文：作孝文本纪第十。
现代文：作《孝文本纪》第十。
English: This is the tenth work of "The Chronicle of Filial Piety."

古文：诸侯骄恣，吴首为乱，京师行诛，七国伏辜，天下翕然，大安殷富。
现代文：诸侯王骄横放肆，吴王率先叛乱，朝廷派兵讨伐，叛乱七国先后伏罪，天下安定，太平富裕。
English: Princes and princes were arrogant and presumptuous, King Wu took the lead in rebellion, the imperial court sent troops to fight, the seven rebellious countries successively committed crimes, and the world was stable and prosperous.

古文：作孝景本纪第十一。
现代文：作《孝景本纪》第十一。
English: It is the eleventh work in the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：汉兴五世，隆在建元，外攘夷狄，内脩法度，封禅，改正朔，易服色。
现代文：汉朝兴建五世，兴隆盛世在建元年间，天子外攘夷狄，内修法度，举行封禅，修订历法，改变服色。
English: The fifth generation of the Han Dynasty was built, and the prosperity of the Han Dynasty began in the first year of the founding of the Han Dynasty. The emperor expelled the barbarians from the outside, reformed the laws within, held the Feudal Zen, revised the calendar, and changed the color of the clothes.

古文：作今上本纪第十二。
现代文：作《今上本纪》第十二。
English: It is the twelfth chapter of "Imajo hongi."

古文：维三代尚矣，年纪不可考，盖取之谱牒旧闻，本于兹，於是略推，作三代世表第一。
现代文：夏、商、周三代太久远了，具体年代已不可考，大致取之于传世的谱牒旧闻，以此为据，进而大略地推断，作《三代世表》第一。
English: Xia, Shang and San dynasties are too long ago, and the specific years have not been investigated. It is roughly taken from the handed down genealogy and old news, and based on this, it is roughly inferred that it is the first to make the "Third Generation World Table."

古文：幽厉之後，周室衰微，诸侯专政，春秋有所不纪；而谱牒经略，五霸更盛衰，欲睹周世相先後之意，作十二诸侯年表第二。
现代文：幽王、厉王之后，周朝王室衰落，诸侯各自为政，《春秋》有些未作记载；而谱牒只记概要，五霸又交替盛衰，为考察周朝各诸侯国的先后关系，作《十二诸侯年表》第二。
English: After Yu Wang and Li Wang, the royal family of the Zhou Dynasty declined, and each of the lords ruled separately. Some of the "Spring and Autumn" are not recorded; while the "Spectrum" only records a summary, and the "Five Dynasties" alternately rise and fall. In order to investigate the succession relationship of the Zhou Dynasty and each of the lords, the second "Twelve Lords Chronology" was made.

古文：春秋之後，陪臣秉政，彊国相王；以至于秦，卒并诸夏，灭封地，擅其号。
现代文：春秋以后，陪臣执政，强国之君竞相称王，及至秦王嬴政，终于吞并各国，铲除封地，独享尊号。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period, the vassals ruled, the kings of the powerful countries competed for the title of king, and it was not until the reign of King Qin that he finally annexed various countries, eradicated fiefdoms, and enjoyed the honorific title.

古文：作六国年表第三。
现代文：作《六国年表》第三。
English: The third volume of the "Chronology of the Six Kingdoms."

古文：秦既暴虐，楚人发难，项氏遂乱，汉乃扶义征伐；八年之间，天下三嬗，事繁变众，故详著秦楚之际月表第四。
现代文：秦帝暴虐，楚人陈胜发难，项氏又自乱反秦阵营，汉王于是仗义征伐。八年之间，天下三易其主，事变繁多，所以详著《秦楚之际月表》第四。
English: The Qin Emperor was tyrannical, the Chu people Chen Sheng encountered difficulties, the Xiang clan also rebelled against the Qin camp, and the Han king then fought a righteous campaign. Between the eight years, the world has changed hands three times, and there have been many changes, so the detailed "Qin Chu Calendar" is the fourth.

古文：汉兴已来，至于太初百年，诸侯废立分削，谱纪不明，有司靡踵，彊弱之原云以世。
现代文：汉朝兴建以来，直到太初一百年间，诸侯废立分削的情况，谱录记载不明，主管的官员也无法接着记下去，但可据其世系推知其强弱的原由。
English: Since the construction of the Han Dynasty, until the first hundred years, the situation of the waste disposal of the princes, the record is unknown, and the officials in charge can not continue to record, but the reason for their strength and weakness can be inferred from their lineage.

古文：作汉兴已来诸侯年表第五。
现代文：作《汉兴已来诸侯年表》第五。
English: It is the fifth work in the "Han Xing Has Come to the Princes' Chronology."

古文：维高祖元功，辅臣股肱，剖符而爵，泽流苗裔，忘其昭穆，或杀身陨国。
现代文：高祖始取天下，辅佐他创业的功臣，都得剖符封爵，恩泽传给他们的子孙后代，有的忘其亲疏远近，分不出辈分，也有的竟至杀身亡国。
English: Gao Zu was the first to conquer the world, and the heroes who assisted him in starting a business were all knighted, and the favor was passed on to their children and grandchildren. Some forgot their relatives and were estranged, unable to distinguish between generations, and some even killed themselves and lost their country.

古文：作高祖功臣侯者年表第六。
现代文：作《高祖功臣侯者年表》第六。
English: It is the sixth work of "Gao Zu Gongshen Hou Chronology."

古文：惠景之间，维申功臣宗属爵邑，作惠景间侯者年表第七。
现代文：惠帝、景帝年间，增封功臣宗属爵位和食邑。作《惠景间侯者年表》第七。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Hui and Emperor Jing, he was awarded the title of a meritorious subject and the title of a member of the imperial household. He was the seventh to write the "Chronology of the Princes of Hui and Jing."

古文：北讨彊胡，南诛劲越，征伐夷蛮，武功爰列。
现代文：北面攻打强悍的匈奴，南面诛讨强劲的越人，征伐四方蛮夷，不少人以武功封侯。
English: In the north, they fought against the powerful Xiongnu, in the south, they fought against the strong Viets, they conquered barbarians in all directions, and many were knighted for their military exploits.

古文：作建元以来侯者年表第八。
现代文：作《建元以来侯者年表》第八。
English: He was the eighth author of the "Chronology of the Hou people since the founding of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：诸侯既彊，七国为从，子弟众多，无爵封邑，推恩行义，其埶销弱，德归京师。
现代文：诸侯国日渐强大，吴楚等七国南北连成一片，诸侯王子弟众多，没有爵位封邑，朝廷下令推行恩义，分封诸侯王子弟为侯，致使王国势力日益削弱，而德义却归于朝廷。
English: The vassal states were becoming more and more powerful, and the seven countries, including Wu Chu, were connected from north to south. There were many vassal princes, and there were no peerage fiefs. The imperial court ordered the implementation of benevolence, and the vassal princes were appointed as vassals. As a result, the power of the kingdom was increasingly weakened, while virtue was attributed to the imperial court.

古文：作王子侯者年表第九。
现代文：作《王子侯者年表》第九。
English: He was the ninth to compose the "Chronology of Princes and Mares."

古文：国有贤相良将，民之师表也。
现代文：国家的贤相良将，是民众的表率。
English: The nation's wise and good generals are the people's role models.

古文：维见汉兴以来将相名臣年表，贤者记其治，不贤者彰其事。
现代文：曾看到汉兴以来将相名臣年表，对贤者则记其治绩，对不贤者则明其劣迹。
English: I once saw a chronology of famous subjects since Han Xing, noting their achievements for the wise, and their bad deeds for the unwise.

古文：作汉兴以来将相名臣年表第十。
现代文：作《汉兴以来将相名臣年表》第十。
English: He was the tenth author of the "Chronology of Famous Subjects since the Han Dynasty."

古文：维三代之礼，所损益各殊务，然要以近性情，通王道，故礼因人质为之节文，略协古今之变。作礼书第一。
现代文：夏、商、周三代之礼，各有所增减而不同，但总地来看，其要领都在于使礼切近人的情性，通于王道，所以礼根据人的质朴本性而制成，减掉了那些繁文缛节，大体顺应了古今之变。作《礼书》第一。
English: The etiquette of the Xia, Shang and San dynasties varied from year to year, but on the whole, its essence was to make the etiquette close to human nature and conducive to the king's way. Therefore, the etiquette was made according to the simple nature of human beings, reducing the red tape, and generally conforming to the changes of ancient and modern times.

古文：乐者，所以移风易俗也。
现代文：乐是用来移风易俗的。
English: Music is used to change customs.

古文：自雅颂声兴，则已好郑卫之音，郑卫之音所从来久矣。
现代文：自《雅》、《颂》之声兴起，人们就已经喜好郑、卫之音，郑、卫之音由来已久了。
English: Since the rise of the voices of "Ya" and "Ode," people have been fond of Zheng and Wei's voices, and Zheng and Wei's voices have been around for a long time.

古文：人情之所感，远俗则怀。
现代文：被人情所感发，那远方异俗之人就会归附。
English: Inspired by human feelings, those who are far away from the world will adhere to it.

古文：比乐书以述来古，作乐书第二。
现代文：仿照已有《乐书》来论述自古以来音乐的兴衰，作《乐书》第二。
English: Based on the existing "Music Book" to discuss the rise and fall of music since ancient times, this is the second "Music Book."

古文：非兵不彊，非德不昌，黄帝、汤、武以兴，桀、纣、二世以崩，可不慎欤？
现代文：没有军队国家就不会强大，没有德政国家就不会昌盛，黄帝、商汤、周武王以明于此而兴，夏桀、商纣、秦二世以昧于此而亡，怎么可以对此不慎重呢？
English: Without an army, a country would not be strong, and without German rule, a country would not prosper. The Yellow Emperor, Shang Tang, and King Zhou Wu all rose to prominence thanks to it, while Xia Yu, Shang Pi, and Qin II all died thanks to it. How can we not be cautious about this?

古文：司马法所从来尚矣，太公、孙、吴、王子能绍而明之，切近世，极人变。
现代文：《司马法》产生已很久了，姜太公、孙武、吴起、王子成甫能继承并有所发明，切合近世情况，极尽人事之变。
English: "Sima Fa" has been in existence for a long time. Jiang Taigong, Sun Wu, Wu Qi, and Prince Cheng Fu were able to inherit and invent it, which is in line with the situation of the modern world and makes the most of the changes in personnel.

古文：作律书第三。
现代文：作《律书》第三。
English: It is the third song to be composed for "The Law Book."

古文：律居阴而治阳，历居阳而治阴，律历更相治，间不容翲忽。
现代文：乐律处于阴而治阳，历法处于阳而治阴，律历交替相治，其间不容许丝毫差错。
English: The musical rhythm is in the yin and rules the yang, the calendar is in the yang and rules the yin, and the rhythms and calendars rule each other alternately, and no mistakes are allowed.

古文：五家之文怫异，维太初之元论。作历书第四。
现代文：原有五家的历书相互悖逆不同，只有太初元年所论历法为是。作《历书》第四。
English: Originally, the five calendars differed from each other, and only the calendar discussed at the beginning of the first year was correct.

古文：星气之书，多杂禨祥，不经；推其文，考其应，不殊。
现代文：星气之书，杂有许多求福去灾、预兆吉凶的内容，荒诞不经；推究其文辞，考察其应验，并无什么特别之处。
English: The Book of the Astral Air, mixed with many contents of seeking blessings and avoiding disasters, and foreshadowing auspicious and inauspicious events, is absurd; there is nothing special about investigating its wording and examining its fulfillment.

古文：比集论其行事，验于轨度以次，作天官书第五。
现代文：待到武帝召集专人研讨此事，并依次用轨度加以验证。作《天官书》第五。
English: Waiting for Emperor Wu to convene a special person to study the matter, and then use the track to verify it.

古文：受命而王，封禅之符罕用，用则万灵罔不禋祀。
现代文：承受天命做了帝王，封禅这样的符瑞之事不可轻易举行，如果举行，那一切神灵没有不受祭祀的。
English: As an emperor who has received the mandate of heaven, such a auspicious event as the enthronement of the emperor cannot be easily held. If it is held, then there is no reason why all the gods should not be sacrificed.

古文：追本诸神名山大川礼，作封禅书第六。
现代文：追溯祭祀名山大川诸神之礼，作《封禅书》第六。
English: This is the sixth volume of "Fu Zensho," tracing the ritual of worshiping the gods of famous mountains and rivers.

古文：维禹浚川，九州攸宁；爰及宣防，决渎通沟。
现代文：大禹疏通河川，九川得以安宁；及至建立宣防宫之时，河道沟渠更被疏浚。
English: When Dayu dredged the rivers, peace came to Jiuchuan; and when the Xuanbao Palace was built, the river channels were even dredged.

古文：作河渠书第七。
现代文：作《河渠书》第七。
English: It is the seventh chapter of "The Book of Canals."

古文：维币之行，以通农商；其极则玩巧，并兼兹殖，争於机利，去本趋末。
现代文：钱币的流通，是为沟通农商；其弊端竟发展到玩弄智巧，兼并发财，争相投机牟利，舍本逐末，去农经商。
English: The circulation of coins is for the purpose of communication between farmers and merchants; its drawbacks have actually developed into playing tricks, making money at the same time, competing to speculate and make profits, and gradually giving up the capital to go to agriculture and commerce.

古文：作平准书以观事变，第八。
现代文：作《平准书》来考察事情的变化发展，这是第八。
English: This is the eighth time I have written the "Reconciliation Book" to examine the changes and development of the situation.

古文：太伯避历，江蛮是適；文武攸兴，古公王迹。
现代文：太伯为让季历继位，避居江南蛮夷之地，文王、武王才得以振兴周邦，发展了古公亶父的王业。
English: In order to let Qili succeed to the throne, King Wen and King Wu had to flee to the south of the Yangtze River to avoid the barbarians. Only then were they able to revitalize Zhou and develop the royal career of their father.

古文：阖庐弑僚，宾服荆楚；夫差克齐，子胥鸱夷；信嚭亲越，吴国既灭。
现代文：阖闾杀了吴王僚，夺取王位，降服楚国；夫差战胜齐国，逼杀伍子胥以革囊盛其尸；听信伯嚭的话亲善越国，最终被越国所灭。
English: He killed Wu Wangli, seized the throne, and subjugated the state of Chu; he defeated the state of Qi, and forced Wu Zixuan to kill Wu Zixuan and put his body in a leather bag; he listened to the words of Bo Xuan and befriended Yue Guo, and was eventually destroyed by Yue Guo.

古文：嘉伯之让，作吴世家第一。
现代文：为赞许太伯让位的美德，作《吴世家》第一。
English: In order to praise the virtue of abdicating the throne, "Wu Family" was written first.

古文：申、吕肖矣，尚父侧微，卒归西伯，文武是师；功冠群公，缪权于幽；番番黄发，爰飨营丘。
现代文：申、吕两国衰弱，尚父微坎坷，终于投归西伯，为文王、武王之师；他的功劳为群臣之首，长于暗中设计权谋；头发斑白，受封于齐，建都营丘，成为齐国始祖。
English: Shen and Lu were weak, and his father was a bit bumpy. Finally, he returned to Xibe, and became the teacher of King Wen and King Wu. His merit was the head of the group of ministers, and he was good at secretly designing and plotting; his hair was white, he was sealed in Qi, and he built the capital Yingqiu, and became the ancestor of Qi.

古文：不背柯盟，桓公以昌，九合诸侯，霸功显彰。
现代文：齐桓公不背弃与鲁国在柯地所订盟约，事业由此昌盛，多次会合诸侯，霸功显赫。
English: King Qi Huan did not renege on the treaty he had signed with the State of Lu in Ke Di, and his business prospered as a result. He held many meetings with the princes, and his achievements as a ruler were outstanding.

古文：田阚争宠，姜姓解亡。
现代文：田恒与阚止争宠，姜姓齐国于是瓦解灭亡。
English: Tian Heng competed for favor with Yao Zhizhi, and Jiang Qi Guo then disintegrated and died.

古文：嘉父之谋，作齐太公世家第二。
现代文：为赞美尚父的宏谋，作《齐太公世家》第二。
English: In order to praise his father's grand plan, he wrote the second "Qi Taigong Sejia."

古文：依之违之，周公绥之；愤发文德，天下和之；辅翼成王，诸侯宗周。
现代文：诸侯和部属对周无论是依顺的，还是违抗的，周公都安抚他们；他努力宣扬文德，天下都响应随和；辅佐保护成王，诸侯以周天子为天下宗主。
English: Whether the princes and their subordinates obeyed or defied Zhou, Zhou appeased them; he worked hard to promote morality, and the whole world responded with harmony; he assisted and protected Chengwang, and the princes regarded Zhou Tianzi as the sovereign of the world.

古文：隐桓之际，是独何哉？
现代文：隐公、桓公之际却屡屡发生悖德非礼之事，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that, on the occasion of Hinkong and Huangong, immoral and indecent things have repeatedly occurred?

古文：三桓争彊，鲁乃不昌。
现代文：只因三桓争强，鲁国国运不昌。
English: It was only because of the struggle for supremacy of the three khanates that the national movement in the Russian Empire did not succeed.

古文：嘉旦金縢，作周公世家第三。
现代文：赞美周公旦的《金滕》策文，作《周公世家》第三。
English: He praised Zhou Gongdan's "Jinteng" and wrote the third chapter of "The Zhou Gong Family."

古文：武王克纣，天下未协而崩。
现代文：武王战胜商纣，天下尚未协洽他便驾崩。
English: King Wu defeated the merchants, but he died before the world could cooperate with him.

古文：成王既幼，管蔡疑之，淮夷叛之，於是召公率德，安集王室，以宁东土。
现代文：成王年幼，管叔、蔡叔怀疑周公篡位，淮夷也起兵叛乱，于是召公以其高德率先支持周公，使王室团结安定，保证了周公东征的胜利，使东方得以安宁。
English: When Cheng Wang was young, Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu suspected Zhou Gong of usurping the throne, and Huaiyi also raised an army to rebel. Therefore, Zhao Gong took the lead in supporting Zhou Gong with his high morals, making the royal family united and stable, ensuring the victory of Zhou Gong's eastward expedition, and making the east peaceful.

古文：燕之禅，乃成祸乱。
现代文：燕王哙的禅位，才造成了祸乱。
English: It was Yan Wang Rong's meditation that caused the calamity.

古文：嘉甘棠之诗，作燕世家第四。
现代文：赞赏《甘棠》诗篇，作《燕世家》第四。
English: Appreciated the "Sweet Pea" poem, made the fourth "Yan family."

古文：管蔡相武庚，将宁旧商；及旦摄政，二叔不飨；杀鲜放度，周公为盟；大任十子，周以宗彊。
现代文：管蔡二叔辅佐武庚，想要安定商朝旧地；周公旦摄政，二叔不服，周公便杀死管叔鲜，流放蔡叔度，周公盟誓忠于成王，太任生育十个儿子，周室以宗族繁盛而强大。
English: Guan Cai's second uncle and assistant, Su Wu Geng, wanted to stabilize the old land of the merchant dynasty; Zhou Gongdan was the regent, the second uncle was not satisfied, Zhou Gong killed Guan Shuxian, exiled Cai Shudu, Zhou Gong Meng swore allegiance to King Cheng, Tai Ren gave birth to ten sons, and the Zhou family was prosperous and powerful with the clan.

古文：嘉仲悔过，作管蔡世家第五。
现代文：表彰蔡仲悔过，作《管蔡世家》第五。
English: In recognition of Cai Zhong's repentance, the fifth volume of "The Cai Family" was published.

古文：王後不绝，舜禹是说；维德休明，苗裔蒙烈。
现代文：先王后代延继不绝，舜、禹为此而感到高兴；他们功德美好清明，后代得以承其功业。
English: The descendants of the previous king continue to succeed each other, and Yu and Yu are happy about this; their merits are beautiful and clear, and future generations can inherit their achievements.

古文：百世享祀，爰周陈杞，楚实灭之。
现代文：百世享受祭祀，到了周时，封有陈国、杞国，后被楚国灭掉。
English: They enjoyed the sacrificial rites for a hundred generations, and by the Zhou Dynasty, they had been conquered by the states of Chen and Yao, and later by the state of Chu.

古文：齐田既起，舜何人哉？
现代文：齐田氏又使之兴起，舜是位多么了不起的人啊！
English: Mr. Saida made it rise again, what a great man he is!

古文：作陈杞世家第六。
现代文：作《陈杞世家》第六。
English: It is the sixth work of "The Chen Xi Family."

古文：收殷馀民，叔封始邑，申以商乱，酒材是告，及朔之生，卫顷不宁；南子恶蒯聩，子父易名。
现代文：收纳殷的遗民，康叔始封邑。周公用商朝乱德亡国的教训申饬他，写了《酒诰》、《梓材》等辞来告诫他。到卫公子朔出生，卫国开始倾危不宁；南子憎恶蒯聩，造成儿子和父亲名分颠倒。
English: To accommodate the remnants of Yin's people, Uncle Kang began to seal the city. Zhou Gong then used the lessons of the Shang Dynasty's chaos and Germany's destruction of the country to tell him, and wrote "Sake Lees" and "Zi Zai" to admonish him. When Wei Gongzi was born, the defense of the country began to be in danger; Nan Zi hated Wei, causing the son and father to be reversed.

古文：周德卑微，战国既彊，卫以小弱，角独後亡。喜彼康诰，作卫世家第七。
现代文：周朝统治日益衰微，各诸侯国日益强大，卫国因为弱小，国君角反而后亡。赞美《康诰》，作《卫世家》第七。
English: The Zhou Dynasty's rule was waning day by day, and the vassal states were growing stronger and stronger. However, the emperor of the country died later because the defense of the country was weak. Praise for "Kang Xi," the seventh volume of "Weixia Jia."

古文：嗟箕子乎！
现代文：可叹啊，箕子！
English: Alas, the cripple!

古文：嗟箕子乎！
现代文：可叹啊，箕子！
English: Alas, the cripple!

古文：正言不用，乃反为奴。
现代文：正确的意见没有被采纳，反被迫害装疯为奴。
English: The correct opinion was not adopted, and the opponent was forced to pretend to be mad as a slave.

古文：武庚既死，周封微子。
现代文：武庚死后，周朝封微子于宋。
English: After the death of Wu Geng, the Zhou Dynasty sealed its fate with Song.

古文：襄公伤於泓，君子孰称。
现代文：宋襄公在泓水之战中受伤，又有哪位君子称道？
English: Song Xiangong was injured in the Battle of Surabaya. Which gentleman praised him?

古文：景公谦德，荧惑退行。
现代文：景公有自谦爱民之德，荧惑为之退行。
English: Jing Gong had the virtue of self-effacement and love for the people, but he degenerated into a charlatan.

古文：剔成暴虐，宋乃灭亡。
现代文：剔成暴虐无道，宋国因而灭亡。
English: The Song dynasty collapsed as a result of the brutality of the culling.

古文：喜微子问太师，作宋世家第八。
现代文：赞美微子请教太师，作《宋世家》第八。
English: In praise of the microcosm, he asked the Grand Master for advice, and wrote the eighth "Song Dynasty."

古文：武王既崩，叔虞邑唐。
现代文：武王去世后，叔虞封邑于唐。
English: After the death of King Wu, Shugu Fongyipu remained in Tang.

古文：君子讥名，卒灭武公。
现代文：君子讥讽晋穆公为儿子取名之事，武公终于灭而代之。
English: Nobles ridiculed Jin Mu Gong for naming his son, and Wu Gong finally died and was replaced.

古文：骊姬之爱，乱者五世；重耳不得意，乃能成霸。
现代文：献公宠爱骊姬，造成五世之乱；重耳不得志，却能威霸诸侯。
English: His devotion to the court and his love for his concubine caused the chaos of the 5th generation; he did not have a strong will, but he was able to dominate the princes.

古文：六卿专权，晋国以秏。
现代文：六卿专权，晋国衰亡。
English: The exclusive power of the six nobles led to the decline and fall of Jin.

古文：嘉文公锡珪鬯，作晋世家第九。
现代文：赞美文公因功得天子珪鬯，作《晋世家》第九。
English: In praise of Wengong, he was awarded the title of "Son of Heaven" for his achievements, making him the ninth member of the Jin family.

古文：重黎业之，吴回接之；殷之季世，粥子牒之。
现代文：重黎创业，吴国继承；殷朝末年，有简札记述鬻子为楚国始祖。
English: He started business in Chongli and was succeeded by Wu; at the end of the Yin Dynasty, there was a note describing Zizi as the founder of Chu.

古文：周用熊绎，熊渠是续。
现代文：周成王任用熊绎封为楚子，熊渠继承先世之业。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang appointed Xiong Yifeng as Chu Zi, and Xiong Qu inherited the business of the previous generation.

古文：庄王之贤，乃复国陈；既赦郑伯，班师华元。
现代文：楚庄王贤明，又恢复陈国。赦免了郑伯之罪，又因华元之言而班师回国。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang Xianming restored Chen Guo, pardoned Zheng Bo's crime, and returned to China because of Hua Yuan's words.

古文：怀王客死，兰咎屈原；好谀信谗，楚并於秦。
现代文：怀王客死于秦，子兰归咎屈原，楚君喜阿谀信谗言，终于被秦所吞并。
English: Huai Wangke died in Qin, Zilan blamed Qu Yuan, Chu Jun rejoiced, and was finally annexed by Qin.

古文：嘉庄王之义，作楚世家第十。
现代文：赞美庄王的德义，作《楚世家》第十。
English: In praise of Zhuang Wang's virtue, the tenth chapter of "The House of Chu."

古文：少康之子，实宾南海，文身断发，鼋鳝与处，既守封禺，奉禹之祀。
现代文：少康之子远弃南海，纹身断发，与鼋鬻相处，守在封山禺山，事奉大禹的祭祀。
English: Shokang's son abandoned the South China Sea, got a tattoo and cut off his hair, got along with Zhai, stayed in the mountain of the mountain, and served the sacrifice of Dayu.

古文：句践困彼，乃用种、蠡。
现代文：勾践受到夫差的困辱，于是信用文种、范蠡。
English: Gochan was humiliated by her husband's bad behavior, so she trusted Wenzhuang and Fan Yao.

古文：嘉句践夷蛮能脩其德，灭彊吴以尊周室，作越王句践世家第十一。
现代文：赞美勾践身在夷蛮能修其德，消灭强大吴国以尊奉周室，作《越王勾践世家》第十一。
English: In praise of Koga's ability to cultivate virtue in the face of barbarism and eliminate the powerful state of Wu by honoring Zhou, he wrote the eleventh chapter of "Overcoming King Koga's Family."

古文：桓公之东，太史是庸。
现代文：桓公东迁，信用太史之言。
English: Kanko's move to the east is a historical fact.

古文：及侵周禾，王人是议。
现代文：庄公派兵侵犯周土，割取庄稼，受到周王臣民的非议。
English: Zhuang Gong sent soldiers to invade the surrounding land and cut crops, which was criticized by the subjects of King Zhou.

古文：祭仲要盟，郑久不昌。
现代文：祭仲被宋胁迫结盟，郑国长期不得昌兴。
English: Song coerced Saizhong into an alliance, and Zheng Guo was not allowed to prosper for a long time.

古文：子产之仁，绍世称贤。
现代文：子产的仁政，后世称道贤明。
English: His benevolent government was praised by later generations as a wise course of action.

古文：三晋侵伐，郑纳於韩。
现代文：三晋侵犯征伐，郑终被韩吞并。
English: The three Jin invaded and conquered, and Zheng was eventually annexed by Han.

古文：嘉厉公纳惠王，作郑世家第十二。
现代文：赞美郑厉公接纳周惠王，作《郑世家》第十二。
English: Praise Zheng Li Gong for accepting Zhou Hui Wang, as the twelfth "Zheng Family."

古文：维骥騄耳，乃章造父。
现代文：骥耳骏马使造父彰名。
English: The ear of the horse made the father of the horse famous.

古文：赵夙事献，衰续厥绪。佐文尊王，卒为晋辅。
现代文：赵夙事奉晋献公，赵衰继承他的事业，辅佐晋文公尊奉国王，终于成为晋国辅臣。
English: Zhao Qian served the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Zhen inherited his business, assisted the Jin Dynasty to serve the king, and finally became the Jin Dynasty's assistant minister.

古文：襄子困辱，乃禽智伯。
现代文：赵襄子被困辱，却擒捉了智伯。
English: Zhao Xiangzi was trapped and humiliated, but he managed to capture Zhibo.

古文：主父生缚，饿死探爵。
现代文：主父遭臣子围困，掏雀充饥活活饿死。
English: His master was besieged by his vassals and died of starvation.

古文：王迁辟淫，良将是斥。
现代文：赵王迁邪僻淫乱，贬斥迫害良将。
English: Zhao Wang moved the wicked and lewd, disparaged and persecuted the good generals.

古文：嘉鞅讨周乱，作赵世家第十三。
现代文：表彰赵鞅子讨平周王室之乱，作《赵世家》第十三。
English: In recognition of Zhao Zizi's efforts to quell the Zhou royal family's rebellion, the thirteenth "Zhao Family" was made.

古文：毕万爵魏，卜人知之。
现代文：毕万在魏封爵，卜官预知其后代必昌盛。
English: Bi Wan was knighted in Wei, and the magistrate foresaw that his descendants would prosper.

古文：及绛戮干，戎翟和之。
现代文：及至魏绛羞辱杨干，负罪完成与戎翟媾和之命。
English: And Wei Shao humiliated Yang Gan, pled guilty and completed the order to make peace with the army.

古文：文侯慕义，子夏师之。
现代文：文侯仰慕仁义，拜子夏为师。
English: Wen Hou admired benevolence, and Baizhixia was his teacher.

古文：惠王自矜，齐秦攻之。
现代文：惠王骄傲自大，受到齐国秦国的攻打。
English: Hui Wang was proud and arrogant, and was attacked by Qin of Qi.

古文：既疑信陵，诸侯罢之。
现代文：安釐王怀疑信陵君，因而诸侯疏远魏国。
English: King Antao suspected Shuling, and the princes distanced themselves from Wei.

古文：卒亡大梁，王假厮之。
现代文：魏终于被秦所灭，魏王假做了厮养卒。
English: Wei was finally extinguished by Qin, and the king of Wei became a puppet.

古文：嘉武佐晋文申霸道，作魏世家第十四。
现代文：赞美魏武子佐助晋文公创立霸业，作《魏世家》第十四。
English: The 14th volume of "Wei Sejia" praises Wei Wuzi's son, Sasuke Jinwengong, for creating a domineering industry.

古文：韩厥阴德，赵武攸兴。
现代文：韩阙善积阴德，赵武才得兴立。
English: Han Ye is good at accumulating yin and yang, Zhao Wu is good at rising.

古文：绍绝立废，晋人宗之。
现代文：使灭国者重新振起，使废弃者得以再立，晋人尊崇他。
English: He is revered by the Jin people for reviving those who destroyed the country and restoring those who abandoned it.

古文：昭侯显列，申子庸之。
现代文：韩昭侯在诸侯中地位显要，重用申不害。
English: Han Zhaohong held a prominent position among the lords, and it was not a bad idea to use him repeatedly.

古文：疑非不信，秦人袭之。
现代文：韩王怀疑韩非而不信用，秦攻袭韩。
English: Han suspected Han and distrusted him, so Qin attacked Han.

古文：嘉厥辅晋匡周天子之赋，作韩世家第十五。
现代文：赞赏韩厥辅佐晋君，匡正周王室的兵赋，作《韩世家》第十五。
English: He praised Han Jue, the 15th generation of the Han family, for his military exploits.

古文：完子避难，適齐为援，阴施五世，齐人歌之。
现代文：完子避难，出奔到齐国请求援助，田氏暗施恩惠于民相继五世，齐人歌颂他。
English: After his son took refuge and fled to Qi to ask for help, the Tian clan secretly granted favors to the people for five generations in a row, and the people of Qi sang his praises.

古文：成子得政，田和为侯。
现代文：田成子夺得齐国政权，田和成为诸侯。
English: Tian Cheng Zi seized power in Qi, and Tian He became a vassal.

古文：王建动心，乃迁于共。
现代文：齐王建被计说动，使齐迁于共。
English: Qi Wangjian was persuaded to move to the CCP.

古文：嘉威、宣能拨浊世而独宗周，作田敬仲完世家第十六。
现代文：赞赏齐威王、齐宣王能冲破污浊之世而独尊崇周天子，作《田敬仲完世家》第十六。
English: Appreciated that King Qiwei and King Qi Xuan were able to break through the filthy world and independently revered Zhou Tianzi, and wrote the 16th "Tan Jingzhong completes the family."

古文：周室既衰，诸侯恣行。
现代文：周王室已经衰落，诸侯恣意而行。
English: The Zhou royal family had already declined, and the lords acted arbitrarily.

古文：仲尼悼礼废乐崩，追脩经术，以达王道，匡乱世反之於正，见其文辞，为天下制仪法，垂六之统纪於後世。
现代文：孔子伤感礼乐崩废，因而追研经术，以重建王道，匡正乱世，使之返于正道，观其著述，为天下制定礼仪法度。留下《六艺》纲纪于后世。
English: Confucius was saddened by the collapse of etiquette and music, so he pursued the study of scripture in order to rebuild the royal road, rectify the chaotic world, return it to the right path, observe his writings, and establish etiquette laws for the world. He left the "Six Arts" syllabus to future generations.

古文：作孔子世家第十七。
现代文：作《孔子世家》第十七。
English: The seventeenth chapter of "The Confucius Family."

古文：桀、纣失其道而汤、武作，周失其道而春秋作。
现代文：桀、纣丧失王道而汤、武兴起，周失其王道而《春秋》一书问世。
English: Zhou and Zou lost their royal road and Tang and Wu arose, Zhou lost his royal road and the book "Spring and Autumn" was published.

古文：秦失其政，而陈涉发迹，诸侯作难，风起云蒸，卒亡秦族。
现代文：秦失其为政之道，陈涉发起反秦义举，诸侯相继造反，风起云涌，终于灭掉秦国。
English: Qin lost its way of governance, Chen Zang initiated an anti-Qin pogrom, the princes rebelled one after another, the wind rose, and finally Qin was destroyed.

古文：天下之端，自涉发难。
现代文：天下亡秦之端，始于陈涉发难。
English: The beginning of the end of the world began with Chen Wanzhang.

古文：作陈涉世家第十八。
现代文：作《陈涉世家》第十八。
English: The 18th episode of "The Chen Clan."

古文：成皋之台，薄氏始基。
现代文：成皋台是薄氏的肇基之地。
English: Chenghuantai is the place where Bo's foundation was laid.

古文：诎意適代，厥崇诸窦。
现代文：窦太后被迫到了代国，才使窦氏家族得以富贵。
English: Empress Dowager Dou was forced to go to a foreign country to make the Dou family rich.

古文：栗姬偩贵，王氏乃遂。
现代文：栗姬依仗地位尊贵而自骄于人，王氏才得以顺达显贵。
English: Kuriki was proud of herself because of her respectable position, and the Wang clan was able to rise to prominence.

古文：陈后太骄，卒尊子夫。
现代文：陈皇后过于娇贵，终于使子夫受到尊宠。
English: Empress Chen was too delicate, and finally made her son-in-law be favored.

古文：嘉夫德若斯，作外戚世家十九。
现代文：赞美卫子夫德行如此之好，作《外戚世家》第十九。
English: To praise the guardian's virtue so well, he wrote the 19th "Mother-in-law's Family."

古文：汉既谲谋，禽信於陈；越荆剽轻，乃封弟交为楚王，爰都彭城，以彊淮泗，为汉宗籓。
现代文：汉高祖设诡计在陈擒拿韩信；越、楚之民慓悍轻捷，于是封其弟刘交作了楚王，建都彭城，以加强淮、泗地区的统治，成为汉王朝的宗属国。
English: Han Gao's ancestor set up a ruse to take Han Xin from Chen Zhen; the people of Yue and Chu were brave and nimble, so he appointed his brother Liu Jia as the king of Chu and built the capital Pengcheng to strengthen the rule of Huai and Zhou regions and became the Han dynasty's suzerain.

古文：戊溺於邪，礼复绍之。
现代文：楚王刘戊溺于邪僻合谋反叛，刘礼又被封为楚王继承王业。
English: Liu Wu, the king of Chu, was addicted to evil and conspired to rebel, and Liu Li was also appointed as the king of Chu to succeed to the throne.

古文：嘉游辅祖，作楚元王世家二十。
现代文：赞赏刘交辅佐高祖，作《楚元王世家》第二十。
English: Appreciated Liu Jiaozuo, the 20th generation of the "Chuyuan royal family."

古文：维祖师旅，刘贾是与；为布所袭，丧其荆、吴。
现代文：高祖率军反秦，刘贾加入其行列，后被英布攻袭，丧失了他的荆、吴之地。
English: Gao Zu led the anti-Qin army, Liu Jia joined his ranks, and was later attacked by Yingbu, losing his Jing and Wu lands.

古文：营陵激吕，乃王琅邪；怵午信齐，往而不归，遂西入关，遭立孝文，获复王燕。
现代文：营陵侯使人游说感动吕后，被封为琅琊王；被祝午诱骗轻信齐王，前往齐国不得归返，用计离齐，西入关中，又遇到迎立孝文帝的事，获封燕王。
English: Yingling Hou lobbied and moved Lvou, and was crowned as the King of Qi; he was tricked into believing in the King of Qi by Zhu Rong; he was not allowed to return to Qi, and he used trickery to leave Qi; when he entered the West Gate, he encountered the matter of welcoming the Emperor Xiaowen, and was crowned the King of Yan.

古文：天下未集，贾、泽以族，为汉籓辅。
现代文：当天下未安定之时，刘贾、刘泽以高祖同族兄弟身份，成为其藩属。
English: When the world was not stable, Liu Jia and Liu Ze, as Gao Zu's brothers of the same clan, became his vassals.

古文：作荆燕世家第二十一。
现代文：作《荆燕世家》第二十一。
English: The twenty-first volume of "The Family of Jing Yan."

古文：天下已平，亲属既寡；悼惠先壮，实镇东土。
现代文：天下平定后，高祖亲属已不多。齐悼惠王先长大成人，镇守东部国土。
English: After the country was pacified, there were not many relatives of Gao Zu. All mourned for Hui Wangxian, who grew up and became an adult, guarding the eastern land.

古文：哀王擅兴，发怒诸吕，驷钧暴戾，京师弗许。
现代文：齐哀王擅自出兵是因为对诸吕用事感到愤怒；驷钧粗暴乖戾，朝廷不准立其为帝。
English: King Qiemo sent troops without authorization because he was angry at Zhu Lyu's actions; he was rude and surly, and the imperial court did not allow him to become emperor.

古文：厉之内淫，祸成主父。
现代文：厉王亲属内部乱，杀身之祸成于主父偃之手。
English: Li Wang's relatives were in internal turmoil, and the evil of killing himself was at the hands of his father.

古文：嘉肥股肱，作齐悼惠王世家第二十二。
现代文：表彰悼惠王刘肥为辅佐天子的股肱，作《齐悼惠王世家》第二十二。
English: Liu Hui was awarded the title of "Supporter of the Son of Heaven" for his tribute to King Hui. This is the 22nd volume of "Tribute to King Hui's Family."

古文：楚人围我荥阳，相守三年；萧何填抚山西，推计踵兵，给粮食不绝，使百姓爱汉，不乐为楚。
现代文：楚霸王围汉于荥阳，相持三年；萧何镇抚山西，计算人口输送兵员，粮食供给不断，使百姓爱戴汉王，而不愿为楚王出力。
English: King Chu surrounded Han in Fenyang and held it for three years; Xiaohe Town in Fuzhansi, calculated the population, transported soldiers, and continuously supplied grain, so that the people loved King Han, but did not want to contribute to King Chu.

古文：作萧相国世家第二十三。
现代文：作《萧相国世家》第二十三。
English: This is the 23rd volume of "The Family of Xiao Xiang Guo."

古文：与信定魏，破赵拔齐，遂弱楚人。
现代文：与韩信一起平定了魏地，又打败赵国，攻取齐地，削弱了楚霸王的势力。
English: Together with Han Xin, he leveled Wei, defeated Zhao, conquered Qi, and weakened the power of King Chu.

古文：续何相国，不变不革，黎庶攸宁。
现代文：继萧何之后成为汉相国，凡事不做变更，百姓得以安宁。
English: After Xiao He, it became a Han Dynasty country. Nothing was changed, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：嘉参不伐功矜能，作曹相国世家第二十四。
现代文：赞美曹参不夸耀自己的功劳和才能，作《曹相国世家》第二十四。
English: To praise Cao San is not to boast of one's own merits and talents. This is the twenty-fourth chapter of "Cao San's Family Tree."

古文：运筹帷幄之中，制胜於无形，子房计谋其事，无知名，无勇功，图难於易，为大於细。作留侯世家第二十五。
现代文：运筹策划于帷幄之中，无形之中克敌制胜，子房谋划克敌制胜之事，没有智巧之名，没有勇武之功，从易处着手解决难题，从小处着手成就大事。作《留侯世家》第二十五。
English: Operation planning is in the drapery, invisibly defeating the enemy and winning the victory. There is no name of cleverness, no bravery, starting from an easy place to solve problems, starting from a small place to achieve great things.

古文：六奇既用，诸侯宾从於汉；吕氏之事，平为本谋，终安宗庙，定社稷。
现代文：六出奇计都被高祖采用，诸侯归附于汉；消灭诸吕之事，陈平为主谋，终于安定王室和国家。
English: Gao Zu adopted all six of the strange plans, and the princes were annexed to Han; Chen Ping was the main planner in eliminating Zhu Lü, and finally stabilized the royal family and the country.

古文：作陈丞相世家第二十六。
现代文：作《陈丞相世家》第二十六。
English: It is the twenty-sixth work of "The Chen Family."

古文：诸吕为从，谋弱京师，而勃反经合於权；吴楚之兵，亚夫驻於昌邑，以戹齐赵，而出委以梁。
现代文：诸吕勾结，阴谋削弱皇室，周勃在剪灭诸吕的问题上，背离常规而合于权变之道；吴楚七国起兵叛乱，周亚夫驻军于昌邑，以扼制齐赵之军，放弃了求救的梁王。
English: Zhu Lyu colluded and conspired to weaken the imperial family. Zhou Bo, on the issue of eliminating Zhu Lyu, deviated from the norm and followed the path of coup d'état. Seven states of Wu and Chu revolted. Zhou Yafu stationed troops in Changyi to curb Qi Zhao's army and abandoned Liang Wang, who was calling for help.

古文：作绛侯世家第二十七。
现代文：作《绛侯世家》第二十七。
English: This is the twenty-seventh volume of "The House of the Eunuchs."

古文：七国叛逆，蕃屏京师，唯梁为扞；偩爱矜功，几获于祸。
现代文：吴楚七国叛逆，藩屏天子的同姓王中只有梁孝王抵御敌国；但他自恃宠爱夸耀前功，几乎遭到杀身之祸。
English: Among the seven rebellious kings of Wuchu, only Liang Xiaowang, the son of the god of the screen, resisted the enemy. However, he liked to boast of his achievements and was almost killed.

古文：嘉其能距吴楚，作梁孝王世家第二十八。
现代文：表彰他能抵抗吴楚叛军，作《梁孝王世家》第二十八。
English: In recognition of his ability to resist the rebels of Wu Chu, he wrote the 28th "Liang Xiao Wang Family."

古文：五宗既王，亲属洽和，诸侯大小为籓，爰得其宜，僭拟之事稍衰贬矣。
现代文：五宗封王以后，天子亲属融洽和睦，诸侯或大或小皆为藩屏，各得其宜，僭位而自拟于天子之事逐渐减少。
English: After the enthronement of the five emperors, the relatives of the heavenly son were harmonious and harmonious, and the lords, big or small, were all hanping, each according to their own needs, and the matter of enthronement and imitation of the heavenly son gradually decreased.

古文：作五宗世家第二十九。
现代文：作《五宗世家》第二十九。
English: "The Five Generations" is the 29th.

古文：三子之王，文辞可观。
现代文：当今皇上三位皇子被封为王，策文文辞典雅可观。
English: The current emperor's three sons have been crowned as kings, and it's a beautiful sight to see.

古文：作三王世家第三十。
现代文：作《三王世家》第三十。
English: This is the thirtieth episode of "The Three Kingdoms."

古文：末世争利，维彼奔义；让国饿死，天下称之。
现代文：末世争权夺利，而伯夷、叔齐兄弟却趋向仁义，为让君位，双双饿死，天下称赞他们的美德。
English: In the last days, they fought for power and profit, but the brothers Bo Yi and Shu Qi tended to be benevolent and righteous. In order to give up the throne, they both starved to death, and the world praised their virtues.

古文：作伯夷列传第一。
现代文：作《伯夷叔齐列传》第一。
English: He was the first to write "Biographies of Uncle Bo Yi."

古文：晏子俭矣，夷吾则奢；齐桓以霸，景公以治。
现代文：晏子节俭，管仲则奢侈：齐桓公因得管仲辅佐而称霸，齐景公因得晏子辅佐而国治。
English: Zongzi was frugal, but Guanzhong was extravagant: Lord Qi Huan became ruler because he had Guanzhong as his assistant, and Lord Qi Jing became ruler because he had Guanzhong as his assistant.

古文：作管晏列传第二。
现代文：作《管晏列传》第二。
English: This is the second work of "Guan Xuan Lian Zhen."

古文：李耳无为自化，清净自正；韩非揣事情，循埶理。
现代文：李耳主张无为而治，使百姓自化于善；清静寡欲，使百姓自归于正。韩非揣度事物的实际情况，遵循事物发展的趋势和道理。
English: Li Er advocated non-action and governance, so that the people would transform themselves into good; tranquil and dispassionate, so that the people would return to righteousness. Han Fei calculated the actual situation of things, and followed the trend and reason of the development of things.

古文：作老子韩非列传第三。
现代文：作《老子韩非列传》第三。
English: He is the third author of "Lao Zi Han Fei's Biography."

古文：自古王者而有司马法，穰苴能申明之。
现代文：自古做帝王的都有《司马法》，穰苴能够对其阐述发挥。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have had the "Sima Law," and Zou is able to expound on it.

古文：作司马穰苴列传第四。
现代文：作《司马穰苴列传》第四。
English: It is the fourth work in the "Biography of Sima Qian."

古文：非信廉仁勇不能传兵论剑，与道同符，内可以治身，外可以应变，君子比德焉。
现代文：没有信、廉、仁、勇不能传授兵法论说剑术，兵法剑术与道相符，内可以修身，外可以应变，君子对此重视并以之为德。
English: Without sincerity, honesty, benevolence, and courage, it is impossible to teach swordsmanship. Swordsmanship is consistent with the Tao, and it can be cultivated internally and adapted externally. A gentleman attaches importance to this and regards it as virtue.

古文：作孙子吴起列传第五。
现代文：作《孙子吴起列传》第五。
English: He is the fifth author of "The Biography of Sun Tzu and Wu Qizhi."

古文：维建遇谗，爰及子奢，尚既匡父，伍员奔吴。
现代文：太子建遇谗毁，祸及伍奢，伍尚救父，伍员逃奔吴国。
English: Prince Jian was killed, woe fell on Wu Shao, Wu Shang saved his father, and the soldiers fled to Wu.

古文：作伍子胥列传第六。
现代文：作《伍子胥列传》第六。
English: It is the sixth work in the Wu Zi Yao Zhen series.

古文：孔氏述文，弟子兴业，咸为师傅，崇仁厉义。
现代文：孔子传述文德，弟子振兴其业，都成为师傅，教导人们尊仁行义。
English: Confucius propagated literature and ethics, and his disciples revived his teachings. They all became masters, teaching people to cherish benevolence and practice righteousness.

古文：作仲尼弟子列传第七。
现代文：作《仲尼弟子列传》第七。
English: It is the seventh work in the "List of Zhong Ni's Disciples."

古文：鞅去卫適秦，能明其术，彊霸孝公，後世遵其法。
现代文：商鞅离卫到秦，能阐明实施他的治国之术，使秦孝公强盛称霸，后世遵循其法度。
English: Shang Hui's departure from Wei to Qin can clarify the implementation of his statecraft, making Qin Xiaogong strong and prosperous, and future generations will follow his laws.

古文：作商君列传第八。
现代文：作《商君列传》第八。
English: It is the eighth story in the "Merchant's Chronicles."

古文：天下患衡秦毋餍，而苏子能存诸侯，约从以抑贪彊。
现代文：天下忧虑连横秦将贪得无厌，苏秦能保存诸侯利益，约定合纵来抑制秦的贪婪强横。
English: The world worries that even the Qin dynasty will become insatiably greedy, Su Qin can preserve the interests of the princes, and the agreement is made to restrain Qin's greed and arrogance.

古文：作苏秦列传第九。
现代文：作《苏秦列传》第九。
English: It is the ninth chapter of "Su Qin's Biography."

古文：六国既从亲，而张仪能明其说，复散解诸侯。
现代文：六国合纵相互亲近，而张仪明了合纵的主张，所以能针锋相对，使联合起来的诸侯再次离散瓦解。
English: The six kingdoms were close to each other, and Zhang Yi understood the idea of unification, so he could confront each other, causing the united princes to disintegrate again.

古文：作张仪列传第十。
现代文：作《张仪列传》第十。
English: He is the tenth author of "Zhang Yi Li Zhuan."

古文：秦所以东攘雄诸侯，樗里、甘茂之策。
现代文：秦国之所以能够向东侵伐，称雄诸侯，是樗里、甘茂的良策。
English: The reason why Qin was able to invade the east and dominate the provinces was the good policy of Baoli and Ganmao.

古文：作樗里甘茂列传第十一。
现代文：作《樗里甘茂列传》第十一。
English: He is the eleventh author of the "Biography of Balikanmao."

古文：苞河山，围大梁，使诸侯敛手而事秦者，魏厓之功。
现代文：席卷河山，围困大梁，使诸侯拱手而服事秦国，是魏冉的功劳。
English: It was Wei Ran's achievement to sweep the mountains and rivers, encircle the girders, and make the lords join hands to serve Qin.

古文：作穰侯列传第十二。
现代文：作《穰侯列传》第十二。
English: It is the twelfth story in the "Biography of Gonghou."

古文：南拔鄢郢，北摧长平，遂围邯郸，武安为率；破荆灭赵，王翦之计。
现代文：南面攻占鄢郢，北面摧毁长平守军，进而围困赵都邯郸，武安君是主将；破楚灭赵，是王翦的计谋。
English: The south side is to capture Zhao, the north side is to destroy the Changping defenders, and then besiege Zhao Tudun. Wu'anjun is the captain; breaking Chu and eliminating Zhao is Wang Yao's strategy.

古文：作白起王翦列传第十三。
现代文：作《白起王翦列传》第十三。
English: He is the thirteenth author of the "Biography of Baiqi Wang Qian."

古文：猎儒墨之遗文，明礼义之统纪，绝惠王利端，列往世兴衰。
现代文：涉猎儒墨的遗文，阐明礼义的纪纲，根绝梁惠王逐利的念头，陈述往世的兴衰。
English: It deals with the remaining texts of Confucianism, clarifies the etiquette of etiquette, eradicates Liang Hui Wang's pursuit of profit, and describes the rise and fall of the past.

古文：作孟子荀卿列传第十四。
现代文：作《孟子荀卿列传》第十四。
English: It is the fourteenth work in the "Biographies of Mencius and Mencius."

古文：好客喜士，士归于薛，为齐扞楚魏。
现代文：喜爱门客、士人，士人归附薛公，为齐抵御楚、魏。
English: He loved his disciples and scholars, and the scholars followed Xue Gong in order to resist Chu and Wei.

古文：作孟尝君列传第十五。
现代文：作《孟尝君列传》第十五。
English: It is the fifteenth work of "Meng Yuqun's Biography."

古文：争冯亭以权，如楚以救邯郸之围，使其君复称於诸侯。
现代文：出于权变争得冯亭所献上党之地，为解邯郸之围亲自赶楚救赵，使其国君得以再次称雄于诸侯。
English: As a result of the coup, Feng Ting won the land offered to the party, and personally rushed to rescue Zhao in order to relieve the siege, so that his sovereign could once again dominate the princes.

古文：作平原君虞卿列传第十六。
现代文：作《平原君虞卿列传》第十六。
English: It is the sixteenth story in the "Biography of Pingyuan Junyuqing."

古文：能以富贵下贫贱，贤能诎於不肖，唯信陵君为能行之。
现代文：身为富贵而能尊重贫者，自身贤能而能屈就不肖，只有信陵君能够如此。
English: As someone who is rich and can respect the poor, and as someone who is virtuous and can be humble, only Mr. Shinryo can do so.

古文：作魏公子列传第十七。
现代文：作《魏公子列传》第十七。
English: It is the seventeenth chapter of "Wei Gongzi's Biography."

古文：以身徇君，遂脱彊秦，使驰说之士南乡走楚者，黄歇之义。
现代文：舍身以救其主，终于逃离强秦，使游说之士向南趋赴楚国，这是黄歇的忠义所致。
English: Sacrificing himself to save his master, he finally escaped from Qiang Qin and made the lobbyists go south to Chu. This was due to Huang Xie's loyalty.

古文：作春申君列传第十八
现代文：作《春申君列传》第十八。
English: It is the 18th work in the "Sequel to the Life of Shunshen."

古文：能忍卼於魏齐，而信威於彊秦，推贤让位，二子有之。
现代文：能忍辱于魏齐，却扬威于强秦，推举贤能让出相位，范睢、蔡泽都有这样的美德。
English: To be able to tolerate humiliation in Wei Qi, but to be dignified in strong Qin, and to be able to give up the phase in the election of a virtuous person, Fan Qi and Cai Ze all have such virtues.

古文：作范睢蔡泽列传第十九。
现代文：作《范睢蔡泽列传》第十九。
English: He is the 19th author of "Fan Yu Cai Ze's Biography."

古文：率行其谋，连五国兵，为弱燕报彊齐之雠，雪其先君之耻。
现代文：身为主将施展谋略，联合五国军队，为弱燕报复了强齐侵凌的仇恨，洗雪了燕国先君的耻辱。
English: As the leader, he will implement strategies, unite the armies of the five countries, and take revenge for the hatred of the strong invasion of the weak Yan, and wash away the shame of the ancestors of Yan.

古文：作乐毅列传第二十。
现代文：作《乐毅列传》第二十。
English: It is the 20th work in the "Biography of Le Yi."

古文：能信意彊秦，而屈体廉子，用徇其君，俱重於诸侯。
现代文：能在强秦朝廷上陈述己意，又能对廉颇忍让谦恭，以尽忠其君，将相二人名重于诸侯。
English: He was able to express his will in the strong Qin court, and at the same time, he was able to be patient with the corrupt and humble, and to be loyal to his sovereign, which made him more important than the princes.

古文：作廉颇蔺相如列传第二十一。
现代文：作《廉颇蔺相如列传》第二十一。
English: This is the twenty-first work in the series.

古文：湣王既失临淄而奔莒，唯田单用即墨破走骑劫，遂存齐社稷。
现代文：齐湣王丢失临淄后逃到莒邑，只有田单凭借即墨打败敌军驱逐骑劫，才保住齐国江山。
English: After the loss of Linyi, the king of Qi fled to Puyi. It was only Tian Shan who defeated the enemy army and drove out the horsemen with the help of ink to save the mountains of Qi.

古文：作田单列传第二十二。
现代文：作《田单列传》第二十二。
English: This is the 22nd volume of "Tan Shan Li Cong Biography."

古文：能设诡说解患於围城，轻爵禄，乐肆志。
现代文：能用巧妙的说辞解除围城之患，轻视爵位利禄，却以尽其志趣为乐。
English: He can use clever rhetoric to lift the siege of the city, despise the knighthood, but take pleasure in doing his best.

古文：作鲁仲连邹阳列传第二十三。
现代文：作《鲁仲连邹阳列传》第二十三。
English: He was the 23rd author of "Lu Zhonglian and the Legend of Shiyang."

古文：作辞以讽谏，连类以争义，离骚有之。
现代文：创作诗赋文章进行讽喻，连类比附来伸张正义，《离骚》有这样的特色。
English: The creation of poems and articles to carry out the parable, even with the analogy attached to uphold justice, "Leaving So-ho" has such a feature.

古文：作屈原贾生列传第二十四。
现代文：作《屈原贾生列传》第二十四。
English: He is the 24th author of "Qu Yuan Jia Sheng's Biography."

古文：结子楚亲，使诸侯之士斐然争入事秦。
现代文：与子楚结交，使各诸侯国的士人争相入秦，为秦效力。
English: He made friends with Zi Chu, so that scholars from all the provinces competed to enter Qin and work for Qin.

古文：作吕不韦列传第二十五。
现代文：作《吕不韦列传》第二十五。
English: This is the twenty-fifth volume of "The Life of Lü Buwei."

古文：曹子匕首，鲁获其田，齐明其信；豫让义不为二心。
现代文：曹沫凭借匕首使鲁国重获失去的土地，也使齐君昭信于诸侯；豫让守义，忠于其君而无二心。
English: By virtue of his dagger, Cao Miao made Lu regain the lost land, and also made Qi Jun show his faith in the princes; Yuzhang kept the righteousness, and was loyal to his ruler without any second thoughts.

古文：作刺客列传第二十六。
现代文：作《刺客列传》第二十六。
English: It is the twenty-sixth work in the "Assassins" series.

古文：能明其画，因时推秦，遂得意於海内，斯为谋首。
现代文：能够阐明自己的谋略，顺应时势推尊秦国，终于使秦得志于海内，李斯实为谋首。
English: Li Sisi was the mastermind who was able to clarify his strategy, promote respect for Qin in accordance with the current situation, and finally make Qin succeed at sea.

古文：作李斯列传第二十七。
现代文：作《李斯列传》第二十七。
English: This is the 27th volume of "The Life of Lisle."

古文：为秦开地益众，北靡匈奴，据河为塞，因山为固，建榆中。
现代文：为秦开拓疆土，增聚民众，北面击败匈奴，据黄河为要塞，依山岭为固垒，建榆中。
English: He opened up the territory for the Qin Dynasty, gathered more people, defeated the Xiongnu in the north, built a fortress along the Yellow River, a fortress along the mountains, and was in the process of building a castle.

古文：作蒙恬列传第二十八。
现代文：作《蒙恬列传》第二十八。
English: This is the 28th volume of "Meng Yao's Biography."

古文：填赵塞常山以广河内，弱楚权，明汉王之信於天下。
现代文：平定赵国要塞常山，扩张河内，削弱西楚霸王的势力，彰明汉王的信义于天下。
English: He pacified Changshan, the fortress of Zhao, expanded Hanoi, weakened the power of the Western Chu Emperor, and demonstrated the loyalty of the Han Emperor to the world.

古文：作张耳陈馀列传第二十九。
现代文：作《张耳陈馀列传》第二十九。
English: He is the 29th author of "Zhang Er Chen Yu Lian Zhen."

古文：收西河、上党之兵，从至彭城；越之侵掠梁地以苦项羽。
现代文：收拢西河、上党之兵，跟随高祖直到彭城；彭越侵掠梁地以困扰项羽。
English: Gather the soldiers of the West River and the Upper Party, and follow Gaozu to Pengcheng; Peng Yue invaded and plundered Liangdi to trouble Xiang Yu.

古文：作魏豹彭越列传第三十。
现代文：作《魏豹彭越列传》第三十。
English: This is the thirtieth volume of "Wei Pao Peng Yue Li Zhen."

古文：以淮南叛楚归汉，汉用得大司马殷，卒破子羽于垓下。
现代文：黥布以淮南之地叛楚归汉，汉王通过他而得到楚大司马周殷，最后在垓下打败项羽。
English: Zibo rebelled against Chu in the land of Huainan and returned to the Han Dynasty. The Han King obtained the Grand Master of Chu, Ma Zhouyin, through him, and finally defeated Xiang Yu under his command.

古文：作黥布列传第三十一。
现代文：作《黥布列传》第三十一。
English: It is the thirty-first chapter of the "Biography of Nie Bu Li."

古文：楚人迫我京索，而信拔魏赵，定燕齐，使汉三分天下有其二，以灭项籍。
现代文：楚军困迫汉军于京、索，韩信攻克魏、赵，平定燕、齐，使三分天下汉得其二，奠定消灭项羽的基础。
English: The Chu army besieged the Han army in Beijing, So, Han Xin, conquered Kwei, Zhao, and pacified Yan, Qi, so that Han won the second place in the world, and laid the foundation for the elimination of Xiang Yu.

古文：作淮阴侯列传第三十二。
现代文：作《淮阴侯列传》第三十二。
English: He was the 32nd author of "Huaiyin Hou's Biography."

古文：楚汉相距巩洛，而韩信为填颍川，卢绾绝籍粮饷。
现代文：楚汉相持于巩、洛，韩信为汉镇守颍川，卢绾断绝了项羽军队的粮饷。
English: Chu and Han held each other in Gong and Lu, Han Xin guarded the Min River for Han, and Lu Wei cut off the grain supply for Xiang Yu's army.

古文：作韩信卢绾列传第三十三。
现代文：作《韩信卢绾列传》第三十三。
English: This is the 33rd volume of "Han Xin Lu Xun's Biography."

古文：诸侯畔项王，唯齐连子羽城阳，汉得以间遂入彭城。
现代文：诸侯背叛项王，唯有齐王在城阳牵制项羽，使汉王得机攻入彭城。
English: The princes betrayed King Xiang, but King Qi restrained Xiang Yu in Chengyang, giving the Han king the opportunity to invade Pengcheng.

古文：作田儋列传第三十四。
现代文：作《田儋列传》第三十四。
English: This is the thirty-fourth volume of "Tanzhao Li Zhen."

古文：攻城野战，获功归报，哙、商有力焉，非独鞭策，又与之脱难。
现代文：攻打城池，战于旷野，获功归报，樊哙、郦商是出力最多的战将，不仅随时听命汉王的驱遣，又常和汉王一起摆脱危难。
English: Attacking the city and battling in the wilderness, they were rewarded for their efforts. Zou and Zou Shang were the most productive generals. They not only obeyed the orders of the Han king at any time, but also often escaped from danger together with the Han king.

古文：作樊郦列传第三十五。
现代文：作《樊郦列传》第三十五。
English: It is the thirty-fifth volume of "The Analects of Confucius."

古文：汉既初定，文理未明，苍为主计，整齐度量，序律历。
现代文：汉朝天下初定，文治条理未明，张苍担任主计，统一度量衡，编订律历。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, Zhang Cang served as the chief accountant, unified weights and measures, and compiled the legal calendar.

古文：作张丞相列传第三十六。
现代文：作《张丞相列传》第三十六。
English: It is the 36th work in the "Biography of Zhang Zhenxiang."

古文：结言通使，约怀诸侯；诸侯咸亲，归汉为籓辅。
现代文：游说通使，笼抚诸侯；诸侯都亲附汉朝，归汉成为藩属辅臣。
English: He lobbied envoys and coaxed the princes; the princes were closely attached to the Han Dynasty and returned to the Han Dynasty as vassals of the domain.

古文：作郦生陆贾列传第三十七。
现代文：作《郦生陆贾列传》第三十七。
English: This is the thirty-seventh volume of the "Twins of Lu Jia" series.

古文：欲详知秦楚之事，维周緤常从高祖，平定诸侯。
现代文：想要详细了解秦楚之际的事情，只有周緤最清楚，因为他经常跟随高祖，参加平定诸侯的军事活动。
English: If you want to know more about the events of Qin Chu's time, only Zhou Qi knows best, because he often followed Gao Zu and participated in military activities to pacify the princes.

古文：作傅靳蒯成列传第三十八。
现代文：作《傅靳蒯成列传》第三十八。
English: This is the thirty-eighth volume of "Fu Xicheng's Biography."

古文：徙彊族，都关中，和约匈奴；明朝廷礼，次宗庙仪法。
现代文：迁徙豪强大族，建都关中，与匈奴和亲；明辨朝廷之礼，制订宗庙仪法。
English: The migratory heroes and powerful clans, built the capital of Guanzhong, and made peace with the Xiongnu; distinguished the court ceremony, and formulated the ancestral temple ritual.

古文：作刘敬叔孙通列传第三十九。
现代文：作《刘敬叔孙通列传》第三十九。
English: He is the 39th author of "Liu Jing Shusun Tong Li Zhen."

古文：能摧刚作柔，卒为列臣；栾公不劫於埶而倍死。
现代文：季布能改其刚戾而为柔顺，终于成为汉朝名臣；栾公不被威势所迫背叛死者。
English: Ji Bu was able to change his stubbornness into a softness, and finally became a famous vassal of the Han Dynasty; Yu Gong was not forced by power to betray the dead.

古文：作季布栾布列传第四十。
现代文：作《季布栾公列传》第四十。
English: This is the 40th volume of "The Chronicle of King Qibao."

古文：敢犯颜色以达主义，不顾其身，为国家树长画。
现代文：敢于犯颜强谏，使主上言行合于道义，不顾自身安危，为国家建立长远方案。
English: Dare to be bold, make the Lord's words and deeds conform to morality, regardless of their own safety and security, and establish a long-term plan for the country.

古文：作袁盎晁错列传第四十一。
现代文：作《袁盎朝错列传》第四十一。
English: He is the 41st author of the "Wrongly Listed Biography of the Yuan and Tang Dynasties."

古文：守法不失大理，言古贤人，增主之明。
现代文：维护法律不失大节，言称古代贤人，增长君主之明。
English: Upholding the law without missing a beat, claiming to be an ancient sage, increasing the monarch's wisdom.

古文：作张释之冯唐列传第四十二。
现代文：作《张释之冯唐列传》第四十二。
English: This is the forty-second volume of "Zhang Xie's Biography of Feng Tang."

古文：敦厚慈孝，讷於言，敏於行，务在鞠躬，君子长者。
现代文：敦厚慈孝，不善言辞，敏于行事，致力于谦恭，堪为君子长者。
English: Kind and considerate, not good at words, good at actions, devoted to modesty, worthy of being a gentleman elder.

古文：作万石张叔列传第四十三。
现代文：作《万石张叔列传》第四十三。
English: This is the forty-third volume of "Wanseok Zhang Shulian's Biography."

古文：守节切直，义足以言廉，行足以厉贤，任重权不可以非理挠。
现代文：恪守节操，恳切刚直，义足以称清廉，行足以激励贤能，担任要职而不能以无理使之屈服。
English: Adhering to discipline, earnestly upright, righteousness is enough to be clean, action is enough to inspire virtue, and to hold important positions without giving in to unreason.

古文：作田叔列传第四十四。
现代文：作《田叔列传》第四十四。
English: It is the 44th work of "Tian Shu Li Zhen."

古文：扁鹊言医，为方者宗，守数精明；後世序，弗能易也，而仓公可谓近之矣。
现代文：扁鹊论医，为医家所尊奉，医术精细高明；后世遵循其法，不能改易，而仓公可谓接近扁鹊之术了。
English: Tendon medicine is revered by doctors and is a highly refined and sophisticated medical technique. Future generations follow its methods, which cannot be changed, and Cangong can be said to be close to Tendon medicine.

古文：作扁鹊仓公列传第四十五。
现代文：作《扁鹊仓公列传》第四十五。
English: This is the 45th volume of "Biographies of Tianzhuangcang."

古文：维仲之省，厥濞王吴，遭汉初定，以填抚江淮之间。
现代文：刘仲被削夺王爵，其子刘濞受封做了吴王，适逢汉朝初定天下，让他镇抚江淮之间。
English: Liu Zhong was deprived of the title of prince, and his son Liu Wei was named the King of Wu. At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, he was appointed as the ruler of the country, and he was given the power to control the Yangtze River.

古文：作吴王濞列传第四十六。
现代文：作《吴王濞列传》第四十六。
English: It is the 46th chapter of the "Biography of King Wu."

古文：吴楚为乱，宗属唯婴贤而喜士，士乡之，率师抗山东荥阳。
现代文：吴、楚叛乱，宗室亲属中只有窦婴贤能而喜好士人，士人归心于他，率军在荥阳抵抗叛军。
English: Wu and Chu rebelled. Among the relatives of the family, only Dou Ying was virtuous and favored the scholar. The scholar was devoted to him and led the army to resist the rebels in Shenyang.

古文：作魏其武安列传第四十七。
现代文：作《魏其武安侯列传》第四十七。
English: It is the forty-seventh story in the "Wei Ji Wu An Hou Chronicles."

古文：智足以应近世之变，宽足用得人。
现代文：智谋足以应付近世之变，宽厚足以得人。
English: Wisdom is enough to cope with the changes in the world around us, and generosity is enough to win people over.

古文：作韩长孺列传第四十八。
现代文：作《韩长孺列传》第四十八。
English: The 48th volume of the "Biography of Han Changtao."

古文：勇於当敌，仁爱士卒，号令不烦，师徒乡之。
现代文：勇于抗敌，仁爱士卒，号令简明不烦，将士归心于他。
English: Courage in resisting the enemy, benevolence and love for one's subordinates, clear and concise orders, subordinating one's subordinates to him.

古文：作李将军列传第四十九。
现代文：他《李将军列传》第四十九。
English: His biography of General Lee is the 49th.

古文：自三代以来，匈奴常为中国患害；欲知彊弱之时，设备征讨，作匈奴列传第五十。
现代文：自夏、商、周三代以来，匈奴常为中原祸害，为要了解强弱时势，设防征讨，作《匈奴列传》第五十。
English: Since the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, the Xiongnu have often been the scourge of the Central Plains. In order to understand the strong and weak situations, he set up defenses and made the 50th "Xiongnu Chronicles."

古文：直曲塞，广河南，破祁连，通西国，靡北胡。
现代文：拓直曲曲折折的边塞，扩展河南之地，攻破祁连山，打开通往西域各国的道路，击败北方匈奴。
English: He straightened out the tortuous border fortress, expanded the land of Henan, broke through the Qilian Mountains, opened the road to the countries in the western region, and defeated the northern Huns.

古文：作卫将军骠骑列传第五十一。
现代文：作《卫将军骠骑列传》第五十一。
English: This is the fifty-first work of "The Legend of the General of the Imperial Guards."

古文：大臣宗室以侈靡相高，唯弘用节衣食为百吏先。
现代文：大臣和宗室以奢侈浪费争高强，只有公孙弘节衣缩食为百官表率。
English: The minister and his family fought for power with extravagance and waste, and only his grandson, Hiroshige, set an example for a hundred officials.

古文：作平津侯列传第五十二。
现代文：作《平津侯列传》第五十二。
English: It is the 52nd work in the "Pyeongjin Clan Chronicles."

古文：汉既平中国，而佗能集杨越以保南籓，纳贡职。
现代文：汉朝已经平定中国，而赵佗能安定杨越以保卫南方藩属之地，纳贡尽职。
English: The Han Dynasty had already subdued China, and Zhao Zhen was able to stabilize Yang Yue to defend the land belonging to the Southern Han Dynasty, and paid tribute to do his duty.

古文：作南越列传第五十三。
现代文：作《南越列传》第五十三。
English: This is the fifty-third volume of "Nan Yue Li Zhen."

古文：吴之叛逆，瓯人斩濞，葆守封禺为臣。
现代文：吴国叛逆，东瓯人斩杀刘濞，保卫封禺山，终为汉臣。
English: Wu rebelled, Donglu people killed Liu Ye, defended Fenglu Mountain, and finally became Han minister.

古文：作东越列传第五十四。
现代文：作《东越列传》第五十四。
English: This is the fifty-fourth volume of "Eastern Vietnam Chronicles."

古文：燕丹散乱辽间，满收其亡民，厥聚海东，以集真籓，葆塞为外臣。
现代文：燕太子丹败散于辽东地区，卫满收拢其逃亡百姓，聚集海东，以安定真藩等部，保卫边塞而成为塞外之臣。
English: Yan Taizi (Prince Yan) was defeated and scattered in the eastern region of Liaoning, while Wei Man gathered his fugitive people and gathered the eastern part of the sea to protect the border fortress by stabilizing the Zhen clan and other departments and became a foreign vassal.

古文：作朝鲜列传第五十五。
现代文：作《朝鲜列传》第五十五。
English: This is the 55th volume of "Korean Chronicles."

古文：唐蒙使略通夜郎，而邛笮之君请为内臣受吏。
现代文：唐蒙出使，经略西南，通使夜郎，而邛、笮之君请求成为汉朝内臣并接受朝廷所派官吏。
English: Tang and Meng sent envoys to negotiate with the Southwest, and Yelang sent envoys to negotiate with the Southwest, while Zou and Zizhi requested to become Han Dynasty vassals and accept officials sent by the imperial court.

古文：作西南夷列传第五十六。
现代文：作《西南夷列传》第五十六。
English: This is the fifty-sixth volume of the "Southwestern Yi Chronicles."

古文：子虚之事，大人赋说，靡丽多夸，然其指风谏，归於无为。
现代文：司马相如作《子虚赋》、《大人赋》之事，深得君主喜欢，虽然文辞过于华丽夸张，但其旨意在于讽谏，归结于无为而治。
English: Sima Xiang's works such as "Zi Fu Fu" and "Adult Fu Fu" were deeply liked by the monarch. Although the words were too gorgeous and exaggerated, his intention was to be ironic, which boiled down to doing nothing.

古文：作司马相如列传第五十七。
现代文：作《司马相如列传》第五十七。
English: He is the 57th author of "Sima Xiangru Lianhuan."

古文：黥布叛逆，子长国之，以填江淮之南，安剽楚庶民。
现代文：黥布叛逆，高祖少子刘长封为那里的国王，镇守江淮之间，安抚剽悍的楚地百姓。
English: Zibo was rebellious, and Gaozu's young son Liu Changfeng became the king there, guarding the Huai River and pacifying the defiant people of Chu.

古文：作淮南衡山列传第五十八。
现代文：作《淮南衡山列传》第五十八。
English: This is the 58th volume of "Hengshan in Huainan" series.

古文：奉法循理之吏，不伐功矜能，百姓无称，亦无过行。
现代文：遵奉法律、按照情理办事的官吏，不自夸其功劳贤能，百姓对其无所称赞，也没有什么过失行为。
English: Officials who abide by the law and act in accordance with reason do not boast of their merits and virtues, and the people have no praise for them, and there is no wrongdoing.

古文：作循吏列传第五十九。
现代文：作《循吏列传》第五十九。
English: This is the 59th volume of "Chu Li Li Li Zhen."

古文：正衣冠立於朝廷，而群臣莫敢言浮说，长孺矜焉；好荐人，称长者，壮有溉。
现代文：端正衣冠立于朝廷，群臣没人敢说虚浮不实的话，汲长孺刚正庄重；好荐贤人，称道长者，郑庄慷慨有节操。
English: Zhengzhuang stood at the imperial court with a proper crown. None of the courtiers dared to say anything untrue. He was upright and dignified. He was good at recommending sages and praising elders. Zhengzhuang was generous and disciplined.

古文：作汲郑列传第六十。
现代文：作《汲郑列传》第六十。
English: This is the sixtieth volume of "Kuzheng Li Chuan."

古文：自孔子卒，京师莫崇庠序，唯建元元狩之间，文辞粲如也。
现代文：自孔子去世以后，在京师没有谁重视学校教育，只有建元至元狩之间，文教事业灿烂辉煌。
English: After the death of Confucius, no one in Beijing paid much attention to school education. Only between the Jianyuan and the Yuanhai Dynasties did the cause of literature and education become brilliant.

古文：作儒林列传第六十一。
现代文：作《儒林列传》第六十一。
English: It is the sixty-first chapter of the "Juring Chronicle."

古文：民倍本多巧，奸轨弄法，善人不能化，唯一切严削为能齐之。
现代文：人们背弃本业而多巧诈，作犯科，玩弄法律，善人也不能感化他们，只有一切依法严酷惩治才能使他们整齐化一，遵守社会秩序。
English: Good-hearted people can't influence people who abandon their profession and are more devious, commit crimes, and play with the law. Only severe punishment in accordance with the law can make them tidy up and abide by the social order.

古文：作酷吏列传第六十二。
现代文：作《酷吏列传》第六十二。
English: It is the 62nd work of "Cruel Official's Biography."

古文：汉既通使大夏，而西极远蛮，引领内乡，欲观中国。
现代文：汉与大厦通使之后，西方极远的蛮族，伸长脖子望着内地，想观瞻中国文明。
English: After the Han Dynasty and the edifice envoy, the barbarians far away from the West craned their necks to look at the mainland and wanted to observe the Chinese civilization.

古文：作大宛列传第六十三。
现代文：作《大宛列传》第六十三。
English: This is the sixty-third volume of the "Daewon Collection."

古文：救人於戹，振人不赡，仁者有乎；不既信，不倍言，义者有取焉。
现代文：救人于难，济人于贫，仁者有此美德吧；不失信用，不背诺言，义者有可取之处。
English: Rescue people from difficulties, help people from poverty, let the benevolent have this virtue; do not lose trust, do not break promises, the righteous have something to recommend them.

古文：作游侠列传第六十四。
现代文：作《游侠列传》第六十四。
English: It is the 64th work in the Ranger Series.

古文：夫事人君能说主耳目，和主颜色，而获亲近，非独色爱，能亦各有所长。
现代文：侍奉君主能使其耳目愉快，脸色和悦，同时得到主上的亲近，这不仅是美色招人喜爱，技能也各有特长。
English: It is not only the beauty of serving the monarch that makes him pleasing to the eye, pleasing to the ear, pleasing to the face, and at the same time close to the Lord. It is not only the beauty that attracts people, but also the skills have their own strengths.

古文：作佞幸列传第六十五。
现代文：作《佞幸列传》第六十五。
English: This is the sixty-fifth volume of "A Collection of Fortunes."

古文：不流世俗，不争埶利，上下无所凝滞，人莫之害，以道之用。
现代文：不流于世俗，不争夺势利，上下无所阻碍，没有人能伤害他们，因善用其道。
English: They don't flow with the world, they don't compete for snobbery, they are unimpeded from top to bottom, and no one can hurt them because they use their way well.

古文：作滑稽列传第六十六。
现代文：作《滑稽列传》第六十六。
English: This is the 66th volume of "Comical Chronicles."

古文：齐、楚、秦、赵为日者，各有俗所用。
现代文：齐、楚、秦、赵占卜者，各有随俗所用的方法。
English: Qi, Chu, Qin and Zhao diviners each have their own methods.

古文：欲循观其大旨，作日者列传第六十七。
现代文：想要总览其要旨，作《日者列传》第六十七。
English: If you want an overview of its essence, read the 67th volume of "Nichijojizakisei."

古文：三王不同龟，四夷各异卜，然各以决吉凶。
现代文：夏、商、周三代君主占卜之法不同，四方蛮夷卜筮风俗各异，但都以卜筮判断吉凶祸福。
English: The divination methods of Xia, Shang and the three dynasties of monarchs are different, and the customs of divination are different in the four directions, but they all use divination to judge good luck, evil, misfortune and fortune.

古文：略闚其要，作龟策列传第六十八。
现代文：粗略考察卜筮的要略，作《龟策列传》第六十八。
English: A rough survey of the essentials of Bu Xun, for the 68th edition of "Kueze Li Zhuang."

古文：布衣匹夫之人，不害於政，不妨百姓，取与以时而息财富，智者有采焉。
现代文：布衣匹夫这种普普通通的人，不妨害政令，也不妨害百姓，据时买卖增殖财富，智者在他们那里可取得借鉴。
English: Ordinary people, such as Bu Yip Fu, may not harm the political order, nor disturb the people, but buy and sell according to the time to increase wealth. Wise people can learn from them.

古文：作货殖列传第六十九。
现代文：作《货殖列传》第六十九。
English: This is the 69th volume of the "Collection of Commodities."

古文：维我汉继五帝末流，接三代业。
现代文：想我大汉王朝继承五帝的遗风，接续三代中断的大业。
English: I think that the Han Dynasty will inherit the legacy of the Five Emperors and continue the great cause that has been interrupted for three generations.

古文：周道废，秦拨去古文，焚灭诗书，故明堂石室金匮玉版图籍散乱。
现代文：周朝王道废弛，秦朝毁弃古代文化典籍，焚毁《诗》、《书》，所以明堂、石室金匮玉版图籍散失错乱。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, the royal road was abandoned, and during the Qin Dynasty, ancient cultural classics were destroyed, and "Poems" and "Books" were burned. As a result, the Ming Hall and the Stone Room's gold and jade engraved picture books were scattered and lost.

古文：於是汉兴，萧何次律令，韩信申军法，张苍为章程，叔孙通定礼仪，则文学彬彬稍进，诗书往往间出矣。
现代文：这时汉朝兴起，萧何修订法律，韩信申明军法，张苍制立章程，叔孙通确定礼仪，于是品学兼优的文学之士逐渐进用。《诗》、《书》不断地在各地发现。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty arose, Xiao He revised the law, Han Xin affirmed the military law, Zhang Cang established the regulations, and his uncle and grandson determined the etiquette, so the literary men with excellent taste and learning gradually came into use. "Poetry" and "Book" are constantly found in various places.

古文：自曹参荐盖公言黄老，而贾生、晁错明申、商，公孙弘以儒显，百年之间，天下遗文古事靡不毕集太史公。
现代文：自曹参荐举盖公讲论黄老之道，而贾生、晃错通晓申不害、商鞅之法，公孙弘以儒术显贵，百年之间，天下遗文古事无不汇集于太史公。
English: Since Cao Sanzhong recommended to hold a public lecture on the way of Huang Lao, while Jia Sheng and Shao Shou were familiar with the methods of saying no harm and negotiating, and Gongsun Hong was distinguished for Confucianism, between a hundred years, all the world's ancient relics have gathered in Taishi.

古文：太史公仍父子相续纂其职。
现代文：太史公父子相继执掌这职务。
English: Mr. Taishi and his son successively held this position.

古文：罔罗天下放失旧闻，王迹所兴，原始察终，见盛观衰，论考之行事，略推三代，录秦汉，上记轩辕，下至于兹，著十二本纪，既科条之矣。
现代文：太史公说： 呜呼！我先人曾职掌此事，扬名于唐虞之世，直到周朝，再次职掌其事，所以司马氏世代相继主掌天官之事。难道中止于我这一代吗？敬记在心，敬记在心啊！ 网罗搜集天下散失的旧闻，对帝王兴起的事迹溯源探终，既要看到它的兴盛，也要看到它的衰亡，研讨考察各代所行之事，简略推断三代，详细载录秦汉，上记轩辕，下至于今，著十二本纪，已按类别加以排列。
English: Taishikong said, "Alas! My predecessors were in charge of this matter, and they were famous in the Tang and Yu dynasties, until the Zhou Dynasty, and they were in charge of it again, so the Sima clan has been in charge of the heavenly officials for generations. Will it stop in my generation? Keep it in mind, keep it in mind! Collect the old news that has been lost in the world, trace the origins of the rise of the emperor, see both its prosperity and its decline, study and examine the deeds of each generation, briefly deduce the three generations, record Qin and Han dynasties in detail, record Xuan and Zhou dynasties, and

古文：并时异世，年差不明，作十表。
现代文：有的同时异世，年代差误不明，作十表。
English: Some are contemporaneous, the chronological error is unknown, and ten tables are made.

古文：礼乐损益，律历改易，兵权山川鬼神，天人之际，承敝通变，作八书。
现代文：礼乐增减，律历改易，兵法权谋，山川鬼神，天和人的关系，趁其衰败实行变革，作八书。
English: The addition and subtraction of ritual music, the change of rites and calendars, military strategy, mountains and rivers, ghosts and gods, and the relationship between heaven and man, taking advantage of their decline to carry out reforms, make up eight books.

古文：二十八宿环北辰，三十辐共一毂，运行无穷，辅拂股肱之臣配焉，忠信行道，以奉主上，作三十世家。
现代文：二十八宿列星环绕北辰，三十根车辐集于车毂，运行无穷，辅弼股肱之臣与此相当，他们忠信行道，以奉事主上，作三十世家。
English: Twenty-eight stars encircle the North Star. Thirty spokes of the chariot converge at the hub of the chariot, running endlessly. The attendants of the chariot are equal to this. They are loyal to the road, to serve the Lord, and to be the thirtieth generation.

古文：扶义俶傥，不令己失时，立功名於天下，作七十列传。
现代文：有些人仗义而行，倜傥不羁，不使自己失去时机，立功名于天下，作七十列传。
English: There are some people who act righteously, are bold, and do not let themselves lose the opportunity to make a name for themselves in the world, and write seventy biographies.

古文：凡百三十篇，五十二万六千五百字，为太史公书。
现代文：总计一百三十篇，五十二万六千五百字，称为《太史公书》。
English: A total of one hundred and thirty articles, 526 thousand five hundred words, known as "Tai Shi Gong Shu."

古文：序略，以拾遗补艺，成一家之言，厥协六经异传，整齐百家杂语，藏之名山，副在京师，俟後世圣人君子。
现代文：序略，以拾遗补充六艺，成为一家之言，协合《六经》异传，整齐百家杂语，藏之于名山，留副本在京都，留待后世圣人君子观览。
English: The preface outlines that the six arts were supplemented by the scavenged relics and became a family saying, the "six sutras" were passed down from generation to generation, and hundreds of miscellaneous sayings were tidied up. They were hidden in famous mountains, and copies were left in Kyoto, to be viewed by future generations of saints and gentlemen.

古文：第七十。
现代文：第七十。
English: Seventy.

古文：太史公曰：余述历黄帝以来至太初而讫，百三十篇。
现代文：太史公说：我历述黄帝以来史事至太初年止，共一百三十篇。
English: Tai Shikong said: I have narrated historical events from the time of the Yellow Emperor to the first year of the Tai Dynasty, a total of one hundred and thirty articles.

