古文：说寒温者曰：人君喜则温，怒则寒。
现代文：解释寒温的人说：君主欢喜天气就温暖，君主发怒天气就寒冷。
English: Those who explain the cold temperature say: When the monarch is happy, the weather is warm; when the monarch is angry, the weather is cold.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：喜怒发於胸中，然後行出於外，外成赏罚。
现代文：因为欢喜发怒都是从胸中发生的，然后由行为在外面表现出来，于是在外就形成了奖赏和惩罚。
English: Because happiness and anger all come from the heart, and are then expressed externally through actions, which then form rewards and punishments.

古文：赏罚，喜怒之效。故寒温渥盛，雕物伤人。
现代文：奖赏和惩罚是欢喜与发怒的结果，所以天气太冷太热，都会使草木凋枯，人受损伤。
English: Reward and punishment are the result of joy and anger, so if the weather is too cold or too hot, the plants will wither and people will be injured.

古文：夫寒温之代至也，在数日之间，人君未必有喜怒之气发胸中，然後渥盛於外。
现代文：寒冷与温暖天气交替的到来，在几天之间，君主不一定会有喜怒的气在胸中产生，然后强烈地表现在外面而引起气候的寒冷与温暖。
English: The arrival of cold and warm weather alternately, in a few days, the monarch will not necessarily have the joy and anger in the chest, and then strongly appear outside, causing the cold and warm weather.

古文：见外寒温，则知胸中之气也。
现代文：而是解释寒温的人看见外界天气的寒温，这才推知君主胸中喜怒的气。
English: Instead, the person who explained the cold temperature saw the cold temperature of the outside weather, which inferred the mood of joy and anger in the monarch's chest.

古文：当人君喜怒之时，胸中之气未必更寒温也。胸中之气，何以异於境内之气？
现代文：当君主喜怒的时候，胸中的气不一定就会改变天气的寒温，君主胸中的气，与国境内的气怎么能有差别呢？
English: When the monarch is angry or happy, the air in his chest does not necessarily change the temperature of the weather. How can there be a difference between the air in the monarch's chest and the air within the country?

古文：胸中之气，不为喜怒变，境内寒温，何所生起？
现代文：胸中的气，不因为喜怒而改变，那么国境内天气的寒温，又怎么会产生变化呢？
English: If the qi in one's chest does not change because of joy and anger, then how can the cold temperature of the weather inside the country change?

古文：六国之时，秦、汉之际，诸侯相伐，兵革满道，国有相攻之怒，将有相胜之志，夫有相杀之气，当时天下未必常寒也。太平之世，唐、虞之时，政得民安，人君常喜，弦歌鼓舞，比屋而有，当时天下未必常温也。
现代文：战国的六国时期、秦、汉时期，诸侯互相讨伐，到处是战争，国与国之间有互相攻打的怒气，将与将之间有相互要战胜的志气，士兵与士兵之间有互相厮杀的仇气，当时天下的天气却未必经常寒冷；太平盛世，尧、舜的时候，政治得当百姓安宁，君主常常欢喜，弹琴唱歌击鼓起舞，家家都有，当时天下天气却未必经常温暖。
English: During the Six Kingdoms Period, the Warring States Period, and the Qin and Han Dynasties Periods, princes fought against each other, wars were everywhere, countries had the anger to attack each other, generals and generals had the ambition to defeat each other, and soldiers had the hatred to kill each other. At that time, the weather in the world was not always cold; when the world was at peace and prosperous, the people were peaceful and the monarchs were often happy, playing the piano, singing, drumming and dancing, all families had, but the weather in the world was not always warm.

古文：岂喜怒之气，为小发，不为大动邪？
现代文：难道喜怒的气只为小事而发，不为大事而动吗？
English: Isn't it true that the qi of joy and anger is only released for small things, but not for big things?

古文：何其不与行事相中得也？
现代文：为什么它们不跟已往的事相一致呢？
English: Why are they not consistent with the past?

古文：夫近水则寒，近火则温，远之渐微。
现代文：靠近水就寒冷，接近火就温暖，离它们越远，冷热的感觉就逐渐减弱。
English: The closer you are to water, the colder it is, the closer you are to fire, the warmer it is, and the further you are from them, the less you feel hot and cold.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：气之所加，远近有差也。
现代文：因为水火寒温之气的扩散，与离距它们的远近有差别。
English: Because of the diffusion of water, fire, cold and hot air, there is a difference between their distance and their proximity.

古文：成事，火位在南，水位在北，北边则寒，南极则热。
现代文：已往事例是：火的位置在南边，水的位置在北边，在北边就寒冷，在南边就炎热。
English: In the past, fire was located in the south, water in the north, cold in the north, and hot in the south.

古文：火之在炉，水之在沟，气之在躯，其实一也。
现代文：火在炉内，水在河里，喜怒之气在人体中，其实一样。
English: Fire in the furnace, water in the river, joy and anger in the human body are actually the same.

古文：当人君喜怒之时，寒温之气，闺门宜甚，境外宜微。
现代文：当君主喜怒的时候，影响天气寒温的气，寝室门内应当最厉害，周围环境应当轻微。
English: When the monarch is in a mood, the air inside the bedroom door should be the most powerful, and the surrounding environment should be light.

古文：今案寒温，外内均等，殆非人君喜怒之所致。
现代文：如今考察天气的寒温，室内外都相等，由此看来，天气的寒温大概不是君主喜怒所引起的。
English: Nowadays, the cold temperature of the weather is equal both indoors and outdoors, so it seems that the cold temperature of the weather is probably not caused by the monarch's joy and anger.

古文：世儒说称，妄处之也。
现代文：俗儒的说法，是妄加判断。
English: Confucianism is judgmental.

古文：王者之变在天下，诸侯之变在境内，卿大夫之变在其位，庶人之变在其家。
现代文：帝王行为引起的变化会影响整个天下，诸侯行为引起的变化会影响整个领地，卿大夫行为引起的变化会影响他们的职权范围，老百姓行为引起的变化会影响他们的家庭。
English: The changes caused by the behavior of emperors will affect the whole world, the changes caused by the behavior of princes will affect the whole territory, the changes caused by the behavior of doctors will affect their scope of authority, and the changes caused by the behavior of ordinary people will affect their families.

古文：夫家人之能致变，则喜怒亦能致气。
现代文：既然一家人能引起变化，那么他们的喜怒也能引起屋内气温的变化。
English: Since a family can cause changes, their emotions can also cause changes in the indoor temperature.

古文：父子相怒，夫妻相督，若当怒反喜，纵过饰非，一室之中，宜有寒温。
现代文：父子互相生气，夫妻互相责备，或者正在发怒的时候又转为高兴，放纵过失，掩盖错误，那么整个屋内，应该有寒温的变化了，可是没有发生。
English: Father and son get angry with each other, husband and wife blame each other, or when they are angry, they turn to happiness, indulge in negligence, cover up mistakes, then the whole house should have a change in cold temperature, but it did not happen.

古文：由此言之，变非喜怒所生，明矣。
现代文：这样说来，天气的变化不是喜怒造成的，这就很明白了。
English: It is clear, then, that changes in the weather are not caused by emotions.

古文：或曰： 以类相招致也。
现代文：有人说： 因为同类互相招引。
English: Some people say: Because like attracts like.

古文：喜者和温，和温赏赐，阳道施予，阳气温，故温气应之。
现代文：欢喜时态度温和，态度温和就会赏赐别人， 阳 的特点是使万物生长，阳气温和，所以温和的气与欢喜相感应而出现。
English: When rejoicing, one's attitude is gentle, and one's gentle attitude will reward others. The characteristic of the yang is to make all things grow, and the yang qi is gentle, so the gentle qi appears in response to joy.

古文：怒者愠恚，愠恚诛杀。阴道肃杀，阴气寒，故寒气应之。
现代文：发怒时样子恼怒，样子恼怒就会惩罚杀人， 阴 的特点是使万物凋残，阴气寒冷，所以寒冷的气与发怒相感应而出现。
English: When angry, the appearance of anger, the appearance of anger will punish the murder, the characteristics of yin is to make everything wither, and yin is cold, so the cold qi is induced by anger.

古文：虎啸而谷风至，龙兴而景云起。同气共类，动相招致。故曰： 以形逐影，以龙致雨 。
现代文：虎啸山谷就会有风来，龙腾彩云就会出现，它们同气同类，一举一动会互相招引，所以说由形体带来影子，由龙招引来了雨。
English: When the tiger howls in the valley, there will be wind, and when the dragon howls, colorful clouds will appear. They are of the same kind, and they will attract each other with every move. Therefore, it is said that the shadow is brought by the shape, and the rain is attracted by the dragon.

古文：雨应龙而来，影应形而去。天地之性，自然之道也。
现代文：雨感应龙而来，影感应形而去，天地的本性，就是自然的本质。
English: Rain is caused by the dragon, shadow is caused by the shadow, and the nature of heaven and earth is the essence of nature.

古文：秋冬断刑，小狱微原，大辟盛寒，寒随刑至，相招审矣。 
现代文：秋冬时节要审判罪案，处决犯人，判处小罪时，寒气就已稍稍露头，执行死刑时，天气会非常寒冷，寒冷跟随着判刑的轻重情况而到来，同类相招引，这是很清楚的了。 
English: Autumn and winter are the seasons for judging crimes and executing prisoners. When a minor crime is sentenced, the cold air has already slightly emerged. When the death penalty is carried out, the weather will be very cold. It is clear that the cold weather comes with the severity of the sentence and attracts the same kind of weather.

古文：夫比寒温於风云，齐喜怒於龙虎，同气共类，动相招致，可矣。
现代文：把寒温比作风云，把喜怒比作龙虎，同气同类，一举一动会互相招引，是可以的。
English: It is possible to compare the cold temperature to the wind and clouds, the joy and anger to dragons and tigers, the same kind of gas, and every move will attract each other.

古文：虎啸之时，风从谷中起；龙兴之时，云起百里内。
现代文：虎啸的时候，风从山谷中产生；龙腾的时候，彩云在百里内兴起。
English: When the tiger roars, the wind arises from the valley; when the dragon soars, the colorful clouds rise within a hundred miles.

古文：他谷异境，无有风云。
现代文：要是在其他山谷和地方，就不会有风云出现。
English: If it were in other valleys and places, there would be no storm.

古文：今寒温之变，并时皆然。
现代文：如今寒温的变化，同一时候都是一样的。
English: Nowadays, the changes in temperature and cold are the same at the same time.

古文：百里用刑，千里皆寒，殆非其验。
现代文：百里内用刑，千里内都会寒冷，这大概不是君主喜怒的作用。
English: Punishment within a hundred miles will be cold within a thousand miles, which is probably not the role of the monarch's anger.

古文：齐、鲁接境，赏罚同时，设齐赏鲁罚，所致宜殊，当时可齐国温、鲁地寒乎？
现代文：春秋时齐国与鲁国接壤，同时赏罚，假设齐国奖赏鲁国惩罚，就应该招致不同的结果，难道当时会齐国温暖而鲁国寒冷吗？
English: In spring and autumn, when Qi and Lu were on the border, they would reward and punish at the same time. If Qi rewarded and punished Lu, it would lead to different results. Would Qi be warm and Lu cold at that time?

古文：案前世用刑者，蚩尤、亡秦甚矣。
现代文：考察前代用刑的情况，蚩尤、秦朝最厉害。
English: Examining the situation of the use of punishment in the previous generation, the Qinyu and Qin Dynasties were the most severe.

古文：蚩尤之民，湎湎纷纷；亡秦之路，赤衣比肩，当时天下未必常寒也。
现代文：蚩尤的老百姓，到处躲避酷刑，社会秩序乱哄哄的；秦朝道路上，穿着赭衣的囚犯，一个挨一个。可当时天下的天气未必经常寒冷。
English: The common people of Qinyu evaded torture everywhere, and the social order was chaotic; on the roads of the Qin Dynasty, prisoners dressed in coats of mail, one by one. However, the weather was not always cold at that time.

古文：帝都之市，屠杀牛羊，日以百数，刑人杀牲，皆有贼心，帝都之市，气不能寒。
现代文：京都的市场上，宰杀牛羊，每天要用百头来计数。杀犯人杀牲口，都有杀害的心，京都的市场上，气候却不会寒冷。
English: In the markets of Kyoto, the number of cattle and sheep slaughtered is counted in hundreds every day. The killers of animals all have the heart to kill, but in the markets of Kyoto, the weather will not be cold.

古文：或曰： 人贵於物，唯人动气。 
现代文：有人说： 人比别的动物尊贵，只有杀人才能感动天气。 
English: Some people say: People are more precious than other animals, and only murder can move the weather.

古文：夫用刑者动气乎？用受刑者为变也？
现代文：那么是由于执刑的人感动天气呢，还是由于受刑的人使天气有变化呢？
English: So is it the executioner who moves the weather, or is it the prisoner who changes the weather?

古文：如用刑者，刑人杀禽，同一心也。
现代文：如果是由于执刑的人，那么杀人跟宰禽兽，是同一个心理，就应该引起寒温的变化。
English: If it is due to the executioner, then the killing of people and the slaughter of animals is the same psychology, and should cause a change in temperature.

古文：如用受刑者，人禽皆物也，俱为万物，百贱不能当一贵乎？
现代文：如果是由于受刑的人，那么人和禽兽都是动物，都属于万物，难道上百头牛羊还抵不上一个人吗？
English: If it is because of the person who is being punished, then people and animals are all animals and belong to all things. Are hundreds of cows and sheep not enough for one person?

古文：或曰： 唯人君动气，众庶不能。 
现代文：有人说： 只有君主能感动天气，一般人不行。 
English: Some people say: Only the monarch can move the weather, not ordinary people.

古文：夫气感必须人君，世何称於邹衍？
现代文：既然感动天气的必须是君主，那么世人为什么要赞颂邹衍呢？
English: Since the monarch must be moved by the weather, why should the world praise the weather?

古文：邹衍匹夫，一人感气，世又然之。
现代文：邹衍是个普通人，一个普通人能感动天气，世人竟然又相信了这件事。
English: Hao Yan is an ordinary person, an ordinary person can move the weather, the world actually believed in this matter.

古文：刑一人而气辄寒，生一人而气辄温乎？
现代文：杀死一个人天气就会寒冷，那么赦免一个人天气就要温暖吗？
English: If it is cold to kill a man, is it warm to pardon him?

古文：赦令四下，万刑并除，当时岁月之气不温。
现代文：四处下赦免令，上万的死囚一齐被解除，但是当时天气并没有温暖。
English: Pardons were issued everywhere, and tens of thousands of death row inmates were released all at once, but the weather was not warm at the time.

古文：往年，万户失火，烟焱参天；河决千里，四望无垠。
现代文：往年，万家失火，火焰和烟雾直冲天空；黄河决堤淹没千里，四望无边。
English: In previous years, thousands of homes have caught fire, sending flames and smoke straight into the sky; the Yellow River burst its banks and flooded thousands of miles, with a boundless view.

古文：火与温气同，水与寒气类。
现代文：火跟温暖的天气同类，水跟寒冷的天气同类。
English: Fire is the same as warm weather, water is the same as cold weather.

古文：失火河决之时，不寒不温。
现代文：万家失火、黄河决堤的时候，天气却不变寒冷也不变温暖。
English: When Wanjia caught fire and the Yellow River burst its banks, the weather did not change from cold to warm.

古文：然则寒温之至，殆非政治所致。
现代文：既然如此，那么寒温天气的到来，大概也不是政治所造成的。
English: That being the case, the arrival of cold and warm weather is probably not caused by politics.

古文：然而寒温之至，遭与赏罚同时，变复之家，因缘名之矣。
现代文：那么寒温天气的到来，恰好与君主的赏罚碰在一起，解说变复的人，就根据这种偶然现象，说君主的喜怒能造成天气的寒温变化。
English: So the arrival of cold and warm weather just happens to coincide with the reward and punishment of the monarch. Based on this coincidence, those who interpret the vicissitudes say that the monarch's emotions can cause the cold and warm changes in the weather.

古文：春温夏暑，秋凉冬寒，人君无事，四时自然。
现代文：春天温暖、夏天炎热、秋天凉爽、冬天寒冷，只要君主不作事干预，四季就自然变化。
English: Spring is warm, summer is hot, autumn is cool, winter is cold. As long as the monarch does not interfere, the four seasons will naturally change.

古文：夫四时非政所为，而谓寒温独应政治？
现代文：四季的化不是政治造成的，而偏偏要说寒温的变化是应和政治的。
English: The change of the four seasons is not caused by politics, but the change of cold and temperature is due to politics.

古文：正月之始，正月之后，立春之际，百刑皆断，囹圄空虚。然而一寒一温，当其寒也，何刑所断？
现代文：正月开始，到立春之间，各种案件都处理完毕，监牢空空，然而天气却有时寒冷，有时温暖。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the year, by the beginning of spring, all kinds of cases have been dealt with, the prison is empty, but the weather is sometimes cold, sometimes warm.

古文：当其温也，何赏所施？
现代文：当天气寒冷的时候，是施行了什么刑罚呢？
English: When the weather is cold, what punishment is meted out?

古文：由此言之，寒温，天地节气，非人所为，明矣。
现代文：当天气温暖的时候，又赦免了什么犯人呢？像这样，天气的寒温，是天地的节气所决定，不是人所能影响的，这已经很明白了。
English: When the weather is warm, what criminals are pardoned? As such, the cold temperature of the weather is determined by the solar terms of heaven and earth, and cannot be influenced by man. This has been well understood.

古文：人有寒温之病，非操行之所及也。
现代文：人有寒病温病，并不是操行造成的。
English: People have colds and fever, which are not caused by exercise.

古文：遭风逢气，身生寒温。
现代文：而是遇上风寒热气，身体便产生了寒热。
English: Instead, when encountering wind, cold and heat, the body produces cold and heat.

古文：变操易行，寒温不除。
现代文：即使改变人的操行，寒病温病也不会消除。
English: Even if we change people's behavior, colds and fever will not be eliminated.

古文：夫身近而犹不能变除其疾，国邑远矣，安能调和其气？
现代文：近到自己的身体，尚且不能用改变操行的办法来消除疾病，国家和封邑离得很远，又怎么能调合天气使它恢复正常呢？
English: Even if you are close to your own body, you can't use behavioral changes to eliminate the disease. The country and the county are far away. How can you adjust the weather to make it normal?

古文：人中於寒，饮药行解，所苦稍衰；转为温疾，吞发汗之丸而应愈。
现代文：人被寒气所伤，吃药消解，痛苦就会稍微减轻；要是转为温病，吞下发汗的药丸随着就好了。
English: People are injured by cold, take medicine to dissolve it, and the pain will be slightly alleviated; if it turns into a fever, swallow the perspiration pill.

古文：燕有寒谷，不生五谷。
现代文：传说燕国有个寒冷的山谷，不长五谷。
English: According to legend, there is a cold valley in Yan's country.

古文：邹衍吹律，寒谷可种。
现代文：邹衍吹律管，寒冷的山谷便可栽种庄稼。
English: When the crickets chirp, crops can be grown in the cold valley.

古文：燕人种黍其中，号曰黍谷。
现代文：燕国人把黍种在这山谷中，称作 黍谷 。
English: The Yan people used to grow millet in this valley, which they called the Valley of Millet.

古文：如审有之，寒温之灾，复以吹律之事，调和其气，变政易行，何能灭除？
现代文：如果确实有这事，寒温引起的灾变也只有用吹律管的办法来调合天气使它恢复正常了，那改变政治和操行的办法，又怎么能消灭它呢？
English: If this is indeed the case, and the calamity caused by the cold temperature can only be adjusted by the method of blowing the rhythm tube to adjust the weather to make it normal, then how can it be eliminated by changing the method of politics and management?

古文：是故寒温之疾，非药不愈；黍谷之气，非律不调。
现代文：所以寒病温病，不吃药就不能治好；黍谷里的气候，不吹律管就不能调合。
English: Therefore, cold and fever cannot be cured without taking medicine; the climate in Shibuya cannot be adjusted without blowing the rhythm tube.

古文：尧遭洪水，使禹治之。
现代文：尧碰到洪水，派禹去治理它。
English: Encountered a flood and sent Yu to control it.

古文：寒温与尧之洪水，同一实也。
现代文：天气的寒温跟尧时的洪水，是同类情况。
English: The cold temperature of the weather is the same kind of situation as the flood in the rainy season.

古文：尧不变政易行，知夫洪水非政行所致。
现代文：尧不能用改变政治和操行来治理洪水，就知道那洪水不是政治和操行所造成。
English: If you can't change the politics and behavior to control the flood, then you know that the flood is not caused by politics and behavior.

古文：洪水非政行所致，亦知寒温非政治所招。
现代文：既然洪水不是政治和操行所造成，也就知道天气的寒温不是政治和操行所造成。
English: Since the flood was not caused by politics and manipulation, we also know that the cold temperature of the weather is not caused by politics and manipulation.

古文：或难曰：《洪范》庶征曰： 急，恆寒若；舒，恆燠若。 
现代文：有人责难说： 《尚书·洪范》庶征上说： 君主急躁时，常有寒冷天气顺应他；君主舒畅时，常有温暖天气顺应他。 
English: Some people criticized: "Shangshu Hongfan" said in a side quest: When the monarch is impatient, cold weather often follows him; when the monarch is comfortable, warm weather often follows him.

古文：若，顺；燠，温；恆，常也。
现代文：其中若，就是顺应；燠，就是温暖；恒，就是经常。
English: Among them, if, it means compliance; if, it means warmth; if, it means often.

古文：人君急，则常寒顺之；舒，则常温顺之。
现代文：君主急躁，就常有寒冷天气顺应他；君主舒畅，就常有温暖天气顺应他。
English: When a ruler is hasty, cold weather often follows him; when a ruler is at ease, warm weather often follows him.

古文：寒温应急舒，谓之非政，如何？
现代文：天气的寒温顺应心情的急舒，说它不是政治造成的，怎么行呢？
English: How is it possible to say that the coldness and mildness of the weather is not caused by politics?

古文：夫岂谓急不寒、舒不温哉？
现代文：其实，这哪里是在说君主心情急躁时天气不会寒冷，心情舒畅时天气不会温暖呢？
English: In fact, where does it say that the weather will not be cold when the monarch is impatient, and the weather will not be warm when the mood is comfortable?

古文：人君急舒而寒温递至，偶适自然，若故相应，犹卜之得兆、筮之得数也。人谓天地应令问，其实适然。
现代文：君主心情的急舒跟天气的寒温是交替着出现的，是自然而然的巧合，好像是故意相互应和一样。如同占卜得到 兆 ，算卦得到 数 一样，人认为天地本来就应该回答卜筮者的提问，这确实是碰巧。
English: The eagerness of the monarch's mood and the cold temperature of the weather appeared alternately, it was a natural coincidence, as if they were deliberately responding to each other. Just as divination obtains omens and fortune-telling obtains numbers, people think that heaven and earth should originally answer the questions of the diviners. This is indeed a coincidence.

古文：夫寒温之应急舒，犹兆数之应令问也。外若相应，其实偶然。
现代文：其实，天气的寒温应和了心情的急舒，就像占卦的兆数应和了卜筮的提问一样，从外面看好像是互相应和，这的确也是碰巧。
English: In fact, the cold temperature of the weather should be in line with the urgency of the mood, just as the trillions of divination should be in line with the questions of divination. From the outside, it seems to be in line with each other, which is indeed a coincidence.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：夫天道自然，自然无为。
现代文：因为天道是自然形成的，自然形成就是无意识的。
English: Because the heavenly way is naturally formed, the natural formation is unconscious.

古文：二令参偶，遭适逢会，人事始作，天气已有，故曰道也。
现代文：兆数回答了卜筮的问题、人事、气候、兆数三者的一致，是恰好偶然碰在一起的，人和社会上一切事开始产生的时候，天气变化的所有现象就已经存在，所以叫做 道 。
English: Trillions of numbers answer the question of divination, and the agreement of personnel, climate, and trillions of numbers is coincidental. When everything in people and society began to occur, all the phenomena of weather changes already existed, so it is called Tao.

古文：使应政事，是有，非自然也。
现代文：假使天气变化应和了政事，这就是说天道是有意识的，而不是自然而然的。
English: If the weather changes in accordance with political events, it means that the heavenly way is conscious, not spontaneous.

古文：《易》京氏布六十卦於一岁中，六日七分，一卦用事。
现代文：京房把《周易》中的六十卦分配在一年里，每六日七分，有一卦主事。
English: In "Zhou Yi," the Sixty Gua were distributed by the imperial household over the course of a year, every six days and seven minutes, with one gua as the main event.

古文：卦有阴阳，气有升降。阳升则温，阴升则寒。
现代文：卦有阴有阳，气有升有降，阳气上升天气就温暖，阴气上升天气就寒冷。
English: Gua has yin and yang, and qi has rise and fall. When yang rises, the weather is warm, and when yin rises, the weather is cold.

古文：由此言之，寒温随卦而至，不应政治也。
现代文：这样说来，天气的寒温是随着卦的变化而来，没有应和政治。
English: In this way, the cold temperature of the weather comes with the change of the hexagram, there is no response and politics.

古文：案《易》无妄之应，水旱之至，自有期节。
现代文：根据《周易》 无妄 卦中的应和例子，水灾旱灾的到来，都各自有一定的时间。
English: According to the responses and examples in the Zhou Yi, floods and droughts each have a certain time of arrival.

古文：百灾万变，殆同一曲。
现代文：千千万万的灾变，恐怕都是同一个道理。
English: Thousands and thousands of catastrophes, I'm afraid, are all caused by the same reason.

古文：变复之家，疑且失实。
现代文：解说变复的人，我怀疑他们的说法不符合事实。
English: I suspect that those who are changing their stories are not telling the truth.

古文：何以为疑？夫大人与天地合德，先天而天不违，後天而奉天时。
现代文：根据什么来怀疑呢？ 圣王与天地的德行是一致的，圣王先天示意采取行动，不会违反天意，在天已经示意而不知道的情况下行动，也符合天时。 
English: What is the basis for this doubt? The saintly king is consistent with the moral conduct of heaven and earth. The saintly king will not act contrary to the will of heaven if he has been indicated by heaven, and he will act in accordance with the time of heaven if he has been indicated by heaven without knowing it.

古文：《洪范》曰： 急，恆寒若；舒，恆燠若。 
现代文：《尚书·洪范》上说： 君主急躁时，常有寒冷天气顺应他；君主舒畅时，常有温暖天气顺应他。 
English: "Shangshu Hongfan" said: When the monarch is impatient, cold weather often follows him; when the monarch is comfortable, warm weather often follows him.

古文：如《洪范》之言，天气随人易徒，当先天而天不违耳，何故复言後天而奉天时乎？
现代文：如果《尚书·洪范》里是说，天气是随着君主的喜怒而变动，那应该说 先天而天不违 就行了，又为什么还要说 后天而奉天时 呢？
English: If "Shang Shu Hong Fan" says that the weather changes according to the monarch's moods and anger, then it should be said that it is only necessary to say that it is predetermined by Heaven, and Heaven will not go against Heaven, and why should it be said that it is predetermined by Heaven?

古文：後者，天已寒温於前，而人赏罚於後也。
现代文：后的意思是，天气已经寒温在前，而人的赏罚在后。
English: The latter means that the weather has been cold and warm before, and people's rewards and punishments are behind.

古文：由此言之，人言与《尚书》不合，一疑也。
现代文：这样说来，《周易》说的跟《尚书》说的不一致，这是第一个疑问。
English: In this way, the inconsistency between what "Zhou Yi" said and "Shang Shu" said is the first question.

古文：京氏占寒温以阴阳升降，变复之家以刑赏喜怒，两家乖迹，二疑也。
现代文：京房占卜天气的寒温是根据阴气阳气的升降，解说变复的人是根据君主的刑赏与喜怒，两家的看法是互相矛盾的，这是第二疑问。
English: The cold temperature of the weather divination is based on the rise and fall of yin and yang, and the person who interprets the change is based on the punishment and anger of the monarch. The two views are contradictory. This is the second question.

古文：民间占寒温，今日寒而明日温，朝有繁霜，夕有列光，旦雨气温，旦旸气寒。
现代文：老百姓预测天气的寒温，多是今天寒冷明天温暖，早晨霜厚，晚上星光闪耀，早晨有雨气候温暖，早晨天晴气候寒冷。
English: The common people predict the cold temperature of the weather, mostly cold today, warm tomorrow, thick frost in the morning, shining stars in the evening, warm rainy weather in the morning, and cold sunny weather in the morning.

古文：夫雨者阴，旸者阳也；寒者阴，而温者阳也。
现代文：雨属阴，旸属阳；寒属阴，而温属阳。
English: Rain is Yin, Hail is Yang; Cold is Yin, and Warm is Yang.

古文：雨旦旸反寒，旸旦雨反温，不以类相应，三疑也。
现代文：早晨天晴反而气候寒冷，早晨有雨反而气候温暖，不是同类互相应和，这是第三个疑问。
English: The third question is whether the weather is cold when it is sunny in the morning, or warm when it is rainy in the morning.

古文：三疑不定， 自然 之说，亦未立也。
现代文：这三个疑问不解决，天道自然的说法，也就不可能建立。
English: If these three questions are not resolved, it will be impossible to establish the theory of natural law.

