古文：◎景帝
现代文：景帝
English: Emperor Jing

古文：恭仁康定景皇帝，讳祁钰，宣宗次子也。
现代文：恭仁康定景皇帝，名叫朱祁钰，宣宗第二子。
English: Emperor Gongren Kangdingjing, named Zhu Xi, was the second son of Emperor Xuan Zong.

古文：母贤妃吴氏。
现代文：其母贤妃吴氏。
English: His mother was a princess of the Wu clan.

古文：英宗即位，封郕王。
现代文：英宗即位，封祁钰为郕王。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and he was crowned as Shao Wang.

古文：正统十四年秋八月，英宗北狩，皇太后命王监国。
现代文：正统十四年秋八月，英宗被俘北去，皇太后命成阝王监国。
English: In the autumn and August of the 14th year of the Juche era, Yingzong was captured and sent to the north, and the empress dowager ordered him to become the overseer of the country.

古文：丙寅，移通州粮入京师。
现代文：十九日，转运通州粮食到京师。
English: On the 19th, the transshipment of Tongzhou grain to Beijing began.

古文：徵两畿、山东、河南备倭运粮诸军入卫，召宁阳侯陈懋帅师还。
现代文：征两畿、山东、河南防备倭寇运粮诸军入卫守备。召宁阳侯率兵回京师。
English: After conquering the two provinces of Kinki, Shandong, and Henan, and preparing to transport grain to the Japanese invaders, the troops went on the defensive. Ningyang Hou was summoned to lead the troops back to Beijing.

古文：戊辰，兵部侍郎于谦为本部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，兵部侍郎于谦为本部尚书。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yu Qian, the attendant of the military department, became the head of the department.

古文：令群臣直言时事，举人材。
现代文：命令群臣直说时事，推举人才。
English: He ordered his courtiers to speak candidly about current affairs and promote talent.

古文：己巳，皇太后诏立皇子见深为皇太子。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后下诏立皇子朱见深为皇太子。
English: On the 22nd, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict naming Prince Zhu Mingshen as the crown prince.

古文：恤阵亡将士。
现代文：抚恤阵亡将士。
English: pensions to fallen soldiers.

古文：庚午，籍王振家。
现代文：二十三日，籍没王振家。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Zhenjia passed away.

古文：辛未，右都御史陈镒抚安畿内军民。
现代文：二十四日，右都御史陈镒安抚畿内军民。
English: On the 24th, the Metropolitan of the Right, Chen Ye, went to pacify the military and civilians in the Kinai region.

古文：壬申，都督石亨总京营兵。
现代文：二十五日，都督石亨总领京师营兵。
English: On the 25th, the governor, Shi Heng, led the battalion of the Beijing Division.

古文：乙亥，谕边将，瓦剌秦驾至，不得轻出。
现代文：二十八日，告诫边将，瓦剌侍奉皇帝前来，不得轻率出兵。
English: On the 28th, he admonished the border guards that if they came to serve the emperor, they should not rashly send out troops.

古文：输南京军器于京师。
现代文：运南京军器到京师。
English: Nanjing's military equipment was transported to Beijing.

古文：修撰商辂、彭时入阁预机务。
现代文：修撰商辂、彭时入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: Composed of merchants and merchants, Peng Shijun valued Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：是月，广东贼黄萧养作乱。
现代文：这月，广东贼黄萧养作乱。
English: This month, the Guangdong thief Huang Xiao instigated a riot.

古文：九月癸未，王即皇帝位，遥尊皇帝为太上皇帝，以明年为景泰元年，大赦天下，免景泰二年田租十之三。
现代文：九月六日，成阝王即皇帝位，遥尊英宗皇帝为太上皇帝，以第二年为景泰元年，大肆赦免天下，免景泰二年田租十分之三。
English: On September 6th, King Chengxuan became the emperor, Emperor Yingzong became the supreme emperor, and the second year of King Taejo's reign, the first year of King Taejo's reign, was amnestied to the world, and King Taejo was exempted from paying three-tenths of the second year's rent.

古文：甲申，夷王振族。
现代文：七日，诛灭王振族人。
English: On the seventh day, the extermination of the Wang Zhen people began.

古文：庚寅，处州贼平。
现代文：十三日，平定处州贼。
English: On the 13th, the state bandits were defeated.

古文：癸巳，指挥佥事季铎奉皇太后命，达于上皇。
现代文：十六日，指挥佥事季铎奉皇太后之命，传达给太上皇帝英宗。
English: On the 16th, the commander, Anji Jiqi, was ordered by the empress dowager to convey the message to Emperor Yingzong.

古文：甲午，祭宣府、土木阵亡将士，瘗遗骸。
现代文：十七日，祭祀宣府、土木之战中阵亡之将士，掩埋战地尸骨。
English: On the 17th, a memorial service was held for the soldiers who died in the Battle of Senshu and Civil Engineering, and their remains were buried on the battlefield.

古文：乙未，总兵官安乡伯张安讨广州贼，败死。
现代文：十八日，总兵官安乡伯张安征讨广州贼，战败而死。
English: On the 18th, the commander-in-chief, Anxiang Bo Zhang An, led a campaign against the Guangzhou bandits, but was defeated and died.

古文：指挥佥事王清被执，死之。
现代文：指挥佥事王清被擒获而死。
English: Conductor Wang Qing was captured and died.

古文：辛丑，给事中孙祥、郎中罗通为右副都御史，守紫荆居庸关。
现代文：二十四日，给事中孙祥、郎中罗通为右副都御史，守卫紫荆、居庸关。
English: On the 24th, Sun Xiang, the middle son, and his brother-in-law, Rotong, became the right vice-governors of the capital, guarding the Bauhinia and Juyongguan.

古文：甲辰，遣御史十五人募兵畿内、山东、山西、河南。
现代文：二十七日，派御史十五人在畿内、山东、山西、河南招募兵士。
English: On the 27th, 15 officers were sent to recruit soldiers in Kinai, Shandong, Shanxi and Henan.

古文：都督同知陈友帅师讨湖广、贵州叛苗。
现代文：都督同知陈友率兵征讨广西、贵州叛苗。
English: The governor and his friend Chen You led an army to recruit traitors from Guangxi and Guizhou.

古文：乙巳，遣使奉书上皇。
现代文：二十八日，派使者送书信给英宗。
English: On the 28th, an envoy was sent to deliver a letter to Yingzong.

古文：丙午，苗围平越卫，调云南、四川兵会王骥讨之。
现代文：二十九日，苗人围攻平越卫，征调云南、四川兵与王骥共讨叛苗。
English: On the 29th, the Miao people besieged Ping Yue Wei, and conscripted soldiers from Yunnan and Sichuan to fight against the rebellious Miao together with Wang Xi.

古文：参议杨信民为右佥都御史，讨广东贼。
现代文：参议杨信民为右佥都御史，征讨广东盗贼。
English: Councillor Yang Xinmin is the Right Honourable Metropolitan Historian, soliciting the Guangdong thieves.

古文：冬十月戊申，也先拥上皇至大同。
现代文：十月一日，也先挟持英宗到大同。
English: On October 1st, they also took Yingzong to Datong.

古文：壬子，诏诸王勤王。
现代文：五日，下诏要诸王勤王。
English: On the fifth day, an edict was issued to all the kings to be loyal to the king.

古文：乙卯，于谦提督诸营，石享及诸将分守九门。
现代文：八日，于谦提督各营兵，石亨及诸将分守九门。
English: On the eighth day, the battalions of Admiral Yu Qian, Shi Heng and the generals divided to guard the nine gates.

古文：丙辰，也先陷紫荆关，孙祥死之，京师戒严。
现代文：九日，也先攻陷紫荆关，孙祥战死。京师戒严。
English: On the 9th, Zijing Pass was also captured first, and Sun Xiang died in battle. The capital was placed under martial law.

古文：丁巳，诏宣府、辽东总兵官，山东、河南、山西、陕西巡抚及募兵御史将兵入援。
现代文：十日，下诏宣府、辽东总兵官，山东、河南、山西、陕西巡抚及募兵御史领兵入京师救援。
English: On the 10th, the general officers of Xuanfu and Liaodong, the inspectors of Shandong, Henan, Shanxi, and Shaanxi, and the recruiting officers led the soldiers into the Beijing Division to rescue.

古文：戊午，也先薄都城，都督高礼、毛福寿败之于彰义门。
现代文：十一日，也先迫近都城，都督高礼、毛福寿在彰义门打败也先。
English: On the 11th day, they also approached the capital first, and defeated the governor Gao Li and Mao Fuxu at the Changyi Gate first.

古文：己未，右通政王复、太常少卿赵荣使也先营，朝上皇于土城。
现代文：十二日，右通政王复、太常少卿赵荣出使到也先营地，在土城朝见太上皇英宗。
English: On the twelfth day, the envoys of the Ruling Prince Utsunomiya and the Junior Secretary of the Grand Council of State, Zhao Rong, went to the camp first and met with the Emperor Yingzong in Tucheng.

古文：庚申，徵兵于朝鲜，调河州诸卫士军入援。
现代文：十三日，向朝鲜征募兵士，调河州诸卫土军入京救援。
English: On the 13th, soldiers were recruited from North Korea, and the Hezhou troops were transferred to Beijing for rescue.

古文：于谦、石亨等连败也先众于城下。
现代文：于谦、石亨等连连在都城下打败也先。十五日，也先退却。
English: Yu Qian, Shi Heng and others were also the first to be defeated in the capital. On the 15th, they also retreated first.

古文：壬戌，寇退。
现代文：十七日，退出紫荆关。
English: On the 17th, they withdrew from the Bauhinia Pass.

古文：甲子，出紫荆关，丁卯，诏止诸王兵。瓦剌可汗脱脱不花使来。
现代文：二十日，下诏诸王兵停止救援京师。瓦剌可汗脱脱不花使者到来。
English: On the 20th, the king ordered his soldiers to stop rescuing the Beijing Division. The envoy of the Varangian Khan arrived.

古文：辛未，昌平伯杨洪充总兵官，都督孙镗、范广副之，剿畿内余寇。
现代文：二十四日，昌平伯杨洪充任总兵官，都督孙镗、范广为副将，征剿畿内余寇。
English: On the 24th, Changping Bo Yanghong was appointed as the commander-in-chief, with the governor of the capital, Sun Yat-sen, and Fan Guang as vice-commanders, and they set out to conquer the rest of the Gyeonggi Province.

古文：十一月癸未，修沿边关隘。
现代文：十一月七日，修筑沿边关隘。
English: On November 7th, construction began along the border pass.

古文：辛卯，毛福寿为副总兵，讨辰州叛苗。
现代文：十五日，毛福寿为副总兵，征讨辰州叛乱苗民。
English: On the 15th, Mao Fushou was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief and enlisted to fight against the rebellious Miao people in Chenzhou.

古文：壬辰，上皇至瓦剌。
现代文：十六日，太上皇英宗到瓦剌。
English: On the 16th, Empress Dowager Yingzong came to Fucheng.

古文：乙未，侍郎耿九畴抚安南畿流民，赐复三年。
现代文：十九日，侍郎耿九畴安抚南畿流民，出任地方官三年。
English: On the 19th, Geng Jiujiao, a chamberlain, pacified the Nanki refugees and served as a local official for three years.

古文：十二月庚戌，尊皇太后为上圣皇太后。
现代文：十二月四日，尊奉皇太后为上圣皇太后。
English: On December 4th, the revered empress dowager was enthroned as the Most Holy Empress Dowager.

古文：辛亥，王骥为平蛮将军，充总兵官，讨贵州叛苗。
现代文：五日，王骥为平蛮将军，充任总兵官。征讨贵州叛乱苗民。
English: On the 5th, Wang Qi was promoted to the rank of general and served as the chief military officer. He was sent to Guizhou to recruit the rebellious Miao people.

古文：都督同知董兴为左副总兵，讨广东贼，户部侍郎孟鉴参赞军务。
现代文：都督同知董兴为左副总兵，征讨广西贼，户部侍郎孟鉴辅助军务。
English: The governor Tongzhi Dongxing was the left vice-commander-in-chief, recruited Guangxi thieves, and the household servant Meng Jian assisted in military affairs.

古文：癸丑，尊母贤妃为皇太后。
现代文：七日，尊母贤妃为皇太后。
English: On the seventh day, His Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager became Empress Dowager.

古文：甲寅，立妃汪氏为皇后。
现代文：八日，立妃汪氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th, Wang became empress.

古文：丙辰，大赦。
现代文：十日，大赦天下。
English: Hunchin and Liu Song were granted amnesty.

古文：己未，石亨、杨洪、柳溥分练京营兵。
现代文：十三日，石亨、杨洪、柳溥分别训练京师营兵。
English: On the 13th, Shi Heng, Yang Hong and Liu Ye separately trained the battalion soldiers of the Beijing Division.

古文：戊辰，祭阵亡官军于西直门外。是年，琉球中山、占城、乌斯藏、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：二十二日，在西直门外祭奠阵亡官军。这年，琉球中山、占城、乌斯藏、撒马儿罕来朝进贡。
English: On the 22nd, a memorial service was held for the fallen officers and soldiers outside the West Front Gate. This year, Zhongshan, Zhancheng, Utsang and Samal rarely came to pay tribute to the Ryukyu Kingdom.

古文：景泰元年春正月丁丑朔，罢朝贺。
现代文：景泰元年正月初一日，停止朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the morning greetings stopped.

古文：辛巳，城昌平。
现代文：五日，在昌平筑城。
English: On the fifth day, they built a city in Changping.

古文：壬午，享太庙。
现代文：六日，祭祀太庙。
English: Renwu, dedicated to the Great Temple.

古文：丙戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：闰月甲寅，瓦刺寇宁夏。
现代文：闰正月九日，瓦剌侵掠宁夏。
English: On the 9th day of the leap month, corrugated iron invaded Ningxia.

古文：癸亥，诏会试取士毋拘额。
现代文：十八日，下诏凡会试取士不限定名额。
English: On the 18th, there will be an unlimited number of probationers.

古文：庚午，大同总兵官郭登败瓦剌于沙窝，又追败之于栲栳山，封登定襄伯。
现代文：二十五日，大同总兵官郭登在沙窝打败瓦剌。又追击瓦剌，大败瓦剌于栲栳山。封郭登为定襄伯。
English: On the 25th, the Datong general officer Guo Deng defeated Waju in Shavo. He also pursued Waju and defeated Waju in Shaoshan. Guo Deng was given the title of Dingxiangbo.

古文：是月，免大名、真定、开封、卫辉被灾税粮。
现代文：这月，免大名、真定、开封、卫辉遭灾税粮。
English: In this month, tax-grain from the disasters of Daming, Zhending, Kaifeng and Weihui was exempted.

古文：二月戊寅，耕耤田。
现代文：二月二日，亲自耕种田地。
English: On February 2, he began to cultivate the fields himself.

古文：癸未，悬赏格招陷敌军民。
现代文：八日，悬赏招纳陷敌军民。
English: On the 8th, a reward was offered for the recruitment of trapped enemy soldiers and civilians.

古文：丙戌，石亨为镇朔大将军，帅师巡大同。
现代文：十一日，石亨为镇朔大将军，率兵巡视大同。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shi Heng became the Zhenshuo Grand General and led the troops to inspect Datong.

古文：都指挥同知杨能充游击将军，巡宣府。
现代文：都指挥同知杨能充任游击将军，巡行宣府。
English: Yang Neng, the commander of the capital and a friend, served as a guerrilla general and led the procession to Xuanwu.

古文：壬辰，太监喜宁伏诛。
现代文：十七日，太监喜宁被诛灭。
English: On the 17th, the eunuch Xining was exterminated.

古文：三月己酉，瓦剌寇朔州。
现代文：三月五日，瓦剌侵犯朔州。
English: On March 5, Wuhan invaded Shuozhou.

古文：辛亥，录土木死事诸臣后。
现代文：七日，审查土木之战中死去诸臣后裔。
English: On the seventh day, the descendants of those who died in the Civil War were examined.

古文：癸丑，瓦剌寇宁夏、庆阳。
现代文：九日，瓦剌侵犯宁夏、庆阳。
English: On the 9th, the Varangians invaded Ningxia and Qingyang.

古文：乙卯，寇朔州。
现代文：十一日，侵犯朔州。
English: On the 11th, it invaded Shuozhou.

古文：癸亥，免畿内逋赋及夏税。
现代文：十九日，免畿内欠交赋税及夏税。
English: On the 19th, tax arrears and summer tax in Gyeonggi Province were exempted.

古文：夏四月丙子，广东都指挥李升、何贵帅兵捕海贼，战死。
现代文：四月三日，广东都指挥李升、何贵率兵捕捉海盗，战死。
English: On April 3, Li Sheng, the commander of Guangdong, and He Gui, who led the troops to capture the pirates, died in battle.

古文：辛巳，瓦剌寇大同，官军击却之。
现代文：八日，瓦剌侵掠大同，被官军击退。
English: On the eighth day, the Varangians invaded and plundered Datong and were repulsed by the government army.

古文：丁亥，保定伯梁珤代王骥讨贵州叛苗。
现代文：十四日，保定伯梁王缶代替王骥征讨贵州叛乱苗民。
English: On the 14th, Baoding Bo Liang Wang Can took the place of Wang Yao to recruit the rebellious Miao people in Guizhou.

古文：戊子，大理寺丞李茂录囚南京，考黜百司，访军民利病。
现代文：十五日，大理寺丞李茂审查南京囚犯，考察并罢免百余名官员。访问军民利弊得失。
English: On the 15th, Li Mao of Dali Temple reviewed the Nanjing prisoners, inspected and dismissed more than a hundred officials.

古文：丙申，瓦剌寇雁门。
现代文：二十三日，瓦剌侵掠雁门。
English: On the 23rd, the Varangians invaded and pillaged the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：己亥，都督同知刘安充总兵官，练兵于保定、真定及涿、易、通三州，佥都御史曹泰参赞军务。
现代文：二十六日，都督同知刘安充任总兵官，在保定、真定及涿、易、通三州练兵，佥都御史曹泰辅佐军务。
English: On the 26th, Liu Ancheng, the governor of the capital, was appointed as the chief military officer. He trained soldiers in Baoding, Zhending, and the three states of Yunnan, Yi, and Tong, and assisted the military affairs of the capital.

古文：庚子，振山东饥。
现代文：二十七日，赈救山东饥荒。
English: On the 27th, the relief of famine in Shandong began.

古文：辛丑，振畿内被寇州县。
现代文：二十八日，赈济畿内遭受侵掠州县。
English: On the 28th, there were more prefectures invaded and plundered in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：癸卯，瓦剌寇大同，郭登击却之。
现代文：三十日，瓦剌再次侵犯大同，被郭登击退。
English: On the 30th, the Varangians again invaded Datong and were repulsed by Guodeng.

古文：五月乙巳，免山西被灾税粮。
现代文：五月二日，免山西遭灾税粮。
English: On May 2, Shanxi disaster relief tax grain was exempted.

古文：瓦剌掠河曲、代州，遂南犯，诏刘安督涿、易诸军御之。
现代文：瓦剌又抢劫河曲、代州，向南侵犯，下诏刘安带领涿、易诸军抵御。
English: In addition, the Varangians robbed Hequ and Daizhou and invaded the south. Liu An led the troops of Zou and Yi to resist.

古文：戊申，瓦剌寇雁门，益黄花镇戍兵卫陵寝。
现代文：五日，瓦剌侵掠雁门，增加黄花镇卫兵保卫帝王陵墓。
English: On the fifth day, the Varangians invaded and pillaged the Wild Goose Gate, increasing the number of Huanghua Town guards to protect the imperial mausoleum.

古文：癸丑，董兴击破广东贼，黄萧养伏诛。
现代文：十日，董兴击败广东贼人，黄萧养伏诛。
English: On the 10th, Dong Xing defeated the Guangdong thief, and Huang Xiao raised Fuxing.

古文：壬戌，振大同被寇军民。
现代文：十九日，赈济大同遭骚扰军民。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the military and civilians of Fuzhi Datong were harassed.

古文：丙寅，侍郎侯琎、副总兵田礼大破贵州苗。
现代文：二十三日，侍郎侯、副总兵田礼大败贵州苗民。
English: On the 23rd, the Chamberlain and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Hyoda Rei suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the Miao people of Guizhou.

古文：辛未，瓦剌遣使请和。
现代文：二十八日，瓦剌派使者讲和。
English: On the 28th, the Varangians sent an envoy to make peace.

古文：六月壬午，瓦剌寇大同，郭登击却之。
现代文：六月十日，瓦剌侵掠大同，被郭登击退。
English: On June 10, the Varangians invaded Datong and were repulsed by Guodeng.

古文：丙戌，也先复拥上皇至大同。
现代文：十四日，也先又挟持英宗到大同。
English: On the 14th, they also took Yingzong to Datong.

古文：丁亥，左都御史陈镒、王文以鞫太监金英家人不实下狱，寻释之。
现代文：十五日，左都御史陈镒、王文因审问太监金英家人不符合事实被下狱，不久释放。
English: On the 15th, the governor of the Capital of the Left, Chen Xi, and Wang Wen were sent to prison for questioning the eunuch Kim Ying's family members in a way that did not conform to the facts, and were soon released.

古文：戊子，瓦剌寇宣府，都督朱谦、参将纪广御却之。
现代文：十六日，瓦剌侵犯宣府，都督朱谦、参将纪广击退瓦剌。
English: On the 16th, the Varangians invaded Xuanfu, and the governor Zhu Qian and the general Jiguang repulsed the Varangians.

古文：戊戌，免山东被灾州县税粮。
现代文：二十六日，免山东遭灾州县税粮。
English: On the 26th, the tax grain of the disaster-stricken counties in Shandong was exempted.

古文：乙亥，给事中李实、大理寺丞罗绮使瓦剌。
现代文：二十七日，给事中李贵、大理寺丞罗绮出使瓦剌。
English: On the 27th, Li Gui and Daliji Rong sent envoys to Wafang.

古文：秋七月庚戌，尚书侯琎、参将方瑛破贵州苗，擒其酋献京师。
现代文：七月八日，尚书侯、参将方瑛攻破贵州苗民，擒获其酋长献给京师。
English: On July 8th, Shang Shuhou and General Fang Ying defeated the Miao people of Guizhou and captured their chieftain to dedicate to the Beijing division.

古文：庚申，右都御史杨善、工部侍郎赵荣使瓦剌。
现代文：十八日，右都御史杨善、工部侍郎赵荣出使瓦剌。
English: On the 18th, Yang Zhen, the Governor of the Capital of the Right, and Zhao Rong, the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, sent out the envoys to Wafang.

古文：停山西民运粮大同。
现代文：停止山西平民运粮到大同。
English: Stop Shanxi civilians from transporting grain to Datong.

古文：癸亥，李实、罗绮还。
现代文：二十一日，李贵、罗绮回京。
English: On the 21st, Li Gui and Luo Gan returned to Beijing.

古文：己巳，杨善至瓦剌，也先许上皇归。
现代文：二十七日，杨善到瓦剌，也先同意英宗回到京师。
English: On the 27th, when Yang Shan arrived in Varan, he first agreed to allow Ying Zong to return to Beijing.

古文：八月癸酉，上皇发瓦剌。
现代文：八月二日，英宗从瓦剌出发。
English: On August 2nd, Yingzong set out from Wafang.

古文：戊寅，祀社稷。
现代文：七日，祭祀社稷。
English: On the seventh day, the ritual ended.

古文：甲申，遣侍读商辂迎上皇于居庸关。
现代文：十三日，派侍读商辂去居庸关迎上皇英宗。
English: On the 13th, attendants were sent to Juyongguan to welcome Emperor Yingzong.

古文：丙戌，上皇还京师。帝迎于东安门，入居南宫。帝帅百官朝谒。
现代文：十五日，上皇回到京师，景帝到东安门迎接，英宗入居南宫，景帝带领文武百官朝拜谒见。
English: On the 15th, the last emperor returned to Beijing, and Emperor Jing came to Dongan Gate to meet him. Emperor Yingzong moved into the South Palace, and Emperor Jing led hundreds of civil and military officials to pay homage and meet him.

古文：庚寅，赦天下。
现代文：十九日，赦免天下。
English: On the 19th, the world was pardoned.

古文：辛卯，刑部右侍郎江渊兼翰林学士，直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：二十日，刑部右侍郎江渊兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁，参与机要事务。
English: On the 20th, the right-hand man of the Criminal Investigation Department, Jiang Yuan and Hanlin Baccalaureate, was assigned to Wen Yuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：九月癸丑，巡抚河南副都御史王来总督湖广、贵州军务，讨叛苗。
现代文：九月十二日，巡抚河南副都御史王来总督湖广、贵州军务，征讨叛乱苗民。
English: On September 12th, the governor of Henan Vice-capital, Wang Shih, came to the governor of Huguang, Guizhou Military Affairs, to recruit rebellious Miao people.

古文：冬十月辛卯，录囚。癸巳，免畿内逋赋。
现代文：十月二十一日，审查囚犯，免畿内欠交赋税。
English: On October 21st, prisoners were reviewed and tax arrears in Gyeonggi Province were waived.

古文：十一月辛亥，礼部尚书胡濙请令百官贺上皇万寿节。
现代文：十一月十一日，礼部尚书胡氵荧请求命令文武百官祝贺上皇英宗万寿节。
English: On November 11th, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies requested and ordered the literary and military officials to congratulate Emperor Yingzong's longevity festival.

古文：十二月丙申，复请明年正旦百官朝上皇于延安门。
现代文：十二月二十六日，又请求明年正旦文武百官在延安门朝贺英宗。
English: On December 26th, he also requested that next year, hundreds of officials from the Zhengtang and Manchu armed forces gather at Yan'an Gate to congratulate Yingzong.

古文：皆不许。
现代文：都没得到允许。
English: The emperor did not agree.

古文：是年，朝鲜贡马者三。
现代文：这年，朝鲜三次进贡马匹。
English: This year, North Korea won the horse race for the third time.

古文：二年春正月庚戌，大礼天地于南郊。
现代文：景泰二年正月十日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the second year of King Tae's reign, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬子，诏天下朝觐官当黜者运粮口外。
现代文：十二日，下诏天下朝觐官应当罢免的运粮外出。
English: On the twelfth day, it was decreed that the imperial eunuchs who should be dismissed should go out to transport grain.

古文：二月辛未，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：二月二日，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On February 2, a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to the forerunner of Confucius.

古文：辛卯，以星变修省，诏廷臣条议宽恤诸政。
现代文：二十二日，因星座发生变化而修身反省。诏群臣分别讨论宽恤之政。
English: On the 22nd, as a result of the change in the constellations, the Emperor and his ministers separately discussed the policy of leniency.

古文：癸巳，诏畿内及山东巡抚官举廉能吏专司劝农，授民荒田，贷牛种。
现代文：二十四日，诏畿内及山东巡抚官推举廉洁奉公官吏专门负责劝农之事，授给农民荒田，借给他们耕牛、种子。
English: On the 24th, the procuratorates of Gyeonggi Province and Shandong Province elected and promoted incorruptible public officials specifically responsible for advising farmers, granted farmers wasteland, and lent them cattle and seeds.

古文：三月壬寅，赐柯潜等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐柯潜等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, there were differences in the number and origin of new recruits such as Ke Xuan and others.

古文：夏四月乙酉，梁珤、王来等破平越苗，献俘京师。
现代文：四月十七日，梁王缶、王来等攻破平越苗民，将俘虏献给京师。
English: On April 17th, Liang Wang Can, Wang Lai and others defeated the Miao people of Pingyue and presented the captives to the Beijing division.

古文：甲午，瓦剌寇宣府马营，敕游击将军石彪等巡边。
现代文：二十六日，瓦剌侵犯宣府马营，命游击将军石彪等巡察边境。
English: On the 26th, the Varangians invaded the Xuanfu Horse Camp and ordered the guerrilla general Shi Biao and others to patrol the border.

古文：乙未，命石亨选京营兵操练，尚书石璞总督军务。
现代文：二十七日，命石亨选京师营兵操练，尚书石璞总督军务。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Shi Heng to select the Beijing division to conduct military exercises, and he also wrote to the Governor of Shijiazhuang about military affairs.

古文：五月乙巳，城固原。
现代文：五月八日，筑固原城。
English: May 8th, Chikugohara Castle.

古文：六月戊辰朔，日当食不见。
现代文：六月初一日，应该有日食，但未看见。
English: On the first day of June, there was supposed to be a solar eclipse, but we didn't see it.

古文：己卯，诏贵州各卫修举屯田。
现代文：十二日，诏贵州各卫兴办屯田。
English: On the 12th, it was announced that each military base in Guizhou would build a military garrison.

古文：秋七月戊申，普定、永宁、毕节诸苗复叛，梁珤等留军讨之。
现代文：七月十二日，普定、永宁、毕节诸苗民再次反叛，梁王缶等留兵征剿。
English: On July 12, the Miao people in Puding, Yongning and Bijie rebelled again, and Liang Wangcan and others stayed behind to be conscripted.

古文：八月壬申，南京地震。
现代文：八月七日，南京地震。
English: On August 7, the Nanjing earthquake occurred.

古文：辛巳，复午朝。
现代文：十六日，恢复午间朝贺。
English: On the 16th, the midday morning greeting was resumed.

古文：九月乙卯，禁诸司起复。
现代文：九月二十日，禁止诸司官吏因父母丧事而辞官守孝。
English: On September 20, it was forbidden for officials to resign from their posts due to the death of their parents.

古文：冬十月己丑，免山西被灾税粮。
现代文：十月二十四日，免山西遭灾税粮。
English: On October 24th, Shanxi disaster relief tax grain was exempted.

古文：十二月庚寅，礼部左侍郎王一宁、祭酒萧镃兼翰林学士，直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：十二月二十六日，礼部左侍郎王一宁、祭酒萧钅兹兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁，参与机要事务。
English: On December 26th, Wang Yining, Left Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Xiao Yanzi, Master of Ceremonial Wine and Hanlin, entered the Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：是月，也先弑其主脱脱不花。
现代文：这月，也先杀其主脱脱不花。
English: This month, it will also kill its master first.

古文：是年，安南、琉球中山、瓦剌、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、琉球中山、瓦剌、哈密来朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Ryukyu Nakayama, Wase, and Hami came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月丙午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：景泰三年正月十二日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the third year of King Tae's reign, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月乙酉，副都御史刘广衡录南京囚。
现代文：二月二十一日，副都御史刘广衡审查南京囚徒。
English: On February 21, Vice Metropolitan Liu Guangheng reviewed the Nanjing prisoners.

古文：戊子，户部尚书金濂以违诏下狱，寻释之。
现代文：二十四日，户部尚书金濂因违抗诏书被下狱，不久释放。
English: On the 24th, the head of the household, Shoshu Kinran, was sent to prison for disobeying the edict and was soon released.

古文：三月戊午，毛福寿讨湖广巴马苗，克之。
现代文：三月二十五日，毛福寿征讨湖广巴马苗民，攻克。
English: On March 25th, Mao Fushou marched out to subjugate the Bama Miao people of Hukang and conquered them.

古文：夏五月甲午，废皇太子见深为沂王，立皇子见济为皇太子。
现代文：五月二日，废皇太子朱见深为沂王，立皇子朱见济为皇太子。
English: On May 2, Zhu Mingshen, the former crown prince, was crowned king, and Prince Zhu Mingshi was appointed crown prince.

古文：废皇后汪氏，立太子母杭氏为皇后。
现代文：废皇后汪氏，立太子母亲杭氏为皇后。
English: Wang, the former empress, and Hang, the mother of the crown prince, became empresses.

古文：封上皇子见清荣王，见淳许王。
现代文：封上皇英宗之子朱见清为荣王，朱见淳为许王。
English: Zhu Mianqing, the son of Emperor Yingzong, was named Rongwang, and Zhu Mian Jun was named Xuwang.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大肆赦免天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：丙申，筑沙湾堤成。
现代文：四日，筑成沙湾堤。
English: On the fourth day, the sand dike was built.

古文：辛丑，河南流民复业者，计口给食五年。
现代文：九日，河南归业流民按人口给粮食五年。
English: On the 9th, Henan returned emigrants were given five years of grain according to population.

古文：乙巳，官颜、孟二氏子孙各一人。
现代文：十三日，授给颜、孟二氏子孙各一人官职。
English: On the 13th, one official post was given to each of Yan and Meng Er's descendants.

古文：六月乙亥，罢各省巡抚官入京议事。
现代文：六月十四日，停止各省巡抚官到京城讨论事情。
English: On June 14, the provincial governors stopped coming to Beijing to discuss the matter.

古文：是月，大雨，河决沙湾。
现代文：这月，下大雨，黄河在沙湾决堤。
English: This month, heavy rain caused the Yellow River to burst its banks in Shawan.

古文：秋七月乙未，左都御史王翱总督两广军务。壬寅，王一宁卒。
现代文：七月四日，左都御史王翱总督两广军务。十一日，王一宁死。
English: On the 4th of July, the governor of Zuo, Wang Shih, took over the military affairs of the two provinces. On the 11th day, Wang Yining died.

古文：八月乙丑，振徐、兖水灾。
现代文：八月五日，赈救徐、兖二州水灾。
English: On August 5th, the floods in Xuzhou and Erzhou were recorded.

古文：戊辰，都御史洪英，尚书孙原贞、薛希琏等分行天下，考察官吏。
现代文：八日，都御史洪英、尚书孙原贞、薛希琏等分别巡行天下，考察官吏。
English: On the 8th, the Metropolitan of Shanghai, Hong Ying, Shangshu, Sun Yuanzhen, Xue Xizhe, and others went on a tour of the country to inspect officials.

古文：丁丑，振两畿水灾州县，免税粮。
现代文：十七日，赈济两畿遭水灾州县，免税粮。
English: On the 17th, tax-free grain was produced in the flood-hit prefectures of the two Kansai regions.

古文：乙酉，振南畿、河南、山东流民。
现代文：二十六日，救济南畿、河南、山东流民。
English: On the 26th, relief was sent to the displaced people in Nanki, Henan and Shandong.

古文：九月庚寅，江渊起复。
现代文：九月一日，江渊守孝未满入朝供职。
English: On September 1st, Jiang Yuan Moritaka did not complete his term of service in the imperial court.

古文：辛卯，以南京地震，两淮大水，河决，命都御史王文巡视安辑。
现代文：二日，因南京地震，两淮大水，黄河决堤，命都御史王文巡视安抚。
English: On the second day, due to the Nanjing earthquake, two floods and the Yellow River bursting its banks, the governor of the capital, Wang Wen, inspected and calmed the situation.

古文：乙未，振两畿、山东、山西、福建、广西、江西、辽东被灾州县。
现代文：六日，赈救两畿、山东、山西、福建、广西、江西、辽东遭灾州县。
English: On the 6th, the rescue of the two Kis, Shandong, Shanxi, Fujian, Guangxi, Jiangxi and Liaodong disaster-stricken counties began.

古文：闰月癸未，开处州银场。
现代文：闰九月二十四日，开处州银场。
English: On September 24th, the opening of the state silver field.

古文：是月，福建盗起。
现代文：这月，福建盗贼大起。
English: This month, Fujian thieves are on the rise.

古文：冬十月戊戌，左都御史王文兼翰林学士，直文渊阁，预机务。
现代文：十月十日，左都御史王文兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁，参与机要事务。
English: On October 10th, the Left Metropolitan Wang Wen and Hanlin Bachelors entered the Wen Yuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：丙辰，都督孙镗、佥事石彪协守大同，都督同知卫颍，佥事杨能、张钦协守宣府，备也先。
现代文：二十八日，都督孙镗、佥事石彪协助守卫大同，都督同知卫颍，佥事杨能、张钦协助守卫宣府，防备也先。
English: On the 28th, the governor-general Sun Yat-sen and the vice-governor Shi Biao assisted in guarding Datong, the governor-general Tong Chih-wei and the vice-governor Yang Neng and Zhang Qin assisted in guarding Xuanwu, and the defense was also the first.

古文：十一月己未朔，日有食之。戊辰，都督方瑛平白石崖诸苗。
现代文：十一月初一日，有日食。十日，都督方瑛平定白石崖诸苗。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, there was a solar eclipse. On the tenth day, the governor of the capital, Fang Yingping, decided to remove all the seedlings from the Shiroishi cliff.

古文：甲戌，安辑畿内、山东、山西逃民，复赋役五年。
现代文：十六日，抚慰安置畿内、山东、山西逃亡平民。免除赋役五年。
English: On the 16th, Fugitive Civilians from Kinai, Shandong and Shanxi Provinces were Comforted and Resettled. They were Exempted from Military Service for Five Years.

古文：是月，免山东及淮、徐水灾税粮。
现代文：这一月，免山东及淮、徐水灾后税粮。
English: This month, Shandong and Huai and Xu were exempt from tax grain after the floods.

古文：十二月癸巳，始立团营，太监阮让、都督杨俊等分统之，听于谦、石亨、太监刘永诚、曹吉祥节制。
现代文：十二月五日，开始设置团营，太监阮让、都督杨俊分别统领，受于谦、石亨、太监刘永诚、曹吉祥节制。
English: On December 5, the regimental camp was set up. The eunuch Ruan Zhan and the governor Yang Jun were in charge, and Yu Qian, Shi Heng, the eunuch Liu Yongcheng, and Cao Jixiang were in control.

古文：是月，免河南及永平被灾秋粮。
现代文：这月内，免河南及永平受灾秋粮。
English: During this month, the autumn crops in Henan and Yongping were exempted from the disaster.

古文：是年，瓦剌、琉球中山、爪哇、暹罗、安南、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，瓦剌、琉球中山、爪哇、暹罗、安南、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Varan, Ryukyu Nakayama, Java, Siam, Annam, Hami, and Utsuko paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：四年春正月辛未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：景泰四年正月十三日，在南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 4th year of King Tae, the Southern Suburbs Grand Festival took place.

古文：二月戊子，五开、清浪诸苗复叛，梁珤、王来讨之。
现代文：二月一日，五开、清浪诸苗民再次反叛，梁王缶、王来出兵征讨。
English: On February 1, the people of Wukai, Qinglang and Zhu Miao rebelled again, and Liang Wangkan and Wanglai sent soldiers to fight.

古文：庚戌，免江西去年被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十三日，免江西去年受灾秋粮。
English: On the 23rd, the autumn grain that was affected by the disaster in Jiangxi last year was exempted.

古文：三月戊寅，开建宁银场。
现代文：三月二十一日，开建宁银场。
English: On March 21st, the Jianning Silver Mine was opened.

古文：夏四月戊子，筑沙湾决口。
现代文：四月一日，筑沙湾黄河决口。
English: On April 1st, the Yellow River's mouth at Tsukisawan Bay.

古文：运南京仓粟振徐州。
现代文：运南京粮食赈济徐州。
English: Transporting grain from Nanjing to Xuzhou.

古文：五月丁巳，发徐、淮仓振饥民。
现代文：五月一日，开徐州、淮安仓库赈济饥民。
English: On May 1, warehouses in Xuzhou and Huai'an were opened to help the hungry.

古文：己巳，王文起复。
现代文：十三日，王文守孝未满复职。
English: On the 13th, Wang Wenshouhong was reinstated.

古文：甲戌，徐州复大水，民益饥。
现代文：十八日，徐州又涨大水，民间饥荒。
English: On the 18th, Xuzhou was hit by another flood, resulting in widespread famine.

古文：发支运及盐课粮振之。
现代文：发放支运及盐课赈救。
English: distribution of relief supplies and salt.

古文：丁丑，发淮安仓振凤阳。
现代文：二十一日，开淮安仓库赈救凤阳。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Huai'an warehouse was opened to save Fengyang.

古文：乙酉，沙湾河复决。
现代文：二十九日，沙湾黄河再次决堤。
English: On the 29th, the Yellow River in Shawan broke through the dike again.

古文：六月壬辰，吏部尚书何文渊以给事中林聪言下狱，寻令致仕。
现代文：六月七日，吏部尚书何文渊因给事中林聪弹劾被下狱，不久命他辞官退职。
English: On June 7, He Wenyuan, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was sent to prison for impeaching Lin Cong. He resigned from his post soon after.

古文：辛亥，瘗土木、大同、紫荆关暴骸。
现代文：二十六日，掩埋土木、大同、紫荆关外露尸骨。
English: On the 26th, they buried the exposed bones outside of Civil Engineering, Datong and Bauhinia.

古文：秋七月庚辰，停诸不急工役。
现代文：七月二十五日，停止各项不急需工役。
English: On July 25, all non-urgent labor services were suspended.

古文：八月己丑，振河南饥。
现代文：八月五日，救济河南饥馑。
English: On August 5, the relief of Henan famine began.

古文：甲午，也先自立为可汗。
现代文：十日，也先自立为可汗。
English: On the tenth day, he also became a khan.

古文：冬十月庚寅，诏天下镇守、巡抚官督课农桑。
现代文：十月七日，下诏天下巡抚官、镇守监督农桑事务。
English: On October 7th, the magistrate of the whole country and the town guard were appointed to supervise agricultural and mulberry affairs.

古文：甲午，谕德徐有贞为左佥都御史，治沙湾决河。
现代文：十一日，谕德徐有贞为左佥都御史，治理沙湾黄河决口。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xu Youzhen of Dezhou was appointed as the governor of Zuoying, governing the mouth of the Yellow River in Shawan.

古文：戊戌，也先遣使来。
现代文：十五日，也先派使者到来。
English: On the fifteenth day, a messenger was sent ahead.

古文：十一月辛未，皇太子见济薨。
现代文：十一月十九日，皇太子朱见济死。
English: On November 19th, Crown Prince Zhu Jizhi passed away.

古文：十二月乙未，免山东被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月十三日，免山东遭灾税粮。
English: On December 13th, the disaster-hit grain in Shandong was exempted from tax.

古文：乙巳，赉边军。
现代文：二十三日，赏赐边境军士。
English: On the 23rd, the award was given to a border guard sergeant.

古文：是年，琉球中山、安南、爪哇、日本、占城、哈密、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、安南、爪哇、日本、占城、哈密、瓦剌来朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Annan, Java, Japan, Zhancheng, Hami, and Wajian came to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月戊午，黄河清，自龙门至于芮城。
现代文：景泰五年正月六日，黄河从龙门到芮城河水清澈。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the fifth year of Jingtai, the Yellow River was clear from Longmen to Lucheng.

古文：甲子，大祀天地于南郊。壬申，罢福州，建宁银场。
现代文：十二日，在京城南郊大祭天地。二十日，停止福州建宁银场。
English: On the 12th, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing. On the 20th, the Fuzhou Jianning Silver Mine was closed.

古文：甲戌，平江侯陈豫、学士江渊抚辑山东、河南被灾军民。
现代文：二十二日，平江侯陈豫、学士江渊安抚并安置山东、河南受灾军民。
English: On the 22nd, Pingjiang marquis Chen Yu and academician Jiang Yuan pacified and resettled the affected soldiers and civilians in Shandong and Henan.

古文：二月乙巳，以雨旸弗时，诏修省，求直言。
现代文：二月二十四日，因下雨日出都不是常规时间，下诏研究反省，征求直言。
English: On February 24th, because of the rain, sunrise is not a regular time, the next imperial edict is to study and reflect, and to solicit candid opinions.

古文：三月壬子，赐孙贤等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，赐孙贤等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the first day of March, Sun Xian and others were conferred the title of knight with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：辛酉，学士江渊振淮北饥民。
现代文：十日，学士江渊赈救淮北饥民。
English: On the 10th, the bachelor Jiang Yuanzhang came to the rescue of the starving people in Huaibei.

古文：王文抚恤南畿。
现代文：王文抚慰南畿。
English: Wang Wen comforted Nanki.

古文：甲子，总督两广副都御史马昂破泷水瑶。
现代文：十三日，总督两广副都御史马昂攻破泷水瑶民。
English: On the 13th, the governor of the two provinces and the vice-governor of the capital, Shimaang, defeated the people of Shishui.

古文：庚辰，缅甸执献思机发。
现代文：二十九日，缅甸捉拿思机发献京师。
English: On the 29th, Myanmar seized the opportunity to send a delegation to Beijing.

古文：夏四月壬午朔，日有食之。辛卯，方瑛破草塘苗，封瑛南和伯。
现代文：四月初一日，有日食。十日，方瑛攻破草塘苗民，封方瑛为南和伯。
English: On the first day of April, there was a solar eclipse. On the tenth day, Fang Ying defeated Caotang Miao Min and sealed Fang Ying as Nanhe Bo.

古文：五月甲子，礼部郎中章纶、御史钟同以请复沂王为皇太子下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：五月十四日，礼部郎中章纶、御史钟同因请求恢复沂王为皇太子被下锦衣卫狱。
English: On the 14th of May, Reibe's son-in-law, Shōkaku, and his son-in-law, Goshi, were both sent to prison for requesting the reinstatement of Shōnō as crown prince.

古文：六月戊子，录囚。
现代文：六月八日，审查囚犯。
English: On June 8, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：秋七月癸酉，振南畿水灾。
现代文：七月二十四日，赈救南畿水灾。
English: On the 24th of July,  came to the rescue of flood victims in Nanki.

古文：八月丁酉，复命天下巡抚官赴京师议事。
现代文：八月十八日，又命天下巡抚官赴京师商量大事。
English: On August 18th, he also ordered the world's magistrate to go to Beijing to discuss important matters.

古文：九月壬戌，免苏、松、常、扬、杭、嘉、湖漕粮二百余万石。
现代文：九月十四日，免苏、松、常、扬、杭、嘉、湖漕粮二百余万石。
English: On September 14th, more than 2 million koku of grain from Su, Song, Chang, Yang, Hang, Jia and Huko were exempted.

古文：冬十月庚辰，副都御史刘广衡巡抚浙江、福建，专司讨贼。
现代文：十月二日，副都御史刘广衡巡抚浙江、福建，专门主管征讨盗贼。
English: On October 2, Liu Guangheng, vice-governor of the capital and governor of Zhejiang and Fujian, was appointed as the special supervisor to investigate the thieves.

古文：十一月戊午，罢苏、松、常、镇织造采办。
现代文：十一月十一日，停止苏、松、常、镇织造及采办事务。
English: On November 11, Su, Song, Chang and Zhen weaving and procurement services were suspended.

古文：十二月，免南畿、浙江被灾税粮。
现代文：十二月，免南畿、浙江受灾税粮。
English: In December, Nanki and Zhejiang were exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：是年，安南、琉球中山、爪哇入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、琉球中山、爪哇入朝进贡。
English: That year, Annan, Ryukyu Nakayama, and Java paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：也先为知院阿剌所杀。
现代文：也先被知院阿剌杀害。
English: He was also killed by the chief abbot.

古文：六年春正月戊午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：景泰六年正月十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 6th year of Jing Tai, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb.

古文：二月壬午，太监王诚同法司、刑科录囚。
现代文：二月六日太监王诚同法官、刑科审查囚犯。
English: On February 6, the eunuch Wang Cheng, together with the judge and the criminal investigation department, examined the prisoner.

古文：大理少卿李茂等录南京、浙江囚。
现代文：大理少卿李茂等审查南京、浙江囚犯。
English: Dali Shaoqing Li Mao and others examined prisoners from Nanjing and Zhejiang.

古文：夏四月丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一日，有日食。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, the sun is eclipsed.

古文：辛巳，敕户、兵二部及两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广抚、按、三司官条宽恤事，罢不急诸务。
现代文：六日，命户、兵二部及两畿、山东、河南、浙江、湖广抚慰安揖三司官陈述宽恤之事，停止不急办事务。
English: On the 6th, the three officials of the Ministry of the Interior, the Second Division of the People's Liberation Army, the People's Republic of China, Shandong Province, Henan Province, Zhejiang Province, and Hubei Province made a statement of leniency, and suspended non-urgent affairs.

古文：五月己巳，祷雨于南郊。
现代文：五月二十五日，在南郊祈求下雨。
English: Praying for rain in the southern suburbs on May 25.

古文：六月乙亥，宋儒朱熹裔孙梃为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
现代文：六月一日，宋儒朱熹后代之后裔朱梃为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
English: On June 1, Zhu Xi, the descendant of the descendants of Zhu Xi of Song Dynasty, became the hereditary doctor of "Five Classics" of Hanlin Academy.

古文：癸未，河决开封。
现代文：九日，开封黄河决堤。
English: On the 9th, the Yellow River in Kaifeng burst its banks.

古文：秋七月乙亥。沙湾决口堤成。
现代文：七月二日，沙湾黄河决口堤筑成。
English: On July 2, the breakwater of the Yellow River in Shawan was completed.

古文：庚寅，以南京灾异屡见，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十六日，因南京多次出现奇怪现象并发生灾害，告诫群臣修身反省。
English: On the 16th, due to the strange phenomena and disasters that have repeatedly occurred in Nanjing, he admonished the ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：八月庚申，南京大理少卿廖庄又请复沂王为皇太子，杖于阙下，并杖章纶、钟同于狱，同卒。
现代文：八月十七日，南京大理少卿廖庄因请求恢复沂王为太子，被杖于台阶下，还杖章纶、钟同于狱中，钟同被杖死。
English: On August 17th, Nanjing Dali Shaoqing Liao Zhuang was caned at the foot of the steps for requesting the reinstatement of King Gong as the crown prince. He was also caned by Zhang Ye and Zhong Tong in prison. Zhong Tong was caned to death.

古文：九月乙亥，振苏、松饥民米麦一百余万石。
现代文：九月三日，赈济苏、松饥民米麦一百余万石。
English: On September 3, more than one million kilos of rice and wheat were distributed to the starving people in Su and Song.

古文：冬十月戊午，免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：十月十六日，免陕西受灾税粮。
English: On October 16th, the disaster-affected tax grain in Shaanxi Province was exempted.

古文：十一月乙亥，南和伯方瑛为平蛮将军充总兵官，讨湖广苗。
现代文：十一月四日，南和伯方瑛为平蛮将军充任总兵官，征讨湖广苗民。
English: On November 4th, Nanhe and Bo Fangying appointed General Pingman as the chief military officer to recruit the people of Hukangmiao.

古文：十二月己巳，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：十二月二十八日，免南畿受灾秋粮。
English: On December 28, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected autumn grain.

古文：是年，琉球中山、暹罗、哈密、满剌加入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、暹罗、哈密、满剌加入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Siam, Hami, and Manchuria joined the tribute to the North.

古文：七年春正月己卯，尚书石璞抚安湖广军民。
现代文：景泰七年正月九日，尚书石璞安抚湖广军民。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Jing Tai, Shang Shuxu Shijie appeased the soldiers and civilians of Hukang.

古文：壬午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月庚申，皇后崩。
现代文：二月二十一日，皇后死。
English: On February 21, the empress died.

古文：甲子，营寿陵。
现代文：二十五日，营建寿陵。
English: On the 25th, the construction of the tomb began.

古文：三月戊寅，免云南被灾税粮。
现代文：三月九日，免云南受灾税粮。
English: On March 9th, Yunnan's disaster-affected grain was exempted from tax.

古文：夏五月戊寅，以水旱灾异，敕内外诸臣修省。
现代文：五月十日，因水旱灾害异常，命内外诸臣修身反省。
English: On May 10th, due to the unusual flood and drought disaster, all the ministers inside and outside the government were forced to reflect on their lives.

古文：辛卯，宋儒周敦颐裔孙冕为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
现代文：二十三日，宋儒周敦颐后裔之孙周冕为翰林院世袭《五经》博士。
English: On the 23rd, Zhou Guan, the grandson of a descendant of Song Confucius Zhou Dun Dun, became the hereditary "Five Classics" doctor of Hanlin Academy.

古文：六月庚申，葬肃孝皇后。
现代文：六月二十二日，葬肃孝皇后。
English: On June 22nd, the funeral of Empress Takahisa took place.

古文：冬十月癸卯，振江西饥。
现代文：十月七日，赈救江西饥荒。
English: On October 7th, the famine relief in Jiangxi Province began.

古文：十二月己亥，方瑛大破湖广苗。
现代文：十二月四日，方瑛大破湖广苗民。
English: On December 4th, Fangying University broke the lake Guangmiao Min.

古文：戊午，振畿内、山东、河南水灾。
现代文：二十三日，赈济畿内、山东、河南水灾。
English: On the 23rd, floods occurred in Gyeonggi Province, Shandong Province, and Henan Province.

古文：癸亥，帝不豫，罢明年元旦朝贺。
现代文：二十八日，景帝身体不适，停止明年元旦朝贺。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Jing fell ill and stopped the New Year's morning greeting.

古文：是冬，免畿内、山东被灾税粮，并蠲逋赋。
现代文：这年冬天，免畿内、山东遭灾税粮，并蠲免欠交赋税。
English: This winter, disaster-affected tax grain in Kinai and Shandong was exempted, and tax arrears were also exempted.

古文：是年，琉球中山、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Samarkand, and Utsuko paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：八年春正月戊辰，免江西被灾税粮。
现代文：景泰八年正月三日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eighth year of Jing Tai, the disaster-affected tax grain in Jiangxi Province was exempted.

古文：丁丑，帝舆疾宿南郊斋宫。己卯，群臣请建太子，不听。
现代文：十二日，景帝带病登车住南郊斋宫，十四日，群臣请求立太子。景帝不听。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Jing took ill and boarded a train to live in the southern suburb of Zaigu. On the 14th, the courtiers requested the crown prince. Emperor Jing did not listen.

古文：壬午，武清侯石亨、副都御史徐有贞等迎上皇复位。
现代文：十七日，武清侯石亨、副都御史徐有贞等迎接上皇英宗复位。
English: On the 17th, Wuching marquis Shi Heng and vice-governor Xu Youzhen welcomed Emperor Yingzong's reinstatement.

古文：二月乙未，废帝为郕王，迁西内。
现代文：二月一日，废景帝为成阝王，迁到西宫内。
English: On the first day of February, Emperor Wujing became King Chengxuan and moved to the West Palace.

古文：皇太后吴氏以下悉仍旧号。
现代文：皇太后吴氏以下全部沿用原来称号。
English: The Empress Dowager and all members of the Wu clan and below continue to use their original titles.

古文：癸丑，王薨于西宫，年三十。
现代文：十九日，景帝死于西宫，终年三十岁。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Jing died in Xi Gong, at the age of thirty.

古文：谥曰戾。
现代文：谥号曰戾。
English: His posthumous name is Tsuro.

古文：毁所营寿陵，以亲王礼葬西山，给武成中卫军二百户守护。
现代文：毁掉他所营建的寿陵，按亲王礼节葬成阝王于西山，给武成中卫军二百户守卫。
English: They destroyed the mausoleum he had built, buried him in the West Mountain according to the prince's etiquette, and sent two hundred guards to guard Wu Cheng's middle guard.

古文：成化十一年十二月戊子，制曰： 朕叔郕王践阼，戡难保邦，奠安宗社，殆将八载。
现代文：成化十一年十二月十三日，宪宗说 ：我叔父成阝王即位，平定叛乱保卫国家，安定宗庙社稷，将近八年。
English: On December 13th, Chenghua 11, Gensong said, "It has been nearly eight years since my uncle, King Chengyu, ascended the throne, quelled the rebellion, defended the country, and stabilized the family, temple, and society.

古文：弥留之际，奸臣贪功，妄兴谗构，请削帝号。
现代文：病危之际，奸臣贪功，乱兴谗言诬陷他人，请求削除皇帝称号。
English: At the time of his critical illness, his treacherous vassal coveted his achievements, slandered others, and requested that he be stripped of the title of emperor.

古文：先帝旋知其枉，每用悔恨，以次抵诸奸于法，不幸上宾，未及举正。
现代文：先帝不久就知道实属冤枉，每次由于悔恨，按规定要将诸奸臣绳之以法。不宠爱贵客，没来得及纠正过失。
English: The former emperor soon knew that he had been wronged. Each time, out of remorse, he was required to bring the traitorous vassals to justice. He did not favor the guests and did not have time to correct his mistake.

古文：朕敦念亲亲，用成先志，可仍皇帝之号，其议谥以闻。 
现代文：朕厚爱亲人，完成先帝遗志，可仍称皇帝之号。讨论谥号已经知道了。 
English: I love my relatives dearly and have fulfilled the last wishes of the former emperor, but I can still be called the emperor's number.

古文：遂上尊谥。
现代文：于是上尊谥。
English: Therefore, the Supreme Court upheld the sentence.

古文：敕有司缮陵寝，祭飨视诸陵。
现代文：命令官吏修整陵墓，祭祀同其他诸先王陵墓一样。
English: He ordered the officials to renovate the mausoleum, and the sacrificial rites were carried out in the same way as other royal mausoleums.

古文：赞曰：景帝当倥偬之时，奉命居摄，旋王大位以系人心，事之权而得其正者也。
现代文：评论：景帝在困难之时，奉命居守摄政，不久登皇位以系人心，受权得势而取得合法地位。
English: Comment: At a difficult time, Emperor Jing was ordered to act as regent, and soon ascended the throne to win the hearts and minds of the people. He gained power and gained legal status.

古文：笃任贤能，励精政治，强寇深入而宗社乂安，再造之绩良云伟矣。
现代文：他信任贤能，全心钻研政治，即使强寇深入内地侵略，但国家仍安然无恙。其治国之绩相当伟大了。
English: He trusted the virtuous, studied politics with all his heart, and even though the invaders penetrated deep into the inland, the country was still safe and sound. His achievements in governing the country were quite great.

古文：而乃汲汲易储，南内深锢，朝谒不许，恩谊恝然。
现代文：然而心情急切改变储粮，使英宗在小皇城深深禁锢，不准朝贺拜见，不注意合理意见。
English: However, he was in a hurry to change the grain reserve, so that Yingzong was deeply imprisoned in the small imperial city, was not allowed to visit the Imperial Palace, and did not pay attention to reasonable opinions.

古文：终于舆疾斋宫，小人乘间窃发，事起仓猝，不克以令名终，惜夫！
现代文：最后，终于抱病登车去了斋宫，小人乘机悄悄兴起得势。事情起得仓猝，还没等到取得胜利，他那好的名声就此结束了，真是可惜啊！
English: In the end, he finally got on the train to Zaigu with his illness, and the villain took advantage of the opportunity to quietly rise to power. Things happened in a hurry, and before he could win, his good reputation ended. What a shame!

