古文：王平子形甚散朗，内实劲侠。
现代文：王平子外表非常潇洒、爽朗，内心却实在刚烈、狭隘。
English: Wang Pingzi looks very dashing and cheerful, but his heart is really rigid and narrow.

古文：袁悦有口才，能短长说，亦有精理。
现代文：袁悦有口才，擅长战国纵横家的合纵连横之说，道理也很精辟。
English: Yuan Yue has eloquence, and is good at the combination of the warring states, and the reason is also very incisive.

古文：始作谢玄参军，颇被礼遇。
现代文：起先在谢玄手下任参军，颇受器重。
English: At first, he joined the army under Xie Xuan, and was quite a heavyweight.

古文：后丁艰，服除还都，唯赍战国策而已。
现代文：后来遭到父母之丧，回家守孝。三年期满，要回都城建康的时候，只带了一部《战国策》。
English: Later, he was bereaved by his parents and returned home to take care of his filial duty. At the end of the three-year period, when he wanted to return to the capital to build a healthy life, he only brought one "Strategy of Warring States."

古文：语人曰： 少年时读论语、老子，又看庄、易，此皆是病痛事，当何所益邪？
现代文：他对别人说： 少年时读《论语》《老子》，又读《庄子》《周易》，这些写的都是小事情，有什么益处呢？
English: He said to others, "When I was a boy, I read "Analects" and "Lao Zi" and also read "Zhuang Zi" and "Zhou Yi." All of these were written about small things. What is the benefit?

古文：天下要物，正有战国策。 
现代文：天下最重要的东西，只有《战国策》。 
English: The most important thing in the world is "Strategy for Warring States."

古文：既下，说司马孝文王，大见亲待，几乱机轴。
现代文：到了建康以后，他游说孝文王司马道子，得到了莫大的信任，几乎扰乱了整个朝廷秩序，不久就被杀了。
English: After he arrived in Jiankang, he lobbied Xiaowen King Sima Daozi, gained great trust, almost disrupted the entire imperial order, and was soon killed.

古文：俄而见诛。孝武甚亲敬王国宝、王雅。
现代文：晋孝武帝非常亲信王国宝、王雅。
English: Emperor Jin Xiaowu was very close to the royal treasure, Wang Ya.

古文：雅荐王珣于帝，帝欲见之。
现代文：王雅向孝武帝推荐王珣，孝武帝很想见见。
English: Wang Ya recommended Wang Ya to Emperor Xiaowu, and Emperor Xiaowu was very eager to meet him.

古文：尝夜与国宝、雅相对，帝微有酒色，令唤珣。
现代文：有一天晚上，孝武帝与王国宝、王雅对坐喝酒，孝武帝微醉时，命令召王珣前来。
English: One evening, Emperor Xiaowu sat drinking with Wang Guobao and Wang Ya. When Emperor Xiaowu was slightly drunk, he ordered Wang Ya to come.

古文：垂至，已闻卒传声，国宝自知才出珣下，恐倾夺要宠，因曰： 王珣当今名流，陛下不宜有酒色见之，自可别诏也。 
现代文：王珣都快要到了，已听到里面士卒的传话声。王国宝自知才能不及王珣，唯恐将来被他夺宠，就说： 王珣是当今的名流，皇上您不应该在喝得半醉的时候见他，您可以另外再召见他啊。 
English: Wang Yao was about to arrive, and he had already heard the messenger's voice. Wang Guobao, knowing that he was not as talented as Wang Yao, but fearing that he would be favored by him in the future, said: Wang Yao is today's celebrity, Emperor, you should not see him when he is half drunk, you can call him again.

古文：帝然其言，心以为忠，遂不见珣。
现代文：孝武帝觉得王国宝说得对，还在心里赞赏他的忠心，于是就没有见王珣。
English: Emperor Xiaowu felt that Wang Guobao was right, and still appreciated his loyalty in his heart, so he did not see Wang Yao.

古文：王绪数谗殷荆州于王国宝，殷甚患之，求术于王东亭。
现代文：王绪屡次茬王自宝面前说荆州刺史殷仲堪的坏话，殷仲堪对这事很担忧，向东亭侯王珣讨教对付他的办法。
English: Wang Xuxu repeatedly told Wang Zibo that Jingzhou stabbed Yin Zhongkang in front of him. Yin Zhongkang was very worried about this and asked Dongting Prince Wang Yao for advice on how to deal with him.

古文：曰： 卿但数诣王绪，往辄屏人，因论它事，如此，则二王之好离矣。 
现代文：王珣说： 你只要一次又一次地去拜访王绪，一去就叫手下的人退出去，于是谈别的事情；这样，二王的交情就疏远了。 
English: Wang Yao said, "You only need to visit Wang Xiu again and again, and as soon as you leave, ask your subordinates to withdraw, and then talk about other things; in this way, the friendship between the two kings is alienated.

古文：殷从之。
现代文：殷仲堪照他所说的做去。
English: Yin Zhong could do as he said.

古文：国宝见王绪问曰： 比与仲堪屏人何所道？ 
现代文：后来王国宝见到王绪，问道： 你近来和殷仲堪在一起，赶走随从，都说些什么呢？ 
English: Later, Wang Guobao saw Wang Xu and asked: What did you say when you were together with Yin Zhongkan recently and drove away the attendants?

古文：绪云： 故是常往来，无它所论。 
现代文：王绪回答说： 只不过是一般往来，没看谈别的什么事。 
English: Wang Xu replied, "It was just a general exchange, I didn't see anything else to talk about."

古文：国宝谓绪于己有隐，果情好日疏，谗言以息。
现代文：王国宝认为王绪对自己有隐瞒，果然两人的感情日渐疏远了，谗言这才平息下来。
English: Wang Guobao thought that Wang Xiu was concealing something from him. As a matter of fact, the feelings between the two of them became more and more distant, and only then did the gossip die down.

