古文：三十有三年春，王二月，秦人入滑。
现代文：三十三年春季，周历二月，秦国攻入滑国。
English: In the spring of 333, in February of the lunar calendar, Qin invaded the State of Nian.

古文：齐侯使国归父来聘。
现代文：齐国的国庄子前来聘问
English: Guozhuangzi of Qi Province came to ask questions

古文：夏四月辛巳，晋人及姜戎败秦师于殽。
现代文：夏季四月辛巳日，晋国和姜戎在殽山将秦军打败。
English: In the summer of April, on Xin Si Day, Jin and Jiang Rong defeated the Qin army in Shaoshan.

古文：癸巳，葬晋文公。
现代文：癸巳日，安葬晋文公。
English: On the following day, Jinwen Gong was buried.

古文：狄侵齐。
现代文：狄国入侵齐国。
English: Di invaded Song.

古文：公伐邾，取訾娄。
现代文：僖公攻打邾国，占取了訾娄。
English: Ying Gong attacked and occupied Ying Guo.

古文：秋，公子遂帅师伐邾。
现代文：秋季，公子遂率领军队攻打邾国。
English: In the autumn, Kimiko led the army to attack Shikoku.

古文：晋人败狄于箕。
现代文：晋国在箕地将狄国打败。
English: Jin defeated Di at the Battle of Badi.

古文：冬十月，公如齐。
现代文：冬季十月，僖公到齐国。
English: In the winter of October, Shigong went to Qi Province.

古文：十有二月，公至自齐。
现代文：十二月，僖公从齐国回国。
English: In December, Zeng Gong returned from Qi.

古文：乙巳，公薨于小寝。
现代文：乙巳日，僖公在寝室去世。
English: On the second day of the month, Shoko passed away in his bedroom.

古文：陨霜不杀草，李、梅实。晋人、陈人、郑人伐许。
现代文：十二月下霜的时候，不拔草晋国、陈国、郑国一起攻打许国。
English: When it was frosty in December, Jin, Chen and Zheng attacked Xu together.

古文：三十三年春，秦师过周北门，左右免胄而下。超乘者三百乘。
现代文：三十三年春季，秦国军队经过成周王城的北门，战车上除御者以外，车左、车右都脱去头盔下车致敬，随即跳上车去的有三百辆战车的将士。
English: In the spring of the 33rd year, the Qin army passed through the north gate of Cheng Zhou Wangcheng. In addition to the driver on the chariot, the left and right of the chariot took off their helmets and got off to pay tribute. Three hundred chariot soldiers immediately jumped on the chariot.

古文：王孙满尚幼，观之，言于王曰： 秦师轻而无礼，必败。
现代文：王孙满年纪还小，看到了，对周襄王说： 秦国军队不庄重又没有礼貌，一定失败。
English: Wang Sun, who was still young at the time, saw this and said to Zhou Xiangwang: The Qin army is not dignified and has no manners. It is sure to fail.

古文：轻则寡谋，无礼则脱。
现代文：不庄重就缺少计谋，无礼貌就不严肃。
English: If you are not dignified, you lack tact; if you are not polite, you are not serious.

古文：入险而脱，又不能谋，能无败乎？ 
现代文：进入险地而满不在乎，又不能出主意，能够不打败仗吗？ 
English: Can you enter a dangerous situation and not care at all, and not be able to make a decision, without losing the battle?

古文：及滑，郑商人弦高将市于周，遇之。以乘韦先牛十二犒师，曰： 寡君闻吾子将步师出于敝邑，敢犒从者。
现代文：秦军到达滑国，郑国的商人弦高准备到成周做买卖，碰到秦军，先送秦军四张熟牛皮作引礼，再送十二头牛犒劳军队，说： 寡君听说您准备行军经过敝邑，谨来犒赏您的随从。
English: When the Qin army arrived in the State of Nian, the merchant Zheng Gao from the State of Zheng was preparing to go to Chengzhou to do business. When he met the Qin army, he first presented the Qin army with four pieces of cooked cowhide as a gift, and then sent twelve oxen to the laboring army, saying: You heard that you are preparing to march through the Yingyur, I would like to reward your entourage.

古文：不腆敝邑，为从者之淹，居则具一日之积，行则备一夕之卫。 
现代文：敝邑贫乏，为了您的随从在这里停留，住下就预备一天的供应，离开就准备一夜的保卫。 
English: The city is poor, so for your entourage to stay here, prepare a day's supply when you stay, and prepare a night's defense when you leave.

古文：且使遽告于郑。
现代文：弦高同时又派传车紧急地向郑国报告。
English: At the same time, Zheng Gao sent a car to report to Zheng Guo urgently.

古文：郑穆公使视客馆，则束载、厉兵、秣马矣。
现代文：郑穆公派人去探看杞子等人的馆舍，发现他们已经装束完毕、磨利武器、喂饱马匹了。
English: Zheng Mu Gong sent someone to inspect the residence of the mule and others, and found that they had finished dressing, sharpening their weapons, and feeding their horses.

古文：使皇武子辞焉，曰： 吾子淹久于敝邑，唯是脯资饩牵竭矣。
现代文：派皇武子辞谢他们，说： 大夫们久住在这里，敝邑的干肉、粮食、牲口都竭尽了。
English: He sent an imperial soldier to thank them, saying: "The doctors have lived here for a long time, and the dried meat, grain, and livestock of the county have all been exhausted.

古文：为吾子之将行也，郑之有原圃，犹秦之有具囿也。吾子取其麋鹿以閒敝邑，若何？ 
现代文：为了大夫们将要离开，郑国的有原圃，就如同秦国的有具圃，大夫们自己猎取麋鹿，使敝邑得有闲空，怎么样？ 
English: Because the doctors will be leaving, Zheng has a nursery, just like Qin has a nursery, the doctors themselves hunt elk, so that there is idle time in the county, how about it?

古文：杞子奔齐，逢孙、扬孙奔宋。
现代文：于是杞子逃到齐国，逢孙、杨孙逃到宋国。
English: As a result, Xunzi fled to Qi, and Feng Sun and Yang Sun fled to Song.

古文：孟明曰： 郑有备矣，不可冀也。
现代文：孟明说： 郑国有准备了，不能存有希望了。
English: Meng Ming said: Zhengzhou is ready, there is no hope.

古文：攻之不克，围之不继，吾其还也。 
现代文：攻打郑国不能取胜，包围它又没有后援，我还是回去吧。 
English: I can't win if I attack Zheng, and I don't have any backup if I surround it. I might as well go back.

古文：灭滑而还。
现代文：灭亡了滑国就回去。
English: After the fall of Nome, they went back.

古文：齐国庄子来聘，自郊劳至于赠贿，礼成而加之以敏。
现代文：齐国的国庄子前来聘问，从郊外迎接一直到赠礼送行，礼节周到，仪容又好。
English: Guozhuangzi from Qi Province came to inquire, from the suburbs to welcome all the way to the gift send-off, the etiquette was thoughtful, and the appearance was good.

古文：臧文仲言于公曰： 国子为政，齐犹有礼，君其朝焉。
现代文：臧文仲对僖公说： 国子执政，齐国还是有礼的，君王去朝见吧！
English: Zou Wenzhong said to Zou Gong: The prince is in power, Qi is still polite, the prince should go to see the emperor!

古文：臣闻之，服于有礼，社稷之卫也。 
现代文：下臣听说：对有礼之邦顺服，这是国家的保障。 
English: The vassal heard that obedience to a polite state is the guarantee of the state.

古文：晋原轸曰： 秦违蹇叔而以贪勤民，天奉我也。
现代文：晋国的先轸说： 秦君违背蹇叔的话，由于贪婪而劳动百姓，这是上天给予我们的机会。
English: The forerunner of the Jin Dynasty said: Qin, contrary to the words of his uncle, worked the people because of greed. This is an opportunity given to us by Heaven.

古文：奉不可失，敌不可纵。
现代文：给予的不能丢失，敌人不能放走。
English: What is given cannot be lost, the enemy cannot be released.

古文：纵敌患生，违天不祥。
现代文：放走敌人，就会发生祸患；违背天意，就不吉利。
English: If you let the enemy go, disaster will occur; if you go against the will of heaven, it will be bad luck.

古文：必伐秦师。 
现代文：一定要进攻秦国军队。 
English: We must attack the Qin army.

古文：栾枝曰： 未报秦施而伐其师，其为死君乎。 
现代文：栾枝说： 没有报答秦国的恩惠而进攻它的军队，心目中还有死去的国君吗？ 
English: Hao Zhi said: Without repaying the favor of Qin and attacking its army, do you still have the dead sovereign in mind?

古文：先轸曰： 秦不哀吾丧而伐吾同姓，秦则无礼，何施之为？
现代文：先轸说： 我们有丧事秦国不悲伤，反而攻打我们的同姓国家，他们就是无礼，还讲什么恩惠？
English: Xianqi said, "Qin is not saddened by our death, but attacks our country of the same name. They are just rude. What kind of favor are they talking about?"

古文：吾闻之，一日纵敌，数世之患也。
现代文：我听说： 一天放走敌人，这是几代的祸患。 
English: I have heard it said that to let the enemy go free for a day is to do harm for generations.

古文：谋及子孙，可谓死君乎？ 
现代文：为子孙后代打算，这可以有话对死去的国君说了吧！ 
English: Planning for future generations, that's something you can say to a dead sovereign!

古文：遂发命，遽兴姜戎。
现代文：于是就发布起兵的命令，立即动员姜戎的军队。
English: He then issued an order to raise an army, immediately mobilizing Jiang Rong's army.

古文：子墨衰绖，梁弘御戎，莱驹为右。
现代文：晋襄公把丧服染成黑色，梁弘驾御战车，莱驹作为车右。
English: Jin Xianggong dyed his mourning clothes black, Liang Hong drove the chariot, and Lai Yao drove on the right.

古文：夏四月辛巳，败秦师于殽，获百里孟明视、西乞术、白乙丙以归。
现代文：夏季，四月十三日，在殽山把秦国军队打得一个人不留，并且俘虏了三个指挥官百里孟明视、西乞术、白乙丙而回去。
English: In the summer, on April 13, he defeated the Qin army in Lushan, leaving no one behind, and captured three commanders, Bai Li, Meng Mingwei, Xi Qizhi and Bai Yipi, and returned home.

古文：遂墨以葬文公。
现代文：于是就穿着黑色的丧服来安葬晋文公。
English: So Jin Xianggong dressed in black funeral clothes and buried Wenguang.

古文：晋于是始墨。
现代文：晋国从此开始使用黑色丧服。
English: From then on, Jin Province began to use black mourning clothes.

古文：文嬴请三帅，曰： 彼实构吾二君，寡君若得而食之，不厌，君何辱讨焉！
现代文：文嬴请求把三位指挥官释放回国，说： 他们挑拨我们两国国君，寡君如果抓到他们，吃他们的肉还不能满足，何必劳君王去讨伐呢？
English: Wen Rong requested that the three commanders be released back to the country, saying, "They have provoked the sovereigns of our two countries. If the sovereigns catch them, they will not be satisfied with eating their flesh. Why should the sovereigns go to war?"

古文：使归就戮于秦，以逞寡君之志，若何？ 
现代文：让他们回到秦国受诛杀，以使寡君快意，怎么样？ 
English: How about letting them go back to Qin to be beaten and killed to make the tyrant happy?

古文：公许之。
现代文：晋襄公答应了。
English: Sadagimi allowed it.

古文：先轸朝，问秦囚。公曰： 夫人请之，吾舍之矣。 
现代文：先轸上朝，问起秦国的囚犯，晋襄公说： 母亲代他们提出请求，我就放走他们了。 
English: When asked about the prisoners in Qin, Jin Xianggong said, "My mother made a request on their behalf, so I let them go."

古文：先轸怒曰： 武夫力而拘诸原，妇人暂而免诸国。堕军实而长寇仇，亡无日矣。 
现代文：先轸生气地说： 武人花力气在战场上逮住他们，女人说几句谎话就把他们在国内放了，毁弃了战果而长了敌人的志气，晋国快要灭亡了！ 
English: The forerunner said angrily, "The warriors expended their energy to capture them on the battlefield, but the woman told a few lies and set them free in the country. They destroyed the results of the battle and raised the morale of the enemy. Jin is about to perish!"

古文：不顾而唾。
现代文：先轸不顾襄公在面前就在地上吐唾沫。
English: He spit on the ground in front of Prince Xiang.

古文：公使阳处父追之，及诸河，则在舟中矣。
现代文：晋襄公派阳处父追赶放走的三个人，追到黄河边上，他们已经上船了。
English: Jin Xiang Gong sent Yang Duifu to chase the three people who had been released, and they chased them to the edge of the Yellow River. They had already boarded the boat.

古文：释左骖，以公命赠孟明。
现代文：阳处父解下车左边的骖马，用晋襄公的名义赠送给他们。
English: Yang's father got out of the car and gave them the horse on the left as a gift in the name of Jin Xianggong.

古文：孟明稽首曰： 君之惠，不以累臣衅鼓，使归就戮于秦，寡君之以为戮，死且不朽若从君惠而免之，三年将拜君赐。 
现代文：孟明叩头说： 承蒙君王的恩惠，不用被囚之臣来祭鼓，让我们回到秦国去受诛戮，寡君如果杀了我们，死了以后名声不朽，如果依从君王的恩惠而赦免了我们，三年之后将要拜谢君王恩赐。 
English: Meng Ming kowtowed and said: "Thanks to the king's favor, we don't have to have our imprisoned vassals come to offer drums. Let's return to Qin to be slaughtered. If you kill us, your reputation will be immortalized after you die. If you pardon us in accordance with the king's favor, you will thank the king's gift three years later."

古文：秦伯素服郊次，乡师而哭曰： 孤违蹇叔以辱二三子，孤之罪也。
现代文：秦穆公穿着素服住在郊外，对着被释放回来的将士号哭，说： 我没有听蹇叔的话，使你们几位受到侮辱，这是我的罪过。
English: Qin Mukong, who was wearing plain clothes and living in the suburbs, wept before the released soldiers and said, "I did not listen to Uncle Zhai and caused several of you to be insulted. This is my sin."

古文：不替孟明，孤之过也。大夫何罪？
现代文：不撤回孟明的驻军，这也是我的过错，你们三位有什么罪？
English: It is also my fault for not withdrawing Meng Ming's garrison. What are the three of you guilty of?

古文：且吾不以一眚掩大德。 
现代文：而且我不能用一次的过错来掩盖大德。 
English: And I can't use one mistake to cover up my greatness.

古文：狄侵齐，因晋丧也。
现代文：狄人入侵齐国，因为晋国有丧事，不能顾及派兵支援齐国。
English: The Di people invaded Qi, and because of the tragic events in Jin, they could not consider sending troops to support Qi.

古文：公伐邾，取訾娄，以报升陉之役。
现代文：僖公进攻邾国，占取了訾娄，以报复升陉这一战役。
English: The Duke of Xing attacked the State of Xing and occupied Xing to take revenge for the battle of Xing.

古文：邾人不设备，秋，襄仲复伐邾。
现代文：邾国没有设防，秋季，襄仲再一次攻打邾国。
English: Xiangguo was not fortified, and in the autumn, Xiangzhong attacked Xiangguo again.

古文：狄伐晋，及箕。
现代文：狄军攻打晋国，到达箕地。
English: Di's army attacked Jin Province and arrived at Fengtian.

古文：八月戊子，晋侯败狄于箕。
现代文：八月二十二日，晋襄公在箕地打败狄军。
English: On August 22nd, Jin Xianggong defeated the Di army in Handan.

古文：郤缺获白狄子。
现代文：郤缺俘虏了白狄子。
English: Yao Gao captured Baidi Zuo.

古文：先轸曰： 匹夫逞志于君而无讨，敢不自讨乎？ 
现代文：先轸说： 一个普通人在国君面前放肆而没有受惩罚，哪里敢不自己惩罚自己？ 
English: Xianqi said, "If an ordinary person acts recklessly in front of the sovereign without being punished, how dare he not punish himself?"

古文：免胄入狄师，死焉。
现代文：先轸脱下头盔冲入狄军中，死在战阵上。
English: He took off his helmet first and rushed into the Di army, dying on the battlefield.

古文：狄人归其元，面如生。
现代文：狄人送回他的脑袋，面色像活着一样。
English: They sent his head back, looking like it was alive.

古文：初，臼季使过冀，见冀缺耨，其妻馌之。敬，相待如宾。
现代文：当初，臼季出使，经过冀国，看到冀缺在锄田除草，他妻子给他送饭，很恭敬，彼此像待客人一样。
English: At first, when the envoys sent by Usuki passed through Hebei Province, they saw Jike weeding in the paddy fields and his wife bringing him food. They were very respectful and treated each other like guests.

古文：与之归，言诸文公曰： 敬，德之聚也。
现代文：臼季和冀缺一起回到国都，对文公说： 恭敬，是德行的集中表现。
English: Usuki and Jie Que returned to the capital together and said to Wengong: Respect is a concentrated expression of virtue.

古文：能敬必有德，德以治民，君请用之。
现代文：能够恭敬，就必定有德行。德行用来治理百姓，请君王任用他。
English: If you can be respectful, you must have virtue. If virtue is used to govern the people, ask the king to appoint him.

古文：臣闻之，出门如宾，承事如祭，仁之则也。 
现代文：臣听说： 出门好像会见宾客，承担事情好像参加祭祀，这是仁爱的准则。  
English: A minister heard: Going out is like meeting a guest, undertaking a task is like participating in a religious service. This is the principle of benevolence.

古文：公曰： 其父有罪，可乎？ 
现代文：晋文公说： 他的父亲冀芮有罪，可以吗？ 
English: Jin Wenkong said, "His father Jie Tong is guilty, is that okay?

古文：对曰： 舜之罪也殛鲧，其举也兴禹。
现代文：臼季回答： 舜惩办罪人，流放了鲧，他举拔人材却起用鲧的儿子禹。
English: Usuki replied, "He punished the guilty and banished them, but he promoted talent and appointed Yu, the son of Yu.

古文：管敬仲，桓之贼也，实相以济。
现代文：管敬仲是桓公的敌人，任命他为相而得到成功。
English: Guan Jianzhong was an enemy of King Kan, and he was appointed as a consort and was successful.

古文：《康诰》曰： 父不慈，子不祗，兄不友，弟不共，不相及也。 
现代文：《康诰》说： 父亲不慈爱，儿子不诚敬，哥哥不友爱，弟弟不恭敬，这是与别人无关的。 
English: "Confucius" said: "If the father is not kind, the son is not sincere, the brother is not friendly, and the younger brother is not respectful, this has nothing to do with others.

古文：《诗》曰： 采葑采菲，无以下体。 
现代文：《诗》说： 采蔓菁，采萝卜，不要把它下部当废料。 
English: "Poetry" says: pick cranberries, pick radishes, don't use the lower part as waste.

古文：君取节焉可也。 
现代文：您挑用他的好的地方就可以了。 
English: All you have to do is use the best parts of him.

古文：文公以为下军大夫。
现代文：晋文公让冀缺担任下军大夫。
English: Jinwen Gong let Ji Que serve as a junior army doctor.

古文：反自箕，襄公以三命命先且居将中军，以再命命先茅之县赏胥臣曰： 举郤缺，子之功也。 
现代文：从箕地回来，晋襄公用诸侯大臣中的最高级别命令先且居率领中军，用次等级别命令把先茅的县赏给胥臣，说： 推举郤缺，是你的功劳。 
English: After returning from Shunde, the highest-ranking order among the ministers of the princes of the Jin and Xiang dynasties was to lead the Chinese army, and the second-level order was to award the first county to the vassal, saying: "It is your merit to promote Shunde."

古文：以一命命郤缺为卿，复与之冀，亦未有军行。
现代文：用三等级别命令郤缺做卿，再给他冀地，但是没有军职。
English: With a third-class order, he was made a lord, and then he was given land, but there was no military post.

古文：冬，公如齐，朝，且吊有狄师也。
现代文：冬季，僖公到齐国朝见，同时对狄人进攻这件事表示慰问。
English: In the winter, Gong Zhai went to the Qin Dynasty to meet with them, and at the same time, he expressed his condolences for the attack of the Di people.

古文：反，薨于小寝，即安也。
现代文：回国，死在路寝里，是因为贪图安逸的缘故。
English: Returning home, he died in his sleep on the road, because of his desire for comfort.

古文：晋、陈、郑伐许，讨其贰于楚也。
现代文：晋国、陈国、郑国进攻许国，惩罚它倾向楚国。
English: Jin, Chen and Zheng attacked Xu and punished it for leaning towards Chu.

古文：楚令尹子上侵陈、蔡。
现代文：楚国令尹子上攻打陈国、蔡国。
English: Chu ordered Yin to attack Chen and Cai.

古文：陈、蔡成，遂伐郑，将纳公子瑕，门于桔柣之门。
现代文：陈国、蔡国和楚国讲和，又进攻郑国，准备把公子瑕送回去做国君。
English: Chen, Cai and Chu declared peace and attacked Zheng, preparing to send Gu Zi back to become the ruler of the country.

古文：瑕覆于周氏之汪。外仆髠屯禽之以献。
现代文：在桔秩之门攻城，公子瑕的战车翻倒在周氏的池塘中，外边的仆人髠抓住了他献给郑文公。
English: He besieged the city at the gate of Kikuchi Chichibu. His chariot overturned in Zhou's pond, and the servants outside caught him and dedicated him to Zheng Wengong.

古文：文夫人敛而葬之郐城之下。
现代文：文公夫人为他殡敛而安葬在郐城下。
English: His wife, Lady Wengong, buried him under the city of Handan.

古文：晋阳处父侵蔡，楚子上救之，与晋师夹泜而军。
现代文：晋国的阳处父入侵蔡国，楚国的子上前去救援，和晋军夹着泜水对峙。
English: The Yang governor of Jin invaded Cai, and the one of Chu went to the rescue, and confronted the Jin army in the middle of Surabaya.

古文：阳子患之，使谓子上曰： 吾闻之，文不犯顺，武不违敌。
现代文：阳处父担心，派人对子上说： 我听说： 文的不能触犯顺理的人，武的不能躲避仇敌之辈。 
English: Yang's stepfather was worried and sent a messenger to the emperor to say, "I've heard that those who are literate can't offend those who are rational, and those who are martial can't avoid those who are enemies.

古文：子若欲战，则吾退舍，子济而陈，迟速唯命，不然纾我。老师费财，亦无益也。 
现代文：您如果想打，那么我就后退三十里，您渡河再摆开阵势，早打晚打听您的。不这样，让我缓口气，军士劳累，费钱财，也没有什么好处。 
English: If you want to fight, then I will retreat thirty miles, you cross the river and then set up a position, and I will call you sooner or later. Otherwise, let me slow down, the sergeant is tired, it costs money, and there is no benefit.

古文：乃驾以待。
现代文：于是就驾上马车等着他。
English: So they got into the carriage and waited for him.

古文：子上欲涉，大孙伯曰： 不可。
现代文：子上想要渡河，大孙伯说： 不行。
English: When his son wanted to cross the river, the great-grandson said, "No, I can't."

古文：晋人无信，半涉而薄我，悔败何及，不如纾之。 
现代文：晋国人不讲信用，如果乘我们渡过一半而迫击我们，那时战败而后悔，哪里还来得及？不如让他们缓口气。 
English: The people of Jin are not trustworthy. If they take advantage of us to attack us halfway through the war, and then regret their defeat, when will it be too late? It's better to let them breathe a little easier.

古文：乃退舍。
现代文：于是就后退三十里。
English: So he retreated thirty leagues.

古文：阳子宣言曰： 楚师遁矣。 
现代文：阳子宣布说： 楚国军队逃走了。 
English: Yoko announced, "The Chu troops have fled."

古文：遂归。
现代文：就回国去了。
English: I went back to my country.

古文：楚师亦归。
现代文：楚国军队也就回国。
English: The Chu troops also returned home.

古文：大子商臣谮子上曰： 受晋赂而辟之，楚之耻也，罪莫大焉。 
现代文：太子商臣诬告子上说： 子上接受了晋国的贿赂而躲避他们，这是楚国的耻辱。罪没有比这再大的了。 
English: The prince said to his false accuser: "Your son accepted bribes from Jin and evaded them. This is a disgrace to Chu. There is no greater crime than this."

古文：王杀子上。
现代文：楚成王杀死了子上。
English: Chu Cheng Wang killed his father.

古文：葬僖公缓，作主，非礼也。
现代文：安葬僖公，没有及时制作神主牌位，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is not proper to bury Shoko without making the shinju card in time.

古文：凡君薨卒哭而祔，祔而作主，特祀于主，烝尝禘于庙。
现代文：凡国君死去，安葬后十多天停止了不定时的号哭，就把死者的神主附祭于祖庙，附祭就要制作神主牌位，单独向新死者的神主祭祀，烝祭、尝祭、禘祭就在祖庙中连同其他祖先一起祭祀。
English: Whenever a sovereign died and stopped crying for more than ten days after burial, the god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple. The god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple. The god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple. The god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple. The god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple. The god of the deceased was attached to the ancestral temple.

