古文：十八日从冷泉庵晨起，令顾仆同妙乐觅驼骑，期以明日行。
现代文：十八日从冷泉庵早晨起床，命令顾仆同妙乐去找马帮，约定在明天动身。
English: On the 18th, he got up from the cold spring hermitage in the morning, ordered his servants to go to the horse gang, and agreed to leave the next day.

古文：余亟饭，出北门，策骑为天姥游，盖以骑去，始能往返也。
现代文：我急忙吃过饭，走出北门，策马去游天姥寺，因为骑马去，才能往返。
English: I hurriedly ate dinner, walked out of the north gate, and rode my horse to visit Tianba Temple, because I could only go there and back by horse.

古文：北二里，由演武场后西北下，约一里，渡一沟，西北当中川行。
现代文：向北二里，由演武场后面向西北下走，约一里，渡过一条水沟，向西北前行在平川中。
English: Walk north two miles, from behind the martial arts arena facing northwest, about one mile, cross a ditch, and walk northwest in the middle of the Hirakawa River.

古文：五里，过荷池。
现代文：五里，路过荷池。
English: Wuli, passing through the pond.

古文：又北一里，过一沟。
现代文：又往北一里，过了一条水沟。
English: Another mile north, past a ditch.

古文：又西北三里，则大溪自东曲而西流，北涉之。
现代文：又向西北三里，就见大溪自东曲向西流，涉到溪流北岸。
English: Another three miles to the northwest, I saw the big stream flowing from east to west, wading into the north bank of the stream.

古文：四里，盘西山东突之嘴，其嘴东突，而大溪上流，亦西来逼之，路盘崖而北，是为蒙化、天姥适中处。
现代文：四里，绕过西山东突的山嘴，此处山嘴向东突，而大溪的上游，也向西流来逼近它，路盘绕着山崖向北走，这里恰好是蒙化城、天姥寺中途之处。
English: Four miles, bypassing the east-west jutting outcrop of the West Mountain, here the jutting outcrop juts out to the east, and the upstream of the big stream also flows west to approach it, the road coils around the cliff to the north, here is exactly the halfway point of Menghua City and Tianba Temple.

古文：又北二里，过西山之湾，又北二里，再盘一东突之嘴。
现代文：又往北二里，走过西山的山湾，又向北二里，再绕过一处东突的山嘴。
English: Another two miles to the north, through the mountain bay of the West Mountain, another two miles to the north, and then around an east jutting promontory.

古文：又过西湾三里，其东突之嘴更长。
现代文：又经过西面的山湾三里，那东突的山嘴更长。
English: The bay to the west is another three miles away, and the promontory jutting out to the east is even longer.

古文：逾其坳而北，有岐西向入峡，其峡湾环西入，内为土司左氏之世居。
现代文：越过山坳往北，有岔路向西进峡，那峡谷向西弯弯绕绕地进去，里面是土司左家世代居住的地方。
English: Crossing the mountains to the north, there is a narrow road to the west into the canyon, and the canyon bends to the west, winding around and around. Inside is the place where generations of the Tosa family have lived.

古文：天姥道由坳北截西峡之口，直度北去。
现代文：去天姥寺的路由山坳北边截过西峡的峡口，径直越到北边去。
English: The road to Tenbaji Temple cuts through the mouth of the West Gorge on the north side of the mountain, and goes straight to the north.

古文：约三里，又盘其东突之嘴，于是居庐连络，始望见天姥寺在北坞之半回腋间，其山皆自西大山条分东下之回冈也。
现代文：约三里，又绕过那东突的山嘴，在这里居民房屋连接不断，开始望见天姥寺在北面山坞的半山腰回绕的山侧之间，那里的山都是从西面的大山分为条状向东下延回绕的山冈。
English: After about three miles, I went around the east-jutting promontory, where the houses of the residents are continuously connected, and I began to see Tenbaji Temple in the middle of the mountainside of the north dock, where the mountains are divided into strips from the mountains in the west to the mountains stretching back to the east.

古文：又三里，有一圆阜当盘湾之中，如珠在盘，而路萦其前。
现代文：又行三里，有一座圆形的土阜正当盘子状山湾的中央，如像明珠在盘子中，而路萦绕在土阜前。
English: After another three miles, there is a round earthen embankment right in the middle of the plate-like mountain bay, like a pearl in a plate, and the road winds around the earthen embankment.

古文：又北三里，循坡西北上，一里而及山门，是为天姥崖，而实无崖也。
现代文：又向北三里，沿山坡向西北上登，一里后到达山门，这是天姥崖，但实际上无山崖。
English: Another three miles to the north, along the mountain slope to the northwest, one mile later to the mountain gate, this is the Tempura cliff, but in fact there is no cliff.

古文：其寺东向，殿宇在北，僧房在南。
现代文：此寺向东，殿宇在北，僧房在南。
English: The temple faces east, with the main hall to the north and the monks' quarters to the south.

古文：山门内有古坊，曰 云隐寺 。
现代文：山门内有座古老的牌坊，写道 云隐寺 。
English: There is an ancient archway in the mountain gate, wrote Yunyin Temple.

古文：按《一统志》，巄屽图山在城西北三十五里，蒙氏龙伽独自哀牢将其子细奴逻居其上，筑巄屽图城，自立为奇王，号蒙舍诏，今上有浮屠及云隐寺。
现代文：据《一统志》，峨好图山在城西北三十五里处，蒙氏龙伽独从哀牢山带领他儿子细奴逻居住在山上，修筑了峨好图城，自立为奇王，号称为蒙舍诏，今天山上有佛塔和云隐寺。
English: According to the "History of the Yi Dynasty," Mount Agaotus is located 35 miles northwest of the city. The Mongolian Emperor Longjia led his son Senulluo to live on the mountain and built the city of Agaotus. He called himself the "Wonderful King" and was known as Monshe Zhao. Today, there is a pagoda and Yunyin Temple on the mountain.

古文：始知天姥崖即云隐寺，而其山实名巄屽图也。
现代文：这才知道天姥崖就是云隐寺，而此山实际名叫胧好图山。
English: It was only then that I knew that the Heavenly Grandmother Cliff was Yunyin Temple, and that the mountain was actually called Yunyangotu Mountain.

古文：其浮屠在寺北回冈上，殿宇昔极整丽，盖土司家所为，今不免寥落矣。
现代文：那佛塔在寺北回绕的山冈上，殿宇从前极为整齐华丽，大概是土司家所建的，今天免不了冷落了。
English: The pagoda is on the hill around the north side of the temple. The hall used to be very neat and gorgeous. It was probably built by the Tusi family, but today it has fallen into disuse.

古文：时日已下午，亟饭而归。
现代文：此时日光已是下午，急忙吃饭后归来。
English: At this time, the sun was already in the afternoon, and I hurriedly returned after dinner.

古文：渡大溪，抵荷池已昏黑矣。
现代文：渡过大溪，抵达荷池天已经昏黑了。
English: After crossing the creek, it was already dark when we arrived at the pond.

古文：入城，妙乐正篝灯相待，乃饭而卧。
现代文：进城后，妙乐正点燃灯火相等，于是吃过饭躺下。
English: After entering the city, Miao Le was lighting the lanterns at the same time, so he had a meal and lay down.

古文：十九日妙乐以乳线赠余。
现代文：十九日妙乐拿乳线香赠给我。
English: On the 19th, Miao Le took the frankincense and gave it to me.

古文：余以俞禹锡诗扇，更作诗赠之。
现代文：我把俞禹锡的诗扇，另外作了诗赠给他。
English: I presented him with a fan of poems by Gong Yuxi and another poem I had written.

古文：驼骑至，即饭而别，妙乐送出北门。
现代文：马帮来到，立即吃饭后告别，妙乐送出北门。
English: The horse gang came, said goodbye immediately after the meal, and sent Miao Le out of the north gate.

古文：仍二里，过演武场东。
现代文：仍是二里，经过演武场东边。
English: It was still two miles away, past the eastern edge of the arena.

古文：又北循东麓一里，有岐分为二：一直北随大坞者。为大理、下关道；一东向入峡逾山者，为迷渡、洱海道。
现代文：又向北沿东麓走一里，有岔路分为两条：一条向正北顺大山坞走的，是去大理、下关的路；一条向东进峡翻山的，是去迷渡、洱海卫的路。
English: Walk north along the eastern foot of the mountain for one mile, and there is a forked road divided into two: one going straight north along the large mountain dock is the road to Dali and Shimonoseki; one going east into the canyon and climbing the mountain is the road to Maidu and Erhaiwei.

古文：乃从迷渡者东向上。
现代文：于是从去迷渡的路向东上走。
English: So I walked eastward from the road to get lost.

古文：五里，涉西下之涧，于是上跻坡。
现代文：五里，涉过向西下流的山涧，于是上登山坡。
English: For five miles, he waded through the mountains that flowed down to the west, and then climbed up the mountain slope.

古文：二里，得坪，有数家在坪北，曰阿儿村。
现代文：二里，走到一块平地，有数家人在平地北边，叫阿儿村。
English: After walking for two miles, we came to a flat area. There were several families living on the north side of the flat area. It was called Al's village.

古文：更蹑坡直上五里，登坡头，平行冈脊而南度之。
现代文：再登坡一直上走五里，登上坡头，平缓行走在冈脊上，而后向南越过它。
English: Then walk up the slope for five miles, climb to the top of the slope, walk gently on the ridge, and then cross it to the south.

古文：此脊由南峰北度而下者，其东与大山夹为坑，北下西转而入大川，其西则平坠川南，从其上俯瞰蒙城，如一瓯脱边境上守望的土屋也。
现代文：此脊是由南峰往北下延的，它的东面与大山夹成坑谷，往北下延后向西转，进入大平川，它的西面则平缓下坠到平川南边，从它上边俯瞰蒙化城，如同一间屯戍的土室。
English: This ridge extends from the south peak to the north. Its east side is sandwiched between the mountain and the valley. After extending northward, it turns west and enters the Ohira River. Its west side gently falls to the south of the Hirakawa River, overlooking Menghua City from above, like a mud hut.

古文：又北倚坡再东上三里，有三四家当脊而居，是为沙滩哨。
现代文：又紧靠北面的山坡再向东上行三里，有三四家人居住在山脊上，这是沙滩哨。
English: There are also three or four families living on the ridge just north of the hillside and three miles further east. This is a beach post.

古文：脊上有新建小庵，颇洁。
现代文：山脊上有新建的小庵，相当整洁。
English: There is a newly built small hermitage on the ridge, which is quite tidy.

古文：又蹑脊东上二里，盘崖北转，忽北峡骈峙，路穿其中，即北来东度而南转之脊也，是为龙庆关。
现代文：又登山脊向东上走二里，绕着山崖向北转，忽然北面峡谷并峙，路穿过峡中，这就是由北面来向东延伸后往南转的山脊了，这里是龙庆关。
English: Then the ridge climbs eastward for two miles, turns around the cliff to the north, and suddenly the north canyon is parallel, and the road passes through the canyon. This is the ridge that extends from the north to the east and then turns south. This is Longqing Pass.

古文：透峡，即随峡东坠，石骨嶙峋。
现代文：穿过峡谷，立即顺山峡向东下坠，石骨嶙峋。
English: After passing through the canyon, it immediately plunged down the mountain gorge to the east, and the stone bones were broken.

古文：半里，稍平。
现代文：半里，略平坦些。
English: Half a mile, slightly flatter.

古文：是脊北自定西岭南下，东挟白崖、迷渡之水，为礼社江，南由定边县东而下元江；西界蒙化甸头之水，为阳江，南由定边县西而下澜沧，乃景东、威远、镇沅阳江并未流入澜沧江，此为徐霞客引明《一统志》所致诸郡州之脉所由度者也。
现代文：此脊自北方的定西岭往南下延，东边傍着白崖站、迷渡的水流，是礼社江，往南由定边县东境流下元江；西临蒙化甸头的水流，是阳江，往南由定边县西境流下澜沧江，是景东府、威远州、镇沉府诸府州的山脉由这里延伸的山。向东下走四里多，有几家住在峡中，这是石佛哨，于是吃饭。
English: This ridge extends from Dingxi Ridge in the north to the south, and the water flow of Baiya Station and Maidu in the east is the Reisha River, and the Yuan River flows south from the eastern border of Dingbian County; the water flow of Mengwu Diankou in the west is the Yangjiang River, the Lancang River flows south from the western border of Dingbian County, and the mountains of Jingdong Prefecture, Weiyang Prefecture, and Zhenxing Prefecture extend from here. Walking more than four miles to the east, there are several families living in the gorge, which is a stone Buddha post, so we eat.

古文：又三里，有三四家在北坡，曰桃园哨。
现代文：又行三里，有三四家人在北坡上，叫桃园哨。
English: After another three miles, there were three or four families on the north slope, called Taoyuan Sentinel.

古文：于是曲折行峡中，随水而出，或东或北。
现代文：从这里起曲折行走在峡中，顺水流出去，有时向东有时向北。
English: From here, you meander through the gorge, following the water flow, sometimes to the east, sometimes to the north.

古文：不二里，辄与峡俱转，而皆在水左。
现代文：不到二里地，就与峡谷一起转向，而且都是在水流左侧。
English: In less than two miles, it turns with the canyon, and is always on the left side of the current.

古文：如是十里，再北转，始望见峡口东达川中，峡中小室累累，各就水次，其瓦俱白，乃磨室也，以水运机，磨麦为面，甚洁白，乃知迷渡川中，饶稻更饶麦也。
现代文：如此走了十里，再向北转，这才望见峡口向东通到平川中，峡中小屋层层叠叠，各自靠近水边，屋瓦全是白色的，是磨房，用水运转机械，把麦子磨成面，面粉十分洁白，这才知道迷渡的平川中，富产水稻更富产小麦了。
English: After walking for ten miles in this way and then turning north, I could see the mouth of the gorge leading east into the middle of the Hirakawa River. The houses in the gorge were stacked on top of each other, each one close to the water's edge. The roof tiles were all white. It was a mill, a machine that ran on water, grinding wheat into flour. The flour was very white. This was how I knew that in the muddled middle of the Hirakawa River, the rice was rich and the wheat was even richer.

古文：又二里，度桥，由溪右出峡口，随山南转半里，乃东向截川而行。
现代文：又走二里，过桥，由溪右走出峡口，顺山势往南转半里，就向东横截平川前行。
English: Walk another two miles, cross the bridge, walk out of the gorge from the right of the stream, turn half a mile south along the mountain, and cross the Pingchuan River to the east.

古文：其川甚平拓，北有崇山屏立，即白崖站也，西北有攒峰横亘而南。即定西岭南度之脊也。
现代文：此处平川非常平坦广阔，北方有高山屏风般矗立，那就是白崖站了；西北有攒聚的山峰往南横亘，那就是定西岭向南延伸的山脊了。
English: Here, the Hirakawa River is very flat and broad. In the north, there is a high mountain screen, which is the White Cliff Station; in the northwest, there are accumulated peaks extending southward, which is the ridge of the Dingxi Ridge extending southward.

古文：两高之间，有坳在西北，即为定西岭。
现代文：两面高山之间，有山坳在西北，那就是定西岭。
English: Between the two high mountains, there is a mountain range in the northwest, that is, the Dingxi Ridge.

古文：逾岭而西，为下关道，从坳北转，为赵州道。
现代文：越岭往西走，是去下关的路；从山坳向北转，是去赵州的路。
English: Going west across the ridge is the road to Shimonoseki; turning north from the foothills is the road to Zhaozhou.

古文：余不得假道于彼，而仅一涉礼社上流，揽迷渡风景，皆驼骑累之也。
现代文：我不能借路于那里，却仅能在礼社江上游跋涉一番，游览迷渡的风景，这皆是马帮拖累我造成的。
English: I couldn't take a detour there, but I was only able to trek up the upper reaches of the Reisha River and visit the scenery of the lost crossing, all of which was caused by the horse gang dragging me.

古文：东行平堤三里，有围墙当路，左踞川中，方整而甚遥，中无巨室，乃景东卫贮粮之所，是曰新城。
现代文：向东在平坦的水堤上行三里，路旁有围墙，在左边盘踞在平川中，方方整整而且十分长，其中无巨大的房屋，是景东卫贮粮的场所，这叫新城。
English: Go east for three miles on the flat embankment. There is a wall along the road. On the left, it is entrenched in the flat river. The square is neat and very long. There are no huge houses in it. It is a place for Jingdongwei to store grain. It is called Xincheng.

古文：半里，其墙东尽，复行堤上三里，有碑亭在路右，乃大理倅ｃｕì副职王君署事景东，而卫人立于此者。
现代文：半里，围墙到了东边的尽头，再行走在水堤上三里，有座碑亭在路右侧，是大理府副职王君署理景东卫政事，而卫里人立石碑于此。
English: After half a mile, the fence reached the end of the east side, and then walked on the embankment for three miles. There was a monument pavilion on the right side of the road. It was the deputy governor of Dali Prefecture who was in charge of the East Wei government affairs, and the Wei people erected a stone monument here.

古文：又东半里，有溪自北而南，架木桥于上，水与溪形俱不大，此即礼社之源，自白崖定西岭来，南注定边，下元江，合马龙，为临安河，下莲花滩者也。
现代文：又向东半里，有溪水自北流向南，在溪上架有木桥，水势与溪流都不大，此溪就是礼社江的源头，从白崖站、定西岭流来，向南注入定边县，下游到元江府，会合马龙水，成为临安河，下流到莲花滩。
English: Another half mile to the east, there is a stream flowing from north to south, with a wooden bridge over the stream. The water potential and the stream are not large. This stream is the source of the Reisha River, flowing from Baiya Station and Dingxi Ridge, flowing south into Dingbian County, downstream to Yuanjiang Prefecture, meeting Malong Water, becoming the Lin'an River, and downstream to Lotus Beach.

古文：时川中方苦旱，故水若衣带。
现代文：此时平川中正苦于干旱，所以江水好似衣带一样宽。
English: At this time, Hirakawa is suffering from drought, so the river water is as wide as a belt.

古文：从此望之，川形如犁尖，北拓而南敛，东西两界山，亦北高而南伏，盖定边、景东大道，皆由此而南去。
现代文：从此望过去，平川形状如同犁尖，北面拓展开去而南面收拢来，东西两列山，也是北边高而南边低伏，大概去定边县、景东府的大道，都是由此往南去。
English: Looking from here, the shape of the Hirakawa River is like the tip of a rake. The north side is widened and the south side is narrowed. The east and west mountains are also high on the north side and low on the south side. The highways to Dingbian County and Jingdong Prefecture probably go south from here.

古文：又东半里，入迷渡之西门。
现代文：又向东半里，进入迷渡的西门。
English: Another half-mile to the east, into the west gate of Maidu.

古文：其墙不及新城之整，而居庐甚盛，是为旧城，有巡司居之。
现代文：它的城墙不如新城的整齐，可居民房屋十分繁盛，这是旧城，有巡检司住在这里。
English: Its walls are not as neat as those of the New Town, but the residential buildings are very prosperous. This is the Old Town, and the inspector lives here.

古文：其地乃赵州、洱海、云南县、蒙化分界，而景东之屯亦在焉。
现代文：此地是赵州、洱海卫、云南县、蒙化府的分界处，而景东卫的驻屯地也在这里。
English: This is the demarcation point of Zhaozhou, Bohaiwei, Yunnan County and Monhua Prefecture, and the garrison of Jingdongwei is also here.

古文：买米于城。
现代文：在城中买米。
English: Buying rice in the city.

古文：出北门，随墙东转一里，有支峰自东南绕而北，有小浮屠在其上。
现代文：走出北门，顺城墙向东转一里，有支峰自东南绕到北方，有座小佛塔在山上。
English: Go out of the north gate and turn east along the city wall for one mile. There are peaks from the southeast to the north, and there is a small pagoda on the mountain.

古文：盘其嘴入东坞中，又一里，其中又成一小壑，曰海子。
现代文：绕过它的山嘴走入东面山坞中，又一里，坞中又形成一个小壑谷，叫做海子。
English: Bypassing the mouth of the mountain and walking into the dockyard on the east side, there is another mile, and a small valley called Haizi is formed in the dockyard.

古文：有倚山北向而居者，遂投之宿。
现代文：有靠山向北居住的人家，就到那里投宿。
English: People who had homes in the mountains to the north went there to stay.

古文：二十日平明，饭而行。
现代文：二十日黎明，饭后上路。
English: At dawn on the 20th, after dinner, we hit the road.

古文：又东一里，入峡，其中又成一小壑。
现代文：又向东一里，进峡，峡中又形成一处小壑谷。
English: Another mile to the east, into the canyon, and in the canyon a small valley is formed.

古文：二里，随壑北转，渐上坡。
现代文：二里，顺壑谷向北转，渐渐上坡。
English: After two miles, turn north along the valley and gradually go uphill.

古文：再上再平，三里，逾岭头，遵冈北行。
现代文：两次上走两次遇上平地，三里，越到岭头，沿着山冈往北行。
English: Walk up twice, meet the flat land twice, walk three miles, go over to the ridge, and go north along the mountain.

古文：又三里，有村在西坡腋间，为酒药村。
现代文：又走三里，有个村庄在西坡的侧旁之间，是酒药村。
English: Another three miles away, there is a village between the sides of the west slope, it is a liquor village.

古文：又北循坡行，其坡皆自东而西向下者，条冈缕缕，有小水界之，皆西出迷渡者。
现代文：又往北沿山坡行，这里的山坡全是自东向西下斜的，条状的山冈一缕缕的，有小溪隔开它们，全是向西流到迷渡的水流。
English: Further north along the mountain slope, the slopes here are all sloping down from east to west, strip-like mountains in a row, with streams separating them, all flowing westward to Maidu.

古文：再下再上约十里，有卖浆者庐冈头，曰饭店，有村在东山下，曰饭店村。
现代文：两次下走两次上登约十里，有卖酒的人在冈头建了房屋，叫做饭店，有村庄在东山下，叫饭店村。
English: It takes about ten miles to go up and down twice. Some people who sell liquor have built houses in Gangtou, which are called restaurants, and there is a village at the foot of Dongshan Mountain, which is called the restaurant village.

古文：又北逾一冈，二里，坡西于是有山，与东坡夹而成峡，其小流南下而西注迷渡。
现代文：又向北越过一座山冈，二里，山坡西面于是有山，与东面的山坡夹立成峡，峡中的小水流向南下流后往西注入迷渡。
English: He also crossed a mountain to the north. Two miles later, there was a mountain on the west side of the mountain slope, and the mountain slope on the east side became a canyon. A small stream in the canyon flowed southward and then flowed westward into the Maidu.

古文：路乃从峡中溯之北，二里余，转而东北上，二里余，陟而逾其坳。
现代文：路于是从峡中溯流往北走，二里多，转向东北上走，二里多，上登越过山坳。
English: The route then follows the stream from the middle of the gorge to the north for more than two miles, turns to the northeast and goes up for more than two miles, and climbs over the mountains.

古文：此乌龙坝南来大脊，至此东度两转，而峙为水目者也。
现代文：此处是乌龙坝往南来的大山脊，到此地往东延伸向南转，耸峙为水目山的山脊。
English: Here is the great ridge of the Wulong Dam to the south, and here it extends eastward and turns southward, rising as the ridge of the Shuime Mountain.

古文：脊颇平坦，南虽屡升降坡间，而上实不多，北下则平如兜，不知其为南龙大脊。
现代文：山脊相当平坦，往南虽屡次升降在山坡间，可上走的路实际上不多，往北下走则平坦得如同头盔，不知它是往南延伸的大山脊。
English: The ridge is quite flat. Although it repeatedly rises and falls between the slopes to the south, there are actually not many ways to go up. If you go down to the north, it is as flat as a helmet. I don't know if it is a large ridge extending southward.

古文：余自二月十三从鹤庆度大脊而西，盘旋西南者半载余，乃复度此脊北返，计离乡三载，陟大脊而东西度之，不啻如织矣！
现代文：我自从二月十三日从鹤庆向西越过大山脊，盘旋在西南方的时间有半年多，于是再次越过此条山脊返回北边，算来离乡三年来，上登大山脊而翻越到它的东西两面，无异于像织布一样往来穿梭了！
English: Since February 13th, I have been crossing the ridge from Heking to the west, circling in the southwest for more than half a year, so I crossed this ridge again to return to the north. It has been three years since I left my hometown. Climbing the ridge and crossing it to the east and west is tantamount to shuttling back and forth like weaving!

古文：脊北平下半里，即清华洞，倚西山东向。
现代文：从山脊北面平缓下走半里，就是清华洞，洞紧靠西山面向东方。
English: Half a mile down from the north face of the ridge is Tsinghua Cave. The cave is close to the West Mountain and faces east.

古文：再入之，其内黄潦盈潴，及于洞口。
现代文：再次入洞，洞内充盈着黄色的积水，满到洞口。
English: Re-entered the cave, the cave is filled with yellow water, up to the mouth of the cave.

古文：余去年腊月十九日，当雨后，洞底虽泞，而水不外盈，可以深入；兹方苦旱，而水当洞门，即外台亦不能及，其内门俱垂垂浸水中，止此穿一隙，其上亦透重光，不如内顶之崇深也。
现代文：我去年腊月十九日来时，正当雨后，洞底虽然泥泞，但水未满到外边，可以深入；此时正苦于干早，而水挡住洞口，即便是外边的平台也不能去到，洞的内洞口全低低地浸在水中，只在北边穿通一条缝隙，缝隙上方也透射进阳光，不如内洞顶那样高深。
English: When I came on the 19th day of the last lunar month, just after the rain, the bottom of the cave was muddy, but the water was not full to the outside, so I could go deeper. At this time, it was suffering from drought, and the water blocked the cave mouth, even the outer platform could not go there. The inner cave mouth of the cave was completely immersed in water, only on the north side through a gap. Above the gap, sunlight was also transmitted, which was not as high and deep as the top of the inner cave.

古文：稍转而北，其上窦即黑暗而穷，其下门俱为水没，无从入中洞也。
现代文：稍转向北，那上洞马上黑暗下来而且到了头，它下方的洞口全被水淹没了，无法进入中洞。
English: Turning slightly to the north, the upper cave immediately darkened and came to an end, the opening below it was completely flooded with water, and it was impossible to enter the middle cave.

古文：此洞昔以无炬不能深入，然犹践泞数十丈，披其中透顶之扃，兹以张望门而止，不知他日归途经此，得穷其蕴藏否也。
现代文：此洞从前由于无火把不能深入，然而仍踩着泥泞走了数十丈，钻入洞中通到山顶的门户，此时因为涨水望见洞口便停下了，不知他日归途中经过此地，能不能穷究它蕴藏着的真面目呢？
English: In the past, this cave could not be penetrated due to the lack of torches. However, he still walked dozens of meters on muddy footpaths, and drilled into the cave to reach the gateway to the top of the mountain. At this time, because of the rising water, he stopped when he saw the mouth of the cave. I don't know if he passed through this place on his way back, can he exhaustively investigate the true face it contains?

古文：出洞，北行半里，逾岭即西向白崖大道，仍舍之而北。
现代文：出洞来，往北行半里，越岭后就是向西去白崖站的大道，仍舍弃它往北走。
English: Out of the cave, half a mile to the north, after crossing the ridge, it is the road to the west to Baiya Station, still abandoning it to go north.

古文：二里，有池一方，在西坡下，其西南崖石嶙峋，亦龙潭也。
现代文：二里，有一塘池水，在西坡下，池西南的石崖石骨嶙峋，也是个龙潭。
English: Two miles away, there is a pond of pond water. At the bottom of the west slope, the stone cliff of the southwest of the pond is also a dragon pond.

古文：又北一里，过一村聚，村北路右有墙一围，为杨土县之宅。
现代文：又向北一里，经过一个村落，村北路右侧有一圈围墙，是杨土知县的宅第。
English: Another mile to the north, passing through a village, there is a circle of walls on the right side of the north road of the village, which is the residence of Yangduchi County.

古文：又北一里，即洱海卫城西南隅。
现代文：又往北一里，就是洱海卫城的西南隅。
English: Another mile to the north is the southwest corner of the Bohai Sea Acropolis.

古文：从西城外行半里，过西门，余昔所投宿处也。
现代文：从西城外行半里，经过西门，是我从前投宿之处了。
English: Half a mile from the west side of the city, past the west gate, is where I used to stay.

古文：又随城而北半里，转东半里，抵北门外，乃觅店而饭。先是余从途中，见牧童手持一鸡葼，甚巨而鲜洁，时鸡葼已过时，盖最后者独出而大也。
现代文：又顺城墙向北半里，转向东半里，抵达北门外，于是找客店吃饭 这之前我在途中，见牧童手握一朵鸡蓄，非常巨大而且鲜嫩洁白，此时鸡萝已过了季节，大概是最后独自长出来而且个大。
English: Then I walked half a mile north along the city wall, half a mile east, and arrived outside the north gate, so I looked for an inn to eat. On my way, I saw a shepherd boy holding a chicken stock, very large and fresh and white. At this time, the chicken was out of season, and it probably grew up alone and large.

古文：余市之，至是瀹汤为饭，甚适。
现代文：我买了它，到此时烧汤下饭，十分适口。
English: I bought it, and by this time I was cooking soup for dinner. It was very tasty.

古文：洱海往鸡山道，在九鼎、梁王二山间，余昔所经者，骑夫以家在荞甸，故强余迂此。
现代文：洱海卫前往鸡足山的路，在九鼎山、梁王山两座山之间，是我从前所经过的路；马夫因为家在荞甸，所以强迫我绕道于此地。
English: The road between Jiu Ding Mountain and Liang Wang Mountain is the road I used to take before; the stableman forced me to take a detour here because my home was in Putian.

古文：盖洱海卫所环之坞甚大，西倚大脊崇冈，东面东山对列，东南汇为青龙海子，破峡而绕小云南驿为水口，其南即清华洞前所逾南坳。
现代文：原来环绕洱海卫的山坞非常大，西边靠着大山脊的高冈，东面与东山对列，东南积水成为青龙海子，冲破峡谷后绕到小云南释成为河口，它南面就是清华洞前越过的南面的山坳。
English: Originally, the docks surrounding the Bohai Sea were very large. On the west side, there was a high hill with a large ridge, on the east side, it was aligned with the Dongshan Mountain, and in the southeast, the stagnant water became the Qinglong Haizi. After breaking through the canyon, it went around to the small Yunnan Xie and became the estuary. On the south side, it was the southern mountain range that passed before the Qinghua Cave.

古文：其北即瀹王山东下之支，平伏而横接东山者，自洱海北望，以为水从此泄，而不知反为上流。
现代文：城北就是梁王山东下的支脉，平缓起伏横接到东山，自洱海卫望北边，以为水从此处外泄，却不知反而是上游。
English: The north of the city is a tributary of Mount Liangwang to the east, gently undulating to the east of the mountain, looking north from the Bohai Sea, thinking that the water would leak out from here, but not knowing that it was upstream.

古文：余亦欲经此验之，于是北行田塍间，西瞻九鼎道，登缘坡，在隔涧之外数里也。
现代文：我也想经过此地验证这一点，于是往北前行在田野间，向西瞻望去九鼎山的路，沿山坡上登，隔着山涧在数里之外。
English: I wanted to verify this by going here, so I walked northward through the fields, looked west to the road to Jiuding Mountain, climbed up the hillside, and passed the mountains a few miles away.

古文：六里，抵梁王山东支之南，有寺在其西腋，南向临川，曰般若寺。
现代文：六里，抵达梁王山东面支脉的南麓，有寺院在山的西侧，向南面临平川，叫般若寺。
English: Six miles away, at the southern foot of the eastern branch of Mount Liangwang, there is a temple on the west side of the mountain, facing the Hirakawa River to the south, called Hanya Temple.

古文：路乃东向逾冈，一里余，有村庐倚西山而居，曰品甸。
现代文：路于是向东翻越山冈，一里多，有村庄房屋紧靠西山居住，叫品甸。
English: The road then turned east over the mountains and hills for more than a mile. There is a village of houses close to the West Mountain, called Pindian.

古文：由其东一里余，再北上坡，乃一堤也。
现代文：由村东走一里多，再向北上坡，原来此坡是一条水堤。
English: From the east of the village, walk more than a kilometer, and then go uphill to the north. Originally, this slope was a dam.

古文：堤西北山回壑抱，东南积水为海，于时久早，半已涸矣。
现代文：水堤西北山峰回绕壑谷围抱，东南方水积为海，在此时长期干旱，一半已干涸了。
English: The northwest peak of the embankment is encircled by the Lugu Valley, and the southeast water volume is the sea. At this time, there is a long-term drought, and half of it has dried up.

古文：从堤而东半里，一庙倚堤而北悬海中，为龙王祠。
现代文：从堤上向东走半里，一座寺庙背靠水堤悬在北边的海中，是龙王祠。
English: Half a mile eastwards from the embankment, a temple hangs in the sea to the north with its back to the embankment. It is the Dragon King's Shrine.

古文：又东半里转北，堤始尽。
现代文：又向东半里转向北，水堤才完了。
English: It turned half a mile to the east and half a mile to the north before the dike was complete.

古文：复逾东突之坡，一里，复见西腋尚蟠海子支流。
现代文：再越过东突的山坡，一里，又见到西侧尚蟠海子的支流。
English: Then, one mile beyond the eastern slope, I saw the tributary of the Shangyu Haizi on the west side.

古文：平行岭脊，又北三里，则东峡下坠，遥接东山，腋中有水盈盈，则周官些海子也。
现代文：平缓行走在岭脊上，又往北三里，就见东峡下坠，远远接到东山，侧边峡中有水满满的，是周官萝海子了。
English: Walking smoothly on the ridge, and then three miles to the north, I saw the East Gorge falling down, far from the East Mountain, and the water in the side canyon was full. It was Zhou Guan Luo Haizi.

古文：其北则平冈东度，而属于东山，此海实青龙海子之源矣。
现代文：它北面是平缓的山冈向东延伸，而后连接到东山，此处海子实际上是青龙海子的源头。
English: To the north, it is a gentle mountain range that extends eastward, and then connects to the East Mountain, where Haizi is actually the source of Qinglong Haizi.

古文：梁王之脉，由此东度，不特南环为洱城东山，即荞甸北宾川东大山崇窿，为铁索箐、红石崖者，皆此脊绕荞甸东而磅礴之。
现代文：梁王山的山脉，由此向东延伸，不仅往南环绕成洱海卫城的东山，即荞甸北面宾川东面高大弯隆的大山，称为铁索著、红石崖的山，也全是此条山脊气势磅礴地绕过荞甸东边形成的。
English: The mountains of Mount Liangwang, which extend eastward from here, not only encircle the east mountain of the Bohai Sea Acropolis to the south, that is, the tall and curving mountain on the east side of the Binchuan River on the north side of Putian, known as the mountain of the iron rope and the red stone cliff, but also all of this ridge was formed by the east side of Putian.

古文：余夙闻洱城北有米甸、禾甸、荞甸之名，且知青海子水经小云南随川北转，经胭脂坝，合禾、米诸甸水而北入金沙，意此脊之北，荞甸水亦东北流。
现代文：我过去听说洱海卫城以北有米甸、禾甸、荞甸的地名，并且知道青海子的水流经小云南释顺平川向北转，经过胭脂坝，会合禾甸、米甸诸处甸子的水后往北流入金沙江，意料此条山脊的北面，荞甸的水也是向东北流。
English: In the past, I had heard of the place names of Midian, Hedian and Putian to the north of the Bohai Sea Acropolis, and I knew that the water flow of Qinghaizi turned northward through the Yunnan Shishunping River, passed through the Rouge Dam, met the water of Hedian and Midian everywhere, and then flowed northward into the Jinsha River. It was expected that the water of Putian would also flow to the northeast north of this ridge.

古文：至此乃知其独西北出宾川昔，始晤此脊自山南度为山而尽于小云南，北界于荞甸之东，耸宾川东山而尽于红石崖金沙江岸，脊北盘壑是为荞甸，与禾、米二甸名虽鼎列，而水则分流焉。
现代文：来到此地才知它唯独是往西北流到宾川的水流，这才明白此条山脊自口口山往南延伸成为口口口山而后在小云南骚到了尽头，在荞甸之东隔在北方，耸立为宾川的东山而后在金沙江岸的红石崖到了尽头，山脊北面盘绕的壑谷那便是荞甸，与禾甸、米甸两甸的名字虽然似鼎足一样并列，但水却分流了。
English: When I came here, I knew that it was only the water that flowed to the northwest to Binchuan. This made me understand that this ridge extended from Mount Koukou to the south to become Mount Koukoukou and then came to an end in the small Yunnan Shao. It was separated in the north from the east of the Heding, towering as the east mountain of the Heding, and then came to an end in the red stone cliff on the bank of the Jinsha River. The winding valley on the north side of the ridge is the Heding. Although the names of Heding and Midian are side by side, the water is separated.

古文：从岭上转西北一里，随北坞下，三里而至坞底。
现代文：从岭上转向西北一里，顺北面的山坞下走，三里后到达坞底。
English: From the ridge, turn northwest one mile, go down the dock to the north, and reach the bottom of the dock after three miles.

古文：直北开一坞，其北崇山横亘，即斜骞于宾川之东而雄峙者；西界大山，即梁王山北下之支；东界大山，即周官些北冈东度之脊，所转北而直接横亘崇山者。
现代文：正北敞开一个山坞，它北边高山横亘，那就是斜举在宾川之东雄峙的山；西面一列大山，就是梁王山向北下延的支脉；东面一列大山，就是周官萝北冈向东延伸的山脊，转向北一直接到横亘的高山。
English: Directly to the north, there is a dockyard. To the north, high mountains stretch across it, that is, the mountains that are obliquely raised in the east of Binchuan; to the west, a row of mountains is the branch of Liangwang Mountain extending to the north; to the east, a row of mountains is the ridge of Zhou Guanluo Beigang extending to the east, turning to the north until it is connected to the high mountains.

古文：从岭上观之，东西界仅与脊平，至此而岩岩直上，其所下深也。
现代文：从岭上观看地形，东西两列山仅与岭脊一样高，来到此地却高峻笔直上耸，这里的地势下来得很深了。
English: Viewing the terrain from the ridge, the two rows of mountains to the east and west are only as high as the ridge ridge. However, when you come to this place, the high peaks are straight up, and the terrain here is very deep.

古文：坞中村庐累落，即所谓荞甸。
现代文：山坞中村庄房屋重重叠叠，是所谓的荞甸。
English: The village houses in the dockyard overlap and overlap, which is the so-called "floodplain."

古文：度西南峡所出涧，稍北上坡，又一里而止于骑夫家。
现代文：越过西南峡中流出的山涧，稍向北上坡，又走一里后停在马夫家。
English: After crossing the mountain stream that flows out of the middle of the Southwest Gorge, I walked uphill a little to the north, and after walking another mile, I stopped at Mafu's house.

古文：下午热甚，竟宿不行。
现代文：下午太热，最终住下不走了。
English: It was too hot in the afternoon, so we ended up staying put.

古文：二十一日平明，饭而行，骑夫命其子担而随。
现代文：二十一日黎明，饭后上路，马夫命令他儿子挑担子跟我走。
English: At dawn on the twenty-first day, on the road after dinner, the stableman ordered his son to pick up the burden and follow me.

古文：才出门，子以担重复返，再候其父饭，仍以骑行，则上午矣。
现代文：才出门，他儿子因为担子太重又返回去，再等候他父亲吃饭，仍用马上路，便已是上午了。
English: And when he was gone out, his son rose up early, and went in the morning because his burden was heavy: and he waited till his father had eaten, and went in the way of his father.

古文：北向随西山之麓，五里，有一村在川之东，为海子。
现代文：向北沿西山的山麓，走五里，有一个村子在平川的东面，是海子。
English: Five miles north along the foothills of the West Mountain, there is a village on the east side of the Hirakawa River. It is Haizi.

古文：村当川洼处，而实非海也，第东山有峡向之耳。
现代文：村子位于平川低洼之处，可实际上并不是海，只是东山有峡谷通向那里而已。
English: The village is located in a low-lying area of the Hirakawa River, but it is not actually the sea, but the East Mountain has a canyon leading there.

古文：渐转西北，五里，西山下复过一村。
现代文：渐渐转向西北，五里，在西山下又经过一村。
English: It gradually turned to the northwest, five miles, and passed through another village at the foot of the west mountain.

古文：又四里，有数十家倚西山而庐，其前环堤积水，曰冯翊村，其北即崇山横障之麓。
现代文：又走四里，有数十家人靠着西山建了房，村前水堤环绕积着水，叫冯诩村，村北就是横挡着的高山的山麓。
English: After walking another four miles, dozens of families built houses against the West Mountain, and the village was surrounded by water in front of the embankment, called Fengyao Village. The north of the village is the foothills of the mountains.

古文：川中水始沿东山北流，至是西转，漱北山而西，西山又北突而扼之，与北麓对峙为门，水由其中西向破峡去，路由其南西向逾坳入，遂与水不复见，盖北突之嘴，夹水不可行，故从其南披隙以逾之也。
现代文：平川中水流开始沿东山往北流，到此地向西转，冲刷着北山往西流，西山又向北前突扼住水流，与北麓对峙成门，水由其中向西冲破峡谷流去，路由它的南边向西穿越山坳进去，于是与水流不再见面，原来北突的山嘴，夹住流水不能行走，所以水从南边顺着缝隙流淌。
English: The flow of water in the Hirakawa River begins to flow northward along the Higashiyama. At this point, it turns westward, scouring the Kitayama to the west. The west mountain then protrudes to the north to choke the flow of water, confronting the northern foot as a gate. The water rushes westward through the canyon and passes through the ridge to the west along its southern side. As a result, it no longer meets the flow of water. Originally, it was not possible to walk on the northern tip of the mountain while holding the flowing water, so the water flowed along the gap from the south side.

古文：由冯翊村北一里，至此坳麓，乃西向盘崖历壑。
现代文：由冯翊村往北一里，来到此处山坳的山麓下，于是向西绕山崖过壑谷。
English: From Fengye village, I walked north for one mile and came to the foothills of the mountains here, so I walked west around the cliff and through the valley.

古文：山雨忽来，倾盆倒峡，浃地交流。
现代文：山雨忽然间来临，倾盆般倒入峡中，水遍地流淌。
English: The mountain rain came suddenly, pouring into the gorge like a downpour, and the water flowed everywhere.

古文：二里，转西南盘崖上，又一里，转西北，遂蹑石坡，里余，升冈头。
现代文：二里，转向西南绕着山崖上登，又是一里，转向西北，于是上登石坡，一里多，登上冈头。
English: Two miles, turn southwest around the cliff and climb up, another mile, turn northwest, then climb up the stone slope, more than a mile, climb up the hill.

古文：有岐西向逾坳者，宾居道也；北向陟冈者，宾川道也，乃北上半里，遂登岭头。
现代文：有条岔路向西穿越山坳的，是去宾居的路；向北上登山冈的，是去宾川的路。于是向北上登半里，便登到岭头。
English: There is a fork in the road through the mountains to the west, which is the road to Binju; to the north up the mountain, which is the road to Binchuan. So I climbed half a mile to the north, and then climbed to the ridge.

古文：于是西瞰大川，正与宾居海东之山，隔川遥对，而川之南北，尚为近山所掩，不能全睹，然峰北荞甸之水，已透峡西出，盘折而北矣。
现代文：在这里向西远瞰大平川，正与宾居海东面的山，隔着平川遥遥相对，但平川的南北，还被近处的山遮住，不能看到全貌，然而山峰北面荞甸的水，已穿过峡谷向西流去，又盘绕曲折地向北流了。
English: Here you can see the Daping River in the distance to the west, directly opposite the mountain on the east side of the Binju Sea, across the Daping River. However, the north and south of the Daping River are still covered by the nearby mountains, so you can't see the whole picture. However, the clear water on the north side of the mountain has flowed through the canyon to the west, and has flowed meandering to the north.

古文：乃西北下山。
现代文：于是向西北下山。
English: So we headed northwest down the mountain.

古文：一里余，骑夫指北峰夹冈间，为铁城旧址，昔土酋之据以为险者。
现代文：一里多，马夫指点在北峰山冈相夹之间，是铁城旧址，从前是土人首领占据作为天险之处。
English: More than a mile away, between the peaks of the North Peak and the hills, is the former site of the Iron City, once occupied by the native chiefs as a place of natural danger.

古文：盖梁王山北尽之支，北则荞甸水界为深堑，南则从峰顶又坠一坑环之，此冈悬其中，西向特立，亦如佛光寨恃险一女关之意也，非邹中丞应龙芟除诸巢，安得此宁宇乎！
现代文：梁王山北面的支脉到了尽头后，北边是荞甸水隔为深堑，南面则从峰顶又坠成一个坑谷环绕着它，此冈悬在其中，向西独立，也如同佛光寨一女关凭借险阻的意思，要不是邹中皿铲除诸处巢穴，哪能有这样安宁的天下呢！
English: After the northern branch of Liangwang Mountain came to an end, the north side was separated by the Qutian River as a deep ravine, and the south side fell from the peak into a valley surrounding it. This hill hung in the middle, independent to the west, just like the Buddha's Guangzhai and Niangguan by virtue of the meaning of danger, if it were not for the bowl in the middle of the bowl to eradicate the nests everywhere, how could there be such a peaceful world!

古文：又下里余，渡坠坑之水，乃循东山北行。
现代文：又下走一里多，渡过下坠坑谷中的流水，于是沿东山往北行。
English: Then I walked down for more than a mile, crossing the flowing water in the valley of the falling pit, and then headed north along Dongshan.

古文：又三里，抵荞甸水所出口。
现代文：又走三里，抵达荞甸水流出的河口。
English: They walked another three miles and arrived at the mouth of the river, where the water of the Yingtian River flows out.

古文：其水分衍漫流，而北随之，或行水中，或趋碛ｑì水边浅石滩上，或涉水左，或涉水右，茫无正路。
现代文：那流水分散漫延开来四处流淌，顺着水往北走，有时行走在水中，有时快步在沙石浅滩上，有时涉到水左，有时涉到水右，茫茫无正路。
English: The flowing water spread out and flowed everywhere, following the water to the north, sometimes walking in the water, sometimes walking fast on the sand and stone shoals, sometimes wading into the water to the left, sometimes wading into the water to the right, and there was no clear path.

古文：四里，乃上东麓，始有路北向。
现代文：四里，于是走上东麓，开始有路通向北方。
English: Four miles, so I walked up to the eastern foothills and began to find a path to the north.

古文：循麓行六里，望路西有巩桥当川之中，则大理由宾居来大道。
现代文：沿山麓行六里，望见路西有座拱桥正当平川之中，是大理府经由宾居来的大道。
English: Six miles along the foot of the mountain, you can see an arched bridge on the west side of the road, right in the middle of the Hirakawa River, which is the main road from Dali through Binju.

古文：有聚落在桥西，是为周官营。
现代文：有村落在桥西，这是周官营。
English: There is a village on the west side of the bridge. This is Zhou Guanying.

古文：从其东直北三里，一小坊在冈上，过之，始见宾川城。
现代文：从村东向正北走三里，有一座小牌坊在山冈上，走过牌坊，这才见到宾川城。
English: After walking three miles from the east of the village to the north, there was a small archway on the hill. After walking through the archway, I saw Binchuan City.

古文：又北一里，过南薰桥，入其南门。
现代文：又往北一里，走过南薰桥，进入宾川城南门。
English: Another mile to the north, walk across the Nanxuan Bridge and enter the South Gate of Binchuan City.

古文：行城中，北过州治前，约一里，出北门饭，市肉以食。
现代文：行走在城中，向北经过州衙前，约一里，出北门吃饭，买肉来吃了。
English: Walking in the city, northward through the state gate, about one mile, out of the north gate to eat, buy meat to eat.

古文：北一里，过小冈坊，西北下坡，一里，抵川中涧。
现代文：向北一里，走过小山冈上的牌坊，往西北下坡，一里，抵达平川中的山涧。
English: One mile to the north, walk past the archway on the small hill, downhill to the northwest, one mile, and arrive at the hawthorn in the Hirakawa.

古文：其北有巩桥五洞，颇整，以涧水仅一衣带，故不由桥而越涧。
现代文：这里北边有座拱桥，有五个桥洞，相当整齐，由于涧水仅有一条衣带宽，所以不经过桥便越过山涧。
English: To the north, there is an arched bridge with five bridge holes, which is quite neat. Since Surabaya has only one lane, you can cross the mountains without crossing the bridge.

古文：又西北二里余，遂抵西山东突之嘴。
现代文：又向西北二里多，便抵达西山东突的山嘴。
English: After another two miles to the northwest, they arrived at the mouth of the east ridge of the West Mountain.

古文：盘之北，又二里，有路自西南逾岭坳来合，叫余昔从梁王山来者。
现代文：绕到山嘴的北面，又走二里，有条路自西南越过岭坳前来会合，这就是我从前从梁王山来的路。
English: After going around to the north side of the mountain mouth and walking another two miles, there is a road from the southwest across the ridge to the rendezvous, which is the road I used to come from Liangwang Mountain.

古文：其北有村庐倚西峰下，是为红帽村，余昔来饭处也。
现代文：此地北面有村庄房屋紧靠在西峰下，那是红帽村，是我从前来时吃饭之处。
English: To the north of here, there is a village of houses just below the West Peak. It is Red Hat Village, where I ate when I came here.

古文：从村后随西山北行四里。西山开小峡，于是路分为二，遂西向入峡。
现代文：从村后顺西山往北行四里，西山裂开一条小峡谷，在这里路分为两条，就向西进峡。
English: From the village, follow the Xishan Mountain for four miles to the north. The Xishan Mountain splits a small canyon, where the road divides into two, and then enters the gorge to the west.

古文：一里，涉小涧北上，一里，登冈头，过一坊，复西北行。
现代文：一里，涉过小涧向北上走，一里，登上冈头，经过一座牌坊，再向西北行。
English: One mile, wade through the small stream to the north, one mile, climb to the top of the hill, pass a gatehouse, and then head northwest.

古文：二里，西逾冈脊，望见南山自西屏列而东，是排沙北界之山，西自海东，东抵宾居，南与大脊乌龙坝山并夹者，土人称为北山，而观音箐在其北坞。
现代文：二里，向西越过冈脊，望见南山似屏风一样自西向东排列，这是排沙北面的山，西边起自洱海东面，东边抵达宾居，南边与大山脊乌龙坝山并列相夹，当地人称为北山，而观音臀在它的北坞。
English: Two miles to the west, across the ridge, Nanshan can be seen like a screen from west to east. This is the mountain on the north side of the sand, the west side rises from the east of the Bohai Sea, the east side reaches Binju, and the south side is side by side with the great ridge of Wulongba Mountain. Locals call it the North Mountain, and Guanyin Buttocks is in its north dock.

古文：其西北濒洱海，为鲁摆山，则三涧门所来之脊，又东挟上、下仓之水，而北出拈花寺南桥下者也。
现代文：它的西北濒临洱海，是鲁摆山，是三涧门延伸来的山脊，又向东傍着上仓、下仓的水流，往北流到拈花寺南边桥下。
English: In the northwest, it borders the Bohai Sea, is the Luwang Mountain, and is the ridge extending from Samye Gate. In addition, the water flow from Shangcang and Shimo Cang to the east, and flows north to the south of the Flower Temple under the bridge.

古文：从冈头又西北行三里，稍下，有水自西南来，有亭桥北跨之，是为干果桥。
现代文：从冈头又往西北行三里，稍下走，有水流自西南流来，有亭桥向北跨过流水，这是干果桥。
English: From the head of the hill, it is another three miles to the northwest, and a little further down, there is water flowing from the southwest, and a pavilion bridge crosses the flowing water to the north. This is the dried fruit bridge.

古文：北有数家倚冈，余昔之所宿，而今亦宿之。
现代文：北岸有数家人依傍着山冈，是我从前投宿的地方，而今天也住在此地。
English: There are a few families on the north shore next to the mountain, which is where I used to stay, and where I live today.

古文：干果北有一尖峰，东向而突，亭亭凌上，盖西南自鲁摆海东之脊，分支东北上，为上、下仓、观音箐分界，下为炼洞、干果二溪中垂，亦鸡山东第一水口山也。
现代文：干果村北面有一座尖峰，向东突起，亭亭玉立，凌空而上，大体上西南方起自鲁摆山、洱海东面的山脊，向东北分出支脉，上延成为上仓、下仓和观音著的分界，下延成为炼洞溪、干果溪二溪中间下垂的山，也就是鸡足山东面的第一座水口山了。
English: To the north of Gan Guo Village, there is a sharp peak. It protrudes to the east, stands tall and straight, and soars into the sky. It generally rises in the southwest from the ridge of Luwang Mountain and the eastern Bohai Sea, and branches off to the northeast. The upstretch becomes the boundary between Shangcang, Shimo-cang and Guanyin, and the downstretch becomes the Jingtong Creek and the sagging mountain in the middle of the two streams of Gan Guo Creek, that is, the first water outlet mountain in the east of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：二十二日平明，饭而行。
现代文：二十二日黎明，饭后上路。
English: At dawn on the 22nd, after dinner, we hit the road.

古文：西北三里余，涉一小溪，又上里许，抵尖峰下。
现代文：向西北三里多，涉过一条小溪，又上走一里左右，抵达尖峰下。
English: I walked more than three miles to the northwest, waded through a small stream, walked another mile or so, and arrived at the foot of the peak.

古文：循其东崖而北，一里，随崖西转，遂出峰北。
现代文：沿着尖峰东面的山崖向北走，一里，顺山崖向西转，便到了峰北。
English: Walk north along the cliff on the east side of the peak, one mile, turn west along the cliff, and you will reach the north peak.

古文：于是北坞自西而东，即鸡山之水，自炼洞而东下牛井街，合宾川而北者也。
现代文：在这里北面的山坞自西向东，就是鸡足山的水流，自炼洞往东下流到牛井街，会合宾川溪往北流。
English: From west to east, the dock to the north of here is the water flow of the Chicken's Foot Mountain, flowing eastward from the Refining Cave to Niu Jing Street, meeting Binchuan Creek to the north.

古文：路随南崖西向下，二里，有村在路旁，上有坊，曰 金牛溢井 ，土人指溪北村旁，有石穴为金牛溢处，而街则在其外。
现代文：路顺着南面的山崖向西下走，二里，有村庄在路旁，上边有牌坊，叫 金牛溢井 ，当地人指点在溪北岸的村庄旁，有个石穴是金牛溢水之处，而街子则在村外。
English: The road follows the cliff to the south and heads west for two miles. There is a village on the side of the road with a signboard above it, called Jinniu Yuei. Locals point to a stone cave on the north bank of the stream next to the village, which is where Jinniu Yuei is located, while the town is outside the village.

古文：又西盘峡陟坡，二里，下渡一小水，复西北上。
现代文：又向西绕着峡谷登坡，二里，下走渡过一条小溪，再向西北上登。
English: I climbed westward around the canyon for two miles, walked down and crossed a stream, and then climbed northwest.

古文：再下再上，五里，登一冈头，皆自南而北突者。
现代文：两次下走两次上登，五里，登上一座冈头，都是自南向北突的山冈。
English: Two times down, twice up, five miles, up a ridge, all from the south to the north of the mountain.

古文：鸡山中谿公有三遗迹：东为此庄，西桃花箐下有中谿书院，大顶之侧礼佛台有中谿读书处。
现代文：又走二里，稍下走，经过 广甸流芳 的牌坊。又往北一里，在这里村庄房屋相望，这是炼洞境内了。
English: Walk another two miles, a little further down, and you will pass the gatehouse of Guangdian Liufang. Another mile to the north, where the village houses face each other, this is the territory of Chengdong.

古文：又北上冈一里，茅舍累累布冈头，是为炼洞街子。
现代文：南边紧靠山坡，北边俯瞰山坞，又走二里，经过公馆街，又向北一里，经过中黔庄。又向北上冈走一里，茅屋层层叠叠散布在冈头，这是炼洞街子。
English: The south side is close to the hillside, the north side overlooks the dock, and then walk two miles, pass the public house street, and then go one mile north, pass the Zhongliangzhuang. Walk one mile north to the upper hill, and the thatched houses are scattered in layers at the top of the hill. This is the purgatory street.

古文：又北半里，过 炼法龙潭 坊。
现代文：又往北半里，走过 炼法龙潭 牌坊。
English: Another half-mile to the north, I walked past the Zhengfa Longtan Bridge.

古文：又北里余，稍下，过一桥，有数家倚西山坞中，前有水一塘，其上有井，一小亭覆之，即龙潭也，不知炼法者为谁矣。
现代文：又向北一里多，稍下走，走过一座桥，有数家人紧靠在西面山坞中，村前有一塘水，塘上有井，一座小亭子覆盖着井，这就是龙潭了，不知炼法的人是谁。
English: Another kilometer further north, a little further down, I crossed a bridge. A few families were huddled in the dockyard on the west side. There was a pond in front of the village, a well on the pond, and a small pavilion covering the well. This was Longtan. I don't know who the practitioner was.

古文：村北有巨树一株，根曲而出土上五六尺，中空，巩而复倒入地中，其下可通人行。
现代文：村北有一棵巨树，树根弯曲凸出地上，高五六尺，中间空，弯曲成弧形再倒插入土中，树根下边可通人走。
English: There is a huge tree in the north of the village. The roots of the tree bend and protrude above the ground. It is five or six feet high, with a hollow in the middle. It bends into an arc and then plunges into the ground. People can walk under the roots.

古文：于是又西北二里，逾一坡，又西北一里余，过茶庵。
现代文：从这里又向西北二里，越过一条坡，又向西北一里多，经过茶庵。
English: From here, another two miles to the northwest, over a slope, and another mile to the northwest, past the tea house.

古文：又西北下涉一坑，一里，涉坑复上，乃循北山之环腋而西上。
现代文：又向西北下涉一个坑谷，一里，涉过坑谷再上走，于是沿北山环绕的山侧向西上登。
English: He also waded down a valley to the northwest, one mile, waded through the valley and then walked up, so he climbed westward along the side of the mountain surrounded by the North Mountain.

古文：一里余，瞰其南壑，中环如规，而底甚平。
现代文：一里多，下瞰那南边的壑谷，中间呈环状如同圆规，而且底部非常平坦。
English: For more than a kilometer, looking down on the southern Shizuku Valley, the middle is ring-shaped like a compass, and the bottom is very flat.

古文：又西上一里，遂分两岐，北向逾岭为鸡山道。
现代文：又向西上登一里，便分出两条岔路，向北越岭的是去鸡足山的路。
English: After climbing another mile to the west, there are two branch roads, and the one to the north over the ridge is the road to the Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：乃北上行岭头二里，复西折而下。
现代文：于是向北上走在岭头二里，再折向西下走。
English: So I walked northward for two miles to the top of the ridge, and then turned westward.

古文：下二里余，有峡自西南来，其底水破峡东北出，即下仓海子水所由注牛井者，有亭桥跨之，是鸡山东第二水口山也。
现代文：下走二里多，有峡谷自西南前来，峡底的水冲破峡谷向东北流出去，这是由下仓海子注入牛井街的水流，有座亭桥跨在水上，这是鸡足山东面的第二座水口山了。
English: After walking more than two miles, there is a canyon coming from the southwest, and the water at the bottom of the canyon breaks through the canyon and flows out to the northeast. This is the flow of water from Shimokura Haizi into Niujing Street. There is a pavilion bridge across the water. This is the second Mizukuchi Mountain east of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：渡桥西，复北上坡。
现代文：过到桥西，再向北上坡。
English: Cross to the west of the bridge, then head north uphill.

古文：折而南，盘西峡而北一里余，循峡西北上，又里余，有哨当岭头，从此平行直南，乃下仓道。
现代文：折向南，绕着西峡往北行一里多，沿峡谷向西北上山，又走一里多，有哨房位于岭头，从此处一直往南平缓前行，是去下仓的路。
English: Turn to the south, around the West Gorge to the north for more than a mile, along the canyon to the northwest up the mountain, and walk more than a mile, there is a sentry box at the ridge, from here all the way to the south is the road to the lower warehouse.

古文：逾岭北下一里，则拈花寺东向倚西山，居环壑中，乃入而饭。
现代文：越岭向北下山一里，就见拈花寺向东背靠西山，坐落在环绕的壑谷中，于是进寺吃饭。
English: After crossing the ridge and descending a mile to the north, he saw the Lotus Temple to the east, backed by the West Mountain, nestled in the surrounding reed valley, so he went to the temple to eat.

古文：既饭，雨至，为少憩。
现代文：饭后，山雨来临，为此稍作歇息。
English: After the meal, the mountain rain came, so we took a short break.

古文：遂从寺左转而西上，一里余，逾一北突之岭，有坊曰 佛台仰止 ，始全见鸡山面目。
现代文：于是从寺左转向西上走，一里多，越过一座北突的山岭，有座牌坊叫 佛台仰止 ，这才见到鸡足山的完整面目。
English: So I turned from the left side of the temple to the west and walked for more than a mile, crossing a mountain ridge in the northern part of the country, where there was a gate called Buddha's Terrace, and it was only then that I saw the complete face of the Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：顶耸西北，尾掉东南，高悬天际，令人神往。
现代文：山顶高耸在西北，尾部掉转在东南，高悬在天际，令人神往。
English: The top of the mountain soars in the northwest, the tail turns in the southeast, and hangs high in the sky, which is fascinating.

古文：逾脊西下，即转而北，一里，下涉北坠之峡。
现代文：越过岭脊向西下走，立即转向北，一里，下涉向北下坠的山峡。
English: Cross the ridge ridge and walk down to the west, immediately turn to the north, one mile, wade down the mountain gorge falling to the north.

古文：又半里，西逾一北突之坳。
现代文：又走半里，向西越过一处往北突的山坳。
English: Half a mile further on, to the west, we passed a mountain ridge that jutted out to the north.

古文：坳南岐有坊倚坡，此白石崖东麓坊也，余昔来未及见，故从其西麓之坊，折而东上。
现代文：山坳南边的岔道有座牌坊紧靠山坡，这是白石崖东麓的牌坊，我从前来时未来得及见到，所以从白石崖西麓的牌坊，折向东上山。
English: On the south side of the mountain pass, there is a gatehouse close to the slope. This is the gatehouse at the eastern foot of the Shiraishi cliff. I did not have time to see it when I came, so I turned east from the gatehouse at the western foot of the Shiraishi cliff.

古文：过坳复西向，循大路趋里余，过白石崖西坊。
现代文：过了山坳再向西，沿大路赶了一里多，经过白石崖西麓的牌坊。
English: After passing the mountains and heading west, I drove more than a mile along the highway, passing the archway at the western foot of the Shiroishi cliff.

古文：又西里余，有岐稍下，则鸡山前峡之溪，东向而入牛井街，合宾川溪北向桑园而下金沙矣。
现代文：又往西一里多，有岔道稍下走，就见鸡足山前峡的溪水，向东流入牛井街，会合宾川溪向北到桑园后流下金沙江了。
English: Another mile or so to the west, a little further down the causeway, you will see the water of the stream in the gorge in front of the Chicken's Foot Mountain flowing eastward into Niu Jing Street, joining the Binchuan Creek to the north of the Mulberry Garden and flowing down the Jinsha River.

古文：溪有小亭桥跨其上，过桥北，骑夫东转北上而向沙址，余西向溯溪，欲寻所谓河子孔者。
现代文：溪上有小亭桥跨在水上，过到桥北，马夫由东转向北上登走向沙址，我向西溯溪走，想去找所谓河子孔的地方。
English: There is a small pavilion bridge across the water in the creek. When I crossed the bridge to the north, the groom turned from the east to the north to climb up to the sandy site. I followed the creek to the west, wanting to find the so-called river hole.

古文：时水涨，浊流奔涌，以为不复可物色。
现代文：此时水涨，浊流奔腾汹涌，以为不再可能找到。
English: At this time, the water is rising, the turbulence is surging, and it is thought that it is no longer possible to find it.

古文：遇一妪，问之，指在西南崖下，而沿溪路绝，水派横流，荆棘交翳。
现代文：遇见一位老妇，向她打听，指点我在西南的山崖下，可沿溪走的路断了，溪水支流横流，荆棘纵横密蔽。
English: I met an old woman, asked her for advice, and she pointed me to the foot of a cliff in the southwest. The path along the stream was cut off, the tributaries of the stream were cross-flowing, and there were thorns everywhere.

古文：或涉流，或践莽，西二里，忽见一亭桥跨溪上，其大倍于下流沙址者，有路自北来，越桥南，即循南山东向，出白石崖前，乃登山官道。
现代文：时而涉流水，时而踏丛莽，向西二里，忽然见有一座亭桥跨在溪上，桥的大处比下游沙址的桥大一倍，有路从北边来，越到桥南，马上沿南山向东，通到白石崖前，这是登山的官修大道。
English: Sometimes wading through the water, sometimes trampling through the bushes, two miles to the west, I suddenly saw a pavilion bridge across the stream. The bridge is twice as large as the bridge at the downstream sand site. There is a road from the north to the south of the bridge, immediately along the South Mountain to the east, leading to the White Rock Cliff. This is the official highway for mountaineering.

古文：始知沙址小桥乃捷径，而此桥即洗心桥也，河子孔即在桥南石崖下。
现代文：这才明白沙址的小桥是捷径，而此桥就是洗心桥了，河子孔就在桥南的石崖下。
English: This made it clear that the small bridge at the sand site is a shortcut, and this bridge is the bridge of the heart, and the river hole is just under the stone cliff south of the bridge.

古文：其石横卧二三丈，水由其下北向溢出，穴横长如其石，而高不及三尺，水之从中溢者甚清，而溪中之自桥西来者，浑浊如浆。
现代文：那里岩石横卧有二三丈，水由石下向北溢出，洞穴横处长处都如那岩石一样，但高处不到三尺，从洞穴中溢出的水非常清，而溪中自桥西流来的水，浑浊如同泥浆。
English: The rock there is two or three stories high, and the water overflows from under the rock to the north. The long sides of the cave are like that rock, but the height is less than three feet. The water overflowing from the cave is very clear, while the water flowing from the west of the bridge in the stream is muddy like mud.

古文：孔上有神祠。其南崖之上，更有静室。于是随北来大路，上 灵山一会坊 。二里，至坊下，即沙址西来路所合者。
现代文：桥以西的水从两条支流流来：一条从北边来的，在峡中成为瀑布，与悉檀寺、龙潭两处的水合流；一条从西边来的，是桃花警往东下流的水流。两条支流共同在桥西会合，流出桥东，又会合此处河子孔中的清流，这是鸡足山南涧的上游。由此顺北来的大路，上登 灵山一会 坊。二里，来到牌坊下，这里就是由沙址西来的路会合的地方。
English: The water to the west of the bridge comes from two tributaries: one coming from the north, which becomes a waterfall in the gorge and joins the water at Siddan Temple and Longtan; one coming from the west is the water flowing down from the Peach Blossom Guard to the east. The two tributaries meet together on the west side of the bridge, flow out of the east side of the bridge, and meet here in the clear stream of the river Zikong, which is the upstream of the south fork of the Chicken Foot Mountain. The road coming from the north, up the Lingshan Mountain, is one mile. Two miles, came to the bottom of the archway, here is the

古文：其西南隔涧，有寺踞坡麓，为接待寺。
现代文：它西南隔着山涧，有寺院盘踞在坡脚，是接待寺。
English: It is separated from the mountains in the southwest, and there is a temple at the foot of the slope, which is a reception temple.

古文：此古刹也，在西第一支东尽之麓，鸡山诸刹，山路未辟，先有此寺，自后来者居上，而此刹颓矣。
现代文：这是座古刹，在西面第一支峰东边尽头的山麓，鸡足山诸处的佛寺，山路未开辟时，先有了此寺，自从后来者居上后，而此寺便颓败了。
English: This is an ancient temple, at the foot of the first peak on the west side of the mountain at the end of the east side of the mountain, the Buddhist temple in various parts of the chicken foot mountain. When the mountain road was not opened, this temple first came into being, and since the latecomers came to the fore, this temple has been defeated.

古文：时余不知骑仆前后，徘徊一里，渐随溪东岸而上。
现代文：此时我不知马匹仆人在前还是在后，徘徊了一里，慢慢顺溪流东岸上登。
English: At this time, I don't know if the servants' horses are in front or behind, wandering for a mile, slowly making their way up the east bank of the stream.

古文：其东峰下临，即东第三支回环之岭，新构塔基于其上，中与大士阁中第二支相对成峡，而路由其下者也。
现代文：这里东峰下临，就是东面第三支峰回绕的山岭，新建了塔基在岭上，中间与大士阁中段的第二支峰相对形成峡谷，而路经由它下边走。
English: Here, the east peak descends, that is, the mountain ridge around the third peak in the east, and a tower base is newly built on the ridge. In the middle, it forms a canyon opposite the second peak in the middle of the Taishakou, and the road passes under it.

古文：又北一里，盘坡稍上，过报恩寺。
现代文：又向北一里，绕着山坡稍上走，路过报恩寺。
English: Another mile to the north, walk around the hillside a little higher, and pass the Huai'en Temple.

古文：寺为东第三支山麓之首刹，亦如接待之在西支之首。
现代文：此寺是东面第三支峰山麓的第一座寺院，也正如接待寺在西面支峰是第一座寺院一样。
English: This temple is the first temple at the foot of the third branch peak in the east, just as the reception temple is the first temple at the west branch peak.

古文：惟中第二支，其麓为两溪交会处，夹尖无刹可托，其上即大士阁中临之而已。
现代文：唯有中间的第二支峰，它的山麓是两条溪流相会之处，相夹的尖角地带没有寺院可以依托，它上方就是大士阁当中下临着而已。
English: There is only the second peak in the middle. Its foothills are where two streams meet. There is no temple that can be supported on the sharp corner between them. Above it is just the middle and bottom of the Daishi Pavilion.

古文：从报恩西又北一里，有桥西跨涧上。
现代文：从报恩寺西边又向北一里，有桥向西跨在山涧上。
English: From the west side of Hoon-ji Temple to the north, there is a bridge spanning the mountainside to the west.

古文：度桥，循大士阁东麓北向上半里，有岐西南盘岭者，大土阁大道也；直北临东溪西崖而入者，悉檀、龙潭道也。
现代文：过了桥，沿大士阁的东麓向北上登半里，有岔道：往西南绕着山岭走的，是去大士阁的大道；正北由西面山崖面临东溪进去的，是去悉檀寺、龙潭的路。
English: After crossing the bridge and climbing half a mile northward along the eastern foot of Dashi Pavilion, there is a fork in the road: if you walk around the mountains to the southwest, it is the road to Dashi Pavilion; if you walk due north from the western cliff facing Dongxi, it is the road to Siddan Temple and Longtan.

古文：问驼骑已先向龙潭，余随之。
现代文：问知驮物的马匹已先走向龙潭，我便尾随而去。
English: The horses that asked for the stolen goods had gone to Longtan first, so I followed them.

古文：一里，又东度桥，从涧东蹑峻上，其上趾相叠，然巨松夹陇，翠荫飞流，不复知有登陟之艰也。
现代文：一里，又向东过桥，从山涧东边陡峻地上登，那上去的路脚步相重叠，然而巨大的松树夹住山陇，翠绿的树荫飞舞流动，不再知有登山跋涉的艰难了。
English: One mile further east, I crossed the bridge and climbed up the steep ground on the eastern side of the ridge. The steps on the way up there overlapped. However, huge pine trees clamped the ridge, and the verdant shade danced and flowed. I no longer knew the hardships of hiking.

古文：又二里，转龙潭上，半里而入悉檀寺。
现代文：又是二里，转到龙潭上方，半里后进人悉檀寺。
English: It's another two miles to the top of Longtan, and half a mile further to Shidan Temple.

古文：时四长老俱不在，惟纯白出迎。
现代文：此时四位长老都不在，只有纯白出来迎接。
English: At this time, the four elders are not present, only pure white came out to meet.

古文：乃税驾北楼。
现代文：于是住在北楼。
English: So they lived in the north building.

古文：回忆岁初去此，已半载余矣。
现代文：回忆年初离开此地，已是半年多了。
English: It's been more than half a year since I left here at the beginning of the year.

