古文：十二月初一日，先晚雨丝丝下，中夜愈甚，遂无意留吉水。
现代文：十二月初一日前半夜细雨不停地下首，到半夜雨势更大，于是打消了在吉水停留的念头。
English: In the first half of the night of the first day of December, the drizzle kept falling, and by midnight the rain was more intense, so the idea of staying in Yoshimizu was dispelled.

古文：入城问打听张侯后裔。
现代文：进城去探访张侯的后裔。
English: into the city to visit Zhang Hou's descendants.

古文：有张君重、伯起父子居南门内，隔晚托顾仆言，与张同宗，欲一晤，因冒雨造其家云。
现代文：有叫张君重、张伯起的两父子，居住在城南门内，昨晚托顾仆传话给我，说他家与张侯是同一宗族，想与我会一面，因而我冒雨造访他家。
English: There are two fathers and sons named Zhang Junchong and Zhang Boqi, who live in the south gate of the city. Last night, they sent a message to me, saying that his family is the same clan as Zhang Hou, and they want to be with me, so I visited his house in the rain.

古文：盖张乃世科而无登第者，故后附于侯族，而实非同派。
现代文：大概张君重家是几代参加科举考试而没有考中的，所以后来就附会说是张侯家族，而实际上不是同一族系。
English: It is likely that several generations of Zhang Junchuo's family took the imperial examinations but did not pass, so later it was said to be the Zhang Hou family, but in fact it was not the same family line.

古文：君重之曾祖名峻，嘉靖间云亦别驾吾常，有遗墨在家云，曾附祀张侯之庙，为二张祠。
现代文：张君重的曾祖名叫张峻，说什么嘉靖年间也曾在我的家乡常州府任过通判，有遗作保存在他家中，张峻曾被附带祭祀于张侯的庙中，成为二张祠。
English: Zhang Junwei's great-grandfather's name was Zhang Jun. He said that during the Jiajing Dynasty, Zhang Junwei had also served as a judge in my hometown, Changzhou. Some of his works were preserved in his home. Zhang Junwei was also enshrined in Zhang Hou's temple, becoming the second Zhang Ancestral Hall.

古文：此一时附托之言。
现代文：这是一时的附托之言。
English: It was a throwaway remark.

古文：按张侯无在郡之祠，其在吾邑者，嘉靖时被毁已久，何从而二之？
现代文：据查考，张侯在吉安府无祠堂，而在我家乡江阴县城中的祠堂，嘉靖时已经被毁了许久，从何而来的二张祠？
English: According to the investigation, Zhang Hou did not have an ancestral hall in Ji'an, while the ancestral hall in my hometown of Jiangyin County, Jiajing, had been destroyed for a long time. Where did the two ancestral halls come from?

古文：更为余言：侯之后人居西园，在城西五六十里，亦文昌乡也；族虽众，无读书者，即子衿秀才亦无一人。
现代文：他们又对我说：张侯的后代居住在西园，位于县城南五六十里，也是一个人文兴盛的地方；家族中人口虽多，但没有读书的，即便是秀才也没有一个。
English: They also said to me: Zhang Hou's descendants live in Xiyuan, located fifty or sixty miles south of the county seat, which is also a place of humanistic prosperity; although there are many people in the family, there is no one who does not study, even if they are talented.

古文：余因慨然！
现代文：我于是感慨不已。
English: I was overwhelmed with emotion.

古文：时雨滂沱，以舟人待已久，遂冒雨下舟，盖此中已三月无雨矣。
现代文：当时大雨涝沱、因船夫已等待许久，便冒雨回到船中，这地方大约已三个月没下雨了。
English: It was raining heavily at the time, and since the boatman had been waiting for a long time, he returned to the boat in the rain. It had not rained in this area for about three months.

古文：时舟已移北门赣江上。由北门入至南门之张氏，仍出北门。
现代文：当时船已经移到北门外赣江上，先我是从北门进城到南门的张家，现仍由北门出城。
English: At that time, the ship had already moved to the Lijiang River outside the north gate. I first entered the city from the north gate to Zhangjiajie at the south gate, and now I still leave the city from the north gate.

古文：下舟已上午，遂西南溯赣江行。
现代文：回到船中已是上午，于是往西南溯赣江行。
English: It was already morning when I returned to the boat, so I headed southwest to the Lijiang River.

古文：十里，挟天马山之西。
现代文：十里，绕到天马山的西面。
English: Ten miles, around to the west of Tianma Mountain.

古文：十里，过小洲头，东有大、小洲二重，西则长冈逶迤，有塔与小洲夹江相对。
现代文：又行十里，经过小洲头，东面有大小两个沙洲，西面是长长的山冈蜿蜒绵亘，有座塔与小洲夹江相对。
English: Another ten miles, past the head of the small island, there are two large and small sandbanks in the east, and a long mountain range meanders in the west, and there is a tower opposite the small island and the river.

古文：至是雨止日出。
现代文：到此处雨停日出。
English: The rain stopped here at sunrise.

古文：又十里，转挟螺子山之东，而泊于梅林渡，去吉郡尚十里。
现代文：又行十里，折绕到螺子山的东面，停泊在梅林渡，此处离吉安府城还有十里。
English: Another ten miles, winding around to the east of Mount Nusa Dua, anchored in Meilin, where it is still ten miles from Ji'an City.

古文：既暮，零雨复至。
现代文：傍晚后，又下起了零星小雨。
English: After the evening, sporadic light rain fell again.

古文：螺子，吉郡水口之第一山也。
现代文：螺子山是吉安府水口的第一座山。
English: Nezu Mountain is the first mountain in Mizuguchi, Ji'an Prefecture.

古文：吉水东大而高者，曰东山，即仁山也。
现代文：吉水县城东面大而高的山，叫东山，即仁山。
English: The large and high mountain to the east of the city in Jishui County is called Dongshan, that is, Rinshan.

古文：太平山在其内，又近而附城，曰龙华寺。
现代文：太平山在它的内侧，又往近处靠近城的地方，叫龙华寺。
English: Taiping Mountain is on its inner side, and the place close to the city is called Longhua Temple.

古文：寺甚古，今方修葺ì修整，有邹南皋先生祠。
现代文：寺很古老，如今正在修缮，里面有邹南皋先生的祠堂。
English: The temple is very old and is currently being renovated. It contains the ancestral hall of Mr. Minamino.

古文：佛殿前东一碑，为韩熙载五代南唐重臣，著有《宁史•南唐世家》撰，徐铉八行书。盖即太平西下之垅，南北回环，琐成一坞，而寺在中央。
现代文：佛殿前面东侧有块碑，碑文是韩熙载撰、徐镶书写的，共八行。大概太平山向西延伸而下的低矮山冈，自南向北曲折环绕，围成一个山坞，而寺位于山坞的中央。
English: On the east side of the front of the Buddha Hall, there is a monument. The inscription was written by Han Xizai and Xu Meng, totaling eight lines. It is a low hill that extends down from the Taiping Mountain to the west, twists and turns from south to north, and is surrounded by a dock. The temple is located in the center of the dock.

古文：吉水西为天马山，在恩、赣二江夹脊中。
现代文：吉水县西面为天马山，它在恩、赣两江相夹的山脊中。
English: Tianma Mountain is located in the west of Jishui County. It is in the ridge between the En River and the Min River.

古文：北为玉笥，即峡山之界赣江下流所经也。
现代文：北面为玉筒山，即峡江地界，是赣江下流所经过的地方。
English: To the north is Tamatsuzuzan Mountain, which is the canyon boundary, and is the place where the lower reaches of the Li River pass.

古文：南为巽ù峰，尖峭特立，乃南皋先生堆加而峻者，为本县之文笔峰。
现代文：南面为龚峰，它尖峭独耸，是邹南皋先生堆加后才变得高峻的，为本县的文笔峰。
English: To the south is the Lushan Peak, which stands out due to its steepness. It only became so high after it was piled up by Mr. Lushan of Lushan, and is the county's literary peak.

古文：建昌人言军峰为吉水文笔，因此峰而误也，大小迥绝矣。
现代文：建昌人说军峰是吉水县的文笔峰，这是由此峰导致的讹误，两峰的大小差别极大。
English: Jianchang said that the military peak is the literary peak of Jishui County, which is a mistake caused by this peak. The size difference between the two peaks is extremely large.

古文：初二日，黎明甫刚刚挂帆，忽有顺水舟叱咤而至，掀篷逼舟，痛殴舟人而缚之，盖此间棍徒托言解官银，而以拿舟吓诈舟人也。
现代文：初二日黎明才挂帆出发，忽然有只船顺水而来，船上的人大声吃喝着，掀开我们的船篷强行索要船只，并痛打了船夫，把他绑起来，他们大概是此地的一些无赖之徒，借口说要解送官府银两，需要征借船只，吓唬诈骗船夫。
English: On the first two days of the month, we set sail at dawn. Suddenly, a boat came alongside the water. The people on board were eating and drinking loudly. They opened our canopy to forcefully demand the boat, and beat the boatman and tied him up. They were probably some ruffians from this area. They used the excuse that they wanted to send the government money and needed to borrow a boat to scare and swindle the boatman.

古文：势如狼虎，舟中三十人，视舟子如搏羊，竟欲以余囊过其舟，以余舟下省。
现代文：他们势如虎狼，我们船中的三十个人，看船夫如同在虎狼群中挣扎逃命的羊羔。
English: They were like tigers and wolves. The thirty people in our boat watched the boatman like lambs struggling to escape from a pack of tigers and wolves.

古文：然彼所移入舟者，俱铺盖铃串之物，而竟不见银扛，即果解银，亦无中道之理。
现代文：他们竟然想将我的袋子搬到他们船中，将我所乘的这只船驶下省城。然而那帮人移到船中来的，都是铺盖铃串之类的东西，竟然不见贵重的金银物品、我想即便真的是解送银两，也没有中途上船的道理。
English: They actually wanted to move my bag to their ship and sail the ship I was on down to the provincial capital. However, the people who moved to the ship were all things like bell strings, and there were no valuable gold and silver items. I think that even if it was really a delivery of silver, there is no reason for the ship to be in the middle of the way.

古文：余谕其此间去吉郡甚近，何不同至郡，以舟畀以汝。
现代文：我告诉那帮人，这里离吉安府很近，何不一同到府城，再将船给你们。
English: I told the group, "This is very close to Ji'an, why don't we go to the capital together, and then we'll give you the boat."

古文：其人闻言，咆哮愈甚，竟欲顺流挟舟去。
现代文：他们听后，更加咆哮不已，竟然想顺流挟持船只而去。
English: When they heard this, they roared even louder, to the point that they wanted to take the boat with them and go down the river.

古文：余乘其近涯，一跃登岸，亟觅地方王姓者，梅林保长也。
现代文：我乘船靠近岸之机，一纵身登上岸，赶忙找到当地一个姓王的人，他是梅林的保长。
English: I took a boat to get closer to the shore, swam ashore, and hurried to find a local man surnamed Wang, who was Merlin's bodyguard.

古文：呼而追之，始得放舟。
现代文：我们呼喊着追上去，那帮人才放行了船只。
English: We shouted and ran after them and they let the boat go.

古文：余行李初已被移，见余登陆，乃仍畀还即归还；而舟子所有，悉为抄洗，一舟荡然矣。
现代文：我的行李起初已被移动，见我登陆，才又拿回来；但船夫的所有物件，都被抄掠抢劫去了，整只船被洗劫一空。
English: My luggage was first removed, and when I disembarked, it was taken back again; but all the belongings of the boatman had been plundered, and the whole boat was ransacked.

古文：又十里，饭毕，已过白鹭洲之西，而舟人欲泊南关；余久闻白鹭书院之胜，仍返舟东泊其下，觅寓于书院中净土庵。
现代文：又行十里，吃完饭后，抵达吉安府。已经过了白鹭洲的西面，而船夫想停泊到南关去；我早就听说过白鹭书院的胜迹，所以仍叫船返回东边，停泊在书院下，在书院中的净土庵找了个寓所。
English: After another ten miles, after dinner, we arrived at Ji'anfu. We had already passed the west side of Baekdu Island, and the boatman wanted to moor at Nankuan. I had already heard about the merits of Baekdu Academy, so I still called the boat back to the east, moored under the academy, and found an apartment in the Pure Land Hermitage in the academy.

古文：是日雨丝丝不止，余人游城中，颇寥寂，出南门，见有大街濒江，直西属神冈山，十里阛闠，不减金阊也。
现代文：这天，丝丝细雨下个不停，我进城游览，城中十分寂静。走出城南门，看见有条大街濒临江流，直往西连着神冈山，十里街市，不比苏州逊色。
English: On this day, it was drizzling non-stop. I went into the city for a tour, and it was very quiet in the city. I walked out of the south gate of the city and saw a street bordering the river, stretching west to Kamioka Mountain, and a ten-mile street market, not inferior to Suzhou.

古文：初三日，中夜雨滂沱。
现代文：初三日半夜时大雨涝沱。
English: It rained heavily in the middle of the night on the first three days.

古文：晨餐后，即由南关外西向神冈。
现代文：早餐后，便由南关外往西面向神冈山走去。
English: After breakfast, they walked from outside Nankan to the west towards Mount Kamioka.

古文：时雨细路泞，举步不前，半日且行且止，市物未得其半，因还至其寓。
现代文：当时天下着细雨，道路泥泞，我举步不前，半日中走走停停，所要买的物品没买到一半，于是回到寓所。
English: It was drizzling and the road was muddy, so I didn't move forward. I walked and stopped for half the day. I didn't buy half of the items I wanted to buy, so I returned to my apartment.

古文：是日书院中为郡侯季考，余出时诸士毕集，及返而各已散矣。郡侯即家复生，是日季考不亲至，诸生颇失望。
现代文：这天书院中由府长官主持季度末考试，我出书院时童生毕集，等返回时已经各自散去了，府长官就是我的本家复生，这天进行季度末考试他未亲自到场，众童生很失望。
English: On this day in the college, the prefectural governor presided over the end-of-quarter examination. When I left the college, the students had already gathered, and when I returned, they had already dispersed. The prefectural governor is the resurrection of my family. He did not personally attend the end-of-quarter examination on this day, and the children and students were very disappointed.

古文：初四日雨。
现代文：初四日天下着雨。
English: It rained for the first four days.

古文：入游城中，出止白鹭洲。
现代文：我进城游览，出城来停留在白鹭洲。
English: I went into the city for a tour and came out of the city to stay in Baishuanzhou.

古文：初五日入城拜朱贞明、马继芳。
现代文：初五日进城去拜访朱贞明、马继芳。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I went to the city to visit Zhu Zhenming and Ma Jifang.

古文：下午，取药煮酒，由西门出，街市甚盛。
现代文：下午，去取酒曲回来煮酒，由西门出城，西门外街市非常繁盛。
English: In the afternoon, I went to fetch sake lees, came back to brew sake, and left the city through the West Gate. The street market outside the West Gate was very prosperous.

古文：已由南门大街欲上神冈，复行不及也。
现代文：已经从南门大街上想上神冈山，又来不及去。
English: I've been thinking about climbing Kamioka Mountain from Minamimon-dori Street, but it's too late to go.

古文：初六日卧雪鹭洲。
现代文：初六日躺卧在雪鹭洲。
English: On the sixth day of the first semester, I was lying on the ground in Xueyanzhou.

古文：初七日卧雪鹭洲。
现代文：初七日躺卧在雪鹭洲。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, he lay down on the snow-covered Pengzhou.

古文：下午霁，入城。
现代文：下午天气放晴，我进入城中。
English: In the afternoon the weather cleared and I entered the city.

古文：由东门出，至大觉庵，已在梅林对江，不及返螺子。
现代文：从东门走出城，到了大觉庵，那里已经在梅林的对岸，来不及返回螺子山。
English: I walked out of the city from the East Gate to Daikaku-an, where I was already on the opposite bank of the Meilin River, too late to return to Mt.

古文：初八日由鹭洲后渡梅林，五里。
现代文：初八日从雪鹭洲后渡江到梅林，共五里路。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a five-mile journey was made from Xueyuzhou Houdujiang to Meilin.

古文：又东北十里，大洲。
现代文：又往东北走十里，到大洲。
English: Another ten miles to the northeast, to Ozu.

古文：乃东十里入山，登洲岭，乃南山北度之脊，因西通大洲，故云。
现代文：于是向东十里进了山，往洲岭上攀登，这岭是南山向北延伸的山脊，因它西通大洲，所以叫这个名。
English: So he went into the mountains ten miles to the east and climbed up onto the mountain ridge. This ridge is the ridge of Nanshan Mountain extending to the north. It is called this name because it leads west to the continent.

古文：从岭直上五里，天狱山。
现代文：从岭间直往上爬五里，到天狱山。
English: From the ridge, climb straight up for five miles to Tianjingshan.

古文：下直南十里，宿南山下坑中季道人家。
现代文：从山上直往南朝下走十里，投宿在南山下深谷中的季道人家。
English: I walked ten miles straight down from the mountain to the south, and stayed at the homes of the Ji Dao people in the deep valley below the Nanshan.

古文：初九日东十里，出山口曰五十都。
现代文：初九日往东十里，走出山口叫五十都。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, go ten miles east, and walk out of the mountain pass called the fiftieth capital.

古文：东南十里，过施坊。
现代文：又往东南走十里，经过施坊。
English: Another ten miles to the southeast, past Shifang.

古文：人家甚盛。入山五里，直抵嵩华山西麓，日虎浮，拜萧氏。
现代文：进山五里，直抵嵩华山西麓叫虎浮的地方，拜访一个姓萧的人。
English: Five miles into the mountains, straight to a place called Tiger Float at the western foot of Mount Songhua, to visit a man surnamed Xiao.

古文：其外包山一重，即与施坊为界者也，东北从嵩华过脉，今凿而烧灰，西面有洞云庵向施坊焉。
现代文：虎浮外围环绕着一重山峦，它就是此处与施坊的界山，山脉从东北面的嵩华山越过，如今山中的石头被凿来烧石灰，它的西面有个洞云庵，朝向施坊。
English: The outer perimeter of the Tiger Float is surrounded by a mountain ridge, which is the border mountain with Shifang here. The mountains are crossed from the Songhua Mountain in the northeast, and now the stones in the mountain are hewn to burn lime. There is a cave hermitage on its west side, facing Shifang.

古文：初十日登嵩华山，上下俱十里。
现代文：初十日攀登嵩华山，上去和下来都是十里路程。
English: The first ten days of climbing Mount Songhua, up and down are ten miles away.

古文：十一日游洞云。
现代文：十一日游览洞云庵。
English: On the 11th day, visit Dongyun Monastery.

古文：由北脊来时，由南峡口大路入，往返俱六里。
现代文：从庵北面山脊上来的时候，是由南峡口的大路进入庵中的，往返都是六里路。
English: When coming up from the ridge on the north side of the hermitage, the main road from the mouth of the South Gorge enters the hermitage, and it is a six-mile round trip.

古文：十二日晨餐于萧处，上午始行。
现代文：十二日在萧家吃早餐，上午方出发。
English: On the 12th, we had breakfast at Xiao's house and set off in the morning.

古文：循嵩华而南五里，镜坊澎。
现代文：顺嵩华山往南走五里，到镜坊澎。
English: Shun Song Huashan and walk five miles south to Jingfang Peng.

古文：东为嵩华南走之支，北转而高峙者名香炉峰，其支盖于查埠止十里也。
现代文：此地东面是嵩华山向南延伸的分支，折往北面而高高耸起的叫香炉峰，它的分支延伸到查埠大概只有十里。
English: To the east of this place is a branch of Songhua Mountain that extends southward. When folded to the north, it rises high and is called Incense Burner Peak. Its branch extends to Chabu for about ten miles.

古文：又南五里登分水岭，逾岭东下五里为带源，大魁王艮所发处也。
现代文：又往南五里登上分水岭，越过岭头往东下行五里为带源，它是状元王良的发迹处。
English: Another five miles to the south up the watershed, across the ridge head down five miles to the east as the source, it is the birthplace of the original Wang Liang.

古文：由带源随水东行五里，出水口之峡，南入山。
现代文：从带源沿水流往东行五里，出了水口处的山峡，往南走进山。
English: From the source along the water flow to the east for five miles, out of the gorge at the mouth of the water, south into the mountains.

古文：三里为燕山，其处山低岭小，居民萧氏，俱筑山为塘以蓄水，水边盛放。
现代文：走三里为燕山，那里山低岭小，居民姓萧，家家依山筑起池塘用来蓄水，很多水流从池塘边上漫溢出去。
English: Take three miles to Yanshan, where the mountains are low and the hills are small, the residents are surnamed Xiao, and the families build ponds along the mountains to store water, and a lot of water overflows from the edge of the pond.

古文：复逾小岭而南，三里，过罗源桥，复与带溪水遇，盖其水出峡东行，循山南转至此。
现代文：又越过一座小山岭往南，走三里，跨过罗源桥，又与带溪水相遇，大概带溪水出了山峡往东流，然后顺山折往南流到此处。
English: I also crossed a small mountain range to the south, walked three miles, crossed Luoyuan Bridge, and met with a stream. The stream probably flowed out of the gorge to the east, and then flowed south along the mountain to here.

古文：度桥而南，山始大开，又五里宿于水北。
现代文：过了桥往南走，山峦才远离开，又走五里投宿在水北。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking south, the hawthorn was far away, and I walked five miles to stay in the north of the water.

古文：十三日由水北度桥，直南五里，渡沪溪桥，是为夏朗，即刘大魁名俨发迹处也。
现代文：十三日从水北越过桥，直向南走五里，越过沪溪桥即为夏朗，是刘状元发迹的地方。
English: On the 13th, he crossed the bridge from the north of the water and walked five miles straight to the south. After crossing the Huxi Bridge, he reached Xia Lang, which is the place where Liu Jieyuan started his career.

古文：又南五里，为西园张氏，是日在其家。
现代文：又往南走五里，为张家居住的西园，这夭我呆在张家。
English: I walked another five miles to the south, to the West Garden, where the Zhang family lived. This time I stayed with the Zhang family.

古文：下午，淮河自罗坡来。
现代文：下午，淮河从罗坡来到西园。
English: In the afternoon, the Huaihe River came from Luopo to Xiyuan.

古文：十四日雨雪。
现代文：十四日雨雪交加。
English: It rained and snowed on the 14th.

古文：淮河同乃郎携酒来。
现代文：淮河和他儿子携酒来到我住处一道畅饮。
English: Huaihe and his son came to my place with wine to drink together.

古文：是晚二巫归。
现代文：这晚张二巫回到家。
English: This evening, Zhang Erwu returned home.

古文：十五日霁，风寒甚。
现代文：十五日天气晴开，但寒风刺骨。
English: On the 15th, the weather was fine, but the cold wind was biting.

古文：晚往西山。
现代文：晚上前往西山。
English: In the evening, head to West Mountain.

古文：十六日张氏公祠宴。
现代文：十六日在张氏公祠赴宴。
English: On the 16th, they went to a banquet at Zhang's Public Shrine.

古文：十七日五教祠宴。
现代文：十七日在五教祠赴宴。
English: On the 17th, I went to a banquet at Wujiao Temple.

