古文：二十七日鸡初鸣，自新宁西南行。
现代文：二十七日鸡刚叫，自新宁往西南行。
English: On the 27th, the rooster crowed and rode from Shining to the southwest.

古文：已转西北，直逼西峰之下，乃南转，共八里，江东岸石根突兀，上覆中空，已为幻矣。
现代文：不久转向西北，直逼到西峰之下，于是向南转，共行八里，江东岸岩石突兀，上方下覆中间空心，已成为幻景了。
English: Soon I turned to the northwest, straight under the west peak, and then turned to the south, a total of eight miles, the east bank of the river is rocky and abrupt, and the top is covered with a hollow in the middle, which has become a fantasy.

古文：忽一转而双崖前突，蛩石高连，下辟如阊阖中通，上架如桥梁飞亘，更巧幻中雄观也。
现代文：突然一转就见一双山崖在前方突起，水边巨石高大相连，下边裂开如天门，中间相通，上高架如桥梁飞贯，更是奇巧变幻中的雄伟奇观了。
English: Suddenly, I saw a pair of cliffs protruding in front of me. The waterfront boulders were tall and connected. The lower side was cracked like the gates of heaven, and the middle was connected. The upper ledge was like a bridge flying through. It was even more of a magnificent spectacle in its strange transformation.

古文：但恨舟过其前而不得一登其上，且无知者质之，所谓 狮石  洞府 ，皆以意测，是耶？
现代文：只恨船经过它前边却不能登到它上面去一次，而且又没有知道这里的人询问他，所谓的 狮石 、 洞府 都是凭心意推测，是这里吗？
English: He hated that the ship passed in front of him, but he couldn't go up to it. Moreover, people who didn't know about this place asked him about it. The so-called Lion Rock and Cave Town were all guessed by heart. Was it here?

古文：非耶？
现代文：还是不是？
English: Or not?

古文：又一里，有水自东南来会，所谓冲江今称渠荣河也。其源发自忠州。
现代文：又行一里，有江水自东南流来会合，是所谓的冲江了。它的源头发源于忠州。
English: Another mile further on, there is a junction of river water flowing from the southeast, a so-called rushing river. Its headwaters originate in Chungju.

古文：又南三里，则江东岸一峰甚峭，其北垂环腋转截处，有洞西向者累累，然皆悬而无路。
现代文：又南行三里，就见江东岸一座山峰非常陡峭，它北面下垂向侧旁环绕转截之处，有向西的山洞层层叠叠，但都高悬无路。
English: Three miles further south, on the east bank of the river, there is a very steep mountain peak. It hangs down to the side to the north and surrounds the turning point. There are caves to the west, but they are all high and there is no road.

古文：又西曲南转，共八里，过那勒，风帆甚利，舟人以乡人泊此，复泊而饮。
现代文：又由西弯转向南，共行八里，经过那勒，船帆顺风十分顺利，船夫因为有同乡停泊在此，又停下来饮酒。
English: They also turned from the west bend to the south, a total of eight miles. After passing Nara, the sail was very smooth with a favorable wind. The boatman stopped to drink again because a fellow countryman was anchored here.

古文：余乃登陆为穿山、犀牛二岩之游，舟竟泊此。
现代文：我便登陆去穿山、犀牛岩两个岩洞游览，船始终停在此地。
English: I then disembarked to explore the two caves of Piercing Mountain and Rhinoceros Rock, and the boat always stopped here.

古文：那勒在江东岸，居民颇盛。
现代文：那勒在江东岸，居民十分繁荣。
English: Nalai is on the east bank of the Yangtze River, and its residents are very prosperous.

古文：问犀牛岩，土人皆莫知，误指南向穆窑。
现代文：打听犀牛岩，当地人都不知道，错指为向南的穆窑。
English: When inquiring about Rhinoceros Rock, the locals did not know, and mistakenly referred to it as Mu Yao to the south.

古文：乃透两峰之下，西南三里，有溪自东南来入大江。
现代文：于是穿越在两峰之下，向西南走三里，有溪水自东南来流入大江。
English: So I crossed under the two peaks and walked three miles to the southwest, where streams flowed into the big river from the southeast.

古文：流小而悍，淙淙有声，新甃跨其上，甚整。
现代文：水小但汹涌，发出涂涂的水声，新砌的石桥跨在溪上，十分整齐。
English: The water is small but turbulent, emitting the sound of rushing water. The newly built stone bridge spans the stream and is very neat.

古文：其源发自江州，土人谓之横江。
现代文：它的源头发源于江州，当地人把它称为横江。
English: Its source originates from Jiangzhou, and the locals call it the Hengjiang River.

古文：越梁而南，即为穆窑村，有市肆西临江浒。
现代文：越过桥往南行，马上就是穆窑村，有街市店铺向西面临江边。
English: After crossing the bridge to the south, Muyao Village is immediately ahead, with street markets and shops facing the river to the west.

古文：问犀牛岩不得，得大岩。
现代文：打听不到犀牛岩，找到大岩。
English: I couldn't find the rhinoceros rock, but I found the big rock.

古文：岩在其南一里，群峰排列，岩在峰半，其门西向。
现代文：岩洞在村南一里，群峰排列，洞在山峰半腰，洞口向西。
English: The cave is one mile south of the village, the peaks are lined up, the cave is halfway up the mountain, and the cave entrance is to the west.

古文：攀崖石而上，抵门，始西见江流横其前，山腹透其后。
现代文：攀石崖上登，到达洞口，这才望见西面江流横在山前，穿透山腹通到山后。
English: After climbing up the rock cliff and reaching the mouth of the cave, we could see the west river flowing in front of the mountain and penetrating through the mountainside to the back of the mountain.

古文：又见隔山回环于后门之外，翠壁掩映。
现代文：又见后洞口外边隔山回环之处，掩映着苍翠的崖壁。
English: You can also see the mountain ring around the outside of the entrance to the cave at the back, hiding the green cliffs.

古文：乃由洞上跻，踞其中扃，则东西对辟，两门交透。
现代文：于是由洞内上登，坐在洞中间的门洞中，就见东西两头相向敞开，两个洞口相通。
English: So he climbed up from inside the cave and sat in the doorway in the middle of the cave. He saw that the east and west sides were open to each other, and the two openings were connected.

古文：其上垂石骈乳，凝结两旁；其内西下东上，故东透之门，高出西门之顶，自外望之，不知中之贯彻，必入门而后见焉。
现代文：顶上垂下众多的钟乳石，凝结在两旁；洞内西边低东面高，所以通到东面的洞口，高出西边洞口的顶部，从外边望去，不知中间是贯通的，必定要进洞后才能见到。
English: There are many stalactites hanging down from the top, condensed on both sides; the west side of the cave is low and the east side is high, so it leads to the east hole, higher than the top of the west hole, looking from the outside, I don't know if the middle is through, I must go into the hole to see it.

古文：两门外俱削壁千丈，轰列云表，而东门地势既崇，上壁尤峭，下趾弥峻，环对诸岩，自门北迤逦转东，又南抱围成深谷，若另辟一翠微世界。
现代文：两边洞口外都是千丈高的峭壁，崩裂开来立于云天之外，而东洞口地势既已高峻，上边的石壁尤其陡峭，下边的峭壁根部更加陡峻，呈环状面对着诸洞。从洞口向北曲曲折折转到东面，又在南面围抱成深谷，好似另辟出一个山色翠微的世界。
English: On both sides of the mouth of the cave, there are cliffs that are thousands of meters high. They are cracked open and stand out of the clouds, while the east mouth of the cave is already high, the upper stone wall is particularly steep, and the lower cliff base is even steeper, facing the caves in a ring shape. From the mouth of the cave, it twists and turns to the north to the east, and it is surrounded by a deep valley in the south, as if it were another mountainous world.

古文：其下旋转西去，谷口石崖交错，不得而窥也。
现代文：那以下旋转着向西而去，山谷口石崖交错，不能窥见了。
English: Below that, spinning to the west, the rocky cliffs at the mouth of the valley are interlaced and cannot be glimpsed.

古文：复自前洞下山，循山北行。
现代文：又从前洞下山，沿着山往北行。
English: I went down the mountain from the front cave and walked along the mountain to the north.

古文：一里，过穆窑，问知犀牛洞在麒麟村，乃过石梁东北行。
现代文：一里，经过穆窑，问知犀牛洞在麒麟村，于是过石桥往东北行。
English: After passing Muyao, I asked if the rhinoceros cave was in Kirin village, so I crossed the stone bridge to the northeast.

古文：三里，至麒麟。
现代文：三里，走到麒麟村。
English: I walked three miles to Kirin Village.

古文：盖其村在那勒东二里，三村鼎足，而穆窑稍南。
现代文：原来此村在那勒东面三里，三个村庄像鼎足一样，而穆窑稍偏南些。
English: Originally, this village was three miles east of Nara, and the three villages were as close as a stone's throw, while Muyao was slightly south.

古文：使那勒人即指此，何由向彼得穿岩耶？
现代文：假使那勒人马上指引到这里，从哪里能走向那里找到穿岩呢？
English: If the Nahlians had guided them here, where could they have gone to find the pierced rock?

古文：麒麟村人指犀牛洞在北山东峰之上，相去只里许耳。
现代文：麒麟村的人指点犀牛洞在北山的东峰之上，相距只有一里左右而已。
English: People from Kirin Village pointed out that the rhinoceros cave is on the east peak of the North Mountain, and the distance is only about one mile.

古文：至其下，不得路。
现代文：来到山下，找不到路。
English: I came to the bottom of the mountain and couldn't find my way.

古文：闻岩下伐木声，披荆攀棘，呼之不应，觅之不见得，遂复出大路旁。
现代文：听到岩洞下有伐木声，拨开荆棘抓着刺丛，呼唤他不答应，找他又见不到，只好又出到大路旁。
English: Hearing the sound of felling under the cave, he pushed aside the thorns and clutched at the thorn bushes, calling out to him, but he did not answer, he could not see him, so he had to go out to the side of the road again.

古文：时已过午，虽与舟人期抵午返舟，即舟去腹枵，亦俱不顾，冀一得岩。
现代文：此时已过正午，虽与船夫约好到中午就返船，但即便是船离时就肚中空空，也全然不顾，希望一下子找到岩洞。
English: At this time, it was already past noon, and although we had agreed with the boatman to return to the boat by noon, even if the boat left with an empty stomach, we did not care at all, hoping to find the cave at once.

古文：而询之途人，竟无知者。
现代文：可询问过路人，竟然无人知道。
English: You can ask passers-by, but no one knows.

古文：以为尚在山北。乃盘山东北隅，循大道行。
现代文：以为还在山北面，就绕到山的东北隅，沿大道走。
English: Thinking that I was still on the north side of the mountain, I walked around to the northeast corner of the mountain and walked along the avenue.

古文：二里，见有岐北转，且有烧痕焉。
现代文：道路西北全是石峰。二里，见有条岔道转向北，且有烧火的痕迹在这里。
English: The road to the northwest is all stone pinnacles. After two miles, there is a turnoff to the north, and there are traces of fire here.

古文：初，麒麟村人云： 抵山下烧痕处，即登岩道。 
现代文：当初，麒麟村的人说： 走到山下有火烧的痕迹之处，就是上登岩洞的路。 
English: At first, the people of Kirin Village said, "If you go to the place where there are signs of fire at the bottom of the mountain, that is the way to climb the cave."

古文：余以为此必是矣，竭蹶前趋，遂北入山夹。
现代文：我以为这里必定是了，尽力跌跌撞撞往前赶，于是向北走入山间峡谷中。
English: I thought this must be it, and stumbled as hard as I could, heading north into the mountain canyon.

古文：其夹两旁峰攒崖叠，中道平直，有车路焉。
现代文：这个峡谷两旁山峰攒聚石崖层叠，中间的山沟又平又直，有马车路。
English: On both sides of this canyon, there are peaks and cliffs, and the middle ravine is flat and straight, with a carriage road.

古文：循之里余，见路旁有停车四五辆，有数牛散牧于麓，有数人分樵于崖。
现代文：顺着路走一里多，见路旁有四五辆停着的车，山麓上放有几头牛，有几个人分散在山崖上打柴。
English: After walking along the road for more than a mile, I saw four or five cars parked by the roadside, several cows at the foot of the mountain, and several people scattered on the cliff to collect firewood.

古文：遍叩之，俱不知有岩者。
现代文：问遍这几人，都不知有岩洞。
English: After questioning all these people, none of them knew that there was a cave.

古文：盖其皆远村，且牧且樵，以车为载者。
现代文：原来他们都来自远处的村庄，边放牧边打柴，用车装载木柴。
English: It turned out that they all came from distant villages, grazing and collecting firewood, and loading the trucks with firewood.

古文：过此，车路渐堙。
现代文：过了此地，马车路渐渐隐没了。
English: Beyond here, the carriage road fades into the distance.

古文：又入一里，夹转而东，四眺重崖，皆悬绝无径，而西崖尤为峻峭。
现代文：又深入一里，峡谷转向东，四面眺望重重山崖，全都悬绝无路，而西边的山崖尤为峻峭。
English: After another mile, the canyon turns east, and you can see cliffs on all sides, all of which are impassable, and the cliffs on the west side are particularly steep.

古文：方徘徊间，有负竹而出深丛者，遥呼问之，彼摇手曰： 误矣！ 
现代文：正在徘徊之间，有个背着竹子从深树丛中出来的人，远远呼叫着问他，他摇手说： 错了！ 
English: While he was wandering about, a man with a bamboo pole on his back came out of the deep trees and called out to him from a distance. He waved his hand and said, "Wrong!"

古文：问： 岩何在？ 
现代文：问： 岩洞在哪里？ 
English: Q: Where is the cave?

古文：曰： 可随我出。 
现代文：答： 可随我出去。 
English: A: You can go out with me.

古文：从之出，至前停车处，细叩之，其人亦茫然不知，第以为此中路绝，故呼余出耳。
现代文：跟随他出来，走到先前停车之处，细细问他，此人也茫然不知，只是认为这里边路断了，所以把我叫出来罢了。
English: I followed him out, walked to the place where I had parked earlier, and asked him in detail. He was also at a loss, but he thought that the road was broken here, so he just called me out.

古文：余乃舍而复人，抵其北，复抵其东，共二里，夹环为坞，中平如砥，而四面崖回嶂截，深丛密翳，径道遂穷。
现代文：我于是离开他重新走进去，走到山北麓，又走到山东麓，共走二里，峡谷环绕成山坞，中央平坦得如同磨刀石，可四面山崖回绕险峰横亘，深树丛林密蔽，道路终于断了。
English: So I left him and walked back in, walked to the northern foot of the mountain, and then to the eastern foot of the mountain, a total of two miles. The canyon was surrounded by a dock, the center was flat as a grindstone, but the cliffs on all sides stretched around the dangerous peak, the deep forest was dense, and the road was finally broken.

古文：然其中又有停车散牛而樵者，其不知与前无异也。
现代文：然而山坞中又有停着车子放牛打柴的人，他们也同先前的人一样不知岩洞在何处。
English: However, in the dockyard there are also people who have parked their cars to drive cattle and collect firewood, and they, like the previous people, do not know where the cave is.

古文：余从莽棘中出没搜径，终不可得，始怅然出夹。
现代文：我在丛莽荆棘中出没，搜寻小径，始终不能找到，这才怅怅不乐地走出峡谷。
English: I poked around in the thorn bushes, searching for a trail, never finding one, and walked unhappily out of the canyon.

古文：余观此夹，外入既深，中蟠亦邃，上有飞岩，旁无余径，亦一胜境。
现代文：我观察这个峡谷，从外边走去既已很深，中间弯弯曲曲也很深邃，上有飞石，四旁没有其他路径，也是一处胜境。
English: I looked at the canyon, it was already very deep when I walked from the outside, the bends in the middle were also very deep, there were flying rocks, there were no other paths around, and it was also a place of victory.

古文：其东向逾脊而过，度即舟行所过。
现代文：从这里向东越过山脊，估计就是乘船走过的地方。
English: From here, we crossed the ridge to the east, and it is estimated that this is where we went by boat.

古文：东岸有洞累累者，第崖悬路塞，无从着足。
现代文：东岸有个地方山洞重重叠叠，只是山崖高悬路径堵塞，无从落脚。
English: There is a place on the east coast where caves overlap, but the high cliff path is blocked, making it impossible to land.

古文：然其肺腑未穷，而枝干已抉，亦无负一番跋履也。
现代文：虽然它的核心部分没有穷究，但枝干已经剔出来了，也不辜负我跋涉一番了。
English: Although the core part of it has not been exhausted, the branches have been cut out, and it is worthy of my trek.

古文：共五里，仍西南至麒麟村北大路旁，前望隔垅有烧痕一围，亟趋，见痕间有微径，直趋前所觅伐木声处，第石环丛隔，一时莫得耳，余以为此必无疑矣。
现代文：共走五里，仍向西南来到麒麟村北的大路旁，望见前方隔着土陇之处有一圈烧火的痕迹，急忙赶过去，见火烧痕迹间有条小路，一直赶到先前寻找伐木声的地方，但见石崖环绕丛林相隔，一时之间没找到罢了，我以为此地必是无疑了。
English: After walking a total of five miles, I still went southwest to the side of the main road north of Kirin Village. I saw a circle of fire marks across the mound ahead, and hurried over. I saw a path between the fire marks, and drove all the way to the place where I had previously searched for the sound of logging. However, I saw the stone cliff surrounded by the jungle, and I couldn't find it for a while. I thought there was no doubt about this place.

古文：其时已下午，虽腹中馁甚，念此岩必不可失，益贾勇直前，攀危崖，历丛茅。
现代文：此时已是下午，虽然肚中饿极了，心想此洞必定不能错失，越加鼓足勇气一往直前，攀险崖，经过成丛的茅草。
English: By this time it was already afternoon, and although I was extremely hungry, I thought that this hole must not be missed, and I gathered more and more courage to go straight ahead, climb the cliff, and pass through the clumps of thatch.

古文：然崖之悬处，俱有支石为梯；茅之深处，俱有践痕覆地，并无疑左道邪道矣。
现代文：不过山崖悬绝之处，都有石头支着作为梯子；茅草的深处，都有脚踩的痕迹覆盖在地上，并不怀疑走错道了。
English: But where the cliffs overhang, there are stones propped up as ladders; in the depths of the thatch, there are footprints covering the ground, and they do not suspect that they have taken the wrong path.

古文：乃愈上愈远，西望南垂，横脊攒石，森森已出其上；东望南突，回峰孤崖，兀兀将并其巅，独一径北跻。
现代文：于是越上越远，西望南垂横亘的山脊，攒聚的石峰森森而立，已高出在群峰之上；东望南突回绕的山峰，孤绝的悬崖兀立着，将与峰顶齐平，只有一条小径向北上登。
English: As a result, the higher you go, the further away you get. If you look to the south to the west, you can see the sweeping mountain ridge, and the piles of craggy stone peaks already tower above the peaks. If you look to the south to the east, you can see the jagged peaks, and the isolated cliffs. They are level with the peak, and there is only one path to the north.

古文：二里，越高峰之顶，以为此岩当从顶上行，不意路复逾顶北下，更下瞰北坞，即前误入夹中所云 重崖悬处 也。
现代文：二里，翻越高峰之顶，以为这个岩洞应当从峰上走，想不到路又越过峰顶往北下岭，再下瞰北面的山坞，就是先前误入的峡谷中所说的 重重山崖悬绝之处 了。
English: For two miles, I climbed over the top of the peak, thinking that this rock cave should be reached from the peak. Unexpectedly, I crossed the peak to the lower ridge to the north, and then looked down at the dock to the north, which was the place where the heavy cliff was suspended in the canyon that I had previously mistakenly entered.

古文：既深入其奥，又高越其巅，余之寻岩亦不遗余力矣。
现代文：既深入到它的隐秘之处，又高高越过了它的峰顶，我寻找岩洞也算不遗余力了。
English: Having penetrated deep into its recesses and soared high above its summit, I have spared no effort in finding the cave.

古文：然径路愈微，西下岭坳，遂成茅洼棘峡，翳不可行。
现代文：然而小路越来越小，往西下到岭坳，终于成了满是茅草荆棘地势下洼的峡谷，密蔽不可行。
English: However, the path became smaller and smaller, down to the west to Lingyao, and finally became a canyon full of thatch and thorns. It was not feasible to conceal it.

古文：犹攀坠久之，仍不得路。
现代文：依然攀着下坠了很久，仍找不到路。
English: Still clinging to the downfall for a long time, still can not find a way.

古文：复一里，仍旧路南逾高顶。
现代文：再走一里，仍沿原路向南越过高高的峰顶。
English: After walking another mile, I still followed the original path to the south and passed the high peak.

古文：又二里，下至烧痕间，见石隙间复有一路望东峡上，其径正造孤崖兀兀之下，始与麒麟人所指若合符节军事或外交上的凭证。
现代文：又行二里，下到火烧痕迹之间，见石缝中又有一条路向着东面的峡谷上去，这条小径正是通到兀立孤绝的悬崖之下，这才与麒麟村的人指的路好像符节一样相合。
English: Another two miles down, between the burn marks, I saw another path through the cracks in the stone, heading up the canyon to the east. This path led under the isolated cliff, which matched the path pointed out by the people of Kirin Village like a rhyme.

古文：乃知径当咫尺，而迂历自迷，三误三返而终得之，不谓与山灵无缘也。
现代文：于是明白了路径近在咫尺，却绕弯子自己走迷了路，三次走错三次返回来但最终找到了它，不能说是与山中灵秀的景色无缘了。
English: So I understood that the path was close at hand, but I lost my way around the bend, went wrong three times and came back three times, but finally found it. I can't say that I missed the beautiful scenery in the mountains.

古文：但日色渐下，亟望崖上跻，悬磴甚峻。
现代文：但日色渐渐西下，连忙望着悬崖上登，高悬的石瞪十分陡峻。
English: However, as the sun gradually set, I kept looking up at the cliff. The high-hanging rocks were very steep.

古文：逾半里，即抵孤崖之北。
现代文：翻越了半里，立即抵达孤悬山崖的北面。
English: After climbing half a mile, I immediately arrived at the north side of the lonely cliff.

古文：始知是崖回耸于高峰之间，从东转西向，若独角中突， 犀牛 之名以此。
现代文：才知这座悬崖回绕耸立在高峰之间，从东转向西，有如独角在中间突起， 犀牛 的名字是因为这个原因。
English: It was only then that I realised that the cliff towered between the peaks, turning from east to west, like a unicorn protruding in the middle, hence the name rhinoceros.

古文：崖北一脊，北属高峰，与东崖转处对。
现代文：悬崖北面有一条山脊，北边连着高峰，与东面山崖转折处相对。
English: There is a ridge on the north side of the cliff, with the peak on the north side, opposite the turning point of the cliff on the east side.

古文：脊上巨石巍峙，若当关之兽，与独角并而支其腋。
现代文：山脊上一块巨石巍然矗立，好像把守关口的猛兽，与独角并立并支撑着它的侧旁。
English: On the ridge, a huge boulder looms, like a fierce beast guarding the pass, standing alongside the unicorn and supporting its side.

古文：巨石中裂竖穴，内嵌一石圭，高丈余，两旁俱巨石谨夹，而上复覆之，若剜空而置其间者。
现代文：巨石从中裂开一个竖穴，里面嵌着一个石圭，高一丈多，两旁都有巨石恭谨地夹住它；而上方又覆盖着它，好像是人挖空洞后放置在其中的样子。
English: The boulder cleaves a vertical hole in it, in which there is embedded a cairn, much higher, on both sides of which there are boulders that respectfully clamp it; and above it is covered with it, as if it were a man digging a hole and placing it in it.

古文：圭石赭赤，与一山之石迥别，颇似禹陵窆石，而此则外有巨石为冒，觉更有异耳。
现代文：石圭的颜色是储红色，与整座山的岩石完全不同，很像禹陵的定石，但此处外边却有巨石覆盖着，觉得更有点奇特罢了。
English: The color of the stalagmite is deep red, completely different from the rock of the entire mountain. It is very similar to the stalagmite of Yuling, but here it is covered with boulders on the outside, which is even more peculiar.

古文：脊东下坠成洼，深若回渊，其上削崖四合，环转无隙，高墉城墙大纛，上与天齐，中圆若规。
现代文：山脊东面下坠成洼地，深得好似回绕的深渊，它上方悬崖四面合拢，绕成环形没有空缺，高大的城墙上竖着大旗，上边与天一样高，中间圆得好像圆规。
English: To the east of the ridge, a depression plunges down, as deep as a circling abyss. Above it, the cliffs close in on all sides, forming a loop with no gaps. On the high city wall, there is a large flag, as high as the sky on the top and round as a compass in the middle.

古文：既逾脊上，即俯下渊底。
现代文：越到山脊上后，立即俯身下到深渊底部。
English: Once over the ridge, immediately dive down to the bottom of the abyss.

古文：南崖之下，有洞北向，其门高张，其内崆峒，深不知所止；四崖树蔓蒙密，渊底愈甚；崖旁俱有径可循，每至渊底，俱则翳不可前。
现代文：南面山崖之下，有个洞朝向北方，洞口高高张开，洞内空阔，深得不知它的尽头；四面山崖上树丛蔓枝浓密，深渊底部更加浓密；山崖旁都有小径可顺着走，每条路走到深渊底下，却全都被遮蔽着不可前进。
English: Under the cliff to the south, there is a cave facing the north, the mouth of the cave is high and wide, the cave is empty, so deep that you do not know its end; on all sides of the cliff, the bushes are thick with twigs and branches, and the bottom of the abyss is even more dense; there are paths along the cliff, and every path goes to the bottom of the abyss, but they are all covered and cannot move forward.

古文：使芟除净尽，则环崖高拱，平底如掌，复有深洞崡岈其内，洞天福地，舍此其谁？
现代文：假如全部铲除干净，那么环绕的山崖高高隆起，平坦的底部如同手掌，又有样子深邃的深洞含在其内，洞天福地，舍弃此地那将是哪里呢？
English: If it were all uprooted, then the surrounding cliffs would rise high, the flat bottom would be like the palm of a hand, and there would be a deep, deep hole in it, the cave of heaven and earth. Where would it be if this place were abandoned?

古文：余披循深密，静若太古，杳然忘世。
现代文：我分开深密的林木顺着走，寂静得好似远古混沌之时，沉寂幽静忘了是在人世。
English: When I walk along the deep woods, the silence is like the ancient chaos, the silence is forgotten in the human world.

古文：第腹枵足疲，日色将坠，乃逾脊西下，从麒麟村北西行。
现代文：只是肚中饥饿脚下疲乏，日色将要西坠，便越过山脊向西下山，从麒麟村北向西行。
English: But with hunger in their stomachs and fatigue under their feet, and with the sun about to set, they crossed the ridge and headed west down the mountain, traveling north to west from Kirin Village.

古文：二里，抵那勒下舟，舟犹未发，日已沉渊矣。
现代文：二里路，抵达那勒下船，船还没开，落日已沉入深渊中了。
English: After two miles, we arrived at Nara and disembarked. The boat had not yet set sail, and the setting sun had already sunk into the abyss.

古文：二十八日晨餐后，自那勒放舟南行。
现代文：二十八日早餐后，从那勒放船向南行。
English: After breakfast on the 28th, we set sail from Nahle, heading south.

古文：旋转西北三里，直逼双峰石壁下，再折东南五里，有小水自东南来入，即穆窑也。
现代文：随即转向西北行三里，直逼两座山峰的石壁之下，再折向东南行五里，有小溪自东南来流入江中，就是穆窑了。
English: Then I turned northwest for three miles, straight under the stone walls of the two peaks, and then turned southeast for five miles. There was a stream flowing into the river from the southeast, which was Muyao.

古文：又西南一里，过穿山之西，从舟遥望，只见洞门，不见透穴。
现代文：又向西南一里，经过穿山西面，从船上远望，只见洞口，看不见穿通的洞穴。
English: Another mile to the southwest, passing through the western side of the mountain, from the ship's distant view, only the mouth of the cave can be seen, and the cave through which it passes cannot be seen.

古文：又一里，西入两山隙，于是回旌多西北行矣。
现代文：又行一里，向西进入两山之间的缺口，从这里起似族旗般回绕的群山多半往西北延伸了。
English: I walked another mile and entered the gap between the two mountains to the west. From here, the mountains that wrap around like a family flag mostly extended to the northwest.

古文：又五里，江北岸山崖陡绝，有小峰如浮屠插其前，又有洞缀其半。
现代文：又行五里，江北岸山崖陡绝，有座小峰如佛塔一样插在群山间，又有个向南的山洞点缀在山半腰。
English: After another five miles, the cliffs on the north bank of the river are extremely steep. There is a small peak like a pagoda inserted between the mountains, and a cave to the south is dotted halfway up the mountain.

古文：又六里，又有山蜿蜒而北，是曰界牌山，西即太平境矣。
现代文：又行六里，又有山向北蜿蜒延伸，这叫做界牌山，西面就是太平府的辖境。
English: Six miles further on, there is another mountain that winds its way to the north. This is called Jiepai Mountain. To the west is the jurisdiction of Taiping Prefecture.

古文：盖江之北岸，新宁、太平以此山分界，而南岸则俱新宁也。
现代文：大体上江的北岸，新宁州、太平府以此山作为分界，而南岸便全属新宁了。
English: For the most part, the northern bank of the upper reaches of the river, Shining Prefecture and Taiping Prefecture use this mountain as a boundary, while the southern bank is entirely in Shining.

古文：由此舟遂东转，已复西北抵北山下，循之西向行，又共六里矣。
现代文：又行二里，船转向北行，江西岸群峰巍峨，一峰在前方突起，俗名叫 五虎出洞 。由此船便转向东，不久又向西北抵达北山之下，沿北山向西行，又共行六里。
English: After another two miles, the ship turned to the north. The west bank of the river was dotted with towering peaks, and one peak jutted out in front, commonly known as the Five Tigers' Cave. From there, the ship turned to the east, and soon reached the bottom of the North Mountain in the northwest, and traveled west along the North Mountain for another six miles.

古文：过安定堡，北山既尽，南山复出，又西循之。
现代文：过了安定堡，北山走完后，南山又突现出来，又沿着它向西行。
English: After passing the Fort of Stability, after finishing the North Mountain, the South Mountain emerged again and followed it to the west.

古文：三里，随山北转，过花梨村。
现代文：三里，随山势往北转，经过花梨村。
English: Sanli, turn north with the mountain, passing through the village of Huali.

古文：又西北转，随江北山二里，转而西，随江南山三里，又暮行三里，泊于晓梦村。
现代文：又向西北转去，顺江北岸的山行二里，转向西，顺江南岸的山行三里，又在暮色中行三里，停泊在晚梦村。
English: It also turned to the northwest, two miles up the mountain on the north bank of the Shun River, turned to the west, three miles up the mountain on the south bank of the Shun River, and three miles in the twilight, anchored in the evening dream village.

古文：属新宁。是日共行四十里。
现代文：这一天共行船四十里。
English: On this day, we sailed a total of forty miles.

古文：二十九日循南岸山行二里，转北又一里，为驮塘。
现代文：二十九日沿南岸的山行二里，转向北又行一里，是驮塘。
English: On the 29th, it was a two-mile hike along the south bank and a one-mile hike to the north. It was Qutang.

古文：又二里转而西，山势渐开，又五里，西南过驮卢今作驮芦，山开水绕，百家之市，倚江北岸。
现代文：又行二里转向西，山势渐渐开阔起来，又行五里，往西南经过驮卢，山势开阔江流环绕，是个有百户人家的集市，紧靠江北岸。
English: Another two miles to the west, the mountain gradually opens up, and another five miles to the southwest, passing Bailu, the mountain opens up and is surrounded by the river. It is a market with a hundred households, close to the north bank of the river.

古文：旧为崇善地，国初迁太平府治于此，旋还丽江，今则迁驮朴驿于此，名曰驮柴。
现代文：旧时是崇善县的辖地，国朝初年迁太平府在此设治，不久迁回丽江，今天则把驮朴骚迁到此地，名叫驮柴。
English: In the old days, it was under the jurisdiction of Chongshan County. In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the Taiping Prefecture was moved here to set up the government, and soon moved back to Lijiang. Today, it was moved to this place, and is called Weichai.

古文：盖此地虽宽衍，而隔江即新宁属，控制上流，自当以壶关为胜也。
现代文：大体上此地虽然宽广，可隔江处就是新宁州的属地，控制着上游，自然应当把壶关作为胜地了。
English: On the whole, although this place is wide, the place where the river can be separated is the territory of Shining State, which controls the upstream. It is natural that Kuguan should be regarded as a resort.

古文：江北岸太平之地，濒江虽多属崇善县即今崇左县，内石山之后，即为诸土州地，而左洲则横界焉。
现代文：江北岸太平府昨辖地，濒江地带虽然多半属于崇善县，江内石山的后方，马上就是各土州的属地，但左州却横隔在其中。
English: Taiping Prefecture on the north bank of the Yangtze River was under the jurisdiction of Taiping Prefecture last year, and although the area along the Yangtze River mostly belongs to Chongshan County, the back of the Inner Stone Mountain is immediately the territory of the various prefectures, but Zuozhou is separated in the middle.

古文：是日止行十里，舟人遂泊而不行。
现代文：这一夭只行船十里，船夫便停下来不走了。
English: This morning, after sailing only ten miles, the boatman stopped and wouldn't leave.

古文：十月初一日眯爽，循驮卢西北五里，稍转而南，南岸石峰复突。
现代文：十月初一日黎明，顺着驮卢向西北行五里，北岸是左州辖地，略转向南，南岸石峰重又突起。
English: At dawn on the first day of October, I drove five miles northwest along the Minlu River. The north bank was under the jurisdiction of Zuozhou, and I turned slightly south. The stone peaks on the south bank were heavy and protruding.

古文：又二里，复转西北，北岸亦有石山。
现代文：又行二里，再转向西北，北岸也有石山。
English: Walk another two miles, then turn to the northwest, there are also stone mountains on the north shore.

古文：三里，西南入峰夹间，于是挂帆而行。
现代文：三里，向西南进入山峰相夹之间，于是挂帆航行。
English: Three miles south-west into the mountains, we set sail.

古文：五里，渐转南向，有村在江东山坞间，曰驮木今作驮目，犹新宁属也。
现代文：五里，渐渐转向南，有村庄在江东岸的山坞中，叫驮木，还是新宁州的属地。
English: Wuli, gradually turned to the south, there is a village in the dock on the east bank of the river, called Shunmu, still belongs to Shining State.

古文：又西南五里，江西岸回崖雄削，骈障江流；南崖最高，有三洞东启；又南一峰稍低，其上洞辟尤巨。
现代文：又向西南行五里，江西岸回绕的山崖雄壮陡削，并立着挡住江流；南面的山崖最高，有三个洞朝东敞开；南面又有一峰稍低些，山上的山洞张开得特别巨大。
English: Another five miles to the southwest, the cliffs around the west bank of the river are steep and steep, and stand to block the flow of the river; the southern cliff is the highest, with three caves open to the east; there is another peak slightly lower to the south, and the caves on the mountain are particularly large.

古文：洞右崖石外跨，自峰顶下插江潭；崖右洞复透门而出，其中崆峒，其外交透。
现代文：洞右的石崖跨向外边，从峰顶下插到江边；石崖右边又通着一个洞口，洞中空阔，洞外相通。
English: The rock cliff on the right side of the cave extends outwards, from the top of the peak to the edge of the river; on the right side of the rock cliff there is a cave entrance, the cave is wide open, and the cave is open to the outside.

古文：自舟望之已奇，若置身其内，不知胜更何若矣！
现代文：从船上望去已很奇特，假如置身于洞内，不知优美之处更是什么样了！
English: The view from the boat is already very strange, if you are in the cave, I don't know what the beauty is like!

古文：又南二里，东岸石壁亦然，此地峰壁交映，江潆其间，更为胜绝。
现代文：又向南二里，东岸的石壁也是这样，此地山峰石壁交相辉映，江流萦绕在其中，更是绝顶优美。
English: Two miles to the south, the stone walls on the east bank are also like this. Here, the mountain peaks and stone walls reflect each other, and the river flows around them, which is even more beautiful.

古文：又一里，转向西行，又五里，渐转南行。
现代文：又行一里，转向西行，又是五里，渐转向南行。
English: Another mile, turning west, and another five miles, gradually turning south.

古文：已而东折，则北岸双崖高穹，崖半各有洞南向；南岸矶盘嘴叠，飞石凌空，二里，转向西南，上银瓮滩。
现代文：不久折向东，就见北岸两座山崖高高隆起，山崖半腰上各有山洞向南；南岸石矶盘踞，山嘴层叠，飞石凌空，无处不穿透相通，二里，转向西南，上行银瓮滩。
English: After a short while, turning to the east, I saw two high cliffs on the north shore, each with a cave to the south halfway up the cliff; on the south shore, the rocks were piled up, the mountain mouths were stacked, the flying rocks were soaring into the air, penetrating everywhere, two miles, turning to the southwest, and the upstream Yintai Beach.

古文：滩东，尖崖耸削绝壁，有形如瓮。
现代文：河滩开始有巨石，在中流横亘好像水坝。河滩东面，高耸的尖崖削成绝壁，形状有如瓦瓮。
English: The beach begins with boulders, extending like a dam in the middle of the stream. On the eastern side of the beach, towering cliffs are cut into cliffs, shaped like corrugated iron.

古文：《九成志》谓： 昔有仙丹成，遗瓮成银，人往取之，辄不得，而下望又复俨然。 《一统志》谓： 在南宁府境。 
现代文：《九域志》说： 从前有人炼成仙丹，遗下的瓦瓮变成银子，人前去取银子，总找不到，可从山下望去又十分像， 一统志》说： 在南宁府境内。 
English: "The History of the Nine Provinces" says: Once upon a time, someone distilled a cactus, and the corrugated iron that was left behind turned into silver. People went to get the silver, but they could never find it, but it looked very similar from the bottom of the mountain. "The History of the One Hundred Provinces" says: In the territory of Nanning Prefecture.

古文：盖江东岸犹新宁也。
现代文：原来江东岸仍属新宁州。
English: Originally, the east bank of the Yangtze River still belonged to Shining Province.

古文：转西五里，复转西北，盘东岸危崖二里，抵北山下。
现代文：转向西行五里，再转向西北，绕着东岸的危崖行二里，到达北山之下。
English: Turn to the west for five miles, then turn to the northwest, walk two miles around the cliff on the east bank, and reach the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：仍西向去，五里，又南转。
现代文：仍向西行去，五里，又向南转。
English: He still went west, five miles, and then turned south.

古文：既而转东一里，乃西向行，山开江旷，一望廓然。
现代文：随即转向东行一里，于是向西行，山势开阔江面空旷，一眼望去寥廓无边。
English: Then I turned to the east for one mile, and then to the west, the mountains were open, the river was empty, and there was nothing to see at a glance.

古文：是日行五十里。
现代文：又行五里天黑下来。
English: Another five miles and it was getting dark.

古文：计明日抵驮朴，望登陆行，惟虑路险，而顾奴旧病未痊。
现代文：又行二里停泊在捺利。江面空旷江岸荒寂，孤舟停泊无人为邻，整夜静悄悄的。估计明天抵达驮朴，希望登岸走陆路，只是考虑路途艰险，而顾奴的旧病还未痊愈。
English: They traveled another two miles and anchored in Guli. The river was empty, the riverbank was desolate, and the lone boat was anchored without a neighbor, quietly all night. It is estimated that they will arrive in Zibo tomorrow, and they hope to go ashore by land, but they are only considering the difficult journey, and Gu Nong's old illness has not yet recovered.

古文：不意中夜腹痛顿发，至晨遂胀满如鼓，此岚瘴所中无疑。
现代文：想不到半夜我腹痛忽然发作，到早晨肚子竟然胀得满满的像鼓一样，这无疑是中了山中的瘴气。
English: I couldn't have imagined that I would have a sudden attack of abdominal pain in the middle of the night, and that my stomach would swell to the size of a drum in the morning. This was undoubtedly the result of inhaling radon gas in the mountains.

古文：于是转侧俱难，长途之望，又一阻矣。
现代文：我转身侧睡都很难，走长途的指望，又多一重障碍了。
English: It's hard for me to turn over and sleep on my side, and the hope of walking a long distance is another obstacle.

古文：初二日昧爽，西北行。
现代文：初二日黎明，向西北行。
English: At dawn on the first two days, heading northwest.

古文：碧空如洗，晴朗弥甚。
现代文：碧空如洗，更加晴朗。
English: The sky is clear as can be, and it's getting even clearer.

古文：三里，抵江北危崖下。
现代文：三里，抵达江北岸的危崖下。
English: After three miles, we arrived at the foot of a cliff on the north bank of the river.

古文：转而南二里，过下果湾，有村倚崖临江，在江西岸。
现代文：转向南行二里，路过下果湾，有村庄背靠山崖面临江流，在江西岸。
English: Turning southbound for two miles, passing the Lower Fruit Bay, there are villages backed by cliffs facing the river flow, on the west bank of the river.

古文：又五里，有水自南来注，其声如雷，名响源，发于江州。
现代文：又行五里，有河水自南面流来注入，水声如雷，名叫响源，发源于江州。
English: Another five miles, there is river water flowing from the south to inject, the water sounds like thunder, called Xiangyuan, originated in Jiangzhou.

古文：水之西岸即为江州属，而新宁、江州以此水分界焉。
现代文：河的西岸就是江州的属地，而新宁州、江州以这条河分界。
English: The west bank of the river is the territory of Jiangzhou, and the river forms the border between Jiangzhou and Shining Province.

古文：水入江处，有天然石坝横绝水口如堵墙，其高逾丈，东西长十余丈，面平如砥，如甃而成者。
现代文：河水流入大江之处，有天然石坝横堵在河口如像一堵墙，石坝高处超过一丈，东西长十多丈，石面平滑得如同磨刀石，好像是砌筑而成的样子。
English: Where the river flows into the big river, there is a natural stone dam blocking the mouth of the river like a wall. The height of the stone dam is more than one story, and the length is more than ten stories. The stone surface is smooth like a sharpening stone, as if it were built.

古文：水逾其面，下坠江中，虽不甚高，而雪涛横披，殊瀑平泻，势阔而悍，正如钱塘八月潮，齐驱下坂，又一奇观也。
现代文：水漫过石面，下坠到江中，虽不十分高，可雪花般的波涛横着散开，特别少见的瀑布平铺流泻，水势宽阔而凶猛，正如钱塘江八月间的狂潮，一起奔流下斜坡，又是一处奇观了。
English: The water flows over the stone surface and falls into the river. Although it is not very high, the snowflake-like waves spread out horizontally. It is a particularly rare waterfall. The water is broad and fierce, just like the mad tide of the Qiantang River in August. It rushes down the slope together, and it is another wonder.

古文：过响水，其南岸忠州境虽辖于南宁，而濒江土司实始于此；北岸则为上果湾，有岩西向临江，上亦有村落焉。
现代文：过了响水，江南岸忠州的辖境虽属于南宁府管辖，可濒江地带土司的属地实际上从此开始；北岸就是上果湾，有岩洞向西临江，岸上也有村落。
English: After Xiangshui, although the jurisdiction of Chuzhou on the south bank of the river belongs to the jurisdiction of Nanning Prefecture, the jurisdiction of Tusi in the river area actually begins from here; the north bank is Shanggao Bay, there are rock caves west of the river, and there are villages on the shore.

古文：于是转北行一里，抵北山下。
现代文：从这里转向北行一里，到达北山下。
English: From here, turn north one mile to the bottom of North Mountain.

古文：转西北挂帆行，两岸山复叠出。
现代文：转向西北挂上帆航行，两岸的山再次层层叠叠出现。
English: Turning to the northwest to set sail, the mountains on both sides of the coast once again appeared in layers.

古文：二里为宋村，在江南岸，忠州属。
现代文：二里是宋村，有处八仙岩，是村中景色优美的地方。
English: Erli is a Song village, and there is a place called Hasshenyan, which is a place with beautiful scenery in the village.

古文：有八仙岩，为村中胜地。又三里，转东北，又二里，转西北，又三里，更转东北，两岸崖叠出递换，靡非异境。
现代文：又行三里，转向东北，又行二里，转向西北，又行三里，再转向东北，两岸石崖重重叠叠出现，交替变换，无处不是奇异之境。
English: Walk another three miles, turn to the northeast, walk another two miles, turn to the northwest, walk another three miles, and then turn to the northeast. The cliffs on both sides of the strait overlap and overlap, alternating and changing. Nowhere is this not a strange situation.

古文：转西北五里，又北转，而西岸一崖障天，崖半有洞东向。
现代文：转向西北行五里，又向北转，而西岸一座山崖遮住天空，山崖半中腰有个向东的山洞。
English: Turn northwest for five miles, turn north again, and on the west coast a cliff hides the sky, and halfway up the cliff there is a cave to the east.

古文：始见洞门双穴如连联，北穴大，南穴小，垂石外间而通其内；既而小者旁大者愈穹，忽划然中剜，光透其后。
现代文：开始时望见洞口有两个洞穴好像连在一起，北面的洞穴大，南面的洞穴小，岩石垂在外边但它们的里面是相通的；随即见北面的洞穴变大愈加弯隆，忽然猛地中间剑空，亮光从它后面透过来。
English: At first I saw two caves at the mouth of the cave as if they were connected, the cave to the north was large, the cave to the south was small, the rocks hung outside but they were connected inside; then I saw the cave to the north become larger and more curved, and suddenly there was a sword in the middle, and light came through from behind it.

古文：舟中仰眺，蛩石若连云驾空，明如皎月透影，洞前上下，皆危崖叠翠，倒影江潭，洵神仙之境，首于土界得之，转觉神州凡俗矣。
现代文：从船中仰面眺望，拱起来的岩石如连片的云彩在空中奔跑，明亮得好像皎洁的月亮透射出的光影，洞前边上下之处，都是危崖重叠满山翠色，倒影映在江边，真是神仙之境，首先在土司辖境内见到它，反而觉得中原神州大地都是平庸的了。
English: Looking up from the boat, the arched rocks run in the air like a continuous cloud, the light and shadow transmitted are as bright as the bright moon. The places up and down in front of the cave are the overlapping cliffs full of mountain green, and the reflection is reflected on the river side. It is truly a fairyland. I first saw it in the territory of the local government, but I felt that the land of Central Plains Shenzhou was mediocre.

古文：又北一里，东岸临江，焕然障空者为银山，劈崖截山之半，青黄赤白，斑烂缀色，与天光水影，互相飞动，阳朔画山犹为类大者耳。
现代文：南面有驮朴村，转个弯登到山后，听说可以攀登上去。又向北一里，在东岸临江处，光彩夺目遮蔽天空的山是银山，劈开的悬崖切断半座山，青黄赤白，点缀着五彩斑烂的色彩，与天光波影，互相飞动，阳朔的画山仍只是像狗一样罢了。
English: To the south, there is the village of Zhaopu, turn a corner and climb to the back of the mountain, it is said that it is possible to climb up. Another mile north, on the east bank of the river, the mountain that covers the sky with dazzling brilliance is the Silver Mountain. The split cliff cuts off half of the mountain, blue-yellow-red-white, dotted with multicolored mottled colors, and the skylight waves and shadows, flying each other. Yangshuo's picturesque mountain is still just like a dog.

古文：崖下有上下二洞，门俱西向。
现代文：悬崖下有上下两个洞，洞口都是向西。
English: Under the cliff there are two caves, one above and one below, both of which open to the west.

古文：上洞尤空邃，中悬石作大士形，上嵌层壁，下濒回潭，焉。一里，转而西，遂为驮朴今作驮柏，百家之市，尚在涯北一里。
现代文：上洞尤其空阔深邃，洞中悬着的岩石如观音菩萨的形态，上方嵌入层层石壁之上，下边濒临回漩的深水，无从上登其中，它北面纷纭的石窍很多，裂纹错落点缀在树丛间，呼吸着云雾，如独自含着润泽的美玉。一里，转向西，就是驮朴，是个百户人家的集市，还在江岸北边一里处。
English: The upper cave is especially wide and deep. The rock hanging in the cave is in the shape of a Guanyin Bodhisattva. Above, it is embedded in layers of stone walls. Below, there is deep water on the verge of returning to the whirlpool, and there is no way to climb up. There are many scattered crags on its northern side. Crackles are interspersed among the trees, breathing clouds and fog, like a beautiful jade containing luster. One mile, turning west, is Zibo, a market of a hundred households, still one mile north of the riverbank.

古文：东南即银山，西北又起层峦夹之，迤逦北去，中成蹊焉，而市倚之。
现代文：东南方就是银山，西北又耸起层层山峦夹住它，透逃向北而去，中间成为山路，而集市就紧靠着它。
English: In the southeast is the Silver Mountain, and in the northwest, there are layers of mountains rising up to catch it, and it escapes to the north. The middle becomes a mountain road, and the market is right next to it.

古文：陆路由此而北，则左州、养利诸道；江路由此而西，则太平、思明诸境也。
现代文：陆路由此往北走，是去左州、养利州各地的路；水路由此往西行，是到太平府、思明府各地去的。
English: The land route going north from here is the route to all parts of Zuozhou and Yaoli Prefecture; the water route going west from here is the route to all parts of Taiping Prefecture and Siming Prefecture.

古文：午抵驮朴，先登涯问道，或云： 通 ，或云： 塞 。
现代文：中午到驮朴，先登岸问路，有人说： 通。 有人说： 不通。 
English: At noon, when we arrived at Zibo, we first went ashore to ask for directions. Some people said, "Pass," while others said, "No pass."

古文：盖归顺为高平残破，路道不测，大意须候归顺人至，随之而前，则人众而行始便。
现代文：原来是归顺州被高平人攻破残杀，道路上有意想不到的危险，大体上的意思是必须等有归顺州的人来到，跟随他们前去，人多了走路才安全。
English: Originally, it was the Gaoping people who invaded and slaughtered the Guishun people, and there were unexpected dangers on the road. The general meaning is that it is necessary to wait for the Guishun people to come and follow them. It is only safe to walk when there are many people.

古文：归顺又候富州人至，其法亦如之。
现代文：归顺人又等富州人来到，办法也如此。
English: The same applies to the method of converting people and waiting for the Fuzhou people to come.

古文：二处人犹可待，惟顾奴病中加病，更令人惴惴耳。
现代文：两处的人还可以等待，只是顾奴病上加病，更令人惴惴不安了。
English: People in both places can still wait, but it's more worrisome that they're getting sicker and sicker.

古文：是日，即携行李寄宿逆旅主人家。
现代文：这天，立即带上行李寄宿在旅店主人家中。
English: On this day, immediately take your luggage and stay at the innkeeper's house.

古文：驮朴去驮卢五十里。
现代文：驮朴距驮卢五十里。
English: Zibo is 50 miles away from Yilu.

古文：自驮卢西至此，皆为左州南境，北去龙州四十里 龙州 当为 左州 之讹。西仍为崇善地，抵太平亦四十里，水路倍之。
现代文：从驮卢往西到这里，都是左州南部地区，北边距龙州四十里。西面仍是崇善县的辖地，到太平府也有四十里，水路加一倍。
English: From Palu to here in the west is the southern part of Zuozhou, and the north is forty miles from Longzhou. The west is still under the jurisdiction of Chongshan County, and it is also forty miles to Taiping Prefecture, and the waterway is doubled.

古文：高平为安南地，由龙州换小舟，溯流四日可至，太平龙州山崖更奇，崖间有龙蜿蜒如生。
现代文：高平是安南的属地，由龙州换小船，溯流行四天可到，太平府的人把他们称为高彝。龙州的山崖更加奇特，山崖上有龙形，蜿蜿蜒蜒如活的一样。
English: Gaoping is a territory belonging to Annan. You can get there in four days by changing boats from Longzhou. The people of Taiping call it Gaoping. The cliffs of Longzhou are even more peculiar. There is a dragon shape on the cliffs, winding like a living thing.

古文：思明东换小舟，溯流四日至天龙峒应为迁隆洞，过山半日即抵上思州今上思县。上思昔属思明，今改流官，属南宁，有十万山即十万大山。
现代文：在思明府东边换乘小船，溯流行四天到天龙酮，过了山走半天就到上思州。上思州从前属于思明府，今天改设了流官，划属南宁府，有座十万山。
English: Transfer to a small boat on the east side of Siming Prefecture, travel for four days to Tianlongketone, and then walk for half a day to Shangshizhou. Shangshizhou used to belong to Siming Prefecture, but today it is part of Nanning Prefecture and has 100,000 mountains.

古文：其水西流为明江，东流出八尺江。
现代文：那里的水往西流去是明江，流到龙州；向东流出的是八尺江。
English: The westward flow of the water there is the Ming River, which flows to Longzhou; the eastward flow is the Yasaka River.

古文：高平为莫彝，乃莫登庸之后；安南为黎彝，乃黎利之后。
现代文：高平是莫夷，是莫登庸的后代；安南是黎夷，是黎利的后代。
English: Gao Ping is Mo Yi, a descendant of Moden Yong; Annan is Li Yi, a descendant of Lili.

古文：自入新宁至此，石山皆出土巴豆树、苏木二种。
现代文：自从进入新宁州境内来到此地，石山上都出产土巴豆树、苏木两种树。
English: Since I came to this place after entering the territory of Shining Prefecture, there are two kinds of trees, potato bean tree and cypress tree, produced on the stone mountain.

古文：二树俱不大。
现代文：两种树都不大。
English: Both trees are small.

古文：巴豆树叶色丹映，或队聚重峦，或孤悬绝壁，丹翠交错，恍凝霜痕黔柴。
现代文：巴豆树叶的颜色是红色，红光映照，或成队聚生在重重山峦之中，或孤立悬垂在绝壁之上，红绿交错，恍惚之间怀疑是白色的霜痕黑色的木炭。
English: The color of the mung bean leaves is red, reflected by the red light, or they grow in groups in the middle of the mountains, or they hang over the cliff in isolation. Red and green are intertwined, and between the trance is suspected to be white frost marks and black charcoal.

古文：苏木山坳平地俱生，叶如决明，英如扁豆，而子长倍之，绕干结瘿，点点盘结如乳，乳端列刺如钩，不可向迩。
现代文：苏木在山坳平地上都有生长，叶子如决明，荚如扁豆，但籽粒的长处是扁豆的一倍，绕着枝干结出瘤状球体，一点一点的盘结着如像乳头，乳端排列着如钩子一样的刺，不可接近。
English: Japanese pampas grass grows on the flatlands of the foothills. The leaves are like cedars, and the stalks are like lentils, but the seeds are twice as long as lentils. They form a knobbly sphere around the stem and branches. Little by little, they are coiled like nipples, and the tips of the nipples are lined with hook-like spines. They are not to be approached.

古文：土人以子种成
现代文：当地人用籽种种成树林，收购的商人不来，便砍了作为柴火；又选择其中生长多年枝干细的，削光树皮，乳白色的花纹连在一起，一朵朵旋绕着，似核桃的痕迹，色泽尤其苍白光润。
English: The local people use seeds of all kinds to form forests, and if the merchants who buy them do not come, they cut them down for firewood; they also choose the thin branches that have been growing for many years, the whittled bark, the milky white patterns connected together, one by one twisted, like traces of walnuts, the color is especially pale and glossy.

