古文：王黼字将明，开封祥符人。
现代文：王黼，字将明，开封祥符人。
English: Wang Qian, the character will be bright, Kaifeng Xiangfu people.

古文：初名甫，后以同东汉宦官，赐名黼。
现代文：起初名叫甫，后来因为和东汉宦官同名，皇上赐他名黼。
English: At first, his name was Fu, but later, because he had the same name as an Eastern Han eunuch, the emperor gave him his name.

古文：为人美风姿，目睛如金，有口辩，才疏隽而寡学术，然多智善佞。
现代文：王黼讲究仪表，目光炯炯，有口才，才智出众但没多少学问，善于巧言献媚。
English: Wang Yao is particular about his appearance, his eyes are bright, he is eloquent, his intelligence is outstanding but he has little knowledge, and he is good at flattery.

古文：中崇宁进士第，调相州司理参军，编修《九域图志》，何志同领局，喜其人，为父执中言之，荐擢校书郎，迁符宝郎、左司谏。
现代文：考中崇宁进士，调为相州司理参军，编修《九域图志》，何志和他同时负责，喜欢他，就对自己的父亲何执中说起他，何执中推荐他，他升为校书郎，又升为符宝郎、左司谏。
English: In the middle school entrance examination, he was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Xiangzhou District and joined the army. He was also in charge of compiling the "Diary of the Nine Provinces." He liked him so much that he talked about him to his father and recommended him to his father. He was promoted to the position of the school scribe, then to the position of the treasure hunter, and finally to the position of the left secretary.

古文：张商英在相位，浸失帝意，遣使以玉环赐蔡京于杭；黼觇知之，数条奏京所行政事，并击商英。
现代文：张商英为宰相，渐渐失宠，皇上派使臣把玉环赏给在杭州的蔡京，王黼侦知此事后，逐条上奏赞扬蔡京所推行的政事，并攻击张商英。
English: Zhang Shangying, as the prime minister, gradually fell out of favor. The emperor sent an envoy to award the jade ring to Cai Jing in Hangzhou. After Wang Xi found out about this, he praised Cai Jing's political affairs one by one and attacked Zhang Shangying.

古文：京复相，德其助己，除左谏议大夫、给事中、御史中丞，自校书至是财两岁。
现代文：蔡京再次任宰相，感激王黼帮助自己，就任命他为左谏议大夫、给事中、御史中丞，王黼从任校书郎到现在才两年。
English: Cai Jing was reappointed as prime minister for the second time, and he was grateful to Wang Xi for helping him, so he appointed him as Zuo Xi's doctor of deliberation, secretary, and secretary. Wang Xi has only been a school teacher for two years.

古文：黼因执中进，乃欲去执中，使京颛国，遂疏其二十罪，不听。
现代文：王黼靠何执中得以进升，却想逐去何执中，让蔡京专权，就上疏论奏何执中的二十条罪状，皇上不听。
English: Wang Xuan was able to advance by relying on He Xuanzhong, but he wanted to expel He Xuanzhong and let Cai Jing have exclusive power, so he played the twenty crimes in He Xuanzhong, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：俄兼侍读，进翰林学士。
现代文：不久他兼任侍读，升为翰林学士。
English: Soon he also served as a waiter and rose to the rank of Hanlin bachelor.

古文：京与郑居中不合，黼复内交居中，京怒，徙为户部尚书，大农方乏，将以邦用不给为之罪。
现代文：蔡京与郑居中不合，王黼与郑居中交好，蔡京生气，就调他任户部尚书，正值青黄不接，蔡京想以国家财用不足作为他的罪状。
English: Cai Jing did not get along with Zheng Ju, Wang Xi did not get along with Zheng Ju, and Cai Jing got angry and transferred him to the Household Department of Shangshu. He did not answer the phone at the right time. Cai Jing wanted to use the country's lack of financial resources as his crime.

古文：既而诸班禁旅赉犒不如期，诣左藏鼓噪，黼闻之，即诸军揭大榜，期以某月某日，众读榜皆散，京计不行。
现代文：不久诸班禁军因没如期犒赏，到左藏库鼓噪闹事，王黼听说后，就在诸军前贴上大榜，保证某月某日犒赏他们，众人读榜后都散去，蔡京的计划没实现。
English: Not long after, all the teams of the Forbidden Army caused a ruckus in the left storeroom because they did not get the reward as scheduled. After hearing this, Wang Xi posted a big banner in front of the troops, promising to reward them on a certain day of a certain month. After reading the banner, everyone dispersed. Cai Jing's plan did not come to fruition.

古文：还为学士，进承旨。
现代文：王黼回来后任学士，升为承旨。
English: After Wang Hui returned, he was appointed as a bachelor and promoted to the position of successor.

古文：遭父忧，阅五月，起复宣和殿学士，赐第昭德坊。
现代文：王黼遭父丧辞官守孝，过了五个月，朝廷重新起用他为宣和殿学士，皇上赏他宅第昭德坊。
English: Five months after his father's death, Wang Yao resigned from his position as an official for the sake of filial piety. The imperial court reappointed him as a scholar of the Xuanwu Palace, and the emperor rewarded him with the residence of Zhaodefang.

古文：故门下侍郎许将宅在左，黼父事梁师成，称为恩府先生，倚其声焰，逼许氏夺之，白昼逐将家，道路愤叹。
现代文：原来的门下侍郎许将的住宅在左边，王黼待梁师成像父亲一样，称为恩府先生，凭梁师成的权势，逼许将搬走，白天就赶走了许将全家，道路上的人都很愤怒。
English: The house of the former servant of Liang Shicheng's house is on the left. Wang Xi waited for Liang Shicheng to look like his father and called him Mr. Enfu. With the power of Liang Shicheng, he forced Liang Shicheng to move out and drove away the whole family of Liang Shicheng during the day. People on the road were very angry.

古文：复为承旨，拜尚书左丞、中书侍郎。
现代文：王黼又为承旨，被任命为尚书左丞、中书侍郎。
English: Wang Yao was also a successor, and was appointed as Shang Shuxi Zuo Rong and Zhong Shuxi Jiro.

古文：宣和元年，拜特进、少宰。
现代文：宣和元年，任命为特进、少宰。
English: In the first year of the Xuanhe era, he was appointed as a special envoy and junior steward.

古文：由通议大夫超八阶，宋朝命相未有前比也。
现代文：他由通议大夫超升八阶，宋朝任命宰相前所未有。
English: He was promoted to the eighth rank from the doctor of general discussion, and the appointment of prime minister in the Song Dynasty was unprecedented.

古文：别赐城西甲第，徙居之日，导以教坊乐，供张什器，悉取于官，宠倾一时。
现代文：另外赐给他城西的府第，他迁居那天，以教坊乐为先导，所需的东西，全都取于官府，是当时最受恩宠的人。
English: In addition, he was given a mansion in the west of the city. On the day he moved in, he took the music of the church as a guide. Everything he needed was taken from the government office. He was the most favored person at that time.

古文：蔡京致仕，黼阳顺人心，悉反其所为，罢方田，毁辟雍、医、算学，并会要、六典诸局，汰省吏，减遥郡使、横班官奉入之半，茶盐钞法不复比较，富户科抑一切蠲除之，四方翕然称贤相。
现代文：蔡京辞官，王黼表面顺应人心，一反蔡京所为，罢方田，毁辟雍、医、算学，合并修会要、六典各机构，裁汰冗官，对远郡使、横班官的俸禄减半，茶盐钞法不再比较，对富户的科抑一律蠲除，天下人都称他是贤相。
English: As Caijing's chancellor, Wang Xi, on the surface, conformed to the people's will, but his actions were contrary to Caijing's. He destroyed Yong, medicine, and mathematics, merged religious organizations, and six institutions, dismissed redundant officials, halved the salary of distant county envoys and horizontal shift officials, no longer compared the tea salt banknote method, and eliminated the discipline of rich households. The whole world called him a wise man.

古文：既得位，乘高为邪，多畜子女玉帛自奉，僣拟禁省。
现代文：得到相位后，他借位高权重之机为奸邪，搜罗很多子女玉帛享乐，和皇宫差不多。
English: After he got the position, he used his position as a high-ranking opportunity to commit treason, collecting many children's jade and gems to enjoy, similar to the royal palace.

古文：诱夺徽猷阁待制邓之纲妾，反以罪窜之纲岭南。
现代文：诱惑并抢夺徽猷阁待制邓之纲的妾，反而给邓之纲加罪流放到岭南。
English: He seduced and robbed Deng Zhigang's concubine who was waiting for him at Huiyangge. Instead, he punished Deng Zhigang and exiled him to Lingnan.

古文：加少保、太宰。
现代文：王黼升为少保、太宰。
English: Wang Jinsheng was promoted to Shao Bao and Dazai.

古文：请置应奉局，自兼提领，中外名钱皆许擅用，竭天下财力以供费。
现代文：他请求设应奉局，自己兼任提领，中外钱财允许他随便用，竭天下财力供应奉局的费用。
English: He asked for the establishment of a service bureau, and he was also responsible for the collection. Chinese and foreign money allowed him to use it as he pleased, and it took all the financial resources in the world to supply the expenses of the service bureau.

古文：官吏承望风旨，凡四方水土珍异之物，悉苛取于民，进帝所者不能什一，余皆入其家。
现代文：官吏推测皇上和王黼的意思，凡是四方水土所产的珍奇之物，都苛取于百姓，但进奉给皇上的珍品不到十分之一，其余的全归王黼。
English: The officials surmised that the emperor and Wang Xi meant that all the rare things produced by the land and water in the four directions were taken from the people, but less than one-tenth of the treasures were given to the emperor, and the rest all went to Wang Xi.

古文：御史陈过庭乞尽罢以御前使唤为名冗官，京西转运使张汝霖请罢进西路花果，帝既纳，黼复露章劾之，两人皆徙远郡。
现代文：御史陈过庭请求罢去那些以御前使唤为名的冗官，京西转运使张汝霖请求罢去进奉西路花果，皇上已经采纳，王黼又上章弹劾他们，二人都被流放远郡。
English: The Emperor has accepted the request of the Imperial Historian Chen to dismiss the redundant officials who were appointed in the name of the Imperial Envoy Zhuan, and the request of the Western Capital Transportation Envoy Zhang Rulin to dismiss those who were appointed in the name of the Western Capital Transportation Envoy Zhuan. The Emperor has also impeached them, and both of them have been exiled to a distant county.

古文：睦寇方腊起，黼方文太平，不以告，蔓延弥月，遂攻破六郡。
现代文：睦州方腊起义，王黼粉饰太平，不报告皇上，起义军力量扩大，攻破了六郡。
English: Mutsuzhou Fangla Uprising, Wang Qi whitewashed the Taiping, did not report to the emperor, the rebel forces expanded and broke through six counties.

古文：帝遣童贯督秦甲十万始平之。
现代文：皇上派童贯率秦地十万大军才平灭方腊。
English: It took the emperor sending Tong Xuan to lead a hundred thousand-strong army from Qin to wipe out Fangla.

古文：犹以功转少傅，又进少师。
现代文：王黼仍因功转为少傅，又升为少师。
English: Wang Xi was still promoted to Shao Fu and Shao Shi due to his merits.

古文：贯之行也，帝全付以东南一事，谓之曰： 如有急，即以御笔行之。 贯至吴，见民困花石之扰，众言： 贼不亟平，坐此耳。 贯即命其僚董耘作手诏，若罪已然，且有罢应奉局之令，吴民大悦。
现代文：童贯镇压方腊时，皇上把东南方的事全交童贯处理，对他说： 如果事情紧急，就以诏书的名义实行。 童贯到东南，见百姓苦于花石纲的骚扰，众人说： 没能马上平定反叛，是因为花石纲的骚扰。 童贯立即命令他的僚属董耘做手诏，像皇上的罪己诏，并有罢应奉局的命令，东南百姓高兴。
English: When Tong Rong was suppressing Fang La, the emperor handed over all the affairs of the southeast to Tong Rong and told him: If the matter is urgent, it will be implemented in the name of the edict. When Tong Rong went to the southeast, he saw that the people were suffering from the harassment of Huashiguang, and many people said: It was because of the harassment of Huashiguang that the rebellion could not be immediately quelled. Tong Rong immediately ordered his colleague and subordinate Dong Xuan to make a hand edict, like the emperor's sin, and the people in the southeast were happy to have an order to obey the authority.

古文：贯平贼归，黼言于帝曰： 腊之起由茶盐法也，而贯入奸言，归过陛下。 帝怒。
现代文：童贯平方腊回来，王黼对皇上说 ：方腊反叛的原因是茶盐法，而童贯献奸言，归罪陛下。 
English: When Tong Quan returned from the square, Wang Ye said to the emperor: The reason for Fang La's rebellion was the Tea and Salt Law, and Tong Quan made a false speech and blamed His Majesty.

古文：贯谋起蔡京以间黼，黼惧。
现代文：皇上大怒，童贯谋划起用蔡京来排挤王黼，王黼恐惧。
English: The emperor was furious, and Tongran plotted to use Caijing to oust Wang Yao. Wang Yao was terrified.

古文：是时朝廷已纳赵良嗣之计，结女真共图燕，大臣多不以为可。
现代文：此时朝廷已采纳赵良嗣的计谋，交结女真共图燕地，大臣多数认为不行。
English: At this time, the imperial court had already adopted Zhao Liangzi's strategy of intermarrying with female Genuine Communists, which most ministers considered unacceptable.

古文：黼曰： 南北虽通好百年，然自累朝以来，彼之慢我者多矣。
现代文：王黼说 ：南北虽然已通好百年，但历朝以来，辽人怠慢我们的时候很多。
English: Wang Yao said: Although the South and the North have had good relations for a hundred years, the Liao people have neglected us many times since ancient times.

古文：兼弱攻昧，武之善经也。
现代文：兼并弱小攻打愚昧，这是好的军事策略。
English: Annexation weakens and obscures the attack. This is a good rule for the employment of soldiers.

古文：今弗取，女真必强，中原故地将不复为我有。 帝虽向其言，然以兵属贯，命以保民观衅为上策。
现代文：现在不攻取辽国，女真必会强大，中原故土将不再为我所有。 皇上虽倾向于他的话，但让童贯掌握兵权，命令童贯以保民观战为上策。
English: If we do not conquer Liao Province now, Jurchen will surely become powerful, and the Central Plains will no longer belong to me. Although the emperor was inclined to his words, he let Tong Quan seize military power and ordered Tong Quan to keep the people watching the war as the best strategy.

古文：黼复折简通诚于贯曰： 太师若北行，愿尽死力。 时帝方以睦寇故悔其事，及黼一言，遂复治兵。
现代文：王黼又写信对童贯竭诚说 ：太师若北行，我愿尽死力。 当时皇上正因方腊的缘故后悔对童贯的态度，等王黼一说，就重新让童贯握兵。
English: Wang Hui also wrote a letter to Tong Quan, saying sincerely, "If the Grand Master travels to the north, I will do my best." At that time, the emperor was regretting his attitude towards Tong Quan because of Fang La, and as soon as Wang Hui said that, he let Tong Quan hold the soldiers again.

古文：黼于三省置经抚房，专治边事，不关之枢密。
现代文：王黼在三省设经抚房，专门负责边事，与枢密院不相关。
English: Wang Hui set up finance offices in the three provinces, which were specifically responsible for peripheral affairs and were not related to the Privy Council.

古文：括天下丁夫，计口出算，得钱六千二百万缗，竟买空城五六而奏凯。
现代文：王黼检括天下丁夫，计口出钱，得钱六千二百万缗，竟然买了五六座空城来报捷。
English: Wang Xi surveyed the world's dingos, counted the mouths to pay money, got 62 million baht, and even bought five or six empty cities to report success.

古文：率百僚称贺，帝解玉带以赐，优进太傅，封楚国公，许服紫花袍，驺从仪物几与亲王等。
现代文：王黼率百官祝贺，皇上解下玉带赏给他，并升他为太傅，封为楚国公，允许他穿紫花袍；他的车马、侍从等仪仗几乎和亲王相同。
English: Wang Qian led hundreds of officials to congratulate him. The emperor gave him the jade belt and promoted him to taifu and made him the Duke of Chu, allowing him to wear the purple robe. His chariot, horses, attendants and other ceremonial are almost the same as the prince.

古文：黼议上尊号，帝曰： 此神宗皇帝所不敢受者也。 却弗许。
现代文：王黼建议皇上加尊号，徽宗说： 这是神宗都不敢接受的。 推辞不许。
English: Wang Yao suggested that the emperor add the honorific, and Huizong said, "This is something that even the Shenzong would not dare to accept.

古文：始，辽使至，率迂其驿程，燕犒不示以华侈。
现代文：起初，辽国使臣到，一般是带着辽使绕道走，酒宴和犒赏都不显示侈华。
English: At first, when the envoys from Liao arrived, they usually took the Liao envoys on a detour, and neither the wine banquet nor the reward showed luxury.

古文：及黼务于欲速，令女真使以七日自燕至都，每张宴其居，辄陈尚方锦绣、金玉、瑰宝，以夸富盛，由是女真益生心。
现代文：到王黼想尽快收复燕京时，就命令女真使臣从燕京到京城用七天时间，每次都在使馆设宴，往往把皇家用的尚方锦绣、金玉、瑰宝摆设出来，来夸耀富有繁盛，于是女真更有侵略之心。
English: When Wang Yao wanted to recover Yanjing as soon as possible, he ordered the envoy from Yanjing to Beijing to spend seven days, each time setting up a banquet at the embassy, often setting out the royal Shangfang brocade, gold and precious stones, and treasures to boast of prosperity, so Nianzhen had a more aggressive heart.

古文：身为三公，位元宰，至陪扈曲宴，亲为俳优鄙贱之役，以献笑取悦。
现代文：王黼身为三公，位至元宰，甚至陪皇上在后宫取乐，亲自为皇上表演一些歌舞艺人的下贱动作，来取悦皇上。
English: As one of the Three Princes, and even the Yuan Zai, Wang Yao even accompanied the emperor in the harem to have fun, and personally performed some low-class movements of song and dance artists for the emperor to please the emperor.

古文：钦宗在东宫，恶其所为。
现代文：钦宗在东宫，恨他的所作所为。
English: Qin Zong was in the East Palace and hated what he was doing.

古文：郓王楷有宠，黼为阴画夺宗之策。
现代文：郓王赵楷受宠，王黼暗中替他筹划夺太子位。
English: Zhao Kai, the king of Qi, was favored, and Wang Xi secretly plotted for him to win the position of crown prince.

古文：皇孙谌为节度使、崇国公，黼谓但当得观察使，召宫臣耿南仲谕指，使草代东宫辞谌官奏，竟夺之，盖欲以是撼摇东宫。
现代文：皇孙赵谌为节度使、崇国公，王黼认为赵谌只能任观察使，召宫臣耿南仲讲明自己的意图，让他代替太子起草辞去赵谌官职的奏书，赵谌竟被罢官，王黼想以辞赵谌官职来动摇太子的地位。
English: The emperor's grandson, Zhao Jun, was a ceremonial envoy and revered as the prince of the country. Wang Jun thought that Zhao Jun could only serve as an observation envoy. He summoned the palace retainer, Geng Nanzhong, to clarify his intentions and asked him to draft a letter of resignation from Zhao Jun's post in place of the prince. Zhao Jun was actually dismissed from his post. Wang Jun wanted to shake the prince's position by resigning from Zhao Jun's post.

古文：帝待遇之厚，名其所居閤曰 得贤治定 ，为书亭、堂榜九。
现代文：皇上对王黼十分厚待，把他的住所叫 得贤治定 ，为他题写九处亭、堂的牌额。
English: The emperor treated Wang Xi very generously. He called his residence Dechenji Ding (得贤治定) and inscribed nine pavilions and hall plaques for him.

古文：有玉芝产堂柱，乘舆临观之。
现代文：他家堂柱上长出玉芝，皇上亲临观看。
English: The Emperor himself came to see the gypsophila sprouting on the pillar of his family hall.

古文：梁师成与连墙，穿便门往来，帝始悟其交结状。
现代文：梁师成和他住隔壁，从便门往来，皇上才知道他们交结的情况。
English: Liang Shicheng lived next door to him, and the emperor only learned of their relationship when they were passing through the hallway.

古文：还宫，黼眷顿熄，寻命致仕。
现代文：皇上还宫后，对王黼的宠爱立即消失，不久就命令他辞官。
English: After the emperor returned to the palace, his fondness for Wang Yao immediately disappeared, and he soon ordered him to resign.

古文：钦宗受禅，黼惶骇入贺，閤门以上旨不纳。
现代文：钦宗即位后，王黼惶恐地入宫庆贺，宫门官说皇上不接受他的庆贺。
English: After Emperor Qinzong's accession to the throne, Wang Yao entered the palace with trepidation to celebrate. The palace gate official said that the emperor did not accept his celebration.

古文：金兵入汴，不俟命，载其孥以东。
现代文：金兵进入汴京，他不等诏命来，就带着妻子儿女往东跑。
English: When the gold soldiers entered Beijing, he did not wait for the imperial edict to come, but took his wife and children and ran east.

古文：诏贬为崇信军节度副使，籍其家。
现代文：皇上下诏贬他为崇信军节度副使、籍没他家。
English: The Emperor's edict demoted him to the vice-envoy of the Song Festival of the Chongxin Army, and he lost his family membership.

古文：吴敏、李纲请诛黼，事下开封尹聂山，山方挟宿怨，遣武士蹑及于雍丘南辅固村，戕之，民家取其首以献。
现代文：吴敏、李纲请求杀王黼，这事交给开封尹聂山，聂山正与王黼宿怨未解，就派武士追到雍丘南面的辅固村，杀了王黼，百姓取他的头献上。
English: Wu Min and Li Gang requested to kill Wang Qian, and the matter was handed over to Kaifeng Yin Shaoshan. As Shaoshan's feud with Wang Qian remained unresolved, he sent his warriors to chase Wang Qian to the village of Fuigu, south of Yongqiu, and killed Wang Qian. The people took his head and offered it to the emperor.

古文：帝以初即位，难于诛大臣，托言为盗所杀。
现代文：皇上因为刚即位，诛杀大臣有损仁政，就假托王黼是被强盗杀死的。
English: Since the emperor had just ascended the throne, and killing the minister would damage benevolent government, he pretended that Wang Xi had been killed by robbers.

古文：议者不以诛黼为过，而以天讨不正为失刑矣。
现代文：议论的人不认为杀王黼是过错，而认为上天讨伐的不公正是失去刑罚。
English: The commentators do not think that the killing of Wang Yao is a mistake, but that the injustice of the heavenly crusade is the loss of punishment.

古文：朱勔，苏州人。
现代文：朱勔，苏州人。
English: Zhu Xi, from Suzhou.

古文：父冲，狡狯有智数。
现代文：父亲朱冲，狡猾聪明。
English: Father Zhu Chong, cunning and clever.

古文：家本贱微，庸于人，梗悍不驯，抵罪鞭背。
现代文：他家本来微贱，朱冲受雇于人，他强悍不驯，因罪被处以鞭背的刑罚。
English: His family was originally humble, and Zhu Chong was employed by someone. He was tough and unruly, and was punished with a whipping for his crime.

古文：去之旁邑乞贷，遇异人，得金及方书归，设肆卖药，病人服之辄效，远近辐凑，家遂富。
现代文：朱冲逃到别的县去借贷，遇到一个奇人，得到金子和方书回来，就开设药店，病人服他卖的药后就有效，远近病人都来他这买药，家中就富裕了。
English: Zhu Chong fled to another county to borrow money, met a strange man, got gold and a prescription book back, opened a pharmacy, the patient was effective after taking the medicine he sold, patients from far and near came to him to buy medicine, and the family became rich.

古文：因修莳园圃，结游客，致往来称誉。
现代文：于是他就摆弄园圃，交结游客，以致互相往来称赞。
English: So he tinkered with the gardens, mingling with visitors so that they exchanged compliments.

古文：始，蔡京居钱塘，过苏，欲建僧寺阁，会费钜万，僧言必欲集此缘，非朱冲不可。
现代文：开始，蔡京住在钱塘，经过苏州，想修建佛寺，需要巨万的费用，和尚说要想得到这么多捐赠，非朱冲不可。
English: At the beginning, Cai Jing lived in Qiantang, passing through Suzhou. If he wanted to build a Buddhist temple, it would require a huge amount of money. The monk said that if he wanted to get so many donations, he had to use Zhu Chong.

古文：京以属郡守，郡守呼冲见京，京语故，冲愿独任。
现代文：蔡京就把这事托付给郡守，郡守叫来朱冲去拜见蔡京，蔡京说明原委。朱冲愿意独自承担建寺费用。
English: Cai Jing entrusted this matter to the county governor. The county governor called Zhu Chong to visit Cai Jing. Cai Jing explained the original committee. Zhu Chong was willing to bear the construction costs of the temple alone.

古文：居数日，请京诣寺度地，至则大木数千章积庭下，京大惊，阴器其能。
现代文：过了几天，朱冲请蔡京到佛寺去勘察地形，蔡京到后，数千根建寺用的大木头已堆在院中，蔡京大惊，暗暗佩服朱冲的能力。
English: A few days later, Zhu Chong asked Cai Jing to go to the Buddhist temple to survey the terrain. After Cai Jing arrived, thousands of large trees used to build the temple had been piled up in the courtyard. Cai Jing was shocked and secretly admired Zhu Chong's ability.

古文：明年召还，挟勔与俱，以其父子姓名属童贯窜置军籍中，皆得官。
现代文：第二年蔡京被召回京，蔡京带着朱勔一起到京城，把朱勔父子的名字都写在童贯将遣放的军籍中，他们父子都得到官职。
English: The next year, Cai Jing was recalled to Beijing. Cai Jing took Zhu Xi to Beijing with him, and wrote the names of Zhu Xi and his son in the military records of the dispatched Tongran general. Both father and son were given official positions.

古文：徽宗颇垂意花石，京讽勔语其父，密取浙中珍异以进。
现代文：徽宗十分喜欢花石，蔡京劝朱勔告诉他的父亲，暗取江浙一带的珍奇进献给皇上。
English: Huizong was very fond of flowers and stones, and Cai Jing advised Zhu Xi to tell his father to secretly take some of the rarities from around Jiangsu and Zhejiang and present them to the emperor.

古文：初致黄杨三本，帝嘉之。
现代文：最初送来黄杨三株，皇上赞扬他。
English: At first, he sent three poplar trees, and the emperor praised him.

古文：后岁岁增加，然岁率不过再三贡，贡物裁五七品。
现代文：以后年年增加，但一年一般不超过两三次，贡物才五七种。
English: After that, it increased every year, but generally not more than two or three times a year, with only five or seven kinds of tributes.

古文：至政和中始极盛，舳舻相衔于淮、汴，号 花石纲 ，置应奉局于苏，指取内帑如囊中物，每取以数十百万计。
现代文：到政和中期才达到极盛，运花石的船在淮、汴河上首尾相连，号称 花石纲 ，在苏州设应奉局，用内帑就像用囊中物，每次取内帑都以数十百万计。
English: It was not until the middle of the Edo period and the Meiji period that the industry reached its peak. The ships transporting kaiseki were strung end-to-end along the Huai and Min Rivers, and were known as kaiseki gangs. An office was set up in Suzhou to handle the business. The use of uchi-mochi was like using the contents of a bag, with tens of millions of uchi-mochi taken each time.

古文：延福宫、艮岳成，奇卉异植充牣其中。
现代文：延福宫、艮岳建成，奇花异草充斥其中。
English: Yanfu Palace and Jiuyue Mountain were built, and they are full of strange flowers and plants.

古文：勔擢至防御使，东南部刺史、郡守多出其门。
现代文：朱勔被提拔为防御使、东南部刺史、郡守多数出自他的门下。
English: Zhu Xi was promoted to the position of defense envoy, and most of the leaders in the southeast and county governors came from his school.

古文：徐铸、应安道、王仲闳等济其恶，竭县官经常以为奉。
现代文：徐铸、应安道、王仲闳等助他为恶，倾荡县府经费贡奉他。
English: Xu Cheng, Ying An Dao, Wang Zhongyao and others helped him to do evil, pouring county funds to pay tribute to him.

古文：所贡物，豪夺渔取于民，毛发不少偿。
现代文：他们所贡奉的物品，都是从百姓那豪夺巧取来的，却不给百姓一点补偿。
English: The items they paid tribute to were all stolen from the people, but they did not give the people any compensation.

古文：士民家一石一木稍堪玩，即领健卒直入其家，用黄封表识，未即取，使护视之，微不谨，即被以大不恭罪。
现代文：百姓家有一石一木稍微珍异，就率健卒直入他家，贴上黄封，不马上取走，派人看护，稍不谨慎，就被加上大不恭的罪名。
English: If there is a stone or a tree in a commoner's house that is a little unusual, he will lead a health inspector straight into his house, affix a yellow seal, and if he does not take it away immediately, he will send someone to look after it. If he is a little careless, he will be charged with great disrespect.

古文：及发行，必彻屋抉墙以出。
现代文：等到运走时，定要拆屋毁墙才运出去。
English: When they are transported away, they will have to demolish the house and destroy the wall before they are transported out.

古文：人不幸有一物小异，共指为不祥，唯恐芟夷之不速。
现代文：有谁不幸有一物品稍稍特别，就被说成是不祥之兆，唯恐诛除得不快。
English: Anyone who has the misfortune to have an item that is slightly unusual is said to be a bad omen, lest they get upset.

古文：民预是役者，中家悉破产，或鬻卖子女以供其须。
现代文：百姓服花石纲之役的，中产人家都破产，有的卖儿卖女来提供服役的费用。
English: When the common people served in the military, the middle-class people all went bankrupt, and some sold their sons and daughters to pay for the military service.

古文：斫山辇石，程督峭惨，虽在江湖不测之渊，百计取之，必出乃止。
现代文：凿山运石，对役夫规定任务数量，十分苛刻，即使在江湖深不可测的水下有奇石，也要千方百计地取它，直到取出才罢休。
English: It is very demanding to hew and transport rocks, and the number of tasks is specified for the workers. Even if there is a strange rock under the unfathomable water, it must be taken by all means until it is taken out.

古文：尝得太湖石，高四丈，载以巨舰，役夫数千人，所经州县，有拆水门、桥梁，凿城垣以过者。
现代文：曾经得到太湖石，高四丈，用大船装载，役夫数千人，所过州县，有的被拆去水闸、桥梁，有的凿开城墙才得以通过。
English: Taihu stone, four meters high, was once obtained, loaded with a large ship, and thousands of laborers passed through the county. Some were removed from sluices and bridges, and some were able to pass through the city wall.

古文：既至，赐名 神运昭功石 。
现代文：运到京城后，皇上赐名叫 神运昭功石 。
English: After it was transported to the capital, the emperor gave it the name Shen Yun Zhaogong Stone.

古文：截诸道粮饷纲，旁罗商船，揭所贡暴其上，篙工、柁师倚势贪横，陵轹州县，道路相视以目。
现代文：截各路运粮船，征调商船，把贡物放在上面，篙工、舵师仗势骄横，欺凌州县，人们敢怒不敢言。
English: They cut off grain ships from all directions, requisitioned merchant ships, and placed tributes on them. Shipbuilders and helmsmen were arrogant and bullied counties and prefectures. People dared not speak out in anger.

古文：广济卒四指挥尽给挽士犹不足。
现代文：广济四指挥的兵卒都做挽船工还不够。
English: It is not enough for the soldiers under the command of the four commanders of Guangji to do the work of a shipwright.

古文：京始患之，从容言于帝，愿抑其太甚者。
现代文：蔡京开始认为这是祸患，从容地对皇上进言，希望皇上抑制那些太过分的做法。
English: Cai Jing began to think that this was a calamity, and calmly advised the emperor, hoping that the emperor would restrain those excessive practices.

古文：帝亦病其扰，乃禁用粮纲船，戒伐冢藏、毁室庐，毋得加黄封帕蒙人园囿花石，凡十余事。
现代文：皇上也担心，就禁止用粮纲船，不许掘坟墓，拆屋宇，不得用黄封帕蒙人家花园中的花、石，共十多件。
English: The emperor was also worried, and prohibited the use of grain ships, the digging of graves, the demolition of buildings, and the use of flowers and stones in the garden of the yellow-enveloped Pamun family, a total of more than ten items.

古文：听勔与蔡攸等六人入贡，余进奉悉罢。
现代文：仍允许朱勔和蔡攸等六人进贡花、石，其余的进奉都除去。
English: Six people, including Zhu Rong and Cai You, were still allowed to bring in tribute flowers and stones, and the rest of the tributes were removed.

古文：自是勔小戢。
现代文：从此朱勔稍有收敛。
English: Since then, Zhu Xi has slightly converged.

古文：既而勔甚。
现代文：不久，朱勔更过分。
English: Soon, Zhu Xi went even further.

古文：所居直苏市中孙老桥，忽称诏，凡桥东西四至壤地室庐悉买赐予己，合数百家，期五日尽徙，郡吏逼逐，民嗟哭于路。
现代文：他住在苏州城中的孙老桥，忽然声称有诏旨，凡孙老桥东西四周的土地房屋都买来赏给他自己，有数百家，限他们五天内搬走，郡吏逼迫他们，百姓在路上哀叹痛哭。
English: He lived in Sun Lao Qiao in the city of Suzhou, and suddenly claimed that there was an imperial edict. He bought all the land and houses around the east and west of Sun Lao Qiao to reward himself. There were hundreds of houses. They were allowed to move out within five days. The county officials persecuted them, and the people lamented and cried on the road.

古文：遂建神霄殿，奉青华帝君像其中，监司、都邑吏朔望皆拜庭下，命士至，辄朝谒，然后通刺诣勔。
现代文：于是朱勔建神霄殿，在殿中供奉青华帝君像，监司、都邑吏在初一、十五都来拜谒，朝廷派的使臣，往往先去朝拜，然后再去朱勔那儿传达圣旨。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi built the Hall of Divine Providence, in which the image of the Young Emperor was enshrined. Supervisors and officials from the capital came to pay homage to Zhu Xi on the first day of the first month and on the fifteenth day of the first month. Imperial envoys often went to pay homage first, and then went to Zhu Xi to convey the holy will.

古文：主赵霖建三十六浦闸，兴必不可成之功，天方大寒，役死者相枕藉。
现代文：朱勔让赵霖建三十六座水闸，想建奇功，天气十分寒冷，服役而死的人一个接一个。
English: Zhu Xi asked Zhao Lin to build 36 locks. He wanted to build a miraculous feat. The weather was very cold, and the people who died in service were one after another.

古文：霖志在媚勔，益加苛虐，吴、越不胜其苦。
现代文：赵霖志在取媚朱勔，更加苛虐，吴、越百姓不胜其苦。
English: Zhao Linzhi is even more cruel in his pursuit of Zhu Xi, and the people of Wu and Yue are no match for him.

古文：徽州卢宗原竭库钱遗之，引为发运使，公肆掊克。
现代文：徽州卢宗原把府库钱全送给朱勔，朱勔推荐他为发运使，他公开搜刮。
English: Lu Zongyuan of Huizhou gave all the money from the prefectural treasury to Zhu Xi. Zhu Xi recommended him as a shipping agent, and he openly scrounged.

古文：园池拟禁篽，服饰器用上僣乘舆。
现代文：朱勔家的园池模拟皇宫，服饰用品都超过皇上。
English: The garden and pond of Zhu Xi's house simulate the imperial palace, and the clothing supplies are more than the emperor.

古文：又托挽舟募兵数千人，拥以自卫。
现代文：朱勔又以挽舟为名募兵数千人，作为自己的卫士。
English: Zhu Xi also recruited thousands of soldiers in the name of paddling, as his own guards.

古文：子汝贤等召呼乡州官寮，颐指目摄，皆奔走听命，流毒州郡者二十年。
现代文：朱勔的儿子朱汝贤等使唤乡州的官吏，指手划脚，这些官吏都俯首听命，贻害州郡达二十年。
English: Zhu Ruxian, the son of Zhu Xi, and others called the officials of the township and county, and gave them orders. These officials all bowed their heads and obeyed orders, and they harmed the county and county for twenty years.

古文：方腊起，以诛勔为名。
现代文：方腊起义，以杀朱勔为名。
English: Fangla Uprising, in the name of killing Zhu Xi.

古文：童贯出师，承上旨尽罢去花木进奉，帝又黜勔父子弟侄在职者，民大悦。然寇平，勔复得志，声焰熏灼。邪人秽夫，候门奴事，自直秘阁至殿学士，如欲可得，不附者旋踵罢去，时谓东南小朝廷。
现代文：童贯出兵，秉承皇上的旨意罢去花石纲，皇上又贬去朱勔父子弟侄的官职，百姓十分高兴，但平灭方腊后，朱勔重新得志，气焰嚣张，邪秽小人把他当作主子，从直秘阁到殿学士，如果想保官位，不攀附他的很快就被罢去，当时称为东南小朝廷。
English: Tong Quan dispatched troops, adhering to the emperor's will to abolish the flower and stone class, and the emperor also reduced the official positions of Zhu Xi's father, son and nephew. The people were very happy, but after quelling Fang La, Zhu Xi regained his ambition and arrogance. The evil villain regarded him as his master, from the direct secretary to the palace scholar. If he wanted to keep his official position, he would soon be ousted. At that time, it was called the Southeast Small Court.

古文：帝末年益亲任之，居中白事，传达上旨，大略如内侍，进见不避宫嫔。
现代文：皇上晚年更信任他，他在宫中向皇上奏事，传达皇上圣旨，就像内侍一样，进见皇上不回避妃嫔。
English: In his later years, the emperor trusted him even more. He reported to the emperor in the palace and conveyed the emperor's will, just like a chambermaid. The emperor did not shy away from his concubines.

古文：历随州观察使、庆远军承宣使。
现代文：朱勔历任随州观察使、庆远军承宣使。
English: Zhu Xi successively served as the Suizhou observation envoy, and Qingyuan troops undertook the envoy.

古文：燕山奏功，进拜宁远军节度使、醴泉观使。
现代文：宋占有燕山后，论功行赏，朱勔被升为宁远军节度使、醴泉观使。
English: After the Song Dynasty occupied Yanshan, Zhu Xi was promoted to the Ningyuan Army's commander-in-chief and the commander-in-chief of Quanquan.

古文：一门尽为显官，驺仆亦至金紫，天下为之扼腕。
现代文：朱勔满门都是显官，就连赶车的奴仆也官至金紫光禄大夫，天下人愤怒。
English: Zhu Xi was surrounded by high-ranking officials, and even the servants who drove the car were officials to the doctor Jin Zi Guanglu, and the whole world was angry.

古文：靖康之难，欲为自全计，仓卒拥上皇南巡，且欲邀至其第。
现代文：靖康之难时，朱勔为保全自己，仓卒地保护徽宗南巡，并想把徽宗请到自己的府第。
English: When Jingkang was in trouble, Zhu Xi, in order to save himself, hurriedly protected Huizong's southern inspection, and wanted to invite Huizong to his capital.

古文：钦宗用御史言，放归田里，凡由勔得官者皆罢。
现代文：钦宗采用御史的建议，把朱勔免官，让他回到乡下，凡是靠朱勔而当官的都被罢去。
English: Qinzong adopted the suggestion of the imperial historian to dismiss Zhu Xi and let him return to the countryside. Anyone who relied on Zhu Xi to become an official was dismissed.

古文：籍其赀财，田至三十万亩。
现代文：没收朱勔的家产，土地达三十万亩。
English: The confiscation of Zhu Xi's family property amounted to 300,000 mu of land.

古文：言者不已，羁之衡州，徙韶州、循州，遣使即所至斩之。
现代文：言官不停地弹劾他，就把他发配到衡州，迁到韶州、循州，最后派使者到他的住所斩杀了他。
English: The magistrate kept impeaching him, so he was sent to Hengzhou, moved to Zhangzhou and Xuzhou, and finally sent an envoy to his residence to kill him.

