古文：朱晖孙穆乐恢何敞朱晖字文季，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆朱晖传，朱晖字文季，南阳宛人。家中世代衣冠。
English: ◆ Zhu Xi Chuan, Zhu Xi Zi Wen Ji, Nanyang Anren. Generations of clothing crowns in the family.

古文：家世衣冠。晖早孤，有气决。
现代文：晖早年死去父亲，有气决。
English: His father, who died at an early age, had a decisive influence on him.

古文：年十三，王莽败，天下乱，与外氏家属从田间奔入宛城。
现代文：十三岁时，王莽失败，天下大乱，朱晖与外婆家人从田间奔入宛城。
English: At the age of thirteen, when Wang Mang failed and the world was in turmoil, Zhu Xi and his grandmother's family rushed from the fields into Wancheng.

古文：道遇群贼，白刃劫诸妇女，略夺衣物。
现代文：路遇一群贼人，持白刃劫诸妇女，掠夺衣服财物。
English: Encountered a group of thieves on the road, robbing women with a white blade, looting clothes and property.

古文：昆弟宾客皆惶迫，伏地莫敢动。
现代文：昆弟宾客都惶恐，伏在地下不敢动。
English: Kun Di's guests were terrified and crouched in the basement, not daring to move.

古文：晖拔剑前曰： 财物皆可取耳，诸母衣不可得。
现代文：朱晖拔剑上前道： 财物都可拿走，诸母衣不许动。
English: Zhu Xi drew his sword and said, "You can take away all my belongings, but don't move my mother's clothes."

古文：今日朱晖死日也！ 
现代文：今日是我朱晖死的日子了！ 
English: Today is the day of my Zhu Xi's death!

古文：贼见其小，壮其志，笑曰： 童子内刀。 
现代文：贼人看他年小，其志很壮，笑道 ：童子把刀收起吧！ 
English: The thief saw that he was young and had a strong will. He laughed and said, "Boy, put away your knife!"

古文：遂舍之而去。
现代文：就舍弃他们而走掉了。
English: He abandoned them and walked away.

古文：初，光武与晖父岑俱学长安，有旧故。
现代文：起初，光武帝与朱晖之父朱岑都在长安学习过，有旧交。
English: At first, Emperor Guangwu and Zhu Xi, the father of Zhu Xi, both studied in Chang'an and had old friends.

古文：及即位，求问岑，时已卒，乃召晖拜为郎。
现代文：等到光武即位后，找朱岑，这时朱岑已死，于是召朱晖做郎。
English: After the enthronement of Guangwu, he looked for Zhu Xi, but Zhu Xi was already dead, so he called Zhu Xi to be his son-in-law.

古文：晖寻以病去，卒业于太学。
现代文：朱晖不久因病离职，卒业于太学。
English: Zhu Xi soon left his post due to illness and graduated from the University of Taichung.

古文：性矜严，进止必以礼，诸儒称其高。
现代文：性情矜持严厉，进止必守礼节，诸儒生称赞他品德很高。
English: His temperament is reserved and stern, and he always observes proper etiquette. Confucian scholars praise him for his high moral character.

古文：永平初，显宗舅新阳侯阴就慕晖贤，自往侯之，晖避不见。
现代文：永平初年，显宗的舅父新阳侯阴就仰慕朱晖的贤能，亲自去问候，朱晖避而不见。
English: In the first year of Yongping, Xianzong's uncle, Xinyang Houyin, admired Zhu Xi's virtue and went to greet him in person, but Zhu Xi avoided him.

古文：复遣家丞致礼，晖遂闭门不受。
现代文：阴就又派家丞送礼，朱晖就闭门不受。
English: Yin then sent Jia Rong to deliver the gift, and Zhu Xi closed the door and did not accept it.

古文：就闻，叹曰： 志士也，勿夺其节。 
现代文：阴就听见了，叹息道： 真是有志之士呀，不要夺其气节。 
English: Yin heard this and sighed, "He really is a person with aspirations. Don't rob him of his passion."

古文：后为郡吏，太守阮况尝欲市晖婢，晖不从。
现代文：后来朱晖做了郡吏，太守阮况曾经想买朱晖家的婢女，朱晖不答应。
English: Later, Zhu Xi became a county official. The eunuch Nguyen Quan once wanted to buy the maid of Zhu Xi's family, but Zhu Xi did not agree.

古文：及况卒，晖乃厚赠送其家。
现代文：等到阮况死了，朱晖便送厚礼至其家。
English: When Ruan Jian died, Zhu Xi sent a gift to his family.

古文：人或讥焉，晖曰： 前阮府君有求于我，所以不敢闻命，诚恐以财货污君。
现代文：有人讥讽他，朱晖说： 从前阮府君有求于我，我不敢闻命，的确是怕以财货污辱了他。
English: Some people ridiculed him, Zhu Xi said: Once upon a time, Nguyn Phúc asked me for something. I did not dare to risk my life. I was indeed afraid of defaming him with money and goods.

古文：今而相送，明吾非有爱也。 
现代文：现在相送，表明我不是有爱惜之意。 
English: To send them now is to show that I don't care.

古文：骠骑将军东平王苍闻而辟之，甚礼敬焉。
现代文：骠骑将军东平王刘苍听说后而提拔他，很有礼貌地待他。
English: The cavalry general Dongping Wang Liu Cang heard about him and promoted him. He treated him very politely.

古文：正月朔旦，苍当入贺。
现代文：正月初一天明，刘苍应当入贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, Liu Cang should be congratulated.

古文：故事，少府给璧。
现代文：按照旧例，少府给玉石。
English: According to the old example, the shofu gave the jade.

古文：是时阴就为府卿，贵骄，吏慠不奉法。
现代文：这时阴就为府卿，贵而骄，官吏傲而不守法。
English: At this time, Yin was the prefect, noble and proud, and officials were proud and did not abide by the law.

古文：苍坐朝堂，漏且尽，而求璧不可得，顾谓掾属曰： 若之何？ 
现代文：刘苍坐朝堂之上，更漏将尽，而求玉石找不到，刘苍回头对掾属说 ：怎么回事？ 
English: Liu Cang was sitting on the top of the morning hall, the drain was about to run out, but he couldn't find the jade. Liu Cang turned back to Yu Zhen and said: What's the matter?

古文：晖望见少府主簿持璧，即往绐之曰： 我数闻璧而未尝见，试请观之。 
现代文：朱晖望见少府主簿手持玉石，就去欺骗他道： 我多次听说有璧玉而不曾见过，请给我看看。 
English: Zhu Xi looked up to see the young prefect holding a jade stone and tried to deceive him, saying, "I have heard many times that there are jade gems, but I have never seen one. Please show me."

古文：主簿以授晖，晖顾召令史奉之。
现代文：主簿把璧给朱晖，朱晖回头召令史奉之于刘苍。
English: The master book gave the gem to Zhu Xi, and Zhu Xi's call to return to history was given to Liu Cang.

古文：主簿大惊，遽以白就。
现代文：主簿大吃一惊，连忙报告阴就。
English: The chief clerk was taken aback and hurried to report it.

古文：就曰： 朱椽义士，勿复求。 
现代文：阴就说： 朱掾是义士，不要再求他了。 
English: Yin said: Zhu Xi is a righteous man, don't beg him anymore.

古文：更以他璧朝。
现代文：更以另一玉石朝见。
English: Even more with another jade morning glory.

古文：苍既罢，召晖谓曰： 属者掾自视孰与蔺相如？ 
现代文：刘苍行礼已毕，对朱晖说： 属者掾自认为与蔺相如哪个强些？ 
English: After Liu Cang had performed the salute, he said to Zhu Rong: Which of the two do you think is stronger?

古文：帝闻壮之。
现代文：皇上听说称其勇敢。
English: The Emperor is said to have called him brave.

古文：及当幸长安，欲严宿卫，故以晖为卫士令。
现代文：后来当幸长安时，想严格调整宿卫，所以用朱晖作卫士令。
English: Later, when he was fortunate to be in Chang'an, he wanted to strictly adjust the guards, so he used Zhu Xi as a guard order.

古文：再迁临淮太守。
现代文：再升为临淮太守。
English: He was promoted to Linhuai Taishu again.

古文：晖好节概，有所拔用，皆厉行士。
现代文：朱晖好讲节操，有所拔用，都严厉执行。
English: Zhu Xi is good at speaking about discipline, and has used some methods, all of which have been strictly implemented.

古文：其诸报怨，以义犯率，皆为求其理，多得生济。
现代文：一些报怨之人，以义犯率，朱晖都替他们求其理，多得到生济。
English: Some complainants, with the crime rate of righteousness, Zhu Xi all reasoned for them, and most of them got help.

古文：其不义之囚，即时僵仆。
现代文：那些不义之囚，立即倒下。
English: Those unjustly imprisoned, fall at once.

古文：吏人畏爱，为之歌曰： 强直自遂，南阳朱季。
现代文：吏人对朱晖十分畏爱，作歌道 ：强直自遂，南阳朱季。
English: The officials were very afraid of Zhu Xi, and he composed a song: "Qiang Zhi Zi Sui, Nan Yang Zhu Ji Maru."

古文：吏畏其威，人怀其惠。 
现代文：吏畏其威，人怀其惠。 
English: The authority fears its authority, the people cherish its benefit.

古文：数年，坐法免。
现代文：几年后，因违法免去官职。
English: A few years later, Duan Huizong was removed from office for violating the law.

古文：晖刚于为吏，见忌于上，所在多被劾。
现代文：朱晖做官很刚直，被上司所忌，多次被弹劾。
English: Zhu Xi was a very upright official. He was hated by his superiors and was impeached many times.

古文：自去临淮，屏居野泽，布衣蔬食，不与邑里通，乡党讥其介。
现代文：自从去临淮后，屏居野泽，布衣蔬食，不与邑里交往，乡党讥讽他不与众同。
English: Since he went to Linyi and Huaiyang, he has been living in Fenying and Nozawa, eating cloth, clothing and vegetables. He does not socialize with the townspeople, and the township party mocks him for not being the same as everyone else.

古文：建初中，南阳大饥，米石千余，晖尽散其家资，以分宗里故旧之贫羸者，乡族皆归焉。
现代文：建初年间，南阳大饥荒，米每石值钱千余，朱晖全部分散家资，分给宗里故旧中的贫弱之人，乡族都归附他。
English: During the first year of construction, Nanyang suffered a great famine, rice was worth more than a thousand yuan per stone, and Zhu Xi distributed all of his family's wealth to the poor and weak in Zongli, and the townspeople all belonged to him.

古文：初，晖同县张堪素有名称，尝干太学见晖，甚重之，接以友道，乃把晖臂曰： 欲以妻子托朱生。 
现代文：起初，朱晖之同县人张堪素有名称，曾经在太学里看见朱晖，很器重他，与朱交朋友，并握着朱晖之手臂说 ：想把妻子托付给朱晖。 
English: At first, Zhu Xi's compatriot, Zhang Can, had a name. He had once seen Zhu Xi in Taishu, respected him very much, made friends with Zhu, and held Zhu Xi's arm and said: I want to entrust my wife to Zhu Xi.

古文：晖以堪先达，举手未敢对，自后不复相见。
现代文：朱晖认为张堪是先辈，举手不敢答话，从此以后再没有见面。
English: Zhu Xi thought that Zhang Kan was a forerunner. He did not dare to raise his hand to answer, and they never met again.

古文：堪卒，晖闻其妻子贫困，乃自往候视，厚赈赡之。
现代文：张堪死后，朱晖听说其妻子贫困，于是亲自去看视，并厚赈赡他们。
English: After Zhang Kan's death, Zhu Xi heard that his wife was poor, so he went to see her in person and supported them.

古文：晖少子颉怪而问曰： 大人不与堪为友，平生未曾相闻，子孙窃怪之。 
现代文：朱晖的少子朱颉觉得奇怪而问道 ：大人不与张堪交朋友，平生未曾听说过，子孙感到奇怪。 
English: Zhu Rong's young son Zhu Rong thought it was strange and asked: Adults don't make friends with Zhang Can, I've never heard of it in my life, my children and grandchildren feel strange.

古文：晖曰： 堪尝有知己之言，吾以信于心也。 
现代文：朱晖说： 张堪曾经有知己之言，我早记在心上了。 
English: Zhu Xi said: Zhang Can once had a confidant's words, I remember them in my heart.

古文：晖又与同郡陈揖交善，揖早卒，有遗腹子友，晖常哀之。
现代文：朱晖又与同郡陈揖交情很好，陈揖死得较早，有遗腹子陈友，朱晖常同情他。
English: Zhu Xi also had a good relationship with Chen Xi, a fellow county official. Chen Xi died early and left behind a son, Chen You. Zhu Xi often sympathized with him.

古文：及司徒桓虞为南阳太守，召晖子骈为吏，晖辞骈而荐友。
现代文：等到司徒桓虞做了南阳太守，召朱晖之子朱骈为吏，朱晖辞掉朱骈而推荐陈友。
English: When Sittu Kanyu became the governor of Nanyang, he called Zhu Xi, the son of Zhu Xi, to be the official, and Zhu Xi resigned from Zhu Xi and recommended Chen You.

古文：虞叹息，遂召之。
现代文：桓虞十分叹息，于是召了陈友去。
English: Kengo was very sad, so he called Chen You to go.

古文：其义烈若此。
现代文：他之义烈就是这样。
English: That's how he became a martyr.

古文：元和中，肃宗巡狩，告南阳太守问晖起居，召拜为尚书仆射。
现代文：元和年间，肃宗出外巡狩，告诉南阳太守问候朱晖的起居情况，召拜朱晖为尚书仆射。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Su Zong went out on a hunting tour, told the Nanyang Dynasties to greet Zhu Xi's living conditions, and summoned Zhu Xi to be a disciple.

古文：岁中迁太山太守。
现代文：岁中迁为太山太守。
English: He was transferred to the position of Taiyama Taishu (governor of Taiyama) in the middle of the year.

古文：晖上疏乞留中，诏许之。
现代文：朱晖上疏请求留中，诏书同意了。
English: Zhu Xiangso requested to stay in China, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：因上便宜，陈密事，深见嘉纳。
现代文：于是上书谈政治，陈密事，深深受到嘉奖和采纳。
English: As a result, his book on politics and secrets was widely praised and adopted.

古文：诏报曰： 补公家之阙，不累清白之素，斯善美之士也。
现代文：诏报上说 ：弥补公家的缺漏，不累清白之素质，这是美善之士。
English: The official gazette said: to make up for the shortcomings of public figures, not to exhaust the quality of innocence, this is a virtuous person.

古文：俗吏苟合，阿意面从，进无謇謇之志，却无退思之念，患之甚久。
现代文：俗吏苟且投合，曲意面从，进无蹇难之志，却无退思之念，担心很久。
English: The vulgar officials are eager to fit in, follow the trend, and have no desire to struggle, but they have no thought of retreating, and they have been worried for a long time.

古文：惟今所言，适我愿也。
现代文：只有今所言，适合朕的心愿。
English: Only what I have just said suits my heart.

古文：生其勉之！ 
现代文：先生勉励吧！ 
English: Let the teacher encourage you!

古文：是时谷贵，县官经用不足，朝廷忧之。
现代文：这时谷价昂贵，县官经费不足，朝廷十分着急。
English: At this time, grain prices were expensive, county officials were short of funds, and the imperial court was very anxious.

古文：尚书张林上言： 谷所以贵，由钱贱故也。
现代文：尚书张林上书道 ：谷贵的原因，由于钱贱的缘故。
English: Shangshu Zhanglin on calligraphy: The reason why it is expensive is because it is cheap.

古文：可尽封钱，一取布帛为租，以通天下之用。
现代文：可尽量封钱，一律取布帛作租，让天下通用。
English: You can seal the money as much as possible, take all the cloth bags for rent, and let the whole world use it.

古文：又盐，食之急者，虽贵，人不得不须，官可自鬻。
现代文：又盐，食物中急需之物，虽贵，人不能不要，可由官出卖。
English: And salt, a much-needed ingredient in food, although expensive, is indispensable and can be sold by officials.

古文：又宜因交阯、益州上计吏往来，市珍宝，收采其利，武帝时所谓均输者也。 
现代文：又应通过交阝止、益州上计吏往来之便，买珍宝，收采其利，武帝时所谓均输的办法。 
English: In addition, it is necessary to buy precious treasures and collect their profits through the convenience of the exchange of goods and services, and the convenience of the exchange of accounting officials in Yizhou. This is the so-called equal-loss method in the time of Emperor Wu.

古文：于是诏诸尚书通议。
现代文：于是下诏给尚书们通议。
English: As a result, the following edict was issued to the Shangshu people for discussion.

古文：晖奏据林言不可施行，事遂寝。
现代文：朱晖上奏认为张林之计不可行，事情就罢了。
English: Zhu Xi's envoy thought that Zhang Lin's plan was not feasible, and the matter was over.

古文：后陈事者复重述林前议，以为于国诚便，帝然之，有诏施行。
现代文：后来陈事者又有重复张林之议的，认为对国有利，帝同意了，有诏施行。
English: Later, the petitioner repeated Zhang Lin's suggestion, believing that it was beneficial to the country, the emperor agreed, and the edict was implemented.

古文：晖复独奏曰： 王制，天子不言有无，诸侯不言多少，禄食之家不与百姓争利。
现代文：朱晖又独奏道 ：王制，天子不讲有无，诸侯不讲多少，做官的人不与百姓争利。
English: Zhu Xi also played a solo, saying, "In a monarchy, the emperor doesn't talk about whether there is anything or not, the lords don't talk about how much, and the officials don't compete with the people.

古文：今均输之法与贾贩无异，盐利归官，则下人穷怨，布帛为租，则吏多奸盗，诚非明主所当宜行。 
现代文：今均输之法与贾贩没有区别，盐利归官，则下民穷急，布帛为租，则吏多从中捣鬼，的确不是明主所应当实行的办法。 
English: There is no difference between the current method and the jia vendor. When the salt profit returns to the official, the people are desperate, and when the cloth is rented, the officials are more troublesome. It is indeed not the method that should be implemented by the owner.

古文：帝卒以林等言为然，得晖重议，因发怒，切责诸尚书。
现代文：皇帝最后认为张林等的话是对的，得到朱晖重议，便发怒，责备诸尚书。
English: The emperor finally thought that Zhang Lin's words were right, and when Zhu Xi re-discussed them, he became angry and rebuked Zhu Shangshu.

古文：晖等皆自系狱。
现代文：朱晖等都自请坐牢。
English: Zhu Xi and others all went to jail at their own request.

古文：三日，诏敕出之。
现代文：三天后，诏赦免了他们。
English: Three days later, the emperor pardoned them.

古文：曰： 国家乐闻驳议，黄发无愆，诏书过耳，何故自系？ 
现代文：诏说： 国家愿意听取不同意见，老臣们没有过失，诏书错了，为什么自请坐牢？ 
English: The edict said: The country is willing to listen to different opinions, the old ministers did not make mistakes, the edict was wrong, why did you ask to go to jail?

古文：晖因称病笃，不肯复署议。
现代文：朱晖于是称病太重，不肯再参加议政了。
English: Zhu Xi then said that he was too ill and would no longer take part in political deliberation.

古文：尚书令以下惶怖，谓晖曰： 今临得谴让，奈何称病，其祸不细！ 
现代文：尚书令以下都很恐惧，对朱晖说： 现在面临责备，为什么称病不出，其祸不小！ 
English: Shang Shuling was very afraid of the following, and said to Zhu Xi: Now that you are facing reproach, why do you say that you can't get sick?

古文：晖曰： 行年八十，蒙恩得在机密，当以死报。
现代文：朱晖说 ：年纪已八十了，蒙皇恩能在机密，应当以死相报。
English: Zhu Xi said: I am eighty years old, I have received the emperor's favor and can keep secrets, and I should repay him with my death.

古文：若心知不可而顺旨雷同，负臣子之义。
现代文：如果心知不可而顺着旨意附和，有负臣子之义。
English: If you know in your heart that you can't, but go along with the will, there is a sense of being a subordinate.

古文：今耳目无所闻见，伏待死命。 
现代文：今耳目无所闻见，等待死命好了。 
English: Now my ears and eyes can't hear anything, so I'll just wait for death.

古文：遂闭口不复言。
现代文：于是闭口不再说话。
English: So he shut up and stopped talking.

古文：诸尚书不知所为，乃共劾奏晖。
现代文：诸尚书不知所为，便一起弹劾朱晖。
English: Without knowing what they were doing, they all impeached Zhu Xi together.

古文：帝意解，寝其事。
现代文：皇帝明白了大家的意思，也就不予追究。
English: The emperor understood what everyone meant and did not pursue the matter.

古文：后数日，诏使直事郎问晖起居，太医视疾，太官赐食。
现代文：过后几日，诏使直事郎问候朱晖的起居，派太医看病，太官赐食。
English: A few days later, the emperor sent Naojiro to greet Zhu Xi when he moved in, sent the emperor's doctor to see him, and the emperor gave him food.

古文：晖乃起谢，复赐钱十万，布百匹，衣十领。
现代文：朱晖于是起身谢恩，又赐钱十万，布百匹，衣十套。
English: Zhu Xi then got up to thank him, and gave him 100,000 yuan, 100 pieces of cloth, and 10 sets of clothes.

古文：后迁为尚书令，以老病乞身，拜骑都尉，赐钱二十万。
现代文：后来朱晖升为尚书令，朱以老病请求退休，拜为骑都尉，赐钱二十万。
English: Later, Zhu Bingsheng was appointed as Shang Shuling, Zhu used his old illness to request retirement, was appointed as a cavalry captain, and was given 200,000 yuan.

古文：和帝即位，窦宪北征匈奴，晖复上疏谏。
现代文：和帝即位，窦宪北征匈奴，朱晖又上疏进谏。
English: Emperor He ascended to the throne, Dou Xian led the Northern Expedition against the Xiongnu, and Zhu Xi once again ascended to the throne.

古文：顷之，病卒 
现代文：不久，病死了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：子颉，修儒术，安帝时至陈相。
现代文：儿子朱颉，修儒术，安帝时至陈为相。
English: His son, Zhu Xi, practiced Confucianism from the time of Emperor An to the time of Emperor Chen.

古文：颉子穆。
现代文：朱颉的儿子是朱穆。
English: Zhu Xi's son is Zhu Mu.

古文：穆字公叔。
现代文：◆朱穆传，朱穆字公叔。
English: ◆Zhu Mu Chuan, Zhu Mu Zi Gong Xiu.

古文：年五岁，便有孝称。
现代文：五岁时，便有孝顺之名。
English: At the age of five, he was given the name "Filial Obedience."

古文：父母有病，辄不饮食，差乃复常。
现代文：父母有病，常不饮食，病稍愈才恢复正常。
English: When parents are ill, they often do not eat, and only return to normal when the illness has eased.

古文：及壮耽学，锐意讲诵，或时思至，不自知亡失衣冠，颠队坑岸。
现代文：到了壮年很好学习，在讲诵方面多下功夫，有时想问题专心时，衣冠丢失了还不自知，颠队阝亢岸。
English: When they reach their prime, they are good at studying, they put more effort into lecturing, and sometimes when they want to concentrate on a problem, they don't know when they have lost the crown, and they end up bumping into each other.

古文：其父常以为专愚，几不知数马足。
现代文：他的父亲常认为他太专心近似愚笨，差不多不知道数马足。
English: His father often thought he was so preoccupied that he was almost stupid, barely knowing how many horses there were.

古文：穆愈更精笃。
现代文：朱穆更加精心钻研学问。
English: Zhu Mu studied more carefully.

古文：初举孝廉。
现代文：开始被举为孝廉。
English: He was initially raised as a filial son.

古文：顺帝末，江淮盗贼群起，州郡不能禁。
现代文：顺帝末年，江淮一带盗贼群起，州郡不能制止。
English: In the last years of Emperor Shun, thieves swarmed in the Jianghuai area, and the prefectures and counties could not stop them.

古文：或说大将军梁冀曰： 朱公叔兼资文武，海内奇士，若以为谋主，贼不足平也。 
现代文：有人劝大将军梁冀道： 朱公叔文武全才，海内奇士，如用他做谋主，贼人不难平定。 
English: Some people advised General Liang Jie: Zhu Gongshu is a man of all-round talent in literature and martial arts, and is a wonderful person in Hainan. If he is used as a strategist, it will not be difficult to subdue the bandits.

古文：冀亦素闻穆名，乃辟之，使典兵事，甚见亲任。
现代文：梁冀也常听到朱穆的名声，于是提拔他，让他管军事，很被亲近和重视。
English: Liang Jie also often heard Zhu Mu's reputation, so he promoted him and put him in charge of the military. He was very close and valued.

古文：及桓帝即位，顺烈太后临朝，穆以冀势地亲重，望有以扶持王室，因推灾异，奏记，以劝戒冀曰：穆伏念明年丁亥之岁，刑德合于乾位，《易》经龙战之会，其文曰： 龙战于野，其道穷也。 
现代文：等到桓帝即位，顺烈太后临朝听政，朱穆认为梁冀有权有势，希望他能扶持王室，于是推断灾异发生的根源，写一篇奏记劝戒梁冀道 ：穆想到明年是丁亥之岁，刑德合于乾位，《易经》讲的龙战之会。它的文字说 ：龙战于野，其道穷也。 
English: When Emperor Huan ascended the throne and Empress Dowager Shunli came to listen to the government, Zhu Mu thought that Liang Jie was powerful and hoped that he could support the royal family, so he deduced the root cause of the disaster and wrote a report to exhort Liang Jie: Mu thought that next year would be the year of Ding Hai, and the punishment and virtue would be in the dry position, and the dragon battle would be told in the I Ching. Its text said: The dragon battle is in the field, and its way is poor.

古文：谓阳道将胜而阴道负也。
现代文：说的是阳道将胜而阴道将负的意思。
English: It means that the yang will win and the vagina will lose.

古文：今年九月天气郁冒，五位四侯连失正气，此互相明也。
现代文：今年九月天气郁闷，五位四候连失正气，这是互相说明问题哩。
English: This September, the weather was gloomy, and the five presidents and four vice-presidents lost their heads, which is a mutual explanation.

古文：夫善道属阳，恶道属阴，若修正守阳，摧折恶类，则福从之矣。
现代文：善道属阳，恶道属阴，如果修正守阳，摧折恶类，那么福就跟着来临了。
English: The good way is yang, and the evil way is yin. If you correct and guard the yang and destroy the evil, then good fortune will follow.

古文：穆每事不逮，所好唯学，传受于师，时有可试。
现代文：穆每事不会做，只是喜好学习，传授于老师，时有可试。
English: Mu can't do everything, he just likes to study and pass on what he learns to his teachers.

古文：愿将军少察愚言，申纳诸儒，而亲其忠正，绝其姑息，专心公朝，割除私欲，广求贤能，斥远佞恶。
现代文：愿将军想想我的愚言，重纳诸儒的意见，而亲近忠正之士，断绝小人之道，专心于朝政，割除个人私心，广求贤能之才，排斥小人之邪恶。
English: May the general think about my foolish words, re-adopt the opinions of the Confucianists, and be close to the loyal and upright, cut off the way of the villain, concentrate on the government, cut off personal selfishness, seek the talents of the virtuous, and reject the evil of the villain.

古文：夫人君不可不学，当以天地顺道渐渍其心。
现代文：做人君的不可不学习，做人臣的当以天地顺道渐渍其心。
English: To be a gentleman, one must study. To be a courtier, one must gradually impregnate one's heart with heaven and earth.

古文：宜为皇帝选置师傅及侍讲者，得小心忠笃敦礼之士，将军与之俱入，参劝讲授，师贤法古，此犹倚南山坐平原也，谁能倾之！
现代文：应替皇帝选置师傅和侍讲之人，找一些小心忠笃敦礼之士，将军和他们一道，参劝讲授，师贤法古，这好比靠着南山坐在平原，谁能倾倒它呢！
English: On behalf of the emperor, we should appoint teachers and lecturers, find some careful, loyal, and courteous people, and the general should work with them to advise the lectures and teach the sages. This is like leaning against the South Mountain and sitting on the plain. Who can topple it?

古文：今年夏，月晕房星，明年当有小厄。
现代文：今年夏天，月晕房星，明年当有小灾。
English: This summer, moon sickness, next year there should be a small disaster.

古文：宜急诛奸臣为天下所怨毒者，以塞灾咎，议郎、大夫之位，本以式序儒术高行之士，今多非其人，九卿之中，亦有乖其任者。惟将军察焉。
现代文：应该杀掉一些被天下所怨恨的奸臣，来杜塞灾咎。议郎、大夫之位置，本应是一些儒术高行之士去干，现在多半不是他们；九卿之中，也有不能胜任的，希将军考察。 
English: Some treacherous vassals, who are hated by the whole world, should be killed to avenge the disaster. The position of mediator and doctor should have been occupied by some Confucian scholars, but now it is mostly not them; among the nine nobles, there are also incompetent ones, I hope the general will investigate.

古文：又荐种暠、栾巴等。
现代文：又推荐种詗、栾巴等人。
English: It is also recommended to grow alfalfa, fenugreek and others.

古文：而明年严鲔谋立清河王蒜，又黄龙二见沛国。
现代文：而第二年严鲔谋立清河王蒜，又黄龙两次在沛国出现。
English: In the second year, Yan Xun conspired to establish Qinghe Wang Garlic, and Huanglong appeared twice in Pei Province.

古文：冀无术学，遂以穆 龙战 之言为应，于是请暠为从事中郎，荐巴为议郎，举穆高第，为侍御史。
现代文：梁冀不学无术，便以朱穆 龙战 之言为应验，于是请种詗作从事中郎，荐栾巴做议郎，举朱穆高第，做侍御史。
English: Liang Ji did not learn nothing, he took Zhu Mu Longzheng's words as a fulfillment, so he invited Zong Yao to be a middle-ranking official, recommended Zou Ba to be a high-ranking official, and promoted Zhu Mu Gao Di to be a high-ranking official.

古文：时，同郡赵康叔盛者，隐于武当山，清静不仕，以经传教授。
现代文：这时同郡赵康叔盛，隐居在武当山，清静不愿做官，以经传教授门徒。
English: At this time, the same county Zhao Kangshusheng, living in seclusion in Wudang Mountain, Qingjing did not want to be an official, and taught his disciples with the transmission of scriptures.

古文：穆时年五十，乃奉书称弟子。
现代文：朱穆年已五十，于是奉书称弟子。
English: Zhu Mu was fifty years old, so he wrote a letter and called himself a disciple.

古文：彼与草木俱朽，此与金石相倾，岂得同年而语，并日而谈哉？穆又著《绝交论》，亦矫时之作。
现代文：等到赵康死后，朱穆丧之如老师。他这种尊德重道的行为，被当时人所佩服。朱穆常感到当时风俗浅薄，慕尚敦厚，于是写了《崇厚论》。又著一篇《绝交论》，也是矫正时弊之作。
English: After Zhao Kang's death, Zhu Muxun treated him like a teacher. People at the time admired his behavior of honoring the moral high ground. Zhu Muxun often felt that the customs of the time were shallow, and he was full of vanity, so he wrote "Theory of Sublimity." He also wrote a "Theory of the Ultimate Relationship," which was also a work of correcting the ills of the time.

古文：梁冀骄暴不悛，朝野嗟毒，穆以故吏，惧其衅积招祸，复奏记谏曰：古之明君，必有辅德之臣，规谏之官，下至器物，铭书成败，以防遗失。
现代文：梁冀骄傲暴虐不改，朝野十分怨恨，朱穆因为是梁的故吏，害怕他积恶招祸，又上书谏道： 古时的英明君主，必有辅德之贤臣，规谏之官，下至器物，铭书成败，以防止出现差错。
English: Liang Ji remained proud and tyrannical, and the court and country were very resentful. Zhu Mu, because he was a former official of Liang, was afraid that he would accumulate evil and invite disaster, and wrote: The wise monarch in ancient times must have a wise minister of virtue, an official of discipline, and even a utensil to inscribe success or failure in order to prevent mistakes.

古文：故君有正道，臣有正路，从之如升堂，违之如赴壑。
现代文：所以君有正道，臣有正路，从之如升堂，违之如赴壑。
English: Therefore, you have the right way, and the vassal has the right way, from which it is like ascending the hall, and going against it is like going to hell.

古文：今明将军地有申伯之尊，位为群公之首，一日行善，天下归仁，终朝为恶，四海倾覆。
现代文：现在将军地有申伯之尊，位在群公之首，一日行善事，天下归顺，终朝做坏事，四海遭殃。
English: Now the generals have the respect of Shen Bo, who is at the head of the group of princes. If you do good deeds one day, the whole world will submit to you. If you do bad things all day long, you will suffer misfortune in all directions.

古文：顷者，官人俱匮，加以水虫为害。
现代文：近来，官吏百姓都匮乏，如以洪水虫灾为害。
English: Recently, officials and people have been in need, such as floods and insect plagues.

古文：京师诸官费用增多，诏书发调或至十倍。
现代文：京师诸官费用增多，诏书发调有时至十倍之多。
English: The expenses of officials in Beijing have increased, and the issuance of imperial edicts has sometimes increased as much as tenfold.

古文：各言官无见财，皆当出民，掠割剥，强令充足。
现代文：各人都说官无见财，都归百姓所出，采用扌旁掠割剥之手段，强迫命令满足要求。
English: Everyone said that officials did not see any money, it all came from the people, using the means of pillage and plunder to force the order to meet the requirements.

古文：公赋既重，私敛又深。
现代文：公赋本来很重，私人剥削不少。
English: Public endowment was originally very heavy, and there was a lot of private exploitation.

古文：牧守长吏，多非德选，贪聚无，遇人如虏，或绝命于楚之下，或自贼于迫切之求。
现代文：地方的牧守长吏，多半不是严格挑选的人，贪聚无厌，遇人如虏，有的人死在瞂击拷打之下，有的人被迫自杀。
English: Local shepherds and elders, most of whom are not rigorously selected, are greedy and greedy, treat people like captives, some people die under beatings and torture, and some people are forced to commit suicide.

古文：又掠夺百姓，皆托之尊府。
现代文：又官吏掠夺百姓，都是用尊府的名义。
English: In addition, officials plundered the people, all in the name of honoring the government.

古文：遂令将军结怨天下，吏人酸毒，道路叹嗟。
现代文：于是将军结怨于天下，吏人酸毒，道路嗟叹不止。
English: As a result, the generals have caused resentment in the world, the officials are sour and poisonous, and the road is full of sighs.

古文：昔秦政烦苛，百姓土崩，陈胜奋臂一呼，天下鼎沸，而面谀之臣，犹言安耳。
现代文：从前秦朝政治烦苛，百姓土崩瓦解，陈胜奋臂一呼，天下人声鼎沸，而当面讨好之臣，还说太平无事。
English: In the former Qin Dynasty, politics was troublesome, the people were crumbling and disintegrating, Chen Sheng called for help, the world was in an uproar, and the courtiers who were flattered in person said that there was nothing wrong.

古文：讳恶不悛，卒至亡灭。
现代文：讳恶不改，卒至灭亡。
English: Conceal evil and do not change, die and perish.

古文：昔永和之末，纲纪少弛，颇失人望。
现代文：从前永和末年，纲纪稍有松弛，颇令人失望。
English: In the last years of the Edo period, there was a slight slackening of discipline, which was quite disappointing.

古文：四五岁耳，而财空户散，下有离心。
现代文：四五年光景，而财空户散，下有离心。
English: Forty-five years have passed, and households with financial gaps are scattered, with centrifugation at the bottom.

古文：马免之徒乘敝而起，荆扬之间几成大患。
现代文：马免之徒乘敝而起，荆州扬州之间，差点出了大患。
English: Ma Meng's followers set out on a raft, and between Jingzhou and Yangzhou, they almost got into a big trouble.

古文：幸赖顺烈皇后初政清静，内外同力，仅乃讨定。
现代文：幸亏顺烈皇后初政清静，内外同心协力，才得讨平下来。
English: Fortunately, thanks to Queen Shunli's early peaceful politics and concerted efforts at home and abroad, it was possible to settle the dispute.

古文：今百姓戚戚，困于永和，内非仁爱之心可得容忍，外非守国之计所宜久安也。
现代文：现在百姓担心，困难甚于永和，内非仁爱之心可得容忍，外非守国之计所宜久安。
English: Now the people are worried that the difficulties are greater than the eternal peace, and that it is not the benevolence of the heart that can be tolerated, and it is not the strategy of defending the country.

古文：夫将相大臣，均体元首，共舆而驰，同舟而济，舆倾舟覆，患实共之。
现代文：将相大臣，与元首共于一体，共坐一车奔驰，同乘一船出海，如果车覆船沉，患难共同遭际。
English: The Minister of the Prime Minister, together with the head of state, ride together in a Mercedes, go to sea together in a boat, and if the boat sinks, they will suffer together.

古文：岂可以去明即昧，履危自安，主孤时困，而莫之恤乎！
现代文：难道可以去明即暗，冒险自安，主孤时困，而没有人出来挽救么！
English: Is it possible to go from darkness to light, risking one's own safety, when the Lord is lonely and weary, and no one comes out to save us?

古文：宜时易宰守非其人者，减省第宅园池之费，拒绝郡国诸所奉送。
现代文：应当及时更换不称职的人，减省第宅园池之费用，拒绝郡国奉送的财物。
English: It is necessary to replace incompetent people in a timely manner, reduce the cost of the first house and garden, and refuse the property sent by the county.

古文：内以自明，外解人惑，使挟奸之吏无所依托，司察之臣得尽耳目。
现代文：内以自明，外解人们的疑惑，使挟奸的污吏没有依托，司察之臣得尽耳目之责。
English: Internal self-evident, external explanation of people's doubts, so that the corrupt officials of the pinch did not rely on, the inspector's vassal had to do his best.

古文：宪度既张，远迩清壹，则将军身尊事显，德无穷。
现代文：法度既张，远近清壹，那么将军就身尊事显，德泽永耀后世。
English: If the laws are strict, and the distance and proximity are clear, then the general will be respected, and virtue will forever shine in the future.

古文：天道明察，无言不信，惟垂省览。
现代文：天道明察，无言不信，希您省览。 
English: The way of heaven is clear to see, beyond words, beyond belief. I hope you will take a look.

古文：冀不纳，而纵放日滋，遂复赂遗左右，交通宦者，任其子弟、宾客以为州郡要职。
现代文：梁冀不采纳，而放纵更加厉害，而且左右收受馈赠贿赂，与宦官往来密切，任命他的子弟、宾客作州郡要职。
English: Liang Jie did not accept it, but his indulgence was even more severe, and he received gifts and bribes left and right, had close contacts with eunuchs, and appointed his son and guests to important positions in the county.

古文：穆又奏记极谏，冀终不悟。
现代文：朱穆又上书极谏，梁冀始终不觉悟。
English: Zhu Mu also wrote a very angry letter, and Liang Jie never woke up.

古文：报书云： 如此，仆亦无一可邪？ 
现代文：梁冀回报一书说： 这样，我就没一件好处么？ 
English: Liang Jie wrote back and said, "In this way, won't I gain anything?

古文：穆言切，然亦不甚罪也。
现代文：朱穆言辞虽然恳切，但也不认为有罪。
English: Although Zhu Mu's words are earnest, he does not think he is guilty.

古文：永兴元年，河溢，漂害人庶数十万户，百姓荒馑，流移道路。
现代文：永兴元年，黄河涨水，数十万户人受水灾，百姓饥荒，流移道路。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, the Yellow River flooded, hundreds of thousands of households were flooded, people suffered from famine, and roads were flooded.

古文：冀州盗贼尤多，故擢穆为冀州刺史。
现代文：冀州盗贼更多，所以提拔朱穆作冀州刺史。
English: There are more thieves in Jizhou, so Zhu Mu was promoted to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：州人有宦者三人为中常侍，并以檄谒穆。
现代文：冀州人有宦者三人做中常侍，并以檄文谒见朱穆。
English: In Jizhou, there are three people who have been appointed as middle attendants, and they see Zhu Mu through the eyes of the emperor.

古文：穆疾之，辞不相见。
现代文：朱穆恨他们，辞不相见。
English: Zhu Mu hated them and refused to see them.

古文：冀部令长闻穆济河，解印绶去者四十余人。
现代文：冀部令长听说朱穆已渡河，解除印绶离去的有四十余人。
English: The director of the Hebei Department heard that Zhu Mu had crossed the river, and more than forty people left after the cancellation of the seal.

古文：及到，奏劾诸郡，至有自杀者。
现代文：等朱穆到职，奏劾诸郡，至有自杀的。
English: When Zhu Mu came to office, he sued the counties, and some even committed suicide.

古文：以威略权宜，尽诛贼渠帅。
现代文：朱穆以威略权宜，尽杀贼人头目。
English: Zhu Mu did his best to kill the leader of the thieves.

古文：举劾权贵，或乃死狱中。
现代文：举劾权贵，有的人竟死在狱中。
English: Some people have even died in prison after making accusations against the powerful.

古文：有宦者赵忠丧父，归葬安平，僭为玙璠、玉匣、偶人。
现代文：有宦者赵忠死了父亲，回到安平埋葬，擅作、玉匣、偶人陪葬。
English: Zhao Zhong, who had the misfortune to lose his father, returned to Anping to bury him, accompanied by his masterpiece, a jade box, and a figurine.

古文：穆闻之，下郡案验。
现代文：朱穆听到，下郡案验。
English: When Zhu Mu heard this, he went down to the county to inspect the case.

古文：吏畏其严明，遂发墓剖棺，陈尸出之，而收其家属。
现代文：吏害怕朱的严明，于是挖墓剖棺，陈尸出之，而且收捕其家属。
English: The officials were afraid of Zhu Yanming, so they dug up the grave, dissected the coffin, took out the corpse, and arrested his family members.

古文：帝闻大怒，征穆诣廷尉，输作左校。
现代文：皇帝听了大怒，召朱穆到廷尉那里，输作左校。
English: The emperor listened to the great anger, summoned Zhu Mu to the court lieutenant, and sent him to the left school.

古文：太学书生刘陶等数千人诣阙上书讼穆曰：伏见施刑徒朱穆，处公忧国，拜州之日，志清奸恶。
现代文：太学书生刘陶等数千人到朝廷上书讼穆道 ：伏见施刑徒朱穆，站在公家立场，忧虑国家大事，拜州之日，志在清除奸恶。
English: Thousands of people, including the scholar Liu Tao, went to the imperial court to plead their case: Fushimi executed the convict Zhu Mu, stood on the public position, worried about national affairs, the day of the state visit, and aimed to eliminate treachery.

古文：诚以常待贵宠，父兄子弟布在州郡，竞为虎狼，噬食小人，故穆张理天网，补缀漏目，罗取残祸，以塞天意。
现代文：可是中常侍倚仗贵宠，父兄子弟布在州郡，争为虎狼，噬食小人，所以朱穆张理天网，补缀漏目，罗取残害之徒，以塞天意。
English: However, the middle-ranking attendant relied on the precious pet, and the father and the brother and the child were clothed in the state county, competing to be the tiger and the wolf, and devouring the villain, so Zhu Mu spread the sky net, patched the leak, took the mutilator, and blocked the will of heaven.

古文：由是内官咸共恚疾，谤讟烦兴，谗隙仍作，极其刑谪，输作左校。
现代文：由此内官都恨得要命，毁谤烦兴，谗言仍作，极其刑谪，输作左校。
English: As a result, the officials hated him to death, slandered him, annoyed him, criticized him, punished him severely, and expelled him from the school.

古文：天下有识，皆以穆同勤禹、稷而被共、鲧之戾，若死者有知，则唐帝怒于崇山，重华忿于苍墓矣。
现代文：天下有识之士，都认为朱穆勤同禹、稷而被共工、鲧之害，如果死者有知，那么唐帝怒于崇山，舜帝将在苍梧忿怒了。
English: People of insight all over the world believe that Zhu Mu worked diligently with Yu, and that he was co-worker and victim of Yu. If the deceased knew, then Emperor Tang would be angry at Chongshan, and Emperor Yu would be angry at Gorgo.

古文：当今中官近习，窃持国柄，手握王爵，口含天宪，运赏则使饿隶富于季孙，呼则令伊、颜化为桀、跖。
现代文：当年中官接近皇上，窃持国家权柄，手握王爵，口含天宪，运用赏赐就使饿隶富比季孙，运用处分就使伊尹、颜回化为夏桀、盗跖。
English: In that year, the middle-ranking officials approached the emperor, stole the power of the state, held the title of prince in their hands, and spoke the heavenly constitution. Using rewards, they made the hungry clans richer than the descendants, and using punishments, they made Yi Yin and Yan Hu transform into Xia Yao and Yao Yao.

古文：而穆独亢然不顾身害。
现代文：可朱穆独个亢然不顾自身受害。
English: However, Zhu Mu was the only one who did not care about his own suffering.

古文：非恶荣而好辱，恶生而好死也，徒感王纲之不摄，惧天网之久失，故竭心怀忧，为上深计。
现代文：不是他恶荣而好辱，恶生而好死，而是感到王纲之不持，怕天网之久失，所以竭心怀忧，替皇上深谋远虑。
English: It was not that he was proud but humiliated, born bad but died good, but that he felt the king's position was untenable and feared the loss of heaven's net for a long time, so he was worried and foresaw for the emperor.

古文：臣愿黥首系趾，代穆校作。
现代文：臣愿受黥首系趾的刑罚，代替朱穆校作。 
English: The vassal is willing to accept the punishment of the dagger toe, instead of Zhu Mu.

古文：帝览其秦，乃赦之。
现代文：皇上看了奏折，于是赦了朱穆。
English: The emperor read the report and pardoned Zhu Mu.

古文：穆居家数年，在朝诸公多有相推荐者，于是征拜尚书。
现代文：朱穆在家住了几年，在朝诸公多有相推荐的，于是征拜为尚书。
English: Zhu Mu lived at home for several years, and was recommended by many in the imperial court, so he was recruited as a scholar.

古文：穆既深疾宦官，及在台阁，旦夕共事，志欲除之。
现代文：朱穆深恨宦官，到了台阁后，早晚与他们共事，立志想除掉他们。
English: Zhu Mu deeply hated eunuchs, and when he came to the cabinet, he worked with them day and night, determined to get rid of them.

古文：乃上疏曰： 案汉故事，中常侍参选士人。
现代文：于是上疏道 ：按汉朝旧例，中常侍参选士人。
English: As a result, Shangxiao Road: According to the old example of the Han Dynasty, the middle-ranking attendants were the candidates.

古文：建武以后，乃悉用宦者。
现代文：建武以后，才全用宦者。
English: It was only after the establishment of martial arts that everyone started to use kites.

古文：自延平以来，浸益贵盛，假貂珰之饰，处常伯之任，天朝政事，一更其手，权倾海内，宠贵无极，子弟亲戚，并荷荣任，故放滥骄溢，莫能禁御。
现代文：从延平以来，渐渐更加贵盛，假貂之服饰，处侍中之重任，天朝政事，一经他们之手，权倾海内，宠贵没有极限，子弟亲戚，都担负重任，所以放滥骄溢，没有人能制止。
English: Since Yanping, it has gradually become more and more prosperous. The clothes of the false emperors, the important duties of the attendants, the political affairs of the heavenly court, once they pass through their hands, the power will fall into the sea. There is no limit to how much they can be spoiled. Their children and relatives all bear heavy responsibilities. Therefore, the extravagance is overflowing, and no one can stop it.

古文：凶狡无行之徒，媚以求官，恃势怙宠之辈，渔食百姓，穷破天下，空竭小人。
现代文：凶狡无行之徒，媚以求官，恃势怙宠之辈，渔食百姓，穷破天下，空竭小人。
English: He is a cunning ruffian, a flatterer of officials, a spoiler of the people, a fisherman of the people, a pauper of the world, and an empty-headed villain.

古文：愚臣以为可悉罢省，遵复往初，率由旧章，更选海内清淳之士，明达国体者，以补其处。
现代文：愚臣以为这班人可以全部罢省，恢复往初，按旧规章，更选海内清淳之士，明达国体之人，以补充他们的位置。
English: The foolish minister thought that these people could all be purged and restored to the beginning, and according to the old regulations, they should choose the most honest person at home and the most knowledgeable person in the national team to supplement their position.

古文：即陛下可为尧、舜之君，众僚皆为稷、契之臣，兆庶黎萌蒙被圣化矣。 
现代文：陛下可成为尧舜之君，众僚都做稷契之臣，百万黎民都蒙受圣化了。 
English: Your majesty can become the prince of Jurchen, all your colleagues can be the vassals of Jurchen, and millions of Jurchen have been sanctified.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇帝不采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：后穆因进见，口复陈曰： 臣闻汉家旧典，置侍中、中常侍各一人，省尚书事，黄门侍郎一人，传发书奏，皆用姓族。
现代文：后来朱穆因进见，口中又陈述道 ：臣听说汉家旧典，设侍中、中常侍各一人，总览尚书之事，黄门侍郎一人，传发书奏，都引用士人中有族望的。
English: Later, Zhu Muyin looked into the matter, and he also stated in his mouth: The minister heard that the Han dynasty old books, the establishment of one attendant and one attendant each, the overview of Shangshu, one Huangmen attendant, and the transmission of calligraphy, were all quoted by the scholars who were popular among the people.

古文：自和熹太后以女主称制，不接公卿，乃以阉人为常侍，小黄门通命两宫。
现代文：自和熹太后以女主称制，不接见公卿，用阉人做常侍，小黄门通令两宫。
English: Empress Dowager Zi and Empress Dowager Yao were styled as empresses, they did not receive court nobles, they used eunuchs as attendants, and Xiao Huangmen was in charge of the two palaces.

古文：自此以来，权倾人主，穷困天下。
现代文：自此以来，宦者权倾人主，使天下穷困。
English: Since then, the power of the wicked has been turned against the righteous, and the whole world has been impoverished.

古文：宜皆罢遣，博选耆儒宿德，与参政事。 
现代文：应该一律罢遣，博选耆儒宿德之人，参与政事。 
English: All of them should be removed from office, and those who have the virtues of Confucianism should be elected to participate in political affairs.

古文：帝怒，不应。
现代文：皇帝大怒，不答应。
English: The emperor was furious and did not agree.

古文：穆伏不肯起。
现代文：朱穆伏地不肯起来。
English: Zhu Muvodi refused to get up.

古文：左右传出，良久乃趋而去。
现代文：左右传声令出，好久才趋而去。
English: The left and right horns sounded, and it was a long time before anyone moved away.

古文：自此中官数因事称诏诋毁之。
现代文：从此中官多次因事称诏诋毁朱穆。
English: Since then, the lieutenant-general has repeatedly denigrated Zhu Mu for the incident.

古文：穆素刚，不得意，居无几，愤懑发疽。
现代文：朱穆素性刚直，不得意，居家不久，愤懑长了疽疮。
English: Zhu Muxu was rigid and unwilling, and soon after returning home, he developed gangrene in his anus.

古文：延熹六年，卒，时年六十四。
现代文：延熹六年死去，时年六十四岁。
English: He died six years later, at the age of 64.

古文：禄仕数十年，蔬食布衣，家无余财。
现代文：做官几十年，蔬食布衣，家中没有余财。
English: He has been a government official for decades, eats vegetables and clothes, and has no spare money at home.

古文：公卿共表穆立节忠清，虔恭机密，守死善道，宜蒙旌宠。
现代文：公卿共同上表说朱穆立节忠清，虔恭机密，守死善道，应该得到旌宠。
English: The high-ranking officials jointly said that Zhu Mu Lixing was loyal and pure, pious and confidential, and adhered to the virtuous path. He should be favored.

古文：策诏褒述，追赠益州太守。
现代文：朝廷策诏褒述，追赠益州太守。
English: Imperial edict praised, posthumously awarded the position of Governor of Yishu.

古文：所著论、策、奏、教、书、诗、记、嘲，凡二十篇。
现代文：所著论、策、奏、教、书、诗、记、嘲，共二十篇。
English: He has written a total of twenty articles on theory, strategy, music, teaching, literature, poetry, memoirs, and satire.

古文：穆前在冀州，所辟用皆清德长者，多至公卿、州郡。
现代文：朱穆以前在冀州，所提拔的人都是清德长者，多数做到公卿、州郡。
English: Before Zhu Mu came to Jizhou, the people he promoted were all elders of the Qing Dynasty, and most of them were nobles, prefectures and counties.

古文：子野，少有名节，仕至河南君。
现代文：儿子朱野，少有名节，仕至河南尹。
English: His son, Zhu Ye, was less famous and rose to the rank of Henan Yin.

古文：汉兴称王阳、贡禹、陈遵、张竦，中世有廉范、庆鸿、陈重、雷义云。乐恢字伯奇，京兆长陵人也。
现代文：起初，朱穆父亲死了，朱穆与诸儒生考依古义，谥叫贞宣先生。等朱穆死后，蔡邕又与门人共述其德行，谥为文忠先生。◆乐恢传，乐恢字伯奇，京兆长陵人。
English: At first, when Zhu Mu's father died, Zhu Mu and the other Confucian scholars referred to him as Mr. Zhenxuan. After Zhu Mu's death, Cai Qi also shared his virtues with his disciples, calling him Mr. Wenzhong.

古文：父亲，为县吏，得罪于令，收将杀之。
现代文：父乐亲，做县吏，得罪了县令，被捕将杀。
English: His father, a county official, offended the county magistrate and was arrested and will be killed.

古文：恢年十一，常俯伏寺门，昼夜号泣。
现代文：乐恢年十一岁，常俯伏寺门，昼夜号哭。
English: At the age of eleven, Le Guo often prostrated himself at the gate of the temple and cried day and night.

古文：令闻而矜之，即解出亲。
现代文：县令听见而怜悯他，立即放出乐亲。
English: Hearing this, the county magistrate took pity on him and immediately released him.

古文：恢长好经学，事博士焦永，永为河东太守，恢随之官，闭庐精诵，不交人物。
现代文：乐恢长大后好经学，以博士焦永为老师。焦永做河东太守，乐恢随焦到官所，关门读书，不和别人交往。
English: After growing up, Le Jiao was good at studying, with Dr. Jiao Yong as his teacher. When Jiao Yong became the governor of Hedong, Le Jiao followed Jiao to the government office, closed the door to study, and did not socialize with others.

古文：后永以事被考，诸弟子皆以通关被系，恢独然不污于法，遂笃志为名儒。
现代文：后来焦永因事被查考，他的学生们都因替他打通关节被捕，乐恢独个清白不被法所污染，于是立志做名儒。
English: Later, Jiao Yong was investigated for the incident, and his students were arrested for opening the joint for him. However, his innocence was not tainted by the law, so he decided to become a famous Confucian.

古文：性廉直介立，行不合己者，虽贵不与交。
现代文：乐恢性廉直特立，行为不合己意的人，即使很有权势也不和他结交。
English: Even the very powerful will not associate with a person who is honest, upright, and independent, and whose behavior is not in line with their own.

古文：信阳侯阴就数致礼请恢，恢绝不答。
现代文：信阳侯阴就多次送礼请恢，恢绝不作答复。
English: Xinyang Houyin repeatedly sent gifts to Wei Wei, but he never replied.

古文：后仕本郡吏，太守坐法诛，故人莫敢往，恢独奔丧行服，坐以抵罪。
现代文：后来乐恢做本郡的小官，太守因犯法被杀，老朋友不敢来往，乐恢独自奔丧行服，因以抵罪。
English: Later, Le Huai served as a minor official of the county, the grand marshal was killed for breaking the law, old friends did not dare to come and go, Le Huai went to the funeral alone, to atone for the crime.

古文：归，复为功曹，选举不阿，请托无所容。
现代文：回来后，又做功曹，选举时公正不阿，请托无所容。
English: When he returned, he took credit for the election being fair. Please do not tolerate this.

古文：同郡杨政数众毁恢，后举政子为孝廉，由是乡里归之。
现代文：同郡杨政几次当众诋毁乐恢，后来乐恢仍举杨政之子作孝廉，由此乡里都归服他。
English: In the same county, Yang Zheng publicly slandered Le Wei several times. Later, Le Wei still held Yang Zheng's son as a filial son, and the villagers all obeyed him.

古文：辟司空牟融府。
现代文：后来提升到司空牟融府。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Secretary of Mutsurofu.

古文：会蜀郡太守第五伦代融为司空，恢以与伦同郡，不肯留，荐颍川杜安而退。
现代文：正逢蜀郡太守第五伦代牟融做司空，乐恢认为与伦是同郡人，不肯留任，推荐颍川杜安而自己告退。
English: It was the fifth time that the governor of Shu County, Lentai Murong, was promoted to the position of the governor of Shu County. Lokai thought that Lentai was from the same county, and he did not want to stay in the position. He recommended Duan Xingchuan and resigned.

古文：诸公多其行，连辟之，遂皆不应。
现代文：诸公多赞美他的品行，几次征召他，都不应召。
English: Many princes praised his conduct, and he was called up several times, but he did not respond.

古文：后征拜议郎。
现代文：后来朝廷征召乐恢作议郎。
English: Later, the imperial court conscripted Rakui as a councilor.

古文：会车骑将军窦宪出征匈奴，恢数上书谏争，朝廷称其忠。
现代文：正逢车骑将军窦宪出征匈奴，乐恢几次上书谏争，朝廷称他忠实。
English: At the same time, the cavalry general Dou Xian went to the Xiongnu, Le Wei sent several letters to the emperor, and the court called him loyal.

古文：入为尚书仆射。
现代文：入为尚书仆射。
English: He entered the service as a shoemaker.

古文：是时河南尹王调、洛阳令李阜与窦宪厚善，纵舍自由。
现代文：这时河南尹王调、洛阳令李阜与窦宪交情很厚，纵舍自由。
English: At this time, Yin Wangjing from Henan Province and Li Fu from Luoyang Province had a strong friendship with Dou Xian, and they were free to do as they pleased.

古文：恢劾奏调、阜，并及司隶校尉。
现代文：乐恢劾奏王调、李阜，并涉及司隶校尉。
English: The music revives the music of Wang Jing and Li Fu, and involves the school captain Sisli.

古文：诸所刺举，无所回避，贵戚恶之。
现代文：他所揭发检举之人，没有什么回避，所以贵戚们恨了他。
English: He had no qualms about exposing and denouncing anyone, so the nobles hated him.

古文：宪弟夏阳侯瑰欲往候恢，恢谢不与通。
现代文：窦宪之弟夏阳侯窦王襄想去问候乐恢，恢谢绝不和他来往。
English: Dou Xian's younger brother, Xia Yang Hou Dou Wang Xiang, wanted to say hello to Le Wei, but Le Wei refused to go out with him.

古文：宪兄弟放纵，而忿其不附己。
现代文：窦宪之兄弟放纵，而恨乐恢不附和自己。
English: Dou Xian's brothers indulge, but hate and do not reconcile themselves.

古文：妻每谏恢曰： 昔人有容身避害，何必以言取怨？ 
现代文：乐恢之妻对乐恢说： 古时有容身避害之人，你何必以言取怨？ 
English: Le Wei's wife said to Le Wei: In ancient times, there were people who avoided harm with their bodies. Why do you have to use words to complain?

古文：恢汉曰： 吾何忍素餐立人之朝乎！ 
现代文：乐恢叹道 ：我怎么忍心吃白饭站在人家的朝廷呢！ 
English: Le Wei sighed, "How can I bear to eat white rice and stand in someone else's court!"

古文：遂上疏谏曰： 臣闻百王之失，皆由权移于下。
现代文：于是上疏谏道 ：臣听说百王的过失，都由于权柄落在下面。
English: As a result, Shang Shou Xuan said: "The retainer heard that the faults of the hundred kings were all due to the authority falling below.

古文：大臣持国，常以势盛为咎。
现代文：大臣主持国政，常因势盛为咎。
English: The minister presides over national affairs and is often blamed for being too powerful.

古文：伏念先帝，圣德未永，早弃万国。
现代文：想起先帝，圣德不够久长，早弃万国而去。
English: When I think of the previous emperor, he did not remain a saint long enough to abandon all nations.

古文：陛下富于春秋，纂承大业，诸舅不宜干正王室，以示天下之私。
现代文：陛下正是年富之时，继承大业，诸舅不应干正王室，以示天下之私。
English: Your Majesty is just at the age of wealth, inheriting a great cause, your uncles should not do the royal family, to show the world's ego.

古文：经曰： 天地乖互，众物夭伤。
现代文：经书上说： 天地乖互，众物夭伤。
English: The scriptures say: Heaven and earth obey each other, and all things die young.

古文：君臣失序，万人受殃。 
现代文：君臣失序，万人受殃。 
English: If a prince or a minister is out of order, everyone will suffer.

古文：政失不救，其极不测。
现代文：政治出差错而不纠正，将产生不测之祸。
English: If politics makes a mistake and does not correct it, an unforeseen disaster will occur.

古文：方今之宜，上以义自割，下以谦自引。
现代文：当前之措施，上面应以义自割，下面应以谦自引。
English: For the current measures, the above should be based on righteousness, and the following should be based on modesty.

古文：四舅可长保爵土之荣，皇太后永无惭负宗庙之忧，诚策之上者也。 
现代文：四舅可长保爵土之光荣，皇太后永无惭负宗庙之忧虑，这是上等之策。 
English: The fourth uncle can grow up to be a baron, and the empress dowager will never have to worry about losing her ancestral temple. This is the best strategy.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书奏上去不被理睬。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：时，窦太后临朝，和帝未亲万机，恢以意不得行，乃称疾气骸骨。
现代文：当时正是窦太后临朝听政，和帝没有亲自过问国事，乐恢以自己的意见不被采纳，于是称病请求退职。
English: At that time, it was Dou who was listening to politics, and Emperor He did not personally inquire about state affairs. Le Wei was not accepted with his own opinion, so he called in sick and asked to retire.

古文：诏赐钱，太医视疾。
现代文：朝廷下诏赐钱，派太医看病。
English: The imperial court decreed that money should be given, and sent the imperial physician to see the sick.

古文：恢荐任城郭均、成阳高凤，而遂称笃。
现代文：乐恢推荐任城郭均、成阳高凤，而自己称病厉害了。
English: Le Wei recommended Rencheng Guojun and Chengyang Gaofeng, but he said he was seriously ill.

古文：拜骑都尉，上书辞谢曰： 仍受厚恩，无以报效。
现代文：朝廷拜乐恢作骑都尉，乐恢上书辞谢道： 仍受大恩，无以报效。
English: The imperial court paid tribute to Le Weiwei as a cavalry captain, and Le Weiwei said in his letter of thanks: I am still greatly blessed, and I have nothing to show in return.

古文：夫政在大夫，孔子所疾；世卿持权，《春秋》以戒。
现代文：政治落在大夫之手，这是孔子所痛恨的事；世卿掌握大权，《春秋》提出警戒。
English: Politics fell into the hands of doctors, which was something Confucius abhorred; aristocrats held the reins of power, and "Spring and Autumn" sounded the alarm.

古文：圣人恳恻，不虚言也。
现代文：圣人所担心的，不是空话。
English: What the sage fears is not empty words.

古文：近世外戚富贵，必有骄溢之败。
现代文：近世外戚富贵，必有骄溢之败。
English: In the modern world, if one's relatives are rich, one is bound to be arrogant.

古文：今陛下思慕山陵，未遑政事；诸舅宠盛，权行四方。
现代文：今陛下思慕山陵，没有过问政事，诸舅宠盛，权势达于四方。
English: Now his majesty is thinking of the mountains and the tombs. He has never been involved in political affairs. His uncles are favored and powerful in all directions.

古文：若不能自损，诛罚必加。
现代文：如果不能自己减损，诛罚之罪必将到来。
English: If you can't attenuate yourself, the punishment will surely come.

古文：臣寿命垂尽，临死竭愚，惟蒙留神。 
现代文：臣寿命将尽，临死竭尽愚忠，希望得到留神。 
English: A vassal is at the end of his life, and on the verge of death, he is trying his best to be loyal, hoping to be noticed.

古文：诏听上印绶，乃归乡里。
现代文：诏听上印绶，于是回到乡里。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, he returned to the countryside.

古文：窦宪因是风厉州郡迫胁，恢遂饮药死。
现代文：窦宪因此责成州郡对乐恢进行迫害，乐恢于是饮药而死。
English: As a result, Dou Xian ordered the county to persecute Le Wei, who died from drinking the medicine.

古文：弟子缞绖挽者数百人，众庶痛伤之。
现代文：弟子穿孝服送葬的几百人，百姓都悲痛伤心。
English: Disciples dressed in filial piety sent hundreds of people to the funeral, and the people were heartbroken.

古文：后窦氏诛，帝始亲事，恢门生何融等上书陈恢忠节，除子己为郎中。
现代文：后来窦氏被杀，皇帝开始亲政，乐恢之门生何融等上书陈述乐恢的忠节，朝廷赐其子乐己为郎中。
English: Later, the Dou clan was killed, the emperor began to rule personally, and He Rong, a protégé of Le Huai, wrote a letter stating Le Huai's loyalty, and the court gave his son Le Hui as a steward.

古文：何敞字文高，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：◆何敞传，何敞字文高，扶风平陵人。
English: ◆What a great story, what a great writer, what a great person.

古文：其先家于汝阴。
现代文：他的先辈家在汝阴。
English: His ancestors came from Ruyin.

古文：六世祖比干，学《尚书》于朝错，武帝时为廷尉正，与张汤同时。
现代文：六世祖比干，向朝错学《尚书》，武帝时做过廷尉正，与张汤同时。
English: Zu Bikang, the sixth generation, learned "Shang Shu" from the wrong side of the dynasty, and served as a courtier when Emperor Wu was in power, at the same time as Zhang Tang.

古文：汤持法深而比干务仁恕，数与汤争，虽不能尽得，然所济活者以千数。
现代文：张汤持法深而比干讲究仁恕，几次与汤争，虽不能尽得胜，但所济活的有千数。
English: Zhang Tang held the Dharma deeply and was more concerned with benevolence and forgiveness than Gan. He fought with Tang several times. Although he couldn't win, there were thousands of people who helped him.

古文：后迁丹阳都尉，因徙居平陵。
现代文：后来升为丹阳都尉。于是搬到平陵住。
English: Later, he was promoted to Danyang captain and moved to Pingling.

古文：敞父宠，建武中为千乘都尉，以病免，遂隐居不仕。
现代文：何敞之父何宠，建武年间做过千乘都尉，因病免职，便隐居不做官。
English: He was a favorite of both his father and his grandfather. During the Jianwu era, he served as the captain of the Thousand Immersions. When he was relieved of his duties due to illness, he went into seclusion and did not work as an official.

古文：敞性公正。
现代文：何敞性格主张公正。
English: It is in his nature to stand up for justice.

古文：自以趣舍不合时务，每请召，常称疾不应。
现代文：自认为兴趣爱好不合时务，每次有请召，常称病不应。
English: They consider their hobbies to be out of step with the times. Every time they are summoned, they often say that they should not be ill.

古文：元和中，辟太尉宋由府，由待以殊礼。
现代文：元和年间，授职太尉宋由府，宋由待他以特殊礼节。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Song Yufu promoted him to the rank of taifu, and Song Yufu treated him with special courtesy.

古文：敞论议高。常引大体，多所匡正。
现代文：何敞论议甚高，常引大体，多所匡正。
English: What is open to discussion is very high, often cited as a general rule, and many are rectified.

古文：司徒袁安亦深敬重之。
现代文：司徒袁安也很敬重他。
English: Szu Yuan An also respected him.

古文：是时京师及四方累有奇异鸟兽草木，言事者以为祥瑞。
现代文：这时京师及四方累有奇异的鸟兽草木，言事的认为是祥瑞之兆。
English: At this time, the Beijing division and the four sides accumulated strange birds, animals and plants, which was considered to be a sign of auspiciousness.

古文：敞通经传，能为天官，意甚恶之。
现代文：何敞通晓经传，能为天官，意思很讨厌。
English: It's disgusting to say that anyone who is well-versed in the scriptures can become a heavenly official.

古文：乃言于二公曰： 夫瑞应依德而至，灾异缘政而生。
现代文：于是对二公说： 祥瑞应该依德而至，灾异也因政而生。
English: So he said to the two princes: Good fortune should come from virtue, and misfortune also comes from politics.

古文：故鸲鹆来巢，昭公有乾侯之厄；西狩获麟，孔子有两楹之殡。
现代文：所以瞿鸟鹆来巢，昭公有乾侯的灾难；西狩获麟，孔子有两楹之殡葬。
English: Therefore, the stork flew to the nest, and Zhaogong suffered the calamity of drought; Xiqian gained Lin, and Confucius was buried with two cocoons.

古文：海鸟避风，臧文祀之，君子讥焉。
现代文：海鸟避风，臧文祀之，君子讥诮他。
English: The seabird avoids the wind, the scholar worships it, and the gentleman mocks it.

古文：今异鸟翔于殿屋，怪草生于庭际，不可不察。 
现代文：现在异鸟翔于殿屋，怪草生于庭际，不可不注意。 
English: Now strange birds are flying in the palace, and strange weeds are growing in the courtyard. We must pay attention.

古文：由、安惧然不敢答，居无何而肃宗崩。
现代文：宋由、袁安表现害怕的样子不敢回答。不久而肃宗驾崩了。
English: Song Yu and Yuan An showed fear and did not dare to answer. Soon after, Su Zong passed away.

古文：时，窦氏专政，外戚奢侈，赏赐过制，仓帑为虚。
现代文：当时窦氏专政，外戚奢侈，赏赐超过规定，仓帑虚空了。
English: At that time, the dictatorship of the Dou clan, the extravagance of the maternal relative, the reward exceeded the regulations, and the warehouse was empty.

古文：敞奏记由曰：敞闻事君之义，进思尽忠，退思补过。
现代文：何敞报告宋由说： 我听说侍君的意义，在于进思尽忠，退思补过。
English: In his report, Song Yu said: I heard that the meaning of being a waiter is to think ahead and be loyal, and to think back and make amends.

古文：历观世主时臣，无不各欲为化，垂之无穷，然而平和之政万无一者，盖以圣主贤臣不能相遭故也。
现代文：看看历代世主时臣，没有不各想有所作为，垂之永久，然而平和之政万中无一的，大概因为圣主贤臣不能碰在一起的缘故。
English: Looking at the rulers and ministers of all ages, there is no one who does not want to make a difference, and it will last forever. However, the rule of peace is one of a kind, probably because the saints and sages can not meet together.

古文：今国家秉聪明之弘道，明公履晏晏之纯德，君臣相合，天下翕然，治平之化，有望于今。
现代文：现在国家正秉聪明之大道，明公履行温和之纯德，君臣相合，天下翕然，治平之化，现在大有希望。
English: Now the country is adhering to the road of wisdom, openly fulfilling the pure virtue of moderation, monarchs and ministers are in harmony, the world is peaceful, and there is great hope now.

古文：孔子曰： 如有用我者，三年有成。 
现代文：孔子说 ：如有用我者，三年有成。 
English: Confucius said, "If you make use of me, you will succeed in three years."

古文：今明公视事，出入再期，宜当克已，以酬四海之心。
现代文：现在明公视事，出入两年，应当克己，以酬四海之心。
English: Now that we have seen the light of day, after two years of comings and goings, we should restrain ourselves, and be rewarded with the hearts of the four seas.

古文：《礼》，一谷不升，则损服彻膳。
现代文：《礼记》说，一年收成不好，君王就减少衣服膳食。
English: "Li Ji" says that if the harvest is poor one year, the monarch will reduce clothing and meals.

古文：天下不足，若已使然。
现代文：天下百姓不足，好像自己造成的。
English: The lack of people in the world seems to be self-inflicted.

古文：而比年水旱，人不收获，凉州缘边，家被凶害，男子疲于战陈，妻女劳于转运，老幼孤寡，叹息相依，又中州内郡，公私屈竭，此实损膳节用之时，国恩覆载，赏赍过度，但闻腊赐，自郎官以上，公卿王侯以下，至于空竭帑藏，损耗国资。
现代文：可现在连年水旱之灾，人无收获，氵京州缘边一带，西羌犯边为害。男子疲于打仗，妇女劳于转运，老幼孤寡，叹息相依为命，又中州内郡，公私屈竭，这正是该减膳节用之时。国恩覆载天下，赏赐过度，只听说腊月赏赐一项，自郎官以上，公卿王侯以下，至于用空帑藏，损耗国家资财。
English: But now, after years of floods and droughts, there is no harvest for the people, and the areas along the periphery of Jingzhou and the west bank of the Yangtze River are suffering. Men are tired of fighting, women are working to transport goods, the old and the young are lonely, sighing and relying on each other for their lives, and the counties in the middle of the state are suffering from public and private exhaustion. This is exactly the time for the reduced diet festival. The country's favor is overloaded with the world, and the reward is excessive. I only heard that the moon is rewarded with one thing, from the vassal officials and above, to the nobles and princes

古文：寻公家之用，皆百姓之力。
现代文：公家的费用，都是百姓之劳力换来。
English: The expenses of public houses are all paid for by the labor of the people.

古文：明君赐赍，宜有品制，忠臣受赏，亦应有度，是以夏禹玄圭，周公束帛。
现代文：明君赏赐，应有品制，忠臣受赏，也应有限度，因此夏禹用玄圭，周公受束帛。
English: According to the Ming Dynasty, rewards for princes should be based on merit, and rewards for loyal retainers should be limited. Therefore, Xia Yu used Xuan Gui, and Zhou Gong received Zucun.

古文：今明公位尊任重，责深负大，上当匡正纲纪，下当济安元元，岂但空空无违而已哉！
现代文：今明公位尊而任重，责深而负大，上当匡正纲纪，下当安抚百姓，难道只是空空不违圣旨就罢了！
English: Now it is clear that the public position is dignified but has heavy responsibilities, the responsibility is deep but great, the top is to uphold the correct discipline, and the bottom is to appease the people. Is it just empty words that do not violate the holy will?

古文：宜先正已以率群下，还所得赐，因陈得失，奏王侯就国，除苑囿之禁，节省浮费，赈恤穷孤，则恩泽下暢，黎庶悦豫，上天聪明，必有立应。
现代文：应该先正自己以作群下的表率，退还所得赏赐，表明利害得失，奏请王侯回到各自的封地，除苑囿之禁令，节省多余的费用，赈血阝穷困的孤寡，那么恩泽下达，黎民高兴，上天聪明，必有立刻报应。
English: You should first set yourself as a role model for the crowd, return the rewards received, show the gains and losses, invite the princes to return to their respective fiefdoms, remove the ban of the court, save unnecessary expenses, and save the blood of the poor and lonely, then the grace will be given, the people will be happy, and the heaven will be clever, and there will be immediate retribution.

古文：使百姓歌诵，史官纪德，岂但子文逃禄，公仪退食之比哉！
现代文：使百姓歌功颂德，史官纪录德政，难道只有子文逃禄，公仪退食之比吗！ 
English: To make the people sing the praises of merit and virtue, and the historians record the virtue and politics, is it only the ratio of the children's escape and the public ceremony that is better?

古文：由不能用。
现代文：宋由不能采用。
English: Song Yu cannot be used.

古文：时齐殇王子都乡侯暢奔吊国忧，上书未报，侍中窦宪遂令人刺杀暢于城门屯卫之中，而主名不立。
现代文：当时齐殇王子都乡侯刘畅奔吊国忧，上书未报，侍中窦宪便派人刺杀刘畅于城门屯卫之中，而主名不立。
English: At that time, Liu Changpeng, the lord of the prince's capital township, was in a state of anxiety, and the letter was not reported. Dou Xian, an aide-de-camp, sent someone to assassinate Liu Changpeng among the guards at the city gate, but the lord's name was not found.

古文：敞又说由曰： 刘暢宗室肺府，茅土籓臣，来吊大忧，上书须报，亲在武卫，致此残酷。
现代文：何敞又对宋由说： 刘畅宗室近亲，茅土藩臣，来吊国之大忧，上书待报，亲在武卫，遭此毒手。
English: Ho Chang also said to Song Yu: Liu Chang, a close relative of the family, a minister of the Maotu clan, came to the country with great concern, a report was pending, he was in Wuwei, and suffered this cruel hand.

古文：奉宪之吏，莫适讨捕，踪迹不显，主名不立。
现代文：奉宪之吏，无指望的讨捕凶手，踪迹不明显，主名不立。
English: Constitutional officials, hopeless to catch the murderer, the trail is not obvious, the main name is not established.

古文：敞备数股肱，职典贼曹，故欲亲至发所，以纠其变，而二府以为故事三公不与贼盗。
现代文：我算是手臂之列，职务就是守卫盗贼，所以想亲到发难之所，查清变故，而司徒司空认为按旧例丞相不参与贼盗之案。
English: I am one of the hands, my duty is to guard the thief, so I want to personally go to the place where the trouble started and find out what happened, but Szeto Sku is of the opinion that, according to the old example, the prime minister does not participate in the case of theft.

古文：昔陈平生于征战之世，犹知宰相之分，云 外镇四夷，内抚诸侯，使卿大夫各得其宜 。
现代文：从前陈平在战争年代，还知道宰相之职分，他说： 外镇四夷，内抚诸侯，使卿大夫各得其宜。 
English: Once upon a time, during the war years, Chen Ping also knew the duties of the prime minister. He said: the towns of the four provinces, the governors of the provinces, and the secretaries of the ministries, each to his own.

古文：今二府执事不深惟大义，惑于所闻，公纵奸慝，莫以为咎，惟明公运独见之明，昭然勿疑，敞不胜所见，请独奏案。 
现代文：现在司徒、司空、执事们不深惟大义，惑于所闻，公然放纵坏人，谁也不追究过失。只有明公运独见之明，明白无疑，敞不尽所见，请独奏案。 
English: At present, the magistrates, magistrates, and deacons are not concerned with justice, but only with what they have heard. They openly indulge the wicked, and no one is held accountable for their mistakes. Only those who are clear-sighted, clear-sighted, clear-sighted, and open-minded, please make a solo case.

古文：由乃许焉。
现代文：宋由才允许了。
English: Song Yu only allowed it.

古文：二府闻敞行，皆遣主者随之，于是推举具得事实，京师称其正。
现代文：司徒司空两府听到何敞的行动，都派主知盗贼之曹跟随着，于是查明具体事实，京师称赞做得很正当。
English: When the two governments heard of the actions, they both sent the master thief Cao to follow, so they ascertained the specific facts, and the Beijing division praised the work as very legitimate.

古文：以高第拜侍御史。
现代文：何敞以高第拜为侍御史。
English: It is said that the history of the Imperial Household Agency goes back to the time of Emperor Godai.

古文：时遂以窦宪为车骑将军，大发军击匈奴，而诏使者为宪弟笃、景并起邸第，兴造劳役，百姓愁苦。
现代文：当时以窦宪为车骑将军，大肆调发军队出击匈奴，而诏使者是窦宪的弟弟窦笃、窦景都起了官邸，兴造劳役，百姓悉苦。
English: At that time, Dou Xian was the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the army was dispatched to attack the Xiongnu, while the emissaries of the edict were Dou Dou, the younger brother of Dou Xian, and Dou Jing, both of whom built official residences, created laborers, and the people suffered greatly.

古文：敞上疏谏曰： 臣闻匈奴之为桀逆久矣。
现代文：何敞上疏谏道 ：臣听说匈奴成为桀逆很久了。
English: Ho Jang Soo: My minister heard that the Xiongnu have been rebels for a long time.

古文：平城之围，书之耻，此二辱者，臣子所为捐躯而必死，高祖、吕后忍怒还忿，舍而不诛。
现代文：高帝平城之围，吕后女曼书之耻，这两次耻辱，臣子所为捐躯而必死，高祖、吕后忍怒还忿，舍而不杀。
English: Emperor Gao's siege of Pingcheng, Empress Lv's disgrace of Manchukuo, these two humiliations, the courtiers will die for sacrificing their lives, Emperor Gao and Empress Lv will be angry, but will not kill.

古文：伏惟皇太后秉文母之操，陛下履晏晏之姿，匈奴无逆节之罪，汉朝无可惭之耻，而盛春东作，兴动大役，元元怨恨，咸怀不悦。
现代文：想到皇太后秉承文母的节操，陛下履平安之姿态，匈奴没有逆节之罪，汉朝没有可惭之耻，而盛春农忙季节，兴动大役，百姓怨恨，都怀不高兴的心情。
English: Thinking of the empress dowager adhering to the literary mother's discipline, her majesty taking the posture of peace, the Xiongnu having no sin of contravening the festival, the Han Dynasty having no shame, and the busy spring farming season, the large-scale activities, and the people's resentment, all harbored an unhappy mood.

古文：而猥复为卫尉笃、奉车都尉景缮修馆第，弥街绝里，臣虽斗筲之人，诚窃怀怪，以为笃、景亲近贵臣，当为百僚表仪。
现代文：而卫尉窦笃、奉车都尉窦景修治馆第，弥街绝里。臣虽是器小之人，也感到奇怪，以为窦笃、窦景是亲近的贵臣，应当作百官的表率。
English: However, the guardsman Dou Tu and the commander of the imperial car, Dou Jing, were the first to enter the hall and the last to leave the street. Although the minister was a small person, it was also strange to think that Dou Tu and Dou Jing were close dignitaries and should serve as a model for hundreds of officials.

古文：今众军在道，朝廷焦脣，百姓愁若，县官无用，而遽起大第，崇饰玩好，非所以垂令德，示无穷也。
现代文：现在众军在道，朝廷着急，百姓愁苦，县官无用，而连忙建造大房屋崇饰玩好，这不是垂美德于后世的办法。
English: Now that the army is on the march, the imperial court is in a hurry, the people are worried, and the county officials are useless, it is not a way to extol virtue in the future by hastily building large houses and playing well.

古文：宜且罢工匠，专忧北边，恤人之困。 
现代文：应当暂罢工匠，专忧北边，怜恤百姓的穷。 
English: We should strike temporarily, pay special attention to the north, and have pity on the poor people.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：书奏上去不得省察。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：后拜为尚书，复止封事曰：夫忠臣忧世，犯主严颜，讥刺贵臣，至以杀身灭家而犹为之者，何邪？
现代文：后来何敞拜为尚书，又上封事道： 忠臣忧心世事，犯了君主严颜，讥刺贵臣，以杀身灭家为下场而还在干，为了什么呢？
English: Later, he wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: "A loyal subject is worried about the affairs of the world, has offended the emperor, ridiculed a dignitary, and ended up killing himself and his family, but he is still doing it. What is the reason for this?

古文：君臣义重，有不得已也。
现代文：君臣之义太重，不得不这样。
English: The loyalty of the sovereign and the vassal is too heavy, and it has to be this way.

古文：臣伏见往事，国之危乱，家之将凶，皆有所由，较然易知。
现代文：臣看那些往事，国之危乱，家之将凶，都有原因，道理明摆着。
English: The minister looked at those past events, the country's crisis and turmoil, the family's warlord, there are reasons, the reason is clear.

古文：昔郑武妾之幸叔段，卫庄公之宠州吁，爱而不都，终至凶戾。
现代文：从前郑武姜之爱共叔段，卫庄公宠爱公子州吁，爱而不教，终至凶戾。
English: In the past, Zheng Wujing's love was the same as his uncle's. Weizhuang Gong loved his son, Zhou Wu, loved him but did not teach him, and eventually became vicious.

古文：由是观之，爱子若此，犹饥而食之以毒，适所以害之也。
现代文：由此看来，爱儿子像这样，犹如饥饿时给毒药吃，正是害了他呀。
English: From this point of view, loving his son like this, like eating poison when he is hungry, is exactly what harmed him.

古文：伏见大将军宪，始遭大忧，公卿比奏，欲令典干国事。宪深执谦退，固辞盛位，恳恳勤勤，言之深至，天下闻之，莫不悦喜。
现代文：大将军窦宪，开始遭大忧，公卿上奏，想使他掌管国事，窦宪很谦虚，坚辞盛位，恳恳勤勤，讲得深重，天下人听了，没有人不高兴。
English: The great general Dou Xian began to suffer from great anxiety. The nobles began to play up and wanted to put him in charge of state affairs. Dou Xian was very modest, held his position firmly, was earnest and diligent, and spoke profoundly. The whole world listened, and no one was unhappy.

古文：今逾年无几，大礼未终，卒然中改，兄弟专朝。
现代文：现在过了没有几年，大礼还未终结，猝然中途变卦，兄弟在朝专权。
English: Now, just a few years later, the grand gift has not yet ended, suddenly changing midway, and the brothers have absolute power in the DPRK.

古文：宪秉三军之重，笃、景总官卫之权，而虐用百姓，奢侈僭逼，诛戮无罪，肆心自快。
现代文：窦宪掌握三军的重任，窦笃、窦景总揽宫卫的大权，而虐用百姓，奢侈过度，杀戮无罪之人，觉得心情痛快。
English: Dou Xian grasped the important task of the three armies, Dou Tuo and Dou Jing generally seized the power of the palace guards, but abused the people, overindulged in luxury, and killed innocent people. I felt very happy.

古文：今者论议凶凶，咸谓叔段、州吁复生于汉。
现代文：现在议论凶凶，都说这是叔段、州吁又出生在汉朝了。
English: Now, when people talk about fierce, they all say that this is Uncle Duan, Zhu Xu was born again in the Han Dynasty.

古文：臣观公卿怀持两端，不肯极言者，以为宪等若有匪懈之志，则己受吉甫褒申伯之功，如宪等陷于罪辜，则自取陈平、周勃顺吕后之权，终不以宪等吉凶为忧也。
现代文：臣下看公卿都持两端观望的态度，不肯说直话，以为宪等如果有努力不懈之心，那就己受吉甫褒奖申伯之功。如果宪等陷于罪恶性的深渊，那就自取陈平、周勃顺吕后之权，始终不以宪等吉凶为忧哩。
English: In the eyes of the courtiers, the courtiers held a wait-and-see attitude, refusing to speak frankly, thinking that if Xian et al. made unremitting efforts, they would be commended by Ji Fu. If Xian et al. fell into the abyss of criminality, they would take the power of Chen Ping and Zhou Bo Shunlu, and would never worry about the fortunes of Xian et al.

古文：臣敞区区，诚欲计策两安，绝其绵绵，塞其涓涓，上不欲令皇太后损文母之号，陛下有誓泉之讥，下使宪等得长保其福祐。
现代文：臣敞的区区之心，的确想计策两安，绝其绵绵，不成网罗，塞其涓涓细流，不成江河，上不让皇太后损文母之称号，陛下没有誓及黄泉之讥，下使宪等得以长久保持其福。
English: The open-minded heart of the vassal really wanted to devise a plan for the two peace, which would never be a snare, nor a trickle, nor a river. Above all, he would not allow the empress dowager to lose the title of mother of literature. His majesty did not swear and scorn of hell. Below, he would make the constitution and so on to maintain his happiness for a long time.

古文：然臧获之谋，上安主父，下存主母，犹不免于严怒。
现代文：然而奴婢之计谋，上安主父，下存主母，还不免于严怒。
English: However, the scheming of the slave and the slave-maid, the master of Shang'an and the mother of the remaining master, are not exempt from the wrath.

古文：臣伏惟累祖蒙恩，至臣八世，复以愚陋，旬年之间，历显位，备机近，每念厚德，忽然忘生。
现代文：臣想到累祖蒙恩，至臣已经八代，又以愚陋之才，十年间，历显位，备机近，每念厚德，忽然忘生。
English: The vassal thought of the kindness he had received from his forefathers. The most senior vassal was already eight generations old, but he had been born with a stupid talent. In the past ten years, he had been promoted to a higher position, he was close to being ready, he was always thinking about virtue, and suddenly he forgot his birth.

古文：虽知言必夷灭，而冒死自尽者，诚不忍目见其祸而怀默苟全。
现代文：虽然知道话说出来必有杀身之祸，而冒死吐尽忠言，就是不忍看到大祸临头而默不作声、苟全性命哩。
English: Although knowing that to speak out would be fatal, he risked his life to speak out faithfully, because he could not bear to see the great calamity that was approaching, so he kept silent and lived his life to the full.

古文：驸马都尉瑰，虽在弱冠，有不隐之忠，比请退身，愿抑家权。
现代文：驸马都尉，虽在二十年华，有不忍之忠心，请求退身，原页抑家权。
English: Even though he was in his twenties, Captain Saima had an unbearable sense of loyalty and asked to step down and give up his family rights.

古文：可与参谋，听顺其意，诚宗庙至计，窦氏之福。
现代文：可与之参谋，听顺他的意见，的确是保全宗庙之妙计，窦氏之幸福。 
English: To be able to consult with him and follow his advice is indeed a great way to preserve the ancestral temple and the happiness of the Dou clan.

古文：敞数切谏，言诸窦罪过，宪等深怨之。
现代文：何敞多次恳切进谏，说出窦氏兄弟的罪过，窦宪等十分恨他。
English: Ho Chang repeatedly and earnestly went into the cocoon and spoke of the sins of Dou's brothers. Dou Xian and others hated him very much.

古文：时济南王康尊贵骄甚，宪乃白出敞为济南太傅。
现代文：这时济南王刘康尊贵骄傲极了，窦宪就提出让何敞做济南太傅。
English: At this time, Liu Kang, the king of Jinan, was extremely proud, and Dou Xian proposed that He Zhang be made the Jinan Taifu.

古文：敞至国，辅康以道义，数引法度谏正之，康敬礼焉。
现代文：何敞到了济南，用道义辅佐刘康，几次引法度谏正他，刘康敞礼何敞。
English: When he arrived in Jinan, he assisted Liu Kang with morality and righteousness, and several times quoted the method to correct him. Liu Kang was very generous.

古文：岁余，迁汝南太守。
现代文：一年多后，何敞升为汝南太守。
English: More than a year later, he was promoted to the position of Runan's grand marshal.

古文：敞疾文俗吏以苛刻求当时名誉，故在职以宽和为政。
现代文：何敞恨文俗吏以苛刻求当时名誉，所以在职时用宽和为政。
English: He openly hated the literati for demanding the reputation of the time with harshness, so when he was in office, he made peace and harmony his policy.

古文：立春日，常召督邮还府，分遣儒术大吏案行属县，显孝悌有义行者。
现代文：立春那天，召督邮回府，分派儒术大吏案行属县，表彰孝悌有义行的人。
English: On the day of the first day of spring, the governor was summoned and sent back to the prefecture to assign a Confucian official to the county to commend the filial piety of the righteous.

古文：及举冤狱，以《春秋》义断之。
现代文：举冤狱，按《春秋》的义法来判断。
English: The sentence of unjust imprisonment should be judged according to the righteousness of "Spring and Autumn."

古文：是以郡中无怨声，百姓化其恩礼。
现代文：因此郡中没有怨恨之声，百姓被恩礼所感化。
English: Therefore, there is no resentment in the county, and the people are inspired by grace.

古文：其出居者，皆归养其父母，追行丧服，推财相让者二百许人。
现代文：那些居在外边的，都回家养父母，父母死了的追行丧服，推财相让的二百多人。
English: Those who stayed outside all went home to support their parents. The more than 200 people who lost their parents chased after the funeral clothes and pushed money to each other.

古文：置立礼官，不任文吏。
现代文：设立礼官，不任文吏。
English: Set up a etiquette officer, not a clerk.

古文：又修理鲷阳旧渠，百姓赖其利，垦田增三万余顷。
现代文：又修理鱼同阳旧渠，百姓赖以灌溉，垦田增加三万多顷。
English: In addition, the old Yudongyang canal, which the people rely on for irrigation, has been repaired, and the arable land has increased by more than 30,000 hectares.

古文：吏人共刻石，颂敞功德。
现代文：吏人都刻石立碑，颂扬何敞的功德。
English: Officials have carved stone monuments to praise the merits of Ho Tiao.

古文：及窦氏败，有司奏敞子与夏阳侯瑰厚善，坐免官。
现代文：后来窦氏失败，有司奏何敞之子与夏阳侯友情很厚，因此免去官职。
English: Later, the Dou clan failed, and the son of the sitar player He Zhan had a strong friendship with Xia Yang Hou, so he was exempted from official duties.

古文：永元十二年复征，三迁五官中郎将。
现代文：永元十二年又征召，三迁五官中郎将。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yongyuan era, he was conscripted again, and became the third-moved five-ranked middle-ranking general.

古文：常忿疾中常侍蔡伦，伦深憾之。
现代文：何敞常常痛恨中常侍蔡伦，伦深憾之。
English: It is a matter of deep regret to Ren that he often resented the middle-ranking lady-in-waiting Cai Lun.

古文：元兴元年，敞以祠庙严肃，微疾不斋，后邓皇后上太傅禹冢，敞起随百官会，伦因奏敞祚病，坐抵罪。
现代文：元兴元年，何敞因为祠庙严肃，微疾不斋，后来邓皇后上太傅禹冢，何敞起随百官会，蔡伦于是奏何敞诈病，因抵罪。
English: In the first year of the Yuanxing, He Zhan suffered from minor illnesses due to the solemnity of the ancestral temple. Later, Empress Deng's father-in-law Ufan, He Zhan followed the Hundred Officials' Meeting, and Cai Lun then played the role of He Zhan's fraudulent illness due to his guilt.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家中。
English: He died at home.

