古文：氐者，西夷之别种，号曰白马。
现代文：氐是西夷的别支种族，号称 白马 。
English: Yao is another branch of the Xiyi race, known as the White Horse.

古文：三代之际，盖自有君长，而世一朝见，故《诗》称 自彼氐、羌，莫敢不来王 也。
现代文：三代的时候，氐自有君长，却每世朝见一次。所以《诗经》说 ：从那个氐、羌，没有敢不来朝见天子的。 
English: In the three generations,  had his own monarchs, but he saw the emperor only once in each generation. Therefore, "The Book of Songs" says: From that time on,,, did not dare not to come to see the emperor.

古文：秦、汉以来，世居岐、陇以南，汉川以西，自立豪帅。
现代文：秦汉以来，氐世世代代生活在岐、陇以南、汉川以西的地方，自立首领统率。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, generations of Jurchens have lived in the areas south of the Qi and Jurchens and west of the Han River, and they have been independent leaders.

古文：汉武帝遣中郎将郭昌、卫广灭之，以其地为武都郡。
现代文：汉武帝派中郎将郭昌、卫广消灭了它，把它的地域作为武都郡。
English: The middlemen of Emperor Hanwu's faction eliminated Guo Chang and Wei Guang from it, and took its area as Wudu County.

古文：自汧、渭抵于巴、蜀，种类实繁，或谓之白氏，或谓之故氐，各有侯王，受中国封拜。
现代文：从禥、渭到巴、蜀，种族类别实在繁多，有的称为 白氐 ，有的称为 故氐 ，各有自己的侯王，受中国的封官授爵。
English: There are a wide variety of ethnic groups, from the Yao and Yao to the Ba and Shu. Some are called the White Yao, others are called the Late Yao, and each has its own prince, who was knighted by the Chinese.

古文：汉建安中，有杨腾者，为部落大帅。
现代文：东汉建安年间，有个叫杨腾的人，成为部落的大首领。
English: During the Jianan period of the Eastern Han Dynasty, a man named Yang Teng became the great leader of the tribe.

古文：腾勇健多计略，始徙居仇池，方百顷，因以为号。
现代文：杨腾勇敢，有才能，多谋略，开始迁徙到仇池生活。仇池方圆百顷，因此用 百顷 来作为部落的号。
English: Yang Teng, brave, talented, and resourceful, began to migrate to live in Qiu Lake. Qiu Lake is a hundred hectares in circumference, so he used the hundred hectares as the tribal name.

古文：四面斗绝，高七里余，蟠道三十六回，其上有丰水泉，煮土成盐。
现代文：仇池陡峭险峻，七里多高，弯曲的道路三十六转，上面有丰水泉，可以煮土制盐。
English: Qiu Lake is steep and precipitous, more than seven miles high, with a curved road of thirty-six turns. There is an abundant water spring above, which can be used to boil soil to make salt.

古文：腾后有名千万者，魏拜为百顷氐王。
现代文：杨腾的后人有个名叫 千万 的，魏代时被封为 百顷氐王 。
English: Yang Teng's descendant had a son named Shimen, who was named the King of the Hundred Hectares during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：千万孙名飞龙，渐强盛，晋武帝假平西将军。
现代文：杨千万的孙子名叫飞龙，逐渐强大兴盛起来，晋武帝授予平西将军。
English: Yang Shan's grandson, named Fei Long, gradually became powerful and prosperous, and Emperor Jinwu awarded him the title of Pingxi General.

古文：无子，养外甥令狐茂搜为子。
现代文：飞龙无子，收养外甥令狐茂搜为子。
English: Fei Long had no children, but adopted his nephew, Ling Shaoso, as his son.

古文：惠帝元康中，茂搜自号辅国将军、右贤王，群氐推以为王。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，茂搜自称辅国将军、右贤王，群氐推选他做首领。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Yuankang, Maozao claimed to be the general of the auxiliary state and the rightful king, and he was elected as the leader by the hordes.

古文：关中人士流移者，多依之。
现代文：流移的关中人士多依附他。
English: Most of the displaced Guanzhong people still cling to him.

古文：愍帝以为骠骑将军、左贤王。
现代文：晋愍帝让他做骠骑将军、左贤王。
English: Emperor Jinshan made him the general of cavalry and the king of sages.

古文：茂搜死，子难敌统位，与弟坚头分部曲。
现代文：茂搜死了，儿子难敌继承首领，和他的弟弟坚头将军队分开。
English: Maosao died, and his son Nanyi succeeded him as leader. He and his younger brother Jiankou divided the army.

古文：难敌自号左贤王，屯下辨；坚头号右贤王，屯河池。
现代文：难敌自称左贤王，驻扎在下辨；坚头自称右贤王，驻守在河池。
English: Hard enemy called himself Zu Xian Wang and was stationed in Shideban; Jian Tou called himself Zu Xian Wang and was stationed in Hechi.

古文：难敌死，子毅立。自号使持节、龙骧将军、左贤王、下辨公；以坚头子盘为使持节、冠军将军、右贤王、河池公。
现代文：难敌死了，儿子杨毅承继职位，自称使持节、龙骧将军、左贤王、下辨公；让坚头的儿子做使持节、冠军将军、右贤王、河池公。
English: Unenemy died, his son Yang Yi took over the post, claiming to be Envoy Jisai, General Longyu, King Zuoxian, and King Xiaobeng; let the son of Jiantu be Envoy Jisai, Champion General, King Zuoxian, and King Hechi.

古文：臣晋，晋以毅为征南将军。
现代文：向晋朝称臣，晋王朝让杨毅做征南将军。
English: He was a courtier to the Jin Dynasty, and the Jin Dynasty made Yang Yi a general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：三年，毅族兄初袭杀毅，并有其众，自立为仇池公。
现代文：建兴三年，杨毅的族兄杨初乘其不备杀掉了杨毅，吞并占有了他的属众，自立为仇池公。
English: In the third year of Jianxing, Yang Yi's elder brother Yang Chu took advantage of his unpreparedness to kill Yang Yi, annex his followers, and establish himself as the enemy.

古文：臣于石季龙，后称蕃于晋。
现代文：杨初向石季龙称臣，后来又向晋朝称藩。
English: At first, Yang claimed to be a vassal of Shi Jilong, and later he claimed to be a vassal of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：永和十年，改初为天水公。
现代文：永和十年，改封杨初为天水公。
English: In the tenth year of Yonghe, Yang Chu was renamed Tianshui Gong.

古文：十一年，毅小弟宋奴使姑子梁三王因侍直手刃杀初，初子国率左右诛三王及宋奴，复自立为仇池公。
现代文：十一年，杨毅的小弟宋奴派遣姑母的儿子梁三王乘宿夜值班亲手杀掉了杨初。杨初的儿子杨国率领手下的人杀了三王及宋奴，重新自立为仇池公。
English: In the eleventh year, Yang Yi's younger brother Song Nu dispatched his aunt's son, Liang Sanwang, who was on duty at night, to personally kill Yang Chou. Yang Chou's son, Yang Guo, led his men to kill the three kings and Song Nu, and re-established himself as a public enemy.

古文：桓温表国为秦州刺史，国子安为武都太守。
现代文：桓温上表让杨国为秦州刺史，杨国的儿子杨安为武都太守。
English: In the table above, Kuan Wen made Yang Guo the governor of Qin, and Yang Guo's son Yang An the governor of Wudu.

古文：十二年，国从叔俊复杀国自立。
现代文：十二年，杨国的从叔杨俊又杀掉杨国自立。
English: In the twelfth year, Yang Guo's uncle Yang Jun killed Yang Guo and became independent.

古文：国子安叛苻生，杀俊，复称蕃于晋。
现代文：杨国的儿子杨安背叛苻坚，杀掉杨俊，又向晋朝称藩。
English: Yang An, the son of Yang Guo, betrayed Yu Jian, killed Yang Jun, and declared the domain to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：死，子世自立为仇池公。
现代文：杨安死了，儿子杨世自立为仇池公。
English: Yang An died, and his son, Yang Shih, set up his own business as a public enemy.

古文：晋太和三年，以世为秦州刺史，弟统为武都太守。
现代文：晋太和三年，让杨世做秦州刺史，弟弟杨统做武都太守。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Jin, Yang Shiguo was appointed as the governor of Qin, and his brother Yang Tong as the governor of Wudang.

古文：世死，统废世子纂自立。
现代文：杨世死了，杨统废掉杨世的儿子杨纂自立。
English: Yang Shih died, Yang Tong abolished Yang Shih's son Yang Zuo and became independent.

古文：统一名德。
现代文：杨统一名杨德。
English: Yang Tong is also known as Yang De.

古文：纂聚党袭杀统，自立为仇池公，遣使诣简文帝。以纂为秦州刺史。
现代文：杨纂聚集同党乘其不备杀了杨统，自立为仇池公。杨纂派使者到简文帝处，简文帝让杨纂做秦州刺史。
English: Yang Cong gathered his party to take advantage of the situation and killed Yang Tong, setting himself up as an enemy of the emperor. Yang Cong sent an envoy to Emperor Jianwen, who asked Yang Cong to write the history of Qin.

古文：晋咸安元年，苻坚遣杨安伐纂，克之，徙其人于关中，空百顷于地。
现代文：晋咸安元年，苻坚派杨安讨伐杨纂，打败了他，把他的人迁徙到关中，空出百顷的地域。
English: In the first year of Jin Xian'an, Zou Jian sent Yang An to fight Yang Jiao, defeated him, and moved his people to Guanzhong, leaving a hundred-hectare area.

古文：宋奴之死，二子佛奴、佛狗逃奔苻坚，坚以女妻佛奴子定，拜为尚书、领军。
现代文：宋奴死了，两个儿子佛奴、佛狗出逃投奔苻坚。苻坚把女儿嫁给佛奴的儿子杨定为妻，封杨定为尚书，领军。
English: Song Niu died, and his two sons, Fo Niu and Fo Gu, fled to Ben Nujian. Nujian made his daughter's marriage to Fo Niu's son, Yang, into a marriage, and made Feng Yang into Shang Shu, the leader of the army.

古文：苻坚之败，关右扰乱，定尽力于坚。
现代文：苻坚战败，关右混乱，杨定为苻坚竭尽全力。
English: Zou Jian was defeated, Guan Yu was confused, and Yang Jian determined to do his best for Zou Jian.

古文：坚死，乃率众奔陇右，徙居历城，去仇池百二十里，置食储于百顷。招夷夏得千余家，自称龙骧将军、仇池公，称蕃于晋。
现代文：苻坚死了杨定就率领部众出奔陇右，迁徙居住在历城，离仇池一百二十里，在百顷设置储存谷物和处所，招收并得到夷夏千余家，自称龙骧将军、仇池公，向晋朝称藩。
English: After the death of Yu Jian, Yang Ding led his followers to rush to the right of the Yangtze River, migrated and lived in Licheng, one hundred and twenty miles away from Qiuqi, set up grain storage and premises in one hundred hectares, recruited and obtained more than a thousand families in Yixia, and called himself General Longyu and Qiuqi, and called himself a clan in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：孝武即以其自号假之，后以为秦州刺史。
现代文：孝武帝就按他自称的封号授予他，后来又让他做秦州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaowu bestowed upon him the title according to his self-proclaimed title, and later made him the Qin State Historian.

古文：登国四年，遂有秦州之地，号陇西王。
现代文：登国四年，杨定终于占据了秦州的城域，号陇西王。
English: After four years of ascending to the throne, Yang Ding finally occupied the city area of Qin State, and was called the King of Shaanxi.

古文：后为乞佛乾归所杀，无子。
现代文：后来被乞刺乾归所杀，没有子嗣。
English: He was later killed by a beggar, and had no children.

古文：佛狗子盛，先为监国守仇池，乃统事，自号征西将军、秦州刺史、仇池公。
现代文：佛狗的儿子杨盛，先做监国，驻守仇池，然后总领一切事务，自称征西将军、秦州刺史、仇池公。
English: Yang Sheng, the son of the Buddha's dog, first served as the overseer of the country, stationed in Qiuchi, and then headed all affairs, calling himself the general of the Western Conquest, Qin State, and Qiuchi.

古文：谥定为武王。
现代文：为杨定加谥号为武王。
English: It is Yang Ding plus the posthumous name Wu Wang.

古文：分诸氐、羌为二十部护军，各为镇戍，不置郡县。
现代文：划分各氐、羌为二十部护军，各自进行戍守，不设置郡县。
English: Each county and town were divided into 20 garrisons, each of which was responsible for its own garrison, and no counties were established.

古文：遂有汉中之地，仍称蕃于晋。
现代文：终于据有了汉中这个地方，仍然向晋朝称藩。
English: Finally, with the establishment of Hanzhong, this place was still called Han by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：天兴初，遣使朝贡，诏以盛为征南大将军、仇池王。
现代文：天兴初年，派遣使者朝见进贡，皇帝下诏命杨盛为征南大将军、仇池王。
English: In the first year of Tianxing, an envoy was sent to pay tribute to the emperor, and the emperor ordered Yang Sheng to be the general of the Southern Expedition and the king of Qi.

古文：隔碍姚兴，不得岁通贡使。
现代文：由于姚兴阻隔妨碍，不能每年通达进贡使者。
English: Due to Yao Xing's obstruction, it is not possible to reach the tribute envoy every year.

古文：盛以兄子抚为平南将军、梁州刺史，守汉中。
现代文：杨盛让兄子杨抚做平南将军、梁州刺史，驻守汉中。
English: Yang Sheng made his elder brother Yang Fuzhong the general of Pingnan and the governor of Liangzhou, stationed in Hanzhong.

古文：宋永初中，宋武帝封盛为武都王。
现代文：宋永初年间，宋武帝封杨盛为武都王。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Songwu appointed Yang Sheng as the King of Wudu.

古文：盛死，私谥曰惠文王。
现代文：杨盛死了，私谥叫惠文王。
English: Yang Sheng is dead. I call him King Huiwen.

古文：子玄统位。
现代文：儿子杨玄继承职位。
English: His son Yang Xuan succeeded him.

古文：玄字黄眉，号征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：杨玄字黄眉，号征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史、武都王。
English: Yang Xuan's name was Huang Mei, and his titles included General of the Western Conquest, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments, Qin State Historian, and King of Wudu.

古文：虽蕃于宋，仍奉晋义熙之号。
现代文：虽然向宋称藩，仍遵从晋义熙的年号。
English: Although the domain was named after Song, it still follows the era name of Jin Yixi.

古文：后始用宋元嘉正朔。
现代文：后来才用宋元嘉正朔。
English: It was only later that Song Yuan Jia Zhengshuo was used.

古文：初，盛谓玄曰： 吾年已老，当终为晋臣，汝善事宋帝。 
现代文：当初，杨盛对杨玄说： 我年纪已经老了，应该始终作为晋臣，你好好事奉宋帝。 
English: At first, Yang Sheng said to Yang Xuan: I am already old, I should always be a Jin subject, you should serve Emperor Song well.

古文：故玄奉焉。
现代文：因此杨玄遵奉实行。
English: Therefore, Yang Xuan adhered to the practice.

古文：玄善于待士，为流旧所怀。
现代文：杨玄善待士人，被外地迁入的和祖居当地的人所怀念。
English: Yang Xuan was kind to scholars and is remembered fondly by those who immigrated from abroad and those whose ancestors lived in the local area.

古文：始光四年，太武遣大鸿胪公孙轨拜玄为征南大将军、督梁州刺史、南秦王。
现代文：始光四年，太武帝派遣大鸿胪公孙轨授予杨玄为征南大将军、督梁州刺史、南秦王。
English: In the fourth year of the Shiguang era, Emperor Taibu dispatched the Great Honorable Gongsun Rail to award Yang Xuan as the General of the Southern Expedition, the Governor of Liangzhou, and the King of Southern Qin.

古文：玄上表请比内蕃，许之。
现代文：杨玄上表请求与内藩相同，允许。
English: Yang Xuan's request is the same as that of the Inner Domain, and is allowed.

古文：玄死，私谥孝昭王。
现代文：杨玄死了，私谥叫孝昭王。
English: Yang Xuan is dead, we call him Xiao Zhao Wang.

古文：子保宗统位。
现代文：儿子杨保宗继承职位。
English: His son Yang Baozong succeeded to the post.

古文：初，玄临终谓弟难当曰： 今境候未宁，方须抚慰，保宗冲昧，吾授卿国事，其无坠先勋。 
现代文：当初，杨玄临终时对弟弟难当说： 现在境内情形不安宁，正需抚慰。保宗年幼无知，我将国事交付爱卿，希望不要丢弃祖先的功绩。 
English: At first, Yang Xuan said to his brother Nandu on his deathbed: Now the situation in the country is unstable and needs to be soothed. Hozong was young and ignorant, so I entrusted the affairs of state to Aiqing, hoping that he would not abandon the achievements of his ancestors.

古文：难当固辞，请立保宗以辅之。
现代文：难当坚决推辞，请立保宗来辅佐他。
English: It was hard for him to refuse, so he asked Rikihoson to help him.

古文：保宗既立，难当妻姚氏谓难当曰： 国险，宜立长君，反事孺子，非久计。 
现代文：保宗已立，难当的妻子姚氏对难当说： 国家危急，应该立年长的君主，反而事奉小孩子，不是长久之计。 
English: Pao Zong had already been established, and his wife Yao said to him, "The country is in a critical situation, we should establish an elderly monarch, but to serve a child is not a long-term solution.

古文：难当从之，废保宗而自立，称蕃于宋。
现代文：难当听从她，废掉保宗自立，向宋称藩。
English: It is hard to obey her, abolish the self-reliance of Hozon, and call the domain to Song.

古文：难当拜保宗为镇南将军，镇石昌；以次子顺为镇东将军、秦州刺史，守上邽。
现代文：难当授予保宗做镇南将军，镇守石昌；让次子杨顺做镇东将军、秦州刺史，驻守上圭阝。
English: Nandu awarded Baozong to be the general of the south of the town and the town guard of Shichang; let the second son Yang Shun be the general of the east of the town and the governor of Qinzhou, stationed in Shangguiyu.

古文：保宗谋袭难当，事泄，被系。
现代文：保宗谋划乘其不备杀掉难当，事情泄露，被拘囚。
English: Baozong planned to take advantage of his unpreparedness to kill a difficult situation, the matter was leaked, and he was taken into custody.

古文：先是，四方流人以仇池丰实，多往依附。
现代文：此前，四方的流亡之人，因仇池丰实，多去依附。
English: Previously, the exiles in the four directions, due to the abundance of enemies, were more likely to attach themselves.

古文：流人有许穆之、郝惔之二人投难当，并改姓为司马，穆之自云名飞龙，惔之自云名康之，云是晋室近戚。
现代文：流亡人中有许穆之、郝忄炎之二人投靠难当，并且改姓为司马。许穆之自己说名叫飞龙。郝忄炎之自己说名叫康之，说是晋室的近亲。
English: Two of the exiles, Xu Muzhi and Zou Yan, found it difficult to find a place to stay, and changed their surnames to Sima. Xu Muzhi said his name was Fei Long. Zou Yan said his name was Kang Zhi, and said he was a close relative of Jin's wife.

古文：康之寻为人所杀。
现代文：不久，康之被人杀掉。
English: Soon after, Yasuchika was killed.

古文：时宋梁州刺史甄法护刑政不理，宋文帝遣刺史萧思话代任。
现代文：当时宋梁州刺史甄法护不理刑罚政令，宋文帝派刺史萧思话代任。
English: At that time, Song Liangzhou sent Zhang Shishi and Xiao Siwei to replace him.

古文：难当以思话未至，遣将举兵袭梁州，破白马，遂有汉中之地。
现代文：难当因思话未到，派将发兵袭击梁州，攻破白马城，终于占有了汉中地域。
English: Unable to come up with an answer, he sent an army to attack Liangzhou, break through Baima City, and finally occupy the Hanzhong region.

古文：寻而思话使其司马萧承之先驱进讨，所向克捷，遂平梁州。
现代文：不久，萧思话让他的司马萧承之做先锋进兵征讨，所攻之处无不取胜，终于平定了梁州。
English: Soon, Xiao Si told his Sima Xiao Chengzhu to be the vanguard to enter the army for conscription, and the places he attacked were all victorious, finally leveling Liangzhou.

古文：因又附宋。
现代文：因此又归附了宋。
English: Therefore, it was annexed to Song.

古文：难当后释保宗，遣镇董亭。
现代文：难当后来放了保宗，派他镇守董亭。
English: Nandu later released Hozong and sent him to guard Dongting.

古文：保宗与兄保显归京师，太武拜保宗征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，尚公主；保显为镇西将军、晋寿公。
现代文：保宗和哥哥保显归附京师，太武帝授予保宗征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，把公主嫁给他；授予保显镇西将军、晋寿公。
English: Bao Zong and his brother Bao Xian were assigned to the Beijing division, and Emperor Taibu granted Bao Zong the title of General of the Southern Expedition, Qin State Pastoral, King of Wudu, and the princess was married to him; granted Bao Xian the title of General of the Western Zhen, and Jin Shou Gong.

古文：后遣大鸿胪崔颐拜难当为征南大将军、仪同三司、领护西羌校尉、秦梁二州牧、南秦王。
现代文：后来派大鸿胪崔颐授予难当为征南大将军、仪同三司、领护西羌校尉、秦梁二州牧、南秦王。
English: Later, he sent Daihongzhang Cuiqi to award Nantang as the General of the Southern Expeditionary Army, the Third Division of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, the Lieutenant of the West Garrison, Qin Liang Erzhou Mu, and the King of Southern Qin.

古文：难当后自立为大秦王，号年曰建义，立妻为王后，世子为太子，置百官具拟天朝。
现代文：难当后来自立为大秦王，年号叫建义，立妻子为王后，世子为太子，全部拟照天朝设置百官。
English: After he was overthrown, he set himself up as the king of the Great Qin Dynasty, with the era name Jianyi. He set up his wife as the queen and his son as the crown prince, and set up a hundred officials according to the pattern of the Heavenly Dynasty.

古文：然犹贡献于宋不绝。
现代文：然而还向宋贡献不断。
English: However, he continued to contribute to the Song Dynasty.

古文：寻而其国大旱，多灾异，降大秦王复为武都王。
现代文：不久国家大旱，多灾害怪异，降大秦王重为武都王。
English: Soon after, the country was hit by a severe drought, many disasters and strange occurrences, and King Daqin was demoted to King Wudu.

古文：太延初，难当立镇上邽。
现代文：太延初，难当在上圭阝设镇守。
English: At the beginning of Taiyuan, it was difficult to set up a town guard in Shangguiyu.

古文：太武遣车骑大将军、乐平王丕等督河西、高平诸军取上邽，又诏喻难当，奉诏摄守。
现代文：太武帝派车骑大将军、东平王丕等监督河西、高平各军攻取上圭阝，又下诏晓喻难当遵奉诏令掌管。
English: Emperor Taiwu sent the general of cavalry and cavalry, Dongping Wangye, and others to supervise the capture of Shangguiyu by the armies of Hexi and Gaoping, and then issued the edict that it was difficult to obey the edict and take control.

古文：寻而倾国南寇，规有蜀土，袭宋益州，攻涪城，又伐巴西，获雍州流人七千余家，还于仇池。
现代文：不久，举国向南进犯，谋划占有蜀地，袭击宋的益州，攻打涪城，又进攻巴西，俘获雍州流亡之人七千余家，回到仇池。
English: Soon, the whole country attacked southward, plotted to occupy Shu, attacked Song's Yizhou, attacked Shicheng, and attacked Brazil, captured more than seven thousand families of Yongzhou exiles, and returned to Qiuchi.

古文：宋文帝怒，遣将裴方明等伐之。
现代文：宋文帝发怒了，派将军裴方明等讨伐他们。
English: Emperor Songwen became angry and sent General Pei Fangming and others to fight them.

古文：难当为方明所败，弃仇池，与千余骑奔上邽。
现代文：难当被方明打败，放弃仇池，和千余车骑逃往上圭阝。
English: He was defeated by Fangming, gave up his vendetta, and fled to Shangguan with more than a thousand vehicles.

古文：太武遣中山王辰迎之赴行宫。
现代文：太武帝派中山王展迎接他到行宫。
English: Emperor Taibu sent Zhongshan Wang Zhen to welcome him to the palace.

古文：方明既克仇池，以保宗弟保炽守之，河间公齐击走之。
现代文：方明已经攻克仇池，让保宗的弟弟保炽守护，河间公齐打跑了他。
English: Fang Ming had already conquered Qianchi, and let Baozong's younger brother Baozhuang guard him.

古文：先是，诏保宗镇上邽，又诏镇骆谷，复其本国。
现代文：此前，诏令保宗镇守上圭阝，又诏令镇守骆谷，回到本国。
English: Previously, he was ordered to return to his home country as the guardian of the town of Hozong in Shangguizhou and the guardian of the town of Luogu.

古文：保宗弟文德先逃氐中，乃说保宗令叛。
现代文：保宗的弟弟文德先逃回氐中，于是劝说保宗让他背叛。
English: Baozong's younger brother, Wende, fled back to Shanzhong first, and then persuaded Baozong to betray him.

古文：事泄，齐执保宗送京师，诏难当杀之。
现代文：事情泄露，齐拘捕保宗送到京师，下诏杀掉难当。
English: When the affair leaked out, they arrested and sent Hozong to the capital, but it was too late to kill him.

古文：氐、羌立文德，屯于浊水。
现代文：氐、羌立文德，驻守在浊水。
English: , 立文德, stationed in Surabaya.

古文：文德自号征西将军、秦河梁三州牧、仇池公，求援于宋，封文德为武都王，遣偏将房亮之等助之。
现代文：文德自称征西将军、秦河梁三州牧、仇池公，向宋求援。宋封文德为武都王，派偏将房亮之等援助他。
English: Wende claimed to be the general of the Western Conquest, the herdsman of the three states of Qin and He Liang, and the prince of Qi, and asked for help from Song. Song considered Wende to be the king of Wu, and sent the general Fang Liangzhi to help him.

古文：齐逆击，禽亮之。
现代文：齐迎击，擒获房亮之。
English: They all counterattacked and captured Fusa Ryoichi.

古文：文德奔守葭芦，武都、阴平氐多归之。
现代文：文德逃亡，守卫葭芦、武都、阴平各氐多归附他。
English: Wende fled, and most of the guards of Huludao, Wudu, and Yinping went over to him.

古文：诏淮阳公皮豹子等率诸军讨文德，走汉中，收其妻子、僚属、资粮。
现代文：下诏淮阳公皮豹子等率领各军讨伐文德，文德逃往汉中，俘获他的妻子、僚属、资粮。
English: The following edict issued by Huaiyang Gongpi Leopard led the armies to fight Wende, who fled to Hanzhong and captured his wife, colleagues, and resources.

古文：及保宗妻公主送京师，赐死。
现代文：等到保宗妻公主送到京师，赐死。
English: Wait until Hozon's wife, the princess, is sent to the capital to die.

古文：初，公主劝保宗反，人问曰： 背父母之邦若何？ 
现代文：当初，公主劝说保宗反叛，有人问道： 为什么背叛父母之国？ 
English: At first, the princess persuaded Hozon to rebel. Someone asked, "Why did you betray your parents' country?"

古文：公主曰： 礼，妇人外成，因夫而荣。
现代文：公主说 ：礼，妇人出嫁，依靠丈夫荣耀。
English: The princess said, "Ladies, when a woman marries, she relies on her husband's honor.

古文：事立，据守一方，我亦一国之母，岂比小县之主？ 
现代文：事成，据守一方，我也是一国之母，小县之主怎能相比？ 
English: On the other hand, I am also the mother of a country, the lord of a small county, how can I compare?

古文：以此得罪。
现代文：因此获罪。
English: He was therefore found guilty.

古文：文成时，拜难当营州刺史，还为外都大官。
现代文：文成帝时，授予难当营州刺史，恢复他外都大官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wencheng, he awarded Nandong Yingzhou Shishi and restored him to the position of Gaotou Daikan.

古文：卒，谥曰忠。
现代文：死，加谥号叫 忠 。
English: Death, the gallows is called loyalty.

古文：子和，随父归魏，别赐爵仇池公。
现代文：儿子杨和，跟随父亲归顺北魏，另赐爵仇池公。
English: His son, Yang He, followed his father to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and was also given the title of Prince of Qi.

古文：子德子袭难当爵，早卒。
现代文：儿子杨德子承受难当的爵位，早亡。
English: His son, Yang Dezi, suffered a difficult peerage and died early.

古文：子小眼袭，例降为公，拜天水太守，卒。
现代文：儿子杨小眼承受，依例降为公，授予天水太守，死。
English: His son, Yang Xiaoyan, accepted the position, was demoted to the rank of civil servant according to the regulations, and was awarded the title of Emperor of Tianshui and died.

古文：子大眼，别有传。
现代文：儿子杨大眼，另外有传。
English: A son, Yang Dajian, is also said to have existed.

古文：小眼子公熙袭爵。
现代文：小眼的儿子杨公熙承受爵位。
English: Xiaoyan's son Yang Gongxi received a peerage.

古文：正光中，尚书右丞张普惠为行台，送租于南秦、东益，普惠启公熙俱行。
现代文：正光年间，尚书右丞张普惠任行台，送田赋到南秦、东益，普惠带领公熙同行。
English: During the reign of Zheng Guang, Shangshu Yu Zheng Zhang Pu Hui was appointed as the governor of Xingtai, and sent fields to the Southern Qin and Dongyi Provinces. Pu Hui led Gongxi to accompany him.

古文：至南秦，以氐反不得进，遣公熙先慰氐。
现代文：到达南秦，因氐反叛不能前行，派公熙先行抚慰氐。
English: When he arrived in Southern Qin, he couldn't go forward because of the rebellion, so he sent Gongxi ahead to comfort him.

古文：东益州刺史魏子建以公熙险薄，密令访察，公熙果有潜谋，将为叛乱。
现代文：东益州刺史魏子建因公熙阴险，暗中派人访察。公熙果然暗中谋划，将发动叛乱。
English: Due to the insidiousness of Gongxi, Wei Zijian, the governor of East Yizhou, secretly sent someone to investigate. Gongxi indeed secretly planned to launch a rebellion.

古文：子建仍报普惠，令其摄录。
现代文：子建仍旧报告普惠，让他拘捕公熙。
English: Zi Jian still reported to Pu Hui and asked him to arrest Gong Xi.

古文：普惠急追公熙，公熙竟不肯赴，东出汉中。
现代文：普惠急忙追赶公熙，公熙竟不肯前往，向东出了汉中。
English: Pu Hui hurried to catch up with Gongxi, but Gongxi refused to go and left Hanzhong to the east.

古文：普惠表列其事，公熙大行贿赂，终得免罪。
现代文：普惠上表列述公熙的事，公熙大行贿赂，终于获得免罪。
English: The matter of Gongxi is listed in the table above, and Gongxi paid a large bribe and was finally acquitted.

古文：后为假节、别将，与都督元志同守岐州，为秦贼莫折天生所虏，死于秦州。
现代文：后来做假节、别将，和都督元志共同守卫岐州，被秦贼莫折天生俘虏，死在秦州。
English: Later, he made a false festival, a false general, and the governor Yuan Zhi jointly guarded Qizhou. He was captured by the Qin thieves and died in Qinzhou.

古文：文德后自汉中入统汧、陇，遂有阴平、武兴之地。后为宋荆州刺史刘义宣所杀。
现代文：文德后来从汉中入统、陇，终于占有阴平、武兴这些地方，后来被宋荆州刺史刘义宣杀掉。
English: Wende later moved from Hanzhong to Tongtong and Handan, and finally occupied Yinping and Wuxing. Later, he was killed by Song Jingzhou assassin Liu Yixuan.

古文：保宗之执也，子元和奔宋，以为武都、白水太守。
现代文：保宗被拘捕，儿子元和投奔宋，宋让他做武都、白水太守。
English: Baozong was arrested, and his son Yuanhe defected to Song, who made him the governor of Wudu and the governor of Baishui.

古文：元和据城归顺，文成嘉之，拜征南大将军、武都王，内徙京师。
现代文：元和率城归顺，文成帝嘉奖他，授予征南大将军、武都王，内迁京师。
English: Yuanhe led the city to surrender, and Emperor Wencheng commended him, awarding him the title of General of the Southern Expedition, King of Wudang, and the title of Inner Relocation of Beijing Division.

古文：元和从叔僧嗣复自称武都王于葭芦。
现代文：元和的从叔僧嗣，又在葭芦自称武都王。
English: Yuanhe's uncle and successor, and in Huludao he called himself the King of Wudang.

古文：僧嗣死，从弟文度自立为武兴王，遣使归顺。
现代文：僧嗣死，从弟文度自立为武兴王，派遣使者归顺北魏。
English: After the monk's death, he became King Wu Xing independently from his brother Wenda, and sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：献文授文度武兴镇将，既而复叛。
现代文：献文帝授予文度武兴镇将，不久又背叛。
English: Emperor Xianwen awarded the generalship of Wendao to Wuxing Town, but they soon betrayed him.

古文：孝文初，征西将军皮欢喜攻葭芦破之，斩文度首。
现代文：孝文帝初，征西将军皮欢喜攻破葭芦，斩文度首级。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, the general of the Western Conquest, Pei Huanxi, broke through the gourd and cut off the first level of literacy.

古文：文度弟弘，小名鼠，名犯献文庙讳，以小名称。
现代文：文度的弟弟杨弘，小名鼠，名字触犯献文帝的庙讳，就用小名称呼。
English: Mengdu's younger brother Yang Hong, a minor celebrity, whose name offends Emperor Xianwen's temple taboo, is called by his diminutive name.

古文：鼠自为武兴王，遣使奉表谢罪，贡其方物，孝文纳之。
现代文：鼠自己做武兴王，派使者奉表谢罪，进贡他们的地方物产，孝文帝收纳了。
English: The rat himself, King Wu Xing, sent an envoy to the emperor to express his gratitude and pay tribute for their local products, which Emperor Xiaowen accepted.

古文：鼠遣子狗奴入侍，拜鼠都督、南秦州刺史、征西将军、西戎校尉、武都王。
现代文：鼠派儿子狗奴入内侍奉，授予鼠都督、南秦州刺史、征西将军、西戎校尉、武都王。
English: The rat sent his son, the dog slave, to serve in the imperial court, and awarded the rat the title of the governor of the capital, the governor of Southern Qin, the general of the Western Expedition, the captain of the Western Expedition, and the King of Wu.

古文：鼠死，从子后起统位，孝文复以鼠爵授之。
现代文：鼠死了，侄子后起继承职位，孝文帝又把鼠的爵位授予他。
English: When the rat died, his nephew took over the post, and Emperor Xiaowen awarded him the title of the rat.

古文：鼠子集始为白水太守。
现代文：鼠的儿子集始为白水太守。
English: Rat's son Ji was originally the governor of Baishui.

古文：后起死，以集始为征西将军、武都王。
现代文：后起死了，让集始做征西将军、武都王。
English: He later died, leaving Ji Shi to become the general of the Western Conquest and the King of Wudang.

古文：集始复朝于京师，拜都督、南秦州刺史、安南大将军、领护南蛮校尉、汉中郡侯、武兴王，赐以车旗、戎马、锦彩、缯纩。
现代文：集始又到京师朝见，授予他爵位，返回守卫武头。集始死了，儿子绍先立，授予他都督、南秦州刺史、安南大将军、领护南蛮校尉、汉中郡侯、武兴王，赏赐给他车旗、戎马、锦采、缯纩。
English: Jizhi also went to Beijing to see the emperor, granted him a title of nobility, and returned to guard Wu Tou. When Jizhi died, his son, Shao Xianli, awarded him the governor, the governor of Southern Qin State, the general of Annan, the lieutenant of Nanban, the lord of Hanzhong County, and the king of Wu Xing, and gave him the car flag, the army horse, the brocade, and the scepter.

古文：寻还武兴，进号镇南将军，加督宁、湘五州诸军事。
现代文：不久返回武兴，提升封号为镇南将军，增加督察宁、湘五州各军的事务。
English: He soon returned to Wuxing, was promoted to the title of Zhenan General, and increased his duties as inspector of the armies of Ning and Hunan Five Provinces.

古文：后仇池镇将杨灵珍袭破武兴，集始遂入齐。
现代文：后来，仇池镇将杨灵珍突袭攻破武兴，集始于是入齐。
English: Later, Qiuqi Town attacked Yang Lingzhen and broke through Wu Xing, and the collection began to be in line.

古文：景明初，集始来降，还授爵位，归守武兴。死，子绍先立，拜都督、南秦州刺史、征虏将军、汉中郡公、武兴王，赠集始车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、谥安王。绍先年幼，委事二叔集起、集义。
现代文：景明初年，集始来归降，恢复授予他都督、南秦州刺史、征虏将军、汉中郡公、武兴王，增授集始车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加谥号为安王。绍先年幼，将事务委托两个叔叔集起、集义。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, Ji initially surrendered and was restored to the title of the governor of the capital, the governor of South Qin State, the conscript general, the governor of Hanzhong County, and King Wu Xing. He was also awarded the title of the first chariot and cavalry general of Ji, and the title of the third secretary of Kaifu and the posthumous title of the king of An. Shaoxian was young, and entrusted the affairs to two uncles to collect and collect righteousness.

古文：夏侯道迁以汉中归顺也，梁白马戍主尹天保率众围之。
现代文：夏侯道迁率汉中归顺北魏，梁白马戍主尹天保率领部众包围了他。
English: Xia Hou led the relocation of Han to Shun in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Liang Baima's lord Yin Tianbao led the crowd to surround him.

古文：道迁求援于集起、集义，二人贪保边蕃，不欲救之。
现代文：道迁向集起、集义求援，二人贪求保卫边藩，不想救他。
English: Dao Qian turned to Jiuxi and Jiuxi for help, but the two were too eager to defend the border domain and did not want to save him.

古文：唯集始弟集朗心愿立功。率众破天保，全汉川，朗之力也。
现代文：只有集始的弟弟集朗内心希望立功，率领部众打败尹天保，保全了汉川，是集朗之力。
English: Only Ji Chang's younger brother, Ji Lang, had the inner desire to make a contribution. He led the team to defeat Yin Tianbao and save Hanchuan. This was Ji Lang's strength.

古文：集义见梁、益既定，恐武兴不得久为外籓，遂扇动诸氐，推绍先僭称大号，集起、集义并称王，外引梁为援。
现代文：集义见梁、益已经平定，担心武兴不能长久成为外藩，于是煽动各氐，推举绍先超越身份称大号，集起、集义同时称王，对外把梁朝作为援军。
English: Seeing that Liang and Yixing had been pacified, and fearing that Wu Xing could not remain a foreign domain for long, they instigated all factions to nominate Shaoxing to be the first to surpass his status and call himself the great leader, and simultaneously proclaim Liang and Yixing as kings, and use Liang Dynasty as reinforcements to the outside world.

古文：安西将军邢峦遣建武将军傅竖眼攻武兴克之，执绍先，送于京师，遂灭其国，以为武兴镇，复改镇为东益州。
现代文：安西将军邢峦派建武将军傅竖眼攻打武兴并战胜了他，拘捕了绍先，送到京师，于是灭亡了他的国家，把它作为武兴镇，又改镇为东益州。
English: Anxi General Zou sent Jianwu General Fu Zhizhong to attack Wuxing and defeated him, arrested Shao Xian, sent him to the Beijing Division, and then destroyed his country, made it Wuxing Town, and changed the town to Dongyizhou.

古文：前后镇将唐法乐、刺史杜纂、邢豹以威惠失衷，氐豪仇石柱等相率反叛，朝廷以西南为忧。
现代文：前后镇将唐法乐、刺史杜纂、邢豹因恃势弄权、不合准则，氐豪仇石柱等接连反叛，朝廷将西南看作忧患。
English: Towns successively rebelled against Tang Fale, Zhi Shi Du Zuo, Zhao Bao for usurping power and violating regulations, and Zhao Gao's enemies, and the imperial court regarded the southwest as a trouble spot.

古文：正光中，诏魏子建为刺史，以恩信招抚，风化大行，远近款附，如内地焉。
现代文：正光年间，下诏魏子建为刺史，用恩德、信义招使归顺加以抚慰，风俗教化大行，远近的人诚心归附，如同内地一般。
English: During the Zhengguang era, the Lower Wei Dynasty was built as a stabbing history, with benevolence and sincerity to induce submission and comfort, customs and education were carried out, and people from far and near sincerely adhered, just like the mainland.

古文：后唐永代子建为州，未几，氐人悉反。
现代文：后来唐永代替了建为州官，不多时氐人全都反叛。
English: Later, Tang Yong replaced Jian as a prefectural official, and soon everyone rebelled.

古文：永弃城东走，自此复为氐地。
现代文：唐永丢弃城池向东逃走，从此又成为氐的地盘。
English: Tang Yong abandoned the city and fled to the east, and since then it has become the territory of the Mongols.

古文：魏末，天下乱，绍先奔还武兴，复自立为王。
现代文：魏末，天下混乱，绍先奔回武兴，重新自立为王。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, when the world was in chaos, Shao first ran back to Wuxing and became king again.

古文：周文定秦、陇，绍先称籓，送妻子为质。
现代文：周文平定秦、陇，绍先称蕃，送妻子作为人质。
English: Zhou Wenzhen subdued Qin and Yan, and Shao Xian called Yan, and sent his wife as a hostage.

古文：大统元年，绍先请其女妻，周文奏魏帝许之。
现代文：大统元年，绍先请送还年少的妻子，周文上奏魏帝允准。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification of China, Shao Xian was asked to return his young wife, and Emperor Wei gave his approval.

古文：绍先死，子辟邪立。
现代文：绍先死了，儿子辟邪立。
English: Shaoxing died first, and his son took over.

古文：四年，南岐州氐苻寿反，攻陷武都，自号太白王，诏大都督侯莫陈顺与渭州刺史长孙澄讨降之。
现代文：四年，南岐州氐苻寿造反，攻下武都，自称太白王。诏令大都督侯莫陈顺和渭州刺史长孙澄征讨并使他降服。
English: In the fourth year, Nanqi Zhou Shou rebelled, attacked Wudu, and claimed to be the Great White King. He ordered the great governor Hou Mo Chen Shun and the chief historian of Zhangzhou, Sun Cheng, to subjugate him.

古文：九年，清水氐酋李鼠仁据地作乱，氐帅梁道显叛，攻南由，周文遣典签赵昶慰谕之，鼠仁等相继归附。
现代文：九年，清水氐首领李鼠仁占据地盘作乱，氐帅梁道显反叛，攻打南由，周文派典签赵昶安慰晓喻他们，鼠仁等相继归附。
English: In the ninth year, Li Ruiren, the leader of Qingshui County, occupied the territory and caused turmoil. Liang Daoxian, the commander of Qingshui County, rebelled and attacked Nanyu. Zhou Wen sent the signature of Zhao Wei to comfort them. Ruiren and others were successively annexed.

古文：十一年，于武兴置东益州，以辟邪为刺史。
现代文：十一年，在武兴设置东益州，让辟邪做刺史。
English: In the eleventh year, Dongyizhou was set up in Wuxing to make history.

古文：十五年，安夷氐复叛。
现代文：十五年，安夷重又反叛。
English: Fifteen years later, An Yizhong rebelled again.

古文：赵昶时为郡守，收首逆者二十余人斩之，乃定。
现代文：赵昶当时做郡守，逮捕首逆二十多人斩首，才平定下来。
English: Zhao Wei was the county governor at the time, and he arrested and beheaded more than 20 rebels before the situation was stabilized.

古文：于是以昶行南秦州事。
现代文：于是让赵昶代理南秦州事务。
English: Therefore, he asked Zhao Wei to represent the affairs of South Qin.

古文：氐帅盖闹等作乱，闹据北谷，其党西结宕昌羌獠甘，共推盖闹为主。
现代文：氐帅盖闹等人作乱，占据了北谷，他的党羽勾结西面的宕昌羌獠甘，共同推举盖闹为首领。
English: Gao Shuai, Gao Xuan and others created a disturbance and occupied the north valley. His followers colluded with Gao Chang and Gao Gan in the west to jointly promote Gao Xuan as the leader.

古文：昶分道遣使，宣示祸福，然后出兵讨之。
现代文：赵昶分路派遣使者，宣谕说明祸福，然后才出兵征讨。
English: Zhao Wei dispatched envoys at different times to announce calamities and blessings, and only then sent out troops to recruit.

古文：擒盖闹，散其余党。
现代文：活捉盖闹，解散他的余党。
English: Arrest the troublemaker alive and disband the rest of his party.

古文：兴州叛氐复侵逼南岐州，刺史叱罗协遣使告急，昶赴救，又大破之。
现代文：兴州的叛氐又侵犯逼近南岐州，刺史叱罗协派使者告急，赵昶赶赴救援，又大败他们。
English: The rebels of Xingzhou invaded and approached South Qizhou again, and sent an envoy to express their urgency. Zhao Wei rushed to the rescue and defeated them again.

古文：先是，氐酋杨法深据阴平自称王，亦盛之苗裔也。
现代文：此前，氐的首领杨法深占据阴平，自己称王，也是杨盛的后代子孙。
English: Previously, the leader of the Xiongnu, Yang Fashen, occupied Yinping, calling himself the king, and was also a descendant of Yang Sheng.

古文：魏孝昌中，举众内附，自是职贡不绝。
现代文：魏孝昌年间，全部内附，从此对朝廷按时的贡纳不断。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, they were all included, and from then on, they continued to pay tribute to the imperial court on time.

古文：废帝元年，以深为黎州刺史。
现代文：废帝元年，让杨法深做黎州刺史。
English: In the first year after the fall of the Qing Dynasty, Yang Fashen was asked to write the history of Lizhou.

古文：二年，杨辟邪据州反，群氐复与同逆。
现代文：二年，杨辟邪占据州郡反叛，群氐又和杨辟邪一同背叛。
English: In the second year, Yang Bijie rebelled to occupy the prefecture and county, and Gunchu rebelled together with Yang Bijie.

古文：诏叱罗协与赵昶讨平之。
现代文：诏令叱罗协和赵昶征讨、平定叛乱。
English: The imperial edict ordered Luo Xie and Zhao Jun to subjugate and suppress the rebellion.

古文：周文乃以大将军宇文贵为大都督、兴州刺史。
现代文：周文就让大将军宇文贵做大都督、兴州刺史。
English: Zhou Wen let the great general Yu Wengui become the great governor and the history of Xingzhou.

古文：贵威名先著，群氐颇畏服之。
现代文：宇文贵威名显赫于前，群氐很畏服他。
English: Uwen Guiwei was famous in the past, and the group was very intimidated by him.

古文：来岁，杨法深从尉迟迥平蜀，军回，法深寻与其宗人杨崇集、杨陈侳各拥其众，递相攻讨。
现代文：来年，杨法深跟随尉迟迥平定蜀地，军队班师回来不久，杨法深和他的宗人杨崇集、杨陈亻坐各拥有自己的部众，互相攻讨。
English: In the following year, Yang Fashen followed the lieutenant Liyao to subdue Shu, and soon after the army sergeant came back, Yang Fashen and his ancestors Yang Chongji and Yang Chen Yingzai each had their own followers and fought against each other.

古文：赵昶时督成、武、沙三州诸军事，遣使和解之。
现代文：赵昶当时督察成、武、沙三州各军事务，派使者和解他们。
English: At that time, Zhao Wei was the inspector of the affairs of the armies of Chengdu, Wuxi and Shandong, and sent envoys to reconcile them.

古文：法深等从命，乃分其部落，更置州郡以处之。
现代文：杨法深等从命，于是就划分他们的部落，另外设置州郡安排他们。
English: Yang Fashen waited obediently, and then divided their tribes, and arranged them by state and county.

古文：恭帝末，武兴氐反，围利州，凤州固道氐魏天王等亦聚众响应，大将军豆卢宁等讨平之。
现代文：恭帝末年，武兴的氐反叛，包围和州，凤州固道氐魏天王等人也聚众响应。大将军豆卢宁等征讨平定了他们。
English: In the last years of Emperor Gong, Wu Xing's rebellion, encirclement of He Zhou, Feng Zhou's siege of Wei Tian Wang and others also attracted a large number of responses. The great general Dou Luning and other conquests leveled them.

古文：周明帝时，兴州人段吒及下辩、柏树二县人反，相率破兰皋戍。
现代文：周明帝时，兴州人段吒及下辩、柏树两县的人造反，接连攻破兰皋戍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Ming, the Xingzhou people of Duanzhang, Hefei and Cypress counties staged an artificial rebellion and successively broke through the Lancang.

古文：氐酋姜多复率厨中氐属攻陷落丛郡以应之。
现代文：氐首领姜多又率领厨中氐的部属攻下洛聚郡响应他们。
English: In response to them, the leader Jiang Duo and his subordinates led by Chef Zhong Luo conquered Luoju County.

古文：赵昶讨平二县，并斩段吒。
现代文：赵昶讨伐平定了二县，并斩杀段吒。
English: Zhao Wei's crusade leveled two counties and killed Duan Wei.

古文：而阴平、葭芦氐复往往屯聚，与厨中相应。
现代文：可阴平、葭芦的氐又常常屯聚，和厨中相互应合。
English: But the gourds of Yinping and Gourd often gather together, and they fit together in the kitchen.

古文：昶乃简精骑，出其不意，径入厨中，至大竹坪，连破七栅，诛其渠帅，二郡并降。
现代文：赵昶就选拔精锐骑兵，出其不意，直入厨中，到大竹坪，连续攻破七道栅栏，杀掉他们的魁首，两郡同时投降。
English: Zhao Wei selected the elite cavalry, took them by surprise, went straight into the kitchen, to the big bamboo, continuously broke through seven fences, killed their leader, and the two counties surrendered at the same time.

古文：及昶还，厨中生氐，复为寇掠。
现代文：到赵昶回去，厨中生氐，又攻劫掠夺。
English: When they returned to Zhao Ye, there were maggots in the kitchen, and they attacked and plundered again.

古文：昶又遣仪同刘崇义、宇文琦入厨中讨之，于是群氐并平。
现代文：赵昶又派仪同刘崇义、宇文琦进入厨中讨伐，于是群氐同时平定。
English: Zhao Jun also sent Yi to enter the kitchen with Liu Chongyi and Yu Wenjun to fight, so the group of soldiers were pacified at the same time.

古文：及王谦举兵，沙州氐帅开府杨永安又据州应谦，大将军达奚儒讨平之。
现代文：到王谦起兵，沙州氐帅开府杨永安又占据州郡响应王谦，大将军达奚儒讨伐平定了他们。
English: When Wang Qian raised an army, Yang Yong'an, the marshal of Shazhou and the governor of Kaifu, occupied Shuzhou County in response to Wang Qian, and the great general Dazhong Ru fought and leveled them.

古文：吐谷浑，本辽东鲜卑徒河涉归子也。
现代文：吐谷浑，本来是辽东鲜卑徒河涉归的儿子。
English: Tu Gu Hun, was originally the son of Liaodong Xianbetsu River wading fish.

古文：涉归一名弈洛韩，有二子，庶长曰吐谷浑，少曰若洛廆。
现代文：涉归一名奕洛韩，有两个儿子，庶长子叫吐谷浑，小的叫若洛蝅。
English: Tanggui was a member of the Yi Luo Han, and had two sons, the eldest son was called Tu Gu Hun, and the youngest was called Ruo Luo Yu.

古文：涉归死，若洛廆代统部落，是为慕容氏。
现代文：涉归死了，若洛蝅代理统治部落，这就是慕容氏。
English: If Luo Wei ruled the tribe by proxy, this would be the Murong clan.

古文：涉归之在也，分户七百以给吐谷浑，与若洛廆二部。
现代文：涉归在世时，分七百户给吐谷浑，二部给若洛蝅。
English: When Wengui was alive, seven hundred households were given to Tu Guhun, and two were given to Ruo Luo.

古文：马斗相伤，若洛廆怒，遣入谓吐谷浑曰： 先公处分，与兄异部，何不相远，而马斗相伤？ 
现代文：群马争斗相互有伤，若洛蝅发怒，派人对吐谷浑说： 先公处置分配，和兄长不同部，为什么不离得远些，却群马争斗相伤？ 
English: If Luo Yao was angry, he would send someone to Tu Gu Hun to say: "Your father-in-law is in charge of the distribution, and you and your brother are in different departments. Why don't you move farther away, but the horses are fighting and injuring each other?"

古文：吐谷浑曰： 马食草饮水，春气发动，所以斗，斗在马，而怒及人，乖别甚易，今当去汝万里外！ 
现代文：吐谷浑说 ：马吃草饮水，春气发动，所以争斗。
English: He said: "Horses eat grass and drink water, and spring air is released, which is why they fight.

古文：若洛廆悔，遣旧老及长史七那楼谢之。
现代文：争斗的是马，可发怒牵涉到人！分离很容易，现在就离你万里以外！ 若洛蝅后悔了，派旧老和长史七那楼道歉。
English: It is a horse that fights, but it can get angry and involve people! It is easy to separate, and now it is a million miles away from you! If Luo Yao regrets it, send the old man and the seventh floor of Changshi to apologize.

古文：吐谷浑曰： 我乃祖以来，树德辽右，先公之世，卜筮之言云： 有二子，当享福祚，并流子孙。 
现代文：吐谷浑说 ：我们先祖以来，在辽右树立德政，先公之世，卜筮的话说 ：有两子，当享受福祚，同时流传子孙。 
English: Tu Guhun said, "Since our forefathers established a virtuous government in Liao Yu, in the era of the first emperor, Bu Yao said, "If you have two sons, you should enjoy the blessings, and at the same time, pass them down to your children and grandchildren."

古文：我是卑庶，理无并大。
现代文：我是卑微的庶子，按理不能并列为大。
English: I am a lowly son of a whore, and by rights I cannot be classed as a great man.

古文：今以马致怒，殆天所启。
现代文：现在因为马导致发怒，大概是天的启示。
English: Now because the horse causes anger, it's probably a sign from heaven.

古文：诸君试驱马令东，马若还东，我当随去。 
现代文：各位试驱马让它往东，如果马从东边返回，我就跟随而去。 
English: If the horse returns from the east, I will follow.

古文：即令从骑拥马令回，数百步，欻然悲鸣，突走而西，声若颓山，如是者十余辈，一回一迷。
现代文：就令从骑阻挡马匹使它们回去，数百步后忽然群马悲鸣，急速向西跑去，声音好像山崩，像这样十余次，回去一次执迷一次。
English: He ordered the horses to hold them back from riding, and after hundreds of steps, the horses suddenly cried and ran rapidly westward. The sound was like a landslide. He did this more than ten times, going back one after another.

古文：楼力屈，乃跪曰： 可汗，此非复人事！ 
现代文：七那楼力竭，就跪下说： 可汗，这不是人力所能及的事！ 
English: At the end of his strength, the seventh floor resident knelt down and said: "Khan, this is not something humanly possible!

古文：浑谓其部落曰： 我兄弟子孙并应昌盛，廆当传子及曾玄孙，其间可百余年；我乃玄孙间始当显耳。 
现代文：吐谷浑对自己的部落说 ：我兄弟子孙都应昌盛，蝅该当传给儿子及曾玄孙，时间可达百余年；我是玄孙时该当显赫。 
English: Tu Guhun said to his tribe: My brothers, children and grandchildren should all prosper, and it should be passed on to my sons and great-great-grandchildren, the time can reach more than a hundred years; when I am a great-great-grandson, I should be prominent.

古文：于是遂西附阴山，后假道上陇。
现代文：于是就向西附靠阴山，后来借路到达陇地。
English: So he moved westward to the Shinshan Mountains, and later took the road to Shunde.

古文：若洛廆追思吐谷浑，作《阿于歌》徒河以兄为阿于也。
现代文：若洛蝅追念吐谷浑，作《阿于歌》，徒河把兄长叫作阿于。
English: If Luo Yao wrote "Ayu Song" in memory of Tu Guhun, then Tu He would call his brother "Ayu."

古文：子孙僭号，以此歌为辇后鼓吹大曲。
现代文：子孙称王称帝，把此歌作为辇后鼓吹大曲。
English: His descendants called him "king" and "emperor" and promoted this song as a grand anthem.

古文：吐谷浑遂从上陇，止于枹罕。
现代文：吐谷浑于是就迁徙登上陇地，留在木包罕。
English: As a result, the cormorants migrated to the uplands and stayed in the wooded areas.

古文：自枹罕暨甘松，南界昂城、陇涸，从洮水西南极白兰，数千里中，逐水草，庐帐而居，以肉酪为粮。西北诸杂种谓之阿柴虏。
现代文：从木包罕到甘松，南界昂城、龙涸，从洮水西南到白兰的尽头，数千里中，跟随着水草，搭简陋的房屋和帐篷居住，用肉和奶酪当粮食，西北部各杂处的种族称他们为阿柴虏。
English: From Mokpo Han to Geumsong, the southern border of Aungseong and Longyan, from the southwest of Surabaya to the end of Phnom Penh, for thousands of miles, they follow the water weeds, build simple houses and tents to live in, and use meat and cheese as food. The races in various parts of the northwest call them Achai Krup.

古文：吐谷浑死，有子六十人。
现代文：吐谷浑死了，有儿子六十人。
English: Tuya died without issue, leaving sixty sons.

古文：长子吐延，身长七尺八寸，勇力过人，性刻暴。
现代文：长子叶延，身高七尺八寸，勇力过人，性情苛刻粗暴。
English: The eldest son, Ye Yan, is seven feet and eight inches tall. He is extremely courageous and has a harsh and rough temperament.

古文：为昂城羌酋姜聪所刺，剑犹在体，呼子叶延语其大将绝拔泥曰： 吾气绝，棺敛讫，便速去保白兰。
现代文：被昂城羌族首领姜聪刺杀，剑还插在身体上，呼唤儿子叶延，告诉大将绝拔瞛说 ：我气绝，棺木装殓结束，就速去保卫白兰。
English: He was stabbed to death by Jiang Cong, the leader of the Ancheng Yi people, with his sword still in his body. He called out to his son Ye Yan, told the general Zhe Bao and said, "I'm exhausted, I've finished decorating the coffin, I'm going to go and protect Bai Lan."

古文：地既险远，又土俗懦弱，易控御。
现代文：那个地方既险要遥远，又土俗懦弱，容易控制而使人就范。
English: That place is at once impossibly remote, vulgar and cowardly, easily controlled and pandered to.

古文：叶延小兒，欲授余人，恐仓卒终不能相制。
现代文：叶延是小孩子，想授予其他的人，恐怕仓促而最后不能控制。
English: Ye Yan is a child, he wants to bestow it on others, I'm afraid it's hasty and ultimately uncontrollable.

古文：今以叶延付汝，竭股肱之力以辅之，孺子得立，吾无恨也。 
现代文：现在把叶延托付给你，竭尽股肱之力来辅佐他，孺子能够成立，我没有遗憾了。 
English: Now I entrust Ye Yan to you, and I will do my best to assist him, and I have no regrets.

古文：抽剑而死。
现代文：拔出剑就死了。
English: Pull out your sword and die.

古文：有子十二人。
现代文：叶延有儿子十二人。
English: Ye Yan had twelve sons.

古文：叶延少而勇果，年十岁，缚草为人，号曰姜聪，每旦辄射之，射中则嗥叫泣涕。
现代文：叶延年幼而勇敢果断，十岁时，扎草为人形，取名叫姜聪，每天早晨就射它，射中就嚎叫哭泣。
English: Ye Yan was young, brave and determined. At the age of ten, Zha Cao made a human figure, named Jiang Cong, and shot it every morning. When it was shot, it howled and cried.

古文：其母曰： 仇贼诸将已屠脍之，汝年小，何烦朝朝自苦！ 
现代文：他母亲说 ：仇贼各将已杀掉做成脍，你年纪幼小，何必烦恼天天自找苦吃！ 
English: His mother said, "The enemy has killed every one of them and made them into skeletons. You are so young, why do you have to worry every day?

古文：叶延呜咽若不自胜，答母曰： 诚知无益，然罔极之心，不胜其痛。 
现代文：叶延呜咽得好像不能自制，回答母亲说： 确实知道没有用处，可是心无穷尽，不能承受痛苦。 
English: Ye Yan, sobbing uncontrollably, replied to his mother, "I know it's useless, but my heart is inexhaustible and I can't bear the pain."

古文：性至孝，母病，母三日不食，叶延亦不食。
现代文：叶延生性特别孝顺，母亲病了，三日不吃饭，叶延也不吃。
English: Ye Yan Sheng is particularly filial. When his mother is ill, he does not eat for three days, and neither does Ye Yan.

古文：颇视书传，自谓曾祖弈洛韩始封昌黎公，吾为公孙之子，案《礼》，公孙之子得以王父字为氏，遂以吐谷浑为氏焉。
现代文：他看了很多典籍传述，自称曾祖奕洛韩曾封昌黎公，我是公孙的子嗣，依《礼》，公孙的子嗣可以用祖父的字作氏，于是就用吐谷浑作氏了。
English: He read a lot of classic books and narratives. He said that he was the great-grandfather of Yi Luo Han Zengfeng Changli, and I was the grandson's son. According to the "Ritual," the grandson's son could use the grandfather's name as his family name, so he used Tu Guhun as his family name.

古文：叶延死，子碎奚立。
现代文：叶延死了，儿子碎奚立。
English: Ye Yan is dead, his son is in tatters.

古文：性淳谨，三弟专权，碎奚不能制，诸大将共诛之。
现代文：性情淳厚恭谨。三弟把持大权，各大将共同杀掉了他。
English: His third brother held great power, and the generals killed him together.

古文：奚忧哀不复摄事，遂立子视连为世子，委之事。号曰莫贺郎，华言父也。
现代文：碎奚忧伤悲哀不再管理事务，于是就立儿子视连为世子，把事务委托给他，号叫莫贺郎，华言是 父亲 的意思。
English: Fragments of sadness and sorrow no longer manage affairs, so he set up his son as the heir and entrusted the affairs to him. His nickname is Mo Herong, and Hua Yan means father.

古文：奚遂以忧死。
现代文：碎奚终于因忧伤死了。
English: Finally, Broken Beak died of grief.

古文：视连立，以父忧思，不游娱酣宴。
现代文：视连立，因父亲死去忧伤思虑，不游乐酣饮。
English: Li Lianli, because of his father's death, is sad and worried, and does not play or drink.

古文：十五年死，弟视罴立。
现代文：十五年，弟视黑立。
English: Fifteen years later, my younger brother started to see blackness.

古文：死，子树洛干等并幼，弟乌纥提立，而妻树洛干母，生二子慕璝、慕利延。
现代文：死，儿子树洛干等人均年幼，弟乌纥提立，娶树洛干的母亲为妻，生两子慕、慕利延。
English: After his death, Shulokan's sons, all of whom were young, and his younger brother, U Thi Li, married Shulokan's mother and had two sons, Mu and Muriyan.

古文：乌纥提一名大孩，死，树洛干立，自号车骑将军。
现代文：乌纥提一名大孩。死，树洛干立，自称车骑将军。
English: A big kid from Wuxi. He died and rose from the dead, calling himself a bicycle general.

古文：是岁，晋义熙初也。
现代文：这一年是晋义熙初年。
English: This was the first year of the reign of Emperor Jin Yixi.

古文：树洛干死，弟阿豺立，自号骠骑将军、沙州刺史。
现代文：树洛干死，弟阿豺立，自称骠骑将军、沙州刺史。
English: Shu Luo Gan died, and his younger brother Ah Li stood up, claiming to be the general of the cavalry and the ruler of Shazhou.

古文：部内有黄沙，周回数百里，不生草木，因号沙州。
现代文：部落境内有黄沙，周围数百里，不长草木，因此称为沙州。
English: There is yellow sand in the territory of the tribe, and there are hundreds of miles around, and the grass does not grow, so it is called Shazhou.

古文：阿豺兼并氐、羌，地方数千里，号为强国。
现代文：阿豺兼并了氐、羌，土地方圆数千里，号称强国。
English: Aqiang annexed Shandong and Fujian, with a territory of several thousand miles, and was known as a powerful country.

古文：升西强山，观垫江源，问于群僚曰： 此水东流，更有何名？
现代文：登上西强山，观察垫江源头，问群僚说： 此水东流，另外有什么名称？
English: He climbed the West Qiang Mountain, observed the source of the Jiejiang River, and asked his colleagues: What is the other name for this eastward flow of water?

古文：由何郡国入何水也？ 
现代文：由哪个郡国流进哪条河呢？ 
English: From which county does which river flow?

古文：其长史曾和曰： 此水经仇池，过晋寿，出宕渠始号垫江，至巴郡入江，度广陵入于海。 
现代文：他的长史曾和说 ：此水经过仇池、晋寿，从宕渠流出才称为垫江，到巴郡入江，越过广陵入海。 
English: His long history once said: This water passes through Qiuchi and Jinzhou, and it is only called the Jiejiang River when it flows out of the lagoon canal, enters the Ba County River, and crosses the Guangling River into the sea.

古文：阿豺曰： 水尚知归，吾虽塞表小国，而独无所归乎！ 
现代文：阿豺说 ：水尚且知晓归到一处，我们虽然是塞外小国，难道没有所归吗？ 
English: Amma said, "Water is known to return to the same place. Even though we are a small country, do we not have a place to return to?

古文：遣使通宋，献其方物。
现代文：派使者和宋交往，贡献他们的地方物产。
English: They sent envoys to interact with the Song Dynasty and contribute their local products.

古文：宋少帝封为浇河公。
现代文：宋少帝封阿豺为浇河公。
English: The Song Dynasty's Young Emperor made Ah Qin the governor of Jihe River.

古文：未及拜受，宋文帝元嘉三年，又加除命。
现代文：未来得及拜谢接受，宋文帝元嘉三年，又加任命。
English: In the future, if Bai Xie accepts, Song Wen Di Yuan Jia will be appointed for another three years.

古文：又将遣使朝贡，会暴病，临死召诸子弟告之曰： 先公车骑舍其子虔，以大业属吾，岂敢忘先公之举而私于纬代！
现代文：又将派使者朝见进贡，正逢阿豺暴病，临死前召集所有的子弟，告诉他们说： 先公车骑舍弃他的儿子虔，把大业交付我，怎么敢忘记先公的举动而对纬代有偏私！
English: He will also send an emissary to pay tribute to the emperor, and just as grandpa falls violently ill, he will gather all his children before his death and tell them: "First, ride the bus and abandon his son, Gyan, and entrust the great cause to me. How dare you forget grandpa's actions and show favoritism to the younger generation!"

古文：其以慕璝继事。 
现代文：请让慕王贵继承大事。 
English: Please let Mu Wanggui inherit the important things.

古文：阿豺有子二十人，纬代长子也。
现代文：阿豺有儿子二十人，纬代是长子。
English: Grandmother Yao had twenty sons, and Shidai was the eldest son.

古文：阿豺又谓曰： 汝等各奉吾一只箭，将玩之地下。 
现代文：阿豺又对他们说 ：你们各给我一枝箭，将来在地下研习。 
English: The grandmother also said to them, "Give me an arrow each, and in the future you will study underground."

古文：俄而命母弟慕利延曰： 汝取一只箭折之。 
现代文：一会儿又命母弟慕利延说： 你取一枝箭折断它。 
English: After a while, he ordered his mother and younger brother, Muriyan, to say, "Take an arrow and break it."

古文：慕利延折之。
现代文：慕利延折断了它。
English: Muri Yan broke it.

古文：曰： 汝取十九只箭折之。 
现代文：阿豺说 ：你取十九枝箭折断它。 
English: The grandmother said, "Take nineteen arrows and break it."

古文：慕延不能折。阿豺曰： 汝曹知不？
现代文：慕利延没能折断，阿豺说 ：你们知道不知道？
English: Mulian could not be broken, and the grandmother said, "Do you know?

古文：单者易折，众则难摧，戮力一心，然后社稷可固。 
现代文：单枝的箭容易折断，众多的箭难以摧毁，合力一心，这样社稷就牢固。 
English: A single arrow is easily broken, but many arrows are difficult to destroy. By working together, the community is strong.

古文：言终而死。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: Say the word and you're dead.

古文：慕璝立。
现代文：慕立。
English: Murata sighed.

古文：先是，阿豺时，宋命竟未至而死。
现代文：此前，阿豺那时，宋命竟然未到达就死了。
English: Previously, at that time, Song Ming died before he even arrived.

古文：慕璝又奉表通宋，宋文帝又授陇西公。
现代文：慕又上表交好刘宋，宋文帝又授予陇西公的爵位。
English: Mu also befriended Liu Song, and Emperor Song granted him the title of Duke of Shaanxi.

古文：慕璝招集秦、凉亡业之人，及羌戎杂夷众至五六百落，南通蜀、汉，北交凉州、赫连，部众转盛。
现代文：慕招集秦、梁无业的人，以及羌戎杂夷人众达五、六百部落、南通蜀、汉，北接凉州、赫连，部众变多。
English: Mu summoned the unemployed people of Qin and Liang, as well as the miscellaneous barbarians of Qin and Liang, amounting to five or six hundred tribes, Nantong, Shu, Han, and North of Liangzhou and Helian.

古文：太武时，慕璝始遣其侍郎谢大宁奉表归魏。
现代文：太武帝时，慕才派他的侍郎谢大宁上表归顺北魏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taibu, Mu Cai sent his servant, Xie Daning, to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：寻讨禽赫连定，送之京师。
现代文：不久，讨伐并擒住赫连定，把他送到京师。
English: Soon after, he fought and captured He Lianding and sent him to the capital.

古文：太武嘉之，遣使者策拜慕璝为大将军、西秦王。
现代文：太武帝嘉奖他，派使者策授慕为大将军、西秦王。
English: Emperor Taibu praised him and sent an emissary to recommend him as a great general and the King of Western Qin.

古文：慕璝表曰： 臣诚庸弱，敢竭精款，俘擒僭逆，献捷王府，爵秩虽崇，而土不增廓，车旗既饰，而财不周赏，愿垂鉴察，亮基单款。
现代文：慕上表说： 臣下确实平庸懦弱，竭尽精诚衷心，俘获越分的逆贼，把战利品献给王府，爵秩虽高，但土地没增加扩大，车旗已经修整，可是财物没遍赏，希望能够鉴察、谅解我的竭诚之心。
English: Mu Shang said: My vassals are indeed mediocre and weak, they are sincere in their efforts, they captured traitors who exceeded the score, and presented the spoils to the royal palace. Although the rank is high, the land has not been increased and expanded. The car flag has been repaired, but the property has not been appreciated. I hope you can inspect and understand my sincerity.

古文：臣顷接寇逆，疆境之人，为贼所抄，流转东下，今皇化混一，求还乡土。
现代文：臣下不久前迎击寇逆，边境的人被贼掠夺，流徙转移东去。现在皇上教化统一，请求返回乡土。
English: Not long ago, the vassals fought against the invaders, the people on the border were plundered by the thieves and migrated to the east. Now, the emperor has been unified and asked to return to his hometown.

古文：乞佛曰连、窟略寒、张华等三人家弱在此，分乖可愍，愿并敕遣，使恩洽遐荒，存亡感戴。 
现代文：乞佛曰连、窟略寒、张华等三人妻子老小在此，分离很可怜，希望能下令一并遣返，使恩德滋润远方，生死感恩戴德。 
English: Begged the Buddha to say that the three wives, including Lian, Guo slightly cold, and Zhang Hua, are here, the separation is very poor, and it is hoped that they will be ordered to repatriate together, so that the distant land will be moisturized, and they will be grateful for life and death.

古文：太武诏公卿朝堂会，议答施行。
现代文：太武帝下诏公卿在朝堂会合，商议答复施行。
English: The court nobles under Emperor Taizu met in the Imperial Palace to discuss the implementation of the reply.

古文：太尉长孙嵩及议郎、博士二百七十九人议曰： 前者有司所处，以为秦王荒外之君，本非政教所及，来则受之，去则不禁。
现代文：太尉长孙嵩和议郎、博士二百七十九人奏议说： 以前有司处理，认为西秦王是荒远地区的君主，本不是政治教化所能达到的地方，来就接受，去就不禁。
English: The captain-commander, Sun Song, and the two hundred and seventy-nine members of the councilors and doctors made a petition saying: Previously, there was a division to deal with, and it was considered that the West Qin King was a monarch in a desolate area, and this was not a place where political enlightenment could be achieved. Come and accept it, and you will not be forbidden to go.

古文：皇威远被，西秦王慕义畏威，称臣纳贡，求受爵号。
现代文：皇威加于远方，西秦王仰慕道义畏惧威严，称臣进贡，请求授予爵位称号。
English: The emperor was far away, and the Western Qin king admired his morality and feared his majesty. He demanded tribute from his vassals and asked to be granted a title of nobility.

古文：议者以为古者要荒之君，虽人土众广，而爵不拟华夏。
现代文：商议人认为，古时极远地方的君主，虽然人多地广，可是爵位不能比照华夏。
English: The negotiator believed that although the monarchs of faraway places in ancient times were numerous and extensive, the titles of nobility could not be compared with those of China.

古文：陛下加宠王官，乃越常分，容饰车旗，班同上国。
现代文：陛下对王官给予宠信，是超越了定分，装饰车旗，等列如同上国。
English: His majesty's favor to the royal official is beyond the limit, the decoration of the car flag, and so on are like the upper country.

古文：至于缯絮多少，旧典所无，皆当临时以制丰寡。
现代文：至于缯帛絮绵所制衣服的多少，旧法没有规定，都是临时规定多少。
English: The old law did not stipulate the quantity of clothes made from cocoon yarn, but only specified the quantity on a provisional basis.

古文：自汉、魏以来，抚绥遐荒，颇有故事。
现代文：从汉、魏以来，招抚安定远方之国，有许多先例。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, there have been many precedents of countries far away being attracted and stabilized.

古文：吕后遗单于御车二乘、马二驷，单于答马千匹。其后匈奴和亲，敌国，遗缯絮不过数百；呼韩邪称臣，身自入朝，始乃至万匹。
现代文：吕后赠送单于御车两乘、马两驷，单于报答送马千匹；以后匈奴和亲，对等的国家，赠送缯帛絮绵衣服也不过数百；呼韩邪称臣，亲自入朝，才到万匹。
English: The Empress Dowager Lyu gave a gift of two carriages and two horses, and a gift of a thousand horses in return; later, the Huns and their relatives, the equivalent countries, gave only a few hundred pieces of clothes; calling the Han and the wicked, and personally entering the DPRK, only reached ten thousand horses.

古文：今西秦王若以土无桑蚕，便当上请，不得言财不周赏也。
现代文：现在西秦王如果因为本土没有桑蚕，就应该对朝廷有所请求，不可以说财物没有遍赏。
English: Now, if the Western Qin King does not have mulberry silkworms on the mainland, he should make a request to the imperial court. It cannot be said that the property has not been appreciated.

古文：周室衰微，齐侯小白一匡天下，有赐胙之命，无益土之赏。
现代文：周室衰败，齐侯小白使天下纳入正轨，有赐予祭后之肉的命令，没有增加土地的赏赐。
English: Zhou's court fell into decay, Qihou Xiaobai put the country on the right track, and there was an order to give the meat after the sacrifice, but no increase in the land reward.

古文：晋侯重耳破楚城濮，唯受南阳之田，为朝宿之邑。
现代文：晋侯重耳攻破楚国的城濮，只接受南阳的田地，作为朝见时住宿的城邑。
English: The Jin lords broke through the city walls of Chu, and only accepted the fields of Nanyang as a city to stay in during the morning.

古文：西秦所致，唯定而已。
现代文：西秦所送的，只有赫连定罢了。
English: The one sent by the Western Qin Dynasty was only Her Lianding.

古文：塞外之人，因时乘便，侵入秦、凉，未有经略拓境之勋，爵登上国，统秦、凉、河、沙四州之地，而云土不增廓。
现代文：塞外的人，因时乘便，侵入秦、凉，没有筹划开拓疆界的功勋，爵位列上国，治理秦、梁、河、沙四州地方，却说土地没有增加扩大。
English: People from outside Tibet took advantage of the opportunity to invade Qin and Liang, and did not plan to open up the borders of the country, but said that the land did not increase and expand.

古文：比圣朝于弱周，而自同于五霸，无厌之情，其可极乎！
现代文：把圣朝当作衰败的周室，却将自己看作五霸，没有满足的心情，难道可以穷尽吗？
English: Is it possible to exhaust the feeling of not being satisfied with the Holy Dynasty, which is regarded as a decadent imperial family, while viewing oneself as the Five Great Emperors?

古文：西秦王忠款于朝廷，原其本情，必不至此。
现代文：西秦王忠于朝廷，推究他原来的心情，肯定不是这样。
English: Western Qin kings were loyal to the imperial court, but judging from his original feelings, this was definitely not the case.

古文：或左右不敕，因致斯累。
现代文：或是左右的人不劝诫，因此招来这种带累。
English: Or people on either side do not admonish, thus inviting this kind of entanglement.

古文：检西秦流人，贼时所抄，悉在蒲坂。
现代文： 查检西秦流徙人口，贼人作乱时劫掠的都在蒲坂。
English: The West Qin migratory population was inspected, and the thieves who looted during the riots were all in Busaka.

古文：今既称籓，四海咸泰，天下一家，可敕秦州送诣京师，随后遣还。
现代文：现在已经称藩，四海都已安定，天下成为一家，可令秦州送到京师，随后遣返。
English: Now that the domain has been called, the four seas have been stabilized, and the world has become one family, Qinzhou can be sent to Beijing and then repatriated.

古文：所请乞佛三人，昔为宾国之使，来在王庭，国破家迁，即为臣妾，可勿听许。
现代文：所要求的乞佛等三人，以前是宾国的使者，来到王庭，国破家迁，就成为臣民，不可听受准许。 
English: The requested mendicants and three others, who were formerly envoys of the host country, came to the royal court, the country broke up and moved, they became subjects, and could not be granted permission.

古文：制曰： 公卿议之，未为失体。
现代文：皇帝命令 ：公卿议决的不算违背礼节。
English: Emperor's order: It is not considered a breach of etiquette for nobles to make decisions.

古文：西秦王所书金城、枹罕、陇西之地，彼自取之，朕即与之，便是裂土，何须复廓？
现代文：西秦王收取的金城、木包罕、陇西的地盘，他自己收取的，朕就给予他，就算是分给的土地，何必再扩大？
English: The territory of Jincheng, Mubo Han, and Shaanxi that the West Qin king received, and that he himself received, I will give to him. Even if it is a land allotment, why expand it further?

古文：西秦款至，绵绢随使疏数增益之，非一匹而已。 
现代文：西秦诚挚恳切，絮绵丝织物品随使者的疏密增添，不限于一匹。 
English: West Qin earnestly and sincerely, the density of fluffy silk items with the envoy increased, not limited to one horse.

古文：自是，慕璝贡献颇简。
现代文：从此，慕王贵贡献非常简单。
English: From then on, Mu Wanggui's contribution was very simple.

古文：又通于宋，宋文封为陇西王。
现代文：又和宋交好，宋文帝封他为陇西王。
English: He also befriended Song, and Song Emperor Wen made him the King of Shaanxi.

古文：太延二年，慕璝死，弟慕利延立。
现代文：太延二年，慕死了，弟弟慕利延立。
English: Two years after Taiyan, Mu died, and his younger brother, Mu Li, was born.

古文：诏遣使者策谥慕璝曰惠王。
现代文：北魏下诏派使者用策节为慕王贵加谥号叫惠王。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, emissaries were dispatched to call the king Hui Wang.

古文：后拜慕利延镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王；以慕璝子元绪为抚军将军。
现代文：后来封慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王；让慕王贵的儿子元绪为抚军将军。
English: Later, the title of Mu Liyan was changed to Zhen Xi Da Gen, Yi Tong San Si, and the title of Xiping Wang; the son of Mu Wanggui was reinstated as the general of Fuzhou Army.

古文：时慕利延又通宋，宋封为河南王。
现代文：当时慕利延又和宋交好，宋封他为河南王。
English: At that time, Mu Liyan made friends with Song again, and Song made him the king of Henan.

古文：太武征凉州，慕利延惧，遂率其部人，西遁沙漠。
现代文：太武帝征伐凉州，慕利延害怕了，就率领他的部队，向西逃往沙漠。
English: Mu Liyan was afraid when Emperor Taowu conquered Liangzhou, so he led his troops and fled westward into the desert.

古文：太武以利延兄有禽赫连定之功，遣使宣喻之，乃还。
现代文：太武帝因慕利延兄有擒获赫连定的功劳，派使者向他宣示晓谕，于是返回。
English: Emperor Taivu sent an envoy to deliver an edict to Muriyan because of his brother's achievement in winning the succession to the throne, and then returned.

古文：后慕利延遣使表谢，书奏，乃下诏褒奖之。
现代文：后来慕利延派使者上表谢罪，表章上奏，就下诏褒奖他。
English: Later, Mu Liyan sent an emissary to express his gratitude, and after the seal was raised, he issued an imperial edict to commend him.

古文：慕利延兄子纬代惧慕利延害已，与使者谋欲自归，慕利延觉而杀之。
现代文：慕利延兄长的儿子纬代害怕慕利延害自己，和使者谋划自己回京师，慕利延察觉就杀掉了他。
English: The son of Mu Liyan's elder brother was afraid of Mu Liyan harming himself, and plotted with the emissary to return to Beijing. When Mu Liyan found out, he killed him.

古文：纬代弟叱力延等八人逃归京师，请兵讨慕利延。
现代文：纬代的弟弟叱力延等八人逃回师，请求发兵讨伐慕利延。
English: Shidai's younger brother, Shoryen, and eight others fled back to the division and requested that an army be sent to fight Muriyan.

古文：太武拜叱力延归义王，诏晋王伏罗率诸将讨之。
现代文：太武帝封叱力延为归义王，诏令晋王伏罗率领众将讨伐。
English: Emperor Taibu extended the power of the imperial seal to the king of Guiyi, and ordered the king of Jin, Furo, to lead the people in a crusade.

古文：军至大母桥，慕利延兄子拾寅走河西，伏罗遣将追击之，斩首五千余级。
现代文：军队到达大母桥，慕利延兄长的儿子拾寅奔向河西，伏罗派将追赶击杀，斩首五千余级。
English: When the army arrived at the Dam Bridge, the son of the elder brother of Mu Liyan, Shu Yin, ran to the west of the river. The Voro faction chased and killed him, beheading more than five thousand.

古文：慕利延走白兰，慕利延从弟伏念、长史孚鸠黎、部大崇娥等率众一万三千落归降。
现代文：慕利延逃往白兰。慕利延从弟伏念、长史孚鸟鸠黎、部大崇娥率部众一万三千落归顺投降。
English: Mu Liyan fled to Bai Lan. Mu Liyan surrendered to his brother Fu Nian, Chang Shifu Jiao Xili, and the 13,000-strong army led by the general Zong E.

古文：后复遣征西将军、高凉王那等讨之于白兰。
现代文：后来又派征西将军、高凉王那等人讨伐白兰。
English: Later, he sent the General of the Western Expedition, King Gao Liang and others to fight against the White Lanterns.

古文：慕利延遂入于阗国，杀其王，死者数万人。
现代文：慕利延就进入于阗国，杀掉国王，死者数万人。
English: Muriyan entered Yunnan, killed the king, and tens of thousands of people died.

古文：南征罽宾。
现代文：向南征伐剡宾。
English: The southward campaign against Suibin began.

古文：遣使通宋求援，献乌丸帽、女国金酒器、胡王金钏等物，宋文帝赐以牵车。
现代文：派使者和宋交好、求援，进献乌丸帽、女国金酒器、胡王金钏等物品，宋文帝用牵车赏赐他。
English: He sent an envoy to make friends with Song and ask for help, and presented him with items such as a ebony round hat, a woman's country gold wine vessel, and a Hu Wang gold bowl. Emperor Song Wen rewarded him with a cart.

古文：七年，遂还旧土。
现代文：七年，才返回故土。
English: It took him seven years to return to his native land.

古文：慕利延死，树洛干子拾寅立。
现代文：慕利延死了，树洛干的儿子拾寅立。
English: Muli Yan died, and Shu Luo Gan's son Shu Yin Li was born.

古文：始邑于伏罗川，其居止出入，窃拟王者。
现代文：开始在伏罗川建城邑，居止出入暗中比拟王者。
English: He began to build a castle town in Furokawa, and secretly likened himself to a king.

古文：拾寅奉修贡职，受魏正朔；又受宋封爵，号河南王。
现代文：拾寅奉行进献物品的职责，接受北魏正朔，又接受宋的封爵，号称河南王。
English: Shuyin carried out the duties of presenting goods, accepted the Northern Wei Zhengshuo, and accepted the Song's knighthood, known as the Henan King.

古文：太武遣使拜为镇西大将军、沙州刺史、西平王。
现代文：太武帝派使者封他为镇西大将军、沙州刺史、西平王。
English: Emperor Taibu sent emissaries to appoint him as Zhenxi Grand General, Shazhou Shishi, and Xiping King.

古文：后拾寅自恃险远，颇不恭命。
现代文：后来拾寅因地处险远自负，很不恭敬从命。
English: Later, because of his precarious position, Shuyin became conceited and disobeyed his orders.

古文：通使于宋，献善马、四角羊，宋明帝加之官号。
现代文：派使者和宋交好，献良马、四角羊，宋明帝加封他官号。
English: He sent envoys to make friends with Song Jiaotong, and presented him with a fine horse and a four-horned sheep. Song Mingdi also gave him an official title.

古文：文成时，定阳侯曹安表拾寅今保白兰，多有金银、牛马，若击之，可以大获。
现代文：文成帝时定阳侯曹安上表说拾寅现在的城堡白兰，有许多金银、牛马，如攻打它们，可以有很大的收获。
English: In the time of Emperor Wencheng, the lord of Dingyang, Cao An, said on the table that there were many gold, silver, cattle and horses in the present castle of Bai Lan, and if they were attacked, there could be a great harvest.

古文：议者咸以先帝忿拾寅兄弟不睦，使晋王伏罗、高凉王那再征之，竟无多克，拾寅虽复远遁，军亦疲劳。
现代文：议论的人都认为，先帝不满拾寅兄弟的不和睦，让晋王伏罗、高凉王那再次往讨，竟然没有大胜，虽然拾寅远远逃走，但我军也很疲劳。
English: Commentators believe that the former emperor was dissatisfied with the discord between the Shuyin brothers, so he had the Jin king Furo and the Gaoliang king go back and forth again, but there was no great victory. Although the Shuyin fled far away, our army was also very tired.

古文：今在白兰，不犯王塞，不为人患，非国家之所急也。
现代文：现在待在白兰，不侵犯王朝边塞，没成为人民的祸患，不是国家的紧要事情。
English: Now stay in Phran, do not encroach on the dynastic border, do not become a scourge of the people, is not a national emergency.

古文：若遣使招慰，必求为臣妾，可不劳而定也。
现代文：如果派使者招抚，他们肯定会请求作为臣下，可以不费力就平定了。
English: If you send an envoy to appease them, they will surely ask to be treated as a vassal and can be pacified without much effort.

古文：王者之于四荒，羁縻而已，何必屠其国，有其地。
现代文：王者对四方边远的国家，拘缚他们就行了，何必除掉那个国家，占有他们的土地？
English: It is enough for the king to bind the four far-flung countries. Why does he need to get rid of that country and occupy their land?

古文：安曰： 臣昔为浇河戍将，与之相近，明其意势。
现代文：曹安说： 臣以前是守卫浇河的将军，和他们相距不远，明了他们的意向态势。
English: Cao An said, "I used to be a general guarding the river, and I am not far from them, so I know their intentions.

古文：若分军出其左右，拾寅必走保南山，不过十日，牛马草尽，人无所食，众必溃叛，可一举而定也。 
现代文：如分兵进攻他们附近的地区，拾寅必定逃奔守卫南山，不过十天，牛马的草料吃完了，人也没有吃的了，部众必然溃散叛乱，可以一举平定。 
English: If detachments of soldiers attack the areas near them, the gleaners will certainly flee to guard Nanshan. However, after ten days, the cattle and horses will have finished eating the grass, and there will be no food left for the people. The subordinates will inevitably disperse the rebellion, and it can be quelled at one stroke.

古文：从之。
现代文：文成帝听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏阳平王新成、建安王穆六头等出南道，南郡公李惠、给事中公孙拔及安出北道以讨之。
现代文：下诏阳平王新成、建安王穆六头从南道出兵，南郡公李惠、给事中公孙拔和曹安从北道出兵讨伐他们。
English: Yangping King Xincheng and Jian'an King Mu Rongtou sent troops from Southern Province, while Nangun Gong Li Hui, Jiezhongong Gong Sunba and Cao'an sent troops from Northern Province to fight them.

古文：拾寅走南山，诸军济河追之。
现代文：拾寅逃往南山，各军渡河追赶。
English: Shuying fled to Nanshan, and the armies pursued him across the river.

古文：时军多病，诸将议贼已远遁，军容已振，今驱疲病之卒，要难冀之功，不亦过乎？
现代文：当时军中士卒生病较多，各将商议：逆贼已远远地逃走，军容已振奋，现在驱使疲劳生病的士卒，获取很难有望的功劳，不也是过错吗？
English: At that time, there were a lot of army sergeants who were ill, and they would discuss: the rebels have fled far away, the military has been excited, and now it is not a mistake to drive the tired and sick soldiers to obtain the hard-to-hope-for merit?

古文：众以为然，乃引还，获驼马二十余万。
现代文：众人认为有道理，就领兵返回，缴获驼马二十余万。
English: The people thought it was reasonable, so they led the soldiers back and captured more than 200,000 camels and horses.

古文：献文复诏上党王长孙观等率州郡兵讨拾寅。
现代文：献文帝时又下诏上党王长孙观等人率领州郡的兵马讨伐拾寅。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianwen's dedication, the party king Sun Quan and others issued an edict to lead the soldiers and horses of the county to fight against Shuying.

古文：军至曼头山，拾寅来逆战，观等纵兵击败之，拾寅宵遁。
现代文：军队到达曼头山，拾寅来迎战，长孙观等人指挥士兵击败他，拾寅夜里逃跑了。
English: The army arrived at Mount Mantou, and Shuyin came to meet the battle. Eldest grandson Guan and others commanded the soldiers to defeat him, and Shuyin fled in the night.

古文：于是思悔复蕃职，遣别驾康盘龙奉表朝贡。
现代文：因此想改过恢复蕃职，派别驾康盘龙上表朝拜进贡。
English: Therefore, they want to change and resume their duties, and the faction drives the Kangpan dragon to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：献文幽之，不报其使。
现代文：献文帝拘禁了他，不答复那个使节。
English: Emperor Xianwen detained him without replying to the envoy.

古文：拾寅部落大饥，屡寇浇河。
现代文：拾寅部落饥荒严重、屡次进犯浇河。
English: The Shuyin tribe suffered from a severe famine and repeatedly attacked and poured water into the river.

古文：诏平西将军、广川公皮欢喜率敦煌、凉州、枹罕、高平诸军为前锋，司空、上党王长孙观为大都督以讨之。
现代文：献文帝下诏平西将军、广川公皮欢喜率领敦煌、凉州、木包罕、高平各军做先锋，司空、上党王长孙观为大都督，讨伐他。
English: Emperor Xianwen made Pingxi general, Guangchuan Gongpi rejoiced and led the armies of Dunhuang, Liangzhou, Mubo, and Gaoping as the vanguard, and Siku and Shangdang king Chosun Guan as the grand governor to fight against him.

古文：观等军入拾寅境，刍其秋稼。
现代文：长孙观等军进入拾寅的境内，割掉他们的庄稼。
English: The eldest grandson and other soldiers entered the territory of Shuiyin and cut off their crops.

古文：拾寅窘怖，遣子诣军，表求改过，观等以闻。
现代文：拾寅困迫恐惧，派儿子到军中，表示要改过，长孙观把此事报告皇帝。
English: He sent his son to the army, saying that he wanted to make amends, and the eldest grandson reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：献文以重劳将士，乃下诏切责之，征其任子。
现代文：献文帝重重慰劳将士，于是下诏严词谴责拾寅，求取人质。
English: Emperor Xianwen consoled the laborers, and then issued a stern edict condemning Shuyin and demanding hostages.

古文：拾寅遣子斤入侍，献文寻遣斤还。
现代文：拾寅派儿子斤入侍，献文帝不久将斤遣返。
English: Shuyin sent his son Jin to become an attendant, and Emperor Xianwen soon repatriated Jin.

古文：拾寅后复扰掠边人，遣其将良利守洮阳，枹罕所统也。
现代文：拾寅后来又扰掠边民，派他的将军良利守卫洮阳，这是木包罕统辖的地方。
English: Shuyin later harassed and plundered the border people and sent his general, Liangli, to guard Poyang, which was under the control of Muboqan.

古文：枹罕镇将、西郡公杨锺葵贻拾寅书以责之。
现代文：木包罕镇将、西郡公杨钟葵给拾寅写信谴责他。
English: The mayor of Mubo Han Town, Xi County Gong Yang Zhong Kwai, wrote a letter to Shuyin condemning him.

古文：拾寅表曰： 奉诏，听臣还旧土，故遣良利守洮阳。
现代文：拾寅表白说 ：奉诏令，听凭臣还归故土，所以派良利守卫洮阳。
English: Shuyin said, "According to the imperial edict, the vassals should return to their homeland, so I sent Liangli to guard Shenyang."

古文：若不追前恩，求令洮阳贡其土物。 
现代文：如不追加前恩，请求让洮阳贡奉他们的土产物品。 
English: If they don't show more mercy, they should ask Fenyang to donate their local products.

古文：辞旨恳切，献文许之，自是岁修职贡。
现代文：辞意恳切，献文帝准许，从此每年进奉贡物。
English: His resignation was sincere, and Emperor Xianwen gave his permission. From then on, tributes were paid every year.

古文：太和五年，拾寅死，子度易侯立。遣其侍郎时真贡方物，提上表称嗣事。
现代文：太和五年，拾寅死了，儿子度易侯立，派他的侍郎时真进贡地方物产，提及上表称嗣的事情。
English: In the fifth year of the Taihe era, Shuyin died, and his son Duyi Houli sent his attendant Shizhen to pay tribute to local products, mentioning the matter of the above-mentioned table.

古文：后度易侯伐宕昌，诏让之，赐锦彩一百二十匹，喻令悛改；所掠宕昌口累，部送时还。
现代文：后来度易侯进攻宕昌，下诏责备他，并赐予锦采一百二十匹，晓谕他，让他悔改。掠夺的宕昌家口、部曲按时送还。
English: Later, Du Yihong attacked Gaochang, and issued an edict to reprimand him, and gave him one hundred and twenty horses, telling him to repent. The plundered Gaochang family estates and treasures were returned on time.

古文：易侯并奉诏。
现代文：度易侯全部接受了诏命。
English: All the dukes and princes accepted the imperial command.

古文：死。子伏连筹立。
现代文：度易侯死了，儿子伏连筹立。
English: Du Yi Hou died, and his son, Fulian, took over.

古文：孝文欲令入朝，表称疾病，辄修洮阳、泥和城而置戍焉。
现代文：孝文帝想让伏连筹入朝，他上表称说有病，并立即修整洮阳、泥和城，而且设置戍卫。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wanted Fu Lian to enter the imperial court. He announced on the table that he was ill, and immediately repaired Fenyang, Mudan and the city, and set up a defense.

古文：文明太后崩，使人告凶，伏连筹拜命不恭。有司请伐之，孝文不许。
现代文：文明太后去世，派人报丧，伏连筹拜命不恭敬，有司请求讨伐他们，孝文帝不准。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager of Civilization, the emperor sent someone to report the death, but the people of Fulian did not respect the death, and there was a request to fight them, but Emperor Xiaowen did not allow it.

古文：群臣以其受诏不敬，不宜纳所献。
现代文：群臣认为伏连筹受命不恭敬，不应接受他进献的物品。
English: The courtiers thought that Fulian was disrespectful and should not accept the items he offered.

古文：帝曰： 拜受失礼，乃可加以诘责。
现代文：孝文帝说： 拜受有失节，可加以责问。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "If there is a lapse of propriety in obeying and receiving, it can be reprimanded.

古文：所献土毛，乃是臣之常道。
现代文：进献土毛，是做臣下的常道。
English: It is a common practice for a vassal to donate soil and hair.

古文：杜弃所献，便是绝之，纵欲改悔，其路无由矣。 
现代文：拒绝所献，就是和他断绝，即使想让他改悔，他的通路也没有来由了。 
English: To refuse what is offered is to break with him, and even if you want him to repent, there is no reason for his path.

古文：诏曰： 朕在哀疚之中，未存征讨。
现代文：下诏说： 朕在哀痛内疚，未有征讨之心。
English: The next edict said: "I am wracked with grief and guilt, and I have no desire to fight.

古文：而去春枹罕表取其洮阳、泥和二戍，时以此既边将之常，即便听许。
现代文：去年春天木包罕上表请求攻取洮阳、泥和两戍卫，当时认为这是边将的常事，立即依从准许。
English: In the spring of last year, Mubo Han made a request to capture Fenyang, Mude and the two guards on the table. At that time, he thought that this was a regular thing for the captain and immediately complied with the permission.

古文：及偏师致讨，二戍望风请降，执讯二千余人，又得妇女九百口。子妇可悉还之。 
现代文：在偏师征讨时，两戍卫听到风声请求投降，捉到并加以审讯的两千多人，又俘获妇女九百人，小孩子和妇女可全部放还。 
English: At the time of recruiting teachers, the two guards heard a rumor and asked for surrender. They caught and interrogated more than two thousand people, and captured another nine hundred women. The children and women could all be returned.

古文：伏连筹乃遣世子贺鲁头朝于京师。
现代文：伏连筹就派世子贺鲁头到京师朝见。
English: Fulianqiao sent his heir, Herutou, to see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：礼锡有加，拜伏连筹使持节、都督西垂诸军事、征西将军、领护西戎中郎将、西海郡开国公、吐谷浑王，麾旗章绶之饰，皆备给之。
现代文：礼赐有加，封伏连筹为使持节、都督西垂诸军事、征西将军、领护西戎中郎将、西海郡开国公、吐谷浑王，麾旗章绶饰物，都全数给予。
English: They were all given gifts, including the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, the bestowal of gifts, and the bestowal of gifts.

古文：后遣兼员外散骑常侍张礼使于伏连筹。
现代文：后来派兼员外散骑常侍张礼出使到伏连筹处。
English: Later, he sent Zhang Li, a part-time non-commissioned officer and horseback rider, as an envoy to the Fulian Raising Office.

古文：谓礼曰： 昔与宕昌通和，恆见称大王，己则自有兴动，殊违臣节。
现代文：伏连筹对张礼说 ：以前和宕昌交好，经常被称为大王，自己则称名。现忽然被称为仆，并且拘禁这个使节。
English: Fulianqiao said to Zhang Lili, "In the past, he was friendly with Gaochang, and was often called the great king, but he called himself by his own name. Now, he is suddenly called a servant, and this envoy is under arrest."

古文：当发之日，宰辅以为君若返迷知罪，则克保蕃业；脱守愚不改，则祸难将至。 
现代文：将要命偏师，去问什么意思。 张礼说： 君和宕昌都是魏的藩国，却屡次有所动作，很违背做臣下的节操。正当发兵之时，宰辅认为君如返迷知罪，就能保守藩业；如守愚不改，那灾祸即将到来。 
English: Zhang Li said: You and Tangchang are both Wei's domains, but you have repeatedly made moves that are contrary to the discipline of being a vassal. When it was time to send troops, Zaisuke thought that if you return to your sins, you will be able to preserve the domain; if you do not change, the disaster is coming.

古文：伏连筹遂默然。
现代文：伏连筹于是沉默了。
English: Fulian then fell silent.

古文：及孝文崩，遣使赴哀，尽其诚敬。
现代文：到孝文帝驾崩，伏连筹派使者赴哀，竭力说自己的诚敬之心。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen passed away, Fulian sent an envoy to mourn, trying his best to express his sincerity.

古文：伏连筹内修职贡，外并戎狄，塞表之中，号为强富。
现代文：伏连筹对内整治职贡，对外兼并戎狄。在塞外之中号称强富。
English: Fulian raised the internal rectification duty tribute, and merged with the external military tributes. He was known as a strong rich man outside the country.

古文：准拟天朝，树置官司，称制诸国，以自夸大。
现代文：比拟天朝，设置官员有司，对各国行使皇帝权力，自我夸大。
English: Comparing it to the Heavenly Dynasty, setting up officials with titles, exercising imperial power over all countries, and self-aggrandizement.

古文：宣武初，诏责之曰： 梁州表送卿报宕昌书。
现代文：宣武初，下诏谴责他说： 梁州上表送来卿给宕昌的书信。
English: At the beginning of the Xuanwu Emperor's reign, the following edict was issued condemning him: Liang Zhou sent a letter to Tang Chang.

古文：梁弥邕与卿并为边附，语其国则邻籓，论其位则同列，而称书为表，名报为旨。
现代文：梁弥邕与卿均是边附，说到那个国家是邻藩，论到它的地位是同列，却把书称为表，把答复称作旨。
English: Both Liang Mijun and Xing are side-by-side, when it comes to that country being a neighboring domain, when it comes to its status being on the same level, but they call the book a table and the answer a gong.

古文：有司以国常刑，殷勤请讨。
现代文：有司按国家制定的刑罚，恳切请求讨伐。
English: A magistrate has made a heartfelt plea for a crackdown on the country's draconian punishments.

古文：朕虑险远多虞，轻相构惑，故先宣此意，善自三思。 
现代文：朕考虑到险远多忧，容易造成疑惑，所以先宣示此意，你自己好好考虑。 
English: Considering that the danger is far-reaching and worrisome, it is easy to cause doubts, so declare this intention first, and think about it yourself.

古文：伏连筹上表自申，辞诚恳至。
现代文：伏连筹上表申述自己的意思，词语诚恳至极。
English: Fulian went up to the table to express his thoughts, and his words were extremely sincere.

古文：终宣武世至于正光，嫠牛、蜀马及西南之珍，无岁不至。
现代文：终宣武世到正光，牦牛、蜀马和西南的珍宝，无一年不送。
English: In the end, the declaration of the martial world to Zhengguang, yakitori, Shuma and the treasures of the southwest, no one year does not send.

古文：后秦州城人莫折念生反，河西路绝。
现代文：后来秦州城人莫折念生反叛，河西的道路断绝。
English: Later, the citizens of Qinzhou rebelled, and the road to Hexi was cut off.

古文：凉州城人万于菩提等东应念生，囚刺史宋颖。
现代文：凉州城人万于菩提等人在东面响应莫折念生，囚禁刺史宋颖。
English: The citizens of Liangzhou City, such as Wan Yu Bodhi and others, responded in the east to the relentless pursuit of education by imprisoning Song Ying.

古文：颖密遣求援于伏连筹，伏连筹亲率大众救之，遂获保全。
现代文：宋颖秘密派人向伏连筹求援，伏连筹亲自率领大军救援，因此获得保全。
English: Song Ying secretly sent someone to seek help from Fu Lian Che, who personally led a large army to the rescue, and was thus saved.

古文：自尔以后，关徼不通，贡献遂绝。
现代文：自此以后，关口边界不通，贡献于是也断绝了。
English: Since then, the border crossing has been impassable, and the contribution has been cut off.

古文：伏连筹死，子夸吕立，始自号为可汗。
现代文：伏连筹死了，儿子夸吕立，开始自称为可汗。
English: After the death of Fulian, his son, Kuo Luling, began to call himself a khan.

古文：居伏俟城，在青海西十五里。
现代文：生活在伏俟城，在青海西边十五里。
English: He lives in Fuxi City, 15 miles west of Qinghai.

古文：虽有城郭而不居，恆处穹庐，随水草畜牧。
现代文：虽有城郭却不居住，常常住在穹庐中，追随水草畜牧。
English: Although they have a castle, they don't live there. They often live in caves and follow the herds and flocks.

古文：其地，东西三千里，南北千余里。
现代文：那个地方东西三千里，南北千余里。
English: That place is 3,000 miles from east to west and more than 1,000 miles from north to south.

古文：官有王、公、仆射、尚书及郎中、将军之号。
现代文：官吏有王、公、仆射、尚书和郎中、将军等称号。
English: Government officials had titles such as king, duke, vassal, secretary, lieutenant, and general.

古文：夸吕椎髻毦珠，以皁为帽，坐金狮子床。号其妻为母尊，衣织成裙，披锦大袍，辫发于后，首戴金花冠。
现代文：夸吕有形状如椎的一撮之髻，有羽毛装饰的珠子，用黑色丝织品做帽子，坐金狮子床，给他妻子加称号为母尊，穿彩帛做成的裙子，披锦制的大袍，头发辫成辫子垂在后边，头戴金花冠。
English: He has a pinch of beak in the shape of a vertebra, beads decorated with feathers, a hat made of black silk fabric, sits on a golden lion bed, gives his wife the title of mother, wears a skirt made of colored satin, a robe made of brocade, hair braided into braids hanging behind, and a golden crown on his head.

古文：其俗：丈夫衣服略同于华夏，多以罗冪为冠，亦以缯为帽；妇人皆贯珠贝，束发，以多为贵。
现代文：他们的风俗：男人的衣服和华夏大致相同，多用罗巾做冠，也用缯做帽；妇人都穿连珠贝，束发，以多为贵。
English: Their customs: men's clothing is roughly the same as that of China, with the crown mostly made of a shawl, and the cap also made of a skullcap; the women all wear pearl necklaces and bunched hair, with the more the better.

古文：兵器有弓、刀甲、鞘。
现代文：兵器有弓、刀、甲、矛。
English: Weapons include bows, swords, armor, and spears.

古文：国无常赋，须则税富室商人以充用焉。
现代文：国家没有固定的赋税，需要时就向富室商人征税来充实国用。
English: The state does not have a fixed tax, and when necessary, it will tax the rich merchants to enrich the state.

古文：其刑罚：杀人及盗马，死；余则征物以赎罪，亦量事决杖。
现代文：他们的刑罚：杀人和盗马，死罪；其他的则征收物品来赎罪，也度量事情轻重判决杖刑。
English: Their punishments: murder and horse-stealing, capital punishment; others collect goods to atone for their sins, and also weigh things and sentence them to the cane.

古文：刑人必以氈蒙头，持石从高击之。
现代文：对人施死刑必须用毡子蒙头，拿石头从高处击打。
English: To execute someone, you have to cover their head with a pair of pliers and hit them with a rock from a high place.

古文：父兄死，妻后母及嫂等，与突厥俗同。
现代文：父兄死了，可娶后母及嫂子为妻等，和突厥风俗相同。
English: If one's father or brother dies, one may marry one's stepmother and sister-in-law, etc. This is the same as the Turkish custom.

古文：至于婚，贫不能备财者，辄盗女去。
现代文：至于婚娶，贫穷不能准备财礼的人，就盗走那个女人。
English: As for marriage, if a poor man cannot afford a bride-price, he steals the woman.

古文：死者亦皆埋殡，其服制，葬讫则除之。
现代文：死去的人也都殡埋，他们服丧的丧服，在下葬结束时就去掉。
English: The dead are also buried, and the mourning clothes they wear are removed at the end of the funeral.

古文：性贪婪，忍于杀害。
现代文：性格贪婪，忍心杀害。
English: He is greedy and has the heart to kill.

古文：好射猎，以肉酪为粮。
现代文：喜好射猎，用肉、酪当粮食。
English: He likes to shoot and hunt, using meat and cheese as food.

古文：亦知种田，有大麦、粟、豆。然其北界气候多寒，唯得芜青、大麦，故其俗贫多富少。
现代文：也懂得种田，有大麦、菽、豆，可北界气候多寒，只能种芜菁、大麦，因此土俗贫多富少。
English: They also know how to farm, they have barley, millet and beans, but the northern region has a cold climate, they can only grow turnips and barley, so the local people are more or less poor.

古文：青海周回千余里，海内有小山。
现代文：青海周围千余里，海内有小山。
English: There are more than a thousand miles around Qinghai, and there are small mountains in the sea.

古文：每冬冰合后，以良牝马置此山，至来春收之，马皆有孕，所生得驹，号为龙种，必多骏异。
现代文：每到冬天结冰后，把良牝马放置此山，到来年春天收回，马都有孕，所生的马驹，号称是龙种，肯定多骏异之马。
English: Every winter, after the ice has frozen, the good horses are put on this mountain and taken back in the spring of the coming year. The horses are pregnant, and the foals born, known as dragon species, are certainly very different horses.

古文：吐谷浑尝得波斯草马，放入海，因生骢驹，能日行千里，世传青海骢者也。
现代文：吐谷浑曾得到波斯的草马，放到海中，因而生下青白色马驹，能日行千里，这就是世人所传的青海骢。
English: Tu Gu Hun once got a Persian horse and placed it in the sea, thus giving birth to a blue-white foal, which can travel thousands of miles a day. This is the world-famous Qinghai foal.

古文：土出牛、马、骡，多鹦鹉，饶铜、铁、硃砂。
现代文：当地出产牦牛、马骡，多鹦鹉，铜、铁、朱砂丰富。
English: The local production of yakitori, horse mackerel, parrots, copper, iron and cinnabar are abundant.

古文：地兼鄯善、且末。
现代文：地尽善阝善、且末。
English: All good things come to an end.

古文：兴和中，齐神武作相，招怀荒远，蠕蠕既附于国，夸吕遣使致敬。
现代文：兴和年间，齐神武作相，招徕怀柔荒远之国，蠕蠕已经归附国家，夸吕派使者表达敬意。
English: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, Qi Shenwu made an appearance, inviting Huairou, a faraway country, which had already been annexed by the state, to send an envoy to express his respect.

古文：神武喻以大义，征其朝贡，夸吕乃遣使人赵吐骨真假道蠕蠕，频来东魏。又荐其从妹，静帝纳以为嫔。
现代文：神武晓谕大义，接受朝见进贡，夸吕就派使者赵吐骨真借路蠕蠕，频繁来到东魏，又举荐他的从妹，孝静帝收纳为嫔。
English: After receiving a tribute from the imperial court, the emperor sent an envoy, Zhao Tu Bozhen, who frequently visited the Eastern Wei Dynasty and recommended his younger sister, Emperor Xiaozhing, to accept the tribute.

古文：遣员外散骑常侍傅灵檦使于其国。
现代文：帝派员外散骑常侍傅灵木剽出使到那个国家。
English: The emperor dispatched the imperial equerry Fu Lingmu to the country.

古文：夸吕又请婚，乃以济南王匡孙女为广乐公主以妻之。
现代文：夸吕又求婚，就让济南王匡的孙女作为广乐公主嫁他为妻。
English: When he proposed marriage again, he asked the granddaughter of Jinan Wang Kuang to marry him as the Guangle Princess.

古文：此后朝贡不绝。
现代文：此后朝见进贡不断。
English: Since then, the Imperial Court has continued to pay tribute.

古文：西魏大统初，周文遣仪同潘濬喻以逆顺之理，于是夸吕再遣使献能舞马及羊、牛等。
现代文：西魏大统初，周文派仪同潘浚晓谕逆顺的道理，于是夸吕再次派使者献上能舞蹈的马和羊、牛等。
English: At the beginning of the Western Wei Dynasties, Zhou Wen sent an envoy with Pan Jun to explain the principle of reversing the order of succession, so Guo Lu once again sent an envoy to present horses, sheep, and cattle that could dance.

古文：然寇抄不已，缘边多被其害。
现代文：可是破坏掠夺不停，沿边地区多受其害。
English: However, the destruction and looting continued, and the areas along the border suffered the most.

古文：废帝二年，周文勒大兵至姑臧，夸吕震惧，使贡方物。
现代文：废帝二年，周文率领大军到达姑臧，夸吕惊恐，派人进贡地方物产。
English: Two years after the dethronement of the emperor, Zhou Wen led a large army to arrive at Guzheng, and, alarmed, sent people to pay tribute to local products.

古文：是岁，夸吕又通使于齐。
现代文：这年，夸吕又和齐通使。
English: This year, Kauru and Qi Tong also sent envoys.

古文：凉州刺史史宁觇知其还，袭之于州西赤泉，获其仆射乞伏触状、将军翟潘密，商胡二百四十人，驼骡六百头，杂彩丝绢以万计。
现代文：凉州刺史史宁侦察得知他回返，在州西赤泉袭击了他，俘获他的仆射乞伏触状、将军翟潘密，经商胡人二百四十人，驼骡六百头，杂彩丝绢数以万计。
English: The reconnaissance team of Liangzhou Jishi Shining learned of his return, and attacked him in the west of the state in Akizumi, capturing his minion, the general Zou Panmi, 240 merchants, 600 camels, and tens of thousands of variegated silk cocoons.

古文：恭帝三年，史宁又与突厥木杆可汗袭击夸吕，破之，虏其妻子，获珍物及杂畜。
现代文：恭帝三年，史宁又和突厥木杆可汗袭击夸吕，打败了他，俘获他的妻子儿女，缴获珍稀物品和杂畜。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Gong, Shining and the Turk Muxu Khan attacked Qualu, defeated him, captured his wife and children, and seized rare goods and livestock.

古文：武成初，夸吕复寇凉州，刺史是云宝战没。
现代文：武成初，夸吕又侵犯凉州，刺史是云宝战死。
English: At the beginning of the Wucheng period, the Kwalu invaded Liangzhou again, and Gu Shi was killed in the battle.

古文：贺兰祥、宇文贵率兵讨之，夸吕遣其广定王、锺留王拒战。
现代文：贺兰祥、宇文贵率兵马讨伐，夸吕派他的广定王、钟留王迎战。
English: Horan Xiang and Uwen Gui led the soldiers and horses to fight, and Kwalu sent his Guangding King and Zhongliu King to fight.

古文：祥等破之，广定等遁走。
现代文：贺兰祥等人打败了他们，广定王等逃走。
English: He Lanxiang and others defeated them, and Guangding Wang and others fled.

古文：又拔其洮阳、洪和二城，置洮州而还。
现代文：又攻陷洮阳、洪和二城，设置洮州后还师。
English: He also captured Shenyang, Honghe and two cities, and set up a division in Zhangzhou.

古文：保定中，夸吕前后三辈遣使献方物。
现代文：保定年间，夸吕前后三代派使者进献地方物产。
English: During the Baoding period, the three generations before and after the Kwalu sent emissaries to present local products.

古文：天和初，其龙涸王莫昌率来降，以其地为扶州。
现代文：天和初，他的龙涸王莫昌率众来降，把他的地盘作为扶州。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, his dragon, King Mochang, led his people to come down and claim his territory as Fuzhou.

古文：二年五月，复遣使来献。
现代文：二年五月，又派使者来进献。
English: In May of the following year, an envoy was sent to present the offering.

古文：建德五年，其国大乱，武帝诏皇太子征之。
现代文：建德五年，那个国家大乱，武帝诏令皇太子征讨。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, when the country was in turmoil, Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering the crown prince to investigate.

古文：军至伏俟城，夸吕遁走，虏其余众而还。
现代文：军队到达伏俟城，夸吕逃走，俘获其余部众而返。
English: The army arrived at Fuxi City, QuLu fled, captured the rest of the troops and returned.

古文：明年，又再遣使奉献。
现代文：第二年，又再派使者奉献。
English: The following year, he again sent an emissary to make the offering.

古文：宣政初，其赵王他娄屯来降。
现代文：宣政初，他的赵王他娄屯前来归降。
English: At the beginning of the proclamation of political power, his Zhao Wang Tat Yutong came to surrender.

古文：自是，朝献遂绝。
现代文：从此朝见进献就断绝了。
English: Since then, the morning offering has been discontinued.

古文：及隋开皇初，侵弘州，地旷人梗，废之。
现代文：到隋开皇初，侵犯弘州，土地空阔，人烟阻塞，废弃了它。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, it was invaded by Hongzhou, the land was empty, the people were clogged, and it was abandoned.

古文：遣上柱国元谐率步骑数万击之。
现代文：帝派上柱国元谐率领步骑数万攻打它。
English: The emperor sent tens of thousands of cavalrymen to attack it, led by Kunimoto.

古文：贼悉发国中，自曼头至树敦，甲骑不绝。
现代文：贼寇征发全体国人，从曼头到树敦，甲骑不断。
English: Thieves and bandits conscripted and dispatched the entire population of the country, from Mandou to Shudong.

古文：其所署河西总管定城王钟利房及其太子可博汗前后来拒战，谐频破之。
现代文：他所布置的河西总管定城王钟利房和他的太子可博汗先后来迎战，元谐先后打败他们。
English: He arranged the Hexi Chief Administrator Dingcheng Wang Zhong Lifang and his prince Kobo Khan to fight one after another, and the Yuan Dynasty defeated them one after another.

古文：夸吕大惧，率亲兵远遁，其名王十三人召率部落而降。上以其高宁王移兹裒素得众心，拜大将军，封河南王，以统降众。
现代文：夸吕大为惊惧，率领亲兵远远地逃走了。他们中有名的王十三人召回并率领部落来归降，皇上因其中的高宁王移兹良裒平素得众人之心，封为大将军、河南王，统率降众。
English: The emperor was greatly alarmed and led his soldiers to flee far away. Among them, the famous thirteen kings were recalled and led the tribe to surrender. The emperor won the hearts of the people because one of them, King Gao Ning, moved to Ziliang and became the king of Henan. He led the troops to surrender.

古文：自余官赏各有差。
现代文：其余官员赏赐各有不同。
English: The rest of the officials received different rewards.

古文：未几，复来寇边，州刺史皮子信拒战死之。
现代文：不久，又来侵犯边关，州刺史皮子信迎战而死。
English: Not long after, they invaded the border again, and the prefectural governor, Shishi Zixin, was killed in the fighting.

古文：汶州总管梁远以锐卒击之，乃奔退。
现代文：汶州总管梁远率精锐士卒打击他们，这才逃回。
English: Liang Yuan, the governor of Wenzhou, led the elite soldiers to fight them, but they fled back.

古文：俄而入寇廓州，州兵击走之。
现代文：不久又进犯廓州，廓州兵马打跑了他们。
English: Soon after, they invaded Gushu, and the Gushu soldiers and horses drove them away.

古文：夸吕在位百年，屡因喜怒废杀太子。
现代文：夸吕在位百年，屡次因为喜怒废黜杀掉太子。
English: He reigned for a hundred years and killed the crown prince many times out of anger and joy.

古文：其后太子惧杀，遂谋执夸吕而降，请兵于边吏。
现代文：后来太子惧怕被杀，于是就谋划抓住夸吕而归降，向边关官吏请求发兵。
English: Later, the prince was afraid of being killed, so he plotted to capture Kwalu and surrender, and asked the border officials to send troops.

古文：秦州总管河间王计应之，上不许。
现代文：秦州总管河间王打算答应他，皇上不准。
English: Qin State Governor Kawama Wang intended to agree to this, but the Emperor would not allow it.

古文：太子谋泄，为其父所杀。
现代文：太子的谋划泄露，被他父亲杀掉。
English: The prince's plan was discovered and he was killed by his father.

古文：复立少子嵬王诃为太子。
现代文：又立小儿子嵬王诃为太子。
English: He also appointed his youngest son, Wang Quanzhang, as crown prince.

古文：叠州刺史杜祭请因其衅讨之，上又不许。
现代文：叠州刺史杜祭请求借其挑衅之机讨伐他，皇上又不准。
English: The Emperor did not approve of the request of the chief priest of the State of Meizhou to use his provocation as an opportunity to fight him.

古文：六年，嵬王诃复惧父诛，谋归国，请兵迎接。
现代文：六年，嵬王诃又惧怕他父亲杀他，谋划归国，请求派兵迎接。
English: Six years later, Shao Wangtao, fearing that his father would kill him, planned to return to China and requested that soldiers be sent to meet him.

古文：上谓其使者曰： 溥天之下，皆是朕臣妾，各为善事，即朕称心。
现代文：皇上对使者说 ：普天之下，都是朕的臣下，各自做好事，就是朕称心之事。
English: The emperor said to the envoy: All over the world, all are my vassals. If each of them does a good deed, that is what I am proud of.

古文：嵬王既有好意，欲来投服，唯教嵬王为臣子法，不可远遣兵马，助为恶事。 
现代文：嵬王既有好意，想来投归服从。要教给嵬王做臣子的方法，不能从远方派遣兵马，帮助去做坏事。 
English: To teach the king how to be a vassal, you can't send soldiers and horses from afar to help him do bad things.

古文：嵬王乃止。
现代文：嵬王于是就停止不做了。
English: So he stopped doing it.

古文：八年，其名王拓拔木弥请以千余家归化。
现代文：八年，名王拓拔木弥请求率千余家归化。
English: In eight years, the request rate for naturalization of more than a thousand families has increased.

古文：上曰： 叛天背父，何可收纳！
现代文：皇上说 ：叛天背父，怎么可以收纳？
English: The emperor said, "How can I accept someone who has betrayed his father?

古文：又其本意，正自避死，若今违拒，又复不仁。
现代文：而且他的本意正是避死，现在若拒绝又是不仁。
English: Moreover, his intention was to avoid death, and now it would be cruel to refuse.

古文：若有音信，宜遣慰抚，任其自拔，不须出兵马应接。
现代文：如有音信，应该派人抚慰，听任他主动摆脱，不必派兵马接应。
English: If there is news, someone should be sent to comfort him and let him take the initiative to get rid of it. There is no need to send soldiers and horses to meet him.

古文：其妹夫及甥欲来，亦任其意，不劳劝诱也。 
现代文：他的妹夫和外甥想来，也听从他们的意见，无须鼓励诱导。 
English: His brother-in-law and nephew want to come, and he listens to them, and doesn't have to encourage them.

古文：是岁，河南王移兹裒死，文帝令其弟树归袭统其众。
现代文：这年，河南王移兹裒死了，文帝令他弟弟树归承袭部众。
English: In the same year, the King of Henan died, and Emperor Wen made his younger brother Shu succeed him.

古文：平陈之后，夸吕大惧，逃遁险远，不敢为寇。
现代文：平定陈以后，夸吕大为惊惧，逃往险远的地方，不敢再做贼寇。
English: After subduing Chen, Kauru was greatly alarmed and fled to a faraway place, not daring to be a bandit again.

古文：十一年，夸吕卒，子世伏使其兄子无素奉表称籓，并献方物，请以女备后庭。
现代文：十一年，夸吕死了，儿子世伏派他的侄子无素上表称藩，并进献地方物产，请求让女儿在后庭充数。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, when Koryu died, his son Shibushi sent his nephew Muzo to formally claim the domain, and he offered local products and asked his daughter to fill the number in the backyard.

古文：上谓无素曰： 若依来请，他国便当相学，一许一塞，是谓不平。
现代文：皇上对无素说： 若依从上表请求，其他国家就会效仿，一个准许一个拒绝，这就是不平。
English: The emperor said to Wuzong: If you comply with the above request, other countries will follow suit. One will grant and one will refuse. This is unfair.

古文：若并许之，又非好法。 
现代文：如都准许，又不是好办法。 
English: If everything is permitted, it's not a good idea.

古文：竟不许。
现代文：最终没有准许。
English: In the end, Taizong was not allowed to compile the anthology.

古文：十一年，遣刑部尚书宇文弼抚慰之。
现代文：十一年派刑部尚书文瞖抚慰他。
English: In the eleventh year, the criminal department sent Shang Shumwen to soothe him.

古文：十六年，以光化公主妻世伏，上表称公主为天后，上不许。
现代文：十六年，让光化公主嫁世伏为妻，世伏上表要称公主为天后，皇上不准。
English: Sixteen years later, the emperor did not allow Princess Guanghua to marry Shifu as his wife. Shifu wanted to call the princess the Queen of Heaven.

古文：明年，其国大乱，国人杀世伏，立其弟伏允为主。
现代文：第二年，那个国家大乱，国人杀掉世伏，立他弟弟伏允为首领。
English: The next year, the country was in turmoil. The local people killed Shifu and made his brother Fuxun the leader.

古文：使陈废立事，并谢专命罪，且请依俗尚主，上从之。
现代文：使者陈述废立的事情，并为不请命而行事来谢罪，并请求依从习俗娶公主为妻，皇上准许。
English: The messenger reported the annulment, apologized for acting without orders, and requested the emperor's permission to marry the princess according to custom.

古文：自是朝贡岁至，而常访国家消息，上甚恶之。
现代文：从此每年朝见进贡，但是常常探询国家消息，皇上特厌恶他。
English: From then on, he paid tribute to the Imperial Court every year, but often inquired about national news. The Emperor particularly disliked him.

古文：炀帝即位，伏允遣子顺来朝。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，伏允派儿子顺来朝见。
English: Emperor Sui and Qian ascended to the throne, and Fu Yun sent his son to see the emperor.

古文：时铁勒犯塞，帝遣将军冯孝慈出敦煌御之，战不利。
现代文：当时铁勒侵犯边塞，帝派将军冯孝慈出兵敦煌抵御，铁勒作战失利，派使者谢罪请降。
English: At that time, Tiele violated the border fortress, the emperor sent General Feng Xiao Ci to Dunhuang to resist, Tiele lost the battle, and sent an envoy to Xie Sin to ask for surrender.

古文：铁勒遣使谢罪请降，帝遣黄门侍郎裴矩慰抚之，讽令击吐谷浑以自效。
现代文：帝派黄门侍郎裴矩抚慰他们，婉言让他攻击吐谷浑来表示愿为皇上贡献自己的力量。
English: The emperor sent the Yellow Gate chamberlain, Pei Neng, to soothe them, and gently asked him to attack Tuya Hunla to express his willingness to contribute his strength to the emperor.

古文：铁勒即勒兵袭破吐谷浑，伏允东走，保西平境。帝复令观德王雄出浇河，许公宇文述出西平掩之，大破其众。
现代文：铁勒立即带兵袭击、打败了吐谷浑，伏允东逃，守卫西平境内，帝又令观德王雄出兵浇河，许公宇文述出兵西平偷袭，大败敌众。
English: Tiler immediately led the troops to attack and defeat Tuyugun, Fuyun fled east and guarded the territory of Xiping. The emperor also ordered Guan Dewangxiong to send troops to pour the river, and Xu Gongwu Wenshu sent soldiers to attack Xiping, and defeated the enemy.

古文：伏允遁逃于山谷间，其故地皆空。
现代文：伏允逃跑到山谷中间，他的故地都空无一人。
English: Fuxiong fled to the middle of the valley, leaving his hometown empty.

古文：自西平临羌城以西，且末以东，祁连以南，雪山以北，东西四千里，南北二千里皆为隋有。
现代文：从西平临羌城以西，且末以东，祁连以南，雪山以北，东西四千里，南北二千里都被隋朝占有。
English: From Xiping to the west of Linyi City, and finally to the east, to the south of Qilian, to the north of the Snow Mountain, four thousand miles from east to west, and two thousand miles from north to south were occupied by the Sui Dynasty.

古文：置郡、县、镇、戍，发天下轻罪徙居之。
现代文：设置郡、县、镇、戍，征发天下轻罪之人迁徙居住这里。
English: Set up counties, counties, towns, and counties, and collect and issue the world's misdemeanors to migrate and live here.

古文：于是留顺不之遣。伏允无以自资，率其徒数千骑，客于党项。
现代文：于是留下顺不让回还，伏允没有了资助力量，率徒众数千骑，客居党项。
English: As a result, Shun was left behind and was not allowed to return, and Fu Yun did not have the power to provide financial support. He led thousands of followers on horseback and became a guest of the party.

古文：帝立顺为主，送出玉门，令统余众，以其大宝王泥洛周为辅。
现代文：帝立顺为首领，送出玉门，命他统率剩余部众，让大宝王泥洛周作辅助。
English: Dili Shun was the leader, sent out Yumen, ordered him to lead the remaining followers, and let Dabao Wang Deluo Zhou serve as an assistant.

古文：至西平，其部下杀洛周，顺不果入而还。
现代文：到西平，他的部下杀死泥洛周，顺终于没有进入而返回。
English: To Xiping, his subordinates killed Di Luo Zhou, Shun finally did not enter and returned.

古文：大业末，天下乱，伏允复其故地，屡寇河右，郡县不能制。
现代文：大业末年，天下大乱，伏允收复了他的故地，屡次进犯河右，郡县不能遏制。
English: At the end of the Taiei era, the world was in turmoil. Fu Yun recovered his hometown and repeatedly attacked the right side of the river. The county could not contain him.

