古文：苌从简，陈州人也。
现代文：苌从简，陈州人。
English: From Jane, a native of Chenzhou.

古文：世以屠羊为业，力敌数人，善用槊。
现代文：世代以宰羊为业，力气胜过几个人，善于使用长槊。
English: He has been slaughtering sheep for generations. He is stronger than several people and is good at using a long hoe.

古文：初事后唐庄宗为小校，每遇攻城，召人为梯头，从简多应募焉，庄宗为其勇，擢领帐前亲卫兼步军都指挥使。
现代文：开始时事奉后唐庄宗担任小校，每当碰上攻城，召人搭人梯，苌从简总是应召，庄宗认为他勇敢，提拔他统领帐前亲军卫士兼步军都指挥使。
English: At the beginning, Zhuangzong served as a schoolmaster. Whenever there was a siege of the city, Zhuangzong would call for reinforcements. Zhuangzong thought he was brave and promoted him to be the commander of the front guard and the commander of the infantry.

古文：一日，庄宗领大军与梁军对阵，登高丘而坐，敌人有执大帜扬其武者，庄宗指之谓左右曰： 猛士也。 
现代文：一天，庄宗统领大军与梁朝军队对阵，登上高丘坐观战况，敌军中有位挥舞着大旗耀武扬威，庄宗指着对左右说： 这才是猛士啊。 
English: One day, Zhuang Zong led a large army to fight against the Liang Dynasty army. He climbed a hill to watch the battle. One of the enemy troops waved a big flag to show off his military prowess. Zhuang Zong pointed to the left and right and said: This is a warrior.

古文：从简曰： 臣为大王取之。 
现代文：苌从简说 ：我替大王去抓来。 
English: Zou Congjian said, "I'll go and catch the crocodile for the great king."

古文：庄宗虑其不捷，不许。
现代文：庄宗怕他不能获胜，没有答应。
English: Zhuang Zong was afraid that he could not win, so he did not agree.

古文：从简退，乃潜领十数骑挺身而入，夺帜以归，万众鼓噪，庄宗壮之，锡赉甚厚。
现代文：苌从简退下来，便暗地里带着十几个骑兵挺身而出，夺得敌旗而回，万众欢呼呐喊，庄宗认为他勇壮，赏赐物品很是丰厚。
English: After retreating from Jian, he secretly advanced with a dozen cavalrymen, captured the enemy flag and returned. Everyone cheered and shouted. Zhuangzong thought he was brave, and the rewards were very rich.

古文：又尝中箭而镞入于骨，使医工出之，以刃凿骨，恐其痛也，良久未能摇动。
现代文：他曾经被箭射中，箭镞射进骨头之中，医工为他取出箭镞时，要用刀凿击骨头，担心他疼痛难忍，好久不敢动作。
English: He was once shot by an arrow, the quiver shot into the bone. When the medical worker removed the quiver for him, he had to chisel the bone with a knife. He was afraid of the unbearable pain and did not dare to move for a long time.

古文：从简嗔目谓曰： 何不沈凿？ 
现代文：苌从简目对医工说 ：为什么不重重地凿？ 
English: Gao Jianme said to the medical worker: Why don't you chisel more and more?

古文：洎出之，左右无不恻然，从简颜色自若，其勇壮皆此类也。
现代文：取出箭镞之后，左右人等无不心惊，而苌从简脸色自如，他的勇壮便是这样。
English: After taking out the quiver, people on both sides were shocked, but the quiver was at ease, and his bravery was like this.

古文：从简所为多不法，庄宗以其战斗多捷，常屈法赦之。赐姓，名曰绍琼。
现代文：苌从简做事多行不法，庄宗因他屡立战功，经常屈法赦免他，赐给李姓，赐名绍琼。
English: Zhuang Zong, because of his repeated military exploits, often forgave him, gave him the surname Li, and gave him the name Shao Qiong.

古文：后加竭诚匡国功臣，累官至金紫光禄大夫、检校太保、景州刺史，历洺州团练使。
现代文：后又加封竭诚匡国功臣名号，历官至金紫光禄大夫、检校太保、景州刺史，历任氵名州团练使。
English: Later, he was also awarded the title of Zensheng Kuangguo National Meritorious Servant, and his officials went as far as the Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, the School Inspector, the Jingzhou Historian, and the successive members of the Jingmeizhou Rehearsal Group.

古文：《北梦琐言》云：明宗尤恶贪货，面戒汝州刺史苌从简，为其贪暴。
现代文：当梁朝建立后，主管蔡州。同光四年，任许州节度使，遇上庄宗去世，没来得及赴任而作罢。
English: When the Liang Dynasty was established, Cai Zhou Tongguang, who had been in charge for four years, was appointed as the delegate to the Xuzhou Festival. However, when Zhuang Zong died, he resigned before he could take up the post.

古文：应顺初，举军伐凤翔，从简亦预其行，会军变，乃东还。
现代文：明宗即位，仍旧恢复他的本姓，历任麟、汝、汾、金四州刺史。应顺初年，朝廷起兵讨伐凤翔，苌从简也参与了这次行动，碰上军队发生变故，便向东返回。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he still resumed his original surname, and successively Rin, Ru, Zi, and Jin were appointed as the four provincial governors. In the first year of He Shun, the imperial court raised an army to fight Fengxiang, and Zi Congjian also participated in this action. When the army encountered a change of fortune, he returned to the east.

古文：道遇张廷蕴，为廷蕴所执，送于末帝。
现代文：在途中遇上张廷蕴，被张廷蕴抓获，送给唐末帝处罚。
English: On the way, he met Zhang Tingyun, was captured by Zhang Tingyun, and sent to the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty for punishment.

古文：末帝数之曰： 人皆归我，尔何背我而去也？ 
现代文：末帝指责他说 ：大家都归服我，你为什么背叛我离去？ 
English: The last emperor accused him, saying, "Everyone has submitted to me. Why did you betray me and leave?"

古文：从简曰： 事主不敢二心，今日死生惟命。 
现代文：苌从简说： 服事君主不敢有二心，今天生死唯命是从。 
English: Zou Congjian said, "If you serve the monarch, you dare not have two hearts. Today, you have to follow orders.

古文：末帝释之。
现代文：末帝释放了他。
English: The late emperor released him.

古文：清泰二年，授颍州团练使。
现代文：清泰二年，任颍州团练使。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as the training envoy of the Bozhou Regiment.

古文：高祖举义，末帝将议亲征，诏赴阙，充副招讨使，随驾至孟津，除河阳节度使。
现代文：晋高祖反抗朝廷时，末帝将商讨亲征事宜，诏令他回朝，任副招讨使，随末帝到达孟津，任河阳节度使。
English: When Emperor Gaozu rebelled against the imperial court, the last emperor would discuss the matter of the personal enlistment and ordered him to return to the imperial court to serve as the deputy enlistment envoy. The last emperor then arrived in Mengjin to serve as the Kheyang envoy.

古文：及赵延寿军败，断浮桥归洛，留从简守河阳。
现代文：当赵延寿军队战败，末帝毁断浮桥回到洛阳，留苌从简驻守河阳。
English: When Zhao Yanshou's army was defeated, the last emperor destroyed the pontoon bridge and returned to Luoyang, leaving Jian stationed in Heyang.

古文：高祖自北而至，从简察军情离散，遂渡河迎谒高祖。
现代文：晋高祖从北面来到，苌从简看到军心涣散，于是渡过黄河迎拜高祖。
English: Emperor Gaozong came from the north, and when he saw that the army was scattered, he crossed the Yellow River to greet Emperor Gaozong.

古文：天福元年十二月，授许州节度使，改赐推忠佐运保国功臣。
现代文：天福元年十二月，任许州节度使，改赐推忠佐运保国功臣。
English: In December of the first year of Tianfu, he was appointed as the envoy of the Xuzhou Festival, and was given the title of the loyal Sanyun National Hero.

古文：二年秋，移镇徐州。
现代文：二年秋天，移镇徐州。
English: In the autumn of the second year, it was moved to Xuzhou.

古文：三年，加开府仪同三司、检校太尉，进封开国公，食邑至一千五百户。
现代文：三年，加封开府仪同三司、检校太尉，进封开国公，食邑达到一千五百户。
English: In the third year, Kaifeng Kaifu Yi, together with the three departments and the inspector of the school, went to Kaifeng to open the country, and the food village reached 1,500 households.

古文：受代归阙，授左金吾卫上将军。
现代文：退职回到京城，任命为左金吾卫上将军。
English: He retired and returned to Beijing, where he was appointed General of the Left King's Guard.

古文：从简性忌刻而多疑，历州镇凡十余，所在竖棘于公署，才通人行，左右稍违足而忤，即加鞭笞，或至杀害，其意不可测，吏人皆侧行。
现代文：苌从简生性嫉妒刻薄而又猜忌多疑，历任十几个州镇，所任之所设立棘刺在公署两侧，仅让刚刚能通过行人，左右人等稍有违忤，就加以鞭打，或至被杀害，他的心意深不可测，官吏都小心翼翼地走路。
English: From the simple jealousy of a caustic and suspicious person, he has been appointed to more than a dozen counties and towns, and has set up thorns on both sides of the public office. He only allows pedestrians to pass, and those who are left and right to be whipped or killed if they have a slight violation. His mind is unfathomable, and officials are walking carefully.

古文：其烦苛暴虐，为武臣之最。
现代文：他的烦重苛政暴虐无比，为武臣之最。
English: He was the most troublesome, harsh and tyrannical of all the samurai.

古文：金海之任，居常悒悒不乐，至于捐馆。
现代文：六年秋天，随高祖幸临邺都，因病告假，不久在乡下去世，时年六十五岁。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year, Gao Zuoxing went to Lintu with Gao Zuoxing, took a leave of absence due to illness, and soon died in the countryside, at the age of sixty-five.

古文：刘处让，字德谦，沧州人也。
现代文：追赠太傅。刘处让，字德谦，沧州人。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu. Liu Shuzhen, also known as Deqian, was from Cangzhou.

古文：祖信，累赠太子少保。
现代文：祖父刘信，追赠太子少保。
English: His grandfather, Liu Xin, was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector.

古文：父喻，累赠太子少师。
现代文：父亲刘瑜，追赠太子少师。
English: His father, Liu Yu, bequeathed the crown prince to the young teacher.

古文：梁贞明初，张万进帅兗州，处让事之，为亲校。
现代文：后梁贞明初年，张万进统帅兖州，刘处让服侍他，担任亲校。
English: After Liang Zhenming's first year, Zhang Wanjin was the commander-in-chief of Luzhou, and Liu Shide let him serve him and served as the principal of the school.

古文：万进据城叛，梁遣大将刘鄩讨之。
现代文：张万进据城反叛时，后梁派大将刘寻阝讨伐他。
English: When Zhang Wanjin rebelled in the city, Hou Liang sent General Liu Xuan to fight him.

古文：时唐庄宗屯军于麻口渡，万进密遣处让乞师于庄宗，庄宗未即应之，乃于军门截耳曰： 主帅急难，使我告援，苟不得请，死亦何避。 
现代文：当时唐庄宗驻军在麻口渡，张万进秘密派刘处让向庄宗请求军队援救。
English: At that time, Tang Zhuangzong's troops were stationed in Mazgudu. Zhang Wanjin secretly sent Liu Shide to ask Zhuangzong for an army rescue.

古文：庄宗义之，将举兵渡河，俄闻城陷乃止。因以墨制授处让行台左骁卫将军，俄改客省副使。
现代文：庄宗没有马上答应他。他便在军门割下自己耳朵说 ：主帅处在危难之中，让我告请援救，如果不能请到援军，就是死又怎能回避。 庄宗认为他义气，准备率军渡河援救，突然听说城池已被攻破才作罢，因亲书诏令任刘处让为行台左骁卫将军，不久改任客省副使。
English: Zhuangzong did not immediately agree with him. He cut off his ear at the gate of the army and said, "The commander-in-chief is in danger. Let me call for help. If I cannot call for reinforcements, how can I avoid death?" Zhuangzong thought that he was a righteous man and prepared to lead the army to cross the river for rescue. He suddenly heard that the city had been breached, and only then did he give up. Because of his own written order, he appointed Liu to be the general of the left guard of Xingtai, and soon became the deputy envoy of Hakka Province.

古文：梁平，加检校兵部尚书，累将命称旨。
现代文：后梁平定后，刘处让加封检校兵部尚书，多次领兵都符合皇帝意旨。
English: After Liang was subdued, Liu ordered the military department of Jafeng to inspect the school, and many times the soldiers were in line with the emperor's intention.

古文：天成初，转检校尚书右仆射，依前充职。
现代文：天成初年，改任检校尚书右仆射，原职依旧不变。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was reassigned to the post of inspector of the school, Shangshu Yuhudu, but his original position remained unchanged.

古文：岁余迁引进使。
现代文：一年多后，任引进使。
English: More than a year later, he was appointed as the ambassador of introduction.

古文：长兴三年，转检校司空、左威卫大将军，其职如故。
现代文：长兴三年，转任检校司空、左威卫大将军，职位又与原先一样。
English: After three years in Changxing, he was transferred to the position of inspector of schools, General Zuo Wei Wei, and the position was the same as before.

古文：四年，西川孟知祥跋扈，不通朝贡，朝廷方议怀柔，乃遣处让为官告国信使，复命，转检校司徒。
现代文：四年，西川孟知祥专横跋扈，不进朝贡，朝廷正从事怀柔政策，便派刘处让担任告国信使，回复王命后，转任检校司徒。
English: In the fourth year, when Meng Zhixiang of the West River acted arbitrarily and refused to pay tribute, and the imperial court was engaged in a policy of appeasement, he sent Liu Chengzhan to serve as a messenger to the country, and after returning the king's order, he was transferred to the post of school inspector.

古文：应顺初，授忻州刺史、检校太保，充西北面都计度使，备北寇也。
现代文：应顺初年，任忻州刺史、检校太保，兼西北面都计度使，以防范北方寇贼。
English: In the first year, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, the inspector of the school, and the surveyor of the northwest to prevent the northern bandits.

古文：清泰二年，入为左骁卫大将军。
现代文：清泰二年，入朝担任左骁卫大将军。
English: In the second year of the Qing dynasty, he entered the imperial court as General Zuo Wei.

古文：三年夏，魏博屯将张令昭逐其帅以城叛，朝廷命范延光领兵讨之，以处让为河北都转运使。
现代文：三年夏天，魏博屯将张令昭驱逐他的统帅据城反叛，朝廷命令范延光率军讨伐，任命刘处让为河北都转运使。
English: In the summer of the third year, Wei Botun expelled Zhang Ling Zhao, his commander, to rebel against the city. The court ordered Fan Yanguang to lead the army in a crusade and appointed Liu Chengzhan as the transfer envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：及高祖举义于太原，处让从至洛阳，乃授宣徽北院使。
现代文：晋高祖在太原立国后，刘处让跟随到达洛阳，于是任他为宣徽北院使。
English: After Jin Gaozu founded the country in Taiyuan, Liu Chengzang followed him to Luoyang, whereupon he was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：天福二年，转左监门卫上将军，充宣徽南院使。
现代文：天福二年，改任左监门卫上将军，兼宣徽南院使。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, he was reappointed as the left supervisor of the gate guards, and also became the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：范延光之据鄴也，高祖命宣武军节度使杨光远领兵讨之。
现代文：范延光占据邺城时，高祖命宣武军节度使杨光远率兵讨伐，当时刘处让奉诏与杨光远共同参与商讨军政事务。
English: When Fan Yanguang occupied Lucheng, Gao Zu ordered Yang Guangyuan to lead an army to fight against Fan Yanguang. At that time, Liu sent Feng Zhao and Yang Guangyuan to jointly participate in discussing military and political affairs.

古文：时处让奉诏与光远同参议军政，会张从宾作乱于河阳，处让自黎阳分兵讨袭，从宾平，复与杨光远同攻鄴城。
现代文：碰上张从宾在河阳兴兵作乱，刘处让从黎阳分兵讨伐袭击，张从宾被平定后，刘处让又与杨光远一起进攻邺城。
English: When Zhang Congbin started a riot in Heyang, Liu sent a detachment of soldiers from Liyang to attack. After Zhang Congbin was subdued, Liu and Yang Guangyuan attacked Lucheng.

古文：四年冬，范延光将谋纳款，尚或迟留，处让首入其城，以祸福谕之，延光乃降，以功加检校太傅。
现代文：四年冬天，范延光准备归顺朝廷，但还有些迟疑，刘处让首先进入邺城，用前途祸福来告谕他，范延光才投降，刘处让因功加封为检校太傅。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, Fan Yanguang was ready to submit to the imperial court, but there was still some hesitation. Liu Chengzhan first entered Shicheng and told him about the future. It was only after Fan Yanguang surrendered that Liu Chengzhan was awarded the title of school inspector.

古文：先是，桑维翰、李崧兼充枢密使，处让以庄宗已来，枢密使罕有宰臣兼者，因萌心以觊其位。
现代文：在此之前，桑维翰、李崧兼任枢密使，刘处让认为从庄宗以来，枢密使很少有宰臣兼任的，因此萌生了谋取枢密使一职的动机。
English: Prior to this, Sang Weihang and Li Ye concurrently served as Privy Councilors, and Liu Shujang believed that since Zhuang Zong, few Privy Councilors had concurrently served as vice-ministers, so there was a motive to seek the post of Privy Councilor.

古文：及杨光远讨伐鄴城，军机大事，高祖每命处让宣达。
现代文：到杨光远讨伐邺城时，军机大事，高祖常命刘处让宣布传达。
English: When Yang Guangyuan went to fight the siege of Lucheng, the military aircraft announced and conveyed the great event to Gao Zu Changmei Liu.

古文：时光远恃军权，多有越体论奏，高祖依违而已，光远慊之，频与处让宴语及之，处让诉曰： 非圣旨也，皆出维翰等意。 
现代文：当时杨光远依仗军权，多超越本份上奏论事，高祖只是应付敷衍而已，杨光远对此感到不满，曾多次与刘处让私下谈到这。刘处让告诉他说： 这不是圣上的旨意，都是出自桑维翰等的意思。 
English: At that time, Yang Guangyuan relied on military power and went beyond his duty to report the matter, Gao Zu only dealt with the perfunctory. Yang Guangyuan was dissatisfied with this, and had repeatedly discussed this privately with Liu Shanzhang. Liu Shanzhang told him: This is not the holy will, it is all from the meaning of San Weihan and so on.

古文：及杨光远入朝，遂于高祖前面言执政之失，高祖知其故，不得已乃罢维翰等，以处让为枢密使。
现代文：等到杨光远入朝进见，便在高祖面前谈到执政的过失，高祖知道他的用意，不得已罢免了桑维翰等的枢密使职，任命刘处让为枢密使。
English: When Yang Guang went as far as to visit the imperial court, he spoke of the faults of the government in front of Gaozu. Gaozu knew of his intention and had no choice but to dismiss San Weihan and others from their positions as imperial envoys, and appoint Liu Chengyuan as imperial envoy.

古文：时处让每有敷奏，高祖多不称旨，会处让丁继母忧，高祖因议罢枢密使，其本院庶事并委宰臣分判。
现代文：当时刘处让每次敷陈奏章，高祖大多认为不符合自己的旨意，碰上刘处让服继母的丧事，高祖便提议废除枢密使一职，枢密院诸事一并委任宰相分别判理。
English: At that time, every time Liu Jingzhang wrote a report, Gaozhu mostly thought that it was not in line with his will. When Liu Jingzhang attended the funeral of his stepmother, Gaozhu proposed to abolish the post of the Privy Council, and the Privy Council also appointed the Prime Minister to judge all matters separately.

古文：处让居丧期年，起复，授彰德军节度使、澶卫等州观察处置等使。
现代文：刘处让居丧一周年后，回到朝廷，被任为彰德军节度使，澶、卫等州观察处置等使。
English: After the first anniversary of Liu's death, he returned to the imperial court and was appointed as the envoy of the German Army Festival, and the envoy of the observation and disposition of states such as Shandong and Wei.

古文：处让勤于公务，孜孜求理，驭吏民不至苛察，人甚便之。高祖幸鄴都，处让竭家财贡奉，至于薪炭膏沐之细，悉供亿焉。
现代文：刘处让勤于公务，孜孜不倦于治理，领导官吏百姓不致苛刻严格，人们感到很方便，高祖幸临邺都时，刘处让竭尽全家资财贡奉，以至于柴米油盐这样细微的东西，全都供应。
English: Liu Shanzheng was diligent in his official duties, tireless in governance, leading officials and people without being harsh and strict, people felt very convenient. When Gao Zuo was fortunate enough to take over the capital, Liu Shanzheng made every effort to donate all the family's wealth, so much so that all the fine things such as wood, rice, oil and salt were all supplied.

古文：六年，除右金吾卫上将军，处让自以尝经重任，又历方镇，谓其入朝必重要职，一旦除授金吾，有所不足。
现代文：天福六年，任右金吾卫上将军，刘处让自以为曾经重任，又历任方镇统领，心想入朝一定能担当显要职务，一旦任为金吾，感到很不满足。
English: In the sixth year of Tianfu, he was appointed as the Supreme Commander of Kingu and Wei. Liu Shuanzang thought that he had a heavy responsibility, and he had been the leader of Fangzhen in the past. He thought that he would be able to assume important positions when he entered the imperial court. Once he was appointed as Kingu, he felt very dissatisfied.

古文：少帝即位之初，处让与宰臣言，有协翼之论，覃恩之际，又未擢用。
现代文：晋少帝即位初期，刘处让与宰相交谈中，有辅佐少帝为相的意思，而少帝广施恩惠时，又没有提拔任用他。
English: In the early days of Emperor Jin's accession to the throne, Liu Chengzhang spoke with the prime minister with the intention of assisting the young emperor, but when the young emperor extended his favor, he did not promote and appoint him.

古文：一日至中书，宰臣冯道、赵莹、李崧、和凝在列，处让因酒酣，历诋诸相，道笑而不答。
现代文：一天到了中书省，宰相冯道、赵莹、李崧、和凝都在那里，刘处让趁酒醉，诋毁所有的宰相，冯道只是笑而不答。
English: One day, I arrived at the Ministry of Education and Culture. The prime ministers, Feng Dao, Zhao Ying, Li Xi, and He Jing, were all there. Liu Chengzhan took advantage of being drunk to slander all the prime ministers. Feng Dao just laughed and did not answer.

古文：月余称病。
现代文：一个多月后便称病不出。
English: More than a month later, he said he was no longer ill.

古文：八年，从驾归汴，寄居于封禅寺，遇疾而卒，年六十三。
现代文：天福八年，跟随少帝回到汴州，寄居在封禅寺，得病去世，时年六十三岁。
English: In the 8th year of Tianfu, he followed the young emperor back to Zhangzhou, lived as a sojourner in Fengzen Temple, fell ill and died at the age of 63.

古文：赠太尉，再赠太师。
现代文：初赠太尉，再赠太师。
English: First, he was awarded the rank of captain, and then the rank of grandmaster.

