古文：人曰命难知。
现代文：人们说命难于知道。
English: People say that life is hard to know.

古文：命甚易知。
现代文：其实命很容易知道。
English: In fact, life is easy to know.

古文：知之何用？
现代文：根据什么来知道它呢？
English: What is the basis for knowing it?

古文：用之骨体。
现代文：根据人的骨骼形体。
English: Based on the human skeletal form.

古文：人命禀於天，则有表候见于体。
现代文：人命从上天禀受气一经形成，就在身体上有征候表现出来。
English: As soon as human life is formed from the breath of heaven, there are symptoms on the body.

古文：察表候以知命，犹察斗斛以知容矣。
现代文：只要仔细详察一下表象就能知道命了，就同看了斗和斛可以知道容量一样。
English: As long as you carefully examine the appearance, you can know the life, just as you can know the capacity by looking at the bucket and spade.

古文：表候者，骨法之谓也。
现代文：表象，说的就是骨法。
English: In terms of appearance, it's all about bone structure.

古文：传言黄帝龙颜，颛顼戴午，帝喾骈齿，尧眉八采，舜目重瞳，禹耳三漏，汤臂再肘，文王四乳，武王望阳，周公背偻，皋陶马口，孔子反羽。
现代文：传说黄帝的面部像龙，颛顼的头上长了类似角的东西，帝喾的牙齿连成一片，尧的眉毛有八种颜色，舜的每个眼睛里有两个重迭的瞳人，禹的每只耳朵有三个窟窿，商汤的每只胳膊上有两个肘，周文王有四个乳房，周武王眼高可以看见头顶上的太阳，周公旦的背驼，皋陶的嘴像马口，孔子头顶凹陷像翻过来的屋顶。
English: According to legend, the face of the Yellow Emperor resembled a dragon, the head of Zhou grew something similar to horns, the teeth of the emperor were connected into one piece, the eyebrows of Zhou had eight colors, each eye of Zhou had two overlapping pupils, each ear of Yu had three holes, each arm of Shang Tang had two elbows, King Zhouwen had four breasts, King Zhouwu's eyes were so high that he could see the sun above his head, Zhou Gongdan had a camel's back, Zhou Tao's mouth resembled a horse's mouth, and the concave top of Confucius' head resembled an

古文：斯十二圣者，皆在帝王之位，或辅主忧世，世所共闻，儒所共说，在经传者较著可信。
现代文：这十二个圣人，大都在帝王的皇位，或有的辅助君主，或有的担忧世事，这是世人共同耳闻的，儒者大家谈论的，而且是在经传上有名的，所以较为显著可信。
English: These twelve sages, most of whom are on the throne of the emperor, or some of whom are assisting the monarch, or some of whom are worried about worldly affairs, are commonly heard by the world, talked about by Confucians, and are famous in the scriptures, so they are more significant and credible.

古文：若夫短书俗记、竹帛胤文，非儒者所见，众多非一。
现代文：至于用短简书写的通俗书籍，竹简、绢帛记载流传下来的一般文字，这些虽不是儒者看的东西，还是很多的。
English: As for the popular books written in simplified Chinese characters, the general characters that have been passed down from the records of the bamboo cuttings and the inkstones, although these are not what Confucians look at, there are still many of them.

古文：苍颉四目，为黄帝史。
现代文：像苍颉有四只眼睛，做了黄帝的史官。
English: Like a heron with four eyes, he became the historian of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：晋公子重耳仳胁，为诸侯霸。
现代文：晋文公重耳肋骨长成一片，做了诸侯的霸主。
English: Jinwen Gong's heavy ear ribs grew into one piece, and he became the overlord of the princes.

古文：苏秦骨鼻，为六国相。
现代文：苏秦是个骨鼻，当了六国的丞相。
English: Su Qin was a bone-nose, and became the prime minister of six countries.

古文：张仪仳胁，亦相秦、魏。
现代文：张仪肋骨长成一片，也当了秦国和魏国的丞相。
English: Zhang Yi's ribs grew into one piece, and she also became the prime minister of Qin and Wei.

古文：项羽重瞳，云虞舜之後，与高祖分王天下。
现代文：项羽每个眼睛里有两个重迭的瞳人，据说他是虞舜的后代，因此与汉高祖分治天下。
English: With two overlapping pupils in each of his eyes, he is said to be a descendant of the yakitori, and thus ruled the world separately from the ancestors of the Han Dynasty.

古文：陈平贫而饮食之足，貌体佼好，而众人怪之，曰： 平何食而肥？ 
现代文：陈平家境贫困饮食缺乏，但身体面貌却美好，因而大家感到奇怪，说： 陈平是吃了什么长得这样胖？ 
English: Chen Ping's family was poor and his diet was lacking, but his physical appearance was beautiful, so everyone felt strange, saying: What did Chen Ping eat to grow so fat?

古文：及韩信为滕公所鉴，免於鈇质，亦以面状有异。
现代文：这与韩信被滕公所赏识，免于被鈇质腰斩，也靠面貌出奇一样。
English: This is the same as Han Xin was appreciated by Teng Gong, and was spared from being brutally beheaded, and also by his face.

古文：面状肥佼，亦一相也。
现代文：可见，面貌肥胖好看，也是一种好骨相。
English: It can be seen that the appearance of obesity is good-looking, and it is also a good bone appearance.

古文：高祖隆准、龙颜、美须，左股有七十二黑子。
现代文：汉高祖高鼻子，眉骨凸出，胡须漂亮，左边大腿有七十二颗黑痣。
English: Han Gao Zu has a high nose, protruding eyebrows, a beautiful beard, and seventy-two black moles on his left thigh.

古文：单父吕公善相，见高祖状貌，奇之，因以其女妻高祖，吕后是也，卒生孝惠帝、鲁元公主。
现代文：单父县的吕公擅长相面，看见高祖的形状相貌，感到惊奇，因此把他的女儿嫁给了汉高祖，这就是吕后。吕后终于生下了孝惠帝和鲁元公主。
English: Lugang, a man from Shanzhu County, was good at face painting. He was surprised to see the shape and appearance of Gaozu, so he married his daughter to Han Gaozu, which is Luguo. Luguo finally gave birth to Xiao Hui Di and Luyuan Princess.

古文：高祖为泗上亭长，当去归之田，与吕后及两子居田。
现代文：汉高祖做泗水边上的一个亭长，正当他告假归家去种田，与吕后和两个孩子住在乡间。
English: Henkel's great-grandfather was a pavilion keeper on the edge of Surabaya. He had just taken a leave of absence to return home and farm, living in the countryside with Lyu Hou and his two children.

古文：有一老公过，请饮，因相吕后曰： 夫人，天下贵人也。 
现代文：有位老公路过，求口水喝，因此看了吕后的相，说道： 夫人，你是天下的贵人。 
English: An old man passed by on the highway and asked for a drink of water, so he looked at Lv Gui's face and said: Madam, you are a noble person in the world.

古文：令相两子，见孝惠曰： 夫人所以贵者，乃此男也。 
现代文：再让他看两个孩子的相。看了孝惠帝后说： 夫人你能得到富贵，就是有了这个儿子。 
English: Then he asked her to show him the faces of her two children. After looking at Prince Xiao Hui, she said, "Madam, if you want to be rich, you must have this son."

古文：相鲁元，曰： 皆贵。 
现代文：看了鲁元公主后说： 一样富贵。 
English: After seeing Princess Lu Yuan, he said, "She's just as rich and valuable."

古文：老公去，高祖从外来，吕后言於高祖。
现代文：老公便离开了。汉高祖从外面回来，吕后就对高祖说了这件事。
English: Her husband then left. When Han Gaozu returned from outside, Lv said this to Gaozu.

古文：高祖追及老公，止使自相。
现代文：高祖赶去追上老公，拦住让他给自己相面。
English: Gao Zu rushed to catch up with her husband, stopped him and asked him to give her a facial.

古文：老公曰： 乡者夫人婴兒相皆似君，君相贵不可言也。 
现代文：老公说： 刚才夫人、孩子的骨相都像你，你的骨相富贵得不能说。 
English: The husband said: Just now, the bone morphology of my wife and children are all like you. Your bone morphology is too rich to be described.

古文：後高祖得天下，如老公言。
现代文：后来汉高祖得到天下，正像老公说的一样。
English: Later, Henkel got the world, just like her husband said.

古文：推此以况一室之人，皆有富贵之相矣。
现代文：根据这个来推断，他一家人，全有富贵的骨相。
English: Based on this, it can be deduced that his entire family had a rich bone structure.

古文：类同气钧，性体法相固自相似。
现代文：同一类命的人禀受的气相同，其天性、形体、骨法、相貌本来就相似。
English: People of the same type of life are subject to the same qi, and their nature, shape, bone structure, and appearance are similar.

古文：异气殊类，亦两相遇。
现代文：禀受的气不同，命类不同，也有两人结婚的。
English: People have different qi, different lives, and there are also two people who get married.

古文：富贵之男娶得富贵之妻，女亦得富贵之男。
现代文：有富贵命的丈夫要了有富贵命的妻子，有富贵命的女子嫁了有富贵命的丈夫。
English: The husband with a rich life wanted a wife with a rich life, and the woman with a rich life married the husband with a rich life.

古文：夫二相不钧而相遇，则有立死；若未相适，有豫亡之祸也。
现代文：要是二人骨相不相同而结婚，就会马上死掉；至于还没有嫁娶，会有先死的灾祸。
English: If two people who are not alike are married, they will die at once; if they are unmarried, they will die first.

古文：王莽姑正君许嫁，至期当行时，夫辄死。
现代文：王莽的姑母正君已许配嫁人，到了结婚的日子该举行婚礼时，丈夫却死了。
English: Wang Mang's aunt Zhengjun was engaged to be married. On the day of the wedding, when the wedding was to be held, her husband died.

古文：如此者再，乃献之赵王，赵王未取又薨。
现代文：像这种情况有二次，于是把她献给赵王，赵王还没有迎娶，又死了。
English: This happened twice, so she gave her to King Zhao, who died before he could marry her.

古文：清河南宫大有与正君父稚君善者，遇相君曰： 贵为天下母。 
现代文：清河郡南宫大有与正君的父亲王稚君交情好，遇见时相了正君的面，说： 命贵当为天下母。 
English: Nan Gong, Qinghe County, had a good relationship with Zhengjun's father, Wang Wuzhijun. When they met, he looked at Zhengjun's face and said, "Life is precious, you should be the mother of the world."

古文：是时，宣帝世，元帝为太子，稚君乃因魏郡都尉纳之太子，太子幸之，生子君上。
现代文：这时，汉宣帝在世，元帝是太子，王稚君便通过魏郡的都尉把正君献给太子，太子很宠爱她，后生了个儿子君上。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xuan was still alive, and Emperor Yuan was the crown prince. Wang Wechi dedicated Zhengjun to the crown prince through the Wei County captain. The crown prince loved her very much, and later gave birth to a son, Jun Shang.

古文：宣帝崩，太子立，正君为皇后，君上为太子。
现代文：汉宣帝死，太子即位，正君做了皇后，君上当了太子。
English: Emperor Han Xuan died, the crown prince ascended to the throne, Zheng Jun became the empress, and Jun Shang became the crown prince.

古文：元帝崩，太子立，是为成帝，正君为皇太后，竟为天下母，夫正君之相当为天下母，而前所许二家及赵王，为无天下父之相，故未行而二夫死，赵王薨。
现代文：汉元帝死，太子即位，这就是汉成帝，正君当了皇太后，终于成为天下母。正君的骨相该当天下母，而前面所许配的二家及赵王因为没有天下父的骨相，所以还没有举行婚礼二个丈夫及赵王都死了。
English: Emperor Han Yuan died and the crown prince ascended to the throne, this is Emperor Han Cheng. Zhengjun became the empress dowager and finally became the mother of the world. Zhengjun's bone pattern should have been the mother of the world that day, and the two families and King Zhao who were previously promised because they did not have the bone pattern of the father of the world, so the wedding has not been held. The two husbands and King Zhao are all dead.

古文：是则二夫、赵王无帝王大命，而正君不当与三家相遇之验也。
现代文：这原是前面的二个丈夫和赵王都没有作帝王的贵命，而正君不该与他们三家结婚的证明。
English: This was proof that neither of the previous two husbands nor King Zhao were worthy of the emperor's life, and that Zhengjun should not have married into their three families.

古文：丞相黄次公，故为阳夏游徼，与善相者同车俱行，见一妇人年十七八，相者指之曰： 此妇人当大富贵，为封侯者夫人。 
现代文：丞相黄次公原来做过阳夏的游徼，与一个擅于相面的人同车一起走，看见一个女子十七八岁。相面的人指着她说： 这个女子该大富大贵，将会成为封侯者的夫人。 
English: The chancellor, Huang Jigong, had been a tour guide in the summer of the previous year. He rode in a carriage with a man who was good at making facial expressions, and saw a woman of seventeen or eighteen years old. The man pointed at her and said, "This woman should be very rich and noble, and she will become the wife of the lord of the manor."

古文：次公止车，审视之，相者曰： 今此妇人不富贵，卜书不用也。 
现代文：于是次公拦住车，仔细看了看她，相面的人说： 现今这个女子将来不富贵，那占卜的书就没有用了。 
English: So the magistrate stopped the car, took a closer look at her, and the person on the other side said, "Nowadays, this woman will not be rich in the future, and that divination book is useless."

古文：次公问之，乃其旁里人巫家子也，即娶以为妻。
现代文：次公问她，才知道是他邻里巫卜人家的女儿，就娶来作为妻子。
English: When the king asked her a second time, he learned that she was the daughter of his neighbor, the Wubu family, and he took her as his wife.

古文：其後次公果大富贵，位至丞相，封为列侯。
现代文：那以后，次公果然大富大贵，官做到丞相，被封为列侯。
English: After that, the second lord was indeed very rich and noble, and he was appointed to the post of chancellor, and was made a vassal lord.

古文：夫次公富贵，妇人当配之，故果相遇，遂俱富贵。
现代文：次公命富贵，女子命该配他，所以果然结婚，终于一起富贵。
English: Second, a man's destiny is to be rich, and a woman's destiny is to be with him, so they got married and finally became rich together.

古文：使次公命贱，不得妇人为偶，不宜为夫妇之时，则有二夫、赵王之祸。
现代文：假使次公命贫贱，就不该得这个女子做配偶。要是不该成为夫妻时，就会有前面所说的那二个男人和赵王的灾祸。
English: If the second husband is poor, then this woman should not be his wife. If they should not become husband and wife, then there will be the disaster of the two men and King Zhao mentioned above.

古文：夫举家皆富贵之命，然後乃任富贵之事。
现代文：全家都要有富贵的禄命，然后才能胜任使之富贵的事情。
English: The whole family must have a rich life, and then they can be competent to make it rich.

古文：骨法形体，有不应者，择必别离死亡，不得久享介福。
现代文：如果家中有骨法与形体跟富贵的命不相适应的，必然有别离、死亡的事发生，就不能长期享受荣华富贵。
English: If there are skeletons and bodies in the family that are not compatible with the life of wealth, separation and death will inevitably occur, and you will not be able to enjoy the glory and wealth for a long time.

古文：故富贵之家，役使奴僮，育养牛马，必有与众不同者矣。
现代文：所以富贵的人家，役使奴仆，繁殖饲养牛马，必然有与众不同的地方。
English: That is why the homes of the rich, where servants and slaves were used, and where cattle and horses were bred and reared, were bound to be unique.

古文：僮奴则有不死亡之相，牛马则有数字乳之性，田则有种孳速熟之谷，商则有居善疾售之货。
现代文：家中奴仆则有长命的骨相，牛马则有多生育的特性，种田则有分蘖多成熟快的谷物，经商则有东西好销售快的货物。
English: Domestic servants have long-lived bones, oxen and horses have more fertility, farmers have faster-maturing cereals, and merchants have goods that sell quickly.

古文：是故知命之人，见富贵於贫贱，睹贫贱於富贵。
现代文：所以知道命的人，能从暂时的贫贱中看出富贵，能从暂时的富贵中看出贫贱。
English: Therefore, those who know life can see wealth in temporary poverty, and can see poverty in temporary wealth.

古文：案骨节之法，察皮肤之理，以审人之性命，无不应者。
现代文：用考察骨节的方法，察看皮肤的纹理，来断定人的德性和禄命，没有不应验的。
English: Using the method of examining the bones and looking at the texture of the skin to determine a person's virtue and destiny, there is nothing that should not be tested.

古文：赵简子使姑布子卿相诸子，莫吉，至翟婢之子无恤而以为贵。
现代文：赵简子让姑布子卿为他的儿子们看相，没有一个吉利，但看到他与翟族婢女所生的儿子无恤时，却认为有贵命。
English: Zhao Jianzi had his sons photographed by Gu Buziqing, and none of them were lucky. However, when he saw that his son, who was born to a Yi female servant, was pitiless, he thought that his life was precious.

古文：无恤最贤，又有贵相，简子後废太子，而立无恤，卒为诸侯，襄子是矣。
现代文：无恤最贤能，又有富贵的骨相，于是赵简子后来废掉太子伯鲁而立无恤为太子，他终于当了诸侯，这就是赵襄子。
English: Zhao Xiangzi was the most virtuous and noble, so Zhao Jianzi later abolished the crown prince Boru and made Zhao Jianzi the crown prince. He finally became the prince. This is Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：相工相黥布，当先刑而乃王，後竟被刑乃封王。
现代文：相面的人看了黥布的相认为他该先受刑然后才能称王，后来竟然是他被受刑之后才封的王。
English: The person on the other side looked at the face of the cloth and thought that he should first be punished before he could be crowned king, but later it turned out that he was only crowned king after he had been punished.

古文：卫青父郑季与杨信公主家僮卫媪通，生青。
现代文：卫青的父亲郑季与阳信公主婢女卫媪私通，生下卫青。
English: Wei Qing's father, Zheng Ji, had a love affair with Yang Xin's maidservant, Wei Wei, who gave birth to Wei Qing.

古文：在建章宫时，钳徒相之，曰： 贵至封侯。 
现代文：卫青在建章宫时，一个颈上带着铁钳的刑徒看了他的相，说： 富贵到被封侯。 
English: When Wei Qing was building the Zhang Palace, a convict with an iron shackle around his neck looked at him and said, "He's rich enough to be made a prince."

古文：青曰： 人奴之道，得不笞骂足矣，安敢望封侯？ 
现代文：卫青说： 做人家奴仆的份，能不挨打受骂就够了，哪里敢希望被封侯！ 
English: Wei Qing said: To be someone's slave, it is enough not to be beaten and scolded. How dare you hope to be banned!

古文：其後青为军吏，战数有功，超封增官，遂为大将军，封为万户侯。
现代文：那以后卫青做了军官，打仗屡次有功，被越级封爵升官，终于成为大将军，受封为万户侯。
English: After that, Wei Qing became an officer, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, was promoted to the rank of knight, and finally became a general and was awarded the title of Wanhu Marquis.

古文：周亚夫未封侯之时，许负相之，曰： 君後三岁而入将相，持国秉，贵重矣，於人臣无两。
现代文：周亚夫还没有被封侯的时候，有个姓许的妇女看了他的相，说： 你三年后为侯，为侯八年将作将相，掌持国家权柄，贵重极了，在臣子中再没有第二个。
English: When Zhou Yafu had not yet been made a vassal, a woman surnamed Xu looked at his vassal and said: In three years you will be a vassal, in eight years you will be a vassal, holding state power, extremely valuable, there is no second among vassals.

古文：其後九岁而君饿死。 
现代文：其后九年你会饿死。 
English: Nine years after that, you will starve to death.

古文：亚夫笑曰： 臣之兄已代侯矣，有如父卒，子当代，亚夫何说侯乎？
现代文：周亚夫笑着说： 我的哥哥已经继承父亲为侯，如果他死了，他儿子该继承，我怎么说得上为侯呢？
English: Zhou Yafu said with a smile: My brother has already succeeded his father as marquess. If he dies, his son should inherit. How can I be called marquess?

古文：然既巳贵，如负言，又何说饿死？
现代文：这样，既然我已经富贵了，像妇人说的，又怎么说得上饿死呢？
English: Now that I am rich, how can I starve to death, as the woman said?

古文：指示我！ 
现代文：指给我看看！ 
English: Show me!

古文：许负指其口，有纵理入口，曰： 此饿死法也。 
现代文：姓许的妇女指着他的嘴，有一条直纹通向嘴角，说： 这就是被饿死的骨相。 
English: A woman surnamed Xu pointed to his mouth, which had a straight line running to the corner, and said: "This is the skeleton of someone who died of starvation."

古文：居三岁，其兄绛侯胜有罪，文帝择绛侯子贤者，推亚夫，乃封条侯，续绛侯後。
现代文：过了三年，他的哥哥绛侯胜之有罪，汉文帝要选择绛侯周勃儿子中贤能的来继承其侯位，有人推举周亚夫，于是他被封为条侯，延续了绛侯的后代。
English: Three years later, his brother Zhou Xuan was found guilty, and Emperor Hanwen wanted to choose the most capable of Zhou's sons to succeed him. Someone suggested Zhou Yafu, so he was named the next Zhou, continuing Zhou's descendants.

古文：文帝之後六年，匈奴入边，乃以亚夫为将军。
现代文：汉文帝后元六年，匈奴入侵边境，于是任用周亚夫为将军。
English: In the sixth year of the Han Dynasty, the Huns invaded the border, so Zhou Yafu was appointed as a general.

古文：至景帝之时，亚夫为丞相，後以疾免。
现代文：到汉景帝时，亚夫当了丞相，以后因为生病被免去官职。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Jing, Yafu became chancellor, but was later removed from office due to illness.

古文：其子为亚夫买工官尚方甲盾五百被可以为葬者，取庸苦之，不与钱。
现代文：他儿子为亚夫买了工官和尚方制造的五百套铠甲与盾牌准备作为埋葬品，为造坟墓雇用人工，却虐待他们，不给工钱。
English: His son bought Yafu five hundred suits of armor and shields made by craftsmen and monks to prepare for burial. He hired laborers to build the grave, but abused them and did not pay them.

古文：庸知其盗买官器，怨而上告其子。
现代文：雇工知道他家私买官器，由于怀恨就上告了他儿子。
English: The employee knew that his relative had bought official equipment and, out of spite, sued his son.

古文：景帝下吏责问，因不食五日，呕血而死。
现代文：汉景帝交给下面司法官吏查办，因此他五天不吃东西，吐血而死。
English: Han Jingdi handed over to the following judicial officials to investigate, so he did not eat for five days, vomited blood and died.

古文：当邓通之幸文帝也，贵在公卿之上，赏赐亿万，与上齐体。
现代文：正当邓通被汉文帝宠爱，富贵在众公卿之上，受赏赐亿万，与皇上同样尊贵时。
English: Just when Duntong was favored by Emperor Hanwen, rich above all nobles, rewarded with hundreds of millions, and just as honorable as the emperor.

古文：相工相之曰： 当贫贱饿死。 
现代文：相工看了他的相后说： 该当贫贱饿死。 
English: After looking at his photo, the co-worker said, "He should die poor and hungry."

古文：文帝崩，景帝立，通有盗铸钱之罪，景帝考验，通亡，寄死人家，不名一钱。
现代文：汉文帝死，汉景帝即位，他被告发有私铸钱币的罪行，景帝查问，他逃跑，寄居并死在别人家里，身无分文。
English: Emperor Hanwen died, Emperor Hanqing ascended to the throne. He was accused of the crime of illegally minting coins. Emperor Jing investigated. He ran away, lived and died in someone else's home, penniless.

古文：韩太傅为诸生时，借相工五十钱，与之俱入璧雍之中，相璧雍弟子谁当贵者。
现代文：韩太傅还是太学生的时候，给相工五十文钱，要相工跟他一起去太学里，看太学的同窗中谁该富贵。
English: When Han Taifu was still a student, he gave a fellow worker fifty yuan to go with him to Taigaku to see who among his classmates should be rich.

古文：相工指倪宽曰： 彼生当贵，秩至三公。 
现代文：相工指着倪宽说： 那个学生该富贵，官要做到三公。 
English: The co-worker pointed at Ni Guang and said: That student should be rich and noble, and the official should be a public servant.

古文：韩生谢遣相工，通刺倪宽，结胶漆之交，尽筋力之敬，徙舍从宽，深自附纳之。
现代文：韩生道谢并送走了相工，就与倪宽互通名帖，结下如胶似漆的情谊，竭尽筋力去表示恭敬，把自己的住处搬去靠近倪宽，深情地亲自帖近拉扰他。
English: Han Sheng thanked and sent away his partner, then exchanged business cards with Ni Kuan, forged a friendship like glue, made every effort to show respect, moved his residence close to Ni Kuan, and affectionately approached him personally.

古文：宽尝甚病，韩生养视如仆状，恩深逾於骨肉。
现代文：倪宽曾病得很厉害，韩生像个仆人样地伺候、照看他，真是恩情深厚超过亲骨肉。
English: Ni Kuan had been very ill, and Han Son had served and looked after him like a servant. It was truly a deep feeling of gratitude that went beyond that of kinship.

古文：後名闻於天下。
现代文：过后以此闻名于天下。
English: After that, it became famous all over the world.

古文：倪宽位至御史大夫，州郡丞旨召请，擢用举在本朝，遂至太傅。
现代文：倪宽官做到御史大夫，州郡接旨奉召请韩生去做官，在朝中他被提拔重用，终于做到太傅。
English: Ni Kuan was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, and the prefectural government was ordered to invite Han Sheng to become an official. He was promoted to the position of Taifu in the middle of the dynasty.

古文：夫钳徒、许负及相邓通、倪宽之工，可谓知命之工矣。
现代文：颈上带铁钳的刑徒、姓许的妇女及面邓通、倪宽相的相工，真可以说是知道禄命的人了。
English: The convict with the iron shackle around his neck, the woman surnamed Xu, and the co-workers with the faces of Deng Tong and Ni Kuan Xiang, can truly be said to be people who know their fate.

古文：故知命之工，察骨体之证，睹富贵贫贱，犹人见盘盂之器，知所设用也。
现代文：所以知道禄命的相工，考察了人的骨法形体的表征，就能看出人的富贵贫贱，好比人看到盘盂之类器物，就知道它们该放在什么地方，做什么用。
English: Therefore, knowing the interplay of the lotus life and examining the representation of the human skeletal form, one can see the richness and poverty of people, just as when one sees objects such as pottery, one knows where they should be placed and what they should be used for.

古文：善器必用贵人，恶器必施贱者，尊鼎不在陪厕之侧，匏瓜不在殿堂之上，明矣。
现代文：像精致的器皿一定给贵人使用，粗造的器物一定给卑贱者使用；尊、鼎不会摆在厕所的旁边，匏瓠不能放在殿堂上，这是明摆着的。
English: For example, delicate utensils must be used by nobles, and coarse utensils must be used by the lowly; it is clear that the honor and dignity should not be placed next to the toilet, and the bowl should not be placed in the hall of fame.

古文：富贵之骨，不遇贫贱之苦；贫贱之相，不遭富贵之乐，亦犹此也。
现代文：富贵的骨相不会遭受贫困卑贱的痛苦，贫贱的骨相不会得到富裕尊贵的快乐，也就是这个道理。
English: This is the reason why a rich skeleton will not suffer the pain of a poor and humble one, and a poor skeleton will not get the happiness of a rich and noble one.

古文：器之盛物，有斗石之量，犹人爵有高下之差也。
现代文：容器盛东西，有斗石去量，如同人得到官位有高下的等级。
English: Containers hold things, and there are stones to weigh them, just as people have higher and lower ranks when they get a post.

古文：器过其量，物溢弃遗；爵过其差，死亡不存。
现代文：容器要是超过它的容量，东西就会充满而流出来；官位超过人命中注定的等级，就会死亡而不存在。
English: If the container exceeds its capacity, things will be filled and flow out; if the rank exceeds the destined level in human life, it will die and not exist.

古文：论命者如比之於器，以察骨体之法，则命在於身形，定矣。
现代文：谈论禄命的人如果拿器皿跟禄命相比，又用考察骨法形体的方法，那么禄命决定于身体形象，是确定无疑的了。
English: If those who talk about luck compare utensils with luck, and use the method of examining bone shape, then luck is determined by body image, it is certain.

古文：非徒富贵贫贱有骨体也，而操行清浊亦有法理。
现代文：不仅富贵贫贱有骨法和形体，而操行的清浊也有骨法和皮肤的纹理。
English: Not only do the rich and the poor have bone structure and shape, but the clear beak also has bone structure and skin texture.

古文：贵贱贫富，命也；操行清浊，性也。
现代文：贵贱贫富是命中注定。操行的清浊是天生的本性。
English: Noble, humble, rich and poor are predestined by fate. The purity of conduct is innate nature.

古文：非徒命有骨法，性亦有骨法。
现代文：不仅命有骨法，性也有骨法。
English: Not only does life have a bone structure, but so does sex.

古文：唯知命有明相，莫知性有骨法，此见命之表证，不见性之符验也。
现代文：人们只知道命有明显的骨相，不知道性也有骨法，这是命被认为有表象，性不被认为有征象。
English: People only know that life has an obvious skeleton, and do not know that sex also has a skeleton. This is because life is considered to have a representation, and sex is not considered to have a sign.

古文：范蠡去越，自齐遗大夫种书曰： 飞鸟尽，良弓藏，狡兔死，走犬烹。
现代文：范蠡离开越国，从齐国送给大夫文种一封书信说： 飞鸟灭绝，精良的弓箭已经收藏，狡猾的兔子死尽，猎狗已被煮来吃掉。
English: When Fan Qi left Yue, he sent a letter from Qi to Dr. Wen Zhuang, saying: "The flying birds are extinct, the fine bows and arrows have been collected, the cunning rabbits are dead, and the hunting dogs have been cooked and eaten.

古文：越王为人长颈鸟喙，可与共患难，不可与共容乐。
现代文：越王勾践为人，颈长嘴尖，可以与他共患难，不能跟他共荣乐。
English: Yue Wang Gou is a person with a long neck and a sharp mouth. You can share the hardships with him, but not the joys.

古文：子何不去？ 
现代文：你为什么还不离开？ 
English: Why haven't you left yet?

古文：大夫种不能去，称疾不朝，赐剑而死。
现代文：大夫文种舍不得离开，假托有病不去上朝，结果被赐剑而自杀。
English: Doctor Wenzhong could not bear to leave, and pretended to be ill to avoid going to the court. As a result, he was given a sword and committed suicide.

古文：大梁人尉缭，说秦始皇以并天下之计，始皇从其册，与之亢礼，衣服饮食与之齐同。
现代文：大梁人尉缭劝说秦始皇采纳他兼并天下的策略，始皇信从他的计谋，与他平礼相待，衣服饮食跟他一样相同。
English: Dai Liang persuaded Qin Shi Huang to adopt his strategy of annexing the whole world. The first emperor believed in his strategy, treated him with courtesy, and his clothes and diet were the same as his.

古文：缭曰： 秦王为人，隆准长目，鸷膺豺声，少恩，虎视狼心，居约易以下人；得志亦轻视人。
现代文：尉缭说： 秦王为人，高鼻子大眼睛，胸脯突出得像鹰，声音跟豺一样，很少施人恩惠，像虎一样看人，跟狼一样心狠。处在不得意时容易降低身份待人，得意时又看不起别人。
English: "Qin Wang is a human being, with a high nose and large eyes, his chest protrudes like an eagle, his voice is like a cricket, he rarely gives people favors, he looks at people like a tiger, and his heart is as fierce as a wolf. When he is not satisfied, it is easy to lower his status and treat people, and when he is satisfied, he looks down on others.

古文：我布衣也，然见我，常身自下我。
现代文：我是个平民百姓，然而看见我，常常降低身份尊敬我。
English: I am a commoner, yet when they see me, they often degrade and respect me.

古文：诚使秦王须得志，天下皆为虏矣。
现代文：真使秦王得志，天下人都要成为奴隶。
English: King Qin truly had a dream that everyone in the world would become a slave.

古文：不可与交游。 
现代文：不能与他长期结交，于是逃离了。
English: Unable to maintain a long-term relationship with him, she ran away.

古文：乃亡去。故范蠡、尉缭见性行之证，而以定处来事之实，实有其效，如其法相。
现代文：所以范蠡、尉缭看到越王和秦王天生品行的征象，就用来判定将来事情的真实情况，而确有那种效验，同他们骨相一样。
English: Therefore, when Fan Yu and Li Yu saw the signs of the innate qualities of King Yue and King Qin, they used them to judge the true situation of things in the future. And indeed, there is that kind of test, just like their bones.

古文：由此言之，性命系於形体，明矣。
现代文：这样说来，一个人的生性，禄命与他的形体相貌相关联，是很明显的。
English: In this way, it is clear that a person's nature and destiny are linked to his physical appearance.

古文：以尺书所载，世所共见，准况古今，不闻者必众多非一，皆有其实。
现代文：尺书上所记载的，是世人所共同见到的；推想从古至今，还没有所说过由骨相决定生性禄命的人一定很多，但都有其事实。
English: What is recorded in the shakuhachi is what the world has seen together; it can be inferred that from ancient times to the present, there must be many people who have not been said to be determined by the bone phase, but they all have their own facts.

古文：禀气於天，立形於地，察在地之形，以知在天之命，莫不得其实也。
现代文：人从上天禀受了气，在地上成形，考察在地上的形体，以便知道人在上天形成的禄命，没有不了解其实情的。
English: Man received breath from the heavenly body and took shape on the earth. In order to know man's form on the earth, it is necessary to examine his form on the earth.

古文：有传孔子相澹台子羽、唐举占蔡泽不验之文，此失之不审，何隐匿微妙之表也。
现代文：有传说孔子相澹台子羽面，唐举占卜蔡泽不应验的文字，这两起错误都在于不仔细。
English: There is a legend that Confucius forged the face of the table and the feather of the feather, and that Tang held a divination that Cai Ze should not test. Both of these mistakes are due to carelessness.

古文：相或在内，或在外，或在形体，或在声气。
现代文：相面就要看清精微奥妙的征兆。骨相的表现有的在人的内部，有的在人的外表，有的在形体相貌，有的在声音气息。
English: On the other hand, it is necessary to see the subtle and mysterious signs. Some of the manifestations of the skeleton are inside the person, some are in the appearance of the person, some are in the shape and appearance, and some are in the sound and atmosphere.

古文：察外者遗其内；在形体者，亡其声气。
现代文：考察外面明显的就忽略了他内部较隐蔽的，察看形体相貌就遗漏了他的声音和气息。
English: Examining the obvious on the outside ignores the more hidden within him, and looking at his physical appearance misses his voice and breath.

古文：孔子适郑，与弟子相失，孔子独立郑东门。
现代文：孔子到郑城，与学生相互走散了，就一个人站在郑城的东门。
English: When Confucius arrived in Zhengcheng, he and his students dispersed and he stood alone at the east gate of Zhengcheng.

古文：郑人或问子贡曰： 东门有人，其头似尧，其项若皋陶，肩类子产。
现代文：郑城人有人告诉子贡说： 东门有个人，他的头像尧，他的颈子像皋陶，他的肩膀跟子产差不多。
English: Someone from Zhengcheng told Zigong, "There is a man at the East Gate. His head is like a skull, his neck is like pottery, and his shoulders are like a calf's.

古文：然自腰以下，不及禹三寸，傫傫若丧家之狗。 
现代文：然而从腰部以下，还差禹三寸，垂头丧气的样子就像个丧家的狗。 
English: However, from the waist down, it is still three inches short of Yu Yu, with a crestfallen look like a dog that has lost its home.

古文：子贡以告孔子，孔子欣然笑曰： 形状未也。如丧家狗，然哉！
现代文：子贡把这话告诉了孔子，孔子高兴地笑着说： 形状未必像，像个丧家的狗，倒说对啦！
English: Zigong told this to Confucius, who smiled happily and said, "The shape may not look like a lost dog, but it is right!

古文：然哉！ 
现代文：说对啦！ 
English: That's right!

古文：夫孔子之相，郑人失其实。
现代文：孔子的相貌，郑城的人没有把他看准。
English: People in Zhengcheng didn't pay enough attention to the appearance of Confucius.

古文：郑人不明，法术浅也。
现代文：郑城人一是没有看明白，一是骨法的技术也不高。
English: Zhengcheng people do not see and understand, and the technology of bone method is not high.

古文：孔子之失子羽，唐举惑於蔡泽，犹郑人相孔子，不能具见形状之实也。
现代文：孔子看错澹台子羽，唐举被蔡泽弄迷惑，就像郑城人看孔子，没有能够把他形状的真象全部看清楚一样。
English: Confucius misjudged the shape of the dragon's tail, and Tang Jiu was confused by Cai Ze, just as the people of Zhengcheng did not see the true image of Confucius' shape clearly.

