古文：司马错与张仪争论于秦惠王前。
现代文：司马错与张仪在秦惠文王面前争论攻打蜀国和韩国的事。
English: Sima Zhe and Zhang Yi argued in front of King Qin Huiwen about attacking Shu and Korea.

古文：司马错欲伐蜀，张仪曰： 不如伐韩。 
现代文：司马错认为秦国应该先去进攻蜀国，但张仪说： 不如先去进攻韩国。 
English: Sima wrongly thought that Qin should attack Shu first, but Zhang Yi said: It is better to attack Korea first.

古文：王曰： 请闻其说。 
现代文：秦惠文王说： 我想听听你的意见。 
English: Hui Wang said: I am willing to listen to your respective reasons.

古文：对曰： 亲魏善楚，下兵三川，塞轘辕、缑氏之口，当屯留之道，魏绝南阳，楚临南郑，秦攻新城、宜阳，以临二周之郊，诛周主之罪，侵楚、魏之地。
现代文：张仪回答说： 我们先跟楚、魏两国结盟，然后再出兵到三川、堵住辕和缑氏山的通口，挡住屯留的孤道，这样魏国和南阳就断绝了交通，楚军逼进南郑，秦兵再攻打新城、宜阳，这样我们便兵临东西周的城外，惩罚二周的罪过，并且可以进入楚、魏两国。
English: Zhang Yi replied: We first allied with the two countries of Chu and Wei, and then sent troops to Sanchuan to block the entrances to the mountains of Qi and Qi, and to block the lonely roads of the settlers. In this way, Wei and Nanyang cut off the traffic. The Chu army forced its way into Nanzheng, and the Qin soldiers then attacked Xincheng and Yiyang. In this way, we sent troops to the outskirts of the city around the east and west, punished the sins of the two weeks, and could enter the two countries of Chu and Wei.

古文：周自知不救，九鼎宝器必出。
现代文：周王知道自己的危急，一定会交出传国之宝。
English: King Zhou knew that he was in a critical situation and would certainly hand over the national treasure.

古文：据九鼎，按图籍，挟天子以令天下，天下莫敢不听，此王业也。
现代文：我们据有传国之宝，再按照地图户籍，假借周天子的名义号令诸侯，天下又有谁不敢听我们命令呢？
English: According to the national treasure we have inherited, and then according to the map of household registration, we ordered the lords in the name of Zhou Tianzi. Who in the world would not dare to listen to our orders?

古文：今夫蜀，西辟之国，而戎狄之长也，弊兵劳众，不足以成名，得其地，不足以为利。臣闻： 争名者于朝，争利者于市。 
现代文：这才是霸王之业。至于蜀国，那是一个在西方边远之地，野蛮人当酋长的国家，我们即使劳民伤财发兵前往攻打，也不足以因此而建立霸业；臣常听人说： 争名的人要在朝廷，争利的人要在市场。 
English: As for Shu, it is a remote land in the west, a country where barbarians are the chiefs. Even if we send troops to attack, it is not enough to establish hegemony; subjects often hear people say: those who compete for fame should be in the court, and those who compete for profit should be in the market.

古文：今三川、周室，天下之市朝也，而王不争焉，顾争于戎狄，去王业远矣。 
现代文：现在三川周室，乃是天下的朝廷和市场，可是大王却不去争，反而争夺戎、狄等蛮夷之邦，这就距离霸王之业实在太远了。 
English: Now Mikawa no Chushitsu is the world's court and market, but the great king does not fight, but fights for barbarian states such as Eun and Di, which is really too far away from the overlord's business.

古文：司马错曰： 不然。臣闻之，欲富国者，务广其地；欲强兵者，务富其民；欲王者，务博其德。
现代文：司马错说： 事情不是张仪所说的那样，我听说过这样的道理，要想使国家富强，必须先扩张国家的领土；要想使兵力强大，必须先使人民生活富足；要想得到天下，一定要先广施仁政。
English: Sima Zhe said, "Things are not as Zhang Yi said. I have heard the principle that if you want to make the country rich and strong, you must first expand the country's territory; if you want to make the military strong, you must first make the people's life rich; if you want to gain the world, you must first carry out benevolent policies.

古文：三资者备，而王随之矣。今王之地小民贫，故臣愿从事于易。
现代文：这三个方面都做到以后，那么称王天下就是自然的事情了。如今大王疆域狭小并且百姓生活贫困，因此臣但愿大王先从容易的方面着手。
English: After accomplishing these three aspects, it is natural to be called the king of the world. Nowadays, the king's territory is small and the people live in poverty, so I hope the king will start with the easy aspects first.

古文：夫蜀，西辟之国也，而戎狄之长也，而有桀、纣之乱。
现代文：蜀国是一个西方的偏僻小国，而且是戎、狄国家的首领，并且像夏桀、商纣在位时候一样混乱。
English: Shu is a small, isolated country in the west, and it is the head of the Eun and Di countries, and it is as chaotic as it was during the reigns of Hsia and Shang.

古文：以秦攻之，譬如使豺狼逐群羊也。
现代文：如果用秦国的兵力去进攻蜀国，就好像使狼群去驱逐羊群一样简单。
English: If the forces of Qin were used to attack Shu, it would be as simple as sending wolves to drive out sheep.

古文：取其地，足以广国也；得其财，足以富民；缮兵不伤众，而彼已服矣。
现代文：秦国得到蜀国的土地可以扩大版图，得到蜀国的财富可以富足百姓；即使用兵也不伤害老百姓。并且又让蜀国自动屈服。
English: Qin's acquisition of Shu's land could expand its territory, and its acquisition of Shu's wealth could enrich the people; even if it used soldiers, it would not harm the people, and it would automatically make Shu submit.

古文：故拔一国，而天下不以为暴；利尽西海，诸侯不以为贪。
现代文：所以秦虽然灭掉了蜀国，诸侯也不会认为是暴虐；即使秦抢去蜀国的一切财富，诸侯也不会认为秦贪婪。
English: Therefore, although Qin wiped out Shu, the princes would not think it was tyranny; even if Qin robbed Shu of all its wealth, the princes would not think Qin was greedy.

古文：是我一举而名实两附，而又有禁暴正乱之名。
现代文：可是我们只要做伐蜀一件事，就可以名利双收，甚至还可以得到除暴安良的美名。
English: But as long as we do just one thing, we can gain fame and fortune, and even get a good reputation for eliminating violence.

古文：今攻韩劫天子，劫天子，恶名也，而未必利也，又有不义之名，而攻天下之所不欲，危!
现代文：今天如果我们去攻打韩国，又劫持天子，得到的是恶名，而且也未必就能获得利益，反而落个不义的名声。干天下人不愿做的事情，实在是一件危险的事！
English: Today, if we attack South Korea and kidnap the emperor, we will get a bad reputation, and we may not be able to make a profit, but we will get an unfair reputation. It is really a dangerous thing to do what people around the world do not want to do!

古文：臣请谒其故：周，天下之宗室也；齐，韩、周之与国也。周自知失九鼎，韩自知亡三川，则必将二国并力合谋，以因于齐、赵，而求解乎楚、魏。以鼎与楚，以地与魏，王不能禁。此臣所谓 危 ，不如伐蜀之完也。 
现代文：我请求讲述其中的缘故：周天子是天下各国的共主，同时齐与韩是周的友邦，周自知将要失去九鼎，韩自己也清楚要失去三川，这样两国必定联合起来，共同联络齐、赵去解楚、魏的围困，两国会自动地把九鼎献给楚，把土地割让给魏，这些都是大王所不能制止的，这也就是臣所说的危险所在，所以说，攻打韩国不如先进攻蜀来得完满。 
English: I asked him to tell me the reason: Zhou Tianzi was the co-ruler of all countries in the world, while Qi and Han were Zhou's friends. Zhou knew that he was going to lose Jiu Ding, and Han himself knew that he was going to lose Sanchuan. In this way, the two countries must unite and jointly contact Qi and Zhao to solve Chu and Wei's siege. The two countries will automatically dedicate Jiu Ding to Chu and cede land to Wei. These are all things that the great king cannot stop, which is the danger that the minister said. Therefore, attacking South Korea is not as good as attacking Shu in advance.

古文：惠王曰： 善!
现代文：秦惠王说： 很好，我就采纳你的意见。 
English: Qin Hui Wang said: That's fine, I'll accept your opinion.

古文：寡人听子。 卒起兵伐蜀，十月取之，遂定蜀。蜀主更号为侯，而使陈庄相蜀。
现代文：于是秦国就出兵攻打蜀，经过十个月的征讨，终于占领了蜀地，把蜀主的名号改为侯，并且派秦臣陈庄去作蜀的相国。
English: As a result, Qin dispatched troops to attack Shu. After ten months of conquest, they finally occupied Shu, changed the name of Shu's lord to Hou, and sent Qin minister Chen Zhuang to be Shu's vassal state.

古文：蜀既属，秦益强富厚，轻诸侯。
现代文：蜀地既已划归秦国的版图，秦国就越发强盛富足，而且更加轻视天下诸侯。
English: Now that Shu has been incorporated into the territory of Qin, the more prosperous and powerful Qin will become, and the more contemptuous it will be of the world's princes.

