古文：明年，上将大夸胡人以多禽兽，秋，命右扶风发民入南山，西自褒斜，东至弘农，南驱汉中，张罗罔罴罘，捕熊罴、豪猪、虎豹、狖玃、狐菟、麋鹿，载以槛车，输长杨射熊馆。
现代文：第二年，皇上要向胡人夸耀禽兽之多，秋天，命令右扶风征发百姓进入南山，西从褒斜，东到弘农，南达汉中，张开罗网置罘，捕捉熊熊豪猪虎豹犹获狐菟麋鹿，用槛车装载，运到长杨射熊馆。
English: In the second year, the emperor wanted to boast to the Hu people about the great number of animals. In the autumn, he ordered the right wind to recruit and dispatch the people to enter the Nanshan, the west from Hobao, the east to Hongnong, the south to Hanzhong, Zhang Cairo to set the net, catch the bear bear, the porcupine, the tiger and the leopard, and the fox and the deer, load it with the threshold car, and transport it to the Changyang Shooting Bear Museum.

古文：以罔为周阹，纵禽兽其中，令胡人手搏之，自取其获，上亲临观焉。
现代文：用网作围阵，把禽兽放在裹面，教胡人徒手与它们搏斗，抓到的就自己拿走，皇上亲自去观看。
English: Using a net to form a perimeter, they wrapped the animals in a blanket and taught the Hu people to fight them with their bare hands. When they caught one, they took it away, and the emperor went to see it for himself.

古文：是时，农民不得收敛。
现代文：此时，农民不能去收割庄稼。
English: At this time, farmers can not go to harvest crops.

古文：雄从至射熊馆，还，上《长杨赋》，聊因笔墨之成文章，故借翰林以为主人，子墨为客卿以风。
现代文：扬雄跟着到射熊馆，回来后，献上《长杨赋》，因为是用笔墨写成文章，就假藉翰林作为主人，子墨作为客卿来讽谏。
English: Yang Xiong followed him to the shooting bear hall. After returning, he presented "Chang Yang Fu." Because it was written with pen and ink, he pretended to use Han Lin as the master and Zi Mo as the guest.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：辞中说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：子墨客卿问于翰林主人曰： 盖闻圣主之养民也，仁沾而恩洽，动不为身。
现代文：子墨客卿问翰林主人道： 听说圣主养民，仁恩润泽，行动不为自己。
English: Zi Mokeqing asked the master of Hanlin: I heard that the Holy Lord nourishes the people, is benevolent and moisturizing, and does not act for himself.

古文：今年猎长杨，先命右扶风，左太华而右褒斜，椓嶻而为弋，纡南山以为罝，罗千乘于林莽，列万骑于山隅，帅军踤阹，锡戎获胡。
现代文：今年在长杨打猎，先命令右扶风，左到太华右到褒斜，砍载岸作弋，绕南山布置，林莽中排列千乘，山脚分布着上万骑兵，率军踏围场，赏赐戎狄禽兽。
English: This year, when hunting in Changyang, he first ordered the right wind to blow, the left wind to go to Taihua, and the right wind to go to Baoshan. He cut the bank to make a raft, arranged it around Nanshan Mountain, arranged thousands of horsemen in the forest, and distributed tens of thousands of cavalry at the foot of the mountain. He led the army to the paddock and rewarded the animals.

古文：扼熊罴，拖豪猪，木雍枪累，以为储胥，此天下之穷览极观也。
现代文：抓熊熊，捉豪猪，堆木垒枪，作为储蓄，这是天下所仅见的。
English: Catching a bear, catching a porcupine, stacking a wooden crossbow, as savings, this is only seen in the world.

古文：虽然，亦颇扰于农民。
现代文：即使如此，也很骚扰农民。
English: Even so, farmers are being harassed.

古文：三旬有余，其廑至矣，而功不图，恐不识者，外之则以为娱乐之游，内之则不以为干豆之事，岂为民乎哉！
现代文：三旬多，非常勤苦，却不能有成，怕不知道的人，在外便认为是娱乐之游，在内就不当作是干豆祭祀，难道是为民吗！
English: More than thirty years old, very diligent, but unable to succeed, afraid of people who do not know, outside they think it is an entertainment tour, inside they do not consider it to be a dried bean sacrifice, is it for the people!

古文：且人君以玄默为神，淡泊为德，今乐远出以露威灵，数摇动以罢车甲，本非人主之急务也，蒙窃或焉。 
现代文：并且国君以沉默为神思，以淡泊为品德，现在喜欢出远去显露威武，多次兴师劳累车兵，本来不是人君急须去办的，鄙人私下不解。 
English: Moreover, the ruler of the country is obsessed with silence, with indifference as a virtue, now he likes to go far away to show his might, and has repeatedly sent his army to train and exhaust the soldiers. Originally, it was not urgent for him to do this, and I am not sure about it.

古文：翰林主人曰： 吁，谓之兹邪！
现代文：翰林主人说： 咦，说得真怪！
English: Hanlin's owner said, "Wow, what a strange thing to say!

古文：若客，所谓知其一未睹其二，见其外不识其内者也。仆尝倦谈，不能一二其详，请略举凡，而客自览其切焉。 客曰： 唯，唯。 
现代文：像您，是衹知其一不见其二，见外面不知内部。我说得很累，不能一一详述，请允许我略举大概，您自己看其必要吧。 客说： 好，好。 
English: Like you, I know one thing from another, I see the outside but not the inside. I'm very tired, I can't explain everything in detail, please allow me to give you a brief overview, you'll have to see for yourself. The customer said: Good, good.

古文：主人曰： 昔有强秦，封豕其士，窫窳其民，凿齿之徒相与摩牙而争之，豪俊麋沸云扰，群黎为之不康。
现代文：主人说： 从前有强秦，像封豕、寞窳一样残害士人百姓，凿齿之流互相磨牙争斗，豪杰像麋一样沸腾云一样纷扰，百姓因此不宁。
English: The master said, "Once upon a time, there was a strong Qin Dynasty, which, like the sealing dragon and the lonely dragon, devastated the people and the scholars. The chisel-toothed people grinded their teeth and fought with each other, and the heroes, like the dragonflies, stirred up the clouds, and the people were restless as a result.

古文：于是上帝眷顾高祖，高祖奉命，顺斗极，运天关，横巨海，票昆仑，提剑而叱之，所麾城摲邑，下将降旗，一日之战，不可殚记。
现代文：于是上天垂青高祖，高祖奉命，随斗极，运天关，跨大海，摇昆仑，提剑怒叱，攻城夺邑，战胜众将，一天的战斗，记不完全。
English: Therefore, Heaven sent down the young Gao Zu. Gao Zu was ordered to follow the battle to the end, carry the heaven gate, cross the sea, shake the Kunlun, take up the sword and scold, attack the city and capture the town, defeat the generals, and remember one day's battle incompletely.

古文：当此之勤，头蓬不暇疏，饥不及餐，鞮鍪生虮虱，介胄被沾汗，以为万姓请命乎皇天。
现代文：如此勤苦，头发乱没空儿梳，饿了来不及吃饭，千鍪长了蠛虱，甲胄上都是粘汗，来为万姓向皇天请命。
English: He worked so hard, his hair was so messy that he didn't have time to comb it, he was so hungry that he couldn't wait to eat, his dreadlocks had grown long, and his armor was covered with sweat. He came to ask the emperor for his life.

古文：乃展民之所诎，振民之所乏，规亿载，恢帝业，七年之间而天下密如也。
现代文：于是伸展民屈，兴起百姓所缺少的，规划万年，恢复帝业，七年之间天下安宁。
English: As a result, the people's submission was extended, the lack of the people was aroused, the plan was planned for a thousand years, the empire was restored, and the world was at peace for seven years.

古文： 逮至圣文，随风乘流，方垂意于至宁，躬服节俭，绨衣不敝，革鞜不穿，大夏不居，木器无文。于是后宫贱玳瑁而疏珠玑，却翡翠之饰，除雕瑑之巧，恶丽靡而不近，斥芬芳而不御，抑止丝竹晏衍之乐，憎闻郑、卫幼眇之声，是以玉衡正而太阶平也。
现代文： 到了圣文帝，随风乘浪，便着意在大宁，亲身节俭，绋衣不破就行，皮鞋不透就行，不住大厦，不雕木器，于是后宫不爱玳瑁珠玑，不佩饰翡翠，不做巧妙的雕刻，憎恨远离华丽奢侈，不用芬芳之物，禁奏丝竹宴乐之乐，不爱听郑卫深妙的乐声，所以玉衡端正太阶持平。
English: When he arrived at the court of Emperor Shengwen, he tried to ride the wind and waves, so he decided to stay in Danying. He was frugal in his personal life, wore clothes that did not break, wore shoes that were not transparent, did not live in a building, and did not carve wooden utensils. As a result, the harem did not like to wear beaded bracelets, did not wear emeralds, did not make skillful carvings, hated to stay away from gorgeous luxury, did not use fragrant things, forbade the music of silk and bamboo banquet music, and did not like to listen to the profound music of Zheng Wei. Therefore,

古文： 其后熏鬻作虐，东夷横畔，羌戎睚眦，闽越相乱，遐萌为之不安，中国蒙被其难。
现代文： 之后熏鬻入侵，东夷叛乱，羌戎反目，闽越互扰，远民因此不安宁，中原遭受灾难。
English: After that, the Xuanwu invasion, the rebellion of the Eastern Yi, the conflict between the Xuanwu and Yue, and the mutual disturbance of the Yue and Yue, the distant people were uneasy and the Central Plains suffered a disaster.

古文：于是圣武勃怒，爰整其旅，乃命票、卫，汾沄沸渭，云合电发，飙腾波流，机骇蜂轶，疾如奔星，击如震霆，砰轒辒，破穹庐，脑沙幕，髓余吾。
现代文：于是圣武大怒，整顿师旅，号令骠骑、卫青，奋然出击，如电闪云聚，风起云涌，如惊弩飞蜂，快似流星，击如雷霆，攻打帧辊，捣破毡帐，脑涂沙幕，髓入余吾。
English: As a result, Saint Wu was furious, and the rectification division brigade, ordered the cavalry, Wei Qing, and vigorously attacked, such as lightning clouds gathered, the wind surged, such as a startled bee, fast like a meteor, hit like a thunderbolt, attacked the frame frame, smashed the frame frame frame, brain-painted the sand curtain, and penetrated the rest of me.

古文：遂猎乎王廷。
现代文：于是在王廷打猎。
English: So he went hunting in the royal court.

古文：驱橐它，烧蠡，分梨单于，磔裂属国，夷坑谷，拔卤莽，刊山石，蹂尸舆厮，系累老弱，兖鋋瘢耆、金镞淫夷者数十万人，皆稽颡树颔，扶服蛾伏，二十余年矣，尚不敢惕息。
现代文：驱骆驼，烧炀蠡，离析单于，分裂属国，平坑谷，开草莽，削山石，踏尸收俘，捆系老弱，箭艇中马、金镞伤人数十万，都稽首竖颈，匍匐如蚁，二十多年了，仍不敢喘息。
English: Driven camels, burned cocoons, separated singly, divided dependent countries, leveled valleys, cut grass, scraped rocks, trampled corpses, captured prisoners, tied up the old and the weak, and wounded hundreds of thousands of people in archery, horse riding, and gold panning, all of which have made heads and necks stand on end, like ants. After more than 20 years, we still dare not breathe.

古文：夫天兵四临，幽都先加，回戈邪指，南越相夷，靡节西征，羌僰东驰。
现代文：天兵临境，先到幽都，调戈斜指，南越平定，倒节西征，羌蜒东奔。
English: Heaven's army arrives at the border, first to Yuto, changes direction diagonally, pacifies South Vietnam, marches westward in reverse direction, and meanders eastward.

古文：是以遐方疏俗殊邻绝党之域，自上仁所不化，茂德所不绥，莫不跷足抗手，请献厥珍，使海内淡然，永亡边城之灾，金革之患。
现代文：因此远方异俗隔绝的地方，自古仁化不及，不安于美德，没有不举足拱手，请求贡献珍宝，使海内安定，永无边防交战的灾患。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, remote and isolated places have not been as benevolent as the best, have not been anxious about virtue, have not raised their feet and raised their hands, have asked for contributions of treasures, have made the sea stable, and have never had the disaster of border war.

古文： 今朝廷纯仁，遵道显义，并包书林，圣风云靡；英华沉浮，洋溢八区，普天所覆，莫不沾濡；士有不谈王道者则樵夫笑之。
现代文： 现在朝廷纯仁，遵道重义，兼容诸学，圣德浩荡；英华沉浮，洋溢四海，普天之下，无不润泽；如果有士不谈王道樵夫也笑话他。
English: Now the imperial court is pure and benevolent, adhering to the path of justice, compatible with all schools of thought, and full of sacred virtue; the British and Chinese dynasties are full of ups and downs, pervading the four seas, and all over the world, there is nothing but lusciousness; if someone does not talk about Wang Daofu, he will also laugh at him.

古文：故意者以为事罔隆而不杀，物靡盛而不亏，故平不肆险，安不忘危。乃时以有年出兵，整舆竦戎，振师五莋，习马长杨，简力狡兽，校武票禽。
现代文：所以有人认为事物没有盛而不衰的，所以平安不忘危险。便时常在丰年出兵，整顿车兵，发兵五榨，在长杨习马，与猛兽角力，和轻禽比武。
English: Therefore, some people think that things do not prosper and do not decline, so peace does not forget danger. They often send troops in the good years, rectify the chariot soldiers, send troops to the five squeezes, in the Changyang Xi Ma, wrestle with ferocious beasts, and compete with light birds.

古文：乃萃然登南山，瞰乌弋，西厌月出骨，东震日域。
现代文：便群登南山，远望乌弋，西倾月窑，东震日域。
English: They climbed Nanshan Mountain in groups, looking at Wushan in the distance, the West-leaning Moon Kiln, and the East Seismic Sunspot.

古文：又恐后世迷于一时之事，常以此取国家之大务，淫荒田猎，陵夷而不御也，是以车不安轫，日未靡旃，从者仿佛，骫属而还；亦所以奉太宗之烈，遵文、武之度，复三王之田，反五帝之虞；使农不辍耰，工不下机，婚姻以时，男女莫违；出恺弟，行简易，矜劬劳，休力役；见百年，存孤弱，帅与之，同苦乐。
现代文：又怕后代迷恋于一时快事，经常用这些取代国家大事，荒淫于田猎，持续不止，所以车轫未稳，日未移影，随从没看真切，便逶迤回还；也用来继太宗之业，遵文武之制，恢复三王的田猎，返归五帝的娱乐；使农民不停耕，工人不下机器，按时婚配，男女不乱；外出平和，行动简易，赏勤劳，免徭役；探望长者，抚恤孤弱，和他们共苦乐。
English: It is also afraid that future generations will be infatuated with fleeting pleasures, and often use these to replace national events. Wild sex in the fields and hunting will continue for a long time, so the chariot is not stable, the sun does not move, and the followers do not see the real thing, so they will return it; it is also used to follow the Taizong's career, follow the military system, restore the three kings' field hunting, and return to the five emperors' entertainment; so that farmers do not stop cultivating, workers do not get off the machine, marriage is arranged on time, and men and women are not disorderly; it is peaceful to go out

古文：然后陈钟鼓之乐，鸣鞀磬之和，建碣磍之虡，拮隔鸣球，掉八列之舞；酌允铄，肴乐胥，听庙中之雍雍，受神人之福祜；歌投颂，吹合雅。
现代文：然后设钟鼓之乐，奏朔磬和声，竖勇武之虞，敲打玉磬，摇作八排舞蹈；饮信义，餐礼乐，听庙中雍雍之声，接受神人的福佑；歌吹合于猡》《颂》。
English: Then set up the music of the bell and drum, play the harmony of the bell and gong, erect the courage of the martial arts, beat the jade gong, and shake the eight-row dance; drink faith and righteousness, dinner music, listen to the voice of the temple, and accept the blessing of the godman; the song is blown into the "Ode."

古文：其勤苦此，故真神之所劳也。
现代文：如此勤劳，所以真神勉励。
English: So diligent, that's why the true God encourages them.

古文：方将俟元符，以禅梁甫之基，增泰山之高，延光于将来，比荣乎往号，岂徒欲淫览浮观，驰聘粳稻之地，周流梨栗之林，蹂践刍荛，夸诩众庶，盛狖玃之收，多麋鹿之获哉！
现代文：便要等候符瑞，来禅梁甫山基，增添泰山的威高，与往昔比光荣，延续于未来，难道衹是肆意游览，驰骋于粳稻地，周游于梨栗林，践踏草木，炫于众人，多多收获狄猩麋鹿吗！
English: So we must wait for Fu Rui, to meditate on the foundation of Liang Fu Mountain, to increase the dignity of Mount Tai, to be more glorious than in the past, and to continue in the future. Isn't it a wanton tour, galloping in the rice paddy, traveling around the pear forest, trampling on the grass, showing off to everyone, and harvesting a lot of deer!

古文：且盲不见咫尺，而离娄烛千里之隅；客徒爱胡人之获我禽兽，曾不知我亦已获其王侯。 
现代文：况且盲人看不见咫尺近物，但离娄却洞悉千里远的角落；您衹吝惜胡人得到我们的禽兽，并不知我们已经得到了他们的王侯。 
English: Moreover, the blind cannot see what is near, but the deaf can perceive what is far away; you grudge the barbarians their beasts, but you do not know that we have their princes.

古文：言未卒，墨客降席再拜稽首曰： 大哉体乎！
现代文：话没说完，墨茎退席拜了两次稽首说： 识大体啊！
English: Before he had finished speaking, Inkstalk bowed twice as he left the auditorium, saying, "You know the general idea!

古文：允非小子之所能及也。乃今日发矇，廓然已昭矣！ 
现代文：确实不是我能比得上的。今天启发混沌，已非常清楚了！ 
English: It's really not something I can match. Today, inspired chaos, it's very clear!

古文：哀帝时，丁、傅、董贤用事，诸附离之者或起家至二千石。
现代文：哀帝时，丁、傅、董贤掌权，附庸他们的人有的任官到二千石。
English: When the emperor was mourned, Ding, Fu, and Dongxian held power, and some of their vassals were appointed to positions of up to 2,000 koku.

古文：时，雄方草《太玄》，有以自守，泊如也。
现代文：当时递正在起草《太玄》，用来自守淡泊。
English: At that time, I was writing "Tai Xuan" (太玄), which was written by Shou Tanpo.

古文：或嘲雄以玄尚白，而雄解之，号曰《解嘲》。
现代文：有人嘲笑荡雄用玄色崇尚白色，啦为此作出解释，名为《解嘲》。
English: Some people ridiculed the swinger for using black and advocating white, and La Rong made an explanation for this, called "De-mockery."

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：辞中说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：客嘲扬子曰： 吾闻上世之士，人纲人纪，不生则已，生则上尊人君，下荣父母。析人之圭，儋人之爵，怀人之符，分人之禄，纡青拖紫，朱丹其毂。
现代文：客人嘲笑扬子道： 我听说上世的士人，他们立身处世的准则是，不出生则已，出生于世便向上尊崇国君，在下荣显父母，分别人的圭，受别人的爵，拥有别人的符节，分得别人的俸禄，身配青紫绶带，乘朱丹之车。
English: The guest scoffed at Yang Zi: I heard that the last generation of scholars, their life-long principle is that if you are not born, you are already born, and if you are born in the world, you will respect the sovereign, honor your parents, distinguish people's virtues, receive other people's titles, own other people's symbols, receive other people's salaries, wear a blue and purple ribbon, and ride a jeweller's carriage.

古文：今子幸得遭明盛之世，处不讳之朝，与群贤同行，历金门上玉堂有日矣，曾不能画一奇，出一策，上说人主，下谈公卿。
现代文：现在您有幸遇到明盛之世，处在不必顾忌的朝廷，和众贤人同列，经过金门上到玉堂很长时间了，并不能策划一个奇谋，向上劝说君主，向下和公卿谈论。
English: Now that you are fortunate enough to be living in the golden age, in a court where there is no need to be cautious, and you are on the same level as all the wise men, it has been a long time since you went through the Golden Gate to the Great Hall, and you cannot plan a conspiracy, persuade the monarch upwards, and talk to the nobles downwards.

古文：目如耀星，舌如电光，一从一衡，论者莫当，顾而作《太玄》五千文，支叶扶疏，独说十余万言，深者入黄泉，高者出苍天，大者含元气，纤者入无伦，然而位不过侍郎，擢才给事黄门。
现代文：眼如明星，舌似电光，一纵一横，辩论者没人能抵挡，却作《太玄》五千字，枝叶分布，衹解说十余万言，深的到黄泉，高的出苍天，大的涵元气，细的无可比，然而位不过侍郎，提升才到给事黄门。
English: Eyes like a star, tongue like lightning, one vertical and one horizontal, no one can resist the debater, but he wrote "Too Xuan" five thousand words, the distribution of branches and leaves, more than one hundred thousand words of commentary, deep to hell, high to heaven, great vitality, fine incomparable, but only a waiter, promoted to the yellow door.

古文：意者玄得毋尚白乎？
现代文：料想玄不能用来崇尚白色？
English: Can't the word "hypothetical" be used to promote whiteness?

古文：何为官之拓落也？ 
现代文：为什么做官这么落拓呢？ 
English: Why is being an official such a big deal?

古文：扬子笑而应之曰： 客徒欲朱丹吾毂，不知一跌将赤吾之族也！
现代文：扬子笑着回答说： 您祇想让我的车马华丽，不知道一失足将使我的家族流血！
English: Yangzi replied with a smile, "You only want to make my chariots and horses magnificent, but you don't know that a misstep will make my family bleed!"

古文：往者周罔解结，群鹿争逸，离为十二，合为六七，四分五剖，并为战国。
现代文：从前周朝纲废弛，诸侯纷争，分为十二，合为六七，四分五裂，并为战国。
English: From the previous Zhou Dynasty, the program was scrapped, the princes quarreled, divided into twelve, combined into sixty-seven, fragmented, and became a warring state.

古文：士无常君，国亡定臣，得士者富，失士者贫，矫翼厉翮，恣意所存，战士或自盛以橐，或凿坏以遁。
现代文：士人没有经常的君主，国家没有固定的大臣，得到士人的富，失去士人的穷，举翅而飞，随意栖止，所以士有的用袋子装上自己，有的凿墙逃跑。
English: The nobles do not have a permanent monarch, the country does not have a fixed minister, get the wealth of the nobles, lose the poor of the nobles, fly with wings, and stay at will, so some of the nobles put themselves in bags, and some chiseled walls to escape.

古文：是故驺衍以颉亢而取世资，孟轲虽连蹇，犹为万乘师。
现代文：所以绉衍因上下不定而取得名望，孟轲虽遭遇艰难，仍为万乘之师。
English: Therefore, Qianyan gained fame because of the ups and downs, and Meng Yu, although he encountered difficulties, was still a teacher of Manchukuo.

古文： 今大汉左东海，右渠搜，前番禺，后陶涂。
现代文： 现在大汉左有东海，右有渠搜，前有番禺，后有陶涂。
English: Now the Great Han Dynasty has the East Sea on the left, the canal search on the right, the Panyu in front, and the pottery painting behind.

古文：东南一尉，西北一候。
现代文：东南有一尉，西北有一候。
English: There is a lieutenant in the southeast and a captain in the northwest.

古文：徽以纠墨，制以质铁，散以礼乐，风以《诗》、《书》，旷以岁月，结以倚庐。
现代文：有罪者系于徽墨，更严重的用质鈇砍头，分播礼乐，教化《诗》《书》，建造学舍，岁月持久。
English: The culprits are linked to the crest ink, and the more serious ones are to chop off the head with a chisel, broadcast liturgical music, teach "poetry" and "books," and build a schoolhouse. The years are long.

古文：天下之士，雷动云合，鱼鳞杂袭，咸营于八区，家家自以为稷、契，人人自以为咎繇，戴縰垂缨而谈者皆拟于阿衡，五尺童子羞比晏婴与夷吾，当涂者入青云，失路者委沟渠，旦握权则为卿相，夕失势则为匹夫；譬若江湖之雀，勃解之鸟，乘雁集不为之多，双凫飞不为之少。
现代文：天下士人，都像雷一样行动，像云一样聚合，鱼鳞重叠一般，都在八方经营，家家自以为稷契，人人自以为咎繇，头戴冠缨而谈论的人都自比阿衡，五尺童子羞与晏婴夷吾相比；路顺的高入青云，无路走的弃于沟渠，早晨掌权便是卿相，晚上失势就是匹夫；好比江湖小雀，勃解小鸟，四雁聚集不算多，双凫飞翔不算少。
English: The world's nobles are all acting like thunder, gathering like clouds, overlapping fish scales in general, all operating in the eight directions. Families think of themselves as a contract, everyone thinks of themselves as a culprit, and people who wear crowns and talk about them compare themselves to Ah Heng. A five-foot boy is ashamed to be compared to a baby eagle. The high road of Lushun enters the clouds, and those who have no way to go are abandoned in the ditch. In the morning, the power is a noble phase, and in the evening, the loss of power is a peacock. It is like a small sparrow, a small bird, and the four geese

古文：昔三仁去而殷虚，二老归而周炽，子胥死而吴亡，种、蠡存而粤伯，五羖入而秦喜，乐毅出而燕惧，范睢以折摺而危穰侯，蔡泽虽噤吟而笑唐举。
现代文：从前三个仁人离开后殷虚弱，两位老人归依周便强盛，子胥死吴亡国，种、蠡在越称霸，五段来秦高兴，乐毅走燕恐惧，范雎用折拉使穣侯危险，蔡泽以曲颐受唐举嘲笑。
English: After the departure of the first three benevolent people, Yin was weak, the two old people converted to Zhou and became strong, Zixuan died and Wu lost the country, Zeng and Zou became more and more dominant, the five sections came to Qin and were happy, Le Yi and Yan were afraid to go, Fan Zhe used the fold and pull to make Zhou dangerous, and Cai Ze was ridiculed by Tangfu for the fold and pull.

古文：故当其有事也，非萧、曹、子房、平、勃、樊、霍则不能安；当其亡事也，章句之徒相与坐而守之，亦亡所患。
现代文：所以当天下发生动乱时，不是萧、曹、子房、平、勃、樊、霍便不能安定；当天下安定时，章句小儒一起坐着守卫，也没什么可怕的。
English: Therefore, when the world is in turmoil, it is not Xiao, Cao, Zifu, Ping, Bo, Yao, and Huo who cannot be stable; when the world is stable, there is nothing terrible about small men sitting together to guard.

古文：故世乱，则圣哲驰骛而不足；世治，则庸夫高枕而有余。
现代文：所以世道动乱，便圣哲驱驰不够用；世道安定，便庸才高枕都有余。
English: Therefore, when the world is in turmoil, it is not enough for the sage to drive; when the world is stable, the mediocrity is more than enough.

古文： 夫上世之士，或解缚而相，或释褐而傅；或倚夷门而笑，或横江潭而渔；或七十说而不遇，或立谈间而封侯；或枉千乘于陋巷，或拥帚彗而先驱。
现代文： 先代的士人，有的松了绑作相，有的脱了褐作傅，有的靠着裹塱笑，有的横渡江潭打鱼；有的游说七十次不被用，有的站着谈话间被封侯；有的让千乘之君驾临陋巷，有的使国君拿着扫帚作前导。
English: In the previous generation of scholars, some loosened their ties to become a monk, some took off their brown robes to become a cook, some relied on their cocoon to smile, some crossed the river to fish; some were lobbied seventy times and were not used, some were knighted while standing and talking; some let the king of the thousand rides ride down the back alley, and some made the king lead the way with a broom.

古文：是以士颇得信其舌而奋其笔，窒隙蹈瑕而无所诎也。
现代文：所以士人很能伸舌提笔，钻空塞隙没有止境。
English: Therefore, the scholar can very well extend his tongue to pick up the pen, and there is no end to drilling the gap.

古文：当今县令不请士，郡守不迎师，群卿不揖客，将相不俯眉；言奇者见疑，行殊者得辟，是以欲谈者宛舌而固声，欲行者拟足而投迹。
现代文：当今县令不请士人，郡守不迎老师，群卿不礼遇宾客，将相不低眉；谈怪事的被怀疑，行为怪的被治罪，所以想谈论的人曲舌不作声，想行路的犹豫止步。
English: Today's county magistrates do not invite scholars, county governors do not welcome teachers, and nobles are not polite when receiving guests, so they will not lower their eyebrows; people who talk about strange things are suspected, and those who behave strangely are punished, so people who want to talk are silent, and those who want to travel are hesitant to stop.

古文：乡使上世之士处乎今，策非甲科，行非孝廉，举非方正，独可抗疏，时道是非，高得待诏，下触闻罢，又安得青紫？
现代文：若使先代的士人处在今天，对策不是甲科，行为不是孝廉，举止不是方正，衹能上疏，时常评论是非，好的等待韶书，差的报闻被免职，又怎能披挂青紫？
English: If the previous generation of scholars are in today's situation, the countermeasures are not academic, the behavior is not filial, the manners are not upright, the ability to learn is sparse, the right and wrong are often commented on, the good are waiting to be written, and the bad news is dismissed, how can they wear the blue and purple?

古文： 且吾闻之，炎炎者灭，隆隆者绝；观雷观火，为盈为实，天收其声，地藏其热。
现代文： 并且我听说，火光炽盛终要熄灭，雷声轰轰终至消绝；看雷看火，认为充实，天收拢其声音，地藏起其热量。
English: And I have heard that the light of a flaming fire goes out in the end, and the voice of the thunder is hushed in the end; that the thunder looks on the fire, and considers it full, and the sky hides its voice, and the earth conceals its heat.

古文：高明之家，鬼瞰其室。
现代文：高大明亮的家，鬼偷看他的屋子。
English: A tall, bright house, a ghost peeking into his room.

古文：攫挐者亡，默默者存；位极者宗危，自守者身全。是故知玄知默，守道之极；爰清爰静，游神之廷；惟寂惟莫，守德之宅。
现代文：争权夺势的灭亡，默默无闻的生存；位高的祖先危险，自守的保全身体，所以知道玄默，是守道的顶点；能够清静，在神廷游览；寂寞淡泊，是守德之家。
English: The demise of competing for power, the existence of obscurity; the danger of high ancestors, the self-preservation of the preservation of the body, so knowing the mystery of silence, is the pinnacle of the guard road; to be able to be quiet, to visit the shrine; lonely and dull, is the home of morality.

古文：世异事变，人道不殊，彼我易时，未知何如。
现代文：世事变化，人道不变，我和他换了时候，就不知会怎样。
English: Things change, human nature remains the same. When I change places with him, I don't know what will happen.

古文：今子乃以鸱枭而笑凤皇，执蝘蜓而嘲龟龙，不亦病乎！
现代文：现在您用鸱枭笑话凤凰，拿着蛔蜓嘲笑龟龙，不是很错误吗！
English: Now you are making fun of the phoenix with your gong and mocking the turtle dragon with your gong. Isn't that very wrong!

古文：子徒笑我玄之尚白，吾亦笑子之病甚，不遭臾跗、扁鹊，悲夫！ 
现代文：您徒然笑我用玄崇尚白，我也笑您病得厉害，却碰不上臾跗、扁鹊，可悲啊！ 
English: You laugh in vain at my use of the word "hypocrisy," I also laugh at you being so ill, but not being able to touch your warts and moles, pathetic!

古文：客曰： 然则靡《玄》无所成名乎？
现代文：客人说： 那么没有《玄》就不能成名吗？
English: The guest said: So without "Xuan" can't you become famous?

古文：范、蔡以下何必《玄》哉？ 
现代文：茎、基以下何必要用《玄》呢？ 
English: Why is it necessary to use "Xuan" from stem to base?

古文：扬子曰： 范雎，魏之亡命也，折胁拉髂，免于微索，翕肩蹈背，扶服入橐，激卬万乘之主，界泾阳抵穰侯而代之，当也。
现代文：扬子说： 范雎，魏的亡命徒，折胁拉骨，免于入狱，收肩踏背，被扶入袋中，用才智打动万乘之君，离间泾阳抵制穣侯而代替他，是合时啊。
English: Yang Zi said: Fan Xuan, Wei's fugitive, broke the shackles, was exempted from imprisonment, shrugged his shoulders, was put in a bag, impressed the Prince of Manchuria with his wit, and replaced him with Guo Yang, who resisted Guo Hou. It was the right time.

古文：蔡泽，山东之匹夫也，顉颐折頞，涕涶流沫，西揖强秦之相，扼其咽，炕其气，附其背而夺其位，时也。
现代文：蔡泽，山东的平民，曲颐折鼻，泪唾横流，向西揖拜强秦之相，扼其咽喉，绝其气，附在其背上夺其位，碰对了时候。
English: Cai Ze, a commoner from Shandong, with a crooked nose and tears streaming down his face, went to the West to worship the strong Qin, choked his throat, choked his breath, clung to his back to win his place, and the time was right.

古文：天下已定，金革已平，都于雒阳，娄敬委辂脱挽，掉三寸之舌，建不拔之策，举中国徙之长安，适也。
现代文：天下已平定，武器已收起，建都雒阳，娄敬弃辖解挽，转动三寸之舌，建议牢固的策略，从中原迁到长安，是适当啊。
English: The world has been pacified, the weapons have been put away, the capital has been built in Shenyang, the government has abandoned its jurisdiction, and it is appropriate to move from the Central Plains to Chang'an by turning the three-inch tongue and suggesting a solid strategy.

古文：五帝垂典，三王传礼，百世不易，叔孙通起于枹鼓之间，解甲投戈，遂作君臣之仪，得也。
现代文：五帝传典，三王传礼，百世不变，叔孙通起家于袍鼓之间，解甲丢戈，便制作君臣仪法，为得当。
English: The Five Emperors' Tradition and the Three Kings' Tradition have remained unchanged for a hundred generations. Uncles and grandsons all started their families between the robes and drums, and when the armor was removed, they made the Rites of Kings and Subjects, which was appropriate.

古文：《甫刑》靡敝，秦法酷烈，圣汉权制，而萧何造律，宜也。
现代文：《甫刑》散乱，秦法苛酷，圣汉改制，萧何定法，为适宜。
English: "Imprisonment" is scattered, the Qin method is harsh, the Holy Han system is reformed, and the Xiao He fixed method is suitable.

古文：故有造萧何律于唐、虞之世，则悖矣；有作叔孙通仪于夏、殷之时，则惑矣；有建娄敬之策于成周之世，则缪矣；有谈范、蔡之说于金、张、许、史之间，则狂矣。
现代文：所以有制定萧何律于唐虞之世，就会违理；有制作叔孙通仪法于夏殷时，便会迷惑；有建议娄敬策略于成周时，便是错谬；有谈论范、蔡之说于金、张、许、史之间，便是疯狂。
English: Therefore, it would be unreasonable to formulate the Xiao He Rule in the Tang Yu era; it would be confusing to make the Uncle and Grandson Ritual in the Xia Yin era; it would be wrong to suggest the Zou Jing Strategy in the Cheng Zhou era; and it would be crazy to talk about Fan and Cai Zhi between Jin, Zhang, Xu and Shi.

古文：夫萧规曹随，留侯画策，陈平出奇，功若泰山，向若阺隤，唯其人之赡知哉，亦会其时之可为也。
现代文：萧规曹随，留侯策划，陈平奇谋，功比泰山，响似山崩，是那些人多智吗？也是他们遇到的时候可有作为。
English: Xiao Gui Cao Sui, Lingering Planner, Chen Ping Qizhuang, the result is better than Mount Tai, it sounds like a landslide, are those people more intelligent? It is also possible for them to do something when they meet.

古文：故为可为于可为之时，则从；为不可为于不可为之时，则凶。
现代文：所以在可做的时候做可做的事，便如愿；在不可做的时候做不可做的事，就不吉利。
English: Therefore, to do what can be done when it can be done is auspicious; to do what cannot be done when it cannot be done is inauspicious.

古文：夫蔺先生收功于章台，四皓采荣于南山，公孙创业于金马，票骑发迹于祁连，司马长卿窃訾于卓氏，东方朔割炙于细君。
现代文：蔺先生在章台立功，四皓在南山得名，公孙在金马创业，骠骑在祁连发迹，司马长卿挑引卓氏而致巨资，东方朔给捆君割肉而感动皇帝。
English: Mr. Zou made a great contribution in Zhangdai, Four Brothers made a name for themselves in Nanshan, Gongsun started a business in Jinma, Zou Jian made a fortune in Qilian, Sima Changqing attracted Zhuo and made a huge investment, Dongfangshuo cut meat for Baojun and moved the emperor.

古文：仆诚不能与此数公者并，故默然独守吾《太玄》。 
现代文：我实在不能和这些人相提，所以默然独守我的《太玄》。 
English: I really can't be compared to these people, so I silently keep my "The Great Mystery" to myself.

古文：雄以为赋者，将以风之也，必推类而言，极丽靡之辞，闳侈巨衍，竞于使人不能加也，既乃归之于正，然览者已过矣。
现代文：扬雄认为赋是用来讽谏的，如果一定要推展论述，用尽华丽的辞藻，宏伟侈华推衍无穷，致使人无以复加，既而归为正道，但看的人已翻过去了。
English: Yang Xiong believes that Fu is used for ridicule, if it is necessary to carry out the discussion, it is necessary to exhaust the magnificent words, the magnificent luxury is infinite, so that people can not add more, and it is already the right way, but the people watching have turned over.

古文：往时武帝好神仙，相如上《大人赋》，欲以风，帝反缥缥有陵云之志。
现代文：从前武帝喜欢神仙，相如献上《大人赋》，要用来讽谏，皇帝看后反而飘飘然有凌云的想法。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu liked immortals, and presented "Adult Fu" as if it was to be used as a satire. However, after the emperor read it, the idea of Lingyun floated in his mind.

古文：由是言之，赋劝而不止，明矣。
现代文：由此说来，赋劝而不止，是很明白的。
English: From this, it is very clear that it is more than just persuasion.

古文：又颇似俳优淳于髡、优孟之徒，非法度所存，贤人君子诗赋之正也，于是辍不复为。
现代文：又很像俳优淳于髡、优孟之流，不是法度所在，贤人君子诗赋之正，于是停止不再作赋。
English: It's also very much like the haiku of Jun Yu, Yu Meng and others. It's not where the law is, the wise man and gentleman's poem is correct, so he stopped making it.

古文：而大潭思浑天，参摹而四分之，极于八十一。
现代文：便深思天象，参摹分为四份，终于八十一。
English: He pondered over the celestial body, and divided it into four parts, and finally into eighty-one parts.

古文：旁则三摹九据，极之七百二十九赞，亦自然之道也。
现代文：旁边三摹九据，终于七百二十九赞，也是自然之道。
English: Next to three hundred and ninety-nine references, finally seven hundred and twenty-nine approvals, is also the natural way.

古文：故观《易》者，见其卦而名之；观《玄》者，数其画而定之。
现代文：所以读易》的，看到卦便叫出名；读《玄》的，数其画便可确定。
English: Therefore, if you read Yi, you will be famous when you see Gua; if you read Xuan, you can be sure of the number of his paintings.

古文：《玄》首四重者，非卦也，数也。
现代文：《玄》首的四重，不是卦，是数。
English: The first four lines of "Xuan" are not hexagrams, but numerals.

古文：其用自天元推一昼一夜阴阳数度律历之纪，九九大运，与天终始。
现代文：用法从天元推一昼一夜阴阳数度律历之纪，九九大运，和天始终。
English: Usage From the origin of heaven, one day and one night, yin and yang, several degrees, the discipline of the calendar, the 99th National Day, and the day are consistent.

古文：故《玄》三方、九州、二十七部、八十一家、二百四十三表、七百二十九赞，分为三卷，曰一二三，与《泰初历》相庆，亦有颛顼之历焉。
现代文：所以《玄》三方、九州、二十七部、八十一家、二百四十三表、七百二十九赞，分为三卷，称一二三，和《泰初历》相应，也有颛顼历。
English: Therefore, "Xuan" is divided into three volumes, including the three sides, Kyushu, 27 chapters, 81 chapters, 243 tables, and 729 zans. It is called 123 and corresponds to the "Thai New Year's Calendar" and also has a leap year.

古文：扌筮之以三策，关之以休咎，絣之以象类，播之以人事，文之以五行，拟之以道德仁义礼知。无主无名，要合《五经》，苟非其事，文不虚生。
现代文：用三策占卜，联系吉凶，杂入象类，推布人事，以五行为文，比拟道德仁义礼智。没有主旨名称，切合《五经》，如不是其事，不出虚文。
English: Using the three-pronged divination, linking the auspicious and the inauspicious, mixing in the elephant, promoting personnel, and using the five-character text to compare morality, benevolence, righteousness, and propriety. There is no theme name, which is consistent with the "Five Classics," and if it is not the case, there will be no false text.

古文：为其泰曼漶而不可知，故有《首》、《冲》、《错》、《测》、《摛》、《莹》、《数》、《文》、《掜》、《图》、《告》十一篇，皆以解剥《玄》体，离散其文，章句尚不存焉。
现代文：因为太混沌不可知，所以有《首》、《冲》、《错》、《测》、《摊》、《莹》、《数》、《文》、《挽》、《图》、《告》十一篇，都用来解剖《玄》体，分析文章，章句已不传了。
English: Because it is too chaotic and unknowable, there are "head," "rush," "wrong," "measure," "stand," "bright," "number," "text," "break," "picture," and "announcement" eleven articles, all of which are used to dissect the body of "Xuan," analyze articles, and chapters have not been passed down.

古文：《玄》文多，故不著，观之者难知，学之者难成。
现代文：《玄》文太多，所以不记录；读了难懂，学了难成。
English: "Xuan" has too many texts, so it is not recorded; if it is difficult to understand, it is difficult to learn.

古文：客有难《玄》大深，众人之不好也，雄解之，号曰《解难》。
现代文：有客人责怪《玄》文太深，众人不喜欢，扬雄作文解释，名叫《解难》。
English: Some guests accused "Xuan" of being too deep, and people didn't like it. Yang Xiong's composition explanation was called "Solving Difficulties."

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：辞中说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：客难扬子曰： 凡著书者，为众人之所好也，美味期乎合口，工声调于比耳。
现代文：客人责怪扬子说： 凡是著书的，都要迎合众人的爱好，美味希望它合口，妙声美在悦耳。
English: The guest reproached Yanzi, saying, "Whenever you write a book, you should cater to people's hobbies. You should hope that it is delicious, that it is easy to understand, and that it is pleasing to the ear.

古文：今吾子乃抗辞幽说，闳意眇指，独驰聘于有亡之际，而陶冶大炉，旁薄群生，历览者兹年矣，而殊不寤。
现代文：现在您高辞深说，广意微指，独自驰骋在有无之间，陶制大炉，纷绘群生，阅览过一年了，仍很不懂。
English: Now you are eloquent and profound, broad and subtle, galloping alone between existence and non-existence, a ceramic furnace, a crowd of paintings, and after a year of reading, you still don't understand very much.

古文：亶费精神于此，而烦学者于彼，譬画者画于无形，弦者放于无声，殆不可乎？ 扬子曰： 俞。
现代文：衹是在这裹费精神，在那裹使学者麻烦，好比画家画在无形之上，弹琴的依照无声，大概不行吧？ 扬子说： 对。
English: Isn't it possible that the cocoon is here to encumber the spirit, and there to trouble the scholar, just as a painter paints on the invisible, and a musician plays according to the silent? Yanzi said, "Yes."

古文：若夫闳言崇议，幽微之涂，盖难与览者同也。
现代文：至于高言大论，幽微之道，大概难和读者相同。
English: As for the lofty rhetoric, the subtle way, it is probably difficult to be the same as the reader.

古文：昔人有观象于天，视度于地，察法于人者，天丽且弥，地普而深，昔人之辞，乃玉乃金。
现代文：从前有人观天象，察地度，审人法，天显著广大，地大而深厚，前人的话，是金是玉。
English: In the past, there were people who observed celestial phenomena, surveyed the earth, and judged people. The sky was obviously vast, the earth was large and deep, and the words of the predecessors were gold or jade.

古文：彼岂好为艰难哉？
现代文：他难道是喜欢故作艰难吗？
English: Does he like to play hard to get?

古文：势不得已也。
现代文：情势不得已啊。
English: The situation is desperate.

古文：独不见夫翠虯绛螭之将登乎天，必耸身于仓梧之渊；不阶浮云，翼疾风，虚举而上升，则不能撠胶葛，腾九闳。
现代文：难道没见翠虬绛螭将要登天，一定要耸身到仓梧之深渊；不凭浮云，藉疾风，空举而上升，便不能到达廖阔，飞升九闳。
English: Can't you see that if the Jade Dragonfly wants to ascend to the sky, it must soar into the abyss of chaos; it cannot reach the vast expanse and soar to the nine heavens without floating clouds, whirlwinds, and lifting up in the air.

古文：日月之经不千里，则不能烛六合，耀八纮；泰山之高不嶕峣，则不能浡滃云而散歊烝。
现代文：曰月不行千里，便不能照六合，亮八弦；泰山不高耸入云，便不能聚集浮云而散发浮气。
English: It is said that if the moon does not travel thousands of miles, it will not be able to illuminate the six directions and illuminate the eight chords; if Mount Tai does not rise high into the clouds, it will not be able to gather floating clouds and emit buoyant air.

古文：是以宓牺氏之作《易》也，绵络天地，经以八卦，文王附六爻，孔子错其象而彖其辞，然后发天地之臧，定万物之基。
现代文：所以伏羲氏作《易》，联络天地，统以八卦，文王附着六爻，孔子杂错卦象作彖辞，然后发挥天地之善，定下万物的基础。
English: Therefore, Fuxi wrote "Yi" to connect heaven and earth, using the Eight Trigrams, King Wen adhered to the Six Trigrams, Confucius mixed up the Six Trigrams, and then used the goodness of heaven and earth to lay the foundation for all things.

古文：《典》、《谟》之篇，《雅》、《颂》之声，不温纯深润，则不足以扬鸿烈而章缉熙。
现代文：《典》《谟》篇章，《雅》《颂》之声，不温润纯深，便不足以发扬鸿业彰显光明。
English: The chapters of "Shuan" and "Mao" and the voices of "Ya" and "Chuang" are not warm, pure and deep enough to carry forward the great cause and highlight the light.

古文：盖胥靡为宰，寂寞为尸；大味必淡，大音必希；大语叫叫，大道低回。
现代文：所以用虚无来主事，以寂寞为原则：最好的味道一定平淡，最好的声音一定稀微；至大的话传得远，大道纡曲。
English: Therefore, the use of nothingness as the main thing, with loneliness as the principle: the best taste must be plain, the best sound must be rare; the greatest words are spread far and wide, and the road is crooked.

古文：是以声之眇者不可同于众人之耳，形之美者不可棍于世俗之目，辞之衍者不可齐于庸人之听。今夫弦者，高张急徽，追趋逐耆，则坐者不期而附矣；试为之族《咸池》，揄《六茎》，发《箫韶》，咏《九成》，则莫有和也。
现代文：所以美妙的声音不能被众人的耳朵认可，美丽的形象不能让世俗觉得悦目，幽远的言辞庸人认为不中听。现在弹琴，声调高急，迎合众好，那么大家就不期而至；如果弹奏《咸池》、《六茎》、《箫韶》、《九成》，便没人应和了。
English: Therefore, the beautiful sound cannot be recognized by the ears of many people, the beautiful image cannot make the world feel pleasing to the eyes, and the far-off words are considered unlistenable by the philistines. If you play the piano now, with a high-pitched tone and welcome the public, then everyone will come unexpectedly; if you play "The Salt Pond," "The Six Stems," "The Plough" and "Ninety Percent," then no one will respond.

古文：是故钟期死，伯牙绝弦破琴而不肯与众鼓；獿人亡，则匠石辍斤而不敢妄斫。
现代文：所以钟期死了，伯牙就弄破琴拉断弦不肯再给众人演奏，获人死了，匠石就扔掉斧子不敢轻易砍东西。
English: Therefore, when the clock died, Bega broke the strings and refused to play for everyone again. When someone died, the carpenter threw away the axe and did not dare to cut things easily.

古文：师旷之调钟，俟知音者之在后也；孔子作《春秋》，几君子之前睹也。
现代文：师旷调钟，要等知音在才进行；孔子作《春秋》，期望君子能够先读。
English: When a scholar adjusts a clock, it is necessary to wait until a friend is present; Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," expecting a gentleman to be able to read it first.

古文：老聃有遗言，贵知我者希，此非其操与！ 
现代文：老聃有遣言，以理解我的人少为贵，这不是他的节操吗！ 
English: Lao Zi has a saying that people who understand me are precious. Isn't this his self-restraint?

古文：雄见诸子各以其知舛驰，大氐诋訾圣人，即为怪迂。析辩诡辞，以挠世事，虽小辩，终破大道而或众，使溺于所闻而不自知其非也。
现代文：扬雄见到诸子各自以其知识相背驰，大多诋毁圣人，自做怪僻，巧言诡辩，搅乱时政，虽是小的言论，最终会破坏大道迷惑众人，使他们沉溺于听到的话却自己不知是错的。
English: Yang Xiong saw that all the sons contradicted each other with their knowledge, most of them slandered saints, made themselves eccentric, cleverly argued, and disrupted the politics of the time. Although it was a small speech, it would eventually destroy the avenue and confuse people, making them indulge in what they heard, but they did not know that they were wrong.

古文：及太史公记六国，历楚、汉，讫麟止，不与圣人同，是非颇谬于经。
现代文：到太史公记载六国，经历楚汉，到《麟止》结束，和圣人看法不一样，是非观念和经书相差很大。
English: Up to the time of the official record of the Six Kingdoms, the experience of Chu and Han, and the end of "Lun Zhi," the views are different from the saints, and the concepts of right and wrong are very different from the scriptures.

古文：故人时有问雄者，常用法应之，撰以为十三卷，象《论语》，号曰《法言》。
现代文：所以常有人询问扬雄，扬雄经常模仿经典之言来回答他们，着成十三卷，模仿《论语》，名叫《法言》。
English: Therefore, Yang Xiong was often asked questions. Yang Xiong often imitated classical sayings to answer them, and wrote thirteen volumes, imitating "Analects," called "Dictionary."

古文：《法言》文多不著，独著其目：天降生民，倥侗颛蒙，恣于情性，聪明不开，训诸理。
现代文：《法言》文章多不记述，衹记其目录：天生万民，懵懂无知，肆意纵情，聪明未开通，以理训告。
English: Most of the articles in the "Dictionary of the Law" do not describe, but keep in mind its catalogue: born of the people, ignorant, wantonly indulgent, unenlightened, and admonished by reason.

古文：撰《学行》第一。
现代文：作《学行》第一。
English: He was the first to write "School Trip."

古文：降周迄孔，成于王道，终后诞章乖离，诸子图微。
现代文：从旦公到孔王，建成王道，其后虚诞盛行乖离于道，诸子所谋衰微。
English: From Dangong to Kongwang, the royal road was built, after which the imaginary flourished and deviated from the road, and the children's plots waned.

古文：撰《吾子》第二。
现代文：作《吾子》第一。
English: He was the first to compose the chorus of "My Son."

古文：事有本真，陈施于亿，动不克咸，本诸身。
现代文：事物有本真，布陈于万事，行动不能尽善，原因在自身。
English: Things are real, the cloth is in everything, the action can not be perfect, the reason is in itself.

古文：撰《修身》第三。
现代文：作《修身》第三。
English: It is the third song in the "Self-Cultivation" series.

古文：芒芒天道，在昔圣考，过则失中，不及则不至，不可奸罔。
现代文：芒芒天道，古代圣人所成，超过便不合，不足便不达，不可作奸诬罔。
English: According to the Tao of Heaven, the achievements of ancient sages, if they are more than that, they are not suitable, and if they are not enough, they are not up to the mark.

古文：撰《问道》第四。
现代文：作《问道》第四。
English: This is the fourth song from "Ask."

古文：神心曶恍，经纬万方，事系诸道德仁谊礼。撰《问神》第五。
现代文：心神恍惚，经纬万方，事关道德仁义礼。作《问神》第五。
English: The mind is in a trance, the warp and woof are in all directions, and it is a matter of morality, benevolence and righteousness.

古文：明哲煌煌，旁烛亡疆，逊于不虞，以保天命。
现代文：明哲盛美，光照无疆，避开不测，保全天命。
English: Mingzhe is prosperous and beautiful, shines boundlessly, avoids accidents, and preserves the destiny.

古文：撰《问明》第六。
现代文：作《问明》第六。
English: It is the sixth work in the "Questioning" series.

古文：假言周于天地，赞于神明，幽弘横广，绝于迩言。
现代文：远说周遍天地，礼赞神明，深广宏大，超过近世。
English: It is said that the far reaches of heaven and earth, praises the gods, is profound and vast, and surpasses the modern world.

古文：撰《寡见》第七。
现代文：作《寡见》第七。
English: It is the seventh song of "Widowed."

古文：圣人聪明渊懿，继天测灵，冠于群伦，经诸范。
现代文：圣人聪明深美，继天命测神数，超过众人，作为常法。
English: The sage is wise and profound, following the divine destiny to measure the number of gods, surpassing all others, as a common law.

古文：撰《五百》第八。
现代文：作《五百》第八。
English: It is the eighth work of "The Five Hundred."

古文：立政鼓众，动化天下，莫上于中和，中和之发，在于哲民情。
现代文：建政劝民，感化天下，中和为最高，施用中和，在于知民情。
English: To build a government and persuade the people, to influence the world, neutralization is the highest, and the application of neutralization is to know the people's situation.

古文：撰《先知》第九。
现代文：作《先知》第九。
English: The ninth chapter of the Book of the Prophet.

古文：仲尼以来，国君、将相、卿士、名臣参差不齐，一概诸圣。
现代文：仲尼以来，国君将相卿士名臣志业不同，统一于圣人大道。
English: Since the time of Zhong Ni, the country's sovereigns have unified the ministries of ministers, nobles, and statesmen in the Sage Avenue.

古文：撰《重黎》第十。
现代文：作《重黎》第十。
English: This is the 10th work of "Chong Li."

古文：仲尼之后，讫于汉道，德行颜、闵、股肱萧、曹，爰及名将尊卑之条，称述品藻。
现代文：孔子之后，讫于汉道，德行崇尚颜、闱，股肱大臣推及盖、曹，至于名将排列尊卑，确定差品文质。
English: After Confucius, he followed the Han Dynasty, advocating the virtues of Shangyan and Yao, and promoting the ministers of capital and labor, Gao and Cao. As for the names, he ranked them in order of superiority and inferiority, and determined the quality of the inferior products.

古文：撰《渊骞》第十一。
现代文：作《渊骞》第十一。
English: It is the 11th chorus of "The Fountainhead."

古文：君子纯终领闻，蠢迪检押，旁开圣则。
现代文：君子善终美名，修正而后行动，发扬圣法。
English: A gentleman is good at the end of the day, and he will correct and then act to promote the sacred law.

古文：撰《君子》第十二。
现代文：作《君子》第十二。
English: It is the twelfth chorus of "The Gentleman."

古文：孝莫大于宁亲，宁亲莫大于宁神，宁神莫大于四表之欢心。撰《孝至》第十三。
现代文：最大的孝是使双亲安定，最好的安亲是使其神灵安定，最好的安神是取得四方的欢心。作《孝至》第十三。
English: The greatest filial duty is to bring stability to one's parents, the best peace to one's relatives is to bring stability to one's gods, and the best peace to one's gods is to win the hearts of all four directions.

古文：赞曰：雄之自序云尔。
现代文：赞曰：这是扬雄的自序。
English: Zang said: This is Yang Xiong's self-order.

古文：初，雄年四十余，自蜀来至游京师，大司马车骑将军王音奇其文雅，召以为门下史，荐雄待诏，岁余，奏《羽猎赋》，除为郎，给事黄门，与王莽、刘歆并。
现代文：起初，扬雄四十多岁时，从蜀来游京师，大司马车骑将军王音欣赏其文才，召作门下史，推荐扬雄待诏，一年多后，上奏《羽猎赋》，除官为郎，给事黄门，和王莽、刘歆并列。
English: At the beginning, when Yang Xiong was in his forties, he traveled to Beijing from Shul to visit the master, the grand secretary and the carriage-riding general Wang Yin to appreciate his literary talent, called him to be a disciple of history, and recommended Yang Xiong to wait for the imperial edict. More than a year later, he performed "Hagyu Fu" and was removed from the official position and sent to the Yellow Gate, alongside Wang Mang and Liu Ye.

古文：哀帝之初，又与董贤同官。
现代文：哀帝初，又和董贤同官。
English: At the beginning of the Emperor's mourning period, he became a co-officer with Dong Xian.

古文：当成、哀、平间，莽、贤皆为三公，权倾人主，所荐莫不拔擢，而雄三世不徙官。
现代文：成、哀、平年间，王莽、董贤都作了三公，权过人君，推荐的人没有不提拔的，但扬雄三代不升官。
English: Wang Mang and Dong Xian became the Three Princes during the years of Cheng, Ai, and Ping. They had power over people, and there was no one who was not recommended for promotion, but Yang Xiong was not promoted for three generations.

古文：及莽篡位，谈说之士用符命称功德获封爵者甚众，雄复不侯，以耆老久次转为大夫，恬于势利乃如是。
现代文：到王莽篡位，论谈者用符命赞美其功德而被封爵的人很多，扬雄仍不被封侯，因年纪大而渐升为大夫，他就是如此淡泊势利。
English: By the time Wang Mang usurped the throne, there were many people who were knighted and the commentators praised their merits with the help of omens. Yang Xiong was still not knighted, and because of his age, he gradually became a doctor. He was so indifferent and snobbish.

古文：实好古而乐道，其意欲求文章成名于后世，以为经莫大于《易》，故作《太玄》；传莫大于《论语》，作《法言》；史篇莫善于《仓颉》，作《训纂》；箴莫善于《虞箴》，作《州箴》；赋莫深于《离骚》，反而广之；辞莫丽于相如，作四赋；皆斟酌其本，相与放依而驰骋云。
现代文：确实好古爱道，想以文章在后世扬名，认为经最大的是《易》，所以作《太玄》；传最好的是《论语》，所以作《法言》；史篇最好的是《仓颉》，所以作《训纂》，箴诫最好的是《虞箴》，所以作《州箴》；赋最深的是《离骚》，所以相背而推广它；辞最华丽的是担如，所以作四赋：都探索本源，模仿发挥。
English: He really loved the ancient classics and wanted to make a name for himself in future generations with his essays. He thought that the most profound was "Yi," so he wrote "Tai Xuan"; the best was "Analects," so he wrote "Dogma"; the best was "Chamberlain," so he wrote "Honshu," the best was "Yu Zhen," so he wrote "Zhou Zhen"; the most profound was "Leave So," so he popularized it; the most magnificent was "Tan Ru," so he wrote "Sifu": both explored the source and imitated it.

古文：用心于内，不求于外，于时人皆曶之；唯刘歆及范逡敬焉，而醒潭以为绝伦。
现代文：用心在内，不求于外，当时人都轻视它；衹有型逖和莲逡敬重他，而担爱认为他无与伦比。
English: He was despised by the people of his time for his inward and not his outward devotion; he was revered by the pagans and the Pharisees, but he was regarded as incomparable by the pious.

古文：王莽时，刘歆、甄丰皆为上公，莽既以符命自立，即位之后，欲绝其原以神前事，而丰子寻、歆子棻复献之。
现代文：王莽时，刘歆、甄丰都做了上公，王莽既是假藉符命自立，即位之后想禁绝这种做法来使前事得到神化，而甄丰的儿子甄寻、刘歆的儿子刘棻又奏献符瑞之事。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, Liu Hui and Zhenfeng both became Shangguo. Wang Mang was not only self-reliant by pretending to be a Fu Rong, but also wanted to forbid this practice after his enthronement to make the previous events divine, while Zhenfeng's son Zhenhu and Liu Hui's son Liu Hui also played the role of offering Fu Rui.

古文：莽诛丰父子，投棻四裔，辞所连及，便收不请。
现代文：王莽杀了甄丰父子，流放刘棻到四裔，供辞所牵连到的，立即收系不必奏请。
English: Wang Mang killed Zhenfeng and his son, and exiled Liu Xuan to Shizong. If you are implicated in the confession, you do not need to report it.

古文：时，雄校书天禄阁上，治狱使者来，欲收雄，雄恐不能自免，乃从阁上自投下，几死。
现代文：当时扬雄在天禄阁上校书，办案的使者来了，要抓扬雄，扬雄怕不能逃脱，便从阁上跳下，差点死了。
English: At that time, Yang Xiong was in the Tianlu Pavilion, writing to the colonel. The emissary in charge of the case came and wanted to catch Yang Xiong. Yang Xiong was afraid that he would not be able to escape, so he jumped from the pavilion and almost died.

古文：莽闻之曰： 雄素不与事，何故在此？ 
现代文：王莽听到后说： 扬雄一向不参与其事，为什么在此案中？ 
English: Wang Mang said after listening: Yang Xiong has never been involved in the matter, why in this case?

古文：间请问其故，乃刘棻尝从雄学作奇字，雄不知情。
现代文：暗中查问其原因，原来刘棻曾跟扬雄学写过奇字，扬雄不知情。
English: He secretly inquired about the reason. It turned out that Liu Wei had learned to write strange characters from Yang Xiong, but Yang Xiong did not know about it.

古文：有诏勿问。
现代文：下韶不追究他。
English: He will not be prosecuted.

古文：然京师为之语曰： 惟寂寞，自投阁；爰清静，作符命。 
现代文：然而京师为此评道： 因寂寞，自投合；因清静，作符命。 
English: However, the Beijing teacher commented on this: Because of loneliness, self-attunement; because of tranquility, making a fortune.

古文：雄以病免，复召为大夫。
现代文：扬雄因病免职，又召为大夫。
English: Yang Xiong was relieved of his duties due to illness and was called back to work as a doctor.

古文：家素贫，耆酒，人希至其门。
现代文：家境一向贫寒，爱喝酒，人很少到其家。
English: His family background has always been poor, he likes to drink, and people rarely come to his home.

古文：时有好事者载酒肴从游学，而巨鹿侯芭常从雄居，受其《太玄》、《法言》焉。
现代文：当时有多事的人带着酒菜跟他学习，钜鹿侯芭常跟扬雄一起居住，学了《太玄》、《法言》。
English: At that time, people who had a lot of things to do brought food and wine to study with him. Elk Houba often lived with Yang Xiong and studied "The Great Mystery" and "Dogma."

古文：刘歆亦尝观之，谓雄曰： 空自苦！
现代文：刘歆也曾看到，对扬雄说： 白白使自己受苦！
English: Liu Ye also saw this and said to Yang Xiong: "You have made yourself suffer in vain!

古文：今学者有禄利，然向不能明《易》，又如《玄》何？
现代文：现在学者有利禄，还不能通晓《易》，何况《玄》？
English: Now that scholars have more resources, they still can't understand "Yi," let alone "Xuan"?

古文：吾恐后人用覆酱瓿也。 
现代文：我怕后人用它来盖酱瓿了。 
English: I'm afraid that future generations will use it to cover the sauce.

古文：雄笑而不应。
现代文：扬雄笑而不答。
English: Yang Xiong laughed and did not answer.

古文：年七十一，天凤五年卒，侯芭为起坟，丧之三年。
现代文：活到七十一岁，在天凤五年死去，侯芭为他建坟，守丧三年。
English: He lived to the age of seventy-one and died in Tianfeng five years later. Houba built a tomb for him and held a memorial service for three years.

古文：时，大司空王邑、纳言严尤闻雄死，谓桓谭曰： 子常称扬雄书，岂能传于后世乎？ 
现代文：当时大司空王邑、纳言严尤听说扬雄死了，对桓谭说： 您曾称赞扬雄的书，难道能流传后世吗？ 
English: At that time, when the grand secretary Kuo Wangyi and Nagan Yan You heard that Yang Xiong had died, they said to Huan Tan: You once praised the book of Xiong, can it be passed down to future generations?

古文：谭曰： 必传。
现代文：桓谭说： 一定能够流传。
English: Kan Tan said: It will definitely be able to spread.

古文：顾君与谭不及见也。
现代文：但您和桓谭看不到。
English: But you and Kanthan can't see it.

古文：凡人贱近而贵远，亲见扬子云禄位容貌不能动人，故轻其书。
现代文：凡人轻视近的重视远的，亲眼见扬子云地位容貌不能动人，便轻视其书。
English: Ordinary people despise what is near and value what is far. When they see with their own eyes that Yang Ziyun's status and appearance are not attractive, they despise his book.

古文：昔老聃著虚无之言两篇，薄仁义，非礼学，然后世好之者尚以为过于《五经》，自汉文、景之君及司马迁皆有是言。
现代文：从前老聃作虚无之论两篇，轻仁义，驳礼学，但后世喜欢它的还认为超过《五经》，从汉文帝、景帝及司马迁都有这话。
English: Once upon a time, Lao Zi wrote two treatises on the theory of nothingness, the first of which emphasized benevolence and righteousness and refuted etiquette, but later generations liked it and considered it to be superior to the Five Classics. This was said by Emperor Hanwen, Emperor Jing and Sima Qian.

古文：今诊子之书文义至深，而论不诡于圣人，若使遭遇时君，更阅贤知，为所称善，则必度越诸子矣。 
现代文：现在扬子的书文义最深，论述不违背圣人，如果遇到当时君主，再经贤知阅读，被他们称道，便必定超过诸子了。 
English: Now Yangzi's writings have the deepest meaning, and his exposition does not contradict the sages. If you meet the monarchs at that time, and then read them with wisdom, and are praised by them, you will surely surpass all the sons.

古文：诸儒或讥以为雄非圣人而作经，犹春秋吴楚之君僣号称王，盖诛绝之罪也。
现代文：诸儒有的嘲笑扬雄不是圣人却作经，好比春秋吴楚君主僭越称王，应该是灭族绝后之罪。
English: Some Confucians ridiculed Yang Xiong for not being a saint but writing a sutra, as if the Spring and Autumn and Wuchu emperors had arrogantly proclaimed themselves kings, which should be the crime of exterminating the tribe.

古文：自雄之没至今四十余年，其《法言》大行，而《玄》终不显，然篇籍具存。
现代文：从扬雄死后到现在四十多年，他的《法言》大行于世，但《玄》到底未得彰显，但篇籍都在。
English: From the time of Yang Xiong's death to the present, more than forty years, his "Dharma Sayings" have been widely circulated in the world, but "Xuan" has not been revealed in the end, but all the books are there.

