古文：孙子曰：凡处卒利阵体甲兵者，立官则以身宜，贱令以采章，乘削以伦物，序行以□□，制卒以州闾，授正以乡曲，辨疑以旌舆，申令以金鼓，齐兵以从迹，庵结以人雄，邋军以索阵，茭肆以囚逆，陈师以危□，射战以云阵，御裹以羸渭，取啄以阖燧，即败以包□，奔救以皮傅，燥战以错行。
现代文：孙膑说：凡是治理士兵，布阵统兵，用兵作战的将领，任用官员必须选用称职的人，在他们受命任职的时候，要授给他们彩色旗帜以及相应的车辆、服装，以后他们升职或降职时，都要遵循统一的常理标准，规定队列的前后次序要依照。在编制军中队列的时候，要按照州县籍贯给士兵编队，将同一地区的人编制到同一个队伍，然后从乡里选拔出有才能的人作为统领他们的官长，并用不同颜色的旗帜和不同的图形作为各部队的标帜。用金鼓传达命令。行军时要队形严整，前后跟从步调一致，必须按照次序行进。向敌军讨战时可以用散乱的队形，以便引诱迷惑敌军；布阵时也可以像绳索一样绵亘不断布阵围困敌军，这就是所说的囚逆阵；在要隘之地部署重兵以威慑敌军，可以使用楼车布阵进行弩战；用防御阵形，防止军兵疲困；长距离驰援时，各部队要彼此靠拢；激战时要交替使用各种部队。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: "All generals and appointed officials who manage soldiers, deploy soldiers, and fight with soldiers must select competent people. When they are assigned to serve, they must be given a colored flag and the corresponding vehicles and clothing. When they are promoted or demoted, they must follow a unified common sense standard, and the order of the queue must be followed. When forming a queue in the army, soldiers should be formed according to the state and county of origin, and people from the same region should be formed into the same team. Then, talented people should be selected from the countryside to be the leaders of their officers, and flags of different colors and different shapes should be used as the flags of

古文：用□以正□，用轻以正散，攻兼用行城，□地□□用方，迎陵而阵用刲，险□□□用圜，交易武退用兵，□□陈临用方翼，汜战接厝用喙逢，囚险解谷以□远，草驵沙荼以阳削，战胜而阵以奋国，而为畏以山胠。
现代文：用轻装的部队追击溃散的敌军；攻坚用雁行阵；面向丘陵地布阵用圭形阵；在平坦的地方交战，撤退前先发动进攻以迷惑敌军，撤退时要部署兵力作后卫掩护；两军混战、犬牙交错时，要善于运用精锐部队，循隙觅缝攻击敌军；在杂草荆棘丛生的地方作战，要开辟出畅通的道路；战胜归来，要保持军队阵形严整，军容威武，以振国威；要抢占山地右翼以威慑敌军。
English: Use light-armed troops to chase down the scattered enemy troops; use geese marching formation to attack strongholds; use Gui-shaped formation to face the hilly ground formation; fight in flat areas, launch an attack first to confuse the enemy troops before retreating, and deploy troops to provide rear guard cover when retreating; when the two armies are in a melee and the dogs' teeth are intertwined, be good at using elite troops and find gaps to attack the enemy troops; fight in places where weeds and thorns are thick, and open up a smooth road; win the return, keep the army formation strict and formidable to boost national prestige; seize the right wing of the mountain to

古文：秦怫以透迤，便罢以雁行，险厄以杂管。还退以蓬错，绕山林以曲次，袭国邑以水则，辨夜退以明简，夜警以传节。厝入内寇以棺士，遇短乒以必舆，火输积以车。
现代文：遇到荆棘阻路的地方，可以排列成蜿蜒曲折而行的逶迤阵；军队在停止作战修整的时候，军队要布成雁行阵势以保安全；以地势险要的地带作战，要集中兵力配合多种兵器协同作战；反攻或者退军的时候要注意隐蔽，并且注意交替掩护；经过山林地带要以曲折阵形确保队伍一次通过；袭击城池要像浩荡的水流一样横扫千钧；在难以分辨路径的夜间撤退要设有明显的标志便于识别；夜间警戒通信要有符节作为凭证，以防止敌军混入。
English: When encountering thorns blocking the road, they can be arranged in a meandering and zigzagging formation; when the army stops fighting and trimming, the army should set up a geese-marching formation to ensure safety; when fighting in a terrain where the situation is critical, it is necessary to concentrate forces and cooperate with multiple weapons to fight together; when counterattacking or retreating, pay attention to concealment, and pay attention to alternating cover; when passing through mountainous areas, it is necessary to ensure that the team passes once in a zigzagging formation; when attacking the city, it is necessary to sweep the city like a turbulent current; when retreating at night

古文：阵刃以锥行，阵少卒以合杂。合杂，所以御裹也。
现代文：插入敌阵攻敌时，派遣舍生忘死的士兵前去更容易完成使命；和敌军短兵相接的时候，要使用长兵器和战车；紧急运送军用物资要用最好的快车。
English: When entering the enemy's front to attack the enemy, it is easier to complete the mission by sending soldiers who are willing to sacrifice their lives; when encountering the enemy's short soldiers, it is necessary to use long weapons and chariots; urgent transportation of military supplies should use the best express train.

古文：修行连削，所以结阵也。云折重杂，所权趮也。猋凡振陈，所以乘疑也。
现代文：要想战阵精锐就要排列成锥形阵，兵员不足的时候，布阵要把各兵种混合编队，以便协同作战；混合编队是因为便于防御敌军进攻。为了保持队伍整齐，就要修整阵队，要结成阵势。
English: If you want an elite battle line, you must arrange it into a cone-shaped line. When there is a shortage of soldiers, you should mix the formations of each army in order to fight together; the mixed formation is because it is easy to defend against the enemy's attack. In order to keep the line neat, you must trim the line and form a formation.

古文：隐匿谋诈，所以钓战也。
现代文：采用如同黑云压城、各种兵器齐上阵的形势攻击敌人，是为了应对紧急突发的事变。
English: Attacking the enemy with a situation that is like a black cloud pressing down on the city and all kinds of weapons lining up to attack is in order to deal with urgent and sudden events.

古文：龙隋陈伏，所以山斗也。
现代文：像狂风扬尘一般冲入敌阵展开厮杀，是为了在敌人惊疑之际有机可乘。
English: Rushing into the enemy's line of battle like a storm of wind and dust is in order to take advantage of the moment when the enemy is surprised.

古文：□□乖举，所以厌津也。
现代文：隐蔽自己的兵力，使用欺骗的谋略，是为了引诱敌军上钩。
English: Concealment of one's own forces and the use of deceptive stratagems are meant to lure the enemy into a trap.

古文：□□□卒，所以□□也。不意侍卒，所以昧战也。
现代文：借助山区复杂的地形设伏，是为了在山地战中消灭敌军。
English: With the help of the complex terrain of the mountainous area, it is designed to destroy the enemy army in mountain warfare.

古文：遏沟□陈，所以合少也。
现代文：是为了夺取渡口。不把作战意图告诉身边的士兵，是为了保守作战机密。
English: He did not tell the soldiers around him of his intention to fight, in order to keep the battle secret.

古文：疏削明旗，所以疑敌也。
现代文：广列兵器，在显眼之地多布旗帜，是为了迷惑敌军。
English: The wide array of weapons and the numerous flags displayed in conspicuous places were meant to confuse the enemy troops.

古文：剽阵车，所以从遗也。
现代文：动用快速勇猛的部队和轻便的战车，是为了追击败逃的敌人。
English: The use of fast and brave troops and light chariots was intended to chase down the fleeing enemy.

古文：椎下移师，所以备强也。
现代文：在敌军的威胁下转移部队，是为了避开强敌，保存实力。
English: The transfer of troops under the threat of enemy forces is to avoid strong enemies and preserve strength.

古文：浮沮而翼，所以燧斗也。
现代文：谨慎地借助一侧潮湿地带驻军，是为了更好地防范敌军使用火攻战术。
English: It was prudent to use the wet zone on one side to garrison the troops, in order to better prevent the enemy from using fire attack tactics.

古文：禅蘩避，所以莠也。
现代文：故意装出行动迟缓散漫，躲闪避让的样子，是要引诱敌军追赶。
English: Deliberately pretending to be sluggish and scatterbrained, dodging and evading, is to lure the enemy to chase.

古文：筒练剽便，所以逆喙也。
现代文：挑选出精干的士兵，轻装出击，是为了迎击敌军的先锋。
English: In order to meet the enemy's vanguard, they selected capable soldiers and went out lightly armed.

古文：坚阵敦□，所以攻槥也。
现代文：坚固阵势，激励士兵，是为了攻击拼命的敌军。
English: The purpose of fortifying the position and motivating the soldiers is to attack the enemy's desperate troops.

古文：揆断藩薄，所以眩疑也。
现代文：故意破坏自己阵地的屏障，是用以迷惑敌军。
English: The barrier of deliberately destroying one's own position is used to confuse the enemy.

古文：伪遗小亡，所以聭敌也。
现代文：故意遗弃一些物资军械，装出退败的样子，用以引诱敌军上钩。
English: Deliberately abandoning some materials and equipment, pretending to be defeated, to lure the enemy on the hook.

古文：重害，所以茭□也。顺明到声，所以夜军也。
现代文：整夜巡逻，宜至天明，并有联络信号互相呼应，从而保证夜里驻扎的安全。
English: Patrol all night, preferably until dawn, and have contact signals to echo each other, thus ensuring the safety of the night stationing.

古文：佰奉离积，所以利胜也。
现代文：把各种军用物资分散储存，可以保证军队取胜。
English: The dispersed storage of various military materials can ensure the victory of the army.

古文：刚者，所以御劫也。
现代文：使用精锐部队，是为了防止敌军劫营。
English: The elite troops were used to prevent the enemy from looting the camp.

