古文：齐武明皇后娄氏，讳昭君，赠司徒内干之女也。
现代文：齐武明皇后娄氏，名昭君，是追赠为司徒的内干的女儿。
English: Qiwu Ming's Empress Zou, named Zhaojun, was posthumously presented as the daughter of the instigator of the scholar.

古文：少明悟，强族多娉之，并不肯行。
现代文：她从小聪明懂事，豪强世族很多前去致聘，她都不肯答应。
English: She has been smart and sensible since she was a child. Many powerful people have come forward to hire her, but she would not agree.

古文：及见神武城上执役，惊曰： 此真吾夫也。 
现代文：当她看见神武帝高欢在城上服役时，吃惊地说 ：这位真是我的丈夫啊！ 
English: When she saw Emperor Gao Huan serving in the city, she was surprised and said, "This is really my husband!"

古文：乃使婢通意，又数致私财，使以娉己，父母不得已而许焉。
现代文：于是，她让女婢前去告知自己的心意，又几次送去自己的私房钱，让高欢前来下聘礼，父母亲不得已，只得答应了。
English: As a result, she asked her maidservants to go and tell her what they wanted, sent money to her private quarters several times, and asked Gao Huan to come and give a betrothal gift. Her parents had no choice but to agree.

古文：神武既有澄清之志，倾产以结英豪，密谋秘策，后恆参预。
现代文：高欢有统一天下的志向，便倾其家产以结交天下英雄，在进行密谋策划时，娄氏经常参与。
English: Gao Huan had the ambition to unify the world, so he devoted his family property to make friends with the heroes of the world. When he was plotting and planning, Mr. Zou often participated.

古文：及拜勃海王妃，阃闱之事悉决焉。
现代文：当被封为渤海王妃后，内庭之中所有事情，都由娄氏决断。
English: When she was crowned Queen of the Bohai Sea, all matters in the Inner Court were decided by the Gong clan.

古文：后高明严断，雅遵俭约，往来外舍，侍从不过十人。
现代文：娄氏精明严断，一向注重勤俭节约，内外往来的侍从，不过十人。
English: Mr. Zou is shrewd and strict. He has always paid attention to diligence, thrift and economy. There are only ten domestic and foreign attendants.

古文：性宽厚，不妒忌，神武姬侍咸加恩待。
现代文：性情宽厚，不妒忌，神武帝的姬妾和侍从们，都得到她的恩惠。
English: Generous in nature and not jealous, Emperor Jimmu's concubines and attendants all received favors from her.

古文：神武尝将西讨出师，后夜孪生一男一女，左右以危急，请追告神武。
现代文：高欢曾经准备出兵西征，娄氏当晚生下双胞胎一男一女，左右侍从见临产时情况危急，便请求把高欢追回来。
English: Gao Huan had been preparing to go to the Western Expedition. That night, Ms. Zou gave birth to twins, a boy and a girl. When the attendants saw that the situation was critical, they requested that Gao Huan be brought back.

古文：后弗听，曰： 王出统大兵，何得以我故轻离军幕？
现代文：娄氏不肯听从，她说： 大王出征，统领大军，怎么能因我的缘故而轻易离开军营呢？
English: She said, "The great king has set out to lead a great army. How can he leave the camp so easily because of me?"

古文：死生命也，来复何为。 
现代文：死生是命中注定的，就是回来了又有什么办法。 
English: Life and death are predestined, even if you come back, what can you do?

古文：神武闻之，嗟叹良久。
现代文：高欢知道以后，感叹了很久。
English: After Gao Huan knew, he sighed for a long time.

古文：沙苑败后，侯景屡言请精骑二万，必能取之。
现代文：沙苑兵败之后，侯景多次上言说请给他两万名精兵，一定能够取胜。
English: After the defeat of Sha Yuan's soldiers, Hou Jing repeatedly said, "Please give him twenty thousand elite soldiers, he will surely win."

古文：神武悦，以告于后。
现代文：高欢很高兴，便告诉了娄氏。
English: Gao Huan was very happy and told Mr. Zou.

古文：后曰： 若如其言，岂有还理？
现代文：娄氏说： 如果像他所说的那样，他哪里还会回来？
English: Mr. Zou said: If it is as he said, where will he come back?

古文：得獭失景，亦有何利。 
现代文：得了黑獭而失侯景，对我们又有什么好处？ 
English: What good is it for us to have a black beard and lose our looks?

古文：乃止。
现代文：这才算了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：神武逼于蠕蠕，欲娶其女而未决。
现代文：高欢迫于蠕蠕大军的压力，准备娶蠕蠕公主，可是还犹豫不决。
English: Gao Huan, under pressure from the army of Cree, is ready to marry the Cree princess, but he still hesitates.

古文：后曰： 国家大计，愿不疑也。 
现代文：娄氏说 ：这关系国家大事，请您不要犹豫。 
English: Mr. Zou said: This is a matter of national importance, please do not hesitate.

古文：及蠕蠕公主至，后避正室处之，神武愧而拜谢焉。
现代文：当蠕蠕公主到达以后，娄氏为回避而把正室让出来。神武帝自觉心中有愧而向她谢罪。
English: When Princess Creep Creep arrived, Toad gave up his rightful wife to avoid her. Emperor Jinmu felt guilty and apologized to her.

古文：曰： 彼将有觉，愿绝勿顾。 
现代文：娄氏说： 她将会发觉的，请您不要再顾念我。 
English: Mr. Zou said, "She will find out. Please don't think about me anymore."

古文：慈爱诸子，不异己出，躬自纺绩，人赐一袍一裤。
现代文：她疼爱高欢的所有孩子，和自己所生的同样看待。亲自纺纱织布，每人送给一袍一裤。
English: She loved all of Gao Huan's children as if they were her own, spinning and weaving cloth herself and giving each of them a robe and a pair of trousers.

古文：手缝戎服，以帅左右。
现代文：亲手缝制军服，并带领侍女们一起做。
English: He sewed military uniforms with his own hands and led the maids of honor to make them together.

古文：弟昭以功名自达，其余亲属，未尝为请爵位，每言有材当用，义不以私乱公。
现代文：她的弟弟娄昭因功而得到高位，其他亲属，她从未给他们求封爵位。她常说有才干的人就应当重用，不能因徇私情而影响公事。
English: Her brother, Zou Zhao, got a high position because of his merits, and she never asked for a knighthood for other relatives. She often said that talented people should be reused, and they should not influence public affairs because of their personal feelings.

古文：文襄嗣位，进为太妃。
现代文：文襄帝继位后，晋封她为太妃。
English: After Emperor Wenxiang succeeded to the throne, she was promoted to the rank of crown princess.

古文：文宣将受魏禅，后固执不许，帝所以中止。
现代文：文宣帝准备接受魏帝禅位，娄氏坚决不同意，文宣帝因而停止。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was ready to accept the throne of Emperor Wei, but Mr. Zou strongly disagreed, so Emperor Wenzhong stopped.

古文：天保初，尊为皇太后，宫曰宣训。
现代文：天保初年，尊封为皇太后，宫名为 宣训 。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, she was given the title of empress dowager, and the palace name was changed to Xuanxun.

古文：济南即位，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：济南王即位后，又尊封为太皇太后。
English: After the enthronement of the King of Jinan, she was also given the title of Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：尚书令杨愔等受遗诏辅政，疏忌诸王。太皇太后密与孝昭及诸大将定策诛之，下令废立。
现代文：尚书令杨等接受遗诏以辅政，却疏远和忌恨各亲王，太皇太后便秘密地和孝昭帝以及众大将定计杀掉他，下令废除高殷的帝位。
English: Shang Shu ordered Yang and others to accept the last will and testament to support the government, but they alienated and hated the princes. The Empress Dowager secretly plotted with Emperor Xiaozhao and the generals to kill him and ordered the abolition of Gao Yan's imperial throne.

古文：孝昭即位，复为皇太后。
现代文：孝昭帝即位后，娄氏又是皇太后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozhao, the Min clan became empress dowager again.

古文：孝昭崩，太后又下诏立武成帝。
现代文：孝昭帝死，太后又下诏立武成帝。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozhao, the Empress Dowager issued an edict to establish Emperor Wu Cheng.

古文：大宁二年春，太后寝疾，衣忽自举，用巫媪言，改姓石氏。
现代文：太宁二年春，太后患病，衣服忽然自动飘起来，她便听了巫婆的话，改姓石氏。
English: In the spring of the second year of Taining, the empress dowager fell ill, and her clothes suddenly floated up automatically. She listened to the words of the witch and changed her surname to Shi.

古文：四月辛丑，崩于北宫，时年六十二。
现代文：四月初二，死于北宫，享年六十二岁。
English: On the second day of April, he died in Hokugu, at the age of 62.

古文：五月甲申，合葬义平陵。
现代文：五月十五日，合葬于义平陵。
English: On May 15, they were buried together in the Yiping Mausoleum.

古文：太后凡孕六男二女，皆感梦。
现代文：太后共生了六男二女，都是感梦而生。
English: The Empress Dowager gave birth to six sons and two daughters, all of whom were born from a dream.

古文：孕文襄则梦一断龙；孕文宣则梦大龙，首尾属天地，张口动目，势状惊人；孕孝昭则梦蠕龙于地；孕武成则梦龙浴于海；孕魏二后，并梦月入怀；孕襄城、博陵二王，梦鼠入衣下。
现代文：怀文襄帝时梦见一条断龙；怀文宣帝时，梦见一条大龙，头尾接连天地，张开大口，眼珠闪动，模样十分惊人；怀孝昭帝时梦见龙在地上蠕动，怀武成帝时梦见龙在大海洗澡；怀魏的两个皇后时，都梦见月亮进入怀中；怀襄城、博陵两王时，梦见老鼠钻进衣服下面。
English: When Emperor Waiwenxiang was young, he dreamed of a broken dragon; when Emperor Waiwenxuan was young, he dreamed of a great dragon, with heaven and earth following each other, its mouth wide open, its eyes flashing, and its appearance quite astonishing; when Emperor Huaixiao Zhao was young, he dreamed of a dragon wriggling on the ground; when Emperor Huaiwu was young, he dreamed of a dragon bathing in the sea; when the two queens of Huaiwei were young, they both dreamed of the moon entering their bosom; when the two kings of Huaixiang City and Boling, they both dreamed of a mouse burrowing under their clothes

古文：后未崩，有童谣曰： 九龙母死不作孝。 
现代文：太后还没死以前，有童谣说： 九龙母死不作孝。 
English: Before the empress dowager died, there was a nursery rhyme that said, "Kowloon mothers die without filial piety."

古文：及后崩，武成不改服，绯袍如故。
现代文：当太后死后，武成帝不改换丧服，依旧身穿大红袍，和平时一样。
English: When the empress dowager died, Emperor Wu Chengdu did not change his mourning clothes, he still wore a big red robe, as usual.

古文：未几，登三台，置酒作乐；宫女进白袍，帝怒，投诸台下。
现代文：不多久，他登上三台，饮酒作乐。宫女们送来白袍，武成帝很生气地把它扔到台下。
English: Before long, he was on three stages, drinking and making merry. The palace maids brought him a white robe, which Emperor Wucheng angrily threw off the stage.

古文：和士开请止乐，帝大怒，挝之。
现代文：和士开请求武成帝停止听乐，皇帝大怒，并打了和士开一顿。
English: When He Shikai asked Emperor Wu Chengdi to stop listening to music, the emperor was furious and beat He Shikai.

古文：帝于昆季，次实九，盖其征验也。
现代文：武成帝在兄弟之间的排行，正是第九，这也是童谣的应验了。
English: The ranking of Emperor Wu Chengdi among the brothers is the ninth, which is also the fulfillment of the nursery rhyme.

古文：蠕蠕公主者，蠕蠕主郁久闾阿那瑰女也。
现代文：蠕蠕公主，是蠕蠕国君郁久闾阿那瞔的女儿。
English: Princess Wormworm is the daughter of Wormworm's sovereign, Ikujutsu Anahata.

古文：蠕蠕强盛，与西魏通和，欲连兵东伐。
现代文：当时蠕蠕强大，和西魏通婚和好，准备联合出兵攻打东魏。
English: At that time, China was very powerful, and had made peace with the Western Wei Dynasty, and was preparing to jointly send troops to attack the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：神武病之，令杜弼使蠕蠕，为世子求婚。
现代文：神武帝高欢很担心，便让杜弼出使蠕蠕，替大儿子向蠕蠕公主求婚。
English: Emperor Gao Huan was very worried, so he asked Cuckoo to send Creep Creep to propose to Princess Creep Creep for his eldest son.

古文：阿那瑰曰： 高王自娶则可。 
现代文：阿那瞔说 ：如果高王爷自己娶亲我就答应。 
English: Anaxagoras said: "I will agree if Prince Gao marries his cousin."

古文：神武犹豫，尉景与武明皇后及文襄并劝请，乃从之。
现代文：神武帝犹豫不决。尉景和武明皇后以及文襄帝都一起劝他答应，他便听从了。
English: Emperor Jinwu hesitated. Emperor Yeongjing, Empress Wu Ming and Emperor Wenxiang all urged him to agree, and he complied.

古文：武定三年，使慕容俨往娉之，号曰蠕蠕公主。
现代文：武定三年，派慕容俨前去致聘礼，号称 蠕蠕公主 。
English: In the third year of Wuding, he sent Murong Yao to present the betrothal gift, who was known as Princess Creep.

古文：八月，神武迎于下馆，阿那瑰使其弟秃突佳来送女，且报聘，仍戒曰： 待见外孙，然后返国。 
现代文：八月，神武帝把她迎接到下馆。阿那瞔让他的弟弟秃突佳去送女儿，并且进行酬答，阿那瞔还特意关照他： 等见到外孙出世，然后再回国。 
English: In August, Emperor Jinmu welcomed her to the Lower Pavilion. Anaxagoras asked his brother Balducchia to send his daughter, and in return, Anaxagoras also took special care of him: wait until he sees his grandchild born, and then return to the country.

古文：公主性严毅，一生不肯华言。
现代文：公主性格严肃刚毅，一生中不肯讲汉人语言。
English: The princess had a serious and strong character and refused to speak Chinese all her life.

古文：神武尝有病，不得往公主所，秃突佳怨恚，神武自射堂舆疾就公主。
现代文：神武帝曾经因为有病，没有住到公主的卧房，秃突佳便十分抱怨并生气，神武帝只得从大殿上带病来和公主同住。
English: Once, Emperor Shenwu did not live in the princess's bedroom because he was ill, and Balduccia complained and got angry. Emperor Shenwu had to bring his illness from the Great Hall to live with the princess.

古文：其见将护如此。
现代文：他对公主护卫得这样严紧。
English: He guarded the princess so closely.

古文：神武崩，文襄从蠕蠕国法，蒸公主，产一女焉。
现代文：神武帝死后，文襄帝依照蠕蠕国的规矩，把公主作为妻子，和她生了一个女孩。
English: After the death of Emperor Shenwu, Emperor Wenxiang took the princess as his wife and had a girl with her, in accordance with the rules of the State of Wurm.

古文：彭城太妃尔硃氏，荣之女，魏孝庄后也。
现代文：彭城太妃尔朱氏，是尔朱荣的女儿，原是北魏孝庄帝的皇后。
English: Pengcheng Tafeer Zhu, the daughter of Er Zhu Rong, was the empress of Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：神武纳为别室，敬重逾于娄妃，见必束带，自称下官。
现代文：神武帝高欢把她娶为夫人，但对她的敬重超过原配夫人娄妃，每次入见时一定束着衣带，自称为 下官 。
English: Emperor Gao Huan married her as his wife, but he respected her more than his original wife, Empress Dowager Cixi. Whenever he saw her, he always wore a sash and called himself a lower-ranking official.

古文：神武迎蠕蠕公主还，尔硃氏迎于木井北，与蠕蠕公主前后别行，不相见。
现代文：神武帝迎接蠕蠕公主回来时，尔朱氏在木井北面迎候。她和蠕蠕公主前后分开行走，两人并不见面。
English: When Emperor Shenwu came back to greet Princess Creep, Er Zhu was waiting for him on the north side of the well. She and Princess Creep walked separately, and the two did not meet.

古文：公主引角弓仰射翔鸱，应弦而落；妃引长弓斜射飞乌，亦一发而中。
现代文：公主拉开角制的硬弓仰射正在飞翔的鹞鹰，弓响而鹰落。彭城太妃也拉开长弓斜射高飞的鸟，也一发而中。
English: The princess pulled the angled hard bow to shoot the eagle that was flying, and the bow rang and the eagle fell. Pengcheng Taifei also pulled the long bow to shoot the high-flying bird, and also hit it.

古文：神武喜曰： 我此二妇，并堪击贼。 
现代文：神武帝高兴地说： 我的这两位妻子，都能够杀贼。 
English: Emperor Shenwu said happily, "Both of my wives are capable of killing thieves."

古文：后为尼，神武为起佛寺。
现代文：后来，她出家当了尼姑，神武帝为她修建了寺院。
English: Later, she became a nun and Emperor Jimmu built a temple for her.

古文：及神武贵，韩氏夫已死，乃纳之。冯翊太妃郑氏，名大车，严祖妹也。
现代文：天保初年，被封为太妃。当文宣帝酒醉发酒疯时，想要对她无礼，太妃不肯顺从，因而遇祸身亡。冯翊太妃郑氏，名叫大车，是郑严祖的妹妹。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, she was given the title of Toifei. When Emperor Wenxuan was drunk and went mad, he wanted to be rude to her. Toifei refused to obey, and died in an accident. Fengyu Toifei Zheng, named Dacha, was the sister of Zheng Yanzu.

古文：初为魏广平王妃。
现代文：原是魏广平王的妃子。
English: She was originally the concubine of King Guangping of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：迁鄴后，神武纳之，宠冠后庭，生冯翊王润。
现代文：东魏迁都于邺城后，神武帝把她收来当妻子，对她宠爱无比，超过其他妃子。生下了冯翊王高润。
English: After the capital of the Eastern Wei Dynasty was moved to Lucheng, Emperor Shenwu took her as his wife and loved her more than any other concubine. She gave birth to Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun.

古文：神武之征刘蠡升，文襄蒸于大车。
现代文：神武帝攻打刘蠡升时，文襄帝私通大车。
English: When the Emperor Shenwu attacked Liu Xingsheng, the Emperor Wenxiang fornicated with a chariot.

古文：神武还，一婢告之，二婢为证。
现代文：高欢回朝后，一个女婢告发，两位女婢作证。
English: After Gao Huan returned to the imperial court, one maidservant denounced him and two maidservants testified against him.

古文：神武杖文襄一百而幽之，武明后亦见隔绝。
现代文：神武帝打了文襄帝一百棍，然后把他囚禁起来。武明皇后也被断绝往来。
English: Emperor Shenwu beat Emperor Wenxiang with a hundred sticks and then imprisoned him. Empress Wuming was also cut off.

古文：时彭城尔硃太妃有宠，生王子浟，神武将有废立意。
现代文：当时彭城尔朱太妃很受宠，并生下了王子高氵攸，神武帝便想废掉文襄帝和皇后。
English: At that time, Pengcheng Er Zhu Taifei was very favored, and gave birth to Prince Gao Zhiyou, and Emperor Shenwu wanted to abolish Emperor Wenxiang and the queen.

古文：文襄求救于司马子如。
现代文：文襄帝只得求救于司马子如。
English: Emperor Wenxiang had to turn to Sima Ziru for help.

古文：子如来朝，伪为不知者，请武明后。
现代文：司马子如来到朝廷以后，假装不知道这件事，便请求朝见武明皇后。
English: When Sima Zi came to the imperial court, he pretended that he did not know about the matter and asked to see Empress Wu Ming.

古文：神武告其故。
现代文：神武帝把发生的事情告诉了他。
English: Emperor Jimmu told him what had happened.

古文：子如曰： 消难亦奸子如妾，如此事，正可覆盖。
现代文：司马子如说 ：我的儿子消难也私通了我的小妾，像这样的事情，应该掩盖起来才是。
English: Sima Ziru said: My son Qigong also fornicated with my concubine, things like this should be covered up.

古文：妃是王结发妇，常以父母家财奉王，王在怀朔被杖，背无完皮，妃昼夜供给看疮。
现代文：王妃是大王的结发妻子，过去常常拿父母的家财来供给大王。大王在怀朔被杖打，体无完肤，王妃日夜喂水喂饭，治疗疮伤。
English: The princess was the wife of the king, and she used to provide the king with her parents' wealth. The king was beaten with a cane in Wai Shuo, and his body was exhausted. The princess fed him with water and rice day and night, and treated his wounds.

古文：后避葛贼，同走并州。
现代文：后来为了躲避葛荣，你们一起逃往并州。
English: Later, in order to avoid Ge Rong, you fled together to Bianzhou.

古文：贫困，然马屎，自作靴，恩义何可忘？
现代文：贫困的时候，烧马屎作饭，自己制作马靴，这样的恩义怎么可以忘却呢？
English: When you are poor, you burn horse dung for cooking and make your own riding boots. How can you forget such kindness?

古文：夫妇相宜，女配至尊，男承大业，又娄领军勋，何宜摇动？
现代文：夫妇相助相爱，女儿嫁给皇帝，儿子继承您的事业，况且娄领军功勋盖世，怎么可以轻易加以变故呢？
English: Couples help each other and love each other, a daughter marries an emperor, a son inherits your business, and moreover, he leads the army and brings glory to the world. How can you easily change the past?

古文：一女子如草芥，况婢言不必信。 
现代文：况且一个女子不过像一株小草一样，而女婢的话您不必深信。 
English: Besides, a woman is just like a blade of grass, and you don't have to believe what a maid says.

古文：神武因使子如鞫之。
现代文：高欢便让司马子如审问这件事。
English: Gao Huan then let Sima Ziru interrogate the matter.

古文：子如见文襄，尤之曰： 男兒何意畏威自诬？ 
现代文：子如见到文襄帝后，责备他说： 男子汉怎么可以害怕威逼而自己诬说自己呢？ 
English: When his son saw Emperor Wenxiang, he scolded him, "How can a man be afraid of being bullied and lie about himself?

古文：因教二婢反辞，胁告者自缢，乃启神武曰： 果虚言。 
现代文：于是，子如让两位女婢推翻自己的证词，并威胁告发的女婢使她上吊自杀。子如这才告诉高欢说 ：果然说的是假话。 
English: As a result, Sonny asked the two maidservants to overturn their testimony, and the maidservant who threatened to denounce him made her hang herself. Sonny then told Gao Huan: "It's true that what you said was a lie.

古文：神武大悦，召后及文襄。
现代文：高欢非常高兴，立即召来武明皇后和文襄帝。
English: Gao Huan was very happy and immediately summoned Empress Wu Ming and Emperor Wenxiang.

古文：武明后遥见神武，一步一叩头。文襄且拜且进，父子夫妻相泣，乃如初。
现代文：武明皇后远远望见高欢，一步一叩头，文襄帝也边走边拜，父子夫妻相对而哭，和好如初。
English: Empress Wu Ming could see Gao Huan from far away, and bowed down step by step. Emperor Wenxiang also bowed as he walked. The father and son cried together, and were as happy as ever.

古文：括父子由是超授，赏赐甚厚焉。
现代文：神武帝便设酒宴欢庆，并说： 让我们父子重新团圆的，是司马子如啊！ 
English: Emperor Shenwu then held a wine banquet to celebrate, and said: It was Sima Ziru who reunited our father and son!

古文：文宣皇后李氏讳祖娥，赵郡李希宗女也。
现代文：于是，赐给子如黄金一百三十斤，文襄帝也送给他良马五十匹。文宣皇后李氏名祖娥，是赵郡李希宗的女儿。
English: As a result, Emperor Wenxiang gave his son one hundred and thirty catties of gold and fifty fine horses. Empress Wenxuan, surnamed Zu'e, was the daughter of Li Xizong of Zhao County.

古文：容德甚美。
现代文：她容貌、德行都十分美好。
English: She was very beautiful, both in appearance and in character.

古文：初为太其原公夫人。
现代文：原来封为太原公夫人。
English: She was originally given the title of Lady Taiyuan.

古文：及帝将建中宫。高隆之、高德正言汉妇人不可为天下母，宜更择美配。
现代文：文宣帝准备册封皇后时，高隆之、高德正向文帝进言，说汉家妇人不可以成为天下之母，应当另外选择美好的配偶。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan was preparing to crown her empress, Gao Longzhi and Gao De were saying to Emperor Wen that Han women could not become the mother of the world, and that they should choose another beautiful spouse.

古文：杨愔固请依汉、魏故事，不改元妃。
现代文：但杨坚决请求文宣帝依照汉、魏以来的作法，不改变元配夫人的地位。
English: However, Yang firmly requested Emperor Wenzhong not to change the status of Yuanpai's wife in accordance with the practice since Han and Wei Dynasties.

古文：而德正犹固请废后而立段昭仪，欲以结勋贵之援。
现代文：可是高德正仍然坚持请皇帝废李氏而立段昭仪为皇后，也可借此结好显贵豪族作为后援。
English: However, Gao Dezheng still insisted on asking the emperor to abolish the Li clan and establish Duan Zhaoyi as the empress, and he could also use this to unite the noble and powerful families as back-up.

古文：帝竟不从而立后焉。
现代文：文宣帝最终没有听从而仍立李氏为皇后。
English: Emperor Wenxuan did not listen in the end and still made Li the empress.

古文：帝好捶挞嫔御，乃至有杀戮者，唯后独家礼敬。
现代文：文宣帝喜欢动手毒打嫔妃们，有的甚至于被杀掉，惟独文宣皇后一直受到皇帝以礼相敬。
English: Emperor Wenxuan liked to beat his concubines, and some were even killed, but Empress Wenxuan was always treated with courtesy by the emperor.

古文：天保十年，改为可贺敦皇后。
现代文：天保十年，改封为可贺敦皇后。
English: Ten years later, she was renamed Empress Koga.

古文：孝昭即位，降居昭信宫，号昭信皇后。
现代文：孝昭帝即位后，文宣皇后降居昭信宫，号为昭信皇后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi, Empress Wensun moved to the palace of Emperor Zhaoxin and took the name Empress Zhaoxin.

古文：武成践阼，逼后淫乱云： 若不许我，当杀尔兒。 
现代文：武成帝继位后，强迫文宣皇后和他淫乱，并威胁说： 如果不听从我，就杀掉你的儿子。 
English: After Emperor Wucheng succeeded to the throne, he forced Empress Wenxuan to have sexual intercourse with him, and threatened, "If you don't obey me, I will kill your son."

古文：后惧，从之。
现代文：文宣皇后十分恐慌，只得听从了。
English: Queen Wenxuan panicked and had to obey.

古文：后有娠，太原王绍德至阁，不得见。愠曰： 兒岂不知邪？
现代文：后来怀了孕，太原王绍德到宫中看望，不得见面，便生气地说 ：儿岂不知原因？
English: Later, when she became pregnant, King Saud of Taiyuan visited the palace, but was not allowed to see her, and angrily said: "Don't you know the reason?

古文：姊姊腹大，故不见兒。 
现代文：母亲肚子大了，所以不肯见我。 
English: My mother refused to see me because she was very ill.

古文：后闻之大惭，由是生女不举。
现代文：皇后听说后大为惭愧，于是生下女儿后不肯养活。
English: When the Empress heard of this, she was so ashamed that she refused to feed her daughter after she was born.

古文：帝横刀诟曰： 尔杀我女，我何不杀尔兒？ 
现代文：武成帝得知，横刀大骂道： 你杀了我的女儿，我为什么不杀你的儿子？ 
English: When Emperor Wu Chengdi learned of this, he cursed and said: "You killed my daughter, why shouldn't I kill your son?"

古文：对后前筑杀绍德。
现代文：他公然在皇后面前砍死了绍德。
English: He publicly hacked Sauder to death in front of the queen.

古文：后大哭，帝愈怒，裸后乱挝挞之，号天不已。
现代文：皇后伤心痛哭不止，武成帝更为恼怒，便剥光皇后的衣服，没头没脸地乱打不停，打得皇后呼天抢地大声喊叫着。
English: The Empress was crying inconsolably, and Emperor Wucheng was even more angry. He stripped off the Empress's clothes and beat her mercilessly, until she was screaming at the top of her lungs.

古文：武成既杀乐陵王，元被閟隔，不得与家相知。
现代文：武成帝把皇后装进绢做的袋子里，鲜血淋漓地扔到水沟中，过了很久才苏醒过来。
English: Emperor Wucheng put the queen into a bag made of straw and threw her into the gutter, covered in blood. It took her a long time to wake up.

古文：宫闱内忽有飞语，帝令检推，得后父兄书信，元蛮由是坐免官。后以齐亡，入周氏宫中。
现代文：于是用牛车把她送到妙胜尼寺中。皇后生性喜好佛法，所以也就在这里当了尼姑。齐亡之后，她进了关中。
English: So they sent her in an ox-drawn cart to Myoshenyi Temple. The empress had a natural affinity for Buddhism, so she became a nun there. After Qi's death, she went to Guanzhong.

古文：隋文帝作相，放还山东。武成皇后胡氏，安定胡延之女。
现代文：隋时，得以回到赵郡。武成皇后胡氏，是安定胡延之的女儿。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, she was able to return to Zhao County. Wu Cheng, the Empress of the Hu clan, was the daughter of Wangan Hu Yanzhu.

古文：其母范阳卢道约女。
现代文：她的母亲是范阳人卢道约的女儿。
English: Her mother was the daughter of Lu Daoyao, a Fanyang man.

古文：初怀孕，有胡僧诣门曰： 此宅瓠芦中有月。 
现代文：当初怀孕时，有个胡僧到家门前说： 这屋里的瓠芦中有月亮。 
English: When she was pregnant, a monk came to her door and said, "There is a moon in the gourd in this house."

古文：既而生后。
现代文：不久就生下了皇后。
English: Soon after, the queen gave birth.

古文：天保初，选为长广王妃。
现代文：天保初年，被选为长广王妃。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, she was selected as the queen of Changguang.

古文：产后主日，有鸮鸣于产帐上。
现代文：生下后主那天，有猫头鹰在产帐中叫啼。
English: On the day after she gave birth, an owl hooted in the delivery room.

古文：武成崩，尊为皇太后。
现代文：武成帝死后，被尊封为皇太后。
English: After Emperor Wucheng's death, she was given the title of empress dowager.

古文：陆媪及和士开密谋杀赵郡王睿，出娄定远、高文遥为刺史。
现代文：陆媪密谋策划杀死赵郡王睿又，把娄定远、高文遥外放当刺史。
English: Lu Yao plotted to kill Zhao County's Wang Rui Mata, and put Zhai Dingyuan and Gao Wenyao on the outside.

古文：和、陆谄事太后，无所不至。
现代文：和士开跟陆媪拼命讨好胡太后，真是无所不至。
English: Kazuchika and Lu Hao desperately try to please the Empress Dowager Hu, and they really go to great lengths.

古文：初，武成时，后与诸阉人亵狎。
现代文：当初，还是武成帝在位时，胡太后就常常跟太监们一起鬼混。
English: In the beginning, when Emperor Wu Cheng was still on the throne, Empress Dowager Hu often fooled around with the eunuchs.

古文：武成宠幸和士开。每与后握槊，因此与后奸通。
现代文：武成帝宠爱和士开，和士开经常为皇后拿槊，因此便和皇后通奸。
English: Emperor Wucheng was fond of Wo Shikai, and Wo Shikai often carried bags for the queen, so he committed adultery with the queen.

古文：自武成崩后，数出诣佛寺，又与沙门昙献通。布金钱于献度下，又挂宝装胡床于献屋壁，武成平生之所御也。
现代文：自从武成帝死后，胡太后常常前往佛寺，又跟和尚昙献私通，放了许多金钱在昙献的席下，又挂宝装胡床在昙献屋内墙壁上，这是武成皇帝生前所用的东西。
English: Since the death of Emperor Wu Cheng, Empress Dowager Hu often went to the Buddhist temple, and she also had an illicit affair with the monk Xuan Xian. She put a lot of money under the Xuan Xian's seat, and hung a treasure-laden wooden bed on the walls of the Xuan Xian's house, which was used by Emperor Wu Cheng before his death.

古文：乃置百僧于内殿，托以听讲，日夜与昙献寝处。以献为昭玄统。
现代文：她又安排了百名和尚到内殿，假托听和尚讲佛经，日夜和昙献同宿，并以昙献作为弘扬大统的人。
English: She also arranged for a hundred monks to come to the inner hall, pretending to listen to the Buddhist sutras preached by the monks, and to stay with Shoken day and night, using Shoken as a promoter of the Great Unification.

古文：僧徒遥指太后以弄昙献，乃至谓之为太上者。
现代文：和尚们经常远远地指着皇太后和昙献开玩笑，甚至有戏称他为太上皇的。
English: Monks often joked about the empress dowager and Xuan Xuan from a distance, and even jokingly called him the emperor's son.

古文：帝闻太后不谨，而未之信。
现代文：皇帝开始听到传言说太后不检点，还不肯相信。
English: The emperor began to hear rumors that the empress dowager was indiscreet, but he refused to believe them.

古文：后朝太后，见二少尼，悦而召之，乃男子也。
现代文：后来，他有一次去朝见太后时，在那里见到两个小尼姑，他很喜欢她们，就把她们召来，这才发现原来是男子。
English: Later, when he once went to see the empress dowager, he saw two little nuns there. He liked them very much, so he called them, only to find out that they were men.

古文：于是昙献事亦发，皆伏法。
现代文：于是，昙献的事情也就暴露了，皇帝把他们都处死了。
English: As a result, the sacrificial offering was exposed, and the emperor had them all executed.

古文：并杀元山王三郡君，皆太后之所昵也。
现代文：同时被杀的还有元山王等三位郡君，他们也都是胡太后所亲近的人。
English: At the same time, three county officials, including the former mountain king, were also killed. All of them were close to the Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：帝自晋阳奉太后还鄴，至紫陌，卒遇大风。
现代文：皇帝从晋阳把皇太后接回邺都，走到紫陌这个地方时，突然遇到一阵狂风。
English: The emperor took the empress dowager back to Shidu from Jinyang, and when he came to this place in Zimao, he suddenly encountered a gust of wind.

古文：兼舍人魏僧伽明风角。奏言： 即时当有暴逆事。 
现代文：兼舍人魏僧伽懂得风候的吉凶，便上奏说 ：不久便有叛逆的大祸。 
English: The Wei Sangha, who were concubines, knew the fortunes of the times, so they made a report: "Soon there will be a great calamity of rebellion."

古文：帝诈云鄴中有急，弯弓缠弰，驰入南城。令邓长颙幽太后北宫。
现代文：皇帝便假称邺中有急事，弯弓并握紧末稍，飞奔进入南城，命令郑长把胡太后幽禁在北宫。
English: The emperor pretended to be in a hurry, bent his bow and clenched his fist, rushed into Nancheng, and ordered Zheng Chang to imprison the Empress Dowager Hu in the North Palace.

古文：仍有敕，内外诸亲一不得与太后相见。
现代文：同时下诏，命令所有内外亲属不得和皇太后见面。
English: At the same time, an edict was issued ordering all relatives inside and outside the country not to meet the empress dowager.

古文：久之，帝迎复太后。
现代文：过了很久，皇帝又把太后迎接出来。
English: After a long time, the emperor came out to greet the empress dowager.

古文：太后初闻使者至，大惊，虑有不测。
现代文：胡太后刚听说使者前来时，十分吃惊，她担心会有大祸降临。
English: When the Empress Dowager Hu heard that the messenger had just arrived, she was very surprised and feared that a great disaster would befall.

古文：每太后设食，帝亦不敢尝。
现代文：每当太后送食物时，皇帝也不敢品尝。
English: Whenever the empress dowager sent food, the emperor did not dare to taste it.

古文：周使元伟来聘，作《述行赋》，叙郑庄公克段而迁姜氏。
现代文：周朝的使者元伟来齐，写了一篇《述行赋》，叙述郑庄公克段以后，把母亲姜氏改迎出来的故事。
English: Yuan Wei Laiqi, an emissary of the Zhou Dynasty, wrote an article "Recounting the Deeds," describing the story of Zheng Zhuang Gong Kuan's changing his mother's name to Jiang.

古文：後主皇后穆氏，名邪利，本斛律后从婢也。
现代文：文字虽然并不很美，但皇帝看后也深感惭愧。北齐灭亡以后，胡太后到了北周，这时便得以大肆淫乱。
English: Although the writing was not very beautiful, the emperor was deeply ashamed after reading it. After the fall of Northern Qi, the Empress Dowager Hu went to Northern Zhou, where she was able to indulge in a great deal of fornication.

古文：母名轻霄，本穆子伦婢也，转入侍中宋钦道家，奸私而生后，莫知氏族，或云后即钦道女子也。
现代文：开皇年间死去。齐后主的皇后穆氏，名叫邪利，原是斛律皇后随从女婢。她母亲名叫轻霄，本是穆子伦的女婢，后来又转入侍中宋钦道家里，和人私通而生下穆氏，也不知该姓什么，有人说她就是宋钦道的女儿。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Kai. The queen of the queen of Qi, Mu, was named Zari, and was originally a servant girl of the queen of Balochistan. Her mother's name was Qiao Xiao, and she was originally a servant girl of Mu Zilun. Later, she was transferred to the family of the middle servant, Song Qinduo, and had an affair with a man and gave birth to Mu. It is not known what her surname was. Some people say that she was the daughter of Song Qinduo.

古文：小字黄花，后字舍利。
现代文：穆氏小字黄花，后改字为舍利。
English: Mu's small character, Huanghua, was later changed to Sheli.

古文：钦道妇妒，轻霄面黥为宋字。
现代文：宋钦道的老婆很妒嫉，她把轻霄的脸上刺了个宋字。
English: Song Qin Dao's wife was so jealous that she tattooed a "Song" character on his face.

古文：钦道伏诛，黄花因此故宫。
现代文：宋钦道因罪而被杀以后，黄花便因此而进入宫廷。
English: After Song Qin Dao was killed for his crime, Huang Hua entered the court for this reason.

古文：有幸于后主，宫内称为 舍利大监 。
现代文：她得到齐后主的宠爱，宫里人都戏称她为 舍利大监 。
English: She was favored by Empress Dowager Qi, and the courtiers jokingly called her the Grand Inspector of the Imperial Palace.

古文：女侍中陆太姬知其宠，养以为女，荐为弘德夫人。
现代文：女侍中陆太姬知道皇帝喜欢她，便把她收养起来，当成自己的女儿，推荐给皇帝。受封为弘德夫人。
English: The lady-in-waiting, Zhonglu Taiki, knew that the emperor liked her, so she adopted her as her own daughter and recommended her to the emperor. She was given the title of Lady Hongde.

古文：武平元年六月，生皇子恆。
现代文：武平元年六月，生下了皇子高恒。
English: In June of the first year of Wuping, she gave birth to Prince Gao Heng.

古文：于时后主未有储嗣，陆阴结待，以臣抚之任不可无主。
现代文：当时齐后主还没有立太子，陆太姬暗中作好准备。
English: At that time, Qi Hou had not yet been crowned crown prince, and Lu Taiki secretly made preparations.

古文：时皇后斛律氏，丞相光之女也，虑其怀恨，先令母养之立为皇太子。
现代文：这时的皇后斛律氏，是丞相斛律光的女儿，陆太姬怕她心中怀恨，便以皇子看管抚养责任重大，不能没人主管，让斛律氏作为皇子的嫡母而抚养皇子恒。
English: At that time, the empress, Ya Lu, was the daughter of the chancellor, Ya Lu Guang. Lu Taiki was afraid that she would hold a grudge against him, so she took the responsibility of looking after and raising the prince. No one should be in charge, and let Ya Lu, as the prince's legitimate mother, raise Prince Heng.

古文：陆以国姓之重，穆、陆相对，又奏赐姓穆氏。
现代文：后来皇子恒被立为太子。陆太姬认为国家的重要姓氏中穆和陆相对，便又奏请赐黄花姓穆。
English: Later, Prince Heng was made crown prince. Lu Taiji thought that the important surname of the country, Zhong Mu, was different from Lu, so she asked for the surname of Huanghua, Mu.

古文：胡庶人之废也，陆有助焉。故遂立为皇后，大赦。
现代文：在胡皇后被废为庶人时，陆太姬是出了大力气的，所以黄花也就被册立为皇后，于是，大赦天下。
English: When Empress Hu was dethroned as a commoner, Lu Taiki was very energetic, so Huanghua was also enthroned as empress, thus, amnesty to the world.

古文：初，有折冲将军元正烈，于鄴城东水中得玺以献，文曰 天皇后玺 ，盖石氏所作。
现代文：起初，有折冲将军元正烈，在邺城东边的水里得到一方玉玺献给朝廷，上面刻有 天王后玺 四个字，原是后赵的石勒家族所刻的。
English: At first, there was a general, Yuan Zhengli, who got a piece of jade in the water on the east side of Handan City and dedicated it to the imperial court. It was engraved with the four characters of the Heavenly King's Empress Dowager. It was originally engraved by the Shi Le family of Emperor Zhao.

古文：诏书颁告，以为穆后之瑞焉。
现代文：于是，皇帝下诏书颁告，认为这是应了立穆皇后的祥瑞。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict announcing that this was in response to Empress Shomu's auspiciousness.

古文：武成为胡后造真珠裙裤，所费不可称计，被火烧。
现代文：武成帝当年为胡皇后制作真珍裙裤，所耗费的钱财不计其数，后来，被火烧掉了。
English: Emperor Wucheng once made a pair of truly exquisite culottes for Empress Hu, spending countless amounts of money. Later, they were destroyed by fire.

古文：後主既立穆皇后，复为营之。
现代文：齐后主册立穆皇后以后，又重新制作。
English: After the enthronement of Empress Mu, it was remade again.

古文：属周武遭太后丧，诏侍中薛孤、康买等为吊使，又遣商胡赍锦彩三万疋与吊使同往。欲市真珠，为皇后造七宝车。
现代文：正好北周武帝的太后去世，皇帝令侍中薛孤、康买作为使者前去吊唁，又派商人带着采缎三万匹和使者一同去北周，准备购买真珍，给皇后建造七宝车。
English: Just as the empress dowager of the Northern Zhouwu Emperor died, the emperor ordered the attendants, Xue Qiao and Kang Bai, to go as messengers to offer condolences. He also sent merchants with 30,000 horses to the Northern Zhou to prepare to buy real treasures and build a treasure chariot for the empress.

古文：周人不与交易，然而竟造焉。
现代文：但周人不肯和北齐商人做成这件买卖。
English: However, Zhou refused to make the deal with the Beiqi merchant.

古文：先是，童谣曰： 黄花势欲落，清觞满杯酌。 
现代文：尽管如此，七宝车还是制成了。起初，有童谣唱： 黄花势欲落，清觞满杯酌。 
English: In spite of this, the treasure chariot was built. At first, there was a nursery rhyme: "The yellow flowers are wilting, the chrysanthemums are in full bloom."

古文：言黄花不久也。
现代文：是说黄花难于持久。
English: That is to say, yellow flowers are difficult to last.

古文：后主自立穆后以后，昏饮无度，故云 清觞满杯酌 。
现代文：齐后主自从册立穆皇后以后，昏庸而又好酒，荒唐而无节制，所以说是 清觞满杯酌 。
English: Since the enthronement of Empress Mu, the lord of Qi Hou, the wine has been dull and good, absurd and unrestrained, so it is said to be a glass full of clear ginger.

古文：陆息骆提婆，诏改姓为穆；陆，太姬。皆以皇后故也。
现代文：陆太姬的儿子叫骆提婆，皇帝下诏让他改姓穆，这也是因为要和皇后同姓的缘故。
English: Lu Taiji's son was called Luo Dibao, and the emperor issued an edict to change his surname to Mu, also because he wanted to have the same surname as the empress.

古文：后既以陆为母，提婆为家，更不采轻霄。
现代文：穆皇后既然把陆太姬当作母亲，就把骆提婆的家看成自己的家，也就不理睬亲生母亲轻霄了。
English: Since Empress Mu regarded Lu Taichi as her mother, she regarded Loti's home as her own, and she ignored her own mother.

古文：轻霄后自疗面，欲求见，为太姬陆媪使禁掌之，竟不得见。
现代文：轻霄后来曾经用药治疗自己的面孔，想要求见穆皇后，可是被陆太姬让人给挡住了，竟见不到面。
English: Later, Qiao Xiao had used medicine to treat his face, and wanted to ask to see Empress Mu, but was blocked by Lu Taichi, and was unable to see her.

古文：冯淑妃名小怜，大穆后从婢也。
现代文：冯淑妃名叫小怜，是穆皇后的随从女婢。
English: Feng Shufei's name was Xiaorai, and she was a servant girl of Empress Mu.

古文：穆后爱衰，以五月五日进之，号曰 续命 。
现代文：穆皇后宠衰，便在五月五日把小怜进给齐后主，称为 续命 。
English: Empress Mu fell out of favor, so on May 5th, she gave Xiao Rongjin to Qi Huan, calling it "the continuation of life."

古文：慧黠能弹琵琶，工歌舞。
现代文：淑妃聪明灵巧，善弹琵琶，精于歌舞。
English: Shuxi was clever and dexterous. She was good at playing the lute and was good at singing and dancing.

古文：后主惑之，坐则同席，出则并马，愿得生死一处。
现代文：后主被她迷住了，坐时同席，出则乘同匹马，但愿两人生死在一处。
English: The late master was captivated by her. They sat at the same table and rode out on the same horse. I hope they both died in the same place.

古文：命淑妃处隆基堂，淑妃恶曹昭仪所常居也，悉令反换其地。
现代文：后主让淑妃住在隆基堂，淑妃厌恶这里原是曹昭仪日常居住的地方，所以命人把地面都换了一遍。
English: Later, the master let Shu Fei live in Longji Hall. Shu Fei disliked the fact that this was the place where Cao Zhaoyi used to live, so he ordered the ground to be changed.

古文：周师之取平阳，帝猎于三堆，晋州亟告急。帝将还，淑妃请更杀一围，帝从其言。
现代文：周军攻打平阳城时，后主正在三堆打猎。晋州连连告急，后主准备回去救援，可是淑妃余兴未尽，请求再杀一围，皇帝听从了。
English: When the Zhou army attacked Pingyang City, the queen mother was hunting in three piles. Jinzhou was in a hurry, and the queen mother was ready to go back to rescue, but Shu Fei Yu was still in high spirits and asked for another round of killing, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：识者以为后主名纬，杀围言非吉征。
现代文：有见识的人认为，齐后主名叫纬，杀围的话不是吉兆。
English: People with insight believe that the lord's name after Qi is Wei, and the words of killing are not a good omen.

古文：及帝至晋州，城已欲没矣。
现代文：待齐后主抵达晋州时，城已将失陷了。
English: By the time the main body arrived in Jinzhou, the city had already fallen.

古文：作地道攻之，城陷十余步，将士乘势欲入。
现代文：于是后主令士兵挖地道向城里发起攻击，城墙倒下十几步宽，将士们正准备趁势而入。
English: As a result, the lord ordered the soldiers to dig a tunnel to attack the city. The city wall fell more than a dozen steps wide, and the soldiers were preparing to take advantage of the situation.

古文：帝敕且止，召淑妃共观之。
现代文：齐后主传令暂时停下，让人召冯淑妃一起观看。
English: After the concert, the main announcer ordered the audience to stop momentarily and let someone call Feng Shufei to watch the performance together.

古文：淑妃妆点，不获时至。
现代文：可是，淑妃正在梳妆打扮，没能马上赶来。
English: However, Shuhei was in the middle of dressing up and couldn't come right away.

古文：周人以木拒塞，城遂不下。
现代文：周人便用许多木头把缺口堵塞严密，因此城未能攻下。
English: Zhou people then used a lot of wood to plug the gap tightly, so the city could not be captured.

古文：旧俗相传，晋州城西石上有圣人迹，淑妃欲往观之。
现代文：过去民间相传说晋州城西的石头上有圣人留下的遗迹，冯淑妃想前往观看。
English: According to the folklore of the past, there are relics left by saints on the stone in the west of the city of Jinzhou. Feng Shufei wants to go and see them.

古文：帝恐弩矢及桥，故抽攻城木造远桥，监作舍人以不速成受罚。
现代文：皇帝担心城上的弓弩能把箭射到桥上，所以就让部下抽去不少攻城用的木头制造远桥，监作舍人因未能立即造好而受处罚。
English: The emperor was worried that the crossbows on the castle could shoot arrows onto the bridge, so he had his subordinates remove a lot of the wood used to attack the city to make a long bridge. The overseer was punished for failing to build it immediately.

古文：帝与淑妃度桥，桥坏，至夜乃还。
现代文：当皇帝和淑妃一起走上桥去时，桥都断裂了，一直折腾到天黑才回来。
English: When the emperor and the empress went to the bridge together, the bridge broke, and they did not return until it was dark.

古文：称妃有功勋，将立为左皇后，即令使驰取祎翟等皇后服御。
现代文：齐后主又称赞冯淑妃有功劳，准备立她为左皇后，便当即令人去取衣、翟羽衣等皇后的衣服，同时和冯淑妃并肩观战。
English: After the match, the host praised Feng Shuxi for her merits and prepared to appoint her as the left queen. He immediately sent someone to pick up the queen's clothes, such as her coat and feathered coat, and watched the match with Feng Shuxi.

古文：仍与之并骑观战，东偏少却，淑妃怖曰： 军败矣！ 
现代文：齐军东头部队略微后退，冯淑妃就十分恐惧地说： 我军败了！ 
English: When the easternmost troops of the Qi army retreated slightly, Feng Shufei said with great fear: Our army has been defeated!

古文：帝遂以淑妃奔还。
现代文：后主便和冯淑妃一起奔回营中。
English: Afterward, the master ran back to the camp with Feng Shufei.

古文：至洪洞戍，淑妃方以粉镜自玩，后声乱唱贼至，于是复走。
现代文：当他们到洪洞戍地时，冯淑妃拿起脂粉和镜子玩耍，忽然后面有杂乱的声音喊叫说贼兵追来了。他们只得起身败走。
English: When they arrived at Hongdong, Feng Shufei picked up the talcum powder and a mirror to play with. Suddenly, there was a disjointed voice shouting that the bandits were chasing them. They had no choice but to get up and leave.

古文：内参自晋阳以皇后衣至，帝为按辔，命淑妃著之，然后去。
现代文：这时，内参从晋阳拿来皇后的服饰，皇帝便勒住马缰，让冯淑妃把衣服穿好，然后继续奔跑。
English: At this time, Neizan brought the queen's clothes from Jinyang, and the emperor held back the horse and let Feng Shuxi wear the clothes, and then continued to run.

古文：帝奔鄴，太后后至，帝不出迎；淑妃将至，凿城北门出十里迎之。
现代文：皇帝直奔到邺城，太后随后也来了，皇帝虽然知道却不出来迎接，可是听说冯淑妃将到时，他令人凿开城门到十里远的地方迎接。
English: The emperor went straight to Lucheng, and the empress dowager also came later. Although the emperor knew, he did not come out to meet her. However, when he heard that Feng Shufei would arrive, he opened the city gate to a place ten miles away to meet her.

古文：复以淑妃奔青州。
现代文：后来又带着冯淑妃逃到青州。
English: He later fled to Qingzhou with Feng Shuxi.

古文：后主至长安，请周武帝乞淑妃，帝曰： 朕视天下如脱屣，一老妪岂与公惜也！ 
现代文：后主被抓到长安以后，他还请周武帝把冯淑妃还给他。周武帝说 ：我看天下也不过像脱下的鞋子一般，一个老太婆我怎么舍不得给你！ 
English: After the lord was caught in Chang'an, he also asked Zhou Wudi to return Feng Shufei to him. Zhou Wudi said: I see the world is just like taking off shoes, how can I not give you an old woman!

古文：仍以赐之。
现代文：他仍把冯淑妃赐给齐后主。
English: He still gave Feng Shufei to Qi Xuan.

古文：及帝遇害，以淑妃赐代王达，甚嬖之。
现代文：当齐后主遇害之后，周武帝便把冯淑妃赏赐给了代王达，很受代王宠爱。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Qi, Emperor Zhou gave Feng Shu Fei as a reward to King Da, who was very fond of the Empress Dowager.

古文：淑妃弹琵琶，因弦断，作诗曰： 虽蒙今日宠，犹忆昔时怜。
现代文：冯淑妃弹琵琶时，因为弦断了，便作了一道诗： 虽蒙今日宠，犹忆昔时怜。
English: When Feng Shu Fei was playing the lute, because the strings were broken, she composed a poem: Although I am favored today, I still remember the old days.

古文：欲知心断绝，应看胶上弦。 
现代文：欲知心断绝，应看胶上弦。 
English: If you want to cut off your lustful heart, you should watch the glue winding.

古文：隋开皇元年三月，出俗为尼，改名常悲。
现代文：代王妃被淑妃中伤，差点死去。后来，隋文帝把冯淑妃赐给代王妃的哥哥李询，命令她穿着粗布衣裙舂粮食。
English: The empress dowager was slandered by Shu Fei and almost died. Later, Emperor Sui gave Feng Shu Fei to the empress dowager's brother, Li Xun, and ordered her to wear a coarse cloth dress and carry grain.

古文：八年，殂，以尼礼葬于京城南。宣皇后杨氏名丽华，隋文帝之长女也。
现代文：李询的母亲逼令她自杀。宣皇后杨氏，名叫丽华，是隋文帝的大女儿。
English: Li An's mother forced her to commit suicide. Queen Yang of Xuan, named Li Hua, was the eldest daughter of Emperor Sui Wen.

古文：帝在东宫，武帝为帝纳后为皇太子妃。
现代文：周宣帝还是东宫太子时，周武帝替他娶杨氏作为皇太子妃。
English: When Zhou Xuandi was still the crown prince of the Eastern Palace, Zhou Wudi married Yang as the crown princess for him.

古文：宣政元年闰六月，并为皇后。
现代文：宣政元年闰六月，册立为皇后。
English: She was enthroned as empress in the leap June of the first year of the proclamation of the Republic.

古文：帝后自称天元皇帝，号后为天元皇后。
现代文：宣帝后来自称为 天元皇帝 ，便称皇后为 天元皇后 。
English: After the proclamation of the emperor, he was called the Emperor Tengen, and the empress was called the Empress Tengen.

古文：寻又立天皇后及左右皇后，与为四皇后。
现代文：不久，又立天皇后和左右皇后，和天元皇后共有四位皇后。
English: Soon after, the Empress Dowager and the Empresses of the Left and Right, and the Empress of Tengen were also established, making a total of four empresses.

古文：二年二月，诏取象四星，于是后及三皇后并加大焉。册授后为天元大皇后，又立天中大皇后，与后为五皇后焉。
现代文：第二年的二月又下诏取照天象的四星，于是在四个皇后的称号前加封 大 字，册封杨氏为天元大皇后，又册立了一位天中大皇后，这样共有五位皇后。
English: In February of the following year, an imperial edict was issued to take the four stars from the celestial body, so the title of the four queens was preceded by a large seal, and the Yang clan was proclaimed the Great Empress of Heaven, and a Great Queen of Heaven was established, so there were a total of five queens.

古文：后性柔婉，不妒忌，四皇后及嫔御等咸爱而仰之。
现代文：杨氏性格柔顺，没有妒忌之心，其他四位皇后和嫔妃们都很敬爱她。
English: Yang's personality is gentle, without jealousy, and the other four queens and concubines all love her.

古文：帝後昏暴滋甚，喜怒乖度。
现代文：宣帝后来昏庸暴虐，越来越厉害，喜怒无常。
English: Emperor Xuan later became violent, increasingly violent, and moody.

古文：尝谴后，欲加之罪，后进止详闲，辞色不挠。
现代文：有一次，他大骂宣皇后，并准备将她治罪，杨氏举止安详，但言辞却不肯屈服。
English: On one occasion, he swore at Empress Xuan and prepared to punish her. Mr. Yang's demeanor was calm, but his words refused to yield.

古文：帝大怒，遂赐后死，逼令自引决。后母独孤氏闻之，诣阁陈谢，叩头流血，然后得免。
现代文：宣帝大怒，便下令强迫她自杀。杨氏的母亲独孤氏听说后，急忙入宫向皇帝谢罪，叩头直至流血，这才赦免皇后的死罪。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and ordered that she be forced to commit suicide. After hearing this, Yang's mother, Du Guo, hurried to the palace to apologize to the emperor, bowed down until she bled, and only then was the queen's capital crime pardoned.

古文：帝崩，静帝尊后为皇太后，居弘圣宫。
现代文：宣帝死后，静帝尊封杨皇后为皇太后，住在弘圣宫。
English: After the death of Emperor Xuan, Emperor Jing honored Empress Yang with the title of empress dowager and lived in the Hongsheng Palace.

古文：初，宣帝不豫，诏隋文帝入禁中侍疾。
现代文：起初，宣帝有病，下诏让隋文帝入宫侍候皇帝治病。
English: At first, Emperor Xuan was ill, and it was decreed that Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen should enter the palace to wait for the emperor to be cured.

古文：及大渐，刘昉、郑译等因矫诏以隋文帝受遗辅政。
现代文：当病重垂危时，刘日方、郑译等人便假传遗诏由隋文帝辅佐朝政。
English: When he was gravely ill and on the verge of death, Liu Yifang, Zheng Zhe and others falsely transmitted his last will and testament to the Sui Emperor Wen as an assistant to the imperial government.

古文：后初虽不预谋，然以嗣主幼冲，恐权在他族，不利于己，闻昉、译已行此诏，心甚悦。
现代文：皇后起初虽然并未参与定计，但她觉得太子年幼，担心大权落在别人家的手中，对自己不利，所以听到刘日方和郑译传下的遗诏以后，心里很高兴。
English: Although the empress did not participate in the calculation at first, she felt that the prince was young and worried that the great power would fall into the hands of someone else's family, which would be disadvantageous to herself. Therefore, she was very happy after hearing the will translated by Liu Yifang and Zheng.

古文：后知隋文有异图，意颇不平。
现代文：后来，她知道隋文帝另有打算，心里很不高兴。
English: Later, when she learned that Emperor Sui had other plans, she was very upset.

古文：及行禅代，愤惋愈甚。隋文内甚愧之。
现代文：当进行禅让帝位以后，她更加愤愤不平，隋文帝为此也深感内疚。
English: She became even angrier after the abdication ceremony, for which Sui Emperor Wen also felt deeply guilty.

古文：开皇初，封后为乐平公主。
现代文：开皇初年，封皇后为乐平公主。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, the empress was Princess Leping.

古文：后又议夺其志，后誓不许，乃止。
现代文：后来又打算让她改嫁。皇后对天发誓不肯改变志向，这才算了。
English: Later, he planned to remarry her. The empress swore to the heavens that she would not change her mind, and that was that.

古文：隋文献皇后独孤氏，讳伽罗，河南洛阳人，周大司马、卫公信之女也。
现代文：大业五年，她跟着隋炀帝出行到达张掖，死在河西。诏令回京，有关方面准备葬礼，把宣皇后附葬于定陵。隋文帝的献皇后独孤氏，名叫伽罗，河南洛阳人，原是北周大司马、卫国公信的女儿。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiei era, she traveled to Zhangye with the Emperor Sui and died in Hexi. The emperor ordered her to return to Beijing, and the relevant authorities prepared a funeral and buried the Empress Xuan in the Dingling Mausoleum. The Empress Xuan dedicated to the Emperor Sui was named Jia Luo, a native of Luoyang, Henan Province, and was originally the daughter of Northern Zhou Da Sima and Emperor Weiguo.

古文：信见文帝有奇表，故以后妻焉。时年十四。
现代文：独孤信见隋文帝有奇特的仪表，所以把女儿嫁给他，当时她只有十四岁。
English: He believed that Emperor Sui had a strange appearance, so he married his daughter to him when she was only fourteen years old.

古文：帝与后相得，誓无异生之子。
现代文：隋文帝和独孤氏感情深厚，两人发誓不要旁人所生的孩子。
English: Emperor Sui and Du Guo had a deep affection for each other, and they both vowed not to have a child born by someone else.

古文：后姊为周明帝后，长女为周宣帝后；贵戚之盛，莫与为比，而后每谦卑自守。
现代文：独孤氏的姐姐是周明帝的皇后，大女儿是周宣帝的皇后，这种皇亲国戚的盛况，没有谁能够相比，可是皇后一向十分谦虚，自我约束。
English: Duko's sister was the empress of Zhou Mingdi, and her eldest daughter was the empress of Zhou Xuandi. No one can compare to the grandeur of these imperial relatives, but the empress has always been very modest and self-restrained.

古文：及周宣帝崩，隋文居禁中，总百揆。
现代文：当周宣帝死时，隋文帝住在宫廷内，掌管所有朝政。
English: When Emperor Zhou Xuan died, Emperor Suiwen lived in the palace and was in charge of all court affairs.

古文：后使李圆通谓文帝曰： 骑兽之势，必不得下，勉之！ 
现代文：皇后让李圆通传话给隋文帝说 ：现在是骑虎之势，一定不能下来，努力吧！ 
English: The empress had Li Yuntong send a message to the Sui Emperor saying, "Now is the time to ride the tiger, you must not get off, work hard!"

古文：及帝受禅，立为皇后。
现代文：隋文帝受禅以后，立独孤氏为皇后。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen accepted Zen, she became the empress.

古文：突厥尝与中国交市，有明珠一箧，价直八百万；幽州总管阴寿白后市之。
现代文：突厥曾经和中国进行贸易，拿来一小箱明珠，价值八百万。幽州总管阴寿告诉独孤皇后让她把它买下来。
English: Turk once traded with China and brought a small box of pearls, worth eight million. Yuzhou Governor Yin Shou told the lonely queen to let her buy it.

古文：后曰： 当今戎狄屡寇，将士罢劳，未若以八百万分赏有功者。 
现代文：皇后说 ：如今敌寇屡次入侵，将士们为此都疲于奔命，还不如把八百万拿来分赏作战有功的人员。 
English: The empress said, "Nowadays, enemy invaders have repeatedly invaded, and soldiers are exhausted from running for their lives. It would be better to use the eight million to reward those who have distinguished themselves in battle."

古文：百寮闻而毕贺。
现代文：百官们知道这件事以后都向隋文帝祝贺。
English: All the officials congratulated the Sui Emperor after they knew about this.

古文：文帝甚宠惮之。
现代文：隋文帝既宠爱她又有所畏惧。
English: Emperor Sui both loved and feared her.

古文：帝每临朝，后辄与上方辇而进，至阁乃止。
现代文：文帝每次上朝听政，皇后就和他乘车一起前去，到阁前皇后才停下。
English: Every time Emperor Wen came to listen to the government, the empress went with him in the car, and only stopped when she reached the front of the pavilion.

古文：使宫官伺帝，政有所失，随则匡谏，多所弘益。
现代文：她让宫中的官员在一旁注意观察文帝，处理国政方面如有不妥的地方，随时匡正和劝谏，这样大有补益。
English: She asked the officials in the palace to pay attention to the observation of Emperor Wen, and to rectify and advise at any time if there is anything wrong in the handling of state affairs, which is of great benefit.

古文：候帝退朝而同反宴寝，相顾欣然。
现代文：一直等到皇帝退朝才一起回内宫吃饭和休息，两人总是相视而笑。
English: They waited until the emperor retired before returning to the inner palace to eat and rest together. The two always looked at each other and smiled.

古文：后早失二亲，常怀感慕，见公卿有父母者，每为致礼焉。
现代文：皇后早年就失去双亲，对父母十分想念并羡慕有父母的人。她看见公卿的父母在府中，往往亲自前去拜问。
English: The Empress, who lost her parents at an early age, misses them very much and envies those who have parents. When she sees the parents of a nobleman in the palace, she often goes to visit them in person.

古文：有司奏曰： 《周礼》，百官之妻，命于王后。宪章在昔，请依古制。 
现代文：有关方面官员奏说： 按《周礼》，百官的妻子，听命于王后，这是古代的典章制度，请您依照古法行事。 
English: The officials concerned said: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the wife of a centurion must obey the queen. This is an ancient ceremonial system. Please act in accordance with the ancient law.

古文：后曰： 以妇人与政，或从此渐，不可开其源也。 
现代文：皇后说： 这是以妇人干政啊，那样做恐怕就会越来越变本加厉了。不能开这个头啊！ 
English: The queen said, "This is a woman's way of doing politics, and I'm afraid it will get worse and worse. We can't do this!

古文：不许。
现代文：她不答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：后每谓诸公主曰： 周家公主类无妇德，失礼于舅姑，离薄人骨肉，此不顺事，尔等当诫之。 
现代文：皇后常对几位公主们说 ：北周的那些公主们都是缺乏妇德的人，对公公和婆婆没有礼节，使人家骨肉分离，感情疏远，这是不应该的事情，你们都应该引以为戒。 
English: The empress often said to several princesses, "Those princesses of Beizhou are all devoid of womanly virtue. They have no etiquette for their father-in-law and mother-in-law, separating the flesh and blood of the family, and alienating their feelings. This is something that should not be done, and you should all take it as a warning.

古文：后姑子都督崔长仁犯法当斩，文帝以后故免之。
现代文：皇后姑姑的儿子都督崔长仁犯了法，论罪应当斩首，隋文帝因为皇后的缘故而赦免了他。
English: The son of the queen's aunt, the governor Cui Changren, broke the law and should be beheaded for his crime, but the Sui Emperor pardoned him for the sake of the queen.

古文：后曰： 国家之事，焉可顾私！ 
现代文：皇后说 ：国家的大事，怎么能够徇私情呢？ 
English: The Empress said: How can one's private feelings interfere with the important affairs of the state?

古文：长仁竟坐死。
现代文：崔长仁到底被处死了。
English: Choe Chung-in was executed after all.

古文：异母弟陀以猫鬼巫蛊咒诅于后，坐当死。
现代文：独孤氏的异母弟独孤瞓用猫鬼等巫术来诅咒和危害她，依照法律应判死刑。
English: According to the law, Doko's half-brother, Doko Atsushi, should be sentenced to death for cursing and endangering her with cat spirits and other witchcraft.

古文：后三日不食，为之请命曰： 陀若蠹政害民者，不敢言。
现代文：皇后知道以后三天不吃东西，替他向文帝请求说 ：独孤瞓假如干的是祸国殃民的大事，我就不敢说情了。
English: The empress knew that he would not eat for the next three days, and begged Emperor Wen on his behalf, saying, "If I am the only one who has done something to harm the country and the people, I dare not intercede.

古文：今坐为妾身，请其命。 
现代文：如今他犯罪仅仅是因为我的缘故，就请您留他一条命吧！ 
English: Now he has committed a crime only because of me, so please let him live!

古文：陀于是减死一等。
现代文：独孤瞓因而被减罪一等而免死。
English: As a result, he was given a first-class reduction of his sentence and was spared death.

古文：后雅性俭约。
现代文：皇后向来注意勤俭节约。
English: The Empress has always paid attention to thrift and economy.

古文：帝常合止利药，须胡粉一两，宫内不用，求之竟不得。
现代文：隋文帝曾经调制止痢药，需用妇人涂脸的白胡粉一两，由于皇后平时不用，找来找去也找不到。
English: Sui Emperor Wen had adjusted the anti-dysentery medicine, and needed to use one or two white goose powder for women to paint their faces. Since the empress did not usually use it, she could not find it.

古文：又欲赐柱国刘嵩妻织成衣领，宫内亦无。
现代文：又想赐给柱国刘嵩的妻子一些织好的衣领，宫内也没有。
English: He also wanted to give the wife of Liu Song, the pillar country, some well-woven collars, but there were none in the palace.

古文：上以后不好华丽，时齐七宝车及镜台绝巧丽，使毁车而以镜台赐后。
现代文：文帝知道皇后不喜欢穿着华丽，当时原北齐的七宝车和镜台制作得极其精巧华丽，文帝便让人把车拆毁了，只把镜台赐给皇后。
English: Emperor Wen knew that the empress did not like to dress in ornate attire. At that time, the cloisonné carriage and the mirror stand of the original Beiqi were made extremely elaborately and gorgeously. Emperor Wen had the carriage demolished and only gave the mirror stand to the empress.

古文：后雅好读书，识达今古，凡言事皆与上意合，宫中称为二圣。
现代文：皇后又一向爱好读书，明达古今的各种事情，所说的事情都和皇帝的想法一致，所以宫中把他们称作 二圣 。
English: The empress has always been fond of reading, knowing all kinds of things from ancient times to the present, and the things she says are in line with the emperor's thoughts, so the palace calls them two saints.

古文：尝梦周阿史那后，言受罪辛苦，求营功德。
现代文：皇后曾经梦见北周的阿史那皇后，说她正在受罪，十分辛苦，请求独孤皇后给她做佛家的功德善事。
English: The empress once dreamt of Queen Ashina of Northern Zhou, saying that she was suffering from sin, very hard, and asked the lonely queen to do Buddhist merit and good deeds for her.

古文：明日言之，上为立寺追福焉。
现代文：第二天她告诉文帝，文帝便为她修建寺庙以祈福。
English: The next day she told Emperor Wen that Emperor Wen would build a temple for her to pray for good luck.

古文：后兄女，夫死于并州，后嫂以女有娠，请不赴葬。
现代文：皇后哥哥的女儿，丈夫死在并州，皇后的嫂嫂因为女儿已经怀孕在身，请求不必前往奔丧。
English: The daughter of the brother of the Empress, whose husband died in Bozhou, the sister-in-law of the Empress, because her daughter was already pregnant, asked not to go to the funeral.

古文：后曰： 妇人事夫，何容不往！
现代文：皇后说 ：妇人是侍奉丈夫的，怎么能够不去！
English: The queen said: A woman serves her husband, how can she not go!

古文：其姑在，宜自谘之。 
现代文：她的婆婆还在，应当自己去问婆婆的意见。 
English: Her mother-in-law is still alive, you should ask her opinion.

古文：姑不许，女遂行。
现代文：婆婆不同意，皇后的侄女便上路了。
English: When her mother-in-law disagreed, the queen's niece went on her way.

古文：后颇仁爱，每闻大理决囚，未尝不流涕。然性尤妒忌，后宫莫敢进御。
现代文：皇后很仁爱，她一听到大理寺处决囚犯，没有不流泪的，可是她性情特别妒嫉，所以文帝不敢到后宫去和别的女人同宿。
English: The empress was very benevolent. When she heard that prisoners were being executed at Dali Temple, there was no way she would not shed tears. However, her nature was particularly jealous, so Emperor Wen did not dare to go to the harem to share a room with another woman.

古文：尉迟迥女孙有美色，先在宫中，帝于仁寿宫见而悦之，因得幸。
现代文：尉迟迥的孙女长得漂亮，很早就在宫中，文帝在仁寿宫见了以后很喜欢她，因而得到宠幸。
English: Emperor Wen's granddaughter was very beautiful, and she was in the palace very early. Emperor Wen liked her very much after meeting her at the Palace of Renshou, so he was favored.

古文：后伺帝听朝，阴杀之。
现代文：皇后等文帝上朝听政时，暗地把她杀死了。
English: Emperor Wen secretly killed the empress while she was in the audience of the last emperor.

古文：上大怒，单骑从苑中出，不由径路，入山谷间三十余里。
现代文：文帝大为恼怒，便从御苑中单身骑马而出，不沿道路奔驰，直跑进山谷三十多里路远。
English: Emperor Wen was very angry, so he rode out of the imperial garden on a single horse, did not ride along the road, and ran straight into the valley more than thirty miles away.

古文：高颎、杨素等追及，扣马谏。
现代文：高赹、杨素等追到后，拉住马缰劝谏。
English: After catching up with Gao Wei and Yang Su, they stopped Ma Wei to persuade him.

古文：帝太息曰： 吾贵为天子，不得自由！ 
现代文：文帝长叹着说 ：我身为天子，地位高贵，却没有自由。 
English: Emperor Wen sighed for a long time and said, "I am the son of heaven, I have a noble position, but I have no freedom.

古文：高颎曰： 陛下岂以一妇人而轻天下？ 
现代文：高赹说 ：陛下怎么能因为一位妇人而轻弃天下呢？ 
English: Gao Yao said, "How can Your Majesty despise the world because of a woman?"

古文：帝意少解，驻马良久，夜方还宫。
现代文：文帝的心情才稍微平静下来，他拉着马，站立了许久，直到黑夜才回到宫中。
English: Emperor Wen's mood only calmed down a little. He pulled the horse and stood for a long time before returning to the palace in the dark.

古文：后候上于阁内，及帝至，流涕拜谢。
现代文：皇后在阁中等候文帝，当文帝到时，她流着泪谢罪。
English: The empress waited for Emperor Wen in the pavilion. When Emperor Wen arrived, she shed tears of repentance.

古文：颎、素等和解之，上置酒极欢。
现代文：高赹、杨素等又劝说了一番，两人才和解了，文帝命人设宴，君臣同饮十分高兴。
English: Gao Yao, Yang Su and others tried to persuade him, and the two men were reconciled. Emperor Wen ordered a banquet to be held, and the emperor and the minister were very happy to drink together.

古文：后自此意颇折。
现代文：皇后从此以后也比较收敛一些了。
English: Since then, the empress has also become more restrained.

古文：初，后以高颎是父之家客，甚见亲礼。
现代文：当初，皇后因为高赹是父亲家里的常客，对他很是亲近和尊敬。
English: At first, the Empress was very close to her father and respected him because he was a frequent visitor to her father's home.

古文：至是，闻颎谓己为一妇人，因以衔恨。
现代文：这时，听到高赹把自己说成是 一个妇人 ，便对他心中怀恨。
English: At this time, hearing Gao Yao describe himself as a woman, she harbored hatred in her heart for him.

古文：又以颎夫人死，其妾生男，益不善之，渐加谮毁。帝亦每事唯后言是用。
现代文：后来又因为高赹的夫人死去，而小妾却生下男孩，便更不高兴，渐渐地常在文帝面前说高赹的坏话。
English: Later, because Gao Yao's wife died, and his concubine gave birth to a boy, he was even more unhappy, and gradually he often spoke ill of Gao Yao in front of Emperor Wen.

古文：后见诸王及朝士有妾孕者，必劝帝斥之。
现代文：而文帝也总是事事听从皇后的意见。皇后只要见到那些侯王的朝臣们中有小妾怀孕生产的，便劝皇帝疏远和罢免他们。
English: However, Emperor Wen always listened to the queen's advice. Whenever the queen saw that some of the princes' courtiers had concubines who had given birth, she would persuade the emperor to distance himself from them and dismiss them.

古文：时皇太子多内宠，妃元氏暴薨，后意太子爱妾云氏害之。
现代文：当时皇太子喜爱好几位妃子，而太子正妃元氏突然去世，皇后认为是被太子的爱妾云氏害死的。
English: At that time, the crown prince was fond of several concubines, and the crown prince's real wife, Genji, died suddenly. The empress believed that she was killed by the prince's beloved concubine, Yunji.

古文：由是讽帝，黜高颎，竟废太子立晋王广，皆后之谋也。
现代文：于是，她便劝说文帝，罢免了高赹，后来甚至废掉太子而立晋王杨广当太子，都是独孤皇后所策划的。
English: As a result, she persuaded Emperor Wen, dismissed Gao Yu, and later even abolished the prince and appointed the Jin king Yang Guang as the prince, all of which were planned by the lonely queen.

古文：仁寿二年八月甲子，日晕四重。
现代文：仁寿二年八月十九日，太阳出现四重日晕。
English: On August 19 of the second year of Ren Shou's reign, the sun appeared to have quadruple heliocentricity.

古文：己巳。太白犯轩辕。
现代文：二十四日，太白星侵犯了轩辕星。
English: On the 24th, Taibai Xing violated Xuan Ying Xing.

古文：其夜，后崩于永安宫，时年五十九，葬于太陵。
现代文：当夜，独孤皇后死于永安宫，享年五十九岁，被安葬在太陵。
English: That night, the lonely empress died at the Yongan Palace at the age of fifty-nine and was buried in the tomb.

古文：其后宣华夫人陈氏、容华夫人蔡氏俱有宠，帝颇惑之，由是发疾。
现代文：此后宣华夫人陈氏、容华夫人蔡氏都得到文帝的宠爱，文帝经常沉缅于美色之中，于是得了病。
English: After that, Emperor Wen's favorite wives, Chen, the wife of Emperor Xuanhua, and Cai, the wife of Emperor Yonghua, were both favored by Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen often indulged in the pursuit of beauty, which led to his illness.

古文：及危笃，谓侍者曰 使皇后在，吾不及此 云。
现代文：当他病危时，对侍从们说： 要是皇后还在，我就不会这样了。 
English: When he was gravely ill, he said to his attendants: "If the queen were still alive, I would not be like this.

古文：宣华夫人陈氏，陈宣帝女也。
现代文：宣华夫人陈氏，是陈宣帝的女儿。
English: Lady Xuanhua Chen is the daughter of Emperor Xuan of Chen.

古文：性聪慧，姿貌无双。
现代文：她生性聪明而又长得秀丽无双。
English: She is naturally intelligent and has an unmatched beauty.

古文：及陈灭，配掖庭，后选入宫为嫔。
现代文：当陈国被灭以后，被送往宫妃居住的掖廷，后又选入宫中当嫔妃。
English: After the destruction of Chen Guo, she was sent to the imperial court where the imperial concubine lived, and later she was selected to be the imperial concubine.

古文：时独孤皇后性妒，后宫罕得进御，唯陈氏有宠。
现代文：当时独孤皇后性情嫉妒，后宫中罕有人被皇帝亲近，惟独陈氏受到宠幸。
English: At that time, the lonely empress was jealous. Few people in the harem were close to the emperor, but Mr. Chen was favored.

古文：炀帝之在籓也，阴有夺宗之计，规为内助，每致礼焉。
现代文：隋炀帝还是藩王时，便阴谋想篡夺继承权，打算让陈氏做为内助，常常去给她送礼问候。
English: When the Sui Dynasty was still the king of the Han Dynasty, it plotted to usurp the right of succession, intending to make Chen a domestic helper, and often went to send gifts and greetings to her.

古文：进金蛇、金驼等物，以取媚于陈氏。
现代文：曾送金蛇、金骆驼等物品，以讨得陈氏的欢心。
English: He once sent items such as a golden snake and a golden camel to win Chen's favor.

古文：皇太子废立之际，颇有力焉。
现代文：在皇太子的被废和新立的事情上，陈氏很出了些力气。
English: In the matter of the dethronement and reinstatement of the crown prince, Mr. Chen was very energetic.

古文：及文献皇后崩，进位为贵人。专房擅宠，主断内事，六宫莫与为比。
现代文：当文献皇后去世后，她被晋封为贵人，专房受宠，主持和决断内宫中各项大事，六宫没有人能和她相比。
English: After the death of the Empress of Literature, she was promoted to the rank of noblewoman, was favored with a special room, presided over and decided on various major events in the Inner Court, and no one in the Six Courts could compare to her.

古文：及帝大渐，遗诏拜为宣华夫人。
现代文：隋文帝病重时，下诏封她为宣华夫人。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen was seriously ill, he issued an edict to make her the wife of Emperor Xuanhua.

古文：初，帝寝疾于仁寿宫，夫人与皇太子同侍疾。
现代文：开始时，隋文帝生病住在仁寿宫，由陈氏和皇太子一起照料文帝治病。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Sui Wendi was ill and lived in Renshou Palace. Mr. Chen and the crown prince took care of Emperor Wendi to treat his illness.

古文：平旦更衣，为太子所逼，夫人拒之得免。
现代文：夫人天亮时更换衣服，皇太子杨广逼她交欢，夫人坚拒不从，因而幸免。
English: The wife changed her clothes at dawn. Crown Prince Yang Guang forced her to have sex, but the wife refused and was spared.

古文：归于上所，上怪其神色有异，问之。
现代文：当她回到文帝身边时，文帝发现她神色和平时不同，便问她是怎么回事。
English: When she returned to Wendi's side, Wendi noticed that she looked different from usual and asked her what was going on.

古文：夫人泣以实对。
现代文：宣华夫人哭着把经过告诉文帝。
English: Mrs. Xuanhua cried and told the story to Emperor Wen.

古文：帝恚曰： 畜生何堪付大事，独孤诚误我！ 
现代文：文帝生气地说： 畜生，怎么能够承担国家重任呢？独孤氏真是耽误了我的大事了！ 
English: Emperor Wen said angrily, "Bastard, how can you take on the heavy responsibility of the country? Mr. Du Guo has really delayed my important task!"

古文：意谓献皇后也。
现代文：他说的就是献皇后独孤氏。
English: He said it was dedicated to the Empress Doko.

古文：因呼兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩曰： 呼我兒！ 
现代文：于是，他喊来兵部尚书柳述、黄门侍郎元岩说 ：快喊我儿子！ 
English: As a result, he shouted to the warlord Shang Shuliushu and the yellow gate attendant Yuan Yan and said: Quickly call my son!

古文：述等呼太子。
现代文：柳述等人把皇太子杨广叫来。
English: Liu Su and others called the crown prince Yang Guang.

古文：帝曰： 勇也。 
现代文：文帝说 ：我叫的是杨勇。 
English: Wen Di said: My name is Yang Yong Cang.

古文：述、岩出阁为敕书讫，示左仆射杨素。
现代文：柳述和元岩便走到阁外，为文帝起草召回杨勇的诏书，然后拿给杨素看。
English: Liu Su and Yuan Yan then went outside the palace to draft an edict for Emperor Wen to recall Yang Yong, and then showed it to Yang Su.

古文：素以白太子，太子遣张衡入寝殿，遂令夫人及后宫同侍疾者并就别室。
现代文：杨素立即告诉了杨广，杨广便派张衡进入文帝卧病的寝殿，同时命令宣华夫人和一起照顾隋文帝的侍从们都到另外的房间去。
English: Yang Su immediately told Yang Guang, and Yang Guang sent Zhang Heng to enter Emperor Wen's sick bed, and ordered Madame Xuanhua and the attendants who were taking care of Emperor Sui to go to another room.

古文：俄闻上崩，而未发丧也。
现代文：一会便传来文帝逝世的消息，可是这一消息并没有对外宣布。
English: News of Emperor Gong's death spread quickly, but it was not announced to the outside world.

古文：夫人与诸后宫相顾曰： 事变矣！ 
现代文：宣华夫人和后宫的所有嫔妃们都相互说 ：事情发生变故了！ 
English: Lady Xuanhua and all the concubines in the harem said to each other: Things have changed!

古文：皆色动股粟。
现代文：一个个都脸色突变，双腿战栗。
English: Everyone's face turned suddenly pale, and their legs trembled.

古文：晡后，太子遣使者赍金合，帖纸于际，亲署封字，以赐夫人。
现代文：午后，太子派使者送来一只金盒子，贴了一层纸在盒边，由太子亲自署名和加封。赐给宣华夫人。
English: In the afternoon, the prince sent an emissary to bring a gold box, affixed a layer of paper to the edge of the box, signed and sealed by the prince himself. Given to Mrs. Xuanhua.

古文：夫人见，怕惧，以为鸩毒，不敢发。
现代文：宣华夫人见后，以为送来鸩毒，不敢打开。
English: After seeing her, Mrs. Xuanhua thought she had been given poison and did not dare to open it.

古文：使者促之，乃发，见合中有同心结数枚。
现代文：使者不停地催促，这才不得不打开了，只见金盒内放有几枚同心结。
English: The messenger kept urging him, and he had to open it, only to find several concentric knots in the gold box.

古文：诸宫人相谓曰： 得免死矣！ 
现代文：那些宫女们都互相看着说 ：可以免死了。 
English: The ladies-in-waiting looked at each other and said: we can avoid death.

古文：陈氏恚而却坐，不肯致谢。
现代文：陈氏却很生气地坐下，并不肯拜谢。
English: Mr. Chen, however, angrily sat down and refused to say thank you.

古文：诸宫人共逼之，乃拜使者。
现代文：那些宫女们都一齐强迫她，这才拜谢来人。
English: All those maids of honour forced her to leave, and that's why she's apologising.

古文：其夜，太子蒸焉。
现代文：当夜，皇太子和她一同过夜。
English: That night, the crown prince spent the night with her.

古文：帝寝疾，加号容华夫人。
现代文：隋炀帝即位后，宣华夫人出居于仙都宫。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Sui, Empress Xuanhua took up residence in the Xiantu Palace.

古文：帝崩後，亦为炀帝所蒸。
现代文：不久又召回内宫，一年多后，她便去世了，这一年她二十九岁。
English: She was soon recalled to the Inner Court, where she died just over a year later, at the age of 29.

古文：炀帝愍皇后萧氏，梁明帝岿之女也。
现代文：隋炀帝对她去世十分惋惜和悲伤，为此而写了《神伤赋》。隋炀帝的愍皇后萧氏，是梁明帝萧岿的女儿。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Sui Dynasty was very sorry and saddened by her death, and wrote "Divine Wounds" for this reason. The Empress Xiao of Emperor Xuanzong of the Sui Dynasty was the daughter of Emperor Xiao of the Liang Ming Dynasty.

古文：江南风俗，二月生子者不举。
现代文：江南一带风俗，二月里出生的孩子不抚养。
English: It is a custom in the south of the Yangtze River that children born in February are not raised.

古文：后以二月生，由是季父岌收养之。
现代文：皇后正是二月出生的，于是便由她的叔叔萧岌收养下来。
English: The empress was born in February and was adopted by her uncle Xiao Wu.

古文：未岁，岌夫妻俱死，转养舅张轲家。
现代文：不久，萧岌夫妇都去世了，她又被转养在舅舅张轲家。
English: Soon after, both Xiao Rui and her husband passed away, and she was transferred to the home of her uncle, Zhang Ye.

古文：轲甚贫窭，后躬亲劳苦。
现代文：张轲家境贫寒，皇后亲自劳作，生活艰苦。
English: Zhang Ye's family was poor, and the empress herself worked hard and lived a hard life.

古文：炀帝为晋王，文帝为选妃于梁，卜诸女皆不吉。
现代文：隋炀帝被封为晋王时，文帝替他到梁朝选聘王妃，占卜了几位公主，都说不吉利。
English: When Emperor Sui Xuan was crowned as the King of Jin, Emperor Wen went to the Liang Dynasty to select a princess for him. He divined several princesses, and they all said it was unlucky.

古文：岿乃迎后于舅氏，令使者占之，曰： 吉。 
现代文：萧岿便把萧皇后从舅舅家里接来，来使占卜后，说 ：吉利！ 
English: Xiao Yao then brought Queen Xiao from her uncle's home to do the divination and said, "Good luck!

古文：遂册为妃。
现代文：于是便册封为王妃。
English: As a result, she was crowned princess.

古文：后性婉顺，有智识，好学解属文，颇知占候，文帝大善之。
现代文：萧皇后性情温顺，有智谋和见识，喜欢读书，会写文章，颇知晓占候之术，隋文帝很喜欢她。
English: Empress Xiao was gentle, intelligent and insightful. She liked to read and write, and was quite familiar with divination. Emperor Sui liked her very much.

古文：炀帝甚宠敬焉。
现代文：隋炀帝也很宠爱和敬重她。
English: Sui and Qin emperors also loved and respected her.

古文：及帝嗣位，立为皇后。
现代文：当炀帝继位后，便立她为皇后。
English: When Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, he made her the empress.

古文：帝每游幸，未尝不随从。
现代文：炀帝每次外出巡游，没有一次不把她带在身边。
English: Every time Emperor Zou went out on a tour, he never once did not take her along.

古文：惧达人之盖寡，谓何求而自陈。诚素志之难写，同绝笔于获麟。
现代文：这时，萧皇后看到隋炀帝已失去当帝王的品德，心里认为这样不行，可是又不敢直说，便写了一篇《述志赋》来寄托自己的感情。
English: At this time, Empress Xiao saw that Emperor Sui and Qin had lost the virtue of being an emperor, and thought in her heart that this was not possible, but she did not dare to say it directly, so she wrote a "Shu Zhi Fu" to express her feelings.

古文：及帝幸江都，臣下离贰，有宫人白后曰： 外闻人人欲反。 
现代文：当隋炀帝南下江都时，臣子们都有离叛之心。有宫人对皇后说 ：外面传闻人人要谋反。 
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties went to the south of the Yangtze River, the courtiers all had a rebellious heart. A courtier said to the empress: "There are rumors that everyone is going to rebel."

古文：后曰： 任汝奏之。 
现代文：皇后说： 随你向皇帝上奏。 
English: The empress said, "Play as you please to the emperor."

古文：宫人言于帝，帝大怒曰： 非汝宜言！ 
现代文：宫人们对隋炀帝上奏后，炀帝大怒，说 ：这不是你该说的。 
English: After the palace people played the music for Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu, Emperor Pu was furious and said, "This is not what you should have said."

古文：乃斩之。
现代文：便把她斩了。
English: and beheaded her.

古文：后宫人复白后曰： 宿卫者往往偶语谋反。 
现代文：后来又有宫人来告诉皇后说 ：那些防卫的兵士们都在窃窃私语准备谋反。 
English: Later, someone from the palace came to tell the queen that the soldiers on guard were whispering and preparing to rebel.

古文：后曰： 天下事一朝至此，势去已然，无可救也。
现代文：皇后说 ：天下大事，想不到一朝之间已到这样了，大势已去，难以挽救了。
English: The empress said, "The world's great events have come to such a pass in the space of a single day that it is hard to imagine. The tide has turned, and it is difficult to save it."

古文：何用言，徒令帝忧烦耳！ 
现代文：何必再讲呢！只会让皇帝增添忧愁而已！ 
English: What's the point of talking about it? It will only add to the emperor's sorrow!

古文：自是无复言者。
现代文：从此以后再没有人说话了。
English: After that, no one spoke again.

古文：及宇文化及之乱，随军至聊城。
现代文：当宇文化及叛乱时，萧皇后跟随乱军到达聊城。
English: During the Yu Culture and Rebellion, Empress Xiao followed the rebels to Liaocheng.

古文：化及败，没于窦建德。
现代文：宇文化及失败后，萧皇后被窦建德抓获。
English: After the defeat of Yu Culture, Empress Xiao was captured by Dou Jiande.

古文：建德妻曹氏妒悍，炀帝妃嫔美人并使出家，并后置于武强县。
现代文：窦建德的妻子曹氏既嫉妒又很凶狠，隋炀帝的嫔妃和美人她都让出家为尼，连皇后也被送往武强县安置。
English: Dou Jiande's wife, Cao, was both jealous and fierce. She had Emperor Sui's concubines and beauties leave home to become nuns. Even the empress was sent to Wuqiang County for resettlement.

古文：是时突厥处罗可汗方盛，其可贺敦即隋义城公主也，遣使迎后。
现代文：这时，突厥部的处罗可汗实力兴盛，他的可贺敦是隋的义城公主，这时便派人来迎接萧皇后。
English: At this time, Luo Khan, the head of the Turkic Department, was at the height of his power. He was Kehetun, the princess of Yicheng in the Sui Dynasty. At this time, he sent someone to meet Empress Xiao.

古文：建德不敢留，遂携其孙正道及诸女入于虏庭。
现代文：窦建德不敢强留，萧皇后便带着孙子正道以及一起的女子前往突厥的王廷。
English: Dou Jiande did not dare to stay, so Empress Xiao took her grandson Zheng Dao and a woman with him to the Turkish royal court.

古文：大唐贞观四年，破突厥，皆以礼致之。归于京师，赐宅于兴道里。
现代文：大唐贞观四年，击破突厥，便都依照礼节把她们接回送往京城，赐宅院在长安兴道里。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Tang Zhengjuan, after defeating the Turks, they all took them back to the capital in accordance with etiquette, and gave them a house in Chang'an Xing Road.

古文：二十一年，殂。
现代文：贞观二十一年，逝世。
English: Zhenguan, 21 years old, passed away.

古文：诏以皇后礼于扬州合葬于炀帝陵，谥曰愍。
现代文：传旨以皇后的礼节把她合葬于扬州的隋炀帝陵，加谥号为 愍 。
English: According to the order, she was buried together with the empress in the mausoleum of the Sui Dynasty in Yangzhou, and her posthumous name was.

