古文：徐陵，字孝穆，东海郯人也。
现代文：徐陵，字孝穆，是东海郯人。
English: Xuling, also known as Xiaomu, is a native of the East China Sea.

古文：祖超之，齐郁林太守，梁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：祖父超之，是齐朝的郁林太守，后任梁朝员外散骑常侍。
English: Grandfather Chaozhi was the governor of Yulin in the Qi Dynasty, and later he was a member of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父摛，梁戎昭将军、太子左卫率，赠侍中、太子詹事，谥贞子。
现代文：父亲徐摘是梁朝戎昭将军、太子左卫率。赠侍中、太子詹事，谧贞子。
English: Xu Zhan's father was General Liang Chao Rong Zhao and Prince Zuo Wei. He was given the titles of Chamberlain, Prince Zhan Zhi, and Empress Dowager Sadako.

古文：母臧氏，尝梦五色云化而为凤，集左肩上，已而诞陵焉。
现代文：母亲臧氏，曾梦见五色云朵化作凤凰，落到她的左肩上，不久生下徐陵。
English: His mother, Ms. Zou, once dreamed that a five-colored cloud turned into a phoenix and landed on her left shoulder. Soon, she gave birth to Xu Ling.

古文：时宝志上人者，世称其有道，陵年数岁，家人携以候之，宝志手摩其顶，曰： 天上石麒麟也。 
现代文：当时有个叫宾志上人的，社会上都说他有道行，徐陵几岁的时候，家裹人携带他去见宝志上人，实志上人手摩徐陵的头顶，说： 这是天上的石麒麟啊。 
English: At that time, there was a man named Bin Zhi Shangren, and the society said that he had Taoism. When Xuling was a few years old, a family member carried him to see Baozhi Shangren. Shishi Shangren rubbed the top of Xuling's head and said: This is the stone unicorn in the sky.

古文：光宅惠云法师每嗟陵早成就，谓之颜回。
现代文：光宅寺惠云法师每每感叹徐陵年轻有为，称他是颜回。
English: Mage Huiyun of Koyakuji Temple often laments that Xu Ling is young and active, saying that he is the reincarnation of Yan.

古文：八岁能属文，十二通《庄》、《老》义。
现代文：徐陵八岁能写文章，十二岁通晓《庄子》《老子》的文义。
English: Xu Ling was able to write articles at the age of eight, and was familiar with the meaning of "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi" at the age of twelve.

古文：既长，博涉史籍，纵横有口辩。
现代文：长大后又广泛地涉猎史籍，颇有纵横家的口才。
English: After growing up, he also extensively dabbled in historical books, and was quite eloquent.

古文：梁普通二年，晋安王为平西将军、宁蛮校尉，父摛为王咨议，王又引陵参宁蛮府军事。
现代文：梁普通二年，晋安王为平西将军、宁蛮校尉时，父亲徐搞为晋安王谘议参军，晋安王又请徐陵参与宁蛮府军事。
English: In the second year of Liang's reign, when Jinan Wang was promoted to Pingxi General and Ningban Lieutenant, his father, Xu, advised Jinan Wang to join the army, and Jinan Wang also invited Xu Ling to participate in the military of Ningban Prefecture.

古文：中大通三年，王立为皇太子，东宫置学士，陵充其选。
现代文：中大通三年，晋安王被立为皇太子，东宫设置学士，徐陵充当学士人选。
English: In the third year of the middle and high school, Jinan Wang was appointed as the crown prince, the East Palace set up a bachelor, and Xu Ling acted as a bachelor candidate.

古文：稍迁尚书度支郎。
现代文：稍后升任尚书度支郎，离京作上虞县令。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shang Shudo Shiro, and left Beijing to become the governor of Shangyu County.

古文：出为上虞令，御史中丞刘孝仪与陵先有隙，风闻劾陵在县赃污，因坐免。
现代文：御史中丞刘耋仪与涂庆先前不和，根据传闻弹劾途壁在上虞县贪脏，因此被免官。
English: Grand Historian Liu Puyi and Tu Qing were previously at odds, and according to rumors, the impeachment roadblock was corruption in Shangyu County, so he was removed from office.

古文：久之，起为南平王府行参军，迁通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：遇了很久，才起用为鱼垩王府行参军，再调任通直散骑侍郎。
English: It was a long time before he was assigned to join the army as a cavalry officer and then transferred to be a horseman.

古文：梁简文在东宫撰《长春殿义记》，使陵为序。
现代文：銮筵塞童在东宫撰《长春殿义记》，让徐陵作序。
English: In the East Palace, Xu Sedong wrote "Changchun Palace Records," and let Xu Ling write the preface.

古文：又令于少傅府述所制《庄子义》。
现代文：又令他在少傅府讲述他撰写的《庄子义》。
English: He also ordered him to recite his book "Zhuang Ziyi" in Shao Fu Fu.

古文：寻迁镇西湘东王中记室参军。
现代文：不久调任镇西湘东王中记室参军。
English: He was soon transferred to the West Xiangdong Wang Middle Records Office to join the army.

古文：太清二年，兼通直散骑常侍。
现代文：太清二年，兼通直散骑常侍。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he also became a samurai.

古文：使魏，魏人授馆宴宾。
现代文：出使魏，魏人安排行馆宴请宾客。
English: Wei was sent out, and the Wei people arranged a banquet to invite guests.

古文：是日甚热，其主客魏收嘲陵曰： 今日之热，当由徐常侍来。 
现代文：逭一天很热，魏主持宴客的瑟业嘲讽鑪说： 今天的热是由涂当售引来的吧。 
English: One day it was very hot. Wei Se Ye, who was hosting the banquet, scoffed and said, "Today's heat must have been brought on by the tobacconists."

古文：陵即答曰： 昔王肃至此，为魏始制礼仪；今我来聘，使卿复知寒暑。 
现代文：途堕当即答道： 从前玉虫到逭襄替墓制订了礼仪；今日我来访，又使你知道了寒暑。 
English: The wayfarer immediately replied, "From before Tamamushi came to Shuxiang, we established the etiquette for the tomb; today, when I visit, I make you aware of the cold and heat.

古文：收大惭。
现代文：魏收很惭愧。
English: Wei Hui was very ashamed.

古文：及侯景寇京师，陵父摛先在围城之内，陵不奉家信，便蔬食布衣，若居忧恤。
现代文：到侯景侵扰京城时，徐陵父徐摘被困在围城之中，徐陵得不到家中消息，就吃粗食穿布衣，好像居丧的情形。
English: When Houjing invaded Beijing, Xu Ling's father Xu Zhan was trapped in the siege, and Xu Ling could not get news from home, so he ate coarse food and wore cloth clothes, as if he was in mourning.

古文：会齐受魏禅，梁元帝承制于江陵，复通使于齐。
现代文：适逢齐接受魏禅让，梁元帝在江陵秉承武帝旨意即皇帝位，又派使臣到齐。
English: When Qi accepted the Wei-Zen concession, Emperor Liang Yuan in Gangneung followed the will of Emperor Wu, that is, the emperor's throne, and sent envoys to Qi.

古文：陵累求复命，终拘留不遣，陵乃致书于仆射杨遵彦曰：
现代文：徐陵屡次请求齐准许他返梁覆命，始终被拘留不放，徐陵就写信给仆射杨遵彦说：
English: Xu Ling repeatedly requested permission for him to return to Liang to end his life, and he was always detained. Xu Ling wrote a letter to his servant Yang Zunyan, saying:

古文：夫一言所感，凝晖照于鲁阳，一志冥通，飞泉涌于疏勒，况复元首康哉，股肱良哉，邻国相闻，风教相期者也！
现代文：被一句话感动，夕阳的余晖为鲁阳公凝聚照耀；一念暗中契合，干涸的疏勒也为之涌出飞瀑流泉。何况元首伟大，辅臣优良，邻国声音相互听到，风俗教化相互会合!
English: Moved by a word, the afterglow of the setting sun shines for Lu Yang Gong; a thought secretly coincides, and the dry Sule also gushes out flying waterfalls and springs. What's more, the great leader, the excellent assistant minister, the voices of neighboring countries hear each other, and the customs and education meet each other!

古文：天道穷剥，钟乱本朝，情计驰惶，公私哽惧，而骸骨之请，徒淹岁寒，颠沛之祈，空盈卷轴，是所不图也，非所仰望也。
现代文：天象穷厄，专乱本朝，情计惶惑，于公伤怀，于私恐惧，可是保全身体回家的请求，白白费了岁月，狼狈困顿的申诉，空空塞满了卷轴，这样不图谋，不是我等希望的啊。
English: The sky is poor, the emperor is despotic, the situation is confused, the public is hurt, and the private is afraid, but the request to save the body and go home is in vain, the years have been wasted, the complaints have been frustrated, and the sky is full of scrolls. This is not a plan, it is not what we expect.

古文：执事不闻之乎：昔分鰲命勣之世，观河拜洛之年，则有日乌流灾，风禽骋暴，天倾西北，地缺东南，盛旱坼三川，长波含五岳。
现代文：执事没听说这些吗!上古女娲分鳖足立四极、轩辕划野分邑的时世，伏羲观河圃绘八卦、夏禹拜洛书成九畴的年代，骄阳肆虐，风妖逞凶，天塌西北，地陷东南，大旱时三川干裂，雨涝时五岳淹没。
English: Didn't the deacon hear about these things? The time when ancient women divided the world into four parts, the time when men divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women divided the world into four parts, the time when women

古文：我大梁应金图而有亢，纂玉镜而犹屯。
现代文：我大梁承应上天旨意而辅臣尽忠，继承清政却遭逢艰难。
English: I have been entrusted with the leadership in accordance with God's will, and my vassals have been loyal. However, it has been difficult for me to succeed the Qing Dynasty.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：圣人不能为时，斯固穷通之恒理也。
现代文：圣人不能造就时运，遣原本是穷困舆显达的常理。
English: A saint cannot create good fortune, and it is a common sense that misfortune is inevitable.

古文：至如荆州刺史湘东王，机神之本，无寄名言，陶铸之馀，犹为尧、舜，虽复六代之舞，陈于总章，九州之歌，登于司乐，虞夔拊石，晋旷调钟，未足颂此英声，无以宣其盛德者也。
现代文：至如荆州刺史湘束王萧绎本是枢要的根苗，不用依附名称说法，经过一番陶冶之后，还可具有尧、舜的风范，即使在总章那样的宫观、明堂，再陈设上六代时的舞蹈，在主管音乐的地方演奏九州的歌曲，舜时的典乐官夔来敲打石器，晋国的师旷演奏编钟，也不足以歌颂此等美名，无以彰明他的大德啊。
English: For example, the Jingzhou bard, Xiangzhu Wang Xiaoyan, was originally a pivotal root and shoot. He did not need to rely on the name of the saying. After some cultivation, he could still have the demeanor of the bard and the bard. Even in the general chapter, such as the Palace View and the Ming Hall, it is not enough to praise the dance of the previous six dynasties, to play the songs of Kyushu in the place of music, to play the bard of the time of the bard to beat the stone tools, and to play the chimes of the Jin Dynasty. It is not enough to praise these beautiful names.

古文：若使郊禋楚翼，宁非祀夏之君，戡定艰难，便是匡周之霸，岂徒豳王徙雍，期月为都，姚帝迁河，周年成邑。
现代文：假如让他在楚地郊外祭梼天地，能不是承祀夏朝的君王?戡定艰难，便是匡扶周室的霸主，哪能仅仅是西周末豳王迁徙雍州一月之间整个豳国就变成了地方区域，姚帝迁移黄河边，刚一年就成了一个城市。
English: If he were to hold a festival of the Heaven and Earth on the outskirts of Chudi, wouldn't he be honoring the king of the Summer Dynasty? If he were to hold a festival of the Heaven and Earth on the outskirts of Chudi, wouldn't he be honoring the king of the Summer Dynasty? If he were to hold a festival of the Heaven and Earth on the outskirts of Chudi, wouldn't he be honoring the king of the Summer Dynasty? If he were to hold a festival of the Heaven and Earth on the outskirts of Chudi, wouldn't he be honoring the king of the Summer Dynasty? If he were to hold a festival of the Heaven and Earth on the outskirts of

古文：方今越常藐藐，驯雉北飞，肃纻茫茫，风牛南偃，吾君之子，含识知归，而答旨云何所投身，斯其未喻一也。
现代文：现在正所谓遥远的南海越常国向北进献驯雉，茫茫海外肃音国放逸的牛群奔到南边即停止，我们君上的子民，胸怀卓识，深知南归的意义，可是得到的答覆却说投身到什么地方呢?
English: Right now, the so-called distant South China Sea, Yue Chang country, is advancing northward to offer tamed horses, and the cattle of the vast overseas silent country are running to the south and will stop. Our lord's people, with great wisdom, are well aware of the significance of returning south, but the answer they get says where to devote themselves?

古文：又晋熙等郡，皆入贵朝，去我寻阳，经途何几。
现代文：这是我不明白的第一点。又，晋熙等郡都并入贵朝，距我国寻阳能有几多路途。
English: This is the first point I don't understand. Moreover, since Jinxi and other counties were incorporated into the Guizhou Dynasty, how many roads can there be from our country to the sun?

古文：至于铛铛晓漏，的的宵烽，隔溆浦而相闻，临高台而可望。
现代文：至于铛铛报时的钟声，隔着溆浦彼此能听见，天空中明明白白的烽烟，登上高台就可望见。
English: As for the sound of the bell at the time of the bugle call, they can hear each other across the Niepu River, and the bright white smoke in the sky can be seen as soon as you get on the platform.

古文：泉流宝碗，遥忆湓城，峰号香炉，依然庐岳。
现代文：遥想湓城，实碗泉流，庐山依旧，香鑪峰高。
English: The distant image of Lucheng, the real bowl spring flow, Lushan is still the same, and the Xiangfan peak is high.

古文：日者鄱阳嗣王治兵汇派，屯戍沦波，朝夕笺书，春秋方物，吾无从以蹑屩，彼何路而齐镳。
现代文：近来鄱阳嗣王在汇派统管军队，屯驻在水边，早晚书信往来，褒贬人事，辨别名分，我却穿着草鞋无从迈步，他是何种道路偏可并驾齐驱。
English: Lately, Emperor Yangzhi has been in Huizhou, in charge of the army, stationed at the water's edge, exchanging letters in the morning and evening, praising and criticizing personnel, and distinguishing names, but I can't walk in straw sandals. What kind of road can he take?

古文：岂其然乎？
现代文：难道就是这样的吗?
English: Is that really how it is?

古文：斯不然矣。
现代文：这不对啊。
English: That's not right.

古文：又近者邵陵王通和此国，郢中上客，云聚魏都，鄴下名卿，风驰江浦，岂卢龙之径于彼新开，铜驼之街于我长闭？
现代文：还有，最近邵陵王与这个国家通和，郢中贵宾像风卷云霓一样聚集到魏国都城，邺下的要员也像风一样驰向江边，怎么卢龙山的道路能为他人新开出来，洛阳的铜驰街对我就长期封闭?
English: Moreover, recently, King Shao Ling made peace with this country, the guests of honor from the Middle Kingdom gathered in the capital city of Wei like a whirlwind, and the dignitaries under his command also rushed to the riverside like the wind. How could the roads of Lulong Mountain be newly opened for others, and the Tongchi Street in Luoyang be closed to me for a long time?

古文：何彼途甚易，非劳于五丁，我路为难，如登于九折？
现代文：为何他人的道路那么容易，也不劳五丁力士去开辟，我的道路却如此艰难，好像登九折坂令王阳感叹凶险?
English: Why is everyone else's path so easy, so effortless for a five-year-old wrestler to open up, but my path is so difficult, as if I had to climb a nine-fold slope to make Wang Yang lament the danger?

古文：地不私载，何其爽欤？
现代文：地不私载，这是何等清楚?
English: How clear is that?

古文：而答旨云还路无从，斯所未喻二也。
现代文：可是却回答说没有回去的途径，这是不明白的第二点。
English: But it replied that there was no way back, which is the second unclear point.

古文：晋熙、庐江，义阳、安陆，皆云款附，非复危邦，计彼中途，便当静晏，自斯以北，桴鼓不鸣，自此以南，封疆未壹。
现代文：晋熙、庐江，义阳、安陆，都说归附贵朝，不再是危险地区，估计途中就应太平。自此以北，战鼓不响，自此以南，疆界不一。
English: Jinxi, Minjiang, Yiyang, and Anlu all said that they had been annexed to Guizhou and were no longer dangerous areas, and it was estimated that there would be peace on the way. From this point north, the war drums did not sound, and from this point south, the borders were not the same.

古文：如其境外，脱殒轻躯，幸非边吏之羞，何在匹夫之命。
现代文：像这样在境外逃避死亡，看轻自己，幸而不属守边官吏失土被俘蒙受羞辱，又为何在乎一个寻常人的性命。
English: How could they care about the life of an ordinary person when they are fleeing death abroad like this, belittling themselves, when fortunately they are not border guards who have lost their land, been captured and suffered humiliation.

古文：又此宾游，通无货殖，忝非韩起聘郑，私买玉环，吴札过徐，躬要宝剑。
现代文：还有，此次旅游作客，财物全都没有，愧的不是像韩起出访郑时，想私自买玉环，也不是像吴国季札过徐时，腰上挂带令人艳羡的宝剑。
English: What's more, as a guest on this tour, I didn't have any belongings. I'm not ashamed like Han Ji, who wanted to buy a jade ring when he visited Zheng, or like Wu Guo Ji, who wore an enviable sword around his waist when he passed by.

古文：由来宴锡，凡厥囊装，行役淹留，皆已虚罄，散有限之微财，供无期之久客，斯可知矣。
现代文：由来宴请赏赐，总缺少钱财，旅行滞留都已用尽，正是散有限的财物，供无期的客用，这种窘况是可以知道的。
English: It is a well-known fact that there is always a shortage of money when it comes to dinners and gifts, that travel and stay are exhausted, and that there is a limited supply of goods for the use of guests for an indefinite period.

古文：且据图刎首，愚者不为，运斧全身，庸流所鉴。
现代文：况且据圃自杀，愚蠢的人也不干，挥斧保身，平常人也会明白如镜。
English: Besides, if you commit suicide, stupid people won't do it. If you swing an axe to protect yourself, ordinary people will understand it like a mirror.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：生轻一发，自重千钧，不以贾盗明矣。
现代文：尽管生命轻如一发，自觉重有千钧，不因此而卖给盗寇，道理是明白的。
English: Although life is as light as a feather, they consciously weigh a thousand ounces, and do not sell it to thieves for that reason. The reason is clear.

古文：骨肉不任充鼎俎，皮毛不足入货财，盗有道焉，吾无忧矣。
现代文：再说骨头和肉不配充作锅内舆砧板上的物品，皮毛不值得算入财货之属，盗寇也有盗寇的才智与品德，我不用担心了。
English: Besides, bones and meat are not worthy of being used as items on the chopping board in the pot, fur is not worthy of being included in the category of goods, thieves also have the intelligence and character of thieves, I don't have to worry about it.

古文：又公家遣使，脱有资须，本朝非隆平之时，游客岂皇华之势。
现代文：公家派遣使臣，缺少财货，本朝并非兴盛太平的时候，出访的人哪裹有皇华的地位与权力。
English: Public figures sent envoys, there was a shortage of goods and money, this was not a time of prosperity and peace, and those who visited foreign countries had the status and power of emperors.

古文：轻装独宿，非劳聚橐之仪，微骑闲行，宁望輶轩之礼。
现代文：轻装独宿，不劳集合击柝者敲奏的仪式，为数很少的几骑随便动身，哪会想有辅轩名号的轻车乘坐的仪礼。
English: Lightly loaded and staying alone, the effortless ceremony of assembling the strummers to play, a small number of riders casually setting off, who would want to have the ceremony of riding a light car with the name of Fu Xuan.

古文：归人将从，私具驴骡，缘道亭邮，唯希蔬粟。
现代文：回归的人带着随从，自己准备驴骡，沿途亭邮，衹希望有些蔬菜米粮。
English: The returnees, accompanied by their entourage, prepared donkey ploughs themselves, and sent post along the way, hoping for some vegetables and rice.

古文：若曰留之无烦于执事，遣之有费于官司，或以颠沛为言，或云资装可惧，固非通论，皆是外篇。
现代文：假如说留下我等对于管事的无烦扰，遣送我等对于官方却有破费，或者用颠沛辛苦为话由，或者说行李供给令人担惊受怕，逭原本不是通达之言，都是题外文章。
English: If we say that leaving us behind is no trouble for the management, but sending us away is a waste of money for the authorities, or use hard work as a reason, or say that the provision of luggage is frightening, it is not an accurate statement, it is an off-topic article.

古文：斯所未喻三也。
现代文：这是不明白的第三点。
English: This is the third unclear point.

古文：又若以吾徒应还侯景，侯景凶逆，歼我国家，天下含灵，人怀愤厉，既不获投身社稷，卫难乘舆，四冢磔蚩尤，千刀剸王莽，安所谓俯首顿膝，归奉寇仇，珮弭腰鞬，为其皁隶？日者通和，方敦曩睦，凶人狙诈，遂骇狼心，颇疑宋万之诛，弥惧荀幹之请，所以奔蹄劲角，专恣凭陵，凡我行人，偏膺仇憾。
现代文：又，若认为我等应归还侯景，侯景是叛逆凶犯，歼灭我等的国家，天下的人，人人心怀愤恨，既不能投身国家社稷，保卫皇上，四冢分裂葬蚩尤，干刀剐王莽，怎能说俯首屈膝，回去侍奉寇仇，腰挂革囊，佩带弓箭，作他的皂隶近来两朝通和，正促进先前的友好，诡诈凶寇的狼子野心受到惊骇，很疑心自己会遭受到像春秋时宋万即南宣姜那样诛灭的下场，更害怕出现像晋人归还楚公子台巴巨而交换萤萤的请求。我等之所以奔波抗争，任由侵侮，是因为我们逭一行人都胸怀仇恨。
English: Moreover, if you think that we should return Hou Jing, Hou Jing is a traitorous criminal, annihilate our country, the people of the world, everyone is resentful, neither can join the national society, defend the emperor, the four branches are divided and buried, the dry knife is reckless, how can you say bow your head and bend your knees, go back to serve the enemy, wear a leather bag around your waist, wear a bow and arrow, and make his soap? The recent peace between the two dynasties is promoting the previous friendship, the ambition of the deceitful and murderous wolf is shocked, I am very suspicious that I will suffer the fate of annihilation like Song Wan

古文：政复俎筋醢骨，抽舌探肝，于彼凶情，犹当未雪，海内之所知也，君侯之所具焉。
现代文：恰恰又是断筋碎骨、抽舌摘肝那样的深仇还未申雪，海内人所共知，君侯所开列过的。
English: It is precisely the deep-rooted vendettas, such as breaking bones and pulling out tongues to pluck livers, that have not yet snowed, which are well known to the people of the Inland Sea and have been listed by princes.

古文：又闻本朝公主，都人士女，风行雨散，东播西流，京邑丘墟，奸蓬萧瑟，偃师还望，咸为草莱，霸陵回首，俱沾霜露，此又君之所知也。
现代文：还听说本朝王公，京都男女，风行雨散，束播西流，繁华的京城萧条破败，一片废墟。真是还望偃师都成了蒿草，回首忧庆披霜带露，逭又是大人您所知道的。
English: I have also heard that the kings and queens of this dynasty, the men and women of Kyoto, were dispersed by the wind and rain, and were scattered to the west, leaving the bustling capital city in ruin and ruin. I really hope that the gossips have all become weeds, looking back at the sorrow and celebration, the frost and dew, and the adults you know.

古文：彼以何义，争免寇仇？
现代文：他凭什么道义避免仇敌贼子的臭名?
English: On what moral grounds did he avoid the infamy of being the enemy's thief?

古文：我以何亲，争归委质？
现代文：我凭什么亲谊回去屈身下跪?
English: On what basis of kinship can I go back, bend down and kneel?

古文：昔钜平贵将，悬重于陆公，叔向名流，深知于鬷篾。
现代文：从前晋钜平贵将堇茧被里陆运深信不疑，春秋晋国叔血是社会名人，对于郑国貌丑的酸篾早有深入的了解。
English: Formerly, it was believed that the land transport of the former Jin Dynasty was carried out by the Jin Dynasty. The uncle of the Spring and Autumn Jin Dynasty was a social celebrity, and he had an in-depth understanding of the ugly Zheng Dynasty.

古文：吾虽不敏，常慕前修，不图明庶有怀，翻其以此量物。
现代文：我虽说不够聪敏，但常常仰慕前代名人的道德操守，不能希图胸怀明亮，却也要以此衡量社会事物。
English: Although I am not smart enough, I often admire the moral integrity of the previous generation of celebrities. I can't hope to be bright, but I have to measure social things in this way.

古文：昔魏氏将亡，群凶挺争，诸贤戮力，想得其朋。
现代文：先前魏氏将亡，群凶竞争，诸贤尽力，都希望得到他的朋党。
English: Previously, Wei's death, fierce competition, all the sages tried their best, all hoping to get his party.

古文：为葛荣之党邪？
现代文：成为墓茔的部众吗?
English: Become a member of the graveyard chorus?

古文：为邢杲之徒邪？
现代文：成为邢呆那一类的人吗?
English: Become a demented sort of person?

古文：如曰不然，斯所未喻四也。
现代文：假如说不是这样，这是不明白的第四点。
English: If this is not the case, this is the fourth point that is unclear.

古文：假使吾徒还为凶党，侯景生于赵代，家自幽恒，居则台司，行为连率，山川形势，军国彝章，不劳请箸为筹，便当屈指能算。
现代文：假使我等回去作了侯景的帮凶，侯景生在赵代一带，家在幽恒之间，居住的是官衙，行动时有统帅的仪仗，山川形势，军国日常规章，用不着拿箸作筹，衹消屈指即能算计。
English: If I were to go back and become Hou Jing's accomplice, Hou Jing was born in the Zhao Dynasty area, his home was in Yucheng, he lived in an official residence, there was a commander's ceremonial battle at the time of action, the mountain and river situation, the military daily regulations, there was no need to use chopsticks to make a plan.

古文：景以逋逃小丑，羊豕同群，身寓江皋，家留河朔，舂舂井井，如鬼如神。
现代文：侯景逃亡小丑，猪羊一般，寓身长江边上，家人却弃置在黄河北岸。春舂井井，如鬼如神。
English: Hou Jing, a fugitive clown, a pig and a sheep, lived on the edge of the Yangtze River, but his family was abandoned on the north bank of the Yellow River. Chunyu Jingjing, like a ghost like a god.

古文：其不然乎？
现代文：难道不是这样吗?
English: Isn't that how it is?

古文：抑又君之所知也。
现代文：或许也是您知道的。
English: You probably know it, too.

古文：且夫宫闱秘事，并若云霄，英俊訏谟，宁非帷幄，或阳惊以定策，或焚藁而奏书，朝廷之士，犹难参预，羁旅之人，何阶耳目。
现代文：宫闱机秘，如隐云霄。漂亮的大谋划，能不在军帐之内进行。有的才俊之士的谋划像漠张安世表面惊讶而实际早已参与的决策；有的像汉孔光、晋羊祜那样奏闻朝廷后即烧毁了书稿，不留痕迹。在朝的人尚难参预其事，羁绊在外的旅人怎能接近其事呢?
English: The secret of the imperial court is like a hidden cloud. Can a beautiful grand plan be carried out without military accounts? Some talented people's plans are like the decision-making that Zhang Anshi was surprised by on the surface, but actually participated in; some, like Han Kongguang and Jin Yoke, burned the manuscript immediately after reporting to the court, leaving no trace. It is still difficult for people in the North to participate in the matter, how can travelers who are trapped outside get close to it?

古文：至于礼乐沿革，刑政宽猛，则讴歌已远，万舞成风，不知手之舞之足之蹈之也。安在摇其牙齿，为间谍者哉？
现代文：至于礼与乐的延续变更，刑政的宽松和严厉，那是颂歌远扬，万舞成风，不知道为此手舞足蹈啊，哪在于摇唇鼓舌充当间谍呢?
English: As for the continuation and change of etiquette and music, the looseness and severity of criminal policy, that is a far-reaching ode, a universal dance. I don't know if this is the reason for the dancing, but what is the point of wagging the tongue to act as a spy?

古文：若谓复命西朝，终奔东虏，虽齐、梁有隔，尉候奚殊？
现代文：假如说我等以回江陵覆命为名，到头来还是会投奔东边的贼寇，虽说齐、梁两国有所阻隔，就像 东南一尉，西北一候 那样，又有什么不同?
English: If we wait to go back to Jiangling to save our lives, in the end, we will still rush to the eastern bandits, although Qi and Liang are somewhat separated, just like Southeast First Lieutenant, Northwest First Lieutenant, what's the difference?

古文：岂以河曲之难浮，而曰江关之可济？
现代文：难道说因为河曲难以行船，却以为江关可以渡过?
English: Was it because the river bend was difficult to navigate that they thought they could cross the pass?

古文：河桥马度，宁非宋典之奸？
现代文：河阳津放跑了司马睿，难道不是由于宋典的奸诈?
English: Isn't it because of Song Dian's treachery that Heyangjin let Sima Rui go?

古文：关路鸡鸣，皆曰田文之客。何其通蔽，乃尔相妨？
现代文：出函谷关路上未到五更而有鸡啼，都称赞田文门客的技能，行舆不行，为什么如此相互影响?
English: On the way out of the Hakodate pass, there was a rooster crowing before reaching the fifth rank. They all praised the skills of Tianwenmen, but they couldn't do anything about it. Why did they affect each other so much?

古文：斯所未喻五也。
现代文：这是不明白的第五点。
English: This is the fifth point that is unclear.

古文：又兵交使在，虽著前经，傥同徇仆之尤，追肆寒山之怒，则凡诸元帅，并释缧囚，爰及偏裨，同无翦馘。
现代文：再说两国交兵，互通使臣，这是以前经典上有的，假如以古代不杀而杀仆的事例而肆意追泄梁武帝筑寒山堰水灌彭城的怨怒，那么众多元帅，释放俘虏，宽放到偏将、裨将一起都不剪割左耳。
English: In addition, the two countries exchanged soldiers and sent envoys to each other, which was a classic case in the past. If Emperor Liangwu used the ancient example of not killing but killing servants to wantonly vent the anger of Pengcheng, then the many different generals, the release of captives, the wide release of partial generals, and the help of generals would not cut off the left ear.

古文：乃至钟仪见赦，朋笑遵途，襄老蒙归，《虞歌》引路。
现代文：甚至像钟仪那样的也被赦免以礼放归，途中充满朋友般的笑声。楚国大夫襄老得以回归，《虞哥》为之引路。
English: Even someone like Zhongyi was pardoned and allowed to return home with full of laughter like a friend. Dr. Xiang Lao from the State of Chu was able to return, and "Buddha" led the way.

古文：吾等张拭玉，修好寻盟，涉泗之与浮河，郊劳至于赠贿，公恩既被，宾敬无违，今者何愆，翻蒙贬责？
现代文：我等来时张着大红的旗帜，把实玉擦拭得亮亮的，寻找朋友建立友谊，跨过泗水渡过黄河。到时郊外有迎候慰问直至惠赠，深荷你们的恩德，不失款待贵宾的礼节，现在因何遇错，反而被贬斥?
English: When we came, we put up a big red flag, wiped the solid jade brightly, looking for friends to establish friendship, crossed the Surabaya River and crossed the Yellow River. At that time, there were greetings and condolences in the suburbs until the gift. I am deeply grateful for your kindness, and do not lose the etiquette of hospitality to distinguished guests. Now, why is it a mistake, but it is being disparaged?

古文：若以此为言，斯所未喻六也。
现代文：假若把逭当作不准回去的藉口，这是我不明白的第六点。
English: This is the sixth point that I don't understand, if the raft is used as an excuse for not allowing them to return.

古文：若曰妖氛永久，丧乱悠然，哀我奔波，存其形魄，固已铭兹厚德，戴此洪恩，譬渤澥而俱深，方嵩、华而犹重。
现代文：若说战乱气氛长久不息，死亡随时都会发生，同情我奔波颠沛，保全我等的性命，本来我早巳铭记这番好意，感戴那比渤海深，比嵩山、华山还重的大恩。
English: If I were to say that the war-torn atmosphere would continue for a long time, and death would occur at any time, they would sympathize with me and save our lives. Originally, I had already remembered this kindness, and felt that it was deeper than the Bohai Sea, and greater than Mount Song and Mount Hua.

古文：但山梁饮啄，非有意于笼樊，江海飞浮，本无情于钟鼓。
现代文：可是雉饮食愿在野外寻找，并不对樊笼有意，长江大海中的飞凫，即使像鲁侯那样供以钟岛鼎食依然忧悲而死，因为它们对于钟鼓本无留恋之情。
English: However, dragonflies are willing to look for food in the wild, and are not interested in dragonfly cages. The dragonflies in the Yangtze River sea, even if they are provided with food from Zhongdao like Lu Hou, still die sadly, because they have no lingering feelings for the bell and drum.

古文：况吾等营魂已谢，馀息空留，悲默为生，何能支久，是则虽蒙养护，更夭天年。
现代文：何况我等精神已失，空留活命，悲苦沉默地生活，怎能长时间支撑下去，这样即使承蒙供养保护，也还要短命的。
English: Besides, how can we sustain ourselves for a long time when we have lost our spirit, when we are left with nothing to live on, living a sad, silent life? Even if we are provided for and protected, our lives will be short-lived.

古文：若以此为言，斯所未喻七也。
现代文：若据此说不能回去，这是我不明白的第七点。
English: If that means I can't go back, that's the seventh thing I don't understand.

古文：若云逆竖歼夷，当听反命，高轩继路，飞盖相随，未解其言，何能善谑？
现代文：若说侯景逆贼歼灭荡平了就由我等返回，高敞的车子于路相继，遮阳的车盖自然相随，不弄清那些话的含义，怎能随便开玩笑?
English: If it is said that if the Houjing rebels and thieves are wiped out and leveled, we will wait for them to return, the spacious cars will follow each other on the road, and the sunshade covers will naturally follow, without clarifying the meaning of those words, how can we casually joke?

古文：夫屯亨治乱，岂有意于前期。
现代文：艰难与顺畅，太平舆动乱，哪是特意在事前预料得到的。
English: Difficult and smooth, peaceful and turbulent, which is deliberately anticipated in advance.

古文：谢常侍今年五十有一，吾今年四十有四，介已知命，宾又杖乡，计彼侯生，肩随而已。
现代文：谢常侍今年五十一岁，我今年四十四岁，已处在知命之年，行将又到六十岁，算来与那个侯生的年龄七十也相差无几丫。
English: Xie Changzhu is fifty-one years old this year, I am forty-four years old this year, I am already in the year of my death, and I will be sixty years old, which is almost the same as the seventy-year-old's age.

古文：岂银台之要，彼未从师，金灶之方，吾知其决，政恐南阳菊水，竟不延龄，东海桑田，无由可望。
现代文：成仙的要术他还未从师学习，炼丹灶内的配方那诀窍我却知道。正恐怕南阳菊水到头来不延长寿命，束海变桑田的事无从看到。
English: He has not yet learned the essential technique of becoming a saint from his teacher, but I know the recipe for the recipe in the almond kiln. I am afraid that Nanyang Chrysanthemum Water will not extend life in the end, and there is no way to see the transformation of the sea into a mulberry field.

古文：若以此为言，斯所未喻八也。
现代文：若以此为由说不让我等回去，是我不能明白的第八点。
English: If you use this as a reason not to let me wait to go back, that's the eighth point I don't understand.

古文：足下清襟胜托，书囿文林，凡自洪荒，终乎幽、厉，如吾今日，宁有其人，爰至《春秋》，微宜商略。
现代文：足下胸怀宽广值得信托，书识囊括文士之林，从洪荒之世到幽、厉时代，像我等现在，还有那样的人吗至于《春秋》，才稍可商讨。
English: The broad-mindedness underfoot is worthy of trust, and the knowledge of literature encompasses the forest of scribes. From the world of floods and deserts to the dark and harsh times, are there still people like me now? As for "Spring and Autumn," it can only be discussed a little.

古文：夫宗姬殄坠，霸道昏凶，或执政之多门，或陪臣之凉德，故臧孙有礼，翻囚与国之宾，周伯无愆，空怒天王之使，迁箕卿于两馆，絷骥子于三年。
现代文：姬周宗庙崩塌，霸道惑乱凶残，有的是政出多门，有的是臣下德薄，像鲁臧孙文仲作为友好国家的宾朋访齐，反而被齐国囚禁；周伯作为天子的使臣并无罪错，却遭受戎的攻伐，春秋晋箕卿出使被邾人强迁到别的馆舍，唐成公到楚国因有两匹好马被茎人看中，唐成公不给而被拘滞三年。
English: The collapse of the Ji Zhou family temple, domineering, chaotic, and ferocious, some of them had many political connections, and some of them were vassals who were weak in virtue. Like Lu Wei Sun Wenzhong, who visited Qi as a friend of a friendly country, but was imprisoned by Qi; Zhou Bo, as an envoy of the son of heaven, was not guilty, but was attacked by the army; Spring and Autumn Jinyao sent an envoy and was forced to move to another embassy; Tang Chenggong was detained for three years in Chu because two good horses were favored by the stem people, but Tang Chenggong did not give them.

古文：斯匪贪乱之风邪？
现代文：遣不是贪乱的风气所致吗?
English: Wasn't the expulsion the result of a corrupt culture?

古文：宁当今之高例也？
现代文：能作为当今的范例吗?
English: Can it serve as an example for today?

古文：至于双崤且帝，四海争雄，或构赵而侵燕，或连韩而谋魏，身求盟于楚殿，躬夺璧于秦庭，输宝鼎以托齐王，驰安车而诱梁客。
现代文：至于秦齐都想称帝，天下争雄，或者交结赵国而侵犯燕国，或者联合韩国而算计秀困，或者在楚殿寻求结盟，或者在豢庭抢夺璧玉，用输送宝鼎来托付齐王，用一马拉的小坐车诱载客卿范睢入秦。
English: As far as Qin and Qi were concerned, they all wanted to become emperors and compete for supremacy in the world. They either allied themselves with Zhao and invaded Yan, or united with Korea and calculated to be weak, or sought an alliance in the Chu Palace, or robbed the jade in the Summer Palace, used the transport of Baoding to entrust Qi Wang, and used a one-mile small car to lure Hakka Fan into Qin.

古文：其外膏脣贩舌，分路扬镳，无罪无辜，如兄如弟。
现代文：此外群邪油嘴滑舌，或势均力敌，各有千秋，谈不上罪错，如兄弟一般。
English: In addition, a group of evil-doers who are glib and smooth-tongued, or an equal opponent, each has its own destiny, and there is no question of guilt, such as brothers in general.

古文：逮乎中阳受命，天下同规，巡省诸华，无闻幽辱。
现代文：等到沛丰邑中阳里汉高祖秉承天命，天下同规，巡视中国，没听说有拘押羞辱的。
English: When Han Gaozu, adhering to the Mandate of Heaven, visited China, he did not hear of anyone being detained and humiliated.

古文：及三方之霸也，孙甘言以娬媚，曹屈诈以羁縻，旍轸岁到于句吴，冠盖年驰于庸蜀，则客嘲殊险，宾戏已深，共尽游谈，谁云猜忤，若使搜求故实，脱有前踪，恐是叔世之奸谋，而非为邦之胜略也。
现代文：待到三方称霸，孙则甜言媚态，曹则委曲欺诈而四方笼络，年年有官车到句吴，岁岁有使臣通庸蜀，那么讥嘲很险厄，玩笑已加深，尽兴交游谈笑罢了，谁说猜疑忤逆呢。假若搜寻以往的事例，倘若有以前的踪迹，恐怕是乱世的奸谋，不是治理邦国的好策略。
English: By the time the three parties are dominating, Sun is sweet-talking and flattering, Cao is deceptive and deceitful, and the four parties are entangled. Year after year, there are official cars to go to Gu Wu, year after year, there are envoys to go to Yongshu, then the mockery is very dangerous, the joke has deepened, and it is only fun to mingle and talk. Who says suspicion is treacherous? If you search for past cases, if there are traces of the past, I am afraid it is a wicked plot, not a good strategy for governing the country.

古文：抑又闻之，云师火帝，浇淳乃异其风，龙跃麟惊，王霸虽殊其道，莫不崇君亲以铭物，敦敬养以治民，预有邦司，曾无隆替。
现代文：还听说，黄帝与炎帝时代，社会风气有浮薄和敦厚的不同，蛟龙腾跃、麒麟出世，王道霸道虽说有差别，但没有不推崇君亲铭刻碑板器物以赞颂他们的功德，敦促敬长养亲以治理百姓，国家部门干预，竟没有改换。
English: I also heard that in the era of the Yellow Emperor and the Burning Emperor, the social ethos was different from that of the Floating Emperor and that of the Strong Emperor. The dragon leaped, the unicorn was born, and although there was a difference in the way of the king and the way of the tyrant, there was nothing that did not praise the merits of the king and his relatives by inscribing them on tablets and urging the people to respect the elders and raise their relatives to govern the people. The state department intervened, but there was no change.

古文：吾奉违温清，仍属乱离，寇虏猖狂，公私播越。
现代文：我侍奉亲长有违冬温夏清做人子的礼节，还连着离乱，贼寇猖獗，致使官民四处流散。
English: I served my father-in-law in violation of the etiquette of being a son of winter, winter, summer and winter, and I was also accompanied by disorder, and banditry was rampant, causing officials and citizens to disperse everywhere.

古文：萧轩靡御，王舫谁持？
现代文：萧车无人驾御，王舫谁来把持?
English: There is no one to drive the carriage, so who will control Wang Yao?

古文：瞻望乡关，何心天地？
现代文：回望家乡，还有什么心绪活在天地之间?
English: Looking back on my hometown, what is the mood of living between heaven and earth?

古文：自非生凭廪竹，源出空桑，行路含情，犹其相愍。
现代文：自己并非像夜郎那样由廪竹而生，也不是像采桑女在空桑树中拾得婴儿那样是捡来的。过路的人怀着情感，也会相互同情。
English: You are not born from a bamboo shoot like Yeloh, nor are you picked up like a mulberry picker picks up a baby in an empty mulberry tree. People passing by have emotions and will sympathize with each other.

古文：常谓择官而仕，非曰孝家，择事而趋，非云忠国。
现代文：常言道挑拣官位任职，不能说是孝，选择有利之事去攀附，不能叫做忠。
English: As the saying goes, choosing a post to hold cannot be called filial piety, and choosing something advantageous to cling to cannot be called loyalty.

古文：况乎钦承有道，骖驾前王，郎吏明经，鸱鸢知礼，巡省方化，咸问高年，东序西胶，皆尊耆耋。
现代文：况且我主承接天道，为前王之伴驾。郎官吏属悉明经义，冥顽不孝之人亦懂得礼仪，检查四方、知晓教化。衹要是年老高寿之人，都会像夏后氏和周那样东序西胶地予以敬重赡养。
English: Moreover, my lord has inherited the heavenly way and is the companion of the former king. His officials are well versed in the scriptures, and those who are not filial also understand etiquette, check the four directions, and know how to be educated. If you are old and have a long life, you will be respected and supported like Xia Guo and Zhou.

古文：吾以圭璋玉帛，通聘来朝，属世道之屯期，钟生民之否运，兼年累载，无申元直之祈，衔泣吞声，长对公闾之怒，情礼之诉，将同逆鳞，忠孝之言，皆应齚舌，是所不图也，非所仰望也。
现代文：我以圭璋玉帛般的南尚品格、美好资质，到贵朝出使访问，遇上世道动乱，汇聚了人民的厄运，连年累载，不能像徐元直在刘备处提出到曹营侍奉老母的请求，含泪吞声，长对公间的怒容，一点情理的诉说，也将同触摸龙的逆鳞似的激怒人主，忠孝的话语，都皆该当咬破舌头以作失言之戒。这是不去谋取的，不是要依赖他人啊。
English: With the Nan Shang character and fine qualifications like Gui Yao and Yu Yao, I made an envoy visit to the Guizhou Dynasty. When the world was in turmoil, it brought together the people's doom. It has been accumulated for years. I can't, like Xu Yuan Zhi, put forward the request to serve the old mother in Cao Ying at Liu Bei's place, swallow my voice with tears, look angry at the public, appeal with a bit of reason, and also infuriate the master like touching the inverse scales of the dragon, and the words of loyalty and filial piety should bite my tongue to make a curse. This is not to seek

古文：且天伦之爱，何得忘怀？
现代文：而且兄弟的友爱。怎能忘怀?
English: And the brotherly love. How can I forget?

古文：妻子之情，谁能无累？
现代文：妻子儿女之情爱，谁能不被拖累?
English: The love of wife and children, who can not be dragged?

古文：夫以清河公主之贵，馀姚书佐之家，莫限高卑，皆被驱略。
现代文：以清河公主的高贵身份，筮毖主办文书佐吏的家室，不管其高贵卑贱，都被驱赶掠夺。
English: With the noble status of the Qinghe Princess, the family of the host clerk, no matter how noble or humble, was driven away and plundered.

古文：自东南丑虏，抄贩饥民，台署郎官，俱馁墙壁，况吾生离死别，多历暄寒，孀室婴儿，何可言念。
现代文：自从侯景丑虏在东南作祸以来，饥饿的百姓被抄掠贩卖；台署郎官在墙壁之间一起挨饿。何况我生离死别，历经多年，家中妻子儿女，哪还谈得上挂念二字。
English: Ever since the villain Hou Jing Ugurup wreaked havoc in Southeast China, the starving people have been robbed and sold; the officials of the Taiwan Affairs Office have been starving together between the walls. What's more, I have been separated from my wife and children for many years, and I can't even say that I miss them.

古文：如得身还乡土，躬自推求，犹冀提携，俱免凶虐。
现代文：我如能够回到家乡，亲身操持，也许还能帮助他们免遭凶犯残害。
English: If I could go back to my hometown and conduct the operation myself, I might be able to help them avoid being harmed by the murderer.

古文：夫四聪不达，华阳君所谓乱臣，百姓无冤，孙叔敖称为良相。
现代文：隔绝四方的消息，秦国的华阳君被说成是乱臣，百姓没有冤屈，汉朝的孙叔敖被称作良相。
English: Isolated from the news of the four directions, Hua Yangjun of Qin was said to be a chaotic vassal, the people had no grievances, and Sun Shuxuan of the Han Dynasty was called a good friend.

古文：足下高才重誉，参赞经纶，非豹非貔，闻《诗》闻《礼》，而中朝大议，曾未矜论，清禁嘉谋，安能相及，谔谔非周舍，容容类胡广，何其无诤臣哉？
现代文：岁月如流水，人生有几何。
English: The years go by like water, and life is a series of ups and downs.

古文：岁月如流，平生何几，晨看旅雁，心赴江、淮，昏望牵牛，情驰扬、越，朝千悲而掩泣，夜万绪而回肠，不自知其为生，不自知其为死也。
现代文：清晨看到南飞雁，这颗心也跟着到了江淮，晚上望着牵牛星，情思驰向了扬越。早晨心怀千种悲伤而掩面哭泣，夜晚有万般愁绪在腹内萦回，自己也不知道是死是活。
English: In the morning, seeing the Southern Flying Geese, this heart also followed to the Huai River. In the evening, looking at the Morning Glory, the feelings were soaring. In the morning, with a thousand kinds of sadness, I hid my face and cried. At night, I felt all kinds of sadness in my stomach. I didn't know whether I was dead or alive.

古文：足下素挺词锋，兼长理窟，匡丞相解颐之说，乐令君清耳之谈，向所咨疑，谁能晓喻。
现代文：足下一向擅长言谈，更兼深明义理，就像漠丞相匡衡令人开颜欢笑的演讲，晋尚书令乐广使人静心倾听的言谈，一向不明白想探问，谁能清楚地告诉我。
English: My feet have always been good at talking, and even better at explaining the meaning of things. Just like the speech of Minister Kuang Heng, which made people laugh and smile, and the speech of Jin Shang, which made people listen attentively, I have never been able to understand and want to inquire. Who can tell me clearly?

古文：若鄙言为谬，来旨必通，分请灰钉，甘从斧镬，何但规规默默，齰舌低头而已哉。
现代文：如果我的话是错的，回信我定会理解，如我罪当死，甘愿被斧砍锅煮，为什么足下衹是拘泥不语，咬着舌，低着头呢?
English: If my words are wrong, I will surely understand when I write back. If my sin deserves death and I am willing to be boiled with an axe, why is the lower jaw stiff, biting its tongue and bowing its head?

古文：若一理存焉，犹希矜眷，何必期令我等必死齐都，足赵、魏之黄尘，加幽、并之片骨，遂使东平拱树，长怀向汉之悲，西洛孤坟，恒表思乡之梦。
现代文：假如我说的这些有点道理，还希望矜悯眷顾，又何必一定让我们死在齐国都城，给赵魏幽并之地加一点尘埃，多一片白骨?遂使得西汉东平思王因思念京城而死，后出现坟头上大树都倾向京都的悲剧。温序死节，光武帝赐葬渣堡城西，其子过昼梦见父亲诉说思乡之苦。
English: If what I'm saying makes any sense, and I hope for your compassion, why do you have to let us die in the capital city of Qi, adding a bit of dust and an extra white bone to the land of Zhao Wei's retreat? As a result, King Ping Si of the Western Han Dynasty died of homesickness for the capital city, and then the tragedy of large trees leaning toward Kyoto appeared on his grave. On the day of his death, Emperor Guangwu gave his ashes to the west of the city, and his son dreamed of his father telling him about the pain of homesickness.

古文：干祈以屡，哽恸增深。遵彦竟不报书。
现代文：多次请求放返故里，悲伤之情，与日俱增。遵彦始终没有回信。
English: He repeatedly asked to be allowed to return to his hometown, and his sadness increased day by day. Zunyuan never replied to his letter.

古文：及江陵陷，齐送贞阳侯萧渊明为梁嗣，乃遣陵随还。
现代文：直到江陵被攻陷后，齐送贞阳侯萧渊明为梁的嗣君，才让江陵跟他返梁。
English: It was not until after the fall of Gangneung that he was allowed to return to Gangneung as the heir of Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming.

古文：太尉王僧辩初拒境不纳，渊明往复致书，皆陵词也。
现代文：梁太尉玉僧峦起初拒绝萧渊明入境不肯接钠，萧渊明的来往书信，都是途箧的手笔。
English: At first, Liang Taifu Gyul Sangyu refused to allow Xiao Yuanming to enter the country, and refused to receive him. All of Xiao Yuanming's letters to and from China were written by Tuyao.

古文：及渊明之入，僧辩得陵大喜，接待馈遗，其礼甚优。
现代文：等到龃塱入凿，得到筮堕大为高兴，接待赠送，礼遇十分优厚。
English: Waiting for the chisel to enter the chisel, I was very pleased to receive the chisel, the reception was a gift, and the courtesy was very generous.

古文：以陵为尚书吏部郎，掌诏诰。
现代文：任徐陵作尚书吏部郎，主持韶诰事宜。
English: Xu Ling was appointed as Shang's secretary and presided over the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：其年高祖率兵诛僧辩，仍进讨韦载。
现代文：那年陈霸先率兵诛减王僧辩，进而讨伐僧辩的心腹义兴太守韦载。
English: That year, Chen Baxian led the troops to subdue Wang Sofen, and then to fight Sofen's henchman, Yixing Taishu Wei Zai.

古文：时任约、徐嗣徽乘虚袭石头，陵感僧辩旧恩，乃往赴约。及约等平，高祖释陵不问。
现代文：当时任约、徐嗣徽乘虚袭取石头城，徐陵为感激王僧辩先前知遇之恩，就投奔任约处，待到陈霸先荡平任约等，赦免徐陵不予追究。
English: At the time of the appointment, Xu Shihui took advantage of the false attack to take Stone City. Xu Ling, in gratitude to Wang Sangyan for the grace he had previously encountered, rushed to the appointment place, and waited until Chen Baxian won the appointment. Xu Ling was pardoned and would not be investigated.

古文：寻以为贞威将军、尚书左丞。
现代文：不久以徐陵为贞威将军、尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, Xu Ling became General Zhenwei, and Shang Shuzhu became Zojo.

古文：绍泰二年，又使于齐，还除给事黄门侍郎、秘书监。
现代文：绍泰二年，徐陵又出使到齐，回来后授任给事黄门侍郎、秘书监。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, Xu Ling was sent to Qi again, and after returning, he was appointed as Huangmen waiter and secretary supervisor.

古文：高祖受禅，加散骑常侍，左丞如故。
现代文：陈高祖霸先受梁禅位时加徐陵散骑常侍，尚书左丞照旧。
English: When Chen Gaozuba was first enthroned by Liang Zhen, he was accompanied by Xu Ling Sanzhijie, and Shang Shuzhu was still in the middle.

古文：天嘉初，除太府卿。
现代文：天嘉初年任太府卿。
English: Tenka's first year as Dafu-kyo.

古文：四年，迁五兵尚书，领大著作。
现代文：天嘉四年升任五兵尚书，领大著作。
English: In four years, Tianjia was promoted to the position of the five soldiers of Shangshu, leading the major works.

古文：六年，除散骑常侍、御史中丞。
现代文：天嘉六年任散骑常侍、御史中丞。
English: Tenka served as a samurai for six years and was appointed to goshi chujo.

古文：时安成王顼为司空，以帝弟之尊，势倾朝野。
现代文：当时安成王陈顼为司空，凭着皇帝弟弟的尊荣，权势压倒朝野。
English: At that time, Ancheng Wang Chen Qi was the Siku, and with the honor of the emperor's younger brother, the power overwhelmed the court.

古文：直兵鲍僧叡假王威权，抑塞辞讼，大臣莫敢言者。
现代文：直兵鲍僧散凭藉安成王的威权压抑诉讼，大臣没有敢讲的。
English: The minister didn't dare to say that Naobei Baosangsan had resorted to King Ancheng's authoritarian power to suppress the lawsuit.

古文：陵闻之，乃为奏弹，导从南台官属，引奏案而入。
现代文：徐陵听说这件事就写奏章弹劾，让御史台的属官跟着他，带着奏案上朝。
English: When Xu Ling heard about this, he wrote an impeachment report and asked the officials of the Imperial Historian's Office to follow him and bring the report to the emperor.

古文：世祖见陵服章严肃，若不可犯，为敛容正坐。
现代文：世祖陈蓓见徐陵身着朝服庄重严肃，正气凛然像不可冒犯，也随之严肃面孔端正坐姿。
English: The world's first ancestor Chen Xi saw Xu Ling dressed in a solemn and serious imperial robe, with a dignified demeanor that could not be offended, and also with a serious face sitting upright.

古文：陵进读奏版时，安成王殿上侍立，仰视世祖，流汗失色。
现代文：徐陵上前诵读奏板，当时安成王陈顼正侍立殿上，仰望世祖皇童，变脸变色，冷汗直冒。
English: Xu Ling went up to the front to recite the music board. At that time, Ancheng King Chen Yu was standing in the hall, looking up at the ancestor Wang Tong, his face changed color, and he broke out in a cold sweat.

古文：陵遣殿中御史引王下殿，遂劾免侍中、中书监。
现代文：徐陵让殿中御史把安盛王带下殿来，于是弹劾免除塞旦适侍中、中书监职。
English: Xu Ling asked the palace official to bring An Sheng Wang down to the palace, so the impeachment exempted Sedan from serving as a middle-ranking official and inspector of books.

古文：自此朝廷肃然。
现代文：从此朝廷上下为之肃然。
English: From then on, the imperial court was awestruck.

古文：天康元年，迁吏部尚书，领大著作。
现代文：天康元年，徐陵调任吏部尚书，领大著作。
English: In the first year of Tiankang, Xu Ling was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu, leading the work of the university.

古文：陵以梁末以来，选授多失其所，于是提举纲维，综核名实。
现代文：继认为自凿塑后期以来，选拔授官大多失当，于是整理列举国家主要法典，综合审核才智资历是否同所任职官相一致。
English: He continued to believe that since the late period of chiseling and molding, most of the selection and awarding of officials have been improper, so he sorted out and listed the major national codes, and comprehensively checked whether the talents and qualifications were consistent with the officials.

古文：时有冒进求官，喧竞不已者，陵乃为书宣示曰： 自古吏部尚书者，品藻人伦，简其才能，寻其门胄，逐其大小，量其官爵。
现代文：当时有冒进求官喧闹竞争没完没了的，徐陵就作书宣示说： 自古吏部尚书一职，在于评论人物，选拔才士，探寻他的门第，依据情况，评估他应授的官爵品位。
English: At that time, there was a never-ending noisy competition for officials, and Xu Ling wrote a letter to declare: Since ancient times, the position of the Ministry of Personnel has been to comment on people, select talents, explore his lineage, and assess the rank he should be awarded according to the situation.

古文：梁元帝承侯景之凶荒，王太尉接荆州之祸败，尔时丧乱，无复典章，故使官方，穷此纷杂。
现代文：梁元童承位于呈墨之乱后，玉立盛接掌权柄于垦幽败亡之时，那时节因为战乱，不再有健全的典章制度，故而使官方为纷杂情况所困扰。
English: When Liang Yuan Tongcheng took over the reins of power from Yulisheng after the Genghis Khan Rebellion and Yu Yu was defeated, there was no longer a sound legal system due to the war, so the authorities were troubled by the complicated situation.

古文：永定之时，圣朝草创，干戈未息，亦无条序。府库空虚，赏赐悬乏，白银难得，黄札易营，权以官阶，代于钱绢，义存抚接，无计多少，致令员外、常侍，路上比肩，咨议、参军，市中无数，岂是朝章，应其如此？
现代文：永定时，我朝由于刚刚创建，战争尚未休止，也没有条理，府库空虚，缺少赏赐物品，白银难以获得，黄卷容易营造，暂且用官阶代替钱绢，意义在于存恤抚养，不能计较多少。致使员外、常侍路上比肩接踵；谘议、参军街市中无法统计，哪是朝廷章程上应该这样?
English: At the time of Yongding, our dynasty had just been founded, the war had not yet ceased, there was no organization, the treasury was empty, there was a lack of rewards, silver was difficult to obtain, yellow rolls were easy to make, and official ranks were temporarily used instead of money bags. The significance lies in the maintenance and upbringing, which cannot be overestimated. As a result, foreign envoys and regular attendants were on the road side by side; consultation and participation in the military street market could not be counted, which is the way it should be in the imperial charter?

古文：今衣冠礼乐，日富年华，何可犹作旧意，非理望也。
现代文：现在衣冠礼乐不断富足繁荣，怎么能还照先前的用意呢?
English: Now that the crown ceremony is constantly prosperous, how can it still be performed according to the previous plan?

古文：所见诸君，多逾本分，犹言大屈，未喻高怀。
现代文：遣不是于理所应当的。现在见到各位仁君，官职待遇大多超过了应有的，还说受了大委屈，未能显示坦荡的胸怀。
English: Now I see all of you benevolent people, the official treatment is mostly more than it should be, and it is said that you have suffered great grievances and failed to show an open mind.

古文：若问梁朝硃领军异亦为卿相，此不逾其本分邪？
现代文：假若问到梁朝领军朱异也作了卿相，遣不超过他的本分吗?
English: If it is asked that Zhu Yiren, the leader of the Liang Dynasty, also served as the prime minister, did he not exceed his duty?

古文：此是天子所拔，非关选序。
现代文：这是出自皇上的赏拔，不关吏部按等第选授的事。
English: This is an award and commendation from the emperor, and has nothing to do with the selection and awarding of officials according to their ranks.

古文：梁武帝云 世间人言有目色，我特不目色范悌 。
现代文：梁武帝说 世间人说有偏爱，我特不偏爱范悌 。
English: Emperor Liangwu said that people in the world have their own preferences, and I especially do not like Fan Ye.

古文：宋文帝亦云 人世岂无运命，每有好官缺，辄忆羊玄保。 此则清阶显职，不由选也。
现代文：宋文帝也说 人世难道没有命运，每有好官缺，就想羊玄保，这些都是地位尊贵职司重要，不由吏部选拔的。
English: Song Wendi also said that there is no fate in the world. Whenever there is a shortage of good officials, they want to protect the sheep. These are all important positions and are not selected by the cadre department.

古文：秦有车府令赵高直至丞相，汉有高庙令田千秋亦为丞相，此复可为例邪？
现代文：秦朝有车府令赵高直做到丞相，汉朝有个高庙令田千秋也做了丞相，这些能再作为例规吗?
English: In the Qin Dynasty, there was a Chefu that ordered Zhao Gaozhi to become chancellor, and in the Han Dynasty, there was a Gaomiao that ordered Tian Qianqiu to become chancellor. Can these be regarded as rules?

古文：既忝衡流，应须粉墨。
现代文：既然我辱居简选人才的职分，自应做些有裨益的事情。
English: Since I hold the position of an elected person, I should do something useful.

古文：所望诸贤，深明鄙意。 
现代文：希望各位贤达，深明我浅陋的意见。 
English: I hope that all of you sages will understand my shallow opinion.

古文：自是众咸服焉。时论比之毛玠。
现代文：从逭以后大家都佩服他，当时人把他比作毛蚧。
English: Everyone admired him from the cormorant onwards, when he was likened to a toad.

古文：废帝即位，高宗入辅，谋黜异志者，引陵预其议。
现代文：陈废帝伯宗即位时，高宗陈顼入朝辅政，谋划罢黜心怀不轨的人，延引徐陵参预筹划。
English: When Emperor Chen Wuzong ascended the throne, Gaozong Chen Rong entered the government as an aide-de-camp, planned to remove those who had evil intentions, and involved Xu Ling in the pre-planning.

古文：高宗纂历，封建昌县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：高宗继位，徐陵受封建昌县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Gao Zong succeeded to the throne, Xu Ling received the fief of Jianchang County, and there were 500 households in the county.

古文：太建元年，除尚书右仆射。
现代文：太建元年官拜尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, the officials worshipped Shang Shu and his right-hand man Shu.

古文：三年，迁尚书左仆射，陵抗表推周弘正、王劢等，高宗召陵入内殿，曰： 卿何为固辞此职而举人乎？ 
现代文：太建三年调任尚书左仆射时，徐陵上表推拒，荐举周弘正、王励等，高宗陈顼召徐陵到内殿，说： 爱卿为什么坚决推辞这一职务并且荐举别人呢? 
English: In the third year of the Taijian era, when Shang Shuxu's left-hand retainer was appointed, Xu Ling refused to go up to the table and recommended Zhou Hongzheng, Wang Li, etc. Gao Zong Chen Yu summoned Xu Ling to the inner hall and said: Why did Ai Jing resolutely refuse this position and recommend others?

古文：陵曰： 周弘正从陛下西还，旧籓长史，王劢太平相府长史，张种帝乡贤戚，若选贤与旧，臣宜居后。 
现代文：徐陵说： 周弘正是跟随陛下从北周回来的原藩国长史，王勘是太平相府长史，张种是皇上同乡亲戚中的贤人，假若选拔贤达旧臣，我理应在后。 
English: Xu Ling said: Zhou Hong is the former governor of the domain who followed His Majesty back from North Zhou, Wang Kan is the minister of peace and the governor of the prefecture, Zhang Zong is a wise man among the emperor's relatives from the same village, if I were to choose a wise old minister, I should be the last.

古文：固辞累日，高宗苦属之，陵乃奉诏。
现代文：坚持推辞多，高宗苦苦劝说他，他才接受韶旨。
English: He persisted in rejecting many, and Gaozong painstakingly persuaded him to accept the imperial edict.

古文：及朝议北伐，高宗曰： 朕意已决，卿可举元帅。 
现代文：待到朝中议论北伐，高宗说： 我已经决定伐齐，你们可以推举元帅。 
English: When the discussion on the Northern Expedition reached the middle of the court, Gaozong said, "I have already decided to make the expedition complete. You can nominate a field marshal."

古文：众议咸以中权将军淳于量位重，共署推之。
现代文：大家都以为中权将军违王量权位重要，共同推举他。
English: Everyone thought it was important for General Zhongquan to succeed to the throne, and jointly nominated him.

古文：陵独曰： 不然。
现代文：惟独说： 不能这样。
English: But he said: "It can't be done.

古文：吴明彻家在淮左，悉彼风俗，将略人才，当今亦无过者。 
现代文：吴明彻家住淮左，熟悉那裹的风俗，而且将略人才方面现在也没有超过他的。 
English: Wu Mingche's family lived in Huai Zuo, he was familiar with the customs there, and he was no better than him in terms of talent.

古文：于是争论累日不能决。
现代文：于是一连争论几天都决断不下。
English: The dispute went on for several days.

古文：都官尚书裴忌曰： 臣同徐仆射。 
现代文：都官尚书裴忌说： 我赞同涂壁逝的意见。 
English: Shangshu Peihui, a city official, said: I agree with the opinion that the walls should be painted.

古文：陵应声曰： 非但明彻良将，裴忌即良副也。 
现代文：途堕紧接着说： 不但明彻是良将，裴忌也是良副。 
English: Tudou immediately went on to say: Not only is Mingcheng a good general, Peihui is also a good deputy.

古文：是日，诏明彻为大都督，令忌监军事，遂克淮南数十州之地。
现代文：这天，皇帝诏令吴明彻为大都督，令苤显监军事，于是攻取了淮南敷十州的地方。
English: On this day, the emperor decreed that Wu Mingche should be the grand governor and Zou Xianxuan should be the military inspector, thus conquering the ten prefectures of Huainan.

古文：高宗因置酒，举杯属陵曰： 赏卿知人。 
现代文：摆设酒宴，举杯对着途建说： 奖赏爱卿知人善任。 
English: Set up a wine banquet, raise a glass to Jian on the way and say: Reward Aicheng's acquaintance and goodwill.

古文：陵避席对曰： 定策出自圣衷，非臣之力也。 
现代文：继离开席位回奏： 定策出自圣上，并非我的功劳啊。 
English: After leaving his seat, he said: "The decision-making comes from the top, it's not my doing.

古文：其年加侍中，馀并如故。
现代文：那年加俭堕侍中，且其余官职照旧。
English: That year, Gao Jian fell into samurai, and the rest of the official positions remained unchanged.

古文：七年，领国子祭酒、南徐州大中正。
现代文：太建七年徐陵领国子监祭酒、南徐州大中正。
English: In the seventh year of Tai Jian's reign, he was appointed as the provincial overseer of Xu Ling, and became the vice-president of South Xuzhou University.

古文：以公事免侍中、仆射。
现代文：以公事免侍中、仆射。
English: To be excused from being an attendant or a footman on official business.

古文：寻加侍中，给扶，又除领军将军。
现代文：不久又加侍中，给扶。又拜受领军将军。
English: Soon he was made an aide-de-camp, and promoted to the rank of general leading the army.

古文：八年，加翊右将军、太子詹事，置佐史。
现代文：太建八年加翊右将军、太子詹事，置佐史。
English: In the 8th year of the Tai Jian era, General Gao Yu, Prince Zhan Zhi, and Okisa Shi were added.

古文：俄迁右光禄大夫，馀并如故。
现代文：不久调任右光禄大夫，其他任官照旧。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Doctor Uko Roku, but his other positions remained the same.

古文：十年，重为领军将军。寻迁安右将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：太建十年重任领军将军，随后调安右将军、且墨尹。
English: Tai Jian was reappointed as the leading general for ten years, and then transferred to the right general, and then to Mo Yin.

古文：十三年，为中书监，领太子詹事，给鼓吹一部，侍中、将军、右光禄、中正如故。
现代文：基建十三年为中书监，领太子詹事，给鼓吹一部，侍中、将军、右光禄、中正照旧。
English: Ji Jian served as the middle school's librarian for 13 years. He led Prince Zhan Zhi to give a speech, and the middle school students, generals, Uguanglu, and middle school students performed as usual.

古文：陵以年老累表求致仕，高宗亦优礼之，乃诏将作为造大斋，令陵就第摄事。
现代文：途堕由于年老，屡次上表辞官，产塞还是特别优待他，下韶让将作为他造一所大房屋，让涂陆在自己府第处理事务。
English: Due to his old age, Tu Lu was repeatedly promoted to the position of speech writer, and he was given special preferential treatment in the delivery of speeches. He was told that he would build a large house for him, and that Tu Lu would handle affairs in his own office.

古文：后主即位，迁左光禄大夫、太子少傅，馀如故。
现代文：后主即皇帝位，任徐陵左光禄大夫、太子少傅，其余都照旧。
English: Afterward, the master, that is, the emperor, was appointed as the doctor of Xuling Zaganglu, the young prince, and the rest were as before.

古文：至德元年卒，时年七十七。
现代文：至德元年逝世，享年七十七岁。
English: He died in 1981, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：诏曰： 慎终有典，抑乃旧章，令德可甄，谅宜追远。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 依据典章制度，务使德行彰明，丧尽其哀，祭尽其敬。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "According to the legal code system, we must make virtue clear, mourn as much as possible, and worship as much as possible.

古文：侍中、安右将军、左光禄大夫、太子少傅、南徐州大中正建昌县开国侯陵，弱龄学尚，登朝秀颖，业高名辈，文曰词宗。
现代文：侍中、安右将军、左光禄大夫、太子少傅、南徐州大中正建昌县开国侯徐陵，年少学问深厚，在朝为官聪颖隽秀，业绩高出名家，文章号称一代宗师。
English: Servant, General An Yu, Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Prince Junior Fu, South Xuzhou University Junior High School, Zheng Jianchang County, the founder of Guoling County, Xu Ling, was a young man with profound knowledge. He was a brilliant official in the imperial court, and his performance was high. He was a famous family. The article is known as a generation of teachers.

古文：朕近岁承华，特相引狎，虽多卧疾，方期克壮，奄然殒逝，震悼于怀。
现代文：朕近年在承华宫与他特相亲昵，虽说经常患病卧床，正希望康复，忽然辞世，实令朕心震惊伤悼。
English: In recent years, I was particularly close to him at the Chenghua Palace. Although he was often ill in bed and was hoping to recover, he died suddenly, which really shocked and saddened me.

古文：可赠镇右将军、特进，其侍中、左光禄、鼓吹、侯如故，并出举哀，丧事所须，量加资给。
现代文：可追赠镇右将军、特进，他的侍中、左光禄、鼓吹、侯依旧，举哀一并如仪，丧事费用，酌予供给。
English: The town's right general, the special envoy, his attendant, the left light, the propaganda, the marquis are still the same, the mourning is the same as the ceremony, the funeral expenses, and the supply.

古文：谥曰章。 
现代文：谧号为章。 
English: The  sign chapter begins.

古文：陵器局深远，容止可观，性又清简，无所营树，禄俸与亲族共之。
现代文：徐陵才识胸怀深远，形貌举动可作表率，秉性清廉简洁，家资无所积累，所得薪俸同亲族之人共享。
English: Xu Ling's talent is far-reaching, his appearance and behavior are exemplary, his character is clean and simple, he has no accumulated family assets, and his salary is shared with his relatives.

古文：太建中，食建昌邑，邑户送米至于水次，陵亲戚有贫匮者，皆令取之，数日便尽，陵家寻致乏绝。
现代文：太建年间，领食建昌县，县民送赋税米粮到水边，逮陵亲戚中有贫穷的，都让他们领取，数日便光了，以致徐陵自家不久也穷困了。
English: During the years of the Great Construction, the people of Jianchang County sent tax-paid rice and grain to the water's edge to receive food, and the poor among the relatives of Xu Ling were allowed to receive it. A few days passed, so that Xu Ling's own family was soon impoverished.

古文：府僚怪而问其故，陵云： 我有车牛衣裳可卖，馀家有可卖不？ 
现代文：幕僚感到奇怪，问他为什么这样做?徐陵说： 我家尚有车、牛、衣服可以卖，其余人家有卖的吗? 
English: The aide was puzzled and asked him why he was doing this. Xu Ling said: My family still has cars, cattle, and clothes to sell. Do other people have anything to sell?

古文：其周给如此。
现代文：他就是这样来周济别人。
English: That's how he makes ends meet.

古文：少而崇信释教，经论多所精解。
现代文：他从年轻时起尊崇信仰佛教，很多经典都能解说精到。
English: Since he was young, he has revered the Buddhist faith, and is able to explain many of the classics.

古文：后主在东宫，令陵讲大品经，义学名僧，自远云集，每讲筵商较，四座莫能与抗。
现代文：后主在束宫时，让涂陆讲解大品经义学，高僧远道赶来如云霓相聚，讲席时每有疑义商较，在座的没人能够同他抗辩。
English: When the late master was in Sokgong, he asked Tu Lu to give a lecture on the Great Text of the Doctrine of Righteousness. The high priests came from far and wide to gather like clouds, and whenever there was a dispute about the meaning of the sermon, no one present could argue with him.

古文：目有青睛，时人以为聪惠之相也。
现代文：他眼中有青睛，当时的人都认为这是聪慧的面相。
English: He had blue eyes, which people at the time thought was a sign of intelligence.

古文：自有陈创业，文檄军书及禅授诏策，皆陵所制，而《九锡》尤美。
现代文：自从陈朝创业以来，文檄军书等重要文书以及禅位韶旨等，都是徐陵撰写，其中《九锡》尤其好。
English: Since the founding of the Chen Dynasty, important documents such as the Book of the Grand Historian of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and the Precepts of Zen Buddhism were all written by Xu Ling, of which "Juxi" is particularly good.

古文：为一代文宗，亦不以此矜物，未尝诋诃作者。其于后进之徒，接引无倦。
现代文：是一代文章宗师，而且不因此恃才傲物，对著书立说之人从无贬斥，而对晚生后辈的接待引进却乐此不疲。
English: is a generation of essay masters, and it is not because of this that he is proud of his talent. He has never disparaged anyone who has written a book, but he has enjoyed the introduction of the reception of the late generation.

古文：世祖、高宗之世，国家有大手笔，皆陵草之。
现代文：世祖、高宗时，国家有重要文章，都由徐陵草拟。
English: At the time of the founder, Gao Zong, the country had important articles, all of which were drafted by Xu Ling.

古文：其文颇变旧体，缉裁巧密，多有新意。
现代文：他的文章对于旧有文体多有变异，剪裁组织，细密精巧，常有新意。
English: His articles are mostly variations on the old style, well-organized, detailed and ingenious, and often contain new ideas.

古文：每一文出手，好事者已传写成诵，遂被之华夷，家藏其本。
现代文：每每一文撰出，有兴趣爱好的人已为传抄背诵，于是他的文章散布华夏外夷，家中多有收藏。
English: Each and every article has been compiled, and people who are interested in hobbies have been transcribed and recited, so his articles have been distributed all over China and abroad, and there are many collections at home.

古文：后逢丧乱，多散失，存者三十卷。
现代文：后历经死丧祸乱，大多散失，留存的有三十卷。
English: After the death and disaster, most of them were lost, and only thirty volumes remained.

古文：有四子：俭，份，仪，僔。
现代文：继有四个儿子，依次是!继，徐捡，涂仪，徐傅。
English: There were four sons, successively! Sui, Xu Pai, Tu Yi, Xu Fu.

古文：俭一名众。
现代文：徐俭又名众。
English: Xu Jian is also famous.

古文：幼而修立，勤学有志操，汝南周弘正重其为人，妻以女。
现代文：从小修养成立，勤奋好学志行操守好，汝南周弘正看重他的为人，嫁女给他为妻。
English: Having cultivated himself since childhood, being diligent, studious, and good-behaved, Runan Zhouhong valued him as a person and gave him a daughter to marry.

古文：梁太清初，起家豫章王府行参军。
现代文：梁太清初年，出仕为豫章王府行参军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Liang Taiqing, he went to the capital of Yuzhang to join the army.

古文：侯景乱，陵使魏未反，俭时年二十一，携老幼避于江陵，梁元帝闻其名，召为尚书金部郎中。
现代文：堡景作乱时，徐陵出使魏未回朝，徐俭当时二十一岁，携老带幼到江陵避难。梁元帝听说他的名声，召他任尚书金部郎中。
English: When there was a disturbance in the castle town, Xu Ling sent Wei Wei to return to the imperial court. Xu Jian, who was 21 years old at the time, took refuge in Jiangling with his wife and child. Emperor Liang Yuan heard of his reputation and called him to serve as Shangshu's vice-minister of finance.

古文：尝侍宴赋诗，元帝叹赏曰： 徐氏之子，复有文矣。 
现代文：他曾经陪从元帝宴会而赋诗，元帝赞赏说 徐家的孩子，又是有文才的 。
English: He once accompanied the Yuan Emperor to a banquet and composed a poem. The Yuan Emperor appreciated that the children of the Xu family were literate.

古文：江陵陷，复还于京师。
现代文：江陵沦陷，徐俭又回到京城。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Xu Jian returned to Beijing.

古文：永定初，为太子洗马，迁镇东从事中郎。
现代文：永定初年为太子洗马，调镇束从事中郎。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was the prince's horse washer, and he was engaged in tuning the harness.

古文：天嘉三年，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：天嘉三年，调任中书侍郎。
English: At the age of three, he was transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：太建初，广州刺史欧阳纥举兵反，高宗令俭持节喻旨。
现代文：太建初年，广州刺史欧阳纥起兵反叛，高宗命令途俊持带信节宣读圣旨。
English: In the first year of the Taijian era, Ouyang Zhen, the governor of Guangzhou, rebelled, and Gaozong ordered Tu Jun to hold a letter and read out the sacred edict.

古文：纥初见俭，盛列仗卫，言辞不恭，俭曰： 吕嘉之事，诚当已远，将军独不见周迪、陈宝应乎？
现代文：欧垦区丝起初见选俭时，排列许多卫队器仗，言语间颇不尊重，徐俭说： 吕嘉的故事已久远了些，将军难道没看到旦迪、陈实应的事吗?
English: At first, when Ouyi District saw the election of Chen Jian, many guards were lined up, and there was a lot of disrespect between words. Xu Jian said: Lujia's story has been around for a long time. Didn't the general see what happened to Dandi and Chen Jian?

古文：转祸为福，未为晚也。 
现代文：变祸为福还不算晚啊。 
English: It's not too late to turn bad luck into good luck.

古文：纥默然不答，惧俭沮其众，不许入城，置俭于孤园寺，遣人守卫，累旬不得还。
现代文：欧阳纥默然不答，担心徐俭涣散他的部众，不准途俭入城，把涂堡安置在巫玺寺，派人守卫，几十天不能返回。
English: Ouyang Diao silently did not answer, worried that Xu Jian would scatter his subordinates. He was not allowed to enter the city on his way. He placed the Tu Fort in Wuxi Temple, sent guards, and could not return for dozens of days.

古文：纥尝出见俭，俭谓之曰： 将军业已举事，俭须还报天子，俭之性命虽在将军，将军成败不在于俭，幸不见留。 
现代文：匦阳纥曾经出城会见徐俭，徐俭对他说： 将军已经起事，我徐俭须回去向天子报告，我的性命虽然在将军掌握中，可将军的成败却不在于我徐俭，徐俭以不再被留为幸。 
English: Shanyang Yao once went out of the city to meet with Xu Jian. Xu Jian said to him, "The general has started an uprising. I, Xu Jian, must go back and report to God. Although my life is in the general's hands, the success or failure of the general does not depend on me, Xu Jian. Xu Jian is lucky to no longer be left behind."

古文：纥于是乃遣俭从间道驰还。
现代文：欧屋匿纬于是打发途俭从小路骑马奔回。
English: Ouya Anhui then sent Dousheng riding back from the path.

古文：高宗乃命章昭达率众讨纥，仍以俭悉其形势，敕俭监昭达军。
现代文：产塞于是就命童旦旦崖率领部众讨伐匦压垦选，还因为熟悉那裹的形势，诏令徐俭监昭达军。
English: Zangze then ordered Tongdantan to lead the troops to fight against and suppress the election, and also, because he was familiar with the situation there, he ordered Xu Jian to supervise the troops.

古文：纥平，高宗嘉之，赐奴婢十人，米五百斛，除镇北鄱阳王咨议参军，兼中书舍人。
现代文：平叛结束，高祖嘉奖继，赏赐奴婢十人，米五百斛，授镇北鄱阳王谘议参军，兼中书舍人。
English: At the end of the rebellion, Gao Zu commended and rewarded the successors, rewarded ten slaves and maidservants, five hundred taels of rice, conferred the town of Beibeiyang Wang with the advice to join the army, and concurrently became a middle school student.

古文：累迁国子博士、大匠卿，馀并如故。
现代文：积累年资而升任国子博士、大匠卿，其余任职照旧。
English: After accumulating seniority, he was promoted to Dr. Kuniko, Daisho-kyo, and the rest of his positions remained the same.

古文：寻迁黄门侍郎，转太子中庶子，加通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞，以公事免。
现代文：不久升任黄门侍郎，转太子中庶子，加通直散骑常侍，兼尚书左丞。后因公事免职。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Huangmen chamberlain, the step-son of the crown prince, and the son-in-law of the prince's second son, and the son-in-law of the prince's second son, and the son-in-law of the prince's third son, and the son-in-law of the prince.

古文：寻起为中卫始兴王限外咨议参军，兼中书舍人。
现代文：不久又起用为中卫始兴王限外谘议参军，兼中书舍人。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the middle guard of Shixing Wang, who was allowed to join the army for consultation outside the limit, and was also a middle school student.

古文：又为太子中庶子，迁贞威将军、太子左卫率，舍人如故。
现代文：又为太子中庶子，迁贞威将军、太子左卫率，中书舍人照旧兼任。
English: He is also an illegitimate son of the middle son of the prince, General Qian Zhenwei, the prince's left guard, and the middle school teacher concurrently as before.

古文：后主立，授和戎将军、宣惠晋熙王长史，行丹阳郡国事。
现代文：后主即位，授继和戎将军、宣惠晋熙王长史，行且坠郡国事。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, he was succeeded by General Wo Jung and King Changshi of the Jin Dynasty, and the state affairs of the county fell into disarray.

古文：俄以父忧去职。
现代文：随后因父丧去职。
English: He subsequently lost his position due to the death of his father.

古文：寻起为和戎将军，累迁寻阳内史，为政严明，盗贼静息。
现代文：不久起用为和戎将军，再调至寻阳内史。为政严明，盗贼不兴。
English: He was soon promoted to General Wajimaru, and then transferred to Hoyang Naishi. He was a strict politician, and thieves did not like him.

古文：迁散骑常侍，袭封建昌侯，入为御史中丞。
现代文：升任散骑常侍，袭封建旦堡，入朝为御史中丞。
English: He was promoted to the rank of straggling equerry, inherited the feudal Danburg, and entered the imperial court as a junior secretary of history.

古文：俭性公平，无所阿附，尚书令江总望重一时，亦为俭所纠劾，后主深委任焉。
现代文：途俭秉性公正平和，不阿附势要，尚书令江总声威重极一时，也被徐俭纠察弹劾，后主对他非常信任。
English: Tu Jian was a just and peaceful person, and he did not attach any importance to the situation. Shangshu made Jiang Zongsheng extremely powerful. He was also impeached by Xu Jian for picketing. His successor had great trust in him.

古文：又领右军。
现代文：又领右军。
English: He also led the right army.

古文：祯明二年卒。
现代文：祯明二年逝世。
English: He died two years later.

古文：份少有父风，年九岁，为《梦赋》，陵见之，谓所亲曰： 吾幼属文，亦不加此。 
现代文：徐份从小有他父亲的风度，九岁时，写了一篇《梦赋》，徐陵看后，对他亲近的人说 我小时候写文章，也不比这好 。
English: When he was nine years old, he wrote an article "Dream Fu." After reading it, Xu Ling said to those close to him, "When I was a child, writing articles was no better than this."

古文：解褐为秘书郎。转太子舍人。
现代文：步入仕途任秘书郎，转太子舍人。
English: He entered his career as a secretary and became a prince.

古文：累迁豫章王主簿、太子洗马。
现代文：多次升迁后任豫章王主簿、太子洗马。
English: After being promoted several times, he was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of King Yuzhang and the prince's horse washer.

古文：出为海盐令，甚有治绩。
现代文：后离京任海盐令，治理很有成绩。
English: After leaving Beijing, he was appointed to the Sea Salt Order, and his governance was very successful.

古文：秩满，入为太子洗马。
现代文：任期满。返京任太子洗马。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to Beijing as Crown Prince Saima.

古文：份性孝悌，陵尝遇疾，甚笃，份烧香泣涕，跪诵《孝经》，昼夜不息，如此者三日，陵疾豁然而愈，亲戚皆谓份孝感所致。
现代文：徐份生性孝顺长辈友爱兄弟，徐陵曾经患病很厉害，徐份流泪烧香祷告，跪着诵念《孝经》，昼夜不停，就这样三天，徐陵的病突然痊愈，亲戚都说是因为徐份的孝行感动了上天。
English: Xu Rong was born with filial piety, respect for elders, friendship and love for brothers. Xu Rong was once very ill. Xu Rong shed tears, burned incense and prayed, knelt down and recited the "Filial Piety Sutra," day and night, and for three days, Xu Rong's illness suddenly healed. Relatives all said that it was because Xu Rong's filial piety moved heaven.

古文：太建二年卒，时年二十二。
现代文：太建二年逝世，那时年仅二十二岁。
English: Tai Jian died two years later, when he was only 22 years old.

古文：仪少聪警，以《周易》生举高第为秘书郎，出为乌伤令。
现代文：徐份自小聪慧机敏，以《周易》生考试名次高任秘书郎，离京作锤令。
English: Xu Peng, who was clever and astute since he was a child, became a high-ranking secretary with the rank of "Zhou Yi" student examination, and left Beijing to make hammer orders.

古文：祯明初，迁尚书殿中郎，寻兼东宫学士。
现代文：擅塱初年，升任尚书殿中郎，不久兼东宫学士。
English: In his first year as a squire, he was promoted to the position of the junior chamberlain of the Imperial Palace, and soon became a scholar of the Eastern Palace.

古文：陈亡入隋。
现代文：速亡后转入堕曲。
English: After the death of the Chen Dynasty, they became subjects of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：开皇九年，隐于钱塘之赭山，炀帝召为学士，寻除著作郎。
现代文：盟皇九年，在鱼瞳赵旦隐居，艳征召他作学士，不久改任著作郎。
English: In the ninth year of Menghuang, Zhao Dan lived in seclusion in Yuhu, and Yan called him to be a bachelor, and he was soon appointed as a scholar.

古文：大业四年卒。
现代文：太墓四年逝世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：孝克，陵之第三弟也。
现代文：孝克是徐陵的第三个弟弟。
English: Xiaoke is Xu Ling's third younger brother.

古文：少为《周易》生，有口辩，能谈玄理。
现代文：小时作《周易》生，能说会道，能讲说幽深微妙的义理。
English: As a student of "Zhou Yi" for an hour, he can speak well and can talk about deep and subtle principles.

古文：既长，遍通《五经》，博览史籍，亦善属文，而文不逮义。
现代文：长大后，遍通《五经》，博览史籍，也很会写文章，但对于文采不及义理更擅长。
English: When he grew up, he was well versed in the Five Classics, read a lot of historical books, and was also able to write articles, but he was better at writing than he was at reasoning.

古文：梁太清初，起家为太学博士。
现代文：梁太清初年，初仕任太学博士。
English: In the first year of Liang Taiqing's reign, he was appointed Doctor of Theology for the first time.

古文：性至孝，遭父忧，殆不胜丧，事所生母陈氏，尽就养之道。
现代文：孝克为人最孝，父丧时几乎经受不了哀痛。侍奉生母陈氏，极尽赡养的义务。
English: Xiaoke is the most filial of people. When his father passed away, he could hardly bear the grief. He served his birth mother, Chen, and did his best to support her.

古文：梁末，侯景寇乱，京邑大饥，饿死者十八九。
现代文：梁朝末年，侯基作乱，京城大饥荒，十有八九的人都饿死了。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, Houji caused a riot, and there was a great famine in Beijing. In all likelihood, nine out of ten people starved to death.

古文：孝克养母，饘粥不能给，妻东莞臧氏，领军将军臧盾之女也，甚有容色，孝克乃谓之曰： 今饥荒如此，供养交阙，欲嫁卿与富人，望彼此俱济，于卿意如何？ 
现代文：孝克赡养母亲，连粥饭也拿不出。他的妻子姓臧，东莞人，是领军将军臧盾的女儿，很有姿色，孝克就对她说： 现在这样饥荒，供养缺少，想把你嫁给富人，彼此都可能度遇难关，你看怎么样? 
English: His wife's family name was Yu, she was from Dongguan, and she was the daughter of the leading general Yu Dun. She was very beautiful. Xiaoke said to her, "Nowadays, with the famine and the lack of food and clothing, if you want to marry a rich man, both of you may be in trouble. What do you think?

古文：臧氏弗之许也。
现代文：臧氏不答应。
English: Mr. Zou did not agree.

古文：时有孔景行者，为侯景将，富于财，孝克密因媒者陈意，景行多从左右，逼而迎之，臧涕泣而去，所得谷帛，悉以供养。
现代文：当时有个叫孔景行的人，是侯景的部将，富有钱财，孝克秘密通过媒人陈述此意，孔景行多带随从，逼着迎娶她，臧氏哭着离别了孝克。得来的粮食布匹，孝克全敷用来供养母亲。
English: At that time, there was a man named Kong Jingxing, who was a captain of Houjing, rich in money. Xiao Ke secretly stated this intention through a matchmaker. Kong Jingxing often brought followers and forced her to marry. Mr. Zou left Xiao Ke crying. All the grain cloth he obtained was used by Xiao Ke to support his mother.

古文：孝克又剃发为沙门，改名法整，兼乞食以充给焉。
现代文：孝克又剃掉头发当了和尚，改名法整，兼带乞食以补充给养。
English: Xiaoke shaved off his hair to become a monk, changed his name to Fa Zhei, and took a beggar with him to supplement his food supply.

古文：臧氏亦深念旧恩，数私自馈饷，故不乏绝。
现代文：臧氏也很记念先前的恩情，多次私下送他些财物吃食，所以不至于穷绝。
English: Mr. Zou also remembered his previous kindness, and privately sent him some money and food many times, so that he would not become destitute.

古文：后景行战死，臧伺孝克于途中，累日乃见，谓孝克曰： 往日之事，非为相负，今既得脱，当归供养。 
现代文：后来孔量丘战死，在路上等候：好些天才见到，臧氏对孝克说： 往日的事情，并非相负，现在既然能够脱离这场灾祸，就应当回归供养。 
English: Later, Kong Yueqiu died in battle, waiting on the road: After seeing several geniuses, Mr. Zou said to Mr. Xiaoke: The past is not a burden, now that we can get rid of this disaster, we should return to provide support.

古文：孝克默然无答。
现代文：孝克默然说不出话来。
English: Xiaoke was speechless.

古文：于是归俗，更为夫妻。
现代文：于是还俗，又同臧氏作了夫妻。
English: As a result, he returned to secular life, and became a husband and wife with Mr. Zou.

古文：后东游，居于钱塘之佳义里，与诸僧讨论释典，遂通《三论》。
现代文：后来向东游历，住在钱塘的佳义里，同僧人们研讨佛经，于是精通《三论》。
English: Later, he traveled to the east and lived in Jiayili, Qiantang, where he studied Buddhist scriptures with monks and became proficient in the Three Treatises.

古文：每日二时讲，旦讲佛经，晚讲《礼传》，道俗受业者数百人。
现代文：每天早晚两次开讲，早晨讲佛经，晚上讲《礼》《传》，僧俗来听讲的达数百人。
English: Twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, there are sermons, in the morning on Buddhist scriptures, and in the evening on "Rite" and "Legend." Hundreds of people come to listen to the sermons.

古文：天嘉中，除剡令，非其好也，寻复去职。
现代文：玉嘉年间，任剡令，这不合他的趣味，不久又离职了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Taizong Dynasty, Ren Shuling, which was not to his liking, soon left his post.

古文：太建四年，征为秘书丞，不就，乃蔬食长斋，持菩萨戒，昼夜讲诵《法华经》，高宗甚嘉其操行。
现代文：太建四年，征作秘书丞，他不就职，还素食斋戒，持菩萨戒，昼夜讲诵《法华经》，高宗很褒奖他的操行。
English: For four years, Tai Jian was conscripted as a secretary. When he was not on duty, he fasted and ate vegetarian food, followed the Bodhisattva precepts, and recited the Lotus Sutra day and night. Gaozong highly praised his conduct.

古文：六年，除国子博士，迁通直散骑常侍，兼国子祭酒，寻为真。
现代文：立建六年，任国子博士，升任通直散骑常侍，兼国子祭酒，不久授实职。
English: After six years of construction, he was appointed as Dr. Kuniko, promoted to the position of Tsuchizhitsuji Sanzhijishi, concurrently as Kuniko's sacrificial wine, and was soon given a real job.

古文：孝克每侍宴，无所食啖，至席散，当其前膳羞损减，高宗密记以问中书舍人管斌，斌不能对。
现代文：孝克每次陪侍宴席，没见他吃什么，到席散，在他座席前的食品却少了，直塞暗暗记着逭件事用以询问中书舍人笪逊，笪越回答不了。
English: Every time Xiao Ke attends a banquet, he doesn't see what he's going to eat, and when he gets to the table, there's less food in front of his seat. He just secretly remembers things to ask the Chinese scholars about, and he can't answer any more.

古文：自是斌以意伺之，见孝克取珍果内绅带中，斌当时莫识其意，后更寻访，方知还以遗母。
现代文：从此管斌留意观察遣件事，看到耋克拿珍果塞在宽腰带内，管斌当时不解他的用意，后来查访，才知是拿回去送给母亲。
English: From then on, Guan Bin paid attention to the observation of the repatriation matter, and saw that Yan Ke was holding a prized fruit tucked inside a wide belt. At that time, Guan Bin did not understand his intention. Later, when he visited, he only knew that he was taking it back to his mother.

古文：斌以实启，高宗嗟叹良久，乃敕所司，自今宴享，孝克前馔，并遣将还，以饷其母，时论美之。
现代文：笪逊据实向产塞禀报，直塞感叹很久，于是诏令有关管事人员，以后宴会时，孝克席前食物，全让他拿回去孝敬他母亲。当时舆论都夸赞遣件事情。
English: He then ordered the relevant management personnel to let him take back all the food before the banquet to show his respect for his mother. At that time, the public opinion was full of praise for the incident.

古文：至德中，皇太子入之释奠，百司陪列，孝克发《孝经》题，后主诏皇太子北面致敬。
现代文：至德年间，皇太子入学举行祭拜至圣先师仪礼，百官陪列，耋直阐发《孝经》题意，后主命皇太子面朝北方向孝克致敬。
English: During his stay in Germany, the Crown Prince held a ceremony of worship to the Holy Prophet at his school entrance, accompanied by hundreds of officials, and directly expounded the meaning of the "Filial Piety Sutra," after which the Lord commanded the Crown Prince to face north to pay tribute to filial piety.

古文：祯明元年，入为都官尚书。
现代文：祯明元年，入朝任都官尚书。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Shangshu entered the imperial court and was appointed as a magistrate.

古文：自晋以来，尚书官僚皆携家属居省。
现代文：自晋以来，尚书官与僚属都携带家眷一起住在官署。
English: Since Jin, Shang Shukan and his colleagues have all brought their families to live with them at the government office.

古文：省在台城内下舍门，中有阁道，东西跨路，通于朝堂。
现代文：尚书官署在台越内下舍门，中间有阁道，东西跨路，通到朝堂。
English: The Office of the Registrar-General of the Republic of China is located in the lower gate of Ta Yue, with a pavilion road in the middle, crossing the road from east to west, leading to the morning hall.

古文：其第一即都官之省，西抵阁道，年化久远，多有鬼怪，每昏夜之际，无故有声光，或见人著衣冠从井中出，须臾复没，或门阁自然开闭。
现代文：其中第一家就是都官的官署，西面挨着阁道，年代久远，常闹鬼怪，每每夜裹无缘无故出现声音和光亮；有时看见穿衣戴帽的人从井内出来，一会儿又没了；有时阁门自开自闭。
English: The first of these was the government office of the city's governor. It was on the west side, next to the loft road. It had been there for a long time, and was often haunted by ghosts. Every night, for no reason at all, there would be sounds and lights. Sometimes you would see a man in a robe and hat come out of the well, but he would be gone in a moment. Sometimes the loft door would open and close by itself.

古文：居省者多死亡，尚书周确卒于此省。孝克代确，便即居之，经涉两载，妖变皆息，时人咸以为贞正所致。
现代文：住在官署的人多有死亡，尚书周确就死在这个官署襄，孝克接替周确也就住在这裹，经历两年，妖孽之事都平息了。当时的人都认为是正气导致的结果。
English: Many people who lived in government offices died. Shang Shu and Zhou Zhengyi died in this government office, and Xiao Ke succeeded Zhou Zhengyi and also lived here. After two years, the witchcraft had subsided. At that time, people thought it was the result of righteous anger.

古文：孝克性清素而好施惠，故不免饥寒，后主敕以石头津税给之，孝克悉用设斋写经，随得随尽。
现代文：孝克生性清廉并且喜欢接济他人，因而不免穷困，后主诏命把石头津的税收给他，孝克全都用作设斋写经，随得随尽。
English: Xiao Ke was born with an incorruptible nature and liked to help others, which led to poverty. Later, the lord ordered to give him the tax revenue from the stone tax. Xiao Ke used all of it to set up a fast and write a sutra. He did as he pleased.

古文：二年，为散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：桢明二年，孝克为散骑常侍，侍奉束宫。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Xiao Ke was a horseback riding equerry, serving the Imperial Palace.

古文：陈亡，随例入关。
现代文：陈亡，按例进入关中。
English: Chen Rui, as usual, entered Guanzhong.

古文：家道壁立，所生母患，欲粳米为粥，不能常办。
现代文：家徒四壁，生身母亲患病，想吃粳米粥，也不能经常办到。
English: I have four walls, my biological mother is ill, and if I want to eat glutinous rice porridge, I can't always do it.

古文：母亡之后，孝克遂常啖麦，有遗粳米者，孝克对而悲泣，终身不复食之焉。
现代文：母亲亡故之后，孝克就常吃麦饭，有人送来粳米，他对着粳米悲伤哭泣，终身不再吃粳米。
English: After his mother's death, Xiaoke often ate barley rice. Someone brought him glutinous rice, and he cried with sadness over the glutinous rice. He never ate glutinous rice again.

古文：开皇十年，长安疾疫，隋文帝闻其名行，召令于尚书都堂讲《金刚般若经》。
现代文：开皇十年，长安发生疾疫，隋文帝听说他的名声德行，召他在尚书都堂讲《金刚般若经》。
English: In the tenth year of the Emperor's reign, a disease broke out in Chang'an. The Sui Emperor heard of his reputation for virtue and invited him to speak on "The Diamond Sutra" at Shangshudu Hall.

古文：寻授国子博士。
现代文：不久授他国子监博士。
English: He was soon awarded the title of Doctor of the State Children's Supervision.

古文：后侍东宫讲《礼传》。
现代文：后侍奉东宫讲《礼》《传》。
English: After that, he served the East Palace and spoke about "Rite" and "Legend."

古文：十九年，以疾卒，时年七十三。
现代文：开皇十九年因病死去，当时七十三岁。
English: He died of illness in the 19th year of the Emperor's reign, at the age of 73.

古文：临终，正坐念佛，室内有非常异香气，邻里皆惊异之。
现代文：临终时，正坐念佛，室内有平常没有的特殊香味，邻居都为此惊奇。
English: When he was on his deathbed, he was sitting and chanting the Buddha's name. The room had a special fragrance that was unusual, which surprised the neighbors.

古文：子万载，仕至晋安王功曹史、太子洗马。
现代文：他的儿子万载，官做到晋安王功曹史、太子洗马。
English: His son, Wan Zai, became the official of the Jinan King Gong Cao Shi, and the prince of Shima.

古文：史臣曰：徐孝穆挺五行之秀，禀天地之灵，聪明特达，笼罩今古。及缔构兴王，遭逢泰运，位隆朝宰，献替谋猷，盖亮直存矣。
现代文：史臣曰：徐孝穆秉承天地五行之灵秀，聪明练达，笼盖古今。至于营建兴王大业，遭遇鸿运，地位高过朝廷重臣，静言进谏谋划，都因存心忠耿。
English: The historian said: Xu Xiaomu adhered to the spirit of the five elements of heaven and earth, was clever and practiced, and has been around for a long time. As for the construction of the great cause of rejuvenating the king, he suffered great fortune, his status was higher than that of the senior vassals of the imperial court, and his quiet words and advanced plans were all due to his loyalty.

古文：孝克砥身厉行，养亲逾礼，亦参、闵之志欤！
现代文：垄直磨炼节操德行，供养亲人超越常礼，也具有丰参、闵子骞的志行啊。
English: It is a virtuous practice to cultivate virtue, and it is a virtuous practice to provide for relatives beyond the common courtesy. It is also a virtuous practice to eat a lot of ginseng and eat a lot of bean sprouts.

