古文：宁献王权，太祖第十七子。
现代文：宁献王朱权，太祖第十七子。
English: Ning Xian Wang Zhu Quan, the 17th son of the great-grandfather.

古文：洪武二十四年封。
现代文：洪武二十四年受封。
English: Hongwu was given the title in the 24th year.

古文：逾二年，就藩大宁。
现代文：二年之后，朱权前往藩地大宁。
English: Two years later, Zhu Quan went to Daming in the domain.

古文：大宁在喜峰口外，古会州地，东连辽左，西接宣府，为巨镇。
现代文：大宁地处喜峰口外，属古会州之地，东连辽左，西接宣府，为一大镇。
English: Located just outside the mouth of the Qifeng Mountains, Danyang is an ancient county town. It is connected to Liao Zuo in the east and to Xuanfu in the west, making it a large town.

古文：带甲八万，革车六千，所属朵颜三卫骑兵皆骁勇善战。
现代文：朱权带有甲兵八万，战车六千，所属朵颜三卫骑兵均骁勇善战。
English: Zhu Quanzhang had 80,000 cavalrymen, 6,000 chariots, and Do Yan's three guards cavalrymen all fought bravely.

古文：权数会诸王出塞，以善谋称。
现代文：朱权多次会合诸王出塞作战，以善于谋略著称。
English: Zhu Quan met many times with other kings to go to Tibet to fight, and he was known to be good at strategizing.

古文：燕王初起兵，与诸将议曰： 曩余巡塞上，见大宁诸军慓悍。
现代文：燕王起兵之初，与诸将商议道： 以往我巡察塞上时，见大宁诸军十分剽悍。
English: At the beginning of Yan Wang's army, he discussed with the generals: In the past, when I was on patrol, I saw that the armies of Danyang were very fierce.

古文：吾得大宁，断辽东，取边骑助战，大事济矣。
现代文：如果我能获得大宁，截断辽东，采用边骑助战，便大事可成啊！ 
English: If I can get Danying, cut off Liaodong, and use the cavalry to help the battle, then great things can be achieved!

古文：建文元年，朝议恐权与燕合，使入召权，权不至，坐削三护卫。
现代文：建文元年，朝臣商议惟恐朱权与燕王会合，派人召朱权回京，朱权未到，被削三护卫。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, the courtiers discussed the fear that Zhu Quan and Yan Wang would meet, and sent someone to summon Zhu Quan back to Beijing. Zhu Quan did not arrive, and the three guards were cut.

古文：其年九月，江阴侯吴高攻永平，燕王往救。
现代文：当年九月，江阴侯吴高进攻永平，燕王前往营救。
English: In September of that year, Jiangyin marquis Wu Gao attacked Yongping, and Yan Wang went to the rescue.

古文：高退，燕王遂自刘家口间道趋大宁，诡言穷蹙来求救。
现代文：吴高退兵，燕王于是从刘家口抄小路直趋大宁，诈称是因为穷蹙前来求救。
English: Wu Gao retired from the army, so Yan Wang followed a path from Liujiakou all the way to Taining, falsely claiming that it was because of the poor egrets that he came to ask for help.

古文：权邀燕王单骑入城，执手大恸，具言不得已起兵故，求代草表谢罪。
现代文：朱权邀请燕王一人骑马入城，燕王握住朱权的手大哭，诉说自己是不得已才起兵的，求他代为起草奏章谢罪。
English: Zhu Quan invited Yan Wang to ride into the city alone. Yan Wang held Zhu Quan's hand and cried loudly, telling him that he had no choice but to raise an army, and asked him to apologize for drafting the report.

古文：居数日，疑洽不为备。
现代文：燕王居住数日，朱权都诚恳相待，全无防备之心。
English: Yan Wang lived there for a few days, and Zhu Quan treated everyone sincerely, without any defensiveness.

古文：北平锐卒伏城外，吏士稍稍入城，阴结三卫部长及诸戍卒。
现代文：北平精税部队则埋伏城外，官兵也渐渐入城，暗中勾结三卫部长及诸守军。
English: The Beiping fine tax troops ambushed outside the city, and the officers and soldiers gradually entered the city, secretly colluding with the three ministers of defense and the defenders.

古文：燕王辞去，权祖之郊，伏兵起，拥权行。
现代文：燕王这才告辞离去，朱权到郊外为其饯行，伏兵趁机而起，将朱权拥往前行。
English: It was only then that Yan Wang said goodbye and left. Zhu Quan went to the suburbs to accompany him. The ambush took advantage of the opportunity and pushed Zhu Quan forward.

古文：三卫彍骑及诸戍卒，一呼毕集。
现代文：三卫弓广骑及诸守军，一呼云集。
English: The three guards, the archers, the cavalry and the defenders all gathered.

古文：守将朱鉴不能御，战殁。
现代文：守将朱鉴抵挡不住，力战而死。
English: Zhu Jian, the guard, could not resist and died in the struggle.

古文：王府妃妾世子皆随入松亭关，归北平，大宁城为空。
现代文：王府妃妾世子均随入松亭关，回到北平，大宁成了一座空城。
English: The empress dowager, her concubines, and their descendants all entered Songting Pass and returned to Beiping, and Danying became an empty city.

古文：权入燕军，时时为燕王草檄。
现代文：朱权进入燕军之后，时常为燕王草拟檄文。
English: After Zhu Quan entered Yan's army, he often drafted eulogies for Yan Wang.

古文：燕王谓权，事成，当中分天下。
现代文：燕王对朱权许诺，事成之后，平分天下。
English: Yan Wang promised Zhu Quan that he would divide the world equally.

古文：比即位，王乞改南土。
现代文：待燕王即帝位后，朱权请求改封南方。
English: After Emperor Yan ascended the throne, Zhu Quan requested to change his title to the south.

古文：请苏州，曰： 畿内也。 
现代文：当他要求苏州时，燕王回答： 苏州属于畿内。 
English: When he asked for Suzhou, Yan Wang replied: Suzhou belongs to the Kinai region.

古文：请钱塘，曰： 皇考以予五弟，竟不果。
现代文：当他要求钱塘时，燕王则说： 先父将它赐给五弟，终无结果。
English: When he asked for Qiantang, Yan Wang said, "My father gave it to my fifth brother, but nothing came of it.

古文：建文无道，以王其弟，亦不克享。
现代文：建文帝无道，在钱塘封其弟为王，也未能享受。
English: Emperor Jianwen had no choice but to crown his younger brother as king in Qiantang, and he did not enjoy it.

古文：建宁、重庆、荆州、东昌皆善地，惟弟择焉。 
现代文：建宁、重庆、荆州、东昌都是好地，权弟你随意选择吧。 
English: Jianning, Chongqing, Jingzhou, and Dongchang are all good places, so you can choose your favorite.

古文：永乐元年二月改封南昌，帝亲制诗送之，诏即布政司为邸，瓴甋规制无所更。
现代文：永乐元年二月，改封南昌，成祖亲自写诗送行，命朱权以布政司为宫邸，建筑规模毫无变更。
English: In February of the first year of Yongle, the name was changed to Nanchang, Cheng Zu personally wrote a poem to see him off, and ordered Zhu Quan to use Bu Zhengji as the palace residence. The scale of the building remained unchanged.

古文：已而人告权巫蛊诽谤事，密探无验，得已。
现代文：不久，有人告发朱权用巫术害人，并且诽谤别人，成祖命人秘密查访，未获证据，于是停止追查此事。
English: Soon, someone accused Zhu Quan of using witchcraft to harm people and slander others. Cheng Zu ordered a secret visit, but there was no evidence, so he stopped investigating the matter.

古文：自是日韬晦，构精庐一区，鼓琴读书其间，终成祖世得无患。
现代文：从此以后，朱权终日韬光养晦，并建造书斋一间，弹琴读书于其间，因此，成祖在位期间，朱权未遭祸患。
English: From then on, Zhu Quan kept a low profile all day, and built a study room, where he played the piano and read. Therefore, during the reign of Cheng Zu, Zhu Quan did not suffer any misfortune.

古文：仁宗时，法禁稍解，乃上书言南昌非其封国。
现代文：仁宗时，法禁稍有缓解，朱权乃上书说南昌并非他的封国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Nianzong, the legal ban was slightly eased, and Zhu Quan wrote a letter saying that Nanchang was not his fief.

古文：帝答书曰： 南昌，叔父受之皇考已二十余年，非封国而何？ 
现代文：仁宗回信说道： 南昌，叔父从先皇那里受封已达二十余年了，不是封国，那又是什么呢？ 
English: In reply, Emperor Nenzong said, "Nanchang, my uncle has been awarded the title of nobility by the former emperor for more than 20 years. It is not a national title, so what is it?

古文：宣德三年请乞近郭灌城乡土田。
现代文：宣德三年，朱权请求宣宗将靠近南昌城的灌城乡土田赐给他。
English: In the third year of Xuande's reign, Zhu Quan asked Xuanzong to give him the land of Guancheng Township near Nanchang City.

古文：明年又论宗室不应定品级。
现代文：第二年又议论说宗室不应确定品级。
English: The following year, it was argued that the family line should not determine the grade.

古文：帝怒，颇有所诘责。
现代文：宣宗十分生气，对朱权颇有指责之意。
English: Xuan Zong was very angry and accused Zhu Quan.

古文：权上书谢过。
现代文：朱权便上书谢罪。
English: Zhu Quan then wrote a letter of apology.

古文：时年已老，有事多齮龁以示威重。权日与文学士相往还，托志翀举，自号臞仙。
现代文：当时朱权年纪已老，有关官员大多相互倾轧，以显示自己的威权，而朱权则整日与文学士互相往来，寄托自己的远大志向，自号月瞿仙。
English: At that time, Zhu Quan was already old, and most of the relevant officials were competing with each other to show their authority. Zhu Quan, on the other hand, spent the whole day interacting with the Bachelor of Arts, pinning his lofty ambitions, and calling himself the Moon Immortal.

古文：尝奉敕辑《通鉴博论》二卷，又作家训六篇，《宁国仪范》七十四章，汉唐秘史二卷，《史断》一卷，《文谱》八卷，《诗谱》一卷，其他注纂数十种。
现代文：朱权曾奉命编辑《通鉴博论》二卷，又写成《家训》六篇，《宁国仪范》七十四章，《汉唐秘史》二卷，《史断》一卷，《文谱》八卷，《诗谱》一卷，其他记载、编纂数十种。
English: Zhu Quan was ordered to edit two volumes of "Tongjianbo," six volumes of "Jiaxing," seventy-four chapters of "Ning Guo Yi Fan," two volumes of "Han and Tang Secret History," one volume of "Historical Fragments," eight volumes of "Wen Shu" and one volume of "Poetry," and dozens of other records and compilations.

古文：正统十三年薨。
现代文：正统十三年，朱权去世。
English: In the 13th year of orthodoxy, Zhu Quan passed away.

古文：世子盘烒先卒，孙靖王奠培嗣。
现代文：世子朱盘火式已死，因此由朱权之孙靖王朱奠培继嗣。
English: His heir, Zhu Penghu, had already died, so the grandson of Zhu Quan, King Jing, Zhu Dian, was chosen to be his successor.

古文：奠培善文辞，而性卞急，多嫌猜。
现代文：朱奠培善文工辞，但性情急躁，喜欢猜疑。
English: Zhu Dian is a good writer, but he is quick-tempered and suspicious.

古文：景泰七年，弟弋阳王奠壏讦其反逆，巡抚韩雍以闻。
现代文：景泰七年，其弟弋阳王朱奠土监揭发他谋反，巡抚韩雍将此事上奏。
English: In the seventh year of Jing Tai's reign, his younger brother, Shanyang Wang Zhu Dian, was exposed by the land inspector for plotting a rebellion. The inspector, Han Yong, reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝遣官往谳，不实。
现代文：代宗命官吏前往审判定罪，结果发现与事实不符。
English: A deputy magistrate went to trial and convicted him, but the result was found to be inconsistent with the facts.

古文：时军民连逮者六七百人，会英宗复辟，俱赦释，惟谪戍其教授游坚。
现代文：当时受此案牵连而下狱治罪的军民有六、七百人，这些人直到英宗复辟才全部赦免释放，唯独贬谪其教授游坚。
English: At that time, there were six or seven hundred soldiers and civilians who were implicated in this case and sentenced to prison. These people were all pardoned and released until the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, except for their professor Yu Jian.

古文：奠培由是憾守土官，不为礼。
现代文：朱奠培因此对守土官表示不满，不以礼相待。
English: As a result, Zhu Dianpei expressed dissatisfaction with the land steward and did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：布政使崔恭积不平，王府事多持不行。
现代文：布政使崔恭心积不平，因此将王府事务大多控制在手，而不去办理。
English: Bu Zheng made Cui Qiong restless, so he controlled most of the affairs of the royal court in his hands, rather than handling them.

古文：奠培遂劾奏恭不法。
现代文：朱奠培于是上奏弹劾崔恭违法。
English: Zhu Dianpei then brought up the illegality of impeaching Choe Kyong.

古文：恭与按察使原杰亦奏奠培私献、惠二王宫人，逼内官熊璧自尽。
现代文：崔恭与按察使原杰也上奏说朱奠培私通献、惠二王的宫女，又逼宦官熊璧自尽。
English: Choe Kyong and his assistant inspector, Yuan Jie, also reported that Zhu Dien Pei was a womanizer and a concubine of King Hui II, and forced eunuch Xiong Bi to commit suicide.

古文：按问皆实，遂夺护卫。
现代文：朝廷派人审问，朱奠培之罪属实，于是夺其护卫。
English: The imperial court sent someone to investigate and found Zhu Dianpei's crime to be true, so they took away his bodyguard.

古文：逾三年，而奠壏以有罪赐死。
现代文：三年后，朱奠鉴也因罪赐死。
English: Three years later, Zhu Dianjian also died as a result of his crime.

古文：初，锦衣卫指挥逯杲听诇事者言，诬奠壏烝母。
现代文：当初，锦衣卫指挥逯杲听了多事者之言，诬告朱奠鉴与其母通奸。
English: At first, the commander of the Jin Yi Guard, Zou, listened to the words of many people and falsely accused Zhu Dianjian of adultery with his mother.

古文：帝令奠培具实以闻，复遣驸马都尉薛桓与杲按问。
现代文：英宗命朱奠培将此事一五一十地奏上，又派驸马都尉薛桓与逯杲前去审问。
English: Emperor Yingzong ordered Zhu Denpei to report the matter to the emperor, and also sent the imperial equerry, Lieutenant Xue Huan, to interrogate him.

古文：奠培奏无是事，杲按亦无实。
现代文：朱奠培上奏说并无此事，逯杲审问也未获实据。
English: Zhu Dianpei said in his report that there was no such thing, and Zou's interrogation did not find any evidence.

古文：帝怒，责问杲。
现代文：英宗大为生气，责问逯杲。
English: Yingzong was very angry and scolded him.

古文：杲惧，仍以为实，遂赐奠壏母子自尽，焚其尸。
现代文：逯杲心中害怕，便说确有此事，英宗于是赐朱奠鉴母子自尽，将其尸体焚毁。
English: He was afraid in his heart and said that this was indeed the case. Emperor Yingzong then gave Zhu Dianjian and his mother permission to commit suicide and burn their bodies.

古文：是日雷雨大作，平地水深数尺，众咸冤之。
现代文：当日雷雨大作，致使平地水深数尺，众人都认为朱奠鉴母子冤枉。
English: On the day of the big thunderstorm, which caused the water to be several feet deep on the flat ground, everyone thought that Zhu Dianjian and his mother had been wronged.

古文：弘治四年，奠培薨。
现代文：弘治四年，朱奠培去世。
English: In the fourth year of Hongzhi, Zhu Dianpei passed away.

古文：子康王觐钧嗣，十年薨。
现代文：其子康王朱觐钧继嗣，十年，朱觐钧去世。
English: His son, Kang Wang, Zhu Xi's successor, died ten years later.

古文：子上高王宸濠嗣。
现代文：其子上高王朱宸濠继嗣。
English: He was succeeded by his father, the high king Zhu Xi.

古文：其母，故娼也。
现代文：朱宸濠的母亲，以前是娼妓。
English: Zhu Xi's mother used to be a prostitute.

古文：始生，靖王梦蛇啖其室，旦日鸱鸣，恶之。
现代文：当朱宸濠出生时，靖王梦见有蛇在屋里吃东西，白天则有鹞鹰绕屋鸣叫，因此厌恶朱宸濠。
English: When Zhu Xi was born, King Jing dreamt that there were snakes eating in the house, and during the day there were vultures circling the house and chirping, so he disliked Zhu Xi.

古文：及长，轻佻无威仪，而善以文行自饰。
现代文：朱宸濠长大之后，为人轻佻，全无威仪，却善于以文自饰。
English: After Zhu Xi grew up, he was a frivolous person, completely without dignity, but he was good at decorating himself with literature.

古文：术士李自然、李日芳妄言其有异表，又谓城东南有天子气。
现代文：术士李自然、李日芳胡说他外表奇异，又说城东南有天子之气。
English: The sorcerers Li Zhizhen and Li Rihong Hu said that he was strange in appearance, and also said that Cheng Dongnan had the spirit of a son of heaven.

古文：宸濠喜，时时诇中朝事，闻谤言辄喜。
现代文：朱宸濠听后很高兴，时常探听朝中之事，听到诽谤言论后总是十分欣喜。
English: Zhu Xi was very happy after listening to it. He often inquired about North Korea and China, and was always very happy after hearing slanderous remarks.

古文：或言帝明圣，朝廷治，即怒。
现代文：如果有人说皇帝圣明，朝廷太平，他便十分愤怒。
English: If someone says that the emperor is saintly and the court is peaceful, he is very angry.

古文：武宗末年无子，群臣数请召宗室子子之。
现代文：武宗老年无子，群臣屡次请求召宗室之子过继。
English: Emperor Wuzong was old and childless, and the courtiers repeatedly requested that a son of the emperor's wife be called to succeed him.

古文：宸濠属疏，顾深结左右，于帝前称其贤。
现代文：朱宸濠与皇帝关系疏远，因此他便极力巴结皇帝的左右，在皇帝面前称赞其贤能。
English: Zhu Xi had a distant relationship with the emperor, so he tried his best to curry favor with the emperor and praised his virtue in front of the emperor.

古文：初，宸濠贿刘瑾，复所夺护卫。
现代文：开始，朱宸濠贿赂刘瑾，恢复了所夺护卫。
English: At first, Zhu Xi bribed Liu Bei to restore the captured escort.

古文：瑾诛，仍论夺。
现代文：刘瑾被诛后，其护卫仍被褫夺。
English: After Liu Yao was abducted, his bodyguard was still abducted.

古文：及陆完为兵部尚书，宸濠结嬖人钱宁、臧贤为内主，欲奏复，大学士费宏执不可。
现代文：到陆完担任兵部尚书时，朱宸濠巴结受皇帝恩宠的钱宁、臧贤为内应，想上奏再次恢复护卫，大学士费宏坚持不行。
English: When he arrived on land after serving as the secretary of the military department, Zhu Rongba, together with the emperor's favored Qianning and Jianxian, tried to restore the escort again, but the university scholar Feihong could not insist.

古文：诸嬖人乘宏读廷试卷，取中旨行之。
现代文：那些受宠者便乘费宏翻阅廷试考卷时，偷取中旨恢复朱宸濠的护卫。
English: Those who were favored took advantage of Fei Hong's reading of the court's examination papers to steal the meaning and restore Zhu Xi's escort.

古文：宸濠益恣，擅杀都指挥戴宣，逐布政使郑岳、御史范辂，幽知府郑巘、宋以方。
现代文：朱宸濠由此更加恣意妄为，擅自处死都指挥戴宣，赶走布政使郑岳、御史范辂，幽禁知府郑山献、宋以方。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi behaved even more arbitrarily. He ordered the execution of Dai Xuan without authorization, drove away the cloth political envoy Zheng Yue and the imperial historian Fan Yu, and banned the prefectural governors Zheng Shan Xian and Song Yifang.

古文：尽夺诸附王府民庐，责民间子钱，强夺田宅子女，养群盗，劫财江、湖间，有司不敢问。
现代文：强夺所有靠近王府的民房，向民间索取利息，霸占百姓田宅子女，豢养群盗，在江、湖之间劫掠财物，官府不敢问津。
English: They forcibly seized all the houses close to the royal palace, demanded interest from the people, occupied the children of the people's homes, raised gangs of thieves, and looted property between rivers and lakes. The government did not dare to ask for more.

古文：日与致仕都御史李士实、举人刘养正等谋不轨。
现代文：经常与卸任都御史李士实、举人刘养正等图谋不轨。
English: He often plotted with the outgoing governor of the capital, Li Shishi, and the leader of the people, Liu Yangzheng.

古文：副使胡世宁请朝廷早裁抑之。
现代文：副使胡世宁请求朝廷及早裁处他。
English: Deputy envoy Hu Shining asked the court to sentence him as soon as possible.

古文：宸濠连奏世宁罪，世宁坐谪戍，自是无敢言者。
现代文：朱宸濠便接连上奏胡世宁之罪，使胡世宁获罪被贬谪，从此再也没有人敢揭发他了。
English: Zhu Xi then played up Hu Shining's crimes one after another, so that Hu Shining was convicted and humiliated. From then on, no one dared to expose him.

古文：正德十二年，典仪阎顺，内官陈宣、刘良间行诣阙上变。
现代文：正德十二年，典仪阎顺，宦官陈宣、刘良悄悄到宫中告发朱宸濠企图谋反。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhengde, the eunuchs Yan Shun, Chen Xuan and Liu Liang quietly went to the palace to report Zhu Xi's attempted rebellion.

古文：宁、贤等庇之，不问。
现代文：钱宁、臧贤等加以庇护，不予追究。
English: Channing, Yu Xian and others sheltered them and will not be investigated.

古文：宸濠疑出承奉周仪，杀仪家及典仗查武等数百人。
现代文：朱宸濠怀疑此事出自承奉周仪，便杀死周仪全家及典仗查武等数百人。
English: Zhu Xi suspected that the incident was caused by a follower of Zhou Yi, so he killed Zhou Yi's entire family and hundreds of people including the ceremonial guards.

古文：巡抚都御史孙燧列其事，中道为所邀，不得达。
现代文：巡抚都御使孙燧条列其事上奏，但中途被截，奉章未能上达朝廷。
English: The governor of the capital sent Sun Yanzhi to report on the matter, but he was cut off in the middle, and the report failed to reach the imperial court.

古文：宸濠又贿钱宁，求取中旨，召其子司香太庙。
现代文：朱宸濠又贿赂钱宁，求取中旨，召其儿子前往太庙进香。
English: Zhu Xi also bribed Channing to get his son to go to the Imperial Temple to burn incense.

古文：宁言于帝，用异色龙笺，加金报赐。
现代文：钱宁禀告武宗，武宗乃用异色龙笺，加金赐答。
English: Qian Ningyi sued Wuzong, Wuzong used a different-colored dragonfly, and gave her more money.

古文：异色龙笺者，故事所赐监国书笺也。
现代文：异色龙笺是以往皇帝赐给监国的书笺。
English: The different-coloured dragon scroll is a scroll given by the emperor to the overseer in the past.

古文：宸濠大喜，列仗受贺。
现代文：朱宸濠大喜，列队接受庆贺。
English: Zhu Xi was overjoyed and lined up to receive congratulations.

古文：复勒诸生、父老奏阙下，称其孝且勤。
现代文：又勒令儒生、父老上奏朝廷，称赞他孝顺又勤劳。
English: He also ordered the Confucian scholar and his father to report to the imperial court, praising him for his filial piety and hard work.

古文：时边将江彬新得幸，太监张忠附彬，欲倾宁、贤，乘间为帝言： 宁、贤盛称宁王，陛下以为何如？ 
现代文：当时边将江彬新受皇帝恩宠，太监张忠依附江彬，想排挤钱宁、臧贤，乘机对武宗说： 钱宁、臧贤极力称赞宁王，陛下您认为呢？ 
English: At that time, the border general Jiang Binxin was favored by the emperor, the eunuch Zhang Zhong was attached to Jiang Bin, and wanted to push out Channing and Juxian. He took the opportunity to say to Wuzong: Channing and Juxian praised King Ning very much, Your Majesty, what do you think?

古文：帝曰： 荐文武百执事，可任使也。
现代文：武宗回答说： 推荐文武百官，可供任用。
English: Wu Zong replied, "Recommended by hundreds of civil and military officials, available for appointment."

古文：荐藩王何为者？ 
现代文：推荐藩王有什么用呢？ 
English: What is the use of recommending the lord of the domain?

古文：忠曰： 贤称宁王孝，讥陛下不孝耳。
现代文：张忠便说： 臧贤称赞宁王孝顺，是讥讽陛下不孝顺。
English: Zhang Zhongben said, "Yu Xian's praise of Ning Wang's filial piety is a mockery of His Majesty's lack of filial piety.

古文：称宁王勤，讥陛下不勤耳。 
现代文：称赞宁王勤劳，则是讥讽陛下不勤劳啊！ 
English: To praise Ning Wang for his diligence is to ridicule His Majesty for not being diligent!

古文：帝曰： 然。 
现代文：武宗答道 ：你说得对。 
English: Taizong said, "Yes."

古文：下诏逐王府人，毋留阙下。
现代文：于是下诏驱逐王府之人，不许留在朝廷。
English: Therefore, an edict was issued to expel anyone from the royal palace, and they were not allowed to remain in the imperial court.

古文：是时宸濠与士实、养正日夜谋，益遣奸人卢孔章等分布水陆孔道，万里传报，浃旬往返，踪迹大露，朝野皆知其必反。
现代文：当时朱宸濠正与李士实、刘养正日夜谋划，又逐渐派遣卢孔章等奸党分布水陆交通要道，万里传报，十日往返，踪迹大露，朝野都知他必然要谋反。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi was plotting with Li Shishi and Liu Yangzheng day and night, and gradually dispatched Lu Kongzhang and other traitors to distribute water and land transportation routes, spread the news over thousands of miles, and went back and forth for ten days. The trail was revealed, and the government and the people all knew that he would inevitably plot a rebellion.

古文：巡抚都御史孙燧七上章言之，皆为所邀沮。
现代文：巡抚都御史孙燧为此连续七次上奏，但都被拦截下来。
English: The governor of the capital, Sun Yat-sen, made seven consecutive overtures to this end, but they were all intercepted.

古文：诸权奸多得宸濠金钱，匿其事不以闻。
现代文：朝廷奸臣大多收到朱宸濠所贿金钱，将事情隐瞒起来而不上奏。
English: Most of the treacherous courtiers of the imperial court received bribe money from Zhu Xi and concealed the matter without reporting it.

古文：十四年，御史萧淮疏言宸濠诸罪，谓不早制，将来之患有不可胜言者。
现代文：十四年，御史萧淮上疏列举朱宸濠各项罪状，并指出若不及早遏制，将来祸害无穷。
English: In the 14th year of his reign, Grand Historian Xiao Huai enumerated Zhu Xi's various crimes, and pointed out that if they were not curbed early, the future would be full of disasters.

古文：疏下内阁，大学士杨廷和谓宜如宣宗处赵府事，遣勋戚大臣宣谕，令王自新。
现代文：此疏下到内阁商议，大学士杨廷和建议应像宣宗处置赵府一样，派勋戚大臣前去宣读诏书，命朱宸濠改过自新。
English: This was sent down to the cabinet for deliberation. Yang Ting, a university scholar, came up with the suggestion that, just as Emperor Xuanzong dealt with the Zhao government, the minister should be sent to read the edict and order Zhu Xi to reform.

古文：帝命驸马都尉崔元、都御史颜颐寿、太监赖义持谕往，收其护卫，令还所夺官民田。
现代文：武宗便命驸马都尉崔元、都御史颜颐寿、太监赖义携诏前往，没收他的护卫，命他归还所夺官民田地。
English: Emperor Wuzong then ordered the eunuchs Ma Du, Cui Yuan, Du Mi, Yan Xuzhou, and Lai Yi to go with the imperial edict to confiscate his bodyguards and order him to return the seized lands of officials and commoners.

古文：宸濠闻元等且至，乃定计，以己生辰日宴诸守土官。
现代文：朱宸濠听说崔元等将到，于是定下计谋，在自己生日那天宴请各位守土官。
English: Zhu Xi heard that Cui Yuan and others would be arriving, so he devised a plan to invite the local officials to a banquet on his birthday.

古文：诘旦皆入谢。
现代文：到了第二天早晨，守土官全部入宫拜谢。
English: In the morning of the next day, all the local officials went to the palace to offer their thanks.

古文：宸濠命甲士环之，称奉太后密旨，令起兵入朝。
现代文：朱宸濠命亲兵将他们包围起来，诈称奉太后密旨，起兵入朝。
English: Zhu Xi ordered his soldiers to encircle them, falsely claiming that he was carrying out the empress dowager's secret order to raise an army to invade the imperial court.

古文：孙燧及副使许逵不从，缚出斩之。
现代文：孙燧及副使许逵拒不从命，朱宸濠便将两人捆绑起来，拉出去斩首了。
English: Sun Yat-sen and his deputy Xu Yat-sen refused to die, so Zhu Xi tied them up, dragged them out and beheaded them.

古文：执御史王金，主事马思聪、金山，参议黄宏、许效廉，布政使胡廉，参政陈杲、刘棐，佥事赖凤，指挥许金、白昂等下狱。
现代文：又将御史王金，主事马思聪、金山，参议黄宏、许效廉，布政使胡廉，参政陈杲、刘非木，佥事赖凤，指挥许金、白昂等人逮捕下狱。
English: In addition, Wang Jin, the secretary of the commission, Ma Sicong, Jinshan, the councilor Huang Hong, Xu Xicheng, the cloth minister Hu Lian, the councilor Chen Wei, Liu Fei Mu, Anji Lai Feng, the commander Xu Jin, Bai Ang and others were arrested and jailed.

古文：参政王纶、季斅，佥事潘鹏、师夔，布政使梁宸，按察使杨璋，副使唐锦皆从逆。
现代文：参政王纶、季，佥事潘鹏、师夔，布政使梁宸，按察使杨璋，副使唐锦都参与叛逆。
English: Sanzheng Wang Yao, Ji, Anji Pan Peng, Shi Yao, Bu Zheng Envoy Liang Yao, Baizhang Envoy Yang Yao, and Deputy Envoy Tang Jin all participated in the rebellion.

古文：以李士实、刘养正为左、右丞相，王纶为兵部尚书，集兵号十万。
现代文：朱宸濠以李士实、刘养正为左、右丞相，王纶为兵部尚书，集合叛军，号称十万。
English: Zhu Xi took Li Shishi and Liu Yangzheng as the left and right ministers, and Wang Xi as the secretary of the military department, and gathered the rebels, known as the hundred thousand.

古文：命其承奉涂钦与素所蓄群盗闵念四等，略九江、南康，破之。驰檄指斥朝廷。
现代文：命其承奉涂钦与平日蓄养的闵念四等群盗，攻克九江、南康，并传送檄文斥责朝廷。
English: He ordered him to follow the example of Tu Qin and the four-class group of bandits he had cultivated in his day-to-day life, conquer Jiujiang and Nankang, and send a message to the imperial court to reprimand it.

古文：七月壬辰朔，宸濠出江西，留其党宜春王拱〈木条〉、内官万锐等守城，自帅舟师蔽江下，攻安庆。
现代文：七月初一，朱宸濠率军出江西，留下其党羽宜春王拱木条、宦官万锐等守城，亲自率水师顺江而下，进攻安庆。
English: On the first day of July, Zhu Xi led the army out of Jiangxi, leaving his party members such as Yichun Wang Arch Wood, and eunuch Wan Rui to defend the city, and personally led the sailors down the river to attack Anqing.

古文：汀赣巡抚佥都御史王守仁闻变，与吉安知府伍文定等檄诸郡兵先后至。
现代文：汀赣巡抚佥都御史王守仁获悉叛乱消息，与吉安知府伍文定等命各郡军队先后赶到。
English: When the governor of Tingtao and the governor of the capital, Wang Shuren, learned of the rebellion, he and the governor of Ji'an, Wu Wensing, ordered the troops of each county to arrive one after another.

古文：乃使奉新知县刘守绪破其坟厂伏兵。
现代文：于是命奉新知县刘守绪攻破朱宸濠的坟厂伏兵。
English: So he was ordered by Liu Shouxu of Xinchi County to break through the ambush at Zhu Xi's tomb.

古文：戊申，直攻南昌。
现代文：十七日，直攻武昌。
English: On the 17th, it attacked Wuchang directly.

古文：辛亥，城破，拱〈木条〉、锐等皆就擒，宫人自焚死。
现代文：二十日，南昌城破，王拱木条、万锐等都被擒获，宫女则自焚而死。
English: On the 20th, the Nanchang city was broken, Wang Gongmu and Wan Rui were captured, and the princess died after self-immolation.

古文：宸濠方攻安庆不克，闻南昌破，大恐，解围还，守仁逆击之。
现代文：朱宸濠当时正在进攻安庆，未能攻下，闻知南昌城破，大为恐慌，急忙解围而返，王守仁率军迎击。
English: Zhu Xi was attacking Anqing at the time, but failed to capture it. When he heard that Nanchang had been defeated, he panicked and hurried to break the siege and return. Wang Shouren led the army to meet the attack.

古文：乙卯，遇于黄家渡，贼兵乘风进薄，气骄甚。
现代文：二十四日，两军在黄家渡相遇，贼兵乘风进逼，气焰十分嚣张。
English: On the 24th, the two armies met at Huangjiadu. The bandits took advantage of the wind to advance. They were very arrogant.

古文：文定及指挥余恩佯北，诱贼趋利，前后不相及。
现代文：伍文定及指挥余恩佯装败北，诱使贼兵进击，而前后不能相顾。
English: Wu Wending and commander Yu Enya pretended to be defeated, luring the bandits to attack, but they could not take care of each other.

古文：知府邢珣、徐琏、戴德孺从后急击，文定还兵乘之，贼溃，斩溺万计。
现代文：知府邢王旬、徐琏、戴德孺从后急攻，伍文定也回兵追击，贼兵大溃，被斩首或溺死者，数以万计。
English: The prefectural governors Shao Wangjun, Xu Xi, and De Dejun led a sudden attack from the rear, and Wu Wending also pursued the troops. The bandits were routed, and tens of thousands of people were beheaded or drowned.

古文：又别遣知府陈槐、林瑊、曾玙、周朝佐复九江、南康。
现代文：王守仁又另外派遣知府陈槐、林蠨、曾王与、周朝佐率军收复九江、南康。
English: In addition, Wang Shouren dispatched the governors Chen Qi, Lin Qi, Zeng Wang and Zhou Chaosa to lead the army to recover Jiujiang and Nankang.

古文：明日，复战，官兵稍却，文定帅士卒殊死斗，擒斩二千余级，宸濠乃退保樵舍。
现代文：第二天，再战，官兵稍有退却，但伍文定率领士兵殊死战斗，擒斩贼兵二千余人，朱宸濠乃退保樵舍。
English: The next day, after the second battle, the officers and soldiers retreated a little, but Wu Wending led the soldiers in a desperate battle, killing more than two thousand soldiers. Zhu Xi was forced to retreat.

古文：明日，官军以火攻之，宸濠大败。
现代文：第三天，官军放火而攻，朱宸濠大败。
English: On the third day, the government army set fire and attacked, and Zhu Xi was defeated.

古文：诸妃嫔皆赴水死，将士焚溺死者三万余人。
现代文：各妃嫔都投水而死，被烧死或溺死的将士达三万余人。
English: All the concubines were drowned, and more than 30,000 soldiers were burned to death or drowned.

古文：宸濠及其世子、郡王、仪宾并李士实、刘养正、涂钦、王纶等俱就擒。
现代文：朱宸濠及其世子、郡王、仪宾及李士实、刘养正、涂钦、王纶等都被擒获。
English: Zhu Xi and his descendants, Gu Wang, Yi Bin and Li Shishi, Liu Yaozheng, Tu Qin, Wang Yao and others were all captured.

古文：宸濠自举事至败，盖四十有三日。
现代文：朱宸濠从起兵举事到失败，共四十三天。
English: It took Zhu Xi a total of forty-three days from the time he raised an army to his defeat.

古文：时帝闻宸濠反，下诏暴其罪，告宗庙，废为庶人。
现代文：当时武宗获悉朱宸濠谋反，下诏公开其罪，祭告宗庙，将其废为庶人。
English: At that time, Emperor Wuzong learned that Zhu Xi was plotting a rebellion, issued an edict to make his crime public, denounced him to the ancestral temple, and abolished him as a commoner.

古文：逮系尚书陆完，嬖人钱宁、臧贤等，籍其家。
现代文：将尚书陆完，内应钱宁、臧贤等人逮捕下狱，抄没家产。
English: After Shangshu was taken ashore, Naiying Channing, Yu Xian and others were arrested and sent to prison, and their family property was confiscated.

古文：江彬、张忠从臾帝亲征，至良乡，守仁捷奏至，檄止之。
现代文：江彬、林忠怂恿武宗亲征，到达良乡时，王守仁所奏捷报送到，武宗乃下诏命王守仁停止前进。
English: Jiang Bin and Lin Zhongxuan were personally recruited by Wuzong, and when they arrived at Liangxiang, the report of Wang Shuren's victory was delivered, and Wuzong issued an edict ordering Wang Shuren to stop advancing.

古文：守仁已械系宸濠等，取道浙江。
现代文：而王守仁已将朱宸濠等戴上械锁，取道浙江。
English: But Wang Shouren has put Zhu Xi and others on a mechanical lock and taken the road to Zhejiang.

古文：帝留南京，遣许泰、朱晖及内臣张永、张忠搜捕江西余党，民不胜其扰。
现代文：武宗于是留居南京，派许泰、朱晖及宦官张永、张忠前去搜捕江西余党，百姓不胜其扰。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wuzong stayed in Nanjing and sent Xu Tai, Zhu Xi and eunuchs Zhang Yong and Zhang Zhong to hunt down the remaining Jiangxi Party members. The people were greatly disturbed by this.

古文：檄守仁还江西。
现代文：又下诏命王守仁返回江西。
English: Another edict ordered Wang Shouren to return to Jiangxi.

古文：守仁至杭州，遇张永，以俘付之，使送行在。
现代文：王守仁到达杭州，遇到张永，便将俘虏交给他，让他押送武宗行在所。
English: When Wang Shuren arrived in Hangzhou and met Zhang Yong, he handed over the prisoner to him and asked him to escort Wu Zongxing to his place.

古文：十五年十二月，帝受所献俘回銮，至通州诛之，封除。
现代文：十五年十二月，武宗带着王守仁所献俘虏，起驾回銮，到达通州时，将朱宸濠处死，并取消其封爵。
English: In December of the fifteenth year, Emperor Wuzong took the captives offered by Wang Shuren and drove back to Tongzhou. When he reached Tongzhou, he put Zhu Xi to death and cancelled his knighthood.

古文：初，宸濠谋逆，其妃娄氏尝谏。
现代文：当初，朱宸濠企图谋反，其妃娄氏曾加以劝谏。
English: At first, Zhu Xi attempted to rebel, and his wife, the Zou clan, tried to dissuade him.

古文：及败，叹曰： 昔纣用妇言亡，我以不用妇言亡，悔何及！ 
现代文：当他失败后，哀叹道： 昔日纣王采纳妇人之言而亡，我却因不听妇人之言而亡，现在后悔也来不及了。 
English: When he failed, he lamented, "Once upon a time, Shao Wang accepted a woman's advice and died, but I died because I didn't listen to a woman's advice. Now it's too late to regret it."

