古文：虞玩之刘休沈冲庾杲之王谌
现代文：虞玩之字茂瑶，会稽余姚人。
English: The characters of Yu Yu are lush, and Yu Yao is the auditor.

古文：虞玩之，字茂瑶，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：他祖父虞宗，任晋朝库部郎。他父亲虞玫，任通直常侍。
English: His grandfather, Yu Zong, was appointed as the treasurer of the Jin Dynasty, and his father, Yu Mei, was appointed as the regular attendant of the Emperor.

古文：祖宗，晋库部郎。父玫，通直常侍。玩之少闲刀笔，泛涉书史，解褐东海王行参军，乌程令。
现代文：虞玩之从小熟习案牍文章，又广泛涉猎经书史集，脱去布衣由平民百姓做了东海王行参军，乌程令。
English: He was familiar with the case study articles from childhood, and also extensively dabbled in the history of the collection of scriptures. The common people took off their clothes and did the East Sea King's march to join the army, the Ucheng Order.

古文：路太后外亲朱仁弥犯罪，依法录治。太后怨诉孝武，坐免官。
现代文：路太后外亲朱仁弥犯罪，他依据法律逮捕治罪，路太后怨怒而向孝武帝申诉，因而受到免官处治。
English: When the empress dowager's maternal relative Zhu Renya committed a crime, he was arrested and punished according to the law. The empress dowager complained to Emperor Xiaowu in anger, and was therefore dismissed.

古文：泰始中，除晋熙国郎中令，尚书起部郎，通直郎。
现代文：泰始年间，授予晋熙国郎中令，尚书起部郎，通直郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, it was awarded to Jinxi Guolang Zhongling, Shangshu Kiburo, and Tongnairo.

古文：元徽中，为右丞。
现代文：元徽年间，为右丞。
English: During the Yuanhui era, he was appointed to the position of Ujo.

古文：时太祖参政，与玩之书曰： 张华为度支尚书，事不徒然。
现代文：当时太祖参政，给虞玩之的信上说： 张华为度支尚书，事情并非没有原因。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in politics, and he said in a letter to Yu Yanzhi: Zhang Hua Duzhi Shangshu, things are not without reason.

古文：今漕藏有阙，吾贤居右丞，已觉金粟可积也。 
现代文：现在库存不足，我的好友你身居右丞，已经感到需积存金钱粟米了。 
English: Now that stocks are running low, my good friend, you are in the right place, you have already felt the need to accumulate money for corn.

古文：玩之上表陈府库钱帛，器械役力，所悬转多，兴用渐广，虑不支岁月。
现代文：虞玩之上表奏陈府库钱帛，器械役力，差额日渐加大，支用渐渐增多，担心支持不了几年。
English: On top of the gambling, the government treasury's money and equipment are used, the difference is increasing day by day, the expenditure is gradually increasing, and it is feared that the support will not last for several years.

古文：朝议优报之。
现代文：朝廷议定从优酬报他。
English: The court agreed to reward him with a fine.

古文：迁安成王车骑录事，转少府。
现代文：遭虞玩之为安成王车骑录事，转少府。
English: He was forced to move to a smaller prefecture after he was involved in the Ancheng King Car Ride Incident.

古文：太祖镇东府，朝野致敬，玩之犹蹑屐造席。
现代文：太祖镇东府扬州，朝野都来向太祖表示敬意，虞远之还是足蹬木屐来到席上。
English: In Yangzhou, the eastern prefecture of Taizu Town, people from all walks of life came to pay their respects to Taizu. Yu Yuanzhi was the only one who came to the banquet.

古文：太祖取屐视之，讹黑斜锐，断，以芒接之。
现代文：太祖取过他的木屐一看，木屐变成黑色且底板磨成斜锐的，鞋带也断了，是用芒草连接的。
English: When the great-grandfather took out his clogs, he saw that the clogs had turned black and the soles were sharpened. The shoelaces were also broken and were connected with miscanthus.

古文：问曰： 卿此屐已几载？ 
现代文：太祖询问说： 爱卿这屐用了几年? 
English: The great-grandfather asked, "How many years has it taken Aiching to do this?"

古文：玩之曰： 初释褐拜征北行佐买之，著已二十年，贫土竟不办易。 
现代文：虞玩之说： 刚做官任征北行佐时买的，已经穿了二十年。贫穷的人到头来还不能置办脱换。 
English: Yu Yanzhi said, "I bought it when I was just appointed as an official and went to the north as a conscript, and I have been wearing it for twenty years. Poor people can't afford to replace it.

古文：太祖善之，引为骠骑谘议参军。
现代文：太祖觉得他这样很好，引荐他做了骠骑谘议参军。
English: His great-grandfather thought it was a good idea and recommended him to join the army as a cavalry officer.

古文：霸府初开，宾客辐凑，太祖留意简接，玩之与乐安任遐，俱以应对有席上之美，齐名见遇。
现代文：霸府初开，宾客就像车辐集向轮轴那样附向太祖，太祖留意从中拣选结纳，虞玩之与乐安任遐，都由于座席上对答称心，同有名气被赏识。
English: At the opening of the palace, the guests were attached to the great ancestor like the spokes of a car are attached to the axle. The great ancestor paid attention to the selection and payment, and the playfulness and happiness of the guests were all appreciated because of the appreciation and fame on the seat.

古文：遐字景远，好学，有义行，兼与太祖素游，褚渊、王俭并见亲爱。官至光禄大夫，永元初卒。
现代文：任遐字景远，好学行事仁义，更兼同太祖有老交情，褚渊、王俭都舆他友好，官至光禄大夫，永元初年逝世。
English: Ren Zhaozhizhiyuan was far away from Jingyuan, he was eager to learn and act with benevolence and righteousness. Moreover, he had an old friendship with the great-grandfather. Zhaoyuan and Wang Jian both regarded him as a friend. He was a high-ranking Guanglu doctor. He died in the first year of Yongyuan.

古文：玩之迁骁骑将军，黄门郎，领本部中正。
现代文：虞玩之迁骁骑将军，黄门郎，领本州中正。
English: The general of the horse cavalry, Huangmen Lang, the leader of Honshu Zhongzheng.

古文：上患民间欺巧，及即位，敕玩之与骁骑将军傅坚意检定簿籍。
现代文：皇上感到民间事务欺瞒奸诈是个祸患，待到即皇帝位，便敕命虞玩之与骁骑将军傅坚意检定户口簿籍。
English: The emperor felt that deception and treachery in civil affairs was a scourge. When he became emperor, he risked his life to verify the household registration books with the general Fu Jianyi.

古文：建元二年，诏朝臣曰： 黄籍，民之大纪，国之治端。
现代文：建元二年，皇帝诏告朝臣说：黄籍，是民众管理的纲纪，治理国家的开端。
English: In the second year of the first century, the emperor told the courtiers: "Yellow nationality is the discipline of the people's management and the beginning of the governance of the country."

古文：自顷氓俗巧伪，为日已久，至乃窃注爵位，盗易年月，增损三状，贸袭万端。
现代文：由于近来民间风俗奸巧诈伪，时间很长了，甚至竟然有在黄籍户名下偷注爵位，偷改年月，增损三状，贸袭万端。
English: Due to the recent folk customs of treachery and fraud, the time is very long, even to the point of stealing the title of nobility under the household name of the Yellow nationality, secretly changing the year, increasing the loss by three times, and raiding the trade.

古文：或户存而文书已绝，或人在而反托死叛，停私而云隶役，身强而称六疾。
现代文：有的户头在而有关文书已没有了；有的人活在那裹反而在籍注上假托死了、叛逃了；居家独处却说籍没为奴隶；本来身强体壮反而谎称患有种种疾病。
English: Some had accounts but the relevant documents were no longer there; some people lived there but faked their death and defected on the registration note; they lived alone but said they were not slaves; they were physically strong but falsely claimed to suffer from various diseases.

古文：编户齐家，少不如此。
现代文：编写户籍，整治家室，很少不如此。
English: Compiling a household register and tidying up the home are rarely anything else.

古文：皆政之巨蠹，教之深疵。
现代文：造都是国政的大蠹虫，名教的大弊病。
English: All of these are the big worms of national politics and the big ills of the great religions.

古文：比年虽却籍改书，终无得实。
现代文：近来虽然退回户籍进行改写伹始终没能落到实处。
English: Recently, although it has been returned to the household registration for rewriting, it has not been implemented.

古文：若约之以刑，则民伪已远；若绥之以德，则胜残未易。
现代文：若是用刑法约制这种隐匿户籍的行为，则民间欺瞒诈骗时间久远；若用德泽安抚，则又不容易纠正缺漏。
English: If the criminal law is used to restrict this kind of concealment of household registration, it will take a long time for people to deceive and defraud; if virtue is used to appease, it will not be easy to correct the omissions.

古文：卿诸贤并深明治体，可各献嘉谋，以振浇化。
现代文：你们各位贤能都深深懂得治理国家的体要，可以各自进献好谋略，以便使浮薄的社会风化得以振兴。
English: All of you capable people have a deep understanding of the essentials of governing the country, and you can each contribute good strategies in order to revitalize the weak social mores.

古文：又台坊访募，此制不近，优刻素定，闲剧有常。
现代文：另有台坊寻求招募，这一制度实施很久了，优待条款向来有规定，闪忙有一定标准。
English: In addition, Taifang is seeking to recruit. This system has been implemented for a long time. The preferential treatment clause has always been stipulated, and there is a certain standard.

古文：宋元嘉以前，兹役恒满，大明以后，乐补稍绝。
现代文：宋元嘉以前，服此役的人经常是满的，大明以后，乐意补充的稍少了。
English: Before Song Yuanjia, the number of people who served in this role was often full, but after Daming, there were fewer people who were willing to supplement.

古文：或缘寇难频起，军荫易多，民庶从利，投坊者寡。
现代文：或许因为战乱频仍，凭军功得荫养的容易增多，庶民依利益多少而去从，投入台坊的就少了。
English: Perhaps because wars are still frequent, it is easy to increase the number of people who rely on military achievements, and the common people follow according to the amount of profit, and there are fewer people who invest in Taibo.

古文：然国经未变，朝纪恒存，相揆而言，隆替何速！
现代文：然而国家命脉未变，朝廷纲纪常存，就宰相一类来说，盛衰变化太快了啊。
English: However, the lifeblood of the country has not changed, the imperial system still exists, and as far as the prime minister is concerned, the rise and fall of change is too fast.

古文：此急病之洪源，晷景之切患，以何科算，革斯弊邪？ 
现代文：遣正是急病的巨大源泉，光阴的紧要祸患，用什么办法筹算，可以革除这一弊端呢?
English: It is a huge source of acute illness, a serious scourge of time. What methods of planning can be used to eliminate this drawback?

古文：玩之上表曰： 宋元嘉二十七年八条取人，孝建元年书籍，众巧之所始也。
现代文：虞玩之上表奏道：宋元嘉二十七年按八条订正人口户籍。孝建元年书写登记的户籍，是诸多奸诈欺瞒的开始。
English: Song Yuanjia revised the population and household registration in accordance with the eight articles in the 27th year. The household registration that was written and registered in the first year of Xiao Jian is the beginning of many frauds.

古文：元嘉中，故光禄大夫傅隆，年出七十，犹手自书籍，躬加隐校。
现代文：元嘉年间，已故世的光禄大夫傅隆，当时都七十出头了，还亲手书写簿籍，亲自检查隐瞒情况。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, the late Guanglu doctor Fu Long, who was in his early 70s at the time, also wrote books by hand and personally checked the situation of concealment.

古文：隆何必有石建之慎，高柔之勤，盖以世属休明，服道修身故耳。
现代文：傅隆何必要有石建那样的谨慎，高柔那样的勤劳呢?大约因为那时时世美善两旺，服从道义修养心性罢了。
English: Why did Fulong need to be as cautious as Shijian and as diligent as Gao Rong? It was probably because at that time the world was a place of both good and evil, and obedience to morality was the only way to cultivate one's character.

古文：今陛下日旰忘食，未明求衣，诏逮幽愚，谨陈妄说。
现代文：现在陛下天色已晚还忘了吃饭，天尚未亮就忙着起床，诏书直达我等昏暗愚鲁的人，我谨此表达不明智的主张。
English: Now that Your Majesty is so late in the day that you have forgotten to eat, and you are so busy getting up before dawn, and the edict has reached us dim and stupid people, I would like to express my unwise opinion.

古文：古之共治天下，唯良二千石，今欲求治取正，其在勤明令长。
现代文：古时候要使天下都得到治理，衹要领二千石俸禄的官吏优良；现在要求得天下治理、户籍正确，则要求令长勤明。
English: In ancient times, if you wanted to govern the whole country, you had to be a good official with a salary of 2,000 koku; now, if you want to govern the whole country and have a correct household registration, you have to be a diligent commander.

古文：凡受籍，县不加检合，但封送州，州检得实，方却归县。
现代文：大凡要求重新审查的户籍，县裹不给检查验证，衹把它封起来送到州，州官检查核实后，才退回县。
English: If the county does not allow the county to check and verify the household registration that is required to be re-examined, it will be sealed and sent to the state. After the state official checks and verifies it, it will be returned to the county.

古文：吏贪其赂，民肆其奸，奸弥深而却弥多，赂愈厚而答愈缓。
现代文：官吏贪图庶民的贿赂，庶民就放肆地施展他的奸诈，奸诈愈厉害，退回的就愈多，贿赂愈厚，答覆的也就愈缓慢。
English: The official covets the bribe of the common people, and the common people are free to carry out his treachery. The more treachery, the more returns, the thicker the bribe, and the slower the response.

古文：自泰始三年至元徽四年，扬州等九郡四号黄籍，共却七万一千余户。
现代文：从泰始三年到元徽四年，扬州等九郡四号黄籍，总共退回七万一千多户。
English: From the first three years of the Tai Dynasty to the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, more than 71,000 households in nine counties, including Yangzhou, were returned to the Yellow Emperor.

古文：于今十一年矣，而所正者犹未四万。
现代文：到现在十一年了，可是订正在籍的户头还未满四万。
English: It's been eleven years now, but the registered account is still less than forty thousand.

古文：神州奥区，尚或如此，江、湘诸部，倍不可念。
现代文：神州腹地尚且如此，江州、湘州那些地方，就不足加倍的事了。
English: This is still the case in the hinterland of Mainland China, but in those places in Jiangzhou and Hunan, it is not enough to double the amount.

古文：愚谓宜以元嘉二十七年籍为正。
现代文：我认为应该把元嘉二十七年黄籍作为正籍。
English: I think that the 27th year of Yuan Jia's yellow nationality should be regarded as his real nationality.

古文：民惰法既久，今建元元年书籍，宜更立明科，一听首悔，迷而不反，依制必戮。
现代文：庶民很久未尊重法律，现在对建元元年书写登记的黄籍，应当设立清查验证部门，一概听由弄虚作假的自首悔过；执迷不反悔的，查出来一律依据法制诛戮。
English: Ordinary people have not respected the law for a long time, and now for the yellow cards that were first written and registered in the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, a verification department should be set up. All of them will be forced to make false confessions and repent. If they persist and do not repent, they will be punished according to the law.

古文：使官长审自检校，必令明洗，然后上州，永以为正。
现代文：命令地方官长亲自审查检校，一定要责令他们清查完毕，然后才允许上报到州，以此算作永远正确的。
English: It is always correct to order the local officials to personally review the inspection of the school, and they must be ordered to complete the investigation before they are allowed to report to the state.

古文：若有虚昧，州县同咎。
现代文：假如有虚报欺瞒的，一经查出，州、县官同受罪责。
English: If there is any false report or deception, once it is found out, the state and county officials will be held jointly responsible.

古文：今户口多少，不减元嘉，而板籍顿阙，弊亦有以。
现代文：现在的户口数目，不比元嘉时少，而板籍上突然缺少，弊病也就可想而知了。
English: The current number of hukou is no less than that of Yuan Jia, and the sudden shortage on the board of registration, the ills can be imagined.

古文：自孝建已来，入勋者众，其中操干戈卫社稷者，三分殆无一焉。
现代文：从孝建以来，列入勋功的人数很多，其中操干戈保卫国家的人，三分裹几乎没有一分。
English: Since the time of Xiaojian, a large number of people have been included in the list of meritorious service. Among them, those who have been involved in the defense of the country are almost one-third.

古文：勋簿所领而诈注辞籍，浮游世要，非官长所拘录，复为不少。
现代文：勋功簿上所领的，还有用欺诈手法注销户籍，依附世代豪门势要的，不是地方官长所能拘禁的，又为数不少。
English: There are also quite a number of people who have been awarded the Order of Merit, who have used fraudulent methods to cancel their household registration, who are dependent on generational magnates, and who cannot be detained by local officials.

古文：寻苏峻平后，庾亮就温峤求勋簿，而峤不与，以为陶侃所上，多非实录。
现代文：不久苏峻事件平定后，庾亮曾到温崤那儿求取军功簿籍，温崤没有给，认为陶侃上报的，大多不是实际应记的数目。
English: Soon after the Su Jun Incident was settled, Zou Liang once went to Wen Jiabao to ask for a military service record book. Wen Jiabao did not give it to him, believing that most of what Tao Kan reported was not the actual number that should be recorded.

古文：寻物之怀私，无世不有，宋末落纽，此巧尤多。
现代文：在人登记方面杂有私念，没有哪个时代没有，宋末衰败，这些奸巧尤其多。
English: In the registration of people, there are mixed selfish thoughts. No era is without them. The late Song Dynasty was decadent. There are especially many of these tricks.

古文：又将位既众，举恤为禄，实润甚微，而人领数万，如此二条，天下合役之身，已据其太半矣。
现代文：加上将位多了，用周济作俸禄，实惠很少，可是一人率领几万，像这样两条，天下符合服役的人。已被他占据了多半了。
English: In addition, there are too many generals, and they use the weekly allowance as a salary, and the actual benefits are few, but one person leads tens of thousands, like these two, the world is fit for service. He has already occupied most of it.

古文：又有改注籍状。诈入仕流，昔为人役者，今反役人。
现代文：又有改写籍注情状的，冒充仕流，从前是被别人役使的，如今成了役使别人的人。
English: There are also those who rewrite history to suit their own purposes, pretending to be leaders, who were once used by others, but have now become people who are used by others.

古文：又生不长发，便谓为道人，填街溢巷，是处皆然。
现代文：生来不长头发，就说是和尚，以便免除赋役，这些人填街溢巷，到处都是这样。
English: Born without hair, they claim to be monks in order to be exempt from military service. These people fill the streets and alleys, and it's the same everywhere.

古文：或抱子并居，竟不编户，迁徙去来，公违土断。
现代文：有的儿子成家了却父子居住在一起，竟然不另登户籍，迁徙来的？公然违背土断政令不入当地户籍。
English: Some sons have married into a family, but the father and son live together, and they don't register their household separately. Migrants? They openly violate the local government decree and don't enter the local household register.

古文：属役无满，流亡不归，宁丧终身，疾病长卧。
现代文：服役了就永无满期，流亡了就不回归，甚至有终身服丧的，长期疾病的。
English: If you serve, you will never complete your term, if you go into exile, you won't return, and even if you serve for life, you will have a long-term illness.

古文：法令必行，自然竞反。
现代文：必定要法令施行，自然竞相返回。
English: Laws and regulations must be enforced, and they will naturally compete to return.

古文：又四镇戍将，有名寡实，随才部曲，无辨勇懦，署位借给，巫媪比肩，弥山满海，皆是私役。
现代文：还有四镇守将，有名无实，随其所率的部曲，勇猛怯懦不加分辨，填充了一个位置就加以供给，巫媪比肩，满山满海，都是私家役使。
English: There are also four town guards, who are famous but not real, and follow their assigned parts, brave and cowardly without distinction, filling a position and providing it, witches and elves side by side, full of mountains and seas, are all private servants.

古文：行货求位，其涂甚易，募役卑剧，何为投补？
现代文：用财物换取位置，那途径很容易，招募人当官役被轻视的事更为严重，用什么作投补呢?
English: It's easy to exchange property for a position, but it's even more serious to recruit people for official positions. What should be used to make up for this?

古文：坊吏之所以尽，百里之所以单也。
现代文：工场无人服役的原因，就是百里行单的原因。
English: The reason why there is no one serving in the workshop is the reason for the hundred-mile-long line.

古文：今但使募制明信，满复有期，民无迳路，则坊可立表而盈矣。
现代文：现在祇要使募役制度明确守信，满役复役有一定期限，庶民没有捷径可通，那么公役作坊立即可见很多人来。
English: Now we just need to make the recruitment system clear and trustworthy, there is a certain time limit for re-enlistment and re-enlistment, and there is no shortcut for ordinary people, then the public service workshop can immediately see a lot of people coming.

古文：为治不患无制，患在不行，不患不行，患在不久。 
现代文：从事治理，不用忧患没有制度，要忧患的是不能实行，不用忧患不能实行，要忧患的是行之不久。
English: When engaging in governance, there is no need to worry because there is no system, what should be worried about is that it cannot be implemented, what should not be worried about is that it cannot be implemented, and what should be worried about is that it has not been implemented for a long time.

古文：上省玩之表，纳之。
现代文：皇上阅读了虞玩之的表章，采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor read Yu Danzhi's seal and adopted his opinion.

古文：乃别置板籍官，置令史，限人一日得数巧，以防懈怠。
现代文：于是，另外专设板籍官，设置令史，限定一人一天发现几宗奸巧事，用这来防范令史的懈怠。
English: As a result, a special board registrar was set up in addition, a record of orders was set up, and one person was limited to discovering several treacherous tricks a day, which was used to prevent the slackness of the record of orders.

古文：于是货赂因缘，籍注虽正，犹强推却，以充程限。
现代文：依据货赂的线索，籍注虽然得以修正，令史还是强行推究，以便用推究所得填充对他的限程。
English: According to the clue of the bribe, although the attribution note could be amended, the order history still forced the investigation, so that the investigation income could be used to fill his limit.

古文：至世祖永明八年，谪巧者戍缘淮各十年，百姓怨望。
现代文：到世祖永明八年，因犯奸诈欺瞒户籍而被罚到淮河沿岸戍守的都各有十年，百姓产生怨恨。
English: In the eighth year of King Yongming, those who were punished for committing treachery and deception and concealing their household registration were each sentenced to ten years on the banks of the Huai River, which caused resentment among the people.

古文：世祖乃诏曰： 夫简贵贱，辨尊卑者，莫不取信于黄籍。岂有假器滥荣，窃服非分。
现代文：世祖于是下诏说： 简选贵贱，辨别尊卑，没有不从黄籍中选取凭证，岂能容虚假人才滥受荣誉，窃取本不该他分内应得的东西。
English: The patriarch then issued the following edict: Simplify the selection of high and low, distinguish between high and low, and do not select a certificate from the yellow book. How can we allow a false talent to abuse honor and steal what he does not deserve?

古文：故所以澄革虚妄，式允旧章。
现代文：所以仿效旧时的典章制度，用来澄清事实，革除虚妄。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to emulate the old system of ordinances to clarify the facts and eliminate falsehood.

古文：然衅起前代，过非近失，既往之愆，不足追咎。
现代文：然而裂痕起自前代，过失不在近期，已经过去了的罪错，不值得追究罪责。
English: However, the rift is from the previous generation, the fault is not recent, the crime has already passed, and it is not worth pursuing criminal responsibility.

古文：自宋升明以前，皆听复注。
现代文：从宋升明年以前的黄籍，都听由照旧再予注释。
English: From Song Sheng to Huang Qi before the next year, all are subject to the same comment.

古文：其有谪役边疆，各许还本。
现代文：其中有在边疆谪戍的，允许各自返回原籍。
English: Some of them had been stranded in the border areas, and were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：此后有犯，严加翦治。 
现代文：此后再有触犯的，再给予严惩。 
English: If there is any violation after that, they will be severely punished.

古文：玩之以久宦衰疾，上表告退，曰： 臣闻负重致远，力穷则困，竭诚事君，智尽必倾，理固然也。
现代文：虞玩之因为做官的日子长了，年老病弱，上表告退，说：我听说肩负重担走远路，力用尽了就会困顿，竭心诚意侍奉君主，智慧用尽了必定会倾翻，道理原本就是这样。
English: Because the days of being an official are long, old age and illness are weak, Gu Jianzhi resigned from the post, saying: I heard that shouldering a heavy burden and going a long way, exhausted strength will be in trouble, serving the monarch wholeheartedly, exhausted wisdom will certainly fall over, the reason was originally like this.

古文：四十仕进，七十悬车，壮则驱驰，老宜休息。
现代文：四十岁进身为官，七十岁辞官归家，壮年就应驱驰，老年则适合休息。
English: At the age of forty, one becomes an official, and at the age of seventy, a retired official returns home. In the prime of life, one should drive fast, and in old age, one should rest.

古文：臣生于晋，长于宋，老于齐，世历三代，朝市再易。
现代文：臣在晋代出生，在宋代长成，到齐朝曰渐衰老，一生经历三代，名利之场两改。
English: The minister was born in the Jin Dynasty, grew up in the Song Dynasty, and gradually aged to the Qi Dynasty. He experienced three generations in his lifetime and two changes in the field of fame and fortune.

古文：臣以宋元嘉二十八年为王府行佐，于兹三十年矣。
现代文：我从宋元嘉二十八年做王府行佐，至今三十年了。
English: It's been 30 years since I became an aide to Wangfujing in the 28th year of Song Yuanjia.

古文：自顷以来，衰耗渐笃。
现代文：近些年来，衰老渐渐显明。
English: In recent years, the signs of ageing have become increasingly apparent.

古文：为性不懒惰，而倦怠顿来。
现代文：生性不懒惰，可是倦怠的神情一下就表现出来了。
English: I'm not lazy by nature, but the look of weariness was immediately apparent.

古文：耳目本聪明，而聋矒转积。脚不支身，喘不绪气。
现代文：本来耳聪目明，却渐渐趋向昏聩迷蒙，两脚支不住身体，呼吸起来气不顺畅。
English: Originally, the ears and eyes were clear, but gradually they tended to be dizzy, the feet could not support the body, and breathing was not smooth.

古文：景刻不推，朝昼不保。
现代文：时刻难换，朝不保夕。
English: It is difficult to change the time, and it is not safe in the morning and evening.

古文：大功兄弟，四十有二人，通塞寿夭，唯臣独存。朝露末光，宁堪长久！
现代文：堂兄弟四十二人，有仕途显达的，也有时运不通的，有寿长的，也有命短的，现在衹有我一个人活着，好比早晨的露珠，傍晚的阳光，哪能长久。
English: There are forty-two cousins, some of whom are prosperous and some of whom are not, some of whom are long-lived and some of whom are short-lived. Now that I'm the only one alive, it's like the dew in the morning and the sunshine in the evening, which can't last long.

古文：且知足不辱，臣已足矣。
现代文：况且知道满足的就不至于屈辱，我已经很满足了命赋饥寒，不求富贵。
English: Moreover, knowing that those who are satisfied will not be humiliated, I have been very satisfied with my life and do not seek wealth.

古文：禀命饥寒，不求富贵，铜山由命，臣何恨焉，久甘之矣。
现代文：铜山也由命招，我又有何怨恨呢，我把这些当作甘甜已经很久了。
English: I don't hold a grudge against the copper mine, I've been treating it as a sweet treat for a long time.

古文：直道事人，不免缧绁，属遇圣明，知其非罪，臣之幸厚矣。
现代文：用正直的方式侍奉他人，终不免牢狱的灾祸，适值遇到圣明的君主，知道没有罪错，我的幸运也算深厚了。
English: Serve others in an honest manner, and you will not be spared the scourge of prison. If you meet a saintly monarch at the right time, you will know that there is no fault, and my luck is also profound.

古文：授命于道消之晨，效节于百揆之日，臣忠之效也。
现代文：我在宋室道消之晨受命，在太祖总领百事之效节，正是我忠于朝廷的见证。
English: The fact that I received the order in the morning of the Song Dynasty Emperor's death, and the order in the afternoon of the Emperor Taizu's death, is a testimony of my loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：降庆于文明之初，荷泽于天飞之运，臣命之偶也。
现代文：吉庆降于文明之初，荷泽于天飞之运，这正是我命中所遇。
English: At the dawn of civilization, auspiciousness descended, and at the dawn of civilization, misfortune descended. This is exactly what happened in my life.

古文：不谋巧宦而位至九卿，德惭李陵而忝居门下。
现代文：不为升官投机弄巧去钻营而官位已达九卿，德行羞惭于李陵可是却能愧居门下。
English: He did not go to the drilling camp for the sake of promotion speculation and luck, but the official rank has reached nine ranks. He is ashamed of Li Ling, but he can live under the door.

古文：尧舜无穷，臣亦通矣。年过六十，不为夭矣。
现代文：尧舜没有穷尽，我也算通达，年过六十，不算早死。
English: There is no exhaustion, I am also considered to be accomplished, over sixty years old, not an early death.

古文：荣期之三乐，东平之一善，臣俱尽之矣。经昏践乱，涉艰履危，仰圣德以求全，凭贤辅以申节，未尝厌屈于勋权，畏溺于狐鼠，臣立身之本，于斯不亏。
现代文：春秋荣启期的所谓三乐，汉束平思王刘宇的客久思归的一善，我都占全了经历了多少混乱，跋涉了多少危难，仰蒙圣上恩高德厚才得以保全，依仗宰辅的贤良才得以表明节操，不曾讨好屈从于权贵势要，畏怯沉溺于狐鼠肖小，我树立自身的根本，不虚不亏。
English: The so-called three joys at the beginning of the Spring and Autumn Festival, the good fortune of Han Shu Ping thinking of King Liu Yu's guest for a long time and thinking of returning home, I have accounted for how much chaos I have experienced, how many dangers I have traveled. It was only thanks to the saintly and virtuous people that I was able to preserve myself, and it was only thanks to the virtuous people who assisted me that I was able to show discipline. I did not please and succumb to the powerful and influential, and I fearlessly indulged in the fox and mouse Xiao Xiao. I set up my own foundation, which is not a bad thing.

古文：在其壮也，当官不让；及其衰矣，豪露靡因。
现代文：壮年当官不曾逊让于人，待到年老体弱，才能、威望没有显露的依凭。
English: Officials in their prime have never been inferior to others, and have stayed until they are old and weak, with no evidence of talent or prestige.

古文：伏愿慈临，赐臣骸骨。
现代文：我俯伏请求，希望皇上恩准我退职返家养老。
English: I prostrated myself and begged, hoping that the emperor would grant me permission to retire and return home to retire.

古文：非为希高慕古，爱好泉林，特以丁运孤贫，养礼多阙，风树之感，夙自缠心。
现代文：这不是希图高洁，追慕古人，爱好泉林。
English: It's not about wanting to be noble, admiring the ancients, and loving the spring forest.

古文：庶天假其辰，得二三年间，扫守丘墓，以此归全，始终之报遂矣。 上省玩之表，许之。
现代文：衹不过因为家中壮丁不多，赡养供奉的礼仪大多缺少， 树欲静而风不止，子欲养而亲不待 ，担心父母不能享受奉养的想法，早就缠绕心头，但愿老天能给些时曰，在二三年内，看守祭扫坟墓，以此使我能归附到忠孝两全的行列，实现始终如一的愿望。皇上阅览虞玩之的奏表后，准许了他的要求。
English: However, since there were not many sons and daughters at home, the etiquette of supporting and offering sacrifices was mostly lacking, the tree wanted to be quiet and the wind would not stop, the son wanted to be raised and the relatives would not wait, and the thought of worrying that the parents could not enjoy the support had long been haunting my heart. I hope that God can give me some time, say, within two or three years, to sweep the tomb, so that I can join the ranks of loyalty and filial piety, and realize my consistent wish. After reading the report form of Yu Yanzhi, the emperor granted his request.

古文：玩之于人物好臧否。宋末，王俭举员外郎孔襜使虏，玩之言论不相饶，襜、俭并恨之。
现代文：虞玩之喜欢议论褒贬人，宋末，王俭荐举员外郎孔遏出使魏，虞玩之品评时言词不饶人，孔遏、王俭都怨恨他。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Wang Jian recommended that his brother-in-law, Kong Jian, should be appointed as a member of the committee, which made Wei angry. Kong Jian and Wang Jian both resented him.

古文：至是玩之东归，俭不出送，朝廷无祖饯者。
现代文：到虞玩之束归出时候，王俭不出来送行，朝廷也没有人设宴送行。
English: By the time the bundles were returned, Wang Jian did not come out to see them off, and no one from the imperial court held a banquet to see them off.

古文：玩之归家起大宅，数年卒。
现代文：虞玩之到家后建了座大宅院，数年后逝世。
English: After arriving home, Yu Danzhi built a large mansion, and died a few years later.

古文：其后员外郎孔瑄就俭求会稽五官，俭方盥，投皂荚于地，曰： 卿乡俗恶。
现代文：那以后员外郎孔琯到王俭那裹谋求会稽五宫，王俭正洗手，他把皂荚投在地上，说： 你那儿的乡俗很坏。
English: After that, the foreign minister, Kong Li, went to Wang Jian to seek the meeting of the five palaces. Wang Jian was washing his hands, he threw the soap on the ground and said: Your local customs are very bad.

古文：虞玩之至死烦人。 
现代文：虞玩之到死都烦人。 
English: It's boring to death to play around with the situation.

古文：孔襜字世远，玩之同郡人，好典故学。
现代文：孔襜字世远，是虞玩之的同乡。爱好典故学。
English: Kong Yu Zi is a fellow villager of Yu Yuanzhi. He is fond of studying folk tales.

古文：与王俭至交。
现代文：同王俭交谊最好。
English: Friendship with Wang Jian is the best.

古文：升明中为齐台尚书仪曹郎，太祖谓之曰： 卿仪曹才也。 
现代文：升明年间，为齐朝尚书仪曹郎，太祖对他说： 你是个做仪曹的人才。 
English: In the middle of the following year, when he was appointed as the imperial secretary of the Zi Dynasty, the great-grandfather said to him, "You are a talented person to be an imperial secretary.

古文：俭为宰相，襜尝谋议帷幕，每及选用，颇失乡曲情。
现代文：王俭做宰相，孔遏曾经在他帐下参预议论谋划机密，每当涉及到选举任用，很没乡曲情感。
English: Wang Jian was the prime minister, and Kong Jian had participated in the preliminary discussion and secret planning under his account. Whenever it comes to election and appointment, he is very homesick.

古文：俭从容启上曰： 臣有孔襜，犹陛下之有臣也。 
现代文：王俭从容向太祖启奏说： 我有了，就像陛下有我一样。 
English: Wang Jian calmly said to his great-grandfather, "I have it, just as your majesty has me.

古文：永明中为太子家令，卒。
现代文：永明年间为太子家令，并在此期间逝世。
English: He became the heir to the throne in the middle of the year and died during this period.

古文：时人呼孔襜、何宪为王俭三公。
现代文：当时人说孔遏、何宪是王俭的三公。
English: At that time, people said that Kong Jian and He Xian were the three princes of Wang Jian.

古文：宪字子思，庐江人也。
现代文：孔宪字子思，庐江人。
English: Kong Xian Zizi Si, a native of the Minjiang River.

古文：以强学见知。
现代文：因为学识优异著名。
English: He is famous for his academic excellence.

古文：母镇北长史王敷之女，聪明有训识。
现代文：他母亲是镇北长史王敷之的女儿，聪明并擅长教育。
English: His mother was the daughter of the mayor of the northern part of the town, Shi Wangshiki, and was clever and good at education.

古文：宪为本州别驾。
现代文：孔宪为本州别驾。
English: Kong Xian is a special case for Honshu.

古文：永明十年，使于虏中。刘休，字弘明，沛郡相人也。祖徽，正员郎。
现代文：永明十年，出使魏。刘休字弘明，沛郡相地人。他祖父刘徽，是正员郎。
English: In the tenth year of Yongming, Wei was sent out. Liu Xiu Zi Hongming, a native of Pei County. His grandfather, Liu Hui, was the eldest son.

古文：父超，九真太守。
现代文：他父亲刘超，是九真太守。
English: His father, Liu Chao, was the 9th Emperor of China.

古文：休初为驸马都尉，奉朝请，宋明帝湘东国常侍。
现代文：刘休起初为驸马都尉，奉朝请，宋明帝湘东国常侍。
English: At first, Liu Xiu was the captain of the imperial horse, and was invited by the Song Dynasty to serve as the imperial equerry of the Song and Ming Dynasties.

古文：好学谙忆，不为帝所知。
现代文：好学并且很会记忆，不被皇帝知道。
English: He was studious and had a good memory, unbeknownst to the emperor.

古文：袭祖封南乡侯。
现代文：承袭祖荫被封为南乡侯。
English: He inherited his grandfather's title and was given the title of Nanxianghou.

古文：友人陈郡谢俨同丞相义宣反，休坐匿之，被系尚方七年，孝武崩，乃得出。
现代文：他的朋友陈郡谢俨同丞相义宣反叛，刘休因藏匿他而受罪责，被拘押在尚方七年，孝武帝崩，才得以释放出来。
English: His friend Chen County Xie Jun rebelled with the prime minister Yixuan, and Liu Xiu was held responsible for hiding him. He was detained in Shangfang for seven years, and only after Emperor Xiaowu's death was he released.

古文：随弟钦为罗县。
现代文：跟随弟弟刘钦在罗县。
English: He followed his brother Liu Qin in Luo County.

古文：泰始初，诸州反，休筮明帝当胜，静处不预异谋。
现代文：太始初年，各州反叛，刘休用蓍草占卦，知明帝会胜，以清静无为处之，不参预其他图谋。
English: At the beginning of the first year, the states rebelled. Liu Xiu used the weeds to predict the future, knowing that the emperor would win. He kept quiet and did not participate in other plans.

古文：数年，还投吴喜为辅师府录事参军。喜称其才，进之明帝，得在左右。
现代文：数年后，还京投奔吴喜做了辅师府录事参军，吴喜称赞他的才能，把他进献给宋明帝，因而能侍奉在明帝左右。
English: A few years later, Wu Xi, who also went to Beijing, made a supplementary record to join the army. Wu Xi praised his talent and dedicated him to Emperor Song Ming, so he could serve around Emperor Ming.

古文：板桂阳王征北参军。
现代文：书面委任刘休为桂阳王的征北参军。
English: Liu Hui was commissioned in writing to join the Northern Expedition of King Guiyang.

古文：帝颇有好尚，尤嗜饮食。休多艺能，爰及鼎味，问无不解。
现代文：皇帝有很多嗜好，尤其嗜爱吃喝，刘休多才多能，祇要涉及钟鼎美味，询问他，他没有不懂的。
English: The emperor had many hobbies, especially a penchant for eating and drinking. Liu Xiu was more than capable, as long as it involved Zhongding delicacies. If you asked him, he wouldn't have failed to understand.

古文：后宫孕者，帝使筮其男女，无不如占。
现代文：后宫有怀孕的人，皇帝令他用蓍草占卦测其是男是女，没有不符合他的占卜。
English: For a pregnant woman in the harem, Emperor Ming asked him to divine whether she was a man or a woman, which was a complete failure.

古文：帝素肥，痿不能御内，诸王妓妾怀孕，使密献入宫，生子之后，闭其母于幽房，前后十数。
现代文：皇帝向来肥胖，阳痿而不能御女，诸王的妓妾怀孕，他令其秘密献入宫中，生了孩子之后，把小孩母亲关闭在暗房襄，这样前后有十来次。
English: The emperor has always been fat, impotent and unable to concubine, the kings' prostitutes were pregnant, he secretly presented them to the palace, and after giving birth to a child, he closed the child's mother in a dark room, and there were more than ten times.

古文：顺帝，桂阳王休范子也。苍梧王亦非帝子，陈太妃先为李道儿妾，故苍梧微行，尝自称为李郎焉。
现代文：从帝就是桂阳王休范的儿子苍梧王也不是皇帝的儿子，陈太妃先前曾是李道儿的妾，所以苍梧王在着便服私自外出时曾自称李郎。
English: King Cangwu, the son of King Guiyang Xuanfan, was not the emperor's son from the emperor. Chen Taifei had previously been the concubine of Li Daor, so King Cangwu called himself Li Lang when he went out in civilian clothes.

古文：帝憎妇人妒，尚书右丞荣彦远以善棋见亲，妇妒伤其面，帝曰： 我为卿治之，何如？ 
现代文：明帝憎恨妇女妒忌，尚书右丞荣彦远因为擅长棋艺被皇帝亲近，他妻子因妒忌伤了他的脸，明帝说： 我替你治治她，怎么样? 
English: Emperor Ming hated women's jealousy. Shang Shuyuan Rong Yanyuan was close to the emperor because he was good at chess. His wife hurt his face out of jealousy. Emperor Ming said, "How about I treat her for you?"

古文：彦远率尔应曰： 听圣旨。 
现代文：荣彦远轻率地应道： 听从圣上旨意。 
English: Rong Yanyuan blithely replied: "Obey the will of the Almighty."

古文：其夕，遂赐药杀其妻。
现代文：那天晚上，皇上就赐药把他妻子杀了。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Ming gave him medicine to kill his wife.

古文：休妻王氏亦妒，帝闻之，赐休妾，敕与王氏二十杖。
现代文：刘休的妻子王氏也妒忌，皇帝听说，赏刘休妾，并敕令责打王氏二十杖。
English: Wang, Liu Xiu's wife, was very jealous. After learning of this, Emperor Ming gave Liu Xiu a concubine and ordered that Wang be beaten with twenty large sticks.

古文：令休于宅后开小店，使王氏亲卖扫帚皂荚以辱之。
现代文：命令刘休在屋后开小店，让王氏亲自卖扫帚皂荚，以此羞辱她。
English: He ordered Liu Xiu to open a small shop at the back of the house and let Mr. Wang himself sell broom soap, in order to humiliate her.

古文：其见亲如此。
现代文：刘休被宋明帝亲近到这般地步。
English: You can see how close they are.

古文：寻除员外郎，领辅国司马、中书通事舍人，带南城令。
现代文：时遇不久任命刘休员外郎，领辅国司马、中书通事舍人，带南城令。
English: Soon after the incident, Liu Xiujian was appointed as the second-in-command, the assistant to the State Secretary of the People's Republic of China, and the secretary of the General Office of the People's Republic of China, with the order of Nancheng.

古文：除尚书中兵郎，给事中，舍人、令如故。
现代文：任尚书中兵郎，给事中，舍人、令依前不变。
English: In the letter of appointment, he was referred to as a soldier, but in the interview, he was referred to as a person, and the order remained unchanged.

古文：除安成王抚军参军，出为都水使者，南康相。
现代文：任安成王抚军参军，出京任都水使者，南康相。
English: Appointed Ancheng Wang Fu Jun to join the army, went to Beijing to serve as the capital's water envoy, and became the minister of health.

古文：休善言治体，而在郡无异绩。
现代文：刘休很会讲说治国体要，可是他在郡时却没有突出的政绩。
English: Liu Xiu is very good at talking about the need for national governance, but he did not have outstanding political achievements when he was in the county.

古文：还为正员郎，邵陵王南中郎录事、建威将军、新蔡太守。
现代文：返朝为正员郎，邵陵王南中郎录事、建威将军、新蔡太守。
English: He returned to China as the official retainer, Shao Ling Wang Nan Zhong Lang Record, General Jian Wei, and the new Cai Taimou.

古文：随转左军府，加镇蛮护军，将军、太守如故。
现代文：随转左军府，加镇蛮护军，将军、太守职依前未变。
English: With the turn to the left, the military headquarters, the garrison, the general and the grand marshal remained unchanged.

古文：迁谘议，司马，进宁朔将军，镇蛮护军、太守如故。
现代文：迁谘议，司马，进宁朔将军，镇蛮护军、太守职依前不变。
English: Relocation consultation, Sima, into the Ningshuo General, the town guard, the guard duty remains unchanged.

古文：徙寻阳太守，将军、司马如故。
现代文：徙寻阳太守，将军、司马职依前未变。
English: The position of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, the general and the steward remain unchanged.

古文：后迁长史。
现代文：后迁长史。
English: A long history of relocation followed.

古文：沈攸之难，世祖挟晋熙邵陵二王军府镇盆城，休承奉军费，事宁，仍迁邵陵王安南长史，除黄门郎，宁朔将军，前军长史，齐台散骑常侍。
现代文：沈攸之起兵发难事起，世祖挟持晋熙、邵陵二王军府镇守盆城，刘休供给军费，事态平定后，仍然迁邵陵王安南长史，除黄门郎，宁朔将军，前军长史，齐台散骑常侍。
English: Shen You's army was raised and the troubles began. The founder of the dynasty held Jin Xi and Shao Ling II's military headquarters hostage to guard Boncheng, and Liu Hui supplied military expenses. After the situation was settled, Shao Ling Wang Annan Changshi was still transferred, except Huang Men Lang, Ning Shuo general, former military commander, and Qitai strolling equerry.

古文：建元初，为御史中丞。
现代文：建元初年，刘休为御史中丞。
English: In the first year after the founding of the Republic of China, Liu Xiu was appointed to the position of the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：顷之，休启曰： 臣自尘荣南宪，星晷交春，谬闻弱奏，劾无空月。
现代文：随后不久，刘休启奏说： 我从平地而光荣地担任御史中丞，仿佛时光到了春天，闻听各种乖谬的话语，陈奏不甚高明的意见，审决讼案揭发罪错没有一个月空遇。
English: Not long after, Liu Xiuqi said: "I have served as the Vice-President of the State Council of the People's Republic of China from a flat and glorious place, as if the time has come to spring, listening to all kinds of perverse words, opinions that are not very clever, and the disclosure of crimes in the trial and adjudication of cases have not met a month.

古文：岂唯不能使蕃邦敛手，豪右屏气，乃遣听已暴之辜，替网触罗之鸟。
现代文：衹恐不能使得藩邦缩手，豪门恶霸屏声忍气。于是遣发断决已暴露的罪犯，代替网罗捕捉触犯法网的罪犯。
English: Fear could not make the feudal lords hold back their hands, and the powerful bullies could not bear it. Therefore, the criminals who had been exposed were sent away, and the criminals who violated the law were caught instead of the traps.

古文：而犹以此，里失乡党之和，朝绝比肩之顾，覆背腾其喉唇，武人厉其觜吻。
现代文：可是就因为这样，在家乡失去了乡亲的和睦，在朝断绝了地位接近的人的看顾，背后是纷腾的讥笑议论，武人也磨利了他们的嘴巴。
English: But just because of this, they have lost the harmony of their fellow countrymen in their hometown, and have cut off the care of people close to them in the government. Behind them is a swirl of ridicule, and the warriors have sharpened their mouths.

古文：怨之所聚，势难久堪；议之所裁，孰怀其允？
现代文：积聚的怨气，那势力万难禁受，舆论的裁决，哪有什么公平。
English: Accumulated resentment is a force that cannot be contained, and there is nothing fair about the verdict of public opinion.

古文：臣窃寻宋世载祀六十，历职斯任者五十有三，校其年月，不过盈岁。
现代文：我私下查寻宋世载祀六十，经历这一职务的共有五十三人，计算他们任职的时间，不过一午稍多。
English: Privately, I looked up the number of priests who have held this position since the 60th anniversary of the Song Dynasty, and found a total of 53 people who had held this position. I calculated the time they had served, but it was a little more than an afternoon.

古文：于臣叨滥，宜请骸骨。 
现代文：对于我这个叨充滥竽的人，理应准我请假回家养老。 
English: I went to make up for it, and now I'd like to ask for retirement.

古文：上曰： 卿职当国司，以威裁为本，而忽惮世诮。
现代文：皇上说： 你的职责关系着国家司法，理应把威裁看作自己的本分，可是却忽然害怕社会讥诮。
English: The emperor said, "Your duty is related to the national justice, and you should regard the punishment as your duty, but you are suddenly afraid of social ridicule.

古文：卿便应辞之事始，何可获惰晚节邪？ 
现代文：你应当从辞官的事开始考虑，想想怎样才能获取不让晚节衰败? 
English: You should start thinking about dictionaries. How can you get a dictionary that won't let you down?

古文：宋末，上造指南车，以休有思理，使与王僧虔对共监试。
现代文：宋末，皇上造指南车，因为划休有才思情致，让他与王僧虔合作监造试制。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, the emperor built a guide car, and because he was talented and sentimental, he let him work with Wang Sangyan to supervise the trial production.

古文：元嘉世，羊欣受子敬正隶法，世共宗之，右军之体微古，不复见贵。
现代文：元嘉时代，羊欣接受了子敬的正隶法，当时社会上的人都宗法于他，右车的书体稍许古了些，不再被尊贵。
English: During the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, Yang Xin accepted Zi Jian's Zhengyi Law. At that time, everyone in the society followed his law. The typeface of the right cart is a bit old and is no longer respected.

古文：休始好此法，至今此体大行。
现代文：刘休也开始喜好这种书法，到现在这种书体盛行。
English: Liu Xiu also began to like this kind of calligraphy, and this type of book is still popular.

古文：四年，出为豫章内史，加冠军将军。
现代文：建元四年，刘休外出为豫章内史，加冠军将军。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liu Xiu went out as a general in the internal history of Yuzhang, plus a champion.

古文：卒，年五十四。
现代文：去世，时年五十四岁。
English: He later died at the age of 54.

古文：沈冲，字景绰，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈冲字景绰，吴兴武康人。
English: Shenchong Zi Jingqiao, Wu Xingwu Kangren.

古文：祖宣，新安太守。
现代文：他祖父沈宣，任新安太守。
English: His grandfather, Shen Xuan, was the governor of Xin'an.

古文：父怀文，广陵太守。
现代文：他父亲沈怀文，任广陵太守。
English: His father, Shen Huaiwen, was the governor of Guangling.

古文：冲解褐卫尉五官，转扬州主簿。
现代文：沈冲脱去布衣由百姓做了卫尉五官，转扬州主簿。
English: Shen Chong took off his clothes and was made a lieutenant and five officials by the people, and was transferred to the main book of Yangzhou.

古文：宋大明中，怀文有文名，冲亦涉猎文义。
现代文：宋大明年间，沈怀文在文才方面颇有名气，沈冲也涉猎些文章的内容涵义。
English: During his time at Song University, Shen Huaiwen was quite famous in terms of literary talent, and Shen Chong also dabbled in the content and meaning of some articles.

古文：转西阳王抚军法曹参军，寻举秀才，还为抚军正佐，兼记室。
现代文：转西阳王抚军法曹参军，随后被荐举秀才，还京为抚军正佐，兼记室。
English: Transferred to Xiyang, Wang Fuzhun joined the army as a legal officer, then was recommended for promotion as a scholar, and returned to Beijing as a senior aide to Fuzhun, and also as a secretary.

古文：及怀文得罪被系，冲兄弟行谢，情哀貌苦，见者伤之。
现代文：待到沈怀文获罪被拘押，沈冲兄弟赔罪道歉，心情哀痛，形貌悲苦，看见的人都为之感伤。
English: Until Shen Huaiwen was convicted and detained, Shen Chong brothers apologized for the crime, the mood was sad, the appearance was sad, and everyone who saw it was sad.

古文：柳元景欲救怀文，言于帝曰： 沈怀文三子涂炭不可见，愿陛下速正其罪。 
现代文：翅元景想救沈怀文，对皇帝说： 沈怀文的三个儿子神色凄苦让人不忍看，望陛下快些审定他的罪过。 
English: Ying Yuanqing wanted to save Shen Huaiwen, and said to the emperor: Shen Huaiwen's three sons look so miserable that one can't bear to look at them. I hope His Majesty will quickly judge his sins.

古文：帝竟杀之。
现代文：皇帝居然把他杀了。
English: The emperor actually killed him.

古文：元景为之叹息。
现代文：柳元景很替他惋惜。
English: Liu Yuanjing felt very sorry for him.

古文：冲兄弟以此知名。
现代文：沈冲兄弟也因此出了名。
English: The Shenchong brothers are also famous for this.

古文：泰始初，以母老家贫，启明帝得为永兴令。
现代文：泰始初年，因为他的母亲年老家境贫穷上奏启明帝因而做了永兴令。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, because his mother was old and her family was poor, he made the Yongxing order.

古文：迁巴陵王主簿，除尚书殿中郎。
现代文：迁巴陵王主簿，除尚书殿中郎。
English: He was the chief scribe of King Qianbaling, but also the second-in-command of the palace.

古文：元徽中，出为晋安王安西记室参军，还为司徒主簿，山阴令，转司徒录事参军。
现代文：元徽年间，外出做了晋安王安西记室参军，返回后为司徒主簿，山阴令，转司徒录事参军。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, he went out to join the army as the secretary of Jinan Wang Anxi, and after returning, he joined the army as the chief secretary, the commander of Shanyin, and the secretary of the secretary.

古文：世祖为江州，冲为征虏长史、寻阳太守，甚见委遇。
现代文：世祖为江州刺史时，选迚为征虏长史、寻阳太守，很被世祖结纳信任。
English: When the founder was writing the history of Jiangzhou, he chose Zeng as the conqueror of Changshi and the ruler of Xuanyang, and was trusted by the founder.

古文：世祖还都，使冲行府、州事。
现代文：世祖返回京都，让沈迚行使府、州的权力，代为处事。
English: Sezu returned to Kyoto and asked Shen Yi to exercise the power of the prefectural and prefectural governments on his behalf.

古文：迁领军长史。
现代文：迁领军长史。
English: Changshi, the leader of the relocated troops.

古文：建元初，转骠骑谘议参军，领录事，未及到任，转黄门郎，仍迁太子中庶子。
现代文：建元初年，转骠骑谘议参军，领绿事，没来得及到任，转为黄门郎，仍迁太子中庶子。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he changed his name to Huangmenro (黄門郎) before he could take up his new position. He was still an illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：世祖在东宫，待以恩旧。
现代文：世祖在东宫时，把他当老朋友、恩人看待。
English: When the ancestor was in the East Palace, he was regarded as an old friend and benefactor.

古文：及即位，转御史中丞，侍中。冠军庐陵王子卿为郢州，以冲为长史、辅国将军、江夏内史，行府、州事。
现代文：待到即皇帝位，转沈冲为御史中丞，侍中，冠军庐陵王子卿为郢州刺史，以沈冲为长史、辅国将军、江夏内史，行使府、州职权。
English: When he became emperor, he appointed Shen Chong as the vice-chancellor of the imperial history, and the champion of the imperial history, Prince Gongling, as the vice-chancellor of the imperial history, and appointed Shen Chong as the long history, the general of the auxiliary country, and the history of Jiangxia, and exercised the powers of the prefectural government and the state.

古文：随府转为安西长史、南郡内史，行荆州府事，将军如故。
现代文：随府转为安西长史、南郡内史，行荆州府事，将军职依前未变。
English: According to the prefecture, it was changed to Anxi Changshi, Nan County Inner History, and Jingzhou prefectural affairs were carried out, and the military post remained unchanged.

古文：永明四年，征为五兵尚书。
现代文：永明四年，被征做五兵尚书。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he was conscripted into the Five Soldiers of Shangshu.

古文：冲与兄淡、渊名誉有优劣，世号为 腰鼓兄弟。 
现代文：沈冲和他哥哥沈淡、沈渊名誉各有优劣，当时称他们是 腰鼓兄弟 。
English: Shen Chong, his brother Shen Tan, and Shen Yuan each had their own merits and demerits. At that time, they were called the Waist Drum Brothers.

古文：淡、渊并历御史中丞，兄弟三人皆为司直，晋、宋未有也。
现代文：沈淡、沈渊都曾做过御史中丞，一家兄弟三个人都做司直，这在晋、宋都没有过。
English: Both Shen Tan and Shen Yuan had served as goshi chujo, and three brothers in one family had served as sizao, which had never been done in Jin or Song.

古文：中丞案裁之职，被宪者多结怨。
现代文：中丞是审查裁决案情的职务，被依法追究的人大多结怨。
English: The vice-chairman is in charge of reviewing the merits of the ruling, and those who are prosecuted according to the law are mostly resentful.

古文：渊永明中弹吴兴太守袁彖，建武中彖从弟昂为中丞，到官数日，奏弹渊子缋父在僦白宪车，免官禁锢。
现代文：沈渊在永明年间弹劾吴兴太守袁彖，建武年间，袁彖的从弟袁昂任中丞，上任衹几天，就弹劾沈渊的儿子沈绩在他父亲活在人世间时租赁了挂白色车幔的车子，把他免去官职永不录用。
English: Shen Yuan impeached Wu Xing's deputy governor, Yuan Shun, in the middle of the Yongzheng era. During the Jianwu era, Yuan Shun's younger brother, Yuan Ang, was appointed as a middle-ranking officer. Just a few days after taking office, Shen Yuan's son, Shen Yi, was impeached for leasing a car with a white rickshaw while his father was still alive. He was removed from his official position and will never be hired.

古文：冲母孔氏在东，邻家失火，疑为人所焚爇，大呼曰： 我三儿皆作御史中丞，与人岂有善者！ 
现代文：沈冲母亲孔氏在柬部老家，邻居家失火，她怀疑是被别人故意放火烧的，大喊说： 我三个儿子都当御史中丞，同别人哪会有好的! 
English: Shenchong's mother, Kong, was in her hometown of the Cambodian Ministry, and a neighbor's house caught fire. She suspected that it was deliberately set on fire by someone else, shouting: My three sons are all middle school students, and there is no good with others!

古文：世祖方欲任冲，冲西下至南州而卒。
现代文：世祖正想任用沈冲，沈冲西下到南州时逝世。
English: The founder wanted to appoint Shen Chong, but Shen Chong died when he went west to Nanzhou.

古文：时年五十一。
现代文：当时五十一岁。
English: He was fifty-one years old.

古文：上甚惜之。
现代文：皇上很惋惜。
English: The Emperor was very sorry.

古文：丧还，诏曰： 冲丧柩至止，恻怆良深。
现代文：他的丧柩返回时，有韶旨说： 沈冲丧柩到居所，非常悲痛。
English: When his mourners returned, someone said: "Shen Chong's mourners came to his residence, very sad.

古文：以其昔在南蕃，特兼悯悼。 
现代文：因为他过去在南州作藩屏，特别加倍怜恤悲悼。 
English: Because he used to be a hanping in Nanzhou, his sympathy and mourning are especially doubled.

古文：车驾出临冲丧，诏曰： 冲贞详闲理，志局淹正。
现代文：皇帝车驾出临沈冲的丧礼，韶告说： 沈冲正直公平娴静理致，志向度量纯正渊博。
English: When the emperor drove out to attend Shen Chong's funeral, the obituary said, "Shen Chong was honest, fair, calm and reasonable, and his aspirations were pure and profound.

古文：诚著蕃朝，绩彰出守。
现代文：在藩屏与朝内均以诚信著称，在京城内外有政绩昭明。
English: He was known for his honesty both in the Han Dynasty and the Joseon Dynasty, and his political achievements were outstanding both in and out of the capital.

古文：不幸早世，朕甚悼之。 
现代文：不幸过早辞世，朕十分悼念他。 
English: Unfortunately, he passed away prematurely, and I mourn his loss deeply.

古文：追赠太常，谥曰恭子。
现代文：追赠沈冲太常，谧号为恭子
English: Shen Chong Taizang, posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously posthumously

古文：庾杲之，字景行，新野人也。
现代文：庾杲之字景行，新野人。
English: 之字景行,新野人.

古文：祖深之，雍州刺史。
现代文：他祖父庾深之，做过雍州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Zou Shengzhi, was a historian of Yongzhou.

古文：父粲，司空参军。
现代文：他父亲庾粲，做过司空参军。
English: His father, a former air vice-marshal, joined the army.

古文：杲之少而贞立，学涉文义。
现代文：庾杲之年轻正直而有建树，学识关涉到许多文章的内容与涵义。
English: His youth is honest and constructive, and his knowledge is related to the content and meaning of many articles.

古文：起家奉朝请，巴陵王征西参军。
现代文：起始做官为奉朝请，巴陵王征西参军。
English: At the beginning of his service as an official, Baling Wang Zhengxi was invited to join the army.

古文：郢州举秀才，除晋熙王镇西外兵参军，世祖征虏府功曹，尚书驾部郎。
现代文：在郢州被荐举为秀才，除授晋熙王镇西外兵参军，世祖征虏府功曹，尚书驾部郎。
English: In Zhangzhou, he was recommended as an outstanding talent, in addition to awarding Jin Xi Wang Zhen Xi foreign soldiers to join the army, the founder of the Zheng Ruifu meritorious service, Shang Shuxu driver.

古文：清贫自业，食唯有韭、抃韭、生韭杂菜，或戏之曰： 谁谓庾郎贫，食鲑常有二十七种。 
现代文：清贫自处，食用的蔬菜衹有腌韭菜、汤煮韭菜和生韭杂菜。有的人同他开玩笑说： 谁说庾郎贫穷，吃的鱼类菜肴常有二十七种之多。 
English: Some people joked with him, saying, "Whoever said that the eunuch was poor often ate as many as 27 kinds of fish dishes."

古文：言三九也。
现代文：韭九同音，所以说三九。
English: Thirty-nine is a consonant, so it's pronounced thirty-nine.

古文：仍为世祖抚军中军记室，迁员外散骑常侍，正员郎，迁中书郎，领荆、湘二州中正。
现代文：仍然为世祖抚军中军记室，迁员外散骑常侍，正员郎，迁中书郎，镇荆、湘二州中正。
English: It is still the military record office of the World Ancestor's Relocation Army, the wandering horseman outside the relocation, the regular attendant, the official attendant, the bookkeeper during the relocation, the town of Jing, and the middle school of Xiang Erzhou.

古文：转尚书左丞，常侍、领中正如故。
现代文：转尚书左丞，常侍、领中正职依前未变。
English: He was transferred to the post of Vice-Commander of the Left Division of the Imperial Household Agency, but his duties as a regular attendant and head of the Imperial Household Agency remained unchanged.

古文：出为王俭卫军长史，时人呼入俭府为芙蓉池。
现代文：庾杲之出京任王俭卫军长史，当时的人称进王俭府是入芙蓉池。
English: At that time, people said that to enter Wang Jianfu was to enter the hibiscus pond.

古文：俭谓人曰： 昔袁公作卫军，欲用我为长史，虽不获就，要是意向如此。
现代文：王俭对人说： 先前袁公做卫军，想用我做长史，虽说没能实现，重要的是他的意向是这样的。
English: Wang Jian said to the man, "Previously, Yuan Gong was a guard, and he wanted to make a long history with me. Although he couldn't achieve it, what's important is that this was his intention.

古文：今亦应须如我辈人也。 乃用杲之。迁黄门郎，兼御史中丞，寻即正。
现代文：现在也应像我们这些人一样 于是任用庾杲之迁黄门郎，兼御史中丞，随后即为正职。
English: Now, he should be like us. So, he was appointed to the post of Shizenki hwangmenro, concurrently to the post of goshi chujo, and then to the official post.

古文：杲之风范和润，善音吐。
现代文：庾杲之风度平和，擅长言谈。
English: His demeanor is peaceful and he is good at talking.

古文：世祖令对虏使，兼侍中。
现代文：世祖让他同虏使应对洽谈，兼侍中。
English: The ancestor asked his fellow captives to negotiate with him, and served as an attendant.

古文：上每叹其风器之美，王俭在座，曰： 杲之为蝉冕所照，更生风采。
现代文：皇上海每为他的优美风度形态而感叹，王俭在座，说： 庾杲之要是有饰蝉纹的冠冕映照，就更见风采。
English: Every time the emperors lamented his graceful demeanor, Wang Jian, who was present, said: "If you have a crown with a cicada pattern, you will look more elegant."

古文：陛下故当与其即真。 
现代文：陛下因此应当给他个真侍中。 
English: His Majesty should therefore give him a real equerry.

古文：帝意未用也。
现代文：皇帝之意仍没想任用。
English: The emperor still did not want to appoint him.

古文：永明中，诸王年少，不得妄与人接，敕杲之与济阳江淹五日一诣诸王，使申游好。
现代文：永明年间，诸王年少，不能随意与他人交接，敕命庾杲之和济阳江淹五日拜会诸王一次，使他们进行交游联络感情。
English: In the middle of the year, the kings were young and could not meet with others at will. On the 5th day of the year, the king of death and the flood of the Jiyang River visited the kings once, so that they could make contacts and feelings.

古文：寻又迁庐陵王中军长史，迁尚书吏部郎，参大选事。
现代文：不久又迁庐陵王中军长史，迁尚书吏部郎，参预量才授官的铨选大事。
English: It was not long before Wang Zhong, the military commander of the Ming Dynasty, and Shang Shuli, the secretary of the imperial court, were also transferred to the palace, which was a major event in the selection of officials.

古文：转太子右卫率，加通直常侍。
现代文：转太子右卫率，加通直常侍。
English: The crown prince's right-hand man, and the prince's second-in-command.

古文：九年，卒。
现代文：庾杲之于永明九年逝世。
English: Yan Xi died nine years later.

古文：临终上表曰： 臣昨夜及旦，更增气疾，自省绵痼，顷刻危殆，无容复卧。
现代文：临终上表奏道： 臣昨天晚上以及今天清晨，更添气病，自觉缠绵难治，快要濒临绝境，不容再躺下去了。
English: On his deathbed, he uttered these words: "Yesterday evening and this morning, I became more and more ill, and I'm self-conscious that it's difficult to cure. I'm on the verge of dying, and I can't lie down any longer.

古文：任居隆显，玷尘明世，乞解所忝，待终私庭。
现代文：我做官已是职高位显，在圣明的时代就像实玉上的尘垢，乞请解除我当之有愧的荣耀职衔，让我在家裹等待生命终了。
English: I have been a high-ranking official, and in the era of enlightenment, I am like the dust on the solid jade. Please relieve me of my well-deserved honorable title, and let me wait for the end of my life at home.

古文：臣以凡庸，谬徼昌运，奖擢之厚，千载难逢。
现代文：我凭依凡庸的资才，不适当地求得了美好的运气，提拔奖赏的优厚，千载难逢。
English: By virtue of my mediocre talent, I inappropriately sought good luck, promotion and rewards, which are rare in a thousand years.

古文：且年逾知命，志事荣显，修夭有分，无所厝言。
现代文：况且我年龄已过丁知命，心志事业荣耀显达，寿命长短自有天分，再也找不到什么话说了。
English: Moreover, I am too old to know my fate, the glory of my career has been revealed, the length of my life has its own talent, and I can no longer find what to say.

古文：若天鉴微诚，暂借余历，倾宗殒元，陈力无远。
现代文：假如上天照见我的一点诚心，能暂借时，倾家掉脑袋，为陛下效力为时不久。
English: If Heaven sees my sincerity, it will not be long before I can lend my services to Your Majesty.

古文：仰违庭阙，伏枕鲠恋。
现代文：仰头却远离庭阙，依恋之情顿教我伏枕哽咽。
English: But my head is turned away from the courtyard, and the feeling of attachment has made me lie down and choke.

古文：送貂蝉及章。 
现代文：送回表示职位显贵的貂蝉冠以及章服。 
English: Send back the crested cicada crown, which signifies a high-ranking position, as well as the ceremonial robes.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：皇上诏告不允许辞退官职。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：杲之历在上府，以文学见遇。
现代文：庾杲之屡次在上府任职，由于文章学识被厚待。
English: Shizhi repeatedly served in the Shangfu, and was treated well because of his knowledge of the article.

古文：上造崇虚馆，使为碑文。
现代文：皇上造崇虚馆，让他撰写碑文。
English: The emperor built a memorial hall for him and asked him to write an inscription.

古文：卒时年五十一，上甚惜之。
现代文：逝世时五十一岁，皇上很为他惋惜。
English: He was fifty-one years old at the time of his death, and the emperor was very sorry for him.

古文：谥曰贞子。
现代文：谧号为贞子。
English: Her nickname is Sadako.

古文：时会稽孔广，字淹源，亦美姿制。
现代文：当时会稽入孔广，字淹源，姿容仪态也漂亮。
English: At that time, it would have a wide range of holes, the characters would be inundated, and the appearance and posture would be beautiful.

古文：历州治中，卒。
现代文：官历州治中，逝世。
English: He died when he was in the middle of governing the prefecture.

古文：王谌，字仲和，东海郯人也。
现代文：王谌字仲和，是东海郯地人。
English: Wang Zhaozhong, also known as Zhonghe, is a native of the East China Sea.

古文：祖万庆，员外常侍。
现代文：他祖父王万庆，做遇员外常侍。
English: His grandfather, Wang Wanqing, worked as a waiter.

古文：父元闵，护军司马。
现代文：他父亲王五因；曾是护军司马。
English: His father, Wang Wuyin, used to be a guard sergeant.

古文：宋大明中，沈昙庆为徐州，辟谌为迎主簿，又为州迎从事，湘东王国常侍，镇北行参军，州、国、府主皆宋明帝也。
现代文：宋大明年间，沈昙庆做徐州刺史，征王谌做迎主簿，又为州迎从事，湘束王国常侍，镇北行参军，州、国、府主都是宋明帝。
English: During the next year of the Song Dynasty, Shen Yueqing made the history of Xuzhou, and Zheng Wangye made the welcome book, and also engaged in welcoming for the state. He was a regular attendant of the Hunan Kingdom and went to the north of the town to join the army. The governor of the state, country and prefecture was Song Mingdi.

古文：除义阳王征北行参军，又除度明帝卫军府。
现代文：除义阳王征北行参军，又除度明帝卫军府。
English: In addition to Yiyang Wang's northward march to join the army, the Ming Emperor's Imperial Guard Headquarters was also removed.

古文：谌有学义，累为帝蕃佐。
现代文：王谌有学识才能，多次做宋明帝的屏卫和辅佐。
English: Wang Hui had the ability to learn, and he served as a guard and assistant to Emperor Song Ming for many times.

古文：及即位，除司徒参军，带薛令，兼中书舍人，见亲遇，常在左右。
现代文：待到宋明帝即皇帝位，除授王谌司徒参军，带薛令，兼中书舍人，被皇上当亲信相待，常在左右侍奉。
English: When Emperor Songming came to the throne, in addition to awarding Wang Jinshi to join the army, with Xue Ling, he was also the person who gave up Chinese calligraphy. He was treated as a close confidant by the emperor, and often served on the left and right.

古文：谌见帝所行惨僻，屡谏不从，请退，坐此见怒，系尚方，少日出。
现代文：王谌看到宋明帝行事过于乖僻，屡屡劝谏，宋明帝不予听从，王谌请假引退，因此招惹宋明帝生气，受到罪责，被拘押在尚方，日子不多就放出来了。
English: Wang Yao saw that Song Ming's actions were too eccentric, and repeatedly advised him. Song Ming did not listen to Wang Yao, and Wang Yao asked for leave to retire. As a result, he incurred Song Ming's anger, was held responsible, and was detained in Shangfang. He was released after a short time.

古文：寻除尚书殿中郎，徙记室参军，正员郎，薛令如故。
现代文：随后除授尚书殿中郎，徙记室参军，正员郎，薛令依前未变。
English: Subsequently, in addition to conferring the title of Shoden no churo, moving the record room to join the army, the official title of Shoden no churo, Xue Ling remained unchanged.

古文：迁兼中书郎，晋平王骠骑板谘议，出为湘东太守，秩中二千石，未拜，坐公事免。
现代文：迁兼中书郎，晋平王骠骑板谘议，出京任湘东太守，俸禄为中二千石，没有接受任命，因公事被免除官职。
English: He was transferred to the post of middle school teacher, and became a member of the advisory council of the Jinping Wangye Riding Board. He was appointed as the governor of eastern Hunan Province, with a salary of 2,000 koku. He did not accept the appointment, and was dismissed from his post for official business.

古文：复为桂阳王骠骑府谘议参军，中书郎。
现代文：后又为桂阳王骠骑府谘议参军，中书郎。
English: Later, he joined the army as an adviser to the Guiyang Wangye Cavalry Corps, and became a middle school teacher.

古文：明帝好围棋，置围棋州邑，以建安王休仁为围棋州都大中正，谌与太子右率沈勃、尚书水部郎庾珪之、彭城丞王抗四人为小中正，朝请褚思庄、傅楚之为清定访问。
现代文：明帝爱好围棋，设置围棋州邑，以建安王休仁做围棋州都大中正，王谌和太子右率沈勃、尚书水部郎庾珪之、彭城丞王抗四人做小中正，朝请褚思庄、傅楚之为清定访问。
English: Emperor Ming loved Go and set up Go prefectures, with Jian'an Wang Xuren as the prefect of the Go prefectural capital, Wang Xuan and the prince's right-hand man Shen Bo, Shang Shuxu, and Peng Cheng Rong Wang Jian as the four prefects of the small prefectures, and invited Xuzhuang and Fu Chu to visit Qingding.

古文：出为临川内史，还为尚书左丞。
现代文：王谌出京任临川内史，返朝为尚书左丞。
English: Wang Xi went to Beijing to work as a historian in Linchuan, and returned to the imperial court as Shang Shuzhu Zuo.

古文：寻以本官领东观祭酒，即明帝所置总明观也。
现代文：时隔不久又以本官领东观祭酒，束观也就是宋明帝设置的总明观。
English: Not long after, the Dongguan sacrificial liquor, Sokuan, which is the total Mingguan set up by Song Mingdi, was used as the official drink.

古文：迁黄门，转正员常侍，辅国将军，江夏王右军长史，冠军将军。
现代文：迁黄门，转正员常侍，辅国将军，江夏王右军长史，冠军将军。
English: He was transferred to the Yellow Gate, became a regular member of the regular attendants, a general of the auxiliary country, a long history of the right army of the King of Jiangxia, and a champion general.

古文：转给事中，廷尉卿，未拜。
现代文：转给事中，廷尉卿，但未接受任职命令。
English: He was transferred to the case, Lord Lieutenant, but did not accept the appointment order.

古文：建元中，武陵王晔为会稽，以谌为征虏长史行事，冠军如故。
现代文：建元年间，武陵王萧哗为会稽太守，任用王谌做征虏长史行事，冠军将军职依前未变。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wuling Wang Xiaoguo was appointed as the auditor-general of the association, and appointed Wang Xi to act as a long-term conscript. The champion general's duties remained unchanged.

古文：永明初，迁豫章王太尉司马，将军如故。
现代文：永明初年，迁豫章王太尉司马，将军职依前未变。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Zhang Yu, Wang Taifeng, and Sima were transferred, but the military posts remained unchanged.

古文：世祖与谌相遇于宋明之世，欲委任，为辅国将军、晋安王南中郎长史、淮南太守，行府、州事。
现代文：世祖与王谌在宋明帝时代结识，因而委任王谌做辅国将军、晋安王南中郎长史、淮南太守，行府、州事。
English: King Sejong and Wang Hui became acquainted during the Song Dynasty, and Wang Hui was appointed as the assistant general of the state, the vice-regent of Jinan, and the governor of Huainan. He was in charge of the government and state affairs.

古文：五年，除黄门郎，领骁骑将军，迁太子中庶子，骁骑如故。
现代文：永明五年，除授黄门郎，领骁骑将军，迁太子中庶子，骁骑将军职依前未变。
English: In the 5th year of the Yongming era, Huangmen Lang was awarded the title of General of the Horse, and the Prince's middle son, the Prince's son-in-law, was promoted to General of the Horse.

古文：谌贞正和谨，朝廷称为善人，多与之厚。
现代文：王谌忠贞正直平和谦谨，朝廷上下称他是善人，大多同他交谊深厚。
English: Wang Xizhen was loyal, honest, peaceful and modest. The imperial court called him a good man, and most of them had a deep friendship with him.

古文：八年，转冠军将军、长沙王车骑长史，徙庐陵王中军长史，将军如故。
现代文：永明八年，转冠军将军、长沙王车骑长史，徙庐陵王中军长史，将军职依前未变。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, the champion-turned-general, the Changsha King Chariot Rider Long History, the Yibinling King Middle Army Long History, and the general's post remained unchanged.

古文：西阳王子明在南兖州，长史沈宪去职，上复徙谌为征虏长史，行南兖府、州事，将军如故。
现代文：西阳王子明在南兖州，长史沈宪离职，皇上又徙王谌做征虏长史，行南兖府、州事，将军职依前未变。
English: Xiyang Prince Ming was in Nanluozhou, Changshi Shen Xian left the post, and the emperor also sent Wang Xi to recruit Changshi, to conduct Nanluofu and state affairs, and the military post remained unchanged.

古文：谌少贫，尝自纺绩，及通贵后，每为人说之，世称其志达。九年，卒。
现代文：王谌年轻时贫穷，曾经自己纺纱织布，待到他发达尊贵后，每每向人讲述这些事，当时社会上都称赞他志行旷达丞塱九年逝世。
English: Wang Yao was poor when he was young. He used to spin and weave his own yarn. When he became rich and famous, he often told people about these things. At that time, the society praised his selflessness. He died nine years later.

古文：年六十九。
现代文：时年六十九。
English: He was 69 years old.

古文：史臣曰：鹑居鷇饮，裁树司牧，板籍之起，尚未分民，所以爱字之义深，纳隍之意重也。
现代文：史臣日：人像鹑那样居无定所，像彀雏那样自给自食的时候，就设立了官吏管理百姓，书板登记户籍的起始，尚未把民众分成阶级，因为爱字的含义深，接纳土地的意义重。
English: Shishen Day: When people lived without a fixed place like baboons, and when they were self-sufficient and self-sufficient like baboons, they set up officials to manage the people. The beginning of the household registration has not yet divided the people into classes, because the meaning of love of words is deep, and the meaning of accepting land is heavy.

古文：季世以后，务尽民力，量财品赋，以自奉养。
现代文：衰世以后，一定要竭尽民众的能力。估量财物评疰赋税，用以供养自己。
English: After the decline of the world, we must exhaust the ability of the people. Estimate the property appraisal tax to support themselves.

古文：下穷而上不恤，世浇而事愈变。
现代文：下民穷困而上官却不体恤，社会风气浮薄而事态愈是变化多端。
English: The lower classes are impoverished, but the higher officials are unsympathetic. The social atmosphere is unstable, and the more things change, the more they change.

古文：故有窃名簿阀，忍贼肌肤，生滥死乖，趋避绳网。
现代文：因此有冒充先代官籍的，有忍心白残肌肤的，生的人数失实，死的人数谬误，极力躲避法律的绳网。
English: Therefore, there are those who pretend to be the previous generation of officials, those who have the patience to leave their skin white, the number of births is untrue, the number of deaths is false, and they try their best to evade the law.

古文：积虚累谬，已数十年，欺蔽相容，官民共有，为国之道，良宜矫革。
现代文：虚的错的，已经累积几十年，互相欺瞒，官和民统统作弊，治理国家的办法，实在应当矫枉革新。
English: False and erroneous, has been accumulated for decades, mutual deception, officials and people all cheating, the method of governing the country, really should be reformed.

古文：若令优役轻徭，则斯诈自弭；明纠群吏，则兹伪不行。
现代文：假如能减轻劳役而优待防守边疆的人，那么这些欺诈就自会消失；严明纠察各级官吏，那么这些作伪就不会施行。
English: If labor service could be lightened and those who defend the frontiers given preferential treatment, then these frauds would disappear of their own accord; if officials at all levels were strictly picketed, then these frauds would not be carried out.

古文：空阅旧文，徒成民幸。
现代文：白白地翻阅先前的文牍，使百姓们空怀希望。
English: Flicking through the previous documents in vain, the people are full of hope.

古文：是以崔琰之讥魏武，谢安之论京师。断民之难，岂直远在周世哉？
现代文：所以崔琰讥讽魏武，谢安议论京师，裁决民事的艰难，哪能说公正衹能远在周世呢?
English: Therefore, Cui Zhen ridiculed Wei Wu, Xie An discussed the Beijing division, and adjudicated the difficulties of civil affairs. How can it be said that justice can be far away in Zhou Dynasty?

古文：赞曰：玩之止足，为论未光。
现代文：赞曰：玩之知止知足，立论却不算完善。
English: Zang said: It is enough to know how to play, but the theory is not perfect.

古文：刘休善筮，安卧南湘。
现代文：刘休善于用蓍草占卜休咎，能在南湘安稳躺卧。
English: Liu Hui is good at divination and atonement with reeds, and can lie down safely in southern Hunan.

古文：冲获时誉，杲信圭璋。
现代文：沈冲深得当时称道，庾杲之德行确实美好。
English: Shen Chong Sheng was praised at the time, and his virtue was truly beautiful.

古文：谌惟旧序，并用兴王。
现代文：王谌衹守着旧有的序列，全都发挥作用，就可兴盛王。
English: Wang Xuan adheres to the old sequence, all play a role, and the king can prosper.

