古文：凡战，若敌人行阵整而且锐，未可与战，宜坚壁待之；候其阵久气衰，起而击之，无有不胜。
现代文：凡是作战，如果遇到敌人阵容严整且士气高涨时，不可轻易与其交战，应当坚守壁垒以待有利时机；等到敌人列阵过久而士气衰落之时，再出兵攻击它，就没有不胜利的。
English: In any battle, if you encounter an enemy with a well-ordered lineup and high morale, you should not easily engage with it, you should hold the barrier to wait for a favorable opportunity; when the enemy has been lined up for too long and morale has declined, and then send troops to attack it, there is no victory.

古文：法曰： 后于人以待其衰。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 后发制人是为了等待敌人士气衰落时再攻击它。 
English: As stated in the Art of War, the purpose of delaying the attack is to wait for the enemy's morale to decline before attacking.

古文：唐，武德中，太宗围王世充于东都，窦建德率众来救。
现代文：唐高祖武德四年五月，秦王李世民率军围攻洛阳的王世充，窦建德应王世充之请而率领全部兵马自河北而来援救。
English: In May of the fourth year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Qin King Li Shimin led an army to besiege Wang Shicheng in Luoyang. At the request of Wang Shicheng, Dou Jiande led all the soldiers and horses from Hebei to rescue.

古文：太宗守武牢以拒之。
现代文：李世民率军东进扼守虎牢以阻截窦建德军。
English: Li Shimin led the army eastward and held the tiger tightly to block the German army.

古文：建德阵汜水东，弥亘数里，诸将皆有惧色。
现代文：窦建德于汜水以东布阵，绵延横贯数里，唐军将领望见此情都面生惧色。
English: Dou Jiande set up a line of battle east of Surabaya, stretching several miles across. The Tang generals were horrified to see this.

古文：太宗将数骑登高以望之，谓诸将曰： 贼起山东，未见大敌。
现代文：李世民亲率数名骑兵登上高冈观察敌阵，回头对将领们说： 窦建德自山东起兵至今，还没有遇到过强敌。
English: Li Shimin's relatives led several cavalrymen to climb the hill to observe the enemy line, and turned back to the generals and said: Dou Jiande has not encountered a strong enemy since he started his army in Shandong.

古文：今渡险而嚣，是军无政令；逼城而阵者，有轻我之心也。
现代文：如今他们越过险要地带还喧闹不止，这说明其军队没有严格的号令；迫近我们城前而布列营阵，这说明其有轻视我军的心理。
English: The fact that they are still making a lot of noise as they pass through the critical area shows that their army does not have strict orders; the fact that they are approaching our city and setting up a camp shows that they have the mentality of despising our army.

古文：我按兵不动，待彼气衰，阵久卒饥，必将自退，退而击之，何往不克！ 
现代文：我现在按兵不动，以等待其士气衰落之时；他们列阵过久而士卒饥疲，必将自行退走。乘他们撤退的时候再进攻，哪有不胜之理！
English: I am now holding my line, waiting for the time when their morale will fail; they have been too long in the line, and their men are tired and hungry, and they will withdraw of their own accord. It is not right to attack when they are retreating!

古文：建德列阵，自卯至午时，卒饥倦列坐，又争饮水。
现代文：我与诸位约定，一定要在中午刚过之时打败它。 窦建德军从清晨摆开阵势，直到中午时分，士卒们饥饿劳累，个个都无精打彩地坐在队列里，以至又有互相争夺饮水的。
English: I agreed with you that we must defeat it just after noon. Dou Jian The German army took up positions from the early morning until noon, and the soldiers were hungry and tired, and they all sat in the queue listlessly, and even competed with each other for drinking water.

古文：太宗令宇文士及率三百骑，经贼阵之西，驰而南，诫曰： 贼若不动，止，宜退归；如觉其动，宜率东出。 
现代文：李世民见此情景便命令宇文士及率领三百骑兵，经敌阵之西向南急驰，并告戒他说： 如果此举仍不见敌军有后退行动，你就带兵退回来；如果发觉敌军行动了，就率兵攻打。 
English: Seeing this scene, Li Shimin ordered Wu Wenshi and his three hundred cavalrymen to head south through the west of the enemy's line, and warned him: If you still do not see the enemy retreating, you will retreat with your soldiers; if you find the enemy moving, you will attack with your soldiers.

古文：士及才过，贼众果动。
现代文：宇文士及刚过敌阵，敌军果然行动了。
English: As soon as Uwenshi and his troops crossed the enemy lines, the enemy troops took action.

古文：太宗曰： 可击矣。 
现代文：李世民这时对部将说： 现在可以进攻了。 
English: At this time, Li Shimin said to his captain: Now we can attack.

古文：士及命骑将建旗列阵，自武牢乘高入南山，循谷而东，以掩贼背。
现代文：于是，命令骑兵将领树旗列阵，从虎牢关上以高屋建瓴之势直插南山，沿着山谷向东，袭击敌军背后。
English: As a result, he ordered the cavalry to line up the flags of the leader trees, from the tiger's stronghold to the Nanshan mountain, along the valley to the east, and attack the enemy behind.

古文：建德遽率其师却，止东原，未及整列，太宗轻骑击之，所向披靡。
现代文：窦建德急忙率领其军向后撤退，刚刚退到东山坡处，还未来得及整顿好队伍，李世民已率领轻骑兵冲杀过来。唐军所向之处，敌军无不瓦解溃散。
English: Dou Jiande hurriedly led his army to retreat backwards. He had just retreated to the eastern slope of the mountain, and had not yet had time to reorganize his troops. Li Shimin had already led the light cavalry to charge. Wherever the Tang army went, the enemy army disintegrated and dispersed.

古文：程咬金等众骑缠幡而入，直突出贼阵后，齐张旗帜，表里俱备，贼众大溃，生擒建德。
现代文：唐军大将程咬金等所率骑兵卷起军旗冲进敌阵，径直突击敌军阵后，齐张旗帜，内外奋击，大败敌军，活捉了窦建德。
English: The cavalry led by the Tang general Cheng Qijin rolled up the flag and rushed into the enemy line, directly attacked the enemy line, raised the flag, fought inside and outside, defeated the enemy, and captured Dou Jiande alive.

