古文：董俊董俊，字用章，真定藁城人。少力田，长涉书史，善骑射。
现代文：董俊字用章，真定藁城人，少务农，长大涉猎书史，善于骑射。
English: Dong Jun's character is Zhang, while Zhending is a city dweller. He did not do much farming, but grew up learning about the history of hunting and books. He is good at riding and shooting.

古文：金贞祐间，边事方急，藁城令立的募兵，射上中者拔为将。
现代文：金贞年间，边境战事紧急，藁城县令设立靶子召募兵将，射艺优良者提升为将领。
English: During the Jin Zhen years, the border war was urgent, and the county of Licheng ordered to set up a target to recruit soldiers, and those who were good at shooting were promoted to generals.

古文：众莫能弓，独俊一发破的，遂将所募兵迎敌。
现代文：众人没有谁能射中，只有董俊一发中的，于是率所募士兵抵御南下蒙古大军。
English: No one in the crowd was able to hit the target, only Dong Jun was able to hit the target, so he led the recruited soldiers to resist the southward Mongolian army.

古文：岁乙亥，国王木华黎帅兵南下，俊遂降。己卯，以劳擢知中山府事，佩金虎符。
现代文：乙亥年蒙军南下时，归降于国王木华黎。太祖十四年，提升他为知中山府事，佩金虎符。
English: When the Mongolian army went south in the year of Yihai, he surrendered to King Mu Huali. In the fourteenth year of Taizu, he was promoted to Chizhongshan prefectural governor, with a gold tiger emblem.

古文：金将武仙据真定，定武诸城皆应仙。俊率众夜入真定，逐仙走之，定武诸城复去仙来附。
现代文：金将武仙占据真定，定武诸城都响应武仙，董俊率兵夜袭真定，武仙逃跑，定武诸城又归附于蒙古军。
English: Jin took Wuxian to occupy Zhending, and all the cities of Zhending responded to Wuxian. Dong Jun and his soldiers attacked Zhending at night, the Wuxian fled, and the cities of Zhending were annexed by the Mongol army.

古文：庚辰春，金大发兵益仙，治中李全叛中山应之。
现代文：太祖十五年春，金朝以大军增援武仙，中山府治中李全起兵响应。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of King Taejo's reign, the Kim dynasty reinforced Wuxian with a large army, and Li Quan, the governor of Zhongshan, raised an army in response.

古文：俊军时屯曲阳，仙锐气来战，败之黄山下，仙脱走。
现代文：这时董俊屯军于曲阳，武仙攻曲阳，被董俊大败于黄山下，武仙逃走，后来走投无路，只得投降。
English: At this time, Dong Jun's army was in Quyang, Wuxian attacked Quyang, was defeated by Dong Jun at the foot of Huangshan Mountain, Wuxian fled, and later had no choice but to surrender.

古文：献捷于木华黎，由是仙以穷降。木华黎承制授俊龙虎卫上将军、行元帅府事，驻藁城。
现代文：木华黎升董俊为龙虎卫上将军，行元帅府事，驻藁城。
English: Dong Jun, who was the general of Longhuwei, served as the marshal of the prefectural government and was stationed in Lucheng.

古文：俊尝谒木华黎曰： 武仙黠不可测，终不为我用，请备之。 
现代文：俊曾对木华黎说： 武仙为人狡猾，不会为我军效力，请防备些。 
English: Jun once said to Mu Huali: Wuxian is a cunning person, he will not serve our army, please beware.

古文：木华黎然其言，承制授左副元帅。
现代文：木华黎表示同意，授董俊为左副元帅。
English: Mu Huali agreed and promoted Dong Jun to vice marshal of the left.

古文：升藁城县为永安州，号其众为匡国军，事一委俊。
现代文：升藁城县为永安州。太祖二十年，武仙果然反叛，杀都元帅史天倪，占据真定。
English: Shengqicheng County is Yong'an County. In the 20th year of Taizu, Wuxian rebelled, killed Marshal Shi Tianni, and occupied Zhending.

古文：乙酉，仙果杀都元帅史天倪，据真定以叛，旁郡县皆为仙守。
现代文：董俊率军不过千人，固守永安，武仙围攻一年不下，只得退走。董俊乘夜袭击真定，武仙败走。木华黎以史天倪之弟史天泽为元帅。
English: Dong Jun led an army of no more than a thousand, held fast to Yong'an, besieged Wuxian for a year, and had to retreat. Dong Jun attacked Zhending at night, and Wuxian was defeated. Mu Huali took Shitian Ni's brother Shitian Ze as marshal.

古文：克汴时，以侍其轴为贤，延归教诸子。
现代文：攻克汴京后，聘请当地贤人侍其轴为师来教育诸子。
English: After conquering Beijing, he hired local sages to serve as teachers to educate his children.

古文：尝曰： 射，百日事耳；《诗》、《书》非积学不通。 
现代文：他常告诫儿子们说： 骑射，百日可以学会，《诗》、《书》非经常学习，日积月累则不能通晓。 
English: He often admonished his sons, saying, "Riding and shooting can be learned in a hundred days. Poetry and books can be learned infrequently, but over time they cannot be understood.

古文：屡诫诸子曰： 吾一农夫耳，遭天下多故，徒以忠义事人，仅立门户。深愿汝曹力田读书，勿求非望，为吾累也。 
现代文：又说： 我本一农夫，天下战乱不安，我以忠义待人。深愿你们以耕读立世，不求非分之望，否则会连累我。 
English: He also said, "I am a farmer, the world is in turmoil, and I treat people with loyalty. I sincerely hope that you will start your life by cultivating, and not by expecting something for nothing, otherwise you will be a burden to me."

古文：俊忠实自许，不为夷险少移，临阵勇气慑众，立矢石间，怡然若无事，虽中伤亦不为动。
现代文：董俊为人忠实勇敢，不怕艰险，临阵其勇气慑服敌人，虽矢如雨下，他怡然若无其事，虽受伤也无所谓。
English: Dong Jun is a loyal and brave person, not afraid of hardships and dangers, and his courage in the face of adversity has deterred the enemy. Although it is raining arrows, he is happy if there is nothing wrong, and it does not matter if he is injured.

古文：每慕马援为人，曰： 马革裹尸，援固可壮。 
现代文：他常羡慕马援之为人，赞叹道： 马革裹尸，马援真可谓壮哉！ 
English: He often envied Ma Yuan for being a human being, and said in admiration: Ma Ke wrapped in a corpse, Ma Yuan is truly magnificent!

古文：故战必持矛先士卒，或谏止之，俊曰： 我人臣也，敌在前，不死，乃趋安脱危乎！ 
现代文：所以每次战斗他总是持矛身先士卒。有人劝阻，他说： 我为人臣，敌在前，不誓死战斗，难道应求安脱危吗？ 
English: Therefore, every time he fought, he always marched at the head of his men with a spear. When someone tried to dissuade him, he said: I am a vassal, the enemy is in front of me, I do not swear to fight to the death, should I seek safety from danger?

古文：先是，戊子岁，朝于行在，诸将献户口，各增数要利，吏请如众，俊曰： 民实少而欺以数多，他日上需求无应，必重敛以承命，是我独利，而民日困也。 
现代文：太祖崩，拖雷监国，他与诸将去朝见，诸将多报所征服地方的户口以求赏。董俊说 ：民实少而谎报数多，将来朝廷按所报户口征发，必然要对百姓重重征敛，我们得了利，而人民一天天贫困。 
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, the mine inspector of the country, he and the generals went to the court to see the emperor, and the generals asked for a reward for reporting the number of households in the conquered areas. Dong Jun said: The number of people is small, but the number of false reports is large. In the future, the court will collect and distribute according to the reported households, and it is inevitable to collect and collect from the people. We have gained profits, but the people are getting poorer day by day.

古文：行元帅府时，狂男子三百余人期日作乱，事觉，戮其渠魁，余并释之。
现代文：他在行元帅府事时，有狂徒三百余人约期作乱，事被发觉，董俊只杀首恶，其余释放。
English: When he was in charge of the affairs of the Marshal's Palace, there were more than three hundred madmen who made a riot at the appointed time. The matter was discovered, and Dong Jun only killed the ringleaders and released the rest.

古文：深、冀间妖人惑众，图为不轨，连逮者数万人，有司议当族，俊力请主者，但诛首恶。
现代文：深州、冀州一带有妖人惑众，图谋不轨，官府逮捕了数万人，准备斩首灭族。董俊说服主办其事的人只诛首恶。
English: In Shenzhou and Jizhou, the government arrested tens of thousands of people and prepared to behead them to exterminate the people. Dong Jun convinced the people who organized the event to only behead the evil.

古文：永安节度使刘成叛降武仙于威州，俊下令曰： 逆者一人，余能去逆，即忠义士，与其家财，仍奏官之。 
现代文：永安节度使刘成叛变，到威州去投降武仙，董俊下令 ：叛逆者仅一人，其余的人若抛弃刘成，就是忠义之士，把刘成的家财分给你们，还要奏请封官。 
English: The Yongan Festival made Liu Cheng mutiny, and he went to Wizhou to surrender to Wuxian. Dong Jun ordered: There is only one rebel. If the rest of the people abandon Liu Cheng, they are loyal people. Liu Cheng's family wealth should be distributed to you, and you should also submit an application for a seal.

古文：众果去成降。
现代文：这些人果然离开刘成而归降蒙古军。
English: These people did indeed leave Liu Cheng and returned to the Mongol army.

古文：沃州民寨天台为盗，既破降之，他将利其子女，欲掠之，俊曰： 城降而俘其家，仁者不为也。 
现代文：沃州民据天台为寨，抗拒蒙古军。蒙军攻破天台寨，抗拒者投降。蒙古军将领们要强夺民女，董俊说 ：城降还俘虏其家人，有德行的人不会做这等事。 
English: The Mongolian army broke through the Tiantai Zhai, and those who resisted surrendered. The Mongolian generals wanted to forcibly seize the women, and Dong Jun said: The city surrendered and took their families captive. People with virtue would not do such a thing.

古文：众义不取。
现代文：众人听他的话。
English: And the people hearkened unto him.

古文：南征时，人多归俊愿为奴者，既全其家，归悉纵为民。
现代文：蒙古军南征时，人们都愿投入董俊门下充当奴隶，这样可保全一家人的性命，而董俊把他们都释放为民。
English: When the Mongolian army was marching south, the people were all willing to serve as slaves under Dong Jun, so that they could save the lives of their families, and Dong Jun released them all as citizens.

古文：邻境人有被掠卖者，亦与直赎还之。
现代文：邻境人有被掠卖者，他出钱去赎出来。
English: A man in the neighborhood had a captive, and he offered to ransom him.

古文：其天性之美类如此。
现代文：其天性善良如此。
English: So much for his innate goodness.

古文：俊器度弘远，善战而不妄杀，故人乐为之用。大小百战，无不克捷。
现代文：俊器度弘大，善战而不妄杀，故人们乐意听他任用，大小百战，无不胜利。
English: Jun's abilities are vast, and he fights well without killing, so people are willing to listen to his appointment. He has fought hundreds of battles, large and small, and has been victorious in all of them.

古文：为政宽明，见人善治田庐，必召与欢语，有惰者，则怒罚之，故其部完实，民惟恐其去也。
现代文：他为政宽明，见有善于经营农业的人，必召来与他谈笑；对于懒惰的人，则不客气地惩罚他，故其部队充实，人民惟恐他离开。
English: He was generous in his politics. If he saw someone who was good at farming, he would invite him to have a chat with him. If he saw someone who was lazy, he would not hesitate to punish him. As a result, his troops were well-equipped and the people were afraid that he would leave.

古文：赠翊运效节功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，封寿国公，谥忠烈。
现代文：董俊去世后赠翊运效节功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，封寿国公，谥忠烈。
English: After the death of Dong Jun, he bestowed the titles of meritorious subject, grand tutor, keeper of the imperial edifice and three departments, the first-ranked provincial official, the second-ranked provincial official, and the third-ranked provincial official.

古文：时以真定藁城奉庄圣太后汤沐，庚戌，太后命择邑中子弟来上，文用始从文炳谒太后于和林城。
现代文：后又加赠推忠翊运效节功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，改封赵国公。其子有：文炳、文蔚、文用、文直、文忠。董文用，字彦材，董俊之第三子。
English: Later, he also gave the title of Zhao Guogong to the meritorious vassals, the great vassals, the three great vassals, and the three great vassals. His sons were: Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi, Wenyi and Wenyi.

古文：世祖在潜藩，命文用主文书，讲说帐中，常见许重。癸丑，世祖受命宪宗自河西征云南大理。
现代文：十岁时父死，由长兄文炳教养。文用的学问早有成就，二十岁即以词赋中选。世祖为太子时，命文用主管文书，受到重用。宪宗三年，世祖受命自河西征云南大理。
English: At the age of ten, his father died, and he was brought up by his eldest brother, Wenyu. His literary knowledge was already quite accomplished, and at the age of twenty, he was selected as a poet. When his grandfather was crown prince, he was ordered to use the official script, which was used a lot. In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, his grandfather was ordered to conquer Dali in Yunnan from the west of the river.

古文：将攻鄂州，宋贾似道、吕文德将兵来拒，水陆军容甚盛。
现代文：文用与弟文忠从军，督运粮草军械，参与军务。宪宗七年，世祖令他为皇子讲授经典，皇子即北平王与云南王。
English: Wenyi and his brother Wenzhong served in the army, supervising the transportation of grain and grass and military equipment, and participating in military affairs. In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the patriarch ordered him to teach the classics to the prince, the prince was the king of Peking and the king of Yunnan.

古文：九月，世祖临江阅战，文炳求先进战，文用与文忠固请偕行，世祖亲料甲胄，择大舰授之，大破宋师。
现代文：又命他于各地召请遗老如窦默、姚枢、李俊民、李冶、魏等人。宪宗九年伐宋，文用奉命调发沿边蒙古、汉人诸军，并管理军需。九月，世祖临江阅战，文炳请为先锋，文用与文忠同往，世祖亲自为他们清点甲胄，挑选大舰，他们大破宋军。
English: He also ordered him to call up veterans such as Dou Mo, Yao Zu, Li Junmin, Li Ye, Wei and others from all over the country. In the ninth year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Xianzong ordered Wenyi to dispatch the Mongolian and Han armies along the border, and to manage the military supplies. In September, Emperor Xizong held a military parade along the Linjiang River. Wenyi was invited to be the vanguard. Wenyi and Wenzhong marched together. Emperor Xizong personally sorted out armor for them and selected large ships. They defeated the Song Army.

古文：世祖即位，建元中统。文用持诏宣谕边郡，且择诸军充侍卫，七月还朝。
现代文：世祖即位，建元中统，文用持诏宣谕边郡，从诸军挑选官卒以充侍卫，七月还朝。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, Jianyuan Zhongtong, Wenyi proclaimed the border county with an imperial edict, selected officials and subordinates from the armies to serve as bodyguards, and returned to the court in July.

古文：中书左丞张文谦宣抚大名等路，奏文用为左右司郎中。
现代文：中书左丞张文谦为大名等路宣抚使时，奏请文用为左右司郎中。
English: When Zhang Wenqian, the left junior secretary of the Central Secretariat, was the envoy of the daimyo and other roads, he was used as a left and right junior secretary.

古文：二年八月，以兵部郎中参议都元帅府事。
现代文：中统二年八月，以兵部郎中之职参议都元帅府事。
English: In August of the second year of unification, he was appointed to the post of vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：文用谢病不行。至元改元，召为西夏中兴等路行省郎中。
现代文：三年，李王在济南叛变，文用随元帅阔阔带统兵征讨，平定山东之乱。至元元年，任命为西夏、中兴等路行省郎中。
English: In the third year, Li Wang rebelled in Jinan, and Wenyo followed the marshal Kuo Kuo to lead the troops to quell the rebellion in Shandong. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the minister of Xixia and Zhongxing.

古文：中兴自浑都海之乱，民间相恐动，窜匿山谷。
现代文：中兴这地方自浑都海之乱以后，人心惶惶，百姓逃匿山谷中。
English: Zhongxing, this place has been in turmoil since the Hunduhai Rebellion, and the people have fled into the valley.

古文：文用至，镇之以静，乃为书置通衢谕之，民乃安。始开唐来、汉延、秦家等渠，垦中兴、西凉、甘、肃、瓜、沙等州之土为水田若干，于是民之归者户四五万，悉授田种，颁农具。更造舟置黄河中，受诸部落及溃叛之来降者。
现代文：文用到任后出榜安民，开凿唐来、汉延、秦家诸渠，开垦中兴、西凉、甘、肃、瓜、沙等州之地为水田若干，于是百姓之回归家园者达四五万，均授田耕种，颁发农具，造舟船置于黄河备渡，接受诸部落及溃叛者来降。
English: After Wen Ying took office, he set out to pacify the people, dug the canals of Tang Lai, Han Yan and Qin Jia, and reclaimed several rice fields in the provinces of Zhongxing, Xiliang, Gan, Su, Gua and Sha. As a result, the number of people returning to their homes reached 450,000, all of whom were given land to cultivate, issued agricultural tools, and placed boats on the Yellow River for ferry, and accepted tribes and rebels to come and go.

古文：时诸王只必铁木儿镇西方，其下纵横，需索无算，省臣不能支，文用坐幕府，辄面折以法。
现代文：当时诸王只必铁木儿坐镇西部，其下属横行无忌，无限度地向行省索取，行省无法应付。
English: At that time, the kings only had to sit in the western part of the town, and their subordinates ran rampant, demanding unlimited amounts from the province, which could not cope.

古文：其徒积忿，谮文用于王，王怒，召文用，使左右杂问之，意叵测。文用曰： 我天子命史，非汝等所当问，请得与天子所遣为王傅者辨之。 
现代文：文用把这帮人召到幕府来，当面用国法来教育他们。这些人恼怒，去向诸王只必铁木儿说文用的坏话。王怒，召文用来质问，文用说 ：我是天子派来的使臣，你们无资格质问，请与天子所派来的王之老师来同我分辨是非。 
English: Bunin summoned this group of people to the shogunate and educated them in front of them using the law of the land. These people were angry and went to speak ill of Bunin to the kings. The king was angry and summoned Bunin to question him. Bunin said, "I am an envoy sent by the Son of Heaven. You are not qualified to question me. Please distinguish right from wrong with the king's teacher sent by the Son of Heaven."

古文：王即遣其傅讯文用。
现代文：王即遣其老师来讯问文用。
English: Wang immediately sent his teacher to interrogate Wenyu.

古文：其傅中朝旧臣，不肯顺王意。
现代文：这位老师是朝廷老臣，并不肯顺从王意。
English: The teacher, an old court official, did not want to follow the king's wishes.

古文：文用谓之曰： 我汉人，生死不足计。所恨者，仁慈宽厚如王，以重戚镇远方，而其下毒虐百姓，凌暴官府，伤王威名，于事体不便。 
现代文：文用对他说： 我是汉人，生死置之度外，但遗憾的是，王本是个仁慈宽厚的人，且以皇室贵戚来坐镇远方，但其下人毒害百姓，欺凌官府，损害王的威名，对王来说也不体面。 
English: Wenyu said to him, "I am a Han Chinese, regardless of whether I live or die, but unfortunately, the king is a kind and generous person, and he comes from afar as a noble relative of the royal family, but his subordinates poison the people, bully the government, and damage the king's reputation. It is not dignified for the king.

古文：因历指其不法者数十事。
现代文：接着指出许多不法的事数十件。
English: Then dozens of illegal things were pointed out.

古文：其傅惊起，去白王，王即召文用谢之曰： 非郎中，我殆不知。
现代文：这位老师十分惊讶，回去禀告于王，王即召文用来表示道歉： 若非郎中，我还完全不知道呢。
English: The teacher was very surprised and went back to report to Wang, who wrote a letter to apologize: If you are not a disciple, I still don't know.

古文：郎中持此心事朝廷，宜勿怠。 
现代文：郎中忠心于朝廷，请勿懈怠。 
English: If you are loyal to the Imperial Court, please do not slack off.

古文：自是谮不行而省府事颇立。二年，入奏经略事宜还，以上旨行之，中兴遂定。
现代文：从此以后，谗言再不起作用了，行省的事也好办了，按朝廷旨意行事，中兴地方安定无乱。
English: From then on, nagging no longer worked, it was easier to run the province, act according to the will of the imperial court, and the ZTE region was stable and disorderly.

古文：八年，立司农司，授山东东西道巡行劝农使。
现代文：至元八年设立司农司，授文用为山东东西道巡行劝农使。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Department of Agriculture was established, and the document was used to persuade the agricultural envoys to march from the east to the west of Shandong.

古文：山东自更叛乱，野多旷土，文用巡行劝励，无问幽僻。
现代文：山东自发生叛乱以来，多荒地旷土，文用巡视劝农，使这些荒地得到开发。
English: Since the rebellion in Shandong, there have been many wastelands and wastelands, and literary inspections have been used to persuade farmers to develop these wastelands.

古文：入登州境，见其垦辟有方，以郡守移剌某为能，作诗表异之。
现代文：到了登州，见那里开垦有方，做诗表彰其郡守移剌某的能干。
English: When I arrived in Dangzhou, I saw that there was a party there, and I wrote a poem to commend the ability of its county governor, Ipyeong.

古文：于是列郡咸劝，地利毕兴，五年之间，政绩为天下劝农使之最。
现代文：其他各郡也都照办，使土地得到充分利用，五年之间，山东的政绩为天下劝农使之最。
English: Other counties also followed suit, making full use of the land. In the past five years, Shandong's political achievements have been the best in the world in persuading farmers to start farming.

古文：十二年，丞相安童奏文用为工部侍郎，代纥石里。纥石里，阿合马私人也。
现代文：十二年，丞相安童奏请任命文用为工部侍郎以代替纥石里，因为纥石里是奸相阿合马的人。
English: In the twelfth year, the prime minister, Ando So, requested the appointment of Wenyo as the steward of the engineering department to replace Zou Shili, because Zou Shili was a traitor.

古文：其徒既谗间安童罢相，即使鹰监奏曰： 自纥石里去，工部侍郎不给鹰食，鹰且瘦死。 
现代文：此人向皇帝进谗言，罢安童丞相之职，又指使养鹰的太监上奏 ：自革纥石里职后，工部侍郎不给鹰食，以致鹰瘦死。 
English: This person made a complaint to the emperor, dismissed the post of Minister of Children and Youth Affairs, and ordered the eunuch who raised the eagle to recite: Since the revolution, the eagle has been thin and died because the waiter of the Ministry of Industry did not give the eagle food.

古文：帝怒，促召治之，因急捕文用入见。
现代文：皇帝大怒，要治文用的罪，急召文用入见。
English: The emperor was furious. He wanted to punish the crime of using literature, and urge the use of literature.

古文：帝望见曰： 董文用乃为尔治鹰食者耶！ 
现代文：见文用后却对养鹰的太监说 ：董文用是专为你管鹰食的吗？ 
English: However, after reading the eulogy, he said to the eunuch who raised the eagle, "Was the eulogy just for you?

古文：置不问，别令取给有司。
现代文：不治文用的罪，令鹰监到别处官府去取给鹰食。
English: For the crime of non-compliance, the eagle supervisor was ordered to go to another government office to get eagle food.

古文：十三年，出文用为卫辉路总管，佩金虎符。
现代文：十三年，调文用为卫辉路总管，佩金虎符。
English: In the thirteenth year, the tune was used as the general manager of Weihui Road, with a gold tiger emblem.

古文：郡当冲要，民为兵者十之九，余皆单弱贫病，不堪力役。
现代文：卫辉是冲要之地，其民为兵者十分之九，其余都是单弱贫病不能服役之人。
English: Weihui is an important place. Nine-tenths of its people are soldiers, and the rest are weak, poor and sick people who cannot serve.

古文：会初得江南，图籍、金玉、财帛之运，日夜不绝于道，警卫输挽，日役数千夫。
现代文：初平江南，宋皇室的图册档案，金玉财帛都要运到京师去，日夜运输不息，每天运夫数千人。
English: In the south of the Huping River, the Song royal family's album archives, and the golden and jade money bags were all transported to Beijing. They were transported day and night, transporting thousands of people every day.

古文：文用忧之曰： 吾民弊矣，而又重妨耕作，殆不可。 乃从转运主者言： 州县吏卒，足以备用，不必重烦吾民也。 
现代文：文用为之忧愁不已，认为这样做会使百姓疲惫不堪，又严重妨碍农业，不可行，向主管转运的官说 ：州县吏卒足以担任这运输任务，不必征发百姓。 
English: Literary and practical people were deeply saddened by this, and thought that this would make the people exhausted and seriously hinder agriculture, which was not feasible. They said to the official in charge of transshipment: State and county officials are sufficient for this transportation task, and there is no need to conscript the people.

古文：主者曰： 汝言诚然，万一有不虞，则罪将谁归！ 
现代文：主管官员说： 你的话确实很对，但若万一有不测，其罪归谁？ 
English: The official in charge said: Your words are indeed very correct, but if something happens, whose fault will it be?

古文：文用即手书具官姓名保任之。民得以时耕，而运事亦不废。
现代文：文用立即写下署有他的官职姓名的担保书，这样使百姓能按时耕种，而运输之事也不受影响。
English: The clerk immediately wrote out a guarantee with his official name, so that the people could cultivate on time, and transportation would not be affected.

古文：诸郡运江淮粟于京师，卫当运十五万石，文用曰： 民籍可役者无几，且江淮风水，舟不能以时至，而先为期会，是未运而民已困矣。 
现代文：诸郡将江淮的粮食运到京师，卫辉的任务是十五万石。文用认为 ：本郡能征调的民夫不多，而且在江淮地方水运不便，船不能按时到达，而且必须先把民夫召来，粮未运而百姓已受困扰。 
English: The counties transported the grain from the Huai River to Beijing, and Wei Hui's task was to collect 150,000 koku. Wen Ying believed that: there were not many people in the county who could be conscripted, and it was inconvenient to transport by water in the Huai River area. The ship could not arrive on time, and the people had to be summoned first. The grain had not been transported, but the people were already troubled.

古文：乃集旁郡通议，立驿置法，民力以舒。
现代文：于是与邻郡共同商议，设立驿站，这样可省民力。
English: As a result, they discussed with the neighboring counties to set up a post station, which would save manpower.

古文：十四年，诣汴漕司言事。
现代文：至元十四年，文用到汴梁与漕司商议开河漕运的事。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wen used to go to Qiliang to discuss with the oarsmen about the opening of the river rowing.

古文：适漕司议通沁水北东合流御河以便漕者，文用曰： 卫为郡，地最下，大雨时行，沁水辄溢出百十里间；雨更甚，水不得达于河，即浸淫及卫，今又引之使来，岂惟无卫，将无大名、长芦矣。 
现代文：漕司计划开通沁水，使流向东北与御河会合以便漕运。文用说 ：卫辉地方地势最低，每逢大雨，沁水溢出，淹没百十里，还未流到黄河就把卫辉淹没了，今又把沁水引来，不仅卫辉，连大名、长芦也会淹没。 
English: The oarsmen planned to open the Weihui, so that the flow to the northeast would meet the Ohe River for rowing. The text says: Weihui has the lowest terrain. Whenever there is heavy rain, the Weihui overflows and floods a hundred and ten miles. Before it reached the Yellow River, it flooded the Weihui. Now it has brought the Weihui, not only the Weihui, but also the Daming and the Changlu.

古文：会朝廷遣使相地形，上言： 卫州城中浮屠最高者，才与沁水平，势不可开也。 
现代文：朝廷遣使去考察地形，回去报告说： 卫州城中的塔是最高的，也才与沁水相平，河不可开。 
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to inspect the terrain, and reported back: the tower in the city of Weizhou is the highest, and it is only on a par with Surabaya, and the river cannot be opened.

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：开河之事也就作罢。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：十六年，受代归田里，茅茨数椽，仅避风雨，读书赋诗，怡然燕居。
现代文：至元十六年，文用任职期满，回归故里，虽只茅屋数间，仅避风雨，但他读书赋诗，安闲自怡。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he returned to his hometown after his term of service as a clerk expired. Although he only had a few huts to shelter from the wind and rain, he read poetry and enjoyed his leisure time.

古文：裕宗在东宫，数为台臣言： 董文用勋旧忠良，何以不见用？ 
现代文：裕宗在东宫多次对台臣说： 董文用为勋臣忠良，为何不见用？ 
English: In the East Palace, Yuzong repeatedly said to the Taiwanese vassal: Dong Wen is used as a loyal and honorable vassal, why is he not used?

古文：十八年，台臣奏起文用为山北辽东道提刑按察使，不赴。
现代文：十八年，台臣奏荐起用文用为山北辽东道提刑按察使，但未赴任。
English: In the 18th year, Taizhen made a report recommending the appointment of Wen Ying as the inspector of Shandong and Liao Provinces, but he did not take up the post.

古文：十九年，朝廷选用旧臣，召文用为兵部尚书。
现代文：至元十九年，朝廷选用旧臣，召文用为兵部尚书。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court selected old vassals, and the calligraphy was used as the Hyobusho.

古文：自是朝廷有大议，未尝不与闻。
现代文：从此以后，朝臣每议大事，文用无不参预。
English: From then on, courtiers had to take part in every major decision.

古文：及弃官，浮沉里社，任真适意，亲宾过从，尊酒相劳。
现代文：二十年，江淮省臣欲专权，但又惧怕廉察官，因建议将行御史台隶属于行省。奏章上报后，朝廷召集大臣们讨论其事。
English: Twenty years ago, Jianghuai province's vassal wanted exclusive power, but was afraid of the anti-corruption inspector, because he proposed to subordinate the Executive History Station to the Executive Province. After the report was published, the imperial court convened the ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：家门日以烜赫，己独恬然，不见诸辞色。
现代文：文用认为不可，他说，御史台譬如一只卧虎，虽未吃人，但人们还是怕它，若一旦去掉就难以恢复。对于按察司，国家应该鼓励而不可撤销。
English: Literature and art are not acceptable, he said. He said that the Office of the Chief Historian is like a crouching tiger. Although it does not eat people, people are still afraid of it. Once it is removed, it is difficult to restore. For inspectors, the state should encourage and not revoke.

古文：以病卒，年五十有二。文忠字彦诚，俊第八子也。
现代文：大家都听从文用的意见。董文忠，字彦诚，董俊之第八子。
English: Everyone followed Wenyu's advice. Dong Wenzhong, also known as Yancheng, was the eighth son of Dong Jun.

古文：岁壬子，入侍世祖潜邸。
现代文：宪宗二年，入王府侍奉世祖。
English: In the second year of Kenzo's reign, he entered the imperial palace to serve his grandfather.

古文：王鹗尝言诗，因问文忠能之乎，文忠曰： 吾少读书，惟知入则孝于亲，出则忠于君而已。诗非所学也。 
现代文：王鹗有次讲诗，问文忠能写诗否，文忠说 ：我小时读书，只知入则孝于亲，出则忠于君而已，诗不是我所学的。 
English: Wang Yao once gave a poetry lecture and asked Wen Zhong if he could write poetry. Wen Zhong said, "I studied poetry when I was a child. I only know that when I go to school, I am loyal to my relatives, and when I leave, I am loyal to you. Poetry is not what I learned.

古文：癸丑，从征南诏。
现代文：宪宗三年从征南诏。
English: Kenzong three years from the Southern Expedition.

古文：已未，伐宋，与兄文炳、文用败宋兵于阳罗堡，得蒙冲百艘，进围鄂。
现代文：九年随大军伐宋，与兄文炳、文用败宋军于阳罗堡，得艨艟战船百艘，进围鄂州。
English: In the ninth year, with the great army of the Song Dynasty, he defeated the Song Army with his brother Wenyi and Wenyi in Yangluo Fort, won a hundred warships, and entered the siege of Ezhou.

古文：世祖即位，置符宝局，以文忠为郎，授奉训大夫，居益近密，尝呼董八而不名。
现代文：世祖即位，置符宝局，任文忠为郎，授奉训大夫。因他排行第八，故世祖呼他为 董八 而不呼其名。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, set up the treasure bureau, appointed Wenzhong as his son, and awarded him the title of doctor of discipline. Because he ranked eighth, the ancestor called him Dongba without calling his name.

古文：而俗儒守亡国余习，欲行其说，故以是上惑圣听，恐非陛下教人修身治国之意也。 
现代文：至元二年，安童为右丞相，管领中书省事务，陈奏建议十条，言词有违皇帝旨意，文忠从旁代替对答，恳切真诚，好像条陈是他写的一样，这才为世祖批准。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ando was the Minister of the Right, in charge of the affairs of the Central Literature and Literature Ministry. Chen proposed ten articles, the words were against the emperor's will, and Wen Zhong took the place of the answer, earnestly and sincerely, as if Chen had written the article. This was only approved by the patriarch.

古文：事遂止。十一年，伐宋，民困供馈，文忠奏免常岁横征，从之。
现代文：至元十一年，伐宋，为供应军粮百姓贫困不堪，文忠奏请免去常年的超额征派，朝廷允准。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the Song Dynasty, in order to supply military grain to the impoverished people, Wen Zhongso asked to be exempted from the annual excess conscription, which was approved by the imperial court.

古文：帝尝见宋降将，从容问宋所以亡者，皆曰： 贾似道当国，薄武人而重文儒，将士怨之，莫有斗志。
现代文：世祖曾问宋朝降将宋之所以亡国的原因。降将们都说是因为 贾似道当权，薄武重文，将士抱怨，无有斗志。
English: The founder of the Song Dynasty once asked the generals of the Song Dynasty about the reason for the downfall of the country. The generals all said that it was because Jia Liang Dao was in power, Bo Wu was a heavyweight, the generals complained and had no fighting spirit.

古文：故大军既至，争解甲归命也。 
现代文：故大军至则争相交械投降 。
English: As a result, the large army scrambled to surrender.

古文：帝问文忠： 此言何如？ 文忠因诘之曰： 似道薄汝矣，而君则贵汝以官，富汝以禄，未尝薄汝也。
现代文：帝问文忠此话对不对，文忠反问他们： 贾似道待你们薄，而皇帝则给官你们做，给你们俸禄并不薄待你们。
English: The emperor asked Wenzhong if this was true, and Wenzhong retorted, "Jia Xi Dao treats you poorly, but the emperor gives you positions and pay, and does not treat you poorly."

古文：今有怨于相，而移于君，不肯一战，坐视国亡，如臣节何！
现代文：你本当抱怨宰相，现在却移怨皇帝，不能作战，坐视国亡，哪有做臣的节义？
English: Did you really complain about the prime minister, but now you resent the emperor, can't fight, sit back and watch the country die, what's the point of being a minister?

古文：然则似道薄汝者，岂非预知汝曹不足恃乎！ 
现代文：贾似道薄待你们，岂不是预知你们这些人是不可靠的吗？ 
English: Didn't Jia Xi Dao treat you poorly because he foresaw that you people were unreliable?

古文：帝深善之。
现代文：世祖认为他这种分析很好。
English: The patriarch thinks he is good at this kind of analysis.

古文：有旨徙大都猎户于郢中，文忠奏止之。又请罢官鬻田器之税，听民自为。
现代文：朝廷旨令将大都的猎户迁到郢中，文忠奏请不移，还奏请废除官卖农具之税，听民自造农具。
English: The imperial court ordered that most of the hunters in the capital be moved to the middle of the country. Wen Zhong requested that this be done, and also requested that the tax on the sale of agricultural tools by officials be abolished and that the people be allowed to make their own agricultural tools.

古文：时多盗，诏犯者皆杀无赦。在处系囚满狱。
现代文：当时多盗，凡盗者均杀无赦，监狱都关满了。
English: At that time, there were many thieves, all thieves were killed without mercy, and the prisons were full.

古文：文忠言： 杀人取货，与窃一钱者均死，惨黩莫甚，恐乖陛下好生之德。 
现代文：文忠陈奏 ：杀人窃货与偷一钱者均判死刑，是太残酷了，恐有违陛下好生之德。 
English: Wenzhong Chenxiao: It is too cruel to give the death penalty to those who commit murder, steal goods and steal a penny. It may be against His Majesty's virtue of a good life.

古文：敕革之。
现代文：敕令改正。
English: The edict was amended.

古文：或告汉人殴伤国人，及太府监属卢甲盗剪官布。
现代文：有人告有一汉人伤蒙古人，又有太府监官员卢甲盗剪官布。
English: One person accused a Han Chinese of injuring a Mongolian, and another accused Lu Jiao, an official of the Dafu Supervision Bureau, of stealing the official cloth.

古文：帝怒，命杀以惩众。
现代文：帝怒，命杀头以惩戒其他人。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the executioner to punish the others.

古文：文忠言： 今刑曹于囚罪当死者，已有服辞，犹必详谳，是岂可因人一言，遽加之重典！
现代文：文忠进谏道 ：今衙门对于判死刑的囚犯，虽已在供辞上画押服罪，但还要再加详审，是岂可因一人之言而加重刑！
English: Wenzhong Jinshan said, "For prisoners sentenced to death, although they have already confessed and served their sentence, they still need to undergo a detailed examination. Is it possible to increase the sentence because of one person's words?"

古文：宜付有司阅实，以俟后命。 
现代文：这些人应交给官府审讯属实再等候处理。 
English: These people should be handed over to the authorities for interrogation before being dealt with.

古文：乃遣文忠及近臣突满分核之，皆得其诬状，遂诏原之。
现代文：派文忠及近臣突满分头核实，都查明系诬告，诏免治罪。
English: After sending Wenzhong and close vassals to investigate, it was found to be a false accusation and he was exonerated.

古文：帝因责侍臣曰： 方朕怒时，卿曹皆不敢言。非董文忠开悟朕心，则杀二无辜之人，必取议中外矣。 
现代文：因谴责侍臣道： 朕方怒时，你们都不敢言，若不是董文忠提醒我，险杀此二无辜之人，致使朝廷内外议论我的不是。 
English: For condemning the courtier, he said, "You would not have dared to say anything when I was angry, if it had not been for Dong Wenzhong reminding me that I had risked killing these two innocent people, causing the court and outside to discuss my innocence.

古文：因赐文忠金尊，曰： 用旌卿直。 
现代文：为此，赐文忠金酒器，以旌表他的忠直。
English: To this end, he gave Wenzhong a golden goblet to show his loyalty.

古文：裕宗亦语宫臣曰： 方天威之震，董文忠从容谏正，实人臣难能者。 
现代文：裕宗称赞文忠在皇上盛怒时敢于从容谏正 ：实人臣之难能者。 
English: Yuzong praised Wenzhong for daring to calmly stand up to the emperor when he was angry: a difficult task for a real vassal.

古文：太府监属奉物诣文忠泣谢曰： 鄙人赖公复生。 文忠曰： 吾素非知子，所以相救于危急者，盖为国平刑，岂望子见报哉！ 
现代文：那位太府监官员拿着礼物去感谢文忠使他再生之恩，文忠拒不受礼，对他说： 对你，我素不认识，其所以救你于危急之时，是为国平刑而不是望你报答。 
English: The daifu procuratorate official took the gift to thank Wenzhong for the grace of his rebirth. Wenzhong refused to accept the courtesy and said to him: I don't know you, so saving you in a time of crisis is a punishment for the country, not a reward.

古文：却其物不受。自安童北伐，阿合马独当国柄，大立亲党，惧廉希宪复入为相，害其私计，奏希宪以右丞行省江陵。
现代文：自安童北伐，阿合马独掌大权，树立亲党，怕廉希宪再为宰相于他的阴谋不利，奏请调希宪以右丞之职去视察江陵。
English: Since Andong's Northern Expedition, Ahma has been in sole control of power and has established a pro-party. Afraid that Lian Hixian would once again be unfavorable to his conspiracy as prime minister, he requested that Hixian be transferred to the position of U-jo to inspect Gangneung.

古文：以臣所知，不若令有司先启而后闻，其有未安者，则以诏敕断之，庶几理顺而分不逾，太子必不敢辞其责矣。 
现代文：文忠向皇帝陈奏道： 希宪是国家名臣。今宰相虚位，不可让他久居外地，有负人望，应早召回。 皇帝允准。至元十六年十月，文忠奏请令廷臣奏事，必须先报告太子，然后再上奏皇上，这样 可符合道理，顺理而不逾分，太子必不敢推辞其责 。
English: In October of the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wen Zhongso asked a courtier to report the matter, which must first be reported to the prince and then to the emperor. This is reasonable, logical and not excessive, and the prince will not dare to shirk his responsibility.

古文：帝即日召大臣，面谕其意，使行之。
现代文：世祖当时就召谕大臣，按此制度行事。
English: At that time, the patriarch summoned ministers to act in accordance with this system.

古文：复语太子曰： 董八，崇立国本者，其勿忘之。 礼部尚书谢昌元请立门下省，封驳制敕，以绝中书风晓近习奏请之弊。
现代文：礼部尚书谢昌元奏请设立门下省，以封还皇帝不当的诏令，改正诸臣错误的奏章，还可杜绝中书暗示近臣奏请之弊。
English: Xie Changyuan, the secretary of the Ministry of Rites, established a subordinate province to seal the emperor's improper edict, correct the erroneous records of the ministers, and also eliminate the drawbacks of the middle book suggesting that close ministers should be invited to play.

古文：帝锐意欲行之，诏廷臣杂议；且怒翰林学士承旨王磐曰： 如是有益之事，汝不入告，而使南方后至之臣言之，汝用学问何为！
现代文：世祖决意建立，指责翰林学士承旨王磐 ：如此有益之事，你不上朝陈奏，而让南方后来的大臣提出来，你的学问是做什么用的？
English: The founder was determined to establish it, accusing Hanlin Scholar Wang Pang of following his orders: "Such a beneficial thing, you don't go to the court to recite it, but let the minister from the south come up with it, what is the use of your knowledge?"

古文：必今日开是省。 
现代文：必今日建立这门下省。 
English: We must establish this lower ministry today.

古文：十八年，升典瑞局为监，郎为卿，仍以文忠为之。
现代文：第三天，廷臣奏荐文忠为门下省侍中及其属员数十人。中书左丞董文炳卒，太傅伯颜上表称述文忠可为相，世祖使他继为中书左丞。文忠辞谢。
English: On the third day, the courtiers recommended Wen Zhong as the provincial attendant and dozens of his subordinates. The second-highest-ranking official of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy, Dong Wenjun, and the first-ranked official of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy, Taifu Boyan, said that Wen Zhong could be the successor, and the patriarch made him the second-highest-ranking official of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy. Wen Zhong expressed his thanks.

古文：授正议大夫，俄授资德大夫、佥书枢密院事，卿如故。
现代文：至元十八年，升典瑞局为典瑞监，升郎为卿，仍以文忠为典瑞监卿，授正议大夫，不久又授资德大夫、佥书枢密院事，同时仍为典瑞监卿。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Sheng Xianrui Bureau was appointed as Xianrui Supervisor, Sheng Lang was appointed as Xianrui Sir, and Wen Zhong was still appointed as Xianrui Supervisor, awarded the title of Doctor of the Supreme People's Assembly, and was soon awarded the title of Doctor of the Supreme People's Assembly, and the title of Secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, while still being the Xianrui Supervisor.

古文：车驾行幸，诏文忠毋扈从，留居大都，凡宫苑、城门、直舍、徼道、环卫、营屯、禁兵、太府、少府、军器、尚乘诸监，皆领焉。
现代文：皇帝出行，都要诏令文忠不必扈从，而留居大都，总领宫苑、城门、直舍、徼道、环卫、营屯、禁兵、太府、少府、军器、尚乘诸监。
English: When the emperor traveled, he had to issue a decree that Wenzhong did not have to follow him, but stay in most of the capital, the general palace, the city gate, the direct residence, the road, the guard, the camp, the forbidden soldiers, the Taifu, the Shofu, the military equipment, and the prisoners.

古文：兵马司旧隶中书，并付文忠。
现代文：兵马司原隶属中书省，但也交付文忠领管。
English: The Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division was originally under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Chinese Literature, but was also transferred to the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education.

古文：时权臣累请夺还中书，不报。是冬十月二十有五日，鸡鸣，将入朝，忽病仆，帝遣中使持药投救，不及，遂卒，甚悼惜之，赙钱数十万。
现代文：是年十月二十五日，鸡鸣，准备入朝，忽然病倒，帝遣中使持药抢救不及，逝世。
English: On October 25 of the same year, Ji Ming, preparing to enter the imperial court, suddenly fell ill, and the imperial envoy was unable to save him with medicine, and he died.

古文：后制赠光禄大夫、司徒，封寿国公，谥忠贞。
现代文：帝甚哀惋惜，以钱数十万作为安葬费。后赠光禄大夫、司徒，封寿国公，谥忠贞。
English: The emperor was very saddened and regretted, and used hundreds of thousands of money as funeral expenses. Later, he gave Dr. Guanglu, Stowe, Fuzhou Guoguo, and Zou Zhongzheng.

古文：严实子忠济忠嗣
现代文：文用转任礼部尚书，后任翰林、集贤二院学士并知秘书监。
English: Wenyu was transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies as Shangshu, and later as Hanlin, Jixian Second Academy Bachelor and Secretary Supervisor.

古文：严实，字武叔，泰安长清人。
现代文：当时中书右丞卢世荣因搜括民财，增加国库收入而得到皇帝信任宠爱，任贵官。
English: At that time, Lu Shirong, the Second Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was trusted and favored by the emperor for collecting people's wealth and increasing the income of the state treasury, and was appointed as a dignitary.

古文：略知书，志气豪放，不治生产，喜交结施与，落魄里社间。
现代文：他却伪称： 我立法理财，收入比常年增加了一倍，而民不受扰。 
English: However, he falsely claimed: I have legislated financial management, my income has doubled compared to previous years, and the people are not disturbed.

古文：屡以事系狱，侠少辈为出死力，乃得脱去。
现代文：朝廷诏令朝臣议论，都不敢直言，只有文用公开质问： 此钱是取之于你右丞之家，还是取之民？
English: Courtiers are afraid to speak their minds when the Imperial Court issues a decree, and only the literati openly question: Was this money taken from your Ujo family, or from the people?

古文：癸酉秋，太祖率兵自紫荆口入，分略山东、河北、河东而归。
现代文：若取于你右丞之家就不说什么，若取之民则有话可说了。牧羊者，每年只剪两次羊毛，今有牧人每天剪羊毛献给主人，主人得毛多固然高兴，然而羊不能避寒热，将会死尽，还能得到毛吗？
English: Shepherds, you only shear the sheep twice a year. Now there are shepherds who shear the sheep every day for their masters. The masters are pleased with the amount of wool, but the sheep cannot escape the cold and heat and will die. Will they still be able to get wool?

古文：金东平行台调民为兵，以实为众所服，命为百户。
现代文：民财是有限的，取之时还怕伤害了他们，如今剥削无遗，哪还有百姓！ 
English: The people's wealth is limited. When they took it, they were afraid of hurting them. Now the exploitation is complete, and there are still people!

古文：甲戌春，泰安张汝楫据灵岩，遣别将攻长清，实破走之。
现代文：世荣无言答对。丞相安童对在座的人说 ：董尚书真没有虚食俸禄。 
English: Se-Rong was speechless. Prime Minister Ando said to those present: "Dong Shangshu really did not waste his salary."

古文：以功授长清尉。戊寅，权长清令。宋取益都，乘胜而西，行台檄实备刍粮为守御计。
现代文：参加议论的出来对文用说 ：君一言折服了聚敛之臣，而巩固了国家根本，真是仁人之言。 
English: Those who took part in the discussion said to Wenyo, "You have won the hearts and minds of the people with just a few words, and you have strengthened the foundation of the country. This is truly a benevolent speech."

古文：实出督租，比还，而长清破，俄以兵复之。
现代文：卢世荣因此而得罪。
English: Lu Shirong was offended by this.

古文：有谮于行台者，谓实与宋有谋，行台以兵围之，实挈家避青崖。宋因以实为济南治中，分兵四出，所至无不下，于是太行之东，皆受实节制。
现代文：至元二十二年，拜江淮行中书省参知政事，文用极力辞谢，世祖对他说 ：卿家世非他人可比，朕之所以任卿者，目的不是要你去管那些钱谷小事，而是要考察大政方针，有不妥者，但言不妨。 文用才受任启程。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the middle of the Baijianghuai trip, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Literature had a meeting with the Minister of State for Political Affairs, and the Minister of Education and the Minister of State for Political Affairs thanked the Minister of Education and the Minister of State for Political Affairs. The father of the nation said to the Minister of Education and the Minister of State for Political Affairs, "Your family history is incomparable to that of others. The reason why I appointed you as Minister of State for Political Affairs is not to ask you to take care of those trifling matters of money and grain, but to examine the major political policies. If there is anything wrong, you

古文：庚辰三月，金河南军攻彰德，守将单仲力不支，数求救。实请于主将张林，林逗遛不行，实独以兵赴之，比至而仲被擒。
现代文：江淮行省长官十分傲慢，与他同列的官员见他总是跪着禀报，不敢仰视。文用至，则坐在堂上与他侃侃而论是非短长，毫不迁就，虽多次意见不合，也无所顾及。有人奉皇上之命，在宋故宫内建佛塔，而且要急于建成。
English: The governor of Jianghuai Province was very arrogant. The officials who were with him saw that he was always kneeling to read the newspaper and did not dare to look up. When it came to writing, they would sit in the hall and argue with him about the merits and demerits. They did not relent, and although they disagreed many times, they did not care. Some people were ordered by the emperor to build a stupa in the Song Forbidden City, and they were in a hurry to complete it.

古文：实知宋不足恃。
现代文：还要建大寺庙。
English: A large temple is also to be built.

古文：七月，谒太师木华黎于军门，挈所部彰德、大名、磁、洺、恩、博、滑、浚等州户三十万来归，木华黎承制拜实金紫光禄大夫、行尚书省事。进攻曹、濮、单三州，皆下之。偏将李信，留镇青崖，尝有罪，惧诛，乘实之出，杀其家属，降于宋。辛巳，实以兵复青崖，擒信诛之。
现代文：大雨大雪，入山伐木而死者数百人。
English: Heavy rain and snow, hundreds of people died while logging in the mountains.

古文：进攻东平，金守将和立刚弃城遁，实入居之。
现代文：文用对这人说 ：征发百姓现在不是时候，百姓受不了，稍缓些时如何？ 这个长官说 ：参政为何要违抗上命？ 
English: The clerk said to the man: "Now is not the time to conscript the people, the people can't stand it, how about a little more time?" The officer said: "Why do you have to disobey your orders to participate in politics?"

古文：壬午，宋将彭义斌率师取京东州县，实将晁海以青崖降，尽掠实家，义斌军西下，郡县多归之。
现代文：文用说 ：不是敢于违抗上命，当今百姓困苦，这样做会失民心的，也不是皇上的爱民之意。 这人垂头丧气，只得缓期进行。
English: Wenyu said, "It was not because he dared to disobey the emperor's order, but because the people are suffering today, and doing so would lose the hearts of the people, and it was not the emperor's intention to love the people, and he was so discouraged that he had to postpone it.

古文：乙酉四月，遂围东平，实潜约大将孛里海合兵攻之，兵久不至，城中食且尽，乃与义斌连和。
现代文：二十三年，朝廷准备用兵于东海，向百姓征敛甚急，官府也从中渔利。文用上书详细陈述事不可为，大意是 耗尽国家珍贵之民力，取偏僻无用之小邦 。
English: In 233, the imperial court was preparing to use troops in the East China Sea. It was in a hurry to collect money from the people, and the government also profited from it. A detailed statement was made in writing, to the effect that it was impossible to exhaust the precious people's power of the country and take a remote and useless small country.

古文：义斌亦欲藉实取河朔，而后图之，请以兄事实。
现代文：书上之后，用兵于东海之事就此罢休。至元二十五年，拜御史中丞。文用认为 ：中丞不应当做那些具体小事，而应当首先荐举贤才。 
English: After the book was written, the use of troops in the East China Sea was discontinued. By the year 255, he was a middle-ranking courtier. Wenyo believed that a middle-ranking courtier should not do those specific little things, but should first recommend the promotion of talents.

古文：时麾下众尚数千，义斌听其自领，而青崖所掠者则留不遣。
现代文：于是他荐举了胡祗、王恽、雷膺、荆幼纪、许楫、孔从道等十余人为按察使，徐琰、魏初为行御史台中丞。当时认为这些都是极优秀的人才。桑哥当权正深受皇上宠信，就是近戚贵人见了他也忙回避，不敢惹他。
English: Therefore, he recommended more than ten people, including Hu Yao, Wang Yao, Lei Yao, Jing Youji, Xu Yao, and Kong Congdao, as inspectors, and Xu Yao and Wei Chu as acting historians. At that time, these were considered to be very outstanding talents. Sango, who was in power, was deeply trusted by the emperor. Even close relatives and dignitaries avoided him and did not dare to provoke him.

古文：七年，义斌下真定，道西山。
现代文：文用是以旧臣任中丞，不附和他。
English: The literary use is based on the former vassal, Chujo, and does not refer to him.

古文：与孛里海等军相望，分实以帐下兵，阳助而阴伺之。实知势迫，急赴孛里海军与之合，遂与义斌战，宋兵溃，擒义斌。
现代文：桑哥令人暗示文用，为他在皇帝面前歌功颂德，文用不予理会。北方用兵，军粮已经备办，而还向百姓急切征发。
English: Sango made people suggest literary use, sing his praises for him in front of the emperor, and literary use ignored it. In the north, soldiers were used, military rations were prepared, and they were urgently requisitioned from the people.

古文：不旬月，京东州县复为实有。
现代文：文用对桑哥说 ：人民活不下去了！
English: Wenyu said to Sango: The people can't go on living!

古文：是冬，木华黎之弟带孙取彰德；明年，取濮、东平；又明年，木华黎之子孛鲁取益都，实皆有功焉。
现代文：外难尚未解除，而国内又砍伐国之根本，丞相应好好想想。 
English: The external difficulties have not yet been resolved, and the country is cutting down the foundation of the country, so think about it accordingly.

古文：庚寅四月，朝太宗于牛心之幄殿，帝赐之坐，宴享终日，赐以虎符。
现代文：果真远近人民进行反抗。文用又对桑哥说 ：百姓何尝不希望过好日子，是苛法暴敛逼得他们造反。
English: If it is true that the people are close to revolting, Wen Ying also said to Sango: The people do not want to live a good life, it is the harshness of the law that forces them to rebel.

古文：数顾实谓侍臣曰： 严实真福人也。 
现代文：御史台的职责就是纠正官府的过失，丞相应当帮助他们而不是抑制他们。
English: The duty of the Office of the Historian is to correct the mistakes of the government, and the prime minister should help them rather than restrain them.

古文：甲午，朝于和林，授东平路行军万户，偏裨赐金符者八人。
现代文：如果御史台的工作不能进行，则百姓有怨无处诉，这样会政治日乱，其后果就不止是御史台的事不能办了。 
English: If the work of the Imperial Historian's Office cannot be carried out, then the people will have no place to complain, and this will lead to political turmoil, the consequences of which will not only be that the work of the Imperial Historian's Office cannot be carried out.

古文：先是，实之所统，凡五十余城，至是，惟德、兖、济、单隶东平。
现代文：这些话更是冲撞了桑哥，他收集了许多关于御史台的事，文用则每天同他辩论，从不屈服。桑哥向皇帝进谗言 ：朝中只有董文用傲慢不听令，阻挠尚书省政务，请重治其罪。 世祖说： 他秉公直言，是御史的职责，何罪之有？
English: These words further offended Sango, who had collected a lot of information about the Imperial Historian, while Bunyo argued with him every day and never gave in. Sango said to the emperor, "In the imperial court, only Dongwen used arrogance to disobey orders and obstruct the government affairs of Shangshu Province. Please punish him severely." The patriarch said, "He spoke honestly and fairly, which is the duty of the Imperial Historian. What is his crime?"

古文：丁酉九月，诏实毋事征伐。
现代文：董文用为人端正谨慎，朕所素知，你要好好效法。 
English: Dong Wen is a straightforward and prudent person. As far as I know, you should follow his example.

古文：初，彰德既下，又破水栅，带孙怒其反覆，驱老幼数万欲屠之，实曰： 此国家旧民，吾兵力不能及，为所胁从，果何罪耶！ 带孙从之。
现代文：调任大司农，朝廷要没收民田为屯田，文用坚持不可。
English: When he was transferred to the post of Chief Secretary for Agriculture, the imperial court wanted to confiscate the people's farmland and use it as military garrisons.

古文：继破濮州，复欲屠之。
现代文：又调任为翰林学士承旨。
English: He was also transferred to the Hanlin College of Arts and Sciences.

古文：实言： 百姓未尝敌我，岂可与执兵刃者同戮，不若留之，以供刍秣。 濮人免者又数万。
现代文：至元二十七年，隆福太后在东宫，因文用是旧臣，欲使他为皇孙讲经，得到世祖同意。
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Empress Dowager Longfu was in the East Palace, and she wanted him to give a sermon for the grandson of the emperor, which was approved by the patriarch.

古文：其后于曹、楚丘、定陶、上党皆然。
现代文：文用每讲说经书中主旨时，必以朝廷事例来加以解释，作为比喻来反复开导，皇孙对他也十分尊敬。
English: Whenever the main meaning of the scripture is used, it must be explained by the example of the imperial court, and it must be repeatedly explained as a metaphor. The emperor's grandson also respects him very much.

古文：时兵由武关出襄、邓，实在徐、邳间，以为河南破，屠戮必多，乃载金缯往赎之，且约束诸将，毋敢妄有杀掠。
现代文：至元三十一年，世祖崩，成宗将在上都即位，太后命文用从行。成祖即位后巡视三不剌之地，文用进谏道： 先帝新离人世，陛下巡视不按时回朝，无以安慰百姓，应速还京师。且臣听说，人君如同北斗星，居其位，群星环绕，而不在于常常到处走动。 
English: In the 31st year of the Yuan Dynasty, after the death of his ancestor, Chengzong ascended to the throne in Shangdu, and the empress dowager ordered Wenyi to accompany him. After Chengzong ascended to the throne, he inspected the land of the Three Immortals, and Wenyi entered the imperial road: The previous emperor had just passed away, and His Majesty's inspection did not return to the Imperial Palace on time, could not comfort the people, and had to return to Beijing immediately. Moreover, the minister heard that people are like the Big Dipper, they live in their place, surrounded by stars, but they do not always walk around.

古文：灵壁一县，当诛者五万人，实悉救之。会大饥，民北徙者多饿死。
现代文：成宗明白其意。帝常召文用入帐问先朝理政的事例，文用大力称赞世祖虚心纳贤及开国经世的事情，往往谈至深夜。这年，诏修世祖《实录》，升文用为资善大夫、知制诰兼修国史。
English: Chengzong knew what he meant. The emperor often summoned Wen to the account to ask about the previous dynasty's administration and politics. Wen praised his ancestor's modesty and wisdom and the founding of the country, and often talked about it until late at night. In this year, he corrected the ancestor's "real record" and promoted Wen as a good doctor, intellectual and scholar, and studied national history.

古文：又法，藏匿逃者，保社皆坐。
现代文：文用对于祖宗世系、功德，近戚将相家世、功绩，都记得清清楚楚，史馆考究询问，他都能回答无遗。
English: Literary and practical for the ancestral lineage, merits, relatives will be related to the family history, achievements, all remember clearly, the history museum exquisite inquiry, he can answer exhaustively.

古文：逃亡无所托，僵尸蔽野，实命作糜粥，盛置道傍，全活者众。实部曲有逃归益都者数十人，益都破，皆获之，以为必杀，实置不问。
现代文：大德元年，上章请求告老辞官，皇上赐中统钞万贯以归家安度晚年，授其一子就本郡为官，以便奉养。六月病卒，年七十四岁。
English: In the first year of the Taide era, the previous chapter requested to retire from the post, and the emperor gave Zhongtongzheng Wanquan to return home and spend his old age, and granted one of his sons to be the official of this county in order to support him. He died in June at the age of seventy-four.

古文：王义深者，义斌之别将，闻义斌败，将奔河南，实族属在东平者，皆为所害。
现代文：朝廷赠银青荣禄大夫、少保、赵国公，谥忠穆。严实，字武叔，泰安长清人，略知书，性情豪放，不治家产，喜交结朋友，好施舍。
English: The court bestowed the Silver Youth Award to Dr. Ronglu, Shao Bao, and Zhao Guogong, all of whom were loyal and pious. They were strict, called themselves Uncle Wu, were from the Tai'an Changqing Dynasty, knew a little about literature, had a generous nature, did not manage their family property, were happy to make friends, and were good at giving alms.

古文：河南破，实获义深妻子，厚周恤之，送还乡里，终不以旧怨为嫌。
现代文：在穷困失意时，多次因肇事被捕入狱，一些讲义气朋友死力相救，才得出来。
English: When he was down and out, he was arrested and jailed several times for causing accidents, and it was only through the desperate efforts of some friends with a sense of duty that he was able to get out.

古文：其宽厚长者类若此。庚子卒，年五十九。
现代文：太祖八年秋，蒙古大兵自紫荆口入金朝境，攻取山东、河北、河东，然后又北归。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of Taizu, Mongolian soldiers entered the territory of the Jin Dynasty from the mouth of the Bauhinia, conquered Shandong, Hebei, and Hedong, and then returned north.

古文：远近悲悼，野哭巷祭，旬月不已。
现代文：金朝东平行台调民为兵，因严实为众所服，就任命他为百户。
English: The Kim dynasty sent people to the east parallel to the plateau as soldiers, and because of his strict obedience to the public, he was appointed as the leader of a hundred households.

古文：中统二年，追封实为鲁国公，谥武惠。
现代文：太祖九年春，泰安张汝楫占据灵岩，遣将攻长清，为严实所击败，金朝因严实有功授长清尉。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the founder's reign, Tai'an Zhang Rong occupied Lingyan and sent a general to attack Changqing. He was defeated by Yan Si, for which the Kim dynasty awarded him the title of Changqing lieutenant.

古文：子忠贞，金紫光禄大夫；忠济，忠嗣，忠范，忠杰，忠裕，忠祐。
现代文：十三年，暂任长清县令。宋军取益都后，乘胜而西，金东平行台传令严实储备粮草防守。
English: In the thirteenth year, he temporarily served as the county magistrate of Changqing County. After the Song Army gained the capital, it took advantage of the victory and went to the west, and ordered the Jin Dong parallel station to strictly reserve grain and grass defense.

古文：忠济，一名忠翰。
现代文：实外出督促租税，回来时长清已被宋军攻破，他立即率军收复。
English: In fact, he went out to supervise the taxation. When he returned, Changqing had been defeated by the Song Army, and he immediately led the army to recover.

古文：字紫芝，实之第二子也。
现代文：有人向金朝行台告密，说严实与宋有勾结，行台以兵围长清，严实携家逃避于青崖。
English: Someone tipped off the Kim dynasty about the trip to Taiwan, saying that Yan Si and Song Rong had colluded, that the trip to Taiwan was surrounded by soldiers, and that Yan Si and his family had fled to Qingyao.

古文：仪观雄伟，善骑射。
现代文：宋朝任命严实为济南治中。
English: The Song Dynasty appointed Yan Si as the governor of Jinan Province.

古文：辛丑，从其父入见太宗，命佩虎符，袭东平路行军万户、管民长官，开府布政，一法其父。
现代文：实分兵四出，扩大地盘，太行以东皆受严实统制。太祖十五年三月，金河南军攻彰德，宋守将单仲支持不住，多次求援。
English: In March of the fifteenth year of the Taizu era, when the Southern Army of the Jin Dynasty attacked Changde, Song Shou could not support Shan Zhong and repeatedly asked for help.

古文：养老尊贤，治为诸道第一。
现代文：严实请主将张林出兵援救，林逗留不前，实独自率兵赴援，赶到时，单仲已被擒。
English: He earnestly asked the commander Zhang Lin to send troops to rescue him, but Lin did not go. He actually led his own troops to the rescue. When he arrived, Shan Zhong had already been captured.

古文：领兵略地淮、汉，偏裨部曲，戮力用命。
现代文：由此实知道宋军不可靠。
English: From this, we really know that the Song Army is unreliable.

古文：定宗、宪宗即位之始，皆加褒宠。忠济初统千户十有七，乙卯，朝命括新军山东，益兵二万有奇。
现代文：七月，拜谒太师木华黎，以所领属之彰德、大名、磁、氵名、恩、博、滑、等州三十万户归附于蒙古，木华黎拜严实为金紫光禄大夫，行尚书省事。
English: In July, 300 thousand households in the provinces of Changde, Daimyo, Mago, Shimen, En, Bo, Nome, and other provinces under the jurisdiction of the Grand Master Mu Huarai were annexed to Mongolia. Mu Huarai was indeed a doctor of the Golden Purple and the Golden Light, and he was careful in his dealings.

古文：忠济弟忠嗣、忠范为万户，以次诸弟暨勋将之子为千户，城戍宿州、蕲县，而忠济皆统之。
现代文：严实攻克曹、濮、单三州。其偏将李信留镇青崖，信有罪，怕杀，乘实外出，杀他家属，投降宋朝。
English: He strictly conquered Cao, Yao, and Shan states. He kept Li Xin in Qingya Town. Xin was guilty and afraid of being killed. He took advantage of the situation to go out, kill his family members, and surrender to the Song Dynasty.

古文：己未，世祖南伐，诏率师由间道会鄂。
现代文：太祖十六年，严实收复青崖，擒杀李信。
English: In the 16th year of Taizu, the Qing cliff was restored and Li Xin was killed.

古文：亲率勇士，梯冲登城。
现代文：接着进攻东平，金守将和立刚弃城而逃，严实占据东平。
English: Next, they attacked Dongping. Jin Shou Zhe and Liguang abandoned the city and fled, firmly occupying Dongping.

古文：师还，忠济选勇敢二千，别命千户将之，甲仗精锐，所向无前。
现代文：太祖十七年，宋将彭义斌率师攻取京东州县，严实部将晁海守青崖，开城降宋，并掠尽严实家产，又率军西下，占领许多郡县。
English: In the seventeenth year of Taizu, Song general Peng Yibin led his division to capture Jingdong County, and Yan Shibu led his army westward to occupy many counties.

古文：大臣有言其威权太盛者，中统二年，召还京师，命忠范代之。忠济治东平日，借贷于人，代部民纳逋赋，岁久愈多。
现代文：太祖二十年四月，宋将彭义斌军围东平，实暗中约定与大将孛里海联合出兵夹攻围东平宋军，但孛里海军迟迟不来，而东平城中粮尽，严实只得与义斌议和。
English: In April of the 20th year of Emperor Taizu, Song general Peng Yibin's army encircled Dongping, and secretly agreed with the general of the Balinese Sea to jointly send troops to encircle the Song army in Dongping. However, the Balinese navy was slow to arrive, and the grain in Dongping City was exhausted, and strictly had to negotiate with Yibin.

古文：及谢事，债家执文券来征。
现代文：义斌打算藉严实之力攻取河朔，而后再图严实，故待实如其兄。
English: Yibin planned to capture Heshuo by Yan's force, and then again by Yan's force, so he waited for Yan to do the same as his brother.

古文：帝闻之，悉命发内藏代偿。
现代文：当时严实所属有数千兵马，义斌听任严实统领。
English: At that time, Yansei had thousands of soldiers and horses under his command, and Yibin followed Yansei's lead.

古文：东平庙学故隘陋，改卜高爽地于城东，教养诸生，后多显者。
现代文：七月，义斌下真定，途经西山与蒙古孛里海军相遇，令实与蒙古交战，他自己表面是助战，实际是坐观虎斗。
English: In July, Yibin Shimo Zhending passed through Xishan and met with the Mongolian Baili Navy, which actually led to a war with Mongolia. On the surface, he was assisting in the war, but in reality, he was just watching.

古文：幕僚如宋子贞、刘肃、李昶、徐世隆，俱为名臣。
现代文：严实知形势急迫，忙与孛里海军会合，共同击败宋军，生擒义斌。不到一个月，京东州县又为严实所有。
English: Knowing the urgency of the situation, Yan Shizhi hurriedly met with the Baili Navy to jointly defeat the Song Army and give birth to Yu Yibin. Less than a month later, Jingdong County was once again in Yan Shizhi's possession.

古文：至元二十三年，特授资德大夫、中书左丞、行江浙省事，以老辞。
现代文：这年冬季，木华黎之弟带孙攻取彰德。第二年又攻濮州、东平。第三年木华黎之子孛鲁攻取益都，这些战果中都有严实的功劳。太宗二年四月，严实在牛心帐殿朝拜太宗，赐虎符。
English: In the winter of that year, Mu Huali's younger brother and his grandson conquered Changde. In the following year, they conquered Bozhou and Dongping. In the third year, Mu Huali's son, Jilu, conquered Yidu. All of these victories were due to the merits of Yan Sheng. In April of the second year of Taizong, Yan Sheng paid homage to Taizong at the Bull's Heart Hall and was given a tiger emblem.

古文：二十九年，赐钞万五千缗、宅一区，召其子瑜入侍。
现代文：六年，再朝拜于和林，授东平路行军万户，其偏将八人赐金符。
English: Six years later, he paid homage to Warim and granted the Dongping Road to all households, of which only eight were given gold charms.

古文：三十年，卒。忠济统理方郡凡十一年，爵人命官，生杀予夺，皆自己出。
现代文：严实原来统属五十余城，而现在只有德州、兖州、济州、单州隶属于东平路。九年九月，诏令严实不要征伐。在攻下彰德时，带孙恼恨该城时降时叛，反复无常，要诛杀该城老幼万人。
English: Yan Si was originally subordinated to more than 50 cities, but now only Dezhou, Zhangzhou, Jeju and Shanzhou are subordinated to Dongping Road. In September of the ninth year, the imperial edict ordered Yan Si not to invade. When he conquered Zhangde, he was angry with the city's ups and downs, capricious, and wanted to kill the city's old and young people.

古文：及谢去大权，贵而能贫，安于义命，世以是多之。
现代文：严实劝道： 他们本来是国家臣民，只因我们兵力未到，他们被胁从，何罪之有？ 
English: He earnestly advised, "They were originally subjects of the state, but because we did not have enough troops, they were coerced into obedience. What is their crime?

古文：后谥庄孝。
现代文：带孙听了他的劝告。
English: Take-sun listened to his advice.

古文：忠嗣，实之第三子也。少从张澄、商挺、李桢学，略知经史大义。
现代文：攻下濮州，又要大肆屠杀，严实再次劝阻： 百姓不曾与我们为敌，岂可与兵卒一样同处于死，不如留下来以供军需粮草。 
English: If they capture Bozhou, they will start a large-scale massacre, and we must sternly dissuade them again: If the people have never been our enemies, shouldn't they be put to death together with the soldiers? It would be better to stay to supply the army with grain and grass.

古文：辛亥，其兄忠济授以东平人匠总管，遥领单州防御使事。乙卯，充东平路管军万户。
现代文：濮州城民因而幸免于死者数万人。其后在曹州、楚丘、定陶、上党诸地也是一样。当时，蒙古军由武关出襄阳、邓州。严实在徐州、邳州之间，以为大军破河南，杀戮必多，便载一些金银缎匹去赎人命，并且约束诸将，不准妄有杀掠。灵壁一县，蒙军要屠杀五万人，严实把他们都救了出来。
English: As a result, the citizens of Zhangzhou were spared tens of thousands of deaths. Later, the same happened in Caozhou, Chuqiu, Dingtao, and Shangdang. At that time, the Mongolian army left Xiangyang and Dengzhou from Wuguan. Yancheng was between Xuzhou and Zhangzhou. Thinking that a large army would break through Henan and there would be a lot of killing, he carried some gold and silver horses to redeem human lives, and restrained the generals from killing and looting. In Lingbi County, the Mongolian army wanted to kill 50,000 people, and Yancheng saved them all.

古文：丁巳，从忠济略地扬州，取邵伯埭，首立战功。己未南征，从忠济渡淮，分兵出挂车岭，与宋兵相拒三昼夜，杀获甚众，始达蕲州。
现代文：这年大闹饥荒，百姓向北方逃亡者多饿死。蒙古法律规定：凡隐藏逃亡者，同乡邻里一同治罪，以致逃亡者无处可去，僵尸遍野。
English: There was a famine that year, and most of the people who fled to the north died of starvation. Mongolian law stipulates that anyone who hides a fugitive will be punished together with their neighbors, so that the fugitive has nowhere to go, and zombies are everywhere.

古文：及渡江抵鄂，分部攻城九十余日，战甚力。
现代文：严实命煮粥置于道旁，救活者甚多。严实的部下有逃归益都者数十人，益都攻下后这些人都被俘，以为必杀无疑，而实置之不问。
English: Yan solidly cooked porridge and placed it by the roadside, saving many lives. Yan solidly's subordinates had dozens of people who escaped and returned to Yidu. After Yidu was captured, these people were all captured. They thought that they would be killed without a doubt, but they did not question it.

古文：师还，授金虎符。中统三年，李璮叛，宋兵攻蕲县，势张甚，徐州总管李杲哥降于宋，齐鲁山寨为宋兵所据。
现代文：王义深是彭义斌的部将，闻义斌败，准备跑向河南，路过东平，杀害了严实的家族。后来河南被攻破严实俘获了王义深的妻子，不仅不杀，而且不记旧怨，厚加周济，送还其乡里。严实于太宗十二年卒，年五十九岁。远近为之悲痛，野哭巷祭，时达一月之久。中统二年，追封为鲁国公，谥武惠。
English: Wang Yishen was the general of Peng Yibin. When he heard that Yibin was defeated, he prepared to run to Henan, passed Dongping, and killed Yan Si's family. Later, Henan was invaded and Yan Si captured Wang Yishen's wife. Not only did he not kill her, but he also did not remember the old grudge, gave her a generous allowance, and sent her back to his hometown. Yan Si died in the 12th year of Taizong, at the age of 59. He was mourned far and wide, and wept in the streets for a month. Two years after the unification of China, he was posthumously named the Prince of

