古文： 宁馨 、 阿堵 ，晋宋间人语助耳。
现代文： 宁馨 、 阿堵 是晋、宋时候的语助词。
English: Ningxiang and Adong were the auxiliary words in the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：后人但见王衍指钱云： 举阿堵物却。 
现代文：后代人但见王衍指着钱说： 搬掉阿堵物。 
English: Subsequent generations saw Wang Yan pointing to the money and saying, "Remove the blockage."

古文：又山涛见衍曰： 何物老媪生宁馨儿？ 
现代文：又山涛见王衍时说： 什么老婆婆生了个宁舞儿？ 
English: When Shantao saw Wang Yan again, he said, "What kind of old woman gave birth to a Ning Dang son?

古文：今遂以阿堵为钱，宁馨儿为佳儿，殊不然也。
现代文：遂把阿堵当成钱，宁馨儿当成佳儿实际上不是的。
English: So he took A Dou as money, but Ning Xin'er as a girl, which is actually not true.

古文：前辈诗 语言少味无阿堵，冰雪相看有此君 ，又 家无阿堵物，门有宁馨儿 ，其意亦如此。
现代文：前代人诗： 语言少滋味因为没阿堵，冰雪中相看顾只有此竹君。 又： 家无阿堵物，门有宁落儿 ，意思也是这样。
English: The previous generation's poem: The language is less delicious because there is no A-tou, only this Bamboo Monk looks after each other in the ice and snow. Also: Home without A-tou, the door has a peaceful fall, the meaning is the same.

古文：宋废帝之母王太后疾笃，帝不往视，后怒谓侍者： 取刀来剖我腹，那得生宁馨儿！ 
现代文：宋废帝的母亲王太后病重，废帝不去看问。王太后大怒对陪侍的人说： 取刀来剖我腹，那得生宁馨儿！ 
English: The empress dowager, the mother of Emperor Song, was seriously ill, and Emperor Song did not visit her. The empress dowager angrily said to the attendants: "Take a knife and cut open my belly, that will give birth to Ning Xin Er!"

古文：观此，岂得为佳？
现代文：看看这句话，怎么能是佳儿？
English: Look at this sentence, how can you be a good girl?

古文：顾长康画人物，不点目睛，曰： 传神写照正在阿堵中。 
现代文：顾长康画人物，不点眼珠。他说： 写真传神全在阿堵中。 
English: Gu Changkang paints figures without batting an eyelid. He said, "Photographic inspiration is all in Adu.

古文：犹言 此处 也。
现代文：犹说 此处 啊。
English: They say it all starts here.

古文：刘真长讥殷渊源曰： 田舍儿，强学人作尔馨语。 
现代文：刘真长说： 庄家儿，也学别人作尔馨语。 
English: Liu Zhenchang said: Zhuangjia'er, it is also good to learn other people's calligraphy.

古文：又谓桓温曰： 使君，如馨地宁可斗战求胜？ 
现代文：又对桓温说： 如馨地怎么能用武力求取胜利？ 
English: He also said to Kuan Wen, "How can Ru Xiangdi seek victory by force?

古文：王导与何充语曰： 正自尔馨。 
现代文：王导对何充说： 正自尔馨。 
English: Wang Du said to He Chong: You are being selfish.

古文：王恬拨王胡之手曰： 冷如鬼手馨，强来促人臂。 
现代文：王恬拔开王胡的手说： 冷似鬼手馨，强力来捉人臂膀。 
English: Wang Yao pulled away Wang Hu's hand and said, "Cold as a ghost's hand, strong enough to catch a man's arm."

古文：至今吴中人语言尚多用宁馨字为问，犹言 若何 也。
现代文：到现在吴地的语言还多用宁馨二字作问答，犹说 如柯这样 啊！
English: Up to now, the language of Wuxi still uses the word "Ningxing" for questions and answers. It is still said, "Like Ke!"

古文：刘梦得诗： 为问中华学道者，几人雄猛得宁馨。 盖得其义。以宁字作平声读。
现代文：刘梦得诗： 伪问中华学道者，几人雄猛得宁馨， 得到真义，他把宁字当平声字用。
English: Liu Mengde's poem: When asking pseudo-Chinese scholars about Taoism, a few of them bravely got Ningxiang and got the true meaning. He used the word Ning as a phonetic character.

