古文：文信侯出走，与司空马之赵，赵以为守相。
现代文：文信侯吕不韦被罢免了相国的职位，和司空马一起逃到赵国，赵王让他做了代理相国。
English: Wenxin Hou Lvubei was removed from his position as consort and fled to Zhao with Sikuoma. Zhao Wang made him acting consort.

古文：秦下甲而攻赵。
现代文：秦国调集军队正准备进攻赵国。
English: Qin mobilized troops and was preparing to attack Zhao.

古文：司马空说赵王曰： 文信侯相秦，臣事之，为尚书，习秦事。
现代文：司空马游说赵王说： 文信侯担任秦国相国的时候，我是侍奉他的下属，做过尚书，因此熟悉秦国的情况。
English: Zhao Wang, the secretary of Kuangma Lobbying, said: When Wenxin Hou served as the Minister of State of Qin, I served as his subordinate, did Shangshu, so I am familiar with the situation of Qin.

古文：今大王使守小官，习赵事。请为大王设秦、赵之战，而亲观其孰胜。
现代文：如今大王让我做代理小官，我也熟悉赵国的情况，请大王假设一下秦赵两国之间的战争，来看看哪个国家会取得胜利。
English: Now the king asked me to be a deputy minor official, and I am also familiar with the situation in Zhao. I asked the king to assume a war between the two countries of Qin and Zhao to see which country would win.

古文：赵孰与秦大? 
现代文：依大王看来，赵国和秦国相比而言，哪一个国家强大？ 
English: According to the great king, compared to Zhao and Qin, which country is more powerful?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文：赵王说： 赵国不如秦国强大。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文： 民孰与之众? 
现代文：司空马说： 两国的人口相比而言，哪一个国家的人口多？ 
English: Sikuoma said: Comparing the population of the two countries, which country has a larger population?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文：赵王说： 赵国不如秦国的人口多。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文： 金钱粟孰与之富? 
现代文：司空马说： 两国的粮食钱币相比而言，哪一个国家更富有？ 
English: Sikuoma said: Compared to the grain money of the two countries, which country is richer?

古文：曰： 弗如。 
现代文：赵王说： 赵国不如秦国富有。 
English: Zhao Wang said: Zhao is not as rich as Qin.

古文： 国孰与之治? 
现代文： 两国相比，哪一个国家政治清明、社会安定？ 
English: Compared to the two countries, which country has the most political clarity and social stability?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文： 赵国不如秦国。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文： 相孰与之贤? 
现代文： 两国的宰相哪一个国家的贤明？ 
English: The prime minister of which of the two countries is wise?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文： 赵国不如秦国。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文： 将孰与之武? 
现代文： 两国的将军哪一个国家的更勇武？ 
English: Which country's generals are the bravest?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文： 赵国不如秦国。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文： 律令孰与之明? 
现代文： 两国相比，哪一个国家的政令更严明？ 
English: Compared to the two countries, which country's government decree is stricter?

古文：曰： 不如。 
现代文： 赵国的政令不如秦国的政令严明。 
English: The edicts of Zhao were not as strict as those of Qin.

古文：司空马曰： 然则大王之国，百举而无及秦者，大王之国亡。 
现代文：司空马说： 既然这样的话，大王的国家在各个方面没有能够比得上秦国的，那么大王的国家要灭亡了。 
English: Sikuoma said, "In that case, if Daowang's country cannot match Qin's country in all aspects, then Daowang's country will perish."

古文：赵王曰： 卿不远赵，而悉教以国事，愿于因计。 
现代文：赵王说： 请先生不要远离赵国而去，全力以赴的教导国事，我愿意听从先生的计策。 
English: Zhao Wang said, "Please sir, don't go far away from Zhao Guo, and do your best to teach state affairs. I am willing to follow your advice."

古文：司空马曰： 大王裂赵之半以赂秦，秦不接刃而得赵之半，秦必悦。
现代文：司空马献策说： 假如大王赂秦以半数国土，秦国兵不血刃便获此厚利，必大喜过望。
English: Sikyong Ma Xianke said: If the great king bribed Qin with half of the land, the Qin soldiers would get this huge profit without bloodshed, and they would be overjoyed.

古文：内恶赵之守，外恐诸侯之救，秦必受之。
现代文：秦一来担心赵兵作鱼死网破之争，二来深恐诸侯率兵来救，秦王必定迫不急待收受献地。
English: On the one hand, Qin was worried that Zhao's soldiers would make a mess of the dispute, and on the other hand, he was deeply afraid that the princes would come to the rescue with soldiers. The Qin king must be in no hurry to receive the offered land.

古文：秦受地而卻兵，赵守半国以自存。
现代文：秦得到土地，欲望得到一时的满足，便会退兵回国暂作休整，赵国虽然仅剩半壁河山，还足以自存。
English: When Qin got land and his desires were satisfied for a while, he would withdraw his troops and return to China to take a break. Although Zhao Province only has half of its mountains and rivers left, it still has enough resources to survive.

古文：秦衔赂以自强，山东必恐；亡赵自危，诸侯必惧。惧而相救，则从事可成。
现代文：秦国收到贿赂日益骄横，山东诸侯必然十分恐慌；假如赵国灭亡就会危及他们自已，他们一定会惊恐不安，从而出兵救赵。
English: Qin received bribes and became more and more arrogant. The princes of Shandong must have panicked. If Zhao were to fall, it would endanger them. They must have been terrified and anxious, so they sent troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：臣请大王约从。
现代文：在形势的推动下，合纵阵线顷刻间就能形成。
English: Driven by the situation, a united front can be formed in an instant.

古文：从事成，则是大王名亡赵之半，实得山东以敌秦，秦不足亡。 
现代文：臣请求为大王约合各路诸侯，如此，大王名义上失去了半壁河山，实际上却得到山东各诸侯的援助来共同抗击秦国，秦国也不难被灭亡了。 
English: The vassal requested that the vassals of the Great King make an agreement with the vassals of the various provinces. In this way, the Great King nominally lost half of the mountains and rivers, but in fact received the assistance of the vassals of Shandong to jointly resist Qin. Qin was not difficult to be destroyed.

古文：赵王曰： 前日秦下甲攻赵，赵赂以河间十二县，地削兵弱，卒不免秦患。
现代文：赵王说： 前日秦国派出军队进攻赵国，我为了求得自保，就拿河间十二个县贿赂秦国，国土减少，兵力削弱，最终也免不了秦国军队的患难。
English: Zhao Wang said, "The day before yesterday, Qin sent troops to attack Zhao. In order to protect myself, I bribed Qin with twelve counties in Hebei Province. The territory was reduced, the troops were weakened, and eventually the Qin army was in trouble.

古文：今又割赵之半以强秦，力不能自存，因以亡矣。
现代文：现在你又建议割让我一半的国土，来使秦国变得更加强大，赵国更加无力自保，难免因此就会遭受亡国之灾。
English: Now you are proposing to cut off half of my land to make Qin more powerful and Zhao less able to defend itself, which will inevitably lead to the downfall of the country.

古文：愿卿之更计。 
现代文：你还是再想一个别的计策吧。 
English: You'll have to think of another trick.

古文：司空马曰： 臣少为秦刀笔，以官长而守小官，未尝为兵首，请为大王悉赵兵以遇。 
现代文：司空马说： 我年少的时候做过刀笔小吏，做了那么多年了，还是尚书小官，从来没有做过将帅，我请求带领赵国的全部军队去抗击秦国大军。 
English: Sikuoma said, "When I was young, I was a petty officer in charge of swords and pens. After so many years, I am still a petty officer in charge of calligraphy. I have never been a general. I ask you to lead the entire army of Zhao to fight against the great army of Qin."

古文：赵王不能将。
现代文：赵王不肯让司空马做将帅。
English: Zhao Wang refused to let Sikuoma be the captain.

古文：司空马曰： 臣效愚计，大王不用，是臣无以事大王，愿自请。 
现代文：司空马说： 我只有进献这个愚蠢的计策，大王不愿意采用，这样的话我也没什么能够侍奉大王的了，请允许我离开赵国吧。 
English: Sikuoma said, "I have no choice but to propose this stupid plan, but the great king does not want to adopt it. In that case, I would have nothing to serve the great king with. Please allow me to leave Zhao."

古文：司空马去赵，渡平原。
现代文：司空马离开赵国，从平原津渡过。
English: Sikuoma left Zhao and passed through the plain of Tsu.

古文：平原津令郭遗劳而问： 秦兵下赵，上客从赵来，赵事何如? 
现代文：平源津的长官郭遗得到了消息，便热情地接待他，向他打听战事： 听说秦兵正在攻打赵国，客人自邯郸来，请问战况如何？ 
English: The governor of Pingyuanjin, Guo Yu, received the news and warmly received him, asking him about the war: I heard that the Qin soldiers were attacking Zhao, and the guests came voluntarily. How was the war?

古文：司空马言其为赵王计而弗用，赵必亡。
现代文：司空马叙述了一遍为赵王设谋图存而赵王不采纳、赵国灭亡只在朝夕之间的事。
English: Sikuoma recounted the story of how King Zhao devised a plan to survive, but King Zhao did not adopt it, and the destruction of Zhao was only in the morning and evening.

古文：平原令曰： 以上客料之，赵何时亡? 
现代文：郭遗说： 那么客人估计赵国能支持多久？ 
English: Guo Yu said: So how long does the guest estimate that Zhao Guo can support?

古文：司空马曰： 赵将武安君，期年而亡；若杀武安君，不过半年。
现代文：司空马说： 赵王若能坚持以武安君李牧为将，可支一年；如果妄杀武安君，灭亡之期，则不出半年。
English: Sikyong Ma said, "If Zhao Wang can persist in using Wu'anjun and Li Mu as his generals, he can live for one year; if he kills Wu'anjun, the period of his death will not exceed half a year."

古文：赵王之臣有韩仓者，以曲合于赵王，其交甚亲，其为人疾贤妒功臣。
现代文：我听说赵王臣子之中有个叫韩仓的，善于阿谀奉承、曲意迎上，甚得赵王欢心。这个人妒贤嫉能，每每谗害有功之臣。
English: I heard that among Zhao Wang's vassals, there was a man named Han Cang, who was good at flattery and seduction, and was very popular with Zhao Wang. This man was envious and jealous, and every time he harmed a meritorious vassal.

古文：今国危亡，王必用其言，武安君必死。 
现代文：如今赵国正是风雨飘摇之时，赵王非亲勿用，必听韩仓之言，武安君下场可想而知。 
English: Now is the time when Zhao Guo is in the storm, Zhao Wangfuxin should not be used, must listen to Han Cang's words, Wu Anjun's fate can be imagined.

古文：韩仓果恶之，王使人代。
现代文：韩仓果然对赵王进谗言，赵王派人取代李牧统帅的职位，令其马上返回邯郸。
English: Han Cang really said to Zhao Wangjin, Zhao Wang sent someone to replace Li Mu's position as commander-in-chief and ordered him to return to the capital immediately.

古文：武安君至，使韩仓数之曰： 将军战胜，王觞将军。将军为寿于前而捍匕首，当死。 
现代文：然后派韩仓胡乱找茬数落李牧： 将军得胜归来，大王向你敬酒贺功，可将军回敬大王时，袖套里藏着匕首，犯下这样的罪过应该被处死！ 
English: Then Han Cang was sent to randomly find out the number of cheats to trick Li Mu: When the general returned victorious, the great king gave you a toast to congratulate you, but when the general returned the tribute to the great king, he had a dagger hidden in his sleeve. If you commit such a crime, you should be executed!

古文：武安君曰： 繓病钩，身大臂短，不能及地，起居不敬，恐惧死罪于前，故使工人为木材以接手。上若不信，繓请以出示。 
现代文：武安君急忙分辩说： 臣胳膊患了曲挛之疾，无法伸直，而我的身躯高大，跪拜之时不能双手够地，臣深恐对大王不敬而触犯死罪，便叫木工做了一个假臂，大王若是不信，臣可示之于王。 
English: Wu Anjun hurriedly argued: My arm suffers from the disease of torticollis and cannot be straightened, and my body is tall, so when I kneel, my hands cannot reach the ground. Fearing that I would offend the king by disrespecting him, I asked the carpenter to make a prosthetic arm. If the king does not believe me, I can show it to him.

古文：出之袖中，以示韩仓，状如振捆，缠之以布。 愿公入明之。 
现代文：于是从袖中取出假肢给韩仓看。那假肢状如木橛，缠以布条。
English: So he took out a prosthetic limb from his sleeve and showed it to Han Cang. The prosthetic limb was shaped like a raft and was wrapped in cloth strips.

古文：韩仓曰： 受命于王，赐将军死，不赦。臣不敢言。 
现代文：李牧恳求韩仓向赵王加以解释。韩仓却不理睬，冷言道： 臣只是受命于王，大王赐将军死，绝不容恕，我不敢为你多言。 
English: Li Mu implored Han Cang to explain to King Zhao, but Han Cang ignored him and coldly said, "The vassal was only ordered by the king, the great king gave the general death, which is absolutely unacceptable, I dare not say more for you."

古文：武安君北面再拜赐死，缩剑将自诛，乃曰： 人臣不得自杀宫中。 
现代文：无奈，李牧朝北向赵王遥叩感谢往昔知遇之恩，抽出宝剑准备自杀，可转念一想：臣子不能自杀于宫中。
English: In desperation, Li Mu Chao Bei thanked Zhao Wangyao for the kindness he had received in the past, drew his sword and prepared to commit suicide, but then thought: a courtier cannot commit suicide in the palace.

古文：遇司空马门，趣甚疾，出諔门也。
现代文：于是他快步走出司马门。
English: So he walked briskly out of Sima Gate.

古文：右举剑将近自诛，臂短不能及，衔剑征之于柱以自刺。
现代文：当他前行走出门之后，李牧右手引剑自杀，可是胳膊太短，宝剑无法刺透，于是以嘴含剑，将剑柄抵在柱子上自刺而死。
English: When he walked out of the door, Li Mu drew his sword with his right hand to commit suicide, but his arm was too short to pierce the sword, so he held the sword in his mouth and stabbed himself to death.

古文：武安君死五月，赵亡。
现代文：李牧死后才个月，赵国就灭亡了。
English: Only a month after Li Mu's death, Zhao's state collapsed.

古文：平原令见诸公，必为言之曰： 磋嗞乎，司空马! 
现代文：平原令郭遨，每次见到朋友，总为司空马咨嗟叹惜不已。
English: Every time he sees his friend, Guo Wei, the governor of the plain, always feels sorry for Sikuo Ma Zhi.

古文：又以为司空马逐于秦，非不知也；去赵，非不肖也。
现代文：而他又认为，司空马为秦所放逐并非由于愚鲁，离开赵国并非出于无能。
English: But he also believed that the expulsion of Sikuoma for Qin was not due to stupidity, and leaving Zhao was not due to incompetence.

古文：赵去司空马而国亡。国亡者，非无贤人，不能用也。
现代文：赵国走了一个司空马，致使国家灭亡，可见亡国灭族，并不是没有贤才辅佐，只是君主不能用贤罢了。
English: The State of Zhao was led by an incompetent ruler, which led to the country's downfall. It can be seen that the downfall of a country and the annihilation of its people is not without the assistance of a wise man, but a monarch cannot use a wise man.

