古文：武王问太公曰： 王者举具，三军器用，攻守之具，科品从寡，岂有法乎？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 君王发动战争，军队的武器装备和攻守器械，其种类的区分和数量的多少，难道有一定的标准吗？ 
English: King Wu asked the grand duke, "Does the king have a certain standard for starting a war, for the army's weaponry and offensive and defensive equipment, and for their types and quantities?

古文：太公曰： 大哉，王之问也！
现代文：太公答道： 君王您问的这个确实是一个大问题啊！
English: The father-in-law replied: Your Majesty, what you are asking is indeed a big question!

古文：夫攻守之具，各有科品，此兵之大威也。 
现代文：攻守器械的种类和数量，各有不同，这可是关系到军队威力强弱的大事。 
English: The type and quantity of offensive and defensive equipment are different, which is an important matter related to the strength of the army.

古文：武王曰： 愿闻之。 
现代文：武王说： 我想听听相关的详细内容。 
English: Wu Wang said: I want to hear the relevant details.

古文：太公曰： 凡用兵之大数，将士万人，法用：武冲大扶胥三十六乘。
现代文：太公说： 凡是用兵作战，所使用的武器装备都有一个基本的标准。
English: Taigong said: Whenever soldiers fight, there is a basic standard for the weapons and equipment used.

古文：材士强弩矛戟为翼一车二十四人推之，以八尺车轮，车上立旗鼓，兵法谓之震骇，陷坚陈，败强敌。
现代文：统率甲士达到万人，所需武器装备的标准是：名为武冲大扶胥的战车三十六辆，让勇武之士手执强弓、劲弩、长矛、铁戟护卫在战车两侧，每辆车用二十四人推行，其车轮的高度为八尺，车上没有旌旗和战鼓。按照兵法上所说，这种车辆被称为 震骇 ，它可以用来攻破坚固的敌阵，击败强大的敌军。
English: The standard of the required weapons and equipment is as follows: thirty-six chariots called Wuchong Da Fu Rong, with brave warriors holding strong bows, cudgels, spears, and shovels as guards on both sides of the chariots. Each vehicle is driven by twenty-four people. The height of its wheels is eight feet, and there are no flags or drums on the vehicle. According to the laws of war, this vehicle is called "shock and awe," and it can be used to break through solid enemy lines and defeat powerful enemy forces.

古文：武翼大橹矛戟扶胥七十二具。
现代文：名为武翼大橹矛戟扶胥的战车七十二辆，以有技能而勇猛的武士使用强弩、矛、戟为两翼护卫。
English: There are seventy-two chariots called "Wu-Wing-Da-Ji-Ji-Ji-Fu-Ji," with skilled and brave warriors using strong shields, spears, and halberds as two-wing escorts.

古文：材士强弩矛戟为翼，以五尺车轮，绞车连弩自副，陷坚陈，败强敌。
现代文：其车轮高五尺，并附设用绞车发射的连弩，可用它攻破坚阵，击败强敌。
English: Its wheels are five feet high, and it is equipped with a winch-launched chain hoist, which can be used to break through the strong line and defeat the strong enemy.

古文： 提翼小橹扶胥一百四十具。
现代文：名为提翼小橹扶胥的战车一百四十辆，附设用绞车发射的连弩。
English: There were one hundred and forty chariots with the names of Wing-Lifting Chariots and Small Chariot Chariot Chariots, and attached to them was a winch-launched pike.

古文：绞车连弩自副，以鹿车轮，陷坚陈，败纱敌。
现代文：这种车装有独轮，可用它攻破坚阵，击败强敌。
English: This kind of car is equipped with a single wheel, which can be used to break through the strong line and defeat the strong enemy.

古文： 大黄参连弩大扶胥三十六乘。材士强弩矛戟为翼，飞凫、电影自副。飞凫，赤茎白羽，以铜为首；电影，青茎赤羽，以铁为首。
现代文： 大黄参连弩大扶胥 三十六辆，以勇武之士手执强弓、劲弩、长矛、铁戟护卫左右，并附设 飞凫 和 电影 两种旗帜。 飞凫 用红色的杆、白色的羽制成，用铜做旗竿头； 电影 用青色的杆、红色的羽制成，用铁做旗竿头。
English: There are thirty-six rhubarb-leafed palanquins and thirty-six large palanquins, with bows, halberds, spears, and crossbows held in the hands of brave warriors, guarding the left and right sides, and attached to them are two kinds of flags: flying and film flags.Flying and film flags are made of red rods and white feathers, with a copper flagpole; film flags are made of blue rods and red feathers, with an iron flagpole.

古文：昼则以绛缟，长六尺，广六寸，为光耀；夜则以白缟，长六尺，广六寸，为流星。
现代文：白天就用红色的丝绢作旗子，长六尺，宽六寸，称之为 光耀 ；晚上就用白色的丝绢作旗子，长六尺，宽六寸，称之为 流星 。
English: During the day, they use red silk ribbons to make flags, six feet long and six inches wide, and call it a radiance; at night, they use white silk ribbons to make flags, six feet long and six inches wide, and call it a meteor.

古文：陷坚陈，败步骑。
现代文：这种战车可以用来攻破坚固的敌阵，击败其步兵和骑兵。
English: It can be used to break through the stronghold and defeat the enemy on foot.

古文： 大扶胥冲车三十六乘。螳螂武士共载，可以纵击横，可以败敌之。
现代文：名为大扶胥冲车的战车三十六辆，车上载乘称作螳螂的武士，可以用来纵横冲击，击败强敌。
English: There are thirty-six chariots called "Daifukuro Chariots" with samurai warriors called "roaches" on board, which can be used to strike vertically and horizontally to defeat strong enemies.

古文： 辎车骑寇，一名电车，兵法谓之电击。
现代文：名为辎车寇骑的战车，也叫电车。兵法上称为电击。
English: The chariot called the chariot raider is also called the tram. It is called electric shock in military law.

古文：陷坚陈，败步骑。
现代文：可以用来攻破坚阵，击败敌人步骑。
English: It can be used to break through the stronghold and defeat the enemy on foot.

古文：寇夜来前，矛戟扶胥轻车一百六十乘，螳螂琥士三人共载，兵法谓之霆击。陷坚陈，败步骑。
现代文：敌人乘黑夜前来突袭，宜用名为矛戟扶胥轻车的战车一百六十辆，每车上载乘称作螳螂的武士三人。兵法上称为霆击，可用来攻破坚阵，击败敌人步骑。
English: When the enemy comes in the dark to attack, it is advisable to use 160 chariots called Spearman Light Chariot, each carrying three warriors called Mantis. In the art of war, it is called Thunder Strike, which can be used to break through strong lines and defeat the enemy on foot.

古文： 方首铁棓维盼，重十二斤，柄长五尺以上，千二百枚，一名天棓。
现代文：名为方首铁棓维朌的铁棒，重十二斤，柄长五尺以上，共置一千二百把，这种武器也叫天棓。
English: The iron rod, called the square head iron hammer, weighs twelve pounds, the handle is more than five feet long, and there are a total of twelve hundred. This weapon is also called the heavenly hammer.

古文：大柯斧，刃长八寸，重八斤，柄长五尺以上，千二百枚，一名天钺。
现代文：名为大柯斧的长柄斧，刃长八寸，重八斤，柄长五尺以上，共置一千二百把，这种武器也叫天钺。
English: The long-handled axe, known as the Da Ke axe, has a blade eight inches long, weighs eight pounds, and has a handle more than five feet long. There are a total of twelve hundred of them. This weapon is also called the Heavenly Hammer.

古文：方首铁锤，重八斤，柄长五尺以上，千二百枚，一名天锤。
现代文：方首铁槌，重八斤，柄长五尺以上，共一千二百把，也叫天槌。
English: Square-headed hammer, weighing eight pounds, handle length of more than five feet, a total of twelve hundred, also known as the Heavenly Hammer.

古文：败步骑群寇。
现代文：这些武器都可以用来击败敌人的步骑。
English: These weapons can be used to defeat the enemy's cavalry.

古文：飞钩长八寸，钩长芒长四寸，柄长六尺以上，千二百枚，以投其众。
现代文：飞钩，长八寸，钩尖长四寸，柄长六尺以上，共一千二百枚，可以用来投掷钩伤敌人。
English: Flying hooks, eight inches long, hook tip four inches long, handle more than six feet long, a total of twelve hundred pieces, can be used to throw hooks to injure the enemy.

古文：三军拒守，木螳螂剑刃扶胥，广二丈，百二十具，一名行马，平易地，以步兵败车骑。
现代文：军队防守时，应使用一种名为木螳螂剑刃扶胥的战具，每具宽两丈，共一百二十具，也叫行马。在平坦开阔的地形上，步兵可以用它来阻碍敌车骑的行动。
English: When defending, the army should use a kind of combat equipment called the wooden cockroach sword blade support, each of which is two feet wide, a total of one hundred and twenty, also called the walking horse. On flat and open terrain, infantrymen can use it to hinder the movement of enemy chariots.

古文：木蒺藜，去地二尺五寸，百二十具。败步骑，要群寇，遮走北。 
现代文：木蒺藜，设置时要高于地面二尺五寸，共一百二十具，可以用来阻碍敌步骑行动，拦阻势穷力竭的敌人，截堵撤退逃跑的敌人。
English: A total of one hundred and twenty rafts, which should be set two feet and five inches above the ground, can be used to impede enemy cavalry movements, block exhausted enemies, and block retreating and fleeing enemies.

古文： 轴旋短冲矛戟扶胥，百二十具。黄帝所以败尤氏。
现代文：名为轴旋短冲矛戟扶胥的战车一百二十辆，黄帝曾用以打败蚩尤。
English: One hundred and twenty chariots, known as axle-driven short-punched spears, were used by the Yellow Emperor to defeat Miao Yu.

古文：败步骑，要穷寇，遮走北。
现代文：可以用来击败敌人的步骑，拦阻势穷力竭的敌人，截堵撤退逃跑的敌人。
English: It can be used to defeat the enemy's cavalry, hinder the exhausted enemy, and block the retreat of the fleeing enemy.

古文：狭路微径，张铁蒺藜，芒高四寸，广八寸，长六尺以上，千二百具。败步骑。
现代文：在隘路、小道上，可以布设铁蒺藜。铁蒺藜刺长四寸，宽八寸，每具长六尺以上，共一千二百具，可用来阻碍敌人步骑行动。
English: On narrow roads and paths, spikes can be placed. The spikes are four inches long and eight inches wide, each is more than six feet long, a total of twelve hundred, and can be used to impede the enemy's walking and riding.

古文： 突瞑来前促战，白刃接，张地罗，铺两镞蒺藜，参考连织女，芒间相去二尺，万二千具。
现代文：敌人乘着黑夜突然前来逼战，白刃相接，这时应张设地罗，布置两镞蒺藜和名为参连织女的障碍物，每具芒尖相距二寸，共一万二千具。
English: When the enemy suddenly comes in the dark to force a battle and the two sides meet, the ground should be spread out, and the two yokes and the obstacle called the "suspended weaver woman" should be arranged, with the points of each point two inches apart, for a total of twelve thousand.

古文：旷野草中，方胸铤矛，千二百具。
现代文：在旷野深草地区作战，应设置名为方胸铤矛的障碍物共一千二百具。
English: In order to fight in the grasslands of the wilderness, a total of 1,200 obstacles called square breasted spears should be set up.

古文：张铤矛法，高一尺五寸。
现代文：布设铤矛的方法，是使它高出地面一尺五寸。
English: The way to place the spear is to raise it a foot and a half off the ground.

古文：败步骑，要穷寇，遮走北。
现代文：以上这些器具，可以用来击败敌人步骑，拦阻势穷力竭的敌人，截堵撤退逃跑的敌人。
English: It can be used to defeat the enemy's cavalry, hinder the exhausted enemy, and block the retreat of the fleeing enemy.

古文： 狭路微径，地陷，铁械锁参连，百二十具。
现代文：在隘路、小道和低洼的地形上，可以张设名为铁械锁参连的障碍物，共一百二十具。
English: On narrow roads, paths and low-lying terrain, a total of one hundred and twenty obstacles called mechanical locks can be set up.

古文：败步骑，要穷寇，遮走北。
现代文：可以用来击败敌人的步骑，阻碍势穷力竭的敌人，截堵撤退逃跑的敌人。
English: It can be used to defeat the enemy's cavalry, hinder the exhausted enemy, and block the retreat of the fleeing enemy.

古文： 垒门拒守，矛戟小橹，十二具，绞车连弩自副。
现代文：守卫营门，用矛、戟、小橹十二具，并附设绞车连弩。
English: The gate of the camp was guarded by twelve spears, halberds, and small crossbows, and a winch with a chain was attached.

古文：三军拒守，天罗虎落锁连，一部广一丈五尺，高八尺，百二十具。
现代文：军队进行守御时，应设置名为天罗虎落锁连的障碍物，每部宽一丈五尺，高八尺。共一百二十具。
English: When the army is on guard duty, they should set up obstacles called "Tianluo Tiger Locks," each five feet wide and eight feet high, for a total of one hundred and twenty.

古文：虎落剑刃扶胥，广一丈五尺，高八尺，五百二十具。
现代文：并设置名为虎落剑刃扶胥的战车，每部宽一丈五尺，高八尺，共五百二十具。
English: There were also five hundred and twenty chariots, each five feet wide and five feet high, called "Tiger-Dropping-Sword-Edge-Folding-Handles."

古文： 渡沟堑，飞桥一间，广一丈五尺，长二丈以上，着转关辘辘八具，以环利通索张之。
现代文：渡越沟堑，要设置飞桥，每间宽为一丈五尺，长两丈以上，飞桥上装备转关辘轳，共八具，用铁环和长绳架设。
English: To cross the ravine, it is necessary to set up a flying bridge, each with a width of up to five feet and a length of more than two feet. The flying bridge is equipped with turnstiles, a total of eight, set up with iron rings and long ropes.

古文：渡大水，飞江，广一丈五尺，长二丈以上，八具，以环利通索张之。
现代文：横渡江河，要使用名为飞江的浮桥，宽一丈五尺，长两丈以上，共八具，用铁环和长绳把它们联结起来。
English: To cross the river, it is necessary to use a floating bridge called Feijiang, which is five feet wide and more than two feet long, a total of eight, and connect them with an iron ring and a long rope.

古文：天浮铁螳螂，矩内园外，径四尺以上，环络自副，三十二具。
现代文：名为天浮的渡水器材有叫做铁螳螂的铁锚，内呈圆形，外径四尺以上，并用铁环和绳索联结，共三十二具。
English: There are 32 iron anchors called "Iron Mantis," which are circular in shape, with an outer diameter of more than four feet, and are connected with iron rings and ropes.

古文：以天浮张飞江，济大海，谓之天潢，一名天舡。
现代文：用天浮架设飞江，可以横渡大河。这种渡河工具叫做天潢，也叫天舡。
English: With the sky float, you can cross the big river. This river crossing tool is called the sky raft, also known as the sky raft.

古文： 山林野居，结虎落柴营，环利铁索，长二丈以上，千二百枚。
现代文：军队在山林旷野地区扎营，应用木材结成名叫虎落柴营的栅寨。用铁环长绳锁连，每条长两丈以上，共需一千二百条。
English: The troops encamped in the mountain forest wilderness area, and used wood to build a stockade called the Tiger Lumber Camp. They were locked together with iron rings and long ropes, each more than two meters long, and a total of 1,200 ropes were needed.

古文：环利大通索，大四寸，长四丈以上，六百枚。
现代文：带铁环的粗大绳索，铁环大四寸，绳长四丈以上，共六百条。
English: Coarse ropes with iron rings, the iron ring is four inches large, the rope is more than four feet long, a total of six hundred.

古文：环利中通索，大二寸，长四丈以上，二百枚。环利小微缧，长二丈以上，万二千枚。
现代文：带铁环的中等绳索，铁环大两寸，绳长四丈以上，共三百条；小号绳索，每条长两丈以上，共一万二千条。
English: There are three hundred medium-sized ropes with iron rings, the iron ring is two inches large, and the rope is more than four meters long; there are twelve thousand small-sized ropes, each more than two meters long.

古文： 天雨盖重车上板，结枲鉏铻，广四尺，长四丈以上。车一具，以铁杙张之。
现代文：天下雨时，辎重车要盖与车顶板，板上契刻齿槽，使它与车子吻合，每付木板宽四尺，长四丈以上，每辆车配置一付并用名为铁杙的钉子加以固定。
English: When it rains, the roof of the heavy-duty vehicle should be covered with the roof board, and a groove should be carved on the board to make it match the vehicle. Each wooden board is four feet wide and more than four feet long. Each vehicle is equipped with one and fixed with a nail called a spade.

古文： 伐木大斧，重八斤，柄长三尺以上，三百枚；棨钁刃广六寸，柄长五尺以上，三百枚；铜筑固为垂，长五尺以上，三百枚；鹰爪方胸铁耙，柄长七尺以上，三百枚；方胸铁叉，柄长七尺以上，三百枚。
现代文：砍伐树木用的大斧，重八斤，柄长三尺以上，共三百把；名为棨钁的大锄，刃宽六寸，柄长五尺以上，共三百把；名叫铜筑固的大锤，长五尺以上，共三百把；名为鹰爪方胸的铁耙，柄长七尺以上，共三百把；名为方胸铁叉的叉竿，柄长七尺以上，共三百把。
English: There were three hundred large axes for felling trees, weighing eight pounds, with handles more than three feet long; three hundred large hoes, called shovels, with blades six inches wide and handles more than five feet long; three hundred sledgehammers, called copper sledgehammers, with handles more than five feet long; three hundred iron hoes, called eagle claws and square chests, with handles more than seven feet long; three hundred forks, called square chests and forks, with handles more than seven feet long.

古文：芟草木大镰，柄长七尺以上，三百枚；大橹，刃重八斤，柄长六尺，三百枚；委环铁，长三尺以上，三百枚；大槌，重五斤，柄长二尺以上，百二十具。
现代文：剪除草本用的大镰，柄长七尺以上，共三百把；名为大橹刃的割草工具，重八斤，柄长六尺，共三百把；带环的铁橛，长三尺以上，共三百个；钉橛用的大铁槌，重五斤，柄长二尺以上，共一百二十把。
English: There were three hundred large hoes for cutting herbs, with handles more than seven feet long; three hundred mowing tools called large hoe blades, weighing eight pounds, with handles six feet long; three hundred hoes with rings, more than three feet long; and one hundred and twenty large hammers for nailing hoes, weighing five pounds, with handles more than two feet long.

古文： 甲士万人，强弩六千，戟盾一千，矛盾二千，修治攻具，砥砺兵器巧手三百人，此举兵军用之大数也。 
现代文：军队万人，需要装备强弩六千张，戟和大盾两千套，矛和盾两千套，以及修理作战器具和制造兵器的能工巧匠共三百人。以上就是兴兵作战按一万人计算所需要的装备器材的大致数目。 
English: An army of ten thousand men needs to be equipped with six thousand strong shields, two thousand sets of halberds and large shields, two thousand sets of spears and shields, and a total of three hundred skilled craftsmen to repair combat equipment and manufacture weapons.

古文：武王曰： 允哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 的确是像你所说的这样！ 
English: King Wu said, "It is indeed as you say!"

