古文：二十三年春，公至自齐。
现代文：二十二年春季，鲁庄公从齐国回来。
English: In the spring of 1922, Prince Luzhuang returned from Qi.

古文：祭叔来聘。
现代文：周天子大夫祭叔来鲁国访问。
English: Dr. Zhou Tianzi's uncle came to visit Lu.

古文：夏，公如齐观社。
现代文：夏季，鲁庄公到齐国观看祭祀社神。
English: In the summer, Lu Zhuanggong went to Qi Province to watch the worship of the shrine god.

古文：公至自齐。
现代文：庄公从齐国回来。
English: Zhuang Gong has returned from Qi Province.

古文：荆人来聘。
现代文：楚国来鲁国访问。
English: The State of Chu came to visit the State of Lu.

古文：公及齐侯遇于穀。
现代文：庄公在谷地遇见了齐侯。
English: Zhuang Gong met Qi Hou in the valley.

古文：萧叔朝公。
现代文：肖叔朝见庄公。
English: Uncle Xiao went to see Zhuang in the morning.

古文：秋，丹桓宫楹。
现代文：秋季，将鲁桓公庙的柱子漆成红色。
English: In autumn, the pillars of Luhuan Temple are painted red.

古文：冬十有一月，曹伯射姑卒。
现代文：冬季十一月，曹庄公射姑去世。
English: In the winter of November, Cao Zhuang Gongsao passed away.

古文：十有二月甲寅，公会齐侯，盟于扈。
现代文：十二月甲寅日，庄公会见齐侯，在扈地盟会。
English: On December 1st, Zhuang Gong met with Qi Hou at the Fengtian League.

古文：二十三年夏，公如齐观社，非礼也。
现代文：二十三年夏季，鲁庄公到齐国去观看祭祀社神，这是不合于礼的。
English: In the summer of 233, Lu Zhuanggong went to Qi Province to watch the worship of the shrine god, which was not proper.

古文：曹刿谏曰： 不可。
现代文：曹刿劝谏说： 不行。
English: Cao Yu dissuaded him, saying, "You can't go.

古文：夫礼所以整民也，故会以训上下之则，制财用之节，朝以正班爵之义，帅长幼之序，征伐以讨其不然。
现代文：礼，是用来整饬百姓的。所以会见是用以训示上下之间的法则，制订节用财赋的标准；朝觐是用以排列爵位的仪式，遵循老少的次序；征伐是用以攻打对上的不尊敬。
English: Rites are used to discipline the people. Therefore, the meeting is used to teach the rules between the upper and lower classes and to establish the standards for the use of wealth; the pilgrimage is used to arrange the nobility ceremony and follow the order of the old and the young; the conquest is used to attack the disrespect of the other.

古文：诸侯有王，王有巡守，以大习之。
现代文：诸侯朝聘天子，天子视察四方，以熟悉会见和朝觐的制度。
English: Princes and lords hire a heavenly son, and the heavenly son inspects the four directions to familiarize himself with the system of meetings and pilgrimages.

古文：非是，君不举矣。
现代文：如果不是这样，国君是不会有举动的。
English: If this were not the case, the sovereign would not have taken action.

古文：君举必书，书而不法，后嗣何观？ 
现代文：国君的举动史官一定要加以记载。记载而不合于法度，后代子孙看到的是什么？ 
English: Historians must record the actions of the sovereign. If the records are not in accordance with the law, what will future generations see?

古文：晋桓、庄之族偪，献公患之。
现代文：晋国桓叔、庄伯的家族势力强盛而威逼公族，晋献公担心这种情况。
English: The powerful families of Emperor Jin's uncles Kan and Zhuangbo intimidated the commoners, and Emperor Jin was worried about this situation.

古文：士曰： 去富子，则群公子可谋也已。 
现代文：士说： 去掉富子，对公子们就好办了。 
English: The judge said, "If we get rid of the rich kids, it will be easier to deal with the nobles."

古文：公曰： 尔试其事。 
现代文：晋献公说： 你试着办这件事。 
English: Jin Xiangong said: You try to do this thing.

古文：士与群公子谋，谮富子而去之。
现代文：士就在公子们中间讲富子的坏话，然后和公子们设法去掉了富子。
English: He spoke ill of Tomiko in the midst of the nobles, and then he and the nobles managed to get rid of Tomiko.

古文：秋，丹桓宫之楹。
现代文：秋季，在桓公庙的梁柱上涂上红漆。
English: In autumn, red lacquer is applied to the beams and pillars of the Kanko Temple.

