古文：蒲宗孟，字传正，阆州新井人。
现代文：蒲宗孟，字传正，阆州新井人。
English: Po Tsung-Meng, the character Chuan Zheng, and Zhangzhou Arai people.

古文：第进士，调夔州观察推官。
现代文：中进士第，调任夔州观察推官。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking officer and transferred to the post of Zhangzhou observation officer.

古文：治平中，水灾地震，宗孟上书，斥大臣及宫禁、宦寺，熙宁元年，改著作佐郎。
现代文：治平年间，发生水灾地震，蒲宗孟上书，斥责大臣及宫禁、宦寺。熙宁元年，改任著作佐郎。
English: During the Heian period, a flood and an earthquake occurred, and Budo Meng wrote a letter, reprimanding the minister and the Imperial Palace, and Shuji. In the first year of the Heian period, he was reassigned as Shosasaro.

古文：神宗见其名，曰： 是尝言水灾地震者邪！ 召试学士院，以为馆阁校勘、检正中书户房兼修条例，进集贤校理。
现代文：宋神宗看见他的名字，说： 是那个曾经上书谈水灾地震的人哪！ 又召试学士院，用为馆阁校勘、检正中书户房兼修条例，进升为集贤校理。
English: When Song Shenzong saw his name, he said, "This is the man who once wrote a book about floods and earthquakes!" He was also summoned to the Examination Academy, where he was used as a librarian, and was promoted to a scholar.

古文：时三司新置提举帐司官，禄丰地要，人人欲得之。
现代文：当时三司下面新设置了提举账司官，这个官职俸禄优厚，地位关键，很多人都想得到。
English: At that time, the accounting officer was newly set up under the Third Division. Many people wanted to get this position, which has a high salary and a key position.

古文：执政上其员，帝命与宗孟。
现代文：主管其事的执政将候选人名单上报皇上，神宗诏令将这个位置给了蒲宗孟。
English: The regent in charge of the matter reported the list of candidates to the emperor, and the Emperor's edict gave this position to Po Tsung-men.

古文：命察访荆湖两路，奏罢辰、沅役钱及湖南丁赋，远人赖之。
现代文：皇上派他察访荆湖两路，他上奏免去了辰、沅二州的役钱以及湖南的丁赋，偏远之地的人都很信赖他。
English: The emperor sent him to inspect the two roads of Jinghu, and he played the role of freeing Chen, Ying of the two states and Dingfu of Hunan. People in remote areas trusted him.

古文：吕惠卿制手实法，然犹许灾伤五分以上不预。
现代文：吕惠卿制定手实法，但仍然允许受灾损失过半的地区可以不实施手实法。
English: Lyu Huixing formulated the manual method, but still allowed the areas with more than half of the disaster losses not to implement the manual method.

古文：宗孟言： 民以手实上其家之物产而官为注籍，以正百年无用不明之版图而均齐其力役，天下良法也。
现代文：宗孟说 ：百姓自己申报其家中之财产多少，官府为其登记注册，这样可以搞清楚长期以来混淆不清的地产而达到平均百姓劳役的目的，是一个非常好的法令。
English: Zong Meng said: It is a very good law for people to declare the amount of property in their homes themselves, and for the government to register them. In this way, it is possible to clarify the real estate that has been confused for a long time and achieve the goal of average people's labor service.

古文：然灾伤五分不预焉。
现代文：但却又规定受灾损失过半的可以不参与手实法的实施。
English: However, it also stipulates that those who have suffered more than half of the losses from the disaster may not participate in the implementation of the hand-to-hand method.

古文：臣以为使民自供，初无所扰，何待丰岁？
现代文：我认为让百姓自己申报物产，这开始对他们就比较优厚，无所扰乱，又何必硬要等到丰收年月呢？
English: I think that letting people declare their own property is better for them from the start, without any disturbance, and why do they have to wait until the harvest time?

古文：愿诏有司，勿以丰凶弛张其法。 从之，民于是益病矣。
现代文：希望皇上诏令有关官员，无论丰年或是灾年都要大力施行手实法。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will issue an imperial edict to the relevant officials to vigorously enforce the law, regardless of whether it is a good year or a bad year.

古文：俄同修起居注、直舍人院、知制诰，帝又称其有史才，命同修两朝国史，为翰林学士兼侍读。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见，从此老百姓的负担就更加重了。不久，同修起居注、直舍人院、知制诰。皇上又称赞他精通历史，很有史才，于是命他同修两朝国史，为翰林学士兼侍读。
English: The emperor listened to his advice, and from then on the burden on the common people became even heavier. Soon, the monk began to live in a monastery, a hermitage, and a manor house. The emperor also praised him for his mastery of history and great historical talent, so he ordered him to study the history of the two dynasties and serve as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：旧制，学士唯服金带，宗孟入谢，帝曰： 学士职清地近，非他官比，而官仪未宠。 乃加佩鱼，遂著为令。
现代文：按照过去的规定，学士在服饰上只佩金带，宗孟为翰林学士后入朝感谢皇上的恩典时，皇上说： 学士之职位清淡而接近皇位，非其他官职可以比拟，但宫廷礼仪官员却未多加注意，在服饰方面都没有搞得很好。 于是准许他佩鱼袋，并以此为令，以后皆同此。
English: According to the previous regulations, the bachelor only wore a gold band on his clothing. When Zong Meng, a Hanlin bachelor, entered the imperial court to thank the emperor for his grace, the emperor said: The position of the bachelor is light and close to the throne, no other official position can be compared, but the court etiquette officials did not pay much attention and did not do a good job in terms of clothing. Therefore, he was allowed to wear a fish bag, and this was the order, and they were all the same in the future.

古文：枢密都承旨张诚一预书局事，颇肆横，挟中旨以胁同列。
现代文：枢密都承旨张诚一参与书局之事，颇为骄横，常以皇上之旨令要挟、胁迫朝廷官员。
English: The Privy Council ordered Zhang Chengyi to participate in the bookstore, and he was quite arrogant, often using the Emperor's order to threaten and coerce officials of the Imperial Court.

古文：宗孟持其语质帝前，皆非是，因叩头白其奸。
现代文：蒲宗孟拿张诚一所传之旨令到皇上面前对质，结果都不是那样，而往往是他借皇上之名假传的，因此蒲宗孟即叩头于皇帝前，一一陈述张诚一之罪状。
English: Pu Zongmeng ordered to confront Zhang Chengyi in front of the emperor. The results were not the same, but he often falsified the emperor's name. Therefore, Pu Zongmeng bowed before the emperor and stated Zhang Chengyi's charges one by one.

古文：帝察其不阿，欲大用，拜尚书左丞。
现代文：皇上发觉蒲宗孟为人刚正不阿，想给以重用，即拜他为尚书左丞。
English: The emperor found out that Budong Meng was a man of integrity, and wanted to give him a great deal of use, that is, to worship him as Shangshu Zuo.

古文：帝尝语辅臣，有无人才之叹，宗孟率尔对曰： 人才半为司马光邪说所坏。 帝不语，直视久之，曰： 蒲宗孟乃不取司马光邪！
现代文：皇上在与朝中大臣谈话时，曾发出国无人才之感叹，蒲宗孟遂起而答道： 国家之人才多半被司马光之异端邪说影响坏了。 皇上沉默不语，紧盯着蒲宗孟，过了好久才说： 蒲宗孟却是没有受司马光的影响。
English: When the emperor was talking with the ministers of the DPRK and China, he lamented that there was no talent in the country, to which Po Jong Meng replied, "Most of the country's talent has been ruined by Sima Guang's heretical influence." The emperor was silent and stared at Po Jong Meng for a long time before he said, "But Po Jong Meng was not influenced by Sima Guang."

古文：未论别事，只辞枢密一节，朕自即位以来，唯见此一人；他人，则虽迫之使去，亦不肯矣。 宗孟惭惧，至无以为容。
现代文：不说别的，只就辞去枢密使之事而言，我从即位以来，还只看到他一个人这样做；至于其他的人，就算是强迫他调离，也不肯离开。 蒲宗孟听后，诚惶诚恐，觉得无地自容。
English: Since his accession to the throne, I have only seen him do this once; as for the others, even if he was forced to leave, he would not leave.

古文：仅一岁，御史论其荒于酒色及缮治府舍过制，罢知汝州。
现代文：仅仅过了一年，御史上书指责他沉溺于酒色以及建造府第超过了规定，即被罢知汝州。
English: Just a year later, he was ousted from Ruzhou after the official history book accused him of indulging in heavy drinking and building a mansion over the limit.

古文：逾年，加资政殿学士，徙毫、杭、郓三州。
现代文：又过了一年，加升为资政殿学士，徙任亳、杭、郓三州。
English: After another year, he was promoted to a scholar of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs, and moved to the three states of Quzhou, Hangzhou, and Handan.

古文：郓介梁山泺，素多盗，宗孟痛治之，虽小偷微罪，亦断其足筋，盗虽为衰止，而所杀亦不可胜计矣。
现代文：郓州在梁山泺之间，历来都是盗贼出没之地。蒲宗孟到任后，即大加治理，就算犯了小偷这样轻微的罪行，也要挑断他的脚筋。这样盗贼虽然逐渐减少了，而所杀的人却也多得不可胜计。
English: Luzhou, between the Liang Mountains and the Yangtze River, has always been a place where thieves haunt. After Po Tsung-men took office, even if he committed such a minor crime as a thief, he had to break his foot. Although the number of thieves has gradually decreased, the number of people killed has also increased.

古文：方徙河中，御史以惨酷劾，夺职知虢州。
现代文：当他刚迁任河中时，御史即弹劾他施行刑法过于残酷，因此他被罢知虢州。
English: When he had just moved to Hechu, he was impeached by the Emperor for being too cruel in enforcing the criminal law, so he was banished to Zhangzhou.

古文：明年，复知河中，还其职。
现代文：次年，恢复其职，仍知河中。
English: He was reinstated the following year, but remained in the middle of the river.

古文：帅永兴，移大名。
现代文：又徙任永兴军、大名府。
English: He was also appointed to the Yongxing Army and the Daimyo-fu.

古文：宗孟厌苦易地，颇默默不乐，复求河中。
现代文：蒲宗孟厌烦了频繁的易地调任，非常苦闷，因此请求再到河中任职。
English: Po Tsung-meng was fed up with the frequent changes of location and was very bored, so he asked to be reassigned to Ho Chung.

古文：卒，年六十六。
现代文：死时，终年六十六岁。
English: He was 66 years old at the time of his death.

古文：宗孟趣尚严整而性侈汰，藏帑丰，每旦刲羊十、豕十，然烛三百入郡舍。
现代文：蒲宗孟性格严肃而崇尚奢侈，聚集了大量钱财，每天早晨要宰杀十头羊、十头猪，在房间里点燃三百支蜡烛。
English: Serious and extravagant, he amassed a large amount of money, slaughtered ten sheep and ten pigs every morning, and lit three hundred candles in his room.

古文：或请损之，愠曰： 君欲使我坐暗室忍饥邪？ 常日盥洁，有小洗面、大洗面、小濯足、大濯足、小大澡浴之别。
现代文：有人劝他节省一点，他非常不高兴，大怒道： 你是想让我坐在黑暗之中忍受饥饿吗？ 他每天要进行很多种盥洗，分别有小洗面、大洗面、小濯足、大濯足、小大澡浴等等。
English: He was very angry and said, "Do you want me to sit in the dark and go hungry? " He had to perform many kinds of ablutions every day, including small ablutions, large ablutions, small washing feet, large washing feet, small large baths, and so on.

古文：焘论议识趣，有可称述，虽立朝无附，而依违蔡确、章惇间，无所匡建，非大臣之道也。
现代文：每次都要几个婢女服侍，洗一次澡要用五斛澡汤。至于其他方面的享受就更是穷奢极侈了。蒲宗孟曾经写信给苏轼说 ：我晚年学道很有收获。 苏轼则回信说道： 听说你的收获还很不小，但有二件事我不能不劝告你：一是仁慈，二是节俭。 
English: Several maidservants were required to serve each time, and five bowls of bath broth were needed to take a bath. As for other aspects of enjoyment, it was even more extravagant and luxurious. Po Tsung-men once wrote to Su Shi saying, "I have gained a lot from my late years of study." Su Shi wrote back, "I heard that your gains are not small, but there are two things I must advise you: one is kindness, and the other is frugality.

古文：蔡挺，字子政，宋城人。
现代文：这是针对蒲宗孟的过失而言的。蔡挺字子政，宋城人。
English: This is for the fault of Pu Zongmeng. Cai Ting Zi Zheng, a Songcheng resident.

古文：第进士，调虔州推官。
现代文：中进士，调任虔州推官。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking officer and transferred to the post of Kenzhou magistrate.

古文：秩满，以父希言当官蜀，乞代行，遂授陵州团练推官。
现代文：任期满，因其父亲希言该当调往蜀州任职，蔡挺请求代替其父前往蜀，故授他为陵州团练推官。
English: At the end of his term of office, because his father hoped that he should be transferred to Shuzhou to serve, Cai Ting requested to go to Shuzhou in place of his father, so he was awarded the post of Lingzhou Rehearsal Officer.

古文：王尧臣安抚陕西，辟管勾文字。
现代文：王尧臣任陕西安抚使，任命蔡挺为主管机宜文件的管勾文字。
English: Wang Shuxin was appointed as the Shaanxi pacification envoy, and Cai Ting was appointed as the person in charge of the relevant documents.

古文：富弼使辽，奏挺从，至雄州，誓书有所更易，遣挺还白。
现代文：富弼出使辽国，上奏请求让蔡挺随从前往。到达雄州时，因与辽国的盟约有所改变，富弼即派蔡挺回朝禀告。
English: Fuxi sent an envoy to Liao, and requested that Cai Ting accompany him. When he arrived in Xiongzhou, because the alliance with Liao had changed, Fuxi sent Cai Ting back to the imperial court to report.

古文：仁宗欲知契丹事，召对便殿，挺时有父丧，听以衫帽人。
现代文：仁宗想了解契丹的情况，召蔡挺于便殿询问，蔡挺当时还在为父亲服丧，遂听任他着孝服入殿。
English: Renzong wanted to know about the situation in Khitan and summoned Cai Ting to the hall for questioning. Cai Ting was still in mourning for his father at the time, so he allowed him to enter the hall in filial piety.

古文：范仲淹宣抚陕西、河东，奏挺通判泾州，徙鄜州。
现代文：范仲淹任陕西、河东宣抚使，上奏请任蔡挺为泾州通判，又徙任州。
English: Fan Zhongran was appointed as the envoy of Shaanxi and Hedong, and Cai Ting was appointed as the magistrate of Zhangzhou, and then moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：河北多盗，精择诸郡守，以挺知博州。
现代文：河北盗贼极多，朝廷慎重选择各郡守人选，以蔡挺任博州知州。
English: There are many thieves in Hebei, and the imperial court carefully selects the candidates for the county guards, with Cai Ting as the head of Bozhou Zhizhou.

古文：申饬属县严保伍，得居停奸盗者数人，弛其宿负，补为吏，使之察警，盗每发辄得。
现代文：蔡挺到任后，饬令所属各县建立严格的保伍制度。蔡挺抓获了几名寄居当地的盗贼，不再追究他们过去的罪行，然后将他们补为属吏，让他们也来参加纠察盗贼，一有情况即赶紧汇报。
English: After Cai Ting took office, he ordered the counties he belonged to to establish a strict security system. Cai Ting caught several thieves living in the local area, no longer pursued their past crimes, and then added them as subordinate officers, so that they could also participate in picketing thieves, and report them as soon as possible.

古文：均博平、聊城二县税，岁衍钜万。
现代文：此后，盗贼只要一出来活动就马上会被抓获。均衡博平、聊城二县税收，每年增加税收巨万。
English: Since then, thieves have been caught as soon as they start their activities. The taxes of the two counties of Boping and Liaocheng have been balanced, and the taxes have increased by a huge amount every year.

古文：三司下其法于四方，然大抵增赋也。
现代文：三司将他的方法在各地施行，大都增加了赋税。
English: The Third Division implemented his method in various regions, mostly increasing taxes.

古文：为开封府推官、提点府界公事。
现代文：任开封府推官、提点府界公事。
English: He was appointed as the deputy governor of Kaifeng, and was in charge of public affairs in the prefecture.

古文：部修六漯河，用李仲昌议，塞北流，入于六漯。
现代文：主管六漯河的修整，他采纳李仲昌的意见，堵塞黄河商胡北流，引水入于六漯河。
English: The person in charge of the repair of the Liuchuan River, he adopted the opinion of Li Zhongchang, blocked the Yellow River merchant Hu Bei flow, and diverted water into the Liuchuan River.

古文：一夕复决，兵夫芟楗漂溺不可计。
现代文：一天夜里，大坝决口，不计其数的兵士、役夫及各种设施被水冲走。
English: One night, the dam burst, and countless soldiers, servants and various facilities were swept away by the water.

古文：降知滁州，言者以为轻，乃贬秩停官。
现代文：因此之故，蔡挺被降职知滁州，有人认为对他的处罚太轻了，于是他又被削减俸禄，夺去官职。
English: For this reason, Cai Ting was demoted to Zhishu. Some people thought that his punishment was too light, so he was also reduced in salary and deprived of his official position.

古文：越数岁，稍起知南安军，提点江西刑狱，提举虔州盐。
现代文：过了几年，朝廷又开始起用他知安南军，提点江西刑狱，提举虔州盐。
English: A few years later, the imperial court began to use his knowledge of the Southern Army again, mentioning the Jiangxi Penal Prison and raising the salt of Qianzhou.

古文：自大庾岭下南至广，驿路荒远，室庐稀疏，往来无所芘。
现代文：从大庾岭南下至广州，路途遥远荒凉，沿边没有什么居民，往返都没有什么荫蔽之处。
English: From the south of Dalatangling to Guangzhou, the road is remote and desolate, there are few residents along the edge, and there is no shade for the round trip.

古文：挺兄抗时为广东转运使，乃相与谋，课民植松夹道，以休行者。
现代文：蔡挺之兄蔡抗当时为广东转运使，于是他俩策划，让百姓在沿路两边种植松树，以便于赶路的人休息。
English: At that time, Cai Ting's brother, Cai Jian, was the Guangdong transshipment envoy, so the two of them planned to let the people plant pine trees along both sides of the road so that people in a hurry could rest.

古文：江闽盐贼率千百为州县害，挺谕所部与期，使首纳器甲，原其罪，得兵械万计。
现代文：江、闽二地的盐贼成百上千，成为各州县一大祸害。蔡挺即谕示盐贼，限制他们在一定时期内都缴出器甲，即免除他们的罪行，最后获得数以万计的兵器。
English: Hundreds of salt thieves in Jiangsu and Fujian have become a major scourge in every prefecture. Cai Ting immediately ordered the salt thieves to surrender their weapons within a certain period of time, that is, to absolve them of their crimes, and finally obtained tens of thousands of weapons.

古文：官盐恶而价贵，盗盐善而价且下，故私贩日滋。
现代文：官盐质量差而价格贵，盐贼的盐质量好而价格低，所以私自贩盐的人日益增多。
English: The quality of government salt is poor and the price is high, while the quality of salt from salt thieves is good and the price is low. As a result, the number of people selling salt privately is increasing.

古文：挺简僚吏至淮转新盐，明殿赏，以官数之余畀之，于是贼党破散，宿弊遂绝，岁增卖盐四十万。
现代文：于是蔡挺选派僚吏到淮地转输新盐，首先言明奖赏。在转输的新盐售出后，用官盐价与私盐价之间的差额来兑付奖赏，从此私自贩盐的贼党破散，积弊得以根除，每年增加了卖盐的钱四十万。
English: After the new salt was sold, the difference between the official salt price and the private salt price was used to pay the reward. From then on, the thieves who illegally sold salt were dispersed, the accumulated evil was eradicated, and the money for selling salt increased by 400,000 yuan every year.

古文：改陕西转运副使，进直龙图阁、知庆州，因上书论攻守大计。
现代文：改任陕西转运副使，进升直龙图阁、知庆州，遂上书陈论战事攻守之大计。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of Shaanxi transshipment, promoted to Zhilongtu Pavilion and Zhigeizhou, and then wrote a book on the war and the grand plan of attack and defense.

古文：夏人大入，挺尽敛边户入保，戒诸砦无出战。
现代文：夏国人大举入边，蔡挺组织所有的边境民户入保联防，并戒令各砦不要出战。
English: The people of Xia Province entered the border in large numbers, and Cai Ting organized all the border households to join the joint defense, and ordered the forts not to go to war.

古文：谅祚亲帅军数万攻大顺，挺料城坚不可破，而柔远城恶，亟遣总管张玉将锐师守之。
现代文：谅祚亲自率领数万军队进攻大顺，蔡挺估计大顺城墙坚固不易攻破，而柔远城墙不牢固，因此急派总管张玉率领精锐部队前去驻守。
English: Xuanzang personally led tens of thousands of troops to attack Dashun. Cai Ting estimated that the Dashun city wall was strong and difficult to break through, while the Zhuoyuan city wall was not strong, so he dispatched the general manager Zhang Yu to lead the elite troops to the garrison.

古文：先布铁蒺藜大顺城旁水中，骑渡水多踬，惊言有神。
现代文：首先将铁蒺藜布置在大顺城旁边的水中，敌人的骑兵渡河时多被刺倒，他们大为惊讶，说水中有神在守护。
English: First of all, the spade was placed in the water next to Dashun City. The enemy's cavalrymen were mostly stabbed when crossing the river. They were very surprised and said that there was a god in the water.

古文：过三日不克，谅祚督帐下决战，挺伏强弩壕外，飞矢贯其铠，遂引却。
现代文：过了三天，敌人都没有攻下城池，谅祚即督促其部队决战。蔡挺将手持强弩的弓箭手埋伏在城壕外，用箭射伤了谅祚，敌人不得已而退却。
English: After three days, the enemy had not captured the castle, so Yuzhen urged his troops to fight a decisive battle. Cai Ting ambushed an archer armed with a strong crossbow outside the trench and wounded Yuzhen with an arrow. The enemy had no choice but to retreat.

古文：移寇柔远，玉夜斫营，夏人惊扰溃去。
现代文：敌人转攻柔远，张玉率兵夜袭敌营，夏人惊慌失措，溃不成军，大败而去。
English: The enemy turned to attack Zhuoyuan, Zhang Yu led the troops to attack the enemy camp at night, Xia Ren panicked, failed to make an army, and was defeated.

古文：环州熟羌思顺举族投谅祚，倚为乡导。
现代文：环州的 熟羌 思顺带领全族投奔谅祚，作为向导。
English: Huanzhou's Juyao Shishun led the whole family to rush to Pengyuan as a guide.

古文：挺宣言思顺且复来，命葺其旧舍，出兵西为迎候之举。
现代文：蔡挺得知此事后，即到处宣扬说思顺将要回来，并派人修好了他们的旧房舍，又派军队出城做出迎接的样子。
English: After Cai Ting learned of this, he announced everywhere that Sishun would return, sent people to repair their old house, and sent troops out of the city to greet them.

古文：谅祚果疑思顺，毒之死。
现代文：谅祚果然怀疑思顺投奔他的诚意，将他毒死了。
English: Xuanzang doubted Shishun's sincerity and poisoned him to death.

古文：挺筑城马练平为荔原堡，分属羌三千人守之。
现代文：蔡挺在马练平修筑城墙为荔原堡，分遣三千羌人坚守。
English: Cai Ting built the city wall at Ma Lianping to become Lihuan Fort, and dispatched 3,000 soldiers to defend it.

古文：神宗即位，加天章阁待制、知渭州。
现代文：神宗即位，加蔡挺天章阁待制、知渭州。
English: Shenzong ascended to the throne, Cai Ting Tianzhangge was put on hold, and Zhisheng Prefecture was formed.

古文：举籍禁兵悉还府，不使有隐占。
现代文：他下令所有在籍的禁兵都必须归队，任何人不得隐瞒。
English: He ordered that all active banned soldiers must return to the team, and no one can hide it.

古文：建勤武堂，五日一训之，偏伍钲鼓之法甚备。
现代文：建勤武堂，一天训导一次，军队的编制、组织及作战时的攻守之法都十分健全。
English: A military training hall has been built, and soldiers are trained once a day. The army's composition, organization, and methods of attack and defense during combat are all very sound.

古文：储劲卒于行间，遇用奇，则别为一队。
现代文：另外在军队中选拔了一批精兵，遇有特殊情况，则将他们抽调出来，单独编成一队。
English: In addition, a group of elite soldiers were selected from the army, and in the event of special circumstances, they were pulled out and formed into a separate team.

古文：甲兵整习，常若寇至。又分义勇为伍番，番三千人，参正兵防秋与春，以八月、正月集，四十五日而罢，岁省粟帛、钱缗十三万有奇。
现代文：军队的士兵常常是甲胄武器不离身，常备不懈，就像敌人来侵犯而时刻准备整装上阵一样。又将义勇兵分为五番，每番三千人，参照正规军队进行的秋季和春季的驻防，每年八月和正月二次集结，每次集结四十五天，而后散去，这样每年就节省钱粮等十三万多。
English: The soldiers of the army are often armed with armor and weapons, and they are constantly on the alert, just as if the enemy were to invade and they were always ready to be fully equipped for battle. In addition, the volunteer soldiers are divided into five groups of three thousand each, with reference to the autumn and spring garrisons conducted by the regular army, and they are assembled twice a year in August and the first month, each time for forty-five days, and then dispersed, thus saving more than one hundred and thirty thousand a year in money, grain, etc.

古文：括并边生地冒耕田千八百顷，募人佃种，以益边储。
现代文：清理出边境没有开发的土地和冒耕的田一千八百顷，将这些田招募人来佃种，以充实边境储备。
English: 1,800 hectares of undeveloped land and rogue fields along the border will be cleared, and people will be recruited to cultivate these fields to replenish the border reserve.

古文：取边民阑市蕃部田八千顷，以给弓箭手。
现代文：取边民阑市蕃部田八千顷，以田中之收入供给弓箭手之用。
English: Eight thousand hectares of rice paddies have been cultivated in Hattori, Tottori, and the income from the rice paddies is used by archers.

古文：又筑城定戎军为熙宁砦，开地二千顷，募卒三千人耕守之。
现代文：又在定戎军修筑熙宁砦，开拓土地二千顷，招募三千士卒耕种守备。
English: In addition, the Ding Rong Army built the Xining Fort, developed 2,000 hectares of land, and recruited 3,000 soldiers to cultivate and defend it.

古文：谍告夏人候胡卢河，挺出奇兵迎击之。
现代文：据谍报人员告知，夏人集结于胡卢河。蔡挺出兵奇袭敌营，夏人溃败。
English: According to the intelligence officers, the Xia people gathered at the Hulu River. Cai Ting sent troops to surprise the enemy camp, and the Xia people were defeated.

古文：夏人溃，分诸将蹑而讨之，荡其七族。
现代文：又派军队分成几路跟踪追击，大肆扫荡敌部族。
English: The army was also sent to follow the pursuit in several directions, sweeping the enemy tribes.

古文：进右谏议大夫，赐金帛三千。
现代文：进升为右谏议大夫，赐金帛二千。
English: He was promoted to the post of right-hand speech doctor and given 2,000 gold ingots.

古文：夏人复犯诸砦，环庆兵不能御，挺遣张玉以万人往解其围。
现代文：夏人又侵犯各砦，环庆的军队无力抵御，蔡挺派遣张玉率领万余兵力前往，解除了环庆的危困。
English: The Xia people invaded the forts again, and Huanqing's army was powerless to resist. Cai Ting sent Zhang Yu to lead more than 10,000 troops to relieve Huanqing's crisis.

古文：庆州军变，挺讨平之，进龙图阁直学士。
现代文：庆州军队发生兵变，蔡挺也派兵将其平息了，因而进升龙图阁直学士。
English: There was a mutiny in the Gyeongju army, and Tsai Ting also sent troops to quell it. As a result, he was promoted to the rank of Longtougu.

古文：广锐卒徙营，众惮迁，欲为乱，城中震扰，挺推斩首恶十九人，讫徙营。
现代文：大批精兵须迁徙营地，他们都不愿迁徙，想作乱，城里为之震动。蔡挺处斩了十九个作乱之首恶者，终于平息了叛乱，将他们迁徙到了新的营地。
English: A large number of elite soldiers had to move camps, they were reluctant to move, wanted to make trouble, and the city was shaken by it. Cai Ting executed nineteen rioters and finally quelled the rebellion and moved them to a new camp.

古文：蕃部岁饥，以田质于弓箭手，过期辄没。
现代文：蕃部发生饥荒，将田抵押给弓箭手，过期则为弓箭手所有。
English: When there was a famine in Hebei Province, the fields were mortgaged to the archers, and after a certain period of time, they became the property of the archers.

古文：挺为贷官钱，岁息什一，后遂推为蕃汉青苗、助役法。
现代文：蔡挺则将官府的钱贷给他们，每年利息为十分之一，后来此法逐渐变成少数民族、汉族之青苗、助役法。
English: Cai Ting, on the other hand, lent them money from the government, with an annual interest rate of one-tenth. Later, this law gradually turned into the Law on Minorities, the Law on Han Youth, and the Law on Helpers.

古文：又自以意制渡河大索及兵械镰枪，皆获其用。
现代文：蔡挺又按照自己的设计制造了渡河大索以及兵器镰枪，都派上了用场。
English: Cai Ting also made a large rope for crossing the river and a weapon harpoon gun according to his own design, both of which came in handy.

古文：熙宁五年，拜枢密副使。
现代文：熙宁五年，拜枢密副使。
English: In the fifth year of Xi Ning, he became the vice-envoy to the Privy Council.

古文：帝问挺泾原训兵之法，召部将按于崇政殿，善之，下以为诸郡法。
现代文：皇上询问蔡挺在泾原练兵的方法，并召各将领在崇政殿加以考察，觉得他的练兵方法很好，于是将他的练兵之法传达到各郡，作为各郡练兵的方法。
English: The emperor inquired about Cai Ting's method of training soldiers in Suwon, and called the generals to examine it at the Su Zheng Palace. He thought his method of training soldiers was very good, so he passed on his method of training soldiers to each county as a method of training soldiers in each county.

古文：河州景思立战死，帝开天章阁访执政，挺请行。
现代文：河州人景思立战死，皇上于天章阁询问执政何人可以代替，蔡挺上前请命。
English: The Emperor inquired at Tianzhangge as to who could replace him as ruler, and Cai Ting stepped forward to plead for his life.

古文：帝曰： 此小事，不足烦卿。
现代文：皇上说： 这是件小事，没有必要来烦劳你。
English: The emperor said, "This is a small matter, there is no need to trouble you."

古文：河朔有警，卿当行矣。 契丹议云中地，挺请罢沿边戍人，示以无事，因乞置三十七将，皆行其策。
现代文：河朔形势吃紧，你应当到那里去。 契丹对云中之地提出异议，蔡挺请撤去沿边境一线的戍守部队，以向契丹表示无意于战事，接着又上书请将蕃兵、弓箭手、禁兵等混合编制，设置三十七将，皇上都采纳了他的意见。
English: The situation is tight, you should go there. Khitan raised an objection to the land in the clouds, Cai Ting asked to withdraw the garrison troops along the border line to indicate to Khitan that he had no intention of fighting, and then sent a letter to request the mixed formation of crossbowmen, archers, forbidden soldiers, and the establishment of thirty-seven generals. The emperor accepted his opinion.

古文：七年冬，奏事殿中，疾作而仆，帝亲临赐药，罢为资政殿学士、判南京留司御史台。
现代文：熙宁七年冬，在殿中奏事，因病突发而倒在地上，后来皇上还亲自去慰问他，并赐给他药。罢为资政殿学士、判南京留司御史台。
English: In the winter of the seventh year of Xining's reign, he was giving a lecture in the palace, and fell to the ground due to a sudden illness. Later, the emperor himself went to console him and gave him medicine. He was awarded the title of "Bachelor of the Palace of Succession" and was sentenced to stay in Nanjing.

古文：元丰二年，薨，年六十六。
现代文：元丰二年死，时年六十六岁。
English: Yuanfeng died two years later, at the age of 66.

古文：赠工部尚书，谥曰敏肃。
现代文：死后，皇上赠他为工部尚书，谥号 敏肃 。
English: After his death, the emperor presented him with the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, and the nickname Minshu.

古文：及灵驾发引之旦，东望号恸，见僚佐于便室，骤得疾卒，年六十。
现代文：蔡挺诡谲而多智谋，城府很深，人们很难了解他的内心世界。当初为富弼、范仲淹的幕客时，曾多次将他们的秘密泄露给吕夷简。在渭州时间久了，觉得有点郁郁不乐，落寞无聊，于是寄情于词曲，发出 玉关人老 的感叹。
English: Cai Ting is cunning and resourceful. The city government is very deep, and it is difficult for people to understand his inner world. When he was originally a guest of Fuxi and Fan Zhongran, he repeatedly leaked their secrets to Lü Yijian. After spending a long time in Zhangzhou, he felt a bit depressed, lonely and bored, so he took a liking to the lyrics and uttered a sigh of regret.

古文：特赠礼部侍郎。又欲赐谥，吴奎曰： 抗以旧恩，自杂学士赠官，已逾常制。 遂止。王韶，字子纯，江州德安人。
现代文：皇上派宦官为使者前往渭州，蔡挺则将自己的心思让优伶唱给中使听，以便中使将他的意思告诉皇上。神宗知道后，非常哀怜他，这样才有拜他为枢密之举。王韶字子纯，江州德安人。
English: The emperor sent an eunuch as an envoy to Bozhou, and Cai Ting told the envoy to listen to the eunuch sing his thoughts, so that the envoy could tell the emperor what he wanted to say. After learning this, Shenzong felt very sorry for him, and this is how he was able to worship him as a confidential move. Wang Xizhi was a pure character, a native of De'an, Jiangzhou.

古文：第进士，调新安主簿、建昌军司理参军。
现代文：中进士，调任新安主簿、建昌军司理参军。
English: He was promoted to middle-ranking officer, transferred to Xin'an as chief accountant, and joined the army as secretary of Jianchang Army.

古文：试制科不中，客游陕西，访采边事。
现代文：考试制科不中，即游历陕西，采访边境之风土民情。
English: The examination system is not in the middle, that is, he traveled to Shaanxi and interviewed the customs and customs of the border.

古文：熙宁元年，诣阙上《平戎策》三篇，其略以为： 西夏可取。
现代文：熙宁元年，入朝将《平戎策》三篇进呈皇上，其大意认为： 西夏可以攻取。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xining, three articles of "Pingwu Strategy" were presented to the emperor, the gist of which was: Western Xia can be conquered.

古文：欲取西夏，当先复河、湟，则夏人有腹背受敌之忧。
现代文：要想攻取西夏，应当先收复河、湟二州之地，这样夏人就有腹背受敌之忧。
English: If you want to conquer Western Xia, you should first recover the land of Fuxihe and Shandong Erzhou. In this way, the Xia people will have the fear of suffering from the enemy.

古文：夏人比年攻青唐，不能克，万一克之，必并兵南向，大掠秦、渭之间，牧马于兰、会，断古渭境，尽服南山生羌，西筑武胜，遣兵时掠洮、河，则陇、蜀诸郡当尽惊扰，瞎征兄弟其能自保邪？
现代文：夏人近年攻打青唐，未能攻下，万一攻打下来，它必定会挥兵南下，大肆掠夺秦、渭二州，牧马于兰、会之地，切断古渭交通，征服南山的落后的羌人，西面构筑武胜城，时常派兵骚扰洮、河，那么陇、蜀各郡就都会受到威胁，瞎征兄弟他们能自保吗？
English: In recent years, the Xia people have attacked the Qing and Tang Dynasties, but failed to conquer them. In the unlikely event that they were attacked and defeated, they would certainly send troops to the south, plunder Qin, Shandong and Yunnan provinces, cut off ancient Yunnan traffic, conquer the backward people of Nanshan, build Wusheng City in the west, and frequently send troops to harass Yunnan and Hebei. Then, Yunnan and Shu counties would all be threatened. Can they protect themselves?

古文：今唃氏子孙，唯董毡粗能自立，瞎征、欺巴温之徒，又法所及，各不过一二百里，其势岂能与西人抗哉！
现代文：就目前情况来看，口角氏子孙中，只有董毡稍能自立，瞎征、欺巴温等人，他们的势力范围都不超过一二百里，这么弱的势力能与西夏人抗衡吗？
English: As far as the current situation is concerned, among the descendants of the Kuchaku clan, only Dong Xuan is able to stand on his own, blindly recruiting, bullying Bavin and others. Their sphere of influence does not exceed one or two hundred miles. Can such weak forces compete with the Xixia people?

古文：武威之南，至于洮、河、兰、鄯，皆故汉郡县，所谓湟中、浩亹、大小榆、枹罕，土地肥美，宜五种者在焉。
现代文：武威以南到洮、河、兰、鄯，都是过去汉代所辖的郡县，所谓湟中、浩、大小榆、木包罕等地，土地肥沃，很适合羌人各部生存。
English: From south of Wuwei to Min, He, Lan, and Handan, they were all counties and counties under the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty in the past. The so-called Middle Handan, Large Handan, Small Handan, and Small Handan, the land is fertile, and it is very suitable for all parts of the Handan people to survive.

古文：幸今诸羌瓜分，莫相统一，此正可并合而兼抚之时也。
现代文：所幸的是现在各羌分裂，互不统属，正好将他们割裂开来，各个击破。
English: However, fortunately, now each shackle is split, they do not belong to each other, they are just split apart, and each one is broken.

古文：诸种既服，唃氏敢不归？
现代文：一旦各部都臣服了，口角氏敢不归顺吗？
English: Once all the ministries have submitted, will Mr. Kuchikaku dare not submit?

古文：唃氏归则河西李氏在吾股掌中矣。
现代文：口角氏归顺了，那么河西李氏就成为我掌中之物了。
English: If the Kuchaku clan surrenders, then the Hexi Li clan will be in my hands.

古文：且唃氏子孙，瞎征差盛，为诸羌所畏，若招谕之，使居武胜或渭源城，使纠合宗党，制其部族，习用汉法，异时族类虽盛，不过一延州李士彬、环州慕恩耳。
现代文：再说口角氏子孙中，瞎征的势力相对来说比较大，羌人各部都畏惧他，如果招抚他后，让他驻扎在武胜或者渭源城，以纠合宗党，统治部族，习用汉人之法，到那时夏人虽然强大，而不为我统治的也不过只有延州李士彬、环州慕恩罢了。
English: Furthermore, among the descendants of the Kuchaku clan, the power of blind recruitment was relatively large, and all the departments of the Xiongnu were afraid of him. If he was pandered to, he would be stationed in Busheng or Shiyuan City to entangle the patriarchal party, rule the tribe, and learn to use the methods of the Han people. At that time, although the Xia people were powerful, it was only Yanzhou Li Shibin and Huanzhou Mun who ruled for me.

古文：为汉有肘腋之助，且使夏人无所连结，策之上也。 神宗异其言，召问方略，以韶管干秦凤经略司机宜文字。
现代文：如此行事，则对大宋有肘腋之助，而又可以使夏人各部相互孤立，不能连结在一起，这应当算是上策了。 神宗对他的话很感兴趣，召他询问具体方略，并任他管干秦凤经略司机宜文字。
English: To act in this way would be of great help to the Great Song Dynasty, and at the same time it would isolate the various branches of the Xia people from each other and prevent them from linking together, which should be considered the best strategy.Shenzong was very interested in his words, called him to inquire about the specific strategy, and let him be in charge of the Qin and Feng strategy.

古文：蕃部俞龙珂在青唐最大，渭源羌与夏人皆欲羁属之，诸将议先致讨。
现代文：蕃部的俞龙珂在青唐一带势力最大，渭源的羌人与夏人他都想加以节制。各将帅议论先对俞龙珂进行讨伐。
English: In the Qing and Tang Dynasties, Jia Longke of Xibe had the greatest influence, and both the Jia people and the Xia people of Xiyuan wanted to control him. The generals discussed the crusade against Jia Longke first.

古文：韶因按边，引数骑直抵其帐，谕其成败，遂留宿。
现代文：王韶因为纠察边境之事，带领数骑直到俞龙珂的帐中，给他分析其成败胜负，当晚又留宿在那里。
English: Because of the picketing of the border, Wang Yao led several horsemen to the account of Yao Longke, gave him an analysis of his success or failure, and stayed there that night.

古文：明旦，两种皆遣其豪随以东。
现代文：第二天早晨，羌人、夏人都派遣他们的一些重要首领随王韶东去了。
English: In the morning of the next day, both the Xiang people and the Xia people sent some of their important leaders to follow Wang Xiangdong.

古文：久之，龙珂率属十二万口内附，所谓包顺者也。
现代文：很久以后，龙珂率领其部属十二万多人臣服大宋，这就是所说的包顺。
English: A long time later, Long Ke led more than 120,000 of his subordinates to submit to the Great Song Dynasty, which is the so-called Baoshan.

古文：韶又言： 渭源至秦州，良田不耕者万顷，愿置市易司，颇笼商贾之利，取其赢以治田。 帝从其言，改著作佐郎，仍命韶提举。
现代文：王韶又说： 渭源到秦州一带，良田弃置无人耕种的有上万顷。希望设置市易司，以求商贾之利，将经商所得拿来治理农田。 皇上采纳了他的意见，改任著作佐郎，仍命王韶提举。
English: Wang Yao also said, "There are tens of thousands of hectares of good fields that have been abandoned and left uncultivated in the area from Luyuan to Qinzhou. It is hoped to set up a city administration department to seek the interests of merchants and use business income to manage farmland. The emperor adopted his opinion and was reassigned to the post of Zhuozhongzaro, and Wang Yao was still promoted.

古文：经略使李师中言： 韶乃欲指占极边弓箭手地耳，又将移市易司于古渭，恐秦州自此益多事，所得不补所亡。 王安石主韶议，为罢师中，以窦舜卿代，且遣李若愚按实。
现代文：经略使李师中说 ：王韶这样做是想侵占边境的弓箭手的田地，他又打算将市易司移到古渭，我担心秦州的麻烦事只怕会越来越多了，会搞得得不偿失。 王安石支持王韶的意见，为此罢免了李师中，其职位让窦舜卿代替，并且派李若愚对此事进行调查。
English: Wang Anshi supported Wang Hui's opinion, and therefore dismissed Li Shizhong, replacing him with Dou Yuqing, and sent Li Ruogu to investigate the matter.

古文：若愚至，问田所在，韶不能对。
现代文：李若愚到后，问王韶他所说的荒弃不耕的农田在哪里，王韶无言以对。
English: After Li Ruogu arrived, he asked Wang Yao where the abandoned farmland was. Wang Yao was speechless.

古文：舜卿检索，仅得地一顷，既地主有讼，又归之矣。
现代文：舜卿仔细地检查，只发现了一顷田，这还是此地的主人被诉讼而没收的，后来又归还了。
English: After careful inspection, Lord Zou found only one hectare of land, which was confiscated by the owner of this place in a lawsuit and later returned.

古文：若愚奏其欺，安石又为罢舜卿而命韩缜。
现代文：若愚上奏皇上说王韶所谓的荒田是谎报的，为此王安石又罢免了舜卿而任命韩缜。
English: When Wugu reported to the emperor that Wang Yao's so-called wasteland was a lie, Wang Anshi dismissed Yao and appointed Han Yao.

古文：缜遂附会实其事，师中、舜卿皆坐谪，而韶为太子中允、秘阁校理。
现代文：韩缜于是附会王韶，说他奏报的是事实，师中、舜卿都被贬谪，而王韶则升为太子中允、秘阁校理。
English: Han Zheng then summoned Wang Zheng, saying that what he had reported was the truth, that both Shizhong and Zhiqing had been demoted, while Wang Zheng had been promoted to Prince's Vice-Commander and Secret Cabinet Chief.

古文：后帅郭逵上韶盗贷市易钱，安石以为不足校，徙逵泾原。
现代文：后来将领郭逵上奏说王韶偷偷地贷市易钱，王安石认为他所说的证据不足，将他调任到泾原去了。
English: Later, the general Guo Gan reported that Wang Gan had secretly borrowed money from the market. Wang Anshi thought that the evidence was insufficient, and transferred him to Zhangyuan.

古文：帝志复河、陇，筑古渭为通远军，以韶知军事。
现代文：神宗志在收复河、陇，于是修筑古渭城，组建通远军，以王韶知军事。
English: Shen Zongzhi wanted to recover the Fuxing River and the Yunnan River, so he built the ancient Yunnan City and established the Tongyuan Army, with Wang Shizhi as the military leader.

古文：五年七月，引兵城渭源堡及乞神平，破蒙罗角、抹耳水巴等族。
现代文：熙宁五年七月，派兵至渭源堡和乞神平，击败了蒙罗角、抹耳水巴等族。
English: In July of the fifth year of Xi's reign, he sent troops to Shiyuan Fort and Qian Shenping, defeating the Mengluo Cape, Mawl Shui Ba and other tribes.

古文：初，羌保险，诸将谋置阵平地，韶曰： 贼不舍险来斗，则我师必徒归。
现代文：开始，羌人据守险要之地，一些将领打算将部队布置在空旷的平地，王韶说： 敌人如果不离开险要之地，我们只有徒劳而归。
English: At the beginning, some generals planned to deploy their troops in open plains. Wang Yao said: If the enemy does not leave the critical area, we can only return in vain.

古文：今已入险地，当使险为吾有。 乃径趣抹邦山，压敌军而阵，令曰： 敢言退者斩！ 贼乘高下斗，师小却。
现代文：现在既然已涉入险要之地，就应当占领它，使它为我所有。 于是带领部队直趋抹邦山，与敌军对垒，并下令说： 谁要敢说退兵，就将他斩首。 敌军居高临下攻击，宋朝军队稍受挫败。
English: Now that we have entered a dangerous place, we should occupy it and make it mine. So he led the troops straight to Mount Mabang, confronted the enemy army, and ordered: "Whoever dares to say retreat, behead him." The enemy army attacked from a high position, and the Song Dynasty army was slightly defeated.

古文：韶躬披甲胃，麾帐下兵逆击之，羌大溃，焚其庐帐而还，洮西大震。
现代文：王韶这时亲自披挂上阵，指挥部队反攻，羌人大败，他们将营房帐篷焚烧后撤退了，洮西大为震动。
English: At this time, Wang Qian personally went into battle, commanded the troops to counterattack, and the Qian people were defeated. They burned the barracks and tents and retreated. The west of Shaanxi was greatly shaken.

古文：会瞎征度洮为之援，余党复集。
现代文：这时瞎征带兵渡洮河来援救，被击散的敌军又集结起来。
English: At this time, the blindly recruited soldiers crossed the Minhe River to come to the rescue, and the enemy forces that had been dispersed gathered again.

古文：韶命别将由竹牛岭路张军声，而潜师越武胜，遇瞎征首领瞎夔等，与战破之，遂城武胜，建为镇洮军。
现代文：王韶戒令部下将领由竹牛岭路出动，虚张声势，以牵制敌人，而暗地里让部队攻打武胜，与瞎征一首领瞎药等部相遇，双方激战，宋朝军队大败瞎药等部，遂进驻武胜，建为镇洮军。
English: Wang Qian ordered his subordinate generals to set out from Zhuguiling Road, bluffing to contain the enemy, and secretly let the troops attack Wusheng, and met with the head of blind recruitment and the head of blind medicine and other departments. The two sides fought fiercely. The Song Dynasty army defeated the blind medicine and other departments, and then entered Wusheng and built it as a garrison.

古文：进右正言、集贤殿修撰。
现代文：进升王韶为右正言、集贤殿修撰。
English: Jin Sheng Wang Yao was the Right Zheng Zang, and Shixian Dian Shuxian.

古文：复击走瞎征，降其部落二万。
现代文：接着又击走瞎征，降其部落二万人。
English: Next, they beat off a blind expedition and reduced their tribe by twenty thousand.

古文：更名镇洮为熙州，以熙、河、洮、岷、通远为一路，韶以龙图阁待制知熙州。
现代文：更镇洮之名为熙州，划熙、河、洮、岷、通远为一路，王韶以龙图阁待制知熙州。
English: The name of the town is Xizhou, and the roads are Jiaxi, He, He, He, He, and Tongyuan. Wang Yao used the Longtu Pavilion to describe Xizhou.

古文：六年三月，取河州，迁枢密直学士。
现代文：熙宁六年三月，王韶攻取河州，升迁为枢密直学士。
English: In March of the sixth year of Xining, Wang Xi conquered Hezhou and was promoted to the rank of Privy Direct Bachelor.

古文：降羌叛，韶回军击之。
现代文：原已归降的羌人又叛乱，王韶回军攻打。
English: The Xiongnu people, who had already surrendered, rebelled again, and Wang Hui's army attacked.

古文：瞎征以其间据河州，韶进破诃诺木藏城，穿露骨山，南入洮州境，道狭隘，释马徒行，或日至六七。
现代文：瞎征让叛乱的羌人据守河州，王韶进军攻下诃诺木藏城，穿越露骨山，向南进入洮州境内。洮州境内道路崎岖狭窄，部队只好弃马徒步而行。
English: The blind march allowed the rebellious Hanzhong people to defend Hezhou, and Wang Qi marched into the army to capture Hanzhong Muzang City, crossed the bare bones mountain, and went south into the territory of Hanzhong. The roads in Hanzhong were rugged and narrow, and the troops had to abandon their horses and walk on foot.

古文：瞎征留其党守河州，自将尾官军，韶力战破走之，河州复平。
现代文：瞎征令其部下留守河州，而亲自带兵尾随官军，王韶奋力激战打败了瞎征，收复了河州。
English: The blind enlistment ordered his subordinates to stay behind in Hezhou, while he personally led the troops to follow the government army. Wang Hui fought hard to defeat the blind enlistment and recovered Hezhou.

古文：连拔宕、岷二州，叠、洮羌酋皆以城附。
现代文：接着攻下宕、岷二州，叠、洮二州的羌人首领于是都开城投降。
English: Next, the leaders of the Jurchens, who had conquered Taka, Saeki, Saeki, Saeki and Saeki, surrendered.

古文：军行五十有四日，涉千八百里，得州五，斩首数千级，获牛、羊、马以万计。
现代文：部队转战五十四天，跋涉一千八百多里，拿下五个州，杀敌数千人，缴获牛、羊、马数以万计。
English: The troops fought for fifty-four days, traveled more than eighteen hundred miles, won five states, killed thousands of enemies, and captured tens of thousands of cattle, sheep, and horses.

古文：进左谏议大夫、端明殿学士。
现代文：进升为左谏议大夫、端明殿学士。
English: He was promoted to Zuo Jianli Doctor and Duan Mingden Scholar.

古文：七年，入朝，又加资政殿学士，赐第崇仁坊。
现代文：熙宁七年，回京入朝，又加封资政殿学士，赐府第崇仁坊。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xining, he returned to Beijing and entered the imperial court. He was also awarded the title of "Bachelor of the House of Councillors" and given the prefectural seat of Chongrenfang.

古文：还至兴平，闻景思立败于踏白城，贼围河州，日夜驰至熙。
现代文：王韶返回到达兴平时，听说景思立败于踏白城，敌人包围了河州，于是他又日夜兼程赶至熙州。
English: When Wang Yao returned to Daxingping, he heard that Jing Sili had been defeated in the Battle of Tabai, and the enemy had encircled Hezhou. Therefore, he made a day and night trip to Hezhou.

古文：熙方城守，命撤之。
现代文：熙州正加紧设防，他命令撤防。
English: Xizhou was fortifying itself, and he ordered the withdrawal.

古文：选兵得二万。
现代文：又从熙州挑选了二万兵力，以解河州之围。
English: In addition, twenty thousand troops were selected from Heizhou to relieve the siege of Hezhou.

古文：议所向，诸将欲趋河州。
现代文：召集各部将领讨论怎样解围，都认为要直赴河州。
English: The generals of various departments were called together to discuss how to relieve the siege, and all agreed that they should go straight to Hezhou.

古文：韶曰： 贼所以围城者，恃有外援也。
现代文：王韶说： 敌人之所以围城，是因为他们有外援。
English: Wang Yao said: The reason why the enemy besieged the city was because they had foreign aid.

古文：今知救至，必设伏待我，且新胜气锐，未可与争。
现代文：现在他们知道我们要去直接解救河州，一定会埋下伏兵等着我们。
English: Now that they know that we are going to rescue Hezhou directly, they will definitely lay an ambush for us.

古文：当出其不意，以攻其所恃，此所谓 批亢捣虚，形格势禁，则自为解 者也。 乃直扣定羌城，破结河族，断夏国通路，进临宁河，分命偏将入南山。
现代文：而且他们刚刚打了胜仗，士气高昂，因此不能直接与他们交锋，而应当出其不意，去攻打他们仗以依靠的外援，这就是所谓 批亢捣虚，形格势禁，则自为解 。 故王韶挥师直扑定羌城，攻破结河族，切断了夏国的交通。又进逼宁河，分兵几路进入南山。
English: Moreover, they had just fought a victorious battle, and their morale was high, so they could not directly confront them, but they should surprise them and attack the foreign aid they relied on for the battle. This is the so-called "attacking the enemy and defeating the enemy," which is self-explanatory. Therefore, Wang Zhiwu's division directly attacked Dingyao City, defeated the Jiehe people, and cut off the traffic of Xia. They also entered the Ninghe River, and several soldiers entered the Nanshan.

古文：瞎征知援绝，拔栅去。
现代文：瞎征知道外援已绝，遂撤兵而去。
English: The blind enlistment knew that foreign aid was exhausted, so they withdrew.

古文：初，思立之覆师也，羌势复炽，朝廷议弃熙河，帝为之旰食，数下诏戒韶持重勿出。
现代文：当初景思立兵败时，羌人之气焰又高涨起来，朝廷有的大臣议论要放弃熙河，神宗为之也寝食不安，多次诏令王韶须稳住，不要轻易出战。
English: At first, when Jing Sili was defeated, the arrogance of the Xiong people rose high again. Some ministers in the imperial court discussed giving up Heihe, which made Shenzong uneasy. He repeatedly ordered Wang Xiong to remain stable and not to go to war easily.

古文：及是，帝大喜。
现代文：至此羌人大败，神宗欣喜万分。
English: So far, Hayato has been defeated, and Shinso is overjoyed.

古文：韶还熙州，以兵循西山绕出踏白后，焚八千帐，瞎征穷蹙丐降，俘以献。
现代文：王韶返回熙州，指挥部队沿西山绕出踏白城后，焚烧敌人八千帐，瞎征投降，并被押送京城。
English: Wang Hui returned to Xizhou, and after marching his commanding troops along the West Mountain and out of Taibai City, he burned eight thousand enemy tents, surrendered blindly, and was escorted to Beijing.

古文：拜韶观文殿学士、礼部侍郎。
现代文：拜王韶观文殿学士、礼部侍郎。
English: He was a scholar at the Imperial Academy of Arts and Sciences and a chamberlain at the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：资政、观文学士，非尝执政而除者，皆自韶始。
现代文：资政殿学士、观文殿学士之衔被授给未尝执政的人，即是从王韶开始的。
English: The titles of Scholar of the Palace of Succession and Scholar of the Palace of Literature were given to those who had not been in power, starting with Wang Xi.

古文：官其兄弟及两子，前后赐绢八千匹。
现代文：因其功劳很大，皇上特授给他的兄弟及两个儿子官职，前前后后共赐给他八千匹绢。
English: Because of his great merit, the emperor specially conferred official positions on his brother and two sons, and gave him a total of eight thousand horses.

古文：未几，召为枢密副使。
现代文：没过多久，召他入京，拜为枢密副使。
English: Not long after, he was called to Beijing to serve as a privy vice-envoy.

古文：熙河虽名一路，而实无租人，军食皆仰给他道。
现代文：熙河虽然名义上是一个路，而实际上没有什么租赋收入，军粮的供给全都要依靠其他的道。
English: Although Heihe is nominally a road, in reality there is little rental income, and the supply of military food must all rely on other roads.

古文：转运判官马瑊捃官吏细故，韶欲罢瑊，王安石右瑊，韶始沮，于是与安石异。
现代文：转运判官马王咸找了一些官吏问其具体缘故，王韶于是很不满，想罢免马王咸，因王安石庇护马王咸，才未能如意，他也因此与王安石产生了矛盾。
English: The judge of transshipment, Ma Wangxian, found some officials to ask about the specific reason. Wang Yao was very dissatisfied and wanted to dismiss Ma Wangxian. However, Wang Anshi's protection of Ma Wangxian did not work out as he had hoped. As a result, he came into conflict with Wang Anshi.

古文：数以母老乞归，帝语安石勉留之。
现代文：王韶多次以母亲年迈为由，上书请求辞官回家，皇上即让王安石极力挽留他。
English: On the grounds of his mother's old age, Wang Yao repeatedly wrote a letter requesting the official to return home. The emperor then asked Wang Anshi to do his best to retain him.

古文：安南之役，韶言： 决里、广源之建，臣以为贪虚名而忘实祸，执政乃疑臣为刺讥。
现代文：安南之役，王韶说： 决里、广源的建置，我以为乃是贪图虚名而忘记了实际上所带来的损害，当朝执政还认为我在进行讥讽。
English: In the Annan Campaign, Wang Zhe said: I thought that the construction of Zhuli and Guangyuan was a desire for false fame and forgot the damage actually caused. When I was in power, I also thought that I was making a mockery.

古文：方举事之初，臣力争极论，欲宽民力而省财用，但同列莫肯听，至以熙河事折臣。
现代文：当举事之初，我据理力争，想节用民力，节省财政开支，但各位官员都不愿听，以至于拿熙河之事来指责我。
English: At the beginning of the campaign, I argued that I wanted to save people's energy and save financial expenses, but officials did not want to listen, so much so that they accused me of taking advantage of the Xi River.

古文：臣本意不费朝廷而可以至伊吾卢甘，初不欲令熙河作路，河、岷作州也。
现代文：我本来的意思是不想使朝廷受到损失而可以到伊吾卢甘，所以最初就不想将熙河作路，河、岷作州。
English: My original intention was that I did not want to cause any loss to the imperial court and be able to go to Iguruqan, so I initially did not want to make the Xihe River the road, and the He River and the Min River the prefectures.

古文：今与众异论，偿不求退，必致不容。 韶本凿空开边，骤跻政地，乃以勤兵费财归曲朝廷，帝由是不悦，以故罢职知洪州，又坐谢表怨慢，落职知鄂州。
现代文：现在我与大家的意见不同，如果还不引退，一定不会为大家容纳。 王韶本是带兵驻守、开发边境的武将，这时刚一跻身于政坛，就将屡用兵事、劳力费财的错误归于朝廷，神宗很不高兴，所以将他贬去知洪州。王韵因在谢恩表上颇多怨言，又被降职知鄂州。
English: Now I disagree with everyone's opinion, if I do not retire, I will not be able to accommodate everyone. Wang Xuan was originally a military commander who stationed soldiers and developed the border, but as soon as he entered the political arena, he attributed the mistakes of repeatedly using the military and expending labor to the imperial court. Shenzong was very unhappy, so he demoted him to Chihon. Wang Yun was demoted to Chihon because he complained a lot on the gratitude list.

古文：元丰二年，还其职，复知洪州。
现代文：元丰二年，复其原职，仍然知洪州。
English: In the second year of Yuanfeng, he was reinstated to his original position, still from Zhihong Prefecture.

古文：四年，病疽卒，年五十二。
现代文：元丰四年，因生毒疮疽而死，时年五十二岁。
English: In the fourth year of Yuanfeng, he died of poisonous gangrene, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫，谥曰襄敏。
现代文：赠他为金紫光禄大夫，谥号曰 襄敏 。
English: He was given the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and his nickname was "Xiang Min."

古文：韶起孤生，用兵有机略。
现代文：王韶自小就没有了父亲，是一个孤儿。他非常善于用兵，极有谋略。
English: Wang Yao has not had a father since he was a child, he is an orphan. He is very good at using soldiers and has a lot of strategies.

古文：临出师，召诸将授以指，不复更问，每战必捷。
现代文：每当带兵出去作战，他都事先把部下各将领召集起来，告诉他的作战计划，然后再也不过问了，而每次战斗都能取胜。
English: Whenever he led troops into battle, he would gather his generals together in advance and tell them his battle plan, and then they would never question it again, and every battle would be won.

古文：尝夜卧帐中，前部遇敌，矢石已交，呼声震山谷，侍者往往股栗，而韶鼻息自如。
现代文：有一次夜晚，他在帅部帐中睡觉，部队前锋与敌人发生遭遇，双方发生激战，箭石如雨，杀声震天，军部那些侍者都颤抖不已，而王韶仍安然酣睡。
English: Once at night, he was sleeping in the commander's quarters. The army's forwards had an encounter with the enemy, and the two sides had a fierce battle. The arrows were like rain, the killing sound shook the sky, and those waiters in the military department were trembling, but Wang Yao was still sleeping peacefully.

古文：在鄂宴客，出家姬奏乐，客张缋醉挽一姬不前，将拥之，姬泣以告。
现代文：在鄂州任上，设宴待客，当家中姬妾奏乐给客人听时，客人张缋酒醉后拉着一位姬妾想拥抱她，姬妾痛哭流涕，将此事告诉了王韶。
English: During his tenure in Ezhou, he held a banquet to welcome guests. When a concubine played music for the guests at home, the guest, Zhang Ye, got drunk and pulled a concubine to hug her. The concubine cried bitterly and told Wang Ye about this.

古文：韶徐曰： 本出汝曹娱客，而令失欢如此。 命酌大杯罚之，谈笑如故，人亦服其量。
现代文：王韶慢悠悠地说： 我叫你们出来，就是要你们让客人高兴，怎么能够这样，让客人扫兴呢？ 于是用大杯罚姬妾喝酒，他自己仍然谈笑风生，好像没发生这事一样，人们都佩服他有涵养，有肚量。
English: Wang Yao said slowly, "I asked you to come out because I wanted you to make the guests happy. How can you do this and make the guests unhappy?" So he punished his concubine with a large glass of wine. He himself was still talking and laughing as if nothing had happened. People admired his restraint and stamina.

古文：韶交亲多楚人，依韶求仕，乃分属诸将，或杀降羌老弱予以首为功级。
现代文：王韶所结交的朋友多是楚人，他们都依附王韶以求仕途。王韶将他们分别荐给手下的将领，这些人中有的残杀已经臣服的羌人中的老人弱者，将首级献上以邀功。
English: Most of the friends Wang Yao made were Chu people, and they all depended on Wang Yao for their livelihood. Wang Yao recommended them separately to the generals under his command. Some of these people killed the old and weak among the Yao people who had already surrendered, and offered their heads as a reward.

古文：韶晚节言动不常，颇若病狂状。
现代文：王韶晚年言语失常，像得了癫狂病。
English: In his later years, Wang Yao's speech became erratic, as if he were suffering from a mental illness.

古文：既病疽，洞见五脏，盖亦多杀徵云。
现代文：生毒疮以后，毒疮溃烂，甚至可以看见五脏六腑，这大概是杀人太多的征象吧。
English: After the poisonous sores, the sores fester, and even the internal organs can be seen, which is probably a sign of too much killing.

古文：子十人，厚、寀最显。
现代文：他有十个儿子，其中以王厚、王肕最突出。
English: He had ten sons, of whom Wang Hou and Wang Xi were the most prominent.

古文：厚字处道。
现代文：王厚字处道。
English: Wang Houzhi said.

古文：少从父兵间，畅习羌事，官累通直郎。
现代文：小的时候即随父亲居于军中，因此对羌人的情况非常熟悉，累官至通直郎。
English: When he was a child, he followed his father into the army, so he was very familiar with the situation in Shinshiro, and rose through the ranks to become Tsuchinairo.

古文：元祐弃河、湟，厚上疏陈不可，且诣政事堂言之，不听。
现代文：元年间，皇上决定放弃河、湟二地。王厚上疏极力劝阻，认为不能放弃，并且亲自到政事堂陈述，他的意见没有被采纳。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the emperor decided to give up the Hebei and Fujian provinces. Wang Houjie tried his best to dissuade him, saying that he could not give up, and he personally went to the State Council to make a statement, but his opinion was not accepted.

古文：绍圣中，用荐者换礼宾副使、干当熙河公事。
现代文：绍圣年间，用荐者换礼宾副使、干当熙河公事。
English: During the reign of King Shoshen, the recommenders were replaced by the vice-ambassadors of protocol and the officials of Dangdang River.

古文：会羌酋瞎征、陇拶争国，河州守将王赡与厚同献议复故地。
现代文：正好遇上羌族首领瞎征、陇拶争权，河州守将王赡与王厚一起上书请出兵收复失地。
English: It just so happened that the leaders of the Yi people were fighting for the right to blindly recruit, recruit and recruit, and the governor of Hebei Province, Wang Yi, together with Wang Hou, submitted a request to send troops to recover the lost land.

古文：元符元年六月，师出塞。
现代文：元符元年六月，率兵出塞。
English: In June of the first year of the Yuanfu era, he led an army out of Tibet.

古文：七月，下邈川，降瞎征。
现代文：七月，攻下邈川，降服了瞎征。
English: In July, they captured Shichuan and surrendered to the blind expedition.

古文：九月，次青唐，陇拶出迎。遂定湟、鄯。
现代文：九月，兵临青唐，陇拶投降，于是收复湟、鄯。
English: In September, the soldiers of Linqing and Tang surrendered, and then recovered the city and the castle.

古文：诏赐陇拶姓名曰赵怀德，进厚东上阁门副使、知湟州。
现代文：皇上下诏赐陇拶姓名叫赵怀德，进升王厚为东上门副使、知湟州。
English: The name of the Emperor's greetings is Zhao Huide, and Wang Hou is the deputy envoy to Dongshanmen and Zhishangzhou.

古文：既而他种叛，合兵来攻，厚不能支。
现代文：不久羌族的其他部落叛乱，聚合兵力攻打王厚，王厚力不能敌。
English: Soon, other tribes of the Shan people rebelled and gathered their forces to attack Wang Houli. Wang Houli was no match for them.

古文：朝廷度二州不可守，乃以畀怀德，而贬厚右内府率，再贬贺州别驾。
现代文：朝廷估计湟、鄯二州难以守住，遂将这二个州给赵怀德了，并贬王厚为右内府率，又贬为贺州别驾。
English: The imperial court estimated that it would be difficult to hold the two prefectures of Gansu and Fujian, so they gave the two prefectures to Zhao Hai De, and relegated Wang Hou to the right inner prefectural government, and relegated him to the He Prefecture.

古文：崇宁初，蔡京复开边，还厚前秩，于是羌人多罗巴奉怀德之弟溪赊罗撒谋复国。
现代文：崇宁初年，蔡京又开启边关，恢复了王厚以前的职位俸禄，这时羌人多罗巴拥戴怀德的弟弟溪赊罗撒出来，谋划复国。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Cai Jing opened the border gate again and restored Wang Hou's former post salary. At this time, Drogba, who was in favor of the younger brother of Wyde, came out and planned to restore the country.

古文：怀德畏偪，奔河南，种落更挟之以令诸部。
现代文：怀德很害怕，逃到黄河以南，但仍被各部落抓获，挟持他以统率各部。
English: Terrified, Huai De fled south of the Yellow River, but was still captured by the tribes, who held him hostage to lead the tribes.

古文：朝廷患众羌扇结，命厚安抚洮西，遣内客省使童贯偕往。
现代文：朝廷担心羌族各部会受煽动而纠合在一起，遂任王厚为洮西安抚使，以安抚洮西，又派遣内客省使童贯与他一同前往。
English: The imperial court was worried that the various ministries of the Yi people would be incited and entangled together, so they appointed Wang Hou as the Shaanxi pacification envoy to pacify Shaanxi, and sent the provincial envoy of Neige Province, Tong Quan, to go with him.

古文：多罗巴知王师且至，集众以拒。
现代文：多罗巴知道朝廷军队即将到达的情况后，即纠集各部以对抗。
English: When Doroba knew that the imperial army was about to arrive, he gathered all the ministries to fight.

古文：厚声言驻兵而阴戒行，羌备益弛，乃与偏将高永年异道出。
现代文：王厚对外宣扬将军队驻扎下来，却暗地里命令部队前进，这样羌人警戒逐渐松懈，于是王厚与偏将高永年分兵两路前进。
English: Wang Hou publicly announced that the army would be stationed, but secretly ordered the troops to advance. As a result, people's vigilance gradually slackened, so Wang Hou and General Gao Yongnian's detachment advanced in two directions.

古文：多罗巴三子以数万人分据险，厚进击破杀之，唯少子阿蒙中流矢去，道遇多罗巴，与俱遁。
现代文：多罗巴的三个儿子带领数万人分别据守住险要之地，王厚领兵进击，破关斩将，将他的二个儿子杀了，只有小儿子阿蒙被乱箭射中而逃走了。其小儿子阿蒙在逃跑途中遇上了多罗巴，接着二人一起逃遁。
English: Doroba's three sons led tens of thousands of people to defend the critical location. Wang Hou led the troops to attack, broke the deadlock, and killed his two sons. Only his youngest son, Amon, was shot by random arrows and escaped. His youngest son, Amon, met Doroba on the way to escape, and then the two fled together.

古文：遂拔湟州。
现代文：于是攻下了湟州。
English: As a result, they captured Zhangzhou.

古文：以功进威州团练使、熙河经略安抚。
现代文：王厚也因战功卓著而进升威州团练使、熙河经略安抚。
English: Due to his outstanding war service, Wang Hou was also promoted to Wizhou regimental training envoy, and Heihe was slightly pacified.

古文：三年四月，厚帅大军次于湟，命永年将左军循宗水而北，别将张诫将右军出宗谷而南，自将中军趋绥远，期会宗哥川，羌置陈临宗水，倚北山，溪赊罗撒张黄屋，建大旆，乘高指呼，望中军旗鼓争赴之。
现代文：崇宁三年四月，王厚率领大军进驻湟州，命令高永年带领左军沿宗水北上，别将张诫带右军出宗谷往南，他自己则带中军前往绥远，计划在宗哥川会合。羌人则将军队布置在濒临宗水，倚靠北山的地方，溪赊罗撒筑黄屋，树大旗，在高处指挥军队进攻。敌人望见王厚中军的旗号，遂争相攻来。
English: In April of the third year of Chongning, Wang Hou led a large army into Zhangzhou. He ordered Gao Yongnian to lead the left army north along Zongshui, and not to take the right army out of Zonggu to the south. He himself took the Chinese army to Shandong, planning to meet at Zongguochuan. The Xiongnu placed the army on the edge of Zongshui, leaning on the North Mountain, built yellow houses along the creek, and planted a large flag, and commanded the army to attack at a high altitude. The enemy saw the banner of Wang Hou's army, and then attacked each other.

古文：厚麾游骑登山攻其背，亲帅强弩迎射，羌退走，右军济水击之，大风从东南来，扬沙翳羌目，不得视，遂大败，斩首四千三百余级，俘三千余人。
现代文：王厚麾下的游骑登山攻击敌人的背后，他自己亲自率领手持强弩的弓箭手从正面迎击敌人，最后羌人大败而逃。右军渡水攻击，当时大风从东南方面刮来，吹起的沙粒遮住了敌人的眼睛，敌人看不见，又大败而逃。在这场战斗中，右军斩敌首四千三百多，俘获三千余人。
English: The cavalry under Wang Hou attacked the enemy from behind the mountain, and he personally led the archers armed with powerful crossbows to attack the enemy from the front, and finally the attackers were defeated and fled. The right army attacked across the water. At that time, a strong wind blew from the southeast, and the blowing sand covered the eyes of the enemy. The enemy could not be seen and fled in defeat. In this battle, the right army beheaded more than 4,300 enemies and captured more than 3,000 people.

古文：罗撒以一骑驰去，其母龟兹公主与诸酋开鄯州降。
现代文：罗撒仅一个人骑马逃脱，他的母亲龟兹公主与各敌首领打开鄯州城投降。
English: Rosa was the only one to escape on horseback. His mother, Princess Kamez, opened the city of Zhangzhou and surrendered with the leaders of the enemy.

古文：厚计罗撒必且走青唐，将夜追之，童贯以为不能及，遂止。
现代文：王厚估计罗撒必定会逃到青唐，打算连夜追赶，童贯认为来不及了，于是停止了追赶。
English: Wang Hou estimated that Rosa would definitely flee to Qing Tang and planned to chase her all night. Tong Can thought it was too late, so he stopped chasing her.

古文：师下青唐，知罗撒留一宿去，贯始悔之。
现代文：等后来军队到达青唐后，才知罗撒在青唐留宿了一个晚上才走，为此童贯后悔不已。
English: Later, after the army arrived in Qingtang, it was learned that Rosa stayed in Qingtang for one night before leaving, for which Tongran regretted deeply.

古文：厚将大军趣廓州，酋落施军令结以众降，遂入廓州。
现代文：王厚率大军前往廓州，羌人首领落施军令结带领部众归降，宋朝大军进驻廓州。
English: Wang Hou led the army to Guozhou. The leader of the Song Dynasty, Luo Shi, ordered his troops to surrender, and the Song Dynasty army entered Guozhou.

古文：超拜厚武胜军节度观察留后。
现代文：破格提拔王厚为武胜军节度观察留后。
English: After the unprecedented promotion of Wang Hou as the leader of the victorious army, the festival was observed.

古文：明年，罗撒复入寇，永年战死，羌焚大通河桥以叛，新疆大震。
现代文：次年，罗撒又带兵来犯，高永年战死，原来已经归降的羌人焚烧了大通河桥，又响应罗撒而叛乱，边境大震，烽火再起。
English: The following year, Rosa again led soldiers to commit crimes. Gao Yongnian died in battle. The Xiongnu, who had already surrendered, burned the Datong River Bridge. They also rebelled in response to Rosa. The border was shaken and the bonfires started again.

古文：厚坐逗遛，降郢州防御使。
现代文：王厚因逗留延误军机，被降为郢州防御使。
English: Wang Hou was demoted to the post of defense envoy of Zhangzhou for delaying the military aircraft.

古文：帝斋洁敬待，越三夕无所闻，乃下寀大理，狱成，弃市，寀窜琼州。薛向，字师正。
现代文：不久，赵怀德想降顺大宋，却又犹豫不决，王厚写信劝说他，使他终于归降，于是恢复了王厚原来的官职。入朝，任职提举醴泉观。死去，赠为宁远军节度使，谥号曰 庄敏 。薛向，字师正。
English: Soon, Zhao Hai De wanted to surrender to the Great Song Dynasty, but he hesitated. Wang Hou wrote to him to persuade him to finally surrender, so he restored Wang Hou's original official position. He entered the imperial court, held the post and promoted Quan Quan. He died, and was given the title of Ningyuan military festival envoy, with the nickname Zhuang Min. Xue Xiang, the calligrapher.

古文：以祖颜任太庙斋郎，为永寿主簿，权京兆户曹。
现代文：以祖荫任太庙斋郎，又为永寿主簿，权京兆户曹。
English: It is said that his ancestor was the chief priest of the Imperial Temple, and also the main book of eternal life, and the power of the Beijing Zhao household.

古文：有商胡赍银二箧，出枢密使王德用书，云以与其弟。
现代文：有一个胡商带了二箧银子，又拿出了枢密使王德用的信，说是给他弟弟的。
English: A Hu merchant brought with him two shekels of silver, and also took out a letter from the confidential envoy Wang De, saying that it was for his brother.

古文：向适监税，疑之曰： 乌有大臣寄家问而诿胡人者？ 鞫之，果妄。
现代文：薛向当时正好监税，对这事感到怀疑，说 ：哪里有大臣要寄家书而委托胡人的呢？ 
English: Xue Xiang happened to be a tax inspector at the time and was suspicious of the matter, saying, "Where is there a minister who wants to send a family letter and entrusts someone like Hu?"

古文：为邠州司法参军。
现代文：遂把胡商抓起来审讯，果然是假的。任州司法参军。
English: He then arrested Hu Shang for interrogation, which turned out to be a fake. Renzhou Justice joined the army.

古文：夏人叛，秦中治城，侍御史陈洎行边，向诣洎陈三敝，言： 今板筑暴兴，吏持斧四出伐木，无问井闾丘陇，民不敢诉。
现代文：夏人反叛，秦州修筑城垒以御敌，这时侍御史陈洎巡察边境，薛向找到陈洎，向他面陈了修城的三大害处，说： 现在大肆修城筑垒，官吏带人到处砍伐树木，无论是街巷里还是田地里皆不能幸免，百姓皆不敢申诉。
English: The Xia people rebelled and Qinzhou built a fortress to resist the enemy. At this time, the attendant Chen Yao was inspecting the border. Xue Xiang found Chen Yao and confronted him with the three major harms of building a city, saying: Now the city is building a fortress, the officials are cutting down trees everywhere, whether in the streets or in the fields, the people are not spared, and the people are afraid to complain.

古文：必不得已，宜且葺边城。
现代文：如果是迫不得已，就暂时修葺好边防城市。
English: If it is a last resort, the border city will be temporarily repaired.

古文：函关，秦东塞，今西乡设守，是为弃关内乎？
现代文：函关是秦州东部的要塞，现在却要在西边设防，这是想放弃关内吗？
English: Hanguan is a fortress in the eastern part of Qin, but now it is to be fortified in the west. Is this a move to abandon Hanguan?

古文：三司贷龙门富人钱，以百年全盛之天下，一方有警，即称贷于民，非义也。 洎上其说，悉从之。
现代文：三司借贷龙门富裕人家的钱，以大宋上百年的盛世大国，一有危警，就借贷百姓的钱，是不道义的。 陈洎将其意见反映上去，皇上都听从了。
English: It is immoral for the Third Division to borrow money from rich people, with the Great Song Dynasty as the most prosperous country for hundreds of years, and to borrow money from the people as soon as there is a crisis. Chen Xi reflected his opinion, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：邠守贪沓，欲因事为邪，并治于城，立表于市以撤屋，冀得赂免，向力争罢之。
现代文：这要拆掉很多民房。他的目的就是希望得到居民的贿赂。对此薛向据理反对，最后才停罢了。
English: This would require the demolition of many houses. His aim was to hope for bribes from residents. Xue Xiang reasonably objected to this, but eventually stopped.

古文：监在京榷货务，连岁羡缗钱，当迁秩，移与其兄。
现代文：监掌京师榷场事务，因治理得好，连续几年超额交纳了缗钱，朝廷提高了他的俸禄，而他都转给了他的哥哥。
English: Supervisor of the affairs of the capital market, because of good governance, for several years in a row overpaid his salary, the court raised his salary, and he transferred it to his brother.

古文：三司判官董沔议改河北便籴，行钞法。
现代文：三司判官董沔提议改变河北的便籴法，实行钞法，即官府以后购买民间的粮时直接兑付钱钞。
English: Third Division Judge Dong Wei proposed to change Hebei's note-taking method and implement the banknote method, that is, when the government buys grain from the private sector, it will directly cash the banknotes.

古文：向曰： 如此，则都内之钱不继，茶、盐、香、象将益不售矣。 有司主沔议，既而边籴滞不行，沔坐黜。
现代文：薛向说： 如果这样做，则都内的钱就不够了，茶、盐、香、象等也将更加卖不出去了。 主管机关同意董沔的意见，过了不久边关因为没有钱而无法购买粮草了。
English: Xue Xiang said: If this is done, the money in the capital will not be enough, and tea, salt, incense, elephants, etc. will be even more difficult to sell.The competent authorities agreed with Dong Xuan's opinion, and after a short time, the border guards could not buy grain and grass because they had no money.

古文：以向知鄜州。
现代文：因此董沔被罢官。任薛向为州知州。
English: As a result, Dong Xuan was removed from office. Ren Xuexiang was promoted to prefectural governor.

古文：大水冒城郭，沉室庐，死者相枕。
现代文：发生水灾，大水浸漫了州城，淹没了大量房屋，溺死了无数的人。
English: A flood occurred, flooding the state capital, inundating a large number of houses and drowning countless people.

古文：郡卒戍延安。诣主将求归视。弗得，皆亡奔。
现代文：戍守延安的州士兵要求归家探视，没得到批准，结果这些士兵都逃跑了。
English: The soldiers from the prefecture who were in Yan'an requested a home visit, but it was not approved. As a result, the soldiers ran away.

古文：至，则家人无存者，聚谋为盗，民大恐。
现代文：那些家人全被淹死了的士兵聚集起来，图谋做盗匪，听到这个消息后老百姓大为恐慌。
English: When the soldiers, whose families had all been drowned, got together to plot a robbery, the people panicked at the news.

古文：向遣吏晓之曰： 冒法以赴急，人之常情，而不听若辈归，此武将不知变之过也。
现代文：薛向派官员开导那些士兵说 ：冒犯法令以赴急难，这是人之常情，而不让你们回家探望亲人，这是将领不知道变通的错误。
English: Xuexiang sent officials to enlighten those soldiers, saying: it is human nature to violate the law and go to an emergency, but not letting you go home to visit your relatives is a mistake that generals do not know how to work around.

古文：亟往收溺尸，贳汝擅还之罪。 众人庭下泣谢，一境乃安。
现代文：现在赦免你们擅自逃跑之罪，快回去掩埋被溺死的亲人的尸首吧。 
English: Now that you have been pardoned for running away without permission, go back and bury the bodies of your drowned relatives.

古文：又论河北籴法之弊，以为： 度支岁费钱缗五百万，所得半直，其赢皆入贾贩家。
现代文：那些想做盗匪的士兵都哭了，并感谢薛向赦免了他们的罪过，这样州全境才安定下来。薛向又陈述河北便籴法的弊端，认为 ：度支部每年要花费五百万缗钱在籴买粮草上，而所买的东西实际上只值得了一半的钱，那另外的利润都被商贾赚去了。
English: Those soldiers who wanted to be bandits cried and thanked Xue Xiang for forgiving their sins, so that the entire state could settle down. Xue Xiang also stated the drawbacks of Hebei's note-taking method, arguing that: the provincial branch spends five million baht a year on buying grain and grass, and what is bought is actually worth only half the money, and the other profits are earned by merchants.

古文：今当有以权之，遇谷贵，则官籴于澶，魏，载以给边；新陈未交，则散籴价以救民乏；军食有余，则坐仓收之。
现代文：现在应当加以整顿权衡，遇到谷物贵的时候，则官府从澶、魏之地买进，然后运到边境；青黄不接时，则将谷物按当时的买入价卖给民众，以救民乏；军粮有剩余的，则仓库就收进。
English: Now it is time to rectify the balance. When grain is expensive, the government buys it from the land of Wei and Wei and then transports it to the border. When it is not received, the grain will be sold to the people at the current purchase price to save the people. If there is surplus of military grain, the warehouse will collect it.

古文：此策一行，谷将不可胜食矣。 朝廷是向计，始置便籴司于大名，以向为提点刑狱兼其事。
现代文：按照这个办法施行，粮食就再也不会缺乏了。 朝廷按照薛向的意见，在大名府设置了便籴司，任命薛向为提点刑狱并兼管便籴司。
English: If implemented according to this method, there will never be a shortage of grain again.The imperial court, in accordance with Xue Xiang's opinion, set up a post of postmaster in Damingfu, appointed Xue Xiang as the head of the prison and also in charge of the postmaster.

古文：武强有盗杀人而逸，尉捕平民抑使承，向覆其冤，脱六囚于死。
现代文：武强有盗匪杀人后逃跑了，尉胡乱逮捕平民强迫他们认罪。薛向审问他们后发现他们是被冤枉的，就把他们释放了，共放了六个被冤屈的死囚犯。
English: Wu Qiang had robbers who killed people and then ran away, and officers arrested civilians indiscriminately and forced them to confess. After interrogating them, Xue Xiang found that they had been wronged and released them, releasing a total of six death row prisoners who had been wronged.

古文：入为开封度支判官，权陕西转运副使、制置解盐。
现代文：入京任开封度支判官，权陕西转运副使、制置解池的盐。
English: After entering Beijing, he served as the judge of the opening of the Great Seal, the deputy envoy for the transfer of power to Shaanxi, and the salt for the preparation of the solution tank.

古文：盐足支十年，而岁调畦夫数千，向奏损其数。
现代文：盐足够食用十年，而每年仍然要征调数千人服役，薛向上奏将这些都停罢了。
English: There is enough salt to last for ten years, but thousands of people still have to be conscripted into military service every year. Xue Xiangxiao should put a stop to all of this.

古文：兼提举买马，监牧沙苑养马，岁得驹三百，而费钱四千万，占田千顷。
现代文：兼任提举买马，监牧沙苑养马，沙苑每年可得马驹三百匹，而要花费四千万钱，占地上千顷。
English: He is also in charge of purchasing horses and supervising the horse breeding of Sha Yuan. Sha Yuan can obtain 300 horses every year, but it costs 40 million yuan and covers a thousand hectares of land.

古文：向请斥闲田予民，收租入以市之。
现代文：薛向请求将这些闲田租给农民耕种，然后将所收的租金用以买马。
English: Xue Xiang requested that these idle fields be leased to farmers for cultivation, and then the rent collected would be used to buy horses.

古文：乃置场于原、渭，以羡盐之直市马，于是马一岁至万匹。
现代文：于是朝廷在原、渭二州置榷场，将卖盐所赚的钱用以买马，这样每年可以买马上万匹。
English: As a result, the imperial court set up stables in Hara and Shonan, and used the money earned from the sale of salt to buy horses, so that they could buy 10,000 horses every year.

古文：昭陵复土，计用钱粮五十万贯石，三司不能供亿，将移陕西缘边入盐中于永安县。
现代文：昭陵整修，估计要用钱粮五十万贯石，这笔费用三司无力供给，即打算将准备在陕西沿边卖的盐转移到永安县去卖。
English: For the renovation of Zhaoling, it is estimated that 500 thousand yuan of money and grain will be needed. The three departments are unable to provide this cost, that is, they plan to transfer the salt that is to be sold along the border in Shaanxi to Yong'an County.

古文：向陈五不可，以为失信商旅，遂举所阙之数以献。
现代文：薛向上书陈述了这样做的五个不利的方面，认为会失信于商人，于是他拿出钱来补上了不足的部分费用。
English: Xue stated in the letter the five unfavorable aspects of doing so, believing that it would discredit the merchant, so he took out money to make up for the insufficient part of the cost.

古文：尝夜至灵宝县，先驱入驿，与客崔令孙争舍。
现代文：薛向有一次夜晚到灵宝县，他的随从到驿站后，与客人崔令孙争房子。
English: Xue Xiang once went to Lingbao County at night. After his entourage arrived at the post station, he quarreled with the guest Cui Lingsun over the house.

古文：令孙正病卧，惊而死，罢知汝州。
现代文：当时崔令孙正在生病，卧床不起，受此惊吓后死去，薛向也因此被罢知汝州。
English: At that time, Cui Lingsun was ill, bedridden, and died after being frightened by this, and Xue Xiang was also removed from Ruzhou.

古文：甫数月，复以为陕西转运副使，进为使。
现代文：过了几个月，又任他为陕西转运副使，不久升任为转运使。
English: A few months later, he was appointed deputy envoy to Shaanxi for transshipment, and was soon promoted to envoy for transshipment.

古文：厚陵役费，其助如永昭时，凡将漕八年，所入盐、马、刍、粟数累万，民不益赋，其课为最。
现代文：英宗的陵墓厚陵整修所需的费用，又是像昭陵一样由薛向补足。薛向掌管漕运八年，漕运盐、马、刍、粟所得的钱有数万之多，没有增加百姓的负担，而收入却是最多的。
English: The cost of renovating the thick mausoleum of Yingzong's mausoleum was covered by Xue Xiang, just like that of Zhaoling. Xue Xiang was in charge of transportation for eight years, and the amount of money earned by transporting salt, horses, donkeys, and poppies was tens of thousands. This did not increase the burden on the people, but the income was the most.

古文：夏将嵬名山以绥州来归，青涧城主种谔将往迎，诏向与议。
现代文：夏国将领嵬名山以绥州归降宋朝，青涧城长官种谔打算去迎接，皇上诏令薛向与他讨论一下。
English: The general of Xia Province led the famous mountain of Yunnan to Yanzhou to return to the Song Dynasty, and the mayor of Qingyuan City, Zeng Yao, planned to go to meet him. The emperor ordered Xue to discuss with him.

古文：谔不俟命，亟率所部出塞，遂城之。
现代文：种谔没有听从命令，急急忙忙地带领部队出塞，进驻并整修了绥州城。
English: Zeng Yao disobeyed the order and hurriedly led the troops out of the city, stationed and renovated Zhangzhou City.

古文：廷议劾谔擅兴，将致法。
现代文：朝中大臣弹劾种谔，说他擅自行动，准备治他的罪。
English: The Minister of the DPRK and the ROK impeached So Yeon, saying that he had acted without authorization and that they were preparing to punish him for his crime.

古文：向言： 谔今者之举，盖忘身以徇国，有如不称，臣请坐之。 谔既贬，向亦罢知绛州，再贬信州，移潞州。
现代文：薛向说： 种谔的举动不是为了私利，而完全是为了国家，如果有什么不妥，就请处罚我吧。 种谔被贬官，薛向也被罢知绛州，再贬知信州，后又迁任知潞州。
English: Xue Xiang said: "The actions of Zeng Yao are not for personal gain, but entirely for the sake of the country, if there is anything wrong, please punish me." Zeng Yao was demoted, Xue Xiang was also dismissed from Zhangzhou, then dismissed from Zhisheng, and then transferred to Zhisheng.

古文：张靖使陕西还，陈向制置盐、马之失。
现代文：张靖出使陕西后回京，即指责薛向治理盐、马事务的失误。
English: Zhang Jing sent an envoy to Shaanxi and then returned to Beijing, accusing Xue Xiang of mismanagement of salt and horse affairs.

古文：诏向诣阙与辩，靖辞穷，即罪之。
现代文：皇上诏令薛向回朝对质，张靖理屈辞穷，故被治罪。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Xue to return to the court for a confrontation, but Zhang Yingli refused to do so and was therefore punished.

古文：神宗知向材，以为江、浙、荆、淮发运使。
现代文：神宗很了解薛向的才能，任他为江、浙、荆、淮发运使。
English: Shenzong was well aware of Xue Xiang's talent, and appointed him as the envoy of Jiang, Zhejiang, Jing and Huai.

古文：纲舟历岁久，篙工利于盗货，尝假风水沉溺以灭迹。
现代文：漕运的船只因使用年限长了，很多都遭到损坏，撑船的篙工即乘机盗取货物，并把船沉入水中以毁灭证据，对官府则说是船朽坏太厉害而被风浪打沉了。
English: Due to the long service life of the rowing boats, many of them were damaged. The riggers of the rowing boats took the opportunity to steal the goods and sank the boat into the water to destroy the evidence. To the government, they said that the ship was too rotten and was sunk by the wind and waves.

古文：向募客舟分载，以相督察。
现代文：薛向即招募商人的船分别载运，以使他们互相监督。
English: Xue Xiang immediately recruited merchant ships to carry them separately so that they could supervise each other.

古文：官舟有定数，多为主者冒占，悉夺畀属州，诸运皆诣本曹受遣；以地有美恶，利有重轻，为立等式，用所漕物为诛赏。
现代文：官船有定数，但多被人假借理由冒占了，薛向将这些被冒占的船都收回来，让他们回本曹接受调遣；漕运时，因为地段有好坏之分，利益有轻重之别，薛向考虑到各方面的因素，定立了一个使大家都能获得同等利益的标准，并用所漕运的物资进行赏罚。
English: There is a fixed number of official ships, but most of them have been occupied by people under false pretenses. Xue Xiang retrieved all these occupied ships and sent them back to Bentsao for dispatching. When rowing, because the location is good or bad, and the benefits are different, Xue Xiang took into account all aspects and set a standard so that everyone can get the same benefits, and used the goods to be rowed to reward and punish.

古文：迁天章阁待制。
现代文：迁任为天章阁待制。
English: He was transferred to Tenshangaku as a trainee.

古文：环庆有疆事，帝以向习知地形，召诣中书。
现代文：环庆边界发生战事，皇上考虑到薛向熟悉那里的地形，即把他召到中书省。
English: When the war broke out on the Huanqing border, the emperor summoned Xue Xiang to Zhongshuo because he was familiar with the terrain there.

古文：旧制，发运使上计毋得出人，唯止都门达章奏。
现代文：过去的制度规定，发运使要上奏章不得直接出入宫中，只要送达都门就可以了。
English: Under the previous system, the courier who was to deliver the seal was not allowed to enter the palace directly, but only had to deliver it to the capital.

古文：至是，弛其禁。
现代文：到这时，取消了这个禁制。
English: By this time, the ban had been lifted.

古文：熙宁四年，权三司使。
现代文：熙宁四年，暂代三司使之职。
English: In the fourth year of Xi Ning, he was temporarily appointed to the third division.

古文：明堂礼成，有司误迁向右谏议大夫，诏罚吏而向官不夺。
现代文：明堂礼成，有关官员误升薛向为右谏议大夫，诏令处罚了有关官员，但并没有取消薛向的官职。
English: Ming-tang-li Cheng, the relevant officials mistakenly promoted Xue Xiang to the post of doctor of right-hand speech. The imperial edict punished the relevant officials, but did not cancel Xue Xiang's official position.

古文：河、洮用兵，县官费不可计，向未尝乏供给。
现代文：河、洮两地用兵，费用不计其数，薛向却一直没有中断过供给。
English: Hebei and Shandong have used soldiers, and the cost is incalculable, but Xue Xiang has never interrupted the supply.

古文：及解严，上疏乞戒将帅裁溢员，汰冗卒、省浮费、节横赋，手敕褒纳。
现代文：等到解除危机后，薛向上疏请求皇上戒令将帅裁除多余的官员，削减士卒，节省不必要的开支，皇上亲自草写诏书采纳了他的意见，并褒扬了他。
English: After the crisis was resolved, Xue Xiangsu asked the emperor to order the generals to dismiss superfluous officials, reduce the number of officers, and save unnecessary expenses. The emperor personally drafted the edict, adopted his opinion, and praised him.

古文：进龙图阁直学士。
现代文：进升为龙图阁直学士。
English: He was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Pavilion.

古文：辽人求代北地，北边择牧，加枢密直学士、给事中、知定州。
现代文：辽人向宋朝求取代州北面的土地作为放牧之用，薛向给他们划定了一个地方。加为枢密直学士、给事中、知定州。
English: The Liao people asked the Song Dynasty to replace the land to the north of the prefecture for grazing, and Xue designated a place for them. It was added as a privy direct bachelor, giving things in the middle, and knowing the prefecture.

古文：高阳关募兵，敌阴遣人应选。
现代文：高阳关招募兵员，敌人暗地里遣人去应试。
English: Gaoyang Pass recruits soldiers, and the enemy secretly sends people to take the test.

古文：向谍知之，主者觉，纵使亡去，向遣逻捕取之，械送瀛州，戮于市。
现代文：薛向通过谍报人员获知了这件事，敌方首领发觉后就要这些冒充应试的人逃走。薛向派人将他们抓获，押送到瀛州斩首示众。
English: Xue Xiang learned of the incident through spies, and when the enemy leader found out, he ordered these pretend candidates to flee. Xue Xiang sent someone to capture them and take them to Zhangzhou to behead them in public.

古文：北使久留都亭，数出不逊语，而云、应点兵，涿、易治道，佥谓必谕盟。
现代文：辽国使者长期停留都亭，多次出言不逊，并在云州、应州加派兵力，在涿州、易州修路，摆出一副要进攻的架式。
English: The emissary of Liao stayed in Du Ting for a long time, made many insolent remarks, and sent additional troops to Yunnan and Yingzhou, built roads in Zhangzhou and Yizhou, and set up a framework for attack.

古文：向曰： 彼欲疆议速成，故多张虚势以撼我。
现代文：有人认为他们要撕毁盟约。薛向则说： 他们是想将疆域尽快划定下来，所以虚张声势威胁我们。
English: Some people think they want to tear up the treaty. Xue Xiang said: They want to delineate the territory as soon as possible, so they are bluffing and threatening us.

古文：使者惧不如其请，故肆嫚言以徼幸取成。
现代文：他们的谈判使者害怕我大宋不会答应他们的条件，所以故意谩骂想侥幸取得成功。
English: Their negotiators were afraid that I, Dasong, would not agree to their terms, so they deliberately hurled insults in order to succeed.

古文：兵来不除道，其亦无能为也已。 后皆如向言。
现代文：部队派来了，除了开挖道路，也没有什么其他的事可以干哪。 后来薛向的话都一一应验。
English: Troops were dispatched, and there was nothing else to do except dig up the road. Later, all of Xue Xiang's words came true.

古文：迁工部侍郎。
现代文：迁为工部侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of a chamberlain in the engineering department.

古文：向控辞，赐诏弗允。
现代文：薛向请辞官，皇上赐诏不允许。
English: Xue Xiang asked for a resignation, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：故事，前两府辞官乃降诏，两省得诏自向始。元丰元年，召同知枢密院。
现代文：在过去，只有两府的官员辞职时皇上才降诏，而今从薛向开始，两省的官员辞职时皇上也赐诏。元丰元年，召薛向同知枢密院。
English: In the past, only when the officials of the two prefectures resigned did the emperor issue an imperial edict, but now, starting with Xue Xiang, the emperor also issued an imperial edict when the officials of the two provinces resigned. In the first year of the Yuanfeng era, Xue Xiang was summoned to Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：向干局绝人，尤善商财，计算无遗策，用心至到，然甚者不能无病民，所上课间失实。
现代文：薛向才干气度都超人一等，尤其擅长于治理商业和财政，计算严密，用心细致周到，当然再严谨的人也不能说完全没有错误，所以他上交的收入间或有些失实。
English: Xue Xiang's talent and temperament are all superhuman. He is particularly good at managing business and finance. He is meticulous in his calculations and thoughtful in his intentions. Of course, even the most rigorous person cannot say that there are no mistakes at all, so the income he submitted may be somewhat untrue.

古文：时方尚功利，王安石从中主之，御史数有言，不听也。
现代文：当时正崇尚聚敛财赋，王安石在朝中很推崇薛向，尽管御史多次指斥他，王安石都没有听。
English: At that time, Shang was advocating the accumulation of wealth, and Wang Anshi was advocating Xue Xiang in the court. Although the imperial historian rebuked him many times, Wang Anshi did not listen.

古文：向以是益得展奋其材业，至于论兵帝所，通畅明决，遂由文俗吏得大用。
现代文：因此薛向得以更好地发挥其才干，至于在皇上面前议论兵事，往往有条有理，清晰明快，故他得以由一般文官受到重用。
English: Therefore, Xue Xiang was able to make better use of his talents. As for discussing military affairs in front of the emperor, it was often orderly and clear, so he was able to be reused by ordinary civil servants.

古文：及在政地，同列质以西北事，则养威持重，未尝启其端，非常所以属望意。
现代文：在他执政的任上，同列官员质询有关西北兵事的情况，他往往非常持重，不轻易开口，这就不是皇上所寄希望于他的。
English: During his reign, when the same officials questioned him about the military situation in northwest China, he was often very reserved and did not open his mouth easily. This was not what the emperor had hoped for.

古文：会诏民畜马，向既奉命，旋知民不便，议欲改为。
现代文：诏令民间蓄养马匹，薛向已经奉命执行，不久他了解到这对百姓很不利，要求改变这种做法。
English: Xue Xiang had already been ordered to implement the edict ordering the people to keep horses. He soon realized that this was very disadvantageous to the people and demanded that this practice be changed.

古文：于是舒亶论向反覆无大臣体，斥知颍州。又改随州，卒，年六十六。
现代文：对此舒指责薛向反复无常，不是朝廷大臣该有的举动，薛向被贬知颍州，又改知随州，去世，时年六十六岁。
English: In response, Shu accused Xue Xiang of being capricious, which was not the behavior expected of a minister of the imperial court. Xue Xiang was demoted to Zhangzhou and then to Suzhou, where he died at the age of 66.

古文：元祐中，录其言，谥曰恭敏。
现代文：元年间，将他的言论作了收集整理，赠谥号曰 恭敏 。
English: During the first year of the year, his remarks were collected and organized, and he was given the nickname "Kyo Min."

古文：子绍彭，有翰墨名，中子嗣昌。
现代文：其子绍彭很有文学才华，名著于当时。其次子叫嗣昌。
English: His son, Shao Peng, was very talented in literature and wrote a famous book at that time. His second son was named Tszuchang.

