古文：○李茂贞李茂贞，深州博野人也。
现代文：李茂贞是深州博野人。
English: Li Maozhen is a native of Shenzhou.

古文：本姓宋，名文通，为博野军卒，戍凤翔。
现代文：原本姓宋，名叫文通，在博野军当兵，戍守凤翔。
English: Originally surnamed Song, he was called Wentong. He was a soldier in the Bono army and guarded Fengxiang.

古文：黄巢犯京师，郑畋以博野军击贼，茂贞以功自队长迁军校。
现代文：黄巢侵犯京师，郑畋率博野军攻打贼军，李茂贞因功从队长升任军校。
English: Huang Chao invaded the capital division, Zheng He led the Bo field army to attack the thief army, and Li Maozhen was promoted from captain to the military school.

古文：光启元年，硃玫反，僖宗出居兴元。
现代文：光启元年，朱玫反频，唐僖宗出逃住在兴元。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, Zhu Mei rebelled, and Tang Xizong fled and lived in Xingyuan.

古文：玫遣王行瑜攻大散关，茂贞与保銮都将李钅延等败行瑜于大唐峰。
现代文：朱玫派王行瑜进攻大散关，李茂贞和保銮都将李键等人在大唐峰打败王行瑜。
English: Zhu Mei sent Wang Xingyu to attack the Great Sankuan, and both Li Maozhen and Baojun defeated Wang Xingyu in Datangfeng.

古文：明年，玫遂败死。
现代文：第二年，朱玫就战败而死。
English: The following year, Zhu Mei was defeated and died.

古文：茂贞以功自扈跸都头拜武定军节度使，赐以姓名。
现代文：李茂贞因功从扈跸都头拜为武定军节度使，赐给他姓名。
English: Li Maozhen was awarded the title of the Wuding Army's special envoy and given his name.

古文：扈跸东归，至凤翔，凤翔节度使李昌符与天威都头杨守立争道，以兵相攻，昌符不胜，走陇州。
现代文：护从皇帝车驾束归，到凤翔，凤翔节度使李昌符和天威都头杨守立争路，率兵相攻，李昌符没有取胜，逃到陇州。
English: The escort returned from the emperor's chariot to Fengxiang, and the Fengxiang festival made Li Changfu and Yang Shouli, the head of the Tianwei capital, fight for the road and lead the troops to attack each other. Li Changfu did not win and fled to Zhangzhou.

古文：僖宗遣茂贞击杀昌符，以功拜凤翔陇右节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗派李茂贞击杀李昌符，因功拜为凤翔陇右节度使。
English: Li Maozhen killed Li Changfu, a member of the Tang Dynasty Jiuquan sect, and became Fengxiang's right-hand man because of his service.

古文：大顺元年，封陇西郡王。
现代文：大顺元年，封为陇西郡王。
English: In the first year of Dashun, he was named the king of Shaanxi County.

古文：二年，枢密使杨复恭得罪，奔于兴元，兴元节度使杨守亮，复恭之养子也，纳之。
现代文：二年，枢密使杨复恭犯罪，逃奔到兴元，兴元节度使杨守亮，是杨复恭的养子，收留了他。
English: In the second year, the privy council made Yang Fuguang commit a crime and flee to Xingyuan. The Xingyuan Festival made Yang Shouliang, the adopted son of Yang Fuguang, take him in.

古文：茂贞乃上书言复恭父子罪皆当诛，因自请为山南招讨使。
现代文：李茂贞于是上书说按杨复恭父子的罪行都应杀掉，于是自己请求任山南招讨使。
English: Li Maozhen then wrote a letter saying that according to the crimes of Yang Fuqiong and his son, they should all be killed, so he asked to be appointed as an envoy to Shannan.

古文：昭宗以宦者故，难之，未许。
现代文：唐昭宗由于宦官的缘故，感到为难，没有答应。
English: Because of the eunuch, Tang Zhaozong felt embarrassed and did not agree.

古文：茂贞擅发兵攻破兴元，复恭父子见杀。茂贞表其子继密权知兴元军府事，昭宗乃徙茂贞山南西道节度使，以宰相徐彦若镇凤翔。
现代文：李茂贞擅自出兵攻破兴元，杨复恭父子被杀死李茂贞上表请求任他的儿子李继密暂且主持兴元军府事，唐昭宗于是调任李茂贞为山南西道节度使，任命宰相徐彦若镇守凤翔。
English: Li Maozhen sent troops without authorization to defeat Xingyuan, Yang Fuguo and his son were killed. Li Maozhen requested that his son Li Jimi temporarily preside over the military affairs of Xingyuan. Tang Zhaozong then transferred Li Maozhen to be the envoy of the Shannan West Road Festival, and appointed Prime Minister Xu Yanruo as the town guard of Fengxiang.

古文：茂贞不奉诏，上表自论曰： 但虑军情忽变，戎马难羁。
现代文：李茂贞不遵从诏令，上表为自己辩论说： 只是忧虑军情突变，军士难以控制。
English: Li Maozhen did not comply with the imperial edict, and argued for herself on the table, saying: I am only worried about the sudden change in the military situation, and it is difficult to control the sergeant.

古文：徒令甸服生灵，因兹受币；未审乘舆播越，自此何之？ 
现代文：枉自让王畿附近的百姓，因此受到损害；不知道皇上流亡，从此到哪里去？ 
English: People in the vicinity of Wang Gui were harmed as a result of the emperor's self-indulgence; I don't know where the emperor went after his exile.

古文：昭宗以茂贞表辞不逊，不能忍，以问宰相杜让能，让能以谓： 茂贞地大兵强，而唐力未可以致讨；凤翔又近京师，易以自危而难于后悔，佗日虽欲诛晁错以谢诸侯，恐不能也。 
现代文：唐昭宗因李茂贞表中的话不恭敬，不能忍受，因此向宰相杜让能询问，杜让能说： 李茂贞地大兵强，而唐的实力不能够讨伐他；凤翔又靠近京师，容易给自己造成危害而难以后悔，以后即使想诛杀晁错向诸侯谢罪，恐怕都不能够了。 
English: Tang Zhaozong did not respect Li Maozhen's words and could not bear it, so he asked Prime Minister Du Jian about it. Du Jian could say: Li Maozhen had a strong army, but Tang's strength could not fight him; Feng Xiang was close to the Beijing division, so it was easy to cause harm to himself, but difficult to repent. In the future, even if you want to apologize to the princes for killing them, I am afraid it will not be enough.

古文：昭宗怒曰： 吾不能孱孱坐受凌弱！ 
现代文：唐昭宗发怒说： 我不能懦弱地坐着忍受凌辱！ 
English: Tang Zhaozong said angrily, "I can't cowardly sit there and take the abuse!

古文：乃责让能治兵，而以覃王嗣周为京西招讨使。
现代文：于是责令杜让能整治军队，而任命覃王李嗣周为京西招讨使。
English: Therefore, he ordered Dujang Neng to reorganize the army, and appointed the warlord, Li Zhi Zhou, as the envoy to Beijing and the West.

古文：令下，京师市人皆知不可，相与聚承天门，遮宰相请无举兵，争投瓦石击宰相，宰相下舆而走，亡其堂印，人情大恐，昭宗意益坚。
现代文：命令下达后，京师市民都知道不行，一起聚集在承天门，阻止宰相请求不要出兵，争相投掷瓦块石头打宰相，宰相下车而逃，丢失了他的印，人们心里十分恐惧，唐昭宗的主意更加坚定。
English: After the order was issued, the citizens of Beijing Division all knew that it was impossible. They gathered together at the Chengtian Gate to prevent the prime minister from requesting not to send troops. They fought to throw bricks and stones to hit the prime minister. The prime minister got off the bus and fled, losing his seal. People were very afraid, and Tang Zhaozong's idea was more firm.

古文：覃王率扈驾军五十四都战于盩厔，唐军败溃，茂贞遂犯京师，屯于三桥。
现代文：覃王率领扈驾军五十四都在盘历打仗，唐军战败溃散，李茂贞于是进犯京师，屯驻在三桥。
English: The fifty-four armies led by Shao Wang were all fighting in Panli. The Tang army was defeated and dispersed. Li Maozhen then attacked the Beijing division and stationed in Sanqiao.

古文：昭宗御安福门，杀两枢密以谢茂贞，使罢兵。
现代文：唐昭宗到安福门，杀掉两个枢密使向李茂贞请罪，求他罢兵。
English: Tang Zhaozong went to Anfu Gate, killed two confidential envoys, pleaded guilty to Li Maozhen, and asked him to disband.

古文：茂贞素与让能有隙，因曰： 谋举兵者非两枢密，乃让能也。 
现代文：李茂贞素来和杜让能有矛盾，于是说： 策划出兵的不是两个枢密使，而是杜让能。 
English: Li Maozhen had always been at odds with Du Jiangneng, so she said: It was not the two emissaries who planned to send troops, but Du Jiangneng.

古文：陈兵临皋驿，请杀让能。
现代文：在临皋驿布兵，请求杀掉杜让能。
English: In Linfen cloth soldiers, asked to kill Du Zhaneng.

古文：让能曰： 臣故先言之矣，惟杀臣可以纾国难。 昭宗泣下沾襟，贬让能雷州司户参军，赐死，茂贞乃罢兵。明年，河中节度使王重盈卒，其诸子珂、珙争立。
现代文：杜让能说： 我过去说过，只有杀掉我纔能够解除国难 唐昭宗流泪沾湿衣襟，贬杜让能为雷州司户参军，赐他死，李茂贞纔罢兵第二年，河中节度使王重盈死，他的儿子王珂、王珙相争自立。
English: Dujang Neng said: I have said in the past that only killing my uncle can solve the national calamity. Tang Zhaozong's tears drenched his lapels. Dujang Neng joined the army for the governor of Leizhou and was sentenced to death. Li Maozhen Neng went on a military strike the following year. Huazhong Jiedu caused the death of Wang Chou Ying. His sons Wang Ke and Wang Ye struggled to stand on their own feet.

古文：晋王李克用请立珂，茂贞与韩建、王行瑜请立珙，昭宗不许。茂贞等怒，率三镇兵犯京师，谋废昭宗，立吉王保。
现代文：晋王李克用请求立王坷，李茂贞和韩建、王行瑜请求立王珙，唐昭宗不答应李茂贞等人发怒，率领三镇军队侵犯京师，策划废掉唐昭宗，拥立吉王李保。
English: Jin King Li Ke requested the establishment of Wang Bu, Li Maozhen and Han Jian, Wang Xingyu requested the establishment of Wang Yao, Tang Zhaozong did not allow Li Maozhen and others to be angry, led the three-town army to invade Beijing Division, planned to abolish Tang Zhaozong, and supported the establishment of Ji Wang Li Bao.

古文：未果，而晋王亦举兵，茂贞惧，乃杀宰相韦昭度、李磎，留其养子继鹏以兵二千宿卫而去。
现代文：没有成功，而晋王也出兵，李茂贞害怕，于是杀掉宰相韦昭度、李候，留下他的养子李继鹏率兵两千在宫中值宿警卫而离去。
English: It did not succeed, and the Jin king also sent troops. Li Maozhen was afraid, so he killed the prime minister Wei Zhaodu and Li Hou, leaving his adopted son Li Jipeng to lead two thousand soldiers to guard the palace.

古文：晋兵至河中，继鹏与行瑜弟行实等争劫昭宗出奔，京师大乱，昭宗出居于石门。
现代文：晋军到河中，李继鹏和王行瑜的弟弟行实等人争相劫持唐昭宗出逃，京师大乱，唐昭宗出逃住在石门。
English: When the Jin army arrived in the middle of the river, Li Jipeng and Wang Xingyu's younger brother, Xing Cheng, and others vied with each other to kidnap Tang Zhaozong and escape. The capital was in turmoil, and Tang Zhaozong fled and lived in Shimen.

古文：茂贞以兵至鄠县，斩继鹏自赎。
现代文：李茂贞率兵到鄂县，杀掉李继鹏为自己赎罪。
English: Li Maozhen led an army to E County and killed Li Jipeng to atone for his sins.

古文：晋兵已破王行瑜，还军渭北，请击茂贞。
现代文：晋军攻破王行瑜后，返回驻扎在渭北，请求攻打李茂贞。
English: After defeating Wang Xingyu, the Jin army returned to be stationed in the north of Shandong and requested to attack Li Maozhen.

古文：昭宗以谓晋远而茂贞近，因欲庇之以为德，而冀缓急之可恃也；且茂贞已杀其子自赎矣，乃诏罢归晋军。
现代文：唐昭宗认为晋相距远而李茂贞靠得近，因而想庇护他作为恩惠，希望在危急时可以依靠；而且李茂贞已杀死他的养子赎罪了，于是诏令晋军罢兵返回。
English: Tang Zhaozong thought that Jin was far away and Li Maozhen was close, so he wanted to shelter him as a favor, hoping to rely on him in a crisis; and Li Maozhen had already killed his adopted son to atone for his sins, so he ordered the Jin army to strike and return.

古文：克用叹曰： 唐不诛茂贞，忧未已也！ 
现代文：李克用叹息说： 唐不杀掉李茂贞，忧患无穷！ 
English: Li Ke said with a sigh: If Tang doesn't kill Li Maozhen, there will be endless sorrow!

古文：昭宗自石门还，益募安圣、捧宸等军万馀人，以诸王将之。
现代文：唐昭宗从石门返回，增募安圣、捧宸等军一万多人，任命诸王统率。
English: Tang Zhaozong returned from Shimen, recruited more than ten thousand soldiers including An Sheng and Huping, and appointed Zhu Wang as the leader.

古文：茂贞谓唐将讨己，亦治兵请觐，京师大恐，居人亡入山谷。
现代文：李茂贞认为唐将要讨伐自己，也整治军队请求朝见，京师百姓大为恐惧，居民都逃到山谷中。
English: Li Maozhen thought that Tang was going to fight against himself, and also rectify the army and request a meeting with the court. The people of Beijing were very afraid, and the residents fled to the valley.

古文：茂贞遂犯京师，昭宗遣覃王拒之，覃王至三桥，军溃，昭宗出居于华州。
现代文：李茂贞于是侵犯京师，唐昭宗派覃王抵御他，覃王到三桥，军队溃散，唐昭宗出逃住在华州。
English: Li Maozhen then invaded the capital, and the Tang Zhaozong sect sent Shao Wang to resist him. Shao Wang went to Sanqiao, the army was dispersed, and Tang Zhaozong fled and lived in Huazhou.

古文：遣宰相孙偓以兵讨茂贞，韩建为茂贞请，乃已。
现代文：派宰相孙倔率兵讨伐李茂贞，韩建为李茂贞请求，纔作罢。
English: He sent Prime Minister Sun Yat-sen and his soldiers to fight against Li Maozhen. Han Jian pleaded with Li Maozhen not to do so.

古文：久之，加拜茂贞尚书令，封岐王。
现代文：过了很久，加拜李茂贞为尚书令，封为岐王。
English: After a long time, Ji Bai Li Maozhen became Shang Shuling and was named King of Qi.

古文：其后，昭宗为宦者所废，既反正，宰相崔胤欲借梁兵诛诸宦者，阴与梁太祖谋之。
现代文：后来，唐昭宗被宦官废除，重新登位后，宰相崔胤打算藉助梁军诛杀宦官，暗中和梁太祖商议。
English: Later, Tang Zhaozong was abolished by the eunuchs, and after he ascended the throne again, Prime Minister Cui Yin planned to use Liang Jun to assassinate the eunuchs, and secretly negotiated with Liang Taizu.

古文：中尉韩全诲等，亦倚茂贞之强，以为外援，茂贞遣其子继筠以兵数千宿卫京师，宦者恃岐兵，益骄不可制。
现代文：中尉韩全诲等人，也倚仗李茂贞的强大，作为外援，李茂贞派他的儿子李继筠率领几千士兵护卫京师，宦官仗恃岐州军兵，更加骄横不可控制。
English: Lieutenant Han Quanzhang and others also relied on the strength of Li Maozhen. As foreign aid, Li Maozhen sent his son Li Jizhong to lead several thousand soldiers to guard the Beijing Division, and eunuchs to guard the soldiers of the Iki State Army, which was even more arrogant and uncontrollable.

古文：天复元年，胤召梁太祖以西，梁军至同州，全诲等惧，与继筠劫昭宗幸凤翔。
现代文：天复元年，崔胤召梁太祖向西，梁军到达同州，韩全诲等人害怕，和李继筠劫持唐昭宗逃到凤翔。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Cui Yin called Liang Taizu to the west, Liang's army reached Tongzhou, Han Quanzhi and others were afraid, and Li Jizhe kidnapped Tang Zhaozong and fled to Fengxiang.

古文：梁军围之逾年，茂贞每战辄败，闭壁不敢出。
现代文：梁军包围了一年多，李茂贞每次作战就败，关闭营垒不敢出来。
English: Liang's army had been surrounded for more than a year. Li Maozhen was defeated in every battle, and dared not come out of the closed camp.

古文：城中薪食俱尽，自冬涉春，雨雪不止，民冻饿死者日以千数。米斗直钱七千，至烧人屎煮尸而食。父自食其子，人有争其肉者，曰： 此吾子也，汝安得而食之！ 
现代文：城中柴粮都耗尽了，从冬到春，下雪不断，饿死冻死的老百姓每天上千人一斗米值七干钱，以至于烧人粪煮尸体来吃，父亲吃自己的儿子，有人争夺他吃的肉，就说： 这是我的儿子，你怎么能吃！ 
English: The city has run out of firewood and grain. From winter to spring, it snows constantly. Every day, thousands of people starve to death and freeze to death. A bucket of rice is worth seven dry pennies, so much so that they burn human excrement to cook corpses and eat them. A father eats his own son, and some people compete for the meat he eats, saying: "This is my son, how can you eat him!"

古文：人肉斤直钱百，狗肉斤直钱五百。父甘食其子，而人肉贱于狗。
现代文：人肉每斤值一百钱，狗肉每斤值五百钱，父亲甘愿吃儿子，而人肉不如狗肉值钱。
English: Human flesh is worth a hundred dollars a pound, dog flesh is worth five hundred dollars a pound. Fathers are willing to eat their sons, but human flesh is not as valuable as dog flesh.

古文：天子于宫中设小磨，遣宫人自屑豆麦以供御，自后宫、诸王十六宅，冻馁而死者日三四。
现代文：夭子在宫中设置了一个小磨，派宫人自己磨豆麦供应天子，从后官、诸王十六宅以下，冻死饿死的每天有三四个人。
English: The emperor set up a small mill in the palace and sent palace servants to grind their own beans and wheat to supply the emperor. Three or four people died of cold and hunger every day, from the court officials to the sixteen households of the emperors.

古文：城中人相与邀遮茂贞，求路以为生。茂贞穷急，谋以天子与梁以为解。
现代文：城中人一起拦住李茂贞，请求他想办法给生路，李茂贞穷窘危急，策划把天子交给梁来换取解围。
English: People in the city stopped Li Maozhen together and asked him to find a way to survive. Li Maozhen was in dire straits and planned to hand over Tianzi to Liang in exchange for lifting the siege.

古文：昭宗谓茂贞曰： 朕与六宫皆一日食粥，一日食不托，安能不与梁和乎？ 
现代文：唐昭宗对李茂贞说： 我和六宫的人都一天吃稀饭，一天吃汤饼，怎能不和梁和解呢？ 
English: Tang Zhaozong said to Li Maozhen: I and the people of Liugong eat porridge one day and soup cakes one day. How can we not be reconciled with Liang?

古文：三年正月，茂贞与梁约和，斩韩全诲等二十馀人，传首梁军，梁围解。
现代文：三年正月，李茂贞和梁订约和解，杀死韩全诲等二十多人，把他们的人头送到梁军，梁的包围解除。
English: In the first month of the third year, Li Maozhen and Liang signed a reconciliation agreement, killed more than 20 people such as Han Quanzhang, sent their heads to Liang's army, and lifted Liang's siege.

古文：天子虽得出，然梁遂劫东迁而唐亡，茂贞非惟亡唐，亦自困矣。及梁太祖即位，诸侯之强者皆相次称帝，独茂贞不能，但称岐王，开府置官属，以妻为皇后，鸣梢羽扇视朝，出入拟天子而已。
现代文：天子虽然得以出城，但梁又劫持天子束迁而唐灭亡，李茂贞不只是使唐灭亡，也困住了自己到梁太祖登位，诸侯当中势力强大的都相继称帝，惟独李茂贞不能，只称爵岐王，开王府设置属官，封妻子作皇后，以天子仪卫上朝办事，进出模拟天子罢了。
English: Although Tianzi was able to leave the city, Liang kidnapped Tianzi and exiled him, and Tang perished. Li Maozhen not only caused Tang's demise, but also trapped himself until Liang Taizu ascended the throne. The powerful among the princes were successively crowned emperor, but Li Maozhen could not. He only crowned the king of Qi, set up subordinate officials in the king's palace, made his wife the empress, and used Tianzi to guard the imperial court. He only went in and out to imitate Tianzi.

古文：茂贞居岐，以宽仁爱物，民颇安之，尝以地狭赋薄，下令搉油，因禁城门无内松薪，以其可为炬也，有优者诮之曰： 臣请并禁月明。 
现代文：李茂贞住在岐，由于宽厚仁慈、爱惜财物，老百姓较为安定，曾因土地窄赋税少，下令专卖油，于是禁止城门放松柴进城，因为松柴可以做火炬，有艺人讥诮说： 我请求一并禁止月亮发光。 
English: Li Maozhen lived in Qi. Because of the generosity, benevolence and love of property, the common people were more stable. Because of the narrow land, the tax was less, and he ordered the exclusive sale of oil. Therefore, he forbade the city gate to release firewood into the city, because the pinewood could be used as a torch. Some artists scoffed and said: I request that the moon be prohibited from shining.

古文：茂贞笑而不怒。
现代文：李茂贞笑了而没有发怒。
English: Li Maozhen smiled instead of getting angry.

古文：初，茂贞破杨守亮取兴元，而邠、宁、鄜坊皆附之，有地二十州，其被梁围也，兴元入于蜀；开平已后，邠、宁、鄜、坊入于梁，秦、凤、阶、成又入于蜀；当梁末年，所有七州而已。
现代文：当初，李茂贞攻破杨守亮而夺取兴元，而合、宁、郦、坊各州都依附他，共有二十个州；当他被梁包围时，兴元归属蜀；开平以后，郐、宁、郦、坊等州归属梁，秦、凤、阶、成等州又归属蜀；在梁末年，只有七个州罢了。
English: At first, Li Maozhen defeated Yang Shouliang and captured Xingyuan, while He, Ning, Shao and Fang states all adhered to him, a total of twenty states; when he was surrounded by Liang, Xingyuan belonged to Shu; after Kaiping, Shao, Ning, Shao and Fang states belonged to Liang, and Qin, Feng, Ji and Cheng states belonged to Shu; at the end of Liang, there were only seven states.

古文：庄宗已破梁，茂贞称岐王，上笺以季父行自处。
现代文：唐庄宗攻破梁后，李茂贞称岐王，上书以季父辈分自居。
English: After Tangzhuangzong broke through the beam, Li Maozhen called himself the king of Qi, and separated himself from his father's generation.

古文：及闻入洛，乃上表称臣，遣其子从严来朝。
现代文：到听说唐庄宗攻入洛阳，就上表自称臣子，派他的儿子李从暇前来朝拜。
English: When he heard that Tang Zhuangzong had invaded Luoyang, he called himself a courtier and sent his son Li to come and pay homage in his spare time.

古文：庄宗以其耆老，甚尊礼之，改封秦王，诏书不名。
现代文：唐庄宗因为他年老，很尊敬礼待他，改封为秦王，诏书上不称名。
English: Because of his old age, Tangzhuangzong treated him with great respect and changed his title to King Qin. He was not named in the edict.

古文：同光二年，以疾卒，年六十九，谥曰忠敬。
现代文：同光二年，病死，六十九岁，谧号叫忠敬。
English: Tongguang two years, died of illness, sixty-nine years old, nicknamed Zhongjing.

古文：从严为人柔而善书画，茂贞承制拜从严彰义军节度使。
现代文：李从瞄为人温柔而擅长书画，李茂贞受权拜李从暇为彰义军节度使。
English: Li Congnai was a gentle person and good at calligraphy and painting, and Li Maozhen was authorized to use Li Congnai's spare time to promote the festival of the rebel army.

古文：茂贞卒，拜凤翔节度使。
现代文：李茂贞死，拜为凤翔节度使。
English: After Li Maozhen's death, Feng Xiang was appointed as the regent.

古文：魏王继岌征蜀，为供军转运应接使。
现代文：魏王李继岌出征蜀，任供军转运应接使。
English: The Wei king, Li Jie, set out to conquer Shu, and was appointed as the envoy of the army.

古文：蜀平，继岌遣从严部送王衍，行至凤翔，监军使柴重厚拒而不纳，从严遂东至华州，闻庄宗之难乃西归。
现代文：蜀平定后，李继岌派李从咪监押王衍，到达凤翔时，监军使柴重厚拒不接纳，李从暇于是往东到华州，听说唐庄宗遭难又西归。
English: After Shu was pacified, Li Jizhe sent Li Zongmi to supervise Wang Yan. When Li arrived in Fengxiang, the supervising army refused to accept Chai Chonghou, so Li went east to Huazhou in his spare time. When he heard that Tangzhuangzong was in trouble, he returned to the west.

古文：明宗入立，闻重厚尝拒从严，遣人诛之。
现代文：唐明宗登位，听说柴重厚曾拒纳李从暇，派人杀了他。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, it was heard that Chai Chonghou had refused to accept Li Conglu and had sent someone to kill him.

古文：从严上书，言重厚守凤翔，军民无所扰，愿贷其过。
现代文：李从哦上书，说柴重厚守凤翔时，没有骚扰军队百姓，希望宽恕他的罪过。
English: Li Cong Oh wrote a letter, saying that when Chai Chong Hou was guarding Feng Xiang, he did not harass the army people, hoping to forgive his sins.

古文：虽不许，士人以此多之。历镇宣武、天平。
现代文：虽然没有准许，士人因此称赞他相继镇守宣武、天平。
English: Although he did not have permission, the judges praised him for successively winning the town guards of Xuanwu and Tianping.

古文：从严有田千顷、竹千亩在凤翔，惧侵民利，未尝省理，凤翔人爱之。
现代文：李从瞄有一千顷田、一千亩竹子在凤翔，怕损窨百姓的利益，不曾清理租赋，凤翔人喜爱他。
English: Li Congnai had a thousand hectares of farmland and a thousand mu of bamboo in Fengxiang. He was afraid of damaging the interests of the local people and did not clear up the land lease. The people of Fengxiang loved him.

古文：废帝起凤翔，将行，凤翔人叩马乞从严。
现代文：唐废帝从凤翔出发，快要走时，凤翔人拉住马请求留下李从暇。
English: Emperor Tang Wasted away from Fengxiang, and when he was about to leave, Fengxiang people pulled the horse and asked Li Congfu to stay.

古文：废帝入立，复以从严为凤翔节度使，卒年四十九。
现代文：唐废帝登位，又任李从睑为凤翔节度使，死时四十九岁。
English: He was forty-nine years old at the time of his death.

古文：○韩建韩建，字佐时，许州长社人也。
现代文：韩建字佐时，是许州长社人。
English: Han Jian Zi Sa Shi is a member of the Xu Guo Society.

古文：少为蔡州军校，隶忠武军将鹿晏弘。
现代文：年轻时任蔡州军校，隶属忠武军将领鹿晏弘。
English: When he was young, he was in charge of the Caizhou Military Academy, under the command of the loyal army general Lu Yinghong.

古文：从杨复光攻黄巢于长安，巢已破，复光亦死，晏弘与建等无所属，乃以麾下兵西迎僖宗于蜀，所过攻劫。
现代文：跟随杨复光在长安进攻黄巢，黄巢被攻破后，杨复光也死了，鹿晏弘和韩建等人无所归属，于是率领手下的士兵往西从蜀中迎唐僖宗，打劫经过的地方。
English: He followed Yang Fuguang to attack Huang Chao in Chang'an. After Huang Chao was breached, Yang Fuguang also died. Lu Yuhong and Han Jian and others had nowhere to belong, so he led his soldiers westward from Shuzhong to meet Tang Xizong and rob the places they passed.

古文：行至兴元，逐牛丛，据山南。
现代文：到达兴元时，驱逐牛丛，占据山南。
English: When they reached Xingyuan, they drove out the cattle and occupied the southern part of the mountain.

古文：已而不能守，晏弘东走许州，建乃奔于蜀，拜金吾卫将军。
现代文：不久不能守，鹿晏弘束逃到许州，韩建于是逃奔到蜀，拜为金吾卫将军。
English: Soon unable to defend, Deguan Hongzhu fled to Huzhou, Han Jian then fled to Shu, and worshiped General Jinwuwei.

古文：僖宗还长安，建为潼关防御使、华州刺史。
现代文：唐僖宗返回长安，韩建任潼关防御使、华州刺史。
English: Tang Xizong returned to Chang'an, and Han Jianren became the defense envoy of Shaoguan and the historian of Huazhou.

古文：华州数经大兵，户口流散，建少贱，习农事，乃披荆棘，督民耕植，出入闾里，问其疾苦。
现代文：华州多次经受大军浩劫，户口流散，韩建小时候低贱，熟习农活，于是披剂斩棘，督促百姓耕田种植，出入乡里，询问百姓疾苦。
English: Huazhou has repeatedly suffered the havoc of large armies and the dispersion of household registration. When Han Jian was a child, he was lowly and familiar with agricultural work. Therefore, he took the initiative to urge the people to plant farmland, go in and out of the countryside, and inquire about the people's illnesses.

古文：建初不知书，乃使人题其所服器皿床榻，为其名目以视之，久乃渐通文字。
现代文：韩建原来不识字，于是派人在他用的器物床榻上题字，写出它们的名称来看，时间长了逐渐粗通文字。
English: Han Jian was illiterate, so he sent someone to inscribe the names of the objects he used on his bed. As the time passed, he gradually became unable to read the inscriptions.

古文：见《玉篇》，喜曰： 吾以类求之，何所不得也。 
现代文：见到《玉篇》，高兴地说： 我按类推求，还有什么学不到呢。 
English: When he saw the "Jade Chapter," he said happily, "I learned by analogy. What else can't I learn?"

古文：因以通音韵声偶，暇则课学书史。
现代文：因此而通音韵声律，有空就钻研书史。
English: As a result, he became interested in phonology and rhyme and studied the history of books in his spare time.

古文：是时，天下已乱，诸镇皆武夫，独建抚缉兵民，又好学。
现代文：这时，天下已乱，各镇都由武夫把持，只有韩建安抚军兵百姓，又好学。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and every town was controlled by warriors. Only Han Jian appeased the soldiers and people, and was eager to learn.

古文：荆南成汭时冒姓郭，亦善缉荆楚。
现代文：剂南成讷这时改姓郭，也治理剂、楚有方。
English: At this time, the agent Nan Cheng Ne changed her surname to Guo, and also the treatment agent, Chu Yifang.

古文：当时号为 北韩南郭 。
现代文：当时号称 北韩南郭 。
English: At that time, it was known as the North Korea of South Korea.

古文：大顺元年，以兵属张浚伐晋，浚败，建自含山遁归。
现代文：大顺元年，以兵归属张浚攻伐晋，张浚失败，韩建从含山逃回。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Zhang Jun attacked Jin with soldiers belonging to Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun failed, and Han Jian fled back from Han Mountain.

古文：河中王重盈死，诸子珂、珙争立，晋人助珂，建与王行瑜、李茂贞助珙。
现代文：河中王重盈死，儿子王珂、王珙争位，晋人支持王珂，韩建和王行瑜、李茂贞支持王珙。
English: In the middle of the river, Wang Chungying died, and his sons Wang Ke and Wang Yao competed for the throne. The Jin people supported Wang Ke, and Han Jian and Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen supported Wang Yao.

古文：昭宗不许，建等大怒，以三镇兵犯京师。
现代文：唐昭宗不同意，韩建等人大怒，率三镇兵侵犯京师。
English: Tang Zhaozong disagreed, Han Jian and others were outraged, and led three soldiers to invade Beijing Division.

古文：昭宗见建等责之，行瑜、茂贞惶恐战汗不能语，独建前自陈述。
现代文：唐昭宗召见韩建等人责备他们，王行瑜、李茂贞惶恐发抖不能说话，韩建独自上前陈述理由。
English: Tang Zhaozong summoned Han Jian and others to reprimand them. Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen trembled with fear and were unable to speak. Han Jian independently came forward to state his reasons.

古文：乃杀宰相韦昭度、李磎等，谋废昭宗。
现代文：于是杀掉宰相韦昭度、李蹊等人，策划废除唐昭宗。
English: Therefore, he killed Prime Minister Wei Zhaodu, Li Yao and others, and planned to abolish Tang Zhaozong.

古文：会晋举兵且至，建等惧，乃还。
现代文：恰逢晋出兵快要到了，韩建等人害怕，纔返回。
English: Just as Jin's soldiers were about to arrive, Han Jian and others were afraid and had to turn back.

古文：晋兵问罪三镇，兵傅华州，建登城呼曰： 弊邑未常失礼于大国，何为见攻？ 
现代文：晋罩向三镇兴师问罪，兵临华州，韩建登城呼喊说： 我们国家对你们大国未尝失礼，为什么受到攻打？ 
English: Jin Hood asked the three towns of Xing Division about the crime, soldiers from Linhua County and Han Jian went to the city shouting: Our country has not been rude to your great power, why is it being attacked?

古文：晋人曰： 君以兵犯天子，杀大臣，是以讨也。 
现代文：晋人说： 你率兵冒犯天子，诛杀大臣，因此讨伐你。 
English: The Jin people said, "You have led your soldiers to offend the Son of Heaven, to fight and kill the minister, so we will fight you."

古文：已而与晋和。
现代文：不久与晋言和。
English: He soon made peace with Jin.

古文：乾宁三年，李茂贞复犯京师，昭宗将奔太原，次渭北，建遣子允请幸华州。
现代文：干宁三年，李茂贞又侵犯京师，唐昭宗准备逃奔到太原，停驻渭北，韩建派儿子韩允请求唐昭宗到华州。
English: After three years of hard work, Li Maozhen again violated the Beijing division, Tang Zhaozong was preparing to flee to Taiyuan, stationed in northern Anhui, and Han Jian sent his son Han Yun to request Tang Zhaozong to go to Huazhou.

古文：昭宗又欲如鄜州，建追及昭宗于富平，泣曰： 籓臣倔强，非止茂贞，若舍近畿而巡极塞，乘舆渡河，不可复矣！ 
现代文：唐昭宗又想往墉州，韩建在富平追上唐昭宗，哭泣着说： 藩臣倔强不驯，不止是李茂贞，如果舍弃靠近京师的地方而去偏远的边塞，皇上渡过黄河，就不能回来了！ 
English: Tang Zhaozong also wanted to go to Zhangzhou, Han Jian caught up with Tang Zhaozong in Fuping, and said with tears: The vassal of the domain is stubborn and unruly, not only Li Maozhen, if you abandon the place close to the Beijing division and go to the remote border fortress, the emperor crossed the Yellow River, you can't come back!

古文：昭宗亦泣，遂幸华州。
现代文：唐昭宗也哭了，于是到华州。
English: Tang Zhaozong also cried, so he went to Huazhou.

古文：是时，天子孤弱，独有殿后军及定州三都将李筠等兵千馀人为卫，以诸王将之。
现代文：这时，天子孤单弱小，只有殿后军和定州三都将李筠等人的士兵一千多人作护卫，以各王统率。
English: At this time, Tianzi was alone and weak, and only the palace rear army and the Dingzhou three were escorting more than a thousand soldiers of Li Xi and others, led by the kings.

古文：建已得昭宗幸其镇，遂欲制之，因请罢诸王将兵，散去殿后诸军，累表不报。
现代文：韩建已使唐昭宗到他镇守的地方，于是想控制他，就请求罢免各王统率的军兵，解散殿后军，多次上表都没有答复。
English: Han Jian had already sent Tang Zhaozong to the place of his garrison, so he wanted to control him, he asked to dismiss the soldiers of the kings and disband the army behind the palace, and there was no answer to the above table for many times.

古文：昭宗登齐云楼，西北顾望京师，作《菩萨蛮辞》三章以思归，其卒章曰： 野烟生碧树，陌上行人去。
现代文：唐昭宗登上齐云楼，向西北顾望京师，作《菩萨蛮辞》三首表达思归的感情，最后一首写道： 野姻生碧树，陌上行人去。
English: Tang Zhaozong ascended the Qiyun Building, went to the northwest to look for the Beijing Division, and wrote "Bodhisattva's Brutal Speech," three poems expressing the feelings of homesickness. The last one wrote: "Go wild, Bishu, strange pedestrians go."

古文：安得有英雄，迎归大内中？ 
现代文：安得有英雄，迎归大内中？ 
English: There is a hero in Ando, welcome to the university and junior high school?

古文：酒酣，与从臣悲歌泣下，建与诸王皆属和之。
现代文：酒酣情尽，和跟随他的臣子悲歌流泪，韩建和诸王都作词与之唱和。
English: Han Jian and all the kings composed lyrics to sing along with the sad songs and tears of the vassals who followed him.

古文：建心尤不悦，因遣人告诸王谋杀建、劫天子幸佗镇。
现代文：韩建心里尤其不高兴，于是派人诬告各王策划杀掉韩建、劫持天子去别的地方。
English: Han Jian was particularly unhappy in his heart, so he sent someone to falsely accuse the kings of plotting to kill Han Jian and kidnap Tianzi to go somewhere else.

古文：昭宗召建，将辨之，建称疾不出，乃遣诸王自诣，建不见。请送诸王十六宅，昭宗难之。
现代文：唐昭宗召韩建，准备辨明是非，韩建声称有病不去，于是派各王亲自前去，韩建不见，请求送各王归十六宅，唐昭宗以此为难。
English: Tang Zhaozong called Han Jian and prepared to distinguish right from wrong. Han Jian claimed that he was ill and would not go, so he sent the kings to go in person. Han Jian did not see him and asked to send the kings to the 16th mansion. Tang Zhaozong was in trouble.

古文：建乃率精兵数千围行宫，请诛李筠。
现代文：韩建于是率领几千精兵包围行宫，请求杀掉李筠。
English: Han Jian then led several thousand elite soldiers to encircle the imperial palace and requested that Li Qiye be killed.

古文：昭宗大惧，遽诏斩筠，悉散殿后及三都卫兵，幽诸王于十六宅。
现代文：唐昭宗非常恐惧，急忙下诏杀掉李筠，全部解散殿后和三都卫兵，把各王幽禁在十六宅中。
English: Tang Zhaozong was very afraid, and hastily issued an edict to kill Li Xi, disband all the palace guards and the guards of the three capitals, and imprison all the kings in sixteen houses.

古文：昭宗益悔幸华，遣延王戒丕使于晋，以谋兴复。
现代文：唐昭宗更加后悔到华州，派延王李戒丕出使到晋，以便谋求复兴。
English: Tang Zhaozong regretted going to Huazhou even more, and sent Yan Wang Li Jianxuan to send an envoy to Jin to seek revival.

古文：戒丕还，建与中尉刘季述诬诸王谋反，以兵围十六宅，诸王皆登屋叫呼，遂见杀。
现代文：李戒丕返回，韩建和中尉刘季述诬告各王谋反，率兵包围十六宅，各王都登上屋顶呼叫，于是被杀。
English: When Li Jingyao returned, Han Jian and Lieutenant Liu Ji falsely accused all the kings of plotting rebellion and led the soldiers to surround 16 houses. All the kings climbed onto the rooftops to shout, and were killed.

古文：昭宗无如之何，为建立德政碑以慰安之。
现代文：唐昭宗无可奈何，为韩建立下德政碑安慰他。
English: Tang Zhaozong couldn't help but comfort him by erecting a German monument for Han.

古文：建已杀诸王，乃营南庄，起楼阁，欲邀昭宗游幸，因以废之而立德王裕。
现代文：韩建杀掉各王后，就营建南庄，修筑楼阁，打算邀请唐昭宗巡游，借机废除他而拥立德王李裕。
English: After Han Jian killed all the queens, he built Nanzhuang, built mansions, and planned to invite Tang Zhaozong to parade, taking the opportunity to abolish him and support the establishment of King Li Yu.

古文：其父叔丰谓建曰： 汝陈、许间一田夫尔，遭时之乱，蒙天子厚恩至此，欲以两州百里之地行大事，覆族之祸，吾不忍见，不如先死！ 
现代文：他的父亲韩叔丰对韩建说： 你不过是陈、许二州问的一个农夫罢了，碰上时代混乱，蒙受天子的大恩纔成现在这样，想要靠两个州一百里的地方做大事被灭族的灾祸，我不忍心看见，不如先死： 于是抽泣泪下。
English: His father, Han Shufeng, said to Han Jian, "You are just a farmer from the two states of Chen and Xu. Faced with the chaos of the times, you have received the great grace of the Son of Heaven, and now you are like this. If you want to rely on a place a hundred miles from the two states to do great things, I can't bear to see it. You might as well die first." So he sobbed and shed tears.

古文：因泣下歔欷。李茂贞、梁太祖皆欲发兵迎天子，建稍恐惧，乃止。光化元年，昭宗还长安，自为建画像，封建颍川郡王，赐以铁券。
现代文：李茂贞、梁太祖都想出兵迎接天子，韩建稍感害怕，纔作罢。光化元年，唐昭宗返回长安，亲自为韩建画像，封韩建为颖川郡王，赐给他铁券。
English: Both Li Maozhen and Liang Taizu wanted to send soldiers to welcome the heavenly son, but Han Jian was a little scared and stopped pretending. In the first year of the Guanghua era, Tang Zhaozong returned to Chang'an, personally painted a picture for Han Jian, made Han Jian the king of Yingchuan County, and gave him iron coupons.

古文：建辞王爵，乃封建许国公。
现代文：韩建推辞郡王的爵位，于是封韩建为许国公。
English: Han Jian resigned the title of county king, so Han Jian became the feudal lord of Xu.

古文：梁太祖以兵向长安，遣张存敬攻同州，建判官司马鄴以城降，太祖使鄴召建，建乃出降。
现代文：梁太祖率兵向长安进军，派张存敬进攻同州，韩建的判官司马邺以城投降，梁太祖派司马邺召降韩建，韩建纔出来投降。
English: Liang Taizu led an army to march to Chang'an, sent Zhang Cunjing to attack Tongzhou, Han Jian's judge Sima Yu surrendered in the city, Liang Taizu sent Sima Yu to call for the surrender of Han Jian, and Han Jian Yu came out to surrender.

古文：太祖责建背己，建曰： 判官李巨川之谋也。 
现代文：梁太祖指责韩建背叛自己，韩建说： 这是判官李巨川策划的。 
English: Liang Taizu accused Han Jian of betraying him. Han Jian said: This was planned by the judge Li Juchuan.

古文：太祖怒，即杀巨川，以建从行。
现代文：梁太祖发怒，立即杀掉李巨川，让韩建随行。
English: Liang Taizu became angry and immediately killed Li Juchuan, leaving Han Jian to accompany him.

古文：昭宗东迁，建从至洛，昭宗举酒属太祖与建曰： 迁都之后，国步小康，社稷安危，系卿两人。 
现代文：唐昭宗束迁，韩建跟随到洛阳，唐昭宗举酒敬梁太祖和韩建说： 迁都之后，国家稍微安定，国家的安危，全靠你们俩人。 
English: When Emperor Zhaozong of Tang relocated and Han Jian followed him to Luoyang, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang offered a toast to Grandfather Liang and Han Jian and said, "After the relocation of the capital, the country is somewhat stable, and the country's security depends entirely on the two of you."

古文：次何皇后举觞，建蹑太祖足，太祖乃阳醉去。
现代文：其次轮到何皇后举杯，韩建踩梁太祖的脚，梁太祖于是假装喝醉离去。
English: Next, it was Queen He's turn to raise a glass, and Han Jian stepped on Liang Taizu's foot. Liang Taizu then pretended to be drunk and left.

古文：建出，谓太祖曰： 天子与宫人眼语，幕下有兵仗声，恐公不免也。 
现代文：韩建出来，对梁太祖说： 天子和宫人递眼色，帷幕下有兵器的声音，怕你不能幸免。 
English: Han Jian came out and said to Liang Taizu, "The emperor and the courtiers are winking at each other, and there are sounds of weapons under the curtain. I'm afraid you won't be spared."

古文：太祖以故尤德之，表建平卢军节度使。
现代文：梁太祖因此很感激他，表奏韩建为平卢军节度使。
English: Liang Taizu was very grateful to him for this, and made Han Jian the festival envoy of the Pinglu Army.

古文：太祖即位，拜司徒同中书门下平章事。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜为司徒、同中书门下平章事。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and he was worshipped as a disciple, and the book of the same school was published.

古文：太祖性刚暴，臣下莫敢谏诤，惟建时有言，太祖亦优容之。
现代文：梁太祖性格刚烈暴躁，臣子们不敢进谏，只有韩建不时进谏，梁太祖也宽容他。
English: Liang Taizu's character was stubborn and irascible. His courtiers did not dare to enter the palace. Only Han Jian entered the palace from time to time. Liang Taizu was also tolerant of him.

古文：太祖郊于洛，建为大礼使。
现代文：梁太祖在洛阳郊外祭天，韩建任大礼使。
English: Liang Taizu held a divine service on the outskirts of Luoyang, and Han Jian was appointed as the grand envoy.

古文：罢相，出镇许州，太祖崩，许州军乱，见杀，年五十八。
现代文：罢宰相任，外任许州节度使，梁太祖死，许州兵变，被杀，五十八岁。
English: He was fifty-eight years old when he was appointed as the minister of dethroning the chancellor and the foreign envoy to the Xu Province Festival, when Liang Taizu died, and when he was killed in the Xu Province mutiny.

古文：○李仁福
现代文：李仁福，不知道他的家世。
English: Li Renfu, I don't know his family history.

古文：李仁福，不知其世家。当唐僖宗时，有拓拔思敬者，为夏州偏将，后以与破黄巢功，赐姓李氏，拜夏州节度使。
现代文：当唐僖宗时，有个叫托跋思敬的人，任夏州偏将，后来因参加攻破黄巢有功，赐姓李氏，拜为夏州节度使。
English: When Tang Xizong was the emperor, there was a man named Tuoba Sijian, who was the general of Xiazhou. Later, he was given the surname Li for his participation in the conquest of the Yellow Nest, and he was worshipped as the festival envoy of Xiazhou.

古文：思敬卒，乾宁二年，以其弟思谏为节度使。
现代文：托跋思敬死，干宁二年，任命他的弟弟托跋思谏为节度使。
English: Two years after the death of Tobas, Dangning appointed his younger brother, Tobasizhao, as the regent.

古文：自唐末天下大乱，史官实录多阙，诸镇因时倔起，自非有大善恶暴著于世者，不能纪其始终。
现代文：自从唐末天下大乱以来，史官的实录大多阙失，各节镇凭借时机崛起，如不是有大善大恶昭着于世的，就无法从头到尾地记述。
English: Since the great turmoil at the end of the Tang Dynasty, most of the historians' records have been lost, and each town has risen by virtue of the opportunity. If there is no great good or great evil known to the world, it cannot be recorded from beginning to end.

古文：是时，兴元、凤翔、邠宁、鄜坊、河中、同华诸镇之兵，四面并起而交争，独灵夏未尝为唐患，而亦无大功。
现代文：这时，兴元、凤翔、合宁、郦坊、河中、同华各镇的军队，四面并起而交相争斗，只有灵夏没有成为唐的祸患，但也没有大的功劳。
English: At this time, the armies of the towns of Xingyuan, Fengxiang, Haining, Weifang, Hechu, and Tonghua all fought side by side. Only Lingxia did not become a disaster for Tang, but it did not have much merit.

古文：硃玫之乱，思敬与鄜州李思孝皆以兵屯渭桥。
现代文：朱玫作乱，托跋思敬和墉州李思孝都率兵屯驻在渭桥。
English: Zhu Mei caused a riot, and both Tobasijing and Zhangzhou Li Sijiao led their troops to stay in Qianqiao.

古文：其后，黄巢陷京师，王重荣、李克用等会诸镇兵讨贼，思敬与破巢复京师，然皆未尝有所可称，故思敬之世次、功过不显而无传。
现代文：后来，黄巢攻陷京师，王重荣、李克用等人会同各镇的军队讨伐贼军，托跋思敬参加攻破黄巢收复京师，但都不曾有可以称道的事情，因此托跋思敬的世次、功过都不清楚而没有传下来。
English: Later, when the Yellow Nest was conquered by the Beijing Division, Wang Chong Rong, Li Kejun and others joined with the troops of various towns to fight against the Kleptocratic Army, and Tobasuki participated in the conquest of the Yellow Nest and the recovery of the Beijing Division, but there was never anything praiseworthy. Therefore, the lineage and achievements of Tobasuki are unclear and have not been passed down.

古文：梁开平二年，思谏卒，军中立其子彝昌为留后，梁即拜彝昌节度使。明年，其将高宗益作乱，杀彝昌。
现代文：梁开平二年，托跋思谏死，军中立他的儿子托跋彝昌为留后。随即拜托跋彝昌为节度使第二年，他的将领高宗益作乱，杀掉托跋彝昌。
English: In the second year of Liang Kaiping, Tobasixuan died, and his son, Tobasichang, was left behind by the military. He immediately asked Tobasichang for the festival, so that the next year, his general Gao Zongyip made a disturbance and killed Tobasichang.

古文：是时，仁福为蕃部指挥使，戍兵于外，军中乃迎仁福立之，不知其于思谏为亲疏也。
现代文：这时，李仁福任蕃部指挥使，带兵戍守在外，军中于是迎接李仁福拥立他，不知道他跟托跋思谏的亲疏关系怎样。
English: At this time, Li Renfu, who was the commander of the Imperial General Headquarters, stayed outside with the soldiers. The army then welcomed Li Renfu and supported him. They did not know what kind of intimate relationship he had with Tuoba Shixuan.

古文：是岁四月，拜仁福检校司空、定难军节度使。
现代文：这年四月，拜李仁福为检校司空、定难军节度使。
English: In April of this year, Bai Li Renfu was the inspector of the school and the festival envoy of the Dingan Army.

古文：终梁之世，奉正朔而已。
现代文：在整个梁代，奉行唐朝历法罢了。
English: Throughout the Liang Dynasty, they only followed the Tang Dynasty calendar.

古文：是时，岐王李茂贞，晋王李克用，数会兵攻仁福，梁辄出兵救之。
现代文：这时，岐王李茂贞、晋王李克用，多次合兵攻打李仁福，梁就出兵救他。
English: At this time, the king of Qi, Li Maozhen, and the king of Jin, Li Ke, repeatedly joined forces to attack Li Renfu, and Liang sent troops to rescue him.

古文：仁福累官至检校太师兼中书令，封朔方王。
现代文：李仁福累官到检校太师兼中书令，封为朔方王。
English: Li Renfu was appointed to the post of procurator-teacher and chancellor, and was given the title of Shuo Fangwang.

古文：长兴四年三月卒，其子彝超自立为留后。
现代文：长兴四年三月死，他的儿子李彝超自任为留后。
English: Changxing died in March of the fourth year, and his son, Li Yuchao, took it upon himself to stay behind.

古文：自仁福时，边将多言仁福通于契丹，恐为边患。
现代文：从李仁福时起，边将多说李仁福和契丹勾结，恐怕会造成边患。
English: From the time of Li Renfu, the border guards often said that Li Renfu and the Khitan colluded, which would probably cause border problems.

古文：明宗因其卒，乃以彝超为延州刺史、彰武军节度使，而徙彰武安从进代之。
现代文：唐明宗藉他死的机会，于是任李彝超为延州刺史、彰武军节度使，而调彰武军安从进代替他。
English: Tang Mingzong took the opportunity of his death, so he appointed Li Yuchao as the secretary of the Yanzhou history and the military awards ceremony, and promoted the military awards ceremony to replace him.

古文：恐彝超不受代，遣邠州药彦稠以兵五万送从进之镇。
现代文：怕李彝超不接受替代，派合州药彦稠率兵五万人送安从进赴任。
English: Fearing that Li Yuchao would not accept the replacement, he sent Hezhou Yuhang to send fifty thousand soldiers from Jin to assume the post.

古文：彝超果不受代，从进与彦稠以兵围之，百馀日不克。
现代文：李彝超果然不接受替代，安从进和药彦稠率兵包围他，一百多天不能攻克。
English: Li Yuchao did not accept the substitution, and An Congjin and Yakuhiko encircled him with soldiers and could not defeat him for more than a hundred days.

古文：夏州城壁素坚，故老传言赫连勃勃蒸土筑之，从进等穴地道，至城下坚如铁石，凿不能入。
现代文：夏州城墙历来坚牢，老人们传说是赫连勃勃蒸土修筑的，安从进等人挖地道，挖到城下坚如铁石，凿不能入。
English: The city wall of Xiazhou has always been strong. The old people said that it was built by Herengong steam. An Zongjin and others dug a tunnel, dug to the bottom of the city as strong as iron stone, and the chisel could not enter.

古文：彝超外招党项，抄掠从进等粮道，自陕以西，民运斗粟束刍，其费数千，人不堪命，道路愁苦。
现代文：李彝超从关外招党项，抄掠安从进等人运粮的路，从陕州以西，老百姓运送一斗粮一束草料，花费袋千钱，人们受不了，一路上都是愁苦之声。
English: Li Yuchao recruited party members from outside the Guan, copied and plundered the grain transport routes of Anzongjin and others, and from the west of Shaanxi, the common people transported a bucket of grain and a bunch of herbs, spending thousands of money. People can't stand it, and all along the way are the voices of sorrow.

古文：明宗遂释不攻，以彝超为定难军节度使。
现代文：唐明宗于是放弃而不攻打，任李彝超为定难军节度使。
English: Tang Mingzong then gave up and did not attack, and appointed Li Yingchao as the commander of the expeditionary force.

古文：清泰二年卒。
现代文：清泰二年去世。
English: He died in the second year of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：其弟彝兴，累官检校太师兼侍中，周显德中，封西平王，其后事具国史。
现代文：他的弟弟李彝兴，屡经升迁至检校太师兼侍中，周显德年间，封为西平王，以后的事载于国史。
English: His younger brother, Li Bingxing, was repeatedly promoted to the post of proctor and attendant, and during the Zhou Xiande era, he was crowned King of Xiping. What happened next is recorded in national history.

古文：○韩逊
现代文：韩逊，不知道他的家世。
English: Hanson, I don't know his family tree.

古文：韩逊，不知其世家。初为灵武军校，当唐末之乱，据有灵盐，唐即以为节度使，而史失不录，不见其事。
现代文：最初任灵武军校，当唐末大乱时，占据灵盐，唐就任他为节度使，而史书失传没有记录，找不着这件事。
English: He was originally appointed to Lingwu Military Academy, and when the Great Chaos broke out at the end of the Tang Dynasty, he occupied Lingyan. The Tang Dynasty appointed him as the commander of the festival, but there is no record in the history books, and this matter cannot be found.

古文：梁开平三年，封朔方节度使韩逊为颍川王，始见于史。
现代文：梁开平三年，封朔方节度使韩逊为颖川王，纔见于史书。
English: In the third year of Liang Kaiping's reign, Han Song became the king of Yingchuan, as recorded in history books.

古文：是时，邠宁杨崇本、鄜延李周彝、凤翔李茂贞，皆与梁争战，独逊与夏州李思谏臣属于梁，未尝以兵争。
现代文：这时，邰宁杨崇本、墉延李周彝、凤翔李茂贞，都和梁争战，惟独韩逊和夏州李思谏归属梁称臣，不曾率兵相争。
English: At this time, Yan Ning Yang Chong Ben, Yan Yan Li Zhou Jie, Feng Xiang Li Maozhen, all fought against Liang, but Han Xun and Xia Zhou Li Sijie belonged to Liang's vassals and did not lead troops to fight.

古文：李茂贞尝遣刘知俊攻逊，不能克，逊亦善抚其部，人皆爱之，为逊立生祠。
现代文：李茂贞曾派刘知俊攻打韩逊，役能攻克，韩逊也善于安抚他的部下，人们都喜欢他，为韩逊修建生祠庙。
English: Li Maozhen once sent Liu Zhijun to attack Han Xun, and he was able to defeat him. Han Xun was also good at appeasing his subordinates. People liked him and built a temple for Han Xun.

古文：贞明中，逊卒，军中立其子洙为留后，梁即以为节度使。
现代文：贞明年间，韩逊死，军中拥立他的儿子韩洙为留后，梁就任命他为节度使。
English: In the middle of the following year, Han Xun died, and after his son Han Xuan was appointed to stay in the army, Liang appointed him as the festival envoy.

古文：至庄宗时，又以洙兼河西节度。
现代文：到唐庄宗时，又任韩洙兼河西节度。
English: When he came to live in Tangzhuang, he also served as Han Zong and Hexi Jie Du.

古文：天成四年，洙卒，即以洙子澄为朔方军留后。
现代文：天成四年，韩洙死，就任命韩洙的儿子韩泼为朔方军留后。
English: In the fourth year of Tiancheng, when Han Zheng died, he appointed Han Zheng's son, Han Pu, as the successor of the Shuo army.

古文：其将李宾作乱，澄乃上章请师于朝，明宗以康福为朔方河西节度使以代澄，由是命吏而相代矣。
现代文：他的将领李宾作乱，韩澄于是向朝廷上章请求任命军帅，唐明宗任康福为朔方河西节度使代替韩澄，从此由朝廷任命官吏来相替代。
English: His general, Li Bin, caused a disturbance, and Han Cheng therefore requested the imperial court to appoint a military commander. Tang Ming Zongren appointed Kangfu to replace Han Cheng as the governor of Shuo Fang and Hexi, and from then on the court appointed officials to replace him.

古文：韩氏自逊有灵武，传世皆无所称述，澄后不知其所终。
现代文：韩氏自从韩逊占据灵武，流传几代都没有什么值得称述的地方，后来不知韩澄最终如何。
English: Since Hanson took over Lingwu, there has been nothing worth mentioning about the Han clan for several generations. I don't know what happened to Han Cheng later.

古文：○杨崇本杨崇本，幼事李茂贞，养以为子，冒姓李，名曰继徽，茂贞表崇本静难军节度使。
现代文：杨崇本，小时候侍奉李茂贞，被他收养作儿子，改姓李，名叫李继徽，李茂贞表奏杨崇本为静难军节度使。
English: Yang Chongben, who served Li Maozhen when he was a child, was adopted by him as his son, changed his surname to Li, named Li Jihui, and Li Maozhen played Yang Chongben as an envoy of the Jingnan Army.

古文：梁太祖攻岐未下，乃移兵攻邠州，崇本迎降，太祖使复其姓，赐名崇本，迁其家于河中以为质。
现代文：梁太祖攻打岐没有攻克，于是移兵进攻郇州，杨崇本出迎投降，梁太祖让他恢复原姓，赐名叫崇本，把他的家迁到河中作为人质。
English: Liang Taizu did not conquer Daki, so he moved troops to attack Zhangzhou. Yang Chongben surrendered. Liang Taizu let him restore his original surname, gave him the name Chongben, and moved his home to the middle of the river as a hostage.

古文：崇本妻有美色，太祖用兵，往来河中，尝幸之。
现代文：杨崇本的妻子有美色，梁太祖用兵打仗，往返于河中，曾经宠幸她。
English: Yang Chongben's wife was beautiful. Liang Taizu used soldiers to fight in wars and went back and forth in the river. He once favored her.

古文：崇本妻颇愧耻，间遣人诮崇本曰： 大丈夫不能庇其伉俪，我已为硃公妇矣，无面视君，有刀绳而已！ 
现代文：杨崇本的妻子感到十分羞愧耻辱，秘密派人责备杨崇本说： 大丈夫不能庇护他的妻子，我已成为朱公的女人了，没有脸见你，只有用刀子绳子结果生命罢了！ 
English: Yang Chongpeng's wife felt very ashamed and humiliated, and secretly sent someone to reproach Yang Chongpeng, saying: "A good husband cannot shelter his wife, I have become Zhu Gong's woman, I have no face to see you, I can only use a knife and a rope to save my life!"

古文：崇本涕泣愤怒。
现代文：杨崇本哭泣愤怒。
English: Yang Chongben wept with anger.

古文：其后梁兵解岐围，崇本妻得归，崇本乃复背梁归茂贞。
现代文：后来梁军解除对岐的包围，杨崇本的妻子得以回来，杨崇本于是又背叛梁而归附李茂贞。
English: Later, Liang's army lifted the siege on Qi, and Yang Chongpeng's wife was able to return. Yang Chongpeng then betrayed Liang and joined Li Maozhen.

古文：茂贞西连蜀兵会崇本攻雍、华，关西大震。
现代文：李茂贞西连蜀兵会同杨崇本进攻雍、华二州，关西十分震惊。
English: Li Maozhen, Xilian Shu soldiers and Yang Chongben attacked Yong and Huazhou, Kansai was very shocked.

古文：太祖以兵西至河中，遣郴王友裕击之，友裕至永寿而卒，梁兵乃旋。
现代文：梁太祖率兵向西到河中，派郴王朱友裕攻打他，朱友裕到达永寿而死，梁军就回师。
English: Liang Taizu led his troops west to the middle of the river, and sent Zhu Youyu to attack him. Zhu Youyu reached Yongshou and died, and Liang's troops returned to their division.

古文：崇本屯美原，太祖复遣刘知俊、康怀英等击之，崇本大败，自此不复东。
现代文：杨崇本屯驻在美原，梁太祖又派刘知俊、康怀英等人攻打他，杨崇本大败，从此不再东征。
English: Yang Chong Ben was stationed in Mihara, and Liang Taizu sent Liu Zhijun, Kang Huaiying and others to attack him. Yang Chong Ben was defeated and never went to the East again.

古文：乾化四年，为其子彦鲁所杀。
现代文：干化四年，被他的儿子杨彦鲁杀死。
English: He died four years later, killed by his son Yang Yanru.

古文：崇本养子李保衡，杀彦鲁以降梁。
现代文：杨崇本的养子李保衡，杀掉杨彦鲁向梁投降。
English: Li Baoheng, the adopted son of Yang Chongben, killed Yang Yanlu and surrendered to Liang.

古文：○高万兴
现代文：高万兴是河西人。
English: Gao Manxing is from Hexi.

古文：高万兴，河西人也。唐末，河西属李茂贞，茂贞将胡敬璋为延州刺史，万兴与其弟万金俱事敬璋为骑将。
现代文：唐末，河西归属李茂贞，李茂贞的大将胡敬璋任延州刺史，高万兴和他的弟弟高万金都侍奉胡敬璋任骑将。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Hexi belonged to Li Maozhen, and Li Maozhen's general Hu Jintao served as the governor of Yanzhou. Gao Wanxing and his brother Gao Wanjin both served Hu Jintao as cavalry commanders.

古文：敬璋死，其将刘万子代为刺史。
现代文：胡敬璋死后，他的将领刘万子代任刺史。
English: After the death of Hu Jintao, his general Liu Wanzi took over the post.

古文：梁开平二年，葬于州南，万子在会，其将许从实杀万子，自为延州刺史。
现代文：梁开平二年，在州南安葬胡敬璋，刘万子在场，他的将领许从实杀掉刘万子，自封延州刺史。
English: In the second year of Liang Kaiping, Hu Jingyao was buried in Nan'an, Shuzhou, in the presence of Liu Wanzi. His generals agreed to kill Liu Wanzi and make themselves the history of Yanzhou.

古文：是时，万兴兄弟皆将兵戍境上，闻万子死，以其部下数千人，降梁。
现代文：这时，高万兴兄弟都率兵戍守在边境上，听说刘万子被杀，率领部下几千人向梁投降。
English: At this time, Gao Wanxing's brothers were leading soldiers to guard the border. Hearing that Liu Wanzi had been killed, they led several thousand of their men to surrender to Liang Tong.

古文：梁太祖兵屯河中，遣同州刘知俊以兵应万兴，攻丹州，执其刺史崔公实。
现代文：梁太祖的军队屯驻在河中，派同州刘知悛率兵接应高万兴，攻打丹州，擒获刺史崔公实。
English: Liang Taizu's army stationed in the middle of the river, sent Liu Zhisheng from Tongzhou to lead the troops to meet Gao Wanxing, attack Danzhou, and captured and stabbed Shi Cui Kunshi.

古文：进攻延州，执许从实。
现代文：进攻延州，擒获许从实。
English: They attacked Yanzhou and captured Xu Congsheng.

古文：鄜州李彦容、坊州李彦昱皆弃城走。
现代文：墉州李彦容、坊州李彦昱都弃城逃跑。
English: Bozhou Li Yan Rong and Bozhou Li Yan Jie both abandoned the city and fled.

古文：梁太祖乃以万兴为延州刺史、忠义军节度使，以牛存节为保大军节度使。
现代文：梁太祖于是任命高万兴为延州刺史、忠义军节度使，任牛存节为保大军节度使。
English: Liang Taizu then appointed Gao Wanxing as the festival envoy of the Yanzhou Zhishi and the Loyalist Army, and appointed Niu Cunjie as the festival envoy of the Baodai Army.

古文：已而刘知俊叛，乃徙存节守同州，以万金为保大军节度使。
现代文：不久刘知俊反叛，于是调牛存节守同州，任命高莴金为保大军节度使。
English: Soon after, Liu Zhijun rebelled, so he changed the cow to save the festival to keep the same state, and appointed Gao Yujin as the military commander of the festival.

古文：万兴累迁检校太师兼中书令，渤海郡王。
现代文：高万兴屡经升迁至检校太师兼中书令、渤海郡王。
English: Gao Wanxing was repeatedly promoted to school inspector and middle school librarian, the king of Bohai County.

古文：贞明四年，万金卒，乃以万兴为鄜延节度使，进封延安郡王，徙封北平王。
现代文：贞明四年，高万金死，于是任高万兴焉郦延节度使，进封为延安郡王，改封为北平王。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenming, Gao Wanjin died. Therefore, Gao Wanxing sent Gao Wanxing to Yan'an as the official of Yan'an Festival, and Gao Wanxing was appointed as the king of Yan'an County and changed his title to the king of Beiping.

古文：梁亡，庄宗入洛，万兴尝一来朝。
现代文：梁灭亡，唐庄宗进入洛阳，高万兴曾朝拜一次。
English: Liang perished, Tang Zhuozong entered Luoyang, Gao Wanxing once paid homage to the emperor.

古文：同光三年，卒于镇。
现代文：同光三年，死在任上。
English: He served for three years and died in office.

古文：万兴兄弟皆骁勇，而未尝立战功，然以戍兵降梁，梁取鄜、坊、丹、延自万兴始，故其兄弟世守其土。
现代文：高万兴兄弟都骁悍勇猛，却不曾立下战功，但以戍边的军队向梁投降，梁攻取郦、坊、丹、延等州是从高万兴开始的，因此他们兄弟二人世代都守护本土。
English: Gao Manxing's brothers were both brave and courageous, but they did not achieve any military feats, but surrendered to Liang with the troops of the Lijiang side. It was Gao Manxing who started Liang's conquest of the provinces of Shao, Fang, Dan and Yan. Therefore, both generations of their brothers guarded the mainland.

古文：万兴死，子允韬代立，长兴元年徙镇安国，又徙义成，清泰中卒。
现代文：高万兴的儿子高允韬代任他的职任，长兴元年调任镇守安国，又改任义成，清泰年间死。
English: Gao Wanxing's son Gao Yunjun took over his post, and in the first year of the Changxing Dynasty, Gao Yunxing was transferred to the post of the town guard of An Guo, and then to the post of Yicheng. Gao Yunxing died in the Qing and Tai Dynasty.

古文：万金子允权，开运中为肤施令，罢居于家。
现代文：高万金的儿子高允权，开运中任肤施令，免职住在家中。
English: Gao Yunquan, the son of Gao Wanjin, was in charge of giving orders at the beginning of the operation and lived at home when he was relieved of his duties.

古文：是时，周密为彰信军节度使，契丹灭晋，延州军乱，逐密，密守东城，而西城之兵以允权为留后。
现代文：这时，周密任彰信军节度使，契丹消灭晋，延州兵变，驱逐周密，周密坚守束城，而西城的军队拥立高允权为留后。
English: At this time, Zhou Mi was appointed as the commander of the Zhangxin Army, the Khitan annihilated Jin, the Yanzhou mutiny, the expulsion of Zhou Mi, Zhou Mi defended Sokcheng, and the army of Xicheng supported Gao Yunquan to stay behind.

古文：闻汉高祖起太原，遂归汉，即拜节度使，广顺三年卒。
现代文：听说汉高祖在太原起兵，于是归附汉，就拜为节度使，广顺三年死。
English: Hearing that Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty had raised an army in Taiyuan, he joined the Han Dynasty and served as an envoy to the festival. Guangshun died three years later.

古文：○温韬温韬，京兆华原人也。
现代文：温韬是京兆府华原人。
English: Wen Wei is a native of Hua Yuan, Beijing.

古文：少为盗，后事李茂贞，为华原镇将，冒姓李，名彦韬。
现代文：年轻时做盗贼，后来侍奉李茂贞，任华原镇将，改姓李，名叫彦韬。
English: When he was young, he was a thief. Later, he served Li Maozhen and was appointed as the warden of Hua Yuan Town. He changed his surname to Li and was named Yan Rong.

古文：茂贞以华原县为耀州，以韬为刺史。
现代文：李茂贞以华原县为耀州，任温韬为刺史。
English: Li Maozhen took Hua Yuan County as Yaozhou, and Ren Wenqi as Zhisheng.

古文：梁太祖围茂贞于凤翔，韬以耀州降梁，已而复叛归茂贞。
现代文：梁太祖在凤翔包围李茂贞，温韬以耀州向梁投降，不久又叛梁归附李茂贞。
English: Liang Taizu encircled Li Maozhen in Fengxiang, Wen Qi surrendered to Liang with Yaozhou, and soon Liang rebelled and joined Li Maozhen.

古文：茂贞又以美原县为鼎州，建义胜军，以韬为节度使。
现代文：李茂贞又改美原县为鼎州，建义胜军，任温韬为节度使。
English: Li Maozhen also changed Mihara County to Dingzhou, established the Yixing Victory Army, and appointed Wen Qi as the commander of the army.

古文：末帝时，韬复叛茂贞降梁，梁改耀州为崇州，鼎州为裕州，义胜为静胜军，即以韬为节度使，复其姓温，更其名曰昭图。
现代文：梁末帝时，温韬又背叛李茂贞向梁投降，梁改耀州为崇州，改鼎州为裕州，改义胜军为静胜军，就任温韬为节度使，恢复他的姓氏温，改他的名叫昭图。
English: When Liang was the last emperor, Wen Xuan betrayed Li Maozhen and surrendered to Liang. Liang changed Yaozhou to Chongzhou, Dingzhou to Yuzhou, Yi Shengjun to Jing Shengjun, and appointed Wen Xuan as the regent. He restored his surname Wen and changed his name to Zhaotu.

古文：韬在镇七年，唐诸陵在其境内者，悉发掘之，取其所藏金宝，而昭陵最固，韬从埏道下，见宫室制度闳丽，不异人间，中为正寝，东西厢列石床，床上石函中为铁匣，悉藏前世图书，钟、王笔迹，纸墨如新，韬悉取之，遂传人间，惟乾陵风雨不可发。
现代文：温韬在镇七年，在他境内的唐宗室各个陵墓，都被挖掘，拿走里面藏的金宝，而昭陆最牢固，温韬从墓道卜去，看见宫室规模宏伟壮丽，和人间一样，中门是正寝，东西厢陈列着石床，床上石盒中是铁匣，全部收藏着前代图书，锺繇、王羲之的笔迹，纸墨就像新的一样，温韬全部取出来，于是流传到人间，只有干陵因狂风暴雨役能打开。
English: During his seven years in the town, all the mausoleums of the Tang dynasty in his territory were excavated, and the gold and treasures hidden inside were taken away, while Zhaolou was the most solid. Wen Hui took a detour from the cemetery and saw the magnificent scale of the palace room. As in the human world, the middle door was sleeping, the stone beds were displayed in the east and west compartments, and there was an iron box in the stone box on the bed. All the books of the previous generation were collected, the handwriting of Zhai and Wang Qizhi, and the paper and ink were like new. Wen Hui took them all out, so they were

古文：其后硃友谦叛梁，取同州，晋王以兵援友谦而趋华原，韬惧，求徙佗镇，遂徙忠武。庄宗灭梁，韬自许来朝，因伶人景进纳赂刘皇后，皇后为言之，庄宗待韬甚厚，赐姓名曰李绍冲。
现代文：后来朱友谦背叛梁，攻取同州，晋王率兵援救朱友谦而奔赴华原，温韬害怕，请求改任别的节镇，于是移任忠武，唐庄宗消灭梁，温韬从许州前来朝拜，藉乐官景进献纳贿赂刘皇后，皇后替他说话，唐庄宗待温韬很好，赐给他姓名叫李绍冲。
English: Later, Zhu Youqian betrayed Liang and captured Tongzhou. Jin Wang led an army to rescue Zhu Youqian and rushed to Huahuan. Wen Ji was afraid and asked to be reassigned to another festival town, so he was transferred to Zhongwu. Tang Zhuangzong eliminated Liang. Wen Ji came from Xuzhou to worship, and used the music official Jing Jin to offer bribes to Queen Liu. The queen spoke for him. Tang Zhuangzong treated Wen Ji very well and gave him the name Li Shaochong.

古文：郭崇韬曰： 此劫陵贼尔，罪不可赦！ 
现代文：郭崇韬说： 这是劫掠陵墓的盗贼，罪行不能饶恕！ 
English: Guo Chongyao said, "This is a thief who robbed the mausoleum. The crime cannot be forgiven!"

古文：庄宗曰： 已宥之矣，不可失信。 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 已经宽恕他了，不能失信。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said, "I have already forgiven him. I cannot break my trust."

古文：遽遣还镇。
现代文：于是派他回镇。
English: So they sent him back to town.

古文：明宗入洛，与段凝俱收下狱，已而赦之，勒归田里。
现代文：唐明宗进入洛阳，温韬和段凝一起都被收捕投入狱中，不久赦免，勒令回到乡里。
English: Tang Mingzong entered Luoyang, and both Wen Qi and Duan Jian were arrested and thrown into prison. They were soon pardoned and ordered to return to the countryside.

古文：明年，流于德州，赐死。
现代文：第二年，流放到德州，赐死。
English: The following year, he was exiled to Texas and sentenced to death.

古文：呜呼，厚葬之弊，自秦汉已来，率多聪明英伟之主，虽有高谈善说之士，极陈其祸福，有不能开其惑者矣！
现代文：唉，厚葬的弊病，自从秦、汉以来，很多聪明英伟的君主，即使有高谈阔论善于游说的士人，极力陈说厚葬的祸福利害，也有不能消除君主的迷惑的！
English: Alas, since the Qin and Han dynasties, many wise and great monarchs have been unable to eliminate the evil of heavy burials, even if there are scholars who are good at lobbying and trying their best to explain the benefits and harms of heavy burials!

古文：岂非富贵之欲，溺其所自私者笃，而未然之祸，难述于无形，不足以动其心欤？
现代文：难道不是富贵的欲望，沉溺在自己偏爱的事情中很深，而还没有显现的灾祸，难以在无形中描述，不足以震动君主的心吗？
English: Are not the desires of riches, and indulgence in the things of one's fancy, very deep, and the evils that have not yet appeared, and are difficult to describe in the invisible, not enough to shake the heart of a prince?

古文：然而闻温韬之事者，可以少戒也！
现代文：但听到温韬的事的人可稍引以为戒了！
English: But those who have heard about Wen Jiabao should take this as a warning!

古文：五代之君，往往不得其死，何暇顾其后哉！
现代文：五代的君主，常常死于非命，哪有时间顾及他们死后的事呢！
English: Five generations of monarchs have often died a violent death, and there is no time to think about what happens after their death!

古文：独周太祖能鉴韬之祸，其将终也，为书以遗世宗，使以瓦棺、纸衣而敛。
现代文：祇有周太祖能从温韬的灾祸中引以为鉴，他临终时，留书给周世宗，让他用瓦棺、纸衣为自己殓尸。
English: Only Zhou Taizu could learn from the calamity of Wen Xuan. On his deathbed, he left a letter for Zhou Shizong, asking him to use a casket and paper clothes to cover his corpse.

古文：将葬，开棺示人，既葬，刻石以告后世，毋作下宫，毋置守陵妾。其意丁宁切至，然实录不书其葬之薄厚也。
现代文：要安葬时，打开瓦棺给人看，安葬后，刻石告诉后代，不建地下宫殿，不设守陵妾，反复叮咛他的意思，十分恳切，但实录没有记载他安葬的厚薄。
English: When he wanted to be buried, he opened the earthenware coffin to show it to people. After he was buried, he carved a stone to tell future generations not to build an underground palace, not to set up a concubine to guard the tomb, and repeatedly told them what he wanted, very earnestly, but the record does not record the thickness of his burial.

古文：又使葬其平生所服衮冕、通天冠、绛纱袍各二，其一于京师，其一于澶州；又葬其剑、甲各二，其一于河中，其一于大名者，莫能原其旨也。
现代文：又以他活着时穿戴的衮冕、通天冠、绛纱袍各两套随葬，一套埋在京师，一套埋在澶州；又以他的剑、镗甲各两件随葬，一件埋在河中，一件埋在大名，没有人能推知他的用意。
English: He was also buried with two sets of the imperial crown, crown of heaven and gauze robe that he wore when he was alive, one set buried in Beijing and one set buried in Zhangzhou. He was also buried with two pieces of his sword and armor, one buried in the river and one buried in Daming. No one can deduce his intention.

