古文：司马楚之，字德秀，晋宣弟太常馗之八世孙也。
现代文：司马楚之，字德秀，是晋宣帝的弟弟太常司马馗的八世孙。
English: Sima Chuzhi, also known as Dexiu, was the eighth-generation grandson of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother, Sima Xuan.

古文：父荣期，晋益州刺史，为其参军杨承祖所杀。
现代文：他的父亲司马荣期晋时为益州刺史，后来被他的参军杨承祖所杀。
English: His father, Sima Rongji Jin, was the governor of Yizhou at the time, and was later killed by his conscript Yang Chengzu.

古文：楚之时年十七，送父丧还丹杨。
现代文：父亲被杀时，司马楚之十七岁，他送父丧回到丹杨。
English: When his father was killed, Sima Chuzhi was 17 years old. He went back to Danyang to see his father off.

古文：会刘裕诛夷司马氏，叔父宣期、兄贞之并遇害。
现代文：这时刘裕正在诛灭司马氏，他的叔父司马宣期、哥哥司马贞之同时遇害。
English: At this time, Liu Yu was exterminating the Sima clan, and his uncle Sima Xuanji and brother Sima Zhen were killed at the same time.

古文：楚之乃逃，匿诸沙门中，济江至汝、颍间。
现代文：司马楚之逃了出来，藏身寺院中，又过江到了汝水颍水之间。
English: Sima Chu Zhi escaped, hid in a temple, and then crossed the river to between Ru Shui and Shun Shui.

古文：楚之少有英气，能折节待士。
现代文：楚之从小便有英气，能礼贤下士。
English: From an early age, Chu Zhi had a heroic spirit and was able to be a corporal.

古文：及宋受禅，规欲报复。收众据长社，归之者常万余人。
现代文：刘宋政权建立后，楚之一心想报仇，他聚集了人马占据了长社，归附他的常有一万多人。
English: After the establishment of the Liu Song regime, one of the Chu wanted to take revenge. He gathered people and horses to occupy Changsha, often more than ten thousand people attached to him.

古文：宋武深惮之，遣刺客沐谦图害楚之。
现代文：宋武帝很害怕他，便派了刺客沐谦去谋害他。
English: Emperor Song Wu was very afraid of him, so he sent the assassin Mu Qian to assassinate him.

古文：楚之待谦甚厚。
现代文：司马楚之对沐谦十分宽厚。
English: Sima Chuzhi was very generous to Mu Qian.

古文：谦夜诈疾，知楚之必来，欲因杀之。
现代文：沐谦夜间装病，知道司马楚之一定会来看他，他可趁机下手。
English: Muchen feigned illness at night, knowing that one of the Sima Chu would certainly come to see him, and he could take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：楚之闻谦病，果自赍汤药往省之。谦感其意，出匕首于席下，以状告，遂委身以事之。
现代文：司马楚之听说沐谦病了，果然亲自端着汤药来探望，沐谦被他的情意感动了，从席子底下拿出了匕首，将实情告诉了他，从此便跟随了司马楚之。
English: Sima Chuzhi heard that Mu Qian was ill, so he came to visit Mu Qian personally with a potion. Moved by his feelings, Mu Qian took out a dagger from under the mat and told him the truth. From then on, he followed Sima Chuzhi.

古文：其推诚信物，得士心，皆此类也。
现代文：司马楚之以诚待人，很得士人之心。
English: Sima Chu treated people with sincerity and won the hearts of scholars.

古文：明元末，山阳公奚斤略地河南，楚之遣使请降，授荆州刺史。
现代文：明元帝末年，山阳公奚斤略取河南，司马楚之派使者去请降，被授予荆州刺史。
English: In the last years of the Ming and Yuan Dynasties, Sanyang Gong Xingjin skimmed off Henan, and Sima Chu sent an envoy to ask for a reduction, and was awarded the title of Jingzhou Sashih.

古文：奚斤既平河南，以楚之所率人户，分置汝南、汝阳、南顿、新蔡四郡，以益豫州。
现代文：奚斤平定了河南，将司马楚之管理的地区，分别设置汝南、汝阳、南顿、新蔡四个郡。
English: He leveled Henan and divided the area under the administration of Sima Chu into four counties, namely, Runan, Ryuyang, Nantong and Xin Cai.

古文：太武初，楚之遣妻子内居于鄴。寻征入朝，授安南大将军，封琅邪王，以拒宋师。
现代文：太武帝初即位，司马楚之让妻子和儿子居住在内地邺城，不久他应召入朝，授南安大将军，并被封为琅邪王，以抵御宋军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taowu, Sima Chuzhi let his wife and son live in the inland city of Lucheng. Soon he was summoned to the court, given the title of Nan'an Grand General, and was named the evil king of Lucheng to resist the Song Army.

古文：赐前后部鼓吹。
现代文：太武帝赐给司马楚之前后部鼓吹。
English: Emperor Taivu gave Sima Chu the right to preach.

古文：破宋将到彦之别军于长社。又与冠军安颉攻拔滑台，禽宋将硃修之、李元德及东郡太守申谟，俘万余人。
现代文：司马楚之在长社打败了宋将到彦之的军队，又与冠军将军安颉攻克了滑台，俘获了宋将朱之、李元德和东郡太守申谟，俘虏了一万多人。
English: Sima Chuzhi defeated the army of Song general Zhu Yanzhi in Changsha, and conquered the slide with the champion general An Qian. He captured Song generals Zhu Zhi, Li Yuande, and the East County Governor Shen Mu, and captured more than 10,000 people.

古文：上疏求更进讨，太武以兵久劳，不从，以散骑常侍征还。
现代文：他上疏要求再次进行征讨。太武帝认为军队长期作战过于疲劳而没答应。楚之被召回，任散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Taibu thought that the army was too tired from fighting for a long time and did not agree. Chu Zhi was recalled and became a samurai.

古文：宋将裴方明、胡崇之寇仇池。楚之与淮南公皮豹子等督关中诸军击走方明，禽崇之。仇池平而还。
现代文：宋将裴方明、胡崇之侵犯仇池，司马楚之与淮南公皮豹子等率领关中各军打跑了裴方明，抓获了胡崇之，仇池平安地回到他们手中。
English: Song sent Bei Fangming and Hu Chongzhi to invade Qiu Chi, while Sima Chuzhi and Huainan Gongpi Leopard led the troops of Guanzhong to fight off Bei Fangming and capture Hu Chongzhi, and Qiu Chi was safely returned to their hands.

古文：车驾征蠕蠕，楚之与济阴公卢中山等督运以继大军。
现代文：皇帝车驾出征蠕蠕，司马楚之与济阴公卢中山等督运粮食供应大军。
English: The emperor went to the front in his chariot, and Sima Chu Zhi and Jiyin Gong Lu Zhongshan oversaw the transportation of grain to supply the army.

古文：时镇北将军封沓亡入蠕蠕，说令击楚之以绝粮运。
现代文：当时镇北将军封沓逃入蠕蠕，给蠕蠕献策，让他们攻打司马楚之以断绝魏军的粮食供应。
English: At that time, Zhenbei General Feng Qi fled to Crum Crum and offered Crum Crum a plan to let them attack Sima Chu and cut off the Wei army's grain supply.

古文：蠕蠕乃遣觇楚之军，截驴耳而去。
现代文：蠕蠕就派人去窥测司马楚之的军队，偷了驴子便跑了。
English: Creep Creep sent someone to spy on Sima Chu Zhi's army, stole a donkey and ran away.

古文：有告失驴耳者，楚之曰： 必觇贼截之为验耳，贼将至矣。 
现代文：有人把丢驴的情况报告给楚之，楚之说： 这一定是前来窥探的贼寇劫去做凭证的，敌兵就要到了。 
English: Someone reported the situation of the abandoned donkey to Chu Zhi. Chu Zhi said: This must be the thief and robber who came to snoop and make a certificate. The enemy soldiers are about to arrive.

古文：乃伐柳为城，灌水令冻，城立而贼至，不可攻逼，乃走散。
现代文：他立即叫人砍伐柳树，用树围成城，周围灌上水，让树冻住。城筑好后敌军就到了。敌人见司马楚之的军队无法攻打，就跑散了。
English: He immediately ordered that the willows be cut down, and the city was surrounded with trees, and water was poured around them to freeze the trees. After the city was built, the enemy army arrived. When the enemy saw that Sima Chu Zhi's army could not attack, they ran away.

古文：太武闻而嘉之。
现代文：太武帝听说了此事夸奖了他。
English: Emperor Taibu heard about this and praised him.

古文：寻拜假节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、云中镇大将、朔州刺史。
现代文：司马楚之官拜假持节、侍中、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、云中镇大将、朔州刺史。
English: The officials of Sima Chu paid homage to the holiday, including the chamberlains, the general of Zhenxi, the three officials of Kaifu, the general of Yunzhong, and the historian of Shuozhou.

古文：在边二十余年，以清俭著闻。
现代文：司马楚之在边境二十多年，以清廉俭朴闻名。
English: Sima Chuzhi has been working at the border for more than 20 years and is known for his frugality.

古文：及薨，赠征南大将军，领护西戎校尉、扬州刺史，谥贞王，陪葬金陵。
现代文：他死后，被追赠征南大将军、领护西戎校尉、扬州刺史，谥号 贞王 ，陪葬金陵。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Lieutenant of the Western Expeditionary Force, Yangzhou Sashimi, and the nickname King Zhen, and was buried with Jinling.

古文：例降为公，坐连穆泰罪，失爵，卒。悦字庆宗，历位豫州刺史。
现代文：司马楚之的长子宝胤与他一同入魏，任中书博士、雁门太守时去世。司马悦，字庆宗，历任豫州刺史。
English: Sima Chu Zhi's eldest son, Bao Yan, entered the Wei Dynasty together with him, and died when he was appointed Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy and Governor of Ganmen. Sima Yue, surnamed Qing Zong, successively served as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：时有汝南上蔡董毛奴者，赍钱五千。死于道路。
现代文：当时汝南上蔡有个叫董毛奴的人，带了五千钱外出，死在路途中。
English: At that time, there was a man named Dong Mao Rong in Southern Shangcai, who went out with five thousand yuan and died on the way.

古文：郡县人疑张堤为劫，又于堤家得钱五千，堤惧掠，自诬言杀。
现代文：郡县的人怀疑是张堤杀了董毛奴，抢了钱，而且在张堤家得了五千钱。张堤害怕受拷打，便自己承认杀了人。
English: People in the county suspected that Zhang Di killed Dong Mao Nuo, robbed him of money, and got 5,000 yuan from Zhang Di's home. Zhang Di was afraid of being tortured, so he admitted to killing someone.

古文：至州，悦观色，疑其不实。
现代文：案子报到州上，司马悦观察张堤以后，怀疑这事不真实。
English: The case was reported to the state, and Sima Yue suspected that it was not true after observing Zhang Qi.

古文：引见毛奴兄灵之，谓曰： 杀人取钱，当时狼狈，应有所遗，得何物？ 
现代文：他引见了董毛奴的哥哥董灵之，对他说： 杀人抢钱，当时一定很狼狈，应当会丢下些东西，不知你们发现什么没有？ 
English: He introduced him to Dong Mao's brother, Dong Lingzhi, and said to him: "Killing people and robbing money must have been very upsetting at the time. You must have left something behind. I don't know if you found anything?

古文：灵之曰： 唯得一刀削。 
现代文：董灵之说 ：只得到一把刀鞘。 
English: Dong Lingzhi said: I only got one scabbard.

古文：悦取视之，曰： 此非里巷所为也。 
现代文：司马悦取刀鞘来看，说： 这不是小街小巷制作的。 
English: Sima Yue took a look at the scabbard and said, "This was not made in a back alley.

古文：乃召州内刀匠示之。
现代文：他召集了州内的刀匠，将刀给他们看。
English: He called together all the cutlers in the state and showed them the knife.

古文：有郭门前曰： 此刀削，门手所作，去岁卖与郭人董及祖。 
现代文：有个叫郭门的说： 这刀鞘是我亲手制作的，去年卖给了城里人董及祖。 
English: A man named Guo Men said, "I made this scabbard with my own hands. Last year, I sold it to Dong and Zu, who live in the city.

古文：悦收及祖诘之，及祖款引。灵之又于及祖身上得毛奴所衣皁襦，及祖伏法。
现代文：司马悦收捕了董及祖并审问了他，董及祖从实招认了，董灵之又在罪犯的身上找到了毛奴穿的黑色衣服。董及祖伏法。
English: Sima Yue arrested Mr. Dong and Mr. Zu and interrogated him. Mr. Dong and Mr. Zu confessed truthfully. Mr. Dong Lingzhi also found the black clothes worn by Mao Niu on the criminal's body. Mr. Dong and Mr. Zu were arrested.

古文：悦察狱，多此类也。
现代文：司马悦断案明察，类似这样的事很多。
English: Sima Yue has seen many similar cases.

古文：俄与镇南将军元英攻克义阳，诏改梁司州为郢州，以悦为刺史。
现代文：不久，司马悦与镇南将军元英一起攻克义阳，皇帝下诏将梁司州改为郢州，司马悦任郢州刺史。
English: Soon, Sima Yue and the Zhenan general Yuan Ying jointly conquered Yiyang. The emperor issued an edict to change Liang Sizhou to Ganzhou, and Sima Yue was appointed as the governor of Ganzhou.

古文：后执晖于河内温县，幽于司州，将加死刑。
现代文：后来他又改任豫州刺史。根据他的功勋，他被封为渔阳子。永平元年，城中人白早生谋反，斩了司马悦，将他的首级送到了梁。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian. According to his merits, he was awarded the title of Yuyangzi. In the first year of Yongping, people in the city plotted a rebellion, beheaded Sima Yue, and sent his head to Liang.

古文：会赦，免。后复其官爵，迁征虏将军、中散大夫，卒，家遂衰顿。
现代文：皇帝下诏到扬州，让人买回了司马悦的首级，追赠青州刺史，谥号 庄子 。
English: The emperor sent an imperial edict to Yangzhou, and the head of Sima Yue was bought back, and he was posthumously given a Qingzhou tattoo and the posthumous name Zhuangzi.

古文：萧宝夤，字智亮，齐明帝第六子，废主宝卷之母弟也。
现代文：他的儿子司马月出继承了爵位。萧宝夤字智亮，齐明帝的第六位儿子。齐废帝宝卷的同母弟弟。
English: His son Sima Yuexing inherited the title of nobility. Xiao Baozhu Zi Zhi Liang, the sixth son of Emperor Qiming, was the younger half-brother of Emperor Qibao.

古文：在齐封建安王。
现代文：在齐时被封为建安王。
English: At the same time, he was given the title of King of Jianan.

古文：及和帝立，改封鄱阳王。
现代文：当和帝继位后，改封为鄱阳王。
English: When Emperor He ascended the throne, he changed his title to the King of Shenyang.

古文：梁武克建业，以兵守之，将加害焉。
现代文：梁武帝攻克建业时，派兵看守他，并准备杀死他。
English: When Emperor Liangwu conquered Jianye, he sent soldiers to guard him and prepare to kill him.

古文：其家阉人颜文智与左右麻拱、黄神密计，穿墙夜出宝夤。
现代文：萧府中的太监颜文智和左右侍从麻拱、黄神秘密定计，乘夜间挖开墙洞把宝夤送出。
English: Yan Wenzhi, the eunuch of Xiaofu, and his attendants Ma Gong and Huang Shen secretly decided to dig a hole in the wall at night to send out the treasure.

古文：具小船于江岸，脱本衣服，着乌布襦；腰系千许钱，潜赴江畔；蹑屩徒步，脚无全皮。
现代文：他们预先准备了一艘小船停靠在江岸，让宝夤脱掉原来所穿的制服，穿着黑布短衫，腰中系着一千多铜钱，偷往江边。他穿着草鞋徒步行走，脚上磨得没有一块完好的皮肤。
English: They prepared a small boat in advance to dock on the riverbank, and let Baojun take off the uniform he was wearing, put on a black short-sleeved shirt, with more than a thousand copper coins tied around his waist, and steal to the river's edge. He walked on foot wearing sandals, and there was not a single piece of intact skin on his feet.

古文：防守者至明追之。宝夤假为钓者，随流上下十余里，追者不疑。
现代文：看守他的军士们到天亮时发现并追赶他，宝夤装扮成在江上钓鱼人，让小船在江中上下漂流十多里远，追赶的军士并没有怀疑他。
English: The sergeants guarding him found and chased him at dawn. Baojun dressed up as a fisherman on the river and let the boat drift up and down the river for more than ten miles. The pursuing sergeants did not suspect him.

古文：待散，乃度西岸。遂委命投华文荣。
现代文：等到追兵散去之后，他才把船靠到西岸，以身投靠华文荣。
English: Only after the pursuers had dispersed did he pull the boat to the west coast and throw himself on the mercy of Hua Wen Rong.

古文：文荣与其从天龙、惠连等三人，弃家，将宝夤遁匿山涧，赁驴乘之，昼伏宵行。
现代文：华文荣和他的随从天龙、惠连等三人把家也抛弃了，将萧宝夤先藏到山涧里，然后租赁一头驴给他乘坐，他们白天藏起来，夜间行走。
English: Hua Wen Rong and his three followers, Tianlong and Huilian, also abandoned their home. They first hid Xiao Baojun in the mountains, and then rented a donkey for him to ride. They hid during the day and walked at night.

古文：景明二年，至寿春东城戍。戍主杜元伦推检，知实萧氏子，以礼延待。驰告扬州刺史、任城王澄。
现代文：景明二年，到达寿春东城军营中，营主杜元伦反复审查，确知是萧家的子弟，便以礼相待，同时派人飞速报告扬州刺史、任城王澄。
English: In the second year of the Jingming Dynasty, when he arrived at the Shouchun Dongcheng Military Camp, the camp commander Du Yuanlun repeatedly examined him and confirmed that he was the son of the Xiao family, and then treated him with courtesy. At the same time, he sent someone to quickly report Yangzhou Zhishi and Rencheng Wangcheng.

古文：澄以车马侍卫迎之。
现代文：任城王澄便派了车马和侍卫前来迎接他。
English: The acting king of the city, Cheng, then sent horses, chariots and bodyguards to meet him.

古文：时年十六，徒步憔悴，见者以为掠卖生口也。
现代文：当时只有十六岁，他徒步行走，面容十分憔悴，见到他的人还以为是别人掠来卖的人。
English: He was only 16 years old at the time. He walked on foot, his face was very gaunt, and people who saw him thought he was someone else who had been stolen and sold.

古文：澄待以客礼。
现代文：元澄以贵客的礼节接待他。
English: Motosumi received him with the etiquette of a distinguished guest.

古文：乃请丧君斩衰之服，澄遣人晓示情礼，以丧兄之制，给其齐衰，宝夤从命。
现代文：萧宝夤请求穿国君死亡时服用的斩衰的制服，任城王澄派人向他说明依照情礼，应按照死去兄长的礼节，给了齐衰的丧服，宝夤便听从了。
English: Xiao Baojun asked to wear the uniform worn by Guojun at the time of his death. The king of the city, Ren Cheng, sent someone to explain to him that according to the etiquette, he should follow the etiquette of his dead brother, and gave him the mourning clothes of Qi Wei. Baojun obeyed.

古文：澄率官僚赴吊。
现代文：任城王带着他的部属们前往吊唁。
English: Ren Shiwang and his subordinates went to pay their respects.

古文：宝夤居处有礼，不饮酒食肉；辍笑简言，一同极哀之节。
现代文：宝夤居处都合乎服丧的礼节，不喝酒吃肉，不苟言笑，完全是一种十分悲哀的丧礼。
English: Baojun's residence conforms to the etiquette of mourning, does not drink, does not eat meat, does not smile, and is completely a very sad funeral.

古文：寿春多其故义，皆受慰唁。
现代文：寿春这里有很多萧家故友，宝夤一一接受他们的慰问和吊唁。
English: In Shuchun, there are many old friends of the Xiao family here, and Baodi accepts their condolences and condolences one by one.

古文：唯不见夏侯一族，以其同梁故也。
现代文：惟独不见夏侯氏一族，这是因为他们倾向于梁朝。
English: However, the Xia Hou clan was not seen, because they were inclined to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：改日造澄，澄深器重之。
现代文：过了些日子，宝夤前去拜见任城王澄，任城王非常器重他。
English: A few days later, Baojun went to pay homage to the king of Rencheng, Rencheng was very fond of him.

古文：及至京师，宣武礼之甚重。
现代文：当萧宝夤到达京都以后，宣武帝以隆重的礼节接待他。
English: When Xiao Baojun arrived in Kyoto, Emperor Xuanwu received him with great courtesy.

古文：伏诉阙下，请兵南伐，虽遇暴风大雨，终不暂移。
现代文：宝夤跪在殿下哭诉，请求宣武帝派兵南征，并表示哪怕遇到狂风暴雨，自己决不改变心愿。
English: Baojun knelt down and cried to his royal highness, begging Emperor Xuanwu to send troops to the south, and said that even if he encountered a storm, he would never change his mind.

古文：是年，梁江州刺史陈伯之与其长史褚胄等自寿春归降，请军立效。
现代文：这一年，梁朝的江州刺史陈伯之和州长史褚胄等人一起从寿春前来归降，请求建立军功报效朝廷。
English: In this year, Chen Bozhi, the governor of Jiangzhou and governor of the Liang Dynasty, together with others, came from Shouchun to surrender and requested the establishment of an imperial court to reward military service.

古文：帝谓伯之所陈，时不可失。以宝夤恳诚，除使持节、都督、东扬州刺史、镇东将军、丹杨郡公、齐王，配兵一万，令据东城，待秋冬大举。
现代文：皇帝认为按陈伯之所说的情况，机不可失，更兼萧宝夤真心恳求，便封宝夤使持节、都督、东扬州刺史、镇东将军、丹杨郡公、齐王，配给军队一万人，让他驻守东城，准备到秋冬季节时大举南征。
English: The emperor thought that according to the situation mentioned by Chen Bozhi, the opportunity should not be lost. Moreover, Xiao Baojun sincerely pleaded with him. He then appointed Baojun as the envoy of Ji Jie, the governor of Dongyang, the governor of Dongyang, the general of Zhendong, the governor of Danyang County, and the king of Qi. He allocated an army of ten thousand people, and had him stationed in Dongcheng to prepare for a large-scale southern expedition in the autumn and winter.

古文：宝夤明当拜命，其夜恸哭。
现代文：宝夤第二天将要受封，当晚痛哭不已。
English: The next day, Baojun was going to be crowned. That night, she cried bitterly.

古文：至晨，备礼策授，赐车马什物，事从丰厚，犹不及刘昶之优隆也。
现代文：天亮时，皇帝按照礼节封授宝夤，赏赐马和各类物品，样样都十分丰厚，不过还比不上赏赐刘昶时的优厚和隆重。
English: At dawn, the emperor, in accordance with the etiquette of the time, bestowed the title of "treasure seal" and rewarded the horse and all kinds of items, all of which were very rich, but not as rich and grand as when Liu Bei was rewarded.

古文：又任其募天下壮勇，得数千人。
现代文：同时，朝廷允许他任意招募天下的勇士，共招到几千人。
English: At the same time, the imperial court allowed him to recruit warriors from all over the world at will, recruiting several thousand in total.

古文：以文智等三人为积弩将军，文荣等三人为强弩将军，并为军主。
现代文：他便让文智等三人为积弩将军，文荣等三人任强弩将军，都是一军的主将。
English: He then made Wen Zhi and the other three generals of Jiechuan, and Wen Rong and the other three generals of Qiangchuan, all of whom were commanders of the same army.

古文：宝夤虽少羁寓，而志性雅重。
现代文：萧宝夤虽年轻又寄居北国，但为人高雅稳重，虽然服丧期满却仍断绝酒肉，表情悲伤，面容憔悴。
English: Although Xiao Baojun was young and lived in the north, he was an elegant and stable person. Although he had completed his mourning period, he still cut off meat and wine, his expression was sad, and his face was gaunt.

古文：过期犹绝酒肉，惨悴形色，蔬食粗衣，未尝嬉笑。
现代文：他身穿粗布衣服，吃普通蔬菜和食品，从不和人嘻笑。
English: He wore coarse clothes, ate ordinary vegetables and food, and never smiled at anyone.

古文：及被命当南伐，贵要多相凭托，门庭宾客若市。
现代文：当他被朝廷选派南征时，许多权贵们纷纷前来投靠和嘱托各种事情，一时门庭若市，各种书信文札接连不断。
English: When he was selected by the imperial court to go to the south, many dignitaries came one after another to offer their support and entrust various matters to him. At one time, his door was wide open, and he was inundated with letters and postcards.

古文：而书记相寻，宝夤接对报复，不失其理。
现代文：萧宝夤一一应接和回复，办得有条有理。
English: Xiao Baojun responded and replied one by one, and it was orderly.

古文：正始元年，宝夤行达汝阴，东城已陷，遂停寿春之栖贤寺。
现代文：正始元年，当萧宝夤的军队到达汝阴时，东城却已沦陷了，他便让部队停留在寿春的栖贤寺。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, when Xiao Baojun's army arrived in Ruyin, Dongcheng had already fallen, and he let the troops stay in Shuchun's Jixian Temple.

古文：逢梁将姜庆真内侵，围逼寿春。宝夤率众力战，破走之。
现代文：这时，恰逢梁军将领姜庆真入侵，围逼寿春城，萧宝夤领着部队奋力作战，击败了梁军。
English: At this time, it coincided with the invasion of Jiang Qingzhen, the general of Liang's army, and the siege of Shouchun City. Xiao Baojun led the troops to fight hard and defeated Liang's army.

古文：宝夤勇冠诸军，闻见者莫不壮之。
现代文：宝夤勇冠三军，见到的人无不深受鼓舞。
English: The three armies of Baojun won the bravery award, and everyone who saw them was deeply inspired.

古文：还，改封梁郡公。
现代文：领军北还后，被改封为梁郡公。
English: After leading the army to the north, he was changed to Liang County.

古文：及中山王英南伐，宝夤又表求征。
现代文：当中山王英领兵南征时，宝夤又上表请求出征。
English: When Zhongshan Wang Ying led the troops to march south, Baojun also requested to go to the front.

古文：与英频破梁军，乘胜攻钟离。
现代文：他和中山王英多次打败梁军，乘胜攻打钟离。
English: He and Wang Ying of Zhongshan defeated Liang's army many times, taking advantage of the victory to attack Zhong Rong.

古文：淮水泛溢，宝夤与英狼狈引退，士卒死没者十四五。
现代文：可是遇到淮河泛滥，宝夤和中山王英狼狈领军退走，士兵有十分之四五的人被杀死或淹没于洪水中。
English: However, when the Huai River flooded, Baodi and Zhongshan Wang Yinglu led the troops to retreat. Four-fifths of the soldiers were killed or drowned in the flood.

古文：有司奏处以极法。
现代文：有关方面官员上奏朝廷，请求将他们处以极刑。
English: The officials concerned appealed to the Imperial Court, requesting that they be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：诏恕死，免官削爵还第。
现代文：皇帝传旨免去他的死罪，罢免官职削去爵位回府。
English: The emperor sent an order to absolve him of the capital crime, remove him from his official post, strip him of his title and send him back to the capital.

古文：寻尚南阳长公主。
现代文：不久，和南阳长公主成婚。
English: Soon after, he married the eldest Nanyang princess.

古文：公主有妇德，宝夤尽雍和之礼，虽好合而敬事不替。
现代文：公主具备妇人应有的各种美德，对待宝夤十分谦和，后来两人十分和睦而公主依然不改变对他的敬意。
English: The princess possessed all kinds of virtues that a woman should have. She treated Breguet very humbly, and later the two were very harmonious, and the princess still did not change her respect for him.

古文：宝夤每入室，公主必立以待之，相遇如宾，自非太妃疾笃，未曾归休。
现代文：每当宝夤进房时，公主必定站立起来迎接他，两人相敬如宾。如果不是遇到皇太妃有病，公主从不回娘家。
English: Whenever Breguet enters the room, the princess must stand up to greet him, and the two respect each other as guests. If it were not for the illness of the Empress Dowager, the princess would never return to her daughter's house.

古文：宝夤器性温顺，自处以礼，奉敬公主，内外庇穆。
现代文：宝夤也性情温和，彬彬有礼，敬爱公主，因此内外和谐安宁。
English: Baojun is also gentle, courteous, and loves the princess, so there is harmony and tranquility inside and outside.

古文：清河王怿亲而重之。
现代文：清河王怿对他们十分亲近和敬重。
English: Qinghe Wang Xi was very close to them and held them in high regard.

古文：永平四年，卢昶克梁朐山戍，以琅邪戍主傅文骥守之。
现代文：永平四年，卢昶攻下梁朝的朐山戍，让琅笽戍主傅文骥镇守。
English: In the 4th year of Yongping, Lu Yu conquered the Liang Dynasty's Lushan County, leaving its lord, Fu Wenjun, to defend the town.

古文：梁师攻文骥，昶督众军救之。
现代文：梁军攻打傅文骥，卢昶指挥众军前往救援。
English: Liang's army attacked Fu Wenyi, and Lu Wei led the army to rescue him.

古文：诏宝夤为使持节、假安南将军，别将长驱往赴，受昶节度。
现代文：皇帝传旨派宝夤为使持节、假安南将军，另带一支军队长途奔赴救援，接受卢昶的管辖。
English: The emperor sent Baojun as an envoy to hold the festival, the fake Annan general, and another army to rush to the rescue for a long distance, to accept the jurisdiction of Lu Wei.

古文：宝夤受诏，泣涕横流，哽咽良久。
现代文：宝夤接旨后，泪流满面，哽咽了很久说不出话来。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Baojun burst into tears and choked for a long time, unable to speak.

古文：后昶军败，唯宝夤全师而还。
现代文：后来卢昶军队被打败了，只有宝夤这支队伍得以全师而回。
English: Later, Lu Wei's army was defeated, and only Baodi's team was able to return with the whole division.

古文：延昌初，除瀛州刺史，复其齐王，迁冀州刺史。
现代文：延昌初年，任瀛州刺史，并恢复了齐王的封爵，又改任冀州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, he was appointed as the governor of Bozhou, restored the knighthood of King Qi, and was appointed as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：及大乘贼起，宝夤遣军讨之，频为贼破。
现代文：当大乘贼寇四起时，宝夤领兵征讨，但多次被贼军打败。
English: When the Mahayana bandits attacked, Baojun led the army to fight, but was repeatedly defeated by the bandits.

古文：台军至，乃灭之。
现代文：行台军队到达后，才将贼军消灭。
English: It was only after the arrival of the Guotai army that the Kleptocrats were eliminated.

古文：灵太后临朝，还京师。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政时，调宝夤回到京城。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling was in Beijing to listen to the government, she returned to the capital.

古文：梁将康绚于浮山堰淮以灌扬、徐。
现代文：梁朝将领康绚在浮山筑大坝引淮河水淹灌扬州和徐州。
English: Liang Dynasty general Kang Hua built a dam in Fushan to divert water from the Huai River to flood Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：除宝夤使持节、都督东讨军事、镇东将军以讨之，复封梁郡公。
现代文：朝廷授宝夤使持节、都督东讨军事、镇东将军以讨伐梁朝，又封他为梁郡公。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Baojun Zhiji Festival, the title of Eastern Governor for military affairs, the title of Eastern General for fighting against the Liang Dynasty, and the title of Liang County Governor.

古文：熙平初，梁堰既成，淮水将为扬、徐之患，宝夤乃于堰上流更凿新渠，水乃小减。
现代文：熙平初年，梁军构筑的大坝已成，淮河水将成为扬州、徐州的祸害，宝夤便在大坝的上游又开通新渠道，水势就减弱了。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the dam built by Liang Jun was completed, and the Huai River water would become the scourge of Yangzhou and Xuzhou. Baodi then opened a new channel upstream of the dam, and the water potential weakened.

古文：乃遣壮士千余人夜度淮，烧其竹木营聚，破其三垒，火数日不灭。
现代文：他又派遣精壮勇士一千多人在夜间渡过淮河，焚烧梁军用竹、木建造的营垒，破坏了三座军营，大火烧了几天都没有停止。
English: He also sent more than a thousand elite warriors to cross the Huaihe River at night, burned the bamboo and wood camps built by Liang's army, destroyed three military camps, and the fire burned for several days without stopping.

古文：又分遣将破梁将垣孟孙、张僧副等于淮北。
现代文：他又另派将领打败了梁将垣孟孙、张僧副等人在淮北的军队。
English: He also sent other generals to defeat Liang Shouqi, Meng Sun, Zhang Zangwei and other troops in Huaibei.

古文：仍度淮南，焚梁徐州刺史张豹子等十一营。
现代文：又渡过淮河南下，焚烧了梁朝徐州刺史张豹子等人的十一座营垒。
English: They also crossed the Huai River to the south and burned the eleven camps of Liang Chaozhou, Xuzhou, Zhishi, Zhang Leopards and others.

古文：及还京师，为殿中尚书。
现代文：当他回到京城后，被任命为殿中尚书。
English: When he returned to the capital, he was appointed to the post of palace secretary.

古文：宝夤之在淮堰，梁武寓书招诱之。
现代文：宝夤驻守淮河堤岸时，梁武帝寄信招降他。
English: When Baojun was stationed on the embankment of the Huai River, Emperor Liang Wudi sent a letter to recruit him.

古文：宝夤表送其书，陈其忿毒之意。
现代文：宝夤把这些信表送朝廷，揭发梁朝的毒计。
English: Baojun sent these letters to the imperial court, exposing Liang's poisonous scheme.

古文：志存雪复，屡请居边。
现代文：他一心一意想报仇雪恨，恢复故国，多次请求驻守边境。
English: He was bent on revenge and restoring his homeland, and repeatedly asked to be stationed at the border.

古文：神龟中，为都督、徐州刺史、车骑大将军。
现代文：神龟年间，被任为都督、徐州刺史、车骑大将军。
English: During the years of the Divine Turtle, he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, the governor of Xuzhou and the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：乃起学馆于清东，朔望引见土姓子弟，接以恩颜，与论经义。
现代文：他便在清河东侧建造学馆，朔望日接见当地百姓的子弟，他和颜悦色地对待他们，并一起讨论各种经义。
English: He then built a school on the east side of the Qing River, and met with the children of the local people on the first day of the new year. He and Yan treated them pleasantly, and discussed various teachings together.

古文：勤于听理，吏人爱之。
现代文：他勤于处理政务，深得属吏和州人的敬爱。
English: He was diligent in handling government affairs and was deeply loved by his subordinates and the people of the state.

古文：正光二年，征为尚书左仆射。
现代文：正光二年，朝廷召回任尚书左仆射。
English: In the second year of Masamitsu, the imperial court recalled Ren Shosho's second-in-command.

古文：善于吏职，甚有声名。
现代文：他善于治理政事，很有名声。
English: He has a reputation for good governance.

古文：四年，上表曰：
现代文：正光四年，他表奏朝廷说：
English: In the fourth year of Masamitsu's reign, he told the imperial court:

古文：窃惟文武之名，在人之极地；德行之称，为生之最首。
现代文： 我私下以为，在文治武功方面都成名，也就是做人的最高成就了；在品德和行为方面受到称赞，也就是人生中最重要的方面。
English: Privately, I thought that to be famous in both the arts and martial arts was the highest achievement of a human being, and to be praised for one's character and behavior was the most important aspect of life.

古文：忠贞之美，立朝之誉；仁义之号，处身之端。
现代文：忠贞的美名，是立身朝廷的声誉；仁义的雅号，是处世的根本。
English: The reputation of loyalty is the reputation of standing up to the imperial court; the reputation of benevolence and righteousness is the foundation of one's life.

古文：自非职惟九官，任当四岳，授曰尔谐，让称俞往，将何以克厌大名，允兹令问。
现代文：虽然职非三公六卿，任当四岳重臣，皇帝授职时说： 你去谐和万方 ，臣下辞别而说： 是的，我听命前往！ 
English: Although his position was not that of the three princes and six nobles, he was appointed as the senior vassal of the four mountains. When the emperor conferred the position, he said, "You should go in harmony with the world." The vassal resigned and said, "Yes, I will go according to my orders!"

古文：自比以来，官罔高卑，人无贵贱，皆饰辞假说，用相褒举。求者不能量其多少，与者不能核其是非，遂使冠履相贸，名实皆爽。
现代文：那么又根据什么能够得到高名，享有盛誉？自近以来，官无高低，人无贵贱，都以虚美之辞，相互称誉举荐，求之者不能估量其多少，给予者不能核查其是非，于是而冠履变易，名实皆失。
English: Then, on what basis can they obtain a high reputation and enjoy a high reputation? Since recently, officials of all ranks and people of all ranks have been recommending each other with false words and praise. Those who ask for it cannot estimate how much it is, and those who give it cannot verify its rights and wrongs. As a result, the crown changes, and the reputation is lost.

古文：谓之考功，事同泛陟，纷纷漫漫，焉可胜言！
现代文：名为考功，实同虚进，纷纷漫漫，岂能尽言！
English: The name of the examination is "examination of merits," but it is actually "examination of faults" and "improvement of virtues."

古文：又在京之官，积年十考。其中，或所事之主，迁移数四；或所奉之君，身亡废绝。
现代文： 又，在京官员，积数年而一考，期间，或所侍奉主官，更换数次；或所服侍的国君，身亡废绝。
English: In addition, officials in Beijing, accumulated over several years and one exam, during which, or served the chief officer, replaced several times; or served the sovereign, dead and gone.

古文：虽当时文簿，记其殿最，日久月遥，散落都尽。
现代文：虽当时各种文簿，记其功绩之高低上下，但日久天长，散失已尽。
English: Although at that time various books recorded the highs and lows of his exploits, they have been lost over time.

古文：累年之后，方求追访，无不苟相悦附，共为脣齿；饰垢掩疵，妄加丹素，趣令得阶而已，无所顾惜。
现代文：多年之后，再求追访，无不相互吹嘘，结为唇齿之交，掩饰过错，妄加增色。只求多得品阶而已，无所顾惜事之真伪。
English: After many years, they sought to visit each other again, boasted about each other, became friends, covered up their mistakes, and added to their beauty. They only wanted to get more grades, and did not care about the truth or falsity of things.

古文：贤达君子，未免斯患；中庸已降，夫复何论！
现代文：而贤达君子，则难免深感忧患，中庸之道已不被遵行，还有什么可说的呢！
English: And the sages and gentlemen are inevitably deeply worried, the middle way has not been followed, what else can be said!

古文：官以求成，身以请立，上下相蒙，莫斯为甚。
现代文：官以求取而得，身以请托而立，上下相互欺骗，没有比这事更加过分的了。
English: There is nothing more excessive than officials seeking and obtaining, holding themselves up by their elbows, and deceiving each other.

古文：又勤恤人隐，咸归守令，厥任非轻，所责实重。然及其考课，悉以六载为约，既而限满代还，复经六年而叙。是则岁周十二，始得一阶。
现代文： 又勤政体恤民众之隐哀，都是州官县令的职责，责任重大，然而对他们的考察以六年为期，期满后替回，再经六年才得到奖叙，因而须经十二年才能晋升一阶。
English: In addition, it is the duty and responsibility of the prefectural and county governors to be diligent in politics and sympathize with the people's grief. However, they are examined for a period of six years, and are replaced after the expiration of the period. It takes another six years to receive the award, so it takes twelve years to be promoted to the first level.

古文：于东西两省，文武闲职，公府散佐，无事冗官，或数旬方应一直，或朔望止于暂朝。
现代文：可是东西两省的文武闲职，公府中的闲散佐官，没有什么事做的多余官员，或者几十天才值一次班，或者在朔望日里才暂时朝见一次。
English: However, the civil and military officials in the eastern and western provinces are idle, the government officials in the government are idle, and there are superfluous officials who have nothing to do, or they have only been on duty once for dozens of days, or they have only seen the emperor once for a while on the New Year's Eve.

古文：及其考日，更得四年为限。
现代文：可是他们考察时间，却以四年为限。
English: However, they were limited to four years.

古文：是则一纪之中，便登三级。
现代文：这样，十二年间，便可晋升三级。
English: In this way, in twelve years, they can be promoted to the third level.

古文：彼以实劳剧任，而迁贵之路至难；此以散位虚名，而升陟之方甚易。何内外之相县，令厚薄之若此！
现代文：守令辛劳而责任重大，但升迁之路十分艰难；闲职冗官只挂虚名，而晋升之途非常容易，何以内外之悬殊，造成待遇厚薄相差如此之大！
English: The guards are hard-working and have heavy responsibilities, but the path to promotion is very difficult; the idle officials only have false names, and the path to promotion is very easy. What is the disparity between inside and outside, resulting in such a big difference in treatment!

古文：孟子曰： 仁义忠信，天爵也；公卿大夫，人爵也。
现代文： 孟子说： 仁义忠信，是天然而成的爵位；公卿大夫，是人为封赠的爵位。
English: Mencius said: "Righteousness, loyalty, and benevolence are natural titles of nobility; the title of noble doctor is a title bestowed by man.

古文：古之人，修其天爵而人爵从之。 
现代文：古代人注意修天爵而人爵也就随之而至。 
English: The ancients paid attention to the establishment of the peerage, and the peerage followed.

古文：故虽文质异时，污隆殊世，莫不宝兹名器，不以假人。
现代文：所以虽然外表与内质因时而异，宠幸与受辱因世而殊，却无不珍惜这种爵号，不肯轻易给别人。
English: Therefore, although the appearance and inner quality vary from time to time, and the favors and insults vary from world to world, they all cherish this title and do not want to give it to others easily.

古文：是以赏罚之科，恆自持也。
现代文：所以赏罚等级，应当持正公平。
English: Therefore, the level of reward and punishment should be fair.

古文：乃至周之蔼蔼，五叔无官；汉之察察，馆陶徒请。诚以赏罚一差，则无以惩劝；至公暂替，则觊觎相欺。
现代文：这是因为赏罚出现偏差，便难以进行惩处或勉励；公正的法则一旦废止，怀有侥幸心理的人便想法欺骗。
English: This is because if rewards and punishments are biased, it is difficult to punish or encourage; once the rules of justice are abolished, people with a sense of luck will try to cheat.

古文：故至慎至惜，殷勤若此。
现代文：所以一定要十分谨慎十分珍惜。
English: So we must be very careful and cherish it.

古文：况乎亲非肺腑，才乖秀逸，或充单介之使，始无汗马之劳；或说兴利之规，终县十一之润。
现代文：何况现在这些人不是肺腑之亲，也不是才华横溢的人；既没单身出使敌国，也无立过汗马之劳，更无陈说兴利除弊之功，却终身享受官员的俸禄。
English: What's more, these people are neither close relatives nor talented people; they have neither been sent to the enemy country alone, nor have they worked hard, nor have they made any contributions to the society, but they enjoy the salary of an official for life.

古文：皆虚张无功，妄指赢益；坐获数阶之官，籍成通显之贵。
现代文：他们都在虚张声势、毫无寸功；乱加指点，争说赢益，轻易得到几级官职，藉以成为显耀的贵人。
English: They are all bluff and bluster, without any effort; they add points, argue about profit and gain, and easily obtain several levels of official positions, so as to become illustrious nobles.

古文：于是巧诈萌生，伪辩锋出，役万虑以求荣，开百方而逐利。
现代文：于是巧诈之计萌生，奸伪之论四起，千思万虑以求荣，千方百计而争利。
English: As a result, cunning and deceitful schemes sprouted up, and theories of treachery and falsehood arose. They thought of everything to seek glory, and did everything possible to compete for profits.

古文：抑之则其流已往，引之则有何纪极！
现代文：要加以约束而流弊已久，要加以引导又有何规矩？
English: It has been a long time since it was necessary to restrain it, so what are the rules for guiding it?

古文：夫琴瑟在于必和，更张求其适调。
现代文： 琴瑟必求音声相和，改弦更张以得合适的音调。
English: The zither must seek the harmony of the sound, change the strings and stretch to get the right tone.

古文：去者既不可追，来者犹或宜改。
现代文：过去的东西已难以追回，未来的事情却还能改正。
English: Things in the past are difficult to recover, but things in the future can still be corrected.

古文：案《周官》：太宰之职，岁终，则令官府各正所司，受其会计，听其事致而诏于王。
现代文：据《周官》载：太宰的职责，每年底，便令官府各自端正职责，接受总计，听取汇报然后上报于国王。
English: According to the "Weekly Official," the duties of the Dazai begin at the end of each year, and the government offices are ordered to correct their duties, accept the total, listen to the report and then report to the king.

古文：三岁，则大计群吏之政而诛赏之。
现代文：三年便总算一次所有官员的政绩而进行奖惩。
English: In three years, all officials will be rewarded and punished for their political achievements.

古文：愚谓今可粗依其准。
现代文：我认为今后可以大体依照这种办法。
English: I think that this approach can be broadly followed in the future.

古文：见居官者，每岁终，本曹皆明辨在官日月，具核才行能否，审其实用。而注其上下，游辞宕说，一无取焉。
现代文：凡是为官的人，每年底，由本部门写清楚他任职的日期，具体考核其才能和品行的好坏，弄清实际才干，注明上下等级，虚辞滥语一概不要。
English: For all officials, at the end of each year, this department will clearly write the date of his appointment, specifically assess his talents and good or bad conduct, clarify the actual talents, indicate the upper and lower grades, and do not use any false words.

古文：列上尚书，覆其合否。
现代文：将名字列好，上报尚书，由尚书再次核实。
English: The names will be listed, reported to Shangshu, and verified again by Shangshu.

古文：如有纰缪，即正而罚之，不得方复推诘委下，容其进退。
现代文：如果发现谬误，立即加以纠正并给予处罚，不允许将责任推委下属，容许他们自由进退。
English: If errors are found, they will be corrected immediately and punished. It is not allowed to delegate responsibility to subordinates, and they are allowed to advance and retreat freely.

古文：既定其优劣，善恶交分，经奏之后，考功曹别书于黄纸、油帛。
现代文：在确定优劣和善恶之后，上奏朝廷，再由考功曹将这些情况分别书写在黄纸和油帛上。
English: After ascertaining the merits and demerits and good and evil, the imperial court was notified, and then the examination committee wrote these conditions separately on yellow paper and linoleum.

古文：一通则本曹尚书与令仆印署，留于门下；一通则以侍中黄门印署，掌在尚书。
现代文：一份由本部尚书加盖印章，留在门下；一份则由侍中黄门盖印，由尚书省掌管。
English: One copy is stamped by the head office and left under the door; the other is stamped by the attendant and kept by the Ministry of Literature.

古文：严加缄密，不得开视。
现代文：必须严加保密，不得打开。
English: It must be kept strictly confidential and must not be opened.

古文：考绩之日，然后对共裁量。
现代文：考绩的时候，再最终加以确定。
English: This will be finalised at the time of the performance appraisal.

古文：其外内考格，裁非庸管，乞求博议，以为画一。
现代文：所有内外考核标准，裁定其可用与不可用，要广泛征求意见，使标准统一。
English: All internal and external assessment standards, to decide whether they can be used or not, should widely solicit opinions and unify the standards.

古文：若殊谋异策，事关废兴，遐迩所谈，物无异议者，自可临时斟酌，匪拘恆例。
现代文：如果有特殊的谋略或奇特的计策，事情关系到国家的兴亡，为远近所传知，没有人提出不同意见的，当然可以临时根据情况加以斟酌，不要拘于常规。
English: If there is a special strategy or a strange strategy, if the matter is related to the rise and fall of the country, if it is known far and wide, and no one has raised a dissenting opinion, of course, it can be considered temporarily according to the situation, and do not stick to the routine.

古文：至如援流引比之诉，贪荣求级之请。如不限以关键，肆其傍通，则蔓草难除，涓流遂积，秽我彝章，挠兹大典，谓宜明加禁断，以全至化。
现代文：至于像援引同流的说法，贪图荣誉以求晋级的请求，如果不用条件加以限制，任其随意大开方便之门的话，以后就像蔓草滋生蔓延，难以铲除了。小小细流积成大河，就会破坏规章制度，挠乱国家大典，因此我认为应当明令加以禁止，以保证形成良好的风气。 
English: As for the request of coveting honor in order to advance, if it is not restricted by conditions and allowed to open the door of convenience at will, it will be like a vine that breeds and spreads, and it is difficult to eradicate. Small streams will accumulate into large rivers, which will destroy the rules and regulations and disturb the national grand ceremony. Therefore, I think that it should be expressly prohibited to ensure the formation of a good culture.

古文：诏付外博议，以为永式。
现代文：皇帝传旨将这份奏章交百官们广泛讨论，并以此作为永久实行的标准。
English: By imperial order, this document was submitted to the officials for extensive discussion, and it was used as a permanent standard.

古文：竟无所改。
现代文：最后也没有对其内容作任何更改。
English: In the end, no changes were made to its content.

古文：时梁武弟子西丰侯正德来降，宝夤表曰： 正德既不亲亲，安能亲人。
现代文：这时，梁武帝弟弟的儿子西丰侯萧正德前来归降。萧宝夤上表说 ：萧正德既然不能和亲属亲近，又怎么能够和外人亲近？
English: At this time, Xiao Zhengde, the son of Emperor Liangwu's younger brother, Xifeng Hou (西丰侯), came to surrender. Xiao Baoji said on the table: Since Xiao Zhengde cannot be close to relatives, how can he be close to outsiders?

古文：脱包此凶丑，置之列位，百官是象，其何诛焉？
现代文：假如容许这样的丑类也封给爵位，百官们都以此为榜样，那么还有什么人才能够上杀头的罪名呢？
English: If such an ugly creature is allowed to be knighted, and if all the officials take this as an example, then what other person can be accused of beheading?

古文：臣衅结祸深，痛缠骨髓，日暮途遥，报复无日，岂区区于一竖哉！
现代文：微臣和南梁仇隙深重，痛入骨髓，如今日暮途穷，报仇无日，岂在乎这样一位区区小人！
English: The enmity between Weixin and Nanliang runs deep and cuts to the marrow of the bones. If today we are destitute and vengeful, how can we care about such a petty villain!

古文：但才虽庸近，职居献替，愚衷寸抱，敢不申陈。 
现代文：只是虽为平庸之才，而身居门下重职，忠心一片，敢不申说？ 
English: It's just that although he is a mediocre talent, he is a loyal subordinate, dare I say?

古文：正德既至京师，朝廷待之尤薄，岁余，还叛。
现代文：萧正德到京城之后，朝廷待他十分轻薄，一年多后，他又叛变回梁。
English: After Xiao Zhengde arrived in Beijing, the imperial court treated him very lightly. More than a year later, he rebelled and returned to Liang.

古文：初，秦州城人薛伯珍、刘庆、杜迁等反，执刺史李彦，推莫折大提为首，自称秦王。
现代文：起初，秦州城里人薛伯珍、刘庆、杜迁等反叛朝廷，抓了刺史李彦，推举莫折大提当首领，自称秦王。
English: At the beginning, Qinzhou townsmen Xue Bozhen, Liu Qing, Du Qian and others rebelled against the imperial court, arrested Zishi Li Yan, and elected Moreno Dati as the leader, calling himself Qin Wang.

古文：大提寻死，其第四子念生窃号天子，年曰天建。
现代文：莫折大提不久死去，他的第四位儿子莫折念生自号为皇帝，年号天建。
English: Mowendati died soon after, and his fourth son Mowendati proclaimed himself emperor, with the era name Tianjian.

古文：置官寮，以息阿胡为太子，其兄阿倪为西河王，弟天生为高阳王，伯珍为东郡王，安保为平阳王。
现代文：他设置了文武百官，以儿子阿胡为太子，阿胡的哥哥阿倪为西河王，弟弟天生为高阳王，伯珍为东郡王，安保为平阳王。
English: He set up a hundred civil and military officials, with his son Ahu as the crown prince, Ahu's brother Anni as the king of the West River, his brother was born as the king of Gaoyang, Bo Zhen as the king of the East County, and Bao Bao as the king of Pingyang.

古文：天生率众出陇东，遂寇雍州，屯于黑水。
现代文：天生带领军队出陇东，攻打雍州，屯兵于黑水。
English: He was born to lead the army out of Shandong, attack Yongzhou, and garrison in Heishui.

古文：朝廷甚忧之，除宝夤开府、西道行台，为大都督，西征。
现代文：朝廷为此十分忧虑，便任萧宝夤为开府、西道行台、大都督，领兵西征。
English: The imperial court was very worried about this, and appointed Xiao Baojun as Kaifu, Xi Daogangdai, Daduotu, and leader of the Western Expedition.

古文：明帝幸明堂以饯之。
现代文：明帝亲自在明堂设宴为他饯行。
English: Emperor Ming personally held a banquet for him in the Ming Hall.

古文：宝夤与大都督崔延伯击天生大破之，追奔至小陇。
现代文：萧宝夤和另一位大都督崔延伯合击天生，把他打得大败，直追赶到小陇。
English: Xiao Baojun and another great governor, Cui Yanbo, were born to fight together. They defeated him and chased him to Xiaojun.

古文：进讨高平贼帅万俟丑奴于安定，更有负捷。
现代文：又进讨高平的贼寇统率万俟丑奴，在安定大战，双方互有胜负。
English: In the great war of stability, both sides have won and lost.

古文：时有天水人吕伯度兄弟始共念生同逆，后与兄众保于显亲聚众讨念生。战败，奔于胡琛。
现代文：当时有天水人吕伯度兄弟，原来和莫折念生一起反叛朝廷，可是他后来和哥哥吕众保在显亲一带聚合许多人马讨伐念生，被念生打败，奔逃到胡琛那里。
English: At that time, there was a brother named Lü Bodu from Tianshui, who had originally rebelled against the imperial court together with Mu Rui Nian Sheng. However, he and his brother Lü Zhong Bao later gathered many people to fight against Nian Sheng in the vicinity of Xiancheng. They were defeated by Nian Sheng and fled to Hu Yao.

古文：琛以伯度为大都督、秦王，资其士马，还征秦州。
现代文：胡琛任命吕伯度为大都督、秦王，并又给他一部分兵马，让他再攻秦州。
English: Hu Jintao appointed Lü Bodu as the great governor and king of Qin, and gave him a part of the soldiers and horses to let him attack Qinzhou again.

古文：大破念生将杜粲于成纪，又破其金城王莫折普贤于水洛城，遂至显亲。
现代文：吕伯度大破莫折念生的部将杜粲于成纪，又在水洛城大败念生部的金城王莫折普贤，进军至显亲。
English: Lv Bodu defeated Moru Puxian, the king of Jincheng, and marched into Xian Kinship.

古文：念生率众身自拒战，又大败。
现代文：莫折念生亲自领兵和吕伯度作战，被吕伯度击败。
English: He did not hesitate to personally lead soldiers to fight against Lü Bodu and was defeated by Lü Bodu.

古文：伯度乃背胡琛，遣其兄子忻和率骑东引大军。
现代文：吕伯度便背着胡琛，派他哥哥的儿子忻和带领骑兵到东面引来萧宝夤的大军。
English: Lü Bodu then sent his brother's son, Zou, and his cavalry to the east with Hu Yao on his back to attract Xiao Baolu's large army.

古文：念生事迫，乃诈降于宝夤。
现代文：莫折念生感到事情不妙，只得假装向萧宝夤投降。
English: Feeling that things were not good, I had to pretend to surrender to Xiao Baojun.

古文：朝廷嘉伯度立义之功，授泾州刺史、平秦郡公。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖吕伯度起义而立下的大功，任命他为泾州刺史、平秦郡公。
English: The imperial court commended Lv Baidu for his great contribution to the uprising and appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Pingqin County.

古文：而大都督元脩义、高聿停军陇口，久不西进。念生复反，伯度为丑奴所杀。故贼势更甚，宝夤不能制。
现代文：可是这时大都督元义、高聿把军队留驻陇口，而吕伯度又被万俟丑奴所杀害，这样，敌军气势大增，萧宝夤难以制服。
English: However, at this time, the great capital governors, Yuan Yi and Gao Qi, stationed their troops at Hekou, while Lü Bodu was killed by Wanzhong Ugliness. As a result, the strength of the enemy army greatly increased, and it was difficult to subdue Xiao Baojun.

古文：孝昌二年，除宝夤侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、假大将军、尚书令，给前后部鼓吹。
现代文：孝昌二年，萧宝夤被授为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、假大将军、尚书令，并给予前后部鼓吹仪仗。
English: In the second year of Xiaochang, Xiao Baojun was awarded the titles of Chamberlain, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry, and Grand Marshal of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：宝夤初自黑水，终至平凉，与贼相对，年年攻击，贼亦惮之。
现代文：萧宝夤起初从黑水进军，终于打到平凉，和叛贼对阵，年年进攻，贼军也很害怕他。
English: At first, Xiao Baojun marched from Heishui, and finally reached Pingliang. He fought against the rebels and attacked every year. The rebels were also afraid of him.

古文：关中保全，宝夤之力。
现代文：关中得到保全，全仗萧宝夤的力量。
English: Guanzhong was preserved, and Xiao Baojun's strength prevailed.

古文：三年正月，除司空公。
现代文：孝昌三年正月，改授司空公。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he was awarded the title of Sikuo.

古文：出师既久，兵将疲弊，是月大败，还雍州。
现代文：由于他出征日久，兵将都十分疲惫，所以在这个月被敌人打得大败，退回雍州。
English: As he had been away for a long time, the soldiers were very tired, so this month they were defeated by the enemy and returned to Yongzhou.

古文：有司处宝夤死罪，诏恕为编户。
现代文：有关部门认为萧宝夤应当处死，但皇帝下诏从宽处置，削职成为编户民。
English: Relevant departments believed that Xiao Baojun should be put to death, but the emperor decreed a lenient punishment, and he was demoted to the position of household editor.

古文：四月，除征西将军、雍州刺史、开府、西讨大都督，自关以西，皆受节度。
现代文：但四月间，又任他为征西将军，雍州刺史、开府，西讨大都督，所有关西军队，全部听从他的调遣。
English: However, in April, he was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, and all the Kansai troops obeyed his dispatch.

古文：九月，念生为其常山王杜粲所杀，合门皆尽。
现代文：九月，莫折念生被他的部属常山王杜粲杀死，全家被杀尽。
English: In September, he was killed by his subordinate, Changshan Wang Dujuan, and his entire family was killed.

古文：粲降宝夤。
现代文：杜粲向萧宝夤投降。
English: Cuckoo surrenders to Xiao Baojun.

古文：十月，除尚书令，复其旧封。
现代文：十月，朝廷授给他尚书令，恢复原来的封爵。
English: In October, the Imperial Court granted him a posthumous decree to restore his original knighthood.

古文：时山东、关西，寇贼充斥，王师屡北，人情沮丧。
现代文：这时，山东、关西一带，到处都是贼寇，朝廷出兵多次打败仗，士气低落。
English: At this time, around Shandong and Kansai, there were bandits everywhere, the imperial court sent troops to defeat them many times, and morale was low.

古文：宝夤自以出师累年，糜费尤广，一旦覆败，虑见猜责，内不自安。
现代文：萧宝夤连年出征，耗费巨大，一旦被打败，心里十分担心受到猜疑和斥责，常常心中不安。
English: Xiao Baojun went to war year after year, spending huge amounts of money. Once he was defeated, he was very worried about being suspected and reprimanded, and he was often uneasy.

古文：朝廷颇亦疑阻。
现代文：朝廷这时也已对他产生了怀疑，并设障碍。
English: At this time, the imperial court also had doubts about him and set up obstacles.

古文：及遣御史中尉郦道元为关中大使，宝夤谓密欲取己，将有异图，问河东柳楷。
现代文：当朝廷委派御史中尉郦道元当关中大使时，萧宝夤怀疑是朝廷准备暗中除掉自己，所以便另有打算。
English: When the imperial court appointed Lieutenant Gong Dogen as ambassador to Guanzhong, Xiao Baojun suspected that the imperial court was preparing to secretly eliminate him, so he had other plans.

古文：楷曰： 大王齐明帝子，天下所属，今日之举，实允人望。
现代文：他把想法问河东柳楷，柳楷说： 大王原是齐明帝的儿子，正天下原来就应属您所有。所以您今日的作法，正符合人们的愿望。
English: He asked Hedong Liu Kai for his thoughts, and Liu Kai said: The great king was originally the son of Emperor Qiming, and the whole world should have belonged to you. Therefore, your actions today are in line with people's wishes.

古文：且谣言： 鸾生十子九子段，一子不段关中乱。 
现代文：况且近来有民谣传唱说 ：鸾生十子九子歹段，一子不歹段关中乱。 
English: Moreover, there is a folk song recently that says, "Twins have ten children, nine of them are not good, and one is not bad, but they have a quarrel."

古文：武王有乱臣十人，乱者理也，大王当理关中，何所疑虑？ 
现代文：武王有十位乱臣，所谓 乱 ，就是理的意思，这是说大王应当治理关中，您还有什么可以怀疑的呢？ 
English: King Wu has ten chaotic vassals. The so-called "chaos" means "reason," which means that the great king should govern Guanzhong. What else can you doubt?

古文：道元行达阴盘驿，宝夤密遣其将郭子恢等攻杀之，而诈收道元尸，表言白贼所害。
现代文：当郦道元走到阴盘驿时，萧宝夤派遣部将郭子恢等人秘密地杀掉了他，然后诡称前往收埋郦道元的尸体，上表朝廷，假称是被贼人所杀害。
English: When Shao Dogen went to Yinpanyu, Xiao Baojun dispatched Guo Zikai and others to secretly kill him, and then pretended to go to bury Shao Dogen's body, and presented it to the imperial court, pretending to be killed by thieves.

古文：遂反，僭举大号，大赦其部内，称隆绪元年，立百官。
现代文：于是，萧宝夤叛变了，他另立旗帜，大赦其部内众人，称为隆绪元年，封百官。
English: As a result, Xiao Baojun mutinied, he set up another banner, amnestied everyone in his department, known as the first year of Longxu, and sealed hundreds of officials.

古文：诏尚书仆射、行台长孙承业讨之。
现代文：朝廷派尚书仆射、行台长孙承业前去讨伐。
English: The imperial court sent Shang Shuxubei and Sun Chengye, the governor of the Yangtze River, to fight.

古文：时北地毛鸿宾与其兄遐纠率乡义，将讨宝夤。
现代文：当时北地的毛鸿宾和他哥哥遐纠合民间义军，准备讨伐萧宝夤。
English: At that time, Mao Hongbin and his brother Yan in the north of the country were entangled with the civilian rebels and were preparing to fight against Xiao Baojun.

古文：宝夤遣其将侯终德往攻遐。
现代文：萧宝夤派将军侯终德前去攻打毛遐。
English: Xiao Baojun sent General Hou Shende to attack Mao Yu.

古文：终德还图宝夤，军至白门，宝夤始觉。
现代文：但侯终德却回兵打萧宝夤，当军队到达白门时，萧宝夤才发觉。
English: However, Hou Shende returned to fight Xiao Baojun, and when the army arrived at the White Gate, Xiao Baojun only found out.

古文：与终德战，败，携公主及其少子与部下百余骑从后门出，遂奔万俟丑奴。
现代文：他和侯终德作战，兵败，便带着公主和小儿子以及部下一百多骑从后门出走，投奔万俟丑奴。
English: He fought with Hou Zhende and was defeated, so he took the princess and his little son and more than a hundred cavalrymen out of the back door and went to Wanhu Ugly Bastard.

古文：丑奴以宝夤为太傅。
现代文：万俟丑奴任命他为太傅。
English: If you're going to be an asshole, make it a good one.

古文：尔硃天光遣贺拔岳等破丑奴于安定，追禽丑奴及宝夤，并送京师。
现代文：尔朱天光派遣贺拔岳等人在安定大败万俟丑奴军，并追捕了万俟丑奴和萧宝夤，把他们送回京城。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent He Batyue and others to defeat Wanyan Ugly Slave Army, and hunted down Wanyan Ugly Slave and Xiao Baojun, and sent them back to Beijing.

古文：诏置阊阖门外都街中，京师士女聚观，凡经三日。
现代文：皇帝传旨的把萧宝夤绑在阊阖门外的大街上，让京城的男女百姓围观，共有三天时间。
English: According to the emperor's order, Xiao Baojun was tied up on the street outside the city gate, and the men and women of the capital watched for a total of three days.

古文：吏部尚书李神俊、黄门侍郎高道穆并与宝夤素旧，二人相与左右，言于庄帝，云其逆迹事在前朝，冀将救免。
现代文：吏部尚书李神亻隽、黄门侍郎高道穆历来和萧宝夤有交情，两人帮他在庄帝的面前说好话，并讲萧宝夤背叛朝廷的事情是在前朝时发生的，希望能够救他免去死罪。
English: Shangshu Li Shenshun, the head of the personnel department, and Gao Daomu, the Yellow Gate attendant, have always been friends with Xiao Baojun. The two helped him say good words in front of Emperor Zhuang, and said that Xiao Baojun's betrayal of the imperial court occurred during the previous dynasty, hoping to save him from the death penalty.

古文：会应诏王道习时自外至，庄帝问道习在外所闻。
现代文：这时正好应诏王道习从外面进来，庄帝问他在外面听见什么没有？
English: At this time, King Daoxi came in from outside. Zhuangdi asked him if he heard anything outside.

古文：道习曰： 唯闻陛下欲不杀萧宝夤。人云李尚书、高黄门与宝夤周款，并居得言之地，必能全之。 
现代文：王道习说： 只是听说陛下不准备杀萧宝夤，人们都说李尚书、高黄门和萧宝夤交情深厚，两人又都是能在皇上面前进言的要人，一定能够救他。 
English: Wang Daoxi said, "I just heard that His Majesty is not going to kill Xiao Baojun. People say that Li Shangshu, Gao Huangmen and Xiao Baojun have a deep friendship. Both of them are important people who can speak in front of the emperor, and they will definitely be able to save him."

古文：道习因曰： 若谓宝夤逆在前朝，便将恕之；败在长安，为丑奴太傅，并非陛下御历之日？
现代文：接着，王道习又说： 如果说萧宝夤背叛朝廷是前朝发生的事情，就可以赦免的话，那么他这次在长安兵败时，任万俟丑奴的太傅，难道不是陛下登基后发生的事情？
English: Then, Wang Daoxi also said: If Xiao Baojun's betrayal of the imperial court is something that happened in the previous dynasty and can be pardoned, then isn't what happened after His Majesty ascended the throne, when he was defeated in the Battle of Chang'an and became the father of thousands of ugly slaves?

古文：贼臣不翦，法欲安施？ 
现代文：贼臣不除，法律又怎么实行呢？ 
English: If you don't expel traitors, how can you enforce the law?

古文：帝然其言，乃于太仆驼牛署赐死。
现代文：庄帝同意他的看法，便传旨将萧宝夤带到太仆驼牛署赐死。
English: Emperor Zhuang agreed with him and ordered Xiao Baojun to be taken to the Camels and Cows Office to be put to death.

古文：将刑，神俊携酒就之叙故旧，因对之下泣。
现代文：临刑前，李神亻隽带着酒食来看望萧宝夤，并重叙旧日的友情，他伤心地流下泪来。
English: Before his execution, Li Shenyao brought wine and food to visit Xiao Baojun, and recounted the old friendship. He shed tears with sadness.

古文：宝夤夷然自持，了不忧惧，唯称推天委命，恨不终臣节。
现代文：可是萧宝夤神色坦然，一点也没有愁苦恐惧的模样，只是说这是上天的旨意和自己命该如此，自恨没有能始终保全作为臣子的节操。
English: However, Xiao Baojun's expression was calm, and there was no appearance of sorrow or fear at all. He only said that this was God's will and that it was his destiny to do so. He hated himself for not being able to always maintain his discipline as a courtier.

古文：公主携男女就宝夤诀别，恸哭极哀，宝夤亦色貌不改。
现代文：公主带着他的儿女来向萧宝夤诀别，伤心地大哭不已，而萧宝夤依然神色不变。
English: The princess came with his children to bid farewell to Xiao Baojun, crying inconsolably, but Xiao Baojun still looked unchanged.

古文：宝夤三子皆公主所生，并凡劣。
现代文：萧宝夤有三个儿子，都是公主所生，全是平庸而低劣的人品。
English: Xiao Baojun had three sons, all of whom were born to princesses, and all of whom were of mediocre and inferior character.

古文：长子烈，复尚明帝妹建德公主，拜驸马都尉，坐宝夤反，伏法。
现代文：大儿子萧烈，娶孝明帝的妹妹建德公主，官封驸马都尉，因萧宝夤反叛而受牵连被杀。
English: Xiao Lei, the eldest son, married Xiao Mingdi's sister, Princess Jian De, and was given the official title of Captain of the Horse. He was implicated and killed because of Xiao Baolu's rebellion.

古文：次子权与小子凯射戏，凯矢激，中之，死。
现代文：次子萧权和小儿子萧凯互相用箭对射游戏，萧凯的箭快而强劲，射中了萧权，萧权死去。
English: The second son, Xiao Quan, and the younger son, Xiao Kai, played archery against each other. Xiao Kai's arrow was fast and strong, and it hit Xiao Quan, and Xiao Quan died.

古文：凯妻，长孙承业女也，轻薄无礼，公主数加罪责。
现代文：萧凯的妻子是长孙承业的女儿，为人十分轻薄又不懂礼貌，公主时常责备她。
English: Xiao Kai's wife was the daughter of the eldest grandson, Chengye. She was very frivolous and impolite, and the princess often scolded her.

古文：凯窃衔恨，妻复惑说之。
现代文：萧凯为此而怀恨在心，他的妻子也不断地在他面前说坏话。
English: Xiao Kai held a grudge for this, and his wife constantly spoke ill of him in front of him.

古文：天平中，凯遣奴害公主。
现代文：天平年间，萧凯派奴仆害死公主。
English: During the Heian period, Xiao Kai sent a slave to kill the princess.

古文：乃轘凯于东市。妻枭首，家遂灭。
现代文：依照法律萧凯被判以车裂的刑法，死于东市，他的妻子也被斩首，全家因而灭绝。
English: According to the law, Xiao Kai was sentenced to the criminal law of car cracking and died in Dongshi. His wife was also beheaded, and the whole family was thus exterminated.

古文：宝夤兄子赞。
现代文：萧宝夤的哥哥有个儿子叫萧赞。
English: Xiao Baojun's brother has a son named Xiao Zan.

古文：赞字德文，本名综。
现代文：萧赞，字德文，本名综。
English: Xiao Zan, Zhe German, real name Zhe.

古文：初，梁武灭齐，齐废主东昏侯宝卷宫人吴氏始孕，匿不言；及生赞，梁武以为己子，封豫章王。
现代文：当初，梁武帝灭齐，齐废主东昏侯萧宝卷的宫女吴氏刚刚怀孕，隐瞒了没说，等萧赞出生后，梁武帝以为是自己的儿子，封他为豫章王。
English: At first, Emperor Liangwu was killed, and Emperor Qi's dethroned lord Dongwu, Prince Xiao Baorong's concubine, Lady Wu, had just become pregnant. She concealed the fact and did not tell anyone. After Xiaozan was born, Emperor Liangwu thought he was his own son and named him King Yuanzhang.

古文：及长，学涉有才思。
现代文：长大后，他学识渊博，聪明有才气。
English: When he grew up, he was well-educated, clever and talented.

古文：其母告之以实。赞昼则谈谑，夜则衔悲涕泣。
现代文：他的母亲将实情告诉他，于是他白天谈笑嘲谑，晚上则悲伤哭泣。
English: His mother told him the truth and he spent his days laughing and joking and his nights crying.

古文：有济阴苗文宠、安定梁话，赞曲加礼接，割血自誓，布以心腹。宠、话感其情义，深相然诺。
现代文：有济阴人苗文宠、安定人梁话，萧赞对他们礼遇有加，割血发誓，向他们倾吐心腹大事，苗文宠、梁话为他的情义所感动，诚恳地应诺要帮助他。
English: Xiao Zan treated them with courtesy, swore blood oaths, and confided in them. Miao Wen Darling and Liang Zhe were moved by his feelings and sincerely promised to help him.

古文：会元法僧以彭城叛入梁，梁武命赞都督江北诸军事，镇彭城。
现代文：正逢元法僧在彭城反叛后归顺梁，梁武帝命萧赞统领指挥江北诸路军事，镇守彭城。
English: It was at this time that the former monks in Pengcheng rebelled and returned to Shunliang. Emperor Liangwu ordered Xiao Zan to take command of the military in the north of the Yangtze River and guard Pengcheng.

古文：时明帝遣安丰王延明、临淮王彧讨之，赞与宠、话夜奔延明。
现代文：当时明帝派安丰王延明、临淮王征讨萧赞，萧赞与苗文宠、梁话于夜间投奔延明。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming sent Anfeng Wang to Yanming and Linhuai Wang to solicit Xiaozan. Xiaozan and Miao Wenzai and Liang Zhe rushed to Yanming at night.

古文：孝昌元年秋，届于洛阳。
现代文：孝昌元年秋，他们到了洛阳。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Xiaochang, they arrived in Luoyang.

古文：陛见后，就馆举哀，追服三载。
现代文：朝见过皇帝后，就地在宾馆举行悼念仪式，服丧三年。
English: After seeing the emperor in the morning, a mourning ceremony was held at the hotel, and the mourning lasted for three years.

古文：宝夤时在关西，遣使观察，问其形貌，敛眉悲感。
现代文：萧宝夤当时在关西，派使者去探查情况，问了萧赞的形容面貌后，双眉紧锁，十分悲伤。
English: At that time, Xiao Baojun was in Kansai and sent an envoy to investigate the situation. After asking Xiao Zan to describe his appearance, his eyebrows were tightly locked and he was very sad.

古文：朝廷赏赐丰渥，礼遇隆厚，授司空，封高平郡公、丹杨王。
现代文：朝廷给他的赏赐丰厚，礼仪隆重，授予他司空之职，封为高平郡公、丹杨王。
English: The imperial court gave him a rich reward, a grand ceremony, awarded him the post of Siku, and made him the governor of Gaoping County and the King of Danyang.

古文：及宝夤反，赞怖，欲奔白鹿山，至河桥，为北中所执。
现代文：后来萧宝夤反叛，萧赞害怕了，想逃往白鹿山，到了河桥，被北中郎将拿获。
English: Later, Xiao Baojun rebelled, and Xiao Zan was afraid and wanted to escape to Bailu Mountain. When he reached the bridge, he was captured by Beizhonglu.

古文：朝议明其不相干预，仍蒙慰免。
现代文：在朝廷上商议后明确了他和萧宝夤之事并无关系，得到皇上的抚慰和加勉。
English: After deliberation in the imperial court, it was made clear that he had nothing to do with the matter of Xiao Baojun, and he received the emperor's consolation and encouragement.

古文：建义初，转司徒，迁太尉，尚帝姊寿阳长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：建义初年，他转任为司徒，升为太尉，娶皇帝之姐寿阳长公主为妻，拜为驸马都尉。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was transferred to the post of Stowe, promoted to the rank of captain, married the emperor's sister, Princess Shouyang, and became the captain of the horse.

古文：出为都督齐州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：出任为都督齐州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Qizhou, the general of the imperial cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments.

古文：宝夤见禽，赞拜表请宝夤命。
现代文：萧宝夤被擒获后，萧赞上表朝廷请求保全萧宝夤的性命。
English: After Xiao Baojun was captured, Xiao Zan petitioned the imperial court to preserve Xiao Baojun's life.

古文：尔硃兆入洛，为城人赵洛周所逐。
现代文：尔朱兆攻入洛阳后，萧赞被齐州人赵洛周赶走。
English: After Zhu Zhao invaded Luoyang, Xiao Zan was driven away by Zhao Luo Zhou, a native of Qizhou.

古文：公主被录送京，尔硃世隆欲相陵逼。公主守操被害。
现代文：公主被捕押送到京城，尔朱世隆想要对她施暴，公主因严守贞操而被杀害。
English: The princess was arrested and escorted to the capital, where Er Shulong tried to rape her. The princess was killed for her strict adherence to chastity.

古文：赞既弃州，为沙门，潜诣长白山。未几，至阳平，病卒。
现代文：萧赞逃出州城后，做了和尚，偷偷来到长白山，不久，到了阳平，因病去世。
English: After Xiao Zan escaped from the state capital, he became a monk and secretly came to Changbai Mountain. Soon, he came to Yangping and died of illness.

古文：赞机辩，文义颇有可观，而轻薄俶傥，犹有父风。
现代文：萧赞机智善辩，所写文章的内容和立意颇有可取之处，但他为人轻薄风流，还有他父亲的遗风。
English: Xiao Zan is witty and eloquent, and the content and intention of his articles are quite commendable, but he is a frivolous person, as well as his father's legacy.

古文：普泰初，迎其丧，以王礼与公主合葬嵩山。
现代文：普泰初年，将他的遗体接回，按照王礼和公主合葬在嵩山。
English: In the first year of Putai, his remains were brought back and buried together with the princess in Songshan according to the royal custom.

古文：元象初，吴人盗其丧还江东，梁武犹以为子，祔葬萧氏墓焉。
现代文：元象初年，吴人将他的遗体偷回江东，梁武帝还把他看成是自己的儿子，将他与萧氏祖基合葬在一起。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhao, the Wu people stole his body back to the east of the Yangtze River. Emperor Liang Wu also regarded him as his own son and buried him together with the founder of the Xiao clan.

古文：赞，江南有子，在魏无后。
现代文：萧赞在江南有儿子，在魏没留下后代。
English: Xiao Zan had a son in the south of the Yangtze River, but he left no descendants in Wei.

古文：萧正表，字公仪，梁武帝弟临川王宏之子也。
现代文：卢伯源，小名阳乌，性情温和儒雅，不重私利，颇有他祖父的风范，他专注于学业，和家中人相处和睦。承袭了侯爵之位，按常规降为伯爵。
English: Lu Bo Yuan, nicknamed Yang Wu, was mild-mannered and gentle, did not care about personal gain, and had the demeanor of his grandfather. He focused on his studies and got along well with his family. He inherited the position of marquis and was reduced to count as usual.

古文：在梁封山阴县侯，位北徐州刺史，镇钟离。
现代文：后来逐渐加官为秘书监，本州大中正。当时孝文帝想要立冯皇后，先征求卢伯源的意见。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen wanted to establish Empress Feng, and first sought the opinion of Lu Bo Yuan.

古文：正表长七尺九寸，虽质貌丰美，而性理短暗。
现代文：卢伯源请皇帝命人再占卜一下。皇帝道： 因为她是先后的侄女，朕主意已定。 卢伯源道 ：虽然这是皇帝的吩咐，但臣仍保留意见。 
English: Lu Bo Yuan asked the emperor to order someone to do a second divination. The emperor said, "Since she is my niece, my mind is made up." Lu Bo Yuan said, "Although this is the emperor's order, I still have reservations."

古文：初，梁武未有子，以正表兄西丰侯正德为子。
现代文：等到后来朝臣集体商议，卢伯源仍持原来的意见，冯诞当时很得宠，对他怀恨在心。
English: Later, when the courtiers held a collective discussion, Lu Bo Yuan still held the original opinion. Feng Xue was very favored at that time and held a grudge against him.

古文：及自有子，正德归本，私怀忿憾，以正光三年，背梁奔魏。
现代文：卢伯源并没放在心上。后来孝文帝商议伐齐之事，卢伯源上表认为皇帝御驾亲征，运输很难跟上。
English: Lu Peiyuan did not take it to heart. Later, Emperor Xiaowen discussed the matter of unification, and Lu Peiyuan thought that the emperor would personally lead the expedition, and transportation would be difficult to keep up with.

古文：魏朝以其人才庸劣，不礼焉。
现代文：皇帝虽然下诏否定了他的奏表，但措辞婉转客气。不久因齐武帝驾崩，所以没有出兵。
English: Although the emperor issued an edict denying his report, he couched his words in polite terms. Emperor Qiwu died soon after, so no troops were dispatched.

古文：寻逃归梁，梁武不之罪，封为临贺王。
现代文：当时泾州的羌人叛乱，攻破城池。卢伯源带领步、骑兵六千人号称三万，从容进兵，不到三旬，贼兵逃的逃，散的散。
English: At that time, the Lushan Rebellion broke through the city. Lubaoyuan led the march, with six thousand cavalry, said to be thirty thousand, marched into the army calmly, less than thirty minutes, the robbers fled and scattered.

古文：侯景将济江，知正德有恨，密与交通，许推为主，正德以船迎之。
现代文：投降的有数万人，卢伯源只诛杀了首恶，其余的都不再追究。皇帝下诏任命他兼任侍中。
English: There were tens of thousands of people who surrendered. Lu Bo Yuan only killed the top villain, the rest would not be pursued. The emperor issued an edict appointing him to serve as an aide-de-camp.

古文：景度，攻扬州。
现代文：当初卢伯源十四岁时，曾经去过长安。
English: When Lu Boyuan was 14 years old, he once went to Chang'an.

古文：正表闻正德为侯景所推，盘桓不赴援。景寻以正表为南兗州刺史，封南郡王。
现代文：临走时，五十多人为他饯行，在渭河北岸话别，有个相士扶风人王逵道： 诸位都不如这位卢郎，虽然以后官位和他真实才干不相称，但能获得很高的声望，名望将超过三公及宰相等重臣。
English: When he was about to leave, more than fifty people walked with him. As they said goodbye on the north bank of the Wei River, a comrade-in-arms, Wang Xuan, said: You are all not as good as this Lulang. Although his official position and his true talent are not commensurate, he can obtain a high reputation. His reputation will exceed that of the three princes and senior ministers such as the prime minister.

古文：正表遂于欧阳立栅，断梁援军。
现代文：二十多年后，你将奉皇帝之命节制关西，希望您不要忘记我。 
English: After more than 20 years, you will govern Kansai according to the emperor's order. I hope you will not forget me.

古文：南兗州刺史南康王萧会理遣兵击破之。
现代文：这次出兵，相士已经年过八十，到军门求见，叙述一生之事。不久，任仪曹尚书。
English: This time, the consort, who was over 80 years old, went to the military gate to seek an audience and recount the story of his life. Soon, he was appointed Cao Shangshu.

古文：正表走还钟离，以武定七年，据州内属，封兰陵郡王。寻除侍中、太子太保、开府仪同三司。薨，赠司空公，谥曰昭烈。
现代文：后来齐的雍州刺史曹武请求归降，皇上任命卢伯源为使持节、安南将军，统率前锋各路军马，径直开赴樊、邓两地。
English: Later, the Yongzhou general Cao Wu requested to surrender, and the emperor appointed Lu Bo Yuan as the envoy and general of Annan, leading the vanguard of all the horses and horses, and went straight to the two places of Shao and Deng.

古文：子广寿。
现代文：谥号 懿 。
English: 號.

