古文：三国攻秦，入函谷。
现代文：齐、韩、魏三国联合攻打秦国，侵入函谷关。
English: The three countries of Qi, Han, and Wei jointly attacked Qin and invaded Hanyuguan.

古文：秦王谓楼缓曰： 三国之兵深矣，寡人欲割河东而讲。 
现代文：秦昭王对相国楼缓说： 三国的兵力很强大，我想割让河东以求和解。 
English: Qin Zhao Wang said slowly to Guolou: The military forces of the three countries are very strong, I want to cede Hedong to seek reconciliation.

古文：对曰： 割河东，大费也；免于国患，大利也。
现代文：楼缓回答说 割让河东损失太大；再说避免祸患又是国家根本利益所在。
English: Lou Ye replied that the loss of ceding Hedong was too great; moreover, avoiding the disaster was the fundamental interest of the country.

古文：此父兄之任也。
现代文：这是父兄交给的责任。
English: It's a responsibility given to them by their parents.

古文：王何不召公子池而问焉? 
现代文：大王为什么不召见公子他来商量一下呢？ 
English: Why didn't the great king summon him to consult with him?

古文：王召公子池而问焉，对曰： 讲亦悔，不讲亦悔。 
现代文：于是秦王召见公子他询问此事，公子他回答说： 割地讲和要后悔，不割地讲和也要后悔。 
English: So King Qin summoned the nobleman to inquire about the matter. The nobleman replied, "If you make peace, you will regret it. If you do not make peace, you will also regret it."

古文：王曰： 何也? 
现代文：秦王说： 这是为什么呢？ 
English: Chu Huai Wangzi: Why?

古文：对曰： 王割河东而讲，三国虽去，王必曰： 惜矣!
现代文：公子他回答说： 大王割让河东讲和，齐、韩、魏三国虽然收兵离去，但大王必定要说： 可惜我的土地了！
English: He replied, "The Great King ceded Hedong to make peace, and although Qi, Han, and Wei withdrew, the Great King must have said, 'What a pity about my land!'"

古文：三国且去，吾特以三城从之。 
现代文：三国即将退兵的时候，我们偏偏拿出三座城池送给他们。 
English: When the three countries were about to withdraw, we took out three castles and gave them to them.

古文：此讲之悔也。
现代文：这是讲和后的悔恨。
English: This is the remorse after the peace talks.

古文：王不讲，三国入函谷，咸阳必危，王又曰： 惜矣!吾爱三城而不讲。 
现代文：如果大王不割地讲和，三国的军队攻破函谷关。咸阳必定危险了，大王又会说： 真后悔，我们因为爱惜三座城池而不去讲和。
English: If the great king were to declare peace unconditionally, the armies of the three countries would break through the barrier of Hangeul. Hamyang would certainly be in danger, and the great king would say, "I really regret that we did not declare peace because we cherished the three cities."

古文：此又不讲之悔也。 
现代文：这是不讲和后的悔恨。 
English: This is the remorse after not making peace.

古文：王曰： 钧吾悔也，宁亡三城而悔，无危咸阳而悔也。
现代文：秦王说： 既然讲和与不讲和都同样是悔恨，我宁可因为失去三城而悔恨，也不愿意让咸阳遭到危险而悔恨。
English: King Qin said, "Since it is the same to regret whether to make peace or not to make peace, I would rather regret losing the three cities than regret putting Xianyang in danger."

古文：寡人决讲矣。 
现代文：我决定割地讲和了。 
English: I decided to make peace.

古文：卒使公子池以三城讲于三国，之兵乃退。
现代文：终于让公子他用三座城和齐、韩、魏三国讲和，这样三国的军队才退去。
English: Finally, he asked the prince to use the three cities to make peace with Qi, Han, and Wei, so that the armies of the three countries would retreat.

