古文：丁丑闰四月初八日夜雨霏霏，四山叆叇，昧爽放舟。
现代文：丁丑年闰四月初八日夜雨霏霏，四围群山浓云笼罩，黎明开船。
English: On the night of the 8th day of the 4th month of the Dingwuxian leap year, it rained heavily, the surrounding mountains were covered with thick clouds, and the ship left at dawn.

古文：湘江在路东紫云岩西。又南三里，双桥。
现代文：往西行船三十里，午后分道走，顾仆乘船到桂林，我同静闻从湘江南岸登岸这是山角释，地名叫黄沙。
English: We sailed west for thirty miles and split up in the afternoon. Gu Min took the boat to Guilin, and I quietly heard that we disembarked from the south bank of the Hunan River. This was Shan Kok Shi, a place called Huang Sha.

古文：有水自西大岭注于湘。
现代文：往西南行，高大的松树夹道而立，五里，到黄沙铺。
English: Heading southwest, tall pine trees line the road, and it's five miles to the yellow sand shop.

古文：又七里，石月铺，其西岭曰黄花大岭。
现代文：湘江在路的东边紫云岩的西面。又往南行三里，到双桥。又走七里，到石月铺，它西面的山岭叫黄花大岭。
English: The Xiangjiang River is on the east side of the road on the west side of Ziyunyan. It also goes south for three miles to Shuangqiao. It also goes seven miles to Shi Yuepu. The mountain range on its west side is called Huanghua Daling.

古文：又西南五里，出山陇行平畴间。
现代文：又往西南行五里，走出山陇行走在平坦的田野间。
English: Another five miles to the southwest, out of the mountains and through flat fields.

古文：又一里，上小岭，舍官道，深溪一十里官道至太平辅，又十里至全。右入山。
现代文：又走五里，到深溪铺。过铺后一里，有条溪水自西面的大山往东流注，小石桥跨在溪上，应当就是深溪了。又走一里，登上一座小岭，离开了官道，从右侧入山。
English: I walked another five miles to the deep creek. One mile after passing the creek, a stream flowed eastward from the large mountain to the west. A small stone bridge spanned the stream, which should have been the deep creek. I walked another mile, climbed a small ridge, left the official road, and entered the mountain from the right side.

古文：西向大山行，二里，直抵山下，又二里，宿于牛头冈蒋姓家。
现代文：向西朝着大山走，二里，直抵山下，又走二里，住宿在牛头冈姓蒋的人家。
English: Walk west towards the mountain, two miles, straight to the bottom of the mountain, walk another two miles, stay at the home of a man named Jiang in Niu Tougang.

古文：夜大雨。
现代文：夜里下大雨。
English: It rained heavily at night.

古文：初九日冒雨西行五里，至砻岩普润寺。
现代文：初九日冒雨往西行五里，到了确岩普润寺。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, I drove west for five miles in the rain, and arrived at Jiuyan Purun Temple.

古文：寺有宋守赵彦晖诗碑，宋李时亮记。
现代文：寺中有宋代州官赵彦晖题诗的石碑，宋代李时亮的记文。
English: In the temple, there is a stone monument inscribed with a poem by Zhao Yanyan, a prefectural official in the Song Dynasty, and a document inscribed by Li Shiliang in the Song Dynasty.

古文：岩洞前门东向后门北向，西入甚奥，中有立笋垂柱。
现代文：岩洞的前洞口向东，如桥一样，高出水面约三十丈；后洞口向北，浸入水中约十五丈。
English: The front entrance of the cave faces east, like a bridge, and is about 30 meters above the water; the back entrance faces north, and is about 15 meters underwater.

古文：出岩，西三里，有小石山兀立路旁。
现代文：泉水自山后冲出石窟分三级流下，所以称为 砒 。
English: The spring water rushes out of the grotto from behind the mountain and flows down in three stages, which is why it is called.

古文：又西三里，张家村，南五里，冈岭高下，出平坞中西行一里，上大冲，西行半里，为福寿庵，饭于庵。
现代文：向西进去十分深邃，洞中有竖立的石笋和下垂的石柱。出了岩洞，往西三里，有座小石山竖立在路旁。又向西三里，到张家村，村后的大山叫回龙岩。往南五里，冈峦山岭高下不一，走到平坦的山坞往西行一里，登上大冲，向西行半里，是福寿庵。
English: It is very deep to the west, and there are standing stalagmites and sagging stone pillars in the cave. Out of the cave, three miles to the west, there is a small stone mountain standing by the roadside. Another three miles to the west, to Zhangjia village, the mountain behind the village is called Longyan. Five miles to the south, there are different heights of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of the Mountains of

古文：此山为郡守柳开讲道处。院为林蚆所建，与睢、岳、嵩，庐四书院共著。其南有泉一方，中有石题曰 虎踞石 。
现代文：在庵中吃了饭，又向西半里，往西北登上柳山，有座楼阁，是曹学侄题写的匾额，这是柳仲涂书院。又上去是寸月亭，亭子前边是清湘书院。它的南面有一塘泉水，水中有块岩石，题为 虎踞石 。
English: Having eaten dinner in the hermitage, they went half a mile to the west and northwest to climb Liushan Mountain. There was a mansion, inscribed by Cao Xue's nephew, which was the Liu Zhongtu Academy. They also went up to Cangyue Pavilion, and in front of the pavilion was the Qingxiang Academy. To the south of it was a pond of spring water, with a rock in the water, entitled the Tiger Rock.

古文：由此蹑岭，逾而西，一里，为慈慧庵。
现代文：由此登岭，越岭往西，一里，是慈慧庵。
English: From there, climb the ridge, cross the ridge to the west, one mile, is Cihui An.

古文：转北一里，为狮子岩，岩僧见性。
现代文：转向北一里，是狮子岩，住宿在狮子岩南面的清泉庵。
English: Turning north one mile, it is Lion Rock, with accommodation at Seisen-an on the south side of Lion Rock.

古文：初十日由狮子岩南下，二里，至湘山寺。
现代文：初十日由狮子岩往南下行，二里，到湘山寺。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I went south from Lion Rock, two miles, to Xiangshan Temple.

古文：由寺东侧入，登大殿，寄行李。
现代文：由寺东侧进去，登上大殿，寄放了行李。
English: Enter from the east side of the temple, go up to the main hall, and deposit your luggage.

古文：东半里，入全州西门。
现代文：往东半里，进入全州城西门。
English: Half a mile to the east, enter the west gate of Jeonju.

古文：东至小南门，三江合处。约舟待于兴安。
现代文：经过州衙前，出大南门，往东到小南门，约定船在兴安等候。
English: After passing the state gate, go out of the big south gate, go east to the small south gate, and wait for the agreed ship in Xing'an.

古文：复入城，出西门至寺，登大殿，拜无量寿佛塔。
现代文：再次进出西门到了寺中，登上大殿，拜了无量寿佛塔。
English: I went in and out of the West Gate again, entered the temple, ascended the main hall, and paid homage to the Immeasurable Life Pagoda.

古文：无量寿佛成果于唐咸通间，《传灯录》未载，号全真，故州以全名。
现代文：塔后有块飞来石。
English: There is a flying stone behind the tower.

古文：肉身自万历初段，丙戌又毁，后又毁。从塔东上长廊，西有观音阁。
现代文：从塔东边走上长廊，西边有观音阁。
English: Walk up the promenade from the east side of the tower, and there is a Guanyin Pavilion on the west side.

古文：下寺，由寺西溯罗江一里，上卷云阁，绝壁临江。有无量指甲印石，作细点字六个。
现代文：绝壁上有一朵莲花，凹入石壁间，白色的花瓣黑色的石崖；有块上有无量寿佛指甲印的岩石，写着六个细点组成的字。
English: There is a lotus flower on the cliff, recessed between the stone walls, white petals on the black cliff; there is a rock with the immeasurable Buddha's fingernail mark, written with a word consisting of six dots.

古文：又西，名玉龙泉。
现代文：又往西，一个山洞面临江流，泉水从洞东侧裂石中流出，名叫玉龙泉。
English: Further to the west, a cave faces the river. Spring water flows out of the cracked rock on the east side of the cave. It is called the Jade Dragon Spring.

古文：又西，有一石峰高竖如当关者，上大书 无量寿佛 四大字。
现代文：再往西，有一座石峰高高竖立如同把守关口的人一样，上面写着 无量寿佛 四个大字。
English: Further to the west, there is a stone pinnacle standing tall like a man guarding the gate, with the words "Immeasurable Life Buddha" written on it.

古文：共五里，又西为断桥。
现代文：共行五里，又往西是断桥。
English: Five miles together, and a broken bridge to the west.

古文：又西十里，度石蚬冈。
现代文：又向西十里，越过石规冈。
English: Another ten miles to the west, over the stone hill.

古文：石规，《志》作石燕，南为龙隐洞，洞门西向。出洞而西，即为桫木渡桥，宿。
现代文：南面是龙隐洞，一座小山独立在江上，出洞后往西走，就是秒木渡桥，住下来。
English: To the south is Longyin Cave. A small hill stands alone on the river. After emerging from the cave, walk west to Secoku Ferry Bridge and settle down.

古文：北入峡十里为阎家村。又五里为白竹江，饭于李念嵩家。
现代文：桥横跨的水流往东在龙水流出河口，山峰耸秀，相对而立。十一日从渡桥往西北行，五里是石鼓村，又走三里是白沃村，过七里冈是寨墟。
English: The water flow across the bridge flows eastward at the mouth of the Longshui River, and the mountain peaks stand opposite. On the 11th day, from the bridge to the northwest, it is five miles to Shigu Village, three miles to Baiwo Village, and seven miles to the hill.

古文：云开日丽，望见西北有山甚屼突，问之为钩挂山，其上又有金宝顶，甚奇异。
现代文：往北进峡是山川口，行十里是阎家村。又五里是白竹江，在李念嵩家吃了饭。云开日丽，望见西北方有座山十分突兀，间知是钩挂山，它上面又有个金宝顶，非常奇异。
English: Heading north into the gorge is the mouth of the Yamakawa River, going ten miles is Yanjia village. Another five miles is the Baizhu River, and I had dinner at Li Nian Song's house. In broad daylight, I saw a mountain in the northwest that was very abrupt, I knew it was a hooked mountain, and it had a gold top on it, very strange.

古文：始问一僧，曰： 去金宝有六十里。 
现代文：起初问一僧人，说： 离金宝顶有六十里。 
English: At first, a monk asked, saying, "It's sixty miles from the top of Jinbao Mountain.

古文：复问一人，曰： 由四川岭只犬里。 时已西南向宝顶，遂还白竹桥边，溯西北江而上。
现代文：再问一个人，说： 由四川岭走只有兰十里  此时已向西南朝着金宝顶走去，于是返回白竹桥边，溯西北流来的江水而上。
English: He asked another person and said, "From Sichuan Ridge, it's only 10 miles to Lan. At this time, I was already walking southwest toward Jinbao Top, so I returned to the edge of the Bai Zhu Bridge and followed the river water flowing northwest.

古文：五里，进峡口，两山壁立夹溪，甚峭。
现代文：五里，进了峡口，两旁的山墙壁样夹住溪流耸立，非常陡峭。
English: Five miles into the gorge, the mountain walls on both sides of the stream rise up, very steep.

古文：路沿溪西北崖上行，缘崖高下屈曲，十里出峡，为南峒。
现代文：路沿着溪流西北的山崖上行，随着山崖的高低起伏曲曲折折，十里走出峡谷，是南炯。
English: The road ascends along the cliff northwest of the stream, twists and turns with the ups and downs of the cliff, and ten miles out of the canyon is Nanlu.

古文：有一僧同行，曰： 四川路已没，须从打狗岭上，至大竹坪而登，始有路。 遂随之行。
现代文：听说从这里往北走五里洞就到了尽头，可由四川岭到达金宝顶。有一个僧人同行，说： 四川岭的路已经隐没，必须从打狗岭上走，到大竹坪后登山，这才有路石 便跟随他走。
English: I heard that if you walk north from here, you will reach the end of Wuli Cave, and you can reach Jinbao Peak from Sichuan Ridge. A monk who was walking with me said, "The road to Sichuan Ridge has disappeared. You have to walk from the top of Tagou Ridge to the top of the mountain after Dazhuping. Only then will you find the roadblocks." So I followed him.

古文：由溪桥度而西上岭，有瀑布在其左腋，其上峻极。
现代文：由溪上的桥过去往西上岭，有条瀑布在山岭左旁，岭上极其陡峻。
English: From the bridge over the stream to the West Upland, there is a waterfall on the left side of the ridge, which is extremely steep.

古文：共三十里至打狗凹，已暮，宿于兴龙庵，
现代文：共行三十里来到打狗凹，已经天黑，住宿在兴龙庵，庵北的高岭就是金宝顶了。
English: After walking for thirty miles, we arrived in Takao, where it was already dark. We stayed at Xinglong An, and Gaoling to the north of An is the top of Jinbao Mountain.

古文：十二日由兴龙庵西上，始沿涯北转，钩挂山在其北，为本山隐而不见。三下三上，三度坳曲，共三里，逾土地坳，西望新宁江已在山麓。下山五里，为大竹坪。
现代文：十二日由兴龙庵往西上山，并始时沿着溪岸向北转，三次下走三度上山，三次越过山坳中的山弯，共三里，穿过土地坳，向西远望新宁江已在山麓下山五里，是大竹坪。
English: On the 12th day, I went up the mountain from Xinglong's hermitage to the west, and at the beginning, I turned north along the riverbank, walked down three times, walked up the mountain three times, crossed the mountain bend in the mountains three times, a total of three miles, crossed the land fold, and looked westward. The Xinning River had descended five miles at the foot of the mountain, and it was Dazhuping.

古文：由坪右觅导登金宝者，一人方插秧，送余二里，逾上岭，又下一里，至大鼻山。
现代文：在坪右寻找领路登金宝顶的人，一个人正在插秧，送了我二里地，越过一道岭，又下山一里，到了大鼻山。
English: The person who was looking for a guide to the top of the golden treasure in Pinghu, a person was planting, and sent me two miles, over a ridge, and down a mile, to the Big Nose Mountain.

古文：余因寄行李于山下刘秦川家。
现代文：我于是把行李寄放在山下刘秦川家中。
English: So I left my luggage at Liu Qinchuan's house in Yamashita.

古文：兄弟二人俱望八，妻寿同。
现代文：他家唯有老年人在家，年轻人已出门。
English: In his family, only the elderly are at home, the young people have left.

古文：其家惟老者在，少者已出。余置行李，由村后渡溪，溯而上二里，当逾岭西登大道，误随溪直东上，二里路穷。还至中道，览岐草中，西二里，逾岭上，得南来大道，乃从之。
现代文：我安置了行李，由村后渡过澳水，溯溪而上二里，本应越岭向西登上大道，错随溪流一直往东上走，二里后路断了返回到半路上，在草中找到岔道，往西二里，越到岭上，找到南边来的大道，便顺着大道走。
English: I placed my luggage, crossed the Oshui River from the back of the village, followed the creek for two miles, and should have crossed the ridge to the west to board the avenue. I mistakenly followed the stream all the way to the east. After two miles, the road was broken and I returned to the middle of the road. I found a fork in the grass. Two miles to the west, I crossed the ridge, found the avenue coming from the south, and walked along the avenue.

古文：北二里，又登岭，又北上一里，为旧角庵基。
现代文：往北二里，又登岭，又向北上走一里，是旧角庵的废址。
English: Two miles to the north, another climb to the ridge, another mile to the north, is the waste site of the old Kakunodate.

古文：由基后丛木中上六七里，不得道，还宿刘家。
现代文：由废址后的丛林中上行六七里，找不到路，回来住在刘家。
English: From the jungle behind the waste site, he walked uphill for six or seven miles, couldn't find the road, and came back to live in Liu's house.

古文：刘后有涧，其上一里，悬峡飞瀑，宛转而下，修竹回岩，更相掩映。
现代文：刘家屋后有条山涧，它上边一里处，山峡高悬瀑布飞流，蜿蜒而下，翠竹修长，岩右回绕，更相掩映。
English: There is a mountain ridge behind Liu's house. A mile above it, there is a canyon with a high-hanging waterfall, winding down. The green bamboo is slender, and the rock wraps around to the right, further obscuring each other.

古文：归途采笋竹中，闻声寻壑，踏月乃返。
现代文：归途中在竹林中采笋子，听到水声找到壑谷，踏着月光返回来。
English: On the way back, I picked hazelnuts in the bamboo forest, heard the sound of the water, found Shibuya, and walked back in the moonlight.

古文：十三日早饭于刘，倩刘孙为导，乃腰镳裹餐，仍从村后夹涧上。
现代文：十三日在刘家吃早饭，请刘秦川的孙子当向导，于是在腰间擂上飞镖裹上饭食，仍从村后狭窄的山涧上行。
English: On the 13th day, having breakfast at Liu's house, he asked Liu Qinchuan's grandson to be his guide, so he wrapped a dart around his waist to catch the food, and still walked up from the narrow mountains behind the village.

古文：一里，中道至飞瀑处，即西攀岭，路比前上更小。一里，至南来大道，三里，逾岭隘，一里，至角庵基。
现代文：一里，中途到了飞流的瀑布之处，立即向西登岭，路比前边的更小 一里、走到从南面来的大道，就是从南面大源上通此处的路。三乳穿过岭上的隘口，一里，来到角庵废址。
English: One mile, halfway to the waterfall of the flying stream, immediately go to Xidenling, the road is smaller than the front one mile, go to the avenue coming from the south, that is, the road leading to this place from the source of the south. Sanren through the pass on the ridge, one mile, came to the waste site of the corner hut.

古文：复从丛竹中东北上，其观音竹更大而笋多，又采而携之。
现代文：再次从庵后丛林中伏下身体蛇行进去，约四黑，穿越丛林荆棘与上次一样，不久就从右侧山崖上的丛林中蛇行而上。
English: Once again, I crept from the jungle behind the hermitage, about four o'clock in the morning, through the thorns of the jungle, just like the last time, and soon I crept from the jungle on the cliff on the right.

古文：前采置路侧者较细，不能尽肩，弃之。又上一里至绝顶。
现代文：原来前次是从东面的峡谷中一直上来，所以扰不到路，然而路虽然不同，丛林荆棘却恻司，从岔道又行二里，从观音竹丛中行走。又上走一里来到绝顶。
English: Originally, the previous time, I had come all the way up from the canyon in the east, so I couldn't disturb the cranes. However, although the path was different, the thorns in the jungle had disappeared. I walked another two miles from the footpath and from the Guanyin bamboo thicket. I walked another mile up to the very top.

古文：丛密中无由四望，登树践枝，终不畅目。
现代文：在浓密的丛林中无从四处远望，爬上树踩着树枝看，始终不能畅快观望。
English: In the dense jungle, you can't see far away from everywhere. Climbing up a tree and stepping on the branches, you can't always enjoy the view.

古文：已而望竹浪中出一大石如台，乃梯跻其上，则群山历历。
现代文：随即望见竹浪中现出一块大石如像高台，便登到石上，只见群山历历在目。
English: Then I saw a big rock appear in the bamboo wave, like a hill, and I climbed onto it. I could only see the mountains stretching before my eyes.

古文：遂取饭，与静闻就裹巾中以丛竹枝拨而餐之。
现代文：于是取出饭，与静闻就着裹饭的方巾采断竹枝拨着吃饭。
English: So he took out the rice and ate it while quietly listening to the swan, which was wearing a rice-wrapped square scarf and cutting bamboo branches.

古文：既而导者益从林中采笋，而静闻采得竹菰数枚，玉菌一颗，黄白俱可爱，余亦采菌数枚。
现代文：随即向导又到竹林中去采笋，静闻采到了几个竹扰，一朵玉菌，笋黄菌白全都很可爱，我也采到几朵菌。
English: Then the guide went to the bamboo forest to pick bamboo shoots, Jing He picked up a few bamboo shoots, one yakitori, and the yellow yakitori were all lovely, and I also picked up a few mushrooms.

古文：从旧路下山，抵刘已昏黑，乃瀹菌煨笋而餐之。
现代文：从原路下山，来到刘家时天已经昏黑，便煮菌烤笋吃了饭。
English: From the original road down the mountain, when I came to Liu's house, it was already dark, so I cooked mushrooms, roasted quail and ate rice.

古文：十四日别刘而行。
现代文：十四日告别刘秦川后动身。
English: After bidding farewell to Liu Qinchuan on the 14th, he left.

古文：随溪西下一里，得大竹坪来道。
现代文：随溪流向西下行一里，遇上从大竹坪来的路。
English: I followed the stream westward for a mile and came across a road coming from Dazhuping.

古文：又三里为大源，置桥其上，有亭随桥数楹，桥曰潮桥。
现代文：我走过桥，向东登岭而上，这就是涌流的瀑布南面的山岭了。
English: I walked across the bridge and headed east up the ridge, which is the mountain range south of the gushing waterfall.

古文：由桥以西为大源村。逾一岭出西堰，又西四里为陈墓源，有瀑自东山峡中涌跃而出，与东岭溪合，有桥跨其会处，余渡桥，东跻岭而上，下岭从坳中行。
现代文：二里，平缓地行走在岭脊上，北望北宝顶岿然屹立，峡中的水流在近处，从打狗岭南面的山崖直逼到山下。南望新宁江江流，远远地从巾子岭横隔在南宝顶的西方。岭脊西南方有座山峰尖尖突起，正位于陈墓源的河口，不久路渐渐通到它下边。二里，往南下岭从山坳中前行。
English: For two miles, walk gently on the ridge. Looking north, the North Pao Ding stands tall. The water flow in the gorge is nearby, from the cliff on the south side of the Ta Gu Ling to the bottom of the mountain. Looking south, the new Ningjiang River flows, far from the Hanzi Ridge across the west of the South Pao Ding. There is a mountain peak in the southwest of the ridge, which is located at the mouth of the Chen Tomb source, and soon the road will gradually pass under it. Two miles, go south down the ridge from the middle of the mountains.

古文：又二里，逾一小岭，一里至苏家大坪，聚居甚盛，皆苏姓也。
现代文：又走二里，越过一座小岭，一里来到苏家大坪，村落居民十分兴盛，都是姓苏的。
English: They walked another two miles, over a small ridge, and one mile to Sujiadaiping. The residents of the village are very prosperous, and all of them are surnamed Su.

古文：饭于苏怀江家。下午大雨，怀江坚留，遂止其处。
现代文：在苏怀江家吃饭下午下大雨，怀江坚决挽留，便住在他这里。
English: When it rained heavily in the afternoon after eating at Su Huaijiang's home, Huaijiang resolutely stayed behind and stayed with him.

古文：十五日过山路。
现代文：十五日走过山路。
English: On the 15th, I walked through the mountains.

古文：十六日快乐庵。十七日宿白云庵，晤相宗师。
现代文：于是登上定心石，经过圣水涯，再由舍身崖登上飞锡峰的绝顶，返回白云庵。住在白云庵会见了相宗禅师。
English: So he climbed up the Centering Stone, passed through the Sacred Waters, and then climbed from the cliff to the top of the Fei Xian Peak, returning to Baiyun An. He met a Zen master of the Xiang Zong sect while staying at Baiyun An.

古文：十八日晨餐后，别相宗，由东路下山。
现代文：十八日早餐后，告别了相宗，由东路下山。
English: After breakfast on the 18th, I said goodbye to my roommate and headed down the mountain on the east road.

古文：一里余，则路旁峭石分列，置悬级出其间，是为天门。
现代文：一里多，就见路旁峻峭的山石分为两列，山石之间修有悬梯，这是天门。
English: After more than a mile, I saw that the steep rocks by the side of the road were divided into two rows, and there was a suspended ladder between the rocks. This was Heaven's Gate.

古文：门外有耸石立路右，名金刚石，上大书 白云洞天 。
现代文：天门外有高耸的岩石立在路右，名叫金刚石，上面写着 白云洞天 几个大字。
English: Outside the Heaven's Gate, there is a towering rock standing on the right side of the road. It is called the Diamond, with the words "Baiyun Cave Heaven" written on it.

古文：从此历磴而下，危峭逾于西路。
现代文：从此地沿石橙而下，危险陡峭超过西路。
English: From here it's a perilously steep descent along the craggy, overhanging West Road.

古文：西庵之名快乐，岂亦以路之坦耶！
现代文：西边的寺庵名叫快乐，莫非也是因为道路平坦而起的名吗？
English: The temple and hermitage on the west side is called Happy. Is it because the road is flat?

古文：又四里，过题龙庵，先是，从观音静室遥见两人入箐棘中，问云知为掘青暑者，而不辩其为何。
现代文：又走四里，路过题龙庵，庵门向北往东下行一里左右，南望那叉山飞流的瀑布悬空而坠。先前从金宝顶就窥见到了，到了此地才看清它高高的好像在九天之上。
English: After walking another four miles, I passed the dragon's hermitage and the hermitage gate and walked about one mile north to east. Looking south, I saw the waterfall of the flying stream of the Fork Mountain hanging in the sky. I had previously seen it from the top of Jinbao Peak, and only here did I see it high as if it were above the nine heavens.

古文：惟竹豚未尝，而无奈其活不能携，况此时笋过而肥，且地有观音美笋，其味未必他处所能及。东下里许，南望那叉山飞瀑悬空而坠。又东下五里，左渡小溪，深竹中有寺寂然，则苦炼庵。从庵前东南渡桥南上岭，从西岐下，见西峡中又一瀑如线，透山而下，连泄九层，虽细而甚长。
现代文：不过苦炼溪近在对面的山上，道路沿着溪流一同下山，清清楚楚看见它捣击壑谷的威势，瀑布下的山环绕成城墙一样，瀑布下垂到其中，流出西边的崖壁，与那叉山东面的大溪合流后往东南流去。望见西面峡谷中又有二条瀑布如线一样，穿山而下，一连下泄九层，水流虽细但却非常长。
English: However, the Kuju Stream was close to the opposite mountain, and the road went down the mountain along the stream. I clearly saw the power of it striking the valley. The mountain under the waterfall was surrounded like a city wall, the waterfall dropped into it, flowed out of the cliff on the west side, and merged with the large stream on the east side of the Nafang Mountain and flowed to the southeast. I could see two more waterfalls in the west canyon, like a line, going down through the mountain, draining nine layers in a row. Although the water flow was thin, it was very long.

古文：路乃转东，又一溪自西北来。
现代文：路于是转向东，共走三里，又有一溪从西北流来。
English: The road then turned east, a total of three miles, and a stream flowed from the northwest.

古文：渡而随之，始觉甚微，渐下渐大，路应从溪右下，而误从溪右。
现代文：渡过溪后顺流而行，起初觉得溪流很小，慢慢下去渐渐大起来，终于变成轰鸣雷响雪花腾涌的景观。路应该从澳右下行，可我错从溪左走。
English: After crossing the stream, I walked along the stream. At first, I thought the stream was small, but it gradually got bigger and bigger, and finally turned into a landscape of roaring thunder and snowflakes. The road should go down from the right of Ao, but I made the mistake of walking from the left of the stream.

古文：又二里，是为大坪。
现代文：又行二里，这是大坪。
English: Another two miles and it's Daping.

古文：渡溪而右，人一村家问之，则在莲花庵之下矣，村妪出所炊粥羹饷，余以炙笋酬之，余自大鼻山刘家炙得观音笋，即觅一山篮背负之。
现代文：渡溪后往右走，走进一农户人家问路，则已在莲塘庵的下边了，竹子成丛，翠色葱郁。村妇拿出她烧制的稀粥和菜汤款待我，我用烤竹笋酬谢她。于是向西南渡过那叉大溪，溪水往东北方流进白沙江。
English: After crossing the stream, I walked to the right and walked into a farmer's house to ask for directions, and I was already at the bottom of the lotus pond, with bamboo clumps, green and lush. The villager took out her baked gruel and vegetable soup to entertain me, and I thanked her with roasted bamboo shoots. So I crossed the Nafang Creek to the southwest, and the stream water flowed into the Baisha River to the northeast.

古文：于是那叉大溪，又西上岭，三里，饭于村家，其处乃大坪之极南也。又西南逾岭而上，二里，是为半山岭。
现代文：义向西上岭，三里，在农户人家吃饭，此处是大坪极南之处了。又往西南越岭而上，二里，这是半山岭。
English: Yiyi walked westward up the ridge, three miles, to eat at a farmer's house, here is the extreme south of Daping. He also walked southwest up the ridge, two miles, this is the mid-mountain ridge.

古文：屡渡溪，逾岭而上，八里，入望江岭。
现代文：多次渡溪，越岭而上，八里，走入望江岭。
English: I crossed the creek several times, walked up the ridge, eight miles, and walked into the Wangjiang Ridge.

古文：逾岭溯溪，又十里，为桐源山。
现代文：翻过岭溯溪行，又走十里，是桐源山。
English: After crossing the ridge and tracing the stream, another ten miles away is Tongyuan Mountain.

古文：南下山二里，为韭菜园。
现代文：往南下山行二里，是韭菜园。
English: Two miles down the mountain to the south is the lettuce garden.

古文：东过坳下山三里，又循一水，为小车江。
现代文：向东经过山坳下山三里，又沿一条河走，是小车江。
English: To the east, three miles downhill through the mountains, and along a river, is the Xiaochue River.

古文：随江南下四里，有大溪自西来，即桐源韭菜溪，有大路亦自西来，南与小车江合而南去。
现代文：顺江南下四里，有桐源大溪自西边流来，就是流经桐源山、韭菜园的溪流，有大路也是从西边来，溪水往南与小车江合流后向南流去。
English: Four miles south along the river, there is Tongyuan Creek flowing from the west, that is, the stream flowing through Tongyuan Mountain and the vegetable garden. There is also a large road coming from the west, and the stream water flows south after merging with the Xiaochue River.

古文：路渡小车江口桥，从水右上山一里，随江而东南，有小石山，北面平剖，纹如哥窑，而薄若片板。
现代文：路越过小车江江口的桥，从江右上山一里，顺江往东南走，路通过夹江的山上，极险峻。有座小石山，北面平直剖开：纹路如哥窑瓷器，而且薄如成片的木板。
English: The road crosses the bridge at the mouth of the Xiaochuanjiang River. From the right side of the river, it climbs up the mountain for one mile, and goes along the river to the southeast. The road passes through the mountains between the rivers, which are extremely precipitous. There is a small stone mountain, and the north face is cut straight: the grain road is like the porcelain of the Go Kiln, and it is thin as a piece of wood.

古文：江绕其南，路绕其北。
现代文：江水绕到它南边，路绕过它的北面。
English: The river goes around it to the south, and the road goes around it to the north.

古文：又东南二里始下，又一里下至江涯。
现代文：东北又有条小溪，冲破山峡形成瀑布。又向东南二里开始下山，又行一里下到江边。
English: In the northeast, there is another small stream, which breaks through the mountain gorge to form a waterfall. Another two miles to the southeast, the descent begins, and another mile down to the river.

古文：稍上为木皮口，乃宿。
现代文：略略上走是木皮口，有溪流自东北流来汇人。
English: Slightly upstream is Muxikou, where a stream flows from the northeast to draw people.

古文：十九日晨餐后，东南上岭。
现代文：它北面的山峰叫不住岭。于是住下。十九日早餐后，向东南上岭。
English: The mountain peak to the north of it could not be called a ridge, so he stayed there. After breakfast on the 19th, he headed southeast up the ridge.

古文：随江左行四里，下涉跳石江。
现代文：顺江左岸行四里，下水涉过跳石江。
English: The left bank of the Shun River is four miles long, and the water flows over the Jumping Rock River.

古文：又上岭，过车湾台盘石。共三里，出两山峡口，有坝堰水甚巨，曰上官坝。
现代文：又上岭，路过车湾台，绕石山共走三里，走出两山之间的峡口，有堤坝拦水非常宽广，叫做上官坝。 
English: He also went to Shangling, passed Chewan Terrace, walked around Shishan Mountain for a total of three miles, walked out of the canyon between the two mountains, and there was a very wide dam, called Shangguan Dam.

古文：坝外一望平畴，直南抵里山隅。
现代文：坝外是一望无际的平整田野，二直往南延抵里山限。
English: Outside the dam is an endless expanse of flat fields, stretching south to the limits of the mountains.

古文：出峡，水东南入湘，路随峡右西南下。
现代文：出了峡口，水往东南流入湘江，路沿峡右向西南下走。
English: After leaving the mouth of the gorge, the water flows into the Xiangjiang River to the southeast, and the road turns right along the gorge to the southwest.

古文：行平畴中又一里，抵赵塘，其聚族俱赵，巨姓也。村后一石山峙立，曰西钟山，下俱青石峭削，上有平窝，土人方斥石叠路，建五谷大仙殿。
现代文：行走在平坦的田野中又一里，到达赵塘。村后一座石山独立，叫西钟山，下部全是陡峭削立的青石，上面有个平缓的山窝，当地人正在采石筑路，修建五谷大仙殿。
English: After walking another mile in the flat fields, we arrived at Zhaotang. Behind the village, a stone mountain stands alone, called West Bell Mountain. The lower part is all steeply hewn bluestone, with a gentle mountain hollow above. Locals are quarrying stone to build a road and construct the Itani Great Hall.

古文：其东峭崖上有洞可深入。
现代文：殿东陡峭的山崖上有山洞可以深入。
English: On the steep cliff to the east of the hall, there is a cave that can be entered.

古文：时以开道伐木，反隘其路，不得攀缘而渡。
现代文：此时由子开路伐树，反而阻碍了那里的通路，不能攀缘过去。
English: At this time, Yu Zi opened the road and cut down trees, but hindered the passage there, and could not climb over.

古文：又西南一溪桥，共四里，过弃鸡岭。
现代文：又往西南走过一座溪流上的桥，共四里，过了弃鸡岭。
English: I also walked southwest over a bridge over a stream, a total of four miles, and passed the abandoned chicken ridge.

古文：又四里，出咸水，而山枣驿在焉，则官道也。
现代文：又是四里，到了咸水，而山枣释就在这里，是官道了。
English: It is another four miles to the salt water, and the mountain jujube release is here, it is the official way.

古文：咸水之南，大山横亘，曰里山隈；咸水之北，崇岭重叠，曰三清界：此咸水南北之界也。
现代文：咸水的南边，大山横亘着，叫里山限；咸水的北面，崇山峻岭重重叠叠，叫三清界：此即咸水南北两境的情况了。
English: On the south side of the salty water, large mountains stretch across, which is called the limit of the mountains; on the north side of the salty water, high mountains and steep ridges overlap and overlap, which is called the Sanqing boundary: this is the situation of the north and south borders of the salty water.

古文：咸水溪自三清界发源，流为焦川，自南宅出山，至此透桥东南罗江口入湘。
现代文：咸水溪从三清界发源，流下去叫焦川，自南宅流出山，到此处穿过桥下往东南在罗江口流入湘江。
English: The Saltwater Creek originates from the Sanqing region and flows down to the Jiao River. It flows out of the mountains from the South House, where it crosses under the bridge to the southeast at the mouth of the Luo River and flows into the Hunan River.

古文：渡桥西南行，长松合道，夹径蔽天，十里，板山铺。
现代文：过了桥往西南行，沿路是高大的松树，夹在路旁遮蔽天日，极似道州到永明的道路。十里，到板山铺。
English: After crossing the bridge to the southwest, there are tall pine trees along the road, clamped on the side of the road to shade the sun, very similar to the road from Daozhou to Yongming. Ten miles to Pan Shan Pu.

古文：又十里，石子铺。
现代文：又走十里，到石子铺。
English: Walk another ten miles to the stone shop.

古文：从小路折而东南，五里抵界首，乃千家之市，南半属兴安，东半属全州。
现代文：从小路折向东南，五里抵达界首，是个有千户人家的集市，南半边属兴安县，东半边属全州。
English: It is a market with a thousand households. The southern half belongs to Xing'an County, and the eastern half belongs to Quanzhou.

古文：至界首才下午，大雨忽至，遂止不前。
现代文：到界首时才是下午，大雨忽然来临，就停下不走了。
English: It was afternoon when I arrived at the beginning of the world, and when the heavy rain suddenly came, I couldn't stop walking.

古文：是日共行五十里。
现代文：这一天共走五十里。
English: We walked a total of fifty miles that day.

