古文：乐大酺梨园乐太真妃天宝乐章韦皋于頔文宗沈阿翘懿宗王令言
现代文：乐大酺梨园乐太真妃天宝乐章韦皋于頔文宗沈阿翘懿宗王令言
English: Ledao Pear Garden, Ledao Zhenfei, Tianbao Music Chapter, Wei Wei at the Jomon King's Sermon

古文：宁王献王仁裕
现代文：宁王献王仁裕
English: Ning Wang presents Wang Renyu

古文：歌秦青韩娥戚夫人李龟年李衮韩会米嘉荣
现代文：歌秦青韩娥戚夫人李龟年李衮韩会米嘉荣
English: Song Qin Qing Han E's relative, Mrs. Li Juchen, Li Wei Han Hui, Mei Jia Rong

古文：笛昭华管唐玄宗汉中王瑀李謩许云封吕乡筠觱篥李蔚乐
现代文：笛昭华管唐玄宗汉中王瑀李謩许云封吕乡筠觱篥李蔚乐
English: Flute Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir Choir

古文：大酺
现代文：大酺
English: Daxing

古文：唐玄宗在东洛，大酺于五凤楼下。
现代文：唐玄宗在东都洛阳，下令群臣聚饮在五凤楼下。
English: Emperor Tang Xuanzong, in the eastern capital Luoyang, ordered a group of courtiers to gather and drink under the Wufeng Building.

古文：命三百里内县令刺史，率其声乐来赴阙者。
现代文：又命令三百里以内的县令、刺史，率领本地的乐工和歌手赶来参加。
English: He also ordered the county magistrates and magistrates within three hundred miles to lead the local musicians and singers to come and participate.

古文：或谓令较其胜负而赏罚焉。
现代文：还说让他们比赛胜负加以赏罚。
English: He also said that they should be rewarded or punished according to whether they won or lost the game.

古文：时河内郡守令乐工数百人于车上，皆衣以锦绣；伏厢之牛，蒙以虎皮，及为犀象形状，观者骇目。
现代文：当时，河内郡守让几百名乐工乘在车上，都穿着锦衣绣袍。在车厢上站立的牛身上披上虎皮，或将它们扮成犀牛，大象的形状，观看的人们都惊骇不止。
English: At that time, the county governor of Hanoi had hundreds of musicians ride in the car, all dressed in brocade and embroidered robes. They put tiger skins on the cattle standing on the car, or dressed them in the shape of rhinoceroses and elephants, and the people watching were shocked.

古文：时元鲁山遣乐工数十人联袂歌于蒍，于蒍鲁山之文也。
现代文：当时还有从鲁山派来数十名乐工联合演唱于蒍谱写的歌。于蒍，是鲁山的一名文士。
English: At that time, there were also dozens of musicians sent from Lushan to jointly sing songs composed by Yu Yu, a scribe from Lushan.

古文：玄宗闻而异之，征其词，乃叹曰：贤人之言也。
现代文：唐玄宗听了后很是惊异，传旨将歌词奉上，看后赞叹地说：这是贤人的言论啊！
English: After listening, Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised. He sent the lyrics by courier. After reading, he said with admiration: This is the speech of a wise man!

古文：其后上谓宰臣曰：河内之人，其在涂炭乎。
现代文：之后，玄宗对宰相们说：河内人，他们都很困顿么？
English: Afterward, Xuanzong said to the prime ministers: "Hanoi people, are they all in trouble?

古文：促命征还，而授以散秩。
现代文：催促将于蒍召来，授予他散秩的官职。
English: Urge will be summoned to the capital, and he will be given an official post with a lower rank.

古文：每赐宴设酺会，则上御勤政楼。
现代文：每次群臣聚宴，玄宗都亲临勤政楼。
English: Every time a group of courtiers gathered for a banquet, Emperor Xuanzong came to the Gongzheng Building in person.

古文：金吾及四军兵士，未明陈仗，盛列旗帜，皆被黄金甲，衣短后绣袍。
现代文：金吾使及四军卫士，天还未亮就阵设仪仗。到处悬挂彩旗，卫士们都披戴黄金铠钾，着短后绣袍。
English: The King's envoy and the guards of the four armies set up a ceremonial battle before dawn. Bunting was hung everywhere, and the guards were all dressed in gold and embroidered robes.

古文：太常陈乐，卫尉张幕后。
现代文：执掌礼仪的官员太常卿献乐，卫士们阵列帷帐的后面。
English: The official in charge of etiquette, Lord Tai Changqing, played music, and the guards lined up behind the curtain.

古文：诸番酋长就食府县。
现代文：各蕃属国的首领、头人分别在各府县上就餐。
English: The leaders and headmen of each of the three subordinate countries dined separately in each prefecture.

古文：教坊大陈：山车旱船，寻撞走索，丸剑角抵，戏马斗鸡。
现代文：教坊中所有的伶人都出场表演：山东旱船，寻撞走索，丸剑摔跤，戏马斗鸡，热闹非凡。
English: All the students in the classroom took part in the performance: Shandong dry boat, chasing away the rope, round sword wrestling, horse play and cockfight, it was very lively.

古文：又令宫女数百饰以珠翠，衣以锦绣，自帷中出，击雷鼓，为《破阵乐》、《太平乐》、《上元乐》。
现代文：玄宗又让数百宫女饰珠着翠，衣锦着绣，从帷幕里面走出来，敲击雷鼓，演奏《破阵乐》、《太平乐》、《上元乐》，载歌载舞。
English: Xuanzong also let hundreds of palace maidens adorned with jade beads and embroidered brocade come out from behind the curtain, beat the thunder drum, play "Broken Band Music," "Peaceful Music" and "Upper Yuan Music," and sing and dance.

古文：又引大象犀牛入场，或拜舞，动中音律。
现代文：又引来大象、犀牛入场表演，或拜或舞，每个动作都踏着节拍随乐而舞。
English: Elephants and rhinoceroses were also brought in for the entrance performance, either to worship or to dance, with each movement dancing to the beat of the music.

古文：每正月望夜，又御勤政楼观作乐。
现代文：每到正月十五晚上，玄宗又亲临勤政楼观看各种社火表演，与民同乐。
English: Every evening on the 15th day of the first month of the year, Xuanzong also visited the Gongzheng Tower to watch various social fire performances and have fun with the people.

古文：贵臣戚里，官设看楼。
现代文：三公贵戚有官家特为他们设置的看楼，供他们合家登楼观看。
English: The relatives of the three princes and nobles have a viewing tower specially set up for them by the official family, for them to go up to the building to watch.

古文：夜阑，即遣宫女于楼前歌舞以娱之。
现代文：到夜阑更深时节，玄宗又传旨让宫女在看楼前歌舞，共同娱乐。
English: When it was late in the evening, Emperor Xuanzong sent an order to the palace maids to sing and dance in front of the palace for mutual entertainment.

古文：梨园乐
现代文：梨园乐
English: Pear Garden Music

古文：天宝中，玄宗命宫女数百人为梨园弟子，皆居宜春北院。
现代文：天宝年间，唐玄宗命令宫女数百人充当梨园子弟，习歌演舞，她们都居住在宜春北院。
English: During the Tenpo era, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty ordered hundreds of court ladies to serve as the children of the pear garden, learn songs and perform dances. They all lived in Yichun North Courtyard.

古文：上素晓音律，时有马仙期、李龟年、贺怀智皆洞知律度。
现代文：玄宗一向通晓音乐。当时还有马仙期、李龟年、贺怀智等通晓音乐的著名乐师都在梨园任职。
English: Xuanzong has always been familiar with music. At that time, famous musicians who were familiar with music, such as Ma Xianzhong, Li Qimen and He Huaiji, all worked in Liyuan.

古文：安禄山自范阳入觐，亦献白玉箫管数百事，皆陈于梨园。
现代文：兼领朔方、河东、范阳三镇节度使的安禄山从范阳进京朝拜、献上白玉箫管数百件，都放在梨园。
English: Anlu Mountain, which also led the three towns of Shuofang, Hedong and Fanyang, came to Beijing from Fanyang to pay homage and presented hundreds of white jade gongs, all of which were placed in Liyuan.

古文：自是音响殆不类人间。
现代文：从这时起梨园的音乐象仙境一样。
English: From then on, Pear Orchard's music was like a fairyland.

古文：太真妃
现代文：太真妃
English: Princess Taizhen

古文：太真妃多曲艺，最善击磬。
现代文：太真妃杨玉环能歌能舞会多种技艺，最擅长的是击磬。
English: Taizhenfei Yang Yuhuan Nenga Nenga Dance has a variety of skills, the best of which is striking the gong.

古文：拊搏之音，玲玲然多新声，虽太常梨园之能人，莫能加也。
现代文：拍击之音，玲玲然，非常悦耳动听，而且演奏的多是新曲。就是太常寺、梨园的专职乐工，也不能跟太真妃相比。
English: The sound of the clapping is very beautiful and pleasing to the ear, and most of the performances are new songs. Even the full-time musicians at Taiji Temple and Liyuan cannot be compared to Taizhenfei.

古文：玄宗令采蓝田绿玉琢为磬，尚方造簨簴流苏之属，皆以金钿珠翠珍怪之物杂饰之。
现代文：唐玄宗让人采来蓝田绿玉为她琢成玉磬，为帝王造器物的官，打造了挂磬的架子，还做了流苏等，并镶嵌上金钿珠翠等奇珍异宝等。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty had people collect Lantian green jade to make jade bracelets for her, and officials who made objects for the emperor created shelves for hanging bracelets, made tassels, etc., and inlaid rare treasures such as gold-encrusted beads.

古文：又铸金为二狮子，拿攫腾奋之状，各重二百余斤，以为趺。
现代文：又让人铸造金狮二只，作抓取跳跃之状，每只重二百斤，做为悬磬支架的底座。
English: Two golden lions were also cast, in the shape of grabbing leaps, each weighing two hundred pounds, as the base of the suspension bracket.

古文：及上幸蜀回京师，乐器多亡失，独玉磬偶在。
现代文：其他地方的色彩绘画也都繁饰华丽，作工都精妙异常，无与伦比。
English: The color paintings in other places are also ornate and gorgeous, and the workmanship is exquisite and extraordinary, unparalleled.

古文：上顾之凄然，不忍置于前，促令载送太常寺。
现代文：待安史之乱后，唐玄宗自蜀地重返京师。历经刀兵火燹，宫内的乐器遗失很多，唯有太真妃当年拊搏过的绿玉石磬还在。
English: After the Anshi Rebellion, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang returned to Beijing from Shudi. After the war, many musical instruments in the palace were lost. Only the green jade cymbals used by Empress Taizhen are still there.

古文：至今藏于太乐署正声库者是也。
现代文：玄宗望着石磬，抚今追昔，神色凄然，再不忍心看它悬挂宫里，马上命人将它送到太常寺，放置在正声库房里。
English: Xuanzong looked at the stele, fiddling with the past and the present, and his face was aghast. He couldn't bear to see it hanging in the palace any longer, so he immediately ordered someone to take it to Taizhong Temple and place it in the Zhengsheng Library.

古文：天宝乐章
现代文：天宝乐章
English: Tianbao Music

古文：天宝中，乐章多以边地为名。
现代文：天宝年间，乐章多用边疆的一些地名命名。
English: During the Tenpo era, most of the movements were named after some place names in the frontier.

古文：若《凉州》、《甘州》、《伊州》之类是焉。
现代文：如《凉州曲》、《甘州曲》、《伊州曲》等。
English: Such as "Liangzhou Song," "Ganzhou Song," "Izhou Song" and so on.

古文：其曲遍繁声，名入破。
现代文：这些乐曲普遍用的繁声，名前多冠以破。
English: These pieces of music are popularly known as bustling sounds, and many of them are known by their names.

古文：后其地尽为西蕃所没破，乃其兆矣。
现代文：这些边地后来果然都被西边胡人所吞没占领，这些就是征兆啊！
English: These borderlands were later swallowed up and occupied by the Hu people in the west, these are signs!

古文：韦皋
现代文：韦皋
English: Wei Xuan

古文：韦皋镇西川，进奉圣乐曲，兼与舞人曲谱同进。
现代文：韦皋镇守西川，向皇上进奉乐曲，连同跳舞的人乐谱一同进奉。
English: Wei Wei, a town guarding the West River, presented music to the emperor, together with the dancing man's music score.

古文：到京，于留邸按阅，教坊数人潜窥，因得先进。
现代文：到京后，在官邸处披阅，教坊中有几个人悄悄偷看，因此才被最先进奉皇上。
English: After arriving in Beijing, he read it at the official residence, and a few people quietly peeked at it in the classroom, which is why he was the first to be crowned emperor.

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：于司空頔因韦太尉奉圣乐，亦撰《顺圣乐》以进。
现代文：司空于頔因为太尉韦皋奉献圣乐，也撰写了《顺圣乐》进献。
English: Sikuku Yu also wrote "Shun Sheng Le" as a dedication to the sacred music because of the dedication of the sacred music by Taiyi Wei.

古文：每宴，必使奏之。
现代文：每有酒宴，都让人演奏《顺圣乐》。
English: "Shun Sheng Le" is played at every banquet.

古文：其曲将半，行缀皆伏，而一人舞于中央。
现代文：乐曲演奏到一半时，群舞的队列都匍伏在地，只有一人舞在中央。
English: Halfway through the piece, the line of dancers is prostrate, with only one person dancing in the middle.

古文：幕客韦绶笑曰：何用穷兵独舞。
现代文：幕僚宾客韦绶笑着说：为什么用穷兵独舞呢！
English: Wei Wei, a member of the guest's staff, said with a smile: "Why use poor soldiers to dance alone?

古文：虽诙谐，亦各有为也。
现代文：虽然看是笑谈，其实是各有所指。
English: Although it looks like a joke, in fact, each has its own meaning.

古文：頔又令女妓为侑舞，雄健壮妙，号《孙武顺圣乐》。
现代文：于頔又让女舞妓作八人行舞。舞姿雄健丽妙，号称是《孙武顺圣乐》。
English: In addition, Yu Yu also had the maiko perform an eight-person line dance. The dance is vigorous and graceful, and is known as the "Sun Wushun Sacred Music."

古文：文宗
现代文：文宗
English: Wenzong

古文：文宗善吹小管。
现代文：唐文宗善吹小管。
English: Tang Wensong is good at playing the flute.

古文：时法师文溆为入内大德，一日得罪流之。
现代文：当时文溆法师进宫为最高的法师。一天获罪文宗，罪当流放。
English: At that time, Master Wenzong entered the palace as the highest-ranking mage. One day, he was accused of being a monk and was banished.

古文：弟子入内，收拾院中籍入家具辈，犹作法师讲声。上采其声为曲子，号《文溆子》。
现代文：文溆法师的弟子进宫收拾他的物品。边收拾东西边模仿文溆法师讲道的声音，被文宗无意中听到，用这声音为旋律，即兴谱写出一支曲子，名叫《文溆子》。
English: Wenzong's disciple went to the palace to pack up his belongings. While packing up, he imitated the sound of Wenzong's sermon, which was overheard by Wenzong. Using this sound as a melody, he improvised a piece of music called "Wenzhongzi."

古文：沈阿翘
现代文：沈阿翘
English: Shen Agao

古文：文宗时，有宫人沈阿翘为上舞《河满子》。声词风态，率皆宛畅。
现代文：文宗时，宫人沈阿翘为皇上跳《河满子》舞，不论是歌声、歌词，还是舞姿神态，都宛扬畅丽。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong, the palace attendant Shen Agao danced the "Kawamanzi" dance for the emperor. Whether it was the singing, the lyrics, or the dance posture, it was all beautiful.

古文：曲罢，上赐金臂环，即问其从来，阿翘曰：妾本吴元济之妓。
现代文：舞曲终，文宗赏赐给沈阿翘金臂环一只，问她：从什么地方进到宫里来的？沈阿翘回答说：我原来是吴元济的乐妓。
English: At the end of the dance, Wenzong rewarded Shen Aqiao with a golden arm ring and asked her: "Where did you come into the palace from?" Shen Aqiao replied: "I used to be a prostitute of Wu Yuanji."

古文：元济败，因以声得为宫娥。
现代文：吴元济兵败后，我因为会歌会舞才得以进宫啊。
English: After the defeat of Wu Yuanji, I was only able to enter the palace because I could sing and dance.

古文：遂自进白玉方响，云：本吴元济所有也。
现代文：并且将白玉方响献给文宗皇上。说：这白玉方响本是吴元济的。
English: He also dedicated the White Jade Fang Huan to Emperor Wenzong, saying: "This White Jade Fang Huan was made by Wu Yuanji."

古文：光明洁泠，可照十数步。
现代文：白玉方响光洁明亮，可照十步内外。
English: The white jade square bell is bright and shiny, and can be seen from ten paces away.

古文：言其槌即犀也，凡物有声，乃响其中焉。
现代文：沈阿翘说击打这方响的槌，是用犀角做成的，不论遇到什么物件发出响声，都能在它这里得到回声。
English: Shen Aqiao said that the hammer used to strike the square bell is made of rhinoceros horn, and no matter what object makes a sound, it can get an echo here.

古文：架则云檀香也，而文彩若云霞之状，芬馥著人，则弥月不散。
现代文：支架是用檀香木制成的，上面的文彩灿若云霞。它散发出来的香气扑人脸面，可弥漫月余不散。
English: The stand is made of sandalwood, and the painting on it is as bright as a cloud. The fragrance it emits hits your face and can last for months.

古文：制度精妙，故非中国所有。
现代文：这方响的作工精妙非凡，因为它不是中国制造的。
English: The workmanship of this square bell is exquisite and extraordinary, because it is not made in China.

古文：上因令阿翘奏《凉州曲》，音韻清越，听者无不怆然。
现代文：于是让阿翘当场演奏一阙《凉州曲》，声音清越，听的人无不神色凄凉。
English: So let Ah Gao play a piece of "Liangzhou Music" on the spot, the sound is clearer and clearer, and the listeners are all bleak.

古文：上谓之曰：天上乐。
现代文：文宗赞叹地说：真是天上仙乐啊！
English: Wen Zong said with admiration: "It really is heavenly bliss!

古文：仍选内人，与阿翘为弟子。
现代文：于是挑选宫女中能歌舞的人让沈阿翘收为弟子，跟她学习歌舞。
English: Therefore, she chose a courtesan who could sing and dance and let Shen Aqiao take her as an apprentice to learn singing and dancing with her.

古文：懿宗
现代文：懿宗
English: Shizong

古文：懿宗一日召乐工，上方奏乐为《道调弄》，上遂拍之。故乐工依其节，奏曲子，名《道调子》。
现代文：唐懿宗一次召见乐工。乐工方始为懿宗演奏《道调弄》，于是懿宗用手打着拍子，因此乐工就随着懿宗拍节演奏曲子，命名曲子为《道调子》。
English: At one time, Emperor Taizong of Tang summoned a musician. The musician began to play "Taming of the Shrew" for Emperor Taizong, so Emperor Taizong beat the time with his hand, so the musician played the piece according to Emperor Taizong's beat, naming the piece "Taming of the Shrew."

古文：十宅诸王，多解音声。
现代文：十家护卫都通晓声律。
English: The ten guards are all familiar with the rules of singing.

古文：倡优杂戏皆有之，以备上幸其院，迎驾作乐。
现代文：宫中的倡优杂戏人等都备好，以备皇帝亲临他们这里时演奏。
English: The court acrobats and actors were ready to perform when the emperor came to see them.

古文：禁中呼为音声郎君。
现代文：为此，皇宫里的人，私下都叫懿宗音声郎君。
English: For this reason, people in the Imperial Palace privately call him the "Voice Master."

古文：王令言
现代文：王令言
English: King's edict

古文：隋炀帝幸江都时，乐工王令言子自内归。
现代文：隋炀帝巡游江都时，乐工王令言的儿子自宫内回家来。
English: When the Emperor of the Sui Dynasty was on a tour of the Yangtze River, the son of the musician Wang Lingyan came home from the palace.

古文：令言问其子：今日所进曲子何？曰：安公子。
现代文：王令言问他的儿子：今日进献给皇上的是什么曲子！儿子说：是《安公子》。
English: Wang Lingyan asked his son: What is the piece of music presented to the emperor today? The son said: It is "Angong Zi."

古文：令言命其子奏之，曰：汝不须随驾去，此曲子无宫声，上必不回。
现代文：王令言让他儿子演奏一遍，听完后，说：你不要随驾去江都了。这支曲子没有宫声，皇上一定不会回来了。
English: Wang Lingyan asked his son to play the melody again. After listening to it, he said, "Don't drive to the Yangtze River. This piece doesn't have the sound of the palace, so the emperor will definitely not come back."

古文：果如其言。宁王献
现代文：后来真如王令言说的那样，隋炀帝在江都被刺杀身死。宁王献
English: Later, as Wang Lingyan said, the Sui and Qian emperors were all assassinated in the river.

古文：西凉州俗好音乐，制新曲曰《凉州》。开元中，列上献之，上召诸王于便殿同观焉。
现代文：西凉州素有喜好音乐的风俗，制作新曲叫《凉州》，开元年间，西凉府都督郭知远将这支曲子进献给玄宗皇帝。玄宗召集诸王在便殿一同观赏。
English: West Liangzhou is known to have a custom of liking music, producing a new piece called "Langzhou." In the first year of the year, Guo Zhiyuan, the governor of West Liangfu, dedicated this piece to Emperor Xuanzong. Xuanzong gathered all the kings to watch it together in the toilet.

古文：曲终，诸王拜贺，蹈舞称善，独宁王不拜。
现代文：曲终，诸王齐声祝贺，手舞足蹈，唯有宁王不祝贺。
English: At the end of the song, all the kings congratulated in unison and danced with hands and feet. Only Ning Wang did not congratulate.

古文：上顾问之，宁王进曰：此曲虽佳。臣有所闻焉。夫音也，始之于宫，散之于商，成之于角徵羽，莫不根蒂而袭于宫商也。
现代文：玄宗问他，宁王回答说：这支曲子听起来是很美的，但是臣听人说，一支乐曲从宫音开始，在商音结束，中间由角、徵、羽诸音组成，没有不头、尾都相因宫、商的。
English: Xuanzong asked him, and Ning Wang replied, "This piece sounds very beautiful, but I have heard people say that a piece of music begins with the palace sound and ends with the merchant sound, and the middle is composed of horns, chimes, and feathers, and there is no beginning and end because of the palace and merchant.

古文：斯曲也，宫离而少，徵商乱而加暴。
现代文：这支乐曲，开头离开宫调而且中间也很少用宫，徵、商用的乱而且加强。
English: This piece of music, the beginning of leaving the palace tune and rarely using the palace in the middle, attracting commercial chaos and strengthening.

古文：臣闻宫君也，商臣也。宫不胜则君势卑，商有余则臣事僭。
现代文：臣闻宫是君，商是臣，宫不强盛则势力小，商有余则臣有僭越的欲望。
English: If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small. If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small. If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small. If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small. If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small. If the palace is not powerful, the influence is small.

古文：卑则逼下，僭则犯上。
现代文：势力小必然被下所逼，有僭越之欲必然犯上。
English: Those with little power will inevitably be forced by those below, and those with the desire to surpass others will inevitably commit crimes.

古文：发于忽微，形于音声；播之于咏歌，见之于人事。
现代文：事情引发在微细之端，而现形在音声之表；传播在咏歌，而见之在人事。
English: The event is triggered at the fine end, and the actual form is at the sound table; the propagation is in the eulogy, and the sight is in the personnel.

古文：臣恐一日有播越之祸，悖逼之患，莫不兆于斯曲也。
现代文：臣恐有一天国人上下有走死逃亡之厄，乱臣有作乱逼上之犯，都预兆在这支曲子上啊。
English: The courtiers feared that one day the people of the country would have the misfortune of fleeing to their deaths, and the unruly courtiers would be forced to commit crimes, all of which were foreshadowed in this piece of music.

古文：上闻之默然。
现代文：玄宗皇帝听了默然无语。
English: Emperor Xuanzong listened in silence.

古文：及安史乱作，华夏鼎沸，所以见宁王审音之妙也。
现代文：待到安史之乱发生后，举国上下一片混乱，才证实了宁王审音度势的绝妙啊！
English: It wasn't until after the Anshi Rebellion that the country was engulfed in chaos that the brilliance of Ning Wang's audition was confirmed!

古文：王仁裕
现代文：王仁裕
English: Wang Renyu

古文：后唐清泰之初，王仁裕从事梁苑，时范公延光师之。
现代文：后唐清泰初年，王仁裕在梁苑任从事。当时是范延光镇守在此。
English: Wang Renyu worked in Liangyuan in the first year after the Tang and Qing dynasties. At that time, Fan Yanguang was the town guard here.

古文：春正月，郊野尚寒，引诸幕寮，饯朝客于折柳亭。
现代文：这年春正月，郊野还很寒冷。范延光率领诸位幕僚在郊外折柳亭为朝廷派来的使臣饯行，席间奏乐为乐。
English: In the first month of this year's spring, the countryside was still very cold. Fan Yanguang led all the staff members to walk in the suburbs of Oryuting for the envoys sent by the imperial court, and played music between meals.

古文：乐则于羽，而响铁独有宫声，泊将掺执，竟不谐和。
现代文：乐曲用的是羽调，而铙钹单独击出宫声，自相干扰，竟不谐和。
English: The music is in feather tuning, but the cymbals strike out the palace sound separately, interfering with each other, resulting in disharmony.

古文：王独讶之，私谓戎判李大夫式、管记唐员外献曰：今日必有诪张之事，盖乐音不和。
现代文：王仁裕独自惊讶，暗下跟戎判大夫李式、管记员外唐献说：今天一定要有差错的事情出现的，是乐音不和 兆示 出来的。
English: Wang Renyu was surprised all by himself, and secretly said to the judge, doctor Li Shigu, and the registrar, Tang Xian: "Something must have gone wrong today. It's because the music doesn't match the omens."

古文：今诸音举羽，而独扣金有宫声。
现代文：刚才奏乐时诸音奏的是羽调，而唯独铙钹扣的是宫声。
English: When the music was played just now, all the notes were played in a feather tone, but the only thing that clicked was the sound of the palace.

古文：且羽为水，宫为土，水土相克，得无忧乎？
现代文：羽为水，宫为土。水、土相克，能没有忧患吗？
English: The feather is water, the palace is earth. Can water and earth coexist without sorrow?

古文：于时筵散，朝客西归。范公引宾客，绁鹰火，猎于王婆店北。为奔马所坠，不救于荒陂。
现代文：待到席散，朝庭使臣西归，范延光带领诸位宾客，驾鹰牵狗去王婆店北狩猎，从奔跑的马上摔下来昏死过去。
English: At the end of the meal, the court envoy returned to the west, and Fan Yanguang led all the guests to go hunting north of Wangba's shop with an eagle and a dog. He fell off his running horse and passed out.

古文：自辰巳至午后，绝而复苏。
现代文：从辰巳到午后才从昏死中醒过来。
English: I didn't wake up from the coma until the afternoon.

古文：乐音先知，良可至矣。
现代文：王仁裕能够从乐音中预先得到征兆，其准确程度可算到了家啊！
English: Wang Renyu is able to get the signs from the music in advance, and his accuracy can be counted as a home!

古文：歌
现代文：歌
English: Song

古文：秦青韩娥
现代文：秦青韩娥
English: Qin Qing Han'e

古文：薛谈学讴于秦青，未穷青之技，自谓尽之，遂辞去归。
现代文：薛谈跟秦青学唱歌，没有完全学到秦青的唱歌的技艺，就自己以为全都学到手了，于是辞别秦青而归。
English: Xue talked about learning to sing with Qin Qing, but did not fully learn Qin Qing's singing skills. He thought he had learned everything, so he left Qin Qing and returned.

古文：秦青弗止。
现代文：秦青并没有阻止她离去。
English: Qin Qing did not stop her from leaving.

古文：饯于郊衢，抚节悲歌，声振林木，响遏行云。
现代文：在郊外大道旁边的长亭为薛谈置酒辞行时，不由得一边拍着桌案一边引吭悲歌。歌声振动林木，响遏行云。
English: In the long pavilion next to the suburban avenue, when talking about drinking wine and resigning for Xue, he couldn't help but beat the table while singing a sad song. The song vibrated the trees and sounded the clouds.

古文：谈谢求返，终身不敢言知。
现代文：薛谈听后立即表示谢意，请求继续留下来跟秦青学唱歌，此后终生再不敢说可以出师了。
English: After listening to the talk, Xue immediately expressed his gratitude and asked to stay and learn to sing with Qin Qing. After that, he never dared to say that he could become a teacher.

古文：秦青顾谓其友曰：昔韩娥东之齐，匮粮。过雍门，鬻歌假食。
现代文：秦青对朋友说：从前韩娥东行齐国去，途中没钱吃饭，过雍门卖唱乞食。
English: Qin Qing said to his friend, "Before Han E traveled east to Qi, he didn't have money to eat on the way, so he went to the Yongmen Gate to sing and beg.

古文：既去而余音绕梁，三日不绝，左右以其人弗去。
现代文：她离去后留下的歌声绕梁回响，历时三日不消失，周围的人还以为她没有离开这里呢。
English: The songs she left behind reverberated for three days, and the people around her thought she hadn't left.

古文：过逆旅，旅人辱之。
现代文：韩娥在客栈住宿时，旅人侮辱她。
English: When Han E was staying at an inn, a traveler insulted her.

古文：韩娥因曼声哀哭，一里老幼悲愁涕泣相对，三日不食。
现代文：韩娥长声哀哭。整个乡里的老老少少被她的歌声感动得相对哭泣，涕泪沾湿了衣裳。
English: Han'e cried for a long time. The whole village was moved to tears by her singing, and her clothes were wet with tears.

古文：遽追而谢之，娥复曼声长歌，一里老幼喜欢拤舞，弗能自禁。
现代文：韩娥又拉长声唱歌，整个乡里人又都欢喜得手舞足蹈又跳又唱，不能自禁。
English: Han E also sang a long song, and the entire villagers were so happy that they danced and danced and sang, unable to restrain themselves.

古文：乃厚赂而遣之。
现代文：于是送给韩娥充足的食物、礼品，热情地送她上路。
English: So he gave her plenty of food and gifts and sent her on her way with enthusiasm.

古文：故雍门之人，至今善歌善哭，効娥之遗声也。
现代文：由于这个缘故，雍门人至今还依然能歌善哭，这是效仿韩娥的遗风啊！
English: For this reason, the people of Yongmen are still able to sing and cry, which is a legacy of emulating Han E!

古文：戚夫人
现代文：戚夫人
English: Relative's wife

古文：汉戚夫人善为翘袖折腰之舞，歌《出塞》《入塞》《望归》之曲。
现代文：汉朝时的戚夫人，善于跳翘袖折腰式样的舞蹈，能歌《出塞》、《入塞》等描摹出征将士盼望归乡的歌曲。
English: The wife of a relative during the Han Dynasty was good at dancing in the form of a crotch-sleeve dance, and was able to sing songs such as "Out of the Box" and "Into the Box," which depict the soldiers' longing to return home.

古文：侍婢数百人皆为之，后宫齐唱，常入云霄。
现代文：她手下有侍候她的宫娥几百人，都跟她学得能唱一口好歌、跳一身好舞。常常是她跟她的侍女们在后宫一齐放声高唱，歌声响入云霄。
English: She has hundreds of palace attendants at her beck and call, all of whom have learned from her how to sing a good song and dance a good dance. Often, she and her ladies-in-waiting sing loudly together in the harem, their voices reaching into the sky.

古文：李龟年
现代文：李龟年
English: The Year of the Tortoise

古文：唐开元中，乐工李龟年、彭年、鹤年兄弟三人皆有才学盛名。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，乐工李龟年、彭年、鹤年兄弟三人都因为他们在歌舞上的杰出才华而负盛名。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, three musicians, brothers Li Kucheng, Peng Nian and He Nian, were famous for their outstanding talent in singing and dancing.

古文：彭年善舞，鹤年、龟年能歌，尤妙制《渭川》。
现代文：彭年善舞，鹤年、龟年能歌，特别是谱写出了《谓川》这样的绝妙好曲。
English: He was good at dancing in the year of the Peng, and good at singing in the years of the crane and the turtle. In particular, he composed such a wonderful song as "The River of Words."

古文：特承顾遇，于东都大起第宅。僭侈之制，逾于公侯。
现代文：由此，受到玄宗皇帝的特殊待遇，在东都洛阳为他们修造了豪华的住宅，侈华的程度超过了某些王公大臣。
English: As a result, they received special treatment from Emperor Xuanzong, who built luxurious residences for them in the eastern capital of Luoyang. The level of luxury exceeded that of some princes and ministers.

古文：宅在东都通远里，中堂制度，甲于都下。
现代文：住宅建在洛阳的通远里，庭院的规模甲于京都长安的一些显贵的宅第。
English: The house was built in Tongyuanli, Luoyang, and the size of the courtyard is comparable to that of some noble residences in Chang'an, Kyoto.

古文：其后龟年流落江南，每遇良辰胜赏，为人歌数阕，座中闻之，莫不掩泣罢酒。
现代文：后来，李龟年流落到江南。每当良辰胜景，他为人唱歌数首，在坐的听众没有一人不停止饮酒掩面哭泣的。
English: Later, Li Kuei was exiled to the south of the Yangtze River. Whenever there was a good time, he would sing a few songs for people, and there was no one in the audience who would not stop drinking and hide their faces to cry.

古文：则杜甫尝赠诗，所谓歧王宅里寻常见，崔九堂前几度闻。
现代文：跟他同时代的大诗人杜甫曾送李龟年诗一首。诗的大意是这样的：在岐王府里经常见到你，在崔九的客厅里也曾几次听到过你的大名。
English: Du Fu, a great poet of his time, once sent a poem to Li Guiren. The gist of the poem is as follows: I often see you in the Qi Wangfu, and I have heard your name several times in the living room of Cui Jiu.

古文：正值江南好风景，落花时节又逢君。
现代文：正值江南风光最好的时候，在落花缤纷的暮春时节又跟你相逢在异乡。
English: It was the best time for the scenery in the south of the Yangtze River, and I met you again in a foreign country in the colorful late spring season.

古文：崔九堂殿中监崔涤、中书令湜之弟也。
现代文：堂殿中监崔涤，别人送他个雅号为崔九，是中书令崔湜的弟弟。
English: The supervisor of the hall, Cui Dara, was given the nickname Cui Jiu by others. He was the younger brother of the Chinese scholar, Cui Yao.

古文：又李龟年开元中，禁中初重木芍药，即今牡丹也。
现代文：李衮在江南以歌唱得好闻名，而且名声一直轰动京师。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, Li Yao is famous for her good singing, and her fame has always been a sensation in Beijing.

古文：得四本，红、紫、浅红、通白者。
现代文：崔昭自江南到京都长安朝拜皇帝，密秘带着李衮同来。
English: Cui Zhao traveled from the south of the Yangtze River to Kyoto Chang'an to pay homage to the emperor, secretly bringing Li Xi with him.

古文：上因移植于兴庆池东沉香亭前。
现代文：到京城后，邀请宾客，并请首席乐师和京城中的著名歌手，来参加这个盛会。
English: After arriving in Beijing, invited guests, and invited the chief musician and famous singers in Beijing, to participate in this grand event.

古文：会花方繁开，上乘照夜白，太真妃以步辇从。
现代文：开宴前，崔昭说：我有个表弟从江南同来，请他入末座。
English: Before the banquet, Cui Zhao said, "I have a cousin from the south of the Yangtze River, and I have invited him to sit in the last seat.

古文：诏特选梨园弟子中尤者，得乐十六部。
现代文：于是让穿着破衣的李衮出来入席，满座的宾客都不屑一顾地耻笑崔昭。
English: So Li Yao, dressed in rags, was allowed to come out and take a seat, and the full house of guests laughed at Cui Zhao with disdain.

古文：李龟年以歌擅一时之名，手捧檀板，押众乐前，将歌之。
现代文：过了少许，崔昭命令仆人给诸位宾客斟酒，同时说：请我表弟给大家唱支歌，以助酒兴。众位宾客又鄙薄地笑了。
English: After a while, Cui Zhao ordered the servant to pour wine for all the guests, and said, "Ask my cousin to sing a song for everyone to help with the wine." The guests laughed contemptuously.

古文：上曰：赏名花，对妃子，焉用旧乐词为？遂命龟年持金花笺，宣赐李白，立进《清平调》辞三章。
现代文：待到一声歌起，在座的诸位乐工、歌手都大吃一惊地喊：不是名扬江南、声振京师的李八郎吗！
English: When a song started, all the musicians and singers present were surprised and shouted: Isn't it Li Hachiro of the famous Jiangnan and Sheng Zhen Beijing division!

古文：白欣然承旨，犹苦宿酲未解，因援笔赋之。
现代文：于是立即起身环绕着李衮连连下拜。
English: So he immediately got up and bowed down around Li Qilian.

古文：辞曰：云想衣裳花想容，春风晓拂露华浓。
现代文：李衮
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：若非群玉山头见，会向瑶台月下逢。
现代文：韩会韩会唱一手好歌，他的歌声优美动听达到出神入化境界。
English: The sound of the flute is clear and far away, and the direction is drifting. Suddenly, someone on the shore calls out, asking to board the boat.

古文：一支红艳露凝香，云雨巫山枉断肠。
现代文：韩会在当时跟另外三名歌手一起被人称为歌坛四魁，韩会单独被人称为魁首。
English: At that time, Han Hui, together with three other singers, was known as the four best singers in the world, and Han Hui alone was known as the best singer.

古文：借问汉宫谁得似，可怜飞燕倚新荘。
现代文：米嘉荣
English: Mei Jia Rong

古文：名花倾国两相欢，长得君王带笑看。
现代文：人们喜爱歌曲，由来已久。唐宪宗元和年间，梨园中称得上国家级歌星的就有米嘉荣、何戡等人，近来又出了个陈不嫌。
English: The flute played by this man is so exquisite that it can crack mountains and rocks. Li Yao has never heard it before in his life. At the beginning, the flute was played in the descending and middle order, and the sound of the flute was extraordinary.

古文：解释春风无限恨，沉香亭北倚栏杆。龟年遽以辞进。
现代文：陈不嫌的儿子陈意奴，一二十年来从来没听说过他能演唱所谓的正歌，却以能演唱流行歌曲而称盛一时。
English: Chen Yi Niu, the son of Chen Nuxuan, had never heard of him being able to sing the so-called main song for a decade or two, but he was famous for being able to sing pop songs.

古文：上命梨园弟子，约略调抚丝竹，遂促龟年以歌。
现代文：第一个演唱流行歌曲的歌手是李可久。到了唐懿宗时代，连堂堂的一国之主的懿宗也喜欢流行歌曲。象《哭赵十》、《别赵十》这两支流行歌曲，皇帝佬官就非常爱听。
English: The first singer to sing pop songs was Li Kegui. By the time of Tang Xizong, Emperor Xizong, the ruler of a powerful country, also liked pop songs. Like "Crying Zhao X" and "Leave Zhao X," these two pop songs, the emperor's officials loved to listen to.

古文：太真妃持玻璃七宝盏，酌西凉州葡萄酒，笑领歌意甚厚。
现代文：礼部尚书刘禹锡在一首《与歌者米嘉荣》的诗中，曾记述了当时歌坛的一些事情。
English: In a poem "With the singer Mi Jia Rong," Liu Yuxi, the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Culture, once described some of the events in the singing world at that time.

古文：上因调玉笛以倚曲，每曲遍将换，则迟其声以媚之。
现代文：诗是这样的：三朝供奉米嘉荣，能变新声作旧声。
English: The poem is like this: the three dynasties offer tribute to Mei Jia Rong, and can change the new voice to the old voice.

古文：太真饮罢，敛绣巾重拜上。
现代文：于今后辈轻前辈，好染髭须事后生。
English: For the younger generation, good dyeing of the beard is an afterthought.

古文：龟年常语于五王，独忆以歌得自胜者，无出于此，抑亦一时之极致耳。上自是顾李翰林，尤异于他学士。
现代文：刘禹锡自他被贬谪发配的州郡重返京师后，又写过一首吟著名歌星何戡的词。大意是这样的：二十年来别帝京，重闻天乐不胜情。
English: After Liu Yuxi returned to Beijing from the state and county where he was banished, he also wrote a poem about the famous singer He Xuan. The meaning is as follows: In the past twenty years, I have been away from Beijing, and I have heard a lot about heavenly music.

古文：会高力士终以脱靴为深耻。
现代文：旧人唯有何戡在，更请殷勤唱渭城。
English: The only thing the old people need to do is to sing more diligently.

古文：异日，太真妃重吟前词，力士戏曰：此为妃子怨李白，深入骨髓。
现代文：笛
English: Flute

古文：何反拳拳如是？
现代文：昭华管
English: Zhao Hua Guan

古文：太真因惊曰：何翰林学士能辱人如斯？力士曰：以飞燕指妃子，是贱之甚矣。
现代文：秦咸阳宫有玉笛，长二尺三寸，二十六孔，吹奏时就可以看到车、马、山川、树木隐约相接出现，不吹了就消失了。
English: Qin Xianyang Palace has a jade flute, two feet and three inches long, with 26 holes. When it is played, you can see cars, horses, mountains, rivers, and trees appear vaguely adjacent to each other. If it is not played, it disappears.

古文：太真颇深然之。
现代文：这支玉笛叫昭华管。
English: This flute is called the Zhaohua flute.

古文：上尝三欲命李白官，卒为宫中所捍而止。开元年间，宫中刚刚看重木芍药，就是现今的牡丹。
现代文：唐玄宗唐玄宗一次坐朝，用手上下按自己的肚腹。退朝后，高力士进前问玄宗说：刚才陛下多次用手指按腹部，是圣体不太舒服么？玄宗说：非也。
English: Tang Xuan Zong Tang Xuan Zong once sat in the morning and pressed his belly up and down with his hands. After retiring, Colossus came forward and asked Xuan Zong, "Just now, Your Majesty pressed your abdomen with your fingers many times. Is it because the Blessed Sacrament is not comfortable?" Xuan Zong said, "Not at all."

古文：得到四个品种：红、紫、浅红、通白。
现代文：我昨夜梦游月宫，诸位仙女为我演奏上清之乐，流亮清越，在人间是完全听不到的啊！
English: I was sleepwalking through the Moon Palace last night, and you fairies were playing the music of the Upper Clear for me. It's so bright and clear that it's completely inaudible on earth!

古文：因为将这些牡丹移植在特为太真妃新建成的沉香亭边，又值花会繁开，玄宗皇帝乘照夜白宝马，太真妃乘步辇相随，前往沈香亭畔观赏牡丹。
现代文：使我久久地沉醉在这仙声妙乐之中。后来，仙女们又演奏清乐为我送别，这支仙曲凄楚清丽、哀宛动人。我醒来后还感觉到余音杳杳，如在耳边。我马上吹奏玉笛来寻找记录它，都让我记录下来了。
English: I was intoxicated for a long time with this fairy melody. Later, the fairies also played a farewell song for me, this fairy song is very beautiful and moving. I woke up and felt the aftertaste, as if in my ear. I immediately played the tambourine to find and record it, and I recorded it all.

古文：下诏特选梨园弟子中的优秀的歌手唱歌，得乐曲十六部。
现代文：刚才坐朝，我怕有所遗忘，因此怀里揣着玉笛，不时地上下寻找它的音律，不是身体不适啊。高力士再次拜贺玄宗，说：这可是千载难遇的事情啊，愿陛下为老奴吹笛一遍可以吗？
English: Having just sat in the morning, I was afraid of forgetting something, so I carried a jade flute in my arms, and from time to time I went up and down looking for its melody. It wasn't a physical ailment. Golis again congratulated Xuanzong, saying, "This is a once-in-a-lifetime event. May His Majesty play the flute for the old man once more, please?"

古文：李龟年以唱歌能手而名噪一时。
现代文：玄宗试着吹奏一遍，其声飘渺旷远，绝非凡响，不可名状啊！
English: Xuanzong tried to play it once, and the sound was ethereal and distant, absolutely extraordinary, indescribable!

古文：他手捧檀板，站在众歌手前边，刚要唱歌。玄宗说：观赏名花，面对爱妃，怎么能用旧曲旧词唱呢？
现代文：高力士再次拜贺玄宗皇帝，并请皇帝给这支仙曲起个名字。玄宗笑着说：就暂叫它《紫云回》吧。
English: Koryoshi once again congratulated Emperor Xuanzong and asked the emperor to give a name to this celestial melody. Xuanzong said with a smile: Let's call it "Ziyunbei" for the time being.

古文：于是，命李龟年持御用金花笺，宣召李白进宫，让他立刻写出《清平调》三章。
现代文：后来主管乐事的太常卿将这支仙曲收入唐乐大典中，现在还有当年太常府的刻石为证。汉中王瑀汉中王李瑀任太卿时，一天早起上朝，听到永兴里有人吹笛，问：是太常府的乐工在吹笛子吧？答：是的。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong, who was in charge of music, included this celestial melody in the Great Tang Music Festival, and now there is evidence of this in the carved stone of Emperor Taizong's palace. When the Han dynasty king Li Yong was appointed emperor, he got up early one morning and heard someone playing a flute in Yongxing. He asked: "Is it the musician from Emperor Taizong's palace playing a flute?" The answer: "Yes."

古文：李白欣然接受了这个任务。这时李白昨夜喝醉了酒现在还没有完全醒酒呢。
现代文：后来，他因查阅乐曲召唤来太常府的乐工，问：在某天，你们怎么能够躺着吹笛呢！
English: Later, he summoned the musicians of Taichung for consulting the music and asked: "How can you play the flute lying down on a certain day?"

古文：只见他略一沉思，即提笔一挥而就，写成《清平调》三章。
现代文：謩李舟好事，曾经从一处山村野舍中得到一根烟竹，截作笛子，坚实象铁石，送给李謩。
English: Li Zhou, a good man, once got a stick of bamboo from a mountain village, which was cut into a flute, solid as a rock, and gave it to Li Zhou.

古文：这些词是：云想衣裳花想容，春风晓拂露华浓。
现代文：李謩吹笛，可谓天下第一。有一次他与几位客人，在明月高悬的夜晚，棹一小舟，泛江漫游，吹笛观景赏月。
English: Once, on a night when the moon was high in the sky, he and several guests rowed a small boat, roamed the river, and watched the moon while playing the flute.

古文：若非群玉山头见，会向瑶台月下逢。
现代文：笛声旷远清亮、宛转飘逸。忽然岸上有人招呼，请求登舟同游。
English: The sound of the flute is clear and far away, and the direction is drifting. Suddenly, someone on the shore calls out, asking to board the boat.

古文：一支红艳露凝香。云雨巫山枉断肠。借问汉宫谁得似，可怜飞燕倚新荘。
现代文：李謩他们棹舟到岸边，这个人上船后，请求李謩让笛借他吹一支曲子。
English: After the man got on the boat, he asked Li Qian to let him play a tune on the flute.

古文：名花倾国两相欢，长得君王带笑看。
现代文：这个人吹奏的笛声精妙无比，可让山石破裂，李謩平生从未听到过。初时，吹入散序、中序，笛声已非同凡响。
English: The flute played by this man is so exquisite that it can crack mountains and rocks. Li Yao has never heard it before in his life. At the beginning, the flute was played in the descending and middle order, and the sound of the flute was extraordinary.

古文：解释春风无限恨，沉香亭北倚栏杆。
现代文：待到进入第三大段入破时，只见吹笛人呼吸盘旋回转，指法粉碎如雨敲窗。
English: By the time the third major section was broken, the piper could only be seen breathing, spinning around and around, and tapping on the windows as if it were raining.

古文：李白写罢，龟年立即进献。
现代文：再听笛声犹如千军万马撕杀奔吼，又如雨打沙滩噼罗有声。
English: Listening to the flute again was like hearing the roar of an army of thousands of horses tearing and killing, and also like hearing the sound of rain hitting the beach.

古文：玄宗皇帝命令梨园弟子约略调抚丝竹伴奏，催促李龟年引喉唱之。
现代文：游赏结束，这位客人离船而去，从此不知下落。棹船的稍翁，认为这位不速之客很可能是水底的蛟龙啊！
English: At the end of the tour, the guest left the boat and has not been seen since. The boatman thought that the uninvited guest might be an underwater dragon!

古文：太真妃杨玉环手持玻璃七宝杯，酌饮西域凉州供奉的葡萄美酒，满脸含笑地领会着歌中的情意。玄宗亲吹玉笛为李龟年伴奏。每吹完一曲将换新曲时，故意拖长笛声取悦太真妃。
现代文：李謩有一次在瓜洲吹笛。
English: Li Yao once played the flute in Guazhou.

古文：太真妃饮完酒，收起绣帕两次拜谢皇上的恩宠。
现代文：当时江上舟船很多，人声喧闹。当李謩吹出第一声笛音，喧闹的人声立即停下来。
English: At that time, there were many boats on the river, and the voices were noisy. When Li Qian blew the first flute, the noisy voices immediately stopped.

古文：李龟年常将此事讲给五王听。
现代文：待到吹奏数节后，静谧的江面上似有微风飒飒拂来。
English: After a few bars, a breeze seems to blow across the calm river.

古文：回想一下，以唱歌而赢得这么高的声誉的，还没有超过这次的呢。
现代文：稍顷，满江的舟子、贾客，都发出欷歔之声，哀、叹、悲、怨溢于言表。
English: All of a sudden, the boatmen and passengers on the river were crying out, and their words were full of lamentation, grief, and bitterness.

古文：这也是一时的极致啊！
现代文：又李謩，开元年间是唐教坊首席吹笛手，直到现在也没有人超过他。
English: And Li Qian, who was the chief piper of the Tang Academy in the first year of the 21st century, until now no one has surpassed him.

古文：玄宗皇帝亲自顾眷李白，尤其有别于其他学士。
现代文：一次，李謩因故请假去越州。到了越州后，当地的达官名士或设公宴、或设私宴请他，为的是能一睹他的尊容，亲耳聆听到他吹奏的笛声。
English: Once, for some reason, Li Qian took a leave of absence to go to Yuezhou. After arriving in Yuezhou, local dignitaries and celebrities invited him to either a public banquet or a private banquet, in order to see his dignified face and hear the sound of his flute.

古文：使得内宫总管大太监高力士深深地认为皇上让他给李白脱靴是奇耻大辱。
现代文：当时，正逢越州新有十几位生员考中了进士。这些人家中都有些产业，于是凑集二千文钱准备在镜湖游船上聚会饮酒同乐，邀请李謩上船吹笛，以饱耳福。
English: At that time, it was a time when more than a dozen new students in Yuezhou had passed the entrance examination. These people all had some industry in their families, so they collected two thousand yuan to prepare to gather on the Mirror Lake cruise ship to drink and have fun, and invited Li Yao to play the flute on the ship to satisfy their ears.

古文：后来有一天，太真妃重吟李白的《清平调》时，高力士故作戏言说：为这些歪词，娘娘你应该怨恨李白那小子深入骨髓，怎么还念念不忘呢？
现代文：因为钱多人少，又相约每人可带一位客人同来。
English: Because there are many people with little money, it has been agreed that each person can bring one guest.

古文：太真妃惊异不解地问：你怎么能说李翰林用诗侮辱我呢？
现代文：其中有一位参加聚会的人，已经到了晚上方才想起这件事，没有功夫去请别人。
English: One of them, who was at the party, didn't think about it until the evening and didn't bother to invite anyone else.

古文：高力士说：李白那小子用赵飞燕指代娘娘你，是作贱你了。
现代文：就近请邻居中的一个孤老头儿。这位老头儿，长久居在这荒田野地里，外面的人情事故一点也不懂得。
English: He invited a lonely old man from the neighborhood to come closer. This old man, who had lived in this barren field for a long time, did not know anything about the human accident outside.

古文：赵飞燕后来失宠又有别欢，这不是借她来侮辱娘娘你么？太真妃听后很以为然，于是开始迁怒于李白。
现代文：有数间茅舍只他一人居住，乡里人都称他为独孤丈。第二天，这位进士带着独孤丈人一起到镜湖聚会的地方赴宴。酒宴开始后，只见湖水澄碧、波光荡洋，芳草修林，景物非凡。李謩以手拂笛，立于船边。
English: There were several cottages where he lived alone, and the villagers all called him the only son. The next day, the priest took the only son with him to the meeting place at Mirror Lake for a banquet. After the banquet began, the lake water was clear and blue, the waves were shining, the herbs were planted, and the scenery was extraordinary. Li Yao whistled with his hand and stood on the edge of the boat.

古文：玄宗皇帝曾有三次欲拜李白为官，都因在宫里遭到太真妃、高力士的阻碍而作罢。
现代文：在桨声款乃中，舟船渐移湖心。
English: In the middle of the paddle sound, the boat gradually moved to the center of the lake.

古文：李衮李衮善歌于江外，名动京师。
现代文：此时轻云笼湖，微风拂浪，波澜陡起。
English: At this time, the lake is lightly clouded, the breeze is blowing, and the waves are rising steeply.

古文：崔昭入朝，密载而至。乃邀宾客，请第一部乐及京邑之名倡，以为盛会。
现代文：李謩捧笛吹奏，笛声初发，风云齐开，水明林秀，上下澄碧，仿佛如有鬼神之工使之如此啊！
English: Li Qian held a flute and played, the flute sounded for the first time, the wind and clouds were at the same time, the water was clear and beautiful, and the sky was clear and blue, as if there were a ghost god's work to make it so!

古文：昭言有表弟，请登末座，令衮弊衣而出，满坐嗤笑之。
现代文：船上的宾客都赞叹不已，纷纷说：就是敬天的神乐也没有这么大的神力啊！独孤丈一言未发。与会的人都脸现不快。
English: The guests on the boat were full of admiration and said one after another: Even the heavenly music does not have such great divine power! Not a single word was uttered. The faces of the participants were unhappy.

古文：少顷命酒，昭曰：请表弟歌。
现代文：李謩也认为这个老丈轻视自己，也怨愤不语。
English: Li Yan also thought that this old man despised himself, and he was also resentful.

古文：坐中又笑。
现代文：过了好一会儿，才又静思一曲吹奏出来。
English: After a while, I started to play a meditative piece.

古文：及喉啭一声，乐人皆大惊曰：是李八郎也。
现代文：曲调更加绝妙异常，在座的宾客没有人不惊骇赞赏的，唯有独孤丈还是不出一言。
English: The tune is even more extraordinary, and there is no one among the guests present who does not admire it, except for one person who does not say a word.

古文：罗拜之。韩会
现代文：请他同来的这位进士也深感羞愧，后悔自己带这么个不通人情的孤老头儿赴会，对座上的宾客解释说：独孤老丈常年独居山村，不与人来往，更是很少进城。对于音乐，他一点也不懂得，请大家不必介意。
English: The scholar who invited him was also deeply ashamed, regretting that he had brought such an unsociable lonely old man to the meeting. He explained to the guests at the table: the lonely old man lives alone in a mountain village all year round, does not socialize with people, and rarely goes to the city. He does not understand music at all, please do not mind.

古文：韩会善歌，绝妙。
现代文：四座的宾客同声刺讽独孤老丈，老丈依然不语，只是微微笑笑而已。
English: The guests in the four seats satirized the lonely old man in unison. The old man still did not speak, but only smiled slightly.

古文：名辈号为四夔，会为夔头。
现代文：李謩问道：这位老丈你一言不发，是你真的不懂音乐呢？
English: Li Yao asked, "You didn't say a word to this old man, do you really not understand music?"

古文：米嘉荣
现代文：还是一位高人？
English: Or a high-ranking official?

古文：歌曲之妙，其来久矣。
现代文：独孤丈才慢慢说道：你怎么就知道我不懂音乐呢？
English: How do you know that I don't know music?

古文：元和中，国乐有米嘉荣、何戡，近有陈不嫌。
现代文：李謩听了这句不太友好的回答后，脸色更加不好看。
English: After listening to this not-so-friendly answer, Li Yao's face looked even worse.

古文：不嫌子意奴，一二十年来绝不闻善唱，盛以拍弹行于世。
现代文：四座客人见李謩变了脸色，都纷纷站起向李謩道歉，劝慰李謩。正在这时，独孤丈人沉静地说：请你试吹一首《凉州》吧。李謩傲岸地捧笛吹了一首《凉州》曲。
English: When the four guests saw Li Qiye's face change, they all stood up to apologize to Li Qiye and comfort Li Qiye. At this time, the only one said quietly: Please try to play a "Liangzhou" song. Li Qiye proudly held a flute and played a "Liangzhou" song.

古文：拍弹起于李可久。
现代文：曲终，独孤丈人品评说：李公的笛子果然吹得不错。
English: At the end of the piece, his father-in-law commented: "Li Gong's flute is really well played.

古文：懿宗朝恩泽曲子，《别赵十》、《哭赵十》之名。
现代文：然而，你的笛声掺揉进去夷狄乐曲，你是不是在龟兹有朋友啊！
English: However, the sound of your flute mixed in with the Yiddish melody, do you have a friend in the Turtle!

古文：刘尚书禹锡《与米嘉荣》诗云：三朝供奉米嘉荣，能变新声作旧声。
现代文：李謩听了后大吃一惊，站起身参拜独孤丈人，说：老丈乃是方外神奇之人，恕我李謩有眼不识。
English: Li Yao was taken aback after hearing this. He stood up and paid homage to his lonely father-in-law, saying, "My father-in-law is a miraculous person from outside the family. I'm sorry, but Li Yao is blind.

古文：于今后辈轻前辈，好染髭须事后生。又自贬所归京，《闻何戡歌》曰：二十年来别帝京，重闻天乐不胜情。
现代文：我的老师确实是龟兹人啊。独孤丈人又说：《凉州》一曲，你吹到第十三叠误入水调，你自己知道不？
English: My teacher really is a turtle. My father-in-law also said: "Liangzhou" song, you blew to the thirteenth stack by mistake into the water, do you know?

古文：旧人唯有何戡在，更请殷勤唱渭城。
现代文：李謩恭谨地回答道：李謩愚钝顽冥，实在不知道哇。
English: Li Qiye respectfully replied: Li Qiye is stupid and stubborn, I really don't know.

古文：笛昭华管
现代文：独孤丈人伸手取笛欲吹给李謩看看。
English: Doko's father-in-law reached out to take the flute and wanted to play it for Li Yao.

古文：秦咸阳宫有玉笛长二尺三寸，二十六孔。
现代文：李謩连忙更换一笛，用袖拂试后递给独孤丈人。
English: Li Yao hurriedly replaced a flute and handed it to his father-in-law after testing it with his sleeve.

古文：吹之则见车马山林，隐隐相次，息亦不见，名曰昭华之管。
现代文：独孤丈人接过看看，说：你这些笛子都不堪使用。使用它们的主人都是粗通吹笛的人。
English: Doko's father-in-law took a look and said, "These flutes of yours are not fit for use. The people who use them are crude flute players."

古文：唐玄宗玄宗尝坐朝时，以手指上下按其腹。
现代文：于是又换了一只笛子，说：这只笛子吹到入破时也要破裂的，你不会舍不得吧。李謩说：不敢。
English: So he changed to another flute and said, "This flute will break when you blow into it. You won't regret it, will you?" Li Yan said, "I wouldn't dare."

古文：朝退，高力士进曰：陛下向来数以手指按其腹，岂非圣体小不安耶？
现代文：于是独孤丈人捧笛吹起来。笛声初发即响遏云霄，四座震況，李謩恭敬不安地立在那儿一动不敢动。
English: So his father-in-law took up a flute and began to play. The first sound of the flute shook the sky, and there were four tremors. Li Yao stood there respectfully and uneasily, not daring to move.

古文：玄宗曰：非也。吾昨夜梦游月宫，诸仙娱余以上清之乐。
现代文：吹到第十三叠，独孤丈人停下来，向李謩讲解他刚才吹的谬误所在。
English: When he reached the thirteenth stack, his father-in-law stopped and explained to Li Yao the fallacy of what he had just said.

古文：流亮清越，殆非人所闻也。
现代文：李謩完全敬服连连拜谢。待到入破，笛子立即破裂了，不能再吹下去了。
English: Li Qiye bowed in complete reverence and bowed repeatedly. When he reached the break, the flute immediately broke and could not be blown any further.

古文：酣醉久之，合奏清乐。
现代文：李謩再次拜谢，众位宾客彻底折服。会散。
English: Li Yao thanked again, and all the guests were thoroughly satisfied. They dispersed.

古文：以送吾归。其曲凄楚动人，杳杳在耳。
现代文：第二天早晨，李謩和与会的诸位宾客，一起前往独孤丈人住所等候拜见。
English: The next morning, Li Yao and all the guests who attended the meeting went to the residence of his father-in-law to wait for him.

古文：吾向以玉笛寻，尽得矣。
现代文：到那儿一看，只留有几间空宅，独孤丈人已经不知哪里去了。
English: When I got there, there were only a few empty houses left, and I didn't know where my parents had gone.

古文：坐朝之际，虑或遗忘，故怀玉笛，时以上下寻之。非不安也。
现代文：越州人得知这件奇闻后，纷纷出访，四处寻找独孤丈人，然而始终没有寻到，谁也不知道他去向哪里。
English: After the people of Yuezhou learned of this strange story, they went abroad one after another, searching everywhere for the only son-in-law. However, he was never found, and no one knew where he had gone.

古文：力士再拜贺曰：非常之事也，愿陛下为臣一奏之。上试奏，其音寥寥然，不可名也。
现代文：许云封
English: Xu Yunfeng

古文：力士又奏拜，且请其名。
现代文：许云封，乐工中吹笛的人。
English: Xu Yunfeng, a flute player among the musicians.

古文：上笑曰：此曲名《紫云回》。
现代文：唐德宗贞元初年，韦应物自兰台郎改任和州牧，不是出自他的本愿，很是不得志。
English: In the first year of Tang De Zong Zhen Yuan, Wei Ying changed his position from Lantai Lang to the state herdsman, not out of his original wish, but out of frustration.

古文：载于乐章，今太常刻石在焉。
现代文：他乘小船顺水东下，夜晚停泊在灵璧驿站。
English: He took a small boat along the water to the east, and moored at Lingbi Railway Station at night.

古文：汉中王瑀汉中王瑀为太卿。
现代文：正值夜空初现莹碧的夜光，秋天的冷露凝聚在衰草的枯叶上。
English: At the right time, the night sky is beginning to glow with a brilliant blue glow, and the cold dew of autumn is condensing on the dead leaves of the withered grass.

古文：早起朝，闻永兴里人吹笛，问是太常乐人否。
现代文：韦应物坐在船仓中一边饮酒一边吟诗，正要将吟得的诗句记下来时，忽然听到许云封吹奏的笛声，慨叹许久。
English: Wei Yingwen was sitting in the hold of the ship, drinking wine and chanting poetry. Just as he was about to write down the verses he had recited, he suddenly heard the sound of Xu Yunfeng's flute, and he sighed for a long time.

古文：曰：然。已后因阅乐而唤之，问曰：何得某日卧吹笛耶。謩
现代文：韦应物通晓音律，说许云封的笛声，很象天宝年间京都梨园首席笛手李謩吹的。
English: Wei Ying is a connoisseur of music, and says that the sound of Xu Yunfeng's flute is very similar to that played by Li Xuan, the chief flautist of Kyoto's Pear Garden, during the Tenpo era.

古文：李舟好事尝得村舍烟竹，截为笛，坚如铁石。
现代文：于是召来许云封询问。方知到他是李謩的外孙。许云封讲述道：我原本是任城人，已经有多年没有回去。
English: So he called Xu Yunfeng to inquire. He learned that he was the grandson of Li Yan. Xu Yunfeng said: I was originally from Rencheng, and I haven't been back for many years.

古文：以遗李謩。謩吹笛，天下第一。
现代文：天宝改元时，我才生下来一个月。
English: I was only a month old when Tianbao was reformed.

古文：月夜泛江，与同舟人吹，寥亮逸发。
现代文：当时正值玄宗皇帝东到泰山封禅归来，外祖父随圣驾到任城，听说我刚生下来，见到后非常喜欢。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was returning to Taishan Fuzhen, and my grandfather accompanied him to Rencheng. I heard that I had just been born, and I liked it very much when I saw it.

古文：俄有客于岸，呼舟请载。
现代文：亲手抱给李白学士看，并请李翰林给我起个名字。
English: I held it in my hands and showed it to Li Bai and asked Li Hanlin to give me a name.

古文：既至，请笛而吹，甚为精妙，山石可裂。
现代文：李老先生当时正坐在集市的旗楼上，高声招呼：快拿酒来！
English: At that time, Mr. Li Lao was sitting on the flag tower of the market, shouting loudly: Quickly bring wine!

古文：謩平生未尝见。
现代文：当炉卖酒的老太太贺兰氏已经九十多岁了。
English: Helan, an old woman who works as a stove and sells wine, is over ninety years old.

古文：及入破，呼吸盘擗，应指粉碎。
现代文：是她邀请李翰林到旗楼上饮酒的。我外祖父听到呼喊，赶紧将酒送到旗楼上。
English: It was she who invited Li Hanlin to drink alcohol on the flag tower. My grandfather heard the shouts and rushed to bring the wine to the flag tower.

古文：客散，不知所之。舟人著记，疑其蛟龙也。
现代文：李翰林大口猛喝几口酒后，提笔挥毫在我胸上醉书五言诗一首：树下彼何人，不语真吾好。语若及日中，烟霏谢成宝。
English: After Li Hanlin gulped down a few sips of wine, he waved his pen on my chest and drunkenly wrote a five-sentence poem: Under the tree, no matter who he is, he's really good at not speaking. If he speaks during the day, he'll be a success.

古文：謩尝秋夜吹笛于瓜州，楫载甚隘。
现代文：外祖观后说：我是特意向你为我外孙乞讨个名字的，你写了一首诗，这是什么意思啊？
English: After watching, the grandfather said, "I specifically begged you to give my grandson a name. You wrote a poem. What does that mean?"

古文：初发调，群动皆息；及数奏，微风飒然立至。
现代文：李翰林说：你要求的名字就在这首诗中间呢。你看，树下人是木子。木子，李字也。
English: Li Hanlin said, "The name you asked for is in the middle of this poem. Look, the person under the tree is Muzi. Muzi is also the Chinese character for "Li."

古文：有顷，舟入贾客，有怨叹悲泣之声。
现代文：不言是莫言，莫言謩也。好是女子，女子外孙也。语及日中，是言午。言午，许也。
English: If you don't speak, you can't speak, and if you don't speak, you can't speak. If you are a woman, you can't speak. If you are a woman's grandchild, you can't speak. If you speak during the day, you can't speak. If you speak at night, you can't speak.

古文：又謩，开元中吹笛为第一部，近代无比。
现代文：烟霏谢成宝，是云出封中，乃是云封也。
English: Xie Chengbao, a smoker, is in the middle of the cloud seal, and is also a cloud seal.

古文：有故，自教坊请假至越州，公私更宴，以观其妙。
现代文：即李謩外孙许云封也。后来，我就叫了云封这个名字。
English: That is, Li Yao's grandson Xu Yunfeng. Later, I called him Yunfeng.

古文：时州客举进士者十人，皆有资业，乃醵二千文同会镜湖，欲邀李生湖上吹之，想其风韵，尤敬人神。
现代文：我才长至十岁，便父母相继去世孤身一人了。
English: I was only ten years old when my parents died one after the other and I was left alone.

古文：以费多人少，遂相约各召一客。
现代文：后乘驿马来到长安。外祖父怜我孤身远道而来，让我跟着几个舅舅学吹笛。
English: Later, I came to Chang'an on a pack horse. My grandfather took pity on me, coming all the way here alone, and let me learn to play the flute with a few uncles.

古文：会中有一人，以日晚方记得，不遑他请。
现代文：说我天性就对音律知悉，于是教我吹横笛。
English: He said that I had a natural knowledge of musical notation, so he taught me to play the flute.

古文：其邻居有独孤生者年老，久处田野，人事不知，茅屋数间，尝呼为独孤丈。
现代文：每当学成一支曲子时，外祖父总是抚摸着我的脊背赏叹。这时，正赶上宫里梨园设置音声小科班，共收三十多人，年龄须在十五岁以下，外祖父将我推荐去了。
English: Whenever I learned a piece of music, my grandfather always stroked my back and admired me. At this time, I was just in time for the Imperial Pear Garden to set up a small audio science class, with a total of more than thirty people, all under the age of fifteen, and my grandfather recommended me to go.

古文：至是遂以应命。到会所，澄波万顷，景物皆奇。
现代文：玄宗天宝十四年六月日，正值皇帝住下骊山行宫，又是贵妃杨玉环的诞辰生日。皇上诏见梨园小科班为娘娘演奏祝寿。我们都被接到长生殿，奏献新曲，没有命名。
English: On June 14th, the 14th year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, the emperor was staying at the Lushan Imperial Palace, and it was also the birthday of Yang Yuhuan, the empress dowager. The emperor decreed that the Liyuan Elementary Science Class should perform for his daughters to celebrate their birthdays. We were all received at the Hall of Immortality to perform a new piece, which was not named.

古文：李生拂笛，渐移舟于湖心。
现代文：南海向贵妃进奉鲜荔枝，因此将曲名定为《荔枝香》。
English: Nanhai offered fresh lychees to Guifei, so the song was named "Lychee Fragrance."

古文：时轻云朦胧，微风拂流，波澜陡起。
现代文：演奏完，左右欢呼，声动山谷，算是出了风头。
English: After the performance, cheering left and right, the sound of the valley, is out of the limelight.

古文：李生捧笛，其声始发之后，昏噎齐开，水木森然，仿佛如有神鬼之来。
现代文：当年，安禄山起兵反叛朝庭，皇上与娘娘匆忙返驾还京，我们也做鸟兽散了。
English: That year, Mount Anlu rebelled against the imperial court, and the emperor and his daughters hurried back to Beijing. We were scattered like birds and beasts.

古文：坐客皆更赞咏之，以为钧天之乐不如也。
现代文：我则流落南海近四十年。我要将去龙立探访诸亲友。
English: I have been living in the South China Sea for nearly forty years. I am going to visit relatives and friends in Longli.

古文：独孤生乃无一言，会者皆怒。李生为轻己，意甚忿之。
现代文：韦应物说：我的乳母有个儿子名叫千金，曾在天宝中年拜你外祖父李謩为师，艺学成后却死了。
English: Wei Yingwen said, "My nanny had a son named Qianjin. In the Middle Ages, he was a pupil of your grandfather Li Jun in Tianbao. However, he died after completing his studies.

古文：良久，又静思作一曲，更加妙绝，无不赏骇。
现代文：我每每想起来就很悲伤啊！千金昔日吹的笛子，就是李君所赠。
English: Every time I think about it, I feel very sad! The flute that Senkin used to play was a gift from Li Jun.

古文：独孤生又无言。
现代文：说着，从行囊中取出一个旧笛递与许云封。
English: Saying this, he took out an old flute case and envelope from his travelling bag.

古文：邻居召至者甚惭悔，白於众曰：独孤村落幽处，城郭稀至。音乐之类，率所不通。
现代文：许云封悲伤地跪拜接过，抚摸观看，说：我相信这是一支很好的笛子，但并不是当年我外祖父吹的那支。
English: Xu Yunfeng knelt down sadly to pick it up, stroked it, and said, "I believe this is a good flute, but it's not the one my grandfather used to play.

古文：会客同诮责之，独孤生不答，但微笑而已。
现代文：又对韦应物说：制笛用的竹子应是生长在云梦泽南岸山上的，在柯亭下边挑选。
English: He also said to Wei Yingwen: The bamboo used for flute making should be grown on the hill on the south bank of Yunmenze, and should be selected at the bottom of the pavilion.

古文：李生曰：公如是，是轻薄为？
现代文：须在当年七月十五日前生，明年七月十五日前伐。
English: They must be born before July 15 of that year, and born before July 15 of the next year.

古文：复是好手？独孤生乃徐曰：公安知仆不会也？
现代文：过期不伐，它的音色发窒，未到日期就伐下来的，它的音色就浮。
English: If it is not cut before the expiration date, its tone will be suffocated. If it is cut before the expiration date, its tone will float.

古文：坐客皆为李生改容谢之。
现代文：所谓浮，外面泽润而内里干。干，受气不全。气不全，竹必夭。
English: The so-called floating, the outside is moist and the inside is dry. Dry, not enough air. Not enough air, the bamboo will die.

古文：独孤曰：公试吹《凉州》。
现代文：笛子吹一声，出入九息。古时吹奏出的最美丽动听的笛音，一叠十二节，一节十二敲。
English: The most beautiful flute sound played in ancient times, a stack of twelve stanzas, a stanza of twelve strokes.

古文：至曲终，独孤生曰：公亦甚能妙，然声调杂夷乐，得无有龟兹之侣乎？
现代文：今天的名乐曲啊，可以吹奏出梅花流韵，感叹金谷游人；折柳传情，悲怜守卫艮关的戍客。
English: Today's famous piece of music can play the plum blossom rhyme and lament the visitors of Kanaya; it can tell the story of the willow and pity the guests of the gate.

古文：李生大骇，起拜曰：丈人神绝，某亦不自知，本师实龟兹之人也。
现代文：诚然也是清音亮响，但是离达到至音还有很大的差距，不能作降神祈福用的祭祀乐曲啊。
English: It is true that it is also clear and loud, but there is still a big gap from reaching the highest note, and it cannot be used as a sacrificial music for praying to the gods.

古文：又曰：第十三叠误入水调，足下知之乎？
现代文：用已夭的竹管制成的笛子，遇到最高音时必定要破损的。
English: A flute made from an old bamboo reed is bound to break when it hits the highest note.

古文：李生曰：某顽蒙，实不觉。独孤生乃取吹之。
现代文：所以，我才辩别这笛子不是外祖父以前所吹的。
English: That's why I couldn't tell that it wasn't the flute that my grandfather used to play.

古文：李生更有一笛，拂试以进。
现代文：韦应物听了后说：我想看看你说的是否真的那样。请你吹奏一曲试试，笛子吹坏了无妨。
English: After listening, Wei Yingwen said, "I want to see if what you said is true. Please try to play a piece of music. It's okay if the flute is broken."

古文：独孤视之曰：此都不堪取，执者粗通耳。
现代文：于是，许云封捧笛吹一曲《六州遍》。一叠还未吹完，駭然一声，笛管中间破裂。
English: As a result, Xu Yunfeng held a flute and played a piece of music, "Rokuzhouhen." One group had not yet finished playing, when there was a horrifying sound and the middle of the flute broke.

古文：乃换之，曰：此至入破，必裂，得无吝惜否？
现代文：韦应物久久惊叹不已，于是聘请许云封在他治下的曲部任事。
English: Wei Ying was astonished for a long time, so he hired Xu Yunfeng to work in the music department under his reign.

古文：李生曰：不敢。
现代文：吕乡筠
English: Lu Township

古文：遂吹。声发入云，四座震況，李生蹙踖不敢动。
现代文：洞庭商客吕乡筠，常用洞庭的鱼虾贩江西杂货。
English: Dongting merchants Lv Xiangtao, commonly used Dongting fish and shrimp sellers Jiangxi grocery.

古文：至第十三叠，揭示谬误之处，敬伏将拜。
现代文：取十层之一的利，利外还有富余就资助贫穷的亲友，再有富余的就救助穷人。
English: Take one-tenth of the profits, and if there is any surplus, help poor relatives and friends, and if there is any surplus, help the poor.

古文：及入破，笛遂败裂，不复终曲。
现代文：自己从来不积蓄攒钱。吕乡筠擅长吹笛。每遇到好山水，没有不驾舟游赏、吹笛而去的。
English: He never saved money. Lv Xiangtao was good at playing the flute. Whenever he came across a beautiful landscape, he would not leave without taking a boat ride and playing the flute.

古文：李生再拜。众皆贴息，乃散。
现代文：一次，在一个中春月夜，吕乡筠船泊在君山旁边，摆酒一樽独饮。
English: Once, on a mid-spring moon night, Lv Xiang's barge moored next to Junshan, drinking a barrel of wine.

古文：明旦，李生并会客皆往候之，至则唯茅舍尚存，独孤生不见矣。越人知者皆访之，竟不知其所去。
现代文：饮一杯吹笛数曲，忽然看见烟波浩淼中有一渔舟驶来。渐渐近了，见一鬓眉花白的老翁驾着一条渔船，举止行为不同凡人。吕乡筠放下笛子站起来，迎过去。
English: After drinking a glass of wine and playing a few flute tunes, he suddenly saw a fishing boat coming in the midst of a vast sea of smoke. As he got closer, he saw a white-faced old man driving a fishing boat, whose behavior was unlike that of an ordinary person. Lv Xiangyao put down his flute and stood up to welcome him.

古文：许云封许云封，乐工之笛者。
现代文：老翁将渔舟系在吕乡筠船上，走过船来。寒暄过后，老翁说：听你的笛声嘹亮，曲调不一般，我过来看看。
English: The old man tied the fishing boat to the Lvxiang paddle boat and walked past the boat. After the cold snap, the old man said: Listen to your flute, the tune is not ordinary, let me come and have a look.

古文：贞元初，韦应物自兰台郎出为和州牧，非所宜愿，颇不得志。轻舟东下，夜泊灵璧驿。
现代文：吕乡筠没说什么，又饮了几杯酒，老翁又说：我少时学过吹笛，可以让我教教你吗？
English: Lu Xiangyao didn't say anything, and drank a few more glasses of wine. The old man said, "I learned to play the flute when I was young. Can I teach you?"

古文：时云天初莹，狄露凝冷，舟中吟瓢，将以属词。
现代文：吕乡筠平素对求教好学的体会很深，站起参拜老翁，说：愿作你的关门弟子。
English: Lv Xiang Yu Ping has a deep understanding of the desire to learn, and stood up to pay homage to the old man, saying: I am willing to be your closed-door disciple.

古文：忽闻云封笛声，嗟叹良久。
现代文：老翁于是从怀袖里取出三管笛子。
English: The old man then took out a three-pipe flute from his sleeve.

古文：韦公洞晓音律，谓其笛声，酷似天宝中梨园法曲李謩所吹者。
现代文：一管大如双臂合抱，第二管如常人用的那么大，第三管小如细笔管。吕乡筠又一次下拜，请老渔翁吹一曲听听。老渔翁说：最大的那管不能吹它，中间的那管也不能吹。
English: One pipe is as big as a pair of arms held together, the second pipe is as big as the one used by ordinary people, and the third pipe is as small as a fine pen. Lv Xiangyu bowed again and asked the old fisherman to play a tune. The old fisherman said, "The biggest pipe can't play it, and the pipe in the middle can't play it either."

古文：遂召云封问之，乃是李謩外孙也。
现代文：老汉我可以用最小的这管为你吹一曲，但不知道能否吹到终了？
English: Old man, I can play a tune for you with the smallest of these pipes, but I don't know if I can play it to the end.

古文：云封曰：某任城旧土，多年不归。
现代文：吕乡筠说：我愿意听听你说的不可以吹的那管。
English: Lu Xiangyao said, "I am willing to listen to what you have to say about the pipe that cannot be blown."

古文：天宝改元，初生一月。时东封回，驾次至任城。
现代文：老翁说：最大的那管原本在天上，是为天上的诸位天帝、元君和上元夫人们，伴奏上天的神乐而吹的。
English: The old man said, "The biggest trumpet was originally in heaven, and it was blown to accompany the heavenly music for all the heavenly emperors, princes, and queens.

古文：外祖闻某初生，相见甚喜，乃抱诣李白学士，乞撰令名。
现代文：假如在人世间吹它，就会人消地隐、日月无光，五星失位，山峦崩塌，余下的后果我就不说了吧。
English: If you blow it in the human world, people will disappear, the sun and moon will not shine, the five stars will lose their position, the mountains will collapse, and I will not talk about the remaining consequences.

古文：李公方坐旗亭，高声命酒。当炉贺兰氏年且九十余，邀李置饮于楼上。
现代文：第二管笛是给诸位洞府仙人、蓬莱、射姑诸仙岛、仙山上的方士，和昆仑山西瑶池王母娘娘合仙乐而吹的。假若在人间吹它，就会石飞沙走、翔鸟坠地、走兽脑裂、五星内错，稚幼的生命都会被震死，人众没有路可走，余下的后果我就不说了。
English: The second pipe flute was blown for all the deities in Dongfu, Penglai, Sagu in the Fairy Islands, the magicians on the Fairy Mountains, and the mother and daughter of the Queen of the West Dianchi Lake in Kunlun Mountain. If you blow it in the human world, it will cause the stone to fly away, the bird to fall to the ground, the animal's brain to crack, and the five stars to be wrong. The lives of young children will be shaken to death, people have no way to go, and I will not say the remaining consequences.

古文：外祖送酒，李公握管醉书某胸前曰： 树下彼何人，不语真吾好。
现代文：最小的这管，是老汉我与朋友同辈可以娱乐的。世上万物、众生都可以听。但是一旦吹起来，他们都会不安分的，是否可以吹完一曲还不好说。
English: The smallest pipe is the one that can entertain me, my friends and my peers. Everything and everyone in the world can listen to it. But once they blow it, they will be restless, and it's hard to say if they can finish a song.

古文：语若及日中，烟霏谢成宝。
现代文：老翁说完后，抽出最细的那管笛子吹了三声，湖上刮起了大风，波浪激荡，鱼鳖喷跳。
English: After the old man finished speaking, he pulled out the thinnest flute and played it three times. A strong wind blew on the lake, the waves swirled, and the fish jumped.

古文：外祖辞曰： 本于李氏乞名，今不解所书之语。
现代文：吕乡筠和童仆们惊慌恐惧。吹了五声六声，君山上的鸟兽嘶鸣孔叫，天上的月亮昏暗无光，湖上的各种舟船摇荡，船上的人惊慌失措。
English: Lv Xiangtao and his servants were panicked and frightened. The horns blew five or six times, the birds and beasts on the majestic mountain hissed, the moon in the sky was dim and dark, all kinds of boats on the lake rocked, and the people on the boat panicked.

古文：李公曰：此即名在其间也。树下人是木子，木子李字也。
现代文：老翁于是不吹了，连连饮酒数杯，吟诗一首：湖中老人读黄老，手援紫藟坐翠草。
English: So the old man did not blow the horn. He drank several cups of alcohol in succession, and chanted a poem: The old man in the lake reads Huanglao, and helps Zijuan to sit on the grass.

古文：不语是莫言，莫言謩也。
现代文：春至不知湖水深，日暮忘却巴陵道。
English: From spring to spring, no one knows how deep the lake is. At dusk, Baling Road is forgotten.

古文：好是女子，女子外孙也。
现代文：吟完，又喝了数杯酒，对吕乡筠说：明年秋天，与君还在此处相聚。
English: After chanting, he drank several glasses of wine and said to Lv Xiangtao: Next autumn, I will still meet you here.

古文：语及日中，是言午，言午许也。
现代文：于是摇着渔舟离去，渐渐隐没于湖波深处。
English: So he rocked the fishing boat and left, gradually disappearing into the depths of the lake.

古文：烟霏谢成宝，是云出封中，乃是云封也。
现代文：到了第二年秋天，吕乡筠十旬就在君山旁边等候老渔翁，然而始终没有再见到他。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Lv Xiangzhuanzhun was waiting for the old fisherman next to Junshan, but he never saw him again.

古文：即李謩外生许云封也。
现代文：觱篥李蔚李蔚，初为官时就日理百事，颇有政绩。
English: Li Wei Li Wei, when she first became an official, was very good at Japanese politics, and had quite a few political achievements.

古文：后遂名之。
现代文：后来，在僖宗朝中任过宰相。
English: Later, he served as prime minister during the reign of Emperor Taizong.

古文：某才始十年，身便孤立。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通中年，李蔚由大梁迁任淮海，他的政治声誉便一天天的大起来。
English: In the middle years of Tang Xizong's reign, Li Wei was transferred to Huaihai from Daliang, and his political reputation grew day by day.

古文：因乘义马，西入长安。
现代文：来淮海没到一年，便着手治水保土，移风易俗。
English: Less than a year after coming to Huaihai, he began to control water and soil conservation, and changed customs.

古文：外祖悯以远来，令齿诸舅学业。
现代文：他的这些做法非常符合淮海民众的意愿，很受欢迎。自彭门之乱后，藩镇割据四起，疮痍满目。
English: These actions of his are very much in line with the wishes of the people of Huaihai, and are very popular. Since the Pengmen Rebellion, four towns have been divided and devastated.

古文：谓某性知音律，教以横笛。
现代文：李蔚在淮海克己奉公、励精图治。他治理乱政，整肃纪纲，没有一天空闲的时候。
English: Li Wei devoted himself to public service and worked hard to govern in Huaihai. He governed the chaotic government, rectified the discipline, and did not have a day off.

古文：每一曲成，必抚背赏叹。值梨园法部置小部音声，凡三十余人，皆十五以下。
现代文：淮海几乎没有什么名胜可供人们游赏，郡内原有的几处亭、榭、花园、钓台，也都荒芜颓败了。李蔚看到这些，打算重新整修一番郡容。一天，他命人在戏马亭西边的连玉钩斜道处，开挖一座人工湖，在湖中修建一座亭台，起名叫赏心亭。
English: There are almost no places of interest in Huaihai for people to visit, and several of the county's original pavilions, pavilions, gardens, and fishing platforms have also fallen into disrepair. Li Wei saw this and planned to renovate the county's appearance. One day, he ordered people to dig an artificial lake at the slope of Lianyu Hook on the west side of Zhimating, and build a pavilion in the lake, called Baoshin Pavilion.

古文：天宝十四载六月日，时骊山驻跸，是贵妃诞辰。
现代文：在湖边广植花木，并从别处收集奇禽异兽，都放置在这里，使得原来的一处荒野沼泽变成了美丽的公园。每到春暖花开时节，平民百姓和官宦士女都到这里来游玩观赏。
English: Extensive planting of flowers and trees along the lake and the collection of exotic birds and beasts from elsewhere have all been placed here, turning what was originally a wilderness swamp into a beautiful park. Every spring, when the flowers bloom, ordinary people and government officials come here to play and watch.

古文：上命小部音声，乐长生殿。
现代文：有一天，听说浙右的一个下级军官薛阳陶，监押运往朝庭库府的米粮来到淮海郡。
English: One day, I heard that Xue Yangtao, a lower-ranking officer from Zhejiang Province, had come to Huaihai County to detain the rice grain that was being transported to the Imperial Treasury.

古文：仍奏新曲，未有名。
现代文：李蔚觉得这个小军官的姓名，同以前的同事朱崖李相有些连带。
English: Li Wei felt that the name of this petty officer was somewhat related to his former colleague Zhu Yali and Li Xiang.

古文：会南海进荔枝，因以曲名《荔枝香》。
现代文：于是，让人询问，果然是故人。李蔚大喜，如得到一件古物。
English: As a result, people inquired that it was indeed the deceased. Li Wei was overjoyed, as if he had obtained an antique.

古文：左右欢呼，声动山谷。
现代文：让他手下的一位武官代替薛阳陶监押粮船，将他留住在驿馆里。
English: He asked one of his military attachés to take the place of Xue Yang Tao as overseer of the grain ships and kept him in the Summer Palace.

古文：其年安禄山叛，车驾还京。
现代文：一天，李蔚请薛阳陶外出游玩。
English: One day, Li Wei invited Xue Yangtao to go out to play.

古文：自后俱逢离乱，漂流南海，近四十载。
现代文：一路上谈起许多往事，特别问薛阳陶：你听说过，我们常在一起吹芦管的事吗？
English: Along the way, they talked about many past events, and asked Xue Yangtao in particular: Have you heard that we often played the reed pipe together?

古文：今者近访诸亲，将抵龙丘。韦公曰：我有乳母之子，其名千金，尝于天宝中受笛李供奉。
现代文：薛阳陶回说知道，并取出朱崖、李相、元、白所写的乐曲一轴，献给李蔚。李蔚更高兴了。
English: Xue Yangtao replied that he knew, and took out a spool of music written by Zhu Yali, Li Xiang, Yuan and Bai, and dedicated it to Li Wei. Li Wei was even happier.

古文：艺成身死，每所悲嗟。
现代文：薛阳陶又从怀中拿出芦管，就在赏心亭上吹奏起来。
English: Xue Yangtao took out the reed pipe from his bosom and began to play it on the pavilion.

古文：旧吹之笛，即李君所赐也。
现代文：声音好象从天上飘来的，情宽思闲，如同仙乐。
English: The sound seems to come from the sky, the mood is relaxed and leisurely, like a fairy tale.

古文：遂囊出旧笛。云封跪捧悲切，抚而观之曰：信是佳笛，但非外祖所吹者。
现代文：李蔚听后大加赞赏，当场写诗一首，其中有两句诗的大意是：小小的芦管啊，你体小心虚燕子衔着都绰绰有余。
English: After listening to Li Wei, she greatly appreciated it and wrote a poem on the spot, of which there are two poems to the effect of: Little reed pipe, you are more than enough to be careful of the virtual swallow.

古文：乃为韦公曰：竹生云梦之南，鉴在柯亭之下。
现代文：但是你发出的声音凤鸣龙吟都不及啊！于是，李蔚厚赏薛阳陶，并将他的两个儿子安排在府内管辖的煮盐场任百夫长，领导一百名盐工。
English: But the sounds you make are nothing compared to the phoenixes chirping and dragons singing! Therefore, Li Wei Hou praised Xue Yangtao and arranged for his two sons to serve as centurions in the boiled salt field under the jurisdiction of the government, leading a hundred salt workers.

古文：以今年七月望前生，明年七月望前伐，过期不伐。
现代文：刚修好人造湖上的亭台，没有什么好名字。李蔚起名叫：赏心。
English: There is no good name for a pavilion on a lake built by a man who had just been rehabilitated. Li Wei's name is "appreciation."

古文：则其音窒。
现代文：他手下的同事认为这个名字犯讳。
English: His colleagues think the name is a misnomer.

古文：未期而伐，则其音浮。
现代文：李蔚说：孔子说讲征兆就不讲存在，讲存在就不信征兆。
English: Li Wei said: Confucius said that if you talk about signs, you do not talk about existence, and if you talk about existence, you do not believe in signs.

古文：浮者外泽中干，干者受气不全，气不全则其竹夭。
现代文：况且，又不是什么内官宫妾，有什么忌讳可避的呢！
English: Moreover, she is not a palace concubine, so there is no taboo to avoid her!

古文：凡发扬一声，出入九息。
现代文：于是不更名。
English: So they didn't change the name.

古文：古之至音者，一叠十二节，一节十二敲。
现代文：这座赏心亭，在秦毕叛乱后，无人管理修葺，荒芜破败，成了饲养牲畜的地方了。
English: After the rebellion of Qin Bi, there was no one to manage and repair this pleasure pavilion, and it fell into disrepair and ruin. It became a place to raise livestock.

古文：今之名乐也，至如落梅流韵，感金谷之游人，折柳传情，悲玉关之戍客。
现代文：可叹啊，公孙弘的东阁，后来成为刘屈牦的马圈。赏心亭的结局，跟这有什么两样呢！
English: It's a pity that Gongsunhong's Dongge later became Liu Quan's stables. What's the difference between this and the end of the pleasure pavilion?

