古文：魏人钻火齐俊士元魏臣并州士族高敖曹梁权贵柳骞之阮嵩郝象贤朱前疑张由古侯思正王及善逯仁杰袁琰台中语沈子荣武懿宗张衡李良弼来子珣阎知微崔湜权龙襄
现代文：魏人钻火齐俊士元魏臣并州士族高敖曹梁权贵柳骞之阮嵩郝象贤朱前疑张由古侯思正王及善逯仁杰袁琰台中语沈子荣武懿宗张衡李良弼来子珣阎知微崔湜权龙襄
English: Wei people drill fire Qijun Shishi, the former Wei minister, and the statesmen Gao Jiao, Cao Liang, Quan Gui, Liu Jiao, Ruan Song, Xiang Xian, Zhu Qian, Zhang Yu, the ancient princes Sizheng Wang and Zheng Renjie, Yuan Xingtai, the Chinese language Shen Zi, Rong Wu, Zong Zhang Heng, Li Liang Jie, the son of the son of the son of the son of the state Gao Jiao, Cao Liang, Quan Gui, Liu Jie, Ruan Song, Xiang Xian, Zhu Qian, Zhang Yu, the ancient princes S

古文：魏人钻火
现代文：魏人钻火
English: Wei people drill fire

古文：魏人夜暴疾，命门人钻火。
现代文：三国时，有个魏国人夜晚突然得了重病，叫门人钻木取火。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, a Wei man suddenly fell seriously ill in the evening and asked the porter to drill wood for a fire.

古文：是夕阴暝。督迫颇急。门人念然曰：君责人亦大无理。今暗如漆，何以不把火照我？
现代文：这天晚特别阴暗，他督促得很急迫，门人愤然道：你责备人也太无理了，现在夜黑如漆，为何不拿火来给我照照？
English: It was a particularly gloomy evening, and he was pressing his point very urgently. The doorkeeper angrily said: Your reproach is unreasonable. It's pitch black now, why don't you light a fire to give me some light?

古文：当得觅钻火具，然后易得耳。
现代文：要能够找到钻火用的工具，然后就容易得到火了。
English: You have to be able to find the tools to drill the fire, and then it's easy to get the fire.

古文：孔文举闻之曰：责人当以其方也。
现代文：孔文举所说这件事后说：责备人应当讲究方法才行。
English: After mentioning this matter, Kong Wenqiu said: It is necessary to pay attention to the method of reproaching people.

古文：齐俊士
现代文：齐俊士
English: Qi Junshi

古文：《汉书》·《王莽赞》云：紫色蛙声，余分闰位。
现代文：《汉书》中《王莽传》的最后部分写道：紫色蛙声，余分闰位。
English: The last part of "The Legend of Wang Mang" in the "Hanshu" reads: "Purple frog's voice, extra spaces."

古文：谓以伪乱真。
现代文：谓以伪乱真。
English: It is said that falsehood is confused with truth.

古文：颜之推常言：吾近共人读书，与言及王莽形状，有一俊士自许知史学，名价甚高，乃云： 王莽非直鸱目虎吻，亦紫色蛙声。
现代文：颜之推常说：我近来和人一道读书，在跟他们谈到王莽的相貌时，有位俊士自称熟知史学，名声很高，他说： 王莽不只长着鹰眼虎嘴，而且紫脸蛙声。
English: Yan Zhi Tu often said: I recently read with people. When talking to them about Wang Mang's appearance, a young man who claimed to be familiar with history and had a high reputation said: Wang Mang not only has eagle eyes and a tiger's mouth, but also a purple face and a croak.

古文：元魏臣
现代文：元魏臣
English: Former Wei minister

古文：元魏之世，在洛京时，有一才学重臣，新得《史记》音，而颇纰误。
现代文：北魏时，京都洛阳有一个很有才学的大官，对《史记》中疑难字的发音有了新发现，其实很多都是错误的。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, there was a very talented official in Luoyang, Kyoto, who made new discoveries about the pronunciation of difficult words in the "Histories." In fact, many of them were wrong.

古文：及见颛顼字为许绿，错作许缘。其人遂谓朝士言：从来谬音专旭，当专翲耳。
现代文：他见颛顼的顼字拼作许绿，便错误地拼作许缘，于是他就对朝士们说：从来 颛顼 二字就错误地读成 专旭 ，应当读作 专翲 才对。
English: He saw that the  character of  was spelled "许绿" and mistakenly spelled "许缘," so he said to the Asashi, "I never read the  character as "专旭" by mistake, it should be read as "专."

古文：此人先有高明，翕然行信。
现代文：此人既然先有了高明，其他人也只好跟着念专翲。
English: Since this person was the first to become highly skilled, the others had to follow suit.

古文：期年之后，更有硕儒，苦相究讨，方知误焉。
现代文：一年之后，有一位更有学问的人，与他苦苦地探讨研究，他才知道自己错了。
English: A year later, when a more learned man pored over his research with him, he realized he was wrong.

古文：并州士族
现代文：并州士族
English: and the statesmen's race

古文：北齐并州有士族，好为可笑诗赋，轻蔑邢魏诸公。
现代文：南北朝时，北齐并州有个读书人，专好写一些令人可笑的诗赋，而且鄙视邢邵、魏收等有学问人。
English: At the time of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, there was a reader in North Qianzhou, who was good at writing some ridiculous poems, and despised scholars such as Zou Shao and Wei Jie.

古文：众共嘲弄。
现代文：常受到人们的嘲弄。
English: He is often mocked by people.

古文：虚相称赞，必击牛酾酒延之。
现代文：如果有人虚假地称赞几句，他一定会杀牛斟酒招待人家。
English: If someone falsely praises a few words, he will certainly kill a cow and pour wine to invite others.

古文：其妻明鉴人也，泣而谏之。
现代文：他的妻子是个明白人，曾含着眼泪苦苦地规劝他。
English: His wife, a sensible woman, had tried to reason with him through her tears.

古文：此人叹曰：才华不为妻子所容，何况行路。
现代文：此人却感叹道：有才华的人，自己的妻子都容忍不得我，何况路人了。
English: This person, however, lamented: Talented people, their wives can't tolerate me, let alone passers-by.

古文：至死不觉。
现代文：至死也未醒悟。
English: He didn't wake up until he was dead.

古文：高敖曹
现代文：高敖曹
English: Gao Bing Cao

古文：高敖曹常为杂诗三首云：冢子地握槊，星宿天围棋。
现代文：高敖曹曾经写杂诗三首，如：冢子地握槊，星宿天围棋。
English: Gao Yu Cao once wrote three miscellaneous poems, such as: the dice are held, and the game of Go is played.

古文：开坛瓮张口，卷席床剥皮。
现代文：开坛瓮张口，卷席床剥皮。
English: Open the jar and peel off the skin.

古文：又：相送重相送，相送至桥头。
现代文：又如：相送重相送，相送至桥头。
English: Another example: send to send, send to send, send to the bridge.

古文：培堆两眼泪，难按满胸愁。
现代文：培堆两眼泪，难按满胸愁。
English: With two piles of tears, it's hard to suppress the sadness in my heart.

古文：又：桃生毛弹子，瓠长棒槌儿。
现代文：又如：桃生毛弹子，瓠长棒槌儿。
English: Another example: the peach-haired marbles, the long-beaked mallets.

古文：墙欹壁亚肚，河冻水生皮。
现代文：墙欹壁亚肚，河冻水生皮。
English: Wall-to-wall mutton belly, river-frozen aquatic crust.

古文：梁权贵
现代文：梁权贵
English: Liang Quanguo

古文：梁有一权贵，读误本《蜀都赋》，注解蹲鸱，芋也，而为羊字。
现代文：梁朝时有一位权贵，读了一篇有错误的《蜀都赋》，注解中将蹲鸱、芋也中的芋，解释为羊。
English: At the time of the Liang Dynasty, a powerful nobleman read an erroneous "Shu Du Fu," and the commentator interpreted the squatting yakitori and the yakitori in the yakitori as sheep.

古文：后有人饷羊肉。答书云：损惠蹲鸱。
现代文：后来有人要请他去吃羊肉，他在回答的信笺中写道：损惠蹲鸱。
English: Later, when someone asked him to go eat mutton, he wrote in his reply letter: "Kasohui squatting."

古文：举朝惊骇，不解事义。
现代文：满朝的官员们听说后无不感到惊讶，不解其意。
English: The officials of the Manchu Dynasty were surprised and puzzled when they heard about it.

古文：久后寻绎。方知如此。
现代文：过了很久，找出了原因，方知是这么回事。
English: After a long time, I found out the reason. I knew this was the case.

古文：柳骞之
现代文：柳骞之
English: by Yu Shizhi

古文：隋内史舍人河东柳骞之，奏事好错。
现代文：隋朝时，有个内史舍人河东人柳骞之，在朝堂奏事时经常出错。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a person from the east of the river, Liu Xizhi, who often made mistakes in the morning hall.

古文：尝有周家公主，表请出家。
现代文：有一次，周氏所生公主要出嫁，需奏请皇上。
English: Once upon a time, a princess born to the Zhou clan wanted to get married, so she had to petition the emperor.

古文：骞之奏云：周家公主上表，求作道人。
现代文：柳骞之奏道：周氏公主上表，求作道人。
English: Yanagishima's way of playing: Zhou's princess is on the top table, aspiring to be a moralist.

古文：上大笑。
现代文：皇上大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：及出，虞仆射庆则问之曰：奏事若为错。
现代文：退出朝堂后，仆射虞庆则问他道：你上奏的事情好象说错了。
English: After he left the hall, his attendant Shoyu Qing asked him, "It seems that what you said at the recital was wrong.

古文：骞之复错答曰：周家公主，欲得还俗。
现代文：柳骞之又错误答道：啊，周氏公主，想要还俗。
English: Liu Xizhi again answered incorrectly: Ah, Princess Zhou, I want to return to the secular world.

古文：骞之历位光禄卿。
现代文：柳骞之后来曾做过光禄卿。
English: After Yanukovych, he served as the Minister of Finance.

古文：阮嵩
现代文：阮嵩
English: Ruan Song

古文：唐贞观中，桂阳令阮嵩，妻阎氏，极妒。
现代文：唐朝贞观年中期，有一个桂阳县令叫阮嵩，他的妻子阎氏忌妒心极强。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a governor of Guiyang County named Ruan Song. His wife, Yan, was extremely jealous.

古文：嵩在厅会客饮，召女奴歌。阎被发跣足袒臂，拔刀至席。
现代文：阮嵩在客厅里与客人饮酒时，把一个女仆叫来为大家唱歌助兴，阎氏便披头散发光脚袒臂持刀冲进客厅。
English: While Ruan Song was drinking with guests in the living room, he called a maid to come and sing for everyone, and Yan rushed into the living room, bare-headed, bare-footed, holding a knife.

古文：诸客惊散，嵩伏床下，女奴狼狈而奔。
现代文：客人们惊慌散去，阮嵩吓得藏于床下，女仆狼狈而逃。
English: The guests scattered in panic, Ruan Song hid under the bed in fear, and the maid fled in panic.

古文：刺史崔邈为嵩作考词云：妇强夫弱，内刚外柔。
现代文：在对官吏进行考课的时候，刺史崔邈给阮嵩的鉴定中写道：妇强夫弱，内刚外柔。
English: During the examination of officials, Zhang Shih Cui Wei wrote to Ruan Song's appraisal: a strong woman is weak, and she is tough on the inside and soft on the outside.

古文：一妻不能禁止，百姓如何整肃？
现代文：一妻不能禁止，百姓如何整肃？
English: A wife cannot be banned, how can the people clean up?

古文：妻既礼教不修，夫又精神何在？
现代文：妻既礼教不修，夫又精神何在？
English: What is the spirit of the husband if his wife does not practice etiquette?

古文：考下。
现代文：考为下等。
English: He was in the bottom of the class.

古文：省符，解见任。
现代文：经吏部审核符合事实，阮嵩被解除现职。
English: After verification by the personnel department, it was found to be true, and Ruan Song was dismissed from his current position.

古文：郝象贤
现代文：郝象贤
English: Zou Xiangxian

古文：唐郝象贤，侍中处俊之孙，顿丘令南容之子也，弱冠。
现代文：唐朝的郝象贤，是侍中郝处俊的孙子，顿丘县令郝南容的儿子，二十左右岁。
English: Zou Xiangxian of the Tang Dynasty was the grandson of the chamberlain Zou Chengjun, and the son of the Dongqiu County magistrate Zou Nan Rong. He was about 20 years old.

古文：诸友生为之字曰宠之，每于父前称字。
现代文：朋友们都说对他的字很喜爱。每次在父亲面前提到别人称赞自己字写的好这件事，父亲便哄骗他说：你的朋友很贤明。
English: Friends said they loved his handwriting, and every time he mentioned to his father that someone had praised his handwriting, his father coaxed him: "Your friend is very clever."

古文：父绐之曰：汝朋友极贤，吾为汝设馔，可命之也。翌日，象贤因邀致十数人，南容引生与之饮，谓曰：谚云： 三公后，出死狗。
现代文：我为你设宴，可以把他们请来。第二天，郝象贤邀请到十几个人，郝南容与他们一起饮酒，他对他们说：谚语云： 三公后，出死狗。
English: The next day, Gong Xiangxian invited more than a dozen people, and Gong Nan Rong drank alcohol with them. He said to them, "There is a saying: Three queens, one dead dog."

古文：小儿诚愚，劳诸君制字，损南容之身尚可，岂可波及侍中也？
现代文：小儿诚然很愚痴，有劳各位抑制他练字了。损害我南容倒没什么，怎可以波及侍中呢？
English: It is true that my child complains a lot, thank you for restraining him from practicing the alphabet. There is nothing to harm my Nan Rong, how can it affect the attendants?

古文：因泣涕，众惭而退。
现代文：于是哭了起来，众人惭愧而去。
English: Then she began to cry, and everyone left in shame.

古文：宠之者，反语为痴种也。
现代文：原来说喜爱郝象贤字的人，现在反说他是痴种了。
English: People who used to say that they liked the characters of Zou Zi Xian are now saying that he is an idiot.

古文：朱前疑
现代文：朱前疑
English: Zhu Qianxuan

古文：周朱前疑浅钝无识，容貌极丑。
现代文：后周朝时，有个叫朱前疑的人，浅薄迟钝而又无知，相貌也很丑陋。
English: In the late Zhou Dynasty, there was a man named Zhu Qianqian, who was shallow, dull, ignorant, and ugly.

古文：上书云：臣梦见陛下八百岁。
现代文：他向皇上上书道：臣梦见陛下活八百岁。
English: He wrote to the emperor: My vassal dreamed that his majesty would live to be eight hundred years old.

古文：即授拾遗，俄迁郎中。
现代文：于是被授与拾遗，不久又升为郎中。
English: As a result, he was awarded the posthumous title of "Shui" (拾遺) and was soon promoted to "Lozhong" (郎中).

古文：出使回，又上书云：闻嵩山唱万岁声。
现代文：出使归来，又上书写道：我听到嵩山在唱万岁的声音。
English: When the envoy returned, he also wrote in his letter: I heard the voice of Songshan singing "long live."

古文：即赐绯鱼袋，未入五品，于绿衣衫上带之。朝野莫不怪笑。
现代文：于是又赐与他绯鱼袋，未入五品。在绿色官服上佩带一个相当五品的银鱼袋，朝野没有不笑他的。
English: So they gave him a codfish bag, not worth five rupees, and made him wear a silver fish bag worth five rupees on his green official uniform. The court did not fail to laugh at him.

古文：后契丹反，有敕京官出马一匹供军者，即酬五品。
现代文：后来契丹人反叛，皇上下敕京官，如果献给军队一匹马的，就可得到五品官阶。
English: Later, the Khitans rebelled, and the emperor punished the officials in Beijing. If you donated a horse to the army, you could get five official ranks.

古文：前疑买马纳讫，表索绯。
现代文：朱前疑买了一匹马送去后，又上表索要绯色官服。
English: Zhu Qianqian bought a horse and sent it away, and then asked for a navy-colored official uniform.

古文：上怒，批其状：即放归丘园。
现代文：皇上大怒，在其状文上批道：立即放归丘园。
English: The emperor was furious, and in his letter of complaint, he reprimanded them: they were to be immediately released to the hill garden.

古文：愤恚而卒。
现代文：朱前疑为此愤恨而死。
English: Zhu Qianxu died of this resentment.

古文：张由古
现代文：张由古
English: Zhang Yugu

古文：唐张由古有吏才而无学术，累历台省。
现代文：唐朝人张由古有做官的能力但没有学问，一直在最上层的官署里任职。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Zhang Yugu had the ability to be an official, but he lacked knowledge. He always served in the highest-level government office.

古文：尝于众中，叹班固有大才，而文章不入《文选》。
现代文：曾在众人之中感叹说班固虽是个很有才能的人，可他的文章却未被收入《文选》。
English: He once lamented among the crowd that although Ban Gu was a very talented person, his article was not included in the "Selected Works."

古文：或谓之曰：《两都赋》、《燕山铭》、《典引》等，并入《文选》，何为言无？
现代文：有人对他说：《两都赋》、《燕山铭》、《典引》等一起收入了《文选》，怎么能说没有呢？
English: Someone said to him: "Fu Duodu Fu," "Yanshan Ming" and "Analects" were included in the "Selected Works" together. How can you say that they are not?

古文：由古曰：此并班孟坚文章，何关班固事。
现代文：张由古说：这些都是班孟坚的文章，与班固有什么关系？
English: Zhang Yugu said: These are all articles by Pan Mengjian, what does it have to do with Pan Gu?

古文：闻者掩口而笑。
现代文：听到他的话的人都掩嘴而笑。
English: Everyone who heard him covered their mouths and laughed.

古文：又谓同官曰：昨买得《王僧襦集》，大有道理。
现代文：又对同僚们说：昨天买到一套《王僧襦集》，讲得很有些道理。
English: He also said to his colleagues: "Yesterday I bought a set of "Wang Zangyu Collection," which makes a lot of sense.

古文：杜文范知其误，应声曰：文范亦买得《佛袍集》，倍胜《僧襦集》。
现代文：杜文范知道他又又弄错，随声说道：我也买到一套《佛袍集》，大大胜过《僧襦文集》。
English: Du Wenfan knew that he had made another mistake, and said casually: "I also bought a set of "Buddha's Robes," which is much better than "Collection of Buddhist Monastic Writings."

古文：由古竟不知觉。
现代文：张由古竟不知道是怎么回事。
English: Zhang Yugu didn't know what was going on.

古文：累迁司计员外。以罪放于庭州。
现代文：张由古一直升至司计员外，后因获罚被流放庭州。
English: Zhang Yugu rose to the rank of comptroller, and was later exiled to Tianzhou for being punished.

古文：时中书令许敬宗综理诏狱。帖召之。由古喜，至则为所责，惧而手战，笏坠于地，口不能言。
现代文：当时中书令许敬宗省理狱案，便写了价帖子把他召回来，张由古十分欢喜，当他来见许敬宗时，因受到责难而惧怕得双手战抖，把笏都掉在了地上，嘴里一句话也说不出来。
English: At that time, the Central Government ordered Xu Jingzong to solve the prison case, and then summoned him back with a price list. Zhang Yugu was very happy. When he came to see Xu Jingzong, his hands trembled with fear because of the reproach, and he dropped his shovel on the ground. He couldn't say a word.

古文：初为殿中正班，以尚书郎有错立者，谓引驾曰：员外郎小儿难共语，可鼻冲上打。
现代文：一开始被授与殿中正班，因有位尚书郎在上殿时站错了位置，他便对领驾的长官说：跟这个员外郎小儿没什么好讲的，就该把他倒提起来狠打！
English: At the beginning, he was assigned to the main class in the hall, but because a Shoshuro stood in the wrong position when he went up to the hall, he said to the officer leading the way: There is nothing to talk about with this member, so you should lift him up and beat him!

古文：朝士鄙之。
现代文：朝官们都很鄙视他。
English: The courtiers despised him.

古文：侯思正
现代文：侯思正
English: Hou Sizheng

古文：唐侯思正出自皂隶，言音不正，以告变授侍书御史。
现代文：唐代时有个叫侯思正的人，当过衙役，说话时吐字音不正，他是因告发有人叛变而被授予侍书御史官职的。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Hou Sizheng, who had been a eunuch and spoke with a crooked tongue. He was awarded the post of courtier and historian for denouncing someone's rebellion.

古文：按制狱，苛酷日甚。
现代文：他在审理皇上交办的案子时，一天比一天刻毒残酷。
English: When he was trying a case assigned by the emperor, he became more and more vicious and cruel.

古文：尝按中丞魏元忠曰：急承白司马，不然，即吃孟青。
现代文：在他审问原中丞魏元忠时说：你赶紧去承载白司马得了，不然，你就去把孟青吃喽！
English: When he was interrogating Wei Yuanzhong, he said, "Hurry up and carry Bai Sima, otherwise, you'll have to eat Meng Qing!"

古文：白司马者，洛阳有坂，号曰白司马坂。
现代文：白司马是个大山坡，在洛阳，人们称它叫白司马坂。
English: Baishima is a large hillside. In Luoyang, people call it Baishima Slope.

古文：孟青者，将军姓孟名青，曾杖杀琅玡王冲者也。
现代文：孟青原是军中的将军，曾用棍棒打死了琅玡人王冲。
English: Meng Qingyuan was a general in the army. He once clubbed Wang Chong, a eunuch, to death.

古文：思正闾巷庸人，常以此言逼诸囚。
现代文：侯思正本来是个巷里中的平庸之辈，因而常用这样的话去威逼囚徒。
English: Hou Si was originally a mediocre person in the alley, so he often used such words to intimidate prisoners.

古文：元忠辞气不屈，思正怒而倒曳之。
现代文：但是魏元忠在语言和气度上均未屈服，侯思正气怒而将他大头朝下地拖他。
English: However, Wei Yuanzhong did not give in in terms of language and demeanor, and Hou Sizheng was furious and dragged him headlong.

古文：元忠徐起曰：我薄命，如乘恶驴而坠，脚为镫所挂，遂被贼曳耳。
现代文：魏元忠慢慢地站起来道：算我运气不好，就好象是骑了头恶驴被摔了下来，可是脚还被挂在鞍镫上，于是被这贼好顿拖拉。
English: Wei Yuanzhong slowly stood up and said, "If I were unlucky, it would be like riding a donkey and being thrown off, but my feet were still attached to the saddle, so I was dragged by this thief.

古文：思正大怒，又曳之曰：汝拒捍制使，奏斩之。
现代文：侯思正大怒，又把他拖了一阵，道：你竟敢抗拒皇上派来的人，我要上奏把你杀了！
English: Hou Si was furious and dragged him away for a while, saying, "How dare you resist the person sent by the emperor, I'll kill you on the spot!"

古文：元忠曰：侯思正，汝今为国家御史，须识礼仪轻重。
现代文：魏元忠道：侯思正，你如今是国家的御史，必须知道礼仪轻重。
English: Wei Yuanzhong: Hou Sizheng, you are now a national historian, you must know the importance of etiquette.

古文：如此须魏元忠头，何不以锯截去！
现代文：你这样需要魏元忠的头颅，为什么不拿锯来截去！
English: You need Wei Yuanzhong's head so badly, why don't you use a saw to cut it off!

古文：无为抑我反。
现代文：用不着逼我反抗，怎么想拿我去做邀官请赏的资本？
English: You don't have to force me to rebel, how can you want to use me as the capital to invite officials and reward them?

古文：奈何佩服朱绂，亲衔天命，不能行正道之事。乃言白司马孟青，是何言也？
现代文：你负有上边的使命，不能正确地履行自己的职责，却说什么 白司马孟青 ，这是什么语言！
English: You have a mission from above, you can't perform your duties correctly, but what do you say to Bai Sima Meng Qing, what language is this!

古文：若非魏元忠，无人仰教。
现代文：若不是我魏元忠，没人对你指教！
English: If it weren't for me, Wei Yuanzhong, no one would give you any advice!

古文：思正惊起，悚怍曰：思正死罪，实不解，幸蒙中丞见教。
现代文：侯思正惊慌地站起来，害怕而又惭愧地说：思正该死，我真的不明白这些，多亏了中丞的指教。
English: Hou Sizheng stood up in a panic, scared and ashamed, saying: "Sizheng deserves to die, I really don't understand this, thanks to the advice of Zhongzheng."

古文：乃引上阶，礼坐而问之。
现代文：于是把他领上台阶，按照礼数坐下来问话。
English: So he led him up the steps, sat him down according to the rules of etiquette, and asked him questions.

古文：元忠徐就坐自若。
现代文：魏元忠也慢慢地坐下，神情自若。
English: Wei Yuanzhong also slowly sat down, looking confident.

古文：又思正言音不正，时断屠杀，思正曰：今断屠杀，鸡、鱼、猪、驴俱不得吃，谓空吃米面，如何得饱。
现代文：侯思正语音不正，当时禁止屠宰时，侯思正道：今天已判定要屠杀你，可是鸡鱼猪驴俱不得吃，因为光吃米面，如何得饱。
English: Hou Sizheng's pronunciation is incorrect. When slaughtering was prohibited at that time, Hou Sizheng said: Today it has been decided to slaughter you, but you must not eat chicken, fish, pigs and donkeys, because how can you get enough if you only eat rice noodles.

古文：侍御史霍献可笑之。思正诉于则天。则天怒谓献可曰：我知思正不识字，我已用之，卿笑何也？
现代文：侍御史霍献可听到后忍不住笑了，侯思正便把他告到了武则天，武则天很生气，对霍献可说道：我知道思正不识字，既然我已经用他了，你为什么还要笑他呢？
English: After hearing this, the chamberlain Shi Huoqian could not help but laugh. Hou Sizheng then reported him to Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian was very angry and said to Huo Qian: "I know that Sizheng is illiterate. Since I have already used him, why do you still want to laugh at him?"

古文：献可具言鸡猪之事，则天亦大笑。
现代文：献可便把鸡猪之事学了一遍，武则天也不禁大笑。
English: Xian Ke then learned the chicken and pig thing all over again, and Wu Zetian couldn't help but laugh.

古文：思正尝命作笼饼，谓膳者曰：与我作笼饼，可缩葱作。
现代文：侯思正叫人作笼饼，他对厨师说：给我作笼饼，可缩葱作。
English: Hou Si was asking someone to make a cage cake. He said to the cook: "Make me a cage cake. You can make it with scallions."

古文：比市笼饼，葱多而肉少。故令缩葱加肉也。
现代文：若是比较起来，买的笼饼葱多肉少，所以叫你缩葱加肉。
English: If you compare it, the crab cakes you buy have more onion and less meat, so they ask you to add meat to the onion.

古文：时人号为缩葱侍御史。
现代文：当时人们称他为缩葱侍御史。
English: At the time, he was known as the "shrinking green onion" (缩葱侍御史).

古文：时来俊臣弃故妻，奏逼娶太原王庆诜女，思正亦奏请娶赵郡李自挹女，敕政事商量。
现代文：那时还有个叫来俊臣的人，抛弃了元配妻子，上奏非要娶太原的王庆诜的女儿不可，侯思正此时也奏请要赵郡李自挹的女儿，皇上下敕让政事堂商议。
English: At that time, there was also a person called Juncin, who abandoned his former wife, insisting that he must marry the daughter of Wang Qingyao of Taiyuan, and Hou Sizheng also asked the daughter of Li Zixuan of Zhao County at this time, and the emperor and the court let the government discuss it.

古文：凤阁侍郎李昭德抚掌谓诸相曰：大可笑，大可笑。
现代文：商议时，中书省的侍郎李昭德拍着手对各位宰相说：太可笑了！太可笑了！
English: During the deliberation, Li Zhaode, the attendant of the Chinese Book Ministry, clapped his hands and said to the prime ministers: "It's ridiculous! It's ridiculous!

古文：诸相问之，昭德曰：往年来俊臣贼劫王庆诜女，已大辱国。今日此奴又请娶李自挹女，无乃复辱国耶？
现代文：宰相们问他怎么回事，他说：去年来俊臣贼劫王庆诜女，已经大为辱国了，今日此奴又请娶李自挹女，这不是又一次辱国吗？
English: The prime ministers asked him what was going on, and he said: Last year, a young minister and a thief kidnapped Wang Qingyao's daughter, which was a great humiliation for the country. Today, this man has asked Li Zhisheng's daughter to marry him. Isn't this another humiliation for the country?

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：于是这件事被阻止。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：竟为李昭德榜杀之。
现代文：后来侯思正竟被李昭德棒杀。
English: Later, Hou Sizheng was actually beaten to death by Li Zhaodong.

古文：王及善
现代文：王及善
English: Wang Yishan

古文：唐王及善才行庸猥，风神钝浊。
现代文：唐朝时有个叫王及善的人，才学平庸，行为猥琐，精神迟钝而不清醒。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Jizhen, whose talent was mediocre, whose behavior was obscene, and whose spirit was dull and not lucid.

古文：为内史时，人号为鸠集凤池。
现代文：在任中书令时，人们说他是雉鸠落在凤凰池。
English: When he was in the position of vice-chancellor, people said that he fell into the phoenix pond.

古文：俄迁文昌右相，无他政，但不许令史之驴入台，终日迫逐，无时暂舍。
现代文：不久又迁转文昌台任右相，身为宰相不去做国务政柄大事，而只去监管不准令史的驴子进入都省官署，而且整天都在监督驱赶，从不暂停。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Wenchangdai as the minister of the right. As the prime minister, he did not do any major state affairs, but only supervised and did not allow the donkeys of history to enter the provincial government offices. Moreover, he supervised and drove them all day long, never pausing.

古文：时人号驱驴宰相。
现代文：因而这时人们又称他为驱驴宰相。
English: Therefore, at this time, people also called him the prime minister of donkey driving.

古文：逯仁杰
现代文：逯仁杰
English: Gong Renjie

古文：周朝有逯仁杰，河阳人。
现代文：周朝时有个叫逯仁杰的人，是河阳人。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was a man named Gong Renjie, who was from Kheyang.

古文：自地官令史出尚书，改天下帐式，颇甚繁细，法令滋章。
现代文：在户部任令史小官时，制订了一项新政策下发全国各地，这项政策主要是改变过去对农村户籍和税赋帐目的管理办法，规定十分繁细，法令之下又派生出许多条文。
English: At the time of the appointment of the minor official of history by the Ministry of Households, a new policy was formulated and distributed throughout the country. This policy is mainly to change the management method of rural household registration and tax accounts in the past. The provisions are very detailed, and many provisions have been derived under the law.

古文：每村立社官，仍置平直老三员，掌簿案，设锁钥。
现代文：规定每村必须设一社官，社官之下还要设平直老三员，分别掌管各种帐簿案卷，并要求上锁。
English: It is stipulated that each village must have one community officer, and under the community officer there must also be three members of the community, who are in charge of various account books and files, and require them to be locked.

古文：十羊九牧，人皆散逃。
现代文：一时间在乡间村吏泛滥成灾，形成了十只羊就有九个人放牧的局面，人们纷纷散逃。
English: At one time, the flood of villagers in the countryside became a disaster, forming a situation where there were nine people grazing ten sheep, and people fled in droves.

古文：而宰相浅识，以为万代皆可行，授仁杰地官郎中。
现代文：可是宰相见识浅薄，认为这是万代可行的好政策，因而授予逯仁杰户部郎中的官职。
English: However, the prime minister was short-sighted and thought that this was a good policy that would work for all generations, so he awarded the official position of chief of the household department to Jie.

古文：数年，百姓苦之，其法逐寝。
现代文：实行数年后，因百姓越来越苦，这项法令才逐渐停止。
English: After a few years of implementation, the decree was gradually suspended due to the increasing suffering of the people.

古文：袁琰
现代文：袁琰
English: Yuan Shao

古文：周考功令史袁琰，国忌，众人聚会，充录事勾当。遂判曰：曹司繁闹，无时暂闲。
现代文：周代时，有个吏部考功司的令史袁琰，在禁止娱乐的国忌日里，因有些人搞了聚会，他充当录事时，便在其状子上判道：司曹官署里总是很繁闹，没有一时间歇。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, there was an official in charge of the examination of meritorious service, Ling Shi Yuan Rong. On the National Day of Mourning, when entertainment was prohibited, because some people had a party, when he acted as a recorder, he judged on his letter: The Sgt. Office is always very noisy, there is no time to rest.

古文：不因国忌之辰，无以展其欢笑。
现代文：没有因国忌之时，就不展现其欢乐。
English: When there is no national mourning, they do not show their joy.

古文：合坐嗤之。
现代文：在坐的人都很鄙视他。
English: Everyone sitting there despised him.

古文：台中语
现代文：台中语
English: Taichung dialect

古文：周夏官侍郎侯知一，年老，敕放致仕。上表不伏，于朝堂踊跃驰走，以示轻便。
现代文：周朝的兵部侍郎侯知一，在他年老的时候，皇上下敕让他退休，他上表不服老，并在朝堂里跳跃奔走，以表现自己敏捷轻便。
English: Hou Zhiyi, the attendant of the military department of the Zhou Dynasty, was retired by the emperor when he was old. He did not accept his old age, and jumped and ran in the morning hall to show his agility and lightness.

古文：张琮丁忧，自请起复。
现代文：张悰在丁忧期间，自己请求复职。
English: During the Dingzhao period, Zhang Ye himself asked to be reinstated.

古文：吏部主事高筠，母丧，亲戚为举哀。筠曰：我不能作孝。
现代文：吏部主事高筠的母亲去世，亲戚要举办丧礼，高筠说：我不能守孝。
English: Gao Yao, the head of the personnel department, whose mother died and whose relatives wanted to hold a funeral, said, "I can't be a filial son.

古文：张悰自请起复，高筠不肯作孝，张栖贞情愿遭忧，皆非名教中人，并是王化外物。
现代文：员外郎张栖贞被人起诉，他却骗人说自己正遭母忧守孝，不肯去答辩。当时在尚书省官署中对此说道：侯知一不伏致仕，张悰自请起复，高筠不肯作孝，张栖贞情愿遭忧。这些人都是没有教养的人，全是些礼教之外的东西。
English: Zhang Xizhen's brother-in-law was sued, but he lied and said that he was suffering from his mother's care and filial piety, and refused to defend himself. At that time, he said this in the Shangshu Provincial Government Office: Hou Ji did not submit to the service, Zhang Yao asked to be reinstated, Gao Yao refused to be filial, and Zhang Xizhen was willing to suffer. These people are uneducated people, all of them are things other than etiquette.

古文：兽心人面，不其然乎？
现代文：人面而兽心，不正是这样的吗？
English: Human face but animal heart, isn't that just the way it is?

古文：沈子荣
现代文：沈子荣
English: Shen Zirong

古文：周大官选人沈子荣诵判二百道，试日不下笔。
现代文：周朝时，吏部有个参加铨选考试的人沈子荣，试卷有二百道题，可是考试那天一直没动笔。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, Shen Zirong, a member of the cadre department, took part in the selection exam. The exam paper had 200 questions, but he never picked up his pen on the day of the exam.

古文：人问之，荣曰：无非命也，今日诵判，无一相当，有一道迹同，人名又别。
现代文：有人问他怎么不答，他说：无非是运气不佳，今日的题目，没有一个相当的，有一道题中讲述的事迹倒跟我知道的是相同的，可是其中的人名又不同。
English: When someone asked him why he did not answer, he said: "It was just bad luck. Today's question has no equivalent. One of the questions tells the same story as I know, but the names of the people in it are different.

古文：至来年选，判水磑。又不下笔。人问之，曰：我诵水磑，乃是蓝田，今问之富平，如何下笔。
现代文：到第二年又参加考试，题目是关于水磨的论述，沈子荣又未动笔，人们又问到他时，他说：我能答的水磨是蓝田县的，今天问的是富平的水磨，我如何下笔？
English: The following year, he took the exam again, and the topic was an exposition on watermills. Shen Zirong did not start writing. When people asked him again, he said, "I can answer that the watermills are from Lantian County, but today I am asking about the watermills in Fuping. How should I start writing?

古文：闻者莫不抚掌焉。
现代文：听到的人没有不为他鼓倒掌的。
English: There was no one who did not give him a round of applause.

古文：武懿宗
现代文：武懿宗
English: Wu Xizong

古文：周则天内宴甚乐，河内王懿宗忽然起奏曰：臣急告君，子急告父。
现代文：周朝武则天赐宴招待内亲，正在喝的高兴时，河内王武懿宗忽然奏道：臣有急事要禀告君主，子有急事要禀告父亲！
English: The Zhou Dynasty and the Wu Zi Dynasty held a heaven-sent banquet to invite their relatives. While they were drinking and rejoicing, the king of Hanoi, Wu Xizong, suddenly announced: "The vassal has an urgent matter to report to the monarch, the son has an urgent matter to report to his father!"

古文：则天大惊，引前问之，对曰：臣封物，承前府家自征。近敕州县征送，大有损折。
现代文：武则天一听大惊，急召引他到跟前询问，武懿宗道：臣的封地，从前都是由我家府直接征收税赋，近来皇上下令由州县征送，这样一来就大有折扣。
English: Wu Zetian was taken aback, and urgently summoned him to inquire. Wu Zetian said, "In the past, taxes were directly collected from my family's fiefdom. Recently, the emperor's orders were collected from prefectures and counties. As a result, there is a big discount.

古文：则天大怒，仰观屋椽，良久曰：朕诸亲饮正乐，汝是亲王，为三二百户封，几惊杀我，不堪作王。
现代文：武则天听后大怒，她仰望屋椽，很久才说道：我的亲属们正喝得高兴，你是亲王，竟为了三二百户的封赏之事，几乎吓死我，不配作王！
English: Wu Zetian was furious after hearing this. She looked up at the eaves of the house for a long time before saying, "My relatives are drinking happily. You are a prince, yet you almost scared me to death with the matter of awarding 3,200 households. You don't deserve to be king!"

古文：令曳下。
现代文：于是下令拉下去。
English: So he gave the order to pull it down.

古文：懿宗免冠拜伏，诸王救之曰：懿宗愚钝，无意矣。
现代文：武懿宗脱下帽拜倒在地，各位亲王请救道：懿宗愚蠢迟钝，完全是无意的。
English: Wu Yanzong took off his cap and bowed down to the ground. Princes, please help me: Yanzong is stupid and slow, and it was completely unintentional.

古文：上乃释之。
现代文：武则天才宽恕释放了他。
English: Wu Zetian forgave him and released him.

古文：张衡
现代文：张衡
English: Zhang Heng

古文：周张衡，令史出身，位至四品，加一阶，合入三品，已团甲。因退朝，路旁见蒸饼新熟，遂市其一，马上食之。被御史弹奏。则天降敕：流外出身，不许入三品。
现代文：周朝人张衡，令史出身，官阶达到四品，又给他加了一阶，应当进入三品，已经团甲，可是因退朝时，在路旁看见有卖蒸饼的刚熟馍，就买了一张马上吃了，此事被御史检举揭发，武则天下敕道：流外出身，不许入三品。
English: Zhang Heng, a man of the Zhou Dynasty, was born in Lingshi, and his official rank reached the fourth grade, and he was given another grade, he should enter the third grade, he was already in the first grade. However, when he retired, he saw a steamed bun selling steamed buns on the roadside, so he bought one and ate it immediately. The matter was revealed by the Imperial Historical Inspection, and Wu Zetian said: He was born in exile, and he was not allowed to enter the third grade.

古文：遂落甲。
现代文：于是落甲。
English: As a result, the armor fell off.

古文：李良弼
现代文：李良弼
English: Li Liangyao

古文：周右拾遗李良弼，自矜唇颊，好谈玄理，请使北蕃说骨笃禄。匈奴以木盘盛粪饲之，临以白刃。弼惧，食一盘并尽，乃放还。
现代文：周朝时，右拾遗李良弼有一幅很傲慢的嘴脸，好谈论些玄奥的道理，他曾请求出使北蕃去游说骨笃禄，匈奴便用木盘盛上粪便让他吃，并用刀对着他，李良弼害怕，将一盘子粪便吃了个干尽，然后放他回来。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, Li Liangyao had a very arrogant mouth and face, so that he could talk about some esoteric truths. He had asked to send an envoy to Beiyao to lobby Bone Tu Lu. The Xiongnu then used a wooden plate to fill with excrement for him to eat, and held a knife to him. Li Liangyao was afraid and ate a plate of excrement and then let him come back.

古文：人讥之曰：李拾遗能拾突厥之遗。
现代文：人们都讥笑他说：李拾遗能拾突厥人的遗。
English: People sneered at him and said, "A Turk's remains can be found anywhere."

古文：出为真源令，秩满，还瀛州。
现代文：后自朝中外放任真源县令，届满后回瀛州。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Zhenyuan County from the middle of the dynasty, and returned to Zhangzhou after his term expired.

古文：遇契丹贼孙万荣，使何阿小取沧、瀛、冀具入。
现代文：后来又遇上契丹孙万荣派遣来的何阿小，他是来说降沧州、瀛州、冀州等地并入契丹的。
English: Later, he met He Ah Xiao, who was sent by the Khitan Sun Wan Rong, and he came to incorporate Cangzhou, Zhangzhou, Jizhou and other places into Khitan.

古文：良弼谓鹿城令李怀璧曰：孙者胡孙，即是猕猴，难可当也。
现代文：李良弼对鹿城县令李怀璧说：孙，乃胡孙，就是猕猴，遇上大难可以抵挡。
English: Li Liangyao said to Li Huai Bi, the governor of Lucheng County: Sun, it is Hu Sun, it is a macaque monkey, it can resist in the face of great difficulties.

古文：万字者有草。即是草中藏。
现代文：万字有草，就是在草中可以藏身。
English: If there is grass in a thousand characters, it means you can hide in the grass.

古文：劝怀璧降。何阿小授怀璧三品将军。
现代文：劝怀璧投降契丹，何阿小授予李怀璧三品将军官职。
English: After persuading Huai Bi to surrender to the Khitan, He Ah Xiao awarded Li Huai Bi the rank of three-star general.

古文：阿小败，怀璧及良弼父子四人，并为河内王武懿宗斩之。
现代文：何阿小败露，李怀璧、李良弼父子四人一起被河内王武懿宗斩首。
English: He Ah Xiao was defeated, and Li Huai Bi and Li Liang Yao, father and son, were beheaded together by the king of Hanoi, Wu Xizong.

古文：来子珣
现代文：来子珣
English: Lai Zixuan

古文：唐来子珣，则天委之按制狱，多希旨。
现代文：唐代人来子珣，常被武则天委派审理案子，他自己也经常去请旨。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, people came to Zixuan, often appointed by Wu Zetian to hear cases, and he himself often went to ask for permission.

古文：赐姓武氏，字家臣。
现代文：武则天便赐他武姓，字家臣。
English: Wu Zetian gave him the surname of Wu and the title of vassal.

古文：丁父忧起复，累加游击将军右羽林军中郎将。
现代文：父丧丁忧后又重新复职，官职累累相加，从游击将军到右羽林军中郎将。
English: After the death of his father, Ding Zhen, he was reinstated, and his official posts were accumulated, from the guerrilla general to the middle-ranking general of the Right Uebayashi Army.

古文：常衣锦半臂，言笑自若。
现代文：经常半臂套着锦衣，谈笑自若，朝官们无不谴责他的。
English: He often wore a brocade jacket over one arm and talked and joked freely. The imperial officials all condemned him.

古文：朝士诮之，谕德张元一好讥谑，曰：岂有武家儿，为你来家老翁制服耶？
现代文：谕德人张元一喜好开玩笑讽刺人，他说：哪有武家的儿郎，为你来家的老头子做衣服穿的！
English: Zhang Yuanzhong liked to make fun of and satirize people. He said, "What kind of samurai's son would make clothes for the old man who came to your house?"

古文：阎知微
现代文：阎知微
English: Yan Zhiwei

古文：周春官尚书阎知微庸琐驽怯，使入蕃，受默啜封为汉可汗。
现代文：周朝时有个礼部尚书阎知微，猥琐怯懦而又才智低劣，派他出使北蕃，接受了默啜给他的封号汉可汗。
English: At the time of the Zhou Dynasty, there was a ceremonial official with little knowledge, cowardly and inferior intellect, who was sent to Beilun and accepted the title of Han Khan given to him.

古文：贼入恒定，遣知微先往赵州招慰。将将军陈令英等守城西面，知微谓令英曰：陈将军何不早降下，可汗兵到然后降者，剪土无遗。
现代文：后来蕃人侵入恒定，朝廷派他先去赵州慰劳前方将士，将军陈令英等守在城的西面，阎知微对陈令英说道：陈将军何不尽早投诚，如果可汗的兵到了之后再投降，就会死无葬身之地！
English: Later, the Xiongnu invaded Hengding, and the imperial court sent him first to Zhaozhou to console the front-line soldiers. General Chen Lingying and others guarded the west side of the city. Yan Zhiyu said to Chen Lingying: "Why doesn't General Chen surrender as soon as possible? If the Khan's soldiers surrender after they arrive, they will die without a place to bury themselves!"

古文：令英不答。知微城下连手踏歌，称万岁乐。
现代文：陈令英不答应，阎知微便在城下拉着手踏足唱起《万岁乐》歌谣来。
English: Chen Lingying did not agree, so Yan Zhiwei started to sing the "Long Live Music" ballad under the city.

古文：令英曰：尚书国家八座，受委非轻，翻为贼踏歌，无惭也。
现代文：陈令英道：尚书是国家的重臣，你受到的恩遇和委托已算不轻，可你反而去为蕃贼唱歌，难道不感到羞耻吗？
English: Chen Lingying said: Shang Shu is the chief minister of the country. The favor and entrustment you have received are not light, but you instead go to sing for the bandits. Aren't you ashamed?

古文：知微仍唱曰：万岁乐，万岁年，不自由，万岁乐。
现代文：阎知微仍然唱道：万岁乐，万岁年，不自由，万岁乐。
English: Yan Zhiwei still sang: Long live music, long live years, no freedom, long live music.

古文：时人鄙之。
现代文：当时的人们都十分鄙视他。
English: People at that time despised him very much.

古文：崔湜
现代文：崔湜
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔湜为吏部侍郎，贪纵。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫崔湜的人曾任吏部侍郎，此人贪婪而放纵。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a greedy and self-indulgent man by the name of Cui Yao who once served as a steward in the cadre department.

古文：兄凭弟力，父挟子威，咸受嘱求，赃污狼籍。
现代文：常言说：兄凭弟力，父借子威。他的父兄都受过别人的求托，因此也都有贪赃受贿等不法行为。
English: It is often said that "a brother relies on his brother's strength, and a father relies on his son's will." Both his father and brother were asked for help by others, and therefore both of them committed illegal acts such as greed and bribery.

古文：父挹，为司乐，受选人钱，湜不之知也。长名放之，其人诉曰：公亲将略去，何为不与官？
现代文：他的父亲崔挹，任司乐，曾接受了一个选人的一笔贿赂，可是崔湜并不知道这件事，等到公布名单时那个人却落选，那人质问道：你的亲属收了我贿钱，为什么不给我官作？
English: His father, Cui Wei, Ren Cui Le, once accepted a bribe from a candidate, but Cui Wei did not know about it. When the list was announced, that person was not elected. The hostage asked: Your relatives took my bribe, why not give me an official work?

古文：湜曰：所亲为谁？
现代文：崔湜道：这个亲属是谁？
English: Cui Rongdao: Who is this relative?

古文：吾捉取鞭杀。
现代文：我要把他抓来用鞭子抽死他！
English: I'll catch him and whip him to death!

古文：曰：鞭即遭忧。
现代文：那选人道：用鞭子抽死他你就会丁忧。
English: The chosen one: kill him with a whip and you'll be fine.

古文：湜大怒惭。
现代文：崔湜很生气又很惭愧。
English: Cui Wei was very angry and ashamed.

古文：主上以湜父年老，瓜初熟，赐一颗。
现代文：又：皇上因为觉着崔湜的父亲年岁已老，在瓜刚刚成熟的时候，便赏赐了一个。
English: Also: the emperor, because he felt that Cui Yao's father was old, rewarded one when the melon was just ripe.

古文：湜以瓜遗妾，不及其父。朝野诮之。
现代文：可崔湜都把瓜给了自己的小老婆，没有送他的父亲，朝内外没有不斥责他的。
English: But Cui Gan gave the melon to his little wife, and did not give it to his father. The imperial court and the outside world scolded him.

古文：时崔、岑、郑愔，并为吏部。京中谣之曰：岑义獠子后，崔湜令公孙，三人相比接，莫贺咄最浑。
现代文：当时崔湜、岑义、郑愔一起在吏部做官，京城里有歌谣咏道：岑义獠子后，崔湜令公孙，三人相比接，莫贺咄最浑。
English: At that time, Cui Jun, Puyi and Zheng Jun were working together in the cadre department, and there was a song in Beijing: After Puyi Junzi, Cui Junling's grandson, the three of them were connected, and Moga was the most muddied.

古文：通天年中，为沧州剌史，初到，乃为诗呈州官曰：遥看沧海城，杨柳郁青青。
现代文：权龙襄唐代有个左卫将军叫权龙襄，性情急躁而肚量窄小，经常自夸能写诗。通天年间，被任命为沧州刺史。刚刚上任，便写诗拿给州官们看。诗写道：遥看沧海城，杨柳郁青青。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a left-wing general named Guan Longxiang, who had a quick temper and a small stomach, and often boasted that he could write poetry. During the Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as the chief historian of Cangzhou. As soon as he took office, he wrote a poem and showed it to the state officials. The poem said: "Looking at Canghai City from afar, the willow trees are lush and green."

古文：中央一群汉，聚坐打杯觥。
现代文：中央一群汉，聚坐打杯觥。
English: A group of Han Chinese in the center, sitting together and having a drink.

古文：诸公谢曰：公有逸才。
现代文：各位官员都称赞道：你有超群的才华。
English: All the officials said, "You are very talented."

古文：襄曰：不敢，趁韵而已。
现代文：权龙襄说：不敢当，不过是凑韵而已。
English: Guan Longxiang said: I wouldn't dare, it's just a rhyme.

古文：又秋日，《述怀》曰：檐前飞七百，雪白后园强。
现代文：后来到了秋天，又作《述怀》诗道：檐前飞七百，雪白后园强。
English: Later, in the autumn, he wrote another poem, "Reflections," in which he said, "The crane flies seven hundred meters ahead, and the snow-white backyard is strong."

古文：饱食房里侧，家粪集野蜋。
现代文：饱食房里侧，家粪集野螂。
English: On the inside of the feeding room, there is a dung collection for cockroaches.

古文：参军不晓，请释，襄曰：鹞子檐前飞。值七百文。
现代文：参军不明白，请他解释一下，他说：鹞鹰在屋檐前飞旋，能值七百文钱。
English: Joining the army does not understand, ask him to explain, he said: the bald eagle flying in front of the eaves, can be worth seven hundred dollars.

古文：洗衫挂后园，干白如雪。饱食房中侧卧，家里便转，集得野泽蜣螂。
现代文：洗过的衣衫凉挂在后园里，晒干后洁白如雪，吃饱了饭就在房子里侧身躺卧，家里的粪便，必然会招集来许多野泡子里的屎壳郎。
English: Washed clothes hang in the cool of the backyard. After drying in the sun, they are as white as snow. After eating a full meal, they lie on their sides in the house. The feces in the house will inevitably attract a lot of dung beetles.

古文：谈者嗤之。
现代文：谈到这件事的人无不嘲笑他的。
English: Everyone who talks about it laughs at him.

古文：皇太子宴，夏日赋诗：严霜白浩浩，明月赤团团。
现代文：皇太子赐宴，正好是夏天，他赋诗写道：严霜白浩浩，明月赤团团。
English: It was summer when the crown prince gave the banquet, and he wrote a poem: "The frost is white and the moon is red."

古文：太子授笔为讚曰：龙襄才子，秦州人士。
现代文：皇太子提写赞道：龙襄才子，秦州人士。
English: The crown prince wrote in praise: Long Xiang Cai Zi, a person from Qinzhou.

古文：明月昼耀，严霜夏起。
现代文：明月昼耀，严霜夏起。
English: The bright moon shines in the daytime, and severe frosts begin in the summer.

古文：如此诗章，趁韵而已。
现代文：如此诗章，趁韵而已。
English: It's a poem, it's just a rhyme.

古文：襄以张易之事，出为容山府折冲。神龙中追入，乃上诗曰：无事向容山，今日向东都。
现代文：他曾因张易之事的牵连，从京城里派出去作了容山府折冲，到神龙年间又被调回京师，于是给皇上写诗道：无事向容山，今日向东都。
English: He was once involved in the Zhang Yi Incident, and was sent from the capital city to do the Yongsan prefectural inspection, and was transferred back to the capital city in the year of the dragon, so he wrote a poem to the emperor: Nothing to Yongsan, today to Dongdu.

古文：陛下敕进来，今作右金吾。
现代文：陛下敕进来，今作右金吾。
English: Your Majesty has come in, now it's Kingo's turn.

古文：又为喜雨诗曰：暗去也没雨，明来也没云。
现代文：又作《喜雨》诗道：暗去也没雨，明来也没云。
English: He also wrote the poem "The Joy of Rain": "It never rains when it's dark, and there's never a cloud when it's light."

古文：日头赫赤出，地上绿氲氤。
现代文：日头赫赤出，地上绿氲氤。
English: The sun is bright red and the ground is green.

古文：为瀛州史日，新过岁，京中数人附书曰：改年多感，敬想同之。
现代文：任瀛州剌史时，有一年春节刚过，京城中几个人都捎来书信说：改年多感，敬想会同有此心的。
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, just after the Spring Festival one year, several people in Beijing wrote to him saying, "I feel more sentimental in the new year. I would like to share this feeling with you."

古文：正新唤官人集云：有诏改年号为多感元年。
现代文：正月里他把所有官员都召集来说道：有诏改年号为多感元年。
English: In the first month of the year, he called all the officials together and said, "There is an edict to change the year's name to the first year of multi-sensory."

古文：将书呈判司已下。众人大笑。
现代文：并把书拿给判司等官兄们看，众人大笑。
English: He also showed the book to the judges and other court officials, and everyone laughed.

古文：龙襄复侧听，怪敕书来迟。
现代文：他侧耳听到人们的哄笑时，又怪敕书迟迟不到。
English: When he listens to people's laughter, he blames himself for not being able to finish the book.

古文：高阳博野两县，竞地陈牒，龙襄乃判曰：两县竞地，非州不裁。既是两县，于理无妨付司。
现代文：高阳、博野两县为了争夺其地的管辖权，都状书各自的理由，权龙襄判状道：两县争地盘，不是本州府不予裁决，既是两个县的事，按理应交付主管部门去裁判。
English: In order to compete for their local jurisdiction, the two counties of Goyang and Bono each filed their own reasons, and the court ruled: the two counties are competing for the site, it is not that the Honshu government will not make a ruling, as it is a matter of two counties, it should be submitted to the competent department for adjudication.

古文：权龙襄示。
现代文：最后署名权龙襄示。
English: The final signatory authority is not indicated.

古文：典曰：比来长官判事，皆不著姓。
现代文：典吏说：近来长官判事，皆不署名。
English: The usher said, "Recently, all the magistrates and judges have stopped signing their names."

古文：龙襄曰：余人不解，若不著姓，知我是谁家浪驴也。
现代文：龙襄曰：本人不解。若不署名，知道我是谁家的浪驴呀！
English: Long Xiang said, "I don't understand. If I don't sign, you know who I am, donkey!"

古文：龙襄不知忌日，谓府史曰：何名私忌？
现代文：权龙襄不知道什么叫忌日，问府史道：什么叫私忌？
English: Guan Longxiang didn't know what a death anniversary was, so he asked the prefectural historian: What is a private death anniversary?

古文：对曰：父母亡日，请假，独坐房中不出。
现代文：府史道：父母死亡时，要告假在家，独坐房中不能出门。
English: Fushido: When your parents die, you have to spend your leave at home. You can't go out when you're alone in your room.

古文：襄至日，于房中静坐，有青狗突入，龙襄大怒曰：冲破我忌。
现代文：后来在他遇上丧忧之时，便在房中一人静坐，不巧有只黑狗突然闯入，权龙襄大怒，道：冲破我的忌日！
English: Later, when he was depressed, he was sitting alone in his room. Unfortunately, a black dog suddenly broke in, and the dragon of power flew into a rage, saying, "Break through my day of death!"

古文：更陈牒，改作明朝，好作忌日。
现代文：于是重写书扎，改为明天再作忌日。
English: As a result, they rewrote the calligraphy and changed the day of death to tomorrow.

古文：谈者笑之。
现代文：谈论的人莫不大笑。
English: People who talk about it can't help but laugh.

