古文：秦攻赵长平，齐、楚救之。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国的长平，齐、楚两国发兵援赵。
English: Qin attacked Changping in Zhao, and Qi and Chu sent troops to aid Zhao.

古文：秦计曰： 齐、楚救赵，亲，则将退兵；不亲，则且遂攻之。 
现代文：秦王分析说： 如今齐、楚来救援赵国，如果他们联合作战，寡人就退兵；如果他们一盘散沙，我就趁机攻打它。 
English: Qin Wang analyzed: Now Qi and Chu have come to the rescue of Zhao. If they fight together, few will retreat; if they scatter sand, I will take the opportunity to attack it.

古文：赵无以食，请粟于齐，而齐不听。
现代文：这时，赵军粮食告急，派人向齐国借粮，可是齐王不答应借粮。
English: At this time, the Zhao army was in urgent need of grain and sent people to Qi to borrow grain, but the King of Qi did not agree to borrow grain.

古文：苏秦谓齐王曰： 不如听之以却秦兵，不听则秦兵不却，是秦之计中，而齐、燕之计过矣。
现代文：谋臣苏秦对齐王说： 大王不如把粮米暂借赵国，让他击退秦兵，如果不加理睬，秦兵就会无所忌惮，不会退去。这样一来就中了秦国的计谋，而齐、燕的计策就落空了。
English: Su Qin, the king's advisor, said to King Qi: "It would be better for the great king to temporarily borrow grain and rice from Zhao and let him repel the Qin soldiers. If he ignores them, the Qin soldiers will have nothing to fear and will not retreat. In this way, the Qin's strategy will be successful, while Qi and Yan's strategy will fail."

古文：且赵之于燕、齐，隐蔽也，齿之有唇也，唇亡则齿寒。
现代文：而且赵对于燕、齐两国来说，正是御秦的天然屏障。
English: Moreover, Zhao is a natural barrier for Yan and Qi.

古文：今日亡赵，则明日及齐、楚矣。
现代文：这就像牙齿跟嘴唇的关系，没有了嘴唇，牙齿就会感到寒冷。
English: It's like the relationship between teeth and lips. Without lips, teeth feel cold.

古文：且夫救赵之务，宜若奉漏壅，沃焦釜。
现代文：今日赵国遇到亡国之祸，明日亡国之祸就会降临到齐、楚身上。因此救援赵国就好比捧着漏瓮、浇灭烧焦的锅一样，实在是十万火急。
English: Today, Zhao encountered the calamity of losing the country, tomorrow, the calamity of losing the country will befall Qi and Chu. Therefore, the rescue of Zhao is like holding a leaking bucket and pouring out a scorched pot, it is really urgent.

古文：夫救赵，高义也；却秦兵，显名也。义救亡赵，威却强秦兵，不务为此，而务爱粟，则为国计者过矣。 
现代文：再说救赵是一种高尚的国际义举，击退秦国，也可以张扬名声，不去显示正义张扬威名，却一味地吝啬粮食，这确实是战略决策的错误啊。 
English: Moreover, rescuing Zhao is a noble international act of righteousness. It is possible to repel the Qin State and also to promote one's reputation. Instead of showing justice and promoting one's reputation, one should be stingy with grain. This is indeed a mistake in strategic decision-making.

