古文：果上柤稼柩树实如何树实仙梨绮缟树实波那婆树实瞻波异果神仙李
现代文：果上柤稼柩树实如何树实仙梨绮缟树实波那婆树实瞻波异果神仙李
English: How to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree how to pick the fruit of the tree

古文：武陵桃李金李汉帝杏仙人杏御李子朱李兔头柰脂衣柰朱柰
现代文：武陵桃李金李汉帝杏仙人杏御李子朱李兔头柰脂衣柰朱柰
English: Wuling peach, gold, Han emperor, fairy godmother, apricot, plum, cinnamon, rabbit's head, rouge, clothing, cinnamon

古文：文林果圣柰木桃东方村桃仙桃勾桃一石桃偏桃王母桃食核桃
现代文：文林果圣柰木桃东方村桃仙桃勾桃一石桃偏桃王母桃食核桃
English: Oriental village peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach peach

古文：韶子罗浮甘子天宝甘子北方枣西王母枣仙人枣仲思枣波斯枣
现代文：韶子罗浮甘子天宝甘子北方枣西王母枣仙人枣仲思枣波斯枣
English: Sea bream, floating sweet potato, heavenly treasure sweet potato, northern sweet potato, western king potato, hermit potato, middle-eastern sweet potato, Persian sweet potato

古文：果上
现代文：果上
English: Gogami

古文：柤稼柩树实
现代文：柤稼柩树实
English: Strawberries, strawberries, strawberries

古文：东方大荒之中，有树焉，名曰柤稼柩，柤，柤梨也；稼者，株稼也；柩，暱也。
现代文：东方大荒之中，有一种树，名叫 柤稼柩 。 柤 就是柤梨； 稼 ，就是株稼； 柩 就是 昵 。
English: In the Great Eastern Desert, there is a tree called 稼.  is 梨; 稼, is株稼;  is 昵.

古文：三千岁作花，九千岁作实。
现代文：这种树三千年开花，九千年结果。
English: This tree blossoms for three thousand years and bears fruit for nine thousand years.

古文：其花蕊紫色，其实赤色。
现代文：它的花蕊是紫色的，果实是赤色的。
English: Its stamens are purple and the fruit is red.

古文：亦高百丈，或千丈也。
现代文：树高可百丈，有的可达千丈。
English: Trees can be hundreds of feet tall, and some can reach thousands of feet.

古文：数张自辅。
现代文：枝干全都铺陈张扬自相辅助。
English: All the branches and trunks are self-supporting.

古文：东西南北方枝，各近五十丈。
现代文：东西南北各方的树枝，各近五十丈。
English: Branches in all directions, east, west, north and south, each nearly fifty feet tall.

古文：叶长七尺，广五尺。
现代文：叶长七尺，宽五尺。
English: The leaves are seven feet long and five feet wide.

古文：色如绿青，木皮如梓。
现代文：叶色像绿青，树皮像梓树皮。
English: The leaves are greenish-blue and the bark is like the bark of a cypress tree.

古文：树理如甘草，味饴。
现代文：树的纹理有如甘草，味道甜美。
English: The texture of the tree is like licorice, and the taste is sweet.

古文：实长九尺，围如长，无瓤核。
现代文：果实长九尺，围长也九尺。果实没有瓤和核。
English: The fruit is nine feet long, with a circumference of nine feet. The fruit does not have a beak or core.

古文：竹刀剖之，如凝蜜。
现代文：用竹刀把它剖开，有如切割凝结的蜜。
English: Cut it open with a bamboo knife, like cutting condensed honey.

古文：得食，复见实，即灭矣。
现代文：能吃到它的果实的人，再见到它的果实，果实就化了。
English: Anyone who can eat its fruit will see its fruit again, and the fruit will be destroyed.

古文：言复见后实熟者，寿一万二千岁。
现代文：传说又见到的果实如果是成熟的，这个人可活一万二千岁。
English: Legend has it that if the fruit is ripe, the person can live for 12,000 years.

古文：如何树实
现代文：如何树实
English: How to grow a tree

古文：南方大荒，有树焉，名曰如何。
现代文：南方大荒中有一种树，名字叫做 如何 。
English: In the southern wasteland, there is a tree called "How."

古文：三百岁作花，九百岁作实。
现代文：这种树三百年一开花，九百年一结果。
English: This tree flowers once every three hundred years and bears fruit once every nine hundred years.

古文：花色朱，其实正黄。
现代文：花色朱红。果实正黄，高五十丈。
English: The flower color is vermilion. The fruit is bright yellow and stands fifty feet tall.

古文：高五十丈，敷张如盖。
现代文：树冠枝叶全都铺陈张扬，形如车盖。
English: The canopy branches and leaves are all spread out, shaped like a car cover.

古文：叶长一丈，广二尺余，似菅苎，色青。厚五分。可以絮，如厚朴。
现代文：叶长一丈，宽二尺多，像菅苎，青色，五分厚，像厚朴，可以用来絮棉衣。
English: The leaves are up to one meter long, more than two feet wide, like a cane toad, blue, five-tenths thick, like a thick gardenia, and can be used to make cotton clothes.

古文：材理如支。九子，味如饴。
现代文：共结九粒种子，味道甜美。
English: It contains nine seeds and has a sweet taste.

古文：实有核，形如枣。
现代文：果实有核，形状像枣子。
English: The fruit has a core and is shaped like a jujube.

古文：子长五尺，围如长。
现代文：种子长五尺，围长也五尺。
English: The seed is five feet long and has a girth of five feet.

古文：金刀割之则酸，芦刀剖之则辛。
现代文：用金属刀剖它，它就酸；用芦苇做的刀剖它，它就辣。
English: Cut it with a metal knife and it becomes sour; cut it with a reed knife and it becomes spicy.

古文：食之者地仙，不畏水火，不畏白刃。
现代文：吃到它便可以成为不能升天却可以长生不老的地仙，不怕水火，不怕兵刃。
English: If they eat it, they can become immortals who cannot ascend to heaven but can live forever. They are not afraid of water, fire, or the sword.

古文：仙梨
现代文：仙梨
English: Cinnamon

古文：南方有树焉，高百丈，敷张自辅。
现代文：南方有一种树，高一百丈，枝叶全都辅陈张扬自辅自助。
English: In the south, there is a tree that is a hundred feet tall. All of its branches and leaves are self-reinforcing.

古文：叶长一丈，广六尺。
现代文：叶长一丈，宽六尺。
English: The leaves are a foot long and six feet wide.

古文：名梨。如今之柤梨，但树大耳。
现代文：树名叫做 梨 ，就像现在的柤梨，只是树特别大罢了。
English: The name of the tree was 梨 (pear), just like today's avocado, except that the tree was particularly large.

古文：其子径三尺，剖之少瓤，白如素。
现代文：它的种子直径三尺。剖开之后，里边的瓤很少，瓤像白绦绸一样白。
English: Its seed is three feet in diameter. When it is cut open, there is very little cocoon inside, and the cocoon is as white as chalk silk.

古文：和羹食之地仙，衣服不败，辟谷，可以入水火也。
现代文：用这瓤做汤喝就能成为地仙，衣服永远不坏，不用吃东西，不怕水火。
English: If you drink soup made with this gourd, you can become a celestial being. Your clothes will never wear out, you won't have to eat, and you won't be afraid of water or fire.

古文：绮缟树实
现代文：绮缟树实
English: Eucalyptus seeds

古文：东南荒中有邪木焉，高三千丈，或十余围，或七八尺。
现代文：东南大荒之中有一种树叫 邪木 ，高三千丈，粗的有十余围，有的七八尺。
English: In the Southeastern wastelands, there is a kind of tree called yakitori, which is 3,000 meters tall, more than ten times as thick, and sometimes seven or eight feet.

古文：其枝有乔直上，不可那也。
现代文：它的枝干挺拔向上，直上云端，矗然不动。
English: Its branches stretch straight up, straight up to the clouds, and do not move.

古文：叶如甘瓜，三百岁尽。
现代文：它的叶像甜瓜叶。三百年叶子落尽而生花。
English: Its leaves are like melon leaves. Three hundred years of leaves have fallen and flowers have sprung up.

古文：落而生花，形如甘瓜。花复二百岁，落而生萼。
现代文：花形像甜瓜叶。花又二百年，尽落而生花萼。
English: The shape of the flower is like a melon leaf. The flower is two hundred years old, and it is a calyx.

古文：萼下生子，三岁而成熟。
现代文：花萼下边生果实。三年以后果实成熟。
English: The calyx bears fruit on the underside. The fruit matures after three years.

古文：成熟之后，不长不减。
现代文：成熟之后，不增长也不减小。
English: After maturation, it does not increase or decrease.

古文：子形如寒瓜，似冬瓜也，长七八寸，径四五寸。
现代文：果实形状就像寒瓜、冬瓜那样。果子长七八寸，圆径四五寸。
English: The shape of the fruit is like that of a cucumber or a winter melon. The fruit is seven or eight inches long and has a diameter of four or five inches.

古文：萼复覆生顶。
现代文：花萼又从果实顶上生出来。
English: The calyx emerges from the top of the fruit.

古文：言发萼而得成实。
现代文：又从萼生出来的果实才能成熟。
English: It is from the calyx that the fruit ripens.

古文：此不取，万世如故。若取子而留萼，萼复生子。如初年月复成熟。
现代文：这果实如果不取走，万世如故；如果把果实拿走而留下萼，萼就再生果实，还是要那么长时间才能成熟。
English: If this fruit is not taken away, it will remain as it is; if the fruit is taken away and the calyx is left, the calyx will regenerate the fruit, and it will still take that long to mature.

古文：复二年则成萼，则复生子。
现代文：再二年就又长成萼，萼就再生果实。
English: In another two years, it will grow into a calyx, and the calyx will produce fruit.

古文：其子形如甘瓤，少錬甘美。食之，令人身泽。
现代文：果实像甜瓜的瓤，味道甜美，吃到它，能让全身滋润有光泽。
English: The fruit is like a melon seed, tastes sweet, and when eaten, can make the whole body moist and shiny.

古文：不可过三升，令人冥醉，半日乃醒。
现代文：不能多吃，吃多了人就醉，半天才能醒过来。
English: You can't eat too much. If you eat too much, you'll get drunk and it'll take you half a day to wake up.

古文：木高，人取不能得。唯木下有多罗之人，缘能得之。
现代文：这树特别高，一般人摘不下它的果实来，只有这里的多罗人，让他爬上去才能摘取。
English: The tree is so tall that ordinary people can't reach it to pick its fruit. Only the local Dora people can reach it by climbing it.

古文：一名无叶。
现代文：它的一个名字叫 无叶 。
English: One of its names is leafless.

古文：世人后生，不见叶，谓之无叶也。
现代文：因为谁也没见过它的叶子，才叫无叶的。
English: They are called leafless because no one has ever seen their leaves.

古文：一名绮缟。
现代文：还有一名叫 绮缟 。
English: There is also a person named Zou Cang.

古文：人见无叶，谓之绮缟。
现代文：人们见它没有叶，就叫它 绮缟 。
English: When people see that it has no leaves, they call it a maple tree.

古文：波那婆树实
现代文：波那婆树实
English: Bonapha tree sap

古文：波那婆树，出佛林国，呼为阿萨亸。
现代文：波那婆树，出在佛林国，本国人叫它 阿萨亸 。
English: Bonaparte tree, originated in the country of Flushing, the locals call it Assam.

古文：树长五六丈，皮色青绿。
现代文：树高五六丈，树皮青绿色。
English: The tree is five or six meters tall, and its bark is blue-green.

古文：叶极光净，冬夏不凋。
现代文：叶子极其光滑干净，冬夏不凋。
English: The leaves are extremely smooth and clean, and do not wither in winter or summer.

古文：无花结实。
现代文：此树无花结果，果实是从树茎上长出来的。
English: The tree bears no fruit, the fruit grows from the stem.

古文：其实从树茎出，大如冬瓜，有皮裹之。壳上有刺。
现代文：果实大小有如冬瓜，有皮包裹着。皮壳上有刺。
English: The fruit is the size of a winter melon and is covered in skin. It has thorns on the skin.

古文：瓤至甘甜，可食。
现代文：果实的瓤极其甘甜，可以吃。
English: The fruit pods are extremely sweet and can be eaten.

古文：核大如枣，一实有数枚。
现代文：果中核大如枣，一个果中有几个核。
English: The core of the fruit is as large as that of a jujube, and there are several cores in one fruit.

古文：核中仁如粟黄，炒之食甚美。
现代文：核中的仁儿像粟子黄，炒着吃特别好吃。
English: The kernel in the core is like a yellow poppy seed, and it is particularly delicious when stir-fried.

古文：瞻波异果
现代文：瞻波异果
English: Junpei's Strange Fruit

古文：瞻波国有人牧牛百余头。
现代文：瞻波国有一个牧牛人牧牛一百多头。
English: In Junba Province, there is a cowherd with more than a hundred head of cattle.

古文：有一牛离群，忽失所在，至暮方归。形色鸣吼异常，牛主异之。
现代文：有一天，有一头牛离群，忽然间就不知跑到哪儿去了，到了晚上牛才回来。
English: One day, a cow wandered away from the herd. All of a sudden, it didn't know where it had gone. The cow only returned in the evening.

古文：明日遂独行，主因随之。
现代文：主人发现，这头牛的形体、颜色，以及鸣叫的声音，都有所变化。他很奇怪。
English: His owner noticed that the cow's shape, colour and even the sound of its mooing had changed. He was puzzled.

古文：入一穴，行五六里。
现代文：第二天，这头牛独自行动，主人就跟随其后。
English: The next day, the cow wandered off on its own and the owner followed.

古文：豁然明朗，花木皆非人间所有。
现代文：牛走进一个洞穴，走了五六里，豁然明朗，山山水水花草树木都不是人间有的。
English: The cow walked into a cave, walked five or six miles, and suddenly it was clear that the landscape, flowers, and trees were not of this world.

古文：牛于一处食草，草不可识。
现代文：牛走到一处去吃草，他不认识是什么草。
English: The cow went to a place to graze. He didn't know what kind of grass it was.

古文：有果作黄金色，牧牛人窃将还，为鬼所夺。
现代文：草上结着果，金黄色。他偷摘了那果，但是要回来的时候被鬼夺下了。
English: There was a golden-yellow fruit on the grass. He picked it by stealth, but it was taken by the ghost when he was about to return.

古文：又一日，复往取此果，至穴，鬼复欲夺。
现代文：又一天，他又去偷那果子，走到洞穴，鬼又要夺，他急忙把果吞到肚子里。
English: Another day, he went to steal the fruit, walked to the cave, the ghost tried to snatch it again, and he quickly swallowed the fruit into his stomach.

古文：其人急吞之，身遂暴长。
现代文：于是他的身体便迅猛地增长。
English: As a result, his body grew rapidly.

古文：头才出，身塞于穴。
现代文：他的头刚从洞口伸出来，他的身体就塞在洞中不能动了。
English: As soon as his head emerged from the hole, his body was stuck in the hole, unable to move.

古文：数日化为石。
现代文：几天之后他变成了石头。
English: A few days later he turned to stone.

古文：神仙李
现代文：神仙李
English: Shen Xian Li

古文：防陵楚山，有朱神李圃三十六所。
现代文：防陵楚山有朱神李子园三十六处。
English: There are thirty-six places of Zhu Shen plum garden in Boryeong Chushan.

古文：潘岳《闲居赋》云 房陵朱神之李 。又李尤《果赋》云 三十六之朱李 。
现代文：潘岳《闲居赋》称为 房陵朱神之李 ，李尤《果赋》称为： 三十六之朱李 。
English: Pan Yue's "Idle Dwelling" is called "Fang Ling Zhu Shen's Li," and Li You's "Fruits" is called "Thirty-Six Zhu Li."

古文：盖仙李缥而神李红。
现代文：大概仙李是淡青色的，神李是朱红色的。
English: Probably, the celestial plumage is pale blue, and the celestial plumage is vermilion.

古文：陆士衡《果赋》云 中山之缥李 是也。
现代文：陆士衡《果赋》中有 中山有淡青色李子 这样的话就是证明。
English: In Lu Shiheng's "Fruitful Life" there is a radish, and in Zhongshan there is a pale blue plum. This is proof.

古文：武陵桃李
现代文：武陵桃李
English: Wuling Taoli

古文：武陵源在吴中。
现代文：武陵源在吴中。
English: Wulingyuan is in Wuzhong.

古文：山中无他木，尽生桃李，俗呼为桃李原。
现代文：山中没有其它树木，全生长着桃树李树，一般人称这里是 桃李原 。
English: There are no other trees in the mountain, all of which are peach and plum trees. People generally call this place the Peach and Plum Plain.

古文：原上有石洞，洞中有乳水。
现代文：原上有个石洞，洞中有乳水。
English: Originally, there was a stone cave, and there was milk in the cave.

古文：世传秦乱，吴人于此避难者，食桃李实者，皆得仙去。
现代文：世间传说，秦时战乱，到这里来避难的吴国人，凡是吃过这里的桃李的，都成仙而去。
English: According to legend, when the Qin Dynasty was at war, the Wu people who came here to take refuge all became immortals after eating the peaches and plums here.

古文：金李
现代文：金李
English: Jin Li

古文：杜陵有金李。
现代文：杜陵有一种李子叫 金李 。
English: There is a kind of plum in Duling called Jin Li.

古文：李之大者，谓之夏李；尤小者谓之鼠李。
现代文：大的，叫它 夏李 ；小的，叫作 鼠李 。
English: The big one is called Xia Li; the small one is called Rat Li.

古文：汉帝杏
现代文：汉帝杏
English: Hantei apricot

古文：济南郡之东南，有分流山。
现代文：济南郡的东南，有座分流山。
English: In the southeast of Jinan County, there is a diversion hill.

古文：山上多杏，大如梨，色黄如桔。
现代文：山上多杏树。杏像梨那么大，颜色像桔子那样橙黄橙黄的。
English: There are many apricot trees on the mountain. Apricots are as big as pears and as orange-yellow as oranges.

古文：土人谓之汉帝杏，亦曰金杏。
现代文：当地人叫它 汉帝杏 ，也叫 金杏 。
English: Locals call it "Hantei apricot" or "golden apricot."

古文：仙人杏
现代文：仙人杏
English: Fairy Apricot

古文：杏圃洲，南海中多杏，海上人云，仙人种杏处。
现代文：杏圃洲在南海之中，洲中多杏，海上人都说，那是神仙种杏的地方。
English: Apricot Island is in the South China Sea. There are many apricots in the island. People at sea say that it is a place where the gods grow apricots.

古文：汉时，尝有人舟行遇风，泊此洲五六日，日食杏，故免死。
现代文：汉朝时，曾经有人乘船出海遇风，停泊在这洲上五六天，天天吃杏，所以没有饿死。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was once a man who went out to sea in a boat and was caught by the wind. He anchored on this island for five or six days, eating apricots every day, so he did not starve to death.

古文：云，洲中有冬杏。
现代文：说洲中有冬杏。
English: It is said that there are winter apricots on the island.

古文：王充《果赋》云。冬实之杏，春熟之甘。 
现代文：王充的《果赋》说： 冬天结果的杏，到了春天就熟了，变得很甜。 
English: Wang Chong's "Fruits" says: The apricots that are harvested in winter will ripen in spring and become very sweet.

古文：晋郭太仪《果赋》云： 杏或冬而实 。
现代文：晋代的郭太仪的《果赋》说： 杏，有的冬季结果。 
English: Guo Taiyi's "Fruits" of the Jin Dynasty said: Apricots, some winter results.

古文：御李子
现代文：御李子
English: Goryo-zome

古文：许昌节使小厅，是故魏景福殿。
现代文：许昌节使的小厅，是过去魏时的景福殿。
English: The small hall of Xu Changjie is the Gingfu Hall of the past Wei Dynasty.

古文：董卓乱，魏武挟令迁帝，自洛都许。
现代文：董卓作乱，魏武曹操挟迫天子迁都，从洛阳迁到许昌。
English: Dong Zhuo made a disturbance, Wei Wu Cao Cao forced Tianzi to move the capital from Luoyang to Xuchang.

古文：许州有小李子，色黄，大如樱桃，谓之御李子。
现代文：许州有一种小李子，色黄，大小有如樱桃，叫做 御李子 。
English: In Huzhou, there is a small plum, yellow in color, the size of a cherry, called O plum.

古文：即献帝时所植，至今有焉。朱李
现代文：这御李子就是汉献帝那时候栽的，到现在还有。朱李
English: This plum tree was planted by Emperor Han Xian at that time, and it still exists today. Zhu Li

古文：魏文帝安阳殿前，天降朱李八枚。
现代文：魏文帝的安阳殿前，从天上掉下来八个朱红色李子。
English: Eight scarlet plums fell from the sky in front of Emperor Weiwen's Anyang Palace.

古文：啖一枚，数日不食。
现代文：吃一个，好几天不想吃饭。
English: Eat one and you won't want to eat for days.

古文：今李种有安阳李，大而甘者，即其种也。兔头柰
现代文：如今有一种又大又甜的安阳李子，就是这朱李传下来的种。兔头柰
English: Nowadays, there is a large and sweet Anyang plum, which is the species handed down from Zhu Li.

古文：白柰，出凉州野猪泽，大如兔头。
现代文：白柰，出在凉州的野猪泽，大如兔子头。
English: The white stork, from the wild boar lake in Liangzhou, is as big as a rabbit's head.

古文：脂衣柰
现代文：脂衣柰
English: 脂衣

古文：脂衣柰，汉时紫柰。大如升，核紫花青。
现代文：脂衣柰是汉时的紫柰，体大如升，核是紫色的，花是青色的。
English: The fat-coated dragonfly is the Han Dynasty's purple dragonfly, its body is as large as a liter, the nucleus is purple, and the flower is blue.

古文：研之有汁，可漆，或著衣，不可浣。
现代文：脂衣柰研磨出来的浆汁，可以漆器物，有的人也用它染衣服。
English: The pulp from the grind of the fat-coated gourd can be used to varnish objects, and some people also use it to dye clothes.

古文：朱柰
现代文：但是它染的衣服不能洗。朱柰
English: But the clothes stained by it cannot be washed.

古文：唐贞观年中，顿丘县有一贤者，于黄河渚上拾菜，得一树栽子。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间，顿丘县有一个贤德的人，在黄河里的一个小岛上拾菜，拾到了一棵树栽子，手指那么大。
English: During the Zhenguan era of the Tang Dynasty, there was a virtuous man in Dongqiu County who picked vegetables on a small island in the Yellow River and found a tree sapling with fingers as big as his.

古文：大如指。
现代文：他把它拿回去栽好莳弄它。
English: He took it back and planted it and tinkered with it.

古文：持归莳之，三年，乃结子五颗。
现代文：三年之后，这棵小树结了五颗果子。
English: Three years later, the little tree produced five fruits.

古文：味状如柰，又似林檎。
现代文：果子的味道、样子都像柰，又像林檎。
English: The taste and appearance of the fruit are similar to that of a toad, and also to that of a sloth.

古文：多汁，异常酸美。
现代文：果子多汁，又酸又甜，很好吃。
English: The fruit is juicy, sour and sweet. It's delicious.

古文：送县，县上州，以其奇味，乃进之。
现代文：他把果子送到县上，县上又送到州，因为它味道奇特，就献给了皇上。
English: He sent the fruit to the county, and the county sent it to the state, and because it tasted strange, it was presented to the emperor.

古文：上赐绫一十匹。
现代文：皇上赐绫十匹。
English: The emperor gave him ten yakitori.

古文：后树长成，渐至三百颗。每年进之，号曰朱柰。
现代文：后来这棵树渐渐长大，果子可以结到三百颗，每年都进贡，名叫 朱柰 。
English: Later, this tree gradually grew and could bear up to three hundred fruits. It was given a tribute every year and was named Zhu Xi.

古文：至今存。
现代文：朱柰至今还有。
English: Zhu Xi still has it.

古文：德贝博等州，取其枝接，所在丰足。
现代文：德、贝、博等州，用它的枝条嫁接，产量大增。
English: De, Bei, Bo and other provinces have used its branches to graft, and the output has increased greatly.

古文：人以为从西域浮来，碍渚而住矣。
现代文：人们认为这是从西域漂来的，被小岛子挡住了。
English: It is thought to have drifted from the Western Isles and was blocked by the islet.

古文：文林果
现代文：文林果
English: Wenlin fruit

古文：唐永徽中，魏郡临黄王国村人王方言，尝于河中滩上，拾得一小树栽，埋之。
现代文：唐永徽年中，魏郡临黄王国村人王方言，有一次在河中的沙滩上拾到一小棵树栽子。
English: In the middle of the Tang and Yonghui Dynasties, a villager from Linhuang Kingdom Village, Wei County, once picked up a small tree sapling on the beach in the river.

古文：及长，乃林檎也。
现代文：他就把它栽上了。长大一看，原来是一棵林檎。
English: He planted it, and when it grew up, it turned out to be a cucumber tree.

古文：实大如小黄瓠，色白如玉，间以珠点。
现代文：这棵林檎结的果个头挺大，一个个都像黄色小葫芦。果肉白如美玉，间杂有圆点。
English: The fruits of this juniper tree are quite large, each one resembling a small yellow gourd. The flesh is as white as a berry, with dots in between.

古文：亦不多，三数而已，有如缬。实为奇果。
现代文：圆点并不多，三两个而已，恰似彩结，实在是奇果。
English: There aren't many dots, just three or two, just like colored knots, it's really a strange fruit.

古文：光明莹目，又非常美。
现代文：样子好看，味道又美。
English: It looks good and tastes good.

古文：纪王慎为曹州刺史，有得之献王。
现代文：纪王慎是曹州刺史。有人把弄到的果献给王，王又把它献给高宗。
English: Ji Wangshen is the history of Caozhou acupuncture. Some people dedicated the fruit to the king, and the king dedicated it to Gaozong.

古文：王贡于高宗，以为朱柰，又名五色林檎，或谓之联珠果。
现代文：高宗认为是朱柰，又名叫 五色林檎 ，有的人叫它 联珠果 。
English: Gao Zong thought that it was Zhu Xi, also known as Five-Colored Lin Xi, and some people called it Lian Zhu Guo.

古文：种于苑中。西城老僧见之云： 是奇果亦名林檎。 
现代文：皇上命人把它种在花园里，西城的一位老和尚见了说： 这是奇果，也叫林檎。 
English: The emperor ordered someone to plant it in the garden, and an old monk in Xicheng saw it and said, "This is a strange fruit, also known as the linden tree."

古文：上大重之，赐王方言文林郎，亦号此果为文林郎果。
现代文：皇上很重视这件事，赐王方言 文林郎 的官职，也把果子叫做 文林郎果 。
English: The emperor attached great importance to this matter and gave the official post of the king's dialect Wenlin Lang, and also called the fruit Wenlin Langguo.

古文：俗云频婆果。
现代文：此果一般叫做 频婆果 。
English: This fruit is commonly known as the phoenix fruit.

古文：河东亦多林檎，秦中亦不少。
现代文：河东也多有林檎，秦中也不少。
English: In the east of the river, there are also many cucumbers, and there are also many cucumbers in the middle of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：河西诸郡。亦有林檎。
现代文：河西各郡，也有林檎。
English: In all counties in the west of the river, there are also apple trees.

古文：皆小于文林果。
现代文：不过它们都小于文林果。
English: However, they are all smaller than cucumbers.

古文：圣柰
现代文：圣柰
English: St. John's

古文：河州凤林关有灵岩寺。
现代文：河州凤林关有一座灵岩寺。
English: There is a Lingyan Temple in Fenglin Pass, Hezhou.

古文：每七月十五日，溪穴流出圣柰，大如盏。
现代文：每年七月十五日，就能从溪穴中流出来一些圣柰，像小酒杯那么大。
English: On the 15th of July every year, some sacred reeds, as big as small wine glasses, flow out of the cave.

古文：以为常。
现代文：人们习以为常。
English: People get used to it.

古文：木桃
现代文：木桃
English: Wood peach

古文：桃之大者木桃。
现代文：桃中最大的是木桃。
English: The largest of the peaches is the wood peach.

古文：诗云 投我以木桃 是也。
现代文：《诗经》说 投我以木桃 就是证明。
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "To cast me as a peach tree is proof."

古文：东方村桃
现代文：东方村桃
English: Oriental Village Peach

古文：东方村有桃树。
现代文：东方村有一棵桃树。
English: There is a peach tree in Dongfang Village.

古文：其子径三尺二寸。
现代文：它结的果子直径三尺二寸长。
English: Its fruit is three feet and two inches in diameter.

古文：和核羹食之，令人益寿。
现代文：用它的核熬汤喝，可以延年益寿。
English: If you drink soup made from its seeds, you can prolong your life.

古文：食核中仁，可以治嗽。
现代文：吃它核中的仁，可以治咳嗽。
English: If you eat the kernels in its core, you can cure your cough.

古文：小桃温润，既嗽人食之即止也。
现代文：小桃温润，咳嗽时吃了它就能止住。
English: The peach is warm and moist. When you cough, you can stop it by eating it.

古文：仙桃
现代文：仙桃
English: Pistachio

古文：出郴州苏耽仙坛。有人至心求之者，桃落坛上。
现代文：有一个极虔诚地到彬州苏耽仙坛去求药的人，桃子落到坛上。
English: There was a very pious person who went to the Binzhou Su Tan Immortal Shrine to ask for medicine, and a peach fell onto the altar.

古文：或至五六颗。
现代文：有时候一次就落下来五六颗。
English: Sometimes there are five or six falling at once.

古文：形似石块，赤黄色。
现代文：桃子形似石块，赤黄色。
English: The peaches are stone-shaped and reddish-yellow.

古文：破之，如有核三重。
现代文：把这桃子砸破，见里面似乎有三重核。
English: Break this peach open and you'll see what appears to be a triple core inside.

古文：研饮之，愈众疾。
现代文：把它研细饮下，能治百病。
English: Study it carefully and drink it, it can cure all diseases.

古文：尤治邪气。
现代文：治邪气尤其有效。
English: It is especially effective in curing evil spirits.

古文：勾桃
现代文：勾桃
English: Sour peach

古文：邺华林苑勾桃子，重三斤，或二斤半。
现代文：邺华林苑的勾桃子，重三斤，有的二斤半。
English: The hooked peaches of the Yuhua Forest Garden weigh three catties, some two and a half catties.

古文：亦有名梨者。
现代文：也有叫它梨的。
English: It is also called pear.

古文：比众果气味甘美，入口消释，人间有名果。
现代文：它比其它水果的气味都要甘美，入口就化了，真是人间的名果。
English: It smells sweeter than any other fruit, and it melts in your mouth. It's truly a world-famous fruit.

古文：季龙作虾蟆车，四箱广一丈，深一丈，合土载中植之，则无不生也。
现代文：季龙做了一辆虾蟆车，车箱宽一丈，深一丈，在这里边装土去把这种桃树拉回来栽植，没有栽不活的。
English: Ji Long made a shrimp truck, the box is wide and deep, and the soil is loaded here to pull this peach tree back and plant it. Nothing can be planted and not live.

古文：石桃
现代文：石桃
English: Stone peach

古文：吐谷浑桃，大如石瓮。
现代文：吐谷浑桃，像石瓮那么大。
English: Tukudani hazelnut, as big as a stalactite.

古文：偏桃
现代文：偏桃
English: Partial peach

古文：偏桃出波斯国，波斯呼为婆淡。
现代文：偏桃出在波斯国。波斯叫它 婆淡 。
English: The partial peach originated in the country of Persia. Persians call it "bataan."

古文：树长五六丈，围四五尺，叶似桃而阔大。三月开花，白色。
现代文：树高五六丈，树围四五尺，叶像桃但比桃叶宽大，三月开花，白色，花落之后结果。
English: The tree is five or six feet tall, with a circumference of four or five feet. The leaves are like those of a peach, but wider than peach leaves. The flowers bloom in March and are white. The fruit is produced after the flowers have fallen.

古文：花落结实，状如桃子而形偏。
现代文：果的样子像桃，但是比桃偏。
English: The fruit looks like a peach, but is smaller than a peach.

古文：其肉苦涩，不堪啖。
现代文：它的果肉又苦又涩，不能吃。
English: Its pulp is bitter and astringent and cannot be eaten.

古文：核中仁甘甜。
现代文：核中的仁儿甘甜。
English: The cumin in the core is sweet.

古文：西域诸国并珍之。王母桃
现代文：西域各国都很珍视这种桃子。王母桃
English: This peach is highly prized in all Western countries.

古文：王母桃，洛阳华林园内有之。十月始熟。
现代文：王母桃，洛阳的华林园里有，十月才成熟。
English: The Queen Mother peach, which can be found in Luoyang's Hualin Garden, only ripens in October.

古文：形如括篓。
现代文：形状像扎束着口的篓子。
English: Shaped like a pair of mouth-tied pigtails.

古文：俗语曰： 王母甘桃，食之解劳。 
现代文：俗语说： 王母甜桃，王母甜桃，吃了之后，解除疲劳。 
English: As the saying goes: the queen mother sweet peach, the queen mother sweet peach, after eating, relieve fatigue.

古文：亦名西王母桃。
现代文：此桃也叫 西王母桃 。
English: This peach is also called the Western Queen Peach.

古文：食核桃
现代文：食核桃
English: Walnut soup

古文：杨子留后吴尧卿家，有佣赁者。
现代文：杨子留后吴尧卿家，有一个雇用很久的老长工。
English: After Yang Zi left, Wu Yuqing's family had a long-term employee.

古文：役之既久。一日，持一大桃核，可容数升，以献尧卿。
现代文：有一天，老长工拿来一个可容纳好几升米的大桃核献给尧卿。
English: One day, an old longshoreman brought a large peach kernel, which could hold several liters of rice, to present to Lord Zou.

古文：尧卿知其异，稍磨之取食。
现代文：尧卿知道这不是个寻常之物，就将桃核稍稍磨了磨，掏里边的桃仁吃。
English: Knowing that this was not an ordinary thing, Yuqing grinded the peach pit a little bit and took out the peach kernel inside to eat.

古文：食尽，颇觉轻健。
现代文：吃完之后，他觉得浑身轻捷有力。
English: After eating, he felt light and powerful all over.

古文：尧卿为吏，贪猥残虐。
现代文：尧卿做官贪婪残暴。
English: As an official, Gongqing was greedy and cruel.

古文：毕师铎之难，投所居后阁井中死。
现代文：毕师铎发起的那场灾难，把他投到宅后的一口井里整死了。
English: The calamity initiated by Bi Shizhen caused him to be thrown into a well behind his house, where he died.

古文：师铎求得类尧卿者杀之。
现代文：毕师铎是求一个和尧卿一样残暴的人把他杀死的。
English: Bi Shizhao was begging for someone as cruel as Zou Qing to kill him.

古文：后有得其故居者，窃知其尸在井中，取而得之。
现代文：后来有人得到了尧卿的故居，才知道他的尸体在井中。
English: Later, someone obtained the former residence of Lord Zou, only to find out that his body was in the well.

古文：举体皆腐坏，而藏府有成金者。
现代文：把尸体捞上来一看，全身都腐坏了，而脏腑里有成型的金器。
English: When the body was fished out, the whole body was rotten, and there were molded gold objects in the intestines.

古文：韶子
现代文：韶子
English: Dice

古文：初宁县里有石榆子，一名山枣，又时呼为韶子也。
现代文：初宁县里有一种叫做 石榆子 的东西，一名 山枣 ，又时常叫做 韶子 。
English: In Hatsuning County, there is something called "shihakushi," a mountain jujube, which is also often called "hakushi."

古文：罗浮甘子
现代文：罗浮甘子
English: Luo Fu sweet bean

古文：罗浮甘子，唐开元中，始有山僧种于南楼寺。其后进献。
现代文：唐开元年间，有山僧将罗浮甘子种到南楼寺，以后把它献进宫廷。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a mountain monk brought Luo Fu amanzi to Nanluo Temple and later presented it to the imperial court.

古文：幸蜀奉天之岁，皆不结实。天宝甘子
现代文：皇上巡幸蜀地奉天的那一年，所有的罗浮甘子全都没有结果。天宝甘子
English: In the year of the emperor's inspection tour to Shoushi and Bongtian, all Luo Fu candies were fruitless.

古文：唐天宝十年，上谓幸臣曰： 近于宫内种甘子数株，今秋结实一百五十颗，与江南蜀道所进不异。 
现代文：唐天宝十年，皇上对一个幸臣说： 近年在宫内种了几棵甘子，今秋结了一百五十颗果子。这些果子与江南和蜀地所进贡的没有不同。 
English: In the tenth year of Tang Tianbao, the emperor said to a fortunate retainer: In recent years, several sweet potatoes have been planted in the palace, and this autumn they have produced one hundred and fifty fruits. These fruits are no different from the tributes from the south of the Yangtze River and Shu Di.

古文：宰臣贺表曰： 雨露所均，混天区而齐被。
现代文：宰臣祝贺说： 雨露均匀的年月，满天下都在这雨露的滋润之下。
English: The Vice-Minister congratulated and said, "During the years of uniform rain and dew, the whole world is under the moisture of this rain and dew.

古文：草木有性，凭地气而潜通。
现代文：草木有灵性，凭借着地气而于地下沟通。
English: Grasses and trees have spirituality and communicate underground by virtue of being grounded in the earth's atmosphere.

古文：故得资江外之珍果，为禁中之华实。 
现代文：所以才能将江南的珍异之果变为宫中的华美之实。 
English: This is the reason why the rare fruit from the south of the Yangtze River can be transformed into the sumptuous fruit of the palace.

古文：相传云，玄宗幸蜀年，罗浮甘子不实。
现代文：相传说，唐玄宗巡幸蜀地的那一年，罗浮甘子不结果。
English: According to legend, in the year that Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty visited Shoushi, Luo Fuguangzi did not succeed.

古文：岭南有蚁，大于秦中马蚁，结巢于甘树。
现代文：岭南有一种蚂蚁，比秦中的蚂蚁大，在甘树上筑巢。
English: In southern Lingnan, there is an ant that is larger than the ants in the Qin Dynasty. It builds its nest in a camphor tree.

古文：实时，幸循其上，故甘皮薄而滑。
现代文：甘树结果的时候，蚂蚁循着甘树上上下下，所以甘皮薄而光滑。
English: When the sugar beet is harvested, the ants follow the sugar beet up and down, so the sugar beet is thin and smooth.

古文：往往甘实在巢中，冬深取之。味数倍于常者。
现代文：往往有一些甘子果掉在蚂蚁巢中，冬深之后取出来，味道要比通常的甘子好上不知多少倍！
English: There are often some candied fruits that fall into ant nests and are taken out after the depths of winter. The taste is I don't know how many times better than regular candied fruits!

古文：北方枣
现代文：北方枣
English: Northern jujube

古文：北方荒中，有枣林焉。
现代文：北方大荒之中，有一片枣树林。
English: In the midst of the northern wasteland, there is a grove of jujube trees.

古文：其高五十丈，敷张枝条数里余。
现代文：枣树高五十丈，一棵树的枝条就能铺陈好几里地。
English: A jujube tree is fifty meters tall, and the branches of a single tree can stretch for several miles.

古文：疾风不能偃，雷电不能摧。
现代文：疾风不能使它倾斜；雷电不能把它摧毁。
English: Wind cannot tilt it; lightning cannot destroy it.

古文：其子长六七寸，围过其长。
现代文：它的果实长六七寸，粗细超过长短。
English: Its fruits are up to six or seven inches long, and the thickness exceeds the length.

古文：熟色如朱。
现代文：果实成熟之后是朱红色的。
English: The fruit is reddish-crimson when ripe.

古文：乹之不缩。
现代文：即使晒干了，个头也不缩小。
English: Even if the sun dries, the head does not shrink.

古文：气味润泽，殊于常枣。
现代文：而且气味温润，与通常的枣大不相同。
English: Moreover, the smell is warm, which is quite different from the usual jujube.

古文：食之可以安驱益气。
现代文：吃了可以安躯益气。
English: You can eat to calm your body and boost your energy.

古文：故方书云： 此枣枝条，盛于常枣，亦益气安躯。 
现代文：所以方书说： 此枣枝条，比通常的枣树茂盛，也益气安躯。 
English: Therefore, Fang Shu said: This jujube branch is more luxuriant than the usual jujube tree, and it is also good for the body.

古文：赤松子云。北方大枣味有殊，既可益气又安躯。 
现代文：赤松子说： 北方的大枣味道特殊，既可益气又能安躯。 
English: Akamatsuko said, "Northern large jujube has a special taste, which is both beneficial for qi and healthy for the body.

古文：西王母枣
现代文：西王母枣
English: West royal jujube

古文：邺华林苑中西王母枣，冬夏有叶，九月生花，腊月乃熟。
现代文：邺华林苑中的西王母枣，冬夏都生长。九月开花，到了腊月，枣子就熟了。
English: The West King Mother jujube grows in both winter and summer. The flowers bloom in September, and the jujube ripens in November.

古文：三子一尺。
现代文：三颗枣子的长度加起来，正好是一尺。
English: The sum of the lengths of the three jujubes is exactly one foot.

古文：又有圭角枣。亦三子一尺。
现代文：另外，有一种叫 圭角枣 的枣子，也是三个枣子一尺长。
English: In addition, there is a type of jujube called Keikaku jujube, which is also three jujubes a foot long.

古文：仙人枣
现代文：仙人枣
English: Immortal jujube

古文：晋时。太仓南有翟泉，西有华林园，园有仙人枣。
现代文：晋朝时，太仓的南面有翟泉，太仓的西面有华林园，华林园中有仙人枣。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, there was a gourd spring on the south side of Taicang, a Chinese garden on the west side of Taicang, and cactus in the Chinese garden.

古文：长五寸。
现代文：仙人枣长五寸。
English: The hermit jujube is five centimeters long.

古文：核细如针。仲思枣
现代文：它的核像针一般细。仲思枣
English: Its nuclear image needle is generally thin.

古文：信都献仲思枣四百枝。
现代文：信都献来四百枝仲思枣。
English: Shintou presented four hundred sprigs of jujube.

古文：枣长四五寸，紫色，皮皱细核。
现代文：枣长四五寸，紫色，皮皱，核细。
English: The jujube is four or five inches long, purple, with wrinkled skin and a fine core.

古文：实肥有味，贤于青州枣。
现代文：果肉肥厚，味道鲜美，比青州枣还好。
English: The flesh is thick, the taste is delicious, and it is better than Qingzhou jujube.

古文：北齐时，有仙人仲思得此枣，种之。
现代文：北齐的时候，有个叫仲思的仙人得到此枣，就开始种植它。
English: At the time of the Northern Qi Dynasty, a hermit named Zhong Si obtained this jujube and began to grow it.

古文：亦名仙枣。
现代文：也叫它仙枣。
English: It is also called senjaku.

古文：时海内唯有数树。
现代文：那时海内只有几棵这样的枣树。
English: At that time, there were only a few such jujube trees in the country.

古文：波斯枣
现代文：波斯枣
English: Persian dates

古文：波斯枣出波斯国。
现代文：波斯枣出在波斯国。
English: The Persian jujube comes from the country of Persia.

古文：波斯呼为窟莽。
现代文：波斯人叫它 窟莽 。
English: The Persians call it "the cavernous."

古文：树长三四丈，围五六尺。
现代文：树高三四丈。树围五六尺。
English: The tree is three or four stories tall, with a circumference of five or six feet.

古文：叶如土藤，不凋。
现代文：叶像土藤叶，四季不凋。
English: Leaves like soil and vine leaves, four seasons do not wither.

古文：二月生花。
现代文：二月开花。
English: Flowers in February.

古文：状如蕉。
现代文：花似芭蕉花。
English: The flower resembles a plantain.

古文：花有两甲，渐渐开罅，中有十余房。
现代文：花有两片甲，渐渐绽开缝隙，里边有十多个花房。
English: The flower has two lobes, gradually opening a gap, inside of which there are more than ten flower chambers.

古文：子长二尺，黄白色，有核。
现代文：枣子二寸长，黄白色，有核。
English: The jujube is two centimeters long, yellow-white, and has a core.

古文：熟则紫黑，状类干枣。味甜如饴，可食。
现代文：枣子成熟之后就是紫黑色的了，样子像干枣，味道甘甜如糖，可以吃。
English: After the jujube ripens, it is purple-black, looks like a dried jujube, tastes sweet like sugar, and can be eaten.

