古文：崔光崔光，本名孝伯，字长仁，高祖赐名焉。东清河鄃人也。
现代文：崔光，本名孝伯，字长仁，名为高祖所赐，东清河俞阝人。
English: Cui Guang, real name Xiao Bo, alias Chang Ren, was given the name Gao Zu, and was born in the East Qing River.

古文：祖旷，从慕容德南渡河，居青州之时水。
现代文：祖名旷，跟随慕容德南渡黄河，定居青州时水。
English: Zou Mingyuan followed Murong De Nan to cross the Yellow River and settled in Shishimizu, Qingzhou.

古文：慕容氏灭，仕刘义隆为乐陵太守。
现代文：慕容氏灭亡之后，出仕刘义隆政权，任乐陵太守。
English: After the demise of the Murong clan, he served the Liu Yilong regime and was appointed as the governor of Le Ling.

古文：父灵延，刘骏龙骧将军、长广太守，与刘彧冀州刺史崔道固共拒国军。
现代文：父亲灵延，任刘骏的龙骧将军，长广太守，与刘的冀州刺史崔道固一起抵抗国军。
English: His father, Ling Yan, served as Liu Bei's Longjing general and Changguang governor, resisting the national army together with Liu's Jizhou vassal, Cui Daogu.

古文：慕容白曜之平三齐，光年十七，随父徙代。
现代文：慕容白曜平定三齐，崔光时年十七，随父迁往代州。
English: Murong Bai You was 17 years old when he moved to Daizhou with his father.

古文：家贫好学，昼耕夜诵，佣书以养父母。
现代文：家中虽然贫困，但崔光好学，昼耕夜读，奉养父母。
English: His family was poor, but he was a great student. He farmed during the day and studied at night. Later, he supported his parents by teaching.

古文：太和六年，拜中书博士，转著作郎，与秘书丞李彪参撰国书。
现代文：太和六年，被授予中书博士，转任著作郎，与秘书丞李彪一起参与国史编写。
English: In the sixth year of Tahe, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Chinese Literature, transferred to the post of editor-in-chief, and participated in the compilation of national history together with the secretary, Li Biao.

古文：迁中书侍郎、给事黄门侍郎，甚为高祖所知待。
现代文：后升任中书侍郎，给事黄门侍郎，受到高祖很好的知遇与优待。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro (chamber secretary) and given the position of Hwangmen-sajiro (gate attendant). He was treated very well and favourably by Gao Zu.

古文：常曰： 孝伯之才，浩浩如黄河东注，固今日之文宗也。 
现代文：高祖常说： 孝伯之才，浩浩东流如黄河入海，理所当然是今天的文章宗主。 
English: Gao Zu often said: filial piety, vast eastward flow like the Yellow River into the sea, of course, is the sire of today's article.

古文：以参赞迁都之谋，赐爵朝阳子，拜散骑常侍，黄门、著作如故，又兼太子少傅。
现代文：因参与谋划迁都之功，高祖赐爵朝阳子，授官散骑常侍，黄门侍郎、著作郎官职仍旧，又兼任太子少傅。
English: For his participation in the planning of the relocation of the capital, Gao Zu gave a peerage to Chaoyang Zi, was awarded the title of Sanzhi, Huangmen Zhi Rong, and Zhaozhong Rong, and also served as the prince's junior tutor.

古文：寻以本官兼侍中、使持节，为陕西大使，巡方省察，所经述叙古事，因而赋诗三十八篇。
现代文：不久又以原官兼任侍中、使持节，朝廷派其为陕西大使，巡察地方民政人情，经过之处，游历古迹，述诗怀古，作诗三十八篇。
English: Not long after, he also served as an attendant and envoy, and the imperial court appointed him as the ambassador of Shaanxi Province. He inspected local civil affairs and people's living conditions, visited places, traveled to ancient sites, recited poems about ancient times, and wrote 38 poems.

古文：还，仍兼侍中，以谋谟之功，进爵为伯。
现代文：归朝之后，仍兼任侍中，因其筹划谋略之功，爵位上升为伯。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he still concurrently served as a chamberlain, and because of his contribution to planning and strategizing, his rank was raised to the highest.

古文：光少有大度，喜怒不见于色。有毁恶之者，必善言以报之，虽见诬谤，终不自申曲直。
现代文：崔光年少即显度量之大，喜怒哀乐均不见于表情，有人诋毁侮辱他，崔光必定好言好语作为回报，即使被人诬骂毁谤，他也不自己申辩曲直。
English: At such a young age, Cui Guang is obviously a man of great discretion. His emotions are not reflected in his facial expressions. If someone slanders and insults him, Cui Guang will certainly say something good in return. Even if he is slandered and defamed, he will not defend himself.

古文：皇兴初，有同郡二人并被掠为奴婢，后诣光求哀，光乃以二口赎免。
现代文：皇兴初年，同郡有两人同时被掠去当奴婢，后来到崔光那里求救，崔光用另外二人把他们赎了出来。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xing, there were two people in the same county who were abducted at the same time to be slaves. Later, they came to Cui Guang for help. Cui Guang used the other two people to ransom them.

古文：高祖闻而嘉之。
现代文：高祖听说此事，十分称赞。
English: When Gaozu heard about this, he was very complimentary.

古文：虽处机近，曾不留心文案，唯从容论议，参赞大政而已。
现代文：崔光在朝，虽身处机近，却一向不大留心书面文案，只是行止从容，议论述说，替国家大政出谋划策而已。
English: In the DPRK, although Cui Guang is in a position of power, he has never paid much attention to written documents. He just behaves calmly, discusses and discusses, and makes suggestions for the country's major policies.

古文：高祖每对群臣曰： 以崔光之高才大量，若无意外咎谴，二十年后当作司空。 
现代文：高祖经常对大臣们说： 凭着崔光的高才大量，如没有意外的错误罪责，二十年后应该身任司空之职。 
English: Gaozu often said to the ministers: With Cui Guang's large number of talents, if there is no accidental wrongful culpability, he should take up the post of Sifu after twenty years.

古文：其见重如是。
现代文：其受高祖器重，可见一斑。
English: It is heavily influenced by its ancestors, as can be seen.

古文：又从驾破陈显达。
现代文：后又跟随皇帝剿灭陈显达。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to exterminate Chen Xianda.

古文：世宗即位，正除侍中。
现代文：世宗即位，升为正侍中。
English: Sejong ascended the throne and was promoted to the position of chief chamberlain.

古文：初，光与李彪共撰国书。太和之末，彪解著作，专以史事任光。
现代文：当初，崔光与李彪一起撰写国史，太和末年，李彪被解除著作郎之职，撰史的任务都交给了崔光一人。
English: At the beginning, Cui Guang and Li Biao worked together to write the national history. At the end of the Taiga era, Li Biao was relieved of his duties as author, and the task of writing the history was given to Cui Guang alone.

古文：彪寻以罪废。
现代文：李彪不久又因罪废职。
English: Li Biao was soon removed from office for his crimes.

古文：世宗居谅暗，彪上表求成《魏书》，诏许之，彪遂以白衣于秘书省著述。
现代文：世宗居丧期间，李彪上书请求让他继续完成《魏书》，世宗下诏应允，他于是以白衣身份在秘书省继续著述。
English: During Shizong's funeral, Li Biao sent a letter to request that he continue to complete the "Weishu," and Shizong replied in the affirmative, so he continued to write in the secretarial department as a white-clothed person.

古文：光虽领史官，以彪意在专功，表解侍中、著作以让彪，世宗不许。
现代文：崔光虽然身为史官，但认为李彪意在独领其功，上表请求解除他自己的侍中、著作郎，以此表示对李彪行为的不满，世宗不同意。
English: Although Cui Guang was a historian, he thought that Li Biao intended to be the sole leader of his work. He asked the upper table to dismiss his own attendant and scribe to express his dissatisfaction with Li Biao's behavior. Shizong disagreed.

古文：迁太常卿，领齐州大中正。
现代文：后迁太常卿、领齐州大中正。
English: Later, he was transferred to Taizongqing and became the leader of the middle school of Qizhou University.

