古文：惟十有一年，武王伐殷。一月戊午，师渡孟津，作《泰誓》三篇。
现代文：周武王十一年，武王挥师讨伐商纣，一月戊午，渡过孟津，作《泰誓》三篇，训诫诸军。
English: In the eleventh year of King Zhou of Wu, King Wu waged a crusade against the Shang, and in the afternoon of January, he passed through Mengjin and wrote three "Thai oaths" to admonish the troops.

古文：周书·泰誓上
现代文：泰誓上
English: I solemnly swear

古文：惟十有三年春，大会于孟津。
现代文：周武王十三年春天，诸侯大会于河南孟津。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year of King Zhouwu, the princes' assembly was held in Mengjin, Henan.

古文：王曰： 嗟！
现代文：武王说： 啊！
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：我友邦冢君越我御事庶士，明听誓。
现代文：我的友邦大君和我的治事大臣、众士们，请清楚地听取我的誓言。
English: My friends, my sovereigns and my ministers of state, ladies and gentlemen, please listen attentively to my oath.

古文：惟天地万物父母，惟人万物之灵。
现代文：天地是万物的父母，人是万物中的灵秀。
English: Heaven and earth are the parents of all things, and man is the most brilliant of all things.

古文：亶聪明，作元后，元后作民父母。
现代文：真聪明的人就作大君，大君作人民的父母。
English: Among them, a particularly clever person, as the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven is the people's parent.

古文：今商王受，弗敬上天，降灾下民。
现代文：现在商王纣不尊敬上天，降祸灾给下民。
English: Now the merchant king does not respect the heavens and brings disaster to the people.

古文：沈湎冒色，敢行暴虐，罪人以族，官人以世，惟宫室、台榭、陂池、侈服，以残害于尔万姓。
现代文：他嗜酒贪色，竟然施行暴虐，用灭族的严刑惩罚人，凭世袭的方法任用人。宫室呀，台榭呀，陂池呀，奢侈的衣服呀，他用这些东西来残害你们万姓人民。
English: He is a drunkard and a glutton, he practises violence, he punishes people with cruel punishments, he appoints people by hereditary methods, he uses palaces, palaces, palaces, luxurious clothes, he uses all these things to brutalise your people.

古文：焚炙忠良，刳剔孕妇。
现代文：他烧杀忠良，解剖孕妇。
English: He burned Tadayoshi to death and dissected a pregnant woman.

古文：皇天震怒，命我文考，肃将天威，大勋未集。
现代文：皇天动了怒，命令我的文考文王严肃进行上天的惩罚，可惜大功没有完成。
English: Emperor Tian became angry and ordered my disciple, King Wen, to seriously carry out Heaven's punishment. Unfortunately, the great work was not completed.

古文：肆予小子发，以尔友邦冢君，观政于商。惟受罔有悛心，乃夷居，弗事上帝神祗，遗厥先宗庙弗祀。
现代文：从前我小子姬发和你们友邦大君到商邦考察政治，看到了商纣没有悔改的心，他竟然傲慢不恭，不祭祀上天神祗，遗弃他的祖先宗庙而不祭祀。
English: Once upon a time, my son, Himefa, and your friends, the Grand Princes, went to Shangpang to investigate politics. They saw that Shangpang did not have a repentant heart. He was so arrogant and disrespectful that he did not offer sacrifices to the heavenly deities, and abandoned his ancestral temple and did not offer sacrifices.

古文：牺牲粢盛，既于凶盗。
现代文：为祭祀而宰杀的牲畜和盛在祭器中的黍稷等祭物，也被凶恶盗窃的人吃尽了。
English: The animals slaughtered for the sacrifice and the sacrificial animals, such as the donkeys, which were placed in the sacrificial vessels, were also eaten up by the vicious thieves.

古文：乃曰： 吾有民有命！ 
现代文：他却说： 我有人民有天命！ 
English: But he said: I have a people and a destiny!

古文：罔惩其侮。
现代文：不改变他侮慢的心意。
English: He did not change his arrogant mind.

古文：天佑下民，作之君，作之师，惟其克相上帝，宠绥四方。
现代文：上天帮助下民，为人民建立君主和师长，应当能够辅助上天，爱护和安定天下。
English: Heaven will help the people and establish a monarch and teacher for the people. It should be able to assist Heaven, and protect and stabilize the world.

古文：有罪无罪，予曷敢有越厥志？
现代文：对待有罪和无罪的人，我怎么敢违反上天的意志呢？
English: How dare I go against God's will in the treatment of the guilty and the innocent?

古文：同力，度德；同德，度义。
现代文：力量相同就衡量德，德相同就衡量义。
English: The same strength is measured by virtue, and the same virtue is measured by righteousness.

古文：受有臣亿万，惟亿万心；予有臣三千，惟一心。
现代文：商纣有臣亿万，是亿万条心，我有臣子三千，只是一条心。
English: Shangtao has hundreds of millions of vassals, which is hundreds of millions of hearts. I have three thousand vassals, but only one heart.

古文：商罪贯盈，天命诛之。予弗顺天，厥罪惟钧。
现代文：商纣的罪恶，象穿物的串子已经穿满了，上天命令我讨伐他；我如果不顺从上天，我的罪恶就会跟商纣相等。
English: The sins of the merchants are full as the skein of a garment, and I have been commanded by heaven to fight against them. If I do not obey heaven, my sins will be like those of the merchants.

古文：予小子夙夜祗惧，受命文考，类于上帝，宜于冢土，以尔有众，厎天之罚。
现代文：我小子早夜敬慎忧惧。在文考庙接受了伐商的命令，我又祭告上天，祭祀大社，于是率领你们众位，进行上天的惩罚。
English: My son was cautious and worried in the morning and at night. I accepted the orders of the loggers at the Wenkao Temple, and I also preached to the heavens and sacrificed the great shrine, so I led all of you to carry out the punishment of the heavens.

古文：天矜于民，民之所欲，天必从之。
现代文：上天怜闵人民，人民的愿望，上天一定会依从的。
English: Heaven will have mercy on the people, and the wishes of the people will be obeyed by Heaven.

古文：尔尚弼予一人，永清四海，时哉弗可失！ 
现代文：你们辅助我吧！要使四海之内永远清明。时机啊，不可失去呀！ 
English: Help me, then, to keep the four seas forever clear. The time is now, do not lose it.

古文：周书·泰誓中
现代文：泰誓中
English: In the middle of a vow

古文：惟戊午，王次于河朔，群后以师毕会。
现代文：一月二十八日戊午，周武王驻兵在黄河之北，诸侯率领他们的军队都会合了。
English: On the afternoon of January 28th, King Zhou Wu stationed his troops in the north of the Yellow River, and the princes led their armies to meet.

古文：王乃徇师而誓曰： 呜呼！
现代文：武王于是巡视军队并且告戒他们。武王说： 啊！
English: King Wu then inspected the troops and admonished them. King Wu said, "Ah!

古文：西土有众，咸听朕言。
现代文：西方各位诸侯，请都听我的话。
English: Western lords, please listen to my words.

古文：我闻吉人为善，惟日不足。凶人为不善，亦惟日不足。
现代文：我听说好人做好事，整天地做还是时间不够；坏人做坏事，也是整天地做还是时间不够。
English: I've heard it said that good people do good things all day and never have enough time; bad people do bad things all day and never have enough time.

古文：今商王受，力行无度，播弃犁老，昵比罪人。
现代文：现在商王纣，力行不合法度的事，放弃年老的大臣，亲近有罪的人，过度嗜酒，放肆暴虐。
English: Now the king of merchants, he does illegal things, abandons old ministers, befriends the guilty, drinks too much, and is violent.

古文：淫酗肆虐，臣下化之，朋家作仇，胁权相灭。
现代文：臣下也受到他的影响，各结朋党，互为仇敌；挟持权柄，互相诛杀。
English: His vassals were also influenced by him. Each party and crony was the enemy of the other; they held power hostage and fought with each other.

古文：无辜吁天，秽德彰闻。
现代文：无罪的人呼天告冤，秽恶的行为公开传闻。
English: Innocent people cry out to heaven to avenge their wrongdoings, and foul deeds become public rumors.

古文：惟天惠民，惟辟奉天。
现代文：上天惠爱人民，君主遵奉上天。
English: Heaven favors the people, and the monarch obeys Heaven.

古文：有夏桀弗克若天，流毒下国。
现代文：夏桀不能顺从天意，流毒于天下。
English: Xia Yao can't obey the will of heaven, and his poison has spread all over the world.

古文：天乃佑命成汤，降黜夏命。
现代文：上天于是佑助和命令成汤，使他降下废黜夏桀的命令。
English: Therefore, Heaven helped and ordered Cheng Yu to issue the order to depose Xia Yao.

古文：惟受罪浮于桀。剥丧元良，贼虐谏辅。谓己有天命，谓敬不足行，谓祭无益，谓暴无伤。
现代文：纣的罪恶超过了夏桀，他伤害善良的大臣，杀戮谏争的辅佐，说自己有天命，说敬天不值得实行，说祭祀没有益处，说暴虐没有害处。
English: Yao's sins exceeded Xia Yao's. He harmed the good minister, killed the assistant of the rival, said that he had the destiny of heaven, said that worshiping heaven was not worth practicing, said that sacrifice was not beneficial, and said that tyranny was not harmful.

古文：厥监惟不远，在彼夏王。
现代文：他的鉴戒并不远，就在夏桀身上。
English: His admonition is not far away, right on Xia Yao's body.

古文：天其以予乂民，朕梦协朕卜，袭于休祥，戎商必克。
现代文：上天该使我治理人民，我的梦符合我的卜兆，吉庆重叠出现，讨伐商国一定会胜利。
English: Heaven should let me govern the people, my dream is in line with my oracle, auspicious and auspicious overlaps will appear, and the crusade against the merchants will surely succeed.

古文：受有亿兆夷人，离心离德。予有乱臣十人，同心同德。
现代文：商纣有亿兆平民，都离心离德；我有拨乱的大臣十人，都同心同德。
English: There are billions and trillions of people in the world, and they are all centrifugal and anti-democratic; I have ten ministers to deal with the turmoil, and they are all of the same mind.

古文：虽有周亲，不如仁人。
现代文：纣虽有至亲的臣子，比不上我周家的仁人。
English: Although he has a close vassal, he is no better than my Zhou family's benevolent person.

古文：天视自我民视，天听自我民听。
现代文：上天的看法，出自我们人民的看法，上天的听闻，出自我们人民的听闻。
English: Heaven's opinions come from our people's opinions, and Heaven's hearsay comes from our people's hearsay.

古文：百姓有过，在予一人，今朕必往。
现代文：老百姓有所责难于我，我一定要依从民意前往讨伐。
English: The people have reproached me, I must follow the will of the people to go to the crusade.

古文：我武维扬，侵于之疆，取彼凶残。我伐用张，于汤有光。
现代文：我们的武力要发扬，要攻到商国的疆土上，捉到那些残暴之徒；我们的付伐要进行，这个事业比成汤的还辉煌呀！
English: We must develop our armed forces, we must invade the territory of the merchant countries, we must capture those brutal thugs; we must carry out our campaign, this cause is more brilliant than a soup!

古文：勖哉夫子！
现代文：努力吧！将士们。
English: Let's work hard, players.

古文：罔或无畏，宁执非敌。
现代文：不可出现不威武的情况，宁愿你们保持没有对手的思想。
English: Do not be intimidated, and keep the idea that you have no rivals.

古文：百姓懔懔，若崩厥角。
现代文：百姓危惧不安，他们向我们叩头求助，额角响得就象山崩一样呀！啊！
English: The people are afraid and uneasy. They bow to us and ask for help. The horns of their foreheads sound like a landslide!

古文：呜呼！乃一德一心，立定厥功，惟克永世。 
现代文：你们要一心一德建功立业，就能够长久安定人民。 
English: If you all work together to make achievements, you will be able to keep the people stable for a long time.

古文：天有显道，厥类惟彰。
现代文：泰誓下时在戊午的明天，周武王大规模巡视六军，明告众将士。王说： 啊！
English: At the time of the oath, on the morning of the afternoon of the 15th, King Zhou Wu made a large-scale inspection of the six armies and announced to the soldiers. The king said: Ah!

古文：今商王受，狎侮五常，荒怠弗敬。
现代文：我们西方的将士。上天有明显的常理，它的法则应当显扬。
English: Our Western soldiers. Heaven has a clear common sense, and its laws should be displayed.

古文：自绝于天，结怨于民。
现代文：现在商王纣轻慢五常，荒废怠情无所敬畏，自己弃绝于上天，结怨于人民。
English: Now the merchant kings are five times more contemptuous, there is no fear of waste and idleness, they abandon themselves to the heavens and bear grudges against the people.

古文：斫朝涉之胫，剖贤人之心，作威杀戮，毒痡四海。
现代文：斫掉冬天清晨涉水者的脚胫，剖开贤人的心，作威作恶，杀戮无罪的人，毒害天下。
English: Breaking the shackles of wading in the winter morning, opening the hearts of the wise, doing evil, killing the innocent, poisoning the world.

古文：崇信奸回，放黜师保，屏弃典刑，囚奴正士，郊社不修，宗庙不享，作奇技淫巧以悦妇人。
现代文：崇信奸邪的人，逐退师保大臣，废除常刑，囚禁和奴役正士。祭天祭社的大礼不举行，宗庙也不享祀。造作奇技荒淫新巧的事物来取悦妇人。
English: Those who believe in evil and treachery, the expulsion of the Minister of Education and Social Security, the abolition of capital punishment, the imprisonment and enslavement of righteous men. The grand ceremony of the Festival of the Heavens is not held, and the ancestral temple does not enjoy worship. They create new and ingenious things to please women.

古文：上帝弗顺，祝降时丧。
现代文：上天不依，断然降下这种丧亡的诛罚。
English: Heaven does not obey, and resolutely decrees this punishment of death.

古文：尔其孜孜，奉予一人，恭行天罚。
现代文：你们要努力帮助我，奉行上天的惩罚！
English: You must work hard to help me, and carry out Heaven's punishment!

古文：古人有言曰： 抚我则后，虐我则仇。 
现代文：古人有言说： 抚爱我的就是君主，虐待我的就是仇敌。 
English: The ancients said: "He who caresses me is the sovereign, he who mistreats me is the enemy."

古文：独夫受洪惟作威，乃汝世仇。
现代文：独夫商纣大行威虐，是你们的大仇。
English: It is your great enmity that leads to the tyranny of one-man negotiation.

古文：树德务滋，除恶务本，肆予小子诞以尔众士，殄歼乃仇。
现代文：建立美德务求滋长，去掉邪恶务求除根，所以我小子率领你们众将上去歼灭你们的仇人。
English: To establish virtue in order that it may grow, to uproot vice in order that it may be uprooted, therefore I, a child, shall lead you all forth to destroy your enemies.

古文：尔众士其尚迪果毅，以登乃辟。
现代文：你们众将士要用果敢坚毅的精神来成就你们的君主！
English: All of you soldiers should use the spirit of courage and perseverance to achieve your monarch!

古文：功多有厚赏，不迪有显戮。
现代文：功劳多的将有重赏，不用命的将有明显的惩罚。啊！
English: There will be a great reward for those with more merit, and a clear punishment for those who do not die.

古文：呜呼！惟我文考若日月之照临，光于四方，显于西土。惟我有周诞受多方。
现代文：我文考文王的明德，象日月的照临一样，光辉普及四方，显著表现在西土，因此我们周国特别被众方诸侯所亲近。
English: The wisdom and virtue of our King Wenko, like the sun and the moon, has spread to all four directions, and is clearly manifested in the West, so our Zhou Kingdom is particularly close to all the princes.

古文：予克受，非予武，惟朕文考无罪；受克予，非朕文考有罪，惟予小子无良。 
现代文：这次如果我战胜了纣，不是我勇武，是因为我的文考没有过失；如果纣战胜了我，不是我的文考有过失，是因为我这小子不好。 
English: This time, if I beat Yao, it's not because I'm brave, it's because I didn't do anything wrong in the exam. If Yao beats me, it's not because I didn't do anything wrong in the exam, it's because I'm a bad boy.

