古文：《务本新书》：清明，将瓮中所顿蚕连，迁于避风温室，酌中处悬挂。
现代文：《务本新书》：清明节时，把瓮内放置的蚕连取出，转移到背风的温暖房屋，悬挂在屋的中间。
English: "Ryuhon Shinsho": During the Qingming Festival, the silkworms placed in the cocoon are taken out, transferred to a warm house away from the wind, and hung in the middle of the house.

古文：太高伤风，太下伤土。
现代文：挂得过高会受风寒，过低会有土气。
English: If it is too high, it will be affected by wind and cold, and if it is too low, it will be rustic.

古文：谷雨日，将连取出，通见风日。
现代文：谷雨时节，把蚕连取出，挂到通风和有阳光的地方。
English: In the rainy season, the silkworms are taken out and hung in a ventilated and sunny place.

古文：那表为里：左卷者却右卷，右卷者却左卷。
现代文：蚕连原在外面的一面，转过来放在里面：原来向左边卷的，转过来向右卷；向右卷的转过来向左卷。
English: The silkworms were originally on the outside, turned around and placed inside: originally rolled to the left, turned around and rolled to the right; rolled to the right, turned around and rolled to the left.

古文：每日交换卷那。卷罢依前收顿。
现代文：每天倒换卷过以后，仍然收起。
English: After changing the roll every day, it is still put away.

古文：比及蚕生，均得温和风日，生发匀齐。
现代文：等到蚕出蚁时，蚕子皆受到和风的吹拂，煦日的照射，会孵化得均匀齐整。
English: When the silkworms emerge from the ants, the silkworms are all blown by the wind and irradiated by the sun, and they will hatch evenly.

古文：《要旨》云：清明后种初变红和肥满；再变尖圆微低，如春柳色；再变蚁周盘其中，如远山色。
现代文：《要旨》说：清明节气过后，蚕种先回变红，变得肥大饱满；再后便变得圆而有尖，稍低平，颜色变成春柳的青色；再后变成蚕蚁，满满地盘居在蚕子内，颜色如远山的灰色。
English: "Summary" said: After the Qingming solar term, the silkworm seed first turns red and becomes fat and full; then it becomes round and pointed, slightly low and flat, and the color turns into the blue of spring willow; then it turns into silkworm ants, full of cocoons, and the color is like the gray of distant mountains.

古文：此必收之种也。
现代文：这种蚕子是一定会孵出好蚕蚁的。
English: This kind of silkworm is sure to hatch good ants.

古文：若顶平焦干、及苍、黄、赤色，便不可养；此不收之种也。
现代文：假如蚕子变得顶部很平，焦枯干燥，并呈现苍、黄、赤各种颜色的，便不可再留作蚕种；这是不会生出好蚕蚁的蚕种。
English: If the top of the silkworm becomes very flat, scorched and dry, and appears pale, yellow, and red in various colors, it can no longer be kept as a silkworm seed; this is a silkworm seed that does not produce good ants.

古文：《士农必用》：蚕子变色，惟在迟速由己，不致损伤自变。
现代文：《士农必用》：蚕子在催青过程中，颜色变化的快慢，应该任其自己发展，不要去破坏它们的正常变化。
English: "Essential for farmers": The speed of color change of silkworms in the process of rejuvenation should be left to their own development, and their normal changes should not be disrupted.

古文：视桑叶之生，以定变子之日。
现代文：应依照桑叶的生长状况，决定下蚁的日期。
English: The date of emergence should be determined according to the growth status of mulberry leaves.

古文：须治之三日，以色齐为准。农语云： 蚕欲三齐 ，子齐，蚁齐，蚕齐是也。
现代文：这要经过三天的调治，使蚕子全部变成灰色方可。 农语 说： 养蚕要三齐 ，即下子齐、出蚁齐、蚕的眠起齐。
English: It would take three days of treatment to turn all the silkworms grey.The agricultural language says: It is necessary to raise silkworms in three stages, that is, the lower stage, the ant stage, and the dormant stage.

古文：其法：桑叶已生，自辰、巳间，于风日中，将瓮中连取出，舒卷提掇。
现代文：具体做法是：等桑叶已经生长出来，从午前辰时至午后巳时，将瓮中蚕连取出，在有日光和通风处，用手舒卷提掇。
English: The specific approach is as follows: when the mulberry leaves have grown, from the early morning to the late afternoon, the silkworms are removed from the cocoon, and the cocoons are removed by hand in a sunny and ventilated place.

古文：舒时连背向日晒至温，不可热。
现代文：舒展开时，应使蚕连的背面向着太阳，只能晒到温的程度，切不可晒到 热 。
English: When unfolding, the back of the silkworm should be facing the sun, and it should only be exposed to a warm degree, and must not be exposed to heat.

古文：凡一舒一卷时，将元卷向外者却卷向里，元向里者却卷向外，横者竖卷，竖者横卷，以至两头卷来中间相合。
现代文：每次展开和卷起时，应将原来向外卷的反过来向里卷，原向里卷的反过来向外卷，原来横卷的改作竖卷，竖卷的改作横卷，还可以从两头卷向中间合起来。
English: When unrolling and rolling up each time, the original outward roll should be rolled inward, the original inward roll should be rolled outward, the original horizontal roll should be changed into a vertical roll, and the vertical roll should be changed into a horizontal roll. It is also possible to close the roll from both ends to the middle.

古文：舒卷无度数；但要第一日，十分中变灰色者，变至三分，收了。
现代文：将蚕连打开、卷起并没有固定的次数，但要求第一天要有十分之三的蚕子，变为灰色才可收起来。
English: There is no fixed number of times to open and roll up the silkworm coils, but it is required that three-tenths of the silkworms must turn gray on the first day before they can be put away.

古文：次二日，变至七分，收了。
现代文：此后的两天当中，变色的蚕子要达到十分之七，便可以收起。
English: During the next two days, if seven out of ten of the silkworms are discoloured, they can be put away.

古文：此二日收了后，必须用纸密糊封了，如法还瓮内收藏。
现代文：这时必须将收起的蚕连，用纸糊封好，依法放回瓮中贮存。
English: At this time, the collected silkworm coils must be unwrapped, sealed with paper paste, and returned to the cocoon for storage according to law.

古文：至第三日，于午时后，出连舒卷提掇，展连，手提之；凡半日十数遍。须要变十分。
现代文：等到第三天中午过后，再将连取出 舒卷提掇 ，将蚕连舒展开，用手提起来，在半天的时间内，要反复舒展开、卷起来，达十多次，必须要等到全部蚕子都变为灰色。
English: Wait until after noon on the third day, and then take out the silkworm coils, unroll the silkworm coils, and pick them up by hand. In half a day's time, it is necessary to repeatedly unroll and roll them, up to more than ten times, and it is necessary to wait until all the silkworms turn gray.

古文：第三次必须至午时后出连者，恐第一次先变者先生蚁也。
现代文：第三次出连，必须等候到午时过后的原因，是害怕第一次先变灰色的蚕子先下蚁。
English: The reason why they have to wait until after midday for their third outing is that they are afraid that the silkworms will turn grey first.

古文：蚁生在巳、午时之前，过午时，便不生。
现代文：蚕子下蚁的时间是在巳、午时以前，午时过后便不会生蚁。
English: The time for the ants to descend from the silkworms is before the morning and afternoon, and there will be no ants after the afternoon.

古文：《桑蚕直说》：欲疾生者，频舒卷；卷之须虚慢。欲生者，少舒卷；卷之须紧实。
现代文：《桑蚕直说》：想让蚕子快些生，舒展卷起的次数要频繁进行，蚕连也要卷得虚松一些；想延迟下蚁的时间的，卷舒的次数就要减少，蚕连要卷紧卷实。
English: "Mulberry Silkworm Straight Talk": If you want to make the silkworm grow faster, the number of stretching and rolling should be frequent, and the coiling should be looser; if you want to delay the time of the ant, the number of coiling and shaking should be reduced, and the coiling should be tightly coiled.

