古文：宰我以三年之丧为久，夫子以食稻衣锦问之曰： 于女安乎？ 曰： 安。 
现代文：宰我认为三年的服丧期太长，孔夫子用在服丧期间吃好米饭穿锦缎衣来问他说： 你心里安不安呢？ 宰我说： 安。 
English: In my opinion, the three-year mourning period is too long. Confucius used the example of eating good rice and wearing brocade clothes during the mourning period to ask him, "Are you at peace in your heart?" I said, "Yes."

古文：后人以是讥宰我，谓孔门高第乃如是。殊不知其由衷之言，不为诈隐，所以为孔门高第也。
现代文：后来人们认为这是讥讽宰我，说孔子门下的高徒竟然会这样，根本不知道这是宰我出于内心的话，不作欺诈隐瞒，这正是作为孔子门下高徒的优点。
English: Later, people thought that this was a mockery, saying that a high disciple under Confucius would do such a thing. They did not know at all that this was a heartfelt speech, without deception and concealment, which is precisely the advantage of being a high disciple under Confucius.

古文：鲁悼公之丧，孟敬子曰： 食粥，天下之达礼也，吾三臣者之不能居公室也，四方莫不闻矣，勉而为瘠，毋乃使人疑夫不以情居瘠者乎哉！
现代文：鲁悼公的丧礼期间，孟敬子说： 服丧期间吃稀饭，这是天下通常的礼节，我们三个做臣子的不能效忠于君主的事，四方邻国没有不知道的了，勉强吃粥服丧，就会瘦病，岂不会让人疑心我们是不依据真实感情而处于瘦病之态的人吗？
English: During the funeral of Prince Lu, Meng Keizi said: "Eating porridge during the mourning period is a common etiquette in the world. As three courtiers, we cannot be loyal to the monarch. There is nothing that our neighbors in the four directions don't know. If we eat porridge while mourning, we will become thin. Won't people suspect that we are not people who are thin because of our true feelings?

古文：我则食食。 
现代文：我们就吃正常的饮食吧。 
English: Let's just eat a normal diet.

古文：乐正子春之母死，五日而不食，曰： 吾悔之，自吾母而不得吾情，吾恶乎用吾情！ 
现代文：乐正子春的母亲死后，他五天不吃东西，说： 我对此后悔了，自从我母亲死后，就知道我的真实情感了，还上哪儿去运用我的情感呢？ 
English: After Le Zhengyi's mother died, he didn't eat for five days and said, "I regret it. Since my mother died, I know my true feelings. Where else can I use my emotions?"

古文：谓勉强过礼也。
现代文：这是指后悔勉强超过丧礼三天不吃东西的规定。
English: This refers to the regret of barely exceeding the funeral's three-day rule of not eating.

古文：夫不情之恶，贤者所深戒，虽孟敬子之不臣，宁废礼食食，不肯不情而为瘠。
现代文：不运用真实情感的恶行，是贤明的人深深戒忌的，即使象孟敬子这种不守臣道的人，也宁愿放弃礼节而吃正常饮食，不肯违背真实情感而受瘦病。
English: Wicked deeds that do not use true emotions are deeply avoided by wise people. Even if people like Meng Keizi, who do not keep the vassal road, would rather give up etiquette and eat normal food, rather than violate true emotions and suffer from leanness.

古文：盖先王之泽未远，故不肖者亦能及之。
现代文：大概是因为离古代贤明君王的恩泽不远，因此连不贤良的人也能受到影响吧。
English: Probably because it is not far from the benevolence of ancient wise kings, so even people who are not virtuous can be affected.

