古文：康君立，蔚州兴唐人，世为边豪。
现代文：康君立，蔚州兴唐人，世代为边地豪强。
English: Kangjunli, Ulshu Xingtang people, the generation is the edge of the heroic.

古文：乾符中，为云州牙校，事防御使段文楚。
现代文：乾符年中，任云州牙校，事奉防御使段文楚。
English: In the middle of the Qianfu year, he was appointed to Yunnan Dental School and served as a defense envoy of Duan Wenchu.

古文：时群盗起河南，天下将乱，代北仍岁阻饥，诸部豪杰，咸有啸聚邀功之志。
现代文：这时有大群强盗出没在黄河以南，天下将乱，代北仍然每年有饥荒，各部豪杰都有聚众起事，建立功业之心。
English: At this time, there were large groups of robbers in the south of the Yellow River, the world was in turmoil, there was still famine every year in the north, and heroes from all departments gathered to rise up and establish a sense of accomplishment.

古文：会文楚稍削军人储给，戍兵咨怨。
现代文：碰上段文楚削减军人粮饷，兵士怨声四起。
English: When Duan Wenchu cut the soldiers' rations, the soldiers complained.

古文：君立与薛铁山、程怀信、王行审、李存璋等谋曰： 段公懦人，难与共事。
现代文：康君立和薛铁山、程怀信、王行审、李存璋等人谋划说： 段文楚是懦弱之人，很难和他共事。
English: Kang Junli and Xue Tieshan, Cheng Huaixin, Wang Xingren, Li Cunxu and others planned to say: Duan Wenchu is a weak person, it is difficult to work with him.

古文：方今四方云扰，武威不振，丈夫不能于此时立功立事，非人豪也。
现代文：现在四方动乱，军威不振，大丈夫如不能在这时立功干一番事业，就不是人中豪杰。
English: Now the four quarters are in turmoil, military prestige is weak, it's okay if you can't do a good job at this time, you're not a hero among men.

古文：吾等虽权系部众，然以雄劲闻于时者，莫若沙陀部，复又李振武父子勇冠诸军，吾等合势推之，则代北之地，旬月可定，功名富贵，事无不济也。 
现代文：我们虽然暂且只是一般部将，但以雄强闻名于时的，莫如沙陀李氏部族，又有李振武父子勇武在诸军之首，我们联合起来推戴他们，则代北之地，个把月就可平定，功名富贵没有得不到的。 
English: Although we are just ordinary generals for the time being, we are no better than the Li clan of Shatou, which was famous for its strength at the time, and Li Zhenwu and his son Li Yongwu were at the head of the armies. If we unite to push them, we can pacify the northern land in a month. There is no achievement that cannot be achieved.

古文：君立等乃夜谒武皇言曰： 方今天下大乱，天子付将臣以边事，岁偶饥荒，便削储给，我等边人，焉能守死！
现代文：康君立等人便在晚上进见武皇，说： 现在天下大乱，天子把边防交给将臣，一碰上饥荒，便削减粮饷，我们这些守边士兵，怎么能等死！
English: Kang Junli and others went to Emperor Wu in the evening and said, "Nowadays, the world is in great turmoil. Heaven has entrusted the border defense to the generals. Whenever there is a famine, they cut the grain supply. How can we, the soldiers guarding the border, wait for death!

古文：公家父子，素以威惠及五部，当共除虐帅，以谢边人，孰敢异议者！ 
现代文：您家父子，一贯以威武施恩惠给五部，应当共同清除暴虐的主帅，以告谢边兵，有谁敢说不同意的话！ 
English: Your father and son, who have always favored the Fifth Division with their might and prowess, should jointly remove the tyrannical commander and thank the border soldiers. Who would dare to disagree?

古文：武皇曰： 明天子在上，举事当有朝典，公等勿轻议。
现代文：武皇说： 有英明的天子在上，做事应守朝廷法典，你们不要轻易乱发议论。
English: Emperor Wu said, "There is a wise heavenly son above. When doing things, you should abide by the Imperial Code. Don't easily make random comments."

古文：予家尊远在振武，万一相迫，俟予禀命。 
现代文：我父亲远在振武军中，万一要逼迫我做事，也等我向父亲禀告。 
English: My father was far away in the Zhenwu army, and if he wanted to force me to do something, he would wait for me to report to my father.

古文：君立等曰； 事机已泄，迟则变生，曷俟千里咨禀！ 
现代文：康君立等人说： 机密已经泄漏，再推迟就要产生变乱，怎么能等到向千里之外禀告！ 
English: Kang Junli and others said: The secret has been leaked, delaying it any longer will cause turmoil, how can we wait until thousands of miles away to announce it!

古文：众因聚噪，拥武皇。比及云州，众且万人，师营斗鸡台，城中械文楚以应武皇之军。
现代文：大伙因而聚集一起喧哗，拥立武皇，等到达云州时，已有万人之众，队伍在斗鸡台宿营，云州城中人抓住段文楚以响应武皇的军队。
English: As a result, everyone gathered together in a clamor, supported Emperor Wu, and by the time they arrived in Yunnan, there were already tens of thousands of people. The team camped at the cockfighting ring, and people in Yunnan City grabbed Duan Wenchu to respond to Emperor Wu's army.

古文：既收城，推武皇为大同军防御留后。
现代文：攻占云州后，推举武皇为大同防御留后。
English: After conquering Yunnan, Emperor Wu was elected as the leader of Datong's defense.

古文：众状以闻，朝廷不悦，诏征兵来讨。
现代文：大家向上面报告，朝廷不高兴，下诏征兵前来讨伐。
English: We report to you that the imperial court is displeased and has issued a decree to conscript soldiers for the crusade.

古文：俄而献祖失振武，武皇失云州。朝廷命招讨使李钧、幽州李可举加兵于武皇，攻武皇于蔚州。
现代文：不久献祖失去振武军，武皇失去云州城，朝廷命招讨使李钧、幽州李可举对武皇用兵，在蔚州攻打武皇，康君立攻击李可举军队多次取胜。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wudi lost Zhenwu's army, Emperor Wu lost Yunnan's city, and the imperial court ordered Li Xi and Yuzhou Li Ke to raise an army against Emperor Wudi, attack Emperor Wudi in Ulju, and Kangjunli attack Li Ke to raise an army and win many times.

古文：君立从击可举之师屡捷，及献祖入达靼，君立保感义军，武皇授雁门节度，以君立为左都押牙，从入关，逐黄孽，收长安。
现代文：到献祖进入鞑靼后，康君立守住感义军。武皇被授予雁门节度后，任康君立为左都押牙，随从入关，驱逐黄巢军队，收复长安。
English: After the Emperor Wu was awarded the Wild Goose Gate Festival, Ren Kangjunli was appointed as the left capital of Azusa, followed the customs, drove out the Yellow Nest army, and recovered Chang'an.

古文：武皇还镇太原，授检校工部尚书、先锋军使，
现代文：武皇回师镇守太原时，授康君立为检校工部尚书、先锋军使。
English: When Emperor Wu returned to Taiyuan, he appointed Jukang Junli as the inspector of the inspection department and the vanguard military envoy.

古文：文德初，李罕之既失河阳，来归于武皇，且求援焉，乃以君立充南面招讨使，李存孝副之，帅师二万，助罕之攻取河阳。
现代文：唐僖宗文德初年，李罕之失去河阳后，来归顺武皇，并且向他求援。武皇于是任康君立兼南面招讨使，任李存孝为副使，率二万军队，协助李罕之攻取河阳。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wende of the Tang Dynasty, after Li Hanzhi lost Kheyang, he came to surrender to Emperor Wu and asked him for help. The Emperor Wu then appointed Kang Junli and Nanmen Zhaotongshi, appointed Li Cunxiao as deputy envoy, and led 20,000 troops to assist Li Hanzhi in conquering Kheyang.

古文：三月，与汴将丁会、牛存节战于沇河。临阵之次，骑将安休休叛入汴军，君立引退。
现代文：三月，和汴将丁会、牛存节在氵允河交战，临阵时，骑将安休休叛变投向汴军，康君立撤退。
English: In March, Dinghui and Niu Cunjie, the generals of the Warlord and the Warlord, clashed at Su Yun River. During the battle, the cavalry general An Xiu Xiu defected to the Warlord's army, and Kang Junli withdrew.

古文：八月，授汾州刺史。
现代文：八月，授汾州刺史。
English: In August, he was awarded the honorary title of "Luzhou stabbing historian."

古文：大顺元年，潞州小校安居受反，武皇遣君立讨平之，授检校左仆射、昭义节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗大顺元年，潞州小校安居受反叛，武皇派康君立讨伐平定他，授检校左仆射、昭义节度使。
English: In the first year of the Great Shun Dynasty of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty, Anju, a small school in Zhangzhou, suffered a rebellion. Emperor Wu sent Kangjunli to fight and subdue him. He was awarded the title of "school inspector" by Zuo Fuxia and Zhaoyi Jiedu.

古文：自武皇之师连岁略地于邢、洺，攻孟方立，君立常率泽潞之师以为掎角。
现代文：自从武皇军队连年在邢州、氵名州攻占土地，攻击孟方立，康君立经常率泽潞的军队做掎角以配合夹击敌人。
English: Ever since the Emperor Wu's army occupied the land of Zhangzhou and Zhangye in successive years and attacked Meng Fangli, Kangjunli often led the army of Zeguo to make a corner to cooperate with the enemy.

古文：景福初，检校司徒，食邑千户。
现代文：景福初年，授检校司徒，食邑千户。
English: In the first year of Gingfu, he was awarded the title of inspector of the school.

古文：二年，李存孝据邢州叛，武皇命君立讨之，以功加检校太保。
现代文：二年，李存孝占据邢州叛乱，武皇命令康君立讨伐他，因战功授检校太保。
English: In the second year, Li Cunxiao occupied Zhangzhou rebellion, Emperor Wu ordered Kangjunli to fight him, and he was awarded the title of "school inspector" for his war service.

古文：乾宁初，存孝平，班师。
现代文：乾宁初年，李存孝被平定，康君立回师。
English: In the first year of Qianning, Li Cunxiao was subdued, and Kangjun was reinstated.

古文：存孝既死，武皇深惜之，怒诸将无解愠者。
现代文：李存孝死后，武皇深为惋惜，埋怨诸将没人来劝解。
English: After the death of Li Cunxiao, Emperor Wu was deeply sorry and complained that there was no one to persuade him.

古文：初，李存信与存孝不叶，屡相倾夺，而君立素与存信善。
现代文：起初，李存信与李存孝不和，多次互相倾轧，而康君立一直和李存信关系好。
English: At first, Li Cunxin and Li Cunxiao did not get along and repeatedly quarreled with each other, but Kang Junli has always had a good relationship with Li Cunxin.

古文：九月，君立至太原，武皇会诸将酒博，因语及存孝事，流涕不已。
现代文：九月，康君立到太原，武皇设酒席招待各位将军，谈到李存孝一事，流泪不止。
English: In September, Kang Junli went to Taiyuan, Emperor Wu set up a banquet to invite the generals, and when he talked about Li Cunxiao, he shed tears.

古文：时君立以一言忤旨，武皇赐鸩而殂，时年四十八。
现代文：这时康君立因一句话忤逆了武皇，武皇赐他饮毒酒而死，当时四十八岁。
English: At this time, Kangjunli rebelled against Emperor Wu with a single word. Emperor Wu gave him poisoned wine to drink and he died at the age of forty-eight.

古文：明宗即位，以念旧之故，诏赠太傅。
现代文：明宗即皇帝位后，因为念旧，下诏追赠为太傅。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Mingzong, because of his nostalgia for the past, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

