古文：张惠绍，字德继，义阳人也。
现代文：张惠绍字德继，是义阳人。
English: Zhang Huishao is from Yiyang.

古文：少有武干。
现代文：少年时就有军事才干。
English: He showed military talent as a boy.

古文：齐明帝时为直阁，后出补竟陵横桑戍主。
现代文：南朝齐明帝时，他任直合，后来补任竟陵横桑的戍主。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qiming of the Southern Dynasty, he served as the warlord of Zhouga, and later as the warlord of Xingling and Yangsang.

古文：永元初，母丧归葬于乡里。
现代文：永元初年，因母亲去世，他回乡里安葬。
English: In the first year of Yongyuan, due to the death of his mother, he returned to his hometown to be buried.

古文：闻义师起，驰归高祖，板为中兵参军，加宁朔将军、军主。
现代文：听说梁高祖义师兴起，就急忙跑去归附高祖，被授官为中兵参军，加宁朔将军、军主。
English: Hearing that Liang Gaozhu Yishi was rising, he hurriedly ran to join Gaozhu, and was awarded the position of middle-ranking soldier in the army, General Kaningshuo, the commander of the army.

古文：师次汉口，高祖使惠绍与军主硃思远游遏江中，断郢、鲁二城粮运。
现代文：义师临时驻扎在汉，高祖派惠绍舆军主朱思远在长江中巡游，阻断郢、鲁二城之间的运粮通道。
English: Yishi was temporarily stationed in Han, and Gao Zu sent Zhu Siyuan, the commander of the Hui-Shao army, to cruise in the Yangtze River, blocking the grain transportation channel between the cities of Handan and Lushan.

古文：郢城水军主沈难当帅轻舸数十挑战，惠绍击破，斩难当，尽获其军器。
现代文：郢城的水军军主沈难当率领敷十艘轻便战船向惠绍挑战，被惠绍击败，沈难当被斩，所有军器都被缴获。
English: Shennan Dang, the naval commander of Handan, led ten light warships to challenge Huishao. He was defeated by Huishao, Shennan Dang was beheaded, and all military equipment was captured.

古文：义师次新林、硃雀，惠绍累有战功。
现代文：义师停在新林、朱雀，惠绍又屡有战功。
English: The righteous teachers stopped at Xinlin and Suzaku, and Huishao has repeatedly won military exploits.

古文：建康城平，迁辅国将军、前军，直阁、左细仗主。
现代文：建康城被义师攻下后，惠绍迁任辅国将军、前军，直合、左细仗主。
English: After Jiankang City was conquered by the righteous, Huishao was transferred to the position of general of the auxiliary state, the former army, the direct match, and the left small battle.

古文：高祖践阼，封石阳县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：梁高祖登基后，封惠绍为石阳县侯，食邑五百户。
English: After Liang Gaozu ascended to the throne, Feng Huishao was the lord of Shiyang County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：迁骁骑将军，直阁、细仗主如故。
现代文：惠绍又迁任为骁骑将军，直合、细仗主如故。
English: Hui Shao was reappointed as the general of the cavalry, and remained the commander of the cavalry and light cavalry.

古文：时东昏余党数百人，窃入南北掖门，烧神虎门，害卫尉张弘策。
现代文：当时东昏侯的余党敷百人，偷偷潜入南掖门、北掖门，放火烧神虎门，杀害了卫尉张弘策。
English: At that time, more than a hundred members of the party in Dongguan secretly sneaked into the South Gate and the North Gate, set fire to the Gate of God, and killed the guard Zhang Hongze.

古文：惠绍驰率所领赴战，斩首数十级，贼乃散走。
现代文：惠绍率领部下急奔来战，斩首敷十级，余党这才逃散。
English: Hui Shao led his subordinates to rush to the battle, decapitated Shiki Jiu, and the rest of the party fled.

古文：以功增邑二百户。迁太子右卫率。
现代文：惠绍因功增加食邑二百户，迁任太子右卫率。
English: As a result of his efforts, Huishao has increased the number of food villages by 200 households, and has been promoted to the rank of prince's right guard.

古文：天监四年，大举北伐，惠绍与冠军长史胡辛生、宁朔将军张豹子攻宿预，执城主马成龙，送于京师。
现代文：天监四年，梁军大举北伐，惠绍舆冠军长史胡辛生、宁朔将军张豹子进攻宿预，捉拿了城主马成龙，押送到京师。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Liang's army launched a large-scale northern expedition, led by Huishao's champion general Shi Huxinsheng and Ningshuo's general Zhang Leopardi, attacked Shudu, captured the lord of the city, Ma Chenglong, and escorted him to Beijing.

古文：使部将蓝怀恭于水南立城为掎角。
现代文：他让部下将领蓝怀恭在河南岸建城，构成掎角之势。
English: He let his subordinate generals, led by Lan Huaiqong, build a city on the south bank of the river, creating the situation of a corner.

古文：俄而魏援大至，败陷怀恭，惠绍不能守，是夜奔还淮阴，魏复得宿预。
现代文：不久，魏军的援兵大批到来，打败了蓝怀恭，攻陷了怀恭所建之城，惠绍守不住宿预城，当夜逃回淮阴，魏军重新得到宿预。
English: Soon, a large number of reinforcements from the Wei army arrived, defeated Lan Huaiqiong, captured the city built by Huaiqiong, Huishao defended the pre-city, fled back to Huaiyin that night, and the Wei army regained the pre-city.

古文：六年，魏军攻钟离，诏左卫将军曹景宗督众军为援，进据邵阳。惠绍与冯道根、裴邃等攻断魏连桥，短兵接战，魏军大溃。
现代文：天监六年，魏军进攻钟离，梁武帝命令左卫将军曹景宗监督各路军队作为后援，进军占据邵阳，惠绍与冯道根、裴邃等攻断魏军的连桥，两军短兵相接，魏军大败。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjun, the Wei army attacked Zhongli, and Emperor Liang ordered the left guard general Cao Jingzong to supervise the various armies as backup, marching to occupy Shaoyang, Huishao with Feng Dogen, Pei Xuan and others to break the Wei army's bridge, the two armies were close, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：以功增邑三百户，还为左骁骑将军。
现代文：惠绍又因功增加食邑三百户，回来后担任左骁骑将军。
English: Huishao also increased the number of food villages by 300 due to his merits, and served as the left-hand cavalry general after returning.

古文：寻出为持节、都督北兗州诸军事、冠军将军、北兗州刺史。
现代文：不久，出任持节、都督北兖州诸军事、冠军将军、北兖州刺史。
English: Soon, he served as the military commander of Jisong, the military governor of North Luzhou, the champion general, and the governor of North Luzhou.

古文：魏宿预、淮阳二城内附，惠绍抚纳有功，进号智武将军，益封二百户。
现代文：魏国的宿预、淮阳二城归附梁朝，惠绍因招纳抚慰有功，进封号为智武将军，增加食邑二百户。
English: The two cities of Huaiyang and Zhaoyuan in the State of Wei were annexed by the Liang Dynasty, and Huishao was awarded the title of General Zhiwu, adding 200 households to the county.

古文：入为卫尉卿，迁左卫将军。
现代文：后被召回任卫尉卿，迁任左卫将军。
English: Later, he was recalled to the post of Captain of the Imperial Guards and transferred to the post of General of the Left Guards.

古文：出为持节、都督司州诸军事、信威将军、司州刺史、领安陆太守。
现代文：又出任持节、都督司州诸军事、信威将军、司州刺史、兼任安陆太守之职。
English: He also held the posts of Jisetsu, the military governor of the prefecture, the general of the army, the general of the army, the governor of the prefecture, and the governor of Anlu.

古文：在州和理，吏民亲爱之。
现代文：惠绍在州任上治理有方，官民们都很喜爱他。
English: Huishao was a good governor when he was in charge of the state, and the officials and people loved him very much.

古文：征还为左卫将军，加通直散骑常侍，甲仗百人，直卫殿内。
现代文：塞钮被召回京师任左卫将军，加通直散骑常侍，带甲胄仪仗队一百人，在殿内当值守卫。
English: Jian Niu was recalled to the Beijing Division to serve as the left guard general, and Jia Tong Zhi rode as a regular attendant, with an armored honor guard of a hundred people on duty in the hall.

古文：十八年，卒，时年六十三。
现代文：天监十八年，亟塞超去世，终年六十三岁。
English: In the 18th year of Tianjun, Ersa Chao passed away at the age of 63.

古文：诏曰： 张惠绍志略开济，干用贞果。
现代文：皇帝的韶书这样写道： 张惠绍志向才略能够创业济时，办事固守正道并能圆满完成。
English: The emperor's imperial edict wrote: Zhang Huishao's ambition is to be able to start a business, save time, adhere to the correct way of doing things and complete it successfully.

古文：诚勤义始，绩闻累任。
现代文：为人真诚勤恳遵循义理，在历任官职上都成绩突出。
English: He is a person who sincerely and diligently follows the principles of righteousness, and has achieved outstanding results in his previous posts.

古文：爰居禁旅，尽心朝夕。
现代文：居值宫中当禁军时，又尽心尽力，朝夕守卫。
English: When the Imperial Guard was on duty in the palace, he did his best to guard the palace in the morning and evening.

古文：奄至殒丧，恻怆于怀。
现代文：现在突然去世，让人心中凄侧悲伤。
English: Now he has passed away suddenly, which is very sad.

古文：宜追宠命，以彰勋烈。
现代文：可以追赠加恩特赐的任命，以表彰他的功业。
English: He could be posthumously awarded a Garne Distinguished Service Order in recognition of his service.

古文：可赠护军将军，给鼓吹一部，布百匹，蜡二百斤。
现代文：可追赠他为护军将军，给鼓吹一部，布一百匹，蜡二百斤。
English: He can be posthumously awarded the title of General of the Guards, a piece of cloth, one hundred horses, and two hundred kilos of wax.

古文：谥曰忠。 
现代文：谧号叫忠。 
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：子澄嗣。
现代文：他的儿子张澄继嗣。
English: His son Zhang Cheng succeeded him.

古文：澄初为直阁将军，丁父忧，起为晋熙太守，随豫州刺史裴邃北伐，累有战功，与湛僧智、胡绍世、鱼弘并当时之骁将。
现代文：呈谴开始任直合将军，遭父丧之后，起用为置塞塑太守，跟随塑刺史塑塞北伐，屡有战功，在当时，舆湛僧智、胡绍世、鱼旦并为骁将。
English: After his father's death, he was appointed as the first governor of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the Northern Expedition of the

古文：历官卫尉卿、太子左卫率。
现代文：他一生做过卫尉卿、太子左卫率等官。
English: Throughout his life, he held positions such as Captain of the Imperial Guard and Prince of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：卒官，谥曰愍。
现代文：死于任上，谧号愍。
English: He died in office, and his posthumous name was changed to.

古文：冯道根，字巨基，广平酂人也。
现代文：遁道担字旦基，是庐垩璺毖人。
English: It is the people of Xing who are responsible for the foundation of Xing.

古文：少失父，家贫，佣赁以养母。
现代文：幼年便失去父亲，家境贫穷，从小就受雇给人干活来奉养母亲。
English: He lost his father at a young age, his family was poor, and he was hired to work from a young age to support his mother.

古文：行得甘肥，不敢先食，必遽还以进母。
现代文：他得到好吃的东西，自己不敢先吃，一定要赶紧回家进献给母亲。
English: When he gets something delicious, he doesn't dare to eat it first. He must rush home and give it to his mother.

古文：年十三，以孝闻于乡里。
现代文：年仅十三岁，就因孝顺而闻名乡里。
English: He was only thirteen years old, but he was famous in the village for his filial piety.

古文：郡召为主簿，辞不就。
现代文：郡守召他当主簿，他推辞不受。
English: The county governor asked him to be his chief clerk, and he was not to be denied.

古文：年十六，乡人蔡道斑为湖阳戍主，道斑攻蛮锡城，反为蛮所困，道根救之。
现代文：十六岁时，同乡人墓道逛当邀荡的戍主，道逛进攻蛮人居住的垒泌，反被蛮入围困，冯道根前去救助。
English: At the age of sixteen, a fellow villager wandered around the cemetery as an invited intruder, wandered around to attack the barbarians living in the bastion, but was besieged by the barbarians, and Feng Dogen went to the rescue.

古文：匹马转战，杀伤甚多，道斑以免，由是知名。
现代文：他只身匹马转战东西，杀伤很多敌人，道斑因此得以免除围困，冯道根也因此而成知名人物。
English: He went from place to place on horseback, killing and wounding many of the enemy. As a result, Dokuba was able to avoid being besieged. As a result, von Dogen became a well-known figure.

古文：齐建武末，魏主托跋宏寇没南阳等五郡，明帝遣太尉陈显达率众复争之。
现代文：卢塑蛮建武末年，魏童托壁塞领兵侵犯并吞没了直屋等五个郡，查旦堕派太尉堕题逵率军队去夺回失地。
English: In the last years of Lu Shuo's barbaric Jianwu, Wei Tong Topsi led the troops to invade and engulf five counties such as Naoya, and Chadan sent the army led by Taifeng Taifeng Topsi to recapture the lost land.

古文：师入汮均口，道根与乡里人士以牛酒候军，因说显达曰： 汋均水迅急，难进易退。
现代文：队伍进入沟，冯道根与乡里百姓用牛肉和酒迎候军队，并劝说显达： 沟水迅猛湍急，前进很难，后退容易。
English: The team enters the ditch, and Feng Dogen and the villagers welcome the army with beef and wine, and persuade Xanda: The water in the ditch is swift and rapid, it is difficult to advance, and it is easy to retreat.

古文：魏若守隘，则首尾俱急。
现代文：如果魏军守住隘口，那么，你们将首尾难顾，形势危急。
English: If the Wei army holds the pass, then you will have no choice, the situation is critical.

古文：不如悉弃船舰于酂城，方道步进，建营相次，鼓行而前。
现代文：不如把船舰都留在酆城，队伍整队步行前进，依次建立营寨，击鼓而进。
English: It would be better to leave the ships in Lucheng. The whole team would march on foot, build camps in turn, and march forward to the beat of drums.

古文：如是，则立破之矣。 
现代文：这样，很快就可以打败魏军了。 
English: In this way, it will soon be possible to defeat the Wei army.

古文：显达不听，道根犹以私属从军。
现代文：显达没有听从他的建议，而道根仍然让自己的人跟着军队。
English: Shanda did not follow his advice, and Dogen still had his men follow the army.

古文：及显达败，军人夜走，多不知山路；道根每及险要，辄停马指示之，众赖以全。
现代文：等到显达战败时，军人连夜逃跑，却大多不认识山路；冯道根每到险要处，就停马向士兵指示方向，队伍靠了他的指引才得以保全下来。
English: When it became clear that the battle was lost, the soldiers fled overnight, but most of them did not know the mountain roads; whenever von Dogen reached a critical point, he stopped his horse to show the soldiers the direction, and the team relied on his guidance to survive.

古文：寻为汮均口戍副。
现代文：不久，冯道根担任沟口的副戍主。
English: Soon, Feng Dogen served as the deputy leader of Mizoguchi.

古文：永元中，以母丧还家。
现代文：永元年间，冯道根的母亲去世，他回家奔丧。
English: During the Yongyuan era, Feng Dogen's mother passed away, and he went home to mourn.

古文：闻高祖起义师，乃谓所亲曰： 金革夺礼，古人不避，扬名后世，岂非孝乎？
现代文：听说直担组织起义师，就对亲戚们说： 战争时期不能守礼，古人也不回避这个问题，能够扬名于后世，逭难道不是孝吗?
English: Hearing that he was directly responsible for organizing the insurgents, he said to his relatives: It is impossible to observe etiquette during wartime. The ancients did not avoid this problem, and they were able to make a name for themselves in future generations. Isn't it filial piety?

古文：时不可失，吾其行矣。 
现代文：这个时机不能错过，我要走了。 
English: I can't miss this opportunity. I have to go.

古文：率乡人子弟胜兵者，悉归高祖。
现代文：他率领乡里能够当兵打仗的子弟，全都投奔了高祖。
English: He led the children in the village who were able to fight as soldiers, and they all went to Gaozu.

古文：时有蔡道福为将从军，高祖使道根副之，皆隶于王茂。
现代文：当时有一个叫蔡道福的任将从军，高祖让道根当他的副手，他们都隶属于王蔗。
English: At that time, there was a man named Cai Daofu who was appointed to be the general of the army, Gaozu asked Dogen to be his deputy, and they were all subordinated to Wang Cane.

古文：茂伐沔，攻郢城，克加湖，道根常为前锋陷陈。
现代文：王茎讨伐迺地，进攻坚球，攻克扭趋时，通道担都在前面冲锋陷阵。
English: When Wang Zi is fighting in the battlefield, attacking the hard ball, and conquering the twist, the channel bearers are all in the front of the charge.

古文：会道福卒于军，高祖令道根并领其众。
现代文：逭时蔡道福在军中去世，产狙就命令通道担统领基道桓的全部军队。
English: At that time, Cai Daofu died in the army, and Sanzhi ordered Tonggang to take charge of the entire army led by Ji Daohan.

古文：大军次新林，随王茂于硃雀航大战，斩获尤多。
现代文：起义大军驻在堑挞，遇道垄随王芦在塞雀并大战，斩杀俘获了很多敌人。
English: The insurgent army was stationed in Handan, and met and fought with Wang Lu in Sichuan, killing and capturing many enemies.

古文：高祖即位，以为骁骑将军，封增城县男，邑二百户。
现代文：高祖即位后，任命冯道担为骁骑将军。并封他为增城县男，食邑二百户。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended the throne, he appointed Feng Daotang as the general of the imperial cavalry. He was also named the man of Zengcheng County, with more than 200 households.

古文：领文德帅，迁游击将军。
现代文：兼领塞德帅，迁任游击将军。
English: He also served as the commander of Said, and was transferred to the post of guerrilla general.

古文：是岁，江州刺史陈伯之反，道根随王茂讨平之。
现代文：这年，江州刺史陈伯之反叛，遇道担随王蓬一起讨伐速值之，平定了这次反叛。
English: In the same year, the rebellion of Chen Bo, the governor of Jiangzhou, was put down by Wang Peng.

古文：天监二年，为宁朔将军、南梁太守，领阜陵城戍。
现代文：玉监二年，冯道根任宁朔将军、亩梁郡太守，兼任皇屋她的戍主。
English: In the second year of the Jade Emperor, Feng Dogen was appointed Ningshuo General, Mu Liang County Governor, and also served as the head of the imperial house.

古文：初到阜陵，修城隍，远斥候，有如敌将至者，众颇笑之。
现代文：遥道握刚到皇陆，就修筑护城壕，远远地放了哨兵，仿佛敌人就要来了似的，大家都笑他。
English: As soon as he arrived at Huanlu, he built a moat and sent a sentry far away, as if the enemy was about to come. Everyone laughed at him.

古文：道根曰： 怯防勇战，此之谓也。 
现代文：冯道根说： 小心防御。勇敢作战，说的就是这种情况。 
English: Von Dogen said, "Be careful in defense. Fight bravely. This is what I am talking about."

古文：修城未毕，会魏将党法宗、傅竖眼率众二万，奄至城下。道根堑垒未固，城中众少，皆失色。
现代文：城壕还未修完，逭时馥将堂迭塞、传里胆率领二万大军，突然来到城下，此时道根修的阜陵城堑壕堡垒不够坚固，城裹兵众又少，大家都惊慌失色。
English: The trench had not yet been completed. At that time, Emperor Gaozong led a 20,000-strong army under the command of Dong Dui Xie and Chu Li Ji, and suddenly arrived at the foot of the city. At this time, the trench fortress of Fuling City, which had been repaired by Daogan, was not strong enough, and the number of soldiers surrounding the city was small. Everyone panicked and lost their color.

古文：道根命广开门，缓服登城，选精锐二百人，出与魏军战，败之。
现代文：冯道根下令大开城门，他从容地穿上战服登上城头，选出精锐士兵二百人，出城与魏军交战，打败了魏兵。
English: Von Dogen ordered the city gate to be opened wide. He calmly put on his battle uniform and climbed to the top of the city, selected 200 elite soldiers, went out of the city to fight with the Wei army, and defeated the Wei soldiers.

古文：魏人见意闲，且战又不利，因退走。
现代文：翘军看见道担这边神态安闲，而自己与他作战又不利，因此就撤退了。
English: The retreating troops saw that the roadblocker was looking relaxed, and that they were at a disadvantage in fighting him, so they withdrew.

古文：是时魏分兵于大小岘、东桑等，连城相持。
现代文：当时魏军分兵力布置在左岘、尘蛆和塞垩等地，城与城之间互相保持联系，舆道根的阜陵城相对峙。
English: At that time, the Wei troops were deployed in Zuoying, Ducheng and Saiyuan. The cities maintained contact with each other, and the city of Fuling, which was at the root of the conflict, confronted each other.

古文：魏将高祖珍以三千骑军其间，道根率百骑横击破之，获其鼓角军仪。
现代文：魏军将领高祖珍率领三千骑兵在其间来往联络，冯道根率领一百名骑兵拦腰打败魏军，缴获了魏军的鼓角军仪仗。
English: The Wei general Gao Zuzhen led three thousand cavalrymen to liaise between them, and Feng Dogen led one hundred cavalrymen to defeat the Wei army and captured the Wei army's Drum Corps.

古文：于是粮运既绝，诸军乃退。
现代文：于是，魏军的运粮通道被断绝，各路军队祇好退走。
English: As a result, the Wei army's grain transportation channel was cut off, and all the armies had to retreat.

古文：迁道根辅国将军。
现代文：冯道根被提升为辅国将军。
English: Von Dogen was promoted to General of the Auxiliary.

古文：豫州刺史韦睿围合肥，克之。道根与诸军同进，所在有功。
现代文：豫州刺史韦散包围并攻占了合肥，冯道根和各路军共同前进，所到之处，都有功劳。
English: He surrounded and captured Hefei, the capital of Yuzhou Province. Feng Dogen marched forward with all the armies and made contributions wherever he went.

古文：六年，魏攻钟离，高祖复诏睿救之，道根率众三千为睿前驱。
现代文：六年，龚军进攻钟盘，产担又命令韦题前去救援，遇道担率领三千士兵作为韦散的先驱部队。
English: In the sixth year, the Wei army attacked the bell plate, and the commander ordered Wei Qi to go to the rescue, leading three thousand soldiers as Wei San's pioneer troops.

古文：至徐州，建计据邵阳洲，筑垒掘堑，以逼魏城。
现代文：到达徐州后，冯道根建议先占据邵阳洲，修筑堡垒，挖掘堑壕，以此进逼魏军城垒。
English: After arriving in Xuzhou, Feng Dogen suggested occupying Shaoyangzhou first, building a fortress and digging trenches, in order to force the Wei army into the fortress.

古文：道根能走马步地，计马足以赋功，城隍立办。
现代文：冯道根能够骑马丈量土地，计算马的步数就能得到土地的长度，护城壕很快就修好了。
English: Von Dogen was able to measure the land on horseback and calculate the length of the land by counting the steps of the horse. The moat was soon repaired.

古文：及淮水长，道根乘战舰，攻断魏连桥数百丈，魏军败绩。
现代文：等到淮河水涨潮时，冯道根乘坐战舰，攻断魏军的连桥敷百丈，魏军大败。
English: When the water of the Huaihe River was at high tide, Feng Dogen took a warship and attacked the hundreds of bridges of the Wei army, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：益封三百户，进爵为伯。
现代文：冯增加食邑三百户，进爵位为伯。
English: Feng increased the number of restaurants to 300, and he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：还，迁云骑将军、领直阁将军，改封豫宁县，户邑如前。
现代文：回师后迁任云骑将军、兼任直合将军，后改封豫宁县伯，食邑户数同前。
English: After returning to the division, he was transferred to General Yunjie and concurrently to General Zhihe. Later, he was transferred to Bo, Yuning County, and the number of households in the restaurant was increased to the same level.

古文：累迁中权中司马、右游击将军、武旅将军、历阳太守。
现代文：又多次迁任中权中司马、右游击将军、武旅将军、历阳郡太守。
English: In addition, he was transferred many times to the posts of central power, middle Sima, right-wing guerrilla general, military brigade general, and Liyang County governor.

古文：八年，迁贞毅将军、假节、督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史、领汝阴太守。
现代文：八年，迁任贞毅将军、假节、督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史、兼任汝阴型太守。
English: In the eighth year, he was transferred to the post of General Zhengyi, the false festival, the military governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Ruyin.

古文：为政清简，境内安定。
现代文：冯道根为政清廉简朴，郡内安定。
English: Feng Dogen is a clean and simple politician, and the county is stable.

古文：十一年，征为太子右卫率。
现代文：十一年，被召入任太子右卫率。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was appointed to the post of crown prince.

古文：十三年，出为信武将军、宣惠司马、新兴、永宁二郡太守。
现代文：十三年，出任信武将军、宣惠司马、新兴永宁二郡太守。
English: In the thirteenth year, he served as Nobutake Shogun, Xuan Hui Sima, and the newly-emerged Yongning Second County Governor.

古文：十四年，征为员外散骑常侍、右游击将军，领硃衣直阁。
现代文：十四年，被召任员外散骑常侍、右游击将军，兼任朱衣直合。
English: Fourteen years later, he was called to serve as a non-commissioned officer, horseback cavalryman, and right-wing guerrilla general, and also served as Zhu Yizhong.

古文：十五年，为右卫将军。
现代文：十五年，任右卫将军。
English: Fifteen years later, he was appointed to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：道根性谨厚，木讷少言，为将能检御部曲，所过村陌，将士不敢虏掠。
现代文：冯道根性格谨慎宽厚，木讷少言，当将军时能够约束部下，他们所经过的村庄阡陌，官兵们都不敢进行掳掠。
English: As a general, he was able to restrain his subordinates. The villages they passed through were so remote that the officers and soldiers did not dare to carry out plundering.

古文：每所征伐，终不言功，诸将讠雚哗争竞，道根默然而已。
现代文：每次征战之后，道根总是不说自己的功劳，其他将领喧哗竞相争功，他衹是默不作声而已。
English: After each campaign, Dogen always refrained from talking about his own merits. While other generals clamored for credit, he remained silent.

古文：其部曲或怨非之，道根喻曰： 明主自鉴功之多少，吾将何事。 
现代文：他的部下有人对他有怨言，道根给他讲道理说： 皇帝明察秋毫，自会鉴别出谁的功劳多，谁的功劳少，我们还用做什么呢。 
English: Some of his subordinates complained about him, and Dogen reasoned with him, saying, "The emperor sees everything clearly, and will judge for himself who deserves more credit, and who deserves less. What else can we do?

古文：高祖尝指道根示尚书令沈约曰： 此人口不论勋。 
现代文：高担曾指着道担对尚书令选垫说： 这个人从来不说自己的功绩。 
English: Gao Dang once pointed to Tao Dang and said to Shang Shuling, "This man never talks about his own achievements.

古文：约曰： 此陛下之大树将军也。 
现代文：沈约说： 这是陛下的大树将军啊。 
English: Shen Yu said, "This is His Majesty's Great Tree General."

古文：处州郡，和理清静，为部下所怀。
现代文：堕：蔓担在州郡任官时，宽和治理，为政清明而无争，一直被部下所怀念。
English: Fallen: When serving as an official in the state and county, Mangtang was broad and governance, clear and undisputed for politics, and has been missed by his subordinates.

古文：在朝廷，虽贵显而性俭约，所居宅不营墙屋，无器服侍卫，入室则萧然如素士之贫贱者。
现代文：在朝廷当官时，即使地位显贵，他的本性仍很俭朴，他所居住的房宅没有修筑墙屋，也没有器物服饰，没有侍卫人员，进入他的房间，非常冷清，就像是普通百姓中贫穷低下者的房子一样。
English: When he was an official in the imperial court, even though his position was prominent, his nature was still very frugal. The house he lived in had no walls, no utensils, no clothes, no bodyguards. Entering his room, it was very cold, just like the house of the poor and lowly among the common people.

古文：当时服其清退，高祖亦雅重之。
现代文：当时的人们佩服他的清贫淡泊，高祖也非常看重他。
English: At that time, people admired his poverty and indifference, and Gaozu also thought highly of him.

古文：微时不学，既贵，粗读书，自谓少文，常慕周勃之器重。
现代文：道根年轻位低时没有学习的机会，地位升高后，才粗通文墨，自称缺少文采，经常羡慕周勃因才能而受到重视。
English: When he was young and poor, Dogen had no opportunity to study. Only after his status rose did he become fluent in literature and call himself uneducated. He often envied Zhou Bo for being valued for his talent.

古文：十六年，复假节、都督豫州诸军事、信武将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：十六年，冯道根再次任假节、都督豫州诸军事、信武将军、豫州刺史。
English: Sixteen years later, Feng Dogen was once again appointed as the head of the military, the military governor of Yuzhou, the general of Xinwu, and the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：将行，高祖引朝臣宴别道根于武德殿，召工视道根，使图其形像。
现代文：将要出发前，高祖带领朝廷官员在武德殿设宴为他饯行，高祖叫来画工观察道根，然后把他的形像画下来。
English: Before leaving, Gaozu led the court officials to hold a banquet for him at Wude Hall. Gaozu called an artist to observe Dogen, and then painted his portrait.

古文：道根踧谢曰： 臣所可报国家，惟余一死；但天下太平，臣恨无可死之地。 
现代文：道根恭敬不安地道谢说： 臣所可以报效国家的事，衹有死逭一件了；但是现在天下太平，臣衹恨没有可死的地方和机会。 
English: Dogen respectfully and uneasily expressed his thanks, saying, "There is no death for a vassal who can serve the country; but now that the world is at peace, there is no place or opportunity for vassals to die.

古文：豫部重得道根，人皆喜悦。
现代文：豫州部众重新得到冯道根，人人都很高兴。
English: Everyone in the Yuzhou club is happy to have Feng Dogen back.

古文：高祖每称曰： 冯道根所在，能使朝廷不复忆有一州。 
现代文：高祖常常称赞他说： 冯道根所到之处，能够使朝廷不再记得还有遣一州。 
English: Gaozu often praised him, saying, "Wherever Feng Dogen went, he was able to make the imperial court no longer remember that he was sent to Yizhou.

古文：居州少时，遇疾，自表乞还朝，征为散骑常侍、左军将军。
现代文：冯道根到州任上不久就生病了。他上表给皇帝，请求回京师，皇帝召他任散骑常侍、左军将军。
English: Not long after taking up his post in Shuzhou, Feng Dogen fell ill. He petitioned the emperor to return to Beijing, and the emperor called him to serve as a cavalryman and general of the Left Army.

古文：既至疾甚，中使累加存问。
现代文：道根回到京师，病情更重，皇帝派使者几次三番询问病情。
English: When Dogen returned to Beijing, his condition worsened, and the emperor sent emissaries to inquire about his condition several times.

古文：普通元年正月，卒，时年五十八。
现代文：普通元年正月，冯道根去世，终年五十八岁。
English: In the first month of the first year of the common year, Feng Dogen died at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：是日舆驾春祠二庙，既出宫，有司以闻。
现代文：去世这天，皇帝正要去二庙做春祭，刚出宫殿，有关官员就向他报告道根去世的消息。
English: On the day of his death, the emperor was on his way to the Second Temple for the Spring Festival. As soon as he left the palace, officials informed him of the news of Dogen's death.

古文：高祖问中书舍人硃异曰： 吉凶同日，今行乎？ 
现代文：高祖间中书舍人朱异： 吉凶在同一天，今天可以去吗? 
English: Zhu Yiren, a junior high school student at Gaozu Middle School, said, "Good luck and bad luck come on the same day. Can I go today?"

古文：异对曰： 昔柳庄寝疾，卫献公当祭，请于尸曰： 有臣柳庄，非寡人之臣，是社稷之臣也，闻其死，请往。 
现代文：朱异回答道： 从前柳庄病死在床上，卫献公正在祭祀，他问主持祭祀的人： 有一个臣子叫柳庄，他不是我的臣子，是社稷的臣子，听说他死了，我请求去看他。 
English: Zhu Yi replied: Once upon a time, Liu Zhuang died of illness in his bed. Wei Xianjun was performing a sacrifice. He asked the person leading the sacrifice: There is a courtier named Liu Zhuang. He is not my courtier, he is a courtier of the social eunuch. I heard that he died, so I asked to see him.

古文：不释祭服而往，遂以襚之。
现代文：他没有脱掉祭服就到柳庄家，并赠送衣被给柳庄。
English: He went to Liu Zhuang's home without taking off his ceremonial robes, and was given a robe as a gift.

古文：道根虽未为社稷之臣，亦有劳王室，临之，礼也。 
现代文：冯道根虽然没有成为社稷的臣子，但也对王室有功劳，陛下去看他是符合礼的。 
English: Although he did not become a courtier of the shogunate, Feng Dogen also did a lot for the royal family. His Majesty deems him to be in line with protocol.

古文：高祖即幸其宅，哭之甚恸。
现代文：高祖就来到道根家，哭悼道根，非常悲痛。
English: Gaozu came to Dogen's house, crying and mourning Dogen, very sad.

古文：诏曰： 豫宁县开国伯、新除散骑常侍、领左军将军冯道根，奉上能忠，有功不伐，抚人留爱，守边难犯，祭遵、冯异、郭亻及、李牧，不能过也。
现代文：颁下韶书道： 豫宁县开国伯、新任散骑常侍、兼任左军将军冯道根，事奉朝廷忠心耿耿，有功劳而不夸耀，抚慰人民充满爱心，守卫边境使敌人难犯，就算从前的祭遵、冯异、郭伋、李牧，都不能超过他。
English: He was awarded the honorary title of: Yuanning County's Founding Father, the newly-appointed cavalryman, and the general of the Left Army, Feng Dogen. He served the imperial court loyally, had merits without boasting, comforted the people with love, guarded the border and made it difficult for the enemy to commit crimes. Even the former Saizong, Feng Yi, Guo Wei, and Li Mu could not surpass him.

古文：奄致殒丧，恻怆于怀。
现代文：他突然去世，让人胸怀悲怆。
English: His death was sudden and saddening.

古文：可赠信威将军、左卫将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：可追赠他为信威将军、左卫将军，给鼓吹一部。
English: He can be given posthumously as General Xinwei, General Zuwei, and a part of the propaganda.

古文：赙钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：送钱十万，布一百匹。
English: A hundred thousand for the funeral and a hundred horses for the cloth.

古文：谥曰威。 
现代文：谧号威。 
English: 号威.

古文：子怀嗣。
现代文：他儿子冯怀继嗣。
English: He is succeeded by his son Feng Huai.

古文：康绚，字长明，华山蓝田人也。
现代文：尘刨宇昼塱，是华山郡蓝旦壁人。
English: He is a resident of Lantang Wall, Huashan County.

古文：其先出自康居。
现代文：他的祖先出自尘昼厘。
English: His forefathers came from the dust of the earth.

古文：初，汉置都护，尽臣西域。
现代文：最初，莲堑设置都护。
English: At first, the lotus pond was set up to protect the capital.

古文：康居亦遣侍子待诏于河西，因留为黔首，其后即以康为姓。
现代文：酉球各国全都于荡，尘昼厘也派遣王子作为侍子到达回西都护府，等待皇帝的命令，因而就留在那裹成了普通百姓，他们的后代就以康作为姓氏。
English: All the countries of the world were in turmoil, and in the twilight of the day, princes were also sent as attendants to arrive back in Xidougou, waiting for the emperor's order, so they stayed there and became ordinary people, and their descendants took Kang as their surname.

古文：晋时陇右乱，康氏迁于蓝田。
现代文：晋朝时，陇右骚乱，康氏家族迁到了蓝田。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, there were riots in Shandong Province, and the Kang family moved to Lantian.

古文：绚曾祖因为苻坚太子詹事，生穆，穆为姚苌河南尹。
现代文：康绚的曾祖父尘鱼当了荭坚的太子詹事，生子名叫康穆，赵当了蜷迪尹。
English: Kang Hua's great-grandfather Chen Yu became the prince Zhan Zhi of Jian Jian, his son was named Kang Mu, and Zhao became Nin Di Yin.

古文：宋永初中，穆举乡族三千余家，入襄阳之岘南。宋为置华山郡蓝田县，寄居于襄阳，以穆为秦、梁二州刺史。
现代文：咸塞攰年间，趋发动乡里尘姓家族三千余家，进入襄阳的岘南地区，塞曲为此设置了华山郡蓝艳，隶属于塞隧，任命尘穆为台、凿二州的刺史，还没上任就去世了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xian and Empress Dowager Cixi, more than three thousand families with the surname of Deng in the countryside moved into the southern part of Yongnan in Yangyang. To this end, Cixi set up Huashan County Lanyan, which was affiliated with Cixi Tunnel, appointed Deng Mu as the director, and engraved the history of the two states. He died before taking office.

古文：未拜，卒。绚世父元隆，父元抚，并为流人所推，相继为华山太守。
现代文：尘面的大伯父尘五坠、父亲鏖豆面，都被移民们推举出来，相继担任华山郡太守。
English: Dumen's great-uncle, Dumen Wujing, and his father, Peas Noodles, were both nominated by immigrants and successively served as the governor of Huashan County.

古文：绚少俶傥有志气。齐文帝为雍州刺史，所辟皆取名家，绚特以才力召为西曹书佐。
现代文：尘面少年时卓尔不群，志向高远，齐文帝当面出刺史时，所选用的官员全都出自名家，康绚以他特别的才华被召为西曹书佐。
English: When he was a dusty-faced boy, he stood out from the crowd and had high aspirations. When Emperor Qianwen made a personal attack on him, the officials he chose were all from famous families. Kang Huan was called to be the West Cao Shuzo with his special talent.

古文：永明三年，除奉朝请。
现代文：永明三年，康面被授予奉朝请。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, Kangmen was awarded the honor of being invited to the imperial court.

古文：文帝在东宫，以旧恩引为直后，以母忧去职。
现代文：塞童在束宫当太子时，康绚因以前的旧恩情，被文帝任为直后，因母亲去世而离职。
English: When Saedong was crown prince at Sokgong Palace, Kang Hua left the post due to the death of her mother immediately after being appointed by Emperor Wen due to her previous old feelings of gratitude.

古文：服阕，除振威将军、华山太守。
现代文：服丧期满，被授予振威将军、华山郡太守。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded the title of General Zhenwei and Governor of Huashan County.

古文：推诚抚循，荒余悦服。
现代文：他安抚百姓，以诚相待，荒远地区的人也对他心悦诚服。
English: He pacified the people and treated each other with sincerity, and the people in the remote areas were also pleased with him.

古文：迁前军将军，复为华山太守。
现代文：后迁任前军将军，又任华山郡太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the general of the former army, and also served as the governor of Huashan County.

古文：永元元年，义兵起，绚举郡以应高祖，身率敢勇三千人，私马二百五十匹以从。
现代文：返元年，产担的仁义之师起兵，康绚带领整个华山郡响应直担，他自己率领勇敢者三千人，牵着自己的二百五十匹马跟从高祖。
English: In the first year of the year of return, the teacher of benevolence and righteousness raised an army, and Kang Huan led the entire Huashan County to respond to the direct burden. He himself led three thousand brave people and led his two hundred and fifty horses to follow Gao Zu.

古文：除西中郎南康王中兵参军，加辅国将军。
现代文：他被任命为西中郎尘尘王的中兵参军，并加辅国将军。
English: He was appointed to join the army as a middle-ranking soldier of West Middle-earth's King Dusty, and became a general of Kazu Province.

古文：义师方围张冲于郢城，旷日持久，东昏将吴子阳壁于加湖，军锋甚盛，绚随王茂力攻屠之。
现代文：起义部队正把呈鼬围困在旦困，旷日持久，束昏堡的将领县王屋沿邀形成包围圈，军队的前锋很厉害，虚饱随王茎奋力进攻，歼灭了吴子阳部。
English: The insurgent forces are besieging Chengdu in a long-drawn-out and protracted siege. The general of the shackled fort, County Wangya, is invited to form an encirclement. The army's forwards are very powerful, and the enemy is struggling to attack and annihilate Wu Ziyang.

古文：自是常领游兵，有急应赴，斩获居多。
现代文：从此，尘面经常带领士兵巡游，哪裹有危急就奔赴那裹救援，杀死和俘获了很多敌人。
English: From then on, Dustface often led soldiers on patrols, rushing to the rescue whenever there was a crisis, killing and capturing many enemies.

古文：天监元年，封南安县男，邑三百户。
现代文：天监元年，尘钩被封为南安县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Denghu was sealed as the man of Nan'an County, with three hundred households in food villages.

古文：除辅国将军、竟陵太守。
现代文：又被任命为辅国将军、竟陵郡太守。
English: He was also appointed as the General of the Auxiliary Province and the Governor of Jingting County.

古文：魏围梁州，刺史王珍国使请救，绚以郡兵赴之，魏军退。
现代文：魏军包围了梁塑，刺史王珍国派人来请求援助，康绚带领竟陵邓的士兵前往，魏军退走。
English: The Wei army encircled Liang Shuo, and Wang Zhenguo sent someone to request assistance. Kang Hua led the soldiers of Jingling Deng to go there, and the Wei army retreated.

古文：七年，司州三关为魏所逼，诏假绚节、武旅将军，率众赴援。
现代文：七年，司州三关被魏军围逼，直担命令尘面持符节，任武旅将军，率大军奔赴救援。
English: In the seventh year, Shizhou Sankuan was besieged by the Wei army, and he was ordered to hold the sign of the festival on his shoulder, and he was appointed as the general of the military brigade, and he led the army to go to the rescue.

古文：九年，迁假节、督北兗州缘淮诸军事、振远将军、北兗州刺史。
现代文：九年，迁任假节、督北兖州缘淮诸军事、振远将军、北兖州刺史。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred to the holiday, the governor of North Luzhou was transferred to the military, General Zhenyuan, and the history of North Luzhou was written.

古文：及朐山亡徒以城降魏，绚驰遣司马霍奉伯分军据嶮。魏军至，不得越朐城。
现代文：当朐山的亡命之徒献出整个城投降秀蝈时，尘饱骑马调遣司马霆叁侦分兵占据险要地段，魏军到了这裹，不能越过旦蛆。
English: When the desperadoes of Lushan surrendered the whole city to Xiuzhen, Ducheng dispatched the reconnaissance detachment of Sima Tingting on horseback to occupy the critical area. When the Wei army arrived here, it could not cross the Dan River.

古文：明年，青州刺史张稷为土人徐道角所杀，绚又遣司马茅荣伯讨平之。
现代文：第二年，壹业刺史强扰被土人涂道鱼杀害，尘面又派司马菱曲讨伐平定涂道角。
English: In the second year, a local fisherman was killed by a strong disturbance, and Dumen sent Sima Lingqu to settle the dispute.

古文：征骠骑临川王司马，加左骁骑将军，寻转硃衣直阁。
现代文：之后，康绚被召为骠骑临川王的司马，加左骁骑将军，不久，转为朱衣直合。
English: After that, Kang Hua was called to be the stallion of the King of Linchuan, and the left stallion of the general, and soon changed to Zhu Yi Zhihe.

古文：十三年，迁太子右卫率，甲仗百人，与领军萧景直殿内。
现代文：十三年，迁任太子右卫率，领甲仗一百人，舆领军萧景一起在殿内当值。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was transferred to the position of the prince's right guard, leading a hundred men in armor, and leading the army of public opinion, Xiao Jing, together in the hall.

古文：绚身长八尺，容貌绝伦，虽居显官，犹习武艺。
现代文：康绚身高八尺，相貌堂堂，无与伦比，即使位居显官，仍然练习武艺。
English: Kang Hua is eight feet tall, handsome and incomparable. Even though she is a high-ranking official, she still practices martial arts.

古文：高祖幸德阳殿戏马，敕绚马射，抚弦贯的，观者悦之。
现代文：一次，高祖前往德阳殿骑马游玩，令康绚骑马射箭，康绚弯弓搭箭，应声中靶，围观者都很开心。
English: On one occasion, Gao Zu went to Deyang Hall to ride a horse and play. He made Kang Huan ride a horse and shoot arrows. Kang Huan bent his bow and shot an arrow. He hit the target, and the onlookers were very happy.

古文：其日，上使画工图绚形，遣中使持以问绚曰： 卿识此图不？ 
现代文：逭天，皇帝让画工画了康绚的像，派宦官拿着画去问康绚： 你认识逭圆上的人吗? 
English: One day, the emperor had an artist paint a portrait of Kang Hua, and sent an eunuch to take the painting and ask Kang Hua: Do you know the people on the roundabout?

古文：其见亲如此。
现代文：可见其受亲近程度。
English: You can see how close they are.

古文：时魏降人王足陈计，求堰淮水以灌寿阳。
现代文：当时从魏国投降过来的王足提出一个计策，请求在淮水上筑拦河坝，用水灌寿阳。
English: At that time, Wang Zu, who had surrendered from Wei, proposed a plan to build a dam on the Huai River to flood Shouyang with water.

古文：足引北方童谣曰： 荆山为上格，浮山为下格，潼沱为激沟，并灌钜野泽。 
现代文：王足引用北方的童谣说： 荆山为上格，浮山为下格，潼沱为激沟，并灌钜野泽。 
English: Wang Zu quoted a northern nursery rhyme, saying: Jingshan is the upper case, Fushan is the lower case, Zou is the furrow, and Guanzhong is the field.

古文：高祖以为然，使水工陈承伯、材官将军祖芃视地形，咸谓淮内沙土漂轻，不坚实，其功不可就。
现代文：高祖认为有道理，让水工陈承伯、材官将军祖佢去视察地形，他们视察以后都说淮河内沙土轻漂，不坚实，不可以筑坝。
English: Gao Zu thought it was reasonable to have the hydraulic engineer Chen Chengbo and the quartermaster general Zu Xi go to inspect the terrain. After their inspection, they all said that the sandy soil in the Huai River was light, not solid, and it was impossible to build a dam.

古文：高祖弗纳，发徐、扬人，率二十户取五丁以筑之。
现代文：高祖没有采纳他们的意见，发动徐州、扬州两地的人民，以每二十户取五丁的比例，抽调入丁去筑大坝。
English: Gao Zu did not accept their opinions, and mobilized the people of Xuzhou and Yangzhou to build the dam at a ratio of five Ding to every twenty households.

古文：假绚节、都督淮上诸军事，并护堰作，役人及战士，有众二十万。
现代文：授康绚假节，都督淮上诸军事，并监护堰坝的修筑，服役的民工和战士，共有二十万之多。
English: On the auspicious day of the Chinese New Year, Huai, the governor of the city, was promoted to the military, and supervised the construction of the dam. A total of 200,000 migrant workers and soldiers served in the military.

古文：于钟离南起浮山，北抵巉石，依岸以筑土，合脊于中流。
现代文：在钟离，南起浮山，北抵巉石，依河岸堆土，到中流合拢。
English: In Zhongli, from the south to the floating mountain, from the north to the flint, along the bank of the heap, to the middle of the stream.

古文：十四年，堰将合，淮水漂疾，辄复决溃，众患之。
现代文：十四年，堰坝就要合拢时，淮水变得迅猛湍急，大堰又被水冲垮了，大家为之担忧。
English: Fourteen years ago, when the dam was about to be closed, the Huai River became swift and turbulent, and the weir was washed down by the water, which worried everyone.

古文：或谓江、淮多有蛟，能乘风雨决坏崖岸，其性恶铁，因是引东西二冶铁器，大则釜鬵，小则鋘锄，数千万斤，沉于堰所。
现代文：有人说，长江、淮河经常有蛟龙，它能乘着风雨冲坏山崖堤岸，但它生性怕铁，因此，人们引进东西两处冶铸的铁器，大到釜鬻这样的大锅，小到耕地用的锋锄，敷千万斤的铁器沉入大堰所在的水中。
English: Some people say that the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River often have dragonflies, which can take advantage of the wind and rain to break down the mountain cliff embankment, but it is naturally afraid of iron. Therefore, people have introduced two pieces of smelted ironware, large to cauldrons such as kettles, small to harrows used for farming, and ironware weighing tens of millions of pounds into the water where the weir is located.

古文：犹不能合，乃伐树为井干，填以巨石，加土其上。
现代文：还是不能合拢，于是砍伐树木做成井栏，在中间填上大石头，上面再加上土。
English: They still couldn't close it, so they cut down trees to make a well fence, filled it with large stones in the middle, and added soil on top.

古文：缘淮百里内，冈陵木石，无巨细必尽，负担者肩上皆穿。
现代文：淮河沿岸百里之内，山冈丘陵上的树木石头，无论粗细大小，都被砍光取尽，扛树挑担的人肩上都被磨破了。
English: Within a hundred miles along the coast of the Huai River, the trees and stones on the mountains and hills, no matter how large or small, have all been cut down, and the shoulders of those who carry the trees and carry the burden have been worn out.

古文：夏日疾疫，死者相枕，蝇虫昼夜声相合。
现代文：夏天，发生了流行病，死去的民工堆在一起，互相枕藉，蚊蝇虫子的声音日夜不停。
English: In the summer, there was an epidemic, dead migrant workers were piled up next to each other, and the sound of mosquitoes, flies, and bugs was incessant day and night.

古文：高祖愍役人淹久，遣尚书右仆射袁昂、侍中谢举假节慰劳之，并加蠲复。
现代文：高祖怜悯役人劳作的日期太长，就派遣尚书右仆射袁昂、侍中谢举持节去工地慰劳，并免除他们的赋税。
English: Gao Zu felt sorry for the officials who had worked for too long, and sent Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao Yuan'ang, and his attendant, Xie Huojie, to the construction site to console them, and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：是冬又寒甚，淮、泗尽冻，士卒死者十七八，高祖复遣赐以衣袴。
现代文：这年冬天又非常寒冷，淮河、泅水全都冻冰了，民工士兵中死去的人占了十分之七八，高祖又派人赐给做工的人衣服裤子。
English: This winter was also very cold. The Huaihe River and the Surabaya River were completely frozen, and the dead accounted for seventy-eight out of ten of the migrant soldiers. Gao Zu also sent people to give clothes and trousers to the workers.

古文：十一月，魏遣将杨大眼扬声决堰，绚命诸军撤营露次以待之。
现代文：十一月，魏国派遣大将杨大眼声称要开决大堰，康绚命令各军撤出军营露宿，以等待魏军的到来。
English: In November, Wei dispatched general Yang Dajian to claim that he wanted to break through the great weir. Kang Hua ordered all the troops to withdraw from the camp and camp out to wait for the arrival of the Wei army.

古文：遣其子悦挑战，斩魏咸阳王府司马徐方兴，魏军小却。
现代文：他派儿子康悦前去挑战，斩杀了魏咸阳王府的司马徐方兴，魏军稍稍后退。
English: He sent his son Kang Yue forward to challenge and killed Sima Xu Fang Xing of the Wei Xianyang Royal Palace, and the Wei army retreated slightly.

古文：十二月，魏遣其尚书仆射李昙定督众军来战，绚与徐州刺史刘思祖等距之。
现代文：十二月，魏国派遣尚书仆射李昙定统率大军前来挑战，康绚和徐州刺史刘思祖等进行抵抗。
English: In December, the State of Wei dispatched Shang Shuxu's lackey Li Shuding to lead a large army to challenge, and Kang Hua and Xuzhou's assassin Liu Shizu and others resisted.

古文：高祖又遣右卫将军昌义之、太仆卿鱼弘文、直阁曹世宗、徐元和相次距守。
现代文：高祖又派右卫将军昌义之、太仆卿鱼弘文、直合曹世宗、徐元和相继前来抵御守卫。
English: Gao Zu also sent the right guard general, Chang Yizhi, the great servant, Yu Hongwen, Zhao He, Cao Shizong, and Xu Yuanhe to protect the guards.

古文：十五年四月，堰乃成。
现代文：十五年四月，大堰才筑成。
English: The weir was only built in April 15th.

古文：其长九里，下阔一百四十丈，上广四十五丈，高二十丈，深十九丈五尺。
现代文：它长九里，底边宽一百四十丈，顶部宽四十五丈，高二十丈，深十九丈五尺。
English: It is nine li long, with a bottom width of one hundred and forty cubits, a top width of forty-five cubits, a height of twenty cubits, and a depth of nineteen cubits and five feet.

古文：夹之以堤，并树杞柳，军人安堵，列居其上。
现代文：中间夹有堤，在堤上种植杞柳树，军民在上面并列安居。
English: There is an embankment in the middle, willow trees are planted on the embankment, and soldiers and civilians live side by side on it.

古文：其水清洁，俯视居人坟墓，了然皆在其下。
现代文：河水非常清洁，从上往下看，民居和坟墓都在下面，一目了然。
English: The water of the river is very clean. If you look down from above, you can see people's houses and graves below at a glance.

古文：或人谓绚曰： 四渎，天所以节宣其气，不可久塞。
现代文：有人对康绚说： 长江、淮河、黄河、济水四渎，是老天用来调节宣泄它的气的，不可长期堵塞。
English: Someone said to Kang Hua: The Yangtze River, the Huai River, the Yellow River and the Jishui all have four impurities. They are used by God to regulate and vent its qi, and should not be blocked for a long time.

古文：若凿湫东注，则游波宽缓，堰得不坏。 
现代文：如果开凿一个涵洞，让水向东灌注，那么水流宽缓，大堰可以不受损坏。 
English: If a culvert is dug and the water is allowed to flow eastwards, the water flow will be slow and the weir will not be damaged.

古文：绚然之，开湫东注。又纵反间于魏曰： 梁人所惧开湫，不畏野战。 
现代文：康绚认为他说得对，开洞向东注水，又派人到魏国去施反问计说： 梁朝人最怕开洞，却不怕在野地襄打仗。 
English: Kang Hua thought he was right. He opened a hole to pour water to the east, and sent someone to Wei to make a counter-question, saying: Liang Dynasty people are most afraid of opening a hole, but they are not afraid to fight in the field.

古文：魏人信之，果凿山深五丈，开湫北注，水日夜分流，湫犹不减。
现代文：魏人相信了这话，果真凿了一个山洞，深五丈，在堤上开洞，让水向北注入山洞，河水日夜分流，洞中的水却仍然不减。
English: The Wei people believed this, and indeed they dug a cave, five meters deep, opened a hole in the dike, and let the water flow north into the cave. The river water was diverted day and night, but the water in the cave still did not decrease.

古文：其月，魏军竟溃而归。
现代文：当月，魏军全都溃败而归。
English: That month, the Wei army all returned home in defeat.

古文：水之所及，夹淮方数百里地。
现代文：河水所到之处，有淮河沿岸数百里地。
English: Wherever the river goes, there are hundreds of miles along the Huai River.

古文：魏寿阳城戍稍徙顿于八公山，此南居人散就冈垄。
现代文：魏国寿阳城的戍所祇好迁徙到八公山安顿下来，遣裹是南边人零散形成的坟山。
English: The imperial family of Shouyang City in the State of Wei migrated to Ba Gongshan to settle down, and the burial mounds were formed by the scattered people from the south.

古文：初，堰起于徐州界，刺史张豹子宣言于境，谓己必尸其事。
现代文：最初，大堰在徐州界内开筑时，刺史张豹子在境内到处扬言，说自己一定会主管此事。
English: At first, when the weir was being built in Xuzhou, Zhang Leopardi, the chief engineer, threatened everywhere in the territory, saying that he would be in charge of the matter.

古文：既而绚以他官来监作，豹子甚惭。
现代文：后来尘面派其他官员来监督主管这项工作，亟豹王感到非常惭愧。
English: Later, he sent other officials to supervise and supervise the work, which made him feel very ashamed.

古文：俄而敕豹子受绚节度，每事辄先谘焉，由是遂谮绚与魏交通，高祖虽不纳，犹以事毕征绚。
现代文：不久，皇帝命令张豹子受康绚的节度指挥，每件事都要先向他咨询，因此，张豹子就诬陷康绚和魏国勾通，高祖虽然不采纳他的话，仍然每事都向康绚征询。
English: Soon, the emperor ordered Zhang Baozi to be under the command of Kang Hua, and to consult him first in every matter. Therefore, Zhang Baozi falsely accused Kang Hua of colluding with Wei. Although Gaozu did not accept his words, he still consulted Kang Hua in every matter.

古文：寻以绚为持节、都督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，领安陆太守，增封二百户。
现代文：不久，调任康绚为持节、都督司州诸军事、信武将军、司州刺史，兼任安陆郡太守，增加食邑二百户。
English: Soon after, Kang Huan was transferred to the position of Jisetsu, the military governor of the prefecture, the general of the army, the governor of the prefecture, and the governor of Anlu County, increasing the number of restaurants by 200 households.

古文：绚还后，豹子不修堰，至其秋八月，淮水暴长，堰悉坏决，奔流于海，祖芃坐下狱。
现代文：康绚回去后，张豹子不再修筑大坝，到遣年的秋季八月。进回水暴涨，堰堤全被冲决毁坏，河水一直奔流到大海，祖佢因而被逮捕下狱。
English: After Kang Huan's return, Zhang Baozi stopped building the dam, and by the autumn of the following year, in August, the inflow and outflow of water skyrocketed, the dam was completely destroyed, and the river water flowed all the way to the sea. As a result, Zu Xi was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：绚在州三年，大修城隍，号为严政。
现代文：康绚在州任职三年期间，大修护城壕，为政号令严谨。
English: During the three years that Kang Hua served in the state, she overhauled the moat and issued strict orders.

古文：十八年，征为员外散骑常侍，领长水校尉，与护军韦睿、太子右卫率周舍直殿省。
现代文：十八年，康绚被召为员外散骑常侍，兼任长丞校尉，与护军童壑、太子右卫率凰捡在殿内当值。
English: In the 18th year, Kang Huan was called to be a non-commissioned officer of the cavalry, and concurrently served as the captain of the chengjo, and was on duty in the palace with the escort boy and the prince Uwei Ruoqi.

古文：普通元年，除卫尉卿，未拜，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：普通元年，康绚被授予卫尉卿，还未正式拜官就去世了，终年五十七岁。
English: In the first year of the common era, Kang Hua was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, but she died before she was officially appointed, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：舆驾即日临哭。
现代文：皇帝当天亲自去哭悼。
English: The emperor himself went to mourn on the same day.

古文：赠右卫将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：追赠他为右卫将军，送给鼓吹一部。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Right Division, and a part of it was given to the Drum Major.

古文：赙钱十万，布百匹。
现代文：送办丧事的钱十万，布一百匹。
English: A hundred thousand for the funeral and a hundred horses for the cloth.

古文：谥曰壮。
现代文：谧号壮。
English: The call sign is Zhuang.

古文：绚宽和少喜惧，在朝廷，见人如不能言，号为长厚。
现代文：尘面性情宽厚和悦，喜怒不形于色，在朝廷上，看见别人就像是不会说话的人，被称为长厚之人。
English: Dusty's disposition is generous and pleasant, and he is impervious to joy and anger. In the court, seeing others is like a person who can't speak, and is called a long and thick person.

古文：在省，每寒月见省官繿缕，辄遗以襦衣，其好施如此。
现代文：在省裹，每当寒冬腊月，看见省官衣衫褴褛，就送棉衣给他们，他就是这样乐善好施的。
English: In the province, whenever the cold winter comes and he sees the provincial officials in rags, he gives them cotton coats. This is how he likes to give.

古文：子悦嗣。
现代文：他的儿子康悦继嗣。
English: His son, Kang Yue, became his successor.

古文：昌义之，历阳乌江人也。少有武干。
现代文：昌义之，壁盐：姐人。少年时就有强壮的身躯。
English: Chang Yizhi, Wall Salt: Sister. When he was a boy, he had a strong body.

古文：齐代随曹虎征伐，累有战功。
现代文：壹伐时他随萱虚征伐，屡屡立有战功。
English: At the time of the First Expedition, he accompanied the invaders and repeatedly achieved military exploits.

古文：虎为雍州，以义之补防阁，出为冯翊戍主。
现代文：曹虎在堑出任官时，让盏之补任防合，出任为冯翊戍主。
English: When Cao Hu took up his post as an official in Zhai, he asked Zhan to fill the post of defense and defense, and took up the post as the head of Feng Zhai.

古文：及虎代还，义之留事高祖。时天下方乱，高祖亦厚遇之。
现代文：到萱虚被换回时，盏之便留下来为直趄服务。当时天下正乱，高祖待义之很好。
English: When Gao Hui was replaced, Zhan Zhi stayed behind to serve for Zhi Yao. At that time, the world was in turmoil, and Gao Zu was very happy to wait for justice.

古文：义师起，板为辅国将军、军主，除建安王中兵参军。
现代文：义师起来后，羞之被授予辅国将军、军主，任建安王的中兵参军。
English: After the righteous teachers rose up, Shizhi was awarded the auxiliary general and commander of the army, and the middle soldiers of King Jian'an were appointed to join the army.

古文：时竟陵芊口有邸阁，高祖遣驱，每战必捷。
现代文：当时童堕登的芏旦有屯积军粮的仓库，产坦派他去作战，每次都能获胜。
English: At that time, Tong Kuidong's Shantang had a warehouse full of military rations. Shantang sent him to fight, and he won every time.

古文：大军次新林，随王茂于新亭，并硃雀航力战，斩获尤多。
现代文：起义大军驻在塞眯时，昌义之随王茎在堑皇及苤雀筮奋力作战，斩杀缴获了很多。
English: When the insurgent army was stationed in Sai Ye, Chang Yi followed Wang Zuo and fought hard against Emperor Zhaozong and Emperor Gaozong, killing and capturing many.

古文：建康城平，以为直阁将军、马右夹毂主。
现代文：建康城被平定后，高祖任命昌义之为直合将军、马右夹毂主。
English: After Jiankang City was subdued, Gaozu appointed Chang Yixing as the general of Zhaohai and the leader of Ma Yizhe.

古文：天监元年，封永豊县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：天监元年。盏主被封为丞丰悬堡爵，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Tenkyo era, the owner of the teahouse was given the title of "Jo-Fung-Kinpaku-Kaku-Kaku" (丞丰悬堡爵) and served 500 households.

古文：除骁骑将军。
现代文：任骁骑将军。
English: Appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：出为盱眙太守。
现代文：出任贬脸塑太守。
English: He assumed the position of the disgraced crown prince.

古文：二年，迁假节、督北徐州诸军事、辅国将军、北徐州刺史，镇钟离。
现代文：二年，迁任假节、督北徐蛆诸军事、辅国将军、壬逮州刺史，镇守钟离。
English: In the second year, the relocation of the holiday, the governor of the north, Xu Xi, to the military, the general of the auxiliary state, the governor of the province, and the town guard were separated.

古文：魏寇州境，义之击破之。
现代文：魏军侵犯韭途，被旦盏之率兵击败。
English: The Wei army invaded Shifu and was defeated by the soldiers led by Dan Zhai.

古文：三年，进号冠军将军，增封二百户。
现代文：三年，昌盏之进封号为冠军将军，增加食邑二百户。
English: Three years later, Changzhan was awarded the title of Champion General, and the number of restaurants increased by 200 households.

古文：四年，大举北伐，扬州刺史临川王督众军军洛口，义之以州兵受节度，为前军，攻魏梁城戍，克之。
现代文：四年，銮曲大规模地北伐，扬州刺史临川王统率各路大军驻在弛，盏之带领州兵接受节度，担任前军，进攻魏国的梁城戍所，并攻克了戍所。
English: In the fourth year, the Northern Expedition was carried out on a large scale in Zhenqu. Yangzhou's prefect, Linchuan Wang Tong, led a large army from all directions to stay in Zhao. Zhan led the National Guard to accept the festival, served as the vanguard, attacked Liangcheng's camp in Wei, and conquered the camp.

古文：五年，高祖以征役久，有诏班师，众军各退散，魏中山王元英乘势追蹑，攻没马头，城内粮储，魏悉移之归北。
现代文：五年，直担感到军兵征役时间太长久，就命令军队班师回朝，众军各自退散，魏国中山王丞垄乘势跟踪追击，攻陷了马头城，城裹储备的粮食，苏军全都移运到了北方。
English: In the fifth year, Zhitang felt that the military conscription time was too long, so he ordered the army division to return to the North, the troops retreated separately, Wei Zhongshan Wang Rong took advantage of the situation to follow and pursue, captured Ma Tou City, the city wrapped up the reserve grain, and the Soviet army all moved to the north.

古文：议者咸曰： 魏运米北归，当无复南向。 
现代文：议论者都说： 垫军把米运回北方，应该是不会再向南侵犯了吧。 
English: Commentators all say: If the advance troops transport the rice back to the north, they probably won't invade the south again.

古文：高祖曰： 不然，此必进兵，非其实也。 
现代文：产担说： 不对，逭一定是要进兵，目前的情形不是事情的真相。 
English: The production supervisor said, "No, he must be going to the army. The current situation is not the truth of the matter."

古文：乃遣土匠修堑营钟离城，敕义之为战守之备。
现代文：于是派遣土木工匠修筑营建钟盘塑，命令旦盏之作好战守的准备。
English: So he dispatched civil engineers to build a bell tower and ordered Dantalion to prepare for war.

古文：是冬，英果率其安乐王元道明、平东将军杨大眼等众数十万，来寇钟离。
现代文：这年冬天，丞基果然率领塞銮王五划且、平东将军杨左腿等数十万大军，向南进犯钟离。
English: In the winter of that year, Joseki led hundreds of thousands of troops, including King Sejong's Five Armies and General Yang Zuoling of the Pingdong Army, to invade Zhongli in the south.

古文：钟离城北阻淮水，魏人于邵阳洲西岸作浮桥，跨淮通道。
现代文：钟离城北边被翅水阻隔，魏军在迎堡巡西岸架起浮桥，横跨淮河，作为通道。
English: The bell was separated from the north side of the city by the water. The Wei army erected a pontoon bridge on the west bank of the Yingbao patrol, across the Huai River, as a channel.

古文：英据东岸，大眼据西岸，以攻城。
现代文：元英占据束岸，杨大眼占据西岸，夹攻锤离城。
English: Yuan Ying occupied Sokang, Yang Dajian occupied the west coast, and seized the hammer and left the city.

古文：时城中众才三千人，义之督帅，随方抗御。
现代文：当时城裹祇有三千人，昌义之统率他们随时进行抵抗。
English: At that time, there were only three thousand people in the city, and they resisted at any time under the leadership of Chang Yi.

古文：魏军乃以车载土填堑，使其众负土随之，严骑自后蹙焉。人有未及回者，因以土迮之，俄而堑满。
现代文：魏军于是用车装土来填堑壕，让魏军士兵们背着土跟随其后，军官骑马在后面催促着他们，有的人还未来得及回来，泥土紧跟着压上他们，很快，堑壕就被填满了。
English: The Wei army then started to fill the trenches with truckloads of soil, letting the Wei soldiers follow behind with the soil on their backs, the officers on horseback urged them behind, and some people did not have time to come back, the soil followed them, and soon the trenches were filled.

古文：英与大眼躬自督战，昼夜苦攻，分番相代，坠而复升，莫有退者。
现代文：元英与杨大眼亲自督战，昼夜苦攻，轮番上阵，掉下来就又爬上去，没有一个后退的。
English: Yuan Ying and Yang Dajian personally supervised the battle, fought hard day and night, took turns to fight, fell down and climbed up again, and no one retreated.

古文：又设飞楼及冲车撞之，所值城土辄颓落。
现代文：他们又架设飞楼和冲车冲撞城墙，所撞之处，城墙上的土就往下塌落。
English: They also set up a flying tower and a car to crash into the city wall, and where they hit, the earth on the city wall fell down.

古文：义之乃以泥补缺，冲车虽入而不能坏。
现代文：昌义之就用泥补上缺口，冲车即使撞进了城墙，也不能把城墙破坏。
English: Chang Yizhi used mud to fill the gap. Even if the car crashed into the city wall, it could not destroy the city wall.

古文：义之善射，其被攻危急之处，辄驰往救之，每弯弓所向，莫不应弦而倒。
现代文：昌义之还善于射箭，城裹有被攻打得危急的地方，义之就急驰而去救援，每次他弯弓搭箭，所向披靡，没有不应弦而倒的。
English: Chang Yizhi was also good at archery. When the city was in a critical situation, he would rush to the rescue. Every time he bent his bow and shot an arrow, he was invincible. No one could resist him.

古文：一日战数十合，前后杀伤者万计，魏军死者与城平。
现代文：一天交战数十回合，前后死伤人员数以万计，魏军战死的士兵与城墙一样高。
English: Dozens of combat rounds a day, tens of thousands of casualties before and after, the dead soldiers of the Wei army are as high as the city wall.

古文：六年四月，高祖遣曹景宗、韦睿帅众二十万救焉，既至，与魏战，大破之，英、大眼等各脱身奔走。
现代文：六年四月，高祖派曹景宗、韦教率领二十万大军前来救援，到了钟离，与魏军交战，大败魏军，五茎、挝去盟等各自脱身逃走。
English: In April of the sixth year, Gao Zu sent Cao Jingzong and Wei Jiao to lead a 200,000-strong army to come to the rescue. When they arrived at Zhongli, they fought with the Wei army, defeated the Wei army, and the Five Stems and Laotian allies escaped and fled.

古文：义之因率轻兵追至洛口而还。斩首俘生，不可胜计。
现代文：旦羞之率领轻骑兵一直追到洛口才返回，这次战役，杀死和活捉的魏军，不可胜数。
English: Dan Shizhi led the light cavalry and chased Luo Jucai all the way back to Luo Jucai. In this battle, the number of Wei troops killed and captured alive was countless.

古文：以功进号军师将军，增封二百户，迁持节、督青、冀二州诸军事、征虏将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：旦盏之因功进封号为军师将军，增加食邑二百户，迁任持节、督青冀二州诸军事、征虏将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: Danzhalizhi was awarded the title of General of the Military Division for his merits, the number of food villages increased by two hundred, and he was transferred to hold festivals, govern the military of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, recruit generals, and write history of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：未拜，改督南兗、兗、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、辅国将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：还未正式拜官，又改任督南兖兖徐青冀五州诸军事、辅国将军、南兖州刺史。
English: He was not yet an official worshiper, but he was appointed as the military governor of the five states of Nanxun, Xuqing and Hebei, the general of the auxiliary state, and the historian of Nanxun.

古文：坐禁物出籓，为有司所奏免。
现代文：因犯禁物出管辖范围之罪，被有关官员奏本，免官。
English: For the crime of taking prohibited items outside the jurisdiction, he was reported by the relevant officials and dismissed.

古文：其年，补硃衣直阁，除左骁骑将军，直阁如故。
现代文：同年，义之补任朱衣直合，被授予左骁骑将军，仍旧担任直合。
English: In the same year, Yoshiyuki's replacement, Zhu Yi Zhi He, was awarded the title of General of the Left Division of Cavalry, and still served as Zhi He.

古文：迁太子右卫率，领越骑校尉，假节。
现代文：后迁任太子右卫率，兼任越骑校尉，假节。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of the prince's right guard, concurrently serving as the Yue cavalry lieutenant, and then the false section.

古文：八年，出为持节、督湘州诸军事、征远将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：八年，昌义之出任持节、督翅业诸军事、征远将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the eighth year, Chang Yizhi was appointed as the military, the general of the expedition, and the history of Hunan Province.

古文：九年，以本号还朝，俄为司空临川王司马，将军如故。
现代文：九年，以原来的封号回朝，不久任司空临川王司马，将军之职如故。
English: Nine years later, he returned to the imperial court with his original title, and was soon appointed as the second-in-command of the air force, Wang Sima of Linchuan. His position as a general remained unchanged.

古文：十年，迁右卫将军。
现代文：十年，迁任右卫将军。
English: Ten years later, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：十三年，徙为左卫将军。
现代文：十三年，改任左卫将军。
English: Thirteen years later, he was reassigned to the post of General of the Left Division.

古文：是冬，高祖遣太子右卫率康绚督众军作荆山堰。
现代文：遣年冬季，高祖派太子右卫率康绚监督大军修筑荆山堰。
English: In the winter of the Year of the Dragon, Gao Zu sent Prince Uwei and Kang Hua to supervise the construction of the Jingshan Weir.

古文：明年，魏遣将李昙定大众逼荆山，扬声欲决堰，诏假义之节，帅太仆卿鱼弘文、直阁将军曹世宗、徐元和等救绚，军未至，绚等已破魏军。
现代文：第二年，稳压派遣奎垦宣统率大军进逼型山，扬言要决开大堰，皇帝命令义之假节，统率太仆卿鱼弘文、直合将军曹世宗、徐元曲等去救援尘面，大军还未到，尘绚等已打败魏军。
English: In the second year, the stable pressure sent Qui Xuan to lead the army into the mountain, threatening to break through the weir. The emperor ordered the false festival of righteousness, and led the great servant Yu Hongwen, the general Cao Shizong, and Xu Yuanqu, etc. to rescue the dust. The army had not yet arrived, and the dust had defeated the Wei army.

古文：魏又遣大将李平攻峡石，围直阁将军赵祖悦，义之又率硃衣直阁王神念等救之。
现代文：翘军又派大将奎垩进攻!蚯，包围直合将军赵祖悦，昌义之又率领朱衣直合王神念等去救助。
English: The retreating army also sent General Kui to attack!, encircled General Zhao Zuyue, and Chang Yizhi led Zhu Yi Zhihe Wang Shinni to rescue.

古文：时魏兵盛，神念攻峡石浮桥不能克，故援兵不得时进，遂陷峡石。
现代文：当时，魏兵士气正盛，王神念进攻峡石的浮桥没能成功，所以援兵不能立刻进来，于是峡石被陷。
English: At that time, the Wei soldiers were in high spirits, and Wang Shennian's attack on the pontoon bridge of the canyon stone did not succeed, so the reinforcements could not come in immediately, so the canyon stone was trapped.

古文：义之班师，为有司所奏，高祖以其功臣，不问也。
现代文：昌义之班师回朝，被有关官员奏本，高祖认为他是功臣，就不问他的过失。
English: When the team leader of Changyi returned to the imperial court, he was given a report by the relevant officials. Gaozu considered him to be a meritorious subject, and did not ask about his faults.

古文：十五年，复以为使持节、都督湘州诸军事、信威将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：十五年，昌义之又被任命为使持节、都督湘蛆诸军事、信威将军、渔业刺史。
English: In the fifteenth year, Chang Yizhi was also appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Hunan Province, the general of the credibility, and the fishery history.

古文：其年，改授都督北徐州缘淮诸军事、平北将军、北徐州刺史。
现代文：同年，改任都督北徐州缘进诸军事、平北将军、北徐州刺史。
English: In the same year, he was reappointed as the governor of North Xuzhou Province and promoted to the military, the general of North Pyongan Province, and the governor of North Xuzhou Province.

古文：义之性宽厚，为将能抚御，得人死力，及居籓任，吏民安之。
现代文：昌义之生性宽厚，任将军而能够抚慰人心、统御有方，所以能够得到部下拼死力相报效，他在藩邦任官时，部下和百姓都很安定。
English: Changyi was born with a generous nature. As a general, he was able to soothe people's hearts and govern well, so he was able to get his subordinates to work hard. When he served as an official in the state, his subordinates and the people were very stable.

古文：俄给鼓吹一部，改封营道县侯，邑户如先。
现代文：不久，皇帝送给他鼓吹一部，改封为营道县侯爵，食邑户数同前。
English: Not long after, the emperor gave him a piece of land and changed his title to Marquis of Yingdao County, with the same number of households.

古文：普通三年，征为护军将军，鼓吹如故。
现代文：萱逼三年，旦盏之被召任护军将军，鼓吹如旧。
English: At the end of three years, Tang Jizhi was called to serve as a general to protect the army, and continued to preach as before.

古文：四年十月，卒。
现代文：四年十月去世。
English: He died in October of the same year.

古文：高祖深痛惜之，诏曰： 护军将军、营道县开国侯昌义之，干略沉济，志怀宽隐，诚著运始，效彰边服。
现代文：高祖为他的死深感痛惜，在诏书上写道： 护军将军、营道县开国侯昌义之，办事稳重，谋略有成，胸怀宽阔威重，忠诚卓著于国运开始的时候，效力边境并取得成绩。
English: Gaozu deeply regretted his death, and wrote in the imperial edict: "Chang Yi, the general of the escorting army and the founder of Yingdao County, was steady in his work, successful in his strategy, broad-minded and dignified. His loyalty was outstanding at the beginning of the National Games, and he was effective on the border and achieved results.

古文：方申爪牙，寄以禁旅；奄至殒丧，恻怆于怀。
现代文：才宣布为国之重臣，就派他统领禁卫军。他的突然去世，让人不胜悲哀。
English: He was only declared the chief minister of the country when he was sent to command the imperial guard. His sudden death is very sad.

古文：可赠散骑常侍、车骑将军，并鼓吹一部。
现代文：可追赠他为散骑常侍、车骑将军，并送鼓吹一部。
English: He can be posthumously presented as a strolling equestrian, a chariot-riding general, and a drum set.

古文：给东园秘器，朝服一具。
现代文：给束园秘器，朝服一套。
English: He gave her a secret gardening tool and a set of morning clothes.

古文：赙钱二万，布二百匹，蜡二百斤。
现代文：送钱二万，布二百匹，蜡二百斤。
English: Twenty thousand in money, two hundred in cloth, two hundred in wax.

古文：谥曰烈。 
现代文：谧号烈。 
English: 号烈.

古文：子宝业嗣，官至直阁将军、谯州刺史。
现代文：昌义之的儿子昌实业继嗣，官作到直合将军、谯州刺史。
English: The son of Chang Yizhi, he was the successor of Chang Jianye. He rose to the rank of Zhaohai general and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：张惠绍、冯道根、康绚、昌义之，初起从上，其功则轻。
现代文：南塑睫吏部尚书她塞说：亟塞翅、周龃、尘面、昌义之，刚开始跟从皇上时，功劳还很轻微。
English: Nanpu eyelash librarian Shang Shuxu said to her: "As a wing, a beak, a face, and a merit, when I first followed the emperor, the merit was still very slight.

古文：及群盗焚门，而惠绍以力战显；合肥、邵阳之逼，而道根、义之功多；浮山之役起，而康绚典其事：互有厥劳，宠进宜矣。
现代文：到群盗焚烧城门时，张惠绍因奋力作战而功显；合胆、旦旷两城被围逼时，迈道根、昌义之的功劳最多；灿之役兴起时，是鏖绚主管其事：他们各有各的功劳，所以受到宠信，而加官进爵也是理所应当的了。
English: When the bandits set fire to the city gate, Zhang Huishao distinguished himself by fighting hard; when the two cities were besieged and besieged, Maidogen and Changyi did most of the work; when the war broke out, it was Zou Hua who was in charge of it. They each had their own merits, so they were favored, and it was right that they were promoted to the peerage.

古文：先是镇星守天江而堰兴，及退舍而堰决，非徒人事，有天道矣。
现代文：在此之前，土星守住天江星时，大堰兴建起来，土星移动位置后，大堰就决堤，这不仅是人事问题，而是有天道的旨意吧。
English: Prior to this, when Saturn guarded the Celestial River, the great weir was built, and after Saturn moved its position, the great weir broke the dike. This is not only a personnel issue, but it is the will of Heaven.

