古文：儒者称五帝、三王致天下太平，汉兴已来，未有太平。
现代文：俗儒说五帝、三王时期招致了天下太平，汉代兴建以来，没有出现太平。
English: Confucianism says that the Five Emperors and Three Kings period brought peace to the world, but since the Han Dynasty, there has been no peace.

古文：彼谓五帝、三王致太平，汉未有太平者，见五帝、三王圣人也，圣人之德能致太平；谓汉不太平者，汉无圣帝也，贤者之化，不能太平。
现代文：他们说五帝、三王时期招致了天下太平汉代没有出现太平，是由于见五帝、三王是圣人，圣人的功德，可以招致天下太平的缘故；说汉代不太平，是由于汉代没有圣帝，贤人的教化，是不能招致天下太平的缘故。
English: They said that the Five Emperors and Three Kings period brought about world peace. The reason why there was no peace in the Han Dynasty was because the Five Emperors and Three Kings were saints, and the merits of saints could bring about world peace. The reason why the Han Dynasty was not peaceful was because there was no holy emperor in the Han Dynasty, and the enlightenment of wise men could not bring about world peace.

古文：又见孔子言 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫 ！
现代文：又见孔子说过 凤鸟不飞来了，黄河中也没有图出现，我这一生可能是完了 。
English: I also saw that Confucius said, "If the phoenix bird does not fly, and no map appears in the Yellow River, my life may be over."

古文：方今无凤鸟、河图，瑞颇未至悉具，故谓未太平。
现代文：当今没有凤鸟、河图，祥瑞略欠齐备，所以说汉代不太平。
English: Today, there are no phoenix birds and river maps, and Xiang Rui is slightly lacking, so it is said that the Han Dynasty was not peaceful.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这种说法太荒谬了。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：夫太平以治定为效，百姓以安乐为符。
现代文：天下太平是以社会安定作为吉祥的征兆的，老百姓是以安居乐业作为吉祥的征兆的。
English: The peaceful world is characterized by social stability as an auspicious sign, and the common people are characterized by a peaceful life as an auspicious sign.

古文：孔子曰： 修己以安百姓，尧、舜其犹病诸！ 
现代文：孔子说： 修养自身以使老百姓安居乐业，就是尧、舜大概也还难于完全做到这一点吧！ 
English: Confucius said: Cultivating oneself so that the common people can live and work in peace and contentment is even more difficult to accomplish completely.

古文：百姓安者，太平之验也。
现代文：老百姓安居乐业，是天下太平的证明。
English: The fact that ordinary people can live and work in peace is proof that the world is at peace.

古文：夫治人以人为主，百姓安而阴阳和，阴阳和则万物育，万物育则奇瑞出。
现代文：治理人，就应该以人为主。老百姓安居乐业就阴阳之气和谐；阴阳之气和谐就万物滋生；万物滋生就有奇瑞出现。
English: If the common people can live and work in peace, the yin and yang will be in harmony; if the yin and yang are in harmony, all things will be in harmony; if all things are in harmony, miracles will occur.

古文：视今天下，安乎？
现代文：看看当今的天下，老百姓是安居乐业呢？
English: Look at today's world, how do people live a happy life?

古文：危乎？
现代文：还是岌岌可危呢？
English: Or is it precarious?

古文：安则平矣，瑞虽未具，无害於平。
现代文：既然老百姓安居乐业，那么天下就是太平的了，祥瑞即使不齐备，并不妨害它称为太平盛世。
English: Since the common people live and work in peace, the world is peaceful. Even if Xiang Rui is not complete, it does not prevent it from being called a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：故夫王道定事以验，立实以效，效验不彰，实诚不见。
现代文：所以先王之道用祥瑞作为判断天下太平的根据，如果祥瑞不显著，那就是天下太平的事实还没有出现。
English: Therefore, the Ancestor's Way uses auspiciousness as the basis for judging world peace. If auspiciousness is not significant, then the fact of world peace has not yet appeared.

古文：时或实然，证验不具。是故王道立事以实，不必具验。圣主治世，期於平安，不须符瑞。
现代文：但是有时也许天下确实太平了，然而祥瑞未必齐备，所以先王之道又是用事实来作为判断天下太平的根据的，不一定要求祥瑞齐备。圣主治理天下，盼望天下太平，百姓安乐，并不期待符瑞的出现。
English: However, sometimes the world may indeed be at peace, but peace is not necessarily ready, so the way of the ancients is to use facts as the basis for judging the peace of the world, and does not necessarily require peace to be ready. The Lord governs the world, hoping for peace and people's happiness, and does not expect peace to appear.

古文：且夫太平之瑞，犹圣之相也。
现代文：象征太平的祥瑞，好比是圣王的骨相。
English: Xiang Rui, a symbol of peace, is like the skeleton of a holy king.

古文：圣王骨法未必同，太平之瑞何为当等？
现代文：圣王的骨相特征未必都相同，象征太平的祥瑞为什么就应当相同呢？
English: The bone characteristics of holy kings are not necessarily the same, so why should those of Xiang Rui, a symbol of peace, be the same?

古文：彼闻尧、舜之时，凤皇、景星皆见，河图、洛书皆出，以为後王治天下，当复若等之物，乃为太平。
现代文：他们听说尧、舜的时候，凤凰、景星都出现，河图、洛书也都出现，就认为以后的帝王大治天下时，也应当出现这一类祥瑞之物，才能称为天下太平。
English: They heard that phoenixes and constellations appeared when there was thunder and lightning, and river maps and maps of Luo Province also appeared. They thought that when emperors ruled the world in the future, this kind of auspicious thing should also appear, so that the world could be called peaceful.

古文：用心若此，犹谓尧当复比齿，舜当复八眉也。
现代文：依照这种想法，好比说尧应当像帝喾那样长出比齿，舜也应当像尧那样眉毛有八种颜色。
English: According to this idea, for example, the dragonfly should grow teeth like the imperial dragonfly, and the dragonfly should have eight colors of eyebrows like the dragonfly.

古文：夫帝王圣相，前後不同，则得瑞古今不等。
现代文：帝王的圣相前后不相同，那么他们遇到的祥瑞古代和现代就不会一样。
English: The sacred appearance of emperors is different before and after, so the Xiangrui they encountered in ancient and modern times would not be the same.

古文：而今王无凤鸟、河图，未太平，妄矣。
现代文：如果当今的帝王由于没有凤鸟、河图一类的祥瑞，便认为天下还没有太平，这就错了。
English: If today's emperors think that the world is not peaceful because there are no auspicious signs such as phoenixes and river maps, they are wrong.

古文：孔子言凤皇、《河图》者，假前瑞以为语也，未必谓世当复有凤皇与河图也。
现代文：孔子说到凤凰、河图这类东西，是要借用从前出现过的祥瑞来阐述自己观点的缘故，不一定是说世上应当再有凤凰与河图出现。
English: When Confucius talked about things like the phoenix and the river map, it was because he wanted to borrow the auspiciousness that had appeared before to explain his point of view. It does not necessarily mean that there should be another phoenix and river map in the world.

古文：夫帝王之瑞，众多非一，或以凤鸟、麒麟，或以河图、洛书，或以甘露、醴泉，或以阴阳和调，或以百姓乂安。
现代文：帝王遇到的祥瑞，多种多样并非一种，或许是凤鸟、麒驎，或许是河图、洛书，或许是甘露、醴泉，或许是阴阳之气调和，或许是老百姓安居乐业。
English: The auspiciousness encountered by the emperor is not one kind of variety, perhaps it is the phoenix bird, the dragonfly, perhaps it is the river map, the Luo book, perhaps it is the nectar, the spring, perhaps it is the harmony of the yin and yang, perhaps it is the common people living in peace and happiness.

古文：今瑞未必同於古，古应未必合於今，遭以所得，未必相袭。
现代文：现在的祥瑞未必与古代的相同，古代的祥瑞未必与现在的相合，偶然遇上什么祥瑞就是什么祥瑞，不一定古今相沿袭。
English: The present Xiang Rui may not be the same as the ancient one, the ancient Xiang Rui may not coincide with the present one, what Xiang Rui encounters by chance is what Xiang Rui is, it may not necessarily follow the ancient and modern phases.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：以帝王兴起，命不同也。
现代文：用帝王兴起时，遇到的祥瑞不同就可以证明。
English: With the rise of the emperor, the differences in happiness encountered can be proved.

古文：周则乌、鱼，汉斩大蛇。
现代文：周武王遇到的是赤乌、白鱼，汉高祖是斩了大白蛇。
English: What King Zhou Wu encountered was red wormwood and white fish, while the founder of the Han Dynasty cut off the great white snake.

古文：推论唐、虞，犹周、汉也。初兴始起，事效物气，无相袭者。
现代文：推论唐尧、虞舜时的祥瑞，也应当如同周代和汉代的祥瑞不相沿袭一样。
English: Inferring the auspiciousness of the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty should also be the same as the auspiciousness of the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty.

古文：太平瑞应，何故当钧？以已至之瑞，效方来之应，犹守株待兔之蹊，藏身破置之路也。
现代文：帝王刚刚兴起的时候，具体遇到的祥瑞，没有互相沿袭相同的，象征天下太平的祥瑞，为什么应当相同呢？用已经出现过的祥瑞作为标准，去硬套将来会出现的祥瑞，就好比是采用守株待兔和藏身破置的办法一样可笑。
English: When emperors were just emerging, the specific auspicious signs they encountered did not follow the same pattern as each other. Why should the auspicious signs that symbolize world peace be the same? Using the auspicious signs that have already appeared as a standard, and trying to anticipate the auspicious signs that will appear in the future, is just as ridiculous as using the methods of waiting and hiding.

古文：天下太平，瑞应各异，犹家人富殖，物不同也。
现代文：天下太平，出现的祥瑞各不相同，如同老面姓发财致富，收藏的财物不相同。
English: The world is at peace, the auspiciousness that appears is different, just as the old man's surname is rich, the collection of property is different.

古文：或积米谷，或藏布帛，或畜牛马，或长田宅。
现代文：有的积蓄米谷，有的收藏布帛，有的畜养牛马，有的添置田宅。
English: Some are accumulating rice, some are collecting cloth, some are raising cattle and horses, and some are buying farmhouses.

古文：夫乐米谷不爱布帛，欢牛马不美田宅，则谓米谷愈布帛，牛马胜田宅矣。
现代文：喜欢米谷的不喜欢布帛，喜欢牛马的不羡慕田宅，就说米谷胜过布帛，牛马胜过田宅了。
English: If you like yakitori but don't like bukuro, if you like oxen and horses but don't envy rice fields, then yakitori is better than bukuro, and oxen and horses are better than rice fields.

古文：今百姓安矣，符瑞至矣，终谓古瑞河图、凤皇不至，谓之未安，是犹食稻之人入饭稷之乡，不见稻米，谓稷为非谷也。
现代文：当今老百姓安乐了，符瑞也出现了，竟然说古代的祥瑞河图与凤凰没有到来，认为天下还不太平，这好比吃稻米的人进入吃稷类的地方，没有看见稻米，就认为稷不属于谷类一样。
English: Today's common people are at ease, and prosperity has also appeared. They even say that the ancient Xiangrui River map and the phoenix have not arrived, and think that the world is not peaceful. This is like a rice eater entering a place where they eat bran, and not seeing rice, they think that bran does not belong to cereals.

古文：实者，天下已太平矣，未有圣人，何以致之，未见凤皇，何以效实？
现代文：实际上，天下已经太平了。有人说： 没有圣人，怎么能使天下太平呢？没有见到凤凰，怎么能证明天下太平是事实呢？ 
English: In fact, the world is already peaceful. Some people say: Without a saint, how can we make the world peaceful? Without seeing the phoenix, how can we prove that world peace is a fact?

古文：问世儒不知圣，何以知今无圣人也？
现代文：质问俗儒并不能识别圣人，凭什么知道当今没有圣人呢？
English: Confucianism does not recognize saints, so how can we know that there are no saints today?

古文：世人见凤皇，何以知之？
现代文：一般人见到了凤凰，又怎么能识别它呢？
English: When ordinary people see a phoenix, how can they recognize it?

古文：既无以知之，何以知今无凤皇也？
现代文：既然不能识别它，凭什么知道当今没有凤凰呢？
English: Since we cannot identify it, how can we know that there is no phoenix today?

古文：委不能知有圣与无，又不能别凤皇是凤与非，则必不能定今太平与未平也。
现代文：确实不能识别有没有圣人，又不能识别凤凰是不是凤凰，那么必然不能确定当今天下是太平还是不太平。
English: Indeed, it is not possible to identify whether there is a saint, and it is not possible to identify whether the phoenix is a phoenix, so it is inevitable that it is not possible to determine whether it is peaceful or not.

古文：孔子曰： 如有王者，必世然後仁。 三十年而天下平。
现代文：孔子说： 如果有圣人兴起统治天下，必须经过三十年才能实现仁政。 
English: Confucius said: If a sage arose to rule the world, it would take thirty years to realize benevolent government.

古文：汉兴，至文帝时二十余年，贾谊创议以为天下洽和，当改正朔、服色、制度，定官名，兴礼乐。
现代文：经过三十年天下就可以太平了。汉朝兴起，到汉文帝时已经二十多年了，贾谊首先建议，修改正月初一的日子，改变服色，改变各种制度，确定官职名称，兴办礼乐仪式。
English: After thirty years, the world can be at peace. When the Han Dynasty arose, it had been more than twenty years by the time of Emperor Hanwen, Jia Yi first suggested that the day of the first day of the first month should be revised, the dress color should be changed, various systems should be changed, the names of official positions should be determined, and the ritual music should be held.

古文：文帝初即位，谦让未遑。
现代文：汉文帝刚登上帝位，谦让说还来不及顾到这些改革。
English: Emperor Hanwen had just ascended to the throne, and it was too late to take these reforms into account.

古文：夫如贾生之议，文帝时已太平矣。
现代文：按照贾谊的建议，汉文帝时天下就已经太平了。
English: According to Jia Yi's suggestion, the world was already peaceful at the time of Emperor Hanwen.

古文：汉兴二十余年，应孔子之言 必世然後仁 也。
现代文：汉朝兴建二十多年，应验了孔子 必须经过三十年才能实现仁政 的话。
English: The Han Dynasty took more than 20 years to build, fulfilling the words of Confucius that it would take 30 years to achieve benevolent government.

古文：汉一之年数已满，太平立矣，贾生知之。
现代文：汉朝三十年的年数已经满了，太平已经成功，贾谊明白这一点。
English: The thirty years of the Han Dynasty have been completed, the Taiping has been successful, and Jia Yi understands this.

古文：况至今且三百年，谓未太平，误也。
现代文：何况至今已将近三百年了，说天下还不太平，这就错了。
English: Moreover, it has been nearly three hundred years since then. It is wrong to say that the world is not at peace.

古文：且孔子所谓一世，三十年也；汉家三百岁，十帝耀德，未平，如何？
现代文：况且孔子所说的一世，是三十年。汉家天下已经历了三百年，十位皇帝功德显耀，说天下还没有太平怎么行呢？
English: Moreover, Confucius said that the first life is thirty years. The Han dynasty has already experienced three hundred years, and ten emperors have shown great merits. How can it be said that there is no peace in the world?

古文：夫文帝之时，固已平矣，历世平矣。
现代文：汉文帝的时候，本来天下已经太平了，历代都达到了太平。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwen, the world was already peaceful, and all previous generations have achieved peace.

古文：至平帝时，前汉已灭，光武中兴，复致太平。
现代文：到了汉平帝时，前汉已经灭亡，光武皇帝复兴了汉朝，再次导致了天下太平。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanping, the former Han Dynasty had already perished, and Emperor Guangwu revived the Han Dynasty, once again leading to world peace.

古文：问曰： 文帝有瑞，可名太平，光武无瑞，谓之太平，如何？ 
现代文：有人问： 汉文帝时有祥瑞出现，可以称为天下太平，光武皇帝时没有祥瑞出现，称之为天下太平，怎么行呢？ 
English: Someone asked: When Emperor Hanwen had Xiang Rui appear, it could be called world peace. When Emperor Guangwu did not have Xiang Rui appear, it could be called world peace. How is that possible?

古文：曰：夫帝王瑞应，前後不同。虽无物瑞，百姓宁集，风气调和，是亦瑞也。
现代文：回答说：帝王的祥瑞，前后出现的不相同，虽然没有具体的事物表现祥瑞，但是老百姓安定，风调雨顺，这些也都是祥瑞。
English: He replied, "The auspiciousness of emperors varies from time to time. Although there are no specific things that show auspiciousness, the stability of the people, the good weather, these are also auspicious.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：帝王治平，升封太山，告安也。
现代文：帝王治理天下太平时，就要登上泰山封禅，这是向上天报告天下太平了。
English: When the emperor governs the world peace, it is necessary to ascend Mount Tai to seal the Zen, which is to report to heaven that the world is at peace.

古文：秦始皇升封太山，遭雷雨之变，治未平，气未和。
现代文：秦始皇登上泰山封禅，遇到了雷雨的灾变，是因为治理天下还没有太平，阴阳之气尚未调和。
English: Qin Shihuang ascended Mount Taishan, and encountered the disaster of a thunderstorm, because the governance of the world has not yet been peaceful, and the yin and yang have not yet been reconciled.

古文：光武皇帝升封，天晏然无云，太平之应也，治平气应。
现代文：光武皇帝登泰山封禅，天气晴朗万里无云，是天下太平的应验，天下太平了，和气就自然会同它应和。
English: Emperor Guangwu's ascension to Mount Tai for the Great Zen Festival, with the weather clear and cloudless, is the fulfillment of world peace. When the world is at peace, harmony will naturally come with it.

古文：光武之时，气和人安，物瑞等至，人气已验，论者犹疑。
现代文：光武皇帝的时候，阴阳之气调和老百姓安定，物瑞等待出现。 人安 、 气和 已经应验，然而论事的人却还不肯相信。
English: At the time of Emperor Guangwu, the yin and yang of the atmosphere and the people were stable, and things were waiting to appear.Human security, harmony and harmony have been fulfilled, but people who discuss the matter still refuse to believe.

古文：孝宣皇帝元康二年，凤皇集於太山，後又集於新平。
现代文：汉宣帝元康二年，凤凰停落在泰山上，后来又停落在新平这个地方。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yuan Kang of the Han Dynasty, the phoenix stopped on Mount Tai, and later it stopped at this place in Xinping.

古文：四年，神雀集於长乐宫，或集於上林，九真献麟。
现代文：元康四年，神雀停落在长乐宫，有时又停落在上林苑，同时九真郡进献了麒麟。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Kang, the divine sparrow stopped at the Changle Palace, and sometimes at the Shanglin Garden, while Jiuzhen County donated the unicorn.

古文：神雀二年，凤皇、甘露降集京师。
现代文：神爵二年，凤凰，甘露降落在京城长安。
English: In the second year of Jianzhe, the phoenix and the nectar landed in the capital Chang'an.

古文：四年，凤皇下杜陵及上林。
现代文：神爵四年，凤凰飞下杜陵县及上林苑。
English: In the fourth year of Jianzhe, the phoenix flew down to Duling County and Shanglin Court.

古文：五凤三年，帝祭南郊，神光并见，或兴谷，烛耀斋宫，十有余。
现代文：五凤三年，汉宣帝在南郊祭天，神光一齐出现，有时出现在山谷中，照耀斋宫达十余刻。
English: In the year of the five phoenixes, Emperor Han Xuan held a heavenly festival in the southern suburbs. The divine light appeared all at once, and sometimes appeared in the valley, shining on the palace for more than ten minutes.

古文：明年，祭後土，灵光复至，至如南郊之时；甘露、神雀降集延寿万岁宫。
现代文：第二年，汉宣帝祭祀土地神，灵光再次出现，灵光出现时的情形和在南郊祭天时一样。同时，甘露、神雀降落在延寿宫和万岁宫。
English: In the second year, Emperor Han Xuan offered a sacrifice to the earth god, and the spirit light appeared again, and the situation when the spirit light appeared was the same as when the southern suburb offered a sacrifice to the sky. At the same time, the nectar and the divine bird landed in the Palace of Long Life and the Palace of Long Life.

古文：其年三月，鸾凤集长乐宫东门中树上。
现代文：这年三月，鸾凤停落在长乐宫东门中的树上。
English: In March of this year, Zou Feng stopped on a tree in the middle of the east gate of Changle Palace.

古文：甘露元年，黄龙至，见於新丰，醴泉滂流。
现代文：甘露元年，黄龙来到，出现在新丰这个地方，同时，醴泉涌流不息。
English: In the first year of Kamloops, the Yellow Dragon came and appeared in this place in Xinfeng. At the same time, the gushing springs continued to flow.

古文：彼凤皇虽五六至，或时一鸟而数来，或时异鸟而各至。麒麟、神雀、黄龙、鸾鸟、甘露、醴泉，祭後土、天地之时，神光灵耀，可谓繁盛累积矣。
现代文：那些凤凰虽然来了五六次，或许是同一只凤凰来了几次，或许是不同的凤凰分别到来，麒麟、神雀、黄龙、鸾鸟、甘露、醴泉先后出现，祭祀土地神和天地的时候，神光显灵照耀，可以说是祥瑞繁盛层出不穷了。
English: Although those phoenixes came five or six times, perhaps the same phoenix came several times, perhaps different phoenixes arrived separately. Kirin, divine sparrow, yellow dragon, ostrich, nectar, and spring appeared successively. When worshipping the gods of the land and heaven and earth, the divine light manifested and shone. It can be said that auspicious prosperity emerged endlessly.

古文：孝明时虽无凤皇，亦致麟、甘露、醴泉、神雀、白雉、紫芝、嘉禾，金出鼎见，离木复合。
现代文：汉明帝时候，虽然没有出现凤凰，也招致了麒麟、甘露、醴泉、神雀、白雉、紫芝、嘉禾，黄金铜鼎出现，伸出去的树枝又长回到树干上。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Ming, although there was no phoenix, there were also unicorns, nectar, gourd springs, divine sparrows, egrets, purple grass, jiahe, gold and copper tripods, and the outstretched branches grew back to the trunk.

古文：五帝、三王，经传所载瑞应，莫盛孝明。
现代文：五帝、三王时代，经传上所记载的祥瑞，没有一个超过汉明帝的。
English: In the era of the Five Emperors and Three Kings, none of the auspicious events recorded in the scriptures surpassed that of Emperor Han Ming.

古文：如以瑞应效太平，宣、明之年倍五帝、三王也。
现代文：如果以祥瑞来判断天下是不是太平，那么汉宣帝、汉明帝时的瑞应已加倍胜过五帝、三王时代了。
English: If Xiang Rui is used to judge whether the world is peaceful, then the Rui of the Han Xuan and Han Ming dynasties should have been twice as good as that of the Five Emperors and Three Kings era.

古文：夫如是，孝宣、孝明可谓太平矣。
现代文：如果是这样，汉宣帝、汉明帝时可以称作天下太平了。
English: If so, the Han Xuan and Han Ming dynasties can be said to have brought peace to the world.

古文：能致太平者，圣人也，世儒何以谓世未有圣人？
现代文：能够招致天下太平的，是圣人，俗儒凭什么说当代没有圣人呢？
English: It is the saints who can bring about world peace. Why do the laymen say that there are no saints in our time?

古文：天之禀气，岂为前世者渥，後世者泊哉！
现代文：上天供给气，难道由于是前代的人就供给多些，是后代的人就供给少些吗？
English: If the heavens supply the air, is it because the previous generation provided more and the next generation will provide less?

古文：周有三圣，文王、武王、周公并时猥出。
现代文：周代有三位圣人，周文王、周武王和周公旦，同时纷纷出现。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, three saints, King Zhouwen, King Zhouwu and King Zhou Gongdan, appeared at the same time.

古文：汉亦一代也，何以当少於周？
现代文：汉朝也是一个朝代，凭什么圣人应当少于周代呢？
English: The Han Dynasty is also a dynasty. Why should there be fewer saints than the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：周之圣王，何以当多於汉？
现代文：周代的圣王，凭什么应当多于汉代呢？
English: Why should the holy kings of the Zhou Dynasty be more numerous than those of the Han Dynasty?

古文：汉之高祖、光武，周之文、武也。
现代文：汉代的汉高祖、光武帝，可与周代的文王、武王相比。
English: The Han dynasty's Han Gao ancestor, Emperor Guangwu, can be compared to the Zhou dynasty's King Wen and King Wu.

古文：文帝、武帝、宣帝、孝明、今上，过周之成、康、宣王。
现代文：汉文帝、汉武帝、汉宣帝、汉明帝以及当今皇上汉章帝，都超过了周代的周成王、周康王和周宣王。
English: Emperor Hanwen, Emperor Hanwu, Emperor Han Xuan, Emperor Hanming, as well as the current Emperor Han Zhang, all surpass the Zhou kings Zhou Cheng Wang, Zhou Kang Wang, and Zhou Xuan Wang.

古文：非以身生汉世，可褒增颂叹，以求媚称也；核事理之情，定说者之实也。
现代文：并不是因为自己生活在汉代，就随意夸大赞美汉代，以博得君王的宠幸、赞赏啊。是为了考察事理的真情，判断论说者的实际情况。
English: It is not because they lived in the Han Dynasty that they freely exaggerate and praise the Han Dynasty to win the favor and appreciation of the king. It is to investigate the truth of the matter and judge the actual situation of the speaker.

古文：俗好褒远称古，讲瑞上世为美，论治则古王为贤，睹奇於今，终不信然。
现代文：世俗喜好赞美称颂远古时代，说祥瑞就认为古代的为好，论治理天下就认为古代的帝王贤明，在当今见到卓绝的帝王，却始终不相信。
English: Secular preferences, praise and glorification of ancient times, saying that Xiang Rui thought that the ancient times were good, and that the ancient emperors were wise in terms of governing the world, but when they saw the outstanding emperors today, they still did not believe.

古文：使尧、舜更生，恐无圣名。
现代文：即使尧、舜再生，恐怕也不会获得圣人的美名。
English: Even if  and  are reborn, I'm afraid they won't get the reputation of a saint.

古文：猎者获禽，观者乐猎，不见渔者，心不顾也。
现代文：打猎的人猎获了禽兽，旁观的人就对打猎感兴趣，由于没有观看到捕鱼的人，观者的心理就不会向往这方面的事情。
English: When a hunter catches an animal, the onlookers are interested in hunting. Since they do not see the fisherman, the psychology of the onlookers will not yearn for this kind of thing.

古文：是故观於齐不虞鲁，游於楚不欢宋。
现代文：所以在齐国观光就不会喜欢鲁国，在楚国游览就不会喜欢宋国。
English: So if you visit Qi, you won't like Lu, and if you visit Chu, you won't like Song.

古文：唐、虞、夏、殷同载在二尺四寸，儒者读，朝夕讲习，不见汉书，谓汉劣不若，亦观猎不见渔，游齐、楚不愿宋、鲁也。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜、夏代、殷代的事情都记载在二尺四寸大的经书上，读书人认真钻研，早晚互相讨论学习，由于经书上看不到关于汉代历史的记载，就说汉代不行，比不上唐、虞、夏、殷几代。也就如观看打猎没有看见捕鱼，游览在齐国、楚国就不羡慕宋国、鲁国一样。
English: The events of the Tang, Yu, Xia and Yin dynasties are all recorded in the two-foot-four-inch-tall scriptures. Readers study them carefully and discuss and learn from each other in the morning and evening. Since there is no record of the history of the Han Dynasty in the scriptures, they say that the Han Dynasty is not good, it is not comparable to the Tang, Yu, Xia and Yin dynasties. It is like watching hunting without seeing fishing, and visiting Qi and Chu without envying Song and Lu.

古文：使汉有弘文之人，经传汉事，则《尚书》、《春秋》也，儒者宗之，学者习之，将袭旧六为七，今上、上王至高祖皆为圣帝矣。
现代文：假使汉代有擅长写文章的人，把汉代的历史写成经传，那就会和《尚书》、《春秋》一样受重视了。读书人尊崇它，做学问的人温习它，将会接续原来的六经而成为七经，从当今的皇帝往上推到汉高祖都成为圣王了。
English: If there were people in the Han Dynasty who were good at writing articles and wrote the history of the Han Dynasty as a biography, it would be as valued as "Shang Shu" and "Spring and Autumn." Readers would respect it, scholars would review it, and it would succeed the original Six Classics and become the Seven Classics. From today's emperors to the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, they would become holy kings.

古文：观杜抚、班固等所上《汉颂》，颂功德符瑞，汪濊深广，滂沛无量，逾唐、虞，入皇域。三代隘辟，厥深洿沮也。 殷监不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：看杜抚、班固等献上的歌颂汉代功德的辞赋，颂扬汉代的功德祥瑞，像汪洋一样又深又广，像急流一样永无止息，超过了唐、虞时代，进入了三皇时代的崇高境界，连夏、商、周三代也显得很浅陋，它们的深度只不过像低洼的泥塘罢了。 殷代的借鉴不必到很远的时代去寻找，就在夏代可以找到。 
English: Looking at the eulogies for the merits of the Han Dynasty offered by Dufu, Banggu and others, praising the merits and virtues of the Han Dynasty, it is as deep and wide as the vast ocean, and as endless as the rapids. It has surpassed the Tang and Yu Dynasties, and entered the lofty realm of the Three Kingdoms era. Even the Xia, Shang and Wednesday Dynasties are very shallow, and their depth is just like a low-lying mud pond. The reference of the Yang Dynasty does not have to go to a distant era to find, it can be found in the Xia Dynasty.

古文：且舍唐、虞、夏、殷，近与周家断量功德，实商优劣，周不如汉。
现代文：故且抛开唐、虞、夏、殷几代不谈，就近和周代比较功德。实事求是地评定优劣，周代比不上汉代。
English: Therefore, apart from the Tang, Yu, Xia and Yin dynasties, the merits of the recent and Zhou dynasties are compared. Evaluating merits and demerits in a realistic manner, the Zhou dynasty is not comparable to the Han dynasty.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：周之受命者文、武也，汉则高祖、光武也。
现代文：周代承受天命的是周文王和周武王，汉代则是汉高祖和光武皇帝。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, it was King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu who were destined by Heaven, and in the Han Dynasty, it was Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty and Emperor Guangwu.

古文：文、武受命之降怪，不及高祖、光武初起之佑；孝宣、明之瑞，美於周之成、康、宣王。
现代文：周文王和周武王受命时出现的祥瑞，赶不上汉高祖和光武帝兴起时出现的祥瑞；汉宣帝和汉明帝时出现的祥汉，好于周代成王、康王、宣王时代。
English: The Xiang Rui that appeared when King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu received the order was not as good as the Xiang Rui that appeared when Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty and Emperor Guangwu arose; the Xiang Han that appeared when Emperor Han Xuan and Emperor Han Ming were better than the times of King Cheng, King Kang and King Xuan of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孝宣、孝明符瑞，唐、虞以来，可谓盛矣。
现代文：汉宣帝和汉明帝时出现的祥瑞，从尧、舜以来，可以说是最盛的了。
English: Xiang Rui, which appeared during the reigns of Emperor Han Xuan and Emperor Han Ming, was arguably the most prosperous dynasty since the Zhou and Qing dynasties.

古文：今上即命，奉成持满，四海混一，天下定宁。
现代文：当今皇帝即位，继承前代功业各方面都很完善，天下统一，全国安宁。
English: Today's emperor is enthroned, inheriting all aspects of the previous generation's work is perfect, the world is unified, and the whole country is peaceful.

古文：物瑞已极，人应隆。
现代文：祥瑞之物已经多到了极点，表现在人事上的瑞应同样兴盛。
English: The number of auspicious and auspicious things has reached the extreme, and the auspicious and auspicious things in terms of personnel are equally prosperous.

古文：唐世黎民雍熙，今亦天下修仁，岁遭运气，谷颇不登，迥路无绝道之忧，深幽无屯聚之奸。
现代文：唐尧时代百姓和睦融洽，当今也是天下讲求仁义道德。尽管遇上了灾害之气，谷物颇为歉收，可是远行没有被拦路抢劫的忧虑，偏僻的地方也没有坏人聚集。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the people were harmonious and harmonious. Today, the world is also about seeking benevolence, righteousness and morality. Despite the disaster, the grain harvest is quite poor, but there is no fear of roadblocks and robberies when traveling far away, and there are no bad people gathered in remote places.

古文：周家越常献白雉，方今匈奴、善鄯、哀牢贡献牛马。
现代文：周代有越常进贡白野鸡，当今有匈奴、鄯善、哀牢贡献牛马。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there were more and more white pheasants brought in as tribute, and today there are Xiongnu, Xizan, and sadly contributed cattle and horses.

古文：周时仅治五千里内，汉氏廓土收荒服之外。
现代文：周朝所管辖的区域不超过五千里，汉朝开拓疆域，控制了最边远的荒服之外的地区。
English: The area under the jurisdiction of the Zhou Dynasty did not exceed five thousand miles, while the Han Dynasty explored the territory and controlled the areas outside the most remote areas.

古文：牛马珍於白雉，近属不若远物。
现代文：牛马比白野鸡珍贵，近处缴纳的东西不如远方的贡物珍贵。
English: Cows and horses are more precious than white pheasants, and what is paid nearby is not as precious as distant tribute.

古文：古之戎狄，今为中国；古之裸人，今被朝服；古之露首，今冠章甫；古之跣跗，今履舄。
现代文：古代西北的戎狄，现在变成了中原的诸侯国；古代的裸人，现在穿上了朝服；古代光着头的人，现在戴上了帽子；古代赤足的人，现在穿上了厚底鞋。
English: The ancient Yongdi in the northwest has now become the Central Plains' vassal state; the ancient naked man now wears a court dress; the ancient bare-headed man now wears a hat; the ancient barefoot man now wears thick-soled shoes.

古文：以盘石为沃田，以桀暴为良民，夷坎坷为平均，化不宾为齐民，非太平而何？
现代文：把沙石地改造成肥沃的田土，把强悍不驯的人教化成良民，把高低不平的土地铲得很平整，教化不臣服的人成为平民，这不是天下太平而是什么呢？
English: The transformation of sand and stone into fertile fields, the transformation of tough and unruly people into good people, the leveling of uneven land, and the transformation of non-submissive people into civilians. This is not world peace, but what is it?

古文：夫实德化则周不能过汉，论符瑞则汉盛於周，度土境则周狭於汉，汉何以不如周？
现代文：依据事实判断在道德教化方面则周代不可能超过汉代，若讲到祥瑞的出现则汉代比周代兴盛，计算国土区域则周代比汉代狭小，汉代为什么不如周代呢？
English: Judging from the facts, it is impossible for the Zhou Dynasty to surpass the Han Dynasty in terms of moral enlightenment. When it comes to the emergence of Xiangrui, the Han Dynasty is more prosperous than the Zhou Dynasty. When calculating the land area, the Zhou Dynasty is smaller than the Han Dynasty. Why is the Han Dynasty inferior to the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：独谓周多圣人，治致太平？
现代文：偏说周代圣人多，治理天下达到太平。
English: It is said that Zhou Dynasty had many sages, and the governance of the world achieved peace.

古文：儒者称圣泰隆，使圣卓而无迹；称治亦泰盛，使太平绝而无续也。
现代文：世儒称颂圣人过高，使得圣人卓越无比而无法仿效；称颂天下大治也太过分，使得太平之世断绝而无法延续下去。
English: The world of Confucianism praises the sage too highly, making the sage incomparably superior and impossible to imitate; the praise of the world's great rule is also too excessive, making the world of peace cut off and unable to continue.

