古文：○高宗三四年春正月甲辰朔，御舟碇海中。
现代文：建炎四年春正月初一，高宗的船开到海中。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Jianyan Spring, Gaozong's ship sailed out to sea.

古文：乙巳，金人犯明州，张俊及守臣刘洪道击却之。
现代文：初二，金军侵犯明州，张俊和守臣刘洪道打退金军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded Mingzhou. Zhang Jun and Liu Hongdao, the guarding vassal, repelled the Chinese army.

古文：丙午，帝次台州章安镇。
现代文：初三，高宗到达台州章安镇。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Gao Zong arrived in Zhang'an Town, Taizhou.

古文：己酉，遣小校自海道如虔州问安太后。
现代文：初六，派遣小校从海道到虔州向太后问安。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, a small school was dispatched from Kaido to Gyeongju to greet the empress dowager.

古文：庚戌，金人再犯明州，张俊引兵去，浙东副总管张思政及刘洪道继遁。
现代文：初七，金军又一次侵犯明州，张俊率兵退走，浙东副总管张思政和刘洪道在张俊之后逃跑。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded Mingzhou again. Zhang Jun and his soldiers retreated. Zhang Sizheng and Liu Hongdao, vice-governors of East Zhejiang Province, fled after Zhang Jun.

古文：癸丑，贬郭仲荀汝州团练副使、广州安置。
现代文：初十，郭仲荀贬为汝州团练副使，广州安置。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Guo Zhongya was demoted to vice-envoy of the Ruzhou Rehearsal Team and resettled in Guangzhou.

古文：丙辰，诏原两浙州郡降金官吏。
现代文：十三日，下诏赦免两浙州郡投降金朝的官吏。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict pardoned the officials of the two Zhejiang counties who surrendered to the Kim dynasty.

古文：丁巳，娄宿陷陕州，守臣李彦仙死之。
现代文：十四日，娄宿攻陷陕州，守臣李彦仙战死。
English: On the 14th, Shishuku fell to Shaanxi Province, and the guardian Li Yanxian died in the battle.

古文：己未，金人陷明州夜，大雨震电，乘胜破定海，以舟师来袭御舟，张公裕以大舶击退之。
现代文：十六日，金军攻陷明州。这天晚上，降大雨，闪电，金军乘胜攻陷定海，用水军来追击高宗的船，张公裕用大船打退金军。
English: On the 16th, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Mingzhou. That evening, heavy rain and lightning fell. The Chinese army took advantage of the victory to invade and occupy the Dinghai Sea. The navy chased Gao Zong's ship, and Zhang Gongyu used a large ship to repel the Chinese army.

古文：辛酉，发章安镇。
现代文：十八日，高宗从章安镇出发。
English: On the 18th, Gaozong set off from Zhang'an Town.

古文：壬戌，雷雨又作。
现代文：十九日，又打雷降雨。
English: On the 19th, there was thunder and rain again.

古文：甲子，泊温州港口。
现代文：二十一日，高宗船停泊在温州港口。
English: On the 21st, the Gaozong ship docked at the port of Wenzhou.

古文：乙丑，以中书舍人李正民为两浙、湖南、江西抚谕使，诣太后问安。
现代文：二十二日，任命中书舍人李正民为两浙、湖南、江西抚谕使，到太后住所向太后问安。
English: On the 22nd, Li Zhengmin, a Chinese scholar, was appointed as the envoy to Zhejiang, Hunan and Jiangxi, and went to the empress dowager's residence to greet her.

古文：丁卯，台州守臣晁公为弃城遁。
现代文：二十四日，台州守臣晃公为弃城逃跑。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Taizhou's governor, Sheng Xiang, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：虔州卫兵及乡兵相杀，纵火肆掠三日。
现代文：虔州卫兵与乡兵互相火并，纵火肆掠三天。
English: The Qianzhou guards and the townspeople set fire to each other and set fire to and plundered for three days.

古文：刘可转寇京西，屡为桑仲所败，至是为其党所杀，复推刘超据荆门军。
现代文：刘可转而攻打京西，多次被桑仲打败，这时被他的部众杀死，又推举刘超割据荆门军。
English: Liu Ke turned to attack the western part of Beijing, and was repeatedly defeated by Sangzhong. At this time, he was killed by his subordinates, and Liu Chaowei was elected to lead the Jingmen Army.

古文：戊辰，滕康、刘珏罢，仍夺职。
现代文：二十五日，滕康、刘医罢官，削夺官职。
English: On the 25th, Tengkang and Liu Yi resigned from their posts and took their positions back.

古文：己巳，换给僧道度牒，人输钱十千。
现代文：二十六日，更换给僧道度碟，每人输钱十千。
English: On the 26th, the discs were replaced with Buddhist ones, with each person losing ten thousand.

古文：辛未，命臣僚条具兵退之后措置之策、驻跸之所。
现代文：二十八日，命令臣僚陈述金兵退走之后措置的策略和皇帝暂住的地方。
English: On the 28th, he ordered his ministers to present the strategy of the measures to be taken after the retreat of the gold soldiers and the place where the emperor would temporarily reside.

古文：是月，金人攻楚州，守臣赵立拒之。
现代文：这个月，金军攻陷楚州，守臣赵立率兵抵抗。
English: This month, the Chinese army invaded Chuzhou, and the vassal Zhao Li led the resistance.

古文：金人犯邠州，曲端遣泾原路副总管吴玠拒战，败之于彭原；又陷同州。
现代文：金军侵犯州，曲端派遣径原路副总管吴率兵抵抗，在彭原失败；金军又攻陷同州。
English: The Chinese army invaded the prefecture, and the vice-governor Wu, the vice-governor of Chengyuan Road, was dispatched to Quandu to lead the resistance. He failed in Pengyuan; the Chinese army invaded and occupied the prefecture again.

古文：张浚遣谢亮使夏国，至则其主乾顺已称制，遂还。
现代文：张浚派遣谢亮出使夏国，到夏国后，其主乾顺已经代行皇帝权力。
English: Zhang Jun dispatched Xie Liang as an envoy to Xia, and after arriving in Xia, his master Qian Shun had already assumed the power of the emperor.

古文：二月甲戌朔，郦琼率众降于刘光世。
现代文：于是，归国。二月初一，丽仔琼率部众向刘光世投降。
English: Therefore, she returned to China. On the first day of February, Liza Qiong and her followers surrendered to Liu Guangxi.

古文：叛将傅选诣虔州乞降。
现代文：叛将傅选到虔州请求投降。
English: The renegade general Fu Xuan went to Qianzhou to ask for surrender.

古文：乙亥，奉安祖宗神御于福州。
现代文：初二，恭敬迁置祖宗神主到福州。
English: On the second day of the school year, we respectfully relocated our ancestor, Shinshu, to Fuzhou.

古文：诏复以卢益为资政殿学士，李回端明殿学士，并权知三省、枢密院事。
现代文：下诏重新任命卢益为资政殿学士，李回为端明殿学士，并且暂代知三省、枢密院事。
English: The following edict reappointed Lu Yi as the academician of the House of Councillors, and Li Hui as the academician of the House of Representatives, and temporarily took charge of the three provinces and the Privy Council.

古文：金人陷潭州，将吏王暕、刘价、赵聿之战死，向子諲率兵夺门亡去，金兵大掠，屠其城。
现代文：金军攻陷潭州，将吏王谏、刘价、赵幸之战死，向子率军夺门逃走，金兵大肆劫掠，屠杀州城。
English: The gold army invaded Tanzhou, killed the officials Wang Yao, Liu Jian and Zhao Xingzhi, and fled with the army led by Xiangzi. The gold soldiers plundered and slaughtered the city of Suzhou.

古文：丙子，金人自明州引兵还临安。
现代文：初三，金军从明州退到临安。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Chinese army retreated from Mingzhou to Lin'an.

古文：癸未，虔州乡兵首领陈新率众数万围城，叛将胡友亦犯虔州，与新战，破之，新乃去。
现代文：初十，虔州乡兵首领陈新率领数万人围攻州城，叛将胡友也侵犯虔州，与陈新军交战，打败陈新军，陈新率部退走。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Chen Xin, the leader of the Gyeongju township soldiers, led tens of thousands of people to besiege the city of Gyeongju. The traitor Hu You also invaded Gyeongju, fought with Chen Xin's army, defeated Chen Xin's army, and Chen Xin and his troops retreated.

古文：甲申，禁逃卒投刺别军。
现代文：十一日，禁止逃亡士卒投刺其他军队。
English: On the 11th, fugitive soldiers were forbidden to attack other troops.

古文：丙戌，金人自临安退兵，命刘光世率兵追之。
现代文：十三日，金军从临安退兵，命令刘光世率兵追击。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese army retreated from Lin'an and ordered Liu Guangxie to lead the troops in pursuit.

古文：丁亥，金人陷汴京，权留守上官悟出奔，为盗所杀。
现代文：十四日，金军攻陷汁京，代理留守上官悟出逃，被盗贼杀死。
English: On the 14th, the Jin army captured Shijing, and the deputy left-behind Shangguo fled, and was killed by thieves.

古文：庚寅，帝次温州。
现代文：十七日，高宗到达温州。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong arrived in Wenzhou.

古文：浙东防遏使傅崧卿入越州。
现代文：浙东防遏使傅裕卿进人越州。
English: The East Zhejiang Anti-Drug Campaign caused Fu Yuqing to enter Yuezhou.

古文：辛卯，金人陷秀州。
现代文：十八日，金军攻陷秀州。
English: On the 18th, the Chinese army captured Xiuzhou.

古文：甲午，知蔡州程昌寓弃城南归。
现代文：二十一日，蔡州知州程昌辨弃城南逃。
English: On the 21st, Cai Zhou, Chizhou, and Chengchang abandoned the city and fled south.

古文：鼎州民钟相作乱，自称楚王。
现代文：鼎州民钟相起义，自称楚王。
English: Dingzhou people's Zhongxiang uprising, claiming to be the king of Chu.

古文：乙未，杜充罢。
现代文：二十二日，杜充罢官。
English: On the 22nd, Du Chong was dismissed.

古文：丙申，以金兵退，肆赦。
现代文：二十三日，因金兵北退，宽赦罪人。
English: On the 23rd, as the gold soldiers retreated north, he pardoned the sinners.

古文：张浚承制以陕西制置使王似知成都府。
现代文：张浚承朝命任命陕西制置使王似为成都知府。
English: Zhang Juncong was appointed by the imperial command to establish Shaanxi Province and make Wang Lian the governor of Chengdu.

古文：罢诸路武臣提点刑狱。
现代文：罢除各路武臣提点刑狱。
English: Expel all samurai retainers and sentence them to prison.

古文：李成入舒州。
现代文：李成进人舒州。
English: Li Chengjin is from Shuzhou.

古文：金游骑至平江，周望奔太湖，守臣汤东野亦遁。
现代文：金军游骑到平江，周望逃奔太湖，守臣汤东野也逃跑。
English: The gold army rode to Pingjiang, Zhou Wang fled to Taihu Lake, and the vassal Tang Dongye also fled.

古文：茶陵县军贼二千余人犯郴州永兴县。
现代文：茶陵县军贼二千多人侵犯郴州永兴县。
English: More than 2,000 war criminals from Chaling County invaded Yongxing County, Ganzhou.

古文：戊戌，金人入平江，纵兵焚掠。
现代文：二十五日，金军进人平江，纵兵焚掠。
English: On the 25th, the Chinese army marched into the Pingjiang River, burning and looting.

古文：辛丑，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十八日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 28th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：钟相陷澧州，杀守臣黄宗。
现代文：钟相攻陷遭州，杀死守臣黄宗。
English: Zhong Xiang was attacked and captured by the state, and killed the vassal Huang Zong.

古文：权湖北制置使傅雱招谕孔彦舟，彦舟听命，因以为湖南、北捉杀使。
现代文：代理湖北制置使傅稣招谕孔彦舟，孔彦舟听从命令于是任命他为湖南、湖北捉杀使。
English: The acting governor of Hubei Province, Fu Xi, summoned Kong Yanzhou. Kong Yanzhou obeyed the order and appointed him as the governor of Hunan Province and Hubei Province.

古文：荆南守臣唐悫弃城去。
现代文：荆南守臣唐意弃城逃跑。
English: The Jingnan governor Tang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：金人陷醴州，守臣王淑弃城去。
现代文：金军攻陷醛州，守臣王淑弃城逃走。
English: The Chinese army invaded Yaldang Prefecture, and the guardian Wang Shu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：是月，张浚自秦州引兵入援。
现代文：这个月，张浚从秦州率军援救。
English: This month, Zhang Jun led an army from Qinzhou to rescue them.

古文：三月癸卯朔，孔彦舟入鼎州。
现代文：三月初一，孔彦舟进人鼎州。
English: On the first day of March, Kong Yanzhou entered Dingzhou.

古文：金人去平江，统制陈思恭以舟师邀败其后军于太湖。
现代文：金军离开平江，统制陈思恭在太湖用水军邀击打败金军的殿后部队。
English: The gold army left Pingjiang, and Chen Sicong commanded the water army in Taihu Lake to invite and defeat the rear troops of the gold army.

古文：吕颐浩请幸浙西。
现代文：吕颐浩请高宗到浙西。
English: Lv Yinghao invited Gao Zong to West Zhejiang.

古文：丙午，赵鼎言金兵去未远，遂缓其行。
现代文：初四，赵鼎说金军北退未远，于是暂缓到浙西。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Zhao Ding said that the Jin army was not far from retreating to the north, so he delayed to western Zhejiang.

古文：丁未，命发运司说谕两浙富民助米，以备巡幸。
现代文：初五，命令发运司劝说两浙富民拿出粮食，准备高宗巡视。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered the Shipping Department to persuade the two rich people of Zhejiang to take out grain and prepare for Gaozong's inspection.

古文：辛亥，遣兵部员外郎冯康国等抚谕荆湖南北、广南诸路。
现代文：初九，派遣兵部员外郎冯康国等抚谕湖南北、广南各路。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he dispatched Feng Kangguo, the younger brother of a member of the military department, and others to visit the north and south of the lake and the south of Guangnan.

古文：壬子，金人入常州，守臣周杞弃城去。
现代文：初十，金军进人常州，守臣周祀弃城逃走。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Jin army marched into Changzhou, and Shushi Zhou abandoned the city and fled.

古文：甲寅，遣卢益及御营都统制辛企宗奉迎太后东还。
现代文：十二日，派遣卢益及御营都统制辛企宗奉迎太后东还。
English: On the twelfth day, Lu Yi and Oying were sent to control the capital, and Xin Kezong followed the Empress Dowager to the east.

古文：丙辰，金人犯终南县，经略使郑恩战败，死之。
现代文：十四日，金军侵犯终南县，经略使郑恩战败而死。
English: On the 14th, the Chinese army invaded Jinan County, and Zheng En was defeated and died.

古文：丁巳，金人至镇江府，韩世忠屯焦山寺邀击之。
现代文：十五日，金军北退到镇江府，韩世忠屯兵焦山阻击金军。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Chinese army retreated north to Zhenjiang Prefecture, and Han Shizhong's garrison in Jiaoshan blocked the Chinese army.

古文：诏侍从官各举可充监司者一二人。
现代文：下诏侍从官各自推举可以担任监司的人一、二名。
English: According to the following edict, the attendant officers will each nominate one or two people who can serve as supervisors.

古文：辛酉，御舟发温州。
现代文：十九日，高宗乘船从温州出发。
English: On the 19th, Gao Zong departed from Wenzhou by boat.

古文：宣抚司节制军马李允文部兵至鄂州。
现代文：宣抚司节制军马李允文率兵到鄂州。
English: Marshal Ma Li Yunwen led the troops to Ezhou.

古文：御营前军将杨勍叛。
现代文：御营前军将领汤劝叛乱。
English: The commander-in-chief of the army in front of the camp advised Tang to rebel.

古文：甲子，张浚请便宜辟官不许动改。
现代文：二十二日，张浚请求不上奏自行决定任命官员，朝廷不得更改。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Jun did not submit a request to appoint officials at his own discretion, and the imperial court could not change it.

古文：戊辰，孔彦舟击败钟相，禽相及其子子昂，槛送行在。
现代文：二十六日，孔彦舟击败钟相，俘获钟相及其儿子钟昂，押送到行在。
English: On the 26th, Kong Yan Zhou defeated Zhong Xiang, captured Zhong Xiang and his son Zhong Ang, and escorted them to Zhulong.

古文：己巳，戚方陷广德军，杀权通判王俦。
现代文：二十七日，戚方攻陷广德军，杀死代理通判王侍。
English: On the 27th, his relatives attacked and defeated the German army in Guangxi, and killed the agent Tsudan Wangzhi.

古文：夏四月癸酉，蠲江西州县兵盗贱破民家夏税。
现代文：夏四月初一，免除江西州县被兵盗践踏百姓家夏税。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the summer tax of the people whose homes were trampled by soldiers in Jiangxi Prefecture was exempted.

古文：戊寅，吴玠及金人战于邠州彭原店，败绩，部将杨晟死之。
现代文：初六，吴与金军在州彭原店交战，失败，部将杨晨战死。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wu and the Jin army fought in the state of Pengyuan, failed, and the commander Yang Chen died in battle.

古文：己卯，以观文殿学士朱胜非为江西、湖南北宣抚使。
现代文：初七，任命观文殿学士朱胜非为江西、湖南，湖北宣抚使。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Zhu Shengfei, a bachelor of the Academy of Confucianism, was appointed as the envoy of Jiangxi, Hunan and Hubei.

古文：是日，张浚引兵至房州，知金兵退，乃还。
现代文：这天，张浚率兵退到房州，得知金兵退走，才回。
English: On this day, Zhang Jun and his soldiers retreated to Fangzhou. He only returned when he learned that the Golden Army had retreated.

古文：癸未，帝驻越州。
现代文：十一日，高宗驻留越州。
English: On the 11th, Gao Zong stayed in Yuezhou.

古文：甲申，下诏亲征，巡幸浙西。
现代文：十二日，下诏亲征，巡视浙西。
English: On the twelfth day, he issued an edict to personally march and inspect western Zhejiang.

古文：韩世忠驻军扬子江，要金人归路，屡败之，兀引军走建康。
现代文：韩世忠驻军扬子江，拦截金军归路，多次打败金军，兀率兵退走建康。
English: Han Shizhong garrisoned the Yangtze River, intercepted the return route of the Chinese army, defeated the Chinese army many times, and led the soldiers to retreat to Jiankang.

古文：乙酉，以御史中丞赵鼎为翰林学士，鼎固辞不拜。
现代文：十三日，任命御史中承赵鼎为翰林学士，赵鼎坚决推辞不受。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Ding, a member of the imperial history, was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, and Zhao Ding was firmly rejected.

古文：戚方围宣州。
现代文：戚方围攻宣州。
English: The relatives besieged Xuanzhou.

古文：刘光世遣统制王德诱诛刘文舜于饶州。
现代文：刘光世派遣统制王德在饶州诱杀刘文舜。
English: Liu Guangxing dispatched the regent Wang De to trap and kill Liu Wenzhong in Raozhou.

古文：丙申，用赵鼎劾奏，吕颐浩罢为镇南军节度使、醴泉观使。
现代文：二十四日，采纳赵鼎的上奏弹勃，吕颐浩罢为镇南军节度使、醛泉观使。
English: On the 24th, he adopted Zhao Ding's Shangso Piao Bo, and Lv Yinghao became the festival envoy of the Zhennan Army and the Yu Yuan Envoy.

古文：命三省、枢密院同班奏事。
现代文：命令三省、枢密院一起奏事。
English: Ordered the three provinces and the Privy Council to jointly report the matter.

古文：韩世忠及兀再战江中，金人乘风纵火，世忠败绩。
现代文：韩世忠与金兀又在长江中激战，金军乘风纵火，韩世忠军失败。
English: Han Shizhong and Jin Qi fought fiercely in the Yangtze River again. The Jin army used the wind to set fire, and Han Shizhong's army failed.

古文：兀渡江，屯六合县。
现代文：兀北渡长江，驻屯六合县。
English: He went to the Yangtze River in northern Anhui Province and was stationed in Liuhe County.

古文：丁酉，复以赵鼎为御史中丞。
现代文：二十五日，又任命赵鼎为御史中承。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Zhao Ding was also appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：戊戌，振明州被兵民家。
现代文：二十六日，贩济明州遭兵火的民户。
English: On the 26th, the families of the victims of the military fire in Jimin County left the area.

古文：己亥，以张俊为浙西、江东制置使。
现代文：二十七，任命张俊为浙西、江东制置使。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Jun was appointed as the chief envoy for the western Zhejiang and eastern Jiangsu provinces.

古文：辛丑，王德破妖贼王宗石于信州贵溪县，执其渠帅，诸县悉平。
现代文：二十九日，王德在信州溪县击破妖贼王宗石，俘获他的主帅，各县平定。
English: On the 29th, Wang De defeated the bandit Wang Zongshi in Xinshouxi County, captured his commander, and subdued all counties.

古文：是月，金人犯江西者自荆门军北归，留守司同统制牛皋潜军宝丰击败之。
现代文：这个月，金军侵犯江西的一路从荆门军北退，留守司同统制牛皋在宝丰设伏兵击败金军。
English: This month, the Jin army invaded Jiangxi and retreated from the Jingmen army all the way to the north. The remaining troops of the Sino-Japanese alliance set up an ambush in Baofeng to defeat the Jin army.

古文：五月甲辰，以范宗尹为尚书右仆射兼御营使。
现代文：五月初三，任命范宗尹为尚书右仆射兼御营使。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, Fan Zongyin was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man and envoy.

古文：辛亥，统领赤心队军马刘晏及戚方战于宣州，败死。
现代文：初十，统领赤心队军马刘晏与戚方在宣州交战，战败而死。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the commander of the Red Heart Army, Ma Liuqi, fought with his relatives in Xuanzhou and was defeated and died.

古文：壬子，金人焚建康府，执李棁、陈邦光而去。淮南宣抚司统制岳飞邀击于静安镇，败之。
现代文：十一日，金军火烧建康府，俘虏李、陈邦光退归；淮南宣抚司统制岳飞在静安镇邀击，打败金军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Jin army set fire to Jiankangfu, and the captives Li and Chen Bangguang retreated; Yuefei, the governor of Huainan Province, invited the attack in Jing'an Town and defeated the Jin army.

古文：是夜，紫微垣内有赤云亘天，白气贯其中。
现代文：这天晚上，紫微垣内有红色云布满天空，白色气贯穿其中。
English: That evening, a red cloud covered the sky in Ziyi Weigaki, with a white aura penetrating it.

古文：癸丑，诏台谏等官各举所知二人。
现代文：十二日，下诏台谏等官各自推举所熟知的人才二名。
English: On the 12th, the lower echelon of Taiwanese officials each nominated two well-known talents.

古文：以张守参知政事、赵鼎签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命张守为参知政事，赵鼎为签书枢密院事。
English: Zhang Shou was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Zhao Ding was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：以白金三万两赐韩世忠军，赠战殁将孙世询、严永吉、张渊等官。
现代文：赐给韩世忠军三万两白金，赠给战死将领孙世询、严永吉、张渊等人官职。
English: He gave 30,000 taels of platinum to Han Shizhong's army, and official posts to Sun Shizhen, Yan Yongji, Zhang Yuan and other generals who died in the war.

古文：甲寅，金人陷定远县，执闾勍去，勍不屈，死之。
现代文：十三日，金军攻陷定远县，俘走哥初，哥葡不屈而死。
English: On the 13th, the Chinese army captured Dingyuan County, took away Brother Chu, and Brother Lu died indomitably.

古文：巨师古击戚方于宣州，数败之，方引去。
现代文：巨师古在宣州攻击戚方，多次打败他，戚方退走。
English: The great master Gu attacked his relative in Xuanzhou, defeated him many times, and the relative retreated.

古文：乙卯，王綯罢。
现代文：十四日，王罢官。
English: On the 14th, Wang resigned.

古文：丁巳，命刘光世移军捕戚方。
现代文：十六日，命令刘光世迁移军队捕获戚方。
English: On the 16th, Liu Guangxing ordered the relocation of troops to capture relatives.

古文：杨勍犯婺州。
现代文：杨就进犯姿州。
English: Yang then attacked Zhouzhou.

古文：戊午，复置权尚书六部侍郎。
现代文：十七日，重新设置暂代尚书六部侍郎。
English: On the 17th, the temporary position of Sho Sho Roppongi waiter was reinstated.

古文：癸亥，诏中原、淮南流寓士人，听所在州郡附试。
现代文：二十二日，下诏中原、淮南流亡侨寓士人，允许在所在州郡附试。
English: On the 22nd, the Central Plains and Huainan exile overseas scholars were allowed to take the supplementary examination in their counties.

古文：甲子，周望罢，寻分司、衡州居住。
现代文：二十三日，周望罢职，不久遭到处分，衡州居住。
English: On the 23rd, Zhou Wang was dismissed from his post and was soon punished. He now lives in Hengzhou.

古文：置京畿、淮南、湖北、京东西路镇抚使。
现代文：设置京瓷、淮南、湖北、京东西路镇抚使。
English: Kyocera, Huainan, Hubei, and Beijing East-West Road townships were set up.

古文：乙丑，升高邮军为承州。
现代文：二十四日，升高邮军为承州。
English: On the 24th, the postal troops were raised to Chengzhou.

古文：以翟兴、孟汝、赵立、刘位、赵霖、李成、吴翊、李彦先、薛庆并为镇抚使：兴河南府，唐州，立楚、泗州、涟水军，位滁、濠州，霖和州、无为军，成舒、蕲，翊光、黄州，彦先海州、淮阳军，庆，承州、天长军。
现代文：任命翟兴、赵立、刘位、赵霖、李成、吴诩、李彦先、薛庆并为镇抚使；翟兴为河南府、孟汝唐等州镇抚使；赵立为楚泅州、涟水军镇抚使；刘位为滁、壕州镇抚使；赵霖为和州、无为军镇抚使；李成为舒、薪州镇抚使；吴诩为光、黄州镇抚使；李彦先为海州、淮阳军镇抚使；薛庆为承州、天长军镇抚使。
English: He appointed He Xing, Zhao Li, Liu Yi, Zhao Lin, Li Cheng, Wu Hao, Li Yan Xian, and Xue Qing as town commissioners; He Xing as town commissioners of Henan Prefecture, Meng Rutang and other states; Zhao Li as town commissioners of Chu Ying State and Shishui Army; Liu Yi as town commissioners of Yao and Hezhou; Zhao Lin as town commissioners of Hezhou and Muwei Army; Li as town commissioners of Shu and Zhouzhou; Wu Hao as town commissioners of Guang and Huangzhou; Li Yan Xian as town commissioners of Haizhou and Huaiyang Army; X

古文：丁卯，庆及金人战于承州城下，累败之。
现代文：二十六日，薛庆在承州城下与金军交战，多次打败金军。
English: On the 26th, Xue Qing fought with the Chinese army under the castle of Chengzhou and defeated the Chinese army many times.

古文：戊辰，命江、浙州县祭战死兵民。
现代文：二十七日，命令江、浙州县祭奠战死兵民。
English: On the 27th, Jiang and Zhezhou counties were ordered to pay tribute to the war dead.

古文：分江东、西为鄂州、江州、池州三路，置安抚使。
现代文：分置江东、西路为鄂州、江州、池州三路，设置安抚使。
English: The eastern and western routes of the Yangtze River were divided into the three routes of Ezhou, Jiangzhou and Chizhou, and a pacification mission was set up.

古文：罢诸路帅臣兼制置使、诸州守臣兼管内安抚使。
现代文：罢除各路帅臣兼制置使、各州守臣兼管内安抚使。
English: The appointment of commanders-in-chief and ministers-in-waiting in each province and the appointment of provincial governors-in-chief and pacification commissioners in each province were abolished.

古文：是月，刘超据荆南，分兵犯峡州，又合叛将彭筠犯复州。
现代文：这个月，刘超割据荆南，分兵进犯峡州，又会合叛将彭箔进犯复州。
English: This month, Liu Chao divided Jingnan, divided the army and invaded Xiaozhou, and also met with the traitor Peng Fei to invade Fuzhou.

古文：淮西败将崔增陷焦湖水砦。
现代文：淮西败将崔增攻陷焦湖水寨。
English: Huaixi defeated Cui Zeng and captured Jiaohu Water Village.

古文：河东、北经制使王俊举兵及金人战于襄城县，败之，复颍昌府。
现代文：河东、北经制使王俊率兵在襄城县与金军交战，打败金军，收复颖昌府。
English: In Xiangcheng County, Wang Jun and his soldiers led by the Hengtong and Beijingshe forces fought against the Chinese army, defeated the Chinese army, and successfully recovered Yingchangfu.

古文：张浚承制以金、房州隶利路。
现代文：张浚承朝廷命令把金、房州划属利州路。
English: Zhang Juncheng was ordered by the imperial court to assign Jin and Fangzhou to Lizhou Road.

古文：六月辛未朔，蠲绍兴府三县湖田米。
现代文：六月初一，免除绍兴府三县湖田米。
English: On the first day of June, rice from the lakes in three counties of Shaoxing was exempted.

古文：诏侍从、台谏、诸将集议驻跸事宜。
现代文：下诏侍从、台谏、军事将领们集中商议高宗出行暂住事宜。
English: Under the imperial edict, the attendants, the eunuchs, and the military generals discussed Gao Zong's travel and temporary residence.

古文：杨勍犯处州。
现代文：汤劝进犯处州。
English: Tang advised the offender to go to the state.

古文：癸酉，遣统制陈思恭讨勍。
现代文：初三，派遣统制陈思恭讨伐汤劝。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Chen Sicong, the school's headmaster, was dispatched to persuade the students to cut down the trees.

古文：合江南两路转运为都转运使。
现代文：合并两路转运使为都转运使。
English: The merger of the two transshipment companies will result in a unified transshipment company.

古文：再贬周望昭化军节度副使、连州安置。
现代文：周望又一次贬降为昭化军节度副使，连州安置。
English: Zhou Wang was once again demoted to the vice-envoy of the Shaohua Army, and was resettled in Lianzhou.

古文：甲戌，罢御营司。
现代文：初四，罢除御营司。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, the overseer was dismissed.

古文：以范宗尹兼知枢密院事。
现代文：任命范宗尹兼知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Fan Zongyin and Kanechi as Privy Councilors.

古文：乙亥，王燮遣统领林闰等追袭杨勍于东阳县，军败，裨将李在死之。
现代文：初五，臼燮派遣统领林闰等追击汤劝到东阳县，军队失败，副将李在战死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Usuki dispatched commander Lin Yue and others to chase and persuade Tang to Dongyang County. The army failed, and Vice Admiral Li Zorong was killed in the battle.

古文：丁丑，以刘光世部兵为御前巡卫军，光世为都统制。
现代文：初七，任命刘光世率兵为御前巡卫军，刘光世为都统制。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Liu Guangzhe to lead the troops as the imperial guard, and Liu Guangzhe to be the governor of the capital.

古文：杨勍等焚建州。
现代文：汤葡等人焚烧建州。
English: Tang Guo and others burned Jianzhou.

古文：戚方犯湖州安吉县，诏张俊捕之。
现代文：戚方进犯湖州安吉县，下诏张俊捕获他们。
English: The relatives invaded Anji County, Huzhou, and Zhang Jun captured them.

古文：戊寅，更御前五军为神武军，御营五军为神武副军。
现代文：初八，改御前五军为神武军，御营五军为神武副军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Imperial Five Armies were changed to the Divine Military, and the Imperial Five Armies were changed to the Divine Vice-Military.

古文：以知建康府权邦彦为淮南等路制置发运使。
现代文：任命建康知府权邦彦为淮南等路制置发运使。
English: Jiankang Governor Quan Kunyan was appointed as the transportation envoy for the construction of Huainan and other roads.

古文：滁、濠镇抚使刘位为贼张文孝所杀，命其子纲袭职。
现代文：滁、壕州镇抚使刘位被贼张文孝杀死，任命他的儿子刘纲继承他的职位。
English: The governors of Handan and Hezhou had Liu Yi killed by the thief Zhang Wenxiao and appointed his son Liu Gang to succeed him.

古文：庚辰，置镇抚使六人：陈规，德安府、复州、汉阳军；解潜，荆南府、归、峡州、荆门、公安军；程昌寓，鼎、澧州；陈求道，襄阳府、邓、随、郢州；范之才，金、均、房州；冯长宁，淮宁、顺昌府、蔡州。
现代文：初十，设置镇抚使六名：陈规，德安府、复州、汉阳军镇抚使；解潜，荆南府、归峡州、荆门公安军镇抚使；程昌辨，鼎、遭州镇抚使；陈求道，襄阳府、邓随郑州镇抚使；范之才，金、均、房州镇抚使；冯长宁，淮宁顺昌府、蔡州镇抚使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, six military governors were set up: Chen Gui, the military governor of De'an, Fuzhou and Hanyang; Desu, the military governor of Jingnan, Guixiaozhou and Jingmen; Cheng Changbin, Ding and Shangzhou; Chen Cui Dao, the military governor of Xiangyang and Deng Zui, the military governor of Zhengzhou; Fan Zhi Cai, the military governor of Jin, Rong and Fangzhou; Feng Changning, the military governor of Huaining, Shunchang and Caizhou.

古文：辛巳，虑囚。
现代文：十一日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 11th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：申命有司，讨论厘正崇宁以来滥赏。
现代文：又一次命令有关部门，讨论清理崇宁以来滥赏问题。
English: He once again ordered the relevant departments to discuss the issue of excessive rewards since the clean-up of Chongning.

古文：罢诸州添差通判职官。
现代文：罢除各州添差通判职官。
English: Removing judgeships from the states.

古文：癸未，召刘光世赴行在。
现代文：十三日，召刘光世到行在。
English: On the 13th, Liu Guangxi was summoned to the line.

古文：甲申，岳飞破戚方于广德军。
现代文：十四日，岳飞在广德军攻破戚方。
English: On the 14th, Yuefei defeated his relatives in the Guangde Army.

古文：乙酉，钟相伪将胡源引兵入慈利县，执其党陈诚来降。
现代文：十五日，钟相伪将胡源率兵进人慈利县，俘获同党陈诚来投降。
English: On the 15th, Zhong Xianghong led Hu Yuan and his soldiers into Cili County and captured Chen Cheng, a member of the same party, who surrendered.

古文：丙戌，以吕颐浩为建康路安抚大使，刘光世为两浙路安抚大使，朱胜非为江州路安抚大使，郭仲威为真、扬州镇抚使。
现代文：十六日，任命吕颐浩为建康路安抚大使，刘光世为两浙路安抚大使，朱胜非为江州路安抚大使，郭仲威为真、扬州镇抚使。
English: On the 16th, he appointed Lv Yinghao as the Jiankang Road pacification ambassador, Liu Guangshi as the two Zhejiang Road pacification ambassador, Zhu Shengfei as the Jiangzhou Road pacification ambassador, Guo Zhongwei as the Zhen and Yangzhou Town pacification envoy.

古文：戚方诣张俊降。
现代文：戚方到张俊军中投降。
English: My relative surrendered to Zhang Jun's army.

古文：庚寅，召韩世忠率兵赴行在。
现代文：二十日，召韩世忠率兵到行在。
English: On the 20th, Han Shizhong was summoned to march with his soldiers.

古文：辛卯，妖贼王宗石等伏诛。
现代文：二十一日，妖贼王宗石等人处以死刑。
English: On the twenty-first day, the demon thief Wang Zongshi and others were sentenced to death.

古文：壬辰，权密州都巡检徐文率部兵泛海来归。
现代文：二十二日，暂代密州都巡检徐文率所部士兵泛海来归朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, Xu Wen, the provisional governor of Mizhou, led the soldiers of the inspection department across the sea to return to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，置枢密院干办官四员。
现代文：二十四日，设置枢密院干办官员四名。
English: On the 24th, four officials were appointed to act as agents of the Privy Council.

古文：乙未，郭仲威犯镇江府，遣岳飞击之。
现代文：二十五日，郭仲威进犯镇江府，派遣岳飞率兵攻打他们。
English: On the 25th, Guo Zhongwei invaded Zhenjiang Prefecture and sent Yuefei to attack them.

古文：是月，兀闻张浚在秦州，将举兵北伐，自六合引兵趋陕西。
现代文：这个月，兀听说张浚在秦州，准备率军北伐，就率金兵从六合赶往陕西。
English: This month, when Zou heard that Zhang Jun was in Qinzhou, preparing to lead the Northern Expedition, he rushed from Liuhe to Shaanxi with the Golden Army.

古文：秋七月癸卯，刘光世援宣抚使例，乞便宜行事，不许。
现代文：秋七月初三，刘光世引用宣抚使的条例，请求不上奏自行决断事务，高宗没有批准。
English: At the beginning of the third day of July in autumn, Liu Guangxu cited the regulations of the Chinese envoy and asked Gao Zong not to make a report, but to decide matters on his own. Gao Zong did not approve.

古文：诏军兴以来诸州得便宜指挥者并罢。
现代文：下诏：对外用兵以来各州被允许不上奏自行决断军政事务的，一律罢除。
English: The following edict: Since the introduction of the use of foreign troops, all states that have been allowed to decide military and political affairs on their own without reporting shall be dismissed.

古文：乙巳，冯长宁复顺昌府。
现代文：初五，冯长宁收复顺昌府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Feng Changning recaptured Shunchangfu.

古文：张浚罢曲端都统制。
现代文：张浚罢除曲端都统制职务。
English: Zhang Jun removed Qudan from the position of the city's governor.

古文：丁未，以刘光世为集庆军节度使、开府仪同三司。
现代文：初七，任命刘光世为集庆军节度使、开府仪同三司。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Liu Guangxing was appointed as the envoy of the National Day of the People's Republic of China and the third secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：戊申，以孔彦舟为辰、沅、靖州镇抚使。
现代文：初八，任命孔彦舟为辰、沉、靖州镇抚使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Kong Yanzhou as the chief envoy to the cities of Chongqing, Shenyang and Jingzhou.

古文：张浚献黄金万两助军用。
现代文：张浚献出一万两黄金补助军事开支。
English: Zhang Jun donated ten thousand taels of gold to subsidize military expenditure.

古文：宣抚司遣统制官吕世存、王俊复鄜州，其余州县多迎降。
现代文：宣抚司派遣统制官吕世存、王俊收复州，其余各州县大多数归降朝廷。
English: The Department of Propaganda and Fostering dispatched the commanding officers Lü Shicun and Wang Jun to recover and recover the state, and the majority of the remaining states and counties returned to the imperial court.

古文：后军将王辟叛，陷归州，钤辖田祐恭击败之。
现代文：后军将官王叛乱，攻陷归州，铃辖田恭率军打败王。
English: Afterward, the army rebelled against Wang Guanzhong, captured and returned to the state, and the army led by Zhu Yuetian led the army to defeat the king.

古文：己酉，王辟犯房州，守臣韦知几弃城走。
现代文：初九，王进犯房州，守臣韦知几弃城逃走。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Wang Jin committed a crime in Fuzhou, and Wei Zhiguo abandoned the city and fled.

古文：庚戌，杨勍受刘光世招安，寻复叛去，迫泉州。
现代文：初十，汤劝接受刘光世招安，不久又叛乱，逼近泉州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Tang was persuaded to accept Liu Guangshi's offer of peace, and soon rebelled, approaching Quanzhou.

古文：癸丑，崔增犯太平州，守臣郭伟拒却之。
现代文：十三日，崔增进犯太平州，守臣郭伟抵抗打退他们。
English: On the 13th, Cui Shangbo invaded Taiping Prefecture. Guo Wei, a retainer, resisted and repulsed them.

古文：乙卯，金人徙二帝自韩州之五国城。
现代文：十五日，金军把徽、钦二帝从韩州迁徙到五国城。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Jin army moved the emblem and Emperor Qin from Hanzhou to the Five Kingdoms City.

古文：刘光世乞移司平江，不许。
现代文：刘光世请求把安抚使司迁移到平江，高宗没有同意。
English: Liu Guangshi requested that the pacification envoy be moved to Pingjiang, but Gao Zong did not agree.

古文：丙辰，张俊合诸将戚方等兵万余赴行在。
现代文：十六日，张俊集合各将、戚方等军队一万多人前往行在。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Jun gathered more than 10,000 soldiers, including generals and relatives, to march.

古文：丁巳，申命元祐党人子孙于州郡自陈，尽还当得恩数。
现代文：十七日，重新发布命令，元党人子孙在州县自己陈述，应当得到的推恩和奖赏要全部兑现。
English: On the 17th, the order was reissued, and the descendants of the former party members made their own statements in Zhoushan County, saying that the grace and reward they should receive should be fully honored.

古文：韩世忠、张俊并罢。
现代文：韩世忠、张俊一起罢职。
English: Han Shizhong and Zhang Jun resigned together.

古文：己未，禁闽、广、淮、浙海舶商贩山东，虑为金人乡导。
现代文：十九日，禁止闽、广、淮、浙海船到山东贸易，恐怕被金军利用当南下的向导。
English: On the 19th, the ships of Yunnan, Guangxi, Huai and Zhejiang were banned from trading in Shandong. I am afraid that they will be used by the Chinese army as a guide to the south.

古文：诏江、浙、福建州县，谕豪右募民兵据险立栅，防遏外寇。
现代文：下诏江、浙、福建州县，招谕豪右募集民兵占据险要设置栅栏，防止敌军进攻。
English: In the following counties of Zhaojiang, Zhejiang and Fujian, Gao Zui ordered to recruit militias to occupy and set up fences to prevent the enemy from attacking.

古文：庚申，以岳飞为通、泰州镇抚使。
现代文：二十日，任命岳飞为通、秦州镇抚使。
English: On the 20th, Yuefei was appointed as the chief envoy of Tong and Qinzhou.

古文：辛酉，建州民范汝为作乱，命统制李捧捕之。
现代文：二十一日，建州民范汝为作乱，命令统制官李捧捕获他。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the people of Jianzhou arrested Fan Ru for creating a disturbance, and ordered the commanding officer Li Hupo to capture him.

古文：乙丑，复李邦彦以下十九人官职，听自便。
现代文：二十五日，恢复李邦彦以下十九人官职，允许自由活动。
English: On the 25th, 19 officials below Li Bangyan were reinstated and allowed to work freely.

古文：复李纲银青光禄大夫，许翰、颜岐端明殿学士。
现代文：恢复李纲为银青光禄大夫，许翰、颜岐端为明殿学士。
English: Li Gang was reinstated as a silver Qingguanglu doctor, and Xu Han and Yan Qiduan as Myeongdong scholars.

古文：张浚贬曲端阶州居住。
现代文：张浚贬曲端阶州居住。
English: Zhang Junban lived in Chaozhou.

古文：丁卯，金人立刘豫为帝，国号齐。
现代文：二十七日，金军立刘豫为皇帝，国号齐。
English: On the 27th, the Jin army made Liu Yu the emperor, and the country was unified.

古文：戊辰，罢提领措置茶盐司。
现代文：二十八日，罢除提领措置茶盐司。
English: On the 28th, the Tea and Salt Division was abolished.

古文：己巳，诏王燮部兵屯信州。
现代文：二十九日，下诏哪彭率兵屯驻信州。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that Peng and his troops would be stationed in Shinshu.

古文：程昌寓遣将杜湛禽李合戎于松滋县。
现代文：程昌辨派遣将领杜湛在松滋县俘获李合戎。
English: Cheng Changbin dispatched General Du Zhan to capture Li He Rong in Songzhi County.

古文：是月，张用据汉阳军，沿江措置副使李允文招降之，以便宜徙鄂州路副总管，以右军统制马友知汉阳军。
现代文：这个月，张用割据汉阳军，沿江措置副使李允文招降张用，没有上奏自行决定张用为鄂州路副总管，任命右军统制马友为汉阳知军。
English: This month, Zhang was assigned to the Hanyang Army, Li Yunwen, the deputy envoy of the measures along the river, was recruited by Zhang, and Zhang was appointed as the deputy commander of the Ezhou Road, and Ma You, the commander of the right army, was appointed as the Hanyang Zhijun.

古文：八月辛未朔，以礼部尚书谢克家参知政事。
现代文：八月初一，任命礼部尚书谢克家为参知政事。
English: On the first day of August, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shang Shusheke, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：壬申，李成请降于江州，诏抚纳之，张浚停程千秋官、文州编管。
现代文：初二，李成在江州请求投降，下诏抚纳李成。张浚停程千秋的官职，文州编管。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Li Cheng asked for surrender in Jiangzhou, and the emperor accepted Li Cheng. Zhang Jun was suspended from his official post, and became the editor-in-chief of Wenzhou.

古文：癸酉，选神武中军亲兵六百人番直禁中。
现代文：初三，挑选神武中军亲兵六百人在皇宫轮流值班。
English: In the third year of junior high school, 600 soldiers of the Jinwu Middle Army were selected to take turns on duty at the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲戌，诏侍从官日一员轮直，进故事关治体者。
现代文：初四，下诏侍从官每日一人轮流值班，进讲有关国家治理的史事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, one attendant of the Lower Zhao will take turns on duty every day to give a lecture on the history of national governance.

古文：丁丑，以韩世忠为检校少师、武成感德军节度使，张俊检校少保、宁武昭庆军节度使。
现代文：初七，任命韩世忠为检校少师、武成感德军节度使，张俊为检校少保、宁武昭庆军节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Han Shizhong was appointed as the junior inspector of the school, Wu Chengxin as the German military festival envoy, Zhang Jun as the junior inspector of the school, and Ningwu Zhaoqing as the military festival envoy.

古文：赠监察御史常安民、左司谏江公望为左谏议大夫，录其后二人。
现代文：赠给监察御史常安民、左司谏江公望为左谏议大夫，录用他们后代二人。
English: It was presented to the inspector of imperial history, Chang'an Min, and the left secretary, Minjiang Gongwang, was appointed as the left secretary and two of their descendants were hired.

古文：庚辰，太后至自虔州。
现代文：初十，太后从虔州回到朝廷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the empress dowager returned to the imperial court from Kenzhou.

古文：薛庆及金人战于扬州城下，死之。郭仲威奔兴化县。
现代文：薛庆在扬州城下与金军交战，战死。郭仲威逃奔兴化县。
English: Xue Qing fought with the Chinese army under the Yangzhou Castle and was killed. Guo Zhongwei fled to Xinghua County.

古文：辛巳，侍御史沈与求、户部侍郎季陵以论宰相范宗尹，皆黜，宗尹复视事。
现代文：十一日，侍御史沈与求、户部侍郎季陵因议论宰相范宗尹都被罢除，范宗尹又到朝廷处理政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the chamberlains Shinyoku and Suirei were both dismissed for discussing the prime minister, Fan Zongyin, and Fan Zongyin went to the imperial court to deal with political affairs.

古文：癸未，卢益罢。
现代文：十三日，卢益罢官。
English: On the 13th, Lu Yi resigned.

古文：张浚复永兴军，再贬曲端海州团练副使、万州安置。
现代文：张浚收复永兴军，再次贬降曲端为海州团练副使，万州安置。
English: Zhang Jun recovered the Yongxing Army, once again demoted Qudan to the vice-envoy of Haizhou regimental training, and resettled him in Wanzhou.

古文：甲申，陈万信余党雷进作乱。
现代文：十四日，陈万信同党雷进叛乱。
English: On the 14th, Chen Wanxin and his party went into rebellion.

古文：乙酉，焚慈利、石门二县。
现代文：十五日，焚烧慈利、石门二县。
English: On the 15th, two counties, Cili and Shimen, were burned.

古文：以御营司参议官王择仁权河东制置使，山砦首领韦忠佺为都统制，宋用臣、冯赛同都统制。
现代文：任命御营司参议官王择仁暂代河东制置使，山寨首领韦忠侄为副都统制，宋用臣、冯赛为都统制。
English: He appointed Wang Ziren, the councillor of the Imperial General Headquarters, as the temporary representative of the Eastern Capital Administration, Wei Zhongnei, the leader of the cottages, as the deputy of the Central Capital Administration, and Song Yoson and Feng Sai as the Central Capital Administration.

古文：丙戌，命李成、吴翊捍御上流，翊弃城去，以成为四州镇抚使。
现代文：十六日，命令李成、吴诩防御长江上流，吴诩弃城逃走；任命李成为四州镇抚使。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Li Cheng and Wu Gan to defend the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and Wu Gan abandoned the city and fled; he appointed Li to be the governor of Shizhou.

古文：命李捧便道过信州招捕靳赛。
现代文：命令李捧抄小路经过信州捕获靳赛。
English: He ordered Li Chuxu to take a shortcut through Shinshu to capture Yuxai.

古文：戊子，以饶、信妖贼平，赦二州徒以下囚，蠲民今年役钱。
现代文：十八日，因饶、信妖贼平定，赦免二州徒刑以下囚犯，免除百姓今年役钱。
English: On the 18th, he purged criminals, pardoned prisoners with less than two years of imprisonment, and exempted people from paying taxes this year.

古文：贬滕康永州、刘珏衡州，并居住。
现代文：贬降滕康永州居住、文妊玉衡州居住。
English: Those who live in Tengkang and Yongzhou will be downgraded, while those who live in Yugang and Yuhangzhou will be upgraded.

古文：己丑，诏岳飞救楚州，仍命刘光世遣兵往援。
现代文：十九日，下诏岳飞救援楚州，并命令刘光世也派兵救援。
English: On the 19th, Yuefei issued an order to rescue Chuzhou, and ordered Liu Guangxi to send troops to help.

古文：辛卯，杜湛渡江讨群贼，复石首等五县。
现代文：二十一日，杜湛渡过长江讨伐群贼，收复石首等五县。
English: On the 21st, Du Zhan crossed the Yangtze River to fight the bandits and recovered the first five counties.

古文：壬辰，盗入梅州，杀守臣沈同之，大掠而去。
现代文：二十二日，盗进人梅州，杀死守臣沈同之，大肆劫掠后退走。
English: On the 22nd, he stole into Renmeizhou, killed the guard Shen Tong, plundered extensively, and then retreated.

古文：癸巳，命福建安抚使程迈会兵讨范汝为。
现代文：二十三日，命令福建安抚使程迈集结军队讨伐范汝为。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered Cheng Mai, the pacifier of Fujian Province, to assemble an army to fight Fan Ru.

古文：甲午，知虢州邵兴遣统制阎兴及金人战于解州东，屡破之。
现代文：二十四日，貌州知州邵兴派遣统制阎兴在解州东与金军交战，多次打败金军。
English: On the 24th, Shao Xing, the governor of Chizhou, dispatched Yan Xing to fight against the Chinese army in the east of Dezhou, defeating the Chinese army many times.

古文：金人陷承州。
现代文：金军攻陷承州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Choshu.

古文：命陈思恭屯兵明州，以防海道。
现代文：命令陈思恭屯兵明州，防止金军从海道进攻。
English: He ordered Chen Sikyong to garrison Mingzhou to prevent the Chinese army from attacking from the sea route.

古文：刘光世遣王德、郦琼以轻兵渡江。
现代文：刘光世派遣王德、丽仔琼率领轻捷部队渡江。
English: Liu Guangshi dispatched Wang De and Lizi Qiong to lead the Light Rapid Deployment Force to cross the river.

古文：乙未，遇金游骑于召伯埭，败之。
现代文：二十五日，王德、丽仔琼在召伯球遇到金军游骑部队，打败金军。
English: On the 25th, Wang De and Lizi Qiong met the roving troops of the Golden Army in Zhaobaiqiu and defeated the Golden Army.

古文：戊戌，以桑仲为襄阳、邓随郢州镇抚使。
现代文：二十八日，任命桑仲为襄阳、邓、随、即州镇抚使。
English: On the 28th, Kuangzhong was appointed as Xiangyang, Deng, Sui, that is, the state township envoy.

古文：是月，罢提举广西峒丁。
现代文：这个月，罢除提举广西酮丁。
English: This month, Guangxi Ketongding was removed from the list.

古文：孔彦舟入潭州，宣抚司参议官王以宁率兵拒之，以宁败，遁去。
现代文：孔彦舟进人潭州，宣抚司参议官王以宁率军抵抗，王以宁失败逃走。
English: Kong Yan Zhou entered Ren Tan Zhou, and Wang Yining, the Procurator of the State Council, led the army to resist. Wang Yining failed and fled.

古文：宣抚司主管机宜文字傅雱在彦舟军中，承制以彦舟权湖南副总管。
现代文：宣抚司主管机宜文字傅稣在孔彦舟军队中，承接朝廷命令任命孔彦舟暂代湖南副总管。
English: In the army of Kong Yanzhou, the chief of the propaganda department took the opportunity to appoint Kong Yanzhou as the interim deputy general manager of Hunan upon the order of the imperial court.

古文：刘纲以乏食，率兵奔溧阳。
现代文：刘纲因缺乏粮晌率兵逃奔漂阳。
English: Liu Gang and his soldiers ran away due to lack of food and water.

古文：九月辛丑，吕颐浩入见，请益兵，命王燮、巨师古、颜孝恭兵隶之，分屯境内。
现代文：九月初二，吕颐浩人朝晋见高宗，请求增加部队，命令臼燮、巨师古、颜孝恭所部归他管辖，分别屯驻境内各地。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Emperor Jin met with Gao Zong, requesting an increase in troops, and ordered the headquarters of Usuki, Kojigu, and Yan Xiaogong to be under his jurisdiction and stationed in various parts of the territory.

古文：壬寅，诏诸路决囚。
现代文：初三，下诏各路判决囚犯。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, all the prisoners were sentenced.

古文：甲辰，徽宗皇后郑氏崩于五国城。
现代文：初五，徽宗皇后郑氏在五国城去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Empress Zheng of Huizong died in Wuguo City.

古文：戊申，命秦凤将关师古领兵赴行在。
现代文：初九，命令秦凤将领关师古率领部队赶往行在。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Qin Feng ordered General Guan Shi Gu to lead the troops to rush there.

古文：刘豫僭位于北京。
现代文：刘豫在北京称帝即位。
English: Liu Yu was crowned emperor in Beijing.

古文：庚戌，禁宣抚司僚属便宜行事，及京西、湖南北路勿隶川、陕宣抚司节制。
现代文：十一日，禁止宣抚司僚属不上奏自行决断事务，及京西、湖南、湖北路不归属川、陕宣抚司节制。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was forbidden for the Xuanfu officials to make decisions on their own without being consulted, and the Xuanfu and Shaanxi Xuanfu officials were restricted in the west of Beijing, Hunan and Hubei provinces.

古文：癸丑，泾原同统制李彦琦及金人战于洛河车渡，败之。
现代文：十四日，径原同统制李彦琦与金军在洛河车渡交战，打败金军。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Li Yanqi, the former leader of the Communist Party of China, fought with the Chinese army in Luohe County, and defeated the Chinese army.

古文：乙卯，罢中书门下省检正官。
现代文：十六日，罢除中书门下省检正官。
English: On the 16th, the provincial procurator under Zhongshumen was dismissed.

古文：桑仲陷均、房州，进犯白土关。
现代文：桑仲攻陷均、房州，进犯白土关。
English: Kuanzhong invaded Jin, Fangzhou, and attacked Baidu Pass.

古文：丙辰，复增左右司郎官为四员。
现代文：十七日，重新增置左右司郎官为四名。
English: On the 17th, the number of left and right deputy secretaries was increased to four.

古文：金人攻楚州，赵立死之。
现代文：金军攻打楚州，赵立战死。
English: The Chinese army attacked Chuzhou, and Zhao Li was killed.

古文：丁巳，赵霖复和州。
现代文：十八日，赵霖收复和州。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Lin recovered Hezhou.

古文：李成遣马进犯兴国军。
现代文：李成派遣马进进犯兴国军。
English: Li Cheng sent horses to invade the Xingguo army.

古文：戊午，荆、襄贼赵延寿犯德安府，陈规拒却之。
现代文：十九日，荆、襄贼赵延寿进犯德安府，陈规抵抗打退他们。
English: On the 19th, Jing and fellow thief Zhao Yanshou invaded De'an Prefecture, and Chen Gui resisted and repulsed them.

古文：己未，金、均、房安抚使王彦及桑仲战于平丽县，败之。
现代文：二十日，金、均、房州安抚使王彦与桑仲在平丽县交战，打败桑仲。
English: On the 20th, Jin, Jun, and Fangzhou pacified Wang Yan and Kuang Zhong in Pingli County, and defeated Kuang Zhong.

古文：王诣彦降。
现代文：王到王彦军中投降。
English: Wang went to the middle of Wang Yan's army and surrendered.

古文：辛酉，李捧击范汝为于建州，官军皆溃，捧遁去。
现代文：二十二日，李捧在建州攻打范汝为，官军都溃败，李捧逃走。
English: On the 22nd, Li Huping attacked Fan Ru in Jianzhou. The government army was defeated, and Li Huping fled.

古文：金人犯扬州，统制靳赛逆战于港河，败之。
现代文：金军进犯扬州，统制靳赛在港河抵抗，打败金军。
English: The gold army invaded Yangzhou, and controlled the resistance of Bisei in the Ganghe River, defeating the gold army.

古文：金人陷延安府，执吕世存，又陷保安军。
现代文：金军攻陷延安府，俘获吕世存，又攻陷保安军。
English: The Chinese army invaded Yan'an Prefecture, captured Lü Shixun, and invaded the security forces.

古文：癸亥，张浚遣都统制刘锡统五路兵及金将娄宿战于富平县，浚驻邠州督战，官军败绩。
现代文：二十四日，张浚派遣都统制刘锡率领五路军队在富平县与金军将领娄宿交战，张浚驻扎州督战，官军溃败。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Jun dispatched Liu Xi, who was in charge of the capital city, to lead the Fifth Route Army in Fuping County to fight with the general of the Jin Army, Shu Shuku. Zhang Jun was stationed in the state to supervise the battle, and the government army was defeated.

古文：丙寅，给刘光世犒军银二万两、绢二万匹。
现代文：二十七日，发给刘光世搞军银二万两、绢二万匹。
English: On the 27th, 20,000 taels of silver and 20,000 horses were sent to Liu Guangxi to engage in military affairs.

古文：戊辰，赵延寿焚郢州。
现代文：二十九日，赵延寿焚烧即州。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Yanshou burned Zhouzhou.

古文：金人陷楚州，镇抚使李彦先求救，兵败死之。
现代文：金军攻陷楚州，镇抚使李彦先率兵来救援，兵败战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded Chuzhou, and the governor sent Li Yan to lead the first troops to come to the rescue. The soldiers were defeated and died.

古文：冬十月庚午朔，张浚斩环庆经略使赵哲于邠州，贬刘锡合州安置，命诸将各领兵归本路。
现代文：冬十月初一，张浚在州斩杀环庆经略使赵哲，贬降刘锡合州安置，命令各将领率兵回到本路。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zhang Jun killed Zhao Zhe, the envoy of the Central Committee of the Qing Dynasty, demoted Liu Xi and placed him in Hezhou, and ordered the generals and soldiers to return to the main road.

古文：浚退保秦州，陕西大震。
现代文：张浚退保秦州，陕西大为震惊。
English: Zhang Jun retreated to Qinzhou, Shaanxi was greatly shocked.

古文：辛未，秦桧自楚州金将挞懒军中归于涟水军丁禩水砦。
现代文：初二，秦桧从楚州金军将领挞懒军中回到涟水军丁得水寨。
English: On the second day of the first grade, Qin Hui returned to Ding De Water Fort from the Lazy Army, the general of the Chuzhou Golden Army.

古文：壬申，命杨惟忠、王燮讨李成。
现代文：初三，命令杨惟忠、臼剪寸伐李成。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he ordered Yang Weizhong to cut Li Cheng into pieces.

古文：丙子，以孔彦舟为鼎、澧、辰、沅、靖州镇抚使。
现代文：初七，任命孔彦舟为鼎、遭、辰、沉、靖州镇抚使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed Kong Yanzhou as the leading, second, third, fourth, and fifth Jingzhou Zhenfu envoy.

古文：戊寅，钟相余党杨华举兵围桃源县。
现代文：初九，钟相余党杨华率兵围攻桃源县。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Yang Hua of the Zhongxiang Yu Party led an army to besiege Taoyuan County.

古文：己卯，马进犯江州。
现代文：初十，马进进犯江州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Ma Jin invaded Jiangzhou.

古文：癸未，程昌寓入鼎州，击杨华，破之。
现代文：十四日，程昌辨进人鼎州，击败杨华。
English: On the 14th, Cheng Changbin entered Dingzhou and defeated Yang Hua.

古文：甲申，趣刘光世救楚州。
现代文：十五日，督促刘光世救援楚州。
English: On the 15th, Liu Guangse was urged to rescue Chuzhou.

古文：丁亥，以李回同知枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命李回为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Li Hui was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：庚寅，遣前御史台检法官谢向招范汝为。
现代文：二十一日，派遣前御史台检法官谢向招降范汝为。
English: On the twenty-first day, the former judge of the Supreme People's Procuratorate of Taiwan was dispatched to thank Fan Ru for the invitation.

古文：召张浚以兵入援。
现代文：召张浚率兵人援。
English: Zhang Jian and his soldiers were summoned to help.

古文：追复李邦彦观文殿大学士。
现代文：追复李邦彦为观文殿大学士。
English: The reinstatement of Li Bangyan as a member of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：辛卯，虔州贼李敦仁及弟世雄举兵破虔州石城县。
现代文：二十二日，虔州贼李敦仁及弟李世雄率兵攻破虔州石城县。
English: On the 22nd, Li Dunren and his brother Li Shixiong, the bandits of Qianzhou, led an army to break through Qianzhou Shicheng County.

古文：甲午，命杨惟忠率兵屯江州。
现代文：二十五日，命令杨惟忠率兵屯驻江州。
English: On the 25th, Yang Weizhong and his soldiers were ordered to stay in Jiangzhou.

古文：乙未，岳飞破金人于承州。
现代文：二十六日，岳飞在承州攻破金军。
English: On the 26th, Yuefei defeated the Jin army in Chengzhou.

古文：丙申，诏刘光世节制诸镇，守御通、泰州，伺便袭金人过淮。
现代文：二十七日，下诏刘光世节制各镇抚使，守卫通州、泰州，伺机袭击渡过淮河的金军。
English: On the 27th, Liu Guangxu issued an edict to restrain all the town officials, guard Tongzhou and Taizhou, and wait for the opportunity to attack the Chinese army crossing the Huai River.

古文：是月，冯长宁弃城去，寻以淮宁附刘豫。
现代文：这个月，冯长宁弃城逃走，不久占据淮宁府归附刘豫。
English: This month, Feng Changning abandoned the city and fled, and soon occupied Huaining Prefecture and annexed Liu Yu.

古文：江东贼张琪犯建康府，刘洪道招降之。
现代文：江东贼张琪进犯建康府，刘洪道招降张琪。
English: Jiangdong thief Zhang Qi invaded Jiankangfu, Liu Hongdao recruited Zhang Qi.

古文：环庆路统制慕洧叛附于夏国。
现代文：环庆路统制慕消叛乱归附夏国。
English: Huanqing Road was taken over by the central government, and it was annexed to Xia Province.

古文：泾原统制张中彦、经略司干办赵彬叛降金人。
现代文：径原统制张中彦、经略司干办赵彬叛乱投降金军。
English: Zhang Zhongyan, the leader of the Radial Command System, and Zhao Bin, the leader of the Economic Strategy Division, rebelled and surrendered to the Golden Army.

古文：刘忠据岳州平江县白面山。
现代文：刘忠割据岳州平江县白面山。
English: Liu Zhong was assigned to Baimen Mountain in Pingjiang County, Yuezhou.

古文：王善余党祝友拥众为乱，屯滁州龚家城。
现代文：王善余党祝友率兵叛乱，屯驻滁州龚家城。
English: Wang Shan Yu's party, Zhu Rongrui, led the soldiers in the rebellion and settled in Zhangjiajie, Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月癸卯，慕洧遂引金人围环州。
现代文：十一月初四，慕消向导金军攻打环州。
English: On the fourth day of the eleventh month of the first month of the year, Muxie led the gold army to attack Huanzhou.

古文：吕颐浩复南康军。
现代文：吕颐浩收复南康军。
English: Lv Yinghao recovers the Nankang Army.

古文：甲辰，赵鼎罢。
现代文：初五，赵鼎罢官。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhao Ding was dismissed.

古文：乙巳，秦桧入见。
现代文：初六，秦桧朝见高宗。
English: In the sixth year of his junior high school, Qin Yu met Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：丙午，岳飞弃泰州渡江。
现代文：初七，岳飞放弃泰州渡江。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Yue Fei gave up crossing the Taizhou River.

古文：丁未，金人犯泰州，飞退保江阴军沙上。
现代文：初八，金军侵犯泰州，岳飞退保江阴军沙上。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Golden Army invaded Taizhou, and Yuefei retreated to Baoji.

古文：以御史中丞富直柔签书枢密院事，秦桧为礼部尚书。
现代文：任命御史中承富直柔为签书枢密院事，秦桧为礼部尚书。
English: In the imperial history, Chengfu Zhi Rong was appointed as the secretary of the Privy Council, and Qin Hui as the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：李允文杀岳州守臣袁植。
现代文：李允文杀死岳州守臣袁植。
English: Li Yunwen killed Yuezhou Governor Yuan Zhi.

古文：吕颐浩会杨惟忠与马进战南康军，不利。
现代文：吕颐浩会合杨惟忠在南康军与马进交战，官军不利。
English: Yang Weizhong meets with Ma Jin of the Nankang Army in Lv Hao, and the government army is at a disadvantage.

古文：戊申，颐浩遣巨师古救江州，为进所败，师古奔洪州。
现代文：初九，吕颐浩派遣巨师古救援江州，为马进打败，巨师古逃奔洪州。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Lv Yinghao dispatched the great master Gu to rescue Jiangzhou, defeated Ma Jin, and the great master Gu fled to Hongzhou.

古文：金人陷泾原，经略使刘锜退屯瓦亭。
现代文：金军攻陷径原，经略使刘倚退屯瓦亭。
English: The Chinese army captured the Plain of Reeds and forced Liu Jie to retreat to Tunwatei.

古文：己酉，以孔彦舟为湖南副总管，部兵屯潭州。
现代文：初十，任命孔彦舟为湖南副总管，部兵屯驻潭州。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Kong Yanzhou as the deputy general manager of Hunan, and stationed troops in Tanzhou.

古文：庚戌，命神武副军都统制辛企宗讨范汝为。
现代文：十一日，命令神武副军都统制辛企宗讨伐范汝为。
English: On the 11th day, he ordered Jinwu's vice-army to take control of the capital and fight the Sin Kezong.

古文：壬子，日南至，率百官遥拜二帝，乙卯，改枢密院干办官为计议官，丙辰，金人陷泰州。
现代文：十三日，冬至，高宗率文武百官遥拜徽、钦二帝。十六日，枢密院干办官改为计议官。十七日，金军攻陷泰州。
English: On the 13th day, the winter solstice, Gao Zong led hundreds of civil and military officials to worship Hui and Qin II. On the 16th day, the steward of the Privy Council was changed to the deliberation officer. On the 17th day, the Chinese army invaded Taizhou.

古文：丁巳，通州守臣吕伸弃城去。
现代文：十八日，通州守臣吕伸弃城逃走。
English: On the 18th, Tongzhou governor Lu Shin abandoned the city and fled.

古文：王彦攻桑仲于黄水，破之，房州平。张浚以彦为金、均、房州镇抚使。
现代文：王彦在黄水攻破桑仲，房州平定。张浚任命王彦为金、均、房州镇抚使。
English: Wang Yan defeated Kuanzhong in Huangshui and subdued Fangzhou. Zhang Jun appointed Wang Yan as the governor of Jin, Jun and Fangzhou.

古文：崔增犯池州，刘洪道遣统制李贵击走之，增以兵万余诣吕颐浩降。
现代文：崔增进犯池州，刘洪道派遣统制李贵击退崔增，崔增率军一万多人到吕颐浩军中投降。
English: Cui Zengbo invaded Chizhou, Liu Hongdao dispatched Li Gui to repel Cui Zengbo, and more than ten thousand of Cui Zengbo's army surrendered to Lv Yinghao's army.

古文：甲子，诏诸路守臣节制管内军马。
现代文：二十五日，下诏各路守臣节制管辖区军马。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, it was decreed that the guards and retainers of each road should restrain the military horses in the jurisdiction.

古文：丙寅，金、房州贼郭希犯归州，田祐恭击却之。
现代文：二十七日，金、房州贼郭希进犯归州，田恭击退郭希。
English: On the 27th, Kim and Fangzhou thief Guo Xi attacked and returned to Fangzhou, and Tian Gong fought off Guo Xi.

古文：命王燮部兵万人速援吕颐浩。
现代文：命令巨燮率兵一万人急速救援吕颐浩。
English: He ordered the giant centipede to lead ten thousand soldiers to quickly rescue Lv Yinghao.

古文：祝友渡江大掠。
现代文：祝友渡江大肆劫掠。
English: Wishing friends across the river plundered.

古文：是月，张浚退军兴州，秦凤副总管吴玠收余兵保大散关东和尚原。
现代文：这个月，张浚军退到兴州，秦凤副总管吴收集余兵退保大散关东面的和尚原。
English: This month, Zhang Junjun's army retreated to Xingzhou, and Wu Qinfeng, the deputy commander-in-chief, collected the remaining soldiers to retreat to the east of the Great Sankuan and Monchohara.

古文：诏诸路转运司括借寺观田租芦场三年。
现代文：下诏各路转运使搜刮预借寺观田租芦场三年。
English: The following decree on the transfer of various roads has made it possible to scrape the pre-borrowed temple of Guanta to rent the reed field for three years.

古文：十二月庚午，安南请入贡，却之。
现代文：十二月初二，安南请求来进贡，高宗拒绝了。
English: On the second day of December, Annan requested to pay tribute, but Gaozong refused.

古文：辛未，遣度支员外郎韩球括饶、信诸州钱粮，凡江、湖、川、广上供皆拘之。
现代文：初三，派遣度支员外郎韩球搜刮饶州、信州钱粮，凡是江、湖、川、广地区上供的钱粮，都集中收来。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Hanqiu, a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, was sent to search for money grain in Raozhou and Shinshu, and all the money grain supplied by rivers, lakes, rivers and wide areas was collected centrally.

古文：壬申，命孔彦舟援江州。
现代文：初四，命令孔彦舟救援江州。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he ordered Kong Yanzhou to rescue Jiangzhou.

古文：丙子，禁节制军马守臣便宜行事。
现代文：初八，禁止节制军马守臣不上奏自行决断处理事务。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it is forbidden for temperate warriors, horses, and retainers to handle affairs on their own without report.

古文：丁丑，马进分兵犯洪州。
现代文：初九，马进分出部分兵力进犯洪州。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Ma Jinbi sent part of his troops to invade Hongzhou.

古文：乙丑，李敦仁犯抚州崇仁县，命李山、张忠彦讨之。
现代文：乙丑日，李敦仁进犯抚州崇仁县，命令李山、张忠彦讨伐李敦仁。
English: On the second day of the second lunar month, Li Dunren invaded Fuzhou Chongren County and ordered Li Shan and Zhang Tadahiko to fight against Li Dunren.

古文：壬辰，金人犯熙州，总管刘惟辅战败之，杀五千余人。
现代文：二十四日，金军侵犯熙州，总管刘惟辅打败金军，杀死五千多人。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army invaded Xizhou. The general manager Liu Weiyu defeated the Chinese army and killed more than 5,000 people.

古文：甲午，再犯熙州，惟辅军溃被执，死之。
现代文：二十六日，金军又一次侵犯熙州，刘惟辅军队溃败，被金军俘获，刘惟辅战死。
English: On the 26th, the Chinese army invaded Xizhou again. Liu Weifu's army was defeated and captured by the Chinese army. Liu Weifu died in the battle.

古文：乙未，以张俊为江南招讨使，讨李成。
现代文：二十七日，任命张俊为江南招讨使，讨伐李成。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Jun was appointed as the envoy to the south of the Yangtze River to fight against Li Cheng.

古文：丁酉，范汝为降，诏补民兵统领。
现代文：二十九日，范汝为投降，下诏补给他民兵统领的官职。
English: On the 29th, Fan Ru surrendered and was given the post of militia commander.

古文：是月，张浚承制复海州团练副使曲端左武大夫，兴州居住。
现代文：这个月，张浚秉承朝廷命令恢复海州团练副使曲端为左武大夫，兴州居住。
English: This month, Zhang Jun, adhering to the order of the imperial court to resume the group training in Haizhou, the deputy envoy, Qu Duan, is the doctor of Zuo Wu, and lives in Xingzhou.

古文：是岁，宣抚处置司始令四川民岁输激赏绢三十三万匹有奇。
现代文：这一年，宣抚处置司开始命令四川人民每年输纳三十三万多匹激赏绢。
English: In the same year, the Department of Publicity and Disposition began to order the people of Sichuan to donate more than 330,000 animals to the zoo each year.

古文：绍兴元年春正月己亥朔，帝在越州，帅百官遥拜二帝，不受朝贺。
现代文：绍兴元年春正月初一，高宗在越州，率文武百官遥拜徽、钦二帝，不接受大臣们的朝拜和祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Shaoxing, Gaozong arrived in Yuezhou, leading hundreds of officers and men to worship Hui, Qin II, and did not accept the worship and congratulations of the ministers.

古文：下诏改元，释流以下囚，复贤良方正直言极谏科，蠲两浙夏税、和买绢丝绵，减闽中上供银三分之一。
现代文：下诏改元为绍兴，释放流刑以下的囚犯，恢复贤良方正直言极谏科，免除两浙夏税、和买绸绢丝绵，闽中上供银减少三分之一。
English: In the following edict, the Yuan was changed to Shaoxing, prisoners under the sentence of exile were released, the virtue of honesty was restored, two Zhejiang summer taxes were exempted, and silk and silk were bought, and the supply of silver to the middle and upper classes was reduced by one third.

古文：戊申，改命张俊为江淮路招讨使。
现代文：初十，改命张俊为江淮路招讨使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhang Jun changed his name to Jianghuai Road Recruitment Envoy.

古文：复江、池路为江东、西路，分荆湖江南诸州为荆湖东、西路，置安抚司，治池、江、鄂、鼎州。
现代文：恢复江、池州路为江东、江西路，分荆湖江南各州为荆湖东、西路，设置安抚司，治所设在池、江、鄂、鼎州。
English: The restoration of the Yangtze River and Chizhou Road to the East and West of the Yangtze River, and the division of the states south of the Yangtze River into the East and West of the Yangtze River, the establishment of a pacification department, and the establishment of a government office in the Chizhou, Yangtze River, Hubei and Dingzhou.

古文：江南东、西路各置转运司，荆湖东、西路转运司通掌两路财赋。
现代文：江南东、西路分别设置转运司，荆湖东、西路转运司统一掌管两路财赋。
English: Jiangnan East and West Road Transportation Departments will be set up separately, and Jinghu East and West Road Transportation Departments will be in charge of the two roads.

古文：以吕颐浩为江东路安抚大使，朱胜非江西路安抚大使。
现代文：任命吕颐浩为江东路安抚大使，朱胜非为江西路安抚大使。
English: Appointed Lv Yinghao as the pacification ambassador of the East Jiangsu Province, and Zhu Shengfei as the pacification ambassador of the West Jiangsu Province.

古文：马进陷江州，守臣姚舜明弃城走，端明殿学士王易简等二百人皆遇害。
现代文：马进攻陷江州，守臣姚舜明弃城逃走，端明殿学士王易简等二百人被杀害。
English: Ma attacked Zhenjiang Prefecture, guarding minister Yao Zhiming abandoned the city and fled, and 200 people, including Duanming Palace scholar Wang Yijian, were killed.

古文：己酉，岳飞引兵之洪州。
现代文：十一日，岳飞率兵到洪州。
English: On the 11th, Yuefei led his soldiers to Hongzhou.

古文：金人犯扬州。
现代文：金军侵犯扬州。
English: The Chinese army invaded Yangzhou.

古文：谢向率范汝为讨平建阳贼刘时举。
现代文：谢向率领范汝为讨平建阳贼刘时举。
English: Xie Xiang led Fan Ru to fight against Liu Shih, the thief of Jianyang.

古文：金人犯秦州，吴玠击败之。
现代文：金军侵犯秦州，吴率军打败金军。
English: The gold army invaded Qinzhou, and Wu led the army to defeat the gold army.

古文：庚戌，又犯西宁州，守臣俱重迎降。
现代文：十二日，金军又侵犯西宁州，守臣俱重投降金军。
English: On the 12th, the Chinese army invaded Xining again, and all the vassals surrendered to the Chinese army.

古文：辛亥，谢克家罢。
现代文：十三日，谢克家罢官。
English: On the 13th, the Shiek family resigned.

古文：壬子，诏京官、知县并堂除，内外侍从各举可任县令者二人，犯赃连坐。
现代文：十四日，下诏京官、知县都由政事堂直接奏注差遣，内外侍从官分别推举可以担任知县的人二名，被荐人犯了贪赃罪，举荐人要遭到处罚。
English: On the 14th, the Beijing and Zhixian officials were dispatched directly by the State Council. The internal and external attendants separately elected two people who could serve as Zhixian. The person who was recommended committed the crime of corruption, and the person who recommended him should be punished.

古文：自今不历县令者勿除监司、郎官，不历外任者勿除侍从，著为令。
现代文：从今以后没有担任县令的不能授给监司、郎官，没有经历外任的不能授给侍从官，成为法令。
English: From now on, those who have not served as county magistrates cannot be awarded to supervisors and stewards, and those who have not been assigned to outside positions cannot be awarded to attendants, which becomes a law.

古文：张中孚以原州叛降于金。
现代文：张中孚据原州投降金军。
English: Zhang Zhongfu surrenders to the Golden Army according to Wonju.

古文：癸丑，李敦仁围建昌军，蔡延世率乡兵击退之。
现代文：十五日，李敦仁围攻建昌军，蔡延世率乡兵击退李敦仁。
English: On the 15th, Li Dunren besieged the Jianchang army, and Cai Yanshi led the townspeople to repel Li Dunren.

古文：贼曹成入汉阳军，李允文招之，成入鄂州，复趋江西。
现代文：贼曹成进人汉阳军，李允文招降曹成，曹成进人鄂州，又进人江西。
English: The thief Cao Cheng entered the Hanyang Army, Li Yunwen recruited Cao Cheng, Cao Cheng entered Ezhou, and entered Jiangxi.

古文：丁巳，吕颐浩遣王燮、崔增击贼于湖口，大败之。
现代文：十九日，吕颐浩派遣臼燮、崔增在湖口打击叛贼，大败叛贼。
English: On the 19th, Lv Biao sent Usheng and Cui Zeng to fight the traitors in Hukou, and the traitors were defeated.

古文：颐浩及杨惟忠引兵趋江州。
现代文：吕颐浩、杨惟忠率兵前往江州。
English: Lv Yinghao and Yang Weizhong led the troops to Jiangzhou.

古文：辛酉，诏： 太祖创业垂统，德被万世。
现代文：二十三日，下诏： 太祖创业，把基业留传给后世子孙，德泽恩惠波及万世千秋。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: The great-grandfather started a business and left the foundation business to future generations. De Zeen's benevolence extends to all ages.

古文：神宗诏封子孙一人为安定郡王，世世勿绝。
现代文：神宗下诏封子孙一人为安定郡王，世世代代不要断绝。
English: According to the Shenzong, only one of the descendants of Zhaofu was the king of Ding'an County, and it should not be cut off for generations.

古文：自宣和末至今未举。
现代文：自从宣和末年至今没有实行。
English: It has not been implemented since the end of the declaration of peace.

古文：有司其上应袭封人名，依故事举行。 
现代文：有关部门奏上应该继承封位人的姓名，按照旧时的典章制度施行。 
English: The relevant departments should inherit the name of the enthroned person and implement it in accordance with the old ordinance system.

古文：金人再围环州。
现代文：金军再次围攻环州。
English: The Chinese army once again besieged Huanzhou.

古文：是月，张浚复曲端荣州刺史、提举江州太平观、阆州居住，寻移恭州。
现代文：这个月，张浚恢复曲端为荣州刺史、提举江州太平观，间州居住，不久迁移恭州。
English: This month, Zhang Jun restored the curved end to the history of Rongzhou and promoted the Taiping view of Jiangzhou. He lived in interstate, and soon moved to Jingzhou.

古文：二月戊辰朔，宜章县民李冬至二作乱，犯英、连、韶、郴诸州。
现代文：二月初一，宜章县民李冬至二叛乱，进犯英、连、韶、郴各州。
English: On the first day of February, the people of Yizhang County revolted on the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, and invaded the provinces of Ying, Lian, Handan and Handan.

古文：祝友降，刘光世分其军，以友知楚州。
现代文：祝友投降，刘光世瓜分他的部队，任命祝友为楚州知州。
English: Zhu Rongyu surrendered, and Liu Guangshi divided his troops and appointed Zhu Rongyu as the leader of Chuzhou.

古文：庚午，改行宫禁卫所为行在皇城司。
现代文：初三，改行宫禁卫所为行在皇城司。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was transferred to the Imperial Palace Guard Station, and then to the Imperial City Division.

古文：李成党邵友犯筠州，守臣王庭秀弃城去。
现代文：李成的同伙邵友攻打箔州，守臣王庭秀弃城逃走。
English: Li Cheng's accomplice Shao You attacked Hwaizhou, and the retainer Wang Tingxiu abandoned the city and fled.

古文：辛未，犯临江军，守臣康倬遁。
现代文：初四，邵友攻打临江军，守臣康悼逃跑。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Shao You attacked the Linjiang Army, and Shou Sheng Kang mourned and fled.

古文：壬申，初定岁祀天地、社稷，如奏告之礼。
现代文：初五，初步拟定每年祭祀天地、社翟，像奏告之礼一样。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, a preliminary plan is drawn up for the annual sacrifice of heaven, earth, and society, just like the ceremony of the proclamation.

古文：癸酉，桑仲自枣阳引兵还襄阳。
现代文：初六，桑仲从枣阳率兵退还襄阳。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Kuangzhong led his troops from Zaoyang back to Yangyang.

古文：丁丑，鄜延将李永琦叛，犯庆阳府。
现代文：初十，延将领李永琦叛乱，攻打庆阳府。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Yan general Li Yongqin rebelled and attacked Qingyang.

古文：戊寅，禁州郡统兵官擅招安乱军盗贼。
现代文：十一日，禁止州郡统领军队的守官擅自招降叛乱军队和盗贼。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was forbidden for the military commander of the state and county to recruit rebel troops and thieves without authorization.

古文：己卯，日中有黑子，四日乃没。
现代文：十二日，太阳中出现黑子，四天后才消失。
English: On the twelfth day, a spot appeared in the sun, and four days later it disappeared.

古文：以辛企宗为福建制置使。
现代文：任命辛企宗为福建制置使。
English: Xin Qizong was appointed as the Fujian envoy.

古文：辛巳，以秦桧参知政事。
现代文：十四日，任命秦桧为参知政事。
English: On the 14th, Qin Hui was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：壬午，水贼张荣入通州。
现代文：十五日，水贼张荣进人通州。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Rong, a water thief, entered Zhentongzhou.

古文：癸未，诏辛企宗及谢向罢遣范汝为兵，汝为不听命。
现代文：十六日，下诏辛企宗及谢向罢除遣散范汝为的部队，范汝为不接受命令。
English: On the 16th, Xin Kizong and Xie Xiang issued an order to dismiss and disband Fan Ru's troops. Fan Ru refused to accept the order.

古文：甲申，诏王燮、张俊掎角讨捕马进等贼。
现代文：十七日，下诏臼燮、张俊分兵牵制夹击马进等贼。
English: On the 17th, under the command of Usuki and Zhang Jun, a detachment of soldiers attacked Majin and other thieves.

古文：丙戌，复置秘书省。
现代文：十九日，重置秘书省。
English: On the 19th, the secretary of the ministry was replaced.

古文：己丑，命孔彦舟、吕颐浩、张俊会兵讨李成。
现代文：二十二日，命令孔彦舟、吕颐浩、张俊联合起来讨伐李成。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Kong Yanzhou, Lv Yinghao, and Zhang Jun to unite to fight Li Cheng.

古文：壬辰，雨雹。
现代文：二十五日，降冰雹。
English: On the 20th, hail fell.

古文：癸巳，邵青寇宣州。
现代文：二十六日，邵青攻打宣州。
English: On the 26th, Shao Qing attacked Xuanzhou.

古文：丙申，诏诸路提刑司以八月类省试。
现代文：二十九日，下诏各路提刑司八月举行类省试。
English: On the 29th, it was announced that the Criminal Investigation Department would hold a similar provincial trial in August.

古文：张浚亦以便宜合川、陕举人即置司类省试。
现代文：张浚也自行决定川陕举人集中在治所举行类省试。
English: Zhang Jun also decided at his own discretion to concentrate people in Sichuan and Shaanxi provinces to hold provincial examinations.

古文：丁酉，宣教郎范焘坐诬讼孟忠厚，且及太后，除名、潮州编管。
现代文：三十日，宣教郎范煮因诬告孟忠厚，而且涉及太后，被除名，潮州编管。
English: On the 30th, the missionary, Lang Fanqi, was expelled for falsely accusing Meng Zhonghou and implicating the empress dowager.

古文：是月，李敦仁犯汀州。
现代文：这个月，李敦仁攻打汀州。
English: This month, Li Dunren attacked Tingzhou.

古文：马友遣其党犯鄂州，总管张用拒却之。
现代文：马友派遣同伙攻打鄂州，总管张用率兵抵抗，打退他们。
English: Ma You dispatched his allies to attack Ezhou. Zhang, the commander-in-chief, used his soldiers to resist and beat them back.

古文：李允文以友权湖南招捉公事，友大掠汉阳而去，过岳州，守臣吴锡遁，友据之。
现代文：李允文任命马友暂代湖南招捉公事，马友大肆劫掠汉阳后退走，经过岳少，守臣吴锡逃跑，马友占据岳州。
English: Li Yunwen appointed Ma You as the temporary representative of Hunan Province to recruit and capture officials. Ma You plundered Hanyang and then retreated. He passed through Yuexiao, the retainer Wu Xi fled, and Ma You occupied Yuezhou.

古文：三月戊戌朔，以严、衢二州守臣柳约、李处劢有治效，各进职一等。
现代文：三月初一，因严、瞥二州守臣柳约、李处肋管理有成效，分别升官一级。
English: On the first day of March, due to the strict and effective management of the two state guards Liu Yu and Li Shili, they were promoted to the first level.

古文：吕颐浩遣崔增、王燮合兵击李成于湖口，大败之。
现代文：吕颐浩派遣崔增、臼燮集中兵力在湖口攻击李成，大败李成。
English: Lv Yinghao sent Cui Zeng and Usong to attack Li Cheng in Hukou, and Li Cheng was defeated.

古文：庚子，张浚以富平之败上疏待罪，诏免。
现代文：初三，张浚因富平战役失败上疏自勃，等待治罪，高宗下诏免治其罪。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jun was furious because of the defeat in the Battle of Fuping, and waited to be punished. However, Emperor Gaozong pardoned him.

古文：壬寅，禁诸路遏籴。
现代文：初五，禁止各路阻止人境购买粮食。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, it is forbidden for all roads to prevent people from buying grain.

古文：丙午，张俊、杨沂中、岳飞渡江击马进，大败之。
现代文：初九，张俊、杨沂中、岳飞渡江攻击马进，大败马进。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Zhang Jun, Yang Xizhong, and Yue Fei crossed the river to attack Ma Jin, and defeated Ma Jin.

古文：孔彦舟焚掠潭州，趋衡州。
现代文：孔彦舟焚烧劫掠潭州，率兵前往衡州。
English: Kong Yan Zhou burned and plundered Tan Zhou and led his troops to Heng Zhou.

古文：己酉，李成犯饶州。
现代文：十二日，李成攻打饶州。
English: On the 12th, Li Cheng attacked Raozhou.

古文：庚戌，张俊、杨沂中复击马进于筠河，败之，复筠州，进奔江州。
现代文：十三日，张俊、杨沂中又在箔河打击马进，击败马进，收复箔州，马进逃奔江州。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Jun and Yang Yuzhong again attacked Majin in Foil River, defeated Majin, recovered Foil State, and Majin fled to Pengjiang State.

古文：男子崔绍祖诈称越王中子，受上皇诏为天下兵马大元帅，赵霖以闻。
现代文：有男子崔绍祖诈称自己是越王中子，受上皇诏令为天下兵马大元帅，赵霖把这件事报告朝廷。
English: A man named Cui Shaozu fraudulently claimed to be the middle son of the king of Yue, and was made the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses by imperial decree. Zhao Lin reported this to the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，诏赴行在。
现代文：十四日，下诏崔绍祖到行在。
English: On the 14th, the next emperor, Cui Shaozu, arrived.

古文：命刘光世兼淮南、京东路宣抚使，治扬州，经画屯田。
现代文：命令刘光世兼淮南、京东路宣抚使，治所扬州。经营筹划屯田。
English: He ordered Liu Guangzhe, who was also the propaganda envoy of Huainan and Jingdong Road, to govern Yangzhou, and to plan the management of the military cantonment.

古文：光世迄不行。
现代文：刘光世最终没有前往。
English: In the end, Liu Guangxi did not go.

古文：甲寅，罢诸州免行钱。
现代文：十七日，罢除各州免行钱。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the states are exempted from the tax.

古文：乙卯，金人破阶州。
现代文：十八日，金军攻破阶州。
English: On the 18th, the Chinese army broke through Zhazhou.

古文：庚申，刘超犯澧州，统制杜湛率兵拒之。
现代文：二十三日，刘超攻打遭州，统制杜湛率兵抵抗刘超。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Chao was attacked by the state, and Du Zhan led the troops to resist Liu Chao.

古文：甲子，始下诏罪李成，募人禽斩，赦胁从者。
现代文：二十七日，开始下诏处罚李成，招募擒获斩杀李成，赦免李成的同伙。
English: On the 27th, the government began to issue edicts to punish Li Cheng, recruit cadres to kill Li Cheng, and pardon Li Cheng's accomplices.

古文：张俊追马进至江州，进战败，遁去。
现代文：张俊追击马进到江州，马进战败逃走。
English: Zhang Jun chased Ma Jin to Jiangzhou. Ma Jin was defeated and fled.

古文：乙丑，俊复江州，杨沂中、赵密引兵追击进，又大败之。
现代文：二十八日，张俊收复江州，杨沂中、赵密率兵追击马进，又大败马进。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Jun recovered Jiangzhou, Yang Yuzhong and Zhao Mi led soldiers to pursue Ma Jin, and defeated Ma Jin.

古文：成奔蕲州。
现代文：李成逃奔薪州。
English: Li Cheng fled to Zhouzhou.

古文：振淮南、京东西流民。
现代文：贩济淮南、京东西流民。
English: Traffickers target Huainan and Beijing's eastern and western exiles.

古文：荆湖东路安抚使向子諲说降马友，与共讨李冬至二，平之。
现代文：荆湖东路安抚使向子劝说马友投降，与他共同讨伐李冬至二，平定李冬至二。
English: Jinghu East Road pacification envoy Xiangzi persuaded Ma You to surrender, and jointly fought Li Dongzhi II and pacified Li Dongzhi II.

古文：是月，金人攻张荣缩头湖水砦，荣击败之，来告捷，刘光世以荣知泰州。
现代文：这个月，金军进攻张荣缩头湖水寨，张荣打败金军，来向上司告捷，刘光世任命张荣为泰州知州。
English: This month, the Golden Army attacked Zhang Rong's Shizitou Lake Water Village. Zhang Rong defeated the Golden Army and came to congratulate his superior. Liu Guangxi appointed Zhang Rong as Taizhou Zhizhou.

古文：金人迫兴州，张浚退保阆州，以端明殿学士张深为四川制置使，及参议军事刘子羽趋益昌。参谋官王庶为龙图阁待制、知兴元府兼利、夔两路制置使，节制陕西诸路。
现代文：金军逼近兴州，张浚退保间州，任命端明殿学士张深为四川制置使，命令参议军事刘子羽前往益昌；任命参谋官王庶为龙图阁待制、兴元知府兼利夔两路制置使，节制陕西各路。
English: The gold army approached Xingzhou, Zhang Jun withdrew to Baozhongzhou, appointed Duanmingdian Scholar Zhang Sheng as the envoy to Sichuan, and ordered the military counselor Liu Zi Yu to go to Yichang; appointed staff officer Wang Zhe as the envoy to Longtu Ge, the governor of Xingyuan and the two-way envoy to Lishui, and controlled all roads in Shaanxi.

古文：桑仲以其党李道知随州。
现代文：桑仲任命同伙李道为随州知州。
English: Sang Chung appointed his comrade Li Dao as Suizhou chizhou.

古文：夏四月己巳，张浚承制分利、阆、剑、文、政五州为利州路，置经略安抚使。
现代文：夏四月初三，张浚秉承朝命分利、间、剑、文、政五州为利州路，设置经略安抚使。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhang Jun, adhering to the order of the dynasty to divide the five states of interest, diplomacy, sword, literature and politics, set up a pacifying envoy.

古文：庚午，张琪复叛，犯当涂县。
现代文：初四，张琪又叛乱，攻打当涂县。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Zhang Qi rebelled again and attacked Dangtu County.

古文：金将挞懒渡淮，屯宿迁县马乐湖。
现代文：金军将领挞懒渡过淮河，屯驻宿迁县马乐湖。
English: The general of the Jin Army, Zou Lazy, crossed the Huai River and settled in Ma Le Lake, Suqian County.

古文：壬申，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙亥，刘光世复楚州。
现代文：初九，刘光世收复楚州。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Liu Guangxi recovered Chuzhou.

古文：阶州统领杜肇复阶州。
现代文：阶州统领杜肇收复阶州。
English: Du Zhaozhou, the leader of Zhouzhou, recovered Zhouzhou.

古文：马友引兵入潭州。
现代文：马友引兵进人潭州。
English: Ma You led an army into RenTanZhou.

古文：戊寅，杜琪弃澧州，刘超入据之。
现代文：十二日，杜琪放弃遭州，刘超占据遭州。
English: On the 12th, Du Qi gave up the state, and Liu Chao occupied the state.

古文：己卯，金泾原帅赵彬犯耀州，守臣赵澄击走之。
现代文：十三日，金军径原将领赵彬攻打耀州，守臣赵澄击退赵彬。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Bin, the former general of the Jin Army, attacked Yaozhou, and the guardian Zhao Cheng repulsed Zhao Bin.

古文：淮贼寇宏犯濠州。
现代文：淮贼寇宏攻打壕州。
English: Huai Kuo Hong attacked Trench State.

古文：庚辰，隆祐皇太后崩。
现代文：十四日，隆皇太后逝世。
English: On the 14th, Empress Dowager Long passed away.

古文：癸未，桑仲陷邓州，守将谭兖弃城走，河东招捉使王俊引兵来援，仲执斩之，以其党李横知州事。
现代文：十七日，桑仲攻陷邓州，守将谭充弃城逃走，河东招抚使王俊率兵来救援，桑仲俘获并斩杀王俊，任命同伙李横为邓州知州。
English: On the seventeenth day, Sang Chung invaded Dangzhou, the garrison commander Tan Chung abandoned the city and fled, and the governor of Hedong Province persuaded Wang Jun to come to the rescue with his soldiers. Sang Chung captured and killed Wang Jun, and appointed his comrade Li Yang as the governor of Dangzhou.

古文：乙酉，为太后制期年服。
现代文：十九日，为太后制丧服。
English: On the 19th, the mourning clothes for the empress dowager were made.

古文：辛卯，群臣三上表，始听政。
现代文：二十五日，大臣们三次上表，高宗才答应处理政事。
English: On the 25th, the ministers met three times, and only then did Gao Zong agree to deal with political affairs.

古文：癸巳，命向子諲发兵及广西安抚许中同扼险要，防孔彦舟入广，仍许胁从自新以招谕。
现代文：二十七日，命令向子发兵与广西安抚使许中同扼险要，防止孔彦舟进人两广，仍然允许他的同伙悔过自新，朝廷招降他们。
English: On the 27th, the order was issued to send troops to Xiangzi and the Guangxi pacification envoy Xu Zhongxiao to prevent Kong Yanzhou from entering the two regions, and still allow his accomplices to repent and reform, and the court invited them to surrender.

古文：是月，京西贼李忠陷商州，守臣杨伯孙弃城走。
现代文：这个月，京西贼李忠攻陷商州，守臣杨伯孙弃城逃走。
English: This month, the Western Capital thief Li Zhong invaded Shangzhou, and the guardian Yang Bosun abandoned the city and fled.

古文：吕颐浩遣统制阎皋、通判建昌军蔡延世袭击李敦仁，禽其弟世雄、世臣。
现代文：吕颐浩派遣统制阎皋、建昌军通判蔡延世袭击李敦仁，擒获他的弟弟李世雄、李世臣。
English: Lv Yinghao dispatched the commander-in-chief of the Yan'an and Jianchang armies, Cai Yanshi, to attack Li Dunren and capture his younger brothers Li Shixiong and Li Shichen.

古文：五月丙申朔，蠲江西路被贼州县赋税。
现代文：五月初一，免除江西路遭贼劫掠州县赋税。
English: On the first day of May, Jiangxi Road was exempted from the county tax.

古文：丁酉，诏吕颐浩、朱胜非、刘光世并兼淮南诸州宣抚使。
现代文：初二，下诏吕颐浩、朱胜非、刘光世并兼淮南各州宣抚使。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the following officials, Lv Yinghao, Zhu Shengfei, and Liu Guangxi, also served as the envoys of the Huainan states.

古文：始夺李成官。
现代文：开始削夺李成官职。
English: He began to reduce Li Cheng's official position.

古文：戊戌，以张用为舒、蕲镇抚使。
现代文：初三，任命张用为舒、薪州镇抚使。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhang Ying was appointed as Shu and Zhouzhou township envoy.

古文：癸卯，作 大宋中兴宝 成。
现代文：初八，制作成功 大宋中兴宝 。
English: At the age of eight, he succeeded in producing Dasong Zhongxingbao.

古文：金人犯和尚原，吴玠击败之。
现代文：金军攻打和尚原，吴打退金军。
English: The gold army attacked Monchohara, and Wu beat back the gold army.

古文：丙午，初复召试馆职之制。
现代文：十一日，初次恢复召试馆职制度。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the recruitment office system was restored for the first time.

古文：刘光世遣统制王德袭扬州，执郭仲威以献，伏诛。
现代文：刘光世派遣统制王德袭击扬州，俘获郭仲威献给朝廷，郭仲威被处以死刑。
English: Liu Guangxing sent the regent Wang De to attack Yangzhou, captured Guo Zhongwei and presented him to the imperial court. Guo Zhongwei was sentenced to death.

古文：辛亥，水军统制邵青叛，围太平州。
现代文：十六日，水军统制邵青叛乱，围攻太平州。
English: On the 16th, the naval forces controlled the rebellion of Shao Qing and besieged Taiping.

古文：赵彬及金人合兵围庆阳府，守臣杨可升击败之。
现代文：赵彬与金军会合发兵围攻庆阳府，守臣杨可升击败他们。
English: Zhao Bin gathered with the Jin army and sent troops to besiege Qingyang Prefecture, and the vassal Yang Kesheng defeated them.

古文：甲寅，命知南外宗正事令选年幼宗子，将育于宫中。
现代文：十九日，命令知南外宗正事令溉挑选年幼宗子，将在宫中养育。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Chunan Gaizong to select a young heir and raise him in the palace.

古文：诏收耆户长役钱。
现代文：下诏征收鲁户长役钱。
English: The following edict imposes the Lu household chieftain money.

古文：己未，诏州县因军期征取民财物者，立式榜示，禁过数催扰。
现代文：二十四日，下诏州县因军事行动征取百姓财物，确定征取范围和数量，贴出布告，禁止超过数量征取，骚扰百姓。
English: On the 24th, Zhaozhou County began to requisition people's property due to military operations, determined the scope and quantity of the requisition, posted a notice, prohibited the requisition exceeding the quantity, and harassed the people.

古文：庚申，孔彦舟引众过潭州，马友迎击，大败之。
现代文：二十五日，孔彦舟率众经过潭州，马友迎击，大败孔彦舟。
English: On the 25th, Kong Yan Zhou led the crowd through Tanzhou, Ma You counterattacked, and defeated Kong Yan Zhou.

古文：彦舟趋岳州，犯鄂州。
现代文：孔彦舟到岳州，攻打鄂州。
English: Kong Yan Zhou went to Yuezhou and attacked Ezhou.

古文：李允文以彦舟为湖东副总管，屯汉阳。
现代文：李允文任命孔彦舟为湖东副总管，屯驻汉阳。
English: Li Yunwen appointed Kong Yanzhou as the deputy head of Hudong, stationed in Hanyang.

古文：辛酉，以直秘阁宗纲为荆南镇抚司措置营田官，樊宾为副。
现代文：二十六日，任命直秘阁宗纲为荆南镇抚司措置营田官，樊宾为副官。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the direct secretary of the cabinet, Zong Gang, was appointed as the Jingnan Town Fusiliers and the camp officer, and Zou Bin was appointed as the adjutant.

古文：壬戌，刘光世招降邵青。
现代文：二十七日，刘光世招降邵青。
English: On the 27th, Liu Guangxi recruited Shao Qing.

古文：赵延寿据分宁县，吕颐浩招降之。
现代文：赵延寿占据分宁县，吕颐浩招降赵延寿。
English: Zhao Yanshou occupied Fening County, Lv Hao recruited and demoted Zhao Yanshou.

古文：是月，张俊及李成战于黄梅县，杀马进，成败，遁归刘豫。
现代文：这个月，张俊与李成在黄梅县交战，杀死马进，李成失败，逃跑归顺刘豫。
English: This month, Zhang Jun and Li Cheng fought in Huangmei County, killed Ma Jin, Li Cheng failed, and fled to Liu Yu.

古文：李忠、谭兖各率兵归张浚，浚命王庶分其兵。
现代文：李忠、谭充分别率兵归顺张浚，张浚命令王庶瓜分其军。
English: Li Zhong and Tan Zheng separately led their troops to Shun Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun ordered Wang Shiao to divide his army.

古文：张用复叛，寇江西，岳飞招降之。
现代文：张用又叛乱，攻打江西，岳飞招降张用。
English: Zhangye rebelled again, attacked Jiangxi, and Yuefei invited Zhangye to surrender.

古文：湖州进士吴木上书论宰执，送徽州编管。
现代文：湖州进士吴木上书议论宰执大臣，被送到徽州编管。
English: Wu Muxian, a scholar from Huzhou, was sent to Huizhou to edit a book about the prime minister.

古文：六月己巳，始鬻承直、修武郎以下官。
现代文：六月初四，开始买承直、修武郎以下官。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, he started to serve as the second-in-command after Kaji Shosei and Shuburo.

古文：壬申，册谥皇太后曰昭慈献烈。
现代文：初七，册溢皇太后为昭慈献烈。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, Empress Dowager Choi dedicated herself to Shoji.

古文：甲戌，张琪犯余杭，又犯宣州。
现代文：初九，张琪攻打余杭，又攻打宣州。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Zhang Qi attacked Yuhang, and then attacked Xuanzhou.

古文：乙亥，月犯心。
现代文：初十，月亮侵犯心宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the moon encroaches on the heart.

古文：庚辰，湖贼杨华、杨广犯鼎州，程昌寓拒却之。
现代文：十五日，湖贼杨华、杨广攻打鼎州，程昌辨打退他们。
English: On the 15th, the lake bandits Yang Hua and Yang Guang attacked Dingzhou, and Chengchang fought them off.

古文：上虞县丞娄寅亮上书，请选立继嗣。
现代文：上虞县承娄寅亮上书，请挑选确立皇太子。
English: Shangyu County, Chengyu County, please select and establish the crown prince.

古文：壬午，权欑昭慈献烈皇后于越州。
现代文：十七日，昭慈献烈皇后陵寝暂时崇奉在越州。
English: On the 17th, the queen's tomb was temporarily venerated in Yuezhou.

古文：张琪犯徽州，守臣郭东弃城去，琪入据之。
现代文：张琪攻打徽州，守臣郭东弃城逃走，张琪占据徽州。
English: Zhang Qi attacked Huizhou, Guodong abandoned the city and fled, and Zhang Qi occupied Huizhou.

古文：癸未，张浚引大兵至瑞昌县之丁家洲，李允文自鄂部兵归浚，浚并其兵，护允文赴行在。
现代文：十八日，张俊率领大部队到瑞昌县的丁家洲，李允文从鄂州率兵归隶张俊，张俊合并他的军队，护送李允文到行在。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun led a large force to Dingjiazhou in Ruichang County. Li Yunwen led the troops from Ezhou to Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun merged his army and escorted Li Yunwen to Xingye.

古文：邵青率舟师至镇江，甲申，复叛去。
现代文：邵青率舟师到镇江，十九日，又叛乱离去。
English: Shao Qing led the boat division to Zhenjiang, and on the 19th, the rebellion left.

古文：丁亥，崇安民廖公昭合范汝为余党熊志宁作乱，众既散，志宁复与建阳民丁朝佐合兵陷二县。
现代文：二十二日，崇安民廖公昭集结范汝为余党熊志宁叛乱，部众已经失散，熊志宁又与建阳民丁朝佐联合攻陷二个县。
English: On the 22nd, Liao Gongzhao, a member of the Chong'an People's Government, gathered Fan Ru to lead a rebellion against Xiong Zhining, a member of the remaining party. The group had already dispersed, and Xiong Zhining, together with Jianyang People's Government member Ding Chaoza, jointly captured two counties.

古文：戊子，虑囚。
现代文：二十三日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 23rd, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：己丑，邵青犯江阴军之福山，遣海州镇抚使李进彦、中军统制耿进率舟师会刘光世讨之。
现代文：二十四日，邵青攻打江阴军的福山，派遣海州镇抚使李进彦、中军统制耿进率水师联合刘光世一起讨伐他。
English: On the 24th, Shao Qing attacked Fukuyama of the Jiangyin army, and dispatched the governor of Haizhou, Li Jinyan, the commander of the Chinese army, Geng Jin, and the sailors, together with Liu Guangxi, to fight him.

古文：南安贼吴忠、宋破坛、刘洞天作乱。
现代文：南安贼吴忠、宋破坛、刘洞天叛乱。
English: The Nan'an bandits Wu Zhong, Song Baitan, and Liu Dongtian rebelled.

古文：庚寅，江西提刑司遣官讨之，破坛、洞天皆伏诛，忠遁去。
现代文：二十五日，江西提刑司派遣官员讨伐他们，宋破坛、刘洞天都被处死，吴忠逃跑。
English: On the 25th, the Jiangxi Provincial Criminal Investigation Department dispatched officials to crack down on them. Song Baitan and Liu Dongtian were both executed, and Wu Zhong escaped.

古文：癸巳，熙河统制关师古、洮东安抚郭玠同讨熙州叛兵，连败之。
现代文：二十八日，熙河统制关师古、姚东安抚使郭共同讨伐熙州叛兵，连续打败叛兵。
English: On the 28th, Guo was sent by Guan Shigu and Yao Dong Anfu to fight against the rebels in Xizhou, defeating the rebels in succession.

古文：甲午，广贼邓庆、龚富围南雄州，守臣郑成之率兵民以拒。
现代文：二十九日，广贼邓庆、龚富围攻南雄州，守臣郑成之率兵民抵抗。
English: On the 29th, the Guang bandits Deng Qing and Yan Fu besieged Nanxiongzhou, and the soldiers and people resisted led by the guarding vassal Zheng Cheng.

古文：蠲建、剑、汀州、邵武军租。
现代文：免除建、剑、汀州和邵武军租税。
English: Jian, Jian, Tingzhou and Shaowujun are exempt from the tax.

古文：是月，知虢州邵兴屯卢氏县，为河南统制董先所破，走兴元，先遂取商、虢二州。
现代文：这个月，貌州知州邵兴屯驻卢氏县，被河南统制董先攻破，退走兴元，董先于是攻取商、貌二州。
English: This month, Shao Xingtun of Chizhou and Shao Xingtun of Guanzhou, stationed in Lu County, were defeated by the Henan Unification Council and retreated to Xingyuan. The Council then captured Shang and Guanzhou.

古文：张浚承制以吴玠为陕西诸都统制。
现代文：张浚秉承朝命任命吴为陕西各路都统制。
English: Zhang Jun, adhering to the imperial order, appointed Wu as the governor of all roads in Shaanxi.

古文：时关陇六路尽陷，止余阶、成、岷、凤、洮五郡、凤翔之和尚原、陇州之方山原。
现代文：当时关陇六路都被金军攻陷，只剩下阶、成、山民、凤、姚五郡和凤翔的和尚原、陇州的方山原。
English: At that time, all the six roads of Guanzhong were captured by the Chinese army, leaving only the five counties of Ju, Cheng, Shanmin, Feng, Yao, and Fengxiang, as well as Mozhangyuan and Fangshanyuan in Ganzhou.

古文：粘罕既得陕西地，悉与伪齐。
现代文：粘罕得到陕西大片土地后，全部交给伪齐统治。
English: After Mui Han obtained a large area of land in Shaanxi, he handed it all over to the pseudo-Qi.

古文：秋七月乙未朔，以马友权荆湖东路副总管，趣讨孔彦舟。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命马友暂代荆湖东路副总管，督促讨伐孔彦舟。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Ma You was appointed as the interim deputy general manager of Jinghu East Road to urge the crackdown on Kong Yanzhou.

古文：统制潘逵、后军将胡江等叛、破玉山、弋阳、永丰三县，遣枢密院准备将领徐文讨之。
现代文：统制潘连、后军将领胡江等人叛乱，攻破玉山、弋阳、永丰三县，派遣枢密院准备将领徐文讨伐。
English: He controlled the rebellion of Pan Lian and Hu Jiang, the rear army general, and defeated the three counties of Yushan, Shenyang and Yongfeng, and dispatched the Privy Council to prepare for the general Xu Wen's crusade.

古文：戊戌，吴锡复入邵州。
现代文：初四，吴锡又进人邵州。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Wu Xi entered Shaozhou again.

古文：庚子，以岳飞为神武右副军统制，留军洪州，弹压盗贼。
现代文：初六，任命岳飞为神武右副军统制，留下军队屯驻洪州，镇压盗贼。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Yuefei was appointed as the right vice-commander of the Shenwu army, leaving the army stationed in Hongzhou to suppress the thieves.

古文：辛丑，封伯右武卫大将军令话为安定郡王。
现代文：初七，封伯右武卫大将军令话为安定郡王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, General Hombo Ubuwei issued an order to be the king of Stable County.

古文：壬寅，虔州贼陈颙作乱，命趣捕之。
现代文：初八，虔州贼陈叛乱，命令督促讨伐捕获。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Qianzhou thief Chen rebelled, ordered to supervise the crusade and capture.

古文：甲辰，诏秘书省长贰通修日历。
现代文：初十，下诏秘书省长官、副长官共同修撰日历。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the secretary, governor and vice-governor jointly compiled a calendar.

古文：丙午，刘光世遣将乔仲福击邵青于常熟，为所败。
现代文：十二日，刘光世派遣将领乔仲福在常熟攻打邵青，被邵青打败。
English: On the 12th, Liu Guangxi dispatched General Qiao Zhongfu to attack Shao Qing in Changshu, and was defeated by Shao Qing.

古文：挞懒自宿迁北归。
现代文：挞懒从宿迁北归。
English: Lazy from Sukken north return.

古文：戊申，韩世清追袭张琪，复祁门县。
现代文：十四日，韩世清追击攻打张琪，收复祁门县。
English: On the 14th, Han Shiching chased and attacked Zhang Qi and recovered Zhimen County.

古文：庚戌，张俊执傅雱赴行在。
现代文：十六日，张俊捕获傅稣到行在。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Jun captured Fu Zuo.

古文：张浚以曲端属吏，以武臣康随提点夔路刑狱，与王庶杂治之。
现代文：张浚把曲端交给主管官吏处理，任命武臣康随提点夔路刑狱，与王庶共同处置他。
English: Zhang Jun handed Qu Duan over to the officials in charge, and appointed Wu Zhen Kang as the person to be sent to the Jiaotong Road Penal Prison, and dealt with him together with Wang Shuo.

古文：辛酉，召吕颐浩赴行在。
现代文：二十七日，召吕颐浩赶到行在。
English: On the 27th, Lyu Yinghao was summoned and arrived at the scene.

古文：张琪犯饶州，颐浩遣阎皋击败之。
现代文：张琪攻打饶州，吕颐浩派遣阎皋打败他。
English: Zhang Qi attacked Raozhou, and Lv Yinghao sent Yan Zong to defeat him.

古文：琪党姚兴降，琪走徽州。
现代文：张琪同伙姚兴投降，张琪退走徽州。
English: Zhang Qi's accomplice, Yao Xing, surrendered, and Zhang Qi retreated to Huizhou.

古文：癸亥，范宗尹罢。
现代文：二十九日，范宗尹罢官。
English: On the 29th, Fan Zongyin was dismissed.

古文：是月，濠州守臣李玠弃城去。
现代文：这个月，壕州守臣李弃城逃走。
English: In the same month, Ho Chau's retainer, Li Qicheng, fled the city.

古文：王彦数击败李忠。
现代文：王彦多次打败李忠。
English: Wang Yan defeated Li Zhong many times.

古文：赵彬来归，张浚承制以彬为陕西转运使，又以泾原兵马都监李彦琪为本路副总管，彦琪寻叛去。
现代文：赵彬来归降，张浚秉承朝命任命赵彬为陕西转运使；又任命径原兵马都监李彦琪为本路副总管。李彦琪不久叛乱离去。
English: Zhao Bin came to surrender, and Zhang Jun, adhering to the imperial order, appointed Zhao Bin as the Shaanxi transit envoy; he also appointed Li Yanqi, the former Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor, as the deputy head of this road. Li Yanqi soon rebelled and left.

古文：八月丙寅，以孔彦舟为蕲、黄镇抚使。
现代文：八月初二，任命孔彦舟为薪、黄镇抚使。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, he appointed Kong Yanzhou as the first secretary and Huang Zhen as the second secretary.

古文：丁卯，以知潭州吴敏为荆湖东西、广南路宣抚使。
现代文：初三，任命潭州知州吴敏为荆湖东西路、广南路宣抚使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Wu Min from Chizhou, Tanzhou was appointed as the envoy of Jinghu East-West Road and Guangnan Road.

古文：张浚杀曲端于恭州狱。
现代文：张浚在恭州监狱杀死曲端。
English: Zhang Jun killed Qu Duan in Gongzhou Prison.

古文：张用部兵至瑞昌归张浚，浚以用为本军统制。
现代文：张用率兵到瑞昌归顺张俊，张俊任命张用为本军统制。
English: Zhang Yiming led his soldiers to Ruichang and then returned to Shun Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun appointed Zhang Yiming as the commander of his army.

古文：戊辰，张守等上《绍兴重修敕令格式》。
现代文：初四，张守等人呈上绍兴重修救令格式。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, Zhang Shou and others submitted the form of a rescue order to Shaoxing.

古文：癸酉，复以汪伯彦为江东安抚大使。
现代文：初九，重新任命汪伯彦为江东安抚大使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, Wang Bohian was reappointed as the ambassador for pacification of Jiangdong.

古文：乙亥，吕颐浩遣将李铸复舒州。
现代文：十一日，吕颐浩派遣将领李铸收复舒州。
English: On the 11th day, Lv Yinghao dispatched the general Li Ji to recover Shuzhou.

古文：丁丑，祔昭慈献烈皇后神主于温州太庙。
现代文：十三日，在温州太庙附祭昭慈献烈皇后神主。十四日，张守罢官。
English: On the 13th, in the Wenzhou Imperial Temple, a memorial service was held to commemorate the queen god. On the 14th, Zhang Shou was dismissed.

古文：戊寅，张守罢。以李回参知政事，富直柔同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命李回为参知政事，富直柔为同知枢密院事。
English: Li Hui was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Fuzhizhuo as a member of the Council of Privy Council.

古文：庚辰，杜湛及刘超战于彭山，为所败。
现代文：十六日，杜湛在彭山与刘超交战，为刘超打败。
English: On the 16th, Du Zhan fought with Liu Chao in Pengshan and defeated Liu Chao.

古文：辛巳，超及杨华、杨广合兵复寇鼎州，程昌寓遣湛率舟师击败之。
现代文：十七日，刘超和杨华、杨广联合又一次攻打鼎州，程昌辨派遣杜湛率水军打败他们。
English: On the 17th, Liu Chao, Yang Hua, and Yang Guang jointly attacked Dingzhou again, and Cheng Changbai dispatched Du Tam to lead the navy to defeat them.

古文：遣辛企宗移军福州，讨熊志宁、胡江等诸贼。
现代文：派遣辛企宗把军队迁移福州，讨伐熊志宁、胡江等贼。
English: He dispatched Xin Kenzong to relocate the army to Fuzhou to fight against thieves such as Xiong Zhining and Hu Jiang.

古文：韩世清及张琪战，世清败，琪复入祁门县。
现代文：韩世清与张琪交战，韩世清失败，张琪又进人祁门县。
English: Han Shiching fought with Zhang Qi, Han Shiching lost, and Zhang Qi entered Renmin County.

古文：壬午，命张俊遣兵捕之。
现代文：十八日，命令张俊派遣军队捕获张琪。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Jun ordered to send troops to capture Zhang Qi.

古文：铸绍兴钱。
现代文：铸造绍兴钱。
English: Casting Shaoxing money.

古文：癸未，诏许邵青、张琪胁从徒党自新。
现代文：十九日，下诏允许邵青和张琪的同伙悔过自新。
English: On the 19th, the next edict allowed the accomplices of Shao Qing and Zhang Qi to repent and reform.

古文：乙酉，以李成在顺昌，恐复谋乱，遣使赍蜡书谕淮宁、蔡州将士，立赏格，募人禽斩成。
现代文：二十一日，因李成在顺昌，恐怕他又策划叛乱，派遣使臣持蜡书告谕淮宁、蔡州将士，确定奖赏标准，招募捕获斩杀李成的人。
English: On the 21st, since Li Cheng was in Shunchang, I was afraid that he was planning another rebellion. He sent an envoy with a wax book to tell the soldiers of Huaining and Caizhou, determine the reward standard, and recruit the person who captured and killed Li Cheng.

古文：丁亥，以秦桧为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，任命秦桧为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Qin Hui was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the second-in-command of Zhong Shu, as well as the second-in-command of the Privy Council.

古文：庚寅，复李纲资政殿大学士。
现代文：二十六日，李纲恢复资政殿大学士。
English: On the 26th, Li Gang was reinstated as a Scholar of the Academy of Governance.

古文：募人往京东、河南伺察金、齐动止，仍赍诏慰抚忠义保聚之人。
现代文：招募人员前往京东、河南侦察金军和伪齐的动静，仍持诏书慰问抚恤忠义保聚之人。
English: Recruiters went to Jingdong and Henan to investigate the movements of the Golden Army and the pseudo-Qi, and still held the imperial edict to offer condolences to those who were loyal to the party.

古文：蔡州镇抚使范福弃城去，以土豪李祐代之。
现代文：蔡州镇抚使范福弃城逃走，任命土豪李代替他。
English: The governor of Caizhou ordered Fan Fu to abandon the city and flee, and appointed the local hero Li Zeng to replace him.

古文：辛卯，蠲徽州被贼民家夏税。
现代文：二十七日，免除徽州遭贼劫掠破坏百姓家夏税。
English: On the 27th, Huizhou was exempted from the summer tax of robbing and destroying people's homes.

古文：壬辰，置三省、枢密院赏功房。
现代文：二十八日，设置三省、枢密院赏功房。
English: On the 28th, three provinces and the Privy Council were set up.

古文：是月，知郢州曹成掠湖西，犯沅州，与知复州李宏合屯济阳，既而攻宏，宏奔潭州。
现代文：这个月，呈阵州知州曹成劫掠湖西，攻打沉州，与复州知州李宏一起屯驻浏阳，不久攻打李宏，李宏逃奔潭州。
English: This month, Cao Cheng of Zhizhou and Zhizhou attacked and plundered West Huzhou, attacked and defeated Shenzhou, and stationed in Liuyang with Li Hong of Zhizhou and Fuzhou, and soon attacked Li Hong, and Li Hong fled to Tanzhou.

古文：九月甲午朔，张琪党李捧犯宣州，守臣李彦卿及韩世清击却之。
现代文：九月初一，张琪同伙李捧攻打宣州，守臣李彦卿及韩世清击退李捧。
English: On the first day of September, Zhang Qi's ally Li Huping attacked Xuanzhou, and the vassals Li Yanqing and Han Shiching repulsed Li Huping.

古文：诏江东、西路安抚使复治建康府、洪州。
现代文：下诏江东、西路安抚使的治所分别恢复为建康府、洪州。
English: In the following edict, the administrative centers of Jiangdong and Xilu appeasement envoys were restored to Jiankangfu and Hongzhou respectively.

古文：以王燮知池州，杨惟忠知江州，并兼管内安抚使，率部兵赴官。
现代文：任命臼燮知池州，杨惟忠知江州，并兼任管内安抚使，率所部军队赴任。
English: He appointed Usuki Chichizhou and Yang Wei Zhongzhi Jiangzhou, and concurrently served as a pacifying envoy within the jurisdiction, leading the troops of the headquarters to the post.

古文：丙申，斩李世臣。
现代文：初三，斩杀李世臣。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he killed Li Shichen.

古文：己亥，以资政殿学士叶梦得为江南东路安抚大使，兼寿春等六州宣抚使。
现代文：初六，任命资政殿学士叶梦得为江南东路安抚大使，兼任寿春等六州宣抚使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, Ye Mengde, a Scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed as the pacification ambassador of the south-eastern part of the Yangtze River and concurrently served as the pacification envoy of the six states including Shuchun.

古文：庚子，张琪复陷宣州，已乃遁去。
现代文：初七，张琪又攻陷宣州，随即逃跑离去。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhang Qi attacked Xuanzhou again, and then ran away.

古文：辛丑，命王燮讨琪。
现代文：初八，命令臼燮讨伐张琪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he ordered Usuki to fight Zhang Qi.

古文：丁未，诏岁再遣使省谒诸陵，因抚问河南将士。
现代文：十四日，下诏每年派遣使臣朝拜祖宗陵，并顺便抚恤慰问河南将士。
English: On the 14th, the emperor decreed that envoys should be dispatched annually to pay homage to the ancestral mausoleum, and to offer condolences to the soldiers of Henan Province.

古文：命马友移屯鄂州。
现代文：命令马友移屯鄂州。
English: He ordered Ma You to move to Ezhou.

古文：庚戌，命宗室右监门卫大将军士芑朝飨温州太庙。
现代文：十七日，命宗室右监门卫大将军士芭祭祀温州太庙。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the Grand Master of the Right Division of the Grand Master of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Grand Master's Office of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office of the Grand Master's Office of the Gate Guards of the Grand Master's Office

古文：辛亥，合祭天地于明堂，太祖、太宗并配，大赦。
现代文：十八日，在明堂合祭天地，用太祖、太宗配享，实行大赦。
English: On the 18th, in Myeongdong, the heavens and the earth were united for the festival, and the great ancestors and the great patriarchs were distributed, and an amnesty was carried out.

古文：罢诸州守臣节制军马。
现代文：罢除各州守臣节制军马。
English: Remove the guards, vassals, and restraining troops and horses in each state.

古文：录用元符末上书人子孙。
现代文：录用元符末年上书人子孙。
English: At the end of the letter of employment, the descendants of the previous year's scribes came.

古文：癸丑，复以吕颐浩为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：二十日，又任命吕颐浩为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事兼知枢密院事。
English: On the 20th, Lv Yinghao was also appointed as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's right-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Shumun's left-hand man, Shang Sh

古文：丁巳，王彦破李忠于秦郊店，忠奔归刘豫。
现代文：二十四日，王彦在秦郊店攻败李忠，李忠逃奔归顺刘豫。
English: On the 24th, Wang Yan defeated Li Zhong in Qin Suburban Store, and Li Zhong fled to Shun Liu Yu.

古文：戊午，禁福建转运司抑民出助军钱。
现代文：二十五日，禁止福建转运司强迫百姓出纳助军钱。
English: On the 25th, the Fujian Transportation Department was prohibited from forcing people to pay money to support the military.

古文：落范宗尹观文殿学士。
现代文：范宗尹贬为观文殿学士。
English: Fan Zongyin was relegated to the position of a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：己未，初措置河南诸镇屯田。
现代文：二十六日，开始措置河南各镇屯田。
English: On the 26th, measures began to be taken in all towns in Henan Province.

古文：以户部尚书孟庾为江东西、湖东等路宣谕制置使。
现代文：任命户部尚书孟庚为江东西、湖东等路宣谕制置使。
English: He appointed Meng Geng, the head of the Household Division, as the envoy responsible for the promulgation and establishment of the East-West and East-Hubei routes.

古文：辛酉，诏四方有建策能还两宫者，实封以闻，有效者赏以王爵。
现代文：二十八，下诏：全国各地有能使徽、钦二帝回国的建议策略，密封后报告朝廷。有效的奖赏给王爵。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: All over the country, there were suggested strategies that would enable the return of Emperor Hui and Emperor Qin II to the country, and they were reported to the imperial court after being sealed. An effective reward was given to Wang Jie.

古文：壬戌，遣御史胡世将督捕福建盗贼。
现代文：二十九日，派遣御史胡世将督促捕获福建盗贼。
English: On the 29th, the imperial historian Hu Shiguang was dispatched to urge the capture of the Fujian thief.

古文：是月，长星见。
现代文：这个月，长星出现。
English: This month, the long star appears.

古文：冬十月乙丑，诏蔡京、王黼门人实有才能者，公举叙擢。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏：蔡京、王敞门人确实有才能的人，公开推举，提拔任用。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Cai Jing and Wang Zhandumen were indeed talented people, and they were publicly elected and promoted.

古文：李回罢。
现代文：李回罢官。
English: Li Wei was dismissed.

古文：丙寅，朱胜非分司、江州居住。
现代文：初三，朱胜非遭到处罚，江州居住。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhu Shengfei was punished and forced to live in Jiangzhou.

古文：丁卯，以李允文恣睢专杀，赐死大理狱。
现代文：初四，因李允文悠肆专杀，下大理寺狱，赐死。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he was sentenced to death for the murder of Li Yunwen.

古文：己巳，王德招邵青，降之。
现代文：初六，王德招降邵青，邵青接受招降。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Wang De recruited Shao Qing, and Shao Qing accepted the offer.

古文：庚午，以孟庾参知政事，徽猷阁直学士汤东野为江、淮发运使。
现代文：初七，任命孟庚为参知政事，徽酞阁直学士汤东野为江、淮发运使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Meng Geng was appointed to the post of party secretary, and Tang Dongye, a direct graduate of Huizhong Academy, was appointed to the post of Jiang and Huai dispatched envoy.

古文：刘洪道招降李捧、华旺。
现代文：刘洪道招降李捧、华旺。
English: Liu Hongdao recruited Li Yu and Hua Wang.

古文：壬申，置行在大宗正司。
现代文：初九，设置行在大宗正司。
English: At the beginning of the ninth, the setting line is in the Daizong main division.

古文：癸酉，兀攻和尚原，吴玠及弟璘力战，大败之，兀仅以身免。
现代文：初十，兀攻打和尚原，吴及其弟吴瞒奋力拼战，大败金军，兀得以逃命。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Yao attacked the monk Yuan, Wu and his brother Wu Zhe fought hard, defeated the Jin army, and Yao was able to escape.

古文：丁丑，增置诸路武尉。
现代文：十四日，增加设置各路武尉。
English: On the 14th, the number of military lieutenants was increased.

古文：戊寅，以张俊为太尉，移屯婺州。
现代文：十五日，任命张俊为太尉，移屯姿州。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Jun was appointed as a captain and moved to Zizhou.

古文：壬午，初置见钱关子，招人入中，以给军食。
现代文：十九日，首次设置现钱关子，招人人中，用来供给军晌。
English: On the 19th, the cash gate was set up for the first time, and everyone was recruited to provide military pay.

古文：范汝为复叛，入建州，守臣王浚明弃城走，辛企宗退屯福州。
现代文：范汝为又叛乱，进人建州，守臣王浚明弃城逃走，辛企宗退兵屯驻福州。
English: Fan Ru rebelled again and marched into Jianzhou. Shushi Wang Junming abandoned the city and fled. Xin Qizong retreated and settled in Fuzhou.

古文：甲申，刘超请降，以超守光州。
现代文：二十一日，刘超请求投降，任命刘超守卫光州。
English: On the 21st, Liu Chao requested to surrender and appointed Liu Chao to guard Gwangju.

古文：戊子，崔绍祖伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，崔绍祖被处以死刑。
English: On the 25th, Cui Shaozu was sentenced to death.

古文：诏邵青以舟师赴行在。
现代文：下诏邵青率水军到行在。
English: Under the command of Shao Qing, the navy arrived at the scene.

古文：己丑，升越州为绍兴府。
现代文：二十六日，升越州为绍兴府。
English: On the 26th, Yuezhou was upgraded to Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：李成军正李雱伏诛。
现代文：李成军正李稣处以死刑。
English: Li Chengjun was sentenced to death by Li Zu.

古文：知承州王林禽张琪于楚州，槛送行在。
现代文：承州知州王林在楚州捕获张琪，押送到行在。
English: Wang Lin of Chengzhou Chizhou captured Zhang Qi in Chuzhou and escorted her to Xuanwu.

古文：壬辰，录程颐孙易为分宁令。
现代文：二十九日，录用程颐孙程易为分宁县令。
English: On the 29th, Cheng Yu's grandson Cheng Yi was appointed as the governor of Banning County.

古文：癸巳，范汝为犯邵武军，守臣吴必明、统制李山率兵拒之，众溃，退保光泽县。
现代文：三十日，范汝为攻打邵武军，守臣吴必明、统制李山率兵抵抗，部众溃败，退保光泽县。
English: On the 30th, Fan Ru led the troops to attack Shao Wu's army, and Wu Biming, the guarding minister, and Li Shan, the regent, led the troops to resist. The troops were defeated and withdrew to Guangze County.

古文：关师古复秦州，获郭振。
现代文：关师古收复秦州，俘获郭振。
English: Guan Shi Gu recovered Qinzhou and captured Guo Zhen.

古文：是月，刘豫遣将王世冲寇庐州，守臣王亨大破之，斩世冲。
现代文：这个月，刘豫派遣将领王世冲攻打庐州，守臣王亨大破王世冲军，斩杀王世冲。
English: This month, Liu Yu sent the general Wang Shichong to attack Bozhou, and the vassal Wang Heng defeated Wang Shichong's army and killed Wang Shichong.

古文：曹成及马友战于潭州，成败，还攸县。
现代文：曹成在潭州与马友交战，曹成失败，退回枚县。
English: Cao Cheng fought with Ma You in Tanzhou. Cao Cheng failed and returned to Heshian.

古文：王才遣将丁顺围濠州，刘光世遣兵攻横涧山，顺解围去。
现代文：王才派遣将领丁顺围攻壕州，刘光世派遣军队进攻横涧山，丁顺解围退去。
English: Wang Cai dispatched general Ding Shun to besiege and attack Trench County, Liu Guangshi dispatched troops to attack Hengye Mountain, and Ding Shun lifted the siege and retreated.

古文：十一月乙未，叶梦得至建康，以诏招王才，降之。
现代文：十一月初二，叶梦得到建康，用诏令招王才，使他投降。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Ye Meng obtained Jiankang and summoned Wang Cai with an imperial edict to make him surrender.

古文：丙申，遣内侍抚问孔彦舟、桑仲。
现代文：初三，派遣内侍抚恤慰问孔彦舟、桑仲。
English: On the third day of the first month, the palace attendants were dispatched to console Kong Yanzhou and Kuanzhong.

古文：丁酉，榜谕福建、江东群盗，赦其胁从者。
现代文：初四，张贴布告晓谕福建、江东盗贼，赦免他们当中被逼参加的人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a notice was posted to tell the thieves in Fujian and Jiangdong to pardon those who were forced to participate.

古文：戊戌，诏移跸临安。
现代文：初五，下诏行宫迁往临安。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Imperial Palace was moved to Lin'an.

古文：以孟庾为福建、江西、荆湖宣抚使，神武左军都统制韩世忠副之，仍命械谢向、陆棠赴行在。
现代文：任命孟庚为福建、江西、荆湖宣抚使，神武左军都统制韩世忠为副使，命令拘禁谢向、陆棠到行在。
English: He appointed Meng Geng as the envoy of Fujian, Jiangxi and Jinghu, and Han Shizhong as the deputy envoy of the Left Army of the Jin and Wu Dynasties, and ordered the detention of Xie Xiang and Lu Tang.

古文：己亥，以娄寅亮为监察御史。
现代文：初六，任命娄寅亮为监察御史。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, Gong Yinliang was appointed as the inspector of history.

古文：范汝为犯光泽县，李山走信州。
现代文：范汝为攻打光泽县，李山退走信州。
English: Fan Ru attacked Guangze County, while Li Shan retreated to Shinshu.

古文：辛丑，续编《绍兴太常因革礼》。
现代文：初八，续编绍兴太常因革字巨。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the sequel Shaoxing is too often due to the word "huge."

古文：桑仲请正刘豫恶逆之罪，诏进幸荆南。
现代文：桑仲请求治刘豫潜逆罪行，下诏将亲临荆南。
English: Kuangzhong requested that Liu Yuqun be punished for the crime of treason, and the next emperor will personally visit Jingnan.

古文：乙巳，以右司谏韩璜党富直柔，责监浔州税。
现代文：十二日，因右司谏韩磺阿附富直柔，责监得州税。
English: On the 12th, because the right secretary, Han Xuan, attached to Fuzhongru, was responsible for supervising the state tax.

古文：张琪伏诛。
现代文：张琪处以死刑。
English: Zhang Qi was sentenced to death.

古文：庚戌，富直柔罢。
现代文：十七日，富直柔罢官。
English: On the 17th, Fuchijo resigned.

古文：荆湖、广西宣抚使吴敏始受命置司柳州。
现代文：荆湖、广西宣抚使吴敏开始接受命令在柳州设置宣抚使司。
English: Wu Min began to receive orders to set up an envoy office in Liuzhou from the Jinghu and Guangxi envoys.

古文：辛亥，升康州为德庆府。
现代文：十八日，升康州为德庆府。
English: On the 18th, Shengkang Prefecture became Deqing Prefecture.

古文：壬子，诏内外侍从各举所知三人。
现代文：十九日，下诏朝廷内外侍从官各自推举所知人才三名。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that the attendants inside and outside the imperial court would each nominate three well-known talents.

古文：丙辰，程昌寓遣杜湛击杨华，败之。
现代文：二十三日，程昌派遣杜湛攻打杨华，打败杨华。
English: On the 23rd, Chengchang sent Du Zhan to attack and defeat Yang Hua.

古文：命张俊遣使持诏招曹成，以所部赴行在。
现代文：命令张俊派遣使臣带着诏书招降曹成，率领所部士兵赶往行在。
English: Zhang Jun ordered to send envoys to invite Cao Cheng to surrender with an imperial edict, and led the soldiers of the headquarters to rush there.

古文：己未，杨华请降。
现代文：二十六日，杨华请求投降。
English: On the 26th, Yang Hua requested to surrender.

古文：辛酉，命吏部侍郎李光节制临安府内外诸军。
现代文：二十八日，命令吏部侍郎李光节制临安府内外各军。
English: On the 28th, he ordered Li Guang, the attendant of the cadre department, to restrain all the troops inside and outside Lin'an.

古文：壬戌，曹成犯安仁县，执安抚使向子諲，进攻道州。
现代文：二十九日，曹成攻打安仁县，俘获安抚使向子，进攻道州。
English: On the 29th, Cao Cheng attacked Anren County, captured the pacification envoy Xiangzi, and attacked Daozhou.

古文：是月，前知廓州李惟德以岷州来归。
现代文：这个月，前廓州知州李惟德据崛州归降。
English: This month, former Guozhou, Zhizhou, Li Wei De, according to the subjugation of Horizhou.

古文：吴玠始遣人通书夏国。
现代文：吴开始派遣使臣送去致夏国书。
English: Wu began to send envoys to deliver letters to Xia.

古文：十二月乙丑，吴敏罢。
现代文：十二月初二，吴敏罢官。
English: On the second day of December, Wu Min was dismissed.

古文：丙寅，复置枢密院都承旨。
现代文：初三，重新设置枢密院都承旨。
English: On the third day of the new year, the re-establishment of the Privy Council was decreed.

古文：范汝为遣叶澈寇南剑州，守臣拒战，大破之。
现代文：范汝为派遣叶澈攻打南剑州，守臣张烦率兵抵抗，大破叶澈。
English: Fan Ru dispatched Ye Zhe to attack South Jianzhou, but his vassal Zhang Dui led the troops to resist and defeated Ye Zhe.

古文：己巳，遣吏部侍郎傅崧卿为淮东宣谕使。
现代文：初六，派遣吏部侍郎傅裕卿为淮东宣谕使。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the year, Fu Yuqing, an attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was dispatched as an envoy to Huaidong.

古文：甲戌，遣江东安抚司统制郝晸、颜孝恭讨建昌军贼。
现代文：十一日，派遣江东安抚司统制郝、颜孝恭讨伐建昌军贼。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he dispatched Jiangdong Pacifying Division to control and suppress Yan Xiaogong and Yan Xiaogong to fight against Jianchang bandits.

古文：乙亥，辛企宗罢，仍追三官，率兵赴军前自效。
现代文：十二日，辛企宗罢官，并且追夺三官，率兵到前线效力。
English: On the 12th, Xin Qizong resigned from his post, and pursued the three officials, and led the soldiers to the front line.

古文：丁丑，蠲诸路在官积欠。
现代文：十四日，免除各路拖欠官府钱粮。
English: On the 14th, all roads were exempted from arrears of government money and grain.

古文：诏官户名田过制者与民均科。
现代文：下诏官户占田超过规定、超过数量的，与百姓田一样征收租税。
English: According to the following edict, if the official households occupy more than the prescribed amount of farmland, they will be taxed in the same way as the peasants.

古文：以岳飞为神武副军都统制，部兵屯洪州。
现代文：任命岳飞为神武副军都统制，率兵屯驻洪州。
English: He appointed Yuefei as the deputy commander of the Jinwu army and stationed him in Hongzhou.

古文：曹成陷道州，守臣向子忞弃城走。
现代文：曹成攻陷道州，守臣向子弃城逃走。
English: Cao Cheng attacked and captured Doushou, and Shoucheng abandoned the city to his son and fled.

古文：戊寅，以彗出，求直言。
现代文：十五日，因彗星出现，下诏官民直言极谏。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the appearance of the comet, officials and the public were extremely angry.

古文：增行在职事官职钱。
现代文：增加行在职事官职钱。
English: To increase the salary of officials in service.

古文：遣驾部员外郎李愿抚谕川、陕。
现代文：派遣驾部员外郎李愿安抚慰恤川、陕。
English: Dispatching driver Wei Lang Li is willing to appease and comfort Xichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：己卯，诏两浙分东、西路，置提点刑狱。
现代文：十六日，下诏两浙分东、西路设置提点刑狱。
English: On the 16th, it was decreed that the two Zhejiang Provinces, East and West, would set up special penal prisons.

古文：庚辰，桑仲遣兵寇复州，守臣俎遹弃城去。
现代文：十七日，桑仲派遣军队攻打复州，守臣姐弃城逃走。
English: On the 17th, Kuanzhong sent troops to attack Fuzhou, and Shoucheng abandoned the city and fled.

古文：辛巳，复置广西提举茶盐司。
现代文：十八日，重新设置广西提举茶盐司。
English: On the 18th, the tea and salt department of Guangxi Zhizhong was re-established.

古文：知海州薛安靖杀伪都巡检使王企中，率军民以城来归。
现代文：海州知州薛安靖杀死伪都巡检使王企中，率军民据城归顺。
English: Haizhou Zhizhou Xue Anjing killed the pseudo-metropolitan inspector Wang Qizhong, and led the army to surrender the city.

古文：增诸路酒钱，以备军费。
现代文：增加征收各路酒钱，用来预备军费开支。
English: Increase the levy of all kinds of liquor money, used to prepare for military spending.

古文：甲申，知龙州范综、统制雷仲举兵复水洛城。
现代文：二十一日，龙州知州范综、统制雷仲率兵收复水洛城。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Longzhou, Chizhou, Fan Zong and Lei Zhong led the troops to recapture Shuiluo City.

古文：己丑，起复陕西都统制吴玠为镇西军节度使。
现代文：二十六日，重新起用陕西都统制吴为镇西军节度使。
English: On the 26th, Wu, the governor of Shaanxi, was reappointed as the special envoy of the Western Military Command.

古文：诏江西安抚司趣兵讨捕吴忠。
现代文：下诏江西安抚司督促率兵讨伐捕获吴忠。
English: The next edict urged the director of the Jiangxi Pacification Department to lead troops to fight and capture Wu Zhong.

古文：是月，刘豫遣将王彦充攻寿春府。
现代文：这个月，刘豫派遣王彦充攻打寿春府。
English: This month, Liu Yu sent Wang Yancheng to attack Shuchunfu.

古文：桑仲遣李横复寇金州，王彦拒战于马郎岭，大破之，均州平。
现代文：桑仲派遣李横又攻打金州，王彦率兵在马郎岭抵抗，大破李横，平定均州。
English: Kuang Zhong dispatched Li Yang to attack Jinzhou again, Wang Yan and his soldiers resisted in Malangling, defeated Li Yang and pacified Junzhou.

古文：蔡州褒信县弓手许约叛，据光州。
现代文：蔡州褒信县弓手许约叛乱，占据光州。
English: The archers of Baoxin County in Caizhou promised to rebel and occupy Gwangju.

古文：阶州安抚孙注复洮州。
现代文：阶州安抚使孙注收复姚州。
English: The pacification of Fuzhou enabled Sun Yat-sen to recover Yaozhou.

古文：龚富等围南剑州。
现代文：龚富等人围攻南剑州。
English: Xingfu and others besieged Nanjianzhou.

