古文： 白马非马 ，可乎？
现代文：问：可以说白马与马不同吗？答：可以。
English: Q: Can you say that a white horse is different from a horse? A: Yes.

古文：曰：可。
现代文：问：为什么？
English: He said, "Yes."

古文：曰：何哉？曰：马者，所以命形也；白者，所以命色也。命色者非名形也。
现代文：答： 马 是对物 形 方面的规定， 白马 则是对马 色 方面的规定，对 色 方面的规定与对 形 方面的规定性，自然是不同的。
English: A: The horse is the stipulation of shape, and the white horse is the stipulation of horse color. The stipulation of color and the stipulation of shape are naturally different.

古文：故曰： 白马非马 。曰：有马不可谓无马也。
现代文：白马与马也是不同的。问：有白马，不可以说是没有马。
English: A white horse is also different from a horse. Q: If there is a white horse, it cannot be said that there is no horse.

古文：不可谓无马者，非马也？
现代文：既然不可以说是没有马，那么白马不就是马了？
English: Since it cannot be said that there is no horse, then isn't a white horse just a horse?

古文：有白马为有马，白之，非马何也？
现代文：既然有白马称为有马，那么为什么白色的马不就是马呢？
English: Since a white horse is called a horse, why is a white horse not a horse?

古文：曰：求马，黄、黑马皆可致；求白马，黄、黑马不可致。
现代文：答：如果要求得到 马 ，黄马、黑马都可以满足要求；如果要求得到 白马 ，黄马、黑马就不能满足要求了。
English: Answer: If you ask for a horse, a yellow horse or a black horse, you can meet the requirements; if you ask for a white horse, a yellow horse or a black horse, you cannot meet the requirements.

古文：是白马乃马也，是所求一也。所求一者，白者不异马也，所求不异，如黄、黑马有可有不可，何也？
现代文：假使白马就是马，那么要求得到马与要求得到白马便完全一样了，如果所要求得到的是一样的话，那么白马与马自然就没有区别，但是，如果所要求得到的是一样的话，那么白马与马自然就没有区别，但是，如果要求得到马与要求得到白马没有区别，那么为什么黄马、黑马有时答应有马而不可以答应有白马呢？
English: If a white horse is a horse, then asking for a horse is exactly the same as asking for a white horse. If what is asked for is the same, then there is naturally no difference between a white horse and a horse. However, if what is asked for is the same, then there is naturally no difference between a white horse and a horse. However, if there is no difference between asking for a horse and asking for a white horse, then why do yellow horses and black horses sometimes promise a horse but cannot promise a white horse?

古文：可与不可，其相非明。
现代文：这就明显地说明要求得到 马 与要求得到 白马 是完全不同的。
English: This clearly shows that asking for a horse is completely different from asking for a white horse.

古文：如黄、黑马一也，而可以应有马，而不可以应有白马，是白马之非马，审矣！
现代文：所以，同样一匹黄马或黑马可以答应有马，而不可以答应有白马。所以， 白马区别与马 ，这是清楚不过的事理。
English: Therefore, the same yellow horse or black horse can be allowed to have a horse, but it cannot be allowed to have a white horse. Therefore, the white horse is different from the horse, this is a clear fact.

古文：曰：以马之有色为非马，天下非有无色之马。
现代文：问：照您的意思看来，马有了颜色就不同于马了。
English: Q: According to your view, a horse with a color is different from a horse.

古文：天下无马可乎？曰：马固有色，故有白马。
现代文：可是世界上没有无颜色的马，那么，能说世界上有颜色的马都不算是马了吗？答：马本来有颜色，所以有白马。
English: But there is no colorless horse in the world, so can we say that the colored horses in the world are not horses? Answer: Horses originally have color, so there are white horses.

古文：使马无色，有马如已耳，安取白马？
现代文：假使马没有颜色，就只有 马 而已，怎能称它为白马？
English: If a horse has no color, it is just a horse, so how can it be called a white horse?

古文：故白马非马也。白马者，马与白也。
现代文：但是，规定马是白色的马就与 马 有区别了。
English: But a horse that is white is a different horse.

古文：黑与白，马也？故曰：白马非马也。曰：马未与白为马，白未与马为白。
现代文：所谓白马，是马限定于白色的，限定于白色的马自然与马是有区别的，所以说白马非马。马，是不受 白 限定的马；白，是不受 马 限定的白。
English: The so-called white horse is a horse limited to white, a horse limited to white is naturally different from a horse, so a white horse is not a horse. A horse is a horse that is not limited by white; white is a white that is not limited by a horse.

古文：合马与白，复名白马。是相与以不相与为名，未可。故曰：白马非马未可。
现代文：把白与马两个概念结合起来而相与限定，变成一个新的概念来称呼受了限定的概念，这当然是不可以的。所以，认为白马是马，是不对的。
English: It is, of course, impermissible to combine the two concepts of white and horse into a new concept to call the limited concept. Therefore, it is wrong to think that the white horse is a horse.

古文：曰：以 有白马为有马 ，谓有白马为有黄马，可乎？
现代文：照您看来，有白马就是有马，但是，能够说 有白马就是有黄马 了吗？
English: In your opinion, a white horse is a horse, but can we say that a white horse is a yellow horse?

古文：曰：未可。
现代文：答：当然不可以那样说。
English: A: Of course, you can't say that.

古文：曰：以 有马为异有黄马 ，是异黄马与马也；异黄马与马，是以黄为马非马。以黄马为非马，而以白马为有马，此飞者入池而棺椁异处，此天下之悖言辞也。
现代文：答：既然承认了 有马区别于有黄马 ，就是把黄马与马区别开来了，这就是说黄马非马了；既然把黄马与马区别开来，反而要把白马与马等同起来，这不就是叫飞鸟沉到水里飞翔而让棺与椁各在西东那样好笑吗？
English: Answer: Since it is admitted that there is a difference between a horse and a yellow horse, it is to distinguish a yellow horse from a horse, that is to say, a yellow horse is not a horse; since it is to distinguish a yellow horse from a horse, it is to equate a white horse with a horse. Isn't this just as funny as calling a flying bird to sink into the water and let the coffin and cocoon fly separately in the west and the east?

古文：以 有白马不可谓无马 者，离白之谓也；不离者有白马不可谓有马也。
现代文：这是十足的逻辑混乱。答：认为有白马不能说是没有马，这是不去考虑 白马 而就马形来说的。但是， 白马 却是与马相结合的概念，因此，作为白马的概念不能称为马。
English: This is a complete logical confusion. Answer: To say that there is a white horse cannot mean that there is no horse. This is not to consider the white horse, but the horse shape. However, the white horse is a concept combined with the horse, so the concept of a white horse cannot be called a horse.

古文：故所以为有马者，独以马为有马耳，非以白马为有马耳。
现代文：所以，称为 马 的，仅仅是以马形而称为马，而不能以白马称为马。
English: Therefore, what is called a horse is only called a horse because it is horse-shaped, and cannot be called a horse because it is white.

古文：故其为有马也，不可以谓 白马 也。
现代文：因此，称为马的概念，是不能作为任何一匹具体有色之马的概念的。
English: Therefore, the concept called horse cannot be the concept of any particular colored horse.

古文：以 白者不定所白 ，忘之而可也。
现代文：白色并不限定于哪一种事物的白，具体事物对 白 来说并不妨碍作为 白 的本质，因而可以忽略不计。
English: White is not limited to the whiteness of any one thing, and specific things for white do not interfere with the essence of being white, so they can be ignored.

古文：白马者，言白定所白也，定所白者非白也。
现代文：白马，则是限定于白色的马。
English: The white horse, on the other hand, is limited to white horses.

古文：马者，无去取于色，故黄、黑皆所以应；白马者，有去取于色，黄、黑马皆所以色去，故唯白马独可以应耳。
现代文：限定于具体事物的白是与抽象的、一般的 白 有区别的， 马 ，是不限定于哪一种颜色的，所以，黄马、黑马都可以算数；白马，只限定于白色的马，黄马、黑马都因具有与 白马 不同的颜色而不能算数。
English: The white limited to concrete things is different from the abstract, general white. The horse is not limited to any color, so both the yellow horse and the black horse can be counted; the white horse is only limited to the white horse, and both the yellow horse and the black horse cannot be counted because they have different colors from the white horse.

古文：无去者非有去也，故曰： 白马非马 。
现代文：所以仅仅只有白马才能算数。换言之，只有白马才能答应 白马 的概念，黄马、黑马都不能答应 白马 的概念。
English: Therefore, only the white horse can be counted. In other words, only the white horse can meet the concept of the white horse, and neither the yellow horse nor the black horse can meet the concept of the white horse.

