古文：闵子骞为费宰，问政于孔子。子曰： 以德以法。
现代文：闵子骞任费地长官时，向孔子请教孔子治理百姓的方法。
English: When Zou Zixuan was appointed governor of Fei Province, he asked Confucius for advice on how to govern the people.

古文：夫德法者，御民之具，犹御马之有衔勒也。
现代文：孔子说： 用德政和法制。德政和法制是治理百姓的工具，就好像驾驭马用勒口和缰绳一样。
English: Confucius said, "Using morality and the rule of law. Morality and the rule of law are tools for governing the people, just like using a bridle and reins to control a horse."

古文：君者，人也；吏者，辔也；刑者，策也。
现代文：国君好比驾马的人，官吏好比勒口和缰绳，刑罚好比马鞭。
English: The sovereign is like the driver of a horse, the officials are like the bridle and the reins, and the punishment is like the whip.

古文：夫人君之政，执其辔策而已。 
现代文：君王执政，只要掌握好缰绳和马鞭就可以了。 
English: The monarch governs, as long as he has a good grasp of the reins and the whip.

古文：子骞曰： 敢问古之为政？ 
现代文：闵子骞说： 请问古时候的人是怎样执政的呢？ 
English: Zou Zixuan said: How did people govern in ancient times?

古文：孔子曰： 古者天子以内史为左右手，以德法为衔勒，以百官为辔，以刑罚为策，以万民为马，故御天下数百年而不失。
现代文：孔子说： 古代的天子把内史作为帮助自己执政的左右手，把德政和法制当做马的勒口，把百官当做缰绳，把刑罚当做马鞭，把万民当做马，所以统治天下数百年而没有失误。
English: Confucius said: The ancient heavenly sons took the internal history as the right and left hand to help themselves govern, regarded the German government and the legal system as the horse's bridle, the officials as the reins, the punishment as the whip, and the people as the horse, so they ruled the world for hundreds of years without making mistakes.

古文：善御马者，正衔勒，齐辔策，均马力，和马心。
现代文：善于驾驭马，就要安正马勒口，备齐缰绳马鞭，均衡使用马力，让马齐心合力。
English: To be good at driving a horse, it is necessary to adjust the horse's mouth, prepare a bridle whip, use horsepower in a balanced manner, and let the horse and the horse work together.

古文：故口无声而马应辔，策不举而极千里。
现代文：这样不用吆喝马就应和缰绳的松紧前进，不用扬鞭就可以跑千里之路。
English: In this way, the horse should move forward with the reins loosely without yelling, and the road of thousands of miles can be run without raising the whip.

古文：善御民者，壹其德法，正其百官，以均齐民力，和安民心。
现代文：善于统治民众，就得统一道德和法制，端正百官，均衡地使用民力，使民心安定和谐。
English: To be good at governing the people, it is necessary to unify morality and the legal system, correct all officials, use the people's power in a balanced manner, and make the people's hearts stable and harmonious.

古文：故令不再而民顺从，刑不用而天下治。
现代文：所以法令不用重复申告民众就会服从，刑罚不用再次施行天下就会得到治理。
English: Therefore, the law does not need to be repeatedly declared and the people will obey it, and the punishment does not need to be enforced again and the world will be governed.

古文：是以天地德之，而兆民怀之。
现代文：因此天地也认为他有德，万民也乐于服从。
English: Therefore, heaven and earth also think that he is virtuous, and all people are willing to obey.

古文：夫天地之所德，兆民之所怀，其政美，其民而众称之。
现代文：天地之所以认为他有德，万民之所以乐于服从，因为各种政令美好，民众就会交口称赞。
English: The reason why heaven and earth consider him to be virtuous, and the reason why all people are willing to obey, because all kinds of decrees are beautiful, the people will praise each other.

古文：今人言五帝三王者，其盛无偶，威察若存，其故何也？
现代文：现在人说起五帝、三王，他们的盛德无人能比，他们的威严和明察好像至今还存在，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Nowadays, when people talk about the Five Emperors and Three Kings, no one can match their magnanimity, and their majesty and insight seem to still exist. What is the reason for this?

古文：其法盛，其德厚，故思其德，必称其人，朝夕祝之。
现代文：他们的法制完备，他们的德政深厚，所以一想起他们的德政，必然会称赞他们个人，朝夕为他们祝祷。
English: Their legal system is complete, and their virtue is profound. Therefore, when one thinks of their virtue, one is bound to praise them individually and pray for them in the morning and evening.

古文：升闻于天，上帝俱歆，用永厥世，而丰其年。
现代文：上天听到了这些声音，天帝知道了都很高兴，因此让他们国运长久而年成丰收。
English: Heaven heard these voices, and Heaven's emperors were happy to know, so they let their national fortune last long and had a bumper harvest every year.

古文： 不能御民者，弃其德法，专用刑辟，譬犹御马，弃其衔勒，而专用棰策，其不制也，可必矣。
现代文： 不擅长治理百姓的人，他们丢弃了德政和法制，专用刑罚，这就好比驾驭马，丢弃了勒口和缰绳，而专用棍棒和马鞭，事情做不好是必然的。
English: Those who are not good at governing the people, they have discarded the German government and the legal system, special punishment, which is like driving a horse, discarded the muzzle and bridle, and special sticks and whips, it is inevitable that things are not done well.

古文：夫无衔勒而用棰策，马必伤，车必败。
现代文：驾驭马没有勒口和缰绳，而用棍棒和马鞭，马必然会受伤，车必然会毁坏。
English: If you drive a horse without bridle and reins, but with a club and a whip, the horse is bound to be injured, and the cart is bound to be destroyed.

古文：无德法而用刑，民必流，国必亡。
现代文：没有德政和法制而用刑罚，民众必然会流亡，国家必然会灭亡。
English: Without morality and the rule of law, the people will inevitably go into exile, and the country will inevitably perish.

古文：治国而无德法，则民无修；民无修，则迷惑失道。
现代文：治理国家而没有德政和法制，民众就没有修养，民众没有修养，就会迷惑不走正道。
English: If the country is governed without virtue politics and the legal system, the people will not be cultivated, and if the people are not cultivated, they will be confused and will not follow the right path.

古文：如此，上帝必以其为乱天道也。
现代文：这样，天帝必然认为这是扰乱了天道。
English: In this way, the heavenly emperor must have thought that this was disturbing the heavenly way.

古文：苟乱天道，则刑罚暴，上下相谀，莫知念忠，俱无道故也。
现代文：如果天道混乱，就会刑罚残暴，上下相互奉承讨好，没人再考虑忠诚信义，这都是没有遵循道的缘故。
English: If the way of heaven is chaotic, there will be cruel punishments, mutual flattery, and no one will think about loyalty. All of this is the result of not following the way.

古文：今人言恶者，必比之于桀纣，其故何也？
现代文：现在人们说到恶人，必定会把他比作夏桀、商纣，这是为什么呢？
English: Nowadays, when people talk about the wicked, they are bound to compare him to Xia Yao and Shang Yao. Why is that?

古文：其法不听，其德不厚。
现代文：因为他们制定的法令不能治理国家，他们的德政不厚。
English: Because the decrees they have made cannot govern the country, their German politics are not strong.

古文：故民恶其残虐，莫不吁嗟，朝夕祝之。
现代文：所以民众厌恶他们的残暴，没有不叹息的，会朝夕诅咒他们。
English: That is why the people detest their cruelty and curse them day and night without ceasing.

古文：升闻于天，上帝不蠲，降之以祸罚，灾害并生，用殄厥世。
现代文：上天听到了这些声音，天帝不会免除他们的罪过，降下灾祸来惩罚他们，灾难祸害一起发生，因此灭绝了他们的朝代。
English: Heaven heard these voices. The heavenly emperor would not absolve them of their sins, but punished them with calamities. The calamities occurred simultaneously, thus wiping out their dynasty.

古文：故曰德法者御民之本。
现代文：所以说德政和法制是治理民众的根本方法。
English: Therefore, German politics and the legal system are the fundamental methods of governing the people.

古文： 古之御天下者，以六官总治焉。
现代文： 古代统治天下的帝王，用六官来总理国家。
English: The emperors who ruled the world in ancient times used six officials to lead the country as prime minister.

古文：冢宰之官以成道，司徒之官以成德，宗伯之官以成仁，司马之官以成圣，司寇之官以成义，司空之官以成礼。
现代文：冢宰之类的官来成就道，司徒之类的官来成就德，宗伯之类的官来成就仁，司马之类的官来成就圣，司寇之类的官来成就义，司空之类的官来成就礼。
English: Officials such as 宰 accomplish Tao, officials such as司徒 accomplish virtue, officials such as宗伯 accomplish benevolence, officials such as司马 accomplish holiness, officials such as司寇 accomplish righteousness, and officials such as司空 accomplish ritual.

古文：六官在手以为辔，司会均仁以为纳。
现代文：六官控制在手就如同有了缰绳，司会使仁义均齐就如同有了内侧缰绳。
English: To control the six organs with the hand is like having a bridle, and to make benevolence and righteousness equal is like having an inner bridle.

古文：故曰御四马者执六辔，御天下者正六官。
现代文：所以说：驾驭四马的人要控制好六条缰绳，治理天下的人要掌握好六官。
English: Therefore, it is said that those who drive the four horses should control the six reins, and those who govern the world should master the six positions.

古文：是故善御马者，正身以总辔，均马力，齐马心，回旋曲折，唯其所之。
现代文：因此，善于驾驭马的人，端正身体揽好缰绳，使马均匀用力，让马齐心一致，即使走曲折婉转之路，到何处都随心所欲。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at riding a horse, straightens his body to grasp the reins, makes the horse uniformly forceful, and makes the horse have the same heart. Even if he takes a tortuous and gentle path, he can go wherever he wants.

古文：故可以取长道，可赴急疾。
现代文：所以可以走长道，可以赴急难。
English: So you can go the long way, you can go to the emergency.

古文：此圣人所以御天地与人事之法则也。
现代文：这是圣人用来掌握天地和治理民众的法则。
English: This is the law that the sages used to control heaven and earth and to govern the people.

古文：天子以内史为左右手，以六官为辔，已而与三公为执六官，均五教，齐五法。故亦唯其所引，无不如志。
现代文：天子把内史作为左右手，把六官作为缰绳，然后和三公一起来控制六官，使五教均齐，使五法齐备，只要你有所指引，没有不如愿的。
English: The Son of Heaven takes the internal history as the right and left hand, and the six organs as the reins, and then controls the six organs together with the three kings, so that the five teachings are uniform and the five laws are complete. As long as you have guidance, there is nothing you can't do.

古文：以之道则国治，以之德则国安，以之仁则国和，以之圣则国平，以之礼则国定，以之义则国义，此御政之术。
现代文：遵从道，国家就能治理；遵从德，国家就能安定；遵从仁，国家就能和平；遵从圣贤，国家就能平安；遵从礼，国家就能长治久安；遵从义，国家就会有信义。
English: If you follow the Tao, the country will be able to govern; if you follow virtue, the country will be stable; if you follow benevolence, the country will be peaceful; if you follow saints and sages, the country will be peaceful; if you follow etiquette, the country will have lasting peace; if you follow righteousness, the country will have righteousness.

古文： 过失，人之情，莫不有焉。
现代文：这就是施政的方法。 过错和失误，是人之常情，人不可能没有过失。
English: This is the method of governance. Faults and mistakes are part of the human condition, and it is impossible for a person to be without fault.

古文：过而改之，是为不过。
现代文：有了过错能改正，就不为过。
English: If a mistake can be corrected, it is not a mistake.

古文：故官属不理，分职不明，法政不一，百事失纪，曰乱。
现代文：因此，官属不理清，职责不分明，法律政策不统一，百事失去纲纪，这叫做混乱。
English: Therefore, the officials and subordinates are not clear, the responsibilities are not clear, the laws and policies are not unified, and Pepsi has lost discipline. This is called confusion.

古文：乱则饬冢宰。
现代文：混乱就整饬冢宰。
English: Chaos is the beginning of order.

古文：地而不殖，财物不蕃，万民饥寒，教训不行，风俗淫僻，人民流散，曰危。
现代文：田地没有种好，财务没有增加，万民饥寒，教令不行，风俗淫乱邪僻，人民流离失散，这叫做危险。
English: The fields are not well sown, the finances have not increased, the people are hungry and cold, the teachings are not good, the customs are immoral and perverse, and the people are displaced and dispersed. This is called danger.

古文：危则饬司徒。
现代文：危险就整饬司徒。
English: It's dangerous to straighten out Stutts.

古文：父子不亲，长幼失序，君臣上下，乖离异志，曰不和。
现代文：父子不亲，长幼失序，君臣上下离心离德，各有其志，这叫做不和。
English: The father and son are not related, the elder and younger are out of order, the monarchs and ministers are separated from each other, and each has their own aspirations. This is called discord.

古文：不和则饬宗伯。
现代文：不和就整饬宗伯。
English: If they don't get along with each other, they'll get rid of each other.

古文：贤能而失官爵，功劳而失赏禄，士卒疾怨，兵弱不用，曰不平。
现代文：贤能的人失去官爵，有功劳失去奖赏利禄，士卒心怀怨恨，兵力虚弱不堪使用，这叫做不平。
English: When a man of virtue loses his title, when a man of merit loses his reward, when a man of honor bears a grudge, when a man of war is too weak to fight, this is called injustice.

古文：不平则饬司马。
现代文：不平就整饬司马。
English: If there is a complaint, Sima will be dealt with.

古文：刑罚暴乱，奸邪不胜，曰不义。
现代文：刑罚暴乱，奸邪不能被制伏，这叫做不义。
English: Punishment is a riot. Treachery cannot be subdued. This is called injustice.

古文：不义则饬司寇。
现代文：不义就整饬司寇。
English: Injustice will be rectified.

古文：度量不审，举事失理，都鄙不修，财物失所，曰贫。
现代文：度量不详审，举事失去条理章法，城邑不修，财物流散，这叫做贫穷。
English: Measurements are not scrutinized, affairs are not organized, cities are not rebuilt, and wealth is dissipated. This is called poverty.

古文：贫则饬司空。
现代文：贫穷就整饬司空。
English: Poverty is an emptiness to be filled.

古文：故御者同是车马，或以取千里，或不及数百里，其所谓进退缓急异也。
现代文：所以驾驭着同样的车马，有的可以行千里，有的走不到数百里，这就是所谓进退缓急不同啊。
English: Therefore, driving the same car, some can travel thousands of miles, some can't walk hundreds of miles, this is the so-called difference in priorities.

古文：夫治者同是官法，或以致平，或以致乱者，亦其所以为进退缓急异也。
现代文：各级官员执行的是同样的官法，有的人治理得很好，有的人却导致了混乱，这也是因为进退缓急不同造成的。
English: Officials at all levels implement the same official law, some are well governed, while others have led to confusion, which is also caused by different priorities.

古文： 古者天子常以季冬考德正法，以观治乱。
现代文： 古时候天子常在冬末考察德政，调整法令，用以观察治乱。
English: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven often inspected German politics at the end of winter and adjusted laws and regulations to observe and control chaos.

古文：德盛者治也，德薄者乱也。
现代文：德政深厚，世道就安定；德政浅薄，世道就混乱。
English: If the German politics is profound, the world will be stable; if the German politics is shallow, the world will be chaotic.

古文：故天子考德，则天下之治乱可坐庙堂之上而知之。
现代文：所以天子只要考察德政，那么天下的治乱，坐在朝堂之上就可以知道了。
English: Therefore, as long as the Son of Heaven examines German politics, he will know how to deal with chaos in the world, sitting on top of the Imperial Palace.

古文：夫德盛则法修，德不盛则饬，法与政咸德而不衰。
现代文：德政深厚，法令就会得到修治，德政不深厚就要整饬，法令和政治都合乎德就不会衰败。
English: If the German politics is profound, the laws will be rectified. If the German politics is not profound, it will be rectified. If the laws and politics are in line with the German morals, they will not decay.

古文：故曰王者又以孟春论之德及功能，能德法者为有德，能行德法者为有行，能成德法者为有功，能治德法者为有智。
现代文：所以天子又在春季的第一个月评论官吏的德行及功劳才能。能够遵守德政和法治的为有德行，能够施行德政和法治的为有才干，施行德政和法治有成效的为有功劳，能运用德政和法治来管理政事的为有智谋。
English: Therefore, in the first month of spring, the heavenly son commented on the virtues and merits of officials. Those who can abide by the German government and the rule of law are virtuous, those who can implement the German government and the rule of law are talented, those who effectively implement the German government and the rule of law are meritorious, and those who can use the German government and the rule of law to manage political affairs are wise.

古文：故天子论吏，而德法行，事治而功成。
现代文：因此天子评定官吏，而德政和法治得到推行，政事得到治理而大功告成。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven appraised officials, and German politics and the rule of law were promoted, and political affairs were governed, and great achievements were made.

古文：夫季冬正法，孟春论吏，治国之要。 
现代文：冬末调整法律，初春评定官吏，这是治国的关键。 
English: Adjusting laws at the end of winter and evaluating officials in early spring is the key to governing the country.

古文：子夏问于孔子曰： 商闻易之生人及万物，鸟兽昆虫，各有奇偶，气分不同，而凡人莫知其情，唯达德者能原其本焉。
现代文：子夏问孔子说： 我听说《易》讲人、万物及鸟兽昆虫的出生，各有单数，双数，气分不同。而普通人不知其中的具体实情，只有通晓道德的人能推出他们的本原。
English: Zixia asked Confucius, "I have heard that "Yi" tells of the birth of man, all things, and birds, beasts, and insects, each of which has a singular and a dual number, and a different temperament. But ordinary people do not know the specific facts, and only those who are versed in morality can deduce their origin.

古文：天一，地二，人三，三三如九，九九八十一，一主日，日数十，故人十月而生；八九七十二，偶以从奇，奇主辰，辰为月，月主马，故马十二月而生；七九六十三，三主斗，斗主狗，故狗三月而生；六九五十四，四主时，时主豕，故豕四月而生；四九三十六，六为律，律主鹿，故鹿六月而生；三九二十七，七主星，星主虎，故虎七月而生；二九一十八，八主风，风为虫，故虫八月而生；其余各从其类矣。鸟鱼生阴而属于阳，故皆卵生。
现代文：七乘九得六十三，三为斗，斗代表狗，因此狗怀胎三个月出生。六乘九得五十四，四为时，时代表猪，因此猪怀胎四个月出生。五乘九得四十五，五为音，音代表猿，因此猿怀胎五个月出生。四乘九得三十六，六为律，律代表鹿，因此鹿怀胎六个月出生。三乘九得二十七，七主星，星代表虎，因此虎怀胎七个月出生。二乘九得一十八，八主风，风代表虫，因此虫八日而生。其余各从其类。 鸟鱼生于阴而属于阳，因此都是卵生。
English: Seven times nine is sixty-three, three is do, do represents dog, so dog was born in three months. Six times nine is fifty-four, four is hour, hour represents pig, so pig was born in four months. Five times nine is forty-five, five is sound, sound represents ape, so ape was born in five months. Four times nine is thirty-six, six is law, law represents deer, so deer was born in six months. Three times nine is twenty-seven, seven is master star, star represents tiger, so tiger was born in seven months. Two times nine is eighteen, eight is master wind, wind represents worm, so worm was born on the eighth day. The

古文：鱼游于水，鸟游于云，故立冬则燕雀入海化为蛤。
现代文：鱼游于水中，鸟翔于云中，因此立冬季节燕雀入海化为蛤蛎。
English: Fish swim in the water, birds fly in the clouds, so when the winter season begins, the chaffinches go into the sea and turn into cormorants.

古文：蚕食而不饮，蝉饮而不食，蜉蝣不饮不食，万物之所以不同。
现代文：蚕吃食而不饮水，蝉饮水而不吃食，蜉蝣不饮不食，万物各有不同。
English: The silkworm eats but does not drink, the cicada drinks but does not eat, the dragonfly does not drink but does not eat. All things are different.

古文：介鳞夏食而冬蛰，龁吞者八窍而卵生，咀嚼者九窍而胎生，四足者无羽翼，戴角者无上齿，无角无前齿者膏，无角无后齿者脂。昼生者类父，夜生者似母，是以至阴主牝，至阳主牡。
现代文：介虫磷虫夏天吃食，冬天蛰伏。用咬吞方法吃食的动物有八窍而且是卵生，用咀嚼方法进食的动物有九窍而且是胎生。四足的动物没有羽翼，头上长角的动物没有上面的牙齿，没有角没有前齿的动物身上有膏状油脂，有角无后齿的动物有脂状油脂。白天出生的动物像父亲，夜里出生的动物像母亲，因此阴的极点代表雌性，阳的极点代表雄性。
English: Insect phoenixes feed in summer and hibernate in winter. Animals that feed by biting and swallowing have eight points and are ovoviviparous, and animals that feed by chewing have nine points and are viviparous. Four-legged animals have no wings, animals with long horns on their heads have no upper teeth, animals without horns and no front teeth have paste-like grease on their bodies, and animals with horns and no back teeth have grease-like grease. Animals born during the day are like fathers, and animals born at night are like mothers, so the extreme of yin represents the female, and the extreme of yang represents the

古文：敢问其然乎？ 
现代文：请问是这样吗？ 
English: Is that so, please?

古文：孔子曰： 然，吾昔闻老聃亦如汝之言。 
现代文：孔子说： 是这样。我从前听老聃也说过你这样的话。 
English: Confucius said, "That's right. I once heard Lao Tzu say the same thing about you.

古文：子夏曰： 商闻山书曰： 地东西为纬，南北为经，山为积德，川为积刑，高者为生，下者为死，丘陵为牡，溪谷为牝，蚌蛤龟珠，与日月而盛虚。 
现代文：子夏说： 我听说《山书》讲。 大地东西方向为纬，南北方向为经。山为积聚道德之地，江河为积聚刑罚之所。处高者为生，处低下为死。丘陵为雄性，溪谷为雌性。蛤龟珠因日月的变化而有满和虚的不同。 
English: Zixia said: I have heard of the "Mountain Book." The east-west direction of the earth is the latitude, and the north-south direction is the longitude. The mountains are the place of accumulation of morality, and the rivers are the place of accumulation of punishment. The higher place is for life, and the lower place is for death. The hills are male, and the valleys are female. The tortoise bead is full and empty due to the changes of the sun and the moon.

古文：是故坚土之人刚，弱土之人柔，墟土之人大，沙土之人细，息土之人美，秏土之人丑。
现代文：因此生长在坚硬土地上的人刚强，生长在软弱土地上的人柔弱；生长在丘陵地方的人高大，生长在沙土地上的人矮小；生长在肥沃土地上的人美丽，生长在贫瘠土地上的人丑。
English: Therefore, those who grow on hard soil are strong, those who grow on soft soil are weak; those who grow on hills are tall, those who grow on sandy soil are short; those who grow on fertile soil are beautiful, and those who grow on barren soil are ugly.

古文：食水者善游而耐寒，食土者无心而不息，食木者多力而不治，食草者善走而愚，食桑者有绪而蛾，食肉者勇毅而捍，食气者神明而寿，食谷者智惠而巧，不食者不死而神。
现代文：食水的动物善于游泳而且耐寒，食土的动物没有心脏而且不呼吸，食木的动物力气大而且不容易驯服，食草的动物善于奔跑而且愚蠢，食桑叶的动物会吐丝而且会变为飞蛾，食肉的动物勇敢果毅而且强悍，食气的动物神明而且长寿，食谷的动物有智慧而且灵巧，不食东西的不死而且能成神。
English: Water-eating animals are good at swimming and cold-resistant, earth-eating animals have no heart and do not breathe, wood-eating animals are strong and not easy to tame, herbivorous animals are good at running and stupid, mulberry leaf-eating animals can spit silk and become moths, carnivorous animals are brave and strong, gas-eating animals are gods and long-lived, cereal-eating animals are intelligent and dexterous, non-eating things are immortal and can become gods.

古文：故曰羽虫三百有六十，而凤为之长；毛虫三百有六十，而麟为之长；甲虫三百有六十，而龟为之长；鳞虫三百有六十而龙为之长。倮虫三百有六十而人为之长。
现代文：所以说有羽毛的动物有三百六十种，而凤凰为第一；有毛的动物有三百六十种，而麒麟为第一；有甲的动物有三百六十种，而龟为第一；有鳞的动物有三百六十种，而龙为第一；无羽毛鳞甲的动物有三百六十种，而人为第一。
English: Therefore, it is said that there are 360 kinds of animals with feathers, and the phoenix is the first; there are 360 kinds of animals with hair, and the unicorn is the first; there are 360 kinds of animals with armor, and the turtle is the first; there are 360 kinds of animals with scales, and the dragon is the first; there are 360 kinds of animals without feathers and scales, and humans are the first.

古文：殊形异类之数，王者动必以道动，静必以道静，必顺理以奉天地之性，而不害其所主，谓之仁圣焉？ 
现代文：这就是天地的美妙之处，殊形异类各有其数。作为君王，行动必须遵循道，安静必须顺从理，奉行天地的本性，而不伤害其所代表的事物，这叫做仁圣。  
English: This is the beauty of heaven and earth, each of which has its own number of peculiarities. As a king, action must follow the way, quietness must obey reason, and pursue the nature of heaven and earth without harming the things it represents. This is called benevolence.

