古文：○魏徵魏徵，字玄成，钜鹿曲城人也。
现代文：魏徵字玄成，巨鹿曲城人。
English: Wei Zheng Zi Xuancheng, a resident of the Great Deer Curve City.

古文：父长贤，北齐屯留令。
现代文：父亲魏长贤，任北齐屯留县令。
English: His father, Wei Changxian, was the governor of North Qitun County.

古文：徵少孤贫，落拓有大志，不事生业，出家为道士。
现代文：魏徵幼年丧父，家境贫寒，穷困失意却有远大志向，不从事谋生的职业，出家当了道士。
English: Wei Zheng lost his father at a young age, his family was poor, he was destitute and frustrated, but he had lofty aspirations. He did not engage in a profession to earn a living, and became a Taoist monk.

古文：好读书，多所通涉，见天下渐乱，尤属意纵横之说。
现代文：他喜爱读书，能融会贯通，见天下越来越乱，特别留意先秦纵横家的学说。
English: He likes to read, can integrate and penetrate, sees the world getting more and more chaotic, and pays special attention to the teachings of the pre-Qin dynasty.

古文：大业末，武阳郡丞元宝藏举兵以应李密，召徵使典书记。
现代文：大业末年，武阳郡郡丞元宝藏起兵响应李密，召请魏徵掌管文书。
English: At the end of the Taiei era, the county magistrate Yuan Baozhu of Wuyang County raised an army in response to Li Mi and summoned Wei Zheng to take charge of the documents.

古文：密每见宝藏之疏，未尝不称善，既闻徵所为，遽使召之。
现代文：李密每次见到元宝藏送来的文书，总称赞写得好，后来听说是魏徵写的，就立即派人把他召来。
English: Every time Li Mi saw the document sent by Yuan Treasure, he always praised it as well written. Later, when he heard that it was written by Wei Zheng, he immediately sent someone to summon him.

古文：徵进十策以干密，虽奇之而不能用。
现代文：魏徵进献十条计策给李密，李密虽感到新奇但未能采用。
English: Wei Zheng presented ten strategies to Li Mi. Although Li Mi found them novel, she could not adopt them.

古文：及王世充攻密于洛口，徵说密长史郑颋曰： 魏公虽骤胜，而骁将锐卒死伤多矣；又军无府库，有功不赏。战士心惰，此二者难以应敌。
现代文：到了王世充在洛口进攻李密时，魏徵对李密的长史郑廷页说： 魏公李密虽然屡次获胜，但精兵骁将死伤的也很多了；军费又紧张，对有功的不能论功行赏，志气不高，有这两条就难得与敌人硬拼。
English: When Wang Shichong attacked Li Mi in Lokou, Wei Zheng, the head of Wei Zheng's long history of Li Mi, said: Although Wei Gong Li Mi has repeatedly won, there are many deaths and injuries among the elite soldiers; military expenses are tight, those who have meritorious deeds cannot be rewarded for their merits, and ambition is not high. With these two things, it is difficult to fight hard with the enemy.

古文：未若深沟高垒，旷日持久，不过旬月，敌人粮尽，可不战而退，追而击之，取胜之道。
现代文：不如挖深沟筑高垒，与敌人拖延时间，过不了十天半月，敌人粮尽草绝，不用攻打，他们就会撤兵，那时我们再出兵追击敌人，这就是取胜的方法。
English: It is better to dig a deep trench, build a high fortress, and delay the enemy. In less than ten days and a half months, the enemy will run out of food. Without attacking, they will withdraw. At that time, we will send troops to chase the enemy. This is the way to win.

古文：且东都食尽，世充计穷，意欲死战，可谓穷寇难与争锋，请慎无与战。 
现代文：况且东都的粮食断绝了，王世充已经无计可施，一心想决一死战，我们实在难与陷入绝境的敌寇争锋，请慎重考虑不要与他们决战。 
English: Moreover, the grain supply in Dongdu has been cut off, and Wang Shichong has no choice but to fight to the death. It is really difficult for us to compete with the desperate enemy, so please carefully consider not to fight with them.

古文：颋曰： 此老生之常谈耳！ 
现代文：郑廷页说： 这些话不过是老生常谈罢了！ 
English: Zheng Tingzhe said: These words are nothing but commonplace!

古文：徵曰： 此乃奇谋深策，何谓常谈？ 
现代文：魏徵说 ：这是出奇制胜的良策，怎么说是老生常谈？ 
English: Wei Zheng said: This is a good strategy for surprising victory, how can it be said to be a cliché?

古文：因拂衣而去。
现代文：因此拂衣而去。
English: So he ran away.

古文：及密败，徵随密来降，至京师，久不见知。自请安辑山东，乃授秘书丞，驱传至黎阳。
现代文：李密失败后，魏徵跟随李密归降唐王，到了京师，很长时间都默默无闻，他自己请求去安抚山东，于是授命为秘书丞，驱驾驿车赶到黎阳。
English: After the defeat of Li Mi, Wei Zheng followed Li Mi to the Tang Dynasty, and arrived at Beijing Division. For a long time, he was unknown. He himself asked to appease Shandong, so he was appointed as secretary and drove a carriage to Li Yang.

古文：时徐世勣尚为李密拥众，徵与世勣书曰：
现代文：那时，徐世责力还是李密的部将，魏徵给徐世责力写信说：
English: At that time, Xu Shileili was still Li Mi's captain. Wei Zheng wrote to Xu Shileili:

古文：自隋末乱离，群雄竞逐，跨州连郡，不可胜数。
现代文： 自从隋末政局混乱，群雄竞相追逐，跨州连郡，不可胜数。
English: Since the political turmoil at the end of the Sui Dynasty, the heroes have been chasing each other, and there are countless cross-state counties.

古文：魏公起自叛徒，奋臂大呼，四方响应，万里风驰，云合雾聚，众数十万。
现代文：魏公李密起兵叛隋，振臂大呼，四方响应如万里风驰，似云合雾聚，一下子就聚集了几十万人。
English: Wei Gong Li Mi raised an army to rebel against the Sui Dynasty, waving his arms and shouting loudly. The four sides responded like a thousand miles of wind, like clouds gathering, and hundreds of thousands of people gathered at once.

古文：威之所被，将半天下，破世充于洛口，摧化及于黎山。
现代文：声威遍及近半个天下，在洛口破王世充，在黎山摧毁宇文化及。
English: His fame spread throughout nearly half of the world, defeating Wang Shichong in Lokou and destroying Yu Cunhua in Lishan.

古文：方欲西蹈咸阳，北凌玄阙，扬旌瀚海，饮马渭川，翻以百胜之威，败于奔亡之虏。
现代文：正准备向西占领咸阳，往北进攻玄阙，让自己的旌旗飘扬在瀚海，让自己的战马到渭川饮水，不料有百胜之威反而败在奔逃的敌军之手。
English: He was preparing to occupy Xianyang in the west and attack Xuanzang in the north, let his banner fly in the vast sea, and let his horses drink water in the Fenchuan River. However, he was defeated by the fleeing enemy.

古文：固知神器之重，自有所归，不可以力争。是以魏公思皇天之乃睠，入函谷而不疑。
现代文：由此可见，天下的归属已成定局，不能以力抗争，因此魏公感念皇天才回头反省，进入函谷关而没有疑虑。
English: From this, it can be seen that the world's belonging has become a foregone conclusion, and it cannot be resisted by force. Therefore, Wei Gong felt the emperor's genius, looked back and reflected, and entered the Hakodate Pass without any doubts.

古文：公生于扰攘之时，感知己之遇。根本已拔，确乎不动，鸠合遗散，据守一隅。
现代文：您生于混乱之时，感念知己之遇，在根已拔掉的情况下，还坚持不动摇，纠集溃散的兵马，据守在一方。
English: You were born at a time of chaos, feeling the feelings of a confidant, in a situation where the roots have been pulled out, you still insist on unwavering, gather the scattered soldiers and horses, and stay on one side.

古文：世充以乘胜余勇，息其东略；建德因侮亡之势，不敢南谋。
现代文：王世充趁着战胜的余勇，在他东边的地域休养生息，窦建德处在失败受辱的形势，不敢对南方有所图谋。
English: Wang Shichong took advantage of the remaining courage of victory to rest and recuperate in his eastern region. Dou Jiande was in a situation of defeat and humiliation, and did not dare to plot against the south.

古文：公之英声，足以振于今古。
现代文：你的美好的名声，足可以振动古今。
English: Your beautiful reputation, feet can vibrate from ancient to modern.

古文：然谁无善始，终之虑难。
现代文：然而谁没有好的开始，可结局却难以预料。
English: However, who does not have a good start, but the outcome is difficult to predict.

古文：去就之机，安危大节。
现代文：把握去留进退的时机，是安危的关键。
English: It is the key to safety to grasp the opportunity to stay and retreat.

古文：若策名得地，则九族廕其余辉；委质非人，则一身不能自保。
现代文：假如做官得到封地，九族就会受到余辉的庇护，如果投靠的人不得当，自己一身还不能自保。
English: If officials get fiefdoms, the nine ethnic groups will be protected by the afterglow. If those who rely on them cannot be trusted, they cannot protect themselves.

古文：殷鉴不远，公所闻见。
现代文：殷灭夏的鉴戒不远，是你能够看到听到的。
English: The warning of summer is not far away, you can see and hear it.

古文：孟贲犹豫，童子先之，知几其神，不俟终日。
现代文：古代勇士孟贲迟疑不决，童子都能在他之先做出决断，智慧接近神明，不整天等待。
English: The ancient warrior Meng Xuan hesitated, the boy can make a decision before him, wisdom is close to the gods, do not wait all day.

古文：今公处必争之地，乘宜速之机，更事迟疑，坐观成败，恐凶狡之辈，先人生心，则公之事去矣。
现代文：现在您处在兵家必争之地，应当速急乘机谋划，如果遇事迟疑不决，坐观成败，恐怕凶险狡诈之辈，先生出异心，那么您的大事就无法挽回了。 
English: Now that you are in a place where the soldiers must fight, you should quickly take the opportunity to plan. If you hesitate in the face of things, wait for success or failure, I am afraid that you are a dangerous and cunning generation, and you have a different heart, then your great event will be irreparable.

古文：世勣得书，遂定计遣使归国，开仓运粮，以馈淮安王神通之军。
现代文：世责力得到书信，于是决定派使者到长安表示归顺唐朝，并开仓运粮，送给淮安王神通的军队。
English: After receiving the letter, the emperor decided to send an envoy to Chang'an to express his allegiance to the Tang Dynasty, and to open a warehouse to transport grain to the army of Huai'an King Shentong.

古文：俄而建德悉众南下，攻陷黎阳，获徵，署为起居舍人。
现代文：不久，窦建德率军南下，攻陷黎阳，俘获了魏徵，任命他为起居舍人。
English: Not long after, Dou Jiande led his army to the south, invaded Liyang, captured Wei Zheng, and appointed him as his successor.

古文：及建德就擒，与裴矩西入关。
现代文：后来窦建德被李世民擒获，魏徵与裴矩西行入潼关。
English: Later, Dou Jiande was captured by Li Shimin, and Wei Zheng and Pei Guan traveled westward into Shaoguan.

古文：隐太子闻其名，引直洗马，甚礼之。
现代文：隐太子建成早已听说魏徵的名气，把他召为洗马，非常恭敬他。
English: Ying Taishi Jiancheng had already heard of Wei Zheng's fame, and he called him to wash horses, and he respected him very much.

古文：徵见太宗勋业日隆，每劝建成早为之所。
现代文：魏徵见太宗屡建功勋，威望越来越高，常常劝建成早定对策。
English: Wei solicited the opinion of Emperor Taizong, who had many achievements in construction, and his prestige was getting higher and higher. He often persuaded Emperor Taizong to build an early countermeasure.

古文：及败，太宗使召之，谓曰： 汝离间我兄弟，何也？ 
现代文：太子建成失败后，太宗派人召见魏徵，对魏徵说： 你离间我兄弟关系，这是为什么？ 
English: After the failure of the construction of the Prince, the Tai Sect sent a person to summon Wei Zheng and said to Wei Zheng: You have severed my brotherly relationship, why is this?

古文：徵曰： 皇太子若从徵言，必无今日之祸。 
现代文：魏徵说： 太子如果听从了我的意见，一定不会遭到今天的杀身之祸。 
English: Wei Zheng said, "If the prince had listened to my advice, he would not have been killed today."

古文：太宗素器之，引为詹事主簿。
现代文：太宗平素就器重魏徵的敢于直言，于是任命他为詹事主簿。
English: Emperor Taizong, who was a staunch supporter of the Wei Dynasty, dared to speak his mind, so he appointed him as Zhan's chief secretary.

古文：及践祚，擢拜谏议大夫，封钜鹿县男，使安辑河北，许以便宜从事。
现代文：太宗即位后，提升魏徵为谏议大夫，封巨鹿县男，派他安抚河北，授予他遇事可酌情处理的权力。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he promoted Wei Zheng to the post of doctor of consultation and appointed him as the man of Julu County, sent him to pacify Hebei, and granted him the power to deal with matters as he saw fit.

古文：徵至磁州，遇前宫千牛李志安、齐王护军李思行锢送诣京师。
现代文：魏徵到了磁州，遇到前东宫千牛李志安、齐王护军李思行锁在囚车中押解京师。
English: Wei collected the magnetic state, encountered the former Donggu Qianniu Li Zhi'an, Qi Wang's bodyguards Li Sixing locked in the prison car and relieved the Beijing Division.

古文：徵谓副使李桐客曰： 吾等受命之日，前宫、齐府左右，皆令赦原不问。
现代文：魏徵对副使李桐客说 ：我们动身时刚得到皇上的诏命，前东宫、齐王府的旧人都一律赦免不问。
English: Wei Zheng said to the deputy envoy Li Tongke: When we left, we had just received the emperor's imperial decree. All the old people in the former East Palace and the Qi royal palace were pardoned without question.

古文：今复送思行，此外谁不自疑？
现代文：现在又把李思行等押送京师，这样做其他的人谁还再相信皇上的诏令而不疑虑呢？
English: Now they have sent Li Sihong and others to the capital. Who else would believe the emperor's edict without hesitation?

古文：徒遣使往，彼必不信，此乃差之毫厘，失之千里。且公家之利，知无不为，宁可虑身，不可废国家大计。
现代文：朝廷派我们安抚山东，人们一定不会相信，这岂不是差之毫厘、失之千里，况且有关国家利益，明白了没有不去做的，宁可自己承担责任，也不能损害国家大计。
English: The imperial court has sent us to pacify Shandong. People will certainly not believe that this is not a millimeter of difference, but a thousand miles of loss. Moreover, it is related to national interests. If they understand that they have no choice but to do it, they would rather take on the responsibility themselves than damage the national plan.

古文：今若释遣思行，不问其罪，则信义所感，无远不臻。
现代文：现在如果释放李思行他们，不再追究他们的罪责，那么信义的感召就会远达天下。
English: Now, if Li Sihong releases them and no longer pursues their guilt, then the call of loyalty will reach far and wide.

古文：古者，大夫出疆，苟利社稷，专之可也。
现代文：古时大夫出使，只要是对国家有利，就可以自己做主。
English: In ancient times, when a doctor sent an envoy, as long as it was beneficial to the country, he could make his own decision.

古文：况今日之行，许以便宜从事，主上既以国士见待，安可不以国士报之乎？ 
现代文：况且我们这次出使，皇上给予我们灵活行事的权力。皇上既然对我们以国士相待，我们怎能不以国士相报呢？ 
English: Moreover, the emperor has given us the power to act flexibly on this mission. Since the emperor treats us as fellow countrymen, how can we not reciprocate as fellow countrymen?

古文：即释遣思行等，仍以启闻，太宗甚悦。
现代文：副使同意，立即释放了李思行等人，并上书呈报皇上，太宗非常高兴。
English: The deputy envoy agreed, immediately released Li Sihong and others, and submitted a letter to the emperor. Taizong was very happy.

古文：太宗新即位，励精政道，数引徵入卧内，访以得失。
现代文：太宗刚即位，励精图治，多次把魏徵召到卧室里，单独询问治国施政的得失。
English: As soon as Tai Zong ascended the throne, he worked hard to govern the country. He repeatedly summoned Wei to his bedroom to inquire about the merits and demerits of governing the country.

古文：徵雅有经国之才，性又抗直，无所屈挠。太宗与之言，未尝不欣然纳受。
现代文：魏徵很有治理国家的才干，性情又耿直，从不退缩屈服，太宗与他谈论，总是欣然接受他的意见。
English: Wei Zheng was very capable of governing the country, and his temperament was upright. He never flinched or yielded. Taizong talked with him and always gladly accepted his opinion.

古文：徵亦喜逢知己之主，思竭其用，知无不言。
现代文：魏徵也为遇到赏识自己的君主而喜不自胜，于是把心里的想法全部说出来，毫不隐瞒。
English: Wei Zheng was also overjoyed to meet a monarch who appreciated him, so he said all his thoughts and did not hide anything.

古文：太宗尝劳之曰： 卿所陈谏，前后二百余事，非卿至诚奉国，何能若是？ 
现代文：太宗曾经慰劳魏徵说 ：您所陈述进谏的事，前后有二百多项，不是您至诚报效国家，怎么能够这样？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once consoled Lao Wei by saying, "There are more than two hundred things you have reported to the imperial court. If you are not sincere in serving the country, how can you do this?

古文：其年，迁尚书左丞。
现代文：那年，太宗又升任他为尚书左丞。
English: That year, Taizong was also promoted to He Shangshu Zuo Jie.

古文：或有言徵阿党亲戚者，帝使御史大夫温彦博案验无状，彦博奏曰： 徵为人臣，须存形迹，不能远避嫌疑，遂招此谤。
现代文：有人诽谤魏徵包庇自己的亲戚，太宗派御史大夫温彦博去查办，结果查无实据，温彦博向太宗奏道： 魏徵作为一个臣子，应该使自己的行为显明，他不能远避嫌疑，以致遭受这些没有根据的诽谤。
English: Some people slandered Wei Zheng for shielding his relatives. The Grand Historian of the Tai Sect, Wen Yanbo, went to investigate, but found no evidence. Wen Yanbo appealed to Tai Zong: Wei Zheng, as a courtier, should make his actions clear. He cannot avoid suspicion, so he suffered from these unfounded slanders.

古文：虽情在无私，亦有可责。 
现代文：虽然没有私情，也应当受到责备。 
English: Although there is no personal feelings, they should also be blamed.

古文：帝令彦博让徵，且曰： 自今后不得不存形迹。 
现代文：太宗叫温彦博去责备魏徵，并说： 从今以后，行为不得不存痕迹。 
English: Taizong called Wen Yanbo to reprimand Wei Zheng and said: From now on, there must be traces of behavior.

古文：他日，徵入奏曰： 臣闻君臣协契，义同一体。
现代文：第二天，魏徵入朝上奏太宗说： 我听说君臣一心，如同一个整体。
English: The next day, Wei was conscripted into the imperial court, and he said, "I have heard that the emperor and his ministers are of one mind, like a single whole.

古文：不存公道，唯事形迹，若君臣上下，同遵此路，则邦之兴丧，或未可知。 
现代文：置国家大事于不顾，一味追求行为显露痕迹，如果君臣上下都共同遵循这条道路，那么国家的兴衰就难以预料了。 
English: If monarchs and ministers follow this path together, it will be difficult to predict the rise and fall of the country.

古文：帝瞿然改容曰： 吾已悔之。 
现代文：太宗大惊失色说 ：我已经悔悟这件事了。 
English: A shocked Taizong said, "I've already repented of this."

古文：徵再拜曰： 愿陛下使臣为良臣，勿使臣为忠臣。 
现代文：魏徵又跪下说 ：愿陛下让臣做良臣，不要让臣做忠臣。 
English: Wei Zheng knelt down again and said, "May His Majesty let his vassal be a good vassal, but not a loyal one."

古文：帝曰： 忠、良有异乎？ 
现代文：太宗说： 忠臣、良臣有不同的地方吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "Are there different places for loyal subjects and good subjects to go?"

古文：徵曰： 良臣，稷、契、咎陶是也。忠臣，龙逢、比干是也。
现代文：魏徵说 ：稷、契、咎陶就是良臣，龙逢、比干就是忠臣。
English: Wei Zheng said: Shun, Qi, and Gui Tao are good vassals, while Longfeng and Bi Gan are loyal vassals.

古文：良臣使身获美名，君受显号，子孙传世，福禄无疆。
现代文：良臣使自身获得美名，君主得到光耀的称号，子孙世代相传，福禄无边。
English: Good vassals gain a good name for themselves, the monarch obtains a brilliant title, which is passed down from generation to generation, and the benefits are boundless.

古文：忠臣身受诛夷，君陷大恶，家国并丧，空有其名。
现代文：忠臣自身遭祸被杀，君主陷于愚昧、凶暴的境地，国破家亡，只得到一个忠臣的空名。
English: The loyal vassal himself was killed by misfortune, the monarch fell into a stupid and violent situation, the country was ruined, and only the empty name of a loyal vassal was obtained.

古文：以此而言，相去远矣。 
现代文：从这说来，忠臣、良臣相差就远了。 
English: From this point of view, the difference between a loyal subject and a good subject is far.

古文：帝深纳其言，赐绢五百匹。
现代文：太宗深深地被魏徵的话打动了，赐给魏徵绢五百匹。
English: Taizong was deeply moved by Wei Zheng's words and gave Wei Zheng 500 horses.

古文：贞观三年，迁秘书监，参预朝政。
现代文：贞观二年，魏徵升任秘书监，参预朝政。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng was promoted to the post of secretary supervisor and participated in the pre-imperial politics.

古文：徵以丧乱之后，典章纷杂，奏引学者校定四部书。
现代文：魏徵因为感到国家经历了丧乱之后，图籍散失，制度、法令纷乱繁杂，奏报朝廷组织学者校定四部书。
English: Wei Zheng, because he felt that after the country experienced the turmoil, the books were lost, the system and laws were complicated and complicated, and he reported to the imperial court to organize scholars to proofread four books.

古文：数年之间，秘府图籍，粲然毕备。
现代文：几年之间，秘府中收藏的书籍，精要而又完备。
English: In the space of a few years, the books in Hifuchu's collection have grown more detailed and complete.

古文：时高昌王麹文泰将入朝，西域诸国咸欲因文泰遣使贡献，太宗令文泰使人厌怛纥干往迎接之。
现代文：当时高昌王麴文泰准备入京朝见皇帝，西域各国都想乘麴文泰入朝的机会，派使者给皇帝进贡，太宗命文泰的使臣厌怛纥干前去迎接西域各国使臣。
English: At that time, Gaochang's King Wen Tai was preparing to enter Beijing to meet the emperor. Western countries all wanted to take the opportunity of Wen Tai's entry into the imperial court to send envoys to pay tribute to the emperor. Emperor Taizong ordered Wen Tai's envoys to go to meet the envoys from Western countries.

古文：徵谏曰： 中国始平，疮痍未复，若微有劳役，则不自安。
现代文：魏徵规劝说 ：天下刚刚平定，战乱的创伤还未恢复，如果稍有劳役，自己就不得安宁。
English: Wei solicited and persuaded: the world had just been pacified, the trauma of war had not yet recovered, if there was a little labor service, he would not be at peace.

古文：往年文泰入朝，所经州县，犹不能供，况加于此辈。
现代文：往年文泰入京朝见皇上，所经过的州县，尚且疲于供给，何况又加上西域各国的使臣。
English: In previous years, when Wen Tai entered Beijing to see the emperor, the states and counties he passed through were still busy with supplies, not to mention the envoys from Western countries.

古文：若任其商贾来往，边人则获其利；若为宾客，中国即受其弊矣。
现代文：假如让西域的人以商人的身份来往，边地人民就会因此得利；如果作为宾客前来。国中就会消耗大量资财而深受其害。
English: If the people of the western region were allowed to travel as merchants, the people of the outlying areas would benefit from this; if they came as guests, the country would consume a large amount of wealth and suffer from it.

古文：汉建武二十二年，天下已宁。西域请置都护、送侍子，光武不许，盖不以蛮夷劳弊中国也。
现代文：东汉建武二十二年，天下已经安定，西域请求东汉设置都护、派遣王子入京侍奉皇帝，光武帝不准许，是不愿因为异族而使中原消耗劳力资财受害。
English: In the 22nd year of the establishment of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the country was already stable. The Western Regions requested the Eastern Han Dynasty to set up a capital guard and send princes to Beijing to serve the emperor. Emperor Guangwu did not allow it, because he did not want to cause the Central Plains to suffer from the consumption of labor, capital and wealth due to foreigners.

古文：今若许十国入贡，其使不下千人，欲使缘边诸州何以取济？
现代文：现在如果答应十国使者入京进贡，它们的使者不下千人，将使边地各州怎么应付？
English: Now, if the envoys of ten countries are allowed to enter Beijing to pay tribute, and their envoys are no less than a thousand, how will the border states cope?

古文：人心万端，后虽悔之，恐无所及。 
现代文：人的心性各异、头绪万端，过后即使后悔，恐怕就来不及了。 
English: People's mentalities are all different, the clues are all over the place, and even if you regret it later, I'm afraid it's too late.

古文：上善其议。时厌怛纥干已发，遽追止之。
现代文：太宗认为魏徵的意见很好，当时厌怛纥干已经出发，太宗命人立即追赶制止了他。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Wei Zheng's suggestion was good. At that time, Xuanzang had already set out, and Emperor Taizong ordered people to immediately chase and stop him.

古文：后太宗幸九成宫，因有宫人还京，憩于湋川县之官舍。
现代文：后来太宗到九成宫游玩，因有宫人回京，住在氵韦川县的官舍里。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong visited the Jiu Chenggong Palace, but due to the presence of courtiers, he returned to Beijing and lived in an official residence in Wei Chuan County.

古文：俄又右仆射李靖、侍中王珪继至，官属移宫人于别所而舍靖等。
现代文：不久右仆射李靖、侍中王王圭接着到来，县吏把宫人移到别的住所，让出官舍给李靖等住。
English: Soon after, his right-hand man, Prince Li Jing, and his equerry, Prince Wang Gui, arrived. The county officials moved the courtiers to other residences and gave the official residence to Li Jing to live in.

古文：太宗闻之，怒曰： 威福之柄，岂由靖等？
现代文：太宗听说这件事，发怒说： 威力福禄的权柄，难道是由李靖等掌握的吗？
English: When Emperor Taizong heard about this, he was furious and said, "Is it possible that Li Jing and others have seized the power of the mighty Fulou?

古文：何为礼靖而轻我宫人！ 
现代文：为什么礼待李靖而轻视我的宫人！ 
English: Why do you treat Li Jing with courtesy and despise my palace attendants!

古文：即令案验湋川官属及靖等。
现代文：立即命令审查氵韦川县吏和李靖等人。
English: Immediately ordered to review the officials of Xingwei River County and Li Jing and others.

古文：徵谏曰： 靖等，陛下心膂大臣；宫人，皇后扫除之隶。
现代文：魏徵劝阻道 ：李靖等人，都是陛下的心腹大臣，宫人不过是后宫打扫庭院的奴婢。
English: Wei Zheng dissuaded: Li Jing and others are the ministers of His Majesty's heart, and the courtiers are just the servants of the harem to clean the courtyard.

古文：论其委付，事理不同。
现代文：论他们付托的使命，事理各不相同。
English: On the mission entrusted to them, things are different.

古文：又靖等出外，官吏访朝廷法式，归来，陛下问人间疾苦。
现代文：再说李靖等外出，官吏要向他们询问朝廷法度，他们回来，陛下要向他们询问民间疾苦。
English: Furthermore, when Li Jing and others go out, officials should ask them about the imperial court's legal system, and when they return, His Majesty should ask them about the people's suffering.

古文：靖等自当与官吏相见，官吏亦不可不谒也。
现代文：李靖等理所当然要与官吏相见，官吏也不能不拜见他们。
English: Li Jing and others naturally have to meet with government officials, and government officials cannot but meet with them.

古文：至于宫人，供食之外，不合参承。
现代文：至于宫人，供奉饮食之外，无须参见侍候。
English: As for the courtiers, they do not need to see the waiters except when they are serving food.

古文：若以此罪责县吏，恐不益德音，徒骇天下耳目。 
现代文：如果因此怪罪责罚官吏，恐怕有损皇上的声誉，使天下人听了感到惊骇。 太宗说 ：您说得对。 
English: If the officials were to be blamed and punished for this, I'm afraid it would damage the emperor's reputation, and the world would be shocked to hear it.

古文：帝曰： 公言是也。 乃释官吏之罪，李靖等亦寝而不问。
现代文：于是开释了官吏的罪名，李靖等仍然住在官舍里，也不再查问了。
English: As a result, the officials were acquitted of the charges, and Li Jing and others still lived in the official residence and were no longer questioned.

古文：寻宴于丹霄楼，酒酣。太宗谓长孙无忌曰： 魏徵、王珪，昔在东宫，尽心所事，当时诚亦可恶。
现代文：不久，太宗在丹霄楼设宴，饮酒之中酒兴正浓时，太宗对长孙无忌说： 魏徵、王王圭，从前在东宫，尽心侍奉隐太子建成，当时那么忠心也确实可恶。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong held a banquet at Danzhong Building. While drinking, the wine was getting stronger and stronger. Emperor Taizong said to his eldest grandson: Wei Zheng, Wang Wang Gui, once in the East Palace, served the crown prince wholeheartedly. At that time, his loyalty was truly abominable.

古文：我能拔擢用之，以至今日，足为无愧古人。
现代文：我能提拔任用他们，以至今日，足以说明我是无愧于古人的了。
English: That I am able to promote and employ them to this day is proof enough that I am worthy of the ancients.

古文：然徵每谏我不从，发言辄即不应，何也？ 
现代文：但魏徵每当他进谏我没有听从时，我发话他就不马上答应，这是为什么呢？ 
English: But Wei Zheng, whenever he came into contact with me and I didn't listen, he wouldn't immediately say yes when I spoke. Why was that?

古文：对曰： 臣以事有不可，所以陈论，若不从辄应，便恐此事即行。 
现代文：魏徵回答说 ：臣认为事情有不合适的地方，所以才进谏，如果陛下不听规劝而臣马上答应，那恐怕事情就会照样施行。 
English: Wei Zheng replied: "The minister thought that there was something inappropriate about the matter, so he came to the court. If Your Majesty does not listen to the advice and the minister immediately agrees, then I am afraid that the matter will still be implemented."

古文：帝曰： 但当时且应，更别陈论，岂不得耶？ 
现代文：太宗说： 只管当时答应，有机会再另外陈述意见，难道不行吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "Even though I agreed at the time, isn't it possible to have another opportunity to state my opinion?

古文：徵曰： 昔舜诫群臣： 尔无面从，退有后言。 
现代文：魏徵说 ：从前舜告诫群臣说 ：你们不要当面顺从我，退下后又有话说。 
English: Wei Zheng said, "In the past, I warned my ministers, saying, 'Don't obey me to my face. If you retreat, I'll have something to say to you.'

古文：若臣面从陛下方始谏，此即 退有后言 ，岂是稷、契事尧、舜之意耶？ 
现代文：如果臣当面顺从陛下又找机会陈述意见，这就是 退下后又有话说 ，难道是稷、契事奉尧、舜的办法吗？ 
English: If a vassal obeys his majesty in person and seeks an opportunity to state his opinion, is this the way to step back and have a say?

古文：帝大笑曰： 人言魏徵举动疏慢，我但觉妩媚，适为此耳。 
现代文：太宗大笑说： 别人说魏徵举动粗野、傲慢，我却觉得妩媚，正是因为这些啊。 
English: Taizong laughed loudly and said, "Others say that Wei Zheng's behavior is rude and arrogant, but I find it charming, precisely because of these things."

古文：徵拜谢曰： 陛下导之使言，臣所以敢谏，若陛下不受臣谏，岂敢数犯龙鳞？ 
现代文：魏徵拜谢说 ：陛下启发引导臣让臣说话，所以臣敢于进谏，如果陛下不接受臣的进谏，怎么敢多次触犯皇上的尊严呢？ 
English: Wei Zheng Bai Xie said: His Majesty inspired and guided the vassal to let the vassal speak, so the vassal dared to speak. If His Majesty did not accept the vassal's speech, how dare he repeatedly violate the dignity of the emperor?

古文：是月，长乐公主将出降，帝以皇后所生，敕有司资送倍于永嘉长公主。
现代文：那月，长乐公主将要出嫁，太宗因她是皇后所生，命令有关部门办的嫁妆比永嘉长公主多一倍。
English: That month, Princess Changle was to be married, and Emperor Taizong ordered the relevant departments to double the dowry of Princess Yongjia because she was the daughter of an empress.

古文：徵曰： 不可。
现代文：魏徵说 ：不行。
English: Wei Zheng said, "No."

古文：昔汉明欲封其子，云 我子岂与先帝子等？可半楚、淮阳。 
现代文：从前汉明帝准备授封地给他的儿子，说 我的儿子怎么能与先帝的儿子等同，可封给他楚地、淮阳的一半。 
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Ming of Han prepared to bestow land to his son, saying, "How can my son be equal to the son of the previous emperor? I can give him half of Chu and Huaiyang."

古文：前史以为美谈。
现代文：以前的吏书把这事作为美谈。
English: Historians in the past have treated this as a fairy tale.

古文：天子姊妹为长公主，子为公主，既加 长 字，即是有所尊崇。
现代文：天子的姊妹是长公主，天子的女儿是公主，既然加 长 字，就是有它的尊荣显贵。
English: The sister of the Son of Heaven is the eldest princess, and the daughter of the Son of Heaven is a princess. Since it is a long letter, it has its honor and dignity.

古文：或可情有浅深，无容礼相逾越。 
现代文：感情可以有深有浅，但不容许超越了礼仪制度。 
English: Feelings can be deep or shallow, but they are not allowed to go beyond the etiquette system.

古文：上然其言，入告长孙皇后，后遣使赍钱四十万、绢四百匹，诣徵宅以赐之。
现代文：太宗认为他说得对，入宫告诉长孙皇后，然后派使者送钱四十万、绢四百匹，到魏徵的住宅赐给他。
English: Emperor Taizong thought he was right, told the eldest grandchild of the queen to enter the palace, and then sent an envoy to send 400,000 yuan and 3,400 horses to Wei Zheng's house to give it to him.

古文：寻进爵郡公。
现代文：不久魏徵晋升爵位为郡公。
English: Soon after, Wei Zheng was promoted to the title of county magistrate.

古文：七年，代王珪为侍中，尚书省滞讼有不决者，诏徵评理之。
现代文：贞观七年，魏徵代王王圭任侍中，尚书省长期积压没有判决的诉讼案，太宗命魏徵秉公处理。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng replaced Wang Wang Gui as an aide-de-camp. Shangshu Province had a long backlog of lawsuits that had not been adjudicated. Emperor Taizong ordered Wei Zheng to deal with them impartially.

古文：徵性非习法，但存大体，以情处断，无不悦服。
现代文：魏徵不大熟悉法律，但能抓住根本原则，依实际情况处理，大家都心悦诚服。
English: Wei Zheng is not familiar with the law, but he can grasp the fundamental principles and deal with the actual situation. Everyone is pleased and convinced.

古文：初，有诏遣令狐德棻、岑文本撰《周史》，孔颖达、许敬宗撰《隋史》，姚思廉撰《梁》、《陈史》，李百药撰《齐史》。
现代文：当初，太宗命令狐德、岑文本撰修《周史》，孔颖达、许敬宗撰《隋史》，姚思廉撰《梁史》、《陈史》，李百药撰《齐史》。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Taizong ordered Foo De and Yan Yan to write "Zhou History," Kong Yingda and Xu Jingzong to write "Sui History," Yao Siliang to write "Liang History" and "Chen History," and Li Baiyao to write "Qi History."

古文：徵受诏总加撰定，多所损益，荐在简正。
现代文：魏徵受诏总加撰定，对书稿多有删补，力求达到简明正确。
English: The Wei Zheng was compiled by the General Zhao, and there were many deletions and additions to the manuscript, in an effort to achieve conciseness and correctness.

古文：《隋史》序论，皆徵所作、《梁》、《陈》、《齐》各为总论，时称良史。
现代文：《隋史》的序、论，都是魏徵所做，并为梁、陈、齐各史撰写总论，被当时称为良史。
English: The preface and annotation of "Sui History" were all written by Wei Zheng, and he also wrote a general annotation for the histories of Liang, Chen, and Qi, which was called a good history at that time.

古文：史成，加左光禄大夫，进封郑国公，赐物二千段。
现代文：史书撰成后，魏徵加封左光禄大夫，晋爵郑国公，赐绢二千段。
English: After the compilation of the history book, Wei Zheng added the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, the title of Prince of Zheng Guoguo, and granted him two thousand paragraphs.

古文：徵自以无功于国，徒以辩说，遂参帷幄，深惧满盈，后以目疾频表逊位。
现代文：魏徵自认为对国家没有功，只不过是凭借辩论、游说，就参与决策，深怕遭遇好到头会有亏损，后来借口眼疾多次请求辞位。
English: Wei Zhengzhi believed that he had no merit for the country, but participated in decision-making by means of debate and lobbying. He was deeply afraid that he would eventually suffer losses. Later, he repeatedly requested to resign on the pretext of eye disease.

古文：太宗曰： 朕拔卿于雠虏之中，任公以枢要之职，见朕之非，未尝不谏。
现代文：太宗说 ：朕把你从虏获的敌军中提拔起来，任命你担任关键的职务，见到我的过失，没有不直言劝谏的。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I promoted you from the captured enemy army and appointed you to a key position. When I saw my mistake, I did not hesitate to advise you.

古文：公独不见金之在矿也，何足贵哉？
现代文：你难道没有看到金在矿里，有什么值得珍贵的呢？
English: Do you not see the gold in the mine, how precious it is?

古文：良冶锻而为器，便为人所宝，朕方自比于金，以卿为良匠。
现代文：好的工匠把它冶炼、锻造成器物，就被人们当作宝贝，朕正是把自己比做金矿，把你当成好的工匠。
English: A good craftsman smelting and forging it into a vessel is regarded as a treasure by people. I compare myself to a gold mine and regard you as a good craftsman.

古文：卿虽有疾，未为衰老，岂得便尔？ 
现代文：你虽然有病，但还未衰老，哪能就这样辞官呢？ 
English: You are sick, but you are not old. How can you resign like this?

古文：其年，徵又面请逊位，太宗难违之，乃拜徵特进，仍知门下事。
现代文：那年，魏徵又当面请求辞位，太宗很难违背他的请求。于是拜魏徵为特进，仍旧让他掌管门下省事务。
English: That year, Wei Zheng also asked for his resignation in person, and it was difficult for Taizong to go against his request. Therefore, Bai Wei Zheng was promoted to special envoy, and he was still put in charge of the affairs of the province under his control.

古文：其后又频上四疏，以陈得失。
现代文：那以后魏徵又先后上了四道奏疏，用来陈述政事的得失。
English: After that, the Wei Zheng was successively published in the Four Books of Records, which were used to present the gains and losses of political affairs.

古文：其一曰：
现代文：其一曰：
English: On the first day:

古文：臣观自古受图膺运，继体守文，控御英杰，南面临下，皆欲配厚德于天地，齐高明于日月，本枝百代，传祚无穷。
现代文： 臣观察自古帝王为受瑞图应运而兴，继承王位遵守法度，控制英杰，统治天下，都想让宽厚仁德与天地媲美，高尚明达与日月齐光，子孙百代，传福无穷。
English: The minister observed that since ancient times, emperors have risen to the occasion, succeeded to the throne, abided by the law, controlled the heroes, and ruled the world. They all wanted to make the benevolence and benevolence comparable to heaven and earth, the high-mindedness and wisdom to be equal to the sun and the moon, and the descendants to be hundreds of generations, and the blessings to be passed on to infinity.

古文：然而克终者鲜，败亡相继，其故何哉？
现代文：然而能善终者少，失败灭亡相继出现，这是什么缘故呢？
English: What is the reason for the successive decline and fall of various dynasties?

古文：所以求之失其道也。殷鉴不远，可得而言。
现代文：所以要探求失去天下的规律，隋朝的借鉴不远，可以得到而把它说出来。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to explore the lost laws of the world. The reference of the Sui Dynasty is not far away, it can be obtained and it can be said.

古文：昔在有隋，统一寰宇，甲兵强盛，四十余年，风行万里，威动殊俗；一旦举而弃之，尽为他人之有。
现代文： 过去隋朝，统一天下，兵甲强盛，据有天下三十多年，教化风行万里，威力使异邦人感到震慑，一旦丧失天下，都成为他人所有。
English: In the past, the Sui Dynasty unified the country and made the military strong. It is said that the world has existed for more than 30 years. Indoctrination has been popular for thousands of years, and the power has made foreigners feel intimidated. Once the world is lost, it will all become the property of others.

古文：彼炀帝岂恶天下之治安，不欲社稷之长久，故行桀虐，以就灭亡哉？
现代文：那隋炀帝难道讨厌天下太平，不求国家长久，所以施行桀的暴虐，用来造成国家的灭亡吗？
English: Could it be that the Sui and Qian emperors hated the world peace and did not want the country to last long, so they carried out the tyranny of Wei and used it to bring about the demise of the country?

古文：恃其富强，不虞后患。
现代文：这是他依仗国家的富强，不考虑后患的缘故。
English: This is because he relies on the country's wealth and strength and does not consider the consequences.

古文：驱天下以从欲，罄万物以自奉，采域中之子女，求远方之奇异。
现代文：驱使天下的人来满足自己放纵的欲望，用尽万物来奉养自己，搜求国内的女子，搜刮远方的奇珍异宝。
English: Driving the world's people to satisfy their indulgent desires, exhausting everything to feed themselves, searching for domestic women, and searching for distant treasures.

古文：宫宇是饰，台榭是崇，徭役无时，干戈不戢。
现代文：修饰宫宇，筑高台榭，徭役不断，战争不息。
English: They embellished the palaces, built high towers, constantly served as guards, and waged war incessantly.

古文：外示威重，内多险忌。谗邪者必受其福，忠正者莫保其生。
现代文：向外显示自己的威严，对内常常阴险猜忌，谗佞邪恶的人必定得到好处，忠心正直的人却自身不保。
English: He shows his dignity outwardly, but inwardly he often harbors insidious suspicions. Those who do evil are sure to receive benefits, but those who are loyal and honest will not be able to protect themselves.

古文：上下相蒙，君臣道隔，人不堪命，率土分崩。
现代文：上下相互欺骗，君臣隔绝不通，人们无法活命，境内分崩离析。
English: The upper and lower echelons deceive each other, monarchs and ministers are cut off from each other, people can't live, and the country is falling apart.

古文：遂以四海之尊，殒于匹夫之手，子孙殄灭，为天下笑，深可痛哉！
现代文：因而导致君王死于匹夫之手，子孙绝灭，被天下人耻笑，让人十分痛心啊！
English: Thus leading to the death of the king at the hands of the peacock, the extinction of his descendants, and being ridiculed by the world, people are very sad!

古文：圣哲乘机，拯其危溺，八柱倾而复正，四维绝而更张。
现代文： 圣人乘此机会，拯救天下的危难，重正倾倒的八柱，申张绝灭的四维。
English: The sage took this opportunity to save the world's peril, restore the eight pillars that were overthrown, and proclaim the four dimensions of annihilation.

古文：远肃迩安，不逾于期月；胜残去杀，无待于百年。
现代文：使远处恭敬近处安宁，不用超过一个月；使凶残人从善，废除死刑，不须等待百年。
English: However, it is by no means a long-term solution to rely solely on temporary border stability and national tranquility to maintain rule; it is also difficult to rule for a hundred years by stopping wars and doing nothing to maintain the status quo.

古文：今宫观台榭，尽居之矣；奇珍异物，尽收之矣；姬姜淑媛，尽侍于侧矣；四海九州，尽为臣妾矣。
现代文：现在隋帝的宫殿楼台，陛下全都住了；奇珍异物，陛下全都收下来了；贵妇美女，都在陛下身边侍候；四海九州的人，都成为陛下的臣妾。
English: Your Majesty, you are now living in a luxurious palace, with a collection of the world's rarest treasures, with the nation's beautiful women waiting by your side, and the people of Kyushu all over the world listening to your every command.

古文：若能鉴彼之所以亡，念我之所以得，日慎一日，虽休勿休。
现代文：陛下如果能借鉴隋朝之所以灭亡的原因，思索我朝之所以得天下的原因，一天比一天谨慎，把盛世当成危难之时。
English: Your Majesty, if you can learn from the reasons for the fall of the Sui Dynasty and think about the reasons for the rise of the Ming Dynasty, be more cautious day by day, and treat the prosperous times as a time of crisis.

古文：焚鹿台之宝衣，毁阿房之广殿，惧危亡于峻宇，思安处于卑宫，则神化潜通，无为而理，德之上也。
现代文：焚毁隋宫的宝衣，废弃阿房的广殿，害怕危险脱离高大的殿宇，追求安宁住在低矮的宫室，那就出神入化，无为而治。这是德的最高境界。
English: To burn the Sui Palace's treasures, to abandon the Great Hall of the Imperial Palace, to fear the danger of leaving the great hall, to pursue peace and live in a low palace room, is to lose one's mind and do nothing. This is the highest realm of virtue.

古文：若成功不毁，即仍其旧，除其不急，损之又损。
现代文：如果已经成就的事业不败落，继承原有的传统，取消不急迫的事物，减少再减少。
English: If the cause that has already been accomplished is not defeated, inherit the original tradition, cancel things that are not urgent, reduce and reduce.

古文：杂茅茨于桂栋，参玉砌以土阶，悦以使人，不竭其力，常念居之者逸，作之者劳，亿兆悦以子来，群生仰而遂性，德之次也。
现代文：在桂栋中杂以茅草，在玉阶中参以土阶，用人叫人悦服，不把劳力用尽。常考虑士人的安逸、百姓的劳苦，万民欢迎您驾临，众生仰慕而遂心。这是德的次一等境界。
English: In the Gui building, we mixed with thatch, in the Jade steps, we used earth steps, we employed people to make people happy, and did not exhaust their labor. We always consider the comfort of the scholars and the labor of the people. All people welcome you to come, and all beings admire and satisfy their hearts. This is the second-class realm of virtue.

古文：若惟圣罔念，不慎厥终，忘缔构之艰难，谓天命之可恃。忽彩椽之恭俭，追雕墙之侈靡，因其基以广之，增其旧而饰之。
现代文：如果不慎重地考虑后果，忘记创业的艰难，认为天命可以依恃，忽视采椽的恭俭，追求雕情的奢侈，在旧有的基址上扩建宫殿，加以装饰。
English: If you do not carefully consider the consequences, forget the difficulties of starting a business, think that the destiny can be snuggled, ignore the frugality of picking straw, pursue the luxury of sculpture, expand the palace on the old site and decorate it.

古文：触类而长，不思止足，人不见德，而劳役是闻，斯为下矣。
现代文：见到什么就扩展什么，欲望不知道满足，人们看不到君主的德政，而只听到要去服劳役的事，这是德中的下等。
English: Whatever is seen expands, desires are not satisfied, people do not see the monarchy, but only hear about the labor service, which is the lowest level of morality.

古文：譬之负薪救火，扬汤止沸，以乱易乱，与乱同道，莫可则也，后嗣何观，则人怨神怒；人怨神怒，则灾害必下，而祸乱必作。
现代文：好像是背着柴禾去救火，用开水去浇息水的沸腾，以暴乱更替暴乱，走上动乱道路，没有可以让后人效法的准则，导致民怨神怨；民怨神怨，那么灾害就会发生，祸乱就必然兴起。
English: It is like carrying firewood to put out a fire, using boiling water to quench the boiling water, replacing riots with riots, and embarking on the road of turmoil. There is no standard that can be emulated by future generations, leading to people's resentment of God; people's resentment of God, then disasters will occur, and disasters will inevitably arise.

古文：祸乱既作，而能以身名令终者，鲜矣！
现代文：祸乱已经兴起，而能使自己的躯体名声善终的不多啊。
English: The scourge has already arisen, and there are not many who can make their bodies famous.

古文：顺天革命之后，隆七百之祚，贻厥孙谋，传之万世，难得易失，可不念哉！
现代文：周武王顺应天命改朝换代，兴隆了七百年的江山，传给子孙万代，得来不易而失去却很简单，可不深思吗？ 
English: King Zhou Wu, in accordance with the destiny of heaven, changed the dynasty and generation. The country flourished for seven hundred years and was passed down to his descendants for generations. It was not easy to gain, but it was easy to lose. Shouldn't you think about it?

古文：其二曰：
现代文：其二曰：
English: The second is:

古文：臣闻求木之长者，必固其根本；欲流之远者，必浚其泉源；思国之安者，必积其德义。
现代文： 我听说想要树木生长，一定要使它的根长得牢固；想要水流得远，一定要疏通它的源头；想让国家安定的人，就一定积聚自己的道德仁义。
English: I have heard that if you want a tree to grow, you must make its roots grow strong; if you want water to flow far, you must clear its source; if you want a stable country, you must accumulate your own morality.

古文：源不深而岂望流之远，根不固而何求木之长？
现代文：源头不深哪能指望水流得远，根不牢固怎么能要树木生长。
English: If the source is not deep, how can we expect the water to flow far? If the roots are not firm, how can we expect the trees to grow?

古文：德不厚而思国之治，虽在下愚，知其不可，而况于明哲乎！
现代文：道德仁义不厚重而想国家安定，即使最愚蠢的人，也知道这是不可能的。何况明智的人呢！
English: Even the most stupid person knows that it is impossible to have a stable country without a strong sense of morality, benevolence and righteousness, let alone a wise person.

古文：人君当神器之重，居域中之大，将崇极天之峻，永保无疆之休。
现代文：国君担负着治理天下的重任，在天地之间处于至高无上的地位，将达到无穷之高，永保无穷之美。
English: The sovereign bears the heavy responsibility of governing the world, is in a supreme position between heaven and earth, will reach an infinite height, and will forever preserve an infinite beauty.

古文：不念于居安思危，戒贪以俭；德不处其厚，情不胜其欲，斯亦伐根以求木茂，塞源而欲流长者也。
现代文：如果不考虑在安乐中想到危难，用俭朴戒除奢侈，如果道德不能保持厚重，感情不能战胜贪欲，这也像砍树根而求树长得茂盛，塞水源而想水流得长一样。
English: If one does not think of danger in the midst of comfort, and uses frugality to banish luxury, if morality cannot be kept strong, and emotions cannot overcome greed, it is like cutting the roots of a tree to make it grow more luxuriantly, or blocking the source of water to make the water flow longer.

古文：凡百元首，承天景命，莫不殷忧而道著，功成而德衰。
现代文： 古代所有的君王，都是承受上天授予的使命，没有不是深深忧虑而道义显著，功业完成而道德衰落的。
English: Generally speaking, many emperors, after obeying God's will, did not worry about their achievements, but their virtue would be degraded.

古文：有善始者实繁，能克终者盖寡，岂其取之易而守之难乎？
现代文：有好的开端的的确很多，能够善终的却很少。难道是取得天下容易守住天下难吗？
English: There are indeed many who have a good start, but few who can finish well. Is it easy to gain the world and difficult to keep the world?

古文：昔取之而有余，今守之而不足，何也？
现代文：过去取得天下游刃有余，现在守住天下却力不从心，这是为什么呢？
English: In the past, when they conquered the world, their strength was inexhaustible, but now they are unable to hold on to their heritage. What is the reason for this?

古文：夫在殷忧必竭诚以待下，既得志则纵情以傲物。
现代文：在忧患深重时必定竭尽诚心地对待下面的人，一旦达到目的就放纵自己的感情傲慢地待人接物。
English: In times of deep sorrow, they must treat the people below them with utmost sincerity. Once they have achieved their goal, they will indulge their feelings and treat others arrogantly.

古文：竭诚则胡越为一体，傲物则骨肉为行路。
现代文：竭尽诚心，那么胡、越也可以结为一体；傲慢待人，那么骨肉至亲也会像路人一样。
English: If you treat people with sincerity, even enemies can become friends; however, even brothers can turn against each other and become strangers.

古文：虽董之以严刑，振之以威怒，终苟免而不怀仁，貌恭而不心服。
现代文：即使用严酷的刑罚来督查人，用威力暴怒来震慑人，最终只能使人苟且免刑而不怀念君王的仁慈，态度恭敬而内心不服。
English: That is to say, the use of severe punishment to supervise people, the use of power and anger to deter people, and ultimately only to make people cautious and exempt from punishment without remembering the king's mercy, the attitude of respect and heart is not satisfied.

古文：怨不在大，可畏惟人。
现代文：怨恨不在于大小，可怕的只有人民。
English: Resentment does not lie in size, only the people are terrible.

古文：载舟覆舟，所宜深慎。奔车朽索，其可忽乎？
现代文：人民像水一样，既可负载船只，也可倾覆船只，所以应当十分慎重，朽烂的绳子驾着奔驰的车，难道是可以忽视的吗？
English: The people, like water, can either load a boat or capsize a boat, so they should be very careful. Is it possible to ignore a rotting rope driving a speeding car?

古文：君人者，诚能见可欲则思知足以自戒，将有所作则思知止以安人，念高危则思谦冲而自牧，惧满溢则思江海而下百川，乐盘游则思三驱以为度，恐懈怠则思慎始而敬终，虑壅蔽则思虚心以纳下，想谗邪则思正身以黜恶，恩所加则思无因喜以谬赏，罚所及则思无因怒而滥刑。
现代文： 为人君者，果真见到自己想要的，就应用知足来警戒自己；将有劳作就应想到停止使人民安宁；想到地位高的危险，就要谦让虚心加强自我修养；害怕骄傲自满会造成损失，就考虑要像江海容纳百川一样放宽度量；喜爱游玩，就应想到皇帝一年打猎三次的限度；担心意志懈怠，就想到办事始终都要谨慎；忧虑会受到蒙蔽，就要想到虚心采纳下面的意见；要想避开谗邪，就想到端正自身的品性而斥退邪恶小人；给人赏赐，就应想到不因为高兴而奖赏不当；给人处罚，就应想到不因为发怒而滥施刑罚。
English: If you are a human being, if you really see what you want, you should apply contentment to guard yourself; if you have work, you should think of stopping to make the people calm; if you think of the danger of high status, you should be humble and humble to strengthen self-cultivation; if you are afraid that pride and complacency will cause losses, you should consider widening the measure like the rivers and seas to accommodate hundreds of rivers; if you like to play, you should think of the emperor's limit of hunting three times a year; if you are worried about slacking, you should think of doing things carefully all the time; if you are worried about being blinded,

古文：总此十思，弘兹九德，简能而任之，择善而从之。
现代文：完全做到这十件应当深思的事情，发扬光大这九种美德，选拔有才能的人而加以任用，选择好的意见而加以采纳。
English: To do these ten things thoroughly, to cultivate these nine virtues, to select able men for appointment, to choose good opinions for adoption.

古文：则智者尽其谋，勇者竭其力，仁者播其惠，信者效其忠。
现代文：那么智慧的人就能完全贡献他的谋略，勇敢的人就能竭尽他的全力，仁义的人就能传布他的恩惠，有信用的人就会献出他的忠心。
English: Then will the wise man give his counsel in full, the brave man his best, the just man his bounty, and the faithful man his loyalty.

古文：文武争驰，君臣无事，可以尽豫游之乐，可以养松乔之寿，鸣琴垂拱，不言而化。
现代文：文人武士争相驰骋，君主臣下相安无事，尽情享受游玩的乐趣，修养身心达到松乔的高寿，鸣琴奏乐，垂衣拱手，不用言词而达到教化。
English: The literati and samurai compete with each other, the monarchs and their subjects are at peace with each other, enjoy the fun of playing, cultivate the body and mind to reach the longevity of Song Qiao, play the piano, hang clothes, and achieve enlightenment without words.

古文：何必劳神苦思，代下司职，役聪明之耳目，亏无为之大道哉！
现代文：何必劳神苦思，代替下属履行职责，役使聪明的耳目，有损无为而治的大道呢？ 
English: Why should you toil and think hard, perform duties in place of subordinates, and use your clever eyes and ears, to the detriment of the path of doing nothing?

古文：其三曰：
现代文：其三曰：
English: On the third day:

古文：臣闻《书》曰： 明德慎罚，惟刑恤哉！ 
现代文： 臣听《尚书》上说： 宣扬道德慎用处罚，刑罚是最应慎重的！ 
English: The minister listened to "Shang Shu" and said: "Preach morality and use punishment carefully, and punishment should be the most prudent!

古文：《礼》云： 为上易事，为下易知，则刑不烦矣。
现代文：《礼记》说： 处在上位的人容易侍奉，处在下位的人容易了解，那么刑罚就不会繁多。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: The ruler is generous and easy to serve, and the vassal is honest and easy to drive, so there is no need for much punishment.

古文：上多疑则百姓惑，下难知则君长劳矣。 
现代文：处在上位的人多疑，那么百姓就会迷惑；处在下位的人难于了解，那么君长就会劳苦。 
English: When those at the top are suspicious, the people will be confused; when those at the bottom are hard to understand, the leaders will struggle.

古文：夫上易事，下易知，君长不劳，百姓不惑。
现代文：处在上位的人容易侍奉，处在下位的人容易了解，那么君长就不会疲劳，百姓就不会迷惑。
English: It is easy for those at the top to serve, and easy for those at the bottom to understand. Then the leaders will not be tired, and the people will not be confused.

古文：故君有一德，臣无二心；上播忠厚之诚，下竭股肱之力，然后太平之基不坠， 康哉 之咏斯起。
现代文：所以君主有一种美德，臣下就不会有二心，君主传布忠厚的诚信，臣下竭尽全身的力量，然后太平的根基就会牢固， 康哉 的吟咏就从这里兴起。
English: Therefore, the monarch has a virtue, the subjects will not have two hearts, the monarch propagates loyal integrity, the subjects exert their full strength, and then the foundation of peace will be solid, and the harmony of harmony will rise from here.

古文：当今道被华夷，功高宇宙，无思不服，无远不臻。
现代文：现在大道覆盖天下，功高宇宙，无思不服，无远不达。
English: Now the avenue covers the whole world, the achievement is high, the universe is unconvinced, and nothing is far away.

古文：然言尚于简大，志在于明察，刑赏之本，在乎劝善而惩恶。帝王之所以与天下为画一，不以亲疏贵贱而轻重者也。
现代文：言论崇尚简明宏大，志向在于明察，刑罚赏赐的根本在于劝善惩恶，所以帝王在运用刑罚时天下依据同一的标准，不因为亲疏贵贱而有所轻重。
English: Speech advocates simplicity and grandeur, the aspiration is to see clearly, the reward of punishment is fundamentally to persuade good and punish evil, so when the emperor uses punishment, the world is based on the same standard, not because of the relative importance.

古文：今之刑赏，未必尽然。
现代文：现在的刑罚赏赐，却未必都是这样。
English: Today's rewards and punishments are not necessarily able to achieve what "Shang Shu" and "Li Ji" advocated.

古文：或申屈在乎好恶，轻重由乎喜怒。
现代文：有时断事的曲直出于自己的喜好或厌恶，量刑的轻重取决于自己的高兴或恼怒。
English: Sometimes the verdict is based on one's own likes or dislikes, and the severity of the sentence depends on one's pleasure or anger.

古文：遇喜则矜其刑于法中，逢怒则求其罪于事外；所好则钻皮出其毛羽，所恶则洗垢求其瘢痕。
现代文：遇上高兴的时候就惜于用刑，在法律上徇私情，遇上恼怒的时候就背离法律寻找别人的罪过，对自己喜爱的人赞美言过其实，对自己厌恶的人就故意挑剔毛病。
English: When they are happy, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are angry, they deviate from the law to look for the sins of others; when they are pleased, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are angry, they deviate from the law to look for the sins of others; when they are pleased, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are happy, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are angry, they deviate from the law to look for the sins of others; when they are pleased, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are pleased, they do not hesitate to use punishment; when they are angry, they deviate from the law to look

古文：瘢痕可求，则刑斯滥矣；毛羽可出，则赏典谬矣。
现代文：毛病可以挑出来，那么刑罚就因此而过度；赞美之词言过其实，那么就会赏赐不当。
English: If wickedness is singled out, the punishment will be excessive; if praise is excessive, the reward will be inadequate.

古文：刑滥则小人道长，赏谬则君子道消。
现代文：刑罚过度，小人之道就会增长；赏赐不当，君子之道就会消亡。
English: Excessive punishment increases the strength of the villain, and the wrong reward will make the way of the gentleman disappear.

古文：小人之恶不惩，君子之善不劝，而望治安刑措，非所闻也。
现代文：小人的恶行不惩罚，君子的善行不奖励，而希望天下太平，刑罚弃而不用，这是我没有听说过的。
English: It is unheard of not to punish the villain's evil and not to reward the gentleman's good, if by so doing one also hopes for a well-ordered state and rewards and punishments.

古文：且夫豫暇清谈，皆敦尚于孔、老；威怒所至，则取法于申、韩。
现代文： 况而且空闲时清谈，都笃信崇尚孔子、老子；发威动怒时，就效法申不害、韩非子。
English: Moreover, when they talk freely, they all believe in Confucius and Lao Tzu; when they get angry, they follow the example of Shen Nihong and Han Feizi.

古文：直道而行，非无三黜，危人自安，盖亦多矣。
现代文：走正道的人，不是没有被罢免三次的，嫁祸别人以自求安宁，这样的事也很多了。
English: There are many things like this. People who walk on the right path are not those who have not been dismissed three times, but those who seek peace by blaming others.

古文：故道德之旨未弘，刻薄之风已扇。
现代文：所以道德的宗旨还未弘扬，刻薄的风气却已经煽起。
English: Therefore, the moral purpose has not yet been promoted, but the caustic atmosphere has been stirred up.

古文：夫上风既扇，则下生百端，人竞趋时，则宪章不一，稽之王度，实亏君道。
现代文：上面的风已经煽起，那么下面就生出事端，人们竞相随时势转移，宪章就不统一，考察王家的法度，确实有损君王的大道。
English: The winds above are stirred up, and there is a tumult below, and men are contending, and the tables are turned, and the charters are divided, and the laws of kings are examined, and the ways of kings are found wanting.

古文：昔州黎上下其手，楚国之法遂差；张汤轻重其心，汉朝之刑以弊。
现代文：从前州黎与人串通作弊，楚国的法律就遭破坏；张汤心里有所轻重，汉朝的刑罚就出弊病。
English: Since the former Zhu Li colluded with others and cheated, the laws of Chu were destroyed; Zhang Tang had something important in his heart, and the Han Dynasty's punishments caused ills.

古文：人臣之颇僻，犹莫能申其欺罔，况人君之高下，将何以措其手足乎！
现代文：人臣的偏颇，尚不能识破他的蒙骗，况且君王居高临下，又将使人怎么举手投足呢？
English: For how can a man lift up his hand, when he cannot see through the crookedness of his neighbor, and the prince is high and lifted up?

古文：以睿圣之聪明，无幽微而不烛，岂神有所不达，智有所不通哉？
现代文：凭圣上的聪明，没有幽暗的地方不被照亮，哪里会有精神不能达到、智慧不能通晓的地方呢？
English: An emperor should have the wisdom of a saint. He should be able to see everything clearly. Can't even a saint avoid omissions?

古文：安其所安，不以恤刑为念；乐其所乐，遂忘先笑之变。
现代文：自求安逸不以慎用刑罚为念；只求笑乐，于是忘了褒姒一笑所引发的变故。
English: The king should make the people feel at ease, not just punish them; make the people happy, and avoid making the same mistakes as the ancients.

古文：祸福相倚，吉凶同域，唯人所召，安可不思？
现代文：祸福相依，吉凶同域，只是人自己招来的，怎么可以不思索呢？
English: Misfortune and good fortune depend on each other, good luck and bad luck are the same, but they are caused by people themselves, how can they not think about it?

古文：顷者责罚稍多，威怒微厉，或以供给不赡，或以人不从欲，皆非致治之所急，实乃骄奢之攸渐。
现代文：近来责罚渐渐增多，威怒暗暗加重，有的是因为供应不充足，有的是因为别人不能顺从自己的欲望，这些都不是为达到太平急需办理的事务，实在是骄奢的浸染。
English: Recently, punishments have been gradually increasing, and arrogance has been secretly increasing, some because of insufficient supply, some because others cannot obey their own desires, these are not urgent matters to achieve peace, but are really arrogant.

古文：是知贵不与骄期而骄自来，富不与奢期而奢自至，非徒语也。
现代文：由此知道尊贵没有与骄傲相约而骄傲自来，富裕没有与奢侈相约，奢侈自到，这并不是空话。
English: From this, we know that nobility does not coincide with pride, but pride comes from it, wealth does not coincide with luxury, luxury comes from it, this is not empty talk.

古文：且我之所代，实在有隋，隋氏乱亡之源，圣明之所临照。
现代文： 况且我们所取代的是隋朝，隋朝动乱灭亡的根源，可以作为圣明的对照。
English: Moreover, what we have replaced is the Sui Dynasty, the root cause of the tumultuous demise of the Sui Dynasty, which can be used as a comparison for Shengming.

古文：以隋氏之甲兵，况当今之士马；以隋氏之府储藏，譬今日之资储；以隋氏之户口，校今时之百姓。度长计大，曾何等级？
现代文：以隋朝的军队，比今日的兵马；以隋朝的仓库，比今日的储备；以隋朝的户口，比今日的百姓；计量其长短大小，有多大差别呀！
English: The army of the Sui Dynasty is more important than today's soldiers and horses; the warehouse of the Sui Dynasty is more important than today's reserves; the household registration of the Sui Dynasty is more important than today's people; how big is the difference in measuring its length and size!

古文：然隋氏以富强而丧败，动之也；我以贫寡而安宁，静之也。
现代文：然而隋朝以富强而灭亡，原因是国家的动荡；我们依贫困而安宁，原因是国家平静。
English: However, the Sui Dynasty died rich and strong because of the country's turmoil; we are poor and peaceful because of the country's tranquility.

古文：静之则安，动之则乱，人皆知之，非隐而难见也，微而难察也。
现代文：平静就安宁，动荡就混乱，大家都知道，并不是隐晦难见、细微难察的道理。
English: Calm is tranquility, and turmoil is chaos. Everyone knows that this is not an obscure or subtle truth.

古文：鲜蹈平易之途，多遵覆车之辙，何哉？
现代文：不走平坦的道路，而遵循已倾覆的车子的辙迹，这是为什么呢？
English: Why not follow the path of the overturned car, rather than the smooth road?

古文：在于安不思危，治不念乱，存不虑亡之所致也。
现代文：在于安宁时没有想到危险，太平时没有想到动乱，生存时没有想到灭亡所导致的。
English: In tranquility there is no thought of danger, in peace there is no thought of turmoil, in survival there is no thought of what perishing will bring.

古文：昔隋氏之未乱，自谓必无乱；隋氏之未亡，自谓必不亡。
现代文：过去隋朝没有乱的时候，自以为一定不会乱；还没有亡的时候，自以为一定不会亡。
English: In the past, when there was no turmoil in the Sui Dynasty, they thought that there would be no turmoil; when there was no death, they thought that they would not die.

古文：所以甲兵屡动，徭役不息，至于身将戮辱，竟未悟其灭亡之所由也，可不哀哉！
现代文：所以屡次发动战争，徭役不息，直到被杀受辱，竟然还没有明白自己灭亡的原因，不可悲吗！
English: Therefore, it is not a pity that they have not understood the reason for their own demise, even though they have repeatedly waged war and worked tirelessly until they were killed and humiliated!

古文：臣愿当今之动静，思隋氏以为鉴，则存亡治乱，可得而知。
现代文： 照相貌的美丑，一定要用静止的水；照看国家的安危，一定要找已灭亡的国家。《诗经》说： 殷朝的借鉴不远，就在前一代的夏朝。 
English: To photograph beauty and ugliness, you must use still water; to look after the safety of the country, you must look for a country that has perished. "The Book of Songs" says: The reference of the Yin Dynasty is not far away, just in the previous generation of the Summer Dynasty.

古文：若能思其所以危，则安矣；思其所以乱，则治矣；思其所以亡，则存矣。
现代文：臣希望当今的动静，能以隋朝为借鉴，那么存亡治乱的道理就可以知道了。如果能想到导致危险的原因，就会安宁；想到导致它动乱的原因，就会太平；想到导致它灭亡的原因，就能生存。
English: If you can think about the reasons for its death, then you can cure it; if you can think about the reasons for its death, then you can survive.

古文：存亡之所在，节嗜欲以从人。省畋游之娱，息靡丽之作，罢不急之务，慎偏听之怒。
现代文：生存灭亡的关键，在于节制嗜好与欲望，减少出游、打猎等娱乐，摆脱奢华的排场，停止办理并不急迫的事务，谨防偏听偏信带来的恼怒。
English: The key to survival and death is to control one's hobbies and desires, reduce travel, hunting and other entertainment, get rid of luxurious pomp, stop handling non-urgent matters, and beware of the irritation caused by partial listening and partial belief.

古文：近忠厚，远便佞，杜悦耳之邪说，听苦口之忠言。
现代文：亲近忠厚的人，疏远阿谀奉迎的人，杜绝悦耳的邪说，采纳苦口的忠言。
English: Stay close to those who are loyal, stay away from those who are flatterers, reject the sweet-tongued and adopt the bitter-tongued.

古文：去易进之人，贱难得之货。采尧、舜之诽谤，追禹、汤之罪己，惜十家之产，顺百姓之心。
现代文：让易进的人离去，使难得的货价廉，学习尧、舜徵求意见，对照禹、汤检查自己，惜十家之产，顺百姓之心。
English: Let the people who are easy to enter leave, make the rare goods cheap, learn to ask for advice, check themselves against Yu and Tang, spare the production of the ten families, and follow the hearts of the people.

古文：近取诸身，恕以待物。
现代文：近取之于身，以宽恕待人。
English: Draw close to yourself and treat others with forgiveness.

古文：思劳谦以受益，不自满以招损。
现代文：劳苦谦逊而受益，不自满以免招致损害。
English: Work humbly and benefit, do not become complacent lest you incur damage.

古文：有动则庶类以和，出言而千里斯应，超上德于前载，树风声于后昆。
现代文：有所行动百姓都附和，说话千里之外就来呼应，高超的德行超过前代，良好的风尚树给后代子孙。
English: When there is an action, the people all agree, and when they speak, they are echoed thousands of miles away. The superb virtue surpasses the previous generation, and the good fashion tree is given to future generations.

古文：此圣哲之宏规，帝王之盛业，能事斯毕，在乎慎守而已。
现代文：这是圣哲的宏规，帝王的盛业，能做到这些方面，在于慎守而已。
English: This is the grand plan of the sages, the prosperous career of the emperors. To be able to achieve these aspects, it is only prudent.

古文：夫守之则易，取之实难，既得其所以难，岂不能保其所以易？
现代文： 守住天下是容易的，取得天下确实很难，已经得到难以取得的天下，难道不能保持容易守住的天下吗？
English: It is easy to keep the world, it is really difficult to obtain the world, and the world that has been obtained is difficult to obtain. Can't we keep the world that is easy to keep?

古文：其或保之不固，则骄奢淫泆动之也。
现代文：保持它而不牢固，是因为骄奢淫逸的欲望在动摇它。
English: If anyone is not secure, it is because of pride and arrogance.

古文：慎终如始，可不勉欤！
现代文：对待终结要像对待开始一样小心翼翼，能不尽心尽力吗？
English: Prudence is as good as it gets, how can you not always encourage yourself!

古文：《易》云： 君子安不忘危，存不忘亡，治不忘乱，是以身安而国家可保。 
现代文：《易经》说 ：君子安宁不忘危险，生存不忘灭亡，太平不忘动乱，因此自身安宁而国家可以保全。 
English: "I Ching" says: A gentleman does not forget danger, survival does not forget death, and peace does not forget turmoil, so he is calm and the country can be preserved.

古文：诚哉斯言，不可以不深察也。
现代文：这话确实有道理，是不可不深入考察的。
English: This is very true and must be deeply understood.

古文：伏惟陛下欲善之志，不减于昔时，闻过必改，少亏于曩日。
现代文：愿陛下追求善的志向不减于过去，闻过必改的作风无异于当年。
English: I would like to think that His Majesty's desire to do good is no less than it was then, but I have heard that the spirit of reform is somewhat inferior to the past.

古文：若能以当今之无事，行畴昔之恭俭，则尽善尽美，固无得而称焉。
现代文：如果能在平安无事的今天，像过去一样恭敬节俭，就尽善尽美，根本没有必要得意而自加颂扬。 
English: If you can be safe and sound today, respectful and frugal as in the past, you will be perfect. There is no need to boast and praise yourself.

古文：其四曰：
现代文：其四曰：
English: On the fourth day:

古文：臣闻为国之基，必资于德礼；君子所保，惟在于诚信。
现代文： 臣听说治国的基础，必须以礼、德为根本；君子的保证，只在于诚、信。
English: The vassal hears that the foundation of governing the country must be based on etiquette and virtue; the gentleman's guarantee lies only in sincerity and trust.

古文：诚信立则下无二心，德礼形则远人斯格。
现代文：诚、信建立，处在下位的人就不会有二心；德礼具备，远方的人就会前来朝贡。
English: If there is good faith, there will be no double-mindedness. If a virtuous government is implemented, the people in remote areas will also come to submit.

古文：然则德礼诚信，国之大纲，在于父子君臣，不可斯须而废也。
现代文：所以德、礼、诚、信，是治理国家的重要纲领，对于父子君臣，不可以有片刻的废弃。
English: Therefore, morality, propriety, sincerity, and trust are important programs for governing the country. There should be no momentary abandonment of the father-son relationship.

古文：故孔子曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 
现代文：因此孔子说： 君主应该按礼来使用臣子，臣子应该以忠来侍奉君主。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said, "The king treats his vassal with courtesy, and the vassal serves the king with loyalty."

古文：又曰： 自古皆有死，人无信不立。 
现代文：又说： 自古以来人总是要死的，人没有信义就不能立足。 
English: And he said, For ever since the world began men have been dying, and without faith it is impossible to be saved.

古文：文子曰： 同言而信，信在言前；同令而行，诚在令外。 
现代文：文子说 ：同样的言语而有时被信任，是因为信任建立在言语之前；同样的命令有时能被执行，是因为诚心已经在命令之外。 
English: Fumiko said, "Speaking words can make people believe because you have gained people's trust before speaking, and issuing orders can be carried out because there is sincerity in the order.

古文：然则言而不行，言不信也；令而不从，令无诚也。
现代文：因此言语不能施行，是言语没有信义；命令不被听从，是因为命令没有诚意。
English: Then, speech is not obeyed because it is not trusted; orders are not carried out because of a lack of sincerity.

古文：不信之言，无诚之令，为上则败国，为下则危身，虽在颠沛之中，君子所不为也。
现代文：没有信义的言语，没有诚意的命令，对上就会败国，对下就会危及自身，即使在狼狈困顿之中，君子也不会言无信、令不诚。
English: If there are no words of truth and no sincere orders, the country will be defeated on the one hand, and the country will endanger itself on the other. Even in the midst of troubles, a gentleman will not be dishonest and dishonest.

古文：自王道休明，十有余载，威加海外，万国来庭，仓禀日积，土地日广。
现代文： 自从帝王的大道美好兴旺，已经十多年了，威力施加到海外，万国前来朝贡，国库里的粮食日益增多，国土一天比一天扩大。
English: It has been more than ten years since the emperor's road was beautiful and prosperous. Power was exerted overseas, all nations came to pay tribute, the grain in the treasury was increasing day by day, and the land was expanding day by day.

古文：然而道德未益厚，仁义未益博者，何哉？
现代文：然而道德没有一天比一天厚重，仁义没有一天比一天广博，这是为什么呢？
English: However, morality does not become more profound day by day, and benevolence and righteousness do not become more extensive day by day. Why is this?

古文：由乎待下之情未尽于诚信，虽有善始之勤，未睹克终之美故也。
现代文：这是由于陛下对待臣子还没有完全做到真诚信任，虽然有善始的勤俭，却没有坚持善终的缘故。
English: Because the attitude of the imperial court towards the courtier is not honest enough, although His Majesty was diligent in government affairs in the early days of chastity and had a good beginning, he failed to achieve a good beginning and a good end.

古文：其所由来者渐，非一朝一夕之故。
现代文：这样的情况是逐渐形成的，不是一朝一夕可以做到的。
English: Such a situation is formed gradually and cannot be achieved overnight.

古文：昔贞观之始，闻善若惊，暨五六年间，犹悦以从谏。
现代文：贞观初年，陛下听到好的意见感到惊喜，到贞观五六年间，还喜欢听从规劝。
English: In the first year of chengguan, His Majesty was surprised to hear good advice, and in the five or six years since he became chengguan, he still likes to listen to advice.

古文：自兹厥后，渐恶直言，虽或勉强，时有所容，非复曩时之豁如也。
现代文：从这以后，渐渐厌恶直言，即或勉强接受，有时也露出不高兴的脸色，不能还像过去接受意见时那样大度。
English: Since then, I have gradually come to detest direct speech, and accept it reluctantly or reluctantly, sometimes with an unhappy face, unable to accept opinions as generously as I did in the past.

古文：謇谔之士，稍避龙鳞；便佞之徒，肆其巧辩。
现代文：直言的君子，渐渐躲开陛下；阿谀奉迎之徒，尽力施展他们的巧辩伎俩。
English: The outspoken gentleman, by degrees, evaded his majesty; the flatterers, by degrees, exerted their wiles.

古文：谓同心者为朋党，谓告讦者为至公，谓强直者为擅权，谓忠谠者为诽谤。
现代文：说彼此同心的人是结党营私，说揭人隐私的人是大公无私，说刚强正直的人是专权，说忠直敢谏的人是诽谤。
English: Saying that people who are like-minded are partisan and selfish, saying that people who expose people's privacy are selfless, saying that people who are strong and honest are authoritarian, and saying that people who are loyal and brave are slanderous.

古文：谓之朋党，虽忠信而可疑；谓之至公，虽矫伪而无咎。
现代文：称之结党营私，即使忠诚不欺也值得怀疑；称之大公无私，即使弄虚作假也没有过错。
English: It is doubtful to call it "partisanship" even if it is not deceitful; it is not wrong to call it "selflessness" even if it is deceptive.

古文：强直者畏擅权之议，忠谠者虑诽谤之尤。
现代文：刚强正直的人害怕专权的非议，忠直敢谏的人顾虑诽谤的指责。
English: Therefore, strong and honest people are afraid of being accused of dereliction of duty, and loyal and honest people are worried about defaming the reputation of the imperial court.

古文：至于窃斧生疑，投杼致惑，正人不得尽其言，大臣莫能与之诤。
现代文：以致窃斧生疑，投杼致惑，刚直的人不能完全说出自己的想法，大臣不敢直言进谏。
English: As a result, suspicions are aroused, doubts are cast, upright people cannot fully express their thoughts, and ministers dare not speak their minds.

古文：荧惑视听，郁于大道，妨化损德，其在兹乎？
现代文：惑乱视听，阻滞正道，妨害教化，损伤道德，也许就在这里吧？
English: Disturbing audio-visual, obstructing the right path, hindering education, damaging morality, maybe it's here?

古文：故孔子恶利口之覆邦家，盖为此也。
现代文：所以孔子厌恶利口谗言倾覆国家，就是这个缘故。
English: It is for this reason that Confucius abhorred clever talk about overthrowing the state.

古文：且君子小人，貌同心异。
现代文： 且君子小人，表面相同而内心各异。
English: This is probably the situation today. Moreover, a gentleman and a villain are the same on the outside, but not on the inside.

古文：君子掩人之恶，扬人之善，临难无苟免，杀身以成仁。
现代文：君子掩人之恶，扬人之善，面对危难不苟且偷生，能杀身以成仁。
English: A gentleman is tolerant of other people's shortcomings, praises other people's merits, and is absolutely meticulous and stealthy in times of danger. Even if he sacrifices his life, he must achieve the virtue of benevolence.

古文：小人不耻不仁，不畏不义，唯利之所在，危人以自安。
现代文：小人不耻于不仁，不怕行为不义，只追求利之所在，危险的人自得安宁。
English: A small person is not ashamed of being unkind, is not afraid of acting unfairly, only pursues what is profitable, and a dangerous person is at peace with himself.

古文：夫苟在危人，则何所不至。
现代文：对于危险的人来说，有什么不敢做的。
English: For dangerous people, there is nothing to be afraid of.

古文：今将求致治，必委之于君子；事有得失，或访之于小人。
现代文：现在要追求达到太平，就把重任委托给君子；事情的得失，有时又咨访小人。
English: Now, in the pursuit of attaining peace, the important tasks are entrusted to gentlemen; the gains and losses of affairs are sometimes consulted by villains.

古文：其待君子也，则敬而疏；遇小人也，必轻而狎。狎则言无不尽，疏则情或不通。
现代文：陛下对待君子是恭敬而疏远，对小人却是轻视而亲昵，亲昵小人，小人就可以言无不尽，疏远君子，君子就不能畅所欲言而产生隔阂。
English: His majesty treats the gentleman with respect and distance, but treats the villain with contempt and closeness. If you are close to the villain, the villain can talk endlessly, and if you are distant from the gentleman, the gentleman cannot talk freely and create estrangement.

古文：是誉毁在于小人，刑罚加于君子，实兴丧所在，亦安危所系，可不慎哉！
现代文：因此说好说坏在于小人，刑罚却加给君子，这实在是国家兴亡的关键，国家安危的要害所在，是可以不慎重对待的吗？
English: Therefore, to say that good and evil lie in the villain, but punishment is imposed on the gentleman, this is really the key to the rise and fall of the country, the key to the safety of the country, can it be treated carelessly?

古文：夫中智之人，岂无小慧，然才非经国，虑不及远，虽竭力尽诚，犹未免于倾败；况内怀奸利，承颜顺旨，其为患祸，不亦深乎？
现代文：中等才智的人，难道没有点小聪明，然而却不是经世治国之才，思考问题不能深远，即使他们竭诚尽力，仍不能免于使国家遭受倾覆而败亡；更何况心怀用不正当手段获取利益的企图、承顺天子的脸色和旨意行事的人，他们所带来的祸患灾难，不是更深重吗？
English: Is it not true that people of average intelligence are a little clever, but they do not have the ability to govern the country, and they cannot think far-reaching problems. Even if they try their best, they still cannot prevent the country from being overthrown and defeated. What is more, those who have the intention of gaining benefits by improper means, and those who are obedient to the face and will of the Son of God, are they not more serious?

古文：故孔子曰： 君子或有不仁者焉，未见小人而仁者。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 君子中没有仁德的人是有的，但是没有小人而具有仁德的。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: There are gentlemen without benevolence, but there are no villains with benevolence.

古文：然则君子不能无小恶，恶不积，无妨于正道；小人或时有小善，善不积，不足以立忠。
现代文：这样看来，君子不能没有小恶，但恶不多不妨害他行正道；小人有时也有小善，但善不多不足以使他成为忠臣。
English: From this perspective, a gentleman cannot do without minor evils, but a few evils may not prevent him from walking a righteous path; a villain sometimes has minor virtues, but a few virtues are not enough to make him a loyal subject.

古文：今谓之善人矣，复虑其有不信，何异夫立直木而疑其影之不直乎？
现代文：现在说某人是善人，又顾虑他不可信任，这和竖立一根直木却怀疑它的影子不直有什么不同呢？
English: Now, what is the difference between saying that someone is a good man and being afraid that he cannot be trusted, and erecting a straight tree and suspecting that its shadow is not straight?

古文：虽竭精神，劳思虑，其不可亦已明矣。
现代文：即使竭尽精神，费力思虑，它的不可取也已经是很明白的了。
English: Even if one exhausts one's energy and thinks hard, its undesirability is already very clear.

古文：夫君能尽礼，臣得竭忠，必在于内外无私，上下相信。
现代文： 君主能完全的礼待人，臣下能尽力效忠社稷，必定以内外无私、上下相信为前提。
English: If the king is to be respected and his vassals are to be loyal, they must be selfless at home and abroad, and they must trust each other.

古文：上不信则无以使下，下不信则无以事上。信之为义，大矣哉！
现代文：君主不讲诚信就无法支使臣下，臣下不讲诚信就无法侍奉君主，诚信的意义是很重大的啊！
English: Without honesty, the monarch cannot support his subjects, and without honesty, his subjects cannot serve the monarch. The meaning of honesty is very important!

古文：故自天祐之，吉无不利。
现代文：所以自有上天保佑它，而没有不吉利的。
English: Therefore, there is nothing unlucky about it, since it is blessed by the heavens.

古文：昔齐桓公问于管仲曰： 吾欲酒腐于爵，肉腐于俎，得无害于霸乎？ 
现代文：从前齐桓公问管仲说 ：我想让酒在酒爵里腐臭，肉在砧板上腐烂，该不会妨害成就霸业吧？ 
English: Once upon a time, Prince Qi Huan asked Guanzhong: "I want the wine to be rancid in the wine cellar and the meat to rot on the cutting board. Won't that interfere with the achievement of hegemony?"

古文：管仲曰： 此极非其善者，然亦无害霸也。 
现代文：管仲说 ：这固然很不好，但也不会妨害成就霸业。 
English: Guanzhong said: This is certainly very bad, but it will not hinder the achievement of hegemony.

古文：公曰： 何如而害霸乎？ 
现代文：桓公说 ：那么什么会妨害成就霸业呢？ 
English: Kanko said, "Then what would hinder the achievement of hegemony?"

古文：曰： 不能知人，害霸也；知而不能用，害霸也；用而不能信，害霸也；既信而又使小人参之，害霸也。 
现代文：管仲说： 不能了解人，会妨害成就霸业；了解人而不能任用他，会妨害成就霸业；任用而不信任，会妨害成就霸业；已经信任他而又让小人参与他的事务，会妨害成就霸业。 
English: Guanzhong said: If you cannot understand a person, it will hinder the achievement of hegemony; if you understand a person but cannot appoint him, it will hinder the achievement of hegemony; if you appoint him but do not trust him, it will hinder the achievement of hegemony; if you trust him but let villains participate in his affairs, it will hinder the achievement of hegemony.

古文：晋中行穆伯攻鼓，经年而不能下，馈间伦曰： 鼓之啬夫，间伦知之，请无疲士大夫而鼓可得。 
现代文：晋国中行穆伯攻打鼓国，历时一年而不能攻下，饣鬼间伦说 ：鼓国的啬夫我认识，请不必让士大夫们受累，鼓国就可以得到。 
English: In the middle of Jin Province, Mubo attacked Drum Province. It took him a year, but he could not conquer it. He said, "I know the stingy man of Drum Province. Please don't make the scholars suffer, you can get Drum Province."

古文：穆伯不应。左右曰： 不折一戟，不伤一卒，而鼓可得，君奚为不取？ 
现代文：穆伯不答应，穆伯身边的人说： 不损失一支戟，不伤害一个士兵，而鼓国就可以得到，这样的事您为什么不做呢？ 
English: Mubo did not agree, and the people around Mubo said, "Without losing a single gong, without harming a single soldier, you can obtain the gong kingdom. Why don't you do such a thing?"

古文：穆伯曰： 间伦之为人也，佞而不仁。
现代文：穆伯说 ：间伦的为人，善于阿谀奉承而没有仁德。
English: Mu'awiya said, "He is a hypocrite. He is a flatterer and has no mercy."

古文：若间伦下之，吾不可以不赏。赏之，是赏佞人也。
现代文：如果间伦拿下鼓国，我不可以不给他奖赏，奖赏他，就是奖赏阿谀奉承的人。
English: If Zailun wins the Drum Kingdom, I cannot but give him a reward. To reward him is to reward a flatterer.

古文：佞人得志，是使晋国之士舍仁而为佞，虽得鼓，将何用之？ 
现代文：阿谀奉承的人得志，这就使晋国的士人舍弃仁德而效法阿谀奉承，即使得到鼓国，又有什么用呢？ 
English: Those who flatter others succeed, which makes the statesmen of Jin abandon benevolence and imitate flattery. Even if they get the Drum Kingdom, what is the use?

古文：夫穆伯列国大夫，管仲霸者之佐，犹慎于信任，远避佞人也如此，况乎为四海之大君，应千龄之上圣，而可使巍巍之盛德，复将有所间然乎？
现代文：穆伯不过是春秋列国的大夫，管仲只是霸主的辅佐，尚且对应该信任什么人十分谨慎，远避阿谀奉承的人到这种程度；更何况陛下是治理四海的国君，受命千年的圣上，怎么可以让巍巍的盛德，又将有所间断呢？
English: Mubo is just a doctor of the Spring and Autumn period countries, Guanzhong is just an assistant to the overlord, yet he is very cautious about whom to trust and avoids flatterers to such an extent; not to mention that His Majesty is the ruler of the four seas, the saint of a thousand years, how can he let the pompous virtue be interrupted?

古文：若欲令君子小人是非不杂，必怀之以德，待之以信，厉之以义，节之以礼，然后善善而恶恶，审罚而明赏，则小人绝其佞邪，君子自强不息。无为之化，何远之有？
现代文： 如果想使君子与小人、是与非不混杂，一定要用德关怀臣下，用信对待臣下，用义激励臣下，用礼约束臣下，然后奖善而嫉恶，使赏罚分明。那么小人就弃绝他的狡诈邪恶，君子就会自强不息，达到无为的教化又有多远呢？
English: If you want to make the gentleman and the villain not to mix with each other, you must use virtue to care for your subjects, treat your subjects with faith, encourage your subjects with righteousness, restrain your subjects with courtesy, and then reward the good and the evil, and make the reward and punishment clear. Then the villain will abandon his cunning and evil, the gentleman will be self-improving, and how far is it to achieve the enlightenment of inaction?

古文：善善而不能进，恶恶而不能去，罚不及于有罪，赏不加于有功，则危亡之期，或未可保。永锡祚胤，将何望哉？
现代文：奖善而不能提拔他们，惩恶而不除去恶人，惩罚不给予有罪的人，奖赏不施予有功的人，那么就有危亡的时候，国家或许也不能保住，王位永远世代相传又有什么指望呢！ 
English: To reward the good without promoting them, to punish the wicked without removing the wicked, to punish the guilty without punishing the guilty, and to reward the meritorious without rewarding the meritorious, then, when there is danger of ruin, the state may not be able to hold out, and what hope is there of the throne being handed down from generation to generation forever!

古文：太宗手诏嘉美，优纳之。
现代文：太宗亲笔写诏书嘉奖赞美魏徵的奏疏，格外看重他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong personally wrote an imperial edict praising Wei Zheng's recitation and paid special attention to his opinion.

古文：尝谓长孙无忌曰： 朕即位之初，上书者或言 人主必须威权独运，不得委任群下 ；或欲耀兵振武，慑服四夷。
现代文：曾对长孙无忌说 ：朕刚即位时，上书的人有的说 君主必须把握威权独断专行，不能把权力委任给臣下 ；有的想显示武力强大，使异族恐惧而服从自己。
English: He once said to his eldest grandson: "When I first came to the throne, some of the people who wrote the letter said that the monarch must grasp the authority to act arbitrarily and cannot delegate power to his subjects; some wanted to show the strength of the armed forces and make foreigners fear and obey themselves.

古文：唯有魏徵劝朕 偃革兴文，布德施惠，中国既安，远人自服 。
现代文：只有魏徵劝朕 停止战争大兴文事，传布道德广施恩惠，中原既然安定，异族自然会归顺服从 。
English: Only Wei Zeng advised us to stop the war, greatly promote literature, spread morality, and extend grace. Since the Central Plains is stable, the foreign people will naturally submit and obey.

古文：朕从其语，天下大宁。
现代文：我听了他的话，天下太平。
English: I listened to his words and the world was at peace.

古文：绝域君长，皆来朝贡，九夷重译，相望于道。
现代文：边地的君长都来朝贡，各个民族的语言辗转相译，在路上相互远望。
English: Princes from outlying regions came to pay tribute, and the languages of various ethnic groups were translated into each other, and they looked out for each other on the road.

古文：此皆魏徵之力也。 
现代文：这都是魏徵的功劳。 
English: It's all thanks to Wei Zheng.

古文：太宗尝嫌上封者众，不近事实，欲加黜责。
现代文：太宗曾经嫌进呈密封奏章的人多不切合事实，想加以贬斥。
English: Taizong was once reluctant to present a sealed record, and many people did not fit the facts and wanted to disparage it.

古文：徵奏曰： 古者立诽谤之木，欲闻己过。
现代文：魏徵说： 古时尧设立诽谤之木，想知道自己的过错。
English: Wei Zheng said: In ancient times, people set up a slander tree to find out their own faults.

古文：今之封事，谤木之流也。
现代文：现在这密封的奏章，就是古时立诽谤木制度流传下来的。
English: Now, this sealed record has been handed down from the ancient libel law system.

古文：陛下思闻得失，祗可恣其陈道。
现代文：陛下想知道自己的得失，只可以听任人们上言。
English: If His Majesty wants to know his gains and losses, he can only listen to people's advice.

古文：若所言衷，则有益于陛下；若不衷，无损于国家。 
现代文：如果话说得对，就有益于陛下；如果说得不对，无损于国家。 
English: If you say the right thing, it will benefit your majesty; if you say the wrong thing, it will not harm the country.

古文：太宗曰： 此言是也。 
现代文：太宗说 ：这话说得对。 
English: Taizong said, "That's right.

古文：并劳而遣之。
现代文：对进呈奏章的人加以抚慰后才让他们离去。
English: The musicians were comforted before being allowed to leave.

古文：后太宗在洛阳宫，幸积翠池，宴群臣，酒酣各赋一事。
现代文：后来太宗在洛阳积翠池宴请群臣，酒喝得高兴时和群臣各以一事为题赋诗。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong held a banquet for his courtiers at the Jiecui Pond in Luoyang. When he was happy with the wine, he and his courtiers each wrote a poem on a different subject.

古文：太宗赋《尚书》曰： 日昃玩百篇，临灯披《五典》。
现代文：太宗赋《尚书》道： 日昃玩百篇，临灯披《五典》。
English: "Shang Shu" by Taizong Fu: The sun plays a hundred pieces, and the lantern hangs "Five Classics."

古文：夏康既逸豫，商辛亦流湎。
现代文：夏康既逸豫，商辛亦流湎。
English: Xia Kang is not only hesitant, but also mercantile.

古文：恣情昏主多，克己明君鲜。
现代文：恣情昏主多，克己明君鲜。
English: Arbitrary feelings are often confused, self-restraint is clear and fresh.

古文：灭身资累恶，成名由积善。 
现代文：灭身资累恶，成名由积善。 
English: Death brings misfortune, but fame brings good fortune.

古文：徵赋西汉曰： 受降临轵道，争长趣鸿门。
现代文：魏徵赋 西汉 道 ：受降临轵道，争长趣鸿门。
English: Wei Zhengfu Western Han Dynasty: by the advent of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty fought against the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：驱传渭桥上，观兵细柳屯。
现代文：驱传渭桥上，观兵细柳屯。
English: After the parade, the spectators gathered on the bridge to watch the parade.

古文：夜宴经柏谷，朝游出杜原。
现代文：夜宴经柏谷，朝游出杜原。
English: The evening banquet went through Kashiwa Valley, and the morning tour went through Duyuan.

古文：终藉叔孙礼，方知皇帝尊。 
现代文：终藉叔孙礼，方知皇帝尊。 
English: With the passing of his uncle and grandson, Emperor Fangzhi passed away.

古文：太宗曰： 魏徵每言，必约我以礼也。 
现代文：太宗说： 每次魏徵说话，必定用礼来约束我。 
English: Taizong said, "Every time Wei Zheng speaks, he must restrain me with a salute.

古文：寻以修定《五礼》，当封一子为县男，请让孤兄子叔慈。
现代文：不久因魏徵修订《五礼》，按例应当封一个儿子为县男，魏徵请求让孤兄的儿子叔慈受封。
English: Soon after, the "Five Rites" was revised by Weizheng, according to which one son should be designated as the man of the county. Weizheng requested that Uncle Ci, the son of an orphan, be designated.

古文：太宗怆然曰： 卿之此心，可以励俗。 
现代文：太宗很伤感地说： 卿的这份心意，可以勉励民俗。 
English: Taizong said sadly, "With this kind of heart, you can encourage folk customs.

古文：遂许之。
现代文：于是应许了他的请求。
English: He agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：十二年，礼部尚书王珪奏言： 三品以上遇亲王于途，皆降乘，违法申敬，有乖仪准。 
现代文：贞观十二年，礼部尚书王王圭上奏说： 三品以上的官员在路上遇到亲王，都下车，违反法度来表示恭敬，这违背了礼仪的标准。 
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Wang Gui, the head of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, said in his report: When officials with three or more titles met the prince on the road, they all got out of the car to show respect in violation of the law, which violated the standards of etiquette.

古文：太宗曰： 卿辈皆自崇贵，卑我兒子乎？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：你们自己的地位都尊贵，就轻视我的儿子吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Do you despise my son, even though you yourselves are in high positions?

古文：徵进曰： 自古迄兹，亲王班次三公之下。
现代文：魏徵进言说 ：从古至今，亲王列在三公之下。
English: Wei Zhengjin said: From ancient times to the present, the prince is ranked below the three princes.

古文：今三品皆曰天子列卿及八座之长，为王降乘，非王所宜当也。
现代文：现在三品都是天子列卿和八座之长，为亲王下车，不是亲王所应当受的礼。
English: Now the three prizes are the sons of heaven, the lords and the chiefs of the eight seats, and getting off the train for the prince is not a gift that the prince should receive.

古文：求诸故事，则无可凭；行之于今，又乖国宪。 
现代文：求之于旧例，又没有可以作为凭证的依据；施行于现在，又违背了国法。 
English: If it is based on the old cases, there is no basis for evidence; if it is implemented now, it is against the national law.

古文：太宗曰： 国家所以立太子者，拟以为君也。
现代文：太宗说： 国家所以立太子，是准备他做国君。
English: Emperor Taizong said: The reason why the country established a crown prince is to prepare him to be the sovereign.

古文：然则人之修短，不在老少，设无太子，则母弟次立。
现代文：然而人的长短，不在老少，假如没有太子，那就依次立兄弟。
English: However, the length of a person's life is not determined by age. If there is no crown prince, then brothers will be appointed in turn.

古文：以此而言，安得轻我子耶？ 
现代文：这样说来，怎么能轻视我的儿子呢？ 
English: Don't you despise my son when you say that?

古文：徵曰： 殷家尚质，有兄终弟及之义；自周以降，立嫡必长，所以绝庶孽之窥觎，塞祸乱之源本，有国者之所深慎。 
现代文：魏徵说： 殷代崇尚质朴，有兄长去世其弟即位的礼义；自周以来，立太子必定要是嫡出的长子，以这杜绝各个兄弟的私念，堵塞祸乱的根源，这是国君应当十分慎重的事。 
English: Wei Zheng said: The Yin Dynasty advocated simplicity, with the etiquette of a brother ascending the throne after the death of his elder brother; since Zhou, the crown prince must be the eldest son of the eldest son, so as to eliminate the selfishness of each brother and plug the root of the disaster. This is a matter that the sovereign should be very cautious about.

古文：于是遂可珪奏。
现代文：于是太宗同意了王王圭的奏言。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong agreed to Wang Wanggui's proposal.

古文：会皇孙诞育，召公卿赐宴，太宗谓侍臣曰： 贞观以前，从我平定天下，周旋艰险，玄龄之功，无所与让。
现代文：适逢皇孙诞生，太宗召公卿入宴，太宗对侍臣说： 贞观以前，跟随我平定天下，辗转奔波于乱世，这是房玄龄的功劳。
English: When his grandson was born, Emperor Taizong called the court nobles to a banquet. Emperor Taizong said to his vassals, "Before Zhenguan, follow me to pacify the world, and turn the world upside down. This is the merit of Fang Xuanling.

古文：贞观之后，尽心于我，献纳忠谠，安国利民，犯颜正谏，匡朕之违者，唯魏徵而已。
现代文：贞观之后，尽心对我，进献忠直的劝告，安国利民，敢于冒犯国君尊严直言规劝，纠正朕的过失的，只有魏徵一人而已。
English: After observing chastity, Wei Zheng was the only one who devoted himself to me, offering loyal advice, safeguarding the country and benefiting the people, daring to offend the dignity of the sovereign, and correcting my mistakes.

古文：古之名臣，何以加也！ 
现代文：古代的名臣，也不能超过他们。 
English: The famous ministers of ancient times could not surpass them.

古文：于是亲解佩刀以赐二人。
现代文：于是亲自解下佩刀，赐给他们两人。
English: So he took off his sword and gave it to the two of them.

古文：徵以戴圣《礼记》编次不伦，遂为《类礼》二十卷，以类相从，削其重复，采先儒训注，择善从之，研精覃思，数年而毕。
现代文：魏徵因认为戴圣《礼记》编得没有条理，于是编《类礼》二十卷，依类排列次序，删削其中重复的内容，搜集前辈儒家的注释，择善取用，精心研究深思熟虑，经过数年才完成。
English: Wei Zhengyin thought that Dai Sheng's "Record of Rites" was not well organized, so he compiled "Similar Rites" in 20 volumes, arranged in order of similarity, deleted the duplicate content, collected the comments of the predecessors of Confucianism, selected the best use, carefully studied and deliberated, and completed it after several years.

古文：太宗览而善之，赐物一千段，录数本以赐太子及诸王，仍藏之秘府。
现代文：太宗看了后认为写得好，赐绢一千段，命抄录数本用来赐给太子和诸王，收藏在秘府中。
English: After reading it, Emperor Taizong thought that it was well written. He gave him a thousand paragraphs, and several copies of the life were used to give to princes and kings, and were stored in the secret palace.

古文：先是，遣使诣西域立叶护可汗，未还，又遣使多赍金银帛历诸国市马。
现代文：在这之前，太宗派遣使者到西域立叶护可汗，使者还未回来，太宗又派遣使者携带金银绢帛到西域各国买马。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to the Western Regions to set up the Yegu Khan, but the envoy had not yet returned. Emperor Taizong also sent an envoy carrying gold and silver ingots to various countries in the Western Regions to buy horses.

古文：徵谏曰： 今以立可汗为名，可汗未定，即诣诸国市马，彼必以为意在市马，不为专意立可汗。
现代文：魏徵说 ：现在确立可汗的事还未定下来，陛下就派人到西域各国买马，西域人一定会认为陛下意在买马，不是专意去立可汗。
English: Wei Zheng said: Now that the matter of establishing a khan has not yet been decided, His Majesty will send people to buy horses in Western countries. Westerners will certainly think that His Majesty intends to buy horses, not specifically to establish a khan.

古文：可汗得立，则不甚怀恩。
现代文：可汗得到确立，一定不会感念陛下的恩德。
English: When the khan is established, he will certainly not be impressed by His Majesty's kindness.

古文：诸蕃闻之，以为中国薄义重利，未必得马，而失义矣。
现代文：西域各属国听说这事，就会认为中原轻义重利，不一定能够得到马却先失去了义。
English: When the western region's vassal states heard about this, they would think that the Central Plains valued virtue more than profit, and that they might not be able to get a horse, but they would lose their virtue first.

古文：昔汉文有献千里马者，曰：吾凶行日三十里，吉行五十里，銮舆在前，属车在后，吾独乘千里马将安之？
现代文：从前汉文帝时，有个献千里马的人，文帝对他说：我不顺利每天走三十里，顺利每天走五十里，銮车在前，跟着的车在后，我单独乘千里马将走到哪里去呢？
English: Once upon a time, when Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, there was a man who offered a thousand horses. Emperor Wen said to him, "If I don't successfully walk thirty miles a day, and if I do successfully walk fifty miles a day, with the carriage in front and the car following behind, where will I go alone on a thousand horses?"

古文：乃赏其道里所费而返之。
现代文：文帝于是赏给献马者旅费让他回去了。
English: Emperor Wen then rewarded the horse donor with travel expenses and let him go back.

古文：汉光武有献千里马及宝剑者，马以驾鼓车，剑以赐骑士。
现代文：汉光武帝时有人献千里马和宝剑，汉光武帝让马去驾鼓车，把宝剑赐给骑士。
English: When Emperor Han Guangwu was presented with a thousand-mile horse and a sword, Emperor Han Guangwu let the horse drive the drum car and gave the sword to the knight.

古文：陛下凡所施为，皆邈逾三王之上，奈何至于此事，欲为孝文、光武之下乎？
现代文：陛下所施行的事，都远远超过三王之上，怎么到了这件事，却在汉文、光武之下呢？
English: The things that His Majesty has done are far above the three kings. How did it come to this, but under Hanwen and Guangwu?

古文：又魏文帝欲求市西域大珠，苏则曰： 若陛下惠及四海，则不求自至，求而得之，不足为贵也。 
现代文：再说魏文帝想寻求购买西域大珠，苏则说： 如果陛下恩惠遍及四海，那么大珠就会不寻找而自来；寻找而后得到它，也不值得宝贵。 
English: Speaking of Emperor Wei's desire to purchase the Great Pearl of the Western Regions, Su said, "If His Majesty's favor extends to the four seas, then the Great Pearl will come without searching; it is not valuable to search for it and then obtain it.

古文：陛下纵不能慕汉文之高行，可不畏苏则之言乎？ 
现代文：纵然陛下不能敬慕汉文帝的高尚行为，可是能不敬畏苏则的言论吗？ 
English: Even though His Majesty cannot admire the noble behavior of Emperor Hanwen, can he not revere the speech of Su Ze?

古文：太宗纳其言而止。
现代文：太宗采纳了魏徵的意见，停止派遣买马的使者。
English: Taizong accepted Wei Zheng's opinion and stopped sending envoys to buy horses.

古文：时公卿大臣并请封禅，唯徵以为不可。
现代文：当时公卿大臣一起上书，请太宗举行封禅。惟独魏徵认为不可。
English: At that time, the court nobles and ministers jointly submitted a letter, asking Taizong to hold a fuzan. However, Wei Zheng considered it impossible.

古文：太宗曰： 朕欲卿极言之。
现代文：太宗说： 我想让您尽情说说这事。
English: Taizong said, "I want you to talk about this to your heart's content."

古文：岂功不高耶？
现代文：难道我的功业还不高吗？
English: Aren't my merits high enough?

古文：德不厚耶？
现代文：道德还不厚吗？
English: Don't you have any morals?

古文：诸夏未治安耶？
现代文：天下还没治理太平吗？
English: Hasn't the world been pacified yet?

古文：远夷不慕义耶？
现代文：异族不仰慕我的仁义吗？
English: Don't foreigners admire my benevolence?

古文：嘉瑞不至耶？
现代文：为什么不能封禅？ 
English: Why can't we seal Zen?

古文：年谷不登耶？何为而不可？ 对曰： 陛下功则高矣，而民未怀惠；德虽厚矣，而泽未滂流；诸夏虽安，未足以供事；远夷慕义，无以供其求；符瑞虽臻，罗犹密；积岁丰稔，仓廪尚虚，此臣所以窃谓未可。
现代文：魏徵回答说 ：陛下的功业虽然很高，但百姓受到的恩惠还不多；陛下的道德虽厚，但恩泽还没有遍及每一个角落；天下虽已太平，还不足以供应用度；异族仰慕仁义，但还不能满足他们所求；祥瑞虽然到来，但网罗还很密；虽然连年丰收，但仓库还嫌空虚；因此，我认为还不到举行封禅的时候。
English: Wei Zheng replied: Although His Majesty's achievements are high, the people have not yet received many favors; although His Majesty's morality is strong, the grace has not yet spread to every corner; although the world is peaceful, it is not enough to provide application degree; foreigners admire benevolence and righteousness, but they can not yet meet their demands; although Xiang Rui has arrived, the net is still very tight; although there has been a bumper harvest for years, the warehouse is still empty; therefore, I think it is not time to hold the Fei Zen.

古文：臣未能远譬，且借喻于人。
现代文：臣不能用很远的事来比喻，暂且借人来打个比方。
English: A minister can't use a faraway thing as a metaphor. Let's borrow someone's metaphor for a moment.

古文：今有人十年长患，疗治且愈，此人应皮骨仅存，便欲使负米一石，日行百里，必不可得。
现代文：现在有一个患病十年的人，经过医治已经好了，但体力还未恢复，就想让他背一石米，一天走一百里路，一定是做不到的。
English: Now there is a person who has been ill for ten years, who has recovered after treatment, but his physical strength has not yet recovered. If you want him to carry a stone of rice and walk a hundred miles a day, it must be impossible.

古文：隋氏之乱，非止十年，陛下为之良医，疾苦虽已乂安，未甚充实，告成天地，臣窃有疑。
现代文：隋朝的祸乱，不只十年，陛下像良医一样把它治好，疾苦虽然治好太平无事，但财物还不是很充实，向天地祭告说已经功成业就，我私下还有些怀疑。
English: The scourge of the Sui Dynasty lasted for more than ten years, and His Majesty cured it like a good doctor. Although the illness and suffering were cured peacefully, the wealth was not very substantial. He announced to the world that he had accomplished his mission. Privately, I still have some doubts.

古文：且陛下东封，万国咸萃，要荒之外，莫不奔走。
现代文：而且陛下东去泰山封禅，各国都要派使者前来祝贺，域外极远的地方，没有不奔走前来的。
English: Moreover, when His Majesty went to Mount Tai to attend a retreat, all countries sent envoys to congratulate him, and no one came from far away.

古文：今自伊、洛以东，暨乎海岱，灌莽巨泽，苍茫千里，人烟断绝，鸡犬不闻，道路萧条，进退艰阻，岂可引彼夷狄，示以虚弱？
现代文：现在伊水、洛水以东，直到海边，灌木丛生，大泽纵横，苍茫千里，人烟断绝，鸡犬不闻，道路荒凉，行旅艰难，怎么可以引那些异邦外人进入，看到我们的虚弱？
English: Now, to the east of Yishui and Luoshui, all the way to the seashore, there are thick bushes, the length and breadth of Osawa is vast, thousands of miles, people are cut off, chickens and dogs do not hear, the roads are desolate, travel is difficult, how can we lead those foreigners to enter and see our weakness?

古文：竭财以赏，未厌远人之望；重加给复，不偿百姓之劳。
现代文：就是竭尽财力给以厚赏，也不能满足异族的欲望；即使连年免除赋役，也不能抵偿百姓的劳力费用。
English: Even if we use all our financial resources to reward them generously, we will not be able to satisfy the desires of foreigners; even if we exempt them from forced labor for years, we will not be able to compensate for the labor costs of the people.

古文：或遇水旱之灾，风雨之变，庸夫横议，悔不可追。
现代文：再遇上水旱灾害，风雨的变幻，庸人肆加议论，即使后悔也不能追回了。
English: In the event of floods and droughts, the vagaries of wind and rain, and the chatter of philistines, even regret cannot be recovered.

古文：岂独臣之恳诚，亦有舆人之诵。 
现代文：哪里是惟独臣诚恳规谏，也有众人的讽诵。 
English: Where there is only the sincere discipline of the minister, there is also the sarcastic recitation of many people.

古文：太宗不能夺。
现代文：太宗听后不能反驳。
English: Tang Taizong listened and did not say a word in reply.

古文：是后，右仆射缺，欲拜之，徵固让乃止。
现代文：那以后，右仆射空缺，太宗欲拜魏徵任职，魏徵坚决推让不受，才没有任命。
English: After that, there was a vacancy in the right-hand seat, and Taizong wanted to be appointed by Wei Zheng, but Wei Zheng was adamant that he would not be pushed around, so he was not appointed.

古文：及皇太子承乾不修德业，魏王泰宠爱日隆，内外庶僚，并有疑议。
现代文：后来皇太子承乾不学习德行和术业，魏王泰的宠爱一天天增长，朝廷内外众官，都有些疑虑和议论。
English: Later, Crown Prince Jian Qian did not learn the virtues and skills, Wei Wang Tai's favor grew day by day, and all officials inside and outside the court had some doubts and discussions.

古文：太宗闻而恶之，谓侍臣曰： 当今朝臣忠謇，无逾魏徵，我遣傅皇太子，用绝天下之望。 
现代文：太宗听到后很厌恶这些议论，对侍臣说： 当今朝臣忠诚正直的，没有人能超过魏徵，我派他辅佐皇太子，用这杜绝天下的怨言。 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard this, he was disgusted by these arguments and said to his attendant: Today's courtiers are loyal and honest, and no one can surpass Wei Zheng. I sent him to assist the crown prince and use this to put an end to the complaints of the world.

古文：十六年，拜太子太师，知门下省事如故。
现代文：贞观十六年，太宗任命魏徵为太子太师，知门下省事如旧。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong appointed Wei Zheng as the prince daishi, and under his tutelage, the situation remained as before.

古文：徵自陈有疾，诏答曰： 汉之太子，四皓为助，我之赖公，即其义也。
现代文：魏徵自称有病推辞，太宗下诏回答说： 汉朝的太子以四老为辅佐，我现在依靠您，也是这个道理。
English: Wei Zheng said that he was ill, but Emperor Taizong replied: The princes of the Han Dynasty are assisted by four elders. I am now relying on you, and this is also the reason.

古文：知公疾病，可卧护之。 
现代文：知道您患病，你卧病也可以保全太子。 
English: Knowing that you are ill, you can also protect the prince while you are sick.

古文：其年，称绵惙，中使相望。
现代文：那年，魏徵病危，宫廷中派出使者探望。
English: That year, Wei Zheng was critically ill, and the court sent an envoy to visit him.

古文：徵宅先无正寝，太宗欲为小殿，辍其材为徵营构，五日而成，遣中使赍素褥布被而赐之，遂其所尚也。
现代文：魏徵的住宅原先没有正室，太宗把原来自己准备建小殿的材料为魏徵修造正室，五天就修成了。太宗派宫中使者携带白色的褥子和布被赐给魏徵，用这满足魏徵崇尚简朴的心愿。
English: Wei Zheng's residence originally did not have a regular room. Emperor Taizong used the materials he had originally prepared to build a small hall to build a regular room for Wei Zheng, which was completed in five days. An emissary from the imperial court of the Taizong school was given to Wei Zheng, carrying white socks and cloth, to satisfy Wei Zheng's desire for simplicity.

古文：及病笃，舆驾再幸其第，抚之流涕，问所欲言，徵曰： 嫠不恤纬而忧宗周之亡。 
现代文：到魏徵病重，太宗再次到魏徵的府第，抚摸着魏徵流泪，问他有什么要求，魏徵说 ：寡妇不愁织布的纬线少，而忧虑宗周的危亡。 
English: When Wei Zheng fell seriously ill, Taizong again went to Wei Zheng's residence, stroked Wei Zheng's tears, and asked him what he wanted. Wei Zheng said, "A widow is not worried about the lack of weft threads in her weaving, but she is worried about Zhou's imminent death."

古文：后数日，太宗夜梦徵若平生，及旦而奏徵薨，时年六十四。
现代文：过了几天，太宗夜里梦见魏徵像平时一样，到清晨魏徵去世的消息就奏报上来了，时年六十四岁。
English: A few days later, Taizong dreamt of Wei Zheng in the night as usual. In the morning, the news of Wei Zheng's death was reported in the newspaper. He was 64 years old.

古文：太宗亲临恸哭，废朝五日，赠司空、相州都督，谥曰文贞。
现代文：太宗亲自到魏徵家中吊唁，哭得非常悲伤，下令停止上朝五天。
English: Taizong personally went to Wei Zheng's home to offer condolences, cried with great sadness, and ordered him to stop going to the capital for five days.

古文：给羽葆鼓吹、班剑四十人，赙绢布千段、米粟千石，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：追赠魏徵为司空、相州都督，赐谥号文贞，宫廷供给手持羽葆、班剑的仪仗队和吹鼓乐手共四十人，送给办丧事用的绢帛千段、米粟千石，让魏徵陪葬昭陵。
English: Wei Zheng was posthumously awarded the titles of Siku and the governor of Xiangzhou, and was given the posthumous name of Wenzhen. The court provided a ceremonial guard of forty men armed with feathers and swords, as well as a band of trumpeters. He was given a thousand pieces of straw and a thousand grains of rice for the funeral, and allowed Wei Zheng to attend the funeral of Shao Ling.

古文：及将祖载，徵妻裴氏曰： 徵平生俭素，今以一品礼葬，羽仪甚盛，非亡者之志。 
现代文：将要下葬的时候，魏徵的夫人裴氏说： 魏徵平生节俭，现在让他按一品官的礼节安葬，所需仪仗、器物极多，不符合魏徵的心意。 
English: When Wei Zheng's wife Pei Ran was about to be buried, she said, "Wei Zheng was frugal all his life. Now let him be buried according to the etiquette of a court official. He needs a lot of ceremonies and objects, which is not in line with Wei Zheng's wishes."

古文：悉辞不受，竟以布车载柩，无文彩之饰。
现代文：对朝廷供给的一切仪仗和物品都推辞不受，竟用布车载棺柩，没有花纹色彩等装饰。
English: All the honors and items provided by the imperial court were not rejected, and the casket was actually carried in a cloth cart, without decorations such as patterns and colors.

古文：太宗登苑西楼，望丧而哭，诏百官送出郊外。
现代文：太宗登上御苑中的西楼，望着魏徵的灵柩痛哭，诏令百官把魏徵的灵柩送出郊外。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the west tower in the middle of the imperial garden, looked at Wei Zheng's coffin and cried bitterly. He ordered the officials to take Wei Zheng's coffin out of the suburbs.

古文：帝亲制碑文，并为书石。
现代文：太宗亲自为魏徵做碑文，并将它书写在石上。
English: Taizong himself made an inscription for Wei Zheng and wrote it on the stone.

古文：其后追思不已，赐其实封九百户。
现代文：魏徵死后，太宗对他追思不已，赐给实封九百户。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, Emperor Taizong pined for him and gave him 900 households.

古文：尝临朝谓侍臣曰： 夫以铜为镜，可以正衣冠；以古为镜，可以知兴替；以人为镜，可以明得失。
现代文：有次上朝时太宗感叹地对侍臣说 ：用铜做镜子，可以端正衣冠；用历史做镜子，可以知道兴衰更替；用人做镜子，可以了解得失。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers with exclamation: If you use copper as a mirror, you can straighten your clothes; if you use history as a mirror, you can know the rise and fall; if you use people as a mirror, you can understand the gains and losses.

古文：朕常保此三镜，以防己过。
现代文：朕常保持这三面镜子，用来防止自己的过失。
English: I often keep these three mirrors to prevent myself from making mistakes.

古文：今魏徵殂逝，遂亡一镜矣！
现代文：现在魏徵去世，我失去了一面镜子！
English: Now that Wei Zheng has passed away, I have lost a mirror!

古文：徵亡后，朕遣人至宅，就其书函得表一纸，始立表草，字皆难识，唯前有数行，稍可分辩，云： 天下之事，有善有恶，任善人则国安，用恶人则国乱。公卿之内，情有爱憎，憎者唯见其恶，爱者唯见其善。
现代文：魏徵去世后朕派人到他家里，得到他的一页遗表，才刚起草，字都难以辨识，只有前面几行，稍微可以辨认，上面写道： 天下的事情，有善有恶，任用善人国家就安定，任用恶人国家就衰败，公卿大臣中，感情有爱有憎，自己憎的就只看见他的恶，自己爱的就只看见他的善。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, I sent someone to his home and obtained a page of his death certificate. It had just been drafted, and the characters were difficult to recognize. Only the first few lines were slightly recognizable. It read: In the world, there are good and evil. If you appoint a good person, the country will be stable. If you appoint an evil person, the country will decline. Among the nobles and ministers, there are feelings of love and hate. If you hate someone, you only see his evil. If you love someone, you only see his good.

古文：爱憎之间，所宜详慎，若爱而知其恶，憎而知其善，去邪勿疑，任贤勿贰，可以兴矣。 
现代文：爱憎之间，应当审慎，如果爱而知道他的恶，憎而知道他的善，除去邪恶不犹豫，任用贤人不猜忌，国家就可以兴盛了。 
English: Between love and hate, one should be prudent. If love knows its evil and hate knows its good, does not hesitate to eliminate evil, and does not hesitate to appoint wise people, the country can prosper.

古文：其遗表如此，然在朕思之，恐不免斯事。
现代文：遗表的大意就是这样，然而朕思考这事，自己恐怕不能避免魏徵所说的这些过错。
English: That's the gist of the will, but when I think about it, I'm afraid I can't avoid the mistakes Wei Zheng mentioned.

古文：公卿侍臣，可书之于笏，知而必谏也。 
现代文：公卿侍臣，可以把这些话写在手板上，知道朕有过错一定要进谏。 
English: Your highness, you can write these words on the tablet, knowing that I am at fault and must be punished.

古文：徵状貌不逾中人，而素有胆智，每犯颜进谏，虽逢王赫斯怒，神色不移。
现代文：魏徵的相貌不超过平常人，而很有胆量智慧，常冒犯天子的尊严进谏，即使遇到君王威吓震怒，也神色不变。
English: Wei Zheng's appearance is no more than that of an ordinary person, but he has great courage and wisdom, often offends the dignity of the Son of Heaven, and even if he encounters the king's intimidation and wrath, his appearance remains unchanged.

古文：尝密荐中书侍郎杜正伦及吏部尚书侯君集有宰相之材。
现代文：曾暗地推荐中书侍郎杜正伦和吏部尚书侯君集有宰相之才。
English: He once secretly recommended that Du Zhenglun, the secretary of the Central Committee, and Shang Shuhongjun, the secretary of the General Staff, had the talent of the prime minister.

古文：徵卒后，正伦以罪黜，君集犯逆伏诛，太宗始疑徵阿党。
现代文：魏徵去世后，杜正伦因罪被罢免官职，侯君集叛逆朝廷被杀，太宗开始怀疑魏徵与他们是同党。
English: After Wei Zheng's death, Du Zhenglun was removed from office for crimes, and Hou Junji was killed for rebelling against the imperial court. Taizong began to suspect that Wei Zheng was a member of the same party as them.

古文：徵又自录前后谏诤言辞往复以示史官起居郎褚遂良，太宗知之，愈不悦。
现代文：魏徵又自己抄录前后谏言多次给史官褚遂良看，太宗知道这事，更不高兴。
English: Wei Zheng also copied the anecdotes himself and showed them to the historian Su Sui Liang several times. When Emperor Taizong found out about this, he was even more displeased.

古文：先许以衡山公主降其长子叔玉，于是手诏停婚，顾其家渐衰矣。
现代文：于是亲手下诏取消了衡山公主与魏徵长子叔玉的婚约。魏徵的家族从此渐渐衰落了。
English: As a result, Prince Hengshan personally cancelled the engagement between Princess Hengshan and Wei Zheng's eldest son, Uncle Yu. From then on, Wei Zheng's family gradually declined.

古文：徵四子，叔琬、叔璘、叔瑜。
现代文：魏徵有四个儿子：叔玉、叔琬、叔王、叔瑜。
English: Wei Zheng had four sons: Shuyu, Shuyu, Shuwang and Shuyu.

古文：叔玉袭爵国公，官至光禄少卿；叔瑜至潞州刺史，叔璘礼部侍郎，则天时为酷吏所杀。
现代文：叔玉承袭魏徵的爵位，官至光禄少卿；叔瑜官至潞州刺史；叔王任礼部侍郎，武则天当权时被酷吏杀害。
English: Shudama inherited the title of Wei Zheng, and was promoted to Guanglu Shaoqing; Shuyuan was promoted to Zhangzhou Shishi; Shouwang was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department, and Wu Zetian was killed by cruel officials when he was in power.

古文：神龙初，继封叔玉子膺为郑国公。
现代文：神龙初，继封叔玉的儿子魏膺为郑国公。
English: At the beginning of the divine dragon, Wei Wei, the son of the successor of Uncle Jade, became Zheng Guogong.

古文：叔瑜子华，开元初太子右庶子。
现代文：叔瑜的儿子魏华，开元初任太子右庶子。
English: Shu Yu's son, Wei Hua, was the son-in-law of the crown prince at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty.

