古文：伎巧华清池重明枕韩志和
现代文：伎巧华清池重明枕韩志和
English: Han Zhihe, the mastermind behind Hua Qingchi and Shigeming Pillow

古文：绝艺督君谟李钦瑶苏州游僧江西人僧灵鉴张芬河北将军西蜀客陟屺寺僧
现代文：绝艺督君谟李钦瑶苏州游僧江西人僧灵鉴张芬河北将军西蜀客陟屺寺僧
English: Master of Arts Mu Liqin, Suzhou Visiting Monk, Jiangxi Visiting Monk, Zhang Fen, Hebei General, West Shuxi Visiting Monk, Temple Monk

古文：伎巧
现代文：伎巧
English: A clever trick

古文：华清池
现代文：华清池
English: Huaqing Pool

古文：玄宗于华清宫新广一池，制度宏丽。
现代文：唐玄宗在华清宫新修建一座浴池，规模宏大壮丽。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty built a new bath on a grand scale in the Huaqing Palace.

古文：安禄山于范阳以白玉石为鱼龙凤雁，仍为石梁及石莲花献。
现代文：安禄山在范阳让工匠们用白玉石雕刻成鱼、龙、凤凰、大雁，又雕制成石梁、石莲，一块儿进献给唐玄宗。
English: In Fanyang, Anlu Mountain allowed craftsmen to use white jade to carve fish, dragons, phoenixes, and geese, as well as stone beams and stone lotuses, all dedicated to Tang Xuan Zong.

古文：雕镌巧妙，殆非人工。
现代文：这些东西，雕刻制作得异常精致、巧妙，完全不象是人工制成的。
English: These things, the carvings are made with extraordinary delicacy and skill, it's not like they're man-made at all.

古文：上大悦，命于池中，仍以石梁横亘其上，而下莲花出于水际。
现代文：玄宗皇帝非常高兴，命人将鱼，龙、凤凰、大雁与石莲花，都安放在浴池中，将石梁横放在浴池上面，下面的石莲花露出水面。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very pleased. He ordered the fish, dragon, phoenix, wild goose and stone lotus to be placed in the bath, the stone beam was placed horizontally on top of the bath, and the stone lotus below was exposed to the water.

古文：上因幸华清宫，至其所。
现代文：于是玄宗皇帝亲临华清宫，来到这座新建的浴池。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong visited the Huaqing Palace in person and came to this newly built bath.

古文：解衣将入，而鱼龙凤雁皆若奋鳞举翼，状欲飞动。
现代文：脱去衣服刚刚下到浴池里，池中的白玉石鱼、龙、凤凰、大雁，都象在奋动鳞片、展开翅膀，似乎要跳跃飞动。
English: He had just taken off his clothes and stepped into the bath. The white jade stone fish, dragon, phoenix, and goose in the pool all seemed to be struggling with their scales and spreading their wings, as if they wanted to jump and fly.

古文：上甚恐，遽命撤去，去之而莲花石梁尚存。
现代文：玄宗皇帝惊恐异常，急忙命令将这些东西搬出浴池，只留下石莲花与石梁还安放在原来的地方。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was extremely alarmed and hastily ordered these things to be removed from the bath, leaving only the stone lotus and the stone beam still in their original places.

古文：又尝于宫中置长汤池数十间，屋宇环回。
现代文：唐玄宗又曾在华清宫中建造一座长温池，有几十间屋，回环相通。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also built a long-temperature pool in the Huaqing Palace, with dozens of rooms and interconnected circuits.

古文：甃以文石。为银镂漆船及檀香水船，致于其中。
现代文：温池的岸边都是用带有纹彩的卵石装饰垒砌而成。又造饰有白银的漆船和檀香水船放在温池里。
English: The banks of the warm pool are made of pebbles decorated with patterns, and lacquered boats and sandalwood boats decorated with silver are placed in the warm pool.

古文：至楫棹皆饰以珠玉。
现代文：船上长短船桨，都用珍珠、美玉作装饰。
English: The long and short oars on the ship are decorated with pearls and gems.

古文：又于汤池中，垒瑟瑟及檀香木为山，状瀛洲方丈。
现代文：又在温池中，用碧色宝石和檀香木垒造成山，形状仿效传说中的东海瀛洲、方丈两座仙山。
English: In addition, in the heated pool, mountains were made of turquoise gemstones and sandalwood, the shape of which was modeled after the legendary East China Sea and the abbot's two heavenly mountains.

古文：重明枕
现代文：重明枕
English: Shigeming pillow

古文：元和八年，大轸国贡重明枕神锦衾。
现代文：唐宪宗元和八年，有大轸国使臣来京城长安，向宪宗皇帝进献重明枕与神锦被。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty, an envoy from the State of Dadu came to the capital Chang'an to present Emperor Xianzong with a heavy bright pillow and a sacred brocade quilt.

古文：云其国在海东南三万里，当轸宿之位，故曰大轸国，合丘禺藁山，重明枕长一尺二寸，高六寸。洁白逾于水精。
现代文：这位使臣说他们国家远在东海南边三万里，正当朱雀七星中最末一星宿轸所在的位置，因此叫大轸国，国中有丘禺、藁山。重明枕长一尺二寸，高六寸，光洁透明超过水晶。
English: The envoy said that their country was 30,000 miles away in the south of the East China Sea, just as the location of the last star of the seven stars of the Suzaku, Sukuk, which is why it is called Daxi Country. There are hills and mountains in the country. Chongming pillow is one foot two inches long, six inches high, and its gloss and transparency exceed that of crystal.

古文：中有楼台之状，四方有十道士持香执简，循环无已，谓之行道真人。
现代文：枕中有楼台。楼台的四周有十个道士，手中拿着香与手板，在枕中循环走动，总也不停止，被称为行道其人。
English: There is a platform in the pillow. There are ten Taoists around the platform, holding incense and a tablet in their hands, walking around in the pillow, and they never stop. They are known as "walkers."

古文：其楼台瓦木丹青，真人簪帔，无不悉具，通莹焉如水睹物。
现代文：枕中楼台上的房瓦、木檐、上面的绘画图饰，以及行道真人头上戴的簪子，身上披的帔衣，都看得清清楚楚，透明得就象看水中的东西一样。
English: The tiles on the landing in the middle of the pillow, the wooden beams, the painted decorations above, as well as the pigtails worn on the heads of the real people on the sidewalk, and the satin robes on their bodies, are all clearly visible, as transparent as looking at something in the water.

古文：神锦衾水蚕丝所织，方二尺，厚一寸。
现代文：神锦被是用水蚕丝织成的。二尺见方，厚有一寸。
English: The sacred brocade quilt is woven from water silk. It is two feet square and one inch thick.

古文：其上龙文凤彩，殆非人工。
现代文：上面呈现五彩的龙、凤图案，都不是人工所能织出来的。
English: The multicolored dragon and phoenix patterns on it are not artificially woven.

古文：其国以五色石甃池塘，采大柘叶。饲蚕于池中。
现代文：大轸国有用五色纹石砌成的池塘，采来大柘叶，在这池塘的水中饲养蚕。
English: In Dafang, there is a pond made of five-colored veined stone. Dafang leaves are harvested and silkworms are raised in the water of this pond.

古文：始生如蚁睫，游泳其间。
现代文：这种蚕刚生出来时象蛟虫的眼睫毛那样小，在池水中游泳。
English: The baby silkworm, as small as a ladybird's eyelash, swims in the pond water.

古文：及长可五六寸。池中有挺荷，虽惊风疾吹不能动，大者可阔三四尺。
现代文：池塘中生有挺拔的荷叶，虽然遇到狂风吹刮也不倒，叶片最宽大的有三四尺。
English: In the middle of the pond, there are upright lotus leaves. Although they do not fall down when the wind blows, the widest leaves are three to four feet.

古文：而蚕经十五日即跳入荷中，以成其茧。
现代文：水蚕生出后十五天，长到五六寸长，就自己跳到荷叶上，在上面结茧。
English: Fifteen days after being born, the water serpents grow to five or six inches long, jump onto the lotus leaves themselves, and scab over them.

古文：形如方斗，自然五色。
现代文：茧形如方斗，自然呈五色。
English: It is square-shaped and naturally comes in five colors.

古文：国人缫之，以织神锦。
现代文：大轸国中的人将这种蚕茧缫成丝，织成神锦。
English: The people of Dafeng Province twisted this silkworm into silk and wove it into sacred brocade.

古文：亦谓之灵泉丝。
现代文：这种水蚕丝，又叫灵泉丝。
English: This water silk is also called Lingquan silk.

古文：上始览锦衾，与嫔御大笑曰：此不足以为婴儿绷褯，曷能为我被耶？
现代文：宪宗皇帝刚看到神锦被时，对身边的侍妾和宫女们说：这么大点儿，都不能做包婴儿的小被，怎么能给我盖呢？
English: When Emperor Gensong first saw the shin brocade quilt, he said to the attendants and concubines around him: Such a large piece cannot be used to make a baby's small quilt, how can it be used to cover me?

古文：使者曰：此锦之丝，水蚕也，得水即舒。
现代文：大轸国的使臣说：这条神锦被是用水蚕丝织作的，遇到水就会舒展开。
English: The envoy of Dazhao said: This sacred brocade quilt is woven with water silk, and it will unfold when it encounters water.

古文：水火相返，遇火则缩。
现代文：水火正好相反，遇到火就缩回来。
English: Water and fire are just the opposite. When they encounter fire, they shrink back.

古文：遂于上前，令四官张之，以水一喷，即方二丈，五色焕烂，逾于向时。
现代文：说完，这位使臣走到宪宗皇帝近前，让四位宫人扯住锦被的四个角，口中含水一喷，立时舒展成二丈见方，五彩斑斓，比刚才光亮多了。
English: Having said this, the envoy approached Emperor Gensong and asked the four courtiers to take hold of the four corners of the brocade quilt. With a splash of water in their mouths, they immediately stretched it into a double-height square. It was multicolored and much brighter than before.

古文：上叹曰：本乎天者亲上，本乎地者亲下。
现代文：宪宗皇帝看了，赞叹地说：来源于天的亲近上天，来源于地的亲近土地。
English: Emperor Gensong looked at it and said admiringly, "From heaven, it is close to heaven; from earth, it is close to earth."

古文：不亦然哉！
现代文：不都是这样吗？
English: Aren't they all?

古文：则却令以火逼之，须臾如故。
现代文：又让人将神锦被放在火上烤，不一会儿，又缩回到原来那么大小。
English: The sacred brocade was put on the fire and roasted, and after a while, it shrank back to its original size.

古文：韩志和
现代文：韩志和
English: Han Zhihe

古文：穆宗朝，有飞龙士韩志和，本倭国人也。
现代文：唐穆宗在位期间，有个人叫韩志和，外号飞龙士，是日本国人。
English: During the reign of Tang Mu Zong, there was a man called Han Zhi He, also known as the Flying Dragon, who was a native of Japan.

古文：善雕木，作鸾、鹤、鸦、鹊之状，饮啄悲鸣，与真无异。
现代文：韩志和擅长木雕。他雕刻制作的木鸾、木鹤、木鸦、木鹊，喝水、啄食与鸣叫，都和真的没有什么两样。
English: Han Zhihe is good at wood carving. His sculptures of wood pigeons, wood cranes, wood crows, wood pigeons, drinking water, eating and singing, are no different from the real thing.

古文：以关捩置于腹内，发之则凌空奋翼，可高百尺，至一二百步外，方始却下。
现代文：韩志和在这些鸟的肚腹中安置机关，启动开关后，能凌空振翼飞行，高达一百尺，飞到一二百步外才落下来。
English: Han Zhihe placed an organ in the stomachs of these birds, and after activating the switch, they could fly with flapping wings up to one hundred feet, and only fall down when they were one or two hundred paces away.

古文：兼刻木猫儿以捕雀鼠，飞龙使异其机巧。奏之，上睹而悦之。
现代文：韩志和雕刻制做的木猫，可以捕捉到雀鼠。韩志和用这些奇异的机巧上报穆宗皇帝，皇上看了后很是喜欢。
English: Han Zhi He, a carved wooden cat, can catch a mouse. Han Zhi He used these strange skills to report to Emperor Muzong, and the emperor liked it very much.

古文：志和更雕踏床高数尺，其上饰之以金银采绘，谓之见龙床。
现代文：韩志和还会雕刻制作踏床，床高好几尺，床上装饰着金银和彩色绘画、图案。这种踏床叫见龙床。
English: Han Zhihe will also carve and make a treadmill, the bed is several feet high, the bed is decorated with gold and silver and colorful paintings and patterns. This treadmill is called dragon bed.

古文：置之则不见龙形，踏之则鳞鬣爪角俱出。
现代文：置放在那儿看不见龙形，用脚一踏，龙的头角爪鳞和龙须都从床中展现出来。
English: Placed there, you can't see the shape of the dragon, but if you step on it with your foot, the dragon's head, horns, claws, scales and whiskers will all emerge from the bed.

古文：始进，上以足履之，而龙夭矫若得云雨。
现代文：这张踏床刚进献给穆宗皇帝时，皇上用脚去踏，龙从床中伸出来扭摆摇动就象得到了云雨似的。
English: When this treadmill was just dedicated to Emperor Muzong, the emperor stepped on it with his foot, and the dragon stretched out from the bed, twisting and swaying as if it had received rain.

古文：上恐畏，遂令撤去。
现代文：穆宗皇帝感到惊恐，立即命令宫人将这张踏床搬出殿外。
English: Emperor Muzong was alarmed and immediately ordered palace officials to remove the step stool from outside the palace.

古文：志和伏于上前，称臣愚昧，而致有惊忤圣躬。
现代文：韩志和得知这件事情后，跪伏在穆宗皇帝面前，说：我很愚昧，因此才惊吓触犯了皇上。
English: After learning of this incident, Han Zhihe knelt down in front of Emperor Muzong and said, "I am very ignorant, so I only offended the Emperor by scaring him."

古文：上笑曰：所解何伎，试为我出。
现代文：我请求另外再进献一种雕虫小技，用以娱乐皇上的耳目。来赎我的死罪。
English: I request that you also present me with another small skill of carving insects to entertain the emperor's ears and eyes, to atone for my mortal sin.

古文：志和于怀中将出一桐木合方数寸。
现代文：韩志和起身从怀中取出一只桐木盒，几寸见方。
English: Han Zhihe got up and took out a paulownia box from his arms, a few inches square.

古文：其中有物名蝇虎子，数不啻一二百焉。其形皆赤，云以丹砂啗之故也。
现代文：盒里装着蝇虎子，约有一二百只，都是红色的，说是喂食朱砂的缘故。
English: The box contained about one or two hundred flycatchers, all red, said to be the result of feeding cinnabar.

古文：乃分为五队，令舞《梁州》。
现代文：韩志和打开盒盖放出蝇虎子，将它们分列成五队，让它们表演《梁州舞》。
English: Han Zhihe opened the lid of the box to release the fly tigers, divided them into five teams, and let them perform the "Liangzhou Dance."

古文：上召国乐，以举其曲。
现代文：穆宗皇帝召令宫中国乐师前来伴奏。
English: Emperor Muzong summoned the Chinese musicians of the Imperial Court to come and accompany him.

古文：而虎子盘回宛转，无不中节，每遇致词处，则隐隐如蝇声。
现代文：蝇虎子在音乐的伴奏下，盘回宛转地飞舞，都符合节拍。遇到需要致词朗诵的地方，就隐隐约约地发出蝇蝇声。
English: Under the accompaniment of music, the fly tigress flies back and forth in a circle, all in accordance with the beat. When it encounters a place where it is necessary to recite a speech, it vaguely emits a fly fly sound.

古文：及曲终，累累而退，若有尊卑等级。
现代文：等到一曲奏完，这些蝇虎子很有秩序地回到盒中，好象它们中间也有等级似的。
English: When a piece is over, the tigers and flies return to the box in an orderly fashion, as if there were a hierarchy among them.

古文：志和臂虎子于指上，猎蝇于数步之内，如鹞擒雀，罕有不获者。
现代文：韩志和将蝇虎子放在手指上，在几步之内猎获苍蝇如同鹰捉鸟雀，很少有捕获不着的时候。
English: Han Zhihe put the flycatcher on his finger and caught the fly within a few steps. It was like an eagle catching a sparrow. There was rarely a time when he couldn't catch it.

古文：上嘉其伎小有可观，即赐以杂彩银器。
现代文：穆宗皇帝嘉奖韩志和，虽然是小技但却很好观赏，当即赏赐给他各种彩锦、绫帛和银器。
English: Emperor Muzong rewarded Han Zhihe, although it was a small skill, it was good to watch, and immediately gave him a variety of brocade, enamel and silverware.

古文：而志和出宫门，悉转施于人。
现代文：韩志和出了宫门后，随手将这些东西都给了别人。
English: After Han Zhihe left the palace, he immediately gave these things to others.

古文：不逾年，竟不知志和所在。
现代文：不到一年的工夫，不知道韩志和到哪里去了。
English: Less than a year later, I don't know where Han Zhihe has gone.

古文：上于殿前种千叶牡丹，及花始开，香气袭人。一朵千叶，大而且红。
现代文：穆宗皇帝在大殿前边种植千叶牡丹。到了开花季节，香气袭人，一朵千叶，花朵大而红得鲜艳。
English: Emperor Muzong planted a thousand-leaf peony in front of the Great Hall. In the flowering season, the fragrance is striking, one thousand leaves, the flowers are large and bright red.

古文：上每睹芳盛，叹人间未有。
现代文：穆宗皇帝每次观赏，都赞叹是人间没有过的。
English: Every time Emperor Muzong watched it, he was awestruck in a way that had never been seen before.

古文：自是宫中每夜，即有黄白蝴蝶万数。
现代文：从此，宫中每夜都有上万只黄、白蝴蝶飞集在牡丹花间。
English: Since then, tens of thousands of yellow and white butterflies have gathered in the peony flowers every night in the palace.

古文：飞集于花间，辉光照耀，达曙方去。
现代文：而且，这些蝴蝶身上发出耀眼的光辉，照耀着宫内，直到天亮才飞去。
English: Moreover, these butterflies emit a dazzling glow and shine in the palace until dawn.

古文：宫人竞以罗巾扑之，无有不获者。
现代文：宫里的嫔妃、宫娥，争相用手帕罗巾扑蝶，没有扑不着的。
English: Empress Dowager and Empress Dowager E competing to catch butterflies with handkerchiefs.

古文：上令张网于宫中，遂得数百。于殿内纵嫔御追捉，以为娱乐。
现代文：穆宗皇帝让宫人在宫中张网，一次就捕到蝴蝶好几百只，放在殿堂中，让嫔妃们追捕，用来娱乐。
English: Emperor Muzong had his courtiers set up a net in the palace, and they caught hundreds of butterflies at a time and placed them in the hall of fame for the concubines to chase and use for entertainment.

古文：迟明视之，则皆金玉也。
现代文：到天亮一看，所捕到的蝴蝶都是用黄金、白玉制作的啊！
English: At first glance at dawn, the butterflies caught are all made of gold and white jade!

古文：其状工巧，无以为比。
现代文：制作的精巧劲儿，无以伦比。
English: The craftsmanship of the production is second to none.

古文：而内人争用丝缕绊其脚，以为首饰，夜则光起于妆奁中。
现代文：宫人们都争着用丝线系住蝴蝶的脚，戴在胸前头上当作首饰。到了晚上。它们会从梳妆匣中发出光亮来。
English: Courtiers compete to tie the butterfly's feet with silk thread and wear them on their chests as jewelry. At night, they glow from the dresser.

古文：其夜开宝厨，视金屑玉屑藏内，将有化为蝶者，宫中方觉焉。
现代文：这天夜里，宫人们打开内库装宝物的柜橱，见到的都是金屑玉屑，有的正要制成蝴蝶。宫里人这才觉悟到：原来这些黄、白蝴蝶，都是韩志和用宫中内库的黄金、玉石等制作的啊！
English: On this night, the palace people opened the cabinet containing the treasures in the inner vault. All they saw was gold and jade, and some were about to be made into butterflies. It was only then that the palace people realized that these yellow and white butterflies were all made by Han Zhihe with gold and jade from the inner vault of the palace!

古文：绝艺
现代文：绝艺
English: Master of Arts

古文：督君谟
现代文：督君谟
English: Governor Mume

古文：隋末有督君谟善闭目而射，志其目则中目。
现代文：隋朝末年，有个叫督君谟的人擅长闭着眼睛射箭。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was a man named Du Jun Moo who was good at shooting arrows with his eyes closed.

古文：志其口则中口。
现代文：想射中眼睛就射中眼睛，想射中口就射中口。
English: If you want to hit your eyes, hit your eyes. If you want to hit your mouth, hit your mouth.

古文：有王灵智者学射于君谟。以为曲尽其妙，欲射杀君谟，独擅其美。
现代文：有个叫王灵智的人跟督君谟学习射箭，认为已将督君谟的技艺全都学到手了，想射死督君谟，他好独占鳌头，天下第一。
English: There was a man named Wang Lingzhi who studied archery with Du Junmo. He thought that he had learned all of Du Junmo's skills. He wanted to shoot Du Junmo to death so that he could dominate the sport and be the best in the world.

古文：君谟志一短刀，箭来辄截之。
现代文：督君谟手中持一短刀，王灵智射过来的箭，他都用刀拨落。
English: Du Junmo held a short sword in his hand, and he shot down all the arrows shot by Wang Lingzhi.

古文：惟有一矢，君谟张口承之。遂啮其镝而笑曰：汝学射三年，未教汝啮镞法。
现代文：只有一只箭，督君谟张开口承接，咬着了箭头笑着对王灵智说：你跟我学射箭学了三年，自以为将我的技艺都学去了。
English: There was only one arrow. Du Junmo opened his mouth to take it, bit the arrow and said to Wang Lingzhi with a smile: You have been learning archery from me for three years, and you think you have learned all my skills.

古文：《列子》，具蝇古之善射者，弟子名飞卫，巧过于师。
现代文：其实，我还没有教你用牙齿咬箭头的方法呢！《列子》中说：具蝇古擅长射箭，他有个弟子叫飞卫，比他师父具蝇古的技艺还高。
English: In fact, I still haven't taught you how to bite an arrow with your teeth! "Reishi" said: Gu Meiguo is good at archery, he has a disciple called Fei Wei, who is more skilled than his master, Gu Meiguo.

古文：纪昌又学射于飞卫，以征角之弧，朔逢之竿，射贯虱心。既尽飞卫之术，计天下敌己，一人而已。乃谋杀飞卫。
现代文：有个叫纪昌的人，又跟飞卫学习射箭。他用征角作弓，用朔逢作竿，能够射穿虱子的心，已将飞卫的射箭技艺全都学到手里，认为普天下能够跟自己相匹敌的只有师父飞卫一个人，于是想谋害飞卫。
English: There was a man named Ji Chang, who also learned archery from Fei Wei. He used the Quenching Angle as a bow, and the Shuo Feng as a rod, and was able to shoot through the heart of a nipper. He had learned all of Fei Wei's archery skills, and thought that there was only one master Fei Wei in the whole world who could compete with him, so he wanted to murder Fei Wei.

古文：相遇于野，二人交射，矢锋相触，坠地而尘不扬。飞卫之矢先穷，纪遗一矢。
现代文：师徒二人在野外相遇，互相对射，箭镞相撞同时坠地，连点尘土都不扬起来，师父飞卫的箭先射完了，徒弟纪昌还剩下一只，射向飞卫。
English: The two masters and apprentices met in the field and shot at each other. The crossbows collided and fell to the ground at the same time. Not even a speck of dust was raised. Master Fei Wei's arrowhead was finished, and apprentice Ji Chang still had one left to shoot at Fei Wei.

古文：既发，飞卫以棘棘之端捍之，而无差焉。
现代文：飞卫用棘刺的尖端来接纪昌射来的箭，一点偏差也没有。
English: Fei Wei used the tip of the thorn to catch the arrow shot by Ji Chang. There was no deviation at all.

古文：于是二子泣而投弓，请为父子。
现代文：于是，两人痛哭流涕地将手中的弓扔在地上，互相请求为父子关系。
English: As a result, the two men, weeping bitterly, threw their bows on the ground and asked each other for a father-son relationship.

古文：刻背为誓，不得告术于人。
现代文：并且刻背盟誓：谁也不得将射箭的技艺告诉他人。
English: He also took an oath: no one is allowed to tell others about his archery skills.

古文：《孟子》曰：逢蒙学射于羿，尽羿之道。惟羿为愈己，于是杀羿。
现代文：《孟子》上说：逢蒙跟羿学习射箭，将羿的射箭技艺全都学到手后，觉得只有师父羿可以超过自己，于是射死了后羿。
English: "Mencius" said: Feng Meng learned archery from Yao, and learned all of Yao's archery skills, and felt that only Master Yao could surpass himself, so he shot and killed Hou Yao.

古文：李钦瑶
现代文：李钦瑶
English: Lee Chin-soo

古文：天宝末，有骑将李钦瑶者，弓矢绝伦。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝末年，有个骑兵将领叫李钦瑶，射箭的技艺没有人可以跟他相比。
English: In the last years of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there was a cavalry general named Li Qinqian. No one could match his skill in archery.

古文：以劳累官至郡守，兼御史大夫。
现代文：因为成功而连续升迁到郡守，兼任御史大夫。
English: Because of his success, he was successively promoted to the position of county governor and concurrently served as chief historian.

古文：至德中，隶临淮，与史思明相持与陕西。
现代文：唐肃宗至德年间，李钦瑶隶属于临淮军，跟史思明在陕西两军对峙。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui of Tang and Emperor Dezong of Song, Li Qincheng belonged to the Linhuai Army and confronted Shi Siming in Shaanxi.

古文：晨朝合战，临淮布阵徐进。
现代文：一天早晨，两军交战。临淮军布好阵，徐徐向前开进。
English: One morning, the two armies clashed. The Linyi and Huai armies formed a good front and slowly marched forward.

古文：去敌尚十许里，忽有一狐起于军前，踉跄而趋，若导引者。
现代文：在距离敌军还有十几里的地方，在军队前边忽然出现一只狐狸，踉踉跄跄地奔跑，象是在前引导带路。
English: At a distance of more than ten miles from the enemy, a fox suddenly appeared in front of the army, running briskly, as if leading the way.

古文：临淮不怿曰：越王轼怒蛙，盖激励官军士耳。
现代文：临淮军统帅不高兴地说：越王勾践出兵伐吴时，在路上遇一只鼓足气的蛤蟆，勾践凭车前横木向这只鼓足气的蛤蟆表示敬意，是为了鼓励士气。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Linhuai Army said with displeasure, "When Yue Wang Qochun marched out to attack Wu, he encountered an energetic baboon on the road. In order to encourage morale, Qochun paid respect to this energetic baboon by leaning on the crossbar in front of the car.

古文：狐乃持疑妖邪之物，岂有前阵哉。
现代文：狐狸乃是犹疑妖邪的东西，怎么能让它在军阵前呢？
English: The fox is a hesitant and mischievous creature. How can it be allowed to march in front of the army?

古文：即付钦瑶以三矢，令取狐焉。
现代文：立即交给李钦瑶三只箭，命令他前去射杀这只狐狸。
English: He immediately gave three arrows to Li Qinqian and ordered him to shoot the fox.

古文：钦瑶受命而驰，适有浅芜三二十亩，狐奔入其中。
现代文：李钦瑶接受命令驱马前驰，遇到方圆二三十亩大小的一片浅草地。
English: Li Qinqian accepted the order to drive his horse forward and encountered a shallow grassland with a circumference of twenty to thirty mu.

古文：钦瑶逐之，歘有野雉惊起马足，径入云霄。
现代文：狐狸奔进这片草地里，李钦瑶追过去，忽然在马蹄旁边惊起一只野鸡，径直飞入空中。
English: The fox ran into the meadow, Li Chunhui ran after it, and suddenly a pheasant was startled by the horse's hoof and flew straight into the air.

古文：钦瑶翻身仰射，一发而坠。然后鸣鞭逐狐，十步之内，拾矢又中。
现代文：李钦瑶继续鸣鞭催马追逐狐狸。十步之内，张弓射箭，又一箭射中狐狸。
English: Li Qinqian continued to use his whip to urge the horse to chase the fox. Within ten paces, he shot an arrow with his bow, and another arrow hit the fox.

古文：于是携二物以复命焉。
现代文：于是，李钦瑶手里拿着一狐一鸡，回到军中禀报主帅。
English: So, with a fox and a chicken in his hands, Li Qinlu went back to the army to report to the commander.

古文：举军欢呼，声振山谷。
现代文：见此情景，全军将士欢呼声振动山谷。
English: Seeing this scene, the cheers of the whole army vibrated the valley.

古文：时回鹘列骑置阵于北原，其首领仅一二百辈。
现代文：当时，对面的回鹘骑兵正列阵在北面的原野上。回鹘军的骑兵几乎有一万左右。
English: At that time, the opposite Uighur cavalry was lined up on the north field. The cavalry of the Uighur army was almost ten thousand.

古文：弃军飞马而来，争捧钦瑶，似为神异。
现代文：他们的首领见李钦瑶连射连中，也兴奋地离开军队飞马跑过来，争着抱住李钦瑶，将他视为神人。
English: Their leader was also excited to see Li Qinyan in the firing line, so he left the army and ran to the Pegasus, clinging to Li Qinyan and treating him as a god.

古文：仍谓曰：尔非回鹘之甥。
现代文：对李钦瑶说：你不是回鹘的外甥吗？
English: He said to Li Qingyao, "Aren't you Hui Yao's nephew?

古文：不然，何能弧矢之妙，乃得如此哉。
现代文：不然，怎么能射一手这么好的箭啊！
English: Otherwise, how can one shoot such a good arrow!

古文：苏州游僧
现代文：苏州游僧
English: Suzhou wandering monk

古文：苏州重玄寺阁一角忽垫，计其扶荐之功，当用钱数千贯。
现代文：苏州重玄寺的一座阁楼，忽然有一角下陷。寺里的僧人初步估计要想将它扶正，得花费几千贯钱。
English: A corner of an attic in Suzhou's Chongyuan Temple suddenly caved in. The monks of the temple initially estimated that it would cost thousands of yuan to straighten it out.

古文：有游僧曰：不足劳人，请得一夫，斫木为楔，可以正之。
现代文：有位游方僧说：不需要动用那么多的人力，只要雇用来一个人给我砍木楔，我一个人就可以将它扶正。
English: A wandering monk said, "There is no need to use so much manpower. As long as one person is hired to cut a wooden wedge for me, I can hold it upright by myself."

古文：寺主从焉。
现代文：寺里的方丈采纳了这位游方僧的建议。
English: The abbot of the temple accepted the suggestion of the wandering monk.

古文：游僧每食讫，辄取楔数十，执柯登阁，敲椓其间。
现代文：这位游方僧每天吃完饭，就拿着几十个木楔，带着一把斧子，上到阁楼上。
English: Every day, after finishing his meal, the wandering monk took dozens of wooden wedges and an axe and went up to the attic.

古文：未旬日，阁柱悉正。旧说圣善寺阁常贮醋十瓮，恐为蛟龙所伏，以致雷电。
现代文：这敲敲，那钉钉，不过十天，用这种钉楔扶正的方法，将阁楼的柱子都扶正了。还有，旧时曾有一种说法。说圣善寺阁里，常常贮放着十瓮醋，说是怕有蛟龙蛰伏在里面，引来雷电。
English: There was knocking and nailing, but after ten days, the pillars of the attic were all straightened using this method of nailing wedges. In addition, there was a saying in the old days. It was said that there were often ten jars of vinegar stored in the attic of Shuzenji Temple, and it was said that they were afraid of dragons lurking inside and attracting lightning.

古文：江西人
现代文：江西人
English: People from Jiangxi Province

古文：江西人有善展竹，数节可成器。
现代文：江西人有擅长用展竹的方法制作竹器的，几节竹子就可以制成一个竹器。
English: Jiangxi people are good at making bamboo utensils using the method of spreading bamboo, and a few pieces of bamboo can be made into a bamboo utensil.

古文：又有人熊葫芦，云翻葫芦易于翻鞠。
现代文：还有一个叫熊葫芦，他说：翻制一个葫芦，就象翻球一样容易。
English: There is another one called Xiong Hulou. He said: "It's as easy to turn a gourd as it is to turn a ball."

古文：僧灵鉴
现代文：僧灵鉴
English: 僧灵鉴

古文：贞元末，阆州僧灵鉴善弹，常自为弹丸，其弹丸方。
现代文：唐德宗贞元末年，阆州有个叫灵鉴的僧人擅长弹丸。这位灵鉴和尚自己制作弹丸，是方形的。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk in Ganzhou named Lingjian who was good at making marbles. This Lingjian monk made his own marbles, which were square in shape.

古文：用洞庭沙岸下土三斤，炭末三两，资末一两，榆皮半两，泔澱二勺，紫矿二两，细沙三分，藤纸五张，渴毾汁丰合，九味和捣三杵，齐丸之，阴干。
现代文：它的用料配方是：洞庭湖沙岸下的土三斤，炭末三两，资末一两，榆树皮半两，淘米泔水沉淀物二勺，紫矿树脂二两，细沙三分，藤纸五张，渴毾汁半盒。将这九种原料放在一块儿，捣三千杵，然后都作成弹丸，慢慢阴干后便可以使用。
English: The recipe for its ingredients is as follows: 3 kg of soil from the sandy shore of Dongting Lake, 3 kg of carbon powder, 1 kg of bone powder, 1/2 tsp of eucalyptus bark, 2 tbsp of de-milled rice and water sediment, 2 tbsp of purple ore resin, 3 tbsp of fine sand, 5 sheets of rattan paper, and half a box of yakitori juice. These nine ingredients are put together, pounded into 3,000 kilos, and then made into a projectile, which can be used after it has been slowly dried in the shade.

古文：郑汇为刺史时，有当家名寅，读书善饮酒，汇甚重之。
现代文：郑汇任阆州刺史时，有个叫寅的人给他主持家政。此人喜欢读书，能饮酒，郑汇很是看重他。
English: When Zheng Hui was the governor of Luzhou, there was a man named Ying who was in charge of his household. This man liked to read and could drink alcohol. Zheng Hui valued him very much.

古文：寅常与灵鉴较角放弹。
现代文：寅有一次跟灵鉴和尚比赛弹丸。
English: Once, Yin competed with Lingjian Monk in a game of marbles.

古文：寅指一树节，相去数十步。曰：中之获五千。
现代文：寅指着一个树节说：这个树节距离你我有几十步远，谁能射中它赢钱五千文。
English: Ying pointed to a tree stump and said, "This tree stump is dozens of paces away from you and me. Whoever can hit it will win 5,000 yuan."

古文：寅自一发而中之，弹丸反射而不破。
现代文：说完，寅先弹一弹，果然射中了树节。弹丸反弹回来，完好无缺。
English: Having said that, Tora fired a shot first, and it hit the tree stump. The projectile bounced back, intact.

古文：灵鉴控弦，百发百中，皆节陷而丸碎焉。
现代文：灵鉴和尚拉弓控弦，百发百中。所射出去的弹丸都陷入到树节中，而且都碎在里面。
English: The guru and the monk drew the bow and the strings, and made hundreds of shots. The projectiles that were shot out all fell into the tree's branches, and they were all broken inside.

古文：张芬
现代文：张芬
English: Zhang Fen

古文：张芬曾为韦皋行军，曲艺过人。
现代文：张芬曾经任过韦皋的行军司马，该人有些特殊的技艺超过常人。
English: Zhang Fen once served as Weizhong's marching steed. This person has some special skills that exceed those of ordinary people.

古文：力举七尺碑，定双轮水磑。
现代文：他能举起七尺长的石碑，能够拉住双轮水磨让它停住不能转动。
English: He can lift a seven-foot-long stone tablet, can pull the two-wheeled water mill to stop it from turning.

古文：常于福感寺赶鞠，高及半塔。
现代文：张芬有一次在福感寺踢球，一脚将球踢到塔身的一半那么高。
English: Zhang Fen once kicked a ball halfway up the pagoda at Fukang Temple.

古文：弹弓力五斗。
现代文：张芬能使用五斗力的弹弓。
English: Zhang Fen can use a five-dart slingshot.

古文：常拣向阳巨笋，织竹笼之。随长旋培，常留寸许。
现代文：这种弓的制作方法是：每年春季，挑选向阳生长的巨笋，用编织成的竹笼将它罩起，随着笋往上长而随时培土，始终让它留在土外面约一寸左右。
English: The method of making this bow is as follows: every spring, a giant earthworm that grows towards the sun is selected and covered with a woven bamboo cage. As the earthworm grows, the soil is constantly cultivated, and it always remains about one inch outside the soil.

古文：度竹笼高四尺，然后放长。
现代文：等到估计竹笼有四尺高了，就可以不培土让竹笋自然生长了。
English: When the bamboo cage is estimated to be four feet high, you can let the bamboo shoots grow naturally without cultivating the soil.

古文：秋深，方去笼伐之。
现代文：到了深秋，挪去竹笼将竹笋砍下来。
English: In late autumn, remove the bamboo cage and cut down the bamboo shoots.

古文：一尺十节，其色如金，用成弓焉。
现代文：这种竹子一尺长有十个节，颜色象金子一样呈金黄色。
English: This kind of bamboo is a foot long with ten knots, and the color is golden yellow like gold.

古文：每涂墙方丈，弹成天下太平字。
现代文：再将这种竹子制作成弓。张芬经常在墙壁上涂成一丈见方大小的一块白地，用弹弓弹成天下太平四个大字。
English: This bamboo is then made into a bow. Zhang Fen often paints a square-sized piece of white ground on the wall and uses a slingshot to create the four characters of world peace.

古文：字体端研，如人摸成。
现代文：字体端正研丽，象人手摹写的一样。
English: The font is neat and crisp, like a human handwriting.

古文：河北将军
现代文：河北将军
English: General of Hebei Province

古文：建中初，有河北将军姓夏，弯弓数百斤。
现代文：唐德宗建中初年，有个姓夏的河北将军，能拉动几百斤的硬弓。
English: In the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School, there was a Hebei general surnamed Xia, who could pull a hard bow of several hundred pounds.

古文：常于球场中，累钱十余，走马，以击鞠杖击之。一击一钱飞起，高六七丈，其妙如此。
现代文：这位将军一次在球场上，将十几枚铜钱摞在一起，他骑马飞驰过来，用击球的拐杖击钱，一次只击飞一枚铜钱，飞出去高达六七丈。他的绝妙功夫就是这样的啊！
English: Once on the court, the general tied a dozen copper coins together. He galloped on horseback, hit the money with a crutch, hit only one copper coin at a time, and flew out as high as six or seven feet. That's his amazing feat!

古文：又于新泥墙安棘刺数十，取烂豆，相去一丈，掷豆贯于刺上，百不差一。
现代文：这位夏将军在新抹的泥墙上插刺棘几十株，手中拿着煮烂的豆子，距离有一丈远，投掷墙上的棘刺，百发百中，没有一枚豆子不是穿在棘刺上的。
English: This General Xia planted dozens of thorns on the newly plastered mud wall, holding boiled beans in his hands, a long way away, throwing thorns on the wall, in a hundred cases, not a single bean is not worn on the thorns.

古文：又能走马书一纸。
现代文：这位夏将军还能在飞驰的马上握笔在纸上写字。
English: This General Xia can also hold a pen and write on paper while galloping.

古文：西蜀客
现代文：西蜀客
English: West Shukou

古文：又张芬在韦皋幕中，有一客于宴席上，以筹碗中绿豆击蝇，十不失一。一座惊笑。
现代文：张芬在韦皋帐下任幕僚时，有一位西蜀来的客人，在宴席上用筹碗中当筹码用的绿豆击苍蝇，十击十中，满座客人都惊讶大笑。
English: When Zhang Fen was an aide-de-camp under Wei Wei, there was a guest from West Shou who used green beans in a bowl as chips to hit flies at a banquet. When he hit ten out of ten, all the guests were surprised and laughed.

古文：芬曰：无费吾豆。
现代文：张芬说：不要浪费我的豆子。
English: "Don't waste my beans," Zhang Fen said.

古文：遂指起蝇，拈其后脚，略无脱者。
现代文：说着用手指捉苍蝇，都掐住苍蝇的后脚，几乎没有脱逃的。
English: He said that he used his fingers to catch flies, and they all clung to the fly's hind legs, barely escaping.

古文：陟屺寺僧
现代文：陟屺寺僧
English: Monks of Shuji Temple

古文：荆州陟屺寺僧那照善射，每言照射之法。
现代文：荆州陟屺寺有个叫那照的僧人擅长根据野兽眼睛夜间发出的光来判断他是什么兽。
English: There is a monk named Nateru in Jingzhou Yingge Temple who is good at judging what kind of beast he is according to the light emitted by the beast's eyes at night.

古文：凡光长而摇者鹿；贴地而明灭者兔；低而不动者虎。
现代文：这位僧人谈起这种方法时说：在夜间，凡是眼睛发出的光亮长而摇动的，一准是鹿；贴地面而又时而亮时而灭的，一准是野兔；低而不协的，一准是虎。
English: The monk said of this method: "At night, if the light emitted by the eyes is long and shaky, it must be a deer; if it is close to the ground and sometimes bright and sometimes extinguished, it must be a hare; if it is low and not coordinated, it must be a tiger.

古文：又言夜格虎时，必见三虎并来。
现代文：这位僧人又说：夜间跟虎搏斗，你一定会看见有三只虎一同向你扑来。
English: The monk also said, "If you fight a tiger at night, you will definitely see three tigers charging at you together.

古文：狭者虎威，当刺其中者。
现代文：这是由于距离太近，虎纵跳疾速造成的。应当刺杀中间的那只，才能刺中。
English: This is caused by the distance being too close and the tiger's long jump being too fast. The one in the middle should be stabbed to get it in.

古文：虎死，威乃入地，得之可却百邪。
现代文：虎死后，虎威就进入地里。得到虎威可避各种邪魔。
English: After the death of the tiger, tiger's venom enters the ground. Getting tiger's venom can avoid all kinds of obstacles.

古文：虎初死，记其头所藉处，候月黑夜掘之。
现代文：虎刚死时，你要记住虎头所枕的位置。等到没有月亮的夜晚去挖掘。
English: When the tiger has just died, you must remember the position of the tiger's head. Wait until a moonless night to dig.

古文：欲掘时，必有虎来吼掷前后，不足畏，此虎之鬼也。
现代文：挖掘时，一定有虎在你的前后吼叫跳跃，不要怕，那是死虎的鬼魂。
English: When digging, there must be a tiger roaring and jumping in front and behind you. Don't be afraid, it's the ghost of a dead tiger.

古文：深二尺，当得物如琥珀，盖虎目光沦入地所为也。
现代文：掘地二尺深，你可以找到一种东西，象琥珀。它就是虎的目光掉入地里所形成的虎威！
English: If you dig two feet deep, you can find something like amber, which is a tiger's eyes falling into the ground and forming tiger's breath!

