古文：四年五月，莽曰： 保成师友祭酒唐林、故谏议祭酒琅邪纪逡，孝弟忠恕，敬上爱下，博通旧闻，德行醇备，至于黄发，靡有愆失。
现代文：四年五月，王莽说： 保成师友祭酒唐林和原谏议祭酒琅邪郡人纪逡，孝顺父母，恭敬兄长，对事忠诚，待人仁爱，尊敬朝廷，爱护百姓，广泛通晓古籍，德行纯厚完美，直到老年，没有过失。
English: In May of the fourth year, Wang Mang said: "Hosheng's teachers and friends sacrifice wine to Tanglin and Yuan Shao discuss the sacrifice of wine to the evil county. People are disciplined, filial and obedient to their parents, respect their brothers and sisters, are loyal to things, treat people with kindness, respect the imperial court, love the people, are widely familiar with ancient books, and have pure and perfect virtues until old age, and have no faults.

古文：其封林为建德侯，逡为封德侯，位皆特进，见礼如三公。
现代文：赐封卢挞为建擅堡，显逞为封德侯，都给予特进之位，接见他们的礼仪像接见三公一样。
English: Lu Xun, who was given the title of building a fortress, and Xiang Gang, who was given the title of a feudal lord, were both given special promotion, and the etiquette for receiving them was the same as that for receiving the three princes.

古文：赐弟一区，钱三百万，授几杖焉。 
现代文：赏赐大宅子一所、钱三百万，授予凭几和手杖的待遇。 
English: He was awarded a large house, three million in money, and the treatment of a few and a cane.

古文：六月，更授诸侯茅土于明堂，曰： 予制作地理，建封五等，考之经艺，合之传记，通于义理，论之思之，至于再三，自始建国之元以来九年于兹，乃今定矣。
现代文：六月，重新在明堂把象征封国的茅土授予诸侯，说道： 我规划土地制度，封建五等诸侯，根据经典的正文，符合经典的解说，贯通经义的事理，再三思考，再三讨论，自从始建国元年以来到现在快九年了，今天才正式定下来。
English: In June, he re-awarded the symbol of the fief, thatched earth, to the lords in the Ming Hall, saying, "I planned the land system, the five feudal lordships, according to the classic text, consistent with the classic explanation, through the principles of scripture, repeated thinking, repeated discussion. It has been almost nine years since the founding of the country, and today it was officially decided.

古文：予亲设文石之平，陈菁茅四色之土，钦告于岱宗泰社后土、先祖先妣，以班授之。
现代文：我亲自设立文石台阶，陈列菁茅和四色泥土，敬谨祷告于泰山、国家宗社、大地之神和先代的祖父祖母，然后颁授它。
English: I personally set up the stone steps, displayed the jingmao and four-colored soil, respectfully prayed to Mount Tai, the national ancestral shrine, the god of the earth and the ancestors' grandparents, and then awarded it.

古文：各就厥国，养牧民人，用成功业。
现代文：各归各的封国，抚育管教人民，以建立功业。
English: Each of them should be responsible for ruling the country, educating and disciplining the people, and building up the cause.

古文：其在缘边，若江南，非诏所召，遣侍于帝城者，纳言掌货大夫且调都内故钱，予其禄，公岁八十万，侯、伯四十万，子、男二十万。 
现代文：那些在边境地区或江南一带的诸侯，虽然不是韶令所召唤而被派遣到京城来侍奉皇帝的，纳言掌货大夫权且调拨京城库存金钱发放他们的俸禄，公爵每年八十万钱，侯爵、伯爵每年四十万钱，子爵、男爵每年二十万年俸。 
English: Those lords in the border regions or along the south of the Yangtze River, although they were not summoned by the imperial order and were sent to Beijing to serve the emperor, were recommended by the doctor in charge of goods and allocated Beijing's stock of money to pay their salaries, 800,000 yuan per year for the duke, 400,000 yuan per year for the marquis and the earl, and 200,000 yuan per year for the viscount and the baron.

古文：然复不能尽得。
现代文：然而还是不能完全得到。
English: However, it is still not fully available.

古文：莽好空言，慕古法，多封爵人，性实遴啬，托以地理未定，故且先赋茅土，用慰喜封者。
现代文：王莽喜欢说空话，羡慕古代的制度，多给人赐封爵位，性格其实吝啬，拿土地规划没有确定作为托辞，所以权且先授予象征封国的茅土，用来安慰喜欢封爵的人。
English: Wang Mang liked to speak empty words, admired the ancient system, and gave knighthoods to many people. In fact, his character was stingy, and he used the excuse that the land planning had not been determined. Therefore, he first granted the right to symbolize the fiefdom of thatch, which was used to comfort people who liked to be knighted.

古文：是岁，复明六管之令。
现代文：这一年，重申六项财政经济管理制度。
English: This year, six financial and economic management systems were reaffirmed.

古文：每一管下，为设科条防禁，犯者罪至死，吏民抵罪者浸众。
现代文：每一项管理制度下达，总要为它设置法令条规来加以防范，违犯的人最重的罪甚至被处死，官吏和平民犯罪受罚的更加多了。
English: Whenever a management system is issued, it is always necessary to set up laws and regulations for it to prevent it. Violators of the most serious crimes are even put to death, and officials and civilians are punished even more.

古文：又一切调上公以下诸有奴婢者，率一口出钱三千六百，天下愈愁，盗贼起。
现代文：又对上公以下凡蓄养了奴婢的一律征税，都是每一个奴婢出三千六百钱，天下人更加怨恨，盗贼兴起。
English: There was also a tax levied on all those who had kept slaves and maidservants after the Shangguo, with each slave and maidservant paying 3,600 yuan. The people of the world became even more resentful, and thieves arose.

古文：纳言冯常以六管谏，莽大怒，免常官。
现代文：纳言冯常就六项管理制度的问题进行了规劝，王莽大怒，免去了冯常的官职。
English: Wang Meng flew into a rage and removed Feng Chang from his official position.

古文：置执法左右刺奸。
现代文：设置执法左刺奸和执法右刺奸。
English: Set law enforcement left stabbing rape and law enforcement right stabbing rape.

古文：选用能吏侯霸等分督六尉、六队，如汉刺史，与三公士郡一人从事。
现代文：选用能干的官吏侯霸人分别督察六尉和六队，职权像汉朝的刺史一样，随带三公办事人员每郡一人处理有关事项。
English: The competent official Houba people were selected as inspectors, respectively, the sixth lieutenant and the sixth team, with the same powers as the Han Dynasty, and one person from each county accompanied by three public officials to deal with relevant matters.

古文：临淮瓜田仪等为盗贼，依阻会稽长州，琅邪女子吕母亦起。
现代文：临淮郡瓜田仪等人作盗贼，盘踞会稽郡城长州苑，琅邪郡妇女吕母也起事。
English: Guatian Yi and others from Linhuai County acted as thieves, and set fire to the county seat, Choshuyuan. Lu Mu, a woman from Suye County, also rose in revolt.

古文：初，吕母子为县吏，为宰所冤杀。
现代文：起初，吕母的儿子作县吏，被县长冤枉杀死。
English: At first, Lu Mu's son, a county official, was unjustly killed by the county governor.

古文：母散家财，以酤酒买兵弩，阴厚贫穷少年，得百余人，遂攻海曲县，杀其宰以祭子墓。
现代文：吕母拿出家中财产，用来买酒肉、武器。秘密地优待贫穷小伙子，得到了一百多人，便进攻海曲县，杀死了县长去祭她儿子的坟墓。
English: Lu's mother took out the family's property to buy wine, meat, and weapons. Secretly, she gave preferential treatment to poor young men, and gained more than a hundred people. She then attacked Haiqu County and killed the county governor to sacrifice her son's grave.

古文：引兵入海，其众浸多，后皆万数。
现代文：然后带兵到海上活动，她的队伍逐渐壮大，后来共有上万人。
English: Then she led soldiers to sea activities, and her team gradually grew, later totaling tens of thousands of people.

古文：莽遣使者即赦盗贼，还言： 盗贼解，辄复合。
现代文：王莽派遣使者就地赦免盗贼，使者回来说： 盗贼解散了，时常又会合拢来。
English: Wang Mang sent an envoy to pardon the thieves on the spot. The envoy came back and said, "The thieves have disbanded, but they often gather again."

古文：问其故，皆曰愁法禁烦苛，不得举手。
现代文：询问他们原由，都说苦于禁令烦琐苛捆，不能行动。
English: When I asked them why, they all said that they were suffering from the cumbersome and cumbersome ban and could not act.

古文：力作所得，不足以给贡税。
现代文：努力耕作的收入，不够用来缴纳赋税。
English: The income from hard farming is not enough to pay taxes.

古文：闭门自守，又坐邻伍铸钱挟铜，奸吏因以愁民。
现代文：关着门安分守己，又会受到邻居私自铸钱和私藏铜的连累，奸吏藉以勒索人民。
English: If they keep their doors closed and keep themselves separate, they will be ensnared by their neighbors who secretly mint money and hoard copper, which the traitors use to blackmail the people.

古文：民穷，悉起为盗贼。 
现代文：人民走投无路，只好都起来作盗贼。 
English: The people were cornered, and had no choice but to rise up and become thieves.

古文：莽大怒，免之。
现代文：王莽大怒，免掉他们的官职。
English: Wang Meng flew into a rage and removed them from their posts.

古文：其或顺指，言 民骄黠当诛 。及言 时运适然，且灭不久 ，莽说，辄迁之。
现代文：其中有的人顺着他的意图，说 乱民骄纵狡猾，应当惩办 ，还说 时运合该如此，不久就会消灭的 ，王莽就高兴，总是提拔他们。
English: Some of them followed his intention, saying, "The arrogant and cunning of the disorderly people should be punished," and "When the time is right, it should be like this, it will soon be eliminated," Wang Mang was happy and always promoted them.

古文：是岁八月，莽亲之南郊，铸作威斗。
现代文：这年八月间，王莽亲自去南郊，铸造威斗。
English: In August of this year, Wang Mang himself went to the southern suburbs to cast Weidong.

古文：威斗者，以五石铜为之，若北斗，长二尺五寸，欲以厌胜众兵。
现代文：威斗是用铜掺进五色石子铸成的，形状像北斗，长二尺五寸，想要用来威慑各部农民军。
English: Weidou is made of copper mixed with five-colored stones. It is shaped like the Big Dipper and is two feet and five inches long. It is intended to be used as a deterrent to the various peasant armies.

古文：既成，令司命负之，莽出在前，入在御旁。
现代文：威斗铸成了，让司命扛着它，王莽外出它就在前头，王莽进宫就把它放在身旁。
English: When Wang Mang went out, it was right in front of him, and when he entered the palace, he put it next to him.

古文：铸斗日，大寒，百官人马有冻死者。
现代文：铸造威斗的那天，天气特别冷，百官人马有冻死的。
English: On the day of the casting, the weather was particularly cold, and hundreds of officials froze to death.

古文：五年正月朔，北军南门灾。
现代文：五年正月初一，北军营垒的南门发生了火灾。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year, a fire broke out at the south gate of the North Camp.

古文：以大司马司允费兴为荆州牧，见，问到部方略，兴对曰： 荆、扬之民率依阻山泽，以渔采为业。
现代文：任命大司马司允费兴作荆州牧，王莽接见他，询问他达任所以后的计划方案，费兴回答说： 荆州、扬州的人民大都依靠山林湖沼，以捕鱼、樵采作为职业。
English: Wang Mang met with Ma Siyun Feixing, who was appointed as Jingzhou's chief herdsman, and asked him about his plans after taking office. Feixing replied: Most of the people in Jingzhou and Yangzhou rely on mountains, forests, lakes and marshes, with fishing and mining as their occupations.

古文：间者，国张六管，税山泽，妨夺民之利，连年久旱，百姓饥穷，故为盗贼。
现代文：前一段时间，国家推行六管制度，征收山林湖沼税，损害、剥夺了人民的利益，加上连年久旱，百姓饥饿穷困，所以流为盗贼。
English: Some time ago, the state implemented the six-tier system and levied taxes on mountains, forests and lakes, which damaged and deprived the interests of the people. Coupled with the long-term drought, the people were starving and impoverished, so they became thieves.

古文：兴到部，欲令明晓告盗贼归田里，假贷犁牛种食，阔其租赋，几可以解释安集。 
现代文：我到达任所以后，想要下令明白晓谕盗贼返回家园，贷放农具、耕牛、种子、粮食，减免他们的赋税，希望可以解散、安抚他们。 
English: When I arrived at the office, I wanted to give a clear order to tell the thieves to return home, lend farm tools, cattle, seeds, grain, reduce and exempt their taxes, and hope to dissolve and appease them.

古文：莽怒，免兴官。
现代文：王莽发怒，免掉了费兴的官职。
English: Wang Mang flew into a rage and removed Feixing from his post.

古文：天下吏以不得奉禄，并为奸利，郡尹县宰家累千金。
现代文：全国的官吏因为得不到俸禄，纷纷去牟取非法利益，郡尹县宰家产积累上千斤金。
English: Because government officials across the country do not receive a salary, they have gone to make illegal profits, and the county heads of Yin County have accumulated thousands of pounds of gold.

古文：莽下诏曰： 详考始建国二年胡虏猾夏以来，诸军吏及缘边吏大夫以上为奸利增产致富者，收其家所有财产五分之四，以助边急。 
现代文：王莽下韶书说： 彻查始建国二年匈奴扰乱中原以来，所有军官和边境官吏大夫以上牟取非法利益增加产业发了财的，没收他们家中所有财产的五分之四，用来帮助边防的急需。 
English: Wang Manglian said in the imperial edict: After a thorough investigation, since the Huns disturbed the Central Plains in the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, all officers and border officials above the rank of doctor who have made illegal profits and increased their wealth by increasing industries will have four-fifths of their family's property confiscated to help the urgent needs of border defense.

古文：公府士驰传天下，考覆贪饕，开吏告其将，奴婢告其主，几以禁奸，奸愈甚。
现代文：各公府办事人员乘坐传车跑遍全国，仔细审查贪污案件，动员军官告发他们的将领，奴婢告发他们的主人，希望用这样的办法来禁止奸邪，可是奸邪却越加厉害。
English: Officials from various public offices traveled across the country by car, carefully examining corruption cases, mobilizing officers to denounce their generals, slaves to denounce their masters, hoping to use this method to ban adultery, but adultery became more and more severe.

古文：皇孙功崇公宗坐自画容貌，被服天子衣冠，刻印三：一曰 维祉冠存己夏处南山臧薄冰 ，二曰 肃圣宝继 ，三曰 德封昌图 。
现代文：皇孙功崇公王宗由于给自己画了一幅画像，穿着天子的衣服，戴着天子的冠冕，刻了三枚印章：第一枚是 维祉冠，存己夏，处南山，藏薄冰 ，第二枚是 肃圣宝继 ，第三枚是 德封昌图 ，因而犯了罪。
English: Wang Zong, the grandson of Emperor Gongzong, committed a crime because he drew a picture of himself, dressed in the clothes of the Son of Heaven, wearing the crown of the Son of Heaven, and engraved three seals: the first one was the crown of welfare, saving his own summer, located in Nanshan, hiding thin ice, the second one was the sacred treasure, and the third one was the Defeng Changtu.

古文：又宗舅吕宽家前徙合浦，私与宗通，发觉按验，宗自杀。
现代文：又王宗的舅父吕宽家以前被流放到合浦郡，暗地里跟王宗联系，被发觉后，审查核实，王宗自杀了。
English: In addition, Wang Zong's uncle, Lyu Kuan, who had been exiled to Hepu County, secretly contacted Wang Zong. After being discovered and verified, Wang Zong committed suicide.

古文：莽曰： 宗属为皇孙，爵为上公，知宽等叛逆族类，而与交通；刻铜印三，文意甚害，不知厌足，窥欲非望。
现代文：王莽说： 王宗亲属关系是皇孙，爵位是上公，知道吕宽等人是叛逆分子，而竞跟他们来往；刻制钢印三枚，印文的意思很鬼祟，不知满足，觊觎非分的希望。
English: Wang Mang said: Wang Zong's kinship is the grandson of the emperor, his title is the grand duke, he knows that Lyu Kuan and others are rebels, and he competes with them; engraved three steel seals, the meaning of the seal is very secret, I don't know if I'm satisfied, I hope I'm not.

古文：《春秋》之义， 君亲毋将，将而诛焉。 
现代文：《春秋》的原则是 对国君和父母不得存恶念，有恶念就要惩罚他 。
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" is that there should be no evil thoughts towards the sovereign or his parents, and if there are evil thoughts, he should be punished.

古文：迷惑失道，自取此事，乌呼哀哉！
现代文：迷惑得背离了正道，自己犯了这样的罪行，真是可悲呀！
English: It's a pity that he was so confused that he deviated from the right path and committed such a crime.

古文：宗本名会宗，以制作去二名，今复名会宗。
现代文：王宗本来名叫王会宗，因为制度规定要取消双名，现在恢复原名王会宗。
English: Wang Zong was originally called Wang Huizong, because the system stipulates that double names should be abolished, and now the original name Wang Huizong has been restored.

古文：贬厥爵，改厥号，赐谥为功崇缪伯，以诸伯之礼葬于故同谷城郡。 
现代文：贬低他的爵位，改变他的名号，赐予谧号叫功崇缪伯，按照伯爵的礼仪安葬在他原来的封国谷城郡。 
English: Degraded his title, changed his name, given a nickname called Gong Chong Mu Bo, buried in accordance with the count's etiquette in his original county of Guocheng.

古文：宗姊妨为卫将军王兴夫人，祝诅姑，杀婢以绝口。
现代文：王宗的姐姐王妨是卫将军王兴的夫人，祈祷鬼神给她婆母降灾祸，为了灭口杀死婢女。
English: Wang Zong's sister Wang May is the wife of Wei general Wang Xinglu. She prayed to the ghosts and gods to bring disaster to her mother-in-law, and killed her maid in order to silence her.

古文：事发觉，莽使中常侍惲责问妨，并以责兴，皆自杀。
现代文：最后事情被发现了，王莽让中常侍踅惮责问王妨，并且拿这件事责备王兴，王妨和王兴都自杀了。
English: In the end, the matter was discovered. Wang Mang asked the Vice-Minister of the People's Liberation Army to question Wang Jia, and to blame Wang Xing for the matter. Wang Jia and Wang Xing both committed suicide.

古文：事连及司命孔仁妻，亦自杀。
现代文：事情牵连到司命孔仁的妻子，也自杀了。
English: Kong Ren's wife, who was implicated in the incident, also committed suicide.

古文：仁见莽免冠谢，莽使尚书劾仁： 乘 乾 车，驾 神 马，左苍龙，右白虎，前朱雀，后玄武，右杖威节，左负威斗，号曰赤星，非以骄仁，乃以尊新室之威命也。
现代文：孔仁见到王莽便摘下帽子请罪，王莽让尚书弹劾孔仁： 坐着绘有天文图像的车子，套着母马，左边是青龙标志，右边是白虎标志，前头是未雀标志，后头是乌龟标志，右手拿着五威节，左肩扛着威斗，称号叫作赤星，这些都不是用来让孔仁为所欲为，而是用来尊崇新朝的威严命令。
English: When Confucius saw Wang Mang, he took off his hat to plead guilty. Wang Mang asked Shang Shu to impeach Confucius: sitting in a car painted with astronomical images, wearing a mare, the left side is the blue dragon logo, the right side is the white tiger logo, the front is the bird logo, the back is the turtle logo, holding the Five Weights Festival in his right hand and carrying the fight on his left shoulder, the title is called the Red Star. These are not used to let Confucius do whatever he wants, but to honor the new dynasty's majestic command.

古文：仁擅免天文冠，大不敬。 
现代文：孔仁擅自摘下天文冠，这是犯了不敬皇帝的罪行。 
English: Kong Ren took off the astronomical crown without permission, which was a crime of disrespecting the emperor.

古文：有诏勿劾，更易新冠。
现代文：王莽又下诏书指示不要弹劾他，更换一顶新帽子就行了。
English: Wang Mang also issued an edict instructing not to impeach him, but to replace him with a new hat.

古文：其好怪如此。
现代文：他喜怒无常就像这个样子。
English: He's moody like that.

古文：以真道侯王涉为卫将军。
现代文：任命直道侯王涉作卫将军。
English: He appointed Tadamichi no Houwang Watanabe as the general of the Imperial Guard.

古文：涉者，曲阳侯根子也。
现代文：王涉是曲阳侯王根的儿子。
English: Wang Zhan was the son of Wang Gen, the lord of Quyang.

古文：根，成帝世为大司马，荐莽自代，莽恩之，以为曲阳非令称，乃追谥根曰直道让公，涉嗣其爵。
现代文：王根在成帝时期担任大司马，曾经推荐王莽接替自己的职务，王莽因此感激他，认为曲阳不是一个美好的名称，才追谧王根为直道让公，让王涉继承了他的爵位。
English: Wang Gen served as the grand steed during the reign of Emperor Cheng, and once recommended Wang Mang to take over his duties. Wang Mang was grateful to him for this, and thought that Quyang was not a good name, so he chased Wang Gen to give up the throne, and let Wang Zhan inherit his title.

古文：是岁，赤眉力子都、樊崇等以饥馑相聚，起于琅邪，转抄掠，众皆万数。
现代文：这一年，赤眉军力子都和樊崇等人由于饥荒而聚集起来，在琅邪郡起事，到处抢劫，部队共有万人。
English: In that year, the Red Eyebrows' military strongmen, including Tong Tong and others, gathered together due to famine, rioted in Suye County, and looted everywhere, with a total of ten thousand troops.

古文：遗使者发郡国兵击之，不能克。
现代文：王莽派遣使者调动郡国地方部队攻打他们，不能取胜。
English: Wang Mang sent an envoy to mobilize the county's local troops to attack them, but they could not win.

古文：六年春，莽见盗贼多，乃令太史推三万六千岁历纪，六岁一改元，布天下。
现代文：六年春季，王莽看到盗贼很多，便让太史推算出三万六千年的历法大纲，每六年改一次年号，布告全国。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Wang Mang saw that there were many thieves, so he asked Tai Shi to calculate the outline of the 36,000-year calendar, change the year once every six years, and announce it to the whole country.

古文：下书曰： 《紫阁图》曰 太一、黄帝皆仙上天，张乐昆仑虔山之上。
现代文：下文告说： 《紫合图》说： 太一和黄帝都成为神仙上天了，在昆仑山的虔山上演奏仙乐。
English: The following article said: "Zi He Tu" said: Taichi and Huangdi have both become immortals in heaven, playing celestial music on the Qixian Mountain of Kunlun Mountain.

古文：后世圣主得瑞者，当张乐秦终南山之上。 
现代文：后代获得了祥瑞的英明帝王，应当在秦地终南山上演奏仙乐。 
English: The descendants of Emperor Yingming, who gained auspiciousness, should play celestial music on the southern mountain of Qin.

古文：予之不敏，奉行未明，乃今谕矣。
现代文：我不璁明，没有自觉地遵行，到现在才懂得了。
English: I didn't understand, I didn't follow it consciously, and only now do I understand.

古文：复以宁始将军为更始将军，以顺符命。
现代文：再把宁始将军称为更始将军。是顺从符命的意思。
English: General Ninshih is also called Gen. Ninshih, which means to follow one's destiny.

古文：《易》不云乎？ 日新之谓盛德，生生之谓易。 
现代文：《易经》不是说过吗？ 曰曰更新就是优秀的品德，在运动变化的过程中不断有新事物产生就叫作 易 。 
English: Isn't it said in the I Ching that "renewal is an excellent virtue" and that "new things are constantly created in the process of movement and change" is called "I Ching."

古文：予其飨哉！ 
现代文：我会享受这种幸福的！ 
English: I will enjoy this happiness!

古文：欲以诳耀百姓，销解益贼。
现代文：想要用这样的办法来眩惑百姓，消除盗贼。
English: They want to use this method to dazzle people and eliminate thieves.

古文：众皆笑之。
现代文：大家都讪笑这些作法。
English: Everyone laughs at these practices.

古文：初献《新乐》于明堂、太庙。
现代文：初次向明堂、太庙进献《新乐》。
English: For the first time, "New Music" was presented to Myeongdong and Taemyo.

古文：群臣始冠麟韦之弁。
现代文：大臣们开始戴鹿皮帽子。
English: Ministers began to wear deerskin hats.

古文：或闻其乐声，曰： 清厉而哀，非兴国之声也。 
现代文：有人听到那音乐的曲调，说道： 凄凉严肃而且低沉，不是振兴国家的音乐。 
English: Someone heard the melody of the music and said: "It is gloomy, serious and muffled. It is not the music to revitalize the country."

古文：是时，关东饥旱数年，力子都等党众浸多，更始将军廉丹击益州不能克，征还。
现代文：这时候，关东地区接连几年遭到干旱饥荒，力子都等部众逐渐增多。更始将军廉丹攻打益州没能取胜，召回。
English: At this time, the Kanto region had been hit by drought and famine for several years in a row, and the number of influential people such as the Rikidotsu gradually increased. In addition, the first general, Lian Dan, failed to win in attacking Yishu and was recalled.

古文：更遣复位后大司马护军郭兴、庸部牧李晔击蛮夷若豆等，太傅牺叔士孙喜清洁江湖之益贼。
现代文：再派复位后大司马护军郭兴和庸部牧李毕去攻打部族首领若豆等，派太傅牺叔士孙喜去平定各地的盗贼。
English: After the restoration, he sent Guo Xing and Yongbu Mu Li Bi to attack the tribal leader Ruozu, and sent Taifu's uncle Sun Xi to subdue the thieves around the country.

古文：而匈奴寇边甚。
现代文：同时匈奴侵犯边境很厉害。
English: At the same time, the Huns violated the border very badly.

古文：莽乃大募天下丁男及死罪囚、吏民奴，名曰 猪突豨勇 ，以为锐卒。
现代文：王莽便大规模招集全国的壮丁以及死刑罪犯和官吏、平民的家奴，起名叫猪突稀勇，把他们作为精锐的士兵。
English: Wang Mang then summoned on a large scale all of the country's able-bodied men, as well as death-row convicts, officials, and the domestic slaves of the common people, and named them as elite soldiers.

古文：一切税天下吏民，訾三十取一，缣帛皆输长安。
现代文：一切费用向全国的官吏和平民征收，估量财产抽取三十分之一，绸绢都运送到长安。
English: All expenses were levied on government officials and ordinary citizens across the country, one-thirtieth of the estimated property was taken, and the silk and satin were all transported to Chang'an.

古文：令公卿以下至郡县黄绶皆保养军马，多少各以秩为差。
现代文：命令公卿以下直到郡县佩带黄色印纽的官吏都要保养军马，马匹的多少根据各人的俸禄规定等级。
English: It was ordered that the officials from the noblemen down to the county officials wearing yellow Indian neckties should maintain the army horses, and the number of horses should be according to the salary level of each person.

古文：又博募有奇技术可以攻匈奴者，将待以不次之位。
现代文：又广泛招集有奇巧技术可以用来攻打匈奴的专门人才，打算越级提升职位来任用他们。
English: In addition, they extensively recruited specialists with exotic technology that could be used to attack the Xiongnu, and planned to promote them to higher-level positions.

古文：言便宜者以万数：或言能度水不用舟楫，连马接骑，济百万师；或言不持斗粮，服食药物，三军不饥；或言能飞，一日千里，可窥匈奴。
现代文：建议对国家有利的事情的人以万计：有的说能够不用舟船渡过江河，人马连接，可以渡过上百万的军队；有的说不要携带一斗粮食，衹要服食药物，军队可以不饥饿；有的说能够飞行，一天飞行一千里，可以去侦察匈奴。
English: There are thousands of people who suggest things that are beneficial to the country: some say that they can cross rivers without boats, connect people and horses, and can pass over millions of troops; some say that they don't need to carry a bucket of grain, they just need to take medicine, and the army can not be hungry; some say that they can fly, fly a thousand miles a day, and can go to scout the Huns.

古文：莽辄试之，取大鸟翮为两翼，头与身皆著毛，通引环纽，飞数百步堕。
现代文：王莽就让他试试，那个人拿大鸟的羽毛做成两扇翅膀，头上和身上都附上羽毛，遍身用环形纽带缠绕，飞行几百步就掉下来了。
English: Wang Mang let him try. The man made two wings from the feathers of a large bird, attached feathers to his head and body, and wrapped his entire body with a ring-shaped tie. After flying a few hundred steps, he fell down.

古文：莽知其不可用，苟欲获其名，皆拜为理军，赐以车马，待发。
现代文：王莽知道他们不能任用，硬要博得珍惜人才的名声，都任命作理军，拿车马赏赐他们，等待出发。
English: Wang Mang knew that they could not be appointed, and insisted on winning the reputation of cherishing talents. They were all appointed as management troops, rewarded them with chariots and horses, and waited for departure.

古文：初，匈奴右骨都侯须卜当，其妻王昭君女也，尝内附。
现代文：当初，匈奴右骨都侯须当，他的妻子是王昭君的女儿，曾经归附中原。
English: Originally, the Xiongnu's rightful ruler was Hou Sudang, whose wife was the daughter of Wang Zhaojun, who had once been annexed to the Central Plains.

古文：莽遣昭君兄子和亲侯王歙诱呼当至塞下，胁将诣长安，强立以为须卜善于后安公。
现代文：王莽派遣王昭君的侄儿和亲侯王歙引诱须卜当到边界，胁迫他来到长安，强迫立他为须卜善于后安公。
English: Wang Mang sent Wang Zhaojun's nephew and Prince Wang Xi to lure Subutang to the border, coerce him to come to Chang'an, and force him to become Subutang's son.

古文：始欲诱迎当，大司马严尤谏曰： 当在匈奴右部，兵不侵边，单于动静，辄语中国，此方面之大助也。
现代文：起初王莽想要引诱须卜当，大司马严尤规劝道： 须卜当在匈奴右部，他的军队没有侵犯过边境，总是把单于的消息告诉中原，这是一个方面的巨大帮助。
English: At first, Wang Mang wanted to lure Subdang, but the Chief Secretary Ma Yanyou advised: Subdang is on the right side of the Xiongnu, his army has not violated the border, and always tells the news of Shan Yu to the Central Plains, which is a great help in one aspect.

古文：于今迎当置长安槁街，一胡人耳，不如在匈奴有益。 
现代文：现在迎接须卜当安置到长安东街，不过一个匈奴人而已，不如让他留在匈奴有利。 
English: Now it is time to welcome Subutang to the East Street of Chang'an. However, he is only a Xiongnu, so it is better for him to stay with the Xiongnu.

古文：莽不听。
现代文：王莽没有听从。
English: Wang Mang did not obey.

古文：即得当，欲遣尤与廉丹击匈奴，皆赐姓徵氏，号二徵将军，当诛单于舆而立当代之。
现代文：已经把须卜当弄来了，想要派遣严尤和廉丹攻打匈奴，都赐姓征氏，称为二征将军，要杀死单于舆而立须当去代替他。
English: He had already brought Subutang, and wanted to send Yan You and Lian Dan to attack the Huns. They were both given the surname of Zheng, and were called the second generation of generals. He wanted to kill Shan Yu Myu, but Li Shudang went to replace him.

古文：出车城西横厩，未发。
现代文：出兵长安城西马栏，没有起行。
English: Troops were sent to the West Horse Col of Chang'an City, but did not set out.

古文：尤素有智略，非莽攻伐四夷，数谏不从，著古名将乐毅、白起不用之意及言边事凡三篇，奏以风谏莽。
现代文：严尤向来具有智谋和才干，反对王莽攻打西方外族，屡次规劝，王莽都没有听从，于是撰述古代名将乐毅和白起不被信任的历史教训以及陈述边疆防务事宜的文章共三篇，上报去委婉曲折地规谏王莽。
English: Yan You always had the wisdom and talent to oppose Wang Mang's attack on Western foreigners. He repeatedly advised Wang Mang, but Wang Mang did not listen. Therefore, he wrote a total of three articles on the history of the ancient famous general Le Yi and Bai Qi, who was not trusted, as well as the statement of border defense matters, and submitted them to the newspaper to euphemistically restrain Wang Mang.

古文：及当出廷议，尤固言匈奴可且以为后，先忧山东盗贼。
现代文：等到廷议，严尤坚决说明匈奴可以权且放在后面，首先要忧虑山东地区的盗贼。
English: When the court deliberated, Yan You firmly stated that the Xiongnu could be right and left behind, and the thieves in Shandong should be worried first.

古文：莽大怒，乃策尤曰： 视事四年，蛮夷猾夏不能遏绝，寇贼奸宄不能殄灭，不畏天威，不用诏命，貌很自臧，持必不移，怀执异心，非沮军议。
现代文：王莽大怒，便下策书给严尤说： 你就职四年了，外族扰乱中原不能够镇压下去，盗贼奸邪不能够消灭，不畏惧上天的威严，不服从皇帝的命令，相貌狠毒，还白以为善良，固执己见，不可改变，怀抱贰心，破坏军事计划。
English: Wang Mang flew into a rage, and then wrote a letter to Yan You, saying: You have been in office for four years. Foreign interference in the Central Plains cannot be suppressed. Thieves and evil-doers cannot be eliminated. You do not fear the majesty of heaven. You disobey the emperor's orders. You are cruel-looking. You think you are good-natured. You are stubborn and cannot change your mind. You harbor ill-will and sabotage military plans.

古文：未忍致于理，其上大司马武建伯印韨，归故郡。 
现代文：我不忍心交给法司处理，应当缴上大司马武建伯的印信，回到原籍去。 
English: I can't bear to let the legal department deal with it. I should hand in the sealed letter from the chief magistrate, Ma Wu Jianbo, and go back to my hometown.

古文：以降符伯董忠为大司马。
现代文：任命降符伯董忠作大司马。
English: The appointment of the demoted Bao Dongzhong as the chief secretary.

古文：翼平连率田况奏郡县訾民不实，莽复三十税一。
现代文：翼平郡连率田况报告郡里县里估量人民财产不真实，王莽又按三十分之一征收。
English: The field condition report of Yiping County was not true, and Wang Mang was also levied at one-thirtieth.

古文：以况忠言忧国，进爵为伯，赐钱二百万。
现代文：认为田况说话忠诚，关心国家，把他的爵位提升为伯爵，赏赐钱二百万。
English: Believing that Tian Jiao was loyal and concerned about the country, he promoted his title to count and rewarded him with two million yuan.

古文：众庶皆詈之。
现代文：广大民众都咒骂他。
English: The general public cursed him.

古文：青、徐民多弃乡里流亡，老弱死道路，壮者入贼中。
现代文：青州和徐州的人民很多都抛弃家园流亡，老的弱的死在路上，强壮的加入了盗贼的队伍。
English: Many people in Qingzhou and Xuzhou abandoned their homes and went into exile. The old and weak died on the road, while the strong joined the band of thieves.

古文：夙夜连率韩博上言： 有奇士，长丈，大十围，来至臣府，曰欲奋击胡虏。
现代文：夙夜郡连率韩博上报说： 有个奇人，身高一丈，体大十围，来到我的公府，说想要奋力去攻打匈奴。
English: Han Bo, the leader of the company in Handan County, reported: There is a strange man, who is a foot taller and ten times bigger, who came to my government office and said that he wanted to fight against the Huns.

古文：自谓巨毋霸，出于蓬莱东南，五城西北昭如海濒，轺车不能载，三马不能胜。
现代文：自己说名叫巨毋霸，生长在蓬莱东南，五城西北的昭如海边，轻便车装不下，三匹马拖不起。
English: He says his name is Giant Bear. He grew up in the southeast of Penglai and the northwest of Wucheng, on the coast. He can't fit in a small car and can't drag three horses.

古文：即日以大车四马，建虎旗，载霸诣阙。
现代文：立刻用大车套四马，坚立虎旗，装载巨毋霸前来京城。
English: Immediately come to the capital with a four-horse carriage, a tiger flag, and a giant horse.

古文：霸卧则枕鼓，以铁箸食，此皇天所以辅新室也。
现代文：巨毋霸睡觉头枕鼓，用铁筷子吃饭，这是上天要他来辅佐新朝的。
English: The giant sleeping with a pillow over his head and eating with iron chopsticks was God's way of asking him to support the new dynasty.

古文：愿陛下作大甲高车，贲、育之衣，遣大将一人与虎贲百人迎之于道。
现代文：希望您制造一辆大甲高车，一套孟贲、夏育穿的衣服，派遣大将一人和勇士一百人到路上来迎接他。
English: I hope that you will make a big armored car, a set of clothes worn by Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, and send a general and a hundred warriors to meet him on the road.

古文：京师门户不容者，开高大之，以视百蛮，镇安天下。 
现代文：京城门户不能够容纳他的，把它们开高些、开大些，把他给各外族看看，可以镇慑、安定天下。 
English: The gateways of the capital cannot contain him. Open them higher and wider, and show him to all foreign nations. This will deter and stabilize the world.

古文：博意欲以风莽。
现代文：韩博的意思想要用来讥讽王莽。
English: The meaning of "Han Bo" is intended to mock Wang Mang.

古文：莽闻恶之，留霸在所新丰，更其姓曰巨母氏，谓因文母太后而霸王符也。
现代文：王莽听到了，怨恨韩博，让巨毋霸留在他所在的新丰县，更改他的姓叫巨母氏，意思是说多亏文母太后降生这个人，这是使自己成为霸王的符命。
English: Wang Mang heard this and resented Han Bo. He allowed the giant to stay in Xinfeng County, where he was located, and changed his surname to the giant's mother, meaning that thanks to the great-grandmother, this person was born. This was a sign of his destiny to become a tyrant.

古文：征博下狱，以非所宜言，弃市。
现代文：把韩博关进监狱，认为那些话不是他所应当说的，处死。
English: Put Han Bo in prison, think those words are not what he should have said, and execute him.

古文：明年改元曰：地皇 ，从三万六千岁历号也。
现代文：第二年改年号叫作地皇，是依照三万六千年历法大纲上的年号。
English: In the second year, the name of the year was changed to Emperor of the Earth, in accordance with the outline of the 36,000-year calendar.

古文：地皇元年正月乙未，赦天下。
现代文：地皇元年正月乙末日，宣布大赦全国。
English: On the last day of the first month of the second month of the first year of the local emperor, the country-wide amnesty was announced.

古文：下书曰： 方出军行师，敢有趋讠襄犯法者，辄论斩，毋须时，尽岁止。 
现代文：下文告说： 正当出兵行军的时候，敢有奔跑吵闹触犯法律的，就杀头，不要等到行刑季节，这道命令实行到年底为止。 
English: The following notice was issued: "If anyone dares to break the law by running and making a ruckus just as the troops are being sent out to march, he is to be beheaded. Do not wait until the execution season. This order will be in effect until the end of the year."

古文：于是春夏斩人都市，百姓震惧，道路以目。
现代文：于是春季夏季都在都市里杀人，百姓恐怖，路上相见，衹有以目示意，不敢交谈。
English: As a result, in spring and summer, people are killed in the city, the people are terrified, they see each other on the road, they don't make eye contact, and they don't dare to talk.

古文：二月壬申，日正黑。
现代文：二月壬申日，太阳当顶时天色黑暗。
English: On February's Jinshin Day, the sky is dark when the sun is at its peak.

古文：莽恶之，下书曰： 乃者日中见昧，阴薄阳，黑气为变，百姓莫不惊怪。
现代文：王莽讨厌这种现象，下文告说： 前些时候中出现昏暗，阴气侵犯阳气，黑气形成灾异，百姓没有谁不惊怪。
English: Wang Meng hated this phenomenon, and reported as follows: Some time ago, darkness appeared in the middle of the night, the yin invaded the yang, and the black formed a disaster. No one was surprised.

古文：兆域大将军王匡遣吏考问上变事者，欲蔽上之明，是以適见于天，以正于理，塞大异焉。 
现代文：兆域大将军王匡派遣属员去追究上报非常事故的人，想要遮蔽皇帝的耳目，因此从上天发出了谴责，应当让他受到法律制裁，来补救这样的大灾异。 
English: Zhaowei General Wang Kuang sent his subordinates to investigate the person who reported the accident, and wanted to cover the emperor's ears and eyes, so he issued a condemnation from heaven, and he should be subject to legal sanctions to remedy such a catastrophe.

古文：莽见四方盗贼多，复欲厌之，又下书曰： 予之皇初祖考黄帝定天下，将兵为上将军，建华盖，立斗献，内设大将，外置大司马五人，大将军二十五人，偏将军百二十五人，裨将军千二百五十人，校尉万二千五百人，司马三万七千五百人，候十一万二千五百人，当百二十二万五千人，士吏四十五万人，士千三百五十万人，应协于《易》 孤矢之利，以威天下 。
现代文：王莽看到四方盗贼很多，想再要威慑他们，又下文告说： 我的伟大的皇初祖考黄帝平定天下，自己统率军队担任上将军，竖起华丽的车盖，立起北斗形的礼器，大本营设置大将，营外军设置大司马五人，大将军二十五人，偏将军一百二十五人，裨将军一千二百五十人，校尉一万二千五百人，司马三万七千五百人，军候十一万二千五百人，百长二十二万五千人，士宫四十五万人，战士一千三百五十万人，应合《易经》所说的 弓箭锐利，用来威慑天下 。
English: Wang Mang saw that there were many thieves in the four directions and wanted to further deter them. He also reported as follows: My great imperial ancestor, the Yellow Emperor, pacified the world. He himself led the army as the supreme general, erected a magnificent car cover, erected a ceremonial instrument in the shape of a Big Dipper, set up a general at the base camp, and set up five major generals, twenty-five major generals, one hundred and twenty-five minor generals, one thousand two hundred and fifty general officers, twelve thousand five hundred captains, thirty-seven thousand five hundred sergeants, one hundred and twenty-five thousand soldiers in waiting, two hundred and twenty-five thousand

古文：予受符命之文，稽前人，将条备焉。 
现代文：我接受符命的文辞，取法古人，打算逐步设置起来。 
English: I accept the words of fate, take the method of the ancients, and intend to set it up gradually.

古文：于是置前后左右中大司马之位，赐诸州牧号为大将军，郡卒正、连帅、大尹为偏将军，属令长裨将军，县宰为校尉。
现代文：于是设置前大司马、后大司马、左大司马、右大司马、中大司马的职位，授予各州牧军衔为大将军，各郡卒正、连帅、大尹军衔为偏将军，属令、属长军衔为裨将军，各县长军衔为校尉。
English: As a result, the positions of the former grand secretary, the later grand secretary, the left grand secretary, the right grand secretary, and the middle grand secretary were set up, and the rank of grand general was awarded to the pastoral army in each state, the rank of general was awarded to the general in each county, the rank of general in each county was awarded to the general in each county, the rank of general in each county was awarded to the general in each county, the rank of general in each county was awarded to the general in each county, the rank of general in each county was awarded to the general in each county, the rank of general in each county was awarded to the general in each county.

古文：乘传使者经历郡国，日且十辈，仓无见谷以给，传车马不能足，赋取道中车马，取办于民。
现代文：乘坐传车的使者经过各郡国，每天将近十批，仓库里没有现存的粮食供给，驾传车的马匹不能够满足，就征用路上的车马，取给于民间。
English: Messengers in carts passed through the counties and provinces, delivering nearly ten batches of grain every day. There was no existing grain supply in the warehouse, and the horses driving the carts could not be satisfied, so they requisitioned the horses and carts on the road and gave them to the people.

古文：七月，大风毁王路堂。
现代文：七月间，大风损毁了王路堂。
English: In July, the King's Road Church was damaged by high winds.

古文：复下书曰： 乃壬午餔时，有列风雷雨发屋折木之变，予甚弁焉，予甚栗焉，予甚恐焉。
现代文：又下文告道： 前向壬午日申时，发生了暴风大雷雨发掘房屋、摧折树木的变故，我对此非常惊疑，我对此非常战栗，我对此非常恐惧。
English: He also reported the following: "When I was on my way to Jingu and the sun was setting, there was a storm, a thunderstorm, and houses were being excavated and trees were being uprooted. I was very surprised by this, I was very shaken by this, and I was very afraid of this.

古文：伏念一旬，迷乃解矣。
现代文：俯伏考虑十天，迷惑才解除了。
English: It took ten days of contemplation before the confusion was cleared up.

古文：昔符命文立安为新迁王，临国雒阳，为统义阳王。
现代文：从前符命文辞说要立王安为新迁王，让王临在洛阳建国，作统义阳王。
English: In the past, the words of Fu Mui said that Wang An should be established as the new king of relocation, and Wang Lin should establish the country in Luoyang and become the king of Yiyang.

古文：是时予在摄假，谦不敢当，而以为公。
现代文：造时我在代行皇帝职权，谦辞不敢接受，让他们接受了公爵。
English: At that time, I was acting as the emperor, and I did not dare to accept it, so they accepted the duke.

古文：其后金匮文至，议老皆曰： 临国雒阳为统，谓据土中为新室统也，宜为皇太子。 自此后，临久病，虽瘳不平，朝见挈茵舆行。
现代文：那以后金匮文辞来到了，舆论都说： 王临在洛阳建国作统义阳王，是说他据有全国的中心作新朝的继承者，应当作皇太子，从此以后，王临久病，后来虽然痊愈，但没有完全康复，朝见时需要坐在毯子上面，由别人举着毯子放在车厢里推着行进。
English: After that, the Jinxiao Wenjie arrived, and the public opinion said: Wang Lin founded the country in Luoyang as the ruler of Yiyang, which means that he should be the crown prince as the successor of the new dynasty. From then on, Wang Linjiu was ill, and although he recovered, he did not fully recover, and he needed to sit on a blanket when he met the emperor, and someone else carried the blanket and put it in the carriage to push him along.

古文：见王路堂者，张于西厢及后阁更衣中，又以皇后被疾，临且去本就舍，妃妾在东永巷。
现代文：在王路堂朝见时，要在西厢房和后合更衣室中陈设帷帐休息，又因为皇后得病，王临暂时离开原来的住处来到这里居处，他的妃妾住在东永巷。
English: When meeting the emperor at Wanglu Hall, it is necessary to set up curtains in the west wing room and the back-to-back dressing room for rest. Also, because the empress was ill, Wang Lin temporarily left his original residence and came to live here. His concubine lived in Dongyong Lane.

古文：壬午，烈风毁王路西厢及后阁更衣中室。
现代文：壬午曰，暴风损毁王路西厢房和后阁更衣中室。
English: On the afternoon of the 13th, the storm damaged and destroyed the west wing room of Wang Lu and the middle dressing room of the back pavilion.

古文：昭宁堂池东南榆树大十围，东僵，击东阁，阁即东永巷之西垣也。
现代文：昭宁堂池东南有一棵粗十围的榆树，向东边倒下，撞击束合，东阁就是束永巷的西边围墙。
English: In the southeast of the Shoningtang Pond, there is a thick ten-walled eucalyptus tree, which falls to the east and collides with the bund, and the east pavilion is the west wall of the Bundyong Alley.

古文：皆破折瓦坏，发屋拔木，予甚惊焉。
现代文：这些地方都破碎折断，屋瓦毁坏，发掘房屋，拔出树木，我对此非常惊骇。
English: I was horrified to see all these places smashed, roof tiles destroyed, houses dug up, trees uprooted.

古文：又侯官奏月犯心前星，厥有占，予甚忧之。
现代文：又天文官报告说月球侵犯心宿前星，这有预兆，我很担心这件事。
English: Also, the astronomer reported that the moon was encroaching on the Pleiades, which is an omen, and I am very worried about this.

古文：优念《紫阁图》文，太一、黄帝皆得瑞以仙，后世褒主当登终南山。
现代文：俯伏考虑《紫阁图》文辞，太一和黄帝都获得祥瑞而成仙，后代伟大的君主会登上终南山。
English: If we consider the words of "Zijiao Gu" (The Map of the Purple Pavilion), both Taichi and the Yellow Emperor gained auspiciousness and became immortals, and the descendants of the great monarchs will ascend the South Mountain.

古文：所谓新迁王者，乃太一新迁之后也。
现代文：所谓新迁王，就是太一新迁的后继者。
English: The so-called new relocation king is the successor of Taichi new relocation.

古文：统义阳王乃用五统以礼义登阳上千之后也。
现代文：统义阳王就是推行五伦凭藉礼义登上皇位从而上升仙境的后继者。
English: King Tongyiyang is the successor who promoted Wu Lun to ascend to the throne by virtue of courtesy and righteousness and thus ascend to the fairyland.

古文：临有兄而称太子，名不正。
现代文：王临有哥哥而称为太子，名分不正。
English: Wang Lin has an older brother and is called the prince, which is unfair.

古文：宣尼公曰： 名不正，则言不顺，至于刑罚不中，民无错手足。 惟即位以来，阴阳未和，风雨不时，数遇枯旱蝗螟为灾，谷稼鲜耗，百姓苦饥，蛮夷猾夏，寇贼奸宄，人民正营，无所错手足。
现代文：宣尼公说： 名分不正，讲起话来就不顺当、不合理，以致执行刑罚不正确、不恰当，老百姓就不知道怎么办才好，想我登上皇位以来，阴阳没有调和，风雨不适时，屡次遭到大旱和蝗虫螟虫造成灾害，粮食缺少，百姓被饥荒所苦，外族扰乱中原，盗贼奸邪捣乱，以致人民惶恐不安，不知道怎么办。
English: Xuan Ni Gong said: The name is not right, the speech is not proper and reasonable, so that the execution of the punishment is not correct and appropriate, and the people do not know what to do. Since I ascended the throne, the yin and yang have not been reconciled, when the wind and rain are not appropriate, I have repeatedly suffered from droughts and locusts and worms, food shortages, the people are suffering from famine, foreigners disturb the Central Plains, thieves and evil spirits disturb, so that the people are frightened and do not know what to do.

古文：深惟厥咎，在名不正焉。
现代文：深深地思考这些罪责，在于名分不正。
English: To think deeply about these crimes is to be dishonest.

古文：其立安为新迁王，临为统义阳正，几以保全二子，子孙千亿，外攘四夷，内安中国焉。 
现代文：应当立王安作新迁王，王临作统义阳王，希望用这个措施来保全我的两个儿子，子孙发达，对外排除四方外族，对内安定中原。 
English: I hope to use this measure to preserve my two sons, develop my children and grandchildren, exclude foreigners from the four directions, and stabilize the Central Plains domestically.

古文：是月，杜陵便殿乘舆虎文衣废臧在室匣中者出，自树立外堂上，良久乃委地。
现代文：这个月，杜陵寝庙便殿中已经废置不用的收藏在内室箱子里的皇帝用物虎纹衣出来，到外堂上自动竖立，很久才萎缩落地。
English: This month, the emperor's tiger-patterned robe, which had been disposed of and not used in the toilet hall of the Du Ling Sleeping Temple and was stored in a box in the inner room, came out and was automatically erected on the outer hall. It took a long time for it to shrink and fall to the ground.

古文：吏卒见者以闻，莽恶之，下书曰： 宝黄厮亦，其令郎从官皆衣绛。
现代文：看见了的官吏和士兵把这件事上报，王莽讨厌这件事，下文告说： 珍视黄色，贱视火红色，应当让郎官、侍从官都穿着大红色的衣服。 
English: The officials and soldiers who saw it reported the matter to the authorities. Wang Mang hated the incident and reported the following: Yellow is prized and fiery red is despised. It is necessary to have the vassals and attendants all wear bright red clothes.

古文：望气为数者多言有士功象，莽又见四方盗贼多，欲视为自安能建万世之基者，乃下书曰： 予受命遭阳九之厄，百六之会，府帑空虚，百姓匮乏，宗庙未修，且袷祭于明堂太庙，夙夜永念，非敢宁息。
现代文：专门观察云气的人很多都说出现了大兴土木的征象，王莽又看到各地盗贼很多，想要显示自已是一个心胸坦荡能够建立子孙万代的基业的人物，便下文告说： 我承受天命以来，遭遇不幸的命运，灾难的周期，国库空虚，百姓贫穷，祖宗祠庙没有修建，权且在明堂太庙举行夹祭，我日日夜夜都在惦念着，不敢淡忘。
English: Many people who specialize in observing the clouds said that there were signs of large-scale construction. Wang Mang also saw a lot of thieves around the country. He wanted to show that he was a person with an open mind who could build a foundation for generations to come, so he announced below: Since I received the fate of heaven, I have suffered an unfortunate fate, a cycle of disasters, the national treasury is empty, the people are poor, the ancestral temple has not been built, and the right to hold a festival in the Myeongdong Grand Temple. I have been thinking about it day and night, and I dare not forget it.

古文：深惟吉昌莫良于今年，予乃卜波水之北，郎池之南，惟玉食。
现代文：深深想到吉祥昌盛没有比今年更好的了，我才选择波水的北边，郎池的南边，是好地址。
English: Deeply thinking that there is no better time for KISSHANG CHANGSHENG than this year, I chose the north side of Boshui and the south side of Langchi, which is a good address.

古文：予又卜金水之南，明堂之西，亦惟玉食。
现代文：我又选择金水的南边，明堂的西边，也是好地址。
English: I also chose the south side of Jinshui and the west side of Myeongdong, which is also a good address.

古文：予将新筑焉。 
现代文：我打算在这里亲自动土奠基。 
English: I plan to lay the foundation stone here myself.

古文：于是遂营长安城南，提封百顷。
现代文：于是就在长安城南进行营建，基地面积总共一百顷。
English: As a result, construction was carried out in the south of Chang'an City, with a total base area of one hundred hectares.

古文：九月甲申，莽立载行视，亲举筑三下。
现代文：九月甲申日，王莽站在车上巡视，亲自举起棒槌筑了三下。
English: On September 6th, Wang Meng stood on the car to inspect, and personally raised the hammer and struck three times.

古文：司徒王寻、大司空王邑持节，及侍中常侍执法杜林等数十人将作。
现代文：大司徒王寻和大司空王邑拿着符节，还有侍中常侍执法杜林等几十人监督指挥建造。
English: Daishi Tutu Wanghong and Daishi Kuo Wangyi carried the runes, and there were dozens of people such as the chamberlain, the regular attendant of law enforcement, Du Lin, who supervised and directed the construction.

古文：崔发、张邯说莽曰： 德盛者文缛，宜崇其制度，宣视海内，且令万世之后无以复加也。 
现代文：崔发和张邯劝说王莽说： 德行崇高的人必然礼仪丰富，应当让这项工程的结构规模显得堂皇富丽，让全国人民都知道，而且要让千秋万代之后都能法超过。 
English: Cui Fa and Zhang Ye persuaded Wang Mang to say: A person with lofty virtue is bound to be rich in etiquette. It is necessary to make the structural scale of this project appear magnificent, so that the people of the whole country know, and to make it possible to exceed the law after thousands of generations.

古文：莽乃博征天下工匠诸图画，以望法度算，乃吏民以义入钱、谷助作者，骆驿道路。
现代文：王莽便广泛征求全国工匠的许多设计图样，运用勾股定理来测量计算，以及官吏和平民由于陈慨好义捐献钱粮来帮助建设的，在大路上络绎不绝。
English: Wang Meng then extensively solicited many design drawings from craftsmen across the country, used the gradient theorem to measure and calculate, and officials and ordinary people donated money and grain to help with the construction, which was endless on the highway.

古文：坏彻城西苑中建章、承光、包阳、犬台、储元宫及平乐、当路、阳禄馆，凡十余所，取其材瓦，以起九庙。
现代文：拆毁长安城西上林苑中的建章宫、承光宫、包阳宫、大台宫、储元宫和平乐馆、当路馆、阳禄馆，共十多所，拿它们的木材砖瓦来修建九所祠庙。
English: They demolished more than ten temples in the West Shanglin Garden of Chang'an City, including Jianzhang Palace, Chengguang Palace, Baoyang Palace, Datai Palace, Zhuyuan Palace, Peace and Music Hall, Danglu Hall, and Yanglu Hall, and used their wood bricks to build nine ancestral temples.

古文：是月，大雨六十余日。
现代文：从这个月起，下了六十多天的大雨。
English: Since this month, there have been more than sixty days of heavy rain.

古文：令民入米六百斛为郎，其郎吏增秩赐爵至附城。
现代文：让平民缴纳米粮六百斛可以作郎官，原来是郎官的可以增加俸禄和赏赐爵位到附城为止。
English: Let the common people pay 600 nanograms of grain to be a steward, and the steward can increase his salary and award him a title up to the castle.

古文：九庙：一曰黄帝太初祖庙，二曰帝虞始祖昭庙，三曰陈胡王统祖穆庙，四曰齐敬王世祖昭庙，五曰济北愍王王祖穆庙，凡五庙不堕云；六曰济南伯王尊祢昭庙，七曰元城孺王尊称穆庙，八曰阳平顷王戚祢昭庙，九曰新都显王戚祢穆庙。
现代文：九所祠庙是：第一是黄帝太初祖庙，第二是虞帝始祖昭庙，第三是陈胡王统祖穆庙，第四是齐敬王世祖昭庙，第五是济北愍王王祖穆庙，共五所祖庙永远不准废除；第六是济南伯王尊弥昭庙，第七是元城孺王尊弥穆庙，第八是阳平顷王戚榈昭庙，第九是新都显王戚弥穆庙。
English: The nine ancestral temples are: the first is the ancestral temple of the Yellow Emperor, the second is the ancestral temple of the Emperor Yu, the third is the ancestral temple of Chen Hu, the fourth is the ancestral temple of Qi Jing Wang, the fifth is the ancestral temple of the King of Jibei, and a total of five ancestral temples are never allowed to be abolished; the sixth is the ancestral temple of the King of Jinan, the seventh is the ancestral temple of the King of Yuancheng, the eighth is the ancestral temple of the King of Yangping, and the ninth is the ancestral temple of the King of Xian.

古文：殿皆重屋。
现代文：殿堂都是层叠的房屋。
English: The halls of fame are all cascading houses.

古文：太初祖庙东西南北各四十丈，高十七丈，余庙半之。
现代文：太初祖庙东西南北四方各长四十丈，高十七丈，其余的祠庙相当于它的一半。
English: The east, west, north and south sides of the original ancestral temple are each 40 meters long and 17 meters high, and the rest of the ancestral temple is equivalent to half of it.

古文：为铜薄栌，饰以金银雕文，穷极百工之巧。
现代文：用铜皮包里斗拱，用镶金镶银的花纹作为装饰，用尽了各种工艺美术的技巧。
English: With the copper leather bag inside the arch, with the gold-inlaid silver pattern as a decoration, exhausted all kinds of arts and crafts skills.

古文：带高增下，功费数百巨万，卒徒死者万数。
现代文：把高地作为基础，把旁边低下的地方增筑起来，工程费用无法计算，累死的奴隶和民夫上万人。
English: Taking the highlands as the foundation and building up the lowlands next to it, the cost of the project is incalculable, involving tens of thousands of dead slaves and peasants.

古文：巨鹿男子马適求等谋举燕、赵兵以诛莽，大司空士王丹发觉以闻。
现代文：巨鹿郡男子马适求等人谋划发动燕地、趟地的军队来讨伐王莽，大司空的办事人员王丹发觉了，把它上报。
English: A man from Guolu County, Ma Shicu, and others planned to launch troops from Yanchi and Wudu to fight Wang Meng. Wang Dan, a clerk of Taishi Kuchu, discovered this and reported it.

古文：莽遣三公大夫逮治党与，连及郡国豪杰数千人，皆诛死。
现代文：王莽派遣三公大夫去逮捕追究他们的党羽，牵连到各郡国权威人士几千人，都被处死。
English: Wang Mang dispatched the Three Grand Doctors to arrest and investigate their followers, implicating thousands of authorities in various counties and countries, all of whom were executed.

古文：封丹为辅国侯。
现代文：赐封王丹为辅国侯。
English: Wang Dan was given the title of Auxiliary Governor.

古文：自莽为不顺时令，百姓怨恨，莽犹安之，又下书曰： 惟设此一切之法以来，常安六乡巨邑之都，枹鼓稀鸣，盗贼衰少，百姓安土，岁以有年，此乃立权之力也。
现代文：自从王莽措施不合时令，百姓怨恨，王莽仍安于这种状况，又下文告说： 想到制定这样的权宜法令以来，长安是六乡大县的中心城市，报警的鼓声响得稀少了，盗贼减弱、减少了，百姓安居乡土，年成因此获得了丰收，这就是采取权宜措施的功效。
English: Since Wang Mang's measures were out of step with the times and the people resented it, Wang Mang remained satisfied with this situation, and reported below: Since the idea of formulating such an expedient decree, Chang'an has been the central city of the six townships and counties, the sound of the alarm drum has become rare, the thieves have weakened and decreased, the people live in peace in the countryside, and the year-end harvest has been achieved. This is the effect of taking expedient measures.

古文：今胡虏未灭诛，蛮僰未绝焚，江湖海泽麻沸，盗贼未尽破殄，又兴奉宗庙社稷之大作，民众动摇。
现代文：现在匈奴没有灭亡，西南夷没有灭绝，四方各地像一团乱麻，盗贼没有完全消灭，又在兴办恭敬祖宗和神祇的大建设，民众动摇。
English: Now the Xiongnu have not perished, the Southwest Yi have not been exterminated, all over the country there is chaos, the thieves have not been completely eliminated, and a large-scale construction to respect ancestors and gods is under way. The people are shaken.

古文：今夏一切行此令，尽二年止之，以全元元，救愚奸。 
现代文：现在还有必要实行这项法令，到二年底终止它，用来保全善良的老百姓，挽救愚蠢邪恶的人。 
English: It is still necessary to implement this decree and terminate it by the end of the second year to protect the good people and save the stupid and evil people.

古文：是岁，罢大小钱，更行货布，长二寸五分，广一寸，真货钱二十五。
现代文：这一年，废止大钱和小钱，改用货布，货布长二寸五分，宽一寸，值货钱二十五枚。
English: In the same year, large and small coins were abolished, and goods cloth was used instead. The goods cloth was two inches and five minutes long, one inch wide, and had a value of twenty-five goods coins.

古文：货钱径一寸，重五铢，枚直一。
现代文：货钱直径长一寸，重五铢，每枚是一个单位。
English: The money is one inch in diameter and weighs five shekels. Each piece is a unit.

古文：两品并行。
现代文：两种货币同时流通。
English: Both currencies circulate at the same time.

古文：敢盗铸钱及偏行布货，伍人知不发举，皆没入为官奴婢。
现代文：敢有私自铸钱和衹用布货的，邻居知情不揭发检举的，都没收作官府的奴婢。
English: Those who dared to mint money and use cloth and goods without permission, and those whose neighbors knew about it but did not report it, were all confiscated as slaves of the government.

古文：太傅平晏死，以予虞唐尊为太傅。
现代文：太傅平晏死了，任命予虞唐尊作太傅。
English: Taifu Pingyao died, and Yu Tangjun was appointed as Taifu.

古文：尊曰： 国虚民贫，咎在奢泰。 
现代文：唐尊说： 国库空虚，人民贫困，灾祸的根源在于奢侈过度。 
English: Tang Zun said: The national treasury is empty, the people are poor, and the root of the disaster lies in excessive luxury.

古文：乃身短衣小袖，乘牝马柴车，藉槁，瓦器，又以历遗公卿。
现代文：于是身穿小袖短衣，乘坐母马驾的简陋的车子，睡坐时用干草作衬垫，用瓦器作具，又用瓦器盛着食物赠送公卿大官。
English: As a result, he wore short-sleeved jackets, rode in a humble carriage driven by a mare, used hay as a cushion when he slept, used earthenware as utensils, and used earthenware to hold food to present to nobles and dignitaries.

古文：出见男女不异路者，尊自下车，以象刑赭幡污染其衣。
现代文：外出时看到不分开走路的男女，唐尊自己下车，采用象征性的刑罚，拿红色抹布弄脏他们的衣服。
English: When he saw men and women walking together, he would get out of the car and, as a symbolic punishment, smear their clothes with a red rag.

古文：莽闻而说之，下诏申敕公卿思与厥齐。
现代文：王莽听到了，赞赏他的作法，下诏书明白告诫公卿大臣考虑向他看齐。
English: Wang Mang heard this, appreciated his approach, and in the next imperial edict explicitly admonished the nobles and ministers to consider following his example.

古文：封尊为平化侯。
现代文：赐封唐尊为平化侯。
English: Tang Zun was given the title of Pinghua Hou.

古文：是时，南郡张霸、江夏羊牧、王匡等起云杜绿林，号曰：下江兵 ，众皆万余人。
现代文：这时候，南郡人张霸和江夏郡人羊牧、王匡等在云杜县绿林山起事，号称下江兵，部队都有一万多人。
English: At this time, Zhang Ba from Nan County and Yang Mu and Wang Kuang from Jiangxia County rose up in Gulingshan, Yundu County. They were known as the Lower River Troops, with more than 10,000 troops.

古文：武功中水乡民三舍垫为池。
现代文：武功县中水乡居民三家房屋陷下去成为了池沼。
English: Three houses of residents of Zhongshui Township, Wugong County, sank and became a pond.

古文：二年正月，以州牧位三公，刺举怠解，更置牧监副，秩元士，冠法冠，行事如汉刺史。
现代文：二年正月，把州牧提高到三公的地位，调查揭发松松垮垮的官吏，另外设置州牧、部监的副职，俸禄是元士级，戴着法冠，像汉朝的刺史一 样执行任务。
English: In the first month of the second year, the state pastors were raised to the status of the three princes, and the officials who had been slacking were investigated and exposed. In addition, the deputy positions of the state pastors and supervisors were set up. The salary was at the level of the former soldiers, and they wore the legal crown and carried out their tasks like the scribes of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是月，莽候妻死，谥曰： 孝睦皇后 ，莽渭陵长寿园西，令永侍文母，名陵曰 亿年 。
现代文：这个月，王莽的妻子死了，赐给谧号叫孝睦皇后，安葬在渭陵长寿园西边，让她永远侍奉文母，给她的墓地起名叫亿年。
English: This month, Wang Mang's wife passed away. She was given the posthumous title of Empress Xiaomu and was buried in the west side of Fuling Longevity Garden. She was allowed to serve as the mother of literature forever, and her grave was named Billion Years.

古文：初莽妻以莽数杀其子，涕泣失明，莽令太子临居中养焉。
现代文：当初王莽的妻子由于王莽几次杀死了她的儿子，哭瞎了眼睛，王莽让太子王临住在宫中照顾她。
English: At first, Wang Mang's wife cried her eyes out because Wang Mang had killed her son several times. Wang Mang asked Prince Wang to stay in the palace to take care of her.

古文：莽妻旁侍者原碧，莽幸之。
现代文：王莽妻子身边的侍者原碧，王莽奸淫了她。
English: The waiter around Wang Mang's wife, Yuan Bi, was raped by Wang Mang.

古文：后临亦通焉，恐事泄，谋共杀莽。
现代文：后来王临也跟她通奸，恐怕事情泄露，两个人计划一同杀死王莽。
English: Later, Wang Lin also committed adultery with her, fearing that the affair would leak out, and the two planned to kill Wang Mang together.

古文：临妻愔，国师公女，能为星，语临宫中且有白衣会。
现代文：王临的妻子刘情，是国师公的女儿，会观察星象，告诉王临宫中将会有白衣会。
English: Wang Lin's wife Liu Rong, the daughter of the Grand Master, would watch the stars and tell Wang Lin that there would be a white-robed party in the palace.

古文：临喜，以为所谋且成。
现代文：王临高兴了，以为自己所计划的事将会成功。
English: Wang Lin was happy, thinking that what he had planned would be successful.

古文：后贬为统义阳正，出在外第，愈忧恐。
现代文：后来被贬降作统义阳王，被打发到外面的宅子里居住，更加忧虑恐惧。
English: Later, he was demoted to the position of the King of Yiyang and sent to live outside in a mansion, which made him even more anxious and fearful.

古文：会莽妻病困，临予书曰： 上于子孙至严，前长孙、中孙年俱三十而死。
现代文：当王莽的妻子病得厉害的时候，王临给她一封信说： 皇上对于子孙极为严厉，以前长孙和仲孙都是三十岁的年纪就死了。
English: When Wang Mang's wife fell seriously ill, Wang Lin sent her a letter saying: "The emperor is very strict with his grandchildren. In the past, the eldest grandson and the middle grandson both died at the age of thirty.

古文：今臣临复适三十，诚恐一旦不保中室，则不知死命所在！ 
现代文：现在我王临又刚好三十岁，衹恐怕一旦皇后有什么不幸，我就不知道会死在哪里！ 
English: Now I am just thirty years old, and I am afraid that if there is any misfortune to the queen, I do not know where I will die!

古文：莽妻疾，见其书，大怒，疑临有恶意，不令得会丧。
现代文：王莽来探望妻子的病情，看见了那封信，大发怒火，怀疑王临有恶意，不让他参加丧礼。
English: Wang Mang, who came to visit his wife's illness, saw the letter and flew into a rage, suspecting Wang Lin of malice for not letting him attend the funeral.

古文：既莽，收原碧等考问，具服奸、谋杀状。
现代文：已经安葬了，逮捕原碧等人审问，完全承认了通奸、谋杀等情况。
English: They have been buried, arrested and interrogated, and have fully confessed to adultery, murder and other crimes.

古文：莽欲秘之，使杀案事使者司命从事，埋狱中，家不知所在。
现代文：王莽想要掩盖造件事，派人杀死办案人员司命从事，把他们埋在监狱里，家里不知道他们到哪里去了。
English: Wang Mang wanted to cover up the fabrication of the case. He sent someone to kill the investigators and bury them in the prison. The family did not know where they had gone.

古文：赐临药，临不肯饮，自刺死。
现代文：赐给王临毒药，王临不肯喝，自杀而死。
English: He gave Wang Lin poison, but Wang Lin refused to drink it and committed suicide.

古文：使侍中票骑将军同说侯林赐魂衣玺韨，策书曰： 符命文立临为统义阳王，此言新室即位三万六千岁后，为临之后者乃当龙阳而起。
现代文：命侍中骠骑将军同说侯王林赐给鬼衣和印信，下策书说： 符命文辞说要立王临作统义阳王，这是说新朝开国三万六千年之后，作为王临的后代的人才会像潜龙飞腾一样兴起。
English: The general in charge of the order said that the lord Wang Lin gave the ghost clothes and the seal, and the next strategy book said: The words of the order said to establish Wang Lin as the king of Yiyang, which means that after 36,000 years since the founding of the new dynasty, people who are descendants of Wang Lin will rise like flying dragons.

古文：前过听议者，以临为太子，有烈风之变，辄顺符命，立为统义阳正。
现代文：我以前错误地听从舆论的意见，把王临作为太子，后来发生了暴风的灾异，就顺从符命，立他作统义阳王。
English: In the past, I mistakenly followed the opinion of public opinion and made Wang Lin the crown prince. Later, when the storm disaster occurred, I obeyed the will of Fu and made him the ruler of Yiyang.

古文：在此之前，自此之后，不作信顺，弗蒙厥佑，夭年陨命，呜呼哀哉！
现代文：在此以前，从此以后，他不表示服从，以致不能享受自己的福气，年纪轻轻短命而死，可悲啊！
English: Before and since, he did not obey, so that he could not enjoy his good fortune, and died young and short-lived, alas!

古文：迹行赐谥，谥曰： 缪王 。 
现代文：考查所作所为赐予谧号，赐给他谧号叫缪王。 
English: He was given the nickname "Miu Wang" after an investigation into his actions.

古文：又诏国师公： 临本不知星，事从愔起。 
现代文：又命令国师公说： 王临本来不懂得星象，事情是从刘情开始的。 
English: He also ordered Guo Shiguang to say: Wang Lin did not know the constellations originally, the matter began with Liu Xi.

古文：愔忆自杀。
现代文：刘惰也自杀了。
English: Liu Lian also committed suicide.

古文：是月，新迁王安病死。
现代文：这个月，新迁王王安病死了。
English: This month, the newly relocated Wang Wangan died of illness.

古文：初，葬为侯就国实，幸侍者增秩、怀能、开明。
现代文：当初，王莽为列侯去封国的时候，宠爱侍者增秩、怀能和开明。
English: In the beginning, when Wang Mang was a vassal of a feudal lord, he favored his attendants to increase their rank, energy, and enlightenment.

古文：怀能生男兴，增秩生男匡、女晔，开明生女捷，皆留新都国，以其不明故也。
现代文：怀能生下了儿子王兴，增秩生下了儿子王匡和女儿王晕，开明生下了女儿王捷，都留在新都国，因为他们的身份不明的缘故。
English: Huaineng gave birth to her son Wang Xing, Zeng Ritchi gave birth to her son Wang Kuang and daughter Wang Huan, and Kaiming gave birth to her daughter Wang Jie, all of whom remained in Xindu Province because their identities were unknown.

古文：及安疾甚，莽自病无子，为安作奏，使上言： 兴等母虽微贱，属犹皇子，不可以弃。 
现代文：等到王安病得厉害了，王莽自己担心没有儿子，替王安写了一道奏章，让他上奏道： 王兴等人的母亲虽然出身微贱，亲属关系仍然是皇子，不可以抛弃。 
English: When Wang An fell seriously ill, Wang Mang himself was worried that he would not have a son, so he wrote a piece of music for Wang An and asked him to play: Although the mother of Wang Xing and others was from a lowly background, the family relationship was still that of a prince, and could not be abandoned.

古文：章视群公，皆曰： 安友于兄弟，宜及春夏加封爵。 
现代文：王莽把奏章交给各大臣传阅，都说： 王安友爱兄弟，应当趁着春夏两季加给封爵。 
English: Wang Mang gave the report to all the ministers to read, and they all said: Wang Anyou loves brothers, he should take advantage of the spring and summer to be knighted.

古文：于是以王车遣使者迎兴等，封兴为功脩任，匡为功建公，晔为睦脩任，捷为睦逮任。
现代文：于是派遣使者用王车前去迎接王兴等人，赐封王兴为功脩公，王匡为功建公，王晕为睦脩任，王捷为睦逮任。
English: Therefore, an envoy was sent to meet Wang Xing and others with a royal carriage, and Wang Xing was awarded the title of the Prince of Merit, Wang Kuang was awarded the title of the Prince of Merit, Wang Huan was awarded the title of the Prince of Peace, and Wang Jie was awarded the title of the Prince of Peace.

古文：孙公明公寿病死，旬月四丧焉。
现代文：王莽的孙子公明公王寿病死了，一个月里死了四个人。
English: Wang Mang's grandson, Prince Gongming Wang Shouling, died of illness. Four people died in one month.

古文：莽坏汉孝武、孝昭庙，分葬子孙其中。
现代文：王莽毁坏汉武帝和汉昭帝的祠庙，把子孙分别埋葬在里面。
English: Wang Mang destroyed the ancestral temple of Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Han Zhao, and buried his children and grandchildren separately inside.

古文：魏成大尹李焉与卜者王况谋，况谓焉曰： 新室即位以来，民田奴婢不得卖买，数改钱货，征发烦数，军旅骚动，四夷并侵，百姓怨恨，盗贼并起，汉家当复兴。
现代文：魏成郡大尹李焉跟占卦者王况商量，王况对李焉说： 新朝开国以来，田地和奴婢不准买卖，几次改变货币，频繁地征调民间的人力和物资，军队骚扰，四方外族纷纷入侵，百姓怨恨，盗贼纷纷起事，汉朝会复兴。
English: Wei Cheng County Grand Yin Li Yan discussed with the fortune-teller Wang Cang, Wang Cang said to Li Yan: Since the founding of the new dynasty, the fields and slaves were not allowed to be traded, the currency was changed several times, the people's manpower and materials were frequently conscripted, the army harassed, the four foreign ethnic groups invaded one after another, the people resented, the thieves rose up one after another, and the Han Dynasty would be revived.

古文：君姓李，李者徵，徵，火也，当为汉辅。 
现代文：您姓李，李和征读音相近，征声属火，应当成为汉朝的辅佐。 
English: Your surname is Li, Li and征讀 sound similar,征声 is fire, you should become an assistant of the Han Dynasty.

古文：因为焉作谶书言： 文帝发忿，居地下趣军，北告匈奴，南告越人。
现代文：于是替李焉写作谶书，说道： 文帝发怒了，在阴间督促军队，北方通告匈奴，南方通告越人。
English: So he wrote an imperial edict for Li Yan, saying: Emperor Wen got angry and urged the army in the underworld, the north to inform the Xiongnu, and the south to inform the Viets.

古文：江中刘信，执敌报怨，复续古先，四年当发军。
现代文：江中的刘信，结成仇敌，报复冤仇，要恢复和继承祖宗的事业，四年会要出兵。
English: Liu Xin, the middle of the river, formed an enemy, retaliated against the wrongdoers, and wanted to restore and inherit the cause of the ancestors. The four-year association wanted to send troops.

古文：江湖有盗，自称樊王，姓为刘氏，万人成行，不受赦令，欲动秦、雒阳。
现代文：江湖上有大盗，自称为樊王，姓刘，千万人成群结队，不接受赦免的命令，要动摇长安和洛阳。
English: There is a great robber in Jianghu, who calls himself the King of Qi, surnamed Liu. Tens of millions of people are flocking together, refusing to accept the order of amnesty, and want to shake Chang'an and Luoyang.

古文：十一年当相攻，太白杨光，岁星入东井，其号当行。 
现代文：十一年会要进攻，太白星发出光辉，岁星进入东井宿，他的号令应当推行。 
English: The 11th year will attack, the white star will shine brightly, and the year star will enter Dongjing, and his command should be carried out.

古文：又言莽大臣吉凶，各有日期。
现代文：又说明王莽的大臣们的吉凶祸害，各有日期。
English: It also shows that the auspicious, inauspicious and calamitous deeds of Wang Mang's ministers have their own dates.

古文：会合十余万言。
现代文：汇编成为十多万字。
English: Compiled into more than one hundred thousand words.

古文：焉令吏写其书，吏亡告之。
现代文：李焉让属员抄写那本书，属员逃走告发了他。
English: Li Yan had a subordinate copy the book, but the subordinate ran away and reported him.

古文：莽遣使者即捕焉，狱治皆死。
现代文：王莽派遣使者就地逮捕李焉，交付司法官吏进行审判，都被处死。
English: Wang Mang dispatched an envoy to arrest Li Yan on the spot and handed him over to judicial officials for trial. They were all put to death.

古文：三辅盗贼麻起，乃置捕盗都尉官，令执法谒者追击长安中，建鸣鼓攻贼幡，而使者随其后。
现代文：三辅区盗贼纷纷起事，便设置捕盗都尉的官职，让执法谒者在长安城郊追击盗贼，建立鸣鼓攻贼的警报旗帜，使者跟随在他们的后面进行监督。
English: The thieves in Sanfu District rose up one after another, so they set up the official position of the thief-catching captain, let the law enforcers pursue the thieves on the outskirts of Chang'an City, set up the alarm flag for beating the drum to attack the thieves, and the messenger followed behind them to supervise.

古文：遣太师牺仲景尚、更始将军护军王党将兵击青、徐，国师和仲曹放助郭兴击句町。
现代文：派遣太师牺仲景尚和更始将军护军王党率领军队攻打青州和徐州，国师和仲曹放协助郭兴攻打句町。
English: He dispatched the Grand Master Zhongjing Shang and the Prime Minister General Gu Junwang to lead the army to attack Qingzhou and Xuzhou, and the National Division and Zhong Cao Fang assisted Guo Xing to attack Dahu Town.

古文：转天下谷、币诣西河、五原、朔方、渔阳，每一郡以百万数，欲以击匈奴。
现代文：转运全国的钱粮前往西河郡、五原郡、朔方郡和渔阳郡，每一郡以百万计，想要用以攻打匈奴。
English: The money and grain from all over the country were transported to the counties of Xihe, Wuhuan, Shuofang and Yuyang, with millions in each county, to be used to fight the Xiongnu.

古文：秋，陨霜杀菽，关东大饥，蝗。
现代文：秋季里，降霜，冻死了豆类，关东地区饥荒严重，发生了蝗灾。
English: In autumn, when the frosts fell, the beans froze to death, and the famine in the Kanto region was severe, and a locust plague occurred.

古文：民犯铸钱，伍人相坐，没入为官奴婢。
现代文：平民违犯铸钱的禁令，邻居连坐，被没收作官府的奴婢。
English: Civilians violate the ban on minting money, neighbors sit together, and are confiscated as slaves of the government.

古文：其男子槛车，儿女子步，以铁锁琅当其颈，传诣钟官，以十万数。
现代文：其中男子坐囚车，儿童和妇女步行，用铁锁链束缚他们的脖子，辗转前往铸钱的官府，以十万计。
English: Among them, men in prison wagons, children and women on foot, chained with iron chains around their necks, were taken to the government office that minted money, to the tune of one hundred thousand.

古文：到者易其夫妇，愁苦死者什六七。
现代文：到达后改变他们的夫妻关系，愁苦而死的十个中有六七个。
English: Six or seven out of ten of those who changed their relationship after arrival died in misery.

古文：孙喜、景尚、曹放等击贼不能克，军师放纵，百姓重困。
现代文：士孙喜、景尚和曹放等人攻打盗贼没有取胜，军队胡作非为，百姓更加困苦。
English: Judges Sunxi, Jing Shang and Cao Fang and others did not win the battle against the thieves, the army did bad things, and the people suffered even more.

古文：莽以王况谶言刑楚当兴，李氏为辅，欲厌之。乃拜侍中掌牧大夫李棽为大将军、扬州牧，赐名圣，使将兵奋击。
现代文：王莽因为王况的谶书说荆、楚地区会兴起，李姓成为辅佐，想要厌胜它，于是授任侍中掌牧大夫李琴作大将军、扬州牧，赐名叫李圣，让他统率军队奋勇进击。
English: Wang Mang, because Wang Quan's imperial edict said that the Jing and Chu regions would rise to the top, and Li surnamed became an assistant, wanted to defeat it, so he appointed Li Qin as the general and Yangzhou Mu, named Li Sheng, and let him lead the army to attack bravely.

古文：上谷储夏自请愿说瓜田仪，莽以为中郎，使出仪。
现代文：上谷郡人储夏自动请求愿意去劝说瓜田仪投降，王莽任命他作中郎，让他去叫瓜田仪出来投降。
English: Shanggu County resident Shu Xia spontaneously asked if he would be willing to persuade Guadai to surrender. Wang Mang appointed him as a middle man and asked him to call Guadai to come out and surrender.

古文：仪文降，未出而死。
现代文：瓜田仪上文书表示投降，还没有出来就死了。
English: Guatao ceremoniously signed a document to surrender, but died before he could leave.

古文：莽求其尸葬之，为起冢、词室，谥曰 瓜宁殇男 ，几以招来其余，然无肯降者。
现代文：王莽要来他的尸体安葬了他，给他修起高大的坟墓和祠庙，赐给谧号叫瓜宁殇男，希望用这样的办法招徕其余的人，可是没有肯投降的。
English: Wang Mang wanted to come and bury him in his corpse, build a tall tomb and temple for him, and give him the nickname Guan Ning, hoping to use this method to lure the rest of the people, but he did not want to surrender.

古文：闰月丙辰，大赦天下，天下大服、民私服在诏书前亦释除。
现代文：闰月丙辰日，宣布全国大赦，全民的国丧和在韶书下达前的民间私人丧服也都解除。
English: On the fourth day of the leap month, a national amnesty was announced, and the national mourning of the whole people and the private mourning clothes of the people before the issuance of the imperial edict were also lifted.

古文：郎阳成脩献符命，言继立民母，又曰： 黄帝以百二十女致神仙。 
现代文：郎官阳成脩进献符命，说应当再立皇后，又说： 黄帝靠着一百二十个女子成了神仙。 
English: His retainer, Yang Chengyu, offered his life as a sacrifice, saying that the empress should be reinstated, and added: "The Yellow Emperor became a god by relying on one hundred and twenty women."

古文：葬于是遣中散大夫、谒者各四十五人分行天下，博采乡里所高有淑女者上名。
现代文：王莽于是派遣中散大夫和谒者各四十五人分道巡视全国，广泛选取有被邻里推崇的美好女子送上名册来。
English: Wang Mang then dispatched forty-five people each from Zhongshan doctors and magicians to travel around the country, extensively selecting beautiful women who were respected by the neighborhood to send the roster.

古文：莽梦长乐宫铜人五枚起立，莽恶之，念铜人铭有 皇帝初兼天下 之文，即使尚方工镌灭所梦铜人膺文。
现代文：王莽梦见长乐宫铜人有五个起立，他厌恶遣件事，想到铜人上刻着 皇帝刚刚统一全国 的字样，就派尚方工人凿掉所梦见的铜人胸前的文字。
English: Wang Meng dreamt that there were five bronze figures standing up in the Changle Palace. He hated sending things. Thinking that the bronze figures were engraved with the words "The emperor has just unified the whole country," he sent Shangfang workers to chisel away the words on the chests of the dreamed bronze figures.

古文：又感汉高庙神灵，遣虎贲武士入高庙，拔剑四面提击，斧坏户牖，桃汤赭鞭鞭洒屋壁，令轻车校尉居其中，又令中军北垒居高寝。
现代文：又感应汉高帝庙的神灵，派遣虎贲武士进入汉高帝庙，抽出剑来四面掷击，用斧子砍坏门窗，用桃木汤挥洒墙壁，用土红色鞭子抽打墙壁，让轻车校尉住在那里，又让中军北垒校尉住在汉高帝的寝庙里。
English: He also sensed the gods of the Hangoo Temple, sent the Tiger Warriors to enter the Hangoo Temple, drew swords to throw them on all sides, cut the doors and windows with an axe, sprinkled the walls with peach soup, and whipped the walls with a red whip, and let the light car captain live there, and let the Chinese military base captain live in the sleeping temple of Hangoo.

古文：或言黄帝时建华盖以登仙，莽乃造华盖九重，高八丈一尸，金瑵羽葆，载以秘机四轮车，驾六马，力士三百人黄衣帻，车上人击鼓，挽者皆呼 登仙 。
现代文：有人说黄帝由于建造了华丽的车盖而成为神仙，王莽便制造九层的华丽车盖，高八丈一尺，用黄金装饰车盖的骨架，用羽毛装饰车盖，用内部装置机械的四轮大车装载，套着六匹马，由里着黄头巾、穿着黄衣服的力士三百人护卫，车上的人敲着鼓，拉车的人都呼喊 登仙 的口号。
English: Some people say that the Yellow Emperor became a god because he built a magnificent car cover. Wang Mang then made a nine-storey magnificent car cover, one foot high, decorated the skeleton of the car cover with gold, decorated the car cover with feathers, loaded it with a mechanical four-wheeled cart, put six horses, escorted by three hundred guards wearing yellow bandanas and wrestlers wearing yellow clothes. The people on the car were beating drums, and the people pulling the car were shouting slogans of "ascending to heaven."

古文：莽出，令在前。
现代文：王莽外出时，让它在前头。
English: When Wang Mang goes out, let it sing in front of him.

古文：成官窃言： 此似软车，非仙物也。 
现代文：官吏们私下襄说： 这像灵柩车，不是神仙的用物。 
English: Officials said privately: "It's like a hearse, it's not for the gods."

古文：是岁，南郡秦丰众且万人。
现代文：这一年，南郡人秦丰的部队将近一万人。
English: In that year, the troops of Qin Feng, a native of Nan County, numbered nearly ten thousand.

古文：平原女子迟昭平能说博经以八投，亦聚数千人在河阻中。
现代文：平原郡女子迟昭平能够解说博奕经，用八枚博具投掷取胜，也在黄河的险要地区聚集了几千人。
English: Chi Zhaoping, a woman from Pingyuan County, was able to explain the Book of Fortune, win with eight pieces of the Book of Fortune, and gather several thousand people in the critical area of the Yellow River.

古文：莽召问群臣禽贼方略，皆曰： 此天囚行尸，命在漏刻。 
现代文：王莽召集大臣们询问捉拿盗贼的计划方案，都说： 这些触犯了天条的罪犯，行走的死尸，活不多久了。 
English: Wang Mang gathered the ministers to inquire about the plan to catch the thieves, and they all said: These criminals who have violated the Tenjo, the walking dead, do not have long to live.

古文：故左将军公孙禄征来与议，禄曰： 太史令宗宣典星历，候气变。以凶为吉，乱天文，误朝廷。
现代文：原左将军公孙禄应召来参加会议，他说： 太史令宗宣掌管天文历法，推测气运的转移变化，把凶险的征象当作吉利的征象，淆乱天文，贻误朝廷。
English: Gongsun Lu, a former left-wing general, was summoned to attend the meeting. He said: Taishi ordered Zongxuan to take charge of the astronomical calendar, speculate on the transfer and change of fortune, take the ominous signs as auspicious signs, confuse the chaotic astronomy, and mislead the court.

古文：太傅平化侯饰虚伪以偷名位， 贼夫人之子 。国师嘉信公颠倒《五经》，毁师法，令学士疑惑。
现代文：太傅平化侯用虚伪的言行掩饰自己来窃取名誉地位， 害了人家的子弟，国师嘉信公颠倒《五经》，毁坏了师法，造成学术界的思想混乱。
English: Tai Fu Pinghua Hou used hypocritical words and deeds to disguise himself to steal the honorable position, harmed others' children, the national teacher Jia Xin Gong reversed the "Five Classics," destroyed the teaching method, and caused ideological confusion in the academic community.

古文：明学男张邯、地理侯孙阳造井田，使民弃土业。
现代文：明学男张邯和地理侯孙阳搞井田制。使得民众丧失土地产业。
English: Zhang Xuan, a scholar of the Ming Dynasty, and Sun Yang, a geographer, introduced the rice field system, causing the people to lose the land industry.

古文：牺和鲁匡设六管，以穷工商。
现代文：牺和鲁匡设立六项管理制度，弄得工商业者走投无路。
English: Sacrifice and Lu Kuang set up six management systems, making industry and commerce desperate.

古文：说符侯崔发阿谀取容，令下情不上通。
现代文：说符侯崔发吹牛拍马来讨好，使得下情不能上达。
English: It is said that Fuhou Cui bragged and flattered to curry favor, which made it impossible to make a good impression.

古文：宜诛此数子以慰天下！ 
现代文：应当处死这几个人来安慰全国人！ 
English: These few should be put to death to console the whole nation!

古文：又言： 匈奴不可攻，当与和亲。
现代文：又说： 匈奴不可以去攻打，应当跟它和好。
English: He also said: The Huns must not attack the country, but should be reconciled with it.

古文：臣恐新室忧不在匈奴，而在封域之中也。 
现代文：我恐怕新朝的忧患不在匈奴，而在国家内部。 
English: I'm afraid the new dynasty's woes lie not with the Huns, but within the country.

古文：莽怒，使虎贲扶禄出。
现代文：王莽发火了，让虎贲武士搀扶公孙禄走了。
English: Wang Mang was furious and let Sun Lu go.

古文：然颇采其言，左迁鲁匡为五原卒正，以百姓怨非故。
现代文：然而稍微采纳了他的某些意见，把鲁匡降职去作五原郡卒正，因为老百姓怨恨抨击的缘故。
English: However, he slightly adopted some of his opinions and demoted Lu Kuang to the post of Wuhara County deputy chief, because the people resented the criticism.

古文：六管非匡所独造，莽厌众意而出之。
现代文：六管制度并不是鲁匡一个人搞起来的，王莽为了满足大家愿望就把他抛弃了。
English: The six-tier system was not set up by Lu Kuang alone. Wang Mang abandoned him in order to satisfy everyone's wishes.

古文：初，四方皆以饥寒穷愁起为盗贼，稍稍群聚，常思岁熟得归乡里。
现代文：起初，各地人民都由于饥寒贫苦才艇而走险去作盗贼，逐渐聚集成为群体，时常盼望着年成丰收了能够返回家园。
English: At first, due to hunger, cold and poverty, people from all over the country risked their lives to become thieves. Gradually, they gathered into groups, often looking forward to returning home after a good harvest.

古文：众虽万数，亶称臣人、从事、三老、祭酒，不敢略有城邑，转掠求食，日阕而已。
现代文：部队虽然以万计，为首的衹称巨人、从事、三老、祭酒，不敢攻占城市，到处抢劫糊口，每天吃完就算了。
English: Although the troops with tens of thousands of troops, led by the so-called "giants," "engaged," "three old men" and "sacrificial wine," did not dare to capture the city, they robbed their livelihoods everywhere, and did not care if they finished eating every day.

古文：诸长吏牧守皆自乱斗中兵而死，贼非敢欲杀之也，而莽终不谕其故。
现代文：各县长官和州牧、郡太守都是自己乱碰乱撞被杀伤而死的，盗贼并不是存心想要杀死他们，可是王莽一直不懂得这个道理。
English: Every county magistrate, prefectural governor, and county magistrate died from injuries caused by their own careless actions. The thieves did not intend to kill them, but Wang Mang did not understand this.

古文：是岁，大司马士按章豫州，为贼所获，贼送付县。
现代文：这一年，有个大司马士到豫州办案，被盗贼俘虏了，盗贼把他送交县里。
English: This year, there was a chief magistrate Ma Shi who went to Yuzhou to investigate a case. He was captured by thieves, and the thieves sent him to the county.

古文：士还，上书具言状。
现代文：这个人回来，上报告备文捆说情况。
English: This person came back and reported the situation in writing.

古文：莽大怒，下狱以为诬罔。
现代文：王莽大发怒火，认为这是诬蠛欺骗，把他送进了监狱。
English: Wang Meng flew into a rage, thought it was a false accusation and sent him to prison.

古文：因下书责七公曰： 夫吏者，理也。
现代文：于是下文告责备四辅三公道： 吏的意思就是管理、治理人民。
English: Therefore, the following is a reproach to the four auxiliary and three public roads: Li means management and governance of the people.

古文：宣德明恩，以牧养民，仁之道也。
现代文：宣扬德政，彰明恩泽，去管教抚育人民，这是善良政治的原则。
English: It is the principle of good politics to propagate the virtue of politics, to highlight the benevolence, and to discipline and educate the people.

古文：抑强督奸，捕诛盗贼，义之节也。
现代文：压制强梁，督察奸邪，逮捕处死盗贼，这是正义行为的标准。
English: Suppressing tyrants, inspecting evil-doers, and arresting and executing thieves are the standards of righteous conduct.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：现在就不是这个样子。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：盗发不辄得，至成群党，遮略乘传宰士。
现代文：盗贼发生了，不能够逮捕法办，直到结成群体，拦劫乘坐传车的朝廷官吏。
English: A theft occurred, and the law office was unable to make an arrest until they formed a group and intercepted the imperial officials who were riding in the courier.

古文：士得脱者，又妄自言：我责数贼： 何故为是？ 贼曰： 以贫穷故耳。 
现代文：官脱了身的，又妄白说 我列举罪状谴责盗贼 为什么干这种事 ，盗贼说 就因为贫穷的缘故罢了 。
English: When the magistrate was relieved of his duties, he said in vain, "I have listed the charges and condemned the thief." Why did he do such a thing, the thief said, "It's just because of poverty."

古文：贼护出我。今俗人议者率多若此。
现代文：盗贼送我出来，现在一些糊涂人谈论的通常多是这样。
English: Thieves sent me out, that's how it's usually talked about these days by some half-wits.

古文：惟贫困饥寒，犯法为非，大者群盗，小者偷穴，不过二科，今乃结谋连常以千百数，是逆乱之大者，岂饥寒之谓邪？
现代文：想想看，由于贫困饥寒，犯法为非作歹，大的群体去抢劫，小的一个人去偷窃，不过这样两种方式，现在竟然有计划有组织以千百计，这是叛乱的罪魁祸首，难道是饥寒可以解释得了的吗？
English: Think about it, due to poverty, hunger and cold, breaking the law is a crime, a large group to rob, a small one to steal, but these two ways, now there are hundreds of plans and organizations, this is the main culprit of the rebellion, can hunger and cold be explained?

古文：七公其严敕卿大夫、卒正、连率、庶尹，谨牧养善民，急捕殄盗贼。
现代文：七公应当严肃告诫卿大夫、卒正、连率和各大尹，认真管教抚养善良人民，迅速捉拿歼灭盗贼。
English: The seven generals should seriously admonish the chief doctor, the lieutenant general, the company commander and the major generals, earnestly discipline and educate the good people, and quickly capture and destroy the thieves.

古文：有不同心并力，疾恶黜贼，而妄曰饥寒所为，辄捕系，请其罪。 
现代文：如有不同心合力，憎恨邪恶行为，谴责盗贼，而胡说他们是由于饥寒所迫才这样干的，就逮捕监禁，查办他们的罪行。 
English: If there are dissenters, haters of evil and denouncers of thieves, who falsely claim that they are driven by hunger and cold, they should be arrested, imprisoned, and their crimes investigated.

古文：于是群下愈恐，莫敢言贼情者，亦不得擅发兵，贼由是遂不制。
现代文：于是官吏们更加惶恐，没有谁敢说盗贼的真实情况，又不准擅自调动军队，盗贼因此终于无法制服。
English: As a result, the officials were even more frightened. No one dared to tell the truth about the thieves, and they were not allowed to mobilize the army without permission. As a result, the thieves could not be subdued.

古文：唯翼平连率田况素果敢，发民年十八以上四万余人，授以库兵，与刻石为约。
现代文：只有翼平郡连率田况一向果断勇敢，他发动年龄在十八岁以上的民众四万多人，发给他们库存的武器，把军事法令刻在石上向他们宣布。
English: Only the Yiping County Company, led by Tian Cang, has always been decisive and brave. He mobilized more than 40,000 people over the age of eighteen, issued them weapons from the inventory, and announced to them the military decree engraved on the stone.

古文：赤糜闻之，不敢入界。
现代文：赤眉军听到了，不敢进入郡界。
English: Hearing this, the Red Eyebrows did not dare to enter the county.

古文：况自劾奏，莽让况： 未赐虑符而擅发兵，此弄兵也。厥罪乏兴。
现代文：田况自动弹劾检举自己，王莽责备田况： 没有发给虎符而擅自调集军队，这是擅动干戈犯上作乱，这种罪名应当跟贻误军机同样处理。
English: Tian Jiao automatically impeached and indicted himself, Wang Mang blamed Tian Jiao: He did not issue the tiger emblem and mobilized the army without authorization. This was an unauthorized intervention to commit a riot. This crime should be handled in the same way as delaying military aircraft.

古文：以况自诡必禽灭贼，故且勿治。 
现代文：因为你自己保证一定捉拿消灭盗贼，所以姑且不予处分。 
English: Because you yourself guarantee that you will definitely catch and eliminate the thief, you will not be punished.

古文：后况自请出界击贼，所向皆破。
现代文：后来田况自动请求越过郡界攻打盗贼，他的军队所指向的盗贼都被打败了。
English: Later, Tian Fu spontaneously requested to cross the county boundary to attack the thieves, and the thieves that his army pointed at were all defeated.

古文：莽以玺书令况领青、徐二州牧事。
现代文：王莽用加盖了御玺的诏书命令田况代理青州和徐州两州牧的职务。
English: Wang Mang ordered Tian Cang to act as the acting governor of Qingzhou and Xuzhou in a royal edict.

古文：况上言： 盗贼始发，其原甚微，非部吏、伍人所能禽也。
现代文：田况上报告说： 盗贼刚发生，他们的基础很薄弱，但不是地方治安官吏和邻里后备兵所能捉拿得了的。
English: The field report said: "The thieves are new and their base is weak, but it is not possible for the local sheriff and the neighborhood reserve to catch them.

古文：咎在长吏不为意，县欺其郡，郡欺朝廷，实百言十，实千言百。
现代文：责任在于县级主要官吏不在意，县里欺骗郡里，郡里欺骗朝廷，实际上有一百人，衹说十人，实际上有一千人，衹说一百人。
English: The responsibility lies in the fact that the main officials at the county level do not care, the county cheats the county, the county cheats the imperial court, in fact there are a hundred people, but they say ten people, in fact there are a thousand people, but they say a hundred people.

古文：朝廷忽略，不辄督责，遂至延曼连州，乃遣将率，多发使者，传相监趣。
现代文：朝廷忽略，不立即进行督察，给予责罚，终于发展到蔓延几州，才派遣将帅，多派出使者，辗转督促。
English: The imperial court neglected, did not immediately inspect and punish, and finally developed to spread to several states, only to send generals and more envoys to urge.

古文：郡县力事上官，应寒诘对，共酒食，具资用，以救断斩，不给复忧盗贼治官事。
现代文：郡里县里尽力服事上级长官，应付责问检查，供给酒饭，准备物资和费用，来解救自己的死罪，没有工夫再去考虑盗贼和办理公事。
English: The county tried its best to serve the superior officers, deal with the inspection, provide food and drink, prepare materials and expenses to save their own capital crimes, and did not have time to think about thieves and handle public affairs.

古文：将率又不能躬率吏士，战则为贼所破，吏气浸伤，徒费百姓。
现代文：将帅又不能亲自率领军官和士兵去冲锋陷阵，一交战就被盗贼打败，士气逐渐削弱，徒然耗费了老百姓的钱粮。
English: The general could not personally lead the officers and soldiers to charge the battlefield, and was defeated by the thieves in a battle. Morale gradually weakened, and the money and grain of the common people were wasted.

古文：前幸蒙赦令，贼欲解散，或反遮击，恐入山谷转相告语，故郡县降贼，皆更惊骇，恐见诈灭，因饥馑易动，旬日之间更十余万人，此盗贼所以多之故也。
现代文：前次幸而得到了赦免的命令，盗贼想要解散，有人反而加以截击，他们惶恐地退入山谷，辗转传告原先各郡县已经投降的盗贼，都更加惊骇，恐怕被欺骗以致被消灭，因为饥荒时期人心容易动摇，十来天的时间又是十多万人，造就是盗贼所以众多的缘故。
English: The last time they were fortunate enough to receive an amnesty order, the thieves wanted to disband, but someone intercepted them instead. They retreated into the valley in fear, relaying the news to the thieves who had already surrendered in various counties. They were even more shocked, fearing that they would be deceived and eliminated, because people's hearts are easily swayed in times of famine, and there are more than a hundred thousand people in ten days, which is why there are so many thieves.

古文：今雒阳以东，米石二千。
现代文：现在洛阳以柬地区，米价每石值两千钱。
English: Currently, in Luoyang and Cambodia, the price of rice is as high as 2,000 yuan per stone.

古文：窃见诏书，欲遣太师、更始将军，二人爪牙重臣，多从人众，道上空竭，少则亡以威视远方。
现代文：我看到诏书，说想要派遣太师和更始将军前来，他们两人是权威的大臣，一定要多带人员，而沿途民穷财尽，无法供给，如果随从人员太少，就无法用来威震远方。
English: I saw an imperial edict saying that if they wanted to send the Grand Master and the First General to come, both of whom were authoritative ministers, they must bring more personnel, but along the way the people would run out of money and be unable to supply them, and if there were too few attendants, they would not be able to use them to threaten faraway places.

古文：宜急选牧、尹以下，明其赏罚。收合离乡、小国无城郭者，徙其老弱置大城中，积藏谷食，并力固守。
现代文：应当迅速选择州牧、大尹以下官吏，明确规定对他们的赏罚，让他们收集没有城堡的分散的乡聚和小封国，把它们的老弱居民迁移安顿到大城里，储积粮食，合力坚守。
English: It is necessary to quickly select officials from the ranks of prefectural pastors and grand imams, clearly stipulate rewards and punishments for them, let them collect scattered townships and small fiefdoms without castles, relocate their old and weak residents to the big city, store grain, and work together to hold on.

古文：贼来攻城，则不能下，所过无食，势不得群聚。
现代文：盗贼来攻城，就不能攻下，所经过的地方没有粮食，凭这样的发展趋势，他们就不可能大规模聚集。
English: With such a development trend, it is impossible for them to gather in large numbers.

古文：如此，招之必降，击之则灭。
现代文：像这样，招抚他们就一定会投降，攻打他们就一定会被消灭。
English: In this way, if you appease them, they will definitely surrender, and if you attack them, they will definitely be eliminated.

古文：今空复多出将率，郡县苦之，反甚于贼。
现代文：如果徒然再多派出将帅，地方官民害怕他们，反而比害怕盗贼还厉害。
English: If more generals are sent in vain, local officials and citizens will fear them more than they fear thieves.

古文：宜尽征还乘传诸使者，以休息郡县。
现代文：应当全部调回乘坐传车的众多使者，让地方官民得到休养生息。
English: All of the numerous envoys riding in the carriages should be sent back, so that local officials and citizens can rest and recuperate.

古文：委任臣况以二州盗贼，必平定之。 
现代文：您如果把乎定两州盗贼的任务委托我田况，我一定平定他们。 
English: If you entrust me with the task of subduing the thieves in the two states, I will surely subdue them.

古文：莽畏恶况，阴为发代，遣使者赐况玺书。
现代文：王莽畏忌厌恶田况，悄悄派出了接替他的人，派遣使者赐给田况盖了御玺的韶书。
English: Wang Mengji abhorred Tian Quo, and quietly sent someone to replace him. He sent an envoy to Tian Quo to give him an imperial edict.

古文：使者至，见况，因令代监其兵。
现代文：使者到达，会见了田况，便让接替的人监管他的部队。
English: When the envoy arrived and met with Tabuchi, he asked his replacement to supervise his troops.

古文：况随使者西，到，拜为师尉大夫。
现代文：田况随同使者西行，到了长安，授任他作师尉大夫。
English: Tian Jiao followed the envoy westward and arrived in Chang'an, where he was appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：况去，齐地遂败。
现代文：田况走了以后，齐地的局势终于不可收拾了。
English: After Tian Zhou left, the situation in Qi finally became unmanageable.

古文：三年正月，九庙盖构成，纳神主。
现代文：三年正月，九所祠庙建筑竣工，安放了神主。
English: In the first month of the third year, the construction of nine ancestral temples was completed, and the deities were released.

古文：莽谒见，大驾乘六马，以五采毛为龙文衣，著角，长三尺。
现代文：王莽去拜见，车队按照最高规格组成，他的乘车套着六匹马，马披着用五彩羽毛织成龙形图案的套子，头上装着义角，有三尺长。
English: Wang Meng went to pay a visit. The motorcade was composed according to the highest specifications. His carriage was pulled by six horses. The horses were draped in dragon-shaped capes made of multicolored feathers, with three-foot-long horns on their heads.

古文：华盖车，元戎十乘有前。
现代文：华盖车和十辆大型战车走在前头。
English: The Huagai chariot and ten large chariots led the way.

古文：因赐治庙者司徒、大司空饯客千万，侍中、中常侍以下皆封。
现代文：于是赏赐主持建庙工程的大司徒和大司空各一千万钱，侍中和中常侍以下人员都有封赏。
English: As a result, the grand steward and the grand steward who presided over the construction of the temple were awarded ten million yuan each, and the attendants and middle attendants and below were rewarded.

古文：封都匠仇延为邯淡里附城。
现代文：赐封建庙大工匠仇延为邯淡里附城。
English: Qian Yan, a great craftsman of the feudal temple, was given the fief of Shantanli.

古文：二月，霸桥灾，数千人以水沃救，不灭。
现代文：二月，霸桥发生了火灾，几千人用水浇泼，不熄。
English: In February, a fire broke out on the bridge. Thousands of people poured water on the flames, but they did not go out.

古文：莽恶之，下书曰： 夫三皇象春，五帝象夏，三王象秋，五伯象冬。
现代文：王莽讨厌这件事，下文告说： 三皇象征春天，五帝象征夏天，三王象征秋天，五霸象征冬天。
English: Wang Mang hated this, and said: "Three emperors symbolize spring, five emperors symbolize summer, three kings symbolize autumn, and five bulls symbolize winter."

古文：皇王，德运也；伯者，继空续乏以成历数，故其道驳。惟常安御道多以所近为名。
现代文：从三皇、五帝到三王，都是靠德行来决定国家统治权力的转移；五霸的出现，是由于这个时期没有权威的帝王来统治，只好由他们来填补时代的空缺，因而获得了天运，所以他们的治国原则是杂乱的。想起长安的大街多数根据所邻近的地方起名。
English: From the Three Emperors and Five Emperors to the Three Kings, the transfer of the power to rule the country was determined by virtue; the emergence of the Five Overlords was due to the fact that there was no authoritative emperor to rule during this period, and they had to fill the vacancy of the era, and thus gained heavenly fortune, so their principle of governing the country was chaotic. Most of the streets in Chang'an are named according to the neighboring places.

古文：乃二月癸巳之夜，甲午之辰，火烧霸桥，从东方西行，至甲午夕，桥尽火灭。
现代文：前向二月癸巳曰的深夜，到甲午日的早晨，火烧霸桥，从束端烧到西端，直到甲午曰的傍晚，桥烧光了火才熄灭。
English: Fast forward to the middle of the night in February, to the morning of the afternoon of the 1st, the fire burned the bridge, from the end of the bundle to the west end, until the evening of the 1st, the bridge burned out and the fire was extinguished.

古文：大司空行视考问，或云寒民舍居桥下，疑以火自燎，为此灾也。
现代文：大司空巡视审问，有人说贫民在桥下留宿，可能是他们烤火取暖，造成了这场灾害。
English: Some people said that the poor people were sleeping under the bridge, and they may have caused the disaster by lighting fires to keep warm.

古文：其明旦即乙未，立春之日也。
现代文：第二天就是乙末日，是立春的日子。
English: The next day is the last day of the second lunar month, the first day of spring.

古文：予以神明圣祖黄、虞遗统受命，至于地皇四年为十五年。
现代文：我凭着神明圣祖黄帝、虞帝的后代子孙的身份承受天命，到地皇四年是十五年。
English: By virtue of my status as a descendant and descendant of the divine ancestors, the Yellow Emperor and the Yu Emperor, I bear the destiny of heaven, and it has been fifteen years since I became the emperor.

古文：正以三年终冬绝灭霸驳之桥，欲以兴成新室统一长存之道也。
现代文：刚好在三年冬季的尽头彻底毁灭，反映了杂乱的霸道的霸桥，想要用来完成新朝统一长存的治国原则。
English: Just at the end of the three-year winter, it was completely destroyed, reflecting the chaotic and domineering hegemony of the bridge, which wanted to be used to complete the unification of the new dynasty and the long-standing principles of governance.

古文：又戒此桥空东方之道。
现代文：又用毁灭这座桥来警告我们，要开拓东方的道路。
English: They also used the destruction of this bridge to warn us to open the road to the east.

古文：今东方岁荒民饥，道路不通，东岳太师亟科条，开东方诸仓，赈贷穷乏，以施仁道。
现代文：现在东方年岁灾荒，人民饥饿，道路不通，束岳太师迅速制定法令条规，开放东方各处粮仓，救济贫苦人民，实行仁慈的原则。
English: Now that the East has been ravaged by years of natural disasters, the people are starving, and the roads are impassable, Sokyu Daishi quickly formulated laws and regulations, opened granaries everywhere in the East, provided relief to the poor people, and implemented the principle of benevolence.

古文：其更名霸馆为长存馆，霸桥为长存桥。 
现代文：应当把霸馆改名为长存馆，把霸桥改名为长存桥。 
English: The Hall of Heroes should be renamed the Hall of Eternal Survival, and the Bridge of Heroes should be renamed the Bridge of Eternal Survival.

古文：是月，赤眉杀太师牺仲景尚。
现代文：这个月，赤眉军杀死了太师牺仲景尚。
English: This month, the Red Eyebrows killed the Daishi's sacrificial victim, Zhongjing Shang.

古文：关东人相食。
现代文：关东地区人吃人。
English: In the Kanto region, people eat people.

古文：四月，遣太师王匡、更始将军廉丹东，祖都门外，天大雨，沾衣止。
现代文：四月，派遣太师王匡和更始将军廉丹束征，到京城城门外送行，天下大雨，淋湿了衣服才停止。
English: In April, the Grand Master Wang Kuang and the First General Lian Dan Sokzheng were dispatched to see him off outside the capital's city gate. It was raining heavily, and they only stopped when their clothes got wet.

古文：长老叹曰： 是为泣军！ 
现代文：老年人叹息说： 这是为军队哭泣！ 
English: The old man sighed and said, "This is crying for the army!"

古文：莽曰： 惟阳九之厄，与害气会，究于去年。
现代文：王莽说： 想起不幸的命运，跟灾害之气相会合，到去年终止了。
English: Wang Mang said: Remembering the unfortunate fate and meeting with the atmosphere of disaster, it ended last year.

古文：枯旱霜蝗，饥馑荐臻，百姓困乏，流离道路，于春尤甚，予甚悼之。
现代文：大旱灾、霜灾、蝗灾不断发生，饥荒接连来到，百姓生活困难，到处流浪，在今年春天尤其厉害，我非常悲伤。
English: Severe droughts, frosts, and locust plagues continue to occur, famine comes one after another, the people's lives are difficult, and they wander everywhere. This spring is particularly severe, and I am very sad.

古文：今使东岳太师特进褒新侯开东方诸仓，赈贷穷乏。
现代文：现在派束岳太师特进里新侯开放东方各处粮仓，救济贫苦人民。
English: At present, Grand Master Yue is dispatching a special envoy, Xin Hou, to open granaries in various parts of the East to help the poor people.

古文：太师公所不过道，分遣大夫谒者并开诸仓，以全元元。
现代文：太师公所不经过的地方，分派大夫和谒者同时开放各处粮仓，以保全善良的老百姓。
English: In areas where the Taishi Public Institution does not pass, assign doctors and inspectors to open grain silos at the same time to protect the good people.

古文：太师公因与廉丹大使五威司命位右大司马更始将军平均侯之兖州，填抚所掌，及青、徐故不轨盗贼未尽解散，后复屯聚者，皆清洁之，期于安兆黎矣。 
现代文：太师公随后同大使五威司命、位右大司马、更始将军平均侯廉丹前往兖州，镇抚所属官吏和人民，还有青州和徐州原来无法无天的盗贼没有完全解散或者后来又聚集起来的，都把他们消灭干净，以求安定亿万人民。 
English: The Grand Master then went to Zhangzhou with the ambassador Wu Wei Si Min, the first-ranked Right Grand Master Ma Tong and the first-ranked General Yan Hou Liantan to pacify the officials and people belonging to them, as well as the lawless thieves in Qingzhou and Xuzhou who had not completely disbanded or later regrouped, and wiped them out in order to stabilize hundreds of millions of people.

古文：太师、更始合将锐士十余万人，所过放纵。
现代文：太师和更始将军一起统率精锐士兵十多万人，所经过的地方放任士兵，不加约束。
English: The grandmaster and the general at the beginning of the war led more than 100,000 elite soldiers together, and the soldiers were allowed to go wherever they wanted without restriction.

古文：东方为之语曰： 宁逢赤眉，不逢太师！
现代文：束部地区人民为他们编成俗语说： 宁肯遇着赤眉军，不要遇着太师兵！
English: The people of Sokube region made up a proverb for them, saying, "I'd rather encounter the Red Eyebrows than the Taiji soldiers!"

古文：太师尚可，更始杀我！ 
现代文：太师兵抢劫还是小事，更始兵屠杀我们！ 
English: It's a small matter for a division's soldiers to loot, let alone the first soldiers to massacre us!

古文：卒如田况之言。
现代文：终于像田况所说的一样。
English: At last, it was just as Tabuko had said.

古文：莽又多遣大夫谒者分教民煮草木为酪，酪不可食，重为烦费。
现代文：王莽又派遣很多大夫和谒者分道教授人民把草木熬成胶，胶不能吃，反而增加人力物力的浪费。
English: Wang Mang also dispatched many doctors and magicians to teach the people to boil grass and trees into glue. The glue could not be eaten, but it increased the waste of manpower and material resources.

古文：莽下书曰： 惟民困乏，虽溥开诸仓以赈赡之，犹恐未足。
现代文：王莽下文告说： 想到人民生活困难，虽然普遍开放各处粮仓去救济他们，还恐怕不够。
English: Wang Mang said: "Considering the difficulties of people's lives, although the general opening of granaries everywhere to relieve them is not enough, I am afraid.

古文：其且开天下山泽之防，诸能采取山泽之物而顺月令者，其恣听之，勿令出税。
现代文：应当权且开放全国山林湖沼的禁令，凡属能够采取山林湖沼的产物而又符合季节时令规律的，应当听任他们，不要让他们缴纳捐税。
English: The ban on mountain forests and lakes throughout the country should be authorized and opened. Those who can take the products of mountain forests and lakes and meet the seasonal laws should be allowed to do so, and they should not be required to pay taxes.

古文：至地皇三十年如故，是王光上戊之六年也。
现代文：到地皇三十年恢复原来的状态，那是王光上戊的六年了。
English: It took the emperor thirty years to restore the original state, which was six years after Wang Guangshangwu.

古文：如令豪吏猾民辜而攉之，小民弗蒙，非予意也。
现代文：如果让强梁的官吏和狡猾的豪民垄断了那些利益，普通人民得不到好处，那就不是我的用意了。
English: If powerful officials and cunning tycoons monopolize those benefits, and ordinary people do not benefit, that is not my intention.

古文：《易》不云乎？ 损上益下，民说无疆。 
现代文：《易经》不是说过吗？ 削减贵族的利益，增加平民的利益，人民无比高兴。 
English: Didn't the I Ching say that if the interests of the aristocracy were reduced and the interests of the common people increased, the people would be extremely happy?

古文：《书》云： 言之不从，是谓不艾。 
现代文：《书经》说： 说了不能够做到，造就叫作不治安。 唉！
English: "Shu Jing" said: If you say it, you can't do it, and if you create it, it's called insecurity. Alas!

古文：咨乎群公，可不忧哉！ 
现代文：大臣们呀，能不担心吗！ 
English: Ministers, why don't you stop worrying!

古文：是时，下江兵盛，新市朱鲔、平林陈牧等皆复聚众，攻击乡聚。
现代文：这时下江兵势盛，新市人朱鲔和平林人陈牧等都又集合部队，攻打乡村小集镇。
English: At this time, the Shimoji soldiers were in full swing, and the people of Xincheng, Zhu Xi, and the people of Pinglin, Chen Mu, all gathered forces to attack the small rural market town.

古文：莽遣司命大将军孔仁部豫州，纳言大将军严尤、秩宗大将军陈茂击荆州，各从吏士百余人，乘船从渭入河，至华阴乃出乘传，到部募士。
现代文：王莽派遣司命大将军孔仁巡察豫州，派遣纳言大将军严尤和秩宗大将军陈茂攻打荆州，各随带军官和士兵一百多人，坐船从渭河进入黄河，到华阴县才上岸乘坐传车，到辖区招集士兵。
English: Wang Mang sent the General of the General Staff, Kong Ren, to inspect Yuzhou, sent the General of the General Staff, Yan Yu, and the General of the General Staff, Chen Mao, to attack Jingzhou, each accompanied by more than a hundred officers and soldiers. They entered the Yellow River from the Min River by boat, and went ashore in Huayin County to take a ferry, and called up soldiers in the jurisdiction.

古文：尤谓茂曰： 遣将不与兵符，必先请而后动，是犹绁韩卢而责之获也。 
现代文：严尤对陈茂说： 派出将领不发给兵符，遇事一定要先请示然后才能行动，这就好像牵着猎犬而要求它去捉住野兽一样。 
English: Yan You said to Chen Mao: "The dispatching generals do not issue military insignia to soldiers. In the event of an emergency, they must first ask for instructions before they can act. This is like leading a hunting dog and asking it to catch a beast.

古文：夏，蝗从东方来，蜚蔽天，至长安，入未央宫，缘殿阁。
现代文：夏季里，蝗虫从东方飞来，遮蔽了天空，飞到长安，飞进了未央宫，附于殿堂楼阁。
English: In summer, the locusts flew from the east, covered the sky, flew to Chang'an, flew into the Weiyang Palace, and attached themselves to the palace.

古文：莽发吏民设购赏捕击。
现代文：王莽设置奖励发动官吏和平民去捕捉扑打。
English: Wang Mang set up an incentive to encourage officials and civilians to catch the flapping.

古文：莽以天下谷贵，欲厌之，为大仓，置卫交戟，名曰 政始掖门 。
现代文：王莽因为全国粮价昂贵，想要厌胜它，给大仓设置卫兵，相对持戟交叉着守卫仓门，称为 朝政从旁边小门开始 。
English: Wang Mang, who was fed up with the high price of grain in the country, set up a guard for the granary and guarded the gate of the granary with his arms crossed, which was called the "Dynasty Starts from the Side Gate."

古文：流民入关者数十万人，乃置养赡官禀食之。
现代文：进入函谷关的流民有几十万人。于是设置赡养官吏发粮食给他们吃。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of displaced people who have entered Hakodate. Therefore, support officials have been set up to distribute food to them.

古文：使者监领，与小吏共盗其禀，饥死者十七八。
现代文：使者监督领导，跟小官吏一起盗窃了那些粮食，流民饿死的十人中有七八人。
English: Envoys supervised the leaders, who, together with minor officials, stole the grain. Of the ten people who died of starvation, seven or eight were refugees.

古文：先是，莽使中黄门王业领长安市买，贱取于民，民甚患之。
现代文：在此之前，王莽让中黄门王业管理长安贸易，压低价格向人民收购物资，人民非常厌恨他。
English: Prior to this, Wang Mang let Zhonghuangmen Wangye manage the Chang'an trade and buy materials from the people at low prices. The people hated him very much.

古文：业以省费为功，赐爵附城。
现代文：王业由于节省收购费用立了功，赏赐了附城的爵位。
English: Wangye was awarded the title of "Annexed City" for its contribution to saving acquisition costs.

古文：莽闻城中饥馑，以问业，业曰： 皆流民也。 
现代文：王莽听到城里发生了饥荒，向王业询问情况。王业说： 都是些流民。 
English: When Wang Mang heard that there was a famine in the city, he asked Wang Ye about the situation. Wang Ye said: They are all refugees.

古文：乃市所卖梁飰肉羹，持入视莽，曰： 居民食咸如此。 
现代文：于是买些市场上的精米饭和肉汁，拿进去给王莽看，说道： 居民的食物都像这个样子。 
English: So he bought some polished rice and gravy from the market, took it inside and showed it to Wang Mang, saying, "The residents' food all looks like this."

古文：莽信之。
现代文：王莽信了他的话。
English: Wang Mang believed his words.

古文：冬，无盐索卢恢等举兵反城。
现代文：冬季里，无盐县索卢恢等人占据县城起兵造。
English: In winter, the people of Soluhuai, Wuxi County, occupied the county seat to build a military base.

古文：廉丹、王匡攻拔之，斩首万余级。
现代文：廉丹和王匡攻下了县城，斩首一万多人。
English: Lian Dan and Wang Kuang captured the county seat and beheaded more than ten thousand people.

古文：莽遣中郎将奉玺书劳丹、匡，进爵为公，封吏士有功者十余人。
现代文：王莽派遣中郎将捧着加盖了御玺的韶书去慰劳廉丹和王匡，进升为公爵，赐封有功的军官和士兵十多人。
English: Wang Mang sent Zhonglang to comfort Liandan and Wang Kuang with an imperial edict stamped with the imperial scepter, promoted him to the rank of duke, and conferred the title of nobility on more than ten meritorious officers and soldiers.

古文：赤眉别校董宪等众数万人在梁郡，王匡欲进击之，廉丹以为新拔城罢劳，当且休士养威。
现代文：赤眉军别部校尉董宪等人的部队几万人在梁郡活动，王匡想要进攻他们，廉丹认为新近攻下县城的士兵疲劳了，应当暂时让士兵休整一下恢复战斗力。
English: Tens of thousands of troops led by Captain Dong Xian and others from other units of the Red Eyebrows Army were active in Liang County. Wang Kuang wanted to attack them, and Lian Dan thought that the soldiers who had recently captured the county town were tired and should temporarily let the soldiers take a break to restore their combat effectiveness.

古文：匡不听，引兵独进，丹随之。
现代文：王匡不听从，单独带领军队前进，廉丹只好跟着他。
English: Wang Kuang disobeyed and led the army forward alone. Lian Dan had to follow him.

古文：合战成昌，兵败，匡走。
现代文：在成昌进行会战，军队吃了败仗，王匡逃走了。
English: A battle was fought in Chengchang, the army was defeated, and Wang Kuang fled.

古文：丹使吏持其印韨符节付匡曰： 小儿可走，吾不可！ 
现代文：廉丹派军官拿着自己的印信和符节交给王匡，说道： 小儿可以逃走，我不行！ 
English: Lian Dan sent an officer to take his seal letter and symbols to Wang Kuang, saying: Children can escape, I can't!

古文：遂止，战死。
现代文：便停下来，战斗而死。
English: He stopped, fought and died.

古文：校尉汝云、王隆等二十余人别斗，闻之，皆曰： 廉公已死，吾谁为生？ 
现代文：校尉汝云和王隆等二十多人在另外的地方进行战斗，听到这个消息，都说： 廉将军已经死了，我们还为了谁活着？ 
English: Captain Ruyun, Wang Long and more than 20 others who were fighting in other places heard the news and said, "General Liang is dead, for whom are we still alive?

古文：驰奔贼，皆战死。
现代文：飞马冲向贼军，都战斗而死。
English: Pegasus rushes to the thief army, and they all die in battle.

古文：莽伤之，下书曰： 惟公多拥选士精兵，众郡骏马仓谷帑藏皆得自调，忽于诏策，离其威节，骑马呵噪，为狂刃所害，乌呼哀哉！
现代文：王莽伤痛，下文告说： 想起您拥有很多经过挑选的精锐士兵，各郡的好马、仓储粮食、库存金钱都准许你自己调用，可是忽略了诏书里所说的战略战术，离开了自己的权威标志，骑着马大喊大叫，被乱刀所杀害，可悲呀！
English: Wang Mang was heartbroken, and reported as follows: Remembering that you have many selected elite soldiers, good horses from various counties, stored grain, and stockpiled money, you are allowed to call on your own, but you ignored the strategy and tactics mentioned in the edict, left your own authority sign, rode a horse shouting, and were killed by a random knife, pathetic!

古文：赐谥曰 果公 。
现代文：赐给谧号叫作果公。 
English: He was given the nickname "Chuo."

古文：国将哀章谓莽曰： 皇祖考黄帝之时，中黄直为将，破杀蚩尤。
现代文：国将哀章对王莽说： 皇祖考黄帝的时候，中黄直作大将，打败并杀死了蚩尤。
English: The national commander lamented to Wang Mang: During the imperial examination of the Yellow Emperor, Zhong Huang Zhi, as the general, defeated and killed Pu You.

古文：今臣中黄直之位，愿平山东。 
现代文：现在我居于中黄直的职位，愿意去平定山东地区。 
English: Now that I live in Zhonghuanzhi, I am willing to go to Pingding in Shandong.

古文：莽遣章驰东，与太师匡并力。
现代文：王莽派遣哀章赶往东方，跟太师王匡合力。
English: Wang Mang sent the Lamentation to the East to join forces with Grand Master Wang Kuang.

古文：又遗大将军阳浚守敖仓，司徒王寻将十余万屯雒阳填南宫，大司马董忠养士习射中军北垒，大司空王邑兼三公之职。
现代文：又派遣大将军阳浚去防守敖仓，大司徒王寻统率十多万人驻扎洛阳，坐镇南宫，大司马董忠在中军北垒营地训练士兵练习武艺，大司空王邑兼理三公的职务。
English: He also dispatched the general Yang Jun to defend Kamakura, the grand secretary Tuo Wang Huan Tong led more than one hundred thousand people stationed in Luoyang and sat in the town's South Palace, the grand secretary Ma Dong Zhong trained soldiers to practice martial arts in the Chinese army's North Camp, and the grand secretary Kuo Wang Yip concurrently performed the duties of the three princes.

古文：司徒寻初发长安，宿霸昌厩，亡其黄钺。
现代文：大司徒王寻刚从长安出发，在霸昌厩过夜，丢失了他的黄金铁斧。
English: The head monk Wang Xiang had just set out from Chang'an and spent the night at the Bajang stable when he lost his golden iron axe.

古文：寻士房扬素狂直，乃哭曰： 此经所谓 丧其齐斧 者也！ 
现代文：王寻的办事官员房扬一向放纵直率，便哭着说： 造就是经书上所说 失掉了锐利的斧子 的意思啊！ 
English: Fang Yang, Wang Huan's clerk, who had always indulged in straightforwardness, cried and said: "Zou is the meaning of the lost sharp axe mentioned in the scriptures!

古文：自劾去。
现代文：他自我弹劾离职了。
English: He self-impeached and left office.

古文：莽击杀扬。
现代文：王莽把房扬打死了。
English: Wang Mang beat Fang Yang to death.

古文：四方盗贼往往数万人攻城邑，杀二千石以下。
现代文：各处盗贼每每几万人进攻城邑，杀死二千石级以下的官吏。
English: Thieves everywhere attacked townships by the tens of thousands, killing officials of less than two thousand koku.

古文：太师王匡等战数不利。
现代文：太师王匡等人交战多次不胜利。
English: Grand Master Wang Kuang and others fought many times without success.

古文：莽知天下溃畔，事穷计迫，乃议遣风俗大夫司国宪等分行天下，除井田奴婢山泽六管之禁，即位以来诏令不便于民者皆收还之。
现代文：王莽知道全国民心分离背叛，事势已经到了尽头，再也无计可施了，于是商量着派遣风俗大夫司国宪等人分路巡视全国，废除有关井田制度、不准买卖奴婢和征收山林湖沼税等六管制度的禁令，登上帝位以来所不便于民的诏令都收回去。
English: Wang Mang knew that the separation and betrayal of the national people's hearts had come to an end and that there was nothing more to be done, so he discussed sending the Doctor of Customs and National Constitution Division and others to inspect the whole country in separate routes, to abolish the ban on the six-tier system such as the well system, the prohibition of the sale and purchase of slaves and the levying of mountain, forest and lake taxes, and to withdraw all the edicts that were inconvenient to the people since he ascended the throne.

古文：待见未发，会世祖与兄齐武王伯升、宛人李通等帅舂陵子弟数千人，招致新市平林朱鲔、陈牧等合攻拔棘阳。
现代文：使者们正在等待接见还没有出发，恰好世祖和哥哥齐武王刘伯升、宛县人李通等率领春陵子弟几千人，招来新市朱鲔和平林陈牧等部联合攻下棘阳县。
English: The envoys were waiting to be received and had not yet set off. It so happened that the patriarch and his brother, the king of Qiwu, Liu Bo Sheng, and Li Tong, a native of Wuan County, led thousands of Chunling's sons and sons to invite Zhu Xi from Xincheng and Chen Mu from Hepinglin to jointly conquer Spineyang County.

古文：是时，严尤、陈茂破下江兵，成丹、王常等数千人别走，入南阳界。
现代文：这时候，严尤和陈茂打败了下江兵，成丹和王常等几千人单独逃走，进入南阳郡境内。
English: At this time, Yan Yu and Chen Mao defeated the soldiers of the lower river, Cheng Dan and Wang Chang and other thousands of people fled alone and entered the territory of Nanyang County.

古文：十只月，有星孛于张、东南行，五日痘见。
现代文：十一月间，在张宿天区有一颗流星光芒四射，向东南运行，经过五天不见。
English: In November, there was a meteor shining brightly in the Zhangzhou sky area, traveling southeast and disappearing after five days.

古文：莽数召问太史令宗宣，诸术数家皆缪对，言天文安善，群贼且灭。
现代文：王莽几次召见、询问太史令宗宣，许多术数家都虚伪地回答，说天文现象平安良好，各股盗贼行将灭亡。
English: Wang Mang several times summoned and inquired about Taishi Ling Zongxuan, and many magicians answered hypocritically, saying that the astronomical phenomenon is safe and sound, and all the thieves are about to perish.

古文：莽差以自安。
现代文：王莽勉强用这些话来安慰自己。
English: Wang Meng reluctantly used these words to comfort himself.

古文：四年正月，汉兵得下江王常等以为助兵，击前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐，皆斩之，杀其众数万人。
现代文：四年正月，漠军得到下江王常等部作为支援，进攻前队大夫甄阜和属正梁丘赐，把他们都杀了，歼灭了他们的部队几万人。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Mongolian army received the support of the Lower River King Chang and other departments, attacked the vanguard doctor Zhenfu and the subordinate Zheng Liang Qiu, killed them all, and annihilated tens of thousands of their troops.

古文：初，京师闻青、徐贼众数十万人，讫无文号旌旗表识，咸怪异之。
现代文：起初，京城听到青州和徐州盗贼部队几十万人，一直没有告、官号、旗帜、徽章，都对他们感到惊奇。
English: At first, the capital was surprised to hear that hundreds of thousands of Qingzhou and Xuzhou thief troops had not been reported, official names, flags, and badges.

古文：好事者窃言： 此岂如古三皇无文书号谥邪？ 
现代文：喜欢多事的人私下里说： 这些人莫不像古代的三皇不要文书、称号吧？ 
English: People who like a lot of things say in private: These people are not like the ancient three emperors who did not want paperwork or titles, are they?

古文：莽亦心怪，以问群臣，群臣莫对。
现代文：王莽也暗中感到奇怪，询问大臣们，大臣们没有人回答。
English: Wang Mang also secretly felt strange and asked the ministers, but no one answered the ministers.

古文：唯严尤曰：笭此不足怪也。
现代文：衹有严尤说： 这不足为奇。
English: "It's not surprising," said Zou Youyan.

古文：自黄帝、汤、武行师，必待部曲旌旗号令，今此无有者，直饥寒群盗，犬羊相聚，不知为之耳。 
现代文：自从黄帝、商汤和周武王行军用兵，都一定要有建制、旗帜和号令，现在这些人没有这些制度，衹不过是一群群饥寒盗贼，像牲畜成群结伙一样，不懂得采用这些办法罢了。 
English: Ever since the Yellow Emperor, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu marched into battle, there must have been a system, flags and orders. Now these people do not have these systems, they are just a group of hungry and cold thieves, like a herd of cattle, who do not know how to use these methods.

古文：莽大说，群臣尽服。
现代文：王莽非常高兴，大臣们都佩服。
English: Wang Mang was very happy, and the ministers were all impressed.

古文：及后汉兵刘伯升起，皆称将军，攻城略地，既杀甄阜，移书称说。
现代文：等到后来汉军刘伯升起事，都自称将军，攻打城市，占领地盘，杀死甄阜之后，发布文告，宣传自己的主张，声讨王莽的罪恶。
English: Later, when Liu Bo of the Han army rose up, they all claimed to be generals, attacked the city, occupied the site, and killed Yan Fu. After that, they issued a statement to promote their own ideas and condemn Wang Mang's evil.

古文：莽闻之忧惧。
现代文：王莽听到了，才担心和害怕起来。
English: When Wang Mang heard this, he became worried and afraid.

古文：汉兵乘胜遂围宛城。
现代文：汉军乘胜包围了宛城。
English: The Chinese army took advantage of the victory and encircled Wancheng.

古文：初，世祖族兄圣公先在平林兵中。
现代文：起初，世祖远房哥哥刘圣公先参加了平林兵。
English: At first, Liu Shengong, the elder brother of Liu Yuanfang, first joined the Pinglin soldiers.

古文：三月辛巳朔，平林、新市、下江兵将王常、朱鲔等共立圣公为帝，改年为更始元年，拜置百官。
现代文：三月辛巳初一，平林兵、新市兵和下江兵的将领王常和朱鲔等人共同拥立刘圣公作皇帝，改年号为更始元年，任命了各种官吏。
English: On the first day of the new moon in March, the generals Wang Chang and Zhu Xi of the Pinglin soldiers, Xinchi soldiers and Shimoji soldiers jointly supported Liu Shengong as emperor, changed the year to the first year of the new era, and appointed various officials.

古文：莽闻之愈恐。
现代文：王莽听到这个消息，更加惶恐。
English: Wang Mang was even more frightened when he heard the news.

古文：欲外视自安，乃染其须发，进所征天下淑女杜陵史氏女为皇后，聘黄金三万斤，车马、奴婢、杂帛、珍宝以巨万计。
现代文：他想要对外表示自己的心情是安定的，于是染黑了自己的头发和胡须，召进所征选的全国的美好女子，立杜陵县史家的女儿作皇后，送彩礼黄金三万斤，车马、奴婢、各种绸绢和珍珠宝玉等贵重物品以亿万计。
English: He wanted to show the outside world that his mood was stable, so he dyed his hair and beard black, called in beautiful women from all over the country, appointed the daughter of the historian of Durin County as the queen, sent 30,000 kilos of gold as a gift, and hundreds of millions of precious items such as chariots, horses, slaves, all kinds of silk brocades and pearl gems.

古文：莽亲迎于前殿两阶间，成同牢之礼于上西堂。
现代文：王莽亲自在前殿两边台阶之间迎接，在上西堂举行新婚夫妇聚餐的仪式。
English: Wang Mang personally greeted the newlyweds between the steps on both sides of the vestibule and held the ceremony of the newlyweds' dinner in the Upper West Hall.

古文：备和嫔、美御、和人三，位视公；嫔人九，视卿；美人二十七，视大夫；御人八十一，视元士：凡百二十人，皆佩印韨，执弓韣。
现代文：设置和嫔、美御、和人共三人，爵位比照三公；嫔人九人，爵位比照九卿；美人二十七人，爵位比照大夫；御人八十一人，爵位比照元士：共一百二十人，都佩带印信，拿着弓袋。
English: A total of three were set up, including a concubine, a concubine, and a concubine, with peerage corresponding to three dukes; nine concubines, with peerage corresponding to nine lords; twenty-seven concubines, with peerage corresponding to a doctor; eighty-one concubines, with peerage corresponding to a knight: a total of one hundred and twenty people, all wearing seals and holding bow bags.

古文：封皇后父谌为和平侯，拜为宁始将军，谌子二人皆侍中。
现代文：赐封史皇后的父亲史谌为和平侯，授任为宁始将军，史谌的两个儿子都作侍中。
English: Queen Shih's father, Shih Chung, was given the title of Prince of Peace and the title of General of Ningshi. Both of Shih Chung's sons served as chamberlains.

古文：是日，大风发屋折木。
现代文：这一天，刮起了大风，发掘房屋，折断树木。
English: On this day, a strong wind blew, digging up houses and snapping trees.

古文：群臣上寿曰： 乃庚子雨水洒道，辛丑清靓无尘，其夕谷风迅疾，从东北来。
现代文：大臣们祝贺说： 昨庚子曰雨水洗涤了道路，辛丑曰清洁宁静，了无纤尘，那天晚上东风强劲，从东北方向吹来。
English: The ministers congratulated and said: "Yesterday, Geng Zi said that the rain had washed away the road, Xin Xi said that it was clean and quiet, and there was no dust. That evening, the east wind was strong and blew from the northeast.

古文：辛丑。《巽》之宫日也。
现代文：辛丑日是《巽卦》主帝的日子。
English: Xinqiu Day is the day of the main emperor of "The Tale of Genji."

古文：《巽》为风为顺，后谊明，母道得，温和慈惠之化也。
现代文：《巽卦》象征风，它的含义是卑顺，作皇后的原则明确了，作母亲的规范具备了，这就是温和慈惠的造化功效。
English: "The Analects of Confucius" symbolizes the wind, its meaning is humble, the principle of being an empress is clear, and the standard of being a mother is available. This is the creation effect of gentle benevolence.

古文：《易》曰： 受兹介福，于其王母。 
现代文：《易经》说： 赐予这样的洪福，给国王的母亲。 
English: The "I Ching" says: bestow such great blessings on the mother of a king.

古文：《礼》曰： 承天之庆，万福无疆。 
现代文：《礼经》说： 承受上天赐予的幸福，这种幸福是无限量、无止境的。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says: "Bear the happiness bestowed by Heaven. This happiness is limitless and endless.

古文：诸欲依废汉火刘，皆沃灌雪除，殄灭无余杂矣。
现代文：凡是想要依靠已经被推翻的汉朝、以火德称王的刘家的势力，都被泼洒冲刷，消灭得彻底干净了。
English: All the forces that wanted to rely on the overthrown Han Dynasty and the Liu family, which called itself the king of fire and virtue, were splashed and washed and completely wiped out.

古文：百谷丰茂，庶草蕃殖，元元欢喜，兆民赖福，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：庄稼丰茂，作物繁殖，人民欢喜，全民托福，全国上下都幸运得很！ 
English: Abundant crops, crop reproduction, people's joy, national TOEFL, the whole country is very lucky!

古文：莽日与方士涿郡昭君等于后宫考验方术，纵淫乐焉。
现代文：王莽每天跟方士涿郡人昭君等在后宫考究房中术，放肆荒淫享乐。
English: Every day, Wang Mang and Fang Shizhen County people such as Zhaojun studied in the harem, indulged in debauchery and pleasure.

古文：大赦天下，然犹曰： 故汉氏舂陵侯群子刘伯升与其族人婚姻党及北狄胡虏逆舆洎南僰虏若豆、孟迁，不用此书。
现代文：宣布全国大赦，可是还要说： 原汉朝舂陵侯的堂房侄儿刘伯升和他的族家、亲戚、党羽，狂妄地制造流言，迷惑群众，背叛天命，还有亲手杀害更始将军廉丹和前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐的人，还有北狄匈奴的叛乱头目舆和南荚贼虏若豆、孟迁，不适用这个文告。
English: Announce a national amnesty, but also say: Liu Bo-sheng, the cousin and nephew of the former Han Dynasty's Prince of Fuling, and his family members, relatives, and party members, arrogantly fabricated rumors, confused the masses, betrayed the destiny of heaven, and personally killed the original general Lian Dan and the former team doctor Zhen Fu, who belonged to Zheng Liang Qiu Ji, as well as the rebel leader of the North Di Xiongnu, Myu, and the South Thief, Ru Ru Ruozi and Meng Qian, do not apply to this announcement.

古文：有能捕得此人者，皆封为上公，食邑万户，赐宝货五千万。 
现代文：有能够捉到这些人的，都赐封为上公，封邑一万户，赏赐宝货五千万。 
English: Anyone who could capture these people was given the title of shogun, ten thousand households in fiefs, and fifty million in treasure.

古文：又诏： 太师王匡、国将哀章、司命孔仁、兖州牧寿良、卒正王闳、扬州牧李圣亟进所部州郡兵凡三十万众，迫措青、徐盗贼。
现代文：又下诏书说： 太师王匡、国将哀章、司命孔仁、兖州牧寿良、卒正王闳和扬州牧李圣迅速推进所属各州郡的部队共三十万人，围剿追捕青州和徐州的盗贼。
English: The following imperial edict also said: Grand Master Wang Kuang, General of the People's Commissariat of War Yanzhang, Secretary of the People's Commissariat of War Kong Ren, Zhangzhou Mu Shouliang, General of the People's Commissariat of War Wang Qian and Yangzhou Mu Lisheng quickly advanced the troops of 300,000 in total in their respective states and counties, encircled and pursued the thieves in Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂、车骑将军王巡、左队大夫王吴亟进所部州郡兵凡十万众，迫措前队丑虏。
现代文：纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂、车骑将军王巡和左队大夫王吴迅速推进所属各州郡的部队共十万人，围剿追捕前队丑类。
English: General Nagan Yan Yu, General Chichizong Chen Mao, Cavalry General Wang Jun and Left Team Doctor Wang Wu quickly pushed forward a total of 100,000 troops from their respective states and counties to surround and pursue the vultures of the advance team.

古文：明告以生活丹青之信，复迷惑不解散，皆并力合击，殄灭之矣！
现代文：把投降就有活路的公开保证向他们明确宣布，如果再执迷不悟，不自行解散，那就都协力围剿，歼灭他们！
English: Give them a clear public assurance that there is a way out if they surrender, and announce to them that if they persist and do not disband on their own, then we will all work together to encircle and annihilate them!

古文：大司空隆新公，宗室戚属，前以虎牙将军东指则反虏破坏，西击则逆贼靡碎，此乃新室威宝之臣也。
现代文：大司空隆新公是皇族亲属，从前以虎牙将军的身份指向东方反贼就溃败，向西进攻叛乱头目就被粉碎，他是新朝有着崇高的权威和非凡的才能的大臣。
English: Daishi Ku Rong Xin Gong is a relative of the imperial family. He once pointed to the East as General Hu Ya and defeated the rebels. When he attacked the West, the rebel leader was crushed. He is a minister of the new dynasty with lofty authority and extraordinary talent.

古文：如黠贼不解散，将遣大司空将百万之师征伐剿绝之矣！ 
现代文：如果狡猾的盗贼还不解散，就会派遣大司空统率百万大军征伐剿减他们！ 
English: If the cunning thieves do not disband, we will send a million-strong army led by the commander-in-chief of the Air Force to conquer and subdue them!

古文：遣七公干士隗嚣等七十二人分下赦令晓谕云。
现代文：于是派遣七公干士隗嚣等七十二人分路下达赦免命令晓谕各地。
English: Therefore, he dispatched seven public officials and seventy-two others to issue an amnesty order to all regions.

古文：嚣等既出，因逃亡矣。
现代文：隗嚣等人一出京城，便逃跑了。
English: As soon as Yan Han and the others left the capital, they fled.

古文：四月，世祖与王常等别攻颍州，下昆阳、郾、定陵。
现代文：四月间，世祖和王常等人另外进攻颖川郡，攻下了昆阳县、郾县和定陵县。
English: In April, Shizu and Wang Chang and others also attacked Yingchuan County and captured Kunyang County, Ya County and Dingling County.

古文：莽闻之愈恐。遣大司空王邑驰伟至雒阳，与司徒王寻发众郡兵百万，号曰 虎牙五威兵 ，平定山东。
现代文：王莽听到这个消息更加惶恐，派遣大司空王邑坐传车前往洛阳，和司徒王寻调动各郡部队上百万人，称为 虎牙五威兵 ，平定山东地区。
English: Wang Mang was even more alarmed when he heard this news. He dispatched the major general Kuo Wangyue to Luoyang by car, and Sitou Wangxuan to mobilize a million troops from all counties, known as Huya Wufei soldiers, to pacify Shandong.

古文：得颛封爵，政决于邑，除用征诸明兵法六十三家术者，各持图书，受器械，备军吏。
现代文：有权自行赐封爵位，军政大计由王邑决定，任用选调来的许多通晓六十三家兵法和战略战术的专家，每人携带图书，领用武器，候补军官。
English: He has the right to bestow knighthoods on his own, and the military and political plan is decided by Wang Yue. He has appointed many experts who are familiar with the 63 families of military law and strategy and tactics, each carrying books, carrying weapons, and alternate officers.

古文：倾府库以遣邑，多赍珍宝、猛兽，欲视饶富，用怖山东。
现代文：把所有仓库里的军需物资全都拿出来交给王邑，多带贵重物品和猛兽，想要显示朝廷的富足，用来震慑山东地区。
English: He took out all the military supplies in the warehouse and handed them over to Wangyi, bringing many valuables and fierce beasts to show the wealth of the imperial court and to deter the Shandong region.

古文：邑至雒阳，州郡各选精兵，牧守自将，定会者四十二万人，余在道不绝，车甲士马之盛，自古出师未尝有也。
现代文：王邑到达洛阳，各州郡分别选派了精锐的军队，由州牧和郡太守亲自率领，按照规定期限会合的有四十二万人，其余在路上的络绎不绝，人马和武器装备的威武齐全，自古以来出兵都没有过。
English: Wangyi arrived in Luoyang, and each prefecture and county separately selected and dispatched elite troops, led by the prefect of the prefecture and the governor of the county. There were 420,000 people who met according to the prescribed time limit, and the rest were on the road in an endless stream. The manpower and weapons and equipment were formidable, and no troops had been dispatched since ancient times.

古文：六月，邑与司徒寻发雒阳，欲室宛，道出颍川，过昆阳。
现代文：六月间，王邑和大司徒王寻从洛阳出发，想要到宛县去，取道颖川郡，经过昆阳县。
English: In June, Wang Yip and Wang Xun, the eldest disciple, set out from Luoyang and wanted to go to Wan County. They took the road to Yingchuan County and passed through Kunyang County.

古文：昆阳时已降汉，汉兵守之。
现代文：昆阳城这时已经投降汉军，汉军守卫着它。
English: At this time, Kunyang City had already surrendered to the Chinese army, and the Chinese army was guarding it.

古文：严尤、陈茂与二公会，二公纵兵围昆阳。
现代文：严尤和陈茂跟两位统帅会合了，两位统帅指挥大军包围了昆阳城。
English: Yan You and Chen Mao met with the two generals, and the two generals commanded a large army to surround Kunyang City.

古文：严尤曰： 称尊号者在宛下，宜亟进。
现代文：严尤说： 自称皇帝的人在宛城，应当迅速前进。
English: Yan Yu said: People who claim to be emperors are in the wrong place, they should move forward quickly.

古文：彼破，诸城自定矣。 
现代文：那里攻下来了，其他城邑自然平定了。 
English: It was conquered there, and the other towns were naturally pacified.

古文：邑曰： 百万之师，所过当灭，今属此城，喋血而进，前歌后舞，顾不快邪！ 
现代文：王邑说： 百万大军，所经过地方的敌人都应当加以消灭，现在攻下这个县城，把里面的人杀光，踏着敌人的血泊前进，前头的部队唱着胜利歌，后头的部队跳着胜利舞，难道不痛快吗！ 
English: Wang Yu said: "A million-strong army, the enemies of all the places it passes through should be eliminated. Isn't it fun to capture this county seat now, kill all the people inside, advance on the blood of the enemy, the troops in front sing a victory song, and the troops behind dance a victory dance!

古文：遂围城数十重。
现代文：便包围昆阳城几十层。
English: and encircled dozens of floors of Kunyang City.

古文：城中请降，不许。
现代文：城里的守军请求投降，没有允许。
English: The defenders of the city asked to surrender, but were not allowed to.

古文：严尤又曰：  归师勿遏，围城为之阙 ，可如兵法，使得逸出，以怖宛下。 
现代文：严尤又说：  退回去的军队不要拦截，包围城邑要给里面的人留下一个缺口 ，可以按照兵法办，让他们有可能逃出去，藉以震慑宛城方面。 
English: Yan Yu also said: Don't intercept the retreating army, surround the city to leave a gap for the people inside, which can be done in accordance with military law, so that they can escape, thereby deterring the city side.

古文：邑又不听。
现代文：王邑又不听从。
English: Wangyur did not listen.

古文：会世祖悉发郾、定陵兵数千人来救昆阳，寻、邑易之，自将万余人行陈，敕诸营皆按部毋得动，独迎，与汉兵战，不利。
现代文：恰好世祖全部调动郾县和定陵县的军队几千人来援救昆阳城，王寻和王邑轻视他们，自己带领一万多人巡视阵地，告诫各军营都要约束部下不准擅自行动，自己单独迎击，跟汉军交战，不顺利。
English: It just so happened that Shizu had mobilized several thousand soldiers from Min County and Dingling County to rescue Kunyang City. Wang Huan and Wang Yue despised them and led more than ten thousand people to inspect the positions. They warned all the military camps that they should restrain their subordinates and not allow them to act without authorization, and that they should fight alone against the Chinese army, which did not go well.

古文：大军不敢擅相救，汉兵乘胜杀寻。
现代文：大军不敢擅自来援救，汉军乘胜杀死了王寻。
English: The large army did not dare to come to the rescue without authorization, and the Chinese army killed Wang Huan.

古文：昆阳中兵出并战，邑走，军乱。
现代文：昆阳城里的守军冲出来两面夹攻，王邑逃走，军队大乱。
English: The defenders in the city of Kunyang rushed out to attack on both sides, Wangyue fled, and the army was in chaos.

古文：大风飞瓦，雨如注水，大众崩坏号呼，虎豹股栗，士卒奔走，各还归其郡。
现代文：大风刮走了屋瓦，大雨像泼水，大军崩溃，大喊大叫，老虎豹子也吓得战怵起来，士兵奔逃，各自回到了自己的郡县。
English: The wind blew away the roof tiles, the rain fell like water, the army collapsed and shouted, the tigers and leopards also trembled, the soldiers fled and each returned to his own county.

古文：邑独与所将长安勇敢数千人还雒阳。
现代文：王邑单独和他所率领的长安勇士几千人回到了洛阳。
English: Wangyi alone and several thousand Chang'an warriors led by him returned to Luoyang.

古文：关中闻之震恐，盗贼并起。
现代文：关中地区听到这个消息，震动恐惧，盗贼纷纷起事。
English: When the Guanzhong area heard the news, it was shaken with fear, and thieves rose up.

古文：又闻汉兵言，莽鸩杀孝平帝。
现代文：又听到汉军说，王莽毒死了汉平帝。
English: Han soldiers were also heard to say that Wang Mang had poisoned Emperor Han Ping.

古文：莽乃会公卿以下于王路堂，开所为平帝请命金滕之策，泣以视群臣。
现代文：王莽便集合公卿以下官吏到王路堂，打开他所作的替平帝请求解除疾病、保全性命而后来收藏在保险柜里的策书，流着泪把它给大臣们看。
English: Wang Mang then gathered the court nobles and other officials to the Wang Lu Hall, opened the strategy book he had made for Emperor Ping to request relief from illness and preservation of life, which was later stored in a safe, and showed it to the ministers with tears.

古文：命明学男张邯称说其德及符命事，因曰： 《易》言 伏戎于莽，升其高陵，三岁不兴。 
现代文：吩咐明学男张邯称道他的德行和有关符命的事情，乘机说： 《易经》说： 把军队埋伏在茂密的草丛中，登上高大的土山了望，不敢前进，直到三年都不能兴起。 
English: He ordered the learned man, Zhang Xuan, to praise his virtue and the things related to his fate, and took the opportunity to say: "The I Ching says: Ambush the army in the thick grass, climb a tall hill, and do not dare to advance until three years have passed.

古文： 莽 ，皇帝之名， 升 谓刘伯升。 高陵 谓高陵侯子翟义也。
现代文： 莽 是皇帝的名字。 升 是说刘伯升。 高陵，是说高陵侯的儿子翟义。
English: Meng is the name of the emperor, Sheng means Liu Bo Sheng, and Gaoling means the son of Gaoling's vassal Zhuang Yi.

古文：言刘升、翟义为伏戎之兵于新皇帝世，犹殄灭不兴也。 群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：说刘伯升和翟义在新皇帝的时代建立地下武装，还是会被消灭不能成功。 大臣们都喊 万岁 。
English: To say that Liu Po-sheng and Zhai Yi, who established underground armed forces in the era of the new emperor, will still be eliminated cannot succeed. The ministers all shouted "long live."

古文：又令东方槛车传送数人，言 刘伯升等皆行大戮 。
现代文：又命令东方用囚车传送几个人，说 造就是刘伯升等人，都会被处死 。
English: He also ordered Dongfang to transport several people in a prison van, saying that Liu Bosheng and the others would all be executed.

古文：民知其诈也。
现代文：百姓知道那是假的。
English: The people know it's fake.

古文：先是，卫将军王涉素养道士西门君惠。
现代文：早先，卫将军王涉一向供养着道士西门君惠。
English: In the early days, the general of the Imperial Guards, Wang Watan, had always supported the Taoist monk, Simon Junhui.

古文：君惠好天文谶记，为涉言： 星孛扫宫室，刘氏当复兴，国师公姓名是也。 
现代文：西门君惠爱好天文谶讳，对王涉说： 有一颗星光芒四射，扫射皇宫，刘家会要复兴，国师公的姓名就是。 
English: Ximen Junhui, who was fond of astronomy, said to Wang Zhan: There is a star that shines brightly, sweeping the royal palace, the Liu family will be revived, and the name of the national teacher is.

古文：涉信其言，以语大司马董忠，数俱至国师殿中庐道语星宿，国师不应。
现代文：王涉相信了他的话，把它告诉了大司马董忠，多次一同到国师在殿中的值班室谈论星宿，国师没有回答。
English: Wang Wan believed his words and told it to the head of Ma Dongzhong. They went to the duty room in the palace to talk about the constellations many times, but the state teacher did not answer.

古文：后涉特往，对歆涕泣言： 诚欲与公共安宗族，奈何不信涉也！ 
现代文：后来王涉特此前往，对刘歆流着泪说： 的确是想要跟您共同保护我们两个家族的安全，为什么不相信我呢！ 
English: Later, Wang Wanzhong made a special trip here and said to Liu Ye in tears: I really want to work with you to protect the safety of our two families, why don't you believe me!

古文：歆因为言天文人事，东方必成。
现代文：刘歆于是给他谈论天文人事，东方军队必定成功。
English: Liu Bei then talked to him about astronomical personnel, and the Eastern Army would certainly succeed.

古文：涉曰： 新都哀侯小被病，功显君素耆酒，疑帝本非我家子也。
现代文：王涉说： 新都哀侯从小得病，功显君一向好酒，怀疑皇帝本来就不是我们王家的儿子。
English: Wang Wanzhong said: Xindu Maohua has been ill since childhood, Gong Xianjun has always been a good wine, suspecting that the emperor is not the son of our royal family.

古文：董公主中军精兵，涉领宫卫，伊休侯主殿中，如同心合谋，共劫持帝，东降南阳天子，可以全宗族；不者，俱夷灭矣！ 
现代文：董公主管中军精兵，我率领宫廷警卫部队，伊休侯主管殿中警卫，如果我们几个同心合谋，一起劫持皇帝，向东方投降现在驻在南阳郡的天子，就可以保全我们的家族；不然的话，都会杀身灭族啊！ 
English: Dong Gong is in charge of the elite soldiers of the Chinese army, I am in charge of the palace guard troops, and Yixiu Hou is in charge of the guards in the palace. If several of us conspire together to kidnap the emperor and surrender to the East, we can save our family; otherwise, we will all kill ourselves and destroy the nation!

古文：伊休侯者，歆长子也，为侍中五官中朗将，莽素爱之。
现代文：伊休侯是刘歆的长子，担任侍中五宫中郎将，王莽一向喜爱他。
English: Yi Xiu Hou was Liu Ye's eldest son, and he served as a general in the Fifth Court. Wang Mang had always loved him.

古文：歆怨莽杀其三子，又畏大祸至，遂与涉、忠谋，欲发。
现代文：刘歆怨恨王莽杀死了他的三个儿女，又畏惧大祸临头，便跟王涉和董忠谋划，想要行动。
English: Liu Bei resented Wang Mang for killing his three sons and daughters, and fearing that a great calamity was imminent, he plotted with Wang Zhan and Dong Zhong and wanted to act.

古文：歆曰： 当待太白星出，乃可。 
现代文：刘歆说： 应当等待太白星出现，才可以行动。 
English: Liu Wei said: We should wait for the white star to appear before we can act.

古文：忠以司中大赘起武侯孙伋亦主兵，复与伋谋。
现代文：董忠因为司中大赘起武侯孙伋也主管军队，又与孙伋商量。
English: Dong Zhong also discussed with Sun Yat-sen, because Sun Yat-sen was also in charge of the army.

古文：伋归家，颜色变，不能食。
现代文：孙伋回到家里，脸色变了，吃不下饭。
English: When Sun Yat-sen returned home, his face had changed and he couldn't eat.

古文：妻怪问之，语其状。
现代文：他的妻子感到奇怪，便问他，他把那些情况告诉了她。
English: His wife was puzzled and asked him about it, and he told her about it.

古文：妻以告弟云阳陈邯，邯欲告之。
现代文：他的妻子把这些情况告诉了她的弟弟云阳县人陈邯，陈邯想要告发他们。
English: His wife told this to her younger brother, Chen Yao from Yunyang County, who wanted to report them.

古文：七月，伋与邯俱告，莽遣使者分召忠等。
现代文：七月间，孙伋和陈邯一同去告发了，王莽派遣使者分别召唤董忠等人。
English: In July, Sun Zheng and Chen Zheng went to denounce together, and Wang Mang sent messengers to summon Dong Zhong and others separately.

古文：时忠方进兵都肄，护军王咸谓忠谋久不发，恐漏泄，不如遂斩使者，勒兵入。
现代文：这时董忠正在讲习武事进行大练兵，护军王咸说董忠谋划已经很久而不行动，恐怕走露了风声，不如就杀掉使者，率领军队进去。
English: At this time, Dong Zhong was studying martial arts to train soldiers. Wang Xian, the military escort, said that Dong Zhong had been planning for a long time without taking action. I am afraid that the rumor had leaked out. It would be better to kill the messenger and lead the army in.

古文：忠不听，遂与歆、涉会省户下。
现代文：董忠不听从，便跟刘歆和王涉在宫中大臣官署会合。
English: When Dong Zhong did not listen, he met with Liu Bei and Wang Wanzhong at the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：莽令惲责问，皆服。
现代文：王莽让踅惮责问他们，都承认了。
English: Wang Meng asked Zou Shuang to interrogate them, and they all confessed.

古文：中黄门各拔刃将忠等送庐，忠拔剑欲自刎，侍中王望传言大司马反，黄门持剑共格杀之。
现代文：宫内太监们抽出刀来把董忠等人送到他们的值班室去，董忠抽出剑来想要抹脖子，侍中王望传告说大司马造，太监们拿着剑一同杀死了他。
English: The palace eunuchs drew their swords to send Dong Zhong and others to their duty room, and Dong Zhong drew his sword to have his neck wiped. The eunuchs took their swords and killed him together after Wang Wang, the chamberlain, announced that he was a horse builder.

古文：省中相惊传，勒兵至郎署，皆拔刃张弩。
现代文：大臣官署一片惊慌，互相传告，正在集中训练的士兵纷纷涌到郎官衙门，都是刀出鞘、箭上弓。
English: The minister's office was in a panic, telling each other that soldiers who were undergoing intensive training had flocked to the official's gate, all with swords out of their scabbards and bows on their arrows.

古文：更始将军史谌行诸署，告郎吏曰： 大司马有狂病，发，已诛。 
现代文：更始将军史谌巡视各郎官衙门，告诉郎官们说： 大司马神经错乱，妄图造，刚刚发动，已被处死。 
English: At the beginning of the new year, General Shi Yan inspected the palace gates of each of his subordinates, and told his subordinates: "Grandmaster Ma is mentally deranged, he made this up, he just started it, and he has been executed.

古文：皆令驰兵，莽欲以厌凶，使虎贲以斩马剑挫忠，盛以竹器，传曰 反虏出 。
现代文：命令他们都放下武器。王莽想要拿董忠来厌胜灾祸，让虎贲勇士用斩马剑剁碎董忠，用竹器盛着，传告说 反贼出来了 。
English: He ordered them all to lay down their weapons. Wang Mang wanted to use Dong Zhong to overcome the disaster, so he had the tiger warrior chop up Dong Zhong with a sword, and put it in a bamboo container to announce that the anti-thief had come out.

古文：下书赦大司马官属吏士为忠所诖误，谋反未发觉者。
现代文：下文告赦免大司马下属官吏和军官士兵被董忠所蒙蔽，参与造还没有被发觉的。
English: It is hereby announced that the officials and officers and soldiers subordinate to the Chief Secretary Ma who have been deceived by Dong Zhong and who have not yet been found to be involved in the conspiracy will be pardoned.

古文：收忠宗族，以醇醯毒药、尺白刃丛棘并一坎而埋之。
现代文：逮捕董忠的家族，用浓醋、毒药和小刀子、棘条子合成一穴埋葬了他们。
English: They arrested Dong Zhong's family members and buried them in a hole made of vinegar, poison, a knife and thorns.

古文：刘歆、王涉皆自杀。
现代文：刘歆和王涉都自杀丫。
English: Liu Ye and Wang Zhan both committed suicide.

古文：莽以二人骨肉旧臣，恶其内溃，故隐其诛。
现代文：王莽因为这两个人是至亲和老部下，嫌厌人家说他的内部崩溃了，所以不公开宣布对他们的惩罚。
English: Wang Mang did not publicly announce the punishment of the two men because they were close relatives and old subordinates, and he did not want people to say that he had suffered an internal collapse.

古文：伊休侯叠又以素谨，歆讫不告，但免侍中中郎将，更为中散大夫。
现代文：伊休侯刘叠又因为一向谨慎，刘歆一直没有把他们的计划告诉他，衹免掉了侍中中郎将，改任中散大夫。
English: Ixiu marquis Liu Jia and because he had always been cautious, Liu Yao had not told him about their plan. Yao was relieved of the position of vice-chamberlain and was reassigned to the position of middle-ranking doctor.

古文：后日殿中钩盾土山仙人掌旁有白头公青衣，郎吏见者私谓之国师公。
现代文：后来殿中假山仙人掌旁边出现了穿着青衣的白发老头，看见了的郎官私下里说那是国师公。
English: Later, a white-haired old man in a blue robe appeared next to the rockery cactus in the hall. The vassal who saw him said privately that it was the Grand Master.

古文：衍功侯喜素善卦，莽使筮之，曰： 忧兵火。 
现代文：衍功侯王喜一向会占卦，王莽让他用蓍草占了一卦，说： 担心兵灾火灾。 
English: Wang Xi, the master of Yin Gong, would always tell fortunes. Wang Mang asked him to tell fortunes with reeds, saying, "I'm worried about military disasters and fires.

古文：莽曰： 小儿安得此左道？
现代文：王莽说： 小孩子怎么学会了这些邪门旁道？
English: Wang Mang said: How did children learn these evil ways?

古文：是乃予之皇祖叔父子侨欲来迎我也。 
现代文：这是我的皇祖先叔父王子侨要来接我了。 
English: It's my imperial ancestor uncle prince who's coming to pick me up.

古文：莽军师外破，大臣内畔，左右亡所信，不能复远念郡国，欲呼邑与计议。
现代文：王莽的军队在外面吃了败仗，大臣们在内部进行颠覆，身边没有人可资信任了，不能够再考虑远方的郡国，想要叫王邑回来跟他商量。
English: Wang Mang's army was defeated on the outside, his ministers were subverting on the inside, no one around him could be trusted, and he could no longer think about faraway counties and countries, and wanted to call Wang Yue back to consult with him.

古文：崔发曰： 邑素小心，今失大众而征，恐其执节引决，宜有以大慰其意。 
现代文：崔发说： 王邑一向小心，现在损失了大军再调回，恐怕他持忠义而自杀，应当想办法好好安慰一下他的心情。 
English: Cui Fa said, "Wang Yip has always been careful. Now that he has lost a large army and has to bring it back, I'm afraid he will commit suicide out of loyalty. We should find a way to comfort his heart."

古文：于是莽遣发驰传谕邑： 我年老毋適子，欲传邑以天下。
现代文：于是王莽派遣崔发坐传车去晓谕王邑道： 我年老了，没有正妻生的儿子，想要把国家政权传给你。
English: So Wang Mang sent Cui Fa in a carriage to tell Wang Yu: I am old and have no son by my legal wife, and I want to pass on the state power to you.

古文：敕亡得谢，见勿复道。 
现代文：命令你不要检讨罪责，相见时不要再说到那些事情。 
English: I order you not to re-examine the guilt and not to mention those things when we meet.

古文：邑到，以为大司马。
现代文：王邑到达，任命他作大司马。
English: Wanyu arrived and appointed him as the grand steward.

古文：大长秋张邯为大司徒，崔发为大司空，司中寿容苗为国师，同说侯林为卫将军。
现代文：大长秋张邯担任大司徒，崔发担任大司空，司中寿容人苗欣担任国师，同说侯王林担任卫将军。
English: Senior Prefect Qiu Zhangye served as the chief disciple, Cui Fa served as the chief disciple of Kuang, Secretary Zhong Shou Rong Ren Miao Xin served as the national teacher, and the same said Hou Wang Lin served as the general of Wei.

古文：莽忧懑不能食，亶饮酒，啖鳆鱼。
现代文：王莽忧闷得吃不下饭，衹喝酒，吃鲍鱼。
English: Wang Meng was so depressed that he couldn't eat. He drank wine and ate abalone.

古文：读军书倦，因凭几寐，不复就枕矣。
现代文：阅读军书疲倦了，便靠着几案打盹儿，不再上床睡觉。
English: Tired of reading military books, he would rely on a few cases to take a nap and no longer go to bed.

古文：性好时日小数，及事迫急，亶为厌胜。
现代文：喜欢搞趋吉避凶的小名堂，临到事态紧急，还一味在企图厌胜敌人。
English: He likes to engage in petty name-calling, and when the situation is urgent, he is still trying to defeat the enemy.

古文：遣使坏渭陵、延陵园门罘罳，曰： 毋使民复思也。 
现代文：派遣使者去拆毁渭陵和延陵墓门的屏纲，说道： 不要让人民再想起汉朝了。 
English: He sent an envoy to demolish the screens of the tombs of Fuling and Yanling, saying: Don't let the people remember the Han Dynasty.

古文：又以墨洿色其周垣。
现代文：又用墨汁涂黑它们的围墙。
English: and blackened their walls with ink.

古文：号将至曰 岁宿 ，申水为 助将军 ，右庚 刻木校尉 ，前丙 耀金都尉鸀，又曰 执大斧，伐枯木；流大水，灭发火。 
现代文：称将军为 岁宿 ，申水为 助将军 ，还有右庚 刻木校尉 、前丙 耀金都尉 ，又说： 拿着大斧，砍伐枯木；流出大水，淹没残火。 
English: He also called the general "saijuku" and the vice-general "shinsui," as well as Captain Ugo Kekki and former Captain B Yao Jin, and said: "Take a big axe and cut down dead trees; flood water will flow out and drown the residual fire."

古文：如此属不可胜记。
现代文：像这一类把戏，多得无法记载。
English: Tricks of this kind are too numerous to mention.

古文：秋，太白星流入太微，烛地如月光。
现代文：秋季里，太白星流到了太微垣，照耀地面像月光一样。
English: In autumn, the too-white star streamed to the too-faint background, illuminating the ground like moonlight.

古文：成纪隗崔兄弟共劫大尹李育，以兄子隗嚣为大将军，攻杀雍州牧陈庆、安定卒正王旬，并其众，移书郡县，数莽罪恶万于桀、纣。
现代文：成纪县人隗崔兄弟一道劫持大尹李育，拥立他们的侄儿隗嚣作大将军，进攻并杀死了雍州牧陈庆和安定郡卒正王旬，吞并了他们的军队，传递文告到各郡县，列举王莽的罪恶比夏桀、商纣还要多一万倍。
English: Chengji County people Yan Cui brothers together kidnapped the great Yin Li Yu, supported their nephew Yan Han as the general, attacked and killed the Yongzhou herdsman Chen Qing and the stable county official Wang Zheng Jun, annexed their army, sent a message to all counties and counties, and listed Wang Mang's crimes as ten thousand times more than Xia Yao and Shang Yao.

古文：是月，析人邓晔、于匡起兵南乡百余人。
现代文：这个月，析县人邓晔和于匡在南乡起兵，有一百多人。
English: This month, more than a hundred people, including Deng Yihe and Yu Kuang, who are from Jing County, raised an army in Nanxiang.

古文：时析宰将兵数千屯鄡亭，备武关。
现代文：这时析县县长率领军队几千人驻在郑亭，防守武关。
English: At this time, the head of the county led several thousand troops stationed in Zhengting to defend Wuguan.

古文：晔、匡谓宰曰： 刘帝已立，君何不知命也！ 
现代文：邓晔和于匡对县长说： 刘家皇帝已经登位，您怎么不知道天命呢！ 
English: Deng Xiaohe and Yu Kuang said to the county magistrate: Emperor Liu Jia has already ascended to the throne, how can you not know the fate of heaven!

古文：宰请降，尽得其众。
现代文：县长请求投降，全部接收了他的军队。
English: The prefect pleaded for surrender and received all of his troops.

古文：晔自称辅汉左将军，匡右将军，拔析、丹水，攻武关，都尉朱萌降。
现代文：邓晔自称辅汉左将军，于匡自称辅汉右将军，攻下了析县和丹水县，进攻武关，都尉朱萌投降。
English: Deng Xuan claimed to be the second-in-command of the Han Left General, and Yu Kuang claimed to be the second-in-command of the Han Right General. They captured Jing County and Danshui County, attacked Wuguan, and Captain Zhu Meng surrendered.

古文：进攻右队大夫宋纲，杀之，西拔湖。
现代文：进攻右队大夫宋纲，杀死了他，西进攻下了湖县。
English: The right wing attacked Song Gang, a doctor, and killed him, while the west attacked Huxian.

古文：莽愈忧，不知所出。
现代文：王莽更加忧虑，不知道如何应付。
English: Wang Meng was even more worried and didn't know how to deal with it.

古文：崔发言： 《周礼》及《春秋左氏》，国有大灾，则哭以厌之。
现代文：崔发说： 《周礼》和《春秋左氏传》说，国家有了大灾难，就哭着去厌胜它。
English: Cui Fa said: "Zhou Li" and "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi" say that when the country has a great disaster, it will cry and weep to overcome it.

古文：故《易》称 先号啕而后笑 。
现代文：所以《易经》说 首先放声大哭，后来才笑 。
English: That's why the I Ching says, "First cry, then laugh."

古文：宜呼嗟告天以求救。 
现代文：我们可以长吁短叹祷告上天祈求救助。 
English: We can breathe a sigh of relief and pray to the heavens for help.

古文：莽自知败，乃率群臣至南郊，陈其符命本末，仰天曰： 皇天既命授臣莽，何不殄灭众贼？
现代文：王莽自己知道失败了，便率领大批臣子到南郊，陈述他承受符命的首尾经过，仰天说道： 上天既然降命把国家政权交给我王莽，为什么不消灭那些盗贼？
English: Wang Mang himself knew that he had failed, so he led a large number of courtiers to the southern suburb, recounted the first and last steps of his life, and looked up to heaven and said: Since heaven has given the order to hand over the state power to me, Wang Mang, why not eliminate those thieves?

古文：即令臣莽非是，愿下雷霆诛臣莽！ 
现代文：假使我王莽不对，希望您降下霹雷打死我王莽！ 
English: If I am wrong, I hope you will strike me dead with thunderbolts!

古文：因搏心大哭，气尽，伏而叩头。
现代文：于是捶胸大哭，哭不出声来了，伏地叩头。
English: So they beat their chests and wept loudly, and wept silently, and prostrated themselves.

古文：又作告天策，自陈功劳，千余言。
现代文：又写了一篇告天的策书，陈述自己的功劳，有一千多字。
English: He also wrote a self-congratulatory strategy book, stating his achievements, with more than a thousand words.

古文：诸生小民会旦夕哭，为设飧粥，甚悲哀及能诵策文者除以为郎，至五千余人。
现代文：众儒生和老百姓每天早晚会集起来哭，给他们准备了稀饭，哭得非常悲哀和能够背诵策文的，任命他们作郎官，达到五千多人。
English: Every morning and evening, all the Confucian scholars and ordinary people would gather together to cry. They prepared porridge for them. They cried very sadly and were able to recite the precepts. They appointed them as officials, reaching more than 5,000 people.

古文：惲将领之。
现代文：由踅惮率领他们。
English: They are being led by a baboon.

古文：莽拜将军九人，皆以虎为号，九曰 九虎 将北军精兵数万人东，内其妻子宫中以为质。
现代文：王莽授任将军九人，都用 虎 作为将军的名号，称为 九虎 ，率领京城警卫部队的精锐士兵几万人向东方开去，把他们的妻子儿女收容到皇宫里作为人质。
English: Wang Mang appointed nine generals, all of whom used "Tiger" as the general's name, known as the Nine Tigers. They led tens of thousands of elite soldiers of the Beijing city guard force to the east, and took their wives and children to the imperial palace as hostages.

古文：时省中黄金万斤者为一匮，尚有六十匮，黄门、钩盾、臧府、中尚方处处各有数匮。
现代文：这时宫中储存一万斤一箱的黄金还有六十箱，黄门、钩盾、藏府、中尚方每处各有几箱。
English: At this time, there were still sixty boxes of gold stored in the palace at 10,000 jin per box, and there were several boxes each at the Yellow Gate, the Hook Shield, the Tibetan capital, and the Chinese capital.

古文：长乐御府、中御府及都内、平准帑藏钱、帛、珠玉财物甚众，莽愈爱之，赐九虎士人四千钱。
现代文：长乐宫御府、中御府和都内、平准库存钱币、绸绢、珍珠、实玉等各种财物很多，王莽更加吝惜它们，赏赐九虎部队的士兵每人四千钱。
English: There were many kinds of property such as coins, silk brocade, pearls, and solid jade in the Changle Palace Imperial Palace, the Central Imperial Palace, and in the capital, including the quasi-inventory. Wang Mang was even more stingy with them, and rewarded the soldiers of the Nine Tigers with four thousand yuan each.

古文：众重怨，无斗意。
现代文：士兵非常怨恨，没有战斗意志。
English: The soldiers are very resentful and have no will to fight.

古文：九虎至华阴回溪，距隘，北从河南至山。
现代文：九虎将军到达华阴县回溪，扼守险要，北起黄河，南到崤山。
English: General Jiuhu arrived in Huaxi, Huayin County, and guarded the key points, from the Yellow River in the north to Lushan in the south.

古文：于匡持数千弩，乘堆挑战。
现代文：于匡带领几千弓箭手，登高挑战。
English: Yu Kuang led several thousand archers to climb the challenge.

古文：邓晔将二万余人从阌乡南出枣街、作姑，破其一部，北出九虎后击之。
现代文：邓晔率领两万多人从闵乡县向南到枣街和作姑一线，打败了其中的一部，向北绕到九虎防线的后面攻打他们。
English: Deng Xuan led more than twenty thousand people from Minxiang County to the south to Zao Street and Zuogu Line, defeated one of them, and went north to the back of the Nine Tigers Defense Line to attack them.

古文：六虎败走。
现代文：六虎败走。
English: The six tigers were defeated.

古文：史熊、王况诣阙归死，莽使使责死者按在，皆自杀；其四虎亡。
现代文：史熊和王况回到朝廷接受死刑，王莽让使者责问他们死的人在哪里，都自杀了；其他四虎逃跑了。
English: Shi Xiong and Wang Zong returned to the court to receive the death penalty. Wang Mang asked the messenger to ask them where the dead people were, and they all committed suicide; the other four tigers fled.

古文：三虎郭钦、陈翚、成重收散卒，保京师仓。
现代文：还有三虎郭钦、陈巩和成重收集散兵，保卫京师仓。
English: There are also three tigers, Guo Qin, Chen Gong and Cheng Rong, who gather scattered soldiers to defend Beijing Shicang.

古文：邓晔开武关迎汉，丞相司直李松将二千余人至湖，与晔等共攻京师仓，未下。晔以弘农掾王宪为校尉，将数百人北度渭，入左冯翊界，降城略地。
现代文：邓晔打开武关迎接汉军，丞相司直李松率领两千多人到湖县，跟邓晔等人一道攻打京师仓，没能攻下来，邓哗派弘农郡吏员王宪作校尉，带领几百人向北渡过渭河，进入左冯翊境内，攻下城邑，占领地盘。
English: Deng Wei opened Wuguan to welcome the Chinese army, and the prime minister, Secretary Zhi Li Song, led more than two thousand people to Huxian. Together with Deng Wei and others, they attacked Beijing Shicang, but failed to conquer it. Deng Wei sent Wang Xian, an official of Hongnong County, as a lieutenant, and led several hundred people northward across the Fenhe River into the territory of Zuofengye, captured the town, and occupied the site.

古文：李松遣偏将军韩臣等径西至新丰，与莽波水将军战，波水走。
现代文：李松派遣偏将军韩臣等人径直西进，到达新丰县，跟王莽的波水将军交战，波水将军败逃。
English: Li Song sent General Han Chen and others straight to the west, reaching Xinfeng County, and fought with Wang Mang's General Boshui, who was defeated and fled.

古文：韩臣等追奔，遂至长门宫。
现代文：韩臣等人追赶逃跑的败兵，直到长门宫。
English: Han Sen and others chased the fleeing defeated soldiers all the way to Nagato Palace.

古文：王宪北至频阳，所过迎降。
现代文：王宪向北到达了频阳县，所经过的地方官吏都来迎接投降。
English: Wang Xian went north to Fengyang County, and all the local officials he passed came to welcome the surrender.

古文：大姓栎阳申砀、下邽王大皆率众随宪，属县斄严春、茂陵董喜、蓝田王孟、槐里汝臣、盩厔王扶、阳陵严本、杜陵屠门少之属，众皆数千人，假号称汉将。
现代文：世家大族烁阳县人申碣和下邦县人王大都率领部队跟随王宪。三辅阁县牦邰县人严春、茂陵县人董喜、蓝田县人王孟、槐里县人汝臣、盘医县人王扶、阳陵县人严本和杜陵县人屠门少这班人，部队都有几千人，自立名号称为汉朝的将军。
English: Wang Xian was followed by the troops led by the heads of the great families of Xiangyang County, Shen Rong, and Xiabang County, Wang Quan, Yan Chun of Min County, Sanshoukou County, Dong Xi of Muling County, Wang Meng of Lantian County, Ruxin of Baili County, Wang Fu of Panji County, Yan Ben of Yangling County, and Tu Men of Tuling County. There were several thousand troops, and they were called the generals of the Han Dynasty.

古文：时李松、邓晔以为，京师小小仓尚未可下，何况长安城！当须更始帝大兵到。
现代文：这时李松和邓晔认为京城小小的仓储地还没有能够攻下来，更何况长安城，衹有等待更始帝的大军来到才能进攻。
English: At this time, Li Song and Deng Yao believed that the small storage area in Beijing had not yet been able to be attacked, let alone Chang'an City. They had to wait for the emperor's army to come before they could attack.

古文：即引军至华阴，治攻具。
现代文：就带着军队到了华阴县，制造攻城器械。
English: He took the army to Huayin County to manufacture siege equipment.

古文：而长安旁兵四会城下，闻天水隗氏兵方到，皆争欲先入城，贪立大功卤掠之利。
现代文：而长安附近的部队四面会合城下，听到天水郡隗家的部队正要到来，都争着想要先进城，贪图建立大功和抢劫财物的利益。
English: The troops around Chang'an gathered in all directions under the city, and when they heard that the troops of Tianshui County's Ying family were about to arrive, they all wanted to advance to the city, eager to establish great achievements and rob the interests of property.

古文：莽遣使者分赦城中诸狱囚徒，皆授兵，杀豨饮其血，与誓曰： 有不为新室者，社鬼记之！ 
现代文：王莽派遣使者分路赦免城里各个监狱的犯人，都发给武器，杀猪喝它的血，跟他们立誓说： 如有不为新朝效力的人，社鬼记住他！ 
English: Wang Mang sent an envoy to pardon the prisoners of various prisons in the city. They were all issued weapons, killed a pig and drank its blood, and swore to them: If there is anyone who does not work for the new dynasty, remember him!

古文：更始将军史谌将度渭桥，皆散走。
现代文：更始将军史谌率领着他们，渡过渭桥，都四散逃跑了。
English: Gen. Shi Yan, who was in charge at the time, led them across the Fengtai Bridge, and they all scattered and fled.

古文：谌空还。
现代文：史谌一个人回来。
English: Shi Yan came back alone.

古文：众兵发掘莽妻子父祖冢，烧其棺椁及九庙、明堂、辟雍，火照城中。
现代文：各部士兵挖掘王莽的妻子、儿女、父亲、祖父的坟墓，焚烧他们的棺材以及九庙、明堂和辟雍，火光照耀到城。
English: Soldiers from various departments dug up the graves of Wang Mang's wife, children, father, and grandfather, and burned their coffins as well as the Nine Temples, Ming Hall, and Biyong. The firelight shined into the city.

古文：或谓莽曰： 城门卒，东方人，不可信。 
现代文：有人对王莽说： 城门守兵是柬部地区的人，不可以信任。 
English: Someone said to Wang Mang: The gate guards are from the Cambodian region and cannot be trusted.

古文：莽更发越骑士为卫，门置六百人，各一校尉。
现代文：王莽改调越人骑兵担任守卫，每座城门设置六百人，各有一个校尉。
English: Wang Mang transferred the cavalry of the Viets to serve as guards, setting up six hundred people at each gate, each with a lieutenant.

古文：十月戊申朔，兵从宣平城门入，民间所谓都门也。
现代文：十月戊申初一，攻城部队从宣平城门进入，造就是民间所说的都门。
English: On the first day of October, the besieging forces entered the city from the Xuanping gate, creating what is popularly known as the capital gate.

古文：张邯行城门，逢兵见杀。
现代文：张邯巡视城门，遇着士兵被杀了。
English: Zhang Ye inspected the city gate and was killed by a soldier.

古文：王邑、王林、王巡、惲等分将兵距击北阙下。
现代文：王邑、王林、王巡和踅惮等人分别带兵在北阙下抗击。
English: Wang Yip, Wang Lin, Wang Jun and Xiu Shuo and others led their troops to fight against the Northern Wei separately.

古文：汉兵贪莽封力战者七百余人。
现代文：汉军士兵贪图更始帝所规定的捉到或杀死王莽的封赏，因而奋勇作战的有七百多人。
English: Han soldiers coveted the reward for capturing or killing Wang Mang, as stipulated by the emperor, and thus more than seven hundred people fought bravely.

古文：会日暮，官府邸第尽奔亡。
现代文：恰好天黑了，官吏和贵族都逃跑了。
English: Just as it was getting dark, the officials and nobles fled.

古文：二日己酉，城中少年朱弟、张鱼等恐见卤掠，趋讠雚并和，烧作室门，斧敬法闼，呼曰： 反虏王莽，何不出降？ 
现代文：二日己酉，城里青年朱弟和张鱼等人恐怕遭抢劫，成群结队，奔跑喧哗，焚烧尚方工场门，砍开敬法殿的小门，喊道： 反贼王莽，怎么不出来投降？ 
English: On the second day of the self-immolation, the young people in the city, such as Zhu Di and Zhang Yu, were afraid of being robbed, and they ran in groups, burning the Shangfang workshop door, cutting open the small door of the hall of worship, and shouted: Anti-thief Wang Mang, why not come out and surrender?

古文：火及掖廷承明，黄皇室主所居也。
现代文：火烧到了后宫的官署，这里是黄皇室主居住的地方。
English: The fire reached the government office of the harem, where the head of the Huang royal family lives.

古文：莽避火宣室前殿，火辄随之。
现代文：王莽避火到了宣室前殿，火总是跟着他。
English: Wang Mang fled the fire to the front hall of the Xuanwu residence. The fire always followed him.

古文：宫人妇女啼呼曰： 当奈何！ 
现代文：宫人妇女哭叫着说： 应当怎么办！ 
English: The women of the palace cried out, "What is to be done?

古文：时莽绀袀服，带玺韨，持虞帝匕首。
现代文：这时王莽穿着全套天青色的衣服，佩带着御玺，拿着虞帝，首。
English: At this time, Wang Mang was wearing a full set of sky-blue clothes, wearing an imperial scepter, holding Emperor Yu by the neck.

古文：天文郎桉栻于前，日时加某，莽旋席随斗柄而坐，曰： 天生德于予，汉兵其如予何！ 
现代文：天文郎在前面按着拭，随时拨动指针，王莽转动座席随着斗柄所指的方向坐着，说道： 上天把治理国家的圣德和使命赋予了我，漠军能把我怎么样！ 
English: Tianwen Lang pressed the wipe in front and moved the pointer at any time, Wang Mang turned the seat and sat in the direction indicated by the bucket handle, saying: Heaven has given me the sanctity and mission of governing the country, what can the desert army do to me!

古文：莽时不食，少气困矣。
现代文：王莽这时没有吃饭，精神有些困乏了。
English: Wang Meng did not eat at this time, and his spirit was somewhat tired.

古文：三日庚戌，晨旦明，群臣扶掖莽，自前殿南下椒除，西出白虎门，和新公王揖奉车待门外，莽就车，之渐台，欲阻池水，犹抱持符命、威斗，公、卿、大夫、侍中、黄门郎从官尚千余人随之。
现代文：三日庚戌，早晨天亮了，臣子们搀扶着王莽，从前殿向南走下宫中大道，向西走出白虎门，和新公王揖安排车子在门外等待。王莽登上车，前往渐台，想依靠池水作为防御，还是抱着符命和威斗，公卿大夫、侍中、黄门郎等随从官吏还有一千多人跟着他。
English: On the morning of the third day, the morning dawned, the courtiers assisted Wang Mang, walked south from the front hall down the palace road, walked west out of the White Tiger Gate, and arranged a car with the new prince to wait outside the door. Wang Mang boarded the car and went to the platform, hoping to rely on the pool water as a defense, still holding the life and dignity, the court doctor, the chamberlain, Huang Men Lang and other accompanying officials and more than a thousand people followed him.

古文：王邑昼夜战，罢极，士死伤略尽，驰入宫，间关至渐台，见其子侍中睦解衣冠欲逃，邑叱之令还，父子共守莽。
现代文：王邑白天黑夜都在战斗，疲倦极了，士兵死伤快完了，他飞马进入宫中，经过辗转周折来到渐台，看见他的儿子侍中王睦脱下衣帽想要逃去，王邑喝住了让他返回，父子俩共同守卫着王莽。
English: Wangyi fought all day and night. He was very tired, and the soldiers were about to be killed and wounded. He entered the palace on a flying horse, and after many twists and turns, he came to Zhantai. He saw his son, the attendant Wangmut, take off his coat and hat and try to escape. Wangyi drank and let him return. Both father and son guarded Wangmut together.

古文：军人入殿中，呼曰： 反虏王莽安在？ 
现代文：军人进入殿中，喊道： 反贼王莽在哪里？ 
English: A soldier entered the hall and shouted: "Where is the anti-thief Wang Mang?

古文：有美人出房曰 在渐台。 
现代文：有个美人走出房来说： 他在渐台。 
English: A beautiful woman came out of the room and said, "He's in the crotch.

古文：众兵追之，围数百重。
现代文：大批士兵追上去，包围了几百屑。
English: A large number of soldiers chased after and surrounded several hundred cows.

古文：台上亦弓弩与相射，稍稍落去。
现代文：台上也用弓箭跟包围的士兵对射，包围的士兵略微后退。
English: On the platform, he also shot at the encircled soldiers with a bow and arrow, and the encircled soldiers retreated slightly.

古文：矢尽，无以复射，短兵接。
现代文：台上的箭射尽了，没有箭再发射了，短兵相接。
English: All the arrows on the table have been shot, no more arrows are to be fired, and the soldiers are in close contact.

古文：王邑父子、惲、王巡战死，莽入室。
现代文：王邑父子、踅惮、王巡战斗而死，王莽躲进内室。
English: Wang's father and son, Wang Yu, Wang Shao, and Wang Ju died in the battle, and Wang Mang hid in the inner room.

古文：下餔时，众兵上台，王揖、赵博、苗、唐尊、王盛、中常侍王参等皆死台上。
现代文：申时过后，大批士兵上了台，王揖、赵博、苗欣、唐尊、王盛和中常侍王参等人都死在台上。
English: After the appointed time, a large number of soldiers came onto the stage. Wang Xuan, Zhao Bo, Miao Xin, Tang Zun, Wang Sheng, and the middle-ranking attendant Wang San all died on the stage.

古文：商人杜吴杀莽，取其绶。
现代文：商人杜吴杀死了王莽，取下了他的系印纽带。
English: The merchant Du Wu killed Wang Mang and took off his shackle.

古文：校尉东海公宾就，故大行治礼，见吴问： 绶主所在？ 
现代文：校尉东海郡人公宾就，是原大行主治礼郎，看见杜吴就问这条纽带的主人在哪里。
English: When he saw Du Wu, he asked where the owner of this tie was.

古文：曰： 室中西北陬间。 
现代文：杜吴回答说： 在室内西北角的屋子里。 
English: Du Wu replied: In the room at the northwest corner of the room.

古文：就识，斩莽首。
现代文：公宾就认识，就割下了王莽的脑袋。
English: He recognized the official and cut off Wang Mang's head.

古文：军人分裂莽身，支节肌骨脔分，争相杀者数十人。
现代文：军人们分裂了王莽的身躯，四肢关节、肌肉、骨骼被切割成许多块，争着去砍杀的有几十人。
English: The soldiers split Wang Mang's body. The limbs, joints, muscles, and bones were cut into many pieces, and there were dozens of people vying to be chopped up and killed.

古文：公宾就持莽首诣王宪。
现代文：公宾就拿着王莽的脑袋前往王宪那里。
English: The official took Wang Mang's head and went to Wang Xian.

古文：宪自称汉大将军，城中兵数十万皆属焉，舍东宫，妻莽后宫，乘其车服。
现代文：王宪自称为汉朝的大将军，城里的军队几十万人都归属了他，住在长乐宫，把王莽的妃嫔都作为妻妾，使用王莽的车马、衣服和器物。
English: Wang Xian called himself the great general of the Han Dynasty. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers in the city belonged to him. They lived in the Changle Palace, took Wang Mang's concubines as wives and concubines, and used Wang Mang's cars, horses, clothes and utensils.

古文：六日癸丑，李松、邓晔入长安，将军赵萌、申屠建亦至，以王宪得玺绶不辄上、多挟宫女、建天子鼓旗，收斩之。
现代文：六日癸丑，李松和邓晔进入长安，将军赵萌和申屠建也来到，因为王宪缴获了御玺没有上交，私藏了很多宫女，使用了天子的仪仗，把他捉来杀掉了。
English: On the 6th, Li Song and Deng Yao entered Chang'an. General Zhao Meng and Shen Tu Jian also came, because Wang Xian had seized the imperial scepter and did not hand it over. He had hidden a lot of concubines and used the honor of the son of heaven to capture and kill him.

古文：传莽首诣更始，悬宛市，百姓共提击之，或切食其舌。
现代文：传送王莽的脑袋前往更始帝那里，挂在宛城的街道上，百姓都去掷击它，有人切下他的舌头来吃了。
English: Wang Mang's head was sent to Emperor Qianlong and hung in the streets of Wancheng. The people all went to throw it, and someone cut off his tongue to eat it.

古文：莽扬州牧李圣、司命孔仁兵败山东，圣格死，仁将其众降，已而叹曰： 吾闻食人食者死其事。 
现代文：王莽的扬州牧李圣和司命孔仁在山东地区打了败仗，李圣格斗而死，孔仁率领他的部队投降了，随后又叹息说： 我听说，享受了人家的俸禄，就要为他的事业效死命。 
English: Li Sheng, Wang Mang's Yangzhou Patriarch, and Kong Ren, Wang Mang's steward, fought a losing battle in Shandong. Li Sheng fought and died. Kong Ren led his troops to surrender, and then sighed, "I heard that if you enjoy someone else's salary, you will work for his cause until death."

古文：拔剑自刺死。
现代文：便抽出剑来自杀了。
English: He drew his sword and killed himself.

古文：及曹部监杜普、陈定大尹沈意、九江连率贾萌皆守郡不降，为汉兵所诛。
现代文：还有曹部监杜普、陈定郡大尹沈意和九江郡连率贾萌都守卫郡城不肯投降，被汉军所杀。
English: Also, Cao's supervisor Du Pu, Chending County Mayor Yin Shenyi, and Jiujiang County Company leader Jia Meng all guarded the county seat and refused to surrender, and were killed by the Chinese army.

古文：赏都大尹王钦及郭钦守京师仓，闻莽死，乃降，更始义之，皆封为侯。
现代文：赏都郡大尹王钦和郭钦守卫京师仓，听到王莽已经死了，才投降，更始帝认为他们守节义，都赐封为侯爵。
English: Appreciating the efforts of Yin Wangqin and Guo Qin to guard the Beijing Teacher's Quarters, they surrendered only after hearing that Wang Mang had died. Moreover, the emperor believed that they were upholding the law, and they were both awarded the title of marquis.

古文：太师王匡、国将哀章降雒阳，传诣宛，斩之。
现代文：太师王匡和国将哀章在洛阳投降，传送到宛城，杀掉了他们。
English: Grand Master Wang Kuang and the country surrendered the Lamentation in Luoyang, transported it to Yuancheng, and killed them.

古文：严尤、陈茂败昆阳下，走至沛郡谯，自称汉将，召会吏邱。
现代文：严尤和陈茂在昆阳城下被打畋以后，逃到沛郡谯县，自称是漠军将领，召集当地官吏和平民会集。
English: After Yan You and Chen Mao were arrested at the foot of Kunyang City, they fled to Jixian County, Pei County, claiming to be generals of the Mongolian army, and called a meeting of local officials and civilians.

古文：尤为称说王莽篡位天时所亡、圣汉复兴状，茂伏而涕泣。
现代文：严尤向他们宣讲王莽窃取皇位、天意让他灭亡和英明的汉朝复兴的情形，陈茂伏地哭泣。
English: Chen Mao wept bitterly as he told them about Wang Mang stealing the imperial throne, God's will for Wang Mang's demise, and the wise revival of the Han Dynasty.

古文：闻故汉钟武侯刘圣聚众汝南称尊号，尤、茂降之。
现代文：听到原汉朝钟武侯刘圣聚集军队在汝南郡自称皇帝，严尤和陈茂投降了他。
English: Hearing that Liu Sheng, the lord of Zhongwu of the Han Dynasty, had gathered an army in Runan County and claimed to be the emperor, Yan You and Chen Mao surrendered to him.

古文：以尤为大司马，茂为丞相。
现代文：刘圣把严尤任为大司马，陈茂任为丞相。
English: Liu Sheng appointed Yan You as the chief secretary and Chen Mao as the vice-minister.

古文：十余日败，尤、茂并死。
现代文：他们十多天失败了，严尤和陈茂都死了。
English: They failed after more than ten days, and Yan You and Chen Mao both died.

古文：郡县皆举城降，天下悉归汉。
现代文：各郡县都全城投降，全国都回到了汉朝的统治之下。
English: All the counties surrendered, and the whole country returned to the rule of the Han Dynasty.

古文：初，申屠建尝事崔发为《诗》，建至，发降之。
现代文：早先，申屠建曾经追随崔发研究《诗经》，申屠建来到长安，崔发投降了他。
English: Earlier, Shen Tuo Jian had followed Cui Fa to study "The Book of Songs." When Shen Tuo Jian came to Chang'an, Cui Fa surrendered to him.

古文：后复称说，建令丞相刘赐斩发以徇。
现代文：后来又宣扬王莽取代汉朝的事，申屠建让丞相刘赐杀掉崔发示众。
English: Later, he also promoted the idea that Wang Mang had replaced the Han Dynasty, and suggested that General Liu should be given the power to kill Cui Fashi.

古文：史谌、王延、王林、王吴、赵闳亦降，复见杀。
现代文：史谌、王延、王林、王吴和赵闳也投降了，又被杀掉。
English: Shi Yan, Wang Yan, Wang Lin, Wang Wu and Zhao Xi also surrendered and were killed.

古文：初，诸假号兵人人望封侯。
现代文：起初，各处自立名号的部队人人希望封侯。
English: At first, all the self-styled soldiers wanted to be knighted.

古文：申屠建既斩王宪，又扬言三辅黠共杀其主，吏民惶恐，属县屯聚，建等不能下，驰白更始。
现代文：申屠建既已杀掉了王宪，又扬言三辅地区的民众狡猾，一起杀死了自己的君主。因此三辅地区的官吏和平民都惶恐起来，所属各县拥兵割据，申屠建等人没能攻下，派人飞马报告更始帝。
English: Shen Tu Jian had already killed Wang Xian, and also threatened that the people in the Sanfu area were cunning, and together they killed their monarch. Therefore, the officials and civilians in the Sanfu area were terrified, and the soldiers from each county were divided, and Shen Tu Jian and others failed to capture, and sent a Pegasus to report to the emperor.

古文：二年二月，更始到长安，下诏大赦，非王莽子，他皆除其罪，故王氏宗族得全。
现代文：更始二年二月间，更始帝来到长安，下诏书宣布大赦，衹要不是王莽的子女，其他的人都赦免他们的罪责，所以王家族人得以保全。
English: In February of the following year, Emperor Kangxi came to Chang'an and issued an edict declaring an amnesty. If they were not Wang Mang's children, everyone else was pardoned of their guilt, so the Wang family members were saved.

古文：三辅悉平，更始都长安，居长乐宫。
现代文：三辅地区全部平定，更始帝定都长安，住在长乐宫。
English: The Sanfu area was completely pacified, and the imperial capital was moved to Chang'an, where he lived in the Changle Palace.

古文：府藏完具，独未央宫烧攻莽三日，死则案堵复故。
现代文：府库完好，衹有未央宫火攻王莽三天，王莽一死就安定下来恢复了原状。
English: The prefectural treasury was in good condition, and Wang Mang was attacked by the Weiyang Palace fire for three days. Once Wang Mang died, he settled down and returned to his original state.

古文：更始至，岁余政教不行。
现代文：更始帝到后，经过一年多的时间，政令教化不能够推行到全国。
English: After the arrival of the emperor, after more than a year of time, the edification of the decree could not be implemented throughout the country.

古文：明年夏，赤眉樊崇等众数十万人入关，立刘盆子，称尊号，攻更始，更始降之。
现代文：第二年夏季里，赤眉军樊崇等部几十万人进入函谷关，拥立刘盆子，称为皇帝，进攻更始帝，更始帝投降了他们。
English: In the summer of the following year, hundreds of thousands of men of the Red Eyebrow Army, including Shichong, entered Hakodate Pass, supported Liu Bonzi, known as the emperor, attacked Emperor Genshi, and Emperor Genshi surrendered to them.

古文：赤眉遂烧长安宫室市里，害更始。
现代文：赤眉军便焚烧长安的宫室和街道，杀害了更始帝。
English: The Red Eyebrows then set fire to the palace and streets of Chang'an, killing Emperor Qian Shi Huang.

古文：民饥饿相食，死者数十万，长安为虚，城中无人行。
现代文：人民饥饿以致人吃人，死的人有几十万，长安城成为废墟，城里没有人行走。
English: The people were so hungry that they were eating each other. Hundreds of thousands of people died. Chang'an City was in ruins, and no one could walk in the city.

古文：宗庙园陵皆发掘，唯霸陵、杜陵完。
现代文：汉朝祖宗的祠庙坟墓都被发掘，衹有杜陵和霸陵还完好。
English: The ancestral temples and tombs of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty have all been excavated, and some of them are still intact.

古文：六月，世祖即位，然后宗庙社稷复立，天下艾安。
现代文：六月间，世祖登上皇位，然后国家政权得以重新建立，全国太平。
English: In June, Shizu ascended the throne, after which the national government was re-established and the country was at peace.

古文：赞曰： 王莽始起外戚，折节力行，以要名誉，宗族称孝，师友归仁。
现代文：赞曰：王莽开始以皇亲国戚起家，屈己下人，勉力而行，从而博取名誉，赢得了家族称赞他具有孝友的品行，老师、朋友推许他具有仁厚的品德。
English: Praise said: Wang Mang started his career as a relative of the imperial family, bowed to his subordinates, and worked hard to gain fame. He won the praise of his family for his filial piety, and his teachers and friends praised him for his benevolent character.

古文：及其居位辅政，成、哀之际，勤劳国家，直道而行，动见称述。
现代文：等到他登上高位，辅佐朝政，在成帝、哀帝的时期，为国家辛勤治政，本着正直的原则行事，一举一动常常被人们称道。
English: When he ascended to a high position, he assisted the government of the dynasty, and during the period of the emperor's enthronement and the mourning period, he worked hard to govern the country and acted in accordance with the principle of honesty, and his every move was often praised by people.

古文：岂所谓 在家必闻，在国必闻 ， 色取仁而行违 者邪？
现代文：难道他就是孔子所说的 在家族中一定有名声，在朝廷上也一定有名声 ， 表面上好像赞成宽仁厚道，行动中却违背它 的人吗？
English: Is he the one that Confucius said must have a good reputation in the family and in the court, who seems to be in favor of benevolence on the surface, but violates it in his actions?

古文：莽既不仁而有佞邪之材，又乘四父历世之权，遭汉中微，国统三绝，而太后寿考为之宗主，故得肆其奸惹，以成篡盗之祸。
现代文：王莽本来没有仁厚的品德，却有着花言巧语、虚伪奸诈的才能，又利用四个伯父、叔父经历了元帝、成帝两代所掌握的权力，遇到汉朝中途衰落，皇位三次没有继承人，而王太后寿命很长得以长期作为他的保护人，因此得以施逞他的奸诈邪恶的手段，从而造成篡夺皇位、窃取政权的灾祸。
English: Wang Mang originally did not have a benevolent character, but he had the talent of rhetoric, hypocrisy and treachery. He also used four uncles and uncles to experience the power held by the two generations of Yuan Emperor and Cheng Emperor. He encountered the decline of the Han Dynasty in the middle of the road, there was no heir to the throne three times, and the Queen Mother had a long life to serve as his protector for a long time. Therefore, he was able to use his treacherous and evil means, thus causing the disaster of usurping the throne and stealing power.

古文：推是言之，亦天时，非人力之致矣。
现代文：根据这些事实推论起来，这也是天时，不是人力做得到的。
English: Based on these facts, it can be deduced that this is also done by nature, not by man.

古文：及其窃位南面，处非所据，颠覆之势险于桀、纣，而莽晏然自以黄、虞复出也。
现代文：等到他窃取了皇帝的地位，居于不该他所应当占据的地位，败亡的趋势比夏桀、商纣的时候还要来得快，而王莽却若无其事地认为自己就是黄帝、虞舜再世。
English: By the time he stole the position of the emperor, he was not in the position he should have occupied, and the trend of defeat and ruin was even faster than that of the Xia and Shang dynasties. However, Wang Mang thought of himself as the reincarnation of the Yellow Emperor and Gu Yao.

古文：乃始恣睢，奋其威诈，滔天虐民，穷凶极恶，流毒诸夏，乱延蛮貉，犹未足逞其欲焉。
现代文：于是开始放纵暴戾，放肆施逞他的威势权术，欺忤上天，残害人民，穷凶极恶，流毒全国，灾祸蔓延四方外族，还不足以满足他的欲望。
English: So he began to indulge in violence, arrogantly exerting his authority and power, bullying the heavens, destroying the people, being extremely vicious, poisoning the whole country, and spreading the disaster to the foreign ethnic groups in all directions, but it was not enough to satisfy his desires.

古文：是以四海之内，嚣然丧其乐生之心，中外愤怨，远近俱发，城池不守，支体分裂，遂令天下城邑为虚，丘垅发掘，害遍生民，辜及朽骨，自书传所载乱臣贼子无道之人，考其祸败，未有如莽之甚者也。
现代文：因此全国人民忧愁地丧失了他们乐生的心意，朝廷和地方都怨愤，远处和近处一齐发动起来，京城守不住，躯体被分裂，终于使得全国的城市成为废墟，坟墓遭到发掘，害尽了活人，殃及到死尸，自从有文字记载的乱臣贼子这类没有道义的人，查考他们所造成的灾祸和所遭到的失败，都没有像王莽这样厉害的。
English: As a result, the people of the whole country sadly lost their desire to enjoy life, the imperial court and localities were resentful, far and near were mobilized together, the capital could not be defended, the body was divided, and finally the cities of the whole country became ruins, the graves were excavated, the living were exhausted, and the dead bodies were affected. Since there are written records of such immoral people as the ruffian thieves, the disasters they caused and the failures they suffered have not been as severe as Wang Mang.

古文：昔秦燔《诗》、《书》以立私议，莽诵《六艺》以文奸言，同归殊途，俱用灭亡，皆炕龙绝气，非命之运，紫色蛙声，余分闰位，圣王之驱除云尔！
现代文：从前秦朝焚毁储经》、《书经》等典籍从而确立自己一家的主张，王莽引用《六经》来装饰谬论，他们的目的完全一样，手段截然不同，都由此而导致灭亡，他们都是没有德行而窃据君位，都不是天命的命运，衹是一些杂色淫声，多余的闰月，被圣王扫荡的对象罢了。
English: From the former Qin Dynasty, they burned the classics such as the "Shu Jing" and "Shu Jing" to establish their own family's claim, and Wang Mang quoted the "Six Classics" to decorate the fallacy. Their purpose is exactly the same, the means are completely different, all of which lead to their demise. They are all without virtue and steal the throne. They are not the destiny of heaven. They are just some motley sounds, superfluous intercalary months, and the object of the king's sweep.

