古文：赵在礼，字翰臣，涿州人也。
现代文：赵在礼，字干臣，涿州人。
English: Zhao Zaili, nicknamed "Gengchen," is from Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖景裕，祖士廉，皆不仕。
现代文：曾祖父赵景裕，祖父赵士廉，都不曾入仕做官。
English: Neither his great-grandfather Zhao Jingyu nor his grandfather Zhao Shillian ever served as officials.

古文：父元德，卢台军使。
现代文：父亲赵元德，担任过卢台军使。
English: His father, Zhao Yuande, served as a military envoy to the Lutetia.

古文：在礼始事燕帅刘仁恭为小校，唐光化末，仁恭遣其子守文逐浮阳节度使卢彦威，据其城，升在礼为军使，以佐守文。
现代文：赵在礼最初事奉燕帅刘仁恭，担任小校，唐昭宗光化末年，刘仁恭派他儿子刘守文驱逐浮阳节度使卢彦威，占据了那座城池，提升赵在礼为军使，以辅佐刘守文。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Zaili served as the envoy of Yan Shuai Liu Rengong, and served as a small school. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Rengong sent his son Liu Shouwen to expel Fuyang Jiedu and Lu Yanwei, occupied the city, and promoted Zhao Zaili as a military envoy to assist Liu Shouwen.

古文：及守文死，事其子。
现代文：到刘守文死后，赵在礼又事奉他的儿子。
English: After Liu Shouwen's death, Zhao Zaili also served his son.

古文：延祚为守光所害，守光子继威复为部将张万进所杀，在礼遂事万进。
现代文：刘延祚被刘守光杀害，刘守光的儿子刘继威又被步将张万进杀害，赵在礼于是事奉张万进。
English: Liu Yanqi was killed by Liu Shouguang, Liu Shouguang's son Liu Jiwei was killed by Zhang Wanjin, Zhao served Zhang Wanjin.

古文：万进奔梁，在礼乃与沧州留后毛璋归太原。
现代文：张万进投奔到汴梁，赵在礼便与沧州留后毛璋归顺太原。
English: Zhang Wanjin went to Qiliang, Zhao stayed in Reiben and Cangzhou, and Mao Kun returned to Shun Taiyuan.

古文：同光末，为效节指挥使，屯于贝州。
现代文：后唐同光末年，担任效节军指挥使，驻扎在贝州。
English: In the last years of the Later Tang and Tongguang Dynasties, he served as the commander of the Kisetsu army and was stationed in Baizhou.

古文：制下，在礼密奏军情，未欲除移，且乞更伺少顷，寻就改天雄军兵马留后、鄴都留守、兴唐尹。既而在礼将皇甫晖、赵进等相次除郡赴任，《欧阳史·皇甫晖传》：明宗即位，晖自军卒擢拜陈州刺史。
现代文：碰上军士皇甫晖等兴兵作乱，推举指挥使杨为统帅，杨不从，被乱兵杀害，乱兵提着杨的头颅来胁迫赵在礼为帅。赵在礼知道不可抗拒，便答应下来，在同光四年二月六日率领乱兵进入邺都，赵在礼自称为留后。唐庄宗派明宗率兵讨伐他，恰好城下军队发生骚乱，赵在礼迎接明宗进入城内，有关事迹都记载在《唐书》里。
English: Encountering the sergeant-at-arms Wang Fuxiong and others, the soldiers started a riot, elected Yang as the commander, Yang refused to obey, and was killed by the rioters. The rioters took Yang's head to coerce Zhao Zaili to be the commander. Zhao Zaili knew that he could not resist, so he agreed and led the rioters into Shendu on February 6, the same year. Zhao Zaili said that he would stay. The Tangzhu sect sent Mingzong to lead the soldiers to fight against him, just as the army under the city rioted. Zhao Zaili welcomed Mingz

古文：《九国志·赵进传》：天成初，除贝州刺史、鄴都衙内指挥使。
现代文：庄宗天成元年五月，授滑州节度使、检校太保。任命下达后，赵在礼秘密奏报军情，不想除官调任，并且请求再等候一段时间，不久就改任他为天雄军兵马留后、邺都留守、兴唐尹。
English: Zhuangzong Tiancheng, in May of the first year of the year, was awarded the post of Slum State Festival Delegate and the post of school inspector. After the appointment was issued, Zhao secretly reported the military situation in the ceremony, did not want to be removed from the post, and requested to wait for a period of time. Soon he was reappointed as the soldier of Tianxiong Army. After he stayed, he stayed in Xindu and stayed in Xingtangyin.

古文：在礼乃上表乞移旌节。
现代文：接着，赵在礼带着皇甫晖、赵进等相继赴郡就任，上表请求更换旌旗和旄节。
English: Next, Zhao Zaili took Emperor Fuxi, Zhao Jin and others to the county to take office one after another, and requested the above table to replace the national flag and the national anthem.

古文：十二月，授沧州节度使。
现代文：十二月，被任命为沧州节度使。
English: In December, he was appointed as the Cangzhou Festival envoy.

古文：二年七月，移镇兗州。
现代文：二年七月，移镇兖州。
English: In July of the following year, he moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：长兴元年，入为左骁卫上将军，俄改同州节度使。
现代文：长兴元年入朝担任左骁卫上将军，不久改任同州节度使。
English: Changxing entered the imperial court in the first year of the year as General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and was soon transferred to the post of Tongzhou Festival envoy.

古文：会高祖受明宗命统大军伐蜀，以在礼充西川行营步军都指挥使，收剑州而还。
现代文：时逢晋高祖接受明宗命令统帅大军讨伐蜀人，以赵在礼兼任西川行营步军都指挥使，收复剑州后返回。
English: At that time, Jin Gaozu received the order from Emperor Mingzong to lead the army to fight against the Shu people, and Zhao Zaili also served as the commander of the Nishikawa Expeditionary Army, and returned after recovering Jianzhou.

古文：四年，移镇襄州。
现代文：四年，移镇襄州。
English: Four years later, he moved to Xiangzhou.

古文：清泰三年，授宋州节度使，加检校太尉、同平章事。
现代文：清泰三年，担任宋州节度使，加检校太尉、同平章事。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, he served as the Songzhou Festival envoy, the second lieutenant of the inspection school, and the secretary of the same level.

古文：高祖登极，移镇郓州，加检校太师、兼侍中，封卫国公。
现代文：晋高祖登上皇位，移镇郓州，加封检校太师、兼侍中，赐封卫国公。
English: When Emperor Jinguo's ancestor ascended the throne, he moved the capital to Bozhou, added the title of procurator and chancellor, and conferred the title of Prince of the Protectorate.

古文：天福六年七月，授许州节度使。
现代文：天福六年七月，任许州节度使。
English: In July of Tianfu's sixth year, he was appointed as the delegate to the Xuzhou Festival.

古文：八年四月，移镇徐州，进封楚国公。
现代文：八年四月，移镇徐州，进封为楚国公。
English: In April of the eighth year, he moved to the town of Xuzhou and became the prince of Chu.

古文：开运元年，以契丹为患，少帝议北征。
现代文：晋少帝开运元年，因契丹为患，少帝商议北征。
English: In the first year of the Young Emperor Jin's campaign, because of the Khitan, the Young Emperor discussed the Northern Expedition.

古文：八月朔，降制命一十五将，以在礼为北面行营马步都虞候。
现代文：八月一日，下旨任命了十五个将领，让赵在礼担任北面行营马步都虞候。
English: On August 1, an order was issued to appoint fifteen generals, and Zhao Zaili was appointed as the commander of the Northern Campaign.

古文：十一月，改行营副都统，都虞候如故。
现代文：十一月，改任行营副都统，仍兼任都虞候。
English: In November, he was reappointed to the post of Deputy Governor-General, still concurrently serving as Governor-General.

古文：受诏屯澶州，再除兗州节度使，依前副都统。
现代文：奉命屯守澶州，再次担任兖州节度使，仍旧担任副都统。
English: He was ordered to stay in Bozhou, once again served as the Bozhou Festival Delegate, and still served as the Deputy Metropolitan.

古文：三年正月，授晋昌军节度使。
现代文：三年一月，任晋昌军节度使。
English: In January of the third year, he was appointed as the envoy of the Jinchang Army.

古文：时少帝为其子延煦娶在礼女为妻，礼会之日，其仪甚盛，京师以为荣观。
现代文：当时少帝替他的儿子石延煦娶赵在礼的女儿为妻，行礼那天，仪式很是隆重，京城以为是荣耀盛事。
English: At that time, the young emperor married the daughter of Zhao Zaili for his son Shi Yanqi. On the day of the ceremony, the ceremony was very grand, and the capital thought it was a glorious event.

古文：五月，进封秦国公，累食邑至一万三千户，实封一千五百户。
现代文：五月，进封为秦国公，食邑累加至一万三千户，实封一千五百户。
English: In May, Jinfeng was promoted to Qin Guogong, and the total number of food villages was increased to 13,000 and the number of households was increased to 1,500.

古文：在礼历十余镇，善治生殖货，积财巨万，两京及所莅籓镇，皆邸店罗列。
现代文：赵在礼历任十几处藩镇，善于经营生意，储积财货巨万，两京以及他所到过的藩镇，都有他的宅第店铺罗列成行。
English: Zhao served in more than a dozen hanzhongs in succession. He was good at running a business and amassed a huge amount of wealth and goods. His homestead stores are lined up in the two capitals as well as the hanzhongs he visited.

古文：在宋州日，值天下飞蝗为害，在礼使比户张幡帜，鸣鼙鼓，蝗皆越境而去，人亦服其智焉。
现代文：在宋州时，正逢天下飞蝗为害，赵在礼让各家各户张开布幌旗帜，敲击鼙鼓，蝗虫都越境离去，人们也都佩服他的聪慧智谋。
English: When he was in Songzhou, when the whole world was plagued by flying locusts, Zhao Ziliang let every household open the cloth banner and beat the gong, and the locusts all crossed the border and left. People also admired his clever wit.

古文：凡聚敛所得，唯以奉权豪、崇释氏而已。
现代文：大凡聚敛得到的财物，只用来进奉权贵豪族、尊崇佛教而已。
English: The wealth that was amassed was only used to serve the powerful aristocrats and to venerate Buddhism.

古文：及契丹入汴，自镇赴阙，时契丹首领、奚王伊喇等在洛下，在礼望尘致敬，首领等倨受其礼，加之凌辱，邀索货财，在礼不胜其愤。
现代文：当契丹进入汴州，他从藩镇奔赴京城，当时契丹首领、奚王拽剌等正在洛阳，赵在礼望尘致敬，而契丹首领索取货物财宝，赵在礼又非常愤恨。
English: When Khitan entered Zhangzhou, he rushed from the town to Beijing. At that time, the leader of the Khitan and the king of Zhangzhou were in Luoyang, and Zhao was saluting the dust, and the leader of the Khitan was demanding goods and treasures, and Zhao was very angry.

古文：行至郑州，泊于逆旅，闻同州刘继勋为契丹所锁，大惊。
现代文：走到郑州，止歇在旅舍，听说同州刘继勋被契丹拘捕，非常震惊。
English: After walking to Zhengzhou and stopping at a hostel, he was shocked to hear that Liu Jixun from the same state had been arrested by the Khitan.

古文：丁未岁正月二十五日夜，以衣带就马枥自绞而卒，年六十六。
现代文：天福十二年一月二十五日夜晚，用衣带系在马棚栏杆上上吊自杀而死，时年六十六岁。
English: On the night of January 25th of the 12th year of Tianfu, he hanged himself with a belt on the railing of the stable and died at the age of 66.

古文：汉高祖即位，赠中书令。
现代文：后汉高祖登上皇位，追赠中书令。
English: After Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty ascended to the throne, the imperial edict was posthumously bestowed.

