古文：周皓李秀兰杜牧刘禹锡李逢吉洛中举人蔡京武昌妓韦保衢曹生罗虬徐月英
现代文：周皓李秀兰杜牧刘禹锡李逢吉洛中举人蔡京武昌妓韦保衢曹生罗虬徐月英
English: Zhou Qian, Li Xiulan, Du Mu, Liu Yuxi, Li Fengjiro, Zhongzheng, Cai Jing, Wuchang, Prostitute, Wei Bao, Cao Sheng, Luo Wei, Xu Yueying

古文：周皓
现代文：周皓
English: Zhou Ying

古文：太仆卿周皓，贵族子，多力负气。
现代文：太仆卿周皓，贵族子弟，力大气盛。
English: Zhou Qi, the servant of the emperor and the son of an aristocrat, was a man of great strength.

古文：天宝中，皓少年，常结客为花柳之游，竟蓄亡命。
现代文：天宝年间，周皓当时正年轻，常常结伙寻花问柳，终至酿成逃命之灾。
English: During the Tenpo era, when Zhou Qi was young, they often gathered to look for flowers and ask for willows, which eventually led to the disaster of fleeing for their lives.

古文：访城中名姬，如蝇袭膻，无不获者。
现代文：他当时遍访城中名妓，犹如苍蝇猎获腥臭，没有不到手的。
English: At that time, he visited all the famous prostitutes in the city. Like a fly chasing a bad smell, he never missed a hand.

古文：时靖恭有姬子夜来，稚齿巧笑，歌舞绝伦，贵公子破产迎之。皓时与数辈富者更擅之。
现代文：那时有个靖恭坊名妓叫夜来，天真单纯，笑口常开，歌声舞姿又属天下绝伦，贵公子们往往倾家荡产而去奉迎，周皓与几个富家子弟更是专在她身上下功夫。
English: At that time, there was a famous prostitute in Jinghongfang who was called to come at night. She was naive and simple, her smile was often open, and her singing and dancing were the best in the world. Noble lords often came to pay homage to her, and Zhou Qi and several rich children worked hard on her.

古文：会一日，其母白皓曰：某日夜来生日，岂可寂寞乎？
现代文：有一天，夜来母亲告诉周皓说：某日是夜来的生日，可不能冷落了呵！
English: One day, his mother came in the evening and told Zhou Qi that: "One day is my birthday, I can't be left out!

古文：皓与往还，竟求珍货，合钱数十万，会饮其家。
现代文：周皓为她的生日作准备，竟然弄到了折合几十万的贵重东西。
English: Zhou Ying prepared for her birthday and got hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of precious things.

古文：乐工贺怀智、纪孩孩，皆一时绝手。
现代文：在夜来家里举办宴会。贺怀智、纪孩孩等当时最有名的乐手到场献技。
English: He held a banquet at home in the evening, and the most famous musicians of the time, such as He Huai Zhi and Ji Xiaobao, came to perform.

古文：扃方合，忽觉击门声甚急。
现代文：刚把门关好，忽然听到有急切的敲门声，周皓不让屋里的人前去开门。
English: As soon as he closed the door, he suddenly heard an urgent knock on the door. Zhou Ye did not allow the people in the house to open the door.

古文：皓戒内忽开，良久，折关而入。
现代文：过了好长时间，门栓被推断了，外面的人破门而入。
English: After a long time, the bolt was broken, and someone broke in from the outside.

古文：有少年紫衣，骑从数十，诟其母，即将军高力士之子也。母与夜来泣拜，诸客将散。
现代文：领头的是个身穿紫衣服的少年，还有几十名随从的骑手，进屋之后便破口大骂夜来的母亲。这位少年就是高力士将军的儿子，母亲与夜来吓得哭哭啼啼地对他跪拜施礼，客人们见状就要离去。
English: At the head of the procession was a young man dressed in purple, accompanied by dozens of horsemen, who, upon entering the house, cursed his mother, who had come in the night. This young man was the son of General Corix, and his mother had come in the night, terrified and sobbing, to kneel and pay homage to him. The guests were about to leave when they saw the sign.

古文：皓时血气方刚，且恃其力，顾从者不相敌。因前让其怙势，攘臂格之。紫衣者踣于拳下，且绝其颔骨。大伤流血，皓遂突出。
现代文：周皓当时正血气方刚，又仗着有浑身的力气，看相从的人不能敌他，就上前指责他们仗势欺人，就攘臂上去与他格斗，紫衣少年便倒在他的拳下，下巴骨也被打掉了，伤势极重，流血不止。周皓于是夺路而逃。
English: At that time, Zhou Ye, who was full-blooded and had the strength of his whole body to see that those who followed him could not oppose him, came forward to accuse them of being deceitful, and he raised his arm to fight him. The boy in purple fell under his fist, his jawbone was also knocked out, the injury was very serious, and the bleeding continued. Zhou Ye then fled.

古文：时都亭驿所由魏贞，有心义，好养私客，皓以情投之。
现代文：当时都亭驿所由魏贞，很重义气，喜爱私下收养客人。
English: At that time, Wei Zhen, the head of the Du Ting Inn, had a strong sense of loyalty and loved to privately adopt guests.

古文：贞乃藏于妻女间。
现代文：周皓凭着交情投奔到他家。他便将周皓藏匿在妻子女儿们中间。
English: Zhou Ying ran to his house with friendship. He then hid Zhou Ying among his wife and daughters.

古文：时有司追捉急切，贞恐踪露，乃夜办装具，腰白金数锭，谓皓曰：汴州周简老，义士也，复与郎君当家，今可依之，且宜谦恭不怠。
现代文：当时有关部门追扑得很急，魏贞担心暴露踪迹，便乘夜晚置办行装，让周皓带上白金数锭，叮嘱他说：汴州周简老是位义士，又跟你是一家子，如今你可以去投靠他。
English: At that time, the relevant departments were in a hurry to catch up. Wei Zhen was worried about exposing the trace, so she took the night to arrange the luggage, let Zhou Qi take the platinum number, and told him: Zhangzhou Zhou Jian has always been a righteous person, and he is your family member, now you can go to him.

古文：周简老盖大侠也，见魏贞书，喜甚。
现代文：到他那里后应当谦让恭敬不要有所怠慢。
English: When you go to him, you should be humble and respectful, and not be negligent.

古文：皓因拜之为叔，遂言其状。
现代文：周简老乃是一位大侠，见了魏贞的书信非常高兴，周皓便拜他为叔父，向他讲述了自己的遭遇。
English: Zhou Jian has always been a great hero. He was very happy to see Wei Zhen's letter. Zhou Jun worshiped him as his uncle and told him about his own experience.

古文：简老令居一船中，戒无妄出，供与极厚。
现代文：简老让他住在一只船里面，不让他随便出来，供给他极为丰厚的生活用品。
English: Jane always let him live in a boat, did not let him go out casually, and provided him with extremely rich daily necessities.

古文：居岁余，忽听船上哭泣声。皓潜窥之，见一少妇，缟衣甚美，与简老相慰。
现代文：住了一年多，周皓忽然听到船上有哭泣声，便偷偷爬上来观看，见一位少妇穿着孝服，长得极美，正跟简老互相劝慰。
English: After living there for more than a year, Zhou Ye suddenly heard the sound of crying on the boat, so he secretly climbed up to watch. He saw a young woman dressed in filial piety and extremely beautiful, who was consoling each other with Jane Lao.

古文：其夕，简老忽至皓处，问：君婚未？某有表妹，嫁与甲，甲卒无子，今无所归，可事君子。
现代文：这天晚上，简老忽然来到周皓住的地方，问他结婚没有，并说：我有个表妹，嫁给了一个男人，这个男人死了，又没有儿子；表妹如今无依无靠，可以侍奉您。
English: That evening, Jane Lao suddenly came to the place where Zhou Yu was staying, asked him if he was married, and said: I have a cousin, married to a man, this man died and has no son; cousin is now helpless and can serve you.

古文：皓拜谢之。
现代文：周皓当即向他拜谢。
English: Zhou Ye immediately thanked him.

古文：即夕，其表妹归皓，有女二人，男一人，犹在舟中。
现代文：当天夜晚，他就把表妹送给了周皓，还有两个女仆，一个男仆，也都在船里。
English: In the evening of the same day, he gave his cousin to Zhou Xuanwu, and two maids and a manservant were also in the boat.

古文：简老忽语皓：事已息，君貌寝，必无人识者，可游江淮。
现代文：简老忽然对周皓说；事情已经平息，你的相貌又不大惹人注意，肯定没人认出你来，可以到江淮一带去。
English: Old Jane suddenly said to Zhou Yu, "Things have calmed down, your appearance is not very eye-catching, surely no one will recognize you, you can go to the Jianghuai area."

古文：乃赠百余千，号哭而别，于是遂免。
现代文：说完便赠给他一百多串钱，双方挥泪而别。周皓于是逃脱了。
English: After saying this, he gave him more than a hundred bundles of money, and the two parted with tears. Zhou Ye then escaped.

古文：李秀兰
现代文：李秀兰
English: Li Xiulan

古文：李秀兰以女子有才名。
现代文：李秀兰是女子当中有文学名气的人。
English: Li Xiulan is a literary celebrity among women.

古文：初五六岁时，其父抱于庭，作诗咏蔷薇，其末句云：过时未架却，心绪乱纵横。
现代文：五六岁时，父亲抱着她在院子里，她便能作诗词赞蔷薇。诗的末句是过时未架却，心绪乱纵横。
English: When she was five or six years old, her father held her in the yard, and she was able to write a poem in praise of roses. The last sentence of the poem is outdated, but the mood is chaotic.

古文：父恚曰：此女子将来富有文章，然必为失行妇人矣。
现代文：父亲责怪说：这女孩子将来富有文才，然而必定是个行为不检点的女人。
English: The father reproached: This girl will be rich in literary talent, but she must be a woman who behaves badly.

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：结果真象他说的那样。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：又秀兰尝与诸贤会乌程县开元寺。
现代文：秀兰曾与几位贤才在乌程县开元寺聚会。
English: Xiulan once gathered with several sages at Kaiyuan Temple in Wucheng County.

古文：知河间刘长卿有阴疾，谓之曰：山气日夕佳。
现代文：她知道河间刘长卿有男性病，冲他说：山气日夕佳。
English: She knew that Kawama Liu Changqing had a male disease, and said to him, "The mountain air is always good.

古文：长卿对曰：众鸟欣有托。
现代文：长卿对道：众鸟欣有托。
English: Chokei replied, "All the birds are happy.

古文：举坐大笑，论者两美之。
现代文：在座的人都大笑起来，评论者以为双方对答的都极妙。
English: The room erupted in laughter, and the commentators thought both answers were brilliant.

古文：秀兰有诗曰：远水浮仙棹，寒星伴使车。
现代文：秀兰在一着诗里写道：远水浮仙棹，寒星伴使车。
English: Xiulan wrote in a poem: "Distant water brings forth daffodils, cold stars accompany the chariot."

古文：盖五言之佳境也。
现代文：这该是五言中最美的意境了。
English: This should be the most beautiful mood in five words.

古文：上方班姬即不足，下比韩英则有余，亦女中之诗豪也。
现代文：李秀兰的诗才，上比班超尚嫌不够，下比韩英则实有余，她也是女子之中的一个诗豪。
English: Li Xiulan's poetic talent is not enough to be the best in her class, but more than Han Ying. She is also a great poet among women.

古文：尝赋得三峡流泉歌曰：妾家本住巫山云，巫山流水常自闻。
现代文：她曾写过一篇《赋得三峡流泉歌》，诗中充溢着这位女诗豪的才气。现将此诗照录如下；妾家本住巫山云，巫山流水常自闻。
English: She once wrote a poem, "Fu De Three Gorges Flowing Spring Song," which is full of the talent of this female poet. This poem is now recorded as follows; Concubine originally lived in Wushan Yun, Wushan Flowing Water often heard from herself.

古文：王琴弹出转寥夐，直似当时梦中听。
现代文：王琴弹出转寥夐，直似当时梦中听。
English: The Wangqin played a slow tune, just like I had heard it in my dream.

古文：三峡迢迢几千里，一时流入深闺里。
现代文：三峡迢迢几千里，一时流入深闺里。
English: The Three Gorges stretches for thousands of miles, flowing into the deep valley.

古文：巨石奔湍指下生，飞渡走浪弦中起。
现代文：巨石奔湍指下生，飞波走浪弦中起。
English: The boulder rushes down the finger, the flying wave starts from the middle of the string.

古文：初疑喷涌含雷风，又似呜咽流不通。
现代文：初疑喷涌含雷风，又似呜咽流不通。
English: At first, it was suspected that the gush contained a thunderstorm, but it turned out to be nothing more than a whimper.

古文：回湍濑曲势将尽，时复滴沥平沙中。
现代文：回湍濑曲势将尽，时复滴沥平沙中。
English: The ebb and flow of the curve will be exhausted, and it will gradually sink into the asphalt sand.

古文：忆昔阮公为此曲，能使仲容听不足。
现代文：忆昔阮公为此曲，能使仲容听不足。
English: Recalling the old Nguyn Dynasty, this song can make the listener feel inadequate.

古文：一弹既罢又一弹。愿与流泉镇相续。
现代文：一弹既罢又一弹，愿与流泉镇相续。
English: One shot after another, I would like to continue with Liuquan Town.

古文：杜牧
现代文：杜牧
English: Dumu town

古文：唐中书舍人杜牧，少有逸才，下笔成咏。
现代文：唐代中书舍人杜牧年轻时就有过人的才华，落笔成文，出口成章。
English: Du Mu, a scholar in the Tang Dynasty, had extraordinary talent when he was young. He was able to write and export.

古文：弱冠擢进士第，复捷制科。
现代文：二十余岁进士及第，又很快通过制策登科。
English: At the age of twenty-odd, he was promoted to 1st and 2nd, and soon passed the entrance examination.

古文：牧少隽，性野放，虽为检刻，而不能自禁。
现代文：杜牧年青俊逸，生性狷介狂放，即使有法度制约他也不能约束住他的狂放行为。
English: Du Mu is young and handsome, and he is wild by nature. Even if there is a law to restrict him, he cannot restrain his wild behavior.

古文：回游为事。扬州胜地也，每重城向夕，倡楼之上，常有绛纱灯万数，辉罗耀烈空中。九里三十步街中，珠翠填咽，邈若仙境。
现代文：丞相牛僧孺镇守扬州时，召他为节度府中掌书记。杜牧在公务之余，纵情宴游娱乐。扬州乃旅游胜地，城内每到夜晚，青楼之上常有上万只红纱灯悬挂起来，灿烂辉煌，照彻夜空，九里三十步的长街上，熙来攘往着顶珠戴翠的人群；远远望去，犹如仙境一般。
English: Du Mu indulged in banquets and entertainment outside of his official duties. Yangzhou is a tourist destination. Every night in the city, there are often tens of thousands of red lanterns hanging above the youth hostel. They are brilliant and brilliant, shining through the night sky. On the nine-kilometer-and-thirty-step long street, there are crowds of people bustling to the top with beads. Looking far away, it is like a fairyland.

古文：牧常出没驰逐其间，无虚夕。
现代文：杜牧就常到这里宴游娱乐，没有一晚上不来的。
English: Dumoulin often comes here for parties and entertainment, and never misses an evening.

古文：复有卒三十人，易服随后，潜护之。僧孺之密教也。
现代文：又有兵卒三十人换成便服尾随在他的身后，暗中保护他，这是牛僧孺背着杜牧教他们这样做的。
English: Another thirty soldiers changed into civilian clothes and followed behind him, secretly protecting him, which was what the cow monk had taught them to do behind Du Mu's back.

古文：而牧自谓得计。
现代文：但杜牧却满以为自己的行踪绝无人知晓，心里颇为得意。
English: However, Dumu is quite proud of the fact that no one knows his whereabouts.

古文：人不知之。所至成欢，无不会意。
现代文：其实他到什么地方寻欢作乐，牛僧孺无不心中有数。
English: In fact, he went to some place to have fun, and there was no doubt in his mind.

古文：如是且数年，及征拜侍御史，僧孺于中堂饯，因戒之曰：以侍御史气概达驭，固当自极夷涂。然常虑风情不节，或至尊体乖和。
现代文：就这样过了几年，到他被升任侍御史时，牛僧孺在正堂设宴为他饯行，席间告诫他说：以您的才华和气概，在新的位子上，自能化险为夷，应付余裕；但所顾虑的是您在风情方面不能控制自己，说不上会能影响尊体的健康。
English: A few years passed, and when he was promoted to the position of attendant to the Emperor, the Cow Monk Zang held a banquet for him in the main hall. During the banquet, he admonished him, saying, "With your talent and spirit, in your new position, you will be able to avoid risks and have enough time to deal with them. However, what I am concerned about is that you cannot control yourself in terms of your manners, and it cannot be said that it will affect your health.

古文：牧因谬曰：某幸常自检守，不至贻尊忧耳。
现代文：杜牧因误解了对方的好意便说：本人幸而能够自我管束，不至于烦您操心的。
English: Due to misunderstanding the other party's good intentions, Dumu said: I am fortunate to be able to control myself, so I won't bother you.

古文：僧孺笑而不答。即命侍儿，取一小书簏，对牧发之。乃街卒之密报也。凡数十百，悉曰：某夕，杜书记过某家，无恙。某夕，宴某家，亦如之。牧对之大惭，因泣拜致谢，而终身感焉。
现代文：牛僧孺笑了笑没有说什么，当即让侍仆拿来一只小书匣，在杜牧面前打开，里面乃是尾随他的那些兵卒的秘报，共有上千份，上面写的内容都是：某天夜晚杜书记到了谁家，没有出事；某天晚上在哪一家宴饮，也没出事杜牧看罢大为惭愧，于是流着泪向牛僧孺礼拜致谢。
English: He smiled and did not say anything. He immediately asked the attendant to bring a small bookcase and open it in front of Du Mu. Inside was the secret report of those soldiers who were following him. There were thousands of copies. The contents were all written on it: one night, Du Clerk arrived at someone's house without incident; one night, at a banquet, without incident. Du Mu was ashamed to see it, so he shed tears and thanked Du Clerk.

古文：故僧孺之薨，牧为之志，而极言其美，报所知也。
现代文：此后终生感激僧孺，所以在僧孺去世时，杜牧为他作墓志铭，极力表彰其优点，借以报答知遇之恩。
English: After that, he was grateful to the monk for the rest of his life. Therefore, when the monk died, Du Mu made an epitaph for him, and tried his best to commend his merits, in order to repay the grace of knowing him.

古文：牧既为御史，久之分务洛阳。
现代文：杜牧当了侍御史后，长期分治洛阳。
English: After Du Mu became the lord chamberlain, he ruled Luoyang for a long time.

古文：时李司徒愿罢镇闲居，声妓豪华，为当时第一。洛中名士，咸谒见之。
现代文：当时李司徒愿辞掉节度使在家闲居，生活之奢华为一时仅有，洛阳的名士都去拜访他。
English: At that time, Li Si voluntarily resigned from the festival and idled at home. The luxury of life was only temporary, and the celebrities of Luoyang all went to visit him.

古文：李乃大开宴席，当时朝客高流，无不臻赴，以牧持宪，不敢邀致。
现代文：李司徒大开宴席，当时的达官贵人都赶来赴宴。因为杜牧主管法纪，所以没敢邀请他。
English: Li Sitou held a grand banquet, and the dignitaries of the time came to the banquet. Because Dumu was in charge of legal discipline, he did not dare to invite him.

古文：牧遣座客达意，愿预斯会。
现代文：杜牧让前去赴宴的人致意。说自己愿意赴会。
English: Du Mu extended his greetings to those who went to the banquet and said that he was willing to attend the meeting.

古文：李不得已驰书。
现代文：李司徒只好送去了请柬。
English: Li Sitou had no choice but to send out the invitations.

古文：方对酒独斟，亦已酣畅，闻命遽来，时会中已饮酒。
现代文：杜牧此时正对酒独斟，已经喝得微醉了，听到邀请后立即赶了来。
English: At this time, Dumu was pouring the wine, already slightly drunk, and arrived immediately after hearing the invitation.

古文：女妓百余人，皆绝艺殊色。
现代文：当时宴会已经开饮，场上有歌舞妓女一百余人，都是色艺双绝。
English: At that time, the banquet had already begun, and there were more than a hundred singing and dancing prostitutes on the field, all of them erotic.

古文：牧独坐南行，瞪目注视。
现代文：杜牧一人独坐南排，瞪大眼睛注视着歌舞妓女。
English: Dumu sits alone in the south row, staring wide-eyed at the singing and dancing prostitutes.

古文：引满三卮，问李云：闻有紫云者孰是？
现代文：他喝下满满的三杯之后。问李司徒道：听说有个叫紫云的，她们之中哪一个是？
English: After he had drunk three full cups, he asked Li Situdo, "I heard that there is a woman named Ziyun. Which one of them is she?"

古文：牧又自饮三爵，郎吟而起曰：华堂今日绮筵开，谁唤分司御史来？
现代文：李便用手指给他看。杜牧又凝神细看了半天，说：名不虚传，应当赠给我。李司徒俯下身子直笑，妓女们也转过脸来破颜而笑。杜牧又自饮三大杯，一边站身来一身朗声吟道：华堂今日绮筵开，谁唤分司御史来？
English: Li then showed it to him with his finger. Du Mu stared at it for a long time and said, "The name is not a lie, it should be given to me." Li Sitou bent down and smiled, and the prostitutes also turned their faces to smile. Du Mu drank three large cups, and stood up and sang: "Hwado is open today, who will summon the branch secretary?

古文：忽发狂言惊满座，两行红粉一时回。
现代文：忽发狂言惊满座，两行红粉一时回。
English: The sudden appearance of the Kyogen shocked the audience, and the two lines were repeated at the same time.

古文：意气闲逸，旁若无人。
现代文：意气闲逸，旁若无人。
English: The spirit is idle, as if no one is around.

古文：牧又自以年渐迟暮，常追赋感旧诗曰：落魄江湖载酒行，楚腰纤细掌中情。
现代文：杜牧还因自觉渐近迟暮之年。常常追怀往日的生活情景，写下感旧遣怀的诗篇，诗中写道：落魄江湖载酒行，楚腰纤细掌中情。
English: Due to his self-awareness, Dumu is also approaching his twilight years. He often pines for his past life, and has written a poetic poem about his feelings for the past. In the poem, he writes: "I've been to all corners of the world, I've drunk wine, I've got a slim waist, and I'm in love."

古文：三年一觉扬州梦，赢得青楼薄倖名。
现代文：三年一觉扬州梦，赢得青楼薄倖名。
English: After three years, Yangzhou Dream woke up, and won the fame of the best young building.

古文：又曰：舸船一棹百分空，十载青春不负公。
现代文：又写道：舸船一棹百分空，十载青春不负公。
English: He also wrote: "A sinking ship is a hundred percent empty, and ten years of youth are not a burden.

古文：今日鬓丝禅榻伴，茶烟轻飏落花风。
现代文：今日鬓丝禅榻伴，茶烟轻飏落花风。
English: Today, with a silk zen-couch companion, tea smoke lightly sprinkled with the scent of flowers.

古文：太和末，牧复自侍御史出佐沈传师江西宣州幕。
现代文：唐文宗太和末年，杜牧又由侍御史出任沈传师江西宣州府幕僚。
English: In the last years of Emperor Tang Wenzong and Empress Dowager Tang, Du Mu was appointed as a staff member of the Jiangxi Xuanzhou government by his attendant, Emperor Shen.

古文：虽所至辄游，而终无属意，咸以非其所好也。
现代文：虽然在这里仍是处处宴游，但因没有他喜欢的地方，所以处处都不能引起多大兴趣。
English: Although here is still everywhere feasting, but because there is no place he likes, so everywhere can not arouse much interest.

古文：及闻湖州名郡，风物妍好，且多奇色，因甘心游之。
现代文：后来听说湖州是个好地方，风光景物秀丽美好，又有许多出色的女子，于是盼望着前去一游。
English: Later, I heard that Huzhou is a good place, the scenery is beautiful, and there are many outstanding women, so I am looking forward to visiting.

古文：湖州刺史某乙，牧素所厚者，颇喻其意。
现代文：湖州刺史某乙是杜牧平素的好友，也很理解他的心意。
English: Huzhou Zhishi B is a good friend of Du Mu Ping Su, and also understands his intentions.

古文：及牧至，每为之曲宴周游。凡优姬倡女，力所能致者，悉为出之。
现代文：等到杜牧到了湖州时，他便经常为他安排宴会，到处游览，凡属娼优名妓，尽力罗致了来，统统放在杜牧面前。
English: When Dumoulin arrived in Huzhou, he would often arrange banquets for him and take him on tours. He would try his best to woo all the high-class prostitutes and put them all in front of Dumoulin.

古文：牧注目凝视曰：美矣！未尽善也。
现代文：杜牧凝神注目了一番后，说道：确实很美，但未尽善。
English: After paying close attention, Du Mu Jing Shen said: It is indeed very beautiful, but it is not perfect.

古文：乙复候其意，牧曰：愿得张水嬉，使州人毕观。候四面云合，某当闲行寓目，冀于此际，或有阅焉。
现代文：某乙又问他有何要求，杜牧说：应该让张水嬉叫全州人都来观看，待四面围满了人时，我要在人群前漫步注目，希望能借此机会，兴许有新的发现。
English: Someone else asked him what he wanted, and Dumu said: Zhangshui should be allowed to playfully call for the whole state to come and watch. When surrounded by people on all sides, I want to stroll in front of the crowd and pay attention, hoping to take this opportunity to make some new discoveries.

古文：乙大喜，如其言。
现代文：某乙大喜，照他的话办理。
English: A certain B was overjoyed and did as he was told.

古文：至日，两岸观者如堵。迨暮，竟无所得。
现代文：到这天，两岸的观众人山人海，但直到太阳偏西时，仍然一无所得。
English: To this day, the spectators on both sides of the strait are a sea of people, but until the sun sets, they still have nothing.

古文：将罢舟舣岸，于丛人中，有里姥引鸦头女，年十余岁。牧熟视曰：此真国色，向诚虚设耳！
现代文：快要停船靠岸时，在人丛之中，有位寻常老妈子领着一个十多岁的小姑娘，杜牧仔细端量一番后说道：这位才是真正的倾国之色，以前的那些统统是白搭而已。
English: When the ship was about to dock, among the crowd of people, there was an ordinary old woman leading a little girl of more than ten years old. Dumoulin carefully measured her and said: This is the true color of the country. All the previous ones were just a waste.

古文：因使语其母，将接致舟中，姥女皆惧。
现代文：于是让人告诉小姑娘的母亲，要把她们接到船上来。母女两人都害怕了。
English: The little girl's mother was told to get them on the boat, and they were both scared.

古文：牧曰：且不即纳，当为后期。
现代文：杜牧便说：暂且不娶，要在以后约定个日期。
English: Dumoulin then said: "Let's not get married for the time being, let's set a date later."

古文：姥曰：他年失信，复当何如？
现代文：母亲说：如今说定了，以后不算数，又该怎么办？
English: My mother said: Now it's settled, it doesn't count in the future, so what should I do?

古文：牧曰：吾不十年，必守此郡，十年不来，乃从尔所适可也。
现代文：杜牧说：不超过十年，我肯定成为此郡太守；十年之内我不来，那就任你嫁给谁都行。
English: Dumu said, "In less than ten years, I will definitely become the governor of this county; if I don't come within ten years, then you can marry whoever you want."

古文：母许诺，因以重币结之，为盟而别。
现代文：母亲答应了他，杜牧便以重金定了这门亲事，立定盟约之后便分别了。
English: His mother agreed, and with a large sum of money, Dumoulin sealed the deal. After the pact was made, they separated.

古文：故牧归朝，颇以湖州为念。然以官秩尚卑，殊未敢发。
现代文：因为有这段经历，所以杜牧回朝之后，始终惦念着湖州，但因官职尚低，一直未敢公开。
English: Because of this experience, after Du Mui returned to the North, he always thought about Huzhou, but because his official position was still low, he did not dare to make it public.

古文：寻拜黄州池州，又移睦州，皆非意也。
现代文：不久，先后出任黄州、池州的刺史，后来又改任睦州刺史，这都不合他的心意。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Huangzhou and Chizhou successively, and later he was appointed as the governor of Mutsu Province, which did not suit his intentions.

古文：牧素与周墀善，会墀为相，乃并以三牋干墀，乞守湖州，意以弟顗目疾，冀于江外疗之。
现代文：杜牧与周墀一向交往深厚，等到周墀作宰相时，便连续三次向周墀投寄书札，请求镇守湖州。书札的意思是说自己弟弟眼睛有病，希望在江南疗养。
English: Dumu and Zhou Jun had always had a deep relationship. When Zhou Jun became the prime minister, he sent Zhou Jun three cards in a row, asking him to protect Huzhou. The cards meant that his brother had an eye disease and hoped to recover in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：大中三年，始授湖州刺史。
现代文：直到宣宗大中三年，才任他为湖州刺史，等他来到湖州时，已经过了十四年了。
English: It wasn't until he was a third-year student at Xuan Zong University that he was appointed to write the history of Huzhou. By the time he arrived in Huzhou, fourteen years had passed.

古文：比至郡，则已十四年矣，所约者，已从人三载，而生三子。
现代文：原先约定的那个姑娘，已经嫁给别人三年，而且生了三个孩子了。
English: The girl we originally agreed on has been married to someone else for three years and has given birth to three children.

古文：牧既即政，函使召之。其母惧其见夺，携幼以同往。
现代文：杜牧到任后，派人持信去招她，她母亲担心被抢，带着年幼的孩子一同去见他。
English: After Du Mu took office, he sent someone with a letter to recruit her. Her mother, worried about being robbed, went to see him with her young children.

古文：牧诘其母曰：曩既许我矣，何为反之？
现代文：杜牧责问她母亲道：以前既然许给我了，为什么反悔？
English: Du Mu reproached her mother, saying, "Since you gave me permission before, why do you regret it?

古文：母曰：向约十年，十年不来而后嫁，嫁已三年矣。
现代文：母亲说：以前约定的是十年期限，等了十年不来然后才嫁人的，已经嫁出去三年了。
English: My mother said, "The previous agreement was for a ten-year period. I waited for ten years and then got married. I've been married for three years.

古文：牧因取其载词视之，俛首移晷曰：其词也直，疆之不祥。
现代文：杜牧于是拿过记录她说的供词来看了看，低头沉思了一会儿，自语道：她说的都符合事实，勉强她是不好的。
English: Du Mu then took the record of her confession and read it, bowed his head and pondered for a moment, saying to himself: What she said is true, it is not good to force her.

古文：乃厚为礼而遣之。
现代文：便给她一份丰厚的礼物打发走了。
English: and sent her off with a generous gift.

古文：因赋诗以自伤曰：自是寻春去校迟，不须惆怅怨芳时。
现代文：杜牧因此写诗寄托自己的伤感，诗中写道：自是寻春去校迟，不须惆怅怨芳时。
English: As a result, Du Mu wrote a poem to express his sadness. In the poem, he wrote: "I'm late for school because I'm looking for spring, so I don't have to hold a grudge."

古文：狂风落尽深红色，绿叶成荫子满枝。
现代文：狂风落尽深红色，绿叶成荫子满枝。
English: The furious wind is crimson, the green leaves are shady and full of branches.

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：刘禹锡赴任姑苏，道过扬州。州师杜鸿渐饮之酒，大醉而归驿。
现代文：刘禹锡到苏州赴任时，路过扬州，州师杜鸿渐让他去喝酒，喝得大醉后回到了驿馆。
English: When Liu Yuxi went to Suzhou to take up his post, he passed through Yangzhou. The prefectural governor, Du Hongxian, asked him to go out drinking, and after getting very drunk, he returned to the Summer Palace.

古文：稍醒，见二女子在旁，惊非己有也。乃曰：郎中席上与司空诗，特令二乐妓侍寝、且醉中之作，都不记忆。
现代文：稍稍清醒之后，发现身边有两个女子，使他惊异的是，这两个女子并不是自己的人，于是便说：我在酒席上与司空对诗，让他派两名乐妓侍候我睡觉。那是喝醉了后说的话，现在都记不清是怎么回事了。
English: After waking up a little, he found two women around him, and to his surprise, the two women were not his own, so he said, "I had a conversation with Siku at a banquet and asked him to send two prostitutes to wait on me to sleep. That was said after getting drunk, and now I can't remember what happened.

古文：明旦，修启致谢。
现代文：第二天早上，他写信向杜致谢。
English: The next morning, he wrote to Du to thank him.

古文：杜亦优容之。
现代文：杜对此事也很谅解和宽容。
English: Du is also very understanding and tolerant of this matter.

古文：夫禹锡以郎吏州牧，而轻忤三司，岂不过哉。
现代文：刘禹锡乃是个侍郎州刺史之小官，竟在诗中轻慢忤逆三司之显宦，岂不是大大的罪过吗？
English: Liu Yuxi was a minor official in the service of the governor of the state and the history of the state. Isn't it a great sin to be so careless in a poem?

古文：诗曰：高髻云鬟宫样妆，春风一曲杜韦娘。
现代文：其诗道：高髻云鬟宫样妆，春风一曲杜韦娘。
English: His poem: Gao Zhenyun's palace-like makeup, Du Wei's daughter's spring breeze.

古文：司空见惯寻常事，断尽苏州刺史肠。
现代文：司空见惯寻常事，断尽苏州刺史肠。
English: It's a commonplace, everyday occurrence, and it's all the rage in Suzhou.

古文：李逢吉
现代文：李逢吉
English: Li Fengji

古文：李丞相逢吉，性强愎而沉猜多忌，好危人，略无怍色。
现代文：丞相李逢吉，性格刚愎而多猜忌，喜欢算计人，干了缺德事情也毫无惭愧之意。
English: The chancellor, Li Fengji, had a stubborn and suspicious personality, liked to calculate, and was not ashamed of doing things that were immoral.

古文：既为居守，刘禹锡有妓甚丽，为众所知。
现代文：既为居守。刘禹锡有个歌妓十分漂亮，人人都知道。
English: Liu Yuxi had a songstress who was very beautiful, and everyone knew it.

古文：李恃风望，恣行威福。
现代文：李逢吉倚仗自己的权势，作威作福。
English: Li Fengji relied on his own power and arrogance.

古文：分务朝官，取容不暇。
现代文：他分管朝廷官员，取容不暇。
English: He was in charge of the court officials and had a lot of time on his hands.

古文：一旦，阴以计夺之。约曰：某日皇城中堂前致宴，应朝贤宠嬖，并请早赴境会。
现代文：这一天他要用阴谋诡计夺取刘禹锡的歌妓，便通知大家道：某日于皇城正殿前面举行宴会，所有朝廷官员及其宠爱的婢妾均请届时参加盛会。
English: On this day, he wanted to use intrigue and trickery to capture Liu Yuxi's geisha, so he announced to everyone: One day, a banquet will be held in front of the main palace of the imperial city, and all court officials and their favorite concubines are invited to attend the grand event.

古文：稍可观瞩者，如期云集。
现代文：稍有姿色的婢妾到那一天便纷纷前来赴会。
English: On that day, the maidservants and concubines with a slight appearance came to the meeting one after another.

古文：但相见如常，从容久之，并不言境会之所以然者。
现代文：李逢吉命令守门人，要先把刘禹锡家的歌妓放进门去。京都的人对此举动都深感惊异，但是谁也不敢说什么。刘禹锡对此也无计可施，惊恐之余只好忍气吞声。
English: Li Fengji ordered the gatekeeper to first let Liu Yuxi's geisha through the door. People in Kyoto were deeply surprised by this action, but no one dared to say anything. Liu Yuxi had nothing to do about it, and had to swallow his fear.

古文：座中默然，相目而已。既罢，一揖而退。刘叹咤而归，无可奈何，遂愤懑而作四章，以拟四愁云尔。
现代文：拜见结束后，双方行礼告退，刘禹锡无可奈何，唉声叹气地回了家。于是悲愤地写下拟《四愁》诗四篇，以抒胸中之郁闷。
English: After the meeting, the two sides bowed and withdrew, and Liu Yuxi reluctantly returned home with a sigh. So he wrote down four poems imitating the "Four Sorrows" to express the depression in his heart.

古文：玉钗重合两无缘，鱼在深潭鹤在天。
现代文：他写道：玉钗重合两无缘，鱼在深潭鹤在天。
English: He wrote: "There is no chance of the two coinciding, the fish is in the deep pond and the crane is in the sky."

古文：得意紫鸾休舞镜，能言青鸟罢衔笺。
现代文：得意紫鸾休舞镜。能言青鸟罢衔笺。
English: He is good at the purple reed and the dancing mirror. He can say the blue bird and the reed.

古文：金盆已覆难收水，玉轸长抛不续弦。
现代文：金盆已覆难收水。玉轸长抛不续弦。
English: The pot of gold has been overturned, and it is difficult to collect water.

古文：若向靡芜山下过，遥将红泪洒穷泉。
现代文：若向靡芜山下过，遥将红泪洒穷泉。
English: If you go down to Mt. Meili, you will shed tears.

古文：鸾飞远树栖何处？
现代文：鸾飞远树牺何处？
English: Where does the dragonfly fly far away from the tree?

古文：凤得新巢已去心。
现代文：凤得新巢已去心。
English: The phoenix has lost its new nest.

古文：红璧尚流香漠漠，碧云初断信沉沉。
现代文：红璧尚流香漠漠，碧云初断信沉沉。
English: Hongbi is still flowing, fragrant and desolate, and Biyun's initial conviction is heavy.

古文：情知点污投泥玉，犹自经营买笑金。
现代文：情知点污投泥玉。犹自经营买笑金。
English: The sentiment is to throw mud at mudballs. The self-dealing is to buy funny money.

古文：从此山头似人石，丈夫形状泪痕深！
现代文：从此山头似人石。丈夫形状泪痕深！
English: Since then, the mountain top has resembled human stone. The shape of her husband is tear-stained!

古文：人曾何处更寻看，虽是生离死一般。
现代文：人曾何处更寻看。虽是生离死一般。
English: Where have people looked for more? Although it is a matter of life and death.

古文：买笑树边花已老，画眉窗下月犹残。
现代文：买笑树边花已老，画眉窗下月犹残。
English: The flowers on the edge of the smile tree are old, and the painted eyebrow window is still there.

古文：云藏巫峡音容断，路隔星桥过往难。
现代文：云藏巫峡音容断，路隔星桥过往难。
English: The sound of Yunnan-Tibet-Wuxia Gorge is intermittent, and it is difficult to cross the Star Bridge.

古文：莫怪诗成无泪滴。
现代文：莫怪诗成无泪滴。
English: No wonder the poem ends without a tear.

古文：尽倾东海也须干！
现代文：尽倾东海也须干！
English: The entire East China Sea must be drained!

古文：三山不见海沉沉，岂有仙踪更可寻。
现代文：三山不见海沉沉。岂有仙踪更可寻。
English: The three mountains disappear and the sea sinks. Is there a more magical place to be found?

古文：青鸟去时云路断，姮娥归处月宫深。
现代文：青鸟去时云路断，姮娥归处月宫深。
English: When the blue bird leaves, the road is cut off, and Chang'e returns to the depths of the Moon Palace.

古文：纱窗遥想春相忆，书幌谁怜夜独吟？
现代文：纱窗遥想春相忆，书幌谁怜夜独吟？
English: The screened windows are reminiscent of spring, the bookshelves are reminiscent of the solstice.

古文：料得夜来天上镜，只因偏照两人心。
现代文：料得夜来天上镜，只因偏照两人心。
English: It is said that the mirror appeared in the sky at night, only because it reflected the two people's hearts.

古文：洛中举人
现代文：洛中举人
English: Central L.A. raises its game

古文：举子某乙，洛中居人也，偶与乐妓茂英者相识。英年甚小。
现代文：有个举子是洛中人，偶然间认识了乐妓茂英，茂英当时年龄很小。
English: There was a young man from the central part of Laos, who by chance got to know the prostitute, Maoying, who was very young at the time.

古文：及乙到江外，偶与饮席遇之。因赠诗曰：忆昔当初过柳楼，茂英年小尚娇羞。
现代文：后来这位举子到了江南，在一次饮宴中又遇到了茂英，于是赠她一道诗道：忆昔当初过柳楼。茂英年小尚娇羞。
English: Later, when this high-ranking official went to the south of the Yangtze River, he met Mao Ying again at a banquet, so he gave her a poem: "I remember when I first went to Liu Lou. In Mao Ying's younger years, he was still shy.

古文：隔窗未省闻高语，对镜曾窥学上头。
现代文：隔窗未省闻高语。对镜曾窥学上头。
English: The partition window heard high-pitched speech without reflection. The mirror once peeped over the top.

古文：一别中原俱老大，重来南国见风流。
现代文：一别中原俱老大。重来南国见风流。
English: I'm not the boss of the Central Plains club. I've come back to the South to see the trend.

古文：弹弦酌酒话前事。
现代文：弹弦酌酒话前事。
English: Before the string-playing and wine-drinking.

古文：零落碧云生暮愁。
现代文：零落碧云生暮愁。
English: Fragments of a cloudless life.

古文：举子因谒节使，遂客游留连数月。
现代文：举子拜见了当地的节度使，便客居此地留连忘返。
English: After visiting the local governor, the guest stayed here for a long time.

古文：帅遇之甚厚。
现代文：一住就是几个月。
English: I've only lived here a few months.

古文：宴饮既频，与酒乣谐戏颇洽。
现代文：节帅对他以厚礼相待，经常与他设宴共饮，席间让茂英担当录事执掌酒令，饮酒逗乐极为融洽。
English: The festival marshal treated him with great courtesy, often holding a banquet with him and drinking with him. During the meal, he let Mao Ying, who was in charge of the recording, take charge of the wine order, and the drinking and entertainment was extremely harmonious.

古文：一日告辞，帅厚以金帛赆行，复开宴送别。因暗留绝句与乣曰：少插花枝少下筹。
现代文：一天，举子要告辞，节帅赠给他丰厚的路费，并又设筵为他道别，席间悄悄留下一首绝句与茂英道：少插花枝少下筹。
English: One day, he wanted to bid farewell to his son, and the festival marshal gave him a generous travel fee, and also set up an urn for him to say goodbye. He quietly left a poem between the tables with Mao Yingdao: Less flowers, fewer branches, less money.

古文：须防女伴妬风流。
现代文：须防女伴妬风流。
English: It is necessary to prevent female companion envy.

古文：坐中若打占相令，除却尚书莫点头。
现代文：坐中若打占相令。除却尚书莫点头。
English: If you're in the middle of a meeting, it's your turn to speak up. Otherwise, just nod your head.

古文：因设舞曲遗诗。帅取览之，当时即令人所在送付举子。
现代文：茂英为此诗谱写了舞曲，节帅把配了曲的诗拿来看了一遍，当即派人送到举子住处交给了他。
English: Maoying composed a dance music for this poem. Setsusai took a look at the poem with the music and immediately sent someone to Hoe Son's residence to hand it over to him.

古文：蔡京
现代文：蔡京
English: Cai Jing

古文：邕南朝度使蔡京过永州，永州刺史郑史与京同年，连以酒乐相邀。
现代文：朝度使蔡京号邕南，一次路过永州，永州刺史郑史与他同年及第，所以频设酒宴邀请这位老同学。
English: In the morning, Cai Jing traveled south of Shennan, passing through Yongzhou for the first time. Yongzhou's chief historian Zheng Shi was his junior in the same year, so he frequently invited the old classmate to wine banquets.

古文：座有琼枝者，郑之所爱，而席之最妍。
现代文：席间有一个叫琼枝的乐妓，是郑史所宠爱的人，她是在座乐妓中最为娇艳者。
English: Between the tables, there was a courtesan named Qiong Zhi, who was the favorite of Zheng Shi. She was the most beautiful of all the courtesans.

古文：蔡强夺之行。
现代文：蔡京看中后便强行夺了去。
English: After Cai Jing saw it, he forcibly took it away.

古文：郑莫之竟也。
现代文：郑史是争不过他的。
English: Zheng Shi couldn't compete with him.

古文：邕南之所为，多如此类。为德义者见鄙，终其不悛也。
现代文：蔡邕南的为人，就是如此，为有德之人和仁义之士所不齿。而他终其一生，恶习不改。
English: Cai Shennan's character is such that he is despised by virtuous and benevolent people, and he will never change his bad habits throughout his life.

古文：及邕南制御失律，伏法。
现代文：后来蔡邕南因负责防御外敌入侵失职，终于受到了制裁。
English: Later, Cai Yunan was finally sanctioned for dereliction of duty in charge of defense against foreign invasion.

古文：武昌妓
现代文：武昌妓
English: Wuchang prostitute

古文：韦蟾廉问鄂州，及罢任，宾僚盛陈祖席。
现代文：韦蟾治理鄂州期间，为政清廉，等他卸任时，宾客幕僚们设宴为他饯行。
English: During Wei Wei's governance of Ezhou, he was a clean politician. When he left office, the guests and staff members held a banquet for him.

古文：蟾遂书文选句云：悲莫悲兮生别离，登山临水送将归。
现代文：席间，韦蟾挥笔题写了《文选》中的一句话：悲莫悲兮生别离，登山临水送将归。
English: During the banquet, Wei Wei waved a pen and wrote a sentence from "Wenxuan" (Selected Writings): Don't be sad when you part, you will be sent home from the mountain near the water.

古文：以笺毫授宾从，请续其句。
现代文：然后将纸笔递给属僚，请各位续写下句。
English: Then pass the pen and paper to your colleagues and ask them to continue writing the next sentence.

古文：座中怅望，皆思不属。
现代文：在座的各位怅然相望，都感到对不出来。
English: All of you here are looking at each other, and you can't seem to get it right.

古文：逡巡，女妓泫然起曰：某不才，不敢染翰，欲口占两句。
现代文：过了一会儿，一个妓女含泪而起道：在下不才，不敢染墨，愿意口占两句。
English: After a while, a prostitute burst into tears and said, "I'm not good at it, I don't dare to dye my hair, I'm willing to speak my mind."

古文：韦大惊异，令随口写之：武昌无限新栽柳，不见杨花扑面飞。
现代文：韦蟾大为惊异令人照她口说的写了下来。这两句是：武昌无限新栽柳，不见杨花扑面飞。
English: Wei Wei was so surprised that she wrote down what she said. The two sentences were: Wuchang unlimited new willows, no poplars.

古文：座客无不嘉叹。
现代文：在座的客人无不称许赞叹。
English: All the guests present were full of praise and admiration.

古文：韦令唱作《杨柳枝词》，极欢而散。
现代文：韦蟾令她将此四句合在一起，配上曲谱唱作《杨柳枝词》。整个宴会极欢而散。
English: Wei Wei asked her to put these four sentences together and sing the "Willow Branch" with the score. The whole banquet was very happy.

古文：赠数十笺，纳之，翌日共载而发。
现代文：宾客与幕僚们赠给韦蟾几十幅题笺，他都收存起来。第二天，他便携带家眷及歌妓出发了。
English: The guests and staff gave Wei Jun dozens of inscriptions, which he put away. The next day, he set out with his family and geisha.

古文：韦保衢
现代文：韦保衢
English: Wei Baozhen

古文：韦保衢尝访同人，方坐，李钜新及第，亦继至。
现代文：韦保衢有一次去同事家里探望，刚刚坐下，刚刚及第的李钜也相继到了。
English: Wei Baozhen once went to visit a colleague's home. He had just sat down, and Li Yao, who had just won the first place, also arrived one after another.

古文：保衢以其后先，匿于帷下。
现代文：保衢因自己尚未及第反倒先到，于是躲在帐子后面。
English: The bodyguard hid behind a curtain because he was not the first to arrive.

古文：既入曰：有客乎？
现代文：李钜进屋后问道：家里有客人吗？
English: After Li Yao entered the house, he asked: Are there any guests at home?

古文：同人曰：韦保衢秀才，可以出否？
现代文：这位同事说：韦保衢秀才在这里，可以出面吗？
English: The colleague said: Wei Baoqian is here, can you come forward?

古文：钜新及第，甚自得意，徐曰：出也何妨。保衢竟不之出。
现代文：李钜刚刚及第。正在洋洋得意，慢声说道：出面就出面吧，这有什么不可以的。保衢竟说啥也不出面。
English: Li Yao had just won the first place. He was beaming with pride and said in a slow voice, "If you want to come forward, come forward. There's nothing wrong with that." The bodyguard actually said that he wouldn't come forward.

古文：洎衢尚公主为相，李蠙镇岐下，钜方自山北旧从事辟焉。
现代文：等到保衢尚公主为相时，李蠙镇守岐下，李钜才从山北的从事之职调任李蠙幕府任职。
English: It was not until the bodyguard of Princess Shang became the emperor's consort, and the town of Lishui was placed under the protection of the Shogunate, that Lishui was transferred from his post in Shandong to the Lishui Shogunate.

古文：初保衢既登第，独孤云除东川，辟在幕下。
现代文：当初，何衢及第后，独孤云镇守东川，保衢便在他幕府中任职。
English: At first, and later, he was the sole guardian of the East River, and the bodyguard served in his shogunate.

古文：乐籍间有佐饮者，副史李甲属意也。时以逼于他适，私期，回将纳焉。
现代文：乐妓之中有个陪伴酒席的，副史李甲看中了，时常逼她嫁给自己，并私下约定，等自己回来时纳为妾。
English: Among the prostitutes, there was one who accompanied the banquet. Vice-President Li Jia took a fancy to her, and often forced her to marry him, and privately agreed to make her his concubine when he returned.

古文：保衢既至，不之知，祈于独孤，且请降其籍。
现代文：保衢到任后，不知有这种关系，便祈求独孤云将此乐妓许给他，且请降其籍。
English: After the bodyguard took office, he did not know that there was such a relationship, so he prayed for the lonely cloud to grant him this prostitute, and asked to be demoted.

古文：李至，意殊不平，每在宴席，辄以语侵保衢。
现代文：李甲回来后，心里极为不满，时常在宴席上用话刺激保衢。
English: After Li Jia returned, he was extremely dissatisfied and often used words to irritate the bodyguard at the banquet.

古文：保衢不能容，即携其妓人以去。
现代文：保衢无法忍受，便带着这位妓女逃走了。
English: Unable to bear it, the bodyguard fled with the prostitute.

古文：李益怒之，屡言于云。
现代文：李甲更为恼火，屡次在独孤云面前进言。
English: Li Jia was even more irritated and repeatedly spoke in front of Du Guoyun.

古文：云不得已，命飞牒追之而回。
现代文：独孤云迫不得已，便令人带上文书去追他回来。
English: As a last resort, he had someone bring a document to chase him back.

古文：无何，堂牒追保衢赴辇下，乃尚同昌公主也。
现代文：没过多久，扑快便带着文书追赶保钜到了京都，保衢已经和同昌公主结婚。
English: It didn't take long before Po-Hui arrived in Kyoto with paperwork to catch up with the bodyguard, who was already married to Princess Tongchang.

古文：李固惧之矣。
现代文：李甲当然是惧怕公主的。
English: Of course, Li Jia is afraid of the princess.

古文：不日，保衢复入翰林，李闻之，登时而卒。
现代文：没过几天，保衢又进了翰林院，李甲听说后，登时就死了。
English: A few days later, the bodyguard entered Hanlin Hospital again. After Li Jia heard about it, Deng Jiao died.

古文：曹生
现代文：曹生
English: Cao Sheng

古文：卢常侍鉟，牧沪江日，相座嘱一曹生，令署郡职，不免奉之。
现代文：常侍卢鉟镇守沪江时，相座将曹生嘱托给他，让他署理郡宦，卢鉟不免要对曹生格外照顾，以不负相座之托。
English: When Lu Yao, a regular attendant of Lu Yao, was guarding the Hujiang River, Cao Sheng was entrusted to him to be the deputy county magistrate. Lu Yao had to take special care of Cao Sheng so as not to fail to live up to the trust of being the magistrate.

古文：曹悦营妓名丹霞，卢沮而不许。
现代文：曹生喜欢营妓丹霞，卢鉟拒绝他的要求，不许他亲近。
English: Cao Sheng likes the prostitute Danxia. Lu Yao refused his request and did not allow him to get close to her.

古文：会饯朝客于短亭，曹献诗曰：拜玉亭间送客忙，此时孤恨感离乡。
现代文：在一次于短亭为朝廷客人饯别时，曹生于席间献诗一首表达自己的苦衷，诗中说道：拜玉亭间送客忙，此时孤恨感离乡。
English: Once, when bidding farewell to the guests of the imperial court at the pavilion, Cao Sheng dedicated a poem to express his distress between the tables. In the poem, he said: I am busy seeing off guests at the Baiyu Pavilion, at this time I feel lonely and hate to leave my hometown.

古文：寻思往岁绝缨事，肯向朱门泣夜长。
现代文：寻思往发绝缨事，肯向朱门泣夜长。
English: Thinks about the unimaginable and cries to Zhu Men for a long time.

古文：卢演为长句，和而勉之曰：桑扈交飞百舌忙，祖亭闻乐倍思乡。
现代文：卢鉟将此诗演化为一首长句，与曹生相和，并借以勉励他，其诗为：桑扈交飞百舌忙，祖亭闻乐倍思乡。
English: Lu Xun evolved this poem into a long sentence, reconciled with Cao Sheng, and encouraged him by means of it. The poem is: Mulberry is busy with many languages, and Zuting is homesick for music.

古文：樽前有恨惭卑宦，席上无寥爱艳妆。
现代文：樽前有恨惭卑宦，席上无寥爱艳妆。
English: In front of the barrel, there is hate, shame and humiliation, and at the table there is no shortage of love for make-up.

古文：莫为狂花迷眼界，须求真理定心王。
现代文：莫为狂花迷眼界，须求真理定心王。
English: Don't be fooled by the wild flowers. Seek the truth to set your mind at rest.

古文：游蜂采掇何时已，祗恐多言议短长。
现代文：游蜂采掇何时已，祗恐多言议短长。
English: When the swarming bees have already picked the nettle, don't be afraid to be more concise.

古文：罗虬
现代文：罗虬
English: Luo Zhen

古文：罗虬词藻富赡，与宗人隐、邺齐名。咸通乾符中，时号三罗。
现代文：罗虬的文章词藻富丽华赡，与同族人罗隐、罗邺齐名，咸通至乾符年间，一时号称三罗。
English: Luo Yao's writings are full of rich and beautiful words. He is as famous as his compatriots Luo Yin and Luo Yao. During the period from Hamdang to Qianfu, he was once known as San Luo.

古文：广明庚子乱后，去从鄜州李孝恭。
现代文：广明庚子之乱以后，蜀虬到鄜州去跟从李孝恭成为他的宾客。
English: After the Guangming-Gengzi Rebellion, Shu Yan went to Ganzhou to follow Li Xiaogang and become his guest.

古文：籍中有红儿者，善为音声，常为副戍属意。
现代文：乐妓中有个叫红儿的，擅长音乐，为副将所看中。
English: Among the courtesans, there was one named Hong'er, who was good at music and was favored by the vice-commander.

古文：会副戌聘邻道，虬请红儿歌，而赠之缯綵。
现代文：当副将被聘任到邻近的道就职时，罗虬便请红儿为他唱歌，并赠给她细绢。
English: When the vice-premier was appointed to a neighboring province, Luo Yao asked Hong'er to sing for him and gave her a thin reed.

古文：孝恭以副车所盼，不令受之。
现代文：孝恭因为她被副车所瞩盼，不让她接受。
English: Xiao Yang did not let her accept because she was being watched by the second car.

古文：虬怒，拂衣而起。
现代文：罗虬非常生气，拂袖而去。
English: Luo Yao was very angry and stormed away.

古文：诘旦，手刃红儿。
现代文：第二天早上，罗虬亲手杀死了红儿。
English: The next morning, Luo Gan killed Hong'er with his own hands.

古文：既而思之，乃作绝句百编，号《比红儿诗》，大行于时。
现代文：事后时常思念着她，便作绝句上百篇，称为比红儿诗，当时极为流行。
English: After the fact, he often thought about her and composed hundreds of last lines, known as Bi Hong'er poems, which were extremely popular at the time.

古文：徐月英
现代文：徐月英
English: Xu Yueying

古文：江淮间，有徐月英者，名娼也。
现代文：江淮一带有个叫徐月英的，是位名妓。
English: Jianghuai once had a famous prostitute named Xu Yueying.

古文：其送人诗云：惆怅人间万事违，两人同去一人归。
现代文：她在赠送别人的诗中写道：惆怅人间万事违，两人同去一人归。
English: She wrote in the poem she gave as a gift to others: "When everything goes wrong between two people, they both go home alone."

古文：生憎平望亭中水。忍照鸳鸯相背飞。
现代文：生憎平望亭中水，忍照鸳鸯相背飞。
English: I hate being in the middle of the water at Pingwang Pavilion. I can't bear to see the dragonflies flying back and forth.

古文：又云：枕前泪与阶前雨。隔个窗儿滴到明。
现代文：另一道诗中又写道：枕前泪与阶前雨，隔个窗儿滴到明。
English: In another poem, it is written: The tears before the pillow and the rain before the steps are the same, dripping from one window to the next.

古文：亦有诗集。
现代文：她还有诗集。
English: She also has a book of poetry.

古文：金陵徐氏诸公子，宠一营妓，卒乃焚之，月英送葬，谓徐公曰：此娘平生风流，没亦带焰。
现代文：金陵徐家几个公子，宠爱一名营妓，当这个营妓死掉时，徐家便把她焚化了。徐月英前去送葬时，对徐公说：这个女人平生风流，死了也带着火焰光彩。
English: Several sons of the Xu family in Jinling loved a prostitute, and when the prostitute died, the Xu family had her cremated. When Xu Yueying went to the funeral, he said to Xu Gong: "This woman was a womanizer all her life, and she died with a flame of glory.

古文：时号美戏也。
现代文：这句话，当时被称为漂亮的戏言。
English: This sentence, at that time, was called a beautiful play on words.

