古文：宋本纪上宋高祖武皇帝讳裕，字德舆，小字寄奴，彭城县绥舆里人，姓刘氏，汉楚元王交之二十一世孙也。
现代文：宋高祖武皇帝名叫裕，字德舆，小字寄奴，彭城县绥舆里人，姓刘氏，是汉代楚元王刘交的第二十一代孙子。
English: Emperor Song Gao's ancestor, Emperor Song Gao, was named Yu, his family name was Liu, and he was from Pengcheng County. He was the 21st-generation grandson of the Han Dynasty's King Chu Yuan Liu Jia.

古文：彭城楚都，故苗裔家焉。
现代文：彭城是楚国的都城，所以后代子孙便以这里为家了。
English: Pengcheng is the capital of the State of Chu, so the descendants have made it their home.

古文：晋氏东迁，刘氏移居晋陵丹徒之京口里。
现代文：晋朝东迁，刘氏移居到晋陵丹徒的京口里。
English: When the Jin Dynasty moved eastward, the Liu clan moved to the Kyoguchi village of Dantu in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：皇祖靖，晋东安太守。
现代文：他的先祖刘靖，是晋朝的东安太守。
English: His ancestor Liu Jing was the governor of East An during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：皇考翘，字显宗，郡功曹。
现代文：他的父亲刘翘，字显宗，是郡上的功曹。
English: His father, Liu Gao, surnamed Xian Zong, was a famous scholar in the county.

古文：帝以晋哀帝兴宁元年岁在癸亥三月壬寅夜生，神光照室尽明，是夕甘露降于墓树。
现代文：武帝是晋哀帝兴宁元年三月十七日的夜里降生，当时神光照得房子里一片光明，这天夜里有甘露降落在墓地的树上。
English: Emperor Wu was born on the night of the 17th day of the 3rd month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xingning. At that time, the divine light shone brightly in the house, and on that night, there was nectar falling on the trees in the cemetery.

古文：及长，雄杰有大度，身长七尺六寸，风骨奇伟，不事廉隅小节，奉继母以孝闻。
现代文：他长大后，为人雄杰，气度宏大，身高七尺六寸，风神奇伟，不拘生活小节，侍奉继母以孝顺闻名。
English: When he grew up, he was a heroic person, with a magnificent temperament, seven feet six inches tall, with a magical wind, and was famous for serving his stepmother with filial piety, regardless of his daily life.

古文：尝游京口竹林寺，独卧讲堂前，上有五色龙章，衆僧见之，惊以白帝，帝独喜曰： 上人无妄言。 
现代文：他曾游览京口的竹林寺，独自躺在讲堂的前面，上面有一条五色龙显现出来，众僧人见了，惊慌地告诉了武帝，武帝独自高兴地说： 请上人不要乱讲。 
English: He once visited the Bamboo Forest Temple in Kyoguchi. He was lying alone in front of the lecture hall. A five-colored dragon appeared above him. When the monks saw it, they were alarmed and told Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu said happily, "Please don't misrepresent the guru."

古文：皇考墓在丹徒之候山，其地秦史所谓曲阿、丹徒间有天子气者也。
现代文：他父亲的墓在丹徒的候山，那里就是秦史上所说的曲阿、丹徒之间有天子气的地方。
English: His father's grave is in Dantu's Hanging Mountain, which is the place where Qin history said that there was a heavenly son between Qua and Dantu.

古文：时有孔恭者，妙善占墓，帝尝与经墓，欺之曰： 此墓何如？ 
现代文：当时有个叫孔恭的人，很善于占墓，武帝曾经和他一块经过墓地，欺骗他说： 这片坟墓怎么样？ 
English: At that time, there was a man named Kong Qiong, who was very good at seizing tombs. Emperor Wu once walked through a cemetery with him and tricked him by saying, "How is this tomb?

古文：孔恭曰： 非常地也。 
现代文：孔恭说： 不是一般的地方哟！ 
English: Kong Qiong said: It's not an ordinary place!

古文：帝由是益自负。
现代文：武帝从此更加自负。
English: Emperor Wu became even more arrogant.

古文：行止时见二小龙附翼，樵渔山泽，同侣或亦睹焉。
现代文：行动时常常见到有两条小龙附在两翼，到山上砍柴或到水边打鱼，同伴们有的也曾经看见。
English: When they are on the move, they often see two small dragons attached to their wings. They go to the mountains to cut firewood or to the water's edge to fish. Some of their companions have also seen them.

古文：及贵，龙形更大。
现代文：地位尊贵以后，龙形更大。
English: After the status of nobility, the dragon shape grows larger.

古文：帝素贫，时人莫能知，唯琅邪王谧独深敬焉。
现代文：武帝一向贫穷，当时的人都不能识别他的才干，只有琅笽人王谧独自对他深深敬重。
English: Emperor Wu had always been poor, and people at that time could not recognize his talent. Only Wang Yao, a scholar, had deep respect for him.

古文：帝尝负刁逵社钱三万，经时无以还，被逵执，谧密以己钱代偿，由是得释。
现代文：武帝曾经欠刁逵的社钱三万，好长时间无法偿还，被刁逵抓起来，王谧暗中用自己的钱代他还上，由此得到释放。
English: Emperor Wu once owed 30,000 social money to the cormorant, and was unable to repay it for a long time. He was arrested by the cormorant, and Wang Yao secretly used his own money to pay for him, and was thus released.

古文：后伐荻新洲，见大蛇长数丈，射之，伤。
现代文：后来在新洲割荻草，看到了一条大蛇有几丈长，就用箭射它，蛇受了伤。
English: Later, when he was cutting rushes in Xinzhou, he saw a big snake several feet long and shot it with an arrow. The snake was injured.

古文：明日复至洲，里闻有杵臼声，往觇之，见童子数人皆青衣，于榛中捣药。
现代文：第二天又到了新洲，听到里面有杵臼的声音，进去一看，见有好几个童子都穿着青色的衣服，在草丛中捣药。
English: The next day, I went to Xinzhou again. I heard the sound of ploughing inside, and when I looked inside, I saw several boys wearing blue clothes, pounding medicine in the grass.

古文：问其故，答曰： 我王爲刘寄奴所射，合散傅之。 
现代文：问他们是怎么回事，回答说： 我们的大王被刘寄奴射伤了，配些药给他敷上。 
English: He asked them what was the matter, and they replied, "Our great king was shot and wounded by Liu's slave, so we put some medicine on him."

古文：帝曰： 王神何不杀之？ 
现代文：武帝说： 神王怎么不把刘寄奴杀死？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Why didn't the god king kill Liu Yinglong?"

古文：答曰： 刘寄奴王者不死，不可杀。 
现代文：回答说： 刘寄奴是个王，不会死的，所以不能杀他。 
English: He replied, "Liu Yingnong is a king, he cannot die, so we cannot kill him.

古文：帝叱之，皆散，仍收药而反。
现代文：武帝呵叱他们，都跑散了，便收起药来回去了。
English: Emperor Wu scolded them and they all ran away, so he packed up the medicine and went back and forth.

古文：又经客下邳逆旅，会一沙门谓帝曰： 江表当乱，安之者，其在君乎。 
现代文：又曾经住宿在下邳的旅舍，碰到一个小和尚对武帝说： 江东将要大乱，能使这里安定下来的，恐怕就是您了吧！ 
English: He also stayed at a hostel in Jiaozuo, where he met a little monk who said to Emperor Wu, "The East River will be in turmoil. If anyone can bring stability here, I'm afraid it's you!"

古文：帝先患手创，积年不愈，沙门有一黄药，因留与帝，既而忽亡，帝以黄散傅之，其创一傅而愈。
现代文：武帝的手曾经被割伤，多年不愈，和尚有一种黄散，便留给了武帝，随后忽然不见了，武帝用黄散敷在手上，那伤口只敷一次就好了。
English: Emperor Wu's hand was once cut, and it did not heal for many years. The monk had a yellow ointment, so he left it to Emperor Wu, and then it suddenly disappeared. Emperor Wu used the yellow ointment to apply it to his hand. The wound only needed to be applied once.

古文：宝其馀及所得童子药，每遇金创，傅之并验。
现代文：保留剩余的黄散以及所得的童子的药，每当遇到刀伤，敷上都很灵验。
English: Keep the remaining yellow powder and the boy's medicine, whenever you encounter a knife wound, it is very effective.

古文：初爲冠军孙无终司马。
现代文：起初他担任冠军孙无终的司马。
English: At first, he served as the champion's son-in-law.

古文：晋隆安三年十一月，祅贼孙恩作乱于会稽，朝廷遣卫将军谢琰、前将军刘牢之东讨。
现代文：晋朝隆安三年十一月，妖贼孙恩在会稽作乱，朝廷派卫将军谢琰、前将军刘牢之去东方讨伐。
English: In November of the third year of the Longan period of the Jin Dynasty, the evil thief Sun En led a disturbance in the meeting, and the imperial court sent the guard general Xie Jun and the former general Liu Diao Zhi to the east to fight.

古文：牢之请帝参府军事，命与数十人觇贼，遇贼衆数千，帝便与战，所将人多死，而帝奋长刀，所杀伤甚衆。
现代文：刘牢之请武帝参谋府中军事，命令他与几十个人一道监视贼军，遇到了贼兵几千人，武帝便和他们打起来，所率领的人大多战死，而武帝挥舞着长刀，杀伤了很多贼兵。
English: Liu Diao invited Emperor Wu to be the military staff officer of the Central Government, and ordered him to monitor the bandits with dozens of people. When he encountered thousands of bandits, Emperor Wu fought with them. Most of the people he led were killed in battle, and Emperor Wu waved a long knife and killed many bandits.

古文：牢之子敬宣疑帝爲贼所困，乃轻骑寻之；既而衆骑并至，遂平山阴，恩遁入海。
现代文：刘牢之的儿子刘敬宣怀疑武帝被贼兵围困，就带了一些轻骑去寻找他；不久，众多骑兵一齐来到，于是平定了山阴，孙恩逃到了海上。
English: Liu Diao's son, Liu Jingxuan, suspected that Emperor Wu was besieged by bandits, so he took some light cavalry to look for him; soon, many cavalrymen came together, so they leveled the mountains, and Sun En fled to the sea.

古文：四年五月，恩复入会稽，杀谢琰。
现代文：隆安四年五月，孙恩又进入了会稽，杀了谢琰。
English: In May of the fourth year of Longan, Sun En again entered the auditorium and killed Xie Jun.

古文：十一月，牢之复东征，使帝戍句章，句章城小人少，帝每战陷阵，贼乃退还浃口。
现代文：十一月，刘牢之再次东征，让武帝守卫句章，句章城小人少，武帝每次战斗都攻陷敌方阵地，贼军便退回浃口。
English: In November, Liu Dolezhi once again went to the East, leaving Emperor Wu to guard the capital. There were few villains in the capital, and Emperor Wu captured the enemy's position in every battle. The invaders then returned to Hukou.

古文：时东伐诸将，士卒暴掠，百姓皆苦之，惟帝独无所犯。
现代文：当时东伐的各个将官，手下士卒都大肆掠抢，老百姓都深受苦害，只有武帝的军队无所侵犯。
English: At that time, the generals and subordinates of the Eastern Expedition plundered extensively, and the common people suffered deeply. Only Emperor Wu's army remained inviolate.

古文：五年春，恩频攻句章，帝屡破之，恩复入海。
现代文：隆安五年春天，孙恩频繁进攻句章，武帝屡次击败他，孙恩重新逃到海上。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Longan, Sun En made frequent attacks. Emperor Wu repeatedly defeated him, and Sun En fled to the sea again.

古文：三月，恩北出海盐，帝筑城于故海盐，贼日来攻城，城内兵少，帝乃选敢死士击走之。
现代文：三月，孙恩向北开往海盐，武帝在旧海盐筑起城墙，贼军每日都来攻城，城内的兵少，武帝便选了一支敢死队把贼军赶走。
English: In March, Sun En sailed north to Haiyan. Emperor Wu began to build the city wall in the old Haiyan. The rebel army attacked the city every day. There were few soldiers in the city. Emperor Wu then selected a death squad to drive the rebel army away.

古文：时虽连胜，帝深虑衆寡不敌，乃一夜偃旗示以羸弱，观其懈，乃奋击，大破之。
现代文：当时虽然接连胜利，武帝却深深地忧虑着众寡不敌，就在一个夜里把军旗收了起来，以显示自己方面的疲弱，看到敌方懈怠的时候，便奋力出击，大破贼兵。
English: At that time, although successive victories, Emperor Wu was deeply worried about being outnumbered, so he raised the military banner in one night to show his own weakness, and when he saw the enemy slacking off, he attacked with all his might and defeated the bandits.

古文：恩知城不可下，进向沪渎，帝弃城追之。
现代文：孙恩知道城无法攻下，便向沪渎进兵，武帝弃城追赶。
English: Sun En knew that the city could not be conquered, so he marched into Shanghai, and Emperor Wu abandoned the city to pursue him.

古文：海盐令鲍陋遣子嗣之以吴兵一千爲前驱，帝以吴人不习战，命之在后，不从。
现代文：海盐县令鲍陋派遣儿子鲍嗣之率领吴地兵士一千作为前驱，武帝因为吴地人不熟习打仗，命令他们排在后面，他们不答应。
English: Haiyan County ordered Baohui to send his son Baozhi to lead a thousand Wu soldiers as a vanguard. Emperor Wu ordered them to line up behind because the Wu people were not familiar with war, and they did not agree.

古文：是夜帝多设奇兵，兼置旗鼓，明日战，伏发，贼退，嗣之追奔陷没。
现代文：这一夜武帝设了很多奇兵，同时添置旗鼓，第二天战斗，伏兵杀了出来，贼兵撤退，鲍嗣之追赶逃敌，结果被消灭。
English: That night, Emperor Wu set up a lot of strange soldiers, and at the same time increased the fanfare. The next day, the battle, the ambush was killed, the thief soldiers retreated, and Baozhi chased the fleeing enemy, and was eliminated as a result.

古文：帝且退且战，麾下死伤将尽，乃至向处止，令左右解取死人衣以示暇。
现代文：武帝且退且战，部下死伤将尽，便回到原来的地方停了下来，让身边的人们去解取死人的衣服以显示出闲暇的样子。
English: Emperor Wu stood back and watched the battle. His subordinates were about to be killed and wounded, so he returned to the original place and paused, letting the people around him remove the dead man's clothes to show the appearance of leisure.

古文：贼疑尚有伏，乃引去。
现代文：贼兵怀疑还有埋伏，便退走了。
English: Suspecting an ambush, the bandits retreated.

古文：六月，恩浮海至丹徒，帝兼行与俱至，奔击大破之。
现代文：六月，孙恩渡海到了丹徒，武帝加倍赶路与他一齐到达，迅速出击，大破贼军。
English: In June, Sun En crossed the sea to Dantu. Emperor Wu arrived with him in double-quick time, quickly attacked and defeated the bandits.

古文：恩至建邺，知朝廷有备，遂走郁洲。
现代文：孙恩到了建邺，知道朝廷已经有了防备，于是逃往郁洲。
English: When Sun En arrived in Jianye, he knew that the imperial court was already prepared, so he fled to Yuzhou.

古文：八月，晋帝以帝爲下邳太守。
现代文：八月，晋朝皇帝任命武帝为下邳太守。
English: In August, the emperor of the Jin Dynasty appointed Emperor Wu as the Lower Han Dynasty governor.

古文：帝又追恩至郁洲及海盐，频破之。
现代文：武帝又追击孙恩到郁洲和海盐，接连击败他们。
English: Emperor Wu also pursued Sun En to Yuzhou and Haiyan, defeating them one after another.

古文：恩自是饥馑，奔临海。
现代文：孙恩从此以后出现饥荒，逃奔临海。
English: After this, Sun En suffered from famine and fled to the coast.

古文：元兴元年，荆州刺史桓玄举兵东下，骠骑将军司马元显遣牢之拒之，帝又参其军事。
现代文：元兴元年，荆州刺史桓玄率兵东下，骠骑将军司马元显派刘牢之抵抗，武帝又参加了他的军事行动。
English: In the first year of the Genxing era, Jing Zhou's general Sima Yuanxian led his troops eastward, instigated Liu Diao's resistance, and Emperor Wu took part in his military operations.

古文：玄至，帝请击之，牢之不许，乃遣子敬宣诣玄请和。
现代文：桓玄到达以后，武帝请求攻击，刘牢之不许，却派自己的儿子刘敬宣去找桓玄请求和解。
English: After Huan Xuan arrived, Emperor Wu requested an attack, but Liu Diao did not allow it. Instead, he sent his son Liu Jingxuan to seek reconciliation with Huan Xuan.

古文：帝与东海何无忌并固谏，不从。
现代文：武帝和东海人何无忌一齐竭力劝谏，刘牢之拒不听从。
English: Emperor Wu and the East Sea people tried their best to persuade him, but Liu Diao refused to listen.

古文：玄克建邺，以牢之爲会稽内史。
现代文：桓玄攻克了建邺，朝廷任命刘牢之为会稽内史。
English: Huan Xuan defeated Jian Ye, and the imperial court appointed Liu Diao as the internal auditor of the association.

古文：牢之惧，招帝于广陵举兵，帝曰： 人情去矣，广陵亦岂可得之？ 
现代文：刘牢之恐惧，招武帝在广陵起兵，武帝说： 人情不在了，广陵又哪里能得到呢？ 
English: Liu Du's fear caused Emperor Wu to raise an army in Guangling. Emperor Wu said, "Humanity is gone. Where can Guangling be found?

古文：牢之竟缢于新洲。
现代文：刘牢之结果在新洲自缢而死。
English: As a result of Liu's imprisonment, he committed suicide in Xinzhou.

古文：何无忌谓帝曰： 我将何之？ 
现代文：何无忌对武帝说： 我将到哪里去呢？ 
English: Why not say to Emperor Wu: Where will I go?

古文：帝曰： 可随我还京口。
现代文：武帝说： 可以随我回京口。
English: Emperor Wu said: You can follow me back to Beijing.

古文：玄必守臣节，当与卿事之；不然，与卿图之。 
现代文：桓玄必定会保持对待臣子的节操，我可以和您一起侍奉他；不行的话，就和您一起对付他。 
English: Kuan Xuan will surely maintain his discipline towards his vassal. I can serve him with you; if not, I will deal with him with you.

古文：玄从兄修以抚军将军镇丹徒，以帝爲中兵参军。
现代文：桓玄的堂兄桓修以抚军将军的头衔镇守丹徒，任命武帝为中兵参军。
English: Kuan Xuan's cousin, Kanshu, took the title of general of the Fuzhou army and appointed Emperor Wu as the commander of the troops.

古文：孙恩自败后，惧见获，乃投水死于临海，馀衆推恩妹夫卢循爲主。
现代文：孙恩自从兵败以后，害怕被抓获，便在临海投水而死，其余的兵众推举孙恩的妹夫卢循为主帅。
English: After Sun En's defeat, he was afraid of being captured, so he threw water into the sea and died. The rest of the soldiers elected Sun En's brother-in-law Lu Xun as their commander.

古文：玄复遣帝东征。
现代文：桓玄再次派武帝东征。
English: Kuan Xuan once again sent Emperor Wu on an eastern expedition.

古文：二年，循奔永嘉，帝追破之。
现代文：元兴二年，卢循逃奔永嘉，武帝追赶并击破了他。
English: In the second year of the Genxing Dynasty, Lu Xun fled to Yongjia. Emperor Wu chased and defeated him.

古文：六月，加帝彭城内史。
现代文：六月，任命武帝为彭城内史。
English: In June, Emperor Wu was appointed as Pengcheng Inner Historian.

古文：十二月，桓玄篡位，迁晋帝于寻阳。
现代文：十二月，桓玄篡夺了帝位，把晋朝的皇帝迁移到了寻阳。
English: In December, Huan Xuan usurped the imperial throne and moved the emperor of the Jin Dynasty to Xuanyang.

古文：桓修入朝，帝从至建邺，玄见帝，谓司徒王谧曰： 昨见刘裕，风骨不恒，盖人杰也。 
现代文：桓修调入朝廷，武帝跟随到了建邺，桓玄见了武帝，对司徒王谧说： 昨天见到了刘裕，风度不凡，确是世人中的豪杰呀。 
English: Huan Xiu was transferred to the imperial court, and Emperor Wu followed him to Jianye. Huan Xuan met Emperor Wu and said to King Stoo: "I met Liu Yu yesterday. His manners are extraordinary. He is truly a hero among the world's people."

古文：每游集，赠赐甚厚。
现代文：每次游乐宴集，赠送赏赐十分丰厚。
English: For each collection of amusement banquets, the rewards are very rich.

古文：玄妻刘氏，尚书令耽之女也，聪明有智鉴，尝见帝，因谓玄曰： 刘裕龙行虎步，视瞻不凡，恐必不爲人下，宜早爲其所。 
现代文：桓玄的妻子刘氏，是尚书令刘耽的女儿，聪明智慧，很有见识，曾经见到武帝，便对桓玄说： 刘裕龙行虎步，目光不凡，恐怕必定不会做别人的下属，要对他早作安排。 
English: Huan Xuan's wife, Liu, is the daughter of Shang Shuling's Liu Tan Yu. She is smart, wise, and insightful. Once she met Emperor Wu, she said to Huan Xuan: Liu Yulong walks like a tiger, his eyes are extraordinary, I'm afraid he will never be someone else's subordinate, we should make arrangements for him early.

古文：玄曰： 我方平荡中原，非裕莫可，待关、陇平定，然后议之。 
现代文：桓玄说： 我正在荡平中原，非刘裕不可，等关、陇地区平定，然后再作讨论。 
English: Kuan Xuan said: I am leveling the Central Plains. Liu Yu is the only one who can pacify the Guan and Handan regions, and then we can have a discussion.

古文：修寻还京口，帝托以金创疾动，不堪步从，乃与无忌同船共还，建兴复计，及弟道规、沛国刘毅、平昌孟昶、任城魏咏之、高平檀凭之、琅邪诸葛长人、太原王元德、陇西辛扈兴、东莞童厚之，并同义谋。
现代文：桓修不久回到京口，武帝借口说枪伤恶化，不能随同，便与何无忌一同乘船返回，商讨复兴的方案，与弟弟刘道轨、沛国的刘毅、平昌的孟昶、任城的魏咏之、高平的檀凭之、琅笽的诸葛长人、太原的王元德、陇西的辛扈兴、东莞的童厚之，共同谋划大计。
English: Huan Xiu soon returned to Beijing, and Emperor Wu, on the pretext that his gunshot wound had worsened and he could not accompany him, returned by boat with He Muxui to discuss the revival plan with his brother Liu Daoli, Liu Yi of Pei Province, Meng Qian of Pyeongchang, Wei Qian of Rencheng, Dang Biao of Gaoping, Zhuge Changren of Handan, Wang Yuan De of Taiyuan, Xin Qian Xing of Shaanxi, and Tong Hou of Dongguan to jointly plan the grand plan.

古文：时桓修弟弘爲青州刺史，镇广陵，道规爲弘中兵参军，昶爲州主簿，乃令毅就昶谋共袭弘。
现代文：当时桓修的弟弟桓弘担任青州刺史，镇守广陵，刘道轨担任桓弘的中兵参军，孟昶担任青州主簿，于是武帝就让刘毅到孟昶那里谋划共同袭击桓弘。
English: At that time, Huan Xiu's younger brother, Huan Hong, served as the chief historian of Qingzhou and the town guard of Guangling, Liu Daorai served as Huan Hong's middle soldier to join the army, and Meng Yao served as the chief accountant of Qingzhou, so Emperor Wu sent Liu Yi to Meng Yao to plan a joint attack on Huan Hong.

古文：长人爲豫州刺史刁逵左军府参军，谋据历阳相应，元德、厚之谋于建邺攻玄，克期齐发。
现代文：诸葛长人担任豫州刺史刁逵的左军府参军，预谋占据历阳来相策应，王元德、童厚之预谋在建邺进攻桓玄，时间一到一齐行动。
English: Zhuge Changren served as the leader of the left army to join the army in Yuzhou, and planned to occupy Liyang to counterattack. Wang Yuande and Tong Hou planned to attack Kuan Xuan in Jianye, and the time came to act together.

古文：三年二月乙卯，帝托游猎，与无忌、咏之、凭之，毅从弟藩，凭之从子韶、祗、隆、道济，昶族弟怀玉等，集义徒凡二十七人，愿从者百馀人。
现代文：元兴三年二月二十七日，武帝假托游猎，和何无忌，魏咏之，檀凭之，刘毅的堂弟刘藩，檀凭之的侄子檀韶、檀祗、檀隆、檀道济，孟昶的族弟孟怀玉等人，聚集了义徒共二十七人，愿意随从的一百多人。
English: On the 27th day of February in the third year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, Emperor Wudi went on a hunting trip with the help of Wei Xizhi, Dang Biao Zhi, Liu Yi's cousin Liu Han, Dang Biao Zhi's nephews Dang Yu, Dang Yu, Dang Long, Dang Daoji, and Meng Huaiyu, Meng Huai's younger brother. A total of 27 righteous people gathered, and more than 100 people were willing to follow.

古文：丙辰，候城门开，无忌等义徒服传诏服，称诏居前，义衆驰入齐叫，吏士惊散，即斩修以徇。
现代文：二十八日，等城门打开，何无忌等义徒身穿传达诏书人的服装，口称诏书走在前面，义徒们骑马驰入城内齐声大叫，官吏士兵都被惊散，随即将桓修斩首示众。
English: On the 28th, when the gates of the city were opened, there was no doubt that the righteous were dressed in the clothes of those who conveyed the imperial edict. They said that the imperial edict was walking in front of them. The righteous rode into the city and shouted in unison. The officials and soldiers were startled and dispersed. They then beheaded Huan Xiu for the public to see.

古文：帝哭之甚恸，厚加敛恤。
现代文：武帝哭得十分伤心，进行了丰厚的埋葬和抚恤。
English: Emperor Wu cried very sad and had a lavish burial and funeral.

古文：昶劝弘其日出猎，未明，开门出猎人，昶、道规、毅等率壮士五六十人，因开门直入。
现代文：孟昶劝桓弘在这一天外出打猎，天还没有明，打开城门放出了打猎的人，孟昶、刘道轨、刘毅等率壮士五六十人，因城门打开而直接进入。
English: Meng Xuan advised Kuan Hong to go out hunting on this day. The sky was not yet clear, so he opened the city gate and let out the hunters. Meng Xuan, Liu Daorong, Liu Yi and other fifty or sixty strong men entered directly because the city gate was open.

古文：弘方噉粥，即斩之，因收衆济江。
现代文：桓弘正在喝粥，就被斩首，于是收集他的兵众渡江。
English: Kanehiro was drinking porridge when he was beheaded, so he gathered his soldiers to cross the river.

古文：义军初克京城，修司马刁弘率文武佐吏来赴，帝登城谓曰： 郭江州已奉乘舆反正于寻阳，我等并被密诏诛逆党，今日贼玄之首已当枭于大航。
现代文：义军刚刚攻下京城，桓修的司马刁弘率领文武官员前来攻打，武帝登上城头对他们说： 郭江州已经在寻阳侍奉御车拨乱反正，我们全都奉了密诏诛除逆党，现在逆贼桓玄的头应当砍掉挂在大航的高杆上面。
English: The rebel army had just captured the capital city. Sima Qianhong of Huanxiu led the civil and military officials to attack. Emperor Wu ascended to the top of the city and said to them: Guo Jiangzhou has already served as a sun-seeking chariot to resolve the turmoil. Anyway, we have all issued a secret edict to eliminate the traitors. Now the head of the traitor Huan Xuan should be cut off and hung on the high pole of the grand aeroplane.

古文：诸君非大晋之臣乎？ 
现代文：诸君难道不都是大晋的臣子吗？ 
English: Aren't you all vassals of the Great Jin?

古文：弘等信之而退。
现代文：桓弘等人相信了他们，便退了回去。
English: Kanehiro and the others believed them and retreated.

古文：毅既至，帝命诛弘等。
现代文：刘毅到了以后，武帝命令他杀死刁弘等人。
English: After Liu Yi arrived, Emperor Wu ordered him to kill Zou Hong and others.

古文：毅兄迈先在建邺，事未发数日，帝遣同谋周安穆报之，使爲内应。
现代文：刘毅的哥哥刘迈原先住在建邺，事情还没发生的前几天，武帝派遣同谋周安穆报告了他，让他来作内应。
English: Liu Yi's brother Liu Mai used to live in Jianye. A few days before the incident, Emperor Wu sent an accomplice, Zhou Anmu, to report him and ask him to mediate.

古文：迈甚惧，安穆虑事发，驰归。
现代文：刘迈非常恐惧，周安穆害怕事情暴露，驰马返回。
English: Liu Mai was very afraid, Zhou Anmu was afraid of things being exposed, and galloped back.

古文：时玄以迈爲竟陵太守，迈便下船，欲之郡。
现代文：当时桓玄让刘迈担任竟陵太守，刘迈便乘船而下，打算到郡上任。
English: At that time, Kuan Xuan asked Liu Mai to serve as the governor of Qingting, and Liu Mai took a boat and planned to take office in the county.

古文：是夜玄与迈书曰： 北府人情云何？
现代文：这天夜里，桓玄给刘迈寄信说： 北府的人情况怎么样？
English: That night, Huan Xuan sent a letter to Liu Mai, saying: How are the people in Beifu?

古文：卿近见刘裕何所道？ 
现代文：您最近见刘裕说了些什么？ 
English: What did you say when you saw Liu Yu recently?

古文：迈谓玄已知其谋，晨起白之。
现代文：刘迈以为桓玄已经知道了他们的计谋，早晨起来就把情况告诉了他。
English: Liu Mai thought that Huan Xuan already knew about their plot, so he got up in the morning and told him the situation.

古文：玄惊，封迈爲重安侯，又以不执安穆故杀之，诛元德、扈兴、厚之等。
现代文：桓玄很吃惊，封刘迈为重安侯，又因为他没有把周安穆抓住，所以把他杀了，又杀了王元德、辛扈兴、童厚之等。
English: Huan Xuan was very surprised, and he named Liu Mai as Chong'an Hou, and because he did not catch Zhou Anmu, he killed him, and also killed Wang Yuande, Xin Rongxing, Tong Hou, and so on.

古文：乃遣顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷北拒义军。
现代文：于是派遣顿丘太守吴甫之、右卫将军皇甫敷抵御北面的义军。
English: As a result, he sent Dongqiu's governor Wu Fuzhi and the right guard general Wang Fuzhi to defend against the northern rebels.

古文：先是，帝造游击将军何澹之，左右见帝光曜满室，以告澹之，澹之以白玄，玄不以爲意，至是，闻义兵起，甚惧。
现代文：在此以前，武帝曾到游击将军何澹之那里去，身边的人见武帝光耀满室，便把这种现象告诉了何澹之，何澹之又说给了桓玄，桓玄并不介意，到了现在，听说义兵起事了，非常恐惧。
English: Before this, Emperor Wu had gone to the guerrilla general He Xizhi, and the people around him saw Emperor Wu shining all over the room, so they told this phenomenon to He Xizhi, and He Xizhi told it to Huan Xuan. Huan Xuan did not mind, but now, when he heard that the volunteer soldiers had risen up, he was very afraid.

古文：或曰： 裕等甚弱，陛下何虑之深？ 
现代文：有人说： 刘裕他们非常虚弱，陛下何必过深地忧虑？ 
English: Some people said: Liu Yu, they are very weak, why should Your Majesty worry too much?

古文：裕以虚薄，才非古人，受任于既颓之运，接势于已替之机，丹诚未宣，感慨愤激。
现代文：桓玄说： 刘裕足可以成为一世的雄杰，刘毅家里没有一石粮食的储蓄，而赌博时掷骰子一押百万，何无忌，是刘牢之的外甥，酷似他的舅父，共同举办大事，怎么就说不能成功？ 
English: Huan Xuan said: Liu Yuzu can become the hero of the first generation, Liu Yi's family does not have a stone of grain savings, and when gambling, there is nothing to be afraid of. It is Liu Duosi's nephew, who is very similar to his uncle, to jointly hold major events. How can it be said that it cannot be successful?

古文：望霄汉以永怀，眄山川以增伫，投檄之日，神驰贼庭。
现代文：当时众人推举武帝为盟主，以孟昶为长史，总管后方事务，檀凭之为司马，愿意随从的老百姓有一千多人。
English: At that time, the people elected Emperor Wu as the commander-in-chief, with Meng Qian as the long-term leader, the head of the rear affairs, and Danzhong as the leader. There were more than a thousand people who were willing to follow.

古文：三月戊午，遇吴甫之于江乘，帝躬执长刀，大呼，即斩甫之。
现代文：军队驻扎在竹里，向京城发出了檄文。三月初一，在江乘遇到了吴甫之，武帝亲自拿着大刀，大声呼叫，随即把吴甫之杀死。
English: On the first day of March, he met Wu Fuzhi in Jiangren. Emperor Wu personally took a big sword, shouted loudly, and then killed Wu Fuzhi.

古文：进至罗落桥，遇皇甫敷，檀凭之战败，死之，衆退，帝进战弥厉，又斩敷首。
现代文：进军到罗落桥，遇到了皇甫敷，檀凭之战败被杀，众人纷纷后退，武帝前进战斗更加猛烈，而且又杀了皇甫敷的头。
English: Marching to Luolang Bridge, he encountered the imperial residence, was defeated and killed, and the people retreated one after another. Emperor Wu advanced and fought more fiercely, and killed the head of the imperial residence.

古文：初，帝建大谋，有工相者相帝与无忌等近当大贵，惟云凭之无相。
现代文：起初，武帝谋划大计，有善于相面的人给武帝和何无忌等人相面，说他们近期一定会大贵，只是说檀凭之没有贵相。
English: At first, Emperor Wu planned a grand plan. People who were good at facial expressions met with Emperor Wu and He Muxui and others, saying that they would be very expensive in the near future, but that they did not have expensive expressions.

古文：至是，凭之战死，帝知其事必捷。
现代文：到现在檀凭之战死，武帝知道这件事必定胜利。
English: By now, Emperor Wu knew that this was a matter of certain victory.

古文：玄闻敷等没，使桓谦屯东陵口，卞范之屯覆舟山西。
现代文：桓玄听说皇甫敷等人已死，就派桓谦屯驻东陵口，卞范之屯驻覆舟山西面。
English: When Kuan Xuan heard that Wang Fuxi and the others had died, he sent Kuan Qian to be stationed in Donglingkou, and Fan Zhou to be stationed in the west of Zhoushan.

古文：己未，义军进至覆舟东，张疑兵，以油帔冠诸树，布满山谷。
现代文：三月初二，义军进驻覆舟山东部，布置了疑兵，用涂油的披肩盖在树上，布满山谷。
English: On the second day of the third month, the rebels entered the eastern part of Zhoushan. They arranged suspected soldiers, covered the trees with oil-coated shawls, and covered the valley.

古文：帝先驰之，将士皆殊死战，无不一当百，呼声动天地。
现代文：武帝首先驰向敌军，将士们全都进行殊死的战斗，无不一以当百，呼声震天动地。
English: Emperor Wu first rushed to the enemy army, the soldiers all fought a desperate battle, all of them were a hundred, and their voices shook the earth.

古文：因风纵火，烟焰张天，谦等大败。
现代文：又借着风力放火，浓烟与火焰冲天，桓谦大败。
English: He also used the wind to start a fire, sending thick smoke and flames into the sky. He was soundly defeated.

古文：玄始虽遣军，而走意已决，别遣领军殷仲文具舟石头，闻谦败，轻船南逸。
现代文：桓玄开始虽然派出了军队，但是逃走的心意已经决定，另外派遣了领军殷仲文在石头城准备好船只，听说桓谦失败，便乘着轻快的小船向南逃跑了。
English: Although Huan Xuan initially sent an army, his intention to escape had already been decided. In addition, the leader of the army, Yin Zhongwen, was sent to prepare ships in Stone Town. When he heard that Huan Qian had failed, he fled south in a light boat.

古文：庚申，帝镇石头城，立留台百官，焚桓温主于宣阳门外，造晋新主于太庙。
现代文：三月初三，武帝镇守石头城，任命了留守台阁的各级官员，在宣阳门外烧毁了供奉桓温的牌位，在太庙中建造了晋朝的新神主。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：遣诸将追玄，命尚书王嘏率百官奉迎乘舆。
现代文：派遣各路将官追击桓玄，命令尚书王嘏率领百官迎接皇帝的车驾。
English: He dispatched generals from all directions to pursue Kuan Xuan, and ordered Shangshu Wang Rong to lead hundreds of officials to meet the emperor's chariot.

古文：司徒王谧与衆议推帝领扬州，帝固辞，乃以谧爲录尚书事、领扬州刺史，帝爲镇军将军、都督八州诸军事、徐州刺史、领军将军。
现代文：司徒王谧与众人商议推举武帝兼职掌管扬州，武帝坚决推辞，便以王谧担任录尚书事、兼任扬州刺史，武帝担任镇军将军、都督八州诸军事、徐州刺史、领军将军。
English: Wang Qian and the others discussed the appointment of Emperor Wu to take charge of Yangzhou on a part-time basis. Emperor Wu firmly declined, so Wang Qian was appointed as the secretary and the historian of Yangzhou, and Emperor Wu was appointed as the general of the township army, the governor of the eight states of the military, the historian of Xuzhou, and the leading general.

古文：初，晋陵人韦叟善相术，桓修令相帝当得州不，叟曰： 当得边州刺史。 
现代文：起初，晋陵人韦叟擅长相面术，桓修让他相一相武帝是不是能当上州官，韦叟说： 应当做边远州的刺史。 
English: At first, Wei Wei, a person from Jinling, was good at the art of facsimile, and Kanshu asked him whether Emperor Wu could become a prefectural official. Wei Wei said: It should be a history of outlying prefectures.

古文：退而私于帝曰： 君相贵不可言。 
现代文：回头又私下对武帝说： 您的面相贵不可言。 
English: He turned back and privately said to Emperor Wu: Your face is precious beyond words.

古文：帝笑曰： 若中，当相用爲司马。 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 如果说中了，一定任用您为司马。 
English: Emperor Wu said with a smile, "If I am right, I will definitely appoint you as Sima."

古文：至是，叟诣帝曰： 成王不负桐叶之信，公亦应不忘司马之言。
现代文：到了现在，韦叟去见武帝说： 周成王不忘桐叶之信，您也应该不忘司马之言。
English: Now, Wei Wei went to Emperor Wu and said: Zhou Cheng Wang did not forget Tongye's letter, and you should not forget Sima's words.

古文：今不敢希镇军司马，愿得领军佐。 
现代文：现在我不敢希望做镇军司马，只想能够兼任一个军佐。 
English: Now I don't dare to hope to be the town's army chief, I just want to be able to serve as an army sergeant.

古文：于是用焉。
现代文：于是就任用了他。
English: So he was brought in.

古文：时诸葛长人失期，爲刁逵执送，未至而玄败。
现代文：当时诸葛长人没有如期赶到，被刁逵抓住押送过去，还没到达，桓玄就失败了。
English: At that time, Zhuge Changren did not arrive as scheduled, he was caught by the shackles and escorted to the past. Before he arrived, Huan Xuan failed.

古文：玄经寻阳，江州刺史郭昶之爲具乘舆法物。
现代文：桓玄经过寻阳，江州刺史郭昶之为他准备了车子和仪仗器物。
English: After Huan Xuan went to seek the sun, he prepared a chariot and ceremonial objects for Guo Xuan, the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：初，荆州刺史王绥以江左冠族，又桓氏之甥，素甚陵帝，至是，及其父尚书左仆射愉有自疑志，并及诛。
现代文：起初，荆州刺史王绥因为是江东的显贵世族，又是桓氏的外甥，平时对武帝十分欺侮，到了现在，与他的父亲尚书左仆射王愉都抱有怀疑心理，一齐被杀死。
English: At first, because he was a member of a prominent family in the eastern part of the Yangtze River and a nephew of the Huan clan, Jingzhou assassin Wang Qian often bullied Emperor Wu. Now, he and his father Shang Shuxi's right-hand man Sha Wang Yu both had suspicions and were killed together.

古文：四月戊子，奉武陵王遵爲大将军，承制，大赦，惟桓玄一祖后不免。
现代文：四月初一，尊奉武陵王司马遵为大将军，按照圣旨，实行大赦，只有桓玄祖父的后辈不予赦免。
English: On the first day of April, King Sima Zun of Wuling was honored as a great general, and according to the holy will, an amnesty was implemented. Only the descendants of grandfather Huan Xuan were not pardoned.

古文：桓玄之篡，王谧佐命，手解安帝玺绂。
现代文：桓玄篡位，是由王谧辅佐的，是他亲手解下晋安帝的玉玺。
English: Emperor Kuan Xuan's usurpation of the throne was assisted by Wang Qian, who personally removed Emperor Jinan's jade scepter.

古文：及义旗建，衆谓谧宜诛，惟帝素德谧，保持之。
现代文：等到义旗树立，众人都说王谧应该杀掉，只有武帝平时对王谧很感激，因而保护他。
English: When the banner of righteousness was raised, everyone said that Wang Yao should be killed, but Emperor Wu was usually very grateful to Wang Yao and protected him.

古文：刘毅尝因朝会，问谧玺绂所在，谧益惧。
现代文：刘毅曾经趁朝会的机会，问王谧玉玺在什么地方，王谧更加恐惧。
English: Liu Yi once took the opportunity of the morning meeting to ask Wang Yao where Jade Dragonfly was. Wang Yao was even more afraid.

古文：及王愉父子诛，谧从弟谌谓谧曰： 王驹无罪而诛，此是翦除胜己，兄既桓氏党附，求免得乎？ 
现代文：等到王愉父子被杀，王谧的堂弟对王谧说： 王驹无罪而被杀死，这是铲除胜过自己的人，兄长既是桓氏一党的人，希求免祸能够做到吗？ 
English: When Wang Yu's father and son were killed, Wang Yao's cousin said to Wang Yao: Wang Yao was innocent and was killed. This was the eradication of someone who was better than him. Since his brother was a member of the Huan clan, could he hope to be spared?

古文：驹，愉小字也。
现代文：驹，是王愉的小字。
English: , is Wang Yu's small character.

古文：谧惧，奔曲阿。
现代文：王谧恐惧，逃奔曲阿。
English: Wang Yao's "Fear, Run Away"

古文：帝笺白大将军迎还，复其位。
现代文：武帝告诉大将军把他迎接回来，恢复了他的职位。
English: Emperor Wu told the general to welcome him back and restored his position.

古文：玄挟天子走江陵，又浮江东下，与刘毅、何无忌、刘道规等遇于峥嵘洲，衆军大破之。
现代文：桓玄挟持天子逃往江陵，又渡江东下，与刘毅、何无忌、刘道轨等在峥嵘洲相遇，众军把他打得大败。
English: Huan Xuan took Tianzi hostage and fled to Gangneung, and then crossed the river to the east, where he met Liu Yi, He Muxi, Liu Daoliao, and others in Luzhou. The troops defeated him.

古文：玄党殷仲文奉晋二皇后还建邺。
现代文：桓玄的党徒殷仲文拥戴两位皇后回到建邺。
English: Yin Zhongwen, a member of Kuan Xuan's party, returned to Jianye with two queens.

古文：玄复挟天子至江陵，因走南郡，太守王腾之、荆州别驾王康産奉天子入南郡府。
现代文：桓玄重又挟持天子到了江陵，并从那里逃往南郡，太守王腾之、荆州别驾王康产拥戴天子进入南郡府。
English: Huan Xuanzhong also took Tianzi to Gangneung, and from there he fled to Nan County. Wang Tengzhi, the governor-general, and Wang Kangzong, the governor-general of Jingzhou, escorted Tianzi to Nan County.

古文：初，益州刺史毛璩遣从孙佑之与参军费恬送弟丧下州，璩弟子修之时爲玄屯骑校尉，诱玄入蜀，至枚回洲，恬与佑之迎射之，益州督护冯迁斩玄，传首建邺。
现代文：起初，益州刺史毛璩派遣侄孙毛佑之和参军费恬为弟弟送丧离开州城，毛璩弟弟的儿子毛修之当时做桓玄的屯骑校尉，引诱桓玄进入蜀地，到了枚回洲，费恬和毛佑之迎面用箭射他，益州督护冯迁杀死了桓玄，把人头送往建邺。
English: At first, Yizhou's procurator Mao Yuzhi sent his nephew Mao Youzhi and conscript Fei Yan to see his brother off in the capital. Mao Yuzhi's brother's son Mao Xiu, who was Huan Xuan's cavalry lieutenant at the time, lured Huan Xuan into Shu. When Huan Xuan returned to Shu, Fei Yan and Mao Youzhi shot him in the face with arrows. Yizhou's procurator Feng Qian killed Huan Xuan and sent his head to Jianyuan.

古文：玄从子振逃于华容之涌中，招集逆党，袭江陵城，腾之、康産皆被杀。
现代文：桓玄的侄子桓振逃到华容的涌中，招集逆党，袭击江陵城，王腾之、王康产都被杀死。
English: Kuan Xuan's nephew, Kuan Zhen, fled to Huarong's Wuchu, called in the rebels, and attacked Gangneung City. Wang Tengzhi and Wang Kangsang were both killed.

古文：桓谦先匿沮川，亦聚衆应振。
现代文：桓谦先前曾藏在沮川，也聚集人马与桓振呼应。
English: Kuan Qian had previously been hiding in Depu River, and also gathered people and horses to respond to Kuan Zhen.

古文：爲玄举哀，立丧庭。
现代文：他们为桓玄举行哀悼，设立了丧庭。
English: They held a mourning for Kuan Xuan and set up a funeral court.

古文：谦率衆官奉玺绶于安帝。
现代文：桓谦率领众官员奉献玉玺给晋安帝。
English: Huan Qian led the officials to dedicate the Jade Scepter to Emperor Jinan.

古文：刘毅、何无忌进及桓振战，败绩于灵溪。
现代文：刘毅、何无忌进军与桓振交战，在灵溪战败。
English: Liu Yi and He Muxui marched into battle with Kan Zhen and were defeated at Lingxi.

古文：十月，帝领青州刺史，甲仗百人入殿。
现代文：十月，武帝兼任青州刺史，可以带领卫士一百人进入宫殿。
English: In October, Emperor Wu also served as the Qingzhou scribe, and could lead a hundred guards into the palace.

古文：义熙元年正月，毅等至江津，破桓谦、桓振，江陵平。
现代文：义熙元年正月，刘毅等到达江津，击败了桓谦、桓振，江陵平定。
English: In the first month of the first year of Yixi, Liu Yi and others arrived in Jiangjin, defeated Huanqian and Huan Zhen, and pacified Jiangling.

古文：三月甲午，晋帝至自江陵。
现代文：三月十三日，晋朝皇帝从江陵来到。
English: On March 13th, the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty came from Gangneung.

古文：庚子，诏进帝侍中、车骑将军、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：十九日，诏令晋升武帝为侍中、车骑将军、都督中外军事、录尚书事。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu was promoted to attendant, general of cavalry and cavalry, military governor of China and foreign countries, and recorded in the records.

古文：帝固让，旋镇丹徒。
现代文：武帝坚持推辞，不久镇守丹徒。
English: Emperor Wu persisted in his refusal, and soon became the ruler of Dantu.

古文：九月乙巳，加帝领兖州刺史。
现代文：九月二十七日，任命武帝兼做兖州刺史。
English: On September 27th, Emperor Wu was also appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：卢循浮海破广州，获刺史吴隐之，即以循爲广州刺史，以其党徐道覆爲始兴相。
现代文：卢循渡海攻破广州，俘获了刺史吴隐之，于是便以卢循为广州刺史，以他的同党徐道覆为始兴相。
English: Lu Xun crossed the sea to invade Guangzhou and captured the strategist Wu Yingzhi, so he used Lu Xun as the strategist of Guangzhou, and his party member Xu Daohui as the prime minister.

古文：二年三月，进帝督交、广二州。
现代文：义熙二年三月，晋升武帝督率交、广二州。
English: In March of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he was promoted to the post of the military governor of Guanzhou Province.

古文：十月，论匡复勋，封帝豫章郡公，邑万户，赐绢三万疋。
现代文：十月，评论匡复晋朝的功勋，封武帝为豫章郡公，食邑一万户，赐绢一万疋。
English: In October, he commented on the merits of the Kuang-Fu-Jin Dynasty, and named Emperor Wu as the governor of Yuzhang County, with 10,000 households receiving food and 10,000 baht.

古文：其馀封赏各有差。
现代文：其余的人封赏各有差别。
English: The rest of the awards vary.

古文：三年十二月，司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史王谧薨。
现代文：三年十二月，司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史王谧去世。
English: In December of the third year, Wang Yao, who was a member of the Sidu, Luo Shangshu and Yangzhou Jishi, passed away.

古文：四年正月，征帝入辅，授侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，徐、兖二州刺史如故。
现代文：四年正月，征调武帝入朝辅政，授职担任侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，徐、兖二州刺史依旧保留。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Emperor Wu was transferred to the auxiliary government of the dynasty, and he was appointed to the posts of chamberlain, chariot and cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, Yangzhou engraving history, and record bookkeeping, while the engraving history of the two states of Xu and Han remained.

古文：表解兖州。
现代文：武帝上表解去兖州职务。
English: Emperor Wu was formally relieved of his duties in Zhangzhou.

古文：先是，帝遣冠军刘敬宣伐蜀贼谯纵，无功而还。
现代文：在这以前，武帝曾经派遣冠军刘敬宣讨伐蜀地的贼寇谯纵，结果没有成功回来了。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Wu had sent champion Liu Jingxuan to fight against the bandits in Shu, but he did not succeed in returning.

古文：九月，帝以敬宣挫退，逊位，不许。
现代文：九月，武帝因为刘敬宣败退，请求退位，没有批准。
English: In September, Emperor Wu did not approve Liu Jing's request to abdicate because he had been defeated.

古文：十月，乃降爲中军将军，开府如故。
现代文：十月，降级为中军将军，开府职位仍然不变。
English: In October, he was demoted to the rank of general in the Chinese army, but his position as governor remained unchanged.

古文：五年二月，僞燕主慕容超大掠淮北。
现代文：五年二月，伪燕国国主慕容超大肆掠夺淮北。
English: In February of the fifth year, the head of the pseudo-Yan State, Murong, plundered Huaibei.

古文：三月，帝抗表北讨，以丹阳尹孟昶监中军留府事。
现代文：三月，武帝上表请求去北方讨伐，让丹阳尹孟昶监管中军留府事务。
English: In March, Emperor Wu sent a request to go to the north to fight, asking Danyang Yin Mengyao to supervise the affairs of the Chinese army staying in the province.

古文：乃浮淮入泗，五月，至下邳，留船，步军进琅邪，所过筑城留守。
现代文：于是渡过淮水进入泗水，五月，到达下邳，留下船只，军队步行前进到了琅笽，所经过的地方，都筑城留人守卫。
English: So they crossed the Huai River into the Surabaya River, and in May, when they reached the lower Surabaya, they left the ships behind. The army marched on foot to the Surabaya River. Wherever they passed, they built a city and left guards behind.

古文：超大将公孙五楼请断大岘，坚壁清野以待，超不从。
现代文：慕容超的大将公孙五楼请求占领大岘山，坚壁清野等待对方，慕容超不肯听从。
English: Murong Chao's general, Gongsun, pleaded on the fifth floor for the occupation of Dafeng Mountain, and Jianbi Qingye waited for the other side. Murong Chao refused to listen.

古文：初谋是役，议者以爲贼若严守大岘，军无所资，何能自反？
现代文：最初谋划这次战役，参加讨论的人认为贼军如果严守大岘山，军中没有所需物资，自己怎么能够返回？
English: At the beginning of the planning of this battle, the participants in the discussion thought that if the thief army strictly guarded the Dafeng Mountain and the army did not have the necessary materials, how could they return?

古文：帝曰： 不然。
现代文：武帝说： 并不是这样。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "That's not right."

古文：鲜卑性贪，略不及远，既幸其胜，且爱其谷，必将引我，且亦轻战。
现代文：鲜卑人性格贪婪，谋划事情看不到远处，既庆幸自己的胜利，又十分爱惜那些谷物，必然会引诱我们，而且会轻率交战。
English: The vulgar man's character is greedy, his plans are not far away, he is happy with his victory, but he is also very fond of those grains, he will inevitably seduce us, and he will fight rashly.

古文：师一入岘，吾何患焉。 
现代文：部队一入岘山，我们还有什么担忧呢？ 
English: Once the troops entered Shaoshan, what worries do we still have?

古文：及入岘，帝举手指天曰： 吾事济矣。 
现代文：等到进入了岘山，武帝举手指着天说： 我们的事情成功了。 
English: When they entered Shaoshan, Emperor Wu held up his hand to the sky and said, "Our mission has been successful."

古文：衆问其故，帝曰： 师既过险，士有必死之志，馀粮栖亩，军无匮乏之忧，胜可必矣。 
现代文：众人询问其中的缘故，武帝说： 军队已经越过险要地形，兵士都有必死的斗志，余粮储存在田野当中，军队没有缺乏给养的忧虑，胜利是可以断定的。 
English: When the crowd asked the reason for this, Emperor Wu said: The army has already crossed the dangerous terrain, the soldiers have a death-defying fighting spirit, surplus grain is stored in the fields, the army is not worried about lack of supplies, and victory can be determined.

古文：六月，超留羸老守广固，使其广甯王贺刺卢及公孙五楼悉力据临朐。
现代文：六月，慕容超留下老弱兵士守卫广固，派他手下的广宁王贺剌卢与公孙五楼全力占据临朐。
English: In June, Murong Chao left the old and weak soldiers to guard Guanggu, and sent his subordinates Guangning Wang He Binglu and Gongsun Fifth Floor to occupy Linyi.

古文：去城四十里有巨蔑水，超告五楼急据之。
现代文：离城四十里有个巨蔑水，慕容超告诫公孙五楼要抓紧占据它。
English: Forty miles away from the city, there is a huge river. Murong Chao admonished Gongsun Fifth Floor to seize it.

古文：比至，爲龙骧将军孟龙符所保，五楼乃退。
现代文：等他赶到，已经受到龙骧将军孟龙符的保卫，公孙五楼只得退回。
English: By the time he arrived, he had already been protected by the dragon general Meng Longfu, and Gongsun had to return to the fifth floor.

古文：大军分车四千两爲二翼，方轨徐行，车张幰，御者执肖，以骑爲游军，军令严肃。
现代文：大军把四千辆兵车分为两翼，两车并排慢慢行驶，车前张挂帷幔，御手拿着长矛，以骑兵为流动军队，军令十分严肃。
English: The great army divided the four thousand chariots into two wings, and the two chariots drove slowly side by side, with a curtain hanging in front of the chariot and a spear in the driver's hand. The cavalry was the mobile army, and the military order was very serious.

古文：比及临朐，贼骑交至，帝命兖州刺史刘藩、并州刺史刘道怜等陷其阵。
现代文：等到达临朐，贼军的骑兵一齐来到，武帝命令兖州刺史刘藩、并州刺史刘道怜等攻陷敌军阵地。
English: After arriving in Linyi, the cavalry of the thief army came together, and Emperor Wu ordered Liu Han, the governor of Linyi, and Liu Daorei, the governor of Linyi, to attack the enemy's positions.

古文：日向昃，战犹酣，帝用参军胡藩策，袭克临朐，贼乃大奔。
现代文：太阳偏西的时候，战斗仍然十分激烈，武帝利用参军胡藩的计策，袭击攻克临朐，贼军于是大肆逃奔。
English: When the sun was in the west, the battle was still very fierce. Emperor Wu used the strategy of joining the army of the Hu clan to attack and conquer Linyi, and the thief army fled.

古文：超遁还广固，获其玉玺、豹尾、辇等，送于都。
现代文：慕容超逃回广固，获得了他的玉玺、豹尾、轿车等，送到都城。
English: Murong Chao fled back to Guanggu, obtained his jade bracelet, leopard's tail, car, etc., and was sent to the capital.

古文：丙子，克广固大城，超固其小城。
现代文：十九日，攻克了广固的大城，慕容超加固了它的小城。
English: On the 19th, it conquered the large city of Guanggu, and Murong super-strengthened its small city.

古文：乃设长围以守之，馆谷于青土，停江、淮转输。
现代文：武帝于是设下了很长的包围圈进行监守，吃住都在青州，停止了长江、淮河的物资转运。
English: Emperor Wu then set up a very long encirclement to supervise, eat and live in Qingzhou, and stopped the transfer of materials from the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River.

古文：七月，超尚书郎张纲乞师于姚兴，自长安反，泰山太守申宣执送之。
现代文：七月，慕容超的尚书郎张纲去向姚兴请求救兵，从长安返回，泰山太守申宣把他捉住押送过来。
English: In July, Murong Chao's Shang Shulang Zhang Gang went to request rescue from Yao Xing and returned from Chang'an. Taishan's governor Shen Xuan caught him and brought him here.

古文：纲有巧思，先是，帝修攻具，城上人曰： 汝不得张纲，何能爲也。 
现代文：张纲具有巧妙的构思，先前，武帝制造攻城的器具，城上的人说： 你们得不到张纲，怎么能制成呢！ 
English: Zhang Gang has an ingenious concept. Previously, Emperor Wu made siege tools, and the people on the city said: You can't get Zhang Gang, how can you make it?

古文：及至，升诸楼车以示之，城内莫不失色。
现代文：等到张纲来到，城内的人无不大惊失色。
English: By the time Zhang Gang arrived, everyone in the city was stunned.

古文：超既求救不获，纲反见虏，乃求称藩，割大岘爲界，献马千匹，不听。
现代文：慕容超既然求救没有成功，张纲反被俘虏，于是便请求称臣，割大岘山为界，献马一千匹，武帝不答应。
English: Since Murong Chao's request for help was not successful and Zhang Gangtu was captured, he asked the emperor to grant him a thousand horses. Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：时姚兴遣使，声言将涉淮左，帝谓曰： 尔报姚兴，我定青州，将过函谷，虏能自送，今其时矣。 
现代文：当时姚兴派遣使者，声言将要渡过淮水东下，武帝对他说： 你报告姚兴，我平定了青州，将要跨过函谷关，他这贼寇若能自己送上门来，现在正是时候。 
English: At that time, Yao Xing sent an envoy, claiming that he would cross Huai Shui to the east, and Emperor Wu said to him: You report to Yao Xing, I have leveled Qingzhou, I will cross the Huan Valley Pass, if he can send this thief to the door himself, now is the time.

古文：录事参军刘穆之遽入曰： 此言不足威敌，容能怒彼。
现代文：录事参军刘穆之忽然进来说： 这话不足以威胁敌人，也许会激怒他们。
English: Liu Muzhi, who joined the army, suddenly came in and said: This is not enough to threaten the enemy, it may anger them.

古文：若鲜卑未拔，西羌又至，公何以待之？ 
现代文：如果鲜卑没有战胜，西羌又来侵扰，您将怎么对付？ 
English: If Xianbei does not win and Xidi invades again, how will you deal with it?

古文：帝乃笑曰： 此兵机也，非子所及。
现代文：武帝于是笑着说： 这是军事机密，不是您所能知道的。
English: Emperor Wu then smiled and said: This is a military secret, it is not something you can know.

古文：羌若能救，不有先声，是自强也。 
现代文：西羌如果能够来救，不会先有声明，这只是他们自己在故作强大。 
English: If Xidi can come to the rescue, they will not make a statement first. This is just them pretending to be strong.

古文：十月，张纲修攻具成，设飞楼县梯，木幔板屋，冠以牛皮，弓矢无所用之。
现代文：十月，张纲制成了攻城器具，设计了飞楼悬梯、木幔板屋，上面盖上牛皮，弓箭就无法奏效了。
English: In October, Zhang Gang made the siege equipment, designed the flying staircase and the wooden palisade, and covered it with cowhide, so that the bow and arrow could not work.

古文：刘毅遣上党太守赵恢以千馀人来援，帝夜潜遣军会之。
现代文：刘毅派遣上党太守赵恢率领一千余人前来援助，武帝夜间暗中派军队与他会合。
English: Liu Yi dispatched Zhao Wei, the supreme commander of the party, to lead more than a thousand people to come to his aid, and Emperor Wu secretly sent troops to meet him at night.

古文：明旦，恢衆五千，方道而进，每晋使将到，辄复如之。
现代文：天明后，赵恢的部队五千人，才上路前进，每当晋朝使者将到的时候，就如此重复一遍。
English: After daybreak, Zhao Kuan's army of five thousand men set out on the road. Whenever the envoys from the Jin Dynasty were about to arrive, they would repeat this process.

古文：六年二月丁亥，屠广固，超踰城走，追获之，斩于建康市。
现代文：六年二月初五，攻克了广固进行屠杀，慕容超越过城墙逃走，结果追上了他，在建康的街市上将他斩首。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the sixth year, after conquering Guanggu and carrying out the massacre, Murong fled beyond the city wall. As a result, he caught up with him and beheaded him in the market of Jiankang.

古文：杀其王公以下，纳生口万余，马二千匹。
现代文：杀掉了他的王公以下官员，获得人口一万多、马二千匹。
English: He killed his officials below the rank of prince, and gained a population of more than ten thousand and two thousand horses.

古文：初，帝之北也，徐道覆劝卢循乘虚而出，循不从，道覆乃至番禺说循曰： 今日之机，万不可失。
现代文：起初，武帝进军北方，徐道覆劝卢循乘虚而出，卢循不听，徐道覆于是去到番禺说服卢循说： 今天的机会，万万不可丢失。
English: At first, Emperor Wu marched into the north, and Xu Daohui advised Lu Xun to take advantage of the situation. Lu Xun did not listen, so Xu Daohui went to Panyu to convince Lu Xun and said, "Today's opportunity must not be lost."

古文：若克京都，刘公虽还，无能爲也。 
现代文：如果你攻占了京都，刘公虽然回来，也没有什么办法了。 
English: If you capture Kyoto, even if Liu Gong returns, there is nothing you can do.

古文：循从之。
现代文：卢循听从了他。
English: Lu Xun obeyed him.

古文：是月，寇南康、庐陵、豫章诸郡，郡守皆奔走。
现代文：这月，侵犯南康、卢陵、豫章等郡，郡守都逃走了。
English: This month, they invaded Nankang, Luling, Yuzhang and other counties, and the county governors all fled.

古文：时帝将镇下邳，进兵河、洛，及征使至，即日班师。
现代文：当时武帝将要镇守下邳，进军到了黄河、洛水，等征调的使者到后，当天就班师还朝了。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was going to defend the town of Xiamen, marched to the Yellow River and Luoshui, and after the arrival of the envoys, the division returned home the same day.

古文：镇南将军何无忌与道覆战，败死于豫章，内外震骇，朝议欲奉乘舆北走。
现代文：镇南将军何无忌与徐道覆交战，失败战死在豫章，朝内外都很震惊，朝中的议论想拥戴皇上向北逃走。
English: General Zhenan did not hesitate to fight against Xu Daohui. He was defeated and died in Yuzhang. Both inside and outside the court were shocked. The discussion in the court wanted to embrace the emperor and flee to the north.

古文：帝次山阳，闻败，卷甲与数十人造江上征问，知贼尚未至。
现代文：武帝驻军在山阳，听说失败，脱去盔甲与几十个人一起到江上去调查询问，知道贼军还没有到达。
English: Emperor Wu garrisoned troops in Shanyang. Hearing of the defeat, he took off his armor and went to the river with dozens of people to investigate and inquire. He knew that the thief army had not yet arrived.

古文：四月癸未，帝至都。
现代文：四月初二，武帝到了京都。
English: On the second day of April, Emperor Wu arrived in Kyoto.

古文：刘毅自表南征，帝以贼新捷锋锐，须严军偕进，使刘藩止之，毅不从。
现代文：刘毅自己上表请求南征，武帝认为贼军刚刚打了胜仗，气势正盛，必须军容严整，共同前进，便让刘藩制止他，刘毅不听从。
English: Liu Yi himself requested the Southern Expedition on the table. Emperor Wu thought that the bandit army had just won the war and was in full swing. It was necessary to have a strong army and advance together. He asked Liu Han to stop him. Liu Yi did not listen.

古文：五月壬午，卢循败毅于桑落洲。
现代文：五月的壬午日，卢循在桑落洲打败了刘毅。
English: On May Day, Lu Xun defeated Liu Yi in Sanluo Zhou.

古文：及审帝凯入，相视失色，欲还寻阳，平江陵，据二州以抗朝廷。
现代文：等他们得知了武帝胜利进入，个个互相对视，大惊失色，企图退回寻阳，平定江陵，据守二洲来对抗朝廷。
English: When they learned of Emperor Wu's victorious entry, they all looked at each other, shocked, and attempted to return to Xuanyang, pacify Jiangling, and defend Erzhou against the imperial court.

古文：道覆请乘胜遂下，争之旬日，乃从。
现代文：徐道覆请求乘胜继续前进，争论了十天，才依从了他的意见。
English: Xu Daohui pleaded to take advantage of the victory and move on. It took ten days of arguing before he complied with his opinion.

古文：于时北师始还，伤痍未复，战士才数千，贼衆十余万，舳舻亘千里。
现代文：这时北国的军队刚退回去，创伤没有恢复，战士只有几千人，而贼军却有十几万，战船绵延千里。
English: At this time, the army of the North had just retreated, and the wounds had not been healed. There were only a few thousand soldiers, but there were more than a hundred thousand thieves, and the warships stretched for thousands of miles.

古文：孟昶、诸葛长人惧，欲拥天子过江，帝曰： 今兵士虽少，犹足一战，若其克济，臣主同休；如其不然，不复能草间求活，吾计决矣。 
现代文：孟昶、诸葛长人很恐惧，打算保护天子过江，武帝说： 现在兵士虽然少，还足可以一战，如果敌寇渡江成功，大臣、君主就会共同灭亡；如果不是这样，不可能再在草野间求得活命，我的主意已经定了。 
English: The elders of Mengye and Zhuge were very afraid and planned to protect Tianzi from crossing the river. Emperor Wu said: Although there are few soldiers now, there are still enough to fight. If the enemy succeeds in crossing the river, the minister and the monarch will perish together. If this is not the case, it will be impossible to survive in the meadow. My mind is already made up.

古文：初，帝征慕容超，惟孟昶劝行，丙辰，昶乃表天子，引罪，仰药而死。
现代文：起初，武帝征讨慕容超，只有孟昶鼓励行动，四月初五，孟昶便上表给天子，引罪自责，服药而死。
English: At first, Emperor Wu enlisted Murong Chao, and only Meng Yao encouraged the action. On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Meng Yao reported to the emperor, blamed himself, took medicine and died.

古文：时议者欲分兵屯守诸津，帝曰： 贼衆我寡，分其兵则人测虚实，一处失利，则沮三军之心，若聚衆石头，则衆力不分。 
现代文：当时的议论者企图分兵屯守各个渡口，武帝说： 贼众我寡，分兵以后则会有人探测到虚实，一处失利，就会破坏三军的心态，如果在石头城聚集各军，则各军的力量不会分散。 
English: Commentators at the time tried to divide the army to guard the various ferry ports. Emperor Wu said: We are few and far between. After the division of the army, someone will detect the truth and falsehood. One defeat will destroy the mentality of the three armies. If the armies are gathered in Stone Town, the strength of the armies will not be dispersed.

古文：戊午，帝移镇石城。
现代文：四月初七，武帝转移驻地到石头城。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month, Emperor Wu moved his residence to Stone Town.

古文：乙丑，贼大至，帝曰： 贼若新亭直上，且将避之；若回泊蔡洲，成禽耳。 
现代文：十四日，贼军大规模开来，武帝说： 贼军如果由新亭直上，就暂且回避它；如果回头停泊在蔡洲，就会被捉住的。 
English: On the 14th, when the bandits' army arrived in large numbers, Emperor Wu said, "If the bandits go straight up from Xinting, they will avoid it for the time being; if they turn around and anchor in Caizhou, they will be caught.

古文：徐道覆欲自新亭焚舟而战，循多疑少决，每求万全，乃泊蔡洲以待军溃。
现代文：徐道覆打算从新亭烧毁船只交战，卢循疑虑多决断少，常常追求万全之策，于是便停泊在蔡洲以等待军队溃败。
English: Xu Daohui planned to burn the ships from Xinting to fight, Lu Xuan hesitated more than decisive, often pursuing a perfect solution, so he anchored in Caizhou to wait for the army to collapse.

古文：帝登石头以望，见之，悦。
现代文：武帝登上石头城远望，见到了这种情形，很高兴。
English: Emperor Wu boarded the Stone City Lookout and was very happy to see this situation.

古文：庚辰，贼设伏于南岸，疑兵向白石。
现代文：二十九日，贼军在南岸设下伏兵，又向白石派出疑兵。
English: On the 29th, the thief army set up an ambush on the south bank and sent suspected soldiers to Shiroishi.

古文：帝率刘毅、诸葛长人北拒焉，留参军徐赤特戍查浦，戒令勿战。
现代文：武帝率领刘毅、诸葛长人向北出兵抵御，留下了参军徐赤特守卫查浦，告诫和命令他们不准交战。
English: Emperor Wu led Liu Yi and Zhuge Changren to send troops to the north to resist, leaving Xu Chet, who had joined the army, to guard Chapu, warning and ordering them not to engage in battle.

古文：帝既北，贼焚查浦而至张侯桥，赤特与战，大败，贼进屯丹阳郡。
现代文：武帝北出以后，贼军焚烧了查浦而到达张侯桥，徐赤特与他们交战，大败，贼军前进屯驻在丹阳郡。
English: After Emperor Wu left the north, the thief army burned Chapu and reached Zhang Hou Bridge. Xu Chet fought with them and was defeated. The thief army advanced and stationed in Danyang County.

古文：帝驰还石头，斩徐赤特。
现代文：武帝驰马回到石头城，斩了徐赤特。
English: Emperor Wu galloped back to Stone Town and beheaded Xu Chiat.

古文：解甲久之，乃出阵于南塘。
现代文：解去盔甲很长时间，才在南塘出阵。
English: It took him a long time to take off his armor before he went into battle in Nantang.

古文：七月庚申，循自蔡洲退，将还归寻阳，帝遣辅国将军王仲德等追之。
现代文：七月初十，卢循从蔡洲撤退，准备归回寻阳，武帝派遣辅国将军王仲德等追击。
English: At the beginning of July 10, Lu Xun retreated from Cai Zhou and prepared to return to Huan Yang. Emperor Wu sent Wang Zhongde, the general of the Auxiliary State, to pursue him.

古文：使建威将军孙处自海道袭番禺，戒之曰： 我十二月必破祅寇，卿亦足至番禺，先倾其巢窟也。 
现代文：让建威将军孙处从海道上袭击番禺，告诫他说： 我在十二月必定击破妖寇，您也足可以到达番禺，要首先捣毁他的巢穴。 
English: Let General Sun of Jianwei attack Panyu from the sea road, and admonish him: I will surely defeat the monster in December, you can also reach Panyu, you must first destroy his lair.

古文：十月，帝率舟师南伐，使刘毅监太尉留府。
现代文：十月，武帝率领舰队南伐，派刘毅监管太尉留府。
English: In October, Emperor Wu led the southern expedition of the fleet and sent Liu Yi to supervise the captain to stay in the capital.

古文：是月，徐道覆寇江陵，荆州刺史刘道规大破之，道覆走还湓口。
现代文：这月，徐道覆攻击江陵，荆州刺史刘道轨把他打得大败，徐道覆逃回湓口。
English: This month, Xu Daohui attacked Jiangling, Jingzhou assassin Liu Daorong defeated him, and Xu Daohui fled back to Hekou.

古文：十一月，孙处至番禺，克其城，卢循父嘏奔始兴，处抚其人以守。
现代文：十一月，孙处到了番禺，把城攻破，卢循的父亲卢嘏逃奔始兴，孙处安抚当地民众进行守卫。
English: In November, Sun Zu arrived in Panyu and broke through the city. Lu Xun's father, Lu Yao, fled to Shixing. Sun Zu pacified the local people and guarded the city.

古文：十二月己卯，大军次大雷。
现代文：十二月初一，大军驻扎在大雷。
English: On the first day of December, a large army was stationed in Dalai.

古文：庚辰，贼方江而下，帝躬提幡鼓，命衆军齐力击之，军中多万钧神弩，所至莫不摧陷。
现代文：初二，贼军沿江而下，武帝亲自拿着军旗和战鼓，命令各路军队奋力拼杀，军中有很多万钧神弓，所到之处无不摧毁。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the thief army went down the river. Emperor Wu personally took the military flag and war drums and ordered the various armies to fight hard. There were many Banyan God bows in the army, and they were destroyed everywhere they went.

古文：帝自于中流蹙之，因风水之势，贼舰悉薄西岸，岸上军先备火具焚之，大败。
现代文：武帝自己在中流皱眉观看，顺着风和水的走势，贼舰全都先靠近西岸，岸上军士事先已经准备好了火把，将他们全部烧毁，杀得大败。
English: Emperor Wu himself frowned and watched in the middle of the stream. Following the wind and water, the pirate ships all approached the west coast first. The shore sergeant had prepared torches in advance and burned them all to death.

古文：循还寻阳，遂走豫章，悉力栅左里。
现代文：卢循回到寻阳，接着便逃往豫章，全力在左里建造栅栏。
English: Lu Xun returned to Xuanyang and then fled to Yuanzhang, where he did his best to build a fence in Zuoli.

古文：丙申，大军次左里，将战，帝麾之，麾竿折，幡沈于水，衆咸惧，帝笑曰： 昔覆舟之役亦如此，今胜必矣。 
现代文：十八日，大军驻扎在左里，即将开战，武帝挥动令旗，令旗的旗竿折断，旗子沉入水中，众人都很恐惧，武帝笑着说： 过去的覆舟战役也是这样，今日的胜利是必定无疑的了。 
English: On the 18th, the large army was stationed in Zuoli and was about to go to war. Emperor Wu waved the order flag, the flagpole of the order flag broke, and the flag sank into the water. Everyone was very afraid. Emperor Wu said with a smile, "It was the same in the past overturned boat battle. Today's victory is certain.

古文：攻其栅，循单舸走，衆皆降。
现代文：猛攻敌军的栅栏，卢循单独乘着一条船逃走，众官兵都投降了。
English: After storming the enemy's fence, Lu Xun fled alone in a boat, and all the officers and soldiers surrendered.

古文：师旋，晋帝遣侍中黄门劳师于行所。
现代文：大军凯旋，晋安帝派侍中黄门到营地去进行慰劳。
English: The great army returned in triumph, and Emperor Jinan sent Huangmen, an aide-de-camp, to the camp to offer consolation.

古文：七年正月己未，振旅而归，改授大将军、扬州牧，给班剑二十人，本官并如故。
现代文：义熙七年正月十二日，整顿部队归来，改任他为大将军、扬州牧，赠给他班剑二十人，原来的官职依旧。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Yixi, the rectification troops returned, and he was reappointed as the general, Yangzhou Mu, and he was given a squad of twenty swords. The original official position was still the same.

古文：固辞。
现代文：武帝坚持推辞。
English: Insist on refusing the reward.

古文：凡南北征伐战亡者，并列上赙赠，尸丧未反者，遣主帅迎接，致还本土。
现代文：凡是南北征讨战死者，全都列出姓名请朝廷赠发钱财治丧，尸体失掉没有返回的，派遣主帅前去迎接，使归还本土。
English: The names of all those who died in the north-south war should be listed and the imperial court should be asked to provide money and resources for the funeral. If the bodies are lost and not returned, the commander should be sent to meet them and return them to the mainland.

古文：二月，卢循至番禺，爲孙处所破，收余衆南走。
现代文：二月，卢循到了番禺，被孙处击败，收罗剩余兵众向南逃走。
English: In February, Lu Xun arrived at Panyu, was defeated by Sun Shide, and gathered the remaining soldiers to flee south.

古文：刘藩、孟怀玉斩徐道覆于始兴。
现代文：刘藩、孟怀玉在始兴将徐道覆杀死。
English: Liu Han and Meng Huayu killed Xu Daohui in Shixing.

古文：自晋中兴以来，朝纲弛紊，权门兼并，百姓流离，不得保其産业。
现代文：自从晋朝中兴以来，朝廷的纲纪松弛紊乱，权贵之门互相兼并，老百姓流离失所，不能保持自己的产业。
English: Since the rise of the Jin Dynasty, the discipline of the imperial court has been disordered, the gates of power and nobility have merged with each other, and the common people have been displaced, unable to maintain their own industries.

古文：桓玄颇欲厘改，竟不能行。
现代文：桓玄很想改变这种状况，结果没能实行。
English: Kangen really wanted to change this situation, but it didn't work out.

古文：帝既作辅，大示轨则，豪强肃然，远近禁止。
现代文：武帝做了辅佐大臣以后，大力宣传规章制度，豪强谨慎规矩，远近遵法守纪。
English: After Emperor Wu became an assistant minister, he vigorously promoted the rules and regulations, was courageous and prudent, and adhered to the law and discipline at all times.

古文：至是，会稽余姚虞亮复藏匿亡命千馀人。
现代文：到现在，会稽余姚的虞亮又隐藏了逃亡人员一千多人。
English: Up to now, Yu Liang, Yuyao's auditor, has hidden more than a thousand fugitives.

古文：帝诛亮，免会稽内史司马休之。
现代文：武帝杀死了虞亮，罢免了会稽内史司马休之。
English: Emperor Wu killed Yu Liang and dismissed the auditor of the association, Ma Xiu.

古文：晋帝又申前诏，帝固辞。
现代文：晋安帝重申了以前的授官诏令，武帝坚持推辞。
English: Emperor Jinan reiterated the previous imperial edict of conferring official positions, while Emperor Wu persisted in his refusal.

古文：于是改授太尉、中书监，乃受命，奉送黄钺。
现代文：于是改授他为太尉、中书监，他才接受了任命，奉送了黄钺。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of captain and chief librarian, and only then did he accept the appointment and receive the Yellow Ribbon.

古文：交州刺史杜惠度斩卢循父子，函七首送都。
现代文：交州刺史杜惠度杀死了卢循父子，将七个人头用盒子装了送到京城。
English: Jiaozhou assassin Du Huidu killed Lu Xuan and his son, and sent the seven severed heads to Beijing in a box.

古文：先是，诸州郡所遣秀才、孝廉多非其人，帝乃表申明旧例，策试之。
现代文：在这以前，各州所送的秀才、孝廉大多名不符实，武帝于是上表申明从前的规定，对他们进行策试。
English: Prior to this, most of the names of talented people and filial piety sent by various states were not true, so Emperor Wu affirmed the previous provisions and tested them.

古文：荆州刺史刘道规疾患，求归，八年四月，改授豫州刺史，以豫州刺史刘毅代之。
现代文：荆州刺史刘道轨患病，要求回乡，义熙八年四月，改授豫州刺史，让豫州刺史刘毅去代替他。
English: Jingzhou scholar Liu Daorong fell ill and asked to return to his hometown. In April of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he was awarded the title of Yuzhou scholar, and Yuzhou scholar Liu Yi replaced him.

古文：毅既有雄才大志，与帝俱兴复晋室，自谓京城、广陵功足相抗，虽权事推帝，而心不服也。
现代文：刘毅一向具有雄才大志，与武帝一起兴复晋朝，自认为京城、广陵的功劳足以互相抗衡，虽然暂且推举武帝，而心中却不服气。
English: Liu Yi had always had a great ambition to work with Emperor Wu to restore the Jin Dynasty. He believed that the merits of the capital and Guangling were enough to compete with each other. Although he temporarily promoted Emperor Wu, he was not convinced.

古文：厚自矜许，朝士素望者并多归之，与尚书仆射谢混、丹阳尹郗僧施并深相结。
现代文：他非常自傲自夸，朝士中素有威望者多去归附他，他与尚书仆射谢混、丹阳尹郗僧施都结交很深。
English: He was very proud and boastful. Among the court nobles, those with prestige tended to follow him. He had deep friendships with Shang Shufu Sha Xie Ming and Danyang Yinqin Monk Shidu.

古文：及镇江陵，豫州旧府多割以自随，请僧施爲南蛮校尉。
现代文：等他去镇守江陵，豫州旧府的下属许多人都辞职去跟随他，他奏请让郗僧施任南蛮校尉。
English: When he went to the town of Jiangling, many subordinates of the old government of Yuzhou resigned to follow him, and he asked the monk to serve as the captain of Nanban.

古文：帝知毅终爲异端，心密图之。
现代文：武帝知道刘毅终究是一个异端人物，心里在秘密算计他。
English: Emperor Wu knew that Liu Yi was, after all, a heretic and was secretly plotting against him.

古文：毅至西，称疾笃，表求从弟兖州刺史藩以爲副贰，帝僞许焉。
现代文：刘毅到了西部，称言病重，上表请求让堂弟兖州刺史刘藩作为副手，武帝假装答应了他。
English: When Liu Yi arrived in the west, he said that he was seriously ill. He requested that his cousin, Zhangzhou Jishi Liu Han, be appointed as his deputy. Emperor Wu pretended to agree.

古文：九月，藩入朝，帝命收藩及谢混，并赐死。
现代文：九月，刘藩入朝，武帝命令逮捕刘藩和谢混，一并赐死。
English: In September, Liu Han entered the imperial court, and Emperor Wu ordered the arrest of Liu Han and Xie Ming, and they were both sentenced to death.

古文：自表讨毅，又假黄钺，率诸军西征。
现代文：自己上表请求讨伐刘毅，又借掌黄钺，率领各路军队西征。
English: He made a request to Liu Yi on the table to fight against Liu Yi, and also borrowed the palm of Huang Qi to lead the army of all roads to the West.

古文：以前镇军将军司马休之爲平西将军、荆州刺史，兖州刺史道怜镇丹徒，豫州刺史诸葛长人监太尉留府事，加太尉司马丹阳尹刘穆之建威将军，配以实力。
现代文：任命前镇军将军司马休之为平西将军、荆州刺史，兖州刺史刘道怜镇守丹徒，豫州刺史诸葛长人监管太尉留府事务，任命太尉司马丹阳尹刘穆之为建威将军，给他配备实际兵力。
English: He appointed the former township army general Sima Xiuqin as the Pingxi general, Jingzhou Zhangshi, Zhangzhou Zhangshi Liu Daoliang as the town guard of Dantu, and Yuzhou Zhangshi Zhuge as the elder to supervise the affairs of the captain staying in the province, and appointed the captain Sima Danyang Yin Liu Muxin as the general Jianwei, and equipped him with actual troops.

古文：壬午，发建邺，遣参军王镇恶、龙骧将军蒯恩前袭江陵，克之，毅及党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十五日，从建邺出发，派遣参军王镇恶、龙骧将军蒯恩前往袭击江陵，将城攻破，刘毅及其党羽全部被杀。
English: On the fifteenth day, starting from Jianye, Wang Zhenxiong and Longtao General Xiong were sent to attack Jiangling, breaking through the city. Liu Yi and his party were all killed.

古文：十一月，帝至江陵，分荆州十郡爲湘州，帝仍进督焉。
现代文：十一月，武帝到了江陵，分出荆州的十个郡成为湘州，武帝仍旧前往督察。
English: In November, Emperor Wu arrived in Jiangling and divided the ten counties of Jingzhou to become Hunan. Emperor Wu still went to inspect.

古文：以西阳太守朱龄石爲益州刺史，使伐蜀。晋帝进帝太傅、扬州牧，加羽葆、鼓吹，班剑二十人。
现代文：任命西阳太守朱龄石为益州刺史，让他讨伐蜀地，晋安帝晋升武帝为太傅、扬州牧，赠给羽葆、乐队，仪仗二十人。
English: Appointed the Xiyang Daju Zhu Lingshi as the leader of the history of Yizhou, and let him fight against Shu, promoted Emperor An of Jin to Emperor Wu as the leader of Taifu and Yangzhou, and presented feathers and bands to twenty people.

古文：九年二月乙丑，帝至自江陵。
现代文：九年二月三十日，武帝从江陵到来。
English: On February 30th, Emperor Wu arrived from Jiangling.

古文：初，诸葛长人贪淫骄横，帝每优容之。
现代文：起初，诸葛长人贪淫骄横，武帝常常宽容他。
English: At first, Zhuge Changren was greedy and arrogant, and Emperor Wu often tolerated him.

古文：刘毅既诛，长人谓所亲曰： 昔年醢彭越，今年杀韩信，祸其至矣。 
现代文：刘毅处死以后，诸葛长人对他的亲信说： 从前剁死彭越，今年杀死韩信，灾祸就要到了。 
English: After Liu Yi was executed, the elder Zhuge said to his cronies: "In the past, you strangled Peng Yue, this year you killed Han Xin, disaster is coming."

古文：将谋作乱。
现代文：准备阴谋作乱。
English: They're plotting a riot.

古文：帝克期至都，而每淹留不进。
现代文：武帝按时到达都城，却常常停留不进。
English: Emperor Wu arrived at the capital on time, but often did not enter.

古文：公卿以下，频日奉候于新亭，长人亦骤出。
现代文：公卿以下，连日在新亭等候，诸葛长人也忽然出现。
English: The court nobles and below waited in the new pavilion day after day, and the elders of Zhuge suddenly appeared.

古文：既而帝轻舟密至，已还东府矣。
现代文：随后武帝乘一只轻快小船秘密到达，已经回到了东府。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Wu arrived secretly on a light boat and has already returned to Dongfu.

古文：长人到门，引前，却人闲语，凡平生言所不尽者，皆与及之，长人甚悦。
现代文：诸葛长人到了府门，被叫到面前，摈退旁人说起闲话，凡是平生所没有说尽的话，都和他说到了，诸葛长人非常高兴。
English: When Zhuge Changren arrived at the gate of the palace, he was called to the front, and he rebuffed the gossip of others. He said everything that he had not said in his life. Zhuge Changren was very happy.

古文：帝已密命左右丁旿自幔后出，于坐拉焉，死于床侧。
现代文：武帝秘密命令身边的武士丁日午从布幔后出来，从座位上把他拉开，杀死在床边。
English: Emperor Wu secretly ordered the samurai around him to come out from behind the bedclothes in the afternoon, pull him away from the seat, and kill him next to the bed.

古文：舆尸付廷尉，并诛其弟黎人。
现代文：用车子拉着他的尸体交给廷尉，并且处死了他的弟弟诸葛黎人。
English: His corpse was dragged by a cart and handed over to a courtier, and his brother Zhuge Li Ren was also executed.

古文：旿骁勇有力，时人语曰， 勿跋扈，付丁旿 。
现代文：丁日午骁勇有力，当时的人有谚语说： 勿跋扈，会丁日午。 
English: At that time, people had a saying: "Don't trek, meet at dusk."

古文：先是，山湖川泽皆爲豪强所夺，百姓薪采渔钓，皆责税直，至是禁断之。
现代文：以前，山湖川泽都被豪强所夺取，百姓打柴、采摘、打鱼、垂钓，都要强迫交税，到现在一律禁绝。
English: In the past, the mountains, lakes and rivers were all seized by the powerful, and the common people were forced to pay taxes for firewood, harvesting, fishing and angling, which have all been banned until now.

古文：时人居未一，帝上表定制，于是依界土断，惟徐、兖、青三州居晋陵者不在断例。
现代文：当时人们的居住很不统一，武帝上表制定了条例，于是都依划分的土地为准，只有徐、兖、青三州居住在晋陵的人不在划分的范围。
English: At that time, people's residence was very inconsistent. Emperor Wu formulated regulations on the table above, so they were all based on the divided land. Only those who lived in the three states of Xu, Handan and Qing were not in the scope of division.

古文：诸流寓郡县，多所并省。
现代文：各个流民聚集的郡县，有许多进行了合并。
English: Counties and counties where various displaced people gather have been merged in many cases.

古文：以帝领镇西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：由武帝兼任镇西将军、豫州刺史。
English: Emperor Wu also held the posts of Zhenxi General and Yuzhou Chief Historian.

古文：帝固让太傅、扬州牧及班剑，奉还黄钺。
现代文：武帝坚持辞去太傅、扬州牧和班剑，归还了黄钺。
English: Emperor Wu insisted on resigning Taifu, Yangzhou Mu and Panjian, and returned Huang Qi.

古文：七月，朱龄石平蜀，斩谯纵，传首建邺。
现代文：七月，朱龄石平定了蜀地，斩了谯纵，把他的人头传送到建邺。
English: In July, Zhu Lingshi leveled Shudi, cut off the indulgence, and sent his head to Jianye.

古文：九月，晋帝以帝平齐、定卢循功，封帝次子义真爲桂阳县公；并重申前命，授帝太傅、扬州牧，加羽葆、鼓吹，班剑二十人。
现代文：九月，晋安帝因为武帝平齐国、定卢循的功劳，封武帝的次子刘义真为桂阳县公；并且重申以前的任命，授给武帝太傅、扬州牧的职务，配备葆羽、乐队，仪仗二十人。
English: In September, Emperor Jin'an made Emperor Wu's second son Liu Yizhen the governor of Guiyang County in recognition of Emperor Wu's contributions to Pingqigu and Dingluqun, and reaffirmed the previous appointment, bestowing Emperor Wu with the posts of Taifu and Yangzhou Magistrate, and equipping him with a kite, a band, and twenty honor guards.

古文：将吏百僚敦劝，乃受羽葆、鼓吹、班剑，馀固辞。
现代文：将吏百官鼓动劝导，才接受了羽葆、乐队、仪仗，其余坚决推辞。
English: It was only after hundreds of officials had been persuaded by the generals that they accepted the feathers, the band, the ceremonial battle, and resolutely rejected the rest.

古文：十年，息人简役，筑东府城，起府舍。
现代文：义熙十年，精简劳役，让人民得到休息，建筑东府城，修建府衙房舍。
English: In the past ten years, the labor service has been streamlined, so that the people can have a rest, the East Prefectural City has been built, and the prefectural government buildings have been built.

古文：帝以荆州刺史司马休之宗室之重，又得江、汉人心，疑其有异志；而休之子谯王文思在都，招聚轻侠，帝执送休之，令自爲其所。
现代文：武帝看到荆州刺史司马休之宗室繁盛，又很得长江、汉水一带人心，怀疑他存有异志；而司马休之的儿子司马文思住在京城，招聚轻捷侠客，武帝把他抓住送交给司马休之，让他自己去处理。
English: Emperor Wu saw that the ancestral home of Sima Xiu of Jingzhou was prosperous, and that he was very popular in the Yangtze River and Han River areas, and suspected that he had a dream; while Sima Xiu's son, Sima Wensi, lived in Beijing and recruited light cavalry chivalry, Emperor Wu caught him and handed him over to Sima Xiu, and let him deal with it himself.

古文：休之表废文思，并与帝书陈谢。
现代文：司马休之上表请求废除司马文思的爵位，并且给武帝写信致谢。
English: Sima Xiu petitioned for the abolition of Sima Wensi's title and wrote a letter of thanks to Emperor Wu.

古文：十一年正月，帝收休之子文宝、兄子文祖，并赐死，率衆西讨。
现代文：义熙十一年正月，武帝逮捕了司马休之的儿子司马文宝、他哥哥的儿子司马文祖，一并赐命自杀。率领大军西出讨伐。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of Yixi, Emperor Wu arrested Sima Wenbao, the son of Sima Xiu, and his brother's son Sima Wenzhou, and ordered them to commit suicide together. He led a large army to fight in the west.

古文：复假黄钺，领荆州刺史。
现代文：重新借掌黄钺，兼任荆州刺史。
English: Re-borrowed the palm of Huang Qi, and also served as the leader of Jingzhou stabbing history.

古文：以中军将军道怜监留府事。
现代文：派中军将军刘道怜监管留府的事务。
English: General Liu Daolei of the Chinese army was sent to supervise the affairs of the remaining government.

古文：休之上表自陈，并罪状帝。
现代文：司马休之上表自我剖白，并列举武帝罪状。
English: Sima Xiu made a self-explanatory statement above, and listed Emperor Wu's crimes.

古文：休之府录事参军韩延之有干用才，帝未至江陵，密书招之。
现代文：司马休之幕府中的录事参军韩延之有大用之才，武帝还没到江陵，就秘密写信招他。
English: Sima Xiu's records in the shogunate were of great use to Han Yan, who joined the army. Emperor Wu had not yet arrived in Gangneung when he secretly wrote to recruit him.

古文：延之报书曰： 承亲率戎马，远履西偏，阖境士庶，莫不惶骇。
现代文：韩延之回信说： 承蒙亲自率领兵马，远赴西部地区，全境内的士子平民，无不惶恐惊骇。
English: Han Yanzhi's reply said: He personally led the soldiers and horses to the western region, and the soldiers and civilians in the whole territory were terrified.

古文：辱疏，知以谯王前事，良增叹息。
现代文：蒙您来信，知道是因为谯王以前的事，更增添了叹息。
English: Receiving your letter, and knowing that it was because of the events before Shao Wang, made me even more sad.

古文：司马平西体国忠贞，款怀待物，以公有匡复之勋，家国蒙赖，推德委诚，每事询仰。
现代文：司马平西忠于国家，宽宏待人，因为您有匡复晋朝的功勋，是国家依赖的人物，推赞您的德行，向您敬献诚意，常常进行询问请教。
English: Sima Pingsi is loyal to the country and generous to others, because you have the merit of restoring the Jin Dynasty and are a person who is dependent on the country. He praises your virtues, respects your sincerity, and often inquires and consults.

古文：谯王往以微事见劾，犹自表逊位；况以大过而当默邪！
现代文：谯王因为一点小事被弹劾，仍然自己上表辞位；何况有了大错会缄默不语么！
English: King Gong was impeached for a trifle, but he still made a speech; what's more, if he made a big mistake, he would remain silent!

古文：来示云， 处怀期物，自有由来 。
现代文：来信说， 怀抱虚静，期待贤才，由来已久 。
English: The letter said, "It has been a long time since we have embraced emptiness and tranquility and looked forward to a wise man."

古文：今伐人之君，啖人以利，真可谓 处怀期物 者矣。
现代文：现在攻打别人的君长，而以私利引诱别人，真可以说是 怀抱虚静，期待贤才 了呀。
English: Now, attacking other people's sovereigns and tempting others with self-interest can truly be said to be "embracing emptiness and expecting genius."

古文：刘藩死于阊阖之门，诸葛毙于左右之手，甘言诧方伯，袭之以轻兵，遂使席上靡款怀之士，阃外无自信诸侯，以爲得算，良所耻也。
现代文：刘藩死在宫殿门前，诸葛亡于喽罗之手，甜言蜜语使州官们惊诧，突然袭击又开来轻兵，于是使得客席上没有诚心的士人，外地区没有自信的诸侯，自以为是得意算盘，实在是一种耻辱。
English: Liu Han died in front of the palace gate, Zhuge died at the hands of Zhao Luo, the sweet talk surprised the state officials, and the sudden attack brought light soldiers, so it was a shame that the guests did not have a sincere scholar, and the princes outside the region did not have self-confidence.

古文：吾虽鄙劣，尝闻道于君子，以平西之至德，宁可无授命之臣乎？
现代文：我虽然粗鄙拙劣，但是却曾经听君子讲过人生道义。以平西将军的高尚品德，难道会没有能够授官的臣子么？
English: Although I am coarse and clumsy, I once listened to a gentleman lecture me on the morality of life. With the noble character of General Pingxi, will there be no courtiers who can bestow the post?

古文：假天长丧乱，九流浑浊，当与臧洪游于地下。不复多云。 
现代文：借着天下丧乱，九流浑浊，应当与臧洪在地下共同游玩。
English: With the world in turmoil and the nine currents turbulent, we should play together with Zou Hong in the underground.

古文：帝视书叹息，以示将佐曰： 事人当如此。 
现代文：不再多说。 武帝看信后深深叹息，拿它来给将士们看说： 追随别人就应当是这样。 
English: Emperor Wu sighed deeply after reading the letter and showed it to his generals, saying, "This is how it should be to follow others."

古文：三月，军次江陵。
现代文：三月，军队驻扎在江陵。
English: In March, the army was stationed in Gangneung.

古文：初，雍州刺史鲁宗之负力好乱，且虑不爲帝容，常爲谶曰： 鱼登日，辅帝室。 
现代文：起初，雍州刺史鲁宗之依仗气力喜好乱为，而且顾虑不为武帝所容，常常念叨谶语说： 鱼登日，辅帝室。 
English: At first, Emperor Wu did not tolerate the likes and dislikes of the Yongzheng Emperor Shiluzong, who relied on his strength, and his scruples. He often said, "The fish ascends to the sun, the emperor's assistant."

古文：与休之相结。
现代文：与司马休之互相串通。
English: and colluded with Simakyu.

古文：至是，率其子竟陵太守轨会于江陵。
现代文：到了现在，率领他的儿子竟陵太守鲁轨会聚在江陵。
English: Now, led by his son, Goryo Taishu Lu Lu, they have gathered in Gangneung.

古文：帝济江，休之衆溃，与轨等奔襄阳，江陵平。
现代文：武帝渡过长江，司马休之的军队溃败，与鲁轨等人逃奔襄阳，江陵平定。
English: Emperor Wu crossed the Yangtze River, Sima Xizhi's army was defeated, he and Lu Lu and others fled to Yangyang, and Gangneung was pacified.

古文：加领南蛮校尉。
现代文：武帝兼任南蛮校尉。
English: Emperor Wu also served as the captain of Nanban.

古文：将拜南蛮，遇四废日，佐史郑鲜之等白迁日，不许。
现代文：将授南蛮官衔时，正遇上四废日，下属官员郑鲜之等人建议改换一个日子，武帝没有答应。
English: When the official title of Nanban was to be conferred, it was the fourth wasted day. Subordinate officials such as Zheng Xianzhi suggested changing the day, but Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：下书开宽大之恩。
现代文：下令开恩实行宽大政策。
English: A clemency policy has been ordered.

古文：四月，进军襄阳，休之等奔姚兴。
现代文：四月，进军襄阳，司马休之等人逃奔姚兴。
English: In April, marching into Yangyang, Sima Xiu and others fled to Yaoxing.

古文：晋帝复申前令，授太傅、扬州牧，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，加前部羽葆、鼓吹，置左右长史、司马、从事中郎四人，封第三子义隆爲北彭城县公。
现代文：晋安帝重申先前的命令，授职武帝担任太傅、扬州牧，可以带剑穿履朝见皇帝，入朝不须趋步，赞拜不须报名，加赠前部羽葆、乐队，设置左右长史、司马、从事中郎四人，封第三子刘义隆为北彭城县公。
English: Emperor Jin'an reiterated the previous order, appointing Emperor Wu to serve as Taifu and Yangzhou Maki, he could wear a sword to see the emperor, he did not have to walk to enter the court, and he did not have to sign up for worship. He also gave the front part of the feathers and the band, set up four left and right long history, Sima, and engaged in middlemen, and made the third son Liu Yilong the governor of North Pengcheng County.

古文：八月甲子，帝至自江陵，奉还黄钺，固辞太傅、州牧、前部羽葆、鼓吹，其馀受命。
现代文：八月十三日，武帝从江陵返回，奉还黄钺，坚决推辞太傅、州牧、前部羽葆、乐队，其余的接受了任命。
English: On August 13th, Emperor Wu returned from Gangneung, returned the Yellow Ribbon, and resolutely rejected the Taifu, the State Pastoral, the Front Feather Ribbon, and the Band. The rest accepted the appointment.

古文：十二年正月，晋帝诏帝依旧辟士，加领平北将军、兖州刺史，增督南秦，凡二十二州。
现代文：义熙十二年正月，晋安帝诏令武帝依旧征召士人，兼任平北将军、兖州刺史，加上督率南秦，共二十二州。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year of Yixi, the Emperor of Jin and An ordered the Emperor Wu to recruit scholars, and he also served as the general of Pingbei, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the governor of Nanqin, a total of 22 states.

古文：帝以平北文武寡少，不宜别置，于是罢平北府，以并大府。
现代文：武帝因为平北府中文武人才缺乏，不适合另外设置，于是撤销了平北府，把它并入大府。
English: Emperor Wu, because of the lack of Chinese martial arts talents in Pingbei Prefecture, was not suitable for another setting, so he revoked Pingbei Prefecture and merged it into Dafu.

古文：三月，加帝中外大都督。
现代文：三月，任命武帝为中外大都督。
English: In March, Emperor Wu was appointed as the Grand Governor of China and foreign countries.

古文：初，帝平齐，仍有定关、洛意，遇卢循侵逼，故寝。
现代文：起初，武帝扫平了齐国入侵，仍然有平定关中、洛阳的意思，遇上卢循侵袭逼迫，所以放下了。
English: At first, Emperor Wu swept away the invasion of Qi, and still had the intention of pacifying Guanzhong and Luoyang. When Lu Xun was attacked and persecuted, he let it go.

古文：及荆、雍平，乃谋外略。
现代文：等到荆州、雍州平定，于是开始谋划外部策略。
English: Wait until Jingzhou and Yongzhou are pacified, and then begin to plan an external strategy.

古文：会姚兴死，子泓新立，兄弟相杀，关中扰乱。
现代文：正赶上姚兴死去，他的儿子姚泓刚刚继任，兄弟互相杀戮，关中混乱。
English: Just as Yao Xing was about to die, his son Yao Yao had just succeeded him. Brothers were killing each other, and there was chaos in the Guanzhong.

古文：四月乙丑，帝表伐关、洛，乃戒严北讨，加领征西将军、司豫二州刺史。
现代文：四月十八日，武帝上表讨伐关中、洛阳，便戒严讨伐北方，命令他兼任征西将军、司豫二州刺史。
English: On April 18th, Emperor Wu issued a proclamation to invade Guanzhong and Luoyang, and then declared martial law to invade the north, ordering him to also serve as the general of the Western Expedition and the chief historian of the two states.

古文：以世子爲徐、兖二州刺史。
现代文：任命他的世子为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: He appointed his heirs as the heads of the two states of Xu and Handan.

古文：帝欲以义声怀远，奉琅邪王北伐。
现代文：武帝希望以自己的声望怀柔远方，接受了琅邪王的封号北伐。
English: Emperor Wu hoped to use his prestige to pacify the Far East, and accepted the title of the Evil King's Northern Expedition.

古文：五月，庐江霍山崩，获六锺，献之天子。
现代文：五月，庐江的霍山崩裂，获得了六口钟，献给了天子。
English: In May, the Huoshan Mountain of the Lijiang River collapsed, gaining six bells, dedicated to the Son of Heaven.

古文：癸巳，加领北雍州刺史，前后部羽葆、鼓吹，增班剑爲四十人。
现代文：十七日，加职兼任北雍州刺史，前后部羽葆、乐队，增加班剑为四十人。
English: On the seventeenth day, he was assigned to the additional post of Beiyongzhou stabbing history, the front and rear parts of the feather and band, and the number of swords increased to forty.

古文：八月丁巳，率大衆进发，以世子爲中军将军，监太尉留府事，尚书右仆射刘穆之爲左仆射，领监军、中军二府军司，入居东府，总摄内外。
现代文：八月十二日，率领大军进发，以世子为中军将军，监管太尉留府事务，尚书右仆射刘穆之为左仆射，兼任监军、中军二府的军司，住进东府，总管内外一切事务。
English: On August 12th, he led a large army to march forward, with his son as the general of the Central Army, supervising the affairs of the captain staying in the prefecture, Shang Shu's right-hand man Liu Mu Wei as his left-hand man, concurrently serving as the supervisor of the army and the military secretary of the two prefectures of the Central Army, living in the East Prefecture, and being in charge of all internal and external affairs.

古文：九月，帝至彭城，加领北徐州刺史。
现代文：九月，武帝到了彭城，加职兼任北徐州刺史。
English: In September, Emperor Wu arrived in Pengcheng and took on an additional post as the governor of North Xuzhou.

古文：十月，衆军至洛，围金墉，降之。
现代文：十月，各军到达洛阳，包围了金墉，迫使他们投降。
English: In October, the armies reached Luoyang, surrounded Jinlu and forced them to surrender.

古文：枹罕虏乞伏炽盘遣使谒帝，求效力讨姚泓，拜爲平西将军、河南公。
现代文：修复了晋朝皇家的五陵，设置了守卫。十二月二十九日，晋安帝加任武帝为相国、总百揆、扬州牧，封赏十郡为宋公，具备九锡之礼，赐给玉玺、远游冠、绿绶带，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: The five imperial tombs of the Jin Dynasty were restored and guards were set up. On December 29th, Emperor An of the Jin Dynasty appointed Emperor Wu as the father-in-law of the country, the general of the Hundred Imperial Regalia, Yangzhou Patriarch, awarded ten counties to Song Gong, with the gift of Jiuxi, awarded the Jade Scepter, the Long Journey Crown, and the Green Scepter Belt, and the status was above the princes and kings.

古文：十三年正月，帝以舟师进讨，留彭城公义隆镇彭城。
现代文：十三年正月，武帝利用船队前往讨伐，留下彭城公刘义隆镇守彭城。
English: In the first month of the 13th year, Emperor Wu used the fleet to go to the crusade, leaving Liu Yilong, the Duke of Pengcheng, to defend Pengcheng.

古文：军次陈留城，经张良庙，下令以时修饰栋宇致荐焉。
现代文：军队驻扎在陈留城，经过张良庙，下令要定时维修装饰庙宇和祭奠。
English: The army stationed in Chenliucheng passed by the Zhangliang Temple and ordered that the decoration of the temple and the memorial service should be regularly maintained.

古文：晋帝追赠帝祖爲太常，父爲特进、左光禄大夫，让不受。
现代文：晋安帝追赠武帝的祖父为太常，父亲为特进、左光禄大夫，武帝辞让不肯接受。
English: Emperor Jin'an posthumously presented Emperor Wu's grandfather with the title of Taizang, and his father with the titles of Tokujin and Zuo Guanglu. Emperor Wu refused to accept Emperor Wu's resignation.

古文：二月，冠军将军檀道济等军次潼关。
现代文：二月，冠军将军檀道济等人的军队驻扎在潼关。
English: In February, the army of champion general Dang Daoji and others was stationed in Shaoguan.

古文：三月庚辰，帝率大军入河。
现代文：三月初八，武帝率领大军进入黄河。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Emperor Wu led a large army into the Yellow River.

古文：五月，帝至洛阳，谒晋五陵。
现代文：五月，武帝到达洛阳，拜谒晋朝的五陵。
English: In May, Emperor Wu arrived in Luoyang and paid homage to the Five Tombs of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：七月，至陕，龙骧将军王镇恶舟师自河浮渭。
现代文：七月，到了陕州，龙骧将军王镇恶的水军从黄河进入渭河。
English: In July, when they arrived in Shaanxi Province, the evil navy of the Long March general Wang Zhen entered the Fen River from the Yellow River.

古文：八月，扶风太守沈田子大破姚泓军于蓝田，王镇恶克长安，禽姚泓。始义熙九年，岁、镇、荧惑、太白聚东井，至是而关中平。
现代文：八月，扶风太守沈田子在蓝田大破姚泓的军队。起初义熙九年，木星、土星、火星、金星曾经聚拢在井宿，到现在终于关中平定。
English: In August, Fufeng Daju Shen Tianzi defeated Yao Xi's army in Lantian. At the beginning of the ninth year of Yixi, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars and Venus once gathered in the well, and now finally settled in Guanzhong.

古文：九月，帝至长安。
现代文：九月，武帝到长安。
English: In September, Emperor Wu arrived in Chang'an.

古文：长安丰稔，帑藏盈积，帝先收其彜器、浑仪、土圭、记里鼓、指南车及秦始皇玉玺送之都；其馀珍宝珠玉，悉以班赐将帅。
现代文：长安丰收，国库积满，武帝首先收集了他们的彝器、浑天仪、土圭、记里鼓、指南车以及秦始皇玉玺送到京城；其余的珍宝珠玉，全都分别赏赐给将帅。
English: The Chang'an harvest was bountiful and the state treasury was full. Emperor Wu first collected their cymbals, armillary spheres, toques, cymbals, compasses, and Qin Shihuang's jade cymbals and sent them to Beijing. The rest of the precious jewels were all awarded to the generals.

古文：迁姚宗于江南，送泓斩于建康市。
现代文：把姚家宗族迁徙到江南，押送姚泓到建康，在街市上将他斩首。
English: They moved the Yao family to the south of the Yangtze River, escorted Yao Yao to Jiankang, and beheaded him in the street market.

古文：谒汉长陵，大会文武于未央殿。
现代文：武帝拜谒了汉朝的长陵，在未央殿大会文武官员。
English: Emperor Wu paid homage to the Great Mausoleum of the Han Dynasty, and officials from the fields of literature and military affairs gathered in the Weiyang Hall.

古文：十月，晋帝诏进宋公爵爲王，加十郡益宋国，并前爲二十郡。
现代文：十月，晋安帝下诏晋升宋公为宋王，增加十郡扩大宋国，加上以前的共二十郡。
English: In October, Emperor Jinan issued an edict to promote Song Gong to King of Song, adding ten counties to expand the Song state, adding to the previous total of twenty counties.

古文：其相国、扬州牧、领征西将军、司豫北徐雍四州刺史如故。
现代文：他的相国、扬州牧、兼征西将军、司豫北徐雍四州刺史仍旧不变。
English: His compatriots, Yangzhou Maki, concurrently the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and Siyuan Bei Xu Yong, the leader of the Sizhou Expeditionary Force, remain unchanged.

古文：帝欲息驾长安，经略赵、魏，十一月，前将军刘穆之卒，乃归。
现代文：武帝打算在长安休息，经略赵、魏两地，十一月，前将军刘穆之去世，于是才返回。
English: Emperor Wu planned to rest in Chang'an, but after visiting Zhao and Wei, the former general Liu Muzhi passed away in November, so Emperor Wu returned.

古文：十二月庚子，发自长安，以桂阳公义真爲雍州刺史，镇长安，留腹心将佐以辅之。
现代文：十二月初三，从长安出发，以桂阳公刘义真为雍州刺史，镇守长安，留下心腹将领来辅佐他。
English: On the third day of early December, he set out from Chang'an, with Guiyang Prince Liu Yizhen as the prefect of Yongzhou and the town guard of Chang'an, leaving his confidant generals to assist him.

古文：十四年正月壬戌，帝至彭城，解严息甲。
现代文：义熙十四年正月二十六日，武帝到了彭城，解除戒严，脱去盔甲。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the 14th year of Yixi, Emperor Wu arrived in Pengcheng, lifted the martial law and took off his armor.

古文：以辅国将军刘遵考爲并州刺史，领河东太守，镇蒲阪。
现代文：以辅国将军刘遵考为并州刺史，兼河东太守，镇守蒲坂。
English: Liu Zunka, the general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the governor of the annexed prefecture, as well as the governor of Hedong and the governor of Busaka.

古文：帝解司州，领徐、冀二州刺史，固让进爵。
现代文：武帝辞去了司州职务，兼领徐、冀二州刺史，坚持推让晋升爵位。
English: Emperor Wu resigned from the position of Sizhou and concurrently received the titles of Xu and Hebei, insisting on the promotion of the knighthood.

古文：时汉中成固县汉水崖际有异声如雷，俄顷岸崩，有铜锺十二，出自潜壤。
现代文：当时汉中成固县的汉水旁边有奇异的声音如同打雷，不一会河岸崩裂，有十二口铜钟，从地下暴露出来。
English: At that time, there was a strange sound like thunder next to the Han River in Chenggu County, Hanzhong, and the riverbank suddenly collapsed, exposing twelve copper bells from the ground.

古文：巩县人宗曜于其田所获嘉禾，九穗同茎，帝以献，晋帝以归于我。帝冲让，乃止。
现代文：巩县人宗曜在他的农田里得到了一株好庄稼，九个穗子同在一个茎上，武帝把它献给晋安帝，安帝又归还给他，武帝谦让，才算结束。
English: A man from Gongxian County, Zongyou, got a good crop of radish in his farmland on Saturday. Nine ears of corn were on one stem. Emperor Wu dedicated it to Emperor Jin, Emperor An returned it to him, and Emperor Wu conceded. That was the end.

古文：六月丁亥，受相国宋公九锡之命，下命赦国内殊死以下。
现代文：六月二十三日，接受了赐给相国宋公的九锡，下令赦免国内死刑以下的罪犯。
English: On June 23rd, he accepted Jiuxi, which was given to his brother-in-law Song Gong, and ordered to pardon domestic criminals who were sentenced to death or less.

古文：诏崇豫章太夫人爲宋公太妃，世子爲中军将军副贰，相国府百官悉依天朝之制。
现代文：诏令尊崇豫章太夫人为宋公太妃，世子为中军将军副官，相国府百官都依照朝廷的建制。
English: According to the edict, Zong Yu Zhang's great-grandmother was Princess Song, her son was an aide-de-camp to a general of the Chinese army, and all the officials of the imperial court were in accordance with the establishment system of the imperial court.

古文：又诏宋国所封十郡之外，悉得除用。
现代文：又诏令宋国在所封的十郡以外，都可以选人任用。
English: In addition, it was decreed that the Song Dynasty could select and appoint anyone from outside the ten counties.

古文：先是，安西中兵参军沈田子杀安西司马王镇恶，诸将杀安西长史王修，关中乱。
现代文：先前，安西中兵参军沈田子杀死了安西司马王镇恶，将领们杀死了安西长史王修，关中混乱。
English: Previously, the Anxi soldiers joined the army, Shen Tianzi killed the Anxi Sima Wang Zhenqi, the generals killed the Anxi Changshi Wang Xiu, and there was chaos in the gate.

古文：十月，帝遣右将军朱龄石代安西将军桂阳公义真爲雍州刺史。
现代文：十月，武帝派遣右将军朱龄石代替安西将军桂阳公刘义真为雍州刺史。
English: In October, Emperor Wu sent Right General Zhu Lingshi to replace Anxi General Guiyang Liu Yizhen to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：义真还，爲赫连勃勃所追，大败，仅以身免，诸将帅及龄石并没。
现代文：刘义真回京，被赫连勃勃所追赶，大败，仅仅自己一人逃脱，众将帅和朱龄石都被杀死。
English: Liu Yizhen returned to Beijing, was pursued by Helian vigorously, defeated, only he escaped alone, the generals Shuai and Zhu Lingshi were killed.

古文：十二月，晋安帝崩，大司马琅邪王即帝位。
现代文：十二月，晋安帝逝世，大司马琅笽王登上皇帝位。
English: In December, Emperor Jinan passed away, and Grand Prince Ma Jun ascended to the throne.

古文：元熙元年正月，晋帝诏征帝入辅，又申前令，进公爵爲王，以徐州之海陵北东海北谯北梁、豫州之新蔡、兖州之北陈留、司州之陈郡汝南潁川荥阳十郡，增宋国。
现代文：元熙元年正月，晋恭帝下诏征武帝入朝辅政，又重申以前的命令，把他的爵位由公晋升为王，把徐州的海陵、北东海、北谯、北梁，豫州的新蔡，兖州的北陈留，司州的陈郡、汝南、颍川、荥阳十郡，增加为宋国属地。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Jinxiong issued an edict to promote Emperor Wu to the auxiliary government of the Joseon Dynasty. He also reiterated the previous order to promote his title from prince to king, and added Hailing, Beidonghai, Beilun, Beiliang in Xuzhou, Xin Cai in Yuzhou, Beicheng in Zhangzhou, and Chen County, Runan, Luochuan and Fenyang in Shizhou to the ten counties belonging to the Song Dynasty.

古文：七月，乃受命。
现代文：七月，才接受了命令。
English: In July, he finally accepted the order.

古文：赦国内五岁刑以下，迁都寿阳。
现代文：赦免国内五年徒刑以下的罪犯，迁都到寿阳。
English: Pardoned domestic criminals with less than five years of imprisonment, and moved the capital to Shouyang.

古文：九月，解扬州。
现代文：九月，辞去了扬州的职务。
English: In September, he resigned from his post in Yangzhou.

古文：十二月，晋帝命帝冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设锺虡宫县。
现代文：十二月，晋恭帝命令武帝的冕冠可以有十二个玉串，建立天子的旌旗，出入警戒清道，乘坐金根车，驾车用六匹马，具备五时副车，设置旄头云罕，乐舞使用八佾，设置编钟木架悬挂在宫中。
English: In December, Emperor Jinguang ordered that the crown of Emperor Wu could have twelve jade strings, set up the banner of the son of heaven, enter and exit warning clear roads, ride the golden chariot, drive with six horses, have a five o'clock sidecar, set up the steeple, use eight cymbals for music and dance, and set up a wooden frame hanging in the palace.

古文：进王太妃爲太后，王妃爲王后，世子爲太子，王子、王孙爵命之号，一如旧仪。
现代文：晋升王太妃为太后，王妃为王后，世子为太子，王子、王孙的爵位封号，完全和旧时的规制一样。
English: The promotion of the king's daughter-in-law to the empress dowager, the princess to the queen, the heir to the throne to the crown prince, the prince and the grandson to the title of nobility, is completely the same as the old regulation.

古文：二年正月，帝表让殊礼。
现代文：二年正月，武帝上表辞让特殊礼遇。
English: In the first month of the second year, Emperor Wu sent word for special treatment.

古文：竟陵郡江滨自开，出古铜礼器十余枚，帝献之晋帝，让不受，于是归诸瑞物，藏于相府。
现代文：竟陵郡江滨自己裂开，露出了古铜礼器十几枚，武帝把它们献给了晋恭帝，恭帝推让不肯接受，于是送回了各种祥瑞器物，收藏在宰相府。
English: Jiangbin of Qiongling County cracked it himself, revealing more than a dozen bronze ceremonial objects. Emperor Wu gave them to Emperor Jingu, but Emperor Jingu refused to accept them, so he sent back all kinds of Xiangrui ware to be collected at the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：又遣使持节、兼太保、散骑常侍、光禄大夫谢澹，兼太尉、尚书刘宣范奉玺书，归皇帝玺绶，受终之礼，一如唐虞、汉魏故事。
现代文：十一日，晋恭帝派遣使者送上文书，又派遣使持节、兼太保、散骑常侍、光禄大夫谢澹，兼太尉、尚书刘宣范送上玺书，转交皇帝的玉玺，受禅的礼节，完全和唐虞、汉魏从前的办法一样。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Jinguang sent an envoy to deliver the document. He also sent an envoy to hold the festival, concurrently with the grand marshal, the horseback riding attendant, the Guanglu doctor Xie Jun, and the grand marshal, the Shangshu Liu Xuanfan to deliver the imperial edict, hand over the emperor's jade scepter, and receive Zen. The etiquette was completely the same as that of the Tang Dynasty and the Han and Wei Dynasties.

古文：帝奉表陈让，晋帝已逊于琅邪王第，表不获通。
现代文：武帝上表进行辞让，晋恭帝已经退到琅笽王府，奏表没有送到。
English: Emperor Wu tendered his resignation on the table, Emperor Jinguang had already retreated to the Shao Wangfu, and the report card was not sent to the emperor.

古文：于是陈留王虔嗣等二百七十人及宋台群臣并上表劝进，犹不许。
现代文：于是陈留王司马虔嗣等二百七十人和宋台的群臣一齐上表劝武帝即皇帝位，他还是不答应。
English: As a result, Chen Liu Wang, Sima Qianzi and other 270 people, together with Song and Tai's ministers, went to the table to persuade Emperor Wu to become emperor, but he still did not agree.

古文：太史令骆达陈天文符应曰： 案晋义熙元年至元熙元年，太白昼见经天凡七，占曰： 太白经天，人更主，异姓兴。 
现代文：太史令骆达陈述天文符应说： 按晋朝的义熙元年到元熙元年，金星白天出现，共有七次经过天空，占卜说： 金星经过天空，人间换主，异姓新兴。 
English: According to the history of the Jin Dynasty, from the first year of Yixi to the first year of Yuanxi, Venus appeared in the daytime and passed through the sky a total of seven times. Divination said: Venus passed through the sky, the world changed hands, and different names emerged.

古文：义熙七年，五虹见于东方，占曰： 五虹见，天子黜，圣人出。 
现代文：义熙七年，有五条虹出现在东方，占卜说： 五虹出现，天子废黜，圣人将出。 
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Yixi, five rainbows appeared in the east. The soothsayer said: "Five rainbows appear, the heavenly son is dethroned, and a saint will emerge."

古文：九年，镇星、岁星、太白、荧惑聚于东井。
现代文：九年，土星、木星、金星、火星相聚在井宿。
English: For nine years, Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, and Mars gathered in Ijuku.

古文：十三年，镇星入太微。
现代文：十三年，土星进入太微星。
English: Thirteen years ago, Saturn went into retrograde.

古文：占曰： 镇星守太微，有立王,有徙王。 
现代文：占卜说： 镇星守太微，有王新立，有王迁徙。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The town of Xingshu is too small. There is a new king rising, and a king migrating."

古文：元熙元年冬，黑龙四登于天，易传曰： 冬，龙见，天子亡社稷，大人受命。 
现代文：元熙元年冬天，黑龙四次升到天上，《易传》说： 冬天，龙出现，天子失去国家，大人接受天命。 
English: In the winter of the first year of the Yuanxi Dynasty, the black dragon rose to the sky four times. "Yi Zhuan" said: In winter, the dragon appears, the son of heaven loses the country, and the adults accept the fate of heaven.

古文：冀州道人释法称告其弟子曰： 嵩神言，江东有刘将军，汉家苗裔，当受天命，吾以璧三十二、镇金一饼与之，刘氏卜世之数也。 
现代文：冀州道人释法称告诉他的弟子道： 嵩山之神说，江东有一个刘将军，是汉朝皇家的后代，应当承受天命，我将把玉璧三十二只、镇金一饼送给他，这是刘家占卜传国应有的世数啊。 
English: Jizhou Taoist interpretation said to tell his disciples: The god of Songshan said that there is a General Liu in Jiangdong, who is a descendant of the Han Dynasty royal family, and should bear the fate of heaven. I will give him thirty-two pieces of jade and one piece of gold. This is the number of generations that the Liu family should have for divination and passing on the country.

古文：汉建武至建安末一百九十六年而禅魏，魏自黄初至咸熙末四十六年而禅晋，晋自泰始至今百五十六年，三代揖让，咸穷于六。
现代文：汉朝建武到建安末共一百九十六年而禅让给魏朝，魏朝从黄初到咸熙末共四十六年而禅让给晋朝，晋朝从泰始到现在共一百五十六年，三代相让，都是到六结束。
English: The Han Dynasty from Jianwu to the end of Jianan lasted a total of one hundred and ninety-six years, while Zen was ceded to the Wei Dynasty. The Wei Dynasty from the beginning of the Yellow Dynasty to the end of the Han Dynasty lasted a total of forty-six years, while Zen was ceded to the Jin Dynasty. The Jin Dynasty from the beginning of the Tai Dynasty to the present day has lasted a total of one hundred and fifty-six years. The three generations of ceding have all ended in six.

古文：又汉光武社于南阳，汉末而其树死，刘备有蜀，乃应之而兴；及晋季年，旧根始萌，至是而盛矣。 
现代文：又汉光武帝在南阳建立社宫，汉末而社宫前的树死亡，刘备建立蜀国，就是和这相应而兴起；到了晋朝末年，旧根才开始萌发，到现在已经繁盛起来了。 
English: In addition, Emperor Guangwu of Han Dynasty built the Shugu in Nanyang. At the end of Han Dynasty, the tree in front of the Shugu died, and Liu Bei established the Shu Kingdom. This was the corresponding rise. At the end of the Jin Dynasty, the old roots began to germinate, and now it has flourished.

古文：若此者有数十条。
现代文：诸如这些共有几十条。
English: There are dozens of songs like these.

古文：礼毕，备法驾，幸建康宫，临太极前殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：群臣又坚持请求，武帝才依从了。永初元年夏季六月十四日，武帝即位于南郊，设立祭坛，烧起木柴祭天。典礼结束，备好车驾，到了建康宫，坐在太极前殿，宣布大赦，改换年号。
English: On the 14th of June in the summer of the first year of the Yongzheng Emperor, Emperor Wu, who was then in the southern suburbs, set up an altar and burned wood to celebrate the day. After the ceremony, he prepared his car and drove to the Jiankang Palace, where he sat in the front hall of the Taiji Temple, declared an amnesty, and changed the year.

古文：赐人爵二级。
现代文：赐给每人爵位二级。
English: Give each of them a second-class knighthood.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人谷五斛，逋租宿责勿收。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不能自己生活的人，每人发给谷物五斛，拖欠的租税旧债不再收取。
English: Widows, widowers and lonely people who cannot live on their own will be given five baht of grain each, and old debts of tax arrears will no longer be collected.

古文：其犯乡论清议，赃汙淫盗，一皆荡涤。
现代文：那些因为品评乡里人物、发表公正言论以及隐赃、贪污、淫秽、盗窃而被判罪的，一律免除。
English: Those who were convicted for commenting on rural characters, making fair speech, and concealment, corruption, obscenity, and theft were all exempted.

古文：丁未，以庐陵王义真爲侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
现代文：长期刑徒，全部宽大遣返。丢官失爵、受到监禁、强制劳役的，全都恢复旧时的状况。
English: All long-term prisoners will be repatriated with clemency, and those who have been stripped of their titles, imprisoned, or forced to do forced labor will be restored to their previous status.

古文：己未，上疾瘳，大赦。夏四月乙亥，封仇池公杨盛爲武都郡王。
现代文：封晋恭帝为零陵王，可以将全郡作为食邑，悬挂天子的旌旗，乘坐五时副车，实行晋朝的历法，郊外祭祀天地，礼乐制度，都用晋朝的典制，上书不称作表，答表不称作诏，宫殿定在原来的秣陵。
English: Emperor Jinguang is the king of zero tombs, the whole county can be used as a food town, the flag of the son of heaven can be hoisted, the five o'clock train can be taken, the calendar of the Jin Dynasty can be implemented, the suburban sacrificial heaven and earth, and the ritual music system can all be used in the Jin Dynasty. The letter is not called a table, the answer sheet is not called a gong, and the palace is set in the original tomb.

古文：五月，上疾甚，召太子，戒之曰： 檀道济虽有干略，而无远志，非如兄韶有难御之气。
现代文：追尊皇父为孝穆皇帝，母亲为穆皇后，尊王太后为皇太后。永初三年五月，皇上病危，召来太子，告诫他说： 檀道济虽然有才干，却没有远大志向，不像他的哥哥檀韶有难以驾驭的气概。
English: His father was Emperor Kōmu, his mother Empress Kōmu, and his mother was Empress Dowager Kōmu. In May of the 3rd year of the 7th month, when the Emperor was gravely ill, he summoned the Crown Prince and admonished him, saying, "Though he is talented, he does not have lofty aspirations. Unlike his brother, Dangun, he has an unmanageable temperament.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮当无异图。
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮看来不会有异图。
English: Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang do not seem to have a different picture.

古文：谢晦屡从征伐，颇识机变，若有异，必此人也。
现代文：谢晦屡次跟随征伐，很善于随机应变，如果有异图，必定就是这个人。
English: Xie Yu repeatedly followed the conquest, very good at random contingency, if there is a different picture, it must be this person.

古文：小却，可以会稽、江州处之。 
现代文：要缩小他的势力，可以在会稽、江州安置他。 
English: In order to reduce his influence, he can be placed in the party committee and Jiangzhou.

古文：又爲手诏： 朝廷不须复有别府，宰相带扬州，可置甲士千人。
现代文：又写了手诏： 朝廷不需要再有别府，宰相掌管扬州，可以设置铠甲武士一千人。
English: He also wrote a handwritten edict: The imperial court does not need to have another palace, the prime minister is in charge of Yangzhou, and can set up a thousand armored warriors.

古文：若大臣中任要，宜有爪牙，以备不祥人者，可以台见留队给之。
现代文：如果大臣担任重要职务，应该派自己的爪牙，以防备居心不良的人，可以把京城留守部队交给他。
English: If a minister holds an important post, he should send his own minions. In case of ill-intentioned people, they can hand over the remaining troops in Beijing to him.

古文：有征讨，悉配以台见军队，行还复旧。
现代文：有外出征讨，全部拨给京城部队，战争结束归来恢复原状。
English: There were out-of-town levies, all of which were allocated to the capital troops. After the end of the war, they returned to restore the original situation.

古文：后世若有幼主，朝事一委任宰相，母后不烦临朝。
现代文：后世如果有幼主，朝中的政事全部委任宰相，母后不要临朝。
English: In the future, if there is a young master, the prime minister will be appointed to all political affairs in the court, and the queen mother should not be close to the court.

古文：仗既不许入台殿门，要重人可详给班剑。 
现代文：仪仗军队不许进入宫殿门，重要人物可以多给班剑。 
English: Ceremonial troops are not allowed to enter the palace gate, and important people can be given more swords.

古文：癸亥，上崩于西殿，时年六十。
现代文：二十一日，皇上在西殿逝世，当时年龄六十岁。
English: On the twenty-first, the Emperor died in the West Hall, at the age of sixty.

古文：七月己酉，葬丹阳建康县蒋山初宁陵。
现代文：七月二十五日，埋葬在丹阳建康县蒋山初宁陵。
English: On July 25, he was buried in Jiangshan Chuning Mausoleum in Jiankang County, Danyang.

古文：群臣上諡曰武皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：群臣上谥号为武皇帝，庙号称高祖。
English: The imperial family's posthumous name was Emperor Wu, and its temple name was Gao Zu.

古文：上清简寡欲，严整有法度，未尝视珠玉舆马之饰，后庭无纨绮丝竹之音。
现代文：武帝清心寡欲生活简单朴素，很少欲望，风格严整，具有法度，不曾细看珠玉车马这些物品，后庭没有纨绮丝竹各种音乐。
English: Emperor Wu had a pure heart and few desires, his life was simple and plain, he had few desires, his style was strict and legal, he did not scrutinize the jewels, chariots and horses, and there was no music in the backyard.

古文：初，朝廷未备音乐，长史殷仲文以爲言，帝曰： 日不暇给，且所不解。 
现代文：起初，朝廷没有设置乐队，长史殷仲文因此建言，武帝说： 每天都忙不过来，而且也听不懂啊。 
English: At first, the imperial court did not set up an orchestra, so Changshi Yin Zhongwen suggested it. Emperor Wu said, "I'm too busy every day, and I can't understand it."

古文：仲文曰： 屡听自然解之。 
现代文：殷仲文说： 经常听自然就懂了。 
English: Yin Zhongwen said: If you listen to it often, you will understand it naturally.

古文：帝曰： 政以解则好之，故不习耳。 
现代文：武帝说： 正因为懂了，就会爱好它，所以才不去熟悉它。 
English: Emperor Wu said: It is precisely because once you understand it, you will love it, that is why you do not want to become familiar with it.

古文：宁州尝献虎魄枕，光色甚丽，价盈百金。
现代文：宁州曾经贡献琥珀枕，光色十分美丽，价值百金。
English: Ningzhou once contributed amber pillows, the light color is very beautiful, worth a hundred gold.

古文：时将北伐，以虎魄疗金创，上大悦，命碎分赐诸将。
现代文：当时将要北伐，因为琥珀可以治疗枪伤，皇上非常高兴，命令砸碎分别送给各位将军。
English: At that time, the Northern Expedition was about to begin, since amber could be used to treat gunshot wounds. The Emperor was very pleased, and the order to smash the amber was sent to the generals separately.

古文：平关中，得姚兴从女，有盛宠，以之废事，谢晦谏，即时遣出。
现代文：平定关中后，得了姚兴的侄女，十分宠爱，因此荒废了军政大事，谢晦劝谏，马上就把她送出去了。
English: After leveling the pass, he got Yao Xing's niece, who was very beloved, so he abandoned the military and political events, thanked her for her advice, and immediately sent her out.

古文：财帛皆在外府，内无私藏。
现代文：财物都在外府，内部没有一点私人积藏。
English: Their belongings are all outside the prefecture, and there is not a single private collection inside.

古文：宋台建，有司奏东西堂施局脚床，金涂钉，上不许。
现代文：宋台建立以后，有关部门奏请东西堂中放上曲形高脚的坐榻一一一局脚床，用镀金的钉子，皇上不允许。
English: After the Song Dynasty was established, the relevant departments requested that the east and west halls be equipped with a curved high-pitched footbed, with gold-plated nails, which was not allowed by the emperor.

古文：使用直脚床，钉用铁。
现代文：结果使用了直脚床，钉用铁钉。
English: As a result, a straight foot bed was used, and nails were used.

古文：广州尝献入筒细布，一端八丈，帝恶其精丽劳人，即付有司弹太守，以布还之，并制岭南禁作此布。
现代文：广州曾经贡献入筒细布，一匹长八丈，武帝讨厌它的精美累人，于是就交给了有关部门弹劾广州太守，把布还给他们，并且下令岭南禁止纺织这种布。
English: Guangzhou once donated a long, eight-feet-tall tube of fine cloth. Emperor Wu hated its exquisite and cumbersome appearance, so he handed it over to the relevant departments to impeach the governor of Guangzhou, returned the cloth to them, and ordered Lingnan to ban the weaving of this cloth.

古文：帝素有热病，并患金创，末年尤剧，坐卧常须冷物，后有人献石床，寝之，极以爲佳，乃叹曰： 木床且费，而况石邪。 
现代文：武帝平时有一种热病，并且患有枪伤，晚年尤其厉害，坐卧常常需要冷东西，后来有人献了一张石床，睡上，觉得极好，于是叹息说： 木床尚且很费钱，何况是石床呢。 
English: Emperor Wu usually had a fever, and suffered from gunshot wounds, especially in his later years. He often needed something cold to sit and lie on. Later, someone donated a stone bed, and he fell asleep, feeling great, so he sighed and said: A wooden bed is still very expensive, let alone a stone bed.

古文：即令毁之。
现代文：就让人把它给毁了。
English: So they had it destroyed.

古文：制诸主出适，遣送不过二十万，无锦绣金玉。
现代文：他下令各个公主出嫁，陪送不超过二十万，没有锦绣金玉。
English: He ordered each princess to marry, accompanied by no more than two hundred thousand, no brocade.

古文：内外奉禁，莫不节俭。
现代文：朝内外的人供给宫中费用，无不节约俭省。
English: People from both inside and outside the court supplied the expenses of the court, all of which were frugal and economical.

古文：性尤简易，尝着连齿木屐，好出神武门内左右逍遥，从者不过十馀人。
现代文：性格尤其喜欢简易，曾经穿一双连齿的木屐，喜欢出来在神武门内左右散步，随从的不过十多人。
English: He is especially fond of simplicity. He used to wear a pair of wooden clogs with teeth. He likes to go out for a walk around the shrine gate. He is accompanied by no more than a dozen people.

古文：时徐羡之住西州，尝思羡之，便步出西掖门，羽仪络驿追随，已出西明门矣。
现代文：当时徐羡之住在西州，他曾经很想念徐羡之，便步行走出了西掖门，仪仗人员陆续追随上来，已经出了西明门了。
English: At that time, Xu Enzhi lived in Xizhou. He once missed Xu Enzhi very much, so he walked out of the Xidi Gate on foot. The honor guards followed one after another, and they had already left the Ximing Gate.

古文：诸子旦问起居，入合脱公服，止着裙帽，如家人之礼焉。
现代文：诸位儿子早晨来慰问起居情况，进门后脱去公服，只穿戴裙子帽子，就像家庭中的礼节一样。
English: Your sons come in the morning to check on the living conditions, and after entering the door, they take off their official clothes and only wear skirts and hats, just like the etiquette in the family.

古文：微时躬耕于丹徒，及受命，耨耜之具颇有存者，皆命藏之，以留于后。
现代文：当初身份低微的时候，他曾经在丹徒种田，接受天命以后，锄、锹等农具还有一些被保存下来，他命令把它们都收藏起来，以便留给后人。
English: At the beginning, when his status was low, he used to farm in Dantu. After accepting his destiny, some farm tools such as ploughs and harrows were preserved, and he ordered them to be collected so that they could be left to future generations.

古文：及文帝幸旧宫，见而问焉，左右以实对，文帝色惭。
现代文：后来宋文帝视察旧宫，见到后问起来，身旁的人按照实际情况作了回答，文帝脸上很羞愧。
English: Later, Song Emperor Wen inspected the old palace and asked questions after seeing it. The people around him answered according to the actual situation. Emperor Wen's face was very ashamed.

古文：有近侍进曰： 大舜躬耕历山，伯禹亲事土木，陛下不睹列圣之遗物，何以知稼穑之艰难，何以知先帝之至德乎。 
现代文：有一个贴身的侍从进言说： 大舜曾经住在历山种田，大禹曾经亲自从事土木，陛下不看到各位先圣的遗物，怎么知道稼穑的艰难，怎能知道先帝的大德呢？ 
English: A close attendant chimed in, saying, "Daxun once lived in the fields of Leshan, and Dayu was once engaged in civil engineering. If your majesty does not see the relics of your predecessors, how can you know the hardships of earning a living, and how can you know the great virtues of your predecessors?"

古文：及孝武大明中，坏上所居阴室，于其处起玉烛殿，与群臣观之，床头有土障，壁上挂葛灯笼、麻绳拂，侍中袁顗盛称上俭素之德，孝武不答，独曰： 田舍公得此，已爲过矣。 
现代文：到了孝武帝大明年间，拆毁了武帝所住的阴暗房子，在原地筑起了玉烛殿，和群臣一起观看，床头有土障，墙上挂着葛草制的灯笼，麻绳制的拂尘，侍中袁靑十分称赞皇上的俭素品德，孝武帝不作回答，独自说道： 田舍公得到了这些，已经是过分了。 
English: During Emperor Xiaowu's coming of age, he tore down the gloomy house where Emperor Wu lived and built the Jade Candle Hall in its place. He and his courtiers watched it together. There was a dirt barrier at the head of the bed, a lantern made of kudzu hanging on the wall, and a whisk made of hemp rope. The chamberlain, Yuan Qi, highly praised the emperor's frugal and modest character. Emperor Xiaowu did not answer, but said to himself: "It is too much for Tian She Gong to get these things.

古文：故能光有天下，克成大业，盛矣哉。
现代文：所以他能够占有和光照天下，完成大业，真是太隆盛了！
English: So he can occupy and illuminate the world, complete the great cause, it is really so prosperous!

