古文：真君曰：吾今阐教，以示大众，亲存不养，亲殁不葬，亲祚不延，无故溺女，无故杀儿，父母客亡，骸骨不收，为大不孝。
现代文：真君说：我今天阐明教法，以告知众人。父母在世时，不对其赡养；父母去世后，不将其安葬，父母的福泽就不会延长。
English: Zhenjun said, "I am expounding the teachings today to tell people that if you don't support your parents when they are alive, and if you don't bury your parents when they are dead, your parents' blessings will not be prolonged.

古文：养亲口体，未足为孝，养亲心志，方为至孝；生不能养，殁虽尽孝，未足为孝，生既能养，殁亦尽孝，方为至孝。
现代文：无故溺死女婴，无故杀死儿子。父母客死他乡，不去收埋骸骨，这些都是最大的不孝。只是奉养父母的衣食，还不算是孝敬；只有能够体恤父母的心思，促成父母的志愿，才算是最大的孝敬。父母在世时，不能尽到赡养的责任，待去世后虽然尽孝，但不足以算是孝敬；既能在父母在世时，尽到赡养的责任，又能在父母去世后尽孝，这才算是 至孝 。
English: Drowning a baby girl for no reason, killing a son for no reason, parents dying in a foreign country and not burying the bones, these are the greatest forms of unfilial piety. Merely providing food and clothing for one's parents is not considered filial piety; the greatest filial piety is to be able to empathize with the parents' thoughts and facilitate the parents' will. When the parents are alive, they cannot fulfill their duty of support, but after their death, although they fulfill their duty of filial piety, it is not enough to be considered filial piety; when the parents are alive, they can fulfill their duty of support, and when they are dead

古文：生我之母，我固当孝，后母庶母，我亦当孝。
现代文：我的生母，我固然应当尽孝；后母庶母，我也应该尽孝道。
English: Of course, I should be filial to my birth mother; I should also be filial to my stepmother.

古文：母或过黜，母或载嫁，生我劳苦，亦不可负。
现代文：我的母亲或许因过失而被父亲休掉，或者改嫁，但母亲生育我的劳苦，也是不可以背弃的。
English: My mother may have been fired by my father for negligence, or remarried, but my mother's labor to give birth to me cannot be abandoned.

古文：生而孤苦，恩育父母，且不可忘，何况生我。
现代文：幼年就失去父母而孤苦伶仃，恩爱养育我的养父母，都不可忘记，何况是亲生父母。
English: After losing my parents at a young age and being left alone, I cannot forget my adoptive parents who raised me with love, not to mention my biological parents.

古文：同母兄弟，我固当爱，前母兄弟，我亦当爱；同气姐妹，我固当和，连枝妯娌，我亦当和。
现代文：同母兄弟，我固然应当友爱；前母所生兄弟，我也应当友爱。亲生姐妹，我固然应当和敬，对于妯娌，我也应当和敬。
English: Brothers of the same mother I ought to love; brothers of a former mother I ought to love; natural sisters I ought to revere; and for sisters I ought to revere.

古文：我生之子，我固当恃，前室遗子，我亦当恃。
现代文：我的亲生子女，我固然保爱；前妻所生的子女，我也应当保爱。
English: My own children, I certainly cherish; children born of my ex-wife, I should also cherish.

古文：我孝父母，不敬叔伯，不敬祖曾，于孝有亏；我孝父母，不和姻娅，不睦乡党，于孝有亏；我孝父母，不忠君上，不信师友，于孝有亏；我孝父母，不爱人民，不恤物命，于孝有亏；我孝父母，不敬天地，不敬三光，不敬神只，于孝有亏；我孝父母，不敬圣贤，不远邪佞，于孝有亏；我孝父母，财色妄贪，不顾性命，知过不改，见善不为，于孝有亏；淫毒妇女，破人名节，于孝有亏；力全名节，于孝更大。
现代文：我孝敬父母，不爱子孙，不敦睦宗族，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，不和爱姻亲，不与乡邻和睦，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，不效忠君上，对师友不讲信用，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，不爱人民百姓，不怜恤万物的生命，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，不礼敬天地，不礼敬日月星辰三光，不礼敬天地神明，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，不敬奉圣贤，不远离恶人，有损孝德。我孝敬父母，非分地贪求财色，不顾性命，知道过错而不悔改，见有善行可为而不去做，有损孝德。奸淫毒害妇女，破坏人家的名声和节操，有损孝德。极力成全别人的名节，这算是大的孝行。
English: I respect my parents, but I don't love my children and grandchildren, and I don't have a good relationship with my clan, which is detrimental to my filial piety. I respect my parents, but I don't love my in-laws, and I don't have a good relationship with my neighbors, which is detrimental to my filial piety. I respect my parents, but I don't pay allegiance to the emperor, and I don't trust my teachers and friends, which is detrimental to my filial piety. I respect my parents, but I don't love the people, and I don't have mercy on the life of all things, which is detrimental

古文：奉行诸善，不孝吾亲，终为小善；奉行诸善，能孝我亲，是为至善。
现代文：虽能奉行各种善行，但不孝敬父母，终究只是小善；奉行各种善行，而又能够孝敬父母，这才称得上是 至善 。
English: To be able to perform all kinds of good deeds, but not to honor one's parents, is, after all, only a minor good; to be able to perform all kinds of good deeds, and still be able to honor one's parents, is the supreme good.

古文：孝之为道，本乎自然，无俟勉强，不学而能，随行而达，读书明理，因心率爱，因心率敬，于孝自全。
现代文：为孝之道，本于人心自然本性，没有一点勉强。不通过学习就能实行，随着自己的良心去做，所作所为自然就合乎孝道。读书明白了道理，用良心统率爱，用良心统率敬，自然就能够使孝圆满。
English: The way of filial piety is inherent in the natural nature of the human heart, and there is nothing forced about it. It can be practiced without study, and if you act according to your conscience, your actions will naturally conform to the way of filial piety. Reading has made you understand the truth, and if you use your conscience to lead you to love and use your conscience to lead you to respect, you will naturally be able to make your filial piety complete.

古文：愚氓愚俗，不雕不琢，无乖无戾，孝理自在，苟具灵根，知爱率爱，知敬率敬，于孝可推。
现代文：愚夫俗子，不经过雕琢，没有不和暴戾之气，自然合乎孝道。假使他们具有了灵明的根性，知道用爱心来统率爱，知道用敬心来统率敬，这样，孝行就可以推行于外了。
English: Foolish and vulgar people, without being refined, without the spirit of non-conformity and violence, naturally conform to the filial piety. If they have a wise root, know how to use love to lead love, know how to use respect to lead respect, in this way, filial piety can be promoted outside.

古文：孝庭子容，孝妇壶仪，孝男端方，孝女静贞；孝男温恭，孝女柔顺；孝子诚恳，孝妇明洁，孝子开先，孝孙录后；孝治一身，一身斯立；孝治一家，一家斯顺；孝治一国，一国斯仁；孝治天下，天下斯升；孝事天地，天地斯成。
现代文：孝子温良恭敬，孝女顺从柔和。孝子行事诚恳，孝妇持身清洁。孝子率先行孝，就必定会有孝孙继承孝行。通过尽孝来修身，一身的品行就可以立正；通过尽孝来治家，全家就会和顺；通过尽孝来治国，国家就会充满仁爱；通过尽孝来治理天下，天下就会升平；通过尽孝来事奉天地，天地就会太平。
English: Filial sons are gentle and respectful, filial daughters are submissive and soft. Filial sons act sincerely, filial women keep themselves clean. If filial sons lead the way in filial piety, there will surely be filial grandsons to inherit filial piety. Through filial piety to cultivate the body, one's moral conduct can be upright; through filial piety to govern the family, the whole family will be harmonious; through filial piety to govern the country, the country will be full of benevolence; through filial piety to govern the world, the world will be leveled; through filial piety to serve heaven and earth, heaven and earth will be

古文：通于上下，无分贵贱。
现代文：孝道可以通达于天地，不分贵贱，都要尽孝。
English: Filial piety can reach to heaven and earth. No matter how high or low, everyone should be filial.

古文：偈曰：世上伤恩总为财，诚比诸多尤为急。
现代文：偈说：世上恩情的伤害总是由于金钱的缘故，这比其他各种事务尤为关键。
English: "The harm of the world's kindness is always due to money, which is more critical than other matters," the poem said.

古文：相通相让兄和弟，父母心欢家道吉。
现代文：兄弟之间应该相互通融，相互谦让，父母心里欢喜而家境也会吉祥。
English: Brothers should be accommodating and humble to each other. Parents will be happy and the family situation will be auspicious.

古文：财生民命如哺儿，禄奉君享如养亲。
现代文：用钱财养育人民的生命就如哺乳幼儿，做高官事奉国君就如同赡养双亲一般。
English: Raising people's lives with money and wealth is like nursing a baby, and serving the country as a high-ranking official is like supporting one's parents.

古文：本之慈孝为源流，国阜人安景物熙。
现代文：总之以慈爱孝道为源流，就会国家强盛，人民安居乐业，万物万事光明兴盛。
English: In a word, if we take loving-kindness and filial piety as the source, the country will be strong and prosperous, the people will live and work in peace, and all things will be bright and prosperous.

古文：又说偈曰：子赖亲安享，不思尽孝易。
现代文：又说偈道：子女因为依赖父母而得以安享，而不想着尽孝是否容易。
English: He also said: Children can enjoy peace of mind because they rely on their parents, and do not want to think about whether it is easy to be a filial son.

古文：若或罹困苦，方知尽孝难。难易虽不同，承顺是一般。
现代文：只有遭受了困苦，才会知道尽孝的困难，难和易虽然不相同，但敬奉恭顺父母却并没有不同。
English: Only if you have suffered hardships will you know the difficulties of filial piety. Difficult and easy are not the same, but honoring and obeying parents is not different.

古文：又说偈曰：今为辨孝者，辨自夫妇始。
现代文：又说偈道：今天我分辨什么是孝，是从夫妇关系开始着手的。
English: He also said, "Today, when I discern what filial piety is, I start with the relationship between husband and wife.

古文：孝子赖贤助，相厥内以始；后惟尽其孝，君得成其绪；妇惟尽其孝，夫得成其家，同气因之协，安亲无他意。
现代文：孝子有赖贤惠妻子的帮助，互相帮助就能够使家庭得到治理。做皇后的唯有尽孝，做皇帝的才能继承好先皇传下的事业。
English: Filial sons and daughters rely on the help of a virtuous wife, and mutual help enables the family to be governed. To be an empress, one must be filial, and to be an emperor, one must be able to inherit the business passed down from the previous emperor.

古文：自古贤淑妻，动即为夫规，上克承姑顺，下克抚媳慈，从来嫉悍妇，动即为所惑，承姑必不顺，抚媳必不顺，惟尽为妻道，方可为人媳，惟尽为媳职，方可为人姑，身有为媳时，亦有为姑日，人用身为法，后人无不格。
现代文：做妻子的唯有尽孝，丈夫才能把家治理好。夫妻因为孝才能同气相协，安养双亲也并无别的心思。
English: To be a wife, only filial piety is required, so that the husband can manage the family well. Because of filial piety, husband and wife can live in harmony, and there is no other thought than to raise their parents well.

古文：嫔妃与媵妾，致孝以安命，妇德成夫行，化从阃中式，所系重且大，淑训安可越。
现代文：牵涉关系重大，怎么可以轻越做女人的训条。又说偈道：从心来辨别孝，千万不能使其心有所不安分。
English: It involves a major relationship, how can it be lighter than a woman's precept. It is also said that: to distinguish filial piety from the heart, one must not make his heart uneasy.

古文：又说偈曰：辨之以其心，毋使有不安；辨之以其行，毋使有或偏；辨之以其时，毋使有或迁；辨之以其伦，毋使有或闻。
现代文：从行为辨别孝，千万不能使行为有所偏颇。从时间来辨别孝，千万不要使其孝行有所改变。从伦常之理来辨别孝，千万不要使其孝行错乱。
English: If you want to distinguish filial piety from behavior, you must not make the behavior biased. If you want to distinguish filial piety from time, you must not change the filial piety. If you want to distinguish filial piety from morality, you must not make the filial piety disordered.

古文：大小各自尽，亲外罔所愆，诚伪在微茫，省惕当所先。
现代文：男女老少各自尽孝，家里家外都无过失。真诚和虚伪只在微茫之间，在行动之前应当反省警惕。
English: Men, women and children should be filial to each other, and there should be no fault in the family or outside the family. Sincerity and hypocrisy are only between the clouds, and we should reflect and be vigilant before taking action.

古文：又说偈曰：亲怀为己怀，至性实绵绵，即是佛菩萨，即是大罗仙。
现代文：又说偈道：以双亲的情怀为自己的情怀，最真诚的本性实在是绵绵不绝，这就是佛、菩萨，这就是成道的大罗仙。
English: He also said in the sermon, "Take the feelings of your parents as your own feelings. The most sincere nature is truly endless. This is the Buddha, the Bodhisattva, and this is the Great Enlightened One.

古文：纯孝阐微咒：万般切己应为事，俱从一孝参观到，胸中认得真分晓，孝上行来总是道。
现代文：纯孝阐微咒：万种关系自己的应当做的事，全都可以由孝来观察到。只要认清了它真正的道理，本于孝道而行动，就一定会合乎道。
English: Pure filial piety: All the things that one should do in all kinds of relationships can be observed by filial piety. As long as you recognize its true reason and act based on filial piety, you will definitely be on the right path.

