古文：杜范杨简张虙吕午
现代文：杜范，字成之，黄岩人。
English: Du Fan, Zha Cheng Zhi, Huangyan Ren.

古文：杜范，字成之，黄岩人。少从其从祖熚、知仁游，从祖受学朱熹，至范益著。
现代文：小时候跟随从祖杜烨、杜知仁游历，他的从祖是朱熹的学生，到杜范时学问更加显著。
English: When he was a child, he traveled with his ancestors Du Du and Du Zhiren. His ancestors were students of Zhu Xi, and Du Fan's learning was more significant.

古文：嘉字定元年举进士，调金坛尉，再调婺州司法。
现代文：嘉定元年杜范被推举参加进士考试，调为金坛县尉，又调为婺州司法。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Du Fan was selected to participate in the entrance examination, transferred to Jintan County Lieutenant, and transferred to Zhangzhou Judiciary.

古文：绍定三年，主管户部架阁文字。
现代文：绍定三年，杜范担任主管户部架阁文字。
English: In the third year of Shaoding, Du Fan served as the head of the household department.

古文：六年，迁大理司直。
现代文：绍定六年，杜范升任大理司直。
English: In the sixth year of Shaoding, Du Fan was promoted to the post of Dali Sizhi.

古文：端平元年，改授军器监丞。
现代文：端平元年，杜范改任军器监丞。
English: In the first year of Dengping, Du Fan was transferred to the post of military equipment supervisor.

古文：明年，入对，言： 陛下亲览大政，两年于兹。
现代文：第二年，他入朝奏对，他对皇上说： 陛下亲自处理政事，到现在已经两年了。
English: The following year, when he entered the imperial court to report to the emperor, he said to the emperor, "Your majesty has been personally handling political affairs for two years now.

古文：今不惟未睹更新之效，而或者乃有浸不如旧之忧。
现代文：如今不仅没看到革新政治的效果，有时候却有越来越不如以前的担忧。
English: Today, not only do we not see the effects of innovation politics, but sometimes there are more and more concerns than before.

古文：夫致弊必有原，救弊必有本，积三四十年之蠹习，浸渍薰染，日深日腐，有不可胜救者，其原不过私之一字耳。
现代文：导致弊病一定是有根源的，挽救弊病也一定有根源，积累了三四十年的陋习，逐渐地渗透熏染，日益深入并且腐蚀人心，有不能挽救的弊病，它们的根源不过是一个私字而已。
English: There must be a root that causes the malady, and a root that can save the malady. The bad habits accumulated for thirty or forty years have gradually infiltrated and infected, and have increasingly deepened and corroded the human heart. There are incurable maladies, and their root is nothing more than a secret word.

古文：陛下固宜惩其弊原，使私意净尽。
现代文：陛下本来就应该警惕弊病的根源，使私意去除干净。
English: His Majesty should have been alert to the root cause of the malady and cleaned up the selfishness.

古文：顾以天位之重而或藏其私憾，天命有德而或滥于私予，天讨有罪而或制于私情，左右近习之言或溺于私听，土木无益之工或侈于私费，隆礼貌以尊贤而用之未尽，温辞色以纳谏而行之惟艰，此陛下之私有未去也。
现代文：所以身在皇位而或许还心怀私人间的怨恨，天命有德而或许还会因私情滥赏，出兵征讨有罪的人而或许还会被私情牵制，左右亲近臣僚的言论有的是来源于道听途说，土木无益之功有的是为了个人的耗费，尊崇礼貌用来尊敬贤能的人并且任用他们，陛下还没完全做到，和颜悦色地接受劝谏并实行，这在陛下是困难的，这些是陛下没有去除的私心。
English: Therefore, even though he is on the throne, he may still harbor personal grudges; he may still abuse his private feelings to reward virtue; he may still be held back by his private feelings when he sends out troops to collect guilty people; some of the statements made by close ministers are based on hearsay; some of the useless achievements in civil engineering are for personal consumption; his majesty has not yet fully achieved the reverence of courtesy to respect and appoint virtuous people; it is difficult for his majesty to accept and implement persuasion in a pleasant manner; these are the selfishness that his majesty has not removed.

古文：和衷之美不著，同列之意不孚，纸尾押敕，事不预知，同堂决事，莫相可否，集义盈庭而施行决于私见，诸贤在列而密计定于私门，此大臣之私有末去也。
现代文：大臣们不能同心协力，互相之间不信任，在文告的下面标明是皇帝的敕令，事先不告诉具体情况，在一起决定事情，不能互相议论是否行得通，虽然大臣们在一起讨论了但施行的时候还取决于私人的见解，众贤人在朝廷上但却在私人的府第秘密地商议和决定各种事情，这是大臣没有去除的私心。
English: The ministers cannot work together, they do not trust each other, they indicate the emperor's edict at the bottom of the announcement, they do not tell the specifics in advance, they decide things together, they cannot discuss whether it is feasible. Although the ministers discussed together, the implementation still depends on private opinions. Wise men in the court secretly discuss and decide on various matters in private offices. This is the selfishness that the minister has not removed.

古文：君相之私容有未去，则教条之颁徒为虚文。
现代文：如果允许君主和宰相有私心，那么颁布教化百姓的条例只能是一纸虚文。
English: If the monarch and the prime minister are allowed to be selfish, then the promulgation of regulations to educate the people can only be a piece of paper.

古文：近者召用名儒，发明格物致知、诚意正心之学，有好议论者，乃从而诋訾讪笑之，陛下一惑其言，即有厌弃儒学之意。
现代文：近来朝廷召用有名的儒者，阐明关于穷究事物的本原而获得知识、诚心正意的学说，有喜欢议论的人，就因此诋毁和讥笑他们，陛下被这种人的言论所迷惑，就产生了讨厌儒学的想法。
English: Recently, the imperial court has summoned famous Confucianists to expound the doctrine of seeking the origin of things to gain knowledge and sincerity, and some people who like to talk have slandered and ridiculed them. His Majesty was confused by the words of such people and had the idea of hating Confucianism.

古文：此正贤不肖进退之机，天下安危所系，愿以其讲明见之施行。 
现代文：这正是贤能的人和奸邪的人被进用和斥退的关键，它关系到天下的安危，希望陛下认清真伪，并付诸实行。 
English: This is precisely the key to the use and rejection of the virtuous and the wicked. It is related to the safety of the world. I hope that His Majesty will recognize the truth and put it into practice.

古文：改秘书郎，寻拜监察御史。
现代文：杜范改为秘书郎，不久他被任命为监察御史。
English: Du Fan was changed to secretary, and soon he was appointed inspector-general of history.

古文：奏： 曩者权臣所用台谏，必其私人，约言已坚，而后出命。
现代文：他上奏说 ：先前权臣所用的台谏官，一定都是自己的亲信，他们互相约定好了以后，再发出命令。
English: He went on to say: The eunuchs previously used by powerful ministers must have been their close confidants, and they would issue orders only after they had agreed with each other.

古文：其所弹击，悉承风旨，是以纪纲荡然，风俗大坏。
现代文：台谏官所弹劾攻击的人和事，都秉承权臣的微言示意，所以国家的法度被废去，风俗遭到破坏。
English: The people and things that the Taiwanese eunuchs impeached and attacked all adhered to the weak words and gestures of the rulers, so the country's laws were abolished and customs were destroyed.

古文：陛下亲政，首用洪咨夔、王遂，痛矫宿弊，斥去奸邪。
现代文：陛下亲自处理政事后，首先用洪咨夔、王遂，彻底地矫正原有的弊病，斥退奸邪的人。
English: After personally dealing with the political affairs, His Majesty first used the Hongzhi and Wangsui to thoroughly rectify the original ills and repel the evil-doers.

古文：然庙堂之上，奉制尚多。
现代文：然而在朝廷上，受到的牵制还很多。
English: However, at the imperial court, he was still subject to many restrictions.

古文：言及贵近，或委曲回护，而先行丐祠之请；事有掣肘，或彼此调停，而卒收论罪之章。
现代文：台谏官弹劾到皇上宠信的人以后，就想方设法地加以保护，并且先同意被弹劾的人的管理宫观的请求；事情有所牵扯，就从中进行调解，到最后就是收回论罪的奏章。
English: After the Taiwanese eunuchs impeached the emperor's favorite, they tried their best to protect him, and first agreed to the impeached person's request for the management of the palace; if the matter was involved, they would mediate, and finally withdraw the criminal record.

古文：亦有弹墨尚新而已颁除目，沙汰未几而旋得美官。
现代文：也有弹劾有罪的人的墨迹还没干而朝廷已发布了对他的新任命，被裁退不久又很快得到好官职的。
English: There have also been impeachments of guilty men whose ink was not yet dry and the court had issued a new appointment for him, who were dismissed soon after and quickly got a good post.

古文：自是台谏风采，昔之振扬者日以铄；朝廷纪纲，昔之渐起者日以坏。 理宗深然之。
现代文：从此台谏的风采，从前振奋的却日益消溶；朝廷的法度，从前逐渐完善的却日益被破坏。 理宗十分肯定了这些话。
English: From then on, the elegance of the throne, which had previously been exciting, was increasingly dissolving; the laws of the imperial court, which had previously been gradually perfected, were increasingly being destroyed.

古文：又奏九江守何炳年老不足备风寒，事寝不行。
现代文：杜范又上奏说九江守臣何炳年纪大了不能抵御风寒的事，希望罢去他，但没有实行。
English: Du Fan also reported that the governor of Jiujiang, He Xuan, was too old to withstand the wind and cold, and hoped to dismiss him, but this did not happen.

古文：范再奏曰： 一守臣之未罢其事小，台谏之言不行其事大。
现代文：杜范又上奏说 ：一个守臣没罢去，这是小事，台谏官的话不实行，这是大事。
English: Du Fan also made a report, saying, "It is a small matter that a retainer did not resign, but it is a big matter that the words of a Taiwan eunuch were not put into practice."

古文：阻台谏之言犹可也，至于陛下之旨匿而不行，此岂励精亲政之时所宜有哉！ 丞相郑清之见之大怒，五上章丐去，有 危机将发，朋比祸作 之语；且谓范顺承风旨，粉饰挤陷。
现代文：阻遏台谏的话还可以，甚至把陛下的旨意藏起来不实行，这难道是励精新政时所应该有的吗？ 丞相郑清之见到这个奏章后大怒，五次上疏请求免去杜范的官职，他的奏疏中有 危机将要发生，朋党祸起 的话；并且认为杜范秉承某人的微言示意，来装饰自己对大臣的排挤和陷害。
English: It is all right to obstruct the Taichung Declaration, and even to hide and not carry out the will of His Majesty. Is this what we should have at the time of the New Deal? When Premier Zheng Qingzhi saw this document, he was furious. He requested five times that Du Fan be removed from office. In his report, Du Fan said that a crisis was about to occur and that a disaster would befall the Party; and he thought that Du Fan was following someone's subtle suggestion to embellish his ousting and framing of the minister.

古文：范遂自劾，言： 宰相之与台谏，官有尊卑而事关一体，但当同心为国，岂容以私而害公。
现代文：杜范就自己弹劾自己，他说 ：宰相和台谏，官位有尊卑的区别但做的事都是为一个目的，只应该同心为国，怎能容许以私害公。
English: Du Fan himself impeached himself. He said, "Prime minister and Taiwanese premier, there is a difference in rank, but what they do is for one purpose. They should only work together for the country. How can they be allowed to harm the public with their private lives?"

古文：行之者宰相，言之者台谏。
现代文：执行的是宰相，议论的是台谏。
English: It is the prime minister who executes, and the Taiwan Affairs Office that discusses.

古文：行之者岂尽合于事宜，言之者或未免于攻诋，清明之朝，此特常事。
现代文：执行的人怎么能完全符合事情的需要，议论的人或许免不了被攻击诋毁，在清明的国家，这也是常有的事。
English: How can those who execute fully meet the needs of the situation, and those who discuss may inevitably be attacked and slandered, which is also common in a clear-cut country.

古文：古者大臣欲扶持纪纲，故必崇奖台谏，闻有因言而待罪者矣，未闻有讳言而含怒者也。
现代文：古代大臣想维护国家的法度，所以一定要推崇褒奖台谏，听说有因台谏而被处治的大臣，没听说大臣有忌讳台谏的话而发怒的。
English: The Minister of Antiquities wants to uphold the laws of the country, so he must promote the award of the medal table, heard that there were ministers who were punished for the table, and did not hear that the minister was angry because of the taboo table.

古文：曩者柄臣所用台谏，必其私人；陛下更新庶政，而台谏皆出于亲擢。
现代文：从前掌权的人所用的台谏，一定是他们的亲信；陛下改革政治，台谏官都是陛下亲自选拔的。
English: The eunuchs used by those who once held power must have been their cronies; His Majesty reformed politics, and the eunuchs were personally selected by His Majesty.

古文：若庙堂不欲臣言其亲故，钳其口，夺其气，则与曩者之用私人何以异？
现代文：如果陛下不想让我议论掌权大臣的亲戚故旧，那就钳住我的嘴，夺去我的命，那么这与从前大臣任用亲信为台谏官还有什么区别？
English: If your majesty does not want me to talk about the relatives of the minister in power, then cover my mouth and take my life, then what is the difference between this and the former minister appointing cronies as eunuchs?

古文：不知所谓 承顺风旨 者何人？ 粉饰挤陷 者何事？
现代文：不知所说的 秉承某人微言示意 这个某人是谁？ 装饰对大臣的排挤和陷害 又有什么事来证明？
English: Without knowing what is being said, insisting on someone, making subtle gestures, who is this someone? Decorating the ousting and framing of the minister, what is there to prove?

古文：乞检臣前奏，赐之罢黜，以从臣退安田里之欲。 
现代文：请陛下检验我前面的奏疏，罢免我，以满足我退官安居在乡间的心愿。 
English: I ask Your Majesty to examine my previous record and dismiss me in order to fulfill my wish to retire and live in the countryside.

古文：时清之妄邀边功，用师河、洛，兵民死者十数万，资粮器甲悉委于敌，边境骚然，中外大困。
现代文：当时郑清之荒谬地索取战功，在河、洛用兵，兵民死了十多万，物资、粮食、武器、铠甲都被敌人缴获，边境骚动，朝内外都十分困乏。
English: At that time, Zheng Qingzhi absurdly claimed war exploits and used soldiers in Hebei and Luo. More than one hundred thousand soldiers and civilians died, materials, grain, weapons and armor were all captured by the enemy, the border was in turmoil, and both inside and outside the DPRK were very poor.

古文：范率合台论其事，并言制阃之诈谋罔上。
现代文：杜范率全体谏官论奏这些事，并说制置使诈谋欺骗皇上。
English: Du Fan and all the eunuchs discussed these things and said that the system was set up to deceive the emperor.

古文：于是凡侍从、近臣之不合时望者，监司、郡守之贪暴害民者，皆以次论斥。
现代文：凡是监司、郡守中贪暴害民的，都按等论罪。
English: All supervisors and county magistrates who are corrupt and harm the people will be equally punished.

古文：清之愈忌之，改太常少卿。
现代文：郑清之更加忌恨杜范，改他为太常少卿。
English: Zheng Qingzhi hated Du Fan even more and changed him to Taizhang Shaoqing.

古文：转对言： 今日之病，莫大于贿赂交结之风。
现代文：百官轮次奏对时，杜范说： 现在的弊病，没有比贿赂交结成风更大的。
English: Du Fan said: "There is no greater malady today than the prevalence of bribery.

古文：名誉已隆者贾左右之誉以固宠，宦游未达者惟梯级之求以进身。
现代文：名誉已经显赫的人收买身边的人的赞誉以便巩固自己受宠的地位，没有当官的人只是为了升官才逐渐贿赂交结。
English: Those who are already famous buy the praise of those around them in order to consolidate their favored status, and those who are not officials only gradually bribe each other in order to be promoted.

古文：边方帅臣，黄金不行于反间，而以探刺朝廷；厚赐不优于士卒，而以交通势要。
现代文：边疆的帅臣，不用黄金去收买敌人为我所用，而用来探听皇上的意思；不优待和重赏士卒，而用来交结权贵。
English: The handsome vassals of the frontier do not use gold to bribe the enemy for my use, but to listen to the emperor's will; they do not treat and reward the soldiers, but to make friends with the powerful.

古文：以致赏罚颠倒，威令慢亵，罪贬者拒命而不行，弃城者巧计以求免，提援兵者召乱而肆掠，当重任者怙势而夺攘。
现代文：以致赏罚颠倒，严令被轻慢，因罪被贬的人抗拒命令而不执行，弃城逃走的人用巧妙的办法来求得免罪，统帅官兵的人招致祸乱并且大肆抢掠，掌握大权的人恃势而骄。
English: So that rewards and punishments are reversed, strict orders are despised, those who have been demoted for crimes resist orders and do not carry them out, those who have abandoned the city and fled use ingenious methods to seek absolution, those who command officers and soldiers invite disaster and plunder on a large scale, and those who hold great power are depressed and proud.

古文：下至禁旅，骄悍难制，监军群聚相剽劫。
现代文：下面的禁军，骄悍难节制，监军结成团伙互相剽劫。
English: The Forbidden Army below, arrogant and difficult to control, formed gangs to rob each other.

古文：欲望陛下毋以小恩废大谊，毋以私情挠公法，严制宫掖，不使片言得以入于阃；禁约阉宦，不使谗谄得以售其奸。 范自入台，屡丐祠，至是复五上归田之请，皆不允。
现代文：希望陛下不要因为小恩而废大原则，不要因为私情而阻挠公法，严格管理后宫，不让半句话进入宫门；约束宦官，不让那些用谗言诬陷忠良的人得逞。 杜范自从担任台谏官以来，多次请求去管理宫观，这时又五次上疏请求回乡务农，皇上都不允许。
English: I hope that His Majesty will not abandon the great principle because of small favors, and not obstruct public law because of personal feelings, strictly manage the harem, and not allow half-words to enter the palace gate; restrain eunuchs, and not allow those who use slander to frame loyal people to succeed. Du Fan has repeatedly requested to manage the palace view since he served as a eunuch, and at this time he requested five times to go back to the countryside for farming, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：迁秘书监兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：杜范升为秘书监兼崇政殿说书。
English: Du Fan Sheng is the secretary and supervisor of the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：大元兵徇江陵，范乞屯兵蕲、黄以防窥江，且令沿江帅臣兼江、淮制置大使以重其权，令淮西帅臣急调兵拨粮以援江陵。
现代文：大元兵准备占领江陵，杜范请求在蕲、黄二州驻兵以防止元军窥伺长江，并且命令沿江的帅臣兼任江、淮制置大使使他们的权力加强，命令淮西帅马上调兵拨粮去援救江陵。
English: Du Fan requested that soldiers be stationed in the two states of Min and Huang to prevent the Yuan army from spying on the Yangtze River. He also ordered the courtiers along the river to also serve as ambassadors of Jiang and Huai to strengthen their power. He also ordered Huai Xi to immediately send troops to allocate grain to rescue Jiangling.

古文：拜殿中侍御史，辞不获，乃因讲筵，奏： 臣尝冒耳目之寄，辄忤宰相，至烦陛下委曲调护，今又使居向者负芒之地，岂以臣绝私比，而其言犹有可取耶？
现代文：杜范被任命为殿中侍御史，他推辞但没获准，就趁着给皇帝讲读经书时，上奏说： 臣曾经充当过陛下的耳目，往往触犯宰相，以致麻烦陛下从中委婉地调解保护，现在又让我担任从前受攻击的官职，难道因为臣说的阻止私心的话还有可取的吗？
English: Du Fan was appointed as the palace's attendant to the imperial historian. He declined but was not allowed to do so, and took the opportunity to read a scripture to the emperor, saying, "The minister once served as your majesty's eyes and ears, often offending the prime minister, so that it was troublesome for your majesty to gently mediate and protect him, and now he has appointed me to a position that was previously under attack. Is it desirable because of what the minister said to prevent selfishness?

古文：抑以臣巽懦之质，易于调护，而姑使之备数耶？
现代文：因为我性格谦恭懦弱，容易调理保护，就暂时用来充数吗？
English: Because I am a meek and weak character, easy to adjust and protect, will I be temporarily used to replenish?

古文：昔人主之于诤臣，非乐而听之，即勉而从之，否则疏而远之，未闻有不用其言而复用其人者。
现代文：从前人主对于敢于直言的大臣，不是高兴地听他们的话，就是勉励他们，否则就疏远他们，没听说有不采纳他的意见而又用他的。
English: In the past, for ministers who dared to be outspoken, their masters either listened to them with pleasure or encouraged them, otherwise they would distance themselves from them. It was not unheard of for them not to accept his opinion but to use his.

古文：陛下自端平亲政以来，召用正人以振台纲，未几而有委曲调护之弊，其所弹击，或牵制而不行，其所斥逐，复因缘以求进。
现代文：陛下自从端平元年亲自处理朝政以来，召用正直的人来振兴御史台，不久就出现了曲折辗转地进行调理的弊病，御史所弹劾攻击的，或者是受到牵制而没执行，受到贬斥的，又找机会升官进职。
English: Your Majesty, since personally handling the affairs of the Imperial Court in the first year of Dengping, has called for the appointment of honest people to revitalize the Imperial History Office. Soon, the malady of tortuous adjustment appeared. Those who were impeached and attacked by the Imperial History Office, or those who were restrained and did not perform, and those who were disparaged, also looked for opportunities to be promoted to higher posts.

古文：臣于入台之初，固已力言之，不惟不之革，而其弊滋甚，甚至节贴而文理不全，易写而台印无有，中书不敢执奏，见者为之致疑。
现代文：臣在担任台谏官的初期，本来就已经极力说了这些，不仅没有改变它们，反而这种弊病越来越严重。甚至节帖的文理不全，改写但没有御史台的大印，中书不敢把这些奏明，看见的人对它们产生怀疑。
English: In the early days when he served as the eunuch of Taiwan, he had already tried his best to say these things, and not only did he not change them, but on the contrary, this malady became more and more serious. Even the literary and logical incompleteness of the essays, rewritten but without the great seal of the Imperial Historian, the Chinese book did not dare to make these clear, and those who saw them doubted them.

古文：不意圣明之时，其弊一至于此。
现代文：没想到在圣明时候，这种弊病达到了如此程度。
English: I didn't expect this kind of malady to reach such a level during the holy time.

古文：陛下以其言之不可用，又从而超迁之，则是台谏之官，专为仕途之捷径。
现代文：陛下认为他的话不能采用，又从而越级提升他，那么台谏这个官职，就专门成了升官的捷径。
English: His Majesty thought that his words could not be used, and thus promoted him to a higher rank, so the official post of Taibei specifically became a shortcut for promotion.

古文：陛下但知崇奖台谏为盛德，而不知阻抑直言之为弊政，则陛下外有好谏之名，内有拒谏之实，天下岂有虚可以盖实哉。 范始以不得其言不去为恨，至是遂极言台谏失职之弊。
现代文：陛下只知道尊崇和褒奖台谏是盛德，而不知道阻止和压抑正直的言论是弊政，那么陛下就是外有喜欢劝谏的名声，内有拒绝劝谏的事实，天下怎么能有虚可以遮盖实的呢？ 杜范开始把不能说出自己想说的话就离开朝廷看作遗憾的事，这时他就极力讲台谏失职的弊病。
English: His Majesty only knows that it is virtuous to honor and praise the emperor, but he does not know that it is bad politics to prevent and suppress honest speech. Then His Majesty has the reputation of liking to persuade on the outside, and the fact of refusing to persuade on the inside. How can there be falsehood in the world that can cover up the truth? Du Fan began to regard it as a pity that he could not say what he wanted to say and leave the imperial court. At this time, he tried his best to speak about the malady of dereliction of duty.

古文：时襄、蜀俱坏，江陵孤危，两浙震恐，复言： 清之横启边衅，几危宗祀，及其子招权纳贿，贪冒无厌，盗用朝廷钱帛以易货外国，且有实状。 并言： 签书枢密院事李鸣复与史寅午、彭大雅以贿交结，曲为之地。
现代文：当时襄、蜀都遭到破坏，江陵孤单危险，两浙受到震动，人们恐惧，杜范又说： 郑清之蛮横地挑起边境战争，几乎危及国家，他的儿子招引权贵，收取贿赂，贪得无厌，盗窃国家的钱帛用来换外国货，并且有事实。 杜范还说 ：签书枢密院事李鸣复和史寅午、彭大雅用贿赂与郑清之的儿子交结，想尽办法为他开脱。
English: At that time, Xiang and Shu were destroyed, Jiangling was alone in danger, the two Zhejiang provinces were shaken and people were afraid, Du Fan also said: Zheng Qing's insolence provoked a border war, almost endangering the country, his son attracted dignitaries, received bribes, was insatiably greedy, and stole the country's money to exchange for foreign goods, and there were facts. Du Fan also said: Li Mingfu and Shi Yinmo signed a letter of the Privy Council, and Peng Daya used bribes to meet with Zheng Qing's son, and tried his best to absolve him.

古文：鸣复既不恤父母之邦，亦何有陛下之社稷。 帝以清之潜邸旧臣，鸣复未见大罪，未即行，范亦不入台。
现代文：李鸣复既不体恤父母生活的国家，又怎么能想着陛下的社稷。 皇上因为郑清之是自己王府中的老臣，李鸣复没什么大罪，没有马上处治他们，杜范也不接受殿中侍御史这个官职。
English: Li Mingfu did not sympathize with the country where his parents lived, and how could he think about the social status of his majesty. Because Emperor Zheng Qingzhi was an old retainer in his royal palace, Li Mingfu did not have any serious crime and did not immediately deal with them, and Du Fan did not accept the official post of palace attendant.

古文：帝促之，范奏： 鸣复不去则臣去，安敢入经筵？ 方再奏之，鸣复抗疏自辨，言： 台臣论臣，不知所指何事，岂以臣尝主和议耶？
现代文：皇上催促他上任，杜范上奏说： 李鸣复不离开那我就离开，怎么敢进入经筵？ 杜范将要再次论奏李鸣复时，李鸣复针对杜范的奏疏为自己辩解，他说： 台谏官论奏我，不知道所指的是哪些事，难道是因为我曾经主张和议了吗？
English: The emperor urged him to take office, and Du Fan said, "If Li Mingfu does not leave, then I will leave, how dare I enter the government?" When Du Fan was about to debate Li Mingfu again, Li Mingfu defended himself against Du Fan's poor performance, saying, "The Taiwanese eunuch debated me, I don't know what kind of things he was referring to, is it because I once advocated and negotiated?

古文：幸未斥退，则安国家、利社稷，死生以之；否则无家可归，惟有扁舟五湖耳。 范又极言其寡廉鲜耻，既而合台劾之，太学诸生亦上书交攻之。
现代文：幸好我没被斥退，那么使国家安定，对社稷有利，死生都是靠和议决定；否则人们就会无家可归，只有在五湖中坐着小船游荡了。 杜范又极力论奏李鸣复寡廉鲜耻，不久御史台的全体官员都弹劾李鸣复，太学生们也上书攻击他。
English: Fortunately, I was not ousted, then the country would be stable, the society would benefit, and life and death would be decided by peaceful discussion; otherwise, people would be homeless, only wandering around in small boats in the five lakes. Du Fan also strongly criticized Li Mingfu for being corrupt and shameless, and soon all the officials of the State History Channel impeached Li Mingfu, and the students also wrote a letter to attack him.

古文：鸣复将出关，帝又遣使召回，范复与合台奏： 鸣复为宰执，所交惟史寅午、彭大雅，此等相与阴谋，不过赂近习、蒙上听，以阴图相位。
现代文：李鸣复刚出关，皇上又派使臣召回他，杜范又与全体台谏官上奏 ：李鸣复担任宰执，他所交结的只有史寅午、彭大雅，他们这些人在一起搞阴谋，不过是贿赂受到宠幸的人，欺骗皇上，以便暗中谋求宰相的职位。
English: As soon as Li Mingfu left the customs, the emperor sent an envoy to call him back, and Du Fan and all the eunuchs of Taiwan made a report: Li Mingfu served as the leader, and the only people he had contact with were Shi Yinwu and Peng Daya. These people were plotting together, but they were just bribing favored people and deceiving the emperor in order to secretly seek the position of prime minister.

古文：臣近见自辨之章，见其交斗边臣以启嫌隙，妄言和战以肆胁持，且以蜀既破荡而欲泛舟五湖，又以安国家、利社稷自任，不知鸣复久居政府，今又有何安利之策？
现代文：臣最近看到李鸣复为自己辩解的奏章，见到他使边疆的大臣互相争斗而引起矛盾，荒谬地讲和战来肆无忌惮地胁迫别人服从自己，并且因为蜀地已遭破坏而想在五湖泛舟。又把安定国家、有利社稷作为自己的责任，不知道李鸣复在政府中长期任职，现在又有什么安定、有利的策略？
English: The minister recently saw Li Mingfu's speech to defend himself, saw him make the frontier ministers fight each other and cause conflicts, absurdly speak of peace and war to unscrupulously coerce others to obey him, and because Shu has been destroyed, he wants to go boating on the Five Lakes. He also regards a stable country and a favorable society as his responsibility. I don't know if Li Mingfu has been in the government for a long time, what kind of stable and favorable strategy is there now?

古文：欺君罔上，无所不至。
现代文：欺骗皇上的事，他没有不做的。
English: He did not fail to deceive the emperor.

古文：如臣等言是，即乞行之；所言若非，早赐罢斥。 改起居郎，范奏： 臣论鸣复，未见施行，忽拜左史之命，则是所言不当，姑示优迁。
现代文：如果臣的话对，就请马上罢免他；如果说的不对，请皇上早点罢斥我。 杜范改任起居郎，他上奏说： 臣论奏李鸣复，没见朝廷处治他，忽然又任命我当左史，那就是我说的不对，对我表示优待。
English: If the minister's words are right, please dismiss him immediately; if they are not right, please ask the emperor to expel me early. Du Fan was reappointed as the curator, he reported: The minister talked about Li Mingfu, did not see the court punish him, and suddenly appointed me as the left historian, that is what I said was wrong, and showed me preferential treatment.

古文：臣前者尝奏台谏但为仕途之捷径，初无益朝廷之纪纲，躬言之，躬蹈之，臣之罪大矣。 即渡江而归。
现代文：臣以前曾上奏说台谏只是升官的捷径，起初对朝廷的法度没有益处，我亲自说的话，又亲自实现了，我的罪过大了。 他就渡江而回。
English: The vassal had previously made a report saying that the throne was only a shortcut to promotion, and at first it was of no benefit to the imperial court's legal system. What I personally said, and personally realized, my sin was too great. He crossed the river and returned.

古文：授江东提点刑狱，寻改浙西提点刑狱，范力辞之，而鸣复亦出守越。
现代文：杜范被授予江东提点刑狱，不久改为浙西提点刑狱，杜范极力推辞，而李鸣复也出朝到越州担任守臣。
English: Du Fan was awarded the East Jiangsu Provincial Detention Center, which was soon changed to the West Zhejiang Provincial Detention Center. Du Fan strenuously refused, while Li Mingfu also went to Yuezhou to serve as a courtier.

古文：嘉熙二年，差知宁国府。明年至郡，适大旱，范即以便宜发常平粟，又劝寓公富人有积粟者发之，民赖以安。
现代文：嘉熙二年，杜范被差遣为宁国府知府，第二年他到了宁国府，正赶上了大旱，杜范就见机行事，发放常平仓的粮食，又劝寄居在这里的官吏和富人中有存粮的人把粮食拿出来，老百姓因此得以安宁。
English: In the second year of Jiaxi, Du Fan was sent to be the prefect of Ning Guofu. The next year, he arrived in Ning Guofu, just in time for the big drought. Du Fan took advantage of the opportunity to distribute the grain that had been stored for a long time. He also persuaded the officials and rich people who lived here to take out the grain, so that the people could have peace.

古文：始至，仓库多空，未几，米余十万斛，钱亦数万，悉以代输下户粮。
现代文：杜范刚到宁国府时，府中的仓库很多都空了，不久，库存的米就多了十万斛，钱也有数万缗，杜范就把这些用来代替下户纳粮。
English: When Du Fan first arrived in Ningguo prefecture, many of the warehouses in the prefecture were empty. Soon, the inventory of rice increased by 100,000 baht, and there were tens of thousands of baht in money. Du Fan used these to replace the payment of grain to households.

古文：两淮饥民渡江者多剽掠，其首张世显尤勇悍，拥众三千余人至城外。
现代文：两淮饥民渡江的大多剽掠，他们的首领张世显特别勇猛剽悍，率领三千多人来到宁国府城外。
English: Zhang Shixian, the leader of the two groups of starving people crossing the Yangtze River, was particularly brave and courageous. He led more than three thousand people to the outskirts of Ningguo.

古文：范遣人犒之，俾勿扰以俟处分，世显乃阴有窥城之意。范以计擒斩之，给其众使归。
现代文：杜范派人犒劳他们，让他们不要骚扰、等待安排，张世显就暗中怀有夺城的想法，杜范用计谋抓住并杀了他，接济他的部下，让他们回去。
English: Du Fan sent people to encourage them, asking them not to harass and wait for arrangements. Zhang Shixian secretly harbored the idea of seizing the city. Du Fan used stratagems to catch and kill him, to help his subordinates and let them go back.

古文：四年，还朝，首言：
现代文：嘉熙四年，杜范回到朝廷，他首先说：
English: When Du Fan returned to the imperial court in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jiaxi, he first said:

古文：旱暵荐臻，人无粒食。
现代文： 干旱接踵而来，人们吃不到一粒粮食。
English: Droughts followed one after another, and people could not eat a single grain of grain.

古文：楮券猥轻，物价腾踊。
现代文：纸币贬值，物价猛涨。
English: Paper money depreciated and prices soared.

古文：行都之内，气象萧条，左浙近辅，殍死盈道。
现代文：行都里面，景象萧条，左浙在京城的附近，饿死的人充满了道路。
English: Inside the capital, the scene is bleak. In Zuozhe, near the capital, roads are filled with people starving to death.

古文：流民充斥，未闻安辑之政，剽掠成风，已开弄兵之萌，是内忧既迫矣。
现代文：流民比比皆是，没听说有安抚他们的政事，剽掠成风，已经开始有起兵的迹象，这是内忧已经急迫了。
English: Displaced people are everywhere. I have not heard of any government measures to appease them. Looting and pillaging have become the norm, and there are already signs of a military uprising. This is a pressing domestic concern.

古文：新兴北兵，乘胜而善斗，中原群盗，假名而崛起。
现代文：新建的北军，借着胜利的机会又善于战斗，中原地区很多盗贼，都借着这个名声而起兵。
English: The newly built Northern Army was good at fighting, taking advantage of the opportunity to win. Many thieves in the Central Plains region took advantage of this reputation and raised an army.

古文：捣我巴蜀，据我荆襄，扰我淮堧，近又由夔、峡以瞰鼎、澧。
现代文：大元兵捣毁我们的巴蜀，占据我们的荆襄，骚扰我们的淮，最近又从夔、峡二州窥伺鼎、澧二州。
English: The great Yuan soldiers have destroyed our Ba Shu, occupied our Jing Xiang, harassed our Huai, and recently spied on the Ding and Jie Er Zhou from the Jie and Jia Er Zhou.

古文：疆场之臣，肆为欺蔽，胜则张皇而言功，败则掩覆而不言。
现代文：边疆的大臣，肆意欺骗皇上，取胜时就宣扬出来讲自己的功劳，失败时就掩盖起来不向朝廷汇报。
English: The minister of the frontier, wantonly deceives the emperor, and when he wins, he proclaims his merits, and when he loses, he hides and does not report to the imperial court.

古文：脱使乘上流之无备，为饮马长江之谋，其谁与捍之？
现代文：假如敌人趁长江上游我们没有防备的时机，做到长江下游饮马的打算，谁能抵御他们？
English: If the enemy takes advantage of our unprepared opportunity in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to achieve the intention of drinking horses in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River, who can resist them?

古文：是外患既深矣。
现代文：这是外患已经严重了。
English: This is a serious external infection.

古文：人主上所事者天，下所恃者民。
现代文： 人主在上侍奉的是天，在下依靠的是老百姓。
English: The Lord of mankind is served by heaven above, and relies on the common people below.

古文：近者天文示变，妖彗吐芒，方冬而雷，既春而雪，海潮冲突于都城，赤地几遍于畿甸，是不得乎天而天已怒矣。
现代文：近来天象显示了变异，彗星吐出尾巴，正值冬天却打雷，春天已经过去却还下雪，海潮冲进了都城，旱灾造成的不产粮食的土地几乎遍及京城附近的地区，这是不能符合天意而天已经发怒了。
English: Recently, the celestial phenomenon has shown variations, the comet has spit out its tail, it is winter but thunder, spring has passed but it is still snowing, the tide has rushed into the capital, and the land that does not produce food caused by drought has almost covered the areas near the capital. This is not in accordance with the will of heaven, and heaven has been angry.

古文：人死于干戈，死于饥馑，父子相弃，夫妇不相保，怨气盈腹，谤言载路， 等死 一萌，何所不至，是不得乎民而民已怨矣。
现代文：人死于战火，死于饥饿，父亲和儿子互相抛弃，夫妻不能互相保护，满肚子怨气，诽谤朝廷的话充满了道路， 等死 的念头一萌发，什么不能做？这是不得人心而老百姓已经怨恨了。
English: People die in war, die of hunger, fathers and sons abandon each other, husbands and wives cannot protect each other, their stomachs are full of grudges, slander against the imperial court fills the roads, and once the thought of death emerges, what can't be done? This is unpopular and the people have become resentful.

古文：内忧外患之交至，天心人心之俱失，陛下能与二三大臣安居于天下之上乎？
现代文：内忧外患交相而来，天心人心全都失去，陛下能与二三位大臣安居在天下人的上面吗？
English: Internal worries and external troubles have come into contact with each other, and the hearts and minds of the people have all been lost. Can His Majesty and his two or three ministers live safely above the people of the world?

古文：陛下亦尝思所以致此否乎？
现代文：陛下也曾经想过所以这样的原因吗？
English: Has Your Majesty ever thought about the reasons for this?

古文：盖自曩者权相阳进妾妇之小忠，阴窃君人之大柄，以声色玩好内蛊陛下之心术，而废置生杀，一切惟其意之所欲为，以致纪纲陵夷，风俗颓靡，军政不修而边备废缺。
现代文： 从前掌握大权的宰相表面对陛下表达小妻一样的忠心，暗中窃取驾驭人的大权，以音乐女色和赏玩嗜好的物品在内部蛊惑陛下的思想和心计，而废除和设置、生和死，这一切都只按他的心意，想怎么做就怎么做，因此导致国家的法度被破坏，风俗颓废，军政不整治而且边疆的保卫和防备措施被毁坏和缺乏。
English: On the surface, the chancellor who once held power expressed the same loyalty to His Majesty as a concubine, secretly stealing the power to control people, and using music, women and playthings to internally seduce His Majesty's thoughts and plans, while abolishing and setting up, living and dying, all according to his heart, doing whatever he wanted to do, thus leading to the destruction of the country's laws, the decadence of customs, the lack of military and political governance, and the destruction and lack of border protection and prevention measures.

古文：凡今日之内忧外患，皆权相三十年酿成之，如养护痈疽，待时而决耳。
现代文：凡是现在有的内忧和外患，都是掌握大权的宰相三十年酝酿成的，好比养护痈疽，到了一定的时候就该发作了。
English: All the internal and external troubles that exist now have been brewing for thirty years by the chancellors who hold power. It's like nurturing gangrene. At a certain point, it has to break out.

古文：端平号为更化，而居相位者非其人，无能改于其旧，败坏污秽，殆有甚焉。
现代文：端平年间号称革新，但担任宰相的不是革新人物，不能改变旧的弊政，对朝政的败坏和玷污，比原来还严重。
English: During the Deng Ping era, Deng Ping claimed to be an innovator, but he was not an innovator as prime minister. He could not change the old maladministration, and the corruption and defilement of the imperial government was even more serious than before.

古文：自是圣意惶惑，莫知所倚仗，方且不以彼为仇而以为德，不以彼为罪而以为功。
现代文：从此陛下的思想疑惧，不知应该依赖谁，并且不以他为仇人而认为他有德，不以他为罪人而认为他有功。
English: Henceforth, His Majesty's thoughts are in doubt, he does not know whom to rely on, and he does not regard him as an enemy but as virtuous, nor as a sinner but as meritorious.

古文：于是天之望于陛下者孤，而变怪见矣，人之望于陛下者觖，而怨叛形矣。
现代文：于是上天的希望在陛下这里实现的少，天象变异的事就出现了，人们的希望在陛下这里实现的也少，怨恨和反叛就形成了。
English: As a result, less of Heaven's hope was realized in His Majesty, and the phenomenon of celestial mutation occurred. Less of people's hope was realized in His Majesty, and resentment and rebellion developed.

古文：陛下敬天有图，旨酒有箴，缉熙有记，使持此一念，振起倾颓，宜无难者。
现代文： 陛下敬奉上天要有法度，对美酒的需求要有限度，缉熙要有记录，如果能持这样一个念头，那么使国家从倾危颓靡中振兴，应该没有什么困难的。
English: Your Majesty, reverence to the heavens, there must be laws, there must be a limit to the demand for fine wine, and there must be a record of the crackdown. If you can hold such an idea, then there should be no difficulty in reviving the country from the perilous situation.

古文：然闻之道路，谓警惧之意，祗见于外朝视政之顷；而好乐之私，多纵于内廷燕亵之际。
现代文：然而我在道路上听说，陛下所谓的警醒畏惧的想法，只能在外朝处理政事那一会儿能见到；而喜欢玩乐的私心，常在宫中设宴请亲近的人时放纵。
English: However, I heard on the road that His Majesty's so-called cautious and fearful thoughts can only be seen in the moment when he is dealing with foreign affairs; and the selfishness that likes to have fun is often indulged when he hosts a banquet in the palace for people close to him.

古文：名为任贤，而左右近习或得而潜间；政出于中书，而御笔特奏或从而中出。
现代文：名义上是任用贤能的人，而陛下身边的宠臣能从中钻空子；政令由中书发出，而陛下的御笔特奏又从宫内传出。
English: Virtuous men are nominally appointed, and favored courtiers around His Majesty are able to take advantage of them; decrees are issued by imperial edict, and His Majesty's special strokes are transmitted from within the palace.

古文：左道之蛊惑，私亲之请托，蒙蔽陛下之聪明，转移陛下之心术。
现代文：邪说的蛊惑，亲属的请托，蒙蔽陛下的聪明，转移陛下的思想和心计。 
English: The seduction of heresies, the entreaties of relatives, the cleverness of blinding His Majesty, the diversion of His Majesty's thoughts and plans.

古文：于是范去国四载矣，帝抚劳备至。
现代文：这时杜范离开朝廷已经四年了，皇上对他的安抚和慰劳十分周到。
English: At this time, it had been four years since Du Fan left the imperial court, and the emperor was very thoughtful in his appeasement and consolation.

古文：迁权吏部侍郎兼侍讲。
现代文：杜范升为权吏部侍郎兼侍讲。
English: Du Fansheng became the attendant and speaker of the authoritative department.

古文：以久旱，复言： 陛下嗣膺宝位余二十年，灾异谴告，无岁无之，至于今而益甚。
现代文：因为长期干旱，他又说： 陛下继承皇位已经二十多年，灾异的谴责和告诫，没有一年没有，到现在更严重了。
English: Because of the long-term drought, he added: "It has been more than 20 years since His Majesty succeeded to the throne, and the disastrous condemnation and admonition have not been absent for a year, and they are even more serious now.

古文：陛下求所以应天者，将止于减膳彻乐、分祷群祀而已乎？
现代文：陛下追求如何才能符合天意，难道只是减少膳食，撤掉音乐，分别到各祠庙中祈祷就行了吗？
English: Your Majesty is pursuing how to be in accordance with the will of heaven. Is it enough to reduce meals, remove music, and pray separately in each ancestral temple?

古文：抑当外此而反求诸躬乎？
现代文：不应该除此以外又在自身寻找吗？
English: Shouldn't we also look for it in ourselves?

古文：夫不务反躬悔过，而徒觊天怒之释，天下宁有是理？
现代文：不去自己反省悔过，而只希望天怒消散，天下哪有这样的道理？
English: Not to self-reflect and repent, but only hope that the wrath of God will dissipate, where in the world is there such a reason?

古文：欲望陛下一洒旧习以新天下，出宫女以远声色，斥近习以防蔽欺，省浮费以给国用，薄征敛以宽民力。
现代文：希望陛下彻底扫除旧习以使天下一新，放出宫女以疏远音乐和女色，斥退受到亲幸的人以防止受到欺骗和蒙蔽，节省不必要的开支以使国家的财政丰足，减轻征敛以使老百姓得到休息。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will completely sweep away the old customs to make the world a new one, release the maids of honor to alienate music and femininity, repel the lucky ones to prevent being deceived and blinded, save unnecessary expenses to make the country's finances rich, reduce the collection to give the people a rest.

古文：且储贰未立，国本尚虚，乞选宗姓之贤者育之宫中而教导之。 又言铨法之坏： 庙堂既有堂除，复时取部缺以徇人情；士大夫既陷赃滥，乃间以不经推勘而改正。凡此皆徇私忘公之害。 未几，复上疏曰：
现代文：况且没立皇太子，皇太子的位置还空着，请选宗室中有贤德的人在宫中养育并教导他。 又讲铨法的弊病说： 朝廷已经有堂除，又常取吏部的缺额来做人情；士大夫贪污受贿，就暗中不经过推勘结绝而得到改正，这些都是营私舞弊、忘了国家的祸害。 不久，杜范又上疏说：
English: Moreover, since the crown prince has not been appointed, the position of crown prince is still vacant, please select a person with virtue in the ancestral chamber to raise and teach him in the palace. He also talked about the ills of the imperial edict, saying: The imperial court has already been dismissed, and often takes the shortfall of the cadre department to do humanities; the corruption and bribery of the scholar-bureaucrat has been secretly corrected without any recommendation. These are all the evils of selfishness and forgetting the country. Soon, Du Fan went on to say:

古文：天灾旱暵，昔固有之。
现代文： 天灾和干旱，从前本来就有。
English: Natural disasters and droughts have always existed.

古文：而仓廪匮竭，月支不继，升粟一千，其增未已，富户沦落，十室九空，此又昔之所无也。
现代文：但粮仓中的粮食枯竭，每月的开支不能接继，一升米的价格是一千钱，价格还在不停地增加，富户没落，十间房子有九间房子的人都不在了，这又是从前所没有的。
English: But the grain in the granary is exhausted, the monthly expenses cannot be continued, the price of a liter of rice is 1,000 yuan, and the price is still increasing, the rich have fallen, and the people in nine out of ten houses are gone, which is unprecedented.

古文：甚而阖门饥死，相率投江，里巷聚首以议执政，军伍谇语所不忍闻，此何等气象，而见于京城众大之区。
现代文：更严重的是全家饿死，相继投江，老百姓聚集在一起议论掌握政权，士兵的牢骚话不忍心听，这是什么样的景象，却在京城这样核心的地区可以见到。
English: What's more serious is that the whole family starved to death and fell into the river one after another. The common people gathered together to discuss seizing power, and they couldn't bear to listen to the soldiers' complaints. What kind of scene is this, but it can be seen in such a central area as the capital city?

古文：浙西稻米所聚，而赤地千里。
现代文：浙西盛产稻米，但干旱的土地有千里。
English: Western Zhejiang is rich in rice, but there are thousands of miles of arid land.

古文：淮民流离，襁负相属，欲归无所，奄奄待尽。
现代文：淮河流域的老百姓流离失所，背着孩子在路上的人一个接一个，想回家却没有住处，气息微弱就等着死亡。
English: The common people in the Huaihe River basin have been displaced. People with children on their backs are on the road one after another. They want to go home but have no place to live. They are weak and waiting to die.

古文：使边尘不起，尚可相依苟活，万一敌骑冲突，彼必奔迸南来，或相携从敌，因为之乡导，巴蜀之覆辙可鉴也。
现代文：如果没有边疆的战事，老百姓还可以相依为命，苟且活下去，万一敌人的骑兵冲进来，这些流浪的人一定会奔到南方，有的可能被迫屈从敌人，就给他们当向导，那么巴蜀的教训是可以借鉴的啊。
English: If there is no war on the frontier, the common people can still rely on each other and survive. In the unlikely event that the enemy's cavalry rushes in, these wanderers will certainly run to the south. Some may be forced to submit to the enemy, so give them a guide. Then the lesson of Bashu can be used as a reference.

古文：窃意陛下宵旰忧惧，宁处弗遑。
现代文： 我个人认为陛下勤于政务，担心国家的前途和命运，在安定的时候也没间暇。
English: I personally believe that His Majesty is diligent in government affairs, worried about the future and fate of the country, and has no time to spare when things are stable.

古文：然宫中宴赐未闻有所贬损，左右嫱嬖未闻有所放遣，貂珰近习未闻有所斥远，女冠请谒未闻有所屏绝，朝廷政事未闻有所修饬，庶府积蠹未闻有所搜革。秉国钧者惟私情之徇，主道揆者惟法守之侵，国家大政则相持而不决，司存细务则出意而辄行。
现代文：然而宫中的宴饮和赏赐没听说有所减少，身边的宠妃没听说有所放出，宦官和陛下亲幸的人没听说有所斥退和疏远，通过宫中受宠的女子的请托没听说有所摒退和拒绝，朝廷政事没听说有所整顿，官府的积弊没听说有所追查和改变，掌握国家大权的人是按私情处理政事，负责处理各种事物的人不按法度履行自己的职责，国家大政则被两种意见所左右，不能决定，官府中的琐事则有个想法就轻率处理。
English: However, the banquets and rewards in the palace have not been heard to be reduced, the favorite princesses around him have not been heard to be released, the eunuchs and those who are fortunate to be close to his majesty have not been heard to be rejected and alienated, through the solicitation of the favored woman in the palace have not been heard to be rejected and rejected, the affairs of the imperial court have not been heard to be rectified, the accumulated defects of the government have not been heard to be investigated and changed, the people who hold the power of the state handle political affairs according to their personal feelings, the people responsible for handling various things do not perform their duties according to the law, the

古文：命令朝更而夕变，纪纲荡废而不存，无一事之不弊，无一弊之不极。
现代文：朝廷的命令早晨改的而晚上又变了，法度被破坏，没有一件事不存在弊病，没有一个弊病不严重。
English: The orders of the imperial court were changed in the morning and again in the evening, laws were broken, there was not a single thing that was not flawed, not a single flaw that was not serious.

古文：陛下盍亦震惧自省。
现代文：陛下何不也震动恐惧，自我反省。 
English: Your Majesty, why not shake the fear, self-reflection.

古文：诏： 中外臣庶思当今急务，如河道未通，军饷若何而可运？
现代文：皇上下诏 ：朝廷内外的官员和老百姓考虑现在最紧要的事，比如河道不通，怎么才能运送军饷？
English: Emperor's edict: Officials and ordinary people inside and outside the imperial court considered the most pressing issues of the day, such as the impassable river, how to transport military supplies?

古文：浙右旱歉，荒政若何而可行？
现代文：浙右出现旱灾，怎么才能推行救济饥荒的法令制度？
English: If there is a drought in Zhejiang, how can the legal system of famine relief be implemented?

古文：财计空匮，籴本若何而可足？
现代文：财政匮乏，怎么才能使国家买粮的本钱充足？
English: With a lack of finances, how can the country raise enough capital to buy grain?

古文：流徙失所，遣使若何而可定？
现代文：老百姓流离失所，怎么才能使这些人安定？
English: People have been displaced. How can these people be stabilized?

古文：敌情叵测，边圉若何而可固？
现代文：敌情难以预料，怎么才能使边境得到巩固？
English: The hostile situation is unpredictable, how can the border be consolidated?

古文：各务悉力尽思，以陈持危制变之策。 
现代文：每个人都一定要全力思考，来陈述控制危机和变乱的策略。 
English: Everyone must think hard to present a strategy to control crisis and turmoil.

古文：拜吏部侍郎兼中书舍人，复极言宴赐不节、修造不时、玩寇纵欲数事。
现代文：杜范被任命为吏部侍郎兼中书舍人，他又极力讲宴饮和赏赐不节制、修造宫殿不合时宜、穷兵黩武、放纵私欲几件事。
English: Du Fan was appointed as the attendant of the cadres and the secretary of the middle school. He also insisted on several things, such as feasting and rewarding without restraint, building a palace out of time, poor soldiers, and indulgence of selfish desires.

古文：兼权兵部尚书，改礼部尚书兼中书舍人。
现代文：杜范兼权兵部尚书，改为礼部尚书兼中书舍人。
English: Du Fan concurrently held the post of military secretary, and was changed to the post of ceremonial secretary and the post of middle secretary.

古文：淳祐二年，擢同签书枢密院事。
现代文：淳二年，杜范被提升为同签书枢密院事。
English: In June of the same year, Du Fan was promoted to the same position of Privy Councillor.

古文：范既入都堂，凡行事有得失，除授有是非，悉抗言无隐情。
现代文：杜范进入都堂以后，凡是朝政有什么过失，任免官吏有什么不妥当，他都毫不留情地进行反驳。
English: After Du Fan entered the Great Hall of the People, he was merciless in his rebuttal of any faults in the imperial government and any improprieties in the appointment and removal of officials.

古文：丞相史嵩之外示宽容，内实忌之。
现代文：丞相史嵩之表面上对杜范宽容，内心里实际是忌恨他。
English: On the surface, Prime Minister Shisong was tolerant of Du Fan, but in his heart, he actually hated him.

古文：四年，迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：淳四年，杜范升为同知枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year of Jun, Du Fan Sheng became Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：以李鸣复参知政事，范不屑与鸣复共政，去之。
现代文：因为李鸣复任参知政事，杜范看不起他，不愿意与他共同执政，就辞去官职。
English: Because Li Ming was reappointed to the post of co-governor, Du Fan despised him and did not want to co-govern with him, so he resigned from his official post.

古文：帝遣中使召回，且敕诸城门不得出范。
现代文：皇上派中使召他回来，并且下令各城门不能放走杜范。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to summon him back and ordered that Du Fan not be allowed to leave the city gates.

古文：太学诸生亦上书留范而斥鸣复，并斥嵩之。
现代文：太学生们也上书挽留杜范而斥责李鸣复，同时也斥责史嵩之。
English: Other students also wrote to Du Fan to reprimand Li Mingfu, and also to reprimand Shi Song.

古文：嵩之令谏议大夫刘晋之等论范及鸣复，范遂行。
现代文：史嵩之让谏议大夫刘晋之等人论奏杜范和李鸣复，杜范才就任。
English: Shi Songzhi asked Liu Jinzhi and others to discuss Du Fan and Li Mingfu, and Du Fan took office.

古文：会嵩之遭丧谋起复不果，于是拜范右丞相，范以逊游似，不许，遂力疾入觐。
现代文：恰赶上史嵩之遭父母之丧想希望朝廷在他守丧期没满时重新起用自己，但没成功，于是杜范被任命为右丞相，杜范把这个职位推让给游似，皇上没答应，杜范就勉强支撑病体去觐见皇上。
English: Just in time for the bereavement of Shi Song's parents, he hoped that the imperial court would reinstate him when his mourning period was not over, but it was not successful, so Du Fan was appointed as the Minister of the Right, Du Fan gave up this position to You Xiang, the emperor did not agree, Du Fan reluctantly supported the sick body to see the emperor.

古文：帝亲书 开诚心，布公道。集众思，广忠益 赐之。
现代文：皇上亲自写下 待人接物，坦诚无私，集合众人的心思，采纳各种有利国家的意见 赏赐给他。
English: The emperor personally wrote down, "Treat others with consideration, be candid and selfless, gather the thoughts of many people, adopt various opinions that are beneficial to the country" and rewarded him.

古文：范上五事： 曰正治本，谓政事当常出于中书，毋使旁蹊得窃威福。
现代文：杜范上疏讲五件事 ：一是整饬治国的基本措施，认为政事应该常由中书决定，不要让别的人或部门能够窃取权力。
English: Du Fan briefly talked about five things: First, the basic measures for rectifying and governing the country. He believed that political affairs should always be decided by the central government, and other people or departments should not be allowed to steal power.

古文：曰肃宫闱，谓当严内外之限，使宫府一体。
现代文：二是严肃皇后妃嫔居住的地方，认为应该严格区分宫内外，使宫中和官府形成一体。
English: The second is the place where the empress dowager lives. It is believed that there should be a strict distinction between the inside and outside of the palace, so that the palace and the government can form a whole.

古文：曰择人才，谓当随其所长用之而久于职，毋徒守迁转之常格。
现代文：三是选择人才，认为应当根据人的才能用到适当的岗位上，而且要长期任用，不要只遵守官员升迁、转任的一般原则。
English: The third is the selection of talents, which is based on the belief that talents should be used in appropriate positions, and that long-term appointments should be made, rather than just following the general principle of promotion and transfer of officials.

古文：曰惜名器，谓如文臣贴职，武臣阁卫，不当为徇私市恩之地。
现代文：四是爱惜爵禄，认为像文臣贴职，武臣阁卫，不应该作为营私卖恩的场所。
English: The fourth is to cherish peerage, and believe that it should not be used as a place to engage in self-dealing.

古文：曰节财用，谓当自人主一身始，自宫掖始，自贵近始，考封村国用出入之数，而补窒其罅漏，求盐策楮币变更之目，而斟酌其利害。
现代文：五是节约财物，认为应该从皇上开始，自后妃开始，从身居贵要之位而又接近皇上的人开始，考核封桩库中国家的收入和支出的数目，并且补足和堵塞其中的不足和漏洞，寻求食盐的人的户口册籍和纸币变更的条目，并且斟酌其中的好处和害处。
English: The fifth is to conserve wealth. It is believed that it is necessary to start with the emperor, the empress dowager, and those who hold important positions and are close to the emperor, to examine the amount of state income and expenditure in the sealed pile, and to supplement and plug the deficiencies and loopholes in it, to change the entries in the household registration books and banknotes of those who seek salt, and to consider the benefits and harms.

古文：仍乞早定国本以系人心。 
现代文：仍然请求早立皇太子以便维系人心。 
English: He still pleaded for the crown prince to be crowned early in order to keep the public's attention.

古文：时亲王近戚多求降恩泽，引前朝杜衍例，范皆封还。
现代文：当时亲王和外戚大多请求皇上增加恩惠，杜范援引前朝杜衍的例子，都没同意，把皇帝的赐恩诏书全都驳回。
English: At that time, the prince and his relatives mostly asked the emperor to increase the favor. Du Fan, citing the example of the former Du Yan, did not agree and rejected the emperor's decree.

古文：乞拨堂除阙归之吏部，以清中书之务，惟留书库、架阁、京教及要地干官。
现代文：杜范请求拨出堂除的缺额给吏部，以肃清中书的事务，只留下书库、架阁、京教和重要地区官员的任命权。
English: Du Fan requested that the shortfall left by the division of the palace be allocated to the personnel department, so as to clean up the affairs of Chinese books, leaving only the library, the bookcase, the Beijing Church and the appointment power of important regional officials.

古文：人皆以为不便。太学生亦上书言之，帝以示范，范奏曰： 三四十年权臣柄国，以公朝爵禄而市私恩，取吏部之阙以归堂除，太学诸生亦习于见闻，乃以近年之弊政为祖宗之成法。
现代文：人们都认为这样不妥当，太学生也上书讲这件事，皇上把这些反对意见给杜范看，杜范上奏说： 三四十年来，权臣左右国政，用国家的爵禄来买卖自己私人的恩惠，取吏部的缺额来归堂除，太学生们也对自己的所见所闻习惯了，就认为近年来的有弊害的政事是祖宗定下的法度。
English: People all thought that this was inappropriate. The imperial students also wrote a letter to explain the matter. The emperor showed these objections to Du Fan. Du Fan replied: Over the past 30 to 40 years, powerful ministers have controlled national politics, using the country's peerage to buy and sell their own private favors, and taking the shortfall of the cadre to be dismissed. The imperial students have also become accustomed to what they have seen and heard, and they think that the political affairs that have been harmful in recent years are the laws set by the ancestors.

古文：如以臣言为是，上下坚守，则谀者必多而谤者息矣。 未几，赴选调者无淹滞，合资格者得美阙，众始服。
现代文：如果认为我说的对，上下都坚决遵守，那么说好话的人一定多而诽谤就停止了。 不久，来参加选拔和调动的人没有滞留的，符合资格的人都得到好的官职，众人才对他信服。
English: If what I say is right and is resolutely observed by all levels, then there will be more people who speak well of him and the slander will stop. Soon, there will be no delay in the selection and transfer of people, and those who meet the qualifications will get good official positions, and everyone will be convinced of him.

古文：帝命宰执各条当今利病与政事可行者，范上十二事：
现代文：皇上命令宰执分别列举当前的弊病和可以推行的政事，杜范上奏十二件事：
English: The emperor ordered the chief to enumerate the current ills and the policies that could be implemented separately, and Du Fan listed twelve things:

古文：曰公用舍，愿进退人才悉参以国人之论，则乘罅抵巇者无所投其间。
现代文：一是使任用和免退官员公正，希望进用和斥退人才都参考本国人的评论，那么钻空子的人就没有空子可钻。
English: The first is to make the appointment and non-return of officials fair. It is hoped that the use and rejection of talents will refer to the comments of the local people, so that those who take advantage of loopholes have no loopholes to take advantage of.

古文：曰储材能，内而朝列，则储宰执于侍从、台谏，储侍从、台谏于卿监、郎官；外而守帅，则以江面之通判为幕府、郡守之储，以江面之郡守为帅阃之储；他职皆然，如是则临时无乏才之忧。
现代文：二是储备有才能的人，朝内的官员，则是把宰执的人选储备在侍从、台谏中，把侍从、台谏的人选储备在卿监、郎官中；朝外的郡守、统帅，则以长江流域的通判为幕府、郡守的后备人选，以长江流域的郡守为统帅的后备人选；其他官职都这样，这就不会在需要的时候出现缺乏人才的担忧。
English: The second is to reserve talented people. The officials within the Imperial Court reserve the candidates for the leader among the attendants and courtiers, and the candidates for the attendants and courtiers among the court officials; the county governors and generals outside the Imperial Court reserve the candidates for the shogunate and county governors in the Yangtze River valley, and the county governors in the Yangtze River valley as the reserve candidates for the generals; all other official positions are like this, so there will be no worries about a lack of talent when needed.

古文：曰严荐举，宜诏中外之臣，凡荐举必明著职业、功状、事实，不许止为褒词，朝廷籍记不如所举，并罚举主，仍诏侍从、台谏不许与人觅举。
现代文：三是严肃推荐人才，应该下诏书告诉朝内外的官员，凡是推荐人才一定要写明负责哪些方面、工作成绩、事情的真实情况，不许只写赞扬的话，朝廷的记录跟推荐人说的不符合，推荐人要受到处罚，仍诏命侍从、台谏不许答应士子的请托而推荐他。
English: The third is to seriously recommend talents. Officials inside and outside the DPRK should be told in the edict. Any recommended talents must clearly state which aspects they are responsible for, their work performance, and the true situation of the matter. They are not allowed to write only words of praise. If the record of the imperial court does not match the recommending person, the recommending person will be punished. However, the edict still orders the attendant and the daiyang not to accept the request of the scholar and recommend him.

古文：曰惩赃贪，自今有以赃罪案上，即行下勘证，果有赃败，必绳以祖宗之法，无实迹而监司妄以赃罪诬人者，亦量行责罚，台谏风闻言及赃罪，亦行下勘证。
现代文：四是惩治贪污受贿，自今往后，有上报贪污受贿罪案件的，马上派人到下面去勘察验证，果真有赃证，一定按祖宗的法典惩治，没有事实根据，而是监司荒谬地用贪污受贿来诬陷人的，也根据情况给以惩罚，台谏根据传闻而弹劾某人贪污受贿，也进行勘察验证。
English: The fourth is to punish corruption and bribery. From now on, if there is a reported case of the crime of corruption and bribery, immediately send someone down to investigate and verify. If there is false evidence, it must be punished according to the code of the ancestors. There is no factual basis, but the Supervision Department absurdly uses corruption and bribery to frame people, and also punishes according to the situation. The Taiwan Provincial People's Procuratorate impeaches someone for corruption and bribery based on rumors, and also conducts investigation and verification.

古文：曰专职任，吏部不可兼给、舍，京尹不可兼户、吏，经筵亦必专官。
现代文：五是职责专一，吏部的官员不应该兼任给事中、舍人，京尹不应该兼户部、吏部的官职，经筵也一定要设专职官员。
English: Fifth, the duties should be exclusive. The officials of the personnel department should not concurrently serve as the middlemen and subordinates. The Beijing Yin should not concurrently hold the official positions of the household department and the personnel department. The government should also set up full-time officials.

古文：曰久任使，内而财赋、狱讼、铨选与其他烦剧之职，必三年而后迁，外而监司、郡守，亦必使之再任，其不能者则亟行罢斥。
现代文：六是长期担任一种官职，朝廷内管理财赋、狱讼、铨选和其他烦琐、重要部门的官职，一定要在任满三年后再提升或调转，地方上的监司、郡守，也一定让他连任，那些不称职的则要立即罢斥。
English: The sixth is to hold a kind of official position for a long time. The official positions in the imperial court, such as the management of financial resources, prison litigation, election and other cumbersome and important departments, must be promoted or transferred after three years. Local supervisors and county governors must also be reappointed. Those who are incompetent should be dismissed immediately.

古文：曰抑侥幸，布告中外，各务职业，朝廷不以弊例而过恩，宫庭不以私谒而废法；勋旧之家，邸第之戚，不以名器而轻假。
现代文：七是压抑侥幸，向朝廷内外宣布，每个人都致力自己的职事，朝廷上不因为打破先例而过分施恩，宫廷中不因为私人的请托而废除法度；对有功绩的老臣、王侯贵戚，不把国家的爵禄轻易地授予他们。
English: The seventh is the suppression of chance, announcing to both inside and outside the court that everyone is committed to their duties. The court does not grant excessive favors because of breaking precedents, and the court does not abolish laws because of private requests. For meritorious old ministers and noble relatives of princes, they do not easily award them the country's peerage.

古文：曰重阃寄。
现代文：八是把军权交给武将要慎重。
English: Eighth, it is prudent to hand over military power to the generals.

古文：曰选军实。
现代文：九是备齐武器、粮食等军事物资。
English: The ninth is to prepare weapons, grain and other military supplies.

古文：曰招土豪。
现代文：十是招纳地方上的豪强。
English: Ten is to recruit local talent.

古文：曰宜仿祖宗方田之制，疏为沟洫，纵横经纬，各相灌注，以凿沟之土，积而为径，使不得并辔而驰，结阵而前，如曹玮守陕西之制，则戎马之来，所至皆有阻限，而沟之内又可以耕屯，胜于陆地多矣。
现代文：十一是效仿祖宗的方田法，疏导成水渠，纵横交错，互相能连接、灌溉，用挖沟的土，修成田间的路，不应两匹马在路上并排奔跑，不许排队而行，像曹玮守卫陕西的制度，则是敌人骑兵来了以后，所到之处都有阻拦，而沟以里又可以耕种和驻兵，比陆地强多了。
English: The eleventh is to follow the ancestor's Fang Tian method, channeling water into canals, crisscrossing, connecting and irrigating each other, using the soil from the ditch to build a road in the field. Two horses should not run side by side on the road, and they are not allowed to line up. Like Cao Pi's system of guarding Shaanxi, after the enemy cavalry arrives, there are obstacles everywhere, and the ditch can be used for farming and garrisoning, which is much stronger than the land.

古文：曰治边、理财，实为当今急务，有明于治边、善于理财者，搜访以闻。
现代文：十二是治理边防、管理财政，实际是当前最紧迫的事，有懂得治理边防、善于管理财政的人，应该搜求寻访上报给朝廷。
English: The twelfth is the management of border defense and finance, which is actually the most pressing matter at present. People who know how to manage border defense and are good at managing finances should be searched for and reported to the imperial court.

古文：时孟珙权重兵久居上流，朝廷素疑其难制，至是以书来贺。
现代文：当时孟珙掌握重兵长期驻扎在长江上游，朝廷一向怀疑他难以控制，这时孟珙也写信来祝贺。
English: At that time, Meng Xuan had troops stationed in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River for a long time, and the imperial court always suspected that he was difficult to control. At this time, Meng Xuan also wrote a letter to congratulate.

古文：范复之曰： 古人谓将相调和则士豫附，自此但相与同心徇国。
现代文：杜范给他回信说 ：古人认为大将和宰相和睦则士子就心悦而依附，从此我们只应该同心协力，以身殉国。
English: Du Fan wrote back to him, saying, "The ancients believed that if the general and the prime minister were on good terms, then the scholar would follow his heart's desire. From now on, we should only work together and sacrifice ourselves for the country."

古文：若以术相笼架，非范所屑为也。 珙大感服。
现代文：像用不良的手段进行驾驭、控制的事，不是杜范值得做的。 孟珙非常感动和佩服。
English: It's not worth Du Fan doing things like using bad means to drive and control. Meng Yao was very moved and impressed.

古文：未几，大元军大入五河，绝中流，置营栅，且以重兵缀合肥，令不得相援，为必取寿春之计。
现代文：不久，大元军队大举侵入五河，渡过长江中游，设置营寨，并且用重兵牵制合肥，命令不要互相救援，作为一定攻取寿春的计划。
English: Soon, the Taiyuan army invaded the Five Rivers in a big way, crossed the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, set up camps, and used heavy troops to control Hefei, ordering not to rescue each other, as a certain plan to capture Shuchun.

古文：范命惟扬、鄂渚二帅各调兵东西来应，卒以捷闻。
现代文：杜范命令维扬、鄂渚的两位统帅分别调兵从东西两面来策应，最后终于取胜。
English: Du Fan ordered the two commanders, Wei Yang and E Nagisa, to send troops from the east and west to deal with the situation, and finally they won.

古文：范计功行赏，莫不曲当，军士皆悦。
现代文：杜范按功劳的大小进行奖赏，没有不符合事实的，士兵们都很高兴。
English: Du Fan rewards according to the size of the merit. There is nothing inconsistent with the facts, and the soldiers are very happy.

古文：未几，卒，赠少傅，谥清献。
现代文：不久，杜范去世，他被赠为少傅，谥号是 清献 。
English: Not long after, Du Fan passed away, and he was given the title of Shao Fu, and his posthumous name was Qing Jian.

古文：其所著述，有古律诗歌词五卷，杂文六卷，奏稿十卷，外制三卷，《进故事》五卷，《经筵讲义》三卷。
现代文：他的著述，有古律诗歌词五卷，杂文六卷，奏疏的文稿十卷，外制三卷，《进故事》五卷，《经筵讲义》三卷。
English: His writings include five volumes of ancient rhymes, six volumes of miscellaneous writings, ten volumes of scanty manuscripts, three volumes of extraneous writings, five volumes of "Introduction to Stories," and three volumes of "Lectures on the Classics."

古文：杨简，字敬仲，慈溪人。
现代文：杨简，字敬仲，慈溪人。
English: Yang Jian, Zi Jing Zhong, Cixi people.

古文：乾道五年举进士，授富阳主簿。
现代文：乾道五年被推举参加进士考试，被任命为富阳主簿。
English: In the fifth year of the dry road, he was nominated to participate in the entrance examination and was appointed as the main book of Fuyang.

古文：会陆九渊道过富阳，问答有所契，遂定师弟子之礼。
现代文：恰好陆九渊路过富阳，他们问答时互相投合，于是就确定了老师和弟子之礼。
English: Lu Jiuyuan happened to be passing through Fuyang, and their questions and answers coincided with each other, so they confirmed the teacher and disciple's gift.

古文：富阳民多服贾而不知学，简兴学养士，文风益振。
现代文：富阳百姓多经商而不懂学问，杨简兴学养士，文风更加振兴。
English: The people of Fuyang do more business than study, Yang Jianxing is a nursing scholar, and the literary style is more vigorous.

古文：为绍兴府司理，犴狱必亲临，端默以听，使自吐露。
现代文：杨简任绍兴府司理，他亲临乡间牢狱，详细地听犯人自己的陈述。
English: Yang Jian, the governor of Shaoxing prefecture, visited the rural prison and listened in detail to the prisoners' own statements.

古文：越陪都，台府鼎立，简中平无颇，惟理之从。
现代文：越州是陪都，台府鼎立，杨简保持中立，只跟从有理的一方。
English: Yuezhou is the accompanying capital, Taifu is the leading city, Yang Jian remains neutral, and only follows the reasonable side.

古文：一府史触怒帅，令鞫之，简白无罪，命鞫平日，简曰： 吏过讵能免，今日实无罪，必擿往事置之法，某不敢奉命。 帅大怒，简取告身纳之，争愈力。
现代文：一个府史触怒统帅，统帅下令审讯他，杨简汇报说府史无罪，统帅又下令审查他的平时表现，杨简说： 小吏有罪哪能免，现在他确实无罪，一定要挑他过去的错依法处理，我不敢从命。 统帅大怒，杨简请假上交这件事，更是据理力争。
English: A prefectural official angered the commander-in-chief, the commander-in-chief ordered to interrogate him, Yang Jian reported that the prefectural official was not guilty, the commander-in-chief also ordered to review his usual performance, Yang Jian said: The minor official is not guilty, now he is indeed not guilty, we must pick out his past mistakes and deal with them according to law, I dare not follow orders. The commander-in-chief was furious, Yang Jian asked for leave to submit the matter, and even more reasoned.

古文：常平使者朱熹荐之。先是，丞相史浩亦以简荐，差浙西抚干，白尹张枃，宜因凶岁戒不虞。
现代文：常平使者朱熹推荐他，先前，丞相史浩亦推荐杨简，被差遣为浙西抚干，他对长官张木匀说，应该趁荒年防备不测。
English: Changping's envoy Zhu Xi recommended him. Previously, the prime minister Shi Hao also recommended Yang Jian, who was sent to Zhejiang West Fugang. He told the governor Zhang Muyan that it was necessary to take advantage of the lean years to prepare for the unexpected.

古文：乃令简督三将兵，接以恩信，出诸葛亮正兵法肄习之，军政大修，众大和悦。
现代文：张木匀就命令杨简统领三将兵，杨简对他们施以恩信，拿出诸葛亮的正兵法练兵，军政大修，众人十分高兴和睦。
English: Zhang Muyin ordered Yang Jian to lead the three generals and soldiers. Yang Jian gave them a letter of gratitude, brought out Zhuge Liang's positive military training methods, and overhauled the military and politics. Everyone was very happy and harmonious.

古文：改知嵊县。
现代文：杨简改任山乘县知县。
English: Yang Jian was reassigned to Shanren County.

古文：丁外艰，服除，知乐平县，兴学训士，诸生闻其言有泣下者。
现代文：遭父丧，他服丧期满后，为乐平县知县，他兴办学校，训导学生，学生听到他的话有流泪的。
English: After his father's death, he became the prefect of Leping County. He set up a school and trained students. The students shed tears when they heard his words.

古文：杨、石二少年为民害，简置狱中，谕以祸福，咸感悟，愿自赎。
现代文：有杨、石二个少年在民间为害，杨简把他们投入狱中，给他们讲明利害，他们都醒悟，愿意自己赎罪。
English: There were two boys, Yang and Shi, who did harm to the people. Yang Jian threw them into prison and explained their interests to them. They all woke up and were willing to atone for their sins.

古文：由是邑人以讼为耻，夜无盗警，路不拾遗。
现代文：从此乐平县的人都以诉讼为耻，晚上没有偷窃的，路不拾遗。
English: Since then, people in Leping County have been ashamed of litigation. If you don't steal at night, you won't be able to find your way home.

古文：绍熙五年，召为国子博士。
现代文：绍熙五年，杨简被召为国子博士。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Yang Jian was called to be a national doctor.

古文：二少年大帅县民随出境外，呼曰 杨父 。
现代文：杨、石二个少年率县中的人送他走出本县以外，称他为 杨父 。
English: Yang and Shi, two young boys, led the people in the county to send him out of the county, calling him Yang father.

古文：会斥丞相赵汝愚，祭酒李祥抗章辨之，简上书言： 昨者危急，军民将溃乱，社稷将倾危，陛下所亲见。
现代文：恰好朝廷贬斥丞相赵汝愚，祭酒李祥反对并申辩，杨简上书说： 原先形势危急，军民将溃乱，社稷将倾覆，是陛下亲眼所见。
English: It so happened that the imperial court reprimanded the prime minister Zhao Rugu, the sacrificial wine Li Xiang opposed and pleaded, and Yang Jian wrote: The original situation is critical, the military and the people will be in turmoil, and the social order will be overturned. This is what His Majesty saw with his own eyes.

古文：汝愚冒万死易危为安，人情妥定，汝愚之忠，陛下所心知，不必深辨。
现代文：赵汝愚冒着万死使国家转危为安，人情安定，赵汝愚的忠心，是陛下知道的，不需要再深入辩明。
English: Zhao Rugu risked his life and death to turn the country around and stabilize the human condition. His Majesty knows Zhao Rugu's loyalty and does not need to further clarify it.

古文：臣为祭酒属，日以义训诸生，若见利忘义，畏害忘义，臣耻之。 未几，亦遭斥，主管崇道观。
现代文：我是祭酒的僚属，每天都用义训导学生，如果见利忘义，怕祸忘义，我认为这很可耻。 不久，杨简也遭贬斥，为主管崇道观。
English: I am a colleague of the sacrificial wine, and I use righteousness to teach students every day. I think it is very shameful if you forget righteousness when you see benefit, and forget righteousness when you fear evil. Soon, Yang Jian was also disparaged, and he was regarded as a supervisor who worshipped Taoism.

古文：再任，转朝奉郎。
现代文：他再被任用，转为朝奉郎。
English: He was reappointed and became a chosoburo.

古文：嘉泰四年，赐绯衣银鱼，朝散郎，权发遣全州，以言罢，主管仙都观。
现代文：嘉泰四年，赏给他绯衣银鱼，任朝散郎，权且派到全州，因言事被罢职，为主管仙都观。
English: In the fourth year of Jia Tai, he was awarded the title of "Silver Fish" and was appointed as "Chaoshan Lang" with the power to be sent to the whole province. However, he was dismissed because of his speech, and became the head of "Xian Du Guan."

古文：嘉定元年，宁宗更化，授秘书郎，转朝请郎，迁秘书省著作佐郎兼权兵部郎官。
现代文：嘉定元年，宁宗改弦更张，杨简被任命为秘书郎，转为朝请郎，升为秘书省著作佐郎兼权兵部郎官。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Ning Zong changed his mind and changed his title, and Yang Jian was appointed secretary, changed to the morning guest, and promoted to the secretary of the Ministry of Works and the right to the military department.

古文：转对，极言经国之要，弭灾厉、消祸变之道，北境传诵，为之涕泣。
现代文：百官轮次奏对，他极力讲治国的关键，消灾免祸的方法，这些在金国传诵，人们为之流泪。
English: Hundreds of officials came and went, and he tried his best to explain the key to governing the country and how to eliminate and prevent disasters. These were recited in the Golden Kingdom, and people shed tears for it.

古文：诏以旱蝗求直言，简上封事，言旱蝗根本，近在人心。
现代文：因旱、蝗灾皇上下诏求直言，杨简上封事，认为旱、蝗灾的本源，近在人心。
English: Due to droughts and locust plagues, the emperor issued an edict to speak out, and Yang Jian issued an edict, believing that the source of droughts and locust plagues is close to people's hearts.

古文：兼考功郎官，兼礼部郎官，授著作郎、将作少监。
现代文：他兼任考功郎官、礼部郎官，被任命为著作郎、将作少监。
English: He concurrently served as the official in charge of the examination of merit and the official in charge of the ministry of etiquette, was appointed as the official in charge of literature, and will serve as a junior superintendent.

古文：入对，答问往复，漏过八刻，上目送久之。
现代文：入朝奏对，他同皇上一问一答，漏壶过了八刻他才离开，皇上目送他很久。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he asked the emperor a question and answered it. It took him eight hours before he left. The emperor saw him off for a long time.

古文：兼国史院编修官兼实录院检讨官，以面对所陈未行，求外补，知温州。
现代文：他兼任国史院编修官兼实录院检讨官，因在当面奏对时他所建议的没实行，请求到地方任职，他被任命为温州知州。
English: He also served as an editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History and a reviewer of the Institute of Historical Records. Since his suggestion was not implemented at the time of the face-to-face meeting, he requested to serve at the local level. He was appointed to Wenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：移文首罢妓籍，尊敬贤士。
现代文：到温州后，他发布文告首先罢去妓女的名籍，尊敬贤能的人。
English: After arriving in Wenzhou, he issued a proclamation to first expel the names of prostitutes, and respect the virtuous.

古文：私鹾五百为群过境内，分司干官檄永嘉尉及水砦兵捕之。
现代文：贩私盐的五百人结成群路过辖境，分司干官传檄让永嘉县尉和水寨兵逮捕他们。
English: Five hundred salt smugglers passed through the jurisdiction in groups, and the sub-branch cadre ordered the Yongjia County Lieutenant and the soldiers to arrest them.

古文：巡尉不白郡，简惊曰： 是可轻动乎？
现代文：巡尉不向郡守汇报，杨简惊骇地说： 这能轻举妄动吗？
English: When the lieutenant did not report to the county governor, Yang Jian said in shock, "Can this be done lightly?

古文：万一召乱，贻朝廷忧。
现代文：万一招致变乱，就给朝廷带来忧患。
English: In the unlikely event of a coup, it would bring trouble to the imperial court.

古文：兵之节制在郡将，违节制是不严天子命，违节制应斩。 建旗立巡尉庭下，召刽手两行夹立，郡官盛服立西序，数其罪，命斩之，郡官交进为致悔罪意，良久得释，奏罢分司，其纪律如此。
现代文：兵权在郡将手中，违犯节制是不严格执行天子的命令，违犯节制应该斩首。 他设旗在巡尉庭下，召刽子手站在两旁，郡中属官穿戴整齐站在西边。杨简一一列举巡尉的罪状，下令杀他，郡中属官们相继替巡尉表达悔罪的意愿，很久才释放了巡尉，他上奏罢去分司，他的纪律就是这样。
English: The military power is in the hands of the county magistrate, the violation of moderation is not strictly implementing the order of the son of heaven, and the violation of moderation should be beheaded. He set the flag under the lieutenant's court, called the executioners to stand on both sides, and the county subordinate officers stood neatly dressed on the west side. Yang Jian listed the lieutenant's crimes one by one and ordered to kill him. The county subordinate officers successively expressed their willingness to repent on behalf of the lieutenant. It took a long time to release the lieutenant. He was dismissed from the division, and his discipline was like this.

古文：寓官置民田负其直，简追其隶责之而偿所负。
现代文：寓居的官僚买百姓的土地还欠钱，杨简追他的仆人责成他还给百姓欠款。
English: The bureaucrat who lives there still owes money for buying the people's land. Yang Jian chased his servant and ordered him to repay the people.

古文：势家第宅障官河，即日撤之，城中欢踊，名杨公河。
现代文：有权势的大户人家的宅第阻碍官家的河道，杨简当天就把宅第拆除了，城中百姓十分高兴，把官河叫 杨公河 。
English: The homestead of a powerful big family obstructed the river path of the officials. Yang Jian demolished the homestead on the same day. The people in the city were very happy and called the Guan River the Yang Gong River.

古文：帝遣使至郡讥察，使于简为先世契，出郊迎，不敢当，从间道走州入客位。
现代文：皇上派使者到郡中视察，使者是杨简先世仆人的后代，杨简到郊外去迎接他，使者不敢承受，从小道到州中进入客人的位置。
English: The emperor sent an emissary to Guizhong to inspect. The emissary was the descendant of Yang Jian's previous servant. Yang Jian went to the suburbs to meet him. The emissary did not dare to bear it, and entered the guest's position from the trail to Zhouzhong.

古文：简闻之不敢入，往来传送数四，乃驱车反。
现代文：杨简听说后不敢入城，往来传达信息好几次，他才驱车返回。
English: After hearing the news, Yang Jian did not dare to enter the city. He sent messages back and forth several times before driving back.

古文：将降车，使者趋出立戟门外，简亦趋出立使者外，顿首言曰： 天使也，某不敢不肃。 使者曰： 契家子，礼有常尊。 简曰： 某守臣，使者衔天子命，辱临敝邑，天使也，某不改不肃。 遂从西翼偕进，礼北面东上，简行则常西，步则后，及阶，莫敢升，已乃同升自西阶，足踧踧莫敢就主席，使者曰： 邦君之庭也，礼有常尊。 简曰： 《春秋》，王人虽微，例书大国之上，尊天子也。
现代文：杨简将下车，使者赶紧出来站在戟门外，杨简也赶紧出来站在使者旁边，叩头而拜说： 你是天子的使者，我不敢不恭敬。 使者说 ：我是你家仆人的儿子，礼有高低贵贱之分。 
English: Yang Jian will get off the car, the messenger will quickly come out and stand outside the gate, Yang Jian will also quickly come out and stand next to the messenger, bow down and say: You are the messenger of the Son of Heaven, I dare not disrespect.The messenger said: I am the son of your servant, there are highs and lows.

古文：况今天使乎？ 持之益坚，使者辞益力，如是数刻，使者知不可变，乃曰： 某不敏，敢不敬承执事尊天子之义。 即揖而出。
现代文：杨简极力坚持，使者极力推辞，这样过了一段时间，使者知道不能改变杨简的态度，就说 ：我不明智，怎敢不顺承你尊奉天子的大义。 就拱手而出。
English: Yang Jian strenuously insisted, and the messenger strenuously declined. After a period of time, the messenger knew that he could not change Yang Jian's attitude, so he said, "I am not wise, how dare I not obey you in honoring the Great Righteousness of the Son of Heaven."

古文：既就馆，简乃以宾礼见。
现代文：使者到客馆中，杨简才以客礼与他相见。
English: When the envoy arrived at the guesthouse, Yang Jian only met him with a courtesy call.

古文：仪典旷绝，邦人创见之，莫不瞿然竦观，屏息立。
现代文：典章制度长期被废弃，郡中人头一次看到这些礼仪，没有不惊愕地引颈举足观看，屏住呼吸站在那里的。
English: The ceremonial system had been abandoned for a long time, and no one in the county saw these ceremonies for the first time without raising their necks in amazement and standing there holding their breath.

古文：简在郡廉俭自将，奉养菲薄，常曰： 吾敢以赤子膏血自肥乎！ 闾巷雍睦无忿争声，民爱之如父母，咸画象事之。
现代文：杨简在郡中廉洁、勤俭、自我约束，他的日常生活用品都很简单，他常说： 我敢用老百姓的膏血养肥自己吗！ 城中百姓间很和睦没有争斗声，百姓爱他如同父母，都画他的像侍奉他。
English: In the county, Yang Jian was honest, diligent, and self-disciplined. His daily necessities were very simple. He often said, "Do I dare to use the blood of the common people to enrich myself?" There was no fighting among the people in the city, and the people loved him like a parent. They all painted him as if they were serving him.

古文：迁驾部员外郎，老稚扶拥缘道，倾城哭送。
现代文：他升为驾部员外郎，老少沿路搀扶着全城人哭着送他。
English: He was promoted to the rank of driver's mate, and all the townspeople, young and old, supported him along the road and wept as they saw him off.

古文：入对，言： 尽扫喜顺恶逆之私情，善政尽举，弊政尽除，民怨自销，祸乱不作。 改工部员外郎，转对，又以择贤久任为言。
现代文：他入朝奏对，说： 把喜欢顺承，厌恶异己的私情全部丢掉，好的政令都施行，坏的政令都废除，那么百姓的怨恨自然消失，也不会发生祸乱。 杨简改任工部员外郎，百官轮次奏对，他又说应选择贤良，让他们久任官职。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he said: "Throw away all the selfishness of liking obedience and loathing strangers, implement all the good decrees and abolish all the bad decrees, then the people's resentment will naturally disappear, and there will be no disaster.Yang Jian was changed to the foreign minister of the Ministry of Labor, and hundreds of officials were changed, and he also said that it was necessary to choose good people and let them hold official positions for a long time.

古文：迁军器监兼工部郎官，转朝奉大夫，又迁将作监兼国史院编修官兼实录院检讨官，转朝散大夫。
现代文：他升为军器监兼工部郎官，转为朝奉大夫，又升为将作监兼国史院编修官兼实录院检讨官，转为朝散大夫。
English: He was promoted to the supervisor of military equipment and the steward of the engineering department, and then he was promoted to the doctor of the Imperial Court, and then he was promoted to the supervisor of the Imperial Court, the editor of the Academy of National History, and the reviewer of the Academy of Historical Records, and then he was promoted to the doctor of the Imperial Court.

古文：金人大饥，来归者日以数千、万计。边吏临淮水射之。
现代文：金人遭饥荒，来归宋朝的人每天数以千万计，边境的官员在淮水边射杀这些人。
English: The Jin people were starving, and tens of millions of people were returning to the Song Dynasty every day. The border officials shot these people at Huai Shui.

古文：简戚然曰： 得土地易，得人心难。
现代文：杨简悲伤地说： 得土地易，得人心难。
English: Yang Jian said sadly: It is easy to obtain land, but it is difficult to win people's hearts.

古文：薄海内外，皆吾赤子，中土故民，出涂炭，投慈父母，顾靳斗升粟而迎杀之，蕲脱死乃速得死，岂相上帝绥四方之道哉？ 即日上奏，哀痛言之，不报。
现代文：近海内外，都是我国的臣民，中原地区陷没敌境的百姓，逃出受涂炭的惨境，投奔慈父母的怀抱，我们还吝惜那点粮食而阻止并杀害他们，他们祈求逃脱死亡却很快就死了，这样做难道符合上天安抚四方的思想吗？ 他当天就上奏，哀痛地讲了这些，朝廷没答复。
English: Both at home and abroad, they are the subjects of our country. The people of the Central Plains region, who had fallen into the enemy's territory, escaped the tragedy and ran into the arms of their loving parents. We also spared the little grain and stopped and killed them. They prayed to escape death but died soon. Is this in line with the idea of God's appeasement of the four quarters? He played on the same day and spoke these words sadly. The court did not answer.

古文：会有疾，请去益力，乃以直宝谟阁主管玉局观。
现代文：正巧他得病，更极力请求辞职，于是就以直宝谟阁的身份主管玉局观。
English: As it happened, he fell ill and even more strongly requested to resign, so he assumed the position of the head of the Imperial Household Agency as the person in charge.

古文：升直宝文阁主管明道宫、秘阁修撰主管千秋鸿禧观。
现代文：他升为直宝文阁主管明道宫、秘阁修撰主管千秋鸿禧观。
English: He was promoted to the position of the director of Zhi Bao Library, Ming Dao Palace, and the director of the secret library, Qian Qiu Hong Xiyuan.

古文：特授朝请大夫、右文殿修撰主管鸿庆宫，赐紫衣金鱼。
现代文：特被授予朝请大夫、右文殿修撰主管鸿庆宫，赐给他紫衣金鱼。
English: It was specially awarded to Hongqing Gong, the chief doctor of the Morning Invitation and the chief editor of the Right Literature Hall, and he was given a purple goldfish.

古文：进宝谟阁待制、提举鸿庆宫，赐金带。
现代文：他进升为宝谟阁待制、提举鸿庆宫，赐给他金带。
English: He was promoted to the status of Baomu Pavilion, and the Hongqing Palace was promoted, and he was given a gold belt.

古文：理宗即位，进宝谟阁直学士，赐金带。
现代文：理宗即位后，杨简升为宝谟阁直学士，赐给他金带。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Ritsong, Yang Jiansheng became a direct graduate of Baomu Pavilion and was given a gold belt.

古文：宝庆元年，转朝议大夫、慈溪县男，寻授华文阁直学士、提举佑神观，奉朝请。
现代文：宝庆元年，他转为朝议大夫、慈溪县男，不久被授予华文阁直学士、提举佑神观，得到奉朝请的待遇。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, he was transferred to the position of the doctor of the imperial court, the man of Cixi County, and was soon awarded the direct bachelor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the promotion of the concept of God, and received the treatment requested by the imperial court.

古文：诏入见，简屡辞。
现代文：诏命他入宫拜见皇上，杨简多次推辞。
English: The emperor ordered him to enter the palace to meet the emperor, but Yang Jian repeatedly declined.

古文：授敷文阁直学士，累加中大夫，仍提举鸿庆宫，寻以宝谟阁学士、太中大夫致仕，卒，赠正奉大夫。
现代文：他被授予敷文阁直学士，历次加官为中大夫，仍提举鸿庆宫，不久以宝谟阁学士、太中大夫的身份辞官，他去世后，被赠官为正奉大夫。
English: He was awarded the Shibunkaku Direct Bachelor, and was promoted to the position of junior doctor several times. He was still promoted to the position of Hongqing Palace, and soon he was promoted to the position of Bommu Cabinet Bachelor and senior junior doctor. After his death, he was awarded the position of senior junior doctor.

古文：简所著有《甲稿》、《乙稿》、《冠记》、《昏记》《丧礼家记》、《家祭记》、《释菜礼记》、《石鱼家记》，又有《己易》、《启蔽》等书，其论治务最急者五，其次八。
现代文：杨简著有《甲稿》、《乙稿》、《冠记》、《昏记》、《丧礼家记》、《家祭记》、《释菜礼记》、《石鱼家记》，还有《己易》、《启蔽》等书，他论述治国最重要的有五条，其次有八条。
English: Yang Jian is the author of "A Draft," "B Draft," "Crown Record," "Fainting Record," "Funeral Family Record," "Family Sacrifice Record," "Culinary Ritual Record," "Stone Fish Family Record," as well as "Self-Ease," "Enlightenment" and other books. He discusses the five most important rules of governing the country, followed by eight.

古文：一曰谨择左右大臣、近臣、小臣；二曰择贤以久任中外之官；三曰罢科举而行乡举里选；四曰罢设法道淫；五曰治伍法，修诸葛武侯之正兵，以备不虞。
现代文：一是谨慎地选择左右大臣、近臣、小臣；二是选择贤能的人让他们长期在朝内外任职；三是罢去科举而实行乡举里选来选拔人才；四是罢去法术道术和贪色；五是整顿军队，用诸葛武侯的正兵法训练士兵，以备不测。
English: The first is to carefully select the right and left ministers, close vassals, and junior vassals; the second is to select capable people and let them serve for a long time inside and outside the court; the third is to abolish the imperial examination and implement the township election to select talents; the fourth is to abolish magic and greed; the fifth is to rectify the army and train soldiers with Zhuge Wuhou's positive warfare method to prepare for any eventuality.

古文：其次急者有八：一曰募兵屯田，以省养兵之费；二曰限民田，以渐复井田；三曰罢妓籍，从良；四曰渐罢和买、折帛暨诸无名之赋及榷酤，而禁群饮；五曰择贤士教之大学，教成，使分掌诸州之学，又使各择井里之士聚而教之，教成，使各分掌其邑里之学；六曰取《周礼》及古书，会议熟讲其可行于今者行之；七曰禁淫乐；八曰修书以削邪说。
现代文：其次有八条：一是募兵屯田，以便节省养兵的费用；二是限制百姓私田，以便逐渐恢复井田；三是罢去妓女名籍，以使她们从良；四是逐渐罢去和买、折帛及其他无名的赋税和榷酤，以便禁止人们聚饮；五是选贤人教给他们大学，他们学成后，让他们分别负责各州的学校，再让他们分别选出县里、乡里的人集中在一起教这些人，这些人学成后，让他们分别负责自己县、乡的学校；六是取《周礼》和古书，讨论并领会出现在可行的就实行；七是禁止淫乐；八是著书以便去掉邪说。
English: Secondly, there are eight articles: the first is to recruit soldiers to garrison the fields in order to save the cost of raising soldiers; the second is to restrict the private fields of the people in order to gradually restore the fields; the third is to remove the names of prostitutes in order to make them good; the fourth is to gradually remove and buy, fold and other nameless taxes and levies in order to prohibit people from drinking together; the fifth is to select wise men to teach them university, and after they have learned, let them be responsible for schools in each state, and then let them separately select people from the county and the village to gather together to teach these people, and after these people have learned, let

古文：此简之志也。
现代文：这是杨简的志向。
English: This is Yang Jane's ambition.

古文：后咸淳间，制置使刘黻即其居作慈湖书院。
现代文：后来在咸淳年间，制置使刘黻在他的住处建成慈湖书院。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Xianjun, Liu Bei had Cihu Academy built at his residence.

古文：门人钱时。
现代文：杨简的门人叫钱时。
English: When Yang Jian's doorman asked for money.

