古文：韩麒麟程骏寡妪李氏奸合而生三子。王李不穆，迭相告言，历年不罢。
现代文：这就是所谓私民之谷，寄积官府，官府粮仓充实，则老百姓就没有荒年的忧虑了。 
English: This is the so-called private people's valley. If the government stores grain and the government grain silos are full, the people will not have to worry about a bad year.

古文：子熙因此惭恨，遂以发疾。
现代文：太和十二年春，韩麒麟死于任上，时年五十六岁。
English: In the spring of 1912, Han Qilin died in office at the age of fifty-six.

古文：兴和中，孝静欲行释奠，敕子熙为侍讲。
现代文：遗嘱儿子用素朴棺柩装殓，丧事务必从简。
English: Wills son with a rustic coffin  decorated, funeral affairs must follow Jane.

古文：寻卒，遣戒不求赠谥，其子不能遵奉，遂至干谒。
现代文：韩麒麟天性恭敬谨慎，总是把律令放在自己座位旁边。
English: Respectful and cautious by nature, Han Kirin always places the ritsuryo next to his seat.

古文：武定初，赠骠骑将军、仪同三司、幽州刺史。兴宗弟显宗，字茂亲。
现代文：临死的时候，只有作为俸禄的绢数十匹而已，他的清贫于此可见。朝廷赠他为散骑常侍、安东将军、燕郡公，谥称康。韩兴宗的弟弟韩显宗，字茂亲。
English: When he was on the verge of death, he only had a few dozen yakitori as a stipend, which shows his poverty. The imperial court gave him the titles of strolling equerry, General Anton, Yanshongong, and his nickname was Kang. Han Xingzong's younger brother, Han Xianzong, was nicknamed Maojin.

古文：性刚直，能面折庭诤，亦有才学。
现代文：性格刚直，能够面折皇帝庭诤国事，也有才华学识。
English: He had an upright personality and was able to tell the emperor what to do in state affairs. He was also talented and learned.

古文：沙门法抚，三齐称其聪悟，常与显宗校试，抄百余人名，各读一遍，随即覆呼，法抚犹有一二舛谬，显宗了无误错。
现代文：和尚法抚，三齐之人称赞其聪明捷悟，经常与韩显宗一起比试，出题的人抄了一百多个人名，他们通读一遍，然后让他们说出来，比试结果法抚念的还有一两个错误，而韩显宗则一点错误都没有。
English: Monk Fa Fu, praised by the people of Sanqi for his cleverness and quick understanding, often competed with Han Xianzong. The people who asked questions copied more than a hundred names, read them through, and then let them speak out. The results of the competition showed that there were still one or two mistakes in Fa Fu's recitation, while Han Xianzong had no mistakes at all.

古文：法抚叹曰： 贫道生平以来，唯服郎耳。 
现代文：法抚感叹地说： 贫僧平生以来，只佩服郎君耳。 
English: Fa Fu sighed and said, "Since I was a poor monk, I have only admired you, this young man!

古文：太和初，举秀才，对策甲科，除著作佐郎。
现代文：太和初年，韩显宗被举为秀才，对策高中甲科，除授著作郎。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Han Xianzong was promoted to be an outstanding talent, Countermeasures Senior High School Class A, and awarded the title of scholar.

古文：车驾南讨，兼中书侍郎。
现代文：皇帝亲征南方，韩显宗兼任中书侍郎。
English: The emperor himself went to the south, and Han Xianzong also served as the secretary.

古文：既定迁都，显宗上书：
现代文：魏廷讨论确定迁都之后，韩显宗上书说：
English: When the imperial court decided to move the capital to Luoyang, Emperor Xuanzong sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowen saying:

古文：其一曰：窃闻舆驾今夏若不巡三齐，当幸中山，窃以为非计也。
现代文： 其一说：臣听说皇驾今年夏天如果不巡察三齐，就去中山，臣私下以为这是不妥当的做法。
English: One said: "The minister heard that if the emperor did not inspect Sanqi this summer, he would go to Zhongshan. The minister privately thought that this was an inappropriate approach."

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：当今徭役宜早息，洛京宜速成。
现代文：当今的徭役应早早停息，洛京新都宜速建成。
English: Today's construction should be stopped as soon as possible, and the new capital should be built as soon as possible.

古文：省费则徭役可简，并功则洛京易就。
现代文：节省费用则徭役便可俭简，与民合功则洛京易就。
English: By saving costs and expenses, the maintenance work can be reduced; by combining some unnecessary projects, Luoyang can be built as early as possible.

古文：往冬舆驾停鄴，是闲隙之时，犹编户供奉，劳费为剧。
现代文：去年冬天皇驾停居邺城，是闲暇间隙之时，犹且编制户民供奉车马，劳扰百姓，费耗民财很多。
English: Last winter, when the emperor stopped in Juyeongseong, it was a leisure break, and even the preparation of households to provide chariots and horses disturbed the people and consumed a lot of people's money.

古文：圣鉴矜愍，优旨殷勤，爵浃高年，赉周鳏寡，虽赈普霑今，犹恐来夏菜色。
现代文：皇上圣明，怜悯百姓，恩旨不断，爵披高年百姓，赉赏周遍孤独之民，但是尽管赈贷普及万民，臣仍担心来年百姓仍会受到饥寒之苦。
English: Emperor Shengming, pitying the people, continued to bestow favors on the elderly people, and rewarded the lonely people everywhere. However, despite the widespread use of loans, the minister was still worried that the people would still suffer from hunger and cold next year.

古文：况三农要时，六军云会，其所损业，实为不少。
现代文：何况三农要时，六军云会，其所损害农业的情况，实为不少。
English: What's more, at a time when the three agriculture ministries and the six armed forces are in the ascendant, the damage to agriculture will be considerable.

古文：虽调敛轻省，未足称劳，然大驾亲临，谁敢宁息？
现代文：虽然说国家赋税俭敛，徭役减省，说不上烦劳百姓，然而大驾亲临，官民谁敢怠慢？
English: Although it cannot be said that the state is frugal in tax collection and thrifty in reducing the number of civil servants, it cannot be said that the people are overworked. However, if you come to visit, who will dare to neglect the officials and the people?

古文：往来承奉，纷纷道路，田蚕暂废，则将来无资。
现代文：于是，官民往来承奉，纷集道路，农耕蚕桑暂时就顾不上了，这样将来便无资可依。
English: As a result, the government and the people will not be able to take care of the roads and agricultural silkworms for the time being, so there will be no resources to rely on in the future.

古文：此国之深忧也。
现代文：这是国家所深为忧患的。
English: This is a matter of deep concern for the country.

古文：且向炎暑，而六军暴露，恐生疠疫，此可忧之次也。
现代文：而且先前炎天暑热，而六军暴露野外，臣担心会生瘟疫，这是第二可忧虑的。
English: Moreover, it was hot and humid before, and the Six Armies were exposed to the open air. The vassal was worried that there would be a plague. This was the second worry.

古文：臣愿舆驾早还北京，以省诸州供帐之费，并功专力，以营洛邑。
现代文：臣希望皇上车驾早还京城，以省免各州供奉之费，并功专力，营建洛京。
English: The minister hoped that the emperor would drive back to the capital as soon as possible, so as to save the expenses of the states, and devote himself to the construction of Beijing.

古文：则南州免杂徭之烦，北都息分析之叹；洛京可以时就，迁者佥尔如归。
现代文：这样南部州郡免了杂碎徭役之苦，北部都城少了离别之叹，洛京便可很快建成，迁者都会有如归的感觉。
English: In this way, the southern prefectures and counties were spared the hardships of serving as a hodgepodge, the northern capital city was spared the parting sigh, and the city of Loking could be built quickly, and those who moved would feel at home.

古文：其二曰：自古圣帝必以俭约为美，乱主必以奢侈贻患。
现代文： 其二说：自古圣帝必定都以俭约为美，乱世之主必会因奢侈而留下祸患。
English: The second said: Since ancient times, holy emperors must have used frugality for beauty, and the lord of the chaotic world must have left behind disasters due to extravagance.

古文：仰惟先朝，皆卑宫室而致力于经略，故能基宇开广，业祚隆泰。
现代文：臣仰观先朝，皇帝们都卑小宫室而致力于治理国家，所以能够使国家开阔广大，皇帝基业命祚隆盛安泰。
English: The previous emperors of my dynasty all reduced the expenses of the imperial palace and devoted themselves to managing national affairs, so they were able to make the foundation expand widely and the national movement flourish and prosper.

古文：今洛阳基址，魏明帝所营，取讥前代。
现代文：今天洛阳城基址，是魏明帝当年所营造的，被前代之人所取笑。
English: Today, the foundation site of Luoyang City was built by Wei Mingdi, and was ridiculed by the previous generation.

古文：伏愿陛下，损之又损。
现代文：臣认为陛下应减小再减小。
English: In my opinion, Your Majesty should decrease and decrease.

古文：顷来北都富室，竞以第宅相尚，今因迁徙，宜申禁约，令贵贱有检，无得逾制。
现代文：近来北都富家。竞相以宅第豪华彼此攀比夸耀，而今乘着迁都，皇上应申明禁约，责令贵贱之家有个区别，不得逾越制度。
English: In the past, the rich people in the northern capital compared the luxury of their mansions to see who was more luxurious. Now, taking the opportunity to move the capital, it is necessary to declare a ban, so that the homes of the poor and the rich have a certain standard and cannot exceed the state's regulations.

古文：端广衢路，通利沟渠，使寺署有别，四民异居，永垂百世不刊之范，则天下幸甚矣。
现代文：朝廷应广兴交通，兴修水利，应使官府各部门区别清楚，四方百姓异地而居，立下永垂百世不改的范式，那么就是天下人的大幸了。
English: The imperial court should expand transportation, build water conservancy, and make clear the differences between government departments. The people of the four directions should live in different places and establish a paradigm that will never change. Then it will be a great blessing for the people of the world.

古文：三曰：窃闻舆驾还洛阳，轻将数千骑。
现代文： 其三说：臣听说皇驾还归洛阳，只有区区数千骑兵跟随。
English: A third said: "I have heard that the emperor has returned to Luoyang, accompanied only by a few thousand cavalry."

古文：臣甚为陛下不取也。
现代文：臣很是为陛下觉得这不应该。
English: The minister feels very strongly on behalf of His Majesty that this should not happen.

古文：夫千金之子，犹坐不垂堂，况万乘之尊，富有四海乎？
现代文：大凡千金之子，犹且坐不临堂，更何况万乘之尊，富有四海的皇帝呢？
English: How great a son of a thousand golds, and yet he does not sit in the hall, how much more the emperor, who is respected by all, and who is rich in the four seas?

古文：警跸于闱闼之内者，岂以为仪容而已？盖以戒不虞也。
现代文：军队随驾，为的是保卫一国之主，哪里只是仅为仪容摆设呢，这是为了防备不测啊。
English: The army accompanies, in order to defend the lord of a country, where it is just a mere decoration, this is in order to prevent accidents.

古文：清道而后行，尚恐衔蹶之或失，况履涉山河，而不加三思哉！
现代文：清除道路之后皇帝出行，还怕马失前蹄，有个闪失，何况今天跋山涉水，陛下怎能不加考虑！
English: After clearing the road, the emperor travels, but he is still afraid of losing his horse's front hoof, there is a flash loss, moreover, today he is wading through the mountains, how can his majesty not take it into account!

古文：此愚臣之所以悚息，伏愿少垂省察。
现代文：这是愚臣为之担惊受怕的，诚望陛下稍加考虑。
English: This is what fools fear. I hope His Majesty will give it some thought.

古文：其四曰：伏惟陛下，耳听法音，目玩坟典，口对百辟，心虞万几，晷昃而食，夜分而寝。
现代文： 其四说：臣考虑陛下耳听佛音，眼看群书，口对诸侯之言，心思家国大事，日晏而食，三更才睡。
English: The fourth one said, "Your Majesty, I think you should listen to the sound of the Buddha, read books with your eyes, listen to the words of the princes, think about the great events of your country, eat while the sun shines, and only sleep for three days."

古文：加以孝思之至，随时而深，文章之业，日成篇卷。
现代文：加上孝心深厚，尽礼尽节；文章事业，日成篇卷。
English: In addition, he has a deep sense of filial piety, and is polite and courteous at all times.

古文：虽睿明所用，未足为烦，然非所以啬神养性，颐无疆之祚。
现代文：尽管陛下样样得心应手，而且不知厌倦，但这不是珍惜精神、怡养天性、以享无疆福分的行为。
English: Although His Majesty is very handy at everything and never gets tired of it, this is not an act of cherishing the spirit, nurturing nature, and enjoying boundless happiness.

古文：庄周有言：形有待而智无涯。以有待之形，役无涯之智，殆矣。
现代文：庄周说：人的形体是有依恃限度的，而智慧无边无际，以有限制的形体，追无边的智慧，很危险啊。
English: Zhuang Zhou said: The human body has a limit, but wisdom is boundless. It is very dangerous to pursue boundless wisdom with a limited body.

古文：此愚臣所不安，伏愿陛下垂拱司契，委下责成，唯冕旒垂纩，而天下治矣。
现代文：陛下这一点让为臣深感不安，臣诚恳希望陛下端临百官，委事臣属，只要经常监督群臣，那么天下便可大治了。 
English: This made His Majesty deeply uneasy as a vassal. The vassal sincerely hoped that His Majesty would visit the hundreds of officials and subordinates, and as long as he constantly supervised the vassals, then the world could be governed.

古文：高祖颇纳之。
现代文：高祖痛快地接受了他的意见。
English: Gaozu happily accepted his opinion.

古文：显宗又上言曰： 进贤求才，百王之所先也。
现代文：韩显宗又上书说： 进举贤才，这是百王首先考虑的问题。
English: Han Xianzong also wrote: "Promoting talents is the first consideration of the hundred emperors.

古文：前代取士，必先正名，故有贤良、方正之称。
现代文：前代取士，必先刊正名分，所以有贤良、方正的说法。
English: The previous generation of samurai recruits had to have their names published first, which is why there is a saying about them being virtuous and upright.

古文：今之州郡贡察，徒有秀、孝之名，而无秀、孝之实。
现代文：而今州郡贡举察访的人，白白地拥有秀才、孝廉的名称，却无秀才、孝廉的事实。
English: However, the people of Imazu County's tribute inspection have the names of talent and filial piety in vain, but the fact that there is no talent and filial piety.

古文：而朝廷但检其门望，不复弹坐。
现代文：而朝廷只检查该人的门望出身，不再对他的错误进行批评和弹劾。
English: The court only looked at their family name and did not consider any other conditions.

古文：如此，则可令别贡门望，以叙士人，何假冒秀、孝之名也？
现代文：像这样，则只要贡举门望家庭出身以选择士人就行了，何必假冒秀才、孝廉的名称呢？
English: In this way, it is enough to look at the family background to choose a scholar. Why do you have to pretend to be a talented person or a filial son?

古文：夫门望者，是其父祖之遗烈，亦何益于皇家？
现代文：而门望是其父祖的遗烈，对皇家有什么好处？
English: And what good is it for the royal family if the heir to the throne is the last survivor of his ancestors?

古文：益于时者，贤才而已。
现代文：有益于时政的，才是贤才。
English: What is useful to the country is a virtuous and outstanding talent.

古文：苟有其才，虽屠钓奴虏之贱，圣皇不耻以为臣；苟非其才，虽三后之胤，自坠于皁隶矣。
现代文：如果一个人有他的才能，即使是屠夫钓者奴婢虏夫这样低贱的人，圣皇也不应以其为臣而觉得有什么不光彩；如不是其才，虽然是三公的后代，也应自行坠落与皂隶没有区别。
English: If he has talent, although he was born as lowly as a butcher, fisherman, slave, and prisoner, Your Holiness should not be ashamed to make them your vassals; if he does not have talent, although he is a descendant of King Dayu, King Shangtang, and King Zhouwen, he will also be reduced to a servant of soap.

古文：是以大才受大官，小才受小官，各得其所，以致雍熙。
现代文：所以大才授大官，小才授小官，各得其所，才会使家国和乐。
English: Therefore, only those who are great can be promoted to high-ranking officials, and only those who are small can be promoted to low-ranking officials.

古文：议者或云，今世等无奇才，不若取士于门。
现代文：也许有人说，而今世上没有奇才，不如取士于有名望的门庭。
English: It may be said that there are no wizards in the world today, but it is better to be a member of a prestigious court.

古文：此亦失矣。
现代文：这种说法也有不妥之处。
English: This is also wrong.

古文：岂可以世无周邵，便废宰相而不置哉？
现代文：怎么可以因为世上没有周公、邵公那样的人，朝廷便可不设置宰相了呢？
English: How can the imperial court not appoint a prime minister because there are no people like Zhou Gong and Shao Gong in the world?

古文：但当校其有寸长铢重者，即先叙之，则贤才无遗矣。 
现代文：我们应当比较世人当中有些长处的人，然后便先录用，那么就会不漏掉人才了。 又说：
English: Only if he passes the assessment and is considered to have the ability of an inch long and heavy, can he be assigned to a post first, so that the talent will not be lost.

古文：又曰： 夫帝皇所以居尊以御下者，威也；兆庶所以徙恶以从善者，法也。
现代文： 大凡皇帝之所以居尊以统治下属的法宝是威制，黎民所以改恶而从善的原因是法律。
English: The reason why the great emperor respected and used the magic weapon to rule his subordinates was coercion, and the reason why the people changed from evil to good was the law.

古文：是以有国有家，必以刑法为治，生民之命，于是而在。
现代文：因为如此，所以治国治家，必须以法律为依据，老百姓的生命，于是可以有保障。
English: Because of this, governing the country and the family must be based on the law, and the lives of the people can be guaranteed.

古文：有罪必罚，罚必当辜，则虽箠挞之刑，而人莫敢犯也。
现代文：有罪必定惩罚，罚刑一定与罪轻重相符，那么即使是鞭打之类较轻的刑罚，别人也一定不敢冒犯。
English: Guilty must be punished, and the punishment must be commensurate with the severity of the crime, so even if it is a lighter punishment such as whipping, others must not dare to offend.

古文：有制不行，人得侥幸，则虽参夷之诛，不足以肃。
现代文：有制不行，人们都怀侥幸心理，那么即使是施以杀头这样的重刑，也不足以整肃民心。
English: With a legal system that does not enforce, people are lucky, then, although the use of heavy punishment to exterminate the three ethnic groups, it can not eliminate criminal behavior.

古文：自太和以来，多坐盗弃市，而远近肃清。
现代文：皇魏自太和年间以来，没有推行因盗杀头弃市的刑罚，而国家整肃清平。
English: Since the Taiping era, Emperor Wei did not enforce the punishment of abandoning the city due to theft and murder, and the country began to clean up.

古文：由此言之，止奸在于防检，不在严刑也。
现代文：由此而言，禁止奸邪在于预防纠检，而不在严厉的刑罚。
English: Therefore, the prohibition of adultery lies in the prevention and correction, not in the severe punishment.

古文：今州郡牧守，邀当时之名，行一切之法；台阁百官，亦咸以深酷为无私，以仁恕为容盗。
现代文：而今州郡牧守，为邀当时之名，而行一切之法；台阁百官，也都以严酷为无私，以仁恕为纵容盗奸。
English: But Imazu County's herdsman, in order to invite the name of the time, carried out all the laws; the cabinet officials, too, were ruthless and selfless, and condoned theft and treason with mercy.

古文：迭相敦厉，遂成风俗。
现代文：越演越厉害，久之便成风俗。
English: The more it is performed, the more powerful it becomes, and over time it becomes a custom.

古文：陛下居九重之内，视人如赤子；百司分万务之要，遇下如仇雠。
现代文：皇帝陛下起居九重皇宫之内，视人如赤子；百司分理天下繁细事务，对待下属便如仇敌。
English: His Majesty lives in a nine-storied palace and treats the people like babies; the various departments of the Imperial Court are responsible for handling various affairs, but they are like enemies to the people.

古文：是则尧舜止一人，而桀纣以千百。
现代文：所以尧舜只一人，而桀纣成百上千。
English: That's why you don't see just one person, but hundreds and thousands of them.

古文：和气不至，盖由于此。
现代文：上下之间不能和平处之，都是由于这一点引起的。
English: The fact that there is no peace between the upper and lower classes is caused by this.

古文：《书》曰： 与其杀不辜，宁失不经。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 与其杀害无罪的，不如宽懈刑罚。 
English: The scripture says, "It is better to err on the side of caution than to kill an innocent person."

古文：实宜敕示百僚，以惠元元之命。 
现代文：这句话实在应该赐示百官，从而让他们爱惜百姓生命。 
English: This sentence should really be given to all officials, so that they cherish the lives of the people.

古文：又曰： 昔周王为犬戎所逐，东迁河洛，镐京犹称 宗周 ，以存本也。
现代文：又说： 过去周王被犬戎所逐，东迁河、洛之间，镐京仍然称 宗周 ，意在保存根本。
English: He also said: In the past, King Zhou was chased away by Injun Rong, and between Dongjianhe and Luo, Beijing was still called Zongzhou, which was intended to preserve the fundamentals.

古文：光武虽曰中兴，实自创革，西京尚置京尹，亦不废旧。
现代文：光武虽称中兴，实际上是别有创新，但西京还设置京尹之职，也不废弃旧置。
English: Although Guangwu said that ZTE was the best, it was actually a different innovation, but West Beijing also set up the post of Beijing Yin, and did not abandon the old post.

古文：今陛下光隆先业，迁宅中土，稽古复礼，于斯为盛。岂若周汉出于不得已哉？
现代文：今天陛下隆盛光大先祖事业，迁宫中原，稽古复礼，以此为盛，岂止是周代汉朝所能比的呢，然而这也是不得已而采取的做法。
English: Today, His Majesty's prosperity is comparable to that of the Han Dynasty, thanks to the success of his ancestors' undertakings, the relocation of the Imperial Palace to Zhongyuan, and the revival of the ancient rites. However, this was a last resort.

古文：按《春秋》之义，有宗庙曰都，无则谓之邑，此不刊之典也。
现代文：臣查《春秋》书义，有宗庙的称为都，没有宗庙的就称邑，这是不变的法典。
English: According to the text of "Spring and Autumn," if there is a family temple, it is called a capital, and if there is no family temple, it is called a town. This is an unchanging legal code.

古文：况北代宗庙在焉，山陵托焉，王业所基，圣躬所载，其为神乡福地，实亦远矣。
现代文：何况北面代州是魏宗庙所在地，帝家山陵也在那里，王业底基，圣上的资本，代州是神乡福地，实在距京也很远了。
English: What's more, Daizhou in the north is the location of the Wei Dynasty Temple, the Imperial Family Mausoleum is also there, the foundation of the royal industry, the sacred capital, Daizhou is the blessed land of the gods, and it is really far away from Beijing.

古文：今便同之郡国，臣窃不安。
现代文：而今却与郡国相同，毫无突出之处，臣私下里深为不安。
English: I'm very uneasy about the fact that the capital is now just the same as an ordinary county.

古文：愚谓代京宜建畿置尹，一如故事，崇本重旧，以光万叶。 
现代文：愚臣认为代京也应建都畿设京尹，与前代做法一样，崇本重旧，以光万业。 
English: The follower believed that the current capital should also be built in the Kansai region and the capital should be located in Yin. As with the previous generation's approach, the principle of reverence for the past and the pursuit of excellence should be upheld.

古文：又曰： 伏见洛京之制，居民以官位相从，不依族类。
现代文：又说： 臣见洛京之制，官民以官位相从，而不依族类而居。
English: He also said: Under the system of vassalage to the imperial capital, officials and commoners are ranked according to their official positions, rather than according to their ethnic groups.

古文：然官位非常，有朝荣而夕悴，则衣冠沦于厮竖之邑，臧获腾于膏腴之里。物之颠倒，或至于斯。
现代文：但官位并非长久不衰，有朝荣而夕败的，沦败之后原本达官贵人就会沦落在平民之乡，原本混迹卑贱之中的庶民也许会荣耀于豪门大院。物之颠倒，或至如此。
English: But the official position is not long-lasting. If there is a victory and a defeat, after the defeat, the originally high-ranking dignitaries will fall into the country of the commoners, and the commoners who were originally among the lowly may be glorified in the mansion. Things are upside down, or so.

古文：古之圣王，必令四民异居者，欲其业定而志专。
现代文：古代圣王，必定让四方之民各处其地，安居乐业而且务业志专。
English: The ancient holy king must have allowed the people of the four directions to live and work in peace and tranquility in their respective places, and to concentrate on their business.

古文：业定则不伪，志专则不淫。
现代文：本业稳定老百姓则不会乱来，志专则不会流于流俗。
English: If the industry is stable, the people will not be chaotic, and the aspirants will not drift into the mainstream.

古文：故耳目所习，不督而就；父兄之教，不肃而成。
现代文：这样就会使百姓日受本业耳濡目染，官府不用监督他们就会好好务本业的；人伦物理方面受到父兄的潜移默化，官府不用整肃，他们就会自然向礼的。
English: In this way, the common people will be more and more familiar with the subject, and the government will not have to supervise them to do a good job; the humanities and physics will be subtly influenced by the father and brother, and the government will not have to clean up, and they will naturally be polite.

古文：仰惟太祖道武皇帝创基拨乱，日不暇给，然犹分别士庶，不令杂居；伎作屠沽，各有攸处。
现代文：仰思太祖道武皇帝创立基业，拨乱反正，日理万机，茶饭不思，仍然区别士人庶民，不让他们混杂居住，戏子匠人、屠夫沽徒，各人都有合适的位置。
English: Looking back on the founding of the foundation by Emperor Daowu, the founder of Taoism, it is still the case that there is still a distinction between scholars and commoners, and they are not allowed to live together. Every person has a suitable position, whether he is an actor, craftsman or butcher.

古文：但不设科禁，卖买任情，贩贵易贱，错居混杂。
现代文：如果不设科律禁令，市场买卖任其自然，买卖价格贵贱不约，就会出现错乱杂居的局面。
English: If there is no legal prohibition, and market trading is allowed to take its natural course, and trading prices are high and low, there will be a situation of chaotic miscegenation.

古文：假令一处弹筝吹笛，缓舞长歌；一处严师苦训，诵诗讲礼。
现代文：假使一个地方弹筝吹笛，缓舞长歌；另一个地方严师苦训，诵诗讲礼。
English: Suppose that in one place you play the kite and flute and slow-dance a long song; in another place you undergo rigorous training and recite poetry.

古文：宣令童龀，任意所从，其走赴舞堂者万数，往就学馆者无一。
现代文：发出告示，让儿童少年，随便选其所好，那么他们之中跑到歌舞场所的会有成千上万，而到学校学习的将没有一个人。
English: If you put out a notice asking children and adolescents to choose whatever they like, then there will be thousands of them running to the song and dance venues, but none of them will go to school.

古文：此则伎作不可杂居，士人不宜异处之明验也。
现代文：这就是戏子匠人不可杂居，士人不宜异处的明确验证。
English: This is the best proof that craftsmen should not live together, and readers should not live together with people engaged in other professions.

古文：故孔父云里仁之美，孟母弘三徙之训，贤圣明诲，若此之重。
现代文：所以孔夫子有 里仁之美 的说法，孟母有三迁其居的训子之道，圣贤教训，如此之重。
English: Therefore, Confucius said that Confucius had the beauty of Liren, and Meng mother had three ways of training her son, and the teachings of the sages were so important.

古文：今令伎作家习士人风礼，则百年难成；令士人兒童效伎作容态，则一朝可得。
现代文：现在如让戏子匠人学习士人的习惯礼节，那么百年都难以学成；而让士人家的孩子仿效匠人戏子的行为举止，那很快就学会了。
English: Nowadays, if you ask an actor-craftsman to learn the customary etiquette of a scholar, it will be difficult to learn for a hundred years; but if you ask a scholar's child to imitate the behavior of an actor-craftsman, it will be learned quickly.

古文：是以士人同处，则礼教易兴；伎作杂居，则风俗难改。
现代文：所以说士人集中在一起，礼教就容易兴旺；戏子匠人杂乱居住，那就会让不好的风俗难以改掉。
English: Therefore, it is said that when scholars are concentrated together, it is easy for etiquette to flourish; when artists and craftsmen live in a disorderly manner, it will make it difficult to change bad customs.

古文：朝廷每选举人士，则校其一婚一宦，以为升降，何其密也。
现代文：朝廷每次选举人才，都检校其婚姻状况、为官经历，作为提拔或降职依据，工作做得是何等细密。
English: Every time the imperial court elects a person, it checks their marital status and experience as an official, as a basis for promotion or demotion, and how meticulously the work is done.

古文：至于开伎作宦途，得与膏梁华望接闬连甍，何其略也。
现代文：至于打开戏子匠人的官宦之路，让他们与高官豪贵们连门接屋，这是什么策略。
English: As for opening the path to high office for actors and craftsmen, and letting them mingle with dignitaries, what kind of strategy is that?

古文：此愚臣之所惑。
现代文：这是愚臣所大惑不解的。
English: This is the reason why the fools are puzzled.

古文：今稽古建极，光宅中区，凡所徙居，皆是公地，分别伎作，在于一言，有何为疑而阙盛美。 
现代文：如今圣朝稽查往古，建立王法，光被天下，黎民百姓，不管迁往何地，都是皇魏地域，而分开区别戏子匠人，只在于皇上一句话，这对皇上来说有什么难的，而以此导致圣朝大美缺损就不值了。 
English: Nowadays, the Holy Emperor's inspection of the past, the establishment of the king's law, the light of the world, the Li people, no matter where they move to, are the imperial Wei region, and the difference between the actors and craftsmen is only in the emperor's one sentence, which is difficult for the emperor, and it is not worth it to lead to the great beauty of the Holy Empire.

古文：又曰： 自南伪相承，窃有淮北，欲擅中华之称，且以招诱边民，故侨置中州郡县。
现代文：又说： 自从南边伪政权代代相传，窃取淮河以北，想占有我中华原有各种称呼，而且大量招纳引诱我边境之民，从而侨设中州郡县，与我魏郡县名称相重。
English: He also said: Ever since the south-side pseudo-regime has been passed down from generation to generation, stealing everything north of the Huaihe River, trying to occupy my original China with various names, and recruiting a large number of people to lure people from my border, so that foreigners set up Zhongzhou County, which overlaps with the name of my Wei County.

古文：自皇风南被，仍而不改，凡有重名，其数甚众。
现代文：从皇魏势力南被，他们仍不改称，从而重名郡县的数目特别众多。
English: From the imperial and Wei forces southward, they still do not change their names, so the number of counties with different names is particularly large.

古文：疑惑书记，错乱区宇。非所以疆域物土，必也正名之谓也。
现代文：这导致各种书章记录的混乱，把天下弄得混乱不堪，要区别疆域物土，必须重新严格勘定名称。
English: This has led to the confusion of various book chapter records, which has made the world unbearably confusing. In order to distinguish between territory, material and land, it is necessary to strictly recalculate the account name.

古文：愚以为可依地理旧名，一皆厘革。
现代文：愚臣认为可依照地理旧名，全都重新厘定。
English: He thought that everything could be re-evaluated according to the old geographical names.

古文：小者并合，大者分置。
现代文：小州合并，大的分别而置。
English: Small states merged, large ones separated.

古文：及中州郡县，昔以户少并省；今人口既多，亦可复旧。
现代文：及中部郡县，过去因户数少而合并的，如果今天人口增加了，也可分州而治。
English: And the central counties, which were merged in the past due to the small number of households, may also be divided into states if the population increases today.

古文：君人者，以天下为家，不得有所私也。
现代文：作为皇帝的人，应以天下为家，不能有什么私念。
English: As an emperor, one should regard the whole world as his home, and should not have any selfish thoughts.

古文：故仓库储贮，以俟水旱之灾，供军国之用，至于有功德者，然后加赐。
现代文：所以仓库储备，是准备应付水旱灾害，提供军队国家用度的，至于那些有功德于国家的人，应该加以恩赐。
English: Therefore, the warehouse reserve is prepared to cope with floods and droughts, to provide the army with national needs, and as for those who have merit in the country, they should be rewarded.

古文：爰及末代，乃宠之所隆，赐赉无限。
现代文：当年功臣，恩荫后代，皇上于是宠遇隆厚，赏赐不断。
English: As a meritorious vassal of that year and a descendant of the imperial family, the emperor was greatly favored and constantly rewarded.

古文：自比以来，亦为太过。
现代文：过去到今，这也实在太过。
English: In the past and now, it's too much.

古文：在朝诸贵，受禄不轻，土木被锦绮，僮妾厌粱肉，而复厚赉屡加，动以千计。
现代文：现在朝廷的达官贵人，所受俸禄不轻，房舍披金挂彩，仆僮妾奴厌闻稻粱鱼肉，而皇上又加优厚的赏赐，动不动数以千计。
English: Nowadays, the high-ranking dignitaries of the imperial court receive not inconsiderable salaries, their houses are adorned with gold, their servants and concubines are fed up with rice and eel meat, and the emperor has also given them generous rewards. There are thousands of them.

古文：若分赐鳏寡，赡济实多。
现代文：如果陛下把这些东西分赐鳏寡孤独，可受接济的人实在非常之多。
English: If Your Majesty were to distribute these things to the widows and the lonely, there are so many people who could be helped.

古文：如不悛革，岂周给不继富之谓也？
现代文：如果不改变原来的做法，岂不就是周穷不比济富吗？
English: If we do not change the original practice, will it not be a case of the poor helping the rich?

古文：愚谓事有可赏，则明旨褒扬，称事加赐，以劝为善；不可以亲近之昵，猥损天府之储。 
现代文：愚臣认为如果谁事有可赏赐的，就明旨褒扬，扬其功绩赏其粟帛，以此劝人为国效力，而不可因其是近臣密戚，厚加赏赐，从而妄加减损国库储备。 
English: The foolish minister thought that if someone had something to be rewarded, he should praise him explicitly, and reward him with a millet poppy for his merits, in order to persuade him to work for the country, but not because he was a close relative of the minister, he should reward him heavily, thereby reducing the national treasury reserve.

古文：又曰： 诸宿卫内直者，宜令武官习弓矢，文官讽书传。
现代文：又说： 诸保卫皇宫、侍奉皇帝的人，应该让武官练习武功，文官勤读书传。
English: He also said: Those who guard the imperial palace and serve the emperor should let military officers practice martial arts, and civilian officials study history.

古文：而今给其蒱博之具，以成亵狎之容，长矜争之心，恣喧嚣之慢，徒损朝仪，无益事实。
现代文：而今天，却给予他们游戏赌博的工具，从而养成他们轻慢的作风，助长他们好斗的心理，纵容他们目中无人的习惯，徒自损害朝廷威仪，无助于国家政事。
English: Today, however, they are given the tools of games and gambling, thus fostering their frivolous style of work, encouraging their combative mentality, indulging their inhuman habits, and harming the dignity of the imperial court, and not helping national politics.

古文：如此之类，一宜禁止。 
现代文：像这些情形，就应一概禁止。 
English: Situations like these should be banned altogether.

古文：高祖善之。
现代文：高祖称赞他的建议。
English: Gao Zu appreciated Fan Yun very much.

古文：后乃启乞宋王刘昶府谘议参军事，欲立效南境，高祖不许。
现代文：后来，韩显宗上表请求任宋王刘昶府的谘议参军，想为南部军事效力，高祖没有答应。
English: Later, Han Xianzong requested the advice of Song King Liu Bei to join the army, and wanted to be militarily effective in the south, but Gaozu did not agree.

古文：高祖曾谓显宗及程灵虬曰： 著作之任，国书是司。
现代文：魏高祖曾对韩显宗及程灵虬说： 著作郎一职，是掌写国史的。
English: Wei Gao Zu once said to Han Xianzong and Cheng Lingyao: "The post of scribe is to write the history of the country.

古文：卿等之文，朕自委悉，中省之品，卿等所闻。
现代文：卿等文章，朕心中有数，中书省的品第高低，你们也知道。
English: Sir and other articles, I know the number in my heart, and you also know the grade of the province in the book.

古文：若欲取况古人，班马之徒，固自辽阔。
现代文：如要与古人相比，班固司马迁等人，固然比他们不上。
English: If you want to compare with the ancients, Ban Gu Sima Qian and others are certainly inferior to them.

古文：若求之当世，文学之能，卿等应推崔孝伯。 
现代文：但与当世才人比，文学方面的才能，你们中间应推崔光可与相比。 
English: If you compare with contemporary people, you should first nominate Cui Guang.

古文：又谓显宗曰： 见卿所撰《燕志》及在齐诗咏，大胜比来之文。
现代文：又对韩显宗说： 看到卿等所写的《燕志》以及在齐地时所咏诵的诗歌，比自往而来的文字强出许多。
English: He also said to Han Xianzong: "Seeing the "Yan Zhi" written by Jing and others and the poems recited at the time of Qi Di, it is much stronger than the words that came from the past.

古文：然著述之功，我所不见，当更访之监、令。
现代文：然而你在著述方面的功绩，我仍未见到，应当在监、令们那里进一步了解。
English: However, I have yet to see your achievements in the field of writing, which should be further understood by the prison wardens.

古文：校卿才能，可居中第。 
现代文：校比爱卿才能，我看可居中等。 
English: Compared with the talent of Aiqing, I think it can be a middle-ranking one.

古文：又谓程灵虬曰： 卿比显宗，复有差降，可居下上。 
现代文：又对程灵虬说： 你比韩显宗又有些差别，我看可居下上等。 
English: He also said to Cheng Lingyao, "You are somewhat different from Han Xianzong. I think you are better than him.

古文：显宗对曰： 臣才第短浅，猥闻上天，至乃比于崔光，实为隆渥。
现代文：韩显宗说： 为臣才学品第短粗轻浅，陛下却大加夸奖，甚至与崔光相比，实在是优遇太过。
English: Han Xianzong said, "His majesty praises his vassal's talent and learning, but it is too much praise. Even compared to Cui Guang, it is too much.

古文：然臣窃谓陛下贵古而贱今。臣学微才短，诚不敢仰希古人，然遭圣明之世，睹惟新之礼，染翰勒素，实录时事，亦未惭于后人。
现代文：但臣私下认为陛下贵古而贱今，人臣学识微薄，才识短浅，实在不敢仰比古往圣人，但遭逢圣明之世，眼睹惟新之举，掌笔有司，实录时事，为臣也觉得并不惭比于后人。
English: Privately, however, the vassal thought that his majesty was noble in the past, but cheap today. The vassal's knowledge was meager, and his talent was shallow. He really did not dare to look up to the saints of the past. However, when he was in the age of enlightenment, he witnessed a new move, had a good handwriting, and recorded current events. The vassal also felt that he was not ashamed to be compared to future generations.

古文：昔扬雄著《太玄经》，当时不免覆盎之谈，二百年外，则越诸子。
现代文：过去扬雄著《太玄经》，当年不免遭受批评，但二百年后，却越出诸子。
English: In the past, Yang Xiong's "Tao Xuan Jing" was criticized, but two hundred years later, it has become a bestseller.

古文：今臣之所撰，虽未足光述帝载，裨晖日月；然万祀之后，仰观祖宗巍巍之功，上睹陛下明明之德，亦何谢钦明于《唐典》，慎徽于《虞书》？ 
现代文：为臣今天所撰，虽然未必充分表现圣帝经历，以至与日月同辉，但万代之后，后人仰观祖宗巍巍之功，皇上睹陛下光天之德，也没什么比《唐典》逊色、比《虞书》稍差的地方。 
English: Although the book written by the minister today may not fully express the experience of the Holy Emperor, so much so that it shines like the sun and the moon, after thousands of generations, future generations will look up to the contribution of the ancestors, and emperors will see the virtue of His Majesty, and there is nothing inferior to the "Tang Dynasty" and slightly worse than the "Book of the State."

古文：高祖曰： 假使朕无愧于虞舜，卿复何如于尧臣？ 
现代文：魏高祖说： 假使我无愧于虞舜，卿比尧臣又如何呢？ 
English: Wei Gao Zu said: If I am worthy of the status of a magistrate, how is it better to be a lord than a vassal?

古文：显宗曰： 臣闻君不可以独治，故设百官以赞务。
现代文：韩显宗说： 臣听说为君的不能独自治理天下，所以设立百官以分理国家事务。
English: Han Xianzong said: I heard that you can't rule the world alone, so I set up a hundred officials to manage state affairs.

古文：陛下齐踪尧舜，公卿宁非二八之俦？ 
现代文：而陛下与尧舜齐名，公卿们哪敢比古代的八元逊色。 
English: But His Majesty is as famous as the emperor, and the nobles dare not be inferior to the ancient eight yuan.

古文：高祖曰： 卿为著作，仅名奉职，未是良史也。 
现代文：魏高祖说： 你任著作之职，仅能说是称职而已，还不能说是良吏。 
English: Wei Gaozu said: You are only qualified to be a writer, but you are not a good official.

古文：显宗曰： 臣仰遭明时，直笔而无惧，又不受金，安眠美食，此臣优于迁固也。 
现代文：韩显宗说： 臣仰逢明时，直笔而书毫不畏怕，又不受人贿赂，夜晚安眠，白天美食，这是为臣比当年班固、司马迁优越的地方。 
English: Han Xianzong said: "As a minister, I can see the light at any time, I am not afraid to write directly, and I am not bribed by others. I sleep well at night and eat delicious food during the day. This is a superior place for a minister compared to Ban Gu and Sima Qian in those days.

古文：高祖哂之。
现代文：高祖不以为然地笑了。
English: Gaozu laughed disapprovingly.

古文：后与员外郎崔逸等参定朝仪。
现代文：后来，韩显宗与员外郎崔逸等人一起议定朝廷仪礼。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanzong revised the etiquette of the imperial court together with members such as the concubine Cui Yat.

古文：高祖曾诏诸官曰： 自近代已来，高卑出身，恆有常分。
现代文：魏高祖曾经下诏书告示群官： 自近代以来，出身高低，总有一定的分别。
English: Emperor Gaozu of the Wei Dynasty once issued an imperial edict announcing to officials: Since modern times, there has always been a certain distinction between high and low birth.

古文：朕意一以为可，复以为不可。
现代文：朕觉得这样可以，又觉得这样不行。
English: I think it's OK, but I don't think it's OK.

古文：宜相与量之。 
现代文：大家应该加以讨论。 
English: We should discuss it.

古文：李冲对曰： 未审上古已来，置官列位，为欲为膏粱兒地，为欲益治赞时？ 
现代文：李冲回答说： 不知自从上古以来，设置官员列出朝位，是为的给他们富裕之地，还是想使官员们有益于时政？ 
English: Li Chong replied: I don't know, since ancient times, officials have been set up to list the imperial throne, is it to give them a place of wealth, or is it to make officials beneficial to current politics?

古文：高祖曰： 俱欲为治。 
现代文：高祖说： 都是想让他们治理国家。 
English: Gao Zu said: They all want to let them govern the country.

古文：冲曰： 若欲为治，陛下今日何为专崇门品，不有拔才之诏？ 
现代文：李冲说： 如果是要他们治理国家，陛下今天为什么专门推崇门第品位，而没有选拔人才的诏文？ 
English: Li Chong said: If they are to govern the country, why did His Majesty specifically promote the taste of the lineage today, but did not select talent?

古文：高祖曰： 苟有殊人之伎，不患不知。
现代文：高祖说： 如有特殊人才，朕不愁不知道。
English: Gao Zu said: If there is a special talent, I don't mind not knowing.

古文：然君子之门，假使无当世之用者，要自德行纯笃，朕是以用之。 
现代文：然而士君子门庭之中，即使没有治世奇才，只要他们德行纯厚笃实，朕便没有不用他们的理由。 
English: However, if the children of those who were born into a family with status have not yet been hired, I can appoint him as long as his morals are pure and strong.

古文：冲曰： 傅岩、吕望，岂可以门见举？ 
现代文：李冲说： 傅严、吕望，在古代哪里称得上是以门第出身而被荐举呢？ 
English: Li Chong asked: Can talents like Fu Yan and Lü Wang use their family background to decide whether they can be recommended?

古文：高祖曰： 如此济世者希，旷代有一两人耳。 
现代文：高祖说： 像这样的旷世奇才很少见，古往今来只有一两个人而已。 
English: Gao Zu said: It's rare to see such a miracle in history, and there have only been one or two people in history.

古文：冲谓诸卿士曰： 适欲请诸贤救之。 
现代文：李冲对众官员说： 正要诸贤解救。 
English: Li Chong said to the officials: It is time for all the sages to save us.

古文：秘书令李彪曰： 师旅寡少，未足为援，意有所怀，不敢尽言于圣日。
现代文：秘书令李彪说： 眼下军队人员寡少，不足为国家之用。臣心里有想法，不敢尽言于圣日。
English: Secretary Li Biao said: At present, the number of military personnel is small and insufficient for national use. The minister has thoughts in his heart and does not dare to speak out on the holy day.

古文：陛下若专以门地，不审鲁之三卿，孰若四科？ 
现代文：陛下如专论门第出身，不审分鲁的三卿之后，还是选人以四科？ 
English: Your Majesty, if you focus on the lineage of the family, do you not judge the three nobles, or do you choose people with four subjects?

古文：高祖曰： 犹如向解。 
现代文：魏高祖说： 关于这与前面说法相同。 
English: Wei Gaozu said: This is the same as the previous statement.

古文：显宗进曰： 陛下光宅洛邑，百礼唯新，国之兴否，指此一选。
现代文：韩显宗说： 陛下恩泽光被洛邑，百礼惟新，国家兴旺与否，全仗这种选举。
English: Han Xianzong said: His majesty's grace has been robbed by Luoyang, Bairei is only new, whether the country prospers or not, all depends on this election.

古文：臣既学识浮浅，不能援引古今，以证此议，且以国事论之。
现代文：为臣既然学识浮浅，不能够援引古今，以证明此义，姑且便以国事论证它。
English: Since the subject's knowledge is shallow and he cannot cite the past and the present to prove this, let him use national affairs to prove it.

古文：不审中、秘书监令之子，必为秘书郎；顷来为监、令者，子皆可为不？ 
现代文：如果不审别中省、秘书监令的后代如何，让他们都为秘书郎，向来为监、令们的后代，都可以当秘书监令、中书令不？ 
English: If we don't judge the descendants of the Chinese provincial and secretarial supervisors, let them all be secretaries. The descendants of those who have always been supervisors and superintendents can all be secretaries and superintendents, can they not?

古文：高祖曰： 卿何不论当世膏腴为监、令者？ 
现代文：魏高祖说： 卿何不论当世华贵为监、令的呢？ 
English: Wei Gao Zu said: Sir, what is the most important thing for a high-ranking official to do?

古文：显宗曰： 陛下以物不可类，不应以贵承贵，以贱袭贱。 
现代文：韩显宗说： 陛下认为物不可类比，不应该以贵承贵，以贱袭贱。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong replied, "Your Majesty thinks that there is no comparison. It is not right to always let the descendants of aristocrats inherit the positions of their predecessors. The lowly can only inherit the lowly positions.

古文：高祖曰： 若有高明卓尔、才具隽出者，朕亦不拘此例。 
现代文：魏高祖说： 如有高明卓著，才能出众的，朕也不拘于此例。 
English: Wei Gaozu said: If there is a brilliant and outstanding talent, I am not concerned with this example.

古文：后为本州中正。
现代文：后来又让韩显宗为其本州中正。
English: Han Xianzong later became the vice-governor of Honshu.

古文：二十一年，车驾南伐，显宗为右军府长史、征虏将军、统军。
现代文：太和二十一年，皇帝车驾南伐，韩显宗为右军府长史、征虏将军、统军。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Taisho era, the emperor drove southward, and Han Xianzong became the right-wing military governor, conscript general, and unified army.

古文：军次赭阳，萧鸾戍主成公期遣其军主胡松、高法援等并引蛮贼来击军营，显宗亲率拒战，遂斩法援首。
现代文：军队驻扎在赭阳，萧鸾守将成公期派遣他的军主胡松、高法援等人带领蛮贼前来偷袭军营，韩显宗亲自率军迎战，砍下法援首级。
English: The army was stationed in Fenyang. When he became emperor, Xiao Hongshou sent his military commander Hu Song, Gao Fa Yuan and others to lead the barbarians to raid the military camp. Han Xianzong personally led the army to fight and cut off Fa Yuan's head.

古文：显宗至新野，高祖诏曰： 卿破贼斩帅，殊益军势。朕方攻坚城，何为不作露布也？ 
现代文：韩显宗到新野，魏高祖下诏说： 卿破敌斩帅，大增军队声势，但朕正攻坚城，你为什么不写露布告示？ 
English: When Han Xianzong went to Xinyo, Wei Gaozhu issued an edict saying: "Sir, you have defeated the enemy and decisively defeated the enemy, and greatly increased the army's momentum, but I am attacking Jiancheng, why don't you write an open notice?

古文：显宗曰： 臣顷闻镇南将军王肃获贼二三，驴马数匹，皆为露布，臣在东观，私每哂之。
现代文：韩显宗说： 臣过去听说镇南将军王肃抓住两三名俘虏，几匹驴马，都写上露布，臣当时在东宫，私下里每每发出嘲笑。
English: Han Xianzong said: In the past, the minister heard that the Zhenan general Wang Su had captured two or three captives, several donkeys and horses, all of which were written on the cloth. The minister was in the East Palace at the time, and privately ridiculed each one.

古文：近虽仰凭威灵，得摧丑虏，兵寡力弱，擒斩不多。
现代文：近日臣虽然仰凭圣上威灵，得以摧坏丑虏，然臣兵少力薄，擒斩敌人不多。
English: Now, although I am able to defeat my enemies with the help of the holy spirit, due to the small number of soldiers and the lack of strength, I am not able to capture and kill many enemy thieves.

古文：脱复高曳长缣，虚张功捷，尤而效之，其罪弥甚。
现代文：假如夸大事实，虚报功捷，效法当年王肃做法，其罪更大。
English: If you exaggerate the facts, falsely claim success, and follow the practice of Wang Su, your crime will be even greater.

古文：臣所以敛毫卷帛，解上而已。 
现代文：臣之所以收笔敛布，宽解圣上而已。 
English: The reason why the vassal restrained his writing was only because of the grace of the emperor.

古文：高祖笑曰： 如卿此勋，诚合茅社，须赭阳平定，检审相酬。 
现代文：魏高祖笑着说： 像爱卿这样的功劳，实在是为国立下大功，等到赭阳平定之后，朕再检审战绩，表记功劳。 
English: Wei Gaozu said with a smile: Such a merit as Aiqing's is really a great service to the country. After the subjugation of Fenyang, I will re-examine the record and record the merit.

古文：新野平，以显宗为镇南、广阳王嘉谘议参军。
现代文：新野平定之后，魏高祖让韩显宗任镇南、广阳王元嘉府的谘议参军。
English: After Hino was pacified, Emperor Gaozong of Wei asked Han Xianzong to join the army after consulting with Zhennan and Wangyuanjia of Guangyang.

古文：显宗后上表，颇自矜伐，诉前征勋。
现代文：韩显宗后来上书表奏，很是夸耀，诉述前番征战功勋。
English: Han Xianzong later wrote a book, which was very boastful, recounting the merits of the previous war.

古文：诏曰： 显宗斐然成章，甚可怪责，进退无检，亏我清风。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 韩显宗斐然成章，很可怪责，进退无检，亏损我朝清风。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: Han Xian Zong is a great success, very blameworthy, advancing and retreating without inspection, and the loss is my morning breeze.

古文：此而不纠，或长弊俗。
现代文：像这样都不纠整，将会助长不良风气。
English: If they don't rectify things like this, it will foster a bad culture.

古文：可付尚书，推列以闻。 
现代文：可把他交付尚书省，仔细推检调查。 
English: He can be handed over to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology for a thorough investigation.

古文：兼尚书张彝奏免显宗官。诏曰： 显宗虽浮矫致愆，才犹可用，岂得永弃之也！
现代文：兼尚书张彝上书奏请免去韩显宗官职，皇帝下诏说： 韩显宗虽然浮夸矫饰招致过失，但他的才能仍可被用，哪里能够永被弃置呢！
English: In addition, Han Xianzong was asked to be relieved of his official position, and the emperor issued an edict saying: Although Han Xianzong's pompous mannerism caused mistakes, his talent can still be used, where can it be abandoned forever!

古文：可以白衣守谘议，展其后效。
现代文：可以以白衣身份守谘议之职，以观后效。
English: You can hold the advisory position as a white-coated person, and act as a spectator.

古文：但鄙狠之性，不足参华，可夺见囗，并禁问讯诸王。 
现代文：但他生性鄙陋狠凶，不足以参配荣华，可夺其□，并禁止他问讯诸王。 
English: However, his meanness and ferocity were not enough to match Ronghua's, and he was deprived of his right, and he was forbidden to question the kings.

古文：显宗既失意，遇信向洛，乃为五言诗赠御史中尉李彪曰： 贾生谪长沙，董儒诣临江。
现代文：韩显宗既然官途失意，遇信便往洛阳而去，于是又写五言诗赠送御史中尉李彪说： 贾生谪长沙，董儒诣临江。
English: Since Han Xianzong was disappointed in his official career, he went to Luoyang when he received the letter, so he also wrote a five-character poem to present to Lieutenant Li Biao, saying: Jia Sheng lives in Changsha, Dong Rong lives in Linjiang.

古文：愧无若人迹，忽寻两贤踪。
现代文：愧无若人迹，忽寻两贤踪。
English: With no trace of the young man, the search for the two sages is on.

古文：追昔渠阁游，策驽厕群龙。
现代文：追昔渠阁游，策驽厕群龙。
English: Tracing the past canal pavilion tour, plotting toilet dragons.

古文：如何情愿夺，飘然独远踪？
现代文：如何情愿夺，飘然独远从？
English: How would you like to snatch, flutter away from?

古文：痛哭去旧国，衔泪届新邦。
现代文：痛哭去旧国，衔泪届新邦。
English: Weeping for the old country, weeping for the new country.

古文：哀哉无援民，嗷然失侣鸿。
现代文：哀哉无援民，嗷然失侣鸿。
English: Alas, there is no help for the people, and they have lost their beloved.

古文：彼苍不我闻，千里告志同。 
现代文：彼苍不我闻，千里告志同。 
English: I've never heard of him, but he's a kindred spirit.

古文：二十三年卒。
现代文：太和二十三年去世。
English: Jianwu died 23 years ago.

古文：显宗撰《冯氏燕志》、《孝友传》各十卷，所作文章，颇传于世。
现代文：韩显宗撰《燕志》、《孝友传》各十卷，所写的文章，颇为流行。
English: The articles written by Han Xianzong, who compiled "The Biography of Yan Zhi" and "The Biography of Xiao You" in ten volumes each, are quite popular.

古文：景明初，追赭阳勋，赐爵章武男。
现代文：景明初年，朝廷追述其赭阳之功，赐爵章武男。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, the imperial court recounted his feats in the Sanyang Campaign and awarded him the title of Knight of the Military Division.

