古文：起玄黓执徐十月，尽柔兆涒滩，凡四年有奇。
现代文：起玄黓执徐十月，尽柔兆涒滩，凡四年有奇。
English: Every four years, there is a strange thing.

古文：元和七年壬辰，公元八一二年
现代文：唐宪宗元和七年
English: Tang Xian Zong Yuan and the Seven Years' War

古文：冬，十月，乙未，魏博监军以状闻，上亟召宰相，谓李绛曰： 卿揣魏博若符契。 
现代文：冬季十月，乙未，魏博监军将魏博将士废黜田怀谏，拥立田兴的文状上报，宪宗连忙召集宰相前来，对李绛说： 你的揣测和魏博的事态就像符节的两部分相互吻合一样哩。 
English: In the winter of October, Yi Wei, the Wei Bo supervisory army deposed the Wei Bo general Tian Huaiqi and supported the erection of Tian Xing, and reported the letter. The Constitutionalist quickly summoned the Prime Minister to come and said to Li Wei: Your speculation and the state of affairs in Wei Bo are like the two parts of the rune.

古文：李吉甫请遣中使宣慰以观其变，李绛曰： 不可。
现代文：李吉甫请求派遣中使前去安抚，以便观察事态的变化，李绛说： 这样做不恰当。
English: When Li Jifu requested that a middle-ranking envoy be sent to pacify the situation in order to observe changes in the situation, Li Zhe said: "It is not appropriate to do so."

古文：今田兴奉其土地兵众，坐待诏命，不乘此际推心抚纳，结以大恩，必待敕使至彼，持将士表来为请节钺，然后与之，则是恩出于下，非出于上，将士为重，朝廷为轻，其感戴之心亦非今日之比也。
现代文：现在，田兴献出魏博的土地与兵马，正在等候诏书发布命令。如果不趁此时机诚心抚慰并接纳他，以隆厚的恩典维系他，而一定要等候陛下派出的使者到魏博，拿着将士们的上表回来请求任命田兴为节度使，然后再授给他这一职务，这就是恩惠来自下边，而不出自上边，将士的作用大，而朝廷的作用小，田兴对朝廷感激与爱戴的心意也是不能够与现在相比的。
English: Now, Tian Xing has offered the land and soldiers and horses of Weibo and is waiting for the edict to be issued. If you do not take advantage of this time to soothe and accept him with tact and sincerity, and maintain him with generous grace, but must wait for the envoy sent by His Majesty to Weibo to return with the upper watch of the soldiers to request the appointment of Tian Xing as the festival envoy, and then grant him this position, this is the grace from below, not from above, the role of the soldiers is large, but the role of the court is small, Tian Xing's gratitude and love for the court can not be compared with the present.

古文：机会一失，悔之无及！ 
现代文：一旦失去这一时机，后悔也来不及了！ 
English: Once you lose this opportunity, it's too late to regret it!

古文：吉甫素与枢密使梁守谦相结，守谦亦为之言于上曰： 故事，皆遣中使宣劳，今此镇独无，恐更不谕。 
现代文：李吉甫平常与枢密使梁守谦相互勾结，梁守谦也替李吉甫向宪宗说： 根据惯例，对于这种情形，都是派遣中使前去慰劳，现在唯独不向魏博派遣中使，恐怕人们更加难以明白其中的道理了。 
English: Li Jifu usually colluded with the confidential envoy Liang Shouqian, and Liang Shouqian also said to Xianzong on behalf of Li Jifu: According to the usual practice, for this situation, the envoys are sent to comfort, but now they do not send the envoys to Weibo, I am afraid it is more difficult for people to understand the reason.

古文：上竟遣中使张忠顺如魏博宣慰，欲俟其还而议之。
现代文：宪宗最后还是派遣中使张忠顺前往魏博安抚将士，准备等候张忠顺回朝以后再商议此事。
English: In the end, Emperor Gensong sent an envoy to Zhang Zhongshun to Weibo to pacify the soldiers, and prepared to wait for Zhang Zhongshun to return to the North before discussing the matter.

古文：癸卯，李绛复上言： 朝廷恩威得失，在此一举，时机可惜，奈何弃之！
现代文：癸卯，李绛再次进言说： 朝延施加恩典与声威的成功与失败，就在这一次行动。出现这一时机，是值得珍惜的，怎么能够将它放弃呢！
English: Suddenly, Li Yao spoke up again and said, "The success and failure of Asanobu's exertion of grace and prestige is just this one action. This opportunity is worth cherishing, how can we give it up!

古文：利害甚明，愿圣心勿疑。
现代文：哪种做法有利有害，是非常清楚的，希望陛下心中不要再有疑虑了。
English: It is very clear which approach is beneficial and harmful, and I hope that His Majesty will no longer have doubts in his heart.

古文：计忠顺之行，甫应过陕，乞明旦即降白麻除兴节度使，犹可及也。 
现代文：计算张忠顺的行程，现在应当刚过陕州，请陛下明天早晨便颁布白麻纸诏书，任命田兴为节度使，这是还来得及的。 
English: Calculating Zhang Zhongshun's itinerary, it should be just past Shaanxi now. I would like to ask His Majesty to issue a white hemp paper edict tomorrow morning and appoint Tian Xing as the festival envoy. This is still in time.

古文：上欲且除留后，绛曰： 兴恭顺如此，自非恩出不次，则无以使之感激殊常。 
现代文：宪宗打算暂且任命田兴为留后，李绛说： 田兴恭敬顺从到这般地步，若不肯不拘等次地施加恩典，自然无法使他感激朝廷的超常待遇。 
English: After Kenzong planned to temporarily appoint Tian Xing to stay, Li Wei said: Tian Xing has respectfully obeyed to such an extent, if he is not willing to impose grace regardless of the order, it is naturally impossible for him to be grateful for the extraordinary treatment of the court.

古文：上从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了李绛的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：甲辰，以兴为魏博节度使。
现代文：甲辰，宪宗任命田兴为魏博节度使。
English: At that time, Jianzong appointed Tian Xing as Wei Bo's chief envoy.

古文：忠顺未还，制命已至魏州。兴感恩流涕，士众无不鼓舞。
现代文：张忠顺没有返回朝廷以前，宪宗的命令已经到达魏州，田兴因感激朝廷的恩典而流出了眼泪！将士们没有不欢欣雀跃的。
English: Before Zhang Zhongshun returned to the imperial court, the order of Emperor Xianzong had already arrived in Weizhou. Tian Xing shed tears of gratitude for the grace of the imperial court! The generals were overjoyed.

古文：庚戌，更名皇子宽曰恽，察曰悰，寰曰忻，寮曰悟，审曰恪。
现代文：庚戌，宪宗为皇子更改名字，李宽称作李恽，李察称作李，李寰称作李忻，李寮称作李悟，李审称作李恪。
English: Geng Zong, Xianzong changed their names for the prince, Li Guang was called Li Zong, Li Zha was called Li, Li Zong was called Li Zong, Li Liao was called Li Wu, and Li Jing was called Li Ke.

古文：李绛又言： 魏博五十馀年不沾皇化，一旦举六州之地来归，刳河朔之腹心，倾叛乱之巢穴，不有重赏过其所望，则无以慰士卒之心，使四邻劝慕。
现代文：李绛又说： 魏博已经有五十多年没有沾润着帝王的德化了，现在忽然带着魏、博、贝、卫、澶、相六州土地前来归顺，挖空了河朔地区的中心，倾覆了反叛作乱的巢穴，如果没有超过他们所希望的重重的奖赏，便无法安慰将士们的心意，并使四周相邻各道受到劝勉，感到羡慕。
English: Li Yan also said: Wei Bo has not been imbued with the emperor's virtue for more than fifty years. Now, he suddenly brought the lands of Wei, Bo, Bei, Wei, Shun and Six Provinces to submit, hollowed out the center of the Hexuo region, and overturned the nest of rebellion and chaos. If there is no heavy reward beyond their hopes, they cannot comfort the hearts of the soldiers, and make the surrounding neighbors feel encouraged and envious.

古文：请发内库钱百五十万缗以赐之。 
现代文：请陛下拨发内库钱一百五十万缗，颁赐给魏博。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to allocate 1.5 million baht from the treasury and bestow it on Wei Bo.

古文：左右宦官以为 所与太多，后有此比，将何以给之？ 
现代文：宪宗亲近的宦官认为： 给与的赏赐太多，若以后再有此例，将拿什么给他们呢？ 
English: A eunuch who was close to Kenzong thought, "The rewards given to them are too much. If this happens again, what will be given to them?"

古文：上以语绛，绛曰： 田兴不贪专地之利，不顾四邻之患，归命圣朝，陛下奈何爱小费而遗大计，不以收一道人心！
现代文：宪宗将宦官的话告诉了李绛，李绛说： 田兴不肯贪图专擅一地的好处，不顾四周相邻各道的祸患，归顺本朝，陛下怎么能够珍惜微小的费用，反而丢掉重大的谋划，不肯用这点钱财去收取一道的人心呢！
English: Xianzong told the eunuch's words to Li Yao, and Li Yao said: Tian Xing refused to covet the benefits of being an expert in one place, disregarded the misfortunes of the surrounding neighbors, and submitted to this dynasty. How could His Majesty cherish small expenses, but throw away a major plan, and refuse to use this little money to collect a human heart!

古文：钱用尽更来，机事一失不可复追。
现代文：钱财使用光了会重新得到的，而这一时机一旦失去，就不能够再追回来了。
English: Once the money is used up, it will be regained, and once this opportunity is lost, it cannot be recovered.

古文：借使国家发十五万兵以取六州，期年而克之，其费岂止百五十万缗而已乎！ 
现代文：假如国家征发十五万兵马去攻取魏博六州，经过整整一年才战胜敌军，这需要的费用难道是一百五十万缗就可以止住的吗？ 
English: If the state conscripts one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers and horses to attack the six states of Weibo, and it takes a whole year to defeat the enemy army, can this cost of one and a half million baht be stopped?

古文：上悦，曰： 朕所以恶衣菲食，蓄聚货财，正为欲平定四方；不然，徒贮之府库何为！ 
现代文：宪宗高兴了，就说： 朕穿粗劣的衣裳，吃薄味的食物，积蓄物资钱财的意图，正是为了平定各地。否则，将物资钱财白白储存在仓库中是为了什么呢？ 
English: When Gensong was happy, he said, "My intention of wearing coarse clothes, eating bland food, and accumulating materials and money is precisely to pacify various regions. Otherwise, what is the purpose of storing materials and money in warehouses?

古文：十一月，辛酉，遣知制诰裴度至魏博宣慰，以钱百五十万缗赏军士，六州百姓给复一年。
现代文：十一月，辛酉，宪宗派遣知制诰裴度前去安抚魏博，带去钱一百五十万缗，奖赏军中将士，对六州百姓免除一年的赋税徭役。
English: In November, Xinzhuang, Xianzong dispatched Zhi Zhe Pei Du to appease Wei Bo, bringing one and a half million baht in money, rewarding the lieutenant generals of the army, and exempting the people of the six states from one year's tax and service.

古文：军士受赐，欢声如雷。
现代文：将士们得到赏赐，发出了雷鸣般的欢呼声。
English: The soldiers were rewarded with thunderous cheers.

古文：成德、兗郓使者数辈见之，相顾失色，叹曰： 倔强者果何益乎！ 
现代文：成德、兖郓派来的好几个使者看到了这一场景，面面相觑，惊惶变色，叹息着说： 对朝廷刚强不屈的藩镇果真有什么好处吗！ 
English: Several emissaries sent by Chengde and Zou saw this scene, looked at each other, panicked, and sighed and said: Is there really any benefit to the imperial strong and unyielding town!

古文：度为兴陈君臣上下之义，兴听之，终夕不倦，待度礼极厚，请度遍至所部州县，宣布朝命。
现代文：裴度为田兴讲述君臣之间的大义名分，田兴倾听着，整个晚上，都没有倦意。他对待裴度的礼数非常周全，还邀请裴度走遍他管辖的州县，向各处宣布朝廷的命令。
English: Pei Du told Tian Xing about the great cause of justice between the emperor and his subjects. Tian Xing listened attentively throughout the entire evening, never tiring. He treated Pei Du with great courtesy, and also invited Pei Du to travel throughout the prefectures and counties under his jurisdiction to announce the orders of the imperial court to everyone.

古文：奏乞除节度副使于朝廷，诏以户部郎中河东胡证为之。
现代文：田兴奏请朝廷任命节度副使，宪宗颁诏任命户部郎中河东人胡证出任此职。
English: Tian Xingso asked the imperial court to appoint a vice-envoy for the festival, and Emperor Xianzong issued an edict appointing Hu Zhen, a member of the Middle Eastern House of Peers, to the post.

古文：兴又奏所部缺官九十员，请有司注拟，行朝廷法令，输赋税。
现代文：田兴还奏报部下缺少官员九十人，请求有关部门登录姓名，拟定官职，在魏博行使朝廷的法纪命令，向朝廷交纳赋税。
English: Tian Xing also reported that there was a shortage of 90 officials under the newspaper, and requested the relevant departments to register names, draft official positions, exercise the imperial court's legal discipline orders in Weibo, and pay taxes to the imperial court.

古文：田承嗣以来室屋僭侈者，皆避不居。
现代文：田承嗣以来所建造的过度奢华的居室，田兴一概回避，不肯居住。
English: Tian Xing avoided all the excessively luxurious rooms that had been built since Tian Chengzhi and refused to live in them.

古文：郓、蔡、恒遣游客间说百方，兴终不听。
现代文：郓州李师道、蔡州吴少阳、恒州王承宗派遣游说之士，想方设法私下劝说田兴，田兴始终不肯听从。
English: Bozhou Li Shidao, Caizhou Wu Shaoyang, and Hengzhou Wang Chengzong sent lobbyists to try to persuade Tian Xing in private. Tian Xing still refused to listen.

古文：李师道使人谓宣武节度使韩弘曰： 我世与田氏约相保援，今兴非其族，又首变两河事，亦公之所恶也！
现代文：李师道让人告诉宣武节度使韩弘说： 我家世代与田氏约定相互保全，彼此援助。现在，田兴并不出于田氏家族，又第一个改变了河南、河北的先例，这也是您所憎恶的啊！
English: Li Shidao had someone tell him about the Xuanwu Festival, which made Han Hong say: My family's generation and the Tian family agreed to protect each other and help each other. Now, Tian Xing is not from the Tian family, and he is the first to change the precedent of Henan and Hebei. This is what you hate!

古文：我将与成德合军讨之！ 
现代文：我准备与成德会合兵马，讨伐田兴。 
English: I am ready to join forces with Chengde to fight Tianxing.

古文：弘曰： 我不知利害，知奉诏行事耳。
现代文：韩弘说： 我不知道你说的这些利弊得失，只知道遵照诏书办事而已。
English: Han Hong said, "I don't know about the pros and cons you mentioned, I just know that I have to follow the edict."

古文：若兵北渡河，我则以兵东取曹州！ 
现代文：假如你的兵向北渡过黄河，我便领兵东进，攻打曹州！ 
English: If your soldiers cross the Yellow River to the north, I will lead my soldiers eastward and attack Caozhou!

古文：师道惧，不敢动。
现代文：李师道害怕，没敢用兵。
English: Li Shidao was afraid and did not dare to use troops.

古文：田兴既葬田季安，送田怀谏于京师。
现代文：田兴安葬了田季安以后，便将田怀谏往京城。
English: After Tian Xing'an buried Tian Ji'an, he took Tian Huai'an to Beijing.

古文：辛已，以怀谏为右监门卫将军。
现代文：辛巳，宪宗任命田怀谏为右监门卫将军。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gensong appointed Tian Huaiqi as the General of the Right Guard.

古文：李绛奏振武、天德左右良田可万顷，请择能吏开置营田，可以省费足食，上从之。
现代文：李绛奏称，振武、天德周围的良田可达一万顷，请求选择干练的官吏开设屯田，可以节省开支，使粮食充足，宪宗听从了他的建议。
English: Li Yuxiao said that there were up to 10,000 hectares of good farmland around Zhenwu and Tiantai, and asked for the selection of capable officials to set up farmlands, which could save expenses and make grain sufficient. Xianzong listened to his suggestion.

古文：绛命度支使卢坦经度用度，四年之间，开田四千八百顷，收谷四千馀万斛，岁省度支钱二十馀万缗，边防赖之。
现代文：李绛命令度支使卢坦经营规划所需费用。在四年时间里，开辟田地四千八百顷，收获谷物四千多万斛，每年节省度支拨钱二十多万缗，边防都仰仗着屯田的收成。
English: In four years, 4,800 hectares of fields were opened, more than 40 million baht of grain was harvested, and more than 200 thousand baht of money was allocated each year. The border defense relied on the harvest of the occupied fields.

古文：上尝于延英谓宰相曰： 卿辈当为朕惜官，勿用之私亲故。 
现代文：宪宗曾经在延英殿对宰相们说： 你们这些人应当替朕珍惜官位，不要用官位偏袒亲戚故旧。 
English: Kenzong once said to the prime ministers at the Yan Ying Palace: You people should cherish your official positions for me, and not use your official positions to favor your relatives.

古文：李吉甫、权德舆皆谢不敢。
现代文：李吉甫、权德舆都推脱说自己没有那样的胆量。
English: Li Jifu, Quan De and others have all said that they do not have that kind of courage.

古文：李绛曰： 崔祐甫月言， 非亲非故，不谙其才。 
现代文：李绛说： 崔甫说过： 既不是亲属，又不是故交，无法了解一个人的才能。 
English: Li Wei said: Cui Fu said: Neither relatives nor old friends can understand a person's talent.

古文：谙者尚不与官，不谙者何敢复与！
现代文：对自己了解的人尚且不能够授予官职，对不了解的人又怎么敢授给官职呢？
English: If you cannot give a post to someone you know, how can you give a post to someone you don't know?

古文：但问其才器与官相称否耳。
现代文：只须过问一个人的才能和器识与所授官职是否相称而已。
English: It is only necessary to inquire whether a man's talents and abilities are commensurate with the office he holds.

古文：若避亲故之嫌，使圣朝亏多士之美，此乃偷安之臣，非至公之道也。
现代文：倘若规避亲戚故旧的嫌疑，使本朝缺欠人才济济的局面，这便是苟求自安的臣下，并不符合大公无私的原则啊！
English: If you evade the old-fashioned suspicions of relatives and make the situation of the lack of talent in this dynasty worse, this is a vassal who seeks peace and is not in line with the principle of selflessness!

古文：苟所用非其人，则朝廷自有典刑，谁敢逃之！ 
现代文：如果任用的人是不合适的，朝廷自然会有刑罚相加，有谁敢逃避呢！ 
English: If the person appointed is unsuitable, the imperial court will naturally impose additional punishment. Who would dare to evade it?

古文：上曰： 诚如卿言。 
现代文：宪宗说： 诚然如你所说。 
English: Kenzong said, "Of course, as you said.

古文：是岁，吐蕃寇泾州，及西门之外，驱掠人畜而去。
现代文：本年，吐蕃侵犯泾州，一直打到西门以外，驱赶俘掠人口与牲畜离去，宪宗为此事甚为担忧。
English: This year, Tubo invaded Bozhou and fought all the way to the West Gate, driving away the captive population and livestock. Xianzong was very worried about this.

古文：上患之，李绛上言： 京西、京北皆有神策镇兵，始，置之欲以备御叶蕃，使与节度使掎角相应也。
现代文：李绛进言说： 京城西面和京城北面都有神策军赶镇驻守的兵马。起初，朝廷将神策军安置到各军镇，是打算防御吐蕃，使神策军与节度使的兵马形成相互呼应夹击敌军的形势。
English: Li Qian said: There are soldiers and horses of the Divine Providence Army stationed in the towns on the west side of Beijing and the north side of Beijing. At first, the imperial court placed the Divine Providence Army in each military town, intending to defend Tubo, so that the Divine Providence Army and the soldiers and horses sent by the Emperor would form a situation of mutual echo and pinching the enemy army.

古文：今则鲜衣美食，坐耗县官，每有寇至，节度使邀与俱进，则云申取中尉处分；比得其报，虏去远矣。
现代文：如今神策军穿好的，吃好的，无所事事地消耗国家的物资供给。每当有敌寇到来时，节度使邀请神策军与自己共同进军，神策军却说需要申报上去，听取中尉的处理。及至神策军得到中尉的答复，吐蕃已经离开很远了。
English: Nowadays, the Shenzhao army wears well, eats well, and idly consumes the country's material supply. Whenever an enemy arrives, the festival makes the Shenzhao army invite themselves to march together, but the Shenzhao army says that they need to declare it and listen to the lieutenant's treatment. By the time the Shenzhao army gets the lieutenant's reply, Tubo has already left far away.

古文：纵有果锐之将，闻命奔赴，节度使无刑戮以相制之，相视平交，左右前却，莫肯用命，何所益乎！
现代文：纵然神策军中也有果决勇猛的将领，得到命令便奔赴敌军，但是节度使无法使用刑杀的权力来控制他们。这些将领将节度使看作平等交往的人物，节度使支使他们前进或撤退时，他们不肯服从命令，这有什么益处呢？
English: Even if there are brave and resolute generals in the Divine Providence's army who, when ordered, rush to the enemy's army, but moderation makes it impossible to use the power of torture to control them. These generals will see moderation as an equal partner, and when moderation makes them advance or retreat, they will not obey orders. What is the benefit of this?

古文：请据所在之地士马及衣粮、器械皆割隶当道节度使，使号令齐壹，如臂之使指，则军威大振，虏不敢入寇矣。 
现代文：请陛下根据神策军的驻扎地点，将战士、马匹、衣服、口粮、器械等一概分割给本道节度使管辖，使号令统一，犹如胳膊指使手指一般，军队的声威便会大大振作起来，吐蕃就不敢前来侵犯了。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to divide the soldiers, horses, clothes, rations, and equipment according to the stationing locations of the Divine Providence Army, and make them all subject to the jurisdiction of this festival, so that the calls are unified. Just as the arm points to the finger, the voice of the army will be greatly invigorated, and the pigeons will not dare to come and invade.

古文：上曰： 朕不知旧事如此，当亟行之。 
现代文：宪宗说： 朕不知道以往的制度竟是这个样子，应当赶紧实行你的建议。 
English: Gensong said, "I don't know why the previous system is like this. Your suggestion should be implemented immediately."

古文：既而神策军骄恣日久，不乐隶节度使，竟为宦者所沮而止。
现代文：不久，由于神策军骄横放纵得时间长了，不愿意隶属节度使，终于因受到宦官的阻挠而没有实行下去。
English: Soon, because the Shenzhao Army had been arrogant and indulgent for a long time and did not want to be subordinate to the Emperor, it was finally blocked by eunuchs and did not go ahead.

古文：元和八年癸巳，公元八一三年春，正月，癸亥，以博州刺史田融为相州刺史。
现代文：元和八年春季正月，癸亥，宪宗任命博州刺史田融为相州刺史。田融是田兴的哥哥。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 8th year of the Yuan and 8th year of the Heian period, Emperor Gensong appointed Boshu Shishi Tian Rong as Soshu Shishi. Tian Rong was the elder brother of Tian Xing.

古文：融，兴之兄也。融、兴幼孤，融长，养而教之。
现代文：田融与田兴幼年丧父，田融年长，便抚养教育田兴。
English: Tian Rong and Tian Xing lost their father when they were young, and when Tian Rong was older, he raised and educated Tian Xing.

古文：兴尝于军中角射，一军莫及。
现代文：有一次，田兴与军中将士比赛射箭，全军将士都赶不上他。
English: On one occasion, Tian Xing competed in archery with a lieutenant general. The entire army couldn't keep up with him.

古文：融退而抶之曰： 尔不自晦，祸将及矣！ 
现代文：回去以后，田融用鞭子抽打他，还说： 你不能够收敛自己的锋芒，祸殃就要到来了！ 
English: After returning, Tian Rong lashed him with a whip and said, "You can't control your sharpness, the disaster is coming!"

古文：故兴能自全于猜暴之时。
现代文：所以，田兴能够在田季安猜疑而横暴时，将自己保全下来。
English: Therefore, Tian Xing was able to protect himself when Tian Ji'an became suspicious and violent.

古文：勃海定王元瑜卒，弟言义权知国务。
现代文：勃海定王大元瑜去世，弟弟大言义暂时代理执掌国家事务。
English: Bohai Ding Wang Dayuan Yu passed away, and his younger brother Dagon Yi temporarily took charge of state affairs.

古文：庚午，以言义为勃海王。
现代文：庚午，宪宗任命大言义为勃海王。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Gensong appointed Dagenyi as the King of Bohai.

古文：李吉甫、李绛数争论于上前，礼部尚书、同平章事权德舆居中无所可否，上鄙之。
现代文：李吉甫与李绛屡次在宪宗面前争论，礼部尚书、同平章事权德舆置身中间，没有表示过赞同或反对，宪宗因此而轻视他。
English: Li Jifu and Li Jie repeatedly argued in front of Xianzong. He did not express approval or opposition, and Xianzong despised him for this.

古文：辛未，德舆罢守本官。
现代文：辛未，权德舆被罢免宰相职务，仍然担任原有的官职。
English: Soon after, Kwon Tak-myo was removed from the post of prime minister, but he still held his original post.

古文：辛卯，赐魏博节度使田兴名弘正。
现代文：辛卯，宪宗向魏博节度使田兴颁赐名字，叫田弘正。
English: Xinwu, Xianzong gave the name Tian Xing to Wei Bo Jiedu, called Tian Hiromasa.

古文：司空、同平章事于由页久留长安，郁郁不得志。
现代文：司空、同平章事于长时间留在长安，自觉忧闷，难偿平生志愿。
English: Siku and Tongping Zhang stayed in Chang'an for a long time. They were self-consciously sad, and it was difficult to repay their lifelong volunteering.

古文：有梁正言者，自言与枢密使梁守谦同宗，能为人属请，由页使其子太常丞敏重赂正言，求出镇。
现代文：有一个叫梁正言的人，自称与枢密使梁守谦是本家，能够替别人托办各种事情，于便让他的儿子太常丞于敏重重地贿赂梁正言，希图出任节度使。
English: There was a man named Liang Zhengyan, who claimed to be related to the imperial envoy Liang Shouqian and was able to commission all kinds of things for others. Therefore, he had his son, Tai Changzheng Yu Min, bribe Liang Zhengyan heavily, hoping to serve as the imperial envoy.

古文：久之，正言诈渐露，敏索其赂不得，诱其奴，支解之，弃溷中。
现代文：时间长了，梁正言的骗术逐渐败露了，于敏不能够将贿赂索取回来，便诱使梁正言的奴仆，将梁正言的四肢分解了，丢弃到厕所中。
English: As time went on, Liang Zhengyan's trickery was gradually exposed. Unable to get the bribe back, Yu Min induced Liang Zhengyan's servant to dismember Liang Zhengyan's limbs and throw them into the toilet.

古文：事觉，由页帅其子殿中少监季友等素服诣建福门请罪，门者不内。
现代文：事情终于被发觉了，于带领他的儿子殿中少监于季友等人，穿着白色丧服前往建福门请求治罪，守门人不肯让他们进去。
English: When the matter was finally discovered, Yu led his son, Ju Ju Ju Ju, and others, dressed in white mourning clothes, to the Jianfu Gate to plead for punishment. The gatekeepers refused to let them in.

古文：退，负南墙而立，遣人上表，阁门以无印引不受。
现代文：退下来后，于背倚南墙站立着，派人进献表章，阁门的值班人因表上没有印符，又没有内部人援引，因而不肯接受。
English: After withdrawing, he stood with his back against the south wall and sent someone to offer the watch. The person on duty at the attic door refused to accept it because there was no seal on the watch and no insider had invoked it.

古文：日暮方归，明日，复至。
现代文：直到日暮，于等才返回。
English: We waited until nightfall to return.

古文：丁酉，由页左授恩王傅，仍绝朝谒。敏流雷州，季友等皆贬官，僮奴死者数人。
现代文：第二天，又再次前来。丁酉，于被降职为恩王傅，并禁止他入朝谒见；于敏被流放雷州，于季友等人都被贬官，奴仆被处死的有几个人。
English: The next day, they came again. Ding Xi, Yu was demoted to the position of Enwangfu and prohibited from entering the imperial court; Yu Min was exiled to Leizhou; Yu Ji You and others were demoted; and several servants were executed.

古文：敏至秦岭而死。
现代文：于敏刚到秦岭便死去。
English: Yu Min died soon after arriving in Qinling.

古文：事连僧鉴虚。
现代文：事情牵连到僧人鉴虚。
English: The monk was implicated in the case.

古文：鉴虚自贞元以来，以财交权幸，受方镇赂遗，厚自奉养，吏不敢诘。
现代文：自从贞元年间以来，鉴虚凭着资财与拥有权势、取得宠幸的人们交结，收受节度使贿赂的财物，使自己日常获得优厚的供养，吏人们谁也不敢追问。
English: Since the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, officials have not dared to question anyone who has used their wealth to make connections with powerful and favored people, to accept gifts and bribes, and to obtain generous daily sustenance.

古文：至是，权幸争为之言，上欲释之，中丞薛存诚不可。
现代文：至此，有权势、得宠幸的人们争着替鉴虚讲情，宪宗也打算将鉴虚释放出来，御史中丞薛存诚认为是不适当的。
English: At this point, powerful and favored people were vying to intercede on behalf of Jian Hui, and Gensong also planned to release Jian Hui, which Grand Historian Xue Cuncheng considered inappropriate.

古文：上遣中使诣台宣旨曰： 朕欲面诘此僧，非释之也。 
现代文：宪宗派遣中使前往御史台宣布诏旨说： 朕打算当面责问这个僧人，并不是要释放他。 
English: The envoy sent by the Kenzong to the Imperial History Museum announced the edict, saying, "I intend to question this monk face to face, but I do not intend to release him.

古文：存诚对曰： 陛下必欲面释此僧，请先杀臣，然后取之，不然，臣期不奉诏。 
现代文：薛存诚回答说： 如果陛下一定要当面释放这个僧人，请先将我杀掉，然后再将他放走。否则，我定然不肯接受诏命。 
English: Xue Cuncheng replied: "If Your Majesty must release this monk in person, please kill me first and then release him. Otherwise, I will definitely not accept the imperial edict."

古文：上嘉而从之。
现代文：宪宗嘉许并听从了他的请求。
English: Kenzong appreciated and complied with his request.

古文：三月，丙辰，杖杀鉴虚，没其所有之财。
现代文：三月，丙辰，将鉴虚用棍棒笞打而死，没收了他所有的资财。
English: In March, Hsin Chen beat Jian Hui to death with a club and confiscated all of his assets.

古文：甲子，征前西川节度使、同平章事武元衡入知政事。
现代文：甲子，宪宗征召前任西川节度使、同平章事武元衡入朝执掌政事。
English: At the same time, Kenzo summoned the former Saikawa Setsudoshi and Tonghei Shosho to take charge of the government.

古文：夏，六月，大水。
现代文：夏季，六月，发生了严重的水灾，宪宗认为这是阴气满盈的象征。
English: In the summer, in June, there was a severe flood, which was considered by the Confucianists to be a symbol of the fullness of the yin and yang.

古文：上以为阴盈之象，辛丑，出宫人二百车。秋，七月，辛酉，振武节度使李光进请修受降城，兼理河防。
现代文：辛丑，宪宗将二百车宫中妇女打发出宫。秋季，七月，振武节度使李光进请求修筑受降城，同时治理黄河的堤防。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Zhenwu Festival made Li Guangjin request the construction of a fortified city and the control of the Yellow River dike.

古文：时受降城为河所毁，李吉甫请徙其徒于天德故城，李绛及户部侍郎卢坦以为： 受降城，张仁愿所筑，当碛口，据虏要冲，美水草，守边之利也。
现代文：当时，受降城被黄河毁坏，李吉甫请求将李光进的部众迁移到天德军的旧城去。李绛与户部侍郎卢坦认为： 这座受降城是张仁愿修筑起来的，地处大漠的出口，占据着控制异族的交通紧要之地，水草丰美，是守卫边防的好地方。
English: At that time, the surrendered city was destroyed by the Yellow River, and Li Jifu requested that the followers of Li Guangjin be relocated to the old city of the Heavenly German Army. Li Yao and Hube's servant Lutan believed: This surrendered city was built by Zhang Ren, is located at the exit of the desert, occupies an important place for controlling the traffic of foreign ethnic groups, is rich in aquatic plants, and is a good place to guard the border.

古文：今避河患，退二三里可矣，奈何舍万代永安之策，徇一时省费之便乎！
现代文：现在，为了避开黄河的危害，后退两三里地就行了，怎么能够舍弃万世永远安定的大计，曲从暂时节省开支的便利呢！
English: Now, in order to avoid the harm of the Yellow River, it is enough to retreat two or three miles. How can we abandon the eternally stable grand plan and the convenience of temporarily saving expenses?

古文：况天德故城僻处确瘠，去河绝远，烽候警急不相应接，虏忽唐突，势无由知，是无故而蹙国二百里也。 
现代文：何况天德军旧城处于荒远之地，土质瘠薄多石，距离黄河极远，烽火台示警告急时，不能够相互呼应，异族忽然前来横冲直撞，势必无法得知，这是毫无原由地使国家减缩了二百里的土地啊！ 
English: What's more, the Heavenly German Army's Old City is located in a desolate place, the soil is thin and rocky, and it is far away from the Yellow River. The campfire tower shows an emergency warning, but it cannot respond to each other. Foreigners suddenly come to rampage, and it is bound to be impossible to know. This is a land that has shrunk the country by two hundred miles for no reason!

古文：及城使周怀义奏利害，与绛、坦同。
现代文：及至受降城使周怀义奏陈利弊得失，所讲的与李绛、卢坦相同。
English: As far as being relegated to the city, Zhou Huai played the advantages and disadvantages, and spoke the same as Li Xi and Lu Tan.

古文：上卒用吉甫策，以受降城骑士隶天德军。
现代文：但是，宪宗最终还是采用了李吉甫的策划，将受降城的骑兵隶属于天德军。
English: However, in the end, Kenzong adopted Li Jifu's plan and subordinated the cavalry of the surrendered city to the Tian De Army.

古文：李绛言于上曰： 边兵徒有其数而无其实，虚费衣粮，将帅但缘私役使，聚其货财以结权幸而已，未尝训练以备不虞，此不可不于无事之时豫留圣意也。 
现代文：李绛对宪宗说： 边防上的军队空有数额，实际没有那么多士兵，白白浪费衣服与口粮。将帅们只知道假公济私，使唤士兵，积聚物资钱财，用以交结有权势、得宠幸的人们，却不曾训练士兵，以防备意外的事情发生。这种情形，不能不在没有事端时请陛下预先留意。 
English: Li Lan said to Xianzong, "The army on the border has an empty amount of troops, but there are not so many soldiers, and clothes and rations are wasted in vain. The generals only know how to be false to the public and to the private, to use soldiers, to accumulate materials and money to make friends with powerful and favored people, but they have not trained soldiers to prevent unexpected things from happening. In this situation, please pay attention to your majesty in advance when there is no accident.

古文：时受降城兵籍旧四百人，及天德军交兵，止有五十人，器械止有一弓，自馀称是。故绛言及之。
现代文：当时，受降城的士兵名册原有四百人，及至与天德军移交兵员时，只有五十人，军用器具只有一张弓，其余的东西与此相称，所以李绛才提到此事。
English: At that time, there were originally 400 soldiers on the list of soldiers to be transferred to the city, and when the soldiers were handed over to the German army, there were only 50 people. The military equipment had only one bow, and the rest of the things were commensurate with this, so Li Wei only mentioned the matter.

古文：上惊曰： 边兵乃如是其虚邪！
现代文：宪宗惊讶地说： 边境的兵马竟然是这般空虚吗！
English: Surprised, Kenzong said, "How could the soldiers and horses at the border be so empty?"

古文：卿曹当加按阅。 
现代文：你们应当加以按察。 
English: Observe them.

古文：会绛罢相而止。
现代文：适逢李绛被罢免了宰相的职务，于是此事便作罢了。
English: The matter came to an end when Li Xi was removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：乙巳，废天威军，以其众隶神策军。
现代文：乙巳，朝廷废除了天威军，将天威军的部众隶属于神策军。
English: Instantly, the imperial court abolished the Tianwei Army and subordinated the members of the Tianwei Army to the Shinsaka Army.

古文：丁未，辰、溆州贼帅张伯靖请降。
现代文：丁未，辰州与涂州两地蛮人的首领张伯靖请求归降。
English: Ding Wei, Zhang Bojing, the leader of the barbarians in Chenzhou and Tuzhou, requested to surrender.

古文：九月，辛亥，以伯靖为归州司马，委荆南军前驱使。
现代文：辛亥，宪宗任命张伯靖为归州司马，交付荆南节度使军前听候驱遣。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Xianzong appointed Zhang Bojing as the returning state Sima, and delivered the Jingnan Festival to the army to wait for the dispatch.

古文：初，吐蕃欲作乌兰桥，先贮材于河侧，朔方潜遣人投之于河，终不能成。
现代文：当初，吐蕃准备建造乌兰桥，事先在黄河边上储存木材，朔方经常暗中派人将木材投入黄河，乌兰桥到底没有能够造成。
English: At the beginning, Tubo was preparing to build the Ulan Bridge, storing wood on the edge of the Yellow River in advance. The Shuo side often secretly sent people to throw wood into the Yellow River, but the Ulan Bridge was never able to be built.

古文：虏知朔方、灵盐节度使王佖贪，先厚赂之，然后并力成桥，仍筑月城守之。
现代文：吐蕃得知朔方、灵盐节度使王贪婪，便先去重重地贿赂他，然后全力将乌兰桥造成，还修筑了新月形的城墙守卫着它。
English: When Tubo learned that Shuo Fang and Lingyan Festival made the king greedy, he first bribed him heavily, and then made every effort to build the Ulan Bridge, and also built a crescent-shaped city wall to guard it.

古文：自是朔方御寇不暇。
现代文：从此，朔方经常需要抵御吐蕃入侵，再也没有闲暇的时候了。
English: From then on, the Shuo side often needed to resist the invasion of the Tuyi, and there was no more leisure time.

古文：冬，十月，回鹘发兵度碛南，自柳谷西击吐蕃。
现代文：冬季十月，回鹘派兵来到大漠南面，由柳谷西进，攻击吐蕃。
English: In the winter of October, the Uighurs sent soldiers to the south of the desert, marching west from the Willow Valley to attack the Tuam.

古文：壬寅，振武、天德军奏回鹘数吉骑至辟鸟弟鸟泉，边军戒严。
现代文：壬寅，振武、天德军奏称有回鹘骑兵数千人来到鹈泉，边疆上的军队都在警戒防备。
English: Jinyin, Zhenwu, and the Tiande Army reported that thousands of Uighur cavalrymen came to Fuxuan, and the troops on the frontier were on alert.

古文：振武节度使李进贤，不恤士卒。
现代文：振武节度使李进贤不体恤将士。
English: The Zhenwu Festival made Li Jinxian an unworthy soldier.

古文：判官严澈，绶之子也，以刻核得幸于进贤。
现代文：判官严澈是严绶的儿子，因待人苛刻而得到李进贤的宠爱。
English: Judge Yan Chieh is the son of Yan Hui. He is favored by Li Jinxian because of his harsh treatment of others.

古文：进贤使牙将杨遵宪将五百骑趣东受降城以备回鹘，所给资装多虚估。
现代文：李进贤让牙将杨遵宪带领骑兵五百人奔赴东受降城，防备回鹘，供给他的物资装备多不是原物，而是经过虚估价钱后另以他物配给的。
English: Li Jinxian ordered Yang Zunxian to lead 500 cavalrymen to the east of the city to prevent it from being taken back, and most of the materials and equipment supplied to him were not original, but were allocated by other means after the money was overestimated.

古文：至鸣沙，遵宪屋处而士卒暴露。
现代文：来到鸣沙时，杨遵宪住在房屋里，但将士们留在露天地里。
English: When he came to Mingsha, Yang Zunxian lived in a house, but left his students in the open air.

古文：众发怒，夜，聚薪环其屋而焚之，卷甲而还。
现代文：大家发怒了，在夜间堆聚柴草，围绕着房屋放火焚烧杨遵宪，收起铠甲，返回振武。
English: Everyone got angry, piled up firewood at night, set fire to Yang Zunxian around the house, put away armor, and returned to Zhenwu.

古文：庚寅夜，焚门，攻进贤，进贤逾城走，军士屠其家，并杀严澈。
现代文：庚寅，夜晚，返回的将士焚烧大门，进攻李进贤，李进贤翻越城墙逃走。将士们屠杀了李进贤的家口，并且杀死了严澈。
English: In Goyang, at night, the returning soldiers burned the gate, attacked Li Jinxian, and Li Jinxian fled over the city wall. The soldiers slaughtered Li Jinxian's family and killed Yan Che.

古文：进贤奔静边军。
现代文：李进贤逃奔静边军。
English: Li Jinxian fled to the Jingye Frontier Army.

古文：群臣累表请立德妃郭氏为皇后。
现代文：群臣屡次上表请求将德妃郭氏立为皇后。
English: The courtiers repeatedly petitioned to make Tefui Guo the empress.

古文：上以妃门宗强盛，恐正位之后，后宫莫得进，托以岁时禁忌，竟不许。
现代文：宪宗认为郭德妃宗族门户强盛，恐怕郭德妃居正位后，内宫的嫔妃不能够接近他了，便借口时日的忌讳，始终不肯答应。
English: Xianzong thought that Guo Defei's clan was powerful, and feared that after Guo Defei took the throne, the concubines of the Inner Court would not be able to get close to him, so he always refused to agree on the pretext of taboo.

古文：丁酉，振武监军骆朝宽奏乱兵已定，请给将士衣。
现代文：丁酉，振武监军骆朝宽奏称变乱的士兵已经平定，请求给将士们供应服装。
English: Ding Yao, the military inspector of Luo Chao Kuan, said that the mutinous soldiers had been pacified and requested that the soldiers be supplied with clothing.

古文：上怒，以夏绥节度使张煦为振武节度使，将夏州兵二千赴镇，仍命河东节度使王锷以兵二千纳之，听以便宜从事。
现代文：宪宗大怒，任命夏绥节度使张煦为振武节度使，带领夏州兵马二千人奔赴振武，还命令河东节度使王锷率领兵马二千人接纳张煦，任凭他见机行事。
English: Kenzong was so angry that he appointed the Xiali Festival to make Zhang Jun the Zhenwu Festival envoy, leading two thousand soldiers and horses from Xiazhou to Zhenwu. He also ordered the Hedong Festival to make Wang Jun lead two thousand soldiers and horses to receive Zhang Jun, and let him act as he saw fit.

古文：骆朝宽归罪于其将苏若方而杀之。
现代文：骆朝宽将罪责都加给将领苏若方，将他杀掉了。
English: Luo Chaokang put all the blame on General Su Ruofang and killed him.

古文：发郑滑、魏博卒凿黎阳古河十四里，以纾滑州水患。
现代文：朝廷征发郑滑、魏博士兵开凿黎阳古黄河河道十四里，以便缓解滑州的水灾。
English: The imperial court conscripted Zhengbiao and Wei soldiers to excavate 14 miles of the ancient Yellow River channel in Liyang in order to alleviate the flooding in Luzhou.

古文：上问宰相： 人言外间朋党大盛，何也？ 
现代文：宪宗询问宰相说： 人们说外面朋党集团大大兴起，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Kenzong asked the prime minister, "People say that there has been a big rise in the number of crony groups outside the party. Why is that?

古文：李绛对曰： 自古人君所甚恶者，莫若人臣为朋党，故小人谮君子者必曰朋党。
现代文：李绛回答说： 自古以来，人君特别憎恶的，以人臣结成朋党集团为甚，所以，小人诬陷君子，肯定要说他属于朋党集团。
English: Li Lan replied: Since ancient times, what people and lords have particularly abhorred is for their vassals to form a crony group. Therefore, if a villain slanders a gentleman, he must definitely say that he belongs to a crony group.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么要这样做呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：朋党言之则可恶，寻之则无迹故也。
现代文：这是因为，朋党集团谈论起来虽然是可恶的，寻找起来却没有痕迹。
English: That's because, as odious as cronyism is to talk about, there's no trace of it to be found.

古文：东汉之末，凡天下贤人君子，宦官皆谓之党人而禁锢之，遂以亡国。
现代文：东汉末年，凡是天下的贤人和君子，宦官都称他们为党人，因而勒令对他们永不任用，东汉便因此灭亡。
English: In the last years of the Eastern Han Dynasty, all the wise men and gentlemen in the world, the eunuchs, called them party members, and ordered them never to be appointed, and the Eastern Han Dynasty died as a result.

古文：此皆群小欲害善人之言，愿陛下深察之！
现代文：这都是众小人打算谋害好人的说法，希望陛下深入地考察此事。
English: These are all stories of villains plotting to kill good people. I hope His Majesty will investigate this matter thoroughly.

古文：夫君子固与君子合，岂可必使之与小人合，然后谓之非党邪！ 
现代文：一般说来，君子固然与君子相合，难道能够一定使君子与小人相合，然后才能够说君子不属于朋党集团吗！ 
English: Generally speaking, although the gentleman is compatible with the gentleman, can the gentleman be made compatible with the villain, and only then can it be said that the gentleman does not belong to the group of friends!

古文：元和九年甲午，公元八一四年
现代文：元和九年春季正月，甲戌，王锷派遣兵马五千人在善羊栅与张煦会合。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jia Yu and Wang Yu sent five thousand soldiers and horses to rendezvous with Zhang Xuan at Zhenyang Grate.

古文：春，正月，甲戌，王锷遣兵五千余张煦于善羊栅。乙亥，煦入单于都扩府，诛乱者苏国珍等二百五十三人。
现代文：乙亥，张煦进入单于都护府，诛杀变乱者苏国珍等二百五十三人。
English: Yi Hai and Zhang Ye entered Dugongfu alone and killed 253 mutineers including Su Guozhen.

古文：二月，丁丑，贬李进贤为通州刺史。
现代文：二月，丁丑，宪宗将李进贤贬为通州刺史。
English: In February, Dingwuxi, Jianzong relegated Li Jinxian to Tongzhou stabbing history.

古文：甲午，骆朝宽坐纵乱者，杖之八十，夺色，配役定陵。
现代文：甲午，骆朝宽因放纵叛乱者获罪，将他杖责八十，剥夺品色，发配到定陵服役。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Luo Zhaoguang was found guilty of indulging the rebels. He was punished with eighty strokes of the cane, stripped of his title, and sent to Dingling for military service.

古文：李绛屡以足疾辞位。
现代文：李绛因脚病屡次推辞官位。
English: Due to a foot ailment, Li Yao repeatedly resigned from his post.

古文：癸卯，罢为礼部尚书。
现代文：癸卯，李绛被罢为礼部尚书。
English: At the same time, Li Xi was removed as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：初，上欲相绛，先出叶突承璀为淮南监军，至是，上召还承璀，先罢绛相。
现代文：当初，宪宗打算任命李绛为宰相，事先让吐突承璀出任淮南监军。至此，宪宗将吐突承璀召回，事先免除了李绛的宰相职务。
English: At first, Emperor Xianzong planned to appoint Li Jie as prime minister, and had previously appointed Tu Tu Chengjun as the inspector of the South Huai Province. At this point, Emperor Xianzong recalled Tu Tu Chengjun and removed Li Jie from the post of prime minister in advance.

古文：甲辰，承璀至京师，复以为弓箭库使、左神策中尉。
现代文：甲辰，吐突承璀来到京城，宪宗重新任命他为弓箭库使、左神策军中尉。
English: When Jia Chen and Tu Tu Chengjun came to the capital, Emperor Xianzong reappointed him as the official of the bow and arrow depot and the lieutenant of Zuo Sheng Zao's army.

古文：李吉甫奏： 国家旧置六胡州于灵、盐之境，开元中废之，更置宥州以领降户，天宝中，宥州寄理于经略军，宝应以来，因循遂废。
现代文：李吉甫上奏说： 以往，国家在灵州和盐州境内设置了六胡州，开元年间将六胡州废除，又设置宥州来统领归降的人户。天宝年间，宥州由经略军遥控治理。宝应年间以来，由于墨守旧法，于是便被废弃了。
English: Li Jifu said in his report: In the past, the state set up the Six Huzhou in Lingzhou and Yanzhou. In the first year of the year, the Six Huzhou was abolished, and Yuzhou was set up to govern the people who surrendered. In the Tianbao year, Yuzhou was controlled remotely by the Central Military Commission. Since the Baoying year, it has been abandoned due to adherence to the old law.

古文：今请复之，以备回鹘，抚党项。 
现代文：现在，我请求恢复以往的设置，以便防备回鹘，安抚党项。 
English: Now, I ask that the previous setup be restored in order to prevent a backlash and pacify the party.

古文：上从之，夏，五月，庚申，复置宥州，理经略军，取鄜城神策屯兵九千以实之。
现代文：宪宗听从了他的建议。夏季，五月，庚申，朝廷重新设置宥州，治所设在经略军，调来屯驻城的神策军兵九千人，以便充实宥州。
English: In the summer, in May, Goshun, the imperial court re-established Yuzhou, the administrative center was set up in the Economic Affairs Army, and nine thousand soldiers of the Shensha Army stationed in the city were transferred to enrich Yuzhou.

古文：先是，回鹘屡请婚，朝廷以公主出降，其费甚广，故未之许。
现代文：在此之前，回鹘屡次请求通婚，朝廷因公主出国下嫁，开支很大，所以没有答应。
English: Prior to this, Hui Xuan had repeatedly requested a mixed marriage, but the imperial court did not agree because the princess went abroad to marry, which was very expensive.

古文：礼部尚书李绛上言，以为： 回鹘凶强，不可无备；淮西穷蹙，事要经营。
现代文：礼部尚书李绛进言认为： 回鹘凶猛强悍，对他们不能够没有防备。淮西困惑犹豫，其中的事情需要图谋规划。
English: Li Yanjin, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, believes that: Hui Xuan is fierce and powerful, and they cannot be unprepared. Huaxi is puzzled and hesitant, and things need to be planned.

古文：今江、淮大县，岁所入赋有二十万缗者，足以备降主之费，陛下何爱一县之赋，不以羁縻劲虏！
现代文：如今江淮地区的大县，每年上缴的赋税有达到二十万缗的，足够备办下嫁公主的费用，陛下为什么要珍惜一个县的赋税，不肯拿来维系强劲的回鹘呢？
English: Nowadays, large counties in the Jianghuai region have an annual tax payment of up to 200,000 baht, which is enough to prepare for the cost of marrying a princess. Why would His Majesty cherish the tax payment of a county and refuse to use it to maintain a strong revenue?

古文：回鹘若得许婚，必喜而无猜，然后可以修城堑，蓄甲兵，边备既完，得专意淮西，功必万全。
现代文：假如回鹘得到通婚的许可，肯定感到高兴，不再猜疑在此之后，才可以修治城池沟堑，积蓄铠甲兵器。在边疆的防备巩固后，才能够一心一意地对付淮西，必定获得成功，万无一失。
English: If Hui Xuan gets permission to intermarry, he will certainly be happy, and will no longer be suspicious. Only after this, can he repair the city and the ditch, and accumulate armored weapons. Only after the defense of the frontier is consolidated, can he single-mindedly deal with Huaixi. He will surely succeed, and there is no way to fail.

古文：今既未降公主而虚弱西城；碛路无备，更修天德以疑虏心。
现代文：既然如今没有下嫁公主，又使西受降城虚弱难支，对大漠的通路毫无防备，还要修筑天德城，使异族心中感到疑虑。
English: Now that the princess has not been married off, and the West Surrendered City has been weakened to the point of collapse, and there is no protection against the passage of the desert, it is necessary to build the Heavenly City, so that the hearts of the foreign people will feel doubts.

古文：万一北边有警，则淮西遗丑复延岁月之命矣！
现代文：万一北部边疆出现警报，淮西的残余小丑便又能够苟延残喘下去了！
English: In the unlikely event that an alert appears on the northern border, the remaining clowns in Huaxi will be able to continue breathing!

古文：倘虏骑南牧，国家非步兵三万，骑五千，则不足以抗御！
现代文：倘若回鹘的骑兵南来放牧，国家没有步兵三万人、骑兵五千人，就不够抵御他们！
English: If the returning cavalry come south to graze, the country does not have thirty thousand infantry and five thousand cavalry, it is not enough to resist them!

古文：借使一岁而胜之，其费岂特降主之比哉！ 
现代文：假使需要用一年时间战胜回鹘，所需要的费用又怎么能与仅仅下嫁公主的开销相比呢？ 
English: If it takes a year to defeat the Hui, how can the cost be compared to the cost of just marrying a princess?

古文：上不听。
现代文：宪宗不肯听从。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：乙丑，桂王纶薨。
现代文：乙丑，桂王李纶去世。
English: On May 19, Gui Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：六月，壬寅，以河中节度使张弘靖为刑部尚书，同平章事。
现代文：六月，壬寅，宪宗任命河中节度使张弘靖为刑部尚书、同平章事。
English: In June of the same year, Emperor Gensong appointed Zhang Hongjing as a member of the Penal Department of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：弘靖，延赏之子也。
现代文：张弘靖是张延赏的儿子。
English: Zhang Hongjing is the son of Zhang Yanbo.

古文：翰林学士独孤郁，权德舆之婿也。
现代文：翰林学士独孤郁是权德舆的女婿。
English: Hanlin is the son-in-law of Guan Deyu.

古文：上叹郁之才美曰： 德舆得婿郁，我反不及邪！ 
现代文：宪宗赞叹独孤郁的才华说： 权德舆能够使独孤郁作女婿，我反而赶不上权德舆了吗？ 
English: Gensong praised the talent of Duolou, saying, "If Guo Deyu can make Duolou his son-in-law, can't I catch up with Guo Deyu?"

古文：先是尚主皆取贵戚及勋臣之家，上始命宰相选公卿、大夫子弟文雅可居清贯者，诸家多不愿，惟杜佑孙司议郎悰不辞。
现代文：在此之前，公主下嫁，都是选取皇家内外亲族以及功臣家的子弟。至此，宪宗才命令宰相选择公卿、大夫家的温文尔雅、可以置身清流的子弟。然而，各家多不愿意，只有杜佑的孙子司议郎杜没有推辞。
English: Prior to this, princesses were married off to relatives from both inside and outside the royal family, as well as the children of meritorious families. It was only at this point that Emperor Gensong ordered the prime minister to choose courtiers, mild-mannered sons of doctors, and sons who could keep themselves clean. However, most families were unwilling, and only Du You's grandson, Siyorong Du, did not refuse.

古文：秋，七月，戊辰，以悰为殿中少监、驸马都尉，尚岐阳公主。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊辰宪宗任命杜为殿中少监、驸马都尉，让他娶岐阳公主为妻。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Boshin Shinsengumi appointed Du as a junior inspector in the palace and a captain of the imperial horse, and let him marry Princess Qiyang.

古文：公主，上长女，郭妃所生也。
现代文：岐阳公主是宪宗的大女儿，为郭德妃所生。
English: Princess Qiyang was the eldest daughter of Emperor Xianzong and was born to Empress Guo De.

古文：八月，癸巳，成婚。
现代文：八月，癸巳，杜与岐阳公主成婚。
English: In August, Gong Si, Du and Princess Qiyang got married.

古文：公主有贤行，杜氏大族，尊行不翅数十人，公主卑委怡顺，一同家人礼度，二十馀年，人未尝以丝发间指为贵骄。
现代文：岐阳公主举止贤淑，杜氏是一个庞大的家族，行辈高于她的不只数十人，岐阳公主对待他们，谦恭随和，一概如同家里人的礼数，在二十年里，人们不曾因丝毫的嫌隙而指责她恃贵骄慢。
English: Princess Qiyang behaves like a virtuous woman. The toji is a huge family, with more than dozens of practitioners older than her. Princess Qiyang treats them with the same courtesy and politeness as her family members. In the past twenty years, people have never accused her of being arrogant and haughty because of the slightest flaw.

古文：始至，则与悰谋曰： 上所赐奴婢，卒不肯穷屈，奏请纳之，悉自市寒贱可制指者。 
现代文：才到杜家时，岐阳公主就与杜商议说： 皇上赐给我们的奴婢，是终究不肯屈从的，可以奏请皇上将他们收回去，我们自己再悉数购买出身低微、可以指使的奴婢吧。 
English: When she arrived at Du's house, Princess Qiyang consulted with Du and said, "After all, the slaves and maidservants given to us by the emperor are not willing to submit. You can ask the emperor to take them back, and then we can purchase all the slaves and maidservants who are of low birth and can be ordered around."

古文：自是闺门落然不闻人声。
现代文：自此，闺阁门户清静，连人们说话的声音都听不到。
English: Since then, the boudoir entrance has been quiet, and even the voices of people talking can't be heard.

古文：闰月，丙辰，彰义节度使吴少阳薨。
现代文：闰八月，丙辰，彰义节度使吴少阳去世。
English: In leap August, Hsin-Chen, Chang-Yi Festival, Wu Shao-Yang passed away.

古文：少阳在蔡州，阴聚亡命，牧养马骡，时抄掠寿州茶山以实其军，其子摄蔡州刺史元济，匿丧，以病闻，自领军务。
现代文：吴少阳任职蔡州，暗中聚合逃亡的罪犯，放养骡子、马匹，时常抢动寿州茶山的财物来充实军需。他的儿子摄蔡州刺史吴无济，隐瞒了吴少阳的死讯，以吴少阳患病上报朝廷，由自己统领军中事务。
English: Wu Shaoyang served in Caizhou, secretly gathering fugitive criminals, raising mules and horses, and often grabbing the property of Shoushu tea mountain to enrich the military. His son, Wu Wuzhi, concealed the death of Wu Shaoyang, reported the illness of Wu Shaoyang to the court, and led the affairs of the army by himself.

古文：上自平蜀，即欲取淮西。
现代文：自从平定蜀中刘辟以来，宪宗就打算攻取淮西。
English: Ever since he had subdued Liu Bi in Shuzhong, Xianzong had planned to conquer Huaxi.

古文：淮南节度使李吉甫上言： 少阳军中上下携离，请徙理寿州以经营之。 
现代文：淮南节度使李吉甫进言说： 吴少阳军中将士对上面已有背叛之心，请将淮南的治所迁移到寿州去，以便让我来经略规划淮西。 
English: The Huainan Festival prompted Li Jifu to say: Lieutenant General Wu Shaoyang has already betrayed his superiors, please move Huainan's administrative center to Shuzhou, so that I can make a rough plan for Huaixi.

古文：会朝廷方讨王承宗，未暇也。
现代文：适逢朝廷正在讨伐王承宗，没有余暇考虚他的建议。
English: At the time when the imperial court was fighting against Wang Chengzong, there was no time to test his suggestion.

古文：及吉甫入相，田弘正以魏博归附。吉甫以为汝州扞蔽东都，河阳宿兵，本以制魏博，今弘正归附。
现代文：及至李吉甫担任宰相后，田弘正率领魏博归顺了朝廷，李吉甫认为： 东都有汝州护卫着，在河阳屯驻兵马，本来是为了控制魏博的。
English: After Li Jifu assumed the post of prime minister, Tian Hongzheng led Wei Bo to surrender to the imperial court. Li Jifu believed that: In the east, there were guards from Ruzhou, and soldiers and horses were stationed in Heyang, which was originally intended to control Wei Bo.

古文：则河阳为内镇，不应屯重兵以示猜阻。
现代文：现在，田弘正归顺了朝廷，河阳便成了内地的军镇，不应该屯驻重兵，显示对魏博的猜疑。 
English: Now that Tian Hongzheng has submitted to the imperial court, Hebei has become a military town in the inland. It should not station heavy troops, showing suspicion of Weibo.

古文：辛酉，以河阳节度使乌重胤为汝州刺史，充河阳、怀、汝节度使，徙理汝州。
现代文：辛酉，宪宗任命河阳节度使乌重胤为汝州刺史，充任河阳、怀、汝节度使，将治所迁移汝州。
English: At that time, Emperor Gensong appointed Wu Chungyan as the Heyang, Huai, and Ru Festival Delegate, and moved the government office to Ruzhou.

古文：己巳，弘正检校右仆射，赐其军钱二十万缗，弘正曰： 吾未若移河阳军之为喜也。 
现代文：己巳，加封田弘正检校右仆射，赐给魏博军钱二十万缗。田弘正说： 没有比迁移河阳军更使我高兴的啦。 
English: Now, Tian Hongzheng's right-hand man of the inspection school, Jafeng, has given Wei Bo military money of 200,000 baht. Tian Hongzheng said: There is nothing that makes me happier than the relocation of the Kheyang Army.

古文：九月，庚辰，以洺州刺史李光颜为陈州刺史，充忠武都知兵马使。以泗州刺史令狐通为寿州防御使。
现代文：九月，庚辰，宪宗任命州刺史李光颜为陈州刺史，充任忠武都知兵马使，任命泗州刺史令狐通为寿州防御使。
English: In September, Geng Chen, the founder of the Jurchen Dynasty, appointed Li Guangyan, the state secretary of the Jurchen Dynasty, as the state secretary of the Jurchen Dynasty, and appointed Zhongwu Duzhi, the envoy of the Jurchen Dynasty, as the envoy of the Jurchen Dynasty, and appointed Xutong, the secretary of the Jurchen Dynasty, as the envoy of the Jurchen Dynasty, to the Jurchen Dynasty.

古文：通，彰之子也。
现代文：令狐通是令狐彰的儿子。
English: Ling Xutong is the son of Ling Xuchang.

古文：丙戌，以山南东道节度使袁滋为荆南节度使，以荆南节度使严绶为山南东道节度使。
现代文：丙戌，宪宗任命山南东道节度使袁滋为荆南节度使，任命荆南节度使严绶为山南东道节度使。
English: He appointed Shannan to host the festival and Yuan Zi to host the festival in Jingnan, and appointed Jingnan to host the festival and Yan Kun to host the festival in Shannan.

古文：吴少阳判官苏兆、杨元卿、大将侯惟清皆劝少阳入朝。
现代文：吴少阳的判官苏兆、杨元卿和大将侯惟清等人都曾劝说吴少阳入京朝见。
English: Wu Shaoyang's judge Su Zhao, Yang Yuanqing and general Hou Weiqing and others had persuaded Wu Shaoyang to visit the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：元济恶之，杀兆，囚惟清。
现代文：吴元济憎恶他们，诛杀了苏兆，囚禁了侯惟清。
English: Wu Yuanji hated them, killed Su Zhao, and imprisoned Hou Weiqing.

古文：元卿先奏事在长安，具以淮西虚实及取元济之策告李吉甫，请讨之。
现代文：事前，杨元卿在长安奏请事情，将淮西的情况和攻取吴元济的计策全部告诉了李吉甫，并请求讨伐吴元济。
English: Prior to this, Yang Yuanqing sent a request to Li Jifu in Chang'an, telling him all about the situation in Huaixi and the strategy to capture Wu Yuanji, and requesting him to fight Wu Yuanji.

古文：时元济犹匿丧，元卿劝吉甫，凡蔡使入奏者，所在止之。
现代文：当时，吴元济仍然在隐瞒吴少阳的死讯，杨元卿劝说李吉甫，对入朝奏事的蔡州使者，各处均要阻止他们入朝。
English: At that time, Wu Yuanji was still concealing the death of Wu Shaoyang. Yang Yuanqing persuaded Li Jifu to prevent the Caizhou envoys from entering the imperial court.

古文：少阳死近四十日，不为辍朝，但易环蔡诸镇将帅，益兵为备。
现代文：吴少阳死去将近四十天了，但朝廷并没有为他停止上朝以表示哀悼，只是改换了围绕着蔡州的各军镇将帅，增调兵马，作好防备。
English: Wu Shaoyang has been dead for nearly forty days, but the imperial court has not stopped going to the imperial court to express its condolences for him. It has only changed the commanders of the military towns around Caizhou, increased the deployment of soldiers and horses, and prepared for defense.

古文：元济杀元卿妻及四男以圬射堋。
现代文：吴元济杀掉杨元卿的妻子和四个儿子，用他们的血涂射箭的靶子。
English: Wu Yuanji killed Yang Yuanqing's wife and four sons, and used their blood to paint archery targets.

古文：淮西宿将董重质，吴少诚少婿也，元济以为谋主。
现代文：淮西老将董重质是吴少诚的女婿，吴元济便让他作为自己的主谋人。
English: Dong Chongqing, a veteran of Huaxi, was the son-in-law of Wu Shaocheng, and Wu Yuanji made him his mastermind.

古文：戊戌，加河东节度使王锷同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，宪宗加封河东节度使王锷为同平章事。
English: Wuzhong, Gensong and the sealing of the Hedong Festival made Wang Xi a peerage.

古文：李吉甫言于上曰： 淮西非如河北，四无党援，国家常宿数十万兵以备之，劳费不可支也。
现代文：李吉甫向宪宗进言说： 淮西与河北不同，四周是没有同伙援助的。国家经常屯驻数十万兵马，以便防备淮西，将士的劳苦与国家的开支都是难以支撑下去的。
English: Li Jifu gave advice to Xianzong, saying: Unlike Huaxi and Hebei, there is no allied assistance around. The state often stationed hundreds of thousands of soldiers and horses to guard Huaxi. The soldiers' hard work and the state's expenses are difficult to sustain.

古文：失今不取，后难图矣。 
现代文：如果现在失去攻取吴少阳的时机，以后便难以图谋了。 
English: If we lose the opportunity to capture Wu Shaoyang now, it will be difficult to plan in the future.

古文：上将讨之，张弘靖请先为少阳辍朝、赠官，遣使吊赠，待其有不顺之迹，然后加兵，上从之，遣工部员外郎李君何吊祭。
现代文：宪宗准备讨伐淮西，张弘靖请求事先为吴少阳停止上朝表示哀掉，给他追赠官爵，派遣使者前去吊丧，赠送助丧的财物，等淮西出现了对朝廷不恭顺的行迹，然后以兵力相加。宪宗听从了他的建议，派遣工部员外郎李君何前去吊唁祭奠。
English: Xianzong was preparing to attack Huaxi. Zhang Hongjing asked him to express his condolences in advance for Wu Shaoyang's failure to ascend to the throne, to give him a peerage, to send an envoy to pay his respects, and to give him property to help with the funeral. Then, when Huaxi showed signs of disobedience to the imperial court, he increased the number of troops. Xianzong followed his suggestion and sent Li Junhe, a foreign worker, to pay his respects.

古文：元济不迎敕使，发兵四出，屠舞阳，焚叶，掠鲁山、襄城，关东震骇，君何不得入而还。
现代文：吴元济不肯迎接敕使，派出兵马，四面出击，屠杀舞阳县，火烧叶县，掳掠鲁山与襄城，关东震恐惊骇。李君何无法进入淮西，只好回朝。
English: Wu Yuanji refused to meet the envoy, sent soldiers and horses, and attacked in all directions, massacring Wuyang County, burning Ye County, capturing Lu Mountain and Xiangcheng, and shocking Guandong. Li Jun could not enter Huaixi, so he had to return to the North.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，中书侍郎、同平章事赵公李吉甫薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午，中书侍郎、同平章事赵公李吉甫去世。
English: In the winter, in October, on the afternoon of the third day, Zhao Gong Li Jifu, the attendant of the Chinese book and Tongping Zhangji passed away.

古文：壬戌，以忠武节度副使李光颜为节度使。
现代文：壬戌，宪宗任命忠武节度副使李光颜为节度使。
English: At the same time, Kenzong appointed Li Guangyan, the vice-envoy of Zhongwu Jie, as the envoy of Jie.

古文：甲子，以严绶为申、光、蔡招抚使，督诸道兵招讨吴元济，乙丑，命内常侍知省事崔潭峻监其军。
现代文：甲子，宪宗任命严绶为申、光、蔡招抚使，督促各道兵马招抚讨伐吴元济。乙丑，宪宗命令内常侍知省事崔潭峻担任严绶的监军。
English: On the one hand, Emperor Xianzong appointed Yan Xuan as the envoy of Shen, Guang, and Cai, and urged the armies and horses of all provinces to fight against Wu Yuanji. On the other hand, Emperor Xianzong ordered the provincial governor Cui Tanjun to serve as Yan Xuan's supervisor.

古文：戊辰，以尚书左丞吕元膺为东都留守。
现代文：戊辰，宪宗任命尚书左丞吕元膺为东都留守。
English: At that time, Kenzong appointed Shangshu Zuojie Lv Yuanqi to stay in Dongdu.

古文：党项寇振武。
现代文：党项侵犯振武。
English: The party violated Zhenwu.

古文：十二月，戊辰，以尚书右丞韦贯之同平章事。
现代文：十二月，戊辰，宪宗任命尚书右丞韦贯之为同平章事。
English: In December, Boshin, Kenzong appointed Shangshu Yu Rong Wei Guanzhong as Tongping Zhangji.

古文：元和十年乙未，公元八一五年
现代文：元和十年春季正月，乙酉，宪宗加封韩弘守司徒。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian period, Han Hongshu, a scholar of Confucianism, was added to the Han Hongshu.

古文：春，正月，乙酉，加韩弘守司徒。弘镇宣武，十馀年不入朝，颇以兵力自负，朝廷亦不以忠纯待之。
现代文：朝弘镇守宣武，十多年来不肯入京朝见，仗恃着军队的力量，以为自己很了不起，朝廷也不把他当作忠诚笃厚的臣下对待。
English: For more than ten years, Asahiro did not want to go to Beijing to meet with the emperor, relying on the strength of the army. He thought he was great, and the imperial court did not treat him as a loyal vassal.

古文：王锷加同平章事，弘耻班在其下，与武元衡书，颇露不平之意。
现代文：王锷加封了平章事，韩弘以名列王锷之下而感到耻辱，在写给武元衡的书信中，愤慨不满之意颇有流露。
English: Wang Yao added a seal of approval, and Han Hong felt humiliated to be ranked lower than Wang Yao. In his letter to Wu Yuanheng, his indignation and dissatisfaction were quite evident.

古文：朝廷方倚其形势以制吴元济，故迁官，使居锷上以宠慰之。
现代文：朝廷正要借助他所据有的地理形势去扼制吴元济，所以给他升迁了官位，让他的班次列在王锷以上，以示荣宠与抚慰。
English: The imperial court was trying to use his geographical position to curb Wu Yuanji's rise, so they gave him a promotion and made his rank higher than that of Wang Qian as a token of honor and consolation.

古文：吴元济纵兵侵掠，及于东畿。
现代文：吴元济放纵兵马侵扰劫掠，到了东都洛阳周围的地区。
English: Wu Yuanji let the soldiers and horses invade and plunder the area around the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：己亥，制削元济官爵，命宣武等十六道进军讨之。
现代文：己亥，宪宗颁制削夺吴元济的官职与爵位，命令宣武等十六道进军讨伐吴元济。
English: At the same time, the Confucianism awarding system stripped Wu Yuanji of his official position and peerage, and ordered Xuanwu and other 16 provinces to march to fight Wu Yuanji.

古文：严绶击淮西兵，小胜，不设备，淮西兵夜还袭之。
现代文：严绶进击淮西兵马，略微取得了一些胜利，便不再设置防备，淮西兵马在夜间返回来袭击严绶。
English: Yan Xuan attacked the Huaixi soldiers and horses, and won some slight victories, so he no longer set up defenses. The Huaixi soldiers and horses returned at night to attack Yan Xuan.

古文：二月，甲辰，绶败于磁丘，却五十馀里，驰入唐州而守之。
现代文：二月，甲辰，严绶在磁丘战败，后退了五十多里地，急速奔入唐州，据城防守。
English: In February, Jia Chen, defeated by Yan Xuan in the magnetic hill, retreated more than fifty miles and quickly rushed into Tangzhou to defend the city.

古文：寿州团练使令狐通为淮西兵所败，走保州城，境上诸栅尽为淮西所屠。
现代文：寿州团练使令狐通被淮西兵马打败，逃奔寿州城自保，州境上各处栅垒的士兵全部遭到淮西军的屠杀。
English: The Shoushou regimental drill resulted in the defeat of Lingtong by the soldiers and horses of Huaixi, and they fled to the city of Shoushou for self-protection. The soldiers of all the barriers on the state's territory were all slaughtered by the Huaixi army.

古文：癸丑，以左金吾大将军李文通代之，贬通昭州司户。
现代文：癸丑，宪宗使左金吾大将军李文通代替令狐通，将令狐通贬为昭州司户。
English: In the end, Emperor Xianzong sent Li Wentong, the general of the Left Kingu, to replace Ling Jutong, and reduced Ling Jutong to the status of a steward of Zhaozhou.

古文：诏鄂岳观察使柳公绰以兵五千授安州刺史李听，使讨吴元济。
现代文：宪宗颁诏命令鄂岳观察使柳公绰将五千兵马拨给安州刺史李听，让李听讨伐吴元济。
English: Emperor Xianzong issued a decree ordering the observation of Mount E to make Liu Gongpu allocate five thousand soldiers and horses to Anzhou Jishi Li to listen to, and let Li listen to fight Wu Yuanji.

古文：公绰曰： 朝廷以吾书生不知兵邪！ 
现代文：柳公绰说： 朝廷认为我是一个书生，不懂得用兵之道吗？ 
English: Liu Gongchao said: Does the court think that I am a scholar and do not know how to use the army?

古文：即奏请自行，许之。
现代文：他当即上奏请求让他自己前去，宪宗答应了他。
English: He immediately begged to be allowed to go on his own, and Kenzong agreed.

古文：公绰至安州，李听属橐鞬迎之。
现代文：柳公绰来到安州，李听让全副武装的将领前去迎接他。
English: When Liu Gongqiao came to Anzhou, Li Huan asked the generals in full armour to go to meet him.

古文：公绰以鄂岳都知兵马使、先锋行营兵马都虞候二牒授之，选卒六千以属听，戒其部校曰： 行营之事，一决都将。 
现代文：柳公绰将鄂岳都知兵马使、先锋行营兵马都虞候两种文书交给他们，选出士兵六千人归属给李听，告诫他的部队说： 有关行营的事务，一切由都将决定。 
English: Liu Gongpo handed over two documents to them, namely, the Egyu Duchy's envoy and the Duchy's vanguard marching to the camp, selected six thousand soldiers to belong to Li, and admonished his troops, saying, "All matters related to marching to the camp will be decided by you."

古文：听感恩畏威，如出麾下。
现代文：李听感激他的恩德，畏惧他的威严，就象他的部下一般。
English: Li He was grateful for his kindness and feared his majesty, just like his subordinates.

古文：公绰号令整肃，区处军事，诸将无不服。
现代文：柳公绰发号施令，整齐严肃，他处置军旅事务，各位将领无不悦服。
English: Liu Gongqiao issued orders, neat and serious, he dealt with military affairs, and the generals were all pleased.

古文：士卒在行营者，其家疾病死丧，厚给之，妻淫泆者，沉之于江，士卒皆喜曰： 中丞为我治家，我何得不前死！ 
现代文：身在行营的士兵们，凡是家中人有患病或死亡的，都发给他们丰厚的物品，他们的妻子纵欲放荡的，便沉入长江淹死。将士们都高兴地说： 柳中丞替我们整治家务，我们怎么能够不至死向前呢！ 
English: The soldiers in the camp, if any of their family members were sick or died, were given rich goods, and if their wives indulged in debauchery, they sank into the Yangtze River and drowned. The soldiers were happy to say: Liu Zhongzheng is doing our housework for us, how can we move forward without dying!

古文：故每战皆捷。
现代文：所以，柳公绰每次出战，都取得了胜利。
English: Therefore, every time Liu Gongchao went to war, he achieved victory.

古文：公绰所乘马，踶杀圉人，公绰命杀马以祭之，或曰： 圉人自不备耳，此良马，可惜！ 
现代文：柳公绰所骑的马，将养马人踢死了，柳公绰便命令将马匹杀死来祭奠养马人。有人说： 那是由于养马人不加防备造成的，这是一匹好马，杀死它太可惜了！ 
English: The horse that Liu Gongqiao was riding kicked the horse breeder to death, and Liu Gongqiao ordered that the horse be killed to pay tribute to the horse breeder. Some people said: That was caused by the horse breeder being careless, this is a good horse, it's a shame to kill it!

古文：公绰曰： 材良性驽，何足惜也！ 
现代文：柳公绰说： 这匹马能奔善跑，但生性顽劣，有什么值得可惜呢！ 
English: Liu Gongchao said, "This horse can run well, but it has a bad nature. What a pity!"

古文：竟杀之。
现代文：他终于将这匹马杀掉了。
English: He finally killed the horse.

古文：河东将刘辅杀丰州刺史燕重旰，王锷诛之，及其党。
现代文：河东将领刘辅杀死了丰州刺史燕重旰，王锷又将刘辅及其同伙诛杀了。
English: The general of Hedong, Liu Fu, killed the Fengzhou assassin, Shi Yan Jiuyong, and Wang Hui killed Liu Fu and his accomplices.

古文：王叔文之党坐谪官者，凡十年不量移，执政有怜其才欲渐进之者，悉召至京师。谏官争言其不可，上与武元衡亦恶之。
现代文：王叔文一党中获罪贬官的人们，已经十年没有酌情迁官。有些怜惜他们的才华而打算逐渐提升他们的主持政务的官员，主张将他们全部传召到京城来，谏官们争着陈说这种做法是不适当的，宪宗与武元衡也讨厌他们。
English: Wang Shouwen and his party had not transferred the officials who had been convicted and demoted for ten years. Some of the government officials who pitied their talents and planned to gradually promote them advocated that they should all be summoned to Beijing. The eunuchs argued that this practice was inappropriate. They were also hated by Xianzong and Wuyuanheng.

古文：三月，乙酉，皆以为远州刺史，官虽进而地益远。
现代文：三月，乙酉，宪宗将他们全部任命为偏远各州的刺史，虽然官职提升了，所在地却更加遥远了。
English: In March, in Aitutaki, Kenzong appointed all of them as the chief priests of the remote prefectures. Although the official position was promoted, the location was even more remote.

古文：永州司马柳宗元为柳州刺史，朗州司马刘禹锡为播州刺史。
现代文：永州司马柳宗元出任柳州刺史，朗州司马刘禹锡出任播州刺史。
English: Yongzhou Sima Liu Zongyuan served as Liuzhou chief historian, and Langzhou Sima Liu Yuxi served as Banshou chief historian.

古文：宗元曰： 播州非人所居，而梦得亲在堂，万无母子俱往理。 
现代文：柳宗元说： 播州不是人居留的地方，而刘禹锡的母亲尚在高堂，万万没有让母子二人一同前往的道理。 
English: Liu Zongyuan said: Banzhou is not a place for people to stay, and Liu Yuxi's mother is still in high school. There is no reason for the mother and son to go together.

古文：欲请于朝，愿以柳易播。
现代文：他打算向朝廷请求，愿意让自己由柳州改任播州。
English: He planned to ask the imperial court to change his post from Liuzhou to Banzhou.

古文：会中丞裴度亦为禹锡言曰： 禹锡诚有罪，然母老，与其子为死别，良可伤！ 
现代文：适值御史中丞裴度也为刘禹锡进言说： 刘禹锡诚然有罪，但是他的母亲年事已高，与自己的儿子去作永别，实在使人哀伤！ 
English: Liu Yuxi is indeed guilty, but his mother is too old to say goodbye to her son, which is really sad!

古文：上曰： 为人子尤当自谨，勿贻亲忧，此则禹锡重可责也。 
现代文：宪宗说： 作为人子，尤其应该使自己谨慎，不要给亲人留下忧患。如此说来，刘属锡也是甚可责难的啊。 
English: Gensong said, "As a son of man, you should be especially careful not to bring sorrow to your relatives. In this sense, Liu Zixi is also very reprehensible."

古文：度曰： 陛下方侍太后，恐禹锡在所宜矜。 
现代文：裴度说： 陛下正在侍奉太后，恐怕在刘禹锡那里也应予以怜悯。 
English: Pei Du said, "Your Majesty is serving the empress dowager, I'm afraid you should also show mercy to Liu Yuxi."

古文：上良久，乃曰： 朕所言，以责为人子者耳，然不欲伤其亲心。 
现代文：宪宗过了许久才说： 朕说的话，是只责备作儿子的罢了，但是并不打算使他的母亲伤心。 
English: It was a long time before Kenzong said, "What I said was just to reprimand my son, but I didn't mean to make his mother sad.

古文：退，谓左右曰： 裴度爱我终切。 
现代文：退下来后，宪宗对周围的人说： 裴度对朕爱得深切啊。 
English: After stepping back, Xianzong said to the people around him: Pei Du loves me deeply.

古文：明日，改禹锡连州刺史。
现代文：第二天，刘属锡便被改任为连州刺史了。
English: The next day, Liu Zhenxi was reappointed as Lianzhou chief historian.

古文：宗元善为文，尝作《梓人传》，以为： 梓人不执斧斤刀锯之技，专以寻引、规矩、绳墨度群木之材，视栋宇之制，相高深、圆方、短长之宜，指麾众工，各趋其事，不胜任者退之。
现代文：柳宗元善于撰写文章，曾经作过一篇《梓人传》，讲道： 有一位木匠，不肯去做斧砍锯析这一类手艺活计，却专门用长尺、圆规、方尺、墨斗审度各种木料的用场，检视房屋的规制，观察高度、方圆、长短是否合度，指挥着众多的木工，各自去干自己的活计，对不能将任务承担起来的人们，便将他们辞退。
English: Liu Zongyuan was good at writing articles. He once wrote an article entitled "A Biography of the Zi People," and preached: There was a carpenter who refused to do the kind of craft work of axe chopping and sawing, but specialized in using a ruler, a compass, a square ruler, and an inkwell to examine the uses of various wood materials, inspect the regulation of houses, and observe whether the height, circumference, and length were appropriate. He directed many carpenters to do their own work, and dismissed those who could not undertake the task.

古文：大厦既成，则独名其功，受禄三倍。
现代文：一座大型的房屋建成后，唯独以他的名字记载事功，得到的酬金是一般木工的三倍。
English: After the completion of a large building, he was the only one to have his achievements recorded in his name, and he received three times the remuneration of ordinary carpenters.

古文：亦犹相天下者，立纲纪、整法度，择天下之士使称其职，居天下之人使安其业，能者进之，不能者退之，万国既理，而谈者独称伊、傅、周、召，其百执事之勤劳不得纪焉。
现代文：这也正象担当天下宰相的人们，设立大纲要领，整饬法令制度，选择天下的人士，使他们的才干与自己的职务相称；让天下的人们居住下来，使他们安心从事自己的职业。提升有能力的人们，屏退没有能力的人们。全国各地得到治理后，谈论起此事的人们唯独赞伊尹、傅说、周公、召公等宰相，对那些各部门专职人员的辛勤劳苦却不能够予以记载。
English: This is just like the people in charge of the prime minister of the world, setting up a general leader, rectifying the legal system, selecting the people of the world, so that their talents are commensurate with their duties; let the people of the world live down, so that they can safely engage in their own professions. Promote capable people, screen out incapable people. After the whole country was governed, people who talked about this only praised the prime ministers such as Yi Yin, Fu Dian, Zhou Gong, and Zhao Gong, but they could not record the hard work of those full-time employees in various departments.

古文：或者不知体要，衒能矜名，亲小劳，侵众官，听听于府庭，而遗其大者远者，是不知相道者也。 
现代文：有些宰相不识大体，不得要领，夸耀自己的才能与名望，亲自去做细小的劳务，侵犯百官的职责，在官署中吵嚷地争辩不休，而将重大而长远的方略遗落无存，这是不懂得为相之道。 
English: Some prime ministers do not know the big picture, do not know the essentials, boast of their talents and reputation, personally do small work, violate the duties of officials, argue noisily in the government office, and leave the important and long-term strategies behind. This is not the way to behave.

古文：又作《种树郭橐驼传》曰： 橐驼之所种，无不生且茂者。
现代文：柳宗元又曾撰写《种树郭橐驼传》说： 郭橐驼种植的树木，没有不成活、不繁茂的。
English: Liu Zongyuan, who also wrote "The Story of Guo Yingcam," said: "There is no tree planted by Guo Yingcam that does not grow and flourish.

古文：或问之，对曰： 橐驼非能使木寿且孳也。
现代文：有人问他其中的道理，郭橐驼回答说： 我本人并不能够使树木延长寿命并且生长繁盛。
English: Asked why, Guo replied: "I can't make the trees live longer and grow better on my own.

古文：凡木之性，其根欲舒，其土欲故，既植之，勿动勿虑，去不复顾。
现代文：大凡树木的本性，树根喜欢舒展，喜欢让人培上陈泥。将树木种植好后，不需挪动它，不需为它担心，离开它后，便不用再去看管它。
English: It is in the nature of trees that their roots like to stretch out, and that they like to be watered with old mud. After the trees are planted, there is no need to move them, no need to worry about them, and no need to take care of them after they are left.

古文：其莳也若子，其置也若弃，则其天全而性得矣。
现代文：裁种树木时，就象爱护自己的子女一样，将树木放入土中后，就象将它抛弃了似的，这就使树木的天性得以保全，使树木的本性得到发展了。
English: When pruning trees, it is like caring for one's own children. When placing trees in the soil, it is like abandoning them. This preserves the nature of trees and develops the nature of trees.

古文：它植者则不然，根拳而土易，爱之太恩，忧之太勤，旦视而暮抚，已去而复顾，甚者爪其肤以验其生枯，摇其本以观其疏密，而木之性日以离矣。
现代文：别的种植树木的人们就不是这样了，他们使树木的根部拳曲在一起，而且更换了新土，对树木的爱护过于深切，担忧过于细密，早晨去看它，晚上又去抚摸它，已经离开了，还要再回头看上一眼。更为过分的人们还要划破树皮，查看它是成活了，还是枯萎了，摇晃着树干，去观察枝叶哪里稀疏，哪里繁密，而树木却与自己的本性日见脱离了。
English: This is not the case with other tree-planters, who make the roots of the trees fist-clench together, and replace the new soil, the love of the trees is too deep, the worries are too fine, in the morning to see it, in the evening to touch it, has left, and has to look back again. The more excessive people also have to cut the bark to see if it is alive or withered, shake the trunk to see where the branches are sparse and where they are dense, but the trees have become detached from their own nature.

古文：虽曰爱之，其实害之；虽曰忧之，其实仇之。
现代文：虽然说是爱护树木，实际却是损害树木；虽然说是为树木担忧，实际却是将树木当成仇人了。
English: Although they say they love trees, they actually harm trees; although they say they are worried about trees, they actually treat trees as enemies.

古文：故不我若也！
现代文：所以，人们种树都不如我。
English: So people don't grow trees as well as I do.

古文：为政亦然。
现代文：办理政务，也是这个道理。
English: This is also the reason for handling government affairs.

古文：吾居乡见长人者，好烦其令，若甚怜焉而卒以祸之。
现代文：我住在乡间，看到当官的人们，喜欢频频发号施令，象是对百姓非常怜悯，但终究给百姓带来祸殃。
English: I live in the countryside, and I see officials who like to issue orders frequently, as if they have great compassion for the people, but in the end they bring disaster to the people.

古文：旦幕吏来，聚民而令之，促其耕获，督其蚕织，吾小人辍饔飧以劳吏之不暇，又何以蕃吾生而安吾性邪！
现代文：整天都有吏人前来，将百姓聚集起来，向人们发布命令，敦促人们耕地收割，监督人们养蚕织布，我们这些小人把早餐晚饭都停下来，忙着去慰劳吏人还来不及呢，又怎么能够使我们的生计得以蕃息，并且使我们的天性安然无扰呢！
English: All day long the officials come, gather the people together, issue orders to the people, urge the people to plough and harvest, supervise the people to raise silkworms and weave cloth. We, the little people, have stopped breakfast and dinner, and are too busy to comfort the officials. How can we make our livelihoods grow and our nature be safe and sound?

古文：凡病且怠，职此故也。 
现代文：一般说来，人民困窘倦怠，主要是由于这个原故的啊！  
English: Generally speaking, the people's distress and weariness are mainly due to this reason!

古文：此其文之有理者也。
现代文：这是柳宗元文章中深含哲理的作品。
English: This is a deeply philosophical work written by Liu Zongyuan.

古文：庚子，李光颜奏破淮西兵于临颍。
现代文：庚子，李光颜奏称在临颍打败淮西兵马。
English: Geng Zi, played by Li Guangyan, claimed to have defeated the troops of Huai Xi in Linyi.

古文：田弘正遣其子布将兵三千助严绶讨吴元济。
现代文：田弘正派遣他的儿子田布率领兵马三千人，帮助严绶讨伐吴元济。
English: Tian Hongzheng dispatched his son Tian Bu to lead 3,000 soldiers and horses to help Yan Xuan fight Wu Yuanji.

古文：甲辰，李光颜又奏破淮西兵于南顿。
现代文：甲辰，李光颜又奏称在南顿打败淮西兵马。
English: Jia Chen and Li Guangyan also claimed to have defeated Huaxi soldiers and horses in Nantong.

古文：吴元济遣使求救于恒、郓。王承宗、李师道数上表请赦元济，上不从。
现代文：吴元济派遣使者向恒州与郓州请求援救，王承宗和李师道屡次上表请求赦免吴元济，宪宗不肯听从。
English: Wu Yuanji sent envoys to Hengzhou and Zhangzhou to ask for help. Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao repeatedly petitioned to pardon Wu Yuanji, but Xianzong refused to listen.

古文：是时发诸道兵讨元济而不及淄青，师道使大将将二千人趣寿春，声言助官军讨元济，实欲为元济之援也。
现代文：当时，朝廷征调各道兵马讨伐吴元济，还没有讨伐淄青，李师道便让大将率领二千人奔赴寿春，声称帮助官军讨伐吴元济，实际却是打算去援助吴元济。
English: At that time, the imperial court had conscripted soldiers and horses from various provinces to fight Wu Yuanji, but had yet to fight Ao Qing. Li Shidao then sent a general with two thousand men to Shuchun, claiming to help the government army fight Wu Yuanji, but actually intending to aid Wu Yuanji.

古文：师道素养刺客奸人数十人，厚资给之，其徒说师道曰： 用兵所急，莫先粮储。
现代文：李师道平时豢养着刺客和奸人几十人，以丰厚的资财供给他们，此中有人劝说李师道： 用兵打仗急切需要的，没有比粮食储备更为重要的了。
English: Li Shidao usually kept dozens of assassins and traitors and provided them with abundant resources. Some of them persuaded Li Shidao: There is nothing more important than grain reserves that are urgently needed to fight with soldiers.

古文：今河阴院积江、淮租赋，请潜往焚之。
现代文：现在，河阴转运院积存着江淮地区的赋税，请暗中前去焚烧河阴转运院。
English: Now, the taxes of the Jianghuai region have been accumulated in the Hexin Transportation Center. Please secretly go ahead and burn the Hexin Transportation Center.

古文：募东都恶少年数百，劫都市，焚宫阙，则朝廷未暇讨蔡，先自救腹心。
现代文：可以募集洛阳的顽劣少年几百个人，抢劫城市，焚烧宫廷，使朝廷没有讨伐蔡州的余暇，却要首先去援救自己的核心地区。
English: It is possible to recruit hundreds of bad boys from Luoyang to rob the city and burn the court, so that the court does not have the leisure to fight Caizhou, but must first go to rescue its own core area.

古文：此亦救蔡一奇也。 
现代文：这也可以算作救助蔡州的一个奇计了。 
English: This can also be counted as a miracle to save Caizhou.

古文：师道从之。
现代文：李师道听从了此人的建议。
English: Li Shidao followed this person's advice.

古文：自是所在盗贼窃发。
现代文：从此，各处都有盗贼暗中活动。
English: Since then, thieves have been working undercover everywhere.

古文：辛亥暮，盗数十人攻河阴转运院，杀伤十馀人，烧钱帛三十馀万缗匹、谷二万馀斛，于是人情恇惧。
现代文：辛亥傍晚，有强盗数十人攻打河阴转运院，杀伤了十多个人，烧掉钱财布帛三十多万缗匹，谷物三万多斛。
English: In the evening of Xinhai, dozens of robbers attacked the Hexin Transportation Center, killing and wounding more than ten people, and burning more than 300,000 mu of money and cloth, and more than 30,000 mu of grain.

古文：群臣多请罢兵，上不许。
现代文：由此，人们感到恐慌不安，群臣多数请求停止用兵，宪宗不肯应许。
English: As a result, people felt panicked and uneasy. Most of the courtiers requested to stop the use of troops, but Kenzong refused to promise.

古文：诸军讨淮西久未有功，五月，上遣中丞裴度诣行营宣慰，察用兵形势。
现代文：各军长时间讨伐淮西，毫无建树。五月，宪宗派遣御史中丞裴度前往行营抚慰将士，察看采取军事行动的情况。
English: The armies had been fighting in Huaxi for a long time, with no results. In May, Emperor Xianzong sent the imperial historian Baidu to the camp to comfort the soldiers and observe the military operations.

古文：度还，言淮西必可取之状，且曰： 观诸将，惟李光颜勇而知义，必能立功。 
现代文：裴度回朝后，陈述了淮西肯定能够攻取的情况，而且说： 我观察各位将领，只有李光颜骁勇善战，深明大义，一定能够建立功勋。 
English: After Baidu returned to the DPRK, he stated the situation that Huaixi could definitely be conquered, and said: I observed the generals, only Li Guangyan, who was brave and good at fighting, knew the great cause, and could definitely build up merits.

古文：上悦。
现代文：宪宗高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：考功郎中、知制诰韩愈上言，以为： 淮西三小州，残弊困剧之馀，而当天下之全力，其破败可立而待。
现代文：考功郎中、知制诰韩愈进言认为： 淮西只有申、光、蔡三个小州，正当残灭破败、困顿艰难的末路，而且面临着天下的全部兵力，他们的毁灭是指日可待的。
English: Han Yu Jinjun, a meritorious scholar and intellectual, said: Huaxi has only three small prefectures, namely, Shen, Guang and Cai, which are doomed to be destroyed and ruined. They are facing all the forces in the world, and their destruction is just around the corner.

古文：然所未可知者，在陛下断与不断耳。 
现代文：然而，现在还不清楚的因素，就是陛下有没有作出决断。 
English: What is not clear, however, is whether His Majesty has made up his mind.

古文：因条陈用兵利害，以为： 今诸道发兵各二三千人，势力单弱，羁旅异乡，与贼不相谙委，望风慑惧。
现代文：于是他逐条陈述使用兵力的好处与害处，认为： 现在，各道派出的兵马分别有两三千人，声势微弱，力量单薄，客居外乡，不熟悉敌军的实情，以致一看到敌军的势头，就恐惧了。
English: He then went through the advantages and disadvantages of using troops, saying: At present, there are two to three thousand soldiers and horses sent from each province. They are weak and have little strength. They live in a foreign country and are not familiar with the enemy's situation. As soon as they see the enemy's momentum, they are afraid.

古文：将帅以其客兵，待之既薄，使之又苦。
现代文：将帅们认为他们都是外来的兵马，既刻薄地对待他们，又极力使唤他们。
English: The generals thought that they were all foreign soldiers and treated them harshly and tried their best to coerce them.

古文：或分割队伍，兵将相失，心孤意怯，难以有功。
现代文：有些士兵的队伍被拆散重编，士兵与将领被分隔开来，使将士们感到孤单，怀有怯意，这是很难获得成功的。
English: Some soldiers' teams were broken up and reorganized, and soldiers and generals were separated, making the soldiers feel lonely and timid, which was difficult to succeed.

古文：又其本军各须资遣，道路辽远，劳费倍多。
现代文：再者，将士们所在本军分别需要发运给养，道路遥远，人力与财力消耗加倍繁多。
English: In addition, the troops in which the soldiers are stationed need to be transported separately, the roads are far away, and the consumption of manpower and financial resources is more than doubled.

古文：闻陈、许、安、唐、汝、寿等州与贼连接处，村落百姓悉有兵器，习于战斗，识贼深浅，比来未有处分，犹愿自备衣粮，保护乡里。
现代文：听说陈州、许州、安州、唐州、汝州、寿州等与敌军连接着的地方，村庄中的百姓都有武器，已经习惯当兵打仗，晓得敌军的虚实。虽然近来对这些百姓没有做出安排，但他们仍然愿意由自己备办衣服与口粮，保护自己的家乡。
English: I heard that in the villages of Chenzhou, Xuzhou, Anzhou, Tangzhou, Ruzhou, Shoushou and other places connected with the enemy army, the people in the villages have weapons, have been accustomed to fighting as soldiers, and know the truth of the enemy army. Although no arrangements have been made for these people recently, they are still willing to prepare clothes and rations by themselves to protect their hometown.

古文：若令召募，立可成军。
现代文：如果让人召募这些百姓，立即就能够组成军队。
English: If these people were to be conscripted, an army could be formed immediately.

古文：贼平之后，易使归农。
现代文：将敌人平定后，也容易打发他们回乡务农。
English: After subduing the enemy, it is also easy to send them back to the countryside to work in agriculture.

古文：乞悉罢诸道军，募土人以代之。 
现代文：请陛下将各道军队全部撤走，募集当地百姓来取代各道军队。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to withdraw all the troops from each province and recruit local people to replace the troops from each province.

古文：又言： 蔡州士卒皆国家百姓，若势力穷不能为恶者，不须过有杀戮。 
现代文：他还说： 蔡州将士都是国家的百姓，倘若到了吴元济势穷力竭，不再能够作恶时，不须过多地杀害他们。 
English: He also said: "The soldiers of Caizhou are the people of the country. If Wu Yuanji is exhausted and can no longer do evil, there is no need to kill too many of them.

古文：丙申，李光颜奏败淮西兵于时曲。
现代文：丙申，李光颜奏称在时曲打败淮西兵马。
English: According to Yi Shen, Li Guangyan said that he would defeat the Huaixi soldiers and horses in the jingle.

古文：淮西兵晨压其垒而陈，光颜不得出，乃自毁其栅之左右，出骑以击之。
现代文：早晨，淮西兵马紧紧逼迫着李光颜的营垒结成阵列，李光颜无法出兵，便自行毁除本军周围的栅栏，派出骑兵，向淮西军进击。
English: In the morning, the soldiers and horses of Huaixi were closely pressing the camp of Li Guangyan. Li Guangyan could not send troops, so he destroyed the fence around his army and sent cavalry to attack the Huaixi army.

古文：光颜自将数骑冲其陈，出入数四，贼皆识之，矢集其身如胃毛。
现代文：李光颜亲自率领几个骑兵向淮西阵中冲锋，多次冲进去，杀出来，敌人都认识他，箭象刺猬毛般密集地向他身上射去。
English: Li Guangyan personally led several cavalrymen to charge into the Huaixi formation, repeatedly rushed in and killed out, the enemy all knew him, and the arrows shot at him densely like a bristle.

古文：其子揽辔止之，光颜举刃叱去。
现代文：他的儿子抓住缰绳，请他停止冲锋，李光颜举起兵器，喝斥他走开。
English: His son grabbed the reins and asked him to stop charging. Li Guangyan raised his weapon and shouted at him to go away.

古文：于是人争致死，淮西兵大溃，杀数千人。
现代文：于是，人们争着拼死力战，淮西兵马大规模地溃退，被杀死了数千人。
English: As a result, people fought a desperate battle, and the soldiers and horses of Huaxi retreated on a large scale, killing thousands of people.

古文：上以裴度为知人。
现代文：宪宗认为裴度是善于识别人才的。
English: Kenzong believes that Pei Du is good at identifying talent.

古文：上自李吉甫薨，悉以用兵事委武元衡。
现代文：自从李吉甫去世以后，宪宗将采取军事行动的事情全部交托给武元衡。
English: Since the death of Li Jifu, the emperor entrusted all military operations to Wu Yuanhei.

古文：李师道所养客说李师道曰： 天子所以锐意诛蔡者，元衡赞之也，请密往刺之。
现代文：李师道豢养的宾客规劝李师道说： 天子专心一意地声讨蔡州的根由，在于有武元衡辅佐他，请让我秘密前去刺杀他。
English: Li Shidao's guests advised Li Shidao, saying, "The reason why the Heavenly Son is single-mindedly speaking out against Caizhou is because he is assisted by Wuyuan Heng, please let me secretly go and assassinate him."

古文：元衡死，则他相不敢主其谋，争劝天子罢兵矣。 
现代文：如果武元衡死了，其他宰相不敢主持讨伐蔡州的谋划，就会争着劝说天子停止用兵了。 
English: If Takemoto died, the other chancellors would not dare to preside over the plan to attack Caizhou, and they would fight to persuade the emperor to stop using troops.

古文：师道以为然，即资给遣之。
现代文：李师道认为此言有理，当即发给盘资，打发他前去。
English: Li Shidao thought that this was reasonable, and immediately sent him an estimate and sent him on his way.

古文：王承宗遣牙将尹少卿奏事，为吴元济游说。
现代文：王承宗派遣牙将尹少卿奏报事情，为吴元济四处说情。
English: Wang Chengzong dispatched Yin Shaoqing to report the matter and intercede for Wu Yuanji everywhere.

古文：少卿至中书，辞指不逊，元衡叱出之。
现代文：尹少卿来到中书省时，言词的意旨颇不谦恭，武元衡便将他喝斥出去。
English: When Yin Shaoqing came to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, the meaning of his words was quite immodest, and Wu Yuanhei shouted him out.

古文：承宗又上书诋毁元衡。
现代文：王承宗又上书恶意诬蔑武元衡。
English: Wang Chengzong also maliciously slandered Wu Yuanhei in a letter.

古文：六月，癸卯，天未明，元衡入朝，出所居靖安坊东门。
现代文：六月，癸卯，天色尚未大亮，武元衡前往朝廷，从他居住的靖安坊东门出来。
English: In June, when the sky was not yet bright, Wu Yuanheng went to the imperial court and came out of the east gate of Jing'an Square, where he lived.

古文：有贼自暗中突出射之，从者皆散去，贼执元衡马行十馀步而杀之，取其颅骨而去。
现代文：突然，有一个贼人从暗地里出来用箭射他，随从人员纷纷逃散。贼人牵着武元衡的马匹走出十多步以后，将他杀死，砍下他的头颅，便离开了。
English: Suddenly, a thief came out of the shadows and shot him with an arrow, and his followers scattered. The thief led Wu Yuanhe's horses for more than ten steps, killed him, cut off his head, and left.

古文：又入通化坊击裴度，伤其首，附沟中，度氈帽厚，得不死。
现代文：贼人又进入通化坊，前去刺杀裴度，使他头部受伤，跌落在水沟中。由于裴度戴的毡帽很厚实，因而得以不死。
English: The thief then entered the Tonghua Workshop and went to stab and kill Pei Du, injuring him in the head and causing him to fall into a ditch. Because Pei Du was wearing a thick skullcap, he was able to survive.

古文：傔人王义自后抱贼大呼，贼断义臂而去。
现代文：随从王义从背后抱住贼人大声呼叫，贼人砍断他的胳臂，得以走脱。
English: Wang Yi's follower hugged the thief from behind and shouted loudly. The thief cut off his arm and was able to escape.

古文：京城大骇，于是诏宰相出入，加金吾骑士张弦露刃以卫之，所过坊门呵索甚严。
现代文：京城的人们都非常惊骇。于是，宪宗颁诏命令，宰相外出时，加派金吾骑士护卫。金吾骑士张满弓弦，亮出兵器，在需要经过的坊市门前喝呼搜索，很是严密。
English: The people of Kyoto were very shocked. Therefore, Emperor Kenzong issued a decree ordering that when the prime minister went out, he should be escorted by Kingu knights. Kingu knights strung their bows, displayed their weapons, and shouted and searched in front of the gates of the cities they needed to pass through. It was very strict.

古文：朝士未晓不敢出门。
现代文：朝中百官在天未亮时不敢走出家门。
English: In the early morning, hundreds of officials dare not go out of their homes.

古文：上或御殿久之，班犹未齐。
现代文：有时皇上登殿，等了许久，朝班中的官员仍然不能到齐。
English: Sometimes, after waiting for a long time for the emperor to enter the palace, the officials in the imperial office still can't come together.

古文：贼遗纸于金吾及府、县，曰： 毋急捕我，我先杀汝。 
现代文：贼人在金吾卫与兆府万年、长安两县留下纸条说： 不要忙着捉拿我，否则，我先将你杀死。 
English: The thief left a note in Jinwuwei, Zhaofu and Chang'an counties, saying: "Don't be too busy to catch me, otherwise, I will kill you first."

古文：故捕贼者不敢甚急。
现代文：所以，捉拿贼人的人们不敢操之过急。
English: Therefore, the people who caught the thief did not dare to be too hasty.

古文：兵部侍郎许孟容见上言： 自古未有宰相横尸路隅而盗不获者，此朝廷之辱也！ 
现代文：兵部侍郎许孟容进见宪宗说： 自古以来，没有发生过宰相被人在路旁杀害，盗贼却不能捉获的事情，这是朝廷的耻辱啊！ 
English: The attendant of the military department, Xu Meng Rong, went to see Emperor Gensong and said, "Since ancient times, there has never been a case where a prime minister was killed by a person on the roadside, but the thief could not be caught. This is a disgrace to the imperial court!"

古文：因涕泣。
现代文：说着，他便哭泣起来。
English: I started crying as soon as I said it.

古文：又诣中书挥涕言： 请奏起裴中丞为相，大索贼党，穷其奸源。 
现代文：许孟容又前往中书省流着眼泪说： 请求中书省申奏起用裴中丞为宰相，全面搜索贼人的同伙，查清他们为恶的根源。 
English: Xu Mengrong also went to the Ministry of Education and Culture with tears streaming down his face and said, "I request the Ministry of Education and Culture to issue a petition to appoint Pei Zhongzheng as the prime minister, comprehensively search for the thief's accomplices, and find out the root cause of their evil."

古文：戊申，诏中外所在搜捕，获贼者赏钱万缗，官五品；敢庇匿者，举族诛之。
现代文：戊申，宪宗颁诏命令在朝廷内外四处搜查捉拿贼人，对将贼人拿获的人，奖赏钱一万缗，赐给五品官位。如有胆敢包庇隐藏贼人的，诛杀其整个家族。
English: In response, the Emperor issued an edict to search everywhere inside and outside the Imperial Court to catch the thief. The person who caught the thief would receive a reward of ten thousand baht and five official ranks. If anyone dared to cover up and hide the thief, his entire family would be killed.

古文：于是京城大索，公卿家有复壁、重橑者皆索之。
现代文：于是，京城的大搜索开始了，对家中筑有夹壁、复屋的公卿都进行了搜索。
English: As a result, a large-scale search of the capital began, and searches were carried out for court nobles who had walls built around their homes and had their houses rebuilt.

古文：成德军进奏院有恒州卒张晏等数人，行止无状，众多疑之。
现代文：成德军进奏院中有恒州士卒张晏等几个人，行为无礼，众人多怀疑他们就是贼人。
English: Among the Chengde army marching into the concert hall, there were a few people such as Zhang Qi, a soldier from Hengzhou, who behaved rudely, and many people suspected that they were thieves.

古文：庚戌，神策将军王士则等告王承宗遣晏等杀元衡。吏捕得晏等八人，命京兆尹裴武、监察御史陈中师鞫之。
现代文：庚戌，神策军的将军王士则等人告发王承宗派遣张晏等人杀害武元衡，吏人捉拿住张晏等八人，宪宗命令京兆尹裴武与监察御史陈中师审讯他们。
English: Geng Xuan, Wang Shizhe, a general of the Shen Zhe Army, and others denounced Wang Chengzong for sending Zhang Xuan and others to kill Wu Yuanheng. The officials arrested Zhang Xuan and eight others, and the Constitutionalist ordered Jing Zhaoyin Peiwu and the inspector Chen Zhongshi to interrogate them.

古文：癸亥，诏以王承宗前后三表出示百僚，议其罪。
现代文：癸亥，宪宗颁诏将王承宗先后三次所上表章出示百官，商议他应受的罪罚。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict that Wang Chengzong should present the above-mentioned seal three times successively to 100 officials to discuss the punishment he should receive.

古文：裴度病疮，卧二旬，诏以卫兵宿其第，中使问讯不绝。
现代文：裴度创口不愈，卧病二十天，宪宗颁诏命令卫兵住在他的府第中，前去问候的中使接连不断。
English: Pei Du's wound did not heal, and he was bedridden for twenty days. Emperor Xianzong issued an edict ordering the guards to live in his capital, and the envoys came one after another to offer greetings.

古文：或请罢度官以安恒、郓之心，上怒曰： 若罢度官，是奸谋得成，朝廷无复纲纪。
现代文：有人请求免除裴度的官职，以便使恒州王承宗、郓州李师道放下心来，宪宗生气地说： 倘若免除裴度的官职，那就是邪恶的阴谋得逞了，朝廷不再有法度可言。
English: Someone requested that Pei Du be relieved of his official post, so that Wang Chengzong of Hengzhou and Li Shidao of Zhangzhou would be reassured. Xianzong said angrily, "If Pei Du is relieved of his official post, it will mean that the evil plot has succeeded, and the imperial court will no longer have any legitimacy."

古文：吾用度一人，足破二贼。 
现代文：我任用裴度一个人，就足够打败王承宗和李师道两个人。 
English: My appointment of Baidu alone is enough to defeat Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao.

古文：甲子，上召度入对。
现代文：甲子，宪宗传召裴度入朝奏对。
English: At the same time, Kenzong summoned Pei Du to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，以度为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：乙丑，宪宗任命裴度为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the second year of his reign, Kaizong appointed Baidu to the post of chusho-sajiro (chancellor of the imperial court) and donghei-shoji (secretary of state).

古文：度上言： 淮西，腹心之疾，不得不除。
现代文：裴度进言说： 淮西地区是腹心之患，不能不予根除。
English: Pei Dujin said: Huaxi region is a disease of the heart, it must be eradicated.

古文：且朝廷业已讨之，两河籓镇跋扈者，将视此为高下，不可中止。 
现代文：而且，朝廷已经讨伐淮西，河南、河北骄横强暴的藩镇，都打算比照此一战事，来决定对朝廷的态度，因此，讨伐吴元济是不能够半途而止的。 
English: Moreover, the imperial court had already attacked Huaxi, and all the arrogant and violent towns in Henan and Hebei planned to compare this battle to determine their attitude toward the imperial court. Therefore, the attack on Wu Yuanji could not be stopped halfway.

古文：上以为然，悉以用兵事委度，讨贼愈急。
现代文：宪宗认为言之有理，便将采取军事行动的事务全部交托给裴度，对吴元济的讨伐甚为急切。
English: Xianzong thought that his words were reasonable, so he entrusted all the matters of taking military action to Pei Du, and the crusade against Wu Yuanji was very urgent.

古文：初，德宗多猜忌，朝士有相过从者，金吾皆伺察以闻，宰相不敢私第见客，度奏： 今寇盗未平，宰相宜招延四方贤才与参谋议 ，始请于私第见客，许之。
现代文：当初，德宗往往猜疑妒忌臣下，对于相互往来的朝中百官，金吾卫一概侦察情报，上报德宗，宰相也不敢在私人宅第中会见客人。裴度奏称： 如今敌人还没有平定，宰相应当招揽延引各地德才兼备的人才参与谋划计议。 于是，他初次请求在私人宅第中会见宾客，宪宗答应了他的请求。
English: At first, Dezong was often suspicious and jealous of his vassals. For the hundreds of officials of the DPRK and China who interacted with each other, Kim Woo Wei always scouted for intelligence and reported to Dezong. The prime minister also did not dare to meet guests in a private house. Pei Duo said: Now that the enemy has not been pacified, the prime minister should invite and invite talented people from all over the country to participate in planning and discussion. Therefore, he first requested to meet guests in a private house, and Kenzong agreed to his request.

古文：陈中师按张晏等，具服杀武元衡。
现代文：陈中师审讯张晏等人，他们都承认杀害了武元衡。
English: Chen Zhongshi interrogated Zhang Yao and others, and they all admitted to killing Wu Yuanheng.

古文：张弘靖疑其不实，屡言于上，上不听。
现代文：张弘靖怀疑他们的话不属实，屡次进言，宪宗不肯听从。
English: Zhang Hongjing suspected that their words were not true. He repeatedly made suggestions, but Xianzong refused to listen.

古文：戊辰，斩晏等五人，杀其党十四人，李师道客竟潜匿亡去。
现代文：戊辰，朝廷斩杀张晏等五人，杀掉他们的同伙十四人，李师道的宾客终于躲在暗中，逃亡而去了。
English: In Wucheng, the imperial court killed five people, including Zhang Ye, and killed fourteen of their accomplices. Li Shidao's guests finally hid in the shadows and fled.

古文：秋，七月，庚午朔，灵武节度使李光进薨。
现代文：秋季七月，庚午朔，灵武节度使李光进去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Geng Woshuo, Lingwu Festival, Li Guangjin passed away.

古文：光进与弟光颜友善，光颜先娶，其母委以家事。
现代文：李光进与弟弟李光颜关系和睦，李光颜娶妻在先。他们的母亲将家中事务都交给了李光颜的妻子。
English: Li Guangjin and his brother, Li Guangyan, have a harmonious relationship. Li Guangyan married his wife first. Their mother left all the household affairs to Li Guangyan's wife.

古文：母卒，先进后娶，光颜使其妻奉管龠，籍财物，归于其女以。
现代文：母亲去世后，李光进后来也娶了妻子，李光颜让自己的妻子捧着锁钥，登录好家中的财物，交给她的嫂子。
English: After the death of his mother, Li Guangjin later married a wife. Li Guangyan asked his wife to hold the key, register the family's property, and hand it over to her sister-in-law.

古文：光进反之曰： 新妇逮事先姑，先姑命主家事，不可易也。 
现代文：李光进将锁钥、帐簿又退了回去，他说： 弟媳赶上了侍奉已故的婆婆，已故的婆婆命令她主持家中事务，这是不能够更改的啊。 
English: Li Guangjin returned the key and the account book, saying, "My sister-in-law caught up with my late mother-in-law. My late mother-in-law ordered her to preside over the affairs of the family. This cannot be changed."

古文：因相持而泣。
现代文：于是，两人握着手哭泣起来。
English: So the two of them held hands and began to cry.

古文：甲戌，诏数王承宗罪恶，绝其朝贡，曰： 冀其翻然改过，束身自归。
现代文：甲戌，宪宗颁诏数说王承宗的罪恶，不再让他入朝进贡，还说： 希望他能够翻然改过，主动投案。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict saying that Wang Chengzong's sins were too many, and he would no longer be allowed to pay tribute to the emperor. He also said: I hope he can change his ways and take the initiative to join the case.

古文：攻讨之期，更俟后命。 
现代文：前去攻打的日期，再等候以后的命令。 
English: Set a date for the attack and wait for further orders.

古文：八月，己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月，己亥朔，出现日食。
English: In August, at the turn of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：李师道置留后院于东都，本道人杂沓往来，吏不敢诘。
现代文：李师道在洛阳设置了留后院，本道的人们杂乱地往来于此处，吏人不敢责问。
English: Li Shidao has set up a residential courtyard in Luoyang. People from this province come and go here in a chaotic manner, and officials dare not question them.

古文：时淮西兵犯东畿，防御兵悉屯伊阙。
现代文：当时，淮西兵马侵犯东都周围地区，防御他们的兵马全部在伊阙屯驻。
English: At that time, the soldiers and horses of Huaixi invaded the areas around Dongdu, and all the soldiers and horses defending them were stationed in Yili.

古文：师道潜内兵于院中，至数十百人，谋焚宫阙，纵兵杀掠，己烹牛飨士。
现代文：李师道暗中将兵马安置到留后院中，多达数十人到上百人。他策划火烧宫廷，放纵兵马连杀带抢，已经事先烹煮牛肉，对将士们进行了犒赏。
English: Li Shidao secretly placed soldiers and horses in the courtyard of the residence, up to dozens to hundreds of people. He planned to burn the palace, indulged soldiers and horses to kill and rob, had cooked beef in advance, and rewarded the soldiers.

古文：明日，将发，其小卒诣留守吕元膺告变，元膺亟追伊阙兵围之。
现代文：第二天，就要发动时，他的小兵前往留守吕元膺处告发了这一事变，吕元膺连忙追回屯驻伊阙的兵马，前来包围李师道的留后院。
English: The next day, when it was about to be launched, his small soldiers went to the office of the left-behind Lyu Yuanzhang to report the incident. Lyu Yuanzhang hurriedly chased back the soldiers and horses stationed in Ili and came to surround the left-behind courtyard of Li Shidao.

古文：贼众突出，防御兵踵其后，不敢迫，贼出长夏门，望山而遁。
现代文：敌军冲了出来，吕元膺的防御使兵马跟随在他们后边，不敢迫近。敌人出了长夏门，向山上逃去。
English: The enemy army rushed out, and Lv Yuanpi's defense made the soldiers and horses follow behind them, not daring to approach. The enemy left Changxia Gate and fled to the mountains.

古文：是时都城震骇，留守兵寡弱。元膺坐皇城门，指使部分，意气自若，都人赖以安。
现代文：这时候，东都的人们震惊恐骇，留守的兵马单薄微弱，吕元膺坐在皇城门前，指挥部署，态度镇静自如，东都的人们仰赖着他得以放下心来。
English: At this time, the people of Dongdu were shocked and terrified. The remaining soldiers and horses were weak. Lv Yuanpi sat in front of the imperial gate, commanding the deployment, with a calm and relaxed attitude. The people of Dongdu relied on him to put their hearts at rest.

古文：东都西南接邓、虢，皆高山深林，民不耕种，专以射猎为生，人皆趫勇，谓之山棚。
现代文：东都洛阳西南面与邓州和虢州接壤，都是高山深林，山民不从事农业，专门靠打猎维持生计，人人矫捷勇猛，被称为山棚。
English: To the southwest of the eastern capital Luoyang is the border with Dangzhou and Zhangzhou. They are all high mountains and deep forests. The mountain people do not engage in agriculture, but rely exclusively on hunting for their livelihood. Everyone is agile and brave. They are known as mountain shelters.

古文：元膺设重购以捕贼。
现代文：吕元膺悬出重赏，捉拿贼人。
English: Lv Yuanqi put out a reward to catch the thief.

古文：数日，有山棚鬻鹿，贼遇而夺之，山棚走召其侪类，且引官军共围之谷中，尽获之。
现代文：过了几天，有一个山棚正在卖鹿，贼人遇到了他，便将鹿夺走了。山棚跑回去召集同伴，而且领着官军共同将贼人包围在山谷中，将他们全部捉获。
English: A few days later, a stable was selling deer, and the thieves met him and took the deer. The stable ran back to gather his companions, and together with the government army, they surrounded the thieves in the valley and captured them all.

古文：按验，得其魁，乃中岳寺僧圆净，故尝为史思明将，勇悍过人，为师道谋，多买田于伊阙、陆浑之间，以舍山棚而衣食之。
现代文：经过审讯核实，找出了他们的首领，却是中岳寺的僧人圆净。圆净过去曾经担任史思明的将领，勇猛强悍，超过常人。他向李师道献计，在伊阙、陆浑两地之间多多购买田地，使山棚居住下来，而且供给他们衣服与食品。
English: After interrogation and verification, their leader was found, but it was the monk of Zhongyue Temple, Yuancheng. Yuancheng had served as the general of Shi Siming in the past, brave and strong, more than ordinary people. He made a donation to Li Shidao, bought a lot of fields between Ili and Lukhun, made the mountain hut live, and provided them with clothes and food.

古文：有訾嘉珍、门察者，潜部分以属圆净，圆净以师道钱千万，阳为治佛光寺，结党定谋，约令嘉珍等窃发城中，圆净举火于山中，集二县山棚入城助之。
现代文：有名叫訾嘉珍与门察的两个人，暗中部署带领山棚归属圆净。圆净用李师道拨发的一千万钱，装作修治佛光寺，集结同党，制定计谋，邀结并命令訾嘉珍等人在洛阳城里暗中起事，圆净在山上点起火来，集合伊阙、陆浑两县的山棚前往洛阳城中援助他们。
English: There were two people named Gong Jiazhen and Mencha, who secretly deployed and led the mountain shed to belong to Yuancheng. Yuancheng used the ten million money allocated by Li Shidao to decorate and repair the Fo Guang Temple, gathered the same party, made a plan, invited and ordered Gong Jiazhen and others to secretly rise in Luoyang City, Yuancheng lit a fire on the mountain, and gathered the mountain sheds of Ili and Lukun counties to go to Luoyang City to help them.

古文：圆净时年八十馀，捕者既得之，奋锤击其胫，不能折。
现代文：当时，圆净已经有八十多岁，捉拿敌人的官兵得到圆净后，用子猛打他的小腿，但并不能将他的小腿打断。
English: At that time, Yuancheng was already more than eighty years old. After the officers and soldiers who captured the enemy got Yuancheng, they hit his calf with a hammer, but they could not break his calf.

古文：圆净骂曰： 鼠子，折人胫且不能，敢称健儿！ 
现代文：圆净骂着说： 鼠辈小子，连人的小腿都打不断，还敢称作强健的男儿吗？ 
English: Yuancheng scolded and said: "You rat boy, you even beat people's calves, do you still dare to call yourself a strong man?

古文：乃自置其胫，教使折之。
现代文：于是他自己将小腿安放好，教给那位官兵打断了它。
English: So he put the calf in place himself and taught the soldier to break it.

古文：临刑，叹曰： 误我事，不得使洛城流血！ 
现代文：到受刑时。圆净叹息着说： 你们耽误了我的大事，不能血染洛阳城了！ 
English: When he was sentenced, he sighed and said, "You have delayed my important work. You can no longer stain Luoyang City with your blood!"

古文：党与死者凡数千人。
现代文：被处死的圆净的党羽共有数千人。
English: A total of several thousand members of the Yuancheng faction were executed.

古文：留守、防御将二人及驿卒八人皆受其职名，为之耳目。
现代文：留守、防御使的将领二人以及驿站的士兵八人，都接受了李师道的职名，为圆净刺探消息。
English: The two generals who were left behind and sent to defend the capital, as well as the eight soldiers at the station, all accepted the title of Li Shidao and acted as spies for Yuancheng.

古文：元膺鞫訾嘉珍、门察，始知杀武元衡者乃师道也。
现代文：吕元膺审讯了訾嘉珍和门察后，才知道杀害武元衡的主谋是李师道。
English: It was only after Lu Yuanjun interrogated Gong Jiazhen and inspected the door that he learned that the mastermind behind the murder of Wu Yuanheng was Li Shidao.

古文：元膺密以闻，以槛车送二人诣京师。
现代文：吕元膺将此事秘密上报宪宗，用囚车将二人送往京城。
English: Lü Yuanzhang secretly reported the matter to the Jianzong and sent the two men to the capital in a prison van.

古文：上业已讨王承宗，不复穷治。
现代文：宪宗已经讨伐王承宗，不再彻底处治。
English: Kenzong has already fought against Wang Chengzong and will no longer deal with him thoroughly.

古文：元膺上言： 近日籓镇跋扈不臣，有可容贷者。
现代文：吕元膺进言说： 近些时候，藩镇骄横强暴，未尽臣下的礼数，还有能够宽宥的地方。
English: Lv Yuanqin said: Recently, the arrogance and violence of the towns have not been exhausted, and there are still places that can be forgiven.

古文：至于师道谋屠都城，烧宫阙，悖逆尤甚，不可不诛。 
现代文：至于李师道图谋屠杀东都，焚烧宫殿，悖乱忤逆，格外严重，不能够不加诛讨。 
English: As for Li Shidao's plot to massacre Dongdu, burn the palace, and instigate disorder and rebellion, it is particularly serious and cannot be ignored.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：宪宗认为言之有理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：而方讨吴元济，绝王承宗，故未暇治师道也。
现代文：然而，朝廷正在讨伐吴元济，又与王承宗破裂，所以没有余暇处治李师道。
English: However, the imperial court was at war with Wu Yuanji and had broken with Wang Chengzong, so it had no time to deal with Li Shidao.

古文：乙丑，李光颜败于时曲。
现代文：乙丑，李光颜在时曲战败。
English: In the second ugly, Li Guangyan was defeated in the jingle.

古文：初，上以严绶在河东，所遣裨将多立功，故使镇襄阳，且督诸军讨吴元济。
现代文：当初，严绶在河东时，他派出的副将有许多人立了功劳，所以宪宗让他镇守襄阳，并且督促各军讨伐吴元济。
English: At first, when Yan Xuan was in the east of the river, many of the vice-regents sent by him made great contributions, so the Emperor ordered him to guard Xiangyang, and urged the armies to fight against Wu Yuanji.

古文：绶无他材能，到军之日，倾府库，赉士卒，累年之积，一朝而尽。
现代文：严绶没有别的才能，只是在到军镇就任时，竭尽库存，赏赐将士，多年的积蓄，一时散尽。
English: Yan Xun had no other talent, but when he took office in the military town, he exhausted the inventory, rewarded the soldiers, and the years of savings were exhausted.

古文：又厚赂宦官以结声援，拥八州之众万馀人屯境上，闭壁经年，无尺寸功，裴度屡言其军无政。
现代文：他又大力贿赂宦官，与他们互相援助。他掌握着襄、邓、唐、随、均、房、郢、复八州兵众一万多人，驻扎在边境上，将营垒关闭了一年，没有立下任何功劳，裴度屡次说他治军无善政。
English: He also vigorously bribed eunuchs and helped each other with them. He had more than ten thousand soldiers from Xiang, Deng, Tang, Su, Jun, Fang, Ya and Fuzhou stationed on the border. He closed the camp for a year without any merit. Baidu repeatedly said that he did not have good governance.

古文：九月，癸酉，以韩弘为淮西诸军都统。
现代文：九月，癸酉，宪宗任命韩弘为淮西诸军都统。
English: In September, Emperor Xianzong appointed Han Hong as the leader of the Western Huai army.

古文：弘乐于自擅，欲倚贼以自重，不愿淮西速平。
现代文：韩弘喜欢专断独行，打算借助敌军加重自己的地位，不愿意迅速将淮西平定。
English: Han Hong likes to act arbitrarily, intends to strengthen his position with the help of enemy forces, and is not willing to quickly pacify Huaixi.

古文：李光颜在诸将中战最力，弘欲结其欢心，举大梁城索得一美妇人，教之歌舞丝竹，饰以珠玉金翠，直数百万钱，遣使遗之，使者先致书。
现代文：李光颜在各将领中间作战最为出力，韩弘打算博取他的欢心，在全大梁城中找到一个漂亮的妇女，教给她唱歌跳舞，弹奏乐器，用珠宝玉石、金银翡翠将她打扮起来，价值数百万钱，派遣使者将她赠给李光颜。
English: Han Hong planned to win his favor by finding a beautiful woman in the whole city, teaching her to sing and dance, play musical instruments, dress her up with jewelry made of jade, gold, silver, and jade, worth millions of dollars, and send an envoy to present her to Li Guangyan.

古文：光颜乃大飨将士，使者进妓，容色绝世，一座尽惊。
现代文：使者首先书将信交给李光颜，正值李光颜大宴将士。使者将歌妓进献上来，歌妓的容貌姿色冠绝当代，满座将士都惊呆了。
English: The messenger first handed the letter to Li Guangyan. It was the time of Li Guangyan's grand banquet. The messenger presented the geisha. The geisha's appearance was extremely contemporary, and the whole audience was stunned.

古文：光颜谓使者曰： 相公愍光颜羁旅，赐以美妓，荷德诚深。
现代文：李光颜告诉使者说： 韩相公同情我客居他乡，赐给我漂亮的歌妓，我蒙受韩相公的恩德诚然深厚。
English: Li Guangyan told the messenger: Han Xianggong sympathized with my staying away from home and gave me a beautiful geisha. I am truly deeply grateful to Han Xianggong.

古文：然战士数万，皆弃家远来，冒犯白刃，光颜何忍独以声色自娱悦乎！ 
现代文：但是，我这里有数万战士，都是丢下家庭，远道而来，在白晃晃的兵器中间冲撞，难道我能够忍心单独以娇声美色自己娱乐吗！ 
English: However, I have tens of thousands of soldiers here, all of whom have left their families and come from far away to clash in the midst of dazzling weapons. Can I bear to entertain myself alone with a beautiful voice?

古文：因流涕，座者皆泣。
现代文：说着，他便流下了眼泪，在座的人们也都哭泣起来。
English: As he spoke, he broke down in tears and everyone in the room began to weep.

古文：即于席上厚以缯帛赠使者，并妓返之，曰： 为光颜多谢相公，光颜以身许国，誓不与逆贼同戴日月，死无贰矣！ 
现代文：李光颜当即在席上赠给使者许多缯帛，连同歌妓也退还给他，还说： 替我多谢韩相公。我已决心以自身为国效命，立誓不肯与忤逆的贼人共存于世间，就是死了，也不会有二心！ 
English: At the banquet, Lee Kuan Yew immediately presented the envoy with a number of brooms, which were returned to him along with the geisha, and said, "Thank you for me, Han Sang-gong. I have resolved to serve the country on my own, and I have vowed not to coexist with the treacherous thieves in the world. Even if I die, I will not have a second thought!"

古文：冬，十月，庚子，始分山南东道为两节度，以户部侍郎李逊为襄、复、郢、均、房节度使，以右羽林大将军高霞寓为唐、随、邓节度使。
现代文：冬季十月，庚子，朝廷开始将山南东道分成两个节度军府，任命户部侍郎李逊为襄、复、郢、均、房节度使，任命右羽林大将军高霞寓为唐、随、邓节度使。
English: In the winter of October, Geng Zi, the imperial court began to divide the Shannan Host into two festival military headquarters, appointing the household attendant Li Xun as the Xiang, Fu, Yao, Jun and Fang festival envoys, and appointing the Right Ulin General Gao Xia Yue as the Tang, Su and Deng festival envoys.

古文：朝议以唐与蔡接，故使霞寓专事攻战，而逊调五州之赋以饷之。
现代文：朝臣计议认为唐州与蔡州接壤，所以让高霞寓专门从事攻伐接战，而让李逊调发五州的赋税来供给高霞寓军饷。
English: The courtier considered that the border between Tangzhou and Caizhou was too close, so he let Gaoxiaye specialize in offensive and engagement, and let Li Xun transfer the taxes of the five states to supply Gaoxiaye with military pay.

古文：辛丑，刑部侍郎权德舆奏： 自开元二十五年修《格式律令事类》后，至今《长行敕》，近删定为三十卷，请施行。 
现代文：辛丑，刑部侍郎权德舆奏称： 我整理了自开元二十五年修撰的《格式律令事类》以后的律令格式，直至现行的《长行敕》，于最近删定为三十卷的新书，请陛下颁行。 
English: Xin Xi, the attendant of the Criminal Law Department, Quan De Yinsong, said: I have sorted out the format of the ritsuryo since the "Forms, Ritsuryo, and Events" compiled in the 25th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, until the current "Chang Xing Yao," which has recently been edited into a new book of thirty volumes, and I would like to ask His Majesty to issue it.

古文：从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：上虽绝王承宗朝贡，未有诏讨之。
现代文：虽然宪宗不再允许王承宗入朝进贡，但是也没有颁诏讨伐他。
English: Although Kenzong no longer allowed Wang Chengzong to enter the court to pay tribute, he did not issue an edict to fight him.

古文：魏博节度使田弘正屯兵于其境，承宗屡败之，弘正忿，表请击之，上不许。
现代文：魏博节度使田弘正在王承宗的疆境上屯驻兵马，而王承宗屡次打败田弘正军。田弘正愤怨不平，上表请求进击王承宗，宪宗不肯答应。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Tian Hongzong garrison soldiers and horses on Wang Chengzong's territory, and Wang Chengzong repeatedly defeated Tian Hongzong's army. Tian Hongzong was resentful, and requested the above table to attack Wang Chengzong, but Xianzong refused to agree.

古文：表十上，乃听至贝州。
现代文：田弘正接连十次上表，宪宗才准许他前往贝州。
English: Tian Hongzheng went to the table ten times in a row, and it was only after that that Xianzong allowed him to go to Bechu.

古文：丙午，弘正军于贝州。
现代文：丙午，田弘正在贝州驻扎下来。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Tian Hong was stationed in Bechu.

古文：庚戌，东都奏盗焚柏崖仓。
现代文：庚戌，东都洛阳奏称强盗焚烧了柏崖仓。
English: Gyeongbokgung, the capital of the eastern province of Luoyang, said that the robbers burned the warehouse.

古文：十一月，寿州刺史李文通奏败淮西兵。
现代文：十一月，寿州刺史李文通奏称打败了淮西兵。
English: In November, Li Wen Tong, a scholar from Shuzhou, claimed to have defeated the Western Huai soldiers.

古文：壬申，韩弘请命众军合攻淮西，从之。
现代文：壬申，韩弘请求命令各军合力攻打淮西，宪宗听从了他的建议。
English: In Jinshin, Han Hong requested to order the armies to jointly attack Huaxi, and Xianzong followed his suggestion.

古文：李光颜、乌重胤败淮西兵于小溵水，拔其城。
现代文：李光颜与乌重胤在小水打败淮西兵马，并且攻克了小水城。
English: Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan defeated the soldiers and horses of Huaxi in Xiaoshui, and conquered Xiaoshui City.

古文：乙亥，以严绶为太子少保。
现代文：乙亥，宪宗任命严绶为太子少保。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Emperor Gensong appointed Yan Xuan as the Prince's Junior Protector.

古文：盗焚襄州佛寺军储。
现代文：强盗焚毁了襄州佛寺内的军事储备。
English: Robbers burned military reserves in a Buddhist temple in Xiangzhou.

古文：尽徙京城积草于四郊以备火。
现代文：朝廷将京城中堆积的干草全部迁移到四周的效区去，以防备火灾。
English: The imperial court moved all the hay accumulated in the capital to the surrounding service area to prevent a fire.

古文：丁丑，李文通败淮西兵于固始。
现代文：丁丑，李文通在固始打败淮西兵。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Li Wentong defeated Huai Xibing in the beginning.

古文：戊寅，盗焚献陵寝宫、永巷。
现代文：戊寅，强盗焚毁了献陵的后殿和长巷。
English: In Wuyin, the robbers burned down the back of the mausoleum and the alley.

古文：诏发振武兵二千，会义武军以讨王承宗。
现代文：宪宗颁诏征发振武兵马两千人，会合义武军兵马，以讨伐王承宗。
English: The imperial edict dispatched two thousand soldiers of the Zhenwu army to join the Yiwu army to fight Wang Chengzong.

古文：己丑，吐蕃款陇州塞，请互市，许之。
现代文：己丑，吐蕃与陇州通好，请求双方进行贸易往来，得到了许可。
English: Although he was ugly, he was friendly with Bozhou and requested the two sides to carry out trade exchanges. He was granted permission.

古文：初，吴少阳闻信州人吴武陵名，邀以为宾友，武陵不答。
现代文：当初，吴少阳得知信州人吴武陵卓有名望，便邀请他做自己的宾客和朋友，吴武陵不肯应承。
English: At first, when Wu Shaoyang learned that Wu Wulingzhuo, a native of Shinshu, was famous, he invited him to be his guest and friend. Wu Wuling refused to accept.

古文：及元济反，武陵以书谕之曰： 足下勿谓部曲不我欺，人情与足下一也。
现代文：及至吴元济反叛朝廷后，吴武陵写书信开导他说： 您可不要以为您的部下不会欺骗您，人们的心情与您是一样的。
English: After Wu Yuanji rebelled against the imperial court, Wu Wuling wrote a letter to enlighten him, saying, "Don't think that your subordinates won't deceive you. People's moods are the same as yours.

古文：足下反天子，人亦欲反足下。
现代文：既然您可以叛皇上，人们也就打算反叛您。
English: Now that you can rebel against the emperor, people are going to rebel against you.

古文：易地而论，则其情可知矣。 
现代文：倘若您能够换到他们的地位上去看待这个问题，人们的心情就非常清楚了。 
English: If you can put yourself in their shoes and look at this issue, the mood is very clear.

古文：丁酉，武宁节度使李愿奏败李师道之众。
现代文：丁酉，武宁节度使李愿奏称打败李师道的兵马。
English: Ding Xuan and Wu Ning's victory made Li Wanzhong claim that he had defeated Li Shidao's soldiers.

古文：时师道数遣兵攻徐州，败萧、沛数县，愿悉以步骑委都押牙温人王智兴，击破之。
现代文：当时，李师道屡次派兵攻打徐州，打败了萧、沛等好几个县。李愿将步兵、骑兵全部交托给都押牙、温地人王智兴，王智兴击败了李师道军。
English: At that time, Li Shidao repeatedly sent troops to attack Xuzhou, defeating several counties such as Xiao and Pei. Li was willing to entrust all the infantry and cavalry to Wang Zhixing, a native of Duasiya and Wendi. Wang Zhixing defeated Li Shidao's army.

古文：十二月，甲辰，智兴又破师道之众，斩首二千馀级，逐北至平阴而还。
现代文：十二月，甲辰，王智兴又一次打败李师道的兵马，斩首两千多级，追赶败走的敌军，直到平阴，才收兵返回。
English: In December, Jia Chen, Wang Zhixing once again defeated the soldiers and horses of Li Shidao, beheaded more than two thousand, chased the defeated enemy, and did not return until the evening.

古文：愿，晟之子也。
现代文：李愿是李晟的儿子。
English: Li Jian is the son of Li Yao.

古文：东都防御使吕元膺请募山棚以卫宫城，从之。
现代文：东都防御使吕元膺请求召募山棚来护卫宫城，朝廷听从了他的建议。
English: The defense of Dongdu prompted Lü Yuanxuan to request the call-up of mountain huts to guard the palace, and the imperial court heeded his suggestion.

古文：乙丑，河东节度使王锷薨。
现代文：乙丑，河东节度使王锷去世。
English: On the second day of the Ugly, the festival of Hedong caused the death of Wang Xi.

古文：王承宗纵兵四掠，幽、沧、定三镇皆苦之，争上表请讨承宗。
现代文：王承宗放纵士兵四处掳掠，幽州、沧州、定州三军镇都被搅扰得困苦不堪，争着上表请求付伐王承宗，宪宗打算答应他们的请求。
English: Wang Chengzong allowed his soldiers to loot and plunder everywhere, and the three military towns of Yuzhou, Cangzhou and Dingzhou were all disturbed and impoverished. They fought over the request to attack Wang Chengzong, and Kenzong intended to grant their request.

古文：上欲许之。中书侍郎、同平章事张弘靖以为 两役并兴，恐国力所不支，请并力平淮西，乃征恒冀。 
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事张弘靖认为： 如果讨伐吴元济与讨伐王承宗一并进行，恐怕国家的力量难以支撑下去。请合力平定淮西，然后再去征讨恒冀。 
English: Zhang Hongjing, secretary of the Central Committee and Tongping chapter, believed that: If the crusade against Wu Yuanji and the crusade against Wang Chengzong are carried out at the same time, I am afraid that the strength of the country will be difficult to support. Please work together to pacify Huaixi, and then go to conquer Hengji.

古文：上不为之止，弘靖乃求罢。
现代文：宪宗不肯由此停止征讨王承宗，于是张弘靖便请求免除职务。
English: Kenzong refused to stop recruiting Wang Chengzong, so Zhang Hongjing requested to be relieved of his duties.

古文：元和十一年丙申，公元八一六年春，正月，己已，以弘靖同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：元和十一年春季正月，己巳，宪宗任命张弘靖为同平章事，充任河东节度使。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of the Yuan and the first month of the eleventh year of the Yuan, Zhang Hongjing was appointed by Xianzong as Tongping Zhangji, and served as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：乙亥，幽州节度使刘总奏败成德兵，拔武强，斩首千馀级。
现代文：乙亥，幽州节度使刘总奏称打败了成德王承宗的兵马，攻克了武强，斩首一千余级。
English: In Yihai, the Yuzhou Festival, Liu Chongxiao claimed to have defeated the soldiers and horses of Chengde King Chengzong, conquered Wuqiang, and beheaded more than a thousand levels.

古文：庚辰，翰林学士、中书舍人钱徽，驾部郎中、知制诰萧俛，各解职，守本官。
现代文：庚辰，翰林学士、中书舍人钱徽和驾部郎中、知制诰萧被分别解除了职务，守任原来的官职。
English: Geng Chen, Hanlin Baccalaureate, Qian Hui, the person in charge of Chinese literature and calligraphy, and Zhuo Zhong, the person in charge of driving, and Zhisheng Xiao, the person in charge of intellectual property, were relieved of their duties respectively, but retained their original official positions.

古文：时群臣请罢兵者众，上患之，故黜徽、俛以警其馀。
现代文：当时，群臣中请求停止用兵的人很多，宪宗厌恨他们，所以将钱徽与萧贬官，以警告其余的人。
English: At that time, there were many people among the courtiers who requested to stop the use of soldiers. The Emperor hated them, so he sent Qianhui and Xiao to warn the others.

古文：徽，吴人也。
现代文：钱徽是吴地人。
English: Qian Hui is a native of Wu.

古文：癸未，制削王承宗官爵，命河东、幽州、义武、横海、魏博、昭义六道进讨。
现代文：癸未，宪宗颁布制书削除王承宗的官职爵位，命令河东、幽州、义武、横海、魏博、昭义六道进军讨伐王承宗。
English: Soon after, the Constitutionalists issued a decree to remove Wang Chengzong's official title and rank, and ordered the armies of six provinces, including Hedong, Yuzhou, Yiwu, Henghai, Weibo and Shouyi, to march against Wang Chengzong.

古文：韦贯之屡请先取吴元济、后讨承宗，曰： 陛下不见建中之事乎？
现代文：韦贯之屡次请求首先攻取吴元济，然后讨伐王承宗，他说： 陛下没有看到建中年间的事情呢？
English: Wei Gangzhi repeatedly requested to first capture Wu Yuanji and then fight Wang Chengzong. He said: Didn't your majesty see what happened during the Jianzhong period?

古文：始于讨魏及齐，而蔡、燕、赵皆应之，卒致硃泚之乱，由德宗不能忍数年之愤邑，欲太平之功速成效也。 
现代文：德宗开始时是要讨伐魏博田悦和淄青李纳，然而，申蔡李希烈、卢龙朱滔、恒冀王武俊都响应田悦与李纳，终于导致了朱的变乱，这是由于德宗不能够将愤恨与抑郁隐忍几年的时间，而希图天下太平的功业迅速完成的原故啊！ 
English: At the beginning, Dezong wanted to fight against Wei Bo, Tian Yue, and Jiaqing Li Na. However, Shen Cai, Li Xilei, Lulong, Zhu Tao, and Hengji Wang Wujun all responded to Tian Yue and Li Na, which finally led to Zhu's rebellion. This was because Dezong could not tolerate the resentment and depression for several years, but wanted the work of world peace to be completed quickly.

古文：上不听。
现代文：宪宗不肯听从。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：甲申，盗断建陵门戟四十七枝。
现代文：甲申，强盗折断建陵门前的戟四十七枝。
English: In Jiaxing, the robbers broke 47 branches of the oak tree in front of Jianling Gate.

古文：二月，西川奏吐蕃赞普卒，新赞普可黎可足立。
现代文：二月，西川奏称，吐蕃赞普去世，新赞普可黎可足即位
English: In February, Saikawa announced that the new Zampu would succeed to the throne after the death of the old one.

古文：乙已，以中书舍人李逢吉为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：乙巳，宪宗任命中书舍人李逢吉为门下待郎、同平章事。
English: At this time, Kenzong appointed Li Fengji, a scholar in the Middle Kingdom, as a disciple, disciple-in-waiting, and peer.

古文：逢吉，玄道之曾孙也。
现代文：李逢吉是李玄道的曾孙。
English: Li Fengji is the great-grandson of Li Xuan Dao.

古文：乙卯，昭义节度使郗士美奏破成德兵，斩首千馀级。
现代文：乙卯，昭义节度使郗士美奏称打败了成德兵马，斩首一千余级。
English: Second, the Akiyoshi festival made the samurai aesthete claim to have defeated the Chengde soldiers and horses, beheading more than a thousand.

古文：南诏劝龙晟淫虐不道，上下怨疾，弄栋节度王嵯巅弑之，立其弟劝利。
现代文：南诏劝龙晟荒淫暴虐，不施德政，官员乃至百姓都怨恨不满，弄栋节度王嵯颠将他杀掉，改立了他的弟弟劝利。
English: Nanzhao advised Longtao to be wild, lewd, and tyrannical, and not to carry out a virtuous policy. Officials and even the people were resentful and dissatisfied. He persuaded the king of the festival to kill him, and replaced him with his younger brother, Xueli.

古文：劝利德嵯巅，赐姓蒙氏，谓之 大容 。容，蛮言兄也。
现代文：劝利感激王嵯巅的恩德，赐给他姓氏为蒙氏，称他为 大容 ， 大容 就是蛮语的哥哥。
English: He gave him the surname Meng and called him Da Rong, which means "big brother" in Mandarin.

古文：己未，刘总破成德兵，斩首千馀级。
现代文：己未，刘总打败成德兵马，斩首一千余级。
English: Before he knew it, Liu Zong defeated Chengde soldiers and horses and beheaded more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：荆南节度使袁滋父祖墓在朗山，请入朝，欲劝上罢兵。
现代文：荆南节度使袁滋由于父亲与祖父的坟墓立在蔡州朗山县，便请求入京朝见，准备规劝宪宗停止用兵。
English: During the Southern Jing Festival, Yuan Zi, whose father's and grandfather's tombs are located in Langshan County, Caizhou, requested to visit the imperial court in Beijing to persuade Emperor Xianzong to stop using troops.

古文：行至邓州，闻萧俛、钱徽贬官。及见上，更以必克劝之，仅得还镇。
现代文：来到邓州时，袁滋得知萧与钱徽已被贬官，及至见到宪宗以后，他反而规劝一定要制服淮西，然后便返回荆南去了。
English: When he came to Dengzhou, Yuan Zi learned that Xiao and Qian Hui had been demoted, and after seeing Xianzong, he instead persuaded him to subdue Huaxi, and then returned to Jingnan.

古文：辛酉，魏博奏败成德兵，拔其固城。
现代文：辛酉，魏博奏称打败了成德兵，攻克了成德的固城。
English: Xin Zhen, Wei Bo said that he defeated the Chengde soldiers and conquered the Chengde fortress.

古文：乙丑，又奏拔其鸦城。
现代文：乙丑魏博又一次奏称攻克了成德的的鸦城。
English: Second Ugly Weibo once again claimed to have conquered Chengde's Crow City.

古文：三月，庚午，太后崩。
现代文：三月，庚午，太后王氏驾崩。
English: In the late afternoon of March, the Empress Dowager Wang passed away.

古文：辛未，敕以国哀，诸司公事权取中书门下处分，不置摄冢宰。
现代文：辛未，宪宗颁布敕书说，由于遭逢国丧，各有关部门的公务姑且听候中书、门下处理，不再设置摄冢宰。
English: Soon after, Kenzong issued a circular saying that due to the national mourning, the official duties of all relevant departments would be handled by the Central Secretariat and subordinate departments, and there would no longer be a regent.

古文：寿州团练使李文通奏败淮西兵于固始，拔钅敖山。
现代文：寿州团练使李文通奏称在固始打败淮西兵，攻克了山。
English: The Shoushou group practice made Li Wentong play that he defeated the Huaixi soldiers in Guzhi and conquered the mountain.

古文：己卯，唐邓节度使高霞寓奏败淮西兵于郎山，斩首千馀级，焚二栅。
现代文：己卯，唐邓节度使高霞寓奏称在朗山县打败淮西兵，斩首一千余级，还焚毁了两处栅垒。
English: According to Gao Xia's fable, Tang Deng Jiedu defeated the Huaixi soldiers in Langshan County, beheaded more than a thousand soldiers, and burned two fences.

古文：幽州节度使刘总围乐寿。
现代文：幽州节度使刘总包围了乐寿。
English: The Yuzhou Festival caused Liu Zong to surround Le Shou.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，李光颜、乌重胤奏败淮西兵于陵云栅，斩首三千级。
现代文：夏季四月，庚子，李光颜与乌重胤奏称在陵云栅打败淮西兵，斩首三千级。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zi, Li Guangyan and Wu Chung Yin claimed to have defeated the Huai Xi soldiers in Lingyun Grate and beheaded 3,000 soldiers.

古文：辛亥，司农卿皇甫镈以兼中丞权判度支。
现代文：辛亥，司农卿皇甫因兼任中丞而暂理判度支。
English: Xinhai, the Secretary of Agriculture, Emperor Fu, was temporarily removed from the position of judge because he also served as Vice-President.

古文：镈始以聚敛得幸。
现代文：皇甫从此以搜刮财货而得到宠幸。
English: From then on, the crown prince enjoyed the privilege of being able to search for stolen goods.

古文：乙卯，刘总奏破成德兵于深州，斩首二千五百级。
现代文：乙卯，刘总奏称在深州打败成德兵，斩首二千五百级。
English: Second, General Liu said that he defeated the Chengde soldiers in Shenzhou and beheaded 2,500 soldiers.

古文：乙丑，义武节度使浑镐奏破成德兵于九门，杀千馀人。
现代文：乙丑，义武节度使浑镐奏称在九门打败成德兵，斩杀一千多人。
English: The second ugliness, the festival of Yiwu, made the muddles play that they defeated the Chengde soldiers in Jiumen and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：镐，瑊之子也。
现代文：浑镐是浑的儿子。
English: Mud is mud's son.

古文：宥州军乱，逐刺史骆怡。
现代文：宥州的军队发生了变乱，赶走了刺史骆怡。
English: Riots broke out in the Yuzhou army, and the Yuzhou magistrate Luo Yi was expelled.

古文：夏州节度使田进讨平之。
现代文：夏州节度使田进前去讨伐，将变乱平定。
English: The Xiazhou Festival made Tian advance to fight, and the turmoil was quelled.

古文：五月，壬申，李光颜、乌重胤奏败淮西兵于陵去栅，斩首二千馀级。
现代文：五月，壬申，李光颜、乌重胤奏称在陵云栅打败淮西兵，斩首两千多级。
English: In May, in Jinshin, Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan claimed to have defeated the Huaixi soldiers at Lingyunzao, beheading more than two thousand of them.

古文：六月，甲辰，高霞寓大败于铁城，仅以身免。
现代文：六月，甲辰，高霞寓在铁城大败，仅仅使自己幸免于难。
English: In June, Jiachen, Gao Xia lived in the iron city defeated, only to save themselves from disaster.

古文：时诸将讨淮西者，胜则虚张杀获，败则匿之。
现代文：当时，讨伐淮西的诸位将领，打了胜仗便凭空夸大杀伤俘获的数额，打了败仗便将实情隐瞒下来。
English: At that time, the generals who fought against Huaxi exaggerated the number of killed and captured soldiers out of thin air when they won the war, and concealed the truth when they lost the war.

古文：至是，大败不可掩，始上闻，中外骇愕。
现代文：至此，巨大的失败已无法掩盖，这才往上奏报，朝廷内外都很惊异。
English: At this point, the colossal failure could no longer be covered up, and this was reported to the emperor, surprising both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：宰相入见，将劝上罢兵，上曰： 胜负兵家之常，今但当论用兵方略，察将帅之不胜任者易之，兵食不足者助之耳。
现代文：宰相们入朝进见，准备劝说宪宗停止用兵，宪宗说： 胜败乃兵家常事，现在只应该讨论使用兵力的方略，察明不能够胜任的将帅，将他们撤换下来，发现哪里军粮不充足，便去帮助哪里。
English: The prime ministers went to the imperial court to persuade Emperor Kenzong to stop using troops. Emperor Kenzong said, "Victory and defeat are commonplace for soldiers. Now we should only discuss the strategy of using troops. If we detect incompetent generals, we should replace them. If we find that there is not enough food for the troops, we should help them.

古文：岂得以一将失利，遽议罢兵邪！ 
现代文：难道能因为一个将领失利了，便忙着商议停止用兵吗？ 
English: Is it possible that because a general has lost, he is busy negotiating a halt to the use of troops?

古文：于是独用裴度之言，它人言罢兵者亦稍息矣。
现代文：于是，宪宗唯独采用了裴度的进言，其他主张停止用兵者的言论也逐渐平息了。
English: As a result, only Kaizong adopted Pei Du's suggestion, and the other advocates of stopping the use of soldiers gradually calmed down.

古文：己酉，霞寓退保唐州。
现代文：己酉，高霞寓退兵防守唐州。
English: Ji Yao and Gao Xiaye retired from the army to defend Tangzhou.

古文：上责高霞寓之败，霞寓称李逊应接不至。
现代文：宪宗责问高霞寓兵败之事，高霞寓声称李逊没有前来接应。
English: Kenzong questioned Gao Xiafei about the defeat, and Gao Xiafei claimed that Li Xun did not come to meet him.

古文：秋，七月，丁丑，贬霞寓为归州刺史，逊亦左迁恩王傅。
现代文：秋季，七月，宪宗将高霞寓贬为归州刺史，李逊也被降职为恩王傅。
English: In the autumn, in July, Gensong downgraded Gaoxia Apartment to a history of returning to the state, and Li Xun was also demoted to the position of King's Grandson.

古文：以河南尹郑权为山南东道节度使。以荆南节度使袁滋为彰义节度、申、光、蔡、唐、随、邓观察使，以唐州为理所。
现代文：同时，宪宗任命河南尹郑权为山南东道节度使，任命荆南节度使袁滋为彰义节度使和申、光、蔡、唐、随、邓观察使，以唐州作为治所。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xianzong appointed Yin Zhengquan of Henan Province as the host festival envoy of Shannan Province, and appointed Yuan Zi of Jingnan Province as the host festival envoy of Changyi Province, and He Shen, Guang, Cai, Tang, Su and Deng as the observer envoys of Tang Province.

古文：壬午，宣武军奏破郾城之众二万，杀二千馀人，捕虏千馀人。
现代文：壬午，宣武军奏称打败郾城的两万兵马，杀掉两千多人，俘获一千多人。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, the Xuanwu army reported that they had defeated twenty thousand soldiers and horses in Lucheng, killed more than two thousand people, and captured more than one thousand people.

古文：田弘正奏破成德兵于南宫，杀二千馀人。
现代文：田弘正奏称在南宫打败成德兵，杀掉两千多人。
English: Tian Hongzheng claimed to have defeated the Chengde soldiers in Nangu and killed more than two thousand people.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事韦贯之，性高简，好甄别流品，又数请罢用兵。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事韦贯之，生性清高孤傲，喜欢鉴别官员们的类别，又曾好几次请求停止用兵。
English: Zhongshu's attendant and Tongping's subordinate, he was naturally high-spirited and aloof, liked to identify the categories of officials, and had several times requested to stop the use of soldiers.

古文：左补阙张宿毁之于上，云其朋党。
现代文：左补阙张宿在宪宗面前诽谤他，说他属于朋党集团。
English: The Left Complementary, Zhang Shuku, slandered him in front of Kenzong, saying that he belonged to a crony group.

古文：八月，壬寅，贯之罢为吏部侍郎。
现代文：八月，壬寅，韦贯之被罢为吏部侍郎。
English: In August, Renzhin, Wei Gangzhi was dismissed as a clerk of the personnel department.

古文：诸军讨王承宗者互相观望，独昭义节度使郗士美引精兵压其境。
现代文：讨伐王承宗的各支军队互相观望，只有昭度节使郗士美率领精锐兵马迫近了成德的疆境。
English: The various armies that fought against Wang Chengzong looked at each other, and it was only the Zhaodu Festival that brought the Fuximei, led by the elite soldiers and horses, closer to the Chengde border.

古文：己未，士美奏大破承宗之众于柏乡，杀千馀人，降者亦如之，为三垒以环柏乡。
现代文：己未，郗士美奏称在柏乡大破王承宗的兵马，杀掉一千多人，投降的人也与此相当，已经在三处建起营垒，将柏乡环绕起来。
English: In the meantime, Miao Shimei said that he had defeated Wang Chengzong's soldiers and horses in Baixiang, killing more than a thousand people, and the people who surrendered were also equivalent to this. He had built a camp in three places and surrounded Baixiang.

古文：庚申，葬庄宪皇后于丰陵。
现代文：庚申，宪宗将庄宪皇后安葬在丰陵。
English: According to Goshun, Emperor Gensong buried Empress Zhuangxian in Fengling.

古文：九月，乙亥，右拾遗独孤朗坐请罢兵，贬兴元府会曹。
现代文：九月，乙亥，右拾遗独孤朗因请求停止用兵而获罪，被贬为兴元府仓曹。
English: In September, Yi Hai and Yu Zhiguo were found guilty of requesting to stop the use of soldiers, and were demoted to Xingyuanfu Cang Cao.

古文：朗，及之子也。
现代文：独孤朗是独孤及的儿子。
English: Lone Ranger is the son of Lone Ranger.

古文：饶州大水，漂失四千七百户。
现代文：饶州发生严重水灾，淹没并冲散了四千七百户人家。
English: Severe flooding occurred in Raozhou, inundating and scattering 4,700 homes.

古文：丙子，以韦贯之为湖南观察使，犹坐前事也。
现代文：丙子，宪宗任命韦贯之为湖南观察使，这仍然是对他不久前请求停止用兵的惩罚。
English: Incidentally, the appointment of Wei Guanzhong as Hunan observation envoy by Xianzong is still a punishment for his recent request to stop the use of troops.

古文：辛巳，以吏部侍郎韦顗、考功员外郎韦处厚等皆为远州刺史，张宿谗之，以为贯之之党也。
现代文：辛巳，宪宗将吏部侍郎韦、考功员外郎韦处厚等人全部任命为边远各州刺史，这是由于张宿诋毁他们，说他们是韦贯之的同伙。
English: To make matters worse, Emperor Gensong appointed all the officials, such as the secretary, Lang Wei, and the gong examiner, Wai Lang Wei, to be sent to the outlying prefectures, because Zhang Sukui slandered them, saying that they were Wei Gangzhi's accomplices.

古文：顗，见素之孙；处厚，夐之九世孙也。
现代文：韦是韦见素的孙子。韦处厚是韦的九世孙。
English: Wei is the grandson of Wei Jie Su. Wei Jie Hou is the ninth generation grandson of Wei.

古文：乙酉，李光颜、乌重胤奏拔吴元济陵云栅。
现代文：乙酉，李光颜与乌重胤奏称攻克了吴元济的陵云栅。
English: Acetylene, Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan claimed to have conquered the Lingyun Grate of Wu Yuanji.

古文：丁亥，光颜又奏拔石、越二栅，寿州奏败殷城之众，拔六栅。
现代文：丁亥，李光颜又一次奏称攻占了石、越二栅垒，寿州奏称打败了殷城的兵马，攻克六处栅垒。
English: Dinghai, Li Guangyan once again claimed to have captured Shifang and Yueyi, and Shoushou claimed to have defeated the soldiers and horses of Yincheng and conquered six fortresses.

古文：冬，十一月，壬戌朔，容管奏黄洞蛮为寇。
现代文：冬季，十一月，壬戌朔，容管奏称黄洞蛮人侵扰地方。
English: In winter, in November, in Yunnan Province, it is said that the Yellow Cave Barbarians invade the area.

古文：乙丑，邕管奏击黄洞蛮，却之，复宾、蛮等州。
现代文：乙丑，邕管奏称进击黄洞蛮人，并且打退了他们，收复了宾州和蛮州等地。
English: Second Ugly, Gong Guanzhong said that he attacked the Yellow Cave barbarians, and drove them back, recovered Pennsylvania and barbarian states and other places.

古文：丙寅，加幽州节度使刘总同平章事。
现代文：丙寅，宪宗加封幽州节度使刘总为同平章事。
English: Cui Yin, Xianzong and Yuzhou Festival made Liu Zong a peer.

古文：李师道闻拔陵云栅而惧，诈请输款。
现代文：李师道因得知官军攻克了陵云栅而恐惧，便假装请求归附。
English: Fearing that the government army had conquered Lingyunzhao, Li Shidao pretended to ask for annexation.

古文：上以力未能讨，加师道检校司空。
现代文：宪宗因讨伐他的力量尚不具备，便加封李师道为检校司空。
English: Due to the fact that Kenzong did not yet have the power to crack down on him, he added Li Shidao as the school inspector.

古文：王锷家二奴告锷子稷改父遗表，匿所献家财。上命鞫于内仗，遣中使诣东都检括锷家财。
现代文：王锷家中的两个奴仆，告发王锷的儿子王稷篡改父亲死前留下的表章，隐瞒了应当进献的家财，宪宗命令在内仗审讯王稷，派遣中使前往洛阳去核查王锷家中的资财。
English: Two servants in Wang Yao's family denounced Wang Yao's son Wang Yao for tampering with the seal of his father before his death and concealing the family wealth that should have been donated. Emperor Xianzong ordered that Wang Yao be tried in a civil war and sent an envoy to Luoyang to check the wealth of Wang Yao's family.

古文：裴度谏曰： 王锷既没，其所献之财已为不少。
现代文：裴度进谏说： 王锷已经去世，他进献的资财也已不少。
English: Pei Duojin said: Wang Yao has passed away, and he has already donated a lot of money.

古文：今又因奴告检括其家，臣恐诸将帅闻之，各以身后为忧。 
现代文：现在又要因奴仆的告发而去核查他的家产，我恐怕各将帅得知这一消息后，都要为自己去世后的事情担心了。 
English: Now, because of the servant's denunciation, they are going to check his family property. I'm afraid that after the generals learned this news, they will all be worried about what will happen after their death.

古文：上遽止使者。
现代文：宪宗连忙阻止使者前往。
English: Kenzong hurriedly stopped the envoy from going.

古文：己巳，以二奴付京兆，杖杀之。
现代文：己巳，宪宗将两个奴仆交付京兆府，将他们杖打而死。
English: At that time, Kenso handed over two of his servants to Kyosho-fu and beat them to death with a cane.

古文：庚午，以给事中柳公绰为京兆尹。
现代文：庚午，宪宗任命给事中柳公绰为京兆尹。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Xianzong appointed Liu Gongpu as the leader of Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：公绰初赴府，有神策小将跃马横冲前导，公绰驻马，杖杀之。
现代文：柳公绰上任去公府途中，有一个神策军的下级将官跃马横冲开路的仪仗，柳公绰止住坐骑，命人将他杖打而死。
English: When Liu Gongpo was on his way to the government office after taking office, there was a ceremonial battle in which a lower-ranking general of the Divine Providence Army leapt from his horse to open the road. Liu Gongpo stopped his horse and ordered someone to beat him to death with a stick.

古文：明日，入对延英。上色甚怒，诘其专杀之状。对曰： 陛下不以臣无似，使待罪京兆。
现代文：第二天，柳公绰进入延英殿奏对，宪宗满面怒容，责问柳公绰擅自杀人的情况，柳公绰回答说： 陛下不认为我不贤能，让我在京兆府任职。
English: The next day, Liu Gongqiao entered the Yan Ying palace to play a duel. With an angry expression on his face, Xianzong scolded Liu Gongqiao for killing someone without permission. Liu Gongqiao replied, "Your Majesty does not think I am incompetent, so let me work at the Beijing and Shanghai Government.

古文：京兆为辇毂师表，今视事之初，而小将敢尔唐突，此乃轻陛下诏命，非独慢臣也。
现代文：京兆尹是京城的表率，现在我刚刚就任，一个下级军官竟敢如此横冲直撞，这是轻视陛下的诏命，并不只是轻慢了我本人。
English: Jing Zhaoyun was the model of the capital, and now that I have just taken office, a junior officer dares to rampage in such a way. This is a contempt of His Majesty's edict, and not just a contempt of myself.

古文：臣知杖无礼之人，不知其为神策军将也。 
现代文：我只知道杖打不守礼数的人，不知道他是神策军的将领。 
English: I only know a man who does not keep the proper number of staffs, and I do not know if he is the general of the Divine Providence Army.

古文：上曰： 何不奏？ 
现代文：宪宗说： 你为什么不将此事奏报？ 
English: Kenzong said: Why didn't you report this?

古文：对曰： 臣职当杖之，不当奏。 
现代文：柳公绰回答说： 我的职权是应当杖打他，不是应当上奏。 
English: Liu Gongqu replied, "My duty is to beat him with a cane, not to play music."

古文：上曰： 谁当奏者？ 
现代文：宪宗说： 什么人应当上奏？ 
English: Kenzong said: Who should play the harp?

古文：对曰： 本军当奏；若死于街衢，金吾街使当奏；在坊内，左右巡使当奏。 
现代文：柳公绰回答说： 遭受杖打的人的所属部队应当上奏。倘若此人死在街道上，金吾街使应当上奏。倘若此人死在坊市里边，左右巡使应当上奏。 
English: Liu Gongqiao replied: The troops of the person who was beaten with a cane should be played. If the person died on the street, the Kingu Street envoy should be played. If the person died in the city, the left and right envoys should be played.

古文：上无以罪之，退，谓左右曰： 汝曹须作意此人，朕亦畏之。 
现代文：宪宗无法责罚他，退朝以后，对周围的人们说： 你们必须小心此人，连朕也畏惧他呢。 
English: Gensong could not punish him. After he retired, he said to the people around him, "You must be careful of this man. Even I am afraid of him."

古文：讨淮西诸军近九万，上怒诸将久无功，辛已，命知枢密梁守廉宣慰，因留监其军，授以空名告身五百通及金帛，以劝死士。
现代文：讨伐淮西各军有将近九万人，宪宗恼怒各将领长时间不能取得成功，辛巳，命令知枢密梁守谦前去安抚将士，就此留下来监督各军，还交给他五百份空着姓名的委任官职的文凭及金帛等，以勉励人们为国效死。
English: There were nearly ninety thousand people fighting against the armies of Huaxi. The Emperor was angry that the generals could not achieve success for a long time. He ordered Zhizhu Miliang Shouqian to go to appease the generals, and left him to supervise the armies. He also gave him five hundred diplomas of appointed officials with empty names and gold ingots to encourage people to die for the country.

古文：庚寅，先加李光颜等检校官，而诏书切责，示以无功必罚。
现代文：庚寅，宪宗首先给李光颜等人加封散官，然后在诏书中严厉责备他们，向他们表示，如果不能取得成功，一定要遭受惩处。
English: Gyeong-in, Gyeongjong first put Lee Kuan Yew and others under the ban, and then severely reprimanded them in the edict, telling them that if they did not succeed, they must be punished.

古文：辛卯，李文通奏败淮西兵于固始，斩首千馀级。
现代文：辛卯，李文通奏称在固始打败淮西兵，斩首一千余级。
English: Xinwu, Li Wentong said that he defeated Huaixi soldiers in Guzhi and beheaded more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：十二月，壬寅，程执恭奏败成德兵于长河，斩首千馀级。
现代文：十二月，壬寅，程执恭奏称在长河打败淮西兵马，斩首一千余级。
English: In December, Renzhin, Cheng Xingyong claimed to have defeated Huaixi soldiers and horses in Changhe, beheading more than a thousand troops.

古文：义武节度使浑镐与王承宗战屡胜，遂引全师压其境，距恒州三十里而军。
现代文：义武节度使浑镐与王承宗交战，屡次取得胜利，于是率领全军进副成德的疆境，在距离恒州三十里处驻扎。
English: Yiwu Jiedu led the whole army to the border of Vice Chengde, stationed 30 miles away from Hengzhou.

古文：承宗惧，潜遣兵入镐境，焚掠城邑，人心始内顾而摇。
现代文：王承宗害怕，便暗中派兵进入浑镐的疆境，烧杀劫掠城镇。浑镐军因人心顾念家乡而开始发生动摇。
English: Wang Chengzong was afraid, so he secretly sent soldiers into the turbid territory to burn, kill and loot towns. The turbid army began to waver as people began to think about their hometowns.

古文：会中使督其战，镐引兵进薄恒州，与承宗战，大败，奔还定州。
现代文：适值中使前来督战，浑镐领兵迫近恒州，与王承宗交战，遭到严重的失败，便逃回定州。
English: At the right time, the middle envoy came to supervise the battle, and the turbid leader approached Hengzhou, fought with Wang Chengzong, suffered a serious defeat, and fled back to Dingzhou.

古文：丙午，诏以易州刺史陈楚为义武节度使，军中闻之，掠镐及家人衣，至于倮露。
现代文：丙午，宪宗颁诏任命易州刺史陈楚为义武节度使。军中将士得知消息后，抢劫浑镐及其家人的衣服，以至让他们赤身露体。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict appointing the Yizhou general Chen Chu as the envoy of the Yiwu Festival. After learning the news, the lieutenant generals robbed Mudan and his family of their clothes, leaving them naked.

古文：陈楚驰入定州，镇遏乱者，敛军中衣以归镐，以兵卫送还朝。
现代文：陈楚策马奔入定州，压住了变乱的人众，收回军中将士抢去的衣服，交还给浑镐，派出兵员护送他返回朝廷。
English: Chen Chuzema rushed into Dingzhou, suppressed the riotous crowd, recovered the clothes snatched by the lieutenant general, handed them back to Mudan, and sent soldiers to escort him back to the imperial court.

古文：楚，定州人，张茂昭之甥也。
现代文：陈楚是定州人，张茂昭的外甥。
English: Chen Chu is from Dingzhou and is the nephew of Zhang Maozhao.

古文：丁未，以翰林学士王涯为郎中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁未，宪宗任命翰林学士王涯为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Ding Wei, the founder of Confucianism, appointed Hanlin Scholar Wang Liao as the secretary and Tong Ping as the secretary.

古文：袁滋至唐州，去斥候，止其兵不使犯吴元济境。
现代文：袁滋来到唐州后，撤除了岗哨，不让他的士兵去侵犯吴元济的疆境。
English: After Yuan Zi arrived in Tangzhou, he removed the sentry posts to prevent his soldiers from encroaching on Wu Yuan Zi's borders.

古文：元济围其新兴栅，滋卑辞以请之，元济由是不复以滋为意。
现代文：吴元济包围了袁滋的新兴栅，袁滋便以恭敬谦虚的言词请求他撤围。
English: Wu Yuanji surrounded Yuan Zi's Xinxing Grate, and Yuan Zi respectfully and humbly asked him to withdraw.

古文：朝廷知之，甲寅，以太子詹事李愬为唐、随、邓节度使。
现代文：从此，吴元济不再把袁滋放在心上。朝廷得到这一消息后，甲寅，任命太子詹事李为唐、随、邓节度使。
English: From then on, Wu Yuanji no longer cared about Yuan Zi. After the imperial court received this news, Jia Yin appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Li as the envoy of Tang, Su and Deng Jiedu.

古文：愬，听之兄也。
现代文：李是李听的哥哥。
English: Li is Li He's older brother.

古文：初置淮、颍水运使。
现代文：朝廷初次设置淮、颍水运使。
English: The imperial court for the first time set up the Huai and Surabaya Water Transport Commands.

古文：杨子院米自淮阴溯淮入颍、至项城入溵，输于郾城，以馈讨淮西诸军，省汴运之费七万馀缗。
现代文：该使负责将杨子院的粮米从淮阴上溯淮水而进入颍水，到达项城以后转入水，转运到郾城，用来供应讨伐淮西各军的口粮，节省了汴水漕运费用七万多缗。
English: The envoy was responsible for transporting the grain and rice of Yang Zi Yuan from Huaiyin upstream to Huai Shui and then to Lishui. After arriving at Xiangcheng, the grain and rice were transferred to Lishui and then transported to Licheng to be used to supply the rations of the armies fighting in western Huai, saving more than 70,000 baht in Lishui tank transportation costs.

古文：己未，容管奏黄洞蛮屠岩州。
现代文：己未，容管奏称黄洞蛮人屠杀岩州。
English: In the past, Yang Guanzhong said that the Yellow Cave barbarians massacred Iwashu.

