古文：徐有功，名弘敏，避孝敬皇帝讳，以字行，国子博士文远孙也。
现代文：徐有功名弘敏，为避高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝李治谥号的讳，所以别名有功更有影响，他是国子博士徐文远的孙子。
English: Xu Yougong was known as Hongmin. He was the great-grandson of Emperor Gaozong and the great-grandson of Emperor Li Zhizhong. Therefore, his alias, Yougong, was more influential. He was the grandson of Dr. Xu Wenyuan.

古文：举明经，累补蒲州司法参军，袭封东莞县男。
现代文：参加明经科考试，连续委任到蒲州司法参军，继承祖父东莞县男的封号。
English: He took the exam of Mingjing Science, was successively appointed to the judiciary in Puzhou, joined the army, and inherited his grandfather's title of "Dongguan County Man."

古文：为政仁，不忍杖罚，民服其恩，更相约曰： 犯徐参军杖者，必斥之。 
现代文：他以仁爱治理政务，不忍心使用体罚，百姓感激他的恩德，递相约定说： 谁在徐参军任上犯杖刑以上的罪行，我们就一定要斥责他。 
English: He governed the affairs of state with benevolence and love, and did not tolerate the use of corporal punishment. The people were grateful for his benevolence, and sent an agreement to the prime minister saying, "Whoever commits a crime above the cane punishment during Xu's military service, we must reprimand him."

古文：讫代不辱一人。
现代文：直到任满，他没有处罚一个人。
English: Until the end of his term, he did not punish a single person.

古文：累迁司刑丞。
现代文：接连提升到司刑丞。
English: He was successively promoted to Senior Constable.

古文：时武后僭位，畏唐大臣谋己。
现代文：当时武则天皇后超越本份登位称帝，害怕唐朝的大臣们算计自己。
English: At that time, Empress Wu Zetian overstepped her bounds by ascending to the throne and became emperor, and the ministers of the Tang Dynasty were afraid to do the same.

古文：于是周兴、来俊臣、丘神绩、王弘义等揣识后指，置总监牧院诸狱，捕将相，俾相钩逮，掩搦护送，楚掠凝惨。
现代文：在这时，周兴、来俊臣、丘神责力、王弘义等人揣测到了则天皇后的心思，设立了总监、牧院等监狱，拘捕文武官员，使得他们互相牵连从而追捕，秘密拘禁监视遣送，拷打严厉狠毒。
English: At this time, Zhou Xing, Lai Junin, Qiu Shen Rongli, Wang Hongyi and others guessed the thoughts of the Empress Dowager, set up prisons such as the Director General and the Pastoral Hospital, arrested civil and military officials, making them involved with each other and chasing them, secretly detained, monitored and deported, and severely tortured.

古文：又污引天下豪亻桀，驰使者即按，一切以反论。
现代文：还牵连天下的杰出人物，凡有交往的就进行审查，一概以造反判罪。
English: It also implicated the world's outstanding figures, scrutinized anyone who had dealings with them, and convicted them all of sedition.

古文：吏争以周内穷诋相高，后辄劝以官赏，于是以急变相告言者无虚日。
现代文：官吏们靠罗织罪名极力诬陷来争夺高下，则天皇后总是用官爵赏赐进行鼓励，因此告发重大紧急情况的不空一天。
English: Government officials compete for higher and lower positions by fabricating false accusations, while the empress always encourages them with the award of an official title. Therefore, it is not a waste of time to announce a major emergency.

古文：朝野震恐，莫敢正言，独有功数犯颜争枉直，后厉语折抑，有功争益牢。
现代文：朝廷内外震惊恐惧，没有谁敢劝谏，惟独徐有功多次冒犯威严争辩是非曲直，则天皇后用严厉的言词进行压制，徐有功却越争越坚决。
English: Inside and outside the court, there was shock and fear. No one dared to dissuade him. Only Xu Yougong repeatedly offended the majesty and argued the rights and wrongs. The empress used harsh words to suppress him. However, Xu Yougong became more and more resolute.

古文：时博州刺史琅邪王冲，责息钱于贵乡，遣家奴督敛，与尉颜余庆相闻知，奴自市弓矢还。
现代文：当时博州刺史、琅笽王李冲，向贵乡县索取放债的利息，派遣奴仆督促收款，跟贵乡县尉颜余庆互相联系，奴仆自己购买弓箭回去了。
English: At that time, Li Chong, the prince of Bozhou and the king of Qi, asked Guixiang County for interest on loans, sent his servants to collect the money, contacted Guixiang County's lieutenant Yan Yuqing, and the servants went back to buy bows and arrows.

古文：会冲坐逆诛，魏州人告余庆豫冲谋，后令俊臣鞫治，以反状闻。
现代文：碰上李冲因叛逆获罪被杀，魏州的人告发颜余庆参与了李冲的谋反活动，则天皇后命令来俊臣审讯处理，汇报了他参与谋反的情况。
English: When Li Chong was found guilty of treason and killed, the people of Weizhou accused Yan Yuqing of participating in Li Chong's rebel activities, and the empress ordered to interrogate and deal with him, and reported his participation in the rebellion.

古文：有司议： 余庆更永昌赦，法当流。 
现代文：有关主管官吏建议 ：颜余庆应该更改永昌年间的赦令，依法判处流放。 
English: Relevant competent officials suggested that Yan Yuqing should change the pardon order during the Yongchang era and be sentenced to exile according to law.

古文：侍御史魏元忠谓： 余庆为冲督偿、通书，合谋明甚，非曰支党，请殊死，籍其家。 
现代文：侍御史魏元忠讲 ：颜余庆替李冲催讨债务，互通书信，合伙谋反清楚得很，不能叫作从犯，请处斩刑，没收他的家人财产。 
English: Attendant Shi Wei Yuanzhong said: Yan Yuqing's role in Li Chong's debt collection, exchange of letters, and conspiracy to rebel is very clear. He cannot be called an accomplice. Please execute him and confiscate his family's property.

古文：诏可。
现代文：则天皇后下令说行。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：有功曰： 永昌赦令： 与虺贞同恶，魁首已伏诛，支党未发者原之。 
现代文：徐有功说 ：永昌年间的赦令写着 ：与虺贞狼狈为奸的，魁首已处死刑，尚未直接参与行动的从犯给予赦免。 
English: Xu Yougong said: The pardon order issued during the Yongchang period reads: Those who conspired with Zou Zhen were sentenced to death, and those who were not directly involved in the action were pardoned.

古文：《书》曰： 歼厥渠魁 ，律以 造意为首 ，寻赦已伏语，则魁首无遗。
现代文：《尚书·胤征》说 歼灭罪魁祸首，胁从不予治罪 ，法律规定 率先倡议的叫作魁首 ，刚刚颁发赦令说魁首已处死刑，那么魁首没有遗漏的了。
English: "Shangshu·Yinzheng" says "annihilate the culprit, never punish by threat," the law stipulates that the first to take the initiative is called the leader, and a pardon order has just been issued saying that the leader has been sentenced to death, so there is no missing leader.

古文：余庆赦后被言，是谓支党。
现代文：颜余庆在颁发赦令之后被告发，这就是从犯。
English: Yan Yuqing was indicted after the amnesty order was issued, which is an accessory.

古文：今以支为首，是以生入死。
现代文：如果把从犯当作魁首，就是把不该判死刑的人推向死亡。
English: If the accomplice is treated as the ringleader, it means that people who should not be sentenced to death are being pushed towards death.

古文：赦而复罪，不如勿赦；生而复杀，不如勿生。
现代文：赦免了又判罪，不如不赦免；放生了又要杀，不如不放生。
English: If you are pardoned and then convicted, it is better not to pardon; if you are released and then have to kill, it is better not to release.

古文：窃谓朝廷不当尔。 
现代文：我私下认为朝廷不应当那样。 
English: Privately, I don't think the Imperial Court should do that.

古文：后怒曰： 何谓魁首？ 
现代文：则天皇后恼怒地问： 什么叫作魁首？ 
English: The Empress Dowager then asked in exasperation: What do you call the leader?

古文：答曰： 魁者，大帅；首者，元谋。 
现代文：徐有功回答说： 魁，就是主帅；首，就是主谋。 
English: Xu Yougong replied, "The leader is the coach; the head is the mastermind.

古文：后曰： 余庆安得不为魁首？ 
现代文：则天皇后说 ：颜余庆怎么不算魁首？ 
English: Then the empress dowager said, "Why isn't Yan Yuqing the leader?"

古文：答曰： 若魁首者，虺贞是已。
现代文：回答说 ：要说魁首，这就是虺贞。
English: He replied, "If you want to say the leader, that would be Yu Zhen.

古文：既已伏诛，余庆今方论罪，非支党何？ 
现代文：魁首已经被处死刑之后，颜余庆现在才被追究，不是从犯又是什么？ 
English: Yan Yuqing is only being investigated now, after the ringleader has already been sentenced to death. Isn't he an accessory after the fact?

古文：后意解，乃曰： 公更思之。 
现代文：则天皇后怒气消失了，才说： 这事您再考虑一下。 
English: Then the anger of the Empress faded, and she said, "Please reconsider this matter."

古文：遂免死。
现代文：就免去了颜余庆的死刑。
English: Yan Yuqing was spared the death penalty.

古文：当此时，左右及卫仗在廷陛者数百人，皆缩项不敢息，而有功气定言详，闉然不桡。
现代文：当时，在殿上的朝臣和保卫、仪仗人员几百人，都缩起脖子不敢呼吸，但是徐有功神情镇定，说话从容，屹立不屈。
English: At that time, hundreds of courtiers, guards, and honor guards in the palace craned their necks and dared not breathe, but Xu Yougong remained calm, spoke calmly, and stood firm.

古文：有韩纪孝者，受徐敬业伪官，前已物故，推事使顾仲琰籍其家，诏已报可。
现代文：有个叫韩纪孝的人，接受过徐敬业委任的官职，在徐敬业失败之前就已死去，推事使顾仲琰没收他的家人财产，则天皇后已下诏答复说行。
English: There was a man named Han Ji Xiao, who had accepted the official post appointed by Xu Jingye, but died before Xu Jingye's failure. The judge ordered Gu Zhongya to confiscate his family's property, and the empress had issued an imperial edict saying it was fine.

古文：有功追议曰： 律，谋反者斩。
现代文：徐有功补救建议说： 按照法律，谋反的处以斩刑。
English: Xu Yougong's remedial suggestion said: According to the law, the punishment for plotting rebellion is beheading.

古文：身亡即无斩法，无斩法则不得相缘。
现代文：本人死了就没有斩刑的规定，没有这个规定就不能追究。
English: If the person is dead, there is no provision for the death penalty, and without this provision, there can be no investigation.

古文：所缘之人亡，则所因之罪减。 
现代文：牵涉的人死了，那他犯下的罪过就要从轻处理。 
English: The person involved is dead, so the crime he committed should be treated lightly.

古文：诏从之，皆以更赦免，如此获宥者数十百姓。
现代文：下诏采纳了他的建议，因而都改判赦免，像这样获得赦免的有几十上百家。
English: The lower court accepted his suggestion, and as a result, all the sentences were commuted to pardons. Dozens and hundreds of families have been pardoned in this way.

古文：累转秋官郎中。
现代文：多次调任到秋官郎中。
English: He was transferred to Akikanro junior high school several times.

古文：凤阁侍郎任知古、冬官尚书裴行本等七人被诬当死，后谓宰相曰： 古人以杀止杀，我今以恩止杀，就群公丐知古等，赐以再生，可乎？ 
现代文：凤阁侍郎任知古、冬官尚书裴行本等七人遭受诬陷判处死刑，则天皇后对宰相们说： 古人用死刑来制止罪犯杀人，我现在要用恩德制止罪犯杀人，同意您诸位替任知古等人请求免去死刑，给他们第二次生命，行吗？ 
English: Fengge's chamberlain, Ren Zhi Gu, the winter official, Shang Shu, Pei Xingpeng and seven others were framed and sentenced to death, then the empress said to the prime ministers: The ancients used the death penalty to stop criminals from killing people, now I want to use benevolence to stop criminals from killing people, do you agree to your request for Ren Zhi Gu and others to be exempted from the death penalty and give them a second life?

古文：俊臣、张知默固请如法，后不许。
现代文：来俊臣、张知默坚持请求依法处死，则天皇后不同意。
English: When Lai Junshin and Zhang Zhimo insisted on their request to be executed according to law, the Empress did not agree.

古文：俊臣独引行本更验前罪。
现代文：来俊臣独自提审裴行本重新验证原来的罪行。
English: Lai Junchen alone arraigned Pei Xingben to re-verify the original crime.

古文：有功奏曰： 俊臣违陛下再生之赐，不可以示信。 
现代文：徐有功禀奏说 ：来俊臣违抗陛下给人第二次生命的恩赐，不能够表明陛下言而有信。 
English: Xu Yougong said, "For a young minister to defy His Majesty and give a person the gift of a second life cannot prove that His Majesty's words are true."

古文：于是悉免死。
现代文：于是全都免去死刑。
English: As a result, they were all spared the death penalty.

古文：道州刺史李仁褒兄弟为人诬构，有功争不能得。
现代文：道州刺史李仁褒兄弟被人捏造罪名陷害，徐有功为他们争辩没有结果。
English: The brothers of the Daozhou assassin Li Rengbo were framed on trumped-up charges, and Xu Yougong argued with them to no avail.

古文：秋官侍郎周兴劾之曰： 汉法，附下罔上者斩，面欺者亦斩。
现代文：秋官侍郎周兴弹劾他说： 汉朝的法律，迁就下属欺骗长上的处以斩刑，当面欺骗国君的也处斩刑。
English: He was impeached by Zhou Xing, the attendant of the autumn official, who said: According to the laws of the Han Dynasty, subordinates who cheat their superiors will be punished by beheading, and those who cheat the sovereign in person will also be punished by beheading.

古文：在古，析言破律者杀。
现代文：在古代，对法律断章取义的处以死刑。
English: In ancient times, breaking the law was punishable by death.

古文：有功故出反囚，罪当诛，请按之。 
现代文：徐有功故意为造反的囚犯开脱罪责，应判死刑，请查办。 
English: Xu Yougong intentionally exonerated prisoners who rebelled. He should be sentenced to death. Please investigate.

古文：后不许，犹坐史官。
现代文：则天皇后不同意处以死刑，但还是获罪罢免了他的官职。
English: The Empress did not agree to the death penalty, but he was still convicted and removed from office.

古文：俄起为左肃政台侍御史，辞曰： 臣闻鹿走山林而命系庖厨者，势固自然。
现代文：不久起用他任左肃政台侍御史，他谢绝说 ：我听说麋鹿在山林中奔跑但命运却操纵在厨师手里，客观存在本来就是这样。
English: Not long after that, he was appointed as the attendant of the history of Zuoshu Government, but he declined, saying, "I heard that the elk runs in the mountains and forests, but the fate is manipulated in the hands of the chef. This is how objective existence is.

古文：陛下以法官用臣，臣守正行法，必坐此死矣。 
现代文：陛下给我的职责是当执法官员，我坚持正义执行法律，一定会因此获罪被杀。 
English: Your Majesty gave me the duty to be a law enforcement officer, I insist on justice to enforce the law, I will certainly be killed for it.

古文：后固授之。
现代文：则天皇后坚持任命了他。
English: However, the Empress insisted on appointing him.

古文：天下闻有功复进，洒然相贺。
现代文：天下臣民听说徐有功复职提升了，高兴地一同庆贺。
English: Subjects all over the world heard that Xu Yougong was reinstated and promoted, and they were happy to celebrate together.

古文：时有诏： 公坐流、私坐徒以上会赦免，逾百日不首者，复论。 
现代文：当时朝廷颁发诏书 ：因犯法被判处流放以上徒刑而碰上大赦的官吏、百姓，超过一百天不来陈述罪行的，重新判罪。 
English: At that time, the imperial court issued an edict: if an official or a commoner who had been sentenced to exile or imprisonment for a crime and had been granted amnesty did not come to report the crime for more than 100 days, they would be re-sentenced.

古文：有功奏曰： 陛下宽殊死罪，已发者原之，是通改过之心、自新之路。
现代文：徐有功禀奏说 ：陛下宽恕了被判斩刑的罪犯，已经揭发的免了罪，这是帮他们唤醒改正罪过的良知、开辟弃旧图新的道路。
English: Xu Yougong said: His Majesty has pardoned the criminals who were sentenced to beheading, and pardoned the crimes that have been exposed. This is to help them awaken their conscience to correct their sins and open up a new path to abandon the old image.

古文：故律，告赦前事，以其罪坐之。
现代文：按照原有法律，报告赦免前的罪行，就按他的罪行判处。
English: According to the original law, if he reports the crime before the pardon, he will be sentenced according to his crime.

古文：若无告言，所犯终不自发；如告言赦前事，则与律乖。
现代文：如果没有什么可报告的，他犯的罪行终究不会自己揭发；如果报告赦免之前的罪行，又和赦令相违背。
English: If there is nothing to report, the crimes he committed will not reveal themselves after all; if the crimes before the pardon are reported, it is contrary to the pardon order.

古文：今赦前之罪，不自言者，还以法论，即恩虽布天下，而一罪不能贷，臣窃为陛下不取。 
现代文：如果赦免以前的罪行，不是自己报告的，回头依法判罪，就是恩惠即使普布天下，但一条罪过都不能宽恕，我私下认为陛下不能采取这种做法。 
English: If pardoning previous crimes, not self-reported, retroactively convicted according to the law, is a favor, even if the whole world, but one crime can not be forgiven, I privately believe that His Majesty can not take this approach.

古文：后更诏五品以上议可。
现代文：则天皇后重新诏令五品以上的朝臣讨论，同意了徐有功的意见。
English: However, the empress re-issued the imperial edict to discuss the issue of five or more court ranks, and agreed with Xu Yougong's opinion.

古文：又上疏曰： 天下员有定，比选者日多，选曹诿嘱公行，嚣谤满路。
现代文：徐有功还呈递奏疏说 ：全国官吏名额有限，参加候选的人一天天增加，主管官吏公开说情嘱托，全国百姓纷纷谴责。
English: Xu Yougong also submitted a report, saying: the number of national officials is limited, the number of candidates participating in the election is increasing day by day, the officials in charge openly express their feelings, and the people across the country condemn them one after another.

古文：唐季人多逆节，鞫讯结断，刑惨狱严，革命岁久，其流弗改。事表生情，法外构理，而刻薄吏驱扇成奸。
现代文：唐朝末年人们大多背离节操，审理案子，刑罚狠毒监禁严厉，周朝建立好几年了，唐末的影响还没有改变，在事情表面生出枝节，在法律之外编造理由，苛酷的官吏煽动唆使为非作歹。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, most people deviated from the discipline, tried the case, the punishment was harsh and the imprisonment was severe. The Zhou Dynasty had been established for several years, and the influence of the end of the Tang Dynasty had not changed. Branches sprouted on the surface of things, reasons were fabricated outside the law, and harsh officials incited and instigated wrongdoing.

古文：虽朝堂进表，列匦内牒，叫阍弗听，叩鼓弗闻，使申其冤，正增其枉。
现代文：虽然朝廷各有关部门呈递奏表，设置铜匦收集臣民上奏的书札，但是向朝廷申诉冤屈却没有人管，派人去申理冤屈，恰恰增加了冤屈。
English: Although the relevant departments of the imperial court submitted a report form and set up a gong to collect the subjects' report cards, but no one cared about the grievances to the imperial court. Sending someone to settle the grievances just increased the grievances.

古文：诚令天官铨注有所不平、法司推断舞法深诋、三司理匦受所上章拥塞不白者皆许臣按验劾发，夺禄贬劳，不越月逾时，可致刑措。 
现代文：如果把选才任官不公正的吏部官员、审判案件徇私舞弊的刑部官员、管理投书铜匦收集上奏书札积压不报的朝堂三司理匦使都交给我审查揭发，罚扣薪俸降官免职，不超过三两个月，就能做到无人犯法。 
English: If I were to review and expose the officials of the Personnel Department who were unfairly appointed after being selected, the officials of the Criminal Investigation Department who took advantage of the court cases for personal gain, and the courtiers of the three departments of the Imperial Household Agency who did not report the backlogs in the management of the collection of gongs and medals for the submission of letters and the submission of report cards, and if I were to punish them by deducting their salaries, demoting them and removing them from their posts, it would take no more than three or two months to ensure that no one would violate the law.

古文：后纳之。
现代文：则天皇后采纳了他的意见。
English: The Empress then adopted his opinion.

古文：窦孝谌妻庞为其奴怖以妖祟，教为夜解，因告以厌诅。
现代文：窦孝谌的妻子庞氏被自己的奴仆用妖怪作祟的话吓住了，奴仆要她夜晚作法驱妖免灾，又乘机告发她祈求鬼神危害别人。
English: Dou Xiaojuan's wife, Pang, was frightened by her servant's curse words. The servant asked her to drive away the evil spirits at night to avoid disasters, and also took the opportunity to inform her that she was praying for the evil spirits to harm others.

古文：给事中薛季昶鞫之，庞当死。
现代文：给事中薛季昶审理这件案子，庞氏被判死刑。
English: The case was tried by Xue Jizhe, and Pang was sentenced to death.

古文：子希瑊讼冤，有功明其枉。
现代文：儿子窦希蠨告状申冤，徐有功弄明白了其中的冤枉。
English: His son Dou Xizhe filed a complaint to redress the grievance, and Xu Yougong understood the injustice.

古文：季昶劾有功党恶逆，当弃市。
现代文：薛季昶弹劾徐有功偏袒谋杀亲人的罪犯，应该杀头示众。
English: Xue Jizhe's impeachment of Xu Yougong for favoring a criminal who murdered his relatives should be made public.

古文：有功方视事，令史泣以告。
现代文：徐有功刚刚任职，一个令史哭泣着告诉了这事。
English: Xu Yougong had just taken office, and told the story with tears in his eyes.

古文：有功曰： 岂吾独死，而诸人长不死邪？ 
现代文：徐有功说 ：难道只是我一人会死，而人们永远不死吗？ 
English: Xu Yougong said: Is it just me who will die, but people will never die?

古文：安步去。
现代文：从容地走了。
English: He walked away calmly.

古文：后召诘曰： 公比断狱多失出，何耶？ 
现代文：则天皇后召见他责问 ：您近来断案多数重罪轻判，为什么呢？ 
English: The empress dowager then summoned him for a scolding: You have recently dismissed the majority of felony cases and given light sentences. Why is that?

古文：对曰： 失出，臣小过；好生，陛下大德。 
现代文：徐有功回答说 ：重罪轻判，是我的小过失，爱惜生灵，是陛下的大恩德。 
English: Xu Yougong replied, "A light sentence for a serious crime is my small fault, but to love life is His Majesty's great kindness."

古文：后默然。
现代文：则天皇后无话可说。
English: The Empress, however, had nothing to say.

古文：庞得减死，有功免为民。
现代文：庞氏免去了死罪，徐有功罢官成了平民。
English: Pang was spared the death penalty, while Xu was dismissed from his post and became a commoner.

古文：起拜左司郎中，转司刑少卿。
现代文：后来又起用他任左司郎中，改任司刑少卿。
English: Later, he was appointed as a junior secretary of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and later he was appointed as a junior secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：与皇甫文备同按狱，诬有功纵逆党。
现代文：和皇甫文备一起审理案子，皇甫文备诬告他放纵叛逆的党徒。
English: He was tried together with Wang Fuwen Bei, who falsely accused him of indulging traitorous party members.

古文：久之，文备坐事下狱，有功出之。
现代文：过了很久，皇甫文备因事获罪进了监狱，徐有功救出了他。
English: After a long time, Wang Fu Wen Bei was convicted and sent to prison, and Xu Yulong was able to rescue him.

古文：或曰： 彼尝陷君于死，今生之，何也？ 
现代文：有人说： 他曾经诬陷你，把你置于死地，现在你救他的性命，是什么原因？ 
English: Some people say: He once framed you and put you to death, now you are saving his life, what is the reason?

古文：对曰： 尔所言者私忿，我所守者公法，不可以私害公。 
现代文：徐有功回答说 ：你说的是个人恩怨，我坚持的是国家法律，不能用个人恩怨损害国家法律。 
English: Xu Yougong replied: You are talking about personal grudges, I am insisting on national laws, and you cannot use personal grudges to damage national laws.

古文：尝谓所亲曰： 大理，人命所系，不可阿旨诡辞，以求苟免。 
现代文：他曾对亲近的人说： 司法官员，关系着人的生命，不能逢迎圣旨弄虚作假，以便苟且避免个人的祸患。 
English: He once said to those close to him: Judicial officials, whose lives are at stake, must not make false pretenses in order to avoid personal calamity.

古文：故有功为狱，常持平守正，以执据冤罔，凡三坐大辟，将死，泰然不忧，赦之，亦不喜，后以此重之。
现代文：所以徐有功审理案子，一向坚持公平正直。因为执著地纠正冤假错案，先后三次被判死刑，面对死亡，坦荡安详无忧无悔，免去死刑，也不喜悦，则天皇后因此看重他。
English: Because he persistently corrected the unjust, false and erroneous cases, he was sentenced to death three times in succession. Faced with death, he was calm, carefree and regret-free. He was exempted from the death penalty and was not pleased. Therefore, the Empress valued him.

古文：所全活甚众，酷吏为少衰，然疾之如仇矣。
现代文：由他保全生命的人很多，酷吏因而稍有收敛，不过像对仇敌一样地恨他。
English: There are many whose lives he has saved, and the cruel are a little mollified by this, but they hate him as they would an enemy.

古文：改司仆少卿。
现代文：后来改任司仆少卿。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Shiduko Shokei.

古文：卒，年六十八，赠司刑卿。
现代文：去世时，六十八岁，追认为司刑卿。
English: At the time of his death, aged 68, he was promoted to Chief Constable.

古文：中宗即位，加赠越州都督，遣使就第吊祭，赐物百段，授一子官。
现代文：中宗李显登上帝位，提升追认为越州都督，派遣使者登门吊唁祭祀，赏赐绢帛一百段，给他的一个儿子授予官职。
English: Li Xian ascended to the throne of God, was promoted to the governor of Yuezhou, sent an envoy to the door for condolence and sacrifice, awarded a hundred dan, and gave an official post to one of his sons.

古文：开元初，窦希瑊等请以己官让有功子惀，以报旧德，由是自大理司直迁恭陵令。
现代文：玄宗开元初年，窦希蠨等人请求把自己的官职转授给徐有功的儿子徐忄仑，来报答昔日的恩德，徐忄仑因此由大理司直改任恭陵县令。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Xuan Zong Dynasty, Dou Xizhe and others requested that their official posts be transferred to Xu Yulun, the son of Xu Yougong, to repay the kindness of the past. As a result, Xu Yulun was transferred from Dali Sijian to Gongling County.

古文：会昌中，追谥忠正。
现代文：武宗会昌年间，追赠谥号为 忠正 。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zonghuichang, he was posthumously given the posthumous name of Zhongzheng.

古文：初，鹿城主簿潘好礼慕有功为人，论之曰： 昔称张释之为廷尉，天下无冤人，今有功断狱，亦天下无冤人。
现代文：当初，鹿城县主簿潘好礼仰慕徐有功的道德人品，评论说： 从前称赞汉朝的张释之担任廷尉，天下没有遭受冤屈的人，我朝徐有功断案，也是天下没有遭受冤屈的人。
English: At first, Pan Haoli, the chief bookkeeper of Lucheng County, admired the moral character of Xu Yougong, and commented: Zhang Xizhi, who once praised the Han Dynasty, served as a courtier, and there was no one in the world who suffered grievances. I made a decision on the case of Xu Yougong, and there was no one in the world who suffered grievances.

古文：然释之当汉文帝时，中外无事，守法而已。
现代文：但是张释之身处汉文帝时代，朝廷内外平安无事，依法办事就行了。
English: However, Zhang Xizhi was in the era of Emperor Hanwen, there was no trouble inside or outside the imperial court, and it was enough to act in accordance with the law.

古文：五世孙商。赞曰： 徐有功不以唐、周贰其心，惟一于法，身蹈死以救人之死，故能处猜后、酷吏之间，以恕自将，内挫虐焰，不使天下残于燎，可谓仁人也哉！议者谓过汉于、张，渠不信夫！
现代文：徐有功处在唐、周交替的时代，周兴、来俊臣等人压制正义包庇邪恶，喜爱讲颠倒是非的坏话，诬陷道德崇高的人，徐有功坚持到死申张正义，多次差点儿被杀，这些都胜过张释之是明显得很的。 有人认为徐有功仁爱宽容超过了汉朝的于定国、张释之。起居舍人卢若虚说 ：徐公面对则天皇后雷霆般的威严，却能保全仁爱宽容，即使千年之内还不见有人赶得上他。 
English: Xu Yougong was in the era of alternating between Tang and Zhou, Zhou Xing, Lai Junchen and others suppressed justice and covered up evil, loved to speak evil words that reversed right and wrong, and framed people with high morals. Xu Yougong insisted on advocating justice until death, and was almost killed many times. These are clearly superior to Zhang Xizhi. Some people think that Xu Yougong's benevolence and tolerance exceed those of Yu Dingguo and Zhang Xizhi in the Han Dynasty. Lu Ruohu, a layman, said: In the face of Xu Gong, he is as majestic as an empress, but he can preserve benevolence

古文：商，字义声，或字秋卿，客新郑再世，因为新郑人。
现代文：他第五代孙儿名徐商。徐商别名义声，还有个别名秋卿，在新郑县寄居了两代，所以算作新郑县人。
English: His fifth-generation grandchild is named Xu Shang. Xu Shang, who is also known by his nickname and some nicknames such as Qiuqing, has lived in Xinzheng County for two generations, so he is counted as a Xinzheng County resident.

古文：幼隐中条山。
现代文：年轻时隐居在中条山。
English: When he was young, he lived in seclusion in Nakajoyama.

古文：擢进士第。
现代文：参加进士科考试被录用。
English: He took the entrance exam and was accepted.

古文：大中时，擢累尚书左丞。
现代文：宣宗大中年间，提升为尚书左丞。
English: During his junior and senior years at Shengzong University, he was promoted to Shangshu Zuo Rong.

古文：宣宗诏为巡边使，使有指，拜河中节度使。
现代文：宣宗李忱诏令他任巡边使。后完成特定使命，被任命为河中节度使。
English: Xuan Zong Li Zhen Zhao ordered him to serve as a border patrol envoy. After completing a specific mission, he was appointed as a river festival envoy.

古文：突厥残种保特峨山，以千帐度河自归，诏商绥定。
现代文：突厥余部依托特峨山，带领一千帐人众渡过黄河主动归附唐朝，诏令徐商去使他安定。
English: The rest of the Turks, relying on Mount Tega, led a thousand people across the Yellow River to voluntarily join the Tang Dynasty, and ordered Xu Shang to go and stabilize him.

古文：商表处山东宽乡，置备征军，凡千人，襞纸为铠，劲矢不能洞。
现代文：徐商表请朝廷让他们在山东田多人少的地方安家，组织预备征讨的军队，共一千人，折纸当作铠甲，有力的箭也射不穿。
English: Xu Shangbai asked the imperial court to let them settle down in Shandong, where there were few people, and to organize an army of a total of one thousand ready to be conscripted. Origami was used as armor, and powerful arrows could not be shot.

古文：徙节山南东道，襄多山棚，为票贼，商取材卒为捕盗将，别为屯营，寇所发，辄迹捕，捕必得，遂为精兵。
现代文：调任山南东道节度使，襄州山里有许多猎户，是轻捷勇武的盗贼，徐商挑选勇武的士卒当捕盗将，单独组成部队，哪里有盗贼出现，就去追捕，只要动手，必然成功，于是成了精锐部队。
English: There were many hunters in the mountains of Xiangzhou. They were light and brave thieves. Xu Shang selected brave soldiers to be the thief-catchers and formed a separate unit. Wherever there were thieves, they would go after them. As long as they tried, they would succeed. So they became an elite unit.

古文：江西都将反，韦宙乘传抵山南发兵，商命部将韩季友以捕盗营士往。
现代文：番号为江西都的部队就要叛乱，韦宙乘坐驿站马车到南山派兵讨伐，徐商命令部将韩季友带领捕盗营的士卒前去。
English: The troops of the capital of Jiangxi Province were about to rebel. Wei Xiu took a stagecoach to Nanshan to send troops to fight. Xu Shang's command department sent Han Jiyu to lead the soldiers of the anti-piracy battalion.

古文：贼平，宙表留季友所部为纲纪。
现代文：平定了江西都，韦宙呈递奏表留下韩季友带领的捕盗营当治安部队。
English: The capital of Jiangxi Province was pacified, and Wei Xiu submitted a report, leaving the anti-piracy battalion led by Han Jiyu as the security force.

古文：咸通初，以刑部尚书为诸道盐铁转运使，封东莞县子。
现代文：懿宗咸通初年，徐商以刑部尚书的资格任诸道盐铁转运使，被封为东莞县子。
English: In the first year of Xizong Hamdong, Xu Shang, with the qualification of Shang Shu of the Penal Department, was appointed as the salt and iron transportation envoy to various provinces, and was named the son of Dongguan County.

古文：四年，进同中书门下平章事，出为荆南节度使。
现代文：咸通四年，提升为同中书门下平章事，离京任荆南节度使。
English: In the fourth year of Hamdang, he was promoted to the lower level of the book gate of the same school, and left Beijing as the Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：累进太子太保，卒。
现代文：接连升任太子太保，直到去世。
English: He was successively promoted to Crown Prince Taibo until his death.

古文：子彦若，事僖宗为中书舍人。
现代文：儿子徐彦若，侍奉僖宗李儇任中书舍人。
English: His son, Xu Yanruo, served as a disciple of Li Zong and became a scholar.

古文：昭宗立，再用为御史中丞。
现代文：昭宗李晔登位，两次任命他为御史中丞。
English: Zhaozong Li Rong ascended to the throne, and twice appointed him as Goshi Chujo.

古文：张浚师败太原，以彦若为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：张浚的军队在太原吃了败仗后，任命徐彦若为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: After the defeat of Zhang Jun's army in Taiyuan, Xu Yanruo was appointed as the head of the household and the head of the school.

古文：俄代李茂贞为凤翔节度使，不得入，还为御史大夫。
现代文：不久接替李茂贞任凤翔节度使，不合适，回朝廷任御史大夫。
English: Soon he succeeded Li Maozhen as Fengxiang's regent, but he was not suitable and returned to the imperial court as imperial secretary.

古文：乾宁初，复当国，进位太保、齐国公。
现代文：昭宗乾宁初年，重新主持国事，升为太子太保、齐国公。
English: In the first year of Akizong Qianning, he once again presided over state affairs and was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo and the Prince of Qi.

古文：崔胤专政，以彦若位己右，不悦，以平章事为清海军节度使，卒于镇，而行军司马刘隐因主留务。
现代文：崔胤独揽朝政，认为徐彦若的官职爵位比自己高，不高兴，就让他以平章事资格任清海军节度使，在州城去世，行军司马刘隐接着主持留守事务。
English: Cui Yan dominated the politics of the dynasty. He was not happy that Xu Yan had a higher official title and rank than himself, so he appointed him as the Qing Navy's chief of ceremonies with the status of a peerage. He died in the state capital, and the marching secretary, Ma Liuyin, then presided over the affairs left behind.

古文：方时多难，彦若最见信于帝，有以事自陈者，帝曰： 汝当问彦若。 
现代文：当时国家经常发生变故，徐彦若最受昭宗信赖，有向昭宗汇报公务的，昭宗就说 ：你应当去请教徐彦若。 
English: At that time, the country was in a constant state of change. Xu Yanru was the most trusted by Zhaozong. If anyone reported to Zhaozong on official business, Zhaozong would say, "You should consult Xu Yanru."

古文：其所倚任如此。
现代文：他被信赖到这种程度。
English: He is trusted to that extent.

