古文：十有六年春，齐侯伐徐。
现代文：十六年春季，齐侯发兵攻打徐国。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Qin Dynasty, the state of Qi sent troops to attack the state of Xu.

古文：楚子诱戎蛮子杀之。
现代文：楚平王诱骗戎蛮子嘉并杀了他。
English: King Chuping tricked and killed the army barbarian Jiayu.

古文：夏，公至自晋。
现代文：夏季，昭公从晋国回来。
English: In the summer, Akihiro came back from Jin Province.

古文：秋八月己亥，晋侯夷卒。
现代文：秋季八月己亥日，晋侯去世。
English: In the autumn, on August Ji Hai Day, Jin Hou passed away.

古文：九月，大雩。
现代文：九月，举行大的求雨祭祀活动。
English: In September, a large rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：季孙意如如晋。
现代文：季孙意如去到晋国。
English: Ji Sun Yiru went to Jin Province.

古文：冬十月，葬晋昭公。
现代文：冬季十月，安葬晋昭公。
English: In the winter of October, Jin Zhaogong was buried.

古文：十六年春，王正月，公在晋，晋人止公。
现代文：十六年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁昭公在晋国，晋国人扣留了昭公。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Lu Zhaogong was in Jin Province. Jin people detained Zhaogong.

古文：不书，讳之也。
现代文：《春秋》不记载这件事，这是由于隐讳。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record this event, which is due to concealment.

古文：齐侯伐徐。
现代文：齐景公发兵攻打徐国。
English: Qi Jing Gong sent troops to attack Xu Province.

古文：楚子闻蛮氏之乱也，与蛮子之无质也，使然丹诱戎蛮子嘉杀之，遂取蛮氏。
现代文：楚平王听说戎蛮部落发生动乱和蛮子没有信用，派然丹诱骗戎蛮子嘉而杀了他，就占领了戎蛮部落。
English: King Chu Ping heard that there was turmoil in the Rongzhuan tribe and that the barbarians had no trust, so he sent Ran Dan to trick Rongzhuan Jia and kill him, and then occupied the Rongzhuan tribe.

古文：既而复立其子焉，礼也。
现代文：不久以后又立了他的儿子，这是合于礼的。
English: Soon after, he appointed his son, which was proper.

古文：二月丙申，齐师至于蒲隧。
现代文：二月十四日，齐军到达蒲隧。
English: On February 14th, the Qi army arrived at Putian Tunnel.

古文：徐人行成。徐子及郯人、莒人会齐侯，盟于蒲隧，赂以甲父之鼎。
现代文：徐国人求和，徐子和郯人、莒人会见齐景公，在蒲隧结盟，送给齐景公甲父之鼎。
English: Xu's people sued for peace, Xu Zi, Xuan people, and Xuan people met with Qi Jing Gong, made an alliance in Putian Tunnel, and gave Qi Jing Gong a father's ring.

古文：叔孙昭子曰： 诸侯之无伯，害哉！
现代文：叔孙昭子说： 诸侯没有领袖，对小国是个危险啊！
English: My great-uncle Akiko said: Princes without leaders are a danger to small countries!

古文：齐君之无道也，兴师而伐，远方会之，有成而还，莫之亢也。无伯也夫。《诗》曰： 宗周既灭，靡所止戾。
现代文：齐国的国君无道，起兵攻打远方的国家，会见了他们，缔结了和约而回来，没有人能够抵御，这是由于没有霸主啊！《诗》说， 宗周已经衰亡，无所安定。
English: The sovereign of Qi was mad, he raised an army to attack a faraway country, met with them, concluded a peace treaty and returned, no one could resist, this is because there is no overlord! "Poem" said, Zong Zhou has fallen, there is no stability.

古文：正大夫离居，莫知我肄。 其是之谓乎！ 
现代文：执政的大夫四处分居，没有人知道我的辛劳 ，说的就是这个吧！ 
English: The ruling doctors live far and wide, and no one knows about my hard work, let's just say that!

古文：三月，晋韩起聘于郑，郑伯享之。
现代文：三月，晋国的韩起到郑国聘问，郑定公设享礼招待他。
English: In March, Han from Jin Province was invited by Zheng Guo, and Zheng Ding publicly set up a ceremony to invite him.

古文：子产戒之曰： 苟有位于朝，无有不共恪。 
现代文：子产告诫大家说： 如果在朝廷的享礼上有一个席位，不要发生不恭敬的事！ 
English: Zibo warned everyone: If you have a seat at the imperial banquet, don't be disrespectful!

古文：孔张后至，立于客间。执政御之，適客后。又御之，適县间。
现代文：孔张后到，站在客人中间，主管典礼的人挡住他，去到客人后边，主管典礼的人又挡住他，他只好到悬挂乐器的间隙中待着。
English: Kong Zhang arrived later, stood in the middle of the guests, the person in charge of the ceremony blocked him, went to the back of the guests, the person in charge of the ceremony blocked him again, and he had to wait in the gap between the suspended musical instruments.

古文：客从而笑之。
现代文：客人因此而笑他。
English: The guests laughed at him.

古文：事毕，富子谏曰： 夫大国之人，不可不慎也，几为之笑而不陵我？
现代文：事情结束，富子劝谏说： 对待大国的客人，是不可以不慎重的。难道说被他们笑话了，而他们会不欺负我们？
English: At the end of the matter, Tomiko exhorted, "We must not be careless when dealing with guests from a big country. Could it be that they are laughing at us, but they will not bully us?"

古文：我皆有礼，夫犹鄙我。
现代文：我们样样都能做到有礼，那些人还会看不起我们。
English: We can be courteous in every way, and those people will still look down on us.

古文：国而无礼，何以求荣？
现代文：国家没有礼仪，凭什么求得光荣？
English: If a country has no etiquette, how can it claim glory?

古文：孔张失位，吾子之耻也。 
现代文：孔张没有站到应该站的位置上，这是您的耻辱。 
English: Kong Zhang did not stand up to the position he should stand, this is your shame.

古文：子产怒曰： 发命之不衷，出令之不信，刑之颇类，狱之放纷，会朝之不敬，使命之不听，取陵于大国，罢民而无功，罪及而弗知，侨之耻也。
现代文：子产发怒说： 发布命令不恰当，命令发出后没有信用，刑罚偏颇不平，诉讼放任混乱，朝会有时失去礼仪，命令没有人听从，招致大国的欺负，使百姓疲惫而没有功劳，罪过来到还不知道，这是我的耻辱。
English: Zi Yuan said angrily, "I am ashamed that I issued orders inappropriately, that there was no trust after the orders were issued, that the punishments were unbalanced and unfair, that the lawsuits were allowed to be chaotic, that the imperial court sometimes lost its etiquette, that orders were not obeyed, that bullying by the great powers occurred, that the people were exhausted without any merit, and that I did not know when the sin came.

古文：孔张，君之昆孙，子孔之后也，执政之嗣也。为嗣大夫，承命以使，周于诸侯，国人所尊，诸侯所知。
现代文：孔张，是国君哥哥的孙子，子孔的后代，执政大夫的继承人，做了嗣大夫，他接受命令而出使，遍及诸侯各国，为国内的人们所尊敬，为诸侯所熟悉。
English: Kong Zhang was the grandson of the sovereign's elder brother, the descendant of Zi Kong, the heir of the ruling doctor, and became the heir doctor. He received orders and dispatched to all the countries of the princes, and was respected by the people in the country and familiar to the princes.

古文：立于朝而祀于家，有禄于国。有赋于军，丧祭有职，受脤归脤，其祭在庙，已有著位，在位数世，世守其业，而忘其所，侨焉得耻之？
现代文：他在朝中有官职，在家里有祖庙，接受国家的爵禄，分担战争所需的军赋，丧事、祭祀有一定的职责，接受和归还祭肉，辅助国君在宗庙里祭祀，已经有了固定的地位。他家在位已经几代，世世代代保守自己的家业，现在忘记了他应该处的地位，侨哪里能为他感到耻辱？
English: He has an official post in the imperial court, an ancestral temple at home, receives the state stipend, shares the military equipment needed for war, has certain responsibilities for funerals and sacrifices, accepts and returns sacrificial meat, and assists the sovereign in sacrifices at the ancestral temple, and has already established a fixed position. His family has been reigning for several generations, and has preserved their family business for generations. Now he has forgotten the position he should be in. Where can the overseas Chinese feel shame for him?

古文：辟邪之人而皆及执政，是先王无刑罚也。
现代文：不正派的人把一切都归罪于我这个执政的人，等于说先王没有刑罚。
English: Dishonest people blame everything on me, the person in power, which is tantamount to saying that there was no punishment for the former king.

古文：子宁以他规我。 
现代文：你最好用别的事来纠正我。 
English: You'd better correct me on something else.

古文：宣子有环，其一在郑商。
现代文：韩宣子有一付玉环，其中一个在郑国的商人手里。
English: Han Xuan Zi has a set of jade rings, one of which is in the hands of a businessman from Zhengzhou.

古文：宣子谒诸郑伯，子产弗与，曰： 非官府之守器也，寡君不知。 
现代文：韩宣子向郑定公请求得到那只玉环，子产不给，说： 这不是公家府库中保管的器物，寡君不知道。 
English: Han Xuan Zi asked Zheng Ding Gong to get the jade ring, but he would not give it to him, saying: This is not a thing kept in the public treasury, and you don't know it.

古文：子大叔、子羽谓子产曰： 韩子亦无几求，晋国亦未可以贰。
现代文：子太叔、子羽对子产说： 韩子也没有太多的要求，对晋国也不能怀有二心。
English: Uncle Zi and Zi Yu said to their offspring: Han Zi doesn't have too many demands, and he can't have any second thoughts about Jin.

古文：晋国、韩子，不可偷也。
现代文：晋国和韩子都是不能轻视的。
English: Both Jin and Han cannot be taken lightly.

古文：若属有谗人交斗其间，鬼神而助之，以兴其凶怒，悔之何及？
现代文：如果正好有坏人在两国中间挑拨，如果鬼神再帮着坏人，以兴起他们的凶心怒气，后悔哪里来得及？
English: If there happens to be a bad person stirring up trouble between the two countries, if ghosts and gods help the bad person again to arouse their ferocious anger, how can there be time for regret?

古文：吾子何爱于一环，其以取憎于大国也，盍求而与之？ 
现代文：您为什么爱惜一个玉环而以此使大国来讨厌呢？为什么不去找来给他？ 
English: Why do you spare a single ring, to the disgust of a great nation? Why not seek it out and give it to him?

古文：子产曰： 吾非偷晋而有二心，将终事之，是以弗与，忠信故也。
现代文：子产说： 我不是轻慢晋国而有二心，而是要始终事奉他们，所以才不给他，这是为了忠实和守信用的缘故。
English: Zi Yuan said, "I am not two-faced, but I always want to serve them, so I did not give it to him. This is for the sake of loyalty and trustworthiness."

古文：侨闻君子非无贿之难，立而无令名之患。
现代文：侨听说君子不是怕没有财物，而是担心没有美好的名声。
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that a gentleman is not afraid of not having property, but is worried about not having a good reputation.

古文：侨闻为国非不能事大字小之难，无礼以定其位之患。
现代文：侨又听说治理国家不是怕不能事奉大国、抚养小国，而是怕没有礼仪来安定他的地位。
English: The overseas Chinese also heard that governing a country is not a fear of not being able to serve a big country and raise a small country, but a fear of not having etiquette to stabilize his position.

古文：夫大国之人，令于小国，而皆获其求，将何以给之？
现代文：大国命令小国，如果一切要求都得到满足，将要用什么来不断地供给他们？
English: The great nations command the small nations, and if all their demands are met, with what will they be continually supplied?

古文：一共一否，为罪滋大。
现代文：一次给了，一次不给，所得的罪过更大。
English: Once you give, once you don't give, the guilt of what you get is greater.

古文：大国之求，无礼以斥之，何餍之有？
现代文：大国的要求，如果不合乎礼就驳斥，他们哪里会有满足的时候？
English: When will the demands of the great powers be satisfied, if not by politely rejecting them?

古文：吾且为鄙邑，则失位矣。
现代文：我们如果将成为他们的边境城市，那就失去了作为一个国家的地位了。
English: If they are satisfied, we, Zheng Guo, will become his outlying towns, and the prince of Zheng Guo will lose his throne.

古文：若韩子奉命以使，而求玉焉，贪淫甚矣，独非罪乎？
现代文：如果韩子奉命出使而求取玉环，他的贪婪邪恶就太过分了，难道不是罪过吗？
English: If Han Zi was sent by order to seek the jade ring, his greed and evil would be too excessive. Isn't that a sin?

古文：出一玉以起二罪，吾又失位，韩子成贪，将焉用之？
现代文：拿出一只玉环而引起两种罪过，我们又失去了国家的地位，韩子成为贪婪的人，哪里用得着这样？
English: Taking out a jade ring caused two kinds of sins, we lost the status of the country, and Han Zi became a greedy person. What is the use of such a thing?

古文：且吾以玉贾罪，不亦锐乎？ 
现代文：而且我们因为玉环招来罪过，不也是太不值得了吧？ 
English: And since we have sinned because of the jade ring, isn't it too worthless?

古文：韩子买诸贾人，既成贾矣，商人曰： 必告君大夫。 
现代文：韩宣子向商人购买玉环，已经成交了。商人说： 一定要告诉君大夫！ 
English: Han Xuan Zi buys a jade ring from a merchant, and the deal is done. The merchant says, "Be sure to tell Dr. Jun!"

古文：韩子请诸子产曰： 日起请夫环，执政弗义，弗敢复也。
现代文：韩宣子向子产请求说： 前些时候我请求得到这只玉环，执政认为不合于道义，所以不敢再次请求。
English: Han Xuan Zi made a request to the progeny, saying: Some time ago, I asked to get this jade ring. The government thought it was immoral, so I didn't dare to ask again.

古文：今买诸商人，商人曰，必以闻，敢以为请。 
现代文：现在在商人那里买到了，商人说一定要把这件事情报告，谨敢以此作为请求。 
English: Now I bought it from a merchant, and the merchant said that I must report this matter, and I dare to use this as a request.

古文：子产对曰： 昔我先君桓公，与商人皆出自周。庸次比耦，以艾杀此地，斩之蓬蒿藜藋，而共处之。
现代文：子产回答说： 从前我们先君桓公和商人们都是从周朝迁居出来的，共同合作清除这块土地，砍去野草杂木，一起居住在这里。
English: The progeny replied, "In the past, all of our ancestors and merchants migrated from the Zhou Dynasty. We worked together to clear this land, cut weeds and live here together.

古文：世有盟誓，以相信也，曰： 尔无我叛，我无强贾，毋或匄夺。
现代文：世世代代都有盟誓，互相信赖。誓辞说： 你不要背叛我，我不要强买你的东西，不要乞求、不要掠夺。
English: For from generation to generation they have taken an oath, one to another in faith, saying, "Do not rebel against me, and I will not buy your merchandise; do not beg, and you will not be robbed.

古文：尔有利市宝贿，我勿与知。 
现代文：你有赚钱的买卖和宝贵的货物，我也不加过问。 
English: You have a profitable business and valuable goods, I don't question it.

古文：恃此质誓，故能相保，以至于今。
现代文：仗着这个有信用的盟誓，所以能互相支持直到今天。
English: By virtue of this trustworthy oath, we have been able to support each other to this day.

古文：今吾子以好来辱，而谓敝邑强夺商人，是教敝邑背盟誓也，毋乃不可乎！
现代文：现在你带着友好的情谊光临敝邑，而告诉我们去强夺商人的东西，这是教导敝邑背叛盟誓，未免不可以吧！
English: Now that you have come to Xiangyi with a friendly feeling, and told us to take the merchant's things by force, this is teaching Xiangyi to betray the oath, is it not inevitable?

古文：吾子得玉而失诸侯，必不为也。
现代文：如果得到玉环而失去诸侯，那您一定是不干的。
English: If you get the ring and lose your lordship, you won't do it.

古文：若大国令，而共无艺，郑，鄙邑也，亦弗为也。
现代文：如果大国有命令，要我们没原则地供应，那就是把郑国当成了边境里的城市，我们也是不干的。
English: If a big country has an order to supply us without principle, that is to treat Zhengzhou as a city in the border, we will not do it.

古文：侨若献玉，不知所成，敢私布之。 
现代文：侨如果献上玉环，真不知道有什么道理和好处。谨敢私下向您布达。 
English: If an overseas Chinese presents a jade ring, I really don't know what the reason is and what the benefits are. I dare to offer you a bouda in private.

古文：韩子辞玉曰： 起不敏，敢求玉以徼二罪？
现代文：韩宣子就把玉环退了回去，说： 我韩起虽然不聪明，岂敢求取玉环以求得两项罪过？
English: Han Xuan Zi pushed the jade ring back and said, "Although I, Han Qi, am not clever, how dare I ask for the jade ring in order to obtain two sins?

古文：敢辞之。 
现代文：谨请把玉环退还。 
English: Please return the ring.

古文：夏四月，郑六卿饯宣子于郊。
现代文：夏季，四月，郑国的六卿为韩宣子在郊外饯行。
English: In the summer, in April, the six nobles of Zheng were strolling in the countryside for Han Xuan Zi.

古文：宣子曰： 二三君子请皆赋，起亦以知郑志。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 请几位大臣都赋诗一首，起也可以了解郑国的意图。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said: Ask several ministers to compose a poem, and you can also understand the intention of Zheng Guo.

古文：子齹赋《野有蔓草》。
现代文：子齹赋《野有蔓草》。
English: Zifu "Wild Weeds."

古文：宣子曰： 孺子善哉，吾有望矣。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 孺子好啊！我有希望了。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said: "What a good son of a bitch! I have hope now."

古文：子产赋郑之《羔裘》。
现代文：子产赋郑国的《羔裘》。
English: "Lam Qiu" by Zheng Guo.

古文：宣子曰： 起不堪也。 
现代文：韩宣子说： 起是不敢当的。 
English: Han Xuan Zi said, "It's not safe to start."

古文：子大叔赋《褰裳》。
现代文：子太叔赋《褰裳》。
English: His great-great-uncle wrote "Cloak and Dagger."

古文：宣子曰： 起在此，敢勤子至于他人乎？ 
现代文：韩宣子说： 有起在这里，难道敢劳动您去事奉别人吗？ 
English: Han Xuan Zi said, "Since you are here, how dare you work to serve others?

古文：子大叔拜。
现代文：子太叔拜谢。
English: Thank you, great-uncle.

古文：宣子曰： 善哉，子之言是。
现代文：韩宣子说： 好啊，您说起了这个！
English: Han Xuan Zi said: Good, you mentioned this!

古文：不有是事，其能终乎？ 
现代文：要不是有这回事，能从始至终地友好下去吗？ 
English: If this hadn't happened, would it have been possible to remain on friendly terms from start to finish?

古文：子游赋《风雨》，子旗赋《有女同车》，子柳赋蘀兮。
现代文：子游赋《风雨》，子旗赋《有女同车》。子柳赋《萚兮》。
English: Ziyu Fu "Wind and Rain," Ziqi Fu "There is a woman in the car." Ziyu Fu "Bangxi."

古文：宣子喜曰： 郑其庶乎。
现代文：韩宣子很高兴，说： 郑国差不多要强盛了吧！
English: Han Xuan Zi was very happy and said, "Zheng Guo is about to become strong!

古文：二三君子以君命贶起，赋不出郑志，皆昵燕好也。
现代文：几位大臣用国君的名义赏赐起，所赋的《诗》不出郑国之外，都是表示友好的。
English: Several ministers presented the award in the name of the sovereign, and the "poem" awarded did not go beyond Zheng Guo, all of which were expressions of friendship.

古文：二三君子，数世之主也，可以无惧矣。 
现代文：几位大臣都是传了几世的大夫，可以不再有所畏惧了。 
English: Several ministers have been doctors for generations and can no longer be intimidated.

古文：宣子皆献马焉，而赋《我将》。
现代文：韩宣子对他们都奉献马匹，而且赋了《我将》。
English: Han Xuan Zi dedicated horses to all of them, and endowed "I will."

古文：子产拜，使五卿皆拜，曰： 吾子靖乱，敢不拜德？ 
现代文：子产拜谢，又让其他五个卿也都拜谢，说： 您安定动乱，岂敢不拜谢恩德！ 
English: He also asked the other five lords to offer their thanks as well, saying, "You stabilized the turmoil, how dare you not offer thanks to Shaynd!

古文：宣子私觐于子产，以玉与马，曰： 子命起舍夫玉，是赐我玉而免吾死也，敢不藉手以拜？ 
现代文：韩宣子用玉和马作为礼物私下拜见子产，说： 您命令起舍弃那个玉环，这是赐给了我金玉良言而免我一死，岂敢不借此薄礼表示拜谢！ 
English: Han Xuan Zi used the jade and horse as a gift to visit his son-in-law in private, saying: "You ordered me to give up that jade ring. It was given to me as a precious gift to save my life. How dare I not use this humble gift to express my gratitude!"

古文：公至自晋。子服昭伯语季平子曰： 晋之公室，其将遂卑矣。
现代文：鲁昭公从晋国回到国内，子服昭伯对季平子说： 晋国的公室的地位恐怕将要降低了。
English: When Lu Zhaogong returned to China from Jin, Zifu Zhao Bo said to Ji Pingzi, "I'm afraid the status of the official residence in Jin will be lowered.

古文：君幼弱，六卿强而奢傲，将因是以习。
现代文：国君年幼而力量微弱，六卿强大而奢侈骄傲，将要由此而成习惯。
English: It will become a habit that the sovereign is young and weak, while the six lords are powerful and extravagantly proud.

古文：习实为常，能无卑乎？ 
现代文：习惯而成自然，能够不降低吗？ 
English: Habit becomes natural, can it not be reduced?

古文：平子曰： 尔幼，恶识国？ 
现代文：季平子说： 你年轻，哪里懂得国家大事？ 
English: Ji Ping Zi said: You are young, how do you know about national affairs?

古文：秋八月，晋昭公卒。
现代文：秋季，八月，晋昭公逝世。
English: In the autumn, in August, Jin Zhaogong passed away.

古文：九月，大雩，旱也。
现代文：九月，举行盛大的雩祭，这是由于发生了旱灾。
English: In September, a grand burnt offering was held, which was due to the drought.

古文：郑大旱，使屠击、祝款、竖柎有事于桑山。
现代文：郑国大旱，派屠击、祝款、竖柎祭祀桑山。
English: Due to the severe drought in Zhengzhou, people sent offerings of meat, money, and reeds to worship the Mulberry Mountain.

古文：斩其木，不雨。
现代文：砍去了山上的树木，不下雨。
English: They have cut down the trees on the mountain, so there is no rain.

古文：子产曰： 有事于山，蓺山林也；而斩其木，其罪大矣。 
现代文：子产说： 祭祀山神，应当培育和保护山林，现在反而砍去山上的树木，他们的罪过就很大了。 
English: Zi Yuan said, "In worshiping mountain gods, mountain forests should be nurtured and protected, but now they are chopping down trees on the mountain. Their sin is too great."

古文：夺之官邑。
现代文：于是就剥夺了他们的官爵和封邑。
English: So they stripped them of their titles and fiefdoms.

古文：冬十月，季平子如晋葬昭公。
现代文：冬季，十月，季平子到晋国去参加昭公的丧礼。
English: In the winter, in October, Ji Ping Zi went to Jin Province to attend the funeral of Zhaogong.

古文：平子曰： 子服回之言犹信，子服氏有子哉。 
现代文：季平子说： 子服回的话还是可以相信的，子服氏有了好儿子了！ 
English: Said Ji Ping Zi: I can still believe Zifu's words. Mr. Zifu has a good son!

