古文：匡衡字稚圭，东海承人也。
现代文：匡衡，字稚圭，柬海承县人。
English: Kuang Heng, also known as Chuk Kei, is a Cambodian from Haicheng County.

古文：父世农夫，至衡好学，家贫，庸作以供资用，尤精力过绝人。
现代文：祖父世代务农，到匡衡时喜好读书，因家贫，匡衡当雇工获取报酬支付费用。
English: His grandfather worked in agriculture for generations. When he came to Kuangheng, he liked to study. Due to his family's poverty, Kuangheng worked as an employee to get paid and pay expenses.

古文：诸儒为之语曰： 无说《诗》，匡鼎来；匡语《诗》，解人颐。 
现代文：匡衡的精力超过常人，许多儒者赞美说： 不要讲《诗》，匡衡就要来；匡衡来讲《诗》，使人开心大笑不已。 
English: Kuangheng's energy exceeds that of an ordinary person, and many Confucians praise him, saying, "Don't talk about "Poetry," Kuangheng is about to come; when Kuangheng talks about "Poetry," it makes people happy and laugh.

古文：衡射策甲科，以不应令除为太常掌故，调补平原文学。
现代文：匡衡得中甲科，因为不中甲科条令，衹被任命为太常掌故，后选任为平原郡文学。
English: Kuang Heng was awarded the first place in the middle A subject, but because he did not meet the requirements of the middle A subject, he was appointed as the first place in the middle A subject, and later he was appointed as the literature of Pingyuan County.

古文：学者多上书荐衡经明，当世少双，令为文学就官京师；后进皆欲从衡平原，衡不宜在远方。
现代文：很多学者都上书推举匡衡精通经典，当世无双，应任命为文学，去京师为官；后学之辈都愿跟从匡衡到平原郡学习，匡衡不应该在远离京师的地方作官。
English: Many scholars have written to recommend that Kuang Heng, who is well versed in the classics and is second to none in the world, should be appointed as literature and go to Beijing to serve as an official; future generations of scholars are willing to follow Kuang Heng to study in Pingyuan County. Kuang Heng should not serve as an official in a place far away from Beijing.

古文：事下太子太傅萧望之、少府梁丘贺问，衡对《诗》诸大义，其对深美。
现代文：皇上把这件事交太子太傅萧望之、少府梁丘贺前往询问，匡衡用《诗经》大义回答，回答得十分深刻、精彩。
English: The emperor referred the matter to the crown prince, Taifu Shouwangzhi, and the shofu, Liang Qiuhe, went to inquire about it. Kuangheng answered with the great justice of the "Song of Songs," and his answer was very profound and wonderful.

古文：望之奏衡经学精习，说有师道，可观览。
现代文：萧望之上奏匡衡精通经学，讲说有师道传承，可供观览。
English: In front of the audience, Kuang Heng, a well-versed student of the classics, recited that he had inherited the teachings of his teacher, and the performance was open to the public.

古文：宣帝不甚用儒，遣衡归官。
现代文：宣帝不大任用儒者，便遣匡衡回原地。
English: Emperor Xuan did not want to appoint a Confucian, so he sent Kuangheng back to the original place.

古文：而皇太子见衡对，私善之。
现代文：但是，皇太子看到匡衡的问对后，私下裹赏识他。
English: However, after the crown prince saw Kuangheng's answer, he privately appreciated him.

古文：会宣帝崩，元帝初即位，乐陵侯史高以外属为大司马车骑将军，领尚书事，前将军萧望之为副。
现代文：宣帝驾崩，元帝即位，乐陵侯史高以外戚被任命为大司马车骑将军，兼任尚书，前将军萧望之为副手。
English: Emperor Xuan died, Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, and a relative other than Le Ling Hou Shigao was appointed as the general in charge of horse-drawn carriages, also serving as Shangshu, and the former general Xiao Wangjing as his deputy.

古文：望之名儒，有师傅旧恩，天子任之，多所贡荐。
现代文：萧望之是名儒，是皇帝的恩师，皇帝重用他，在推荐人才方面颇多贡献。
English: Xiao Wangzhi was a famous Confucian and the emperor's mentor. The emperor made great use of him, and he contributed a great deal in terms of recommending talents.

古文：高充位而已，与望之有隙。
现代文：而史高则不问政事，徒有名位，和萧望之产生隔阂。
English: Shigao, on the other hand, did not care about politics, only fame and prestige, and the gap created by depression.

古文：长安令杨兴说高曰： 将军以亲戚辅政，贵重于天下无二，然众庶论议令问休誉不专在将军者何也？
现代文：长安县令杨兴劝说史高说： 将军以亲戚关系辅助政事，名位高贵，举世无比，然而在众人的议论中，好的名声、荣誉不全在将军身上，是何原因呢？
English: Yang Xing, the magistrate of Chang'an County, persuaded Shi Gao to say: "The general uses relatives to assist in political affairs. His position is noble and unparalleled in the world. However, in the discussions of many people, the good reputation and honor are not entirely on the general. What is the reason for this?

古文：彼诚有所闻也。
现代文：在于他们听说将军不能荐贤及有才能的人。
English: It's because they've heard that generals don't promote the best and the brightest.

古文：以将军之莫府，海内莫不卬望。
现代文：作为将军的幕府，世人没有不仰望羡慕的，而将军所推举的人不过是私家宾客，乳母的子弟。
English: As the shogun's shogunate, there was no one the world did not look up to and admire, while the people the general promoted were nothing more than private guests, the nanny's children.

古文：而所举不过私门宾客，乳母子弟，人情忽不自知，然一夫窃议，语流天下。
现代文：将军因为人情的缘故忽视了众人的议论，而不知道有自己不对的地方，但是衹要有一个人在私下议论，就会流传天下。
English: The general ignored the discussion of the crowd for the sake of human feelings, and did not know that he was wrong, but if one person discussed it in private, it would spread all over the world.

古文：夫富贵在身而列士不誉，是有狐白之裘而反衣之也。
现代文：您虽然富贵在身，但士人却不称赞，好比反穿着纯白的狐皮大衣一样，华而不实。
English: Although you are rich, the scholars do not praise you, just as if you were wearing a pure white fox fur coat, it is flashy.

古文：古人病其若此，故卑体劳心，以求贤为务。
现代文：古人很忌讳这样的事情，所以他们屈尊费心，以寻求贤能的人作为己任。
English: The ancients were very averse to such things, so they condescended to take the trouble to seek a man of virtue as their duty.

古文：传曰：以贤难得之故因曰事不待贤，以食难得之故而曰饱不待食，或之甚者也。
现代文：经传上说：因为贤人难得，所以说办事不能坐等贤人到来；因为食物难得，所以饱食就不能坐等食物送来。
English: It is said in the sutras: Since a wise man is rare, one should not wait for him to arrive before doing something; since food is rare, one should not wait for food to arrive before eating a full meal.

古文：平原文学匡衡材智有余，经学绝伦，但以无阶朝廷，故随牒在远方。
现代文：还有比这种等待更严重的情况。平原文学匡衡的才能智慧都绰绰有余，经学造诣超群绝伦，因为在朝廷无阶升迁，衹得随着选补的文牒转到远离京师的地方作官。
English: There is a more serious situation than this kind of waiting. Plains literature Kuangheng's talent and wisdom are more than enough, and his academic attainment is outstanding. Because there is no promotion in the imperial court, he was transferred to a place far away from the Beijing division to serve as an official with the notice of supplementation.

古文：将军诚召置莫府，学士歙然归仁，与参事议，观其所有，贡之朝廷，必为国器，以此显示众庶，名流于世。 
现代文：将军如果召匡衡到幕府任职，天下学士一定纷纷跟从他，让他参与议论政事，根据他的特长，推荐给朝廷，一定会成为国家的栋梁之材。您将这件事做给众人看，您的美名也就会在世上流传。 
English: If the shogun summoned Kuangheng to serve in the shogunate, the world's scholars would surely follow him, let him participate in political discussions, and recommend him to the imperial court according to his strengths. He would surely become the backbone of the country. If you do this for everyone to see, your reputation will also spread around the world.

古文：高然其言，辟衡为议曹史，荐衡于上，上以为郎中，迁博士，给事中。
现代文：史高认为杨兴讲得有理，就任命匡衡为议曹史，将他推荐给皇上，皇上让他做郎中，后升为博士，兼任给事中。
English: Shi Gao thought that Yang Xing was right, so he appointed Kuang Heng as the chief adviser to the emperor and recommended him to the emperor. The emperor asked him to be a junior minister, and later he was promoted to a doctor, and also served as a junior minister.

古文：是时，有日蚀、地震之变，上问以政治得失，衡上疏曰：
现代文：这时，发生了日食、地震等灾异变化，皇上询问这些变化与政治得失的关系，匡衡上疏说：
English: At this time, cataclysmic changes such as solar eclipses and earthquakes occurred. The emperor asked about the relationship between these changes and political gains and losses. Kuangheng Shangzhuo said:

古文：臣闻五帝不同礼，三王各异教，民俗殊务，所遇之时异也。
现代文：臣听说五帝礼不相同，三王的政教各异，民情风俗很不同，原因在于时代变化了。
English: The minister heard that the rites of the five emperors are different, the politics and religion of the three kings are different, and the folk customs are very different. The reason is that the times have changed.

古文：陛下躬圣德，开太平之路，闵愚吏民触法抵禁，比年大赦，使百姓得改行自新，天下幸甚。
现代文：陛下亲施圣德，开启天下太平之路，怜悯触犯了法律禁令的愚昧官吏和百姓，年年大赦，让百姓改正行为，自我革新，遣确是天下幸事。
English: His majesty personally bestowed sanctity, opened the road of world peace, pitied the ignorant officials and people who violated the legal ban, and granted amnesty every year, allowing the people to correct their behavior, self-innovation, and repatriation is indeed a blessing for the world.

古文：臣窃见大赦之后，奸邪不为衰止，今日大赦，明日犯法，相随入狱，此殆导之未得其务也。
现代文：臣看到大赦之后，巧佞奸邪没有减少，今天大赦，明天又犯法，紧跟着又入狱，这大概是劝导百姓不得要领吧。
English: After the minister saw the amnesty, there was no reduction in cunning, treachery and evil. Today there is an amnesty, tomorrow they will break the law again, and then they will go to prison again. This is probably to persuade the people not to be led.

古文：盖保民者， 陈之以德义 ， 示之以好恶 ，观其失而制其宜，故动之而和，绥之而安。
现代文：一般说，教养百姓，如《孝经》所说： 陈述道德仁义给他们听 ， 公布好坏标准给他们看 ，观察他们的失误而明确行为规范，因此行动就会和睦相处，抚慰就会安宁无事。
English: Generally speaking, educating the people, as the "Filial Piety Sutra" says: stating moral benevolence and righteousness to them, publishing good and bad standards to show them, observing their mistakes and clarifying behavioral norms, so actions will be harmonious, soothing will be peaceful.

古文：今天下俗贪财贱义，好声色，上侈靡，廉耻之节薄，淫辟之意纵，纲纪失序，疏者逾内，亲戚之恩薄，婚姻之党隆，苟合侥幸，以身设利。
现代文：现在风俗是贪取财利鄙视仁义，喜好声色，崇尚奢侈，轻视廉耻，放纵荒淫，纲纪失去秩序，关系较远的妻妾娘家超过了同姓骨肉的本家，亲戚之间的恩情淡薄，藉婚姻结党之风盛行，相互之间苟且徼幸行事，卖身求荣。
English: Nowadays, the customs are greed for money and profit, contempt for benevolence and righteousness, liking for show, advocating luxury, despising shamelessness, indulging in debauchery, the discipline is out of order, the families of wives and concubines with distant relations exceed the families of relatives with the same surname, the kindness between relatives is weak, the style of forming a party through marriage is prevalent, and they are careful to act favorably to each other and sell themselves for glory.

古文：不改其原，虽岁赦之，刑犹难使错而不用也。
现代文：他们仍不改其本来的面目，虽然每年都大赦一次，刑法也很难置而不用。
English: They still do not change their original face, although they are amnestied once a year, and it is difficult to get rid of the criminal law.

古文：臣愚以为宜一旷然大变其俗。
现代文：以臣愚见应该彻底地改变这种风气。
English: According to Utomi, this culture should be completely changed.

古文：孔子曰： 能以礼让为国乎，何有？ 
现代文：孔子说： 能以礼节谦让治理国家，靠什么呢？ 
English: Confucius said: If you can govern a country with courtesy and modesty, on what do you rely?

古文：朝廷者，天下之桢幹也。
现代文：朝廷是支撑天下的梁柱。
English: The Imperial Court is the pillar that supports the world.

古文：公卿大夫相与循礼恭让，则民不争；好仁乐施，则下不暴；上义高节，则民兴行；宽柔和惠，则众相爱。
现代文：公卿大夫之间相互遵循礼节，恭敬谦让，那么百姓就不会互相争斗；大臣们爱好仁义，乐于施舍，那么百姓就不会使用暴力；上面崇尚高风亮节，那么百姓就会注重品行；上面温柔宽大，那么百姓就会相互爱护。
English: If the princes and doctors mutually follow the etiquette, respect and concede, then the people will not fight with each other; if the ministers love benevolence and charity, then the people will not use violence; if they advocate high morals and bright festivals, then the people will pay attention to morality; if they are gentle and generous, then the people will love each other.

古文：四者，明王之所以不严而成化也。
现代文：以上四点，是开明的君主之所以不行严厉的刑法而能改变天下的风气的原因。
English: The above four points are the reasons why enlightened monarchs can change the world's culture without strict criminal law.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：朝有变色之言，则下有争斗之患；上有自专之士，则下有不让之人；上有克胜之佐，则下有伤害之心；上有好利之臣，则下有盗窃之民：此其本也。
现代文：因为朝廷上有冲动无理的争论言行，下面就有争斗的祸患；上面有独断专权的人，下面就会有不谦让的人；上面有争胜的大臣，下面就会有相互伤害之心；上面有贪财好利之臣，下面就会有偷盗行窃之民：造就是时俗变化的根本原因。
English: Because there are impetuous and unreasonable arguments, words, and deeds in the imperial court, there will be the scourge of fighting below; there will be people with arbitrary power above, and people who are not humble and yielding below; there will be competing ministers above, and there will be mutual hurt feelings below; there will be greedy and profiteering ministers above, and there will be people who steal and steal below: creation is the fundamental reason for the change of times and customs.

古文：今俗吏之治，皆不本礼让，而上克暴，或忮害好陷人于罪，贪财而慕势，故犯法者众，奸邪不止，虽严刑峻法，犹不为变。
现代文：当今俗吏治理国家，都不根据礼节谦让的原则，而推崇强暴取胜，贪取财利并倾慕权势，因此犯法的人很多，奸邪不能制止；即使用严厉的刑法，仍然不能改变这种状况。
English: Today's secular officials do not govern the country according to the principle of courtesy and modesty, but advocate violent victory, greed for money and power. As a result, there are many people who break the law, and vice cannot be stopped; even the use of strict criminal laws cannot change this situation.

古文：此非其天性，有由然也。
现代文：这不是他们的天性，而是由于当政者没有教化好。
English: It's not their nature, it's because the politicians haven't educated them properly.

古文：臣窃考《国风》之诗，《周南》、《召南》被贤圣之化深，故笃于行而廉于色。
现代文：我个人研究《国风》，其中的《周南》、《召南》受圣贤之人的教化很深，因此表现得品行忠厚，不淫其色而知廉耻。
English: I have personally studied "National Style," of which "Zhou Nan" and "Call South" have been deeply educated by saints and sages, so they have shown themselves to be loyal, not lewd and shameless.

古文：郑伯好勇，而国人暴虎；秦穆贵信，而士多从死；陈夫人好巫，而民淫祀；晋侯好俭，而民畜聚；太王躬仁，邠国贵恕。
现代文：郑庄公崇尚勇武，其国人就空手搏虎；秦穆公注重信誉，士人就多以死相从；陈夫人爱好巫术，百姓就大肆祭祀；晋侯喜好节俭，他的百姓就积财聚物；周太王躬行仁义，邻国就崇尚宽恕。
English: Zheng Zhuang advocated bravery, and his countrymen fought tigers with their bare hands; Qin Mu focused on credibility, and the scholars mostly followed him to the death; Mrs. Chen loved witchcraft, and the people made a lot of sacrifices; Jin Hou liked to be frugal, and his people accumulated wealth; Zhou Tai Wang practiced benevolence and righteousness, and the neighboring countries advocated forgiveness.

古文：由此观之，治天下者审所上而已。今之伪薄忮害，不让极矣。
现代文：从以上可以看出，治理国家在于提倡一种可效法的时俗风尚。时下的风俗，虚伪浅薄、嫉妒陷害，不谦让到了极点。
English: From the above, it can be seen that the governance of the country is to promote an exemplary fashion. The current fashion is hypocritical, shallow, jealous, and immodest to the extreme.

古文：臣闻教化之流，非家至而人说之也。
现代文：我听说教化的普及，并不是要到每一家，去对每个人进行说教。
English: I heard that the spread of enlightenment is not to go to every house and preach to everyone.

古文：贤者在位，能者布职，朝廷崇礼，百僚敬让，道德之行，由内及外，自近者始，然后民知所法，迁善日进而不自知。
现代文：衹要贤德的人处在正位，有才能的人安排适合的职位，朝廷崇尚礼节，百官注重谦让。道德教化，由内到外，从身边开始，然后百姓知道效法的准则，不知不觉就会变得善良起来。
English: It is necessary to place virtuous people in the right position, talented people arrange suitable positions, the court advocates etiquette, and officials pay attention to modesty. Moral education, from the inside to the outside, starts from the side, and then the people know the standard of imitation, and they will become good without knowing it.

古文：是以百姓安，阴阳和，神灵应，而嘉祥见。
现代文：这样百姓安乐，阴阳和合，神灵感应，喜庆吉祥的气象就会出现。
English: In this way, the people will be at ease, the yin and yang will be in harmony, the gods will respond to inspiration, and the festive and auspicious weather will appear.

古文：《诗》曰： 商邑翼翼，四方之极；寿考且宁，以保我后生 此成汤所以建至治，保子孙，化异俗而怀鬼方也。
现代文：《诗经》说： 商都的礼俗昭然可以仿效，是天下四方的榜样。
English: "Shijing" said: The etiquette and customs of the mercantile city can obviously be imitated, and it is a model for all four corners of the world.

古文：今长安天子之都，亲承圣化，然其习俗无以异于远方，郡国来者无所法则，或见侈靡而放效之。
现代文：长寿安康，以此来保全我的子孙后代。 这正是成汤之所以实现国家大治，保全子孙，改变异方风俗，使远方之人归附自己的原因。现在长安是天子的京师，亲自承受圣上的教化，但是长安的习俗无异于偏远之地，从郡国来的人无以效法，有的看到奢侈靡乱的风气反而仿效。
English: Long life and good health, in order to preserve my children and grandchildren. This is precisely the reason why Cheng Tang has achieved national prosperity, preserved his children and grandchildren, changed foreign customs, and made people from far away attach themselves. Now, Chang'an is the son of Heaven's Beijing teacher, and he personally receives the enlightenment of the Holy One, but the customs of Chang'an are tantamount to remote places. People from the county cannot follow the example, and some see the extravagant and chaotic customs, but instead follow the example.

古文：此教化之原本，风俗之枢机，宜先正者也。
现代文：这是教化的根本，扭转风俗的关键所在，是应该首先端正的风气。
English: This is the foundation of enlightenment. The key to reversing customs is to first rectify the culture.

古文：臣闻天人之际，精祲有以相荡，善恶有以相推，事作乎下者象动乎上，阴阳之理各应其感，阴变则静者动，阳蔽则明者暗，水旱之灾随类而至。
现代文：我听说天地与入之间，阴阳之气相互感应，形成灾异或祥瑞，善与恶相互衍化，在下层百姓发生的事情，在上层一定有征兆产生，阴阳之气的变动互有感应，阴变静就转化为动，阳被遮蔽则明就会变暗，洪涝或干旱的灾异也就随着到来。
English: I have heard that between heaven and earth, the yin and yang of the qi are mutually induced, forming disasters or auspiciousness, and good and evil are mutually derived. What happens in the lower people must have signs in the upper people. The changes of the yin and yang of the qi are mutually induced. When the yin changes, the stillness is transformed into movement. When the yang is covered, it will obviously become dark. The disasters of floods or droughts will also come.

古文：今关东连年饥馑，百姓乏困，或至相食，此皆生于赋敛多，民所共者大，而吏安集之不称之效也。
现代文：现在关东年年饥荒，百姓贫乏穷困，有的地方到了人相食的地步，造都是由于赋税太多，百姓上缴的过多，而官吏安顿百姓不称职的缘故。
English: Now Kanto is suffering from famine year after year, the people are poor and destitute, and in some places they have reached the point of cannibalism. This is all due to the fact that there are too many taxes, the people have paid too much, and the officials are not competent to settle the people.

古文：陛下祗畏天戒，哀闵元元，大自减损，省甘泉、建章官卫，罢珠崖，偃武行文，将欲度唐、虞之隆，绝殷、周之衰也。
现代文：陛下敬畏上天的警告，爱惜怜悯百姓，自己很节约减省，减省甘泉、建章宫的卫兵，停罢了珠崖郡，停止武力，推行文治，将要继承尧舜那样的盛世，而避免像殷周那样的衰落。
English: His majesty feared the warning of heaven, cherished and pitied the people, and was very frugal in his own economy. He reduced the number of guards at Ganquan and Jianzhang Palace, stopped Zhuya County, stopped the use of force, and promoted the rule of law. He will inherit the prosperous world like Yao, and avoid the decline like Yin Zhou.

古文：诸见罢珠崖诏书者，莫不欣欣，人自以将见太平也。
现代文：大家看到罢置珠崖郡的诏书后，没有不欣喜的，人人都以为将要看到太平盛世了。
English: After everyone saw the edict to abolish Zhuya County, no one was unhappy. Everyone thought they were about to see Taiping prosper.

古文：宜遂减官室之度，省靡丽之饰，考制度，修外内，近忠正，远巧佞，放郑、卫，进《雅》、《颂》，举异材，开直言，任温良之人，退刻薄之吏，显洁白之士，昭无欲之路，览《六艺》之意，察上世之务，明自然之道，博和睦之化，以崇至仁，匡失俗，易民视，令海内昭然咸见本朝之所贵，道德弘于京师，淑问扬乎疆外，然后大化可成，礼让可兴也。
现代文：因此，陛下应该立即减少宫殿皇室的费用，省却奢靡华丽的装饰，修定规章制度，整治朝廷内外，重用忠良正直之臣，疏远巧言佞色之徒，禁止郑、卫淫声，宣扬《雅》、《颂》礼乐，推举有卓异才能的人，广开直言相进的渠道，任用仁慈贤良的人，罢免残忍刻薄的酷吏，表彰高洁清白之士，博览《六艺》的大意，明察前代治国的要领，通晓自然变化之道，推广和睦相处的风气，来推崇至高无上的仁政，匡正败坏的风俗，改变百姓追求的欲望，让世人都清楚地知道朝廷所推崇树立的榜样，让道德风气在京师弘扬光大，让好的名声远播到国外去，之后，教化就可以实现，礼节谦让也就可以蔚然成风。
English: Therefore, His Majesty should immediately reduce the expenses of the royal palace, save the extravagant ornate decorations, amend the rules and regulations, rectify the inside and outside of the imperial court, make good use of loyal and honest subjects, alienate the eloquent people, ban Zheng and Wei's obscene voices, promote "Grace" and "Ode" liturgical music, promote people with outstanding talents, open up channels for straight talk, appoint benevolent and virtuous people, dismiss cruel and harsh officials, commend the noble and pure people, expound the gist of "Six Arts," clearly observe the essentials of the previous generation of governance, understand the way of natural changes, promote

古文：上说其言，迁衡为光禄大夫、太子少傅。
现代文：皇上听了他的话后很高兴，进升匡衡为光禄大夫、太子少傅。
English: After listening to his words, the emperor was very pleased, and promoted Kuangheng to the post of Guanglu Doctor and Prince Junior Master.

古文：时，上好儒术文辞，颇改宣帝之政，言事者多进见，人人自以为得上意。
现代文：这时，皇上喜好儒家的学术和文章，对宣帝时的政治改动很多，上疏谈论政事的人多得到皇上的召见，人人都自以为自己所讲的会称皇上的心意。
English: At this time, the emperor was fond of Confucian scholarship and articles, and there were many political changes in the proclamation of the emperor. Most people who spoke about politics were summoned by the emperor, and everyone thought that what they said would praise the emperor's mind.

古文：又傅昭仪及子定陶王爱幸，宠于皇后、太子。
现代文：与此同时，由于傅昭仪和他的儿子定陶王受到皇帝的宠爱，超过了皇后、皇太子。
English: At the same time, because Fu Zhaoyi and his son Ding Tao Wang were favored by the emperor, they surpassed the queen and the crown prince.

古文：衡复上疏曰：
现代文：匡衡便又上疏说：
English: Kuangheng then went on to say:

古文：臣闻治乱安危之机，在乎审所用心。
现代文：我听说国家治乱安危的关键，在于审察自己的用心。
English: I heard that the key to the country's stability lies in examining one's own intentions.

古文：盖受命之王务在创业垂统传之无穷，继体之君心存于承宣先王之德而褒大其功。
现代文：一般来说，接受天命委任的帝王，其任务主要在于创业立制并把国家大权不断地延续下去；继承先王体制的国君，其用心应在于继承弘扬先王的美德，褒扬光大先王的功业。
English: Generally speaking, emperors who accept the mandate of destiny, their main task is to establish a system of entrepreneurship and continue to perpetuate the power of the state; the prince who inherits the system of the previous king, his intention should be to inherit and promote the virtues of the previous king and praise the work of the previous king.

古文：昔者成王之嗣位，思述文、武之道以养其心，休烈盛美皆归之二后而不敢专其名，是以上天歆享，鬼神祐焉。
现代文：过去周成王继承王位，想的是追述周文王、周武王的治国之道，来修身养性，功绩美名都归之于周文王、周武王，不敢自己独享功名，因此上天满意，成就他的功业，鬼神都保佑他。
English: In the past, when Zhou Cheng Wang succeeded to the throne, he thought of recounting the governance methods of Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang to cultivate his character. The great achievements and fame were all attributed to Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang, and he did not dare to enjoy the achievements alone. Therefore, Heaven was satisfied, he accomplished his work, and the gods and spirits blessed him.

古文：其《诗》曰： 念我皇祖，陟降廷止。 
现代文：记载这事的《诗经。
English: The "Song of Songs" records this.

古文：言成王常思祖考之业，而鬼神祐助其治也。
现代文：周颂。闵予小子》说： 思念我们的先王文王、武王的美德，继承发扬光大，鬼神都降临到朝廷。 
English: Zhouxiang. Zhouyu Xiaozi" said: Remembering the virtues of our forefathers, King Wen and King Wu, inheriting and carrying forward the glory, ghosts and gods have descended on the imperial court.

古文：陛下圣德天覆，子爱海内，然阴阳未和，奸邪未禁者，殆论议者未丕扬先帝之盛功，争言制度不可用也，务变更之，所更或不可行，而复复之，是以群下更相是非，吏民无所信。
现代文：造就是说周成王经常想念先辈的功业，感动天地鬼神来保佑他，帮助他治理国家。陛下圣德覆盖天地，仁爱遍布海内，但是阴阳之气未和，奸邪没有禁止，其原因在于上疏议论政事的人，没有弘扬先帝的丰功伟绩，都争相述说先帝的制度不可以再用了，拼命地加以改变，而改变后的有些制度却又不能够推行，于是又回复过来，造就使得百官是非不清，官吏和百姓没有可以相信的准则。
English: His majesty's holiness covers heaven and earth, benevolence is all over the sea, but the yin and yang are not in harmony, and there is no ban on treachery. The reason for this is that those who discuss political affairs carelessly do not promote the great achievements of the former emperor. They all argue that the system of the former emperor can no longer be used, and they try their best to change it. However, some systems cannot be implemented after the change, so they come back again. This makes the officials unclear, and the officials and the people have no standards to believe in.

古文：臣窃恨国家释乐成之业，而虚为此纷纷也。
现代文：我私下裹很痛恨国家废除百姓已经乐于接受的礼乐和功业，而徒劳地进行各种变更。
English: I secretly hate the country for abolishing the rites and deeds that the people have been willing to accept, and for making all kinds of changes in vain.

古文：愿陛下详览统业之事，留神于遵制扬功，以定群下之心。
现代文：希望陛下详察国家基业，注重遵循先帝的制度，弘扬先王的功业，以此来稳定百官臣僚的心思。《诗经。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will pay close attention to the foundation of the country, pay attention to following the system of the former emperor, and carry forward the work of the former king, so as to stabilize the minds of hundreds of officials and ministers.

古文：《大雅》曰： 无念尔祖，聿修厥德。 
现代文：大雅。文王》说： 常思念你的先祖，继承发扬他的美德。 
English: King Wen said, "Always think of your ancestors, inherit and carry forward their virtues."

古文：孔子著之《孝经》首章，盖至德之本也。
现代文：孔子把它写在《孝经》的第一章，其原因就在于这是圣德的根本所在。
English: The reason why Confucius wrote it in the first chapter of the "Book of Filial Piety" is that it is the foundation of virtue.

古文：传曰： 审好恶，理情性，而王道毕矣。 
现代文：经传上说： 察视善恶，调理情性，而王道也就完成了。 
English: According to legend, the king's way was accomplished by observing good and evil, and regulating the emotions.

古文：能尽其性，然后能尽人物之性；能尽人物之性，可以赞天地之化。
现代文：能够调理好自己的心性，然后才能调理好百姓万物的情性；能够调理好百姓万物的情性，也就可以明晓天地变化。
English: If you can regulate your own mind, then you can regulate the sentiments of the people and all things; if you can regulate the sentiments of the people and all things, then you can know the changes in the world.

古文：治性之道，必审已之所有余，而强其所不足。
现代文：治理心性的方法，一定要分辨自己拥有的特长，然后努力弥补自己的不足。
English: The way to govern the mind is to be sure to distinguish your own strengths, and then try to make up for your shortcomings.

古文：盖聪明疏通者戒于大察，寡闻少见者戒于雍蔽，勇猛刚强者戒于大暴，仁爱温良者戒于无断，湛静安舒者戒于后时，广心浩大者戒于遗忘。
现代文：一般说来，聪明的人，应注重大的方面的观察；孤陋寡闻的人应避免闭塞不通，勇猛刚强的人应杜绝过于暴烈；仁慈厚爱、温和善良的人应警惕没有决断；沉着、安静、行动舒缓的人应防止错过时机；心思广大的人应戒备遣忘事情。
English: Generally speaking, intelligent people should pay attention to large-scale observation; those who are deaf and dumb should avoid obstruction; those who are brave and strong should avoid being too violent; those who are kind, loving, gentle and kind should be wary of indecision; those who are calm, quiet and slow-moving should prevent missing the opportunity; those who are broad-minded should beware of forgetting things.

古文：必审己之所当戒，而齐之以义，然后中和之化应，而巧伪之徒不敢比周而望进。
现代文：一定要仔细分辨自己应当警戒小心的地方，并在道德义理上不断约束，这样才能实现性情和乐的教化，使得巧佞虚伪之徒不敢相互攀比，企望进升。
English: We must carefully distinguish the areas where we should be vigilant and careful, and constantly restrain ourselves in terms of moral principles, so that we can achieve the enlightenment of temperament and music, so that the clever hypocrites do not dare to compare themselves with each other and hope to advance.

古文：唯陛下戒所以崇圣德。
现代文：望陛下明察自己应该有所戒备，以便弘扬圣德。
English: His Holiness observed that he should be on his guard in order to promote holiness.

古文：臣又闻室家之道修，则天下之理得，故《诗》始《国风》，《礼》本《冠》、《婚》。
现代文：我还听说，如果明了治家之道，也就懂得了治国的道理，因此《诗经》以《国风·关雎》篇为开端，《礼记》以《冠义》、《婚义》为根本。
English: I have also heard that if you understand how to run a household, you will also understand how to run a country. Therefore, the "Book of Songs" begins with the "National Style and Customs" chapter, and the "Book of Rites" is based on "Crown Meaning" and "Marriage Meaning."

古文：始乎《国风》，原情性而明人伦也；本乎《冠》、《婚》，正基兆而防未然也。
现代文：以《国风。关雎》为开端的原因，在于推究人的情性从而明人伦之道；以《冠义》、《婚义》为根本的原因，在于奠定基础而防患于未然。
English: The reason for starting with "Kokufu. Guanzhang" is to investigate human emotions and thus clarify the path of human ethics; the fundamental reason for using "Guan Yi" and "Wedding Yi" is to lay the foundation and prevent problems in advance.

古文：福之兴莫不本乎室家。道之衰莫不始乎阃内。
现代文：福的获得无不以家室为根基，而治国之道的衰微也无不是从家室之道开始的。
English: The acquisition of blessings is all based on the family, and the decline of the way of governing the country also begins from the family way.

古文：故圣王必慎妃后之际，别適长之位。
现代文：因此圣王一定小心谨慎地注意皇后和妃子之间的界限，确定嫡长子的地位。
English: Therefore, the holy king must carefully and cautiously pay attention to the boundary between the queen and the concubine, and determine the status of the eldest son.

古文：礼之于内也。卑不逾尊，新不先故，所以统人情而理阴气也。
现代文：家内实行礼节，在于地位卑贱的不超越地位尊贵的，晚辈不先于前辈人，逭也就是统揽人的情性、治理家室的道理。
English: The implementation of etiquette in the family is that the status of the humble does not exceed the status of the honorable, the younger generation does not precede the predecessors,  that is, the principle of controlling people's emotions and governing the family.

古文：其尊適而卑庶也，適子冠乎阼，礼之用醴，众子不得与列，所以贵正体而明嫌疑也。
现代文：尊重嫡系，卑贱庶系，嫡长子在宫廷的主台阶上加冠，举行成人礼，在仪式上饮用美酒，其他的旁支儿子不得与他并排站列，原因就在于推重正体，避免嫌疑。
English: Respect the legitimate line, the lowly illegitimate line, the legitimate eldest son crowned on the main steps of the palace, held a coming-of-age ceremony, drank fine wine at the ceremony, and other collateral sons were not allowed to stand side by side with him. The reason was to emphasize the true identity and avoid suspicion.

古文：非虚加其礼文而已，乃中心与之殊异，故礼探其情而见之外也。
现代文：不是无谓地增加礼仪的式相，而是内心裹认为二者有很大的差别，因此礼仪是用来表明内心的感情，使之表现在行动上。
English: It is not a gratuitous addition to the forms of etiquette, but an inner recognition that there is a great difference between the two, so that etiquette is used to express inner feelings and make them manifest in action.

古文：圣人动静游燕，所亲物得其序；得其序，则海内自修，百姓从化。
现代文：圣人不论是动静游玩宴乐，他接触的事物，无论大小贵贱，都有各自的次序；事物能各自得到自己应处的地位，天下自然而然地得到治理，百姓也就听从教化。
English: Whether it is a saint who is moving around and enjoying a banquet, the things he touches, no matter how big or small, have their own order; things can each get their own position, the world is naturally governed, and the people also listen to edification.

古文：如当亲者疏，当尊者卑，则佞巧之奸因时而动，以乱国家。
现代文：应当亲近的人反而被疏远，应当尊敬的人反而被轻视，奸佞乖巧之徒就会趁机而动，来扰乱国家。
English: People who should be close are instead alienated, people who should be respected are instead despised, and crooks and clever people will take advantage of the opportunity to move and disrupt the country.

古文：故圣人慎防其端，禁于未然，不以私恩害公义。
现代文：因此圣人谨慎地防止这种事情发生，把它们禁止在没有发生之前，不因为个人私恩而损害国家的大义。
English: Therefore, sages are careful to prevent such things from happening, to forbid them before they happen, and not to harm the great cause of the country because of personal favors.

古文：陛下圣德纯备，莫不修正，则天下无为而治。
现代文：如果陛下具备纯洁的圣德，没有什么事物得不到端正，那么国家就可以达到无为而治。
English: If His Majesty has a pure and holy character, and nothing is out of order, then the country can achieve a laissez-faire society.

古文：《诗》云： 于以四方，克定厥家。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 要治理国家，应当首先治理他的家室。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: To govern a country, one should first govern his own family.

古文：传曰： 正家而天下定矣。 
现代文：经传上说： 治理好了家室，然后国家就可以稳定。 
English: According to legend, once a family is well-governed, the country can be stable.

古文：衡为少傅数年，数上疏陈便宜，及朝廷有政议，傅经以对，言多法义。
现代文：匡衡在任太子少傅的几年中，多次上疏陈述皇上应该做的事情，遇到朝廷有政事需要议论，匡衡总是依据经义来回答，言谈多符合法则义理。
English: During the few years that Kuangheng served as the prince's apprentice, he repeatedly stated what the emperor should do. When the imperial court had political affairs that needed to be discussed, Kuangheng always answered according to the teachings of the sutras, and his speech was more in line with the laws and principles.

古文：上以为任公卿，由是为光禄勋、御史大夫。
现代文：皇上认为可以担任公卿的职责了，因此任命匡衡为光禄勋、御史大夫。
English: The emperor thought that he could take on the duties of a court noble, so he appointed Kuangheng as a member of the Order of the Silver Star and Imperial Historian.

古文：建昭三年，代韦玄成为丞相，封乐安侯，食邑六百户。
现代文：建昭三年，接替韦玄成担任丞相，受封乐安侯，享有食邑六百户。
English: In the third year of Jian Zhao, he succeeded Wei Xuancheng as chancellor, was awarded the title of Le An Hou, and enjoyed the food of 600 households.

古文：元帝崩，成帝即位，衡上疏戒妃匹，劝经学威仪之则，曰：
现代文：元帝去世后，成帝即位，匡衡上疏告诫皇上慎重处理配偶的选择，讲述经学、礼节的法则，说：
English: After the death of Emperor Yuan, Emperor Cheng Rong ascended to the throne, Kuang Heng Shang Su admonished the emperor to carefully handle the choice of spouse, telling the rules of scripture and etiquette, saying:

古文：陛下秉至考，哀伤思慕不绝于心，未有游虞弋射之宴，诚隆于慎终追远，无穷已也。
现代文：陛下秉性孝敬，对元帝哀悼思慕不已，没有进行游乐、射猎的宴庆，这诚然是谨守孝道，时时刻刻不忘治国的根本。
English: His Majesty, with his filial piety, mourned and yearned for the former emperor, and did not hold a banquet of amusement and shooting. This is indeed the essence of observing filial piety and not forgetting the fundamentals of governing the country at all times.

古文：窃愿陛下虽圣性得之，犹复加圣心焉。
现代文：卑臣希望陛下虽然天性已经至孝，还要进一步地加意努力。《诗经。周颂。
English: The British subjects hope that although His Majesty's nature is already filial, he will further increase his efforts.

古文：《诗》云 茕茕在疚 ，言成王丧毕思慕，意气未能平也，盖所以就文、武之业，崇大化之本也。
现代文：闵予小子》说 多么忧愁啊，仿佛在病中一般 ，说的是成王在丧事完毕之后，仍思念哀悼先王，胸中意气久久不能平息，这也正是周成王能够成就周文王、周武王的功业，弘扬圣人教化的根本原因。
English: Zhou Yu Xiao Zi said, "How sad you are, as if you are in the middle of an illness," referring to the fact that after the funeral, Cheng Wang still missed and mourned the former king, and the spirit in his chest could not be calmed for a long time. This is the fundamental reason why Zhou Cheng Wang was able to accomplish the work of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu and promote the enlightenment of saints.

古文：臣又闻之师曰： 妃匹之际，生民之始，万福之原。 
现代文：臣又听老师说： 选择配偶的事情，是人生开端，是一切幸福的根本。 
English: The minister also heard the teacher say: The choice of a spouse is the beginning of life and the foundation of all happiness.

古文：婚姻之礼正，然后品物遂而天命全。
现代文：婚姻的大礼确定之后，才可以成就万物，并保全天命。
English: Only after the great gift of marriage has been established can all things be accomplished and God's will be preserved.

古文：孔子论《诗》以《关睢》为始，言太上者民之父母，后夫人之行不侔乎天地，则无以奉神灵之统而理万物之宜。
现代文：孔子论述《诗经》把《关睢》篇作为开端，说高居于尊位的皇帝，是百姓的父母，其皇后的品行不能与天地相匹配，就无法敬奉神灵的管治，无法胜任调理万物的事宜。《诗经。
English: Confucius discussed the "Book of Songs" and took the "Passages" as the beginning, saying that the emperor, who is high in dignity, is the parent of the people. If the behavior of his empress cannot match that of heaven and earth, she cannot respect the governance of the gods and is not competent to regulate the affairs of all things. "Book of Songs.

古文：故《诗》曰： 窈窕淑女，君子好仇。 
现代文：周南。关睢》篇说： 娴静、品行端庄的淑女，才是君子追求的好配偶。 
English: Zhou Nan. Guan Yu's article said: A lady who is quiet and dignified is a good spouse for a gentleman to pursue.

古文：言能致其贞淑，不贰其操，情欲之感无介乎容仪，宴私之意不形乎动静，夫然后可以配至尊而为宗庙主。
现代文：讲的就是衹有能够保持贞洁、端庄的品行，没有三心二意的行为，不把情欲系在心上并在仪表中显露出来，也不把宴乐私情在举止言谈中表现出来，衹有这样，才配得上皇上，才能主持祭祀宗庙。
English: The point is that only those who can maintain a chaste and dignified demeanor, who do not behave in a half-hearted manner, who do not attach their sexual desires to their hearts and reveal them in their appearance, and who do not show their love of feasting and their private feelings in their mannerisms and speech, only those are worthy of the emperor and can preside over the sacrificial rituals of the ancestral temple.

古文：此纲纪之首，王教之端也。
现代文：这是社会秩序和国家法纪的首要之点，也是圣王教化的开端。
English: This is the most important point of the social order and the state's legal discipline, and it is also the beginning of the enlightenment of the holy king.

古文：自上世已来，三代兴废，未有不由此者也。
现代文：从前代以来，三代的兴废，没有不是从这点开始的。
English: Since the previous generation, the rise and fall of the three generations did not start from this point.

古文：愿陛下详览得失盛衰之效以定大基，采有德，戒声色，近严敬，远技能。
现代文：希望陛下详察治理国家的得失兴衰的经验教训，来奠定治国的基础，选择有贤德的配偶，警诫声色之好，亲近端庄恭敬之妃，疏远虽有技能而没有德行的小人。
English: I hope that His Majesty will carefully examine the lessons learned from the ups and downs of governing the country to lay the foundation for governing the country, choose a virtuous spouse, a good warning voice, approach a dignified and respectful princess, and alienate a villain who has skills but no virtue.

古文：窃见圣德纯茂，专精《诗》、《书》，好乐无厌。
现代文：臣看见皇上圣德纯正广大，精通《诗致、《书经》，喜好礼乐而不倦。
English: The vassal saw that the emperor's virtue was pure and vast, that he was well versed in "Poetry" and "Scripture," and that he liked ritual music and never tired of it.

古文：臣衡材驽，无以辅相善义，宣扬德音。
现代文：臣才能不敏，没有用来辅助治国大义，宣扬圣上德音。
English: They are not sensitive to their vassal's talents, and they are not used to assist in the administration of the country, and to propagate the sacred virtue.

古文：臣闻《六经》者，圣人所以统天地之心，著善恶之归，明吉凶之分，通人道之正，使不悖于其本性者也。
现代文：我听说《六经》，是圣人用来统揽天地之心，分别善恶的标准，明晓吉凶的区分，通向人道的正路，使人不违背自己的本性的著作。
English: I heard that the "Six Classics" is a work used by sages to control the heart of heaven and earth, to distinguish between good and evil, to know the difference between good and evil, to lead to the right path of humanity, and to make people not violate their own nature.

古文：故审《六艺》之指，则天人之理可得而和，草木昆虫可得而育，此永永不易之道也。
现代文：如果能考察《六艺》的要旨，人与天之间的关系和规律就可以得到并达到和谐，花草树木昆虫鸟兽就能够得到繁殖。这是永远不变的道理。
English: If we can examine the essence of the "Six Arts," the relationship and laws between man and nature can be harmonized and achieved, and flowers, trees, insects, birds and beasts can be propagated. This is a principle that will never change.

古文：及《论语》、《孝经》，圣人言行之要，宜究其意。
现代文：至于《论语》、《孝经》二书，是记载圣人言谈举止的纲要之作，应该深刻领会它们的意义。
English: As for the two books of "Analects" and "The Book of Filial Piety," they are compendiums of the saint's speech and behavior, and their significance should be deeply understood.

古文：臣又闻圣王之自为动静周旋，奉天承亲，临朝享臣，物有节文，以章人伦。
现代文：臣又听说圣王自己的言行举止，都是敬奉天命秉承先祖，君临朝廷，任用臣僚，事事都合礼节制度，以宣明人伦之道。
English: The vassal also heard that the words and actions of the holy king himself were all about honoring the heavenly mandate, upholding the ancestors, reigning in the imperial court, appointing ministers, and establishing a system of etiquette for everything, in order to proclaim the way of human ethics.

古文：盖钦翼祗栗，事天之容也；温恭敬逊，承亲之礼也；正躬严恪，临众之仪也；嘉惠和说，飨下之颜也。
现代文：因为恭敬谨慎，敬畏颤栗，是事奉天命的礼仪；温和恭敬谦逊，是敬养双亲的礼节；端庄子易，严谨恭敬，是统治百姓的威仪；和颜悦色，慈善仁惠，是对待臣下的礼仪。
English: For reverence and caution, fear and trembling, are the etiquette of serving the Mandate of Heaven; gentleness, respect and modesty, are the etiquette of honoring one's parents; dignity, strictness and respect, are the dignity of ruling the people; friendliness, charity and benevolence, are the etiquette of treating subjects.

古文：举错动作，物遵其仪，故形为仁义，动为法则。
现代文：如果言行举止，事事都遵循礼仪，那么圣王的形象就成为仁义的象征，其行动就成为众人效法的榜样。
English: If the words and actions, everything follows the etiquette, then the image of the holy king becomes a symbol of benevolence and righteousness, and his actions become an example for everyone to follow.

古文：孔子曰： 德义可尊，容止可观，进退可度，以临其民，是以其民畏而爱之，则而象之。 
现代文：孔子说： 品德仁义能够受人尊敬，容貌举止可供效法，进退处世符合法度，这样来治理百姓，那么百姓就会敬畏爱戴他，就会效法他。 《诗经。
English: Confucius said: "If a man can be respected for his moral virtues, benevolence and righteousness, if his appearance and manners can be imitated, and if his conduct in life conforms to the law, and if he governs the people in this way, then the people will revere and love him, and will imitate him."

古文：《大雅》云： 敬慎威仪，惟民之则。 
现代文：大雅》说： 恭敬严谨的威仪，是百姓效法的榜样。 
English: Daya "said: Respecting the rigorous dignity is an example for the people to follow.

古文：诸侯正月朝觐天子，天子惟道德，昭穆穆以视之，又观以礼乐，飨醴乃归。故万国莫不获赐祉福，蒙化而成俗。
现代文：诸侯在正月都来朝廷拜见皇上，皇上依据道德礼仪，以严明肃穆的礼仪接见他们，并表演礼乐，以醴酒宴乐，之后才让他们回去，因此各诸侯国都得到皇上所赐的福祉，都接受圣上的教化，而改进风俗。
English: The princes all came to the imperial court in the first month to pay homage to the emperor. The emperor received them according to moral etiquette, with strict and solemn etiquette, and performed liturgical music, with wine and banquet, and then let them go back. Therefore, all the principalities received the welfare given by the emperor, and all accepted the enlightenment of the saint, and improved their customs.

古文：今正月初幸路寝，临朝贺，置酒以飨万方，传曰 君子慎始 ，愿陛下留神动静之节，使群下得望盛德休光，以立基桢，天下幸甚！
现代文：今年正月初皇上将在正室接受百官朝贺，摆设酒宴款待八方来宾。《易传》说 君子谨慎开始 ，希望陛下注意举止的礼节，让百官百姓能够仰望到您崇高美德的光彩，以建立治国的根基，这样，天下将是非常幸运！
English: At the beginning of the first month of this year, the Empress Dowager received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials at her official residence, and hosted a banquet to entertain guests from all over the world. "Easy to tell" said that the gentleman began cautiously, and hoped that His Majesty would pay attention to the etiquette of manners, so that the people of hundreds of officials could look up to the glory of your noble virtue to establish the foundation of state governance. In this way, the world will be very lucky!

古文：上敬纳其言。
现代文：皇上敬纳他的建言。
English: The Emperor graciously accepted his suggestion.

古文：顷之，衡复奏正南北郊，罢诸淫祀，语在《郊祀志》。
现代文：不久，匡衡又上奏整修南北郊庙，取消各种铺张奢侈的祭祀，他的奏语记录在《郊祀志》裹。
English: Soon after, Kuangheng also issued a proclamation to renovate the temples in the northern and southern suburbs and to abolish all kinds of extravagant sacrificial rites. His proclamation was recorded in the "History of Suburban Rituals."

古文：初，元帝时，中书令石显用事，自前相韦玄成及衡皆畏显，不敢失其意。
现代文：当初，元帝在位时，中书令石显主持朝廷事务，从前任丞相韦玄成到匡衡都害怕石显，不敢违背他的意思。
English: At first, when Emperor Yuan was on the throne, the Chinese emperor ordered Shi Xian to preside over the affairs of the imperial court. From the former prime minister Wei Xuancheng to Kuang Heng, they were afraid of Shi Xian and dared not go against his will.

古文：至成帝初即位，衡乃与御史大夫甄谭共奏显，追条其旧恶，并及党与。
现代文：到成帝初即位，匡衡才与御史大夫甄谭一起上奏弹劾石显，一一追究他的旧恶，并追及他的党羽。
English: It was not until Emperor Chengdu's early accession to the throne that Kuang Heng and the imperial historian Yan Tan jointly petitioned for the impeachment of Shi Xian, investigated his old evils one by one, and tracked down his party members.

古文：于是司隶校尉王尊劾奏： 衡、谭居大臣位，知显等专权势，作威福，为海内患害，不以时白奏行罚，而阿谀曲从，附下罔上，无大臣辅政之义。
现代文：这时司隶校尉王尊上奏弹劾说： 匡衡、甄谭担任大臣的职务，知道石显等人独断专权，作威作福，成了国家的大害，但匡衡、甄谭不及时地上奏弹劾，惩罚他们，反而阿谀奉承，委曲跟从，附和下面，欺瞒皇上，没有尽到大臣辅助朝政的职责。
English: At this time, Wang Zun, the sub-lieutenant of the Sili, said: Kuang Heng and Zhen Tan assumed the post of minister, knowing that Shi Xian and others had become a great harm to the country because of their arbitrary power and arrogance. However, Kuang Heng and Zhen Tan did not timely impeach and punish them, but instead, they flattered, followed orders and agreed with the emperor, and deceived the emperor. They did not fulfill their duties as ministers to assist the imperial government.

古文：既奏显等，不自陈不忠之罪，而反扬著先帝任用倾覆之徒，罪至不道。 
现代文：上奏弹劾石显等人后，又不陈述自己对皇上不忠之罪，反倒张扬先帝任用颠覆国家社稷的坏人的过错，犯下 不道，大罪。 
English: After playing up the impeachment of Shi Xian and others, he did not state his crime of disloyalty to the emperor, but on the contrary, he publicized the former emperor's mistake of appointing a villain to subvert the state and society, committing an immoral and serious crime.

古文：有诏勿劾。
现代文：皇上下诏说不要弹劾匡衡。
English: The emperor ordered that he not be prosecuted.

古文：衡惭惧，上疏谢罪。因称病乞骸骨，上丞相乐安侯印绶。
现代文：但匡衡仍感到惭愧和恐惧，上疏认罪，并称病请求告老还乡，缴上丞相乐安侯的大印。
English: However, Kuangheng still felt ashamed and afraid. Shangsuo pleaded guilty, and said that he was ill and asked to return to his hometown, and submitted the seal of the prime minister Le Anhou.

古文：上报曰： 君以道德修明，位在三公，先帝委政，遂及朕躬。
现代文：皇上回答说： 你的道德修养很高，担任三公的要职，先帝把政事委托于你，现在又帮我辅助政事。
English: The emperor replied, "Your moral cultivation is very high. You hold the important position of the three princes. The former emperor entrusted the government to you, and now you are helping me with the government.

古文：君遵修法度，勤劳公家，朕嘉与君同心合意，庶几有成。
现代文：你遵循并修订法律制度，为国家公务而勤勤恳恳，我很高兴能与你同心同德共同治理国家。
English: You follow and amend the legal system, and work diligently for national affairs. I am glad to be able to govern the country together with you.

古文：今司隶校尉尊妄诋欺，加非于君，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：现在司隶校尉王尊狂妄地诋毁你，说你的不是，我很同情你。
English: Right now, Sergeant-Major Wang Zun is insolently slandering you, saying that you are not, and I feel very sorry for you.

古文：方下有司问状，君何疑而上书归侯乞骸骨，是章朕之未烛也。
现代文：将把王尊提交有司审问，你为什么还疑心，上书请求告老退职呢？这是张扬我不明察。
English: Wang Zun will be brought before a magistrate for questioning. Why are you still suspicious, and why did you submit a letter requesting that he be dismissed? I don't see this as propaganda.

古文：传不云乎？ 礼义不愆，何恤人之言！ 
现代文：《易传》不是说吗： 衹要礼节道义没有过错，为什么要担忧别人的议论呢！ 
English: Doesn't "I Chuan" say: If there is no fault in etiquette and morality, why worry about other people's discussions!

古文：君其察焉。
现代文：你应该明白这一点。
English: You should understand that.

古文：专精神，近医药，强食自爱。 
现代文：集中精力，用医服药，努力进餐，爱惜自己的身体。 
English: Concentrate your energy, take medicine with a doctor, make an effort to eat, and cherish your body.

古文：因赐上尊酒、养牛。
现代文：并赏赐上等酒、饲养食肉牛。
English: He was also rewarded with fine wine and reared beef cattle.

古文：衡起视事。
现代文：匡衡便又重新负责朝政事务。
English: Kuang Heng was then put back in charge of the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：上以新即位，褒优大臣，然群下多是王尊者。
现代文：皇上因为刚刚即位，对大臣多加以褒奖，但是朝廷臣僚多是王尊一类的人。
English: The emperor, because he had just ascended the throne, gave more praise to the ministers, but the court ministers were mostly people like Wang Zun.

古文：衡嘿嘿不自安，每有水旱，风雨不时，连乞骸骨让位。
现代文：匡衡很忐忑不安，每次遇到发生水旱灾害，风雨不调时，便连连上书告老退职请求让位。
English: Kuangheng is very uneasy. Every time he encounters a flood or drought disaster, when the wind and rain are out of kilter, he repeatedly sends a letter to the old retirement request to give way.

古文：上辄以诏书慰抚，不许。
现代文：皇上总是用诏书安慰勉励，不准许匡衡告老退位。
English: The emperor always used the imperial rescript to comfort and encourage, and did not allow Kuangheng to abdicate.

古文：久之，衡子昌为越骑校尉，醉杀人，系诏狱。
现代文：后来，匡衡的儿子匡昌任越骑校尉，酒醉后杀人，被抓入狱。
English: Later, Kuang Heng's son, Kuang Chang, who served as a cavalry captain in Vietnam, was arrested and jailed for killing a man while drunk.

古文：越骑官属与昌弟且谋篡昌。
现代文：越骑官员们与匡昌的弟弟准备合谋救匡昌。
English: The Vietcong officials and Kuang Chang's younger brother prepared to work together to rescue Kuang Chang.

古文：事发觉，衡免冠徒跣待罪，天子使谒者诏衡冠履。
现代文：事情被发觉后，匡衡脱下官帽，光着脚去请罪，皇上派使者韶令恢复匡衡的官帽朝鞋。
English: After the matter was discovered, Kuangheng took off his official hat and went barefoot to plead guilty. The emperor sent an envoy to order the restoration of Kuangheng's official hat and shoes.

古文：而有司奏衡专地盗土，衡竟坐免。
现代文：但是有司上奏弹劾匡衡垄断偷盗土地，匡衡受牵连被免官。
English: However, a superior court judge impeached Kuang Heng for monopolizing and stealing land, and Kuang Heng was implicated and removed from office.

古文：初，衡封僮之乐安乡，乡本田堤封三千一百顷，南以闽佰为界。
现代文：当初，匡衡的封地在临淮郡僮县乐安乡，全乡总共有田地三千一百顷，南边以闽佰为界。
English: At the beginning, Kuangheng's fief was in Le'an Township, Min County, Linhuai County, with a total of 3,100 hectares of farmland in the township, and the southern border was Jiu.

古文：初元元年，郡图误以闽佰为平陵佰。
现代文：初元元年时，临淮郡的郡图把闽佰误作了平陵佰。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the first century, the county map of Linhuai County made the mistake of making Pingling County.

古文：积十余岁，衡封临淮郡，遂封真平陵佰以为界，多四百顷。
现代文：长达十多年，匡衡封地临淮郡，实际上便以原来的平陵佰作为封地的边界，这比以真正的闽佰为封界多出了四百顷。
English: For more than ten years, the Kuangheng fiefdom bordered Huai County. In fact, the original Pingling Fen was used as the boundary of the fief, which was four hundred hectares more than the real Fen.

古文：至建始元年，郡乃定国界，上计簿，更定图，言丞相府。
现代文：到建始元年，郡地又划定国界，重新统计田亩并另造簿册，重新绘制地图，还把这事报告相府。
English: In the first year of the founding, the county and county again delineated the national border, re-counted the fields and mu and made another book, redrew the map, and also reported the matter to the government.

古文：衡谓所亲吏赵殷曰： 主簿陆赐故居奏曹，习事，晓知国界，署集曹掾。 
现代文：匡衡对亲信官员赵殷说： 主簿陆赐过去担任奏曹，通晓划分封地边界的事情，现在担任集曹掾。 
English: Kuang Heng said to his trusted official Zhao Yin: The chief bookkeeper Lu Zi used to be Song Cao and was familiar with the division of fief boundaries. Now he is Song Cao.

古文：明年治计时，衡问殷国界事： 曹欲奈何？ 
现代文：第二年进行土地统计时，匡衡问趟殷有关封地边界的事情： 负责此事的办事员想怎么办？ 
English: In the second year, when conducting land statistics, Kuangheng asked Wai Yin about the fief boundary: What did the clerk in charge of this matter want to do?

古文：殷曰： 赐以为举计，令郡实之。
现代文：赵殷回答说： 陆赐认为主动如实上报统计的田亩账簿，要当地的官吏将封地按实际情形改为以平陵佰为边界。
English: Zhao Yin replied: Lu Zi believed that the land and mu account book, which took the initiative to report the statistics truthfully, required local officials to change the fief to Pingling County as the boundary according to the actual situation.

古文：恐郡不肯从实，可令家丞上书。 
现代文：恐怕当地不肯这样改，那就可以让家丞上书皇上。 
English: I am afraid that if the local authorities do not want to make such a change, then it will be possible for the family to appeal to the emperor.

古文：衡曰： 顾当得不耳，何至上书？ 
现代文：匡衡说： 主要考虑的是应不应当得到，何必要上书给皇上呢？ 
English: Kuangheng said: The main consideration is whether it should be obtained, why is it necessary to submit a letter to the emperor?

古文：亦不告曹使举也，听曹为之。
现代文：但匡衡也没有吩咐负责此事的官吏，让他去上报田亩的账目，听任办事员去办。
English: However, Kuangheng did not order the official in charge of the matter to report the accounts of the mu of land, but left it to the clerk to do so.

古文：后赐与属明举计曰： 案故图，乐安乡南以平陵佰为界，不从故而以闽佰为界，解何？ 
现代文：后来陆赐舆叫做明的下属官吏上报统计田亩说： 根据原来的版图，乐安乡封地南面以平陵佰为界限，不依据原来的划定，而以闽佰作为界限，是什么意思？ 
English: Later, a subordinate official of Lu Zhi Ying Ming submitted a report on the statistics of fields and mu and said: According to the original territory map, the southern side of the Le'an Township fief is bounded by the Pingling Mountains, not according to the original delimitation, but by the mountains as the boundary, what does it mean?

古文：郡即复以四百顷付乐安国。
现代文：临淮郡马上又把四百顷土地划给了乐安国。
English: Linhuai County immediately allocated another 400 hectares of land to Le'an.

古文：衡遣从史之僮，收取所还田租谷千余石入衡家。
现代文：匡衡派负责的办事员到僮县，收取归还的土地的田租，大约有一千多石谷子。
English: Kuang Heng sent the responsible clerk to Min County to collect the land rent of the returned land, which amounted to more than one thousand koku.

古文：司隶校尉骏、少府忠行廷尉事劾奏 衡监临盗所主守直十金以上。
现代文：司隶校尉骏、少府忠负责代理廷尉的事务，上奏弹劾匡衡说： 匡衡监管临淮郡封地，私自盗取当地财物，罪行在罚十金以上。
English: Shih-Li, Shao-Fu-Zhong are responsible for the affairs of the Acting Lieutenant of the Imperial Court, and reported the impeachment of Kuang-Heng, saying: Kuang-Heng supervised the fief of Linhuai County, stole local property, and the crime was fined more than ten gold coins.

古文：《春秋》之义，诸侯不得专地，所以一统尊法制也。
现代文：《春秋》的义理表明，诸侯不能垄断土地，要一律遵循国家的法律制度。
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" shows that the lords cannot monopolize land, and they must all follow the country's legal system.

古文：衡位三公，辅国政，领计簿，知郡实，正国界，计簿已定而背法制，专地盗土以自益，及赐、明阿承衡意，猥举郡计，乱减县界，附下罔上，擅以地附益大臣，皆不道。 
现代文：匡衡官职高居三公，辅助国家朝政，掌握封地的田亩簿册，知晓郡地划定边界的实际情况，应该正确地划定界限，可是在当地重新统计田亩、重新划定封地边界后，匡衡仍然违背国家的法律制度，盗取、专断土地，来增私利，他的下属官员陆赐、明阿谀奉承匡衡的旨意，歪曲上报封地的统计数目，乱减县界，欺上瞒下，擅自将土地归附给大臣，都是违法的。 
English: Kuangheng was a high-ranking official in the Three Kingdoms, assisted the national imperial government, mastered the fief's land and mu book, and knew the actual situation of the county and land boundary delineation, and should correctly delineate the boundaries. However, after the local land and mu were re-calculated and the boundary of the fief was redrawn, Kuangheng still violated the country's legal system, stole and arbitrarily used land to increase private profits. His subordinate officials Lu Zi and Ming A Zi flattered Kuangheng's will, distorted the number of fiefs reported, arbitrarily reduced county boundaries, deceived and concealed,

古文：于是上可其奏，勿治，丞相免为庶人，终于家。
现代文：于是皇上批准两人的上奏，对匡衡没有治罪，衹是免去丞相职务，贬为平民，匡衡最后死在家里。
English: As a result, the emperor approved the two men's appeal, but did not punish Kuangheng. He was dismissed from his post as chancellor and reduced to a commoner. Kuangheng eventually died at home.

古文：子咸亦明经，历位九卿。
现代文：匡衡的儿子匡咸也通晓经义，曾官居九卿职务。
English: Kuang Han, Kuang Heng's son, was also well versed in the classics and had served in nine government posts.

古文：家世多为博士者。
现代文：其后代出了很多经学博士。
English: His descendants produced many doctors of theology.

古文：张禹字子文，河内轵人也。至禹父徙家莲勺。
现代文：张禹，字子文，河内郡软县人，到他父亲时，迁到莲勺县。
English: Zhang Yu, who goes by the name Ziwen, was born in Niu County, Hanoi County, but moved to Lianchao County with his father.

古文：禹为儿，数随家至市，喜观于卜相者前。
现代文：张禹在儿童时代经常跟随家人到市上去，喜欢观看那些占卜、看相的人。
English: When Zhang Yu was a child, he often followed his family to the market. He liked to watch the fortunetellers and fortune tellers.

古文：久之，颇晓其别蓍布卦意，时从旁言。
现代文：时间长了，就非常懂得识别蓍草、八卦的吉凶含义，而且常常从旁说出他的意思。
English: After a long time, he knows very well how to identify the meaning of the auspicious and inauspicious meanings of scribbles and gossip, and often says his meaning from the side.

古文：卜者爱之，又奇其面貌，谓禹父： 是儿多知，可令学经。 
现代文：占卜的人很喜欢他，认为他长相不凡，于是对张禹的父亲说： 这个小孩非常聪明，可以让他学习经文。 
English: The fortuneteller liked him very much and thought his appearance was extraordinary, so he said to Zhang Yu's father: This child is very clever and can let him study scriptures.

古文：及禹壮，至长安学，从沛郡施雠受《易》，琅邪王阳、胶东庸生问《论语》，既皆明习，有徒众，举为郡文学。
现代文：张禹长大之后，就到京都长安求学，跟沛郡人施雠学习《周易》，又向琅邪人王阳、胶东人庸生求教《论语》，直到他对这些经书都很精通时，他就聚徒传经，后被推荐为郡文学。
English: After Zhang Yu grew up, he went to study in Chang'an, Kyoto. He studied "Zhou Yi" with Shi Luo, a resident of Pei County, and "Analects" with Wang Yang, a villain of Pei County, and Yongsheng, a resident of Jiaodong County. When he was proficient in these scriptures, he gathered followers to teach the scriptures, and was later recommended as the county's literature.

古文：甘露中，诸儒荐禹，有诏太子太傅萧望之问。
现代文：汉宣帝甘露年间，诸儒生推荐张禹，皇上命令太子太傅萧望之负责考察张禹的学识。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, various Confucian scholars recommended Zhang Yu, and the emperor ordered the prince Taifu Xiaowang to be responsible for examining Zhang Yu's knowledge.

古文：禹对《易》及《论语》大义，望之善焉，奏禹经学精习，有师法，可试事。
现代文：张禹回答有关《周易》和《论语》的大义，萧望之非常赞赏，报告皇帝说张禹对经学很精通，又有师法，建议皇上可试用张禹当官。
English: Zhang Yu answered about the great righteousness of "Zhou Yi" and "Analects of Confucius," which was highly appreciated by Xiao Wang. He reported to the emperor that Zhang Yu was very proficient in the study of scripture and had a teaching method. He suggested that the emperor could try Zhang Yu as an official.

古文：奏寝，罢归故宫。
现代文：但这个报告未批下来，张禹仍回去担任原来的官职。
English: However, the report was not approved, and Zhang Yu still returned to his former post.

古文：久之，试为博士。
现代文：很久以后，皇上才试用张禹为博士。
English: It was not until much later that the emperor tried Zhang Yu as a doctor.

古文：初元中，立皇太子，而博士郑宽中以《尚书》授太子，荐言禹善说《论语》。
现代文：元帝初元年，立皇太子，当时博士郑宽中教太子《尚书》，他推荐说张禹擅长《论语》，于是皇上诏令张禹教太子学《论语》。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the crown prince, at that time Dr. Zheng Guang, taught the prince "Shang Shu." He recommended that Zhang Yu was good at "Analects," so the emperor ordered Zhang Yu to teach the prince to study "Analects."

古文：诏令禹授太子《论语》，由是迁光禄大夫。
现代文：因此提升张禹任光禄大夫。
English: As a result, Zhang Yu Ren Guanglu was promoted to doctor.

古文：数岁，出为东平内史。
现代文：几年后，他又出任束平郡内史。
English: A few years later, he served as Sokupyeong County's chief historian.

古文：元帝崩，成帝即位，征禹、宽中，皆以师赐爵关内侯，宽中食邑八百户，禹六百户。
现代文：元帝驾崩，成帝即位，征调张禹和郑宽中到长安，他们都因曾是太子的教师而赐爵关内侯，郑宽中食邑八百户，张禹食邑六百户。
English: Emperor Yuan passed away, Emperor Cheng ascended to the throne, and Zhang Yu and Zheng Guang were transferred to Chang'an. They were both given the title of Guan Nei Hou because they had been the prince's teachers. Zheng Guang had 800 households in Zhoushi County, and Zhang Yu had 600 households in Zhoushi County.

古文：拜为诸吏光禄大夫，秋中二千石，给事中，领尚书事。
现代文：张禹任诸吏光禄大夫，官秩为中二千石，给事中，领尚书事。
English: Zhang Yu was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu by the officials, the official rank was 2,000 koku in the middle, he was in charge of affairs, and he was in charge of records.

古文：是时，帝舅阳平侯王凤为大将军，辅政专权。而上富于春秋，谦让，方乡经学，敬重师傅。
现代文：遣时，汉成帝的舅舅阳平侯王凤任大将军，名为辅政，实为专权，皇帝很年轻，为人谦让，爱好经学，敬重教师。
English: At the time of the imperial edict, Emperor Hancheng's uncle Yang Ping, Marquis Wang Feng, was appointed general. His title was Auxiliary Governor, but he actually had absolute power. The emperor was very young, humble, fond of learning, and respected teachers.

古文：而禹与凤并领尚书，内不相安，数病，上书乞骸骨，欲退避凤。
现代文：当时张禹与王凤一起兼任尚书，内心感到很不安，几次托病上书请求辞职回乡，想回避与王凤共事。
English: At that time, Zhang Yu and Wang Feng were concurrently working as senior clerks, and he felt very uneasy in his heart. He requested to resign and return to his hometown several times, and wanted to avoid working with Wang Feng.

古文：上报曰： 朕以幼年执政，万机惧失其中，君以道德为师，故委国政。
现代文：皇帝答覆说： 我年幼即皇位，很担心失误，你因道德高尚而成为我的教师，所以我把国政委托给你。
English: The emperor replied, "I ascended the throne when I was very young, and I was very worried about making mistakes. You became my teacher because of your high morals, so I entrusted the affairs of state to you.

古文：君何疑而数乞骸骨，忽忘雅素，欲避流言？
现代文：你有什么可疑虑的，以致屡次请求辞职，是忘记了我们的师徒关系，还是回避什么流言蜚语？
English: Do you have any suspicious concerns that you have repeatedly asked to resign, have you forgotten our mentor-student relationship, or are you avoiding any gossip?

古文：朕无闻焉。
现代文：我没有听到任何有关你的传闻。
English: I haven't heard any rumors about you.

古文：君其固心致思，总秉诸事，推以孳孳，无违朕意。 
现代文：你还是安心工作，仍总管政事，拿出孜孜不倦的精神，不要违背我的心意。 
English: You can still work with peace of mind, still be in charge of government affairs, show a tireless spirit, and do not go against my wishes.

古文：加赐黄金百斤、养牛、上尊酒，太官致餐，侍医视疾，使者临问。
现代文：接着又加赏张禹黄金百斤、养食肉牛及上等好酒，令太官为张禹供给饮食，令侍医替他看病，还常派使者去慰问他。
English: Next, he rewarded Zhang Yu with 100 catties of gold, beef and fine wine, ordered the eunuch to provide Zhang Yu with food and drink, ordered the attendant doctor to treat him, and often sent emissaries to comfort him.

古文：禹惶恐，复起视事，河平四年代王商为丞相，封安昌侯。
现代文：张禹深感不安，于是他又开始上朝。汉成帝河平四年，张禹继王商任丞相，封安昌侯。
English: Zhang Yu felt deeply uneasy, so he began to ascend to the throne again. In the fourth year of Emperor Heping of Han Dynasty, Zhang Yu succeeded Wang Shang as chancellor and was given the title of Anchang Marquis.

古文：为相六岁，鸿嘉元年以老病乞骸骨，上加优再三，乃听许。
现代文：张禹担任丞相六年，在成帝鸿嘉元年托言年老多病，请求辞官，皇上对他称赞再三，才特许他辞官。
English: Zhang Yu served as chancellor for six years. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hongjia, he asked to resign on the pretext of being old and sick. The emperor praised him repeatedly before allowing him to resign.

古文：赐安车驷马，黄金百斤，罢就第，以列侯朝朔望，位特进，见礼如丞相，置从事史五人，益封四百户。
现代文：同时还赐给张禹安车驷马，黄金百斤，张禹辞官后回到他的住宅，每当初一、十五时就以列侯的身份参加朝见，皇上还给他加封了特进的官衔，按丞相的礼仪召见张禹，允许他选任从事史五人，又增加四百户的食邑。
English: At the same time, he also gave Zhang Yu'an a carriage, a horse and 100 catties of gold. Zhang Yu returned to his residence after his resignation, and attended the imperial court as a vassal at the first and fifteenth hours of each day. The emperor also gave him the official title of special envoy, summoned Zhang Yu according to the etiquette of the prime minister, allowed him to select five people to engage in history, and increased the number of 400 households.

古文：天子数加赏赐，前后数千万。
现代文：皇上先后赏给张禹数千万的财物。
English: The emperor has awarded Zhang Yu tens of millions in property.

古文：禹为人谨厚，内殖货财，家以田为业。
现代文：张禹为人拘谨厚道，家裹以经商和农耕为业。
English: Zhang Yu is a prudent and kind person. His family is involved in business and farming.

古文：及富贵，多买田至四百顷，皆泾、渭溉灌，极膏腴上贾。
现代文：张禹在官场上飞黄腾达，就在泾水、渭水流域买了四百顷良田，都是灌溉方便的膏腴之地。
English: Zhang Yu, who rose to prominence in the government, bought four hundred hectares of good land in Surabaya and the Surabaya watershed, all of which are convenient for irrigation.

古文：它财物称是。
现代文：其他财物也都相当多。
English: There are also a lot of other belongings.

古文：禹性习知音声，内奢淫，身居大第，后堂理丝竹管弦。
现代文：张禹本人精通和偏爱音乐，生活比较奢侈淫逸，他辞官回家后，经常到后堂拨弄丝、竹、管、弦等乐器。
English: Zhang Yu himself is proficient in and partial to music, and his life is relatively luxurious and lascivious. After he returns home from work, he often goes to the back hall to play with musical instruments such as silk, bamboo, pipes, and strings.

古文：禹成就弟子尤著者，淮阳彭宣至大司空，沛郡戴崇至少府九卿。
现代文：张禹的学生中，比较有成就的是淮阳人彭宣，官至大司空，另一个是沛郡人戴崇，官至少府九卿。
English: Among Zhang Yu's students, the most successful was Peng Xuan from Huaiyang, who rose to the rank of Grand Secretary, and the other was Dai Chong from Pei County, who rose to the rank of at least nine officials.

古文：宣为人恭俭有法度，而崇恺弟多智，二人异行，禹心亲爱崇，敬宣而疏之。
现代文：彭宣待人恭敬卑谦，讲究法度，而戴崇则和乐简易，聪明多才，两人的品行各不相。张禹内心比较喜欢戴崇，对彭宣则敬而远之。
English: Peng Xuan treats people with respect, humility, and pays attention to the rule of law, while Dai Chong is easy-going, clever and versatile, and the two people's behaviors are different. Zhang Yu's heart is more like Dai Chong, and he is far away from Peng Xuan.

古文：崇每候禹，常责师宜置酒设乐与弟子相娱。
现代文：戴崇每次拜访张禹时，常要求教师置酒设宴，与自己共享拨弦弄琴的乐趣。
English: Every time Dai Chong visits Zhang Yu, he often asks the teacher to set up a banquet with wine and share the fun of playing the piano with him.

古文：禹将崇入后堂饮食，妇女相对，优人管弦铿锵极乐，昏夜乃罢。
现代文：因此张禹每次都将戴崇带到后堂共同进餐，让妇女陪酒，令优人唱歌跳舞来助兴，直至深夜才散席。
English: Therefore, Zhang Yu would bring Dai Chong every time to the back hall to have a meal together, let the women accompany the wine, and let the nobles sing and dance to help the entertainment, until late at night.

古文：而宣之来也，禹见之于便坐，讲论经义，日晏赐食，不过一肉卮酒相对。宣未尝得至后堂。
现代文：每当彭宣来拜访，张禹则在便坐接待他，与他谈今论古，用餐也非常简单，衹不过是一豆之肉，一卮行酒，从来不邀请彭宣到后堂。
English: Whenever Peng Xuan came to visit, Zhang Yu would sit and receive him, talk with him about the past and present, and the meal was also very simple. The stew was just a bean of meat, a bowl of wine. He never invited Peng Xuan to the back hall.

古文：及两人皆闻知，各自得也。
现代文：待到彭宣、戴崇得知老师以不同的方式接待自己时，都认为这是适合自己个性的。
English: When Peng Xuan and Dai Chong learned that the teacher received them in different ways, they both thought it was suitable for their personalities.

古文：禹年老，自治冢茔，起祠室，好平陵肥牛亭部处地，又近延陵，奏请求之，上以赐禹，诏令平陵徙亭它所。
现代文：张禹年老时，替自己建冢茔，修祠庙，他喜欢平陵肥牛亭这块靠近延陵的地方，于是向皇上请赐该地，皇上特许张禹在此建冢茔和祠庙，并韶令平陵郡太守将肥牛亭迁到其它地方。
English: When Zhang Yu was old, he built a pavilion for himself and repaired an ancestral temple. He liked Pingling Fei Niu Ting, a place close to Yanling, so he asked the emperor for the land. The emperor specially allowed Zhang Yu to build a pavilion and ancestral temple here, and ordered the governor of Pingling County to move Fei Niu Ting to other places.

古文：曲阳侯根闻而争之： 此地当平陵寝庙衣冠所出游道，禹为师傅，不遵谦让，至求衣冠所游之道，又徙坏旧亭，重非所宜。
现代文：曲阳侯王根听闻此事后，向皇上谏争道： 肥牛亭是皇室在平陵寝庙祭祖的地方，张禹身为老师，不以谦让为重，过多考虑自己的利益，不顾徙坏旧亭而索求建墓之地，很不适宜。
English: After hearing about this, Wang Gen, the Marquis of Quyang, complained to the emperor: Figu Ting is the place where the imperial family held the ancestor worship at Pingling Necropolis. Zhang Yu, as a teacher, did not attach importance to modesty, and considered his own interests too much. It was very inappropriate to ask for a place to build a tomb despite the dilapidation of the old pavilion.

古文：孔子称 赐爱其羊，我爱其礼 ，宜更赐禹它地。 
现代文：孔子曾对子贡说： 你爱其羊，我爱其礼，皇上应赐给张禹另外一块地方。 
English: Confucius once said to Zigong: You love his sheep, I love his courtesies. The emperor should give Zhang Yu another piece of land.

古文：根虽为舅，上敬重之不如禹，根言虽切，犹不见从，卒以肥牛亭地赐禹。
现代文：王根虽然是皇上的舅舅，但皇上对他不如对张禹敬重，尽管王根说得非常恳切，可是皇上并没有听从他的劝阻，最终还是把肥牛亭赐给张禹。
English: Although Wang Gen was the emperor's uncle, the emperor did not respect him as much as Zhang Yu. Although Wang Gen spoke very earnestly, the emperor did not listen to his dissuasion, and eventually gave the Fatty Cow Pavilion to Zhang Yu.

古文：根由是害禹宠，数毁恶之。
现代文：王根因此嫉妒张禹得宠，于是多次上书诋毁张禹。
English: As a result, Wang Gen was jealous of Zhang Yu's favor, so he repeatedly wrote to denigrate Zhang Yu.

古文：天子愈益敬厚禹。
现代文：而皇上却更加敬重、厚待张禹。
English: The emperor, however, was more respectful and generous to Zhang Yu.

古文：禹每病，辄以起居闻，车驾自临问之。
现代文：张禹每次生病，皇上都要过问他的起居，甚至亲自去探望张禹。
English: Every time Zhang Yu fell ill, the emperor had to inquire about his living conditions, and even went to visit Zhang Yu in person.

古文：上亲拜禹床下，禹顿首谢恩，因归诚，言： 老臣有四男一女，爱女其于男，远嫁为张掖太守萧咸妻，不胜父子私情，思与相近。 
现代文：皇上驾到，使张禹感激不尽，叩首谢恩，并藉此机会向皇上禀报道： 我有四儿一女，对女儿比较偏爱，可是她远嫁张掖太守萧咸，我非常想念她，希望她离自己近一些。 
English: When the emperor arrived, Zhang Yu was overwhelmed with gratitude, bowed his head in thanks, and took this opportunity to report to the emperor: I have four sons and one daughter, and I prefer my daughter, but she is married to Zhang Yu's father-in-law Xiao Xian. I miss her very much and hope that she will be closer to me.

古文：上即时徙咸为弘农太守。
现代文：皇上立即下令调萧咸任弘农太守。
English: The emperor immediately ordered Xiao Xian to be transferred to the post of the governor of Hongnong.

古文：又禹小子未有宫，上临候禹，禹数视其小子，上即禹床下拜为黄门郎，给事中。
现代文：另外张禹的小儿子当时还没有官衔，皇上看望他时，他多次看他的小儿子，皇上领会他的意思之后，就在他的床前任命他的小儿子为黄门郎，给事中。
English: In addition, Zhang Yu's youngest son did not have an official title at that time. When the emperor visited him, he looked at his youngest son many times. After the emperor understood his meaning, he appointed his youngest son as Huangmenlang in front of his bed.

古文：禹虽家居，以特进为天子师，国家每有大政，必与定议。
现代文：张禹虽然已经辞官，但仍以特进之官做皇帝的老师，每当国家有重大决策，皇上一定要询问张禹。
English: Although Zhang Yu has resigned from the post, he still serves as the emperor's teacher as a special promotion officer. Whenever the country has a major decision, the emperor must ask Zhang Yu.

古文：永始、元延之间，日蚀、地震尤数，吏民多上书言灾异之应，讥切王氏专政所致。
现代文：成帝永始、元延之间，多次发生日食、地震，官吏和百姓纷纷上书说这是灾异感应，讥讽这是因王氏专权所造成的。
English: Between the reigns of Emperor Chengdu and Emperor Yongzheng, and the Yuan Dynasty, there were many solar eclipses and earthquakes. Government officials and ordinary people wrote to say that this was caused by natural disasters, and ridiculed that it was caused by the absolute power of the Wang clan.

古文：上惧变异数见，意颇然之，而未有以明见，乃车驾至禹弟，辟左右，亲问禹以天变，因用吏民所言王氏事示禹。
现代文：皇上害怕灾异会多次出现，心裹惶恐不安，对大臣和百姓的上书没有明确表态，于是乘车到张禹府第，斥退左右侍卫，然后询问张禹对食、地震的看法，并陈述了吏民对王氏的议论。
English: The emperor was afraid that the calamity would appear many times, his heart was full of fear and anxiety, and he did not make a clear statement to the minister and the people's letter, so he took a car to Zhang Yu's residence, repelled the left and right bodyguards, and then asked Zhang Yu's views on food and earthquakes, and stated the opinions of the officials and the people on Wang.

古文：禹自见年老，子孙弱，又与曲阳侯不平，恐为所怨。
现代文：张禹考虑到自己年事已高，后代势力弱小，自己平素与曲阳侯王根关系平淡，害怕被他所怨恨。
English: Zhang Yu considered that he was old, his descendants were weak, and his relationship with Quyang Hou Wanggen was mediocre. He was afraid of being resented by him.

古文：禹则谓上曰： 春秋二百四十二年间，日蚀三十余，地震五，或为诸侯自杀，或夷狄侵中国，灾变之异深远难见，故圣人罕言命，不语怪神。
现代文：于是对皇上说： 春秋二百四十二年间，共出现三十余次日食，五次地震，其间有时发生诸侯相互残杀，有时是夷狄侵扰中原地区，灾变之异难以预见。因此古代圣人很少谈论天命，也不说怪神。
English: Then he said to the emperor, "In the 242 years of the Spring and Autumn Period, there have been more than 30 solar eclipses and five earthquakes, during which princes sometimes killed each other, and sometimes barbarians invaded the Central Plains. It is difficult to predict the outcome of the disasters. Therefore, the ancient sages rarely talked about the fate of heaven, nor did they mention strange gods.

古文：性与天道，自子赣之属不得闻，何况浅见鄙儒之所言！
现代文：从子贡之辈起就不再探讨性命与天道的关系，何况浅见鄙儒所说的话！
English: From the generation of the Zigong, they no longer discussed the relationship between life and the heavenly way, let alone the words of the shallow-minded Confucius!

古文：陛下宜修政事以善应之，与下同其福喜，此经义意也。
现代文：陛下应修整治国政策以适应时局，与百姓同享福祉，这才是天经地义的。
English: It is only natural that His Majesty should adjust the policy of governing the country to suit the current situation and share the well-being with the people.

古文：新学小生，乱道误人，宜无信用，以经术断之。 
现代文：新学小生误人子弟，不应信任重用他们，应用经术去判断他们所说的话。 
English: New students are not to be trusted, they should not be reused, and their words should be judged by the application of scripture.

古文：上雅信爱禹，曲此不疑王氏。
现代文：因为皇上平时就很信任、宠爱张禹，所以张禹一席之言打消了皇上对王氏的疑虑之心。
English: Because the emperor usually trusts and favors Zhang Yu, Zhang Yu's words dispelled the emperor's doubts about the Wang clan.

古文：后曲阳侯根及诸王子弟闻知禹言，皆喜说，遂亲就禹。
现代文：事后，曲阳侯王根及各诸侯王的子弟风闻张禹的言论，都喜形于色，开始接近张禹。
English: After the event, Quyang Prince Wang Gen and the sons of the princes heard Zhang Yu's speech, and they were overjoyed and began to approach Zhang Yu.

古文：禹见时有变异，若上体不安，常择日洁斋露蓍，正衣冠立筮，得吉卦则献其占，如有不吉，禹为感动有忧色。
现代文：张禹看到当时常发生异常现象，而且皇上又身体欠佳，于是他择吉曰洁身斋戒、露蓍草于星宿下，以接天之气，端正衣冠而立筮占卜，如果得到吉卦，就禀告皇上，如果得到凶卦，他就感到忧虑。
English: Zhang Yu saw that abnormal phenomena often occurred at that time, and that the emperor was not in good health, so he chose good luck, saying that he should fast and cleanse his body, take dewdrops under the stars, and use the spirit of heaven to correctly dress and stand up for divination. If he got good luck, he would report to the emperor, and if he got bad luck, he would be worried.

古文：成帝崩，禹及事哀帝，建平二年薨，谥曰节侯。
现代文：成帝驾崩后，张禹又侍奉哀帝。他在哀帝建平二年去世，谧号节侯。
English: After the death of Emperor Chengdu, Zhang Yu also served Emperor Puyi. He died in the second year of Emperor Puyi's reign, on the 7th day of the 7th month.

古文：禹四子，长子宏嗣侯。官至太常，列于九卿。
现代文：张禹有四个儿子，长子张宏继承父亲的爵位为安昌侯，宫至太常，属九卿之列。
English: Zhang Yu had four sons. The eldest son, Zhang Hong, inherited his father's title of Anchang Marquis, and was a member of the Nine Lords.

古文：三弟皆为校尉、散骑、诸曹。
现代文：其余三个儿子都任校尉散骑各从官。
English: The remaining three sons were all commissioned as lance-corporals.

古文：初，禹为师，以上难数对己问经，为《论语章句》献之。
现代文：当初张禹做成帝的老师时，将皇上在学习经文时遇到的疑难问题记载下来，并加以注释，汇编成《论语章句》献给皇上。
English: At the beginning, when Zhang Yu became the emperor's teacher, he recorded the difficult problems encountered by the emperor when studying scriptures, annotated them, and compiled them into "On Language Chapters" dedicated to the emperor.

古文：始，鲁扶卿及夏侯胜、王阳、萧望之、韦玄成皆说《论语》，篇第或异。
现代文：当时鲁扶卿和夏侯胜、王阳、萧望之、韦玄成都传授《论语》，并著书立说，观点各异。
English: At that time, Lu Fuqing and Xia Hosheng, Wang Yang, Xia Wangzhi, Wei Xuancheng all taught the Analects, and wrote books on it, with different views.

古文：禹先事王阳，后从庸生，采获所安，最后出而尊贵。
现代文：张禹先拜王阳为师，后投庸生门下学习《论语》，博采众家之长，独树一帜，最后脱颖而出，身份更尊贵。
English: Zhang Yu first worshiped Wang Yang as a teacher, and later studied "The Analects" under the tutelage of Tong Yong Sheng. He was unique in that he was able to learn from the masters of all families. In the end, he stood out, and his status was more honorable.

古文：诸儒为之语曰： 欲为《论》，念张文。 
现代文：众儒生因此说： 如果想要融会贯通《论语》，就要学习张禹的文章。 
English: Therefore, all Confucianism students said: If you want to integrate the Analects, you must study Zhang Yu's article.

古文：由是学者多从张氏，余家寝微。
现代文：此后，许多儒生都争相学习张禹的文章，其余各家学说渐衰。
English: Since then, many Confucianism students have been competing to study Zhang Yu's articles, while other schools of thought have gradually declined.

古文：孔光字子夏，孔子十四世之孙也。
现代文：孔光，字子夏，是孔子第十四代孙。
English: Kong Guang, also known as Zi Xia, is the 14th generation grandson of Confucius.

古文：孔子生伯鱼鲤，鲤生子思伋，伋生子上帛，帛生子家求，求生子真箕，箕生子高穿。
现代文：孔子的儿子字伯鱼，名鲤；孔鲤的儿子字子思，名伋；孔伋的儿子字子上，名帛；孔帛的儿子字子家，名求；孔求的儿子字子真，名箕；孔箕的儿子字子高，名穿。
English: The son of Confucius is called "Grandpa Fish" and is well-known; the son of Confucius is called "Grandpa Thought" and is well-known; the son of Confucius is called "Grandpa On Top" and is well-known; the son of Confucius is called "Grandpa Home" and is well-known; the son of Confucius is called "Grandpa True" and is well-known; the son of Confucius is called "Grandpa Tall" and is well-known.

古文：穿生顺，顺为魏相。
现代文：孔穿的儿子名顺，孔顺担任魏国的丞相。
English: The son of Confucius, named Confucius, served as the prime minister of Wei.

古文：顺生鲋，鲋为陈涉博士，死陈下。
现代文：孔顺的儿子名鲋，孔鲋曾担任陈涉的博士，死于陈地。
English: Kong Shun's son, Meng Yao, and Kong Yao, who had served as a doctor of Chen Zang, died in Chen Di.

古文：鲋弟子襄为孝惠博士、长沙太博。
现代文：孔鲋弟子襄为孝惠博士，长沙太傅。
English: The disciple of Confucius is Dr. Xiao Hui, Changsha Taifu.

古文：襄生忠，忠生武及安国，武生延年。
现代文：子襄的儿子名忠，孑忠有二子：孔武和孔安国，孔武生延年。
English: Zixiang's son was named Zhong, and Zizhong had two sons: Kongwu and Kong Anguo. Kongwu was born many years later.

古文：延年生霸，字次儒。
现代文：延年之子名霸，字次儒。
English: Nobunaga, son of Ennen, was a famous warlord, also known as Juju.

古文：霸生光焉。
现代文：孔霸之子就是孔光。
English: Kongba's son is Kong Guang.

古文：安国、延年皆以治《尚书》为武帝博士。
现代文：安国、延年都以研治《尚书》成为武帝时的博士。
English: An Guo, for many years, studied "Shang Shu" and became a doctor when Emperor Wu.

古文：安国至临淮太守。
现代文：安国官至临淮太守。
English: Officials from the Ministry of State Security to the Linhuai Empress Dowager.

古文：霸亦治《尚书》，事太傅夏侯胜，昭帝末年为博士，宣帝时为太中大夫，以选授皇太子经，迁詹事、高密相。
现代文：孔霸也研治《尚书》，跟从太傅夏侯胜，在昭帝末年立为博士，宣帝时担任太中大夫，因为被选为教授皇太子经书，而升为詹事，高密相。
English: Kongba also studied "Shang Shu" and followed the Taifu Xia Hou Sheng. In the last years of Emperor Zhao, he was appointed as a doctor. When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, he served as the Taizhong doctor. Because he was chosen to teach the crown prince scriptures, he was promoted to Zhanji, high secret minister.

古文：是时，诸侯王相在郡守上。
现代文：这个时候，诸侯王的相都位在郡守之上。
English: At this time, the princes of the princes were above the county governors.

古文：元帝即位，征霸，以师赐爵关内侯，食邑八百户，号褒成君，给事中，加赐黄金二百斤，第一区，徙名数于长安。
现代文：元帝即位，征召孔霸为皇帝的老师，赏赐孔霸爵位为关内侯，封食邑八百户，号裹成君，任给事中，另外赏赐黄金二百斤，宅第一所，并将户籍迁移到了长安。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended the throne, summoned Kongba as the emperor's teacher, rewarded Kongba with the title of Guan Nei Hou, sealed eight hundred households in the town, gave him the title of Wai Cheng Jun, appointed him to the middle, additionally rewarded him with two hundred catties of gold, the first house, and moved his household registration to Chang'an.

古文：霸为人谦退，不好权势，常称爵位泰过，何德以堪之！
现代文：孔霸待人谦逊礼让，不喜好权势，经常表示自己的爵位过高，没有什么品德才能可以胜任！
English: Confucius treated people with humility and politeness, disliked power, and often said that his title was too high, and he had no moral ability to be competent!

古文：上欲致霸相位，自御史大夫贡禹卒，及薛广德免，辄欲拜霸。
现代文：皇上想要孔霸担任宰相的职务，自御史大夫贡禹死后，到薛广德罢免，皇上总想拜孔霸为相。
English: The emperor wanted Kongba to assume the post of prime minister. Ever since the death of the imperial historian Gong Yu and his dismissal by Xue Guangde, the emperor always wanted to have Kongba as his prime minister.

古文：霸让位，自陈至三，上深知其至诚，乃弗用。
现代文：孔霸让位，一而再，再而三，皇上知道他诚心实意地谦让，才没有任命他为相。
English: Confucius gave way, again and again, and the emperor knew that he sincerely and humbly gave way, so he did not appoint him as the prime minister.

古文：以是敬之，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：这之后，皇上更加尊敬孔霸，赏赐也更加丰厚。
English: After this, the emperor respected Kongba even more and rewarded him even more generously.

古文：及霸薨，上素服临吊者再，至赐东园秘器、钱、帛，策赠以列侯礼，谥曰烈君。
现代文：等到孔霸逝世后，皇上身着丧服两次亲临哀悼，赐束园的秘器、金钱和丝帛，并按照列侯的礼仪策赠，谧号烈君。
English: After the death of Kongba, the emperor came to mourn him twice in mourning clothes, and gave him the secret tools, money and silk brocade of the Bamboo Garden, and in accordance with the etiquette of a vassal, he gave him the posthumous title of "reverend."

古文：霸四子，长子福嗣关内侯。
现代文：孔霸有四子，长子名福，继承了关内侯的爵位。
English: Kongba had four sons, the eldest of whom, Meito, inherited the title of Kwanai marquis.

古文：次子捷、捷弟喜皆列校尉、诸曹。
现代文：次子孔捷、三子孔喜，都担任校尉等官员。
English: The second son, Kong Jie, and the third son, Kong Xi, both served as officers such as school lieutenants.

古文：光，最少子也，经学尤明，年未二十，举为议郎。
现代文：孔光，是孔霸最小的儿子，对经学尤其精通，年纪不到二十岁，就被推举为议郎。
English: Kong Guang, the youngest son of Kong Bawang, was particularly proficient in the study of scripture. At the age of less than twenty, he was elected as a panellist.

古文：光禄勋匡衡举光方正，为谏大夫。
现代文：光禄勋匡衡推举孔光品行端正，担任谏大夫。
English: The Honorable Kuang Rukun Kuangheng recommended Kong Guangpin to be promoted to the post of doctor.

古文：坐议有不合，左迁虹长，自免归教授。
现代文：因为议论政事有与皇上意思不合之处，贬官为虹县县令，孔光白免，回家去教授经学。
English: Because discussing politics was against the emperor's wishes, he was demoted to the post of county magistrate of Hongxian County, and Kong Guang Bai was pardoned and sent home to teach classics.

古文：成帝初即位，举为博士，数使录冤狱，行风俗，振赡流民，奉使称旨，由是知名。
现代文：成帝初即位，了光被推举为博士，多次让他负责平反冤狱，整治风俗，赈济灾民，孔光每次奉命出使都圆满完成任务，孔光的名声传遍朝野。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Cheng's reign, Liguang was promoted to doctor, and he was repeatedly put in charge of rehabilitating unjust prisons, rectifying customs, and providing relief to victims. Every time Kongguang was ordered to send an envoy, he successfully completed the task. Kongguang's reputation spread throughout the court and the country.

古文：是时，博士选三科，高为尚书，次为刺史，其不通政事，以久次补诸侯太傅。光以高第为尚书，观故事品式，数岁明习汉制及法令。
现代文：这时，博士分三科选官，成绩优良的选为尚书，次一等的担任刺史职务，那些不通朝政事务的，就留待以后补任诸侯太傅，孑光以成绩优秀担任尚书，负责考察前代典章制度和礼节仪式，多年研习精通了汉代的制度和法令。
English: At this time, the doctorate was divided into three disciplines for the selection of officials. Those with outstanding achievements were selected as Shangshu, and the second-class ones served as Shishi. Those who were not familiar with the affairs of the imperial court were left to fill in later as Princes and Grand Dukes. Gongguang served as Shangshu with outstanding achievements, and was responsible for examining the previous generation's award system and etiquette ceremony. After many years of study, he was proficient in the system and laws of the Han Dynasty.

古文：上甚信任之，转为仆射、尚书令。
现代文：皇上很信任他，先后升迁为仆射和尚书令。
English: The emperor trusted him very much, and he was successively promoted to the position of Druze monk and scribe.

古文：有诏光周密谨慎，未尝有过，加诸吏官，以子男放为侍郎，给事黄门。
现代文：皇上有韶书嘉奖孔光办事周密谨慎，从来没有出现过差错，升任诸吏官，并任命他的儿子孔放为侍郎，给事黄门。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to commend Kong Guang for his meticulous and prudent work, never making a mistake, promoted him to various officials, and appointed his son Kong Fang as a chamberlain, giving him the yellow door.

古文：数年，迁诸吏光禄大夫，秩中二千石，给事中，赐黄金百斤，领尚书事。
现代文：几年后，孔光又升为诸吏光禄大夫，俸禄中二千石，给事中，赏赐黄金百斤，兼任尚书。
English: A few years later, Kong Guang was promoted to the position of Zhu Li Guanglu Dafu, with a salary of 2,000 kilos, and was awarded 100 kilos of gold, and also served as Shangshu.

古文：后为光禄勋，复领尚书，诸吏给事中如故，凡典枢机十余年，守法度，修故事。
现代文：以后又升为光禄勋，仍负责尚书的事务，像过去一样担任诸吏给事中。孔光一共执掌朝政机要十多年，维护法度，修定制度。
English: Later, he was promoted to Guanglu Kun, still responsible for the affairs of Shangshu, as in the past, he was in charge of all officials. Kong Guang has been in charge of the government for more than ten years, maintaining the rule of law and amending the system.

古文：上有所问，据经法以心所安而对，不希指苟合；如或不从，不敢强谏争，以是久而安。
现代文：皇上有政事询问，孔光总是根据经典法律，以自己认为对的答案来回答，不希望与皇上的旨意苟合；正如果有的时候皇上不听从，孔光也不敢强硬谏争，因此孔光当官时间很长，而且安全。
English: When the emperor inquired about political affairs, Kong Guang always answered in accordance with the classical law and with the answer that he thought was right. He did not want to comply with the emperor's will. If the emperor did not obey, Kong Guang did not dare to fight hard. Therefore, Kong Guang's time as an official was long and safe.

古文：时有所言，辄削草稿，以为章主之过，以奸忠直，人臣大罪也。
现代文：有时他上书言事，已经写好的奏章总是删削修改，认为上书张扬皇上的过失，以此来求得忠直的美名，是做官的大罪。
English: Sometimes, when he wrote a letter, he would always cut and modify the already written report. He believed that it was a great sin for an official to write a letter to publicize the emperor's faults in order to gain the reputation of being loyal.

古文：有所荐举，唯恐其人之闻知。
现代文：子光推荐别人做官时，也惟恐被人听到。
English: When Ziguang recommended someone to become an official, he was also afraid of being heard.

古文：沐日归休，兄弟妻子燕语，终不及朝省政事。
现代文：轮到放假之曰，回家休息，与兄弟、妻子儿女们说家常话时，始终都不提朝廷官署裹的政事。
English: When it was time to go on vacation, I went home to rest, and when I talked with my brothers, wives, and children, I never mentioned the political affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：或问光： 温室省中树皆何木也？ 
现代文：有人问孔光： 长乐宫温室殿的树，都是一些什么树啊？ 
English: Someone asked Kong Guang: What kind of trees are the trees in the greenhouse of Changle Palace?

古文：光嘿不应，更答以他语，其不泄如是。
现代文：孔光衹嘿嘿地一笑，并不回答，然后用别的话岔开去。孔光不泄露朝廷政事就是如此。
English: Kong Guang smiled coquettishly, did not answer, and then used other words to push him away. This is how Kong Guang does not divulge the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：光，帝师傅子，少以经行自著，进官蚤成。不结党友，养游说，有求于人。
现代文：孔光是皇帝的老师的儿子，少年的时候就以经学和品行而著名，当官成名很早，不结党扶植培养游说之徒，也不求助于别人。
English: Kong Guang is the son of the emperor's teacher. When he was a teenager, he was famous for his study of scripture and moral conduct. He became famous very early as an official. He did not form a party to support and train lobbyists, nor did he turn to others for help.

古文：既性自守，亦其势然也。
现代文：这既是他性格内向严谨的结果，也是他学宦早成的身世决定的。
English: This is not only the result of his introverted and rigorous personality, but also the result of his early education.

古文：徙光禄勋为御史大夫。
现代文：后来孔光从光禄勋升任御史大夫。
English: Later, Kong Guang was promoted from Guang Rukun to Goshi Daifu.

古文：绥和中，上即位二十五年，无继嗣，至亲有同产弟中山孝王及同产弟子定陶王在。
现代文：绥和年间，皇上即位二十五年，没有继承皂位的儿子，最亲的亲属有同母的弟弟中山孝王以及同母弟弟的儿子定陶王。
English: During the Heian period, when the emperor had been on the throne for twenty-five years, he had no son to succeed him. His closest relatives were his younger brother, Prince Nakayama Takao, and his younger brother's son, Prince Dento.

古文：定陶王好学多材，子帝子行。
现代文：定陶王博学多才，像皇帝的儿子似的。
English: King Ding Tao was as erudite and versatile as an emperor's son.

古文：而王祖母傅太后阴为王求汉嗣，私事赵皇后、昭仪及帝舅大司马骠骑将军王根，故皆劝上。
现代文：定陶王的祖母傅太后暗地裹为定陶王谋求继承皇位，私下勾结赵皇后、昭仪以及皇帝的舅舅大司马骠骑将军王根，因此他们都劝皇上定继承人。
English: King Ding Tao's grandmother, Empress Dowager Fu, secretly plotted for King Ding Tao to succeed to the throne, secretly colluding with Empress Zhao, Zhao Yi, and the emperor's uncle, Grand Master Ma Xing, and General Wang Gen, so they all advised the emperor to choose a successor.

古文：上于是召丞相翟方进、御史大夫光、右将军廉褒、后将军朱博，皆引入禁中，议中山、定陶王谁宜为嗣者。
现代文：皇上于是召集丞相翟方进，御史大夫孔光，右将军廉褒，后将军朱，引入密室，商议中山孝王、定陶王哪一个应该定为皇位继承人。
English: The emperor then summoned the chancellor, Shifang Jin, the imperial historian, Kong Guang, the right general, Ren Bo, and the rear general, Zhu, into a secret room to discuss which one of Zhongshan Xiao Wang and Ding Tao Wang should be designated as the heir to the throne.

古文：方进、根以为： 定陶王帝弟之子，《礼》曰： 昆弟之子犹子也 ， 为其后者为之子也 ，定陶王宜为嗣。 
现代文：翟方进、王根认为定陶王是皇帝弟弟的儿子，《礼》说 同胞弟兄的儿子就好比是自己的儿子一样 ， 是他的后辈也就是他的儿子 ，因此定陶王应该定为继承人。
English: Yan Fangjin and Wang Gen believed that Ding Tao Wang was the son of the emperor's younger brother. "Li" said that the son of a compatriot brother was just like his own son, it was his offspring, that is, his son. Therefore, Ding Tao Wang should be designated as the heir.

古文：褒、傅皆如方进、根议。
现代文：廉裹、朱博也都跟方进、王根的意思一样。
English: Lianwu and Zhu Bo also have the same meaning as Fangjin and Wang Gen.

古文：光独以为礼立嗣以亲，中山王先帝之子，帝亲弟也，以《尚书·盘庚》殷之及王为比，中山王宜为嗣。
现代文：惟独孔光认为根据礼制选立继承人应根据血亲关系，中山王是先帝的儿子，皇上的亲弟弟。按照《尚书。盘庚》所记载的，哥哥死后弟弟继承王位为例，中山王应该立为继承人。
English: However, Kong Guang believed that the successor should be chosen according to the ritual system and should be based on blood relationship. King Zhongshan was the son of the former emperor and the younger brother of the emperor. According to the "Shang Shu. Pan Geng", for example, if a younger brother inherits the throne after the death of an older brother, King Zhongshan should be appointed as the successor.

古文：上以《礼》兄弟不相入庙，又皇后、昭仪欲立定陶王，故遂立为太子。
现代文：皇上根据《礼》有兄弟不能都入庙堂的记载，加上皇后、昭仪要立定陶王，因此选立定陶王为皇太子。
English: According to the "Ritual," the emperor had brothers who could not all enter the temple, and the empress and Shouyi wanted to establish Ding Tao Wang, so they chose Ding Tao Wang as the crown prince.

古文：光以议不中意，左迁廷尉。
现代文：孔光因为议论不合皇上的意思，贬官为廷尉。
English: Kong Guang was demoted to the rank of courtier because his comments did not conform to the emperor's wishes.

古文：光久典尚书，练法令，号称详平。
现代文：孔光长期掌管尚书事务，制订法律制度，号称精细平和。
English: Kong Guang has long been in charge of book publishing affairs and has established a legal system, known as fine and peaceful.

古文：时定陵侯淳于长坐大逆诛，长小妻虒始等六人皆以长事未发觉时弃去，或更嫁。
现代文：这时，定陵侯淳于长犯了大逆不道之罪被杀了，淳于长的小妾乃始等六人都在淳于长犯罪的事没有被发觉之前离他而去，有的重新嫁了人。
English: At this time, Dingling Hou Chun Yuchang committed the crime of high treason and was killed. Six of Chun Yuchang's concubines, including Naxi, left him before the crime was discovered, and some remarried.

古文：用长事发，丞相方进，大司空武议，以为： 令，犯法者各以法时律令论之，明有所讫也，长犯大逆时，虒始等见为长妻，已有当坐之罪，与身犯法无异。
现代文：等到淳于长的事情发生之后，丞相方进、大司空何武商议，认为 按照法令，犯法的人都要以犯法时的法律论处，在时间上有明确的界限。淳于长犯大逆不道罪的时候，乃始等是他的妻子，已经犯有株连之罪，跟自己犯罪一样。
English: After what happened to Chun Yuchang, the Minister of Justice Fang Jin and the Grand Secretary Ku He Wu discussed and agreed that according to the law, those who violate the law should be punished according to the law at the time of the violation, with a clear time limit. When Chun Yuchang committed the crime of high treason, it was his wife who had committed the crime of stock company, just like his own crime.

古文：后乃弃去，于法无以解。请论。 
现代文：她们在犯罪之后才离开他，按照法律是没法免罪的。请皇上裁定。 
English: They did not leave him until after the crime, and according to the law, they cannot be exonerated. I ask the emperor to make a ruling.

古文：光议以为： 大逆无道，父母妻子同产无少长皆弃市，欲惩后犯法者也。
现代文：孔光发表意见，认为 犯了大逆不道的罪，罪犯的父母妻子子女，以及同母。亲属，无论年纪大小，都应该处斩，弃尸街头，以此来警戒今后犯法的罪人。
English: Kong Guang expressed his opinion that if the crime of high treason is committed, the criminal's parents, wife and children, as well as the same mother, and relatives, regardless of age, should be executed and their bodies abandoned on the streets, in order to warn future criminals.

古文：夫妇之道，有义则合，无义则离。
现代文：而夫妇之间的法则，是相互之间有情义就结合，没有情义的话就分离。
English: But the law between husband and wife is that if there is a meaning between them, they will be united, and if there is no meaning, they will be separated.

古文：长未自知当坐大逆之法，而弃去虒始等，或更嫁，义已绝，而欲以为长妻论杀之，名不正，不当坐。 
现代文：淳于长自己不知道要犯下大逆不道的罪，就抛弃了乃始等人，她们有的重新改嫁了，夫妻之间的情义已绝，如果还要认为她们是淳于长的妻子，来杀掉她们，名义上不正当，因此不应当牵连判罪。 
English: Chun Yuchang himself did not know that he would commit the crime of high treason, so he abandoned Naishi and others. Some of them have remarried, and the relationship between husband and wife has ended. If they are still considered to be the wives of Chun Yuchang, to kill them is nominally improper, so they should not be implicated and convicted.

古文：有诏 光议是 。
现代文：皇上下韶书，肯定孔光的意见正确。
English: The imperial edict affirmed that Kong Guang's opinion was correct.

古文：是岁，右将军褒、后将军博坐定陵、红阳侯皆免为庶人。
现代文：这一年，右将军廉褒、后将军朱博因为与犯罪的定陵侯淳于长、红阳侯王立交谊深厚，也都被罢免为庶人。
English: In the same year, the Right General Renbo and the Rear General Zhu Bo were also dismissed as commoners because of their deep friendship with the criminal lords Dingling, Junyuchang and Hongyang.

古文：以光为左将军，居右将军官职，执金吾王咸为右将军，居后将军官职。
现代文：任命孔光为左将军，担任右将军的官职，任命执金吾王咸为右将军，担任后将军的官职。
English: He appointed Kong Guang as the left general and assumed the official position of the right general, and appointed the executioner King Wu Wang Xian as the right general and assumed the official position of the rear general.

古文：罢后将军官。
现代文：撤销了后将军的官位。
English: The post of rear admiral was abolished.

古文：数月，丞相方进薨，召左将军光，当拜，已刻侯印书赞，上暴崩，即其夜于大行前拜受丞相、博山侯印绶。
现代文：几个月后，丞相方进逝世，皇上召见左将军孔光，准备拜他为相，已经刻好了侯印和写好了拜他为相的策书，这时皇上突然死去。就在皇帝暴死的当夜，葬礼之前，拜授丞相、博山侯的大印。
English: A few months later, after the death of the chancellor Fang Jin, the emperor summoned the left general Kong Guang, prepared to worship him as the chancellor, had engraved the seal and written a plan to worship him as the chancellor, when the emperor died suddenly. On the night of the sudden death of the emperor, before the funeral, the grand seal of the chancellor and the prince of Bosan was awarded.

古文：哀帝初即位，躬行俭约，省减诸用，政事由己出，朝廷翕然，望至治焉。
现代文：哀帝初即位，以身作则，提倡节俭，节省减少了许多费用，朝廷政事都由皇上自己负责处理，朝廷一时震动，盼望太平盛世的到来。
English: When Emperor Aye first ascended the throne, he set an example by advocating frugality, saving and reducing many expenses. The emperor himself was responsible for handling the affairs of state in the imperial court. The imperial court was momentarily shaken, hoping for the advent of a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：褒赏大臣，益封光千户。
现代文：皇上褒扬奖赏大臣，给孔光增加封邑一千户。
English: The emperor commended and rewarded the minister, and gave Kong Guang an additional thousand households in fiefs.

古文：时，成帝母太皇太后自居长乐宫，而帝祖母定陶傅太后在国邸，有诏问丞相、大司空： 定陶共王太后宜当何居？ 
现代文：这时，成帝的母亲太皇太后自己住在长乐宫，而成帝的祖母定陶傅太后住在皇帝的住处，皇上便下诏问丞相、大司空： 定陶共王太后应当住在何处？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Chengdu's mother, the Empress Dowager herself, lived in Changle Palace, while Emperor Chengdu's grandmother, the Empress Dowager Ding Tao Fu, lived in the emperor's residence. The emperor then asked the prime minister and the grand secretary: Where should the Empress Dowager Ding Tao Gong live?

古文：光素闻傅太后为人刚暴，长于权谋，自帝在襁褓而养长教道至于成人，帝之立又有力。
现代文：孔光平时听说傅太后为人处事刚烈残暴，而且擅长于玩弄权术谋略，从皇帝还在襁褓之中，就开始抚养，直至教育他成人，在皇帝登基的时候又出过力。
English: Kong Guang had heard that Empress Dowager Fu was a fierce and cruel person, and that she was good at playing power games. She began to raise the emperor when he was still in the cradle, and educated him until he was an adult. She exerted her strength again when the emperor ascended the throne.

古文：光心恐傅太后与政事，不欲令与帝旦夕相近，即议以为定陶太后宜改筑宫。
现代文：孔光担心傅太后干预朝政事务，不想让她与皇帝朝夕相近，就发表意见，认为定陶太后应该另外修建宫殿居住。
English: Kong Guang was worried that Empress Dowager Fu was meddling in the affairs of the imperial court and did not want her to be so close to the emperor, so he expressed his opinion that Empress Dowager Ding Tao should build another palace to live in.

古文：大司空何武曰： 可居北宫。 
现代文：大司空何武说： 可以住在北宫。 
English: Daishi Kuho Takeshi said, "You can live in Hokugu."

古文：上从武言。
现代文：皇上听从了何武的话。
English: The emperor obeyed He Wu's words.

古文：北宫有紫房复道通未央宫，傅太后果从复道朝夕至帝所，求欲称尊号，贵宠其亲属，使上不得直道行。
现代文：北宫有紫房空中阁道与未央宫相通，傅太后果然从阁道早晚到皇帝的住处，请求皇上赐予尊号，让她的亲属富贵受宠，使得皇上不能根据正直的原则秉公行事。
English: The north palace has a purple room, and the sky pavilion road is connected to the Weiyang Palace. Fu Taizhong went from the pavilion road to the emperor's residence in the morning and evening, asking the emperor to grant the honorary title and let her relatives be rich and favored, so that the emperor could not act fairly according to the principle of honesty.

古文：顷之，太后从弟子傅迁在左右尤倾邪，上免官遣归故郡。
现代文：不久，太后堂弟的儿子傅迁在皇帝左右尤其施展奸邪伎俩，皇上罢免他的官职，遣送他回归故地。
English: Not long after, Fu Qian, the son of the empress dowager's cousin, especially carried out treacherous and evil tricks around the emperor. The emperor dismissed him from his official post and sent him back to his hometown.

古文：傅太后怒，上不得已复留迁。
现代文：傅太后恼怒，皇上不得已，又把傅迁重新留了下来。
English: Empress Dowager Fu was angry, and the emperor had no choice but to keep Fu Qian in place.

古文：光与大司空师丹奏言： 诏书 侍中、驸马都尉迁巧佞无义，漏泄不忠，国之贼也，免归故郡。 
现代文：孔光与大司空师丹上奏说： 皇上下诏书说： 侍中驸马都尉傅迁乖巧邪佞，泄露朝廷秘密，对皇上办事不忠，是国家的祸害，罢免官职，遣送回家。 
English: Kong Guang and the grand secretary of the Ku Klux Klan, Tan Shangsoo, said: The Emperor's edict said: The chamberlain, Ma Du Fu Qian, is a scourge to the country for his deviousness, divulging the secrets of the imperial court, and being disloyal to the emperor. He should be removed from his post and sent home.

古文：复有诏止。天下疑惑，无所取信，亏损圣德，诚不小愆。
现代文：其后又下诏停办，百官都疑惑不解，感到没有什么值得信任的了，这对皇上的圣德是一个很大的损害，确实不是一个小小的过失。
English: Subsequently, he issued an edict to suspend operations, and all the officials were puzzled and felt that there was nothing to trust. This was a great damage to the emperor's sanctity, and it was certainly not a small mistake.

古文：陛下以变异连见，避正殿，见群臣，思求其故，至今未有所改。
现代文：陛下因为灾异接连出现，曾经离开正殿，召见朝廷百官，思考发生灾异的原因，到现在为止，过去那些做得不好的事情，都没有得到改正。
English: Due to successive disasters, His Majesty once left the main hall and summoned hundreds of officials from the Imperial Court to think about the reasons for the disasters. Up until now, the things that were not done well in the past have not been corrected.

古文：臣请归迁故郡，以销奸党，应天戒。 
现代文：我们请求皇上仍旧遣送傅迁回老家，来消除奸党，服从上苍的警告。 
English: We ask the emperor to still send Fu Qiang back to his hometown to eliminate the traitors and obey the warning of God.

古文：卒不得遣，复为侍中。
现代文：但是傅迁最终还是没有被遣送回家，重新做了侍中。
English: However, Fu Qian was not sent home in the end, and became a chamberlain again.

古文：胁于傅太后，皆此类也。
现代文：皇上办事胁迫、服从于傅太后，都跟这种情形一样。
English: The Emperor acting under duress and obeying the Empress Dowager Fu are similar to this situation.

古文：又傅太后欲与成帝母俱称尊号，群下多顺诣，言母以子贵，宜立尊号以厚孝道。
现代文：另外，傅太后又要与成帝的母亲一同获得尊号，群臣多顺从她的旨意，说母亲凭藉儿子而显贵，应该给母亲制定尊号来弘扬孝道。
English: In addition, Empress Dowager Fu also wanted to receive the honorary title together with Emperor Chengdu's mother, and the courtiers mostly obeyed her will, saying that the mother was distinguished by her son and should give her mother a honorary title to promote filial piety.

古文：唯师丹与光持不可。
现代文：衹有师丹和壬眯认为不可。
English: Both Shi Dan and Ren Yu thought it was impossible.

古文：上重违大臣正议，又内迫傅太后，猗违者连岁。
现代文：皇上难于违背大臣们的正直议论，内部又受到傅太后的胁迫，这件事就拖了几年也没有议定。
English: It was difficult for the emperor to go against the honest opinions of his ministers, and he was internally coerced by Empress Dowager Fu. The matter was not resolved for several years.

古文：丹以罪免，而朱博代为大司空。
现代文：师丹因为犯了罪被免官，朱博代替他担任大司空。
English: Shidan was removed from his post for committing a crime, and Zhu Bo replaced him as the chief magistrate.

古文：光自先帝时议继嗣有持异之隙矣，又重忤傅太后指，由是傅氏在位者与朱博为表里，共毁谮光。后数月遂策免光曰： 丞相者，朕之股肱，所与共承宗庙，统理海内，辅朕之不逮以治天下也。
现代文：孔光在先帝时商议皇位继承人就与皇上不合，其后又严重违背傅太后的旨意，因此傅氏在位者舆大司空朱博勾结起来，共同诋毁诬陷孔光，过了几个月后，皇上就下韶罢免孔光，说： 丞相是辅佐君主的大臣，与君主共同继承社稷江山，负责治理国家，并辅助皇上的不周之处，使国家得到治理。
English: At the time of the former emperor, Kong Guang did not agree with the emperor when he discussed the heir to the imperial throne, and then seriously violated the will of Empress Dowager Fu. Therefore, Fu's incumbent, Publicity Secretary Kong Zhu Bo, colluded to jointly defame and frame Kong Guang. A few months later, the emperor dismissed Kong Guang, saying: The prime minister is a minister who assists the monarch, and jointly inherits the Shijiang Mountains with the monarch, and is responsible for governing the country, and assists the emperor's shortcomings, so that the country can be governed.

古文：朕既不明，灾异重仍，日月无光，山崩河决，五星失行，是章朕之不德而股肱之不良也。
现代文：皇上昏昧不明，灾难持续不断，曰、月失去光亮，大山崩塌，黄河决口，五星运行失常，这些都表明了我的德行不够，表明了辅助君主的大臣的不够贤良。
English: The emperor's confusion, the continuous disasters, the moon losing its brightness, the mountains collapsing, the Yellow River bursting its banks, and the Five Stars moving erratically, all indicate that I am not virtuous enough, and that the ministers assisting the monarch are not virtuous enough.

古文：君前为御史大夫，辅翼先帝，出入八年，卒无忠言嘉谋；今相朕，出入三年，忧国之风复无闻焉。
现代文：你以前担任御史大夫的时候，辅助先帝，前后共有八年，始终没有什么忠诚的言语和良好的计谋。现在又担任我的丞相，前后已有三年，还没有听到你有关忧国忧民的进谏。
English: When you previously served as Imperial Historian, assisting the former emperor, for a total of eight years, there were always no loyal words and good strategies. Now that you have served as my prime minister for three years, I have yet to hear of your progress in worrying about the country and the people.

古文：阴阳错谬，岁比不登，天下空虚，百姓饥馑，父子分散，流离道路，以十万数。
现代文：近来天地之间，阴阳之气乖谬不和，连年生产不获丰收，国家粮仓空虚，百姓受饥挨饿，父子分散，四处流离，数日高达十万多人。
English: Recently, between heaven and earth, the yin and yang of the spirit of perverted discord, consecutive years of production have not been harvested, the national granary is empty, the people are starving, the father and son are scattered, and they are displaced everywhere, up to more than 100,000 people in a few days.

古文：而百官群职旷废，奸轨放纵，盗贼并起，或攻官寺，杀长吏。
现代文：而朝廷百官职责废缺，各种奸邪横行，盗匪猖獗，有的攻打官府，杀死官吏。
English: However, the duties of hundreds of officials of the imperial court were abolished, all kinds of treachery and evil were rampant, robbers were rampant, and some attacked government offices and killed officials.

古文：数以问君，君无怵惕忧惧之意，对毋能为。
现代文：多次向你询问这些事情，您没有忧愁、恐惧之意，回答说没有什么危害。
English: I have asked you about these things many times, and you have answered that there is no harm, without sadness or fear.

古文：是以群卿大夫咸惰哉莫以为意，咎由君焉。
现代文：因此百官都懒惰怠慢起来，没有把这些事放在心上，这都是你的责任。
English: As a result, all officials have become lazy and negligent, and have not taken these things to heart. This is all your responsibility.

古文：君秉社稷之重，总百僚之任，上无以匡朕之阙，下不能绥安百姓。
现代文：你担负着治理社稷江山的重任，负责管理百官，可是你对上，不能匡正我的过失，对下，不能安抚百姓。
English: You are responsible for the important task of governing the company, and are responsible for the management of hundreds of officials, but you cannot correct my mistakes, and you cannot appease the people.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 毋旷庶官，天工人其代之 。
现代文：《书经》不是说： 不要委任不称职的官员。
English: The Sutra does not say: Do not appoint incompetent officials.

古文：於虖！君其上丞相、博山侯印绶，罢归。 
现代文：代天管理百官的人必须称职，岛呼！你交出丞相博山侯的宫印，罢官回家。 
English: The person who manages the hundred officials on behalf of heaven must be competent, island ho! You hand over the imperial seal of the imperial minister Bosan, and go home.

古文：光退闾里，杜门自守。
现代文：孔光退归乡里之后，闭门自守。
English: After Kong Guang returned to his hometown, he kept to himself behind closed doors.

古文：而朱博代为丞相，数月，坐承傅太后指妄奏事自杀。
现代文：朱博代替孔光担任丞相，几个月后，就因按照傅太后的指使妄奏政事，犯罪自杀了。
English: Zhu Bo replaced Kong Guang as chancellor, and a few months later, he committed suicide for playing politics at the behest of Empress Dowager Fu.

古文：平当代为丞相，数月薨。
现代文：平当接替朱博担任丞相，几个月后就死了。
English: When he succeeded Zhu Bo as chancellor, he died a few months later.

古文：王嘉复为丞相，数谏争忤指。
现代文：王嘉随后接任丞相，几次进谏，忤逆了皇上的旨意。
English: Wang Jia then took over as chancellor and entered the imperial palace several times, defying the emperor's will.

古文：旬岁间阅三相，议者皆以为不及光。
现代文：短短的时间内频繁地更换了三个丞相，舆论都认为这几个丞相都赶不上孔光。
English: In a short period of time, three prime ministers were frequently replaced, and the public opinion believed that these prime ministers could not catch up with Kong Guang.

古文：上由是思之。
现代文：皇上因此常常想念孔光。
English: As a result, the emperor often missed Kong Guang.

古文：会元寿元年正月朔日有蚀之，后十余日傅太后崩。
现代文：适逢元寿元年正月十五发生了日食，其后十多天傅太后去世。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the fifteenth day of the first month of the first year of the Yuan Shou era, and the Empress Dowager Fu died more than ten days later.

古文：是月，征光诣公车，问日蚀事。
现代文：这个月皇上征召孔光到公车官署，询问有关日食的事情。
English: This month, the emperor summoned Kong Guang to the bus office to inquire about the solar eclipse.

古文：光对曰： 臣闻日者，众阳之宗，人君之表，至尊之象。
现代文：孔光回答说： 我听说太阳是一切阳物的本源，是国君的代表，是至高无上的尊严的象征。
English: Kong Guang replied, "I have heard that the sun is the source of all yang things, the representative of the sovereign, and the symbol of supreme dignity.

古文：君德衰微，阴道盛强，侵蔽阳明，则日蚀应之。
现代文：君主的德行衰微，臣子兴盛强大，侵犯遮蔽了太阳的光明，那么食现象就会随之发生。
English: If the virtue of the monarch declines, if the vassals are prosperous and powerful, and if the invasion obscures the light of the sun, then the phenomenon of eclipses will ensue.

古文：《书》曰 羞用五事 ， 建用皇极 。如貌、言、视、听、思失，大中之道不立，则咎征荐臻，六极屡降。
现代文：《书经》说 进用貌、言、视、听、思五事， 建用广大中正之道，如果貌、言、视、听、思五方面有过失，中正之道没有确立，那么凶祸的现象就会逐渐产生，上天给予的凶、恶、疾、贫、弱、忧六种惩罚和灾异就会频繁发生。
English: "The Classic of Confucianism" says that we should make use of the five aspects of appearance, speech, sight, hearing, and thought, and build a broad and correct way. If we make mistakes in the five aspects of appearance, speech, sight, hearing, and thought, and the correct way is not established, then the phenomenon of evil will gradually occur, and the six kinds of punishments and disasters given by heaven will occur frequently.

古文：皇之不极，是为大中不立，其传曰 时则有日月乱行 ，谓朓、侧匿，甚则薄蚀是也。
现代文：广大而不中正，就称之为 大中不立 ，传书上说 这个时候就会经常发生日月乱行 ，日月不是行得快了，就是转得慢了，甚而至于发生日食的现象。
English: When the sun and the moon are out of alignment, it is called the Great Mid-Autumn Festival. According to legend, at this time, the sun and the moon will often be out of alignment. The sun and the moon will either move quickly or turn slowly, and even the phenomenon of a solar eclipse will occur.

古文：又曰 六沴之作 ，岁之朝曰三朝，其应至重。
现代文：《易传》又说 六种恶气堵塞，岁之朝，月之朝，曰之朝叫三朝，其感应很强。
English: "I Chuan" also said that there are six kinds of evil gas blockages, and the morning of the year, the morning of the month, and the morning of the day are called the three mornings, and the induction is very strong.

古文：乃正月辛丑朔日有蚀之，变见三朝之会。
现代文：正月辛丑初一发生日食，是灾异出现在三朝之会。
English: The solar eclipse that occurred on the first day of the first month of the new year was a disaster that occurred at the Three Dynasties Festival.

古文：上天聪明，苟无其事，变不虚生。
现代文：上天是聪慧明察的，如果国内没有发生什么事情，变异的现象是不会平白无故地发生的。
English: God is wise and observant. If nothing happens in the country, the phenomenon of mutation will not occur without reason.

古文：《书》曰 惟先假王正厥事 ，言异变之来，起事有不正也。
现代文：《书》说： 先藉用至高无上的天王的名义纠正其事 ，指变异现象产生，起因是由于有不正确的事情发生。
English: The "Book" says: First, by using the name of the supreme heavenly king to correct things, it means that the phenomenon of variation occurs, and the cause is due to incorrect things happening.

古文：臣闻师曰，天左与王者，故灾异数见，以谴告之，欲其改更。
现代文：我听老师说，上天为了辅助君主，就让灾异现象多次出现，以此来告诫君主，要他改变过失。
English: I heard from my teacher that, in order to assist the monarch, God has allowed disasters and unusual phenomena to occur many times in order to admonish the monarch and ask him to change his mistakes.

古文：若不畏惧，有以塞除，而轻忽简诬，则凶罚加焉，其至可必。《诗》曰： 敬之敬之，天惟显思，命不易哉！ 
现代文：如果君主不感到畏惧，还遮掩敷衍，轻视忽略上天的告诫，街噪欺瞒上天，那么惩罚性的灾难就必定降临到头上，那是无疑的。《诗经》说： 敬服上天，敬服上天，上天无比明察，受天命难之又难啊！ 
English: If the ruler does not feel afraid, but covers up the perfunctory, despises and ignores the admonition of heaven, and the street noise deceives heaven, then the punitive disaster will certainly fall on the head, that is beyond doubt. "The Book of Songs" says: "Worship heaven, worship heaven, heaven is very clear, and it is difficult to accept the fate of heaven!"

古文：又曰： 畏天之威，于时保之。 皆谓不惧者凶，惧之则吉也。
现代文：又说： 敬畏天的威力，才能保全平安，这些都是说不敬畏上天就会遭受凶祸，敬畏上天就会吉利。
English: He also said, "Only by fearing the power of heaven can peace be preserved. All of this is to say that if you do not fear heaven, you will suffer evil, and if you do fear heaven, you will be lucky."

古文：陛下圣德聪明，兢兢业业，承顺天戒，敬畏变异，勤心虚己，延见群臣，思求其故，然后敕躬自约，总正万事，放远谗说之党，援纳断断之介，退去贪残之徒，进用贤良之吏，平刑罚，薄赋敛，恩泽加于百姓，诚为政之大本，应变之至务也。
现代文：陛下圣德聪慧明察，办事兢兢业业，敬承顺从上天的告诫，敬畏各种变异现象，勤勤恳恳，虚怀若谷，召见百官群僚，反思寻求变异的原因，然后以身作则，自我约束，总理、纠正万事万务，疏远结党营私的小人，接纳忠诚不二的好人，罢免贪婪残暴的酷吏，进用贤明忠良的官员，公正地赏罚惩处，减轻赋税，把恩泽施加给百姓，这真正是处理朝政的根本，应付各种灾异的首要任务。
English: His majesty the saintly, the wise, the sagacious, the discerning, the diligent, the reverent, the obedient to the heavenly admonition, the reverent to all kinds of changes, the diligent, the sincere, the humble, summoned hundreds of officials and colleagues to reflect on the reasons for seeking changes, and then to lead by example, self-discipline, the prime minister, to correct everything, to alienate the small people who are partisan, to accept the good people who are loyal, to dismiss the greedy and cruel officials, to employ the wise and loyal officials, to reward and punish fairly, to reduce taxes, and to impose grace on the people. This is truly the

古文：天下幸甚。
现代文：这是国家的万幸。
English: This is a great blessing for the country.

古文：《书》曰 天既付命正厥德 ，言正德以顺天也。
现代文：《书经》说： 既然接受了天命，就应该实行德政，指的是实行德政来顺应上天。
English: "Scripture" says: Since you have accepted the mandate of heaven, you should practice German politics, referring to the practice of German politics to comply with heaven.

古文：又曰 天棐谌辞 ，言有诚道，天辅之也。
现代文：又说 上天辅助至诚之辞，指的是如果有忠诚之心，上天就会辅助他。
English: He also said that Heaven helps those who are sincere, which means that if one has a loyal heart, Heaven will help him.

古文：明承顺天道在于崇德博施，加精至诚，孳孳而已。
现代文：明智地接受顺应天道，在于增进德行，广施恩泽，加致精诚，毫不懈怠。
English: Wisely accepting to follow the heavenly way is to enhance virtue, spread grace, add refinement, and never slacken.

古文：俗之祈禳小数，终无益于应天塞异，销祸兴福，较然甚明，无可疑惑。 
现代文：世俗所用的求福除祸的小术，最终无益于顺应上天，消除灾异，消祸求福，昭然揭示，没有什么疑惑不解的。 
English: The small trick of seeking blessings and eliminating misfortunes used by the world is ultimately not beneficial to conform to heaven, eliminate disasters, eliminate misfortunes and seek blessings. It is clearly revealed, and there is nothing to be puzzled about.

古文：书奏，上说，赐光束帛，拜为光禄大夫，秩中二千石，给事中，位次丞相。
现代文：奏书递上，皇上看了很高兴，赏赐孔光束帛，拜他为光禄大夫，俸禄中二千石，任给事中，官位仅次于丞相。
English: When the report was submitted, the emperor was very pleased to see it. He rewarded Kong Guangzhuang with a scepter, and made him a doctor of Guanglu, with a salary of 2,000 koku, and appointed him to the position of vice-premier, a position second only to that of chancellor.

古文：诏光举可尚书令者封上，光谢曰： 臣以朽材，前比历位典天职，卒无尺寸之效，幸免罪诛，全保首领，今复拔擢，备内朝臣，与闻政事。
现代文：皇上下诏要孔光举荐可以担任尚书令职务的人，写好后密封奏上，孔光上书敬谢说： 我以老朽之身，以前历任各种重要职务，始终没有半点成效，幸免于没有犯罪被斩，保全了性命，现今重新提拔任用，作为朝廷的后备内臣，参与朝政事务。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to recommend Kong Guang as the person who could hold the post of Shang Shuling, and after it was written and sealed, Kong Guang wrote a letter of appreciation, saying: I am an old man, and I have held various important positions before, and I have never achieved half a point. I was spared from being beheaded without committing a crime, and my life was saved. Now I have been re-promoted and appointed as a reserve courtier of the imperial court, and I am involved in the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：臣光智谋浅短，犬马齿■，诚恐一旦颠仆，无以报称。
现代文：我孔光智慧谋略都很浅短，现已年迈，实在担心有朝一日突然死去，没有什么报答皇上。
English: My wisdom and strategy are very shallow, and now I am old, I am really worried that I will die suddenly one day, and there is nothing to repay the emperor.

古文：窃见国家故事，尚书以久次转迁，非有踔绝之能，不相逾越。
现代文：我私下看到国家朝政事务，尚书一职长期更换人选，没有卓绝的才能，是很难胜任的。
English: Privately, I have seen that it is very difficult to be a competent candidate for the post of Shangshu for a long time without outstanding talent.

古文：尚书仆射敞，公正勤职，通敏于事，可尚书令。
现代文：尚书仆射敞，办事公正，勤于职守，遇事灵敏通达，可以担任尚书令。
English: Shangshu servants are broad-minded, fair in their dealings, diligent in their duties, and sensitive and open-minded in times of need. They can serve as Shangshu deputies.

古文：谨封上。 
现代文：现郑重地写下，密封上奏。 
English: Now solemnly write it down, seal it and play it.

古文：敞以举故，为东平太守。
现代文：敞因为孔光的举荐，担任了束平太守。
English: Because he was recommended by Kong Guang, he served as Sokuhira Taishou.

古文：敞姓成公，东海人也。
现代文：敞姓成公，是束海郡人。
English: His family name is Shingong, and he is from Sokhaigun.

古文：光为大夫月余，丞相嘉下狱死，御史大夫贾延免。
现代文：孔光担任大夫一个来月，丞相王嘉入狱而死，御史大夫买延免官。
English: Kong Guang served as a doctor for a month, the chancellor Wang Jia died in prison, and the chief doctor was dismissed.

古文：光复为御史大夫，二月为丞相，复故国博山侯。
现代文：孔光便重新担任了御史大夫，两个月后又重新担任丞相，重新受封博山侯。
English: Kong Guang then resumed his position as goshi taifu, and two months later he resumed his position as chancellor, and was once again given the title of Bo Shanhou.

古文：上乃知光前免非其罪，以过近臣毁短光者，复免傅嘉，曰： 前为侍中，毁谮仁贤，诬诉大臣，令俊艾者久失其位。
现代文：这时皇上才知道以前免去孔光的官职，并不是孔光犯了罪，而是身边的近臣诋毁诬陷他，于是又免去傅嘉的官职，说： 以前傅嘉担任侍中时，诋毁诬陷仁义贤德之人，诬告大臣，使得贤俊之人，长期得不到重用。
English: At this time, the emperor realized that it was not Kong Guang who had committed a crime, but the vassals around him who had slandered and framed him, so he also relieved Fu Jia of his official position, saying: When Fu Jia served as an attendant, he slandered and framed people of benevolence, righteousness and virtue, and falsely accused ministers, so that people who were virtuous and handsome could not be reused for a long time.

古文：嘉倾覆巧伪，挟奸以罔上，崇党以蔽朝，伤善以肆意。
现代文：傅嘉颠倒是，巧佞虚伪，怀奸诈、欺瞒皇上，结党营私，一手遮天，中伤忠臣，肆无忌惮。
English: Fu Jia, on the other hand, was skillful in hypocrisy, treacherous, and deceitful to the emperor. He formed a party to fight against me, shielded the emperor with one hand, slandered loyal subjects, and was unscrupulous.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 谗人罔极，交乱四国。 其免嘉为庶人，归故郡。 
现代文：《诗经》不是说吗： 谄媚的小人欺瞒猖獗，使国家混乱不宁，因此免去傅嘉的官职成为平民，遣送回原郡。 
English: Didn't the "Song of Songs" say: "The deceit of the charming villain is rampant, making the country chaotic and restless. Therefore, Fu Jia was relieved of his official position, became a commoner, and was sent back to the original county."

古文：明年，定三公官，光更为大司徒。
现代文：第二年，评定三公的官位，孔光改为担任大司徒。
English: In the second year, the official rank of the three princes was evaluated, and Kong Guang was changed to serve as the chief disciple.

古文：会哀帝崩，太皇太后以新都侯王莽为大司马，征立中山王，是为平帝。
现代文：适逢哀帝逝世，太皇太后以新都侯王莽为大司马，选立中山王为皇帝，即汉平帝。
English: When Emperor Aye passed away, the empress dowager took the new capital lord Wang Mang as her great steed and selected King Zhongshan as emperor, that is, Emperor Hanping.

古文：帝年幼，太后称制，委政于莽。
现代文：平帝年纪很小，由太后执掌朝政，太后把政事委托给王莽。
English: Emperor Ping was very young, and the empress dowager was in charge of the imperial government. The empress dowager entrusted the government to Wang Mang.

古文：初，哀帝罢黜王氏，故太后与莽怨丁、傅、董贤之党。
现代文：哀帝时，罢免了王氏，因此太后和王莽对丁、傅、董贤一派权臣很怨恨。
English: When the emperor was mourned, the Wang clan was dismissed, so the empress dowager and Wang Mang were very resentful of Ding, Fu, and Dong Xian, a group of powerful ministers.

古文：莽以光为旧相名儒，天下所信，太后敬之，备礼事光。
现代文：王莽认为孔光是前朝丞相，名儒，为世人所信任、仰慕，太后也敬重他，总是按礼节接待。
English: Wang Mang believed that Kong Guang was a former prime minister, a famous Confucian, trusted and admired by the world. The empress dowager also respected him and always received him according to etiquette.

古文：所欲搏击，辄为草，以太后指风光令上之，睚眦莫不诛伤。
现代文：凡是要打击政敌，总是要孑光帮助起草文件，按照太后的旨意，要孔光写好奏上。凡是与太后有仇的，即使是极小的仇恨，也是睚眦必报，没有不杀的。
English: Whenever there was a need to crack down on political enemies, Gongguang was always asked to help draft the document, and in accordance with the empress dowager's wishes, Kongguang was asked to write it down and play it. Anyone who had a grudge against the empress dowager, even if it was a very small grudge, was bound to be reported, and there was no one he would not kill.

古文：莽权日盛，光忧惧不知所出，上书乞骸骨。
现代文：王莽的权势日益强大起来，孔光内心很惶恐担忧，不知道该如何才好，就上书皇上告老退职。
English: Wang Mang's influence grew stronger and stronger. Kong Guang was very frightened and worried. Not knowing what to do, he wrote to the emperor to retire.

古文：莽白太后： 帝幼少，宜置师傅。 
现代文：王莽便对太后说： 皇上年纪很小，应该给他安排一个老师。 
English: Wang Mang then said to the empress dowager: The emperor is very young, we should arrange a teacher for him.

古文：徙光为帝太傅，位四辅，给事中，领宿卫供养，行内署门户，省服御食物。
现代文：便任命孔光为皇上的太傅，官位为四辅，给事中，负责宿卫供养，在宫禁之中办公，负责供给衣服、车马和食物。
English: He then appointed Kong Guang as the emperor's Taifu, with the official rank of Shifu, and was responsible for the provision of the palace guards during the imperial ban, and for the provision of clothes, horses and food during the imperial ban.

古文：明年，徙为太师，而莽为太傅。
现代文：第二年，升任太师，王莽担任太傅。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the position of Taishi, and Wang Mang served as Taifu.

古文：光常称疾，不敢与莽并。
现代文：孔光经常称病，在朝廷不敢与王莽并位。
English: Kong Guang often claimed to be ill and did not dare to share the throne with Wang Mang in the imperial court.

古文：有诏朝朔望，领城门兵。
现代文：皇上下诏王莽在每月初一十五上朝，并让王莽统率城门卫兵。
English: The emperor sent Wang Mang to the court on the fifteenth day of the first month, and let Wang Mang lead the guards at the city gate.

古文：莽又风群臣奏莽功德，称宰衡，位在诸侯王上，百官统焉。
现代文：王莽又指使群臣上奏，颂扬王莽的功德，汉平帝加给王莽宰衡称号，位于诸侯王之上，统率百官。
English: Wang Mang also ordered his courtiers to play and praise Wang Mang's merits, and Emperor Hanping gave Wang Mang the title of Zaiheng, which is above the princes and heads a hundred officials.

古文：光愈恐，固称疾辞位。
现代文：子光看到这种情形，更感到恐慌，坚持称病辞职。
English: Seeing this situation, Ziguang panicked even more and insisted on calling in sick.

古文：太后诏曰： 太师光，圣人之后，先师之子，德行纯淑，道不通明，居四辅职，辅道于帝。
现代文：太后便下诏书说： 太师孔光，是圣人的后代，先帝老师的儿子，德行纯正端方，道义学术精通，担任四辅的职务，辅助皇帝。
English: The empress dowager then issued an imperial edict saying: Grand Master Kong Guang is the descendant of a saint, the son of the former emperor's teacher, virtuous and upright, well-versed in ethics and scholarship, and holds the position of the fourth auxiliary, assisting the emperor.

古文：今年耆有疾，俊艾大臣，惟国之重，其犹不可以阙焉。
现代文：现在年迈有病。但是像孔光这样德高望重的大臣，是国家的重臣，仍然是不可缺少的。《周书。
English: Now he is old and ill, but a highly respected minister like Kong Guang, who is the chief minister of the country, is still indispensable.

古文：《书》曰 无遗耇老 ，国之将兴，尊师而重傅。
现代文：召诰》说 不遗弃老成之人 ，国家要想兴盛，就要尊敬重用老师。
English: Zhao Wei said that the country should not abandon the old people, and if the country wants to prosper, it is necessary to respect and reuse teachers.

古文：其令太师毋朝，十日一赐餐。
现代文：下令太师孔光不用上朝进见，每十天赏赐一顿饭。
English: Emperor Taishi ordered Kong Guang not to go to the Imperial Court, and rewarded him with a meal every ten days.

古文：赐太师灵寿杖，黄门令为太师省中坐置几，太师入省中用杖，赐餐十七物，然后归老于第，官属按职如故。 
现代文：赐给太师灵寿杖，黄门令给太师在宫禁之内设置坐几，太师进入宫禁之内可持杖，并赏赐十七种食物，然后回到府第养老，而他的下属官员仍按照常规办公。 
English: Daishi Ling was given a scepter, Huangmen ordered to set up a seat for Daishi Cang within the palace ban, and Daishi could hold a scepter when he entered the palace ban, and was rewarded with seventeen kinds of food, and then returned to the prefecture to retire, while his subordinate officials still worked according to the usual routine.

古文：光凡为御史大夫、丞相各再，一为大司徒、太傅、太师，历三世，居公辅位前后十七年。
现代文：孔光两次担任御史大夫、丞相，一次担任大司徒、太傅、太师，经历三代皇帝，位居辅助大臣的高位，前后共十七年。
English: Kong Guang served as imperial historian and chancellor twice, once as grand steward, daifu, and daishi, experienced three generations of emperors, and held the high position of assistant minister for a total of seventeen years.

古文：自为尚书，止不教授，后为卿，时会门下大生讲问疑难，举大义云。
现代文：自从担任尚书后，就停止了教授活动，后来担任卿相，有时遇到门下的太学生讨论、提出疑难问题，孔光常给他们阐述大义。
English: Since taking up the post of Shangshu, he stopped his teaching activities, and later served as a minister. Sometimes he encountered students under his tutelage discussing and raising difficult questions, and Kong Guang often expounded to them.

古文：其弟子多成就为博士、大夫者，见师居大位，几得其助力，光终无所荐举，至或怨之。
现代文：孔光的弟子很多都学有所成，担任了博士大夫，他们看到自己的老师担任显要的职务，都希望得到他的帮助，但孔光始终没有举荐他们，以致有的人抱怨他。
English: Many of Kong Guang's disciples have made academic achievements and served as doctors. They see their teacher holding prominent positions and hope to get his help, but Kong Guang has never recommended them, so that some people complain about him.

古文：其公如此。
现代文：孔光办事公正，就是这样。
English: Kong Guang acted justly, that's it.

古文：光年七十，元始五年薨。
现代文：孔光享年七十岁，在元始五年逝世。
English: Kong Guang was 70 years old and passed away in the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：莽白太后，使九卿策赠以太师、博山侯印绶，赐乘舆、秘器、金钱、杂帛。
现代文：王莽对太后说，让九卿策书赠给太师博山侯印绶，赐给马车、棺材、金钱、杂帛。
English: Wang Mang said to the empress dowager, "Let the nine emperors present the imperial edict to the grandmaster Boshan Houyin, and give him a carriage, coffin, money, and miscellaneous food."

古文：少府供张，谏大夫持节与谒者二人使护丧事，博士护行礼。
现代文：由少府供设帷帐，派谏大夫持符节同接待宾客的谒者两人负责丧事，博士负责丧葬礼仪。
English: The mayor's office is responsible for setting up the curtains, the two doctors who hold the festival and receive guests are responsible for the funeral, and the doctor is responsible for the funeral ceremony.

古文：太后迹遣中谒者持节视丧。
现代文：太后也派遣中谒者手持符节前来吊唁。
English: The empress dowager also sent people who had died in the middle of the war to offer condolences.

古文：公卿百官会吊送葬。
现代文：公卿百官共同吊唁送葬。
English: Hundreds of court nobles and officials sent their condolences to the funeral.

古文：载以乘舆辒辌及副各一乘，羽林孤儿诸生合四百人挽送。
现代文：用丧车及副丧车各一乘装载，皇帝羽林卫军及许多儒生，合计共四百人。
English: The funeral car and the second funeral car were loaded with Emperor Ulin's guards and many Confucian scholars, a total of four hundred people.

古文：车万余辆，道路皆举音以过丧。
现代文：送葬的车子有一万多辆，所到之处，路人都放声痛哭，等车队走完后哭声才止。
English: There were more than 10,000 funeral cars, and wherever they went, passers-by burst into tears. The crying only stopped after the motorcade had finished.

古文：将作穿复土，可甲卒五百人，起坟如大将军王凤制度。
现代文：用五百名兵士掘穴下棺，坟墓隆起，同大将军王凤的葬礼一样。
English: Five hundred soldiers were used to dig a coffin under the pit, and the grave was raised, just like the funeral of General Wang Feng.

古文：谥曰简烈侯。
现代文：赠谧号简烈侯。
English: He was given the posthumous name of Jian Lie Hou.

古文：初，光以丞相封，后益封，凡食邑万一千户。
现代文：当初，孔光以丞相的职位受封，后来又加封，共有食邑一万一千户。
English: At first, Kong Guang was appointed to the post of chancellor, and later he was also appointed, with a total of eleven thousand households.

古文：疾甚，上书让还七千户，及还所赐一第。
现代文：孔光在重病期间，上书退还七千户，并退还皇上赐给的宅第一所。
English: During Kong Guang's serious illness, he returned 7,000 households and the first house given by the emperor.

古文：子放嗣。
现代文：孔光的儿子孔放继承爵位。
English: Kong Guang's son Kong Fang inherited the title.

古文：莽篡位后，以光兄子永为大司马，封侯。
现代文：王莽篡夺皇位后，任命孔光哥哥的儿子孔永为大司马，封侯。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he appointed Kong Yong, the son of Kong Guang's brother, as the grand steward and vassal.

古文：昆弟子至卿大夫四五人。
现代文：兄弟的儿子做官做到卿大夫职位的有四五人。
English: Four or five of my brother's sons have gone on to become government officials and doctors.

古文：始光父霸以初元元年为关内侯食邑。
现代文：当初，孔光的父亲孔霸在初元元年受封为关内侯食邑。
English: At first, Kong Guang's father, Kong Ha, was awarded the title of Guanai Hossu-eup in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：霸上书求奉孔子祭祀，元帝下诏曰： 其令师褒成君关内侯霸以所食邑八百户祀孔子焉。 
现代文：孔霸上书请求供奉、祭祀孔子，元帝下诏书说： 我的尊师，褒成君关内侯孔霸以受封的食邑八百户来祭。子。 
English: The imperial edict issued by the Yuan Emperor said, "My esteemed teacher, the prince of Guanzhong, Confucius, has invited 800 households of the designated food towns to come to the festival.

古文：故霸还长子福名数于鲁，奉夫子祀。
现代文：因此孔霸把长子孑福的户籍迁回到鲁地，以供奉祭祀孔子。
English: Therefore, Kongba moved the household registration of his eldest son, Zifu, back to Ludi to offer a sacrifice to Confucius.

古文：霸薨，子福嗣。
现代文：孔霸死后，儿子孔福继位。
English: After the death of Confucius, his son Confucius succeeded to the throne.

古文：福薨，子房嗣。
现代文：孔福死后，儿子孔房继位。
English: After the death of Confucius, his son Confucius succeeded to the throne.

古文：房薨，子莽嗣。
现代文：孔房死后，儿子孔莽继位。
English: After Kong Fang's death, his son Kong Mang succeeded him.

古文：元始元年，封周公、孔子后为列侯，食邑各二千户。
现代文：在元始元年，皇上封周公、孔子的后代为列侯，食邑各二千户。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor made the descendants of Zhou Gong and Confucius lords of the manor, and there were two thousand households in each manor.

古文：莽更封为褒成侯，后避王莽，更名均。
现代文：孔莽后又封为褒成侯，后来为避讳王莽，改名为孔均。
English: After Kong Mang, he was given the title of Bao Cheng Hou. Later, he changed his name to Kong Jun to avoid Wang Mang.

古文：马宫字游卿，东海戚人也。
现代文：马宫，字游卿，束海戚县人。
English: Ma Gong, Zhi Youqing, from Sokhaiqi County.

古文：治《春秋》严氏，以射策甲科为郎，迁楚长史，免官。
现代文：研治严氏《春秋》，应试策对得甲科之选，担任侍郎，后升为楚长史，不久被免官。
English: Kenji Yan's "Spring and Autumn," should try to get the choice of A-level subjects, served as a waiter, later promoted to Chu Changshi, and was soon dismissed.

古文：后为丞相史司直。
现代文：后来又担任了丞相史司直。
English: Later, he served as the Minister of War, Shisinao.

古文：师丹荐宫行能高洁，迁廷尉平，青州刺史，汝南、九江太守，所在见称。
现代文：师丹推荐马宫品行高尚，被升为廷尉平，历任青州刺史，汝南、九江太守，每到一处都能胜任官职，获得称赞。
English: Ma Gong was recommended by his teacher Dan for his high moral conduct. He was promoted to the highest rank of imperial lieutenant, and successively served as the governor of Qingzhou, the governor of Yunnan Province, and the governor of Jiujiang Province. He was praised for his ability to perform official duties in each place.

古文：征为詹事，光禄勋，右将军，代孔光为大司徒，封扶德侯。
现代文：因此被皇上征召为詹事、光禄勋、右将军，代替孔光担任大司徒，封为扶德侯。
English: Therefore, he was conscripted by the emperor as Zhan Zhi, Guang Luk Hun, and Right General, replaced Kong Guang as the chief disciple, and was named Fu De Hou.

古文：光为太师薨，宫复代光为太师，兼司徒官。
现代文：孔光担任太师逝世后，马宫又接替孔光担任太师，兼任司徒。
English: After the death of Kong Guang as the Grand Master, Ma Gong also succeeded Kong Guang as the Grand Master and also served as a disciple.

古文：初，宫哀帝时与丞相、御史杂议帝祖母傅太后谥，及元始中，王莽发傅太后陵徙归定陶，以民葬之，追诛前议者。
现代文：哀帝时，马宫同丞相、御史大夫商议皇上祖母傅太后的谧号问题，到元始年间，王莽把傅太后的陵墓迁回定陶，按照平民的礼仪埋葬，并追究从前商议葬礼之事的人的罪名。
English: At the time of mourning for the emperor, Ma Gong discussed the issue of the imperial grandmother Fu Taige's posthumous name with the chancellor and the chief historian. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Mang moved Fu Taige's mausoleum back to Dingtao, buried her according to the etiquette of commoners, and investigated the crimes of those who had previously discussed the funeral.

古文：宫为莽所厚，独不及，内惭惧，上书谢罪乞骸骨。
现代文：马宫因为同王莽交谊深厚，惟独他没有被迫究，马宫内心感到惭愧惶恐，就上书向皇上认罪，并请求告老退职。
English: Ma Gong, because of his deep friendship with Wang Mangtuang, was the only one who was not forced to investigate. Ma Gong felt ashamed and frightened, so he sent a letter to the emperor to admit his guilt and asked to retire.

古文：莽以太皇太后诏赐宫策曰：
现代文：王莽以太皇太后的名义下诏，赐给马宫策书说：
English: Wang Mang issued an edict in the name of the Empress Dowager and gave it to Ma Gongzha, saying:

古文：太师、大师徒、扶德侯上书言： 前以光禄勋议故定陶共王母谥，曰 妇人以夫爵尊为号，谥宜曰孝元傅皇后，称渭陵东园。 
现代文： 太师、大司徒扶德侯上书说： 以前担任光禄勋时，商议已故的定陶共王的母亲的谧号，曾经说， 妇人凭藉丈夫的爵位尊称为号，谧号应该叫孝元傅皇后，称渭陵束园。 
English: Daishi and Daishi Tutu Fudeho wrote: When I was serving as a member of the Order of the Star, I discussed the name of the mother of the late King Ding Tao, and I once said that a woman should be called by her husband's title, and the name should be Empress Xiao Yuanfu, and the name should be "Burying Garden."

古文：臣知妾不得体君，卑不得敌尊，而希指雷同，诡经辟说，以惑误上。
现代文：我知道小妾不能代表君王，卑贱者不能与尊贵者相提并论，但却迎合在上者的意旨，同他们一样上奏附和，违背经义，发表邪说，使皇上迷惑、失误。
English: I know that a concubine cannot represent the king, and that the lowly cannot be compared to the honorable, but they cater to the will of the superior, and like them, they accede to the will of the superior, violate the principles of the scriptures, publish heresies, and confuse and mislead the emperor.

古文：为臣不忠，当伏斧钺之诛，幸蒙洒心自新，又令得保首领。
现代文：作为大臣，对上不忠，当处死，幸蒙皇上让臣悔改自新，并让我得以保住性命。
English: As a minister, I was disloyal to the emperor and should have been put to death. Fortunately, the emperor made the minister repent and reform, and I was able to save my life.

古文：伏自惟念，入称四辅，出备三公，爵为列侯，诚无颜复望阙廷，无心复居官府，无宜复食国邑。
现代文：我自己深刻地反省，自己上朝为四辅，出入享有三公的待遇，赐爵为列侯，实在没有脸面再进入朝廷，没有心思敢再担任官职，也不应该再享受食邑。
English: I deeply reflected on myself. I went to the imperial court as the fourth auxiliary, enjoyed the treatment of the three princes when entering and leaving, and was given a peerage as a feudal lord. I really did not have the face to enter the imperial court again, I did not have the courage to hold an official position again, and I should no longer enjoy the food.

古文：愿上太师、大司徒、扶德侯印绶，避贤者路。 
现代文：我恭敬地交出太师、大司徒扶德侯的大印，为贤德之人让路。 
English: I respectfully hand over the Great Seal of the Grand Master, the Grand Master, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, the Great Teacher.

古文：下君章有司，皆以为四辅之职为国维纲，三公之任鼎足承君，不有鲜明固守，无以居位。
现代文：把你的奏章交付给有司处理，都认为四辅大臣是负责执行国家的宪章大法，三公肩负着辅助君主的重任，如果没有卓异的品德，是无法担任这一职务的。
English: If you submit your report to the magistrate, they all think that the four assistant ministers are responsible for implementing the country's Constitution and the Great Law, and the three princes shoulder the important task of assisting the monarch. If you do not have outstanding moral character, you cannot hold this position.

古文：如君言至诚可听，惟君之恶在洒心前，不敢文过，朕甚多之，不夺君之爵邑，以著 自古皆有死 之义。
现代文：你上书所说的，表明你忠心耿耿，令人感动，但衹因为你的错误犯在悔改之前，有司不敢袒护你的遇错，朕很敬重你，不剥夺你的封爵食邑，以弘扬 自古以来人都有一死，民不信不立，的大义。
English: What you said in your letter shows that you are loyal and sincere, which is touching. However, because your mistakes were made before you repented, some judges did not dare to protect you when you made a mistake. I respect you very much and will not deprive you of your knighthood, in order to promote the great justice that since ancient times, all men must die, and the people cannot believe.

古文：其上太师、大司徒印绶使者，以侯就第。
现代文：你把太师大司徒印绶交给使者，以侯位回家养老。 
English: You should give the seal of the Grand Master to the emissary and return home to retire.

古文：王莽篡位，以宫为太子师，卒官。
现代文：王莽篡夺皇位后，任命马宫为太子师，死在任上。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he appointed Ma Gong as crown prince and died in office.

古文：本姓马矢，宫仕学，称马氏云。
现代文：本姓马矢，马宫为就读学官之名，称作马氏。
English: His real family name is Ma Ya, Ma Gong is the name of the school official, and he is called Ma.

古文：赞曰：自孝武兴学，公孙弘以儒相，其后蔡义、韦贤、玄成、匡衡、张禹、翟方进、孔光、平当、马宫及当子晏咸以儒宗居宰相位，服儒衣冠，传先王语，其酝藉可也，然皆持禄保位，被阿谀之讥。
现代文：赞曰：从孝武帝重视儒学，以公孙弘为儒相之后，蔡义、韦贤、玄成、匡衡、张禹、翟方进、孔光、平当、马宫以及平当的儿子平晏，都是以大儒的身份担任宰相职务，穿戴着儒者服装，宣讲先王的言论，博学宽容，品行厚重，值得称赏，但是都为保全俸禄官位，而蒙受了阿谀奉承的讥讽。
English: Zang said: Since Emperor Xiaowu attached importance to Confucianism and took Gongsun Hong as the Confucian scholar, Cai Yi, Wei Xian, Xuanzheng, Kuangheng, Zhang Yu, Xing Fangjin, Kongguang, Pingtang, Ma Gong and Pingtang's son Pingyao have all served as prime ministers as great Confucians, wearing Confucian clothing, preaching the words of the former king, erudite tolerance, and having a strong moral character, which is commendable, but all of them have been subjected to flattery and ridicule in order to preserve their positions.

古文：彼以古人之迹见绳，乌能胜其任乎！
现代文：他们都按照古人直道行事的准则处世，怎么能胜任职责呢！
English: They are all acting according to the principles of the ancients, how can they be competent in their duties!

