古文：高句丽，其先出夫余。
现代文：高句丽，先祖来自夫余。
English: Goguryeo, the ancestors came from Fuyu.

古文：王尝得河伯女，因闭于室内，为日所照，引身避之，日影又逐，既而有孕，生一卵，大如五升。
现代文：夫余国王曾得到河伯的女儿，便关闭在房内，因被太阳照射，她抽身躲避，太阳光又追逐她，不久怀有身孕，生下一蛋，大如五个头。
English: King Yu's husband once got Hebe's daughter, then closed her in the room. Because she was exposed to the sun, she ducked to avoid it. The sun's rays chased her, and soon she was pregnant and gave birth to an egg as big as five heads.

古文：夫余王弃之与犬，犬不食；与豕，豕不食；弃于路，牛马避之；弃于野，众鸟以毛茹之。
现代文：夫余国王把他扔给狗，狗不吃；扔给小猪，小猪不吃；扔在路上，牛马躲避他；扔在田野上，好多鸟用羽毛包住他。
English: King Fuyu threw him to the dogs, but the dogs would not eat him; he threw him to the pigs, but the pigs would not eat him; he threw him on the road, but the cows and horses ran away from him; he threw him in the field, but many birds wrapped their feathers around him.

古文：王剖之不能破，遂还其母。
现代文：夫余国王剖开这个蛋，没能打破，于是还给他的母亲。
English: King Fuyu opened the egg, but could not break it, so he gave it back to his mother.

古文：母以物裹置暖处，有一男破而出。
现代文：母亲用物品裹住放在温暖的地方，有一个男孩破蛋而出。
English: The mother wrapped it in something and put it in a warm place. A boy broke out of the egg.

古文：及长，字之曰硃蒙。
现代文：长大后，给他起名字叫朱蒙。
English: When he grew up, he was given the name Zhu Meng.

古文：其俗言 硃蒙 者，善射也。
现代文：这个地方的方言 朱蒙 ，就是擅长射箭的意思。
English: The local dialect, Zhu Meng, means to be good at archery.

古文：夫余人以硃蒙非人所生，请除之。
现代文：夫余国的人认为朱蒙不是人生下来的，请求除掉他。
English: Some people in other countries believe that Zhu Meng is not a natural person and ask to get rid of him.

古文：王不听，命之养马。
现代文：国王没有答应，让它饲养马。
English: The king did not agree to let him breed horses.

古文：硃蒙私试，知有善恶，骏者减食令瘦，驽者善养令肥。
现代文：朱蒙私下测试，知道马的好坏，好马减食让它变瘦，劣马吃好饲养让它变肥。
English: Zhu Meng privately tested to know whether the horse was good or bad. A good horse would lose weight by eating less, while a bad horse would gain weight by eating well.

古文：夫余王以肥者自乘，以瘦者给硃蒙。后狩于田，以硃蒙善射，给之一矢。
现代文：夫余王把肥马留给自己乘骑，把瘦马送给朱蒙，后来在田野狩猎，因朱蒙擅长射箭，给他一支箭。
English: Husband Yu Wang kept the fat horse for himself to ride, and gave the thin horse to Zhu Meng. Later, he went hunting in the field, and because Zhu Meng was good at archery, he gave him an arrow.

古文：硃蒙虽一矢，殪兽甚多。
现代文：朱蒙虽然只有一箭，但箭发而死的野兽很多。
English: Although Zhu Meng only had one arrow, many beasts died from the arrow.

古文：夫余之臣，又谋杀之，其母以告硃蒙，硃蒙乃与焉违等二人东南走。
现代文：夫余国的大臣，又密谋杀害他，他母亲告知朱蒙，朱蒙就与焉违等二人向东南逃去。
English: Zhu Meng was told by his mother that the ministers of other countries were plotting to kill him. Zhu Meng fled to the southeast with Yan Bao and two others.

古文：中道遇一大水，欲济无梁。
现代文：半路上碰到一条大河，想渡河又没有桥梁。
English: Halfway there, we encountered a large river, and there was no bridge to cross it.

古文：夫余人追之甚急，硃蒙告水曰： 我是日子，河伯外孙，今追兵垂及，如何得济？ 
现代文：夫余国人追得很急，朱蒙对水说： 我是太阳的孩子，河伯的外孙，现在兵快到，如何渡过河去？ 
English: Zhu Meng said to the water, "I am the child of the sun, the grandson of Hebe. Now the soldiers are about to arrive. How can I cross the river?"

古文：于是鱼鳖为之成桥，硃蒙得度。
现代文：于是鱼鳖为他架成桥，朱蒙得以渡河。
English: As a result, the fish hooks formed a bridge for him, and Zhu Meng was able to cross the river.

古文：鱼鳖乃解，追骑不度。
现代文：鱼鳖分开，追兵不能渡河。
English: The baits are separated, so the pursuers can't cross the river.

古文：硃蒙遂至普述水，遇见三人，一著麻衣，一著衲衣，一著水藻衣，与硃蒙至纥升骨城，遂居焉。
现代文：朱蒙便到达普述水，遇见三个人，一个穿着麻布衣服，一人穿着僧衣，一人穿着水草衣，和朱蒙一起到纥升骨城，就在那里居住下来。
English: Zhu Meng then arrived at the Purushu River, met three people, one wearing a linen dress, one wearing a monk's robe, and one wearing a water plant robe, and went with Zhu Meng to the Bone City of Jiu Sheng, where they settled down.

古文：号曰高句丽，因以高为氏。
现代文：号称高句丽，就用高做姓氏。
English: Known as Goguryeo, they use Gao as their surname.

古文：其在夫余妻怀孕，硃蒙逃后，生子始闾谐。
现代文：他在夫余国的妻子怀孕，朱蒙逃走后，生了儿子始闾谐。
English: His wife in husband Yu Guo was pregnant, and after Zhu Meng fled, she gave birth to a son.

古文：及长，知硃蒙为国王，即与母亡归之。
现代文：长大后，得知朱蒙做了国王，就和他母亲逃走，与朱蒙归到一处。
English: When he grew up and learned that Zhu Meng had become king, he ran away with his mother and went to live with Zhu Meng.

古文：名曰闾达，委之国事。
现代文：名字叫闾达，把国事交付给他。
English: His name is Gongda, and he is in charge of state affairs.

古文：硃蒙死，子如栗立。
现代文：朱蒙死后，儿子如粟即位。
English: After Zhu Meng's death, his son Ru Mao ascended to the throne.

古文：如栗死，子莫来立，乃并夫余。
现代文：如粟死后，儿子莫来即位，吞并了夫余国。
English: After the death of Maw, his son Mowlai ascended the throne and annexed the rest of the country.

古文：汉武帝元封四年，灭朝鲜，置玄菟郡，以高句丽为县以属之。
现代文：汉武帝元封四年，灭掉朝鲜，设置玄菟郡，把高句丽作为县归属玄菟郡。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, he eliminated Korea, established Xuanzang County, and assigned Goguryeo to Xuanzang County as a county.

古文：汉时赐衣帻朝服鼓吹，常从玄菟郡受之。
现代文：汉时赏赐衣巾朝服鼓吹，常随着玄菟郡受赏。
English: During the Han Dynasty, he was awarded for his advocacy of the cloth and robe for the imperial court, and often received awards along with Xuanzang County.

古文：后稍骄，不复诣郡，但于东界筑小城受之，遂名此城为帜沟溇。 沟溇娄 者，句丽 城 名也。
现代文：后来慢慢地放纵起来，不再到郡里去，只在东部边境建造小城来接受封赏，于是命名此城为帻沟氵娄。 沟 是高丽 城 的叫法。
English: Later, he gradually indulged himself and no longer went to the county, but only built a small town on the eastern border to receive the reward, and then named the city as Gonggou, which is the name of Goryeo City.

古文：王莽初，发高句丽兵以伐胡，而不欲行，莽强迫遣之，皆出塞为寇盗。
现代文：王莽初年，征调高句丽的军队讨伐胡人，但不想去，王莽强行驱使，都逃出关塞做了寇盗。
English: In the first year of Wang Mang's reign, he conscripted Goguryeo's army to fight the Huns, but they did not want to go. Wang Mang forced them to go, and they all fled the pass and became robbers.

古文：州郡归咎于句丽侯驺，严尤诱而斩之。
现代文：州郡归罪于句丽侯，严尤诱骗杀了他。
English: The prefectural government blamed Gu Li Hou, and Yan You lured and killed him.

古文：莽大悦，更名高句丽，高句丽侯。
现代文：王莽大喜。改名高句丽、高句丽侯。
English: Wang Mang was overjoyed. He changed his name to Goguryeo, Goguryeo Hou.

古文：光武建武八年，高句丽遣使朝贡。
现代文：光武帝建武八年，高句丽派使者入朝进贡。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, Goguryeo sent an envoy to the court to pay tribute.

古文：至殇、安之间，莫来裔孙宫，建寇辽东。
现代文：到汉殇帝、汉安帝年间，莫来后世孙子宫，多次骚扰辽东。
English: During the reigns of the Han and Han dynasties, Liaodong was repeatedly harassed by the descendants of the grandson of the emperor.

古文：玄菟太守蔡风讨之，不能禁。
现代文：玄菟太守蔡风征讨，不能禁止。
English: Xuanzang Daju Cai Feng can not be banned.

古文：宫死，子伯固立。
现代文：宫死后，儿子伯固即位。
English: After the death of the emperor, his son, Bogo, became king.

古文：顺、和之间，复数犯辽东，寇抄。
现代文：顺帝、和帝年间，又多次侵犯辽东，偷盗掠夺。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Shun and Emperor He, they invaded Liaodong several times, stealing and plundering.

古文：灵帝建宁二年，玄菟太守耿临讨之，斩首虏数百级，伯固乃降，属辽东。
现代文：汉灵帝建宁二年，玄菟太守耿临讨伐，斩首数百名，伯固于是投降，临属辽东。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianning of the Han Dynasty, Geng Lin, the governor of Xuanzang, led a crusade and beheaded hundreds of people. As a result, Bo Gu surrendered and became a vassal of Liaodong.

古文：公孙度之雄海东也，伯固与之通好。
现代文：公孙度称雄海东时，伯固和他往来友好。
English: When Gongsundu was the champion of the sea bouquet, Bo Gu made friends with Gongsundu.

古文：伯固死，子伊夷摸立。
现代文：伯固死后，儿子伊夷摸即位。
English: After the death of Bogu, his son, Iyar, became king.

古文：伊夷摸自伯固时，已数寇辽东，又受亡胡五百余户。
现代文：伊夷摸从伯固时起，便已多次侵犯辽东，又接纳逃亡的胡人五百多户。
English: From the time of Bo Gu, Yiyi Bao invaded Liaodong several times, and accepted more than five hundred Hu families who had fled.

古文：建安中，公孙康出军击之，破其国，焚烧邑落，降胡亦叛。
现代文：建安年间，公孙康发兵攻打他，攻克国都，焚烧城池，降服的胡人也反叛。
English: During the Jianan era, Gongsun Kang sent troops to attack him, conquered the capital, burned the city, and the surrendered Hu people also rebelled.

古文：伊夷摸更作新国。
现代文：伊夷摸另建新国。
English: Yi Yi wanted to build a new country.

古文：其后伊夷摸复击玄菟，玄菟与辽东合击，大破之。
现代文：之后伊夷摸又攻打玄菟，玄菟郡与辽东联合攻打他，大败伊夷摸。
English: Later, the Yi Yigou also attacked Xuanzang County, and the Xuanzang County and the Liaodong County jointly attacked the Yi Yigou and defeated the Yi Yigou army.

古文：伊夷摸死，子位宫立。始位宫曾祖宫，生而目开能视，国人恶之。
现代文：伊夷摸死后，儿子位宫即位，原先位宫的曾祖父宫，生下来眼睛张开能看东西，国人讨厌他。
English: After Yi Yigou's death, his son Igu came to the throne. Igu's great-grandfather, Igu, was born with his eyes open and able to see. The Chinese people hated him.

古文：及长凶虐，国以残破。
现代文：长大后凶狠暴虐，国家因他灭亡。
English: He grew up to be a violent tyrant, and the country perished because of him.

古文：及位宫亦生而视人，高丽呼相似为 位 ，以为似其曾祖宫，故名位宫。
现代文：到位宫出生时也是生出来就能看人，高丽人把相似称作 位 ，认为他很像曾祖父宫，所以叫位宫。
English: When he was born, he was born with the ability to see people. The Goryeo people called his resemblance "bit," believing that he was very similar to his great-grandfather, so he was called "bit palace."

古文：位宫亦有勇力，便鞍马，善射猎。
现代文：位宫也很勇猛，熟习鞍马，擅长射猎。
English: Itamiya is also very brave. He is familiar with riding a pommel horse and is good at shooting.

古文：魏景初二年，遣太傅、司马宣王率众讨公孙文懿，位宫遣主簿、大加将数千人助军。
现代文：魏明帝景初二年，派太傅、司马宣王率众讨伐公孙文懿，位宫派主簿、大加带领数千人协助军队。
English: In the first two years of the reign of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, Emperor Taifu and Sima Xuanwang led the people to fight against Sun Yat-sen, and the imperial court sent the master of the palace, Daka, to lead thousands of people to assist the army.

古文：正始三年，位宫寇辽西安平。
现代文：魏齐王正始三年，位宫侵犯辽西安平。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Wei of Qi, the imperial court invaded Anping in western Liaoning.

古文：五年，幽州刺史毋丘俭将万人出玄菟，讨位宫，大战于沸流。
现代文：正始五年，幽州刺史母丘俭带领万人从玄菟郡出发，讨伐位宫，在沸流双方大战。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year, Yuzhou Zishi mother Qiu Jian led ten thousand people to set out from Xuanwu County to fight against the palace, and the two sides fought in the boiling current.

古文：败走，俭追至赪岘，悬车束马登丸都山，屠其所都。
现代文：兵败逃走，母丘俭追到赤见岘，停车勒马登上丸都山，屠杀他所居都城百姓。
English: Defeated, he ran away. His mother, Qiu Jian, chased him to Akaimiao, stopped the horse, mounted Marudoushan Mountain, and slaughtered the people of the capital city where he lived.

古文：位宫单将妻息远窜。
现代文：位宫只带着妻子与儿女向远方奔逃。
English: Iigu fled far away with only his wife and children.

古文：六年，俭复讨之，位宫轻将诸加奔沃沮。
现代文：正始六年，母丘俭再次讨伐他，位宫减少所带物品逃亡沃沮。
English: At the beginning of the sixth year, his mother, Qiu Jian, once again fought against him, and Qiu Jian reduced the items he brought and fled.

古文：俭使将军王颀追之，绝沃沮千余里，到肃慎南，刻石纪功。
现代文：母丘俭让将军王颀追赶他，穿越沃沮地界一千多里，到肃慎南边，刻石记功。
English: His mother, Qiu Jian, had the general Wang Yao chase him across more than a thousand miles of fertile land to the south of Shushan to record his achievements.

古文：又刊丸都山、铭不耐城而还。
现代文：又在丸都山刻石，在不耐城刻字而回。
English: He also carved stone in Marudusan Mountain and returned to carve characters in Niancheng.

古文：其后，复通中夏。
现代文：以后又通好中原。
English: Later, Gao Guanzhang and Zhongyuan became friends again.

古文：晋永嘉之乱，鲜卑慕容廆据昌黎大棘城，元帝授平州刺史。
现代文：晋永嘉之乱时，鲜卑慕容蝅占据昌黎大棘城，元帝授他为平州刺史。
English: At the time of the Jin Yongjia Rebellion, Xianbei Murongqian occupied the city of Changli Dacan, and the Yuan Emperor awarded him the title of the history of Pingzhou.

古文：位宫玄孙乙弗利频寇辽东，廆不能制。
现代文：位宫的玄孙乙弗利频频骚扰辽东，慕容蝅不能禁止。
English: The great-great-grandson of Wigu, Yifu Li, frequently harasses Liaodong, and Murong Yao cannot be banned.

古文：弗利死，子钊代立。
现代文：乙弗利死后，儿子钊代而即位。
English: After the death of Ephraim, his son Jochebed succeeded to the throne.

古文：魏建国四年，慕容廆子晃伐之，入自南陕，战于木底，大破钊军。追至丸都。
现代文：魏建国四年，慕容蝅的儿子慕容晃攻打他，从南陕进军，大战于木底，大败钊的军队，追到丸都。
English: In the fourth year of Wei's founding of the country, Murong Yao's son Murong Ao attacked him, marched from southern Shaanxi, fought a big battle in Moudi, defeated the enemy's army, and chased them to Marudu.

古文：钊单马奔窜，晃掘钊父墓，掠其母妻、珍宝、男女五万余口，焚其室，毁丸都城而还。
现代文：钊单枪匹马逃窜，慕容晃挖掘钊父亲的坟墓，掠夺他的母亲、妻子、珍宝、男女五万多口，焚烧宫室，破坏丸都城而还。
English: Gong fled single-handedly, Murongak excavated the tomb of Gong's father, plundered his mother, wife, treasures, more than fifty thousand men and women, burned the palace room, and destroyed the capital city and returned.

古文：钊后为百济所杀。
现代文：钊后来被百济杀死。
English: He was later killed by Baekje.

古文：及晋孝武太元十年，句丽攻辽东、玄菟郡。后燕慕容垂遣其弟农伐句丽，复二郡。
现代文：到晋孝武帝太元十年，高句丽攻打辽东。玄菟慕容重派他的弟弟慕容农征伐高丽，收复二郡。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, Goguryeo attacked Liaodong. Xuanzang Murong sent his younger brother Murong Nong to conquer Goryeo and recover two counties.

古文：垂子宝以句丽王安为平州牧，封辽东、带方二国王，始置长史、司马、参军官。
现代文：慕容垂的儿子慕容宝任命句丽王安为平州牧，封辽东，带方二国君主，开始设置长史、司马、参军官。
English: Murongtae's son, Murong Bao, appointed King An of Guryeo as the governor of Pingzhou and vassal of Liaodong, bringing the monarchs of the two countries, and began to set up Changshi, Sima, and Sang officers.

古文：后略有辽东郡。
现代文：后来大概设有辽东郡。
English: Later, Liaodong County was probably established.

古文：太武时，钊曾孙琏始遣使者诣安东，奉表贡方物，并请国讳。
现代文：太武帝时，钊的曾孙琏开始派使者到安东去。上奏表进贡地方特产，并且请求国家讳称。
English: At the time of Emperor Taibu, Zou's great-grandson Zou began to send envoys to Andong. The envoys paid tribute in the form of local specialties, and requested the state to conceal the fact.

古文：太武嘉其诚款，诏下帝系名讳于其国。
现代文：太武帝嘉奖他的诚心，下诏给他的国家赐下帝系、名讳。
English: Emperor Taibu commended his sincerity, and issued an edict to bestow the imperial line and fame on his country.

古文：使员外散骑侍郎李敖拜琏为都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领东夷中郎将、辽东郡公、高句丽王。
现代文：派员外散骑侍郎李敖授琏为都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领东夷中郎将、辽东郡公、高句丽王。
English: The dispatched foreign cavalry officer Li Jiuyong was the military governor of Liaohai, the general of the East Conquest, the general of the East Yizhong, the governor of Liaodong County, and the king of Goguryeo.

古文：敖至其所，居平壤城，访其方事，云：去辽东南一千余里，东至栅城，南至小海，北至旧夫余，人户参倍于前魏时。
现代文：李敖到达他那个地方，住在平壤城，询问地方事务，说 ：距辽东南一千多里，东到栅城，南到小海，北到昔日的夫余，户口是前魏时的三倍。 
English: When he arrived at his destination, he stayed in Pyongyang City and inquired about local affairs. He said, "It is more than a thousand miles southeast of Liao, east to Jecheng, south to Xiaohai, and north to the former Fuyu. The household registration is three times that of the former Wei Dynasty.

古文：后贡使相寻。岁致黄金二百斤、白银四百斤。
现代文：以后进贡使臣接连不断，每年送上黄金二百斤，白银四百斤。
English: From then on, the tributary envoys continued one after another, sending two hundred catties of gold and four hundred catties of silver every year.

古文：时冯弘率众奔之，太武遣散骑常侍封拨诏琏，令送弘。
现代文：当时冯弘率领部下投奔太武帝，太武帝派散骑常侍封拨诏令琏，让他护送冯弘。
English: At that time, Feng Hong led his subordinates to rush to Emperor Taowu, and Emperor Taowu sent his cavalry to escort Feng Hong.

古文：琏上书称当与弘俱奉王化，竟不遣。
现代文：琏上书言称应当和冯弘都享受君王的德化，竟然不送。
English: The epitaph on the book said that both he and Feng Hong should enjoy the king's virtuousness, but he did not send it.

古文：太武怒，将往讨之。
现代文：太武大怒，准备去讨伐他。
English: Taiwu flew into a rage and prepared to fight him.

古文：乐平王丕等议等后举，太武乃止。
现代文：乐平王丕商议稍待一段时间后再发兵，太武才作罢。
English: Leping Wang Yao deliberated for a while before sending troops, and only then did he decide to use force.

古文：而弘亦寿为琏所杀。
现代文：而冯弘不久也被琏杀害。
English: Feng Hong was also killed by the cormorants soon after.

古文：后文明太后以献文六宫未备，敕琏令荐其女。
现代文：后来文明太后以献文帝六宫不完备为由，诏令琏进献他的女儿。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager Wenming, on the grounds that Emperor Wen's sixth palace was not complete, issued an imperial edict ordering the emperor to sacrifice his daughter.

古文：琏奉表云：女已出，求以弟女应旨。
现代文：琏上表章说：女儿已经出嫁，请求以弟弟的女儿响应圣旨。
English: The inscription on the plaque reads: "My daughter is married. I ask you to respond to the divine will with my brother's daughter."

古文：朝廷许焉，乃遣安乐王真、尚书李敷等至境送币。
现代文：朝廷答应了，就派安乐王真、尚书李敷等到国家送上聘礼。
English: The court agreed, and sent Anle Wang Zhen and Shang Shul Lishiki to wait for the state to present the bride price.

古文：琏惑其左右之说，云朝廷昔与冯氏婚姻，未几而灭其国。
现代文：琏被身边人的言论迷惑，说朝廷过去和冯氏结为婚姻，不久便灭掉他的国家。
English: He was confused by the remarks of people around him, saying that the imperial court had married Mr. Feng in the past and would soon destroy his country.

古文：殷鉴不远，宜以方便辞之。
现代文：前人之鉴不远，应该见机辞掉。
English: The example of our predecessors is not far away, and we should see an opportunity to quit.

古文：琏遂上书，妄称女死。
现代文：琏就上书皇帝，假称女儿已死。
English: So she sent a letter to the emperor, pretending that her daughter was dead.

古文：朝廷疑其矫拒，又遣假散骑常侍程骏切责之，若女审死，听更选宗淑。
现代文：朝廷怀疑他借故拒绝，又派假散骑常侍程骏严厉责备他，如果女儿确实已死，允许另选宗族淑女。
English: The court suspected that he had refused to do so under some pretext, and sent his equestrian attendant Cheng Yu to reprimand him severely. If his daughter was indeed dead, he was allowed to choose another lady from his clan.

古文：琏云： 若天子恕其前愆，谨当奉诏。 
现代文：琏说： 如果天子宽恕以前的过错，必定恭敬地接受诏令。 
English: Zou said: If the Son of Heaven forgives the previous mistakes, he must respectfully accept the edict.

古文：会献文崩，乃止。
现代文：恰巧献文帝死去，才不讲这事。
English: It just so happened that Emperor Xianwen passed away, so he didn't talk about it.

古文：至孝文时，琏贡献倍前，其报赐亦稍加焉。
现代文：到孝文帝时，琏进贡的物品比以前加倍，朝廷的回报赏赐也慢慢地增加。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, the items of tribute had doubled, and the rewards of the imperial court had gradually increased.

古文：时光州于海中得琏遣诣齐使余奴等，送阙。
现代文：当时光州在海上抓获琏派到齐朝的使者余奴等，送到宫中。
English: At that time, Gwangju captured the envoy Yu Nong, who was sent to the Qi Dynasty, at sea and sent him to the palace.

古文：孝文诏责曰： 道成亲杀其君，窃号江左，朕方欲兴灭国于旧邦，继绝世于刘氏。
现代文：孝文帝下诏责备说： 萧道成杀死自己的君主，私自在江左称号。我正想在过去邦国的土地上复兴已经灭亡的国家，使世代中断的刘氏延续下去。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict saying: "Since Xiao Daocheng killed his own sovereign, I am taking the title of Jiang Zuo. I am trying to revive the country that has perished on the land of the past state, and to continue the Liu clan that has been interrupted for generations.

古文：而卿越境外乡，交通篡贼，岂是籓臣守节之义？
现代文：而你偷越国境到达外乡，结交通好篡位逆贼，难道是藩国臣子坚守忠节的行为吗？
English: And you sneaked across the border to a foreign village, and made a deal to usurp the position of a traitor. Is this the behavior of a vassal of the domain to adhere to the loyalty festival?

古文：今不以一过掩旧款，即送还籓。
现代文：现在不让一次过失掩盖过去的真诚，发送回国。
English: Now, don't let one mistake overshadow past sincerity, send them home.

古文：其感恕思愆，祗承明宪，辑宁所部，动静以闻。 
现代文：要感念宽恕反思过错，恭敬承受英明法令，安宁自己领导的地区，讯息及时上报。 
English: It is necessary to be compassionate, forgive, reflect on mistakes, respectfully accept wise laws and regulations, pacify the areas under one's leadership, and report information in a timely manner.

古文：太和十五年，琏死，年百余岁。
现代文：孝文帝太和十五年，琏死去，活了一百多年。
English: Emperor Xiaowen died at the age of 15 and lived for more than 100 years.

古文：孝文举哀于东郊，遣谒者仆射李安上策赠车骑大将军、太傅、辽东郡公、高句丽王，谥曰康。
现代文：孝文帝在东郊致哀，派谒者仆射李安上封赠车骑大将军、太傅、辽东郡公、高句丽王，谥号康。
English: Emperor Xiaowen offered his condolences in the eastern suburb, and dispatched a messenger to shoot Li An Shangfeng to give a free ride to the General, Taifu, Liaodong County, Goguryeo King, and Kang.

古文：又遣大鸿胪拜琏孙云使持节、都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡公、高句丽王。
现代文：又派大鸿胪授琏的孙子云为使持节，都督辽海诸军事、征东将军、领护东夷中郎将、辽东郡公，高句丽王。
English: He also sent his grandson Yun, the grand duke of Liaohui, as an envoy for the festival. He was the military governor of Liaohui, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Yizhong, the governor of Liaodong County, and the king of Goguryeo.

古文：赐衣冠服物车旗之饰。
现代文：赏赐衣帽服饰车旗装饰等物品。
English: Clothing, hats, clothing, car flags, decorations and other items will be awarded.

古文：又诏云遣世子入朝，令及郊丘之礼。
现代文：又诏令云送太子到朝中，让他到郊野行谒见的礼节。
English: He also ordered Yun to send the prince to the center of the court, and let him go to the countryside to see the etiquette.

古文：云上书辞疾，遣其从叔升于随使诣阙严责之，自此，岁常贡献。
现代文：云上书称病，派他的从叔升于随使者到宫中去。严厉责备他。从此，每年都进贡献礼。
English: Yun Shangshu wrote that he was ill and sent his uncle Zeng Rong to accompany the messenger to the palace. He was severely reprimanded. Since then, he has made a donation every year.

古文：正始中，宣武于东堂引见其使芮悉弗，进曰： 高丽系诚天极，累叶纯诚，地产土毛，无愆王贡。
现代文：正始年间，宣武在东堂召见高丽使者芮悉弗，进谏说 ：高丽确实在天的尽头，历代淳朴忠诚，物产虽然都是土地上的五谷桑麻，却从来不少进贡。
English: At the beginning of the year, Xuanwu summoned the envoy of Goryeo, Gong Sifu, to the East Hall, and Jin Zang said: Goryeo is indeed at the end of the world, the past generations are simple and loyal, and although the property is the grain mulberry on the land, there has never been much tribute.

古文：但黄金出夫余，珂则涉罗所产。
现代文：而黄金出自夫余，像玉的美石是涉罗出产。
English: While gold comes from Fujian, gemstones like jade are produced in Zhanluo.

古文：今夫余为勿吉所逐，涉罗为百济所并。
现代文：现在夫余被勿吉驱逐，涉罗被百济吞并。
English: Now, Fuyu has been expelled by Beiji, and Zhanluo has been annexed by Beiji.

古文：国王臣云惟继绝之义，悉迁于境内。
现代文：国王臣云考虑到断续的礼义，全部迁到境内。
English: King Zhenyun, taking into account the intermittent etiquette, all moved to the territory.

古文：二品所以不登王府，实两贼之为。 
现代文：两种物品之所以不进王府，实是两个贼人做的结果。 
English: The reason why the two items did not enter the royal palace was actually the result of two thieves.

古文：宣武曰： 高丽世荷上将，专制海外，九夷黠虏，实得征之。
现代文：宣武帝说： 高丽世代担当上将，在海外独断独行，九夷狡猾，实在应该征讨。
English: Emperor Xuanwu said: Goryeo's generation is in charge of the admiral, overseas arbitrarily, Jiushi cunning, really should be solicited.

古文：昔方贡之愆，责在连率。
现代文：过去地方物品进贡中断，过错地统率。
English: In the past, the payment of tribute for local goods was interrupted, leading to mistakes.

古文：宜宣朕旨于卿主，务尽威怀之略，使二邑还复旧墟，土毛无失常贡也。 
现代文：应该宣告我的话给您的主人，务必竭尽威镇安抚的策略，使两个邑区回到旧地，地方所产物品不要中断经常进贡。 
English: You should announce my words to your master, and be sure to use the strategy of appeasement to make the two counties return to the old land, and the local products should not interrupt the regular tribute.

古文：神龟中，云死，灵太后为举哀于东堂。
现代文：神龟年间，云死去，灵太后为他在东堂致哀。
English: In the year of the Divine Turtle, Yun died, and the Empress Dowager mourned for him in the East Hall.

古文：遣使策赠车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
现代文：派遣使臣封赠他为车骑大将军，领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
English: Envoys were dispatched to confer on him the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Lieutenant of Dongyi, Count of Liaodong, and King of Goryeo.

古文：又拜其世子安为镇东将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
现代文：又授他的太子安为镇东将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
English: He also granted his son Prince An the titles of Zhendong General, Tongyi Lieutenant, Liaodong County Commissioner, and King of Goryeo.

古文：正光初，光州又于海中执得梁所授安宁东将军衣冠剑珮，及使人江法盛等，送京师。
现代文：正光初年，光州又在海上抓到梁朝君主授予安宁东将军的衣冠，以及使臣江法盛等，送到京城。
English: In the first year of Zheng Guang, Gwangju also captured the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown of the crown

古文：安死，子延立。
现代文：安死后，儿子延即位。
English: After the death of Emperor An, his son Yan ascended the throne.

古文：孝武帝初，诏加延使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高句丽王。
现代文：孝武帝初年，诏令提升延为使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、领护东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高句丽王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the imperial edict was issued to promote and extend the festival to include the Envoys' Day, the Horse Guards' Day, the Horse Guards' Day, the Horse Guards' Day, the Horse Guards' Day, the Prince of Liaodong County, and the King of Goguryeo.

古文：天平中，诏加延侍中、骠骑大将军，余悉如故。
现代文：天平年间，诏令提升延为侍中、骠骑大将军，其余都和以前一样。
English: During the Tenpyo era, the Imperial Edict extended the promotion to Samurai Junior Officer and Grand General of Cavalry, and the rest were the same as before.

古文：延死，子成立。讫于武定已来，其贡使无岁不至。
现代文：延死后，儿子成即位，直至武定以前，进贡使臣没有一年不到。
English: After Yan Yan's death, his son Cheng ascended to the throne, and it was less than a year before Wu Ding paid tribute to the envoys.

古文：大统十二年，遣使至西魏朝贡。及齐受东魏禅之岁，遣使朝贡于齐。齐文宣加成使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军，领东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王如故。
现代文：西魏文帝大统十二年，派遣使臣到西魏进贡，到齐接受东魏禅让那年，派遣使臣到齐进贡，齐文宣帝任命成为使持节侍中、骠骑大将军，领东夷校尉、辽东郡公，高丽王和过去一样。
English: In the 12th year of the Western Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty sent envoys to Qi to pay tribute. In the same year, Emperor Wen of the Eastern Wei Dynasty sent envoys to Qi to pay tribute. Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty appointed him to be the middle-ranking attendant of the Festival of Envoys, the general of the cavalry, the captain of the Dongyi School, the governor of Liaodong County, and the king of Korea, as in the past.

古文：天保三年，文宣至营州，使博陵崔柳使于高丽，求魏末流人。
现代文：天保三年，文宣帝到营州，派博陵人崔柳出使高丽，寻求西魏末年被流放的人。
English: In the third year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenxuan went to Yingzhou and sent Cui Liu, a person from Boling, to send an envoy to Goryeo to look for people who had been exiled at the end of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：敕柳曰： 若不从者，以便宜从事。 
现代文：嘱咐崔柳说 ：如果不答应，可以随机行事。 
English: He instructed Cui Liu, "If you don't agree, you can act randomly."

古文：及至，不见许。
现代文：到高丽，得不到允许。
English: If you go to Korea, you're not allowed.

古文：柳张目叱之，拳击成坠于床下，成左右雀息不敢动，乃谢服，柳以五千户反命。
现代文：崔柳瞪眼大声呵斥，用拳把成打落在床下，成身边的人气力微弱不敢动，于是道歉服从。崔柳带走五千户复命。
English: Cui Liu stared and shouted loudly, using his fist to knock Cheng under the bed. Cheng's people around him were too weak to move, so they apologized and obeyed. Cui Liu took away five thousand households and restored their lives.

古文：成死，子汤立。
现代文：成死后，儿子汤即位。
English: After the death of Cheng, his son Tang ascended to the throne.

古文：乾明元年，齐废帝以汤为使持节、领东夷校尉、辽东郡公、高丽王。
现代文：乾明元年，齐废帝任命汤为使持节、领东夷校尉、辽东公、高丽王。
English: In the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, Emperor Qibao appointed Tang as the envoy of Ji Jie, the leader of Dongyi, the commander of Liaodong, and the king of Goryeo.

古文：周建德六年，汤遣使至周，武帝以汤为上开府仪同大将军、辽东郡公、辽东王。
现代文：北周建德六年，汤派使臣到北周，武帝任命汤为上开府仪同大将军、辽东郡公、辽东王。
English: In the sixth year of Northern Zhou Jiande, Tang sent envoys to Northern Zhou, and Emperor Wu appointed Tang as Shang Kaifu Yi Tong General, Liaodong County Governor, and King of Liaodong.

古文：隋文帝受禅，汤遣使诣阙，进授大将军，改封高丽王。
现代文：隋文帝接受禅让后，汤派遣使者到京城去。提升为大将军，改封高丽王。
English: After Sui Emperor Wen accepted Zen's concession, Tang sent an envoy to the capital. He was promoted to general and given the title of King of Goryeo.

古文：自是，岁遣使朝贡不绝。
现代文：从此，每年派使臣进贡不断。
English: From then on, he continued to send envoys to collect tribute every year.

古文：其国，东至新罗，西度辽，二千里；南接百济，北邻靺鞨，一千余里。
现代文：高丽国，东到新罗，西越过辽，东西二千里；南连百济，北邻，南北一千多里。
English: Koryo Province, east to Silla, west to Liao, east-west two thousand miles; south to Baekje, north neighbor, north-south more than one thousand miles.

古文：人皆士著，随山谷而居，衣布帛及皮。
现代文：国人世代都居住在此地，顺着山谷居住，穿布帛和皮。
English: Chinese people have lived here for generations, living along the valley, wearing cloth and leather.

古文：土田薄瘠，蚕农不足以自供，故其人节饮食。
现代文：土地贫薄，养蚕种地不够供应自己，所以他们的人节约饮食。
English: The land is poor, and the silkworm farms are not enough to feed themselves, so their people have to economize on food.

古文：其王好修宫室，都平壤城，亦曰长安城，东西六里，随山屈曲，南临浿水。
现代文：国王喜爱修建宫室，在平壤建都，也叫长安城，东西有六里，沿着山谷弯曲，南临氵贝水。
English: The king loved to build palaces, and the capital was built in Pyongyang, also known as Chang'an City, which is six miles long from east to west, curves along the valley, and has mussel water to the south.

古文：城内唯积仓储器备，寇贼至日，方入固守。
现代文：城内只堆集仓库储放武器装备，盗贼来到时，才入城坚守。
English: In the city, only warehouses are piled up to store weapons and equipment. When thieves come, they only enter the city to hold out.

古文：王别为宅于其侧，不常居之。
现代文：国王另外在城旁边建造住宅，不常居住。
English: The king also built a residence next to the city and did not live there often.

古文：其外复有国内城及汉城，亦别都也。
现代文：此外还有国内城与汉城，也都是别都。
English: In addition, there are domestic cities and Seoul, which are also other cities.

古文：其国中呼为三京。
现代文：当时国内人称做三京。
English: At that time, people in China called it Sanjing.

古文：复有辽东、玄菟等数十城，皆置官司以统摄。
现代文：还有辽东、玄菟等几十个城，都设置官员来管辖。
English: There are also dozens of cities such as Liaodong and Xuanzang, all of which have set up officials to administer.

古文：与新罗每相侵夺，战争不息。
现代文：与新罗国之间常常互相侵犯掠夺，战争不止。
English: and Silla often invaded and plundered each other, and the war continued.

古文：官有大对卢、太大兄、大兄、小兄、竟侯奢、鸟拙、太大使者、大使者、小使者、褥奢、翳属、仙人，凡十二等，分掌内外事。
现代文：官职有大对卢、太大兄、大兄、小兄、竞侯奢、乌拙、太大使者、大使者、小使者、褥奢、翳属、仙人，总共十二个等级，分别掌管内外事务。
English: There are twelve ranks of official posts, including the grand vassal, great elder brother, elder brother, younger brother, rival vassal, subordinate vassal, great ambassador, ambassador, lesser envoy, subordinate vassal, subordinate vassal, and sage, respectively, in charge of domestic and foreign affairs.

古文：其大对卢则以强弱相陵夺而自为之，不由王署置。
现代文：大对卢的职位是以强弱互相侵犯夺取而自己任命，不通过国王安排。
English: The position of the Grand Prince of Lu is self-appointed through the mutual encroachment of the strong and the weak, and is not arranged by the king.

古文：复有内评、五部褥萨。
现代文：还有内评，五部祷萨。
English: There is also an internal commentary, a five-part prayer.

古文：人皆头著折风，形如弁，士人加插二鸟羽。
现代文：人们都是头戴折风，形状像弁，官员多插上两根鸟羽。
English: People are wearing a headband shaped like a valve, and officials are adding two bird feathers.

古文：贵者，其冠曰苏骨，多用紫罗为之，饰以金银。
现代文：显贵的人，他们的冠叫苏骨，多用紫色丝制成，用金银装饰。
English: Prominent people, their crowns are called Su Bone, mostly made of purple silk, decorated with gold and silver.

古文：服大袖衫、大口袴、素皮带、黄革履。
现代文：穿大袖衫，大口裤，白皮带、黄革鞋。
English: He wears a large-sleeved shirt, wide-legged trousers, a white leather belt, and yellow leather shoes.

古文：妇人裙襦加襈。
现代文：妇女裙襦加边缘。
English: Women's skirts are pleated and edged.

古文：书有《五经》、《三史》、《三国志》、《晋阳秋》。
现代文：书有《五经》、《三史》、《三国志》、《晋阳秋》。
English: His books include "Five Classics," "Three Histories," "Three Kingdoms," and "Jinyang Autumn."

古文：兵器与中国略同。
现代文：兵器和中原大致相同。
English: Weapons and the Central Plains are roughly the same.

古文：及春秋校猎，王亲临之。
现代文：春秋两季围猎时，国王亲自到场。
English: During the spring and autumn hunting seasons, the king himself came to the scene.

古文：其刑法，叛及谋逆者，缚之柱，爇而斩之，籍没其家；盗则偿十倍，若贫不能偿者乐及公私债负，皆听评其子女为奴婢以偿之。
现代文：税收，布五疋，谷子五石；流动人口，就三年交一次税，十人总共细布一疋。租是每户一石，差一点的七斗，最可下的五斗。国家刑法，叛乱以及密谋造反的，绑在柱子上，焚烧后斩掉。户口册上注销他的家。偷盗偿还十倍，如果贫穷不能偿还的，乐意通过私债公付，都听凭他的子女变为奴婢来偿还。
English: Tax, cloth, five baht, grain, five koku; the floating population, three years of tax, ten people in total, one baht. Rent is one stone per household, almost seven bucks, the lowest five bucks. National criminal law, rebellion and conspiracy to rebel, tied to a post, burned and chopped off. His home is cancelled in the household registration book. Theft is repaid ten times, if poverty cannot be repaid, he is willing to pay through private debt, and his children are allowed to become slaves.

古文：用刑既峻，罕有犯者。
现代文：用刑既然很严厉，很少有犯法的。
English: Since the punishment is very severe, very few people break the law.

古文：乐有五弦、琴、筝、筚篥、横吹、箫、鼓之属，吹芦以和曲。
现代文：乐器有五弦、琴、筝、筚篥、横吹、箫、鼓之类，吹芦苇以配合曲。
English: Musical instruments include the five strings, the koto, the kite, the gong, the flute, the gong and the drum, and the reed flute is played to accompany the melody.

古文：每年初，聚戏浿水上，王乘腰辇、列羽仪观之。
现代文：每年开始，都在氵贝水上嬉戏，国王乘腰，排列旌旗观看。
English: At the beginning of each year, they play on the mussel water, and the king sits on his waist, watching the parade of flags.

古文：事毕，王以衣入水，分为左右二部，以水石相溅掷，喧呼驰逐，再三而止。
现代文：国王把衣服扔到水中，分成左右两部分，用水石互相氵平溅投掷。喊叫追逐，再三而止。
English: The king threw his robe into the water, splitting it into two parts, splashing each other with water stones, shouting and chasing, and then stopping.

古文：俗洁净自喜，尚容止，以趋走为敬。
现代文：风俗上，喜欢洁净，崇尚容貌，把快步走看作尊敬。
English: In terms of customs, they like cleanliness, admire good looks, and regard a brisk walk as respect.

古文：拜则曳一脚，立多反拱，行必插手。
现代文：拜见时就拉一只脚，站立时多反拱手，走路时一定叉手。
English: When you meet someone, you pull one foot, when you stand, you hold back your hand, and when you walk, you hold out your hand.

古文：性多诡伏，言辞鄙秽，不简亲疏。
现代文：性情大多奇异内向，言语浅陋污秽，不管亲疏。
English: Most of them are eccentric and introverted, and their speech is shallow and filthy, regardless of whether they are relatives or strangers.

古文：父子同川而浴，共室而寝。
现代文：父子同河洗澡，同室睡觉。
English: Father and son bathe in the same river and sleep in the same room.

古文：好歌舞，常以十月祭天，其公会衣服，皆锦绣金银以为饰。
现代文：爱好歌舞，经常用以在十月祭天。公共场合的衣服，都用锦纟肃金银作为装饰。
English: Love song and dance, often used in the October Festival. Public clothes are decorated with brocade, gold and silver.

古文：好蹲踞，食用俎机。出三尺马，云本硃蒙所乘马种，即果下也。
现代文：好蹲踞，吃饭时用砧板，出产一种三尺长的马，说来源于朱蒙乘坐的马种，就是说果子降世。
English: Good squatting, use a cutting board when eating, produce a three-foot-long horse, said to be derived from the horse species ridden by Zhu Meng, that is, the descent of the fruit.

古文：风俗尚淫，不以为愧，俗多游女，夫无常人，夜则男女群聚而戏，无有贵贱之节。
现代文：风俗崇尚淫乱，不因此羞愧，民间多放荡的女子，男人没有固定的妻子，夜间男女成群聚集在一起戏乐，没有贵贱的分别。
English: Customs advocate fornication and are not ashamed of it, the people are mostly promiscuous women, men do not have a fixed wife, men and women gather in groups at night to play, there is no distinction between the rich and the poor.

古文：有婚嫁，取男女相悦即为之。
现代文：有婚姻嫁娶，男女相爱的就结为夫妻。
English: When there is marriage, men and women who love each other become husband and wife.

古文：男家送猪酒而已，无财聘之礼；或有受财者，人共耻之，以为卖婢。
现代文：男方只送猪酒而已，没有拿钱作聘礼的仪式；有接受财物的，人们都看不起，认为是卖婢女。
English: The man only sent pig wine, there was no ceremony of taking money as a betrothal gift; people looked down on those who accepted property, thinking they were selling their maidservants.

古文：死者，殡在屋内，经三年，择吉日而葬。
现代文：死人，灵柩停放在屋里，过三年，选择吉日安葬。
English: For the dead, the coffin is placed in the house, and after three years, the auspicious day is chosen for burial.

古文：居父母及夫丧，服皆三年，兄弟三月。
现代文：为父母及丈夫居丧，服孝都是三年，兄弟是三月。
English: For parents and husbands in mourning, filial piety is three years, and brothers are three months.

古文：初终哭泣，葬则鼓舞作乐以送之。
现代文：最初和最后哭泣，埋葬时则敲鼓跳舞吹乐相送。
English: At the beginning and at the end they cry, and at the burial they beat drums, dance and play music.

古文：埋讫，取死者生时服玩车马置墓侧，会葬者争取而去。
现代文：埋葬后，拿死者生前衣服物品车马放在墓侧，参加葬礼的人争夺取走。
English: After burial, the deceased's clothes, belongings, chariots and horses are placed on the side of the grave, and those attending the funeral compete to take them away.

古文：信佛法，敬鬼神，多淫祠。
现代文：相信佛法，敬事鬼神，有很多滥设的祠庙。
English: They believe in Buddhism, worship ghosts and gods, and have many temples that were built without permission.

古文：有神庙二所：一曰夫余神，刻木作妇人像；一曰高登神，云是其始祖夫余神之子。
现代文：有二所神庙：一个叫夫余神，把木头刻成妇女像；一个叫高登神，说是他的始祖夫余神的儿子。
English: There are two shrines: one is called the Husband God, and the wood is carved into the likeness of a woman; the other is called the High God, and is said to be the son of his forefather, the Husband God.

古文：并置官司，遣人守护，盖河伯女、硃蒙云。
现代文：都设置官署，派人守护。所敬之神大概是河伯女、朱蒙。
English: They all set up government offices and sent people to guard them. The deities they worshipped were probably Hebe and Zhu Meng.

古文：及隋平陈后，汤大惧，陈兵积谷，为守拒之策。
现代文：隋平定陈朝后，汤很害怕，陈列部队积蓄粮食，做出守卫抵御的打算。
English: After the Sui and Chen dynasties were subdued, Tang was very afraid, and he had his troops stockpile grain and make plans to defend against the invasion.

古文：开皇十七年，上赐玺书，责以每遣使人，岁常朝贡，虽称籓附，诚节未尽。
现代文：开皇十七年，皇帝赐下玺书，批评高丽常派使臣，每年进贡，虽然称为藩国附民，忠诚的礼节还未完备。
English: In the seventeenth year of the emperor's reign, the emperor issued an imperial edict, criticizing the envoys of the Goryeo dynasty, and the annual tribute, although it was called the domain, the country and the people, the loyal etiquette was not complete.

古文：驱逼靺鞨，禁固契丹。
现代文：驱赶，限制契丹。
English: expel, restrict Khitan.

古文：昔年潜行货利，招动群小，私将弩手，巡窜下国，岂非意欲不臧，故为窃盗？
现代文：当年秘密地经营财物，招集动员众人，私下带领弓箭手，巡窜诸侯国，难道不是不怀好意，故意成为盗贼的吗？
English: At that time, secretly managing property, gathering and mobilizing people, privately leading archers, and patrolling the vassal states, wasn't it a bad intention to deliberately become a thief?

古文：会病卒。子元嗣。
现代文：坐镇空馆，严加看守；又多次派遣兵马，杀害边境人士。
English: He kept an open-air museum in the town and kept a strict watch; he also dispatched soldiers and horses many times to kill people at the border.

古文：文帝使拜元为上开府仪同三司，袭爵辽东公，赐服一袭。
现代文：常常自相猜疑，密密地打探消息，勤勤恳恳地晓谕，准允他们改过自新。儿子元继位。文帝派使者授元为上开府仪同三司。荫袭爵位辽东公，赐朝服一套。
English: Emperor Wen sent an envoy to confer on Yuan the title of Shang Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi. He inherited the title of Lord of Liaodong and was given a set of imperial robes.

古文：元奉表谢恩，并贺祥瑞，因请封王。
现代文：元呈奏表章谢恩，并祝贺国家祥瑞，就此请封为王。
English: Yuan presented the medal of thanks, and congratulated the country on the auspiciousness of the new year, and asked Zhou to be crowned king.

古文：文帝优册为王。
现代文：文帝戏谑地册封他为王。
English: Emperor Wen jokingly crowned him king.

古文：明年，率靺鞨万余骑寇辽西，营州总管韦世冲击走之。
现代文：第二年，率领一万多骑兵侵犯辽西，营州总管韦世冲被攻击逃走。
English: The next year, he led more than ten thousand cavalrymen to invade western Liaoning, and Wei Shichong, the governor of Yingzhou, was attacked and fled.

古文：帝大怒，命汉王谅为元帅，总水陆讨之，下诏黜其爵位。
现代文：皇帝大怒，命令汉王谅为元帅，率领大军、讨伐高丽王元，下诏免去他的爵位。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered Han Wang Peng to become a marshal and lead a large army to fight against King Won of Goryeo, and removed him from his title.

古文：时馈运不继，六军乏食，师出临渝关，复遇疾疫，王师不振。
现代文：当时军队的供给跟不上，六军无粮食，军队出临渝关，又碰上传染病，军队士气不振作。
English: At that time, the supply of the army could not keep up, the six armies had no grain, the army left Linyu Pass and encountered infectious diseases, and the morale of the army was low.

古文：及次辽水，元亦惶惧，遣使谢罪，上表称 辽东粪土臣元 云云。
现代文：等军队驻扎在辽水时，元也惊惶害怕，派遣使者谢罪，上奏表称 辽东粪土臣元 等等。
English: When other armies were stationed in Liaoshui, the Yuan was also alarmed and afraid, sent an envoy to apologize, and the record sheet was called "Liaodong Guo Tu Zhen Yuan" and so on.

古文：上于是罢兵，待之如初。元亦岁遣朝贡。
现代文：皇帝于是休兵，对待他和以前一样，元也常常派使臣入朝进贡。
English: The emperor then took a leave of absence and treated him the same way as before, often sending envoys to the court to pay tribute.

古文：炀帝嗣位，天下全盛，高昌王、突厥启人可汗并亲诣阙贡献，于是征元入朝。
现代文：炀帝即位后，天下整个兴盛，高昌王、突厥启人可汗都亲自到京城进贡，于是征召元入朝。
English: After Emperor Qian ascended the throne, the whole country prospered. King Gaochang and the Turkic Qin Khan both came to the capital to pay tribute in person, so Yuan was conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：元惧，蕃礼颇阙。
现代文：元害怕，蕃人礼节颇不齐全。
English: Originally afraid, the eunuch's etiquette is quite incomplete.

古文：大业七年，帝将讨元罪，车驾度辽水，止营于辽东地，分道出师，各顿兵于其城下。
现代文：大业七年，帝准备讨伐罪人元，车驾渡过辽水，在辽东扎营下寨。分路出军，都将士兵停顿在高句丽城下。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Leap Forward, the emperor was preparing to fight the Sinful Yuan Dynasty. He drove across Liaoshui and camped in Liaodong. When he left the army by different routes, all the soldiers stopped at the foot of Goguryeo Castle.

古文：高丽出战多不利，皆婴城固守。
现代文：高丽出城迎敌多不顺利，都围绕京城牢固守卫。
English: Goryeo's departure from the capital to meet the enemy was mostly not successful, and they all firmly guarded around the capital.

古文：帝令诸军攻之，又敕诸将，高丽若降，即宜抚纳，不得纵兵入。
现代文：皇帝令各军攻打元，又诏令各将领，高丽如果投降，就应该安抚接纳，不得放任士兵入城。
English: The emperor ordered the armies to attack Yuan, and also ordered the generals that if Goryeo surrendered, it should be appeased and accepted, and soldiers should not be allowed to enter the city.

古文：城将陷，贼辄言降，诸将奉旨，不敢赴机。
现代文：城将陷落时，反贼就说投降，各将领遵奉皇上旨意，不敢进城。
English: When the city was about to fall, the rebels said they would surrender, and the generals followed the emperor's orders and did not dare to enter the city.

古文：先驰奏，比报，贼守御亦备，复出拒战。
现代文：首先骑马奏请皇上，等到回报后，反贼防守抵御也准备好了，便又出城应战。
English: First of all, he rode a horse to invite the emperor, and when he returned, the anti-thief defense was ready, and he went out of the city to fight.

古文：如此者三，帝不悟。
现代文：像这样三次，皇帝没有明白过来。
English: Three times like this, the emperor did not understand.

古文：由是食尽师老，转输不继，诸军多败绩，于是班师。
现代文：因此粮食吃完军队疲劳，运输跟不上，各军都有败仗，于是班师回朝。
English: Therefore, after eating the grain, the army was tired, transportation could not keep up, and all the armies were defeated, so the team returned to the North.

古文：是行也，唯于辽水西拔贼武厉逻，置辽东郡及通定镇而还。
现代文：这一趟，只在辽水西攻取反贼武万逻，设置辽东郡及通定镇而回。
English: This time, they only captured the anti-thief Wu Wanluo in the west of Liaoshui and set up Liaodong County and Tongding Town.

古文：九年，帝复亲征，敕诸军以便宜从事。
现代文：九年，皇上又带兵亲征，下令各军可以随时机行事。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor again led soldiers to enlist, and ordered that each army could act at any time.

古文：诸将分道攻城，贼势日蹙。
现代文：各将领分路进攻，反贼形势一天比一天窘迫。
English: Each general led a separate attack, and the anti-thief situation became more and more difficult day by day.

古文：会杨玄感作乱，帝大惧，即日六军并还。
现代文：赶上杨玄感叛乱，皇帝很害怕，当天六军同时还京。
English: Catching up with Yang Xuanxuan's rebellion, the emperor was very afraid. On the same day, the six armies returned to Beijing at the same time.

古文：兵部侍郎斛斯政亡入高丽，高丽具知事实，尽锐来追，殿军多败。
现代文：兵部侍郎斛斯政逃到高丽，高丽全部了解真实情况，出动全部精锐部队追击，皇帝军队多败。
English: Goryeo learned the truth and sent all its elite troops in pursuit. The emperor's army suffered many defeats.

古文：十年，又发天下兵，会盗贼蜂起，所在阻绝，军多失期。
现代文：十年，又征发全国兵力，赶上各地盗贼蜂起，军队受阻，大多延误日期。
English: Ten years later, the national army was conscripted again, and the thieves in various regions rose up to catch up. The army was blocked, and most of the dates were delayed.

古文：至辽水，高丽亦困弊，遣使乞降，因送斛斯政赎罪。帝许之，顿怀远镇受其降，仍以俘囚军实归。
现代文：到辽水，高丽也因窘困疲惫，派遣使者请求投降，于是送斛斯政赎罪，皇帝答应他，停在怀远镇接受他投降，仍旧以俘虏囚徒充实而归。
English: When he arrived at Liaoshui, Goryeo was also exhausted from the hardships and sent an envoy to request his surrender, so he sent Goseong to atone for his sins. The emperor agreed to stop at Huaiyuan Town to accept his surrender, but still returned with a full complement of prisoners.

古文：有阿会氏，五部中最盛，诸部皆归之。
现代文：到京城，用高丽的使节亲自告于太庙，就拘留了他。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he personally reported to the Imperial Temple through the envoy of Goryeo, and he was detained.

古文：每与契丹相攻击，虏获财畜，因遣使贡方物。
现代文：仍然征召元入朝，元竟然不到。皇帝又打算攻取，赶上天下丧乱，于是不再去攻打。
English: He still conscripted Yuan into the imperial court, but Yuan did not come. The emperor planned to attack again, but the world was in turmoil, so he did not attack again.

古文：契丹国，在库莫奚东，与库莫奚异种同类。
现代文：契丹国在库莫奚东，与库莫奚不同种而同类。
English: The Khitan kingdom, to the east of Kumo, is a different species from Kumo, but the same.

古文：并为慕容晃所破，俱窜于松漠之间。
现代文：因被慕容晃打败，都躲藏在松漠之间。
English: Because they were defeated by Murong Ao, they all hid in the pine forest.

古文：登国中，魏大破之，遂逃迸，与库莫奚分住。
现代文：登国年间，魏打败契丹，于是逃散，与库莫奚分开居住。
English: During the year of his ascension to the throne, Wei defeated Khitan and fled, living separately from Kumo.

古文：经数十年，稍滋蔓，有部落，于和龙之北数百里为寇盗。
现代文：经过数十年，稍有繁衍，有部落群体。在和龙北数百里的地方做盗贼。
English: After decades, there is a slight proliferation, there are tribal groups, and there are thieves in places hundreds of miles north of Longtan.

古文：真君以来，岁贡名马。
现代文：真君以来，每年进贡名贵马匹。
English: Since the time of Zhenjun, famous and valuable horses have been brought in as tribute every year.

古文：献文时，使莫弗纥何辰来献，得班飨于诸国之末。
现代文：献文时，派莫弗纥何辰来中原进献，受到在诸国之后酒食招待的礼遇。
English: At the time of the donation, he sent Mo Fuxi He Chen to Zhongyuan to make the donation, and received the courtesy of being invited to wine and dine after the other countries.

古文：归而相谓，言国家之美，心皆忻慕，于是东北群狄闻之，莫不思服。
现代文：归国后互相告知，称中国美好，内心都很向往倾慕，东北各狄族部落听说后，无不想到归附。
English: After returning home, they told each other that China was beautiful, and they all yearned for it in their hearts. After hearing this, all the Di tribes in the northeast did not want to return.

古文：悉万丹部、何大何部、伏弗郁部、羽陵部、日连部、匹洁部、黎部、吐六干部等各以其名马、文皮献天府。
现代文：悉万丹部、何大何部、伏弗郁部、羽陵部、日连部、匹洁部、黎部、吐六干部等都拿他们的名马花皮进献京都。
English: Cadres from the Shibandan Club, the He Dai He Club, the Fu Fu Yu Club, the Hualing Club, the Nichiren Club, the Pichai Club, the Lai Club, and the Tu Luo Club all brought their famous horse skins to Kyoto.

古文：遂求为常，皆得交市于和龙、密云之间，贡献不绝。
现代文：于是请求经常往来，都得以在和龙、密云之间集市交易，上贡进献一直不断。
English: As a result, the requests often came and went, and they were able to trade in the bazaars between Long and Miyun, and the tribute was continuously raised.

古文：太和三年，高句丽窃与蠕蠕谋，欲取地豆干以分之。
现代文：魏太和三年，高句丽私下与蠕蠕国商议，想夺取地豆干瓜分。
English: In the third year of the Wei and Taihe Dynasties, Goguryeo secretly negotiated with the Ming and Qing dynasties, trying to seize and divide the dried soybeans.

古文：契丹旧怨其侵轶，其莫贺弗勿干率其部落，车三千乘、众万余口，驱徙杂畜求内附，止于白狼水东。
现代文：契丹过去恨高句丽突袭自己，由莫贺弗勿干率领他的部落，三千辆车，万口人，驱赶各种牲畜来内地要求归附，停在白狼水东边。
English: Khitan used to hate Goguryeo's surprise attack on itself, led by Moga Fubukan, his tribe, three thousand vehicles, ten thousand people, drove all kinds of livestock to the mainland to request annexation, and stopped on the east side of White Wolf Water.

古文：自此岁常朝贡。
现代文：从此每年向朝廷进贡。
English: Since then, it has paid tribute to the Imperial Court every year.

古文：后告饥，孝文听其入关市籴。
现代文：后逢饥荒，孝文帝准许他们入关内购买粮食。
English: After a famine, Emperor Xiaowen allowed them to enter the pass to buy grain.

古文：及宣武、孝明时，恆遣使贡方物。
现代文：到宣武帝、孝明帝时，常派使者进贡地方特产。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xuanwu and Emperor Xiaoming, emissaries were often sent to bring tribute of local specialties.

古文：熙平中，契丹使人初真等三十人还，灵太后以其俗嫁娶之际以青为上服，人给青两匹，赏其诚款之心，余依旧式朝贡。
现代文：孝明帝熙平年间，契丹使者初真等三十人回国，灵太后依照他们在嫁娶时以青为上等服装的习俗，每人给青两匹，赏赐他们诚恳奉朝，其他仍依以前惯例进贡。
English: During the Heiping reign of Emperor Xiaoming, thirty people including the Khitan envoy Jocheng came back to China. According to the custom of the empress dowager, when they got married, they wore blue as their best clothing. She gave each of them two blue horses and rewarded them for their sincere service to the emperor. The others still paid tribute according to the previous custom.

古文：及齐受东魏禅，常不断绝。
现代文：到齐朝接受东魏禅位，常常进贡不断。
English: He came to Qi Dynasty to accept the East Wei zen rank, and often received continuous tribute.

古文：天保四年九月，契丹犯塞，文宣帝亲戎北讨。至平州，遂西趣长堑。
现代文：北齐宣帝天保四年九月，契丹进犯边塞，文宣帝亲自着甲北伐，到平州，挖通向西的漫长壕沟。
English: In September of the 4th year of the Northern Qi Emperor Xuanzong's reign of Tianbao, the Khitan invaded the border fortress. Emperor Wenxuan personally started the Northern Expedition, went to Pingzhou, and dug a long trench to the west.

古文：诏司徒潘相乐帅精骑五千，自东道趣青山；复诏安德王韩轨帅精骑四千东趣，断契丹走路。
现代文：诏令司徒潘相乐率精锐骑兵五千，从东路奔赴青山；又诏令安德王韩轨率四千精锐骑兵向东开拔，断绝契丹国逃路。
English: He ordered the five-thousand-strong elite cavalry led by Stub Pan Sang Lok to rush from the east to Aoyama; he also ordered the four-thousand-strong elite cavalry led by King Ando Han Kuo to march eastward to cut off the escape route of Khitan.

古文：帝亲逾山岭，奋击大破之，虏十余万口、杂畜数十万头。
现代文：文宣帝亲自越过山岭，奋力击敌，大败契丹，俘虏十多万人、各类牲畜十万头。
English: Emperor Wenxuan personally crossed the mountains, fought hard against the enemy, defeated the Khitan, captured more than one hundred thousand people and one hundred thousand heads of livestock of all kinds.

古文：相乐又于青山大破契丹别部。
现代文：潘相乐又在青山大败契丹另外部队。
English: Pan Sang Lok also defeated another unit of the Khitan in Qingshan.

古文：所虏生口，皆分置诸州。
现代文：所俘的契丹人，都分开安置在各州。
English: The captured Khitans have all been resettled separately in different provinces.

古文：其后复为突厥所逼，又以万家寄于高丽。
现代文：之后，契丹又被突厥逼迫，以万余家寄居高丽。
English: After that, Khitan was again persecuted by the Turks and lived as a sojourner in Korea with more than 10,000 families.

古文：其俗与靺鞨同，好为寇盗。
现代文：契丹国风俗与相同，喜做盗贼。
English: Khitan customs are the same, they like to be thieves.

古文：父母死而悲哭者，以为不壮。
现代文：父母死去而悲伤哭泣的人，被认为不豪壮。
English: People who cry when their parents die are not considered heroic.

古文：但以其尸置于山树之上，经三年后，乃收其骨而焚之。
现代文：只把尸体放在山树上面，经过三年后，才收取尸骨焚烧掉。
English: They just put the bodies on the top of the mountain trees, and after three years, they collect the bones and burn them.

古文：因酌酒而祝曰： 冬月时，向阳食。若我射猎时，使我多得猪、鹿。 
现代文：同时斟酒祝辞说 ：冬月季节，向着太阳而食，如果我打猎时，让我多得些猪、鹿。 
English: At the same time, he said in his toast, "During the winter months, I eat facing the sun. If I hunt, let me have more pigs and deer."

古文：其无礼顽嚣，于诸夷最甚。
现代文：他们缺乏礼义廉耻，顽固愚悍，在各夷族中最严重。
English: They lack courtesy, honesty and integrity, and are stubborn and stupid, which is the most serious among all the barbarian tribes.

古文：隋开皇四年，率莫贺弗来谒。
现代文：隋朝文帝开皇四年，契丹率莫贺弗来拜见。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, Khitan leader Moga Fu came to pay his respects.

古文：五年，悉其众款塞，文帝纳之，听居其故地。
现代文：开皇五年，集合他们的人民叩关，文帝接纳了他们，允许他们居住在老地方。
English: In the first five years of the emperor's reign, they gathered their people to knock on the gate, and Emperor Wen accepted them and allowed them to live in the old place.

古文：责让之，其国遣使诣阙，顿颡谢罪。
现代文：开皇六年，契丹各部族互相攻打，很长时间没有结束。又与突厥发生冲突，高祖派使者责怪他们，契丹派遣使者到京城，叩头请罪。
English: In the first six years of the Emperor's reign, the various tribes of the Khitan attacked each other, which did not end for a long time. There was also a conflict with the Turks. Gaozhu sent an envoy to blame them, and the Khitan sent an envoy to the capital to beg for forgiveness.

古文：其后，契丹别部出伏等背高丽，率众内附。
现代文：之后，契丹其他部族出伏等背叛高丽，率众归附。
English: After that, other Khitan tribes came and went, betraying Goryeo and leading their people to annexation.

古文：文帝见来，怜之。
现代文：文帝见他们来归附，怜爱他们。
English: Emperor Wen saw them coming to join him and took pity on them.

古文：上方与突厥和好，重失远人之心，悉令给粮还本部，敕突厥抚纳之。
现代文：皇上刚与突厥和好，担心失去远方之人的支持，下令供给粮草全部归还本部，命突厥抚慰接纳他们。
English: The emperor had just made peace with the Turks, and fearing that he would lose the support of those far away, he ordered that all grain and grass supplies be returned to the headquarters, and ordered the Turks to accommodate them.

古文：固辞不去。
现代文：坚决拒绝前往。
English: He resolutely refused to go.

古文：部落渐众，遂北徙，逐水草，当辽西正北二百里，依托纥臣水而居，东西亘三百里，分为十部。
现代文：部落逐渐增多，于是向北迁移，跟随水草，对着辽西正北二百里，靠讠乇纥臣水居住，东西有百里，分为十个部族。
English: Tribes gradually increased, so they migrated to the north, following the aquatic plants, to the northwest of Liaoning Province, two hundred miles, living by the water of the Yuxian River, one hundred miles from east to west, divided into ten tribes.

古文：兵多者三千，少者千余。
现代文：军队较多的有三千人，少的千余人。
English: The larger army consisted of three thousand men, the smaller of more than a thousand.

古文：逐寒暑，随水草畜牧。
现代文：随寒暑变化和有水草的地方放牧牲畜。
English: With the change of cold and heat, and where there is water and grass, livestock are grazed.

古文：有征伐，则曾帅相与议之，兴兵动众，合如符契。
现代文：有战争，便由酋领互相商议，发动士兵，之间配合如同符契。
English: When there is a war, the chiefs consult with each other and mobilize soldiers, and the cooperation between them is like a contract.

古文：太武遣中书侍郎李敞告祭焉，刊祝文于石室之壁而还。流求国，居海岛，当建安郡东。水行五日而至。
现代文：突厥沙钵略可汗派吐屯潘垤统领契丹，契丹杀死吐屯后逃跑。炀帝大业七年，派使入朝，进贡地方物产。流求国在海岛中，正对建安郡东，水路五天便到。
English: The Turkic Sauron Khan sent the Tutun Pandu to lead the Khitan. The Khitan killed the Tutun and then fled. After seven years of great undertakings, the Tutun Emperor sent an envoy to the DPRK to pay tribute to local products. The wandering country is in the middle of the island, facing the east of Jian'an County, and the waterway will arrive in five days.

古文：土多山洞。
现代文：土地上有很多山洞。
English: There are many caves on the land.

古文：其王姓欢斯氏，名渴刺兜，不知其由来有国世数也。
现代文：国王姓欢斯氏，名字叫渴棘兜，不知道他们国家有多少个世代相传。
English: The king's family name is Huas, and his first name is Thirsty Thorn, and I don't know how many generations their country has been passed down.

古文：彼土人呼之为可老羊，妻曰多拔茶。
现代文：那个地方的人喊他叫可老羊，妻子叫多拔茶。
English: People in the area call him "Kero-goat," and his wife calls him "Doba-cha."

古文：所居曰波罗檀洞，堑栅三重，环以流水，树棘为籓。
现代文：居处称为波罗檀洞，壕洞栅栏有三层，周围有流水，种植树木和荆刺做篱笆。
English: The dwelling place is called Borodan Cave. The fence of the cave has three layers, there is running water around it, and trees and thorns are planted to make a fence.

古文：王所居舍，其大一十六间，雕刻禽兽。
现代文：国王居住的房舍，面积十六间房，雕刻有禽兽。
English: The house where the king lived, with an area of sixteen rooms, was carved with animals.

古文：多斗镂树，似橘而叶密，条纤如发之下垂。
现代文：有很多斗镂树，似橘树而叶子茂密，枝条纤细好像头发下垂。
English: There are a lot of eucalyptus trees, like orange trees with thick leaves and thin branches that look like hair hanging down.

古文：国有四五帅，统诸洞，洞有小王。
现代文：国家有四五个将帅，统领各个山洞，洞有小王。
English: There are four or five generals in the country, who are in charge of each cave, and there is a king in each cave.

古文：往往有村，村有鸟了帅，并以善战者为之，自相树立，主一村之事。
现代文：往往设立村庄，各村有鸟了帅，都让善战的人充任，自己设立，主管一村的事情。
English: Villages are often set up, and each village has a commander, and they all have people who are good at fighting, set up by themselves, and are in charge of the affairs of a village.

古文：男女皆白纟宁绳缠发，从项后盘绕至额。
现代文：男女都用白绳扎束头发，从脖子后边盘绕到前额。
English: Both men and women have their hair tied with white rope, coiled from the nape of the neck to the forehead.

古文：其男子用鸟羽为冠，装以珠贝，饰以赤毛，形制不同。
现代文：男子用鸟的羽毛做帽子，装饰上珠贝，配饰上红色毛，形状不同。
English: A man made a hat out of bird feathers, decorated it with pearls, and accessorized it with red feathers of different shapes.

古文：妇人以罗纹白布为帽，其形方正。
现代文：妇女用罗纹白布做帽子，形状是方正的。
English: A woman makes a hat from a ribbed white cloth. It is square in shape.

古文：织斗镂皮并杂毛以为衣，制裁不一。
现代文：编织斗镂树皮与杂色毛做衣服，制作剪裁不一样。
English: Weaving baskets of eucalyptus bark and variegated hair to make clothes, the production of tailoring is not the same.

古文：缀毛垂螺为饰，杂色相间，下垂小贝，其声如珮。
现代文：缝缀垂螺做装饰，不同颜色相杂，下面垂挂小贝壳，发出的声音好像玉佩。
English: Stitched hanging snails as decoration, different colors mixed together, small shells hanging below, sounding like jade beads.

古文：缀珰施钏，悬珠于颈。
现代文：缀合上、钏，在脖子上挂上珠子。
English: Tie it up, tie it up, and hang beads around your neck.

古文：织藤为笠，饰以毛羽。
现代文：编织藤条做斗笠，配饰上毛羽。
English: Woven rattan strips to make a battle hat, with feathers as accessories.

古文：有刀槊、弓箭、剑铍之属。
现代文：有刀矛肖、弓箭、剑铍之类的武器。
English: There are weapons such as swords, spears, bows and arrows, and sabers.

古文：其处少铁，刀皆薄小，多以骨角辅助之。
现代文：那个地方缺少铁，刀都很薄小，多用骨角辅助。
English: There is a shortage of iron in that area, and the knives are very thin and small, and are mostly assisted by bone angles.

古文：编纟宁为甲，或用熊豹皮。
现代文：用苎麻编成盔甲，或者用熊豹皮。
English: Armour woven from nettles, or leopard skins.

古文：王乘木兽，令左右舆之，而导从不过十数人。
现代文：国王乘坐木制野兽，让左右抬着他，而随从不过十多人。
English: The king rode on a wooden beast and had it carry him from side to side, accompanied by no more than a dozen people.

古文：小王乘机，镂为兽形。
现代文：小王乘坐木机，刻成野兽形。
English: Xiao Wang rides a wooden machine to carve a beast.

古文：国人好相攻击，人皆骁健善走，难死耐创。
现代文：国中人民喜好互相攻杀，人人都很勇猛雄健，善于奔跑，不轻易死亡，能经受伤碰。
English: The people of the country like to attack and kill each other. Everyone is very brave and strong, good at running, not easy to die, and can be injured.

古文：诸洞各为部队，不相救助。
现代文：各山洞都建立部队，之间不互相援助。
English: Troops have been set up in every cave, and there is no mutual aid between them.

古文：两军相当，勇者三五人出前跳噪，交言相骂，因相击射。如其不胜，一军皆走，遣人致谢，即共和解。
现代文：两军对仗，三五个勇敢的人走上前去跳着叫嚷，交口对骂，于是互相射箭，如果不能取胜，整个军队都退走，派人致歉，便又和解。
English: Two armies fight, three or five brave men go forward, jump and shout, exchange insults, and then shoot arrows at each other. If they can't win, the whole army withdraws, sends someone to apologize, and then reconciles.

古文：收取斗死者聚食之，仍以髑髅将向王所，王则赐之以冠，便为队帅。
现代文：收集那些战死者的尸体聚众分吃，还把髑髅送到国王住处，国王则赏赐他帽子，便做军队领帅。
English: He gathered up the bodies of those who had fallen in battle and distributed them among the people. He also took the donkeys to the king's residence, where the king gave him a hat and made him commander of the army.

古文：无赋敛，有事则均税。
现代文：没有征敛赋税，有事就平均出税。
English: If taxes are not collected, they will be paid on an average basis.

古文：用刑亦无常准，皆临事科决。
现代文：施刑也没有固定的标准，都临时裁决。
English: There is also no fixed standard for the imposition of punishment, and all rulings are provisional.

古文：犯罪皆断于鸟了帅，不伏则上请于王，王令臣下共议定之。
现代文：犯罪的事都让鸟了帅裁断，不服判决就上诉给国王，国王令臣子共同商议裁定。
English: Criminal matters were left to the birds to adjudicate, and appeals against judgements were made to the king, who ordered his courtiers to jointly discuss and adjudicate.

古文：狱无枷锁，唯用绳缚。
现代文：牢狱中没有枷锁，只用绳缚。
English: There are no shackles in prison, only ropes.

古文：决死刑以铁锥大如筋，长尺余，钻顶杀之，轻罪用杖。
现代文：判处死刑的用粗如筋、一尺多长的铁锥，钻破头顶杀死。轻罪用杖打。
English: Those sentenced to death are killed by drilling a hole in the top of the head with a coarse-grained, more than one-foot-long iron cone.

古文：俗无文字，望月亏盈，以纪时节，草木荣枯，以为年岁。
现代文：民间没有文字，遥望月亮的圆缺，来记时节变化；草木的枯荣，为年岁交替。
English: The people had no written language. They watched the waning of the moon in the distance to record the changing of the seasons; the withering of plants and trees represented the alternation of the years.

古文：人深目长鼻，类于胡，亦有小慧。
现代文：人深眼窝长鼻子，像北方胡人，也稍有才智。
English: People with deep eye sockets and long noses, like the Northern Hu people, also have a little intelligence.

古文：无君臣上下之节，拜伏之礼。
现代文：没有君臣上下拜见叩头的礼节。
English: There is no etiquette for princes and ministers to bow.

古文：父子同床而寝。
现代文：父与子同床休息。
English: Father and son rest in the same bed.

古文：男子拔去髭须，身上有毛处皆除去。
现代文：男人拔掉胡须，身上有毛的地方都除掉。
English: A man should pluck his beard and remove all the hair on his body.

古文：妇人以黑黥手为虫蛇之文。
现代文：妇女用黑墨在手上刻成虫蛇的花纹。
English: A woman uses black ink to carve a garter snake pattern on her hand.

古文：嫁娶以酒、珠贝为聘，或男女相悦，便相匹偶。
现代文：男女婚嫁用酒、珠贝作为聘礼。有时男女相爱，便成配偶。
English: Men and women marry with wine and jewels as a betrothal gift. Sometimes men and women fall in love and become spouses.

古文：妇人产乳，必食子衣，产后以火自灸，令汗出，五日便平复。
现代文：妇女产乳，一定给子女吃，产育后用火艾自灼，让汗出来，五天就恢复。
English: Women give birth to milk, they must give it to their children to eat. After giving birth, they burn themselves with fire, let the sweat come out, and recover in five days.

古文：以木槽中暴海水为盐，木汁为酢，米面为酒，其味甚薄。
现代文：用木槽暴晒海水做盐，木汁做醋，米面为酒，味道很淡。
English: The seawater is exposed in a wooden tank to make salt, the wood juice to make vinegar, and the rice noodles to make wine. The taste is very light.

古文：食皆用手。
现代文：吃饭都用手抓。
English: They eat with their hands.

古文：遇得异味，先进尊者。
现代文：碰到不同品味，先进奉给尊者。
English: If there is a difference in taste, it is best to serve it to His Holiness first.

古文：凡有宴会，执酒者必待呼名而后饮，上王酒者，亦呼王名后衔杯共饮，颇同突厥。
现代文：大凡碰到宴会，斟酒的人一定要等到喊名字后再喝，给国王敬酒，也要喊国王的名字后才衔杯同饮。很像突厥族。
English: Whenever there is a banquet, the person pouring the wine must wait until the name is called before drinking, toast the king, and also call the king's name before raising the cup and drinking. Very much like the Turks.

古文：歌呼蹋蹄，一人唱，众皆和，音颇哀怨。
现代文：歌唱踢脚，一人领唱，众人皆和，音调比较哀怨。
English: Singing and kicking, one person leads the singing, everyone is in harmony, the tone is more mournful.

古文：扶女子上膊，摇手而舞。
现代文：扶着女子的肩臂，摇手跳舞。
English: Holding the woman's shoulder, shaking hands and dancing.

古文：其死者气将绝，辇至庭前，亲宾哭泣相吊。
现代文：死的人气息将绝，抬到厅堂前，亲戚朋友哭泣吊唁。
English: The dead man's breath will be exhausted, carried to the front of the hall, relatives and friends cry condolences.

古文：浴其尸，以布帛缚缠之，裹以苇席，衬土而殡，上不起坟。
现代文：洗过尸身，用布帛缠缚，裹上苇席，衬土埋葬，上面不起坟。
English: The body was washed, bound with cloth, wrapped in a sheet, buried with soil, and there was no grave above.

古文：子为父者，数月不食肉。
现代文：孩子为父亲守孝，数个月不能吃肉。
English: The child is a filial son to his father and has been unable to eat meat for several months.

古文：其南境风俗少异，人有死者，邑里共食之。
现代文：国家南部风俗稍有不同，有人死去，同乡人共同分吃。
English: In the southern part of the country, customs are slightly different. When someone dies, fellow villagers share the meal.

古文：有熊、豺、狼，尤多猪、鸡、无羊、牛、驴、马。
现代文：有熊、豺、狼，尤其多猪、鸡，没有羊、牛、驴、马。
English: There are bears, lynx, wolves, and especially pigs and chickens, but no sheep, cattle, donkeys, or horses.

古文：厥田良沃，先以火烧，而引水灌，持一锸，以石为刃，长尺余，阔数寸，而垦之。
现代文：田地肥沃，先用火烧，然后引水灌溉，拿一个插子，用石头做刀刃，长一尺多，宽数寸，来开垦土地。
English: Fertile fields, first burn with fire, then divert water from irrigation, take a plug, use stone to make a blade, more than a foot long, a few inches wide, to reclaim land.

古文：宜稻、粱、禾、黍、麻、豆、赤豆、胡黑豆等。
现代文：适宜种稻、梁、禾、黍、麻、豆、赤豆、胡黑豆等。
English: It is suitable for growing rice, bean sprouts, wheat, barley, hemp, beans, red beans, cowpeas, etc.

古文：木有枫、栝、樟、松、楩、楠、枌、梓。竹、藤、果、药，同于江表。
现代文：树有枫、栝、樟、松、木便、楠、木分、竹子、藤蔓、瓜果、药草，和长江以南相同。
English: The trees have maple, maple, maple, pine, pecan, camphor, wood, bamboo, vine, melon, herbs, and south of the Yangtze River.

古文：风土气候，与岭南相类。
现代文：地理环境气候条件与五岭以南地区相似。
English: The geographical environment and climatic conditions are similar to the areas south of the Wuling Mountains.

古文：俗事山海之神，祭以肴酒。
现代文：习惯上敬奉山海神，祭祀用菜肴、用酒。
English: It is customary to venerate the deities of the mountains and the sea, and dishes and wine are used in rituals.

古文：战斗杀人，便将所杀人祭其神。
现代文：战争杀人，就用杀的敌人祭祀他们的神。
English: When war kills people, they use the dead enemy to sacrifice to their gods.

古文：或依茂树起小屋，或悬髑髅于树上，以箭射之，或累石系幡，以为神主。
现代文：或者靠茂密的大树建造小房屋，或者在树上悬挂髑髅，用箭射击，或者堆集石头系挂幡帐，当作神主。
English: Or build a small house by a thick tree, or hang a crossbow on a tree and shoot it with an arrow, or pile up stones and hang a banner as a god.

古文：王之所居，壁下多聚髑髅以为佳。
现代文：国王居住的地方，墙壁下以多聚集髑髅为最好。
English: Where the king lives, it is best to have a lot of maggots under the walls.

古文：人间门户上，必安兽头骨角。
现代文：民间门窗上，一定安装上兽头骨角。
English: On folk doors and windows, animal skull horns must be installed.

古文：隋大业元年，海师何蛮等，每春秋二时，天清风静，东望依稀，似有烟雾之气，亦不知几千里。
现代文：隋朝炀帝大业元年，海师何蛮等人，每年春秋二个季节，天气清朗，风儿平静，东望隐约可见，好像有烟雾气，也不知有几千里。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Haishi He Man and others, every spring and autumn two seasons, the weather is clear, the wind is calm, the eastward look is faintly visible, it seems to have smog, I don't know how many thousands of miles.

古文：三年，炀帝令羽骑尉硃宽入海求访异俗，何蛮言之，遂与蛮俱往。
现代文：大业三年，炀帝让羽骑尉朱宽去海上寻访异地风俗，何蛮述说这种情况，于是与何蛮一同前往。
English: In the third year of the Taiei era, Emperor Qian let Fei Cavalry Lieutenant Zhu Guang go to the sea to search for foreign customs. He Man described the situation, so he and He Man went together.

古文：同到流求国，言不通，掠一人而反。
现代文：一起到流求国，言语不通，抢到一个人返回。
English: They all go to the river to ask for a country, they don't understand the language, they grab one person and return.

古文：明年，复令宽慰抚之，不从。
现代文：第二年，又令朱宽去抚慰流求国，没有接受。
English: In the second year, Zhu Guang was also ordered to appease the current and ask for the country, but he did not accept.

古文：宽取其布甲而归。
现代文：朱宽夺得他们的布匹盔甲回来。
English: Zhu Guang won back their cloth armor.

古文：时倭国使来朝见之，曰： 此夷邪夕国人所用。 
现代文：当时倭国使者来朝中见到这些物品，说： 这是夷邪夕国人用的东西。 
English: At that time, the Japanese envoy came to the DPRK and saw these items and said, "This is something that was used by the Yizoku people.

古文：帝遣武贲郎将陈稜、朝请大夫张镇州率兵自义安浮海至高华屿，又东行二日到鼊屿，又一日，便至流求。
现代文：皇帝派武贲郎将陈陵、朝请大夫张镇州率兵从义安飘海到高华山屿。又往东行走两天句黾辟黾屿，又一天，就到了流求国。
English: The emperor sent Wu Yulang to take Chen Ling, and in the morning invited the doctor Zhang Zhenzhou to lead the soldiers from Yian to sail to Gaohua Lantau. They walked east for two days to the Lantau Lantau, and one day later, they arrived at Lantau.

古文：流求不从，稜击走之。
现代文：流求国不顺从，陈陵用武力将他们驱赶走。
English: Chen Ling drove them away by force.

古文：进至其都，焚其官室，虏其男女数千人，载军实而还。
现代文：攻占他们都域，焚烧宫室，俘虏男女数千人，装载军品珍宝回国。
English: They captured all their territory, burned the palace, captured thousands of men and women, and loaded them with military treasures to return home.

古文：自尔遂绝。
现代文：从此流求国灭绝于世。
English: Since then, the country has been extinct.

