古文：起著雍困敦九月，尽重光单阏，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起著雍困敦九月，尽重光单阏，凡三年有奇。
English: In September, when the doldrums of the doldrums of the doldrums arose, I did my best to be single, which is strange in three years.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之中
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之中
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenwu, Emperor Sheng, Emperor Guangxiao,

古文：贞观二年戊子，公元六二八年九月，丙午，初令致仕官位在本品之上。
现代文：唐太宗贞观二年九月，丙午，初次下令年老退休的文武官员在上朝时列于本品现任官之上。
English: In September of the second year of Taizong Zhenguan, Tang Dynasty, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 9th month, for the first time, the old retired civil and military officials were ordered to be listed on top of the current officials.

古文：上曰： 比见群臣屡上表贺祥瑞，夫家给人足而无瑞，不害为尧、舜；百姓愁怨而多瑞，不害为桀、纣。
现代文：太宗说： 近来看见大臣们多次上表章恭贺祥瑞之事，百姓家中富足而没有祥瑞，不影响成为尧、舜；百姓愁苦怨怼，而多有瑞气，不影响成为桀、纣。
English: Taizong said, "Recently, we have seen that the ministers have congratulated Xiang Rui on many occasions. If there is no Xiang Rui in the people's homes, but they are rich, it will not affect the people's status. If the people are sad and resentful, it will not affect the people's status, but if they are rich, it will not affect the people's status.

古文：后魏之世，吏焚连理木，煮白雉而食之，岂足为至治乎！ 
现代文：后魏的时候，官吏焚烧连理树，煮白雉鸡吃，难道连理树、白雉鸡能是盛世的表征吗？ 
English: During the post-Wei period, government officials burned Lianli trees and cooked pheasants to eat. Can Lianli trees and pheasants be a sign of prosperity?

古文：丁未，诏： 自今大瑞听表闻，自外诸瑞，申所司而已。 
现代文：丁未，下诏说： 从今以后大的祥瑞听任上表奏闻，大瑞之外的诸种瑞兆，申报给有关部门即可。 
English: Ding Wei, the next edict said: From now on, large Xiang Rui will be subject to the above table report, and all kinds of Rui Zhao other than large Rui can be reported to the relevant departments.

古文：尝有白鹊构巢于寝殿槐上，合欢如腰鼓，左右称贺。
现代文：曾有白鹊在皇宫寝殿中的槐树上构巢建窝，合欢交配如腰鼓状，左右的大臣齐声称贺。
English: There was a time when egrets built their nests on the eucalyptus trees in the palace's hall of residence. They mated in unison like a waist drum, and the ministers on both sides congratulated each other.

古文：上曰： 我常笑隋炀帝好祥瑞。瑞在得贤，此何足贺！ 
现代文：太宗说： 我常常笑话隋炀帝喜欢祥瑞，得到贤才就是祥瑞，这有什么值得庆贺的！ 
English: Taizong said, "I often joke that Emperor Sui liked Xiang Rui, and getting a sage was Xiang Rui, so what is there to celebrate!

古文：命毁其巢，纵鹊于野外。
现代文：命令毁掉其巢穴，放白鹊到野外。
English: The order was given to destroy the nest and release the egrets into the wild.

古文：天少雨，中书舍人李百药上言： 往年虽出宫人，窃闻太上皇宫及掖庭宫人，无用者尚多，岂惟虚费衣食，且阴气郁积，亦足致旱。 
现代文：天干旱少雨，中书舍人李百药上书说： 往年虽放出过宫女，我私下听说太上皇宫内与掖庭的宫女，深锁宫中的比较多，岂止是白白耗费衣物粮食，而且阴气郁积，也足以造成干旱。 
English: The weather was dry and there was little rain, and Li Baiyao, the person in charge of the Chinese library, wrote: Although in previous years, the palace maids were let out, I have heard privately that the palace maids in the imperial palace and the imperial court were more often locked up in the palace, which not only wasted clothing and grain, but also accumulated gloom, which was enough to cause drought.

古文：上曰： 妇人幽闭深宫，诚为可愍。
现代文：太宗说： 妇人们常年锁在深宫里，实在值得同情，洒扫庭除之外，还有什么用呢？
English: Emperor Taizong said, "It is really pitiful that women are locked in the deep palace all the year round. What else is there to do but sweep the courtyard?"

古文：洒扫之馀，亦何所用，宜皆出之，任求伉俪。 
现代文：应当全部让她们出宫，听任她们另寻配偶。 
English: They should all be let out of the palace and allowed to find other spouses.

古文：于是遣尚书左丞戴胄、给事中洹水杜正伦于掖庭西门简出之，前后所出三千馀人。
现代文：于是让尚书左丞戴胄、给事中洹水人杜正伦在掖庭西门选择遣返宫女，前后共计三千余人。
English: Therefore, he asked Shangshu Zu Rong Dai and Du Zhenglun, who was in the middle of the matter, to choose the repatriation of the palace maids at the west gate of the Summer Palace, a total of more than three thousand people.

古文：己未，突厥寇边。
现代文：己未，突厥兵侵犯边境。
English: Before long, Turkish soldiers invaded the border.

古文：朝臣或请修古长城，发民乘堡障，上曰： 突厥灾异相仍，颉利不惧而修德，暴虐滋甚，骨肉相攻，亡在朝夕。
现代文：大臣中有人请求修复古代的长城，征发百姓利用城堡以巩固边防，太宗说： 突厥天灾人祸不断，颉利可汗并不因此而积德行善，反而更加暴虐，骨肉相残，其亡日不远了。
English: Some of the ministers asked for the restoration of the ancient Great Wall and the enlistment of the people to use the castle to strengthen the border defense. Taizong said: The Turk natural disasters and man-made disasters continue. The Khari Khan did not accumulate virtue and do good because of this, but became more tyrannical. Flesh and blood are at odds with each other, and his day of death is not far away.

古文：朕方为公扫清沙漠，安用劳民远修障塞乎！ 
现代文：朕正要为您扫清沙漠上的敌人，何必辛劳百姓到远方去修筑城堡要塞呢！ 
English: I am about to clear the desert of your enemies. Why should your people go to great lengths to build castles and fortresses?

古文：壬申，以前司农卿窦静为夏州都督。
现代文：壬申，任命前司农卿窦静为夏州都督。
English: Jinshin, appointed the former Secretary of Agriculture Dou Jing as the governor of Xiazhou.

古文：静在司农，少卿赵元楷善聚敛，静鄙之，对官属大言曰： 隋炀帝奢侈重敛，司农非公不可；今天子节俭爱民，公何所用哉！ 
现代文：窦静在司农寺时，司农少卿赵元楷，颇擅长搜括民财，窦静鄙视他，曾对属下的官员们大声地说道： 隋炀帝骄奢淫逸、贪渎民财，司农署非得有您不可。现在皇帝自身节俭爱护民众，你又有何用呢！ 
English: When Dou Jing was at the Sino-Mongolian Temple, the Sino-Mongolian Minor Secretary, Zhao Yuankai, was quite good at collecting people's wealth. Dou Jing despised him and once said loudly to his subordinate officials: Emperor Sui Xuan was arrogant and debauched, and embezzled people's wealth. The Sino-Mongolian Department must have you. Now the emperor himself is frugal and cares for the people. What use are you?

古文：元楷大惭。
现代文：元楷听后十分的愧疚。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Kai felt very guilty.

古文：上问王珪曰： 近世为国者益不及前古，何也？ 
现代文：太宗问王： 近代以来国家政治越来越赶不上古代，为什么呢？ 
English: Taizong asked Wang: Since modern times, national politics has increasingly failed to catch up with ancient times. Why?

古文：对曰： 汉世尚儒术，宰相多用经术士，故风俗淳厚；近世重文轻儒，参以法律，此治化之所以益衰也。 
现代文：王回答道： 汉代崇尚儒术，宰相多用通经的儒士，所以风俗淳厚；近代以来重文艺而轻儒术，又辅以法律，这便是治世化民之道所以日益衰微的原因。 
English: Wang replied, "The Han Dynasty advocated Confucianism, and the prime ministers mostly used Confucian scholars, so the customs were pure and profound. Since modern times, the emphasis has been on literature and art, and less on Confucianism, supplemented by the law. This is the reason why the way of governing the world and the people is waning.

古文：上然之。
现代文：太宗颇以为然。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：冬，十月，御史大夫参预朝政安吉襄公杜淹薨。
现代文：冬季十月，御史大夫、参预朝政、安吉襄公杜淹去世。
English: In the winter of October, Anji Xianggong Duan, a doctor of history and a member of the prefectural government, passed away.

古文：交州都督遂安公寿以贪得罪，上以瀛州刺史卢祖尚才兼文武，廉平公直，征入朝，谕以 交趾久不得人，须卿镇抚。 
现代文：交州都督、遂安公李寿因贪污犯罪。太宗认为瀛州刺史卢祖尚文武全才，廉洁奉公，便征召他入朝，命令道： 交趾郡很久没有得力人选，需要你前去镇抚。 
English: Li Shou, the governor of Jiaozhou and Su'an Gong, was convicted of embezzlement. Emperor Taizong thought that Jiaozhou's Jishu Lu Zu was a well-educated man and a military man, and that he served the government with integrity, so he conscripted him into the imperial court and ordered him, "Jiaozi County has not had a strong candidate for a long time, and you are needed to go and pacify it."

古文：祖尚拜谢而出，既而悔之，辞以旧疾。
现代文：卢祖尚拜谢出朝，不久又后悔，以旧病复发相辞。
English: Lu Zu still apologized for going to the imperial court, but soon regretted it, saying that he had relapsed from an old illness.

古文：上遣杜如晦等谕旨曰： 匹夫犹敦然诺，奈何既许朕而复悔之！ 
现代文：太宗让杜如晦对他传旨道： 一般的人尚能够重然诺守信用，你为什么已答允了朕而又后悔呢！ 
English: Taizong let Du Rubei preach to him, saying, "Ordinary people can still keep their promises. Why did you promise me and then regret it?

古文：祖尚固辞。
现代文：卢祖尚执意辞退。
English: Lu Zu still stubbornly refused.

古文：戊子，上复引见，谕之，祖尚固执不可。
现代文：戊子，太宗再次召见他，晓以道理，卢祖尚仍固执己见，拒不从命。
English: However, Emperor Taizong summoned him again, and knowing the truth, Lu Zu was still stubborn and refused to obey.

古文：上大怒曰： 我使人不行，何以为政！ 
现代文：太宗大怒道： 我不能对人发号施令，又如何治理国家呢？ 
English: Taizong said angrily, "I can't give orders to people, how can I govern the country?"

古文：命斩于朝堂，寻悔之。
现代文：下令将卢祖尚斩于朝堂之上，不久又后悔。
English: He ordered Lu Zu Shang to be beheaded on top of the imperial hall, but soon regretted it.

古文：他日，与侍臣论 齐文宣帝何如人？ 魏征对曰： 文宣狂暴，然人与之争，事理屈则从之。
现代文：过了几日，与大臣议论 齐文宣帝是怎么样一个人？ ，答道： 齐文宣帝狷狂暴躁，然而人与他争论时，遇到理屈词穷时能够听从对方的意见。
English: A few days later, when discussing with the minister, "What kind of a person is Qiwen Xuandi?," he replied: "Qiwen Xuandi is furious and irascible, but when people argue with him, they can listen to each other's opinions when they are at a loss for words.

古文：有前青州长史魏恺使于梁还，除光州长史，不肯行，杨遵彦奏之。
现代文：当时前青州长史魏恺出使梁朝还朝，拜为光州长史，不肯赴任，丞相杨遵彦奏与文宣帝。
English: At that time, the former youth governor Shi Weiwei sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty to restore the dynasty, bowed to the light of the governor history, refused to take office, and the prime minister Yang Zunyan played with Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：文宣怒，召而责之。
现代文：文宣帝大怒，召入宫中大加责备。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was furious and summoned Zeng to the palace to severely reprimand him.

古文：恺曰： 臣先任大州长史，使还，有劳无过，更得小州，此臣所以不行也。 
现代文：魏恺说： 我先前任大州的长史，出使归来，有功劳没有过失，反而改任小州的长史，所以我不愿意成行。 
English: Wei Wei said: I had previously served as the long history of Dazhou, and returned from a mission, with merit and no fault. Instead, I was reassigned to the long history of Xiaozhou, so I am not willing to go.

古文：文宣顾谓遵彦曰： 其言有理，卿赦之。 
现代文：齐文宣帝回头对杨遵彦说： 他讲得有道理，你就宽赦他吧。 
English: Qiwen Xuandi turned back to Yang Zunyan and said, "He spoke the truth, so you should pardon him."

古文：此其所长也。 
现代文：这是齐文宣帝的长处。 
English: That's their strength.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 有道理。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：向者卢祖尚虽失人臣之义，朕杀之亦为太暴，由此言之，不如文宣矣！ 
现代文：先前卢祖尚虽然缺少做大臣的道义，朕杀了他也过于粗暴，如此说来，还不如齐文宣帝！ 
English: Previously, although Lu Zu still lacked the morality to be a minister, I killed him too brutally, so to speak, it is not as good as Qibun Xuan Di!

古文：命复其官廕。
现代文：下令恢复卢祖尚子孙的门荫。
English: Order to restore the shade of Lu ZuShang's descendants.

古文：征状貌不逾中人，而有胆略，善回人主意，每犯颜苦谏；或逢上怒甚，征神色不移，上亦为之霁威。
现代文：魏徵相貌平平，但是很有胆略，善于挽回皇帝的主意，常常犯颜直谏。有时碰上太宗非常恼怒的时候，他面不改色，太宗的神威也为之收敛。
English: Wei Zheng is plain-looking, but very daring. He is good at rescuing the emperor's idea, and often makes a face. Sometimes when Taizong is very angry, he does not change his face, and Taizong's prestige is also reduced.

古文：尝谒告上冢，还，言于上曰： 人言陛下欲幸南山，外皆严装已毕，而竟不行，何也？ 
现代文：他曾经告假去祭扫祖墓，回来后，对太宗说： 人们都说陛下要临幸南山，外面都已严阵以待、整装完毕，而您最后又没去，不知为什么？ 
English: He once took a leave of absence to go to the temple and sweep the ancestral tomb. After returning, he said to Emperor Taizong, "People say that Your Majesty is going to Nanshan. Outside, everyone has been waiting in line and everything is ready. But you didn't go in the end. I don't know why?"

古文：上笑曰： 初实有此心，畏卿嗔，故中辍耳。 
现代文：太宗笑着说： 起初确实有这个打算，害怕你又来嗔怪，所以中途停止了。 
English: Taizong said with a smile, "At first, I did have this intention, but I was afraid that you would make fun of me again, so I stopped halfway.

古文：上尝得佳鹞，自臂之，望见征来，匿怀中；征奏事固久不已，鹞竟死怀中。
现代文：太宗曾得到一只好鹞鹰，将它置于臂膀上，远远望见魏徵走过来，便藏在怀里；魏徵站在那里上奏朝政大事，很久不停下来，鹞鹰最后竟死在太宗的怀里。
English: Taizong once got a good vulture, put it on his arm, saw Wei Zheng coming from far away, and hid it in his arms; Wei Zheng stood there playing the important events of the dynasty, and did not stop for a long time, and the vulture finally died in Taizong's arms.

古文：十一月，辛酉，上祀圜丘。
现代文：十一月，辛酉，太宗在圜丘祭祀。
English: In November, Emperor Taizong held a religious service at the Huanqiu Temple.

古文：十二月，壬午，以黄门侍郎王珪为守侍中。
现代文：十二月，壬午，任命黄门侍郎王为守侍中。
English: In December, Ren Wu appointed Huang Men's attendant, Wang Rong, as a guard attendant.

古文：上尝闲居，与珪语，有美人侍侧，上指示珪曰： 此庐江王瑗之姬也，瑗杀其夫而纳之。 
现代文：太宗曾闲居无事，与王交谈，有一个美女子在旁侍侯，太宗指给王说： 这是庐江王李瑗的妾，李瑗杀了她的丈夫而收纳她。 
English: Taizong had been idling and talking with Wang. There was a beautiful woman waiting for him. Taizong pointed to her and said to Wang, "This is the concubine of the King of the Li River, Li Xi. Li Xi killed her husband and took her in.

古文：珪避席曰： 陛下以庐江纳之为是邪，非邪？ 
现代文：王离开座位说道： 陛下认为庐江王纳她为妾是对还是不对？ 
English: The king left his seat and said, "Your Majesty, do you think it is right or wrong for the king of the Li River to take her as his concubine?"

古文：上曰： 杀人而取其妻，卿何问是非！ 
现代文：太宗说： 杀了人而娶他妻子为妾，你怎么还要问对错呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "If you kill a man and take his wife as a concubine, how can you still ask about right and wrong?

古文：对曰： 昔齐桓公知郭公之所以亡，由善善而不能用，然弃其所言之人，管仲以为无异于郭公。
现代文：王答道： 从前齐桓公知道郭公灭亡的原因，在于喜好良言而不能采用，而桓公本人弃置进良言的人，管仲认为这与郭公没什么两样。
English: Wang replied: In the past, Lord Qi Huan knew that the reason for Guo Gong's demise was that Guo Gong liked good words and could not use them, and Lord Huan himself abandoned those who gave him good words. Guanzhong thought that this was no different from Guo Gong.

古文：今此美人尚在左右，臣以为圣心是之也。 
现代文：现在这个美女子还在您身边，我认为陛下是认为庐江王做得对。 
English: Now that this beautiful woman is still by your side, I think His Majesty thinks that the King of the Li River did the right thing.

古文：上悦，即出之，还其亲族。
现代文：太宗听了非常高兴，即刻将此女子放出宫去，让她回到自己父母身边。
English: Taizong was very happy to hear this and immediately sent the woman away from the palace to return to her parents.

古文：上使太常少卿祖孝孙教宫人音乐，不称旨，上责之。
现代文：太宗让太常寺少卿祖孝孙教授宫女们音乐，不称太宗的心意，太宗责怪他。
English: Emperor Taizong did not approve of Emperor Taizong's idea to have the Junior High Priest of Taejong-ji Temple, Zu Xiaosun, teach music to the young ladies of the imperial court, and Emperor Taizong blamed him.

古文：温彦博、王珪谏曰： 孝孙雅士，今乃使之教宫人，又从而谴之，臣窃以为不可。 
现代文：温彦博、王劝谏道： 孝孙乃高雅之士，却让他去教宫女们，进而又谴责他，我们觉得不该如此。 
English: Wen Yanbo and Wang Xuan said: Xiaosun is an elegant person, but he let him go to teach the maids of honor, and then condemned him. We feel that this is not right.

古文：上怒曰： 朕置卿等于腹心，当竭忠直以事我，乃附下罔上，为孝孙游说邪？ 
现代文：太宗大怒道： 朕将你们视为心腹，应当竭尽忠心正直来为我服务，现在却附合下面欺罔君上，难道是为孝孙说情吗？ 
English: Taizong said angrily, "I regard you as my confidants, and you should serve me with utmost loyalty and honesty, but now you are siding with the bully-in-chief. Are you interceding for your children and grandchildren?

古文：彦博拜谢。
现代文：温彦博行礼谢罪。
English: Atsuhiko gave a long bow of thanks.

古文：珪不拜，曰： 陛下责臣以忠直，今臣所言岂私曲邪！
现代文：王不行礼，说： 陛下责令我尽忠效诚，现在我所说的话难道有私情吗！
English: The king did not bow and said, "Your Majesty has ordered me to be loyal and faithful. Is what I am saying now a private matter?"

古文：此乃陛下负臣，非臣负陛下。 
现代文：这便是陛下有负于我，并不是我有负于陛下！ 
English: This means that Your Majesty owes me, not that I owe Your Majesty!

古文：上默然而罢。
现代文：太宗沉默良久才作罢。
English: Taizong was silent for a long time.

古文：明日，上谓房玄龄曰： 自古帝王纳谏诚难，朕昨责温彦博、王珪、至今悔之。
现代文：次日，太宗对房玄龄说： 自古以来帝王虚心纳谏的确很难，朕昨天责备温彦博和王，到现在还在后悔。
English: The next day, Taizong said to Fang Xuanling, "Since ancient times, it has been very difficult for emperors to accept bribes. I rebuked Wen Yanbo and Wang yesterday, and I still regret it.

古文：公等勿为此不尽言也。 
现代文：你们不要因此事而不能畅所欲言。 
English: Don't let this stop you from speaking out.

古文：上曰： 为朕养民者，唯在都督、刺史，朕常疏其名于屏风，坐卧观之，得其在官善恶之迹，皆注于名下，以备黜陟。
现代文：太宗说： 为朕养护百姓的，唯有都督、刺史，朕常常将他们的名字书写在屏风上，坐卧都留心观看，得知在任内的善恶事迹，均注于他们的名下，以备升迁和降职时参考。
English: Emperor Taizong said: The only people who protect the people for me are the governor and the chief historian. I often write their names on the screen and watch them attentively when I am sitting or lying down. I know that the good and evil deeds during their tenure are all noted under their names for reference when they are promoted or demoted.

古文：县令尤为亲民，不可不择。 
现代文：县令尤其与百姓亲近，不可不慎加选择。 
English: County magistrates are especially close to the people, and they should not be carelessly selected.

古文：乃命内外五品已上，各举堪为县令者，以名闻。
现代文：于是下令朝廷内外五品以上官员，各荐举能胜任县令职位的人，呈报他们的姓名。
English: Therefore, he ordered the officials of the Imperial Court and outside the Imperial Court who were above the fifth grade, and those who were qualified for the position of county magistrate, to submit their names.

古文：上曰： 比有奴告其主反者，此弊事。
现代文：太宗说： 近有奴婢告其主子谋反的，这是个弊端。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "It is a drawback for a slave to accuse his master of plotting against him.

古文：夫谋反不能独为，必与人共之，何患不发，何必使奴告邪！
现代文：谋反不是一个人干的事，必然有其同伙，还担心事情不会暴露吗？何必让其奴婢告发呢？
English: Conspiracy to rebel is not the work of a single person, there must be accomplices. Are they still worried that the matter will not be exposed? Why do they have to have their slaves denounce it?

古文：自今有奴告主者，皆勿受，仍斩之。 
现代文：从今以后有奴婢告其主子的，均不受理，仍行处斩。 
English: From now on, if a slave accuses his or her master, it will not be accepted and the slave will still be executed.

古文：西突厥统叶护可汗为其伯父所杀；伯父自立，是为莫贺咄侯屈利俟毘可汗。
现代文：西突厥统叶护可汗被其伯父杀死，其伯父自立为首领，是为莫贺咄侯屈利俟毗可汗。
English: The Western Turkic ruler Yegor Khan was killed by his uncle, who then became the leader of his own clan, the Moga Khaganate.

古文：国人不服，弩矢毕部推泥孰莫贺设为可汗，泥孰不可。
现代文：国人不服，弩矢毕部推举泥孰莫贺设为可汗，泥孰不应允。
English: The Chinese people were not satisfied, and they elected Mudan Moga as khan. Mudan did not agree.

古文：统叶护之子咥力特勒避莫贺咄之祸，亡在康居，泥孰迎而立之，是为乙毘钵罗肆叶护可汗，与莫贺咄相攻，连兵不息，俱遣使来请婚。
现代文：统叶护的儿子力特勒，为躲避莫贺咄的祸乱，逃到了康居，泥孰迎回他立为首领，这便是乙毗钵罗肆叶护可汗，与莫贺咄相攻伐，争斗不息，都派使臣请求与唐朝通婚。
English: In order to escape the disaster of Moga, Litoral, the son of Tong Ye Gu, fled to Kangju. He was welcomed back by Mudan, who appointed him as the leader. This was the time when Yipo Khan, who was fighting against Moga, sent envoys to request a marriage with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：上不许，曰： 汝国方乱，君臣未定，何得言婚！ 
现代文：太宗不应允，说： 你们的国家刚发生内部争斗，君臣尚未确定，怎么能谈得上求婚呢？ 
English: Taizong disagreed, saying, "Your country has just had an internal struggle, and the sovereign and the ministers have not yet been determined. How can you talk about proposing marriage?"

古文：且谕以各守部分，勿复相攻。
现代文：而且传谕各部保持稳定，不要再相攻伐。
English: Moreover, he ordered all departments to maintain stability and not to attack each other.

古文：于是西域诸国及敕勒先役属西突厥者皆叛之。
现代文：于是先前依附西突厥的敕勒和西域各国均叛离。
English: As a result, Miletus, which had previously been dependent on the West Turks, and the countries of the Western Region all rebelled.

古文：突厥北边诸姓多叛颉利可汗归薛延陀，共推其俟斤夷男为可汗，夷男不敢当。
现代文：突厥北面的各部族大多叛离颉利可汗归附薛延陀，共同推举薛延陀的俟斤夷男为可汗，夷男不敢担当此任。
English: Most of the tribes on the northern side of the Turkic world rebelled from the Qili Khan and joined Xue Yanta. They jointly elected Xue Yanta's son, Qin Jinyi, as khan, but he did not dare to take on this position.

古文：上方图颉利，遣游击将军乔师望间道赍册书拜夷男为真珠毘伽可汗，赐以鼓纛。
现代文：太宗正欲图谋突厥颉利可汗，便派游击将军乔师望择小道带着册书封夷男为真珠毗伽可汗，并赐给鼓和大旗。
English: Emperor Taizong was plotting to create a Turkic Qili Khan, so he sent the guerrilla general Qiao Shi to Wanzhih Trail with a book to seal the barbarian as the Pearl of the Qili Khan, and gave him a drum and a large flag.

古文：夷男大喜，遣使入贡，建牙于大漠之郁督军山下，东至靺鞨，西至西突厥，南接沙碛，北至俱伦水；回纥、拔野古、阿跌、同罗、仆骨、诸部落皆属焉。
现代文：夷男十分高兴，派使臣进献贡品，建牙帐于大漠中郁督军山下，东至，西到西突厥，南接沙漠，北临俱伦水；回纥、拔野古、阿跌、同罗、仆骨、各部均为其附属。
English: The barbarians were very happy, and sent their envoys to bring in tribute. They set up a tent city in the middle of the desert, at the foot of the mountain of the army of Yutu, east to west, west to west, south to the desert, and north to the Club of Water; Uluo, Bafangou, Abangou, Dongluo, Ducheng, and all other provinces were subordinate to them.

古文：春，正月，戊午，上祀太庙；癸亥，耕藉于东郊。
现代文：贞观三年春季正月，戊午，太宗祭祀于太庙；癸亥，在东郊行耕田礼。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Zhenguan, at noon, Taizong was worshiped in the Great Temple; at dusk, the farming ceremony was held in the eastern suburb.

古文：沙门法雅坐妖言诛。
现代文：和尚法雅以妖言惑众被处死。
English: The monk Faya was put to death for deceiving the people with magic words.

古文：司空裴寂尝闻其言，辛未，寂坐免官，遣还乡里。
现代文：司空裴寂曾听过他的言论，辛未，裴寂也因此事被免职，勒令遣送回老家。
English: Siku Peizhang had heard his remarks, Xin Wei, Peizhang was also dismissed for this matter and ordered to be sent back to his hometown.

古文：寂请留京师，上数之曰： 计公勋庸，安得至此！直以恩泽为群臣第一。
现代文：裴寂请求留在长安，太宗数落他说： 你的功劳平庸，怎么能达到今天这个地步，还不是因高祖皇帝恩泽才使你列居群臣第一。
English: Peizhang asked to stay in Chang'an, and Taizong said, "Your achievements are mediocre. How did you get to where you are today? It wasn't because of Emperor Gaozhu's favor that you ranked first among his ministers.

古文：武德之际货赂公行，纪纲紊乱，皆公之由也，但以故旧不忍尽法。
现代文：武德年间，贪污受贿风气盛行，朝廷政纲混乱，均与你有关，只是因为你是开国老臣，所以不忍心完全依法令处置。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu De, corruption and bribery were rampant, and the political program of the imperial court was in disarray. All of this had to do with you, but because you were an elder statesman at the founding of the country, you did not have the heart to completely dispose of the matter in accordance with the law.

古文：得归守坟墓，幸已多矣！ 
现代文：能够回家守着坟墓，已经是够幸运的人。 
English: To be able to go home and guard the grave is already a lucky person.

古文：寂遂归蒲州。
现代文：裴寂于是回到老家蒲州。
English: Pei Jia then returned to his hometown of Puzhou.

古文：未几，又坐狂人信行言寂有天命，寂不以闻，当死；流静州。
现代文：不久，有一个狂人信行称裴寂面有天相。裴寂并没上报朝廷，依法令当处死；太宗将其流放到静州。
English: Soon after, there was a madman, Nobuyuki, who said that Pei Jakuchu had a heavenly appearance. Pei Jakuchu did not report to the imperial court and was executed according to the law; Emperor Taizong exiled him to Jingzhou.

古文：会山羌作乱，或言劫寂为主。
现代文：正赶上当地的山羌族叛乱，有人说叛军劫持裴寂为其首领。
English: It is catching up with the local Shanxi rebellion, and some people say that the rebels have kidnapped Peizhong as their leader.

古文：上曰： 寂当死，我生之，必不然也。 
现代文：太宗说： 裴寂依罪当处死，我留给他生路，他肯定不会走这条路。 
English: Taizong said, "Pei Shaye should be put to death for his crime. I have left him a way of life, and he will definitely not take this path.

古文：俄闻寂帅家僮破贼。
现代文：不久听说裴寂率领僮仆家丁打败叛军。
English: Soon, it was heard that Pei Zha led his servant Ding to defeat the rebels.

古文：上思其佐命之功，征入朝，会卒。
现代文：太宗考虑他有佐命之功，征召他入进朝，裴寂恰好死去。
English: Taizong considered him to have the merit of supporting the emperor, and called him to join the imperial court. Pei Shanzhong just happened to die.

古文：二月，戊寅，以房玄龄为左仆射，杜如晦为右仆射，以尚书右丞魏征守秘书监，参预朝政。
现代文：二月，戊寅，任命房玄龄为尚书左仆射，杜如晦为右仆射，尚书右丞魏徵为秘书监，参预朝政。
English: In February, Wu Yin appointed Fang Xuanling as Shangshu's left-hand man, Du Rugao as his right-hand man, and Shangshu's right-hand man Wei Zheng as secretary, and participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：三月，己酉，上录系囚。
现代文：三月，己酉，太宗考察、记录囚犯的罪过。
English: In March, Ji Yan and Taizong inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：有刘恭者，颈有 胜 文，自云 当胜天下 ，坐是系狱。
现代文：有个囚犯刘恭，脖颈上刻有 胜 字，自称 定当取胜于天下 ，因此入狱。
English: One prisoner, Liu Qiong, had the word "victory" engraved on his neck and went to prison because he said he was determined to win over the world.

古文：上曰： 若天将兴之，非朕所能除；若无天命， 胜 文何为！ 
现代文：太宗说： 假如上天将要使他兴起，不是朕所能除掉的；如没有天命照应，刻有 胜 文又有何用！ 
English: Emperor Taizong said: "If the heaven is going to make him rise, it is not something I can remove; if there is no heavenly decree to take care of, what is the use of inscribing a victory?

古文：乃释之。
现代文：于是释放刘恭。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：丁巳，上谓房玄龄、杜如晦曰： 公为仆射，当广求贤人，随才授任，此宰相之职也。
现代文：丁巳，太宗对房玄龄、杜如晦说： 你们身为仆射，应当广求天下贤才，因才授官，这是宰相的职责。
English: Just then, Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao, "You are courtiers, you should seek out the world's talents, and because of your talents, you should be given positions. This is the responsibility of the prime minister.

古文：比闻听受辞讼，日不暇给，安能助朕求贤乎！ 
现代文：近来听说你们受理辞讼案情，日不暇接，怎么能帮助朕求得贤才呢？ 
English: Recently, I have heard that you have been busy accepting resignation cases. How can you help me find a talented person?

古文：因敕 尚书细务属左右丞，唯大事应奏者，乃关仆射。 
现代文：因此下令 尚书省琐细事务归尚书左右丞掌管，只有应当奏明的大事，才由左右仆射处理。 
English: Therefore, he ordered that the trivial affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture should be under the control of the Vice-Minister of Education and Culture, and only the important matters that should be reported should be handled by the Vice-Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：玄龄明达吏事，辅以文学，夙夜尽心，惟恐一物失所；用法宽平，闻人有善，若己有之，不以求备取人，不以己长格物。与杜如晦引拔士类，常如不及。
现代文：房玄龄通晓政务，又有文才，昼夜操劳，惟恐偶有差池；运用法令宽和平正，听到别人的长处，便如同自己所有，待人不求全责备，不以己之所长要求别人，与杜如晦提拔后进，不遗余力。
English: Fang Xuanling is well versed in government affairs, and has literary talent. He works day and night, but fears that there may be mistakes. He uses laws and regulations in a broad and peaceful manner. When he hears the strengths of others, he treats them as if they were his own. He does not seek full blame, does not demand others with his own strength, and does not spare any effort to promote Du Ruqiao.

古文：至于台阁规模，皆二人所定。
现代文：至于尚书省的制度程式，均系二人所定。
English: As for the system and procedures of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, they are all determined by the two.

古文：上每与玄龄谋事，必曰： 非如晦不能决。 
现代文：太宗每次与房玄龄谋划政事，一定要说： 非杜如晦不能敲定。 
English: Every time Taizong and Fang Xuanling plan political affairs, they must say: If it is not clear, it cannot be finalized.

古文：及如晦至，卒用玄龄之策。
现代文：等到杜如晦来，最后还是采用房玄龄的建议。
English: Wait until the end of the year, and finally adopt the suggestion of the House of the Ancients.

古文：盖玄龄善谋，如晦能断故也。
现代文：这是因为房玄龄善于谋略，杜如晦长于决断。
English: This is because Fang Xuanling is good at strategy, and Du Ruxu is better at making decisions.

古文：二人深相得，同心徇国，故唐世称贤相者，推房、杜焉。
现代文：二人深相投合，同心为国出力。所以唐朝称为贤相者，首推房、杜二人。
English: The two men were deeply in tune with each other and worked together to contribute to the country. Therefore, the Tang Dynasty was known as a virtuous couple, with Fusa and Du leading the way.

古文：玄龄虽蒙宠待，或以事被谴，辄累日诣朝堂，稽颡请罪，恐惧若无所容。
现代文：房玄龄虽然多蒙太宗宠爱，有时因某事受谴责，总是一连数日到朝堂内，磕头请罪，恐惧得好象无地自容。
English: Although Fong Xuanling was favored by Domontai Sect, he was sometimes condemned for something, and he always went to the morning hall for several days in a row, pleaded guilty, and seemed to be terrified.

古文：玄龄监修国史，上语之曰： 比见《汉书》载《子虚》、《上林赋》，浮华无用。
现代文：房玄龄监修本朝国史，太宗对他说： 近来翻看《汉书》载有《子虚赋》、《上林赋》，均华而不实。
English: When Fong Xuanling was supervising the national history of the dynasty, Taizong said to him, "Recently, I have been looking over the "Chinese Book" and it contains "Zihu Fu" and "Shanglin Fu," both of which are flashy but not true.

古文：其上书论事，词理切直者，朕从与不从，皆当载之。 
现代文：凡有上书议论国事，词理直切的，朕从与不从，均当载入国史。 
English: Whenever there is a discussion on national affairs in a book, and the words are straightforward, whether I agree or not, it should be recorded in the national history.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，上皇徙居弘义宫，更名大安宫。
现代文：夏季四月，乙亥，太上皇李渊迁居弘义宫。改弘义宫为大安宫。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Yi Hai and the retired Emperor Li Yuan moved to the Hongyi Palace. The Hongyi Palace was renamed the Daan Palace.

古文：上始御太极殿，谓侍臣曰： 中书、门下，机要之司，诏敕有不便者，皆应论执。
现代文：太宗开始到太极殿听政，对群臣说： 中书、门下省，都是机要的部门，诏敕文书有不当之处，均应议论提出意见。
English: Emperor Taizong went to the Taiji Hall to listen to the government and said to the courtiers, "The Central Government and the subordinate provinces are all important departments. If there is anything improper in the imperial edict or document, it should be discussed and suggestions should be made.

古文：比来唯睹顺从，不闻违异。
现代文：近来唯见顺从旨意，听不见相反意见。
English: Lately, all I see is obedience to the will, and I do not hear any contrary opinions.

古文：若但行文书，则谁不可为，何必择才也！ 
现代文：如果只是过往文书，那么谁不能干呢，何必又要慎择人才呢？ 
English: If it's just old documents, then who can't do it, and why do we have to be so careful in selecting talent?

古文：房玄龄等皆顿首谢。
现代文：房玄龄等人均磕头谢罪。
English: Fang Xuanling and the others all bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：故事：凡军国大事，则中书舍人各执所见，杂署其名，谓之五花判事。
现代文：按以前的惯例，诏书凡涉及军国大事，则让中书舍人执所见，大家分别署名，称之为五花判事。
English: According to the previous practice, when an imperial edict involved a military event, it was signed separately by everyone, and it was called the Five-Flower Edict.

古文：中书侍郎、中书令省审之，给事中、黄门侍郎驳正之。
现代文：中书侍郎、中书令加以审核，给事中、黄门侍郎予以驳正。
English: The Chusho-jiro and Chusho-ryo reviewed it, and in the middle of the matter, the Huangmen-jiro corrected it.

古文：上始申明旧制，由是鲜有败事。
现代文：太宗开始申明旧的规制，于是很少有错误。
English: Emperor Taizong began to affirm the old regulations, so there were few mistakes.

古文：茌平人马周，客游长安，舍于中郎将常何之家。
现代文：茌平人马周，游历来到长安，住在中郎将常何家里。
English: Gongping Renma Zhou traveled to Chang'an and lived in the home of Zhong Lang Zheng He.

古文：六月，壬午，以旱，诏文武官极言得失。
现代文：六月，壬午，天下大旱，诏令文武百官畅言得失。
English: In June, at noon, when the whole country was suffering from a drought, the edict was issued, and hundreds of civil and military officials openly discussed the gains and losses.

古文：何武人不学，不知所言，周代之陈便宜二十馀条。
现代文：常何乃一介武夫，不学无术，不知道说什么，马周便代他上呈建议二十多条。
English: Often what is a warrior, not learning, not knowing what to say, Ma Zhou submitted more than twenty suggestions on his behalf.

古文：上怪其能，以问何，对曰： 此非臣所能，家客马周为臣具草耳。 
现代文：太宗惊奇常何的能力。便问常何，常何答道： 这不是我能写的，而是我的客人马周代我起草的。 
English: Taizong was surprised at Changhe's ability. He asked Changhe, and Changhe replied, "This is not something I can write, but my guest Ma Zhou drafted it for me."

古文：上即召之；未至，遣使督促者数辈。
现代文：太宗立刻召见马周，没有来，又派人催促了几次。
English: Taizong immediately summoned Ma Zhou, but he did not come, and sent someone to urge him several times.

古文：及谒见，与语，甚悦，令直门下省，寻除监察御史，奉使称旨。
现代文：马周到宫中谒见太宗，太宗与他谈论，十分高兴，令其暂在门下省做事，不久又任命为监察御史，奉使出巡很合旨意。
English: Ma Zhou went to the palace to see Emperor Taizong, Emperor Taizong talked with him and was very pleased, so he temporarily made him work in the province under his supervision, and soon he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history, and it was in accordance with his will to be sent on a tour.

古文：上以常何为知人，赐绢三百匹。
现代文：太宗认为常何知人善任，赐给绢帛三百匹。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Chang Ho's acquaintance was good, and gave him three hundred yakitori.

古文：秋，八月，己巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，八月，己巳朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in August, just after the new year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙子，薛延陀毘伽可汗遣其弟统特勒入贡，上赐以宝刀及宝鞭，谓曰： 卿所部有大罪者斩之，小罪者鞭之。 
现代文：丙子，薜延陀毗伽可汗派其弟弟统特勒进献贡品，太宗赐给宝刀与宝鞭，对他说： 你统属的部族犯下大罪的用刀斩决，小罪的用鞭抽打。 
English: The emperor gave him a sword and a whip, and said to him, "The tribe you belong to uses the sword to punish serious crimes, and the whip to punish minor ones.

古文：夷男甚喜。
现代文：夷男非常高兴。
English: He is very happy.

古文：突厥颉利可汗大惧，始遣使称臣，请尚公主，修婿礼。
现代文：突厥颉利可汗大为惊慌，开始派使者称臣，请求迎娶公主，修女婿礼节。
English: The Turko-Bactrian khan was greatly alarmed and began to send envoys to court officials, requesting that the princess be married, and that the son-in-law be a nun.

古文：代州都督张公谨上言突厥可取之状，以为： 颉利纵欲逞暴，诛忠良，昵奸佞，一也。薛延陀等诸部皆叛，二也。突利、拓设、欲谷设皆得罪，无所自容，三也。塞北霜早，糇粮乏绝，四也。颉利疏其族类，亲委诸胡，胡人反覆，大军一临，必生内变，五也，华人入北，其众甚多，比闻所在啸聚，保据山险，大军出塞，自然响应，六也。 
现代文：代州都督张公谨上奏称可取突厥而代之，原因有六： 颉利可汗奢华残暴，诛杀忠良，亲近奸佞之人，是其一；薛延陀等各部落均已叛离，是其二；突利、拓设、欲谷设均得罪颉利，无地自容，是其三；塞北地区经历霜冻干旱，粮食匿乏，是其四；颉利疏离其族人，委重任于胡人，胡人反复无常，大唐帝国军队一到，必然内部纷乱，是其五；汉人早年到北方避乱，至此时人数较多，近来听说他们聚众武装，占据险要之地，大军出塞，自然内部响应，是其六。 
English: Zhang Gongyan, the acting governor of the prefecture-level city, said in his report that the Turk should be chosen instead of the Turk, for six reasons: the Qili Khan was extravagant and cruel, killing the loyal and close to the traitors, was one; Xue Yanta and other tribes had all defected, was the second; the Turks, the Tibetans, and the Tibetans were all offended by the Turks, and had no respect for the land, was the third; the northern region experienced frost and drought, and there was a shortage of food, was the fourth; the Turks were alienated from their people, and the Hu people were in charge, and the Hu people were capricious

古文：上以颉利可汗既请和亲，复援梁师都，丁亥，命兵部尚书李靖为行军总管讨之，以张公谨为副。
现代文：太宗认为颉利可汗既然想与唐朝和亲，又出兵援助大唐的敌人梁师都，丁亥，任命兵部尚书李靖为行军总管，张公谨为副总管，率兵讨伐突厥。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that since the Qili Khan wanted to make peace with the Tang Dynasty, and sent troops to aid the enemy of the Great Tang Dynasty, Liang Shidu and Ding Hai, he appointed the head of the military department, Shangshu Li Jing, and the deputy head of the military department, Zhang Gongyan, to lead the troops to fight the Turks.

古文：九月，丙午，突厥俟斤九人帅三千骑来降。
现代文：九月，丙午，突厥九位俟斤率三千骑兵投降唐朝。
English: In September, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, nine Turks with 3,000 cavalry surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：戊午，拔野古、仆骨、同罗、奚酋长并帅众来降。
现代文：戊午，拔野古、仆骨、同罗、奚族首领率众投降唐朝。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, the leaders of the Baju, Buyeo, Tonglu, Dongluo and Yao tribes surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：冬，十一月，辛丑，突厥寇河西，肃州刺史公孙武达、甘州刺史成仁重与战，破之，捕虏千馀口。
现代文：冬季，十一月，辛丑，突厥兵侵犯河西地区，肃州刺史公孙武达、甘州刺史成仁重，与之发生激战，大败突厥兵，俘虏一千多人。
English: In the winter, November, Xinwuxi, the Turkic soldiers invaded the Hexi region. Sun Wuda, the governor of Suzhou, and Cheng Renshong, the governor of Gansu, fought a fierce battle, defeated the Turkic soldiers, and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：上遣使至凉州，都督李大亮有佳鹰，使者讽大亮使献之，大亮密表曰： 陛下久绝畋游而使者求鹰。
现代文：太宗派使节到凉州，都督李大亮有一只很好的鹰，使者暗示大亮将鹰进呈给皇上，大亮给太宗上密表说： 陛下一直拒绝畋猎，而使节却为您要鹰。
English: Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to Liangzhou. The governor Li Dayang had a very good eagle. The envoy hinted that Dayang would present the eagle to the emperor. Dayang said to Emperor Taizong: Your Majesty has always refused to hunt, but the envoy wants an eagle for you.

古文：若陛下之意，深乖昔旨；如其自擅，乃是使非其人。 
现代文：假如这是陛下的意思，则深与过去的主张相背离，如果是使节自作主张，便是用人不当 。
English: If this is His Majesty's intention, it is a profound departure from his previous position, and if it is the envoy's own opinion, it is inappropriate.

古文：癸卯，上谓侍臣曰： 李大亮可谓忠直。 
现代文：癸卯，太宗对大臣说： 李大亮称得上忠诚正直 。
English: Suddenly, Taizong said to the minister: Li Dayang is the most loyal and honest.

古文：手诏褒美，赐以胡瓶及荀悦《汉纪》。
现代文：亲书诏令加以褒奖，赐给自用的胡瓶一只及荀悦《汉纪》一部。
English: He ordered that the book should be commended, and gave him a bottle of wine for his own use and a copy of the "Han Dynasty" by Mu Yue.

古文：庚申，以并州都督李世勣为通汉道行军总管，兵部尚书李靖为定襄道行军总管，华州刺史柴绍为金河道行军总管，灵州大都督薛万彻为畅武道行军总管，众合十馀万，皆受李靖节度，分道出击突厥。
现代文：庚申，任命兼任并州都督的李世为通汉道行军总管，兵部尚书李靖为定襄道行军总管，华州刺史柴绍为金河道行军总管，灵州大都督薛万彻为畅武道行军总管，合兵力十余万，均受李节度，分兵进攻突厥。
English: Goshun appointed Li Shih, who also served as the governor of the annexed province, as the general manager of the Tonghan Road march, the military commander Shangshu Li Jing as the general manager of the Dingyang Road march, the governor of Huazhou Zhishi Chai Shao as the general manager of the Jinhe Road march, and the great governor of Lingzhou Xue Wancher as the general manager of the Changwu Road march, with a combined strength of more than 100,000 troops. All of them were subject to Li Jiedu, and the division of troops attacked the Turks.

古文：乙丑，任城王道宗击突厥于灵州，破之。
现代文：乙丑，任城王李道宗在灵州击败突厥兵。
English: Second, Li Daozong, the appointed king of the city, defeated the Turkish soldiers in Lingshou.

古文：十二月，戊辰，突利可汗入朝，上谓侍臣曰： 往者太上皇以百姓之故，称臣于突厥，朕常痛心。
现代文：十二月，戊辰，突利可汗到唐朝请罪，太宗对大臣们说： 以前太上皇为了百姓的利益，忍辱向突厥称臣，朕常为此事感到痛心。
English: In December, when the Turik Khan went to the Tang Dynasty to plead guilty, the Emperor Taizong said to the ministers: In the past, the Emperor Taizong, for the benefit of the people, had to endure the humiliation of being called a Turk. I often feel sad about this.

古文：今单于稽颡，庶几可雪前耻。 
现代文：现在突厥首领向我磕头，这多少可以雪洗以前的耻辱。 
English: Now that the Turkic leaders are kowtowing to me, this can somewhat wash away the previous shame.

古文：壬午，靺鞨遣使入贡，上曰： 靺鞨远来，盖突厥已服之故也。
现代文：壬午，派使节到长安进献贡物，太宗说： 远道而来，是因为突厥已归服的缘故。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, he sent envoys to Chang'an to offer tribute. Taizong said, "I have come all this way because the Turks have surrendered.

古文：昔人谓御戎无上策，朕今治安中国，而四夷自服，岂非上策乎！ 
现代文：从前东汉人称抗御北方戎族没有上策，朕现在使中原安定，四方夷族归服，难道不是上策吗？ 
English: In the past, the Eastern Han people said that there was no best strategy for resisting the Northern Yongzhu, but now we are stabilizing the Central Plains and subduing the barbarians in all directions. Isn't that the best strategy?

古文：癸未，右仆射杜如晦以疾逊位，上许之。
现代文：癸未，尚书右仆射杜如晦，因病请求离职，太宗答应了他的请求。
English: Not long ago, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shedu Ruzhu, requested to leave his post due to illness, and Taizong agreed to his request.

古文：乙酉，上问给事中孔颖达曰： 《论语》： 以能问于不能，以多问于寡，有若无，实若虚。 
现代文：乙酉，太宗问给事中孔颖达： 《论语》说： 有能力的人向无能力的人请教，知识丰富的人向知识匮乏的人请教；有学问像没学问一样，满腹知识象空无所有一样。 
English: "The Analects of Confucius" says: "The capable person asks the incapable person for advice, the knowledgeable person asks the knowledge-deficient person for advice; the learned person is like the unlearned person, and the full stomach of knowledge is like the empty stomach."

古文：何谓也？ 
现代文：如何解释？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：颖达具释其义以对，且曰： 非独匹夫如是，帝王亦然。
现代文：孔颖达完满地解释其本义，且说： 非独一般人如此，帝王也当如此。
English: Kong Yingda fully explained its true meaning, and said: If this is not true of ordinary people, it should also be true of emperors.

古文：帝王内蕴神明，外当玄默，故《易》称 以蒙养正，以明夷莅众。 
现代文：帝王内心蕴含如神之明，但外表却当沉静无为，所以《易经》说 以久表蒙昧来修养贞正之德，用藏智于内的办法来治理民众。 
English: The emperor's heart is as bright as a god, but outwardly he is quiet and inactive. Therefore, the "I Ching" says, "Cultivate the virtue of chastity by keeping your face covered for a long time, and govern the people by hiding wisdom within."

古文：若位居尊极，炫耀聪明，以才陵人，饰非拒谏，则下情不通，取亡之道也。 
现代文：假如身居至高无上的地位，炫耀自己的聪明，依恃才气盛气凌人，掩饰错误，拒绝纳阑，那么就造成下情无法上达，这是自取灭亡之道。 
English: If you live in a supreme position, show off your intelligence, rely on your talent to dominate others, cover up mistakes, and refuse to accept advice, then you will create an inferiority complex that you cannot overcome. This is the road to self-destruction.

古文：上深善其言。
现代文：太宗十分赞许他的话。
English: Emperor Taizong highly praised his words.

古文：庚寅，突厥郁射设帅所部来降。
现代文：庚寅，突厥郁射设率领所部投降唐朝。
English: Gyeongin, the Turk Yushasong led his troops to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：闰月，丁未，东谢酋长谢元深、南谢酋长谢强来朝。
现代文：闰十二月，丁未，东谢部落首领谢元深、南谢首领谢强前来归附唐朝。
English: In the intercalary December, Ding Wei, Dongxie tribal leader Xie Yuancheng and Nanxie leader Xie Qiang came to join the Tang Dynasty.

古文：诸谢皆南蛮别种，在黔州之西。
现代文：诸谢部族均是南蛮一支，聚居在黔州西部地区。
English: The Zhuxie tribes are all from southern Manchuria and live in the western part of Ganzhou.

古文：诏以东谢为应州、南谢为庄州，隶黔州都督。
现代文：唐朝廷下令改东谢所在地为应州，南谢所在地为庄州，均隶属于黔州都督。
English: The Tang court ordered the location of Dongxie to be changed to Yingzhou, and the location of Nanxie to be changed to Zhuangzhou, both of which were subordinate to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：是时远方诸国来朝贡者甚众，服装诡异，中书侍郎颜师古请图写以示后，作《王会图》，从之。
现代文：当时远方周边各国均向唐朝进献贡品，到长安的人较多，服装怪异，中书侍郎颜师古请求绘制《王会图》，绘下每个民族及其服饰以传示给后人，太宗应允。
English: At that time, all the far-flung neighboring countries made tribute offerings to the Tang Dynasty. There were more people in Chang'an, and their clothing was strange. The Chinese scribe Yan Shigu requested to draw a "King's Map," depicting each ethnic group and their clothing to be passed down to future generations, and Emperor Taizong agreed.

古文：乙丑，牂柯酋长谢能羽及充州蛮入贡，诏以牂柯为牂州；党顷酋长细封步赖来降，以其地为轨州；各以其酋长为刺史。
现代文：乙丑，柯首领谢能羽以及充州蛮进献贡品，诏令在柯设置州；党项族首领细封步赖归顺唐朝，以其聚居地为轨州；又任命其首领为刺史。
English: Yixiu, Ke leader Xie Nengyu, and Chenzhou Banzhong paid tribute, and the imperial edict set up a prefecture in Ke; the leaders of the Dangxiang tribe, Xiao Fengbu, returned to the Shun Tang Dynasty, and their place of residence was Luozhou; they also appointed their leader as Sashi.

古文：党项地亘三千里，姓别为部，不相统壹，细封氏、费听氏、往利氏、颇超氏、野辞氏、旁当氏、米擒氏、拓跋氏，皆大姓也。
现代文：党项据地三千里，每姓别为一部，互不统属，细封氏、费听氏、往利氏、颇超氏、野辞氏、旁当氏、米擒氏，拓跋氏、均是其大姓。
English: There are three thousand li of party strongholds, and each surname is a part of it, and they do not belong to each other. The Seifu clan, the Feiyu clan, the Yili clan, the Po Chao clan, the Noji clan, the Bundang clan, the Yibin clan, and the Tuoba clan are all their major surnames.

古文：步赖既为唐所礼，馀部相继来降，以其地为崌、奉、岩、远四州。
现代文：步赖既已受唐朝礼遇，其余各部相继来降，唐朝廷以其聚居地为、奉、岩、远四州。
English: Bu Rai had already been treated with courtesy by the Tang Dynasty, and the remaining provinces were successively downgraded. The Tang Dynasty concentrated its residences in the four provinces of Bong, Yan and Yuan.

古文：是岁，户部奏：中国人自塞外归，及四夷前后降附者，男子一百二十馀万口。
现代文：这一年，户部上奏称：大唐人从塞外归来以及四方夷族前后归顺唐朝的计有男女一百二十余万人。
English: In that year, the head of the household reported that there were more than 1.2 million men and women among the Great Tang people who returned from abroad and the barbarians from the four directions who surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：房玄龄、珪掌内外官考，治书侍御史万年权万纪奏其不平，上命侯君集推之。
现代文：房玄龄、王执掌朝廷内外官吏的考核，治书侍御史、万年人权万纪上奏称有不公平之处，太宗命侯君集重加推勘。
English: Fong Xuanling, the king in charge of the assessment of officials inside and outside the imperial court, the bookkeeper of history, the human rights of all ages and all ages, reported that there was unfairness, and the Taizong's life of the prince was heavily recommended.

古文：魏征谏曰： 玄龄、珪皆朝廷旧臣，素以忠直为陛下所委，所考既多，其间能无一二人不当！
现代文：魏徵劝谏道： 房玄龄、王均是朝中老臣，素以忠诚正直为陛下所信任，所考核的官员过多，中间能没有一二个人考核失当？
English: Wei Zheng advised: "Fang Xuanling and Wang Rong are both senior officials of the dynasty. They have been trusted by His Majesty with their loyalty and honesty. There are too many officials being evaluated. Can there be one or two people in the middle who failed the evaluation?

古文：察其情，终非阿私。
现代文：体察其实情，绝不是有偏私。
English: Looking at the actual situation, it is by no means a case of favouritism.

古文：若推得其事，则皆不可信，岂得复当重任！
现代文：假如找到失当之处，那就不可信，怎么能重新担当重任呢！
English: If you find something improper, it is not credible, how can you take on the heavy responsibility again!

古文：且万纪比来恒在考堂，曾无驳正；及身不得考，乃始陈论。
现代文：而且权万纪近来一直在考堂叙职，并没有任何驳正，等到自己没得到好的考核结果，才开始陈述意见。
English: Moreover, Quan Wanji has recently been in the examination hall for job classification, and there is no refutation, until he did not get a good assessment result, he began to state his opinion.

古文：此正欲激陛下之怒，非竭诚徇国也。
现代文：这正是想激怒陛下，并非竭诚为国。
English: This is just to irritate His Majesty, not for the sake of the country.

古文：使推之得实，未足裨益朝廷；若其本虚，徒失陛下委任大臣之意。
现代文：假如推问后得到考核失当的实情，于朝廷也没有什么益处；如果本来便虚妄，徒失陛下委任大臣的一片心意。
English: It would be of no benefit to the Imperial Court if the truth of the improper assessment were to come to light after the inquiry; if it were false in the first place, it would be a waste of His Majesty's heart to appoint a minister.

古文：臣所爱者治体，非敢苟私二臣。 
现代文：我真正关心的是国家政体，不敢袒护房、王二人。 
English: What I really care about is the country's political system, and I don't dare to criticize Guofang and Wang.

古文：上乃释不问。
现代文：太宗于是放下此事不再过问。
English: Emperor Taizong then put the matter aside and did not inquire further.

古文：濮州刺史庞相寿坐贪污解任，自陈尝在秦王幕府；上怜之，欲听还旧任。
现代文：濮州刺史庞相寿因贪污被解除职务，上表陈情曾是秦王府僚。太宗怜惜他，欲让他官复原职。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Pang Xiangshou, was relieved of his duties for corruption. He was once a member of the Qin royal court. Emperor Taizong took pity on him and wanted to reinstate him.

古文：魏征谏曰： 秦府左右，中外甚多，恐人人皆恃恩私，是使为善者惧。 
现代文：魏徵行谏说： 秦王府的旧僚属，现居朝廷内外官的很多，我担心每个人都仗恃您的偏袒，而让那些真正行为端正的人恐惧。 
English: Wei Zhengxing said, "There are many former colleagues of the Qin royal court who are now officials in and out of the imperial court. I am worried that everyone will rely on your favoritism, and those who truly behave well will be afraid.

古文：上欣然纳之，谓相寿曰： 我昔为秦王，乃一府之主；今居大位，乃四海之主，不得独私故人。
现代文：太宗欣然采纳他的意见，对庞相寿说： 我从前为秦王，乃是一个王府的主人，现在身居皇位，乃是天下百姓的君主，不能单单偏护秦王府的老人。
English: Taizong gladly accepted his opinion and said to Pang Xiangshu: I used to be the king of Qin, but I am the master of a royal palace. Now that I am on the throne, I am the ruler of the people of the world. I cannot just protect the old people of the Qin royal palace.

古文：大臣所执如是，朕何敢违！ 
现代文：大臣的意见都这样，朕怎么能违背呢？ 
English: The minister's opinions are all like this, how can I go against them?

古文：赐帛遣之。相寿流涕而去。
现代文：赐帛打发他走，宠相寿流着泪离去。
English: He was sent away by the Empress Dowager Cixi, and he left the palace in tears.

古文：贞观四年庚寅，公元六三零年春，正月，李靖帅骁骑三千自马邑进屯恶阳岭，夜袭定襄，破之。
现代文：贞观四年春季正月，李靖率领三千骁骑从马邑出发，进驻恶阳岭，当夜，突袭定襄城，取得大胜。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Zhenguan, Li Jing led three thousand horsemen to set out from Ma'i and stationed in Xiyangling. That night, he raided Dingxiang City and won a great victory.

古文：突厥颉利可汗不意靖猝至，大惊曰： 唐不倾国而来，靖何敢孤军至此！ 
现代文：突厥颉利可汗想不到李靖出兵如此神速，大惊失色道： 唐朝没有倾全国兵力北来，李靖怎么敢孤军深入到这里。 
English: The Turkic Qili Khan could not imagine that Li Jing would send troops so quickly, and was shocked: The Tang Dynasty did not pour the entire country's troops to the north, how dare Li Jing's lone army penetrate here.

古文：其从一日数惊，乃徙牙于碛口。
现代文：突厥兵一天内数次受惊，于是将牙帐迁移至碛口。
English: The Turkish soldiers were frightened several times a day, so they moved the rack to the mouth of the moat.

古文：靖复遣谍离其心腹，颉利所亲康苏密以隋萧后及炀帝之孙政道来降。
现代文：李靖又派间谍离间其心腹，颉利的亲信康苏密携带隋萧后及炀帝的孙子杨政道投降唐朝。
English: Li Jing also sent spies to alienate his confidant, and Guili's close confidant Kang Su Mi carried Sui Xiao Hou and Emperor Xuan's grandson Yang Zhengdao to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：乙亥，至京师。先是，有降胡言 中国人或潜通书启于萧后者 。
现代文：乙亥，到达长安，先前，有投降的胡人称 唐朝有人私下与隋萧皇后通书信。 
English: Yi Hai, arrived in Chang'an, previously, there was a capitulation of the Hu people called the Tang Dynasty, some people privately with the Sui Xiao Empress correspondence.

古文：至是，中书舍人杨文瓘请鞫之，上曰： 天下未定，突厥方强，愚民无知，或有斯事。今天下已安，既往之罪，何须问也！ 
现代文：到此时，中书舍人杨文请求讯问，太宗说： 大唐未定天下时，突厥正当强盛，百姓愚昧无知，或许会有这种事，现在天下已安定，既往的过错，又何须追问呢。 
English: At this time, Yang Wen, a Chinese scholar, asked for an interrogation, and Taizong said: When the world was undecided in the Great Tang Dynasty, the Turks were justly powerful, and the people were ignorant and ignorant, perhaps there would be such a thing. Now the world is stable, and there is no need to ask about past mistakes.

古文：李世勣出云中，与突厥战于白道，大破之。
现代文：李世出兵云中城，与突厥兵大战于白道，突厥大败。
English: Li Shih sent troops to Yunzhongcheng and fought with the Turks in Baidoa. The Turks were soundly defeated.

古文：二月，己亥，上幸骊山温汤。
现代文：二月，己亥，太宗驾临骊山温泉。
English: In February, Ji Hai, Taizong drove to Lushan Hot Spring.

古文：甲辰，李靖破突厥颉利可汗于阴山。
现代文：甲辰，李靖在阴山大败突厥颉利可汗的军队。
English: At that time, Li Jing defeated the army of Turku Qili Khan in Yinshan Mountain.

古文：先是，颉利既败，窜于铁山，馀众尚数万；遣执失思力入见，谢罪，请举国内附，身自入朝。
现代文：先前，颉利兵败后，逃窜到铁山，残余兵力尚有数万人。颉利派执失思力谒见太宗，当面谢罪，请求倾国降附，自己入朝抵罪。
English: Previously, after the defeat of the Goryeo soldiers, they fled to the Iron Mountain, and there were still tens of thousands of remaining troops. The Goryeo faction lost their nerve and met with Emperor Taizong, apologized in person, asked for the country to be annexed, and entered the court to atone for their sins.

古文：上遣鸿胪卿唐俭等慰抚之，又诏李靖将兵迎颉利。
现代文：太宗派鸿胪寺卿唐俭等人抚慰，又令李靖领兵迎接颉利。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Hongyu Temple's chief priest, Tang Jian, and others to comfort him, and also sent Li Jing to lead the troops to welcome Gong Li.

古文：颉利外为卑辞，内实犹豫，欲俟草青马肥，亡入漠北。
现代文：颉利外表谦卑，内心尚在犹豫，想等到草青马肥的时候，再逃回到漠北重整旗鼓。
English: He is humble on the outside, but hesitant on the inside. He wants to wait until the grass is greener and the horses are fatter before fleeing back to the north of the country to regroup.

古文：靖引兵与李世勣会白道，相与谋曰： 颉利虽败，其众犹盛，若走度碛北，保依九姓，道阻且远，追之难及。
现代文：李靖率领兵马与李世在白道会合，相互谋划道： 颉利虽然被打败，其兵马还很强大，如果走碛北一带，颉利可依靠旧部族，道路阻隔而且遥远，恐怕一时很难追上。
English: Li Jing led the soldiers and horses to meet with Li Shih on the White Road, and they planned together: Although Goryeo was defeated, its soldiers and horses were still very strong. If they went to the north of Goryeo, Goryeo could rely on the old tribe. The road was blocked and far away, and it would be difficult to catch up for a while.

古文：今诏使至彼，虏必自宽，若选精骑一万，赍二十日粮往袭之，不战可擒矣。 
现代文：现在朝廷的使节已经到了突厥营地，突厥颉利可汗一定觉得宽慰，如果挑选精锐骑兵一万人，带着二十天的粮草前去袭击，可以不战而生擒颉利。 
English: Now that the imperial envoys had arrived at the Turkic camp, the Turkic Khari Khan must have felt relieved. If he selected ten thousand elite cavalry and attacked with twenty days of grain and grass, he could win without a fight.

古文：以其谋告张公谨，公谨曰： 诏书已许其降，使者在彼，奈何击之！ 
现代文：二人将他们的计谋告诉张公瑾，张公瑾说： 圣上已下诏接受他们投降，大唐的使者在对方，怎么能进攻呢？ 
English: The two of them told their plan to Zhang Gongyao. Zhang Gongyao said, "The emperor has issued an edict accepting their surrender. The emissary of the Great Tang Dynasty is on the other side. How can they attack?

古文：靖曰： 此韩信所以破齐也。
现代文：李靖说： 当年韩信就是靠偷袭打败齐国的。
English: Li Jing said: At that time, Han Xin relied on sneak attacks to defeat Qi.

古文：唐俭辈何足惜！ 
现代文：唐俭等人不值得怜惜！ 
English: Tang Jian and others are not worthy of pity!

古文：遂勒兵夜发，世勣继之，军至阴山，遇突厥千馀帐，俘以随军。
现代文：于是率兵夜间出发，李世随后，行军到阴山，遇上了突厥一千多营帐，全部俘获令随唐军。
English: So he set out at night with his soldiers. Li Shih then marched to Yinshan, where he encountered more than a thousand Turkish camps. All of them were captured and ordered to follow the Tang army.

古文：颉利见使者，大喜，意自安。
现代文：颉利见到大唐使者唐俭后十分高兴，内心稍稍安定。
English: Hao Li was very happy to see the emissary of the Great Tang Dynasty, Tang Jian, and his heart was a little stable.

古文：靖使武邑苏定方帅二百骑为前锋，乘雾而行，去牙帐七里，虏乃觉之。颉利乘千里马先走，靖军至，虏众遂溃。
现代文：李靖派武邑人苏定方带领二百名骑兵做为前锋，趁大雾秘密行军，距离突厥牙帐只有七里，突厥兵才发现，颉利乘千里马先逃，李靖大军赶到，突厥兵纷纷溃败。
English: Li Jing sent Su Dingfang, a man from Wuyi, to lead two hundred cavalrymen as the vanguard, taking advantage of the fog to march secretly, only seven miles away from the Turk's tent. The Turk soldiers only discovered that Xili had fled thousands of miles ahead, Li Jing's army arrived, and the Turk soldiers were defeated one after another.

古文：唐俭脱身得归。
现代文：唐俭及时脱身回到唐朝。
English: Tang Jian escaped in time and returned to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：靖斩首万馀级，俘男女十馀万，获杂畜数十万，杀隋义成公主，擒其子叠罗施。
现代文：李靖军队杀死突厥兵一万多人，俘虏男女十余万人，得牲畜数十万头，杀掉隋义成公主，生俘她的儿子叠罗施。
English: Li Jing's army killed more than ten thousand Turkic soldiers, captured more than one hundred thousand men and women, took hundreds of thousands of livestock, killed Princess Sui Yicheng, and captured her son Lushi.

古文：颉利帅万馀人欲度碛，李世勣军于碛口，颉利至，不得度，其大酋长皆帅众降，世勣虏五万馀口而还。
现代文：颉利率领一万多人想要渡过沙漠，李世军队守住碛口，颉利兵至，通不过去，手下的部族首领均率兵众投降，李世俘虏五万多人还朝。
English: He led more than ten thousand people who wanted to cross the desert, and Li Shih's army guarded the mouth of the river. When Li Shih's soldiers arrived, they could not pass through. The tribal leaders under his command led the troops to surrender, and more than fifty thousand of Li Shih's captives returned to the government.

古文：斥地自阴山北至大漠，露布以闻。
现代文：开拓土地从阴山北到沙漠，捷报迅速传到了朝廷。
English: From the gloomy mountains in the north to the deserts in the south, the good news quickly spread to the imperial court.

古文：丙午，上还宫。
现代文：丙午，太宗回到宫中。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：甲寅，以克突厥赦天下。
现代文：甲寅，因平定突厥而大赦天下。
English: Jia Yin was pardoned by the emperor for pacifying the Turks.

古文：以御史大夫温彦博为中书令，守侍中王珪为侍中；守户部尚书戴胄为户部尚书，参预朝政；太常少卿萧瑀为御史大夫，与宰臣参议朝政。
现代文：任命御史大夫温彦博为中书令，守侍中王为侍中；守户部尚书戴胄为户部尚书，参予朝政；太常寺少卿萧为御史大夫，与宰相一同参议朝政。
English: Appointed Goshi no daibu Atsuhiko as chushiro, Shushi no chuo as chujo, Shushi no chuko as shosho, Shushi no shosho as shosho, and Shoshi no shoji as goshi no daibu, and Shoshi no shoji as goshi no daibu, and Shoshi no shoji as shosho, and Shoshi no shoji as shosho.

古文：三月，戊辰，以突厥夹毕特勒阿史那思摩为右武修大将军。
现代文：三月，戊辰，唐朝任命突厥夹毕特勒阿史那思摩为右武候大将军。
English: In March, the Tang Dynasty appointed the Turkic chieftain Bittler Ashina Sima as the right military commander.

古文：四夷君长诣阙请上为天可汗，上曰： 我为大唐天子，又下行可汗事乎？ 
现代文：四方夷族首领齐集宫阙请求太宗做天可汗，太宗说： 我既做了大唐天子，又要做天可汗吗？ 
English: The leaders of the barbarian tribes from the four directions gathered at the imperial palace and asked Emperor Taizong to make him a heavenly khan. Emperor Taizong said, "I have become the son of the Great Tang Emperor, but do I also want to be a heavenly khan?

古文：群臣及四夷皆称万岁。
现代文：文武大臣以及四方各族首领齐呼万岁。
English: Long live the Minister of Education and Culture and the leaders of all ethnic groups in the four directions.

古文：是后以玺书赐西北君长，皆称天可汗。
现代文：此后给西北各族首领的玺书中，均署名 天可汗 。
English: After that, all the letters to the leaders of the Northwest tribes were signed by Tian Khan.

古文：庚午，突厥思结俟斤帅众四万来降。
现代文：庚午，突厥首领思结俟斤率四万多军队投降唐朝。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, more than 40,000 troops led by the Turkic leader Sijian surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：丙子，以突利可汗为右卫大将军、北平郡王。
现代文：丙子，唐朝任命突利可汗为右卫大将军、北平郡王。
English: Cun Zi, the Tang Dynasty appointed Turi Khan as the Great General of the Right Guard and the King of Beiping County.

古文：初，始毕可汗以启民母弟苏尼失为沙钵罗设，督部落五万家，牙直灵州西北。
现代文：起初，始毕可汗重用启民的舅父苏尼失为沙钵罗设，统领五万户的部落，建牙帐在灵州西北。
English: At first, Sunni, the uncle of the founder of Bikhan, was known as Shahrushed, who led a tribe of fifty thousand households and built a tent in the northwest of Lingzhou.

古文：及颉利政乱，苏尼失所部独不携贰。
现代文：等到颉利政局混乱，惟独苏尼失部没有二心。
English: When the political situation in Burma was in disarray, only Sunni lost heart.

古文：突利之来奔也，颉利立之为小可汗。
现代文：突利投奔大唐，颉利立苏尼失为小可汗。
English: Turi defected to the Great Tang Dynasty, and Kili raised Sunni to become a minor khan.

古文：及颉利败走，往依之，将奔吐谷浑。
现代文：此后颉利溃逃，前往依附苏尼失，想去投奔吐谷浑。
English: After that, he ran away, went to Suizhong, and wanted to go to Tuyun.

古文：大同道行军总管任城王道宗引兵逼之，使苏尼失执送颉利。
现代文：大同道行军总管、任城王李道宗领兵进逼，让苏尼失交出颉利。
English: The general manager of the march of Datong Road, the king of the city, Li Daozong, led the troops to force Sunni out of the city.

古文：颉利以数骑夜走，匿于荒谷。
现代文：颉利率几名骑兵趁夜逃跑，藏在荒山野谷中。
English: Several cavalrymen took advantage of the night to escape and hide in the barren mountains and valleys.

古文：苏尼失惧，驰追获之。
现代文：苏尼失害怕，急忙派骑兵将颉利抓回。
English: Frightened, Sunni sent his cavalry in haste to recapture Qili.

古文：庚辰，行军副总管张宝相帅众奄至沙钵罗营，俘颉利送京师，苏尼失举众来降，漠南之地遂空。
现代文：庚辰，行军副总管张宝相率领大批兵力包围沙钵罗营帐，俘虏颉利送回京都长安，苏尼失举兵投降，漠南地区于是空旷无人。
English: Geng Chen and Zhang Baoxiang, the deputy commander-in-chief of the marching troops, led a large number of troops to encircle the Shajilao camp, the prisoners were sent back to Kyoto Chang'an, Suny lost his soldiers and surrendered, and the south of the desert was empty.

古文：蔡成公杜如晦疾笃，上遣太子问疾，又自临视之。
现代文：蔡成公杜如晦病重，太宗先派太子前去询问病情，后又亲去探视。
English: Cai Chenggong was gravely ill, and Emperor Taizong first sent the crown prince to inquire about his condition, and then personally visited him.

古文：甲申，薨。
现代文：甲申，杜如晦去世。
English: Gao Shin, Du Ruxun passed away.

古文：上每得佳物，辄思如晦，遣使赐其家。
现代文：太宗每次得到好物品，都要想起如晦，派人将物品赐给他家里。
English: Every time Taizong gets a good item, he has to think about it and send someone to give it to his family.

古文：久之，语及如晦，必流涕，谓房玄龄曰： 公与如晦同佐朕，今独见公，不见如晦矣！ 
现代文：践踏我大唐土地上的庄稼，抢夺人口，这是第四条罪状。我原宥你的罪过，保存你的社稷江山，而你却数次拖延不来朝，这是第五条罪状。
English: Trampling the crops on my Datang land and robbing the people, this is the fourth charge. I forgave your sins and preserved your society, country and mountains, but you delayed coming to the DPRK several times, this is the fifth charge.

古文：突厥颉利可汗至长安，夏，四月，戊戌，上御顺天楼，盛陈文物，引见颉利，数之曰： 汝藉父兄之业，纵淫虐以取亡，罪一也；数与我盟而背之，二也；恃强好战，暴骨如莽，三也；蹂我稼穑，掠我子女，四也；我宥汝罪，存汝社稷，而迁延不来，五也。然自便桥以来，不复大入为寇，以是得不死耳。 
现代文：自从武德九年我与你在渭水便桥订盟以来，没有大规模的入侵行为。
English: There has been no large-scale invasion since I signed an alliance with you at Surabaya's Poon Bridge nine years ago.

古文：颉利哭谢而退。
现代文：就因这一点可免你一死。 颉利痛哭谢罪，退下宫去。
English: Because of this, your death will be spared. She wept bitterly, repented, and withdrew to the palace.

古文：诏馆于太仆，厚廪食之。
现代文：太宗下诏让其住在太仆寺，赐给丰厚的食物。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to let him live in Taipo Temple and provided him with plentiful food.

古文：上皇闻擒颉利，叹曰： 汉高祖困白登，不能报；今我子能灭突厥，吾托付得人，复何忧哉！ 
现代文：太上皇李渊听说擒住了颉利可汗，感叹道： 当年汉高祖刘邦被匈奴围困在白登城，不能报仇；现在我的儿子能一举剿灭突厥，证明我托付的人是对的，我还有什么忧虑呢！ 
English: When the Empress Dowager Li Yuan heard that he had captured the Qili Khan, she lamented: At that time, Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, was besieged by the Huns in the city of Baden and could not take revenge; now that my son can annihilate the Turks in one fell swoop, proving that the person I entrusted is right, what worries do I have?

古文：上皇召上与贵臣十馀人及诸王、妃、主置酒凌烟阁，酒酣，上皇自弹琵琶，上起舞，公卿迭起为寿，逮夜而罢。
现代文：太上皇召集太宗皇帝与十几位显贵大臣，以及诸王、王妃、公主等，在凌烟阁摆下酒宴，酒喝到兴处，太上皇自己弹奏琵琶，太宗翩翩起舞，公卿大臣纷纷起身祝寿，一直到深夜。
English: The Retired Emperor convened the Emperor Taizong and more than a dozen distinguished ministers, as well as kings, queens, princesses, etc., and held a wine banquet at Lingyukge, drinking to their heart's content. The Retired Emperor himself played the lute, the Taizong danced, and the noble ministers got up one after another to celebrate their birthdays, until late at night.

古文：突厥既亡，其部落或北附薛延陀，或西奔西域，其降唐者尚十万口，诏群臣议区处之宜。
现代文：突厥灭亡后，其属下的部落或北附薛延陀，或者向西投奔西域，投降唐朝的还有十万户，太宗下诏让郡臣商议如何处置。
English: After the demise of the Turks, the tribes under them either moved north to Xueyantuo or headed west to the Western Regions. Another 100,000 families surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Taizong issued an edict to let the county officials discuss what to do.

古文：朝士多言： 北狄自古为中国患，今幸而破亡，宜悉徙之河南兗、豫之间，分其种落，散居州县，教之耕织，可以化胡虏为农民，永空塞北之地。 
现代文：大臣们都说： 北方狄人自古以来就是中原的祸患，现在很幸运他们已经败亡，应当全部迁徙到河南兖、豫之间，分别各个种族部落，让他们分散居住在各州县，教他们耕种织布，将他们转为农民，使塞北地区永远空旷无人。 
English: The ministers all said: The northern Di people have been the scourge of the Central Plains since ancient times. Now, fortunately, they have been defeated. They should all migrate to Henan Province and Henan Province, separate the various ethnic tribes, let them live in various states and counties, teach them to cultivate and weave cloth, turn them into farmers, and make the northern region empty and uninhabited forever.

古文：中书侍郎颜师古以为： 突厥、铁勒皆上古所不能臣，陛下既得而臣之，请皆置之河北。
现代文：中书侍郎颜师古认为： 突厥、铁勒族自古以来很难臣服，陛下既然使他们称臣，请将他们安置在河北地区。
English: Yan Shigu, the attendant of the Chinese classics, said: The Turkic and Tiler peoples have been difficult to submit to since ancient times. Since Your Majesty has made them subordinate, please place them in the Hebei region.

古文：分立酋长，领其部落，则永永无患矣。 
现代文：分别设立酋长，统领其部落，则可以永无祸患。 
English: If chiefs are set up separately to lead their tribes, there will never be any trouble.

古文：礼部侍郎李百药以为： 突厥虽云一国，然其种类区分，各有酋帅。
现代文：礼部侍郎李百药认为： 突厥虽然称为一个国家，但它的各部族划分都有其部族首领。
English: Li Baiyao, a waiter in the ceremonial department, said: Although Turkic is called a country, each tribe has its own tribal leader.

古文：今宜因其离散，各即本部署为君长，不相臣属；纵欲存立阿史那氏，唯可使臣其本族而已。
现代文：现今应当乘其离散，各以本部族设首领，使其不互为臣属，纵使想立阿史那氏为首领，也只可领有其本部族而已。
English: Now it is time to take advantage of their dispersion and set up chiefs for each of the main tribes, so that they are not subordinate to each other. Even if the Ashina clan wants to be the chief, it can only have its main tribe.

古文：国分则弱而易制，势敌则难相吞灭，各自保全，必不能抗衡中国。
现代文：国家分为几部分则力量削弱，容易控制，几部分势均力敌则难以相互吞并，各自力图保全，必不能与大唐相抗衡。
English: If the country is divided into several parts, the strength will be weakened and it will be easy to control. If the country is divided into several parts of equal strength, it will be difficult to annex each other. Each side will try to preserve itself and will not be able to compete with the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：仍请于定襄置都护府，为其节度，此安边之长策也。 
现代文：请求仍然在定襄置都护府，作为节度该地区的机构，这是安定边防的长久之计。 
English: The request still stands for the establishment of a capital city, as an institution to govern the region, which is a long-term measure to stabilize the border defense.

古文：夏州都督窦静以为： 戎狄之性，有如禽兽，不可以刑法威，不可以仁义教，况彼首丘之情，未易忘也。
现代文：夏州都督窦静认为： 戎狄的本性，如同禽兽一般，不能用刑罚法令威服，不能用仁义道德教化，况且他们留恋故土的心情也不易忘却。
English: Dou Jing, the governor of Xiazhou, believed that: The nature of soldiers, like animals, cannot be intimidated by criminal laws and regulations, cannot be educated by benevolence and morality, and their feelings of nostalgia for their homeland are not easy to forget.

古文：置之中国，有损无益，恐一旦变生，犯我王略。
现代文：将他们安置在中原一带，只有损害大唐而没有益处，恐怕一旦陡生变故，对大唐政权构成威胁。
English: Placing them in the Central Plains will only harm the Great Tang Dynasty without any benefit, and I am afraid that once the situation changes abruptly, it will pose a threat to the Great Tang Dynasty regime.

古文：莫若因其破亡之馀，施以望外之恩，假之王侯之号，妻以宗室之女，分其土地，析其部落，使其权弱势分，易为羁制，可使常为籓臣，永保边塞。 
现代文：不如借着它将要灭亡的时机，施加意外的恩宠，封他们王侯称号，将宗室女嫁给他们，分割他们的土地，离析他们的部落，使其权势分化削弱，易于钳制，可让他们永为藩臣，使边塞永保平定。 
English: It would be better to take advantage of the time when it is about to perish, to exert unexpected grace, to give them the title of prince, to marry the heiress to them, to divide their land, to separate their tribes, to divide and weaken their power, to make them easy to control, to make them forever retainers of the domain, and to make the frontier fortress permanently stable.

古文：温彦博以为： 徙于兗、豫之间，则乖违物性，非所以存养之也。
现代文：温彦博认为： 将突厥人迁徙到兖、豫之间，则违背其本性，这不是让他们生存的办法。
English: Atsuhiko Atsuhiko believes: "Migrating the Turks to the areas between Shandong and Henan goes against their nature. This is not a way for them to survive.

古文：请准汉建武故事，置降匈奴于塞下，全其部落，顺其土俗，以实空虚之地，使为中国扞蔽，策之善者也。 
现代文：请求依照汉光武帝时的办法，将投降的匈奴人安置在塞外，保全其部落，顺应其风俗习惯，以充斥空旷之地，使其成为中原的屏障，这是较完善的策略。 
English: It is a more perfect strategy to request that the surrendered Huns be resettled outside of Tibet, preserve their tribe, and conform to their customs and habits in order to fill the open space and make it a barrier to the Central Plains, in accordance with the method used by Emperor Han Guangwu.

古文：魏征以为： 突厥世为寇盗，百姓之仇也；今幸而破亡，陛下以其降附，不忍尽杀，宜纵之使还故土，不可留之中国。
现代文：魏徵认为： 突厥世代为寇盗，是老百姓的敌人。如今幸而灭亡，陛下因为他们投降归附，不忍心将他们全部杀掉，应当将他们放归故土，不能留在大唐境内。
English: Wei Zheng believed that: The Turkic generation were robbers and enemies of the common people. Now they have fortunately perished, because their majesty surrendered to them and could not bear to kill them all. They should be released to their homeland, and cannot remain in the territory of Datang.

古文：夫戎狄人面兽心，弱则请服，强则叛乱，固其常性。
现代文：戎狄人面兽心，力量削弱则请求归服，强盛则重又叛乱，这是其本性。
English: It is in the nature of the beast to subjugate, to demand submission when its power is weakened, and to rebel when it is strong.

古文：今降者众近十万，数年之后，蕃息倍多，必为腹心之疾，不可悔也。
现代文：现在投降的将近十万人，几年之后，发展到几倍之多，必是心腹大患，后悔都来不及。
English: The nearly one hundred thousand people who surrender now will grow to several times that number in a few years. This is bound to be a big headache, and it will be too late to regret it.

古文：晋初诸胡与民杂居中国，郭钦、江统，皆劝武帝驱出塞外以绝乱阶，武帝不从。
现代文：西晋初年胡族与汉民在中原混居在一起，郭钦、江统都劝晋武帝将胡族驱逐出塞外，以杜绝由此产生祸乱，武帝不听。
English: In the early years of the Western Jin Dynasty, the Hu people and the Han people lived together in the Central Plains. Guo Qin and Jiang Tong both advised Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty to expel the Hu people from Tibet in order to prevent the resulting calamity. Emperor Wu did not listen.

古文：后二十馀年，伊、洛之间，遂为氈裘之域，此前事之明鉴也！ 
现代文：此后二十余年，伊水、洛水之间，遂为北方戎狄聚居之地，此乃前代的明鉴！ 
English: After that, for more than twenty years, the area between Yishui and Luoshui became the place where the Northern Yongdi lived together. This is a clear example of the previous generation!

古文：彦博曰： 王者之于万物。天覆地载，靡有所遗。
现代文：温彦博说： 君王对于天地万物，事无巨细，都要有所包容。
English: Wen Yanbo said: The monarch should be tolerant of all things in heaven and earth, no matter how big or small.

古文：今突厥穷来归我，奈何弃之而不受乎！
现代文：现在突厥困窘，前来归附我大唐，为什么抛弃而不予接受呢。
English: Now that the Turks are in a predicament, they have come to attach themselves to my Great Tang Dynasty. Why did they abandon it and not accept it?

古文：孔子曰： 有教无类。 
现代文：孔子说： 对于教育对象不应区分亲疏贵贱。 
English: Confucius said: For the object of education, there should be no distinction between relatives and outsiders.

古文：若救其死亡，授以生业，教之礼义，数年之后，悉为吾民。
现代文：如果拯救他们于将亡之际，教他们生产生活，教他们仁义礼教，年之后，全都变成我大唐民众。
English: If we save them when they are about to die, teach them how to live a productive life, and teach them the principles of benevolence, righteousness, and propriety, in a few years they will all become our Great Tang people.

古文：选其酋长，使入宿卫，畏威怀德，何后患之有！ 
现代文：选择他们中间的部落首领，使其入朝充任宿卫官兵，畏惧皇威留恋皇恩，有什么后患呢！ 
English: Choose a tribal leader from among them, and have him enter the imperial court to serve as a palace guard officer and soldier. Fear the imperial power and yearn for the imperial grace. What are the after-effects?

古文：上卒用彦博策，处突厥降众，东自幽州，西至灵州；分突利故所统之地，置顺、祐、化、长四州都督府；又分颉利之地为六州，左置定襄都督府，右置云中都督府，以统其众。
现代文：太宗最后采纳温彦博的计谋，处置突厥投降的民众，东起幽州，西至灵州，划分突利可汗原来统属之地，设置顺？化、长四州都督府，又划分颉利之地为六州，东面设定襄都督府，西边置云中都督府，以统治其民众。
English: In the end, Emperor Taizong adopted Wen Yanbo's strategy to deal with the people who had surrendered to the Turks. From Yuzhou in the east to Lingzhou in the west, he divided the land that the Turkish khan originally belonged to, set up the Shunhua and Changshu prefectural capitals, and divided the land of Qili into six prefectures, setting up the Xiang prefectural capital in the east and the Yunzhong prefectural capital in the west to rule his people.

古文：五月，辛未，以突利为顺州都督，使帅其部落之官。
现代文：五月，辛未，唐朝任命突利为顺州都督，使其统领各部落官员。
English: In May, Xin Wei, the Tang Dynasty appointed Turi as the governor of Shunzhou, making him the leader of all tribal officials.

古文：上戒之曰： 尔祖启民挺身奔隋，隋立以为大可汗，奄有北荒，尔父始毕反为隋患。
现代文：太宗告诫他说： 你的祖父启民毅然投奔隋朝，隋朝立为大可汗，疆土覆盖北部地区，你父亲始毕可汗反而成为隋的祸患。
English: Emperor Taizong admonished him: Your grandfather Qimin resolutely joined the Sui Dynasty, the Sui Dynasty was established as a great khan, the territory covered the northern region, but your father became a khan and became the scourge of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：天道不容，故使尔今日乱亡如此。
现代文：天理不容，所以才有你今天的惨败灭亡。
English: That is why you have suffered today's fiasco.

古文：我所以不立尔为可汗者，惩启民前事故也。
现代文：我之所以不立你为可汗，就是以启民立可汗的前事作为教训。
English: The reason why I do not appoint you as khan is that I take the previous events of the election of a khan by the people as a lesson.

古文：今命尔为都督，尔宜善守国法，勿相侵掠，非徒欲中国久安，亦使尔宗族永全也！ 
现代文：现在任命你为都督，你应当善守大唐法令，不要再肆意侵占掠夺，这不只是想要大唐长治久安，也是为了使你们的种族永远存在下去！ 
English: Now that you have been appointed as the governor, you should abide by the laws of the Great Tang Dynasty, and no longer wantonly encroach and plunder. This is not only to ensure the long-term stability of the Great Tang Dynasty, but also to ensure that your race will continue to exist forever!

古文：壬申，以阿史那苏尼失为怀德郡王，阿史那思摩为怀化郡王。
现代文：壬申，任命阿史那苏尼失为怀德郡王，阿史那思摩为怀化郡王。
English: In Jinshin, Ashina Suni was appointed as the king of Waide County, and Ashina Sima as the king of Huaihua County.

古文：颉利之亡也，诸部落酋长皆弃颉利来降，独思摩随之，竟与颉利俱擒，上嘉其忠，拜右武候大将军，寻以为北开州都督，使统颉利旧众。
现代文：颉利败亡时，各部族首领纷纷抛弃颉利投降唐朝，惟独思摩跟随颉利，最后与颉利一同被俘。太宗嘉许他的忠诚，拜他为右武候大将军，不久又任命为北开州都督，让他统领颉利旧兵众。
English: When Goryeo was defeated, the tribal leaders abandoned Goryeo one after another and surrendered to the Tang Dynasty. However, Shima followed Goryeo and was eventually captured together with Goryeo. Emperor Taizong praised his loyalty, worshipped him as the right military commander, and soon appointed him as the governor of Beikai Prefecture, allowing him to command the old soldiers of Goryeo.

古文：丁丑，以右武卫大将军史大奈为丰州都督，其馀酋长至者，皆拜将军、中郎将，布列朝廷，五品已上百馀人，殆与朝士相半，因而入居长安者近万家。
现代文：丁丑，任命右武卫大将军史大奈为丰州都督，投奔唐朝的其他各族酋长，均拜为将军中郎将，跻身朝官行列，他们当中五品以上一百多人，大抵与原唐朝官员参半，因此迁居长安人口近一万户。
English: Ding Wuxi appointed the great general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, Shitanai, as the governor of Fuzhou, and the other chiefs of all ethnic groups who joined the Tang Dynasty all became generals and generals, and joined the ranks of the imperial officials. Among them, there were more than 100 people with more than five titles, and most of them were the same as the original Tang Dynasty officials. As a result, nearly 10,000 households moved to Chang'an.

古文：辛巳，诏： 自今讼者，有经尚书省判不服，听于东宫上启，委太子裁决。
现代文：辛巳，太宗下诏： 今后凡有诉讼，经尚书省判决不服，则上启东宫，由太子裁定。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: In the future, if there is a lawsuit and the decision of the Ministry of Education is not accepted, the Eastern Palace will be opened and the decision will be made by the crown prince.

古文：若仍不服，然后闻奏。 
现代文：如果仍然不服，则上奏到朕这里。 
English: If you are still not satisfied, then play up to me here.

古文：丁亥，御史大夫萧瑀劾奏李靖破颉利牙帐，御军无法，突厥珍物，虏掠俱尽，请付法司推科。上特敕勿劾。
现代文：丁亥，御史大夫萧弹劾李靖大破颉利可汗牙帐，治军没有法度，突厥珍奇宝物，抢掠一空，请交付法律部门推勘审理，太宗予以特赦，不加弹劾。
English: Ding Hai, the Imperial Historian Xiao impeached Li Jingda for breaking the Khan's dental record, there was no law to govern the army, the Turkic treasures were looted and plundered, please submit to the legal department for investigation and trial, Taizong granted amnesty, no impeachment.

古文：及靖入见，上大加责让，靖顿首谢。
现代文：等到李靖进见，太宗则大加责备，李靖磕头谢罪。
English: When Li Jing came to see him, Emperor Taizong severely reprimanded him, and Li Jing bowed his head in apology.

古文：久之，上乃曰： 隋史万岁破达头可汗，有功不赏，以罪致戮。
现代文：过了很久，太宗才说： 隋朝史万岁打败达头可汗，有功劳不加赏赐，因罪遭致杀戮。
English: After a long time, Emperor Taizong said: "Long live the Sui Dynasty and Long live the history of defeating the Dadu Khan. There is no reward for merit, and he was killed for his crime.

古文：朕则不然，录公之功，赦公之罪。 
现代文：朕则不这样处理，记录下你的功劳，赦免你的过错。 
English: I, on the other hand, don't treat it that way. I record your merits and forgive your faults.

古文：加靖左光禄大夫，赐绢千匹，加真食邑通前五百户。
现代文：加封李靖为左光禄大夫，赐给绢一千匹，所封食邑连同以前的共五百户。
English: He sealed Li Jing as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, gave him a thousand yakitori, and sealed 500 households in the town along with the previous ones.

古文：未几，上谓靖曰： 前有人谗公，今朕意已寤，公勿以为怀。 
现代文：不久，太宗对李靖说： 以前有人说你的坏话，现今朕已醒悟，你不必挂在心上。 
English: Not long after, Emperor Taizong said to Li Jing, "In the past, some people said bad things about you, but now I've woken up, you don't have to worry about it.

古文：复赐绢二千匹。
现代文：又赐给绢二千匹。
English: And he gave to the donkeys two thousand.

古文：林邑献火珠，有司以其表辞不顺，请讨之，上曰： 好战者亡，如隋炀帝、颉利可汗，皆耳目所亲见也。
现代文：林邑人向唐朝进献火珠，有关部门认为所上表章文辞桀骜不驯，请求讨伐林邑。太宗说： 尚武好战者自取灭亡，隋炀帝、颉利可汗都是亲眼所见的先例。
English: The people of Linyi offered a ball of fire to the Tang Dynasty, and the relevant departments believed that the above-mentioned chapter was insubordinate and requested a crusade against Linyi. Taizong said: Those who are warlike will perish themselves, and the Sui Dynasty and the Qili Khan are examples that can be seen with one's own eyes.

古文：小国胜之不武，况未可必乎！
现代文：打败一个小国并不能表明勇武，何况不一定能取胜。
English: Defeating a small country is not a sign of bravery, let alone victory.

古文：语言之间，何足介意！ 
现代文：遣词造句问题，何必介意呢。 
English: It's a question of phrasing, so why bother?

古文：六月，丁酉，以阿史那苏尼失为北宁州都督，以中郎将史善应为北抚州都督。
现代文：六月，丁酉，任命阿史那苏尼失为北宁州都督，任命中郎将史善应为北抚州都督。
English: In June, Ding Xi appointed Ashina Sunni as the governor of North Ningxia Province, and appointed his lieutenant general Shi Shan as the governor of North Fuzhou Province.

古文：壬寅，以右骁卫将军康苏密为北安州都督。
现代文：壬寅，任命右骁卫将军康苏密为北安州都督。
English: Ren Yin, appointed the right guard general Kang Sumi as the governor of North An Province.

古文：乙卯，发卒修洛阳宫以备巡幸，给事中张玄素上书谏，以为： 洛阳未有巡幸之期而预修宫室，非今日之急务。
现代文：乙卯，征发士兵修筑洛阳宫殿以备太宗巡幸之用，给事中张玄素上书行谏道： 还没确定巡幸洛阳的时间就预先修筑宫室，这并不是现在的急务。
English: Second, soldiers were conscripted to build a palace in Luoyang to prepare for the Emperor Taizong's inspection tour. Zhang Xuansu wrote a letter to the emperor saying, "It is not an urgent task to build a palace room before the time for the inspection tour in Luoyang has been determined.

古文：昔汉高祖纳娄敬之说，自洛阳迁长安，岂非洛阳之地不及关中之形胜邪！
现代文：从前汉高祖刘邦采纳娄敬的建议，从洛阳迁都到长安，难道不是因为洛阳的地利赶不上关中地区的地势好吗？
English: Liu Bang, the ancestor of the former Han Dynasty, took the advice of Zou Jing and moved the capital from Luoyang to Chang'an. Wasn't it because Luoyang's location couldn't keep up with Guanzhong's terrain?

古文：景帝用晁错之言而七国构祸，陛下今处突厥于中国，突厥之亲，何如七国；岂得不先为忧，而宫室可遽兴，乘舆可轻动哉！
现代文：汉景帝采用晁错削藩的建议而导致七国之乱，陛下现在将突厥杂处于中原汉民中间，与突厥的亲近程度怎么抵得上七国呢？怎能不先忧虑此事，却突然兴建宫室，轻易移动皇辇御驾呢！
English: Emperor Han Jing made the mistake of cutting out the Han clans, which led to the Seven Kingdoms War. His Majesty now places the Turks among the Han people of Central Plains. How can he be as close to the Turks as he is to the Seven Kingdoms? How can he suddenly build a palace and easily move the imperial scepter without worrying about it first?

古文：臣见隋氏初营宫室，近山无大木，皆致之远方，二千人曳一柱，以木为轮，则戛摩火出，乃铸铁为毂，行一二里，铁彀辄破，别使数百人赍铁彀随而易之，尽日不过行二三十里，计一柱之费，已用数十万功，则其馀可知矣。
现代文：我知道隋朝起初营造宫室，近处山上没有大的树木，均从远方运来，二千人拉一根柱子，用横木做轮子，则磨擦起火，于是铸铁做车毂，走一二里路，铁毂即破损，另差使几百人携带铁毂随时更换，每天不过走出二三十里，总计一根柱子需花费几十万的劳力，其他的花费便可想而知了。
English: I know that the Sui Dynasty built a palace at the beginning. There were no large trees on the nearby mountains, they were all transported from far away. Two thousand people pulled a pillar, made wheels with cross-beams, and the friction caused a fire. So cast iron was used to make wheels. If you walk one or two miles, the anvil is broken. The other difference is that hundreds of people carry the anvil to replace it at any time. If you walk only twenty or thirty miles a day, a total of hundreds of thousands of labor is required for a pillar. Other costs can be imagined.

古文：陛下初平洛阳，凡隋氏宫室之宏侈者皆令毁之，曾未十年，复加营缮，何前日恶之而今日效之也！
现代文：陛下刚平定洛阳时，凡遇隋朝宫殿巨大奢侈均下令毁掉，还不到十年光景，又重新加以营造修缮，为什么以前讨厌的东西现在却要加以效仿呢？
English: When His Majesty had just conquered Luoyang, he ordered the destruction of all the extravagant palaces of the Sui Dynasty. Less than ten years later, they were rebuilt and repaired. Why should something that was previously repugnant now be emulated?

古文：且以今日财力，何如隋世！
现代文：而且按照现在的财力状况，怎么能与隋代相比！
English: And according to the current financial situation, how can it be compared with the Sui Dynasty!

古文：陛下役疮痍之人，袭亡隋之弊，恐又甚于炀帝矣！ 
现代文：陛下役使极为疲惫的百姓，承袭隋朝灭亡的弊端，祸乱恐怕又要超过炀帝呀！ 
English: His Majesty has made the extremely tired people inherit the drawbacks of the demise of the Sui Dynasty, and I am afraid that the calamity will exceed that of Emperor Qian!

古文：上谓玄素曰： 卿谓我不如炀帝，何如桀、纣？ 
现代文：太宗对张玄素说： 你说我不如炀帝？那么与桀、纣相比如何？ 
English: Taizong said to Zhang Xuansu, "You say I'm not as good as Emperor Qian? Then how do I compare to Emperor Qian and Emperor Qian?

古文：对曰： 若此役不息，亦同归于乱耳。 
现代文：答道： 如果此项劳役不停，恐怕也要一样地遭致变乱！ 
English: He replied, "If this labor is not stopped, I'm afraid there will be turmoil as well!"

古文：上叹曰： 吾思之不熟，乃至于是！ 
现代文：太宗感叹道： 我考虑的不周到，以至于此！ 
English: Taizong lamented, "I didn't think about it carefully enough to end up with this!"

古文：顾谓房玄龄曰： 朕以洛阳土中，朝贡道均，意欲便民，故使营之。
现代文：回头对房玄龄说： 朕以为洛阳地处大唐中央地段，四方朝贡路途均等，想着便利百姓，所以派人营造。
English: Looking back, he said to Fang Xuanling, "I thought that Luoyang was located in the central section of Datang, and the tribute roads were equal in all directions. I thought it would be convenient for the people, so I sent someone to build it.

古文：今玄素所言诚有理，宜即为之罢役。
现代文：刚才玄素所说的确有道理，应立即停止此项工程。
English: What Xuan Su said just now is indeed reasonable, and this project should be stopped immediately.

古文：后日或以事至洛阳，虽露居亦无伤也。 
现代文：日后如有事去洛阳，即使居于露天也不碍事。 
English: In the future, if you have to go to Luoyang, even if you live in the open air, it is not a problem.

古文：仍赐玄素彩二百匹。
现代文：于是赐给张玄素彩绸二百匹。
English: So he gave Zhang Xuansu 200 silkworms.

古文：秋，七月，甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月，甲子朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in the autumn month of July, at the turn of the year.

古文：乙丑，上问房玄龄、萧瑀曰： 隋文帝何如主也？ 
现代文：乙丑，太宗问房玄龄、萧道： 隋文帝作为一代君主怎么样？ 
English: Second Ugly, Taizong asked Fang Xuanling and Xiao Dao: How is the Sui Emperor as a monarch?

古文：对曰： 文帝勤于为治，每临朝，或至日昃，五品已上，引坐论事，卫士传餐而食；虽性非仁厚，亦励精之主也。 
现代文：回答说： 文帝勤于治理朝政，每次监朝听政，有时要到日落西山时，五品以上官员，围坐论事，卫士不能下岗，传递而食。虽然品性算不上仁厚，亦可称为励精图治的君主。 
English: He replied, "Wen Di was diligent in governing the imperial government. Every time he monitored the imperial government and listened to the government, sometimes he had to wait until the sunset in the West Mountain. Officials of five or more ranks sat around and discussed the matter. Guards could not be dismissed and passed on. Although his character was not benevolent, he could also be called a monarch who worked hard to govern.

古文：上曰： 公得其一，未知其二。
现代文：太宗说： 你们只知其一，未知其二。
English: The emperor said, "You only got one, I don't know what the other one is."

古文：文帝不明而喜察，不明则照有不通，喜察则多疑于物。事皆自决，不任群臣。
现代文：文帝不贤明而喜欢苛察，不贤明则察事不能都通达，苛察则对事物多有疑心，万事皆自行决定，不信任群臣。
English: Emperor Wen is not wise and likes to be harsh, but he is not wise enough to be able to understand everything, and he is more suspicious of things, decides everything on his own, and does not trust his ministers.

古文：天下至广，一日万机，虽复劳神苦形，岂能一一中理！
现代文：天下如此之大，日理万机，虽伤身劳神，难道能每一事均切中要领！
English: The world is so big, there are so many things to do every day, and even though we work so hard, we can't get everything right!

古文：群臣既知主意，唯取决受成，虽有愆违，莫敢谏争，此所以二世而亡也。
现代文：群臣既已知主上的意见，便只有无条件接受，即使主上出现过失，也没人敢争辩谏议，所以到了第二代隋朝就灭亡了。
English: Since the group of ministers knew the opinion of the Lord, they only had to accept it unconditionally. Even if the Lord made a mistake, no one dared to argue or discuss, so by the second generation, the Sui Dynasty had perished.

古文：朕则不然。
现代文：朕则不是这样。
English: This is not the case with me.

古文：择天下贤才，置之百官，使思天下之事，关由宰相，审熟便安，然后奏闻。
现代文：选拔天下贤能之士，分别充任文武百官，让他们考虑天下大事，汇总到宰相处，深思熟虑，然后上奏到朕这里。
English: Select the world's most capable men and women, and appoint them as civil and military officials respectively, let them consider the world's major events, summarize and get along with each other, deliberate, and then report to me here.

古文：有功则赏，有罪则刑，谁敢不竭心力以修职业，何忧天下之不治乎！ 
现代文：有功则行赏，有罪即处罚，谁还敢不尽心竭力而各司职守，何愁天下治理不好呢！ 
English: Merit is rewarded, guilt is punished. Who would dare not to do his best and perform his duties? Why worry if the world is not well governed?

古文：因敕百司： 自今诏敕行下有未便者，皆应执奏，毋得阿从，不尽己意。 
现代文：因而敕令各部门： 今后诏敕文书有不当之处，均应执意禀奏，不得阿谀顺从，不充分发表自己的意见。 
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered all departments: In the future, if there is anything improper in the imperial edict and imperial edict documents, they should insist on correcting it, must not be obedient to the emperor, and should not fully express their own opinions.

古文：癸酉，以前太子少保李纲为太子少师，以兼御史大夫萧瑀为太子少傅。
现代文：癸酉，任命前任太子少保李纲为太子少师，兼任御史大夫的萧为太子少傅。
English: He appointed Li Gang, the former Prince's Junior Bodyguard, as Prince's Junior Teacher, and Xiao, who also served as Imperial Historian, as Prince's Junior Teacher.

古文：李纲有足疾，上赐以步舆，使之乘至阁下，数引入禁中，问以政事。
现代文：李纲腿脚不好，太宗赐予步辇，让他乘步辇去东宫，又数次召入皇宫内，向他询问政事。
English: Li Gang's legs and feet were not good, so Emperor Taizong gave him a walking cane and let him take the walking cane to the East Palace. He was also called into the palace several times to ask him about political affairs.

古文：每至东宫，太子亲拜之。
现代文：每次到东宫，太子都要行拜见礼。
English: Every time he visits the East Palace, the prince pays his respects.

古文：太子每视事，上令纲与房玄龄侍坐。
现代文：太子每次上朝听政事，太宗都令李纲与房玄龄坐在太子身旁备顾问。
English: Every time the prince came to the court to listen to political affairs, Emperor Taizong ordered Li Gang and Fang Xuanling to sit next to the prince and prepare advisers.

古文：先是，萧瑀与宰相参议朝政，瑀气刚而辞辩，房玄龄等皆不能抗，上多不用其言，玄龄、魏征、温彦博尝有微过，瑀劾奏之，上竟不问。
现代文：先前，萧与宰相参议朝政，他性情刚直又能言善辩，房玄龄等人均顶不过他，太宗也多不采用他的意见。房玄龄、魏徵、温彦博曾有小的过失，萧以此上奏太宗弹劾他们，太宗丝毫不理。
English: Previously, Xiao and the prime minister consulted on the government of the dynasty. He was upright and eloquent. Fang Xuanling and others were all better than him, and Taizong did not adopt his opinion. Fang Xuanling, Wei Zheng, and Wen Yanbo had minor faults, and Xiao used this to play Taizong to impeach them. Taizong did not care at all.

古文：瑀由此怏怏自失，遂罢御史大夫，为太子少傅，不复预闻朝政。
现代文：萧怏怏不乐，于是被免去御史大夫职，改任太子少傅，不再参与朝政。
English: Xiao Yao was not happy, so he was removed from the post of Imperial Historian, and was reappointed as the Prince's Younger Brother, and no longer participated in imperial politics.

古文：西突厥种落散在伊吾，诏以凉州都督李大亮为西北道安抚大使，于碛口贮粮，来者赈给，使者招慰，相望于道。
现代文：西突厥部族散居在大漠外的伊吾地区，太宗下诏任命凉州都督李大亮为西北道安抚大使，在碛口存贮粮食，凡来此地均予赈给，又让使者四处招抚，道路相望，远近不绝。
English: The West Turkic tribes were dispersed in the Igu region outside the Great Desert. Emperor Taizong issued an edict appointing Li Daliang, the governor of Liangzhou, as the pacification ambassador of the Northwest Passage. He stored grain at the mouth of the estuary. Anyone who came here was given grain, and the envoys were invited everywhere. The roads faced each other, far and near.

古文：大亮上言： 欲怀远者必先安近，中国如本根，四夷如枝叶，疲中国以奉四夷，犹拔本根以益枝叶也。
现代文：李大亮上书言道： 想要怀柔远方必先安抚近地，我大唐如树根，四方如枝叶，倾尽大唐粮食以供给四方少数族，如同拔掉树根来养活枝叶。
English: Li Dayliang said in his book: "If you want to win the hearts and minds of the far away, you must first appease the near land. I treat the Greater Tang Dynasty like the roots of a tree, and the four regions like the branches and leaves. I pour out the grain of the Greater Tang Dynasty to supply the minorities in the four regions. It is like pulling out the roots of a tree to feed the branches and leaves."

古文：臣远考秦、汉，近观隋室，外事戎狄，皆致疲弊。
现代文：我远处考察秦、汉，近处观察隋朝，对外事奉戎狄，均致自身疲弱。
English: I have studied the Qin and Han dynasties from afar, observed the Sui Dynasty from nearby, and served as a foreign service officer, all of which have led to my own weakness.

古文：今招致西突厥，但见劳费，未见其益。
现代文：如今招抚西突厥，只见劳心费财，未见收益。
English: Today, efforts to woo West Turkistan are laborious and costly, with no visible benefits.

古文：况河西州县萧条，突厥微弱以来，始得耕获；今又供亿此役，民将不堪，不若且罢招慰为便。
现代文：更何况河西一带州县寥落稀少，自从突厥衰微以来，才开始耕种收获；如今又放粮赈给，百姓不堪其苦，不如暂且停止招抚慰问。
English: What's more, the states and counties around Hexi are few and far between. Cultivation and harvest only began after the decline of the Turks. Now they are giving out grain to the poor. The people are suffering so much, it is better to temporarily stop soliciting condolences.

古文：伊吾之地，率皆沙碛，其人或自立君长，求称臣内属者，羁縻受之，使居塞外，为中国籓蔽，此乃施虚惠而收实利也。 
现代文：伊吾地区，多是沙漠，当地人有的自立为首领，要求归附大唐，不妨加以联络，让他们居住在塞外，为我大唐屏障，这才是施以小惠而坐收实际利益的办法。 
English: In the Igu region, which is mostly desert, some local people have set themselves up as leaders, demanding to be annexed to Datang. It would be a good idea to contact them and ask them to live outside of Datang and act as a barrier for me. This is the only way to gain practical benefits while giving small benefits.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：八月，丙午，诏以 常服未有差等，自今三品以上服紫，四品、五品服绯，六品、七品服绿，八品服青；妇人从其夫色。 
现代文：八月，丙午，太宗下诏说： 官员日常服装没有等级差别，今后三品以上官员穿紫色衣服，四五品穿大红色，六七品穿绿色，八品穿青色，官员夫人从其丈夫的服色。 
English: In August, on the afternoon of the 3rd, Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: There is no difference in the daily attire of officials. In the future, officials of three or more grades will wear purple clothes, officials of four or five grades will wear red, officials of sixty-seven grades will wear green, officials of eight grades will wear blue, and officials' wives will wear their husband's clothes.

古文：甲寅，诏以兵部尚书李靖为右仆射。
现代文：甲寅，太宗下诏任命兵部尚书李靖为尚书右仆射。
English: In A, Emperor Taizong issued an edict appointing Li Jing, the secretary of the military department, as his right-hand man.

古文：靖性沈厚，每与时宰参议，恂恂似不能言。
现代文：李靖性情深沉忠厚，每次与宰相们议论政事，谦恭拘谨像是说不出话来。
English: Li Jing had a deep and loyal disposition. Every time he discussed politics with the prime ministers, he was so modest and restrained that he seemed to be speechless.

古文：突厥既亡，营州都督薛万淑遣契丹酋长贪没折说谕东北诸夷，奚、室韦等十馀部皆内附。
现代文：突厥灭亡后，营州都督薛万淑派契丹族首领贪没折游说东北各少数族，奚？室韦等十几个部族先后归顺唐朝。
English: After the demise of the Turks, the governor of Yingzhou, Xue Wanshuk, sent the leader of the Khitan tribe, Qiming, to lobby the minority tribes in the northeast, and more than a dozen tribes, including the Qin and the Murwei, successively submitted to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：万淑，万均之兄也。
现代文：薛万淑是薛万均的兄长。
English: Xue Wanshu is the elder brother of Xue Wanjun.

古文：戊午，突厥欲谷设来降。
现代文：戊午，突厥人欲谷设前来投降。
English: In the afternoon, the Turks came to the valley to surrender.

古文：欲谷设，突利之弟也。
现代文：欲谷设是突利可汗的弟弟。
English: He is the younger brother of the Turi Khan.

古文：颉利败，欲谷设奔高昌，闻突利为唐所礼，遂来降。
现代文：颉利可汗被打败后，欲谷设投奔高昌，听说其兄长为唐朝所礼遇，便来投降。
English: After the defeat of the Qili Khan, Zhi Gu set out for Gaochang. Hearing that his brother had been treated with courtesy by the Tang Dynasty, he came to surrender.

古文：九月，戊辰，伊吾城主入朝。
现代文：九月，戊辰，伊吾城的首领来到唐朝。
English: In September, the leader of Igu Castle came to Tang Dynasty.

古文：隋末，伊吾内属，置伊吾郡；隋乱，臣于突厥。
现代文：隋朝末年，伊吾归附，隋设置伊吾郡。隋朝大乱，改附突厥。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Igu was annexed, and the Sui Dynasty set up Igu County.

古文：颉利既灭，举其属七城来降，因以其地置伊西州。
现代文：颉利灭亡后，又举其属下七城投降唐朝，唐便以其所辖之地设置西伊州。
English: After the downfall of the Qili Dynasty, it surrendered seven cities under its jurisdiction to the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty set up the Western Yi Prefecture in the area under its jurisdiction.

古文：思结部落饥贫，朔州刺史新丰张俭招集之，其不来者，仍居碛北，亲属私相往还，俭亦不禁。
现代文：思结部落饥馑贫弱，朔州刺史、新丰人张俭召募他们，不应召的仍然住在漠北，他们的亲属私下往来，张俭也不加禁止。
English: The Si Knot tribe is poor and starving. They are recruited by Zhang Jian, a member of the Shuozhou Jishi and Xinfeng people. Those who should not be recruited still live in the north of the desert. Their relatives come and go privately, and Zhang Jian is not prohibited.

古文：及俭徙胜州都督，州司奏思结将叛，诏俭往察之。
现代文：等到张俭升迁为胜州都督，州衙署上奏称思结部将要反叛，太宗下诏令张俭前往按察。
English: When Zhang Jian was promoted to the position of the governor of Shengzhou, it was reported to the prefectural government that Shijie would rebel, and Emperor Taizong ordered Zhang Jian to go to investigate.

古文：俭单骑入其部落说谕，徙之代州，即以俭检校代州都督，思结卒无叛者。
现代文：张俭单枪匹马到思结部落晓以大义，让他们迁居到代州，朝廷即任命张俭检校代州都督，思结没有反叛的。
English: Zhang Jianhong single-handedly went to the village of Sujie to let them move to Daizhou, and the court appointed Zhang Jianhong as the governor of Daizhou. Sujie did not rebel.

古文：俭因劝之营田，岁大稔。
现代文：张俭借机劝他们从事农作，年底丰收。
English: Zhang Jian took the opportunity to persuade them to engage in farming, and a bumper harvest followed at the end of the year.

古文：俭恐虏蓄积多，有异志，奏请和籴以充边储。
现代文：张俭担心思结族人积蓄多，便会有反叛的意图，上奏请求由官府出钱购买他们的粮食，以充边防储备。
English: Zhang Jian was worried that the Siqiao people had a lot of savings, so they would have a rebellious intention. He requested that the government pay to buy their grain to fill the border defense reserve.

古文：部落喜，营田转力，而边备实焉。
现代文：思结部族大为高兴，种地更加努力，边防储备充实。
English: The Sujie tribe was very happy, made more efforts to farm the land, and enriched the border defense reserves.

古文：丙子，开南蛮地置费州、夷州。
现代文：丙子，唐朝开辟南蛮地区设立费州、夷州。
English: Cun Zi, the Tang Dynasty opened up the southern barbarian regions and established Feizhou and Yizhou.

古文：己卯，上幸陇州。
现代文：己卯，太宗巡幸陇州。
English: At the same time, Taizong toured Bozhou.

古文：冬，十一月，壬辰，以右卫大将军侯君集为兵部尚书，参议朝政。
现代文：冬季十一月，壬辰。任命右卫大将军侯君集为兵部尚书，参议朝政。
English: In November of the winter, in Imjin, Hou Jinshi, the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, was appointed to be the secretary of the military department and a councilor of the imperial government.

古文：甲子，车驾还京师，上读《明堂针炙书》，云： 人五藏之系，咸附于背。 
现代文：甲子，太宗车驾回到长安。太宗读《明堂针灸书》，书中写道： 人的五脏经络，均附在后背。 
English: After a while, Taizong drove back to Chang'an. Taizong read the "Myeongdong Acupuncture and Moxibustion Book," in which he wrote: "The five viscera and meridians of the human body are all attached to the back.

古文：戊寅，诏自今毋得笞囚背。
现代文：戊寅，下诏今后不得鞭笞囚犯的后背。
English: Wu Yin decreed that in the future, prisoners should not be whipped on the back.

古文：十二月，甲辰，上猎于鹿苑；乙巳，还宫。
现代文：十二月，甲辰，太宗去鹿苑射猎，乙巳，回到宫中。
English: In December, Jia Chen, Taizong went deer hunting in Luyuan, and returned to the palace.

古文：甲寅，高昌王麹文泰入朝。
现代文：甲寅，高昌王文泰来到朝中。
English: A Yin, Gaochang Wang Wentai came to the court.

古文：西域诸国咸欲因文泰使入贡，上遣文泰之臣厌怛纥干往迎之。
现代文：西域各国都想跟着文泰派使节进朝贡品，太宗派文泰手下的大臣厌怛纥干前往迎接。
English: Western countries all wanted to follow the envoys of the Ventai faction into the tributes, and the ministers of the Tai sect of Ventai's men were reluctant to go to meet them.

古文：魏征谏曰： 昔光武不听西域送侍子，置都护，以为不以蛮夷劳中国。
现代文：魏徵劝谏道： 从前汉光武帝不允许西域诸王送王子入朝侍奉和置都护府，认为不应当以蛮夷劳顿中原帝国。
English: Wei Zheng advised: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty did not allow the kings of the Western Regions to send princes to serve in the imperial court and set up the capital protection government, believing that the Central Plains Empire should not be ruined by barbarians.

古文：今天下初定，前者文泰之来，所过劳费已甚，今借使十国入贡，其徒旅不减千人。
现代文：如今天下刚刚平定，先前文泰来朝时，已耗费很多，如今假使有十国来进贡，则随从不少于一千人。
English: For example, it has just been settled down today. When Ventai came to the DPRK previously, he had already spent a lot of money. Now, if ten countries come to pay tribute, no less than one thousand people will follow.

古文：边民荒耗，将不胜其弊。
现代文：边区民众耗费过大，将难以承担。
English: It will be difficult for people in the outlying areas to bear the excessive cost.

古文：若听其商贾往来，与边民交市，则可矣，倘以宾客遇之，非中国之利也。 
现代文：如果允许他们商人间相互往来，与边区百姓互市贸易，这还可以，如以宾客接待，对我大唐没有好处。 
English: If their merchants are allowed to interact with each other and trade with the people of the border area, this is fine. If they are received as guests, it is not good for my Datang.

古文：时厌怛纥干已行，上遽令止之。
现代文：当时厌怛纥干已经出发，太宗急令人阻止。
English: At that time, we had already set out, and it was too urgent to stop.

古文：诸宰相侍宴，上谓王珪曰： 卿识鉴精通，复善谈论，玄龄以下，卿宜悉加品藻，且自谓与数子何如？ 
现代文：众位宰相陪太宗饮宴，太宗对王说： 你精通鉴别人才，又很健谈，房玄龄以下宰臣，望你能详细加以品评，而且自己衡量与他们相比如何？ 
English: A number of prime ministers accompanied the Emperor at the banquet. The Emperor said to the King, "You are well-versed in judging other people's talents, and you are very talkative. I hope you will be able to make a detailed evaluation of the vassals under the age of Fang Xuan, and how do you compare with them?

古文：对曰： 孜孜奉国，知无不为，臣不如玄龄。
现代文：王答道： 勤勤恳恳地事奉大唐，尽心竭力无所保留，我不如房玄龄。
English: Wang Yao replied, "I am a conscientious and diligent officer, a resolute and shrewd officer, but I am no match for Xuanling.

古文：才兼文武，出将入相，臣不如李靖。
现代文：文武全才，出将入相，我不如李靖。
English: I am an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. I can both lead an army and govern a country. I am good at literature and martial arts. I am no match for Li Jing.

古文：敷奏详明，出纳惟允，臣不如温彦博。
现代文：议事详尽周到，传达诏令，反映群臣意见，都平允恰当，我不如温彦博。
English: The playbook is clear and precise, the words and deeds are reasonable and well-founded, the rules are correct, and there are no omissions. I am no match for Wen Yanbo.

古文：处繁治剧，众务毕举，臣不如戴胄。
现代文：处理繁重、艰难的事务都能办好，我不如戴胄。
English: I can handle heavy and difficult affairs well, I might as well wear a shackle.

古文：耻君不及尧、舜，以谏争为己任，臣不如魏征。
现代文：惟恐君王赶不上尧、舜，专以苦言强谏为己任，我不如魏徵。
English: However, I am afraid that the king will not be able to catch up with me, so I will take it upon myself to speak harshly and forcefully. I am not as good as Wei Zheng.

古文：至于激浊扬清，嫉恶好善，臣于数子，亦有微长。 
现代文：说到辨别清浊，疾恶奖善，我与他们相比，倒是略有长处。 
English: When it comes to distinguishing between good and bad, and rewarding good for evil, I have a slight advantage compared to them.

古文：上深以为然，众亦服其确论。
现代文：太宗非常赞同，众人也钦佩他的高论。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed very much, and people also admired his high opinion.

古文：上之初即位也，尝与群臣语及教化，上曰： 今承大乱之后，恐斯民未易化也。 
现代文：太宗刚即位时，曾与群臣谈到教化问题，太宗说： 如今刚经过一场大劫乱，我担心百姓不容易教化。 
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he discussed the problem of enlightenment with his courtiers. Emperor Taizong said, "Nowadays, just after a great disaster, I am worried that the people are not easy to be enlightened.

古文：魏征对曰： 不然。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 我认为并非如此。
English: Wei Zheng replied: I don't think so.

古文：久安之民骄佚，骄佚则难教；经乱之民愁苦，愁苦则易化。
现代文：长久安定的百姓容易骄逸，骄逸则难以教化；经过动乱的百姓易于忧患，忧患则容易教化。
English: The people who have been stable for a long time are prone to arrogance, and arrogance is difficult to educate; the people who have experienced turmoil are prone to sorrow, and sorrow is easy to educate.

古文：譬犹饥者易为食，渴者易为饮也。 
现代文：这如同饥饿的人不苛择饮食，饥渴的人不苛择饮水一样。 
English: Just as a hungry man does not choose to eat, and a thirsty man does not choose to drink.

古文：上深然之。
现代文：太宗深表赞同。
English: Gensong deeply felt that this was the right thing to say.

古文：封德彝非之曰： 三代以还，人渐浇讹，故秦任法律，汉杂霸道，盖欲化而不能，岂能之而不欲邪！
现代文：封德彝否定其说法，说道： 三代以后，人心渐趋浇薄奸诈，所以秦朝专用法律，汉代采用王道的同时掺杂霸道内容，正是想行仁义教化而不能收效，哪里是能推行而不想推行呢？
English: Feng Deyao denied his statement, saying: After three generations, people's hearts gradually become more and more treacherous. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty's special laws, the Han Dynasty's use of the royal road while adding tyrannical content, are just trying to carry out benevolence and righteousness and cannot achieve results. Where can it be implemented without wanting to implement it?

古文：魏征书生，未识时务，若信其虚论，必败国家。 
现代文：魏徵是一介书生，不识时务，如果听信他的空谈，必然败坏国家。 
English: Wei Zheng is a scholar, ignorant of current affairs. If you listen to his empty talk, you will inevitably corrupt the country.

古文：征曰： 五帝、三王不易民而化，昔黄帝征蚩尤，颛顼诛九黎，汤放桀，武王伐纣，皆能身致太平，岂非承大乱之后邪！
现代文：魏徵说： 五帝、三王不是换掉百姓而施教化，从前黄帝征伐蚩尤，颛顼诛灭九黎，商汤放逐夏桀，武王讨伐纣王，均能达到生前的太平盛世，难道不是承接大动乱之后的缘故吗？
English: Wei Zheng said: The five emperors and three kings did not replace the people and educate them. In the past, the Yellow Emperor's conquest of Muyu, the annihilation of Jiu Li, the expulsion of Shang Tang, and the King Wu's conquest of Shao Wang were all able to achieve a peaceful and prosperous life. Isn't it because they undertook great turmoil?

古文：若谓古人淳朴，渐至浇讹，则至于今日，当悉化为鬼魅矣，人主安得而治之！ 
现代文：如果说上古人淳朴，后代渐变得浇薄奸诈，那么到了今天，应当全都化为鬼魅了，君主怎么能统治他们呢？ 
English: If we say that the ancients were simple and the descendants gradually became more and more treacherous, then today, they should all be turned into ghosts, how can the monarch rule them?

古文：上卒从征言。
现代文：太宗最后听从了魏徵的意见。
English: Taizong finally listened to Wei Zheng's advice.

古文：元年，关中饥，米斗直绢一匹；二年，天下蝗；三年，大水。
现代文：贞观元年时，关中地区闹饥荒，一斗米值一匹绢；贞观二年，全国出现蝗灾；贞观三年发大水。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, there was a famine in Guanzhong area, and one bucket of rice was worth one horse; in the second year of Zhenguan, there was a locust plague across the country; in the third year of Zhenguan, there was a flood.

古文：上勤而抚之，民虽东西就食，未尝嗟怨。
现代文：太宗勤勉听政，并加以安抚，百姓虽然东乞西讨，也未曾抱怨。
English: Taizong diligently listened to the government and appeased it. Although the people begged and pleaded, they never complained.

古文：是岁，天下大稔，流散者咸归乡里，米斗不过三、四钱，终岁断死刑才二十九人。
现代文：这一年，全国大丰收，背井离乡的人都回归故里，一斗米不过三四钱，整个一年犯死罪的只有二十九个人。
English: This year, there was a bumper harvest across the country, and people who had left their hometowns returned to their hometowns. A barrel of rice cost only three to four yuan, and only 29 people committed capital crimes in the entire year.

古文：东至于海，南及五岭，皆外户不闭，行旅不赍粮，取给于道路焉。
现代文：东到大海，南至五岭，均夜不闭户，旅行不带粮，只是在路途上取食物。
English: East to the sea, south to Wuling, the average night does not close the house, travel without grain, just pick up food on the way.

古文：上谓长孙无忌曰： 贞观之初，上书者皆云： 人主当独运威权，不可委之臣下。 
现代文：太宗对长孙无忌说： 贞观初年，大臣们上书都说： 君王应当独自运用权威，不能委任给臣下。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to his eldest grandson, "In the first year of Zhenguan, the ministers all said in their letters: The sovereign should use his authority alone, and cannot delegate it to his subjects.

古文：又云： 宜震耀威武，征讨四夷。 
现代文：又说： 应当耀武扬威，讨伐四方。 
English: He also said, "We should display our military prowess and fight in all directions."

古文：唯魏征劝朕 偃武修文，中国既安，四夷自服。 
现代文：只有魏徵劝朕说： 放下武力勤修文教，中原安定之后，四方自然钦服。 
English: Only Wei Zheng advised me to: Put down the armed forces and diligently study literature and education. After the Central Plains was stabilized, the four sides naturally admired it.

古文：朕用其言。
现代文：朕采纳他的意见。
English: I'll take his advice.

古文：今颉利成擒，其酋长并带刀宿卫，部落皆袭衣冠，征之力也，但恨不使封德彝见之耳！ 
现代文：如今颉利成了俘虏，其部族首领成为宿卫官，各部落都受到中原礼教的薰染，这都是魏徵的功劳，只是遗憾封德彝见不到了！ 
English: Nowadays, the Qin Li became prisoners, their tribal leaders became guards, and the tribes were all influenced by the Central Plains ritualism. All of this is the merit of the Wei Zheng, but it is a pity that the Feng De Zheng is no longer to be seen!

古文：征再拜谢曰： 突厥破灭，海内康宁，皆陛下威德，臣何力焉！ 
现代文：魏徵再次拜谢说： 突厥灭亡，海内承平，都是陛下的威德，我有何功德呢？ 
English: Wei Zheng bowed again and said, "The downfall of the Turks and the pacification of China are all the merits of your majesty. What are my merits?

古文：上曰： 朕能任公，公能称所任，则其功岂独在朕乎！ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕能够重用你，你能够十分称职，那么功劳怎么能是我一个人的呢？ 
English: Taizong said, "I can use you again and again, you can be very competent, so how can the credit be mine alone?

古文：房玄龄奏： 阅府库甲兵，远胜隋世。 
现代文：房玄龄上奏说： 我看过朝廷府库的兵械，远远超过隋朝。 
English: Fang Xuanling said: I have seen the military equipment in the imperial treasury, which far exceeds that of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：上曰： 甲兵武备，诚不可阙；然炀帝甲兵岂不足邪！
现代文：太宗说： 铠甲兵械等武器装备，诚然不可缺少；然而隋炀帝兵械难道不够吗？
English: Taizong said: It is true that armor and other weapons and equipment are indispensable; however, is the military equipment of the Sui and Qian Dynasties not enough?

古文：卒亡天下。
现代文：最后还是丢掉了江山。
English: In the end, they still lost their country.

古文：若公等尽力，使百姓乂安，此乃朕之甲兵也。 
现代文：如果你们尽心竭力，使百姓人心思定，这就是朕最好的兵械。 
English: If you do your best to make the people think, this is my best weapon.

古文：上谓秘书监萧璟曰： 卿在隋世数见皇后乎？ 
现代文：太宗对秘书监萧说： 你在隋朝时多次见过萧皇后吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to Secretary Guan Xiao: Did you see Empress Xiao many times during the Sui Dynasty?

古文：对曰： 彼儿女且不得见，臣何人，得见之？ 
现代文：萧答道： 她们母女间还不常见，我是何人，怎么能见到呢？ 
English: Xiao replied, "It's not common for mothers and daughters to have sex. How many am I, and how can I see it?

古文：魏征曰： 臣闻炀帝不信齐王，恒有中使察之，闻其宴饮，则曰 彼营何事得遂而喜！ 闻其忧悴，则曰 彼有他念故尔。 
现代文：魏徵说： 我听说隋炀帝不信任齐王，总是派宦官察看，听说他摆宴饮酒，就说 他做成了什么事这么高兴 ；听说他忧虑憔悴，则说 他别有企图故而如此 。
English: Wei Zheng said, "I heard that Emperor Sui did not trust King Qi, and always sent eunuchs to inspect him. When I heard that he was feasting and drinking, I said that he was so happy about what he had done. When I heard that he was worried, I said that he had no intention, so he did it.

古文：父子之间且犹如是，况他人乎！ 
现代文：他们父子之间尚且如此，何况对其他人呢？ 
English: Is this still the case between their father and son, let alone for others?

古文：上笑曰： 朕今视杨政道，胜炀帝之于齐王远矣。 
现代文：太宗笑着说： 朕如今对待杨政道，远超过当年炀帝对待齐王。 
English: Taizong smiled and said, "I treat Yang Zhengdao much better now than Emperor Qian treated King Qi.

古文：璟，瑀之兄也。
现代文：萧是萧的兄长。
English: Xiao is Xiao's older brother.

古文：西突厥肆叶护可汗既先可汗之子，为众所附，莫贺咄可汗所部酋长多归之，肆叶护引兵击莫贺咄，莫贺咄兵败，逃于金山，为泥熟设所杀，诸部共推肆叶护为大可汗。
现代文：西突厥肆叶护可汗是前可汗的儿子，为众人所拥戴，莫贺咄可汗属下部族首领多归附他。肆叶护率兵进攻莫贺咄，莫贺咄兵败逃到金山，被泥熟设杀死，各部落共推肆叶护为大可汗。
English: The Western Turkic Zhabo Yegor Khan was the son of the former khan and was admired by many people. Most of the tribal leaders under Moghag Khan belonged to him. Zhabo Yegor led an army to attack Moghag, Moghag's soldiers fled to Jinshan in defeat and were killed by Mudraks. All tribes promoted Zhabo Yegor as the great khan.

古文：春，正月，诏僧、尼、道士致拜父母。
现代文：贞观五年春季，正月，诏令和尚、尼姑、道士都要叩拜父母。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Zhenguan and the first month of the year, it was decreed that monks, nuns, and Taoists should worship their parents.

古文：癸酉，上大猎于昆明池，四夷君长咸从。
现代文：癸酉，太宗在昆明池大肆围猎，四方夷族首领均陪同前往。
English: At that time, Taizong went on a large-scale hunting expedition in Kunming Lake, accompanied by the leaders of the Yi people from all four directions.

古文：甲戌，宴高昌王文泰及群臣。
现代文：甲戌，太宗设宴款侍高昌王麴文泰及群臣。
English: Kuching, Taizong set up a banquet to serve Gaochang Wang, Wen Tai and a group of ministers.

古文：丙子，还宫，亲献禽于大安宫。
现代文：丙子，太宗回到宫中，亲自到大安宫向太上皇李渊献上野禽。
English: When Emperor Taizong returned to the palace, he personally went to Da'an Palace to present wild fowl to Emperor Li Yuan.

古文：癸未，朝集使赵郡王孝恭等上表，以四夷咸服，请封禅；上手诏不许。 
现代文：癸未，朝集使赵郡王李孝恭等人上表，认为四方夷族均已归服，请求行封禅大礼，太宗手书诏令不允。
English: In the past few days, Choshu sent Zhao County King Li Xiaogong and others to the table, believing that the four ethnic groups had all submitted, requesting a grand ceremony of sealing Zen, which was not allowed by the Emperor's edict.

古文：有司上言皇太子当冠，用二月吉，请追兵备仪仗。
现代文：有关部门上书言道皇太子当行冠礼，采用二月吉日，请求追赐兵备仪仗。
English: Relevant departments put forward the calligraphy saying that the crown prince should perform the coronation ceremony, adopt the auspicious day of February, and request the troops to prepare for the ceremonial battle.

古文：上曰： 东作方兴，宜改用十月。 
现代文：太宗说： 二月耕作刚刚开始，应当改用十月。 
English: Taizong said: February farming has just begun, it should be changed to October.

古文：少傅萧瑀奏： 据阴阳书不若二月。 
现代文：太子少傅萧上奏道： 根据阴阳历书，不如用二月。 
English: The young prince Fu Xiao began to sing: According to the yin and yang calendar, it is better to use February.

古文：上曰： 吉凶在人。
现代文：太宗说： 吉凶祸福在于人。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Good fortune, evil fortune and misfortune all depend on people."

古文：若动依阴阳，不顾礼义，吉可得乎！
现代文：如果动辄依靠阴阳，不顾礼义，能够得到吉祥吗？
English: If you always rely on yin and yang, regardless of etiquette, can you get lucky?

古文：循正而行，自与吉会。
现代文：依循正理而行，自然会有吉祥。
English: If you follow the principles, you will naturally have good luck.

古文：农时最急，不可失也。 
现代文：农耕时最忙，不可失去时机。 
English: When farming is at its busiest, there is no time to lose.

古文：二月，甲辰，诏： 诸州有京观处，无问新旧，宜悉刬削，加土为坟，掩蔽枯朽，勿令暴露。 
现代文：二月，甲辰，太宗下诏： 各州有炫耀武功，收敌军尸体封土筑成的京观，不管新旧，应当一律铲削，分别加土做成坟墓，以掩盖枯骸朽骨，不要使其暴露在外。 
English: In February, Jia Chen, Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: All states had the right to show off their military prowess and to collect the corpses of enemy troops to seal the view of Beijing. Regardless of whether they were new or old, they should all be shoveled, and the soil should be added separately to make a grave to cover the dead bones and bones, and not to expose them.

古文：己酉，封皇弟元裕为郐王，元名为谯王，灵夔为魏王，元祥为许王，元晓为密王。
现代文：己酉，太宗封皇弟李元裕为郐王，李元名为谯王，李灵夔为魏王，李元祥为许王，李元晓为密王。
English: On February 19, the emperor's younger brother, Yuan Yu, was crowned King of Wei, Yuan Yuan was named King of Wei, Lingya was crowned King of Wei, Yuan Xiang was crowned King of Xu, and Yuan Xiao was crowned King of Mi.

古文：庚戌，封皇子愔为梁王，恽为郯王，贞为汉王，治为晋王，慎为申王，嚣为江王，简为代王。
现代文：庚戌，封皇子李为梁王，李恽为郯王，李贞为汉王，李治为晋王，李慎为申王，李嚣为江王，李简为代王。
English: Geng Zheng, Fong Zi's son Li was the king of Liang, Li Zheng was the king of Shao, Li Zhen was the king of Han, Li Zhi was the king of Jin, Li Shen was the king of Shen, Li Han was the king of Jiang, and Li Jian was the acting king.

古文：夏，四月，壬辰，代王简薨。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬辰，代王李简去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Imjin, the king Li Jian passed away.

古文：壬寅，灵州斛薛叛，任城王道宗等追击，破之。
现代文：壬寅，灵州斛薛部反叛，任城王李道宗率兵追击，取得大胜。
English: Ren Yin, Ling Zhou and Xue Bu rebelled, and were pursued by the king of the city, Li Daozong, who led the troops and won a great victory.

古文：隋末，中国人多没于突厥，及突厥降，上遣使以金帛赎之。
现代文：隋朝未年，中原汉人多被突厥人掠去，等到突厥投降时，太宗派人用金银财物将他们赎回。
English: In the last year of the Sui Dynasty, the Central Plains Han people were mostly plundered by the Turks. When the Turks surrendered, the Taizong sent people to redeem them with gold, silver and property.

古文：五月，乙丑，有司奏，凡得男女八万口。
现代文：五月，乙丑，有关部门上奏称，共赎回男女八万人。
English: In May, the relevant departments reported that a total of 80,000 men and women had been redeemed.

古文：六月，甲寅，太子少师新昌贞公李纲薨。
现代文：六月，甲寅，太子少师、新昌贞公李纲去世。
English: In June, Gao Yin, the prince's young teacher, and Xinchang Zhenggong Li Gang passed away.

古文：初，周齐王宪女，孀居无子，纲赡恤甚厚。
现代文：起初，北周齐王宇文宪的女儿，孀居无子女，李纲对她赡养抚恤甚多。
English: At first, Li Gang, the daughter of the Northern Zhou King Yuwen Xian, was a widow with no children, and Li Gang had to support her a lot.

古文：纲薨，其女以父礼丧之。
现代文：李纲死后，齐王之女以待父礼服丧。
English: After the death of Li Gang, the daughter of King Qi was buried in her father's ceremonial dress.

古文：秋，八月，甲辰，遣使诣高丽，收隋氏战亡骸骨，葬而祭之。
现代文：秋季，八月，甲辰，太宗派使臣到高丽，收隋朝阵亡将士尸骨，埋葬并加以祭奠。
English: In the autumn, in August, in Jia Chen, the envoys of the Tai Sect came to Korea to collect the bones of the dead soldiers of the Sui Dynasty, bury them and pay tribute to them.

古文：河内人李好德得心疾，妄为妖言，诏按其事。
现代文：河内人李好德患有心病，胡言乱语，语涉诬妄，太宗下诏按察其事。
English: Li Haode, a native of Hanoi, suffered from a heart disease, spoke gibberish, and uttered lies. Emperor Taizong issued an edict to investigate the matter.

古文：大理丞张蕴古奏： 好德被疾有征，法不当坐。 
现代文：大理丞张蕴古奏道： 好德受疾病折磨而有证验，依法不当治罪。 
English: Dari-sensei Zhang Yunkuo said: Good virtue is tested by illness, and it is not a crime according to the law.

古文：治书侍御史权万纪劾奏： 蕴古贯在相州，好德之兄厚德为其刺史，情在阿纵，按事不实。 
现代文：治书侍御史权万纪弹劾道： 张蕴古籍贯在相州，李好德的哥哥李厚德为相州刺史，为讨人情而纵容阿附，蕴古按察结果与事实不符。 
English: The impeachment was led by the secretary of history, Quan Wanji: Zhang Yungu's ancestral home was in Xiangzhou, Li Houde's brother Li Houde was the historian of Xiangzhou, and in order to please people, he connived at A Zui. The results of the investigation of Yungu did not match the facts.

古文：上怒，命斩之于市，既而悔之，因诏： 自今有死罪，虽令即决，仍三覆奏乃行刑。 
现代文：太宗大怒，下令将张蕴古在集市中处斩，过后又后悔，因而下诏说： 今后有死刑犯人，即使下令立即处决，仍须三次复议才得执行。 
English: He was so angry that he ordered Zhang Yungu to be beheaded in the market. Later, he regretted his decision and issued an edict saying: In the future, if there are death-row prisoners, even if immediate execution is ordered, it must be reviewed three times before it is carried out.

古文：权万纪与侍御史李仁发，俱以告讦有宠于上，由是诸大臣数被谴怒。
现代文：权万纪与侍御史李仁发，均因告发别人而得到太宗宠幸，从此诸位大臣多次被迁怒。
English: Kwon Man-ki and the steward of history, Ri In-fa, were both favored by the Emperor Taejong for denouncing others, and since then, the ministers have been angered many times.

古文：魏征谏曰： 万纪等小人，不识大体，以讦为直，以谗为忠。
现代文：魏徵劝谏道： 权万纪等小人，不识治国大体，以告发别人当做直言，以进谗言当做忠诚。
English: Wei Zheng advised the following way: the villains, such as Guan Wanji, do not know how to govern the country in general, so they use denouncing others as straight talk, and use slandering others as loyalty.

古文：陛下非不知其无堪，盖取其无所避忌，欲以警策群臣耳。而万纪等挟恩依势，逞其奸谋，凡所弹射，皆非有罪。
现代文：陛下并非不知道他们使人无法忍受，只是取其讲话无所忌讳，想以此警策众大臣，然而权万纪等人挟皇恩依仗权势，使其阴谋得逞，凡所弹劾，均非真有罪。
English: It is not that His Majesty does not know that they are unbearable, but that he has no scruples about using their speeches to police his ministers. However, those such as Quan Wanji, who extorted the favor of the emperor and relied on their power to succeed in their plot, are not really guilty of any impeachment.

古文：陛下纵未能举善以厉俗，奈何昵奸以自损乎！ 
现代文：陛下既然不能标举善行以激励风俗，怎么能亲奸邪以损害自己的威信呢！ 
English: Your Majesty, since you cannot point out good deeds to inspire customs, how can you commit adultery to damage your prestige?

古文：上默然，赐绢五百匹。
现代文：太宗默不作声，赐给魏徵绢五百匹。
English: Taizong remained silent and gave Wei 500 horses.

古文：久之，万纪等奸状自露，皆得罪。
现代文：很久以后，权万纪等人的奸状自行暴露，均获惩罚。
English: After a long time, the treachery of Guan Wanji and others was exposed by themselves, and they were all punished.

古文：九月，上修仁寿宫，更命曰九成宫。
现代文：九月，太宗命人修缮仁寿宫，改名为九成宫。
English: In September, Emperor Taizong ordered the Renju Palace to be renovated and renamed the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：又将修洛阳宫，民部尚书戴胄表谏，以 乱离甫尔，百姓凋弊，帑藏空虚，若营造不已，公私劳费，殆不能堪！ 
现代文：又打算修筑洛阳宫，民部尚书戴胄上表行谏，认为 动乱刚结束不久，百姓穷困潦倒，国家府库空虚，如果不停地营造，公私耗费，恐怕难以承受。 
English: He also planned to build the Luoyang Palace, and the Ministry of the People's Affairs wrote to him, saying that since the turmoil had just ended, the people were impoverished, the state treasury was empty, and if they continued to build, it would be difficult to bear the public and private expenses.

古文：上嘉之曰： 戴胄于我非亲，但以忠直体国，知无不言，故以官爵酬之耳。 
现代文：太宗称赞说： 戴胄与我非亲，只是以忠诚正直治理国家，知无不言，所以厚加官爵予以酬劳。 
English: Emperor Taizong praised him, saying, "Dai Kun is not my relative, but he governs the country with loyalty and honesty, and he knows what he is talking about. That is why I rewarded him with an official title.

古文：久之，竟命将作大匠窦璡修洛阳宫，璡凿池筑山，雕饰华靡。
现代文：过了一段时间，还是命将作大匠窦修筑洛阳宫，窦开凿池溏构筑山林，饰华贵奢靡。
English: After a period of time, it was still fate that made the great master Dou Xiu build Luoyang Palace, Dou excavated the pond and built the mountain forest, and the decoration was luxurious.

古文：上遽命毁之，免璡官。
现代文：太宗迅即下令毁掉，罢免窦官职。
English: Emperor Taizong immediately ordered that Dou be destroyed and removed from office.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，上逐兔于后苑，左领军将军执失思力谏曰： 天命陛下为华、夷父母，奈何自轻！ 
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午，太宗在皇宫后苑追打兔子，左领军将军执失思力劝谏说： 上天让陛下做华、夷父母，怎能自我轻贱呢？ 
English: In the winter, in October, on the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Taizong was chasing a rabbit in the backyard of the Imperial Palace. The general of the left leading army lost his will to persuade the hare and said: Heaven let His Majesty be a Chinese and a barbarian parent, how can he be inferior?

古文：上又将逐鹿，思力脱巾解带，跪而固谏，上为之止。
现代文：太宗又要追猎鹿，思力脱下头巾解下腰带，跪在地下苦谏，太宗只好停止。
English: Taizong also wanted to chase the deer, so he took off his headscarf, unbuckled his belt, and knelt down on the ground. Taizong had to stop.

古文：初，上令群臣议封建，魏征议以为： 若封建诸侯，则卿大夫咸资俸禄，必致厚敛。
现代文：起初，太宗令大臣们议论分封诸王的事，魏徵认为： 如果分封诸王建诸侯国，则卿大夫们都靠俸禄生活，必然导致大量征赋。
English: At first, Emperor Taizong ordered the ministers to discuss the matter of dividing the kings. Wei Zheng thought: If dividing the kings and establishing a vassal state, then the noble doctors would all live on salaries, which would inevitably lead to a large number of enlistments.

古文：又，京畿赋税不多，所资畿外，若尽以封国邑，经费顿阙。又，燕、秦、赵、代俱带外夷，若有警急，追兵内地，难以奔赴。 
现代文：另外，京城一带赋税不多，原来依靠京都以外，如果都分封给诸侯国，则国家经费顿时短缺，再加上燕、秦、赵、代诸国均管辖有夷族，如有出现紧急情况，到内地调兵，难以及时奔赴所在地。 
English: In addition, there was not much taxation in the capital area. Originally, it relied on areas outside Kyoto. If they were all assigned to vassal states, there would be an immediate shortage of state funds. In addition, Yan, Qin, Zhao, and other states were all governed by barbarians. In the event of an emergency, it would be difficult to transfer troops to the mainland and rush to the location in time.

古文：礼部侍郎李百药以为： 运祚修短，定命自天，尧、舜大圣，守之而不能固；汉、魏微贱，拒之而不能却。
现代文：礼部侍郎李百药认为： 朝廷运祚的长短，命在上天，尧、舜都是大圣人，守定国祚却不能长久；汉、魏虽然微贱，恣纵却国运长久，推却不掉。
English: Li Baiyao, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, believed that: the length of the imperial funeral rites is the longest, and the life is in heaven. Both the imperial and imperial funeral rites are great saints, but the national funeral rites cannot be kept for a long time. Although the Han and Wei dynasties were cheap, the national funeral rites lasted for a long time, but they could not be pushed away.

古文：今使勋戚子孙皆有民有社，易世之后，将骄淫自恣，攻战相残，害民尤深，不若守令之迭居也。 
现代文：如今让皇亲国戚子子孙孙均有自己封国的百姓与社稷，几代之后，将骄奢淫逸，相互攻伐残杀，对老百姓危害尤大，不如不断地更换郡守县令呢！ 
English: Nowadays, let the people and society who are close to the emperor, relatives, children and grandchildren have their own fiefdoms. After a few generations, they will be arrogant, fight and kill each other, which is particularly harmful to the people. It is better to constantly replace the county magistrate.

古文：中书侍郎颜师古以为： 不若分王诸子，勿令过大，间以州县，杂错而居，互相维持，使各守其境，协力同心，足扶京室；为置官寮，皆省司选用，法令之外，不得擅作威刑，朝贡礼仪，具为条式。
现代文：中书侍郎颜师古认为 不如分封亲王宗子，不使他们过于强大，以州县相间隔，交错为界，互相维持牵制，让他们各自遵守自己的境土，同心协力，足以扶持京城皇室。并且为他们设置的官吏，均由尚书省选拔录用，除皇朝法令外，不许他们擅自施行刑罚，朝贡礼仪，都订立格式。
English: In the opinion of Yan Shigu, the attendant of Zhongshu, it would be better to divide the prince's sons, not to make them too powerful, to maintain mutual restraint with the interlaced boundaries of states and counties, to let them each abide by their own territory, and to work together to support the imperial family in Beijing. And the officials set up for them were all recruited by Shangshu Province, and in addition to the imperial decree, they were not allowed to arbitrarily impose penalties, and the tribute etiquette was all set up.

古文：一定此制，万代无虞。 
现代文：这种制度一旦确定，千秋万代可保平安。 
English: Once this system is established, it will be safe for generations to come.

古文：十一月，丙辰，诏： 皇家宗室及勋贤之臣，宜令作镇籓部，贻厥子孙，非有大故，无或黜免，所司明为条列，定等级以闻。 
现代文：十一月，太宗下诏： 皇室宗亲以及勋贵大臣，应让他们担任地方长官，并传给其子孙，没有大的变故，不得随意黜免，各部门明文规定条例，定下不同等级以上报朝廷。 
English: In November, Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: the imperial family's ancestral relatives and ministers of honor should be appointed as local governors and passed down to their descendants. There should be no major changes, and they should not be arbitrarily removed. All departments should clearly stipulate regulations and set different levels to report to the imperial court.

古文：丁巳，林邑献五色鹦鹉，丁卯，新罗献美女二人；魏征以为不宜受。
现代文：丁巳，林邑进献五色的鹦鹉。丁卯，新罗献美女二人，魏徵认为不应接受。
English: Ding Si and Lin Yip offered five-colored parrots. Ding Wu and Silla offered two beautiful women, but Wei Xuan thought that it should not be accepted.

古文：上喜曰： 林邑鹦鹉犹能自言苦寒，思归其国，况二女远别亲戚乎！ 
现代文：太宗高兴地说： 林邑的鹦鹉还能够自己诉说怕冷，想回到自己国内，更何况两个女子远别亲人。 
English: Taizong said happily, "The parrots in Linyi can also tell you that they are afraid of the cold and want to go back to their own country. What's more, the two women are far away from their relatives."

古文：并鹦鹉，各付使者而归之。
现代文：吩咐使臣将两个美女及鹦鹉分别带回其本国。
English: He ordered the envoy to take the two beauties and the parrot back to his country separately.

古文：倭国遣使入贡，上遣新州刺史高表仁持节往抚之；表仁与其王争礼，不宣命而还。
现代文：倭国派使节来朝进献贡品，太宗派新州刺史高表仁持旌节前往抚慰，高表仁与他们的国王争礼节，未传达王命而回到朝中。
English: The Wakoku sent envoys to the court to offer tribute, the Taisei sent the Shinshū sent the Shishi Gaoburen to offer condolences, the Gaoburen quarreled with their king over etiquette and returned to the court without conveying the king's order.

古文：丙子，上礼圜丘。
现代文：丙子，太宗在圜丘祭天。
English: Bongzi, Taizong at the Mengqiu Festival.

古文：十二月，太仆寺丞李世南开党项之地十六州、四十七县。
现代文：十二月，太仆寺丞李世南开扩党项土地，共计十六州、四十七县。
English: In December, Li Shiminan, the president of Taigu Temple, expanded the party's land holdings to a total of 16 prefectures and 47 counties.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 朕以死刑至重，故令三覆奏，盖欲思之详熟故也。
现代文：太宗对亲近大臣说： 朕认为死刑至关重大，所以下令三次复议，正是为了深思熟虑，以减少误差。
English: Emperor Taizong said to a close minister, "I consider the death penalty to be extremely important, so I ordered three reviews, precisely for the purpose of deliberation to reduce the margin of error.

古文：而有司须臾之间，三覆已讫。
现代文：而有关部门却在片刻之间完成三次复议。
English: However, the relevant departments completed three reconsiderations in a short period of time.

古文：又，古刑人，君为之彻乐减膳。朕庭无常设之乐，然常为之不啖酒肉，但未有著令。
现代文：另外，古代处决犯人，君主常为此停止音乐减少御膳，朕宫庭中没有常设的音乐，然而常常为此而不沾酒肉，只是没有明文规定。
English: In addition, the ancient execution of prisoners, the monarch often stop the music to reduce the meal, there is no permanent music in the palace, but often for this reason without meat and wine, but there is no explicit provision.

古文：又，百司断狱，唯据律文，虽情在可矜，而不敢违法，其间岂能尽无冤乎！ 
现代文：再者，各部门断案判刑，只依据法令条文，即使情有可原，也不敢违反法律，这中间怎么能一点冤枉都没有呢？ 
English: Furthermore, the various departments decide on the case and sentence only according to the provisions of the law. Even if there are extenuating circumstances, they do not dare to violate the law. How can there be no wrongdoing at all?

古文：丁亥，制： 决死囚者，二日中五覆奏，下诸州者三覆奏；行刑之日，尚食勿进酒肉，内教坊及太常不举乐。
现代文：丁亥，太宗下制文规定： 判死刑的犯人，二天之内中央部门要五次复议，下到各州的也要三次复议。行刑的当天，殿中监属下的尚食局不得进酒肉，内教坊及太常寺不得奏乐。
English: Dinghai, Taizong's second edict stipulates: For prisoners sentenced to death, the central department shall review the sentence five times within two days, and the states shall also review the sentence three times. On the day of execution, the Shang Food Bureau under the supervision of the palace shall not eat meat and wine, and the inner school and Taizhong Temple shall not play music.

古文：皆令门下覆视。
现代文：上述规定均由门下省监督。
English: The above-mentioned provisions are supervised by the subordinate provinces.

古文：有据法当死而情可矜者，录状以闻。 
现代文：如有依律应当处死而其情形可以怜悯的犯人，记下情况上报朝廷。 
English: If there is a prisoner who should be executed according to the law, but whose situation can be pitied, write down the situation and report it to the Imperial Court.

古文：由是全活甚众。
现代文：于是由此而免于死罪的甚多。
English: As a result, many are spared the death penalty.

古文：其五覆奏者，以决前一二日，至决日又三覆奏；唯犯恶逆者一覆奏而已。
现代文：凡是五次复议的，在处决前一二天，到处决当天又要三次复议。只有犯 十恶 中殴打、谋杀、打死三服以内亲属的恶逆罪的，只需一次复议即可。
English: If there are five reviews, there should be three more reviews one or two days before the execution and one on the day of the execution. Only those who have committed the ten evil crimes of beating, murdering, and beating to death relatives within three years of service need only one review.

古文：己亥，朝集使利州都督武士彟等复上表请封禅，不许。
现代文：己亥，朝集使、利州都督武士等人又上表请求行封禅大礼，太宗不允。
English: Ji Hai, Choshu envoy, Lishu governor samurai and others also petitioned the table to perform the grand ceremony of sealing Zen, but Taizong did not agree.

古文：壬寅，上幸骊山温汤；戊申，还宫。
现代文：壬寅，太宗到骊山温泉。戊申，回到宫中。
English: Minshin, Taizong to Lushan Hot Spring. Boshin, back to the palace.

古文：上谓执政曰： 朕常恐因喜怒妄行赏罚，故欲公等极谏。
现代文：太宗对执政的大臣说： 朕常常担心由于个人的喜怒而妄加赏罚，所以希望你们极力行谏。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ruling ministers, "I am often worried about arbitrarily imposing rewards and punishments due to personal emotions, so I hope you will do your best."

古文：公等亦宜受人谏，不可以己之所欲，恶人违之。
现代文：你们也应当接受别人的劝谏，不可以自己的喜好要求别人，而讨厌别人违背己意。
English: You should also accept the advice of others, and you should not demand your own preferences from others, but dislike others going against their own wishes.

古文：苟自不能受谏，安能谏人？ 
现代文：如果自己不能接受劝谏，怎么能劝谏别人呢。 
English: If you can't accept advice, how can you advise others?

古文：康国求内附。
现代文：康国要求归附唐朝。
English: Kangguo demanded to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：上曰： 前代帝王，好招来绝域，以求服远之名，无益于用而糜弊百姓。
现代文：太宗说： 前代的帝王，喜欢招抚地处遥远的国家，以讨得降服远方的盛名，这毫无益处而只是让百姓受罪。
English: Emperor Taizong said: The emperors of the past, who were fond of courting faraway countries to win the submission of distant dignitaries, were of no benefit and only made the people suffer.

古文：今康国内附，傥有急难，于义不得不救。
现代文：如今康国要求归附，如果他们遇到危急情况，按照道义来讲不能不去救援。
English: Now that Kangguo is asking for help, if they are in a critical situation, it is morally impossible not to go to the rescue.

古文：师行万里，岂不疲劳！
现代文：士兵们行军万里，岂能不疲劳！
English: How can soldiers march for thousands of miles without getting tired!

古文：劳百姓以取虚名，朕不为也。 
现代文：让百姓疲劳以获取虚名的事，朕不做。 
English: I will not do anything to make the people tired in order to gain a false reputation.

古文：遂不受。
现代文：于是不接受康国的归附。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：谓侍臣曰： 治国如治病，病虽愈，尤宜将护，倘遽自放纵，病复作，则不可救矣。
现代文：太宗曾对亲近大臣说： 治理国家如同治病，病虽好了，仍需调养一段，倘若立即放纵自己，病会复发，那就不可救治了。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to a close minister: "Governing the country is like curing a disease. Although the disease is cured, it still needs to be treated for a period of time. If you indulge yourself immediately, the disease will recur, and it cannot be cured."

古文：今中国幸安，四夷俱服，诚自古所希，然朕日慎一日，唯惧不终，故欲数闻卿辈谏争也。 
现代文：如今中原幸得安定，四方顺服，实在是自古以来所少有，然而朕每日谨慎行事，惟恐不能持久，所以想多次听到你们的谏诤。 
English: Today, the Central Plains are fortunately stable, and obedience from all sides is rare since ancient times. However, I act cautiously every day, fearing that it will not last, so I would like to hear your complaints many times.

古文：魏征曰： 内外治安，臣不以为喜，唯喜陛下居安思危耳。 
现代文：魏徵说： 国家内外俱得安定，我并不觉得高兴，只是高兴陛下能够居安思危。 
English: Wei Zheng said: I am not happy that the country is stable both at home and abroad, but I am happy that His Majesty can live in peace.

古文：上尝与侍臣论狱，魏征曰： 炀帝时尝有盗发，帝令于士澄捕之，少涉疑似，皆拷讯取服，凡二千馀人，帝悉令斩之。
现代文：太宗曾和大臣们讨论刑狱诸事，魏徵说： 隋炀帝时曾有盗窃案发生，炀帝令於士澄逮捕窃贼，稍有疑点，均严刑拷打令其服罪，总共二千余人，炀帝下令全部处斩。
English: Taizong had discussed various matters of imprisonment with the ministers. Wei Zheng said: There was a case of theft in the time of Emperor Sui and Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Xuanzong ordered the arrest of a thief in Shicheng. If there was any doubt, he was severely tortured and ordered to serve his sentence. In total, there were more than two thousand people. Emperor Xuanzong ordered all of them to be beheaded.

古文：大理丞张元济怪其多，试寻其状，内五人尝为盗，馀皆平民；竟不敢执奏，尽杀之。 
现代文：大理寺丞张元济奇怪罪犯这么多，试着查考其诉状，其中五人曾有前科，其余都是普通百姓。张元济竟不敢执意上奏讲明真情，所以都被杀掉。 
English: Zhang Yuanji, the head of Dali Temple, found it strange that there were so many criminals, and tried to check their complaints. Five of them had criminal records, and the rest were ordinary people. Zhang Yuanji did not dare to insist on clarifying the truth, so they were all killed.

古文：上曰： 此岂唯炀帝无道，其臣亦不尽忠。
现代文：太宗说： 这岂只是炀帝无道，大臣们也不能尽忠。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Isn't it just that Emperor Gong has no honor, and his ministers can't be loyal?"

古文：君臣如此，何得不亡？
现代文：君臣都这样，国家怎能不灭亡！
English: All princes and ministers are like this, how can the country not perish!

古文：公等宜戒之！ 
现代文：你们应深以为戒！ 
English: You should be on your guard!

古文：是岁，高州总管冯盎入朝。
现代文：这一年，高州总管冯盎来到朝中。
English: This year, Feng Ang, the head of Gaozhou, came to the DPRK.

古文：未几，罗窦诸洞獠反，敕盎帅部落二万，为诸军前锋。
现代文：不久，罗窦各洞的獠民造反，太宗下令冯盎率本部落二万人马为大军前锋。
English: Not long after, the people of Luo Dou's provinces rebelled, and Emperor Taizong ordered Feng Ang to lead the 20,000 men of his tribe as the vanguard of the army.

古文：獠数万人，屯据险要，诸军不得进。
现代文：獠民几万人，据守险要之地，各路军队难以前进。
English: Tens of thousands of people were stationed there to defend the critical area, and it was difficult for the various armies to advance.

古文：盎持弩谓左右曰： 尽吾此矢，足知胜负矣。 
现代文：冯盎手持弩机对身边人说： 我一次射尽此箭，就知道胜负了。 
English: Holding a hammer in his hand, Feng Ang said to the people around him: "Once I shoot this arrow, I will know the outcome.

古文：连发七矢，中七人。獠皆走，因纵兵乘之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：连发七箭，射中七人，獠民都逃掉，于是挥兵乘胜追击，斩首千余人。
English: Seven arrows were fired in quick succession, seven people were shot, and all the people fled, so the soldiers took advantage of the victory and chased and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：上美其功，前后赏赐，不可胜数。
现代文：太宗夸赞他的功劳。前后赏赐不可胜数。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him for his service, and he received countless awards.

古文：盎所居地方二千里，奴婢万馀人，珍货充积；然为治勤明，所部爱之。
现代文：冯盎占据的地方纵横二千里，奴婢一万多人，珍奇宝物甚多；然而政治勤勉清明，部下都十分爱戴他。
English: Feng Un occupied an area of two thousand li in length and breadth, with more than ten thousand slaves and maidservants, and many rare treasures; however, his political diligence was clear, and his subordinates loved him very much.

古文：新罗王真平卒，无嗣，国人立其女善德为王。
现代文：新罗国王真平去世，没有子嗣，国人拥立其女儿善德为王。
English: King Jampyeong of Silla died without an heir, and the people of Silla crowned his daughter Sonde as king.

