古文：楚、汉久相持未决，项羽谓汉王曰： 天下汹汹，徒以我两人。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：愿与王挑战决雌雄，毋徒罢天下父子为也。 
现代文：楚汉两军对峙，很久都没有分出胜负。项羽对刘邦说： 如今天下所以纷扰不定，原因在于你我两人相持不下。
English: In the confrontation between the two armies of Chu and Han, there was no clear winner for a long time. Xiang Yu said to Liu Bang: The reason why there is so much turmoil today is because you and I can't stand each other.

古文：汉王笑谢曰： 吾宁斗智，不能斗力。 
现代文：不如干脆一点我们两人单挑，不仅谁胜谁负就能马上水落石出，也省得天下人因为我们两人而送命。 
English: Han Wang refused with a smile, saying, "I would rather fight wisdom than fight strength."

古文：项王乃与汉王相与临广武间而语，汉王数羽罪十，项王大怒，伏弩射中汉王，汉王伤胸，乃扪足曰： 虏中吾指。 
现代文：刘邦说： 我宁可和你斗智，不想和你斗力。 后来项羽和刘邦在广武山隔军对话，刘邦举出项羽十条罪状，项羽一听不由怒上心头，举箭一射，正中刘邦前胸。刘邦却忍痛弯身摸脚说： 唉呀，蛮子射中我脚了。 
English: Liu Bang said, "I would rather compete with your wisdom than compete with your strength." Later, Xiang Yu and Liu Bang had a dialogue in the mountains of Guangwu. Liu Bang brought up Xiang Yu's ten crimes. Xiang Yu could not help but be enraged when he heard this. He shot an arrow and hit Liu Bang's forearm. Liu Bang, however, bent over in pain and touched his foot and said, "Alas, the barbarian shot me in the foot."

古文：汉王病创卧，张良强起行劳军，以安士卒，毋令楚乘胜于汉。
现代文：说完便已倒地。刘邦其实伤重得几乎下不了床，张良却要刘邦强忍创伤起来巡视军队，除了安定军心外，更为了不让项羽知道刘邦伤重而乘机进攻。
English: After he finished speaking, he fell to the ground. In fact, Liu Bang was so badly injured that he could hardly get out of bed, but Zhang Liang wanted Liu Bang to endure the trauma and patrol the army. In addition to stabilizing the army, he also took the opportunity to attack in order to prevent Xiang Yu from knowing that Liu Bang was seriously injured.

古文：汉王出行军，病甚，因驰入成皋。
现代文：刘邦一离开军营，便因伤重不支，立即快马返回成皋。
English: Han Wang came out to inspect the troops. As his injuries worsened, he drove to Chengdu to recuperate.

古文：小白不僵而僵，汉王伤而不伤。一时之计，俱造百世之业!
现代文：小白受管仲一箭，本来没有怎么伤，却佯作伤死；刘邦受项羽一箭，已经受了重伤，却佯装没有事情。
English: Xiao Bai received an arrow from Guanzhong Zhong, but was not injured, but died of injuries; Liu Bang received an arrow from Xiang Yu, was seriously injured, but pretended to have nothing to do.

