古文：孟尝君在薛，荆人攻之。
现代文：孟尝君住在薛地，楚人攻打薛地。
English: Meng Yuqun lived in Xue Di, and the Chu people attacked Xue Di.

古文：淳于髡为齐使于荆，还反过薛。
现代文：淳于髡为齐国出使到楚国，回来时经过薛地。
English: Chunyu Kun was sent by Qi to Chu, and when he returned, he passed through Xue.

古文：而孟尝令人体貌而亲郊迎之。
现代文：孟尝君让人准备大礼并亲自到郊外去迎接他。
English: Meng Yuqun had people prepare a grand gift and went to the suburbs to meet him in person.

古文：谓淳于髡曰： 荆人攻薛，夫子弗忧，文无以复侍矣。 
现代文：孟尝君对淳于凳说： 楚国人进攻薛地，先生不要忧虑，只是我以后不能再伺候您了。 
English: Meng Yuqun said to Jun Yuqun: "The people of Chu are attacking Xue, sir, don't worry, but I can't serve you anymore."

古文：淳于髡曰： 敬闻命。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 恭敬地听到您的命令了。 
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "I have respectfully heard your order.

古文：至于齐，毕报。
现代文：淳予髡回到齐国，汇报完毕。
English: Atsuyoshi returned to Qi Province, and the report was completed.

古文：王曰： 何见于荆? 
现代文：齐闵王问： 在楚国都见到了什么？ 
English: King Qi Xuan asked: What did you see in Chu?

古文：对曰： 荆甚固，而薛亦不量其力。 
现代文：淳子髡回答说： 楚国人非常顽固，薛地的人太不自量力。 
English: Jun Zixuan replied, "The people of Chu are very stubborn, and the people of Xue are too self-centered.

古文：王曰： 何谓也? 
现代文：齐闵王说： 这是什么意思呢？ 
English: King Qi said, "What does this mean?"

古文：对曰： 薛不量其力，而为先王立清庙。
现代文：淳于髡回答说： 薛人不自量力，而为先王立宗庙。
English: Junyu replied: Xue people do not measure their own strength, but are the first to establish a family temple.

古文：荆固而攻之，清庙必危。
现代文：楚国人顽固而要攻打薛地，宗庙一定危险。
English: Chu people are stubborn and want to attack Xue, so the ancestral temple must be in danger.

古文：故曰薛不量力，而荆亦甚固。 
现代文：所以说薛人不量力而行，楚国人也太顽固。 
English: Therefore, Xue people do not measure up, and the people of Chu are too stubborn.

古文：齐王和其颜色曰： 嘻!
现代文：齐闵王脸色和蔼地说： 啊？
English: King Qiqian looked amiable and said, "Huh?

古文：先君之庙在焉! 
现代文：先君的宗庙在那里呀！ 
English: Where is your ancestral temple?

古文：疾兴兵救之。
现代文：齐闵王急速发兵去援助薛地。
English: King Qianlong quickly sent troops to aid Xue Di.

古文：颠蹶之请，望拜之谒，虽得则薄矣。
现代文：如果孟尝君惊慌地跑去求救，仰望参拜去乞援，即使得到那也是很微薄的。
English: If Meng Yijun panicked and ran for help, looking up to worship and beg for help, even if he got it, it would be very meager.

古文：善说者，陈其势，言其方，人之急也，若自在隘窘之中，岂用强力哉!
现代文：善于游说的人，陈述形势，谈论方略，别人听了也会着急，就像自己在困境中一样，哪里用得着使用很大的力量去求援呢！
English: Those who are good at lobbying, stating the situation, talking about strategies, others will be anxious when they listen, just like themselves in a predicament, where do you need to use a lot of power to ask for help!

