古文：北齐任城王湝领并州刺史，有妇人临汾水浣衣，有乘马行人换其新靴，驰而去。
现代文：北齐时任城王高湝担任并州刺史，有位妇人在汾水边洗衣时，被一位骑马而过的路人换穿了她正要刷洗的一双新靴子。
English: In Northern Qi, when the city king Gaozhen served as the governor of the state, there was a woman who was washing clothes at the edge of Surabaya when a passer-by on horseback put on a new pair of boots that she was about to wash.

古文：妇人持故靴诣州言之，湝乃召居城诸妪，以靴示之。
现代文：那位路人留下旧靴后，骑马扬长而去。妇人于是拿着这双旧靴告官。
English: After the passer-by left the old shoes, he rode away. The woman then took the old shoes to the prosecutor.

古文：绐云： 有乘马人于路被贼劫害，遗此靴焉，得无亲族乎？ 
现代文：高湝招来城中的老妇人，拿出那双旧靴要她们辨认，接着骗她们说： 有位骑马的过客，在路上遭抢遇害，尸首难以辨认，只留下这双靴子，你们中间可有谁认识这靴子的主人？ 
English: Gao Yao called the old women in the city, took out the pair of old boots and asked them to identify them, then lied to them and said: There is a horse rider who was killed on the road, the body is difficult to identify, leaving only this pair of boots. Do any of you know the owner of these boots?

古文：一妪抚膺哭曰： 儿昨着此靴向妻家也。 
现代文：一名老妇捂着胸哭道： 我的儿子昨天就是穿着这双靴子到他妻子家去的呀! 
English: An old woman sobbed: "My son wore these boots to his wife's house yesterday!

古文：捕而获之，时称明察。
现代文：高湝立即命人将其子追捕到案，当时人称高湝明察秋毫。
English: Gao Gan immediately ordered someone to track down his son, who was then known as Gao Gan Mingzha Qiuhu.

古文：杨津为岐州刺史，有武功人赍绢三匹，去城十里为贼所劫。时有使者驰驿而至，被劫人因以告之。
现代文：北魏杨津担任岐州刺史时，有一名带着三匹绢的武功人在离城十里处遭人打劫，当时正有一名朝廷使者骑着快马经过，遭抢的商人便一口咬定这个使者是劫匪。
English: When Yangjin of the Northern Wei Dynasty was the governor of Qizhou, there was a martial artist with three mules who was robbed ten miles away from the city. At that time, a royal envoy was passing by on a fast horse, and the robbed merchant was sure that the envoy was a robber.

古文：使者到州以状白津，津乃下教云： 有人着某色衣，乘某色马，在城东十里被杀，不知姓名，若有家人，可速收视。 
现代文：使者到官府后将事情经过告诉杨津，杨津于是命人贴出告示说： 有人穿某色衣服，骑着某色马，在城东十里处被人杀害，由于不知死者姓名，若有谁亲友中符合以上特征者，可尽速至官府指认。 
English: After the messenger arrived at the government office, he told Yangjin about the incident. Yangjin then ordered the person to post a notice saying: Someone wearing a certain color of clothes and riding a certain color of horse was killed ten miles east of the city. Since the name of the deceased is unknown, if there is anyone among the relatives and friends who matches the above characteristics, they can go to the government office as soon as possible for identification.

古文：有一老母行哭而出，云是己子。于是遣骑追收，并绢俱获，自是合境畏服。
现代文：有位老太太哭着从人群中走出来，说死者是她的儿子，于是杨津便派官兵前去追捕，结果人赃俱获，从此全境再无盗贼。
English: An old lady came out of the crowd crying, saying that the dead man was her son, so Yangjin sent officers and soldiers to hunt him down. As a result, everyone got what they wanted, and from then on there were no more thieves in the whole territory.

