古文：后妃下元敬虞皇后豫章君明穆庾皇后成恭杜皇后
现代文：后妃下元敬虞皇后豫章君明穆庾皇后成恭杜皇后
English: Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager, Empress Dowager

古文：章太妃康献褚皇后穆章何皇后哀靖王皇后
现代文：章太妃康献褚皇后穆章何皇后哀靖王皇后
English: The Empress Mu, the Empress He, the Empress Zhang, the Empress Kang, and the Empress Wang

古文：废帝孝庾皇后简文宣郑太后简文顺王皇
现代文：废帝孝庾皇后简文宣郑太后简文顺王皇
English: Empress Jianwen Xuan Zheng, Empress Dowager Jianwen Shun Wang Wang

古文：后孝武文李太后孝武定王皇后安德陈太后安僖王皇后恭思褚皇后
现代文：后孝武文李太后孝武定王皇后安德陈太后安僖王皇后恭思褚皇后
English: Empress Dowager Xiaowu, Empress Dowager Li, Empress Dowager Xiaowu, Empress Dowager Ding, Empress Dowager Anding, Empress Dowager Chen, Empress Dowager Anhui, Empress Dowager Gansu

古文：元敬虞皇后，讳孟母，济阳外黄人也。
现代文：元敬虞皇后名孟母，济阳外黄人。
English: The former Empress Jingyu's name was Meng Miao, and she was from the Huang people outside Jiyang.

古文：父豫，见《外戚传》。
现代文：父亲叫虞豫，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: His father's name was Yu Yu, and his deeds can be found in "The Tale of a Relative."

古文：帝为琅邪王，纳后为妃，无子。
现代文：元帝为琅邪王时，娶皇后为妃，没有儿子。
English: When Emperor Yuan was the evil king, he married a queen and had no son.

古文：永嘉六年薨，时年三十五。
现代文：永嘉六年去世，时年三十五岁。
English: Yongjia died six years later, at the age of 35.

古文：帝为晋王，追尊为王后。
现代文：元帝为晋王时，给她追加尊号为王后。
English: When Emperor Yuan was the King of Jin, he gave her the additional honorific title of Queen.

古文：有司奏王后应别立庙。
现代文：官吏奏报王后应另外建庙。
English: Officials reported that the queen should build another temple.

古文：令曰： 今宗庙未成，不宜更兴作，便修饰陵上屋以为庙。 
现代文：元帝下令说： 如今宗庙还未建成，不便另建，可修饰陵上的屋为庙。 
English: Emperor Yuan decreed: Today, the ancestral temple has not yet been built, it is inconvenient to build another one, and the house on the mausoleum can be decorated as a temple.

古文：太兴三年，册曰： 皇帝咨前琅邪王妃虞氏：朕祗顺昊天成命，用陟帝位，悼妃夙徂，徽音潜翳，御于家邦，靡所仪刑，阴教有亏，用伤于怀。
现代文：太兴三年，下册书说： 皇帝哀叹前琅邪王妃虞氏：我恭敬地顺从上天的命令，因此登上帝位。悼念妃的往昔，美名没有得到宣扬，治理国家，没有礼仪法规，后宫教化不够，因此心中伤感。
English: In the third year of Taixing, the next book said: The emperor lamented the former evil princess Yu: I respectfully obeyed the orders of heaven, so I ascended to the throne. Mourning the past of the princess, the good name was not promoted, the country was governed, there was no etiquette and laws, and the harem was not educated enough, so my heart was sad.

古文：追号制谥，先王之典。
现代文：赠封号定谧号，是先王旧典。
English: The bestowal of the imperial seal and the designation of the imperial seal are ancient texts.

古文：今遣使持节兼太尉万胜奉册赠皇后玺绶，祀以太牢。
现代文：今天派遣使持节兼太尉万胜奉册书追赠皇后玉玺，用太牢祭祀。
English: Today, the envoy sent to hold the festival and Taifu Wansheng presented the book to the queen's jade bracelet, and used the dungeon for the sacrifice.

古文：魂而有灵，嘉兹宠荣。 
现代文：皇后魂若有灵，当为之荣耀。 
English: If the queen's soul has a spirit, it should be honored.

古文：乃祔于太庙，葬建平陵。
现代文：于是拊祭于太庙，葬在建平陵。
English: As a result, he was enshrined in the Imperial Temple and buried in the Jianping Mausoleum.

古文：太宁初，明帝追怀母养之恩，赠豫妻王氏为云阝阳县君，从母散骑常侍新野王罕妻为平阳乡君。
现代文：太宁年间，明帝追念母亲养育之恩，赠豫章妻王氏为邱阳县君，姨母散骑常侍新野王司马罕之妻为平阳乡君。
English: During the Taining era, Emperor Ming, in memory of his mother's kindness in raising him, presented Yu Zhang, the wife of Wang, as the Qiuyang County Prince, and his aunt, the wife of Sanyi's regular attendant, Sino Wang Simakhan, as the Pingyang Township Prince.

古文：豫章君荀氏，元帝宫人也。
现代文：豫章君荀氏，是元帝的宫人。
English: The Yuanzhangjunjun clan was a member of the Yuan Emperor's court.

古文：初有宠，生明帝及琅邪王裒，由是为虞后所忌。
现代文：最初受到宠幸，便生下明帝及琅邪王司马裒，因此被虞后忌恨。
English: Initially favored, she gave birth to Emperor Ming and the evil king Sima Qian, so she was hated by Queen Yue.

古文：自以位卑，每怀怨望，为帝所谴，渐见疏薄。
现代文：自己因为地位低下，常怀怨恨，受到元帝谴责，逐渐被疏远冷落。
English: Because of his low status, he often harbored resentment, was condemned by the Yuan Emperor, and was gradually alienated and neglected.

古文：及明帝即位，封建安君，别立第宅。
现代文：等到明帝即位，被封为建玄昼，另建住宅。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he was given the title of Jian Xuan Rong and built another residence.

古文：太宁元年，帝迎还台内，供奉隆厚。
现代文：左窒元年，旦瞪迎她回宫内，供给隆重丰厚。
English: In the first year of Zuo Niu, Dang Gao welcomed her back to the palace and provided her with a grand and plentiful gift.

古文：及成帝立，尊重同于太后。
现代文：等到成帝即位，对她的尊重与太后相同。
English: When Emperor Cheng came to the throne, she was treated with the same respect as the empress dowager.

古文：咸康元年薨。
现代文：咸康元年去世。
English: Ham Kang died in the first year of the year.

古文：诏曰： 朕少遭悯凶，慈训无禀，抚育之勤，建安君之仁也。
现代文：韶书说： 我年少时即遭不幸，慈爱地教育我，辛勤地抚育我，靠的是建塞昼的仁慈。
English: "When I was young, misfortune befell me. I was lovingly educated and diligently nurtured, relying on the benevolence of the Creator.

古文：一旦薨殂，实思报复，永惟平昔，感痛哀摧。
现代文：一朝去世，我实在想报答，永远怀念过去，感伤悲哀。
English: Once I passed away, I really wanted to repay the favor. I will always miss the past and feel sad.

古文：其赠豫章郡君，别立庙于京都。 
现代文：赠豫章郡君的封号，在京都另建庙。 
English: He was given the title of Yuanzhanggunjun and had another temple built in Kyoto.

古文：明穆庾皇后，讳文君，颍川鄢陵人也。父琛，见《外戚传》。
现代文：明穆庾皇后名文君，颖川鄢陵人。父亲庾壁，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: Ming Muxun's empress Meiwenjun, a resident of Yingchuan Mausoleum. Her father, Xuanbi, is described in "The Tale of the Mother-in-Law."

古文：后性仁慈，美姿仪。
现代文：皇后性情仁慈，姿态仪容很美。
English: The empress has a benevolent disposition and a beautiful appearance.

古文：元帝闻之，聘为太子妃，以德行见重。
现代文：元帝听说后，聘她为太子妃，因德行好被尊重。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Yuan hired her as the crown princess, and she was respected for her virtue.

古文：明帝即位，立为皇后。
现代文：明帝即位，立为皇后。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne and she became empress.

古文：册曰： 妃庾氏昔承明命，作嫔东宫，虔恭中馈，思媚轨则。
现代文：册书说： 妃庾氏先前奉承圣命，在东宫作嫔妃，恭行妇道，恩爱有礼。
English: The book of records said: The Hime clan had previously flattered the sacred life, served as concubines in the East Palace, respected women, and were gracious and courteous.

古文：履信思顺，以成肃雍之道；正位闺房，以著协德之美。
现代文：行事忠信心思顺从，以此成就和谐之道；协助端正后宫秩序，因此有和协道德的美名。
English: Conduct loyal, confident and obedient, and thus achieve harmony; help to rectify the order of the harem, so there is a reputation of harmony and morality.

古文：朕夙罹不造，茕茕在疚。
现代文：我过去经历了不幸，孤单得像是在害病。
English: I've been unlucky in the past. I've been lonely to the point of illness.

古文：群公卿士，稽之往代，佥以崇嫡明统，载在典谟，宜建长秋，以奉宗庙。
现代文：众公卿考查了以往朝代，都以推崇嫡亲辨明正统为重，记载在典籍中，应该建皇后宫，以此来供奉宗庙。
English: The nobles examined the previous dynasties, and they all emphasized the importance of promoting the legitimate relatives and identifying the orthodoxy. It was recorded in the classics that a queen's palace should be built as a way to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：是以追述先志，不替旧命，使使持节兼太尉授皇后玺绶。
现代文：追述先帝的愿望，不废弃旧有的命令，派使持节兼太尉赠皇后玺绶。
English: Retrace the wishes of the former emperor, do not discard the old order, and send the emissary Jichijie and the captain to present the queen's scepter.

古文：夫坤德尚柔，妇道承姑，崇粢盛之礼，敦螽斯之义，是以利在永贞，克隆堂基，母仪天下，潜暢阴教。
现代文：女性的德崇尚阴柔，妇道要奉承婆母，崇敬祭祀的礼节，看重多子多孙的道义。因此永远贞节，就能光大皇家基业，做天下母亲的典范，推行后宫教化。
English: The virtue of a woman is to be feminine and submissive, the woman's way is to flatter her mother-in-law, reverence the etiquette of sacrifice, and value the morality of having many children and grandchildren. Therefore, always being chaste can magnify the royal inheritance, be a model for mothers around the world, and promote harem enlightenment.

古文：鉴于六列，考之篇籍，祸福无门，盛衰由人，虽休勿休。
现代文：借鉴六传，稽考典籍，祸福不定，盛衰在人，虽被赞美而不自恃。
English: Drawing on the Six Classics, examining the classics, misfortune and fortune are uncertain, the rise and fall is in people, although it is praised, it does not boast.

古文：其敬之哉，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：要恭敬啊，怎么能不慎重! 
English: Be respectful, how can you not be careful!

古文：及成帝即位，尊后曰皇太后。
现代文：到了成帝即位，把皇后尊为皇太后。
English: When Emperor Cheng ascended the throne, the empress was revered as empress dowager.

古文：群臣奏：天子幼冲，宜依汉和熹皇后故事。
现代文：群臣奏请说：天子幼小，应该依照汉代和熹皇后的旧例。
English: Ministers, please say: since the emperor is still young, we should follow the old example of the Han Dynasty and Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：辞让数四，不得已而临朝摄万机。
现代文：皇后辞让多次，不得已而临朝摄政。
English: The Empress abdicated several times and, as a last resort, became regent.

古文：后兄中书令亮管诏命，公卿奏事称皇太后陛下。
现代文：皇后之兄中书令厘奎管理诏书命令，公卿奏报事情时称皇太后陛下。
English: The empress's brother ordered Li Kui to administer the imperial edict in the imperial edict, and the nobles called the empress dowager "Your Majesty" when reporting the matter.

古文：咸和元年，有司奏请追赠后父及夫人毌丘氏，后陈让不许，三请不从。
现代文：咸和元年，有关官员奏请追赠皇后父亲及夫人丹丘氏，皇后陈辞推让不答应，三次奏请都不依从。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the relevant officials made a request for the posthumous gift of the queen's father and his wife, the Dancu clan. The queen did not accept the resignation and did not comply with the three requests.

古文：及苏峻作逆，京都倾覆，后见逼辱，遂以忧崩，时年三十二。
现代文：苏峻反叛时，京都被颠覆，皇后被逼迫受辱，忧伤而死，时年三十二岁。
English: When Su Jun rebelled, Kyoto was overthrown, the empress was persecuted and humiliated, and died of grief, at the age of thirty-two.

古文：后即位凡六年。
现代文：皇后在位共六年。
English: The empress reigned for a total of six years.

古文：其后帝孝思罔极，赠琛骠骑大将军、仪同三司，毌丘氏安陵县君。从母荀氏永宁县君，何氏建安县君。
现代文：皇帝思念恩德无穷，追赠皇后父亲庾琛骠骑大将军、仪同三司，赠母丘氏安陵县君，姨母苞压永宁县君，坦旦建安县君。
English: The emperor pined endlessly for her, and posthumously presented the queen's father, the Grand General of Horse and Rider, and the Three Grand Masters of Ceremonies, as well as her mother, the Lady of Anling County, her aunt, the Lady of Yongning County, and her father, the Lady of Jian'an County.

古文：亮表陈先志，让而不受。
现代文：厘亳上表陈述皇后生前的意志，辞让不接受。
English: The above table states the will of the empress during her lifetime, and resignation is not accepted.

古文：成恭杜皇后，讳陵阳，京兆人，镇南将军预之曾孙也。
现代文：成恭杜皇后名陵阳，京兆人，镇南将军预之的曾孙女。
English: The great-granddaughter of Empress Chenggongdu Minglingyang, the great-great-granddaughter of General Zhenan Xu.

古文：父乂，见《外戚传》。
现代文：父亲成乂，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: His father died, and his story is told in "A Mother's Story."

古文：成帝以后奕世名德，咸康二年备礼拜为皇后，即日入宫。
现代文：成帝因为皇后家世代以德闻名，咸康二年准备了礼物聘她为皇后，当天入宫。
English: Emperor Cheng because the empress's generation is famous for virtue, Ham Kang prepared a gift two years ago to hire her as an empress and entered the palace on the same day.

古文：帝御太极前殿，群臣毕贺，昼漏尽，悬籥，百官乃罢，后少有姿色，然长犹无齿，有来求婚者辄中止。
现代文：成帝登上太极前殿，群臣都来祝贺，白天过去，该锁宫门了，百官才走。皇后年少时姿容美，然而长大后还是没有牙齿，有来求婚的人就中途放弃。
English: Emperor Cheng boarded the front hall of the Taiji Temple, the courtiers all came to congratulate, the day passed, it was time to lock the palace door, and the officials left. The queen was beautiful when she was young, but she still had no teeth when she grew up, and those who came to propose gave up halfway.

古文：及帝纳采之日，一夜齿尽生。
现代文：成帝备礼娶她那天，皇后的牙一夜之间长好。
English: On the day Emperor Cheng made preparations to marry her, the empress's teeth grew back overnight.

古文：改宣城陵阳县为广阳县。
现代文：改宣城陵阳县为广阳县。
English: Renamed Chenglingyang County to Guangyang County.

古文：七年三月，后崩，年二十一。
现代文：七年三月，皇后去世，时年二十一岁。
English: In March of the seventh year, the empress died, at the age of twenty-one.

古文：外官五日一临，内官旦一入，葬讫止。
现代文：宫外百官每五天进一次灵堂，宫内官员一天一进，一直到安葬完毕才终止。
English: Officials from outside the Imperial Palace enter the chapel once every five days, while officials from inside the Imperial Palace enter once a day until the funeral is over.

古文：后在位六年，无子。
现代文：皇后在位六年，没有子女。
English: The queen has been on the throne for six years and has no children.

古文：先是，三吴女子相与簪白花，望之如素柰，传言天公织女死，为之著服，至是而后崩。
现代文：在此之前，三吴地方的女子在一起时头插白花，看上去如同白色沙果花，流传天上织女死了，为她穿丧服，到这时皇后逝世。
English: Prior to this, the women of the Sanwu region together put white flowers on their heads, looking like white sandalwood flowers. It was said that the Weaver Girl died in the sky, and they wore mourning clothes for her. At this time, the queen died.

古文：帝下诏曰： 吉凶典仪，诚宜备设。然丰约之度，亦当随时，况重壤之下，而崇饰无用邪！
现代文：成帝下诏书说： 吉凶之事的典礼仪式，确实应该实施；然而丰盛或简约的尺度，也应当顺应时势，况且在深深的地底下，大举修建却没有用啊!
English: Emperor Chengzong's edict said: Ceremonies and rituals for auspicious and inauspicious events should indeed be carried out; however, the sumptuous or simple scale should also conform to the current situation, and it is useless to build extensively deep underground!

古文：今山陵之事，一从节俭，陵中唯洁扫而已，不得施涂车刍灵。 
现代文：如今陵墓的事情，一切从简，陵墓中清洁就行，不准用涂车和草扎的人马殉葬。 
English: Nowadays, when it comes to mausoleums, everything should be kept simple, and the mausoleums should be kept clean. People should not be buried with cars and grass.

古文：有司奏造凶门柏历及调挽郎，皆不许，又禁远近遣使，明年元会，有司奏废乐。
现代文：有关官吏奏请建造凶门柏历并调挽郎，都不批准。又禁止远近地方派遣使节。第二年元旦朝会，有关官吏奏请废除音乐。
English: The officials concerned did not approve of the construction of the gate and the setting of the bell, and prohibited the dispatch of envoys to places far and near. At the New Year's Day meeting of the second year, the officials concerned requested the abolition of music.

古文：诏废管弦，奏金石如故。
现代文：成帝下诏废止管弦乐，金石乐照旧演奏。
English: Emperor Chengzong issued an edict abolishing orchestral music, and the Jinshi music was performed as before.

古文：孝武帝立，宁康二年，以后母裴氏为广德县君。
现代文：孝武帝即位，宁康二年，封皇后母亲裴氏为广德县君。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and in the second year of Ningkang, the Empress's mother, Pei, was given the title of Guangde County Princess.

古文：裴氏名穆，长水校尉绰孙，太傅主簿遐女，太尉王夷甫外孙。
现代文：裴氏名穆，是长水校尉裴绰的孙女，太傅主簿裴遐的女儿，太尉王夷甫的外孙女。
English: Pei's name is Mu. She is the granddaughter of Changshui school captain Pei Cao, the daughter of Tai Fu's chief secretary Pei Yao, and the granddaughter of Tai Fu Wang Yi Fu.

古文：中表之美，高于当世。
现代文：表亲关系的显赫，在当时出名。
English: An illustrious cousin, he was famous at the time.

古文：遐随东海王越遇害，无子，唯穆渡江，遂享荣庆，立第南掖门外，世所谓杜姥宅云。
现代文：裴遐跟随东海王司马越遇害，没有儿子。惟有裴穆渡江，于是享受荣耀，在南掖门外建宅第，也就是人们所说的杜姥宅。
English: Pei Mo, who followed the East Sea king Sima Yue, was killed and had no son. Only Pei Mu crossed the river, and then enjoyed the glory of building a house outside the South Gate, which is what people call the grandmother's house.

古文：章太妃周氏以选入成帝宫，有宠，生哀帝及海西公。
现代文：章太妃周氏被选入成帝宫，受到宠幸，生下哀帝及海西公。
English: Zhang Taifei Zhou was selected into the imperial palace, was favored, and gave birth to Emperor Ai and Emperor Haixi.

古文：始拜为贵人。
现代文：开始时为贵人。
English: At the beginning, it was nobles.

古文：哀帝即位，诏有司议贵人位号，太尉桓温议宜称夫人，尚书仆射江虨议应曰太夫人，诏崇为皇太妃，仪服与太后同。
现代文：哀帝即位，下韶让有关官吏议论贵人名位号，太尉桓温认为应该称夫人，尚书仆射江膨认为应当叫太夫人。哀帝下韶尊她为皇太妃，仪仗服饰与太后相同。
English: When Emperor Aye ascended the throne, the Empress Dowager let the relevant officials discuss the name and rank of the noblewoman. First Lieutenant Huan Wen thought that she should be called Madam, and Shang Shubu Sho Jiang Huan thought that she should be called the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager respected her as the Empress Dowager, and the ceremonial dress was the same as that of the Empress Dowager.

古文：又诏 朝臣不为太妃敬，合礼典不。 
现代文：又下韶书说： 朝廷大臣对太妃不恭敬，是否不符合典章礼仪。 
English: The imperial edict also said, "If a minister of the Imperial Court does not show deference to the Empress Dowager, is it not in accordance with the rules and etiquette?"

古文：太常江逌议 位号不极，不应尽敬 。
现代文：太常江迪议论说： 名位不是最高，因而不应恭敬至极。 
English: Too often, Jiang Di argued: the title is not the highest, so it should not be the most respectful.

古文：兴宁元年薨。
现代文：兴宁元年太妃去世。
English: In the first year of the Xingning Dynasty, the Empress Dowager died.

古文：帝欲服重，江虨启应缌麻三月。
现代文：哀帝打算服重丧，江雕奏应服鳃麻三个月。
English: The emperor planned to mourn for three months, while the river deity was to mourn for three months.

古文：诏欲降为期年，虨又启 厌屈私情，所以上严祖考 ，帝从之。
现代文：哀帝下韶打算改为一年，江膨又奏请说 委屈自己的感情，正是对上恭敬自己的祖先 ，哀帝依从了他。
English: The emperor's imperial edict was to be changed to one year, and Jiang Huan again appealed to the emperor, saying, "If you feel aggrieved, you should respect your ancestors. The emperor obeyed him."

古文：康献褚皇后，讳蒜子，河南阳翟人也。
现代文：康献褚皇后名蒜子，河南阳翟人。
English: Kang Xianqi, the empress of the famous garlic, is from Yangshuo, Henan Province.

古文：父裒，见《外戚传》。
现代文：父亲康裒，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: His father, Kang Xi, is described in "A Relative's Story."

古文：后聪明有器识，少以名家入为琅邪王妃。
现代文：皇后聪明有器量见识，年少时以名门闺秀入选为琅邪王妃。
English: The queen is clever and has the ability to see things from a different perspective. When she was young, she was chosen as the Evil Queen because she was a famous girl.

古文：及康帝即位，立为皇后，封母谢氏为寻阳乡君。
现代文：康帝即位，立她为皇后，封她母亲谢压为寻阳乡君。
English: Emperor Kangxi ascended the throne, made her the empress, and made her mother Xie Bin the crown princess of Xiangyang Township.

古文：及穆帝即位，尊后曰皇太后。
现代文：穆帝即位，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: Emperor Mu ascended to the throne, and His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager.

古文：时帝幼冲，未亲国政。
现代文：当时皇帝年幼，尚未亲政。
English: At that time, the emperor was young and had not yet taken office.

古文：领司徒蔡谟等上奏曰： 嗣皇诞哲岐嶷，继承天统，率土宅心，兆庶蒙赖。
现代文：领司徒蔡谟等上奏说： 即位的皇帝一生下来就聪慧，继承帝王世系，海内归心，百姓仰仗。
English: The leader of the scholars, Cai Mu, said in his report: The enthroned emperor was born with wisdom, inherited the imperial lineage, returned to his heart at home, and the people relied on him.

古文：陛下体兹坤道，训隆文母。
现代文：陛下体察妇道，教诲胜过文德之母。
English: Your majesty has experienced the way of women, and your teachings are better than those of the mother of literature.

古文：昔涂山光夏，简狄熙殷，实由宣哲，以隆休祚。
现代文：过去涂山氏使夏朝生辉，简狄使殷商盛明，实在是由于她们显示了圣哲，使国运昌盛。
English: In the past, the Tu Shan clan made the Xia Dynasty brilliant, and the Jian Di clan made the Yin merchants prosperous. It is because they showed the saint and made the national movement prosperous.

古文：伏惟陛下德侔二妫，淑美《关雎》，临朝摄政，以宁天下。
现代文：我们认为陛下的德行可与二嫣匹敌，美善胜过《关雎》中的后妃，当临朝摄政，以安宁天下。
English: We believe that His Majesty's virtue can match that of the two emperors, and his beauty surpasses that of the Empress Dowager in "The Passing of the Great Gate." When he becomes the regent of the Lin Dynasty, he will bring peace to the world.

古文：今社稷危急，兆庶悬命，臣等章惶，一日万机，事运之期，天禄所钟，非复冲虚高让之日。
现代文：如今国家危急，百姓命运未卜，我们惶惶不安，一天之内国家大事极多，事情时机的期限，是上天赐福时所看重的，现在不再是清高谦让的日子。
English: Today, the country is in a critical situation, the fate of the people is uncertain, we are in a state of panic and anxiety, there are many national events in one day, and the time limit for things is important when God gives blessings. Now is no longer the day of high-mindedness and humility.

古文：汉和熹、顺烈，并亦临朝，近明穆故事，以为先制。
现代文：汉的和熹、顺烈，都临朝听政，近代明穆皇后听政，就是先代制度。
English: In the Han Dynasty, both Emperor He and Empress Shun listened to the government, and in modern times, Empress Mingmu listened to the government, which is the predecessor system.

古文：臣等不胜悲怖，谨伏地上请。
现代文：我们十分伤心惶恐，恭敬地下跪请求。
English: With great sorrow and trepidation, we respectfully kneel down to make a request.

古文：乞陛下上顺祖宗，下念臣吏，推公弘道，以协天人，则万邦承庆，群黎更生。 
现代文：乞求陛下对上顺祖宗心意，对下顾念大臣官吏，出以公心弘扬道义，以符合天意人愿，这样则天下庆贺，百姓再生。 
English: I implore Your Majesty to carry out the will of the Shunzoshu above and the consideration of the ministers and officials below, to promote morality with a righteous heart, and to meet the wishes of Heaven, so that the world can celebrate and the people can be reborn.

古文：太后诏曰： 帝幼冲，当赖群公卿土将顺匡救，以酬先帝礼贤之意，且是旧德世济之美，则莫重之命不坠，祖宗之基有奉，是其所以欲正位于内而已。
现代文：太后下诏说： 皇帝年幼，当依赖公卿大臣帮助促成他的美德匡正他的过失，以此来酬谢先帝以礼待人的美意，况且旧有德行和当世救助的好处，没有比能使天命不中落，使祖宗的基业有人奉承更重大的，所以要在宫内确定皇位。
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial edict, saying: The emperor is young, so he should rely on the court nobles and ministers to help promote his virtues and rectify his faults, so as to reward the former emperor's kindness to people. Moreover, the benefits of old virtues and present-day assistance are no more important than the ability to make the fate of heaven not fall, so that the ancestor's inheritance is flattered by someone, so the imperial throne should be determined in the palace.

古文：所奏恳到，形于翰墨，执省未究，以悲以惧。
现代文：所上的奏章恳切周到，流露于笔墨间，拿着还没看完，就又悲又惧。
English: The score on the board is earnestly thoughtful, revealing itself between the pen and the ink. If you haven't finished reading it, you will be sad and afraid.

古文：先后允恭谦抑，思顺坤道，所以不距群情，固为国计。
现代文：先朝皇后诚信恭敬谦让，顺从妇道，她之所以不拒绝群臣的陈请，是为国家考虑。
English: During the previous reign, the Empress Sincerity was respectful, humble and submissive to women. The reason why she did not refuse the request of the courtiers was for the sake of the country.

古文：岂敢执守冲暗，以违先旨。
现代文：我怎敢固守着年幼的皇帝，而违背先帝的意旨。
English: How dare I stick to the young emperor and go against the will of the former emperor.

古文：辄敬从所奏。 
现代文：就恭敬地听从所奏。 
English: and listens respectfully to what is said.

古文：于是临朝称制。
现代文：于是临朝听政。
English: As a result, the imperial court listened to the government.

古文：有司奏，谢夫人既封，荀、卞二夫人亦应追赠，皆后之前母也。
现代文：有关官吏奏报说，谢夫人已经封了，荀、卞两位夫人也应追赠封号，都是皇后父亲的前妻。
English: Relevant officials reported that Mrs. Xie had already been sealed, and that the two wives should also be posthumously sealed, as they were both former wives of the queen's father.

古文：太后不许。
现代文：太后不准许。
English: The Queen Mother wouldn't allow it.

古文：太常殷融议依郑玄义，卫将军裒在宫庭则尽臣敬，太后归宁之日自如家人之礼。
现代文：太常殷融奏议依据郑玄的礼仪，卫将军褚裒在宫庭完全按臣礼恭敬太后，太后回家省亲时按家中的礼仪。
English: According to the etiquette of Zheng Xuan, the general of the imperial guard paid respect to the empress dowager according to the court etiquette, and when the empress dowager went home to visit her relatives, she followed the etiquette at home.

古文：太后诏曰： 典礼诚所未详，如所奏，是情所不能安也，更详之。 
现代文：太后下诏书说： 典礼我实在不清楚，真如所奏，那就会因亲情而不能安心，应再商定。 
English: The empress dowager said in her imperial decree, "I really don't understand the ceremony. If it is as it is played, then I won't feel at ease because of my family ties. We should come to an agreement later."

古文：征西将军翼、南中郎尚议谓 父尊尽于一家，君敬重于天下，郑玄义合情礼之中 。
现代文：征西将军司马翼、南中郎司马尚奏议说 尊重父亲限于一家，恭敬国君重于天下，郑玄的礼仪在情理之中 。
English: Western Conquest generals Sima Ying and Nan Zhong Lang Sima Shang proposed that respect for the father is limited to one family, respect for the sovereign is more important than the world, and Zheng Xuan's etiquette is reasonable.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：太后听从了。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：自后朝臣皆敬裒焉。
现代文：这以后朝中大臣都尊敬褚哀。
English: After that, the ministers of both the North and the South respected and mourned him.

古文：帝既冠，太后诏曰： 昔遭不造，帝在幼冲，皇绪之微，眇若赘旒。
现代文：帝既冠，太后下诏书说： 过去遇上不幸，皇帝年幼，皇家事业不振，就像冠冕上悬垂的玉珠。
English: When the emperor was crowned, the empress dowager issued an edict saying: In the past, misfortune had befallen, the emperor was young, and the royal cause was weak, just like the dangling jade beads on the crown.

古文：百辟卿士率遵前朝，劝喻摄政。
现代文：诸侯卿士都遵循前朝，劝说我摄政。
English: The princes and nobles all followed the former emperor and persuaded me to become regent.

古文：以社稷之重，先代成义，僶俛敬从，弗遑固守。
现代文：因国家重要，先代有范例，我努力顺从，无暇固守妇道。
English: Due to the importance of the country, the previous generation has a good example, I try to obey, and I have no time to adhere to the women's way.

古文：仰凭七庙之灵，俯仗群后之力，帝加元服，礼成德备，当阳亲览，临御万国。
现代文：仰仗七庙的神灵，凭藉诸侯的力量，皇帝行了冠礼，礼节完成，德行具备，应当面向南亲理政务，临朝统治万国。
English: Relying on the deities of the seven temples, with the power of the princes, the emperor performed the coronation, completed the etiquette, and possessed the virtue. He should face the southern relatives to manage the government affairs and rule all countries.

古文：今归事反政，一依旧典。 
现代文：现在我归还政事权力，全依旧有典章。 
English: Now that I have returned political power, there are still regulations.

古文：于是居崇德宫，手诏群公曰： 昔以皇帝幼冲，从群后之议，既以暗弱，又频丁极艰，衔恤历祀，沈忧在疚。
现代文：于是居住崇德宫，手诏群臣说： 过去因为皇帝幼小，顺从了诸侯们的奏议，既因我能力不足，又频频遇上艰难，祭祀亡父，深忧居丧。
English: As a result, the courtiers who lived in the Chongde Palace said: "In the past, because the emperor was young, he obeyed the requests of the princes. Due to my lack of ability, I often encountered difficulties, sacrificed my dead father, and was deeply saddened.

古文：司徒亲尊德重，训救其弊，王室之不坏，实公是恁。
现代文：司徒德高望重，指出改正国家的弊端，王室没有衰败，实在是靠司徒。
English: He held Stuto in high esteem, pointing out that to correct the country's ills and prevent the royal family from decaying, it was really up to Stuto.

古文：帝既备兹冠礼，而四海未一，五胡叛逆，豺狼当路，费役日兴，百姓困苦。
现代文：皇帝既已完成了冠礼，而四海还未统一，五胡叛逆，豺狼当道，财用劳役一天天增多，百姓困苦。
English: The emperor has already completed the crowning ceremony, but the four seas have not yet been unified, the Five Hu are rebellious, the jackals are in charge, the financial and labor service is increasing day by day, and the people are in distress.

古文：愿诸君子思量远算，戮力一心，辅翼幼主，匡救不逮。
现代文：希望诸君子从长远考虑，同心协力，辅佐保护年幼的皇帝，匡正不周到的地方。
English: It is hoped that all gentlemen will take a long-term view and make concerted efforts to assist in the protection of the young emperor.

古文：未亡人永归别宫，以终余齿。
现代文：我永远地回到另外的宫室，度过余生。
English: I'm going back to the other palace forever, for the rest of my life.

古文：仰惟家国，故以一言托怀。 
现代文：全是为了国家，以此言寄托我的心意。 
English: It's all for the sake of the country, and that's what I'm putting my heart and soul into.

古文：及哀帝、海西公之世，太后复临朝称制。
现代文：哀帝、海西公当政之时，太后又临朝摄政。
English: When Emperor Ai and Emperor Haishi were in power, the empress dowager acted as regent.

古文：桓温之废海西公也，太后方在佛屋烧香，内侍启云： 外有急奏 ，太后乃出。
现代文：担坦废迤酉公时，太后正在佛堂烧香，内侍奏报说 外面有紧急奏章 ，太后才出来。
English: At the time of the dethronement of Tan Tan, the empress dowager was burning incense in the Buddhist hall. The chambermaid reported that there was an emergency call outside, and the empress dowager came out.

古文：尚倚户前视奏数行，乃曰 我本自疑此 ，至半便止，索笔答奏云： 未亡人罹此百忧，感念存没，心焉如割。 
现代文：靠着门看了几行奏章，就说 我本来就有这种疑虑 。看了一半就不看了，要来笔答覆奏章说： 我经历了各种忧患，想到生者与死者，心如刀割。 
English: Leaning against the door, he read a few lines of the score and said, "I've always had these doubts." Halfway through, he stopped reading and asked for a pen to write a reply to the score, saying, "I've experienced all kinds of sorrows, and thinking about the living and the dead cuts my heart like a knife."

古文：温始呈诏草，虑太后意异，悚动流汗，见于颜色。
现代文：桓温呈送诏书草稿之初，疑虑太后有异议，害怕得出汗，惊恐表现在脸上。
English: At the beginning of the draft of the imperial edict submitted by Kan-Wen, the doubtful empress dowager objected, afraid of sweating, and fear showed on her face.

古文：及诏出，温大喜。
现代文：等到诏书出来，桓温大喜。
English: When the imperial edict came out, Kanen was overjoyed.

古文：简文帝即位，尊后为崇德太后。
现代文：简文帝即位，尊称太后为崇德太后。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, and the empress dowager was called Empress Dowager Zongde.

古文：及帝崩，孝武帝幼冲，桓温又薨。
现代文：皇帝死时，孝武帝年幼，桓温又死了。
English: At the time of the emperor's death, Emperor Xiaowu was still young, and Emperor Kanwen also died.

古文：群臣启曰： 王室多故，祸艰仍臻，国忧始周，复丧元辅，天下惘然，若无攸济。
现代文：群臣启奏说： 王室多事，灾祸丧事频频，国丧刚完，又死了丞相，天下人失意，好像没有了寄托。
English: A group of courtiers said: The royal family has many affairs, disasters and tragedies are frequent, the national mourning has just ended, and the prime minister has died, the people of the world are disappointed, it seems that there is no trust.

古文：主上虽圣资奇茂，固天诞纵。
现代文：皇帝虽然十分圣明，这本是天意让他如此。
English: Although the emperor was very holy, it was God's will that he should be so.

古文：而春秋尚富，如在谅闇，蒸蒸之思，未遑庶事。
现代文：然而年纪尚小，又在服丧，思念之情，顾不上国事。
English: However, he is still young and in mourning, and his thoughts are not focused on the affairs of state.

古文：伏惟陛下德应坤厚，宣慈圣善，遭家多艰，临朝亲览。
现代文：陛下的德行顺应妇道，仁慈圣明善良，遇上国家多难，临朝亲理政务。
English: His Majesty's moral conduct conforms to women's morality, benevolence is holy and virtuous, and in the face of the country's many difficulties, the crown prince is in charge of government affairs.

古文：光大之美，化洽在昔，讴歌流咏，播溢无外。
现代文：光大国运的美名，在过去深入人心，人们诬歌传咏，播散到四面八方。
English: The reputation of the Great March of the Light has been deeply rooted in people's hearts in the past, and people have spread the false songs to all directions.

古文：虽有莘熙殷，妊姒隆周，未足以喻，是以五谋克从，人鬼同心，仰望来苏，悬心日月。
现代文：就是有莘振兴殷商，妊姒振兴周朝，也不足以比喻。因此而能统一，人鬼一心，仰望着国运的复苏，挂念着皇帝皇后。
English: It is not enough to revitalize the Yin merchants and the Zhou dynasty. Therefore, they can be unified, with one heart and one mind, looking forward to the revival of the national movement, and thinking about the emperor and queen.

古文：夫随时之义，《周易》所尚，宁固社稷，大人之任。
现代文：顺应天人的道理，是《周易》所崇尚的，安宁稳固国家，是大人的重任。
English: Conforming to the principles of heaven and man is what "Zhou Yi" advocates, and keeping the country peaceful and stable is the responsibility of adults.

古文：伏愿陛下抚综万机，厘和政道，以慰祖宗，以安兆庶。
现代文：愿陛下料理国事，调整政道，从而告慰祖宗，安抚百姓。
English: May His Majesty settle the affairs of state and adjust the political course, so as to comfort the ancestors and pacify the people.

古文：不胜忧国喁喁至诚。 
现代文：无法表达我们忧国至诚之心。 
English: It is impossible to express our sincere concern for our country.

古文：太后诏曰： 王室不幸，仍有艰屯。
现代文：太后下诏说： 王室不幸，艰难不断。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying, "The royal family is unhappy and enduring hardships.

古文：览省启事，感增悲叹。
现代文：看了奏章，更增悲叹。
English: When I saw the score, I was even more saddened.

古文：内外诸君并以主上春秋冲富，加蒸蒸之慕，未能亲览，号令宜有所由。
现代文：内外大臣，都认为皇上年幼，再加上哀思之情，不能亲理政务，号令应该有出处。
English: Both the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Foreign Affairs believed that the Emperor was too young, coupled with his feelings of grief, to be able to personally manage government affairs, and that the order should have a source.

古文：苟可安社稷，利天下，亦岂有所执，辄敬从所启。
现代文：如果能安定国家，有利天下，还有什么可坚持的呢，就恭敬地依从大臣的奏章。
English: If you can stabilize the country and benefit the world, what else can you insist on, then respectfully follow the minister's report.

古文：但暗昧之阙，望尽弼谐之道。 
现代文：但是如有昏昧缺漏，望大臣们尽力辅助指出。 
English: However, if there are any ambiguities or omissions, I hope the ministers will do their best to help point them out.

古文：于是太后复临朝。
现代文：于是太后再次临朝亲政。
English: As a result, the empress dowager once again became the ruler of the imperial court.

古文：帝既冠，乃诏曰： 皇帝婚冠礼备，遐迩宅心，宜当阳亲览，缉熙惟始。
现代文：皇帝行冠礼以后，太后下韶书说： 皇帝婚冠礼完备，远近安居乐业，应该面向南亲理政务，光明从遣裹开始。
English: After the emperor's coronation ceremony, the empress dowager said in her imperial edict: The emperor's wedding ceremony is complete, and he will live and work in peace and contentment far and near. He should face the southern relatives to conduct government affairs, and the light begins with the enclosure.

古文：今归政事，率由旧典。 
现代文：现在我归还政事，一切按照旧有的典章。 
English: Now I am returning to government affairs, and everything will be done according to the old regulations.

古文：于是复称崇德太后。
现代文：于是又称崇德太后。
English: Therefore, she was also known as Empress Dowager Zongde.

古文：太元九年，崩于显阳殿，年六十一，在位凡四十年。
现代文：太元九年，太后逝世于显阳殿，时年六十一岁，在位共四十年。
English: In the ninth year of the Taigen era, the empress dowager died at the Hsien Yang Palace at the age of 61, after reigning for a total of 40 years.

古文：太后于帝为从嫂，朝议疑其服。
现代文：太后是皇帝的堂嫂，朝廷议论丧制时有疑惑。
English: The empress dowager was the emperor's sister-in-law, and the imperial court had doubts when discussing the mourning system.

古文：太学博士徐藻议曰： 资父事君而敬同。
现代文：太学博士徐藻说： 事奉父亲与国君的恭敬程度是相同的。
English: "The level of respect for a ministering father and a sovereign is the same," said Xu Miao, a doctor of science.

古文：又《礼》云 其夫属父道者，妻皆母道也 ，则夫属君道，妻亦后道矣。
现代文：而且《仪礼》上说 丧礼中丈夫排列在父辈时，妻子都按母辈对待 ，那么丈夫按国君对待，妻子也应按皇后对待。
English: Moreover, the "Ritual" says that when the husband is arranged in the paternal line in the funeral, the wife is treated according to the maternal line, then the husband is treated according to the sovereign, and the wife should also be treated according to the queen.

古文：服后以齐，母之义也。
现代文：为太后服齐衰，是按母亲对待。
English: For the empress dowager, she is treated as a mother.

古文：鲁讥逆祀，以明尊卑。
现代文：鲁国君子讥讽颠倒次序的祭祀，是要明确尊卑。
English: Lu Guozhong scoffed at the reversed order of the sacrificial rites, in order to make clear the superiority and inferiority.

古文：今上躬奉康、穆、哀皇及靖后之祀，致敬同于所天，岂可敬之以君道，而服废于本亲。
现代文：如今皇上供奉康帝、穆帝、哀帝及靖后的祭祀，致敬像君臣关系一样，怎么能像对国君一样恭敬，而因为亲属关系就废止了丧服的制度呢。
English: Nowadays, emperors offer sacrifices and pay homage to emperors Kantei, Mutei, Medei, and Yasuko, just like the relationship between monarchs and subjects. How can they pay homage to emperors as if they were sovereigns, when the system of mourning clothes was abolished because of kinship?

古文：谓应齐衰期。 
现代文：我认为应服齐衰一年。 
English: I think it should be one year.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：穆章何皇后，讳法倪，庐江灊人也。父准，见《外戚传》。
现代文：穆章何皇后名法倪，庐江潜入。父亲何准，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: Mu Zhang He, the empress's name was Fani, sneaked into the Li River. His father was He Jian, and his deeds can be seen in "The Story of My Relatives."

古文：以名家膺选。
现代文：以出身名门应选入宫。
English: He was chosen to enter the Imperial Palace because of his distinguished family background.

古文：升平元年八月，下玺书曰： 皇帝咨前太尉参军何琦：混元资始，肇经人伦，爰及夫妇，以奉天地宗庙社稷。
现代文：升平元年八月，皇帝下玺书说： 皇帝向前太尉参军何琦咨询：天地形成之初，就开始制定人与人的关系，于是有了夫妇，以此来供奉天地宗庙。
English: In August of the first year of the Heian period, the emperor's imperial edict said: The emperor consults with the former captain who joined the army, He Jian: At the beginning of the formation of heaven and earth, he began to establish the relationship between man and man, so he had a couple, in order to worship the heaven and earth ancestral temple.

古文：谋于公卿，咸以宜率由旧典。
现代文：与公卿商议，都认为应该遵循旧有典章。
English: In consultation with the nobles, it was agreed that everything should be done according to the old rules.

古文：今使使持节太常彪之、宗正综，以礼纳采。 
现代文：现在派使持节太常彪之、宗正司马综，用礼物纳采。 
English: Now, the envoys are sent to collect gifts from Zong Zheng Sima Zi, the head of Zong Zheng Sima Zi, who is also the head of Zong Zheng Sima Zi.

古文：琦答曰： 前太尉参军、都乡侯粪土臣何琦稽首顿首再拜。
现代文：何琦回答说： 前太尉参军、都乡侯小臣何琦行稽首礼叩首再拜。
English: He Qian replied: He Qian, a former captain who joined the army and a vassal of the prince of the capital, performed the bowing ceremony and bowed his head again.

古文：皇帝嘉命，访婚陋族，备数采择。
现代文：皇帝下达美好的命令，在我家族中寻访婚姻，准备了数人供选择。
English: The emperor issued a beautiful order to search for marriage in my family and prepared several people to choose from.

古文：臣从祖弟故散骑侍郎准之遗女，未闲教训，衣履若如人。
现代文：我的堂祖父的弟弟，已故散骑侍郎何准的遣女，没间断过训导，衣着如常人。
English: My great-great-uncle's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin's cousin

古文：钦承旧章，肃奉典制。 
现代文：恭敬严肃地奉承旧有的典章制度。 
English: Respectfully and solemnly abide by the disciplinary system.

古文：又使兼太保、武陵王晞，兼太尉、中领军洽，持节奉册立为皇后。
现代文：又派兼太保、武陵王司马晞，兼太尉、中领军司马洽带上册书，立法倪为皇后。
English: He also sent the concurrent Taiho, Wuling Wang Sima Jun, concurrent Taiye, and the commander-in-chief of the army Sima Chaozhou to bring the registration book, and legislated Ni to be the empress.

古文：后无子。
现代文：皇后没有儿子。
English: The queen has no son.

古文：哀帝即位，称穆皇后，居永安宫。
现代文：哀帝即位，被称为穆皇后，居住在永安宫。
English: Emperor Aye ascended the throne, was known as Empress Mu, and resided in Yongan Palace.

古文：桓玄篡位，移后入司徒府。
现代文：桓玄篡位，把皇后移到司徒府。
English: Kuan Xuan usurped the throne and moved the empress to Stowe.

古文：路经太庙，后停舆恸哭，哀感路人。
现代文：路过太庙，皇后停车大哭，哀伤感动路人。
English: Passing by the Imperial Temple, the empress stopped the car and cried. The sadness moved passers-by.

古文：玄闻而怒曰： 天下禅代常理，何预何氏女子事耶！ 
现代文：桓玄听说后发怒说： 天下挥让替代是平常的事，舆姓包的女子有什么关系! 
English: After hearing this, Kuan Xuan became angry and said, "It is common for people to substitute their surnames, so what does it matter if a woman has a common surname?"

古文：乃降后为零陵县君，与安帝俱西，至巴陵。
现代文：于是把皇后降为零陵题昼。舆宝童一同西行，到了旦医。
English: Therefore, the empress was reduced to zero. My treasure went west together and arrived at Danji.

古文：及刘裕建义，殷仲文奉后还京都，下令曰： 戎车屡警，黎元阻饥。
现代文：塑瞪树立义旗，殷仲文侍奉皇后回到京都，皇后下令说： 战事频繁，百姓艰难饥饿。
English: Yin Zhongwen returned to Kyoto to serve the empress, who ordered him to raise the flag of righteousness. She said, "The war is frequent, and the people are suffering from hardship and hunger.

古文：而饍御丰靡，岂与百姓同其俭约。
现代文：而我们膳食车服丰盛浪费，怎么能舆百姓一同俭朴节约呢。
English: But we waste a lot of food and clothing, so how can we, the common people, be frugal and thrifty?

古文：减损供给，勿令游过。 
现代文：减少供给，不要游乐遇度。 
English: Reduce the supply, not the fun.

古文：后时以远还，欲奉拜陵庙。
现代文：皇后当时因为从远地回京，打算参拜陵庙。
English: At that time, the empress was planning to visit the mausoleum because she was returning to Beijing from a distant place.

古文：有司以寇难未平，奏停。
现代文：有关官吏因敌寇还没平息，奏请取消。
English: The officials concerned have not yet calmed down due to the enemy invasion, so please cancel.

古文：元兴三年崩，年六十六，在位凡四十八年。
现代文：元兴三年去世，时年六十六岁，在位共四十八年。
English: Genxing died three years later, at the age of sixty-six, after reigning for a total of forty-eight years.

古文：哀靖王皇后，讳穆之，太原晋阳人也。司徒左长史濛之女也。
现代文：哀靖王皇后名夔之，左愿置屋人。司徒左长史王遂的女儿。
English: She was the daughter of King Sui, the ruler of the Southern Song Dynasty, and the daughter of King Sui, the ruler of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：后初为琅邪王妃。
现代文：皇后起初是堕墨王的妃子。
English: The Empress was originally the Evil Queen.

古文：哀帝即位，立为皇后，追赠母爰氏为安国乡君。
现代文：塞童即位，立她为皇后，追赠她母亲爱旦为塞垦翅星。
English: Setang ascended the throne, made her the queen, and posthumously gave her mother, Eitan, the winged star of Setang.

古文：后在位三年，无子。
现代文：皇后在位三年，没有儿子。
English: The queen has been on the throne for three years and has no son.

古文：兴宁二年崩。
现代文：星空二年去世。
English: Hoshizora died two years later.

古文：废帝孝庾皇后，讳道怜，颍川焉陵人也。父冰，自有传。
现代文：废帝孝庾皇后名道搓，题丛匮堕入。父亲尘速，本书有传。
English: The deposed emperor's daughter, the empress's daughter, the famous Taoist nun, fell into the thicket of poverty. The father of the dust speed, this book has passed down.

古文：初为东海王妃。
现代文：起初是塞海王的妃子。
English: At first she was the concubine of the king of the Seychelles.

古文：及帝即位，立为皇后。
现代文：废帝即位，立她为皇后。
English: The deposed emperor ascended the throne and made her his empress.

古文：太和六年崩，葬于敬平陵。
现代文：太和六年去世，葬在敬平陵。
English: She died six years later and was buried in the Jingping Mausoleum.

古文：帝废为海西公，追贬后曰海西公夫人。
现代文：皇帝被废为海西公后，追贬她为海西公夫人。
English: The emperor was dethroned as Princess Haisei's consort, and she was relegated to being Princess Haisei's wife.

古文：太元十一年，海西公薨于吴，又以后合葬于吴陵。
现代文：太五十一年，荡酉公死在呈，又把皇后与蛊酉公合葬在吴陵。
English: In the fiftieth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Lingzong died in Chengdu, and the empress and Emperor Zhaozong were buried together in the Mausoleum of Emperor Wu.

古文：简文宣郑太后，讳阿春，河南荥阳人也。世为冠族。
现代文：简文宣郑太后名阿春，河南荥阳人。历代为豪门世族。
English: Empress Dowager Jianwen Xuan Zheng's name was Achun, and she was from Shenyang, Henan Province. She was a member of a powerful family for generations.

古文：祖合，临济令。
现代文：祖父鄞合，是临济令。
English: His grandfather, Zhao He, was a Lin Zhiling.

古文：父恺，字祖元，安丰太守。
现代文：父亲郑恺，字祖元，是安丰太守。
English: His father, Zheng Qi, also known as Zu Yuan, was the governor of Anfeng.

古文：后少孤，无兄弟，唯姊妹四人，后最长。
现代文：皇后年少时即成了孤儿，没有兄弟，仅姐妹四人，皇后最大。
English: When she was young, the empress became an orphan. She had no brothers, only four sisters, of whom the empress was the eldest.

古文：先适渤海田氏，生一男而寡，依于舅濮阳吴氏。
现代文：先嫁给渤海田氏，生下一个男孩就守了寡，投奔舅舅濮阳吴氏家。
English: She first married a member of the Binhai family, and after giving birth to a boy, she became a widow and joined her uncle's family, the Binyang Wu family.

古文：元帝为丞相，敬后先崩，将纳吴氏女为夫人。
现代文：元帝为丞相时，邀后先去世，将娶吴氏女儿作夫人。
English: When Emperor Yuan was chancellor, he invited Wu's daughter to be his wife.

古文：后及吴氏女并游后园，或见之，言于帝曰： 郑氏女虽嫠，贤于吴氏远矣。 
现代文：皇后与吴氏的女儿一起游后园，有人看见了，对皇帝说： 墓返女虽是寡妇，但比呈旦的女儿贤惠多了。 
English: The empress and the daughter of the Wu family were walking in the back garden together. Someone saw them and said to the emperor: "Though Tomb Returner is a widow, she is much more virtuous than the daughter of Chengdan."

古文：建武元年，纳为琅邪王夫人。甚有宠。
现代文：建武元年，娶为琅邪王夫人，很受宠爱。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he married the wife of the evil king, and was greatly loved.

古文：后虽贵幸，而恆有忧色。
现代文：皇后虽然显贵受宠，然而常有忧虑之色。
English: Although the empress was favored by nobles, she was often worried.

古文：帝问其故，对曰： 妾有妹，中者已适长沙王褒，余二妹未有所适，恐姊为人妾，无复求者。 
现代文：皇帝问她缘故，回答说： 我有妹妹，中间那个已嫁给长沙王褒，还剩两个妹妹没出嫁，怕姐姐成了妾，再没有求婚的人了。 
English: The emperor asked her why, and she replied, "I have a younger sister, and the one in the middle has already married Changsha Wang Bo. There are still two younger sisters who have not married, fearing that the older sister will become a concubine, and there is no one to propose marriage.

古文：帝因从容谓刘隗曰： 郑氏二妹，卿可为求佳对，使不失旧。 
现代文：皇帝于是从容地对刘隗说： 郑氏两个妹妹，你可以为她们寻求好配偶，使她们不失去旧日的显赫。 
English: The emperor then calmly said to Liu Wei: Zheng's two sisters, you can find good spouses for them so that they do not lose their former prominence.

古文：隗举其从子佣娶第三者，以小者适汉中李氏，皆得旧门。
现代文：刘隗推举他的侄子刘佣娶了二妹，把最小的嫁给汉中李氏，都到了世族之家。
English: Liu Zhen selected his nephew Liu Jia to marry the second sister, and married the youngest to the Li clan in Hanzhong, and they all came to the family home.

古文：帝召王褒为尚书郎，以悦后意。
现代文：皇帝召王褒为尚书郎，以此取悦皇后的心意。
English: The emperor called Wang Bao to be his disciple to please the queen's heart.

古文：后生琅邪悼王、简文帝、寻阳公主。
现代文：皇后生下琅邪悼王、简文帝、寻阳公主。
English: The Empress gave birth to the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager.

古文：帝称尊号，后虽为夫人，诏太子及东海、武陵王皆母事之。
现代文：琅邪王称帝，皇后虽然是夫人，皇帝令太子及束海王、武陵王都按母亲之礼事奉她。
English: The evil king called himself emperor, and although the queen was his wife, the emperor ordered the prince and the king of Sokha and the king of Wuling to serve her according to the mother's gift.

古文：帝崩，后称建平国夫人。
现代文：皇帝去世，皇后被称为建平国夫人。
English: When the emperor died, the empress became known as Lady Jianping.

古文：咸和元年薨，简文帝时为琅邪王，制服重。
现代文：咸和元年皇后去世，简文帝当时是琅邪王，服大丧。
English: When the empress died in the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Jianwen, who was the evil king at the time, was greatly mourned.

古文：有司以王出继，宜降所生，国臣不能匡正，奏免国相诸葛颐。
现代文：有关官吏认为琅邪王已经过继，对生母的丧礼应降格，国中大臣不能匡正，奏请罢免国相诸葛颐。
English: Relevant officials believe that the evil king has been succeeded, the funeral of the birth mother should be downgraded, the Minister of State cannot be rectified, and the Minister of State Zhuge Liang should be dismissed.

古文：王上疏曰： 亡母生临臣国，没留国第，臣虽出后，亦无所厌，则私情得叙。
现代文：琅邪王上疏说： 亡母在世时在我的国家，去世时留国家的宅第，我虽出继，也没有丧服降等的道理，这样母子之情能表达。
English: "My late mother was in my country when she was alive, and when she passed away, she left her country residence behind. Although I have passed away, there is no reason for me to wear mourning clothes. This is how the feelings of mother and son can be expressed.

古文：昔敬后崩，孝王已出继，亦还服重。
现代文：过去敬后去世，孝王已经过继，也还是服大丧。
English: In the past, after the death of the respected, the king of filial piety has been passed on, and it is still a great mourning.

古文：此则明比，臣所宪章也。 
现代文：这是清楚的先例，我应效法。 
English: This is a clear precedent that I should follow.

古文：明穆皇后不夺其志，乃徙琅邪王为会稽王，追号后曰会稽太妃。
现代文：明穆皇后不强迫他改变主意，于是调琅邪王为会稽王，追封皇后为会稽太妃。
English: Queen Mingmu did not force him to change his mind, so she changed the evil king to the king of the auditor and the queen to the auditor.

古文：及简文帝即位，未及追尊。
现代文：简文帝即位，未来得及追加尊号。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and in the future, there will be time for additional honorary titles.

古文：临崩，封皇子道子为琅邪王，领会稽国，奉太妃祀。
现代文：临死，封皇子道子为琅邪王，领会稽国，祭祀太妃。
English: On the verge of death, he crowned Prince Doji as the King of Evil, understood the country, and worshipped the Empress Dowager.

古文：太元十九年，孝武帝下诏曰： 会稽太妃文母之德，徽音有融，诞载圣明，光延于晋。
现代文：太元十九年，孝武帝下诏书说： 会稽太妃是文德之母，德音融融，满载圣明，光照大晋。
English: In the 19th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu issued an edict saying, "Congregation auditor Taifei is the mother of literature and virtue. She is full of virtue, full of wisdom, and full of light."

古文：先帝追尊圣善，朝议不一，道以疑屈。
现代文：先帝给圣明善良的会稽太妃追加尊号，朝廷的议论不一致，道被怀疑歪曲。
English: The previous emperor gave the saintly and kind-hearted auditor Taifei an additional honorary title, the court's arguments were inconsistent, and the Tao was suspected of being distorted.

古文：朕述遵先志，常惕于心。
现代文：我陈述遵循先帝的志向，常常在心中告诫。
English: I declared that I would follow the wishes of the former emperor, and often admonished him in my heart.

古文：今仰奉遗旨，依《阳秋》二汉孝怀皇帝故事，上太妃尊号曰简文太后。 
现代文：今天恭奉遣旨，依照《春秋》、两汉及孝怀皇帝过去的做法，加太妃尊号为简文宣太后。 
English: Today, in accordance with the "Spring and Autumn," the two Han dynasties and the past practice of the Emperor Xiaohai, I respectfully submit the order to add the honorary title of the Empress Dowager to the Empress Dowager Xuanwen.

古文：于是立庙于太庙路西，陵曰嘉平。
现代文：于是在太庙路西立庙，陵墓称嘉平。
English: Therefore, a mausoleum was built on the west side of Taimiao Road, and the mausoleum was called Jiaping.

古文：时群臣希旨，多谓郑太后应配食于元帝者。
现代文：当时群臣为了迎合皇上旨意，多认为郑太后应配祭于元帝。
English: At that time, in order to meet the emperor's will, most of the courtiers thought that Empress Zheng should match the sacrifice to Emperor Yuan.

古文：帝以问太子前率徐邈，邈曰： 臣案《阳秋》之义，母以子贵。
现代文：皇帝以此询问太子前率徐邈，徐邈说： 我认为《春秋》的义理，是母亲因为儿子而显贵。
English: The emperor asked Xu Xi, the former leader of the crown prince, about this. Xu Xi said: I think the meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is that the mother is distinguished because of her son.

古文：鲁隐尊桓母，别考仲子之宫而不配食于惠庙。
现代文：鲁隐公尊重桓公的母亲，另建仲子之宫而不在惠庙配享。
English: Lu Yin respected Huan Gong's mother and built a separate palace for his son, instead of sharing it with Hui Miao.

古文：又平素之时，不伉俪于先帝，至于子孙，岂可为祖考立配？
现代文：而且在以往，郑太后不是先帝的夫人，到了子孙怎么能为祖辈立元配呢?
English: Moreover, in the past, Empress Dowager Zheng was not the wife of the former emperor, so how could the descendants match the ancestors?

古文：其崇尊尽礼，由于臣子，故得称太后，陵庙备典。
现代文：尊崇已经至极，由于臣子，才得以称太后，陵庙礼典完备。
English: The reverence has reached the extreme, and it is only thanks to the courtiers that she can be called the empress dowager, and the ceremony at the mausoleum is complete.

古文：若乃祔葬配食，则义所不可。 
现代文：假如合葬拊祭，那是义礼所不允许的。 
English: If there is a joint funeral and a wreath-laying ceremony, it is not allowed by the rite.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：简文顺王皇后，讳简姬，太原晋阳人也。父遐，见《外戚传》。
现代文：简文顺王皇后名简姬，太原晋阳人。父亲王遐，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: Jianwen Shun Wang's empress was named Jian Ji, a Taiyuan Jinyang person. Her father, Wang Yao, is described in "The Tale of a Maternal Relative."

古文：后以冠族，初为会稽王妃，生子道生，为世子。
现代文：皇后因为出身显贵世族，最初是会稽王妃，生儿子道生，立为太子。
English: Because the empress was born into a distinguished family, she was originally a princess of the imperial court. She gave birth to a son, Tao Sheng, who became the crown prince.

古文：永和四年，母子并失帝意，俱被幽废，后遂以忧薨。
现代文：永和四年，母子俩都失去皇帝的宠爱，都被幽禁废黜，皇后由此忧郁而死。
English: For four years, both mother and son lost the emperor's favor, were imprisoned and deposed, and the empress died of melancholy.

古文：咸安二年，孝武帝即位，追尊曰顺皇后，合葬高平陵，追赠后父遐特进、光禄大夫，加散骑常侍。
现代文：咸安二年，孝武帝即位，追加尊号为顺皇后，合葬在高平陵，追赠皇后的父亲王遐特进、光禄大夫，加封散骑常侍。
English: In the second year of the Haman era, Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne. She was given the additional honorific title of Empress Shun, and was buried together in the Gaoping Mausoleum. The queen's father, Wang Bingtejin, was posthumously awarded the title of Guanglu Daifu, as well as the title of Jifeng Sanzhi Changzhi.

古文：孝武文李太后，讳陵容，本出微贱。
现代文：孝武文李太后名陵容，出身低贱。
English: Xiaowuwen Li, the empress dowager, was of humble birth.

古文：始简文帝为会稽王，有三子，俱夭。
现代文：起初简文帝是会稽王，有三个儿子，都夭折了。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Jianwen was the king of the imperial court. He had three sons, all of whom died young.

古文：自道生废黜，献王早世，其后诸姬绝孕将十年。
现代文：自从道生被废黜，献王过早去世，这以后众姬妾将近十年没有身孕。
English: Since the dethronement of Tao Sheng and the premature death of King Xianwang, the concubines have not been pregnant for nearly ten years.

古文：帝令卜者扈谦筮之，曰： 后房中有一女，当育二贵男，其一终盛晋室。 
现代文：皇帝命令占卜者扈谦为此卜筮，扈谦说： 后房中有一女子，当能生育两个富贵男孩，其中一个最终能兴盛晋室。 
English: The emperor ordered the soothsayer Zou Qian to make a prediction. Zou Qian said: There is a woman in the back room who will give birth to two rich boys, one of whom will eventually succeed to the throne.

古文：时徐贵人生新安公主，以德美见宠。
现代文：当时徐贵人生下新安公主，因德行美好被宠。
English: At that time, Xu Gui gave birth to Xin'an Princess, who was favored for her virtue and beauty.

古文：帝常冀之有娠，而弥年无子，会有道士许迈者，朝臣时望多称其得道。
现代文：皇帝常希望她怀孕，然而终年无子。适逢有个叫许迈的道士，朝廷大臣及当时名人都说他得道。
English: The emperor often hoped that she would become pregnant, but she remained childless for the rest of her life. It so happened that a Taoist monk named Xu Mai, a minister of the imperial court and a celebrity at the time, said that he had the right path.

古文：帝从容问焉，答曰： 迈是好山水人，本无道术，斯事岂所能判！
现代文：皇帝从容地问他，回答说： 我是喜好山水之人，本来没有道术，这种事怎能判断!
English: The emperor asked him calmly and replied, "I am a person who likes landscapes and rivers. I don't have any Taoist skills, so how can I judge this kind of thing?"

古文：但殿下德厚庆深，宜隆奕世之绪，当从扈谦之言，以存广接之道。 
现代文：不过殿下德行厚福运深，应该是子息兴旺，该听从扈谦的话，来拓宽传宗接代的路子。 
English: However, since His Imperial Highness is so virtuous, blessed and fortunate, he should have a prosperous son, and he should listen to the words of Zou Qian to broaden the path of succession.

古文：帝然之，更加采纳。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对，更加采妃纳妾。
English: The emperor thought he was right, and he began to take more wives and concubines.

古文：又数年无子，乃令善相者召诸爱妾而示之，皆云非其人，又悉以诸婢媵示焉。
现代文：又过了几年没有儿子，于是命令善于相面的人召集众爱妾来给他看，没有一个被相中的，又召来全部婢媵给他看。
English: After a few more years, he had no son, so he ordered the conjurer to gather all the beloved concubines to show him, and none of them were chosen, and he summoned all the maidservants to show him.

古文：时后为宫人，在织坊中，形长而色黑，宫人皆谓之昆仑。
现代文：当时皇后是宫人，在纺织作坊中，身材高脸色黑，宫女都叫她 昆仑 。
English: At that time, the empress was a courtier. In the textile workshops, she was tall and dark-skinned, and the court ladies called her Kunlun.

古文：既至，相者惊云： 此其人也。 
现代文：被召来后，相面人吃惊地说： 就是这个人。 
English: After being summoned, the face-to-face person said in surprise, "It's this person."

古文：帝以大计，召之侍寝。
现代文：皇帝为了子息大计，召她侍奉睡觉。
English: The emperor summoned her to serve and sleep for the sake of his son.

古文：后数梦两龙枕膝，日月入怀，意以为吉祥，向侪类说之，帝闻而异焉，遂生孝武帝及会稽文孝王、鄱阳长公主。
现代文：皇后几次梦见两条龙枕在膝上，日月落入怀中，心中认为是吉祥，向同类人述说，皇帝听说后感到惊异，此后生下了孝武帝及会稽文孝王、鄱阳长公主。
English: The empress dreamed several times of two dragon pillows on her lap and the sun and moon falling into her arms. She thought it was auspicious in her heart and told people of the same kind that the emperor was surprised when he heard about it. After that, she gave birth to Emperor Xiaowu, King He Jianwen and Princess Shenyang.

古文：及孝武帝初即位，尊为淑妃。
现代文：孝武帝刚即位，尊她为淑妃。
English: Emperor Xiaowu had just ascended to the throne, and she was revered as Lady Su.

古文：太元三年，进为贵人，九年，又进为夫人。
现代文：太元三年，进升为贵人。九年，又进升为夫人。
English: In the third year of the Taiyuan era, she was promoted to noblewoman, and in the ninth year, she was promoted to wife.

古文：十二年，加为皇太妃，仪服一同太后。
现代文：十二年，为皇太妃，仪礼服用完全和太后相同。
English: In the twelfth year, as the crown princess, the ceremony is completely the same as the empress dowager.

古文：十九年，会稽王道子启： 母以子贵，庆厚礼崇。
现代文：十九年，会稽王道子启奏： 母以子贵，福厚礼盛。
English: In the 19th year, Daozi Wang, the chief examiner, opened the recital with: Mother and child are precious, good fortune and prosperity.

古文：伏惟皇太妃纯德光大，休祐攸钟，启嘉祚于圣明，嗣徽音于上列。
现代文：我认为皇太妃美德光照四方，她美德的保佑长久聚集，在圣明中开始了福运，从祖先处继承了德音。
English: I think that the virtue of the Empress Dowager shines in all directions, and the blessing of her virtue has been gathered for a long time. She began her good fortune in the Holy Light and inherited the virtue from her ancestors.

古文：虽幽显同谋，而称谓未尽，非所以仰述圣心，允答天人。
现代文：虽然隐微或显赫出于同样的考虑，但称谓没有尊敬到顶点，无法表达对圣心的恭敬。无法应答天人。
English: Though subtle or eminent for the same reason, the appellation does not reach the summit of respect, does not express reverence for the Sacred Heart, does not respond to the Divine.

古文：宜崇正名号，详案旧典。 
现代文：应该端正名号，详情依照旧有的典章。 
English: The name should be corrected and the details should be in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：八月辛巳，帝临轩，遣兼太保刘耽尊为皇太后，称崇训宫。
现代文：八月辛巳，皇帝到殿，派兼太保刘耽尊皇太妃为皇太后，称崇训宫。
English: In August Xin, the emperor came to the palace and sent Liu Tanzun, the empress dowager and grand tutor, as the empress dowager, calling it the Chongxun Palace.

古文：安帝即位，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：安帝即位，尊她为太皇太后。
English: Emperor An ascended the throne, and she was revered as the great empress dowager.

古文：隆安四年，崩于含章殿。
现代文：隆安四年，在含章殿去世。
English: In the fourth year of the Longan era, he passed away in the Hanjong Palace.

古文：朝议疑其服制，左仆射何澄、右仆射王雅、尚书车胤、孔安国、祠部郎徐广等议曰： 太皇太后名位允正，体同皇极，理制备尽，情礼兼申。
现代文：朝廷的议论对丧服的体制有疑虑，左仆射何澄、右仆射王雅、尚书车胤、孔安国、祠部郎徐广等议论说： 太皇太后名位允当，体制如同在帝王之位，礼制完备，情理伸张。
English: The discussion in the imperial court had doubts about the system of funeral attire. The left-hand servant, Sho He-cheng, the right-hand servant, Sho Wang-ya, Shang Shuche-yin, Kong An-guo, and the head of the ancestral hall, Xu Guang, discussed and said: The empress dowager's position is appropriate, the system is like that of the emperor, the etiquette is complete, and the situation is reasonable.

古文：《阳秋》之义，母以子贵，既称夫人，礼服从正。
现代文：《春秋》的义理是母以子贵，既然称作夫人，丧服应正统。
English: According to the meaning of "Yangqiu," the mother is more precious than the child. Since it is called the wife, the etiquette of the funeral dress should be from the positive.

古文：故成风显夫人之号，文公服三年之丧。
现代文：成风因夫人的名号显赫，文公为她服丧三年。
English: Therefore, it became popular to call her Madam, and Wen Gong served three years of mourning for her.

古文：子于父母之所生，体尊义重。
现代文：子女对于父母的生养，身体尊贵情义深重。
English: Children have a deep respect for the physical dignity of their parents.

古文：且礼祖不厌孙，固宜追服无屈，而缘情立制。
现代文：况且以礼恭敬祖先并不贬损孙辈，当然应该追加丧服等级不使受屈，根据人情设立制度。
English: Moreover, it does not detract from the grandchildren to respect the ancestors with courtesy. Of course, it is necessary to establish a system according to the human condition.

古文：若嫌明文不存，则疑斯从重，谓应同于为祖母后齐衰三年。 
现代文：如果嫌没有明文规定，就有疑问之处从重服丧，我们认为应该与为祖母服丧相同，服齐衰三年。 
English: If there is no explicit provision, there is a doubt from the heavy mourning, we believe that it should be the same as the mourning for the grandmother, three years of mourning.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从了他们。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：皇后及百官皆服齐衰期，永安皇后一举哀。
现代文：皇后及百官都服齐衰一年，永安皇后一同哀悼。
English: The empress and all the dignitaries have been together for a year, and the Yongan Empress mourns together.

古文：于是设庐于西堂，凶仪施于神兽门，葬修平陵，神主祔于宣太后庙。
现代文：于是在酉堂设立庐屋，在控凿盟办丧礼，葬在修垩座，神主拊祭于宣太后庙。
English: Therefore, a funeral hall was set up in the hall, a funeral ceremony was held in the control hall, the funeral was held in the repair hall, and the god's funeral was held in the temple of Empress Dowager Xuan.

古文：孝武定王皇后，讳法慧，哀靖皇后之侄也。父蕴，见《外戚传》。
现代文：孝武定王皇后名法慧，哀靖皇后的侄女。父亲王蕴，事迹见《外戚传》。
English: Xiaowu Dingwang's empress was named Fa Hui, the niece of the Empress Pao Jing. Her father, Wang Yun, is described in "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives."

古文：初，帝将纳后，访于公卿。
现代文：当初，皇帝将娶亲，向公卿询问。
English: At first, the emperor would marry a relative and inquire from the nobles.

古文：于时蕴子恭以弱冠见仆射谢安，安深敬重之。
现代文：那时王蕴的儿子王苤二十岁，见了仆射谢窒，谢宣深深敬重他。
English: At that time, Wang Xuan, the son of Wang Yun, was twenty years old. He saw his servant, Xie Xuan, and Xie Xuan deeply respected him.

古文：既而谓人曰： 昔毛嘉耻于魏朝，杨骏几倾晋室。
现代文：后来谢安对人说： 过去毛嘉在魏朝遭人耻笑，杨骏几乎颠覆晋室。
English: Later, Xie An said to someone, "In the past, Mao Jia was ridiculed in the Wei Dynasty, and Yang Hui almost overthrew the Jin Dynasty.

古文：若帝纳后，有父者，唯廕望如王蕴乃可。 
现代文：假如皇帝要娶妻，那皇后如果有父亲在，惟有名望像王蕴那样的才行。 
English: If the emperor wants to marry a wife, the empress, if she has a father, can only do so if she has a reputation like Wang Yun.

古文：既而访蕴女，容德淑令，乃举以应选。
现代文：以后走访王蕴的女儿，容貌品德美好，于是推举她应选。
English: After visiting Wang Yun's daughter, her appearance and character were beautiful, so she was recommended for selection.

古文：宁康三年，中军将军桓冲等奏曰： 臣闻天地之道，盖相须而化成；帝后之德，必相协而政隆。
现代文：宁康三年，中军将军桓冲等奏报说： 臣听说天地之道，是相配而成；皇帝舆皇后之德，一定要协调而兴隆。
English: In the third year of Ningkang, the Chinese army general Kuanchong and other reports said: The minister heard that the way of heaven and earth is a match; the emperor and the empress's virtue must be coordinated and flourish.

古文：然后品物流形，彝伦攸叙，灵根长固，本枝百世。
现代文：然后能造化万物，天地人伦次第分明，灵根长久牢固，枝干百世繁衍。
English: Then He can create all things. The order of heaven and earth and human relationships is clear. The spiritual root is long-lasting and firm, and the branches can reproduce for a hundred generations.

古文：天人同致，莫不由此。
现代文：天人相同，都是如此。
English: It's the same for everyone.

古文：是以涂山作俪，而夏族以熙；妊姒配周，而姬祚以昌。
现代文：因此禹在涂山娶妻，夏曲从而光明；牲蛆嫁给旦室，坦姓从而福运昌盛。
English: Therefore, Yu married a wife in Tuishan, and the summer song became bright; Diao married a wife in Danzhong, and the surname of Danzhong became prosperous.

古文：今长秋将建，宜时简择。
现代文：如今将立皇后，应适时选择。
English: Now that a new empress will be crowned, it is time to choose.

古文：伏闻试守晋陵太守王蕴女，天性柔顺，四业允备。
现代文：我们听说试守晋陵太守王蕴的女儿，天性温柔顺从，《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》四业具备。
English: We have heard that the daughter of Wang Yun, the guardian of the Jinling Mausoleum, is naturally gentle and obedient, and possesses the four qualities of "poetry," "writing," "ritual" and "music."

古文：且盛德之胄，美善先积。
现代文：况且是盛德之家的后代，美德善行积累得早。
English: Moreover, he is a descendant of the Shengde family, and he accumulated virtues and good deeds early.

古文：臣等参议，可以配德乾元，恭承宗庙，徽音六宫，母仪天下。 
现代文：我们这些人参谋商议，可以与皇帝相配，恭敬地奉承宗庙，在六宫播散德音，做天下母亲的典范。 
English: Those of us who consult and consult can match the emperor, respectfully flatter the ancestral temple, spread virtue in the Six Palaces, and be a model of the mother of the world.

古文：于是帝始纳焉。
现代文：于是皇帝娶了她。
English: So the emperor married her.

古文：封蕴妻刘氏为乐平乡君。
现代文：封王蕴妻刘氏为乐平乡君。
English: Liu, Wang Yun's wife, is Leping Xiangjun.

古文：后性嗜酒骄妒，帝深患之。
现代文：皇后生性喜好饮酒而骄傲忌妒，皇帝深感忧虑。
English: The empress is a proud and jealous drunk, and the emperor is deeply worried.

古文：乃召蕴于东堂，具说后过状，令加训诫。
现代文：于是在东堂召见王蕴，一一述说皇后的过失，让他加以训诫。
English: Therefore, Wang Yun was summoned to the East Hall, where he was told about the queen's faults one by one, and he was asked to admonish her.

古文：蕴免冠谢焉。
现代文：王蕴脱帽谢罪。
English: Wang Yun took off his hat to apologize.

古文：后于是少自改饰。
现代文：皇后于是稍加改正。
English: The Empress then made a slight correction.

古文：太元五年崩，年二十一，葬隆平陵。
现代文：左五五年去世，时年二十一岁，葬在隆平陵。
English: He died five years later, at the age of 21, and was buried in the Longping Mausoleum.

古文：安德陈太后，讳归女，松滋浔阳人也。
现代文：安德陈太后名归女，松滋浔阳入。
English: Empress Dowager Ande Chen's maiden name changed to her daughter's name, Songzhi Xiangyang.

古文：父广，以倡进，仕至平昌太守。
现代文：父亲陈广，以伎艺得官，官至平昌太守。
English: His father, Chen Guang, rose to the position of PyeongChang's governor-general through skillful maneuvering.

古文：后以美色能歌弹，入宫为淑媛，生安、恭二帝。
现代文：皇后靠貌美善唱歌弹琴，入宫做了淑媛，生下安、恭两皇帝。
English: The empress relied on her beauty to sing and play the piano, entered the palace as Shuyuan, and gave birth to two emperors, An and Gong.

古文：太元十五年薨，赠夫人。
现代文：主五十五年去世，赠夫人名号。
English: When the master died fifty-five years ago, he gave her the title of madam.

古文：追崇曰皇太后，神主祔于宣太后庙，陵曰熙平。
现代文：追加为皇太后，神主拊祭在宣叁后庙，陵墓叫熙平。
English: In addition, for the empress dowager, the god's funeral rites were held in the temple of Xuanwu Hou, and the mausoleum was called Xiping.

古文：安僖王皇后，讳神爱，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：安僖王皇后名神爱，琅邪临沂人。
English: The queen of King Antao is known as the goddess of love, and the people of Antao are known as the people of love.

古文：父献之，见别传。母新安愍公主。
现代文：父亲献主，事迹另有传；母亲是新安愍公主。
English: His father dedicated his life to the Lord, but the story is told differently; his mother was the New Anhui Princess.

古文：后以太元二十一年纳为太子妃。
现代文：皇后在主五二十一年被娶为太子妃。
English: The empress was married to the crown prince in 521.

古文：及安帝即位，立为皇后。无子。
现代文：塞童即位，立为皇后。没有儿子。
English: Seto ascends the throne and becomes empress. She has no son.

古文：义熙八年崩于徽音殿，时年二十九，葬休平陵。
现代文：盏盐八年在遨宣殿去世，时年二十九岁，葬在体里陆。
English: He died at the age of twenty-nine, eight years old, and was buried on the ground.

古文：恭思褚皇后，讳灵媛，河南阳翟人，义兴太守爽之女也。
现代文：恭思褚皇后名灵媛，河南阳翟人，义兴太守褚爽的女儿。
English: She is the daughter of Empress Meiling of Henan Province and Yixing Taishou of Henan.

古文：后初为琅邪王妃。
现代文：皇后起初是琅邪王妃。
English: The Empress was originally the Evil Queen.

古文：元熙元年，立为皇后，生海盐、富阳公主。
现代文：元熙元年，被立为皇后，生下海盐、富阳公主。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, she was made empress and gave birth to Princess Haiyan and Princess Fuyang.

古文：及帝禅位于宋，降为零陵王妃。
现代文：等到皇帝把皇位禅让给塞，降为零陵王妃。
English: Wait until the emperor abdicates the imperial throne to Zeng Zi and demotes her to Ziling Wangfei.

古文：宋元嘉十三年崩，时年五十三，祔葬冲平陵。
现代文：宋元嘉十三年去世，时年五十三岁。拊葬在冲平陵。
English: Song Yuanjia died in the thirteenth year, at the age of fifty-three. He was buried in Chongping Mausoleum.

古文：史臣曰：方祇体安，俪乾仪而合德；圆舒循晷，配羲曜以齐明。
现代文：史臣曰：皇后体安，匹配帝王而合德；月亮遵循日影，匹配太阳而齐放光明。
English: Shichen said: The queen's body is safe, matches the emperor and fits Germany; the moon follows the shadow of the sun, matches the sun and emits light.

古文：故知阳烁阴凝，万物假其陶铸；火炎水润，六气由其调理。
现代文：因而可知阳炽热阴凝寒，万物依赖阴阳造就；火炎热水湿润，六气靠水火调理。
English: Therefore, it can be known that the sun is hot and the shade is cold, and all things depend on the yin and yang to create; the hot water is hot and humid, and the six airs are conditioned by water and fire.

古文：取譬贤淑，作伉文思，灵根式固，实资于此。
现代文：用来比喻贤妻淑女，匹配帝王的德行，这对皇室根基坚固，实在是有帮助的。
English: Used as a metaphor for a virtuous wife and lady, matching the emperor's virtue, it is really helpful for the royal family to have a solid foundation.

古文：宣穆阅礼，偶德潜鳞，翊天造之艰虞，嗣涂山之逸响，宝运归其后胤，盖有母仪之助焉。
现代文：宣穆皇后知礼，德配直趄，协助帝王艰难创业，继承了涂山流传下来的德音，把好运留给了后代，这都是靠有母亲风范的人相助啊。
English: The empress Xuanmu was wise, virtuous and upright, assisted the emperor in his difficult start-up, inherited the virtues passed down from Tu Mountain, and left good luck to future generations. All of this was helped by people with a mother's demeanor.

古文：武元杨氏预闻朝政，明不逮远，爱弱私情，深杜卫瓘之言，不晓张泓之诈，运其阴沴，韬映乾明，晋道中微，基于是矣。
现代文：武元杨氏干预朝政，目光短浅，爱溺长子以徇私情，完全杜绝卫璀的言论，不知张泓的奸诈，不祥的阴气，遮掩了皇上的圣明，晋国势中道衰微，就是从此开始的。
English: The short-sighted Wuyuan Yang interfered in the imperial government, indulged his eldest son's selfishness, completely suppressed Wei Yao's speech, and did not know that Zhang Yao's treachery and ominous gloom covered the emperor's holy light. The decline of Jin's national power began from this.

古文：惠皇禀质，天纵其嚚，识暗鸣蛙，智昏文蛤。
现代文：惠皇帝禀性老实愚钝，昏庸到问蛙鸣是为官还是为私的地步。
English: Emperor Hui's stubbornness is honestly stupid, and he is so dim-witted that he asks whether the frog's croaking is for the government or for himself.

古文：南风肆狡，扇祸稽天。
现代文：南风放肆狡诈，煽起了漫天的祸水。
English: The south wind is impudent and cunning, and has stirred up the evil waters of the sky.

古文：初践椒宫，逞枭心于长乐；方观梓树，颁鸩羽于离明。褒后灭周，方之盖小；妹妃倾夏，曾何足喻。
现代文：刚踏入后妃的宫室，就开始施展做太后的雄心；才看到得势，就被赐毒药自杀。褒后毁灭周朝，用来比方恐怕还嫌不够；妹妃倾覆夏朝，也不足用来比喻。
English: As soon as she stepped into the empress dowager's palace, she began to show her ambition to become empress dowager; when she saw that she had gained power, she was given poison to commit suicide. The destruction of the Zhou Dynasty by the empress dowager is probably not enough of an analogy; the overthrow of the Xia Dynasty by the empress dowager is also not enough of an analogy.

古文：中原陷于鸣镝，其兆彰于此焉。
现代文：中原陷于战乱，征兆就是从此明显的。
English: Nakahara was engulfed in war, and the signs have been obvious ever since.

古文：昔者高宗谅闇，总百官于元老；成王冲眇，托万机于上公。
现代文：过去高宗居丧，把朝政交给元老；成王年幼无知，把国事托付给上公。
English: In the past, Gao Zong was in mourning and entrusted the imperial government to the elder statesman; Cheng Wang was young and ignorant and entrusted the affairs of state to Shangguo.

古文：太后御宸，谅知非古。
现代文：太后临朝听政，确实不是古代的制度。
English: The empress dowager Lin listening to the government is indeed not an ancient system.

古文：而明穆、康献，仍世临朝，时属委裘，躬行负扆。
现代文：而明穆、康献皇后累代临朝，当时属于皇帝幼小，于是亲自摄政。
English: But Ming Mu and Kang Xian, empresses of the successive Lintong dynasties, belonged to the emperor's infancy at that time, so they became regents in person.

古文：各免华阳之衅，竟蹑和熹之踪，保陵迟以克终，所幸实为多矣。
现代文：各自兔掉了华阳的血祭，竞相追随和熹的足迹，保持衰微的国运不在自己手中断送，可庆幸的实在不少。
English: Each of the rabbits dropped Huayang's blood sacrifice, competed to follow the footsteps of He Zheng, and kept the waning national movement from being sent off by their own hands, but fortunately there are many.

古文：赞曰：二妃光舜，三母翼周。
现代文：赞曰：两个妃子光大了舜业，三位母亲辅翼了周朝。
English: Zang Zi said: Two concubines brightened up the Zhou dynasty, and three mothers supported the Zhou dynasty.

古文：末升夷癸，褒进亡幽。
现代文：末喜受宠使夏桀覆灭，褒姒得意毁灭了西周。
English: Suetai's favoritism caused Xia Yao's downfall, while Bo Yao successfully destroyed Xi Zhou.

古文：家邦兴灭，职此之由。
现代文：国家的兴亡主要是因为这个啊。
English: The rise and fall of nations is largely due to this.

古文：穆后沈断，忘情执爨。
现代文：穆后沉毅果断，杀人灭口后能不露声色地执炊做饭。
English: Mu Hou is resolute and resolute. After killing a murderer, he can cook without making a fuss.

古文：故剑辞恩，池蒲起叹。
现代文：旧妻失宠，池塘蒲柳为她感叹。
English: The old wife fell out of favor, and the pond willow sighed for her.

古文：崇化繁祉，肇基商乱。
现代文：崇化宫皇太后多福，是后世祸乱的起点。
English: The Empress Dowager Dofu of the Chongwu Palace was the starting point of the calamity of later generations.

古文：二杨继宠，福极灾生。
现代文：两位杨皇后先后受宠，福极而祸生。
English: The two Empresses Yang were favored successively, which was a blessing and a curse.

古文：南风炽虐，国丧身倾。
现代文：南风皇后残酷暴虐，国破身亡。
English: The cruel and tyrannical Empress Nanfeng ruined the country and died.

古文：献容幸乱，居辱疑荣。
现代文：献容皇后被乱臣宠幸，身受屈辱反而认为是荣耀。
English: The queen, who was favored by her unruly subjects, considered it an honor to be humiliated.

古文：援笔废主，持尺威帝。
现代文：提起笔就废置君主，拿着韶书欺凌皇帝。
English: Lifting a pen to depose the monarch, holding a scribble to bully the emperor.

古文：契阔终罹，殷忧以毙。
现代文：离散终遭不幸，深忧以致毙命。
English: Dispersion eventually suffered misfortune, and deep sorrow led to his death.

古文：芬实窈窕，芳菲婉嫕。
现代文：芬身材窈窕，芳温柔顺从。
English: Her body is graceful and graceful, and she is gentle and obedient.

古文：吕妾变嬴，黄姬化羋。
现代文：吕氏之妾生子，造就了秦始皇蠃氏，黄帝之姬生子，正是楚国的祖先芈氏。
English: The concubine and son of the Lv clan created the Qin Shi Huang clan, and the granddaughter of the Yellow Emperor was the ancestor of the Chu clan.

古文：石文远著，金行潜徙。
现代文：记载留传久远，晋五行属金，金德悄然离去。
English: Records have been passed down for a long time. Jin Wugang belonged to Jin, and Jin De quietly left.

古文：妇德倾城，迷硃夺紫。
现代文：妇人的德行让人倾倒，影响超出公侯。
English: A woman's virtue makes people fall in love with her, and her influence extends beyond the realm of princes.

