古文：昭明太子统字德施，小字维摩，武帝长子也。
现代文：昭明太子萧统字德施，小名维摩，是武帝的长子。
English: Zhaoming Prince Xiao Tongzhi, also known as Deshi, was the eldest son of Emperor Wu.

古文：以齐中兴元年九月生于襄阳。
现代文：齐中兴元年九月生于襄阳。
English: Qi Zhongxing was born in September of the first year in Xiangyang.

古文：武帝既年垂强仕，方有冢嗣；时徐元瑜降；而续又荆州使至，云： 萧颖胄暴卒。 
现代文：武帝年近四十，始得嫡子；当时有徐元瑜归降；又有荆州使者来，报称萧颖胄暴死。
English: Emperor Wu, nearly forty years old, began to have a legitimate son; at that time, Xu Yuanyu surrendered; there was also an envoy from Jingzhou, who reported that Xiao Yingyao died violently.

古文：时人谓之三庆。
现代文：于是人们称此三件事为 三庆 。
English: As a result, people called these three events the Three Great Festivals.

古文：少日而建邺平，识者知天命所集。
现代文：不久平定建邺，有识之士认为这是天命所归。
English: Jianye was soon pacified, and people of insight believed that this was the result of God's will.

古文：天监元年十一月，立爲皇太子。
现代文：天监元年十一月，立为皇太子。
English: In November of the first year of the Tenjō era, he became crown prince.

古文：时年幼，依旧居于内，拜东宫官属，文武皆入直永福省。
现代文：当时年幼，仍旧和母亲居住在宫内，武帝给他封了东宫的属官，这些官员便到他所居住的永福宫去侍奉。
English: At that time, he was young and still lived in the palace with his mother. Emperor Wu gave him the title of subordinate official of the East Palace, and these officials went to Yongfu Palace, where he lived, to serve.

古文：五年六月庚戌，出居东宫。
现代文：天监五年六月十七，离开母亲出居东宫。
English: On the 17th of June in the 5th year of Tianjing, he left his mother and moved to the East Palace.

古文：太子生而聪叡，三岁受孝经、论语，五岁遍读五经，悉通讽诵。
现代文：太子生性聪明通达，三岁受业读《孝经》、《论语》，五岁遍读《五经》，都能通畅地诵读。
English: The prince is very intelligent and fluent. At the age of three, he was taught to read "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects," and at the age of five, he read "The Five Classics." He can read fluently.

古文：性仁孝，自出宫，恒思恋不乐。
现代文：性情仁爱孝顺，自出居东宫，经常思恋母亲而闷闷不乐。
English: His disposition is benevolent, loving and dutiful. Since he moved out of the Eastern Palace, he often misses his mother and is unhappy.

古文：帝知之，每五日一朝，多便留永福省，或五日三日乃还宫。
现代文：武帝知道了，便叫他五天去朝见他母亲一次，于是他便往往留住在永福宫，有时三五日后才回东宫。
English: Emperor Wu found out and ordered him to visit his mother once every five days, so he often stayed at the Yongfu Palace, sometimes returning to the East Palace after three or five days.

古文：八年九月，于寿安殿讲孝经，尽通大义。
现代文：八年九月，他在寿安殿讲《孝经》，已通晓其大义。
English: In September of the eighth year, he gave a lecture on the "Filial Piety" in Shouan Hall, and became familiar with its great meaning.

古文：讲毕，亲临释奠于国学。
现代文：讲完后，亲自到国学去设祭品祭祀先师孔子。
English: After the lecture, he personally went to the Chinese University to set up a wine banquet to pay tribute to the holy pioneer.

古文：年十二，于内省见狱官将谳事。
现代文：十二岁时，在宫内看到司法官员准备判案。
English: When she was 12 years old, she saw a judicial official preparing to judge a case in the Imperial Palace.

古文：问左右曰： 是皁衣何爲者？ 
现代文：问左右说： 这穿黑衣服的是干什么的？ 
English: They kept asking, "What's with the black clothes?"

古文：曰： 廷尉官属。 
现代文：回答说： 是司法部门的官员。 
English: He replied: "An officer of the judiciary."

古文：召视其书，曰： 是皆可念，我得判否？ 
现代文：萧统把他们的案卷要来看，说： 这些我都能念下来，我能判决吗？ 
English: Xiao Tong asked to see their case files and said, "I can read all of this, can I make a judgment?

古文：有司以统幼，紿之曰： 得。 
现代文：当事官员看他年幼，哄他说： 可以。 
English: Seeing him as a young boy, the officer coaxed him and said, "Yes, you can."

古文：其狱皆刑罪上，统皆署杖五十。
现代文：这些案子都是要判徒刑以上的重罪，萧统都批为杖五十。
English: These cases are all felonies punishable by more than a prison sentence, and Xiao Tong was sentenced to 50 strokes of the cane.

古文：有司抱具狱，不知所爲，具言于帝，帝笑而从之。
现代文：当事官员拿着这判下的案卷，不知该怎么办，报告给武帝，武帝笑着让照此办理。
English: The official in question took the case file of this sentence, did not know what to do, reported to Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu smiled and let it be handled accordingly.

古文：自是数使听讼，每有欲宽纵者，即使太子决之。
现代文：从此屡次让他旁听审案，每逢有意宽大处理的，就让太子来判决。
English: Since then, he has repeatedly allowed him to observe the trial, and whenever he intends to be lenient, he lets the prince judge.

古文：建康县谳诬人诱口，狱翻，县以太子仁爱，故轻当杖四十。
现代文：建康县判决拐卖人口的罪犯，案子重新审理时，太子在场，县令因为太子仁爱，故只轻判杖四十下。
English: Jiankang County sentenced a criminal of human trafficking. When the case was retried, the crown prince was present. Because of the prince's benevolence, the county order only gave a light sentence of forty strokes of the cane.

古文：令曰： 彼若得罪，便合家孥戮，今纵不以其罪罪之，岂可轻罚而已，可付冶十年。 
现代文：并对犯人说： 你如果被判罪，全家老小都要被杀，现在即使不以该判的罪判你，难道就可以这样轻罚一下就算了！可交付官府判刑十年。 
English: And he said to the criminal: "If you are convicted, your whole family will be killed. Now, even if you are not convicted of the crime for which you should be sentenced, can such a light punishment be considered! You can be handed over to the authorities for a ten-year sentence.

古文：十四年正月朔旦，帝临轩，冠太子于太极殿。
现代文：十四年正月初一早上，武帝亲临太极殿，给太子行加冕礼。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the 14th year, Emperor Wu personally visited the Taiji Hall to perform the coronation ceremony for the prince.

古文：旧制太子着远游冠、金蝉翠緌缨，至是诏加金博山。
现代文：按照旧制，太子应戴远游冠，系饰有金蝉翠纟委的冠缨，这次诏命加上饰有山形的金冠。
English: According to the old system, the prince should wear a long-distance crown, which is decorated with a golden cicada. This time, the edict added a gold crown decorated with a mountain.

古文：太子美姿容，善举止，读书数行并下，过目皆忆。
现代文：太子身姿容貌漂亮，举止得体，读书能一目数行，过目不忘。
English: The prince has a beautiful appearance and decent manners. He can read several lines at a glance and never forgets what he has read.

古文：每游宴祖道，赋诗至十数韵，或作剧韵，皆属思便成，无所点易。
现代文：每当出游宴会或饯别亲友时，赋诗可达数十韵，有时用险韵，都能略思便成，而不用改换字句。
English: Whenever there is an outing banquet or a farewell to relatives and friends, the poem can reach dozens of rhymes, sometimes with dangerous rhymes, which can be easily made without changing the words.

古文：帝大弘佛教，亲自讲说。
现代文：武帝大力弘扬佛教，亲自讲说佛经。
English: Emperor Wu vigorously promoted Buddhism and personally recited Buddhist scriptures.

古文：太子亦素信三宝，遍览衆经。
现代文：太子也素来信佛，遍观佛经。
English: The prince has always believed in Buddhism and has read Buddhist scriptures everywhere.

古文：乃于宫内别立慧义殿，专爲法集之所。
现代文：在宫内特别设立慧义殿，专门作为讲佛法的集会场所。
English: Huiyi Hall was specially set up in the palace to serve as a meeting place for the teaching of Buddhism.

古文：招引名僧，自立二谛、法身义。
现代文：招引名僧，太子自己讲解二谛、法身义，都有新创意。
English: Inviting famous monks, and the prince himself explaining the two truths and the dharma, all have new creativity.

古文：司农卿明山宾、步兵校尉朱异议，称 慕悼之解，宜终服月 。于是付典书遵用，以爲永准。七年十一月，贵嫔有疾，太子还永福省，朝夕侍疾，衣不解带。
现代文：普通元年四月，慧义殿降下甘露，大家都认为这是太子至高的德性感化了上天。当时风俗喜欢奢侈，太子想以自己为表率影响别人，使用之物都很简朴，身穿旧衣，吃饭不用两样肉食。普通七年十一月，生母丁贵嫔生病，太子回永福宫，从早到晚侍奉母亲，睡觉没有脱过衣服。
English: In April of the first year of the common era, Huiyidong sent down nectar, and everyone thought that this was the prince's highest virtue, sensitizing the heavens. At that time, the custom favored luxury, the prince wanted to influence others with himself as a role model, and the things he used were very simple. He wore old clothes and did not need to eat two kinds of meat. In November of the seventh year of the common era, his birth mother Ding Guijuan fell ill, and the prince returned to the Yongfu Palace to serve his mother from morning to night, sleeping without taking off his clothes.

古文：及薨，步从丧还宫，至殡，水浆不入口，每哭辄恸绝。
现代文：母亲死时，他徒步跟从母亲丧仪回宫，直到入殓，没进过一口汤水，每当痛哭时都昏厥过去。
English: When his mother died, he followed her funeral procession back to the palace on foot until his deathbed. He never took a sip of soup and fainted every time he cried.

古文：武帝敕中书舍人顾协宣旨曰： 毁不灭性，圣人之制，不胜丧比于不孝。
现代文：武帝派中书舍人顾协向他传达武帝的话说： 居丧不能哀痛过度危及生命，这是圣人的规定，无力胜任丧事就等于不孝。
English: Emperor Wu sent the scholar Gu Xie to convey to him the words of Emperor Wu: mourning cannot be too painful and life-threatening. This is the rule of a saint. Being unable to perform a funeral is tantamount to being unfilial.

古文：有我在，那得自毁如此。
现代文：有我在，哪能这样毁伤自己的身体！
English: With me, how can I damage my body like this!

古文：可即强进饮粥。 
现代文：赶快勉强喝点儿稀粥。 
English: Hurry up and drink some gruel.

古文：太子奉敕，乃进数合，自是至葬，日进麦粥一升。
现代文：太子奉了御旨，才算进食数口，从此直到下葬，每天只喝麦粥一升。
English: The prince only ate a few mouthfuls after receiving the imperial command. From then until his burial, he only drank one liter of wheat porridge a day.

古文：武帝又敕曰： 闻汝所进过少，转就羸瘦。
现代文：武帝又训导他说： 听说你吃的过少，越来越瘦。
English: Emperor Wu also instructed him, "I heard that you eat too little and are getting thinner and thinner.

古文：我比更无馀病，政爲汝如此，胸中亦填塞成疾。
现代文：我近来没有别的病，只因为你这样，心口儿也堵得慌成了病。
English: I don't have any other illness these days, but because of you, my mouth is choked with panic and it has become an illness.

古文：故应强加饘粥，不俟我恒尔悬心。 
现代文：所以你应该勉强自己多吃点儿，别让我老替你担心。 
English: So you should force yourself to eat more. Don't let me worry about you all the time.

古文：虽屡奉敕劝逼，终丧日止一溢，不尝菜果之味。
现代文：虽然屡次有皇命劝说逼迫，萧统在整个办丧事期间每天吃的不超过一溢，没吃过蔬菜水果。
English: Although he was repeatedly ordered by the emperor to persuade and persecute, Xiao Tong did not eat more than one bowlful of food a day during the entire period of the funeral, and did not eat any vegetables or fruits.

古文：体素壮，腰带十围，至是减削过半。
现代文：他平常身体粗壮，腰带很长，这时竟削减大半。
English: He was normally a stocky man with a long belt, but he had slashed most of it off.

古文：每入朝，士庶见者莫不下泣。
现代文：每次入朝，上上下下看到的人没有不下泪的。
English: Every time I enter the Imperial Palace, I can't help but shed a tear when I see the people walking up and down.

古文：太子自加元服，帝便使省万机，内外百司奏事者填塞于前。
现代文：太子自从行冠礼以后，武帝便让他观察处理国家事务，于是面前挤满了奏事的内外百官。
English: Ever since the crown prince performed the coronation, Emperor Wu asked him to oversee the handling of state affairs, so the room was filled with hundreds of officials from both inside and outside the country.

古文：太子明于庶事，每所奏谬误巧妄，皆即辩析，示其可否，徐令改正，未尝弹纠一人。
现代文：太子通晓政务，每当有说错的或是花言巧语说假话，都能马上分辨剖析，指出其正误。令其慢慢改过，而未曾向武帝举报过一人。
English: The prince is well-versed in government affairs, and whenever there is a mistake or a false statement, he can immediately distinguish and analyze it, point out its correctness and error, and make it change slowly, and has never reported a single person to Emperor Wu.

古文：平断法狱，多所全宥，天下皆称仁。
现代文：审理案件，许多人都得到赦免或从宽，天下都称颂太子仁德。
English: When sentencing prisoners, he often pardoned and pardoned criminals, and the common people praised him for his benevolence.

古文：性宽和容衆，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：性情宽厚仁爱能容人，喜怒不露在脸上。
English: Generous and benevolent disposition can tolerate people, and do not show their emotions on their faces.

古文：引纳才学之士，赏爱无倦。
现代文：招纳有才学的人，对他们始终赏识爱重。
English: It is never boring to recruit people with real talent and real learning, and to promote and cherish them.

古文：恒自讨论坟籍，或与学士商榷古今，继以文章着述，率以爲常。
现代文：常常自己研讨经典，或与学者们商讨古今学问，并且还著成文章，已成为经常之事。
English: He often studies the classics on his own, or discusses ancient and modern knowledge with scholars, and has also written articles, which has become a regular thing.

古文：于时东宫有书几三万卷，名才并集，文学之盛，晋、宋以来未之有也。
现代文：当时东宫有藏书近三万卷，名士才子济济一堂，文章学术的盛况，是晋、宋以来从未有过的。
English: At that time, there were almost more than 30,000 volumes in the East Palace, famous talents gathered there, literary creation flourished, and there was a pomp that had not been seen since the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：性爱山水，于玄圃穿筑，更立亭馆，与朝士名素者游其中。
现代文：太子生性喜爱山水，在玄圃园内穿渠筑山，又建立亭台馆阁，和官员中有名望的人士在其中畅游。
English: Xiao Tong liked to walk in the mountains and play in the water. He dug and repaired ponds in the garden, piled up rocks, and built pavilions and pavilions. He often toured the landscape in the garden with learned courtiers from the imperial court or famous people from the people, and composed poems.

古文：尝泛舟后池，番禺侯轨盛称此中宜奏女乐。
现代文：一次在后园池中划船，番禺侯萧轨强调说里边应该有歌女演奏。
English: Once, when rowing in the backyard pool, Panyu Hou Xiaorou stressed that there should be a singer playing inside.

古文：太子不答，咏左思招隐诗云： 何必丝与竹，山水有清音。 
现代文：太子不正面回答，而是吟诵了左思《招隐诗》： 何必丝与竹，山水有清音。 
English: The prince did not answer directly, but instead recited the poem "Invitation to Hiding": Why silk and bamboo, the landscape has a clear sound.

古文：轨惭而止。
现代文：萧轨惭愧而不再提此事。
English: Embarrassed, Xiao Luo did not mention the matter again.

古文：出宫二十馀年，不畜音声。
现代文：太子出居东宫二十余年，不蓄养歌妓。
English: The crown prince has lived in the East Palace for more than 20 years and does not have a go-to prostitute.

古文：未薨少时，敕赐太乐女伎一部，略非所好。
现代文：他死前不久，武帝赐他一班宫庭女乐，他也不甚喜爱。
English: Shortly before his death, Emperor Wu gave him a set of court music for women, which he did not like very much.

古文：普通中，大军北侵，都下米贵。
现代文：普通年间，大军北侵魏国，京城米价因此上涨。
English: In an ordinary year, a large army invaded Wei from the north, and the price of rice in Beijing rose as a result.

古文：太子因命菲衣减膳。
现代文：太子便命令给他减衣缩食。
English: The prince then ordered him to cut back on food and clothing.

古文：每霖雨积雪，遣腹心左右周行闾巷，视贫困家及有流离道路，以米密加振赐，人十石。
现代文：每到雨雪不住的天气，就派心腹左右巡视街巷，看到贫困人家和流浪在道路上的，便私下用米赈济，每人十石。
English: Whenever it rains or snows, they send their henchmen to patrol the streets and lanes. When they see poor people and homeless people on the roads, they privately use rice to feed them, ten kilos per person.

古文：又出主衣绢帛，年常多作襦裤，各三千领，冬月以施寒者，不令人知。
现代文：又拿出宫中的布帛，每年缝制衣裤，各三千件，冬天用来施舍给无衣的人，而不让知道是他做的事。
English: He also took out the palace cloths, and each year he sewed three thousand pairs of trousers, which he used in the winter to give alms to the naked, without letting it be known that he was the one who did it.

古文：若死亡无可敛，则爲备棺槥。
现代文：如果有人死了无棺收殓，就施舍棺木。
English: If someone dies without a coffin, give them a coffin.

古文：每闻远近百姓赋役勤苦，辄敛容变色。
现代文：每听到远近百姓遭受赋税劳役之苦，总会变得面色沉重。
English: Whenever I hear that people near and far are suffering from tax and labor service, my face always becomes heavy.

古文：常以户口未实，重于劳扰。吴兴郡屡以水灾不熟，有上言当漕大渎以泻浙江。
现代文：常因为户籍与实际不符，民间负担过重而不安，吴兴郡屡次因受水灾歉收，有人上奏朝廷说应挖掘河道泄洪入浙江。
English: Often because the household registration does not match the reality, the people are overburdened and uneasy. Wuxing County has repeatedly suffered poor harvests due to floods. Some people appealed to the imperial court saying that the river channel should be excavated to flood into Zhejiang.

古文：中大通二年春，诏遣前交州刺史王弈假节发吴、吴兴、信义三郡人丁就役。
现代文：中大通二年春天，皇帝派前交州刺史王弈持符节征发吴、吴兴、信义三郡民丁去服役。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhongdazhong, the emperor sent the former Jiaozhou scribe Wang Yi to conscript Wu, Wu Xing, and Xinyi Mingting from the three counties to serve.

古文：太子上疏曰： 伏闻当遣王弈等上东三郡人丁开漕沟渠，导泄震泽，使吴兴一境无复水灾，暂劳永逸，必获后利。
现代文：太子上疏说： 听说现在派王弈等上东三郡民丁开挖河道，往震泽泄洪，这样吴郡一处就不会再有水灾，可以一劳永逸，以后一定能获利。
English: The crown prince said, "I heard that Wang Yi and other people from the three counties in the upper east are now digging river channels and releasing floods to the epicenter, so that there will be no more floods in Wuxi County, which can be once and for all, and they will definitely be able to make profits in the future.

古文：未萌难睹，窃有愚怀。所闻吴兴累年失收，人颇流移，吴郡十城，亦不全熟，唯信义去秋有稔，复非恒役之民。
现代文：但有些事情没有露苗头时是难以发现的，我有一点儿不成熟的看法：听说吴兴屡年歉收，人民多外出逃荒，吴郡十城，也不是全都保收，只有信义郡去年秋天收成还好，也不是能经常多加役使的。
English: But some things are difficult to find when they are not in the bud. I have a bit of an immature view: I heard that Wu Xing has had poor harvests for many years, and people often go out to escape the famine. The ten cities in Wuxi County are not all guaranteed to be received. Only Xinyi County had a good harvest last autumn, and it is not always possible to increase the number of laborers.

古文：即日东境谷稼犹贵，劫盗屡起，在所有司，皆不闻奏。
现代文：眼下东部粮价腾贵，劫盗经常出现，当地官员，都不上报。
English: At the moment, grain prices in the east are skyrocketing, robberies often occur, and local officials do not report them.

古文：今征戍未归，强丁疏少，此虽小举，窃恐难合。
现代文：如今前方出征的人还没回来，强壮劳力稀少，此次工程虽然不大，我怕也难以完成。
English: Now the people who went to the front have not returned, strong labor is scarce, although this project is not big, I am afraid it will be difficult to complete.

古文：吏一呼门，动爲人蠹。
现代文：差吏一敲门，就成为危害民众的虎狼。
English: As soon as a police officer knocks on the door, he becomes a wolf that endangers the public.

古文：又出丁之处，远近不一，比得齐集，已妨蚕农。
现代文：再者出丁役之处，远近不一，等到集合起来，就耽误了蚕事与农耕。
English: In addition, the place where the ding comes out is far and near, and when it is assembled, it will delay the sericulture and farming.

古文：去年称爲丰岁，公私未能足食，如复今兹失业，虑恐爲弊更深。
现代文：去年被称为丰年，官府与民间的粮食尚且都还不足，如果再加上现今生活无着，恐怕就会产生更大弊端。
English: Last year was called a bumper year, and both the government and the people are still short of food. If this is added to the fact that there is nothing to eat now, I am afraid it will create even greater drawbacks.

古文：且草窃多伺候人间虚实，若善人从役，则抄盗弥增。
现代文：况且那些不法之徒都在窥探虚实，如果良民都去服役，那么盗贼就会更多起来。
English: Moreover, those lawless people are spying on the truth. If the good people all go to serve, then the thieves will increase.

古文：吴兴未受其益，内地已离其弊。
现代文：这样吴兴还未受益，内地已先蒙受其害。
English: In this way, Wu Xing has yet to benefit, and the mainland has already suffered from it.

古文：不审可得权停此功，待优实以不？ 
现代文：不知是否可以先放一放这项工程，等到以后富足了再说？ 
English: I don't know if it's possible to put this project on hold for a while and wait until we're rich.

古文：武帝优诏以喻焉。
现代文：武帝开恩下诏照他的意见办理。
English: Emperor Wu was so grateful that he ordered the matter to be handled according to his opinion.

古文：太子孝谨天至，每入朝，未五鼓便守城门开。
现代文：太子孝心诚笃，每当入朝，不到五更守在皇城边等开宫门。
English: Prince Xiao Tong was particularly cautious and dutiful. Every morning, he would wait outside the city gate until the fifth bugle was sounded.

古文：东宫虽燕居内殿，一坐一起，恒向西南面台。
现代文：东宫虽在皇宫深处，他的一起一坐，总是面向西南父皇坐朝之处。
English: Although the East Palace is in the depths of the Imperial Palace, he always sits facing the southwest, where his father, the Emperor, sits.

古文：宿被召当入，危坐达旦。
现代文：如夜里接到召见的圣旨，就整夜端坐等到天亮。
English: If he is summoned in the middle of the night, he should sit up all night until dawn.

古文：三年三月，游后池，乘雕文舸摘芙蓉。姬人荡舟，没溺而得出，因动股，恐贻帝忧，深诫不言，以寝疾闻。
现代文：中大通三年三月，在后宫池塘游玩，乘坐画舫采莲，宫女划船不慎，使太子落水，救起后已经伤了股骨，怕武帝知道了担忧，太子严令不许声张，只以偶然患病上报。
English: In March of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was playing in the harem pond, taking a picture raft to pick up lotuses. The concubine rowed carelessly, causing the prince to fall into the water. After being rescued, he had injured his femur. He was worried that Emperor Wu might find out. The prince was strictly ordered not to make a statement, and only reported the illness as accidental.

古文：武帝敕看问，辄自力手书啓。
现代文：武帝派人来探问，他总是硬撑着亲自动笔回奏病情。
English: Emperor Wu sent someone to inquire, and he always reluctantly held up his autopen to play back the illness.

古文：及稍笃，左右欲啓闻，犹不许，曰： 云何令至尊知我如此恶。 
现代文：等到病情渐重，左右要报告皇上，他还不让，说： 为什么要让圣上知道我已病得这么重呢？ 
English: When his illness became more serious, he wanted to inform the emperor, but he would not let him, saying: "Why should I let the emperor know that I am so seriously ill?

古文：因便呜咽。
现代文：说着就难过地呜咽起来。
English: As she spoke, she began to sob inconsolably.

古文：四月乙巳，暴恶，驰啓武帝，比至已薨，时年三十一。
现代文：四月初六，突然病危，宫内赶紧启奏武帝，武帝赶到时已经死去，时年三十一岁。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, suddenly ill and in critical condition, the imperial court hurriedly performed Emperor Wu. By the time Emperor Wu arrived, he had already died, at the age of 31.

古文：帝临哭尽哀，诏敛以衮冕，諡曰昭明。
现代文：武帝在他身边痛哭不止，下诏用帝王的衣冠入殓，谥为昭明。
English: Emperor Wu wept bitterly beside him, and then he used the emperor's crown to enter the coffin, and the coffin was carried away.

古文：五月庚寅，葬安宁陵，诏司徒左长史王筠爲哀册文。
现代文：五月二十一，葬在安宁陵。下诏令司徒左长史王筠撰写哀悼文。
English: On May 21, he was buried in the Anning Mausoleum. The following edict ordered the head of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards, Shi Wangtao, to write a condolence letter.

古文：朝野惋愕，都下男女奔走宫门，号泣满路。四方甿庶及疆徼之人，闻丧皆哀恸。
现代文：朝野上下都为太子的死感到震惊，京城中男女老幼都跑到宫门外致哀，哭声满路，四方庶民及边疆各族民众，听到丧讯都很悲痛。
English: Everyone in the capital was shocked by the death of the prince. Men, women and children ran to the gates of the palace to mourn, and the streets were full of crying. People from all over the country and from all ethnic groups in the border regions were saddened to hear the news of the death.

古文：太子性仁恕，见在宫禁防捉荆子者，问之，云以清道驱人。
现代文：太子性情仁慈宽厚，曾在宫内见到手执荆棍的人，问他们，回答说是用它清道赶人。
English: The prince's disposition is kind and generous. He once saw someone in the palace who was holding a thorny stick. When he asked them about it, they replied that they were using it to drive people away.

古文：太子恐复致痛，使捉手板代之。
现代文：太子怕荆棍打人太疼，使他们换成小板子。
English: The prince was afraid that it would hurt too much to beat people with a stick, so he made them change to small boards.

古文：频食中得蝇虫之属，密置柈边，恐厨人获罪，不令人知。
现代文：他屡次在饭菜中发现苍蝇小虫一类，都悄悄拨到盘子边上，怕厨人因此获罪，不让人知道。
English: He has repeatedly found flies and other small insects in his food, which he has quietly pushed to the edge of the plate, not letting anyone know for fear of offending the cook.

古文：又见后合小儿摊戏，后属有狱牒摊者法，士人结流徒，庶人结徒。
现代文：又见后门外有小孩玩赌钱游戏，政府有禁赌法令，士族聚赌的流放，百姓聚赌的判徒刑。
English: I also saw that there were children playing gambling games outside the back door, the government had a ban on gambling, the banishment of the nobles for gambling, and the imprisonment of the common people for gambling.

古文：太子曰： 私钱自戏，不犯公物，此科太重。 
现代文：太子说： 用自己的钱赌着玩，又不侵犯公物，这样的刑法太重。 
English: The crown prince said: Using one's own money to gamble without violating public property is too severe a criminal offense.

古文：令注刑止三岁，士人免官。
现代文：下令重新注明这个律条，改为百姓徒刑三年以内，士族免官。
English: An order was issued to re-specify this provision, changing it to a three-year term of imprisonment for commoners and removal from office for soldiers.

古文：欢字孟孙，位云麾将军、江州刺史。
现代文：法令规定应处死的一律减为无期徒刑，自此以下都减刑一半。
English: The decree stipulates that all death sentences shall be commuted to life imprisonment, and all sentences below this shall be commuted by half.

古文：薨，諡安王。
现代文：太子共著有文集二十卷，又集古今典章诰命文章，为它们写《正序》十卷，选五言诗的精华为《英华集》二十卷，《文选》三十卷。
English: The prince is the author of 20 volumes of anthologies, as well as a collection of articles on ancient and modern ceremonies, for which he wrote 10 volumes of the "Sequence," 20 volumes of the "Yinghua Collection" and 30 volumes of the "Selected Essays."

古文：子栋嗣。栋字元吉。
现代文：萧栋字元吉。
English: Xiaodong, the character of Yuanji.

古文：及简文见废，侯景奉以爲主。
现代文：简文帝被废黜之后，侯景拥戴他当皇帝。
English: After Emperor Jianwen was deposed, Hou Jing supported him as emperor.

古文：栋方与妃张氏锄葵，而法驾奄至，栋惊不知所爲，泣而升辇。
现代文：当时，萧栋正在和妻子张氏在地里锄葵菜，而皇帝乘坐的马车突然来到，萧栋大惊，不知为什么，便哭泣着上了车。
English: At that time, Xiao Dong and his wife, Ms. Zhang, were harvesting sunflower seeds in the field, and the carriage in which the emperor was riding suddenly arrived. Xiao Dong was shocked and, for some reason, cried as he got on the carriage.

古文：及即位，升武德殿，欻有回风从地涌起，翻飞华盖，径出端门，时人知其不终。
现代文：当他即位时，登上武德殿，突然有一股旋风从地上涌起，吹翻了皇帝使用的华盖，一直把华盖吹出了端门。当时人因而知道萧栋不可能终居帝位。
English: When he ascended to the throne and ascended the Wude Hall, a whirlwind suddenly surged from the ground, blowing over the flower cover used by the emperor and blowing the flower cover out of the main door. At that time, people knew that Xiaodong could not stay on the throne forever.

古文：于是年号天正，追尊昭明太子曰昭明皇帝，安王爲安皇帝，金华敬妃蔡氏爲敬皇后，太妃王氏爲皇太后，妃爲皇后。
现代文：于是定年号为天正，追尊祖父昭明太子为昭明皇帝，父亲安王为安皇帝，金华敬妃蔡氏为敬皇后，太妃王氏为皇太妃，王妃为皇后。
English: As a result, the fixed year was Tensho, the posthumous name of his grandfather, Prince Shomei, was Emperor Shomei, his father, King An, was Emperor An, Princess Jinhua, Princess Cai, was Empress Jing, Princess Wang, was Empress Dowager, and Princess Wang, was Empress Dowager.

古文：未几，行禅让礼，栋封淮阴王，及二弟桥、樛，并锁于密室。
现代文：不久，举行了禅让的礼节，萧栋被封为淮阴王，他和两位弟弟萧桥、萧賬都被锁在密室中。
English: Soon after, the ceremony of Zen Zhen was held, Xiao Dong was crowned King of Huaiyin, and he and his two younger brothers Xiao Qiao and Xiao Jian were locked in a secret room.

古文：景败走，兄弟相扶出，逢杜崱于道，崱去其锁。
现代文：侯景失败逃走之后，萧栋兄弟相扶着走出密室，在路上遇见了杜山则，杜山则给他们去掉了枷锁。
English: After Hou Jing failed to escape, the Xiaodong brothers supported each other and walked out of the secret room. On the way, they met Du Shan, who removed their shackles.

古文：弟曰： 今日免横死矣。 
现代文：萧栋的弟弟说： 今天免于遭到横死了！ 
English: Xiaodong's younger brother said, "I was spared from being killed today!

古文：栋曰： 倚伏难知，吾犹有惧。 
现代文：萧栋说： 祸福难知，我心里还十分害怕。 
English: Xiaodong said, "It's hard to know whether it's good or bad. I'm still very scared.

古文：初，王僧辩之爲都督，将发，谘元帝曰： 平贼之后，嗣君万福，未审有何仪注？ 
现代文：起先，王僧辩当都督，准备发兵之前，问梁元帝说： 讨平贼寇之后，继位的国君健在的话，不知用什么礼节对待？ 
English: At first, Wang Sangye, when he was the governor of the capital, before preparing to send troops, asked Emperor Liang Yuan: "If the emperor who succeeds to the throne is still alive after fighting the bandits, I don't know what kind of etiquette should be used to treat him?

古文：帝曰： 六门之内，自极兵威。 
现代文：元帝说： 六门之内，尽情显扬兵威。 
English: Emperor Yuan said, "Within six gates, I will display my military prowess to the fullest."

古文：僧辩曰： 平贼之谋，臣爲己任，成济之事，请别举人。 
现代文：王僧辩说： 平贼的计谋，臣以为己任，其他事情，请另挑选人。 
English: The king and the monk argued, "As it is the duty of the vassal to plot against the thief, please choose someone else for other matters."

古文：由是帝别敕宣猛将军朱买臣使行忍酷。
现代文：于是，元帝另行命令宣威将军朱买臣进行残忍的屠杀。
English: As a result, Emperor Yuan separately ordered General Xuanzang Zhu to carry out a brutal massacre.

古文：会简文已被害，栋等与买臣遇见，呼往船共饮，未竟，并沈于水。
现代文：这时，因简文帝已被杀害，萧栋等人和朱买臣相遇，朱买臣便装出十分热情，请他们到船上，设宴共饮。
English: At this time, because Emperor Jianwen had already been killed, Xiao Dong and others met Zhu Mai Sheng. Zhu Mai Sheng was very enthusiastic and invited them to the ship to have a banquet and drink together.

古文：河东王誉字重孙，普通二年，封枝江县公。
现代文：酒未喝完，朱买臣就让人把萧栋兄弟全沉入水中。河东王萧誉字重孙，普通二年被封为枝江县公。
English: Before the wine was finished, Zhu Mai Sheng had the Xiao Dong brothers completely submerged in the water. The eldest grandson of the King of Hedong, Xiao Ying, was made the Duke of Shejiang County two years later.

古文：中大通三年，改封河东郡王。
现代文：中大通三年，改封为河东郡王。
English: In the third year of the junior high school, it was renamed as the King of Hedong County.

古文：累迁南中郎将、湘州刺史。
现代文：累迁任南中郎将、湘州刺史。
English: He was successively transferred to the post of Minami-churoshogun and became the shogun of Honshu.

古文：未几，侯景寇建邺，誉入援，至青草湖，台城没，有诏班师。
现代文：不久，侯景入侵建邺，萧誉领兵入京救援，到达青草湖时，台城陷落，皇帝下诏书让他回兵。
English: Soon after, Hou Jing invaded Jianye, and Xiao Rong led the troops to rescue Beijing. When he reached Qingcao Lake, Taicheng fell, and the emperor issued an edict to let him return to the army.

古文：誉还湘镇。
现代文：萧誉回到湘州镇守。
English: Xiao Rong returned to the township of Xiangzhou.

古文：时元帝军于武城，新除雍州刺史张缵密报元帝曰： 河东起兵，岳阳聚米，将来袭江陵。 
现代文：当时，梁元帝驻军于武城，新任命的雍州刺史张缵密报梁元帝说： 河东王起兵，在岳阳存积了许多大米，准备要来攻打江陵。 
English: At that time, Emperor Liang Yuan stationed his army in Wucheng. Zhang Jimi, the newly appointed chief historian of Yongzhou, reported to Emperor Liang Yuan that: The king of Hedong raised an army and stored a lot of rice in Yueyang in preparation for attacking Jiangling.

古文：元帝甚惧，沈米断缆而归。
现代文：梁元帝十分恐惧，便把大米沉入水中，割断船缆以后回兵。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was very afraid, so he sank the rice into the water, cut the boat cable and then returned to the army.

古文：因遣谘议周弘直至誉所督其粮衆。
现代文：于是，梁元帝派谘议官周弘直到萧誉那时去要粮食。
English: As a result, Emperor Liang Yuan sent Zhou Hong, an advisory official until then, to ask for grain.

古文：誉曰： 各自军府，何忽隶人。 
现代文：萧誉说： 各自管辖军府，怎么突然跑来役使别人呢！ 
English: Xiao Yu said, "Each of you is in charge of your own military headquarters. How can you suddenly come to serve others?"

古文：使三反，誉并不从。
现代文：使者连续派去三次，萧誉都不肯听从。
English: The envoys were sent three times in succession, but Xiaoyu refused to listen.

古文：元帝大怒，遣世子方等征之，反爲誉败死。
现代文：梁元帝大怒，便派世子萧方等前去讨伐，结果反被萧誉打败而死。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was so angry that he sent his heir, Xiao Fang, to fight, but he was defeated and died.

古文：又令信州刺史鲍泉讨誉，并陈示祸福。
现代文：梁元帝又让信州刺史鲍泉来攻打萧誉，并且向他陈述利害关系。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan also asked the Shinshu statesman, Bao Quan, to attack Xiao Rong and explain the stakes to him.

古文：誉谓曰： 欲前即前，无所多说。 
现代文：萧誉说： 要打就上前来，不必多说。 
English: Xiao You said, "If you want to fight, just come forward, there's no need to say more."

古文：泉军于石椁寺，誉逆击不利而还。
现代文：鲍泉的军队驻扎在石木郭寺，萧誉迎击不胜而回。
English: Bao Quan's army was stationed at Shijigu Temple, but was repulsed.

古文：泉进军橘洲，誉攻之又见败。
现代文：鲍泉进军至橘洲，萧誉再次发动进攻，又被打败了。
English: Bao Quan marched to Tangerine Island, Xiao You launched another attack, and was defeated again.

古文：于是遂围之。
现代文：于是，鲍泉带军队围住湘州。
English: As a result, Bao Quan surrounded Xiangzhou with his army.

古文：誉幼而骁勇，马上用弩，兼有胆气，能抚士卒，甚得衆心。
现代文：萧誉自幼便十分勇敢，在马上使用弓弩作战，又很有胆量，他善于安抚士卒，很得人心。
English: Xiao Rong was very brave since he was a child. He used a bow and arrow to fight on horseback. He was also very courageous. He was good at pacifying soldiers and was very popular.

古文：元帝又遣领军王僧辩代鲍泉攻誉。
现代文：梁元帝又派领军王僧辩代替鲍泉攻打萧誉。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan also sent the leader of the army, Wang Sofen, to attack Xiaoyu in place of Bao Quan.

古文：誉将溃围而出，会其麾下将慕容华引僧辩入城，遂被执。
现代文：萧誉正准备突围而去，正值他的部将慕容华领着王僧辩进城，于是他被活捉了。
English: Xiao Yu was preparing to break out of the encirclement when his general, Murong Hua, led Wang Sangye into the city, and he was captured alive.

古文：谓守者曰： 勿杀我，得一见七官，申此谗贼，死无恨。 
现代文：萧誉对看守他的人说： 不要杀我，让我去见七官，申说一下谗贼的罪状，死而无恨！ 
English: Xiao You said to his guards, "Don't kill me, let me go to the seven officials and tell them about the crime of being a thief. I will die without hatred!"

古文：主者曰： 奉令不许。 
现代文：主将说： 奉命不许领见。 
English: The captain said, "I've been ordered not to let you see it."

古文：遂斩首，送荆镇。
现代文：于是将萧誉斩首，首级送往荆州。
English: As a result, Xiao Yuan was beheaded and his head was sent to Jingzhou.

古文：元帝返其首以葬焉。
现代文：梁元帝又把首级送回湘州埋葬。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan also sent the head back to Hunan for burial.

古文：初，誉之将败，引镜照面，不见其头。
现代文：起先，萧誉将失败时，取来镜子照脸，却看不见头。
English: At first, when Xiao Rong was about to fail, he took out a mirror to look at his face, but he couldn't see his head.

古文：又见长人盖屋，两手据地噉其脐。
现代文：又见有位长人遮住屋子，两手撑在地上咬他的肚脐。
English: He also saw an elderly man covering the house, with his hands on the ground, biting his navel.

古文：又见白狗大如驴，从城出，不知所在。
现代文：又见到有白狗大得像驴，从城内走出，不知到哪儿去。
English: And I saw a white dog, as big as a donkey, coming out of the city, and I did not know where it was going.

古文：誉甚恶之，俄而城陷。
现代文：萧誉心里十分厌恶，不久城被攻破。
English: Xiaoyu was disgusted by this phenomenon, and soon the city was captured.

古文：豫章王综字世谦，武帝第二子也。
现代文：豫章王萧综，字世谦，是梁武帝的二儿子。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Simi, also known as Shixian, was the second son of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：天监三年，封豫章郡王。
现代文：天监三年，被封为豫章郡王。
English: After three years as the overseer of heaven, he was named the king of Yuzhang County.

古文：累迁北中郎将、南徐州刺史。
现代文：累迁至北中郎将、南徐州刺史。
English: They were successively relocated to North Zhonglang and South Xuzhou.

古文：入爲侍中、镇右将军。
现代文：又入京任侍中、镇右将军。
English: He also entered the capital as a samurai junior middle officer and general of the town of Zhenyu.

古文：初，综母吴淑媛在齐东昏宫，宠在潘、馀之亚。
现代文：当初，萧综的母亲吴淑媛在齐东昏侯的宫中，她所受到的宠爱仅略差于潘妃和余妃。
English: At first, Xiao Zomei's mother, Wu Shuyuan, was only slightly less favored than Panfei and Yufei in the drowsy palace of Qidong.

古文：及得幸于武帝，七月而生综，宫中多疑之。
现代文：当她得到梁武帝宠爱后，七个月就生下萧综，宫里人大多感到怀疑。
English: When she was favored by Emperor Liangwu and gave birth to Xiao Siming after seven months, most people in the palace were suspicious.

古文：淑媛宠衰怨望。
现代文：吴淑媛宠衰之后，心怀怨恨。
English: Wu Shuyuan harbored a grudge after her favorite faded.

古文：及综年十四五，恒梦一年少肥壮自挈其首对综，如此非一，综转成长，心惊不已。
现代文：当萧综长到十四五岁时，总是梦见有位年青人长得十分肥胖壮实，自己拿着脑袋对着萧综看，就这样不止一次地反复出现。萧综转眼已经成长，他对此心中惊恐不已。
English: When Xiao Zomei was 14 or 15 years old, he always dreamed of a young man who was very fat and strong. He would hold his head and look at Xiao Zomei, and this repeated more than once. Xiao Zomei had grown up in the blink of an eye, and he was terrified.

古文：频密问淑媛曰： 梦何所如？ 
现代文：他经常暗地里问吴淑媛： 这个梦是什么意思？ 
English: He often secretly asked Wu Shuyuan: What does this dream mean?

古文：梦既不一，淑媛问梦中形色，颇类东昏。
现代文：由于不止一次地做梦，吴淑媛就询问有关梦中人的形貌表情，所说的很像东昏侯。
English: As she had had the dream more than once, Wu Shuyuan asked about the appearance and expression of the person in the dream. What she said was very similar to Dong Douhou.

古文：因密报之曰： 汝七月日生儿，安得比诸皇子。
现代文：于是，她秘密地告诉萧综，说： 你是七个月就出生的孩子，怎么能和各皇子相比。
English: Therefore, she secretly told Xiao Siming, saying: You are a child born in seven months, how can you be compared with the princes.

古文：汝今太子次弟，幸保富贵勿泄。 
现代文：你如今已是太子的二弟，只希望能保住富贵，千万不可泄露消息。 
English: Now that you are the second brother of the crown prince, you only hope to retain your wealth. You must not divulge the news.

古文：综相抱哭，每日夜恒泫泣。
现代文：萧综和母亲相抱着大哭，后来，他常常日夜独自哭泣。
English: Xiao Zomei and his mother hugged each other and cried. Later, he often cried alone day and night.

古文：又每静室闭户，藉地被发席藳。
现代文：有时，萧综常在静室中关紧房门，披散头发睡在铺着枯草的地上。
English: Sometimes, Xiao Xicheng would shut the door tightly in the quiet room and sleep with her hair loose on the ground covered with dead grass.

古文：轻财好士，分施不辍，唯留身上故衣，外斋接客，分粗服。
现代文：他轻视财物，喜爱交结士人，不停地施舍钱财，只是保留着身上穿的旧衣服，在外屋接待客人时，也穿粗布衣服。
English: He despised possessions, loved to socialize with scholars, and constantly gave away money. He only kept the old clothes he wore, and when receiving guests in the outhouse, he also wore coarse cloth clothes.

古文：厨库恒致罄乏。
现代文：厨房内库中经常空空如也。
English: The pantry in the kitchen is often empty.

古文：常于内斋布沙于地，终日跣行，足下生胝，日能行三百里。
现代文：他又时常在内室地上铺上沙子，成天光脚在上面行走，脚底生了厚厚一层胝，一天能行走三百里路。
English: He often spread sand on the floor of the inner room and walked barefoot on it all day long. A thick layer of calluses developed on the soles of his feet, and he could walk three hundred miles a day.

古文：尝有人士姓王，以屯踬投告综。于时大乏，唯有眠床故皁复帐，即下付之。
现代文：曾经有位姓王的士人，因为家里困乏而向萧综求告，萧综当时也正是十分贫穷的时候，只有睡床中有顶旧帐子，他当即取下交给王生。
English: Once upon a time, a scholar surnamed Wang complained to Xiao Zomei because his family was poor. At that time, Xiao Zomei was also very poor. The only thing he had in his bed was an old curtain, which he immediately took off and gave to Wang Sheng.

古文：其降意下士，以伺风云之会，诸侯王妃主及外人并知此怀，唯武帝不疑。
现代文：他就是这样屈身交结下士，等候风云变幻的时机。梁朝的诸侯王，妃子们以及许多外人都知道萧综的心思，只有梁武帝仍对他深信不疑。
English: In this way, he bowed down and befriended the corporal, waiting for the opportunity to change the situation. The princes and queens of the Liang Dynasty, as well as many outsiders, all knew Xiao Sam's thoughts. Only Emperor Liang Wu still believed in him.

古文：及长有才学，善属文。
现代文：成年后，萧综颇有才学，善写诗文。
English: After he became an adult, Xiao Zhan had a talent for learning and was good at writing poetry.

古文：武帝御诸子以礼，朝见不甚数。
现代文：梁武帝以礼对待各皇子，朝见的时间不太多。
English: Emperor Liangwu treated each prince with courtesy, and there was not much time for a court audience.

古文：综恒怨不见知。
现代文：萧综总是抱怨自己不被皇帝所知遇。
English: Xiao Zomei always complained that he was not well-known by the emperor.

古文：每出蕃，淑媛恒随之至镇。
现代文：每次到藩地去，吴淑媛总是跟随到藩镇去。
English: Every time she went to the domain, Wu Shuyuan always followed her to the town.

古文：时年十五，尚裸袒嬉戏于前，昼夜无别。
现代文：十五岁那年，萧综还袒裸着身子在吴淑媛跟前嬉戏，日夜没有差别。
English: At the age of fifteen, Xiao Zomei was still playing naked in front of Wu Shuyuan, and there was no difference between day and night.

古文：妃袁氏，尚书令昂之女也。
现代文：王妃袁氏，是尚书令袁昂的女儿。
English: Princess Yuan is the daughter of Shang Shuling Yuan Ang.

古文：淑媛恒节其宿止，遇袁妃尤不以道，内外咸有秽声。
现代文：吴淑媛经常限制他们夫妇一起寝宿，她对待袁氏格外不讲礼，内外均有恶名声。
English: Wu Shuyuan often restricted their couples from sleeping together. She treated the Yuan family with extreme rudeness, earning her a bad reputation both at home and abroad.

古文：综后在徐州，政刑酷暴，又有勇力，制及奔马，暴杀驹犊。
现代文：萧综后来被派往徐州任职时，政令刑罚严酷残暴，他又很有气力，能够制服狂奔的烈马，摔死健壮的马驹牛犊。
English: Later, when Xiao Zomei was sent to Xuzhou to take office, the punishment decreed by the government was harsh and cruel. He was also very strong, able to subdue a galloping horse and kill a sturdy horse yakitori.

古文：常阴服微行，着乌丝布帽。
现代文：他时常换便服暗暗外出，戴黑色丝布帽。
English: He often changes his casual clothes and goes out in the dark, wearing a black silk cap.

古文：夜出无有期度，招引道士，探求数术。
现代文：夜间外出没有规律，招引道士，探求数术之学。
English: There is no rule for going out at night, attracting Taoists, and exploring the study of mathematics.

古文：性聪敏多通，每武帝有敕疏至，辄忿恚形于顔色。
现代文：性情聪明机敏，通晓多种知识，每当梁武帝有诏书信件送到，他便十分恼怒，形于颜色。
English: He was intelligent and quick-witted, and was well-versed in many kinds of knowledge. Whenever Emperor Liangwu received an imperial edict, he would become very angry and lose his temper.

古文：帝性严，群臣不敢轻言得失，凡综所行，弗之知也。
现代文：皇帝性情严肃，群臣不敢轻易在他面前谈论是非得失，所以，萧综的所作所为，他一点也不知道。
English: The emperor was of a serious nature, and the courtiers did not dare to talk about rights and wrongs in front of him. Therefore, he did not know anything about Xiao Siming's actions.

古文：于徐州还，频裁表陈便宜，求经略边境。
现代文：当萧综从徐州回朝之后，多次上表陈述对外扩展的有利条件，请求派他去边境上扩大土地。
English: When Xiao Zhan returned to the DPRK from Xuzhou, he repeatedly presented the favorable conditions for foreign expansion and requested to be sent to the border to expand the land.

古文：帝并优敕答之。
现代文：武帝都用好话来给他答复。
English: Emperor Wu replied with kind words.

古文：徐州所有练树，并令斩杀，以帝小名练故。
现代文：徐州的所有练树，他都下令砍死，这是因为武帝的小名叫练的缘故。
English: He ordered to cut down all the Lian trees in Xuzhou, because Emperor Wu's nickname was Lian.

古文：累致意尚书仆射徐勉，求出镇襄阳。
现代文：他多次向尚书仆射徐勉表示，自己要求出镇襄阳。
English: He repeatedly told Shang Shuxu's servant, She Xu Mian, that he wanted to leave Xiangyang.

古文：勉未敢言，因是怒勉，饷以白团扇，图伐檀之诗，言其贿也。
现代文：徐勉不敢答应他，于是萧综便对徐勉表示愤怒，派人送给徐勉一把白团扇，上面写有《伐檀》诗句，是讽刺徐勉收受贿赂。
English: Xu Mian didn't dare to agree with him, so Xiao Zomei expressed his anger at Xu Mian and sent someone to give Xu Mian a white fan with the poem "Felling Sandalwood" written on it, which was a satire of Xu Mian taking bribes.

古文：在西州，于别室岁时设席，祠齐氏七庙。
现代文：到西州任职时，萧综另找了房屋，在各个节令设酒祭奠齐朝的七庙祖先。
English: When he took office in Xizhou, Xiao Zomei found another house and set up a wine festival at each festival to commemorate the seven temple ancestors of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：又累微行至曲阿拜齐明帝陵。
现代文：又多次换服微行到曲阿，拜谒齐明帝的陵墓。
English: He also changed his clothes several times to visit the mausoleum of Emperor Ming at Qu'a.

古文：然犹无以自信，闻俗说以生者血沥死者骨渗，即爲父子。
现代文：但是，他仍难完全相信，听民间传说用活人的血滴到死者的骨头上，如果渗进去了，就是父子关系。
English: But he still finds it hard to fully believe the folklore that the blood of the living drips onto the bones of the dead, and if it seeps in, it's a father-son relationship.

古文：综乃私发齐东昏墓，出其骨，沥血试之。
现代文：萧综便私自挖开东昏侯的坟墓，取出骨头，用自己的血滴下试验。
English: Xiao Zomei then dug up Dong Wouhou's grave, took out the bones, and tested them with drops of his own blood.

古文：既有征矣，在西州生次男月馀日，潜杀之。
现代文：他认为确实有证据之后，当在西州生下二儿子一个多月时，便将孩子偷偷杀掉。
English: He thought that there was indeed evidence, and when his second son was more than a month old in Xizhou, he secretly killed the child.

古文：既瘗，夜遣人发取其骨又试之，其酷忍如此。
现代文：埋葬之后，夜间又派人挖取孩子的骨头再作试验，他就这样残酷无情。
English: After the burial, he sent someone to dig up the child's bones at night and test them again, he was so cruel and heartless.

古文：每对东宫及诸王辞色不恭逊。
现代文：每次和太子以及各亲王讲话时，言辞神色都很不谦虚。
English: Every time he spoke to the prince and the princes, his tone was very immodest.

古文：尝改岁后，问讯临川王巨集，出至中合，登宏羊车次遗粪而出。
现代文：曾有一次新年过后，他到临川王萧宏家问候，走到中阁时，爬上萧宏的精美的羊车上拉了屎以后才下来。
English: Once, after the New Year, he went to Linchuan Wang Xiaohong's home to say hello. When he walked to the middle pavilion, he climbed onto Xiaohong's exquisite goat cart and defecated before coming down.

古文：居都下所爲多如此者。
现代文：他在京城的所作所为大多这个样子。
English: Most of what he does in Kyoto looks like this.

古文：普通四年，爲都督、南兖州刺史。
现代文：普通四年，萧综被任命为都督、南兖州刺史。
English: In ordinary four years, Xiao Zong was appointed as the governor of the city and the chief historian of Nanxizhou.

古文：颇勤于事，而不见宾客。
现代文：他颇勤于政事，但不会见宾客。
English: He is quite busy with politics, but will not meet guests.

古文：其辞讼则隔帘理之。
现代文：凡是审理诉讼时，便隔着帘子处理。
English: Whenever a lawsuit is heard, it is handled behind closed doors.

古文：方幅出行，垂帷于舆，每云恶人识其面也。
现代文：出行时束着幅巾，垂下帷布遮住车子，他总是说不喜欢人家知道他的模样。
English: He always says he doesn't like people to know what he looks like.

古文：初，齐故建安王萧宝寅在魏，综求得北来道人释法鸾使入北通问于宝寅，谓爲叔父。
现代文：早先，齐朝原建安王萧宝夤跑到魏国，萧综找到一位从魏国来的道人释法鸾，让他回到北方时去通告并问候萧宝夤，称萧宝夤为叔父。
English: Earlier, Xiao Baojun, the King of Jian'an in the Qi Dynasty, went to Wei. Xiao Zheng found a Taoist from Wei to interpret the Fa, and asked him to inform and greet Xiao Baojun when he returned to the north, calling Xiao Baojun his uncle.

古文：襄阳人梁话母死，法鸾说综厚赐之，言终可任使。
现代文：襄阳人梁话的母亲死去，释法鸾劝说萧综，让他厚赠梁话，并说将来可以让他任意派用。
English: The mother of Liang Zhe, a person from Yangyang, died. The interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation of the interpretation.

古文：综遗话钱五万。
现代文：萧综送给梁话五万钱。
English: Xiao Zongshi gave Liang Weiguo fifty thousand yuan.

古文：及葬毕，引在左右。
现代文：梁话把母亲埋葬后，被萧综召来在身边作为心腹。
English: After Liang Zhe buried his mother, he was summoned by Xiao Siming to be his confidant.

古文：法鸾在广陵，往来通魏尤数，每舍淮阴苗文宠家。
现代文：释法鸾住在广陵，经常往来私通魏国，每次经过都住在淮阴的苗文宠家里。
English: Xie Fa Yu lived in Guangling. He often traveled to and from Wei, and every time he passed by, he stayed at the home of Miao Wen Rong in Huaiyin.

古文：言文宠于综，综引爲国常侍。
现代文：释法鸾便向萧综推荐苗文宠，萧综任苗为封国的常侍。
English: He recommended Miao Wen to Xiao Zhao, and Xiao Zhao appointed Miao as his personal attendant.

古文：六年，魏将元法僧以彭城降，帝使综都督衆军，权镇彭城，并摄徐州府事。
现代文：普通六年，魏将元法僧以彭城来归降梁朝，梁武帝让萧综都督众军，暂时镇守彭城，并代理处置徐州事务。
English: Six years later, Wei transferred the former legal monk to Pengcheng to return to the Liang Dynasty, and Emperor Liangwu let Xiao gather all the troops and temporarily keep Pengcheng, and act as agent to deal with Xuzhou affairs.

古文：武帝晓别玄象，知当更有败军失将，恐综爲北所擒，手敕综令拔军。
现代文：梁武帝清晨观察天象变化，知道将要有军队失败、将领损失的情况发生，担心萧综被魏国抓去，便写了手书命令萧综起兵回朝。
English: Emperor Liangwu observed the celestial changes in the early morning, knew that the army would fail and the loss of generals would occur, and feared that Xiao Zomei would be arrested by Wei, so he wrote a handwritten order to Xiao Zomei to raise an army to return to the North.

古文：每使居前，勿在人后。
现代文：并且总是让萧综处于众军之前，不让他落在大军的后头。
English: And always let Xiao Zomei be in front of the army, and do not let him fall behind the army.

古文：综恐帝觉，与魏安丰王元延明相持，夜潜与梁话苗文宠三骑开北门，涉汴河，遂奔萧城。
现代文：萧综害怕自己的举动被梁武帝察觉，便乘自己和魏国的安丰王元延明两军相持之际，在夜间和梁话、苗文宠三骑人马偷偷打开北门，渡过汴河，投奔萧城。
English: Xiao Zomei was afraid that his actions would be noticed by Emperor Liang Wudi, so he took advantage of the fact that he and Wei's Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming's two armies were facing each other, and secretly opened the north gate at night with Liang Zhe and Miao Wencai's three cavalry horses, crossed the Lianghe River, and entered Xiaocheng.

古文：自称队主，见延明而拜。
现代文：萧综自称是梁军的队主，见到元延明后向他作拜。
English: Xiao Zong claimed to be the team leader of the Liang Army, and bowed to him after seeing Yuan Yanming.

古文：延明坐之，问其名氏，不答，曰： 殿下问人有见识者。 
现代文：元延明让他坐下，问他的姓名，萧综不肯回答，只是说： 殿下问一问有没有认识我的人。 
English: Yuan Yanming sat him down and asked him his name. Xiao Simi refused to answer, saying only, "Your highness, ask if there is anyone who knows me."

古文：延明召使视之，曰 豫章王也 。
现代文：元延明召使者来观看，使者说： 这是豫章王啊！ 
English: Yuan Yanming called an envoy to watch, and the envoy said, "This is King Yuzhang!"

古文：延明喜，下地执其手，答其拜，送于洛阳。
现代文：元延明大喜，走下地来拉着他的手，答拜之后，送他到洛阳去。
English: Yuan Yanming was overjoyed and came down to take him by the hand. After bowing, he sent him to Luoyang.

古文：及旦，斋内诸合犹闭不开，衆莫知所以，唯见城外魏军叫曰： 汝豫章王昨夜已来在我军中。 
现代文：天亮时，梁人见萧综的住室各门都紧闭不开，众人不知怎么回事。这时，只见城外的魏军在喊叫说： 你们的豫章王昨天晚上已经来到我们军中了。 
English: At dawn, the Liang people saw that all the doors of Xiao Zhan's living room were tightly closed and could not be opened, and everyone did not know what was going on. At this time, the Wei army outside the city was shouting: Your Yu Zhang Wang came to our army yesterday evening.

古文：城中既失王所在，衆军乃退，不得还者甚衆。
现代文：城中人既已不见了豫章王，众军于是撤退，许多人因而回不了南方。
English: Since the people in the city had already disappeared, King Yuanzhang and his army retreated, leaving many people unable to return to the south.

古文：湘州益阳人任焕常有骓马，乘之退走。
现代文：湘州益阳人任焕，平日乘坐一匹毛色苍白的骓马，他便骑着它退走。
English: Ren Huan, a resident of Yiyang, Hunan Province, usually rides a pale horse, and then rides away on it.

古文：焕脚爲抄所伤，人马俱弊，焕于桥下歇，抄复至。
现代文：途中，任焕的脚被搜查的人打伤了，人和马都十分疲乏，任焕便在桥下休息，这时，搜索的人又来了。
English: On the way, Ren Huan's foot was injured by the searchers. Both man and horse were very tired, so Ren Huan rested under the bridge. At this time, the searchers came again.

古文：焕脚痛不复得上马，于是向马泣曰： 骓子，我于此死矣。 
现代文：任焕脚痛得跨不上马，于是，他流着泪向马说： 骓子，骓子，我死于这里了！ 
English: Ren Huan's feet hurt so much that he couldn't step on the horse, so he said to the horse with tears: Mule, mule, I died here!

古文：马因跪其前脚，焕乃得上马，遂免难。
现代文：马便跪下前腿，使任焕得以上马，终于幸免于难。
English: The horse then kneeled down on its forelegs, allowing Ren Huan to mount and finally survive the ordeal.

古文：综长史江革、太府卿祖恒并爲魏军所禽，武帝闻之惊骇。
现代文：萧综的长史江革、太府卿祖日恒都被魏军抓去，梁武帝知道后大为震惊。
English: Xiao Zong's Changshi Jiangge and Taifuqing Zu Rihong were both captured by the Wei army. Emperor Liang Wu was greatly shocked when he learned of this.

古文：综至魏，位侍中、司空、高平公、丹阳王，梁话、苗文宠并爲光禄大夫。
现代文：萧综到了魏国，被任命为侍中、司空，封高平公、丹杨王。梁话、苗文宠都任光禄大夫。
English: When Xiao Zong arrived in Wei, he was appointed as an attendant, a secretary, a vassal of Gaoping and a vassal of Danyang. Liang Zhe and Miao Wen Zhe were both appointed as doctors of Guanglu.

古文：综改名赞字德文，追服齐东昏斩衰，魏太后及群臣并吊。
现代文：萧综改名为赞，字德文，并用斩衰的丧服为齐东昏侯追补服丧，魏国的太后和群臣都前往吊唁。
English: Xiao Zong changed his name to Zhan, a German word, and used the faded mourning clothes to make up for the mourning clothes of Qidong, the dowager empress of Wei, and the courtiers all went to pay condolences.

古文：八月，有司奏削爵土，绝其属籍，改子直姓悖氏。
现代文：八月，有关官员奏请梁武帝，削除萧综的爵位和封地，断绝他皇室的籍属，把他儿子萧直的姓改为悖氏。
English: In August, the relevant officials petitioned Emperor Liangwu to remove Xiao Zuo's title and fief, sever his royal family affiliation, and change his son Xiao Zhi's surname to Puji.

古文：未及旬日，有诏复属籍，封直永新侯。
现代文：但不到十天，皇帝又诏令恢复萧综的属籍，封萧直为永新侯。
English: However, less than ten days later, the emperor issued another imperial edict to restore Xiao Zomei's status as a member of the imperial family, and enthroned Xiao Zomei as Yongxin Hou.

古文：久之乃策免吴淑媛，俄遇鸩而卒，有诏复其品秩，諡曰敬，使直主其丧。
现代文：过了很久才下令废除吴淑媛，不久即饮鸩毒而死，有诏书让恢复吴淑媛的品级和职位，谥为敬，让萧直主持丧事。
English: It took a long time before he ordered the abolition of Wu Shuyuan, who soon died from drinking poison. There was a decree to restore Wu Shuyuan's rank and position, and Xiao Zhi presided over the funeral.

古文：及萧宝寅据长安反，综复去洛阳欲奔之。
现代文：当萧宝夤占据长安反叛魏朝时，萧综又离开洛阳想去投奔他。
English: When Xiao Baojun occupied Chang'an and rebelled against the Wei Dynasty, Xiao Simi left Luoyang to join him.

古文：魏法，度河桥不得乘马，综乘马而行，桥吏执之送洛阳。
现代文：魏国的法令，过河桥时不准骑马，萧综骑着马前行，被守河桥的官员抓住送往洛阳。
English: According to the decrees of Wei, it is not allowed to ride a horse when crossing a river bridge. Xiao Zhao rode a horse and was caught by the officials guarding the river bridge and sent to Luoyang.

古文：魏孝庄初，历位司徒、太尉，尚帝姊寿阳长公主。
现代文：魏孝庄帝年间，历任司徒、太尉，娶了孝庄帝的姐姐寿阳长公主为妻。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Wei Dynasty, the succeeding governors and captains married Emperor Xiaozhuang's sister, Princess Shouyang.

古文：陈庆之之至洛也，送综啓求还。
现代文：陈庆之前往洛阳时，武帝还给萧综带去信让他回南方。
English: When Chen Qing went to Luoyang before, Emperor Wu also sent a letter to Xiao Siming to let him return to the south.

古文：时吴淑媛尚在，敕使以综小时衣寄之。
现代文：那时吴淑媛还活着，武帝让她把萧综小时候穿的衣服取出来寄给萧综。
English: At that time, Wu Shuyuan was still alive. Emperor Wu asked her to take out the clothes Xiao Simi wore as a child and send them to Xiao Simi.

古文：信未达而庆之败。
现代文：可是，信没有送到而陈庆之兵败。
English: However, the letter was not delivered and Chen Qing was defeated.

古文：未几，终于魏。
现代文：不久，萧综死于魏国。
English: Soon after, Xiao Siming died in Wei.

古文：初，综在魏不得志，尝作听锺鸣、悲落叶以申其志，当时莫不悲之。
现代文：早先，萧综在魏国不得意，曾经写了《听钟鸣》、《悲落叶》诗篇来表达自己的心情，当时人无不替他感到悲伤。
English: Earlier, disappointed in Wei, Xiao Zomei had written "Listening to the Chimes" and "Leaves of Sorrow" to express his feelings. At that time, everyone felt sad for him.

古文：后梁人盗其柩来奔，武帝犹以子礼祔葬陵次。
现代文：后来，梁人偷了他的灵柩送回梁朝，梁武帝仍以皇子的礼节将他附葬于皇陵。
English: Later, the Liang people stole his coffin and sent it back to the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wu still buried him in the imperial mausoleum with the courtesy of a prince.

古文：直字思方，位晋陵太守，沙州刺史。
现代文：萧直字思方，任晋陵太守、沙州刺史。
English: Xiao Zhengyi thought about the way, was appointed as the governor of Jinling Mausoleum, and made history in Shazhou.

古文：会理字长才，少聪慧，好文史。
现代文：萧会理字长才，从小聪明灵慧，喜爱文史。
English: Xiao Hui is a long-term talent in writing, smart and clever since childhood, and loves literature and history.

古文：年十一而孤，特爲武帝所爱，衣服礼秩与正王不殊。
现代文：十一岁时，萧会理成了孤儿，因此特别受到梁武帝的宠爱，给他的衣服、礼仪和品爵都和正王待遇相同。
English: At the age of eleven, Xiao Huili became an orphan, so he was especially favored by Emperor Liangwu. He was given the same clothes, etiquette and peerage as the king.

古文：十五爲湘州刺史，多信左右。
现代文：十五岁时被任命湘州刺史，他总是相信他身边的人所出的主意，行事刘纳因此而经常限制他的行动。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was appointed as the mayor of Xiangzhou. He always believed in the ideas of the people around him, so Liu Na often restricted his actions.

古文：行事刘纳每禁之，会理心不平，证以赃货，收送建邺。
现代文：萧会理心里很不高兴，他设法找到刘纳收取贿赂的证据，将他拘禁起来送往建邺。
English: Xiao Huili was very unhappy in his heart. He managed to find evidence that Liu Na received bribes and detained him and sent him to Jianye.

古文：纳叹曰： 我一见天子，使汝等知。 
现代文：刘纳叹息着说： 我一见到天子，就会让你们知道后果。 
English: Liu Na sighed and said, "As soon as I see the Son of Heaven, I will let you know the consequences."

古文：会理厚送资粮，数遣慰喻。
现代文：萧会理厚送给刘纳钱粮，几次派人前往安慰。
English: Xiao Hui sent money and grain to Liu Na, and sent people to comfort him several times.

古文：令心腹于青草湖爲盗，杀纳百口俱尽。
现代文：同时却让心腹到青草湖扮成强盗，将刘纳全家百口人全部杀光。
English: At the same time, he had his henchman go to Qingcao Lake and disguise himself as a robber to kill all 100 members of Liu Na's entire family.

古文：累迁都督、南兖州刺史。
现代文：后萧会理累升而担任都督、南兖州刺史。
English: Later, Xiao Huili was promoted and served as the governor of the capital and the governor of the southern Luzhou.

古文：太清元年，督衆军北侵，至彭城，爲魏师所败，退归本镇。
现代文：太清元年，萧会理总督众军北侵魏国，到彭城时，被魏军打败，退回本镇。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Xiao Huili, the governor of the northern invasion of Wei, arrived in Pengcheng, was defeated by the Wei army, and returned to the town.

古文：二年，侯景围城，会理入援。
现代文：太清二年，侯景包围了京城，萧会理领兵入京救援。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Houjing besieged the capital, and Xiao Huili led the troops to rescue Beijing.

古文：会北徐州刺史封山侯正表将应其兄正德，外托赴援，实谋袭广陵。
现代文：正值北徐州刺史封山侯萧正表准备接应他的哥哥萧正德，表面上声称前往救援，实际上准备偷袭广陵。
English: At the same time, Xiao Zhengbo, a feudal lord of the mountains in the north of Xuzhou, was preparing to meet his brother Xiao Zhengde. On the surface, he claimed to go to the rescue, but in fact he was preparing to raid Guangling.

古文：会理击破之，方得进路。
现代文：萧会理打败了萧正表，这才得以沿着道路进军。
English: Xiao Huili defeated Xiao Zhengbo, and then they were able to march along the road.

古文：台城陷，会理归镇。
现代文：台城陷落以后，萧会理回到本镇。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Xiao Huili returned to his hometown.

古文：侯景遣前临江太守董绍先以武帝手敕召会理。
现代文：侯景派遣前临江太守董绍先带着梁武帝亲笔手书来召回萧会理。
English: Hou Jing dispatched the former governor of Linjiang, Dong Shaoxian, with a handwritten letter from Emperor Liangwu to recall Xiao Huili.

古文：其僚佐曰： 绍先书岂天子意。 
现代文：萧会理的幕僚们说： 董绍先的书信哪里是皇帝的本意！ 
English: Xiao Huili's staff said: "What is the emperor's real intention behind Dong Shaoshan's letter?

古文：咸劝拒之。
现代文：都劝萧会理拒绝接纳。
English: They all advised Xiao Huili to refuse to accept.

古文：会理用其典签范子鸾计，曰： 天子年尊，受制贼虏，今有手敕召我入朝，臣子之心，岂得违背。
现代文：萧会理采纳了典签范子鸾的计谋，便说： 皇上年纪大了，受制于贼寇，如今既然有亲笔信召我入朝，臣子之心，怎么能够违背呢？
English: Xiao Huili adopted the stratagem of Fan Zixuan, a classic sign, and said: The emperor is old and subject to thieves and robbers. Now that he has personally called me to enter the court, how can he violate the heart of a courtier?

古文：且处江北，功业难成，不若身赴京都，图之肘腋。 
现代文：况且如今身居江北，功业也难以成就，不如亲自前往京都，在天子身边再作图谋。 
English: Moreover, now that I live in the northern part of the country, it is difficult to accomplish my work, so it is better to go to Kyoto in person and make plans around the heavenly son.

古文：遂纳绍先。
现代文：于是接纳了董绍先。
English: So he accepted Dong Shaoxian.

古文：绍先入，以乌幡麾衆，单马遣之至都。
现代文：董绍先进城之后，用一杆黑旗指挥众军，将萧会理单骑送回京都。
English: After Dong Shao advanced to the city, he commanded the troops with a black flag and sent Xiao Hui to Kyoto on horseback.

古文：景以爲司空兼尚书令。
现代文：侯景让萧会理任司空兼尚书令。
English: Hou Jing asked Xiao Hui to take over the post of secretary and secretary.

古文：虽在寇手，每思匡复，与西乡侯劝等潜布腹心，要结壮士。
现代文：萧会理虽然在贼寇的控制之中，总是想着恢复朝廷的大计，他和西乡侯萧劝等人暗中布置了许多心腹，交结壮士。
English: Although he served under the Kuo, he often thought of Kuangfu, and persuaded the western townsfolk to secretly dispatch their close friends and invite warriors.

古文：时范阳祖皓斩董绍先，据广陵城起义，期以会理爲内应。
现代文：当时范阳人祖皓斩了董绍先，占领广陵城起义，打算以萧会理作为内应。
English: At that time, Fan Yang's Zhu Xi beheaded Dong Shaoxian, occupied Guangling City and revolted, intending to use Xiao Huili as an internal response.

古文：皓败，辞相连及。
现代文：祖皓失败，供辞中提到萧会理。
English: Zu Xi failed, and Xiao Huili was mentioned in his confession.

古文：侯景矫诏免会理官，犹以白衣领尚书令。
现代文：侯景假传诏书免去萧会理的官位，但仍让他以白衣的身份担任尚书令。
English: Hou Jing faked an imperial edict to remove Xiao Huili from his official position, but still allowed him to serve as Shang Shuling in his white-robed capacity.

古文：是冬，景往晋熙，都下虚弱，会理复与柳敬礼及北兖州司马成钦谋之。
现代文：当年冬天，侯景前往晋熙，京都兵力虚弱，萧会理又和柳敬礼以及北兖州司马成钦谋议。
English: In the winter of that year, Hou Jing went to Jinxi, Kyoto's military strength was weak, and Xiao Huili consulted with Liu Jingli and North Luzhou Sima Chengqin.

古文：敬礼曰： 举大事必有所资，今无寸兵，安可以动。 
现代文：柳敬礼说： 要办大事时必定要有资本，如今身边没有寸兵，怎么能够行动？ 
English: Liu Jingli said: When you want to do big things, you must have capital. Now there are no soldiers around, how can you act?

古文：会理曰： 湖熟有吾故旧三千馀人，昨来相知，克期响集。
现代文：萧会理说： 湖熟有我的故友旧人三千多人，昨天前来告知，准备确定日期响应集合起来。
English: Xiao Huili said: More than 3,000 old friends of mine who are familiar with the lake came yesterday to tell me that they were ready to set a date to respond.

古文：计贼守兵不过千人，若大兵外攻，吾等内应，直取王伟，事必有成。
现代文：合计敌人的守军也不过一千人，如果有大兵从外部进攻，我们在内部接应，直接拿下王伟，事情必定成功。
English: The total number of enemy defenders is no more than a thousand. If a large number of soldiers attack from the outside, we will respond internally and directly take down Wang Wei, and the matter will certainly succeed.

古文：纵景后归，无能爲也。 
现代文：即使侯景知道后归来，也无能为力了。 
English: Even if Hou Jing knew and came back, there was nothing he could do.

古文：敬礼曰 善 。
现代文：柳敬礼说： 好！ 
English: Yanagi saluted and said, "Good!

古文：于时百姓厌贼，咸思用命。
现代文：当时京城的百姓都厌恶贼军，很想为朝廷效命。
English: At that time, the people of Kyoto were disgusted with the bandits and wanted to serve the imperial court.

古文：建安侯贲以谋告王伟，伟遂收会理及其弟通理。
现代文：但建安侯萧贲把这项计谋报告了王伟，王伟便把萧会理和他的弟弟通理抓住关了起来。
English: However, Jianan Hou Xiao Yao reported this scheme to Wang Wei, who then seized Xiao Huili and his brother Tong Li and locked them up.

古文：应不慧，王薨，至内库阅珍物，见金铤，问左右曰： 此可食不？ 
现代文：当时有位钱塘人叫褚冕，是萧会理的旧交，也被关押在京城监狱中，贼寇审问他有关事情的起因，拷打他数以千次之多，但他始终没有说出。萧会理在隔壁听到声音，远远地说： 褚郎，你不就因为我而致于此吗？但你一定不要说话。 
English: At that time, there was a Qiantang man named Zhen Guan, an old friend of Xiao Huili, who was also detained in the Beijing Prison. The bandits interrogated him about the cause of the matter and tortured him thousands of times, but he never said anything. Xiao Huili heard a voice next door and said from a distance: Zhenlang, aren't you here because of me? But you mustn't talk.

古文：答曰： 不可。 
现代文：王伟杀了萧会理等人，而褚冕到底不服罪，王伟便放了他。
English: Wang Wei killed Xiao Huili and others, but Zhen Guan did not admit his guilt in the end, and Wang Wei released him.

古文：应曰： 既不可食，并特乞汝。 
现代文：萧会理的弟弟通理字仲宣，任太子洗马，受封为祈阳侯，到这时也同时遇害。
English: Xiao Huili's younger brother, Tong Li Zi Zhong Xuan, was appointed the prince to wash horses, and was given the title of preacher. At this time, he was also killed.

古文：他皆此类。邵陵携王纶字世调，小字六真，武帝第六子也。
现代文：邵陵携王萧纶字世调，小字六真，是梁武帝的第六个儿子。
English: Shaoling with Wang Xiaojun, the sixth son of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：少聪颖，博学善属文，尤工尺牍。
现代文：他从小聪明，博学并善于写诗文，尤其善于写书信。
English: He is clever, talented, erudite, writes beautifully, and is better at writing letters.

古文：天监十三年，封邵陵郡王。
现代文：天监十三年，受封为邵陵郡王。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, he was named the king of Shaoling County.

古文：普通五年，以西中郎将权摄南徐州事。
现代文：普通五年，萧纶以中郎将的身份代理南徐州事。
English: In the past five years, Xiao Wei has been acting as the agent of South Xuzhou in the capacity of a middle-ranking general.

古文：在州轻险躁虐，喜怒不恒，车服僭拟，肆行非法。
现代文：他在州中轻佻暴虐。喜怒无常，使用的车驾服饰超越他的身份，横行不法。
English: He was reckless and violent in the state. He was moody, used driving apparel that exceeded his status, and ran amok.

古文：遨游巿里，杂于冢隶。
现代文：他时常在市井中游逛，和仆人们混杂在一起。
English: He often roamed the streets, mingling with servants.

古文：尝问卖夔者曰： 刺史何如？ 
现代文：他曾经询问卖黄鳝的人说： 州刺史怎样？ 
English: He once asked a dogwood seller, "What is the history of the state dogwood?"

古文：对者言其躁虐，纶怒，令吞夔以死，自是百姓惶骇，道路以目。
现代文：那人回答说，刺史浮躁暴虐。萧纶大怒，下令让卖鳝鱼的人吞鳝鱼而死，于是从此后，百姓们心惊胆战，路上相遇也只能用眼色表示自己的心情。
English: The man replied that the goblin was impetuous and tyrannical. Xiao Yao flew into a rage and ordered the eel seller to swallow the eel and die. From then on, the people were terrified, and when they met on the road, they could only express their feelings with their eyes.

古文：尝逢丧车，夺孝子服而着之，匍匐号叫。
现代文：有一次他遇到一辆丧车，便一把夺过孝子的丧服穿了起来，趴到地上号啕大哭着。
English: Once, when he encountered a funeral car, he put on the mourning clothes he had taken from his son and lay down on the ground, wailing and crying.

古文：签帅惧罪，密以闻。
现代文：签帅害怕自己获罪，便秘密地报告了皇帝。
English: Fearful of incriminating himself, the captain secretly reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝始严责，纶不能改，于是遣代。
现代文：皇帝起初对萧纶严加责备，可是萧纶仍不能改正行为，于是便派人去替代他。
English: The emperor at first severely reprimanded Xiao Yu, but Xiao Yu still could not correct his behavior, so he sent someone to replace him.

古文：纶悖慢逾甚，乃取一老公短瘦类帝者，加以衮冕，置之高坐，朝以爲君，自陈无罪。
现代文：萧纶却更加违逆傲慢，他找来一个老头，高低胖瘦很像皇帝，让他穿上袍服戴上皇冠，让他高坐上方，向他朝拜，当作皇帝，自己声称无罪。
English: But Xiao Yao was even more rebellious and arrogant. He found an old man, tall and short, fat and thin, very much like the emperor. He made him put on a robe and a crown. He made him sit up high and bow to him. As the emperor, he claimed to be innocent.

古文：使就坐剥褫，捶之于庭。
现代文：然后就在座位上剥下他的衣服，抓到院子里痛打。
English: He was then stripped of his clothes on the seat, taken into the yard and beaten.

古文：忽作新棺木，贮司马崔会意，以驉车挽歌爲送葬之法，使妪乘车悲号。
现代文：突然他又制作了一具新棺木，把司马崔会意装在里头，用轻车拉着并唱挽歌，就像送葬一样，并让老太婆坐在丧车上痛哭。
English: Suddenly, he made a new coffin, put the Simatli Association into it, pulled it with a cart and sang a dirge, just like a funeral, and let the old woman sit on the funeral cart and weep.

古文：会意不堪，轻骑还都以闻。
现代文：崔会意实在受不了，便骑着轻骑回京都向皇帝报告。
English: Cui Heyi could not stand it and rode back to Kyoto to report to the emperor.

古文：帝恐其奔逸，以禁兵取之，将于狱赐尽。
现代文：皇帝怕萧纶逃走，便派禁兵去把他抓住，准备在监狱中将他赐死。
English: The emperor was afraid that Xiao Yao would escape, so he sent soldiers to capture him and prepare to put him to death in prison.

古文：昭明太子流涕固谏，得免，免官削爵土还第。
现代文：昭明太子流着泪坚决劝谏，这才得以免死，于是免去他的官职，削除爵位回家。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Crown Prince Shōmyō resolutely pleaded with Shō, and only then was he able to avoid death. As a result, he was relieved of his official duties, stripped of his title, and allowed to return home.

古文：大通元年，复封爵。
现代文：大通元年，又恢复了他的封爵。
English: In the first year of the Great Reforms, his knighthood was restored.

古文：中大通四年，爲扬州刺史。
现代文：中大通四年，萧纶担任了扬州刺史。
English: For four years, Xiao Wei served as the Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：纶素骄纵，欲盛器服，遣人就巿赊买锦采丝布数百疋，拟与左右职局防合爲绛衫、内人帐幔。
现代文：他一向骄横放纵，便要将器具服饰搞得十分盛美，他派人到市中赊买锦彩丝布几百匹，准备给身边官员防阁将军制作红衣服和内室的帐幔。
English: He had always been arrogant and indulgent, so he wanted to make the utensils and clothing very beautiful. He sent people to the city to buy hundreds of brocade silk cloths, preparing to make red clothes and inner room curtains for the officials around him.

古文：百姓并关闭邸店不出。
现代文：百姓们都关紧店门不肯出来。
English: The people all closed the shop doors tightly and refused to come out.

古文：台续使少府巿采，经时不能得，敕责，府丞何智通具以闻，因被责还第。
现代文：台阁续派少府到市中采买，过了好些时候也没能买到，朝廷下令严责，府丞何智通把详情报告朝廷，于是萧纶又受斥责而送回府第。
English: The Taigong continued to send the young prefect to the city to buy it, but after some time he was unable to buy it. The court ordered a severe reprimand, and the prefect He Zhitong reported the details to the court, so Xiao Gan was reprimanded and sent back to the prefecture.

古文：恒遣心腹马容戴子高、戴瓜、李撤、赵智英等于路寻目智通，于白马巷逢之，以槊刺之，刃出于背。
现代文：他便时常派心腹马容、戴子高、戴瓜、李撤、赵智英等人在路上寻找何智通，并在白马巷找到了他。他们用槊刺死他，槊刃直透后背。
English: He often sent his henchmen Ma Rong, Dai Zigao, Dai Gua, Li Qi, Zhao Zhiying and others to look for He Zhitong on the road and found him in Baima Alley. They stabbed him to death with a pickaxe, and the pickaxe blade went straight through his back.

古文：智通以血书壁作 邵陵 字乃绝，遂知之。
现代文：何智通用血在墙壁上写了 邵陵 两字后死去，所以知道是萧纶干的。
English: He Zhigang wrote the word "Shao Ling" on the wall with his own blood and died two days later, so we know that it was Xiao Yu who did it.

古文：帝悬钱百万购贼，有西州游军将宋鹊子条姓名以啓，敕遣舍人诸昙粲领斋仗五百人围纶第，于内人槛中禽瓜、撤、智英。
现代文：皇帝悬赏钱百万来求购贼徒，有位西州游军将领宋鹊子开列了凶犯的姓名启奏，皇帝下令派舍人诸昙粲带领内廷卫士五百人包围了萧纶的府第，在内人住宿的槛中捉住了戴瓜、李撤、赵智英。
English: The emperor offered a reward of one million yuan for the purchase of the thieves. Song Zizi, a general of the Xizhou Expeditionary Army, listed the names of the criminals. The emperor ordered the dispatch of Zhu Xi, who led 500 guards of the Inner Court to surround Xiao Xi's residence, and caught Daigua, Li Qi, and Zhao Zhiying in the threshold of the innkeeper's accommodation.

古文：子高骁勇，踰墙突围，遂免。
现代文：戴子高骁勇无比，他越墙突出重围，因而免于被捕。
English: Daizi Gao was so brave that he broke through the wall and evaded arrest.

古文：智通子敞之割炙食之，即载出新亭，四面火炙之焦熟，敞车载钱设盐蒜，雇百姓食撤一脔，赏钱一千。
现代文：何智通的儿子何敞之割下他们的肉烤着吃，又立即将他们载到新亭，四面用火把肉烤得焦熟，何敞之同时用车载了钱和放着盐、蒜，雇百姓吃李撤的肉，吃一块赏钱一千。
English: He Zhitong's son, He Zhangzhi, cut off their meat, roasted it and ate it, and then immediately transported them to Xinting. He roasted the meat with fire on all sides until it was well-done. At the same time, He Zhangzhi used a car to transport money and put salt and garlic on it. He hired people to eat Li Yao's meat, and they were rewarded with a thousand yuan for eating a piece of meat.

古文：徒党并母肉遂尽。
现代文：何敞之的同党们和他的母亲一起将肉都吃光了。
English: He and his mother had eaten all the meat.

古文：纶锁在第，舍人诸昙粲并主帅领仗身守视。
现代文：萧纶被锁在府中，舍人诸昙粲和主帅们领着卫士看守。
English: Xiao Yao was locked in the mansion, guarded by guards led by his subordinates Zhu Yao and his superiors.

古文：免爲庶人。
现代文：皇帝将萧纶免职为庶人。
English: The emperor dismissed Xiao Yao as a commoner.

古文：经三旬乃脱锁，顷之复封爵。
现代文：过了三个月以后才给他脱去锁链，不久又恢复了他的封爵。
English: It was three months before his chains were removed, and his knighthood was soon restored.

古文：后预饯衡州刺史元庆和，于座赋诗十二韵，末云 方同广川国,寂寞久无声 。
现代文：后来，萧纶参加了为衡州刺史元庆和饯行举办的酒宴，他在席上赋诗十二韵，最后两句是 方同广川国，寂寞久无声 。
English: Later, Xiao Yao attended a wine banquet held for the Hengzhou princes Yuan Qing and Min Xing. At the banquet, he composed twelve rhymes, the last two of which were Fang Tong and Guangchuan Guo, Loneliness Long Silent.

古文：大爲武帝赏，曰： 汝人才如此，何虑无声。 
现代文：大受梁武帝赞赏，并说： 你有这样的才干，何必忧虑无声名。 
English: He was greatly appreciated by Emperor Liangwu, who said, "You have such talent, why worry about your reputation.

古文：旬日间，拜郢州刺史。
现代文：不出十日，封他为郢州刺史。
English: Not later than the tenth day, he was awarded the title of "Luzhou stabbing history."

古文：太清二年，位中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：太清二年，萧纶担任了中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Xiao Yu served as the general of the Middle Guard, the Kefu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：侯景构逆，加征讨大都督，率衆讨景。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，又被加封为征讨大都督，带领军队讨伐侯景。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, he was also appointed as the Grand Governor of the conquest, leading the army to fight Houjing.

古文：将发，帝诫曰： 侯景小竖，颇习行阵，未可以一战即殄，当以岁月图之。 
现代文：临出发时，武帝告诫他说： 侯景是个小人，但他颇熟悉行军布阵之法，不可能一战就消灭，应当准备用一段时间来谋取他。 
English: On the eve of departure, Emperor Wu admonished him: "Hou Jing is a villain, but he is quite familiar with the method of marching in formation. It is impossible to destroy him in a single battle. You should be prepared to spend some time to win him over."

古文：纶发白下，中江而浪起，有物荡舟将覆，识者尤异之。
现代文：萧纶从白下出兵，船至江中流时风浪突起，有什么东西在摇荡大船，差点把船弄翻了，有识者都感到奇怪。
English: Xiao Yao sent troops from Baixia. When the ship reached the middle of the river, the wind and waves surged. Something was rocking the big ship and almost tipped it over. People with insight were all surprised.

古文：及次锺离，景已度采石，纶乃昼夜兼道，旋军入赴。
现代文：当他们到达钟离时，侯景却已从采石矶渡过江了，萧纶立即日夜兼程，回军入京救援。
English: When they arrived at Zhongli, Houjing had already crossed the river from the quarry, and Xiao Yao immediately made a day and night trip and returned to Beijing for rescue.

古文：济江，中流风起，人马溺者十一二。
现代文：渡江时，到中流又起风浪，人马被淹死的有十分之一二。
English: When crossing the river, there is a storm in the middle of the stream. Two out of ten people and horses are drowned.

古文：遂率西丰公大春、新淦公大成等步骑三万发京口，将军赵伯超请从径路直指锺山，出其不意，纶从之。
现代文：于是，他率领西丰公大春、新淦公大成等步骑兵三万人从京口出发，将军赵伯超请求让军队走大路直奔钟山，出其不意进攻，萧纶听从了。
English: As a result, he led 30,000 infantry and cavalry from the capital, led by Xi Feng Gong Dachun, Xinyi Gong Dacheng and others. General Zhao Bochao requested that the army take the high road and go straight to Zhongshan to make a surprise attack. Xiao Yu obeyed.

古文：衆军奄至，贼徒大骇，分爲三道攻纶，纶大破之。
现代文：众军突然来到，贼众大惊，分成三路围攻萧纶，萧纶大败敌军。
English: The army suddenly arrived, the thieves were shocked, divided into three siege Xiao Yu, Xiao Yu defeated the enemy army.

古文：翌日，贼又来攻，日晚贼稍退。
现代文：次日，敌军又来进攻，打到天黑时贼军稍稍退却。
English: The next day, the enemy attacked again, and by nightfall, the bandits had retreated slightly.

古文：南安侯骏以数十骑驰之，贼回拒骏，骏部乱，贼因逼大军，大军溃。
现代文：南安侯萧骏带着几十骑追赶，敌人回兵和萧骏作战，萧骏队伍混乱，敌军乘势进逼萧纶的大军，大军溃败。
English: Nan'an lord Xiao Wei chased Xiao Wei with dozens of horsemen. The enemy returned and fought with Xiao Wei. Xiao Wei's troops were in disarray. The enemy took advantage of the situation to advance and force Xiao Wei's large army. The large army was routed.

古文：纶至锺山战败，奔还京口。军主霍俊见获，贼送于城下，逼云已禽邵陵王。
现代文：萧纶在钟山战败后，奔回京口，他军中的主将霍俊被抓获，敌人将他送到城下，逼他说邵陵王已经被活捉。
English: After the defeat of Xiao Yan in Zhongshan, he ran back to Jingkou. The leader of his army, Huo Jun, was captured. The enemy sent him to the outskirts of the city and forced him to say that King Shaolin had been captured alive.

古文：俊僞许之，乃曰： 王小失利，政爲粮尽还京口。
现代文：霍俊假装答应，但却说： 邵陵王不过受了点损失，只因粮尽暂回京口。
English: Huo Jun pretended to agree, but said: Shao Ling Wang only suffered a little loss, and only returned to Beijing temporarily because of the shortage of grain.

古文：俊爲托逻所获，非军败也。 
现代文：我被敌人的巡逻兵所抓获，不是军队失败。 
English: I was captured by an enemy patrol, not a military failure.

古文：贼以刀背驱其髀，俊色不变，贼义而舍之。
现代文：敌人用刀背打他的髀骨，霍俊神色不变，敌人被他的义气所感动而放了他。
English: The enemy hit his shinbone with the back of a knife, and Huo Jun's expression remained unchanged. The enemy was moved by his loyalty and released him.

古文：俊，中书舍人灵超子也。
现代文：霍俊，是中书舍人霍灵超的儿子。
English: Huo Jun is the son of Huo Ling Chao, a scholar in the Middle Kingdom.

古文：三年正月，纶与东扬州刺史大连等入援至骠骑洲，进位司空。
现代文：三年正月，萧纶和东扬州刺史大连等人入京救援，到达骠骑洲，被皇帝晋封为司空。
English: In the first month of the third year, Xiao Yu and the East Yangzhou Jishi Dalian and others entered Beijing to rescue, arrived in Zhangjiazhou, and were promoted to the position of Sikuo by the emperor.

古文：台城陷，纶奔禹穴，东土皆附。
现代文：台城失陷，萧纶逃奔禹穴，东边梁地各州郡都来归附他。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, Xiao Wei fled to Yu'an, and all the counties in the eastern Liang Di came to join him.

古文：临城公大连惧将害己，乃图之。
现代文：临城公萧大连害怕萧纶会杀他，便打算害死萧纶。
English: Lincheng Gong Xiao Dalian was afraid that Xiao Yao would kill him, so he planned to kill Xiao Yao.

古文：纶觉乃去。
现代文：萧纶发觉后便离开了。
English: When Xiao Yao found out, he left.

古文：至寻阳，寻阳公大心欲以州让之，不受。
现代文：到达寻阳时，寻阳公萧大心要将州城让给他，萧纶不肯接受。
English: When he arrived at Xuanyang, Xuanyang's lord Xiao Daxin wanted to give him the state capital, but Xiao Yao refused to accept.

古文：大宝元年，纶至郢州，刺史南平王恪让州于纶，纶不受。
现代文：大宝元年，萧纶来到郢州，郢州刺史南平王萧恪要把州让给他，萧纶又不肯接受。
English: In the first year of Dabao, Xiao Yao came to Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou prince Nanping Wang Xiao Yao wanted to cede the state to him, but Xiao Yao refused to accept.

古文：乃上纶爲假黄钺、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：于是，他们便推举萧纶假黄钺，都督中外诸军事。
English: As a result, they elected Xiao Tong and Huang Qi as military governors.

古文：纶于是置百官，改听事爲正阳殿，内外斋省悉题署焉。
现代文：萧纶便设置百官，改大厅为正阳殿，内外各省都题了名。
English: Xiao Wei then set up a hundred officials, changed the hall to Zhengyang Hall, and all provinces at home and abroad were named.

古文：而数有变怪，祭城隍神，将烹牛，有赤蛇绕牛口出。
现代文：可是，多次发生变异，祭城隍庙神的时候，准备烹牛，有一条赤蛇盘绕牛口而出。
English: However, there have been many cases of mutation. When a temple god was being worshipped and a cow was being prepared for cooking, a red snake coiled around the cow's mouth emerged.

古文：南浦施安幄帐，无何风起，飘没于江。
现代文：在南浦安设幄帐时，不久有风突起，将幄帐飘没江中。
English: When the curtain was set up in Nampo, a gust of wind soon blew it into the river.

古文：于时元帝围河东王誉于长沙既久，誉请救于纶，纶欲往救之，爲军粮不继遂止。
现代文：这时，梁元帝在长沙围困了河东王萧誉已经很长时间，萧誉向萧纶求救，萧纶准备去援救他，但因军粮不足而中止。
English: At this time, Emperor Liang Yuan had been besieging the King of Hedong, Xiao Rong, in Changsha for a long time. Xiao Rong asked Xiao Yu for help. Xiao Yu was ready to rescue him, but stopped due to a shortage of military rations.

古文：乃与元帝书曰： 道之斯美，以和爲贵，况天时地利不及人和。
现代文：于是，他写了一封信给梁元帝说： 道之美者，以和为贵，何况天时地利不如人和。
English: As a result, he wrote a letter to Emperor Liang Yuan saying, "Those who have a beautiful way value harmony, and moreover, the time and place are not as good as people.

古文：岂可手足肱支，自相屠害。
现代文：怎么能够手足肢体，自相残害？
English: How can hands, feet and limbs mutilate each other?

古文：即日大敌犹强，天雠未雪。
现代文：当前大敌强盛，天仇未雪。
English: At present, the great enemy is strong, and the natural enemy has not snowed.

古文：余尔昆弟，在外三人，如不匡救，安用臣子。
现代文：所余我们兄弟在外的，只有三人，如果不去匡救，何必要有臣子。
English: The rest of our brothers outside are only three. If we do not go to the rescue, why do we need a vassal?

古文：如使逆寇未除，家祸仍构，料今访古，未或弗亡。
现代文：如果在逆寇未除之时，家祸仍在发生，访古而律今，没有不亡之理。
English: If a family disaster still occurs when the invaders have not been removed, there is no reason to visit ancient times.

古文：夫征战之理，义在克胜。
现代文：征战之时，意在必胜。
English: When you go to war, you want to win.

古文：至于骨肉之战，愈胜愈酷，捷则非功，败则有丧，劳兵损义，亏失多矣。
现代文：至于骨肉之战，越胜越加残忍，胜也无功，败则有丧，劳兵损义，亏失极多。
English: As for the flesh-and-blood battle, the more victory, the more cruelty, victory is of no avail, defeat is of no avail, labor is of no avail, loss is great.

古文：侯景之军所以未窥江外者，政爲蕃屏盘固，宗镇强密。
现代文：侯景之军所以未即攻打江南之地，正因为藩国屏卫坚固，宗室各镇强密。
English: The reason why the army of Houjing attacked the land south of the Yangtze River was precisely because the screen of the domain was strong, and the towns of the family were strong.

古文：若自相鱼肉，是谓代景行师，景便不劳兵力，坐致成效，丑徒闻此，何快如之！ 
现代文：如果自相鱼肉，这是代侯景出师，侯景可不费兵力，坐享成功，丑类听到这种消息，何等快乐！ 
English: If self-similar fish meat, this is the successor of Houjing, Houjing can enjoy success without military effort, ugly people hear this news, how happy!

古文：元帝复书，陈誉有罪不可解围之状。
现代文：梁元帝写了回信，仍在大谈萧誉之罪大，不能解围的道理。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan wrote a reply letter, still talking about the great sin of bad reputation and the reason why the siege could not be lifted.

古文：纶省书流涕曰： 天下之事，一至于斯！ 
现代文：萧纶读完信后流着泪说： 天下之事，竟然到了这种地步！ 
English: Gao Xuanxin said with tears streaming down his face: How could things in the world have turned out like this!

古文：左右闻之，莫不掩泣。
现代文：身边人听后，无不掩泪而泪。
English: There was no one who did not cry when they heard it.

古文：于是大修器甲，将讨侯景。
现代文：于是，萧纶命令大造兵器甲仗，准备讨伐侯景。
English: As a result, the government has transferred major overhaul weapons, and will send troops to collect housing quotas.

古文：元帝闻其盛，乃遣王僧辩帅舟师一万以逼纶。
现代文：梁元帝听说萧纶军威兴盛，便派王僧辩率领水军一万人进逼萧纶。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan heard that Xiao Yu's army was powerful and prosperous, so he sent Wang Sangye to lead 10,000 sailors to force Xiao Yu to retreat.

古文：纶将刘龙武等降僧辩，纶遂与子踬等十馀人轻舟走武昌。
现代文：萧纶部将刘龙武等投降王僧辩，萧纶便和儿子萧踬等十多人乘轻舟逃往武昌。
English: Xiao Yan led Liu Longwu and others to surrender to Wang Sangyan, and Xiao Yan and his son Xiao Yan and more than ten others fled to Wuchang by light boat.

古文：沙门法磬与纶有旧，藏之岩石之下。
现代文：僧人法磬和萧纶有旧交情，将他藏在岩石下。
English: The monk Fa Yu and Xiao Yu had an old friendship and hid him under a rock.

古文：时纶长史韦质、司马姜伟先在外，闻纶败，驰往迎。
现代文：当时，萧纶的长史韦质、司马姜伟事先在外地，听到萧纶败走的消息，驰马前来迎接。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao's eldest sons Shi Weixian and Sima Jiangwei were out of town in advance. Hearing the news of Xiao Yao's defeat and departure, they galloped to meet him.

古文：元帝复遣将徐文盛追攻之。
现代文：梁元帝又派部将徐文盛追击他们。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan sent his general Xu Wensheng to chase them.

古文：纶复收卒屯于齐昌郡，将引魏军共攻南阳。
现代文：萧纶又收容了一些士卒，屯兵于齐昌郡，准备约魏军一起攻打南阳。
English: Xiao Yan also accommodated some soldiers and stationed troops in Qichang County to prepare for the Wei Army to attack Nanyang together.

古文：侯景将任约袭纶，纶败走。
现代文：侯景的部将任约袭击萧纶，萧纶败走。
English: Houjing's general attacked Xiao Yao at any time, and Xiao Yao fled in defeat.

古文：定州刺史田龙祖迎纶，纶惧爲所执，复归齐昌。
现代文：定州刺史田龙祖前来迎接萧纶，萧纶害怕被他抓去，于是又回到齐昌郡。
English: Dingzhou stabber Tian Longzu came to meet Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao was afraid of being caught by him, so he returned to Wuru County, Qichang County.

古文：行收兵至汝南，魏所署汝南城主李素孝者，纶之故吏，开城纳之。
现代文：当他边收容军队来到汝南时，魏国所封的汝南城主帅李素孝是萧纶的故吏，便开门接纳了他。
English: When he came to the south of Runan to receive the troops, the commander of Runan City, Li Su Xiao, who was appointed by Wei, was a former official of Xiao Yan, and he opened the door to welcome him.

古文：纶乃修复城池，收集士卒，将攻竟陵。
现代文：萧纶便修复城池，收集士卒，准备攻打竟陵。
English: Xiao Yu then repaired the castle, gathered soldiers, and prepared to attack the Mausoleum.

古文：魏闻之，遣大将杨忠、仪同侯几通攻破城，执纶，纶不爲屈。
现代文：魏国得知后，派来大将杨忠、仪同侯几通攻破汝南，活捉萧纶。萧纶不肯投降。
English: After learning of this, Wei sent generals Yang Zhong and Yi Tonghou several times to break through the south of the Ryukyus and capture Xiao Yao alive. Xiao Yao refused to surrender.

古文：通乃卧大鼓，使纶坐上杀之，投于江岸，经日色不变，鸟兽莫敢近。
现代文：侯几通便取来一面大鼓放在地下，让萧纶坐在鼓上，然后杀了他，扔到江岸上，尸首过了几天仍不变色，鸟兽也不敢靠近。
English: Hou Qiantong then took a large drum and placed it underground, letting Xiao Yao sit on the drum, and then killed him and threw it onto the riverbank. The corpse did not change color after a few days, and birds and animals did not dare to approach it.

古文：时飞雪飘零，尸横道路，周回数步，独不沾洒。
现代文：当时雪花飘飘，尸横道路上，但尸体的周围几步之内，都没有雪迹。
English: At that time, snow was falling and the corpse was lying on the road, but there was no snow within a few steps of the corpse.

古文：旧主帅安陆人郝破敌敛之于襄阳。
现代文：萧纶军队的旧主帅安陆人郝破敌将他收殓后运到襄阳。
English: An Lu, the former commander of Xiao Yu's army, defeated the enemy, captured him and transported him to Xiangyang.

古文：葬之日，黄雪雰糅，唯冢圹所独不下雪。
现代文：下葬那天，黄雪纷纷扬扬，惟独萧纶的坟墓一块地方没有下雪。
English: On the day of the funeral, there was a lot of yellow snow, but there was no snow in the area around Xiao Yao's grave.

古文：杨忠知而悔焉，使乙太牢往祭殡焉。
现代文：杨忠知道以后十分后悔，派人以太牢的礼节前往祭祀参加殡葬。
English: Knowing that he would regret it later, Yang Zhong sent someone to attend the funeral with great etiquette.

古文：百姓怜之，爲立祠庙。
现代文：百姓们也十分怜悯他，给他建了祠庙。
English: The people also felt very sorry for him and built a temple for him.

古文：岳阳王察遣迎丧，葬于襄阳望楚山南，赠太宰，諡曰安。
现代文：岳阳王萧鮞派人来迎丧，将萧纶安葬在襄阳的望楚山南，追赠为太宰，谥为安。
English: King of Yueyang, Xiao Yao, sent people to attend the funeral, and Xiao Yao was buried in the southern part of Wangchu Mountain in Yangyang. He was posthumously awarded the title of Dazai (Grand Vizier) and the title of An.

古文：后元帝议追加諡，尚书左丞刘彀议，諡法 怠政交外曰携 。
现代文：后来梁元帝又提议追加谥号，尚书左丞刘说，《谥法》上说： 怠政交外称为携。 
English: Later, Emperor Liang Yuan also proposed the addition of 號, Shang Shuzhong Liu said, "法" said: Lazy diplomacy is called 携.

古文：从之。
现代文：于是便听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：纶任情卓越，轻财爱士，不竞人利，府无储积。
现代文：萧纶为人特别任性，轻财而爱士，不与人争利，府中没有积蓄。
English: Xiao Yao is a particularly capricious person. He loves easy money, does not compete with others for profits, and has no savings in the prefecture.

古文：闻有辄求，既得即散，士亦以此归之。
现代文：他听说有财物便立即去取，取得之后立即分散给人，士人们也因此而归附他。
English: When he heard that there was property, he immediately went to get it. After getting it, he immediately distributed it to people, and the scholars also became attached to him.

古文：初镇京口，大造器甲，既涉声论，投之于江。及后出征，戎备颇阙，乃叹曰： 吾昔造仗，本备非常，无事涉疑，遂使零散。
现代文：起初在镇守京口时，大肆制造兵器盔甲，后来遭到人们的非议，他便将这些器物都投入长江中，当他后来出征时，感到军备物资匮乏时，便感叹说： 我当日修造兵器，本来是准备非常时期使用的，想不到无故而招来怀疑，致使这些物品散失。
English: At first, when he was garrisoning Jingkou, he made a lot of weapons and armor. Later, when he was criticized by people, he threw these items into the Yangtze River. When he went to war later, he felt a lack of armaments and materials, and he lamented: I was building weapons that day, and I was originally preparing to use them during a time of emergency. Unexpectedly, I attracted suspicion for no reason, resulting in the loss of these items.

古文：今日讨抄，卒无所资。 
现代文：今日讨求，却终无资望。 
English: Today we seek, but have no hope of success.

古文：初，昭明之薨，简文入居监抚，纶不谓德举，而云 时无豫章，故以次立 。
现代文：以前，昭明太子去世时，简文帝入居监国，萧纶不认为是因德而举用，却说是 已没有了豫章王，所以轮到他 。
English: In the past, when Prince Zhaoming died, Emperor Jianwen went into confinement. Xiao Yao did not think it was because of his virtue, but said that there was no longer a Prince Yuzhang, so it was his turn.

古文：及庐陵之没，纶觖望滋甚,于是伏兵于莽，用伺车驾。
现代文：当庐陵王去世之后，萧纶更增长了抱怨情绪，于是埋伏军队在草莽中，等候皇帝的车驾到来。
English: When the King of Fuling died, Xiao Yao became even more grumbling, so he ambushed the army in the weeds, waiting for the emperor's chariot to arrive.

古文：太清三年，坚书佐董勋华、白昙朗等以坚私室酝酿，亟有烹宰，不相沾及，忿恨，夜遣贼登楼，城遂陷，坚遇害。
现代文：而事情被台省舍人张僧胤知道了，这个计谋也就泄漏了。萧纶又进献曲阿酒百坛，皇帝赏赐给了宦官们，宦官吃了以后死去了。皇帝心中感到十分不安，增加了卫士，严密警卫皇宫。于是人们传言纷纷，互相猜疑，而萧纶也觉得害怕。
English: But the matter was discovered by Zhang Soyin, the governor of Taizhou Province, and the plot was exposed. Xiao Yao again went to the hundred altar of offering wine. The emperor rewarded the eunuchs, and the eunuchs died after eating it. The emperor felt very uneasy in his heart and increased the number of guards to closely guard the palace. As a result, there were many rumors and mutual suspicions, and Xiao Yao also felt afraid.

古文：弟确。确字仲正，少骁勇，有文才，尤工楷隶，公家碑碣皆使书之。
现代文：梁武帝最终也没能对儿子们进行废黜奖惩，以至皇室发生纷争，被天下人所耻笑。萧纶的二儿子萧确，字仲正，从小骁勇过人，有文学才能，尤其工于楷隶书，公家立碑碣都让他书写。
English: In the end, Emperor Liangwu was not able to depose and reward or punish his sons, so much so that there was a dispute in the imperial family, which was ridiculed by the world. Xiao Yao's second son, Xiao Ji, Zi Zhongzheng, was very brave from an early age, and had literary talent, especially in calligraphy, and he was allowed to write on public monuments.

古文：除秘书丞，武帝谓曰： 爲汝能文，所以特有此授。 
现代文：被任命为秘书丞时，梁武帝对他说： 因为你能文，所以特地授给这个职务。 
English: When he was appointed secretary-general, Emperor Liang Wudi said to him, "Because you can write, I have given you this post specially."

古文：大同二年，封爲正阶侯，复徙封永安。
现代文：大同二年，封为正阶侯，又改封永安侯。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was given the title of Zhengzhuo, and then changed his title to Yongan.

古文：常在第中习骑射，学兵法，时人以爲狂。
现代文：他时常在府第中练习骑射，学兵法，当时人认为他是胡闹。
English: He often practiced shooting on horseback and studied military tactics at the prefectural junior high school. At the time, people thought he was just fooling around.

古文：左右或进谏，确曰： 听吾爲国家破贼，使汝知之。 
现代文：左右有时劝谏，他说： 听我为国家破敌，让你们知道。 
English: He said, "Listen to me, let me defeat the enemy for the country and let you know.

古文：锺山之役，确所向披靡，群贼惮之。
现代文：钟山之战，萧确所向披靡，群贼十分害怕他。
English: In the Battle of Zhongshan, Xiao Jizhen was victorious, and the bandits were very afraid of him.

古文：确每临阵对敌，意甚详赡，带甲据鞍，自朝及夕，驰骤往返，不以爲劳，诸将服其壮勇。
现代文：萧确每次临阵对敌，情绪十分安详，从早到晚，往返驰骋，不感到疲劳，众将都佩服他的英勇健壮。
English: Xiao Zhen every time he faced the enemy, his mood was very calm. From morning to night, he galloped back and forth without feeling tired. The generals all admired his bravery and stamina.

古文：军败，贼使负炮，不之知也。
现代文：军队失败后，敌人让他背着跑，并不知道他是谁。
English: After the defeat of the army, the enemy let him run on his back and did not know who he was.

古文：确因隙自拔，得达朱方。
现代文：萧确找了个机会逃跑，得以到达朱方。
English: Xiao Zhengyi found an opportunity to escape and was able to reach Zhu Fang.

古文：及后侯景乞盟，惮确及赵威方在外，虑爲后患，啓求召确入城。
现代文：当侯景请求和朝廷结盟时，害怕萧确和赵威方在外面，担心成为后患，上奏皇帝请召萧确进城。
English: When Hou Jing asked for an alliance with the imperial court, he was afraid that Xiao Zhengyi and Zhao Weifang were outside, and he was worried about becoming a hindrance. He asked the emperor to call Xiao Zhengyi into the city.

古文：诏乃召确爲南中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：皇帝下诏任命萧确为南中郎将、广州刺史。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Xiao Jizhen as the Southern Middle Steward and the Governor of Guangzhou.

古文：确知此盟多贰，城必沦没，欲先遣赵威方入，确因南奔。
现代文：萧确知道这次盟约多半会反复，台城必定陷落，准备让赵威方先进城去，萧确于是南行。
English: Xiao Zhengyi knew that this time the covenant would most likely be repeated, and Taicheng would certainly fall. He prepared to let Zhao Weifang go to the city first, and Xiao Zhengyi went south.

古文：纶闻之，逼确使入。
现代文：萧纶知道后，强迫萧确进城去。
English: After Xiao Yao found out, he forced Xiao Jizhen to go to the city.

古文：确犹不肯，纶流涕谓曰： 汝欲反邪！ 
现代文：萧确依然不肯听从，萧纶流着泪说： 你想要反叛吗？ 
English: Xiao Jizhen still refused to obey, Xiao Yao shed tears and said: Do you want to rebel?

古文：时台使周石珍在坐，确曰： 侯景虽云欲去，而不解长围，以意而推，其事可见。
现代文：当时朝廷使者周石珍在座，萧确说： 侯景虽说要离开，但却不肯解除长围，以心意推测，其结果可以想见。
English: At that time, the imperial envoy Zhou Shizhen was present, and Xiao Ji said: Although Hou Jing said he wanted to leave, he refused to lift the siege, and speculated in his mind that the result could be imagined.

古文：今召我入，未见益也。 
现代文：今召我入城，未见得有益。 
English: To call me to the city now would not be helpful.

古文：石珍曰： 敕旨如此，侯岂得辞。 
现代文：周石珍说： 圣旨这样宣召，侯爷怎能推辞！ 
English: Zhou Shizhen said, "How can the lord of the manor refuse such a sacred call?

古文：确执意犹坚，纶大怒，谓赵伯超曰： 谯州，卿爲我斩之。
现代文：萧确仍然执意不去，萧纶大怒，对赵伯超说： 谯州，你替我斩了他！
English: Xiao Zhen was still determined not to go. Xiao Zhen was furious and said to Zhao Bochao: Zhangzhou, you killed him for me!

古文：当齎首赴阙。 
现代文：自当提着首级赴朝廷。 
English: He went to the Imperial Court with his head held high.

古文：伯超挥刃眄曰： 我识君耳，刀岂识君。 
现代文：赵伯超举起刀来，望着萧确说： 我认识你，刀岂认识你！ 
English: Zhao Bochao raised his sword, looked at Xiao Ju and said, "I know you, but does the sword know you?"

古文：确流涕而出，遂入城。
现代文：萧确流泪而出，于是进城。
English: Xiao Jing burst into tears and went into the city.

古文：及景背盟复围城，城陷，确排闼入啓。
现代文：当侯景违背盟约又再次围城时，城被攻陷，萧确推门入奏皇帝。
English: When Houjing violated the treaty and besieged the city again, the city was captured, and Xiao Jizhen pushed the door open to usher in the emperor.

古文：时武帝方寝，确曰： 城已陷矣。 
现代文：当时武帝正要睡觉，萧确说： 城已沦陷了！ 
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was about to go to sleep, and Xiao Zhen said: The city has fallen!

古文：帝曰： 犹可一战不？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 还能再作战一次吗？ 
English: The emperor asked: Can we fight one more time?

古文：对曰： 人心不可。
现代文：萧确回答说： 人心已经不行了。
English: Xiao Zhen replied: The human heart is no longer able to do so.

古文：臣向格战不禁，缒下仅得至此。 
现代文：我刚才力战制止不住，缒城下来刚来到这里。 
English: I just couldn't stop fighting. I just came here after coming down from Shicheng.

古文：武帝叹曰： 自我得之，自我失之，亦复何恨，幸不累子孙。 
现代文：梁武帝叹息着说： 天下自我得之，又自我失之，又有什么可恨的！所幸不至于连累子孙。 
English: Emperor Liangwu sighed and said, "What is there to hate in the world if I gain and lose? Fortunately, I will not burden my children and grandchildren."

古文：乃使确爲慰劳文，谓曰： 尔速去谓汝父，无以二宫爲念。 
现代文：于是让萧确写了慰问文书，并对他说： 你快去告诉你父亲，不要以父母为念。 
English: So he wrote a letter of condolence to Xiaojing and said to him, "Go quickly and tell your father, don't think about your parents.

古文：及出见景，景爱其膂力，恒令在左右。
现代文：当萧确走出时遇见了侯景，侯景喜爱他有力气，总是让他留在自己身边。
English: When Xiao Zhen walked out, he met Hou Jing. Hou Jing liked his strength and always let him stay by his side.

古文：后从景仰见飞鸢，群贼争射不中，确射之应弦即落。
现代文：后来他跟随侯景外出，抬头望见老鹰在飞，群贼争先恐后射箭，没能射中，萧确一箭射去，老鹰应弦而坠。
English: Later, he went out with Hou Jing and looked up to see an eagle flying. The bandits scrambled to shoot arrows, but failed to hit it. Xiao Jizhen shot an arrow, and the eagle fell in response.

古文：贼徒忿嫉，咸劝除之。
现代文：贼众又生气又嫉妒，都劝侯景除掉他。
English: The thieves were enraged and jealous of him, and they all advised Hou Jing to get rid of him.

古文：先是纶遣典签唐法隆密导确，确谓使者曰： 侯景轻恌，可一夫力致。
现代文：起先，萧纶曾经派典签唐法隆秘密领萧确出走，萧确对使者说： 侯景为人轻佻，可以用一人之力制服他。
English: At first, Xiao Yao had sent a secret courier to Tang Fallong to secretly lead Xiao Ji away. Xiao Ji said to the messenger: "Hou Jing is a frivolous person, you can subdue him with one's own strength."

古文：确不惜死，欲手刃之。
现代文：我不惜一死，要亲手杀了他。
English: I'd kill him myself if I had to.

古文：卿还啓家王，愿勿以一子爲念。 
现代文：你回去告诉父王，请他不要悬念我这个儿子。 
English: Go back to your father and tell him not to worry about my son.

古文：后与景猎锺山，同逐禽，引弓将射景，弦断不得发，贼觉杀之。
现代文：后来，萧确和侯景到钟山打猎，一起追逐禽鸟时，萧确拉开弓射侯景，弓弦被拉断箭射不出去，被敌人发觉杀死了。
English: Later, when Xiao Zhengyi and Hou Jing went hunting in Zhongshan and chased birds together, Xiao Zhengyi pulled open the bow and shot Hou Jing. The bow string was pulled and the arrow could not go out. He was found and killed by the enemy.

古文：武陵王纪字世询，武帝第八子也。
现代文：武陵王萧纪，字世询，是梁武帝的第八位皇子。
English: Wuling King Xiao Ji, also known as Shixuan, was the eighth son of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：少而宽和，喜怒不形于色，勤学有文才。
现代文：他从小待人宽和，喜怒不形于色，勤奋学习，有文学之才。
English: As a child, he was kind and gentle, never lost his temper, studied hard, and had a talent for literature.

古文：天监十三年，封武陵王。
现代文：天监十三年，受封为武陵王。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, he was given the title of King of Wuling.

古文：寻授扬州刺史。
现代文：不久，任命他为扬州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：中书诏成，武帝加四句曰： 贞白俭素，是其清也；临财能让，是其廉也；知法不犯，是其慎也；庶事无留，是其勤也。 
现代文：中书诏书写成之后，武帝又加写了四句话说： 贞白而朴素，是其清也；临财能谦让，是其廉也；知法不违犯，是其慎也；庶事不拖延，是其勤也。 
English: After the Imperial Rescript was written, Emperor Wu added four more sentences: "To be chaste and simple is to be pure; to be affluent and humble is to be honest; to know the law and not violate it is to be prudent; and not to delay common affairs is to be diligent."

古文：纪特爲帝爱，故先作牧扬州。
现代文：萧纪格外受到皇帝的宠爱，所以一开始就让他当扬州刺史。
English: Xiao Ji was especially favored by the emperor, so at the beginning he was made Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：大同三年，爲都督、益州刺史。
现代文：大同三年，任都督、益州刺史。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as the governor of Iksu Province.

古文：以路远固辞，帝曰： 天下方乱，唯益州可免，故以处汝，汝其勉之。 
现代文：他以路远而坚决推辞不去，皇帝说： 天下正在大乱，惟有益州可免于灾祸，所以将它作为安置你的地方，你一定勉力而行！ 
English: The emperor said, "The world is in great turmoil, but the Beneficent State can be spared from disaster, so you must do your best to make it a place where you can be placed!"

古文：纪歔欷，既出复入。
现代文：萧纪哭泣起来。
English: Xiao Ji began to cry.

古文：帝曰： 汝尝言我老，我犹再见汝还益州也。 
现代文：他出任益州刺史后又入朝朝见，武帝说： 你曾经说我年老，我又见到你回益州了。 
English: After he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, he went to see the emperor again. Emperor Wu said: You once said that I was old, I see you back in Yizhou.

古文：纪在蜀，开建宁、越嶲，贡献方物，十倍前人。
现代文：萧纪在蜀地，开辟了建宁、越辒两地，所进贡的地方特产，十倍于前人。
English: Xiao Ji opened up two regions, Jianning and Yueqi, in Shu, and his tribute of local special products was ten times that of his predecessors.

古文：朝嘉其绩，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他的功绩，加封为开府仪同三司。
English: The Imperial Court commended his achievements and awarded him the title of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji.

古文：初，天监中，震太阳门，成字曰： 绍宗梁位唯武王。 
现代文：当初，在天监年间，有雷击太阳门，上面显出字来： 继承梁位惟武王。 
English: At first, during the years of the Celestial Prison, lightning struck the Gate of the Sun, revealing the words: "Successor to King Liang and King Wu."

古文：解者以武陵王当之，于是朝野属意焉。
现代文：解释的人认为指的是武陵王，于是朝野上下都着意于他。
English: The person who explained it thought he was referring to King Wuling, so the entire court was interested in him.

古文：及侯景陷台城，上甲侯韶西上至硖，出武帝密敕，加纪侍中、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉、承制。
现代文：当侯景攻陷台城，上甲侯萧韶沿江西上，到硖口，取出武帝密诏，加封萧纪为侍中、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉、承制。
English: When Houjing conquered Taicheng, Shangjia Hou Xiaoqi went up along the west of Jiangsu to the Hukou, took out the Emperor Wu's secret edict, and added Xiao Ji as a chamberlain, a false Huang Qi, a military governor, a cavalry general, a second lieutenant, and a subordinate.

古文：大宝元年六月辛酉，纪乃移告诸州征镇，遣世子圆照领二蜀精兵三万，受湘东王绎节度。
现代文：大宝元年六月辛酉，萧纪便写了文书转告各州镇，并派世子圆照带领二蜀之地精兵三万，接受湘东王萧绎的管辖。
English: In June of the first year of Dabao, Xiao Ji wrote a document to convey to all the states and towns, and sent his heir, Yuan Zhao, to lead 30,000 elite soldiers in the land of Ershu to accept the jurisdiction of Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan.

古文：绎命圆照且顿白帝，未许东下。
现代文：萧绎下令让圆照暂时屯守在白帝城，不许他东下。
English: Xiao Yu ordered Yuan Zhao to temporarily stay in Baidicheng and not to go east.

古文：七月甲辰，湘东王绎遣鲍检报纪以武帝崩问。
现代文：七月甲辰，湘东王萧绎派鲍检报告萧纪，说梁武帝已经去世。
English: In July, Emperor Liangwu of Eastern Hunan was reported to have died.

古文：十一月壬寅，纪总戎将发益镇，绎使胡智监至蜀，以书止之曰： 蜀中斗绝，易动难安，弟可镇之，吾自当灭贼。 
现代文：十一月壬寅，萧纪总领各军准备从益州出发，萧绎派胡智监到达蜀地，带了一封信制止他出兵，信中说： 蜀中是斗绝之地，易于动乱难于安定，弟弟可镇守，我自当灭贼。 
English: In November, Ren Yin, Xiao Ji, the commander-in-chief of all the armies, was preparing to set out from Yizhou. Xiao Yu sent Hu Zhixuan to arrive in Shu, and brought a letter to stop him from sending troops. The letter said: Shu is a place of struggle, prone to turmoil and difficult to stabilize, my brother can keep the town, I should exterminate the thieves.

古文：又别纸云： 地拟孙、刘，各安境界，情深鲁、卫，书信恒通。 
现代文：又另在一张纸上写道： 地拟孙权、刘备，各安境界，情深于鲁、卫，书信常通。 
English: He also wrote on another piece of paper: I am Sun Quan, Liu Bei, each of them is safe, I am more affectionate than Lu and Wei, and I often write letters.

古文：二年四月乙丑，纪乃僭号于蜀，改年曰天正，暗与萧栋同名。
现代文：二年四月二十二日，萧纪便僭称帝号于蜀，改年号为天正，暗和萧栋同名。
English: On April 22nd of the second year, Xiao Ji wrote that the emperor's name was Shu, and the year was changed to Tianzheng, which was the same name as Xiaodong.

古文：识者尤之，以爲于文 天 爲二人， 正 爲一止，言各一年而止也。
现代文：有识者加以责难，认为 天 字是 二人 ， 正 字是 一止 ，是说两人都不过各当一年皇帝就完了。
English: People with insight criticized them, saying that the Chinese character for the number of emperors is 二人 (二人) and the Chinese character for the number of emperors is 一止 (一止), which means that if two emperors were to reign for only one year each, the emperor would be finished.

古文：纪又立子圆照爲皇太子，圆正爲西阳王，圆满竟陵王，圆普南谯王，圆肃宜都王。
现代文：萧纪又立儿子圆照为皇太子，圆正为西阳王，圆满为竟陵王，圆普为南谯王，圆肃为宜都王。
English: Xiao Ji also made his sons Yuan Zhao the crown prince, Yuan Zheng the king of Xiyang, Yuan Zheng the king of Jingling, Yuan Pu the king of Nanxi, and Yuan Su the king of Yidu.

古文：以巴西、梓潼二郡太守永丰侯撝爲征西大将军、益州刺史，封秦郡王。
现代文：任命巴西、梓潼二郡太守永丰侯萧扌为为征西大将军、益州刺史，封为秦郡王。
English: He appointed Yongfeng Hou Xiaoqi, the governor of Brazil and the second county of Zizhou, as the general of the Western Conquest, the history of Yizhou, and the king of Qin County.

古文：司马王僧略、直兵参军徐怦并固谏，皆杀之。
现代文：司马王僧略、直兵参军徐怦都坚决劝谏，全被杀害。
English: Sima Wang, a monk, and Xu Yao, a soldier who joined the army, all resolutely advised him, and they were all killed.

古文：僧略，僧辩弟；怦，勉从子也，以谏，且以怦与将帅书云 事事往人口具 ，以爲反于己,诛之。
现代文：王僧略是王僧辩的弟弟；徐怦，是徐勉的侄子。就因为他们进谏，萧纪又拿出徐怦写给将帅们的书信，其中有 事事往人口具 的话，认为这是背叛自己，所以便杀了他。
English: Wang Sangye is the younger brother of Wang Sangye; Xu Xi is the nephew of Xu Mian. Just because they got into a quarrel, Xiao Ji took out Xu Xi's letter to the generals, in which he said that things would change, thinking that this was a betrayal of himself, so he killed him.

古文：永丰侯撝叹曰： 王不克矣。
现代文：永丰侯萧扌为叹息着说： 大王不行了。
English: Yongfeng marquis Xiao Wei sighed and said: The great king is no longer able to do it.

古文：夫善人国之基也，今乃诛之，不亡何待。 
现代文：好人是国家的根基，而今却杀掉他，不亡还等待何时？ 
English: A good man is the foundation of a state. If you kill him now, how long will you wait?

古文：又谓所亲曰： 昔桓玄年号大亨，识者爲谓 二月了 ，而玄之败实在仲春。
现代文：他又对所亲近的人说： 过去桓玄建年号为大亨，有识者说是 二月了 ，而桓玄果然在仲春失败。
English: He also said to people close to him: In the past, Huan Xuan Jian was a tycoon, and people with insight said that it was February, but Huan Xuan really failed in mid-spring.

古文：今年曰天正，在文爲 一止 ，其能久乎！ 
现代文：如今建年号为天正，正字成了 一止 ，还能长久吗？ 
English: Now that the founding year is Tianzheng and the orthography has come to an end, can it last?

古文：丁卯，元帝遣万州刺史宋簉袭圆照于白帝，圆照弟圆正时爲西阳太守，召至，锁于省内。
现代文：二十四日，元帝派万州刺史宋鋍袭击圆照于白帝城，圆照的弟弟圆正这时担任西阳太守，元帝将他召来以后，关进内省。
English: On the 24th, the Yuan Emperor sent the Banzhou assassin Song Zheng to attack Yuan Zhao in the White Emperor's City. Yuan Zhao's younger brother Yuan Zheng was acting as the governor of Xiyang at the time. After the Yuan Emperor summoned him, Yuan Zhao went into introspection.

古文：初，杨干运求爲梁州刺史不得，纪以爲潼州刺史。
现代文：起初，杨乾运请求担任梁州刺史，但未能得到这个职务，萧纪任命他为潼州刺史。
English: At first, Yang Qianyun requested to serve as the governor of Liangzhou, but failed to get the post. Xiao Ji appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：杨法深求爲黎州刺史亦不得，以爲沙州刺史。
现代文：杨法深要求担任黎州刺史也未能得到，而任命他为沙州刺史。
English: Yang Fashen's request to be appointed as the governor of Lizhou also failed to get, and he was appointed as the governor of Shazhou.

古文：二人皆憾不获所请，各遣使通西魏。
现代文：这两人都因没有按照自己的请求任职而心中不高兴，并各自派使者私通西魏。
English: Both of them were unhappy at not being appointed to the post as they had requested, and each sent emissaries to West Wei.

古文：及闻魏军侵蜀，纪遣其将谯淹回军赴援，魏将尉迟迥逼涪水，杨干运降之。
现代文：当听说西魏的军队入侵蜀地时，萧纪派部将谯淹回军救援，魏将尉迟进逼涪水，杨乾运投降了他。
English: When he heard that the West Wei army had invaded Shu Di, Xiao Ji's faction drowned Zou back to the army for rescue. Wei General Yuan was late to force Zou into the water, and Yang Qianyun surrendered to him.

古文：迥即趋成都。
现代文：尉迟便直趋成都。
English: After a short delay, they headed straight for Chengdu.

古文：五月己巳，纪次西陵，军容甚盛。
现代文：五月己巳，萧纪到达西陵，军容很是强盛。
English: In May, Xiao Ji arrived at Xiling, and the army was very strong.

古文：元帝命护军将军陆法和立二城于峡口，名七胜城，锁江以断峡。
现代文：梁元帝命令护军将军陆法和在峡口建了两座城，名叫七胜城，封锁长江拦截峡口。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan ordered the escort general Lu Fa He to build two cities at the mouth of the gorge, called Qixing City, to block the Yangtze River from intercepting the mouth of the gorge.

古文：时陆纳未平，蜀军复逼，元帝甚忧。
现代文：这时，陆纳还未讨平，蜀军又来进逼，梁元帝很是担忧。
English: At this time, Lu Na had not yet been leveled, and the Shu army was advancing again. Emperor Liang Yuan was very worried.

古文：法和告急，旬日相继。
现代文：陆法和告急的文书，在十天之内相继不断。
English: There were several consecutive emergencies within ten days.

古文：元帝乃拔任约于狱，以爲晋安王司马，撤禁兵以配之。并遣宣猛将军刘棻共约西赴。
现代文：元帝便将任约从监狱中放出起用，任命为晋安王司马，撤了禁兵配给他统率，并派宣猛将军刘和任约一起西上。
English: Emperor Yuan then released Renjo from prison and appointed him as Jinan King Sima, removed the ban on soldiers and assigned him to command, and sent the fierce general Liu and Renjo together to the west.

古文：六月，纪筑连城，攻绝铁锁。
现代文：六月，萧纪修建起连城，攻打并弄断锁江铁锁。
English: In June, Xiao Ji built Qilian City, attacked and broke the iron lock of the Lock River.

古文：元帝复于狱拔谢答仁爲步兵校尉，配衆一旅上赴。
现代文：梁元帝又从监狱中选拔谢答仁担任步兵校尉，配给他一旅军队出发西上。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan also selected Xie Dairen from prison to serve as an infantry lieutenant, and assigned him to lead an army to the west.

古文：纪之将发也，江水可揭，前部不得行。
现代文：萧纪从蜀地准备起兵时，江水浅得露底，前部兵马不能出发。
English: When Xiao Ji was preparing to raise an army from Shudi, the river was so shallow that it was bare at the bottom, and the front-line soldiers and horses could not set out.

古文：及登舟，无雨而水长六尺。
现代文：可是，当登上船以后，没有下雨而江水却突然涨高六尺。
English: However, after boarding the boat, there was no rain and the river water suddenly rose six feet high.

古文：刘孝胜喜曰： 殆天赞也。 
现代文：刘孝胜高兴地说： 这是天助啊！ 
English: Liu Xiaosheng said happily: This is God's help!

古文：将至峡，有黑龙负舟，其将帅咸谓天助。
现代文：船行至峡口时，又有黑龙来载船而行，萧纪的将帅们都说确实是天助。
English: When the ship sailed to the mouth of the gorge, a black dragon came to carry the ship, and the disciplined captains all said that it was indeed God's help.

古文：及顿兵日久，频战不利，师老粮尽，智力俱殚。又魏人入剑阁，成都虚弱，忧懑不知所爲。
现代文：可是当军队受阻日久，多次作战失利，师老粮尽之后，智谋心力都已耗尽，而魏人入侵剑阁，成都兵力虚弱，萧纪忧愁烦闷不知怎么办好。
English: However, when the army was hindered for a long time, lost many battles, and ran out of food, the wisdom and heart were exhausted, and the Wei people invaded Jiange, Chengdu's military strength was weak, and Xiao Ji was sad and worried and did not know what to do.

古文：先是，元帝已平侯景，执所俘馘，频遣报纪。
现代文：早些时候，梁元帝已经讨平侯景，他将俘虏和斩首的情况，频频向萧纪报知。
English: Earlier, Emperor Liang Yuan had already pacified Houjing, and he frequently reported the situation of captives and beheadings to Xiao Ji.

古文：世子圆照镇巴东，留执不遣。啓纪云： 侯景未平，宜急征讨。
现代文：当时萧纪的世子圆照镇守巴东，他将报告消息的人留下不让向萧纪报知，而是向萧纪说： 侯景还未讨平，应当赶快征讨。
English: At that time, Xiao Ji's son, Yuan Zhao, was in charge of Badong. He left the person who reported the news and did not let him report it to Xiao Ji. Instead, he said to Xiao Ji: Houjing has not yet been leveled, it should be levied quickly.

古文：已闻荆镇爲景所灭，疾下大军。 
现代文：已经听说荆州被侯景所灭，迅速领兵东下。 
English: He had already heard that Jingzhou had been destroyed by Hou Jing, and quickly led his troops eastward.

古文：纪谓爲实然，故仍率衆沿江急进。
现代文：萧纪也认为应当这样做，所以仍然率领大军沿江急速东进。
English: Xiao Ji also believed that this should be done, so he still led a large army to rapidly advance east along the river.

古文：于路方知侯景已平，便有悔色，召圆照责之。
现代文：可是到他上路以后才知道侯景已经讨平，便有后悔的想法，他召来圆照责备他。
English: However, it wasn't until he was on the road that he learned that Hou Jing had already settled the dispute, and he had thoughts of regret. He summoned Yuan Zhao to reprimand him.

古文：圆照曰： 侯景虽诛，江陵未服，宜速平荡。 
现代文：圆照说： 侯景虽然被杀，江陵尚未臣服，应当尽快扫平。 
English: Yuan Zhao said: Although Hou Jing was killed, Jiangling has not yet been subjugated, it should be leveled as soon as possible.

古文：纪亦以既居尊位，宣言于衆，敢谏者死。
现代文：萧纪听后，也觉得自己已经登上帝位，便对众人宣布，有敢进谏的就处死。
English: After listening to Xiao Ji, he also felt that he had ascended to the throne, and announced to everyone that anyone who dared to enter the coffin would be put to death.

古文：蜀中将卒日夜思归。
现代文：但蜀中的将领士兵们日夜想要回乡。
English: But the generals and soldiers in Shuzhong want to return home day and night.

古文：所署江州刺史王开业进曰： 宜还救根本，更思后图。 
现代文：萧纪任命的江州刺史王开业进言说： 应该赶快回去以救根本，再考虑以后进取。 
English: Wang Kaiye, the Jiangzhou chief minister appointed by Xiao Ji, said: It is necessary to go back as soon as possible to save the foundation, and then consider the future.

古文：诸将佥以爲然。
现代文：诸将都认为这样做对。
English: All generals agree that this is the right thing to do.

古文：圆照、刘孝胜独言不可，纪乃止。
现代文：圆照、刘孝胜却单独进言说不能回兵，萧纪便停了下来。
English: However, Yuan Zhao and Liu Xiaosheng said separately that they could not return to the army, and Xiao Ji stopped.

古文：既而闻王琳将至，潜遣将军侯叡傍险出法和后，临水筑垒御琳及法和。
现代文：不久听说王琳将到，便秘密地派将军侯睿从险道绕到陆法和军队的后方，临水修建城垒，以防备王琳和陆法和。
English: Soon after hearing that Wang Lin would be arriving, he secretly sent General Hou Rui to build a rampart along the waterfront to guard against Wang Lin and Lufa by taking the dangerous route around Lufa and the rear of the army.

古文：元帝书遗纪，遣光州刺史郑安中往喻意于纪，许其还蜀，专制崏方。
现代文：梁元帝又送信给萧纪，又派光州刺史郑定中前去向萧纪说明他的想法，答应让萧纪回兵蜀地，专管民日方。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan also sent a letter to Xiao Ji, and sent Zheng Dingzhong, the governor of Gwangju, to explain his thoughts to Xiao Ji, and promised to let Xiao Ji return to Shu and take charge of the Japanese side.

古文：纪不从命，报书如家人礼。
现代文：萧纪不肯听从。回信时仍按家人礼仪。
English: Xiao Ji disobeyed the edict of the patriarch, and only answered the letter to the patriarch according to family etiquette.

古文：既而侯叡爲任约、谢答仁所破，又陆纳平，诸军并西赴，元帝乃与纪书曰： 甚苦大智！
现代文：后来侯睿被任约、谢答仁打败，而陆纳又已被讨平，各路军队全部西进，梁元帝便写信给萧纪说： 真苦恼啊，大智！
English: Later, Hou Rui was defeated by Ren Yao and Xie Dairen, while Lu Nao had been leveled, and all the armies went west. Emperor Liang Yuan then wrote to Xiao Ji, saying, "What a hardship, Da Zhi!

古文：季月烦暑，流金铄石，聚蚊成雷，封狐千里。
现代文：六月烦暑，流金铄石，蚊声如雷，封狐千里。
English: In June, the heat is oppressive, there is flowing vermiculite, the sound of mosquitoes is thunderous, and thousands of miles of foxes are blocked.

古文：自獯丑凭陵，羯胡叛换，吾年爲一日之长，属有平乱之功，膺此乐推，事归当璧。
现代文：以此玉体，辛苦行阵，倦于西回，如何使我辛劳！我年长于你，有平乱之功，受此众人共推，自当继承大业。
English: I am older than you, I have contributed to the pacification of chaos, I have been jointly promoted by everyone, and I should inherit the great cause.

古文：傥遣使乎，良所希也。
现代文：如派使者前来，实所希望。
English: If an emissary is sent to us, we will do as we wish.

古文：如曰不然，于此投笔。
现代文：如认为不然，于此投笔。
English: If it is true that there has been a delay in the arrival of the envoys, and if it is true that this is not good, then I will put down my pen.

古文：友于兄弟，分形共气，兄肥弟瘦，无复相代之期；让枣推梨，长罢欢愉之日。
现代文：友爱兄弟，分形共气，兄肥弟瘦，无复相代之期；让枣推梨，长罢欢愉之日。
English: Brotherly love, fractal symbiosis, brother fat, brother thin, no period of complex phase generation; let the date push the pear, long strike the day of joy.

古文：上林静拱，闻四鸟之哀鸣，宣室披图，嗟万始之长逝。
现代文：上林静寂，闻四鸟之悲鸣；宣室披图，嗟万始之长逝。
English: Shanglin is silent, hearing the sad song of four birds; Xuanshu is painting a picture, and the long death of the beginning of a thousand years is unfolding.

古文：心乎爱矣，书不尽言。 
现代文：心之所爱，书不尽言。 
English: My heart is so full of love for you that I cannot write you a letter.

古文：大智，纪别字也。
现代文：大智，是萧纪的别字。
English: Daichi is another word for Xiao Ji.

古文：帝又爲诗曰： 回首望荆门，惊浪且雷奔，四鸟嗟长别，三声悲夜猿。 
现代文：元帝又作诗： 回首望荆门，惊浪且雷奔，四鸟嗟长别，三声悲夜猿。 
English: The Yuan Emperor also wrote a poem: Looking back at the Jingmen Gate, the waves are startling and thunderous, the four birds sing a long farewell, and the three sad night monkeys sing.

古文：圆正在狱中连句曰： 水长二江急，云生三峡昏，愿贳淮南罪，思报阜陵恩。 
现代文：圆正在狱中连句，写道： 水长二江急，云生三峡昏，愿贳淮南罪，思报阜陵恩。 
English: Yuan Zheng wrote a couplet in prison, saying: "Water Chang Erjiang Express, Yunsheng Three Gorges fainting, I wish to expiate the sins of Huainan, and think of the blessings of Fufu."

古文：帝看诗而泣。
现代文：元帝看诗后哭了起来。
English: Yuan Di burst into tears after reading the poem.

古文：纪频败，知不振，遣署度支尚书乐奉业往江陵论和缉之计。
现代文：萧纪连连惨败，自知难以振作，便派所任命的度支尚书乐奉业前往江陵商议和解的办法。
English: Xiao Jilianli suffered a crushing defeat, and knowing that it was difficult to cheer up, he sent the appointed Du Zhishang to study calligraphy and music to Gangneung to discuss a way to reconcile.

古文：元帝知纪必破，遂拒而不许，于是两岸十馀城遂俱降。
现代文：元帝知道萧纪必定被击败，便拒绝了和议的请求。于是，长江两岸十多座城池都向元帝投降。
English: Emperor Yuan knew that Xiao Ji would certainly be defeated, so he refused the request for peace talks. As a result, more than ten cities on both sides of the Yangtze River surrendered to Emperor Yuan.

古文：游击将军樊猛率所领至纪所，纪在船中遶床而走，以金掷猛等曰： 此顾卿送我一见七官，卿必当富贵 猛曰： 天子何由可见。
现代文：游击将军樊猛率领部众来到萧纪的住处，萧纪在船中绕床而走，把金子扔给樊猛等人，说： 这些就雇请你们送我去见一次七官，你必定会富贵。 樊猛说： 天子怎么能够见得到。
English: The guerrilla general Zou Meng led his troops to Xiao Ji's residence. Xiao Ji walked around the bed in the boat and threw gold to Zou Meng and others, saying, "These people have hired you to send me to see seven officials once. You will surely become rich and famous." Zou Meng said, "How can the Son of Heaven be able to see?"

古文：杀足下，此金何之。 
现代文：杀了你，这些金子还能跑到哪里去？ 
English: If I kill you, where will all this gold go?

古文：犹不敢逼，围而守之。
现代文：可是樊猛还不敢过份进逼，只是将他包围了看守起来。
English: However, the ferocity did not dare to push too hard, but surrounded him and guarded him.

古文：法和驰啓，上密敕樊猛曰： 生还不成功也。 
现代文：陆法和飞奔回江陵报告梁元帝，带来梁元帝的密令，对樊猛说： 让他生还就没有功了！ 
English: Lu Fa and galloped back to Jiangling to report to Emperor Liang Yuan Rong, brought Emperor Liang Yuan's secret order, and said to Zhuang Meng: There is no merit in letting him live!

古文：猛率甲士祝文简、张天成拔刃升舟，犹左右奔掷。第五子圆满驰来就父，纪首既落，圆满躯亦分。
现代文：樊猛便带着兵士祝文简、张天成拔刀上了船，萧纪仍左右奔跑，乱扔金块，他的第五位儿子圆满飞奔过来紧靠他父亲，萧纪的脑袋被砍落，圆满的身躯也一分为二。
English: Yan Meng then took soldiers Zhu Wen Jian and Zhang Tiancheng onto the ship with swords drawn. Xiao Ji was still running around, throwing gold around. His fifth son, Zheng Rong, ran over to his father. Zheng Rong's head was chopped off and his body was split in two.

古文：法和收太子圆照兄弟三人，问圆照曰： 阿郎何以至此？ 
现代文：陆法和活捉了太子圆照兄弟三人，他问圆照： 阿郎何以这副模样？ 
English: Lu Fa captured alive the three brothers of the prince, Yuan Zhao. He asked Yuan Zhao: Why does Aran look like this?

古文：圆照曰： 失计，愿爲公作奴。 
现代文：圆照说： 失计，愿意给明公当奴仆。 
English: Yuan Zhao said, "I have miscalculated and am willing to be a slave to Ming Gong."

古文：法和叱遣之。
现代文：陆法和斥责并将他送往江陵。
English: Lu Fa reprimanded him and sent him to Gangneung.

古文：圆照字明周，中大同初，爲益州东斋郎、宋甯宋兴二郡太守。
现代文：圆照字明周，中大同初年，任益州东斋郎、宋宁宋兴两郡太守。
English: Yuan Zhao Zi Ming Zhou, the first year of junior high school and college, was appointed as the governor of two counties, Dongjailang and Song Ning Song Xing of Yizhou.

古文：远镇诸王世子皆在建邺质守，帝特爱纪，故遣以副纪。
现代文：当时，镇守边境重镇的各藩王世子都留在建邺当人质，武帝格外宠爱萧纪，所以派他来协助萧纪。
English: At that time, the heirs of the kings of the various clans in the towns guarding the important border towns remained in Jianye as hostages. Emperor Wu was particularly fond of Xiao Ji, so he sent him to assist Xiao Ji.

古文：纪之构衅，悉其谋也。
现代文：萧纪所以发生争端，都是由圆照出的主意。
English: Xiao Ji said that the reason for the dispute was the idea of the circle.

古文：次弟圆正先见锁在江陵，及纪既以兵终，元帝使谓曰： 西军已败，汝父不知存亡。 
现代文：圆照二弟圆正已被关在江陵，当萧纪军队失败时，元帝派人对他说： 西蜀军队已失败，你父亲不知生死。 
English: Yuan Zhao's second brother Yuan Zheng had been imprisoned in Jiangling. When Xiao Ji's army was defeated, the Yuan Emperor sent someone to tell him: "The West Shu army has been defeated. Your father does not know whether he will live or die."

古文：意欲使其自裁。
现代文：元帝心中想让圆正自杀。
English: In his heart, Yuan Di wanted Yuan Zheng to commit suicide.

古文：而圆正既奉此问，便号哭尽哀。
现代文：圆正听到这个消息后，号啕大哭十分悲伤。
English: After hearing the news, Yuan Zheng burst into tears with great sadness.

古文：以祸难之兴皆由圆照，于是唯哭世子，言不绝声。
现代文：他因为觉得这场灾难都是由圆照引起的，所以只是哭叫圆照，不绝声地喊叫。
English: Because he felt that the disaster was caused by the full moon, he just cried out for the full moon, shouting incessantly.

古文：上谓圆正闻问悲感，必应自杀，频看知不能死，又付廷尉狱。
现代文：元帝认为圆正听到消息悲伤，必定自杀，可是多次来探视后知道圆正不会自杀而死，就又将他交给廷尉的监狱去看管。
English: Yuan Di thought that Yuan Zheng was sad to hear the news and would surely commit suicide, but after visiting him several times, he knew that Yuan Zheng would not commit suicide and die, so he handed him over to the court lieutenant's prison to take care of him.

古文：及见圆照曰： 阿兄，何乃乱人骨肉，使酷痛如此。 
现代文：当圆正见到圆照后，对他说： 阿兄，为什么要乱人骨肉之情，使得这样惨痛！ 
English: When Yuan Zheng saw Yuan Zhao, he said to him: Ah brother, why do you want to disturb people's feelings, making it so painful!

古文：圆照更无所言，唯云计误。
现代文：圆照无言可答，只是说自己计谋有误。
English: Lunzhao had nothing to say, except that his plan was wrong.

古文：并命绝食于狱，齧臂啖之，十三日死，天下闻而悲之。
现代文：元帝下令狱中停止供给食物，他们咬下自己的臂肉而食，十三天以后死去，天下人听到这个消息都为之悲哀。
English: Emperor Yuan ordered the prison to stop providing food. They bit off their own arms to eat, and died thirteen days later. Everyone in the world was saddened to hear this news.

古文：圆正字明允，纪第二子。
现代文：圆正，字明允，萧纪的二儿子。
English: Yuan Zheng, Zi Ming Yun, second son of Xiao Ji.

古文：美风仪，善谈论，宽和好施，爱接士人。
现代文：仪容俊美而有风度，善于言谈，待人宽和，喜欢施惠于人，爱好结交士人。
English: He is handsome and has good manners. He is good at conversation, treats people generously, likes to do favors for others, and likes to make friends with scholars.

古文：封江安侯。
现代文：被封为江安侯。
English: He was given the title of Jiang'an Hou.

古文：历西阳太守，有惠政。
现代文：任西阳太守，有美政。
English: He was appointed the governor of Xiyang and had a successful political career.

古文：既居上流，人附者甚衆。
现代文：他既是上流人物，前来归附他的人很多。
English: Since he was a high-ranking person, many people came to follow him.

古文：及侯景作逆，圆正收兵衆且一万，后遂跋扈中流，不从王命。
现代文：当侯景叛乱时，圆正招兵一万人，以后便飞扬跋扈于长江中游地区，不听从朝廷指挥。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Yuan Zheng recruited ten thousand soldiers. Later, he roamed the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, disobeying the command of the imperial court.

古文：及景破，复谋入蜀。
现代文：当侯景被击败后，他打算领兵入蜀。
English: When Hou Jing was defeated, he planned to lead troops into Shu.

古文：元帝将图之，署爲平南将军。
现代文：梁元帝准备消灭他，委任他为平南将军。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was ready to eliminate him and appointed him as the general of Pingnan.

古文：及至弗见，使南平嗣王恪等醉而囚之。
现代文：可是当圆正到江陵后，元帝并不接见，却派了南平嗣王萧恪等人将圆正灌醉以后关押起来。
English: However, when Yuan Zheng arrived in Gangneung, Emperor Yuan did not receive him, but sent Nanping Heir Wang Xiao Ke and others to arrest Yuan Zheng after he got drunk.

古文：时纪称梁王。
现代文：当时萧纪自称梁王。
English: At that time, Xiao Ji called himself Liang Wang.

古文：及纪败死，爲有司奏请绝纪属籍，元帝许之，赐姓饕餮氏。
现代文：当萧纪失败而死之后，被有关官员奏请削去萧纪皇家宗室的属籍，梁元帝表示赞同，赐姓为饕餮氏。
English: When, after the death of Xiao Ji after his defeat, he was requested by the relevant officials to be stripped of his status as a member of the royal family of Xiao Ji, Emperor Liang Yuan agreed and gave him the surname Zou.

古文：纪最爲武帝所爱。武帝诸子罕登公位，唯纪以功业显着，先啓黄扉。
现代文：萧纪最受梁武帝的宠爱，武帝的几个儿子罕有登上三公之位的，惟独萧纪因功勋卓著而先担任了这一重要职务。
English: Xiao Ji was the most favored by Emperor Liangwu. Several sons of Emperor Wu rarely ascended to the throne of the three princes, but Xiao Ji was the first to hold this important position because of his outstanding merits.

古文：兄邵陵王纶屡以罪黜，心每不平。
现代文：他的哥哥邵陵王萧纶多次因有罪而被废黜，心中十分不平。
English: His brother, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei, was deposed many times because of his guilt, and he was very unhappy.

古文：及闻纪爲征西，纶抚枕叹曰： 武陵有何功业，而位乃前我？
现代文：当听说任命萧纪为征西都督时，萧纶抚枕叹息道： 武陵有什么功劳，而位置在我之前？
English: When he heard of the appointment of Xiao Ji as the governor of the Western Conquest, Xiao Yan stroked his pillow and sighed: What is the merit of Wuling, and the position before me?

古文：朝廷愦愦，似不知人。 
现代文：朝廷昏庸，似乎并不知人。 
English: The imperial court is dim-witted and does not seem to know anyone.

古文：武帝闻之，大怒曰： 武陵有恤人拓境之勋，汝有何绩。 
现代文：梁武帝听说以后，大怒，并说： 武陵王有抚恤百姓开拓边境的大功，你有什么功劳！ 
English: When Emperor Liang Wu heard of this, he was furious and said: King Wuling has done a great deal of work to support the people and open up the border. What do you have to show for it?

古文：太清初，帝思之，使善画者张僧繇至蜀图其状。
现代文：太清初年，梁武帝想念萧纪，就派了一位善于画像的人名叫张僧繇的到蜀国去画萧纪的相貌。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Emperor Liang Wudi missed Xiao Ji, so he sent a person who was good at painting to Shu to paint Xiao Ji's face.

古文：在蜀十七年，南开宁州、越嶲，西通资陵、吐谷浑。
现代文：萧纪在蜀地十七年，在南面开拓了宁州、越辒，西部沟通了资陵、吐谷浑。
English: In the seventeenth year of Xiao Ji in Shu, he opened up Ningzhou and Yueqi in the south, and communicated Ziling and Tuyugun in the west.

古文：内修耕桑盐铁之功，外通商贾远方之利，故能殖其财用，器甲殷积。
现代文：对内致力于发展农耕、桑麻、煮盐和炼铁，对外开展商业贸易取得远方的利益，所以能够增加财力，兵器甲仗堆积众多。
English: Internally committed to the development of agriculture, mulberry, boiled salt and iron smelting, and abroad to carry out commercial trade to obtain distant benefits, so it can increase financial resources, and there are many weapons piled up.

古文：马八千匹，上足者置之内厩，开寝殿以通之，日落，辄出步马。
现代文：有马八千匹，上等骏马养在王宫内厩中，寝殿里开着门和内厩相通，日落时他便出门骑马。
English: There were eight thousand horses. The best horses were kept in the stables inside the royal palace. The door to the inner stables was open in the bedchamber. At sunset, he would go out to ride.

古文：便骑射，尤工舞矟。
现代文：他习惯骑射，尤其善于舞槊。
English: He is used to riding and shooting, and is particularly good at dancing.

古文：九日讲武，躬领幢队。
现代文：初九讲习武艺时，亲自率领仪仗队。
English: He personally led the guard of honour at a martial arts class for junior high school students.

古文：及闻国难，谓僚佐曰： 七官文士，岂能匡济。 
现代文：当听说国家发生混乱的，便对部下们说： 七官是位文人，怎么能够匡救朝廷！ 
English: When he heard that there was chaos in the country, he said to his subordinates: the seven officials are literati, how can they save the imperial court!

古文：既东下，黄金一斤爲饼，百饼爲簉，至有百簉；银五倍之，其他锦罽缯采称是。
现代文：当他东下时，用一斤黄金制造一只金饼，一百金饼为一鋍，共有一百鋍，银子五倍于黄金，其他各种锦帛缯采数量众多。
English: When he went to the east, he made a gold cake with one kilo of gold, one hundred gold cakes with one ingot, a total of one hundred ingots, five times more silver than gold, and a large number of other kinds of brocade.

古文：每战则悬金帛以示将士，终不赏赐。
现代文：每次作战他就悬挂起黄金锦帛给将士们看，可是始终没有赏赐过。
English: Every time he fought, he would hang up a golden brocade banner for the soldiers to see, but he was never rewarded.

古文：甯州刺史陈知祖请散金银募勇士，不听，恸哭而去。
现代文：宁州刺史陈知祖请他散发金银招募勇士，萧纪不肯听从，陈知祖痛哭着离开了。
English: Chen Zhizu, the famous historian of Ningzhou, asked him to distribute gold and silver to recruit warriors. Xiao Ji refused to listen, and Chen Zhizu left in tears.

古文：自是人有离心，莫肯爲用。
现代文：从此以后人心离散，不肯替他卖力。
English: Since then, people have been divided and unwilling to work hard for him.

古文：纪颇学观占，善风角，亦知不复能济。
现代文：萧纪曾经学过观天象和占卜之术，善于占风，因此他也知道不能成功。
English: Xiao Ji had studied celestial observation and divination, and was good at divining the wind, so he also knew that he could not succeed.

古文：瞻望气色，叹吒天道，椎床声闻于外。
现代文：他每天观望气色，叹息天道不顺，愤怒的槌床声音传到屋外。
English: Every day he watches the weather, sighs at the bad weather, and the angry hammering sound is heard outside.

古文：有请事者，以疾辞不见。
现代文：有人来请示事情，他便以有病为由而推辞不肯接见。
English: When someone came to inquire about the matter, he declined to be interviewed on the grounds of illness.

古文：既死，埋于沙洲，不封无榇。
现代文：死去之后，被埋葬在沙洲上，没有封土也没有棺材。
English: When he died, he was buried on a sandbar, without soil or a coffin.

古文：元帝以刘孝胜付廷尉，寻免之。
现代文：梁元帝将刘孝胜交给廷尉处置，不久又赦免了他。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan put Liu Xiaosheng at the disposal of a courtier, and soon pardoned him.

古文：初，纪将僭号，祅怪不一，内寝柏殿柱绕节生花，其茎四十有六，靃靡可爱，状似荷花。
现代文：当初，萧纪准备僭称帝号时，便出现了各种奇怪的事情，内寝殿柏木柱上绕节长出花朵，有四十六支，长得摇摇欲动，十分可爱，形状有如荷花。
English: At first, when Xiao Ji was preparing to assume the title of emperor, all kinds of strange things happened. On the cypress pillar in the inner hall, there were forty-six flowers growing around the knot. They were wobbly, very lovely, and shaped like lotus flowers.

古文：识者曰： 王敦祅花，非佳事也。 
现代文：有识者说： 这是王敦当年长出的妖花，并不是好事啊！ 
English: Someone with insight said: This is the magic flower that Wang Dun grew that year, and it's not a good thing!

古文：时蜀知星人说纪曰： 官若东下，当用申年，太白出西，从之爲利。
现代文：当时蜀地有位懂得星象的人对萧纪说： 您如果准备东下，应当在申年，太白星从西边出来，顺从它西下有利。
English: At that time, a person in Shu who understood the constellations said to Xiao Ji: If you are preparing to go east, it should be in the year of the rooster. The white star will come out from the west, and it is advantageous to follow it westward.

古文：申岁发蜀，酉年入荆，不可失也。 
现代文：申岁从蜀出发，酉年进入荆州，机不可失。 
English: Starting from Shu in the Year of the Monkey and entering Jingzhou in the Year of the Rooster, there is no time to lose.

古文：发蜀之岁，太白在西，比及明年，则已东出矣。
现代文：萧纪从蜀发兵那年，太白在西面，等到明年，就已经东出了。
English: In the year that Xiao Ji sent soldiers from Shu, Taibai was in the west, but by the next year, it had moved to the east.

