古文：唐若山司命君玄真子刘白云
现代文：唐若山司命君玄真子刘白云
English: Tang RuoShansi Seimei Jun XuanMengZi Liu BaiYun

古文：唐若山
现代文：唐若山
English: Tang Ruoshan

古文：唐若山，鲁郡人也。
现代文：唐若山是鲁郡人。
English: Tang Ruoshan is from Lu County.

古文：唐先天中，历官尚书郎，连典剧郡。
现代文：唐玄宗先天年间，做过尚书郎，连续治理过大郡。
English: During Tang Xuan Zong's lifetime, he served as Shang Shuro and successively governed a large county.

古文：开元中，出为润州，颇有惠政，远近称之。
现代文：开元年间，他出任润州刺史，做了许多仁惠的政事，远近都称颂他。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he served as the governor of Runzhou, and did many benevolent political affairs. He was praised far and wide.

古文：若山尝好长生之道。
现代文：唐若山喜欢长生不老之道。
English: Tang Ruoshan likes the way of immortality.

古文：弟若水，为衡岳道士，得胎元谷神之要。
现代文：他的弟弟唐若水是衡山的道士，懂得道家胎元、谷神等修炼要旨。
English: His younger brother, Tang Ruoshui, is a Taoist from Hengshan. He understands the essence of the Taoist practices such as Tuyuan and Gu Shen.

古文：尝徵入内殿，寻恳求归山。诏许之。
现代文：他曾经应召进入皇宫，不久又恳求回山，皇帝下诏允许他回去。
English: He was once summoned to the imperial palace, but soon begged to return to the mountain, and the emperor issued a decree allowing him to return.

古文：若山素好方术，所至之处，必会炉鼎之客，虽术用无取者，皆礼而接之。
现代文：唐若山平常喜欢道教的方术。他走到哪里，一定要会见一下那里的炼丹人士。即使是道术上没有可取之处的，他也以礼相待。
English: Tang Ruoshan is usually fond of Taoism. Wherever he goes, he is sure to meet a Taoist practitioner. Even if there is no merit in Taoism, he treats them with courtesy.

古文：家财迨尽，俸禄所入，未尝有余。
现代文：他的家财几乎用尽，他的俸禄收入，不曾有过剩余。
English: His family's wealth was almost exhausted, and he had no surplus from his salary income.

古文：金石所费，不知纪极。
现代文：炼丹的费用，不计其数。
English: The cost of puerh is incalculable.

古文：晚岁尤笃志焉。
现代文：到了晚年，他对长生之道更加笃诚。
English: In his later years, he became more convinced of the immortality of the soul.

古文：润之府库官钱，亦以市药。
现代文：润州府库里的公款，他也用来买药炼丹。
English: He also used public money from the Renzhou prefectural treasury to buy the drug alprazolam.

古文：宾佐骨肉，每加切谏，若山俱不听纳。
现代文：宾客僚属和骨肉亲人，常常恳切地劝他不要这样，他都不听。
English: His guests, colleagues and relatives often earnestly advised him not to do so, but he did not listen.

古文：一日，有老叟，形容羸瘠，状貌枯槁，诣款谒。自言有长生之道。
现代文：一天，有一个瘦弱憔悴的老头，来谒见，自己说有长生不老之道。
English: One day, a frail old man came to see him, claiming to have the secret to eternal life.

古文：见者皆笑其衰迈。
现代文：见到的人都笑这老头衰朽老迈。
English: Everyone who sees him laughs at the old man's decrepitude.

古文：若山见之，尽礼回敬，留止月余。
现代文：唐若山见了他却非常尊敬，留他住了一个多月。
English: When Tang Ruoshan met him, he respected him very much and kept him for more than a month.

古文：所论皆非丹石之要。
现代文：老头谈论的，全都不是炼丹方面的事。
English: What the old man is talking about is not all about the alchemy.

古文：若山博采方诀，歌诵图记，无不研究。
现代文：唐若山广泛搜集秘方口诀，用歌诀和绘图的形式记录下来，十分用心研究。
English: Tang Ruoshan extensively collected secret recipes, recorded them in the form of songs and drawings, and studied them with great care.

古文：问叟所长，皆蔑如也。复好肥鲜美酒，珍馔品膳。
现代文：他问老头善长什么，老头对这些炼丹之类的方术一概瞧不起，又喜欢鱼肉美酒，美味饭食。
English: He asked the old man what he was good at. The old man looked down on all these methods of making things like alchemy, but he liked fish and meat, good wine, and delicious food.

古文：虽瘦削老叟，而所食敌三四人。
现代文：虽然是一个很瘦削的老头，而吃起饭来能比得上三四个人。
English: Although he is a very thin old man, he can eat as much as three or four people.

古文：若山敬奉承事，曾无倦色。
现代文：唐若山敬奉他，为他做事，竟丝毫没有厌倦的表现。
English: Tang Ruoshan revered him and did things for him, but he did not show any signs of weariness.

古文：一夕，从容谓若山曰： 君家百口，所给常若不足。
现代文：一天晚上，老头从容地对唐若山说： 你家有一百来口人，资财的供应常常如此不足。
English: One evening, the old man calmly said to Tang Ruoshan: Your family has a hundred or so members, and the supply of capital and wealth is often so insufficient.

古文：贵为方伯，力尚多缺；一旦居闲，何以为赡？
现代文：你贵为一方的长官，财力还差这么多，一旦罢官闲居，凭什么吃饭穿衣？
English: You are a high-ranking official of one side, and your financial resources are still so poor. Once you are dismissed and idle, how can you afford to eat and dress?

古文：况帑藏钱帛，颇有侵用。诚为君忧之。 
现代文：何况府库里的银两钱帛，你也侵用了许多，我实在是为你担忧。 
English: What's more, you also embezzled a lot of money from the government treasury. I'm really worried about you.

古文：若山惊曰： 某理此且久，将有交代，亦常为忧，而计无所出。
现代文：唐若山吃惊地说： 我治理这个州已经很久了，离任时必将有个交代。我也常常为此发愁，但也想不出来好办法。
English: Tang Ruoshan said in surprise: I have been governing this state for a long time, and when I leave office, there will certainly be a replacement. I often worry about this, but I can't think of a good way.

古文：若缘此受谴，固所甘心；但虑一家有冻馁之苦耳。 叟曰： 无多虑也。 
现代文：如果因此受惩罚，本来是自作自受心甘情愿的，只是担心一家人要有挨饿受冻之苦了。 老头说： 不要多虑。 
English: If he was punished for this, he would have done it willingly, but he was worried that his family would suffer from hunger and cold.The old man said, "Don't worry.

古文：促命酒，连举数杯。
现代文：老头催他快摆上酒来，连饮了几杯。
English: The old man urged him to quickly put the wine on the table, and he drank several glasses.

古文：若山饮酒素少，是日亦挹三四爵，殊不觉醉，心甚异之。
现代文：唐若山喝酒一向很少，这一天也干了好几杯。竟不觉得有醉意，心里很是惊奇。
English: Tang Ruoshan has always drunk very little alcohol, and he had several drinks that day. He didn't feel drunk at all, and he was very surprised.

古文：是夜月甚明朗，徐步庭下，良久谓若山曰： 可命一仆，运铛釜铁器辈数事于药室间，使仆布席垒炉。 
现代文：这天夜里月光很明亮，两个人徐徐走到院子里。许久，老头对唐若山说： 可派一个仆人，把锅等铁器运到药室里去。 唐若山就派仆人在药室布置坐席，砌起炉灶。
English: That night, the moonlight was very bright, and the two of them walked slowly to the courtyard. After a long time, the old man said to Tang Ruoshan, "You can send a servant to carry the pots and other ironware to the medicine room." Tang Ruoshan sent the servant to arrange the seats in the medicine room and build a stove.

古文：曰： 鼎铛之属为二聚，炽炭加之，烘然如窑，不可向视。 
现代文：老头又说： 铁锅之类分为两处，锅底下放上燃烧的火炭，烘烤得铁锅就像砖窑，让人不敢看它。
English: The old man also said, "An iron pot is divided into two parts. The bottom of the pot is covered with burning charcoal. The iron pot is baked like a brick kiln, so people are afraid to look at it.

古文：叟于腰间解小瓠，出二丹丸，各投其一，阖扉而出。
现代文：这时老头从腰间解下一个小葫芦，从葫芦里取出两丸丹药，往两口铁锅里各扔了一丸。
English: At this time, the old man unwrapped a small gourd from his waist, took two pills from the gourd, and threw one pill into each of the two iron pots.

古文：谓若山曰： 子有道骨，法当度世，加以笃尚正直，性无忿恚。仙家尤重此行。
现代文：关门出来，老头对唐若山说： 你有道骨，理应引渡你超脱人世，加上你诚实正直，生性不爱发怒，仙家特别器重这样的品行。
English: After closing the door, the old man said to Tang Ruoshan: You have a moral code, you should be extradited beyond the human world, plus you are honest and upright, you don't like to get angry by nature, Xianjia especially values this kind of behavior.

古文：吾太上真人也，游观人间，以度有心之士。
现代文：我是太上真人，到人间游观，以便超渡那些有心之人。
English: I am a real person, and I visit the human world in order to pass over those who have a heart.

古文：悯子勤志，故来相度耳。
现代文：同情你又勤奋又有毅力，所以就来超渡你。
English: Compassion You are diligent and persevering, so I have come to surpass you.

古文：吾所化黄白之物，一以留遗子孙，旁济贫乏。一以支纳帑藏，无贻后忧。
现代文：我所变成的黄金白银，一部分用来留给你的子孙，也可以救济别的穷人；一部分用来支付你侵用的府库里的银两，不要留下后忧。
English: The gold and silver that I have turned into money, part of it can be used to leave to your children and grandchildren, and also to help other poor people; part of it can be used to pay back the money that you have embezzled from the treasury. Don't leave any worries behind.

古文：便可命棹游江，为去世之计。
现代文：这样就可以驾船游江一一这是使你摆脱世俗的计策。
English: In this way, you can travel the river by boat - this is a strategy to get you out of the world.

古文：翌日相待于中流也。 
现代文：明天我在江心等你。 
English: I'll be waiting for you in Jiangxin tomorrow.

古文：言讫，失其所在。
现代文：说完，老头就忽然不见了。
English: After saying this, the old man suddenly disappeared.

古文：若山凌晨开阅，所化之物，烂然照屋。
现代文：第二天早晨，唐若山打开药室一看，昨天所化的东西，光灿灿地把屋子照得通亮。
English: The next morning, Tang Ruoshan opened the medicine room and saw that the things that had been transformed yesterday had brilliantly illuminated the room.

古文：复扃闭之，即与宾客三五人，整棹浮江，将游金山寺。
现代文：他又关上门，就和三五位宾客一起登船漂游在江面上，要到金山寺去游览。
English: He closed the door again and boarded the boat with three or five guests to float on the river and visit Jinshan Temple.

古文：既及中流，江雾晦冥，咫尺不辨。
现代文：到了江心之后，江上的大雾很重，咫尺之间也看不清东西。
English: After reaching the center of the river, the fog on the river was very heavy, and I couldn't see anything clearly.

古文：若山独见老叟，棹渔舟，直抵舫侧，揖若山入渔舟中，超然而去。
现代文：只有唐若山看到了那位老头。老头驾着一条渔船，直接来到唐若山的船旁，请唐若山到渔船上去。于是唐若山超然而去。
English: Only Tang Ruoshan saw the old man. The old man drove a fishing boat and came directly to Tang Ruoshan's boat, and asked Tang Ruoshan to go to the fishing boat. So Tang Ruoshan went anyway.

古文：久之，风波稍定，昏雾开霁。已失若山矣。
现代文：过了些时候，风波稍微平静下来，大雾散去，人们才发现唐若山不见了。
English: After some time, the storm calmed down a bit, the fog dispersed, and people found that Tang Ruoshan was gone.

古文：郡中几案间，得若山诀别之书指挥家事；又得遗表，因以奏闻。
现代文：在郡中的几案之间，得到了唐若山诀别的书信，那上面写的全都是如何处理家事。
English: Between several cases in the county, Tang Ruoshan's farewell letter was obtained, and all that was written on it was how to handle family affairs.

古文：其大旨：以 世禄暂荣，浮生难保，惟登真脱屣，可以后天为期。
现代文：又得到了一份奏章，人们就把奏章报送给皇上。奏章的大意是： 因为世禄是暂时的荣华，世事不定，生命短暂，人生是没有保障的，只有脱离世俗，成为神仙，才能长生不老。
English: They also got a copy of the musical score, which they presented to the emperor. The general idea of the musical score is: Because worldly happiness is a temporary glory, the world is uncertain, life is short, life is not guaranteed, and only by breaking away from the world and becoming a god can one live forever.

古文：昔范丞相泛舟五湖，是知其主不堪同乐也；张留侯去师四皓，是畏其主不可久存也。
现代文：以前丞相范蠡驾船泛在五湖之间，是知道他的主子不能和他同乐；留侯张良学习 四皓 而隐去，是怕他的主子不能长久存在下去。
English: In the past, the prime minister, Fan Rong, sailed between the five lakes, knowing that his master could not enjoy it with him; Zhang Liang stayed to study the four rivers and disappeared, fearing that his master would not last long.

古文：二子之去，与臣不同。
现代文：这二人的离去，和我不一样。
English: The departure of these two people is not the same as mine.

古文：臣运属休明，累叨荣爵，早悟升沉之理，深知止足之规，栖心玄关，偶得丹诀。黄金可作，信淮王之昔言；白日可廷，察真经之妙用。
现代文：我的运气很好，赶上了清明盛世，连连受到皇上恩赐的爵位。早就悟到了升沉的道理，深深懂得止步的规矩。我潜心于入道之门，偶然得到了炼丹的秘诀，我相信淮南王以前说过的话，黄金是可以做出来的。察看真经的妙用，白日可以延长。
English: My luck is very good. I caught up with Qingming Shengshi, and I was repeatedly given the title of nobility by the emperor. I have long realized the principle of rising and sinking, and I deeply understand the rules of stopping. I concentrated on the entrance gate, and I accidentally got the secret of the alchemist. I believe that King Huainan once said that gold can be made. The day can be extended to see the wonderful use of the true scripture.

古文：既得之矣，余复何求。
现代文：明白了这种道理，其余的还追求什么呢？
English: Once this is understood, what is there left to pursue?

古文：是用挥手红尘，腾神碧海。扶桑在望，蓬岛非遥。
现代文：因此我挥手告别尘世，在大海里神游，可望见扶桑，离蓬莱仙岛也就不远了。
English: Therefore, I waved goodbye to the world and wandered in the sea. I could see Fusang, and it was not far from Penglai Xian Dao.

古文：遐瞻帝阍，不胜犬马恋主之至。 
现代文：我遥望皇上的城门，心中不胜犬马留恋主人的感情。 
English: I looked at the imperial city gate from afar, and my heart was overwhelmed with feelings of nostalgia for my master.

古文：唐玄宗省表异之，遽命优恤其家。促召唐若水，与内臣赍诏，于江表海滨寻访，杳无音尘矣。
现代文：唐玄宗看了奏章感到奇怪，急忙下令丰厚地抚恤唐若山的家属，催人把唐若水找来，让唐若水和内臣们一起，拿着皇帝的诏令，在江边海滨到处寻访。但是杳无音信。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was surprised when he read the record, and hastily ordered that Tang Ruoshan's family members be richly rewarded, and urged people to find Tang Ruoshui, so that Tang Ruoshui and his courtiers, together with the emperor's edict, could search everywhere along the riverside. However, there was no news.

古文：其后二十年，有若山旧吏自浙西奉使淮南，于鱼市中见若山鬻鱼于肆，混同常人。
现代文：此后二十年，有一个唐若山的旧部下从浙西奉使到淮南去，在鱼市上见到唐若山在鱼肆里卖鱼，和平常人一样。
English: Twenty years later, one of Tang Ruoshan's former subordinates was sent from West Zhejiang to Huainan. At the fish market, he saw Tang Ruoshan selling fish in the fish market, just like an ordinary person.

古文：睨其吏而延之入陋巷中，萦回数百步，乃及华第。
现代文：唐若山见到了他的属下，他把属下请到了一条陋巷中，曲曲折折走了几百步，来到一所漂亮的府第。
English: Tang Ruoshan met his subordinates. He invited his subordinates to a back alley, walked several hundred steps, and arrived at a beautiful mansion.

古文：止吏与食，哀其久贫，命市铁二十梃，明日复与相遇，已化金矣，尽以遗之。
现代文：他让属下在此休息，并给属下饭吃。他可怜属下长期受穷，让属下买了二十根铁棒。第二天，属下又遇到他，铁就全都变成金子了。
English: He let his subordinates rest here, and gave them food to eat. He pitied his subordinates who had been poor for a long time, and let his subordinates buy twenty iron rods. The next day, when his subordinates met him again, the iron had all turned into gold.

古文：吏姓刘，今刘子孙世居金陵，亦有修道者。
现代文：他把这些金子全赠给属下。他的这个属下姓刘。现在，姓刘的子孙世代居住在金陵，也有修道的。
English: He gave all this gold to his subordinate, whose surname was Liu. Nowadays, generations of Liu's descendants live in Jinling, and they also practice Buddhism.

古文：又相国李绅，字公垂，常习业于华山，山斋粮尽，徒步出谷，求粮于远方。
现代文：另外，相国李绅，字公垂，曾经在华山研习学业，粮食用尽了，就徒步走出山谷，到远方寻粮食。
English: In addition, Li Sheng's countryman, surnamed Gongtu, once studied in Huashan. When he ran out of food, he walked out of the valley to look for food in the distance.

古文：迨暮方还，忽暴雨至，避于巨岩之下，雨之所沾若浼焉。
现代文：天将黑的时候才回来，忽然回来了暴风雨。他在一块巨石下避雨。雨湿的地方像污泥。
English: He didn't come back until it was getting dark, when the storm suddenly returned. He took shelter under a boulder. The wet place was like sludge.

古文：既及岩下，见一道士，舣舟于石上，一村童拥楫而立，与之揖。
现代文：到了岩下之后，他见到一位道士。那道士的船停靠在石头上，一位村童拿着桨立在船头。
English: When he reached the bottom of the rock, he saw a Taoist priest whose boat was anchored on the rock, and a village boy standing at the bow with an oar.

古文：道士笑曰： 公垂在此耶！ 
现代文：李绅向道士一揖，道士笑道： 公垂在这里吗？ 
English: Li Sheng shook his fist at the Taoist, and the Taoist laughed and said, "Is the public hanging here?

古文：言语若深交，而素未相识。
现代文：话说得像老朋友似的。但是他们从来不相识。
English: They talk like old friends, but they've never met.

古文：因问绅曰： 颇知唐若山乎？ 
现代文：于是道士问李绅： 你知道唐若山吗？ 
English: So the Taoist asked Li Sheng: Do you know Tangwak Mountain?

古文：对曰： 常览国史，见若山得道之事，每景仰焉。 
现代文：李绅回答说： 我曾经在《国史》里见过他得道成仙之事，常常景仰他。 
English: Li Sheng replied: I once saw in the "National History" that he had become a Taoist, and I have always admired him.

古文：道士曰： 余即若山也。
现代文：道士说： 我就是唐若山。
English: The moralist said: I am Tangwakayama.

古文：将游蓬莱，偶值江雾，维舟于此，与公垂曩昔之分，得暂相遇。讵忘之耶？ 
现代文：我要到蓬莱去游览，偶尔遇上江雾，把船停在这里。我和你李公垂以前有过一段缘分，所以才能在这里暂时相遇，难道你忘了吗？ 
English: I want to go to Penglai for a tour, occasionally encounter the river mist, and stop the boat here. I had a predestined relationship with you Li Gongliao before, so I could meet you here temporarily. Have you forgotten that?

古文：乃携绅登舟。
现代文：于是道士拉着李绅上船。
English: So the Taoist priest dragged Li Sheng onto the boat.

古文：江雾已霁，山峰如昼，月光皎然。
现代文：这时候江雾已散去，山峰像白天一样，月光皎洁明亮。
English: At this time, the river fog has dispersed, the mountain peaks are like the daytime, and the moonlight is bright and bright.

古文：其舟凌空泛泛而行，俄顷已达蓬岛。
现代文：那船在空中泛泛地行驶，不一会儿已经来到蓬莱岛。
English: The ship sailed across the sky and soon arrived at Penglai Island.

古文：金楼玉堂，森列天表。
现代文：金碧辉煌的楼堂殿阁，林立在天上。
English: The resplendent mansion towers in the sky.

古文：神仙数人，皆旧友也。
现代文：有几位神仙都是老朋友，要留住他们。
English: There are a few immortals who are old friends, and we want to keep them.

古文：将留连之。中有一人曰： 公垂方欲佐国理务，数毕乃还耳。 
现代文：其中有一个神仙说： 李公垂正要辅佐国家参理政事，命中注定要做完这些事才能回来。 
English: One of the immortals said: Li Gongliao was about to assist the country in political affairs. He was fated to do these things before returning.

古文：绅亦务经济之志，未欲栖止。
现代文：李绅也确有以经国济民为务的大志，不想留住这里。
English: It is true that Li Sheng also has the ambition of improving the economy and benefiting the people, and does not want to stay here.

古文：众仙复命若山送归华山。
现代文：众神仙又让唐若山把他送回华山。
English: The gods also asked Tang Ruoshan to send him back to Huashan.

古文：后果入相，连秉旌钺。
现代文：后来李绅果然做了宰相，连续多年执掌军、政大权。
English: Later, Li Sheng did indeed become prime minister, holding the military and political power for many years in a row.

古文：去世之后，亦将复登仙品矣。
现代文：去世之后，他也将登上仙品。
English: After his death, he will also ascend to immortality.

古文：司命君
现代文：司命君
English: Simeikun is waving

古文：司命君者，常生于民间。
现代文：司命君，常常生活在民间。
English: Simeikun, often lives in the folk.

古文：幼小之时，与唐元瑰同学。
现代文：他幼小的时候，与唐元瑰是同学。
English: When he was a child, he was classmates with Tang Yuanju.

古文：元瑰云：君家世奉道。晨夕香烛，持《高上消灾经》、《老君枕中经》，累有祥异，奇香瑞云，生于庭宇。
现代文：唐元瑰说：司命君家世世代代信奉道教，早晚要点香和蜡烛，念《高上消灾经》和《老君枕中经》，经常有祥瑞的奇异景象出现，奇异的香气和祥瑞的云霞出现在庭院殿宇之间。
English: Tang Yuan Jue said: The Simeon family has believed in Taoism for generations. Sooner or later, they have to light incense and candles, recite the "Higher Disaster Prevention Sutra" and the "Old Man's Pillow Sutra." Strange scenes of auspiciousness often appear, and strange aromas and auspicious clouds appear between the courtyards of the palace.

古文：母因梦天人满空，皆长丈余，麾旆旌盖，荫其居宅。有黄光照其身，若金色，因孕之而生。
现代文：他的母亲由于梦见满天都是一丈多高的仙人，旌旗车盖遮蔽了他们家的宅院，有一道黄色的光照在她身上，那光像金子的颜色，于是她怀了孕生下司命君。
English: His mother had a dream that the sky was full of tall fairies, and the roof of the carriage covered their house. A yellow light shone on her, the color of gold, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Simeikun.

古文：生即张目开口，若笑之容。
现代文：司命君生下来就睁着眼张着口，像要笑的样子。
English: When Simeikun was born, his eyes were open and his mouth was open, as if he wanted to smile.

古文：幼而颖悟，诵习诗书，元瑰所不及。
现代文：他从小聪明颖悟，诵读诗书，元瑰比不上他。
English: He was clever from a young age, recited poetry, and could not be compared to him.

古文：十五六岁，忽不知所之，盖游天下寻师访道矣。
现代文：他十五六岁的时候，忽然不知去哪里了，大概是周游天下寻师访道去了。
English: When he was fifteen or sixteen years old, he suddenly did not know where to go. He probably went on a journey around the world in search of a teacher.

古文：不知师何人，得神仙之诀。
现代文：不知他的老师是谁。但他得到了成仙得道的秘诀。
English: I don't know who his teacher was, but he got the secret of how to become an immortal.

古文：宝应二年。元瑰为御史，充河南道采访使，至郑州郊外，忽与君相见。
现代文：宝应二年，元瑰是御史，充当河南道的采访使，来到郑州的郊外，忽然与司命君相遇。
English: In the second year of Baoying, Yuan Rui, who was a historian and acted as an envoy of Henan Province, came to the outskirts of Zhengzhou and suddenly met with Simeikun.

古文：君衣服褴褛，容貌憔悴。
现代文：司命君的衣服很破烂，脸色很憔悴。
English: The lifeguard's clothes were in tatters and his face was gaunt.

古文：元瑰深悯之，与语叙旧。问其所学。
现代文：唐元瑰很可怜他，和他说话叙旧，问他学的是什么学业。
English: Tang Yuanqi felt very sorry for him, talked to him about his past, and asked him what he had studied.

古文：曰： 相别之后，但修真而已。 
现代文：他说，相别之后，他只是修真养性而已。
English: He said that after the break-up, he was just cultivating his true nature.

古文：邀元瑰过甚家，留骑从于旅次相候。
现代文：他请元瑰到他家里去看看，把马匹和随从留在客栈里等候。
English: He invited Yuan Rui to visit his home and left his horses and attendants at the inn to wait for him.

古文：君与元瑰同往，引入市侧，门巷低小，从者一两人。
现代文：司命君陪元瑰一起前往。他把元瑰领到市区的一侧，来到一户低小的门前。随从只有一两个人。
English: He led Yuan Rui to the side of the city and came to a low door. There were only one or two people with him.

古文：才入，外门便闭，从者不得入。
现代文：二人刚走进门，外边的门便关上了，随从不能进入。
English: As soon as the two entered the door, the outer door was closed, and the entourage could not enter.

古文：第二门稍宽广。
现代文：第二道门略加宽广。
English: The second door is slightly wider.

古文：又入一门，屋宇甚大。
现代文：又进了一门，是一所很大的屋子。
English: I went through another door, and it was a big room.

古文：揖元瑰于门下。先入为席，良久出迎。
现代文：司令君请元瑰先在门外稍候，自己先进去摆放坐席，老半天才出来迎接元瑰。
English: The commander asked Yuan Rui to wait outside the door first, and he went ahead to set up the seats. It took him half a day to come out to meet Yuan Rui.

古文：元瑰见其容状伟烁，可年二十许，云冠霞衣，左右玉童侍女三五十辈，皆非世所有。
现代文：元瑰发现司命君的容貌变得光彩焕发，只有二十来岁的样子，顶云冠披霞衣，左右两边的玉童侍女有三五十名，都不是人世间所能有的。
English: Yuan Rui found that the appearance of the steward of life had become radiant, only in his twenties, wearing a cloud-crowned robe, and there were thirty or fifty maidens on the left and right sides, which is not possible in the world.

古文：元瑰莫之测。
现代文：元瑰不知这是怎么回事。
English: I don't know what's going on.

古文：相引升堂，所设馔食珍美，器皿瑰异，虽王者宴赐，亦所不及。
现代文：司命君把元瑰领到正堂，摆设上来的山珍海味和瑰丽奇异的器皿，即使是帝王家的宴席也是比不上的。
English: Simeikun led Yuan Jizhi to the main hall and set up the mountain and sea delicacies and magnificent and strange vessels, even the banquet of the imperial family is incomparable.

古文：彻馔命酒。
现代文：饭饱之后开始饮酒。
English: After a full meal, he began to drink.

古文：君与妻同坐。乃曰： 不可令侍御独坐。 
现代文：司命君与自己的妻子坐在一起，就说： 不能让你自己独坐。 
English: When the steward sat with his wife, he said, "You can't sit by yourself.

古文：即召一人，坐于元瑰之侧。
现代文：就叫来一个坐在元瑰的身边。
English: He called one to come and sit by his side.

古文：元瑰视之，乃其妻也。
现代文：元瑰一看，竟是自己的妻子。
English: At first glance, Yuan Rui is actually his own wife.

古文：奏乐酣饮，既醉各散，终不及相问言情。
现代文：于是奏乐畅饮，大醉之后各自散去，到底没来得及述说旧情。
English: So the musicians had a good drink, got very drunk and then went their separate ways. In the end, they didn't have time to talk about old times.

古文：迟明告别，君赠元瑰金尺玉鞭。
现代文：天将亮的时候告别，司命君送给元瑰一把金尺和一把玉鞭。
English: When it was time to say goodbye at dawn, Simeikun gave Yuan Rui a gold ruler and a jade whip.

古文：出门行数里，因使人访其处，无复踪迹矣。
现代文：出门走了几里，元瑰就让人打听他来时的那个地方，那地方已经没有踪迹了。
English: A few miles after leaving home, Yuan Rui had someone inquire about the place he came from, but there was no trace of it.

古文：及还京，问其妻 曾有异事乎？ 
现代文：等到回到京城，他问妻子曾经有过异常的事吗？
English: When he got back to Beijing, he asked his wife, "Has anything unusual ever happened to you?"

古文：具言： 某日昏然思睡，有黑衣人来，称司命君召，某便随去。
现代文：妻子说： 有一天我昏沉沉地想睡觉，来了一个穿黑衣服的人，说司命君让我去，我就跟着他去了。
English: The wife said, "One day, I was drowsy and wanted to go to sleep, when a man in black came and told me to go, so I followed him."

古文：既至司命宫中，见与君同饮。 
现代文：到了司命君宫中之后，是他和你一块喝酒。 
English: After arriving at the palace of the king's steward, he drinks with you.

古文：所见历然皆同，不谬。
现代文：她所见到的，和元瑰见到的一样。
English: What she saw was the same as what Yuan Rui saw.

古文：后十年。
现代文：可见这件事是确实的。
English: So it's a real thing.

古文：元瑰奉使江岭，又于江西泊舟，见君在岸上。
现代文：十年之后，元瑰奉命出使江岭去，又在江西停船，看到司命君在岸上。
English: Ten years later, Yuan Rui was ordered to go to Jiangling, and he stopped the ship in Jiangxi to see Simei on the shore.

古文：邀入一草堂，又到仙境。留连饮馔，但音乐侍卫，稍多于前，皆非旧人矣。
现代文：司命君请他来到一所草堂，又来到了仙境，又留他吃饭，只是音乐侍卫人员略多于前一次，全都不是前一次的那些人。
English: Simeikun invited him to a grass hut, and again to a fairyland, and again kept him for dinner, but there were slightly more musical attendants than the previous time, and none of them were the same people as the previous time.

古文：及散，赠元瑰一饮器，如玉非玉，不言其名。
现代文：等到散了席，司命君赠给唐元瑰一件饮器。饮器的质地像玉却不是玉。
English: After the meal was over, the steward presented Tang Yuan Rui with a drinking vessel. The texture of the drinking vessel looked like jade, but it was not jade.

古文：自此叙别，不复再见。
现代文：他也不说这东西叫什么名。
English: He won't say what it's called.

古文：亦不知司命所主何事，所修何道，品位仙秩，定何高卑，复何姓字耳。
现代文：从此话别，再没相见，也不知他主管的是什么事，修的是什么道。也不知他在仙界的品位高低，更不知他姓什么叫什么。
English: I never saw him again, and I don't know what he was in charge of or what path he practiced. I don't know his grade in the spirit world, and I don't even know his last name.

古文：一日，有胡商诣东都所居，谓元瑰曰： 宅中有奇宝之气，愿得一见。 
现代文：有一天，一位胡商到东都元瑰的住所里来，说： 你宅第中有奇宝的气象，希望能让我见识见识。 
English: One day, a Hu merchant came to the residence of Dongdu Yuanqiu and said: There is a wonderful weather in your house, I hope I can see it.

古文：元瑰以家物示之，皆非也。
现代文：元瑰把家里的东西拿出来给胡商看，全都不是。
English: Not all of the things that Yuan Rui took out of her home to show to Hu Shang are fake.

古文：乃出司命所赠饮器与商。
现代文：于是他把司命君赠他的饮器拿出来给胡商看。
English: So he took out the drinking vessel that the steward had given him and showed it to Hu Shang.

古文：起敬而后跪接之，捧而顿首曰： 此天帝流华宝爵耳。
现代文：胡商肃然起敬，跪下之后才把饮器接过去，捧着饮器点头说： 这是天帝的流华宝爵呀！
English: Hu Shang was awestruck, and only after kneeling down did he take the drinking vessel over, holding it in his hand and nodding, saying, "This is the Emperor's Flowing Jewels!"

古文：致于日中，则白气连天；承以玉盘，则红光照宜。 
现代文：放到日光下，就能白气连天；放到盘子里，就能红光照室。 
English: Put it in the sunlight, it will be able to glow white; put it in a dish, it will be able to illuminate the room with red light.

古文：即与元瑰就日试之，白气如云，郁勃径上，与天相接。
现代文：胡商立即就和元瑰就着日光试验。白气像云那样蒸蒸而上，与天连到一起。
English: Hu Shang and Yuan Rui immediately began to experiment with sunlight. The white gas steamed up like a cloud and connected with the sky.

古文：日夜更试之，此不谬也。
现代文：日夜交替着试验，说明这不是假货。
English: The tests, which alternate between day and night, show that this is not a fake.

古文：此宝太上西北库中镇中华二十四宝也。顷年已旋降。
现代文：胡商说： 这件宝物是太上西北库中镇中华二十四宝之一，近年来已降回到人间来。
English: Hu Shang said: This treasure is one of the Twenty-four Treasures of China in Taishang Northwest Library Town, and has been returned to the human world in recent years.

古文：今此第二十二宝。亦不久留于人间。即当飞去。
现代文：现在这宝物是第二十二宝，也不会在人间久留的，很快就该飞回去了。
English: Now this treasure is the twenty-second treasure, and it will not stay long on earth. It should fly back soon.

古文：得此宝者。受福七世。
现代文：得到这个宝贝的人，七代人受到福佑。
English: The person who receives this treasure will be blessed for seven generations.

古文：敬之哉。
现代文：一定要敬重它啊！ 
English: You must respect it!

古文：元瑰以玉盘承之。夜视红光满室。
现代文：元瑰把它盛在玉盘里，夜间一看，满室都是红光。
English: Yuan Rui put it in a jade dish, and when he looked at it at night, there was red light all over the room.

古文：玄真子
现代文：玄真子
English: Genmako is growing up

古文：玄真子姓张，名志和，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：玄真子姓张，名志和，是会稽山阴人。
English: Xuanzhen's surname is Zhang, his name is He, and he is a member of the Shanyin Society.

古文：博学能文，擢进士第。
现代文：他博学多才，写得一手好的文章，考中了进士。
English: He is an erudite and multi-talented person. He wrote a well-written article and passed the entrance examination.

古文：善书。饮酒三斗不醉。
现代文：善于书画，喝三斗酒也不醉。
English: He is good at calligraphy and painting, and he doesn't get drunk even if he drinks three buckets of wine.

古文：守真养气，卧雪不寒，入水不濡。
现代文：他守本性养真气，躺在雪地上不冷，跳到水里去不沾湿。
English: He kept true to his nature, lying on the snow to keep warm, and jumping into the water to keep from getting wet.

古文：天下山水，皆所游览。
现代文：天下的山水，他全都游览过。
English: He has visited every landscape in the world.

古文：鲁国公颜真卿与之友善。
现代文：鲁国公颜真卿和他是好朋友。
English: He was a good friend of Yan Zhenqing, the Prince of Lu.

古文：真卿为湖州刺史，与门客会饮，乃唱和为渔父词，其首唱即志和之词，曰： 西塞山边白鸟飞，桃花流水鳜鱼肥。
现代文：颜真卿在湖州任刺史时，他和门客们一起喝酒，就一唱一和地作《渔父》词，那头一首就是张志和的词。词是： 西塞山边白鸟飞，桃花流水鳜鱼肥。
English: When Yan Zhenqing was in Huzhou, he had a drink with his guests and sang the lyrics of "The Fisherman's Father" together. The first one is Zhang Zhihe's lyrics. The lyrics are: "White birds fly on the edge of the Xisai Mountains, peach blossoms run down the river, carp manure."

古文：青箬笠，绿蓑衣，斜风细雨不须归。 
现代文：青箬笠，绿蓑衣，斜风细雨不须归。 
English: Blue felt hat, green felt coat, cross wind and drizzle, no need to return.

古文：真卿与陆鸿渐、徐士衡、李成矩共和二十五首，递相夸赏，而志和命丹青剪素，写景天词，须臾五本。
现代文：颜真卿与陆鸿渐、徐士衡、李成矩，一共和了二十五首，互相传递着夸赏。张志和让拿出来颜料和剪裁白绢，画《景天》词的词意，不一会儿就画出来五幅。
English: Yan Zhenqing, along with Lu Hongqian, Xu Shiheng, and Li Chengru, wrote 25 poems in a row, passing on praise to each other. Zhang Zhihe and Zhang Zhan took out the paint and cut the egrets to draw the meaning of the words of "Jing Tian," and in a short time they drew five pictures.

古文：花木禽鱼，山水景像，奇绝踪迹，今古无伦。
现代文：花鸟鱼虫，山水景象，笔法奇绝，今古无比。
English: Flowers, birds, fish, insects, landscape scenes, pen magic, incomparable to ancient times.

古文：而真卿与诸客传玩，叹服不已。
现代文：颜真卿和客人们传着玩赏，赞不绝口。
English: Yan Zhenqing and the guests spread the word about the play and praise.

古文：其后真卿东游平望驿，志和酒酣，为水戏，铺席于水上独坐，饮酌笑咏。
现代文：后来颜真卿东游平望驿，张志和喝酒喝到酣畅时，作水上游戏，把坐席铺在水面上，独自坐在上面饮笑吟唱。
English: Later, when Yan Zhenqing traveled east to Pingwang, Zhang Zhi and drank until they were drunk, they played water games, spread the seat on the water surface, and sat alone on it to drink, laugh and sing.

古文：其席来去迟速，如刺舟声。
现代文：那坐席的来去快慢，就像撑船的声音。
English: The diners come and go slowly, like the sound of a boat being propelled.

古文：复有云鹤随覆其上。
现代文：接着又有云鹤跟随在他的头顶上。
English: Then another cloud of cranes followed above his head.

古文：真卿亲宾参佐观者，莫不惊异。
现代文：颜真卿等在岸上观看的人们，没有不惊异的。
English: Yan Zhenqing and other people watching on the shore were surprised.

古文：寻于水上挥手，以谢真卿，上升而去。
现代文：不多时，张志和在水上挥手，向颜真卿表示谢意，然后便上升飞去。
English: Not infrequently, Zhang Zhihe would wave his hand on the water to express his gratitude to Yan Zhenqing, and then he would rise and fly away.

古文：今犹有宝传其画在人间。
现代文：至今民间还留传着他的画，被视为珍宝。
English: To this day, his paintings have been preserved by the people and are regarded as precious treasures.

古文：刘白云
现代文：刘白云
English: Liu Baiyun

古文：刘白云者，扬州江都人也。
现代文：刘白云是扬州江都人。
English: Liu Baiyun is from Yangzhou Jiangdu.

古文：家富好义，有财帛，多以济人。
现代文：他家里富足，喜欢伸张正义。他所有的财帛，大多用来救济穷人。
English: He came from a wealthy family and liked to do justice. Most of his wealth went to help the poor.

古文：亦不知有阴功修行之事。
现代文：其实他并不知有阴德修行的事。
English: In fact, he didn't know about the practice of having a vagina.

古文：忽在江都，遇一道士，自称为乐子长，家寓海陵。
现代文：忽然有一天他在江都遇见一位道士。道士自称是 乐子长 ，家住海陵。
English: Suddenly, one day he met a Taoist in Jiangdu. The Taoist claimed to be the "Lead Musician" and lived in Hailing.

古文：曰： 子有仙頔天骨，而流浪尘土中，何也？ 
现代文：道士对他说： 你有仙风道骨，却流落在尘世之中，为什么呢？ 
English: The spiritualist said to him, "You have the spirit of a celestial being, but you are lost in the world. Why is that?

古文：因出袖中两卷书与之。
现代文：于是道士从袖中取出两卷书交给他。
English: So the Taoist monk took out two volumes from his sleeve and handed them to him.

古文：白云捧书，开视篇目。方欲致谢，子长叹曰： 子先得变化，而后受道。此前定也。 
现代文：他捧着书，翻开看那篇目，刚要致谢，乐子长叹道： 你得先有所变，然后才能得道，这是前世定的。 
English: Holding the book, he opened it and read the first chapter. Just as he was about to express his thanks, Music sighed: You must first change something before you can attain the Way. This was determined in a previous life.

古文：乃指摘次第教之。
现代文：于是乐子长就按照次序教他。
English: So the director of music taught him in order.

古文：良久，失子长所在。
现代文：过了好长时间，乐子长忽然不见了。
English: After a long time, the music master suddenly disappeared.

古文：依而行之，能役致风雨，变化万物。
现代文：他按照乐子长教的办法去做，能役使风雨，变化万物。
English: He did it according to the method taught by his father-in-law, which can help weather the storm and change everything.

古文：乃于襄州隔江一小山上化兵士数千人，于其中结紫云帐幄，天人侍卫，连月不散。
现代文：于是他在襄州隔江的一个小山上变化出几千名兵士来，在那里结构了紫云帐幄，由神仙侍卫，连月不散。
English: As a result, he raised several thousand soldiers on a hill across the Yangtze River in Xiangzhou, where he constructed the Purple Cloud Tent, guarded by immortals, and did not disperse for months.

古文：节度使于頔疑其妖幻，使兵马使李西华引兵攻之。帐幄侍卫渐高，弓矢不能及。
现代文：节度使于頔怀疑这是妖幻，派兵马使李西华领兵攻打，帐幄和侍卫渐渐升高，用弓箭都射不到。
English: Jie Du suspected that it was a phantom, and sent soldiers and horses to make Li Xihua lead the troops to attack. The curtain and the guards gradually rose, and they could not be shot with bows and arrows.

古文：判官窦处约曰： 此幻术也，秽之即散。 
现代文：判官窦处约说： 这是幻术，用污秽的东西可以把它驱散。 
English: Magistrate Dou Yu said: "It's an illusion, and it can be dispelled with filth.

古文：乃取尸秽焚于其下，果然兵卫散去。
现代文：于是取来尸体等秽物在那下边燃烧。
English: So they took the bodies and other filth and burned them down there.

古文：白云乘马与从者四十余人，走于汉水之上，蹙波起尘，如履平地，追之不得。
现代文：果然兵卫们散去了，刘白云骑着马和四十多名随从，奔跑在河水之上，水波上践起烟尘，就象奔跑在平地上，追也追不上。
English: Sure enough, the guards dispersed. Liu Baiyun rode on horseback with more than forty followers, running on the river, with smoke and dust on the water waves. It was like running on flat ground, and it was impossible to catch up.

古文：谓追者曰： 我刘白云也。 
现代文：他对追的人说： 我是刘白云。 
English: He said to his pursuers: I am Liu Baiyun.

古文：后于江西湖南，人多见之，弥更少年洁白。
现代文：后来在江西、湖南，很多人见过他，见他更年轻白净了。
English: Later, in Jiangxi and Hunan, many people saw him and saw him younger and whiter.

古文：时湖南刺史王逊好道，白云时来郡中。
现代文：当时湖南刺史王逊喜欢道术，刘白云时常到郡中来。
English: At that time, Hunan scholar Wang Xun liked Taoism, and Liu Baiyun often came to Guozhong.

古文：忽一日别去，谓逊曰： 将往洪州，即与钟陵相见。 
现代文：忽然有一天他告别离去，对王逊说： 我要到洪州去，咱们将在钟陵相见。 
English: Suddenly one day he said goodbye and left, saying to Wang Xun: I want to go to Hongzhou, we will meet in Zhongling.

古文：一揖而行。
现代文：说完他作了一揖便走了。
English: After saying this, he made a face and left.

古文：初不晓其旨。
现代文：起初王逊不明白他的意思。
English: At first, Wang Xun didn't understand what he meant.

古文：辰发灵川，午时已在湘潭。
现代文：他辰时从灵川出发，午时已到了湘潭。
English: He started from Lingchuan at noon and arrived at Xiangtan at noon.

古文：人多识者，验其所行，顷刻七百里矣。
现代文：很多人认识他，查验一下他走的路，顷刻之间就是七百里了。
English: A lot of people know him, and if you check his route, it's seven hundred miles in no time at all.

古文：旬日，王逊果除洪州。
现代文：十天之后，王逊果然改任洪州刺史。
English: Ten days later, Wang Song was indeed appointed as the Hongzhou chief historian.

古文：到任后，白云亦来相访。
现代文：到任后，刘白云也来拜访。
English: After taking office, Liu Baiyun also came to visit.

古文：复于江都值乐真人。
现代文：刘白云又在江都遇到乐真人。
English: Liu Baiyun also met Le Zhenren in Jiangdu.

古文：曰： 尔周游人间，固有年矣。
现代文：乐真人说： 你周游人间，本来有年头了。
English: Le Zhen said: You have been traveling around the world for a long time.

古文：金液九丹之经，太上所敕，令授于尔，可选名岳福地炼而服之，千日之外，可以登云天矣。 
现代文：金液九丹的经书，是太上赐给的，让我交给你，你可以选一个名山福地把丹炼出来吃下去，一千天之后便可以升天做神仙了。 
English: The scripture of gold, liquid, and nine dan was given to me by my mother-in-law. Let me give it to you. You can choose a famous mountain and place to refine the dan and eat it. After a thousand days, you will be able to ascend to heaven and become a god.

古文：乾符中，犹在长安市卖药，人有识之者，但不可亲炙，无由师匠耳。
现代文：乾符年间，刘白云还在长安市上卖药。有人认识他，但不能和他亲热，没有机会向他学习。
English: During the Qianfu era, Liu Baiyun was still selling medicine in Chang'an. Some people knew him, but they couldn't be intimate with him and didn't have the opportunity to learn from him.

