古文：《虞书》曰 乃同律度量衡 ，所以齐远近，立民信也。
现代文：《虞书》说 统一了律、度、量、衡 ，这是为了使远近一致而使百姓有所凭信。
English: "The Book of the State" says that it has unified the law, measure, quantity, and weight, which is in order to make the far and near consistent and give the people some credence.

古文：自伏羲画八卦，由数起，至黄帝、尧、舜而大备。
现代文：从伏羲画八卦，数字就由此而起，到黄帝、尧、舜时就完整齐全了。
English: From the Fuxi painting of the Eight Trigrams, the numbers started from this, and they were complete by the time of the Yellow Emperor, the Year of the Dog, and the Year of the Rooster.

古文：三代稽古，法度章焉。
现代文：三代时研习古事，度量衡制度更加明晰了。
English: Three generations have been studying ancient things, and the measurement system has become more clear.

古文：周衰官失，孔子陈后王之法，曰： 谨权量，审法度，修废官，举逸民，四方之政行矣。 
现代文：周朝衰亡失去了控制，孔子就陈述后代帝王应遵守的准则，说道： 要小心对待斤两与斗斛，慎重对待丈和尺，重整被罢免的官员，举荐人才，天下的政治就可行了。 
English: When the decline and fall of the Zhou Dynasty got out of control, Confucius stated the principles that future generations of emperors should abide by, saying: Be careful with the jing and dou, be careful with the jo and shaku, reorganize the dismissed officials, recommend talents, and the world's politics will be feasible.

古文：汉兴，北平侯张苍首律历事，孝武帝时乐官考正。
现代文：汉朝建立后，北平侯张苍最先确定律法和历法，孝武帝时乐官又进行了考正。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Beiping marquis Zhang Cang was the first to determine the law and calendar, and the music official of Emperor Xiaowu carried out the examination and correction.

古文：至元始中，王莽秉政，欲耀名誉，征天下通知钟律者百余人，使羲和刘歆等典领条奏，言之最详。
现代文：到元始年间王莽把持朝政，想沽名钓誉，就征召了天下通晓钟律的一百多人，叫羲和刘歆等人主持领导分条上奏，所说的最为详细。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Mang, who was in charge of the imperial government, wanted to make a name for himself, so he enlisted more than a hundred people who were familiar with the rules of the clock, and asked Yu and Liu Ye to preside over the leaders' performance of the score. What he said was the most detailed.

古文：故删其伪辞，取正义著于篇。
现代文：所以删除其中不确切的话，选取其中正确的意义，把它们写成篇章。
English: Therefore, delete the inaccurate words, select the correct meaning, and write them into a chapter.

古文：一曰备数，二曰和声，三曰审度，四曰嘉量，五曰权衡。
现代文：一叫完备数字，二叫和协乐音，三叫详细长短标准，四叫标准量器，五叫称量物体轻重工具。
English: The first is called a complete number, the second is called a harmonica, the third is called a detailed length standard, the fourth is called a standard measuring instrument, and the fifth is called a weighing tool.

古文：参五以变，错综其数，稽之于古今，效之于气物，和之于心耳，考之于经传，咸得其实，靡不协同。
现代文：或三或五，加以参合，加以改变，考察古今，验证物体，协调听觉，查考经传，都得到了确实，没有不一致的。
English: or three or five, to be combined, to be changed, to investigate ancient and modern times, to verify objects, to coordinate hearing, to investigate the transmission of the scriptures, have all been confirmed, and there is no inconsistency.

古文：数者，一、十、百、千、万也，所以算数事物，顺性命之理也。
现代文：数就是一、十、百、千、万，是用来计算统计事物，顺应人的性命的规则。
English: Numbers are one, ten, one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, and are used to calculate statistical things and conform to the rules of human life.

古文：《书》曰： 先其算命。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 首先要建立算数来命名万物。 
English: "Shangshu" said: First of all, we must establish arithmetic to name all things.

古文：本起于黄钟之数，始于一而三之，三三积之，历十二辰之数，十有七万七千一百四十七，而五数备矣。
现代文：原本产生于黄钟的律敷，从一开始，用三来乘，再用三来乘，经过十二次相乘的数字，得十七万匕千一百四十七，即一乘以三的十一次方，五行的数字都齐备了。
English: Originally, it was derived from the law of the yellow bell. From the beginning, it was multiplied by three, and then multiplied by three, and after twelve times of multiplication, the number was 177,147, that is, one multiplied by three is eleven squared, and the five rows of numbers were complete.

古文：其算法用竹，径一分，长六寸，二百七十一枚而成六觚，为一握。
现代文：它的计算方法是用竹子，直径一分，长六寸，用二百七十一枚就形成六角，是一握的数量。
English: Its calculation method is to use bamboo, with a diameter of one minute and a length of six inches. Two hundred and seventy-one pieces are used to form hexagons, which is a handful.

古文：径象乾律黄钟之一，而长象坤吕林钟之长。
现代文：直径就像十二律六阳中黄钟的十分之一，长度就像六阴中林钟音律的长度。
English: The diameter is like one-tenth of the yellow bell in the sun, and the length is like the length of the bell in the forest.

古文：其数以《易》大衍之数五十，其用四十九，成阳六爻，得周流六虚之象也。
现代文：它的数字是用《周易》中大衍之数是五、十，其用数为四十九，就成为阳六爻，从而形成六爻周转流行的景象。
English: Its number is derived from the number five and ten in "Zhou Yi," and its use number is forty-nine, which becomes Yang Liuxuan, thus forming the popular scene of Liuxuan turnover.

古文：夫推历生律制器，规圜矩方，权重衡平，准绳嘉量，探赜索隐，钩深至远，莫不用焉。
现代文：推演历术、产生律吕、制作器物，用规来画圆，用矩来画方，称量物体，量知多少，窥探幽深，求索隐微，勾画描绘致深致远的事物，没有不用数的。
English: There is no shortage of things to deduce the art of history, generate laws and rules, make utensils, draw circles with rules, draw methods with moments, weigh objects, know how much to measure, explore the depths, search for subtleties, and outline and depict things that are far-reaching.

古文：度长短者不失毫厘，量多少者不失圭撮，权轻重者不失黍累。
现代文：测量长短可以不差毫，容量多少不差圭撮，称量轻重不差黍累。
English: The measurement length can be the same, the capacity can be the same, and the weight can be the same.

古文：纪于一，协于十，长于百，大于千，衍千万，其法在算术。
现代文：记数超过了一的，和超过了十的，长大于一百的，大小超过一千的，演算超过一万的，计算都在于算数的方法。
English: Counting more than one, and more than ten, growing more than a hundred, the size of more than a thousand, the calculation of more than ten thousand, the calculation is in the method of calculation.

古文：宣于天下，小学是则。
现代文：公布天下，是小学的准则。
English: Publicity is the norm in primary schools.

古文：职在太史，羲和掌之。
现代文：职责在于太史，羲和掌管 芦。
English: It is responsible for the history, administration and management of the province.

古文：声者，宫、商、角、徵、羽也。
现代文：声，是宫、商、角、征、羽。
English: The voice is the palace, the merchant, the horn, the conquest, and the feather.

古文：所以作乐者，谐八音，荡涤人之邪意，全其正性，移风易俗也。
现代文：制作音乐，是用来调谐八音，净化人不正当的心意，完整他们端正的秉性，改变风气转换习俗的。
English: Making music is used to tune the eight tones, purify people's improper thoughts, complete their upright nature, and change customs.

古文：八音：土曰埙，匏曰笙，皮曰鼓，竹曰管，丝曰弦，石曰磬，金曰钟，木曰祝。
现代文：八种乐器包括：用土做的叫埙，用匏做的叫笙，用皮做的叫鼓，用竹做的叫管，用丝做的叫弦，用石做的叫磬，用金属做的叫钟，用木做的叫祝。
English: The eight musical instruments include: a yakitori made of soil, a yakitori made of cymbals, a yakitori made of leather, a yakitori made of bamboo, a yakitori made of silk, a yakitori made of stone, a yakitori made of metal, and a yakitori made of wood.

古文：五声和，八音谐，而乐成。
现代文：五声调和，八音和谐，音乐就成了。
English: Five-part harmony, eight-part harmony, and the music is complete.

古文：商之为言章也，物成孰可章度也。
现代文：商是声音最显著的，物质成熟后可以明显地测量。
English: The quotient is the most prominent sound, and it can be clearly measured after the material matures.

古文：角，触也，物触地而出，戴芒角也。
现代文：角，就是触，植物冲破地面长出来的，是幼苗长出的尖叶。
English: Angle, that is, touch, plants grow out of the ground, are the pointed leaves of seedlings.

古文：宫，中也，居中央，暢四方，唱始施生，为四声纲也。
现代文：宫，就是中，处在中央，四方畅通，最先开始，是四声中起决定作用的部分。
English: Gong, that is, middle, is in the center, four-way smooth, the first to start, is the decisive part of the four-part chorus.

古文：徵，祉也，物盛大而繁祉也。
现代文：征，就是祉，物体盛大就产生福祉。
English: "Sheng" means welfare, and when things are grand, it produces well-being.

古文：羽，宇也，物聚臧，宇覆之地。
现代文：羽，就是字，物体都聚集隐藏在宇宙下面。
English: Feather, that is to say, objects are gathered and hidden under the universe.

古文：夫声者，中于宫，触于角，祉于徵，章于商，宇于羽，故四声为宫纪也。
现代文：声音，就是以宫为中间，从角慢慢开始，到征逐渐强大，而到商就更显著了，到羽就扩大到了整个宇宙，所以四声成为五音了。
English: The sound, that is, takes the palace as the center, slowly starts from the horn, gradually becomes strong to the conquest, and becomes more prominent to the merchant, and expands to the entire universe to the feather, so the four sounds become five sounds.

古文：协之五行，则角为木，五常为仁，五事为貌。
现代文：用五行来和配，那么角就是木，在五常中是仁，在五事中就是貌。
English: With the five elements to match, then the horn is wood, in the five elements is benevolence, in the five things is appearance.

古文：商为金，为义，为言；徵为火，为礼，为视；羽为水，为智，为听；宫为土，为信，为思。
现代文：商就是金、是义、是言，征就是火、是礼、是视，羽就是水、是智、是听，宫就是土、是信、是思。
English: Commerce is money, is righteousness, is speech, sign is fire, is worship, is sight, feather is water, is wisdom, is hearing, palace is earth, is faith, is thought.

古文：以君、臣、民、事、物言之，则宫为君，商为臣，角为民，徵为事，羽为物。
现代文：如果从君、臣、民、事、物方面来说，那么宫就是君，商就是臣，角就是民，征就是事，羽就是物。
English: If we think in terms of ruler, vassal, people, thing, and thing, then the palace is the ruler, the merchant is the vassal, the horn is the people, the tax is the thing, and the feather is the thing.

古文：唱和有象，故言君臣位事之体也。
现代文：此唱彼和，互相呼应，所以用君臣的地位来论说是事物的本体。
English: This chants and that chants, echoing each other, so using the status of monarchs and ministers to argue is the essence of things.

古文：五声为本，生于黄种之律。
现代文：五声的根本，产生于黄钟的律音。
English: The root of the five tones comes from the chime of the yellow bell.

古文：九寸为宫，或损或益，以定商、角、徵、羽。
现代文：以九寸作为宫调，或增或减，用来确定商、角、征、羽。
English: Nine centimeters is used as the imperial measurement, either increasing or decreasing, and is used to determine the quotient, angle, requisition, and feather.

古文：九六相生，阴阳之应也。
现代文：九和六错杂交替，是阴和阳互相呼应的结果。
English: The hybrid of nine and six is the result of the mutual response of yin and yang.

古文：律十有二，阳六为律，阴六为吕。
现代文：律有十二，其中六阳为律，六阴为吕。
English: There are twelve ritsu, of which six yang are ritsu and six yin are ryu.

古文：律以统气类物，一曰黄钟，二曰太族，三曰姑洗，四曰蕤宾，五曰夷则，六曰亡射。
现代文：律是用来统领气息模仿事物的，一叫做黄钟，二叫太蔟，三叫姑洗，四叫蕤宾，五叫夷贝，六叫无射。
English: Law is used to control the breath of imitation things. One is called the yellow bell, the second is called the big bell, the third is called the small bell, the fourth is called the small bell, the fifth is called the small bell, and the sixth is called the small bell.

古文：吕以旅阳宣气，一曰林钟，二曰南吕，三曰应钟，四曰大吕，五曰夹钟，六曰中吕。
现代文：吕是用来集中天阳以发出气息，一叫做林钟，二叫做南吕，三叫做应钟，四叫做大吕，五叫做夹钟，六叫做中吕。
English: Lu is used to concentrate the sun to emit breath. The first is called Lin Zhong, the second is called Nan Lu, the third is called Ying Zhong, the fourth is called Da Lu, the fifth is called Jian Zhong, and the sixth is called Zhong Lu.

古文：有三统之义焉。
现代文：有三统的含义。
English: It has the meaning of trinity.

古文：其传曰，黄帝之所作也。
现代文：相传是黄帝所作。
English: Legend has it that it was made by the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝使泠纶自大夏之西，昆仑之阴，取竹之解谷，生其窍厚均者，断两节间而吹之，以为黄钟之宫。
现代文：黄帝派泠纶从大夏往西，到达昆仑山的北面，砍下生长在解谷的竹子，取竹孔内外厚薄均匀的，截断两节的中间部位用来吹气，就成了黄钟的音律。
English: The Yellow Emperor sent the bell from Daxia to the west, reaching the northern side of Kunlun Mountain. He cut down the bamboo growing in the valley, took the bamboo hole with uniform thickness inside and outside, and cut off the middle part of the two sections to blow. It became the melody of the yellow bell.

古文：制十二筒以听凤之鸣，其雄鸣为六，雌鸣亦六，比黄钟之宫，而皆可以生之，是为律本。
现代文：做成十二个竹筒来听凤凰的鸣叫，其中雄的叫了六下，雌的也叫了六下，参照黄钟的音律，都可以上下相生，所以是律的根本。
English: Twelve bamboo tubes were made to listen to the chirping of the phoenix, of which the male called six times, and the female also called six times. According to the melody of the yellow bell, both can be up and down, so it is the basis of the melody.

古文：至治之世，天地之气合以生风；天地之风气正，十二律定。
现代文：在天下极为太平的时代，天气和地气相合就产生了风；天地的风气端正了，十二律就定了。
English: In a time of great peace, the weather and the earth's atmosphere combined to produce wind; when the weather and the earth's atmosphere were in harmony, the Twelve Precepts were established.

古文：黄钟：黄者，中之色，君之服也；钟者，种也。
现代文：黄钟：黄是中间的颜色，君主的服装；钟就是种。
English: Yellow bell: yellow is the middle color, the monarch's clothing; the bell is the seed.

古文：天之中数五，五为声，声上宫，五声莫大焉。
现代文：天的中间数字是五，五作为声音的数字，在宫上的声音，五声中没有比它更响的了。
English: The middle number of the day is five, and five is the number of the voice; there is no louder voice than the voice of five in the temple.

古文：地之中数六，六为律，律有形有色，色上黄，五色莫盛焉。
现代文：地的中间数字是六，六作为律音，律有形有色，颜色崇尚黄色，五色中再也没有比它更艳丽的了。
English: The middle number of the earth is six. Six is a rhyme. The rhyme has shape and color. The color advocates yellow. Among the five colors, there is nothing more beautiful than it.

古文：故阳气施种于黄泉，孳萌万物，为六气元也。
现代文：所以阳气注于地下深处，使万物萌芽生长，成为六气之首。
English: Therefore, the yang qi is poured into the depths of the underground, causing all things to sprout and grow, becoming the first of the six qi.

古文：以黄色名元气律者，著宫声也。
现代文：用黄色来命名气律之首，是为了突出宫声。
English: Using yellow to name the head of the qi rhythm is to highlight the sound of the palace.

古文：宫以九唱六，变动不居，周流六虚。
现代文：宫用九唱六和，变化不止，流动不息。
English: The palace uses nine chants and six chords, with constant changes and flow.

古文：始于子，在十一月。
现代文：从子位开始，在十一月。
English: Starting with the cubs, in November.

古文：大吕：吕，旅也，言阴大，旅助黄钟宣气而牙物也。
现代文：大吕：吕，就是旅，是说阴气很强，共同帮助黄钟疏通气流而使万物萌芽。
English: Lv: Lv, which means journey, refers to the strong gloomy atmosphere. Together, they help the yellow bell to clear the air flow and make everything sprout.

古文：位于丑，在十二月。
现代文：宫位于丑位，在十二月。
English: The palace is located in Uglich, in December.

古文：太族：族，奏也，言阳气大，奏地而达物也。
现代文：太蔟：蔟，就是奏，是说阳气盛大，波及地面上的物质。
English: Tai Zhi: Zhi, is to play, is to say that the yang qi is grand, affecting the material on the ground.

古文：位于寅，在正月，夹钟：言阴夹助太族宣四方之气而出种物也。
现代文：宫位于寅位，在正月。夹钟，是说阴气在两旁帮助着太蔟传播四方的气流而使种在地下的物质长出来。
English: The palace is located in the "tiger" position, in the first month of the year. "Clamped" means that the gloomy air on both sides helps the earthworm to spread the four-sided air flow and make the material planted underground grow out.

古文：位于卯，在二月。
现代文：宫位于卯位，在二二月。
English: The shrine is located in Ui, and is lit in February.

古文：姑洗：洗，洁也，言阳气洗物辜浩之也。
现代文：姑洗：洗就是洁，是说阳气洗涤物质一定使它洁净。
English: Gu Qi: To wash is to be clean, which means that the yang qi washing substance must make it clean.

古文：位于辰，在三月。
现代文：宫位于辰位，在三月。
English: The palace is located in Tatsunii, in March.

古文：中吕：言微阴始起未成，著于其中旅助姑洗宣气齐物也。
现代文：中吕，是说很小的阴气刚开始起来还没有形成，把它放到裹面是一同帮助姑洗宣泄气流调济物质。
English: The middle line means that the very small yin qi has not yet formed at the beginning, and putting it on the face wrap is a substance that helps purify and vent the airflow.

古文：位于巳，在四月。
现代文：宫位于巳位，在四月。
English: The palace is located in the middle of the country, in April.

古文：蕤宾：蕤，继也；宾，导也，言阳始导阴气使继养物也。
现代文：蕤宾：蕤，就是继，宾，就是导，是说阳气开始引导阴气使其继续滋善万物。
English: Yin-Bin: Yin is the successor, and Bin is the guide, which means that the yang begins to guide the yin so that it can continue to nourish all things.

古文：位于午，在五月。
现代文：宫位于午位，在五月。
English: The palace is located in the afternoon, in May.

古文：林钟：林，君也，言阴气受任，助蕤宾君主种物使长大茂盛也。
现代文：林钟：林，就是君，是说阴气接受任务，帮助蕤宾统治播种的万物使它们生长得很茂盛。
English: Lin Zhong: Lin, that is, Jun, means that Yin Qi accepts the task of helping Zou Bin to rule all things sown and make them grow very luxuriantly.

古文：位于未，在六月。
现代文：宫位于未位，在六月。
English: The palace is unoccupied, in June.

古文：夷则：则，法也，言阳气正法度，而使阴气夷当伤之物也。
现代文：夷则：则，就是法，是说阳气用来端正法度而使阴气去损伤那些应当伤害的物质。
English: 夷则:则, which means law, means that yang qi is used to rectify the law and make yin qi damage those substances that should be harmed.

古文：位于申，在七月。
现代文：宫位于申位，在七月。
English: The palace is under siege, in July.

古文：南吕：南，任也，言阴气旅助夷则任成万物也。
现代文：南吕；南，就是任，是说阴气是用来一同帮助损害那些生成的万物。
English: Nan Lü; Nan, which means Ren, means that yin and yang are used together to help damage the things that are created.

古文：位于酉，在八月。
现代文：宫位于酉位，在八月。
English: The Imperial Palace is located in Shibuya, in August.

古文：亡射：射，厌也，言阳气究物，而使阴气毕剥落之，终而复始，亡厌已也。
现代文：无射：射，就是厌，是说阳气穷究物质而使阴气全部把它剥落，完了以后再开始，没有满足和穷尽。
English: Non-shooting: "shooting" means to be fed up. It means that the yang qi pursues the material and makes the yin qi peel it all off. After it is finished, it will start again. There is no satisfaction and exhaustion.

古文：位于戌，在九月。
现代文：宫位于戌位，在九月。
English: The palace is located in Shiji, up in September.

古文：应钟：言阴气应亡谢，该臧万物而杂阳阂种也。
现代文：应钟，是说阴气呼应无射，把万物都藏塞起来而阴气夹杂着阳气来阻隔所种下的物质。
English: Answering the bell means that the negative air echoes and does not emit, concealing everything, while the negative air is mixed with the positive air to block the material planted.

古文：位于亥，在十月。
现代文：宫位于亥位，在十月。
English: The palace is located in the middle of October.

古文：三统者，天施，地化，人事之纪也。
现代文：三统，是上天所施行，大地所造化，人间所行之事的记载。
English: The trinity is a record of the things done in heaven, the things done on earth, and the things done among men.

古文：十一月， 乾 之初九，阳气伏于地下，始著为一，万物萌动，钟于太阴，故黄钟为天统，律长九寸。
现代文：十一月时，是《干》卦的初九，此时阳气埋伏在地底下，开始时显露为一体，万物开始萌芽生长，种子种于阴气极盛的地方，所以黄钟就是上天的正统，律长有九寸。
English: In November, it was the ninth day of the first month of the Chinese Zodiac. At this time, the yang qi was lurking under the ground. At the beginning, it was revealed as one. Everything began to sprout and grow, and the seeds were planted in the place where the yin qi was at its peak. Therefore, the yellow bell is the orthodoxy of heaven, with a length of nine inches.

古文：九者，所以究极中和，为万物元也。
现代文：九是用来穷究和中和的，是万物之首。
English: Nine is used to investigate and reconcile, and is the head of all things.

古文：《易》曰： 立天之道，曰阴与阳。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 建立上天的规律，就是阴和阳。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: Establishing the laws of heaven is yin and yang.

古文：六月， 坤 之初六，阴气受任于太阳，继养化柔，万物生长，茂之于未，令种刚强大，故林钟为地统，律长六寸。
现代文：六月，是《坤》卦的初六，阴气从阳气极盛的地方接受孕育，用来继续培养万物使之开始萌生，让万物得以生长，在未位变得茂盛，让种子变得刚强壮大，所以林钟就是大地的正统，律长有六寸。
English: June is the sixth month of the "Kun" horoscope. Yin receives nurturing from the place where yang is at its peak. It is used to continue to cultivate all things so that they begin to germinate, so that all things can grow, become lush in the middle, and let the seeds become strong and strong. Therefore, Lin Zhong is the orthodox of the earth, with a regular length of six inches.

古文：六者，所以含阳之施，茂之于六合之内，令刚柔有体也 立地之道，曰柔与刚。 
现代文：六是因为含有阳气的散发，盛行于天地四方，使刚和柔各自有体。 建立大地的规律，就是刚与柔。 
English: Sixth, it is because of the yang that pervades the four quarters of heaven and earth, so that the strong and the weak have their own bodies, and the laws that establish the earth are the strong and the weak.

古文：  乾 知太始， 坤 作成物。 
现代文： 《干》卦可以知道最初的，《坤》卦可以生成万物。 
English: "Deng" gua can know the original, "Kun" gua can generate all things.

古文：正月， 乾 之九三，万物棣通，族出于寅，人奉而成之，仁以养之，义以行之，令事物各得其理。
现代文：正月，《干》卦的九三爻，万物开始通气，聚集起来在寅时长出，人类捧着它使它成形，用仁德来抚养，用道义来对待，使事物各自得到自己发展的规律。
English: In the first month of the year, the ninth and thirtieth day of the Chinese lunar calendar, all things begin to breathe, gather together and grow in the spring, and human beings hold it to shape it, raise it with benevolence, treat it with morality, and make things get their own development rules.

古文：寅，木也，为仁；其声，商也，为义。
现代文：寅位，属木，是五常中的仁；它的声音，是商调，是五常中的义。
English: The yang position, belonging to the wood, is the benevolence of the five constants; its voice, is the modulation, is the meaning of the five constants.

古文：故太族为人统，律长八寸，象八卦，宓戏氏之所以顺天地，通神明，类万物之情也。 立人之道，日仁与义。 
现代文：所以太蔟就是人类的正统，律长有八寸，就像八卦，伏羲氏用它来理顺天地，通达神灵，类推万物的情状。 成为人的原则，就是仁与义。 
English: Therefore, Taixun is the orthodoxy of mankind, and the length of the law is eight centimeters, just like the Eight Trigrams. Fuxun used it to straighten out heaven and earth, access the gods, and analogize the situation of all things. The principle of becoming human is benevolence and righteousness.

古文： 在天成象，在地成形。 
现代文： 在天形成天象，在地就形成形体。 
English: For in the heavens there are constellations, and on the earth are constellations.

古文： 后以裁成天地之道，辅相天地之宜，以左右民。 
现代文： 君王用来总结形成天地的规律，用天地合理的规律来规矩百姓。 
English: It is used by the monarch to summarize the laws that form heaven and earth, and to use the reasonable laws of heaven and earth to govern the people.

古文：此三律之谓矣，是为三统。
现代文：这就是对三律而言的，这就是三统。
English: This is what the Three Laws are all about, this is what the Three Unities are all about.

古文：其于三正也，黄钟，子，为天正；林钟，未之冲丑，为地正；太族，寅，为人正。
现代文：五声在三正中，黄钟在子位为天正，林钟在未位，其相对冲的是丑位，为地正，太蔟在寅位为人正。
English: The five tones are in the middle of the three chakras, and the yellow bell in the zi position is the heavenly chakra, and the forest bell is in the unseated chakra. Its opposite is the ugly chakra, which is the earthly chakra, and the great dragonfly is in the human chakra, which is the human chakra.

古文：三正正始，是以地正适其始纽于阳东北丑位。
现代文：三正用来端正开始，是用地正去适应它开始于阳东北的丑位。
English: Sanzheng is used to begin with rectitude, and jianzheng is used to adapt to its beginning in the north-east of the yang.

古文：《易》曰 东北丧朋，乃终有庆 ，答应之道也。
现代文：《周易》上说 东北丧失了同类，最终一定有福 ，这是答和应的规律。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that the Northeast has lost its peers, and ultimately there must be a blessing, which is the law of reciprocity.

古文：及黄钟为宫，则太族、姑洗、林钟、南吕皆以正声应，无有忽微，不复与它律为役者，同心一统之义也。
现代文：黄钟如果为宫声，那么太蔟、姑洗、林钟、南吕就都用正声相应，没有一点多余的，不再为其他律音所利用，这是同心齐力的道义所在。
English: If the yellow bell is the palace bell, then the great bell, the small bell, the forest bell, and the southern bell all correspond to the positive bell. There is nothing superfluous, and they are no longer used for other rhythms. This is the morality of concerted efforts.

古文：非黄钟而它律，虽当其月自宫者，则其和应之律有空积忽微，不得其正。
现代文：不用黄钟而用其他的律，即使从它所在的月份为宫调，那么与它相和应的律音也会有差异，不能得到它正确的音高。
English: If you do not use the yellow bell and use other rhythms, even if it is a palace tune from the month in which it is located, then the rhythms corresponding to it will also be different, and you will not be able to get its correct pitch.

古文：此黄钟至尊，亡与并也。
现代文：这就是黄钟高高在上的缘故，没有与它相并列的。
English: That's why the yellow bell is so high up, it's not on a par with it.

古文：《易》曰： 参天两地而倚数。 
现代文：《周易》书上说： 天的奇数和地的偶数就组成了数字。 
English: The book "Zhou Yi" says: The odd numbers of the heavens and the even numbers of the earth make up numbers.

古文：天之数始于一，终于二十有五。
现代文：天的数字从一开始，其总和为二十五。
English: The number of days from the beginning adds up to twenty-five.

古文：其义纪之以三，故置一得三又二十五分之六，凡二十五置，终天之数，得八十一，以天地五位之合终于十者乘之，为八百一十分，应历一统千五百三十九岁之章数，黄钟之实也。
现代文：它的含义用三来记数，所以放一个就得三个，又有二十五分之六，一共放二十五个，为终天之数，得八十一，用天地五位的最后一个数以十乘之，得到八百一十分，印证了历法一统有一千五百三十九年的章数，这是黄钟的积数。
English: Its meaning is counted by three, so if you put one, you will get three, and six of twenty-five. If you put a total of twenty-five, which is the number of the last day, you will get eighty-one, and if you multiply the last number of the five heavens and earths by ten, you will get eight hundred and ten. This confirms that the calendar has a total of fifteen hundred and thirty-nine years of chapters, which is the number of the yellow bell.

古文：繇此之义，起十二律之周径。
现代文：用这个含义，就形成了十二律的直径。
English: With this meaning, the diameter of the zodiac is formed.

古文：地之数始于二，终于三十。
现代文：地的数字从二开始，其总和为三十。
English: The digits of the earth begin with two and add up to thirty.

古文：其义纪之以两，故置一得二，凡三十置，终地之数，得六十，以地中数六乘之，为三百六十分，当期之日，林钟之实。
现代文：它的含义用二来记数，所以放一个就得二个，一共放三四个，为终地之数，得到六十，用地的中心数字六来乘以六十，得三百六十分，正好是一年的天数，这是林钟的积数。
English: Its meaning is counted by two, so if you put one, you will get two, and if you put three or four, you will get sixty, and if you multiply sixty by the central number six, you will get 360, which is exactly the number of days in a year, which is the number of the forest clock.

古文：人者，继天顺地，序气成物，统八卦，调八风，理八政，正八节，谐八音，舞八佾，监八方，被八荒，以终天地之功，故八八六十四。
现代文：人，继承天意顺从地意，调节气形成事物，统率八卦，调动八风，治理八政，端工正八节，调和八音，舞蹈八佾，监察八方，身游八荒，用来完成天地所有的功业，所以八乘八得六十四。
English: Man, inheriting the will of heaven, obeying the will of earth, regulating the qi to form things, leading the eight directions, mobilizing the eight winds, governing the eight governments, finishing the work of the eight sections, harmonizing the eight tones, dancing the eight dances, monitoring the eight directions, and traveling the eight deserts, is used to complete all the work of heaven and earth, so eight times eight is sixty-four.

古文：其义极天地之变，以天地五位之合终于十者乘之，为六百四十分，以应六十四卦，大族之实也。
现代文：它的意义包括了天地所有的变化，用天地五位的最后一个数十来乘以六十四，得六百四十分，应了六十四卦，这是太蔟的积数。
English: Its meaning includes all the changes in heaven and earth, using the last ten of the five heavens and earths to multiply by sixty-four, resulting in six hundred and forty minutes, corresponding to sixty-four trigrams, which is the product of Taishan.

古文：《书》曰： 天功人其代之。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 天的功业由人来代替。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Heaven's work is replaced by people.

古文：天兼地，人则天，故以五位之合乘焉， 唯天为大，唯尧则之 之象也。
现代文：天兼有地，入以天为准贝，所以用天数五位的和来乘以它们， 衹有天是最大的，所以尧遵守天的法则 就是这样。
English: Heaven and earth co-exist, and heaven is the standard, so multiply them by the sum of the number of days, which is five, and heaven is the largest, so this is how to abide by the laws of heaven.

古文：地以中数乘者，阴道理内，在中馈之象也。
现代文：地用中心数字来乘，是因为阴气的规律是主持内部，就像在中锁的位置一样。
English: Use the middle digit to multiply, because the rule of yin qi is to preside over the inside, just like in the middle lock position.

古文：三统相通，故黄钟、林钟、太族律长皆全寸而亡余分也。
现代文：三统互相贯通了，所以黄钟、林钟、太蔟的律长都达到了，没有多余一分。
English: The three systems are interlinked, so Huang Zhong, Lin Zhong, and Taizhou's legal chiefs have all been reached, and there is not a minute to spare.

古文：天之中数五，地之中数六，而二者为合。
现代文：天数的中间数字是五，地数的中间数字是六，这两者都是合。
English: The middle digit of the number of days is five, and the middle digit of the number of lands is six, both of which are the same.

古文：六为虚，五为声，周流于六虚。
现代文：六是爻位，五是声位，在天地四方流动不息。
English: The sixth is the gong position, the fifth is the voice position, and it flows ceaselessly in the four directions of heaven and earth.

古文：虚者，爻律夫阴阳，登降运行，列为十二，而律吕和矣。
现代文：虚，爻位和律都有阴阳，它们上下运行，共有十二个，这样律吕就相和谐了。
English: There are twelve meridians, each of which has its own yin and yang, and they run up and down, so that the meridian and the rhumb line are in harmony.

古文：太极元气，函三为一。
现代文：原始混沌之气中，把天地人三者混合为一。
English: In the atmosphere of primordial chaos, the three elements of heaven, earth and man were mixed into one.

古文：极，中也。
现代文：极，是中正的意思。
English: "Extremely" means in the middle.

古文：元，始也。
现代文：元，是开始的意思。
English: Yuan means beginning.

古文：行于十二辰，始动于子。
现代文：从子时开始起动，在十二辰中运行。
English: It starts from the ninth hour and runs through the twelfth hour.

古文：参之于丑，得三。
现代文：在丑时用三乘子时之数，得三。
English: In the ugly time, the number of three times the number of hours is used to get three.

古文：又参之于寅，得九。
现代文：又在寅时用三乘以丑时之数，得九。
English: In addition, three times the number of ugly hours is used to multiply the number of black hours, resulting in nine.

古文：又参之于卯，得二十七。
现代文：又在卯时用三乘以寅时之数，得二十七。
English: In addition, he used three times the number of hours to get twenty-seven.

古文：又参之于辰，得八十一。
现代文：又在辰时用三乘以卯时之数，得八十一。
English: He also multiplied the number of hours in the hour by three to get eighty-one.

古文：又参之于巳，得二百四十三。
现代文：又在巳时用三乘以辰时之数，得二百四十三。
English: And he took the number of the hours of the day, and multiplied it by three, to get two hundred and forty-three.

古文：又参之于午，得七百二十九。
现代文：又在午时用三乘以巳时之数，得七百二十九。
English: And at midday he took the number of the hours of darkness and multiplied it by three, and he came to seven hundred and twenty-nine.

古文：又参之于未，得二千一百八十七。
现代文：又在未时用三乘以午时之数，得二千一百八十七。
English: And he took the number of the hours before noon, and multiplied it by three; and he came to two thousand one hundred and eighty-seven.

古文：又参之于申，得六千五百六十一。
现代文：又在申时用三乘以未时之数，得六千五百六十一。
English: He also multiplied the number at the time of submission by three times the number at the time of non-submission to arrive at six thousand five hundred and sixty-one.

古文：又参之于酉，得万九千六百八十三。
现代文：又在酉时用三乘以申时之数，得一万九千六百八十三。
English: And he took the number of the hours of the sun, and multiplied it three times, and came to nineteen thousand six hundred and eighty-three.

古文：又参之于戌，得五万九千四十九。
现代文：又在戌时用三乘以酉时之数，得五万九千零四十九。
English: He also multiplied the number of leap hours by three to get fifty-nine thousand and forty-nine.

古文：又参之于亥，得十七万七千一百四十七。
现代文：又在亥时用三乘以戌时之数，得十七万七千一百四十七。
English: At the time of the boar, he took the number of hours and multiplied it by three to get 177,147.

古文：此阴阳合德，气钟于子，化生万物者也。
现代文：这是由于阴阳相和，气播洒在子时，用来生成万物。
English: This is due to the yin and yang phase and the air sown at the time of the seed, which is used to create all things.

古文：故孳萌于子，纽牙于丑，引达于寅，冒茆于卯，振美于辰，已盛于巳，咢布于午，昧暧于未，申坚于申，留孰于酉，毕入于戌，该阂于亥。
现代文：所以在子时滋养，在丑时萌芽，在寅时慢慢生长，在卯时冒出地面，在辰时努力向上生长，在巳时就已经强盛起来，在午时就一下全都布满了，在未时开始有滋味，有申时各自保持自己的形状，在酉时就收获已经成熟的，在戌时全部都收获了，在亥时就全都收藏起来。
English: Therefore, it is nourished when it is young, germinates when it is ugly, grows slowly when it is young, emerges from the ground when it is young, strives to grow upwards when it is young, has already grown strong when it is young, is all covered at once in the afternoon, begins to have flavor when it is young, maintains its own shape when it is young, harvests what is ripe when it is young, harvests everything when it is young, and collects everything when it is young.

古文：出甲于甲，奋轧于乙，明炳于丙，大盛于丁，丰茂于戊，理纪于己，敛更于庚，悉新于辛，怀任于壬，陈揆于癸。
现代文：在甲脱出甲壳，在乙轧轧而出，在丙显然易见，在丁强盛壮大，在戊丰盛茂密，在已有形可认，在庚收敛改变，在辛都是新收成的，在壬怀孕，在癸进行测量。
English: In A, the carapace comes out, in B, it is rolled out, in C, it is clearly visible, in D, it is strong and strong, in E, it is lush and dense, in Y, it is recognizable, in G, it converges and changes, in Z, it is newly harvested, in R, it is pregnant, and in Z, it is measured.

古文：故阴阳之施化，万物之终始，既类旅于律吕，又经历于日辰，而变化之情可见矣。
现代文：所以阴阳施行与转化，万物的终结与开始，既依照律吕而进行，又经过丫曰辰，这样变化的情况就可以看出来了。
English: Therefore, the implementation and transformation of yin and yang, the end and beginning of all things, both in accordance with the law and through the law, so that the changing situation can be seen.

古文：玉衡杓建，天之纲也；日月初躔，星之纪也。
现代文：北斗玉衡和杓柄的指向，是天的要则所在；曰月开始运行的位置，是各星的次序。
English: The direction of the Big Dipper and the handle of the pestle is the key to the sky; the position of the beginning of the month is the order of the stars.

古文：纲纪之交，以原始造设，合乐用焉。
现代文：纲和纪相互配合，就形成了原始的状态，用来配合乐音。
English: When the syllabus and discipline cooperate with each other, they form a primitive state, which is used to match the musical sound.

古文：律吕唱和，以育生成化，歌奏用焉。
现代文：律吕一唱一和，是养育生成并演化了的，用来歌唱和演奏。
English: Ruling, singing and harmony are nurtured and evolved, used for singing and playing.

古文：指顾取象，然后阴阳万物靡不条鬯该成。
现代文：斗柄指示星象取准，然后阴阳万物全都畅达完备。
English: The handle of the bucket indicates the alignment of the stars, and then everything in the yin and yang is complete.

古文：故以成之数忖该之积如法为一寸，则黄钟之长也。
现代文：所以用已成的法数除以积数，按法则是一寸，即是黄钟的长度。
English: Therefore, divide the resulting number by the integral number, according to the law is one inch, that is, the length of the yellow bell.

古文：参分损一，下生林钟。
现代文：把黄钟的长度平分成三减去其中之一，就是林钟的长度。
English: Divide the length of the yellow bell into three and subtract one of them, which is the length of the forest bell.

古文：参分林钟益一，上生太族。
现代文：把林钟的长度平分成三再增加一份，就是太蔟的长度。
English: Divide the length of the bell into three equal parts and then add one part, which is the length of the cymbal.

古文：参分太族损一，下生南吕。
现代文：把太蔟平分为三减去其中之一，就是南吕的长度。
English: If you divide Taixingping into three and subtract one of them, it is the length of Nanlu.

古文：参分南吕益一，上生姑洗。
现代文：把南吕平分为三再增加一份，就是姑洗的长度。
English: Dividing Nanluping into three and then adding one is the length of the purge.

古文：参分姑洗损一，下生应钟。
现代文：把姑洗平分为三减去其中之一，就是应钟的长度。
English: Subtract one of them, which is the length of the bell, from three.

古文：参分应钟益一，上生蕤宾。
现代文：把应钟平分为三再增加其中之一的长，就是蕤宾的长度。
English: Divide the length of the bell into three and then increase the length of one of them, which is the length of the gong.

古文：参分蕤宾损一，下生大吕。
现代文：把蕤宾平分为三再减去其中之一，就是大吕的长度。
English: Divide 宾平 into three and then subtract one of them, which is the length of 大吕.

古文：参分大吕益一，上生夷则。
现代文：把大吕平分为三再增加其中之一的长，就是夷则的长度。
English: Dividing the Great Lüping into three and then increasing the length of one of them is the length of the Yizhe.

古文：参分夷则损一，下生夹钟。
现代文：把夷则平分为三再减去其中之一，就是夹钟的长度。
English: Divide the equation by three and subtract one of them, which is the length of the bell.

古文：参分夹钟益一，上生亡射。
现代文：把夹钟平分为三再增加其中之一的长，就是无射的长度。
English: Divide the pendulum clock into three equal parts and then increase the length of one of them, that is, the length without a shot.

古文：参分亡射损一，下生中吕。
现代文：把无射平分为三再减去其中之一长，就是中吕的长度。
English: Divide the projectile-free plane into three and then subtract one of the lengths, which is the length of the middle ridge.

古文：阴阳相生，自黄钟始而左旋，八八为伍。
现代文：阴阳相生，从黄钟开始回旋，八八形成一对。
English: Yin and yang co-exist. From the yellow bell, they begin to rotate, and the eight and eight form a pair.

古文：其法皆用铜。
现代文：这些规矩都要用铜制乐器来体现。
English: All these rules are reflected in the brass instruments.

古文：职在大乐，太常掌之。
现代文：其职责在大乐官，由太常掌管。
English: Its responsibilities are in the Grand Music Office, which is under the control of the Grand Master.

古文：度者，分、寸、尺、丈、引也，所以度长短也。
现代文：度包括分、寸、尺、丈、引，是用来测量长短的。
English: Degrees include minutes, inches, feet, inches, feet and inches, and are used to measure length.

古文：本起黄钟之长。
现代文：本来是起源于黄钟的长度。
English: Originally, it originated from the length of the yellow bell.

古文：以子谷秬黍中者，一黍之广，度之九十分，黄钟之长。
现代文：用谷子黑黍中号大小来测量，一黍的宽度是九十分，正好是黄钟的长度。
English: Measured by the size of a medium-sized yakitori, the width of a yakitori is ninety-tenths, which is exactly the length of a yellow bell.

古文：一为一分，十分为寸，十寸为尺，十尺为丈，十丈为引，而五度审矣。
现代文：一个单位就是一分，十分就是一寸，十寸就是一尺，十尺就是一丈，十丈就是一引，这样五种测量长度的单位就明白清楚了。
English: One unit is one minute, ten minutes is one inch, ten inches is one foot, ten feet is one meter, and ten meters is one inch, so the five units of measuring length are clear.

古文：其法用铜，高一寸，广二寸，长一丈，而分、寸、尺、丈存焉。
现代文：制作的方法是用铜来铸造，高是一寸，宽二寸，长一丈，这样分、寸、尺、丈就都存有了。
English: The method of production is to use copper to cast, the height is one inch, the width two inches, and the length one length, so the minute, inch, yard, and length all exist.

古文：用竹为引，高一分，广六分，长十丈，其方法矩，高广之数，阴阳之象也。
现代文：用竹来制作引，高一分，宽六分，长十丈，它的方形依照矩来制作，高和宽的数字，是阴阳的具体体现。
English: Bamboo is used to make the lead, one point high, six points wide, and ten points long. Its square is made according to the moment, and the numbers of height and width are the concrete embodiment of yin and yang.

古文：分者，自三微而成著，可分别也。
现代文：分，是把许多极微小的组到一块就比较显著了，可以用来分别事物。
English: A fraction is a grouping of many very small circles into one that is more significant and can be used to separate things.

古文：寸者，忖也。
现代文：寸，就是忖，可揣度、思量。
English: 寸, that is,, can be guessed and considered.

古文：尺者，蒦也。
现代文：尺，就是蔓，用来规范长度。
English: The shaku, which is a vine, is used to regulate the length of the ring.

古文：丈者，张也。
现代文：丈，就是张，丈量的意思。
English: "丈" means "Zhang," which means "measurement."

古文：引者，信也。
现代文：引，就是信，伸长的意思。
English: "引" means "letter" and "伸長" means "to stretch."

古文：夫度者，别于分，忖于寸，蒦尺，张于丈，信于引。
现代文：所以度是用分来分别，用寸来揣度，用尺来规范，用丈来丈量，用引来伸长。
English: Therefore, degrees are distinguished by fractions, calculated by inches, standardized by feet, measured by lengths, and elongated by pulls.

古文：引者，信天下也。
现代文：引，就是无限伸展。
English: Pulling, that is, stretching to infinity.

古文：职在内官，廷尉掌之。
现代文：职责在内官，由廷尉来掌管。
English: Duties are vested in an under-secretary, with a courtier in charge.

古文：量者，龠、合、升、斗、斛也，所以量多少也。
现代文：测量容积的工具有龠、合、升、斗、斛，是用来测量多少的。
English: The tools for measuring volume are the ladle, the cup, the bucket, and the spoon, which are used to measure how much something is.

古文：本起于黄钟之龠，用度数审其容，以子谷秬黍中者千有二百实其龠，以井水准其概。
现代文：本来起源于黄钟的竹管，用长度的数字来确定它能容纳多少，用中号的谷子黑黍一千二百颗来装满竹管，用井水来让它平整。
English: The bamboo tube originally originated from the yellow bell, using the length of the number to determine how much it can hold, with a medium-sized millet black bean twelve hundred to fill the bamboo tube, with well water to make it flat.

古文：合龠为合，十合为升，十升为斗，十斗为斛，而五量嘉矣。
现代文：一黄钟竹管的数量就是一合，十合是一升，十升是一斗，十斗就是一斛，这样五种量器就完善了。
English: The number of bamboo tubes in a yellow bell is one full, ten full is one liter, ten liters is one bucket, and ten buckets is one ladle, so the five kinds of measuring instruments are perfect.

古文：其法用铜，方尺而圜其外，旁有庣焉。
现代文：制作的方法是用铜铸造，用方尺再使其外部成圆形，旁边还有剩余的部分。
English: The method of production is to use copper casting, and then use a square ruler to make it round on the outside, with the remaining part next to it.

古文：其上为斛，其下为斗。
现代文：上面就作斛，下面作斗。
English: Above is a battle, below is a fight.

古文：左耳为升，右耳为合龠。
现代文：左耳为升，右耳就是合和龠。
English: The left ear is ascending and the right ear is descending.

古文：其状似爵，以縻爵禄。
现代文：它的形状就像爵器，用来分配爵位和俸禄。
English: It is shaped like a knight's armor and is used to distribute knighthoods and salaries.

古文：上三下二，参天两地，圜而函方，左一右二，阴阳之象也。
现代文：它的上面是三，下面是二，天是奇数，地是偶数，圆中有方，左边有一个，右边有两个，这是阴阳的具体表现。
English: Its above is three, below is two, the sky is an odd number, the earth is an even number, there is a square in the circle, there is one on the left and two on the right, which is a specific manifestation of yin and yang.

古文：其圜象规，其重二钧，备气物之数，合万有一千五百二十。
现代文：它的圆就像规器一样，重有二钧，具备了大气和万物的数字，共有一万一千五百二十。
English: Its circle, like a ruler, weighs two shekels and contains the numbers of the atmosphere and all things, a total of eleven thousand five hundred and twenty.

古文：声中黄钟，始于黄钟而反覆焉，君制器之象也。
现代文：声音符合黄钟，从黄钟长度开始反覆损、益三分之一，是君主制作器物的法式。
English: The sound is consistent with the yellow bell, starting from the length of the yellow bell, repeated loss, gain one-third, is the French style of monarch-made utensils.

古文：龠者，黄钟律之实也，跃微动气而生物也。
现代文：龠是黄钟律长的容积，微微跳动鼓荡气流就生成万物。
English: The gong is the volume of a yellow bell, and everything is created by the slight beating of the air current.

古文：合者，合龠之量也。
现代文：合，是把龠加在一起的数量。
English: The sum is the number of paddles added together.

古文：升者，登合之量也。
现代文：升是比合高一等的容量。
English: The litre is a higher capacity than the litre.

古文：斗者，聚升之量也。
现代文：斗是把升聚集在一起的容量。
English: The bucket is the capacity to hold the litres together.

古文：斛者，角斗平多少之量也。
现代文：斛是用角装一斗平了的容量。
English: The cormorant is a square-rigged one-barrel flat-bottomed capacity.

古文：夫量者，跃于龠，合于合，登于升，聚于斗，角于斛也。
现代文：量器从龠开始，到合相会，到升上升，到斗相聚，把斛用角来量。
English: The measuring instrument starts from the beak, to the meeting, to the rising, to the gathering, and measures the beak with the horn.

古文：职在太仓，大司农掌之。
现代文：它的职责在太仓，由大司农来掌管。
English: Its responsibilities are in Taicang, under the supervision of the director of agriculture.

古文：衡权者：衡，平也；权，重也，衡所以任权而均物平轻重也。
现代文：衡权中衡的意思是干正，权的意思是加重，用秤锤来均分物质使轻重平正。
English: Weighing means to balance the dry weight, weight means to increase the weight, and a balance hammer is used to equalize the weight of the material.

古文：其道如底，以见准之正，绳之直，左旋见规。
现代文：它的方法就像砥石砺物使其平整一样，用来表现准星的平正，绳的笔直，向左转就是规，向右折就是矩。
English: Its method is like a grinding wheel to make it flat. It is used to show that the yardstick is flat, the rope is straight, turning to the left is a rule, and turning to the right is a moment.

古文：右折见矩，其在天也，佐助旋机，斟酌建指，以齐七政，故曰玉衡。
现代文：它在天上，用来辅佐北斗的璇玑星，斟酌斗柄所指的方向，用来协调曰、月、五星七政，所以叫玉衡。
English: It is in the sky, used to support the North Star of the Big Dipper, to consider the direction indicated by the handle of the bucket, and to coordinate the day, the month, and the five stars, so it is called the Jade Balance.

古文：《论语》云： 立则见其参于前也，在车则见其倚于衡也。 又曰： 齐之以礼。 
现代文：《论语》说： 站着见到它坐在前面，在车上就见到它倚靠着车辕头上的横木。 
English: "Analects" says: Standing, you can see it sitting in front, and in the car, you can see it leaning against the crossbeam on the head of the car.

古文：此衡在前居南方之义也。
现代文：又说： 用礼来整治他们。 这是衡在前方，居于南方的意思。
English: And he said, Let them be clothed with sackcloth: for the vision is yet for the morning, and it is toward the south.

古文：权者，铢、两、斤、钧、石也，所以称物平施，知轻重也。
现代文：称量物体的单位有铢、两、斤、钧、石，它们是用来称量物体平衡的标尺，弄清楚物体的重量。
English: The units for weighing objects are cymbals, two, catty, cymbals, and stones. They are used to weigh the balance of an object, and to find out the weight of an object.

古文：本起于黄钟之重，一龠容千二百黍，重十二铢，两之为两。
现代文：本来起源于黄钟的重量。一黄钟竹管装一千二百粒黍子，重量是十二铢，十二铢的两倍就是一两。
English: Originally, it originated from the weight of the yellow bell. A yellow bell bamboo tube contains twelve hundred hazelnuts, the weight is twelve ounces, and twice the weight of twelve ounces is one or two.

古文：二十四铢为两。十六两为斤。
现代文：一两有二十四铢。十六两就是一斤。
English: One and two are twenty-four pennies, and sixteen pennies are a pound.

古文：三十斤为钧。
现代文：三十斤就是一钩。
English: Thirty catties is a hook.

古文：四钧为石。
现代文：四钧就是一石。
English: Four stones are one stone.

古文：忖为十八，《易》十有八变之象也。
现代文：估计有十八钟，象征《周易》有十八种变化的情况。
English: It is estimated that there are eighteen bells, symbolizing that "Zhou Yi" has eighteen kinds of changes.

古文：五权之制，以义立之，以物钧之，其余小大之差，以轻重为宜。
现代文：五权制的建立，用定义来确立，用物体来衡量，其余大小的差别，用轻重来分别比较合适。
English: For the establishment of the five-power system, it is more appropriate to use definitions to establish, objects to measure, and the rest of the differences in size to be weighed separately.

古文：圜而环之，令之肉倍好者，周旋无端，终而复始，无穷已也。
现代文：锤是圆环形状的，让它的形体上有很多小孔，是为了让它变化不定，到终点后又重头开始，循环没有穷尽。
English: The hammer is in the shape of a circle, so that there are many small holes on its shape, in order to make it changeable, to the end and then start again, the cycle is endless.

古文：铢者，物繇忽微始，至于成著，可殊异也。
现代文：铢，是表示物体从很细小的开始，逐渐长得比较明显，可以用来区别不同。
English: , is to indicate that the object from a very small start, gradually grow more obvious, can be used to distinguish between different.

古文：两者，两黄钟律之重也。
现代文：两是黄钟律管的两倍重的意思。
English: Two means twice the weight of the yellow bell.

古文：二十四铢而成两者，二十四气之象也。
现代文：由二十四铢形成一两，是二十四节气的表现。
English: The formation of one pair from twenty-four knots is a manifestation of the twenty-four solar terms.

古文：斤者，明也，三百八十四铢，《易》二篇之爻，阴阳变动之象也。
现代文：斤是显著的意思，共有三百八十四铢，是《周易》二篇的爻数，是阴阳变化的表现。
English: "Jin" means "significant," with a total of 384 jin, which is the number of jin in the two chapters of "Zhou Yi" and is a manifestation of the changes in yin and yang.

古文：十六两成斤者，四时乘四方之象也。
现代文：十六两形成一斤，是表示用四个季节乘以四方。
English: Sixteen twos form a catty, which is expressed by multiplying four seasons by four squares.

古文：钧者，均也，阳施其气，阴化其物，皆得其成就平均也。
现代文：钩是平均的意思，阳气施放，阴气转化万物，都能得到平均的结果。
English: "Hook" means "average." When yang is released and yin is transformed into all things, the result will be average.

古文：权与物均，重万一千五百二十铢，当万物之象也。
现代文：秤锤与物体重量均平，重量就有一万一千五百二十铢，正好是万物的表示。
English: The weight of the balance and the weight of the object are equal, and the weight is eleven thousand five hundred and twenty, which is exactly the representation of all things.

古文：四百八十两者，六旬行八节之象也。
现代文：四百八十两是六旬周行八节的象征。
English: Four hundred and eighty-two is the symbol of sixty weeks and eight days.

古文：三十斤成钧者，一月之象也。
现代文：三十斤形成一钧，是一个月的表示。
English: Thirty catties make a month.

古文：石者，大也，权之大者也。
现代文：石是大的意思，是重量最大的单位。
English: Stone is the largest unit of weight.

古文：始于铢，两于两，明于斤，均于钧，终于石，物终石大也。
现代文：从铢开始，铢的两倍就是两，到斤就比较明显了，到钧就比较平均，到石就是最重的单位，物体的重量单位到石就是最重的了。
English: Starting from the cesium, twice the cesium is two, the cesium is more obvious, the cesium is more average, the stone is the heaviest unit, and the weight unit of the object is the heaviest stone.

古文：四钧为石者，四时之象也。
现代文：四钧形成一石，是表明一年有四季。
English: The four ridges form a stone, indicating that there are four seasons in a year.

古文：重百二十斤者，十二月之象也。
现代文：重一百二十斤，表明一年有十二个月。
English: It weighs one hundred and twenty pounds, indicating that there are twelve months in a year.

古文：终于十二辰而复于子，黄钟之象也。
现代文：到十二辰停止又从子时开始，正是黄钟重量的表示。
English: It is the weight of the yellow clock that stops at 12 o'clock and starts again at 3 o'clock.

古文：千九百二十两者，阴阳之数也。
现代文：一千九百二十两是阴阳的数字。
English: Nineteen hundred and twenty-two is the number of yin and yang.

古文：三百八十四爻，五行之象也。
现代文：三百八十四爻，是五行的表示。
English: Three hundred and eighty-four gongs, representing the five elements.

古文：四万六千八十铢者，万一千五百二十物历四时之象也。
现代文：四万六千零八十铢，是一万一千五百二十物经过四时的表示。
English: 46,080 baht, representing 11,520 objects after four hours.

古文：而岁功成就，五权谨矣。
现代文：这样一岁的功劳成就了，五权制也就严格了。
English: Such a one-year-old achievement, the five-power system is also strict.

古文：权与物钧而生衡，衡运生规，规圜生矩，矩方生绳，绳直生准，准正则平衡而钧权矣。
现代文：秤锤和物体相平就形成平衡状态，秤杆运行就形成圆规，用圆规画的圆来形成矩形，矩尺方正了就生成绳，绳直了就形成丁准，准正了那么秤杆就平直而秤锤就均称了。
English: The balance state is formed when the balance hammer is level with the object, the circular movement of the balance rod forms a compass, the circle drawn by the compass is used to form a rectangle, the square of the square is used to form a rope, the straight rope is used to form a pin, and the square is used to make the balance rod straight and the balance hammer is balanced.

古文：是为五则。
现代文：这就是五则。
English: These are the five principles.

古文：规者，所以规圜器械，令得其类也。
现代文：规是用来画圆的器械，使圆都能相像。
English: A ruler is a tool used to draw circles so that they all look alike.

古文：矩者，矩方器械，令不失其形也。
现代文：矩是画方的器械，使方不能变形。
English: The moment is a device for drawing the square, so that the square cannot be deformed.

古文：规矩相须，阴阳位序，圜方乃成。
现代文：规和矩互相配合，阴和阳位置有序，圆和方才形成。
English: Rules and moments match each other, yin and yang positions are orderly, and circles and squares are formed.

古文：准者，所以揆平取正也。绳者，上下端直，经纬四通也。
现代文：准是用来测量平直使物体平正。绳，上下笔直，经纬畅通。
English: The yardstick is used to measure the straightness and make the object straight. The rope is straight up and down, and the latitude and longitude are smooth.

古文：准绳连体，衡权合德，百工繇焉，以定法式，辅弼执玉，以冀天子。
现代文：准和绳连在一起，衡和权协调一致，各种工匠都要用它，来确定法度，就像辅弼官拿着玉笏来辅助天子。
English: The standard and the rope are connected, the weight and the weight are coordinated, and all kinds of craftsmen should use it to determine the rules, just like the assistant eunuch holding the jade bowl to assist the heavenly son.

古文：《诗》云： 尹氏大师，秉国之钧，四方是维，天子是毘，俾民不迷。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 尹氏任太师，执掌国家的权量，维持四方，辅助天子，使百姓不迷惑。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The Yin clan is appointed as the grandmaster, holding the power of the country, maintaining the four directions, assisting the heavenly son, so that the people are not confused.

古文：咸有五象，其义一也。
现代文：共有五象，它的意义都是一样。
English: There are five of them, and they all mean the same thing.

古文：以阴阳言之，大阴者，北方。
现代文：用阴阳来比喻，那么太阴就是北方。
English: To use the metaphor of yin and yang, the yin is the north.

古文：北，伏也，阳气伏于下，于时为冬。
现代文：北，是伏的意思，阳气蛰伏在地下，在时令上是冬天。
English: North, is the meaning of Fuxi, yang qi lingers in the ground, in the season is winter.

古文：冬，终也，物终臧，乃可称。
现代文：冬，是终的意思，万物整天都躲藏着，于是才可以称量。
English: Winter means the end, everything hides all day, so it can be weighed.

古文：水润下。
现代文：水滋润地势低的物质。
English: Water moistens low-lying material.

古文：知者谋，谋者重，故为权也。大阳者，南方。
现代文：有智慧的善于计谋，有谋略的人就显得重要，所以他们就制作了权。太阳处在南方。
English: Those who are wise and cunning, and who have a plan, are important, so they made the right. The sun is in the south.

古文：南，任也，阳气任养物，于时为夏。
现代文：南就是孕育，阳气孕养万物，在时令上是夏季。
English: The south is the incubation, the yang is the incubation of all things, and the season is summer.

古文：夏，假也，物假大，乃宣平。
现代文：夏就是假，物体很大，就把它弄平整。
English: Summer is just a lie, the object is very large, it is necessary to level it.

古文：火炎上。
现代文：火烤着上面。
English: The fire roasts on top.

古文：礼者齐，齐者平，故为衡也。少阴者，西方。
现代文：知礼的人就能整治，整治的人就能公平，所以就制作了衡。少阴，处在西方。
English: Those who know etiquette will be able to rectify, and those who rectify will be able to be fair, so they made Heng. Shaoyin, located in the west.

古文：西，迁也，阴气迁落物，于时为秋。
现代文：西就是迁，阴气使万物凋落，在时令上已是秋季。
English: The west is the migration, the gloom makes everything fall, and it is already autumn in terms of season.

古文：秋也，物敛，乃成孰。
现代文：秋就是报，万物收敛，就是成熟了。
English: Autumn is a herald, everything is converging, it is ripe.

古文：金从革，改更也。
现代文：金的特性是变革，改变了重新开始。
English: The nature of money is change, change means starting over.

古文：义者成，成者方，故为矩也。少阳者，东方。
现代文：有正义感的人成功，成功的人就方正，所以制作矩。少阳，处在东方。
English: People with a sense of justice are successful, and those who are successful are upright, so they are productive. Shaoyang is located in the East.

古文：东，动也，阳气动物，于时为春。
现代文：东，就是动，阳气使万物萌动，在时令上是春季。
English: The East is the movement, the yang makes everything bud, and the season is spring.

古文：春，蠢也，物蠢生，乃动运。
现代文：春，就是蠢，万物蠢蠢欲动，就开始运动了。
English: Spring is just around the corner, and everything is about to start moving.

古文：木曲直。
现代文：木由曲变直。
English: Kiyokata is straightening up.

古文：仁者生，生者圜，故为规也。
现代文：仁道的人能够生存，能够生存的人比较圆通，所以制作了规。
English: People with benevolence can survive, and those who can survive are more rounded, so the rules were made.

古文：中央者，阴阳之内，四方之中，经纬通达，乃能端直，于时为四季。
现代文：处在中央的，在阴阳之内，四方之中，经和纬都畅通，这样才能端正笔直，这是在一年四季。
English: It is in the center, in the yin and yang, in the four directions, the meridians and latitudes are smooth, so that it can be neat and straight, which is in the four seasons of the year.

古文：土稼啬蕃息。
现代文：在土中种庄稼都能生长。
English: Crops can be grown in the soil.

古文：信者诚，诚者直，故为绳也。
现代文：虔信的人心诚，心诚的人正直，所以制作了绳。
English: Pious people are sincere, sincere people are honest, so they made a rope.

古文：五则揆物，有轻重、圜方、平直、阴阳之义，四方、四时之体，五常、五行之象。
现代文：用五则来度量物体，有轻、重，圆、方，平、直，阴、阳的含义，有四方四季本体，五常、五行的相似之处。
English: Five principles are used to measure objects, with the meanings of light, heavy, round, square, flat, straight, yin and yang, and the similarities of the four seasons, the five elements and the five elements.

古文：厥法有品，各顺其方而应其行。
现代文：法则各有种类，各自顺着自己的方向而运行。
English: There are different types of laws, each of which operates in its own direction.

古文：职在大行，鸿胪掌之。
现代文：职责在大行，由鸿胪来掌管。
English: The responsibility is in the big row, and it is controlled by the giant cormorant.

古文：《书》曰： 予欲闻六律、五声、八音、七始咏，以出内五言，女听。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 我想知道六律、五声、八音、七始的歌咏，用来向天下宣告五言，你也来听听。 
English: "Shangshu" said: "I want to know the songs of the six rhythms, five voices, eight tones, and seven beginnings, which are used to proclaim the five words to the world. Come and listen to them.

古文：予者，帝舜也。
现代文：这里的 我 ，是帝舜。
English: I, here, am the emperor.

古文：言以律吕和五声，施之八音，合之成乐。
现代文：造句话是说用律吕来协调五声，把它在八种乐器上演奏，这样就把它们合成了音乐。
English: To coin a phrase is to harmonize five voices with the lul, play it on eight musical instruments, and thus synthesize them into music.

古文：七者，天地四时人之始也。
现代文：七是指天、地、四时、人的开始。
English: Seven refers to the beginning of heaven, earth, four o'clock, and man.

古文：顺以歌咏五常之言，听之则顺乎天地，序乎四时，应人伦，本阴阳，原情性，风之以德，感之以乐，莫不同乎一。
现代文：把它们配上歌咏五常的音调，听到它就能顺应天地，遵守四时的规律，应合人伦，本守阴阳，依照人的情性，用德来感化，用乐来感动，都是一个道理。
English: If you match them with the tones of the Five Elements of Song and Dance, when you hear it, you will be able to conform to heaven and earth, abide by the four-hour rule, conform to human ethics, adhere to yin and yang, according to human emotions, use virtue to influence, and use music to move, is a reason.

古文：唯圣人为能同天下之意，故帝舜欲闻之也。
现代文：衹有圣明的人才能与天下的人心意相同，所以舜帝想知道。
English: Only those who have the holy light can be of the same mind as the people of the world, so the emperor wanted to know.

古文：今广延群儒，博谋讲道，修明旧典，同律，审度，嘉量，平衡，均权，正准，直绳，立于五则，备数和声，以利兆民，贞天下于一，同海内之归。
现代文：现在广泛地招纳众多儒生，详细讨论后，来阐明道理，修整旧的制度，统一律制，详细度制，完善量制，平等衡制，平均权制，端正准制，笔直绳制，建立在五种法则的基础上，使万数齐备，万音协调，来为天下百姓造福，使天下人走上同一正道，海内同归一路。
English: Now, a large number of Confucian scholars have been widely recruited. After detailed discussion, they will clarify the principles, rectify the old system, unify the legal system, detail the system, improve the measurement system, equal weight and measure system, equal rights system, correct standard system, straight line system, and build on the basis of the five laws, so that the ten thousand numbers are complete and the ten thousand tones are coordinated, so as to benefit the people of the world, so that the people of the world will embark on the same righteous path, and the whole world will return to the same path.

古文：凡律、度、量、衡用铜者，各自名也，所以同天下，齐风俗也。
现代文：凡是律器、度器、量器、衡器都用铜铸造，是各自取铜的谐音，用来统一天下，整齐风俗。
English: All the laws, measures, gauges, and weighing instruments are cast in copper. They are homophones of the respective copper, used to unify the world and tidy up customs.

古文：铜为物之至精，不为燥湿、寒暑变其节，不为风雨、暴露改其形，介然有常，有似于士君子之行，是以用铜也。
现代文：铜是万物中的精华，不为燥、湿、寒、暑而改变它的性质，不为风雨和曰晒夜露而改变形状，专一不变，具有像士人君子一样的品行，所以要用铜。
English: Copper is the essence of all things. It does not change its nature due to dryness, dampness, coldness, or heat. It does not change its shape due to wind and rain, or exposure to the sun and dew. It is precise and unchanging. It has the same character as a scholar and gentleman. Therefore, copper should be used.

古文：用竹为引者，事之宜也。
现代文：用竹来做引器，是制作比较方便的缘故。
English: Bamboo is used as the lead because it is easier to make.

古文：历数之起上矣。
现代文：历法推算的兴起已很久远了。
English: The rise of the calendar has been a long time coming.

古文：传述颛顼命南正重司天，火正黎司地，其后三苗乱德，二官咸废，而闰余乖次，孟陬殄灭，摄提失方。
现代文：传说颛顼任命南正重掌管天文，火正黎掌管地理，后来三苗道德败坏，这两个官都被罢黜了，从而出现一年所剩下的日子错乱，正月消失，木星所应在的位置错误的现象。
English: Legend has it that Zou appointed Nan Zhengju to be in charge of astronomy, and Fuzheng Li to be in charge of geography. Later, San Miao became morally corrupt, and both officials were ousted. As a result, the remaining days of the year were disordered, the first month disappeared, and Jupiter was in the wrong position.

古文：尧复育重、黎之后，使纂其业，故《书》曰： 乃命羲、和，钦若昊天，历象日月星辰，敬授民时。 
现代文：尧帝重新抚养重、黎二官的后代，让他们继承祖业，所以《尚书》上就说： 于是任命羲、和，让他们恭敬顺应上天，观察推算曰月星辰的运行，让百姓知道时节。 
English: Emperor Qian re-raised the descendants of the two officials, Chong and Li, and let them inherit the ancestral inheritance, so the "Shang Shu" said: Then, appoint Gong and He, let them respectfully obey the heavens, observe and calculate the movement of the moon and stars, and let the people know the seasons.

古文： 岁三百有六旬有六日，以闰月定四时成岁，允厘百官，众功皆美。 
现代文： 一年有三百六十六，用闰月来调节四时节气，形成一年的岁时，用来治理百官，各种功业都很美好。 
English: There are three hundred and sixty-six in a year. The intercalary month is used to regulate the four seasons. When a year is formed, it is used to govern the hundred officials, and all kinds of work are beautiful.

古文：其后以授舜曰： 咨尔舜，天之历数在尔躬。 
现代文：后来把它授给舜说： 舜啊，以后天体的历数就属于你了。 
English: Later, he gave it to Zou and said, "Zou, from now on, the celestial calendar will belong to you.

古文： 舜亦以命禹。 
现代文： 舜也对禹这样说。 
English: Later, Hao also used the same words to admonish Yu.

古文：至周武王访箕子，箕子言大法九章，而五纪明历法。
现代文：到周武王时询问箕子，箕子说出了《洪范》九畴，其中五纪阐明历法。
English: When King Zhou Wu came to inquire about Zou Zi, Zou Zi said that "Hong Fan" had nine parts, of which the Five Precepts clarified the calendar.

古文：故自殷、周，皆创业改制，咸正历纪，服色从之，顺其时气，以应天道。
现代文：所以从殷、周开始，都在建立帝位时改换制度，确定历法的计算，用相应的服饰的颜色，顺应时令节气，来迎合自然规律。
English: Therefore, starting from Yin and Zhou, they changed the system when establishing the imperial throne, determined the calculation of the calendar, used the corresponding colors of clothing, and conformed to the seasonal solar terms to meet the laws of nature.

古文：三代既没，五伯之末，史官丧纪，畴人子弟分散，或在夷狄，故其所记，有《黄帝》、《颛顼》、《夏》、《殷》、《周》及《鲁历》。
现代文：三代衰败之后，五霸以后史官丧失记录，而世代懂历法的于孙都分散了，有的人到了夷狄，所以他们所记载的，有《黄帝历》、《颛顼历》、《夏历》、《商历》、《周历》以及《鲁历》。
English: After the decline of the third generation, the historians lost their records after the Five Dynasties, and the generations who knew the calendar were scattered. Some people went to Yidi, so they recorded the "Yellow Emperor Calendar," "Dragon Calendar," "Summer Calendar," "Business Calendar," "Weekly Calendar" and "Lu Calendar."

古文：战国扰攘，秦兼天下，未皇暇也，亦颇推五胜，而自以获水德，乃以十月为正，色上黑。
现代文：战国时，天下大乱，秦兼并天下后，一时来不及改定历法，但也推崇五行相胜，白以为得到了水德，就以十月为正月。崇尚黑的颜色。
English: During the Warring States period, the world was in turmoil, and after the Qin Dynasty annexed the world, it was too late to change the calendar, but it also advocated the victory of the five elements, and thought that it had obtained the virtue of water, so it took October as the first month. It advocated the color black.

古文：汉兴，方纲纪大基，庶事草创，袭秦正朔。
现代文：汉朝建立后，国家纲纪刚建立，万事都处初创之时，就承袭了秦朝的历法。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, when the national system of discipline was just established and everything was in its infancy, it inherited the calendar of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：以北平侯张苍言，用《颛顼历》，比于六历，疏阔中最为微近。
现代文：又采用北平侯张苍的建议，用《颛顼历》，和其他五种历法相比较，在差距中它最为贴近。
English: It also adopted the suggestion of Beiping marquis Zhang Cang to use the "Dragon Boat Calendar," and compared with the other five calendars, it is the closest in the gap.

古文：然正朔服色，未睹其真，而朔晦月见，弦望满亏，多非是。
现代文：但历法对朔的计算和对所应祟尚的服饰的颜色都未取得真切的方法，而且朔、晦时月亮的出现，月亮的弦、满和亏，多与真实情况相异。
English: However, the calendar has not obtained a true method for calculating the new moon and the color of the clothing that should be haunted, and the appearance of the moon at new moon and at dusk, the moon's string, fullness and deficiency are mostly different from the real situation.

古文：至武帝元封七年，汉兴百二岁矣，大中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等言 历纪坏废，宜改正朔 。
现代文：到武帝元封七年时，汉朝已建立了一百零二年，大中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等人说 历法已不能再用了，应改正历法 。
English: By the seventh year of Emperor Wu's reign, the Han Dynasty had been established for one hundred and two years. Grand and Middle Doctors Gongsunqing, Jue Sui, Tai Shi Ling, Sima Qian and others said that the calendar could no longer be used, and that the calendar should be corrected.

古文：是时御史大夫宽明经术，上乃诏宽曰： 与博士共议，今宜何以为正朔？
现代文：这时御史大夫倪宽懂得经学，皇上于是就命令倪宽说： 你去同各位博士一同商议，现在要如何计算朔日？
English: At this time, Ni Kuan, the imperial historian, knew how to study the scriptures, so the emperor ordered Ni Kuan to go and say: You go and discuss with the doctors, how do you want to calculate the new moon now?

古文：服色何上？ 
现代文：服饰要崇尚什么颜色？ 
English: What colour should be favoured for clothing?

古文：宽与博士赐等议，皆曰： 帝王必改正朔，易服色，所以明受命于天也。
现代文：倪宽同博士赐等人讨论，都说： 帝王一定要改换历法和服饰的颜色，用来表明是受命于上天。
English: Ni Guang discussed with Dr. Zi and others, and they all said: The emperor must change the calendar and the color of clothing to show that he was ordered by heaven.

古文：创业变改，制不相复，推传序文，则今夏时也。
现代文：创业后制度要更改，没有重复的，从历史文献推论来看，那么现在应使用夏正。
English: The post-entrepreneurship system should be changed, there is no repetition, from the perspective of historical literature inference, then Xia Zheng should be used now.

古文：臣等闻学褊陋，不能明。
现代文：臣下等人学识狭隘浅陋，不能明晓事理。
English: Subordinates and others have a narrow and shallow knowledge and cannot understand the truth.

古文：陛下躬圣发愤，昭配天地，臣愚以为三统之制，后圣复前圣者，二代在前也。
现代文：陛下身有圣德可以与天地相匹配，臣下等人认为夏、商、周的制度，后代重复前代的，是因为二代在前面。
English: His Majesty is endowed with sacred virtue that can be matched with heaven and earth. His subjects and others believe that the system of Xia, Shang and Zhou, and the fact that the descendants repeat the previous generation, is because the second generation is ahead.

古文：今二代之统绝而不序矣，唯陛下发圣德，宣考天地四时之极，则顺阴阳以定大明之制，为万世则。 
现代文：现在二代的制度已经绝迹没有记载了，希望陛下发圣德，广泛考察天地四时的极限，调顺阴阳以确定历法，作为万代的法则。 
English: Now that the two-generation system has disappeared and there is no record of it, I hope that His Majesty will spread holiness, extensively investigate the limits of the four hours of heaven and earth, adjust the yin and yang to determine the calendar, as the law of all generations.

古文：于是乃诏御史曰： 乃者有司言历未定，广延宣问，以考星度，未能雠也。
现代文：于是下诏命令御史道： 前不久有主管部门说历法没有确定，要求多召集一些人询问对策，用来推算历法的星度，但还没有完成这件事。
English: So he issued an order to the prefect of history: Not long ago, the competent department said that the calendar was not determined, and asked to convene more people to inquire about countermeasures to calculate the star rating of the calendar, but the matter has not yet been completed.

古文：盖闻古者黄帝合而不死，名察发敛，定清浊，起五部，建气物分数。
现代文：听说古时候黄帝能与自然相合而不死，能根据命名的来考察进退，确定律声的清浊，推演五行，建立了节气、万物、历法的推算。
English: It is said that in ancient times, the Yellow Emperor was able to merge with nature and not die. He was able to examine the advance and retreat according to the name, determine the clearness of the rhythm, deduce the five elements, and establish the calculation of the solar terms, all things, and the calendar.

古文：然则上矣。
现代文：但这些都是很早的事了。
English: But that was all a long time ago.

古文：书缺乐弛，朕甚难之。
现代文：现在书籍缺乏，音乐废弃，我对这件事感到很为难。
English: I'm embarrassed by the lack of books and the lack of music.

古文：依违以惟，未能修明。
现代文：左思右想，还是没有能够弄明白。
English: Thinking about it, I still haven't been able to figure it out.

古文：其以七年为元年。 
现代文：就以元封七年为太初元年。 
English: The seventh year of the Yuan dynasty was the first year of the Taisho era.

古文：遂诏卿、遂、迁与侍郎尊、大典星射姓等议造《汉历》。
现代文：于是就命公孙卿、壶遂、司马迁同侍郎尊、大典星射姓等人讨论制造《汉历》。
English: Therefore, the people such as Gongsunqing, Juxui, Simaqian and his attendants, and Datianxing were ordered to discuss the creation of the "Chinese Calendar."

古文：乃定东西，立晷仪，下漏刻，以追二十八宿相距于四方，举终以定朔晦分至，躔离弦望。
现代文：开始确定方向，安装测影以定时刻的仪器，下面放上计时的漏壶，用来测算二十八星宿间隔分布在四方的方位，最终来确定朔晦历数春、秋分冬、夏至，月所运行的所在和弦望。
English: He began to determine the direction, installed an instrument to measure the shadow to determine the time, and put a timing leak pot below the crane to measure the position of the 28 star spacing distributed in the four directions, and finally to determine the New Year's calendar, the spring, the autumn equinox, the winter, the summer solstice, and the whereabouts of the moon.

古文：乃以前历上元泰初四千六百一十七岁，至于元封七年，复得阏逢摄提格之岁，中冬十一月甲子朔旦冬至，日月在建星，太岁在子，已得太初本星度新正。
现代文：就依照前一历法的上元泰初四千六百一十七年，到元封七年，重新出现甲寅年，仲冬十一月甲子初一天明时冬至，日月在建星之处，太岁在于，已经得到太初星度的正确数值。
English: According to the previous calendar, in the year 460017 of Shangyuan Taichu, to the 7th year of Yuanfu, the year of Katoin reappeared, in the middle of winter, in the middle of November, on the first day of Koza, at the time of the winter solstice, in the place where the sun and the moon set a star, the age of the star was too old to have obtained the correct value of the age of the star.

古文：姓等奏不能为算，愿募治历者，更造密度，各自增减，以造《汉太初历》。
现代文：射姓等人上奏表示不会计算，希望招聘研究历法的人，重新制造更精确的计算方法，各自增减，来制作汉朝的《太初历》。
English: Some people, such as Shoen and others, said that they would not calculate, and hoped to recruit people who studied the calendar to re-create a more accurate calculation method, each adding and subtracting, to produce the Han Dynasty's "Taihatsu Calendar."

古文：乃选治历邓平及长乐司马可、酒泉候宜君、侍郎尊及与民间治历者，凡二十余人，方士唐都、巴郡落下闳与焉。
现代文：于是就选拔研究历法的邓平以及长乐的司马可、酒泉的候宜君、侍郎尊以及一些民间研究历法的人，共有二十多人，方士唐都以及巴郡的落下闳也参加了。
English: As a result, more than 20 people were selected to study the calendar, including Deng Ping, Changle's Simarko, Jiuquan's Ho Yi Jun, Zhi Lang Zun, and some folk calendar researchers. Fang Shi Tangdu and Bashun's Fallen Dragon also participated.

古文：都分天部，而闳运算转历。
现代文：唐都划分天上星宿的分布，落下闳推算历数。
English: The Tang Dynasty divided the distribution of the stars in the sky and calculated the number of years according to the falling stars.

古文：其法以律起历，曰： 律容一龠，积八十一寸，则一日之分也。
现代文：他的方法是根据律度来确定历数，说： 律的容量是一龠，积是八十一寸，正好是一天的分数。
English: His method is to determine the number of days according to the rhythm, saying: The capacity of the law is one hoop, the product is eighty-one inches, just a fraction of a day.

古文：与长相终。
现代文：与律长相始终。
English: He has always been on the same page as the Chief Justice.

古文：律长九寸，百七十一分而终复。三复而得甲子。
现代文：律长有九寸，到一百七十一分时又重新开始，经过三次重复就成甲子。
English: The solicitor has nine inches, and at one hundred and seventy-one minutes, he starts again, and after three repetitions, he becomes a knight.

古文：夫律阴阳九六，爻象所从出也。
现代文：律中的阴阳数字是九和六，这是从爻象所演化而来的。
English: The yin and yang numbers in the law are nine and six, which evolved from the dragonfly.

古文：故黄钟纪元气之谓律。
现代文：所以用黄钟来调理元气就叫律。
English: Therefore, using the yellow bell to regulate vitality is called the law.

古文：律，法也，莫不取法焉。 
现代文：律，也就是法则，没有不以律为法则的。 
English: There is no law but the law.

古文：与邓平所治同。
现代文：研究结果正好同邓平相同。
English: The results of the research are exactly the same as Deng Ping's.

古文：于是皆观新星度、日月行，更以算推，如闳、平法。
现代文：于是，大家便都来观察新的星度以及月的运行，重新加以推算，与落下闳、邓乎的结果一样。
English: As a result, everyone came to observe the new constellation and the movement of the moon, and re-calculate it, with the same result as the fall of the dragonfly and Denghu.

古文：法，一月之日二十九日八十一分日之四十三。
现代文：法则是一月有二十九天八十一分之四十三。
English: The rule of thumb is that there are 29 days in the month of January, which is 43 days out of 81.

古文：先藉半日，名曰阳历；不藉，名曰阴历。
现代文：先借半天，叫做阳历；不借，就叫阴历。
English: If you borrow half a day, it's called a solar calendar; if you don't borrow, it's called a lunar calendar.

古文：所谓阳历者，先朔月生；阴历者，朔而后月乃生。
现代文：所谓阳历，就是朔日前可见到月亮；所谓阴历，就是朔日后才可见到月亮。
English: The so-called solar calendar means that the moon can be seen before the new moon; the so-called lunar calendar means that the moon can only be seen after the new moon.

古文：平曰： 阳历朔皆先旦月生，以朝诸侯王群臣便。 
现代文：邓平说： 使用阳历，朔日平旦时可见到月亮，是为了方便诸侯王和群臣的朝见。 
English: Deng Ping said: The use of the solar calendar, when the new moon can be seen on the first day of the month, is to facilitate the imperial court of princes and ministers.

古文：乃诏迁用邓平所造八十一分律历，罢废尤疏远者十七家，复使校历律昏明。
现代文：皇上便下令要司马迁使用邓平所造的八十一分律历，废除相差甚远的十七家，又命令继续校验该律历中是否还存在不正确的地方。
English: The emperor then ordered Sima Qian to use the eighty-one minute lunar calendar created by Deng Ping, to abolish the seventeen schools that were far apart, and to continue to check whether there were any incorrect places in the lunar calendar.

古文：宦者淳于陵渠复覆《太初历》晦、朔、弦、望，皆最密，日月如合璧，五星如连珠。
现代文：宦官淳于陵渠又重新推算《太初历》的晦、朔、弦、望，都比其他历法精确，日月如璧合，五星如珠连在一起。
English: The eunuch Jun re-calculated the eclipses, new moons, signs, and expectancies of the "First Calendar" in the mausoleum, and they were all more accurate than other calendars. The sun and moon were like a perfect match, and the five stars were connected like pearls.

古文：陵渠奏状，遂用邓平历，以平为太史丞。
现代文：淳于陵渠把情况报告给皇上，皇上便使用邓平的历法，任命他为太史丞。
English: Jun Yu Lingqu reported the situation to the emperor, who then used Deng Ping's calendar and appointed him as Taishi Rongzhen.

古文：后二十七年，元凤三年，太史令张寿王上书言： 历者天地之大纪，上帝所为。
现代文：二十七年后的元凤三年，太史令张寿王给皇帝上书说： 历法是天地的大事，是上天所为。
English: Twenty-seven years later, in the third year of Yuanfeng, Zhang Shouwang, the Grand Historian, sent a letter to the emperor saying: The calendar is an important matter of heaven and earth, and it is done by heaven.

古文：传黄帝《调律历》，汉元年以来用之。
现代文：相传下来的黄帝《调律历》，汉朝建立后就使用它。
English: The "tuned calendar" of the Yellow Emperor, which has been handed down, has been used since the establishment of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今阴阳不调，宜更历之过也。 
现代文：现在阴阳不调，是改用了《太初历》造成的。 
English: The fact that the yin and yang are out of kilter now is due to the change to the Chinese lunar calendar.

古文：诏下主历使者鲜于妄人诘问，寿王不服。
现代文：皇帝就命令主持历法工作的使者鲜于妄人去质问，张寿王不服。
English: The emperor ordered the emissary who presided over the calendar work to question the impostor, but Zhang Shouwang was not satisfied.

古文：妄人请与治历大司农中丞麻光等二十余人杂候日、月、晦、朔、弦、望、八节、二十四气，钧校诸历用状。
现代文：鲜于妄人就请求与研究历法的大司农中丞麻光等共二十多人一同观望日月的晦、朔、弦、望、八节二十四节气，来验证各历的情况。
English: Fewer than a handful of people asked to observe the waxing, waning, waxing, waxing, waxing and waning of the sun and moon, and the 24 solar terms to verify the situation of each calendar, together with more than 20 people, including Nongzhongzheng Ma Guang, the senior vice-minister of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, who studied the calendar.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他的请求被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：诏与丞相、御史、大将军、右将军史各一人杂候上林清台，课诸历疏密，凡十一家。
现代文：皇上就命令丞相、御史、大将军、右将军史各一人一同在上林清台观察天象，来验证各种历法的粗疏与精密，共有十一家。
English: The emperor ordered the chancellor, the governor, the general, and the right general to observe the celestial bodies together at Shanglin and Qingdao to verify the coarseness and precision of various calendars, a total of eleven.

古文：以元凤三年十一月朔旦冬至，尽五年十二月，各有第。
现代文：从元凤三年十一月初一天明冬至开始，到五年十二月完成，十一家历法都有自己疏密的次序。
English: Starting from the winter solstice in early November of the third year of the Yuan and Feng dynasties and ending in December of the fifth year, the eleven calendars have their own dense order.

古文：寿王课疏远。
现代文：检验证明张寿王的历法相差甚远。
English: The examination proved that Zhang Shouwang's calendar was far from perfect.

古文：案汉元年不用黄帝《调历》，寿王非汉历，朔天道，非所宜言，大不敬。
现代文：实际上汉朝建立后不使用黄帝的《调律历》，他非议了汉朝的历法，背离天道，不是他所应说的，犯下大不敬的罪。
English: In fact, after the establishment of the Han Dynasty, he did not use the "Tuning Calendar" of the Yellow Emperor. He criticized the calendar of the Han Dynasty, deviated from the heavenly way, was not what he should have said, and committed the crime of great disrespect.

古文：有诏勿劾。
现代文：皇上下令不要追究他的罪责。
English: The emperor ordered that he not be prosecuted.

古文：复候，尽六年。
现代文：又重新观察，用了元凤六年一整年。
English: Re-observed again, it took Yuan Feng six years and a whole year.

古文：《太初历》第一。即墨徐万且、长安徐禹治《太初历》亦第一。
现代文：结果是《太初历》第一，即墨徐万且、长安徐禹研究《太初历》的结果也得出是第一的结论。
English: The result is that the "Tao Hanzhi" is the first, that is, the results of the study of the "Tao Hanzhi" by Mo Xuwan and Chang'an Xu Yu are also the first conclusion.

古文：寿王及待诏李信治黄帝《调历》，课皆疏阔，又言黄帝至元凤三年六千余岁。
现代文：张寿王以及待韶李信所研究的黄帝《调律历》，试验的误差很大，又说从黄帝到元凤三年有六千多年。
English: Zhang Shouwang and Li Xun's study of Huangdi's "tuning calendar," the error of the experiment is very large, and it is said that there are more than six thousand years from Huangdi to Yuanfeng.

古文：丞相属宝、长安单安国、安陵杯育治《终始》，言黄帝以来三千六百二十九岁，不与寿王合。
现代文：丞相委托实、长安单安国、安陵梧育研究《终始》，说从黄帝以来有三千六百二十九年，与张寿王的不合。
English: "The Beginning of the End," a study of Chang'an, Shan'an, and Anling's education commissioned by the prime minister, said that it had been 3629 years since the Yellow Emperor, which did not agree with Zhang Shouwang.

古文：寿王又移《帝王录》，舜、禹年岁不合人年。
现代文：张寿王又转移到《帝王录》，舜、禹的年岁不合人的年龄。
English: Zhang Shouwang also transferred to the "Imperial Record," and Yu Yu's age is not the right age.

古文：寿王言化益为天子代禹，骊山女亦为天子，在殷、周间，皆不合经术。
现代文：张寿王说伯益替代禹为天子，骊山女在殷、周年代也为天子，这些都不合经学。
English: Zhang Shouwang said that Bo Yi replaced Yu as the Son of Heaven, and that Lushan Niang was also the Son of Heaven in the Yin and Zhou eras. These are not compatible with the study of the scriptures.

古文：寿王历乃太史官《殷历》也。
现代文：张寿王的历法就是太史官的《殷历》。
English: Zhang Shouwang's calendar is the "Yin Calendar" of the Grand Historian.

古文：寿王猥曰安得五家历，又妄盲《太初历》亏四分日之三，去小余七百五分，以故阴阳不调，谓之乱世。
现代文：张寿王歪曲地称哪裹能得到五家的历法，又荒谬地说《太初历》差四分之三天，去掉小余七百零五分，因此阴阳不调，称作乱世。
English: Zhang Shouwang distortedly said that no one could get the five calendars, and absurdly said that the "Great First Calendar" was three-quarters of a day off, removing the small remaining seven hundred and five points, so the yin and yang were out of kilter, and it was called a chaotic world.

古文：劾寿王吏八百石，古之大夫，服儒衣，诵不详之辞，作袄言欲乱制度，不道。
现代文：有人弹劾贬张寿王官为八百石，古代的大夫，身穿儒生的衣服，述说不吉祥的话，制造怪诞的邪说想扰乱国家制度，犯大逆不道之罪。
English: Some people impeached Zhang Shouwang, an official of 800 kilos, an ancient doctor, wearing Confucian clothes, telling unlucky words, creating bizarre heresies to disrupt the national system, and committing the crime of high treason.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇上批准了弹劾。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：寿王候课，比三年下，终不服。
现代文：张寿王观察试验，连续三年都属下等，但始终不服。
English: Zhang Shouwang observation test, for three consecutive years have been subordinate, but still not satisfied.

古文：再劾死，更赦勿劾，遂不更言，诽谤益甚，竟以下吏。
现代文：又弹劾他该当死罪，被赦免，张寿王便不再说了，但说他坏话的人更多，最终被交给法官审讯。
English: He was also impeached for a crime punishable by death, and was pardoned. Zhang Shouwang did not say any more, but there were more people who said bad things about him, and he was eventually brought before a judge for trial.

古文：故历本之验在于天，自汉历初起，尽元凤六年，三十六岁，而是非坚定。
现代文：所以历法验证在于天，从汉朝的历法开始实施，到元凤六年，经过了三十六年，是与非才确定了。
English: Therefore, the verification of the calendar depends on the day, from the implementation of the calendar of the Han Dynasty to the six years of Yuanfeng, after 36 years, the rights and wrongs are determined.

古文：至孝成世，刘向总六历，列是非，作《五纪论》。
现代文：到孝成帝的时候，刘向汇总六种历法，罗列出正确与错误，写了《五纪论》。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaocheng, Liu Xiang had compiled six calendars, listed the rights and wrongs, and wrote "Five Chronologies."

古文：向子歆究其微眇，作《三统历》及《谱》以说《春秋》，推法密要，故述焉。
现代文：刘向的儿子刘趑探究其中的微妙，写成《三统历》和《谱》，用来解说《春秋》，所推算的精确得其要领，因此在这裹要说一说。
English: Liu Xiang's son, Liu Wei, explored the subtleties of this, and wrote "Sanzhulian" and "Graph" to explain "Spring and Autumn." The accuracy of the calculation is essential, so I would like to talk about it here.

古文：夫历《春秋》者，天时也，列人事而因以天时。
现代文：《春秋》一书的编年，是按照天时来进行的，依照天时来排列人事。
English: The chronology of the book "Spring and Autumn" is carried out according to the time of day, and personnel are arranged according to the time of day.

古文：传曰： 民受天地之中以生，所谓命也。
现代文：传说： 人呼吸到天地的中和之气而有生命，造就是所谓的命。
English: Legend: Man breathes in the neutralizing air of heaven and earth and lives. Creation is the so-called life.

古文：是故有礼谊动作威仪之则以定命也，能者养以之福，不能者败以取祸。 
现代文：因此有礼、义、动、作及容貌举止的法则来决定命，有能力的人就以此作为修养而得到幸福，不能修养的人就去败坏它们而招致祸患。 
English: Therefore, there are rules of courtesy, righteousness, movement, work and appearance and manners to determine life. Those who have the ability will use this as a cultivation to obtain happiness, and those who cannot cultivate will corrupt them and cause misfortune.

古文：故列十二公二百四十二年之事，以阴阳之中制其礼。
现代文：因此就列出十二公共二百四十二年的事情，用阴阳的中和之气来制定礼。
English: Therefore, the events of the 12th year of the 242nd year of the Common Era are listed, and the rite is formulated with the spirit of the balance of yin and yang.

古文：故春为阳中，万物以生；秋为阴中，万物以成。
现代文：所以春天是阳气的中和之气，万物得以生长；秋天是阴气的中和之气，万物得以成熟。
English: Therefore, spring is the yang and neutralizing air, and everything can grow; autumn is the yin and neutralizing air, and everything can mature.

古文：是以事举其中，礼取其和，历数以闰正天地之中，以作事厚生，皆所以定命也。
现代文：因此事物都列举中心部分，礼就选取谐和部分，历数就是以闰月来协调天地之中，用来指导人们的各种活动使生活充裕，这些都是用来定命的。
English: Therefore, all things enumerate the central part, etiquette selects the harmonious part, and the calendar is to coordinate the world with the leap month, and is used to guide people's various activities to make life more abundant. These are all used to determine life.

古文：《易》金、火相革之卦曰 汤、武革命，顺乎天而应乎人 ，又曰 治历明时 ，所以和人道也。
现代文：《周易》上金、火相革的卦说 汤、武实施变革以应天命，顺应了天命和人事 ，又说 研究历法可以阐明天时的变化 ，是用来与人道相应合的。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that Tang and Wu carried out the reform to meet the fate of heaven, and complied with the fate of heaven and human resources. It also said that the research calendar can explain the change of tomorrow's time, and is used to correspond with humanity.

古文：周道既衰，幽王既丧，天子不能班朔，鲁历不正，以闰余一之岁为蔀首。
现代文：周朝王道衰微，周幽王去世后，天子不能颁布历法，鲁国的历法又不正确，它以一年中闰还剩一作为首。
English: After the death of King Zhou Yu of the Zhou Dynasty, the emperor could not issue a calendar, and the calendar of the Lu Kingdom was not correct. It used the remaining one leap day in a year as a dagger.

古文：故《春秋》刺 十一月乙亥朔，日有食之 。
现代文：所以《春秋》一书讽刺说 十一月乙亥朔，太阳又出现亏食 。
English: Therefore, the book "Spring and Autumn" ironically said that in November, the sun appeared again.

古文：于是辰在申，而司历以为在建戌，史书建亥。
现代文：于是斗柄指向在申，但掌管历法的人却认为在建戌，史书上记载在建亥。
English: As a result, the handle of the bucket points to Jian, but the person in charge of the calendar thinks that it is Jianye, and the history book records it as Jianhai.

古文：哀十二年，亦以建申流火之月为建亥，而怪蛰虫之不伏也。
现代文：哀公十二年，也是以建申大火星在黄昏时位于西方天际的月份为建亥，却怪冬眠的动物不去冬眠。
English: In the twelfth year of mourning, it was also based on the month of the Great Mars, which was located in the western sky at dusk, but blamed hibernating animals for not hibernating.

古文：自文公闰月不告朔，至此百有余年，莫能正历数。
现代文：从文公闰月没有颁布朔日，到这时已一百多年了，不能校正历数。
English: It has been more than a hundred years since the new moon day was not promulgated, and the calendar cannot be corrected.

古文：故子贡欲去其饩羊，孔子爱其礼，而著其法于《春秋》。《经》曰： 冬十月朔，日有食之。 《传》曰： 不书日，官失之也。
现代文：因此子贡打算不送为告朔而准备的牲羊，孔子坚持要行这种礼仪，就把这种方法写进《春秋》之中。《春秋》说： 冬十月初一，又出现日食。 《左传》说： 没有记日，官员有失误。
English: Therefore, Zigong planned not to send the sheep prepared for the New Year's Day, and Confucius insisted on performing this etiquette, and wrote this method into "Spring and Autumn." "Spring and Autumn" said: In winter, on the first day of October, there is another solar eclipse. "Zo Zhuan" said: There is no record of the day, officials have mistakes.

古文：天子有日官，诸侯有日御，日官居卿以底日，礼也。
现代文：天子有日官，诸侯则有日御，日官居卿位观测、祭祀太阳，这是礼。
English: Heavenly sons have Nichikan, lords have Nichigyo, and Nichigokan stay at court to observe and worship the sun. This is a ritual.

古文：日御不失日以授百官于朝。 言告朔也。
现代文：曰御不遗失日期的记载，以便在朝廷上告诉百官。 
English: He said that he would not lose the record of the date, so that he could tell hundreds of officials at the Imperial Court.

古文：元典历始曰元。
现代文：这是说的颁布朔。以常规而言，历数的起始称为元。
English: This is said to be newly promulgated. As a general rule, the beginning of the calendar is called the Yuan.

古文：《传》曰： 元，善之长也。 
现代文：传说： 元，是善良的人中的佼佼者。 
English: Legend: Yuan is the best of the good people.

古文：共养三德为善。
现代文：供养三种品德叫善。
English: It is good to cultivate the three virtues.

古文：又曰： 元，体之长也。 
现代文：又说： 元，是体裁中最长的。 
English: He also said: Yuan is the longest chorus in the genre.

古文：合三体而为之原，故曰元。
现代文：把《风》、《雅》、《颂》三种体裁合起来称作元。
English: The combination of the three genres of "Wind," "Elegance" and "Ode" is called Yuan.

古文：于春三月，每月书王，元之三统也。
现代文：在春季的三个月中，每月都记载春王正月、春王二月、春王三月等，是元的三统。
English: In the three months of spring, the Spring Festival first month, Spring Festival February, Spring Festival March, etc. are recorded every month, which is the original trinity.

古文：三统合于一元，故因元一而九三之以为法，十一三之以为实。
现代文：三统合成一元，因此用元一乘以三的九次方形成法数，用三的十一次方作为实数。
English: All three are combined to form one yuan. Therefore, one yuan is multiplied by the ninth power of three to form a number, and the eleventh power of three is used as a real number.

古文：实如法得一。
现代文：实数如法数得一。
English: The real number is equal to the magic number.

古文：黄钟初九，律之首，阳之变也。
现代文：黄钟初九，是律的头一个，阳的变化。
English: Yellow bell at the beginning of the ninth, is the first one of the law, the yang changes.

古文：因而六之，以九为法，得林钟初六，吕之首，阴之变也。
现代文：用六来乘，以九作为除数，就得到林钟初六，是吕的头一个，阴的变化。
English: Using six to multiply and nine as a divisor, we get Lin Zhong Zhong Six, which is the first one of Lu and the change of Yin.

古文：皆参天两地之法也。
现代文：这都是参天两地的方法。
English: It's a two-pronged approach.

古文：上生六而倍之，下生六而损之，皆以九为法。
现代文：上生六就加倍，下生六就减半，都以九作为除数。
English: The first-born six is doubled, the second-born six is halved, both with nine as the divisor.

古文：九六，阴阳、夫妇、子母之道也。
现代文：九六是阴阳、夫妇、子母的规律。
English: Ninety-six is the law of yin and yang, husband and wife, and mother and child.

古文：律娶妻而吕生子，天地之情也。
现代文：律娶妻而吕生子，是天地的常情。
English: It is the natural order of heaven and earth for a man to marry and have children.

古文：六律六吕，而十二辰立矣。
现代文：六律六吕，十二辰就形成了。
English: Six principles, six laws, and twelve hours formed a rhyme.

古文：五声清浊，而十日行矣。《传》曰 天六地五 ，数之常也。
现代文：五声中有清浊，这样就形成了十日。《左传》说 天六地五 ，这是数的常数。
English: In the five voices, there is a clear chime, thus forming ten days. "Zo Zhuan" says that there are six days and five days, which is a constant number.

古文：天有六气，降生五味。
现代文：天有六气，下降则形成五味。
English: There are six elements in the sky, and the five elements are formed when the sky falls.

古文：夫五六者，天地之中合，而民所受以生也。
现代文：五六是天地的中合之数，人凭藉它们得以生存。
English: Fifty-six is the number of the union of heaven and earth, by virtue of which man can survive.

古文：故日有六甲，辰有五子，十一而天地之道毕，言终而复始。
现代文：所以曰有六甲，辰有五子，相加得十一，天地的规律全都在这裹了，它们周而复始。
English: Therefore, it is said that there are six heavens and six earths, and the hour has five sons, adding up to eleven. The laws of heaven and earth are all wrapped up in this, and they go around and around.

古文：太极中央元气，故为黄钟，其实一龠，以其长自乘，故八十一为日法，所以生权衡、度量，礼乐之所繇出也。
现代文：太极中央元气，所以为黄钟，它的容积是一龠，用它的长来自乘，所以八十一作为日法数，因此产生了权、衡、度、量，礼和乐也由此而产生。
English: The central energy of Taiji is the yellow bell. Its volume is one gong, and it uses its length to multiply itself. Therefore, eighty-one is the Japanese number. Therefore, it has produced weights, measures, measures, and quantities. Rites and music also arise from this.

古文：《经》元，一以统始，《易》太极之首也。
现代文：经过万物惟一的本源来统一开始，是《周易》中太极之首。
English: It is the beginning of unification through the only source of all things, and it is the first of the Taiji in "Zhou Yi."

古文：春秋二以目岁，《易》两仪之中也。
现代文：春秋二季来表示一年，是《周易》两仪的中间。
English: The two seasons of spring and autumn represent one year, which is the middle of the "Zhou Yi" two rites.

古文：于春每月书王，《易》三极之统也。
现代文：在春天每月记载春王正月等，是《周易》三极之统。
English: To record the Spring Festival every month in the spring is the trinity of "Zhou Yi."

古文：于四时虽亡事必书时月，《易》四象之节也。
现代文：在四时即使没有事件也要记时令和月份，是《周易》四象品质。
English: At four o'clock, even if there is no event, it is necessary to record the time and month, which is the "Zhou Yi" four-elements quality.

古文：时月以建分、至、启、闭之分，《易》八卦之位也。
现代文：月份有斗建之分，节气有立春、立夏和立秋、立冬之分，这是《周易》中的八卦之位。
English: The months are divided into phases, and the solar terms are divided into the beginning of spring, the beginning of summer, the beginning of autumn, and the beginning of winter. This is the position of gossip in "Zhou Yi."

古文：象事成败，《易》吉凶之效也。
现代文：仿效事物的成败，是《周易》中吉凶的验证。
English: Imitating the success or failure of things is the verification of good luck and bad luck in "Zhou Yi."

古文：朝聘会盟，《易》大业之本也。
现代文：诸侯定期朝见天子和霸主，是《周易》大业的根本。
English: It is fundamental to the great cause of "Zhou Yi" that the princes regularly visit the emperor and the overlord.

古文：故《易》与《春秋》，天人之道也。
现代文：所以《周易》与《春秋》，是天人的规律。
English: Therefore, "Zhou Yi" and "Spring and Autumn" are the laws of nature.

古文：《传》曰： 龟，象也。
现代文：《左传》说： 龟，就是形象。
English: "Zo Zhuan" says: The turtle is the image.

古文：筮，数也，物生而后有象，象而后有滋，滋而后有数。 
现代文：筮，就是数。万物出生后才有形象，有形象后才繁衍，繁衍后才有数。 
English: Everything is born with an image, reproduces with an image, and reproduces with a number.

古文：是故元始有象一也，春秋二也，三统三也，四时四也，合而为十，成五体。
现代文：因此原始时象数衹有一，春秋有二，三统有三，四时有四，合起来就是十，形成五体。
English: Therefore, the number of primordial time phenomena is one, the number of spring and autumn phenomena is two, the number of trinity phenomena is three, and the number of four-time phenomena is four. Taken together, they are ten, forming five bodies.

古文：以五乘十，大衍之数也，而道据其一，其余四十九，所当用也，故蓍以为数。
现代文：用五乘十，得到大衍之数，道占其中之一，还余四十九，是可以用的，所以蓍就把它作为数。
English: Using five times ten to get the number of large derivatives, Tao accounted for one of them, and the remaining forty-nine could be used, so he took it as a number.

古文：以象两两之，又以象三三之，又以象四四之，又归奇象闰十九，及所据一加之，因以再扐两之，是为月法之实。如日法得一，则一月之日数也，而三辰之会交矣，是以能生吉凶。
现代文：用四十九二、再乘以三、再乘以四、再加上十九，再加上一。以其总和再乘以二，造就是月法的实数。如曰法则得一，是一月的日数，这样天、地、人三辰的轨迹就交会了，因此能产生吉凶。
English: Take 492 and multiply it by 3, then multiply it by 4, then add 19 and add 1. Take the total and multiply it by 2 to create the real number of the lunar calendar. For example, if you get the number 1, it is the number of days in a month. In this way, the trajectories of heaven, earth and people will meet, which can bring about good luck and bad luck.

古文：故《易》曰： 天一地二，天三地四，天五地六，天七地八，天九地十。
现代文：所以《周易》说： 天为一地为二，天为三地为四，天为五地为六，天为七地为八，天为九地为十。
English: Therefore, "Zhou Yi" said: Heaven is one and earth is two, heaven is three and earth is four, heaven is five and earth is six, heaven is seven and earth is eight, heaven is nine and earth is ten.

古文：天数五，地数五，五位相得而各有合。
现代文：天数有五个，地数有五个，五个数相加各有一个和。
English: The number of days is five, the number of lands is five, and the sum of the five numbers is one.

古文：天数二十有五，地数三十，凡天地之数五十有五，此所以成变化而行鬼神也。 
现代文：天数总和二十五，地数总和三十，天数、地数的总和是五十五，它们就形成了卦爻变化的依据，从而推演占卜起来有如鬼神一样灵验。 
English: The sum of the number of days is twenty-five, the sum of the number of lands is thirty, and the sum of the number of days and the number of lands is fifty-five. They form the basis for the changes in the divination system, so that the deduction of divination is as effective as ghosts and gods.

古文：并终数为十九，《易》穷则变，故为闰法。
现代文：把天和地的终数相加为十九，《周易》的规律是穷尽以后就变化，所以是闰法。
English: When the final number of heaven and earth is added to nineteen, the rule of "Zhou Yi" is that it changes after exhaustion, so it is a leap method.

古文：参天九，两地十，是为会数。
现代文：天数九的三倍，加上地数十的两倍，是为会数。
English: Three times nine is the number of days, and twice ten is the number of meetings.

古文：参天数二十五，两地数三十，是为朔、望之会。
现代文：天数之和二十五的三倍，加上地数之和三十的两倍，是为朔望之会的数。
English: Three times the number of the days and twenty-five, and twice the number of the months and thirty, were the days of the feast of tabernacles.

古文：以会数乘之，则周天朔旦冬至，是为会月。
现代文：用会数来乘以朔望交会的数，就是会月的数。
English: Multiply the number of meetings by the number of the Shanghai Stock Exchange, that is, the number of meeting months.

古文：九会而复元，黄钟初九之数也。
现代文：九倍会月又到了正月，是黄钟初九的数。
English: The nine-fold meeting month has come to the first month, which is the number of the first nine of the yellow clock.

古文：经于四时，虽亡事必书时月。
现代文：经过四季，即使没有事件也要记下时月。
English: After four seasons, even if there is no incident, it is necessary to record the time and month.

古文：时所以记启、闭也，月所以纪分、至也。
现代文：时是用来记立春、立夏和立秋、立冬等节气的，月是用来记春分、秋分以及冬至和夏至等的中气的。
English: The hour is used to mark the beginning of spring, summer, autumn and winter, while the month is used to mark the spring equinox, autumn equinox, winter solstice and summer solstice.

古文：启、闭者，节也。
现代文：立春、立夏等是节气。
English: The first day of spring, the first day of summer, etc. are solar terms.

古文：分、至者，中也。
现代文：春分、秋分、夏至、冬至等是中气。
English: The vernal equinox, autumnal equinox, summer solstice, winter solstice, etc. are all in the middle.

古文：节不必在其月，故时中必在正数之月。
现代文：节气不必某一个月有固定的对应关系，而中气则必须同某个月份有固定的对应关系。
English: The solar terms do not have to have a fixed correspondence with a certain month, while the middle terms must have a fixed correspondence with a certain month.

古文：故《传》曰： 先王之正时也，履端于始，举正于中，归余于终。
现代文：因此《左传》说： 先王的正时，从开端开始，举中气来正月，把余曰留在后面。
English: Therefore, "Zo Zhuan" said: The king's time is right, from the beginning, raise the middle breath to the first month, and leave the remaining day behind.

古文：履端于始，序则不愆；举正于中，民则不惑；归余于终，事则不誖。 
现代文：从开端开始，顺序就不会有错误；举中气来正月，百姓就不会迷惑；把余日留在后面，事情就不会惑乱。 
English: Starting from the beginning, there will be no mistakes in the sequence; when the first month comes, the people will not be confused; when the remaining days are left behind, things will not be confused.

古文：此圣王之重闰也。
现代文：这说明圣明的君王是重视闰的。
English: This shows that the king of the holy light is attached to the leap.

古文：以五位乘会数，而朔旦冬至，是为章月。
现代文：用五位乘以会数，就形成朔旦冬至，造就是章月。
English: Multiply the number of meetings by five, and you get the Winter Solstice, which is the beginning of the month.

古文：四分月法，以其一乘章月，是为中法。
现代文：把月法分成四份，用其中之一乘章月，造就是中法。
English: Divide the lunar calendar into four parts, and use one of them to multiply the months. The result is the middle calendar.

古文：参闰法为周至，以乘月法，以减中法而约之，则七扐之数，为一月之闰法，其余七分。
现代文：用三乘以闰法就得周至，用周至来乘月法，以此减中法，再以通法约之，则为奇零之数七，是一个月的闰法数，所余的是七分。
English: If you multiply three times by the intercalary method, you will get the number of weeks. If you multiply the number of weeks by the number of months, you will get the number of months. If you multiply the number of weeks by the number of months, you will get the number of months. If you multiply the number of weeks by the number of months, you will get the number of months. If you multiply the number of weeks by the number of months, you will get the number of months.

古文：此中朔相求之术也。
现代文：造就是求中朔的方法。
English: Construction is the way to find a middle ground.

古文：朔不得中，是谓闰月，言阴阳虽交，不得中不生。
现代文：没有中气的月份叫做闰月，是说阴阳即使相交，没有中气，也不会生长。
English: The month without the middle air is called the intercalary month, which means that even if the yin and yang intersect, without the middle air, it will not grow.

古文：故日法乘闰法，是为统岁。
现代文：所以曰法乘闰法，就是统岁数。
English: Therefore, it is called the method of multiplying by the leap method, which is the uniform number of years.

古文：三统，是为元岁。
现代文：用三乘以统岁数，得元岁数。
English: Use three times the number of years to get the number of years.

古文：元岁之闰，阴阳灾，三弦闰法。
现代文：元岁之中的闰有水旱灾害，用三乘闰法即五十七次。
English: The leap year in the middle of the first year of the year has water and drought disasters, using the three-leap method, that is, fifty-seven times.

古文：《易》九厄曰：初入元，百六，阳九；次三百七十四，阳九；次四百八十，阳九；次七百二十，阴七；次七百二十，阳七；次六百，阴五；次六百，阳五；次四百八十，阴三；次四百八十，阳三。
现代文：《周易》九厄说：从开始进入元年，一百零六年中，有九次旱灾；再过三百七十四年，有水灾九次；再过四百八十年，有旱灾九次；再过七百二十年，有水灾七次；再过七百二十年，有旱灾七次；再过六百年，有水灾五次；再过六百年，有旱灾五次；再过四百八十年，有水灾三次；再过四百八十年，有旱灾三次。
English: "Zhou Yi" Jiu Er said: from the beginning of the first year, 106 years, there are nine droughts; after 374 years, there are nine floods; after 480 years, there are nine droughts; after 720 years, there are seven floods; after 720 years, there are seven droughts; after 600 years, there are five floods; after 600 years, there are five droughts; after 480 years, there are three floods; after 480 years, there are three droughts.

古文：凡四千六百一十七岁，与一元终。
现代文：共有四千六百一十七年，与一元一起结束。
English: A total of four thousand six hundred and seventeen years, ending with one dollar.

古文：经岁四千五百六十，灾岁五十七。
现代文：经过了四千五百六十年，有灾害五十七年。
English: Four thousand five hundred and sixty years have passed, and there have been fifty-seven years of disasters.

古文：是以《春秋》曰： 举正于中。 
现代文：因此《春秋》上就说： 举中气来正月。 
English: Therefore, it was said in "Spring and Autumn": Let's cheer up for the New Year.

古文：又曰： 闰月不告朔，非礼也。
现代文：又说： 闰月不颁布朔日，是不符合礼的。
English: He also said: It is not proper not to announce the new moon on the day of the leap month.

古文：闰以正时，时以作事，事以厚生，生民之道于是乎在矣。
现代文：闰是用来使时令正确，时是用来生产劳作，事情做了才能令万物生长茂盛，养育人民的方法于是乎就有了。
English: Leap is used to make the season correct, time is used to produce labor, things done can make all things grow luxuriantly, and the method of raising people is almost there.

古文：不告闰朔，弃时正也，何以为民？ 
现代文：不颁布闰朔，是抛弃正时，那用什么来治理人民？ 
English: Not to promulgate the leap year is to abandon the right time, so what should be used to govern the people?

古文：故善僖 五年春王正月辛亥朔，日南至，公既视朔，遂登观台以望，而书，礼也。
现代文：所以表扬僖公 五年春王正月辛亥是朔日，冬至，僖公就去视朔，于是就登上观台来观望，然后记了下来，造就是礼。
English: Therefore, the praise of Gong Gong in the fifth year of the Spring King, the first month of Xinhai is the New Year's Day, the winter solstice, Gong Gong went to see the New Year, so he climbed onto the observation deck to watch, and then wrote down, making is a gift.

古文：凡分、至、启、闭，必书云物，为备故也。 
现代文：凡是春分、秋分、冬至、夏至以及立春、立夏、立秋、立冬，一定要记下天象云气的变化，是为了备用的缘故 。
English: Whenever there is a vernal equinox, autumnal equinox, winter solstice, summer solstice, as well as the beginning of spring, summer, autumn, and winter, it is necessary to record the changes in the celestial atmosphere, for the sake of backup.

古文：至昭二十年二月己丑，日南至，失闰，至在非其月。
现代文：到昭公二十年二月己丑，冬至，少了一个闰月，冬至所在的月份不对。
English: In the 20th year of Zhao Gong, February was ugly, and the winter solstice was missing a leap month, and the month in which the winter solstice was located was wrong.

古文：梓慎望氛气而弗正，不履端于始也。
现代文：梓慎见到云气也发现月份不对，是不从开端开始的缘故。
English: When Zi Shen saw the clouds, he also found that the month was wrong, because it did not start from the beginning.

古文：故传不曰冬至，而曰日南至。
现代文：所以《左传》不说冬至，而说太阳南至。
English: Therefore, "Zo Zhuan" does not say the winter solstice, but the sun's southern solstice.

古文：极于牵牛之初，日中之时景最长，以此知其南至也。
现代文：太阳位于牵牛宿初度时，在中午的时候曰影最长，由此可以知道太阳是南至。
English: When the sun is at the beginning of the morning, at noon, the shadow is the longest, from which we can know that the sun is at its southernmost.

古文：斗纲之端连贯营室，织女之纪指牵牛之初，以纪日月，故曰星纪。
现代文：北斗星的柄端连通营室，婺女宿的天区指向牵牛宿的初度，用来记曰月，所以叫星纪。
English: The handle end of the Big Dipper is connected to the camp room, and the celestial region of the Little Maid Inn points to the first degree of the Cowherd Inn. It is used to record the day and month, so it is called Starry.

古文：五星起其初，日月起其中，凡十二次。
现代文：五星从它的初端开始运行，曰月从它中间开始运行，共有十二次。
English: The five stars run from the beginning of it, and the crescent moon runs from the middle of it, a total of twelve times.

古文：日至其初为节，至其中斗建下为十二辰。
现代文：太阳运行到它的开端是节气的开始，运行到中间斗建处为中气的开始，以下为十二辰。
English: The sun's movement to its beginning is the beginning of the solar terms, its movement to the middle of the zodiac is the beginning of the middle terms, and the following are the twelve hours.

古文：视其建而知其次。
现代文：看见斗柄就知道它的运行次度。
English: When you see the handle of the bucket, you know how often it runs.

古文：故曰： 制礼上物，不过十二，天之大数也 。
现代文：所以说： 根据礼，上供物品，不过十二，这是周天的大数。 
English: So he said, "According to the rite, offerings are to be made, but twelve is the greatest number of days.

古文：《经》曰 春，王正月 ，《传》曰：周正月 火出，于夏为三月，商为四月，周为五月。
现代文：《春秋》上记载说春王正月，《左传》中解释说是周朝的正月。 大火星出现，在夏代是三月，在商朝是四月，在周朝是五月。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that it is the first month of the Spring King, and "Left Handed" explains that it is the first month of the Zhou Dynasty. The great Mars appears, in the Summer Dynasty it is March, in the Shang Dynasty it is April, and in the Zhou Dynasty it is May.

古文：夏数得天 ，得四时之正也。
现代文：夏历与天文现象吻合 。对四季的安排是正确的。
English: The lunar calendar coincides with astronomical phenomena, and the arrangement of the four seasons is correct.

古文：三代各据一统，明三统常合，而迭为首，登降三统之首，周还五行之道也。
现代文：三代各占据天、地、人三统中的一统，明了天、地、人三统常重合，所以轮流为岁首。升降三统的岁首，是周旋于五行之道啊。
English: Each of the three generations occupies a position in the trinity of heaven, earth, and man. It is understood that the trinity of heaven, earth, and man often coincides, so they take turns as the year head. The year head of the trinity of ascending and descending is the way around the five elements.

古文：故三五相包而生。
现代文：所以三五之数相容相生。
English: Therefore, the numbers of three and five are compatible.

古文：天统之正，始施于子半，日萌色赤。
现代文：天统开始于子之中，太阳开始出现红色。
English: The heavens began in the womb, and the sun began to appear red.

古文：地统受之于丑初，日肇化而黄，至丑半，日牙化而白。
现代文：地统发生于丑初，太阳生出黄色的光，到了丑之中，太阳生出弱光发白。
English: Geologically, it occurred at the beginning of the Ugly period, when the sun emitted yellow light, and in the middle of the Ugly period, when the sun emitted weak white light.

古文：人统受之于寅初，日孽成而黑，至寅半，日生成而青。
现代文：人统发生在寅初，曰光萌发出现黑色，到寅之中，日光渐亮成青光。
English: The unification occurred at the beginning of the Tora, when the light sprouted black, and in the middle of the Tora, the sunlight gradually brightened into blue light.

古文：天施复于子，地化自丑毕于辰，人生自寅成于申。
现代文：天发挥作用在子，地生万物从丑开始结束于辰，人功自寅开始成在申。
English: The heavens play a role in the son, all things of the earth begin from the ugliness and end in the hour, and human achievements begin from the yin and become in the yin.

古文：故历数三统，天以甲子，地以甲辰，人以甲申。孟、仲、季迭用事为统首。
现代文：所以历法三统术，天统首日甲子，地统首甲辰，人统首甲申，第一、第二、第三轮流为统首。
English: Therefore, the calendar trinity, the first day of heaven, the first day of earth, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man, the first day of man.

古文：三微之统既著，而五行自青始，其序亦如之。
现代文：三统已经形成，那么五行从青色开始，次序是一样的。
English: If the trinity has been formed, then the five elements begin with blue, and the order is the same.

古文：五行与三统相错。
现代文：五行与三统之数相交错对应。
English: The five lines correspond to the interlaced series of the trinity.

古文：传曰 天有三辰，地有五行 ，然则三统五星可知也。
现代文：《左传》上解释说 天有三辰，地有五行 ，所以三统术和五星运行的规律可知道了。
English: "Zo Zhuan" explains that the sky has three hours and the earth has five elements, so the rules of the trinity and the operation of the five stars can be known.

古文：《易》曰： 参五以变，错综其数。
现代文：《周易》说： 三五之数的变化，错综复杂，概括所有的数。
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The change of the number of three and five is complex, and it summarizes all the numbers.

古文：通其变，遂成天下之文；极其数，遂定天下之象。 
现代文：知道了它的变化规律，于是可以成为天下的大理论家。全部了解了它的范围，遂能判定天下的变化。
English: If you know the law of its change, you can become a great theorist in the world. If you fully understand its scope, you can judge the changes in the world.

古文：太极运三辰五星于上，而元气转三统五行于下。其于人，皇极统三德五事。
现代文：天上的太极运转三辰、五星在天上，地下的元气运转三统、五行在地下，至于人，皇权统理人间的三德和五事。
English: The Taiji in the sky operates the three stars, the five stars in the sky, the vitality in the underground operates the three principles, the five elements in the underground, and as for human beings, the imperial power manages the three virtues and five things in the human world.

古文：故三辰之合于三统也，日合于天统，月合于地统，斗合于人统。
现代文：所以三辰暗合三统，合天统，月合地统，斗合人统。
English: Therefore, the three hours coincide with the three unities, the three heavens, the three earths, and the three peoples.

古文：五星之合于五行，水合于辰星，火合于荧惑，金合于太白，木合于岁星，土合于镇星。三辰五星而相经纬也。
现代文：五星与五行相合，水应合辰星，火应合荧惑，金应合太白，木应合岁星，土应合镇星，三辰五星相纵横配合运行。
English: The five stars coincide with the five elements, the water should coincide with the hour star, the fire should coincide with the fluorescence, the gold should coincide with the white, the wood should coincide with the year star, the soil should coincide with the town star, and the three hours and five stars should coincide with the vertical and horizontal movement.

古文：天以一生水，地以二生火，天以三生木，地以四生金，天以五生土。
现代文：天以一生水，地以二生火，天以三生木，地以四生金，天以五生土。
English: Heaven uses water for one lifetime, earth uses fire for two lifetimes, heaven uses wood for three lifetimes, earth uses gold for four lifetimes, and heaven uses earth for five lifetimes.

古文：五胜相乘，以生小周，以乘 乾 、 坤 之策，而成大周。
现代文：五行相克之数相乘，用来生成小周之数，用以乘 干  坤 的策数，而成大周之数。
English: The number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements multiplied by the number of five elements.

古文：阴阳比类，交错相成，故九六之变登隆于六体。
现代文：阴阳对应排列，交错相成，所以阴阳卦象的转变生成来自于六爻。
English: Yin and yang are correspondingly arranged, interlaced with each other, so the transformation of yin and yang is generated from the six elements.

古文：三微而成著，三著而成象，二象十有八变而成卦，四营而成易，为七十二，参三统两四时相乘之数也。
现代文：三正开始的数为 着 ，三乘以 着 得 象 ，二乘以 象 得十八变数而成为 卦 ，再乘以四为 易 ，是七十二，是三倍的三与两倍的四相乘得出的数。
English: The number that starts with three is, three is multiplied by  to get, two is multiplied by  to get 18 variables and becomes, and then multiplied by four is, which is 72, which is the number obtained by multiplying three times by three and four times by two.

古文：参之则得 乾 之策，两之则得 坤 之策。
现代文：三倍的 易 得 干 卦的策数，二倍 易 得 坤 卦的策数。
English: Three times the number of easy-to-get-up-and-go strategies, twice the number of easy-to-get-down-and-go strategies.

古文：以阳九九之，为六百四十八；以阴六六之，为四百三十二，凡一千八十，阴阳各一卦之微算策也。
现代文：以阳九数乘它，得六百四十八，以阴六数乘它得四百三十二，两者相加得一千零八十的数，是阴阳各一卦相合的起始策数。
English: Multiply the yang number 9 by it to get 648, multiply the yin number 6 by it to get 432, and add the two to get 1080, which is the starting number for the combination of yin and yang.

古文：八之，为八千六百四十，而八卦小成。
现代文：用八乘它是八千六百四十，此数为八卦小成之数。
English: Using eight times, it is 8,640. This number is the smallest number in eight trigrams.

古文：引而信之，又八之，为六万九千一百二十，天地再之，为十三万八千二百四十，然后大成。
现代文：以此推算，再乘以八是六万九千一百二十，天地为二，再相乘，得十三万八千二百四十，而后成就大成之数。
English: By this reckoning, then, eight multiplied by eight comes to sixty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty, heaven and earth to two, and then multiplied by one comes to one hundred and thirty-eight thousand two hundred and forty, and then the number of accomplishment.

古文：五星会终，触类而长之，以乘章岁，为二百六十二万六千五百六十，而与日月会。三会为七百八十七万九千六百八十，而与三统会。
现代文：大成之数是五星运行都能俱终会合的年数，再类此而推广它，用它乘以章岁，得二百六十二万六千五百六十，这时是五星运行舆月分、月食之分都能俱终相会合的年数，三次会合为七百八十七万九千六百八十年，这时日分、月分、食分与五星运行都能俱终相合，这是三统之会。
English: The number of completion is the number of years in which the movements of the five stars can all finally meet, and it is further generalized by multiplying it by the number of years to obtain 2,622,615,660. At this time, it is the number of years in which the movements of the five stars, the minutes of the lunar month, and the minutes of the lunar eclipse can all finally meet. The three meetings are 7,879,680. At this time, the minutes of the day, the minutes of the month, and the minutes of the eclipse can all finally meet with the movement of the five stars. This is the meeting of the three unities.

古文：三统二千三百六十三万九千四十，而复于太极上元。
现代文：三倍三统之会数二干三百六十三万九千零四十年，后又回到、月、五星开始运行的初始之点。
English: The number of triplicities and triplicities increased to two hundred and thirty-six hundred and thirty-nine thousand and forty years, and then returned to the initial point where the moon and the five stars began to operate.

古文：九章岁而六之为法，太极上元为实，实如法得一，阴阴各万一千五百二十，当万物气体之数，天下之能事毕矣。
现代文：九乘章岁又乘六的得数，用它去除月、五星一次会合俱终的年数，此得数一分为二，阴、阳各是一万一千五百二十，当是万物的气数，依此观测天下，所有的事物规律就能计算完备了。
English: The number of nine multiplied by the number of years and six multiplied by the number of years, which is used to remove the moon and the five stars from the end of a meeting. This number is divided into two, yin and yang are eleven thousand five hundred and twenty, which is the number of all things. According to this observation of the world, all the laws of things can be fully calculated.

