古文：管仲有言∶ 无翼而飞者声也；无根而固者情也。 
现代文：管仲曾说： 没有翅翼而能四处飞扬的是声音，没有根柢而能深入牢固的是情感。 
English: Guanzhong once said: Without wings, what can fly around is sound; without roots, what can go deep and strong is emotion.

古文：陈思之文，群才之俊也，而《武帝诔》云 尊灵永蛰 ，《明帝颂》云 圣体浮轻 ，浮轻有似于蝴蝶，永蛰颇疑于昆虫，施之尊极，岂其当乎？
现代文：但声音不需要翅翼就很容易飞扬，情感不依靠根抵也不难牢固，根据这个道理来从事写作，能不十分慎重么！自古以来的作者，在不同时代竞相驰骋。有的才华卓越而豪放迅疾，有的思考精致而细密，但思虑所及往往难于全面，很少做到毫无瑕疵。曹植在写作上，是众多文人中较为英俊的了，他在《武帝诔》中却说： 尊灵永蛰。 在《冬至献袜颂》中又说： 圣体浮轻。 说 轻浮 就好像是胡蝶，说 永蛰 则容易怀疑为昆虫；把这种描写用于最尊贵的帝王，哪里能恰当呢！
English: Since ancient times, authors have been competing with each other in different eras. Some talents are outstanding and bold, some thoughts are delicate and detailed, but the thoughts are often difficult to be comprehensive and rarely flawless. Cao Zi is more handsome in writing than many writers, but he said in "The Emperor Wu" that "the spirit is eternal" and in "The Winter Solstice Sock Offering" that "the holy body is light." Saying "light" is like a butterfly, but saying "eternal" is easy.

古文：左思《七讽》，说孝而不从，反道若斯，馀不足观矣。
现代文：又如左思的《七讽》，有说之以孝而不从的话，既然如此违反大道，其他内容就不值得一看了。
English: Another example is Zuo Si's "Seven Ridicules," in which there are words of filial piety, but since they are so against the mainstream, the rest of the content is not worth watching.

古文：潘岳为才，善于哀文，然悲内兄，则云 感口泽 ，伤弱子，则云 心如疑 ，《礼》文在尊极，而施之下流，辞虽足哀，义斯替矣。
现代文：潘岳的文才，是善于写哀伤之作，但写对内兄的伤痛，就说有其留下的 口泽 ；写对幼子的哀悼，就说他思念之心 如疑 。 口泽 和 如疑 ，都是《礼记》中对尊敬的父母用的，潘岳却用之于晚辈，文辞虽然写得很悲哀，但有失于尊卑有别的大义。
English: Pan Yue's literary talent is good at writing sad works, but when he writes about his brother-in-law's pain, it is said to have a lingering taste; when he writes about his young son's mourning, it is said that his missing heart is doubtful. Both taste and doubt are used in "Li Ji" for respected parents, but Pan Yue uses them for his younger generation. Although the words are written very sadly, there is a loss of superiority and inferiority, and there is another great cause.

古文：若夫君子拟人，必于其伦，而崔瑗之《诔李公》，比行于黄虞，向秀之《赋嵇生》，方罪于李斯。
现代文：至于对人物的比拟，必须合于伦类。可是崔瑗对李公的诔文，把他的行为比之黄帝和虞舜；向秀在《思旧赋》中怀念嵇康，竟把李斯的罪过和嵇康相比。
English: As for the comparison of the characters, it must be consistent with the genre. However, Cui Tong's essay on Li Gong compared his behavior to that of the Yellow Emperor and Gu Yao; Xiang Xiu, in his "Shuyu Fu," remembered Li Kang and compared Li's sins to those of Gu Yao.

古文：与其失也，虽宁僭无滥，然高厚之诗，不类甚矣。
现代文：如果不得已而用不当的比拟，那就宁可好的方面比得过头一些，而不要对坏的方面比得太重；但像高厚那样的诗句，比拟得过分不伦不类仍是不对的。
English: If we have to resort to improper comparison, then it is better to overestimate the good aspects than to overestimate the bad aspects; but it is still wrong to overestimate the similarities in a poem like "Tall and Thick."

古文：凡巧言易标，拙辞难隐，斯言之玷，实深白圭。
现代文：大凡精妙的言辞容易显露，拙劣的毛病也难以掩盖，只要有了缺点，就比洁白的玉器上有了缺点更难磨掉。
English: Great and exquisite words are easy to reveal, and clumsy faults are difficult to cover up. As long as there are shortcomings, it is more difficult to erase them than flaws on pure white jade.

古文：繁例难载，故略举四条。
现代文：文章的瑕病是很多的，不可能全部列举出来，所以只大致提出以上四点。
English: There are many flaws in the article, and it is impossible to list them all, so only the above four points are roughly raised.

古文：若夫立文之道，惟字与义。字以训正，义以理宣。
现代文：文章写作的基本途径，不外用字和立义两个方面：用字要根据正确的解释来确定含义，立义要通过正确的道理来阐明。
English: The basic approach to writing an article involves the use of words and the establishment of meaning in two aspects: the use of words should be based on the correct interpretation to determine the meaning, and the establishment of meaning should be clarified through the correct reason.

古文：而晋末篇章，依希其旨，始有 赏际奇至 之言，终有 抚叩酬酢 之语，每单举一字，指以为情。夫赏训锡赉，岂关心解；抚训执握，何预情理。
现代文：晋末以来的作品，有的意旨模糊不清，开始有 赏际奇致 的奇言，后来有 抚叩酬酢 的怪语；且常常是单独标出一字，用来表达情感。 赏 字的意思是赏赐，和内心是否领会毫不相关； 抚 字的意思是执持，也牵涉不到什么情理。
English: In the works since the end of the Jin Dynasty, some of the meanings are vague and unclear. At first, there were whimsical sayings of "appreciation" and later, there were strange sayings of "reward"; and often, a single word was used to express emotions. The meaning of the word "reward" is "reward," and it has nothing to do with whether or not the heart understands it. The meaning of the word "attachment" is "clinging," and there is no reason involved.

古文：《雅》、《颂》未闻，汉魏莫用，悬领似如可辩，课文了不成义，斯实情讹之所变，文浇之致弊。
现代文：这都是《诗经》中未曾见到，汉魏时期也没有人用过。笼统含混地领会似乎还可辨识，核实文字就完全不成其为意义。这都是情感不正常所产生的变化，文风衰落造成的弊病。
English: These are all things that have never been seen in the "Book of Songs," and no one used them during the Han and Wei dynasties. The general and vague understanding seems to be discernible, and verifying the text completely fails to make it meaningful. These are all changes caused by abnormal emotions, and the ills caused by the decline of the literary style.

古文：而宋来才英，未之或改，旧染成俗，非一朝也。
现代文：到刘宋以后的作者，仍然没有改变，老毛病已习染成俗，不是一朝一夕鹅事情了。
English: To the author after Liu Song, there is still no change, the old problems have become habitual, it is not an overnight thing.

古文：近代辞人，率多猜忌，至乃比语求蚩，反音取瑕，虽不屑于古，而有择于今焉。
现代文：近代的作家，大都爱好猜忌，以至从语音相同的字上寻找缺点，从反切出的字音去挑取毛病。这在古代虽不重要，在当今却要受到指责。
English: Most modern writers are suspicious, and even look for faults in phonetically identical words, and find faults in words that are pronounced backwards. Although this was not important in ancient times, it is a cause for criticism today.

古文：又制同他文，理宜删革，若掠人美辞，以为己力，宝玉大弓，终非其有。
现代文：此外，所写和他人的文章雷同，按理应当加以删改。如果掠取人家的美辞，当做自己的创作，就像古代阳虎窃取了鲁国的宝玉大弓，终于不是自己应有之物而退还。
English: In addition, the articles written by others are similar and should be deleted. If you plunder the praise of others, it should be regarded as your own creation, just as the ancient Yanghu stole the precious large bow of Lu, and finally returned it because it was not what he should have.

古文：全写则揭箧，傍采则探囊，然世远者太轻，时同者为尤矣。
现代文：全部抄袭别人的作品，就如巨盗窃取整箱的财物；部分采取他人的文辞，则如小偷摸人家的口袋；但袭用前人论述的很浅薄，窃取当代著作就是过错了。
English: To plagiarize someone else's work in its entirety is like a thief stealing a whole box of goods; to partially adopt someone else's words is like a thief picking someone's pocket; but to plagiarize someone's predecessors is very shallow, and stealing contemporary works is a mistake.

古文：若夫注解为书，所以明正事理，然谬于研求，或率意而断。
现代文：至于注释之成为书籍，是用以辨明事理的，但由于研究得不正确，有的便轻率地做了判断。
English: As for the commentaries that became books, they were used to clarify the facts, but because the research was not correct, some people made hasty judgments.

古文：《西京赋》称 中黄、育、获 之畴，而薛综谬注谓之 阉尹 ，是不闻执雕虎之人也。
现代文：张衡在《西京赋》中讲到 中黄伯，以及夏育、乌获之类勇士 ，薛综把中黄伯误注为宦官的头目，这是他不知道中黄伯是能执雕虎的勇士。
English: In "Sai Jing Fu," Zhang Heng talked about Zhong Huang Bo, as well as warriors such as Xia Yu and Wu Guo, but Xue Zhan mistook Zhong Huang Bo as the head of the eunuch. This was because he did not know that Zhong Huang Bo was a warrior who could carve tigers.

古文：又《周礼》井赋，旧有 匹马 ；而应劭释匹，或量首数蹄，斯岂辩物之要哉？
现代文：又如《周礼》中讲按井田征收赋税，过去有三十户出 匹马 之说，而应劭在《风俗通义》中解释 匹 字，有按马头数马蹄的说法，这岂是辨别事物的要义呢？
English: For example, in "Zhou Li" it is said that the tax was levied according to the number of fields, and in the past, it was said that there were thirty households that produced horses. However, in "Zhu Li" it is said that the word "horses" should be interpreted according to the number of horses' heads and hooves. Is this the essence of distinguishing things?

古文：原夫古之正名，车两而马匹，匹两称目，以并耦为用。
现代文：考查古代正定名称的原意，车用 两 而马用 匹 ， 匹 和 两 的称呼，都是取并偶的意思。
English: Examining the original meaning of the ancient formal names, the car is called "two horses" and the horse is called "horses," "horses" and "two," all of which mean the same thing.

古文：盖车贰佐乘，马俪骖服，服乘不只，故名号必双，名号一正，则虽单为匹矣。
现代文：随帝王朝会和祭祀的贰车、军事和打猎的佐车，驾车在中的两服、在外的两骖，都是双马。既然这些都不是单的，所以它们的名称必须成双；名称一经正定之后，就虽是单数也通称为 匹 了。
English: The chariot of the imperial dynasty and the sacrificial chariot, the military chariot and the hunting chariot, the chariot in the middle and the chariot outside, are all double horses. Since these are not single, their names must be in pairs; once the name is decided, even if it is a single number, it is commonly called a horse.

古文：匹夫匹妇，亦配义矣。
现代文：所谓 匹夫匹妇 ，也就是取配偶的意思。
English: The so-called "pivpivtsi" means to take a spouse.

古文：夫车马小义，而历代莫悟；辞赋近事，而千里致差；况钻灼经典，能不谬哉？
现代文：车马名称的含义是比较简单的，但历代仍然有人不明白；辞赋是文人的家常便饭，还有人注得差之千里，何况研讨宏深的儒家经典，怎么可能不发生错误呢？
English: The meaning of the name of the chariot and horse is relatively simple, but there are still people who do not understand it throughout the ages; the term "fu" is a commonplace for writers, and there are also people who are thousands of miles away, not to mention the study of the profound Confucian classics, how is it possible not to make mistakes?

古文：夫辩匹而数首蹄，选勇而驱阉尹，失理太甚，故举以为戒。
现代文：为辨别 匹 字而计算马头马蹄，挑选勇士却推出了宦官头子，都是错得过分突出的例子，所以举为鉴戒。
English: Counting horses' heads and hooves in order to distinguish horses, and selecting warriors but rolling out eunuch leaders, are all examples of mistakes that are too prominent, so they are cited as a warning.

古文：丹青初炳而后渝，文章岁久而弥光。若能隐括于一朝，可以无惭于千载也。
现代文：绘画是开始鲜明而后来变色，文章却可年代越久而更为光彩；如能在写作时改正了作品中的缺点，就可传之千载而永无愧色了。总结：
English: A painting is bright at first and then changes color, but an article can become more brilliant as the years go by; if you can correct the shortcomings in the work when writing, you can pass it down for thousands of years and never be ashamed.

古文：赞曰∶羿氏舛射，东野败驾。
现代文：善于射箭的后羿曾出过差错，善于御马的东野稷也出现过失误。
English: Hou Yi, who is good at archery, once made a mistake, and Higashino Yao, who is good at horse riding, also made a mistake.

古文：虽有俊才，谬则多谢。
现代文：虽然有杰出的才能，出了错误就很惭愧。
English: Although he has outstanding talent, he is ashamed when he makes a mistake.

古文：斯言一玷，千载弗化。
现代文：作品中一个小小的污点，历经千年也无法改变。
English: A small blemish in a work of art cannot be changed even after thousands of years.

古文：令章靡疚，亦善之亚。
现代文：能写出没有毛病的好作品，也就和写作的高手相去不远了。
English: To be able to write a good work without any problems is not far from being a master of writing.

