古文：李嗣昭，字益光，武皇母弟代州刺史克柔之假子也。
现代文：李嗣昭，字益光，是武皇母弟代州刺史李克柔的义子。
English: Li Shizhao, also known as Yi Guang, was the son-in-law of Emperor Wu's mother's younger brother, Daizhou scribe Li Ke Rong.

古文：乾宁初，王珂、王珙争帅河中，珙引陕州之军攻珂，珂求救于武皇，乃令嗣昭将兵援之，败珙军于猗氏，获贼将李璠等。
现代文：小字进通，不知族姓的来源。年少时侍奉李克柔，颇为谨慎老实，虽然形貌瘦小，但精悍有胆略，深沉坚毅，卓然不群。起初嗜好喝酒，喜欢音乐，武皇仅稍加训诫，就终身不再喝酒了。少年时随从征战熟谙军事机略。乾宁初年，王珂、王珙在河中争霸，王珙军引来陕州之军攻打王珂，王珂向武皇求救，于是武皇命令李嗣昭带兵去救援，在猗氏打败王珙军队，俘获敌将李等人。
English: When he was young, he served Li Keluo. He was quite prudent and honest. Although he was small in stature, he was brave and daring, with a deep fortitude, and stood out from the crowd. At first, he was fond of drinking and liked music. Emperor Wu only gave him a little admonition, and he stopped drinking for life. When he was a boy, he followed the war and was familiar with military tactics. In the first year of Qianning, Wang Ke and Wang Yao fought for supremacy in the river. Wang Yao's army brought the army from Shaanxi to attack Wang Ke. Wang Ke asked Emperor Wu for help, so Emperor Wu ordered

古文：四年，改衙内都将，复援河中，败汴军于胡壁堡，擒汴将滑礼，以功加检校仆射。
现代文：四年，改任衙内都将，再次援助河中，在胡壁堡打败汴军，俘获汴将滑礼，以战功加封检校仆射。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to the post of commander of the Inner Palace Guards, and once again assisted the middle of the river, defeated the troops of the Inner Palace Guards at the Hubei Fort, captured the commander of the Inner Palace Guards, and was awarded the title of "captain of the Inner Palace Guards."

古文：及王珂请婚武皇，武皇以女妻之；珂赴礼于太原，以嗣昭权典河中留后事。
现代文：王珂请求与武皇联姻，武皇把女儿嫁给他，王珂到太原参加婚礼，任李嗣昭暂时掌管河中留后事宜。
English: Wang Ke requested a marriage with Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu married his daughter to him, Wang Ke went to Taiyuan to attend the wedding, and appointed Li Shizhao to temporarily take charge of the affairs of Hechu.

古文：李罕之袭我潞州也，嗣昭率师攻潞州，与汴将丁会战于含口，俘获三千，执其将蔡延恭；代李君庆为蕃汉马步行营都将，进攻潞州，遣李存质、李嗣本以兵扼天井关。
现代文：李罕之袭取潞州时，李嗣昭率军进攻潞州，与汴将丁会在含口交战，俘获三千，擒住将军蔡延恭，代替李君庆任蕃汉马步军行营都将。进攻潞州时，派李存质、李嗣本用兵扼守天井关。
English: When Li Hangzhi attacked and took Bozhou, Li Shizhao led the army to attack Bozhou, and fought with the general Ding Hui in Hanzhongkou, captured three thousand, captured the general Cai Yanqong, and replaced Li Junqing with the general of the Han horse marching army. When attacking Bozhou, Li Cunxu and Li Shizhong's soldiers were sent to guard the ceiling.

古文：汴将泽州刺史刘屺弃城而遁，乃以李存璋为刺史。
现代文：汴将泽州刺史刘屺弃城逃走，于是以李存璋为刺史。
English: Zhai fled the abandoned city of Zhezhou to Liu Zhencheng, so he took Li Cunxu as his successor.

古文：梁祖闻嗣昭之师大至，召葛从周谓曰： 并人若在高平，当围而取之，先须野战，勿以潞州为敌。 
现代文：梁太祖听说李嗣昭大军将到，召葛从周说 ：并州人如在高平，应当围而取之，先必须野战，不要以潞州为敌。 
English: When Liang Taizu heard that Li Shizhao's army was about to arrive, he summoned Ge Zhou and said, "If the Nianzhou people are in Gaoping, they should encircle and take it. First, they must fight in the field. Don't make an enemy of Zhangzhou."

古文：及闻嗣昭军韩店，梁祖曰： 进通扼八议路，此贼决与我斗，公等临事制机，勿落奸便。 
现代文：等到听说李嗣昭在韩店驻军，梁太祖说： 李嗣昭扼守八议路，这个贼人要与我们决斗，你们要临事抓住机会，不要落入圈套。 
English: When he heard that Li Shizhao was garrisoning troops in Hantian, Liang Taizu said: Li Shizhao is holding fast to the eight-sentence road, this thief wants to fight with us, you should seize the opportunity, do not fall into the trap.

古文：贺德伦闭壁不出，嗣昭日以铁骑环城，汴人不敢刍牧，援路断绝。
现代文：贺德伦闭壁不出，李嗣昭每天用铁骑环绕城墙，汴人不敢外出打柴割草，援救之路也被断绝。
English: He Delun could not get out of the closed wall, Li Shizhao circled the city wall with an iron horse every day, and the people of Yao did not dare to go out to cut firewood and grass. The road to rescue was also cut off.

古文：八月，德伦、张归厚弃城遁去，我复取潞州。
现代文：八月，贺德伦、张归厚弃城逃走，我方复得潞州。
English: In August, He Delun and Zhang Gui Hou abandoned the city and fled, and we recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：光化三年，汴人攻沧州，刘仁恭求救，遣嗣昭出师邢、己以应之。嗣昭遇汴军于沙河，击败之，获其将胡礼。
现代文：光化三年，汴人进攻沧州，刘仁恭求救，武皇派李嗣昭出兵到邢州、氵名州接应，李嗣昭在沙河遇上汴军，击败他们，俘其将军胡礼。
English: In the third year of the Gwanghwa era, the Han people attacked Cangzhou, and Liu Rengong called for help. Emperor Wu sent Li Shizhao to dispatch troops to Cangzhou and Anmyang to respond. Li Shizhao met the Han army in Shahe, defeated them, and captured his general Hu Li.

古文：进攻洺州，下之，获其郡将硃绍宗。
现代文：攻下氵名州，俘其郡将朱绍宗。
English: They conquered Shennan Prefecture and captured its county commander, Zhu Shaosong.

古文：九月，梁祖自率军三万至临洺，葛从周设伏于青山口。
现代文：九月，梁太祖亲自率三万军队到临氵名，葛从周在青山口设下埋伏。
English: In September, Liang Taizu personally led 30,000 troops to Linyi, and Ge Cong Zhou set up an ambush at Qingshankou.

古文：嗣昭闻梁祖至，敛军而退，从周伏兵发，为其所败，偏将王郃郎、杨师悦等被擒。
现代文：李嗣昭听说梁太祖来了，收军而退，葛从周的伏兵杀出，李嗣昭被他们击败，偏将王郎、杨师悦等被俘。
English: When Li Shizhao heard that Liang Taizu had arrived, he gathered his troops and retreated. Ge escaped from Zhou's ambush. Li Shizhao was defeated by them, and Wang Lang and Yang Shiyue were captured.

古文：十月，汴人大寇镇、定，王郜告急于武皇，乃遣嗣昭出师，下太行，击怀、孟。
现代文：十月，汴人大肆侵掠镇州、定州，王郜向武皇告急，使派李嗣昭出兵，下太行山，攻击怀、孟二地。
English: In October, the Xiongnu aggressively invaded and plundered Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. Wang Hui sent an urgent message to Emperor Wu, asking him to dispatch Li Shizhao to go down to Taihang Mountain and attack Huai and Meng.

古文：汴将侯信守河阳，不意嗣昭之师至，既无守备，驱市人登城；嗣昭攻其北门，破其外垣，俄而汴将阎宝救军至，乃退。
现代文：汴将侯信守卫河阳，没料到李嗣昭军队到来，没有守备，便驱赶市民登城，李嗣昭攻其北门，破除外墙，不久汴将阎宝救兵赶到，才退下。
English: He put Hou Xin in charge of the defense of Heyang. He did not expect Li Shizhao's army to arrive. He was not prepared, so he drove the citizens up to the city. Li Shizhao attacked the north gate, broke through the outer wall, and soon he drove Yan Bao to rescue the soldiers before retreating.

古文：天复元年，河中王珂为汴人所掳，河中晋、绛诸郡皆陷。
现代文：天复元年，河中王珂被汴人俘虏，河中晋、绛各郡都陷落敌手。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Wang Ke of Hechu was captured by the Jurchens, and the counties of Hechu, Jin and Jurchens all fell to the enemy.

古文：四月，汾州刺史李瑭谋叛，纳款于汴；嗣昭讨之，三日而拔，斩瑭。
现代文：四月，汾州刺史李瑭谋反，向汴州贡献财物交结，李嗣昭讨伐他，三天内被攻下，诛杀李瑭。
English: In April, Li Shizhao, the governor of Zhangzhou, plotted to rebel against Li Shizhao. Li Shizhao fought against Li Shizhao and was captured within three days. Li Shizhao was killed.

古文：是月，汴人初得蒲、绛，乃大举诸道之师来逼太原。汴将葛从周陷承天军，氏叔琮营洞涡驿。
现代文：这个月，汴人刚得到蒲、绛二州，便大举各道军队逼近太原，汴将葛从周攻陷承天军，氏叔琮在洞涡驿宿营。
English: This month, as soon as the Xiongnu obtained the two provinces of Bu and Qu, they massed troops from various provinces and approached Taiyuan. The Xiongnu captured the Ge from the Zhou and the Heaven's Army, and the Xiongnu camped at Dongwu.

古文：太原四面，汴军云合，武皇忧迫，计无从出。
现代文：太原四面被汴军集合围住，武皇忧虑，又想不出计策。
English: Taiyuan was surrounded on all sides by the Wei army. Emperor Wu was worried and could not think of a strategy.

古文：嗣昭朝夕选精骑分出诸门，排击汴营，左俘右斩，或燔或击，汴军疲于奔命；又属霖雨，军多足肿腹疾，粮运不继。
现代文：李嗣昭朝夕挑选精锐骑兵分头从各门出击汴军营地，左俘右杀，或烧或击，汴军疲于奔命，又碰上下大雨，汴军中很多人脚肿腹痛，粮食运不过来。
English: In the morning and evening, Li Shizhao selected elite cavalrymen and sent them out separately from each gate to attack the camp of the Wei army. They killed the prisoners left and right, or burned them, or hit them. The Wei army was exhausted from running for their lives, and they were hit by heavy rain. Many people in the Wei army had swollen feet and abdominal pain, and the grain shipment could not come.

古文：五月，氏叔琮引退，嗣昭以精骑追之，汴军委弃辎重兵仗万计。
现代文：五月，氏叔琮撤退，李嗣昭带精锐骑兵追击，汴军丢下辎重兵器数以万计。
English: In May, when Ujitsuko retreated, Li Shizhao and his elite cavalry pursued them, and the Shanshan army lost tens of thousands of heavy weapons.

古文：六月，嗣昭出师阴地，攻慈、隰，降其刺史唐礼、张瑰。
现代文：六月，李嗣昭出兵阴地关，进攻慈州、隰州，迫使其刺史唐礼、张瑰投降。
English: In June, Li Shizhao sent troops to Yinyi Pass and attacked Cizhou and Zhangzhou, forcing them to surrender.

古文：是时，天子在凤翔，汴人攻围，有密诏征兵。
现代文：这时，天子在凤翔，汴人围攻凤翔，天子有密诏征兵。
English: At this time, the heavenly son was in Fengxiang, and the barbarians were besieging Fengxiang. The heavenly son had a secret edict to recruit soldiers.

古文：十一月，嗣昭出师晋、绛，屯吉上堡，遇汴将王友通于平阳，一战擒之。
现代文：十一月，李嗣昭出兵晋州、绛州，驻扎在吉上堡，在平阳遇汴将王友通，一战就擒获了他。
English: In November, Li Shizhao dispatched troops to Jinzhou and Zhangzhou and stationed them in Jisheng Fortress. In Pingyang, he encountered the general Wang Youtong and captured him in a single battle.

古文：明年正月，嗣昭进兵蒲县。
现代文：第二年一月，李嗣昭进兵蒲县。
English: In January of the following year, Li Shizhao entered Heibo County.

古文：十八日，汴将硃友宁、氏叔琮将兵十万来拒。
现代文：十八日，汴将朱友宁、氏叔琮带十万兵来抵抗。
English: On the 18th day, he sent Zhu Youning and his uncle with 100,000 soldiers to resist.

古文：二十八日，梁祖自率大军至平阳，嗣昭之师大恐。
现代文：二十八日，梁太祖亲自率大军到平阳，李嗣昭军队大为恐慌。
English: On the 28th, Liang Taizu personally led a large army to Pingyang, and Li Shizhao's army panicked.

古文：三月十一日，有白虹贯周德威之营，候者云不利，宜班师。
现代文：三月十一日，有白虹贯穿周德威营地上空，算命的人说不吉利，应该回师。
English: On March 11th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky above the Zhou Dewei camp. The fortune-teller said it was unlucky and that he should go back to school.

古文：翼日，氏叔琮犯德威之营，汴军十余万列阵四合，德威、嗣昭血战解之，乃保军而退，汴军因乘之。
现代文：第二天，氏叔琮侵犯周德威的营地，汴军十多万人，四面列阵，周德威、李嗣昭血战解围，才保住军队而退走，汴军乘势攻击。
English: The next day, Uji Shukun invaded Zhou Dewei's camp, and more than a hundred thousand soldiers of the Wei army lined up on all sides. Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao fought a bloody battle to relieve the siege, only to keep the army and retreat, and the Wei army took advantage of the situation to attack.

古文：时诸将溃散，无复部伍，德威引骑军循西山而遁，硃友宁乘胜陷慈、隰、汾等州。
现代文：此时各位将军溃散，不再有队伍，周德威带骑兵沿西山逃跑，朱友宁乘胜攻占慈、隰、汾等州。
English: At this time, the generals scattered, there was no longer a team, Zhou Dewei and his cavalry fled along the West Mountain, and Zhu Youning took advantage of the victory to occupy Ci, Handan, Handan and other provinces.

古文：武皇闻其败也，遣李存信率牙兵至清源应接，复为汴军所击。
现代文：武皇听到失败消息，派李存信率牙兵到清源接应，又遭汴军攻击。
English: When Emperor Wu heard the news of the defeat, he sent Li Cunxin to Qingyuan with his dental soldiers, but they were attacked again.

古文：汴军营于晋祠，嗣昭、德威收合余众，登城拒守；汴人治攻具于西北隅，四面营栅相望。
现代文：汴军在晋祠扎营，李嗣昭、周德威收集余下众兵，登城拒守，汴人在西北角修造攻城器具，四面营垒栅栏相望。
English: The Xiongnu army set up camp in Jinci. Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei gathered the remaining soldiers and refused to defend the city. The Xiongnu people built siege equipment in the northwest corner, and the four sides of the camp fence faced each other.

古文：时镇州、河中皆为梁有，孤城无援，师旅败亡。
现代文：此时镇州、河中都为汴梁军队占领，孤城无援，军士逃亡溃败。
English: At this time, Zhenzhou and Hechu were both occupied by Yan Liang's army, the lonely city was helpless, and the sergeant fled and was defeated.

古文：武皇昼夜登城，忧不遑食，召诸将欲出保云州，嗣昭曰： 王勿为此谋，兒等苟存，必能城守。 
现代文：武皇昼夜登城，忧虑得顾不上吃饭，召集各位将军想杀出重围去保住云州，李嗣昭说： 王不要这样设想，儿子们只要活着，必能守住城池。 
English: Emperor Wu went to the city day and night, worried that he would not be able to eat, and gathered the generals to try to break out of the heavy siege to save Yunnan. Li Shizhao said: King, don't think like this. As long as our sons are alive, they will be able to defend the city.

古文：李存信曰： 事势危急，不如且入北蕃，别图进取。
现代文：李存信说： 情势危急，不如暂入北蕃，另图进取。
English: Li Cunxin said: The situation is critical, it is better to temporarily enter Beilun and take another shot.

古文：硃温兵师百万，天下无敌，关东、河北受他指挥，今独守危城，兵亡地蹙，傥彼筑室反耕，环堑深固，则亡无日矣！ 
现代文：朱温有百万大军，天下无敌，关东、河北受他指挥，现在我们独守危城，兵亡地少，如果他们筑室反耕，环堑深固，则我们灭亡的日子就到了！ 
English: Zhu Wen has a million-strong army, the world is invincible, and Guandong and Hebei are under his command. Now we are the sole defenders of the dangerous city, and the number of soldiers killed is small. If they build a room and turn it into a farm, and the encirclement is deep, then the day of our demise has arrived!

古文：武皇将从之，嗣昭亟争不可，犹豫未决，赖刘太妃极言于内，武后且止。
现代文：武皇准备听从李存信的主意，李嗣昭急切地争执说不可以，武皇犹豫不决，靠着刘太妃在宫内极言，武皇才打消出城的念头。
English: Emperor Wu was ready to listen to Li Cunxin's idea, Li Shizhao eagerly argued that it was not possible, Emperor Wu hesitated, relying on Liu Taifei to speak in the palace, Emperor Wu only dispelled the idea of leaving the city.

古文：数日，亡散之众复集。
现代文：几天后，流散的众兵又会合到一起。
English: A few days later, the dispersed soldiers came together again.

古文：嗣昭昼夜分兵四出，斩将搴旗，汴军保守不暇。
现代文：李嗣昭昼夜分兵四面出击，斩将搴旗，汴军连保住自己都顾不过来。
English: Li Shizhao's day and night detachments attacked in all directions, decapitating the Wei army, and the Wei army could not even protect themselves.

古文：二十一日，硃友宁烧营退去，嗣昭追击，复收汾、慈、隰等州。
现代文：二十一日，朱友宁烧掉营地而退，李嗣昭追击，又收复汾、慈、隰等州。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Youning burned down the camp and retreated, Li Shizhao pursued, and recovered the provinces of Yao, Ci and Yao.

古文：五月，云州都将王敬晖据城叛，振武石善友亦为部将契苾让所逐，嗣昭皆讨平之。
现代文：五月，云州都将王敬晖据城叛乱，振武军石善友也被部将契絆让驱逐，李嗣昭都讨伐平定了他们。
English: In May, all of Yunnan rebelled against Wang Jinglian's siege of the city, and the Zhenwu army of Shi Shengyou was also driven out by the general Qi Qizong. Li Shizhao fought and defeated them.

古文：天祐三年，汴人攻沧、景，刘仁恭遣使求援。
现代文：天祐三年，汴人进攻沧州、景州，刘仁恭派使者求援。
English: In the third year of Tianyu, the Xiongnu attacked Cangzhou and Jingzhou, and Liu Rengong sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：十一月，嗣昭合燕军三万进攻潞州，降丁会，武皇乃以嗣昭为昭义节度使。
现代文：十一月，李嗣昭会同燕军三万人进攻潞州，降伏丁会，武皇便任李嗣昭为昭义军节度使。
English: In November, Li Shizhao and Yan's army of thirty thousand attacked Zhangzhou, surrendered to Dinghui, and Emperor Wu appointed Li Shizhao as the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army.

古文：始嗣昭未到之前，上党有占者，见一人家舍上常有气如车盖，视之，但一贫媪而已。
现代文：李嗣昭还没上任之前，上党有一占卜的，见一人家房子上常常有气如车盖，仔细看，房内只是住着一个穷老太太而已。
English: Before Li Shizhao took office, the upper party had a divination, see a person's house often has gas like a car cover, look carefully, only a poor old lady lives in the room.

古文：占者谓媪： 有子乎？ 
现代文：占卜者对她说 ：有儿子吗？ 
English: The soothsayer said to her, "Do you have a son?"

古文：曰： 有，见为军士，出戍于外。 
现代文：答道 ：有，现在当兵，在外打仗。 
English: Answer: Yes, I am a soldier now, fighting abroad.

古文：占者心异之，以为其子将来有土地之兆也。
现代文：占卜者心里很惊异，认为她儿子将来必会占有土地。
English: The soothsayer was astonished, thinking that her son would take over the land in the future.

古文：未几，丁会既降，嗣昭领兵入潞，以媪家四面空缺，乃驻于是舍。
现代文：没过多久，丁会投降，李嗣昭带兵进入潞州，看见老太太家四面空缺，便驻扎在她的房子里。
English: Not long after, Ding Hui surrendered, and Li Shizhao led his soldiers into Zhangzhou. Seeing the old lady's house empty on all sides, he stationed himself in her house.

古文：丁会既归太原，武皇遣使命嗣昭为帅，乃自媪舍而入理所，其气寻息，闻者异之。
现代文：丁会已经归附太原，武皇派使者命李嗣昭为主帅，便从老太太家进入官府，房上之气跟着消失，听说的人都很奇怪。
English: The Ding Association had already been attached to Taiyuan. Emperor Wu sent an envoy to appoint Li Shizhao as the head coach, and he entered the government office from the old lady's house. The atmosphere in the room disappeared, and everyone who heard about it was very strange.

古文：四年六月，汴将李思安将兵十万攻潞州，乃筑夹城，深沟高垒，内外重复，飞走路绝。
现代文：天祐四年六月，汴将李思安带十万兵攻潞州，修筑夹城，深沟高垒，内外重复，飞出去的路也断绝了。
English: In June of the 4th year of Tenyu, Yao took Li Sian with 100,000 soldiers to attack Zhangzhou, built a sandwich city, a deep ditch and a high fortress, repeated inside and outside, and the way to fly out was also cut off.

古文：嗣昭抚循士众，登城拒守，梁祖驰书说诱百端，嗣昭焚其伪诏，斩其使者，城中固守经年，军民乏绝，含盐炭自生，以济贫民。
现代文：李嗣昭安抚士兵，登城拒守。梁太祖写信百般劝诱，李嗣昭烧掉他的诏书，杀掉他的使者，固守城池一年多，军民缺乏吃穿，有盐炭自己出现，用来救济贫民。
English: Li Shizhao appeased the soldiers and refused to defend the city. Liang Taizu wrote letters to persuade him in various ways. Li Shizhao burned his edict, killed his envoy, and held the city for more than a year. The soldiers and civilians lacked food and clothing, and salt and charcoal appeared on their own to help the poor.

古文：嗣昭尝享诸将，登城张乐，贼矢中足，嗣昭密拔之，坐客不之觉，酣饮如故，以安众心。
现代文：李嗣昭曾经宴请各将军，登城取乐，敌人射箭射中他的脚，李嗣昭悄悄拔掉箭矢，坐客竟都没有察觉，李嗣昭照常喝酒，以安众人之心。
English: Li Shizhao once invited the generals to a banquet, went to the city to have fun, the enemy shot his foot with an arrow, Li Shizhao quietly pulled out the arrow, the guests did not even notice, Li Shizhao drank as usual, to the peace of everyone's heart.

古文：五年五月，庄宗败汴军，破夹城。
现代文：五年五月，庄宗击败汴军，攻破夹城。
English: In May of the fifth year, Zhuangzong defeated the Wei army and broke through the city.

古文：嗣昭知武皇弃世，哀恸几绝。
现代文：李嗣昭得知武皇去世，哀恸得几乎丧命。
English: When Li Shizhao learned of Emperor Wu's death, he was so saddened that he almost died.

古文：时大兵攻围历年，城中士民饥死大半，廛里萧条。
现代文：此时大军被围攻一年，城中军民饿死一大半，城乡萧条。
English: At this time, the great army was besieged for a year, most of the soldiers and civilians in the city died of starvation, and the urban and rural areas were depressed.

古文：嗣昭缓法宽租，劝农务穑，一二年间，军城完集，三面邻于敌境，寇钞纵横，设法枝梧，边鄙不耸。
现代文：李嗣昭放宽法律减轻租税，劝勉农民多种庄稼，一两年之内，军城完集，三面与敌人边境相邻，敌人纵横劫掠，李嗣昭设法对付，边境不再受惊动。
English: Li Shizhao relaxed the law to reduce taxes and encouraged farmers to grow more crops. Within a year or two, the military camp was completed, and it was adjacent to the enemy's border on three sides. The enemy plundered everywhere. Li Shizhao tried to deal with it, and the border was no longer alarmed.

古文：胡柳之战，周德威战没，师无行列，至晚方集。
现代文：胡柳一战，周德威战死，军队失去行列，到晚上才汇集。
English: In the Battle of Huliu, Zhou Dewei was killed in action, the army lost its ranks, and only assembled in the evening.

古文：汴人四五万登无石山，我军惧形于色。
现代文：汴人五万登上无石山，我军惊恐失色。
English: Fifty thousand men climbed the rockless mountain, and our army panicked and lost its color.

古文：或请收军保营，诘旦复战。
现代文：有人请求收军保营，明早再战。
English: Someone requested that the camp be secured and that the battle be resumed in the morning.

古文：嗣昭曰： 贼无营垒，去临濮地远，日已晡晚，皆有归心，但以精骑逗挠，无令返旆，晡后追击，破之必矣。
现代文：李嗣昭说： 敌人没有营垒，离临濮又很远，天已快黑，都有归心，我们只要用精锐骑兵挑战，叫他们不能回去，天黑后再追击，必然能攻破他们。
English: Li Shizhao said: The enemy has no camp, it is far away from Linyi, it is almost dark, and they have all returned to their hearts. We only need to challenge them with elite cavalry, so that they can not go back, and chase them after dark, we will certainly be able to break through them.

古文：我若收军拔寨，贼人入临濮，俟彼整齐复来，即胜负水决。 
现代文：我们如果收军拔寨，让敌人进入临濮，等他们整齐队伍后再来，则胜败难以决定。 
English: If we withdraw our troops, let the enemy enter Linyi, and wait for them to come back after they are neatly lined up, it will be difficult to decide whether to win or lose.

古文：庄宗曰： 非兄言，几败吾事！ 
现代文：庄宗说 ：如果不是兄长所说，几乎败坏我的大事！ 
English: Zhuangzong said, "If it wasn't for what my brother said, it almost ruined my big event!"

古文：军校王建及又陈方略，嗣昭与建及分兵于土山南北为掎角，汴军惧，下山，因纵军击之，俘斩三万级，由是庄宗之军复振。
现代文：军校王建及又陈述谋略，李嗣昭和王建及分兵在土山南北为掎角之势，汴军害怕，退下无石山，李嗣昭便发兵攻击，俘杀三万人，从此庄宗的军队又振兴了。
English: Military school Wang Jianji also stated the strategy, Li Shoujun Wang Jianji and the detachment of soldiers in the north and south of Tushan were at the forefront of the situation. The Shao army was afraid and retreated to Muxishan. Li Shizhao then sent troops to attack and killed 30,000 people. Since then, Zhuangzong's army has been revitalized.

古文：十六年，嗣昭代周德威权幽州军府事。
现代文：天祐十六年，李嗣昭代替周德威临时主管幽州军府事务。
English: In the 16th year of Tianyu, Li Shizhao replaced Zhou Dewei as the interim head of Yuzhou Military Government Affairs.

古文：九月，以李绍宏代，嗣昭出蓟门，百姓号泣请留，截鞍惜别，嗣昭夜遁而归。
现代文：九月，以李绍宏代李嗣昭，李嗣昭出蓟门，百姓哭泣着请他留下，拦住他的马依依惜别，李嗣昭在夜里悄悄走了。
English: In September, Li Shaohong took the place of Li Shizhao, and Li Shizhao left the imperial court. The people cried and asked him to stay. Ma Yixian, who stopped him, said goodbye, and Li Shizhao quietly left in the night.

古文：十七年六月，嗣昭自德胜归籓，庄宗帐饯于戚城。
现代文：天祐十七年六月，李嗣昭从德胜回到藩地，庄宗在戚城设帐饯别。
English: In June of the seventeenth year of Tianyu, Li Shizhao returned to the domain from Desheng, and Zhuangzong set up a tent in Qicheng.

古文：庄宗酒酣，泣而言曰： 河朔生灵，十年馈挽，引领鹤望，俟破汴军。
现代文：庄宗喝酒喝够了，哭着说： 河朔的生灵百姓，十年来供应军粮，伸长脖子盼望破击汴军。
English: Zhuang Zong had had enough of drinking and crying, he said, "The living and breathing people of Heshuo have been supplying military rations for ten years, and they are craning their necks in the hope of defeating the Wei army.

古文：今兵赋不充，寇孽犹在，坐食军赋，有愧蒸民。 
现代文：现在兵源粮赋不充足，敌人仍存在，我们坐食军粮，实在有愧百姓。 
English: At present, the army's food supply is insufficient, the enemy still exists, and we have to eat army rations, which is really a shame for the people.

古文：嗣昭曰： 臣忝急难之地，每一念此，寝不安席。
现代文：李嗣昭说 ：臣处在重要职位，每当想到这里，睡觉也不安。
English: Li Shizhao said, "My subordinate is in an important position. Whenever I think about it, I can't sleep well."

古文：大王且持重谨守，惠养士民。
现代文：请大王持重谨慎，惠养士民。
English: I would like to ask the king to be cautious and benefit the people.

古文：臣归本籓，简料兵赋，岁末春首，即举众复来。 
现代文：臣回到本藩，整顿兵赋，岁末春首，便带众人再来。 
English: The vassal returned to the domain to reorganize the army, and at the end of the year, on the first day of spring, he brought everyone back.

古文：庄宗离席拜送，如家人礼。
现代文：庄宗离席拜送，如同一家人之间的礼仪。
English: Zhuang Zong left the table to say goodbye, just like the etiquette between a family.

古文：是月，汴将刘鄩攻同州，硃友谦告急，嗣昭与李存审援之。
现代文：这个月，汴将刘寻阝进攻同州，朱友谦告急，李嗣昭与李存审援救他。
English: This month, Zhai attacked Liu Xingyao in Tongzhou, Zhu Youqian was in a hurry, and Li Shizhao and Li Cunxin came to his rescue.

古文：九月，破汴军于冯翊，乃班师。
现代文：九月，在冯翊击破汴军，然后回师。
English: In September, he defeated the Xiongnu army in Fengye, and then returned to his division.

古文：十九年，庄守亲征张文礼于镇州。
现代文：天祐十九年，庄宗亲自到镇州征讨张文礼。
English: In the 19th year of Tianyu, Zhuo Zong personally went to Zhenzhou to solicit Zhang Wenli.

古文：冬，契丹三十万奄至，嗣昭从庄宗击之，敌骑围之数十重，良久不解。
现代文：冬天，契丹兵三十万人突然来到，李嗣昭跟从庄宗攻击他们，被敌人骑兵围住几十层，很久不能解围。
English: In winter, 300,000 Khitan soldiers suddenly arrived. Li Shizhao and Zhuangzong attacked them. They were surrounded by dozens of enemy cavalry and could not break the siege for a long time.

古文：嗣昭号泣赴之，引三百骑横击重围，驰突出没者数十合，契丹退，翼庄宗而还。
现代文：李嗣昭哭喊着赴战，带三百骑兵横扫重围，驰骋进出几十次，契丹退兵，李嗣昭在庄宗身旁保护庄宗而回。
English: Li Shizhao went to the battle crying and shouting, swept the heavy siege with three hundred cavalrymen, galloped in and out dozens of times, Khitan retreated, Li Shizhao protected Zhuangzong beside him and returned.

古文：是时，阎宝为镇人所败，退保赵州，庄宗命嗣昭代宝攻真定。
现代文：这时，阎宝被镇州兵打败，退守赵州，庄宗命令李嗣昭代替阎宝攻打真定。
English: At this time, Yan Bao was defeated by the Zhenzhou soldiers and retreated to Zhaozhou. Zhuang Zong ordered Li Shizhao to attack Zhending instead of Yan Bao.

古文：七月二十四日，王处球之兵出自九门，嗣昭设伏于故营，贼至，伏发，击之殆尽；余三人匿于墙墟间，嗣昭环马而射之，为贼矢中脑，嗣昭箙中矢尽，拔贼矢于脑射贼，一发而殪之。
现代文：七月二十四日，王处球的兵来到九门，李嗣昭在故营设下埋伏，敌人一到，发伏兵将敌人消灭干净，只剩下三人藏在墙墟之间，李嗣昭骑马环绕着射击，被敌人射中脑部，李嗣昭箭袋中的箭用光了，便从头上拔下敌人射的箭射敌人，一发就射死了一位。
English: On July 24th, Wang Duqin's soldiers came to Jiumen. Li Shizhao laid an ambush under the former camp. As soon as the enemy arrived, the ambushers wiped out the enemy. Only three people remained hidden between the ruins of the wall. Li Shizhao rode around shooting and was shot in the head by the enemy. When the arrows in Li Shizhao's quiver were used up, he pulled the arrows shot by the enemy from his head and shot the enemy. He shot one person dead.

古文：嗣昭日暮还营，所伤血流不止，是夜卒。
现代文：李嗣昭天黑回到营地，伤口流血不止，这天晚上去世了。
English: Li Shizhao returned to the camp in the dark, his wound bled profusely, and he died that evening.

古文：嗣昭节制泽、潞，官自司徒、太保至侍中、中书令。
现代文：李嗣昭节制泽州、潞州，官职从司徒、太保到侍中、中书令。
English: Li Tszyu Zhaojie controlled Zhezhou and Zhangzhou, and his official posts ranged from tutor and eunuch to chamberlain and chancellor.

古文：庄宗即位，赠太师、陇西郡王。
现代文：庄宗即皇帝位后，追赠他为太师、陇西郡王。
English: After Emperor Zhuangzong ascended the throne, he posthumously granted him the title of Grand Master and King of Shaanxi.

古文：长兴中，诏配飨庄宗庙庭。
现代文：长兴年中，下诏将他配飨在庄宗庙庭中。
English: In the middle of the Changxing year, the next imperial edict assigned him to the Zhuangzong Temple Garden.

古文：嗣昭有子七人，长曰继俦，泽州刺史；次继韬、继忠、继能、继袭、继远，皆夫人杨氏所生。
现代文：李嗣昭有七个儿子，长子叫李继俦，任泽州刺史；接着是李继韬、李继忠、李继能、李继袭、李继远，都是夫人杨氏生的。
English: Li Shizhao had seven sons. The eldest son was named Li Jizhe, who was appointed as the governor of Zhejiang Province; followed by Li Jizhe, Li Jizhong, Li Jineng, Li Jizhe and Li Jiyuan, all of whom were born to his wife, Yang Shizhe.

古文：杨氏治家善积聚，设法贩鬻，致家财百万。
现代文：杨氏治家善积聚，想方设法做买卖生意，以致家财百万。
English: The Yang family accumulated wealth and tried their best to do business, resulting in millions of dollars in family wealth.

古文：继韬，小字留得，少骄狯无赖。
现代文：李继韬，小名叫留得，小时候骄横无赖。
English: Li Jizhe, nicknamed Yu De, was a proud and arrogant scoundrel when he was a child.

古文：嗣昭既卒，庄宗诏诸子扶丧归太原襄事，诸子违诏，以父牙兵数千拥丧归潞。
现代文：李嗣昭死后，庄宗诏令李嗣昭的各位儿子扶丧回到太原办理丧事，几个儿子违抗诏令，派父亲的几千牙兵扶丧回到潞州。
English: After the death of Li Shizhao, Zhuang Zong ordered all the sons of Li Shizhao to go back to Taiyuan to handle the funeral. Several sons disobeyed the edict and sent several thousand soldiers to support their father's funeral back to Zhangzhou.

古文：庄宗令李存渥驰骑追谕，兄弟俱忿，欲害存渥，存渥遁而获免。
现代文：庄宗令李存渥骑马追上他们宣告他的旨意，兄弟几个都很愤怒，要杀害李存渥，李存渥逃走得以免祸。
English: Zhuang Zong ordered Li Cunwo to ride up to them and announce his will. Several brothers were very angry and wanted to kill Li Cunwo. Li Cunwo was able to escape.

古文：继韬兄继俦，嗣昭长嫡也。当袭父爵，然柔而不武。
现代文：李继韬的哥哥李继俦是李嗣昭的嫡长子，应当世袭父亲的官爵，但他柔弱不勇武。
English: Li Jizhe's elder brother, Li Jizhe, was the eldest legitimate son of Li Shizhao and should have inherited his father's title, but he was weak and not brave.

古文：方在苫庐，继韬诈令三军劫己为留后，囚继俦于别室，以事奏闻。
现代文：还在服丧期间，李继韬就诈令三军劫持自己做留后，把大哥李继俦囚禁在另外的房子里，将事情上报朝廷。
English: While he was still in mourning, Li Jixuan ordered the three armies to kidnap him and hold him as a hostage. He then imprisoned his eldest brother Li Jixuan in another house and reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：庄宗不得已，命为安义军兵马留后。
现代文：庄宗不得已，任命他为安义军兵马留后。
English: As a last resort, Zhuangzong appointed him as the commander of the Anyi Army.

古文：时军前粮饷不充，租庸计度请潞州转米五万贮于相州；继韬辞以经费不足，请转三万。
现代文：此时军中粮饷不足，租庸计度请求潞州转运五万米粮贮藏到相州，李继韬推辞说经费不足，请求只转运三万。
English: At this time, there was a shortage of grain in the army, and the rent-yong measurement requested the transfer of 50,000 meters of grain from Ganzhou to be stored in Xiangzhou. Li Jizhe declined, saying that the funds were insufficient, and only requested the transfer of 30,000 meters.

古文：有幕客魏琢、牙将申蒙者，因入奏公事，每摭阴事报继韬云： 朝廷无人，终为河南吞噬，止迟速间耳。 
现代文：幕客魏琢、牙将申蒙，趁进来禀告公事之机，常常用奸谋游说李继韬，说 ：朝廷没人，终将被河南汴人吞并，只不过早晚的事罢了。 
English: Wei Tuo and Shen Meng, who were guests at the banquet, took advantage of the opportunity to come in and denounce the public affairs, and often lobbied Li Jizhe with treachery, saying: There is no one in the imperial court, and it will eventually be swallowed up by the people of Henan Province, but it will happen sooner or later.

古文：由是阴谋叛计。
现代文：于是阴谋叛乱。
English: This led to a conspiracy to rebel.

古文：内官张居翰时为昭义监军，庄宗将即位，诏赴鄴都。
现代文：内官张居翰这时任昭监临军，庄宗将登位时，诏令他到邺都。
English: At that time, the steward Zhang Juhan was in charge of supervising the troops in Linyi, and when Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to come to Shidu.

古文：潞州节度判官任圜时在镇州，亦奉诏赴鄴。
现代文：潞州节度判官任圜这时在镇州，也奉诏令到邺都。
English: The judge of the Bozhou Festival, Ren Qi, was in Zhenzhou at the time, and he was also ordered to go to the capital of Bozhou.

古文：魏琢、申蒙谓继韬曰： 国家急召此二人，情可知矣。 
现代文：魏琢、申蒙对李继韬说 ：国家急召这二人，事情可以猜测出缘由来。 
English: Wei Taku and Shen Meng said to Li Jizhe: The state urgently summoned these two people, and we can guess the origin of the matter.

古文：弟继远，年十五六，谓继韬曰： 兄有家财百万，仓储十年，宜自为谋，莫受人所制。 
现代文：弟弟李继远，十五六岁，对李继韬说 ：兄有百万家财，仓库储备够用十年，应为自己打算，不要受人制约。 
English: His younger brother Li Jiyuan, 15 or 16 years old, said to Li Jizhe: My brother has a million-dollar family fortune, and the warehouse reserves are enough for ten years. You should plan for yourself and not be restricted by others.

古文：继韬曰： 定哥以为何如？ 
现代文：李继韬说 ：定哥认为怎么办好呢？ 
English: Li Jizhe said: What does Ding Ge think should be done?

古文：曰： 申蒙之言是也。
现代文：说 ：申蒙说的很对。
English: He said, "What Shen Meng said is very right.

古文：河北不胜河南，不如与大梁通盟，国家方事之殷，焉能讨我？
现代文：河北比不过河南，不如和大梁结盟，后唐正处于多事的时候，哪里顾得上讨伐我们？
English: Hebei is no better than Henan. It would be better to ally with Daliang. The late Tang Dynasty is in a time of many events. Who would care about fighting us?

古文：无如此算。 
现代文：没有比这计谋更好的了。 
English: It doesn't get any better than that.

古文：乃令继远将百余骑诈云于晋、绛擒生，遂至汴。
现代文：于是李继韬令李继远带一百多骑兵诈称到晋、绛二地抓生口，遂到汴州。
English: As a result, Li Jiyuan ordered Li Jiyuan to take more than a hundred cavalrymen to Jin and Shan to make a living, and then to Zhangzhou.

古文：梁主见之喜，因令董璋将兵应接，营于潞州之南，加继韬同平章事，改昭义军为匡义军。
现代文：后梁皇帝见了十分高兴，便令董璋带兵接应他们，在潞州南边扎营，加授李继韬同平章事，改昭义军为匡义军。
English: Emperor Houliang was very pleased to see them, so he ordered Dong Xuan and his soldiers to meet them, set up camp on the southern edge of Ganzhou, awarded Li Jixuan with the title of Tongping, and changed the Shao-yi Army to the Kuang-yi Army.

古文：继韬令其爱子二人入质于汴。
现代文：李继韬把两个爱子送到汴州做人质。
English: Li Jizhe sent his two beloved sons to Zhangzhou as hostages.

古文：及庄宗平河南，继韬惶恐，计无所出，将脱身于契丹；会有诏赦之，乃赍银数十万两，随其母杨氏诣阙，冀以赂免。
现代文：等到庄宗平定河南后梁以后，李继韬惶恐不安，想不出计策，准备脱身去契丹，恰逢有诏书赦免他，便带上数十万两银钱，随其母亲杨氏朝见庄宗，指望靠贿赂免予处罚。
English: After Zhuangzong had subdued Henan Houliang, Li Jizhe panicked and worried, could not think of a strategy, and prepared to escape to Khitan. When an edict pardoned him, he brought hundreds of thousands of taels of silver to see Zhuangzong with his mother Yang, hoping to avoid punishment by bribery.

古文：将行，其弟继远曰； 兄往与不往，利害一也。
现代文：将要出发时，其弟李继远说 ：兄去还是不去，利害都是一样的。
English: When he was about to leave, his younger brother Li Jiyuan said, "Whether my brother goes or not, the stakes are the same."

古文：以反为名，何面更见天下！
现代文：已经有反叛的名声，还有什么脸见天下人！
English: You already have a reputation as a rebel, what else do you have to show to the world!

古文：不如深沟峻壁，坐食积粟，尚可苟延岁月，往则亡无日矣。 
现代文：不如挖深沟建坚壁，坐食积存的粮食，还可以苟延几年时间，如去朝廷则活不了几天了。 
English: It is better to dig a deep ditch and build a strong wall, and the grain accumulated by sitting can also last for several years. If you go to the imperial court, you will not live for a few days.

古文：或曰： 君先世有大功于国，主上季父也，宏农夫人无恙，保获万全。 
现代文：有人说 ：您的先世对国家有大功，主上就是您的叔父，弘农夫人还健在，可望得到保全。 
English: Some people said, "Your past lives were of great service to the country. The Lord is your uncle. Mrs. Hongnong is still alive and can be expected to be preserved."

古文：及继韬至，厚赂宦官、伶人，言事者翕然称： 留后本无恶意，奸人惑之故也。
现代文：李继韬到京城后，送厚礼贿赂宦官、伶人，言事的人异口同声地说 ：留后您本来没有恶意，是受奸人惑乱造成的。
English: After Li Jizhe arrived in Beijing, he gave rich gifts and bribed eunuchs and courtiers. The courtiers said in unison, "You did not have any malicious intent when you stayed, but you were deceived by the traitor."

古文：嗣昭亲贤，不可无嗣。 
现代文：李嗣昭是国家亲近贤人，不可以没有后代。 
English: Li Shizhao is a wise man close to the country, and it is impossible to have no descendants.

古文：杨夫人亦于宫中哀祈刘皇后，后每于庄宗前泣言先人之功，以动圣情，由是原之。
现代文：杨夫人也到宫中哀求刘皇后，皇后常常在庄宗跟前哭诉先人之功，以感动庄宗，所以原谅了他。
English: Mrs. Yang also went to the palace to plead with Empress Liu. The empress often cried in front of Zhuangzong about the merits of her ancestors, which moved Zhuangzong, so she forgave him.

古文：在京月余，屡从畋游，宠待如故。
现代文：在京一个多月，多次随从庄宗打猎游玩，恩宠如故。
English: He has been in Beijing for more than a month, and has accompanied Zhuang Zong on hunting trips many times. He is still favored.

古文：李存渥深诃诋之，继韬心不自安，复赂伶阉，求归本镇，庄宗不听。
现代文：李存渥则呵斥诋毁他，李继韬心中不安，又贿赂伶人、宦官，请求回到本镇，庄宗不答应。
English: Li Cunwo rebuked and slandered him, Li Jizhe was uneasy in his heart, and bribed eunuchs and eunuchs, requesting to return to the town. Zhuangzong did not agree.

古文：继韬潜令纪纲书谕继远，欲军城更变，望天子遣己安抚。
现代文：李继韬暗地令仆人写信告诉李继远，让他在军城变乱，指望天子派自己去安抚。
English: Li Jiyuan secretly ordered his servant to write a letter to Li Jiyuan, telling him to stir up trouble in the military city, hoping that the Son of Heaven would send himself to pacify it.

古文：事泄，斩于天津桥南。
现代文：事情泄漏，李继韬在天津桥南被斩首。
English: The affair leaked out, and Li Jizhe was beheaded in the south of Tianjin Bridge.

古文：二子龆年质于汴，庄宗收城得之，抚其背曰： 尔幼如是，犹如能佐父造反，长复何为！ 
现代文：两个儿子幼年时送到汴州做人质，庄宗收复汴州城时得到他们，抚摸着他们的背说： 你们这么年幼，就能帮助父亲造反，长大了还会做出什么来？ 
English: The two sons were sent to Zhangzhou as hostages when they were young. Zhuangzong got them when he recaptured Zhangzhou City, stroked their backs and said: You are so young, you can help your father rebel. What will you do when you grow up?

古文：至是亦诛。
现代文：到这时也被杀了。
English: By this time he had also been killed.

古文：乃遣使往潞州斩继远，函首赴阙，命继俦权知军州事，继达充军城巡检。
现代文：又派使者前往潞州诛杀李继远，把他的首级送往朝廷，任命李继俦临时主管潞州军政事务，李继达兼军城巡检。
English: He also sent an envoy to Ganzhou to assassinate Li Jiyuan, sent his head to the imperial court, appointed Li Jizhe as the interim head of Ganzhou's military and political affairs, and Li Jida as the inspector of the military city.

古文：未几，诏继俦赴阙。时继俦以继韬所畜婢仆玩好之类悉为己有，每日料选算校，不时上路。
现代文：没过多久，庄宗诏令李继俦到朝廷，这时李继俦把李继韬所蓄养的婢仆珍玩之类全部占为己有，每日挑选玩弄，没按时上路。
English: Not long after, Zhuangzong issued an edict ordering Li Jizhe to go to the imperial court. At that time, Li Jizhe took all of Li Jizhe's servants and precious toys as his own, choosing and playing with them every day, and did not go on the road on time.

古文：继达怒谓人曰： 吾仲兄被罪，父子诛死，大兄不仁，略无动怀，而便烝淫妻妾，诘责货财，惭耻见人，生不如死！ 
现代文：李继达愤怒地对人说 ：我二哥被判罪，父子被杀，大哥不仁，一点都没动心，却玩弄二哥的妻妾，聚敛钱财，我惭愧羞耻难以见人，生不如死。 
English: Li Jida angrily said to people: My second brother was convicted, my father and son were killed, my elder brother was not kind, he was not moved at all, but he played with the second brother's wife and concubine, and collected money. I am ashamed and ashamed, it is difficult to meet people, I would rather die than live.

古文：继达服缞麻，引数百骑坐于戟门，呼曰： 为我反乎！ 
现代文：于是穿着丧服，带领几百骑兵坐在戟门，大喊： 跟我反了！ 
English: So he put on mourning clothes and led several hundred cavalrymen to sit at the city gate, shouting: "They've turned against me!

古文：即令人斩继俦首，投于戟门之内。
现代文：立即令人斩下李继俦的头，投到戟门里面。
English: Li Jizhe's head was immediately chopped off and thrown into the courtyard.

古文：副使李继珂闻其乱也，募市人千余攻于城门。
现代文：副使李继珂听说有叛乱，募集市民一千多人攻打城门。
English: Vice-envoy Li Jike heard that there was a rebellion and recruited more than a thousand citizens to attack the city gate.

古文：继达登城楼，知事不济，启子城东门，至其第，尽杀其孥，得百余骑，出潞城门，将奔契丹。
现代文：李继达登上城楼，知道大事不好了，打开子城东门，回到家中，把家里人都杀了，带一百多骑兵杀出潞城门，准备投奔契丹。
English: Li Jida ascended the city tower, knew that things were not good, opened the east gate of the sub-city, returned home, killed his family, and took more than a hundred cavalrymen to kill the city gate and prepare to join the Khitan.

古文：行不十里，麾下奔溃，自刭于路隅。
现代文：走了不到十里，手下人逃散，自己在路边自杀。
English: After walking less than ten miles, his men scattered and he killed himself on the side of the road.

古文：天成初，继能为相州刺史，母杨氏卒于太原，继能、继袭奔丧行服。
现代文：天成初年，李继能任相州刺史，母亲杨氏死于太原，李继能、李继袭奔丧服丧。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, Li Jianeng was appointed as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, and his mother Yang died in Taiyuan. Li Jianeng and Li Jianrong followed suit.

古文：继能笞掠母主藏婢，责金银数，因笞至死。家人告变，言聚甲为乱，继能、继袭皆伏诛。
现代文：李继能鞭打母亲管收藏的婢女，追索金银，因而鞭打致死，那婢女的家人告状，说李继能聚集兵甲预谋作乱，李继能、李继袭都被处死。
English: Li Jianeng whipped a maid who was in charge of his mother's collection to death for demanding gold and silver. The family of the maid sued, saying that Li Jianeng had gathered military armor in preparation for a riot. Li Jianeng and Li Jianfeng were both executed.

古文：嗣昭诸子自相屠害，几于溘尽，惟继忠一人仅保其首领焉。
现代文：李嗣昭几个儿子自相残杀，几乎死尽，只有李继忠一人仅仅保全性命而已。
English: Several of Li Shizhao's sons killed each other and almost died, only Li Jizhong was able to save his own life.

