古文：起重光大渊献，尽玄黓困敦，凡二年。
现代文：起，止一共两年。
English: It lasted for a total of two years.

古文：高祖武皇帝十一中大通三年
现代文：梁武帝中大通三年
English: Liang Wudi completes three years of junior high school

古文：春，正月，辛巳，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月，辛巳，梁武帝在南郊祭天，实行大赦。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Liangwu held an amnesty in the southern suburbs.

古文：魏尚书右仆射郑先护闻洛阳不守，士众逃散，遂来奔。
现代文：北魏尚书右仆射郑先护听说洛阳城失守，部队四散而逃，就前来投奔梁朝。
English: When Zheng Xianbao, the right-hand man of Northern Wei Emperor Shang Shu, heard that Luoyang City was lost and the troops scattered and fled, he came to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：丙申，以先护为征北大将军。
现代文：丙申，梁朝任命郑先护为征北大将军。
English: Bishin, the Liang Dynasty appointed Zheng Xianguo as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：二月，辛丑，上祀明堂。
现代文：二月，辛丑，梁武帝祭祀明堂。
English: In February, at the height of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Liangwu held a ritual in the Ming Hall.

古文：魏自敬宗被囚，宫室空近百日。
现代文：北魏自从孝庄帝被囚禁以后，宫室空虚已近百日。
English: Since Emperor Xiaozhuang was imprisoned in the Northern Wei Dynasty, the palace has been empty for nearly 100 days.

古文：尔硃世隆镇洛阳，商旅流通，盗贼不作。
现代文：尔硃世隆镇守洛阳，商人行旅流通，盗贼不敢骚扰。
English: The town of Shilong guarded Luoyang, merchants traveled and circulated, and thieves did not dare to harass.

古文：世隆兄弟密议，以长广王疏远，又无人望，欲更立近亲。
现代文：尔硃世隆兄弟暗中商议，认为长广王与皇族嫡系比较疏远，而且又素无声望，于是打算重新立一位嫡系近亲为帝。
English: The Erqi Shilong brothers secretly discussed that Prince Nagahiro was relatively distant from the direct line of the imperial family and had no reputation, so they planned to reinstate a close relative of the direct line as emperor.

古文：仪同三司广陵王恭，羽之子也，好学有志度，正光中领给事黄门侍郎，以元义擅权，托瘖病居龙华佛寺，无所交通。
现代文：仪同三司广陵王元恭是元羽的儿子，好学而又有远志，正光年间任给事黄门侍郎，因元叉专权，元恭便假托嗓子哑，住到了龙华佛寺，不再与外人交往。
English: Wang Yuanqong, the third secretary of the Guangling Mausoleum, was the son of Yuan Yu. He was eager to learn and had a long-term vision. During the reign of Zhengguang, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate. Because of Yuan Yu's exclusive power, Yuan Qong pretended to be mute. He lived in the Longhua Buddhist Temple and no longer interacted with outsiders.

古文：永安末，有白敬宗言王阳瘖，将有异志。
现代文：永安末年，有人向孝庄帝报告说广陵王装哑，将别有企图。
English: At the end of the Yongan era, someone reported to Emperor Xiaozhuang that Guangling Wang was pretending to be dumb, and there would be another attempt.

古文：恭惧，逃于上洛山，洛州刺史执送之，系治久之，以无状获免。
现代文：元恭很害怕，便逃到了上洛山，洛州刺史将他抓住送到了洛阳，被囚禁了很长一段时间，因没有发现他有谋反的证据，才释放了他。
English: Yuan Gong was very scared and fled to Shangluo Mountain. Luozhou magistrates caught him and sent him to Luoyang, where he was imprisoned for a long time before releasing him because they found no evidence that he was plotting a rebellion.

古文：关西大行台郎中薛孝通说尔硃天光曰： 广陵王，高祖犹子，夙有令望，沉晦不言，多历年所。若奉以为主，必天人允叶。 
现代文：关西大行台郎中薛孝通对尔硃天光说： 广陵王是高祖的侄子，早有好声望，沉默不言，已经多年，如果推奉他为帝，一定会天人和谐。 
English: Xue Xiaotong, a disciple of Kansai Daigodai, said to Erqi Tianguo: Guangling Wang is the nephew of Gao Zu. He has a good reputation and has been silent for many years. If he is worshipped as the emperor, it will surely be harmonious.

古文：天光与世隆等谋之，疑其实瘖，使尔硃彦伯潜往敦谕，且胁之，恭乃曰： 天何言哉！ 
现代文：尔硃天光跟尔硃世隆等商议立元恭为帝，又怀疑他确实嗓子哑不能说话，于是便派尔硃彦伯秘密前往敦请元恭，并加以胁迫，至此，元恭才说出： 天何言哉！ 
English: Er Qian Tian Guang and Er Qian Shilong and others discussed the establishment of Yuan Qiang as emperor, and suspected that he was really mute and could not speak, so they sent Er Qian Yan Bo to secretly go to urge Yuan Qiang and coerce him. At this point, Yuan Qiang finally said: What a speech!

古文：世隆等大喜。
现代文：四字来，尔硃世隆等人大喜过望。
English: At the sight of the four characters, Er Qi Shilong and others were overjoyed.

古文：孝通，聪之子也。
现代文：薛孝通是薛聪的儿子。
English: Xue Xiaotong is the son of Xue Cong.

古文：己巳，长广王至邙山南，世隆等为之作禅文，使泰山太守辽西窦瑗执鞭独入，启长广王曰： 天人之望，皆在广陵，愿行尧、舜之事。 
现代文：己巳，长广王来到邙山南侧，尔硃世隆等已替他作好了禅让文告，派泰山太守辽西人窦瑗持鞭独入帐中。窦瑗向长广王启奏道： 天意人心，尽归于广陵，希望您行尧、舜禅代之事。 
English: It so happened that the King of Changguang came to the south side of Lushan Mountain. Er Qian Shilong and others had already prepared a Zen message for him, and sent the governor of Mount Taishan, Liaoxi man Dou Qian, to hold the whip and enter the account. Dou Qian to the King of Changguang: It is God's will for the hearts of the people to return to Guangling, and I hope that you will do the same.

古文：遂署禅文。广陵王奉表三让，然后即位。大赦，改元普泰。
现代文：于是便让长广王签署了禅文，广陵王奉表辞让了三次，然后才即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为普泰。
English: As a result, King Quang Quang signed the Zen text, and King Quang Ling abdicated three times, and only then did he become emperor, implement an amnesty, and change his era name to Putai.

古文：黄门侍郎邢子才为赦文，叙敬宗枉杀太原王荣之状，节闵帝曰： 永安手翦强臣，非为失德，直以天未厌乱，故逢成济之祸耳。 
现代文：黄门侍郎邢子才起草了赦文，文中记述了孝庄帝枉杀太原王尔硃荣的情况，节闵帝说道： 孝庄帝亲手剪灭强臣，并非为失德之举，只是由于天意还没有厌恶祸乱，所以才重蹈成济杀高贵乡公的灾祸罢了。 
English: It was Huangmen's chamberlain, Zizi, who drafted the pardon document. The document described the circumstances of Emperor Xiaozhuang's unjustified killing of the Taiyuan Wang Er Rong, and Emperor Jie said: Emperor Xiaozhuang's personal killing of a powerful minister was not an act of moral turpitude, but because the providence had not yet abhorred evil, he only repeated the calamity of killing a noble townsman.

古文：因顾左右取笔，自作赦文，直言： 门下：朕以寡德，运属乐推，思与亿兆，同兹大庆，肆眚之科，一依常式。 
现代文：因回头命左右取来笔砚，亲自起草赦文，直截了当地写道： 门下省：朕以寡德之身，有幸受到众人推举为帝，朕愿与天下万民，共同庆贺。大赦罪人，一依以往定式。 
English: As a result of the order to turn back, he took a pen and ink and personally drafted a pardon, writing straightforwardly: "Ministry: I am a virtuous widow, fortunate to have been chosen by the people as the emperor, I would like to celebrate with all the people in the world. Pardoning sinners, in accordance with the previous formula.

古文：帝闭口八年，至是乃言，中外欣然，以为明主，望至太平。
现代文：元恭闭口不言达八年之久，至此才说话，朝廷内外无不欣然，认为他是一位贤明之君，希望他能使天下太平。
English: For eight long years, Yuan Gong had kept his mouth shut, but now he has spoken, and both inside and outside the court are delighted, considering him to be a wise ruler, and hoping that he can bring peace to the world.

古文：庚午，诏以 三皇称 皇 ，五帝称 帝 ，三代称 王 ，盖递为冲挹；自秦以来，竞称 皇帝 ，予今但称 帝 ，亦已褒矣。
现代文：庚午，北魏节闵帝元恭下诏书道： 三皇称 皇 ，五帝称 帝 ，三代称 王 ，大致是越来越谦让，从秦朝以来，竞相称 皇帝 ，我现在只称 帝 ，就已经是很高的褒扬了。 
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Yuan Rong of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict, saying: "The third emperor is called the emperor, the fifth emperor is called the emperor, and the third generation is called the king. They are generally more and more humble. Since the Qin Dynasty, it has been highly praised to be called the emperor, but now I only call it the emperor.

古文：加尔硃世隆仪同三司，赠尔硃荣相国、晋王，加九锡。
现代文：加封尔硃世隆为仪同三司，追赠尔硃荣为相国、晋王，加九锡。
English: Gafong Er Er Shilong was appointed as the third secretary of Ji Tong, and posthumously, Er Er Rong was awarded the title of "Sokoku" and "Jinwang" and promoted to "Jiu Xi."

古文：世隆使百官议荣配飨，司直刘季明曰： 若配世宗，于时无功；若配孝明，亲害其母；若配庄帝，为臣不终。
现代文：尔硃世隆让文武百官商议让尔硃荣的神位升入皇室宗庙中配飨之事，司直刘季明说： 如果配飨宣武帝的话，尔硃荣在那朝并无功勋；如果配飨孝明帝的话，尔硃荣又曾亲手杀害了孝明帝的母亲胡太后；如果配孝庄帝的话，尔硃荣又为臣不终。
English: Liu Jiming said, "If it is Emperor Xuanwu, then Er Qiong Rong did not do any meritorious deeds that day; if it is Emperor Xiaoming, then Er Qiong Rong killed Emperor Xiaoming's mother, Empress Dowager Hu, with his own hands; if it is Emperor Xiaoming, then Er Qiong Rong is a vassal forever."

古文：以此论之，无所可配。 
现代文：由此看来，没有可以配飨的。 
English: From this point of view, there is nothing to match.

古文：世隆怒曰： 汝应死！ 
现代文：尔硃世隆恼怒地说道： 你罪该万死！ 
English: Irritated, Er Zhe Long said, "Your crime deserves death!

古文：季明曰： 下官既为议首，依礼而言，不合圣心，翦戮唯命！ 
现代文：刘季明道： 我既然身为谏议官之首，就应该依礼直陈意见，如有不合尊意之处，是杀是剐，任听裁处！ 
English: Liu Jiming said, "Since I am the head of the mediator, I should express my opinions according to the etiquette. If there is anything not worthy of respect, it is up to the court to decide whether to kill me or not!"

古文：世隆亦不之罪。
现代文：尔硃世隆听后也没敢加罪于他。
English: After hearing this, Er Zhen Shilong did not dare to add to his guilt.

古文：以荣配高祖庙廷。
现代文：最后将尔硃荣配飨于孝文帝庙廷。
English: In the end, Er Rong Rong was given the imperial scepter at Emperor Xiaowen's imperial court.

古文：又为荣立庙于首阳山，因周公旧庙而为之，以为荣功可比周公。
现代文：又为尔硃荣在首阳山立了庙，在周公旧庙的基址上建成，以此表示尔硃荣的功绩可以跟周公相比。
English: In addition, a temple was built for Er Qirong on Shouyang Mountain, on the site of Zhou Gong's old temple, to show that Er Qirong's achievements were comparable to those of Zhou Gong.

古文：庙成，寻为火所焚。
现代文：庙建成后，不久便被一场大火焚烧掉了。
English: Soon after the temple was built, it was destroyed by a fire.

古文：尔硃兆以不预废立之谋，大怒，欲攻世隆。
现代文：尔硃兆因没能参预废立皇帝的谋划，非常恼怒，打算攻打尔硃世隆。
English: Because of not being able to participate in the emperor's plan, Er Zhaozhao was very angry and planned to attack Er Zhi Shilong.

古文：世隆使尔硃彦伯往谕之，乃止。
现代文：尔硃世隆赶忙派尔硃彦伯前往尔硃兆处进行劝说，尔硃兆才按兵未发。
English: Erqi Shilong hurriedly sent Erqi Yanbo to go to Erqi Zhao's place to persuade him, but Erqi Zhao did not send soldiers.

古文：初，敬宗使安东将军史仵龙、平北将军阳文义各领兵三千守太行岭，侍中源子恭镇河内。
现代文：当初，北魏孝庄帝派安东将军史仵龙、平北将军阳文义各率三千士兵镇守太行岭，派侍中源子恭镇守河内。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent three thousand soldiers each led by General Anton Shi Xilong and General Yang Wenyi of Pingbei to guard Taigangling, and sent the attendant Geng Zi Gong to guard Hanoi.

古文：及尔硃兆南向，仵龙、文义帅众先降，由是子恭之军望风亦溃，兆遂乘胜直入洛阳。
现代文：等到尔硃兆大军南下之时，史仵龙、阳文义率军先投降了尔硃兆，因此源子恭的部队也望风而溃，正因为这样，尔硃兆才得以乘胜直入洛阳城。
English: By the time the Lhotse army was heading south, Shulong and Yang Wenyi led the first army to surrender to Lhotse, so Yuan Zikong's troops also collapsed, and it was because of this that Lhotse was able to take advantage of the victory and enter Luoyang City.

古文：至是，尔硃世隆论仵龙、文义之功，各封千户侯。魏主曰： 仵龙、文义，于王有功，于国无勋。 
现代文：到现在，尔硃世隆为史仵龙、阳文义二人表功，要将他二人各封为千户侯，节闵帝说道： 史仵龙、阳文义二人对您有功，但于国家却无功。 
English: Up to now, Er Qian Shilong has been praising the merits of Shi Qilong and Yang Wenyi, and he wants to appoint them both as princes of a thousand households. Emperor Jiechi said: Shi Qilong and Yang Wenyi have made contributions to you, but they have not made contributions to the country.

古文：竟不许。
现代文：终未答应。
English: In the end, Taizong was not allowed to compile the anthology.

古文：尔硃仲远镇滑台，表用其下都督为西兗州刺史，先用后表。诏答曰： 已能近补，何劳远闻！ 
现代文：尔硃仲远镇守滑台，上表朝廷请求批准其属下的一位都督为西兖州刺史，先任用之后才上表奏闻朝廷，节闵帝下诏答复说： 既然已经能够就近补用了，何必还远奏于朝廷呢！ 
English: Erqin Zhongyuan town guarding the slide, the above table requested the imperial court to approve one of its subordinates as the governor of West Erqin. After the first appointment, the above table was submitted to the imperial court. Emperor Jieyi replied: Since it has been able to supplement the nearby, why is it still far away from the imperial court!

古文：尔硃天光之灭万俟丑奴也，始获波斯所献师子，送洛阳。
现代文：尔硃天光灭万俟奴之时，才得到波斯国向北魏朝廷进献的狮子，于是派人将这头狮子送到了洛阳城。
English: It was not until the time of the Persian Empire's conquest of Manchukuo that the lion presented by the Persian Empire to the Northern Wei Dynasty was obtained. Therefore, someone was sent to Luoyang to bring the lion to the city.

古文：及节闵帝即位，诏曰： 禽兽囚之则违其性。 
现代文：等到节闵帝即位后，下诏道： 禽兽被囚禁则违背了它的天性。 
English: After Emperor Jiechi ascended to the throne, he issued the following edict: It is against the nature of animals to be imprisoned.

古文：命送归本国。
现代文：便命人将狮子送还给波斯国。
English: So he gave orders for the lions to be taken back to Persia.

古文：使者以波斯道远不可达，于路杀之而返。有司劾违旨，帝曰： 岂可以兽而罪人！ 
现代文：使者因波斯国路途遥远，难以到达，便于中途杀掉了狮子返回朝廷，有关部门弹劾使者违背了圣上旨意，节闵帝说道： 怎么可以因为一头野兽而加罪于人呢！ 
English: Because the Persian country is far away and difficult to reach, the envoy killed the lion in the middle of the journey to return to the imperial court. The relevant departments impeached the envoy for violating the sacred will. Emperor Jiechi said: How can a person be punished for a beast!

古文：遂赦之。
现代文：于是便赦免了使者。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：魏镇远将军清河崔祖螭等聚青州七郡之众围东阳，旬日之间，众十馀万。
现代文：北魏镇远将军清河人崔祖螭等人聚集起青州七郡之众包围了州治东阳，十日之内，达十余万人。
English: Northern Wei general Zhenyuan, Qinghe man Cui Zuya and others gathered the people of seven counties in Qingzhou and surrounded the state of Dongyang, within ten days, reaching more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：刺史东莱王贵平帅城民固守，使太傅咨议参军崔光伯出城慰劳，其兄光韶曰： 城民陵纵日久，众怒甚盛，非慰谕所能解。家弟往，必不全。 
现代文：青州刺史东莱人王贵平率东阳城中的百姓固守城池，同时派太傅谘议参军崔光伯出城劝慰安抚崔祖螭。崔光伯的哥哥崔光韶说： 东阳城之民欺凌其属郡百姓时日已久，属郡之民怒气很盛，不是靠劝慰调停所能化解的，我弟弟此次前往，一定难以生还。 
English: Wang Guiping, a Dongyang citizen from Donglai, Qingzhou, led the people in Dongyang City to hold fast to the city. At the same time, he sent Taifu to advise Cui Guangbo, who had joined the army, to go out of the city to comfort and pacify Cui Zuqi. Cui Guangbo's brother Cui Guangbo said: The people of Dongyang City have been bullying the people of their county for a long time. The people of the county are very angry. This cannot be resolved by persuasion and mediation. My brother will not survive this trip.

古文：贵平强之，既出外，人射杀之。
现代文：但王贵平逼崔光伯前往，崔光伯出城后，便被人射杀了。
English: However, Wang Guiping forced Cui Guangbo to go. After Cui Guangbo left the city, he was shot dead.

古文：幽、安、营、并四州行台刘灵助，自谓方术可以动人，又推算知尔硃氏将衰，乃起兵自称燕王、开府仪同三司、大行台，声言为敬宗复仇，且妄述图谶，云： 刘氏当王。 
现代文：幽、安、营、并四州行台刘灵助，自称其方术可以号召民众，又推算说知道尔硃氏将要衰败，于是便起兵叛乱，自封为燕王、开府仪同三司、大行台，扬言要为孝庄帝报仇，而且胡编图谶，说 刘氏当王 。
English: Yu, An, Ying, and Shizhou Gangtai Liu Lingsu, who claimed that his strategy could call on the people, also estimated that he knew that the Erqi clan would decline, so he started a rebellion, self-proclaimed as Yan Wang, Kaifu Yi with the three departments, and Da Gangtai, and threatened to take revenge for Xiaozhuang Emperor, and Hu compiled a map, saying that the Liu clan was king.

古文：由是幽、瀛、沧、冀之民多从之。
现代文：因此幽、瀛、沧崐、冀州的百姓很多前来投奔他。
English: As a result, many people from Yuzhou, Handan, Cangzhou and Jizhou came to join him.

古文：从之者夜举火为号，不举火者诸村共屠之。
现代文：投奔刘灵助的人以夜间举火把为号，不举火把的，各村就一起把他们杀光。
English: The people who rushed to Liu Ling's aid gave themselves the name of night torch-lighters. If they did not hold torches, all the villages would kill them together.

古文：引兵南至博陵之安国城。
现代文：刘灵助率军南下来到了博陵郡的安国城。
English: Liu Lingjun led the army south to Anguo City in Boling County.

古文：尔硃兆遣监军孙白鹞至冀州，托言调发民马，欲俟高乾兄弟送马而收之。
现代文：尔硃兆派监军孙白鹞来到冀州，假托征调百姓的马匹，打算等高乾兄弟送马来的时候收捕他们。
English: He sent the overseer of the army, Sun Baiyao, to Jizhou to collect the people's horses under false pretenses, intending to arrest them when Gao Qian's brothers brought the horses.

古文：乾等知之，与前河内太守封隆之等合谋，潜部勒壮士，袭据信都，杀白鹞，执刺史元嶷。
现代文：高乾等已知道孙白鹞的用意，便与前河内太守封隆之等人合谋，暗中部署部队，袭击并占据了信都，杀掉了孙白鹞，抓获了冀州刺史元嶷。
English: Gao Qian and others already knew Sun Baiyao's intention, so they conspired with former Hanoi governor Fong Long and others, secretly deployed troops, attacked and occupied Xindu, killed Sun Baiyao, and captured Jizhou Jishi Yuanbao.

古文：乾等欲推其父翼行州事，翼曰： 和集乡里，我不如封皮。 
现代文：高乾等想推举高乾的父亲高翼主持冀州的行政事务，高翼推辞道： 集聚乡里百姓，我不如封隆之。 
English: Gao Qian and others wanted to nominate Gao Qian's father, Gao Ying, to preside over the administrative affairs of Jizhou. Gao Ying said: "Gathering the people in the countryside, I am better than Feng Longzhi."

古文：乃奉隆之行州事，为敬宗举哀，将士皆缟素，升坛誓众，移檄州郡，共讨尔硃氏，仍受刘灵助节度。
现代文：于是推举封隆之代行州政，并为孝庄帝举哀，将士们都身穿孝服，升坛誓师，向各州郡发出檄文，共同讨伐尔硃氏，受刘灵助指挥。
English: As a result, Feng Long was elected to represent the state government, and mourned for Emperor Xiaozhuang. The generals all wore filial piety uniforms, swore an oath at the altar, issued an imperial edict to the states and counties, and jointly fought against the Yan clan, under the command of Liu Ling.

古文：隆之，磨奴之族孙也。
现代文：封隆之是封磨奴的族孙。
English: Feng Longzhi is a descendant of Feng Mao.

古文：殷州刺史尔硃羽生将五千人袭信都，高敖曹不暇擐甲，将十馀骑驰击之。乾在城中绳下五百人，追救未及，敖曹已交兵，羽生败走。
现代文：殷州刺史尔硃羽生率五千人马袭击信都，高敖曹来不及披挂铠甲，便率领十余人骑马迎击，高乾从城中用绳子吊放下来五百人，追救高敖曹没能赶上，高敖曹已与尔硃羽生的部队交战，尔硃羽生大败而逃。
English: In Yinzhou, Gao Qian led five thousand horsemen to attack Xindu. Gao Qian was too late to put on armor, so he led more than ten people on horseback to meet the attack. Gao Qian suspended five hundred people from the city with a rope. Gao Qian could not catch up with rescuing Gao Qian. Gao Qian had already fought with Gao Qian's troops, and Gao Qian was defeated and fled.

古文：敖曹马槊绝世，左右无不一当百，时人比之项籍。
现代文：高敖曹的槊术盖世无双，他的部下也个个都以一当百，当时人称高敖曹是项羽再生。
English: Gao Rong Cao's swordsmanship is unparalleled in the world, and his subordinates are also all one hundred. At that time, Gao Rong Cao was known as Xiang Yu Regeneration.

古文：高欢屯胡关大王山六旬，乃引兵东出，声言讨信都。
现代文：高欢驻军于壶关大王山，六十天后，才率兵东进，扬言讨灭信都。
English: Gao Huan garrisoned troops in the Kuguan Daowang Mountain. Sixty days later, he marched east with his soldiers and threatened to destroy the capital.

古文：信都人皆惧，高乾曰： 吾闻高晋州雄略盖世，其志不居人下。
现代文：信都人都很惊惶恐惧，高乾却说道： 我听说高欢雄才武略，盖世无双，他岂肯久居人下。
English: The believers in the capital were very alarmed and afraid, but Gao Qian said: I heard that Gao Huan was a brilliant and unparalleled warrior. Would he be willing to live under others for a long time?

古文：且尔硃无道，弑君虐民，正是英雄立功之会，今日之来，必有深谋，吾当轻马迎之，密参意旨，诸君勿惧也。 
现代文：况且尔硃兆无道，上弑君主，下虐百姓，这正是英雄立功的机会，今日高欢到信都来，肯定有更深的谋划，我应当轻骑前往迎接，暗中观察其意图，诸位不必担心害怕。 
English: Moreover, there is no way out, the emperor is on the throne, the people are being abused, this is precisely the opportunity for the hero to make a contribution, today Gao Huan came to Xindu, there must be a deeper plan, I should ride lightly to meet, secretly observe their intentions, you do not have to worry and be afraid.

古文：乃将十馀骑与封隆之子子绘潜谒欢于滏口，说欢曰： 尔硃酷逆，痛结人神，凡曰有知，莫不思奋。
现代文：于是高乾率十余骑人马与封隆之的儿子封子绘一起秘密至滏口求见高欢，高乾劝高欢说： 尔硃氏残暴叛逆，人神共怨，凡是明白事理的人，谁不想奋起讨伐！
English: As a result, Gao Jian had more than ten horsemen and horses secretly go to the mouth of the river together with Feng Longzhi's son Fuziming to see Gao Huan. Gao Jian advised Gao Huan, saying, "The Erqin clan is brutally rebellious, and people and gods have a grudge against each other. Anyone who understands the matter, who does not want to rise up and fight!

古文：明公威德素著，天下倾心，若兵以义立，则屈强之徒不足为明公敌矣。
现代文：明公您平素威德卓著，天下之人倾心归慕，您若能据道义兴兵，则那些倔强之徒，均不足以跟您相抗衡。
English: Ming Gong, you have always been outstanding in virtue, and people all over the world admire you. If you can raise an army based on morality, then those stubborn people will not be able to compete with you.

古文：鄙州虽小，户口不减十万，谷秸之税，足济军资。愿公熟思其计。 
现代文：我们冀州虽然很小，但户数却不下十万，赋税足够接济军资的，希望您深思熟虑。 
English: Although our Jizhou is small, the number of households is not less than 100,000, and the tax is enough to support the military, I hope you will think about it.

古文：乾辞气慷慨，欢大悦，与之同帐寝。
现代文：高乾言辞慷慨激昂，高欢非常高兴，当夜与高乾同帐而卧。
English: Gao Qian's words were impassioned, Gao Huan was very happy, and that night he slept with Gao Qian.

古文：初，河南太守赵郡李显甫，喜豪侠，集诸李数千家于殷州西山方五六十里居之。
现代文：当初，河南太守赵郡人李显甫，性喜豪放行侠，集聚了数千户李姓人家居住于殷州西山方圆五六十里的地方。
English: At the beginning, Li Xianfu, who was the governor of Zhao County in Henan Province, gathered thousands of households with the surname Li to live in a place 50 to 60 miles away in the western mountains of Yinzhou.

古文：显甫卒，子元忠继之。
现代文：李显甫死后，他的儿子李元忠承继了家业。
English: After the death of Li Xianfu, his son Li Yuanzhong took over the family business.

古文：家素富，多出贷求利，元忠悉焚契免责，乡人甚敬之。
现代文：李家一直很富足，过去多将钱出借他人以获利息，李元忠将契约全部焚烧掉，免除了所有借钱人的债务，因此乡亲们都非常敬重他。
English: The Li family has always been very rich. In the past, they mostly lent money to others to earn interest. Li Yuanzhong burned all the contracts and absolved the debts of all borrowers. Therefore, the villagers respect him very much.

古文：时盗贼蜂起，清河有五百人西戍。还，经赵郡，以路梗，共投元忠。
现代文：当时盗贼四起，清河县有五百人西戍边关，回来时经过赵郡，因道路不通，便一同来投奔李元忠。
English: At that time, there were four robberies. Five hundred people from Qinghe County went to the Xiling Border Pass. When they came back, they passed through Zhao County. Since the road was impassable, they all came to join Li Yuanzhong.

古文：元忠遣奴为导，曰： 若逢贼，但道李元忠遣。 
现代文：李元忠派手下仆人为他们作向导，并对他们说： 如果遇上贼寇的话，只说是李元忠派来的。 
English: Li Yuanzhong sent his servants to guide them, and told them: "If you encounter bandits, just say that Li Yuanzhong sent you.

古文：如言，贼皆舍避。
现代文：这些人按李元忠吩咐的话去说，那些贼寇果然都对他们回避、放行。
English: These people followed Li Yuanzhong's orders and went to speak, and the bandits avoided them and let them go.

古文：及葛荣起，元忠帅宗党作垒以自保，坐大槲树下，前后斩违命者凡三百人。贼至，元忠辄击却之。
现代文：等到葛荣起兵后，李元忠率宗族亲党修筑堡垒以御敌自卫，他亲自坐在大树下，前后共斩违抗命令者达三百人，葛荣的贼军前来骚扰时，李元忠每次都将其击退。
English: After Ge Rong raised an army, Li Yuanzhong led his clan and relatives to build a fortress to defend themselves against the enemy. He personally sat under a big tree, and there were a total of three hundred people who disobeyed orders. When Ge Rong's thief army came to harass, Li Yuanzhong repulsed it every time.

古文：葛荣曰： 我自中山至此，连为赵李所破，何以能成大事！ 
现代文：葛荣说道： 我从中山到这里，连连被李氏所打败，这样怎能崐成就我的大事！ 
English: Ge Rong said: I have come from Zhongshan to here, and I have been defeated by Mr. Li again and again, so how can I achieve my great achievement!

古文：乃悉众攻围，执元忠以随军。
现代文：于是出动全部军队围攻李元忠所部，抓获了李元忠，将他随军羁押。
English: As a result, the entire army was dispatched to besiege Li Yuanzhong's headquarters, captured Li Yuanzhong, and detained him with the army.

古文：贼平，就拜南赵郡太守，好酒，无政绩。
现代文：葛荣的叛乱被平定之后，北魏任命李元忠为南赵郡太守，李元忠在太守任上喜好饮酒，没有做出过什么政绩。
English: After Ge Rong's rebellion was quelled, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Li Yuanzhong as the governor of Nan Zhao County. Li Yuanzhong liked to drink when he was governor, and did not make any political achievements.

古文：及尔硃兆弑敬宗，元忠弃官归，谋举兵讨之。
现代文：等到尔硃兆弑杀了孝庄帝以后，李元忠便弃官回乡，策划兴兵讨伐尔硃兆。
English: After Er Qizhao killed Emperor Xiaozhuang, Li Yuanzhong resigned from his post and returned to his hometown, planning to raise an army to fight against Er Qizhao.

古文：会高欢东出，元忠乘露车，载素筝浊酒以奉迎。
现代文：正赶上高欢出兵东进，李元忠便乘一辆敞篷车，车上载着素筝浊酒前来迎接高欢。
English: Just in time for Gao Huan to march eastward, Li Yuanzhong came to meet Gao Huan in an open-top car, which was carrying vegetarian kites and wine.

古文：欢闻其酒客，未即见之。
现代文：高欢听说李元忠是一位酒徒，便没有立即会见他。
English: Gao Huan heard that Li Yuanzhong was an alcoholic and did not immediately meet him.

古文：元忠下车独坐，酌酒擘脯食之，谓门者曰： 本言公招延俊杰，今闻国士到门，不吐哺辍洗，其人可知，还吾刺，勿通也！ 
现代文：李元忠下车后独自坐下，倒酒撕肉，边饮边吃，对高欢的门卫说： 本以为高公能招揽英雄豪杰，现在他既然已知道国士到了门前，却并不像周公那样放下饭碗、停止洗发去迎接贤士，他这个人也可想而知了，请退还我的名片，不必通报了。 
English: After getting off the bus, Li Yuanzhong sat down alone, poured wine, tore meat, ate while drinking, and said to Gao Huan's doorman: I thought Gao Gong could recruit heroes and heroines, but now that he knows that the national hero has arrived at the door, he does not put down his rice bowl and stop washing his hair to greet the sage like Zhou Gong. He is a person who can be imagined. Please return my business card, there is no need to inform me.

古文：门者以告，欢遽见之，引入，觞再行，元忠车上取筝鼓之，长歌慷慨，歌阕，谓欢曰： 天下形势可见，明公犹事尔硃邪？ 
现代文：门卫报告给高欢，高欢听后马上接见了李元忠，引入大帐之中。两杯酒喝过，李元忠从车上取下筝弹奏起来，长歌一曲，慷慨激昂，唱完歌，李元忠对高欢说道： 而今天下形势已昭然可见，明公您还要为尔硃氏效力吗？ 
English: The doorman reported to Gao Huan. After listening to Gao Huan, he immediately met Li Yuanzhong and introduced him to the big account. After drinking two glasses of wine, Li Yuanzhong took the kite from the car and played it. He sang a long song, impassioned. After singing the song, Li Yuanzhong said to Gao Huan: And today, the current situation is clearly visible. My lord, do you still want to work for Er Qian?

古文：欢曰： 富贵皆因彼所致，安敢不尽节！ 
现代文：高欢道： 我的功名富贵都得之于尔硃氏，怎敢不为尔硃氏尽节！ 
English: Gao Huan said: I owe all my achievements and wealth to the Er Yao clan, how dare I not give my all for the Er Yao clan!

古文：元忠曰： 非英雄也！
现代文：李元忠道： 您如此怎称得上是英雄啊！
English: Li Yuanzhong: How can you be called a hero!

古文：高乾邕兄弟来未？ 
现代文：高乾兄弟来过没有？ 
English: Did the Gaoqian brothers ever come here?

古文：时乾已见欢，欢绐之曰： 从叔辈粗，何肯来！ 
现代文：当时高乾已经见过了高欢，但高欢却哄骗李元忠说： 我堂叔等性格粗犷，怎肯前来见我！ 
English: At that time, Gao Qian had already met Gao Huan, but Gao Huan tricked Li Yuanzhong and said: My uncle is a rough character, how can he come to see me!

古文：元忠曰： 虽粗，并解事。 
现代文：李元忠道： 高乾兄弟虽性情粗犷，却都明晓事理。 
English: Li Yuanzhong said: Although the Gaoqian brothers are rough-tempered, they all know the truth.

古文：欢曰： 赵郡醉矣。 
现代文：高欢说道： 您真是喝醉了。 
English: Gao Huan said: You are really drunk.

古文：使人扶出。
现代文：于是让人将李元忠扶出去。
English: So someone helped Li Yuanzhong out.

古文：元忠不肯起，孙腾进曰： 此君天遣来，不可违也。 
现代文：李元忠不肯起身，孙腾向高欢进言道： 这个人乃是上天派来的，您不能违背了天意啊。 
English: Li Yuanzhong refused to get up, and Sun Teng said to Gao Huan, "This man was sent by heaven, you can't go against the will of heaven."

古文：欢乃复留与语，元忠慷慨流涕，欢亦悲不自胜。
现代文：高欢于是又留下李元忠，与他交谈。李元忠陈述时事言辞慷慨，泪流满面，高欢也不禁悲从中来。
English: Gao Huan then left Li Yuanzhong to talk with him. Li Yuanzhong stated the current situation with generous words and tears, and Gao Huan could not help but feel sad.

古文：元忠因进策曰： 殷州小，无粮仗，不足以济大事。
现代文：李元忠趁机向高欢献计道： 殷州太小，缺乏粮草兵器，不能成就大事。
English: Li Yuanzhong took the opportunity to offer advice to Gao Huan: Yinzhou is too small, lacks grain and grass weapons, and cannot achieve great things.

古文：若向冀州，高乾邕兄弟必为明公主人，殷州便以赐委。
现代文：如果前往冀州，高乾兄弟定会成为明公的东道主，倾心事公，殷州便可赐委我李元忠。
English: If I go to Jizhou, the Gaoqian brothers will definitely become the host of Minggong and devote themselves to public affairs, and Yinzhou will be able to give me the commission of Li Yuanzhong.

古文：冀、殷既合，沧、瀛、幽、定自然弭服，唯刘诞黠胡或当乖拒，然非明公之敌。 
现代文：这样冀州、殷州既已联为一体，那么沧州、瀛州、幽州、定州等自然顺服了，只有刘诞这个狡猾的胡人也许会抗拒，但他远不是明公您的对手。 
English: Now that Jizhou and Yinzhou have been united as one, Cangzhou, Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, Dingzhou, etc. have naturally obeyed. Only Liu Xizhou, the cunning Hu man, may resist, but he is far from being your opponent.

古文：欢急握元忠手而谢焉。
现代文：高欢听后紧紧握住李元忠的手，向他称谢道歉。
English: After listening, Gao Huan gripped Li Yuanzhong's hand tightly and apologized to him.

古文：欢至山东，约勒士卒，丝毫之物不听侵犯，每过麦地，欢辄步牵马。远近闻之，皆称高仪同将兵整肃，益归心焉。
现代文：高欢率部队到了太行山东面，对士兵严加约束，一丝一毫的东西不许侵犯。每次行军路过麦地，高欢总是牵马步行，远近之人听说之后，都称赞高欢带兵有方，纪律严明，也就更加归心于他了。
English: When Gao Huan's troops arrived at the east side of Taihang Mountain, they strictly restrained the soldiers, and they were not allowed to encroach on anything. Every time the march passed through the wheat fields, Gao Huan always led the horses on foot. After hearing this, people from far and near praised Gao Huan for leading the soldiers in a skilful and disciplined manner, and they became more attached to him.

古文：欢求粮于相州刺史刘诞，诞不与；有车营租米，欢掠取之。
现代文：高欢向相州刺史刘诞索要粮食，刘诞没有给，这时恰有车营租米，高欢便派兵将米抢夺过来。
English: Gao Huan asked for grain from Liu Xing, the statesman of Xiangzhou, but Liu Xing did not give it to him. At that time, there happened to be a caravan renting rice, so Gao Huan sent soldiers to snatch the rice.

古文：进至信都，封隆之、高乾等开门纳之。
现代文：部队前进至信都，封隆之、高乾等打开城门迎接高欢入城。
English: The troops advanced to Xindu, and Feng Longzhi, Gao Qian and others opened the gate to welcome Gao Huan into the city.

古文：高敖曹时在外略地，闻之，以乾为妇人，遗以布裙。
现代文：高敖曹当时正在外面攻城略地，听说此事之后，认为高乾真是妇人之见，于是送给了他一件裙子。
English: At that time, Gao Bing Cao was out of the city, and after hearing about this, he thought Gao Qian was really a woman's opinion, so he gave him a skirt.

古文：欢使世子澄以子孙礼见之，敖曹乃与俱来。
现代文：高欢特派长子高澄执子孙之礼往见高敖曹，高敖曹这才与高澄一起回到信都。
English: Gao Huan sent his eldest son, Gao Cheng, to visit Gao Yu Cao, and it was only then that Gao Yu Cao returned to Xindu with Gao Cheng.

古文：癸酉，魏封长广王晔为东海王，以青州刺史鲁郡王肃为太师，淮阳王欣为太傅，尔硃世隆为太保，长孙稚为太尉，赵郡王谌为司空，徐州刺史尔硃仲远、雍州刺史尔硃天光并为大将军，并州刺史尔硃兆为天柱大将军；赐高欢爵勃海王，征使入朝。
现代文：癸酉，北魏朝廷封长广王元晔为东海王，任命青州刺史鲁郡王元肃为太师，淮阳王元欣为太傅，尔硃世隆为太保，长孙稚为太尉，赵郡王元谌为司空，徐州刺史尔硃仲远、雍州刺史尔硃天光二人并为大将军，并州刺史尔硃兆为天柱大将军；赐高欢爵位为勃海王、征召高欢入朝。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty made Guang Wang Yuanjun, the chief of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the king of the East Sea, appointed Qingzhou Zhishulu County Wang Yuansu as the Grand Master, Huaiyang Wang Yuanxin as the Grand Master, Erqun Shilong as the Grand Master, Nagasundzic as the Grand Officer, Zhao County Wang Yuanjun as the Vice-Admiral, Xuzhou Zhishuli Zhongyuan, Yongzhou Zhishuli Tianguang two as the Grand General, and the State Zhishuli Shizhao as the Grand General of the Temple of Heaven; gave Gao Huan the title of the King of the Bohai Sea

古文：长孙稚固辞太尉，乃以为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：长孙稚坚决要求辞去太尉之职，于是便任命他为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: The eldest grandson resolutely demanded to resign from the post of captain, so he appointed him as a cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony and three divisions.

古文：尔硃兆辞天柱，曰： 此叔父所终之官，我何敢受！ 
现代文：尔硃兆推辞不受天柱大将军之职，他说： 这是我叔父生前的最后官职，我怎敢接受呢！ 
English: He said: "This is my uncle's last official position before his death, how dare I accept it!

古文：固辞，不拜，寻加都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：坚决推辞，于是没有授与尔硃兆天柱大将军之职，不久又加封尔硃兆为都督十州诸军事，世袭并州刺史。
English: He resolutely refused, so he did not confer the post of General of the Heavenly Pillar to Er Zhaozhao, and soon after, he sealed Er Zhaozhao as the military governor of ten states, which was hereditary and was recorded in the state history.

古文：高欢辞不就征。
现代文：高欢推辞不肯应召入朝。
English: Gao Huan refused to be summoned to the imperial court.

古文：尔硃仲远徙镇大梁，复加兗州刺史。
现代文：尔硃仲远改镇大梁，又加封为兖州刺史。
English: He changed the town's girders, and was also awarded the title of Zhangzhou girders history.

古文：尔硃世隆之初为仆射也，畏尔硃荣之威严，深自刻厉，留心几案，应接宾客，有开敏之名。
现代文：尔硃世隆当初作尚书仆射的时候，畏惧尔硃荣的威严，很谨慎小心，对尚书省文书也多留心处理，应对接洽宾客，有贤明敏达之名。
English: When Er Qian Shilong was making Shangshu Pu Yao, he was afraid of the majesty of Er Qian Rong, and was very cautious and careful. He also paid more attention to the handling of Shangshu provincial documents, and dealt with guests. He was known as a wise and sensitive person.

古文：及荣死，无所顾惮，为尚书令，家居视事，坐符台省，事无大小，不先白世隆，有司不敢行。
现代文：等到尔硃荣死后，尔硃世隆便再也没有什么顾虑害怕了，身为尚书令，竟在家中处理公事，指挥台省，无论事情大小，若不先禀告尔硃世隆，有关部门便不敢执行。
English: After the death of Er Qiong Rong, Er Qiong Shilong no longer had any concerns or fears. As Shang Shuling, he actually handled official business at home, and the relevant departments would not dare to carry out any matter, no matter how big or small, without first reporting to Er Qiong Shilong.

古文：使尚书郎宋游道、邢昕在其听事东西别坐，受纳辞讼，称命施行；公为贪淫，生杀自恣；又欲收军士之意，泛加阶级，皆为将军，无复员限，自是勋赏之官大致猥滥，人不复贵。
现代文：尔硃世隆让尚书郎宋游道，邢昕在其大厅东西两旁分坐，接受各种呈告诉讼文书，一切均要称尔硃世隆之命方能执行；尔硃世隆公然贪赃淫佚，他人生死，全由其随意定夺；尔硃世隆还想收买军心，对将士滥加提拔，都提为将军，没有员额限制，从此授勋奖赏之官，大都很杂很滥，人们不再看重官爵。
English: Er Qin Shilong made Shang Shulang and Song Youdao sit on the east and west sides of his hall, and accepted all kinds of complaint documents, all of which had to be said that Er Qin Shilong's order could be implemented; Er Qin Shilong was openly corrupt, and his life and death were all decided at will; Er Qin Shilong also wanted to buy the hearts of the military, and promoted soldiers indiscriminately, and promoted them all to generals. There were no post restrictions. From then on, the officials who awarded awards were mostly very promiscuous, and people no longer valued the rank.

古文：是时，天光专制关右，兆奄有并、汾，仲远擅命徐、兗，世隆居中用事，竞为贪暴。
现代文：这时期，尔硃天光专制关右，尔硃兆奄有并州、汾州，尔硃仲远独擅徐、兖二州，尔硃世隆则身居朝中，大权独揽，四人一个更比一个贪婪、残暴。
English: During this period, Er Qian was the absolute ruler of Guanzhong, Er Zhaozhou was in charge of Anhui Province and Shandong Province, Er Jiaozhou was the sole ruler of Shandong Province, Er Jiaozhou was the sole ruler of Shandong Province, and Er Qian Shilong was the sole ruler of Shandong Province. The four of them were even more greedy and cruel than each other.

古文：而仲远尤甚，所部富室大族，多诬以谋反，籍没其妇女财物入私家，投其男子于河，如是者不可胜数。
现代文：其中尤以尔硃仲远为最，尔硃仲远所辖境内的富家大族，大多被其诬为谋反，籍没妇女财产入于尔硃仲远私家，将男子投入河中，这类事情数不胜数。
English: Among them, Yu Erqin Zhongyuan was the most prominent, and most of the rich big families in the territory under the jurisdiction of Yu Erqin Zhongyuan were falsely accused of plotting rebellion, entering the private home of Yu Erqin Zhongyuan without women's property, and throwing men into the river, such things are countless.

古文：自荥阳已东，租税悉入其军，不送洛阳。
现代文：从荥阳以东，租税全部充补其军用，不向京城洛阳上交。
English: From the east of Fenyang, the taxes and duties are all replenished by the military, and are not handed over to the capital Luoyang.

古文：东南州郡自牧守以下至士民，畏仲远如豺狼。
现代文：东南各州郡自牧守以下到普通的士卒百姓，畏惧尔硃仲远如同畏惧豺狼一般。
English: In the southeastern prefectures and counties, from herdsmen on down to ordinary citizens, the fear of strangers is as common as the fear of wolves.

古文：由是四方之人皆恶尔硃氏，而惮其强，莫敢违也。
现代文：因此四方百姓都很憎恶尔硃氏，只是由于畏惧尔硃氏的强大，不敢反抗罢了。
English: As a result, the people in all four directions hated the Erhu clan, but they did not dare to resist because they feared the power of the Erhu clan.

古文：己丑，魏以泾州刺史贺拔岳为岐州刺史，渭州刺史侯莫陈悦为秦州刺史，并加仪同三司。
现代文：己丑，北魏任命泾州刺史贺拔岳为岐州刺史，任命渭州刺史侯莫陈悦为秦州刺史，二人均加封仪同三司。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed He Batyue, the chief historian of Bozhou, as the chief historian of Qizhou, and appointed Hou Mo Chen Yue, the chief historian of Bozhou, as the chief historian of Qin, both of whom were awarded the same three titles.

古文：魏使大都督侯渊、骠骑大将军代人叱列延庆讨刘灵助，至固城，渊畏其众，欲引兵西入，据关拒险，以待其变。
现代文：北魏派大都督侯渊、骠骑大将军代郡人叱列延庆率军讨伐刘灵助。兵至固城，侯渊畏惧刘灵助兵力强盛，打算引兵往西入关，然后据关凭险以等待时机变化。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent the Grand Dictator Hou Yuan and the Grand Equestrian General Yan Qing to lead the army to fight Liu Ling Sui on behalf of the county people. When the soldiers arrived in Gucheng, Hou Yuan was afraid of Liu Ling Sui's strong army, and planned to lead the army to the west to enter the customs, and then wait for the opportunity to change.

古文：灵助闻之，必自宽纵，然后潜军击之，往则成擒矣。 
现代文：叱列延庆对侯渊说： 刘灵助乃是庸人，假借妖术迷惑众人，我军一到，他的军队便都只想凭仗其符咒取胜，怎肯拼死厮杀，跟我军决胜负呢！
English: Yanqing reprimanded Houyuan, saying, "Liu Lingzuo is a mediocrity, using magic to deceive the people. As soon as our army arrived, his army only wanted to win by relying on his spell. How could he fight to the death and decide the outcome with our army!"

古文：渊从之，出顿城西，声云欲还，丙申，简精骑一千夜发，直抵灵助垒；灵助战败，斩之，传首洛阳。
现代文：我们不如扎营城外，诈称要领兵往西回去，刘灵助听说后一定会戒备松懈，之后我们秘密出兵袭击敌人，定能擒获刘灵助。 侯渊采纳了叱列廷庆的计策。
English: We might as well set up camp outside the city and falsely claim that we want to lead the troops back to the west. After hearing this, Liu Ling Rong would surely relax his guard. After that, we secretly sent troops to attack the enemy and would surely be able to capture Liu Ling Rong. Houyuan adopted the strategy of reprimanding Lai Ting Qing.

古文：初，灵助起兵，自占胜负，曰： 三月之末，我必入定州，尔硃氏不久当灭。 
现代文：当初，刘灵助起兵之时，自己曾占卜胜负，说： 三月底，我一定入定州，尔硃氏不久就要灭亡。 
English: At first, when Liu Lingsuo raised an army, he had divined the outcome of the battle, saying, "At the end of March, I will definitely enter Dingzhou, and the Erhai clan will soon perish."

古文：及灵助首函入定州，果以是月之末。
现代文：等到刘灵助首级用匣子装着送到定州的时候，果真是这月之末。
English: By the time Liu Lingjun's head was sent to Dingzhou in a box, it was really the end of the month.

古文：夏，四月，乙巳，昭明太子统卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙巳，梁朝昭明太子萧统去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Prince Xiao Tong of the Liang Dynasty passed away.

古文：太子自加元服，上即使省录朝政，百司进事，填委于前，太子辨析诈谬，秋毫必睹，但令改正，不加案劾，平断法狱，多所全宥，宽和容众，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：昭明太子自从举行冠礼以后，梁武帝便开始让他处理朝政，各部门的官员前来奏事，都汇集到太子哪里。昭明太子善于辨析真伪谬误，对不实之处，洞察入微，但只是命有关部门改正，并不追究罪责。太子断案公正，对犯人往往多加保全宽宥，待人宽和，能容人，喜怒不形于色。
English: After the coronation ceremony, Emperor Liangwu began to let Prince Zhaoming handle the affairs of the imperial court. Officials from various departments came to the crown prince to report matters, and they all gathered there. Prince Zhaoming was good at distinguishing between truth and falsehood, and was very perceptive about what was untrue. However, he only ordered the relevant departments to make corrections, and did not pursue criminal responsibility. Prince Zhaoming adjudicated cases fairly, and was often more protective and forgiving towards prisoners. He treated people with leniency, was tolerant, and did not show emotions.

古文：好读书属文，引接才俊，赏爱无倦。
现代文：昭明太子喜欢读书作文章，引进接待才俊之士，赞叹爱重，毫无倦怠。
English: Prince Akira liked to read and write articles, introduced and received talented people, admired and loved people, and never got tired.

古文：出宫二十馀年，不畜声乐。
现代文：太子出居东宫二十多年，不蓄养乐工歌伎。
English: The prince has lived in the East Palace for more than 20 years, and he does not have any musical instruments.

古文：每霖雨积雪，遣左右周行闾巷，视贫者赈之。
现代文：每当天降大雨或积雪不化之时，昭明太子总要派手下人巡视一番大街小巷，发现有穷苦之人则加以赈济。
English: Every day when it rains heavily or the snow doesn't melt, Crown Prince Shomei always sends his men to inspect the streets and alleys, and if they find anyone in need, they give them money.

古文：天性孝谨，在东宫，虽燕居，坐起恒西向，或宿被召当入，危坐达旦。
现代文：昭明太子天性孝顺，居处东宫，即便是悠闲无事之时，一起一坐，都要面朝西边，如事先接到诏令，召他明日入宫，则正襟危坐直到天明。
English: The natural filial piety of Prince Akimyō, who lived in the East Palace, meant that even when there was nothing going on, he always sat facing west. If he received an imperial edict summoning him to enter the palace the next day, he would sit with his head bowed until dawn.

古文：及寝疾，恐贻帝忧，敕参问，辄自力手书。
现代文：太子病重之后，惟恐梁武帝担忧，每次派人送来问候的敕文，太子总是要亲自写回信奏答。
English: After the crown prince fell seriously ill, Emperor Liang Wu feared that he would be worried. Every time someone sent him a letter of greetings, the crown prince always had to write back and reply in person.

古文：及卒，朝野惋愕，建康男女，奔走宫门，号泣满路。
现代文：等到昭明太子去世的时候，朝野上下都非常惊愕、惋惜，建康城中的男女老少，奔向宫门，沿途道路哭声不断。
English: By the time of Prince Akimei's death, the entire court was shocked and saddened. Men, women, and children in Jenkang rushed to the palace gate, crying constantly along the way.

古文：癸丑，魏以高欢为大都督、东道大行台、冀州刺史，又以安定王尔硃智虎为肆州刺史。
现代文：癸丑，北魏任命高欢为大都督、东道大行台、冀州刺史，又任命安定王尔硃智虎为肆州刺史。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Gao Huan as the Grand Governor, the host of the Grand March, and the historian of Jizhou, and also appointed Wang Erqin Zhiguo as the historian of Wuzhou.

古文：魏尔硃天光出夏州，遣将讨宿勤明达，癸亥，擒明达，送洛阳，斩之。
现代文：北魏尔硃天光出兵夏州，调兵遣将征讨宿勤明达，癸亥，擒获了宿勤明达，将他送到洛阳后处斩。
English: Beiwei Er sent troops to Xiazhou, dispatched soldiers to recruit Suqin Mingda, and captured Suqin Mingda and sent him to Luoyang to be beheaded.

古文：丙寅，魏以侍中、骠骑大将军尔硃彦伯为司徒。
现代文：丙寅，北魏任命侍中、骠骑大将军尔硃彦伯为司徒。
English: Hsin Yin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the equerry and cavalry general Er Qian Yanbo as the leader.

古文：魏诏有司不得复称 伪梁 。
现代文：北魏下诏命令有关部门不得再称梁为伪梁。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the relevant departments were ordered not to call the beam a false beam.

古文：五月，丙子，魏荆州城民斩赵修延，复推李琰之行州事。
现代文：五月，丙子，北魏荆州城百姓斩杀了赵延，又推举李琰之代行州政。
English: In May, the people of Jingzhou City in the Northern Wei Dynasty killed Zhao Yan and promoted Li Xi to take over the state government.

古文：魏尔硃仲远使都督魏僧勖等讨崔祖螭于东阳，斩之。
现代文：北魏尔硃仲远派遣都督魏僧勖等至东阳讨伐崔祖螭，将其斩杀。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent the governor Wei Zengzhu to Dongyang to fight against Cui Zuoren and killed him.

古文：初，昭明太子葬其母丁贵嫔，遣人求墓地之吉者。
现代文：当初，梁昭明太子在埋葬生母丁贵嫔之时，曾派人四处求购风水好的基地。
English: At first, when Prince Liang Zhaoming was burying his birth mother Ding Guijuan, he sent people everywhere to buy a good feng shui base.

古文：或赂宦者俞三副求卖地，云若得钱三百万，以百万与之。
现代文：有人向宦官俞三副行贿，求他帮助将自己的地卖与昭明太子，并说如果得到三百万钱的话，则将其中的一百万钱送给俞三副。
English: Someone offered a bribe to eunuch Xing Sanbei, asking him to help him sell his land to Prince Zhao Ming, and said that if he got three million money, he would give one million of it to Xing Sanbei.

古文：三副密启上，言 太子所得地，不如今地于上为吉 。
现代文：俞三副于是便暗中启奏梁武帝，说： 太子所购之地不如现在这块土地对皇上您更吉祥。 
English: Therefore, the Third Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission secretly sent a message to Emperor Liangwu, saying, "The land purchased by the crown prince is not as good as the present land, but it is more auspicious for you, the emperor.

古文：上年老多忌，即命市之。
现代文：武帝年纪大了，多所忌讳，便命人将这块地买了下来。
English: Emperor Wu was old and had many vices, so he ordered someone to buy the land.

古文：葬毕，有道士云： 此地不利长子，若厌之，或可申延。 
现代文：埋葬了丁贵嫔后，有个道士说： 这块地不利于长子，但如果镇一镇，或许还可以宽延一下。 
English: After the burial of Ding Guizhong, a Taoist said: This piece of land is not conducive to the eldest son, but if the town is a town, it may be possible to extend it.

古文：乃为蜡鹅及诸物埋于墓侧长子位。
现代文：于是便将蜡鹅及其他物品埋在了丁贵嫔墓侧的长子之位。
English: As a result, the wax goose and other items were buried in the place of the eldest son on the side of Ding Guizhou's tomb.

古文：宫监鲍邈之、魏雅初皆有宠于太子，邈之晚见疏于雅，乃密启上云： 雅为太子厌祷。 
现代文：宫监鲍邈之、魏雅当初都很受昭明太子宠幸，鲍邈之后来被魏雅疏远，于是便暗中向武帝启奏道： 魏雅竟敢给太子诅咒祈祷。 
English: At the beginning, the palace overseer Bao Tongzhi and Wei Ya were both favored by Prince Zhaoming. Later, Bao Tongzhi was alienated by Wei Ya, so he secretly recited to Emperor Wu: Wei Ya dared to curse Prince Zhaoming.

古文：上遣检掘，果得鹅物，大惊，将穷其事。徐勉固谏而止，但诛道士。
现代文：梁武帝派人去墓地检查挖掘，果然挖到了蜡鹅等物。武帝大惊，要彻底追究这件事，徐勉竭力劝谏，武帝这才作罢，只诛杀了那位道士。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent someone to the cemetery to inspect the excavation, and sure enough, they dug up a wax goose and other things. Emperor Wu was shocked and wanted to thoroughly investigate the matter. Xu Mian tried his best to persuade him, but Emperor Wu finally gave up and only killed the Taoist.

古文：由是太子终身惭愤，不能自明。
现代文：因为此事，太子终生惭愧忧愤，难以自明。
English: Because of this, the prince was ashamed and angry for the rest of his life, which is hard to explain.

古文：及卒，上征其长子南徐州刺史华容公欢至建康，欲立以为嗣，衔其前事，犹豫久之，卒不立，庚寅，遣还镇。
现代文：等到太子去世后，梁武帝将太子的长子南徐州刺史华容公萧欢召到建康，想立萧欢为继承人，但心中仍记恨那件崐往事，犹豫了很长时间，最终还是没有立萧欢为嗣。
English: After the death of the prince, Emperor Liangwu summoned the prince's eldest son, Nan Xuzhou Zhi Shi Huarong Gong Xiao Huan, to Jiankang, and wanted to make Xiao Huan the heir, but he still remembered the bitter past, hesitated for a long time, and finally did not make Xiao Huan the heir.

古文：臣光曰：君子之于正道，不可少顷离也，不可跬步失也。
现代文：庚寅，又打发萧欢回到了南徐州。臣司马光曰：君子之于正道，不能稍微有所偏离，也不能有半步过失啊。
English: Geng Yin sent Xiao Huan back to South Xuzhou. Minister Sima Guang said: A gentleman cannot deviate from the right path, nor can he make a mistake.

古文：以昭明太子之仁孝，武帝之慈爱，一染嫌疑之迹，身以忧死，罪及后昆，求吉得凶，不可湔涤，可不戒哉！
现代文：以昭明太子这样的仁孝之子，以梁武帝这样的慈爱之君，一旦产生了一点嫌疑，不但太子因忧而致死，而且祸害延及后代子孙。昭明太子本为求吉反而得凶，以致无法洗刷自己的冤屈，人们能不深深引以为戒么！
English: With a benevolent and filial son like Prince Shomei, with a benevolent ruler like Emperor Liangwu, as soon as there is a little suspicion, not only will the prince die of worry, but the evil will spread to future generations. Prince Shomei was originally seeking good luck, but became evil, so that he could not wash away his grievances. Can people not be deeply admonished?

古文：是以诡诞之士，奇邪之术，君子远之。
现代文：所以对于那些诡诈怪诞之徒，奇异邪佞之术，君子要远远地离开。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should stay far away from those deceitful and grotesque people and their strange and evil tricks.

古文：丙申，立太子母弟晋安王纲为皇太子。
现代文：丙申，梁武帝立昭明太子同母弟晋安王萧纲为皇太子。
English: According to him, Emperor Liangwu made Prince Zhaoming and his maternal half-brother Jinan King Xiaogang the crown princes.

古文：朝野多以为不顺，司议侍郎周弘正，尝为晋安王主簿，乃奏记曰： 谦让道废，多历年所。
现代文：朝野之士多认为不符合正常的顺序，司议侍郎周弘正，曾做过晋安王萧纲的主簿，他向萧纲上书劝谏道： 谦让之道不存，已有多年。
English: Many members of the court thought that this was not in accordance with the normal order. The steward of the council, Zhou Hongzheng, had once been the master of King Xiao Gang of the Jin and An dynasties. He wrote to Xiao Gang and advised him: There is no way to be humble, it has been many years.

古文：伏惟明大王殿下，天挺将圣，四海归仁，是以皇上发德音，以大王为储副。
现代文：敬告大王殿下，天意大概要使您成为圣者，四海之内称赞您是仁德君子，所以皇上传下圣旨，立大王您为皇太子。
English: I respectfully inform Your Imperial Highness that it is God's will that you become a saint, and that you are praised throughout the world as a gentleman of benevolence. Therefore, the Emperor has issued a sacred decree, and has appointed You as the Crown Prince.

古文：意者愿闻殿下抗目夷上仁之义，执子臧大贤之节，逃玉舆而弗乘，弃万乘如脱屣，庶改浇竞之俗，以大吴国之风。
现代文：我真心希望您能象目夷那样崇尚仁义，不居皇位；象子臧那样固辞君位，坚守臣节；躲开王舆而不乘；弃天子的尊位如弃敝屣，庶几乎可以一改浇薄竞争之俗，使吴太伯那样的好风气发扬光大。
English: However, I still hope to hear that if His Imperial Highness can resist the temptation of ancient times, adhere to the Spring and Autumn Period's principle of adhering to the principles of benevolence and concession of the Song Dynasty, adhere to the Spring and Autumn Period's high festival of Cao Guozihong's refusal of the monarchy, do not ride the dragon and phoenix, and abandon the monarchy as simply as taking off shoes, then it is possible to reform the above-mentioned long-standing bad habit of competing for power and profit, thus carrying forward the concession style of the great Wu Guotai.

古文：古有其人，今闻其语，能行之者，非殿下而谁！
现代文：古代有这样的人，今天还能听到他们说过的话，但今天能够付诸行动的，只有殿下您！
English: There were such people in ancient times, and today we can still hear what they said, but only Your Highness can take action today!

古文：使无为之化复生于遂古，让王之道不坠于来叶，岂不盛欤！ 
现代文：使往古无为之治的风气再现于今日，令谦让王位之举流传后世，岂不是件盛事么！ 
English: Isn't it a great thing to make the ancient culture of non-domination reappear today, and to pass on the throne to future generations?

古文：王不能从。
现代文：萧纲没有听从他的劝谏。
English: Xiao Gang did not listen to his advice.

古文：弘正，舍之兄子也。
现代文：周弘正是周舍哥哥的儿子。
English: Zhou Hong is the son of Zhou She's brother.

古文：太子以侍读东海徐摛为家令，兼管记，寻带领直。
现代文：皇太子萧纳命侍读东海人徐为家令，兼任管记，不久又任命他为领直。
English: The crown prince Shona appointed Xu, a native of the East China Sea, as the master of the household, and also as the steward, and soon appointed him as the leader.

古文：摛文体轻丽，春坊尽学之，时人谓之宫体。
现代文：徐的文章词赋，艳丽轻靡，东宫文人都模仿他的风格，当时人们称之为 宫体 。
English: Xu's writing style was flamboyant and light-hearted, and writers in the Eastern Palace imitated his style. At that time, people called it "Palace Style."

古文：上闻之，怒，召摛，欲加诮责。及见，应对明敏，辞义可观，意更释然。
现代文：梁武帝听说之后，很恼怒，便将徐召来，打算好好讥诮责怪他一番，等到见到徐后，发现他应答得很机敏，言辞富有文彩，梁武帝内心的不快之意反而消释了。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Liang Wudi was very angry, so he summoned Xu Yu, intending to mock and blame him. When he saw Xu, he found that he was very quick to answer, his words were rich in literature, and Emperor Liang Wudi's inner unhappiness was relieved.

古文：因问经史及释教，摛商较从横，应对如响，上甚加叹异，宠遇日隆。
现代文：接着又向徐问了些经史和佛教方面的问题，徐竟纵横比较，应对如流，于是梁武帝对他大加称赞，越来越宠幸他了。
English: Next, he asked Xu Yu some questions about the history of scripture and Buddhism. Xu was able to compare the two sides of the story and responded well. Therefore, Emperor Liang Wudi praised him greatly and became more and more fond of him.

古文：领军硃异不悦，谓所亲曰： 徐叟出入两宫，渐来见逼，我须早为之所。 
现代文：将军朱异看到这种情形很不高兴，对他的亲信之人说： 徐近来出入两宫，深受庞幸，对我越来越构成威胁了，我必须早点作出安排。 
English: Seeing this situation, General Zhu Rong was very unhappy and said to his close confidant: Xu has recently entered and left the two palaces, which is very fortunate. He is becoming more and more of a threat to me. I must make arrangements early.

古文：遂乘间白上曰： 摛年老，又爱泉石，意在一郡自养。 
现代文：于是朱异便乘机向武帝进言道： 徐年纪已大，又喜爱山水，他希望能到一个郡中任职以自养。 
English: So Zhu Yixin took the opportunity to say to Emperor Wu: Xu is old and loves the landscape, he hopes to work in a county to support himself.

古文：上谓摛真欲之，乃召摛，谓曰： 新安大好山水。 
现代文：梁武帝以为徐真的想这样，便将徐召来，对他说道： 新安郡山水景色非常优美。 
English: Liang Wudi thought that Xu really wanted to do this, so he called Xu and said to him: The landscape of Xin'an County is very beautiful.

古文：遂出为新安太守。
现代文：于是便将徐调出京城出任新安郡太守。
English: As a result, Xu was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Xin'an County.

古文：六月，癸丑，立华容公欢为豫章王，其弟枝江公誉为河东王，曲阿公为岳阳王。
现代文：六月，癸丑，梁武帝立华容公萧欢为豫章王，立萧欢的弟弟枝江公萧益为河东王，曲阿公萧为岳阳王。
English: In June, Emperor Wu of Liangwu made Huarong Gong Xiaohuan the king of Yuzhang, Xiaohan's younger brother, Shijiang Gong Xiaoyi, the king of Hedong, and Quagong Xiao, the king of Yueyang.

古文：上以人言不息，故封欢兄弟以大郡，用慰其心。
现代文：梁武帝因人言不止，所以封萧欢兄弟以大郡，想以此来安慰他们。
English: Emperor Liangwu wanted to console Xiao Huan's brothers by giving them a large county as a reward for their hard work.

古文：久之，鲍邈之坐诱略人，罪不至死，太子纲追思昭明之冤，挥泪诛之。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，鲍邈之因诱骗抢人触犯刑法，罪行并不至于判处死刑，但太子萧纲想到昭明太子的冤屈，便挥泪将他处决了。
English: After a long period of time, Bao Yanzhi violated the criminal law by enticing and robbing people. The crime did not lead to the death penalty, but Prince Xiao Gang thought of Prince Zhaoming's grievances and executed him in tears.

古文：魏高欢将起兵讨尔硃氏，镇南大将军斛律金、军主善无库狄千与欢妻弟娄昭、妻之姊夫段荣皆劝成之。
现代文：北魏高欢将起兵征讨尔硃氏，镇南大将军斛律金、军主善无库狄千与高欢的妻弟娄昭、高欢妻子的姐夫段荣等都力劝高欢起兵。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gao Huan decided to raise an army to subjugate the Erqin clan, and was strongly advised to do so by Zhenan Grand General Yu Liujin, army commander Zhenwu Ku Diqian, Gao Huan's brother-in-law Yu Zhao, and Gao Huan's wife's brother-in-law Duan Rong.

古文：欢乃诈为书，称尔硃兆将以六镇人配契胡为部曲，众皆忧惧。
现代文：高欢于是假借尔硃兆的名义写了一封假信，对士兵们说尔硃兆要把六镇之人配给契胡为部曲，大家听后都很忧虑恐惧。
English: Gao Huan then wrote a fake letter in the name of Er Shanzhao, telling the soldiers that Er Shanzhao was going to distribute the people of the six towns to Chihu. Everyone was very worried and afraid after hearing this.

古文：又为并州符，征兵讨步落稽，发万人，将遣之。
现代文：高欢又伪造了一张并州的符令，要征调高欢军讨伐步落稽。
English: Gao Huan also forged an order to annex the state, and the Gao Huan army was to be conscripted into the crusade.

古文：孙腾与都督尉景为请留五日，如此者再，欢亲送之郊，雪涕执别，众皆号恸，声震郊野。
现代文：高欢派了一万人马，正要出发，孙腾与都督尉景为六镇人向高欢请求停留五天，这样停留了两次。高欢亲自将这支队伍送到郊外，流着眼泪与将士们告别，将士们都失声痛哭，声震原野。
English: Gao Huan sent ten thousand horses, and was about to set off. Sun Teng and the governor, Lieutenant Jing, asked Gao Huan to stay for five days for the six townsmen, so they stayed twice. Gao Huan personally sent this team to the suburbs, bade farewell to the soldiers with tears, and the soldiers all lost their voices and cried bitterly, their voices shaking the wilderness.

古文：欢乃谕之曰： 与尔俱为失乡客，义同一家，不意在上征发乃尔！
现代文：高欢于是又抚慰告诫将士们道： 我与你们大家都是失去了故乡之人，情义如同一家人，没想到上面如此征调我们！
English: Gao Huan then comforted and admonished the generals, saying: I and all of you are people who have lost their hometown, the situation is like a family, I didn't expect that we would be conscripted like this!

古文：今直西向，已当死，后军期，又当死，配国人，又当死，奈何？ 
现代文：今若西向并、汾讨伐步落稽，已经应当死了，延误军期，又该当处死，配属契胡，还是要死，我们该如何是好？ 
English: Now, if the West is at war with us, and we are at war with the West, and we should be dead, and we should delay our military service, and we should be executed, and we should be assigned to Qihu, or we should die, what should we do?

古文：众曰： 唯有反耳！ 
现代文：众人齐声说道： 只有造反了！ 
English: The crowd said in unison: There can only be a revolt!

古文：欢曰： 反乃急计，然当推一人为主，谁可者？ 
现代文：高欢道： 造反乃迫不得已之计，但应推举一人为首领，谁能担当呢？ 
English: Gao Huan said: Starting a rebellion is a last resort, but one person should be chosen as the leader. Who will be in charge?

古文：众共推欢，欢曰： 尔乡里难制。
现代文：众人共推高欢为首领，高欢说道： 你们都是乡里乡亲，难以控制。
English: Everyone put Gao Huan in charge, and Gao Huan said: "You are all villagers, it's hard to control you.

古文：不见葛荣乎？虽有百万之众，曾无法度，终自败灭。
现代文：不见当初葛荣么，虽然拥有百万大军，但却全无法令制度，终究还是败亡了。
English: Did you not see Ge Rong at the beginning, although he had a million-strong army, he was completely unable to make the system succeed, and eventually he was defeated.

古文：今以吾为主，当与前异，毋得陵汉人，犯军令，生死任吾则可；不然，不能为天下笑。 
现代文：现在既然大家推举我为首领，就应该跟以前有所不同，不能凌辱汉人，违犯军纪，生死任我指挥调度才行；否则，就会被天下人耻笑。 
English: Now that everyone has elected me as the leader, it should be different from before. You can't insult the Han people, violate military discipline, and leave it to me to command and dispatch; otherwise, you will be ridiculed by the world.

古文：众皆顿颡曰： 死生唯命！ 
现代文：众人都点头说： 我们不论生死都听您号令！ 
English: Everyone nodded and said: We will follow your orders whether we live or die!

古文：欢乃椎牛飨士，庚申，起兵于信都，亦未敢显言叛尔硃氏也。
现代文：高欢于是杀牛犒飨将士，庚申，高欢在信都起兵，但尚未敢公开声言反叛尔硃氏。
English: Gao Huan then killed Cowshed's generals, and Gaoshen and Gao Huan raised an army in Xindu, but they have not yet dared to openly declare their rebellion against the Erqin clan.

古文：会李元忠举兵逼殷州，欢令高乾帅众救之。
现代文：正值李元忠发兵逼近殷州，高欢命高乾率军前往援救殷州。
English: Just as Li Yuanzhong's army was approaching Yinzhou, Gao Huan Rui led the army to rescue Yinzhou.

古文：乾轻骑入见刺史尔硃羽生，与指画军计，羽生与乾俱出，因擒斩之，持羽生首谒欢。
现代文：高乾轻骑入城会见尔硃羽生，与尔硃羽生一起商议军事计划，尔硃羽生跟高乾一起出城，高乾趁机捕获并斩杀了尔硃羽生，带着尔硃羽生的人头前来拜见高欢。
English: Gao Qian lightly rode into the city to meet Er Qian Hanyuan, and discussed military plans with Er Qian Hanyuan. Er Qian Hanyuan rode out of the city with Gao Qian. Gao Qian took the opportunity to capture and kill Er Qian Hanyuan, and brought the head of Er Qian Hanyuan to visit Gao Huan.

古文：欢抚膺曰： 今日反决矣！ 
现代文：高欢摸着胸口说： 今日只好决计造反了！ 
English: Gao Huan touched his chest and said, "Today, I have no choice but to rebel!"

古文：乃以元忠为殷州刺史，镇广阿。
现代文：遂任命李元忠为殷州刺史，镇守广阿。
English: He then appointed Li Yuanzhong as the governor of Yinzhou and the town guard of Guang'an.

古文：欢于是抗表罪状尔硃氏，尔硃世隆匿之不通。
现代文：高欢于是上表朝廷历举尔硃氏的罪状，尔硃世隆将此表私藏扣押，没有上报皇帝。
English: Gao Huan then presented to the imperial court the list of Er Qian's crimes. Er Qian Shilong seized this watch and did not report it to the emperor.

古文：魏杨播及弟椿、津皆有名德。
现代文：北魏的杨播与其弟杨椿、杨津都素有声望、品德。
English: The Northern Wei dynasty's Yang Bo and his younger brothers, Yang Tsun and Yang Tsin, were both famous and virtuous.

古文：播刚毅，椿、津谦恭，家世孝友，缌服同爨，男女百口，人无间言。
现代文：杨播性情刚毅，杨椿、杨津则性格谦恭。杨家世代孝悌，缌服以内的亲属同灶而食，全家男女上百口，没有异言。
English: Yang Bo's temperament is strong, while Yang Tsun's and Yang Tsin's are gentle. The Yang family has been filial for generations, and their relatives under the age of thirty eat together in the same kitchen. There are hundreds of men and women in the family, and there is no dissent.

古文：椿、津皆至三公，一门七郡太守，三十二州刺史。
现代文：杨椿、杨津官位皆至三公，杨家一门出了七位郡太守，三十二位州刺史。
English: Yang Tsubaki and Yang Tsin's official ranks are all up to the third rank, and the Yang family has produced seven county governors and thirty-two prefectural governors.

古文：敬宗之诛尔硃荣也，播子侃预其谋；城阳王徽、李彧，皆其姻戚也。
现代文：孝庄帝诛杀尔硃荣的时候，杨播的儿子杨侃参预了谋划；城阳王元徵、李，都是杨家的姻亲。
English: When the Emperor of Xiaozhuang killed Er Rong Rong, Yang Kan, the son of Yang Banning, participated in the pre-planning; Chengyang Wang Yuan Rong and Li were the in-laws of the Yang family.

古文：尔硃兆入洛，侃逃归华阴，尔硃天光使侃妇父韦义远招之，与盟，许贳其罪。
现代文：尔硃兆攻入洛阳后，杨侃逃回了华阴故里，尔硃天光派杨侃的岳父韦义远召请杨侃，要与他盟誓，并答应赦免杨侃的罪行。
English: After he invaded Luoyang, Yang Kan fled back to his hometown of Huayin. Wei Yiyuan, Yang Kan's father-in-law, called Yang Kan to swear an oath with him and promised to pardon Yang Kan's crime.

古文：侃曰： 彼虽食言，死者不过一人，犹冀全百口。 
现代文：杨侃说道： 尔硃天光即使食言，死者也不过只我一人，还希望保全一家百口。 
English: Yang Kan said: Even if Erqi Tianguang reneges on his promise, the deceased is not only me, but also hopes to preserve a family of a hundred.

古文：乃出应之，天光杀之。
现代文：于是就出来答应了，果然被尔硃天光所杀。
English: So he came out and agreed, and was killed by Erqin Tianguang.

古文：时椿致仕，与其子昱在华阴，椿弟冀州刺史顺、司空津、顺子东雍州刺史辨、正平太守仲宣皆在洛。
现代文：当时杨椿已退休，跟他儿子杨崐昱正在华阴，杨椿的弟弟冀州刺史杨顺、司空杨津、杨顺的儿子东雍州刺史杨辨、正平太守杨仲宣都在洛阳。
English: At that time, Yang Chun had already retired and was in Huayin with his son Yang Hui, Yang Chun's younger brother Jizhou Shishi Yang Shun, Sikuo Yang Jin, Yang Shun's son Dong Yong Zhou Shishi Yang Ben, and Zhengping Taishu Yang Zhongxuan were all in Luoyang.

古文：秋，七月，尔硃世隆诬奏杨氏谋反，请收治之，魏主不许。
现代文：秋季，七月，尔硃世隆诬奏杨氏家族谋反，请朝廷收捕杨氏家族治罪，北魏国主节闵帝没有同意。
English: In the autumn, in July, Erqi Shilong falsely accused the Yang family of plotting a rebellion, and asked the imperial court to arrest the Yang family and punish them. Emperor Qian did not agree.

古文：世隆苦请，帝不得已，命有司检案以闻。
现代文：尔硃世隆苦苦奏表，节闵帝不得已，只好命令有关部门审查上报。
English: The emperor had no choice but to order the relevant departments to review the report.

古文：壬申夜，世隆遣兵围津第，天光亦遣兵掩椿家于华阴。
现代文：壬申，这一天深夜，尔硃世隆派兵包围了杨津的府第，与此同时，尔硃天光也派兵至华阴逮了杨椿一家。
English: According to Jinshin, late at night on this day, Er Qian Shilong sent troops to encircle the capital of Yangjin. At the same time, Er Qian Tianguo also sent troops to Huayin and arrested the Yangqin family.

古文：东西之族无少长皆杀之，籍没其家。
现代文：这样杨家东西两支不分老少一并被杀得精光，家财籍没入官。
English: In this way, the two branches of the Yang family, regardless of age, were killed to the bone, and the family property did not enter the official.

古文：世隆奏云： 杨氏实反，与收兵相拒，皆已格杀。 
现代文：尔硃世隆上奏节闵帝： 杨氏确实想反叛，竟敢抗拒前往收捕的官军，现已全部杀掉。 
English: Emperor Xizong sent a message to Emperor Xizong: Mr. Yang really wanted to rebel, and dared to resist the government troops who went to arrest him, and now they have all been killed.

古文：帝惋怅久之，不言而已，朝野闻之，无不痛愤。
现代文：节闵帝惋叹良久，什么话也没说，朝廷内外闻听此事，无不痛惜、愤怒。
English: Emperor Jieyi lamented for a long time without saying anything, and both inside and outside the imperial court heard about this matter, and they were both sorry and angry.

古文：津子逸为光州刺史，尔硃仲远遣使就杀之。
现代文：杨津的儿子杨逸为光州刺史，尔硃仲远派人到光州斩杀了杨逸。
English: Yang Jin's son, Yang Yat, was the governor of Gwangju. Er Qin Zhongyuan sent people to Gwangju to kill Yang Yat.

古文：唯津子愔于被收时适出在外，逃匿，获免，往见高欢于信都，泣诉家祸，因为言讨尔硃氏之策。欢甚重之，即署行台郎中。
现代文：只有杨津的儿子杨在全家被收捕遭杀戮时候恰巧外出不在家中，逃走藏匿起来，才得以幸免。杨于是前往信都见高欢，流着眼泪向高欢诉说了自己家所遭的灾祸，并趁机为高欢讨伐尔硃氏出谋划策，高欢很器重杨，便任命他为行台郎中。
English: Only Yang Jin's son, Yang, who happened to be out of the house at the time when the whole family was arrested and killed, escaped and hid, was spared. Yang then went to Xindu to see Gao Huan, told Gao Huan in tears about the disaster that his family had suffered, and took the opportunity to make suggestions for Gao Huan to fight the Warring States. Gao Huan was very important to Yang, so he appointed him as a hawker.

古文：乙亥，上临轩策拜太子，大赦。
现代文：乙亥，梁武帝上殿策封太子，实行大赦。
English: Eihei, Emperor Liangwu came to the palace to crown the crown prince, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：丙戌，魏司徒尔硃彦伯以旱逊位。戊子，以彦伯为侍中、开府仪同三司。
现代文：丙戌，北魏司徒尔硃彦伯因旱灾辞去司徒之职，戊子，任命尔硃彦伯为侍中，开府仪同三司。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, because of the drought, the steward Er Zi Yanbo resigned from the post of the steward, and Er Zi appointed Er Zi Yanbo as the chamberlain, and the ceremony of opening the government was the same as that of the three departments.

古文：彦伯于兄弟中差无过恶。
现代文：尔硃彦伯在尔硃氏弟兄中没有什么过错罪恶。
English: Among the brothers of the Erhu clan, Erhuangbo did not have any faults or sins.

古文：尔硃世隆固让太保，魏主特置仪同三师之官，位次上公之下，庚寅，以世隆为之。
现代文：尔硃世隆坚决推辞太保之职，于是节闵帝特意设置仪同三司之官，地位在上公之下，庚寅，任命尔硃世隆为仪同三司。
English: Er Qi Shilong resolutely refused the position of eunuch, so Emperor Jieyi specially set up the position of the official of the three departments of the Imperial Household Agency, and appointed Er Qi Shilong as the official of the three departments of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：斛斯椿谮硃瑞于世隆，世隆杀之。
现代文：斛斯椿向尔硃世隆诬告朱瑞谋反，尔硃世隆杀了朱瑞。
English: Zhang Shizhong falsely accused Zhu Rui of plotting against him, and he killed Zhu Rui.

古文：庚寅，诏： 凡宗戚有服属者，并可赐沐，食乡亭侯，随远近为差。 
现代文：庚寅，梁武帝下诏： 凡皇宗外戚有缌麻以上服属关系的妇女，都可以赏赐汤沐邑，男的封乡侯或亭侯，按服属关系的远近为等差。 
English: Goyin, Emperor Liangwu decreed: All the women of the emperor's maternal relatives who have a subordinate relationship above the nettle can be rewarded with Tang Muyi, and the men can be awarded the title of township or pavilion, according to the distance of the subordinate relationship.

古文：壬辰，以吏部尚书何敬容为尚书右仆射。
现代文：壬辰，梁武帝任命吏部尚书何敬容为尚书右仆射。
English: In Imjin, he appointed Shangshu He Jingrong as his right-hand man.

古文：敬容，昌宇之子也。
现代文：何敬容是何昌的儿子。
English: He Jingrong is the son of He Chang.

古文：魏尔硃仲远、度律等闻高欢起兵，恃其强，不以为虑，独尔硃世隆忧之。
现代文：北魏尔硃仲远、尔硃度律等听说高欢起兵反叛后，仍自恃力量强盛，并没有太担心忧虑这件事，只有尔硃世隆对高欢起兵之事感到非常担心忧虑。
English: After hearing that Gao Huan raised an army and rebelled, the Northern Wei, Erqun Zhongyuan, Erqun Duru and others still believed that their strength was strong, and they did not worry too much about the matter. Only Erqun Shilong was very worried about the matter of Gao Huan raising an army.

古文：尔硃兆将步骑二万出井陉，趣殷州，李元忠弃城奔信都。
现代文：尔硃兆率步兵和骑兵二万人马从井陉出发，直扑殷州，李元忠弃城逃奔信都。
English: Li Yuanzhao led the infantry and cavalry of 20,000 men and horses to set out from Jingyao and directly attacked Yinzhou. Li Yuanzhong abandoned the city and fled to Xindu.

古文：八月，丙午，尔硃仲远、度律将兵讨高欢。
现代文：八月，丙午，尔硃仲远、尔硃度律等率兵讨伐高欢。
English: In August, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Erqin Zhongyuan, Erqin DuLu and other soldiers led the way to fight Gaohuan.

古文：九月，己卯，魏以仲远为太宰，庚辰，以尔硃天光为大司马。
现代文：九月，己卯，北魏朝廷任命尔硃仲远为太宰，庚辰，又任命尔硃天光为大司马。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Er Qian Zhongyuan as Dazai and Geng Chen, and appointed Er Qian Tianguo as Da Sima.

古文：癸巳，魏主追尊父广陵惠王为先帝，母王氏为先太妃，封弟永业为高密王，子恕为勃海王。
现代文：癸巳，北魏国主元恭追尊其父广陵惠王元羽为先帝，追尊其母王氏为先太妃，加封弟弟元永业为高密王，儿子元恕为勃海王。
English: At that time, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yuan Gong, revered his father, Guangling Hui Wang Yuan Yu, as the first emperor, revered his mother, Wang Shi, as the first empress dowager, revered his younger brother, Yuan Yongye, as King Gao Mi, and revered his son, Yuan Shun, as King Bo Hai.

古文：冬，十月，己酉，上幸同泰寺，升法座，讲《涅槃经》，七日而罢。
现代文：冬季十月，己酉，梁武帝临幸同泰寺，登法座，向众人宣讲《涅经》，持续了七天才结束。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Liangwu visited Tongtai Temple, ascended the throne, and preached the "Nirvana Sutra" to everyone. It lasted for seven days and ended.

古文：乐山侯正则，先有罪徙郁林，招诱亡命，欲攻番禺，广州刺史元景仲讨斩之。正则，正德之弟也。
现代文：梁朝乐山侯萧正则，过去由于犯罪，被流放到了郁林，在郁林招纳亡命之徒，想攻打番禺。广州刺史元仲景讨伐萧正则，杀掉了他。
English: Xiao Zhengzhe, the lord of Le Mountain in Liang Dynasty, was exiled to Yulin in the past for crimes. He recruited outlaws in Yulin and wanted to attack Panyu. Guangzhou assassinated Xiao Zhengzhe and killed him.

古文：孙腾说高欢曰： 今朝廷隔绝，号令无所禀，不权有所立，则众将沮散。 
现代文：萧正则是萧正德的弟弟。孙腾劝说高欢道： 现在我们与朝廷隔绝不通，号令无所禀受，如果不权且立一位皇帝的话，军队就会没有斗志而瓦解溃散。 
English: Xiao Zheng is the younger brother of Xiao Zhengde. Sun Teng persuaded Gao Huan to say: Now we are cut off from the imperial court, and we can't communicate with them. If we don't have the power to appoint an emperor, the army will collapse and disperse without fighting spirit.

古文：欢疑之，腾再三固请，乃立勃海太守元朗为帝。
现代文：高欢对此仍犹疑不定，在孙腾的一再请求下，高欢这才立勃海太守元朗为皇帝。
English: Gao Huan was still hesitant about this, and it was only after repeated requests from Sun Teng that Gao Huan made Yuen Long, the governor of the Bohai Sea, the emperor.

古文：朗，融之子也。
现代文：元朗是元融的儿子。
English: Yuen Long is the son of Yuan Rong.

古文：壬寅，朗即位于信都城西，改元中兴。
现代文：壬寅，元朗在信都城西即皇帝位，改年号为中兴。
English: Renin, Yuen Long in the west of the capital city of Xinyi, that is, the emperor, changed the year name to ZTE.

古文：以欢为侍中、丞相、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事、大行台，高乾为侍中、司空，高敖曹为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，孙腾为尚书左仆射，河北行台魏兰根为右仆射。
现代文：任命高欢为侍中、丞相、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事、大行台，高乾为侍中、司空，高敖曹为骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，孙腾为尚书左仆射，河北行台魏兰根为右仆射。
English: Gao Huan was appointed as a chamberlain, chancellor, governor of the Middle and Outer Military Provinces, general, recorder of records, and grand steward, Gao Qian was appointed as a chamberlain, secretary of the sky, Gao Bing Cao was appointed as a general of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and the chief historian of Jizhou, Sun Teng was appointed as the left assistant of records, and Wei Langen was appointed as the right assistant of records.

古文：己酉，尔硃仲远、度律与骠骑大将军斛斯椿、车骑大将军、仪同三司贺拔胜、车骑大将军贾显智军于阳平。
现代文：己酉，尔硃仲远，尔硃度律与骠骑大将军斛斯椿，车骑大将军、仪同三司贺拔胜，车骑大将军贾显智等率军驻扎于阳平县。
English: The armies led by Ji Kun, Er Qian Zhongyuan, Er Qian Du Rui and his cavalry general Zou Shizhun, the cavalry general, Yi Tong San Shi He Ba Sheng, and the cavalry general Jia Xian Zhi were stationed in Yangping County.

古文：显智名智，以字行，显度之弟也。
现代文：贾显智名字叫贾智，通常以字相称，他是贾显度的弟弟。
English: Jia Xian Zhi's name is Jia Zhi, which is usually pronounced as a consonant. He is the younger brother of Jia Xindu.

古文：尔硃兆出井陉，军于广阿，众号十万。
现代文：尔硃兆率军出兵井陉，驻扎于广阿，号称有十万人马。
English: He led his army out of Jingyi, stationed in Guang'a, and claimed to have 100,000 soldiers.

古文：高欢纵反间，云 世隆兄弟谋杀兆 ，复云 兆与欢同谋杀仲远等 ，由是迭相猜贰，徘徊不进。
现代文：高欢施反间计，说 尔硃世隆兄弟要谋杀尔硃兆 ，又说 尔硃兆与高欢共同谋划要杀掉尔硃仲远等人 ，于是尔硃氏兄弟相互猜疑，均徘徊不进。
English: Gao Huan made a counter-plot, saying that the Erqi Shilong brothers wanted to murder Erqi Zhao, and that Erqi Zhao and Gao Huan jointly plotted to kill Erqi Zhongyuan and others, so the Erqi brothers suspected each other and did not advance.

古文：仲远等屡使斛斯椿、贺拔胜往谕兆，兆帅轻骑三百来就仲远，同坐幕下，意色不平，手舞马鞭，长啸凝望，疑仲远等有变，遂趋出，驰还。
现代文：尔硃仲远等多次派斛斯椿、贺拔胜前往尔硃兆处调停，尔硃兆率三百名轻骑来到尔硃仲远处，与尔硃仲远同坐大帐下。尔硃兆脸色有不平之气，手中挥舞着马鞭，长啸凝望远方。他怀疑尔硃仲远等人有变化，于是便赶快离开大帐出来，上马飞驰，回到自己的营地。
English: Erqin Zhongyuan and others repeatedly sent Jianzhong and He Baisheng to go to Erqin Zhao's place to mediate. Erqin Zhao led three hundred light horsemen to come to Erqin Zhongyuan's place and sit with Erqin Zhao. Erqin Zhao had a grumpy face, waved a whip in his hands and stared into the distance. He suspected that Erqin Zhao and others had changed, so he quickly left the tent, got on a horse and flew back to his camp.

古文：仲远遣椿、胜等追，晓说之，兆执椿、胜还营。
现代文：尔硃仲远派斛斯椿、贺拔胜等人追赶尔硃兆，对他进行劝说，尔硃兆却将斛斯椿、贺拔胜抓了起来带回营中。
English: Erqin Zhongyuan sent Jinszhuan, He Baxing and others to chase after Erqin Zhao and persuade him, but Erqin Zhao caught Jinszhuan and He Baxing and brought them back to the camp.

古文：仲远、度律大惧，引兵南遁。
现代文：尔硃仲远、尔硃度律闻知后非常恐惧，赶忙率军南逃。
English: After hearing the news, he was very afraid and hurriedly led his army to flee south.

古文：兆数胜罪，将斩之，曰： 尔杀卫可孤，罪一也；天柱薨，尔不与世隆等俱来，而东征仲远，罪二也。
现代文：尔硃兆历数贺拔胜罪状，要将他处斩，说道： 你杀了卫可孤，这是第一条罪状。天柱大将军被杀后，你不和尔硃世隆等人一起前来，却东征尔硃仲远，这是第二条罪状。
English: He said, "You killed Wei Ke Guo, which is the first charge. After General Tianzhu was killed, you didn't come with Er Qian Shilong and others, but went to the East to fight Er Qian Zhong Yuan, which is the second charge.

古文：我欲杀尔久矣，今复何言？ 
现代文：我早就想杀你了，今天你还有什么话说？ 
English: I've wanted to kill you for a long time. What else can I say today?

古文：胜曰： 可孤为国巨患，胜父子诛之，其功不小，反以为罪乎？
现代文：贺拔胜说道： 卫可孤是国家的大祸患，我贺拔胜父子将其诛杀，功劳巨大，难道反而算作罪状么？
English: He Baxian said: Wei Kehao is a national calamity, I He Baxian father and son fought and killed him, the merit is huge, but is it a crime?

古文：天柱被戮，以君诛臣，胜宁负王，不负朝廷。
现代文：天柱大将军被杀，是君杀臣，我贺拔胜宁肯有负于大王，也不能负于朝廷。
English: General Tianzhu was killed by Emperor Xiaozhuang. It is the sovereign who kills his vassals. I would rather lose General Tianzhu than betray the imperial court.

古文：今日之事，生死在王。
现代文：今天之事，我是活是死全在于大王您。
English: What happens today, life or death, is up to you.

古文：但寇贼密迩，骨肉构隙，自古及今，未有如是而不亡者。
现代文：只是贼寇越来越近，而兄弟骨肉之间却离心离德，从古至今，没有象这样而不灭亡的。
English: It's just that the bandits are getting closer and closer, while the brothers are estranged from each other. From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything like this without perishing.

古文：胜不惮死，恐王失策。 
现代文：我贺拔胜并不怕死，恐怕大王您这样做是失策的。 
English: I'm not afraid of death, and I'm afraid it's a big mistake for you to do this.

古文：兆乃舍之。
现代文：尔硃兆听了之后便放了贺拔胜。
English: Lzhu Zhao then let him go.

古文：高欢将与兆战，而畏其众强，以问亲信都督段韶，韶曰： 所谓众者，得众人之死；所谓强者，得天下之心。
现代文：高欢将与尔硃兆交战，但却畏惧尔硃兆军队强大，于是便问计于亲信都督段韶，段韶说： 所谓军队多，乃是得到众人的拼死效力；所谓强大，乃是得到天下的人心。
English: Gao Huan would fight with Er Qizhao, but he was afraid of Er Qizhao's powerful army, so he asked his close confidant, the governor Duan Yu. Duan Yu said: "The so-called large army is the result of the desperate efforts of many people; the so-called powerful army is the result of winning the hearts and minds of people all over the world."

古文：尔硃氏上弑天子，中屠公卿，下暴百姓，王以顺讨逆，如汤沃雪，何众强之有！ 
现代文：尔硃氏上弑天子，中间屠杀公卿百官，对下凌残百姓，大王您以顺讨逆，就如同以开水浇雪，尔硃氏有什么军队众多而又强大可言！ 
English: The Erhu clan killed the emperor at the top, slaughtered hundreds of court nobles and officials in the middle, and slaughtered the people at the bottom. You, the great king, using Shun to defeat the enemy is like using boiling water to melt snow. What a large and powerful army the Erhu clan has!

古文：欢曰： 虽然，吾以小敌大，恐无天命不能济也。 
现代文：高欢说道： 虽然如此，我们以弱小的兵力对付强大的敌人，如果得不到上天保佑，恐怕不能成功。 
English: Gao Huan said, "Nevertheless, we are fighting a strong enemy with a small force. If we do not receive the blessing of Heaven, I am afraid we will not succeed."

古文：韶曰： 韶闻 小能敌大，小道大淫。 
现代文：段韶说： 我听说 弱小的一方能够打败强大的一方，因为弱小的一方是正义的，而强大的一方是不正义的。 
English: Duan Yu said: I have heard that the weak side can defeat the strong side, because the weak side is just and the strong side is unjust.

古文： 皇天无亲，唯德是辅。 
现代文：我还听说 上天对任何人并无特别偏爱，只辅佐保佑有德之人。 
English: I have also heard that Heaven has no special preference for anyone, but only helps and blesses those who are virtuous.

古文：尔硃氏外乱天下，内失英雄心，智者不为谋，勇者不为斗，人心已去，天意安有不从者哉！ 
现代文：现在尔硃氏外乱天下，内失英雄之崐心，有智之人不为其出谋划策，勇武之人不为其拼死战斗，他已失去民心，天意怎会不顺从于您呢！ 
English: Now that the world is in turmoil caused by the Erhai clan, the heroes have lost their courage, the wise men do not advise them, the brave men do not fight for them, they have lost the hearts of the people, how can the will of heaven not obey you!

古文：韶，荣之子也。
现代文：段韶是段荣的儿子。
English: Duan Yu is the son of Duan Rong.

古文：辛亥，欢大破兆于广阿，俘其甲卒五千馀人。
现代文：辛亥，高欢在广阿大破尔硃兆，俘获敌军五千余人。
English: In Xinhai, Gao Huan captured more than five thousand enemy soldiers in Guanga Dabal.

古文：十一月，乙未，上幸同泰寺，讲《般若经》，七日而罢。
现代文：十一月，乙未，梁武帝临幸同泰寺，向僧众宣讲《般若经》，持续了七天才结束。
English: In November of the same year, Emperor Liangwu went to Tongtai Temple to preach "The Prajnaparamita Sutra" to the monks, which lasted for seven days.

古文：庚辰，魏高欢引兵攻鄴，相州刺史刘诞婴城固守。
现代文：庚辰，北魏高欢率军攻打邺城，相州刺史刘诞据城固守。
English: Geng Chen, Northern Wei Gao Huan led the army to attack Lucheng, and Liu Xizhi, the governor of Liaoning Province, firmly defended the city.

古文：是岁，魏南兗州城民王乞得劫刺史刘世明，举州来降。
现代文：这一年，北魏南兖州城百姓王乞得劫持南兖州刺史刘世明，率全州前来投降梁朝。
English: In the same year, Wang Bei, a commoner in the Southern Luzhou City of Northern Wei, managed to kidnap Liu Shiming, the governor of Southern Luzhou, and led the whole state to surrender to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：世明，芳之族子也。
现代文：刘世明是刘芳的同族兄弟之子。
English: Liu Shiming is the son of Liu Fang's brother.

古文：上以侍中元树为镇北将军、都督北讨诸军事，镇谯城。
现代文：梁武帝任命侍中元树为镇北将军、都督北讨诸军事，镇守谯城。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed the chamberlain Motoki as the general of the north of the town, the military governor of the north, and the town guard of Lucheng.

古文：以世明为征西大将军、郢州刺史，加仪同三司。
现代文：又任命刘世明为征西大将军、郢州刺史，加封仪同三司。
English: He also appointed Liu Shiming as the general of the Western Expedition, the history of Zhangzhou, the ceremony of sealing and the three divisions.

古文：世明不受，固请北归，上许之。
现代文：刘世明不接受，坚决请求回到北朝，梁武帝答应了他的请求。
English: Liu Shiming did not accept and firmly requested to return to the Northern Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wu agreed to his request.

古文：世明至洛阳，奉送所持节，归乡里，不仕而卒。
现代文：刘世明到了洛阳后，向朝廷奉还了随身带着的符节，回到家乡，不再做官，直到去世。
English: After Liu Shiming arrived in Luoyang, he returned to the court all the symbols he had brought with him, returned to his hometown, and ceased to be an official until his death.

古文：高祖武皇帝十一中大通四年春，正月，丙寅，以南平王伟为大司马，元法僧为太尉，袁昂为司空。
现代文：大通四年春季正月，丙寅，梁武帝任命南平王萧伟为大司马，任命元法僧为太尉，袁昂为司空。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Datong, Hsin Yin, Emperor Liang Wudi appointed Nanping Wang Xiaowei as the chief secretary, appointed the former monk as the first lieutenant, and Yuan Ang as the secretary.

古文：立西丰侯正德为临贺王。
现代文：梁武帝立西丰侯萧正德为临贺王。
English: Emperor Liangwu made Xiao Zhengde, the Prince of Xifeng, the King of Linhe.

古文：正德自结于硃异，上既封昭明诸子，异言正德失职，故王之。
现代文：萧正德结纳朱异，武帝即已加封了昭明太子等几个儿子，朱异便进言说萧正爵位太低，所以梁武帝便将萧正德封为王。
English: Xiao Zhengde married Zhu Rong, and Emperor Wu had already added several sons such as Prince Zhaoming. Zhu Rong then suggested that Xiao Zhengde's title was too low, so Emperor Liang Wudi made Xiao Zhengde king.

古文：以太子右卫率薛法护为司州牧，卫送魏王悦入洛。
现代文：梁武帝任命太子右卫率薛法护为司州牧，派他护送魏王元悦到洛阳。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed Prince Uwei's aide, Xue Fao, as the provincial governor of Shizhou, and sent him to escort Wei Wangyuan Rong to Luoyang.

古文：庚午，立太子纲之长子大器为宣城王。
现代文：庚午，梁武帝立太子萧纲的长子萧大器为宣城王。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Liangwu appointed the eldest son of Prince Xiao Gang, Xiao Daqi, as the king of Xuancheng.

古文：魏高欢攻鄴，为地道，施柱而焚之，城陷入地。
现代文：北魏高欢攻打邺城，挖好地道，将支撑地道顶部的柱子点火烧掉，于是城墙坍塌，陷入地中。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gao Huan attacked Handan City, dug a tunnel, and ignited the pillar supporting the top of the tunnel, causing the city wall to collapse and sink into the ground.

古文：壬午，拔鄴，擒刘诞，以杨愔为行台右丞。
现代文：壬午，攻下了邺城，擒获了刘诞，高欢任命杨为行台右丞。
English: In Renwu, they captured Shicheng, captured Liu Xizhi, and Gaohuan appointed Yang as the right-hand man of Xiangtai.

古文：时军国多事，文檄教令，皆出于愔及开府咨议参军崔凌。
现代文：当时很多军国大事，文告檄文命令等，都出自杨和开府谘义参军崔之手。
English: At that time, many military and state affairs, proclamations and orders, etc. all came from the hands of Yang and Cui, who was a member of the military in Kaifu.

古文：凌，逞之五世孙也。
现代文：崔是崔逞的五世孙。
English: Cui is the fifth grandchild of Cui Gang.

古文：二月，以太尉元法僧为东魏王，欲遣还北，兗州刺史羊侃为军司马，与法僧偕行。
现代文：二月，梁武帝任命太尉元法僧为东魏王，想让他回到北朝，兖州刺史羊侃为军司马，与元法僧同行。
English: In February, Emperor Liangwu appointed the former monk as the king of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and wanted him to return to the Northern Dynasty. Zhangzhou Zishi Yangkan was appointed as the secretary of the army to accompany the former monk.

古文：扬州刺史邵陵王纶遣人就市，赊买锦彩丝布数百匹，市人皆闭邸店不出；少府丞何智通依事启闻。
现代文：扬州刺史邵陵王萧纶派人到市场上赊购锦彩丝布几百匹，商人们都闭店不出；少府丞何智通将此事报告了朝廷。
English: Yangzhou's crown prince, Shao Ling Wang Xiaohui, sent people to the market to buy hundreds of brocade silk cloths, but the merchants did not close their shops; Shofu Cheng He Zhitong reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：纶被责还第，乃遣防阁戴子高等以槊刺智通于都巷，刃出于背。
现代文：结果萧纶被责令回到府第，于是萧纶便派防阁戴子高等人在京城的一条巷子中用槊刺杀何智通，槊刃从背部刺出。
English: As a result, Xiao Yu was ordered to return to the capital, so Xiao Yu sent Fang Ge Daizi, a high-ranking official, to kill He Zhitong with a crossbow in an alley in Beijing. The crossbow blade was stabbed from the back.

古文：智通识子高，取其血以指画车壁为 邵陵 字，乃绝，由是事觉。
现代文：何智通认识戴子高，他用手指蘸着身上的血在车壁上写下了 邵陵 二字之后才死去，因此这件事才被人发觉。
English: He Zhitong knew Dai Zigao. He wrote the word "Shaolin" on the wall of the car with the blood on his fingers before he died, which is why the incident was discovered.

古文：庚戌，纶坐免为庶人，锁之于第，经三旬，乃脱锁，顷之，复封爵。
现代文：庚戌，萧纶因犯罪被黜为平民，将他锁禁于府第之中，过了二十天，才去掉锁，很快又恢复了封爵。
English: Geng Zheng and Xiao Zheng were imprisoned as commoners for a crime, and he was locked up in the palace. It took twenty days to remove the lock, and the knighthood was soon restored.

古文：辛亥，魏安定王追谥敬宗曰武怀皇帝，甲子，以高欢为丞相、柱国大将军、太师；三月，丙寅，以高澄为骠骑大将军。
现代文：辛亥，北魏安定王元朗追谥孝庄帝为武怀皇帝。甲子，任命高欢为丞相、柱国大将军、太师。三月丙寅，任命高澄为骠骑大将军。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Wei stable king, Yuen Long, chased away the Emperor Xiaozhuang to become the Emperor Wuhuai. In Kozi, Gao Huan was appointed as the prime minister, the general of Zhuguo, and the grandmaster. In March, Hsin Yin, Gao Cheng was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：丁丑，安定王帅百官入居于鄴。
现代文：丁丑，安定王率文武百官入居邺城。
English: Ding Yuxi, Wang Ding and hundreds of military and civilian officials moved into Lucheng.

古文：尔硃兆与尔硃世隆等互相猜阻，世隆卑辞厚礼谕兆，欲使之赴洛，唯其所欲，又请节闵帝纳兆女为后；兆乃悦，并与天光、度律更立誓约，复相亲睦。
现代文：尔硃兆与尔硃世隆等人彼此相互猜疑、牵制，尔硃世隆低声下气，派人带着厚礼对尔硃兆进行调停、劝解，想让尔硃兆到洛阳，一切都由他。尔硃世隆又请节闵帝纳尔硃兆的女儿为皇后。尔硃兆这才高兴起来，并且和尔硃天光、尔硃度律等人又立下了誓约，重新互相亲睦。
English: Er Xizhao and Er Xilong suspected and controlled each other. Er Xilong humbly sent someone to mediate and persuade Er Xilong with a heavy gift. He wanted Er Xilong to go to Luoyang, and everything would be up to him. Er Xilong also asked the daughter of the Emperor of the Song Dynasty, Er Xilong, to be the empress. This made Er Xilong happy, and he made a vow with Er Xilong Tianguang and Er Xilong Du Lu to be friends again.

古文：斛斯椿阴谓贺拔胜曰： 天下皆怨毒尔硃，而吾等为之用，亡无日矣，不如图之。 
现代文：斛斯椿私下里对贺拔胜说： 如今天下之人都痛恨尔硃氏，而我们却还在为他们卖命，灭亡之日不远了，不如想办法对付尔硃氏。 
English: Zou Shizhong said to He Baxeng in private: If the people of today all hate the Er Qian clan, but we are still working for them, the day of their demise is not far off, it is better to find a way to deal with the Er Qian clan.

古文：胜曰： 天光与兆各据一方，欲尽去之甚难，去之不尽，必为后患，奈何？ 
现代文：贺拔胜说道： 尔硃天光与尔硃兆各自占据一方，要想全部除掉他们很难，如果不能全部除掉他们，一定会成为后患，怎么办呢？ 
English: He Baxing said: Erqin Tianguang and Erqin Zhao each occupy one side. It is difficult to get rid of them all. If you can't get rid of them all, they will definitely become a hindrance. What should you do?

古文：椿曰： 此易致耳。 
现代文：斛斯椿道： 这容易做到。 
English: Yeong Sze Chin: It's easy to do.

古文：乃说世隆追天光等赴洛，共讨高欢。
现代文：于是斛斯椿便劝说尔硃世隆督促尔硃天光等人到洛阳来，共同讨伐高欢。
English: Therefore, Yao Shiqin persuaded Er Er Shilong to urge Er Er Tianguang and others to come to Luoyang to jointly fight Gao Huan.

古文：世隆屡征天光，天光不至，使椿自往邀之，曰： 高欢作乱，非王不能定，岂可坐视宗族夷灭邪！ 
现代文：尔硃世隆多次征召尔硃天光，尔硃天光却不来，于是尔硃世隆便派斛斯椿亲自前往邀请尔硃天光。斛斯椿对尔硃天光说道： 高欢发动叛乱，只有大王您才能平定，您怎么能够坐视自己宗族遭受夷灭而不顾呢！ 
English: Er Qianlong repeatedly summoned Er Qianlong, but Er Qianlong did not come. Therefore, Er Qianlong sent Gao Shiqin to personally invite Er Qianlong. Gao Shiqin said to Er Qianlong: Gao Huan launched a rebellion, and only you, the great king, can quell it. How can you sit by and watch your clan be destroyed?

古文：天光不得已，将东出，问策于雍州刺史贺拔岳，岳曰： 王家跨据三方，士马殷盛，高欢乌合之众，岂能为敌！
现代文：尔硃天光不得已，将要率军向东出发，问计于雍州刺史贺拔岳，贺拔岳说道： 大王您一家雄据三方，兵马强盛，高欢乃一群乌合之众，怎能与您对抗！
English: As a last resort, Erqi Tianguang will lead the army to the east and ask He Batyue, the governor of Yongzhou, for advice. He Batyue said: Your great king, your family is strong in three directions, your soldiers and horses are strong, and Gaohuan is a group of rabble, how can I fight against you!

古文：但能同心戮力，往无不捷。
现代文：只要能够同心协力，大王您将无往而不胜。
English: As long as you can work together, you will never be defeated.

古文：若骨肉相疑，则图存之不暇，安能制人！
现代文：如果兄弟之间相互疑猜，那么连存身自保尚且来不及，又怎能制服敌人呢！
English: If brothers are suspicious of each other, then it is too late to save themselves, and how can they subdue the enemy!

古文：如下官所见，莫若且镇关中以固根本，分遣锐师与众军合势，进可以克敌，退可以自全。 
现代文：照我看来，您不如暂且镇守关中地区以稳固住自己的根本，然后分路派遣精锐部队与其他众人的部队联合，这样的话，进可以战胜敌人，退可以保全自己。 
English: In my opinion, it would be better for you to hold the Guanzhong area for the time being to firmly hold your own foundation, and then send elite troops to join forces with other troops. In this case, you can defeat the enemy when advancing, and you can protect yourself when retreating.

古文：天光不从。
现代文：尔硃天光没有采纳贺拔岳的建议。
English: Erqi Tianguo did not accept He Baturu's suggestion.

古文：闰月，壬寅，天光自长安，兆自晋阳，度律自洛阳，仲远自东郡，皆会于鄴，众号二十万，夹洹水而军，节闵帝以长孙稚为大行台，总督之。
现代文：闰月，壬寅，尔硃天光从长安出发，尔硃兆从晋阳出发，尔硃度律从洛阳出发，尔硃仲远从东郡出发，几路人马都会聚于邺城，军队号称二十万，沿洹水两岸驻扎下来。节闵帝任命长孙稚为大行台，总督各路大军。
English: The leap month, Ren Yin, Er Yao Tianguang set out from Chang'an, Er Yao Zhao set out from Jinyang, Er Yao DuLu set out from Luoyang, Er Yao Zhongyuan set out from Dong County, several people and horses would gather in Lucheng, the army was known as two hundred thousand, stationed along the two sides of Surabaya. Emperor Jie appointed the eldest grandson to be the grand marshal, the governor of the army.

古文：高欢令吏部尚书封隆之守鄴，癸丑，出顿紫陌，大都督高敖曹将乡里部曲王桃汤等三千人以从。
现代文：高欢命吏部尚书封隆之镇守邺城，癸丑，高欢率军出邺城驻扎于紫陌，大都督高敖曹率领乡里部曲王桃汤等三千人跟随。
English: Gao Huan's subordinate Shang Shufeng and Long Zhen guarded Lucheng, and Gao Huan led his troops out of Lucheng and stationed them in Zimao. Grand Duke Gao Bing Cao led 3,000 people from the township of Libe, including Qu Wang Taotang, to follow.

古文：欢曰： 高都督所将皆汉兵，恐不足集事，欲割鲜卑兵千馀人相杂用之，何如？ 
现代文：高欢对高敖曹说道： 高都督所统率的都是汉兵，恐怕不足以成事，我打算拨给你一千多鲜卑兵，跟汉兵混杂在一起使用，你看怎么样？ 
English: Gao Huan said to Gao Rong Cao: All the soldiers under the command of Gao Rong Cao are Han soldiers. I'm afraid it's not enough to accomplish anything. I'm going to assign you more than a thousand fresh soldiers to use mixed with Han soldiers. What do you think?

古文：敖曹曰： 敖曹所将，练习已久，前后格斗，不减鲜卑。
现代文：高敖曹说： 我所率领的部队，已训练了很长时间，前后几次作战，并不比鲜卑兵弱。
English: Gao Bing Cao said: The troops I lead have been trained for a long time and have fought several times before and after. They are not weaker than the lowly soldiers.

古文：今若杂之，情不相洽，胜则争功，退则推罪，不烦更配也。 
现代文：现在如果混杂起来，彼此情感会不融洽，打了胜仗都要争功，打了败仗便会互相推罪于对方，所以不必混杂在一起。 
English: Now, if they are mixed up, their feelings will not be compatible with each other. If they win the battle, they will compete for merits. If they lose the battle, they will blame each other, so they do not have to be mixed together.

古文：庚申，尔硃兆帅轻骑三千夜袭鄴城，叩西门，不克而退。
现代文：庚申，尔硃兆率三千轻骑夜袭邺城，攻打西门，未能成功，败退下来。
English: Goshun, with a force of three thousand light cavalry, raided Shicheng at night and attacked the west gate, but failed and retreated.

古文：壬戌，欢将战马不满二千，步兵不满三万，众寡不敌，乃于韩陵为圆阵，连系牛驴以塞归道，于是将士皆有死志。
现代文：壬戌，高欢率不满二千的骑兵和不满三万的步兵，因与敌人众寡悬殊，于是便在韩陵布成了一个圆阵，将牛驴等牲畜用绳索连系起来堵塞了归路，于是将士们个个都有拼死战斗的意志。
English: However, the cavalry with a high rate of less than two thousand and the infantry with a high rate of less than thirty thousand, because of the disparity with the enemy, they formed a circle in Hanlingbu, connected the cattle and donkeys with ropes and blocked the way back, so all the soldiers had the will to fight to the death.

古文：兆望见欢，遥责欢以叛己，欢曰： 本所以戮力者，共辅帝室。今天子何在？ 
现代文：尔硃兆望见高欢，远远地责骂他背叛自己，高欢道： 我原来与你同心协力，是为了共同辅佐皇帝，现在皇帝何在？ 
English: Seeing Gao Huan from afar, he scolded him for betraying himself. Gao Huan said, "I originally worked together with you in order to jointly support the emperor. Where is the emperor now?

古文：兆曰： 永安枉害天柱，我报仇耳。 
现代文：尔硃兆说道： 孝庄帝冤杀天柱大将军，我是为了报仇罢了。 
English: Er Hao Zhao said: Xiaozhuangdi unjustly killed General Tianzhu, I just wanted to take revenge.

古文：欢曰： 我昔亲闻天柱计，汝在户前立，岂得言不反邪！
现代文：高欢道： 我过去听说了天柱大将军的阴谋，你当时就在门前站着，怎能说不是反叛呢！
English: Gao Huan said, "I heard about General Tianzhu's plot in the past. You were standing in front of the door at the time. How can you say it wasn't a rebellion?"

古文：且以君杀臣，何报之有！
现代文：况且君杀臣是天经地义的事，你又有什么仇可报的？
English: Besides, killing a minister is a matter of natural justice. What revenge can you take?

古文：今日义绝矣！ 
现代文：你我今日一切情义都断绝了。 
English: You and I have lost all meaning today.

古文：遂战。
现代文：于是两军便大战起来。
English: The two sides then went to war.

古文：欢将中军，高敖曹将左军，欢从父弟岳将右军。
现代文：高欢统帅中军，高敖曹统帅左军，高欢的堂弟高岳统帅右军。
English: Gao Huan commanded the middle army, Gao Yao Cao commanded the left army, and Gao Huan's cousin Gao Yue commanded the right army.

古文：欢战不利，兆等乘之，岳以五百骑冲其前，别将斛律敦收散卒蹑其后，敖曹以千骑自栗园出横击之，兆等大败，贺拔胜与徐州刺史杜德于阵降欢。
现代文：高欢的部队作战不利，尔硃兆等乘机进攻高军。高岳率五百名骑兵从正面冲击尔硃兆军，别将斛律敦将失散了的士卒聚集起来从后面打击尔硃兆军，高敖曹则率一千骑兵从栗园出发横击尔硃兆。尔硃兆等大败，贺拔胜和徐州刺史杜德于阵前投降了高欢。
English: Gao Huan's troops did not fare well in the battle, and Er Qizhao and others took advantage of the opportunity to attack Gao's army. Gao Yue led five hundred cavalrymen to attack Er Qizhao's army from the front, don't let Balutun gather the scattered soldiers to attack Er Qizhao's army from behind, Gao Qizhao led a thousand cavalrymen to attack Er Qizhao from the chestnut orchard. Er Qizhao and others were defeated, and He Baxing and Xuzhou Shidude surrendered to Gao Huan before the battle.

古文：兆对慕容绍宗抚膺曰： 不用公言，以至于此！ 
现代文：尔硃兆摸着胸口对慕容绍宗说道： 没有采纳您的建议，才到了这个地步！ 
English: Touching his chest, Er Qizhao said to Murong Shaosong, "I didn't take your advice, and it's come to this!

古文：欲轻骑西走，绍宗反旗鸣角，收散卒成军而去。
现代文：尔硃兆想率轻骑向西逃奔晋阳，慕容绍宗调转大旗，吹响号角，把逃散的士兵收聚成一支部队带着他们逃跑了。
English: He wanted to flee to the west of Jinyang on a light horse. Murong Shaosong turned the big flag, blew the horn, gathered the fleeing soldiers into a unit and fled with them.

古文：兆还晋阳，仲远奔东郡。
现代文：尔硃兆逃回晋阳，尔硃仲远逃奔东郡。
English: He Xizhao fled back to Jinyang, and he Xizhong Zhongyuan fled to Dong County.

古文：尔硃彦伯闻度律等败，欲自将兵守河桥，世隆不从。
现代文：尔硃彦伯闻知尔硃度律等战败，打算亲自率军镇守河桥，尔硃世隆不同意。
English: When he learned of the defeat of Erhime, he planned to personally lead the army to defend the bridge, but Erhime did not agree.

古文：度律、天光将之洛阳，大都督斛斯椿谓都督贾显度、贾显智曰： 今不先执尔硃氏，吾属死无类矣。 
现代文：尔硃度律、尔硃天光将前往洛阳，大都督斛斯椿对都督贾显度、贾显智说： 现在如果不先抓获尔硃氏的话，我们这些人就要全都死光了。 
English: Er Xuan Du Lu and Er Xuan Tian Guang will go to Luoyang, and the Grand Duchy of Jinshchun said to the Duchy of Jia Xuan Du and Jia Xian Zhi: "If we don't capture Er Xuan first, all of us will be dead."

古文：乃夜于桑下盟，约倍道先还。
现代文：于是几个人夜间便在桑树下盟誓，约定好兼程抢先返回洛阳。
English: As a result, several people swore at night under the mulberry tree and agreed to return to Luoyang ahead of schedule.

古文：世隆使其外兵参军阳叔渊单骑驰赴北中，简阅败众，以次内之。
现代文：尔硃世隆派他的外兵参军阳叔渊飞马赶奔北中郎府城，选拔检阅那些败兵，分批进入洛阳城。
English: Erqi Shilong sent his foreign soldiers to join the army of Yangshuoyuan Pegasus to rush to Beizhonglangfucheng, select and review those defeated soldiers, and enter Luoyang City in batches.

古文：椿至，不得入城，乃诡说叔渊曰： 天光部下皆是西人，闻欲大掠洛邑，迁都长安，宜先内我以为之备。 
现代文：斛斯椿赶到洛阳，未能进入城中，便哄骗阳叔渊说： 尔硃天光的部下都是西部人，我听说他们打算要大肆掠抢洛阳城，之后迁都到长安，你应先让我进城，做好准备。 
English: Gong Shizhun rushed to Luoyang, but failed to enter the city, so he tricked Yang Shuyuan and said: Er Qian Tianguo's subordinates are all westerners. I heard that they plan to plunder Luoyang city, and then move the capital to Chang'an. You should let me enter the city first and prepare.

古文：叔渊信之。
现代文：阳叔渊相信了斛斯椿的话。
English: Yang Shuyuan believed Gong Shuchin's words.

古文：夏，四月，甲子朔，椿等入据河桥，尽杀尔硃氏之党。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲子朔，斛斯椿等占据河桥，将尔硃氏的党羽全部杀掉了。
English: In the summer, in April, Ji Zishuo, Yao Shizhuan and others occupied Heqiao and killed all the followers of the Erqin clan.

古文：度律、天光欲攻之，会大雨昼夜不止，士马疲顿，弓矢不可施，遂西走，至陂津，为人所擒，送于椿所。
现代文：尔硃度律、尔硃天光想攻打河桥，赶上天下大雨，昼夜不停，兵马疲惫困顿，弓箭施展不开，于是只好向西逃去，逃到陂津时，被人擒获，送到了斛斯椿处。
English: Er Xingdu Lu and Er Xing Tianguang wanted to attack the bridge of the river, but they were caught up in the heavy rain of the day and night, the soldiers and horses were exhausted, and the bows and arrows could not be deployed, so they had to flee to the west. When they fled to Shaozin, they were captured and sent to the Shaozhuang area.

古文：椿使行台长孙稚诣洛阳奏状，别使贾显智、张欢帅骑掩袭世隆，执之。
现代文：斛斯椿派行台长孙稚到洛阳向朝廷报告，另外又派贾显智、张欢率骑兵袭击尔硃世隆，将其抓获。
English: Gongsizhun sent the governor Sun Zhi to Luoyang to report to the imperial court, and also sent cavalry led by Jia Xianzhi and Zhang Huan to attack Erqi Shilong and capture him.

古文：彦伯时在禁直，长孙稚于神虎门启陈： 高欢义功既振，请诛尔硃氏。 
现代文：尔硃彦伯当时正在宫中，长孙稚在神虎门向节闵帝启请道： 高欢义军已经成功，请陛下诛杀尔硃氏。 
English: At that time, Er Zhi Yanbo was in the palace, and the eldest grandson went to Emperor Jie Zheng at the Gate of the Gods and asked: "The Gao Huan rebel army has been successful, please kill Er Zhi."

古文：节闵帝使舍人郭崇报彦伯，彦伯狼狈走出，为人所执，与世隆俱斩于阊阖门外，送其首并度律、天光于高欢。
现代文：节闵帝派舍人郭崇将这一情况通报了尔硃彦伯，尔硃彦伯狼狈逃出宫中，被人抓获，与尔硃世隆一起被斩首于阊阖门外，又将尔硃彦伯、尔硃世隆的首级连同尔硃度律、尔硃天光一起送到高欢处。
English: Guo Chong, who was sent by Emperor Jiechi, reported this situation to Er Zhenbo. Er Zhenbo escaped from the palace and was captured. He and Er Zhenglong were beheaded outside the palace gate, and the heads of Er Zhenbo and Er Zhenglong, along with Er Zhenglong and Er Zhenglong, were sent to the place of high happiness.

古文：节闵帝使中书舍人卢辩劳欢于鄴，欢使之见安定王，辩抗辞不从，欢不能夺，乃舍之。
现代文：节闵帝派中书舍人卢辩到邺城慰劳高欢，高欢让卢辩见安定王，卢辩高声抗议不见安定王，高欢不能使他屈服，只好放了他。
English: On the day of the festival, Emperor Qianlong sent Lu Ying to Shicheng to console Gao Huan. Gao Huan allowed Lu Ying to see the King of Stability. Lu Ying protested loudly that he could not see the King of Stability. Gao Huan could not make him give in and had to release him.

古文：辩，同之兄子也。
现代文：卢辩是卢同哥哥的儿子。
English: Lu Yan is the son of Lu Tong's older brother.

古文：辛未，骠骑大将军、行济州事侯景降于安定王。以景为尚书仆射、南道大行台、济州刺史。
现代文：辛未，骠骑大将军、行济州事侯景投降了安定王，安定王任命侯景为尚书仆射、南道大行台、济州刺史。
English: In Xinwei, the cavalry general, the governor of Jeju, Hou Jing, surrendered to the king of stability, and the king of stability appointed Hou Jing as the secretary of the governor of Jeju, the governor of South Jeju Province, and the governor of Jeju.

古文：尔硃仲远来奔。
现代文：尔硃仲远前来投降梁朝。
English: Erqin Zhongyuan came to surrender to Liang Zhao.

古文：仲远帐下都督乔宁、张子期自滑台诣欢降。
现代文：尔硃仲远的部将都督乔宁、张子期从滑台到高欢处请降。
English: Governor Qiaoning and Zhang Ziqi, who were distant from each other, were asked to step down from the podium to the cheering section.

古文：欢责之曰： 汝事仲远，擅其荣利，盟契百重，许同生死。
现代文：高欢斥责他们说： 你们侍奉尔硃仲远，享尽了荣华富贵，与尔硃仲远信誓旦旦，答应和他同生共死。
English: Gao Huan scolded them, saying, "You have served Yelzhan Zhongyuan and enjoyed all the glory and wealth. You swore an oath to Yelzhan Zhongyuan and promised to live and die with him.

古文：前仲远自徐州为逆，妆为戎首；今仲远南走，汝复叛之。
现代文：以前尔硃仲远在徐州叛乱，你们是首要分子，现在尔硃仲远失势南逃，你们又背叛了他。
English: Previously, Erqin Zhongyuan rebelled in Xuzhou, and you were the leading elements. Now, Erqin Zhongyuan has lost power and fled south, and you have betrayed him.

古文：事天子则不忠，事仲远则无信，犬马尚识饲之者，汝曾犬马之不如！ 
现代文：你们对天子不忠，对尔硃仲远不讲信义，犬马还不忘记饲养它的主人，你们连犬马都不如！ 
English: You are disloyal to the Son of Heaven, you are far from being faithful to each other, dogs and horses do not forget their owners, you are not even as good as dogs and horses!

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：于是便杀掉了乔宁和张子期。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：尔硃天光之东下也，留其弟显寿镇长安，召秦州刺史侯莫陈悦，欲与之俱东。
现代文：尔硃天光率军东下之时，留下了他的弟弟尔硃显寿镇守长安城，召请秦州刺史侯莫陈悦和他一起东下洛阳。
English: When Erqin Tianguang led the army to the east, he left his brother Erqin Xianshou, the town guard of Chang'an City, behind, and summoned the Qin State Governor Hou Mo Chen Yue to go east to Luoyang with him.

古文：贺拔岳知天光必败，欲留悦共图显寿以应高欢，计未有所出。
现代文：贺拔岳知道尔硃天光肯定会失败，便想留住侯莫陈悦共同对付尔硃显寿以响应高欢，但却想不出什么办法来。
English: He Batyue knew that Er Er Tianguang would certainly fail, so he wanted to keep Hou Mo Chen Yue to jointly deal with Er Er Xian Shou to respond to Gao Huan, but he could not think of any way to do so.

古文：宇文泰谓岳曰： 今天光尚近，悦未必有贰心，若以此告之，恐其惊惧。
现代文：宇文泰对贺拔岳说道： 现在尔硃天光并没有走远，侯莫陈悦未必会有二心，如果把这计划告诉了他，恐怕侯莫陈悦会惊慌恐惧。
English: Yu Wentai said to He Batyue: Now that the light of day has not gone far, Hou Mo Chen Yue may not have second thoughts. If I told him about this plan, I'm afraid that Hou Mo Chen Yue would be panicked and afraid.

古文：然悦虽为主将，不能制物，若先说其众，必人有留心。悦进失尔硃之期，退恐人情变动，乘此说悦，事无不遂。 
现代文：但侯莫陈悦虽然是主将，却不能控制人，如果先劝说他的部队，一定会人人都愿留下来，侯莫陈悦如果东进，便误了尔硃天光约定的日期；如果后退，则又担心人心浮动，发生变乱，如果乘这个时候劝说侯莫陈悦，事情肯定会成功。 
English: However, although Hou Mo Chen Yue is the commander-in-chief, he cannot control people. If he first persuades his troops, everyone will be willing to stay. If Hou Mo Chen Yue marches east, he will miss the date agreed by Heaven and Earth; if he retreats, he will be worried about the fluctuation of people's hearts and the occurrence of turmoil. If he takes advantage of this time to persuade Hou Mo Chen Yue, things will certainly succeed.

古文：岳大喜，即令泰入悦军说之，悦遂与岳共袭长安。
现代文：贺拔岳非常高兴，便命宇文泰到侯莫陈悦军中去劝说他，侯莫陈悦于是便和贺拔岳一起袭击长安城。
English: He Batur was very happy, so he ordered Wu Wentai to go to Hou Mo Chen Yue's army to persuade him. Hou Mo Chen Yue then attacked Chang'an City together with He Batur.

古文：泰帅轻骑为前驱，显寿弃城走，追至华阴，擒之。
现代文：宇文泰率轻骑为前锋，尔硃显寿弃城而逃，被追到华阴抓获。
English: Yu Wentai led the light cavalry as a forward, Er Yuxian Shou abandoned the city and fled, and was chased to Huayin and captured.

古文：欢以岳为关西大行台，岳以泰为行台左丞，领府司马，事无巨细皆委之。
现代文：高欢任命贺拔岳为关西大行台，贺拔岳任命宇文泰为行台左丞、领府司马，无论大事小事都交与他处理。
English: Gao Huan appointed He Batyue as the Kansai Daigodai, and He Batyue appointed Wu Wentai as the Gangdai Zuojo and the leader of the regional government. No matter how big or small the matter was, it was handled by him.

古文：尔硃世隆之拒高欢也，使齐州行台尚书房谟募兵趣四渎，又使其弟青州刺史弼趣乱城，扬声北渡，为掎角之势。
现代文：尔硃世隆抵抗高欢的时候，派齐州行台尚书房谟招募士兵赶奔四渎，又派房谟的弟弟房弼赶赴乱城，扬言要北渡黄河，构成犄角之势。
English: When Er Qian Shilong resisted the revelry, he sent Shang Shuzhong Miao, the governor of Qizhou, to travel to Taiyuan to recruit soldiers, and also sent Miao's younger brother, Fang Yao, to rush to the chaotic city, threatening to cross the Yellow River to the north, creating a situation of conflict.

古文：及韩陵既败，弼还东阳，闻世隆等死，欲来奔，数与左右割臂为盟。
现代文：等到韩陵失败后，房弼回到东阳，听说尔硃世隆等人已死，便打算前来投奔梁朝，多次与部下割臂盟誓。
English: After waiting for the failure of Han Ling, Fang Yao returned to Dongyang. Hearing that Er Qian Shilong and others had died, he planned to come to the Liang Dynasty, and repeatedly swore with his subordinates.

古文：帐下都督冯绍隆，素为弼所信待，说弼曰： 今方同契阔，宜更割心前之血以盟众。 
现代文：房弼的帐下都督冯绍隆，一直深受房弼信赖，冯绍隆劝说房弼： 现在正是辛苦困难的时候，您应该进一步刺出胸前之血和众人盟誓。 
English: Feng Sholong, the governor of Fangyao, has always been deeply trusted by Fangyao. Feng Sholong persuaded Fangyao: Now is a time of hardship, you should further stab the blood in your chest and swear by everyone.

古文：弼从之，大集部下，披胸令绍隆割之。绍隆因推刃杀之，传首洛阳。
现代文：房弼采纳了他的建议，于是将部下召集起来，敞开前胸令冯绍隆刺血，冯绍隆趁机用刀杀了房弼，将他的首级送到了洛阳。
English: Fang Yao accepted his suggestion, so he gathered his subordinates, opened his chest and ordered Feng Sholong to stab him. Feng Sholong took the opportunity to kill Fang Yao with a knife and sent his head to Luoyang.

古文：丙子，安东将军辛永以建州降于安定王。
现代文：丙子，安东将军辛永率建州投降了安定王。
English: In other words, General Anton Xin Yong led Jianzhou to surrender to the Prince of Stability.

古文：辛巳，安定王至邙山。
现代文：辛巳，安定王到了邙山。
English: All of a sudden, Prince Anzhi arrived in Shaoshan.

古文：高欢以安定王疏远，使仆射魏兰根慰谕洛邑，且观节闵帝之为人，欲复奉之。
现代文：高欢因安定王与皇族嫡系比较疏远，于是派仆射魏兰根前往洛阳慰问，同时观察一下节闵帝的为人，打算再推奉他为帝。
English: Gao Huan was estranged from the royal family due to the estrangement between King Anning and the royal family, so he sent his servant Wei Langeng to Luoyang to offer condolences. At the same time, he observed the person of Emperor Jiechi and planned to promote him as emperor again.

古文：兰根以帝神采高明，恐于后难制，与高乾兄弟及黄门侍郎崔凌共劝欢废之。
现代文：魏兰根认为节闵帝神气高扬，担心以后难以驾驭，便与高乾兄弟及黄门侍郎崔等一起劝高欢废掉节闵帝。
English: Wei Langen believed that Emperor Jiechi was arrogant and feared that he would be difficult to control in the future. Together with Gao Qian's brothers and Huangmen's servant Choi, he advised Gao Huan to abolish Emperor Jiechi.

古文：欢集百官问所宜立，莫有应者，太仆代人綦毋俊盛称节闵帝贤明，宜主社稷，欢欣然是之。
现代文：高欢召集百官向大家征询应该立谁为帝，没人作声，太仆代郡人綦毋俊盛赞节闵帝贤明，认为应该立他做社稷之王，高欢很高兴，觉得綦毋俊说得很对。
English: Gao Huan called together hundreds of officials to ask everyone who should be the emperor, but no one spoke up. The county's servant, Yao Youjun, praised Yao Youjun's wisdom and thought that he should be the king of the county. Gao Huan was very happy and felt that Yao Youjun was right.

古文：凌作色曰： 若言贤明，自可待我高王，徐登大位。
现代文：崔正言厉色地说道： 如果要说贤明，自然应该等待我们高王，慢慢登上皇位。
English: Cui Zheng said sharply: If we want to be wise, we should naturally wait for our high king to slowly ascend the throne.

古文：广陵既为逆胡所立，何得犹为天子！
现代文：广陵王既然是由叛乱的胡人所立，怎能还让他做天子！
English: Since Guangling Wang was established by the rebellious Hu people, how can he still be the son of heaven!

古文：若从俊言，王师何名义举？ 
现代文：如果听从了綦毋俊的话，大王您的队伍怎么称得上是义举？ 
English: If you listen to the words of Yu Neiqun, how can your team be called a righteous act?

古文：欢遂幽节闵帝于崇训佛寺。
现代文：高欢于是便将节闵帝幽禁在崇训佛寺中。
English: Gao Huan then imprisoned Emperor Jiechi in the Buddhist temple of Chongxun.

古文：欢入洛阳，斛斯椿谓贺拔胜曰： 今天下事，在吾与君耳，若不先制人，将为人所制。
现代文：高欢进入洛阳之时，斛斯椿对贺拔胜说道： 当今天下之事，全在于我和您了，如果我们不先发制人的话，将会被别人所制。
English: When Gao Huan entered Luoyang, Gong Shizhun said to He Baxing: Today's situation is entirely up to me and you. If we don't preempt others, we will be preempted by others.

古文：高欢初至，图之不难。 
现代文：高欢现在刚到洛阳，对付他还不难。 
English: Gao Huan is a newcomer, it is not difficult to plot against him.

古文：胜曰： 彼有功于时，害之不祥。
现代文：贺拔胜说道： 高欢有功于国家，杀害了他不吉祥。
English: He Baxing said: Gao Huan was a credit to the country, and killing him is not auspicious.

古文：比数夜与欢同宿，具序往昔之怀，兼荷兄恩意甚多，何苦惮之！ 
现代文：近几夜我与高欢同住，叙谈往昔之情，同时他又很感谢你的恩义，为什么要怕他呢！ 
English: For the past several nights, we have been staying with him, sharing our previous friendship. He has benefited a lot from you. Why are you afraid of him?

古文：椿乃止。
现代文：斛斯椿这才作罢。
English: It was only then that he stopped his plans for a high-spirited party.

古文：欢以汝南王悦，高祖之子，召欲立之，闻其狂暴无常，乃止。
现代文：因为汝南王元悦是孝文帝的儿子，高欢便将元悦召来想立他为帝，但又听说元悦暴戾无常，便只好作罢。
English: Because Yuan Yue, the king of Southern Ru, was the son of Emperor Xiaowen, Gao Huan summoned Yuan Yue to make him emperor. However, he heard that Yuan Yue was violent and unstable, so he had no choice but to give up.

古文：时诸王多逃匿，尚书左仆射平阳王修，怀之子也，匿于田舍。
现代文：当时北魏诸王大多逃走藏匿了起来，尚书左仆射平阳王元修，是元怀的儿子，躲藏在乡间田舍中。
English: At that time, most of the Northern Wei kings fled and went into hiding. Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shao Pingyang Wang Yuan Xiu, the son of Yuan Huai, hid in a rural farmhouse.

古文：欢欲立之，使斛斯椿求之。
现代文：高欢想立元修为帝，便派斛斯椿去寻找元修。
English: Gao Huan wanted to establish Yuan Shao as emperor, so he sent Gong Shiqin to find Yuan Shao.

古文：椿见修所亲员外散骑侍郎太原王思政，问王所在，思政曰： 须知问意。 
现代文：斛斯椿找到元修所亲信的员外散骑侍郎太原人王思政，向他打听元修的下落，王思政说： 我要知道您为何找他。 
English: Zou Shizhuan found a trusted member of the Yuan Shuxiao, Wang Sizheng, a horseback riding attendant from Taiyuan, and asked him about the whereabouts of Yuan Shuxiao. Wang Sizheng said, "I want to know why you are looking for him."

古文：椿曰： 欲立为天子。 
现代文：斛斯椿道： 想立他为皇帝。 
English: Gao Shizhong said: I want to make him emperor.

古文：思政乃言之。
现代文：王思政这才说出元修在什么地方。
English: It was only then that Wang Sizheng said where Yuan Shao was.

古文：椿从思政见修，修色变，谓思政曰： 得无卖我邪？ 
现代文：斛斯椿随王思政去见元修，元修见了他们脸色大变，对王思政说道： 你不是要出卖我吧？ 
English: Yuan Shizhong went with Wang Shizheng to see Yuan Xiu. When Yuan Xiu saw their faces change dramatically, he said to Wang Shizheng, "Aren't you going to betray me?"

古文：曰： 不也。 
现代文：王思政道： 当然不是。 
English: Fan Ye replied: It is not.

古文：曰： 敢保之乎？ 
现代文：元修又说： 你敢保证么？ 
English: Yuan Shao also said: Do you dare to guarantee it?

古文：曰： 变态百端，何可保也？ 
现代文：王思政答道： 事情千变万化，怎么能保证呢！ 
English: Wang Sizheng replied: Things are ever-changing, how can you guarantee it!

古文：椿驰报欢。欢遣四百骑迎修入氈帐，陈诚，泣下沾襟，修让以寡德，欢再拜，修亦拜。
现代文：斛斯椿飞马向高欢作了汇报，高欢派四百名骑兵将元修接入毛毡大帐之中，向元修表达了自己的诚挚之心，言谈之际泪落沾襟。元修以寡德为由推让再三，高欢又拜了两拜，元修也拜了一拜。
English: Gaozqin Feima reported to Gaohuan, Gaohuan sent four hundred cavalrymen to plug Yuan Xiu into the felt ledger, expressed his sincerity to Yuan Xiu, and shed tears while talking. Yuan Xiu gave in repeatedly on the grounds of being a widower, Gaohuan prayed for two days, and Yuan Xiu also prayed for one day.

古文：欢出备服御，进汤沐，达夜严警。
现代文：高欢出帐，准备好皇帝的服装、用品让元修沐浴更衣，彻夜严加警戒。
English: Gao Huan issued an account, prepared the emperor's clothing and supplies to let Yuan Xiu take a bath and change clothes, and kept a strict vigil all night.

古文：昧爽，文武执鞭以朝，使斛斯椿奉劝进表。
现代文：第二天早晨，因军中无法备朝服，所以文武百官执鞭朝拜元修，高欢让斛斯椿进奉劝进表。
English: In the morning of the next day, because the army was unable to prepare the imperial robes, the civil and military officials paid homage to Yuan Shao with a whip, and the high-ranking officials were persuaded to wear the imperial robes.

古文：椿入帷门，磬折延首而不敢前，修令思政取表视之，曰： 便不得不称朕矣。 
现代文：斛斯椿进入帷门，弯腰施礼伸着头不敢进到元修跟前，元修命王思政接过劝进表，看过之后，说道： 我也只好即位称朕了。 
English: Gong Shizhong entered the curtain door, bowed down and bowed his head and did not dare to enter in front of Yuan Shuxiu. Yuan Shuxiu's son Wang Sizheng took over the table, and after reading it, he said, "I have no choice but to enthrone me."

古文：乃为安定王作诏策而禅位焉。
现代文：高欢于是为安定王作诏书禅位于元修。
English: He was so pleased that he wrote an edict for the Prince of Stability.

古文：戊子，孝武帝即位于东郭之外，用代都旧制，以黑氈蒙七人，欢居其一，帝于氈上西向拜天毕，入御太极殿，群臣朝贺，升阊阖门大赦，改元太昌。
现代文：戊子，北魏孝武帝元修在洛阳东郭外即皇帝位，采用鲜卑旧制，将黑毡蒙在七个人身上，高欢便是其中一人。元修在毡上向西拜过天之后，便入御太极殿，群臣朝拜庆贺。孝武帝元修登上阊阖门，大赦天下，改年号为太昌。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu Yuan Shou was enthroned outside Luoyang's Dongguo Gate. Using the old imperial system, he draped black cloths over seven people, Gao Huan being one of them. After bowing to the West on the robe, Emperor Yuan Shou entered the Imperial Palace, and the courtiers bowed to him in celebration. Emperor Xiaowu Yuan Shou ascended to the throne, pardoned the world, and changed the year to Taichang.

古文：以高欢为大丞相、天柱大将军、太师，世袭定州刺史。
现代文：任命高欢为大丞相、天柱大将军、太师、世袭定州刺史。
English: Gao Huan was appointed as the grand chancellor, the general of Tianzhu, the grand master, and the hereditary governor of Dingzhou.

古文：庚寅，加高澄侍中、开府仪同三司。
现代文：庚寅，加封高澄为侍中、开府仪同三司。
English: Geng Yin and Gao Cheng were appointed as the Vice-Chamberlains and the three officials responsible for the opening ceremony.

古文：初，欢起兵信都，尔硃世隆知司马子如与欢有旧，自侍中、骠骑大将军出为南岐州刺史。
现代文：当初，高欢从信都起兵之时，尔硃世隆知道司马子如跟高欢有老交情，于是将司马子如从侍中、骠骑大将军的职位上撤下将他调离洛阳到南岐州任刺史。
English: At first, when Gao Huan raised an army from Xindu, Er Qian Shilong knew that Sima Ziru had an old friendship with Gao Huan, so he removed Sima Ziru from the position of attendant and cavalry general and transferred him from Luoyang to Nanqizhou to serve as an assassin.

古文：欢入洛，召子如为大行台尚书，朝夕左右，参知军国。
现代文：高欢进入洛阳后，征召司马子如为大行台尚书，从此司马子如朝夕在高欢身边，参与军国大事。
English: After Gao Huan entered Luoyang, Sima Zi Rong was conscripted to write a book for the grand march. From then on, Sima Zi Rong was with Gao Huan every morning and evening, participating in military affairs.

古文：广州刺史广宁韩贤，素为欢所善，欢入洛，凡尔硃氏所除官爵例皆削夺，唯贤如故。
现代文：广州刺史广宁郡人韩贤，一直很受高欢赏识，高欢进到洛阳后，凡是尔硃氏所任命的官职爵位都撤销废除了，只有韩贤的官爵还和过去一样。
English: After Gao Huan entered Luoyang, all the official ranks and titles appointed by the Erqin clan were revoked and abolished. Only Han Xian's official rank and title remained the same as before.

古文：以前御史中尉樊子鹄兼尚书左仆射，为东南道大行台，与徐州刺史杜德追尔硃仲远，仲远已出境，遂攻元树于谯。
现代文：北魏任命前御史中尉樊子鹄兼任尚书左仆射，为东南道大行台，与徐州刺史杜德一起追击尔硃仲远，尔硃仲远已逃出境外，于是便到谯城攻打元树。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the former lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, Zou Zixuan, to serve as the second-in-command of Shang Shuxi and the second-in-command of the Southeast Road, and together with Xuzhou Shidude, he pursued Er Qin Zhongyuan. Er Qin Zhongyuan had fled abroad, so he went to Lucheng to attack Yuan Shu.

古文：丞相欢征贺拔岳为冀州刺史，岳畏欢，欲单马入朝。
现代文：丞相高欢征召贺拔岳为冀州刺史，贺拔岳畏惧高欢，便打算单人匹马入朝接受任命。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan conscripted He Batyue to write the history of Jizhou. He Batyue was afraid of Gao Huan, so he planned to enter the imperial court single-handed to accept the appointment.

古文：行台右丞薛孝通说岳曰： 高王以数千鲜卑破尔硃百万之众，诚亦难敌。
现代文：行台右丞薛孝通劝贺拔岳道： 高欢以几千鲜卑军队打败了尔硃氏的百万大军，您确实很难与他相匹敌。
English: Xue Xiaotong, the right-hand man of the procession, advised He Bage: Gao Huan defeated the million-strong army of Er Yao with a few thousand inferior troops. It is really difficult for you to match him.

古文：然诸将或素居其上，或与之等夷，虽屈首从之，势非获已。
现代文：但各位将领有的过去一直职位在他之上，有的跟他职位相当，俯首屈从于他，其势乃迫不得已。
English: But those of you who have been in positions above him in the past, and some in positions equivalent to his, have bowed your heads and submitted to him out of necessity.

古文：今或在京师，或据州镇，高王除之则失人望，留之则为腹心之疾。
现代文：现在这些将领有的在京师洛阳，有的占据着州镇，高欢若除掉他们则会失去人心，若留着他们则会成为他的心腹之患。
English: Now these generals are in Beijing, Luoyang, and some occupy the state towns. If Gao Huan gets rid of them, he will lose the hearts of the people, and if he keeps them, they will become his confidants.

古文：且吐万人虽复败走，犹在并州，高王方内抚群雄，外抗勍敌，安能去其巢穴，与公争关中之地乎！
现代文：况且尔硃兆虽然败逃，却仍在并州，高欢正在内抚群雄，外抗强敌，怎能离开老窝，与您争夺关中之地呢！
English: Moreover, although he was defeated and fled, he is still in the adjacent state, Gao Huan is caressing the heroes and resisting the strong enemy, how can he leave the old nest and compete with you for the land of Guanzhong!

古文：今关中豪俊皆属心于公，愿效其智力。
现代文：现在关中的英雄豪杰，都倾心于您，愿意为您效力。
English: Now the heroes and heroines of the pass are all devoted to you and are willing to work for you.

古文：公以华山为城，黄河为堑，进可以兼山东，退可以封函谷，奈何欲束手受制于人乎！ 
现代文：您若以华山当作城墙，以黄河作为沟堑，进可以兼并崤山以东的区域，退可以封锁函谷关，为什么要捆住自己的手脚，受制于别人呢！ 
English: If you use Huashan Mountain as a city wall and the Yellow River as a ravine, you can annex the area east of Shaoshan when you enter, and you can seal off Hanzhouguan when you leave. Why should you bind your hands and feet and be controlled by others?

古文：言未卒，岳执孝通手曰： 君言是也。 
现代文：话还未说完，贺拔岳便握住薛孝通的手说： 您说得对。 
English: Before he had finished speaking, He Batyue took hold of Xue Xiaotong's hand and said, "You are right.

古文：乃逊辞为启而不就征。
现代文：于是客气地给高欢写了封信加以推辞，未应召到京接受任命。
English: As a result, he politely wrote a letter to Gao Huan to decline the appointment and did not accept the invitation to come to Beijing to accept the appointment.

古文：壬辰，丞相欢还鄴，送尔硃度律、天光于洛阳，斩之。
现代文：壬辰，丞相高欢回到邺城，将尔硃度律、尔硃天光送到洛阳杀掉了。
English: In Imjin, the chancellor Gao Huan returned to Lucheng, and sent Erqin Doru and Erqin Tianguang to Luoyang to kill them.

古文：五月，丙申，魏主鸩节闵帝于门下外省，诏百司会丧，葬用殊礼。
现代文：五月，丙申，北魏国主在门下省用药酒毒死了节闵帝，之后下诏各部门大办丧事，用隆重的葬礼埋葬节闵帝。
English: In May, Hsin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, poisoned Emperor Jieyi with medicine and wine in his province, and then ordered all departments to hold a grand funeral and bury Emperor Jieyi with a grand funeral.

古文：以沛郡王欣为太师，赵郡王谌为太保，南阳王宝炬为太尉，长孙稚为太傅。
现代文：任命沛郡王元欣为太师，赵郡王元谌为太保，南阳王元宝炬为太尉，任命长孙稚为太傅。
English: He appointed Wang Yuanxin of Pei County as the Grand Master, Wang Yuanjun of Zhao County as the Grand Marshal, Wang Yuan Baoqiao of Nanyang County as the First Lieutenant, and his eldest grandson as the Grand Master.

古文：宝炬，愉之子也。
现代文：元宝炬是元愉的儿子。
English: Yuan Baotong is the son of Yuan Rong.

古文：丞相欢固辞天柱大将军，戊戌，许之。
现代文：丞相高欢坚决推辞不当天柱大将军，戊戌，孝武帝元修同意了他的请求。
English: The chancellor Gao Huan firmly rebuffed the inappropriate general Tianzhu, and Emperor Wu and Emperor Yuanxiu agreed to his request.

古文：己酉，清河王亶为司徒。
现代文：己酉，任命清河王元为司徒。
English: and appointed Qinghe Wangyuan as his disciple.

古文：侍中河南高隆之，本徐氏养子，丞相欢命以为弟，恃欢势骄狎公卿，南阳王宝炬殴之，曰： 镇兵何敢尔！ 
现代文：侍中河南人高隆之，本是徐氏的养子，丞相高欢认他为弟，高隆之倚仗高欢的权势对公卿们的态度很骄横，南阳王元宝炬将他痛打了一顿，骂道： 镇兵竟敢如此狂妄！ 
English: Gao Longzhi, a Henan native, who was an adopted son of the Xu clan, was an attendant. The prime minister Gao Huan recognized him as his younger brother. Gao Longzhi, who relied on Gao Huan's power, had a very arrogant attitude towards the nobles. Nanyang Wang Yuan Baotong beat him severely and scolded: How dare the town soldiers be so arrogant!

古文：魏主以欢故，六月，丁犯，黜宝炬为骠骑大将军，归第。
现代文：孝武帝元修因高欢的缘故，于六月丁卯，将元宝炬贬黜为骠骑大将军，令其回到家中去。
English: In June, Emperor Xiaowu demoted Yuan Shuxiu to the rank of general and ordered him to return home.

古文：魏主避广平武穆王之讳，改谥武怀皇帝曰孝庄皇帝，庙号敬宗。
现代文：北魏孝武帝为避广平武穆王之讳，将武怀皇帝的谥号改为孝庄皇帝，庙号为 敬宗。 。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty changed the imperial title of Emperor Wuhuai to Emperor Xiaozhuang and the temple name to Emperor Keizong in order to avoid the reputation of King Guangping Wumu.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，魏复以南阳王宝炬为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子，北魏又重新任命南阳王元宝炬为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Zi and the Northern Wei Dynasty reappointed Nanyang Wang Yuan Baotong as a lieutenant.

古文：壬寅，魏丞相欢引兵入滏口，大都督库狄干入井陉，击尔硃兆。
现代文：壬寅，北魏丞相高欢率兵入滏口，大都督库狄干率兵入井陉，攻打尔硃兆。
English: Ren Yin, the Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan led the troops into the Hekou, and the grand governor Ku Di Gan led the troops into the Jiuyuan, and attacked Erqinzhao.

古文：庚戌，魏主使骠骑大将军、仪同三司高隆之帅步骑十万会丞相欢于太原，因以隆之为丞相军司。
现代文：庚戌，北魏孝武帝派骠骑大将军、仪同三司高隆之率步兵骑兵十万人与高欢在太原会师，于是任命高隆之为丞相军司。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Gao Wudi sent his cavalry general, three divisions of infantry and cavalry with 100,000 soldiers led by Gao Long to join Gao Huan's division in Taiyuan, and then appointed Gao Long as the minister of war.

古文：欢军于武乡，尔硃兆大掠晋阳，北走秀容。
现代文：高欢驻军于武乡，尔硃兆大肆抢掠晋阳，向北逃奔秀容县。
English: Gao Huan garrisoned troops in Wuxiang, and Er Quanzhao plundered Jinyang and fled north to Xiurong County.

古文：并州平。
现代文：从此并州平定。
English: Since then, the province has been unified and pacified.

古文：欢以晋阳四塞，乃建大丞相府而居之。
现代文：因晋阳四面有山为屏障，高欢于是在晋阳建立了大丞相府，住在那里。
English: Due to the mountains on all sides of Jinyang as a barrier, Gao Huan established the Prime Minister's Office in Jinyang and lived there.

古文：魏夏州迁民郭迁据青州反，刺史元嶷弃城走。
现代文：北魏夏州移民郭迁占据了青州反叛朝廷，青州刺史元嶷弃城而逃。
English: In Northern Wei, Guo Qian, an immigrant from Xia Prefecture, occupied the Qingzhou rebel court, and the Qingzhou assassin Yuan Zhi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：诏行台侯景等讨之，拔其城，迁来奔。
现代文：朝崐廷诏令行台侯景等人讨伐郭迁，攻下了青州。郭迁前来投奔梁朝。
English: The Imperial Court issued an imperial edict to the Tai Houjing and others to fight against the Guo Qian and captured Qingzhou. The Guo Qian came to join the Liang Dynasty.

古文：魏东南道大行台樊子鹄围元树于谯城，分兵攻取蒙县等五城，以绝援兵之路。
现代文：北魏东南道大行台樊子鹄在谯城包围了元树，分兵攻取了蒙县等五座县城，以断绝元树的援兵之路。
English: The Southern Wei Dynasty's Southeast Dajangdai Shanzi surrounded Yuanshu in Shicheng, and the detachment captured five counties, including Meng County, to cut off Yuanshu's reinforcement route.

古文：树请帅众南归，以地还魏，子鹄等许之，与之誓约。
现代文：元树向樊子鹄请求率军南归梁朝，将占据的地盘还给北魏，樊子鹄等同意了这一请求，并与元树订立了盟约。
English: At the request of Yuan Shu, he led his army south to the Liang Dynasty and returned the occupied territory to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Yuan Shu and others agreed to this request and signed a treaty with Yuan Shu.

古文：树众半出，子鹄击之，擒树及谯州刺史硃文开以归。
现代文：元树的部队一半人马刚出城，樊子鹄突然袭击，抓获了元树和谯州刺史朱文开，把他们带了回来。
English: Half of Yuanshu's troops had just left the city, when Zhang Zixuan suddenly attacked, captured Yuanshu and Zhu Wenkai, the governor of Zhangzhou, and brought them back.

古文：羊侃行至官竹，闻树败而还。
现代文：羊侃率军行至官竹这个地方时，听说元树已兵败，便又回去了。
English: When Yang Kan led an army to this place in Guanzhu, he heard that Yuan Shu had been defeated, so he went back.

古文：九月，树至洛阳，久之，复欲南奔，魏人杀之。
现代文：九月，元树被押送到了洛阳，过了一段时间，元树又打算南奔梁朝，结果被北魏人杀掉了。
English: In September, Yuan Shu was escorted to Luoyang. After a period of time, Yuan Shu planned to head south to the Liang Dynasty, but was killed by the Northern Wei people.

古文：乙巳，以司空袁昂领尚书令。
现代文：乙巳，梁朝任命司空袁昂兼任尚书令。
English: At this time, the Liang Dynasty appointed Yuan Ang, the Secretary of the Kuomintang, to also serve as Shang Shuling.

古文：冬，十一月，丁酉，日南至，魏主祀圜丘。
现代文：冬季十一月，丁酉，这天是冬至，北魏孝武帝在圜丘祭天。
English: Winter November, Dingyao, this day is the winter solstice, the Northern Wei Dynasty Emperor Xiaowu in Shaoshan Festival.

古文：甲辰，魏杀安定王朗、东海王晔。
现代文：甲辰，北魏杀安定王元朗和东海王元晔。
English: In the Jia Chen Dynasty, the Northern Wei Dynasty killed Wang Yuen Long and Wang Yuan Qi of the East Sea.

古文：己酉，以汝南王悦为侍中、大司马。
现代文：己酉，北魏朝廷任命汝南王元悦为侍中、大司马。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed King Yuan Rong as a chamberlain and grand steward.

古文：魏葬灵太后胡氏。
现代文：北魏为灵太后胡氏举行葬礼。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty held a funeral for Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：上闻魏室已定，十二月，庚辰，复以太尉元法僧为郢州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝听说北魏朝廷已经安定，十二月，庚辰，再次任命太尉元法僧为郢州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Wu heard that the Northern Wei Dynasty had been stabilized, and in December, Geng Chen once again appointed the former monk as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：魏主以汝南王悦属近地尊，丁亥，杀之。
现代文：北魏孝武帝因汝南王元悦与自己亲属关系近而且地位又高，丁亥，杀了元悦。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty killed Yuan Yue, King of Southern Ru, because he was close to his relatives and had a high status.

古文：魏大赦，改元永兴；以与太宗同号，复改永熙。
现代文：北魏实行大赦，改年号为永兴，因为与太宗年号相同，便又改为永熙。
English: The Northern Wei implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Yongxing, because it was the same as the Taizong year, it was changed to Yongxi.

古文：魏主纳丞相欢女为后，命太常卿李元忠纳币于晋阳。
现代文：北魏孝武帝娶丞相高欢的女儿为皇后，命太常卿李元忠将彩礼送至晋阳高欢处。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Northern Wei Dynasty married the daughter of the chancellor Gao Huan to become the empress. Li Yuanzhong, the grand vizier, sent the bride price to Jinyang Gao Huan's place.

古文：欢与之宴，论及旧事，元忠曰： 昔日建义，轰轰大乐，比来寂寂无人问。 
现代文：高欢与李元忠宴饮，谈到过去的往事，李元忠说道： 昔日您兴兵起义的时候，热热闹闹，欢欢乐乐，近来却静悄悄地没人来问候了。 
English: Gao Huan and Li Yuanzhong had a banquet, and when talking about the past, Li Yuanzhong said: In the past, when you raised an army to revolt, there was a lot of excitement and joy, but recently no one has come to say hello quietly.

古文：欢抚掌笑曰： 此人逼我起兵。 
现代文：高欢拍手大笑，说道： 你这人是在逼我起兵啊。 
English: Gao Huan clapped his hands and laughed loudly, saying, "You are forcing me to raise an army."

古文：元忠戏曰： 若不与侍中，当更求建义处。 
现代文：李元忠开玩笑地说： 如果不把权力交给侍中，我就再找一处能够起兵的地方。 
English: Li Yuanzhong jokingly said, "If I don't hand over power to the chamberlain, I'll find another place where I can raise an army."

古文：欢曰： 建义不虑无，止畏如此老翁不可遇耳。 
现代文：高欢道： 起兵的人不用担心没有，只是恐怕象我这样的老头儿你不会再遇到了。 
English: Gao Huan said, "Those who drafted soldiers don't need to worry, but I'm afraid you won't meet an old man like me again.

古文：元忠曰： 止为此翁难遇，所以不去。 
现代文：李元忠说道： 正因为这老头儿难以遇到，所以我是不会离开的。 
English: Li Yuanzhong said: It is precisely because this old man is difficult to meet, so I will not leave.

古文：因捋欢须大笑。
现代文：于是捋着高欢的胡须大笑起来。
English: So he stroked Gao Huan's beard and burst out laughing.

古文：欢悉其雅意，深重之。
现代文：高欢知道李元忠平素的想法，因此很是看重他。
English: Gao Huan knows Li Yuanzhong's thoughts, so he is very important to him.

古文：尔硃兆既至秀容，分守险隘，出入寇抄。
现代文：尔硃兆到了秀容县后，分兵把守险要隘口，四出侵犯抢掠。
English: After he arrived at Xiurong County, the detachment of soldiers took the defense and risk to the pass, and invaded and plundered everywhere.

古文：魏丞相欢扬声讨之，师出复止者数四，兆意怠。
现代文：北魏丞相高欢扬言要讨伐尔硃兆，军队已经出发然而又停止讨伐，这样搞了多次，于是尔硃兆心里便懈怠下来了。
English: The Northern Wei chancellor Gao Huan threatened to make a crusade against Er Qizhao, but the army had already set out but stopped the crusade. This happened many times, so Er Qizhao slacked off.

古文：欢揣其岁首当宴会，遣都督窦泰以精骑驰之，一日一夜行三百里，欢以大军继之。
现代文：高欢估计尔硃兆在年初可能要举行宴会，于是便派都督窦泰率精锐骑兵飞速行军，一天一夜行军三百里，高欢率领大军随后进发。
English: Gao Huan estimated that Er Xizhao might hold a banquet at the beginning of the year, so he sent the governor Dou Tai and his elite cavalry on a speedy march, marching three hundred miles a day and night. Gao Huan led the army and then set off.

