古文：四年春，公至自晋。
现代文：四年春季，鲁文公从晋国回来。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Lu Wen Gong returned from Jin Province.

古文：夏，逆妇姜于齐。狄侵齐。
现代文：夏季，到齐国迎娶姜氏。狄国入侵齐国。
English: In the summer, she came to Qi Province to marry Jiang. Di Province invaded Qi Province.

古文：秋，楚人灭江。
现代文：秋季，楚国灭掉江国。
English: In the autumn, Chu wiped out Jiang.

古文：晋侯伐秦。
现代文：晋侯攻打秦国。
English: Jin attacked Qin.

古文：卫侯使甯俞来聘。
现代文：卫侯派遣甯俞来鲁国访问。
English: Wei Hou sent Zou to visit Lu.

古文：冬十有一月壬寅，夫人风氏薨。
现代文：冬季十一月壬寅日，鲁文公祖母风氏去世。
English: In the winter of November, the day of Renzin, Luweng Gong's grandmother Fu passed away.

古文：四年春，晋人归孔达于卫，以为卫之良也，故免之。
现代文：四年春季，晋国人释放孔达回到卫国，这是由于把他作为卫国的好人材，所以赦免了他。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the people of Jin released Konda to return to defend the country. This was because he was a good person to defend the country, so he was pardoned.

古文：夏，卫侯如晋拜。
现代文：夏季，卫成公到晋国拜谢释放孔达。
English: In the summer, Wei Chenggong went to Jin Province to pray for the release of Kunda.

古文：曹伯如晋，会正。
现代文：曹共公到晋国商谈纳贡的事情。
English: Cao Gongguo went to Jin Province to discuss the matter of tribute.

古文：逆妇姜于齐，卿不行，非礼也。
现代文：在齐国迎接姜氏，鲁国的卿没有去迎接，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is not proper to welcome Jiang in Qi, while Lu did not go to welcome him.

古文：君子是以知出姜之不允于鲁也。曰： 贵聘而贱逆之，君而卑之，立而废之，弃信而坏其主，在国必乱，在家必亡。
现代文：君子因此知道出姜在鲁国不会有好结果，说： 用尊贵的礼节行聘而用低贱的礼节迎接她，身分是国家的第一夫人而轻待她，立为第一夫人而废弃她，丢掉信用而损害妇女之首的身分，这样的事情发生在国家中必然使国家动乱，在家族中必然使家族灭亡。
English: The gentleman therefore knew that bringing Jiang to Lu would not have a good outcome, saying: "If you hire her with noble etiquette and welcome her with low etiquette, treat her lightly as the first lady of the country, discard her as the first lady, lose trust and damage the status of the head of women, such a thing will inevitably cause turmoil in the country, and inevitably cause the family to perish in the family.

古文：不允宜哉。
现代文：没有好下场是应该的了。
English: It was bound to end badly.

古文：《诗》曰： 畏天之威，于时保之。 
现代文：《诗》说： 畏惧上天的威灵，因此就能保有福禄。 
English: "Poem" says: Fear the will of heaven, so you can keep the fortune.

古文：敬主之谓也。 
现代文：这就是说要看重妇女之首这样的身分。 
English: This means valuing a woman's head.

古文：秋，晋侯伐秦，围邧、新城，以报王官之役。
现代文：秋季，晋襄公攻打秦国，包围邧地、新成，以报复王官那次战役。
English: In the autumn, Jin Xiangong attacked Qin and besieged Fengtian and Xincheng in retaliation for the battle.

古文：楚人灭江，秦伯为之降服、出次、不举、过数。
现代文：楚国人灭亡了江国，秦穆公为这件事穿上素服，出居别室，减膳撤乐，超过了应有的礼数。
English: The people of Chu perished in the country of Jiang, and Qin Mu Gong was forced to wear plain clothes, move out of his house, cut down on meals and withdraw from entertainment, which was more than he should have done.

古文：大夫谏，公曰： 同盟灭，虽不能救，敢不矜乎！
现代文：大夫劝谏。秦穆公说： 同盟的国家被灭，虽然没有救援，岂敢不哀怜呢？
English: The doctor advised him. Qin Mu Gong said: The allied country was destroyed, although there was no rescue, how dare we not feel sorry?

古文：吾自惧也。 
现代文：我是自己警惕呀。 
English: I'm on my guard.

古文：君子曰： 《诗》云： 惟彼二国，其政不获，惟此四国，爰究爰度。 
现代文：君子说： 《诗》说： 他们两个国家，政事不合法度；四方的国家，只好设法自谋。 
English: The gentleman said, "The poem says, 'Their two countries are not legitimate in politics; the countries in the four directions have no choice but to seek their own solutions.'

古文：其秦穆之谓矣。 
现代文：秦穆公就是这样的。 
English: Qin Mu Gong is like that.

古文：卫甯武子来聘，公与之宴，为赋《湛露》及《彤弓》。
现代文：卫国的甯武子来鲁国聘问，文公设宴招待他，为他赋《湛露》和《彤弓》两首诗。
English: Emperor Wu Wu's son, who was defending the country, came to Lu to ask for an audience. Wen publicly invited him to a banquet and wrote two poems for him, "Tam Lu" and "Tam Yuen."

古文：不辞，又不答赋。
现代文：甯武子没有辞谢，又不赋诗回答。
English: Zhai Wuzi did not thank him, nor did he reply with a poem.

古文：使行人私焉。
现代文：文公派使者私下探问。
English: Wen Gong sent an emissary to inquire in private.

古文：对曰： 臣以为肄业及之也。
现代文：甯武子回答说： 下臣以为是在练习演奏的。
English: Sono Takeko replied, "My subordinate thought I was practicing to play the drums."

古文：昔诸侯朝正于王，王宴乐之，于是乎赋《湛露》，则天子当阳，诸侯用命也。
现代文：从前诸侯正月去京师向天子朝贺，天子设宴奏乐，在这个时候赋《湛露》这首诗，那就表示天子对着太阳，诸侯听候命令。
English: Once upon a time, the princes went to Beijing in the first month of the year to offer morning greetings to the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven held a banquet and played music. At this time, he composed the poem "Tan Lu," which meant that the Son of Heaven was facing the sun, and the princes were waiting for orders.

古文：诸侯敌王所忾而献其功，王于是乎赐之彤弓一，彤矢百，玈弓矢千，以觉报宴。
现代文：诸侯把天子所痛恨的人作为敌人，而且献上自己的功劳。天子因为这样而赐给他们红色的弓一把、红色的箭一百枝、黑色的弓十把和箭一千枝，以表彰功劳而用宴乐来报答。
English: The princes regarded those whom the Son of Heaven hated as enemies, and offered their own merits. For this, the Son of Heaven gave them a red bow, a hundred red arrows, ten black bows, and a thousand arrows. In recognition of their merits, they were rewarded with a feast.

古文：今陪臣来继旧好，君辱贶之，其敢干大礼以自取戾？ 
现代文：现在陪臣前来继续过去的友好，承君王赐宴，哪里敢触犯大礼来自取罪过？ 
English: Now the attendants come to continue the past friendship, to receive the king's banquet, where dare they offend the great gift and take the blame?

古文：冬，成风薨。
现代文：冬季，成风去世。
English: In the winter, Cheng Feng passed away.

