古文：燕饥，赵将伐之。
现代文：燕国发生饥荒，赵国准备乘机攻打它。
English: A famine occurs in Yan's country, and Zhao's country prepares to take the opportunity to attack it.

古文：楚使将军之燕，过魏，见赵恢。
现代文：楚国派一名将军到燕国去，途经魏国时，见到了赵恢。
English: The State of Chu sent a general to the State of Yan. While passing through the State of Wei, he met Zhao Wei.

古文：赵恢曰： 使除患无至，易于救患。
现代文：赵恢对楚将说： 预防灾祸不让它发生，这比灾祸发生后再去解救要容易得多。
English: Zhao Huai said to Chu Zheng: It is much easier to prevent a disaster from happening than to rescue people after the disaster has occurred.

古文：伍子胥、宫之奇不用，烛之武、张孟谈受大赏。
现代文：历史上伍子胥和宫之奇的劝谏都不被君王采用，而烛之武和张孟谈的谋略却受到君王的赏识。
English: Historically, the advice of Wu Ziqi and Gong Ziqi was not adopted by the king, but the strategy of the candle and Zhang Mengyan was appreciated by the king.

古文：是故谋者皆从事于除患之道，而先使除患无至者，今予以百金送公也，不如以言。
现代文：所以谋臣们都想方设法防患于未然，消除灾祸使它不会发生。现在我与其送您百金，不如送您几句话。
English: That's why strategists try to prevent disasters before they happen, eliminate disasters so that they don't happen. Now, instead of sending you a hundred dollars, I'd rather send you a few words.

古文：公听吾言而说赵王曰： 昔者吴伐齐，为其饥也，伐齐未必胜也，而弱越乘其弊以霸。
现代文：您如果能听我的话，就去劝说赵王： 过去吴国讨伐齐国，是因为齐国闹饥荒，可是没有等到伐齐取得成功，弱小的越国就趁吴国疲惫之机打败了吴国而称霸一方。
English: If you can listen to me, you can persuade King Zhao: In the past, Wu fought against Qi because Qi was starving, but before the battle was successful, the weak Yue took advantage of Wu's exhaustion to defeat Wu and dominate the other side.

古文：今王之伐燕也，亦为其饥也，伐之未必胜，而强秦将以兵承王之西，是使弱赵居强吴之处，而使强秦处弱越之所以霸也。
现代文：现在大王要攻打燕国，也是因为他们闹饥荒，我看讨伐燕国未必能获胜，而且强大的秦国可能在西部出兵乘机进攻赵国。这是让弱赵处在当年强吴的不利地位，而让现在的强秦国处于当年弱越的有利地位啊。
English: Now the great king wants to attack Yan, also because they are suffering from famine. I think the fight against Yan may not be successful, and the powerful Qin may send troops to the west to attack Zhao. This is to put the weak Zhao in the unfavorable position of the strong Wu, and to put the strong Qin in the advantageous position of the weak Yue.

古文：愿王之熟计之也。  
现代文：希望大王认真思量。  
English: I hope the king will think about it seriously.

古文：使者乃以说赵王，赵王大悦，乃止。
现代文：楚国的使者于是就用赵恢的这番话去规劝赵王，赵王听后非常高兴，就打消了攻打燕国的念头。
English: The emissary of Chu then used Zhao Wei's words to persuade Zhao Wang. Zhao Wang was very happy to hear this and dismissed the idea of attacking Yan.

古文：燕昭王闻之，乃封之以地。
现代文：燕昭王听说这件事后，就把土地封赏给这位楚国的使者。
English: When Yan Zhao Wang heard about this, he awarded the land to the envoy from Chu.

