古文：中宫天极星，其一明者，太一常居也；旁三星三公，或曰子属。
现代文：中宫正中央的一颗星星称为天极星，它比周围的星星都要亮，是天神太一的常位；旁边的三颗小星象征三公，有人说是象征太一神的诸子之属。
English: A star in the center of the middle palace is called the celestial pole star. It is brighter than the surrounding stars and is the constant of the God Taichi. The three small stars next to it symbolize the three kings. Some people say that they symbolize the sons of the God Taichi.

古文：后句四星，末大星正妃，余三星后宫之属也。
现代文：天极星的后面是形如钩状的勾星四颗，其中最后一颗较为明亮的星称为正妃，其余三颗是后宫的侧妃嫔媵之类。
English: Behind the celestial pole star are four hook-shaped hooked stars, of which the last brighter star is called the primary, and the remaining three are the harem's side concubines.

古文：环之匡卫十二星，藩臣。
现代文：像护卫一样环绕护卫着天极星的十二颗星的，属于文、武诸藩臣。
English: The twelve stars encircling and guarding the celestial pole star like an escort belong to the ministers of the clans of Wen and Wu.

古文：皆曰紫宫。
现代文：他们合起来就称为紫宫。
English: Together, they are known as the Purple Palace.

古文：前列直斗口三星，随北端兑，若见若不，曰阴德，或曰天一。
现代文：紫宫靠前的部分，对着斗口有三颗星，呈椭形，尖在北端，尖端的那颗星星光暗淡，若隐若现，名为阴德，或者称为天一。
English: In the front part of the Purple Palace, facing the mouth of the bucket, there are three stars, elliptical in shape, with the tip at the northern end. The star at the tip is dimly lit, looming, and is called Yin De, or Tian Yi.

古文：紫宫左三星曰天枪，右五星曰天棓，后六星绝汉抵营室，曰阁道。
现代文：紫宫左方三星名为天枪，右方五星名为天棓，后面六星横跨银河到达营室，称为阁道。
English: The three stars to the left of the Purple Palace are called the Heavenly Lance, the five stars to the right are called the Heavenly Scepter, and the six stars in the back reach the camp room across the Milky Way and are called the Attic Road.

古文：北斗七星，所谓 旋玑、玉衡以齐七政 。
现代文：北斗星有七颗，《尚书》所说的 旋、玑、玉衡以齐七政 中的 七政 ，就是指这七颗星。
English: There are seven stars in the Big Dipper. The "seven stars" mentioned in the "Shang Shu" as the "seven states" of the "seven states" are the seven stars.

古文：杓携龙角，衡殷南斗，魁枕参首。
现代文：北斗的斗杓与东宫七宿中的角宿相连，斗衡与南斗宿殷殷相对，斗魁枕于西方七宿中的参宿头顶。
English: The Big Dipper of the Big Dipper is connected to the Horned Dipper in the East Palace of the Seven Dwellings, the Dipper of the Big Dipper is opposite to the Yin Yin of the South Dipper, and the Dipper of the Big Dipper is on top of the Bench of the West Dipper.

古文：用昏建者杓；杓，自华以西南。
现代文：黄昏时以斗杓所指方位建明四时月份；斗杓，主华县西南方向的祸福吉凶。
English: At dusk, the four-hour moon is set at the direction indicated by the dragonfly; the dragonfly is the main blessing and misfortune in the southwest direction of Hua County.

古文：夜半建者衡；衡，殷中州河、济之间。
现代文：夜半时以斗衡所指方位建明四时月份；斗衡，主黄河、济水之间的中原地区的祸福吉凶。
English: At midnight, the four-hour moon is set at the direction indicated by Douheng; Douheng, the Central Plains region between the main Yellow River and Jishui, is full of misfortune, fortune and good luck.

古文：平旦建者魁；魁，海岱以东北也。
现代文：黎明时以斗魁所指方位建明四时月份；斗魁，主海、岱东北方向的祸福吉凶。
English: At dawn, according to the direction indicated by the leader of the fight, the four months of the year are determined; the leader of the fight, the main sea, and the northeastern direction of the dragonfly are evil, good, and auspicious.

古文：斗为帝车，运于中央，临制四乡。
现代文：北斗就像天帝乘坐的车子，它在中央运转，而主宰、钳制四方。
English: The Big Dipper is like the chariot in which the Heavenly Emperor rides. It operates in the center, and dominates and controls the four directions.

古文：分阴阳，建四时，均五行，移节度，定诸纪，皆系于斗。
现代文：分别阴阳，建明四时，平均五行，移易节度，确定十二辰纪的位置，全部都依靠北斗。
English: The yin and yang, the four o'clock of Jianming, the average of the five elements, the shifting of the solar terms, and the determination of the position of the 12-hour period, all rely on the Big Dipper.

古文：斗魁戴匡六星曰文昌宫：一曰上将，二曰次将，三曰贵相，四曰司命，五曰司中，六曰司禄。
现代文：在斗魁之上有六颗星，形状如筐，名为文昌宫：六颗星的名称一是上将，二是次将，三为贵相，四为司命，五是司中，六是司禄。
English: Above the leader, there are six stars, shaped like a basket, called Wenchang Palace: the names of the six stars are: the first is the general, the second is the second, the third is the noble, the fourth is the steward, the fifth is the middle steward, and the sixth is the steward.

古文：在斗魁中，贵人之牢。
现代文：在斗魁四颗星中间，有星名贵人之牢。
English: In the middle of the four stars, there is a prison for famous celebrities.

古文：魁下六星，两两相比者，名曰三能。
现代文：魁下有六颗星，每二颗相邻成对，共三对，称为三能。
English: There are six stars at the bottom, each two adjacent pairs, a total of three pairs, called three.

古文：三能色齐，君臣和；不齐，为乖戾。
现代文：三能星颜色明暗相同，象征君臣和合；颜色不同，表示君臣关系紧张。
English: The three-pointed star of the same light and dark color symbolizes the unity of the monarch and the minister; the different colors indicate the tension between the monarch and the minister.

古文：辅星明近，辅臣亲强；斥小，疏弱。
现代文：北斗旁的辅星如果明亮且靠近，则表明辅佐的大臣受信任而且权重；离北斗远且黯淡，则表明辅臣和皇帝疏远，权轻而弱。
English: If the bright and close companion star next to the Big Dipper indicates that the assistant minister is trusted and important; if it is distant and dim from the Big Dipper, it indicates that the assistant minister and the emperor are estranged, and the power is light and weak.

古文：杓端有两星：一内为矛，招摇；一外为盾，天锋。
现代文：斗杓的末端有两颗星，靠近北斗的称为天矛，就是招摇星，离北斗较远的为盾星，又名天锋。
English: There are two stars at the end of the Big Dipper. The one close to the Big Dipper is called the Heavenly Spear, which is the defiant star, and the one farther away from the Big Dipper is the Shield Star, also known as the Heavenly Front.

古文：有句圜十五星，属杓，曰贱人之牢。
现代文：靠近斗杓有十五颗星，形状上如勾下如环，名为贱人之牢。
English: There are fifteen stars near the crossbow, the shape of which is like a hook, like a ring, and it is called the Bitch's Prison.

古文：其牢中星实则囚多，虚则开出。
现代文：如果牢中星很多，象征尘世中的囚犯多；如果牢中星少囚犯也少。
English: If there are many stars in the prison, it means that there are more prisoners in the world; if there are fewer stars in the prison, there are fewer prisoners.

古文：天一、枪、棓、矛、盾动摇，角大，兵起。
现代文：天一、天枪、天棓、天矛和盾星动摇，星光的芒角大，预示世乱兵起。
English: Tianyi, Tianyu, Tianyao, Tianpi and Shield Star wavered, and the starlight's angle was large, foreshadowing the start of the world's chaos.

古文：东宫苍龙，房、心。
现代文：东宫名苍龙，包括以下星宿：房宿、心宿。
English: The East Palace is called Soryu, and includes the following star hotels: the room hotel and the heart hotel.

古文：心为明堂，大星天王，前后星子属。
现代文：心宿是天帝发布政令的明堂，其中一颗大星为天王，前后两颗小星为诸子。
English: The innermost place of the heart is the bright hall where the emperor issued the decree. One of the large stars is the heavenly king, and the two small stars in front and behind are the sons.

古文：不欲直，直则天王失计。
现代文：心宿的三颗星排列形状不宜在一条直线上，如果在一条直线则表示天王政令失宜。
English: The arrangement of the three stars in the constellation of Cancer should not be in a straight line. If it is in a straight line, it means that the emperor's decree is inappropriate.

古文：房为府，曰天驷。
现代文：房宿为天府，又名为天驷。
English: The guesthouse is Tianfu, also known as Tianzhu.

古文：其阴，右骖。
现代文：天驷的北面有星名右骖。
English: To the north of the constellation, there is a star named Zuo.

古文：旁有两星曰衿；北一星曰辖。
现代文：旁有两颗星名为衿；衿星北有一星名为辖。
English: Beside it, there are two stars named Hao; to the north of Hao, there is a star named Zuo.

古文：东北曲十二星曰旗，旗中四星曰天市；中六星曰市楼。
现代文：房宿东北有弯曲排列的十二颗星，名为旗。旗中有四星名为天市；靠南居中有六颗星名为市楼。
English: In the northeast of the house, there are twelve stars curvedly arranged, called flags. Four stars in the flag are called Tianshi; six stars in the southern residence are called Shi Lou.

古文：市中星众者实；其虚则秏。
现代文：天市中星数多表示世间富足殷实；星数少则国虚民贫。
English: A large number of stars in the celestial city indicates that the world is rich and affluent; a small number of stars means that the country is poor.

古文：房南众星曰骑官。
现代文：房宿以南有许多星，称为骑官。
English: There are many stars to the south of the inn, known as the horsemen.

古文：左角，李；右角，将。
现代文：角宿有二颗；左边的为李星，主刑罚；右边的为将星，主军事。
English: There are two corner lodgings; the one on the left is Li Xing, the Lord of Punishment; the one on the right is Shou Xing, the Lord of War.

古文：大角者，天王帝廷。
现代文：角宿旁边的大角星，为天王大帝的公廷。
English: The Great Horned Star next to the Horned Inn is the Court of the Heavenly King.

古文：其两旁各有三星，鼎足句之，曰摄提。
现代文：两旁各有三颗星，鼎足而立如勾状，名为摄提。
English: There are three stars on each side, which stand upright like a hook, and are called the shooting stars.

古文：摄提者，直斗杓所指，以建时节，故曰 摄提格 。
现代文：之所以称为摄提，是由于它们正对着斗杓所指的方向，被斗杓所提携，可以更准确地指示时节，所以又有 摄提格 的名号。
English: The reason why they are called "photograms" is because they are facing the direction indicated by the crossbow and are aligned by the crossbow, which can more accurately indicate the time period, so they also have the name "photogram."

古文：亢为疏庙，主疾。
现代文：亢宿是天神的外朝，主疾病。
English: Pushuku is the foreign dynasty of Tenjin, the main disease.

古文：其南北两大星，曰南门。
现代文：在它的南北各有两颗大星，名为南门。
English: In the north and south of it, there are two large stars, called the South Gate.

古文：氐为天根，主疫。
现代文：氐宿就是天的根柢的意思，主疫气。
English: 宿 is the meaning of the root of heaven, the main plague.

古文：尾为九子，曰君臣；斥绝，不和。
现代文：尾宿有九颗星，为天帝九子，又有的说它象征君臣；各星间相距绝远，意味着君臣不和。
English: There are nine stars in Oyado, representing the nine sons of the heavenly emperor, and some say it symbolizes the emperor and his ministers; the stars are very far apart, meaning that the emperor and his ministers are at odds with each other.

古文：箕为敖客，曰口舌。
现代文：箕宿为敖客，主口舌是非之象。
English: The host is the guest and the guest is the host.

古文：火犯守角，则有战。
现代文：火星陵犯或者守在角宿附近，预示着将有战事发生。
English: Martian grave robbers or guards near the corner inn, indicating that there will be a war.

古文：房、心，王者恶之也。
现代文：若它守在房宿、心宿附近，不利于帝王。
English: If it stays in the vicinity of the inn, the inn of the heart, it is not good for the emperor.

古文：南宫朱鸟，权、衡。
现代文：南宫名朱鸟，包括以下星宿：权、衡。
English: The South Palace's famous vermilion bird includes the following constellations: Wei and He.

古文：衡，太微，三光之廷。
现代文：衡指太微垣，是日、月、五星三光的宫廷。
English: Heng finger is too small, it is the court of the sun, the moon, the five stars and the three lights.

古文：匡卫十二星，藩臣：西，将；东，相；南四星，执法；中，端门；门左右，掖门。
现代文：周围有匡辅和守卫的十二颗星，代表藩臣：西边是将星；东边是相星；南边四颗星，中间二颗名为执法，执法之间为端门；端门左右的星，为掖门。
English: There are twelve stars surrounding the governor and guards, representing the ministers of the domain: the west side is the general star; the east side is the phase star; the south side has four stars, the middle two are called law enforcement, the law enforcement is the end door; the stars around the end door are the gate.

古文：门内六星，诸侯。
现代文：门内有六颗星，是诸侯。
English: There are six stars inside the gate, representing the princes.

古文：其内五星，五帝坐。
现代文：里面的五颗星，为五帝座。
English: The five stars in it are the constellations of the five emperors.

古文：后聚一十五星，蔚然，曰郎位；傍一大星，将位也。
现代文：诸侯、五帝坐之后聚集着十五颗星，颇为明亮，名为郎位；郎位旁边有一亮星，称为将位。
English: After the lords and five emperors sat down, there were fifteen stars gathered, quite bright, called roji; next to roji there was a bright star, called shoji.

古文：月、五星顺入，轨道，司其出，所守，天子所诛也。
现代文：月亮与五星循着自西而东的顺序进入太微垣中，要小心察看它们出太微和守候在那里的情况，停留在某星旁，世间与该星对应的官员就由天子派出使臣进行诛杀。
English: The moon and the five stars follow the order from west to east to enter the Great Wall of China. It is necessary to carefully observe the situation when they are too small and wait there. If they stay near a certain star, the world's officials corresponding to that star will be dispatched by the Son of Heaven to fight.

古文：其逆入，若不轨道，以所犯命之；中坐，成形，皆群下从谋也。
现代文：月亮与五星自东而西逆入于太微垣，若不循轨道运行，按照它们所陵犯的星名占卜吉凶；若犯于中间的五帝座，表示一定有灾祸，是群下相从而谋，共同作乱的结果。
English: The moon and the five stars from the east and west invade Taiyuan, and if they do not follow the orbit, they are divined in accordance with the star names of their tombs; if they are committed in the middle of the Five Emperors, it means that there must be a disaster, which is the result of the group's conspiracy and common disturbance.

古文：金、火尤甚。
现代文：如果五星中的金星、火星犯帝座，则情况更为严重。
English: The situation is even more serious if Venus or Mars, two of the five planets, are in the sign of Aries.

古文：廷藩西有隋星五，曰少微，士大夫。
现代文：在太微垣西部藩卫星的西面，有五颗呈椭圆形的星座，名为少微，是士大夫的象征。
English: On the west side of the western satellite of the Taiyukagaki clan, there are five elliptical constellations, named Shouyu, which are the symbols of Shidafu.

古文：权，轩辕。轩辕，黄龙体。
现代文：权，就是轩辕座，它是黄龙星座的主体。
English: It is the main body of the Yellow Dragon constellation.

古文：前大星，女主象；旁小星，御者后宫属。
现代文：轩辕前面有一颗大星，是女主的象征；其他小星代表后宫奉御妃嫔之属。
English: There is a large star in front of Xuan Zang, which is a symbol of the mistress; other small stars represent the harem and belong to the concubine.

古文：月、五星守犯者，如衡占。
现代文：月亮和五星在轩辕附近或者守候在这里的情况，其占卜的原则和衡相同。
English: The principle of divination is the same as that of weighing when the moon and the five stars are in the vicinity of Xuanwu or waiting here.

古文：东井为水事。
现代文：东井宿主占卜与水有关的事宜。
English: The host of the East Well divines water-related matters.

古文：其西曲星曰钺。
现代文：它的西面偏曲处有一颗星名为钺。
English: At its western declination, there is a star called.

古文：钺北，北河；南，南河；两河、天阙间为关梁。
现代文：钺的北面，是北河；钺的南面，是南河；两河与天阙星之间为三光所经的关梁。
English: To the north of the pupa is the Beihe River; to the south of the pupa is the Nanhe River; between the two rivers and the Pleiades is the pass through which the three lights pass.

古文：舆鬼，鬼祠事；中白者为质。
现代文：舆鬼宿，占主占卜鬼神祭祀事；其中一颗白色星名叫质星。
English: In the ghost's house, the fortune-teller divines, and a white star is called the "qualitative star."

古文：火守南北河，兵起，谷不登。
现代文：火星守南、北河，有兵祸起，粮食歉收。
English: Mars guarded the South and the North River, and there were military disasters and poor grain harvests.

古文：故德成衡，观成潢，伤成钺，祸成井，诛成质。
现代文：所以说有德的人先成形于衡宿，帝王出外巡幸可以在天潢星区出现预兆，王者伤败表现于钺宿，有祸乱表现于井宿，有诛杀则表现于质星。
English: Therefore, it is said that virtuous people are first formed in Hengjuku, the emperor's outing can appear in the constellations of the heavens, the king's defeat is manifested in the mansion, the disaster is manifested in the well, and the battle is manifested in the quality star.

古文：柳为鸟注，主木草。
现代文：柳宿是朱雀的嘴，主管草木事。
English: Yanagiyado is the mouth of Suzaku, in charge of plants and trees.

古文：七星，颈，为员官。主急事。
现代文：七星宿为朱雀的脖颈，主管紧急事务。
English: The seven-pointed star is the neck of the starling, which is in charge of emergency affairs.

古文：张，素，为厨，主觞客。
现代文：张宿为朱雀的嗉囊，是天廷的厨房，主管宴请宾客。
English: Zhangshu is the cocoon of the Suzaku, the kitchen of the Heavenly Court, and the host of the banquet.

古文：翼为羽翮，主远客。
现代文：翼宿是朱雀的羽翮，主管远客到来之事。
English: The wing lodge is the feather cocoon of the Suzaku, responsible for the arrival of guests.

古文：轸为车，主风。
现代文：轸宿是天神的车子，主管风事。
English: Shishuku is the chariot of Tenjin, in charge of customs.

古文：其旁有一小星，曰长沙，星星不欲明；明与四星等，若五星入轸中，兵大起。
现代文：它的旁边有一颗小星，名叫长沙星，星不宜明，若与轸宿的四颗星一样明亮，五颗星进入轸宿，表示将有大的战争发生。
English: There is a small star next to it, called the Changsha Star. The star should not be bright. If it is as bright as the four stars in Oshuku, five stars will enter Oshuku, indicating that a major war will occur.

古文：轸南众星曰天库楼；库有五车。
现代文：轸宿南面的众星名为天库楼；库旁有五个车星。
English: The stars on the south side of Oshuku are called Tenkuro; there are five stars next to the library.

古文：车星角若益众，及不具，无处车马。
现代文：车星芒角闪动，不成行列，且数量很多，都预示天下将出现兵车骚动，无处安顿马车。
English: The flashing of chariot horns, the absence of ranks, and the large number of chariots all indicate that there will be a commotion of chariots in the world, and there will be nowhere to settle the chariots.

古文：西宫咸池，曰天五潢。
现代文：西宫名为咸池，包括的星宿有：天五潢。
English: The western palace is called Hamchi, and the constellations include: the five constellations.

古文：五潢，五帝车舍。
现代文：五潢，是五帝的车驾和房舍。
English: Wudi is the name of Wudi's chariot and house.

古文：火入，旱；金，兵；水，水。
现代文：火星入五潢，预示会出现旱灾；金星入五潢，预示会有兵灾；水星入五潢，预示会有水灾。
English: When Mars is in the fifth house, it portends drought; when Venus is in the fifth house, it portends war; when Mercury is in the fifth house, it portends floods.

古文：中有三柱；柱不具，兵起。
现代文：五潢中又有三个柱；每柱各三颗星，如果三柱不成行列，预示有战事发生。
English: In addition, there are three pillars in the pentagram; each pillar has three stars. If the three pillars do not line up, it indicates that there will be war.

古文：奎曰封豕，为沟渎。
现代文：奎宿又名封豕，主占卜有关沟渎的事。
English: Guizhou, also known as Guizhou, is the main place for divination.

古文：娄为聚众。
现代文：娄宿主占卜聚众的事。
English: The host divines and gathers a crowd.

古文：胃为天仓。
现代文：胃宿主占卜仓廪的事。
English: The gastric host divines the fate of the chrysalis.

古文：其南众星曰廥积。
现代文：胃宿南有许多星，名为积。
English: There are many stars in the south of the stomach, called hoarding.

古文：昴曰髦头，胡星也，为白衣会。
现代文：昴宿又名髦头，成为胡星，又主丧事，称为白衣之会。
English: Shibuya is also known as a fashionable head, becoming a Hu star, and also the main funeral, known as the white-clothed party.

古文：毕曰罕车，为边兵，主弋猎。
现代文：毕宿又名为罕车，象征边境的军队，主管狩猎等事。
English: Bijuku, also known as Han Che, symbolizes the border troops and is in charge of hunting and other matters.

古文：其大星旁小星为附耳。附耳摇动，有谗乱臣在侧。
现代文：在毕宿中最大一颗星的旁边有一颗小星，名为附耳，附耳星摇动，则表示天子身边有进谗言的乱臣。
English: Next to the largest star in the zodiac, there is a small star, called the eared one. If the eared one shakes, it means that the heavenly son is surrounded by unruly ministers.

古文：昴、毕间为天街。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿之间的二颗星是天街，是日月和五星的信道。
English: The two stars between Shibuya and Ibusuki are the sky street and the channel for the sun, moon and five stars.

古文：其阴，阴国；阳，阳国。
现代文：天街北面，象征夷狄人的国家；天街南面，象征华夏建立的国家。
English: The north side of Tianjie symbolizes the country of the Yidi people; the south side of Tianjie symbolizes the country established by China.

古文：参为白虎。
现代文：参宿形状如同白虎。
English: The guesthouse is shaped like a white tiger.

古文：三星直者，是为衡石。
现代文：中间三颗东西直立的星，其平如衡，称为衡石。
English: The three upright stars in the middle, which are as flat as a balance, are called Hengshi.

古文：下有三星，兑，曰罚，为斩艾事。
现代文：衡石下有三颗星，直立如锥，名为罚，主管斩杀之事。
English: Under the balance stone, there are three stars, standing upright like cones, named "Punishment" and "Commander of the Beheading."

古文：其外四星，左右肩股也。
现代文：衡石外的四颗星，是参宿的左右肩和左右股。
English: The four stars outside Hengshi are the left and right shoulders and the left and right groin of the Betelgeuse.

古文：小三星隅置，曰觜觿，为虎首，主葆旅事。
现代文：参宿上面边隅处有三颗小星排成三角形，名为觜觽，如同参宿这头白虎的虎头，主管军需运输之事。
English: There are three small stars arranged in a triangle in the upper corner of the Betelgeuse, named, just like the tiger head of the white tiger, Betelgeuse, responsible for the transportation of military supplies.

古文：其南有四星，曰天厕。
现代文：参宿的南面有四颗星，名为天厕。
English: There are four stars to the south of the Betelgeuse, called the celestial toilet.

古文：厕下一星，曰天矢。
现代文：天厕下有一颗星，名为天矢。
English: There is a star under the sky-toilet, called Tianya.

古文：矢黄则吉；青、白、黑，凶。
现代文：矢星为黄色则吉利；若为青色、白色、黑色则是凶兆。
English: If the arrow star is yellow, it is good luck; if it is blue, white or black, it is a bad omen.

古文：其西有句曲九星，三处罗：一曰天旗，二曰天苑，三曰九游。
现代文：参宿的西面有弯弯曲曲的九颗星，分三处罗列，一处名为天旗，第二处名为天苑，第三处名为九游。
English: On the west side of the Betelgeuse, there are nine stars, arranged in three rows. One is called the Banner of Heaven, the second is called the Heavenly Garden, and the third is called the Nine Excursions.

古文：其东有大星曰狼。
现代文：参宿以东有一颗大星名为狼。
English: To the east of Betelgeuse there is a large star called the Wolf.

古文：狼角变色，多盗贼。
现代文：狼星星光的芒角变色，天下多盗贼。
English: Wolves change color at the angle of starlight, and there are more thieves in the world.

古文：下有四星曰弧，直狼。
现代文：下有四颗星名为弧，正对着狼星。
English: Below are four stars called the Arcs, directly opposite the Wolf star.

古文：狼比地有大星，曰南极老人。
现代文：狼星下面与地相接处有一颗大星，名为南极老人。
English: Below the Wolf star, where it meets the earth, there is a large star called the South Pole Old Man.

古文：老人见，治安；不见，兵起。
现代文：老人星出现，世道安宁；不出现，有战事。
English: If the old man appears, the world will be at peace; if he does not appear, there will be war.

古文：常以秋分时候之于南郊。
现代文：常常在秋分时的黎明，于城南郊对它进行观测。
English: It is often observed at dawn during the autumn equinox in the southern suburbs of the city.

古文：附耳入毕中，兵起。
现代文：附耳星进入毕宿之中，有兵事兴起。
English: When the eared star entered the afterlife, there was a military uprising.

古文：北宫玄武，虚、危。
现代文：北宫名为玄武，包括的星宿有：虚宿、危宿。
English: The north palace is called Genbu, and the star lodges include: Haku-juku, Kikaku-juku.

古文：危为盖屋；虚为哭泣之事。
现代文：危宿主天府、天市盖房等土功事；虚宿主占卜丧事。
English: The host of danger should do earthwork such as building a house in Tianfu or Tianshi; the host of falsehood should do divination and mourning.

古文：其南有众星，曰羽林天军。军西为垒，或曰钺。
现代文：虚、危二宿以南有一大群星，总名为羽林天军，羽林天军西部诸星名垒星，或者称为钺星。
English: There is a large group of stars to the south of Deceptive and Dangerous, collectively known as the Ulin Heavenly Army, and the stars in the western part of the Ulin Heavenly Army are known as the famous base stars, or known as the shooting stars.

古文：旁有一大星为北落。
现代文：钺星旁有一颗大星名为北落。
English: Next to Uranus, there is a big star called the North Star.

古文：北落若微亡，军星动角益希，及五星犯北落，入军，军起。
现代文：倘若北落星暗而不明或隐而不见，羽林天军星摇动、有芒角、星数不备，同时五星凌犯北落，或者进入羽林君星官，则预示着将会有战事发生。
English: If the north-falling star is dim and unclear or invisible, if the sky-army star of the north-falling star is wavering, has a mane angle, and the number of stars is not ready, and at the same time, the five-pointed star crosses the north-falling star, or enters the north-falling star of the north-falling star, it indicates that there will be a war.

古文：火、金、水尤甚：火，军忧；水，水患；木、土，军吉。
现代文：如果火星、金星、水星入羽林天军，情况就更严重：如果火星入羽林天军，不利于军队；如果水星入羽林天军水入，有水灾；如果木星、土星入羽林天君，对军事有利。
English: If Mars, Venus, and Mercury enter the sky army, the situation will be more serious: if Mars enters the sky army, it will be detrimental to the army; if Mercury enters the sky army, there will be floods; if Jupiter and Saturn enter the sky emperor, it will be beneficial to the military.

古文：危东六星，两两相比，曰司空。
现代文：危宿的东面有六颗星，每两颗相邻成对，名唤司空。
English: To the east of the dangerous house there are six stars, each two adjacent in pairs, called Siku.

古文：营室为清庙，曰离宫、阁道。
现代文：营室宿是天上的清庙，附近有离宫、阁道。
English: The dormitory is a celestial Qing temple, and there is a detached palace and a loft road nearby.

古文：汉中四星，曰天驷。
现代文：营室北面的银河之中有四颗星，名为天驷。
English: In the Milky Way to the north of the barracks, there are four stars, called the Pleiades.

古文：旁一星，曰王良。
现代文：天驷旁的一颗星，名为王良。
English: A star next to the heavens, named Wang Liang.

古文：王良策马，车骑满野。
现代文：王良旁一星为策，策星动摇，天下兵起。
English: Wang Liang made a plan, the plan faltered, and the whole country rose in arms.

古文：旁有八星，绝汉，曰天潢。天潢旁，江星。
现代文：王良旁有八颗星，横跨银河，名为天潢，天潢旁有一颗星，名为江星。
English: There are eight stars next to Wang Liang, across the Milky Way, called the Celestial Spheres, and one star next to the Celestial Spheres, called the Jiang Star.

古文：江星动，人涉水。
现代文：江星动摇，则预示人间将有大的水灾。
English: If Jiang Xing wavers, it indicates that there will be a great flood in the human world.

古文：杵、臼四星，在危南。
现代文：杵臼有四颗星，在危宿南面。
English: There are four stars in Usu, to the south of Kejuku.

古文：匏瓜，有青黑星守之，鱼盐贵。
现代文：又有匏瓜星，若有青色、黑色星停留在附近，天下鱼盐价贵。
English: There is also the star of the muskmelon. If the blue and black stars stay nearby, the price of fish salt will be high.

古文：南斗为庙，其北建星。
现代文：南斗宿是天帝的庙堂，它的北边有建星。
English: Nanto-juku is the temple of the heavenly emperor, and there is a star on the north side of it.

古文：建星者，旗也。
现代文：建星，形状如旗。
English: Jianxing, shaped like a flag.

古文：牵牛为牺牲。
现代文：牵牛宿主管祭祀牺牲之事。
English: The head of the cowherd's inn was killed in a ritual sacrifice.

古文：其北河鼓。河鼓大星，上将；左右，左右将。
现代文：牵牛的北面是河鼓宿，河鼓中的大星，代表上将；河鼓左右两旁的小星，代表左右将。
English: On the north side of the cowherd is the river drum lodge, the big star in the river drum, representing the general; the small stars on both sides of the river drum, representing the general.

古文：婺女，其北织女。
现代文：又有婺女宿，它的北边是织女星。
English: There is also a maiden's lodging, and to the north of it is Vega.

古文：织女，天女孙也。
现代文：织女，是天帝的孙女。
English: The Weaver Maiden is the granddaughter of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：察日、月之行以揆岁星顺逆。
现代文：观察日、月的运行，以揆度岁星的运行是否正常。
English: Observe the movement of the day and the month, and use the radiant to measure whether the movement of the year star is normal.

古文：曰东方木，主春，日甲乙。
现代文：按五行说，岁星于五方主东方，于五行中属木，于四季主春，于十天干为甲乙。
English: According to the five elements, the year star is in the east of the five elements, in the middle of the five elements it is wood, in the four seasons it is spring, and in the tenth day it is A and B.

古文：义失者，罚出岁星。
现代文：如果有失义的国家，上天对它的惩罚就会由岁星表现出来。
English: If there is an unrighteous nation, God's punishment on it will be shown by the stars.

古文：岁星赢缩，以其舍命国。所在国不可伐，可以罚人。
现代文：岁星运动有了赢缩，就以它所在的星宿占卜它所在的国家的命运，岁星所在的相对应的国家不可以去征伐，而该国反而可以征伐其他的国家。
English: When the Chinese New Year Star Movement won or lost, it used its star constellation to predict the fate of the country in which it was located. The corresponding country in which the Chinese New Year Star was located was not allowed to invade, but the country could invade other countries.

古文：其趋舍而前曰赢，退舍曰缩。
现代文：岁星运行超过了它所应在的星宿，称为赢；没有到达应在的星宿，称为缩。
English: When a year star moves beyond the star it should be in, it is called winning; when it does not reach the star it should be in, it is called shrinking.

古文：赢，其国有兵不复；缩，其国有忧，将亡，国倾败。
现代文：出现赢，所对应的国家有兵事，国家不会覆灭但；出现缩，对应的国家有忧患，军将死亡，国家可能覆灭。
English: If there is a victory, the corresponding country will have a war, but the country will not be destroyed; if there is a contraction, the corresponding country will be in trouble, the general will die, and the country may be destroyed.

古文：其所在，五星皆从而聚于一舍，其下之国可以义致天下。
现代文：岁星所在的地方，出现五颗行星先后会聚于那一宿，其相应的国家可以义取天下。
English: In the place where the lucky star is located, five planets will appear to gather successively in that one night, and the corresponding country can win the world.

古文：以摄提格岁：岁阴左行在寅，岁星右转居丑。
现代文：摄提格岁就是寅年：岁阴在寅位从东向西行，岁星在丑位从西向东行。
English: The year of the Tiger is the year of the Tiger: the year of the Yin moves from east to west in the position of the Tiger, and the year of the Star moves from west to east in the position of the Ox.

古文：正月，与斗、牵牛晨出东方，名曰监德。
现代文：正月时，岁星与斗宿、牵牛宿黎明前出现于东方，名为监德。
English: At the time of the new moon, the year star and the fighting inn and the cowherd's inn appear in the east before dawn, and are called the overseers.

古文：色苍苍有光。
现代文：星色青苍而明亮。
English: The stars are blue and bright.

古文：其失次，有应见柳。
现代文：如岁星失次运动，在它出现时，犹能看到柳宿。
English: If the year star is out of phase, when it appears, you can still see the willow lodge.

古文：岁早，水；晚，旱。
现代文：岁星早出，有水灾；晚出，天旱。
English: The year starts early, with floods; starts late, with droughts.

古文：岁星出，东行十二度，百日而止，反逆行；逆行八度，百日，复东行。
现代文：岁星出现在东方以后，向东运行十二度，需要一百天的时间，然后开始向西逆行；逆行八度，也是要一百天，再向东运行。
English: After the year star appears in the east, it moves eastward twelve degrees, which takes a hundred days, and then begins to retrograde to the west; retrograde eight degrees, which also takes a hundred days, and then moves eastward.

古文：岁行三十度十六分度之七，率日行十二分度之一，十二岁而周天。
现代文：岁星一年共行三十度十六分度之七，平均每天行十二分度之一，十二年在星空运行一整周。
English: The annual course of the celestial body is seven-tenths of thirty-six-tenths of a degree, with an average of one-twelfth of a degree per day. In twelve years, the celestial body orbits the starry sky for an entire week.

古文：出常东方，以晨；入于西方，用昏。
现代文：初见总是先出在东方，就是晨星；在黄昏时结束，隐没在西方，表现为昏星。
English: The first sight always appears first in the east, that is, the morning star; it ends at dusk and disappears in the west, appearing as a faint star.

古文：单阏岁：岁阴在卯，星居子。
现代文：单阏岁就是卯年：岁阴从寅位左行到卯位，岁星居子位。
English: The single leap year is the year of the rabbit: the year of the rabbit is the year of the rabbit, and the year of the rabbit is the year of the rabbit.

古文：以二月与婺女、虚、危晨出，曰降入。
现代文：二月时，岁星与婺女、虚、危三宿早晨出现于东方，这时岁星被命名为降入。
English: In February, the year star appeared in the morning in the east along with the three planets of the opposite signs of the zodiac: the Virgo, the Aquarius and the Capricorn. At that time, the year star was named the waxing gibbous.

古文：大有光。
现代文：星大而且明亮。
English: The star is large and bright.

古文：其失次，有应见张。
现代文：当该月岁星失次时，会在张宿上显示预兆。
English: When the lunar year star is out of phase, it will show an omen on Zhangjuku.

古文：其岁大水。
现代文：这样的年份会有大的水灾。
English: In years like this, there are big floods.

古文：执徐岁：岁阴在辰，星居亥。
现代文：执徐岁即辰年：岁阴在辰位，岁星在亥位。
English: The year of the dog is the year of the ox: the year of the dog is the year of the ox, and the year of the ox is the year of the dog.

古文：以三月与营室、东壁晨出，曰青章。
现代文：在三月份的时候，岁星与营室、东壁二宿一起，早晨时出现在东方，名为青章。
English: In March, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the camp room and the east wall, and is called Qing Zhang.

古文：青青甚章。
现代文：星光青青而章明，因此得名。
English: The stars are very bright, hence the name.

古文：其失次，有应见轸。
现代文：如果岁星运行失次，会在轸宿上显示预兆。
English: If the year star runs out of time, it will show an omen on the mansion.

古文：岁早，旱；晚，水。
现代文：岁星超前进入前一宿，天下会有旱灾；岁星落后一宿，天下会有水灾。
English: If the year star rises early, it portends drought; if it rises late, it portends floods.

古文：大荒骆岁：岁阴在巳，星居戌。
现代文：大荒骆岁即巳年：岁阴在巳位，岁星在戌位。
English: The year of the wild camel is the year of the snake: the year of the yin is in the position of the snake, and the year of the star is in the position of the dragon.

古文：以四月与奎、娄晨出，曰跰踵。
现代文：四月份的时候，岁星与奎、娄二宿一起，早晨出现在东方，名为跰踵。
English: In April, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with Kui and Shun Ershuku, and is called Shun Heel.

古文：熊熊赤色，有光。
现代文：星光熊熊呈赤色，有光芒。
English: The starlight is bright red and shines.

古文：其失次，有应见亢。
现代文：若岁星失次，出现时应能见到亢宿。
English: If the young star is out of phase, it should be able to see Pushuku when it appears.

古文：敦牂岁：岁阴在午，星居酉。
现代文：敦牂岁即午年：岁阴在午位，岁星在酉位。
English: The year of the dragon is the year of the dragon: the year of the yin is in the meridian, and the year of the star is in the cusp.

古文：以五月与胃、昴、毕晨出，曰开明。
现代文：五月份，岁星与胃、昴、毕三宿一起，早晨出现于东方，名为天明。
English: In May, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the stomach, gills, and abdomen, and is called Tenmei.

古文：炎炎有光。
现代文：星光明亮。
English: The stars are bright.

古文：偃兵；唯利公王，不利治兵。
现代文：这一年应该停止兵事，利于帝王推行政令，不利于治军弄武。
English: In this year, military affairs should be stopped, which is conducive to the emperor's promotion of executive orders and is not conducive to military rule.

古文：其失次，有应见房。
现代文：若岁星失次，会在房宿上显示预兆。
English: If a young star is out of phase, it will show ominous signs in the room.

古文：岁早，旱；晚，水。
现代文：岁星早出，则预示会有旱灾；晚出，则预示会有水灾。
English: If the year star rises early, it portends drought; if it rises late, it portends floods.

古文：叶洽岁：岁阴在未，星居申。
现代文：叶洽岁即未年：岁阴在未位，岁星在申位。
English: The year of the leaf is the year of the rooster: the year of the yin is the year of the rooster, and the year of the rooster is the year of the rooster.

古文：以六月与觜觿、参晨出，曰长列。
现代文：六月份，岁星与觜觽、参宿一起，早晨出现于东方，名为长列。
English: In June, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the dragonfly and the rooster, and is called the long line.

古文：昭昭有光。
现代文：星光灿烂。
English: The stars are out.

古文：利行兵。
现代文：这一年利于出兵行武事。
English: This year is favorable for dispatching troops to do martial arts.

古文：其失次，有应见箕。
现代文：岁星若运行失次，会在箕宿显示预兆。
English: If the year star runs out of time, it will show an omen in Shibuya.

古文：涒滩岁：岁阴在申，星居未。
现代文：涒滩岁时：岁阴在申位，岁星在未位。
English: At the time of the beaching: the year yin is in the subordinate position, and the year star is in the subordinate position.

古文：以七月与东井、舆鬼晨出，曰大音。
现代文：七月份，岁星与东井、舆鬼二宿一起，早晨出现于东方，名为大音。
English: In July, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the east well and the second ghost, and is called the big sound.

古文：昭昭白。
现代文：星体昭昭，光呈白色。
English: The star is bright and the light is white.

古文：其失次，有应见牵牛。
现代文：若运行失次，出现时应能见到牵牛宿。
English: If the operation fails, you should be able to see the Cowherd's Inn when it appears.

古文：作鄂岁：岁阴在酉，星居午。
现代文：作鄂岁即酉年：岁阴在酉位，岁星在午位。
English: For the E year, that is, the year of the Rooster: the year of the Yin is in the Rooster, and the year of the Star is in the Noon.

古文：以八月与柳、七星、张晨出，曰长王。
现代文：八月份，岁星与柳宿、七星、张宿一起，早晨时出现于东方，名为长王。
English: In August, the year star appears in the east in the morning, together with the willow star, the seven stars, and the Zhang star, and is called Changwang.

古文：作作有芒。
现代文：星光明亮而有芒角。
English: The star is bright and shiny, with prominent cheekbones.

古文：国其昌，熟谷。
现代文：这一年国家昌盛，五谷丰收。
English: The country was prosperous that year, with a bumper grain harvest.

古文：其失次，有应见危。
现代文：若运行失次，可以在危宿看见预兆。
English: If the operation fails, you can see the signs in the dangerous place.

古文：有旱而昌，有女丧，民疾。
现代文：这时若有旱灾但仍会有好收成，有后妃丧亡，民间有疾疫流行。
English: At this time, if there is a drought, there will still be a good harvest, some queens will die, and there will be epidemics among the people.

古文：阉茂岁：岁阴在戌，星居巳。
现代文：阉茂岁时：岁阴在戌位，岁星在巳位。
English: In the year of the Rooster: the Year Yin is in the Rooster position, and the Year Star is in the Snake position.

古文：以九月与翼、轸晨出，曰天睢。
现代文：九月份，岁星与翼、轸二宿一起，早晨时出现于东方，名为天睢。
English: In September, the year star appears in the east in the morning, together with the wing and the second quarter of the dragonfly, and is called the celestial caterpillar.

古文：白色大明。
现代文：星光呈白色，大而明亮。
English: The starlight is white, large and bright.

古文：其失次，有应见东壁。
现代文：若运行失次，出现时应能见到东壁宿。
English: If the operation fails, you should be able to see the East Cliff Inn when it appears.

古文：岁水，女丧。
现代文：这样的年岁便有水灾或有女主的丧事。
English: At such a young age, there is always a flood or the death of the matriarch.

古文：大渊献岁：岁阴在亥，星居辰。
现代文：大渊献时：岁阴在亥位，岁星在辰位。
English: At the time of the great abyss offering: the year yin is in the sign of the boar, and the year star is in the sign of the dragon.

古文：以十月与角、亢晨出，曰大章。
现代文：十月份，岁星与角宿、亢宿一起，早晨时出现在东方，名为大章。
English: In October, the year star appears in the east in the morning, together with Kakuno-juku and Haku-juku, and is called the Big Chapter.

古文：苍苍然，星若跃而阴出旦，是谓 正平 。
现代文：星光苍苍然。如同星欲提前跃出黎明前的黑暗。名为正严。
English: The starlight is dazzling. It's as if the desire for the stars has leapt ahead of the darkness before dawn. It's called Zhengyan.

古文：起师旅，其率必武；其国有德，将有四海。
现代文：这样的年岁，宜于兴兵用武，其将帅必有武功；岁星所在国有德，将要拥有四海，成为普天下人共同的君主。
English: At such an age, it is appropriate to raise an army and use martial arts, and the commander must have martial arts skills; the national virtue where the star of the year is located will have the four seas and become the common monarch of the whole world.

古文：其失次，有应见娄。
现代文：岁星运行失次，应能见到娄宿。
English: If the year star is out of phase, you should be able to see Shibuya.

古文：困敦岁：岁阴在子，星居卯。
现代文：困敦岁时：岁阴在子位，岁星在卯位。
English: At the time of distress: the year yin is in the position of the son, and the year star is in the position of the son.

古文：以十一月与氐、房、心晨出，曰天泉。
现代文：十一月份，岁星与氐宿、房宿、心宿一起，早晨出现于东方，名为天泉。
English: In November, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the mansion, the room, and the heart, and is called Tianquan.

古文：玄色甚明。
现代文：星光玄色，很是明亮。
English: The starlight is dark, but very bright.

古文：江池其昌，不利起兵。
现代文：当年，有事于江和池沼则吉则，不利于起兵。
English: At that time, there was something going on in Jiang and Ikenuma, which was not conducive to raising an army.

古文：其失次，有应见昴。
现代文：岁星运行失次，应能见到昴宿。
English: If the year star is out of phase, you should be able to see Shibuya.

古文：赤奋若岁：岁阴在丑，星居寅，以十二月与尾、箕晨出，曰天晧。
现代文：赤奋若岁时：岁阴在丑位，岁星在寅位。十二月份，岁星与尾宿、箕宿一起，早晨时出现于东方，名为天皓。
English: At the age of young: the year yin is in the Ugly position, the year star is in the Yin position. In December, the year star appears in the morning in the east, together with the tail and the occipital, and is called the heavenly harp.

古文：黫然黑色甚明。
现代文：星光殷然，色黑而明亮。
English: The stars shone brightly, dark and bright.

古文：其失次，有应见参。
现代文：岁星运行失次，应能见到参宿。
English: If the year star is out of phase, you should be able to see the accompaniment.

古文：当居不居，居之又左右摇，未当去去之，与他星会，其国凶。所居久，国有德厚。
现代文：应当在某处停留而不停留，虽然停留又左右摇动，或者不应当离去而离去，与其他星交会，那么该宿相应的国家有大灾难。
English: If one should stop at a certain place and not stay there, although the stop is shaken from side to side, or if one should not leave and leave, and meet other stars, then there will be a great calamity in the country corresponding to that place.

古文：其角动，乍小乍大，若色数变，人主有忧。
现代文：岁星在某处停留得久，那么相应的国家德泽深厚。岁星光的芒角动摇，光芒时大时小，颜色屡变，都预示该国国君有忧患。
English: If the year star stays somewhere for a long time, then the corresponding country's virtue is profound. The angle of the year star's light fluctuates, the light is sometimes large and sometimes small, and the color changes frequently, all of which indicate that the country's sovereign is in trouble.

古文：其失次舍以下，进而东北，三月生天棓，长四丈，末兑。
现代文：岁星运行失次有如下情况：进而向东北行，不出三月就会出现天棓星，天棓星长约四丈，末端尖锐。
English: The following situations occur when the celestial body moves out of phase: it then moves to the northeast, and in March, the Pleiades will appear. The Pleiades is about four feet long and has a sharp end.

古文：进而东南，三月生彗星，长二丈，类彗。
现代文：进而向东南行，不出三月就会出现彗星，彗星长约二丈，形状与扫帚相类。
English: It will then head southeast, and a comet will appear in March. The comet is about two meters long and has a shape similar to a broomstick.

古文：退而西北，三月生天欃，长四丈，末兑。
现代文：退而向西北行，不出三月就会出现天欃，其长约四丈，末端尖锐。
English: It retreats to the northwest, and in March it emerges as a skylark, which is about four metres long and has a sharp tip.

古文：退而西南，三月生天枪，长数丈，两头兑。
现代文：退而向西南方行，不出三个月就会出现天枪星，看上去好几丈长，两头尖锐。
English: Back away to the south-west, and in less than three months the shooting star will appear, looking several feet tall and sharp at both ends.

古文：谨视其所见之国，不可举事用兵。
现代文：应该谨慎地观察岁星的赢缩状况，其对应的国家不可以举事用兵。
English: It is necessary to carefully observe the win-shrink situation of the year star, and the corresponding country should not raise troops.

古文：其出如浮如沈，其国有土功；如沈如浮，其野亡。色赤而有角，其所居国昌。
现代文：岁星运行中看上去似要往上浮，实际却下沉，则对应的国家可能会扩张它的领土；岁星如果似要下沉实际上却上浮，则对应的国家可能会失去边境的国土。岁星颜色赤红而且有芒角，是所对应国家昌盛的征兆。
English: If the year star appears to rise but actually sinks, the corresponding country may expand its territory; if the year star appears to sink but actually rises, the corresponding country may lose its border land. The year star is red in color and has horns, which is a sign of the prosperity of the corresponding country.

古文：迎角而战者，不胜。
现代文：与该国作战的，必不胜。
English: Whoever fights against this country will not win.

古文：星色赤黄而沈，所居野大穰。
现代文：岁星颜色赤黄而浓重，则所对应的国际将获得大丰收。
English: If the color of the year star is reddish-yellow and dense, the corresponding world will have a bumper harvest.

古文：色青白而赤灰，所居野有忧。
现代文：岁星颜色青白或赤灰，则所对应的国家会有忧患。
English: If the color of the year star is blue-white or red-gray, the corresponding country will have troubles.

古文：岁星入月，其野有逐相；与太白斗，其野有破军。
现代文：岁星隐于月亮之后，则所对应国家的宰相可能被罢黜；岁星与太白星往复离合，则所对应的国家的军事行动会失败。
English: If the year star is hidden behind the moon, the prime minister of the corresponding country may be ousted; if the year star and the white star are interlocked, the military operation of the corresponding country will fail.

古文：岁星一曰摄提，曰重华，曰应星，曰纪星。
现代文：岁星又名摄提，名重华，名应星，名纪星等。
English: The year star is also known as the year star, the year star, the year star, the year star, and so on.

古文：营室为清庙，岁星庙也。
现代文：前面说营室是天上的清庙，就是指岁星的清庙。
English: The camp room is the celestial Qing Temple, the temple of the year star.

古文：察刚气以处荧惑。
现代文：察阳刚的气象以对荧惑星做出决断。
English: The meteorology of Zha Yanggang made a decision on the fluorescent planet.

古文：曰南方火，主夏，日丙、丁。
现代文：按五行说，荧惑与五方相配为南方，五行属火，四时主夏，十干为丙丁。
English: According to the Five Elements, the South corresponds to Fluorescence and the Five Elements, the Five Elements corresponds to Fire, the Fourth Element corresponds to Summer, and the Ten Elements corresponds to Yin and Yang.

古文：礼失，罚出荧惑，荧惑失行是也。
现代文：如果有失礼的国家，上天将下的惩罚会由荧惑星表现出来。荧惑就是行为失礼的意思。
English: If there is an impolite country, the punishment from heaven will be shown by the fluorescent planet. Fluorescence is the meaning of impolite behavior.

古文：出则有兵，入则兵散。
现代文：荧惑出现就有战争，荧惑隐没战争就会停止。
English: Where there is sensationalism, there is war. Where there is no sensationalism, there is no war.

古文：以其舍命国。
现代文：以荧惑所在的分野占卜该国的吉凶。
English: The fortunes of the country are divined by the field in which the lucifer is located.

古文：荧惑为勃乱，残贼、疾、丧、饥、兵。
现代文：荧惑星预示着孛乱、残害贼杀、疾病、死丧、饥饿、战争等灾难的发生。
English: Fluorescent planets indicate the occurrence of turmoil, mutilation, theft, disease, death, starvation, war and other disasters.

古文：反道二舍以上，居之，三月有殃，五月受兵，七月半亡地，九月太半亡地。
现代文：荧惑星逆行两宿以上，停留下来，所停处相对应的国家三个月会有灾祸，停留五月则会有外兵入侵，停留七月内可能会丧失一半国土，停留九月内则会失去大半国土。
English: If a fluorescent planet is retrograde for more than two nights, if it stops, the country corresponding to the stop will have a disaster for three months, if it stops in May, there will be an invasion of foreign soldiers, if it stops in July, it may lose half of its territory, and if it stops in September, it will lose most of its territory.

古文：因与俱出入，国绝祀。
现代文：九月以后仍留而不去，那对应的国家就要灭亡了。
English: If you stay after September and don't leave, your country will be destroyed.

古文：居之，殃还至，虽大当小；久而至，当小反大。
现代文：荧惑停留不去的地方，祸殃不旋踵而至，那本该严重的灾情反而变小了；若缓缓而来，那本不大的灾情反而变严重了。
English: In a place where illusions can't stay, calamities come one after another. The disaster that should have been serious has become smaller; if it comes slowly, the small disaster has become serious.

古文：其南为丈夫丧，北为女子丧。
现代文：荧惑停留在舆鬼宿以南，预示男子死丧；在舆鬼以北，则女子死丧。
English: If the carnival stays south of the ghost town, it means the death of a man; if it stays north of the ghost town, it means the death of a woman.

古文：若角动绕环之，及乍前乍后，左右，殃益大。
现代文：若荧惑星有芒角、动摇、原地旋转，以及忽前忽后、忽左忽右，相应的灾难就更严重。
English: If the fluorescent planet has a mane angle, wavering, spinning in place, as well as suddenly forward and backward, suddenly left and right, the corresponding disaster will be more serious.

古文：与他星斗，光相逮，为害；不相逮，不害。
现代文：荧惑在运行中与其他星复离复合，若亮度相差不多，就会有灾害；星的亮度相差悬殊，就不会有灾害。
English: Fluorescence in operation with other stars complex, if the brightness is similar, there will be disasters; the brightness of the stars vary greatly, there will be no disasters.

古文：五星皆从而聚于一舍，其下国可以礼致天下。
现代文：连同荧惑一起的五星相从聚集在同一舍之中，对应的国家就能以礼号召天下。
English: Together with the five-star phase of fluorescence together from gathered in the same house, the corresponding country will be able to call the world with a ceremonial call.

古文：法，出东行十六舍而止；逆行二舍；六旬，复东行，自所止数十舍，十月而入西方；伏行五月，出东方。
现代文：荧惑运行的规律是，出地后自西向东行，经过十六舍后停止，向西逆行二宿，经过六十天的时间，重又向东行，经过数十宿，约十个月后从西方隐入地下；在地下伏行五个月后，再次出现在东方。
English: The regularity of the operation of fluorescence bewitching is that after leaving the ground, it travels from west to east, after sixteen houses it stops, after sixty days it travels westward two houses, after sixty days it travels eastward again, after dozens of houses, after about ten months it goes underground from the west; after five months underground, it reappears in the east.

古文：其出西方曰 反明 ，主命者恶之。
现代文：若荧惑消逝后又在西方出现称为 反明 ，对人君不利。
English: If fluorescence disappears and then reappears in the West, it is called reflection, which is not good for people.

古文：东行急，一日行一度半。
现代文：荧惑向东时速度比较快，向西行的时候速度比较慢，东行每日行一度半。
English: The speed of fluorescence is relatively fast when it travels eastward, and slower when it travels westward. It travels eastward once and a half times a day.

古文：其行东、西、南、北疾也。
现代文：荧惑向东行急，有兵聚于东；向西行急，有兵聚于西；向南北行急，有兵聚于南北。
English: When the merry-go-round is speeding eastward, soldiers gather in the east; when it is speeding westward, soldiers gather in the west; when it is speeding north and southward, soldiers gather in the north and south.

古文：兵各聚其下；用战，顺之胜，逆之败。
现代文：兵所聚在荧惑下相应的地区。用于占卜战争，顺荧惑所行用兵的必胜，逆荧惑所行用兵的则败。
English: The soldiers are gathered in the corresponding area under the fluorination. For the divination war, the soldiers used by the fluorination are sure to win, and the soldiers used by the reverse fluorination are defeated.

古文：荧惑从太白，军忧；离之，军却。
现代文：荧惑随太白而行，军事有忧患；离太白而去，主退军。
English: Fluttering along with too white, the military is in trouble; away from too white, the main retreat.

古文：出太白阴，有分军；行其阳，有偏将战。
现代文：行于太白以北，有军队分营；行于太白以南，有偏将出战。
English: To the north of Taibai, there are army detachments; to the south of Taibai, there are partial commanders.

古文：当其行，太白逮之，破军杀将。
现代文：当荧惑运行时，太白星自后追及荧惑，有军队被击败，将军被杀的事发生。
English: When the Fluorescence was in operation, Tai Bai Xing chased after the Fluorescence. An army was defeated and a general was killed.

古文：其入守犯太微、轩辕、营室，主命恶之。
现代文：荧惑星停留或陵犯太微垣、轩辕座、营室宿，对人君不利。
English: It is not good for you if you stay at a planetarium or stay at a mausoleum that is too small, or stay at a mansion, or stay at a dormitory.

古文：心为明堂，荧惑庙也。
现代文：前文说心宿是明堂，就是指是荧惑神的祭庙的意思。
English: The Heart Star is the bright hall in the sky, the temple of the fluorescent planets.

古文：谨候此。
现代文：仔细观察以上情况，以断吉凶。
English: Observe the above situation carefully to determine the cause and effect.

古文：历斗之会以定填星之位。
现代文：由历法中与南斗交会的年份判定填星的位置。
English: The position of the star is determined by the year of the Southern Cross and Southern Cross in the calendar.

古文：曰中央土，主季夏，日戊、己，黄帝，主德，女主象也。
现代文：按五行说，填星于五方为中央，于五行属土，于四时主季夏，于十天干为戊、己，于五帝配黄帝，主道德，是女主的象征。
English: According to the Five Elements, the filling star is in the center of the Five Elements, in the Five Elements it belongs to the earth, at 4 o'clock it is the lord of the summer, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the autumn, at 5 o'clock it is the lord of the winter, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the autumn, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the winter, at 5 o'clock it is the lord of the summer, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the autumn, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the winter, at 10 o'clock it is the lord of the autumn, at 5 o

古文：岁填一宿，其所居国吉。
现代文：每年行过一宿，二十八年绕一周，停留处，对相应的国家很吉利。
English: Every year, they travel for one night, and in the 28th year, they go around the world. The stopover is very auspicious for the corresponding country.

古文：未当居而居，若已去而复还，还居之，其国得土，不乃得女。
现代文：不应当停留而停留，或者已经离去重又返回来，返回之后便停留下来，是相应国领土扩大的征兆，或者得子女玉帛。
English: It should not stay and stay, or has left and returned, and stayed after returning, is a sign of the expansion of the territory of the corresponding country, or has a daughter.

古文：若当居而不居，既已居之，又西东去，其国失土，不乃失女，不可举事用兵。
现代文：若填星应当停留而不停留，既已停留，又东西来去，则所对应的国家将丧失国土，或者失子女玉帛，这个国家不宜举办大事，用兵于敌。
English: If the star should stay and not stay, if it has stayed and things come and go, then the corresponding country will lose its land, or lose its children's rights. This country is not suitable for holding major events and using troops against the enemy.

古文：其居久，其国福厚；易，福薄。
现代文：填星在某一宿停留的时间越长，相应国国家的福气越大；停留的时间短暂，相应国家的福薄。
English: According to the stars, the longer you stay in a certain hotel, the greater the blessing of the corresponding country; the shorter the stay, the less the blessing of the corresponding country.

古文：其一名曰地侯，主岁。
现代文：填星又名地侯，主占卜收成好坏。
English: Filling the stars, also known as the magistrate, is the main divination for good or bad harvests.

古文：岁行十三度百十二分度之五，日行二十八分度之一，二十八岁周天。其所居，五星皆从而聚于一舍，其下之国，可以重致天下。
现代文：每年运行度，每日运行度，二十八年绕天一周。填星停留的地方，五星都相从聚集于同一舍之中，下面相应的国家可以重厚之德得天下。
English: Every year, every day, every 28 years, around the world. Where the stars stay, the five stars are gathered in the same house, and the corresponding country below can win the world.

古文：礼、德、义、杀、刑尽失，而填星乃为之动摇。
现代文：礼、德、义、杀戮、刑罚全都失当，填星就会为此而动摇不定。
English: Etiquette, morality, righteousness, killing, and punishment are all inappropriate, and Fuxing will be shaken and unsettled because of this.

古文：赢，为王不宁；其缩，有军不复。
现代文：填星早出，为王者不安；晚出，有战事不得息。
English: If you go out early, you will be uneasy for the king; if you go out late, there will be war.

古文：填星，其色黄，九芒，音曰黄钟宫。
现代文：填星色黄，有九芒，五音与黄钟宫相配。
English: The star is yellow, with nine points, and the five tones match the Yellow Bell Palace.

古文：其失次上二三宿曰赢，有主命不成，不乃大水。
现代文：若失次而行超前二三宿称为赢，象征君主有命不能实行，否则预示有大水灾。
English: If the second place is lost and the first two or three places are advanced, it is called a win, symbolizing that the monarch's command cannot be carried out, otherwise it portends a major flood.

古文：失次下二三宿曰缩，有后戚，其岁不复，不乃天裂若地动。
现代文：若失次而行落后二三宿称为缩，预示以后有悲戚事发生，当年阴阳不和，冬至阴不复，夏至阳不复，不然就会有天裂地动事发生。
English: If the second place is lost and the third place falls behind, it is called a contraction, indicating that there will be a sad event in the future. In that year, the yin and yang will not be reconciled, the winter solstice will not return to the yin and yang, and the summer solstice will not return to the yang. Otherwise, there will be earth-shattering events.

古文：斗为文太室，填星庙，天子之星也。
现代文：斗宿是文太室，是填星之庙，填星是占卜天子吉凶的星宿。
English: The dojo is a literary room, a star-filled temple, and the star-filled star is a star for divining the fortunes of the gods.

古文：木星与土合，为内乱，饥，主勿用战，败；水则变谋而更事；火为旱；金为白衣会若水。
现代文：木星与土星会合，象征有内乱和饥饿发生，这个时候不能发动战争，战必失败；木星与水星会合象征谋事不终，半途而废；木星与火星会合，象征有旱灾；木星与金星会合象征有死丧事或有水灾。
English: Jupiter and Saturn meet, symbolizing the occurrence of civil unrest and hunger, this time can not start a war, the war will fail; Jupiter and Mercury meeting symbolize the never-ending, half-hearted; Jupiter and Mars meeting, symbolizing the drought; Jupiter and Venus meeting symbolizes the death or flood.

古文：金在南曰牝牡，年谷熟，金在北，岁偏无。
现代文：相合的时候，如果金星在木星的南面，称为牝牡，预示着当年五谷丰收；若金星在木星的北面，预示着该年五谷有收有歉。
English: At the time of conjunction, if Venus is to the south of Jupiter, known as the cormorant, it indicates a good harvest that year; if Venus is to the north of Jupiter, it indicates a good harvest that year.

古文：火与水合为焠，与金合为铄，为丧，皆不可举事，用兵大败。
现代文：火星与水星会合称为焠，与金星会合称为铄，预兆有丧事，都不可举行大事，对敌用兵则大败。
English: The conjunction of Mars and Mercury is called the waxing gibbous, and the conjunction with Venus is called the waning gibbous. If there are omens of tragedy, no major events can be held, and the enemy soldiers will be defeated.

古文：土为忧，主孽卿；大饥，战败，为北军，军困，举事大败。
现代文：火星与土星会合称为忧，象征有作孽的公卿；国家将会有大的饥荒，战败、成为败北之军，军被困，举事遭大失败等。
English: The conjunction of Mars and Saturn is called Sorrow, symbolizing the iniquitous nobles; the country will have a great famine, defeat, become a defeated army, the army is trapped, the campaign is a great failure, etc.

古文：土与水合，穰而拥阏，有覆军，其国不可举事。
现代文：土星与水星会合，五谷丰收，但国家发展会受到阻滞，有全军复灭的征兆，相应的国度不可以举办大事。
English: Saturn and Mercury meet, the grain harvest is bountiful, but the country's development will be blocked, there are signs that the whole army will be defeated, and the corresponding country cannot hold major events.

古文：出，亡地；入，得地。金为疾，为内兵，亡地。
现代文：土星和水星相合且出现在天空，则相对应的国家会丧失国土；星入地隐而不见，则相对应的国家将得到土地。土星与金星会合，主疫病流行，为外兵入侵，会丧失国土。
English: If Saturn and Mercury are conjoined and appear in the sky, the corresponding country will lose its land; if the star enters the earth and is not seen, the corresponding country will gain land. If Saturn and Venus are conjoined, the main disease will be prevalent, and if foreign soldiers invade, the country will lose its land.

古文：三星若合，其宿地国外内有兵与丧，改立公王。
现代文：五星中木星、火星、土星相合，与会合处相应的国度，内外有战事和丧事，将改立君王。
English: In the five stars, Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn will be in conjunction, and the country corresponding to the meeting place will have wars and funerals at home and abroad, and the king will be re-established.

古文：四星合，兵丧并起，君子忧，小人流。
现代文：如果四星相合，预示兵祸丧乱同时发生，人君有忧患，百姓流离失所。
English: If the four stars coincide, it indicates that military disaster and turmoil will occur at the same time, people will have sorrow, and the people will be displaced.

古文：五星合，是为易行，有德，受庆，改立大人，掩有四方，子孙蕃昌；无德，受殃若亡。
现代文：五星会合，表示要易世而行，改朝换代了，有德者，受喜庆，改立君主，占有天下，子孙蕃衍昌盛；无德者，受祸殃以致灭亡。
English: The Five-Star Meeting expressed the wish to change the world, change the dynasty and change the generation. Those who have virtue will be celebrated, and those who have re-established the monarchy will occupy the world. Their children and grandchildren will prosper. Those who have no virtue will suffer misfortune and perish.

古文：五星皆大，其事亦大；皆小，事亦小。
现代文：五星星体都大，预兆的事体也大；都小，预兆的事体也小。
English: The five stars are large, and the omens are large; they are small, and the omens are small.

古文：蚤出者为赢，赢者为客。
现代文：五星早出的称为赢，赢者为客星。
English: The five-star early exit is called a win, and the winner is the guest star.

古文：晚出者为缩，缩者为主人。
现代文：晚出者称为缩，缩者为主人星。
English: The latecomer is called the shrinking star, and the shrinking star is the host star.

古文：必有天应见于杓星。
现代文：五星赢缩失次，天必有反应，由北斗的杓星失常显示出来。
English: The five stars win, shrink and lose their positions, and the sky must have a reaction, which is shown by the dislocation of the North Star of the Big Dipper.

古文：同舍为合。
现代文：星同舍为会合。
English: It's a reunion.

古文：相陵为斗，七寸以内必之矣。
现代文：相陵犯为斗，斗者相距七寸以内，预示的祸事必然发生。
English: If two criminals fight, and the fighters are within seven inches of each other, the foreshadowed calamity will inevitably occur.

古文：五星色白圜，为丧旱；赤圜，则中不平，为兵；青圜，为忧水；黑圜，为疾，多死；黄圜，则吉。
现代文：五星色白体圆，表示有丧事和旱灾；色赤体圆，边沿与中部有不平状，表示有战争；色青体圆，表示有忧患和水灾；色黑而圆，表示有疾病，多死亡；色黄而圆，则吉利。
English: Five-star-colored white body circle, indicating that there is mourning and drought; red body circle, the edge and the middle are uneven, indicating war; cyan body circle, indicating sorrow and flood; black and round, indicating disease, more death; yellow and round, it is auspicious.

古文：赤角犯我城，黄角地之争，白角哭泣之声，青角有兵忧，黑角则水。
现代文：五星有赤色芒角表示有敌兵犯我城池；有黄色芒角表示有争夺土地的战争，有白色芒角表示有丧事，有青色芒角表示军队有忧患，有黑色芒角则有水灾。
English: The five-pointed star with a red crescent indicates that there are enemy soldiers attacking our city; with a yellow crescent, there is a war for land; with a white crescent, there is a funeral; with a blue crescent, there is an army in distress; with a black crescent, there is a flood.

古文：意，行穷兵之所终。
现代文：有赤角，坚守以待敌力穷、兵事自解。
English: There is a red corner, hold on to wait for the enemy force to be poor, and solve the military affairs themselves.

古文：五星同色，天下偃兵，百姓宁昌。
现代文：五星同色，天下兵戈止息，百姓安宁昌盛。
English: The five stars are of the same color, the world war has ceased, and the people are peaceful and prosperous.

古文：春风秋雨，冬寒夏暑，动摇常以此。
现代文：春风秋雨，冬寒夏热，时令正常与否，五星的动摇常在这些方面表现出来。
English: Spring wind, autumn rain, winter cold, summer heat, whether the season is normal or not, the wavering of the five stars is often manifested in these aspects.

古文：填星出百二十日而逆西行，西行百二十日反东行。
现代文：填星出现以后，经过一百二十天开始向西逆行，又经过一百二十天重又向东行。
English: After the appearance of the star-filled sky, after one hundred and twenty days, it began to retrograde to the west, and after another hundred and twenty days, it returned to the east.

古文：见三百三十日而入，入三十日复出东方。
现代文：再经过九十天，总计三百三十日然后隐于地下，隐三十日后重新在东方出现。
English: After another ninety days, for a total of three hundred and thirty days, it went underground, and after another thirty days it reappeared in the East.

古文：太岁在甲寅，镇星在东壁，故在营室。
现代文：太初历开始的年份，太岁在甲寅位，镇星在东壁宿，所以说是在营室宿。
English: In the year of the beginning of the lunar calendar, Taisei was in the first place, and the town star was in the east wall, so it was in the camp room.

古文：察日行以处位太白。
现代文：观察太阳的运行以判断太白星的位置。
English: Observe the movement of the sun to determine the position of the white star.

古文：曰西方，秋，日庚、辛，主杀。
现代文：按照五行说，太白星于五方配西方，于四季属秋，于十天干为庚辛，主刑杀。
English: According to the Five Elements, Taibai Star is in the west of the Five Elements, in the autumn of the four seasons, and in the autumn of the ten days, it is Gengxin.

古文：杀失者，罚出太白。
现代文：刑杀失当，天降惩罚就由太白星表现出来。
English: If the punishment is improper, the punishment will be shown by the white star.

古文：太白失行，以其舍命国。
现代文：太白星运行失常，按照所经行的次舍推断对应国家的吉凶。
English: If the Taibai Star malfunctions, the fortunes of the corresponding country will be inferred according to the second house.

古文：其出行十八舍二百四十日而入。
现代文：太白星出现后行经十八舍，凡需二百四十日而隐入地下。
English: After the appearance of the white star, it went through eighteen houses, and it took two hundred and forty days to go underground.

古文：入东方，伏行十一舍百三十日；其入西方，伏行三舍十六日而出。
现代文：若从东方隐入地下，在地下行经十一舍，需一百三十日；从西方隐入地下，则在地下行经三舍，需十六日，然后重新出现。
English: If you go underground from the east, it takes one hundred and thirty days to go through eleven houses underground; if you go underground from the west, it takes sixteen days to go through three houses underground, and then reappear.

古文：当出不出，当入不入，是谓失舍，不有破军，必有国君之篡。
现代文：应当出现而不出现，或者应当隐入地下而不入，都称为失舍。与太白失舍相应的国度，若没有军队被击败，必有国君被篡位的事件发生。
English: Should appear and not appear, or should go underground and not come up, are all called abdication. In a country corresponding to Taibai's abdication, if no army is defeated, there must be an incident in which the sovereign is usurped.

古文：其纪上元，以摄提格之岁，与营室晨出东方，至角而入；与营室夕出西方，至角而入；与角晨出，入毕；与角夕出，入毕；与毕晨出，入箕；与毕夕出，入箕；与箕晨出，入柳；与箕夕出，入柳；与柳晨出，入营室；与柳夕出，入营室。
现代文：再与柳宿晨时同出于东方，行到营室宿时入于地下；然后与柳宿黄昏时同出于西方，行到营室宿时入于地下。
English: In the morning, they leave the east together with Yanagi-juku, and enter the underground when they go to the camp room. Then, they leave the west together with Yanagi-juku at dusk, and enter the underground when they go to the camp room.

古文：凡出入东西各五，为八岁，二百二十日，复与营室晨出东方。
现代文：凡出入东西谷五次为一周，经八年零二百二十天，重新与营室宿晨时同出于东方。
English: After eight years and two hundred and twenty days, the five times of entering and leaving the East and West Valleys will be one week, and they will again leave the East at the same time as the morning of the camp.

古文：其大率，岁一周天。
现代文：平均起来大约每年行一周天。
English: On average, this happens about once a year.

古文：其始出东方，行迟，率日半度，一百二十日，必逆行一二舍；上极而反，东行，行日一度半，一百二十日入。
现代文：开始出现于东方的时候，运行较慢，大约每天行半度，一百二十天以后，必然逆行一二舍；星位极高，而后反向东行，每天行一度半，经一百二十日后入于地下。
English: When it begins to appear in the east, it moves slowly, about half a degree per day, and after one hundred and twenty days, it will inevitably reverse one or two houses; the star is very high, and then reverse to the east, one and a half degrees per day, and after one hundred and twenty days it will enter the ground.

古文：其庳，近日，曰明星，柔；高，远日，曰大嚣，刚。
现代文：星位最低时，距日最近，称为明星，性柔；星位最高时，距日最远，名为大嚣，性刚。
English: When the star is at its lowest, it is closest to the sun and is called the star and is sexually tender; when the star is at its highest, it is farthest from the sun and is called the great tumult and is sexually rigid.

古文：其始出西方，行疾，率日一度半，百二十日；上极而行迟，日半度，百二十日，旦入，必逆行一二舍而入。
现代文：太白星开始出现于西方的时候，运行较快，大约每天行一度半，经一百二十天，星位极高而后运行变慢，每天行半度，一百二十天以后，将入于地下时，必逆行一二舍然后入地下。
English: When a very white star begins to appear in the west, it moves faster, about one and a half times a day. After one hundred and twenty days, the star is very high and then the movement slows down, half a degree a day. After one hundred and twenty days, when it will enter the ground, it will retrograde one or two houses and then enter the ground.

古文：其庳，近日，曰大白，柔；高，远日，曰大相，刚。
现代文：星位最低时，距日最近，名为大白，性柔；星位最高时，距日最远，名为大相，性刚。
English: When the star is at its lowest, it is closest to the sun, and is called the Great White, and is sexually tender; when the star is at its highest, it is farthest from the sun, and is called the Great White, and is sexually rigid.

古文：出以辰、戌，入以丑、未。
现代文：出与辰位、戌位，入与丑位、未位相对应。
English: "出" corresponds to "辰" and "," and "入" corresponds to "丑" and "未."

古文：当出不出，未当入而入，天下偃兵，兵在外，入。
现代文：太白在应当出现时不出现，或者不应当隐没时隐入地下，预兆着天下将干戈停息，不会再有战争，在外的军队将返回。
English: If the Taibai does not appear when it should, or goes underground when it should not, it is a sign that the world will stop fighting, there will be no more wars, and the troops outside will return.

古文：未当出而出，当入而不入，天下起兵，有破国。
现代文：太白在不应当出现而出现，或者应当隐入地下而不隐入，则预兆天下将要发生战争，有国家会被灭亡。
English: If the Taibai appears when it shouldn't, or if it should go underground when it shouldn't, it's a sign that there will be war in the world, and some countries will be destroyed.

古文：其当期出也，其国昌。
现代文：太白星按期出现，则对应的国家必昌盛。
English: If the white star appears on schedule, the corresponding country will be prosperous.

古文：其出东为东，入东为北方；出西为西，入西为南方，所居久，其向利；易，其向凶。
现代文：太白出现在东方与东方国相对应，入于东方与北方国相对应；出于西方与西方国相对应，入于西方与南方国相对应。在某处停留得久，对应方向获吉利；停留得短暂，对应方向不吉利。
English: Taibai appears in the east corresponding to the eastern country, enters the east corresponding to the northern country, emerges from the west corresponding to the western country, and enters the west corresponding to the southern country. If it stays somewhere for a long time, the corresponding direction will be lucky; if it stays for a short time, the corresponding direction will be unlucky.

古文：出西至东，正西国吉。
现代文：太白星在西方出现，向东运行，正西方向上的国家吉利。
English: The white star appears in the west and moves to the east. The country on the west is auspicious.

古文：出东至西，正东国吉。
现代文：太白在东方出现，向西运行，在正东方向上的国家吉利。
English: Taibai appears in the east, runs to the west, and the country is lucky in the eastward direction.

古文：其出不经天；经天，天下革政。
现代文：太白星出现后不会经过整个天空，如若经过整个天空，则预示着天下将会发生大的变革。
English: After the appearance of a very white star, it will not pass through the entire sky. If it passes through the entire sky, it indicates that great changes will occur in the world.

古文：小以角动，兵起。
现代文：太白星光的芒角稍微有动摇，主有战事发生。
English: The mane angle of the too-white starlight wavered slightly, mainly due to the war.

古文：始出大，后小，兵弱；出小，后大，兵强。
现代文：开始出现就很明亮，后来逐渐亮度减小，则相对的国家军力弱小；开始出现时不太明亮，后来逐渐变得很亮，则相对的国家军力强大。
English: If it is very bright when it first appears and then gradually fades, then the relative national military strength is weak; if it is not very bright when it first appears and then gradually becomes very bright, then the relative national military strength is strong.

古文：出高，用兵深吉，浅凶；庳，浅吉，深凶。
现代文：太白星出现的时候距离地面高，用兵一方进入敌国境内愈深愈吉利，正面交锋不利；太白星出现时距离地面低，用兵一方进入敌国境内浅者吉利，深则凶险。
English: When the white star appears, the distance from the ground is high, and the deeper the soldiers enter the enemy's territory, the luckier they are, and the head-to-head battle is unfavorable; when the white star appears, the distance from the ground is low, and the soldiers enter the enemy's territory, the shallow one is lucky, and the deep one is dangerous.

古文：日方南金居其南，日方北金居其北，曰赢，侯王不宁，用兵进吉退凶。
现代文：日向南行，太白星在太阳南方，或者日向北行而太白星在太阳北方，称为赢，预示侯王不得安宁，如正在用兵，进兵吉利，退兵则凶险。
English: If the sun is heading south and the white star is in the south of the sun, or if the sun is heading north and the white star is in the north of the sun, it is called a win, indicating that the lord will not be at peace. If soldiers are being used, it is good luck to enter the army, but it is dangerous to leave the army.

古文：日方南金居其北，日方北金居其南，曰缩，侯王有忧，用兵退吉进凶。
现代文：太阳向南行太白在日以北，或者太阳向北行太白在日以南，称为缩，预示侯王有忧患，如正在用兵，退兵吉利，进兵则凶险。
English: If the sun moves south and Taibai is north of the sun, or if the sun moves north and Taibai is south of the sun, it is called contraction, which indicates that the Hou Wang is in trouble. If he is using soldiers, it is good luck to retreat, but it is dangerous to advance.

古文：用兵象太白：太白行疾，疾行；迟，迟行。
现代文：用兵的必须善于观察太白的表象：太白星运行得快，用兵应速战速决；太白星运行慢，用兵也应持重缓行，静以待变。
English: The soldiers must be good at observing the appearance of the Taibai: the Taibai Star runs fast, the soldiers should speed up and fight quickly; the Taibai Star runs slowly, the soldiers should also hold their weight and walk slowly, and wait for change.

古文：角，敢战。
现代文：太白星明亮有芒角，士兵也有锋芒敢战。
English: The too-white star has bright mane horns, and the soldiers also have sharp mane horns.

古文：动摇躁，躁。
现代文：太白星动摇为躁动，兵也宜动。
English: If the Taibai Star wavers, it is considered to be restless, and the soldiers should also move.

古文：圜以静，静。
现代文：太白星圆而静，兵也宜静。
English: Too white stars are round and quiet, soldiers should also be quiet.

古文：顺角所指，吉；反之，皆凶。
现代文：沿着太白星芒角所指方向用兵吉利；逆芒角方向用兵凶。
English: Along the direction indicated by the angle of the white star, the soldiers are lucky; in the direction of the opposite angle, the soldiers are evil.

古文：出则出兵，入则入兵。
现代文：太白星出则出兵，太白星隐入地下则应收兵。
English: If the star is too white, troops will be sent out, but if the star is too white and hidden underground, troops should be received.

古文：赤角，有战；白角，有丧；黑圜角，忧，有水事；青圜小角，忧，有木事；黄圜和角，有土事，有年。
现代文：太白星有赤色芒角，预示有战争发生；白色芒角，预示有丧事；黑色芒角而且钝，国有忧患，或有水灾；青色芒角而且既小又钝，国有忧患，或者于五行属木的祸事；黄色芒角而且颜色平和，芒角圆钝，国有于五行属土的事发生，有较好的年成。
English: A too-white star has a red crescent, foreshadowing the occurrence of war; a white crescent, foreshadowing a funeral; a black crescent and dull, the country is in distress, or there is a flood; a blue crescent and both small and dull, the country is in distress, or there is a calamity of the five elements; a yellow crescent and a peaceful color, the crescent is round and dull, the country is in the five elements, there is a good harvest.

古文：其已出三日而复，有微入，入三日乃复盛出，是谓耎，其下国有军败将北。
现代文：太白星已经出现三日而又稍微隐入，或者隐入已经三日又大出，称作耎，则相对的国家有率军失败的将领。
English: A too-white star has been appearing for three days and then fading slightly, or a fading star has been appearing for three days and then fading greatly, and is called a cocoon, while the opposite country has a failed general leading an army.

古文：其已入三日又复微出，出三日而复盛入，其下国有忧；师有粮食兵革，遗人用之；卒虽众，将为人虏。
现代文：太白星已入三日又稍有所出，或者已出现三日又复大入，则相对国家有忧患；军队的粮食赀重，会落入敌国之手；士卒虽多，将军却被敌国俘虏。
English: If the star is too bright for three days and then fades slightly, or if it is too dim for three days and then fades again, the relative country will be in distress; the army's grain is heavy and will fall into the hands of the enemy country; although there are many soldiers, the general has been captured by the enemy country.

古文：其出西失行，外国败；其出东失行，中国败。
现代文：太白星在西方出现时运行失常，预示外国的入侵军队失败；在东方出现时运行失常，预示本国的军队失败。
English: When the white star appears in the west, it malfunctions, foreshadowing the failure of foreign invading forces; when it appears in the east, it malfunctions, foreshadowing the failure of domestic forces.

古文：其色大圜黄滜，可为好事；其圜大赤，兵盛不战。
现代文：太白星大而且圆，色黄而又润泽，可做一些通使、会盟之类的和好之事；圆大而色赤，象征兵势虽盛而无战争。
English: The too-white star is large and round, yellow and moist, and can do some good and good things such as envoys and alliances; it is large and red, symbolizing that there is no war even though the army is strong.

古文：太白白，比狼；赤，比心；黄，比参左肩；苍，比参右肩；黑，比奎大星。
现代文：太白星色白，与天狼星相似；色赤，与心星相似；色黄，与参宿左肩上的大星相似；色苍，与参宿右肩上的大星相似；色黑，与奎宿中的大星相似。
English: The too-white star is white in color, similar to Sirius; red in color, similar to the Heart Star; yellow in color, similar to the large star on the left shoulder of Betelgeuse; pale in color, similar to the large star on the right shoulder of Betelgeuse; and black in color, similar to the large star in the Kuiper Belt.

古文：五星皆从太白而聚乎一舍，其下之国可以兵从天下。
现代文：五星随大白聚集在同一舍之中，与所聚处对应的国家可以兵纵横于天下。
English: The Five Stars gather in the same house with the Great White, and the country corresponding to the place where they gather can spread all over the world.

古文：居实，有得也；居虚，无得也。
现代文：太白星所停留处为应当停留的地方，对应国有实利可得；所停留处若是不应停留的地方，对应国虽吉而无所得。
English: If the place where the Taibai Star stops is a place where it should stop, the corresponding country can make real profits; if the place where it should stop is a place where it should not stop, the corresponding country will have no income, although it is lucky.

古文：行胜色，色胜位，有位胜无位，有色胜无色，行得尽胜之。出而留桑榆间，疾其下国。
现代文：由太白星卜吉凶，有关诸因素中，太白星运行的迟疾伏见等状况比星的颜色更重要，星的颜色比所在方位更重要，而有方位吉利的条件胜于无方位吉利的条件，有颜色吉利的条件胜于没有此条件者，若得到运行吉利的条件胜过其他所有条件，即运行有利，色、位全都不利也毫无关系。
English: Among the factors related to the auspicious and inauspicious aspects of the Taibai Star, the delay of the operation of the Taibai Star is more important than the color of the star, the color of the star is more important than the position, and the conditions with the auspicious position are better than the conditions without the auspicious position, and the conditions with the auspicious color are better than those without this condition. If the conditions for the auspicious operation are better than all other conditions, that is, the operation is favorable, and the color and position are all unfavorable, it does not matter.

古文：上而疾，未尽其日，过参天，疾其对国。
现代文：太白星出以后，迟迟停留于树梢之间，对应国不利。
English: After the star is too bright, it lingers between the treetops, which is disadvantageous to the corresponding country.

古文：上复下，下复上，有反将。其入月，将僇。
现代文：向上行，速度极快，行期未尽，其行已超过了星空的三分之一，对于对应国的敌对国不利。太白星忽上忽下，上下反复，预示对应国有反叛的将军。
English: It travels upwards at a very fast speed, and its journey is not over yet. Its journey has already covered more than a third of the starry sky, which is unfavorable to the enemy country of the corresponding country. The white star suddenly goes up and down, and goes up and down repeatedly, foreshadowing the rebel general of the corresponding country.

古文：金、木星合，光，其下战不合，兵虽起而不斗；合相毁，野有破军。
现代文：太白入月中，预示将军遭杀戮。金星与木星会合而有光，对应的地区有战争而兵不相遇，兵虽起而不战；会合而无光，预示双方大战，一方被击破。
English: If the moon is too white, it means that the general has been killed. If Venus and Jupiter meet, there will be light. If there is a war in the corresponding region, the soldiers will not meet, and the soldiers will not fight. If they meet and there is no light, it means that there will be a war between the two sides, and one side will be defeated.

古文：出西方，昏而出阴，阴兵强；暮食出，小弱；夜半出，中弱；鸡鸣出，大弱：是谓阴陷于阳。
现代文：太白星自西方出，时在昏时为阴，西方也属阴，所以象征阴兵强盛。阴兵晚饭时出动，兵势小弱；夜半时出动，势中弱；鸡鸣时出动，最弱，这叫做阴陷于阳。
English: The too-white star rises from the west, and when it is at dusk, it is yin, and the west is also yin, so it symbolizes the strength of the yin soldiers. When the yin soldiers go out for dinner, the army is weak; when they go out at midnight, the army is weak; when the rooster crows, the army is weak. This is called the yin falling into the yang.

古文：其在东方，乘明而出阳，阳兵之强，鸡鸣出，小弱；夜半出，中弱；昏出，大弱：是谓阳陷于阴。
现代文：太白星在东方出现，时在黎明，为阳，东方也属阳，所以象征阳兵强。阳兵倘若鸡鸣时出动，兵势小弱；夜半时出动，势中弱；黄昏时出动，势大弱，这叫做阳陷于阴。
English: A very white star appears in the east at dawn, it is the sun, and the east is also the sun, so it symbolizes the strength of the Yang soldiers. If the Yang soldiers go out when the rooster crows, the army is weak; if they go out at midnight, the army is weak; if they go out at dusk, the army is weak. This is called the sun falling into the shade.

古文：太白伏也，以出兵，兵有殃。
现代文：太白星在地下伏行的时候出兵，兵必有祸殃。
English: If Taibai Xingxing sends out soldiers while he is hiding underground, the soldiers will be in trouble.

古文：其出卯南，南胜北方；出卯北，北胜南方；正在卯，东国利。
现代文：太白星出于卯位以南，象征南方胜北方；出于卯位以北，象征北方胜南方；正好出现在卯位，对东方国有利。
English: If the star is too white, it will appear south of the throne, symbolizing the victory of the south over the north; if it is too white, it will appear north of the throne, symbolizing the victory of the north over the south; if it happens to appear in the throne, it will be beneficial to the East.

古文：出酉北，北胜南方；出酉南，南胜北方；正在酉，西国胜。
现代文：太白星出于酉位以北，北方胜南方；出于酉位以南，南方胜北方；正好出现在酉位，对西方国有利。
English: If the star is too white, the north will win over the south; if the star is too white, the south will win over the north; if the star is too white, the north will win over the south; if the star is too white, the south will win over the north.

古文：其与列星相犯，小战；五星，大战。
现代文：太白星与诸恒星相陵犯，预示有小规模的战争发生；与行星相陵犯，有大的战争发生。
English: If a white star is in conjunction with the stars, it indicates that a small-scale war will occur; if it is in conjunction with the planets, a large-scale war will occur.

古文：其相犯，太白出其南，南国败；出其北，北国败。
现代文：相犯时，太白星位在所犯星的南边，预示南边的国家的战败；太白星在所犯星的北边，预示北边的国家的战败。
English: When they collide, the white star is south of the offending star, indicating the defeat of the country to the south; the white star is north of the offending star, indicating the defeat of the country to the north.

古文：行疾，武；不行，文。
现代文：太白运行得快，象征对应国有武勇；如果太白处于停留期间，象征对应国多礼有文。
English: If the Taibai runs fast, it symbolizes the corresponding country's valor; if the Taibai is in a period of stay, it symbolizes the corresponding country's courtesy.

古文：色白五芒，出蚤为月蚀，晚为天夭及彗星，将发其国。
现代文：太白星色白有五芒角，早出则可能出现月食，晚出就会变成天夭星或彗星，祸事将会发生在对应国中。
English: If the star is too white, it will have a pentagonal shape. If it rises too early, there may be a lunar eclipse. If it rises too late, it will turn into a shooting star or a comet. The disaster will occur in the corresponding country.

古文：出东为德，举事左之迎之，吉。
现代文：太白星从东方出为德星，行事若居太白左方或者面对太白星，吉。
English: Taibai Star rises from the east as a virtuous star. If you stay to the left of Taibai or face Taibai Star, you will be lucky.

古文：出西为刑，举事右之背之，吉。
现代文：从西方出为刑星，行事若居太白右方或背向太白，吉。
English: If you come from the west and act as a punishing star, if you stay on the right side of Taibai or turn your back to Taibai, good luck.

古文：反之皆凶。
现代文：相反则凶。
English: The opposite is true.

古文：太白光见景，战胜。
现代文：太白星光能够见影，战则能胜。
English: Too white starlight can see the shadow, the battle can be won.

古文：昼见而经天，是谓争明，强国弱，小国强，女主昌。
现代文：昼见太白过午位，称为争明，预示强国要变弱，弱国将要变强，女主势力将要昌盛。
English: If the sun is too bright in the afternoon, it is said to be too bright, which indicates that the strong countries will become weaker, the weak countries will become stronger, and the female forces will flourish.

古文：亢为疏庙，太白庙也。
现代文：亢宿是天神的外朝，是指为太白星神的外朝。
English: The Pleiades is a sparse temple in the sky, a temple that is too white.

古文：太白，大臣也，其号上公。
现代文：太白，又是大臣的象征，号为上公。
English: It is too white, and it is also a symbol of the minister, and his name is Shangguo.

古文：其他名殷星、太正、营星、观星、宫星、明星、大衰、大泽、终星、大相、天浩、序星、月纬。
现代文：太白还有其他名称，如殷星、太正、营星、观星、宫星、明星、大衰、大泽、终星、大相、天浩、序星、月纬等。
English: Taibai also has other names, such as Yinxing, Taizheng, Yingxing, Guanxing, Gongxing, Star, Great Decline, Osawa, Final Star, Great Phase, Tianhao, Sequence Star, Moon Latitude, etc.

古文：大司马位谨候此。察日辰之会，以治辰星之位。
现代文：官位为大司马者欲知吉凶应仔细观察太白星的运行。观察太阳与其他星辰的交会以判定辰星的位置。
English: If you want to know whether you are lucky or unlucky, you should carefully observe the movement of the Taibai Star. Observe the intersection of the sun with other stars to determine the position of the star.

古文：曰北方水，太阴之精，主冬，日壬、癸。
现代文：按五行说，辰星于五方属北方，于五行属水，是太阴月亮的精华聚成，于四时为冬，于十天干为壬癸。
English: According to the five elements, the hour star belongs to the north in the five elements, belongs to the water in the five elements, is the essence of the yin and yang of the moon, is winter at four o'clock, and is dry in ten days.

古文：刑失者，罚出辰星，以其宿命国。
现代文：刑罚失当者，天降惩罚于辰星中表现出来，由辰宿的状况判断对应国的吉凶。
English: If the punishment is inappropriate, the heaven-sent punishment will be manifested in the stars, and the fortunes of the corresponding country will be judged by the situation of the stars.

古文：是正四时：仲春春分，夕出郊奎、娄、胃东五舍，为齐；仲夏夏至，夕出郊东井、舆鬼、柳东七舍，为楚；仲秋秋分，夕出郊角、亢、氐、房东四舍，为汉；仲冬冬至，晨出郊东方，与尾、箕、斗、牵牛俱西，为中国。
现代文：由辰星以正四时季节：二月春分，黄昏时出于西郊外奎、娄、胃以东五宿的范围内，对应的分野为齐；仲夏夏至，辰星于黄昏时出现在西郊外东井、舆鬼、柳以东七宿范围之内，对应的分野为楚；仲秋秋分，辰星于黄昏时出现在西郊外角、亢、氐、房以东四宿范围内，对应分野为汉；仲冬冬至，辰星于早晨出现在东方郊外，与尾宿、箕宿、南斗宿、牵牛宿一起随天球西行，对应分野是中原。
English: According to the four o'clock position of the star, the seasons are as follows: at the vernal equinox in February, at dusk, the star will appear in the western suburbs within the range of Kui, Yao, and Goku to the east, and the corresponding fields will be aligned; at the midsummer solstice, the star will appear at dusk in the western suburbs within the range of Dongjing, Myogi, and Liu to the east, and the corresponding fields will be aligned; at the autumnal equinox in mid-autumn, the star will appear at dusk in the western suburbs in the outer corner, within the range of Yao, Yao, and

古文：其出入常以辰、戌、丑、未。
现代文：辰星出现与隐没常常是在辰、戌、丑、未四个方位之间。
English: The appearance and disappearance of the stars are often between the four directions of "Chun," "Jing," "Chou" and "Wei."

古文：其蚤，为月蚀；晚，为彗星及天夭。
现代文：辰星越次早出，会被月所掩成为星食；晚出，就会变成彗星或其他妖星。
English: The next time the star rises early, it will be covered by the moon and become a star eclipse; if it rises late, it will turn into a comet or other monster star.

古文：其时宜效不效为失，追兵在外不战。
现代文：某时辰星应当出现而没出现是罚有失当的表现，虽追兵在外没有战斗。
English: If a star should appear at a certain time but does not appear, it is an improper performance, although there is no battle outside the pursuit.

古文：一时不出，其时不和；四时不出，天下大饥。
现代文：一季不出，该季阴阳不和，四季不出，天下五谷不收，有大饥荒。
English: One season does not appear, the yin and yang of the season are not in harmony, the four seasons do not appear, there is no grain in the world, and there is a great famine.

古文：其当效而出也，色白为旱，黄为五谷熟，赤为兵，黑为水。
现代文：辰星按时出现了，星色白预兆有旱灾，色黄为五谷丰收，色赤有战争，色黑为水灾。
English: The star appeared at the right time. The white color of the star indicates drought, the yellow color indicates a good harvest, the red color indicates war, and the black color indicates floods.

古文：出东方，大而白，有兵于外，解。
现代文：出于东方，星大而色白，表示有敌兵在外，得解兵而去。
English: From the east, the star is large and white, indicating that there are enemy soldiers outside, and they must be relieved and leave.

古文：常在东方，其赤，中国胜；其西而赤，外国利。
现代文：辰星常在东方，星色赤，表示中国胜利；常在西方，星色赤，表示对外国有利。
English: The hour star is often in the east, the star is red, indicating China's victory; often in the west, the star is red, indicating that it is beneficial to foreign countries.

古文：无兵于外而赤，兵起。
现代文：外无敌兵而辰星色赤，将有兵起。
English: When there are no invincible soldiers outside and the stars are red, there will be a military uprising.

古文：其与太白俱出东方，皆赤而角，外国大败，中国胜；其与太白俱出西方，皆赤而角，外国利。
现代文：辰星与太白星都从东方出现，都是星色赤红而有芒角，预兆外国将有大败，中国得胜利；都从西方出现，而且星色赤红有芒角，对外国有利。
English: Both the Hour Star and the Too-White Star appear from the East. Both are star-colored red and have a crescent, foreshadowing that foreign countries will be defeated and China will be victorious. Both appear from the West, and the star-colored red has a crescent, which is beneficial to foreign countries.

古文：五星分天之中，积于东方，中国利；积于西方，外国用兵者利。
现代文：若将天球从子午位中分，五星聚集于子午位以东，对中国有利，聚集于子午位以西，对外国用兵的一方有利。
English: If the celestial sphere is divided from the meridian, the five stars will gather to the east of the meridian, which is beneficial to China, and to the west of the meridian, which is beneficial to the side that uses foreign soldiers.

古文：五星皆从辰星而聚于一舍，其所舍之国可以法致天下。
现代文：五星都随辰星聚于某一星舍，相应国可以法取天下。
English: The five stars are gathered in a certain mansion with the clock, and the corresponding country can take the world by law.

古文：辰星不出，太白为客；其出，太白为主。
现代文：辰星不出现时，太白为客星；与辰星一起出现，太白为主星，辰星为客星。
English: If the star does not appear, it is too folded to be a guest; if the star appears, it is too white.

古文：出而与太白不相从，野虽有军，不战。
现代文：辰星出现而与太白星不在同一方位，郊外虽有敌兵而没有战斗。
English: The star of the hour appeared, but it was not in the same direction as the star of the day. Although there were enemy soldiers in the suburbs, there was no battle.

古文：出东方，太白出西方；若出西方，太白出东方，为格，野虽有兵不战。
现代文：辰星出东方，太白星出西方；或者辰星出西方，太白星出东方，都称为格，预示郊外有兵而没有战斗。
English: The hour star rises in the east, and the white star rises in the west; or the hour star rises in the west, and the white star rises in the east, are both called Ge, indicating that there are soldiers in the suburbs, but no battle.

古文：失其时而出，为当寒反温，当温反寒。
现代文：辰星不按时出现，表示气候应当寒冷反而温暖，应当温暖反而寒冷。
English: If the star does not appear on time, it means that the weather should be cold but warm, and it should be warm but cold.

古文：当出不出，是谓击卒，兵大起。
现代文：应当出现而不出现，称为击卒，预兆有大规模的乱兵兴起。
English: If it should appear, but does not, it is a false alarm, and the whole world will be at war.

古文：其入太白中而上出，破军杀将，客军胜；下出，客亡地。
现代文：辰星入太白之中并从太白星上边离去，预兆有军队被击破、将军被杀的大事发生，客军为胜利的一方；自太白星下边离去，客军失败，丧失领土。
English: The hour star enters the Taibai and departs from the top of the Taibai, foreshadowing that the army will be defeated and the general will be killed, and the guest army will be the winning side; departing from the bottom of the Taibai, the guest army will fail and lose territory.

古文：辰星来抵太白，太白不去，将死。
现代文：辰星追及太白，太白仍停留不动，预兆有将军死。
English: Chinsing chased after Taibai, but Taibai remained motionless, foreshadowing the general's death.

古文：正旗上出，破军杀将，客胜；下出，客亡地。
现代文：辰星自旗星上出，预兆有破军杀将的事发生，客军胜利；下出，客军失败，丧失领土。
English: When the hour star rises from the flag star, it is a sign that the defeated army will kill the general, and the guest army will win; when the hour star falls, the guest army will fail and lose territory.

古文：视旗所指，以命破军。
现代文：观察芒角所指方向，以判定何方军队失败。
English: It is necessary to look at the direction of the flag star to divinize which side is the defeated army.

古文：其绕环太白，若与斗，大战，客胜。
现代文：辰星环绕太白，如同与太白相斗，预示有大战发生，客军得胜。
English: The hour star encircles Taibai, as if fighting with Taibai, foreshadowing that a great war will occur and the guest army will win.

古文：兔过太白，间可椷ā剑，小战，客胜。
现代文：辰星从太白星旁经过，其间距离约一剑宽，预示有小规模的战争发生，客军得胜。
English: The hour star passes by the white star, and the distance between them is about a sword's breadth, foreshadowing a small-scale war and the victory of the guest army.

古文：兔居太白前，军罢；出太白左，小战；摩太白，有数万人战，主人吏死；出太白右，去三尺，军急约战。
现代文：辰星在太白星前，罢军休战；从太白左方经过，有小战发生；与太白星光相触而过，有数万人规模的战争发生，主人一方的官吏被杀；从太白右方经过，相去三尺，象征军情紧急，双方相约而战。
English: In front of the Taibai Star, the Hour Star strikes a truce; passing by the left side of the Taibai Star, a small war occurs; passing by the Taibai Star, a war of tens of thousands of people occurs, and the officials of the host side are killed; passing by the right side of the Taibai Star, three feet apart, symbolizing the military emergency, the two sides fight by agreement.

古文：青角，兵忧；黑角，水。赤行穷兵之所终。
现代文：辰星有青色芒角，军队有忧患；黑色芒角，有水灾；赤色芒角，有外兵来犯，势穷者复灭而终。
English: The hour star has a blue cusp, the army has sorrow; the black cusp, there is a flood; the red cusp, there are foreign soldiers to commit crimes, and the poor are restored and destroyed.

古文：兔七命，曰小正、辰星、天欃、安周星、细爽、能星、钩星。
现代文：势不穷，兵不终。兔星有七个名称，就是：小正、辰星、天欃、安周星、细爽、能星、钩星。
English: The Rabbit Star has seven names, namely: Xiaozheng, Chenxing, Tianyao, Anzhouxing, Xiaoshuang, Nengxing and Hookxing.

古文：其色黄而小，出而易处，天下之文变而不善矣。
现代文：星的颜色发黄且星光很小，出现时又不按正常的方位，表示天下有大的政策变化，不利于百姓。
English: The yellow color of the star and the small size of the starlight, when it appears, it does not follow the normal direction, indicating that there are major policy changes in the world, which is not conducive to the people.

古文：兔五色，青圜忧，白圜丧，赤圜中不平，黑圜吉。
现代文：免星有五种颜色：青而圆预示忧患，白而圆预示丧事，赤而圆预示中有不平事，黑而圆则吉利。
English: There are five colors of the star: blue and round foretell sorrow, white and round foretell mourning, red and round foretell trouble, and black and round foretell good luck.

古文：赤角犯我城，黄角地之争，白角号泣之声。
现代文：兔星有赤色芒角预示有敌军来犯我城，黄色芒角预示有争夺土地的事发生，白色芒角预示丧事，有号哭之声。
English: The rabbit star has a red cape, which foreshadows an enemy army coming to attack our city, a yellow cape, which foreshadows a land dispute, a white cape, which foreshadows a funeral, and a wailing sound.

古文：其出东方，行四舍四十八日，其数二十日，而反入于东方；其出西方，行四舍四十八日，其数二十日，而反入于西方。
现代文：辰星出东方，运行四舍，经四十八日，其中快行二十日，然后反方向从东方入于地下；辰星出于西方，运行四舍，经四十八日，其中快行二十日，然后反方向自西方入于地下。
English: The Hour Star comes from the east, travels around for 48 days, including 20 days of fast travel, and then enters the underground in the opposite direction from the east; the Hour Star comes from the west, travels around for 48 days, including 20 days of fast travel, and then enters the underground in the opposite direction from the west.

古文：其一候之营室、角、毕、箕、柳。
现代文：观测辰星应在营室、角宿、毕宿、箕宿、柳宿之中的某一宿之旁。
English: The star should be observed near one of the following lodgings: camp room, corner lodgings, side lodgings, lodge, and willow lodgings.

古文：出房、心间，地动。
现代文：辰星出于房、心二宿之间，有地震发生。
English: An earthquake occurred between the houses of Hatsu and Shin.

古文：辰星之色：春，青黄；夏，赤白；秋，青白，而岁熟；冬，黄而不明。
现代文：辰星的颜色：春季，青黄色；夏季，赤白色；秋季，青白色，预兆年岁丰熟；冬季，黄色，星不明亮。
English: The color of the lucky star: spring, blue-yellow; summer, red-white; autumn, blue-white, a sign of ripe age; winter, yellow, the star is not bright.

古文：即变其色，其时不昌。
现代文：某季改变颜色，该季不得顺昌。
English: If the color changes in a season, the season must not be a success.

古文：春不见，大风，秋则不实。
现代文：辰星春季不出现，有大风，秋天物不结实。
English: Stars do not appear in the spring, there is a strong wind, and things are not solid in the fall.

古文：夏不见，有六十日之旱，月蚀。
现代文：夏季不出现，有六十天的旱灾，有月蚀发生。
English: Summer does not appear, there is a sixty-day drought, and lunar eclipses occur.

古文：秋不见，有兵，春则不生。
现代文：秋季不出现，有战争，春天物不萌发。
English: Autumn does not appear, there is war, spring things do not germinate.

古文：冬不见，阴雨六十日，有流邑，夏则不长。
现代文：冬季不出现，有阴雨六十天，有流亡的城邑，夏天物不生长。
English: Winter does not appear, there is rain for sixty days, there are exiled cities, and in summer things do not grow.

古文：角、亢、氐，兖州。
现代文：角、亢、氐三宿，分野为衮州。
English: There are three lodgings in Kakunodate, Saitama and Saitama, and the area is Saitama Prefecture.

古文：房、心，豫州。
现代文：房、心二宿，为豫州。
English: Fang and Xin are both in Henan Province.

古文：尾、箕，幽州。
现代文：尾、箕，分野为幽州。
English: Tail, beak, the field is Yuzhou.

古文：斗，江、湖。
现代文：南斗为江、湖地区。
English: Nandu is the center of the river and lake area.

古文：牵牛、婺女，扬州。
现代文：牵牛、婺女，为扬州。
English: "Cowherd" and "Lady with an Ermine" are from Yangzhou.

古文：虚、危，青州。
现代文：虚、危，分野为青州。
English: The virtual and dangerous areas are in Qingzhou.

古文：营室至东壁，并州。
现代文：营室到东壁，为并州。
English: The camp room extends to the east wall, which is the annex.

古文：奎、娄、胃，徐州。
现代文：奎、娄、胃、三宿，分野为徐州。
English: Kui, Qi, stomach, Mishuku, the field is Xuzhou.

古文：昴、毕，冀州。
现代文：昴、毕二宿为冀州。
English: , Bi Erjuku is Jizhou.

古文：觜觿、参，益州。
现代文：觜觽、参宿的分野为益州。
English: The area of  and参宿 is Yishu.

古文：东井、舆鬼，雍州。
现代文：东井、舆鬼为雍州。
English: Dongyi and Myonggim are from Yongzhou.

古文：柳、七星、张，三河。
现代文：柳、七星、张宿的分野为三河地区。
English: The willow, seven-star and Zhangshu areas are in the Sanhe region.

古文：翼、轸，荆州。
现代文：翼、轸二宿为荆州。
English: 翼 and 二宿 are in Jingzhou.

古文：七星为员官，辰星庙，蛮夷星也。
现代文：七星是员官的象征，是辰星的庙廷，是占卜蛮夷吉凶的星宿。
English: The seven stars are the symbol of the officials, the temple court of the star of the hour, and the star of divination.

古文：两军相当，日晕；晕等，力钧；厚长大，有胜；薄短小，无胜。
现代文：两军对阵时，发生日晕，若日晕各处大小厚薄相同，表示两军势均力敌；某方肥厚长大，某方有获胜的希望；某方薄而短小，该方必无胜利和希望。
English: When the two armies are facing each other, a sun haze occurs. If the size of the sun haze is the same everywhere, it means that the two armies are evenly matched; if one side is fat and has grown up, one side has the hope of winning; if one side is thin and short, that side will have no victory and hope.

古文：重抱大破无。
现代文：日有重抱，大胜；有破，无胜。
English: There are days of heavy embrace and great victory; there are days of defeat and no victory.

古文：抱为和，背为不和，为分离相去。
现代文：抱，主两军言和；有背气，军不得和，背主分离而去。
English: Embrace, the two armies of the Lord are reconciled; there is a backlash, the army cannot be reconciled, the army is separated from the Lord.

古文：直为自立，立侯王；破军杀将。
现代文：有直气，象征有自立事，指自立为侯王；也象征有破军杀将的事发生。
English: There is straightforwardness, symbolizing self-reliance, referring to self-reliance as the lord of the manor; it also symbolizes the occurrence of breaking the army and killing the general.

古文：负且戴，有喜。
现代文：日旁有负有戴，象征有喜庆事。
English: Around the sun, there are burdens and burdens, symbolizing joy and celebration.

古文：围在中，中胜；在外，外胜。
现代文：日晕外有芒，被围者胜；晕内有芒，围敌者胜。
English: When the sun is eclipsed, the besieged is victorious; when the sun is eclipsed, the besieged is victorious.

古文：青外赤中，以和相去；赤外青中，以恶相去。
现代文：日晕外圈青色里圈红色者，双方言和而去；外圈红里圈青者，双方怀愤而去。
English: If the sun is faint, the outer circle is blue, the inner circle is red, the two sides are reconciled; if the outer circle is red, the inner circle is blue, the two sides are angry.

古文：气晕先至而后去，居军胜。
现代文：日旁气或晕出现早消失得晚，主军胜利。
English: The sun's breath or halo appears early and disappears late, and the main army is victorious.

古文：先至先去，前利后病；后至后去，前病后利；后至先去，前后皆病，居军不胜。
现代文：出现早消失得也早，对主军起初有利，后来不利；出现晚消失也晚，对主军起初不利，后来有利；出现晚消失早，对主军前后都不利，主军必不能胜。
English: Appearing early and disappearing early is advantageous to the main army at the beginning and disadvantageous later; appearing late and disappearing late is disadvantageous to the main army at the beginning and advantageous later; appearing late and disappearing early is disadvantageous to the main army both before and after, and the main army will not be able to win.

古文：见而去，其发疾，虽胜无功。
现代文：出现后很快消失了，虽胜不会有大功。
English: It appeared and then quickly disappeared, although it won't have done much good.

古文：见半日以上，功大。
现代文：出现在半日以上的才有大功。
English: It is a great achievement to appear for more than half a day.

古文：白虹屈短，上下兑，有者下大流血。
现代文：白虹的形状短而屈，上、下端尖锐，见则预失相应地区有大流血事发生。
English: The shape of the white rainbow is short and bent, the upper and lower ends are sharp. According to the prediction, there will be bloodshed in the corresponding area.

古文：日晕制胜，近期三十日，远期六十日。
现代文：由日晕判定吉凶，应验的日期近在三十日之内，远在六十日之内。
English: Judging the auspicious and inauspicious by the halo of the sun, the date of fulfillment is close to within thirty days, and far within sixty days.

古文：其食，食所不利；复生，生所利；而食益尽，为主位。
现代文：日食，象征不吉利；食后复生，象征吉利；日全食，吉凶的承担者是君主，非全食，的承担都为臣下。
English: The solar eclipse symbolizes bad luck; the resurrection after the eclipse symbolizes good luck; the total solar eclipse, the bearer of good or bad luck is the monarch, and the bearer of non-total eclipse is the vassal.

古文：以其直及日所宿，加以日时，用命其国也。
现代文：根据日食的方位，日所在位置，再加上日食的时间早晚，可以判定对应国的吉凶。
English: According to the position of the eclipse, the location of the sun, and the time of the eclipse, the fortunes of the corresponding country can be determined.

古文：月行中道，安宁和平。
现代文：月在房星中道运行，象征着世道的安宁与和平。
English: The moon moves in the middle of the stars, symbolizing the tranquility and peace of the world.

古文：阴间，多水，阴事。
现代文：在中道以北的阴间运行，象征多雨水，有阴事。
English: It runs in the netherworld north of the middle path, symbolizing a lot of rain and gloom.

古文：外北三尺，阴星。北三尺，太阴，大水，兵。
现代文：阴间以北三尺是阴星，阴星以南三尺之间是太阴道，月行于太阴道象征有大水和兵事。
English: Three feet north of the netherworld is the netherworld, and three feet south of the netherworld is the super-vagina. When the moon passes through the super-vagina, it symbolizes water and war.

古文：阳间，骄恣。
现代文：同样，中道以南为阳间，阳间以外三尺处为阳星，阳星以北三尺之间为太阳道，月行于阳间，象征君主骄横恣肆。
English: Similarly, south of the middle path is the sun, three feet outside the sun is the sun star, three feet north of the sun is the sun path, and the moon is in the sun, symbolizing the arrogance and arbitrariness of the monarch.

古文：阳星，多暴狱。
现代文：行于阳星间，象征国中多以暴虐凶残治刑狱。
English: It goes between the sun and the stars, symbolizing that most of the country's prisons are cruel and brutal.

古文：太阳，大旱丧也。
现代文：行于太阳道，象征将有大旱和丧事。
English: To walk in the path of the sun, foretells drought and death.

古文：角、天门，十月为四月，十一月为五月，十二月为六月，水发，近三尺，远五尺。
现代文：月行于角宿和天门之间，若事在十月，来年四月成灾，事在十一月，来年五月成灾；事在十二月，来年六月成灾，灾是发大水，少说水深三尺，多说深可达五尺。
English: If the moon passes between Kakunodate and Heaven's Gate in October, the disaster will occur in April of the following year, in November, the disaster will occur in May of the following year, and in December, the disaster will occur in June of the following year. The disaster is large water, with a minimum depth of three feet and a maximum depth of five feet.

古文：犯四辅，辅臣诛。
现代文：月与房四星中的任一颗相陵犯，预示有辅佐大臣被诛杀。
English: The moon and any one of the four stars in the four-pointed star indicate that a vice-minister has been killed.

古文：行南北河，以阴阳言，旱水兵丧。
现代文：月行于南河、北河附近，按行道在阴或阳判断：在南河之阴有旱灾、有丧事，在北河之明有水灾、有兵事。
English: When the moon is near the South River and the North River, it is judged according to whether the path is in the shade or the sun: in the shade of the South River, there are droughts and funerals, and in the light of the North River, there are floods and military affairs.

古文：月蚀岁星，其宿地，饥若亡。
现代文：由于月掩蔽岁星发生岁星星蚀，预示对应地区有饥荒或死亡。
English: Due to the lunar occultation of the year star, the year star eclipse occurred, indicating famine or death in the corresponding area.

古文：荧惑也乱，填星也下犯上，太白也强国以战败，辰星也女乱。
现代文：月蚀荧惑星预示世道混乱，月蚀填星预示有臣下犯上作乱，月蚀太白星预示强国由于战争而衰败，月蚀辰星预示有女子作乱。
English: Lunar eclipses of fluorescent planets foreshadow chaos in the world, lunar eclipses filled with stars foreshadow a vassal committing a riot, lunar eclipses too white foreshadow the decline of a powerful country due to war, and lunar eclipses with stars foreshadow a woman's riot.

古文：蚀大角，主命者恶之；心，则为内贼乱也；列星，其宿地忧。
现代文：月蚀大角星，对于执掌命令的君主不利；月蚀心宿，预示有内贼作乱；其他诸星被蚀，预示相应地区有忧患。
English: The Moon eclipses Arcturus, which is unfavorable for the monarch who is in charge of the order; the Moon eclipses Arcturus, foreshadowing that there are insiders causing turmoil; other stars are eclipsed, foreshadowing that there is sorrow in the corresponding region.

古文：月食始日，五月者六，六月者五，五月复六，六月者一，而五月者五，凡百一十三月而复始。
现代文：自月食开始的日子算起，每隔五个月一次的月食连续发生六次，每隔六个月一次的月食连续发生五次，重又每隔五个月发生一次，连续食六次，隔六个月一次的月食发生一次，每隔五个月一次的月食发生五次，总计凡经一百一十三个月上述月食的过程重复发生一遍。
English: Counting from the day of the beginning of the lunar eclipse, the lunar eclipse every five months occurs six times in a row, the lunar eclipse every six months occurs five times in a row, the second occurs every five months, the eclipse six times in a row, the lunar eclipse every six months occurs once, the lunar eclipse every five months occurs five times, and in total, the process of the above-mentioned lunar eclipse repeats every one hundred and thirteen months.

古文：故月蚀，常也；日蚀，为不臧也。
现代文：所以说月蚀，是很平常的事；日食却不常见，见之必会有灾祸。
English: Therefore, a lunar eclipse is a very common thing; a solar eclipse is not common, and there will certainly be a disaster.

古文：甲、乙，四海之外，日月不占。
现代文：甲、乙日发生交食，应验在海外，所以不用来占卜。
English: If a cross-fertilization occurs on days A and B, the fulfillment is overseas, so it is not used for divination.

古文：丙、丁，江、淮、海岱也。
现代文：丙、丁日主南方，对应地区为江、淮、海岱。
English: C and D days are mainly in the south, and the corresponding regions are Jiang, Huai, and Hailu.

古文：戊、己，中州、河、济也。
现代文：戊、己日主中央，对应地区是中州、河、济一带。
English: E and G are mainly in central Japan, and the corresponding areas are around Chushu, He and Ji.

古文：庚、辛，华山以西。
现代文：庚、辛日主西方，对应地区为华山以西。
English: Geng and Xin are mainly in the west, and the corresponding area is in the west of Huashan.

古文：壬、癸，恒山以北。
现代文：壬、癸日主北方，对应地区为恒山以北。
English: The days of Ren and Jun are mainly in the north, and the corresponding area is north of Hengshan Mountain.

古文：日蚀，国君；月蚀，将相当之。
现代文：日食，应验在国君身上；月食，应验在将相的身上。
English: The eclipse of the sun is fulfilled in the sovereign; the eclipse of the moon is fulfilled in the general.

古文：国皇星，大而赤，状类南极。
现代文：国皇星，星大且颜色赤红，形状类似南极老人星。
English: King Star, the star is large and reddish in color, similar in shape to the Antarctic Old Man's Star.

古文：所出，其下起兵，兵强；其冲不利。
现代文：国皇星出现在哪一宿，象征对应的地区会有战事发生，而且兵势强盛，与它相对一宿的国家则不利。
English: When the national emperor star appears in any of the quarters, it symbolizes that there will be war in the corresponding region, and the army is strong, and the country that is opposite to it is unfavorable.

古文：昭明星，大而白，无角，乍上乍下。所出国，起兵，多变。
现代文：昭明星，星大而色白，没有芒角，忽上忽下地移动，昭明星出现，象征相应地区会有战事发生，且形势多变。
English: Zhao star, the star is large and white, there is no angle, suddenly moving up and down, Zhao star appears, symbolizing that there will be war in the corresponding area, and the situation is changeable.

古文：五残星，出正东东方之野。
现代文：五残星，出现于正东方向，在东方分野的上空。
English: The five remaining stars appear in the due east direction, hovering over the eastern sector.

古文：其星状类辰星，去地可六丈。
现代文：形状类似于辰星，距地面约六丈高。
English: The shape is similar to a star, and it is about six feet high from the ground.

古文：大贼星，出正南南方之野。
现代文：大贼星，出现于正南方向，在南方分野的上空。
English: The Great Thief appears due south, over the Southern Hemisphere.

古文：星去地可六丈，大而赤，数动，有光。
现代文：距地面高约六丈，星大而色红，时常摇动，有光芒。
English: From the ground about six feet high, the star is large and red, often shakes, and has a glow.

古文：司危星，出正西西方之野。
现代文：司危星，出现于正西方向，在西方分野的上空。
English: Sige Star, appearing due west, over the western fields.

古文：星去地可六丈，大而白，类太白。
现代文：距地面高约六丈，星大而色白，类似于太白星。
English: About six feet above the ground, the star is large and white, similar to a white star.

古文：狱汉星，出正北北方之野。星去地可六丈，大而赤，数动，察之中青。
现代文：狱汉星，出现于正北方向，在北方分野的上空，距地面高约六丈，星大而色红，时常摇动，仔细观察可以发现星中微带青色。
English: Gu Han Xing, appears in the due north direction, in the sky over the northern fields, about six feet high from the ground, the star is large and red, often shaking, careful observation can find the star with a slight blue tint.

古文：此四野星所出，出非其方，其下有兵，冲不利。
现代文：以上四个方向所出现的星，星出现以及不在应当出的方向上出现，那它所对应的国家就会有战事发生，相冲位置对应的国家也不吉利。
English: The star that appears in the above four directions, if the star appears and does not appear in the direction it should appear, then the country it corresponds to will have a war, and the country corresponding to the collision position is also unlucky.

古文：四填星，所出四隅，去地可四丈。
现代文：四填星，出现于天球四宫相连处的东北、西北等四隅地区，距地面高约四丈。
English: Four-pointed stars, appearing in the four corners of the sky, such as the northeast and northwest, where the four quarters of the sky are connected, about four feet above the ground.

古文：地维咸光，亦出四隅，去地可三丈，若月始出。
现代文：地维咸光星，也出现于上述的四隅地区，距地面高约三丈，星光朦胧，如同月亮刚出现时的样子一样。
English: Earth-dimension halo star, also appears in the above-mentioned four corners of the area, about three feet high from the ground, starlight hazy, just like the appearance of the moon when it first appeared.

古文：所见，下有乱；乱者亡，有德者昌。
现代文：与星出对应的地区若有乱，作乱者必会失败灭亡；有德者将昌盛。
English: If there is disorder in the region corresponding to Hoshide, the troublemakers will surely fail and perish; those with virtue will prosper.

古文：烛星，状如太白，其出也不行。
现代文：烛星，形状如同太白星，出现后不行不动。
English: The candlestick, shaped like a white star, cannot be moved after it appears.

古文：见则灭。所烛者，城邑乱。
现代文：出现不久则消失，对应的地区城邑有乱。
English: Soon after appearing, they disappear, and the corresponding regional towns are in turmoil.

古文：如星非星，如云非云，命曰归邪。
现代文：样子似星非星，似云非云，称为归邪。
English: It looks like a star, but it is not a star, it looks like a cloud, but it is not a cloud, it is called evil.

古文：归邪出，必有归国者。
现代文：归邪出现，预兆必有归降于中国者。
English: If there is a return to evil, it is a sign that there will be a return to the Chinese.

古文：星者，金之散气，其本曰火。
现代文：星，是五行中金气的离散之气，本身是一团火。
English: The star is the dispersed gas of gold in the five elements, and is itself a ball of fire.

古文：星众，国吉；少则凶。
现代文：星众多，对应的国家吉利；少则凶险不利。
English: If there are many stars, the corresponding country will be lucky; if there are few stars, the country will be unlucky.

古文：汉者，亦金之散气，其本曰水。汉，星多，多水，少则旱，其大经也。
现代文：天汉，也是离散的金气，本身是水，天汉中星数多，预兆地上多水；星数少，预兆地上水少有旱灾，以上是以星占卜吉凶的大致情形。
English: Heaven and hell, which are also discrete gold and gas, are themselves water. The more stars in heaven and hell, the more water on the ground; the fewer stars, the less drought on the ground. The above is the general situation of good luck and bad luck in astrology.

古文：天鼓，有音如雷非雷，音在地而下及地。其所往者，兵发其下。
现代文：天鼓，有声音大如雷又不是雷，音响在地上传播，发声处又不在地上，声音所往的方向，有兵兴起。
English: Heavenly drums, there is a sound as loud as thunder, but it is not thunder, the sound propagates on the ground, the sound source is not on the ground, the direction of the sound, soldiers arise.

古文：天狗，状如大奔星，有声，其下止地，类狗。
现代文：天狗，它的形状如同一颗大流星，出现的时候有隆隆声，传到地面，好像狗吠。
English: Tengu, which is shaped like a large meteor, appears with a rumbling sound that reaches the ground like a barking dog.

古文：所堕及，望之如火光炎炎冲天。
现代文：在它坠落的过程中，看上去有炎炎的火光冲天。
English: As it falls, it appears to shoot flames into the sky.

古文：其下圜如数顷田处，上兑者则有黄色，千里破军杀将。
现代文：坠落的地方被撞击成一个数顷的圆坑，上端尖锐处呈黄色，象征着军队剽悍，锐不可挡，可奔袭千里破军杀将。
English: The place where it fell was knocked into a round crater several hectares in size, and the sharp point at the upper end was yellow, symbolizing that the army was fierce and unstoppable, and could rush thousands of miles to defeat and kill the general.

古文：格泽星者，如炎火之状。
现代文：格泽星，形状如同炎火。
English: A lattice star, shaped like a flame.

古文：黄白，起地而上。下大，上兑。
现代文：黄白色，从地上升起，下面大上面尖。
English: Yellowish-white, rising from the ground, large below, pointed above.

古文：其见也，不种而获；不有土功，必有大害。
现代文：格泽星出现，就算不耕种也能获得大丰收；再者，如果没有好的收成，则必然会有大的灾祸发生。
English: If a lucky star appears, a large harvest can be obtained even if it is not cultivated; moreover, if there is no good harvest, there will inevitably be a major disaster.

古文：蚩尤之旗，类彗而后曲，象旗。
现代文：蚩尤旗，形状如同彗星，不同是后端弯曲如旗。
English: Zhou Yuqi, shaped like a comet, with the difference that the back end is curved like a flag.

古文：见则王者征伐四方。
现代文：蚩尤旗出现，表示将有王者征伐四方。
English: The appearance of the banner indicates that there will be a king to conquer the four directions.

古文：旬始，出于北斗旁，状如雄鸡。
现代文：旬始，出现于北斗星旁，形状如同雄鸡。
English: At the beginning of the season, it appears next to the Big Dipper, shaped like a rooster.

古文：其怒，青黑，象伏鳖。
现代文：星怒时有芒角，星为青黑色，形状如同伏鳖。
English: When the star is angry, there are horns, the star is blue-black, and the shape is like a cormorant.

古文：枉矢，类大流星，蛇行而仓黑，望之如有毛羽然。
现代文：枉矢，如同大流星，弯弯曲曲如蛇行走，呈苍黑色，看上去象是有羽毛一样。
English: The false arrow, like a meteor, twists and turns like a snake, is pale black, and looks like it has feathers.

古文：长庚，如一匹布着天。此星见，兵起。
现代文：长庚星，如同一匹布挂在天上，此星出现，预示有兵兴起。
English: Chang Geng star, like a cloth hanging in the sky, this star appears, heralding the rise of soldiers.

古文：星坠至地，则石也。
现代文：星落在地上，则是石头。
English: Stars fall to the ground and turn to stone.

古文：河、济之间，时有坠星。
现代文：在黄河、济水流域之间，时常有坠落的星石。
English: Between the Yellow River and the Jishui Basin, there are often falling asteroids.

古文：天精而见景星。
现代文：天空清朗而明亮时，有的能见到景星。
English: When the sky is clear and bright, some stars can be seen.

古文：景星者，德星也。
现代文：景星，就是德星。
English: Jing Xing, that is, De Xing.

古文：其状无常，常出于有道之国。
现代文：它的形状不固定，常常出现于治理得好的国家。
English: Its shape is not fixed and it often appears in well-governed countries.

古文：凡望云气，仰而望之，三四百里；平望，在桑榆上，千余二千里；登高而望之，下属地者三千里。
现代文：凡是观察云气，若仰面才能望见，云气距人不过三四百里；若平望过去，见云气在树梢之间，可以看一二千里；若登高望远，才能见到云气与地相连，可以看三千里。
English: When observing the clouds, if you look up, you can see the clouds, which are only three to four hundred miles away from you; if you look straight ahead, you can see the clouds between the treetops, you can see twelve thousand miles; if you climb high and far, you can see the clouds connected to the ground, you can see three thousand miles.

古文：云气有兽居上者，胜。
现代文：云气有各种各样的形状，上边如同兽类的，吉利。
English: The clouds have all kinds of shapes, and the tops are like animal horns, auspicious.

古文：自华以南，气下黑上赤。
现代文：自华山以南的云气，下为黑色上赤色。
English: From the clouds south of Mount Hua, the bottom is black and the top is red.

古文：嵩高、三河之郊，气正赤。
现代文：嵩高山、三河一带野外的云气，是正红色。
English: The clouds in the open air around the mountains and the three rivers are bright red.

古文：恒山之北，气下黑上青。
现代文：恒山以北的云气，下边黑色上边为青色。
English: The clouds north of Hengshan are black on the bottom and blue on the top.

古文：勃、碣、海、岱之间，气皆黑。
现代文：勃海、碣石和海岱之间的云气，都是黑色。
English: The sea, the clouds between the rocks and the seagulls, are all black.

古文：江、淮之间，气皆白。
现代文：江、淮之间的云气，都是白色。
English: The clouds between the Yangtze River and Huai River are all white.

古文：徒气白。
现代文：象征得到徒众的云气是白色的。
English: The cloud that symbolizes the gathering of the people is white.

古文：土功气黄。
现代文：象征得土功的云气是黄色的。
English: The clouds, which symbolize the achievements of the country, are yellow.

古文：车气乍高乍下，往往而聚。
现代文：车队行走产生的云气忽高忽低，有时还聚在一起。
English: The cloudiness of the car ride fluctuates from high to low, often coming together.

古文：骑气卑而布。
现代文：骑兵奔走产生的云气低矮但分布面积较大。
English: The spirit of the cavalry is low and broad.

古文：卒气抟。前卑而后高者，疾；前方而后高者，兑；后兑而卑者，却。
现代文：步卒行走产生的云气则高一些，窄一些。云气前边低后边高，表示奔行急，速度快；前边方形后边高，表示士卒精锐；云气后端尖锐且越来越低，表示军队退败。
English: The clouds produced by marching step by step are higher and narrower. The front edge of the clouds is low and the back edge is high, indicating that the army is rushing and the speed is fast; the front edge is square and the back edge is high, indicating that the soldiers are elite; the back end of the clouds is sharp and getting lower, indicating that the army is defeated.

古文：其气平者其行徐。前高而后卑者，不止而反。
现代文：云气平表示军行缓慢，前端高后端低的云气，表示军队不应停留而应返回。
English: The cloud level indicates that the military march is slow, the front end is high and the back end is low, indicating that the army should not stay and should return.

古文：气相遇者，卑胜高，兑胜方。
现代文：二方云气相遇，云气低的一方战胜云气高的一方；云气强锐的一方战胜云气平整的一方。
English: Two sides of clouds meet, the side with low clouds defeats the side with high clouds; the side with strong clouds defeats the side with flat clouds.

古文：气来卑而循车通者，不过三四日，去之五六里见。
现代文：敌气低矮行疾，若向我方移动，且是循车辙而来，不过三四日可至，距我方五六里可见敌踪。
English: If the enemy is moving towards us, and is following a rut, but can arrive in three or four days, the enemy's tracks can be seen five or six miles away from us.

古文：气来高七八尺者，不过五六日，去之十余里见。
现代文：敌气高七八尺，不过五六日可至，距我方十余里可见敌踪。
English: The hostile atmosphere is seven or eight feet high, but it can take five or six days to arrive, and enemy tracks can be seen more than ten miles away from us.

古文：气来高丈余二丈者，不过三四十日，去之五六十里见。
现代文：敌气高一丈多到二丈的，不过三四十日可至，距我五六十里可见敌踪。
English: The enemy's strength is one to two times higher, but it can take thirty or forty days to arrive, and the enemy's trail can be seen fifty or sixty miles away from me.

古文：稍云精白者，其将悍，其士怯。
现代文：云气末梢呈亮白色的，将军勇悍，士卒怯懦。
English: The ends of the clouds are bright white, the generals are brave, and the soldiers are cowardly.

古文：其大根而前绝远者，当战。
现代文：云气根抵大而前方延伸得很远的，应当战。
English: When the roots of the clouds are large and the front stretches far away, it is time to fight.

古文：青白，其前低者，战胜；其前赤而仰者，战不胜。
现代文：云气青白色，前端低矮者，战则能胜；前端红色而上仰的，战不能胜。
English: If the clouds are bluish-white and the front end is low, the battle can be won; if the front end is red and uplifted, the battle cannot be won.

古文：阵云如立垣。杼云类杼。轴云抟两端兑。杓云如绳者，居前亘天，其半半天。其蛪者类阙旗故。
现代文：此外，兵阵形成的云气就象直立的垣墙一样；杼云形状象织布木梭一样；轴云抟直而上，两端尖锐，杓云有一种细长如绳的，长可亘天，一半也有半个天空长；另一种如虹蜺的形如有缺损的旗子，所以边角尖锐。
English: In addition, the clouds formed by the array of soldiers are like an upright wall; the shape of the clouds is like a weaving shuttle; the axial clouds are straight up and sharp at both ends. There is a kind of elongated rope-like cloud, which can be as long as the sky, and half of it is half the sky long; another kind of rainbow-shaped cloud is like a flag with defects, so the edges are sharp.

古文：钩云句曲。
现代文：还有钩云象勾一样弯曲。
English: The hook cloud is curved like a hook.

古文：诸此云见，以五色合占。
现代文：诸如以上云出现后，以所具五色综合考察。
English: For example, after the appearance of the above clouds, a comprehensive examination of the five colors occurred.

古文：而泽抟密，其见动人，乃有占；兵必起，合斗其直。
现代文：云气润泽、抟成团而且密，出现后足以动人的，才是某种事务的预兆而可资占卜；以上云气预兆有兵兴起，对应的地区有战争。
English: If the clouds are moist, close-packed, and moving, it is an omen of some kind of event and can be used for divination; if the clouds are ominous, soldiers will rise, and there will be a war in the corresponding region.

古文：王朔所候，决于日旁。
现代文：善望气者王朔所候望的云气，都取自日旁。
English: The clouds that Wang Shuo, the optimist, is looking forward to, are all taken from the sun.

古文：日旁云气，人主象。
现代文：日旁的云气与其他云气相比有人主的气象。
English: Compared to other clouds, the cloud around the sun has a dominant meteorology.

古文：皆如其形以占。
现代文：卜时按云气所成的形象直接判定吉凶。
English: According to the image formed by the cloud, it directly determines the good and bad luck.

古文：故北夷之气如群畜穹闾，南夷之气类舟船幡旗。
现代文：所以北方夷人所成的云气如同畜群和居住的毡包群，南方夷人所成的云气如同舟船和旗幡。
English: Therefore, the clouds made by the northern barbarians are like the herds of cattle and the herds of camels, and the clouds made by the southern barbarians are like the boats and the flags.

古文：大水处，败军场，破国之虚，下有积钱，金宝之上，皆有气，不可不察。
现代文：那些有大水的地方，又败军被击败的战场，有国家破灭的废墟，以及地下埋藏有积钱、金宝之上等都有云气，占卜的人不可不仔细观察。
English: Those places where there is a lot of water, the battlefields where the defeated army was defeated, the ruins where the country was destroyed, and where there is accumulated money buried underground, above the gold treasure, etc. all have clouds, and soothsayers must carefully observe them.

古文：海旁蜄气象楼台；广野气成宫阙然。云气各象其山川人民所聚积。
现代文：海边的蜃气会出现楼台景象；广阔的原野上也能有宫阙的图像浮现与气上，总之云气各自与所在地的山川人民聚积的气象相同。
English: The mirage on the seashore will appear as a towering scene; the mirage on the vast plains can also appear as an image on the mirage. In short, the clouds are the same as the meteorology of the mountains and rivers where the people gather.

古文：故候息耗者，入国邑，视封疆田畴之正治，城郭室屋门户之润泽，次至车服畜产精华。
现代文：所以，候望某国虚实的人，可以到该国的城邑中去，观察封疆、田畴治理得是否平正，城郭房屋门户是否润泽，其次观察车辆、衣著、畜产等项是朴陋还是精华。
English: Therefore, people who are looking forward to the reality of a certain country can go to the cities and towns of the country to observe whether the fiefdoms and fields are well managed, whether the gates of the castle houses are moist, and secondly, whether the vehicles, clothing, livestock and other items are simple or essence.

古文：实息者，吉；虚耗者，凶。
现代文：殷实而繁息者吉利，虚竭耗损的凶。
English: Abundant and bountiful is good luck, and exhausted and exhausted is bad luck.

古文：若烟非烟，若云非云，郁郁纷纷，萧索轮囷，是谓卿云。
现代文：似烟非烟，似云非云，萧索迷蒙，纷郁一团的称为卿云。
English: Similar to smoke is not smoke, similar to cloud is not cloud, chaotic, chaotic, a group is called a cloud.

古文：卿云，喜气也。
现代文：卿云是喜气化成。
English: Jingyun is the result of good fortune.

古文：若雾非雾，衣冠而不濡，见则其域被甲而趋。
现代文：此外还有一种云气，样子像雾又不是雾，人在其中，衣冠不潮不湿。出现这种云气，则表示这个地方将有战事发生，人人都将披甲参战。
English: In addition, there is a kind of cloud, which looks like fog but is not fog, and people are in it, and their clothes are not damp or wet. If this kind of cloud appears, it means that there will be war in this place, and everyone will wear armor to participate in the war.

古文：夫雷电、虾虹、辟历、夜明者，阳气之动者也，春夏则发，秋冬则藏，故候者无不司之。
现代文：雷电、霞光与飞虹、霹雳、夜明等现象，是阳气发动形成的，春、夏二季发生，秋、冬二季隐藏，所以观察测候的人无不等待季节进行观测。
English: Phenomena such as lightning, haze and flying rainbows, thunder and lightning, and twilight are generated by the yang. They occur in the spring and summer, and are hidden in the autumn and winter. Therefore, people who observe the weather are always waiting for the season to observe.

古文：天开县物，地动坼绝。山崩及徙，川塞谿垘；水澹地长，泽竭见象。
现代文：天开裂而见物象，地震动而有裂缝，山崩摧和移动，河川堵塞，谿谷崩壅，水动荡、地长高，沼泽涸竭，都是吉凶的象征。
English: The sky cracking and seeing objects, the earth moving and cracking, the mountains collapsing and moving, the rivers clogging, the valleys collapsing, the water turbulent, the earth growing high, the swamps drying up, are all symbols of good luck and bad luck.

古文：城郭门闾，闺臬藁枯；宫庙邸第，人民所次。
现代文：此外对城郭家门闾巷，观察它们是润泽还是枯槁；对宫室庙宇、官邸宅第，观察普通人民所处的等次。
English: In addition, for castle gates, gates and lanes, observe whether they are moist or dry; for palaces, temples and official residences, observe the rank of ordinary people.

古文：谣俗车服，观民饮食。
现代文：对于谣谚、风俗、车辆、衣著等，重在观察百姓的饮食。
English: With regard to folk tales, customs, vehicles, clothing, etc., it is important to observe the diet of the people.

古文：五谷草木，观其所属。
现代文：对五谷草木，首先观察它们所属的类别。
English: For grain plants, first observe the category to which they belong.

古文：仓府厩库，四通之路。
现代文：对仓廪、马厩、库藏等，首先观察四周的交通道路。
English: For barns, stables, storerooms, etc., first observe the surrounding traffic roads.

古文：六畜禽兽，所产去就；鱼鳖鸟鼠，观其所处。
现代文：对六畜禽兽，重在观察它们的产地和用场，对鱼鳖鸟鼠，重在观察其居处的环境如何。
English: For the six livestock animals, it is important to observe their origin and use, and for the fish, birds and mice, it is important to observe the environment in which they live.

古文：鬼哭若呼，其人逢俉。
现代文：有鬼哭泣，如同呼叫，人逢必有惊貌。
English: A ghost weeps, as if crying out, and people always look startled.

古文：化言，诚然。凡候岁美恶，谨候岁始。
现代文：万物都与此一般，遇异必有表现，所以可以望气知吉凶。此虽俚俗传言，理实不虚。大凡测候年成的好坏，一定要谨慎地观察一年的开始。
English: All things are like this. When something unusual happens, it must manifest itself, so you can hope for the best and know the worst. Although this is a popular rumor, it is not false. When measuring the year's success, you must carefully observe the beginning of the year.

古文：岁始或冬至日，产气始萌。
现代文：岁始或指冬至节，这一天阳气开始产生。
English: At the beginning of the year, or the winter solstice, the yang begins to arise.

古文：腊明日，人众卒岁，一会饮食，发阳气，故曰初岁。
现代文：或者是指腊祭的第二天，腊祭是由于岁事已毕，众人在一起会餐一顿，以引发阳气，所以称第二天为初岁。
English: Or it refers to the second day of the wax festival, the wax festival is due to the end of the year, everyone has a meal together to trigger the yang, so the second day is called the first year.

古文：正月旦，王者岁首；立春日，四时之始也。
现代文：或者是指正月初一，这是君主历法的岁首。或者是指立春节，这一日是四季的开始。
English: Or it refers to the first day of the first month of the first month, which is the first day of the year in the monarch's calendar. Or it refers to the Spring Festival, which marks the beginning of the four seasons.

古文：四始者，候之日。
现代文：以上四种岁始，都是候岁的重要日子。
English: The above four kinds of New Year's Eve are all important days for waiting for the New Year.

古文：而汉魏鲜集腊明正月旦决八风。
现代文：而汉朝人魏鲜，集中在腊祭的第二日与正月初一黎明时由八方所起的风，判定当年的吉凶美恶。
English: However, the Han dynasty people Wei Xian, concentrated on the second day of the wax festival and the wind that arose from the eight directions at dawn on the first day of the first month, judged that year's auspicious and evil.

古文：风从南方来，大旱；西南，小旱；西方，有兵；西北，戎菽为，小雨，趣兵；北方，为中岁；东北，为上岁；东方，大水；东南，民有疾疫，岁恶。
现代文：风从南方来，有大旱灾；从西南来，有小旱；从西方来，有战争；从西北方来，黄豆的收成好，多小雨，促兵兴起；从北方来，是中等年成；从东北来，丰收年；从东方来，有大水；从东南来，百姓多疾病、时疫，年成不好。
English: The wind comes from the south, there is a big drought; from the southwest, there is a small drought; from the west, there is a war; from the northwest, the soybean harvest is good, there is a lot of light rain, and the soldiers are encouraged to rise; from the north, it is a medium harvest; from the northeast, a bumper harvest; from the east, there is heavy water; from the southeast, the people have many diseases and seasonal epidemics, and the year is not good.

古文：故八风各与其冲对，课多者为胜。多胜少，久胜亟，疾胜徐。
现代文：所以八风吉凶各与它们相对方向的风相比较，以多少、久亟、疾徐决胜负：多胜少，时间长久胜短暂，风速快疾胜于舒缓。
English: Therefore, the eight winds of fortune and misfortune are compared with the winds of their opposite direction, and the outcome is decided by how much, how long, and how slowly: more is better than less, long is better than short, and fast is better than slow.

古文：旦至食，为麦；食至日昳，为稷；昳至餔，为黍；餔至下餔，为菽；下餔至日入，为麻。
现代文：黎明到早饭之间的风与麦子收成相对应；早饭到日偏西之间与稷对应；日偏西到晚饭间与黍对应；晚饭后与豆对应，日入时与麻对应。
English: The wind between dawn and breakfast corresponds to the wheat harvest; between breakfast and the west of the day corresponds to the plow; between the west of the day and dinner corresponds to the plow; after dinner corresponds to the beans, and at sunset corresponds to the hemp.

古文：欲终日有云，有风，有日。
现代文：最好的天气是终日有云、有风、有太阳，这样可保一年之间五谷丰收，没有灾害。
English: The best weather is cloudy, windy and sunny all day long, which ensures a bumper harvest year-round and no disasters.

古文：日当其时者，深而多实；无云有风日，当其时，浅而多实；有云风，无日，当其时，深而少实；有日，无云，不风，当其时者稼有败。
现代文：占卜的方法是，在上述某时段中有风、有云、有太阳，对应的作物株深多实；无云、有风、有太阳，对应的作物株浅而多实；有云、有风，无太阳，对应的作物只长秸杆少结籽实；只有太阳、无云、无风，对应的作物有伤败不得收获的。
English: The method of divination is that in the above-mentioned period of time, if there is wind, cloud or sun, the corresponding crop plants will be deep and dense; if there is no cloud, wind or sun, the corresponding crop plants will be shallow and dense; if there is cloud, wind or no sun, the corresponding crops will only have long stalks and few seeds; if there is only sun, cloud or no wind, the corresponding crops will be damaged and cannot be harvested.

古文：如食顷，小败；熟五斗米顷，大败。
现代文：无风、无云的时间若一顿饭的功夫，伤败小；若时间较长，相当于煮熟五斗米的功夫，伤败大。
English: Windless, cloudless time, if the effort of a meal is high, the injury is small; if the time is longer, it is equivalent to the effort of cooking five buckets of rice, the injury is large.

古文：则风复起，有云，其稼复起。各以其时用云色占种所宜。
现代文：此后重又有云、有风，那末被伤败的作物也重新恢复起来，此外还可以由以上所说各时段中的云气颜色占卜一年之中种植何种作物最为适宜。
English: After that, there are more clouds and wind, so the injured crops are also restored. In addition, the color of the clouds in the above-mentioned time periods can be used to predict which crops are most suitable for planting during the year.

古文：其雨雪若寒，岁恶。
现代文：若岁首有雨雪，天气寒冷，当年的年成不好。
English: When I was young, it rained and snowed for the first time, the weather was cold, and that year's harvest was not good.

古文：是日光明，听都邑人民之声。
现代文：岁首这一天，如果天气晴朗，可由都城人民的声音占卜一岁吉凶。
English: On the first day of the year, if the weather is fine, the voices of the people of the capital can tell the fortunes of the year.

古文：声宫，则岁善，吉；商，则有兵；征，旱；羽，水；角，岁恶。
现代文：若是宫声，则该年年成好，吉利；商声，有则会有兵事；徵声，则会有旱灾；羽声，则会有水灾；角声，则这一年的年成很坏。
English: If it is the sound of the palace, then the year will be good, auspicious; if it is the sound of commerce, then there will be military affairs; if it is the sound of conscription, then there will be droughts; if it is the sound of feathers, then there will be floods; if it is the sound of horns, then the year will be very bad.

古文：或从正月旦比数雨。率日食一升，至七升而极；过之，不占。
现代文：还可以正月初一日开始依次数雨多少，卜年成好坏：初一有雨，当年百姓每人每天可得一升的口粮，初二日有雨，每人每天有两升的口粮，一直数到七升为至。初八日以后，不再占卜。
English: You can also start on the first day of the first month of the year, depending on the number of times it rains, to predict whether the year will be good or bad: if it rains on the first day, the people can get one liter of rations per person per day, if it rains on the first two days, there will be two liters of rations per person per day, and it will count up to seven liters. After the eighth day of the first month, there will be no more divination.

古文：数至十二日，日直其月，占水旱。
现代文：若欲自初一占卜到十二日，卜法又有不同，每日与月相对应，占卜水旱灾情。
English: If you want to do divination from the first day of the month to the twelfth day, the divination method is different, each day corresponds to the month, divination water drought disaster situation.

古文：为其环域千里内占，则为天下候，竟正月。
现代文：以上是为小国卜。
English: The above is for small countries.

古文：月所离列宿，日、风、云，占其国。然必察太岁所在。
现代文：所占卜的地区若至方圆千里，由于地域广大，应该按占卜天下的方法，卜尽整个正月，由正月之内，月在周天绕行，经过某宿时是否有太阳、有风、有云，由此判定对应地区的年成好坏吉凶。
English: If the area to be divined is up to a thousand miles in circumference, due to the vastness of the area, it should be done according to the method of divination of the world, the entire first month should be divined, from the first month, the month should go around the day, and whether there is the sun, wind, and clouds when passing a certain lodging, thereby determining the good luck and bad luck of the year in the corresponding area.

古文：在金，穰；水，毁；木，饥；火，旱。
现代文：但是，必须同时观察太岁的位置。太岁在金位，当年丰收；在水位，庄稼受毁损，收成不好；在木位，有饥荒；在火位，岁旱少雨。
English: However, it is necessary to observe the position of the Tai Lai at the same time. The Tai Lai is at the gold level, with a bumper harvest that year; at the water level, the crops are damaged and the harvest is not good; at the wood level, there is famine; at the fire level, there is drought and little rain.

古文：此其大经也。
现代文：以上是大致情形。
English: The above is the general situation.

古文：正月上甲，风从东方，宜蚕；风从西方，若旦黄云，恶。
现代文：正月上旬，多东风，宜于养蚕；多西风，而且初一日有黄云，岁恶不吉利。
English: In the early part of the first month, the wind is more easterly, which is suitable for raising silkworms; the wind is more westerly, and there are yellow clouds on the first day, which is unlucky.

古文：冬至短极，县土炭，炭动，鹿解角，兰根出，泉水跃，略以知日至，要决晷景。
现代文：冬至这一天白昼极短，可以把土和炭分别悬挂在衡的两端，若悬挂炭的一端开始仰起，此后鹿换新角，兰根生芽，泉水涌出，便能约略判定冬至是否到来，但最终还要用日晷测定日影长短，才能够做出准确的判断。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the daylight is very short, and the soil and charcoal can be hung separately at both ends of the balance. If one end of the hanging charcoal begins to rise, and then the deer changes its new horns, the tree roots sprout, and the spring water gushes out, it can roughly determine whether the winter solstice has arrived, but in the end, it is necessary to use the sundial to determine the length of the sun shadow in order to make an accurate judgment.

古文：岁星所在，五谷逢昌。其对为冲，岁乃有殃。
现代文：一般来说，与岁星所在辰次对应的地区五谷丰登，国家昌盛，相对的辰次称为衡，与衡对应的地区则有灾殃。
English: Generally speaking, the area corresponding to the hour of the year star is prosperous, and the country is prosperous. The relative hour is called Heng, and the area corresponding to Heng has disaster.

古文：太史公曰：自初生民以来，世主曷尝不历日月星辰？
现代文：太史公说：自从人类社会形成以来，历代君王何尝不重视观测日月星辰的运动来制定历法呢？
English: Taishigong said: Since the formation of human society, why did the kings of all ages not pay attention to the observation of the movement of the sun, moon and stars to establish a calendar?

古文：及至五家、三代，绍而明之，内冠带，外夷狄，分中国为十有二州，仰则观象于天，俯则法类于地。天则有日月，地则有阴阳。天有五星，地有五行。天则有列宿，地则有州域。
现代文：直到五帝和三代时期，才把这件事继承而又发扬光大了：内为冠带，外为夷狄，使内外有别，将中原划分为十二州，仰则观察天上的星象，俯则模仿、效法地面上的事物，然后知天上有日月，地上有阴阳；天上有五星的运行，地上则有五行的交替变化；天上有列宿，地上则有州郡，一一相对应。
English: It was not until the period of the five emperors and three dynasties that this matter was inherited and carried forward: the crown belt inside, the eunuch outside, making the inside and outside different, dividing the Central Plains into twelve states, looking up to observe the stars in the sky, and looking down to imitate and imitate things on the ground, and then knowing that there is the sun and the moon in the sky and the yin and yang on the ground; there is the movement of five stars in the sky and the alternation of five lines on the ground; there is a lodging in the sky, and there are states and counties on the ground, corresponding to each other.

古文：三光者，阴阳之精，气本在地，而圣人统理之。
现代文：天上的日、月、星三光，是地上的阴阳二气精华凝聚而成，三光之气是以地为本原的，所以圣人得以统一天地而加以治理。
English: The sun, moon, and stars in the sky are the essence of the yin and yang of the earth. The three lights are based on the earth, so the sage was able to unify the earth and govern it.

古文：幽厉以往，尚矣。
现代文：周幽王、厉王以前，时日太遥远了。
English: Before Zhou Yu Wang and Li Wang, the time was too far away.

古文：所见天变，皆国殊窟穴，家占物怪，以合时应，其文图籍禨祥不法。
现代文：由所观察到的天象变化，各国所卜吉凶均不相同；各家取为占卜的物怪，也都是与当时情事相符合的。所以遗留下来的文字图书记载的祥征兆之类，都不可取为法则。
English: From the observed changes in celestial phenomena, all countries have different fortunetellers; the monsters that are taken as divination by each family are also consistent with the situation at that time. Therefore, the auspicious signs recorded in the remaining text books cannot be taken as a rule.

古文：是以孔子论六经，纪异而说不书。
现代文：因此，孔子论述六经，虽记灾异而有关灾异的理论不与记载，至于天道性命之类，更不相传授。
English: Therefore, Confucius discussed the Six Classics, and although he recorded the calamities, the theories about the calamities were not related to the records, and as for the heavenly way of life, they were not taught.

古文：至天道命，不传；传其人，不待告；告非其人，虽言不着。
现代文：这是由于传得其人，不待告而知之；若不得其人，虽告犹不能明。
English: This is due to the fact that if it is reported to someone, it will be known without being reported; if it is not reported to someone, it will not be known.

古文：昔之传天数者：高辛之前，重、黎；于唐、虞，羲、和；有夏，昆吾；殷商，巫咸；周室，史佚、苌弘；于宋，子韦；郑则裨灶；在齐，甘公；楚，唐眛；赵，尹皋；魏，石申。
现代文：往昔得传授而知天数的人：高辛氏以前，有重和黎；唐、虞时期，有羲氏、和氏；夏朝时，为昆吾；殷商时，有巫咸；周朝时，有史佚、苌弘；列国时宋有子韦；郑有裨灶；齐有甘公；楚有唐眛；赵有尹皋；魏有石申。
English: In the past, people who were able to teach and know the number of days: before Gao Xin, there were Chong and Lai; during the Tang and Yu Dynasties, there were Shun and He; during the Xia Dynasty, there was Kunwu; during the Yin Dynasty, there was Wuxian; during the Zhou Dynasty, there was Shi Yan and Zhi Hong; during the Liang Dynasty, there was Song Ziwei; during the Zheng Dynasty, there was Bu Zhao; during the Qi Dynasty, there was Gan Gong; during the Chu Dynasty, there was Tang Yan; during the Zhao Dynasty, there was Yin Yan; and during the Wei Dynasty, there was Shish

古文：夫天运，三十岁一小变，百年中变，五百载大变；三大变一纪，三纪而大备：此其大数也。
现代文：天体运行，三十年有一小变，百年有一中变，五百年有一大变；每三次大变为一纪，三纪之中所有变化都经历一遍了，这是天体运行的大致规律。
English: In the course of a celestial body, there is a small change in thirty years, a medium change in one hundred years, and a great change in five hundred years; every third great change is a period, and all changes in the three periods are experienced once. This is the general rule for the course of celestial bodies.

古文：为国者必贵三五。上下各千岁，然后天人之际续备。
现代文：作为一个国家的君主必然重视三、五这两个数字，就是基于以上原因。经过上下各一千年，然后天人之间的关系才能接续完备。
English: As a monarch of a country, it is necessary to attach importance to the two numbers three and five, for the above reasons. After a thousand years of each, then the relationship between heaven and man can continue to be complete.

古文：太史公推古天变，未有可考于今者。
现代文：太史公推求古代天象的变化，发现没有今天可资考证的资料。
English: Tai Shigong deduced the changes of ancient celestial phenomena and found that there was no information that could be verified today.

古文：盖略以春秋二百四十二年之间，日蚀三十六，彗星三见，宋襄公时星陨如雨。
现代文：约略以春秋二百四十二年之间的历史为例，据记载其间日蚀有三十六次，彗星出现三次，宋襄公时星体陨落如同降雨。
English: Let's take the history between the spring and autumn of 242 as an example. According to records, there were thirty-six solar eclipses, three comets appeared, and the stars fell like rain during the Song Dynasty.

古文：天子微，诸侯力政，五伯代兴，更为主命。
现代文：当时，天子微弱，诸侯有力者主政事，五霸相继兴起，迭次主掌天下的政令。
English: At that time, the emperor was weak, powerful lords were in charge of political affairs, and the Five Dynasties rose one after another, repeatedly taking charge of the world's decrees.

古文：自是之后，众暴寡，大并小。
现代文：从此以后，人众多的对寡少者横施强暴，国大的对小国加以兼并。
English: Since then, the many have raped the few, and the Great Powers have annexed small countries.

古文：秦、楚、吴、越，夷狄也，为强伯。
现代文：秦、楚、吴、越诸国都是夷狄之国，也成了强有力的霸主。
English: The states of Qin, Chu, Wu, and Yue were all the countries of the Yidi, and they also became powerful overlords.

古文：田氏篡齐，三家分晋，并为战国。
现代文：自田氏篡夺了齐国政权、韩、赵、魏三家分割晋国以后，进入战国时期。
English: After the Zida clan usurped the power of Qi, and the Han, Zhao, and Wei dynasties divided Jin, it entered the Warring States period.

古文：争于攻取，兵革更起，城邑数屠，因以饥馑疾疫焦苦，臣主共忧患，其察禨祥候星气尤急。
现代文：各国间争相攻取掠夺，战争相继而起，城镇屡次遭屠灭，加上灾荒、疾疫与火焚所致的焦土之痛，各国君臣无不以此为忧患，所以观察祥征兆、测候星气以预见吉凶更成了当务之急。
English: With countries competing to conquer and plunder each other, wars breaking out one after another, towns and cities being repeatedly destroyed, and the pain of scorched earth caused by natural disasters, epidemics, and fires, the monarchs and ministers of all countries have no choice but to worry about this. Therefore, observing the auspicious signs and measuring the stars to predict good or bad fortune has become a top priority.

古文：近世十二诸侯七国相王，言从衡者继踵，而皋、唐、甘、石因时务论其书传，故其占验凌杂米盐。
现代文：近世以来十二诸侯、七国争相为王，倡言纵横的人接踵而至，何去何从，骤难判定，在这种情况下，皋、唐、甘、石等人各自根据当时事务解释他们的占卜书籍，以致记载他们占验事的资料陵杂琐屑，至于米盐等细事。
English: Since modern times, twelve princes and seven countries have been competing to become king. Advocates from all walks of life have come one after another, and it is difficult to judge where to go. In this situation, Zou, Tang, Gan, Shi and others have each interpreted their divination books according to the current affairs, so that they have recorded the data of their divination tests, as well as trifles, such as rice salt.

古文：二十八舍主十二州，斗秉兼之，所从来久矣。
现代文：占卜以二十八舍分主十二州，而北斗兼主十二州，自很久以前就是这样了。
English: Since long ago, the divination has been to divide the main 12 states into 28 parts, and the Big Dipper is also the main 12 states.

古文：秦之疆也，候在太白，占于狼、弧。
现代文：秦国疆域内的吉凶，候望于太白星，占卜于狼、弧星。
English: The fortunes within the territory of Qin State are awaited by the Taibai Star, and divined by the Wolf and the Arc Star.

古文：吴、楚之疆，候在荧惑，占于鸟衡。
现代文：吴国、楚国疆域内的吉凶，候望于荧惑星，占卜于鸟衡星。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious events within the territory of Wu and Chu are awaited by the fluorescent planet and divined by the bird-sized star.

古文：燕、齐之疆，候在辰星，占于虚、危。
现代文：燕国、齐国疆域内的吉凶，候望于辰星，占卜于虚、危星。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious events within the territory of Yan and Qi are awaited by the star of the hour, and divined by the star of the day and the star of the night.

古文：宋、郑之疆，候在岁星，占于房、心。
现代文：宋国、郑国疆域内的吉凶，候望于岁星，占卜于房、心星。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious events within the territory of Song and Zheng dynasties are awaited by the year star, divined by the house star and the heart star.

古文：晋之疆，亦候在辰星，占于参、罚。
现代文：晋国疆域内的吉凶，也是候望于辰星，占卜于参、罚星。
English: The auspicious and inauspicious events within the territory of Jin are also awaited by the stars, divined by the constellations, and punished by the stars.

古文：及秦并吞三晋、燕、代，自河山以南者中国。
现代文：秦国并吞三晋和燕、代地区以后，华山与黄河以南的地区称为中国。
English: After Qin annexed the three Jin and Yan dynasties, Huashan and the area south of the Yellow River became known as China.

古文：中国于四海内则在东南，为阳；阳则日、岁星、荧惑、填星；占于街南，毕主之。
现代文：中国在四海之中为东南方向，东南方属阳；阳则与日、岁星、荧惑、填星相对应；占于天街星以南诸星，以毕宿为主。
English: Among the four seas, China is in the southeast direction, and the southeast belongs to the yang; the yang corresponds to the sun, the year star, the fluorescence, and the filling star; it accounts for the stars south of the celestial street star, and is dominated by the afterlife.

古文：其西北则胡、貉、月氏诸衣旃裘引弓之民，为阴；阴则月、太白、辰星；占于街北，昴主之。
现代文：中国西北是胡、貉、月氏等穿毡裘、以射猎为生的百姓，西北为阴，阴则与月、太白、辰星相对应，占于天街星以北诸星，以昴星为主。
English: Northwest China is inhabited by the Hu, Yao, and Yue clans, who wear wigs and live by shooting. Northwest China is yin, and yin corresponds to the moon, the great white, and the star of the hour. It accounts for all the stars north of the heavenly street star, and is dominated by the bright star.

古文：故中国山川东北流，其维，首在陇、蜀，尾没于勃、碣。
现代文：所以中国的山脉、河流多是自西南向东北的走向，山川的源头在陇蜀地区，而末尾消失在渤海、碣石一带。
English: Therefore, most of China's mountains and rivers are from the southwest to the northeast. The source of the mountains and rivers is in the Shoushu region, and the end disappears in the Bohai Sea and the Shinshi area.

古文：荧惑为孛，外则理兵，内则理政。故曰 虽有明天子，必视荧惑所在 。
现代文：秦、晋好用兵，有夷狄风，复占太白星，而秦、晋为中国地，所以，中国不但占日、岁等星，也占太白星，太白星也主中国域内的祸福吉凶；而胡、貉经常侵掠中国，只占辰星，因为辰星出入轻躁、疾速，类夷狄，所以常主夷狄人的吉凶。
English: Qin and Jin were good at using soldiers, and they had the wind of the barbarians, and they occupied the Taibai Star, while Qin and Jin were the land of China. Therefore, China not only accounted for the stars of the day and year, but also accounted for the Taibai Star. The Taibai Star was also the master of misfortune, good luck and good fortune in the territory of China. However, Hu and Qin often invaded and plundered China, and only accounted for the Star of the Hour, because the Star of the Hour was nimble and swift, like the barbarians, so it was always the master of the good luck and bad luck of the barbarians.

古文：诸侯更强，时灾异记，无可录者。
现代文：这是大致情形。是前文所说辰星与太白星更相为客、主人的原因。诸侯更为强大，当时记录的灾异等事，没有可以录用的。
English: This is the general situation. It is the reason why Chinsing and Taibaixing were more like guests and masters as mentioned above. The lords were more powerful, and there were no disasters and other things recorded at that time that could be recorded.

古文：秦始皇之时，十五年彗星四见，久者八十日，长或竟天。
现代文：秦始皇在位时，十五年之间彗星出现四次，存在时间长的达到八十多天，彗星之长或者横空而过的。
English: When Qin Shihuang was on the throne, the comet appeared four times in fifteen years, with a long existence of more than eighty days.

古文：其后秦遂以兵灭六王，并中国，外攘四夷，死人如乱麻，因以张楚并起，三十年之间兵相骀藉，不可胜数。
现代文：后来，果然秦朝灭掉六国，统一天下，对外又攘除四周围的夷人，死人枕藉，如同乱麻，因而有张楚王等人共同起兵。前后三十多年之间，兵相踽藉践踏致死者，不可以数计。
English: Later, the Qin Dynasty did indeed exterminate the Six Kingdoms, unifying them under one ruler, and expelling the barbarians from the four surrounding countries. The dead were piled up as if in a chaotic heap. As a result, King Zhang Chu and others jointly raised an army. Between and after more than thirty years, the deaths caused by soldiers trampling on each other cannot be counted.

古文：自蚩尤以来，未尝若斯也。
现代文：自蚩尤以来，从没如此残酷的。
English: It hasn't been this brutal since You You.

古文：项羽救钜鹿，枉矢西流，山东遂合从诸侯，西坑秦人，诛屠咸阳。
现代文：项羽援救钜鹿时，枉矢星西流，此后，山东诸侯兵联合起来，西行破秦，坑杀秦朝降兵，屠灭咸阳城。
English: When Xiang Yu was rescuing Mule Deer, he made a wrong move westward. After that, the Shandong vassal soldiers united and went west to break Qin, kill the Qin Dynasty soldiers, and destroy Xianyang City.

古文：汉之兴，五星聚于东井。
现代文：汉朝兴起时，五星会聚于东井宿之中。
English: At the rise of the Han Dynasty, the Five Stars gathered in the middle of the Dongjing Inn.

古文：平城之围，月晕参、毕七重。
现代文：匈奴兵围汉高祖于平城，在参、毕二宿附近，月晕多至七重。
English: Hun soldiers besieged Han Gaozhu in Pingcheng, in the vicinity of San and Bi Erju, and the moon was as much as seven times fainter.

古文：诸吕作乱，日蚀，昼晦。
现代文：诸吕作乱，发生日食，虽白昼也黑暗无光。
English: The sun will be eclipsed, and although it is daytime, it will be dark and without light.

古文：吴楚七国叛逆，彗星数丈，天狗过梁野；及兵起，遂伏尸流血其下。
现代文：吴、楚等七国叛乱，有彗星长达数丈，天狗星经过梁国郊野。七国兵起以后，以致尸横血流于梁国城下。
English: Wu, Chu and other seven countries rebelled, there was a comet several feet long, and the Tengu star passed through the countryside of Liangguo. After the soldiers of the seven countries rose, the blood of the dead flowed under the city of Liangguo.

古文：元光、元狩，蚩尤之旗再见，长则半天。
现代文：元光、元狩年间，蚩尤旗星两次出现，其长横过半个天空。
English: During the Genko and Genkari eras, the star of the Kuyu Banner appeared twice, its length spanning more than half the sky.

古文：其后京师师四出，诛夷狄者数十年，而伐胡尤甚。
现代文：以后京城四处出兵，与夷狄作战前后数十年，其中与胡人的战争最为激烈。
English: After that, the capital dispatched troops everywhere, and fought against the Yidi for decades, of which the war with the Hu people was the most intense.

古文：越之亡，荧惑守斗；朝鲜之拔，星茀于河戍；兵征大宛，星茀招摇：此其荦荦大者。
现代文：越国灭亡的征兆，是荧惑星守于南斗；攻拔朝鲜的征兆是彗星出现于南河、北河；出兵征讨大宛前，有彗星出现于招摇附近。
English: The signs of the demise of Vietnam are the fluorescent planets guarding Nanto; the signs of the invasion of Korea are the comets appearing in Nanhe and Beihe; before the troops were sent out to fight against Dayuan, a comet appeared in the vicinity of Shouwang.

古文：若至委曲小变，不可胜道。
现代文：以上是最为明显的例证。至于一些小的。较为间接的例证，更是多不胜数。
English: The above are the most obvious examples. As for some small, more indirect examples, they are countless.

古文：由是观之，未有不先形见而应随之者也。
现代文：由此看来，没有一件事不是先由天象表现出来，然后才在世间看到应验。
English: In this view, there is nothing that is not first manifested by the celestial body and then seen fulfilled in the world.

古文：夫自汉之为天数者，星则唐都，气则王朔，占岁则魏鲜。
现代文：汉初以来占卜天数最著名的人，观星的为唐都，望气的是王朔，卜岁美恶的是魏鲜。
English: Since the beginning of the Han Dynasty, the most famous people who have divined the number of days are Tangdu, Wang Shuo, and Wei Xian.

古文：故甘、石历五星法，唯独荧惑有反逆行；逆行所守，及他星逆行，日月薄蚀，皆以为占。
现代文：甘、石历中的五星法，只有荧惑星才有反行或称为逆行。凡荧惑星逆行所停留的地方；以及其他星的逆行，日与月的薄食等，都是占卜的内容。
English: According to the five-star method in the Gregorian and Gregorian calendars, only the fluorescent planets have retrograde motion or are called retrograde motion. Wherever the retrograde motion of the fluorescent planets stops, as well as the retrograde motion of other stars, the eclipses of the sun and the moon, etc., are the content of divination.

古文：余观史记，考行事，百年之中，五星无出而不反逆行，反逆行，尝盛大而变色；日月薄蚀，行南北有时：此其大度也。
现代文：我曾观看史书的记载，考察历朝发生的事件，发现近百年之间，五星没有一颗出现以后不逆行的，逆行的，常常看到星变大，颜色也有变化；日月发生薄食，与它们所处的南北相对位置有关，这是与以前所知的重要不同。
English: I have looked at the records of history books, examined the events that occurred throughout the dynasties, and found that in nearly a hundred years, none of the five stars appeared and did not retrograde, retrograde, often see the stars become larger, the color also changes; the sun and the moon have a thin eclipse, which is related to the relative position of the north and south in which they are located, which is an important difference from what was previously known.

古文：故紫宫、房心、权衡、咸池、虚危列宿部星，此天之五官坐位也，为经，不移徙，大小有差，阔狭有常。水、火、金、木、填星，此五星者，天之五佐，为纬，见伏有时，所过行赢缩有度。
现代文：所以紫宫、房心、权衡、咸池、虚危等列宿部内的星宿，是天上五官的坐位，为经星，不移动迁徙，大小各有差别，宽窄各有常度；而水、火、金、木、填星，这五颗星是天上五官的辅佐，为纬星，它们或隐伏或出现，各有一定规律，运行以及赢或缩也都有确定的度数。
English: Therefore, the constellations in the row of constellations, such as the purple palace, the center of the house, the balance, the salt pond, and the false danger, are the seats of the five heavenly organs. They are the stars that pass through the heavens, do not move or migrate, have different sizes, and their widths and narrows have constants. And the five stars of water, fire, gold, wood, and stars, these five stars are the assistants of the five heavenly organs, and are the stars of the latitude. They are either hidden or appear, and each has a certain law. They also have a certain degree of movement and win or shrink.

古文：日变修德，月变省刑，星变结和。
现代文：日有变化应该修德，月有变化应该减少刑罚，其他星有变则应该结和人心。
English: Daily changes should cultivate virtue, monthly changes should reduce punishments, and other changes should bring people together.

古文：凡天变，过度乃占。
现代文：凡天体有变化，超过正常度数就要占卜吉凶。
English: Whenever there is a change in the celestial body, it is necessary to tell fortunes beyond the normal degree.

古文：国君强大，有德者昌；弱小，饰诈者亡。
现代文：一般是国君强大，而且有德的吉利；弱小，而又文饰诈诡的凶。
English: Generally, the sovereign is strong and virtuous, but weak and deceitful.

古文：太上修德，其次修政，其次修救，其次修禳，正下无之。
现代文：对付天变的办法最好的是修德，其次是改革政事，再其次是就事论事，有危事才加以挽救，又其次是对神行礼以禳除灾害，最下者是不采取任何措施。
English: The best way to deal with the changes in the heavens is to cultivate virtue, the next best is to reform government affairs, the next best is to discuss things as they are and save them only when they are in danger, the next best is to worship God to eliminate disasters, and the last best is to take no measures.

古文：夫常星之变希见，而三光之占亟用。
现代文：普通经星的变化很少见；而对日、月、五星等三光变化进行占卜却是常常使用的；占日月晕的次数在两者之间。
English: The changes of ordinary stars are rare; but the divination of the three-light changes of the sun, moon, and five stars is often used; the number of halos of the sun and moon is between the two.

古文：日月晕适，云风，此天之客气，其发见亦有大运。
现代文：云和风，这是天的客气，它们的出现在大的方面也有规律可循。
English: Clouds and wind, this is the courtesy of heaven, their appearance in large areas also has a pattern to follow.

古文：然其与政事俯仰，最近天人之符。
现代文：而它们与世间政事相关联，最接近于天向人预示吉凶降下的征兆或凭证。
English: And they are related to the world's political affairs, and are the closest to the signs or evidence that the heavens foretell good and evil to people.

古文：此五者，天之感动。
现代文：以上五种，都是天有所感而产生的变动。
English: The above five are all changes brought about by nature.

古文：为天数者，必通三五。终始古今，深观时变，察其精粗，则天官备矣。
现代文：占卜天数的人，必须通晓天运变化的三五大规律，了解古今终始状况，深刻观察时事的变化，研究它们的精粗质地，那么，作为一个掌管天文的官员可说是尽善尽美的了。
English: A person who divines the number of days must be familiar with the thirty-five laws of the changes in the fate of the heavens, understand the final situation from ancient times to the present, deeply observe the changes in current affairs, and study their fine and coarse qualities. Then, as an official in charge of astronomy, it can be said to be perfect.

古文：苍帝行德，天门为之开。
现代文：春季政令适宜，使东方苍帝得以施行其德泽，天门就会为之开放，使三光能从中间通行。
English: The spring decree is appropriate, so that the Eastern God Emperor can carry out his virtue, and the gate of heaven will be opened for him, so that the three lights can pass through the middle.

古文：赤帝行德，天牢为之空。
现代文：夏季政令适宜，使南方赤帝得以施行德泽，天牢就会为之空虚。
English: Summer decrees are appropriate, so that the Southern Red Emperor can carry out Dezhe, and the dungeon will be empty.

古文：黄帝行德，天夭为之起。
现代文：季夏政令适宜，使中央黄帝得以施行德泽，万物普受含养，连天夭星也会起变化。
English: The Qixia Decree is appropriate, so that the Central Yellow Emperor can carry out virtue, all things are universally supported, and even the stars will change.

古文：风从西北来，必以庚、辛。
现代文：有风从西北方向来，且必须是在庚辛日。
English: There is a wind from the northwest, and it must be in the middle of the day.

古文：一秋中，五至，大赦；三至，小赦。
现代文：整个秋季中，这种风能有五次，当有大赦；三次，有小赦。
English: Throughout the autumn, there will be five times of this wind energy, when there will be an amnesty; three times, there will be a small amnesty.

古文：白帝行德，以正月二十日、二十一日，月晕围，常大赦载，谓有太阳也。一曰：白帝行德，毕、昴为之围。
现代文：若来年春季正月二十日、二十一日有月晕成围，当有大赦，是由于太阳寒水的影响太大，应该行赦以消阴气的缘故。
English: If there is a full moon on the 20th and 21st of the first month of next spring, there should be an amnesty, because the influence of the sun's cold water is too great, and an amnesty should be made to dispel the gloom.

古文：围三暮，德乃成；不三暮，及围不合，德不成。
现代文：另一种说法是：西方白帝施德行化，毕宿、昴宿得以被月晕包围。包围三个晚上，功德才算完成；不足三个晚上，或者月晕有缺口没有合围，功德便不能成。
English: Another way of saying this is that the Western Emperor Baidi practiced virtue, and he was able to be surrounded by the moon halo at the end of his stay and at the beginning of his stay. If he was surrounded for three nights, his merit would be complete; if he was surrounded for less than three nights, or if there was a gap in the moon halo and he was not surrounded, his merit would not be complete.

古文：二曰：以辰围，不出其旬。
现代文：还有一种说法是：月晕围辰星，应验的时间不出旬日之间。
English: There is also a saying: the moon halo surrounds the star, and the time of fulfillment does not fall between the days of the lunar calendar.

古文：黑帝行德，天关为之动。
现代文：冬季政令适宜，北方黑帝得以施行德泽，天关为之变动。
English: The winter decree is appropriate, the northern black emperor can carry out Dezhe, and the weather will change.

古文：天行德，天子更立年；不德，风雨破石。
现代文：上述五方天帝得以施行德泽，天子将为此更改年号；若不能施行德泽，必示警戒，有疾风暴雨，拔木破石。
English: If the above-mentioned five heavenly emperors are able to carry out the Deze, the heavenly son will change the year name for this; if they cannot carry out the Deze, they must be alerted, there will be storms and storms, and the trees will be uprooted.

古文：客星出天廷，有奇令。
现代文：有客星出现于天廷之中，必有奇异的政令产生。
English: When a guest star appears in the heavenly court, strange decrees are bound to occur.

