古文：凡治人者何？
现代文：治理民众用什么办法呢？
English: What method should be used to govern the people?

古文：曰：非五谷无以充腹，非丝麻无以盖形。故充腹有粒，盖形有缕。
现代文：回答是，没有五谷人们就没有饭吃，没有丝麻人们就没有衣穿，所以吃饭有了粮食，穿衣有了丝麻。
English: The answer is that without grain, people would not have food to eat, and without silk, people would not have clothes to wear. Therefore, people would have food to eat and silk to wear.

古文：夫在芸耨，妻在机杼，民无二事，则有积蓄。
现代文：男子从事耕种，女子从事纺织，人们专事耕织不受其他事务的影响，国家就有储备了。
English: Men are engaged in farming, women are engaged in textiles, people specialize in farming and weaving are not affected by other matters, and the country has reserves.

古文：夫无雕文刻镂之事，女无绣饰纂组之作。
现代文：提倡男子不要从事奢侈品的雕刻，女子不要从事装饰品的刺绣。
English: It is recommended that men should not engage in the carving of luxury goods, and women should not engage in the embroidery of ornaments.

古文：木器液，金器腥。圣人饮于土，食于土，故埏埴以为器，天下无费。
现代文：木制的食器容易渗水，金属的食器带有腥味，圣人的饮食用具都是来源于土，因而制作陶土用具，这就可杜绝天下的浪费了。
English: Wooden crockery easily leaks, metal crockery has a fishy smell, and the saint's eating utensils are all derived from soil, so they make clay utensils, which can eliminate waste in the world.

古文：今也，金木之性不寒而衣绣饰，马牛之性食草饮水而给菽粟。
现代文：如今，金木本来是不知道寒冷的，却要给它披上锦绣，牛马本来是吃草炊水的，却要喂它粮食，这种做法完全违反了它们的本性，应该建立。
English: Today, the gold tree, which does not know the cold, has to be dressed in brocade, and the cow and horse, which used to eat grass and boil water, have to be fed grain. This practice is completely contrary to their nature and should be established.

古文：是治失其本，而宜设之制也。春夏夫出于南亩，秋冬女练布帛，则民不困。
现代文：合理的制度才是。春、夏男子到田里耕种庄稼，秋、冬女子在家里染织布帛，这样人民就不会贫困了。
English: A reasonable system is: in spring and summer, men go to the fields to cultivate crops, and in autumn and winter, women dye cloth and weave at home, so that the people will not be poor.

古文：今短褐不蔽形，糟糠不充腹，失其治也。
现代文：现在人民穿的是粗布短衫，而且。还遮不住身体，吃的是粗劣食品，而且还填不饱肚子，这是没有把国家治理好的表现。
English: Now the people are wearing coarse cloth shorts, and they can't cover their bodies, they eat poor quality food, and they can't fill their stomachs, which is a sign that the country is not well governed.

古文：古者，土无肥硗，人无勤惰，古人何得，而今人何失邪？
现代文：古时候，土地的肥舟同今天没有两样，人民的勤惰同今天也没有两样，为什么古人丰衣足食，而令人缺吃少穿呀？
English: In ancient times, the fertility of the land was no different from that of today, and the diligence of the people was no different from that of today. Why did the ancients have plenty of food and clothing, but people lacked food and clothing?

古文：耕有不终亩，织有日断机，而奈何寒饥！
现代文：主要是种田的人不能经常耕作，织布的人不能经常纺织，这怎能免于饥寒呢？
English: In the main, people who farm cannot always farm, and people who weave cannot always weave, so how can they be free from cold and hunger?

古文：盖古治之行，今治之止也。
现代文：总的来说，这是由于古代行之有效的耕织制度，到今天已经把它废止了的原故。
English: In general, this is due to the fact that the ancient effective ploughing and weaving system has been abolished to this day.

古文：夫谓治者，使民无私也。
现代文：所谓良好的政治，在于教育民众不要自私。
English: Good politics is about educating people not to be selfish.

古文：民无私，则天下为一家，而无私耕私织。共寒其寒，共饥其饥。
现代文：如果民众不自私，天下就像一家人一样，而不必进行私耕私织，大家都把别人的寒冷当作自己的寒冷，把别人的饥饿当作自己的饥饿。
English: If people are not selfish, the world will be like a family, and there will be no need for selfishness. Everyone will take the cold of others as their own cold, and the hunger of others as their own hunger.

古文：故如有子十人，不加一饭；有子一人，不损一饭。焉有喧呼酖酒以败善类乎？
现代文：因此，有十个孩子的人，也不加重他的生活负担，只有一个孩子的人，也不减轻他的社会责任，这样人们哪里还会喧喧嚷嚷嗜酒作乐，以致败坏良好的风尚呢？
English: Therefore, a man with ten children does not increase his burden of life, and a man with only one child does not lessen his social responsibility, so where will people clamor to drink and have fun, thus corrupting good morals?

古文：民相轻佻，则欲心，争夺之患起矣。
现代文：如果民众不安分，私欲就会产生，争权夺利的祸患就随之而起了。
English: If the people are restless, selfish desires will arise, and the scourge of competition for power and profit will ensue.

古文：横生于一夫，则民私饭有储食，私用有储财。民一犯禁，而拘以刑治，乌有以为人上也。
现代文：如果有一个人违背了这种无私的准则，别人也跟着他把粮食储藏起来自已吃，把财物储藏起来自己用，而民众一旦犯紫，就逮捕治罪，这怎能配得上为万民之首呢？
English: If a man violates this principle of unselfishness, and others follow him in hoarding grain for their own use, and in hoarding goods for their own use, and the people, when they commit a crime, arrest and punish him, how can this man be worthy of being the head of all the people?

古文：善政执其制，使民无私。为下不敢私，则无为非者矣。
现代文：好的政治，就是坚持法制，教育民众不要自私，大家不敢自和，就没有为非作歹的人了。
English: Good politics means adhering to the rule of law, educating the public not to be selfish, and everyone daring not to be self-righteous, so that there are no evil-doers.

古文：反本缘理，出乎一道，则欲心去，争夺止，囹圄空，野充粟多，安民怀远，外无天下之难，内无暴乱之事，治之至也。
现代文：如果人们恢复纯朴的本性，遵循无私的准则，那么，个人和私欲就会打消，争夺行为就会停止，监狱里就会没有囚犯，劳动的人就会遍布田野，生产的粮食就会增多，民众的生活就会安定，四方的民族也会受到关怀，国家没有外患，也没有内乱，这就可以称得上天下大治了。蓝蓝的天空，谁知道它的边际？
English: If people restore their simple nature and follow the principle of selflessness, then personal and selfish desires will be eliminated, competing behaviors will stop, there will be no prisoners in prisons, laborers will spread all over the fields, food production will increase, people's lives will be stable, and the four-sided ethnic groups will be cared for. The country has no foreign diseases and no civil unrest. This can be called the world's great cure. Blue sky, who knows its margin?

古文：苍苍之天，莫知其极。
现代文：五帝三王的政治，谁的方式可供效法呢？
English: The politics of the five emperors and three kings, whose methods can be emulated?

古文：帝王之君，谁为法则？往世不可及，来世不可待，求己者也。
现代文：过去的时代不可能重现，未来的理想也不能只靠等待，只有求之于自己的创造。
English: The times of the past cannot be recreated, and the ideals of the future cannot be achieved just by waiting, but must be sought in one's own creation.

古文：所谓天子者四焉：一曰神明，二曰垂光，三曰洪叙，四曰无敌。
现代文：能够称为天子的，要具备四个条件：一是智慧超人，二是恩布万民，三是功业宏伟，四是天下无敌。
English: To be able to be called the Son of Heaven, one must meet four conditions: First, he must be a superhuman in wisdom, second, he must be the benefactor of all people, third, he must have a magnificent career, and fourth, he must be invincible.

古文：此天子之事也。
现代文：这都是天子应做到的事。
English: This is what the Son of God should do.

古文：野物不为牺牲，杂学不为通儒。
现代文：不能把野生的动物作为祭品，不能把杂凑的学说当成真才实学。
English: Wild animals should not be used as sacrifices, and patchwork doctrines should not be regarded as real learning.

古文：今说者曰： 百里之海，不能饮一夫；三尺之泉，足止三军渴。 
现代文：现今有人说： 百里宽的大海，不够一个贪得无厌的人喝，三尺深的小泉，却够三军之众解渴。 
English: Nowadays, some people say: A hundred-mile-wide sea is not enough for an insatiable man to drink, but a three-foot-deep spring is enough to quench the thirst of three armies.

古文：臣谓：欲生于无度，邪生于无禁。
现代文：我认为私欲的产生由于没有节制，邪恶的产生由于禁止不力。
English: I believe that lust comes from lack of restraint, and evil comes from lack of restraint.

古文：太上神化，其次因物，其下在于无夺民时，无损民财。
现代文：所以，首先是精神感化，其次是因势利导，再次就是不误农时，不竭民财。
English: Therefore, the first is spiritual influence, the second is due to snobbery, and the third is not to miss the agricultural time and not to exhaust the people's wealth.

古文：夫禁必以武而成，赏必以文而成。
现代文：禁止坏人坏事，必须使用强制手段才能成功；奖励好人好事，必须结合教育才能奏效。
English: The prohibition of bad people and bad things must use coercion to succeed; rewarding good people and good things must be combined with education to be effective.

