古文：义宗，名倍，小字图欲，太祖长子，母淳钦皇后萧氏。
现代文：义宗，名倍，乳名图欲，太祖长子，母为淳钦皇后萧氏。
English: Yoshimune, myobake, milk name Tuwo, great-grandfather's eldest son, his mother was the Empress Junqin Xiao.

古文：幼聪敏好学，外宽内挚。神册元年春，立为皇太子。
现代文：幼时聪明敏慧，好学，外表宽厚内心挚诚，神册元年春，立为皇太子。
English: When he was young, he was bright and keen, eager to learn, outwardly generous and sincere at heart. In the spring of the first year of the Divine Calendar, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：时太祖问侍臣曰： 受命之君，当事天敬神。
现代文：当时太祖问侍臣： 受天命的君王，应该事奉上天敬奉神癨。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather asked the courtier: The king, who was appointed by heaven, should serve heaven and worship the gods.

古文：有大功德者，朕欲祀之，何先？ 
现代文：对于建立了巨大功业德行的人，我想要加以祭祀。先祭祀谁呢？ 
English: For those who have built up great merits and virtues, I want to sacrifice them. Who should I sacrifice first?

古文：皆以佛对。
现代文：侍臣们都回答说祭祀佛。
English: The courtiers all replied that they worshipped Buddha.

古文：太祖曰： 佛非中国教。 
现代文：太祖说 ：佛不是中国教。 
English: Grandfather said, "Buddha is not a Chinese religion.

古文：倍曰： 孔子大圣，万世所尊，宜先。 
现代文：耶律倍说 ：孔子是大圣人，万代尊崇之，应当先加以祭祀。 
English: Yerutube said: Confucius is a great saint, revered by all generations, and should be the first to be sacrificed.

古文：太祖大悦，即建孔子庙，诏皇太子春秋释奠。
现代文：太祖大喜，便建了孔子庙，诏令皇太子春秋二季行释奠礼。
English: The great-great-grandfather was overjoyed and built a Confucius temple, and ordered the crown prince to perform a memorial service in spring and autumn.

古文：尝从征乌古、党项，为先锋都统，及经略燕地。
现代文：耶律倍曾经随从太祖征讨乌古、党项，担任先锋都统，又经营治理燕地。
English: Yelutube once followed his great-grandfather in conquering and fighting Ugu and the Party, served as the vanguard of the capital unification, and managed and governed Yan.

古文：太祖西征，留倍守京师，因陈取渤海计。
现代文：太祖西征，留下耶律倍守京师，于是陈说了攻取渤海的办法。
English: The great-grandfather set out for the West, leaving Jerooby to guard the capital, so Chen told him the way to conquer the Bohai Sea.

古文：天显元年，从征渤海。
现代文：天显元年，随太祖征讨渤海。
English: In the first year of Tian Xian, he went with his great-grandfather to conquer the Bohai Sea.

古文：拔扶余城，上欲括户口，倍谏曰： 今始得地而料民，民必不安。
现代文：攻下扶余城，太祖想要检括户口，耶律倍上谏说： 现在刚刚得到其土地就对人口进行清查，百姓一定不会安宁。
English: After the capture of Buyeo City, Taizu wanted to check the household registration, and Yerutobi said: Now that we have just obtained the land, we will conduct an inventory of the population, and the people will not be calm.

古文：若乘破竹之势，径造忽汗城，克之必矣。 
现代文：如果趁势如破竹之势，直捣忽汗城，攻下它是不成问题的。 
English: If we take advantage of the unprecedented situation and directly attack Khancheng, it will not be a problem to capture it.

古文：太祖从之。
现代文：太祖听从了他的意见。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed him.

古文：倍与大元帅德光为前锋，夜围忽汗城，大諲歙穷蹙，请降。
现代文：耶律倍与大元帅耶律德光担任前锋，在夜里包围了忽汗城，大走投无路，请求投降。
English: Yerutube and Grand Marshal Yerutdeguang served as forwards and surrounded the city of Khukhan in the night. They were cornered and asked to surrender.

古文：寻复叛，太祖破之。
现代文：不久又反叛，太祖攻破之。
English: Soon they rebelled again, and Taizu defeated them.

古文：改其国曰东丹，名其城曰天福，以倍为人皇王主之。
现代文：改其国号为东丹，将东丹城命名为天福，命耶律倍为人皇王及东丹国主。
English: He changed the country's name to Dongdan, named Dongdan City as Tianfu, and appointed Yerut to be the king and ruler of Dongdan.

古文：仍赐天子冠服，建元甘露，称制，置左右大次四相及百官，一用汉法。
现代文：又赐给他天子冠冕、服饰，建元甘露，即位执政，设立左右大相、次相及百官，一律用汉法。
English: He also gave him the crown and clothing of the heavenly son, the Jianyuan nectar, the throne of power, the establishment of the left and right grand ministers, the second minister and hundreds of officials, all using Chinese law.

古文：岁贡布十五万端，马千匹。
现代文：每年进贡布十五万端，马一千匹。
English: Every year, 150,000 pieces of cloth and 1,000 horses are brought in.

古文：上谕曰： 此地濒海，非可久居，留汝抚治，以见朕爱民之心。 
现代文：太祖晓谕说： 此地濒临大海，不能长时间留居，所以留下你来安抚治理，以体现我爱民之心。 
English: The great-grandfather said: This place is on the edge of the sea, I can't stay for a long time, so I'll leave you to pacify and govern, to reflect my love for the people.

古文：驾将还，倍作歌以献。
现代文：车驾将要回京，耶律倍做歌进献。
English: The car will return to Beijing, and Yerutube will make a song presentation.

古文：陛辞，太祖曰： 得汝治东土，吾复何忧。 
现代文：于殿前辞别去赴任，太祖说： 有你治理，我还有什么好担心的呢？ 
English: Before leaving for his new post, the great-grandfather said, "With you in charge, what do I have to worry about?

古文：倍号泣而出。
现代文：耶律倍哭着出来。
English: Yerutube burst into tears.

古文：遂如仪坤州。
现代文：于是便到了仪坤州。
English: So I came to Ikunju.

古文：未几，诸部多叛，大元帅讨平之。
现代文：不久，各部多有反叛的，大元帅讨伐平定之。
English: Before long, most of the ministries had rebelled, and the grand marshal went on a crusade to pacify them.

古文：太祖讣至，倍即日奔赴山陵。
现代文：太祖讣告到，耶律倍当日奔赴先帝崩所。
English: When the great-grandfather announced his arrival, Jeroen rushed to the former emperor's burial place the same day.

古文：倍知皇太后意欲立德光，乃谓公卿曰： 大元帅功德及人神，中外攸属，宜主社稷。 
现代文：倍得知皇太后想要立耶律德光，便对公卿们说： 大元帅功业及德行及于人民与神癨，内外官员同心拥护，应该为社稷之主。 
English: When he learned that the empress dowager wanted to promote Ye Lu Deguang, he said to the nobles: "The grand marshal's achievements and virtues have touched both the people and the gods, and officials at home and abroad have wholeheartedly supported him. He should be the master of the society."

古文：乃与群臣请于太后而让位焉。
现代文：于是与群臣向太后请求而让位于德光。
English: So he and his courtiers asked the empress dowager to give way to Deguang.

古文：于是大元帅即皇帝位，是为太宗。
现代文：于是大元帅耶律德光即位为皇帝，这便是太宗。
English: As a result, Grand Marshal Yerut Deguang ascended to the throne as emperor, which was Taizong.

古文：太宗既立，见疑，以东平为南京，徙倍居之，尽迁其民。
现代文：太宗做了皇帝之后，耶律倍受到猜疑，于是以东平为南京，让耶律倍迁居于此，将百姓全部迁出。
English: After Taizong became emperor, Ye Rubei was suspected, so he chose Dongping as Nanjing, let Ye Rubei move here, and moved all the people out.

古文：又置卫士阴伺动静。
现代文：又设置卫士秘密侦候其行止动静。
English: Guards have also been set up to secretly monitor their movements.

古文：倍既归国，命王继远撰《建南京碑》，起书楼于西宫，作《乐田园诗》。
现代文：耶律倍回东丹国之后，命王继远撰作《建南京碑》，造书楼于西宫，做《乐田园诗》。
English: After Yerutube's return to Dongdan, he ordered Wang Jiyuan to write "The Monument to the Founding of Nanjing," to build a library in Xigong, and to write "Song of the Pastoral Garden."

古文：唐明宗闻之，遣人跨海持书密召倍。
现代文：唐明宗听说后，派人跨越大海带着书信秘密招徕耶律倍。
English: When Tang Mingzong heard of this, he sent someone across the sea with a letter to secretly entice Yeludow.

古文：倍因畋海上。
现代文：倍于是田猎于海上。
English: So they hunted in the sea.

古文：使再至，倍谓左右曰： 我以天下让主上，今反见疑；不如适他国，以成吴太伯之名。 
现代文：使者两次前来，耶律倍对左右说： 我将天下让给主上，现在反而受到猜忌；不如到外国去，以成就像吴太伯那样的声名。 
English: When the envoys came twice, Jeroboam said to all around him, "I have yielded up the kingdom to the Lord, and now I am feared; how much better is it for me to go to a foreign country and make a name for myself like the fame of King David!"

古文：立木海上，刻诗曰： 小山压大山，大山全无力。
现代文：立木于海上，刻诗曰： 小山压大山，大山全无力。
English: Standing on the sea, the carved poem says: A small mountain presses against a large mountain, and the large mountain is powerless.

古文：羞见故乡人，从此投外国。 
现代文：羞见故乡人，从此投外国。 
English: Embarrassed to be a native, he has been living abroad ever since.

古文：携高美人，载书浮海而去。
现代文：携高美人，载书渡海离开了故国。
English: He left his home country with Gao Meiren and crossed the sea with a book.

古文：唐以天子仪卫迎倍，倍坐船殿，众官陪列上寿。
现代文：唐以天子仪仗及卫士迎接耶律倍，倍坐于船殿之上，众官员陪侍祝寿。
English: Tang welcomed Ye Luo with the honor of the son of heaven and guards, and he sat on the nave of the ship, accompanied by officials to celebrate his birthday.

古文：至汴，见明宗。
现代文：到了汴京，见明宗。
English: When I got to Shingyo, I saw Myongjong.

古文：明宗以庄宗后夏氏妻之，赐姓东丹，名之曰慕华。
现代文：明宗将庄宗后宫夏氏嫁给他，赐姓东丹，取名慕华。
English: Mingzong married Xia, the concubine of Zhuangzong, to him and gave her the surname Dongdan and took the name Muhua.

古文：改瑞州为怀化军，拜怀化军节度使、瑞慎等州观察使。
现代文：改瑞州为怀化军，拜耶律倍为怀化军节度使、瑞慎等州观察使。
English: Zheng Ruizhou was assigned to the Huaihua Army, and Bai Yerubai was assigned to the Huaihua Army's ceremonial envoy, Ruishen and other state observation envoys.

古文：复赐姓李，名赞华。
现代文：又赐姓李，名赞华。
English: He was also given the surname Li and given the name Zhanhua.

古文：移镇滑州，遥领虔州节度使。
现代文：移镇滑州，遥领虔州节度使。
English: He moved the capital to Leshou, and became the farthest-flung envoy of the Qianzhou Festival.

古文：倍虽在异国，常思其亲，问安之使不绝。
现代文：耶律倍虽然身在异国，每每思念亲人，问安的使者不绝于道。
English: Although she is in a foreign country, Yeludube misses her relatives every day, and the messenger of greetings is constantly on the road.

古文：后明宗养子从珂弑其君自立，倍密报太宗曰： 从珂弑君，盍讨之。 
现代文：后来明宗养子李从珂弑君自立，耶律倍秘密写信给太宗说： 从珂弑君，何不讨伐他？ 
English: Later, Li, the adopted son of Mingzong, became independent from Ke Yijun. Yerubai secretly wrote to Emperor Taizong, "From Ke Yijun, why not fight him?

古文：及太宗立石敬瑭为晋主，加兵于洛。
现代文：待到太宗立石敬瑭为晋主，对洛阳用兵。
English: Wait until Taizong Risshigong is crowned emperor, and then send troops to Luoyang.

古文：从珂欲自焚，召倍与俱，倍不从，遣壮士李彦绅害之，时年三十八。
现代文：从珂想自焚，召耶律倍与他同死，倍不从，从珂便派壮士李彦绅杀害了他，时年三十八岁。
English: He was thirty-eight years old when he was burned at the stake by the Kuomintang, who called on him to die with them, but he refused, and the Kuomintang strongman Li Yansheng killed him.

古文：有一僧为收瘗之。
现代文：有一僧人收其尸骨掩埋之。
English: A monk collected his bones and buried them.

古文：敬瑭入洛，丧服临哭，以王礼权厝。后太宗改葬于医巫闾山，谥曰文武元皇王。
现代文：石敬瑭进入洛阳，著丧服前往吊孝临哭，以天子礼仪暂时停柩待葬，后来太宗将耶律倍改葬于医巫闾山，谥为文武元皇王。
English: Shi Jingyao entered Luoyang, dressed in mourning clothes and went to Hanging Filial Pity to weep, and temporarily suspended the funeral for burial with the etiquette of the Son of Heaven. Later, Emperor Taizong changed Yerubai to be buried in Iwushan Mountain, and he was crowned as the former Emperor Wenwu.

古文：世宗即位，谥让国皇帝，陵曰显陵。
现代文：世宗即位，谥曰让国皇帝，陵曰显陵。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and his name was changed to Emperor Jangguo, and his mausoleum became known as Xianling.

古文：统和中，更谥文献。
现代文：统和年间，改谥文献。
English: During the unification period, documents were altered.

古文：重熙二十年，增谥文献钦义皇帝，庙号义宗，及谥二后曰端顺，曰柔贞。
现代文：重熙二十年，增谥为文献钦义皇帝，庙号义宗，又谥两位皇后为端顺、柔贞。
English: In the 20th year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, Zeng Rong became the Emperor Jin Yi in documents, the temple name was Yizong, and the two empresses were Duan Shun and Zhuozhen.

古文：倍初市书至万卷，藏于医巫闾绝顶之望海堂。
现代文：耶律倍当初购书万卷，藏于医巫闾山绝顶之望海堂。
English: Yerutube initially purchased ten thousand volumes of books, which were stored in the Bokhaido, the highest peak of Iwushan Mountain.

古文：通阴阳，知音律，精医药、砭焫之术。
现代文：通晓阴阳五行，了解音律，精通医药、砭灸之术。
English: He is familiar with the five elements of yin and yang, understands musical rhythms, and is proficient in medicine and moxibustion.

古文：工辽、汉文章，尝译《阴符经》。
现代文：辽、汉文章都写得很精妙，曾翻译过《阴符经》。
English: His articles on Liao and Han were very well written, and he once translated the Yin Fu Jing.

古文：善不令终，天道难诘，得非性刻嗜杀之所致也？
现代文：擅长描绘本国人物，如《射骑》、《猎雪骑》、《千鹿图》，均藏于宋秘府。
English: He was good at depicting local characters, such as "Shooting Horse," "Hunting Snow Horse" and "Thousand Deer Map," all of which are kept in Songpifu.

古文：虽然，终辽之代，贤圣继统，皆其子孙。
现代文：然而他性情苛刻严峻而嗜杀，婢妾有些小过失，常常加以锥刺烧灼之刑。夏氏因为害怕而请求削发为尼。
English: However, his temperament was harsh, severe, and murderous. If his concubine committed some minor faults, she was often punished by being burned at the stake. Mr. Xia was afraid and asked to have his hair cut off.

古文：至德之报，昭然在兹矣。
现代文：有五子：长子世宗，次为娄国、稍、隆先、道隐。
English: There were five sons: the eldest son, Sejong, followed by Shingoku, Bito, Ryusen, and Dokin.

古文：章肃皇帝，小字李胡，一名洪古，字奚隐，太祖第三子，母淳钦皇后萧氏。
现代文：章肃皇帝，乳名李胡，又名洪古，字奚隐，太祖第三子，母为淳钦皇后萧氏。
English: Emperor Zhang Su, nicknamed Li Hu, also known as Hong Gu, the third son of the great-grandfather, his mother was Empress Xiao of Junqin.

古文：少勇悍多力，而性残酷，小怒辄黥人面，或投水火中。
现代文：少时勇武强悍，力大无比，然而生性残忍酷虐，稍微发怒便要在人脸上刺字，或者将人投入水中火中。
English: Sometimes they are brave, strong, and powerful, but they are cruel by nature. If they get a little angry, they will write on people's faces or throw them into water or fire.

古文：太祖尝观诸子寝，李胡缩项卧内，曰： 是必在诸子下。 
现代文：太祖曾经观察诸子睡觉，见李胡收缩颈项睡在最里面，说 ：这个儿子一定比别的儿子们更低劣。 
English: The great-grandfather once observed his sons sleeping. He saw Li Hu clenching his neck and sleeping on his stomach and said, "This son must be inferior to the other sons."

古文：又尝大寒，命三子采薪。
现代文：又曾经在严寒的冬天，让三个儿子去拾柴。
English: He once sent his three sons to collect firewood in the bitter cold of winter.

古文：太宗不择而取，最先至；人皇王取其乾者束而归，后至；李胡取少而弃多，既至，袖手而立。
现代文：太宗不加挑选一律采取最先到达，人皇王采取干柴捆好后才回，后太宗而到，李胡采的少又丢的多，等到到达，只好空手站着。
English: Taizong arrived first without any choice. The human king took the bundle of dried firewood and came back later. After that, Taizong arrived. Li Huchen lost more and gained less. When he arrived, he had to stand empty-handed.

古文：太祖曰： 长巧而次成，少不及矣。 
现代文：太宗说： 长子心思巧，次子容易成功，小儿子就远远比不上他的兄长了。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: The eldest son has a clever mind, the second son is easy to succeed, and the younger son is far less than his elder brother.

古文：而母笃爱李胡。
现代文：然而淳钦后却钟爱李胡。
English: However, Jun Qin loved Li Hu.

古文：天显五年，遣徇地代北，攻寰州，多俘而还，遂立为皇太弟，兼天下兵马大元帅。
现代文：天显五年，太宗派李胡在代北攻城略地，进攻寰州，大肆俘掠而回，于是立为皇太弟，兼天下兵马大元帅。
English: In the fifth year of Tian Xian, Li Hu, a member of the Tai Sect, attacked Zhangzhou on behalf of the North, captured and plundered a large number of people, and then returned. He was appointed as the emperor's younger brother, and also the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：太宗亲征，常留守京师。
现代文：太宗亲征时，每每让他留守京师。
English: When Emperor Taizong himself was enlisting, he always let him stay in Beijing.

古文：世宗即位镇阳，太后怒，遣李胡将兵击之。至泰德泉，为安端、留哥所败。
现代文：世宗即位于镇阳，太后发怒，派李胡率兵攻打他，到泰德泉，为安端、留哥击败。
English: Sejong was located in Zhenyang, and the empress dowager became angry and sent Li Hu to lead an army to attack him, and he went to Taidequan to defeat Anduan and Liu Ge.

古文：太后与世宗隔潢河而阵，各言举兵意。
现代文：太后与世宗在潢河两岸布阵，各自陈说起兵之意。
English: The Empress Dowager and Shizong set up positions on both sides of the Wei River, and each of them said that they wanted to start a war.

古文：耶律屋质入谏太后曰： 主上已立，宜许之。 
现代文：耶律屋质入帐劝谏太后说 ：主上已经正位，应该答应算了。 
English: Yerutoya was credited with persuading Empress Dowager Zou to say, "The Lord has already been enthroned, so we should agree to let it go."

古文：时李胡在侧，作色曰： 我在，兀欲安得立？ 
现代文：当时李胡在旁，听罢变了脸色，说： 有我在，兀欲怎么能即位？ 
English: At that time, Li Hu was by his side. Hearing this, he changed his face and said, "With me, how can he ascend the throne?

古文：屋质曰： 奈公酷暴失人心何！ 
现代文：屋质说： 谁叫您残忍暴虐，失了人心的呢？ 
English: The doorman said: Who made you so cruel and violent that you have lost the hearts of the people?

古文：太后顾李胡曰： 昔我与太祖爱汝异于诸子，谚云： 偏怜之子不保业，难得之妇不主家。 
现代文：太后回头对李胡说 ：从前我跟太祖宠爱你胜过别的孩子，俗话说 ：偏怜之子不保业，难得之妇不主家。 
English: The empress dowager turned to Li Hu and said, "Once upon a time, I and my grandfather loved you more than any other child. As the saying goes, a favoured child is not guaranteed a career, and a rare woman is not the head of the family."

古文：我非不欲立汝，汝自不能矣。 
现代文：不是我不想立你，你自己没有能力立呀！ 
English: It's not that I don't want to stand up for you, it's that you can't stand up for yourself!

古文：及会议，世宗使解剑而言。
现代文：待到盟议时，世宗让李胡解下佩剑说话。
English: When it came to the alliance discussion, Shizong asked Li Hu to unsheathe his sword and speak.

古文：和约既定，趋上京。
现代文：和约定下之后，便到了上京。
English: After making peace, they went to Tokyo.

古文：会有告李胡与太后谋废立者，徙李胡祖州，禁其出入。
现代文：适逢有人告发李胡与太后图谋废今帝立李胡，于是迁李胡于祖州，禁止他出入。
English: When someone accused Li Hu and the empress dowager of plotting to overthrow the current emperor, Li Hu was banished to the city of Zhuzhou.

古文：穆宗时，其子喜隐谋反，辞逮李胡，囚之，死狱中，年五十，葬玉峰山西谷。
现代文：穆宗时，其子耶律喜隐谋反，供辞牵涉到李胡，遭囚禁，死于狱中，时年五十岁，葬于玉峰山西谷。
English: At the time of Mu Zong, his son, Yeluxi Yingying, plotted a rebellion and made a confession implicating Li Hu. He was imprisoned and died in prison at the age of fifty. He was buried in the West Valley of Yufeng Mountain.

古文：统和中，追谥钦顺皇帝。
现代文：统和年间，追谥为钦顺皇帝。
English: In the years of unification, Chouyi became the emperor of Qinshun.

古文：重熙二十一年，更谥章肃，后曰和敬。
现代文：重熙二十一年，改谥章肃，其皇后谥为和敬。
English: In the twenty-first year of the reign of King Heung-hee, he changed his name to Zhang Su, and his empress was named Wo Kei.

古文：二子：宋王喜隐、卫王宛。
现代文：有二子：宋王喜隐、卫王宛。
English: They had two sons: Song Wang Xiyin and Wei Wangwan.

古文：喜隐，字完德，雄伟善骑射，封赵王。
现代文：喜隐，字完德，长得高大魁梧，擅长骑射，封为赵王。
English: Xiyin, the character of the end of virtue, tall and burly, good at riding and shooting, named Zhao Wang.

古文：应历中，谋反，事觉，上临问有状，以亲释之。
现代文：应历年间，谋反，事情败露，皇上临视咨问，得到凭据，于是亲自解其绳缚放了他。
English: Over the years, he plotted a rebellion, the matter was exposed, the emperor made a face-to-face interview, obtained evidence, and then personally released him.

古文：未几，复反，下狱。
现代文：不久，又反叛，投入狱中。
English: Soon, he rebelled again and was thrown into prison.

古文：景宗即位，闻有赦，自去其械而朝。
现代文：景宗即位，听说有赦令，自己去掉镣铐去上朝。
English: When Emperor Jingzong ascended to the throne, he heard that there was a pardon order, so he removed his shackles and went to the imperial court.

古文：上怒曰： 汝罪人，何得擅离禁所！ 
现代文：皇上发怒说： 你是罪人，怎么竟敢擅自离开囚禁之所。 
English: The emperor was furious and said: "You are a sinner, how dare you leave the place of imprisonment without permission.

古文：诏诛守者，复置于狱。
现代文：诏令诛杀看守，又将他投入狱中。
English: He ordered the guard to be beaten to death and then thrown into prison.

古文：及改元保宁，乃宥之，妻以皇后之姊，复爵，王宋。
现代文：待到改元保宁，便赦免了他，将皇后的姐姐嫁给他，恢复其爵位，为宋王。
English: Boryeong waited until the Yuan Dynasty was reformed, then pardoned him, married the empress's sister to him, restored his title, and became the King of Song.

古文：喜隐轻僄无恒，小得志即骄。
现代文：喜隐轻浮，没有恒心，稍微得志便骄傲自得。
English: Light-hearted, without perseverance, a little self-motivated and proud.

古文：上尝召，不时至，怒而鞭之，由是愤怨谋乱。
现代文：穆宗曾经召见他，没有按时前往，皇上发怒鞭打他，因此恼怒怨恨，图谋叛乱。
English: Mu Zong had summoned him, but he did not go on time, and the emperor whipped him in anger, so he was angry and resentful and plotted a rebellion.

古文：贬而复召，适见上与刘继元书，辞意卑逊，谏曰： 本朝于汉为祖，书旨如此，恐亏国体。 
现代文：他被贬斥后又被召回，正好看见皇上给刘继元写信，言辞语意卑躬谦逊，劝谏说 ：本朝于汉为祖父，书信立意如此，恐怕有亏国体。 
English: After he was reprimanded and recalled, he happened to see the emperor's letter to Liu Jiyuan, in which he urged Liu Jiyuan to be humble and humble, saying, "This dynasty is the grandfather of the Han Dynasty. If the letter is written in such a way, I am afraid it will be detrimental to the national identity."

古文：厥后嗣君，虽严法以绳之，卒不可止。
现代文：皇上马上改正了。授他为西南面招讨使，命令他到河南索讨吐蕃民户，渐渐得到提升和任用。
English: The emperor immediately corrected himself. He appointed him as the envoy to the southwest and ordered him to go to Henan Province to solicit people's households. Gradually, he was promoted and appointed.

古文：乌乎，创业垂统之主，所以贻厥孙谋者，可不审欤！
现代文：又诱导众小人谋反，皇上下令给他戴上脚镣手铐，修造狱城将他囚禁于祖州。
English: He also induced many villains to rebel, the emperor ordered him to wear leg irons and handcuffs, and built a prison to imprison him in Zhuzhou.

古文：顺宗，名浚，小字耶鲁斡，道宗长子，母宣懿皇后萧氏。
现代文：宋降卒两百余人想要劫持扶立喜隐，因为狱城坚固无法进入，立其子留礼寿，上京留守除室擒留礼寿。留礼寿伏诛，也赐喜隐死。顺宗，名浚，乳名耶鲁斡，道宗长子，母为宣懿皇后萧氏。
English: After the fall of the Song Dynasty, more than two hundred people tried to kidnap Fu-Li Xi-Yin, because the prison was too strong to enter, so he sent his son to stay with Li-Shou, and went to Beijing to stay with Li-Shou. Li-Shou fled, and Xi-Yin died. Shunzong, named Jun, nicknamed Yelu, the eldest son of Tao Zong, and his mother was Queen Xiao of Xuanwu.

古文：幼而能言，好学知书。
现代文：幼时即能言善辩，好学，通书文。
English: At a young age, he was a good debater, eager to learn, and good at reading and writing.

古文：道宗尝曰： 此子聪慧，殆天授欤！ 
现代文：道宗曾经说： 此子聪明慧达，大约是上天所授吧！ 
English: The Taoist once said: "This boy is so clever and wise, it's as if he was bestowed by heaven!"

古文：六岁，封梁王。
现代文：六岁，封为梁王。
English: At the age of six, he was given the title of Liang Wang.

古文：明年，从上猎，矢连发三中。
现代文：次年，随皇上出猎，连射三箭，都射中猎物。
English: The following year, he went hunting with the emperor and shot three arrows, all of which hit the prey.

古文：上顾左右曰： 朕祖宗以来，骑射绝人，威震天下。
现代文：皇上回头对左右说 ：我祖先历代相传，骑射之术过人，威震天下。
English: The emperor turned his head to the right and to the left and said: My ancestors have passed down from generation to generation, and the skill of horse archery is unsurpassed, and it shakes the world.

古文：是儿虽幼，不坠其风。 
现代文：这孩子尽管幼小，不改先代之风。 
English: Despite his young age, this child does not change the style of the previous generation.

古文：后遇十鹿，射获其九。
现代文：后来遇到十只鹿，射得其中九只。
English: He later encountered ten deer and shot nine of them.

古文：帝喜，设宴。
现代文：皇上大喜，为之设宴。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and held a banquet for him.

古文：八岁，立为皇太子。
现代文：八岁，立为皇太子。
English: He was crowned crown prince at the age of eight.

古文：大康元年，兼领北南枢密院事。
现代文：大康元年，兼领北南枢密院事。
English: In the first year of the Taikang era, he also led the North-South Privy Council.

古文：及母后被害，太子有忧色。
现代文：及至母后被害，太子面有忧戚之色。
English: After his mother's death, the crown prince looked pensive.

古文：耶律乙辛为北院枢密使，常不自安。
现代文：耶律乙辛为北院枢密使，每每心中不能自安。
English: As a privy councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Yeludoetsin could not feel at ease.

古文：会护卫萧忽古谋害乙辛，事觉，下狱。
现代文：适逢护卫萧忽古谋刺乙辛，事情败露，被捕入狱。
English: At the right time, escort Xiao Huko plotted to assassinate Yixin, but the plot was uncovered and he was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：副点检萧十三谓乙辛曰： 臣民心属太子，公非阀阅，一日若立，吾辈措身何地！ 
现代文：副点检萧十三对乙辛说 ：百官和百姓都归心于太子，您又不是世家门第出身，一旦太子继立，我们这些人将置身于何地呢？ 
English: Sub-inspector Xiao XIII said to Yixin: Hundreds of officials and people are devoted to the prince, and you are not from the same family. Once the prince succeeds, where will we be?

古文：乃与同知北院宣徽事萧特里特谋构陷太子，阴令右护卫太保耶律查剌诬告都宫使耶律撒剌、知院萧速撒、护卫萧忽古谋废立。
现代文：于是便与同知北院宣徽使事萧特里特图谋陷害太子，暗里派右护卫太保耶律查剌诬告都宫使耶律撒剌、知院萧速撒、护卫萧忽古阴谋废旧君立新君。
English: Therefore, he plotted to frame the crown prince with his confidant Xiao Trit, the envoy of the Northern Court, and secretly sent the right guard, the eunuch Ye Luo Zhaqi, to falsely accuse the Imperial Palace of conspiring with Ye Luo Zhaqi, the confidant of the Northern Court, Xiao Zuo Zhaqi, and the guard of the Northern Court, Xiao Ku Gu, to depose the former royal new prince.

古文：诏案无迹，不治。
现代文：诏令审查，没有证据，便没有治罪。
English: If there is no evidence, there is no crime.

古文：乙辛复令牌印郎君萧讹都斡等言： 查剌前告非妄，臣实与谋，欲杀耶律乙辛等，然后立太子。
现代文：乙辛又让牌印郎君萧讹都斡等人声称 ：查剌上次所告并非虚妄，我事实上也参与其谋划，想杀耶律乙辛等人，然后扶立太子。
English: Yixin also let the pawnbroker Xiao Yidu and others claim that the last accusation made by Zhaojun was not false. In fact, I also participated in his plan to kill Yelu Yixin and others, and then set up the crown prince.

古文：臣若不言，恐事发连坐。 
现代文：我如果不讲出，恐怕事情败露后遭到连坐。 
English: If I don't talk about it, I'm afraid I'll be made a scapegoat when things go wrong.

古文：帝信之，幽太子于别室，以耶律燕哥鞫案。
现代文：皇上相信了，将太子幽禁于别宫，由耶律燕哥审讯查验。
English: The emperor believed him and had the prince confined to another palace, where he was interrogated and examined by Ye Lu Yan Ge.

古文：太子具陈枉状曰： 吾为储副，尚何所求。
现代文：太子详细地陈说冤枉之情说： 我身为太子，未来帝位的继承者，何必再追求什么呢？
English: The prince detailed his feelings of injustice, saying: As a prince and future heir to the throne, why should I pursue anything?

古文：公当为我辨之。 
现代文：您应当为我明察。 
English: You should have seen it for me.

古文：燕哥乃乙辛之党，易其言为款伏。
现代文：燕哥乃是乙辛党人，将太子所说改为供认不讳。
English: Yan Ge, a member of the Yixing faction, changed what the prince had said to a confession.

古文：上大怒，废太子为庶人。
现代文：皇上大怒，废太子为庶人。
English: The emperor was furious, and the deposed crown prince became a commoner.

古文：将出，曰： 我何罪至是！ 
现代文：太子将出宫时，说： 我有何罪，落到这步田地？ 
English: When the crown prince leaves the palace, he will say: "What is my sin that I have ended up in this situation?

古文：十三叱登车，遣卫士阖其扉。
现代文：萧十三呵叱上车，派卫士关上车门。
English: Xiao Shizhong scolded him to get on the bus and sent guards to close the door.

古文：徙于上京，囚圜堵中。
现代文：迁徙到上京，囚禁于城内。
English: Moved to Kamigyo and imprisoned in the city.

古文：乙辛寻遣达鲁古、撒八往害之，太子年方二十，上京留守萧挞得绐以疾薨闻。
现代文：乙辛不久便派达鲁古、撒八前往加害，太子死时年方二十，上京留守萧挞得谎报太子因病逝世。
English: Soon after, Yixin sent Darugo and Saba to inflict damage. The prince was in his twenties when he died, and Xiao Yu, who was left behind in Beijing, lied about the prince's death due to illness.

古文：上哀之，命有司葬龙门山。
现代文：皇上很哀痛，下令有司葬之于龙门山。
English: The emperor was very sad and ordered that his body be buried on Longmen Mountain.

古文：欲召其妃，乙辛阴遣人杀之。
现代文：想要召见其妃子，乙辛暗里派人杀掉妃子。
English: Wanting to summon her concubine, Yixin secretly sent someone to kill the concubine.

古文：帝后知其冤，悔恨无及，谥曰昭怀太子，以天子礼改葬玉峰山。
现代文：皇上后来知道其冤情，悔恨无及，谥为昭怀太子，按天子礼仪改葬于玉峰山。
English: Later, the emperor knew of his grievances and was filled with remorse. He was posthumously crowned Prince Akechi and was reburied in Mt. Yufeng according to the etiquette of the heavenly sons.

古文：乾统初，追尊大孝顺圣皇帝，庙号顺宗，妃萧氏贞顺皇后。
现代文：乾统初年，追尊为大孝顺圣皇帝，庙号顺宗，妃萧氏为贞顺皇后。
English: In the first year of the Emperor Qianlong's reign, Dui Zun was the Emperor Da Xiaozhun, Miao Zongzong, and Fei Xiao was the Empress Zhenshun.

古文：一子，延禧，即天祚皇帝。
现代文：有一子，名延禧，即天祚皇帝。
English: There was one son, whose name was Yanxi, that is, Emperor Tianyao.

