古文：公问于公孙鞅曰： 法令以当时立之者，明旦欲使天下之吏民皆明知而用之，如一而无私，奈何 ？
现代文：秦孝公问公孙鞅说： 今天制定的法令，明天清晨就想让全国的官吏和百姓都明确了解并奉行，一致而没有奸私，应怎么办？ 
English: Qin Xiaogong asked Sun Yat-sen: What should be done with the edicts made today, which should be clearly understood and followed by officials and people all over the country in the early morning of tomorrow?

古文：公孙鞅曰：为法令，置官吏，朴足以知法令之谓者，以为天下正，则奏天子。
现代文：公孙鞅说：制定法令，设置朴实厚重以使百姓知道法令的具体内容的人作官吏，把他作为主管法令的官吏。
English: Guo Sun Rong said: the person who formulates the laws and regulations, and sets up the plain and heavy so that the people know the specific content of the laws and regulations is the official, and he is the official in charge of the laws and regulations.

古文：天子则各主法令之，皆降，受命，发官。
现代文：推荐给天子，天子应允，就命令他们主管法令。都诏令受命上任。
English: He recommended them to the emperor, and the emperor agreed, and ordered them to be in charge of the laws. They were all appointed to their posts.

古文：各主法令之民，敢忘行主法令之所谓之名，各以其所忘之法令名罪之。
现代文：各自主管各地的法令，百姓胆敢忘记遵守他主管的法令的名目，就用他所忘记的法令的名目惩罚他。
English: Each of them is in charge of the local laws. If the people dare to forget to obey the name of the law he is in charge of, he will punish him with the name of the law he has forgotten.

古文：主法令之吏有迁徙物故，辄使学读法令所谓，为之程式，使日数而知法令之所谓；不中程，为法令以罪之。
现代文：主管法令的官吏，若有变更或死去，立刻就命人学习阅读理解法令的内容，为他指出准则，让他几日内便通晓法令内容，不能合乎法令准则的就用法令惩罚他。
English: The officials in charge of the laws and regulations, if there is any change or death, will immediately order the person to learn to read and understand the contents of the laws and regulations, point out the standards for him, let him know the contents of the laws and regulations within a few days, and punish him with the laws and regulations if he cannot meet the legal standards.

古文：有敢剟定法令、损益一字以上，罪死不赦。
现代文：若有胆敢刊定法令而增减一个字以上的，就是死罪而不会得到赦免。
English: If anyone dares to publish a decree that adds or subtracts more than one word, he will be punished with death and will not be pardoned.

古文：诸官吏及民有问法令之所谓也于主法令之吏，皆各以其故所欲问之法令明告之。
现代文：众官吏和百姓若向主管法令的官吏询问法令的具体内容，主管法令的官吏必须根据他们的问题明确答复他们。
English: If the officials and the people ask the officials in charge of the laws and regulations about the specific contents of the laws and regulations, the officials in charge of the laws and regulations must give them a clear answer according to their questions.

古文：各为尺六寸之符，明书年、月、日、时、所问法令之名，以告吏民。
现代文：而且要制一个长一尺六寸的符券，符券上写明年、月、日、时间、所问法令的内容。
English: Moreover, it is necessary to make a certificate with a length of one foot and six inches, on which the next year, month, day, time, and the content of the law in question are written.

古文：主法令之吏不告，及之罪，而法令之所谓也，皆以吏民之所问法令之罪，各罪主法令之吏。
现代文：主管法令的官吏不告诉，等到他们犯了罪，正是他们所询问的那一条，那就按他们所询问的那条罪状来惩罚主管法令的官吏。
English: The officers of the law did not inform them, and when they committed the crime for which they were inquiring, they punished the officers of the law for the crime for which they were inquiring.

古文：即以左券予吏之问法令者，主法令之吏谨藏其右券木柙，以室藏之，封以法令之长印。即后有物故，以券书从事。
现代文：在询问时，就要把符券的左片给询问法令的人，主管法令的官吏则小心将右片装入木匣，藏在一个屋子中，用法令长官的印封上，即使以后当事人死了，也依照符券办事。
English: When inquiring, it is necessary to give the left piece of the certificate to the person inquiring about the law, and the official in charge of the law carefully loads the right piece into a wooden box, hides it in a room, and uses the seal of the chief of the law to seal it. Even if the party is dead, they will still act in accordance with the certificate.

古文：法令皆副，置一副天子之殿中，为法令为禁室，有铤钥，为禁而以封之，内藏法令一副禁室中，封以禁印。
现代文：法令复制一份放在天子的殿中，殿中给法令建一个禁室，有锁钥，用封条把它封起来，把法令的副本藏入其中，用禁印封上。
English: A copy of the edict was placed in the temple of the Son of Heaven. In the temple, a forbidden room was built for the edict, with a lock and key, sealed it with a seal, hid the copy of the edict in it, and sealed it with a forbidden seal.

古文：有擅发禁室印，及入禁室视禁法令，及禁剟一字以上，罪皆死不赦。
现代文：有擅自启开禁室的印封，和进入禁室偷看禁室的法令以及删改禁室法令一个字以上的，都是不可赦免的死罪。
English: Opening the seal of the forbidden room without permission, entering the forbidden room to peep into the forbidden room, and deleting or altering more than one word of the forbidden room decree are all unpardonable capital crimes.

古文：一岁受法令以禁令。
现代文：每年一次，将禁室所藏法令颁发给主管法令的官吏。
English: Once a year, the decrees stored in the forbidden room are issued to the officials in charge of the decrees.

古文：天子置三法官，殿中置一法官，御史置一法官及吏，丞相置一法官。
现代文：天子设置三个法官，宫殿中设置一个，御史设置一个，丞相设置一个。
English: The Son of Heaven set up three judges, one in the palace, one in the imperial court, and one in the imperial court.

古文：诸侯、郡、县皆各为置一法官及吏，皆此秦一法官。
现代文：诸侯和郡县也为他们各设置一个法官和法吏，全都比照秦都的法官。
English: The lords and counties also set up a judge and a legal officer for each of them, all of which were the same as the judges in Qin.

古文：郡、县、诸侯一受宝来之法令，学问并所谓。
现代文：诸侯郡县一旦接受禁室的法令，就如同学习询问法令的内容。
English: Once the prefectures and counties accept the forbidden room decree, it is like learning to inquire about the content of the decree.

古文：吏民知法令者，皆问法官。故天下之吏民无不知法者。
现代文：官吏和百姓想知晓法令的，都询问法官，所以天下百姓、官吏没有不知晓法令的人。
English: If officials and people want to know the law, they ask the judge, so there are no people and officials in the world who do not know the law.

古文：吏明知民知法令也，故吏不敢以非法遇民，民不敢犯法以干法官也。
现代文：官吏明知百姓知道法令，所以官吏不敢以非法手段对待百姓，百姓了不敢犯法来触犯法官。
English: Officials know that the people know the laws, so officials do not dare to treat the people by illegal means, and the people do not dare to break the law to offend the judge.

古文：遇民不修法，则问法官，法官即以法之罪告之，民即以法官之言正告之吏。
现代文：对待百姓不遵守法令，人民就可以向法官询问，法官就将法令所规定的罪名告诉他们，百姓就将法官的话警告官吏。
English: If the people do not comply with the law, the people can ask the judge, the judge will tell them the charges stipulated by the law, and the people will warn the officials about the judge's words.

古文：吏知其如此，故吏不敢以非法遇民，民又不敢犯法。
现代文：官吏知道事情这样，就不敢用非法手段对待人民，人民也不敢犯法。
English: When officials know this, they will not dare to treat the people with illegal means, and the people will not dare to break the law.

古文：如此，天下之吏民虽有贤良辩慧，不能开一言以枉法；虽有千金，不能以用一铢。
现代文：像这样，国内官吏和百姓即使有贤良、善辩和狡猾的人，也不可说一句违法的话，即使有千金之一富，也不能使用一铢违法的钱。
English: Thus, domestic officials and people, even if they are virtuous, eloquent and cunning, cannot say a single illegal word, and even if they are rich, they cannot use a single illegal money.

古文：故知诈贤能者皆作而为善，皆务自治奉公。
现代文：于是巧诈贤能的人都改变去作好事，都努力自治，服从国家的法令。
English: As a result, all the cunning and virtuous people changed to do good things, and they all strived to be self-governing and obey the laws of the state.

古文：民愚则易治也，此所生于法明白易知而必行。
现代文：人民敦厚就统治，这是由于法令明白易懂而一定要遵从。
English: The people rule because the laws are clear and easy to understand and must be obeyed.

古文：法令者，民之命也，为治之本也，所以备民也。
现代文：法令就是人民的生命，治国的根本，是用来防备人民的。
English: Laws and regulations are the life of the people and the foundation of governing the country. They are used to protect the people.

古文：为治而去法令，犹欲无饥而去食也，欲无寒而去衣也，欲东而西行也，其不几亦明矣。
现代文：为治国而抛弃法令，好比希望不挨饿而抛弃粮食，希望不受冻而抛弃衣服，希望到东方而向西走一样，其相去甚远是很明显的。
English: To abandon the law in order to govern is like abandoning food in the hope of avoiding hunger, abandoning clothes in the hope of avoiding cold, and abandoning the East in the hope of going to the West.

古文：一兔走，百人逐之，非以兔为可分以为百，由名之未定也。
现代文：一只兔子跑了，一百个人乱哄哄蜂拥而上，要逮住他，并不是因为捉到兔子后每个人都能分到兔子的百分之一，而是因为兔子的所有权没有确定。
English: A rabbit runs away, and a hundred people scramble to catch it, not because they each get one percent of the rabbit, but because the ownership of the rabbit is uncertain.

古文：夫卖兔者满市，而盗不敢取，由名分已定也。
现代文：而市场上有好多兔子在卖，盗贼都不敢去偷，这是因为市场上兔子的所有权是明确的。
English: But there are many rabbits for sale in the market, and thieves do not dare to steal them, because the ownership of rabbits in the market is clear.

古文：故名分未定，尧、舜、禹、汤且皆如鹜焉而逐之；名分已定，贪盗不取。
现代文：所以，当事物的名分没有确定以前，尧、舜、禹、汤也像奔马似地追逐，而名分确定后，贪婪的盗贼也不敢夺取。
English: Therefore, before the title of the object in question was not determined, Yu, Yu, Yu, and Tang also chased like galloping horses, and after the title was determined, greedy thieves did not dare to seize it.

古文：今法令不明，其名不定，天下之人得议之。其议，人异而无定。
现代文：如法令不明确，其条目不确定，天下百姓都会评议，其评议因人而异没有定说。
English: If the law is not clear and its articles are uncertain, the people all over the world will comment on it, and their comments will vary from person to person.

古文：人主为法于上，下民议之于下，是法令不定，以下为上也。此所谓名分之不定也。
现代文：人君在上制定法令，百姓在下议论纷纷，这是法令不定，以下代上，这就是所说的名分不定。
English: In the past, people made laws, and in the future, people discussed them. This is the reason why laws are not stable. In the next generation, this is the reason why they are not stable.

古文：夫名分不定，尧、舜犹将皆折而奸之，而况众人乎？此令奸恶大起、人主夺威势、亡国灭社稷也道也。
现代文：名分不定尧、舜尚且都会违法，何况普通百姓。这样就使奸恶大兴，人君失掉权威，这是国家灭亡的根本。
English: Anyone, even ordinary people, can break the law, regardless of whether they are famous or not. In this way, treachery flourishes and people lose their authority. This is the root cause of the country's demise.

古文：今先圣人为书而传之后世，必师受之，乃知所谓之名；不师受之，而人以其心意议之，至死不能知其名与其意。
现代文：好比古代圣人著书，流传于后世，必须由教师教授，才能知道其具体内容，如不同教师传授，人人都以自己的想法来评议，到死时也不能知道书文字的它的具体意义。
English: It is like a book written by an ancient sage and passed down to future generations. It must be taught by a teacher in order to know its specific content. If it is taught by different teachers, everyone will comment on it with their own thoughts, and they will not know the specific meaning of the calligraphy until they die.

古文：故圣人必为法令置官也，置吏也，为天下师，所以定名分也，名分定，则大诈贞信，巨盗愿悫，而各自治也。
现代文：所以，圣人一定给法令设置法官。设置法官做天下人的老师，就是为了定名分。名分确定了，奸诈之人可以变得正直诚实，人民都谨慎忠诚，而且都能自治。
English: Therefore, the sage must set up a judge for the decree. Setting up a judge as a teacher for the people of the world is to determine the score. The score is determined, the treacherous person can become honest and honest, the people are cautious and loyal, and they can be self-governed.

古文：故夫名分定，势治之道也；名分不定，势乱之道也。
现代文：所以确定名分是势所必治的办法，不确定名分是势所必乱的办法。
English: Therefore, determining the place is a necessary way to deal with the situation, and not determining the place is a necessary way to cause chaos.

古文：故势治者不可乱，势乱者不可治。
现代文：势所必治就不会乱；势所必乱就不会治。
English: If the situation calls for control, there will be no disorder; if the situation calls for disorder, there will be no control.

古文：夫势乱而治之，愈乱；势治而治之，则治。
现代文：势所必乱再加治理，就会更乱；势所必治再加治理，才会更治。
English: If the situation calls for chaos and then governance, there will be more chaos; if the situation calls for governance and then governance, there will be more governance.

古文：故圣王治治不治乱。
现代文：圣王在势所必治的情况下来治国，不是在势所必乱的情况下来治国。
English: The holy king came to govern the country in a situation of necessity, not in a situation of necessity.

古文：夫微妙意志之言，上知之所难也。夫不待法令绳墨，而无不正者，千万之一也。
现代文：微妙深奥的言论上等才智的人也不易理解，不需要法令作准则而行为都是正确的，在千万人中只有一个。
English: Subtle and profound speech is not easily understood by people of superior intelligence. There is no need for laws and regulations to be the norm, and behavior is correct. There is only one among thousands of people.

古文：故圣人以千万治天下，故夫知者而后能知之，不可以为法，民不尽知；贤者而后知之，不可以为法，民不尽贤。
现代文：圣人是针对千万人来治理天下，所以只有智者才理解的东西不能用来作为法令，因为百姓不是人人都是智者。只有贤能的人能理解的东西，不能用来作法令，因为百姓不是人人都贤能。
English: The sage governs the world for thousands of people, so what is understood only by the wise cannot be used as a law, because the people are not all wise. What is understood only by the wise cannot be used as a law, because the people are not all wise.

古文：故圣人为法，必使之明白易知，名正，愚知遍能知之；为置法官，置主法之吏，以为天下师，令万民无陷于险危。
现代文：所以圣人制定法令一定使它明白易懂，愚人智者都能懂得。为百姓设置法官，设置法吏，作为百姓的老师，使万民不致陷入危险的境地。
English: Therefore, when a sage enacts a law, he must make it clear and easy to understand, so that even a fool or a wise man can understand it; he must set up judges for the people, set up legal officials as teachers for the people, so that the people will not fall into a dangerous situation.

古文：故圣人立天下而无刑死者，非不刑杀也，行法令，明白易知，为置法官吏为之师，以道之知，万民皆知所避就，避祸就福，而皆以自治也。
现代文：所以圣人掌握政权，天下没有受刑被杀的人，并不是他不用刑，不杀人，而是圣人推行的法令更明白易懂，又给人民法官、法吏，作他们的老师，教他们懂得法令。从而万民都知道应躲避什么、亲近什么。怎样躲开祸患，接近幸福，而且都能自治。
English: Therefore, when a sage is in power, and there is no one in the world who has been punished or killed, it is not that he does not use punishment or kill people, but that the laws enforced by the sage are more clear and easy to understand, and he also gives the people's judges and legal officials to be their teachers and teach them to understand the laws, so that all people know what to avoid and what to be close to, how to avoid disaster and approach happiness, and can be self-governed.

古文：故明主因治而终治之，故天下大治也。
现代文：明君在人民自治的基础上来从事国家的治理，天下就大治了。
English: When the Ming Dynasty engaged in the governance of the country on the basis of people's autonomy, the world was ruled by a strongman.

