古文：薛渊，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：薛渊，河东汾阴人。
English: Xueyuan, a person from Shiyin, Hedong Province.

古文：宋徐州刺史安都从子。
现代文：宋徐州刺史薛安都的侄子。
English: He was the nephew of Song Xuzhou and Xue Andu.

古文：本名道渊，避太祖偏讳改。
现代文：本来名叫道渊，因避太祖萧道成的偏讳而改。
English: He was originally named Do Yuan, but changed it to avoid the stigma of his great-grandfather Xiao Dao Cheng.

古文：安都以彭城降虏，亲族皆入北。
现代文：薛安都以彭城投降魏，他的亲族都迁居到北方去了。
English: Xue An surrendered to Wei at Pengcheng, and his relatives all moved to the north.

古文：太祖镇淮阴，渊遁来南，委身自结。
现代文：太祖萧道成镇守淮阴，薛渊从北方潜逃来南方，委身投靠太祖。
English: The great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng guarded Huaiyin, and Xue Yuan fled from the north to the south and committed himself to the great-grandfather.

古文：果干有气力，太祖使领部曲，备卫帐内，从征伐。
现代文：薛渊为人果断干练有魄力，太祖令他带领部属，在营帐内警戒保卫，随同征战。
English: Xue Yuan was a resolute, capable and courageous person. The great-grandfather ordered him to lead his subordinates, guard and protect them in the camp, and go to war with them.

古文：元徽末，以勋官至辅国将军，右军将军，骁骑将军、军主，封竟陵侯。
现代文：元徽末年，凭勋劳官至辅国将军，右军将军，骁骑将军、军主，封竟陵侯。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the titles of General of the Auxiliary State, General of the Right Army, General of the Cavalry, and Lord of the Army.

古文：沈攸之难起，太祖入朝堂，豫章王嶷代守东府，使渊领军屯司徒左府，分备京邑。
现代文：沈攸之起兵发难之后，太祖进入朝堂，由太祖子豫章王萧嶷代守束府，派薛渊领军屯驻司徒左府，分别警戒守卫京城。
English: After Shen You's army was dispatched, the great-great-grandfather entered the imperial court, and the great-great-grandfather Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui guarded Sokufu on his behalf, and sent Xue Yuan to lead the army stationed in Shizuofu, respectively guarding the capital.

古文：袁粲据石头，豫章王嶷夜登西门遥呼渊，渊惊起，率军赴难，先至石头焚门攻战。
现代文：袁粲占据石头城发难，豫章王萧嶷连夜登上西门远遍地呼叫薛渊，薛渊闻呼一惊而起，迅即率军靖难，抢先赶到石头城下焚烧城门奋力攻战。
English: Yuan Shao occupied the Stone City and encountered difficulties. Yuzhang Wang Xiaoqi went up to the West Gate all night and called Xue Yuan everywhere. Xue Yuan was surprised and immediately led the army to pacify the difficulties and rushed to the Stone City to burn the gate and fight hard.

古文：事平，明旦众军还集杜姥宅，街路皆满，宫门不开，太祖登南掖门楼处分众军各还本顿，至食后城门开，渊方得入见太祖，且喜且泣。
现代文：事态平定后，第二天清晨众军返回集聚在杜姥宅，路上街上都挤得满满的，宫门不能打开，太祖登上南掖门楼指挥措置众军各自返回原来驻地，直到饭后时分，城门打开，薛渊才得以晋见太祖，高兴得流下了眼泪。
English: After the situation was stabilized, the next morning, the troops returned and gathered at Du Bao's house. The streets were crowded on the way, and the palace gate could not be opened. Grandfather ascended the South Gate Tower to command the troops to return to their original stations. It was not until after dinner that the gate was opened, and Xue Yuan was able to see Grandfather. He was so happy that he shed tears.

古文：太祖即位，增邑为二千五百户。
现代文：太祖即皇帝位，薛渊食邑增为二千五百户。
English: Grandfather, that is, the emperor's throne, Xueyuan food village increased to 2,500 households.

古文：除淮陵太守，加宁朔将军，骁骑将军如故。
现代文：除授进堕太守，加宁朔将军，骁骑将军照旧不变。
English: In addition to awarding the fallen emperor, General Ganingshuo, the general riding the horse remains unchanged.

古文：寻为直阁将军，冠军将军。
现代文：不久为直合将军，冠军将军。
English: Soon, he became General Tadakatsu, the champion general.

古文：仍转太子左率。
现代文：仍转太子左率。
English: Still, the crown prince's popularity is on the rise.

古文：虏遣伪将薛道摽寇寿春，太祖以道摽渊之亲近，敕齐郡太守刘怀慰曰： 闻道摽分明来，其儿妇并在都，与诸弟无复同生者，凡此类，无为不多方误之，纵不全信，足使豺狼疑惑。 
现代文：魏派遣降将薛道标侵犯画画，太祖因为蓝道握与整镗的近亲关系，敕齐郡太守刘怀慰说： 听说道标真要南来，他的妻儿都在都城，和各兄弟不再共同生活，凡此种种，都应使他多方造成误会，纵然不能使人全信，也足能使豺狼们相互怀疑猜忌。 
English: Wei dispatched and sent down Xue Daobiao to encroach on the painting, and the great-grandfather because of the close relationship between Lan Daobiao and Neijiang, Liu Huaiyun, the governor of Qi County, said: I heard that Baozhen wanted to come to the south, his wife and children were in the capital, and he no longer lived with his brothers. All of this should make him cause misunderstanding in many ways. Even if it cannot make people fully believe, it is enough to make the jackals suspicious of each other.

古文：令为渊书与道摽示购之之意，虏得书，果追道摽，遣他将代之。
现代文：让刘怀慰以薛渊的名义写信给薛道标表示拉拢收买他的意思，魏得到这封信，果然将薛道标召回，派别的将领代替他。
English: He asked Liu Huaiyong to write to Xue Daobiao in the name of Xue Yuan to express his intention to win him over. Wei got the letter and recalled Xue Daobiao and sent other generals to replace him.

古文：世祖即位，迁左卫将军。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，薛渊迁左卫将军。
English: The founder is the emperor, and Xue Yuan is the general of the Left Guards.

古文：初，渊南奔，母索氏不得自拔，改嫁长安杨氏，渊私遣购赎，梁州刺史崔慧景报渊云： 索在界首，遣信拘引，已得拔难。 
现代文：当初，薛渊南逃时，他母亲索氏不能自己解脱，改嫁给长安杨氏，薛渊私下派人以钱物赎接其母，梁州刺史崔慧景给薛渊通报说： 索氏老人在边界上，派遣信使接取，就可脱难。 
English: At first, when Xue Yuan Nan fled, his mother, So, could not free herself and married Chang'an Yang. Xue Yuan privately sent someone to ransom his mother with money and goods. Liangzhou assassin, Cui Huijing, informed Xue Yuan that: If the old man of So is on the border, he can get out of the difficulty by sending a messenger to pick him up.

古文：渊表求解职至界上迎之，见许。
现代文：薛渊上表奏请解除官职到边界上去迎接母亲，被准许。
English: Xue Yuan was allowed to go to the border to meet his mother after he asked to be relieved of his official duties.

古文：改授散骑常侍、征虏将军。渊母南归事竟无实。
现代文：又改授散骑常侍、征虏将军薛渊母亲南归的事最终没有实现。
English: In addition, the mother of the conscript general Xue Yuan, who was reclassified as a straggler, did not return to the south.

古文：永明元年，渊上表解职送貂蝉。
现代文：永明元年，薛渊上表奏请解除职务并送还貂蝉冠服。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Xue Yuan was relieved of his duties and sent back his imperial robe.

古文：诏曰： 远隔殊方，声问难审。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 两方相隔遥远，音讯话语难于审辨。
English: The imperial edict said: The distance between the two sides is far, and it is difficult to distinguish the words of the message.

古文：渊忧迫之深，固辞朝列。
现代文：薛渊深深地忧思母亲，坚决要求辞出朝班。
English: Xue Yuan was deeply worried about his mother and insisted on quitting the morning shift.

古文：昔东关旧典，犹通婚宦；况母出有差，音息时至，依附前例，不容申许，便可断表，速还章服。 
现代文：先前束关旧典，还能结婚和做官；况且母亲出来消息不能确知，确切消息也能传来，依据前例，不容辞职。拒绝表章所奏，从速发还他的宫服。 
English: Previously, he could still marry and hold public office; moreover, the news of his mother's coming out could not be known for certain, and the exact news could also be transmitted. According to precedent, he was not allowed to resign. He refused to play the role of the badge, and immediately returned his imperial robe.

古文：渊以赎母既不得，又表陈解职，诏不许。
现代文：薛渊因为赎母没办到，又上表陈请解职，皇上下诏不允许。
English: Because Xue Yuan did not succeed in redeeming his mother, he again petitioned for dismissal, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：后虏使至，上为渊致与母书。
现代文：后来魏使到齐，皇上替薛渊把他给母亲的信交魏使带去。
English: Later, Wei envoys arrived in Qi, and the emperor took Xue Yuan's letter to his mother to the Wei envoys.

古文：车驾幸安乐寺，渊从驾乘虏桥。先是敕羌虏桥不得入仗，为有司所奏，免官，见原。
现代文：世祖驾临安乐寺，薛渊随驾过乘虏桥，这之前羌虏桥有敕仪卫不能人，因此薛渊被有关部门奏请免去他的官职，被原宥。
English: The ancestor drove to Anle Temple, and Xue Yuan drove with him across the Rui Bridge. Before this, there was no one to guard the Rui Bridge. Therefore, Xue Yuan was asked by the relevant departments to be relieved of his official post and was originally dismissed.

古文：四年，出为持节、督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：永明四年，外出为持节、督徐州诸军事、徐州刺史，将军职如故。
English: In the fourth year of Yongming, he went out to hold the festival, the military governor of Xuzhou, the military history of Xuzhou, and the military post as before.

古文：明年迁右军司马，将军如故，转大司马，济阳太守，将军如故。
现代文：第二年迁右车司马，将军仍如故，转大司马，济阳太守，将军还是照前不变。
English: In the second year, he was moved to the right of the chariot and horse, but the general was still the same. When he was transferred to the big horse and Jiyang governor, the general was still the same.

古文：七年，为给事中、右卫将军，以疾解职。
现代文：永明七年，为给事中、右卫将军，由于患病而解除职务。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, he was relieved of his duties due to illness in order to give orders to the middle and right guard generals.

古文：归家，不能乘车，去车脚，使人舆之而去，为有司所纠，见原。
现代文：回家，不能乘车，祇好去掉车轮，让人用车箱抬着他走，因此又被有关部门弹劾，又得到了原宥。
English: When he got home, he couldn't take the car, so he just removed the wheels and had someone carry him with a suitcase. As a result, he was impeached by the relevant authorities and received a reprimand.

古文：八年，为右将军、大司马，领军讨巴东王子响。
现代文：永明八年，为右将军、大司马，领军讨巴东王萧子响。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, Xiao Zixing, the king of Ba Dong, led the army to fight for the right general, Da Sima.

古文：子响军主刘超之被捕急，以眠褥杂物十余种赂渊自逃，渊匿之军中，为有司所奏，诏原。
现代文：子响的军主刘超之被追捕得很惶急。用被褥夹藏十多种物品贿赂薛渊以脱身自逃，薛渊把他藏匿在军队中，又被有关部门弹劾，皇上下诏原宥了他。
English: Liu Chaozhi, the military leader of Zi Xiang, was hunted down very anxiously. He bribed Xue Yuan with more than a dozen items hidden in a quilt to escape. Xue Yuan hid him in the army, was impeached by the relevant departments, and was pardoned by the Emperor.

古文：十年，为散骑常侍，将军如故。
现代文：永明十年，为散骑常侍，将军照前。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, he was a knight-errant and a general.

古文：世祖崩，朝廷虑虏南寇，假渊节，军主、本官如故。
现代文：世祖崩，朝廷担心魏虏南来侵犯，让薛渊持节，军主、原本的官职依旧不变。
English: When the founder of the dynasty died, the imperial court was worried that Wei would invade the south, so they allowed Xueyuan to hold the festival. The military leader and the original official position remained unchanged.

古文：寻加骁骑将军，假节、本官如故。
现代文：不久加骁骑将军，假节、原本的官职依旧不变。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of Cavalry, and the holiday and the original official position remained unchanged.

古文：隆昌元年，出为持节、督司州军事、司州刺史，右将军如故。
现代文：隆昌元年，外出持节、督司州军事、司州刺史。右将军依旧不变。
English: In the first year of Longchang, he went out to hold festivals, supervise the state military, and supervise the state military history. The right general is still unchanged.

古文：延兴元年，进号平北将军，未拜，卒。
现代文：延兴元年，进号平北将军，未拜受，就去世了。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, General Pingbei, who was given the title of Jin, did not accept it and died.

古文：明帝即位，方有诏赙钱五万，布五百匹，克日举哀。
现代文：明帝萧鸾即位，才赠治丧钱五万，布五百匹，限定时曰举哀下葬。
English: When Emperor Xiao Rong of the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, he gave the emperor fifty thousand yuan in mourning money and five hundred horses of cloth. When the time was limited, it was said that the emperor would be buried in mourning.

古文：戴僧静，会稽永兴人也。
现代文：戴僧静，会稽水兴人。
English: Dai Zongjing, will train water entertainers.

古文：祖饰，宋景平中，与富阳孙法先谋乱伏法，家口徙青州。
现代文：祖父戴饰，在宋景平年间，同富厘孙法先谋乱伏法，家裹人迁移到青州。
English: Grandfather Dai Zha, in the Song Jingping years, together with Fulisun Law, first plotted to subvert the law, and the family moved to Qingzhou.

古文：僧静少有胆力，便弓马。
现代文：戴僧静从小有胆量有魄力，熟习骑马射箭。
English: From a young age, Dai Zongjing had courage and courage, and was familiar with riding horses and archery.

古文：事刺史沈文秀，俱没虏。
现代文：在刺史沈文秀处干事，同他一起投奔魏虏。
English: He was an officer in the office of Shen Wenshu, and went to Wei Rui with him.

古文：后将家属叛还淮阴，太祖抚畜之，常在左右。
现代文：后来戴僧静带领家属叛魏返回进坠，主担芦迎抚慰他并且把他养起来，常留他在太祖身边。
English: Later, Dai Sangjing led his family members to rebel against Wei and returned to Jincheng. Master Lu comforted him and raised him, and often left him with his great-grandfather.

古文：僧静于都载锦出，为欧阳戍所得，系兖州狱，太祖遣薛渊饷僧静酒食，以刀子置鱼腹中。
现代文：僧静在京城用车偷载锦缎，被欧阳戍抓住，把他关押在奎业狱中。左担派整渊给坛盏送酒菜，把刀子暗藏在鱼腹中。
English: In Beijing, the monk Jing was caught by Ouyang Yao while he was smuggling koi carp in his car, and he was imprisoned in Kuye Prison. Zuo Gan sent He Yuan to deliver wine and vegetables to Tantan, and hid the knife in the fish's belly.

古文：僧静与狱吏饮酒，既醉，以刀刻械，手自折锁发屋而出。
现代文：僧静邀狱吏一起饮酒，狱吏醉后，僧静用刀割开刑具，用手把锁弄断，破屋而出。
English: Sojing invited the warden to drink alcohol together. After the warden got drunk, Sojing cut open the torture device with a knife, broke the lock with her hand, and went out of the house.

古文：归，太祖匿之斋内。以其家贫，年给谷千斛。
现代文：回到京城后，太祖把戴僧静藏在自己的书房内，因为他家贫穷，一年给谷一千斛。
English: After returning to the capital, the great-great-grandfather hid Dai Soong Jing in his study, because his family was poor and had to pay 1,000 baht a year.

古文：虏围角城，遣僧静战，荡数捷，补帐内军主。
现代文：魏虏围困鱼墟时，派垣趋参战，多次取胜，补帐内军主。
English: When Wei Rui besieged the fish market, faction after faction joined the war, won many times, and became the military leader.

古文：随还京师，勋阶至积射将军、羽林监。
现代文：跟太祖返京师，官位至积射将军、羽林监。
English: He returned to Beijing with his great-grandfather, and rose through the ranks to become a general of artillery and an overseer of forests.

古文：沈攸之事起，太祖入朝堂，僧静为军主从。
现代文：沈攸之作乱，太祖萧道成进入朝堂，戴僧静做军主跟随太祖。
English: Shen Youzhi made a disturbance, the great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng entered the imperial court, and Dai Sojing followed the great-grandfather as the military leader.

古文：袁粲据石头，太祖遣僧静将腹心先至石头。
现代文：袁粲占据互石头，太祖派遣戴僧静率领心腹先到石头城。
English: Yuan Xuan occupied the stone city, and the great-grandfather sent Dai Xiangjing to lead his subordinates to the stone city.

古文：时苏烈据仓城，僧静射书与烈，夜缒入城。
现代文：这时候苏烈在仓球，僧趋将信用箭射入城中给苏烈，又连夜攀援绳索入城。
English: At this time, Suleiman was in Canggu, and the monk shot a trust arrow into the city for Suleiman, and climbed the rope overnight to enter the city.

古文：粲登城西南门，列烛火处分，台军至，射之，火乃灭，回登东门。
现代文：袁粲登上城的西南门，排列的烛火照得通亮。官军到来，用箭射，火才灭，回登东门。
English: Yuan Xuan went up to the southwest gate of the city, and the candles lined up lit up brightly. The official army arrived, shot with arrows, and the fire was extinguished, and returned to the east gate.

古文：其党辅国将军孙昙瓘骁勇善战，每荡一合，辄大杀伤，官军死者百余人。
现代文：直垦的同伙辅国将军孙昙罐骁勇善战，每冲杀一个回合，大有杀伤，官军死了一百多人。
English: Naosuke's comrade, Vice-Governor General Sun Yat-sen, fought bravely and skillfully, inflicting heavy casualties in every round, and more than a hundred government soldiers were killed.

古文：军主王天生殊死拒战，故得相持。
现代文：幸有军主王天生拼死抵抗，才得以坚持下来，自亥时直到丑时。
English: Fortunately, the king of the army was born to fight to the death, so he was able to persevere, from the time of the boar until the time of the ugly.

古文：自亥至丑，有流星赤色照地坠城中，僧静率力攻仓门，身先士卒，众溃，僧静手斩粲，于是外军烧门入。
现代文：有红色流星坠落城内照耀地面，戴灯趁率兵猛攻仓门，身先士卒，冲杀在前，敌军溃败，越灯董亲手斩杀直堑。于是，城外官军放火烧毁城门也冲杀进城内。
English: A red meteor fell in the city and shone on the ground. Dai Lan took advantage of his soldiers to storm the gate of the warehouse. He was the first to rush forward and kill the enemy. The enemy army was defeated, and Yue Lan Dong personally killed Zhi Yao. As a result, the government troops outside the city set fire to the gate and also rushed into the city.

古文：初，粲大明中与萧惠开、周朗同车行，逢大桁开，驻车共语。
现代文：先前，袁粲在大明年间跟萧惠开、剧目同车赶路，逢去桁开，停车交谈。
English: Previously, Yuan Wei and Xiao Huikai went on a road trip during the New Year's holiday, and they drove the same car to catch the bus. Every time they went to the bus stop, they stopped and talked.

古文：惠开取镜自照曰： 无年可仕。 
现代文：塞开拿出镜子自己照着说： 没有哪年可做官。 
English: He tucked it away, took out a mirror and shined it on himself, saying: "You can't become an official in any year.

古文：朗执镜良久曰： 视死如归。 
现代文：且朗手执镜子审视很久，说： 一副视死如归的样子。 
English: After holding the mirror for a long time, Zhou Lang said, "I feel like I'm going to die."

古文：粲最后曰： 当至三公而不终也。 
现代文：塞垦最后说： 应当能位至三公，但是不会有什么结果。 
English: Sai Yeon finally said: It should be able to reach the three kings, but there will be no result.

古文：僧静以功除前军将军，宁朔将军。
现代文：戴僧静因为有功授予前军将军，宁朔将军。
English: Dai Sangjing awarded the former army general, General Ning Shuo, for his meritorious service.

古文：将士战亡者，太祖为敛祭焉。
现代文：作战阵亡的将士，太祖为他们收殓安葬和奠祭。
English: For the soldiers who died in battle, the great-great-grandfather would collect money for their burial and a libation.

古文：升明二年，除游击将军。
现代文：升明二年，戴僧静任游击将军。
English: Two years after ascending the throne, Dai Sojing was appointed as a guerrilla general.

古文：沈攸之平，论封诸将，以僧静为兴平县侯，邑千户。太祖即位，增邑千二百户。
现代文：平定沈攸之之乱后，论功封赏诸将，僧静为兴平县侯，食邑一千户太祖即皇帝位后，僧静食邑增至一千二百户。
English: After the suppression of the Shen Yue Rebellion, awards were given to generals on the basis of merit, and So Jing became the lord of Xingping County. After he became the emperor, there were one thousand households in the food county, and the number of households in So Jing's food county increased to twelve hundred.

古文：除南济阴太守，本官如故。
现代文：任南济阴太守，原来的官职不变。
English: Appointed as the governor of South Jilin Province, the original official position remains unchanged.

古文：除辅国将军，改封建昌。
现代文：任辅国将军，改封建吕侯。
English: He was appointed as the general of Fu Guo Province and changed his fief to Luhou.

古文：建元二年，迁骁骑将军，加员外常侍，转太子左卫率。
现代文：建元二年，迁骁骑将军，加员外常侍，转太子左卫率。
English: In the second year of Jianyuan, he was transferred to the post of cavalry general, the number of non-regular attendants was increased, and he became the prince's left guard.

古文：世祖践阼，出为持节、督徐州诸军事、冠军将军、北徐州刺史。
现代文：世祖萧迹登极后，僧静外出为持节、督徐州诸军事、冠军将军、北徐州刺史。
English: After the Emperor Xiaoqi ascended to the throne, the monk Jing went out to hold the festival, the governor of Xuzhou to the military, the champion general, and the north Xuzhou to the history.

古文：买牛给贫民令耕种，甚得荒情。
现代文：他购买耕牛给贫民让他们种庄稼，为救助灾荒处事很得体。
English: He bought oxen for the poor to grow crops, and handled disaster relief very well.

古文：迁给事中、太子右率。
现代文：迁给事中、太子右率。
English: During the relocation, the prince's right-hand man was promoted.

古文：寻加通直常侍。
现代文：不久加通直常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to Tsuchizane no Tsunenari.

古文：永明五年，隶护军陈显达，讨荒贼桓天生于比阳。
现代文：永明五年，僧静隶属护军陈显达，到比阳征讨 荒人 贼桓天生。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, Sojing belonged to Chen Xianda's escort army and went to Biyang to fight the barbarians.

古文：僧静与平西司马韩孟度、华山太守康元隆前进，未至比阳四十里，顿深桥。天生引虏步骑十万奄至，僧静合战，大破之，杀获万计。
现代文：僧静与平西司马韩盂度、华山太守康元隆向前推进，在距离比阳四十里的深桥驻军。 荒人 贼桓天生引带魏虏步兵骑兵十万人铺天盖地而来，戴僧静收拢兵力与他们大战，打败他们，杀死捕获数以万计。
English: Sojing and Pingxi's Sima Han Xidu and Huashan's governor Kang Yuanlong pushed forward and garrisoned troops at Shumiao, forty miles away from Biyang. The barbarian Thief Han naturally led a hundred thousand Wei army infantry and cavalry to cover the world, and Dai Sojing gathered forces and fought with them, defeated them, killed and captured tens of thousands.

古文：天生退还比阳，僧静进围之。
现代文：桓天生退回比阳，戴僧静挥军包围比阳。
English: Huan Tian Sheng retreated to Biyang, and Dai So Jing and his army surrounded Biyang.

古文：天生军出城外，僧静又击破之。天生闭门不复出，僧静力疲乃退。
现代文：天生军突出城外，僧静又把他打败了，天生衹得退回比阳城里紧闭城门不再出战，僧静因军力疲乏才撤退。
English: The innate army protruded outside the city, and So Jing defeated him again. Innate was so embarrassed that he retreated back to the city of Biyang, closed the city gate and no longer went out to fight. So Jing only retreated due to military fatigue.

古文：除征虏将军、南中郎司马、淮南太守。
现代文：朝廷授予戴僧静征虏将军、南中郎司马、淮南太守。
English: The imperial court awarded Dai Sojing the title of General of Conscripts, Nan Zhong Lang Sima, and Huainan Governor-General.

古文：八年，巴东王子响杀僚佐，世祖召僧静使领军向江陵，僧静面启上曰： 巴东王年少，长史捉之太急，忿不思难故耳。天子儿过误杀人，有何大罪！
现代文：永明八年，巴束王子响杀了僚佐，世祖萧迹召戴僧静，让他率领军队向江陵讨伐，僧静面奏皇上说： 巴东王年轻气盛，长史刘寅操之过急，忿而不顾后果才导致这样的啊，天于的儿子因过失杀错了人，有什么大罪呢。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, Prince Ba Zuo killed his colleague, and the founder of the dynasty, Shao Kui, summoned Dai Sojing to lead the army to fight in the Gangneung region. Sojing said to the emperor, "King Ba Dong is young and vigorous. Long history Liu Yin was too hasty, and his anger and disregard for the consequences led to this. What is the great sin that Tian Yu's son killed the wrong person by mistake?"

古文：官忽遣军西上，人情惶惧，无所不至，僧静不敢奉敕。 
现代文：骤然让我领兵西进，弄得人心惶惧，什么情况都可能出现，僧静不敢奉命前往。 
English: Suddenly, he asked me to lead the troops westward, which made people panic. Any situation could arise, and So Jing didn't dare to go as ordered.

古文：上不答而心善之。
现代文：皇上虽口裹没说话但心中却以为他说得好。
English: Emperor Wu did not say anything, but he sincerely appreciated the words of Dai Sangjing.

古文：徙为庐陵王中军司马、高平太守，将军如故。
现代文：后调任庐陵王中军司马、高平太守，将军职务如前未变。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Sima of the army of the king of Fuling and the governor of Gaoping, but his duties as a general remained unchanged.

古文：九年，卒。
现代文：永明九年去世。
English: Yan Xi died nine years later.

古文：诏曰： 僧静志怀贞果，诚著艰难。
现代文：皇帝有诏说： 僧静志存果断，确是屡经艰难困苦。
English: The emperor said in an imperial edict: "The monk Jing Zhi's determination to persevere is indeed the result of many hardships.

古文：克殄西墉，勋彰运始。
现代文：杀敌取胜于西方遍地，功勋卓著，使国运初昌。
English: Killing the enemy and winning everywhere in the West, with outstanding achievements, made the national movement successful.

古文：奄致殒丧，恻怆伤怀。赙钱五万，布百匹。谥壮侯。 
现代文：忽然传来他去世的噩耗，令人悲痛忧伤。决定赠送丧葬钱五万，布百匹谧为壮侯。 
English: The bad news of his death came suddenly, causing grief and sadness. It was decided to give a funeral gift of fifty thousand yuan, and one hundred horses and mules were given to him as a gift.

古文：僧静同郡余姚人陈胤叔，本名承叔，避宣帝讳改。
现代文：与僧静同郡的余姚人陈胤叔，原名承叔，因避宣帝讳而改为胤叔。
English: Uncle Chen Yan, a resident of Yuyao in the same county as Monk Jing, was originally named Uncle Cheng, but was changed to Uncle Yan because he did not want to offend Emperor Xuan.

古文：强辩果捷，便刀盾。初为左夹毂队将。
现代文：为人能言善辩、果断敏捷，惯使刀盾最初为左夹毂队将领。
English: A man of eloquence, decisiveness and agility, he was initially the leader of the left-hand column.

古文：泰始初，随太祖东讨，遂归身随从征伐。
现代文：泰始初年，跟随太祖萧道成束讨反叛的会稽太守寻阳王子房等，从此就随同太祖征伐，勤谨用心，因有功被太祖赏识。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he followed the great-grandfather Xiao Dao to form a group to fight against the rebels, such as the inspector-general and the prince of Huanyang, and from then on he accompanied the great-grandfather in the conquest, was diligent and diligent, and was appreciated by the great-grandfather for his meritorious service.

古文：小心慎事，以功见赏，封当阳县子，官至太子左率。
现代文：封为当阳县子。官至太子左率。
English: He was given the title of the son of Dangyang County. He rose through the ranks from official to crown prince.

古文：启世祖以狖箭钅禁用铁多，不如铸作。
现代文：陈胤叔曾经因锻造箭镖费铁多，不如改用铸造而向世祖上奏。
English: Uncle Chen Yan once said that forging arrow darts was too expensive, so it would be better to use casting to play to the ancestors.

古文：东冶令张候伯以铸钅禁钝，不合用，事不行。
现代文：束冶令张候伯认为铸造的箭错不够锋利，不利使用，使造一建议未能实行。
English: Zhang Xubo, the commander of the group of smiths, thought that the casting arrowhead was not sharp enough and was not suitable for use, so that the first suggestion could not be implemented.

古文：永明三年，卒。
现代文：速困在永明三年去世。
English: Hosoi died three years later in Nagamine.

古文：桓康，北兰陵承人也。勇果骁悍。
现代文：桓康，北兰陵的承地人，毅果断勇猛剽悍。
English: Huan Kang, a native of North Lanling, is resolute, courageous and fierce.

古文：宋大明中，随太祖为军容。
现代文：宋大明年问，追随太祖萧道成做军容。
English: Song Dynasty University asked next year to follow the great-grandfather Xiao Daocheng to make a military appearance.

古文：从世祖在赣县。
现代文：在赣县跟随世祖萧赜。
English: Follow the ancestor Xiao Qi in Jixian County.

古文：泰始初，世祖起义，为郡所絷，众皆散。
现代文：泰始初年，世祖起义，被地方官府捉住，部属都逃散了。
English: In the first year of Taishi, Shiso revolted and was caught by the local government. His subordinates fled.

古文：康装担，一头贮穆后，一头贮文惠太子及竟陵王子良，自负置山中。
现代文：桓康弄到一担箩筐，一头装着穆皇后，一头装着文惠太子和竞陵王子良，自己挑着藏到山裹。
English: Huan Kang found a load, one end was loaded with Empress Mu, the other with Prince Wenhui and King Xiao Ziliang, and he picked them up in the mountains.

古文：与门客萧欣祖、杨彖之、皋分喜、潜三奴、向思奴四十余人相结，破郡狱出世祖。
现代文：他和门客萧欣祖、杨冢之、皋分喜、潜三奴、向思奴四十余人联络结伙，从狱中救出世祖。
English: He and his disciples, Xiao Xinzu, Yang Xizhi, Zou Fenxi, Qian San Niu and Xiang Sinu, contacted and formed an alliance with more than forty people to rescue his grandfather from prison.

古文：郡追兵急，康等死战破之。
现代文：郡兵追捕紧急，桓康等人拼死战斗才击败他们。
English: The pursuers in the county pressed very hard, and Huan Kang and others fought to the death to defeat them.

古文：随世祖起义，摧坚陷阵，膂力绝人。所经村邑，恣行暴害。江南人畏之，以其名怖小儿，画其形以辟疟，无不立愈。
现代文：随世祖起义，陷阵摧坚，力大无比，所经过的村庄城镇，他任性侵害，江南人畏惧他，用他的名字来吓唬小孩，画出他的图像用作驱避邪神鬼怪，没有不立即奏效的。
English: With the ancestors of the uprising, trapped and destroyed, the strength is incomparable, the villages and towns he passed through, he willfully infringed, the Jiangnan people were afraid of him, used his name to scare children, drew his image to drive away evil spirits, and did not work immediately.

古文：见擢为世祖冠军府参军，除殿中将军，武骑常侍，出补襄贲令。
现代文：被提拔做世祖冠军府参军，授予殿中将军，武骑常侍，出京补襄贲令。
English: He was promoted to be the ancestor of the champion to join the army, awarded the general of the palace, the knight's equerry, and the order to go to Beijing.

古文：桂阳事起，康弃县还都就太祖，会事平，除员外郎。
现代文：宋桂阳王休范在寻阳起兵作乱，桓康从所管的县返回京都太祖处，正遇事态平息，授予员外郎。
English: Song Guiyang King Xuan Fan started a riot in Xuanyang, and Huan Kang returned to Kyoto Taizu's place from the county he was in charge of. When the situation calmed down, he was awarded the title of Foreigner.

古文：元徽五年七月六日夜，少帝微行至领军府，帝左右人曰： 一府人皆眠，何不缘墙入。 
现代文：元徽五年七月六日夜，少帝刘昱身着便服暗中走到萧道成的领军府，皇帝身边的人说： 一府的人都睡了，为什么不爬墙进去。 
English: On the evening of July 6th, 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the young emperor Liu Bei dressed in civilian clothes and secretly went to the leading army headquarters of Xiao Dao Cheng. People around the emperor said: People in the capital are asleep, why not climb the wall to get in.

古文：帝曰： 我今夕欲一处作适，待明日夜。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我今天晚上想到一个地方顺顺心，等明天晚上吧。 
English: The young emperor said: I've thought of a place to play tonight, let's wait until tomorrow night!

古文：康与太祖所养健儿卢荒、向黑于门间听得其语。
现代文：桓康同太祖所收养的壮汉卢荒、向黑在门听到他们的话。
English: Huan Kang and Lu Ao, a strong man who was adopted by his grandfather, went to Xiang He at the gate to listen to their words.

古文：明夕，王敬则将帝首至，扣门，康谓是变，与荒、黑晓下，拔白刃欲出。仍随入宫。
现代文：第二天晚上，王敬则提着皇帝的首级跑来敲门，桓康以为发生事变，同卢荒、向黑遍告部属，拔刀将出，于是护送太祖入宫。
English: The next evening, Wang Jing came knocking on the door with the emperor's head in his hand. Huan Kang thought something had happened, so he and Lu Ao and Xiang Heiben called their subordinates, drew their swords, and escorted the great-grandfather into the palace.

古文：太祖镇东府，除康武陵王中兵、宁朔将军，带兰陵太守，常卫左右。
现代文：太祖移镇束府，授予桓康武陵王中兵、宁朔将军，兼兰陵太守，常在太祖左右护卫。
English: The great ancestor moved to the town of Sokfu and awarded Huan Kang Wuling Wang Zhongbing, Ningshuo General, and Lanling Dazhu, and often escorted around the great ancestor.

古文：太祖诛黄回，回时将为南兖州，部曲数千，欲收，恐为乱。
现代文：太祖诛杀黄回，黄回在南兖州为将，有数干部属，派人收捕，担心他作乱。
English: The great-grandfather killed Huang Hui, Huang Hui was a general in Nanluozhou, several cadres belonged to him, sent people to arrest him, worried that he would make trouble.

古文：召入东府，停外斋，使康将数十人数回罪，然后杀之。
现代文：召他进东府来，让他在外问书房等待，派桓康带数十个人历数黄回的罪过，然后杀了他。
English: He called him to come to Dongfu, made him wait outside the interrogation room, sent Huan Kang to bring dozens of people to recount the sins of Huang Hui, and then killed him.

古文：回初与屯骑校尉王宜与同石头之谋，太祖隐其事，犹以重兵付回而配以腹心。宜与拳捷，善舞刀盾，回尝使十余人以水交洒，不能著。既虑宜与反己，乃先撤其军将，宜与不与，回发怒，不从处分，擅斩之。
现代文：黄回当初同屯骑校尉王宜与一起参预石头城的阴谋，太祖明知却隐瞒不说那桩事，还把重兵交付黄回掌握而用心腹给以搭配王宜与拳脚敏捷，善使刀盾，黄回曾经在他舞弄刀盾时让十多人用水洒泼，不能淋着他既而疑虑宜与反对自己，就先撤走他的将领和军队，宜与不给，黄回很生气不同意他的处置，白作主张把他杀了。
English: At the beginning, Huang Hui and his fellow cavalry lieutenant Wang Yi participated in the conspiracy of Stone Town together. The great-grandfather knew about it but concealed it and did not speak about it. He also entrusted the heavy soldiers to Huang Hui's control, and with his heart and stomach, he matched Wang Yi with quickness in fists and feet, and was good at using swords and shields. Huang Hui once had more than ten people sprinkle water on him while he was playing with swords and shields. He could not be drenched by him, and when he doubted whether it was appropriate and opposed himself, he first withdrew his generals and troops, whether it was appropriate

古文：诸将因此白太祖，以回握强兵，必遂反覆。
现代文：将军们因此向太祖说，让黄回手握重兵，一定会反叛。
English: As a result, the generals said to the great-grandfather that if he let Huang regain control of the army, he would definitely rebel.

古文：康请独往刺之，太祖曰： 卿等何疑甚，彼无能为也。 
现代文：桓康请求独自一人前往刺杀他，太祖说： 你们何必这般疑虑，他没啥能耐。 
English: When Huan Kang asked to be left alone to assassinate him, Taizu said, "Why do you have such doubts? He doesn't have the patience."

古文：及回被召上车，爱妾见赤光冠其头至足，苦捉留，回不肯止。
现代文：等到黄回被召上车时，他的爱妾看见红光从他的头部一直笼罩到脚下，苦苦拉着他不让走，黄回硬是不肯留下才罢。
English: When Huang Hui was called to the car, his beloved concubine saw the red light from his head all the way to his feet, and painstakingly pulled him not to let go. Huang Hui just refused to stay.

古文：时人为之语曰： 欲侜张，问桓康。 
现代文：当时的人为此说： 想要欺诳，去问桓康。 
English: People at the time said: "If you want to be a bully, ask Huan Kang."

古文：除后军将军，直阁将军，南濮阳太守，宁朔如故。
现代文：授予桓康后军将军，直合将军，南濮阳太守，宁朔将军职衔依旧不变。
English: The titles of General of the Huan Kang's Rear Army, General of Zhouga, Governor of Nan Poyang, and General of Ningshuo remained unchanged.

古文：建元元年，封吴平县伯，五百户。
现代文：建元元年，封吴乎县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, Wuhu County was given the title of county seat, with 500 households in food villages.

古文：转辅国将军，左军将军，游击将军，太守如故。
现代文：转辅国将军，左军将军，游击将军，太守职衔依旧不变。
English: The title of general of the auxiliary state, general of the left army, and general of the guerrillas, as well as the title of grand marshal, remain unchanged.

古文：太祖谓康曰： 卿随我日久，未得方伯，亦当未解我意，政欲与卿先共灭虏耳。 
现代文：太祖对桓康说： 你跟随我很多日子了，没能做到一个地方首领，也会有不理解我的意思的地方，我真想和你先共同扫灭魏虏罢了。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Huan Kang: You have been following me for many days. If you have not been able to become a local leader, there will be places that do not understand what I mean. I really want to work with you to wipe out Wei Rui.

古文：虏动，遣康行，假节。寻进冠军将军。
现代文：魏虏侵犯，派遣桓康去前方，假节，不久进升为冠军将军。
English: Wei Rui invaded, sent Huan Kang to the front, made a false festival, and was soon promoted to the champion general.

古文：三年春，于淮阳与虏战，大破之，进兵攻陷虏樊谐城。
现代文：建元三年春季，桓康在淮阳同魏虏大战，大败魏虏军，挥兵进取攻陷了魏虏樊谐城。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianyuan, Huan Kang fought with Wei Krup in Huaiyang, defeated Wei Krup's army, and invaded Wei Krup's Jingyi City.

古文：太祖喜，敕康迎淮北义民，不克。
现代文：太祖很高兴，敕令桓康迎接淮北起义民众，没有取得成功。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy. He ordered Huan Kang to welcome the people of Huaibei Uprising, but he was not successful.

古文：明年，以康为持节、督青冀二州东徐之东莞琅邪二郡朐山戍北徐之东海涟口戍诸军事、青冀二州刺史，冠军如故。
现代文：第二年，以桓康为持节、督青冀二州束徐之束莞琅邪二郡朐山戍北徐之东海涟戍诸军事、青冀二州刺史，冠军将军职衔依旧不变。
English: In the second year, with Huan Kang as the festival, the governor of Qinghai and Hebei, the governor of the two states, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties, the governor of the two counties

古文：世祖即位，转骁骑将军，复前军郡。
现代文：世祖即位，桓康转骁骑将军，复前任军职郡职。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, and Huan Kang was promoted to general of cavalry and regained his former military post of county magistrate.

古文：其年，卒。
现代文：那年桓康去世。
English: That year, Kanko passed away.

古文：诏曰： 康昔预南勋，义兼常怀，倍深恻怆。
现代文：有诏旨说： 桓康从前征战南方，勋劳卓著，心中常常充满深厚情谊，他的逝世使我非常悲痛。
English: An imperial edict said: "Huan Kang once fought in the south, distinguished himself, and his heart was often filled with deep feelings. I am very saddened by his death.

古文：凶事所须，厚加料理。 
现代文：丧事所需一切，应当从厚料理。 
English: Everything needed for the funeral should be prepared from thick dishes.

古文：年五十七。
现代文：享年五十七岁。
English: He was fifty-seven years old.

古文：淮南人尹略，少伏事太祖，晚习骑射，以便捷见使为将。升明中，为虎贲中郎、越骑校尉。
现代文：进亩人世盔，年轻时就服事左担，后来学习骑马射箭等武术，因为动作敏捷被任用做将领昼型年问为虎贲中郎、越骑校尉。
English: When he was young, he served as a left-hander, and later learned martial arts such as horse riding and archery. Because of his quick movements, he was appointed as a general in the daytime, and in the evening, he was appointed as a middle-ranking officer of the Tiger Regiment and a captain of the Yue cavalry.

古文：建元初，封平固男，三百户。
现代文：建元初年，封作平固男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were 300 households in the food village.

古文：永明八年，为游击将军，讨巴东王子响，见害。
现代文：永明八年，为游击将军，在讨伐巴束王飨时，被害。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, he was a guerrilla general and was killed in the battle against Ba Sok Wang Yao.

古文：赠辅国将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：追赠辅国将军、梁州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of Fu Guo Province and the title of Liang Zhou Jishi.

古文：焦度，字文续，南安氐人也。
现代文：焦度字文续，南安氐人。
English: Focussing on the word "continuation," Nan'an is the star.

古文：祖文圭，避难至襄阳。宋元嘉中，侨立天水郡略阳县，乃属焉。
现代文：祖父文圭，因避难至襄阳，宋元嘉年间，暂借寄居之地重新设立天水郡略阳县，于是就隶属这裹。
English: His grandfather, Wen Gui, took refuge in Xiangyang, and during the Song and Yuan Dynasties, he temporarily borrowed a place to live and re-established Liaoyang County, Tianshui County, so he belonged to this county.

古文：度以归国，补北馆客。
现代文：怎度由于归国，被委任北馆客。
English: Due to his return to China, he was appointed as a guest of the North Pavilion.

古文：孝武初，青州刺史颜师伯出镇，台差度领幢主送之。
现代文：孝武帝初年，青州刺史颜师伯外出镇治，朝廷派焦度领幢主送他。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, his teacher and colleague, the Qingzhou scholar Yan, went out to administer justice. The imperial court sent Jiao Du to escort him.

古文：索虏寇青州，师伯遣度领军与虏战于沙沟杜梁，度身破阵，大捷。
现代文：魏索虏侵扰青州，颜师伯派遣焦度率领军兵在沙沟杜梁同敌军作战，焦度亲身冲锋破阵，大获全胜。
English: Wei Soruping invaded Qingzhou, and Yan Shi Bo dispatched Cao Du to lead the soldiers to fight with the enemy army in Shagou Du Liang. Cao Du personally stormed and broke the line, and won a complete victory.

古文：师伯板为己辅国府参军。
现代文：颜师伯行文委任焦度为自己的辅国府参军。
English: Yan Shi Bo Xingwen appointed Jiao Du to join the army as his assistant governor.

古文：虏遣清水公拾贲敕文寇清口，度又领军救援，刺虏骑将豹皮公堕马，获其具装铠霡，手杀数十人。
现代文：魏虏遣清水公拾贲敕文侵犯清口，焦度又领兵援救清口，把魏虏骑兵将领豹皮公刺下马来，缴获了他的鉴甲和武器，亲手杀敌几十人。
English: Wei Krup sent Qingshui Gong to collect the stolen money to invade Qingkou, and then led the soldiers to rescue Qingkou. He stabbed the Wei Krup cavalry commander, the leader of the leopard skin, and captured his armor and weapons, and killed dozens of enemies with his own hands.

古文：师伯启孝武称度气力弓马并绝人，帝召还充左右。
现代文：颜师伯启奏孝武帝称赞焦度气力和弓马技艺均超绝常人，孝武帝召回焦度让他充任左右护卫。
English: Yan Shi Bo Qisong of Emperor Xiaowu praised Jiao Du's strength and archery skills as being beyond those of an ordinary person. Emperor Xiaowu recalled Jiao Du and made him the left and right guard.

古文：见度身形黑壮，谓师伯曰： 真健物也。 
现代文：孝武帝见他又黑又壮，对颜师伯说： 真健壮啊。 
English: When Emperor Xiaowu saw that he was black and strong, he said to Yan Shibo, "He's really strong."

古文：除西阳王抚军长兼行参军，补晋安王子勋夹毂队主，随镇江州。
现代文：任命他为西阳王抚军长兼行参军，补晋安王子勋夹毂队主，随晋安王子勋镇守江州。
English: He appointed him as the commander of the Xiyang Wangfujing Army and joined the army at the same time, the leader of the Jinan Prince's Honor Guard, and the commander of the Jiangzhou with the Jinan Prince's Honor Guard.

古文：子勋起兵，以度为龙骧将军，领三千人为前锋，屯赭圻。
现代文：子勋起兵，任用焦度做龙骧将军，率三千人做前锋，屯驻赭圻。
English: Zixun raised an army, appointed Caodu as the general of Longyu, led three thousand people as the vanguard, and stationed in Zhou.

古文：每与台军战，常自排突，所向无不胜。
现代文：每当同朝廷官军作战时，他常常亲自冲杀战斗，所到之处没有不胜利的。
English: Whenever he fought against the imperial court's official army, he would often charge into battle himself, and wherever he went, he was victorious.

古文：事败，逃宫亭湖中为寇贼。
现代文：晋安王事败，焦度逃到宫亭湖中沦为盗寇。
English: King Jinan was defeated, and he fled to the middle of the Palace Lake, where he became a robber.

古文：朝廷闻其勇，甚忧患之，使江州刺史王景文诱降度等，度将部曲出首，景文以为己镇南参军，寻领中直兵，厚待之。
现代文：朝廷听说他的勇武，把他看作心腹之患，派江州刺史王景文诱降焦度等人，焦度率领部属出来自首，王景文以焦度做自己的镇南参军，不久领中直兵，待他很优厚。
English: The imperial court heard of his bravery and, seeing him as a threat to their inner circle, sent Jiangzhou assassin Wang Jingwen to entice Cao Cao and others to surrender. Cao Cao led his subordinates to surrender. Wang Jingwen used Cao Cao as his subordinate to join the army in the south of the town, and soon led the Zhong Zhi soldiers. He was treated very generously.

古文：随景文还都，常在府州内。
现代文：他随王景文返回京都，常在府州内。
English: He returned to Beijing with Wang Jingwen and often lived in Fuzhou.

古文：景文被害夕，度大怒，劝景文拒命，景文不从。
现代文：王景文被害的那天晚上，焦度很生气，劝景文抗拒命令，王景文不听从。
English: On the night of Wang Jingwen's murder, Cao Du was very angry. He advised Wang Jingwen to resist the order, but Wang Jingwen did not obey.

古文：明帝不知也。
现代文：明帝刘或不知道这件事。
English: Emperor Liu of the Ming Dynasty may not have known about this.

古文：以度武勇，补晋熙王燮防阁，除征虏铠曹行参军，随镇夏口。
现代文：因焦度威武勇敢，补晋熙王刘燮防合，任征虏锁曹行参军，随从镇守夏口。
English: Because of his ardor, he was mighty and brave. King Liu Xuan of the Sui and Jin dynasties joined the army, and he was assigned to be the town guard of Xiakou.

古文：武陵王赞代燮为郢州，度仍留镇，为赞前军参军。
现代文：武陵王刘赞代刘燮镇守郢州，焦度还留在夏口，做刘赞的前军参军。
English: Liu Zan, the king of Wuling, guarded Ganzhou on behalf of Liu Shanzhen, but his focus remained in Xiakou, where he joined the army as Liu Zan's former soldier.

古文：沈攸之事起，转度中直兵，加宁朔将军、军主。
现代文：沈攸之作乱后，焦度转任中直兵，加宁朔将军、军主。
English: After Shen Youzhi's rebellion, the focus shifted to Zhong Zhi Bing, General Kaningshuo, the military leader.

古文：太祖又遣使假度辅国将军、屯骑校尉。
现代文：太祖又派遣使臣去任命焦度为辅国将军、屯骑校尉。
English: The great-grandfather also dispatched an envoy to appoint Jiao Du as an auxiliary national general and a cavalry colonel.

古文：攸之大众至夏口，将直下都，留偏兵守郢城而已。
现代文：沈攸之的大队人马开到夏口，将要直下京都，仅留部分兵力守郢城而已。
English: Shen Youzhi's large army marched all the way to Niaokou and was about to march straight to Kyoto, leaving only a part of the army to defend Lushan.

古文：度于城楼上肆言骂辱攸之，至自发露形体秽辱之，故攸之怒，改计攻城。
现代文：焦度在城楼上肆意乱骂侮辱沈攸之，直到自己裸露形体羞辱他，攸之因此很气愤，就改变原定计划转而攻城。
English: Caught up in the excitement, he verbally abused Shen Youzhu on the castle tower, to the extent that he took off his clothes and exposed his naked body to insult him. Shen Youzhu was so angry that he changed his plan to attack Shicheng.

古文：度亲力战，攸之众蒙楯将登，度令投以秽器，贼众不能冒，至今呼此楼为 焦度楼 。
现代文：焦度亲自奋力战斗，攸之的部众用盾牌遮蒙爬攀城墙，焦度命令兵士用屎尿秽物浇泼，贼众不能冒着秽物上登，至今人们叫这座城楼为 焦度楼 。
English: Cao Du personally fought hard, and his subordinates used shields to climb the walls. Cao Du ordered the soldiers to splash them with excrement and filth, and the thieves could not climb up in the face of filth. To this day, people call this tower the "Cao Du Tower."

古文：事宁，度功居多，转后军将军，封东昌县子，东宫直阁将军。
现代文：事态平定，焦度功劳占多，转任后军将军，封束吕县子，束宫直合将军。
English: The situation was stabilized, and he received much credit for his efforts. He was transferred to the post of general of the rear army, and his son, Lyu Xuanzi, and his son, Sokong Zhaohui, became generals.

古文：为人朴涩，欲就太祖求州，比及见，意色甚变，竟不得一语。
现代文：焦度为人朴实而迟钝，他想到太祖那裹求取州官，等到见了面，神色大变，竟然说不出话来。
English: He was a simple and slow-witted man, and when he thought of his great-grandfather's quest for state office, when he met him, his face changed so much that he couldn't speak.

古文：太祖以其不闲民事，竟不用。
现代文：太祖认为他不熟悉民事，还是没有任用。
English: The great-grandfather thought that he was not familiar with civil affairs, so he was not appointed.

古文：建元四年，乃除淮陵太守，本官如故。
现代文：建元四年才被授予太守，原先的官职不变动。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianyuan era, he was awarded the title of Taishu, and his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：度见朝廷贵戚，说郢城事，宣露如初。
现代文：焦度遇见朝廷贵戚，说起郢城事件来，讲述形容就像当时那样。
English: Caught up in the excitement of meeting a high-ranking member of the imperial court, he recounts the story of the Lucheng Incident, describing it as it was at the time.

古文：好饮酒，醉辄暴怒。上常使人节之。
现代文：他贪杯好饮，酒醉后每每暴怒，皇上常派人对他加以节制。
English: He was a voracious drinker and often flew into violent rages when drunk. The emperor often sent someone to restrain him.

古文：年虽老，而气力如故。寻除游击将军。
现代文：焦度虽然老了，气力仍不减当年，不久被授予游击将军。
English: Although the focus is old, the strength is still the same as that year, and it was soon awarded to the guerrilla general.

古文：永明元年，卒，年六十一。
现代文：永明元午去世，时年六十一岁。
English: Yongming Yuanbo died at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠辅国将军、梁秦二州刺史。
现代文：赠辅国将军、梁秦二州刺史。
English: The history of Liang Qin's conquest of the two states.

古文：子世荣，永明中为巴东王防阁。
现代文：他儿子焦世荣，永明年间为巴束王防合。
English: His son, Jiao Shirong, will forever be remembered as the protector of King Batsuk.

古文：子响事，世荣避奔雍州，世祖嘉之，以为始兴中兵参军。
现代文：子飨事发，世荣逃奔到雍州，世祖嘉奖他的行为，任用他做始兴中兵参军。
English: When the Zixing Incident occurred, Shierong fled to Yongzhou. The patriarch commended his actions and appointed him to join the army as a soldier in Shixing.

古文：曹虎，字士威，下邳下邳人也，本名虎头。
现代文：曹虎字士威，下邳下邳人，原名虎头。
English: Cao Hu Zi Shi Wei, the lower jaw of the lower jaw, the original name of the tiger head.

古文：宋明帝末，为直厢。
现代文：宋明帝末年为直厢。
English: The last years of the Song and Ming Dynasties were years of unrest.

古文：桂阳贼起，随太祖出新亭垒出战，先斩一级持还，由是识太祖。
现代文：桂阳王休范作乱时，跟随太祖从新亭垒出战，首先斩杀一贼提首级而回，太担由此认识他。
English: When King Xuan of Guiyang made a disturbance, he followed his great-grandfather out of the new pavilion to fight. He first killed a thief and then returned with his head held high. This is how the great-grandfather knew him.

古文：太祖为领军，虎诉勋，补防殿队主，直西斋。
现代文：叁袒为领军，直虚诉说自己的勋劳，被补为防殿队主，在西斋当值。
English: As the leader of the army, Zhihu told of his meritorious service. He was appointed as the commander of the palace defense team and was on duty in Xizhai.

古文：苍梧废，明日，虎欲出外避难，遇太祖在东中华门，问虎何之。
现代文：苍梧王被废黜的第二天，曹虎正想到外面避难，在东中华门遇见左担，左担问蔓虐往哪裹去?
English: On the second day after the dethronement of King Cangwu, Cao Hu was thinking of taking refuge outside when he met a left-hander at the East China Gate. The left-hander asked Cangwu, "Where should I go?"

古文：虎因曰： 故欲仰觅明公耳。 
现代文：萱虚趁机说： 衹不过想投奔你啊。 
English: Xiao Hui took the opportunity to say: "But I want to join you."

古文：仍留直卫。
现代文：于足又留做护卫。
English: He was also left behind as an escort.

古文：太祖镇东府，以虎与戴僧静各领白直三百人。
现代文：太祖镇守束府，让曹虎与戴僧静各自带领三百不拿月俸的人随从护卫。
English: Taizu Town guarded Sokufu, and let Cao Hu and Dai Sangjing each lead three hundred people who did not take a monthly salary to accompany the escort.

古文：累至屯骑校尉，带南城令。
现代文：累升至屯骑校尉，兼鱼越令。
English: He was successively promoted to the rank of cadet, and also to the rank of yakitori chef.

古文：豫平石头，封罗江县男，除前军将军。
现代文：参预平定石头之乱，封罗江县男，授予前军将军。
English: Participated in the preliminaries to quell the stone riot, the man of Luojiang County was awarded the former army general.

古文：上受禅，增邑为四百户。
现代文：太祖受禅即皇帝位，食邑增为四百户。
English: Taizu was enthroned as emperor, and the number of households increased to 400.

古文：直阁将军，领细仗主。
现代文：任直合将军，领细仗主。
English: Ren Zhaohai general, leading small warlord.

古文：寻除宁朔将军、东莞太守。
现代文：不久又被授予宁朔将军、塞差太守。
English: Soon he was awarded the title of General of Ningshuo and Governor of Sichang.

古文：建元元年冬，虎启乞改封侯官，尚书奏侯官户数殷广，乃改封监利县。
现代文：建五元年冬，萱虚奏请把赵封给他，尚书奏报侯官人户数目太多，于是改封监利县。
English: In the winter of 5th year of Jian, Zhao Feng was given to Xiao Hui So, and Shang Shu So was given to Hou Guan Guan. The number of households was too many, so the county was changed to Jianli County.

古文：二年，除游击将军，本官如故。
现代文：建五二年，授游击将军，原来的官职不变。
English: In 1952, he was awarded the title of guerrilla general. His original official position remained unchanged.

古文：及彭、沛义民起，遣虎领六千人入涡。
现代文：待茎、迪等地人民起义反魏事起，太祖派曹处率领六千人到过地。
English: After the anti-Wei people's uprisings in Zhucheng, Di and other places, the great-grandfather sent Cao De to lead six thousand people to the countryside.

古文：沈攸之横吹一部，京邑之绝，虎启以自随。
现代文：接受选迪之的一部横吹乐器，那是当时京城的一绝，曹虎要求随身带着。
English: Cao Hu asked him to take a flute with him, which was a must-have musical instrument in Beijing at that time.

古文：义民久不至，虎乃攻虏别营破之。
现代文：起义百姓迟迟未到，曹虎就攻打魏虏别的营地，且打败了他们。
English: Before the uprising people arrived, Cao Hu attacked Wei Krup's camp and defeated them.

古文：将士贪取俘执，反为虏所败，死亡二千人。
现代文：但是将士贪取俘虏的财物，反被魏兵杀败，死亡二千人。
English: However, the soldiers coveted the captives' belongings, but were defeated by the Wei soldiers, and two thousand people died.

古文：世祖即位，除员外常侍，迁南中郎司马，加宁朔将军、南新蔡太守。
现代文：世祖即位，任员外常侍，迁南中郎司马，加宁朔将军、南新蔡太守。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, and was appointed as an outside attendant, followed by Nanzhong Lang Sima, General Ganingshuo, and Nanshin Cai Taishu.

古文：永明元年徙为安成王征虏司马，余官如故。
现代文：永明元年，迁任塞处王征虏司马，其余官职不变。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was transferred to the Sichuan office of Wang Zhengru Sima, and the rest of his official positions remained unchanged.

古文：明年，江州蛮动，敕虎领兵戍寻阳，板辅国将军，伐蛮军主。
现代文：第二年，江州蛮暴动，诏命宣虚领兵戍守曼堡，授辅国将军，伐蛮军主。
English: In the second year, there was a violent riot in Jiangzhou, and the emperor issued an order to proclaim the vanity of leading soldiers to defend Manburg, awarding him the title of general of the country and commander of the barbarian army.

古文：又领寻阳相。寻除游击将军，辅国、军主如故。
现代文：又领垒陨相，不久任游击将军，辅国将军、军主职务照前不变。
English: In addition, the position of the leader of the meteorological station, the short-term guerrilla general, the auxiliary general, and the military commander will remain unchanged.

古文：世祖以虎头名鄙，敕改之。
现代文：世祖认为虎头这个名字鄙俗，诏命改作 虎 。
English: The ancestor thought that the name "Kotou" was vulgar and ordered that it be changed to "Tiger."

古文：六年四月，荒贼桓天生复引虏出据隔城，遣虎督数军讨之。
现代文：永明六年四月， 荒贼 桓天生又引魏兵占据匾球，世担派遣茎处督率数路军队讨伐他。
English: In April of the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, the bandit Huan Tian Sheng again led the Wei soldiers to occupy the world, and the world council dispatched the head of the stem department to lead several armies to fight him.

古文：虎令辅国将军朱公恩领骑百匹及前行踏伏，值贼游军，因合战破之。
现代文：曹虎令辅国将军朱公恩率领骑兵百人在前面侦察有无伏兵，正碰上贼兵的游动部队，因而打了遭遇战，杀败了贼兵。
English: Cao Hu ordered Zhu Gong'en, the general of the auxiliary state, to lead a hundred cavalrymen to scout in front to see if there were any ambushes, and they were encountering the roving troops of the bandits, so they fought an encounter battle and defeated the bandits.

古文：遂进至隔城。
现代文：于是进抵隔城。
English: So we arrived in the next town.

古文：贼党拒守，虎引兵围栅，绝其走路。须臾，候骑还报虏援已至，寻而天生率马步万余人迎战，虎奋击大败之，获二千余人。
现代文：贼军据城拒守，萱处带兵修筑包围该城的栅墙，断绝他们的逃路，不多久，探马返回报告魏虏援军到来，转而担玉生率领骑兵步兵万余人迎战，萱虚奋力拼杀，大败 荒贼 桓天生，擒捉二千多人。
English: The thief army refused to defend the city, and led the soldiers to build a fence to encircle the city and cut off their escape route. Not long after, the probing horse returned to report the arrival of reinforcements from Wei Krup, and Yusheng led the cavalry and infantry of more than 10,000 people to meet the battle, fought hard, and defeated the robbers. He captured more than two thousand people.

古文：明日，遂攻隔城拔之，斩伪虎威将军襄城太守帛乌祝，复杀二千余人，贼弃平氏城退走。
现代文：第二天，就拿下了隔城，斩杀伪虎威将军襄城太守帛昼担，又杀贼二千多人，贼兵丢弃平氏城逃跑了。
English: The next day, they took the next city, killed the pseudo-tiger general Xiangcheng Taishuo, and killed more than two thousand bandits. The bandits abandoned Ping's city and fled.

古文：七年，迁冠军将军，骁骑如故。
现代文：永明七年，迁冠军将军，骁骑将军官职不变。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, the champion was transferred to the general, and the official position of the riding general remained unchanged.

古文：明年，迁太子左率，转西阳王冠军司马、广陵太守。
现代文：第二年，迁太子左率，转西阳王冠军司马、庐堕太守。
English: In the second year, Prince Qian left the leadership and was succeeded by Sima, the champion of Xiyang King, and Zou, the deposed Empress Dowager.

古文：上敕虎曰： 广陵须心腹，非吾意可委者，不可得处此任。 
现代文：皇上诏告壹虚说： 庐堕太守须是心腹之人，不是我认为可以委任的人，是不能够担当这一职位的。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, saying: "The deposed empress dowager must be a confidant, not someone I think I can appoint. She is not capable of holding this position.

古文：随郡王子隆代巴东王子响为荆州，备军容西上，以虎为辅国将军、镇西司马、南平内史。
现代文：随郡王子隆取代巴柬王子响做型业刺史时，整理军容器仗挥师西上，以曹虎为辅国将军、镇西司马、南平内史。
English: When the county prince Long replaced the Pak-Cambodian prince Heung to make the pattern industry stabbing history, he sorted out the military container war waving division westward, with Cao Hu as the auxiliary national general, Zhen Xi Sima, Nanping internal history.

古文：十一年，收雍州刺史王奂，敕领步骑数百，步道取襄阳。
现代文：永明十一年，收捕壅丛刺史王垒，敕命董卢率领步兵骑兵数百人，从小路夺取襄阳。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, he captured Shih Wang Rong, who was hiding in a thicket, and killed Dong Lu, who led hundreds of infantry and cavalry to seize Xiangyang from a small road.

古文：仍除持节、督梁南北秦沙四州诸军事、西戎校尉、梁南秦二州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：于是授持节、督梁南北豢沙四州诸军事、酉戏校尉、銮直台二州刺史，将军官职依前不变。
English: As a result, on the Day of Conferment, the military of the four states of the North, South, and Bansha, the lieutenant of the Bansha Theater, and the historian of the two states of the Bansha Theater, the military posts remain unchanged.

古文：寻进号征虏将军。
现代文：不久进号为征虏将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Conscripts.

古文：郁林即位，进号前将军。
现代文：郁林玉即皇帝位，进爵号为前将军。
English: Yu Linyu is the emperor, and the knighthood goes to the former general.

古文：隆昌元年，迁督雍州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡军事、冠军将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，迁督壅业竖丛的童堕塱业的堕迎军事、冠军将军、壅业刺史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children of the children

古文：建武元年，进号右将军。
现代文：建武元年，进号右将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of General of the Right.

古文：二年，进督为监，进号平北将军，爵为侯，增邑三百户。
现代文：建武二年，由督诸军晋升为监诸军事。进号为平北将军，爵位为侯，增食邑三百户。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was promoted from the military governor to the military supervisor. His promotion name was Pingbei General, his peerage was marquis, and he increased his food supply by 300 households.

古文：四年，虏寇沔北，虎聚军襄阳，与南阳太守房伯玉不协，不急赴救，末乃移顿樊城。
现代文：四年，魏虏侵犯沔北，魏虏的军队在襄阳集结，因与南阳太守房伯玉有隔阗，没有及时赶往援救，最后祇是移兵屯驻樊城。
English: In four years, Wei Krup invaded northern Anhui Province. Wei Krup's army assembled in Xiangyang, but because of the distance from Nanyang's grand vizier Fang Bo-yu, they did not rush to the rescue in time. In the end, they only moved their troops to Anhui City.

古文：虏主元宏遗虎书曰： 皇帝谢伪雍州刺史：神运兆中，皇居阐洛。化总元天，方融八表。而南有未宾之吴，治为两主之隔。
现代文：魏虏君主元宏送给曹虎的信说：皇帝感谢伪雍州刺史：上天神运吉兆中原，皇帝宫室明示在洛，一切造化总来白天然，方俗融会八方之外，可南方却有未归服的呈，分隔为两个君主统治。
English: The letter sent to Cao Hu by the Wei-Rupu monarch Yuan Hong said: "The emperor thanks the pseudo-Yongzhou engraved history: the heavenly gods bring good luck to the Central Plains, the emperor's palace is explicitly in Luo, all creatures always come from white and natural, and customs are integrated in all directions, but the south is still unconverted, separated by the rule of two monarchs.

古文：幽显含嗟，人灵雍阏。
现代文：幽深与浅明令人嗟叹，凡人和神灵阻隔不通。
English: The profundity and shallowness are breathtaking, and mortals and gods cannot be separated.

古文：且汉北江边，密尔乾县，故先动凤驾，整我神邑。
现代文：况且汉北江边，两地相隔不远，因而先移动圣驾，整治我的京都。
English: Moreover, Hanbei River, the two places are not far apart, so I moved first to rectify my Kyoto.

古文：卿进无陈平归汉之智，退阙关羽殉节之忠，婴闭穷城，忧顿长沔，机勇两缺，何其嗟哉！
现代文：你论进取没有辣平归漠的智慧，讲败退缺少关羽殉节的忠贞，闭门固守穷城，心怀忧惧长屯沔水之滨，机会与勇敢两者都欠缺，怎不令人慨叹。
English: How can you not be amazed at your lack of wisdom in forging ahead without being calm and level-headed, your lack of loyalty in defeat and retreat, your adherence to the poor city behind closed doors, your fear of the waterfront, and your lack of both opportunity and courage.

古文：朕比乃欲造卿，逼冗未果，且还新都，飨厥六戎，入彼春月，迟迟扬旆，善修尔略，以俟义临。 
现代文：朕近来就想到你处去，被许多杂事缠住没有实现，暂且返回新建的都城，宴请西部各部族，待到那春季，再慢慢扬起军旗吧，你要好好修订你的谋略，以便等正义之师的光临。
English: I've been thinking lately that you should go somewhere, get caught up in a lot of things that don't come to fruition, return to the newly built capital for a while, feast the western tribes, stay until the spring, and then slowly raise the flag. You should revise your strategy well in order to wait for the arrival of the righteous.

古文：虎使人答书曰： 自金精失道，皇居徙县，乔木空存，茂草方郁。
现代文：曹虎让人写回信说：自从西方之神迷失道路，皇帝宫室移迁县邑，高大的乔木白白生长，繁芜的杂草正茂盛地生长。
English: Cao Hu had someone write back and say, "Since the God of the West lost his way and the emperor's palace was moved to the county seat, tall trees have grown white and numerous weeds are growing luxuriantly.

古文：七狄交侵，五胡代起，顾瞻中原，每用吊焉。
现代文：戌狄交替侵犯，胡夷一代一代兴盛起来，顾望中原，对此每每悲伤。
English: Zou Di alternately encroached, Hu Yi generation after generation prospered, looked to the Central Plains, and was saddened by this.

古文：知弃皋兰，随水瀍涧，伊川之象，爰在兹日。
现代文：懂得舍弃皋兰故地，顺随水源遭到泸涧一带，陆浑戎迁徙伊川之气象，就在这一天。
English: It is on this day that the weather of Ikawa, which knows how to abandon the hometown of Ulan, follows the water source to the Ulan area, and migrates from the land to the sea.

古文：古人有云： 匪宅是卜，而邻是卜。 
现代文：古人说： 匪宅是卜，而邻是卜。 
English: The ancients said: "A bandit's house is his home, but his neighbors are his neighbors."

古文：樊、汉无幸，咫尺殊风，折胶入塞，乘秋犯边，亲属穷于斩杀，士女困于虔刘。与彼蠢左，共为唇齿，仁义弗闻，苛暴先露。
现代文：樊、汉不幸，地近咫尺，风俗不同，秋气来到塞上，乘着秋高气爽就来侵犯边疆，亲属们在斩杀中丧尽，士女们被劫掠所困扰，同那些蠢左，互为唇齿，不曾听说仁义的行为，先显露出苛暴的举动。
English: The Han and Qiang peoples, unfortunately, are very close to each other, and their customs are different. When the autumn breeze comes to Jie Shang, they take advantage of the high autumn breeze to invade the frontier. Relatives have been killed in the slaughter, and men and women have been plagued by looting. They are like each other's lips and teeth. They have never heard of benevolent and righteous behavior, and they first show their harsh behavior.

古文：乃复改易毡裘，妄自尊大。
现代文：竟又改变毡裘的服饰，狂妄地自尊自大。
English: He even changed his clown's clothes and became arrogant and conceited.

古文：我皇开运，光宅区夏，而式乱逋逃，弃同即异。
现代文：我朝皇帝立国开运以来，光辉照耀华夏各地，可是有扰乱法纪带罪潜逃的人，抛弃同胞，投奔异族。
English: Since the founding of the empire, the glory has shone all over China. However, there are people who have violated laws and regulations and absconded with crimes, abandoning their compatriots and defecting to other ethnic groups.

古文：每欲出车鞠旅，以征不庭，所冀干戚两阶，叛命来格，遂复游魂不戢，乾没孔炽。
现代文：常想出动车驾调动军队，以讨伐那些不服朝廷的叛贼，所希望的是斧头与盾牌有两种用途，叛离者能迷途知返，于是又使得游散之魂不能聚敛，以权谋私的贪欲之火愈烧愈旺。
English: They often want to mobilize the army by car and truck to fight those traitors who do not obey the imperial court. What they hope for is that the axe and shield have two uses, and the renegade can return home, thus making the wandering soul unable to gather, and the fire of greed for power and selfishness burns more and more.

古文：孤总连率，任属方邵，组甲十万，雄戟千群，以此戡难，何往不克。
现代文：特总领连率，任属方邵，组甲十万，雄戟千群，凭此戡定发难之徒，所向有何不能制胜。
English: The special commander-in-chief of the company rate is Fang Shao, the group A is 100,000, and the male soldiers are thousands of groups. Based on this, the soldiers who are determined to make difficulties are unable to win.

古文：主上每矜率土，哀彼民黎，使不战屈敌，兵无血刃。
现代文：主上每惜及疆域，哀怜那裹的黎民百姓，想不用战斗而使敌人屈服，兵刃上不着血迹。
English: The Lord pities the territory and the people of Lebanon. He wants to subdue the enemy without fighting. There is no blood on the sword.

古文：故部勒小戍，闭壁清野，抗威遵养，庶能怀音。
现代文：因此约束我等，坚壁清野，抗威遵养，庶几能够心怀感戴。
English: Therefore, we are constrained, we are firm, we are clear, we are resistant, we are obedient, and we can feel it in our hearts.

古文：若遂迷复，知进忘退，当金钲戒路，云旗北扫，长驱燕代，并羁名王，使少卿忽诸，头曼不祀。
现代文：假若由此迷惑心性，知进忘退，我等就将奏起金釭整装出发，军旗如云，长驱北扫，直捣燕代，并擒名王，使得连少卿都没有了，匈奴单于头曼不能享受祭祀。
English: If this were to confuse the nature of the mind, to know how to advance and forget to retreat, we would play the golden gong and set off in full gear, the military flag would be like a cloud, the long drive would sweep north, the direct attack would sweep south, and the king would be named, so that there would not even be a shaoqing, and the Xiongnu would not be able to enjoy the sacrifice only in the first place.

古文：兵交无远，相为悯然。 
现代文：距离兵刃相加为时不远了，看着令人哀怜。
English: It is not far from the time of the battle, and it is pitiful to watch.

古文：永泰元年，迁给事中，右卫将军，持节，隶都督陈显达停襄阳伐虏。
现代文：永泰元年，曹虎迁给事中，右卫将军，持节，隶属于都督陈显达屯驻襄阳讨伐魏虏。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Cao Hu moved to the middle of the matter, the right guard general, holding a festival, was subordinate to the governor Chen Xiandatun stationed in Xiangyang to fight Wei Rui.

古文：度支尚书崔慧景于邓地大败，虏追至沔北。
现代文：度支尚书崔慧景在邓地大败，魏虏追到沔北。
English: Du Zhi Shang Shu Cui Huijing suffered a crushing defeat in Dangdian, and Wei Rui chased him all the way to the north of Anhui.

古文：元宏率十万众，从羽仪华盖，围樊城。
现代文：元宏率十万人马，带着羽仪华盖等帝王仪仗，包围樊城。
English: Yuan Hong led a hundred thousand horses, with feathered warriors such as Huagai, to encircle Lucheng.

古文：虎闭门固守。
现代文：曹虎闭门固守。
English: Cao Hu closed the door and held fast.

古文：虏去城数里立营顿，设毡屋，复再围樊城，临沔水，望襄阳岸乃去。
现代文：魏虏距城数里建立营寨，安设毡帐，又再围樊城，站在沔水边上，隔水望着襄阳才离去。
English: Wei Rui built a camp a few miles away from the city, set up a post, and then surrounded the city, standing on the edge of the water, looking across the water at Xiangyang before leaving.

古文：虎遣军主田安之等十余军出逐之，颇相伤杀。
现代文：曹虎派遣军主田安之等十多支军队出城追逐，相互杀伤较多。
English: Cao Hu dispatched more than ten armies, including the commander Tian Anzhi, to chase them out of the city, and there was a lot of mutual killing.

古文：东昏即位，迁前将军，镇军司马。
现代文：束昏即皇帝位，曹虎迁前将军，镇军司马。
English: When Cao Cao passed away, Cao Hu became the emperor, Cao Hu became the general, and Zhen Jun Sima became the commander.

古文：永元元年，始安王遥光反，虎领军屯青溪中桥。
现代文：永元元年，始安王遥光反叛，曹虎领着军队屯驻青溪中桥。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, King Yaoguang of Shi'an rebelled, and Cao Hu led the army to stay in Zhongqiao, Qingxi.

古文：事宁，转散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：事态平定后，转散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: After the situation calmed down, the cavalry constables and the right guard generals were dispersed.

古文：虎形干甚毅，善于诱纳，日食荒客常数百人。晚节好货贿，吝啬，在雍州得见钱五千万，伎女食酱菜，无重肴。
现代文：曹虎形貌刚强，善于引诱拉拢，每天供养的逃荒就食的常有几百人晚年贪财、吝啬，在雍州有钱五千万，他家伎女吃的是酱菜，没有鱼肉荤腥。
English: Cao Hu has a strong appearance and is good at luring and attracting people. There are often hundreds of people in their later years who are greedy and miserly when it comes to food. In Yongzhou, there are 50 million people with money. The women in his family eat sauces, not fish.

古文：每好风景，辄开库拍张向之。
现代文：每当天气晴朗，每每打开库门使之通风干燥。
English: Whenever the weather is fine, always open the door to ventilate and dry.

古文：帝疑虎旧将，兼利其财，新除未及拜，见杀，时年六十余。
现代文：皇帝怀疑曹虎这些旧将，加上图他钱多，在他新授官职还没来得及受命时就把他杀害了。当时他六十多岁。
English: The emperor suspected that Cao Hu, who was in his sixties at the time, had killed these old generals, as well as Tu, who had more money, before he could be appointed to his new post.

古文：和帝中兴元年，追赠安北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：和帝中兴元年，追赠安北将军，徐州刺史。
English: And Emperor Zhongxing in the first year of the year, posthumously awarded the Anbei General, Xuzhou stabbing history.

古文：史臣曰：解厄鸿门，资舞阳之气；纳降飨旅，仗虎侯之力。
现代文：史臣曰：鸿门刘邦能解困厄，凭藉的是舞阳侯樊啥的勇气；招降纳叛宴赏游民，全仗虎侯的力量。
English: Shichen said: Honmen Liu Bang can solve the predicament by virtue of the courage of Maiyang Hou Xuan; invite, accept, betray and reward the wanderers, all thanks to the strength of Tiger Hou.

古文：观兹猛毅，藉以风威，未必投车挟辀，然后胜敌。
现代文：看到这般勇猛刚毅，藉此就可生发声威，不一定要投车挟轴，然后才能胜敌。
English: When you see such bravery and fortitude, it gives you the confidence that you don't have to throw in the towel in order to win.

古文：故桓康之声，所以震慑江蠡也。
现代文：所以桓康的声名，可以用来震慑长江彭蠡。
English: Therefore, the reputation of Huan Kang can be used to deter the Yangtze River Peng Yao.

古文：赞曰：薛辞亲爱，归身淮涘。
现代文：赞曰：薛渊辞别至亲至爱，身体终归淮水之滨。
English: Zang said: "Xue Yuan bids farewell to his dearest and dearest, and his body finally returns to the shore of Huai Shui."

古文：戴类千秋，兴言帝子。
现代文：戴僧静类似千秋，为帝子兴言。
English: Daizongjing is similar to Qianqiu, and speaks for the emperor.

古文：桓勇焦壮，爪牙之士。
现代文：桓康勇猛、焦度壮健，均属爪牙之士。
English: Huan Kang is brave, eager and vigorous, and belongs to the minions.

古文：虎守西边，功亏北鄙。
现代文：曹虎镇守西部边关，而功亏一篑于北方边陲。
English: Cao Huzhen guarded the western border, but was unsuccessful in the northern border.

