古文：沈庆之宗悫永初二年，庆之除殿中员外将军，又随伯符隶到彦之北侵。
现代文：永初二年，沈庆之被任命为殿中员外将军，又随着赵伯符在到彦之的率领下北侵。
English: In the second year of Yongzheng, Shen Qingzhi was appointed as a general outside the palace, and led the northern invasion under the leadership of Zhao Bofu.

古文：伯符病归，仍隶檀道济。
现代文：赵伯符生病归还，便隶属于檀道济。
English: When Zhao Bofu returned from illness, he was affiliated with Dangdao Jizhi.

古文：道济白文帝称庆之忠谨晓兵，上使领队防东掖门，稍得引接，出入禁省。
现代文：檀道济告诉文帝，沈庆之忠诚谨慎通晓军事，皇上让他担任领队，防守东掖门，逐渐得到提拔，出入宫庭。
English: Dang Daoji told Emperor Wen that Shen Qing's loyalty, prudence and military knowledge were the best. The emperor made him the leader of the team to defend the East Gate, and gradually promoted him to enter and leave the palace.

古文：领军刘湛知之，欲相引接，谓曰： 卿在省年月久远，比当相论。 
现代文：领军刘湛很欣赏他，准备进行引荐，对他说： 你在台阁年月已经很久了，最近我一定要加以推荐。 
English: Liu Zhan, the leader of the army, admired him very much and was ready to make a recommendation. He said to him: You have been in the cabinet for a long time. Recently, I must recommend you.

古文：庆之正色曰： 下官在省十年，自应得转，不复以此仰累。 
现代文：沈庆之严肃地说： 下官在台省十年，自然应该有所调动，不再因此连累您。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said seriously: The lower-ranking official has been in Taiwan Province for ten years, so naturally he should be transferred, so that he will no longer be a burden to you.

古文：寻转正员将军。
现代文：不久转任正员将军。
English: He was soon promoted to full general.

古文：及湛被收之夕，上开门召庆之，庆之戎服履袜缚裤入，上见而惊曰： 卿何意乃尔急装？ 
现代文：等刘湛被捕的那天晚上，皇上开门召见沈庆之，沈庆之披甲着靴而入，皇上见了吃惊地说： 卿为什么要穿这样的紧急服装？ 
English: On the evening of Liu Zhan's arrest, the emperor opened the door to summon Shen Qingzhi. Shen Qingzhi entered wearing armor and boots. The emperor was surprised to see him and said: Sir, why are you wearing such emergency clothing?

古文：庆之曰： 夜半唤队主，不容缓服。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 半夜里喊叫队主，来不及换宽绰的官服。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said: In the middle of the night, the leader of the team was called out, and it was too late to change the loose-fitting official uniform.

古文：遣收吴郡太守刘斌杀之。
现代文：后来派他去把吴郡太守抓来杀掉了。
English: Later, he was sent to arrest and kill the governor of Wu County.

古文：元嘉十九年，雍州刺史刘道産卒，群蛮大动，征西司马朱修之讨蛮失利，以庆之爲建威将军，率衆助修之。
现代文：元嘉十九年，雍州刺史刘道产去世，各地蛮人大肆行动，征西司马朱修之讨伐蛮人失利，任命沈庆之为建威将军，率领军队去帮助朱修之。
English: In the 19th year of Yuan Jia, Liu Daoshan, the governor of Yongzhou, died, and barbarians from all over the country went on a rampage. The crusade to conquer the barbarians led by the Western Magistrate Zhu Xiu failed, and Shen Qing Tong was appointed as General Jian Wei to lead the army to help Zhu Xiu.

古文：修之失律下狱，庆之专军进讨，大破缘沔诸蛮。
现代文：朱修之兵败下狱，沈庆之独自率领军队进讨，大破沔水沿岸的各帮蛮人。
English: Zhu Xiu's soldiers were defeated and imprisoned, and Shen Qingzhi led the army alone to advance, and the gangs of barbarians along the coast of Surabaya were destroyed.

古文：后爲孝武抚军中兵参军。
现代文：后来担任孝武帝的抚军中兵参军。
English: Later, he served as a soldier of Emperor Xiaowu's army and joined the army.

古文：孝武以本号爲雍州，随府西上，征蛮寇屡有功。
现代文：孝武帝以本官号为雍州刺史，沈庆之随着军府西上，征讨蛮寇屡建军功。
English: Emperor Xiaowu used his official title to write the history of Yongzhou, and Shen Qingzhi went west with the military government to recruit barbarians to repeatedly build military exploits.

古文：还都，复爲广陵王诞北中郎中兵参军，加建威将军、南济阴太守。
现代文：回到京城，又做广陵王刘诞北中郎中兵参军，加任建威将军、南济阴太守。
English: After returning to Beijing, he joined the army as a lieutenant of Guangling Wang Liu Zhizhong in the north, and was appointed as General Jian Wei and the governor of Nanjiyin.

古文：雍州蛮又爲寇，庆之以将军、太守复与随王诞入沔。
现代文：雍州蛮人又作乱，沈庆之以将军、太守的身份重新与随王刘诞一起进入沔水地区。
English: The barbarians of Yongzhou made another disturbance, and Shen Qingli, as a general and governor, re-entered the Surabaya region together with Wang Liuxing.

古文：及至襄阳，率后军中兵参军柳元景、随郡太守宗悫等伐沔北诸山蛮，大破之。
现代文：等到达襄阳，率领后军中兵参军柳元景、随郡太守宗悫等讨伐沔北的各帮山蛮，把他们打得大败。
English: When he arrived in Xiangyang, he led the soldiers of the rear army to join the army of Liu Yuanjing, followed by the county governor Zongyi, and fought against the various bands of mountain barbarians in the north of Anhui Province, and defeated them.

古文：威震诸山，群蛮皆稽颡。
现代文：威震诸山，群蛮都叩拜行礼。
English: The mountains trembled, and all the people bowed down and worshipped.

古文：庆之患头风，好着狐皮帽，群蛮恶之，号曰苍头公。
现代文：沈庆之患了头风，好戴狐皮帽子，群蛮很厌恶，称他作苍头公。
English: Shen Qingzhi suffered from a head cold and liked to wear a fox fur hat. The crowd was very disgusted and called him a madman.

古文：每见庆之军，辄畏惧曰： 苍头公已复来矣。 
现代文：每当见到沈庆之的军队，就畏惧地说： 苍头公又过来了。 
English: Whenever he saw Shen Qingzhi's army, he said fearfully, "Cang Tou Gong has come again."

古文：庆之引军出，前后破降甚衆，又讨犬羊诸山蛮，缘险筑重城，施门橹甚峻。
现代文：沈庆之引军出发，前后破阵很多，又去讨伐犬羊各帮山蛮，借着山险建筑起多重城墙，设置的门楼十分险峻。
English: When Shen Qing's lead troops set out, there was a lot of fighting back and forth, and they also went to fight dogs and sheep to help the mountain barbarians. Multiple city walls were built using mountain hazards, and the gatehouse was very steep.

古文：庆之连营山下，营中开门相通。
现代文：沈庆之在山下扎起连营，营中开门互相连通。
English: Shen Qingzhi set up a company camp at the foot of the mountain, and opened the door to communicate with each other.

古文：又令诸军各穿池于营内，朝夕不外汲。
现代文：又命令诸军各自在营内挖池子，早晚都不向外打水。
English: He also ordered all the troops to dig their own pools inside the camp, and not to draw water from them in the morning or evening.

古文：兼以防蛮之火。
现代文：兼用它来防备蛮人放火。
English: It was also used to prevent barbarians from setting fires.

古文：顷之风甚，蛮夜下山，人提一炬烧营。
现代文：不久风刮得很大，蛮人夜间下山，每人提着一支火炬来烧营。
English: Soon the wind was blowing hard, and the savages came down the mountain at night, each carrying a torch to burn the camp.

古文：火至，辄以池水灌灭之。
现代文：火到后，沈庆之的军兵则用池水把它灌灭。
English: When the fire broke out, Shen Qingzhi's soldiers doused it with pool water.

古文：蛮被围守日久，并饥乏，自后稍出归降。
现代文：蛮人被围困的日子久了，都是又饿又乏，自此以后渐渐出来投降。
English: The barbarians, who had been besieged for a long time, were hungry and weary, and gradually came out to surrender.

古文：庆之前后所获蛮，并移都下，以爲营户。
现代文：沈庆之前后所俘获的蛮人，都迁移到京城，作为营户。
English: The barbarians captured before and after Shenqing were all moved to Beijing as tenants.

古文：二十七年，迁太子步兵校尉。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，调任太子步兵校尉。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, he was transferred to the Prince's Infantry School.

古文：其年，文帝将北侵，庆之谏曰： 道济再行无功，彦之失利而反，今料王玄谟等未踰两将，恐重辱王师。 
现代文：这一年，文帝将要北侵，沈庆之劝谏说： 檀道济两次出兵无功，到彦之后又失利而返，现在预料王玄谟等人也不会超过前两位将军，恐怕要再次使皇上的大军受辱。 
English: In that year, Emperor Wen was about to invade the north, and Shen Qingzhi advised him: "Tang Daoji twice sent troops to the north without success, and after arriving at Yan'an, he returned defeated. Now, it is expected that Wang Xuanmu and others will not surpass the previous two generals. I am afraid that they will humiliate the emperor's great army again."

古文：上曰： 王师再屈，别有所由。
现代文：皇上说： 皇上大军两次受到挫折，另有原因。
English: The emperor said, "There is another reason why the emperor's great army has twice suffered setbacks.

古文：道济养寇自资，彦之中涂疾动。
现代文：檀道济纵养敌寇以保持自己的地位，到彦之中途疾病发作。
English: In order to maintain his position, he had to feed and care for the enemy, and he fell ill on the way to Yan'an.

古文：虏所恃唯马，夏水浩大，泛舟济河，碻磝必走，滑台小戍，易可覆拔。
现代文：敌人所凭靠的只有马，夏天河水浩大，乘船渡河，郂的守兵必然逃走，滑台这个小据点，很容易就可以攻下。
English: The only thing the enemy can rely on is horses. In summer, the river is full of water. If you cross the river by boat, the timid guards will inevitably run away. This small stronghold, the slide, can be easily captured.

古文：克此二戍，馆谷吊人，虎牢洛阳，自然不固。 
现代文：攻克了这两个地方，住那里的房，吃那里的粮，抚慰人民，虎牢和洛阳，自然就不巩固了。 
English: After conquering these two places, living in the houses there, eating the grain there, and comforting the people, the Tiger's Lair and Luoyang would naturally not be consolidated.

古文：庆之固陈不可，时丹阳尹徐湛之、吏部尚书江湛并在坐，上使湛之等难庆之。
现代文：沈庆之坚持说明不可以这样，当时丹阳尹徐湛之、吏部尚书江湛都在坐，皇上让徐湛之等人和沈庆之进行辩驳。
English: Shen Qingzhi insisted that it should not be like this. At that time, Danyang Yin Xu Zhan and the official Shangshu Jiang Zhan were both sitting, and the emperor let Xu Zhan and others argue with Shen Qingzhi.

古文：庆之曰： 爲国譬如家，耕当问奴，织当访婢。
现代文：沈庆之说： 治国好像是治家一样，耕田要问奴仆，织布要问婢女。
English: Shen Qingzhi said: "Governing a country is like managing a household. You should ask your servants to plough the fields and your maids to weave the cloth.

古文：陛下今欲伐国，而与白面书生辈谋之，事何由济？ 上大笑。
现代文：陛下现在想要讨伐一个国家，却去和白面书生谋划，事情怎么会办得成？ 皇上大笑。
English: His Majesty now wants to crusade against a country, but plans with white-faced students. How will things work out? The Emperor laughed loudly.

古文：及军行，庆之副玄谟。
现代文：后来军队出发，沈庆之做王玄谟的副将。
English: Later, when the army set out, Shen Qingzhi became Wang Xuanmu's vice-general.

古文：玄谟进围滑台，庆之与萧斌留守碻磝，仍领斌辅国司马。
现代文：王玄谟进军包围滑台，沈庆之与萧斌留守郂，他仍然兼任萧斌的辅国司马。
English: Wang Xuanmu marched into the encirclement of the slide, Shen Qingzhi and Xiao Bin stayed behind, and he still served as Xiao Bin's assistant state secretary.

古文：玄谟攻滑台，积旬不拔，魏太武大军南向，斌遣庆之将五千人救玄谟。
现代文：王玄谟进攻滑台，一连几十天不能攻下，魏太武帝的大军向南开进，萧斌派沈庆之率领五千人去救王玄谟。
English: Wang Xuan Mue attacked the slide and was unable to capture it for dozens of days in a row. Emperor Wei Taiwu's army marched south. Xiao Bin sent Shen Qingzhi to lead five thousand people to rescue Wang Xuan Mue.

古文：庆之曰： 少军轻往，必无益也。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 少量军队轻率前往，必定没有好处。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said: It is definitely not beneficial for a small number of troops to go there rashly.

古文：会玄谟退还，斌将斩之，庆之谏乃止。
现代文：正赶上王玄谟退回，萧斌将要把他斩首，沈庆之进行劝谏才算罢休。
English: Just as Wang Xuanmu was about to return, Xiao Bin was about to behead him, and it was only after Shen Qing's persuasion that he stopped.

古文：萧斌以前驱败绩，欲死固碻磝，庆之以爲不可。
现代文：萧斌因为前驱部队战败，打算死守郂，沈庆之认为不可以。
English: Xiao Bin, because of the defeat of the vanguard troops, planned to hold on to the city, which Shen Qingzhi thought was unacceptable.

古文：会制使至，不许退，诸将并宜留。
现代文：正遇上皇帝的使者到来，不许撤退，各位将领都应该留下。
English: The Emperor's emissaries are arriving. There can be no retreat. All generals should stay.

古文：斌复问计于庆之，庆之曰： 阃外之事，将所得专，制从远来，事势已异。
现代文：萧斌又向沈庆之询问计策，沈庆之说： 国门以外的事情，将领可以独自作主，皇上的命令是从远处来的，形势已经不同了。
English: Xiao Bin also asked Shen Qingzhi about the strategy. Shen Qingzhi said: In matters outside the country, the generals can make their own decisions, the emperor's orders come from afar, and the situation has changed.

古文：节下有一范增而不能用，空议何施？ 
现代文：您的帐下有一个范增而不能利用，空作议论有什么用处？ 
English: There is a surplus under your account that you cannot use. What is the use of empty talk?

古文：斌及坐者并笑曰： 沈公乃更学问。 
现代文：萧斌和在座的人都笑着说： 沈公现在又有了学问了。 
English: Xiao Bin and everyone present laughed and said: Shen Gong now has knowledge again.

古文：庆之厉声曰： 衆人虽见古今，不如下官耳学也。 
现代文：沈庆之大声地说： 众人虽然读过古今的书，却不如下官的耳学。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said loudly: Although people have read books from ancient times to the present, they do not listen to officials.

古文：玄谟自以退败，求戍碻磝。
现代文：王玄谟自己因为退败，请求守卫郂。
English: Wang Xuanmu himself, because of his defeat, asked the guards to leave.

古文：斌乃还历城。
现代文：萧斌便返回历城。
English: Xiao Bin then returned to Licheng.

古文：申坦、垣护之共据清口，庆之奔驿驰归。
现代文：申坦、垣护之共同据守清口，沈庆之乘驿马返回。
English: Shintan and Kakigou jointly defended Kiyokuchi, while Shen Qingzhi rode back on his horse.

古文：二十九年，师复行，庆之固谏不从。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，军队又一次出发，沈庆之坚持劝阻没有听从。
English: In the 29th year of Yuan Jia, the army once again set out, but Shen Qingzhu persisted in dissuading and did not listen.

古文：以立议不同，不使北出。
现代文：因为主张不同，没有让他北出。
English: He was not allowed to leave the country because of his different views.

古文：是时亡命司马黑石、庐江叛吏夏侯方进在西阳五水讙动群蛮，自淮汝间至江沔，咸离其患，乃遣庆之督诸将讨之，制江、豫、荆、雍并遣军受庆之节度。
现代文：当时亡命徒司马黑石、庐江叛吏夏侯方进在西阳五水煽动各帮蛮人，从淮河汝水之间直到长江沔水，都受到他们的祸害，于是便派遣沈庆之督率诸将前往讨伐，诏令江、豫、荆、雍几个州都要派兵接受沈庆之的指挥。
English: At that time, the fugitives Sima Heishi and Xia Hou Fangjin, the traitor of the Minjiang River, incited the barbarians in Xiyang Wushui. From the Huaihe River to the Yangtze River, they were all plagued by them, so they sent the governor of Shenqing and his generals to the crusade, and ordered the Jiang, Yu, Jing and Yong provinces to send soldiers to accept the command of Shen Qingzhi.

古文：三十年，孝武出次五洲，总统群帅。
现代文：元嘉三十年，孝武帝出京驻在五洲，总统各路将帅。
English: In the 30th year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Xiaowu left Beijing and resided in Wuzhou. The president was in charge of every aspect.

古文：庆之从巴水出至五洲谘受军略。
现代文：沈庆之从巴水赶到五洲请示军事策略。
English: Shen Qingzhi rushed from Pashui to Wuzhou to ask for military strategy.

古文：会孝武典签董元嗣自建邺还，陈元凶弑逆，孝武遣庆之引诸军。
现代文：正好遇见孝武帝的典签董元嗣从建邺回来，叙说元凶劭弑君叛逆，孝武帝派沈庆之率领众军返回。
English: Just as he met Emperor Xiaowu's signature, Dong Yuan Ci returned from Jianye, recounting that Emperor Xiaowu sent Shen Qingzhi to lead the troops back.

古文：庆之谓腹心曰： 萧斌妇人不足数，其馀将帅并易与耳。
现代文：沈庆之对心腹说： 萧斌是个妇人，不值得计较，其余的将帅都容易合作。
English: Shen Qingzhi said to his confidant: Xiao Bin is a woman, it is not worth considering, the rest of the generals are easy to cooperate.

古文：今辅顺讨逆，不忧不济也。 
现代文：现在辅佐顺主讨伐叛逆，不愁不能成功。 
English: Now he is helping Shun fight against the rebels, but he may not succeed.

古文：时元凶密与庆之书，令杀孝武。
现代文：当时元凶劭秘密地给沈庆之写信，让他杀死孝武帝。
English: At that time, the perpetrator secretly wrote a letter to Shen Qingzhi, asking him to kill Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：庆之入求见，孝武称疾不敢见。庆之突前，以元凶手书呈简，孝武泣求入内与母辞。
现代文：沈庆之入京求见，孝武帝假称有病不敢相见，沈庆之直闯到面前，把元凶劭的手书呈上，孝武帝哭着请求进去和母亲告辞。
English: Shen Qingzhi came to Beijing to see him, but Emperor Xiaowu pretended to be ill and did not dare to meet him. Shen Qingzhi ran straight to him and presented the handwritten letter from the culprit. Emperor Xiaowu cried and begged him to go in and say goodbye to his mother.

古文：庆之曰： 下官受先帝厚恩，常愿报德，今日之事，唯力是视，殿下是何疑之深。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 下官蒙受了先帝的厚恩，常常希望报答恩德。今天的事情，只是要看力量如何，殿下为什么有这么深的疑虑？ 
English: Shen Qingzhi said, "The lower-ranking official received the benevolence of the former emperor, and often hoped to repay the favor. Today's matter just depends on how strong you are. Why does Your Highness have such deep doubts?"

古文：帝起再拜曰： 家国安危，在于将军。 
现代文：孝武帝起身郑重参拜说： 家国的安危，就在于将军了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu stood up and solemnly paid homage, saying: The safety of the motherland lies in the generals.

古文：庆之即勒内外处分。
现代文：沈庆之于是便统领宫内外的军队进行部署。
English: Shen Qingzhi then deployed the troops inside and outside the Imperial Palace.

古文：府主簿顔竣闻庆之至，驰入见帝曰： 今四方尚未知义师之举，而劭据有天府，首尾不相应赴，此危道也。
现代文：府主簿颜竣听说沈庆之到来，驰马进殿见孝武帝说： 现在四方还不知道义军起事，而刘劭占据着天府，首尾不能呼应，这是很危险的办法。
English: Yan Jun, the chief accountant of the palace, heard of Shen Qing's arrival and galloped into the palace to see Emperor Xiaowu and said, "Right now, the four sides don't know that the rebels have revolted, and Liu Bei is occupying Tianfu, and they can't respond to everything. This is a very dangerous method."

古文：宜待诸镇唇齿，然后举事。 
现代文：应该等各镇的力量联合在一起，然后再起事。 
English: We should wait for the forces of the towns to unite and then rise up.

古文：庆之厉声曰： 今方兴大事，而黄头小儿皆参预，此祸至矣，宜斩以徇衆。 
现代文：沈庆之大声地说： 现在正要举办大事，而黄头小儿都来参预，这样祸患就要到了，应该斩首示众。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said in a loud voice: Now a great event is about to be held, and the yellow-headed children are all coming to participate in advance, such a calamity is about to arrive, and the heads should be beheaded.

古文：帝曰： 竣何不拜谢。 
现代文：孝武帝说： 颜竣怎么还不拜谢！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said: "How can Yan Shun not say thank you!

古文：竣起再拜。
现代文：颜竣起身跪拜。
English: Yan Jun stood up and bowed down.

古文：庆之曰： 君但当知笔劄之事。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 您只能执掌文书的事情。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said: You can only handle the paperwork.

古文：于是处分，旬日内外整办，时皆谓神兵。
现代文：于是他进行了具体部署，十天功夫，内外全部办理完毕，当时都认为是神兵。
English: As a result, he carried out a specific deployment, ten days of hard work, and all internal and external procedures were completed. At that time, he was considered to be a divine soldier.

古文：百姓欣悦。
现代文：百姓十分欢悦。
English: The people are very happy.

古文：衆军既集，假庆之爲武昌内史，领府司马。
现代文：各路军队已经聚集，委任沈庆之为武昌内史，兼任府中的司马。
English: All the armies have gathered and appointed Shen Qing Tong as Wuchang's internal historian, as well as the secretary of the prefectural government.

古文：孝武至寻阳，庆之及柳元景等并劝即大位，不许。
现代文：孝武帝到了寻阳，沈庆之和柳元景等人都奉劝他即皇帝大位，没有答应。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu arrived at Xuanyang, Shen Qingzhi and Liu Yuanjing were advised that he was the emperor, but they did not agree.

古文：贼劭遣庆之门生钱无忌齎书说庆之解甲，庆之执无忌白之。
现代文：贼人刘劭派遣沈庆之的门生钱无忌送信，劝说沈庆之解甲退出，沈庆之抓住钱无忌，报告了孝武帝。
English: Thief Liu Bei dispatched Shen Qingzhi's protégé Qian Mengbo to send a message, persuaded Shen Qingzhi to withdraw from the war, and Shen Qingzhi seized Qian Mengbo and reported to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：孝武践阼，以庆之爲领军将军，寻出爲南兖州刺史，加都督，镇盱眙，封南昌县公。
现代文：孝武帝登基后，任命沈庆之为领军将军，不久派出担任南兖州刺史，加任都督，镇守盱眙，封为南昌县公。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he appointed Shen Qing as the leading general, and soon dispatched him to serve as the governor of South Luzhou, and he was also appointed as the governor of the capital, the town watchman, and the governor of Nanchang County.

古文：孝建元年，鲁爽反，遣庆之与薛安都等往讨之。
现代文：孝建元年，鲁爽反叛，派沈庆之和薛安都等前往讨伐。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, Lu Shuang rebelled and sent Shen Qingzhi and Xue An to fight.

古文：安都临阵斩爽，进庆之号镇北大将军。
现代文：薛安都临阵斩了鲁爽，晋升沈庆之封号为镇北大将军。
English: Xue An immediately killed Lu Shuang and promoted Shen Qing to the title of General of Zhenbei.

古文：寻与柳元景俱开府仪同三司，固辞，改封始兴郡公。
现代文：不久与柳元景一齐任开府仪同三司，他坚持推辞，改封为始兴县公。
English: Soon, together with Liu Yuanjing, he was appointed to the Third Division of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, but he insisted on resigning and changed his title to Shixing County official.

古文：庆之以年满七十，固请辞事，以爲侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：沈庆之因为年满七十，坚持要求辞职，便安排他做侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: Because Shen Qingzhi was over seventy years old and insisted on resigning, he was arranged to be a chamberlain, a doctor of the left light, a keeper of ceremonies and three divisions.

古文：固让，乃至稽颡自陈，言辄泣涕。
现代文：又坚决推让，甚至于叩头自述，说话就流眼泪。
English: He also resolutely gave in, even to the point of tears as he spoke.

古文：上不能夺，听以郡公罢就第，月给钱十万，米百斛，二卫史五十人。
现代文：皇上不能勉强，答应以郡公的身份罢职回府，每月供给钱十万，米一百斛，二卫史五十人。
English: The emperor could not be coerced, so he agreed to resign his post as county magistrate and return to the capital, and to provide 100,000 yuan in money, 100 baht in rice, and 50 members of the Imperial Guard each month.

古文：大明三年，司空竟陵王诞据广陵反，复以庆之爲车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，固让南兖州刺史，加都督，率衆讨之。
现代文：大明三年，司空竟陵王刘诞占据黄陵反叛，又以沈庆之为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，他坚持辞让南兖州刺史，加任都督，率领军队讨伐。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, King Liu Xizhao of the Daming Dynasty occupied the Huangling Rebellion, and appointed Shen Qing as the General of the Cavalry and Cavalry, the Kefu Yi and the Three Departments. He insisted on resigning from the post of the governor of South Luzhou, and was appointed as the governor, leading the army to fight.

古文：诞遣客沈道湣齎书说庆之，饷以玉环刀。
现代文：刘诞派遣门客沈道愍带着书信去劝说沈庆之，赠给他玉环刀。
English: Liu Xing sent his protégé Shen Daojun with a letter to persuade Shen Qingzhi and presented him with a jade-ringed sword.

古文：庆之遣道湣反，数以罪恶。
现代文：沈庆之让沈道愍回去，斥责了刘诞的罪恶。
English: Shen Qingzhi let Shen Daojuan go back and rebuked Liu Xing's evil.

古文：庆之至城下，诞登楼谓曰： 沈公，君白首之年，何爲来此？ 
现代文：沈庆之到了城下，刘诞登楼对他说： 沈公，您白头之年，为什么还到这里来？ 
English: When Shen Qingzhi arrived at the outskirts of the city, Liu Xing went upstairs and said to him: Shen Gong, you are in your golden years, why are you still here?

古文：庆之曰： 朝廷以君狂愚，不足劳少壮，故使仆来耳。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 朝廷认为您狂妄愚蠢，不值得麻烦少壮将军，所以就让我来了。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said: The court thinks that you are arrogant and stupid and not worth the trouble of a young general, so they let me come.

古文：庆之塞堑，造攻道，立行楼土山并诸攻具。
现代文：沈庆之堵塞了护城河，挖掘进攻的通道，建造行楼土山和各种进攻器具。
English: Shen Qingzhi blocked the moat, excavated the offensive channel, built a row of earthen mounds and various offensive equipment.

古文：时夏雨不得攻城，上使御史中丞庾徽之奏免庆之官以激之，制无所问。
现代文：当时夏季下雨不能攻城，皇上让御史中丞庾徽之奏表免除沈庆之的官职来激他，而诏令并不追究。
English: At that time, it was raining in the summer and it was impossible to attack the city. The Emperor had the Imperial Historian, Chujo Zenghu, issue a proclamation exempting Shen Qingzhi from his official duties to provoke him, but the imperial edict did not pursue the matter.

古文：诞饷庆之食，提挈者百余人，庆之不开，悉焚之。
现代文：刘诞赠给沈庆之食物，提送的有一百多人，沈庆之并不打开，而把它们全部烧掉。
English: The food that Liu Xizhao gave to Shen Qingzhi was brought by more than a hundred people. Shen Qingzhi did not open it, but burned it all.

古文：诞于城上投函表，令庆之爲送。
现代文：刘诞在城上投下函表，让沈庆之为他转送。
English: Liu Xizhao dropped a letter on the city and asked Shen Qingzong to forward it to him.

古文：庆之曰： 我奉制讨贼，不得爲汝送表。 
现代文：沈庆之说： 我奉命讨贼，不能为你送表。 
English: Shen Qingzhi said, "I was ordered to track down the thief, but I can't send you the watch."

古文：每攻城，庆之辄身先士卒。
现代文：每次攻城，沈庆之就身先士卒。
English: Every time the city was attacked, Shen Qingzhi took the lead.

古文：上戒之曰： 卿爲统任，当令处分有方，何须身受矢石邪？ 
现代文：皇上告诫他说： 卿担任着统率，应当是指挥有方，何须自身承受弓箭和石头呢？ 
English: The emperor admonished him, "Sir, you are the commander-in-chief, you should be in charge of the army, why do you have to bear the bows and arrows and stones?

古文：自四月至七月，乃屠城斩诞。
现代文：从四月到七月，终于杀进城中，斩了刘诞。
English: From April to July, he finally entered the city and beheaded Liu Xing.

古文：进庆之司空，又固让爵。
现代文：晋升沈庆之为司空，他又坚持推让爵位。
English: Shen Qing Tong was promoted to the position of secretary, but he insisted on giving up his title.

古文：于是与柳元景并依晋密陵侯郑袤故事，朝会庆之位次司空，元景在从公之上，给恤吏五十人，门施行马。
现代文：于是和柳元景一齐依照晋朝的密陵侯郑袤的旧例，朝会时沈庆之位次于司空，柳元景位在群公之上，配给恤吏五十人，门前配备行马。
English: Therefore, together with Liu Yuanjing, in accordance with the old example of Zheng Qi, the Prince of Miling in the Jin Dynasty, Shen Qing's position was second to Siku, and Liu Yuanjing's position was above the group of princes at the time of the imperial meeting. Fifty officials were allocated, and horses were equipped in front of the door.

古文：初，庆之尝梦引卤簿入厕中，庆之甚恶入厕之鄙。
现代文：起初，沈庆之曾经在梦中带领仪仗队进入厕所中，沈庆之很厌恶入厕的鄙陋。
English: At first, Shen Qingzhi used to lead the guard of honor into the toilet in his dream. Shen Qingzhi was disgusted by the meanness of going to the toilet.

古文：时有善占梦者爲解之，曰： 君必大富贵，然未在旦夕。 
现代文：当时有善于占梦的人为他破解，说： 您必定会大富贵，然而并不在旦夕之间。 
English: At that time, someone who was good at divining dreams deciphered for him, saying: You will certainly be very rich, but not immediately.

古文：问其故，答云： 卤簿固是富贵容，厕中所谓后帝也。
现代文：问他是什么缘故，回答说： 仪仗队当然就是富贵的表征，厕所中则是所谓后帝。
English: When asked why, he replied: "The honor guard is, of course, a symbol of wealth, and the toilet is the so-called emperor's toilet."

古文：知君富贵不在今主。 
现代文：知道您富贵不在当朝的人主时期。 
English: Know that you are not rich in the Lord's time.

古文：及中兴之功，自五校至是而登三事。
现代文：到了中兴成功，从五校到现在而登上三公的高位。
English: When he came to ZTE, he was successful, and from the five schools to now, he has ascended to the high position of the three kings.

古文：四年，西阳五水蛮复爲寇，庆之以郡公统诸军讨平之。
现代文：大明四年，西阳的五水蛮又做寇贼，沈庆之以郡公的身份统率军队讨平了他们。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, the Wushu barbarians of Xiyang were also bandits, and Shen Qing, as the county magistrate, led the army to level them.

古文：庆之居清明门外，有宅四所，室宇甚丽。
现代文：沈庆之住在清明门外，有宅院四所，房屋非常华丽。
English: Shen Qingzhi lived outside the gate of Qingming, there are four houses, the houses are very gorgeous.

古文：又有园舍在娄湖，庆之一夜携子孙徙居之，以宅还官，悉移亲戚中表于娄湖，列门同閈焉。
现代文：又有园林在娄湖，沈庆之一夜之间带领子孙迁居到那里，把宅院还给了公家，把亲戚中表都迁到了娄湖，各家的门都开在同一个院墙上。
English: There are also gardens in Wuhu. Shen Qing led his children and grandchildren to move there overnight, returned the courtyard to the public, and moved his relatives to Wuhu. The doors of each family are open on the same courtyard wall.

古文：广开田园之业，每指地语人曰： 钱尽在此。 
现代文：他广开田园产业，常常指着土地对别人说： 钱都在这里呢！ 
English: He expanded the pastoral industry, often pointing to the land and saying to others: The money is all here!

古文：中兴身享大国，家素富厚，産业累万金，奴僮千计。
现代文：中兴后他享受着大型的封国，家财一向丰厚，产业累计万金，奴仆数以千计。
English: After ZTE, he enjoyed a large-scale nationalization, the family wealth has always been rich, the industry has accumulated tens of thousands of dollars, and there are thousands of slaves.

古文：再献钱千万，谷万斛，以始兴封优近，求改封南海郡，不许。
现代文：两次捐献钱一千万、谷一万斛，因为始兴郡的封地质量好距离近，请求改封为南海郡，没有批准。
English: Two donations of ten million won and ten thousand baht, because the quality of the fief of Shixing County is good and the distance is close, the request to change the name to Nanhai County was not approved.

古文：妓妾十数人，并美容工艺。
现代文：他有妓妾十几人，全都容貌美丽、技艺精工。
English: He had more than a dozen prostitutes and concubines, all of whom were beautiful and skilled.

古文：庆之优游无事，尽意欢愉，自非朝贺不出门。
现代文：沈庆之悠闲无事，尽情欢娱，除了进行朝贺，其他时间都不出门。
English: Shen Qingzhi is a laid-back person, enjoying life to the full. Except for the morning greeting, he does not go out at any other time.

古文：每从游幸及校猎，据鞍陵厉，不异少壮。
现代文：常常随从皇帝游览视察和打猎，骑在马上动作凌厉，无异于青壮年。
English: He often accompanied the emperor on tours, inspections and hunting, and rode a horse with vigorous movements, just like a young man.

古文：太子妃上孝武金镂匕箸及杅杓，上以赐庆之曰： 觞酌之赐，宜以大夫爲先也。 
现代文：太子妃献给孝武帝镂金的调羹、筷子以及汤盂、饭勺，皇上都拿来赐给沈庆之，说： 酒具的赏赐，应该以大夫为先。 
English: The crown princess dedicated the spoon and chopsticks, as well as the soup ladle and rice spoon, to Emperor Xiaowu, and the emperor gave them to Shen Qingzhi, saying: "The gift of drinking utensils should be given to the doctor first."

古文：上尝欢饮，普令群臣赋诗，庆之粗有口辩，手不知书，每将署事，辄恨眼不识字。
现代文：皇上曾经饮酒饮得很高兴，便让群臣普遍地作诗，沈庆之粗略地有点口头表达能力，但是手不能写，每当要签署文件的时候，则恨眼不识字。
English: The emperor once drank alcohol and was so happy that he had his courtiers write poetry for him. Shen Qingzhi had some ability to express himself verbally, but he could not write by hand. Whenever he had to sign a document, he could not read.

古文：上逼令作诗，庆之曰： 臣不知书，请口授师伯。 
现代文：皇上逼着让他作诗，沈庆之说： 臣不知书，请让我口授给师伯。 
English: The emperor forced him to write poetry, and Shen Qingzhi said: "My vassal doesn't know how to read, please let me dictate to my teacher."

古文：上即令顔师伯执笔。
现代文：皇上就让颜师伯执笔。
English: The emperor asked Yan Shibao to write.

古文：庆之口授之曰： 微生遇多幸，得逢时运昌。
现代文：沈庆之口授说： 微生遇多幸，得逢时运昌。
English: Shen Qingzhi's dictation said: Micro-society is fortunate, and it is fortunate at the right time.

古文：朽老筋力尽，徒步还南冈。
现代文：朽老筋力尽，徒步还南冈。
English: At the end of his strength, he walked back to Nangang.

古文：辞荣此圣世，何愧张子房。 
现代文：辞荣此圣世，何愧张子房！ 
English: Resigning from this holy world, what a shame for Zhang Zifu!

古文：上甚悦，衆坐并称其辞意之美。
现代文：皇上非常高兴，众人都称赞他的辞意之美。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and everyone praised the beauty of his words.

古文：孝武晏驾，庆之与柳元景等并受顾命。
现代文：孝武帝逝世，沈庆之与柳元景都接受了顾命。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu died, both Shen Qingzhi and Liu Yuanjing accepted his will.

古文：遗制 若有大军旅及征讨，悉委庆之 。
现代文：皇帝的遗诏中说： 如果有大的军事征讨，都要交给庆之。 
English: The emperor's last will and testament said: If there is a large-scale military campaign, it must be handed over to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：前废帝即位，加庆之几杖，给三望车一乘。
现代文：前废帝即位，赠给沈庆之几案和手杖，配给三望车一乘。
English: When the former deposed emperor ascended the throne, he presented Shen Qing with several cases and a cane, and gave him a ride on the three-horse carriage.

古文：庆之每朝贺，常乘猪鼻无幰车，左右从者不过三五骑。
现代文：沈庆之每次朝贺，常常乘坐猪鼻无幔车，左右的随从不过三五个骑士。
English: Every morning greeting of Shen Qingzhi, he often rode in a pig-nosed carriage, with no more than three or five knights accompanying him.

古文：履行园田，每农桑剧月，无人从行，遇之者不知三公也。
现代文：在田园中步行，常常在农忙的月份亲自劳动，没有人随从，遇到的人不知道他就是三公。
English: Walking in the countryside, often working in person during the busy months of farming, no one follows, and those who meet him do not know that he is the Three Princes.

古文：及加三望车，谓人曰： 我每游履田园，有人时与马成三，无人则与马成二。
现代文：等给了他三望车，他对别人说： 从前我常常步行在田园中闲逛，有人时和马合成三个，没人时则和马合成两个。
English: When they gave him a three-horse carriage, he said to the others, "In the past, I often wandered around the countryside on foot. When there were people, I rode three horses, and when there were no people, I rode two horses.

古文：今乘此车，安所之乎？ 
现代文：现在座了这个车子，还能到哪里去呢？ 
English: Now that I'm in this car, where else can I go?

古文：及赐几杖，并固让。
现代文：等赐给了他几案和手杖，都坚持推让。
English: He was given several cases and a cane, but he insisted on giving in.

古文：柳元景、顔师伯尝诣庆之，会其游田，元景等鸣笳列卒满道，庆之独与左右一人在田，见之悄然改容曰： 夫贫贱不可居，富贵亦难守。
现代文：柳元景、颜师伯曾经去看望沈庆之，和他一块去田间游玩，柳元景等鸣笳列卒满路，沈庆之独自与随从一人在田里，见到他们表情变得忧愁地说： 贫贱不能长居，富贵也难自守。
English: Liu Yuanjing and Yan Shibo once went to visit Shen Qingzhi, and went to the fields to play with him. Liu Yuanjing and others lined the road. Shen Qingzhi was alone in the fields with one of his followers. Seeing their expressions, he became sad and said: "Poor people can't live long, and rich people can't protect themselves."

古文：吾与诸公并出贫贱，因时际会，荣贵至此，唯当共思损挹之事。
现代文：我和诸公都是出身于贫贱，因为遇上了时代，荣华富贵到这个地步，只应当共同回想艰难时的情况。
English: Zhu Gong and I both came from a poor background, because in the face of the times, prosperity and wealth to this point, we should only jointly recall the situation in difficult times.

古文：老子八十之年，目见成败者已多，诸君炫此车服，欲何爲乎！ 
现代文：我这个老头子八十岁的年纪，眼见的成功失败已经很多，诸位炫耀这些车辆衣服，想要做什么呢？ 
English: I am an old man, eighty years old, and I have seen a lot of successes and failures. What do you want to do by showing off these cars and clothes?

古文：于是插杖而耘，不爲之顾。
现代文：于是插下手杖耘起地来，全不顾及他们。
English: So he put down his staff, and rose up from the ground, and paid them no attention.

古文：元景等彻侍褰裳从之，庆之乃与相对爲欢。
现代文：柳元景等撤去侍者、提着衣服来到他跟前，沈庆之才与他们相对欢笑。
English: Liu Yuanjing and others removed the waiters and came to him with their clothes, and Shen Qingzhi only laughed with them.

古文：庆之既通贵，乡里老旧素轻庆之者，后见皆膝行而前。
现代文：沈庆之尊贵以后，同乡旧人中过去轻视沈庆之的人，后来见到后都跪行到他跟前。
English: After Shen Qingzhi's ennoblement, the old people in the village who had despised him in the past knelt before him when they saw him.

古文：庆之叹曰： 故是昔时沈公。 
现代文：沈庆之叹息说： 还是从前的那个沈公。 
English: Shen Qingzhi sighed and said: It's still the same old Shen Gong.

古文：视诸沈爲劫首者数十人，士民悉患之。
现代文：当时沈姓而作盗贼首领的有几十个人，民众都很害怕这些祸害。
English: At that time, there were dozens of people with the surname Shen leading the thieves, and the people were very afraid of these scourges.

古文：庆之诡爲置酒大会，一时杀之，于是合境肃清，人皆喜悦。
现代文：沈庆之假装为他们设酒举行大型宴会，一下子把他们全部杀掉，于是整个境内都得到了肃清，人们都很喜悦。
English: Shen Qingzhi pretended to hold a large banquet for them, and killed them all at once, so the entire territory was cleared, and people were very happy.

古文：废帝狂悖无道，衆劝之废立，及柳元景等连谋，以告庆之，庆之与江夏王义恭不厚，发其事。
现代文：前废帝狂悖无道，众人都劝他废旧立新，柳元景等人联合谋划以后，就把打算告诉了沈庆之，沈庆之与江夏王刘义恭关系不深，告发了此事。
English: The former deposed emperor was so rebellious that everyone advised him to abolish the old and establish a new one. After Liu Yuanjing and others made a joint plan, they told Shen Qingzhi about their plan. Shen Qingzhi was not closely related to Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, and reported the matter.

古文：帝诛义恭、元景等，以庆之爲侍中、太尉。
现代文：废帝杀死了刘义恭、柳元景等人，任命沈庆之为侍中、太尉。
English: The deposed emperor killed Liu Yigong, Liu Yuanjing and others, and appointed Shen Qing Tong as a chamberlain and lieutenant.

古文：及义阳王昶反，庆之从帝度江，总统衆军。
现代文：等义阳王刘昶造反，沈庆之跟随废帝渡过了长江，总统众军。
English: Yiyang King Liu Bei rebelled, Shen Qingzhi followed the deposed emperor across the Yangtze River, and the president's army followed.

古文：帝凶暴日甚，庆之犹尽言谏争，帝意稍不悦。
现代文：废帝凶暴日益严重，沈庆之还是尽言劝谏，废帝心里逐渐不悦。
English: The emperor's violence became more and more serious. Shen Qingzhi tried his best to dissuade him, but the emperor's heart gradually became displeased.

古文：及诛何迈，虑庆之不同，量其必至，乃开青溪诸桥以绝之。
现代文：后来处死了何迈，担心沈庆之不同意，估计他必定要来，便切断了青溪等几座桥阻隔他。
English: Later, He Mai was executed, and fearing Shen Qingzhi's disapproval and estimating that he was bound to come, they cut off Qingxi and several other bridges to block him.

古文：庆之果往，不得度而还。
现代文：沈庆之果然去了，不得渡过而返回。
English: Shen Qingzhi did indeed go, but he was not allowed to cross over and return.

古文：帝又忌之，乃遣其从子攸之齎药赐死，时年八十。
现代文：废帝又非常忌恨他，便派他的侄子沈攸之送毒药赐他自杀，当时年龄八十岁。
English: The emperor hated him so much that he sent his nephew Shen Yuanzhi to poison him to commit suicide at the age of eighty.

古文：是岁旦，庆之梦有人以两疋绢与之，谓曰： 此绢足度。 
现代文：这年的生日那天，沈庆之梦见有人拿两疋绢送给他，对他说： 这些绢足够长度。 
English: On the day of his birthday this year, Shen Qingzhu dreamed that someone gave him a pair of sandals and said to him: These sandals are long enough.

古文：寤而谓人曰： 老子今年不免矣。
现代文：醒来后他对别人说： 我老头子今年是免不了啦。
English: After waking up, he said to others: My old man is unavoidable this year.

古文：两疋，八十尺也，足度，无盈馀矣。 
现代文：两疋，就是八十尺；足够长度，就是没有盈余了。 
English: Two fathoms is eighty feet; long enough, there is no surplus.

古文：及死，赠赙甚厚，追赠侍中、太尉如故，给鸾辂轀輬车，前后羽葆、鼓吹，諡曰忠武公。
现代文：死后，馈赠非常丰厚，追赠他为侍中，太尉依旧不变，给予鸾辂卧车，前后羽葆、乐队，谥号为忠武公。
English: After his death, the gift was very rich. He was posthumously given the title of chamberlain, and the rank of captain remained unchanged. He was given a sleeping car, feather bed, band, and his nickname was Zhongwu Gong.

古文：未及葬，帝败。
现代文：还没有来得及埋葬，前废帝失败。
English: Before he could be buried, the former emperor was overthrown.

古文：明帝即位，追赠侍中、司空，諡曰襄公。
现代文：明帝即位，追赠为侍中、司空，谥号为襄公。
English: Emperor Ming ascended the throne, posthumously he was given the titles of chamberlain and magistrate, and his posthumous name was Xianggong.

古文：泰始七年，改封苍梧郡公。
现代文：泰始七年，改封为苍梧郡公。
English: In the seventh year of Taizhi, he was given the title of Cangwu County magistrate.

古文：庆之群从姻戚，由庆之在列位者数十人。
现代文：沈庆之的众多族人和姻亲中，因为沈庆之而得到职位的有几十人。
English: Among Shen Qingzhi's numerous relatives and in-laws, there are dozens of people who have received positions because of Shen Qingzhi.

古文：长子文叔位侍中，庆之之死也，不肯饮药，攸之以被掩杀之，文叔密取药藏录。
现代文：他的长子沈文叔位居侍中，沈庆之死的时候，不肯喝药，沈攸之用被子包住杀死了他，沈文叔偷偷地取药收藏起来。
English: His eldest son, Uncle Shen Wen, was one of the attendants. When Shen Qing died, he refused to drink the medicine. Shen Youzhi wrapped him in a quilt and killed him. Uncle Shen Wen secretly collected the medicine.

古文：或劝文叔逃避，文叔见帝断截江夏王义恭支体，虑奔亡之日，帝怒，容致义恭之变，乃饮药自杀。
现代文：有人劝文叔逃避，沈文叔见到废帝截断江夏王刘义恭的肢体，担心逃亡的时候，废帝发怒，可能会导致与刘义恭同样的结果，于是饮药自杀。
English: Some people advised Uncle Wen to escape. Uncle Shen Wen saw the Emperor Wuzhong amputate the limbs of Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, and feared that when he fled, the Emperor Wuzhong would be angry, which could lead to the same result as Liu Yigong, so he drank medicine and committed suicide.

古文：文叔子昭明位秘书郎，闻父死，曰： 何忍独生。 
现代文：沈文叔的儿子沈昭明位居秘书郎，听说父亲死了，说： 怎么忍心独自生存！ 
English: Uncle Shen's son, Shen Zhaoming, who was a secretary, heard that his father had died and said, "How can I bear to live alone!

古文：文秀善于抚御，被魏围三载无叛者。五年，爲魏所克，终于北。攸之字仲达，庆之从父兄子也。
现代文：也自缢而死。元徽元年，恢复了先前的封号，当时改始兴为广兴，沈昭明的儿子沈昙亮承袭了广兴郡公的爵位，齐朝接受禅让，封国被废除。沈攸之字仲达，是沈庆之堂兄的儿子。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the previous seal name was restored. At that time, it was changed from Shixing to Guangxing. Shen Zhaoming's son, Shen Biao Liang, inherited the title of Guangxing County Duke. Qi Dynasty accepted the transfer of power, and the state seal was abolished. Shen Yue's character, Zhongda, was the son of Shen Qing's cousin.

古文：父叔仁爲宋衡阳王义季征西长史，兼行参军领队。
现代文：他的父亲沈叔仁是宋朝衡阳王刘义季的征西长史，兼做参军领队。
English: His father, Shen Shuren, was the leader of the Western Expedition of the Song Dynasty Hengyang King Liu Yizi.

古文：攸之少孤贫，元嘉二十七年，魏军南攻，朝廷发三吴之衆，攸之亦行。
现代文：沈攸之少年的时候是个孤儿，家里很穷，元嘉二十七年，魏军向南进攻，朝廷调发了三吴的军队，沈攸之也随军行动。
English: When he was a teenager, Shen Youzhi was an orphan and his family was very poor. In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Wei army attacked the south, and the imperial court dispatched the troops of the Three Kingdoms of Wu. Shen Youzhi also followed the army.

古文：及至建邺，诣领军将军刘遵考求补白丁队主。
现代文：等到了建邺，去找领军将军刘遵考请求补任新兵的队主。
English: When he arrived in Jianye, he went to the leading general Liu Zunkao to ask him to fill in as the team leader for the new recruits.

古文：遵考以爲形陋不堪，攸之叹曰： 昔孟尝君身长六尺爲齐相，今求士取肥大者哉。 
现代文：刘遵考认为他外表丑陋，不能充任，沈攸之叹息说： 从前孟尝君身高六尺做齐国的宰相，今天求士就要取肥大的吗？ 
English: Liu Zunkao thought he was ugly and unfit for the post. Shen Youzhi sighed and said: Once upon a time, Meng Youjun was six feet tall and served as the prime minister of Qi. Is it necessary to choose a fat man to be a candidate today?

古文：因随庆之征讨。
现代文：于是便去跟随沈庆之征讨。
English: So he went to follow Shen Qing's campaign.

古文：二十九年，征西阳蛮，始补队主。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，征讨西阳蛮，才补任了队主。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, he became the team leader after the conquest of Xiyang.

古文：巴口建义，授南中郎府板长兼行参军。
现代文：在巴口建立义军，任命他为南中郎府的板长兼行参军。
English: He established the rebel army in Bakou and appointed him as the commander of the Southern Zhonglang Prefecture to join the army.

古文：新亭之战，身被重创，事甯，爲太尉行参军，封平洛县五等侯。
现代文：新亭之战，身受重伤，事情平定后，兼做太尉参军，封为平洛县五等侯。
English: At the Battle of Xinting, he was seriously injured. After the matter was settled, he also joined the army as a captain and was awarded the title of Pingluo County Fifth Rank.

古文：随府转大司马行参军。
现代文：随着军府转为兼大司马参军。
English: He joined the army after the military government was transformed into a concurrent grand secretary.

古文：晋时都下二岸扬州旧置都部从事，分掌二县非违，永初以后罢省。
现代文：晋朝的时候，在京城两岸扬州府旧时曾设置都部从事，分掌两县的违法案件，永初以后撤销。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Yangzhou Prefecture on both sides of the capital was set up to deal with the illegal cases of the two counties, but it was revoked after the Yongchu era.

古文：孝建三年，复置其职，攸之掌北岸，会稽孔璪掌南岸，后又罢。
现代文：孝建三年，重又设置这一职务，沈攸之掌管北岸，会稽人孔掌管南岸，后来又撤销。
English: In the third year of Xiao Jian, this post was set up again, with Shen Youzhi in charge of the north bank, and the auditor-general in charge of the south bank. It was later revoked.

古文：攸之迁员外散骑侍郎，又随庆之征广陵屡有功，被箭破骨。
现代文：沈攸之调任员外散骑侍郎，又跟随沈庆之征伐广陵，屡次建功，曾经被箭射中穿破了骨头。
English: Shen Youzhi was transferred to the post of non-commissioned officer, riding horseback, and followed Shen Qingzhi's conquest of Guangling. He repeatedly made contributions, and was once pierced by arrows.

古文：孝武以其善战，配以仇池步矟。
现代文：孝武帝因为他善战，配给他仇池所产的步。
English: Emperor Xiaowu, because he was a good fighter, gave him the pawns produced by his enemy.

古文：事平当加厚赏，爲庆之所抑。
现代文：事情平定以后要加以厚赏，被沈庆之压下来。
English: After the matter is settled, he should be rewarded generously, but he was suppressed by Shen Qing.

古文：迁太子旅贲中郎，攸之甚恨之。
现代文：调任太子旅贲中郎，沈攸之对他十分恼恨。
English: Shen Youzhi was very angry with the transfer of the prince to the middle-ranking official.

古文：前废帝景和元年，除豫章王子尚车骑中兵参军、直合，与宗越、谭金等并爲废帝所宠。
现代文：前废帝景和元年，任命为豫章王刘子尚的车骑中兵参军、直阁，与宗越、谭金等人一同为废帝所宠爱。
English: In the first year of the former Emperor Jing and the first year, he was appointed as a cavalry soldier of Yu Zhang Wang Liu Zishang to join the army, and Zhougu, together with Zong Yue, Tan Jin and others, was the favorite of the former emperor.

古文：诛戮群公，攸之等皆爲之用命，封东兴县侯。
现代文：杀戮众位大臣，沈攸之等人都替他卖力，被封为东兴县侯。
English: He killed many ministers, and Shen Youzhi and others worked hard for him. He was named the governor of Dongxing County.

古文：明帝即位，以例削封。
现代文：明帝即位，他被依例削除了封爵。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he was stripped of his knighthood.

古文：寻告宗越、谭金等谋反，复召直合。
现代文：不久他又告发宗越、谭金等人谋反，重召他为直阁。
English: Soon after, he accused Zong Yue, Tan Jin, and others of plotting a rebellion, and recalled him to the cabinet.

古文：会四方反叛，南贼已次近道，以攸之爲甯朔将军、寻阳太守，率军据虎槛。
现代文：正赶上四方反叛，南方的贼兵已经开到很近的地方，于是以沈攸之为宁朔将军、寻阳太守，率军据守虎槛。
English: He was just catching up with the four-sided rebellion, and the southern bandits had already advanced to a very close place. Therefore, he appointed Shen You as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Huanyang, and led the army to defend the Tiger Threshold.

古文：时王玄谟爲大统未发，前锋有五军在虎槛，五军后又骆驿继至，每夜各立姓号，不相禀受。
现代文：当时王玄谟为军队的统领，尚未出发，前锋有五支军队在虎槛，五军以后，又陆续赶到其他部队，每到夜间各自树立信号，互不通告。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanmu was the commander of the army, and had not yet set off. The vanguard had five armies in the tiger's threshold. After the five armies, they successively rushed to other troops. Each time they arrived at night, they set up signals and did not inform each other.

古文：攸之谓军吏曰： 今衆军同举，而姓号不同，若有耕夫渔父夜相呵叱，便致骇乱，此败道也。
现代文：沈攸之对军吏说： 现在众军共同举事，而信号却不相同，如果有农民渔夫夜里互相呵叱，就会引起惊恐混乱，这是导致失败的途径啊！
English: Shen Youzhi said to the military officials, "Nowadays, all the armies are working together, but the signals are not the same. If farmers and fishermen scold each other at night, it will cause panic and confusion. This is the way to failure!"

古文：请就一军取号。 
现代文：请大家依着一个军队取号。 
English: Please take your number according to an army.

古文：衆咸从之。
现代文：大家都依从了。
English: Everyone complied.

古文：殷孝祖爲前锋都督，大失人情，攸之内抚将士，外谐群帅，衆并安之。
现代文：殷孝祖担任前锋都督，大失人心，沈攸之对内抚慰将士，对外协调群帅，众人都为此而保持安定。
English: Yin Xiaozu served as the vanguard of the capital, greatly losing the hearts of the people. Shen Youzhi comforted the soldiers internally and coordinated the commanders externally, and everyone remained stable for this reason.

古文：时殷孝祖中流矢死，军主范潜率五百人投贼，人情震骇，并谓攸之宜代孝祖爲统。
现代文：当时殷孝祖中了流箭死去，军主范潜率领五百人投降了贼军，人情震骇，都认为沈攸之应该代替殷孝祖为统率。
English: At that time, Yin Xiaozu was hit by a stray arrow and died. The commander of the army, Fan Qian, led five hundred people to surrender to the thief army. People were shocked. They all thought that Shen Youzhi should replace Yin Xiaozu as the leader.

古文：时建安王休仁屯虎槛，总统衆军，闻孝祖死，遣甯朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军刘灵遗各率三千人赴赭圻。
现代文：当时建安王刘休仁屯驻在虎槛，总统各路军队，听说殷孝祖死去，便派遣宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军刘灵遗各率领三千人赶到赭圻。
English: At that time, the king of Jian'an, Liu Xuren, was stationed in the Tiger's Threshold. When the president's various armies heard that Yin Xiaozu had died, they sent Ningshuo General Jiang Fangxing and Longyu General Liu Lingyi, each leading three thousand people, to rush to Handan.

古文：攸之以爲孝祖既死，贼有乘胜之心，明日若不更攻，则示之以弱。
现代文：沈攸之认为殷孝祖既然已死，贼寇会有乘胜的想法，明天如果不再进攻，则是向他们示弱。
English: Shen Youzhi thought that since Yin Xiaozhu was dead, the bandits would have the idea of winning, and if they did not attack tomorrow, it would show them weakness.

古文：方兴名位相亚，必不爲己下，军政不一，致败之由，乃率诸军主诣方兴推重，并慰勉之，方兴甚悦。
现代文：江方兴与自己名位相当，必定不会为自己的下属，军政不一，是导致失败的原因，于是便率领着各位军主到江方兴那里加以推重，并且进行了慰勉，江方兴非常高兴。
English: Jiang Fangxing is equal to his own position, and he will certainly not be his subordinate. The military and political differences are the reasons for the failure, so he led the military leaders to Jiang Fangxing to give him encouragement, and consoled him. Jiang Fangxing was very happy.

古文：攸之既出，诸军主并尤之。
现代文：沈攸之出去以后，各军主都埋怨他。
English: After Shen Youzhi left, all the generals complained about him.

古文：攸之曰： 卿忘廉蔺、寇贾事邪？
现代文：沈攸之说： 诸位难道忘了廉颇、蔺相如和寇恂、贾复的故事么？
English: Shen Youzhi said, "Have you all forgotten the story of Renpo, who is similar to Guo Xuan and Jia Fu?

古文：吾本以济国活家，岂计此之升降。 
现代文：我本来是报效国家，哪能计较此处的升降。 
English: I am originally from a service country, so I don't care about promotion or demotion here.

古文：明旦进战，自寅讫午，大破贼于赭圻。
现代文：明天早晨进军作战，从寅时直到午时，在赭圻大破贼军。
English: Tomorrow morning, we will march into battle, and from the morning until the afternoon, we will smash the bandit army in Handan.

古文：寻进号辅国将军，代孝祖督前锋诸军事。
现代文：不久，他晋升封号为辅国将军，代替殷孝祖督前锋诸军事。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the title of General of the Auxiliary State, replacing the ancestor Yin Xiao as the military vanguard.

古文：薛常保等在赭圻食尽，南贼大帅刘胡屯浓湖，以囊盛米系流查及船腹，阳覆船，顺风流下，以饷赭圻。
现代文：薛常保等人在赭圻粮食吃尽，南贼大帅刘胡屯驻在浓湖，他用袋子盛上米系在木筏和船腹上，伪装翻船，顺风流下，来增援赭圻。
English: Xue Changbao and others ran out of grain in the raft. Liu Hutun, the commander of the Southern Thieves, was stationed in the thick lake. He used a bag of rice to tie on the raft and the belly of the boat, disguised as a capsized boat, and floated down with the wind to reinforce the raft.

古文：攸之疑其有异，遣人取船及流查，大得囊米，寻克赭圻。
现代文：沈攸之怀疑其中有异常情况，派人取了船和木筏，得到了很大一批米，不久攻克了赭圻。
English: Shen You suspected that something was out of the ordinary. He sent someone to take the boat and the raft, got a large batch of rice, and soon conquered the cormorant.

古文：迁甯蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加都督。
现代文：调任宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加任都督。
English: He was transferred to the positions of Ningban captain, Yongzhou magistrate, and later governor.

古文：袁顗复率大衆来入鹊尾，相持既久，军主张兴世越鹊尾上据钱溪，刘胡自攻之。
现代文：袁靑又率领大军进入鹊尾，相持了很长时间，军主张兴世越过鹊尾到上游占据了钱溪，刘胡自己去攻他。
English: Yuan Shao also led a large army into Shanwei, and they held each other for a long time. The army advocated Xingshi to cross Shanwei to occupy Qianxi upstream, and Liu Hu himself went to attack him.

古文：攸之率诸将攻浓湖。
现代文：沈攸之率领各位将军进攻浓湖。
English: Shen Youzhi led the generals to attack the thick lake.

古文：钱溪信至大破贼，攸之悉以钱溪所送胡军耳鼻示之。
现代文：钱溪的消息传来，知道大破了贼军，沈攸之把钱溪所送来的刘胡军士的耳朵鼻子都拿给他们看。
English: When the news of Qianxi came, knowing that the bandit army had been completely defeated, Shen Youzhi showed them the ears and nose of Sergeant Liu Hu sent by Qianxi.

古文：顗骇惧，急追胡还。
现代文：袁靑十分惊骇，急忙追赶刘胡的军队返回。
English: Yuan Shao was very shocked and hurriedly chased Liu Hu's army back.

古文：攸之诸军悉力进攻，多所斩获，胡于是弃衆而奔，顗亦奔走。
现代文：沈攸之的各路军队全力进攻，杀死和俘虏敌寇很多，刘胡于是抛弃众人独自逃跑，袁靑也逃跑了。
English: Shen Youzhi's various armies attacked with all their might, killing and capturing many enemy raiders. Liu Hu then abandoned everyone to escape alone, and Yuan Shao also fled.

古文：赭圻、浓湖之平也，贼军委弃资财，珍货山积，诸军各竞收敛，唯攸之、张兴世约勒所部，不犯毫芥，诸将以此多之。
现代文：赭圻、浓湖平定后，贼军舍弃的资财、珍宝堆积如山，各路军队竟相收敛，只有沈攸之、张兴世约束所率领的部队，不取一丝一毫，诸将领因此而称赞他们。
English: After Yunnan and Hunan were pacified, the resources and treasures abandoned by the invaders piled up like a mountain, and the armies of all directions actually converged. Only the troops led by Shen Youzhi and Zhang Xingshi did not take a single bit, and the generals praised them for this.

古文：攸之进平寻阳，迁中领军，封贞阳县公。
现代文：沈攸又进军平定了寻阳，调任中领军，封为贞阳县公。
English: Shen You also marched into and pacified Xuanyang, was transferred as the leader of the middle army, and was appointed as the public official of Zhengyang County.

古文：时刘遵考爲光禄大夫，攸之在御坐谓遵考曰： 形陋之人今何如？ 
现代文：当时刘遵考为光禄大夫，沈攸之在皇帝的御座旁边对刘遵考说： 外表丑陋的人现在如何？ 
English: At that time, Liu Zunkao was the doctor of Guanglu. Shen Youzhi said to Liu Zunkao next to the emperor's throne: How are the ugly people now?

古文：帝问之，攸之依实对，帝大笑。
现代文：明帝问是怎么回事，沈攸之依实回答，明帝大笑。
English: Emperor Ming asked what was going on, Shen Youzhi answered truthfully, Emperor Ming laughed loudly.

古文：累迁郢州刺史，爲政刻暴，或鞭士大夫。
现代文：沈攸之经过多次调转，做了郢州刺史，为政苛刻暴虐，有时鞭打士大夫。
English: Shen Youzhi, after many changes, made Zhangzhou stabbing history, was harsh and tyrannical in politics, and sometimes whipped Shidafu.

古文：上佐以下有忤意，辄面加詈辱。
现代文：上等佐官以下的人不合他的心意，就当面加以辱骂。
English: If anyone below the rank of senior admiral did not meet his expectations, he would verbally abuse them to their face.

古文：而晓达吏事，自强不息，士庶畏惮，人莫敢欺。
现代文：但是他通晓官吏事务，自强不息，士人平民都很怕他，人们都不敢欺负他。
English: However, he was well-versed in the affairs of officials and was self-reliant. Politicians and commoners were all afraid of him, and people did not dare to bully him.

古文：闻有猛兽，辄自围捕，往无不得，一日或得两三。
现代文：听说哪里有猛兽，他就亲自去围捕，前往无不得到。一天当中有时捕得两三只。
English: When he heard that there were wild beasts, he personally went to round them up and went everywhere to get them. Sometimes he caught two or three in one day.

古文：若逼暮不禽，则宿昔围守。
现代文：如果临近黄昏还捉不到则连夜围守。
English: If they can't catch them before dusk, they'll keep watch all night.

古文：赋敛严苦，徵发无度，缮修船舸，营造器甲。
现代文：他赋敛严酷，征发无度，修缮船只，营造器甲。
English: He was a stern disciplinarian, a prodigious collector, a ship repairer, and a builder.

古文：自至夏口，便有异图。
现代文：自从到了夏口，他便有了异图。
English: Since arriving in Natsukuchi, he has had a different vision.

古文：进监豫、司之二郡军事，进号镇军将军。
现代文：晋升监管豫、司二郡的军事，晋升封号为镇军将军。
English: He was promoted to supervise the military of Yu and Shiji counties, and his promotion seal was the general of the town army.

古文：泰豫元年，明帝崩，攸之与蔡兴宗并在外蕃，同预顾命。
现代文：泰豫元年，明帝逝世，沈攸之与蔡兴宗都在地方驻守，一同参与顾命。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Emperor Ming died. Shen Youzhi and Cai Xingzong were stationed in the area and participated in the funeral procession together.

古文：会巴西人李承明反，蜀土搔扰。
现代文：正遇上巴西人李承明反叛，蜀地被骚扰。
English: Li Chengming, a Brazilian, is rebelling, and Shu Di is being harassed.

古文：时荆州刺史建平王景素被征，新除荆州刺史蔡兴宗未之镇，乃遣攸之权行荆州事。
现代文：当时荆州刺史建平王刘景素被征调，新任命的荆州刺史蔡兴宗还没有到镇，于是便派沈攸之权且兼管荆州事务。
English: At that time, Liu Jingsu, the king of Jingzhou Jianping, was conscripted, and the newly appointed Jingzhou Jianping Cai Xingzong had not yet arrived in the town, so he sent Shen Yu's power and also managed Jingzhou affairs.

古文：会承明已平，乃以攸之爲镇西将军、荆州刺史，加都督。
现代文：正好李承明已经平定，便以沈攸之为镇西将军、荆州刺史，加任都督。
English: Just as Li Chengming had been pacified, he appointed Shen Yu as the general of Zhenxi and Jingzhou as the governor.

古文：聚敛兵力，养马至二千馀匹，皆分赋逻将士，使耕田而食。
现代文：他聚敛兵力，养马达到二千多匹，都分发给巡逻将士，让他们耕种田地，食物自给。
English: He amassed troops and raised more than two thousand horses, all of which were distributed to patrol soldiers, allowing them to cultivate the fields and feed themselves.

古文：廪财悉充仓储。
现代文：粮食、钱财全部充入仓库。
English: All the grain, money and property were loaded into the warehouse.

古文：荆州作部岁送数千人仗，攸之割留之,簿上云 供讨四山蛮 。
现代文：荆州军工厂每年送来人丁、兵器数千，沈攸之截取一些留下，簿册上记录说是 供讨伐四山蛮使用 。
English: The Jingzhou arms factory sent thousands of men and weapons every year, and Shen Youzhi intercepted some and left them behind. The record in the book said that it was for use in fighting barbarians in the Four Mountains.

古文：装战舰数百千艘，沈之灵溪里，钱帛器械巨积。
现代文：他装备了数百上千艘战舰，沉放在灵溪里，同时聚积了巨量的钱帛器械。
English: He equipped hundreds of thousands of warships and deposited them in Lingxi, while accumulating a huge amount of money-making equipment.

古文：渐怀不臣之心，朝廷制度无所遵奉。
现代文：他渐渐产生了不对别人称臣的心志，朝廷的制度全都不遵守。
English: He gradually developed a spirit of not being subservient to others, and did not abide by the imperial system at all.

古文：富贵拟于王者，夜中诸厢廊然烛达旦，后房服珠玉者数百人，皆一时绝貌。
现代文：富贵情形就和君王一样，夜里各厢房长廊的烛火燃放到天明，后房中佩带珠玉的女子有几百人，都是这一时代的绝佳相貌。
English: The situation of the rich is the same as that of the king. At night, the candles in the corridors of the apartments are lit until dawn, and there are hundreds of women wearing jewels in the back room, all of whom have the perfect appearance of this era.

古文：江州刺史桂阳王休范密有异志，欲以微旨动攸之，使道士陈公昭作天公书一函，题言沈丞相，送攸之门者。
现代文：江州刺史桂阳王刘休范暗中有谋反之心，想用委婉的暗示说动沈攸之，就让道士陈公昭写了一封假托为天帝的书信，题名为沈丞相，把信送给沈攸之的守门人。
English: The King of Guiyang, Liu Xufan, wanted to use a euphemistic hint to persuade Shen Youzhi, so he asked the Taoist Chen Gongzhao to write a letter pretending to be a heavenly emperor, entitled Shen Joseon, and send the letter to Shen Youzhi's gatekeeper.

古文：攸之不开书，推捡得公昭，送之朝廷。
现代文：沈攸之不打开书信，推断出是陈昭公所写，把信送上朝廷。
English: Shen Youzhi did not open the letter, deduced that it was written by Chen Zhaogong, and sent the letter to the imperial court.

古文：后废帝元徽二年，休范举兵袭都，攸之谓僚佐曰： 桂阳今逼朝廷，必声言吾与之同，若不颠沛勤王，必增朝野之惑。 
现代文：后废帝元徽二年，刘休范举兵攻袭京都，沈攸之对属下官员们说： 桂阳王现在逼犯朝廷，必定声称我与他同谋，如果不辛苦保卫君王，必定会增加朝廷和社会上的疑惑。 
English: Two years after Emperor Yuanhui was deposed, Liu Xiufan raised an army to attack Kyoto. Shen Youzhi said to his subordinate officials: King Guiyang is now forcing the imperial court to commit crimes. He will certainly claim that I am in cahoots with him. If I do not work hard to defend the king, I will certainly increase the suspicion of the imperial court and society.

古文：于是遣使受郢州刺史晋熙王燮节度。
现代文：于是派使者去接受郢州刺史晋熙王刘燮的指挥。
English: So he sent an emissary to accept the command of Liu Xuan, the king of Jinxi in Zhangzhou.

古文：会休范平，使乃还。
现代文：等到刘休范被平定，使者才回来。
English: The envoy did not return until Liu Xuan was subdued.

古文：进号征西大将军、开府仪同三司，固让开府。
现代文：沈攸之晋升封号为征西大将军、开府仪同三司，他坚持推辞了开府的封号。
English: Shen Yu's promotion title was General of the Western Expedition, and the title of Kaifu was the same as that of the three departments. He insisted on refusing the title of Kaifu.

古文：攸之自擅阃外，朝廷疑惮之，累欲征入，虑不受命，乃止。
现代文：沈攸之独自带兵在外，朝廷对他怀有疑虑和惧怕，几次想征调他入朝，又担心他不接受命令，因此才停了下来。
English: Shen Youzhi was out alone with soldiers. The imperial court had doubts and fears about him. They wanted to transfer him to the imperial court several times, and they were worried that he would not accept orders, so they stopped.

古文：四年，建平王景素据京城反，攸之复应朝廷，景素寻平。
现代文：泰豫四年，建平王刘景素在京城造反，沈攸之又执行朝廷的命令，刘景素很快就被平定。
English: In the 4th year of the Taiyuan era, Liu Jingsu, the king of Jianping, rebelled in Beijing. Shen Youzhi also carried out the order of the imperial court, and Liu Jingsu was quickly suppressed.

古文：时有台直合高道庆家在江陵，攸之初至州，道庆在家，牒其亲戚十馀人，求州从事西曹，攸之爲用三人。
现代文：当时有个台直阁高道庆家在江陵，沈攸之初到州上的时候，高道庆正在家中，写信介绍了他的亲戚十几人，请求西曹署用他们在州里任职，沈攸之替他安排了三人。
English: At that time, there was a Taizhougu Gao Daoqing family in Jiangling. When Shen Youjun first came to the state, Gao Daoqing was at home. He wrote a letter to introduce more than a dozen of his relatives and asked the State Security Bureau to use them to serve in the state. Shen Youjun arranged three people for him.

古文：道庆大怒，自入州取教毁之而去。
现代文：高道庆大怒，自己到了州里取了那封安置信毁掉而去。
English: Gao Daoqing was furious. He went to the county, took the letter of resettlement, destroyed it and left.

古文：道庆素便马，攸之与宴饮于听事前，合马槊，道庆槊中攸之马鞍，攸之怒索刃槊，道庆驰马而出。
现代文：高道庆平常熟习骑马，沈攸之与他在公堂前面宴饮，于是又上马演习武艺，高道庆的槊刺中了沈攸之的马鞍，沈攸之生气地取刀斩槊，高道庆驰马而出。
English: Gao Daoqing is usually familiar with riding a horse. He and Shen Youzhi had a banquet in front of the public hall, and then they went on horseback to practice martial arts. Gao Daoqing's shovel stabbed Shen Youzhi's saddle, Shen Youzhi angrily took a knife to cut off the shovel, and Gao Daoqing galloped out.

古文：还都说攸之反状，请三千人袭之。
现代文：回京后描述了沈攸之要造反的情景，请求率领三千人前往攻袭。
English: After returning to Beijing, he described the situation of Shen Youzhi's rebellion and asked him to lead three thousand people to attack.

古文：朝议虑其事难济，高帝又保持不许。
现代文：朝廷官员们恐怕事情难以成功，高帝又坚持不许。
English: The court officials feared that it would be difficult for the matter to succeed, and Emperor Gao insisted that it not be allowed.

古文：杨运长等常相疑畏，乃与道庆密遣刺客齎废帝手诏，以金饼赐攸之，州府佐吏进其阶级。
现代文：杨运长等人常常对沈攸之怀有疑虑和畏惧，便与高道庆秘密派遣刺客送上废帝的手诏，把一块金饼赐给沈攸之，而对州府的下属官员们都晋升官级。
English: Yang Yunchang and others often had doubts and fears about Shen Youyou, so they secretly sent an assassin with Gao Daoqing to deliver the Emperor's edict to abolish the emperor, gave a piece of gold cake to Shen Youyou, and promoted the subordinate officials of the state capital.

古文：时有象三头至江陵城北数里，攸之自出格杀之，忽有流矢集攸之马鄣泥，其后刺客事发。
现代文：当时有三头大象到了江陵城北几里地的地方，沈攸之自己出去杀死了它们，忽然有流箭聚落在沈攸之所骑马的障泥上面，后来刺客事情暴露。
English: At that time, three elephants came to a place a few miles north of Gangneung City. Shen Youyou himself went out and killed them. Suddenly, there were stray arrows on the muddy ground where Shen Youyou was riding. Later, the matter of the assassins was exposed.

古文：废帝既殒，顺帝即位，加攸之车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：废帝死后，顺帝即位，封沈攸之为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After the death of the deposed emperor, Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, and Emperor Shen You was appointed as the general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：齐高帝遣攸之子司徒左长史元琰齎废帝刳斮之具以示之，攸之曰： 吾甯爲王淩死，不作贾充生。 
现代文：齐高帝派沈攸之的儿子司徒左长史沈元琰送给他废帝挖心砍头的刑具让他看，沈攸之说： 我宁愿像王凌那样死，不愿像贾充那样生。 
English: Emperor Qigong sent Shen Youzhi's son, Siu Zuo Changshi Shen Yuanjun, to show him the torture tools used to cut off the heads of the emperors. Shen Youzhi said, "I would rather die like Wang Ling than live like Jia Chong."

古文：尚未得即起兵，乃上表称庆，并与齐高帝书推功。
现代文：当时还不能马上起兵，于是便上表向朝廷庆贺，并且给齐高帝寄信推尊他的功劳。
English: At that time, it was not yet possible to raise an army immediately, so he congratulated the imperial court on the table, and sent a letter to Emperor Qigong to commend his service.

古文：攸之有素书十数行，常韬在两裆角，云是宋明帝与己约誓。
现代文：沈攸之有一块白绸布上有字十几行，常常藏在背心的角边上，说是宋明帝与自己有誓约。
English: Shen Youzhi had a piece of white silk cloth with more than a dozen lines of characters, often hidden in the corner of the vest, saying that Song Mingdi had a vow with himself.

古文：又皇太后使至，赐攸之烛十挺，割之得太后手令，曰 国家之事，一以委公 。
现代文：又皇太后的使者来到，赐给沈攸之蜡烛十台，割开后得到了太后的手令，说 国家之事，全部委托给您了。 
English: The emissary of the empress dowager also came and gave ten candles to Shen You, and after they were cut open, they received the empress dowager's order, saying that all matters of state had been entrusted to you.

古文：明日，遂举兵。
现代文：第二天，便起兵了。
English: The next day, they raised an army.

古文：其妾崔氏、许氏谏曰： 官年已老，那不爲百口作计。 
现代文：他的妻子崔氏、许氏劝谏说： 官人年纪已经老了，怎么不为一家百口想想。 
English: His wives, Cui and Xu, urged him, saying, "Officials are already old, why not think about a family of 100 people.

古文：攸之指两裆角示之。
现代文：沈攸之指指背心角让他们看。
English: Shen Youyou's finger pointed at the crotch for them to see.

古文：攸之素畜士马，资用丰积，至是战士十万，铁马三千。
现代文：沈攸之平时收养兵马，用品丰足，到现在已有战士十万、战马三千。
English: Shen Youzhi adopted soldiers and horses in peacetime, with abundant supplies, and now has 100,000 soldiers and 3,000 horses.

古文：将发江陵，使沙门释僧粲筮之，云： 不至都，当自郢州回还。 
现代文：即将从江陵出发时，让和尚释僧粲进行占卜，说： 不到京城，应当是进到郢都返回。 
English: When he was about to set out from Gangneung, he asked the monk Xie Zang to perform divination, saying: If he does not reach the capital, he should enter and return to the capital.

古文：意甚不悦。
现代文：他心里很不高兴。
English: He was not happy in his heart.

古文：初发江津，有气状如尘雾从西北来，正盖军上。
现代文：起初从江津出发，有一种气形状像尘雾一样从西北过来，正覆盖在军队上部。
English: At first, starting from Jiangjin, there was a kind of gas shape coming from the northwest like a dust mist, which was covering the upper part of the army.

古文：齐高帝遣衆军西讨，攸之尽锐攻郢州，行事柳世隆屡破之。
现代文：齐高帝派众军向西讨伐，沈攸之倾尽所有的精锐部队进攻郢州，行事刘世隆屡次将他击败。
English: Emperor Qigong sent troops to the west to fight, Shen Youzhi devoted all his elite troops to attack Zhangzhou, and Liu Shilong repeatedly defeated him.

古文：升明二年，还向江陵，未至，城已爲雍州刺史张敬儿所据，无所归，乃与第三子中书侍郎文和至华容之赏头林，投州吏家。
现代文：升明二年，回头开往江陵，还没有走到，城已经被雍州刺史张敬儿占领，沉攸之无处可归，便与他的第三个儿子中书侍郎沈文和到了华容的头林，投到一个州吏的家里。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he turned around and headed back to Jiangling, but before he got there, the city had been occupied by Zhang Jing'er, the assassin of Yongzhou, and Shen Youzhi had nowhere to return to, so he and his third son, Shen Wenhe, the secretary, went to the head forest of Huarong and went to the home of a state official.

古文：此吏尝爲攸之所鞭，待攸之甚厚，不以往罚爲怨，杀豚荐食。
现代文：这个州吏曾经被沈攸之所鞭打，而现在待沈攸之非常厚道，不以从前的责罚为怨恨，杀猪招待他们吃饭。
English: The magistrate had been whipped by Shen Youyou, and now he was very kind to Shen Youyou. He did not hold the previous punishment as a grudge, but killed a pig and invited them to dinner.

古文：既而村人欲取之，攸之于栎林与文和俱自经死，村人斩首送之都。
现代文：随后村里的人打算把他们捉住，沈攸之在栎林中与沈文和都自缢而死，村里的人把他们斩首后送到了京城。
English: Subsequently, the people in the village planned to catch them, and Shen Youzhi and Shen Wenzhe both hanged themselves in the forest. The people in the village then beheaded them and sent them to the capital.

古文：或割其腹，心有五窍。
现代文：有人割开了沈攸之的肚子，发现他的心有五个孔。
English: Someone cut open Shen Youzhi's stomach and found five holes in his heart.

古文：征西主簿苟昭先以家财葬攸之。
现代文：征西主簿敬昭先以自己的家财埋葬了他。
English: The main leader of the Western Expedition, Kei Shou, buried him first with his own family wealth.

古文：攸之晚好读书，手不释卷，史、汉事多所记忆。
现代文：沈攸之晚年喜欢读书，手不释卷，《史记》、《汉书》记忆了很多。
English: In his later years, Shen Yuanzhi liked to read. He memorized a lot of books, such as "Histories" and "Chinese Classics."

古文：常叹曰： 早知穷达有命，恨不十年读书。 
现代文：他常常叹息说： 早知穷达有命，恨不十年读书。 
English: He often said with a sigh, "I wish I had studied for ten years, before I knew that being poor was a way of life."

古文：及攻郢城，夜尝风浪，米船沈没。
现代文：后来攻郢城，夜里曾遇上风浪，米船沉没。
English: Later, the city was besieged. During the night, there was a storm, and the rice boat sank.

古文：仓曹参军崔灵凤女先适柳世隆子，攸之正色谓曰： 当今军粮要急，而卿不以在意,由与城内婚姻邪。 
现代文：仓曹参军崔灵凤的女儿先前嫁给了柳世隆的儿子，沈攸之严正地告诉他说： 现在军粮紧急，而您却并不在意，是不是因为和城内结了婚姻的缘故啊？ 
English: Cang Cao's daughter, Cui Lingfeng, who had joined the army, had previously married Liu Shilong's son, Ruan. Shen Yuanzhi solemnly told him, "There is an urgent need for army rations, but you don't care. Is it because you married someone from the city?"

古文：灵凤答曰： 乐广有言，下官岂以五男易一女。 
现代文：崔灵凤说： 乐广说过，下官哪能拿五个儿子去换一个女儿！ 
English: Cui Lingfeng said, "Le Guang said, how can a subordinate officer exchange five sons for one daughter!

古文：攸之欢然意解。
现代文：沈攸之高兴地解除了心中的怨怒。
English: Shen Youyou was glad to get rid of the resentment in his heart.

古文：攸之招集才力之士，随郡人双泰真有干力，召不肯来。
现代文：沈攸之召集有才干和气力的人物，随郡人双泰真力气很大，但是召他不肯前来。
English: Shen Youzhi called up talented and powerful people, and Shuang Taizhen, a county resident, was very powerful, but he refused to come.

古文：攸之遣二十人被甲追之，泰真射杀数人，欲过家将母去，事迫不获，单身走入蛮。
现代文：沈攸之派了二十几个人穿着盔甲去追他。双泰真射死了好几个人，想回家把母亲带出来，而事情紧迫没有办成，自己单身逃入蛮人地界。
English: Shen Youzhi sent more than two dozen people wearing armor to chase him. Shuang Taizhen shot several people, wanted to go home and bring his mother out, but the urgent thing was not done, and he fled into the barbarian world alone.

古文：追者既失之，录其母去。
现代文：追赶的人追丢了他，便把他母亲抓去。
English: The pursuers lost him and took his mother.

古文：泰真既失母，乃自归，攸之不罪，曰： 此孝子也。 
现代文：双泰真失去了母亲，于是便自己回来，沈攸之没有怪罪他，说： 这是一个孝子。 
English: Shuang Taizhen lost his mother, so he came back on his own. Shen Youzhi did not blame him, saying: This is a filial son.

古文：赐钱一万，转补队主，其抑情待士如此。
现代文：赐给他了一万钱，转补为队主，他就是这样地抑制自己的感情对待士人。
English: He gave him ten thousand dollars and made him captain of the team. This is how he restrained his feelings towards the scholars.

古文：初，攸之贱时，与吴郡孙超之、全景文共乘一小船出都，三人共上引埭，有一人止而相之，曰： 君三人皆当至方伯。 
现代文：起初，沈攸之地位低贱的时候，与吴郡的孙超之、全景和曾经共同乘着一条小船出京去，三个人共同走上土坝，有一个人把他们拦住给他们相面，说： 你们三个人都会成为地方长官。 
English: At first, when Shen Youyou's status was low, he and Sun Chaozhi, Panorama and I, who were from Wu County, used to take a small boat together to go to Beijing. The three of us walked onto the earthen dam together. A man stopped them and confronted them, saying, "All three of you will become local governors."

古文：攸之曰： 岂有是事。 
现代文：沈攸之说： 哪有这种事？ 
English: Shen Youzhi said: "How can such a thing happen?

古文：相者曰： 不验，便是相书误耳。 
现代文：相面的人说： 如果不灵验，便是相书错了。 
English: The person on the other side said: If it doesn't work, then the photo album is wrong.

古文：后攸之爲郢、荆二州，超之广州刺史，景文南豫州刺史。
现代文：后来沈攸之主持郢、荆二州，孙超之是广州刺史，全景文是南豫州刺史。
English: Later, Shen Youzhi presided over the two states of Zhai and Jing, Sun Chaozhi was the historian of Guangzhou, and the panoramic text was the historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：景文字弘达，齐永明中，卒于光禄大夫。
现代文：全景文字弘达，齐朝永明年间，死在光禄大夫任上。
English: The panoramic text was promulgated, and Qi Chaoyong died on the post of Guanglu doctor in the next year.

古文：攸之初至郢州，有顺流之志，府主簿宗俨之劝攻郢城。
现代文：沈攸之起初到达郢州，有顺流而下的志向，府主簿宗俨之劝他攻郢城。
English: When Shen Yuanzhi first arrived in Zhangzhou, he had the ambition to go down the river. The governor, Zong Xi, advised him to attack Zhangcheng.

古文：功曹臧寅以爲攻守势异，非旬日所拔，若不时举，挫锐损威，攸之不从。
现代文：功曹臧寅认为攻守形势不同，不是旬日之间所能攻下的，如果不能及时攻取，会挫折锐气，折损威风，沈攸之不听从。
English: Gong Cao Yu Yin thought that the situation of attack and defense was different, and it was not something that could be attacked in a day or two. If it could not be attacked in time, it would frustrate the spirit, weaken the authority, and Shen Yu would not obey.

古文：既败，诸将帅皆奔散，或呼寅俱亡。寅曰： 我委质事人，岂可幸其成而责其败。 
现代文：失败以后，各个将领全都逃散，有人叫着臧寅一齐逃亡，臧寅说： 我委身追随别人，怎么能侥幸于他们的成功而去责怪他们的失败。 
English: After the defeat, all the generals fled, and some people called Yu Yin to flee together. Yu Yin said: I am committed to following others, how can I take advantage of their success and blame them for their failure.

古文：乃投水死。
现代文：于是投水而死。
English: As a result, she drowned.

古文：又仓曹参军金城边荣爲府录事所辱，攸之爲荣鞭杀录事。
现代文：又仓曹参军金城人边荣被府录事所侮辱，沈攸之为边荣而用鞭子打死了录事。
English: In addition, Cang Cao, a member of the Jincheng army, and Bian Rong were insulted by the prefectural record, and Shen Yu beat Bian Rong to death with a whip.

古文：攸之自江陵下，以荣爲留府司马守城。
现代文：沈攸之从江陵东下，以边荣为留府司马守城。
English: Shen Youzhi moved from Gangneung to the east, with Bian Rong remaining as the prefectural magistrate to guard the city.

古文：张敬儿将至，人或说之使诣敬儿降。
现代文：张敬儿将要到达，有人劝说他让他到张敬儿那里去请降。
English: Zhang Jing'er was about to arrive, and someone persuaded him to let him go to Zhang Jing'er to ask for his surrender.

古文：荣曰： 受沈公厚恩，一朝缓急，便改易本心,不能也。 
现代文：边荣说： 我受到了沈公的厚恩，一旦情况紧急，便改变本心，我不能这样做。 
English: Bian Rong said: I have been blessed by Shengong. If there is an emergency, I will change my mind. I can't do that.

古文：城败见敬儿，敬儿问曰： 边公何爲同人作贼，不早来。 
现代文：城被攻破见到了张敬儿，张敬儿问他说： 边公为什么同别人一起做贼，而不早些过来？ 
English: Zhang Jing'er saw the city being breached. Zhang Jing'er asked him, "Why did Bian Gong work as a thief with others, instead of coming here earlier?"

古文：荣曰： 沈荆州举义兵，匡社稷，身虽可灭，要是宋世忠臣。
现代文：边荣说： 沈荆州举义兵，挽救国家，我身体虽然可以消灭，却是宋代的忠臣。
English: Bian Rong said: Shen Jingzhou raised a volunteer army to save the country. Although I can be eliminated physically, I am a loyal subject of the Song Dynasty.

古文：天下尚有直言之士，不可谓之爲贼。
现代文：天下还有直言之士，不可以称他们为贼。
English: There are still outspoken people in the world, but you can't call them thieves.

古文：身本不蕲生，何须见问。 
现代文：我本来就没有求生，何必再来相问？ 
English: I wasn't trying to survive in the first place, so why do I have to ask again?

古文：敬儿曰 死何难。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 要死有什么难的？ 
English: Zhang Jing'er said: What is so difficult about dying?

古文：命斩之，荣欢笑而去，容无异色。
现代文：命令把他杀死，边荣欢笑而去，面容毫无异色。
English: Ordered to kill him, Bian Rong laughs and walks away, his face unremarkable.

古文：泰山程邕之者，素依随荣，至是抱持荣谓敬儿曰： 君入人国，不闻仁惠之声，而先戮义士，三楚之人，甯蹈江、汉而死，岂肯与将军同日以生。 
现代文：泰山人程邕之，素来都是依随边荣，现在抱着边荣对张敬儿说： 您到了别人的地面，没有树仁惠的声誉，却先杀了仁义之士，三楚的人们，宁肯跳长江、汉江而死，岂肯同将军同日而生！ 
English: Cheng Xizhi, a man from Mount Taishan, had always followed Bian Rong. Now, he hugged Bian Rong and said to Zhang Jing'er, "You have come to someone else's land, and you do not have the reputation of being benevolent and beneficial, but you first killed the men of benevolence and righteousness, the three wise men. You would rather jump into the Yangtze River and the Han River and die, than be born on the same day as the general!

古文：敬儿曰： 求死甚易，何爲不许。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 求死非常容易，为什么不答应？ 
English: Zhang Jing'er said: It is very easy to ask for death, why not agree?

古文：先杀邕之然后及荣，三军莫不垂泣，曰： 奈何一日杀二义士。 
现代文：先杀了程邕之，然后杀了边荣，三军无不落泪，说： 为什么一天杀了两位义士？ 
English: He first killed Cheng Xizhi, and then killed Bian Rong. All three soldiers shed tears and said, "Why did you kill two righteous men in one day?

古文：比之臧洪及陈容。
现代文：把他们比作臧洪和陈容。
English: Compare them to Zhai Hong and Chen Rong.

古文：废帝之殒，攸之欲起兵，问知星人葛珂之。
现代文：废帝死后，沈攸之想起兵，询问懂星相的人葛珂之。
English: After the death of the deposed emperor, Shen Yuanzhi recalled the soldiers and asked Ge Kezhi, a person who understood the constellations.

古文：珂之曰： 起兵皆候太白，太白见则成，伏则败。
现代文：葛珂之说： 起兵都要等候太白星，太白星出现了就能成功，潜伏着就会失败。
English: Ge Kezhi said: To raise an army, one must wait for a great white star. If a great white star appears, one will succeed; if it lurks, one will fail.

古文：昔桂阳乙太白伏时举兵，一战授首，此近世明验。
现代文：过去桂阳王在太白星潜伏时起兵，打了一仗就被杀死，这是近代的明确验证。
English: In the past, King Guiyang raised an army when he was lurking in Taibaixing, fought a battle and was killed, which is a clear proof of modern times.

古文：今萧公废昏立明，正逢太白伏时，此与天合也。
现代文：现在萧公废除昏君，拥立明君，正是在太白星潜伏的时候，这是与天象相合的。
English: Now that Xiao Gong has abolished the dim prince and established the bright prince, it is exactly when the white star lurks, which is in line with the celestial phenomenon.

古文：且太白寻出东方利用兵，西方不利。 
现代文：况且太白星刚出现在东方有利于用兵，出现在西方则不利。 
English: Moreover, the appearance of the white star in the East is conducive to the use of troops, while the appearance in the West is unfavorable.

古文：故攸之止不下。
现代文：所以沈攸之停止不能东下。
English: Therefore, Shen Youzhi's stop cannot be eastbound.

古文：及后举兵，珂之又曰： 今岁星守南斗，其国不可伐。 
现代文：等后来举兵，葛珂之又说： 现在岁星守在南斗，它那个封国不可以攻伐。 
English: When the troops were raised later, Ge Kezhi also said, "Now that the Star Guard is in Nantou, it is not possible to attack that fiefdom.

古文：攸之不从，果败。
现代文：沈攸之不听从，果然失败。
English: Shen Youzhi disobeyed and failed.

古文：攸之表檄文疏，皆其记室南阳宗俨之辞也，事败责之，答曰： 士爲知己，岂爲君辈所识。 
现代文：沈攸之的表檄文书，都是他的记室南阳人宗俨之的手笔，事情失败以后责备宗俨之，他回答说： 士为知己效命，哪能为你们这些人所理解呢？ 
English: Shen Youzhi's official documents were all written by his secretary, the Nanyang man Zong Xuan. After the failure of the matter, Zong Xuan blamed Zong Xuan. He replied: "A scholar serves his friend's order. How can you people understand this?

古文：既不获许，及乱，百口皆歼。僧昭位廷尉卿，太清三年卒。宗悫字元干，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：齐武帝下诏令让沈攸之的弟弟沈雍之的孙子沈僧昭为义兴公主的后嗣。宗悫，字叫元干，南阳涅阳人。
English: Emperor Qiwu issued a decree to make Shen Youzhi's brother Shen Yongzhi's grandson Shen Sozhao the heir of Princess Yixing. Zonglu, the character is called Yuan Gan, Nanyang Niyang people.

古文：叔父少文高尚不仕，悫年少，问其所志，悫答曰： 愿乘长风破万里浪。 
现代文：叔父宗少文性格高尚，不肯做官，宗悫年少时，问他有什么志向，宗悫回答说： 希望能乘长风破万里浪。 
English: His uncle, Zong Shaowen, had a noble character and refused to become an official. When Zonglu was young, he asked him what his ambition was. Zonglu replied, "I hope I can take advantage of the long wind to break through the waves."

古文：少文曰： 汝若不富贵，必破我门户。 
现代文：宗少文说： 你如果不能富贵，一定会破坏我家的门户。 
English: Zong Shaowen said: If you can't be rich, you will surely destroy the gateway to my home.

古文：兄泌娶妻，始入门夜被劫，悫年十四，挺身与劫相拒，十馀人皆披散，不得入室。
现代文：他的哥哥宗泌娶妻，刚进门那天的夜里遭到抢劫，宗悫当时十四岁，挺身与劫贼搏斗，十几个人都被分散开，不能进入房内。
English: His brother Zong Rong, who had just married, was robbed in the night of the day he entered the door. Zong Rong, who was fourteen at the time, stood up and fought with the robbers. More than a dozen people were dispersed and could not enter the room.

古文：时天下无事，士人并以文义爲业，少文既高尚，诸子群从皆爱好坟典，而悫任气好武，故不爲乡曲所知。
现代文：当时天下太平无事，士人都以文章义理为业，宗少文既然性格高尚，各个子侄都跟从他爱好典籍，而宗悫任气好武，所以不被乡人所了解。
English: At that time, the world was at peace and there was nothing to worry about. The nobles were all engaged in writing and reasoning. Since Zong Shaowen had a noble character, all his nephews and nieces followed him in his love of classics. However, Zong Yao was full of vigor and was fond of martial arts, so he was not understood by the villagers.

古文：江夏王义恭爲征北将军、南兖州刺史，悫随镇广陵。
现代文：江夏王刘义恭为征北将军、南兖州刺史，宗悫随从他镇守广陵。
English: Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, was the general who conquered the north and wrote the history of southern Luzhou, and Zonglu followed him to guard Guangling.

古文：时从兄绮爲征北府主簿，与悫同住，绮妾与给吏牛泰私通，绮入直，而泰潜来就绮妾。
现代文：当时他的堂兄宗绮为征北府主簿，和宗悫住在一起，宗绮的妾与差官牛泰私通。宗绮到衙门值班，而牛泰前来与宗绮的妾幽会。
English: At that time, his cousin Zonglu, the chief registrar of the Northern Expedition, lived with Zonglu. Zonglu's concubine had an affair with the police officer Niu Tai. Zonglu was on duty at the gate, and Niu Tai came to meet Zonglu's concubine.

古文：悫知之，入杀牛泰然后白绮。
现代文：宗悫知道了，进去杀死了牛泰，然后告诉了宗绮。
English: Zong Yao found out, went in and killed Niu Tai, and then told Zong Yao.

古文：义恭壮其意，不罪也。
现代文：刘义恭认为他意气豪壮，没有问罪。
English: Liu Yigong thought he had a strong spirit and did not press charges.

古文：后以补国上军将军。
现代文：后来让他补任了封国中的上军将军。
English: Later, he was appointed to fill the post of general of the army in the middle of the war.

古文：元嘉二十二年，伐林邑，悫自奋愿行，义恭举悫有胆勇，乃除振武将军，爲安西参军萧景宪军副。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，讨伐林邑国，宗悫自告奋勇愿意前往，刘义恭推举宗悫有胆量勇气，便任命为振武将军，做安西参军萧景宪的副官。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zonglu volunteered to go to Lin'ur, and Liu Yigong recommended Zonglu for his courage. Zonglu was appointed as General Zhenwu, and served as an aide-de-camp to Xiao Jingxian, who joined the Anxi army.

古文：随交州刺史檀和之围区粟城。
现代文：他跟随交州刺史檀和之围攻区粟城。
English: He followed the siege of Aucheng, the besieged area, by Jiaozhou's assassin, Tan He.

古文：林邑遣将范毗沙达来救区粟，和之遣偏军拒之，爲贼所败。
现代文：林邑国派遣将领范毗沙达前来援救区粟，檀和之派遣一支偏军进行迎击，被贼军打败。
English: Lin County dispatched General Fan Bishada to come to the rescue of the district, and Tan He dispatched a partial army to counterattack, which was defeated by the thief army.

古文：又遣悫，悫乃分军爲数道，偃旗潜进讨破之，仍攻拔区粟，入象浦。
现代文：又派了宗悫，宗悫便把军队分成几路，偃旗息鼓，秘密前进，把它攻破，然后又回军攻下了区粟，进入了象浦。
English: He also sent Zonglu, and Zonglu divided the army into several routes, waved the banner, advanced secretly, broke through it, and then returned to the army to capture the district of Zuo, and entered Xiangpu.

古文：林邑王范阳迈倾国来逆，以具装被象，前后无际。
现代文：林邑国王范阳迈倾尽全国的兵力前来抵抗，以全副铠甲把大象武装起来，前后不见边际。
English: Fan Yangmai, the king of Linyi, devoted all the forces of the country to resist, armed the elephants with full armor, and there was no limit to their advance.

古文：悫以爲外国有师子威服百兽，乃制其形与象相御，象果惊奔，衆因此溃乱，遂克林邑。
现代文：宗悫认为外国有狮子威猛慑服百兽，于是便制成狮子的形状抵御大象，大象见了果然惊骇奔逃，兵众随之溃乱，于是攻克了林邑。
English: Zonglu thought that there was a lion in a foreign country that would frighten away all the beasts, so he made the shape of a lion to fend off the elephant. When the elephant saw it, it was so frightened that it ran away. The soldiers then broke into a riot, and thus conquered Linyi.

古文：收其珍异，皆是未名之宝，其馀杂物不可称计。
现代文：收缴了他们的珍奇特产，全是叫不上名字的宝物，其余各种杂物不可胜数。
English: They confiscated their rare and special products, all nameless treasures, and countless other miscellaneous items.

古文：悫一毫无犯，唯有被梳枕刷，此外萧然。
现代文：宗悫丝毫也不侵犯，只有自己的被子、梳子、枕头、刷子，此外便很少再有什么了。
English: Zonglu does not infringe at all, he only has his own quilt, comb, pillow, brush, and there is rarely anything else.

古文：文帝甚嘉之。
现代文：文帝对他十分称赞。
English: Emperor Wen praised him highly.

古文：三十年，孝武伐逆，以悫爲南中郎谘议参军，领中兵。
现代文：元嘉三十年，孝武帝讨伐叛逆，任命宗悫为南中郎咨议参军，兼任中兵。
English: In the 30th year of Yuan Jia, Emperor Xiaowu cracked down on the rebels and appointed Zonglu as the Southern Middle Elder to advise and join the army, concurrently serving as a middle soldier.

古文：及事平，功次柳元景。
现代文：待事情平定，他的功劳仅次于柳元景。
English: By the time things settled down, his contribution was second only to that of Liu Yuanqing.

古文：孝武即位，以爲左卫将军，封洮阳侯。
现代文：孝武帝即位，任命他为左卫将军，封为洮阳侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, appointed him as the General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and made him the Marquis of Shenyang.

古文：孝建中，累迁豫州刺史，监五州诸军事。
现代文：孝建年间，逐步升迁为豫州刺史、监五州诸军事。
English: During the Xiao Jian years, he was gradually promoted to Henan Provincial Historian and Inspector of the Five Military Provinces.

古文：先是乡人庾业家富豪侈，侯服玉食。
现代文：在此之前，同乡人庾业家庭富有生活奢侈，穿侯爵的衣服，吃珍贵的食品。
English: Before that, the family of fellow villagers had lived a luxurious life, wearing marquis clothes and eating precious food.

古文：与宾客相对，膳必方丈，而爲悫设粟饭菜葅。
现代文：和宾客对坐，进餐一定肴馔丰盛，铺摆一丈见方，而对宗悫却设米饭青菜。
English: Sitting opposite the guests, the meal is sure to be plentiful, and the dishes are arranged in a square, but the rice and vegetables are set for the main course.

古文：谓客曰： 宗军人惯噉粗食。 
现代文：对客人说： 宗军人习惯吃粗饭。 
English: He said to his guest, "The soldiers are used to eating stale rice.

古文：悫致饱而退，初无异辞。
现代文：宗悫吃饱了便退席了，当时并没有说怪话。
English: Once he had eaten his fill, Zong Yao left the table and did not say anything strange at the time.

古文：至是业爲悫长史，带梁郡，悫待之甚厚，不以昔事爲嫌。
现代文：到现在庾业做了宗悫的长史，负责梁郡，宗悫待他十分宽厚，不因为过去的事情而怀嫌怨。
English: To this day, Zonglu has been in charge of Liang County for most of Zonglu's long history. Zonglu treats him very generously and does not hold grudges for what happened in the past.

古文：大明三年，竟陵王诞据广陵反，悫表求赴讨，乘驿诣都，面受节度。
现代文：大明三年，竟陵王刘诞以广陵为根据地反叛，宗悫上表请求前往讨伐，他乘坐驿马到达京城，当面接受皇帝的指示。
English: In the third year of Daming, Liu Xing, the king of the mausoleum, rebelled with Guangling as the base, and Zonglu requested to go to the crusade. He arrived in Beijing by horse and accepted the emperor's instructions in person.

古文：上停舆慰勉，悫耸跃数十，左右顾眄，上壮之。
现代文：皇上停下龙车慰劳勉励，宗悫高高跃起多次，左右顾盼，皇上感到十分豪壮。
English: The emperor stopped the dragon chariot to offer consolation and encouragement, and Zong Yao jumped high and high several times, looking around. The emperor felt very strong.

古文：及行，隶车骑大将军沈庆之。
现代文：出发时，让他隶属于车骑大将军沈庆之。
English: At the time of departure, let him be subordinate to General Shen Qingzhi.

古文：初，诞诳其衆云： 宗悫助我。 
现代文：起初，刘诞诳骗他的兵众说： 宗悫在帮助我。 
English: At first, Liu Xizhao lied to his soldiers and said, "Zong Yao is helping me.

古文：及悫至，跃马绕城呼曰： 我宗悫也。 
现代文：等宗悫来到，跃马绕城喊道： 我就是宗悫。 
English: When Zonglu arrived, he galloped around the city shouting, "I am Zonglu."

古文：事平，入爲左卫将军。
现代文：事情平息后，入京担任左卫将军。
English: After the situation calmed down, he went to Beijing to serve as General of the Left Division.

古文：五年，从猎堕马脚折，不堪朝直，以爲光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：大明五年，跟随出猎，从马上摔下来脚部骨折，不能上朝值勤，任命他为光禄大夫，加赐金章紫带。
English: Daming five years, followed by hunting, fell from the horse and fractured his foot, unable to go to the morning duty, appointed him as the doctor of Guanglu, and awarded him the gold medal and purple belt.

古文：有佳牛堪进御，官买不肯卖，坐免官。
现代文：他有一头好牛可供进献皇宫，官家要买他却不肯卖，因此被免官。
English: He had a good cow to offer to the palace, but the officials wanted to buy it, but he refused to sell it, so he was dismissed.

古文：明年复先职。
现代文：第二年又恢复了原先的职务。
English: He was reinstated the following year.

古文：废帝即位，爲甯蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加都督。
现代文：废帝即位，他担任宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加封都督。
English: When the deposed emperor ascended to the throne, he served as the captain of Ningban, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of Gafu.

古文：卒，赠征西将军，諡曰肃侯，配食孝武庙庭。
现代文：死后，追赠为征西将军，加谥号为肃侯，在孝武帝的庙庭中配享祭祀。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest and the posthumous title of Soho, and was given a place of worship in the temple garden of Emperor Xiaowu.

