古文：凡棋有益之而损者，有损之而益者。有侵而利者，有侵而害者。有宜左投者，有宜右投者。有先著者，有后著者。有紧避者，有慢行者。
现代文：围棋中有种种应该考虑到的情形：有时候表面上得益而实际上受损，有时候表面上受损而实际上得益；有时候侵占地盘得到好处，有时候侵占地盘反而受害；有时候应该在左边投子，有时候应该在右边投子；有时候先下子，有时候后下子；有时候紧紧压住对方，有时候不慌不忙地行棋。
English: There are various situations that should be taken into account in Go: sometimes the apparent gain is actually a loss, sometimes the apparent loss is actually a gain; sometimes the encroachment of territory is beneficial, sometimes the encroachment of territory is a victim; sometimes the ball should be thrown to the left, sometimes the ball should be thrown to the right; sometimes the ball should be thrown first, sometimes the ball should be thrown last; sometimes the opponent should be pressed tightly, and sometimes the game should be played without haste.

古文：粘子勿前，弃子思后。
现代文：粘子不要太急，弃子须考虑有什么好处。
English: Don't be too hasty in discarding sticky rice. You should consider the benefits of discarding it.

古文：有始近而终远者，有始少而终多者。
现代文：有时候开始显得近而最终远了，有时候开始显得少而最终却多了。
English: Sometimes it starts out close and ends up far away, sometimes it starts out small and ends up big.

古文：欲强外先攻内，欲实东先击西。
现代文：打算加强外围就先在里面进攻，打算充实东部就先在西部进攻。
English: If you want to strengthen the periphery, attack inside first. If you want to enrich the east, attack in the west first.

古文：路虚而无眼，则先觑。无害于他棋，则做劫。
现代文：棋路虚而无眼则先看看势头，如果对其他的棋没有妨害便做劫。
English: If the path is not clear and there are no eyes, first look at the momentum, and if there is no interference with other pieces, then rob.

古文：饶路则宜疏，受路则勿战。
现代文：给对方让路则行棋应疏，接受对方的让路就不要争斗。
English: If you give way to the other side, you will play a poor game. If you accept the other side's way out, you should not fight.

古文：择地而侵，无碍而进。
现代文：选择合适的地方加以侵占，如果没有妨害便继续推进。
English: Choose a suitable place to invade, and if there is no obstruction, continue to advance.

古文：此皆棋家之幽微也，不可不知也。
现代文：这都是棋家的深微之处，不能不认真了解。
English: These are all the subtleties of a chess player, and must be seriously understood.

古文：《易》曰﹕ 非天下之至精，其孰能与于此。 
现代文：《易·系辞上》说： 不是天底下技艺极为精巧的人，谁能领略其中的奥妙呢？ 
English: "Elementary Speech" said: If you are not a highly skilled person under heaven, who can appreciate the mystery of it?

