古文：雨為〈澍〉，及誘粟，輒以書言〈澍〉稼、誘粟及豤田毋稼者頃數。稼已生後而雨，亦輒言雨少多，所利頃數。
现代文：下及时雨和谷物抽穗，应即书面报告受雨、抽穗的顷数和已开垦而末耕种田地顷数。禾稼生长期下雨，也要立即报告降雨量和受益田地顷数。
English: In case of timely rain and cereal sprouting, it is necessary to immediately report in writing the number of hectares affected by rain, the number of hectares sprouting and the number of hectares of cultivated fields. In case of long-term rain during grain production, it is also necessary to immediately report the amount of rainfall and the number of hectares of benefiting fields.

古文：早〈旱〉及暴風雨、水潦、、它物傷稼者，亦輒言其頃數。
现代文：如有旱灾、暴风雨、涝灾、蝗虫及其他虫害等损伤了禾稼，也要报告受灾顷数。
English: If droughts, storms, hailstorms, locusts and other insect pests damage the crops, the number of hectares affected should also be reported.

古文：近縣令輕足行其書，遠縣令郵行之，盡八月□□之。
现代文：距离近的县，由走得快的人专送报告，距离远的县由驿站传送，在八月底以前送达。
English: For counties that are close by, reports will be sent by fast walkers. For counties that are far away, reports will be sent by post, and will be delivered before the end of August.

古文：春二月，毋敢伐材木山林及雍隄水。不夏月，毋敢夜草為灰，取生荔、麛鷇，毋□□□□□□毒魚鱉，置罔，到七月而縱之。
现代文：春天二月，不准到山林中砍伐木材，不准堵塞水道，不到夏季，不准烧草作为肥料，不准采刚发芽的植物，或捉取幼兽、卵，不准毒杀鱼鳖，不准设置捕捉鸟兽的陷井和纲罟，到七月才解除禁令。
English: In spring and February, it is not allowed to cut wood in the mountains and forests, not allowed to block waterways, and before summer, it is not allowed to burn grass as fertilizer, not allowed to pick up newly sprouted plants, or catch young animals and eggs, not allowed to poison fish bait, not allowed to set traps and baits to catch birds and beasts, and the ban will be lifted in July.

古文：唯不幸死而伐綰享者，是不用時。
现代文：只有因死亡而需要伐木制造棺椁的才不受季节限制。
English: Only those whose death requires the felling of trees to make coffins are not subject to seasonal restrictions.

古文：邑之皂及它禁苑者，麛時毋敢將犬以之田。
现代文：居邑靠近牛马的皂和其它禁苑的，幼兽繁殖时不准带着狗去狩猎。
English: Soap, who lives near a cattle and horse farm and other off-limits areas, is not allowed to go hunting with his dog when the young animals are breeding.

古文：百姓犬入禁苑中而不追獸及捕獸者，勿敢殺；其追獸及捕獸者，殺之。河禁所殺犬，皆完入公；其它禁苑殺者，食其肉而入皮。
现代文：百姓的狗进入禁苑和捕兽的，不准打死；如追兽和捕兽的要打死。在专门设置的警戒地区打死的狗要完整上缴官府，其它禁苑打死的，可以吃掉狗肉而上缴狗皮。
English: If a dog belonging to a commoner enters a forbidden garden or hunts animals, it is not allowed to be killed; if it chases or hunts animals, it must be killed. If a dog is killed in a specially set up warning area, it must be completely handed over to the government. If a dog is killed in other forbidden gardens, it can eat dog meat and hand over the dog's skin.

古文：入頃芻，以其受田之數，無豤不豤，頃入芻三石、二石。芻自黃及束以上皆受之。
现代文：每顷田地应缴的芻稾，按照所受田地的数量缴纳，不论垦种与否，每顷缴芻三石，稾二石，干叶和乱草够束以上均收，缴纳时，可以运来称量。
English: The land tax payable per hectare shall be paid according to the maximum quantity of land received, regardless of whether it is a seed tax or not. The land tax payable per hectare shall be 3 koku, 2 koku, and more than enough bundles of dried leaves and tangled grass shall be collected. When paying, it may be transported to be weighed.

古文：入芻，相輸度，可。禾、芻徹木、薦，輒上石數縣廷。勿用，復以薦蓋。
现代文：谷物、芻稾撤下来的木头的草垫，应即向县廷报告粮草石数，木头和草垫不要移作他用，要用来垫盖粮草。
English: Grain, straw removed from the wooden straw mats, should immediately report to the county court the number of grain and grass stones, wood and straw mats should not be used for other purposes, but should be used to cover grain and grass.

古文：乘馬服牛稟，過二月弗稟、弗致者，皆止，勿稟、致。稟大田而毋恒籍者，以其致到日稟之，勿深致。
现代文：驾车牛马的饲料，过期两个月没有领取或发送的，都截止不再领发，向大田领取而未设固定帐目的，按其领取凭证所到日期发给，不得超过凭证的规定。
English: Feeds for driving cattle and horses that have not been received or sent after two months have expired will no longer be collected and sent. If they are collected from Daejeon and no fixed account has been set up, they will be distributed according to the date of receipt of the receipt, and must not exceed the provisions of the receipt.

古文：百姓居田舍者毋敢酉，田嗇夫、部佐謹禁御之，有不從令者有罪。
现代文：居住在农村的百姓不准卖酒，田啬夫及部佐应严加禁止，违反法令的有罪。
English: The people living in rural areas are not allowed to sell alcohol, and the farmers and their assistants should be strictly prohibited, and they are guilty of violating the law.

