古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上元封二年
现代文：起，止，一共十一年。汉纪十三汉武帝元封二年
English: It lasted for a total of eleven years, from the 13th year of the Han Dynasty to the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：冬，十月，上行幸雍，祠五畤；还，祝祠泰一，以拜德星。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉武帝巡幸至雍，祭祀于五；回长安后，祭祀泰一神，并叩拜 德星 。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Hanwu went on a pilgrimage to Yong, and made a sacrifice on the 5th; after returning to Chang'an, he made a sacrifice to Taiyi, and worshipped De Xing.

古文：春，正月，公孙卿言： 见神人东莱山，若云欲见天子。 
现代文：春季，正月，公孙卿报告说： 在东莱山看到神仙，他好像说要见天子。 
English: In the spring, in the first month, Gongsunqing reported: I saw a god in Donglaishan. He seemed to say that he wanted to see the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子于是幸缑氏城，拜卿为中大夫，遂至东莱，宿留之，数日，无所见，见大人迹云。
现代文：于是汉武帝前往缑氏城，封公孙卿为中大夫，到东莱住了几天，却未见到神仙，只看到了巨人的足迹。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwu went to the city of Shanshi and appointed Gongsunqing as the middle doctor. He stayed in Donglai for a few days, but did not see the immortal, but only saw the footprints of the giant.

古文：复遣方士求神怪，采芝药，以千数。时岁旱，天子既出无名，乃祷万里沙。
现代文：汉武帝又派出数以千计的方士去寻访神，采摘灵芝。当时正逢旱灾，汉武帝外出巡游没有理由，便去祭祀万里沙神庙。
English: Emperor Hanwu also sent thousands of magicians to search for gods and collect reishi mushrooms. At that time, there was a drought, and Emperor Hanwu had no reason to go on a tour, so he went to worship the Wanli Sha Temple.

古文：夏，四月，还，过祠泰山。
现代文：夏季，四月，返回长安，中途祭祀泰山。
English: In the summer, in April, they return to Chang'an, and in the middle of the journey, they make a sacrifice to Mount Tai.

古文：初，河决瓠子，后二十馀岁不复塞，梁、楚之地尤被其害。
现代文：先前，黄河在瓠子决口，后二十多年未将决口堵塞，梁、楚一带地方受害最深。
English: Previously, the Yellow River was at the Jizi mouth, but the mouth has not been blocked for more than 20 years. The areas around Liang and Chu have suffered the most.

古文：是岁，上使汲仁、郭昌二卿发卒数万人塞瓠子河决。
现代文：本年，汉武帝派大臣汲仁、郭昌二人征调数万人堵塞瓠子决口。
English: This year, Emperor Hanwu sent two ministers, Kuren and Guo Chang, to recruit and mobilize tens of thousands of people to block the gate.

古文：天子自泰山还，自临决河，沈白马、玉璧于河，令群臣、从官自将军以下皆负薪，卒填决河。
现代文：汉武帝从泰山回长安途中，亲自到黄河决口处视察，将白马、玉璧沉入河中，命随驾群臣和扈从官员自将军以下一律背负柴薪，终于将决口堵住。
English: On his way back to Chang'an from Mount Taishan, Emperor Hanwu personally inspected the mouth of the Yellow River. He sank the white horse and the jade horse into the river, and ordered the courtiers and officials from the general to the general to carry firewood. Finally, the mouth was blocked.

古文：筑宫其上，名曰宣防宫。导河北行二渠，复禹旧迹，而梁、楚之地复宁，无水灾。
现代文：汉武帝命人在原决口处兴建宫室一座，名叫宣防宫；又开挖两条渠道，将黄河导入北行的两条河渠，恢复大禹治水时的旧状，梁、楚地区又安宁了，从此不受水灾之害。
English: Emperor Hanwu ordered people to build a palace room at the original breach, called Xuanfeng Palace; and excavated two channels to lead the Yellow River into two northbound canals, restoring the old situation when Dayu controlled the water. Liang and Chu areas were peaceful again, and were no longer affected by floods.

古文：上还长安。
现代文：汉武帝回到长安。
English: Emperor Hanwu returned to Chang'an.

古文：初令越巫祠上帝、百鬼，而用鸡卜。
现代文：汉武帝开始命令越族巫师祭祀上天神明和众鬼，并使用鸡骨进行占卜。
English: Emperor Hanwu began to order the Viet wizards to offer sacrifices to the gods and demons, and to use chicken bones for divination.

古文：公孙卿言仙人好楼居，于是上令长安作蜚廉、桂观，甘泉作益寿、延寿观，使卿持节设具而候神人。
现代文：据公孙卿说，神仙喜欢住在楼中，于是汉武帝命人在长安兴建蜚廉观、桂观，在甘泉兴建益寿观、延寿观，派公孙卿携带皇帝符节，布置好全部设备，恭候神仙降临。
English: According to Gongsunqing, immortals like to live in buildings. Therefore, Emperor Hanwu ordered people to build the Jialian and Guizhou views in Chang'an, and the Yixing and Yangtze views in Ganquan. Gongsunqing was sent to carry the imperial symbols, arrange all the equipment, and wait for the arrival of immortals.

古文：又作通天茎台，置祠具其下。更置甘泉前殿，益广诸宫室。
现代文：又兴建通天茎台，在台下摆设祭祀器具，兴建甘泉宫前殿，并对其他各处宫室进行扩建。
English: In addition, the Stem of Heaven platform was built, and sacrificial instruments were set up under the platform. The front hall of the Gansen Palace was built, and the other palace rooms were expanded.

古文：初，全燕之世，尝略属直番、朝鲜，为置吏，筑障塞。
现代文：当初，燕国全盛之时，曾经占领真番、朝鲜为属地，设置官吏，修筑边防要塞。
English: At the beginning, when Yan's state was at its peak, it occupied Zhenban and Korea as its territories, set up officials, and built border fortifications.

古文：秦灭燕，属辽东外徼。
现代文：秦灭掉燕国之后，这一带成为辽东郡的外部边界。
English: Later, Qin State eliminated Yan State, and Korea became a border country outside Liaodong County.

古文：汉兴，为其远难守，复修辽东故塞，至氵具水为界，属燕。
现代文：汉朝兴起后，因该地遥远，难于守御，所以只重修了辽东地区的原有边塞，以水作为边界，属燕国管辖。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, due to the remoteness of the area and the difficulty of guarding it, only the original border fortress in the Liaodong region was rebuilt, with water as the boundary, under the jurisdiction of Yan.

古文：燕王卢绾反，入匈奴。燕人卫满亡命，聚党千馀人，椎髻、蛮夷服而东走出塞，渡氵具水，居秦故空地上下障，稍役属真番、朝鲜蛮夷及燕亡命者王之，都王险。
现代文：燕王卢绾谋反，逃入匈奴，燕国人卫满聚集亲信一千余人，头梳发髻，身穿蛮夷服装向东逃出边塞，渡过水，占据秦时旧有空地，自立为王，逐渐将真番、朝鲜的蛮夷部族和从燕国逃出的人归于自己的统治之下，建都王险。
English: Yan King Lu Xun plotted a rebellion and fled to the Xiongnu. Yan people gathered more than a thousand close friends, combed their hair, dressed in barbarian clothes, fled eastward out of the border fortress, crossed the water, occupied the vacant land in Qin Dynasty, became independent as a king, and gradually brought Zhenfan, the barbarian tribes in Korea and the people who fled from Yan Province under their own rule, and built the capital Wangan.

古文：会孝惠、高后时，天下初定，辽东太守即约满为外臣，保塞外蛮夷，无使盗边；诸蛮夷君欲入见天子，勿得禁止。
现代文：到汉惠帝、汉高后时期，因天下刚刚安定不久，崐辽东太守便与卫满约定：由卫满作为汉朝的外臣，保护汉朝边塞之外的蛮夷部族不对汉朝边塞进行侵扰；如果各蛮夷部族的首领要到汉朝晋见天子，卫满不得禁止。
English: In the period of Emperor Hui of the Han Dynasty and after the Han Dynasty, because the world had just stabilized, the Empress Dowager of Liaodong Province made an agreement with Wei Man: Wei Man, as a foreign minister of the Han Dynasty, would protect barbarian tribes outside the Han Dynasty's frontier fortress from intruding into the Han Dynasty's frontier fortress; if the leaders of barbarian tribes wanted to go to the Han Dynasty to meet the Son of Heaven, Wei Man could not forbid it.

古文：以故满得以兵威财物侵降其旁小邑，真番、临屯皆来服属，方数千里。
现代文：因此，卫满得以利用兵威和财物侵略和降服周围弱小部族，真番、临屯都来臣服归属，使其统治地域扩大到方圆数千里。
English: Therefore, Wei Man was able to use his military power and wealth to invade and subjugate the surrounding weak tribes. Zhenban and Lintun all submitted to him, expanding his territory to thousands of miles.

古文：传子至孙右渠，所诱汉亡人滋多,又未尝入见;真番旁众国欲上书见天子，又拥阏不通。
现代文：王位传到卫满的孙子卫右渠时，卫氏朝鲜招降的汉朝逃亡之人越来越多，而卫右渠又从来未到长安朝见过汉朝天子；辰国国君想要上书汉朝，晋见汉天子，也因卫氏朝鲜的阻隔而不得通行。
English: When the throne was passed down to Wei Man's grandson Wei Zuo, more and more people fled to the Han Dynasty, which had been invited to surrender by Wei's Korea. Wei Zuo had never been to the Chang'an Dynasty to see the emperor of the Han Dynasty; Chen Guo Guo wanted to write to the Han Dynasty and see the emperor of the Han Dynasty, but was blocked by Wei's Korea.

古文：元封二年，汉使涉何谯谕右渠，终不肯奉诏。
现代文：汉朝于本年派使臣涉何前去劝诱并卫右渠，但卫右渠却到底不肯接受诏令。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent a delegation to reprimand and inform the Right Canal, but the Right Canal ultimately refused to accept the Han Dynasty's edict.

古文：何去至界上，临湊水，使御刺杀送何者朝鲜裨王长，即渡，驰入塞，遂归报天子曰： 杀朝鲜将。 
现代文：涉何离开朝鲜，来到边界，在水河边，命驾车人将护送他的朝鲜副王长刺杀，然后立即渡过水，驰入汉朝边塞，回来报告汉武帝说： 杀死了朝鲜将领。 
English: After leaving North Korea, he came to the border. At the water's edge, he ordered the driver to assassinate the North Korean vice-premier who was escorting him. He then immediately crossed the water, drove into the Han-North Korean border fortress, and returned to report to Emperor Wu of Han: I have killed the North Korean general.

古文：上为其名美，即不诘，拜何为辽东东部都尉。
现代文：汉武帝认为他有杀朝鲜人的美名，未加责问，任命他为辽东东部都尉。
English: Tianzi thought that he had the reputation of killing the North Korean general, so he no longer pursued his fault, but awarded him the post of captain of the eastern part of Liaodong.

古文：朝鲜怨何，发兵袭攻杀何。
现代文：朝鲜怨恨涉何，派兵攻击辽东，将涉何杀死。
English: What is the reason for North Korea's grudge, what is the reason for the sudden attack and killing?

古文：六月，甘泉房中产芝九茎，上为之赦天下。
现代文：六月，甘泉宫斋房中长出九茎灵芝。为此，汉武帝下令大赦天下。
English: In June, nine stalks of Ganoderma lucidum sprouted in the temple of Ganquan Palace. To this end, Emperor Han Wu ordered a general amnesty.

古文：上以旱为忧，公孙卿曰： 黄帝时，封则天旱，乾封三年。 
现代文：汉武帝因为旱灾而忧虑，公孙卿说： 黄帝时，封祀后便出现大旱，使封土干了三年。 
English: Emperor Hanwu was worried because of the drought, Gongsunqing said: When the Yellow Emperor was enthroned, there was a drought after the enthronement, which made the fenced land dry for three years.

古文：上乃下诏曰： 天旱，意乾封乎！ 
现代文：汉武帝于是颁布诏书说： 天旱，意旨是要使封土干吧！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu then issued an edict saying: The drought is caused by the weather, the intention is to make the fenced land dry!

古文：秋，作明堂于汶上。
现代文：秋季，在汶水边兴建明堂。
English: In the autumn, Ming Hall was built on the water's edge of the lake.

古文：上募天下死罪为兵，遣楼船将军杨仆从齐浮渤海，左将军荀彘出辽东，以讨朝鲜。
现代文：汉武帝下令招募天下犯有死罪的人当兵，由楼船将军杨仆率领，从齐国渡渤海，左将军荀彘从辽东出发，征讨朝鲜。
English: Emperor Hanwu ordered the recruitment of soldiers from all over the world who had committed capital crimes. Led by the general of the Lou ship, Yang Bu, they set out from Qi Province to cross the Bohai Sea, and the left general, Zou, set out from Liaodong to conquer Korea.

古文：初，上使王然于以越破及诛南夷兵威喻滇王入朝。
现代文：当初，汉武帝派王然于利用南越败亡的事例和诛平南夷的兵威劝告滇国国王入朝归附。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu sent Wang Ran to use the example of the defeat of South Vietnam and the military might of Qu Binan Yi to persuade the king of Qu to join the dynasty.

古文：滇王者，其众数万人，其旁东北有劳深、靡莫，皆同姓相杖，未肯听。
现代文：滇王拥有数万部众，邻近的东北方又有与之同姓的劳深、靡莫两国相互支持，所以不肯听从汉朝。
English: Shao Wang has tens of thousands of followers, and the neighboring northeast has the same surname of Laoshen and Mianmo, and the two countries support each other, so they refuse to obey the Han Dynasty.

古文：劳深、靡莫数侵犯使者吏卒。
现代文：劳深、靡莫两国还多次侵袭汉朝使臣部下。
English: The two countries also repeatedly attacked the envoys of the Han Dynasty.

古文：于是上遣将军郭昌、中郎将卫广发巴、蜀兵击灭劳深、靡莫，以兵临滇。
现代文：于是汉武帝派将军郭昌、中郎将卫广征调巴、蜀地区的军队灭掉劳深、靡莫两国，兵临滇国。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwu sent the generals Guo Chang and Zhong Lang to destroy the troops of Wei Guangzheng, Dangba and Shu regions, and the soldiers of Linyi Province.

古文：滇王举国降，请置吏入朝，于是以为益州郡，赐滇王王印，复长其民。
现代文：滇王举国投降，请求汉朝派置官吏，并亲自入朝。汉朝在该地设置益州郡，并赐给滇王王印，命他继续管辖他的百姓。
English: The Han Dynasty set up the county of Yizhou in the area, and gave King Yan the royal seal, ordering him to continue to govern his people.

古文：是时，汉灭两越，平西南夷，置初郡十七，且以其故俗治，毋赋税。
现代文：此时，汉朝先后灭掉了南越和东越两国，剿平了西南夷各部族，新增设了十七个郡，并仍按当地原有风俗习惯进行治理，不征收赋税。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty had successively eradicated the two countries of South Vietnam and East Vietnam, flattened the tribes of the Southwest Yi, newly established seventeen counties, and still governed according to the original local customs and habits, and did not levy taxes.

古文：南阳、汉中以往郡，各以地比，给初郡吏卒奉食、币物、传车、马被具。
现代文：南阳、汉中等旧有各郡，则各根据距离的远近，为新设各郡的官吏和兵卒提供粮食、钱物、邮传车、马匹及配件用具。
English: Nanyang and Hanzhong had counties before, but each county provided grain, money, postal cars, horses and accessories for the officials and soldiers of the newly established counties according to the distance.

古文：而初郡时时小反，杀吏，汉发南方吏卒往诛之，间岁万馀人，费皆仰给大农。
现代文：由于新设各郡时常发生小规模叛乱，杀死官吏，汉朝便征调南方各郡的官吏兵卒前往镇压，过了一年达一万多人，所需费用全部依靠大农。
English: As small-scale rebellions often occurred in the newly established counties, killing officials, the Han Dynasty conscripted officials and soldiers from the southern counties to suppress them. After one year, there were more than 10,000 people, and all the required expenses depended on large farmers.

古文：大农以均输、调盐铁助赋，故能赡之。
现代文：大农靠调剂各地的物资和盐、铁专卖的所得，补充赋税的不足，所以还可以供应。
English: Large-scale farmers rely on the adjustment of materials from all over the country and the income from the sale of salt and iron to supplement the shortage of taxes, so they can still supply.

古文：然兵所过，县为以訾给毋乏而已，不也言擅赋法矣。
现代文：然而军队所过之处，地方官府供应军需，只不使缺乏而已，不敢再提专有赋税的法令了。
English: However, where the army was concerned, the supply of military supplies by local government offices did not only cause shortages, and they did not dare to mention the exclusive tax laws.

古文：是岁，以御史中丞南阳杜周为廷尉。
现代文：这一年，汉武帝任命御史中丞南阳人杜周为廷尉。
English: In the same year, Emperor Hanwu appointed Nanyang's Du Zhou, a member of the Imperial Historian's Office, as a court lieutenant.

古文：周外宽，内深次骨，其治大放张汤。
现代文：杜周外表宽厚，内心却苛刻至极，对事情的处理基本上效法张汤。
English: Du Zhou is generous on the outside, but extremely harsh on the inside. He basically follows Zhang Tang's way of handling things.

古文：时诏狱益多，二千石系者，新故相因，不减百馀人；廷尉一岁至千馀章，章大者连逮证案数百，小者数十人，远者数千，近者数百里会狱。
现代文：当时，长安诏狱的犯人日益增多，二千石官被逮捕囚禁的，旧的未去，新的已来，不下一百余人；廷尉一年要处理的案件达到一千余件。一件大案，受牵连被逮捕或作证的人有几百，小案也有数十人；远的数千里，近的数百里，都要前来对质。
English: At that time, the number of prisoners in Chang'an Imperial Prison was increasing day by day. There were more than a hundred of the 2,000-stone officials who had been arrested and imprisoned, the old ones had not gone, and the new ones had come; the court officers had to deal with more than a thousand cases a year. In a major case, there were several hundred people who were implicated, arrested or testified, and there were dozens of people in minor cases; thousands of miles away, and hundreds of miles away, they had to come to confront.

古文：廷尉及中都官诏狱至六七万人，吏所增加，十万馀人。
现代文：廷尉和京中各官府崐因办理皇帝交下的案狱而逮捕的人达六七万人，再经过法官狱吏的牵连攀扯，增加到十万余人。
English: The number of people arrested by imperial officers and officials of various government offices in Beijing for handling the cases and prisons handed over by the emperor reached 670,000, and then, through the involvement of judges and prison officials, increased to more than 100,000 people.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上元封三年
现代文：元封三年冬季，十二月，打雷；天降冰雹，像马头一般大小。
English: In the winter of the third year of the Yuan dynasty, in December, there was thunder; hail fell from the sky, the size of a horse's head.

古文：冬，十二月，雷；雨雹，大如马头。上遣将军赵破奴击车师。破奴与轻骑七百馀先至，虏楼兰王，遂破车师，因举兵威以困乌孙、大宛之属。
现代文：汉武帝派将军赵破奴攻击西域车师国。赵破奴率轻骑兵七百余名先到西域，生擒楼兰王，然后大破车师国，并乘机以兵威困迫乌孙、大宛等国。
English: Emperor Hanwu sent General Zhao Bonu to attack the Western Regions Chariot Master Kingdom. Zhao Bonu led more than seven hundred light cavalrymen to the Western Regions first, and then attacked the Chariot Master Kingdom, and took the opportunity to use military power to oppress Usun, Dayuan and other countries.

古文：春，正月，甲申，封破奴为浞野侯。
现代文：春季，正月甲申，汉武帝封赵破奴为浞野侯。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Jiaxing, Emperor Hanwu made Zhao Bono the Prince of Shenyang.

古文：王恢佐破奴击楼兰，封恢为浩侯。
现代文：王恢因辅佐赵破奴攻袭楼兰国，被封为浩侯。
English: Wang Huai was given the title of "Grand Marquis" for assisting Zhao Bonu in attacking the State of Loulan.

古文：于是酒泉列亭障至玉门矣。
现代文：于是从酒泉到玉门都有了汉朝设立的边防要塞。
English: As a result, from Jiuquan to Yumen, there were border fortresses established by the Han Dynasty.

古文：初作角抵戏、鱼龙曼延之属。
现代文：角、鱼龙、曼延之类的杂技游戏开始兴起。
English: Acrobatic games such as horns, fish dragons, and Man Yan began to emerge.

古文：汉兵入朝鲜境，朝鲜王右渠发兵距险。
现代文：汉军进入朝鲜境内，朝鲜王卫右渠派兵占据险要之地进行抵抗。
English: The Han army entered the territory of Korea, and the Korean King Weizhong sent troops to occupy critical areas to resist.

古文：楼船将军将齐兵七千人先至王险。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆率领齐国军队七千人先行抵达王险。
English: General Loufeng led a total of seven thousand soldiers and reached Wang Riancheng first.

古文：右渠城守，窥知楼船军少，即出城击楼船；楼船军败散，遁山中十馀日，稍求退散卒，复聚。
现代文：卫右渠据城坚守，探知杨仆兵力单薄，便出城袭击杨仆。杨仆军兵败溃散，逃入山中十几天，后逐渐找回溃散的兵卒，重新聚集起来。
English: Wei Ruchu held fast to the city, and when he discovered that Yang Bu's forces were thin, he went out of the city to attack Yang Bu. Yang Bu's soldiers were defeated and scattered, and fled into the mountains for ten days, after which they gradually recovered the scattered soldiers and regrouped.

古文：左将军击朝鲜氵具水西军，未能破。
现代文：左将军荀彘率部攻击朝鲜水西面的军队，未能攻破。
English: General Zuo and his troops attacked the troops on the west side of the Korean Peninsula, but failed to break through.

古文：天子为两将未有利，乃使卫山因兵威往谕右渠。
现代文：汉武帝因为两位将军未能取胜，便派卫山前往朝鲜，用军事压力劝谕卫右渠归顺。
English: Since the two generals failed to achieve a military victory, the Son of Heaven sent Wei Shan to take advantage of their military prowess and go to the right channel.

古文：右渠见使者，顿首谢： 愿降，恐两将诈杀臣，今见信节，请复降。 
现代文：卫右渠会见卫山，叩头道歉，说道： 我愿意归降，但害怕两位将军用诈术杀我；如今见到天子信节，所以请求再次归降。 
English: Weizhong met with Weizhan, bowed his head in apology, and said, "I am willing to surrender, but I am afraid that the two generals will use trickery to kill me; now I have seen Tianzi Xinsi, so I ask to surrender again."

古文：遣太子入谢，献马五千匹，及馈军粮；人众万馀，持兵方渡氵具水。使者及左将军疑其为变，谓太子： 已服降，宜令人毋持兵。 
现代文：卫右渠派太子前往汉朝谢罪，并献马五千匹，又为汉军提供军粮。朝鲜太子率众一万余人，手持武器，将要渡过水，卫山和荀彘疑心要生出变故，便对太子说： 既然已经归降，应命你手下人不要携带兵器。 
English: The North Korean prince led more than ten thousand people, armed with weapons, and was about to cross the water. Weishan and Zou suspected that something was about to happen, so they said to the prince: Since you have surrendered, you should order your men not to carry weapons.

古文：太子亦疑使者、左将军诈杀之，遂不渡氵具水，复引归。
现代文：太子也怕卫山和荀彘用计杀他，于是不肯渡水，带人返回。
English: The prince was also afraid that Weishan and Zou would kill him by trickery, so he refused to cross the water and returned with someone.

古文：山还报天子，天子诛山。
现代文：卫山回京报告汉武帝，汉武帝将卫山诛杀。
English: Wei Shan returned to the capital to report to Tianzi, and Tianzi killed Wei Shan.

古文：左将军破氵具水上军，乃前至城下，围其西北，楼船亦往会，居城南。
现代文：荀彘攻破水岸上的朝鲜军队，于是向前推进，逼临王险城下，包围城西北。杨仆也率领部众前往会合，屯兵城南。
English: broke through the Korean army on the waterfront, and then pushed forward, forcing Wang Jing under the city and encircling the northwest of the city. Yang Mudu also led the troops to the meeting and stationed troops in the south of the city.

古文：右渠遂坚守城，数月未能下。
现代文：卫右渠坚决守城，汉军一连数月未能攻下。
English: The right canal then held on to Wangancheng. Months passed, and the Chinese army was unable to capture Wangancheng.

古文：左将军所将燕、代卒多劲悍，楼船将齐卒已尝败亡困辱，卒皆恐，将心惭，共围右渠，常持和节。
现代文：荀彘率领的燕、代地区兵卒大多强劲剽悍；而杨仆所率齐国兵卒因曾经遭到败亡困辱，全都心怀恐惧，将领也感到惭愧不安，所以在围困王险城时，常常主张和平解决。
English: The local soldiers led by Yan and Dai were mostly strong and brave; while the soldiers led by Yang and Qi were all afraid because they had been defeated and humiliated. The generals also felt ashamed and uneasy, so they often advocated a peaceful solution when they besieged Wanghuangcheng.

古文：左将军急击之。朝鲜大臣乃阴间使人私约降楼船，往来言尚未肯决。
现代文：荀彘督军猛攻，朝鲜大臣们就暗中派人与杨仆私下商议投降之事。使者往来磋商，还未肯作决定。
English: When the Kwantung Army stormed, the North Korean ministers secretly sent someone to secretly discuss the surrender with Yang Pu. The envoy went back and forth for consultations, but was still unwilling to make a decision.

古文：左将军数与楼船期战，楼船欲就其约，不会。
现代文：荀彘几次和杨仆商约共同作战的日期，但杨仆想与朝鲜私定和约，所以不与荀彘会合。
English: General Zuo had repeatedly agreed with General Lousen on the time of the siege of the city, but General Lousen wanted to fulfill his agreement with the North Korean minister as soon as possible, so he always did not join the division with General Zuo.

古文：左将军亦使人求间隙降下朝鲜，朝鲜不肯，心附楼船，以故两将不相能。
现代文：荀彘也派人寻找机会劝说朝鲜归降，而朝鲜不肯，而希望向杨仆投降，从而引起荀、杨两位将军的不和。
English: Xing also sent people to look for opportunities to persuade North Korea to surrender, but North Korea refused, hoping to surrender to Yang puppet, thus causing discord between the two generals Xing and Yang.

古文：左将军心意楼船前有失军罪，今与朝鲜私善，而又不降，疑其有反计，未敢发。
现代文：荀彘认为，杨仆先前曾经兵败，犯下丧失所属部队之罪，而今与朝鲜私相友善，而朝鲜又不归降，所以怀疑他有背叛的阴谋，但未敢发动。
English: Hao believed that Yang Pu had previously been defeated and had committed the crime of losing his unit, but now he was friendly with North Korea, and North Korea would not surrender, so he suspected him of having a treasonous plot, but he did not dare to launch it.

古文：天子以两将围城乖异，兵久不决，使济南太守公孙遂往正之，有便宜得以从事。
现代文：汉武帝因为荀彘、杨仆二人包围王险城后行动不一致，军队许久不决战，所以派济南太守公孙遂前往纠正，并授权公孙遂遇事可以相机行事。
English: Emperor Hanwu did not act in a consistent manner after the two of them encircled Wang Jingcheng, and the army did not decide to fight for a long time. Therefore, he sent Gongsun, the governor of Jinan Province, to rectify the situation, and authorized Gongsun to act as a camera in case of trouble.

古文：遂至，左将军曰： 朝鲜当下，久之不下者，楼船数期不会。 
现代文：公孙遂到崐达后，荀彘说： 朝鲜早就应当攻下；所以拖了这么久还未攻下，是因为楼船将军好几次不按照约定的日期会合。 
English: After Gongsun Sui arrived in Shunda, Zou said: North Korea should have been conquered long ago; the reason why it took so long to conquer it was because the general of the Lou ship did not meet several times according to the agreed date.

古文：具以素所意告，曰： 今如此不取，恐为大害。 
现代文：又将平时自己对杨仆的怀疑一一告诉公孙遂，说道： 现在这样还不先发制人，恐怕会成大祸。 
English: He also told Gongsun Sui his usual suspicions about Yang Min one by one, saying: If we don't act preemptively now, I'm afraid there will be a big disaster.

古文：遂亦以为然，乃以节召楼船将军入左将军营计事，即命左将军麾下执楼船将军，并其军。
现代文：公孙遂也同意荀彘的看法，便用天子符节召楼船将军杨仆来左将军营中议事，当即命左将军帐下武士将楼船将军逮捕，并兼并了其所属部队。
English: Therefore, Gongsun also agreed with Yao's opinion, so he summoned the general of the block ship, Yang Pu, to the middle of the left battalion for deliberation, and immediately ordered the samurai under the left general to arrest the general of the block ship, and annexed the troops he belonged to.

古文：以报天子，天子诛遂。
现代文：公孙遂将此事报告汉武帝，汉武帝将公孙遂杀死。
English: The grandson then reported the matter to Emperor Han Wudi, who then killed the grandson.

古文：左将军已并两军，即急击朝鲜。
现代文：左将军荀彘将两支部队合并后，随即加紧对朝鲜发动进攻。
English: General Zuo combined the armies of the two sides and tried his best to attack Korea.

古文：朝鲜相路人、相韩阴、尼谿相参、将军王唊相与谋曰： 始欲降楼船，楼船今执，独左将军并将，战益急，恐不能与战；王又不肯降。 
现代文：朝鲜国相路人、国相韩阴、尼相参、将军王等相互商议道： 当初打算向楼船将军投降，今楼船将军已被逮捕，只有左将军一人指挥汉军，攻击越来越猛烈，恐怕我方无法抵挡，而国王偏又不肯向左将军投降。 
English: The North Korean passers-by, Foreign Minister Han Yin, Nie Sang Sang, General Wang, and others discussed among themselves: At first, they had planned to surrender to General Loupen, but now General Loupen has been arrested, and only General Zuo is commanding the Chinese army. The attack is becoming more and more fierce. I'm afraid we won't be able to resist, but the king refuses to surrender to General Zuo.

古文：阴、唊、路人皆亡降汉，路人道死。
现代文：于是韩阴、王、路人都逃亡投向汉军大营，路人死于半途之中。
English: As a result, Han Yin, Wang, and passers-by all fled to the Chinese army camp, and passers-by died halfway.

古文：夏，尼谿参使人杀朝鲜王右渠来降。
现代文：夏季，尼相参派人杀死朝鲜王卫右渠，前来投降。
English: In the summer, Nyisangsan sent someone to kill the Korean King Weiju and came to surrender.

古文：王险城未下，故右渠之大臣成己又反，复攻吏。
现代文：汉军尚未开进王险城时，原卫右渠的大臣成己降而复叛，再次进攻汉朝官吏。
English: When the Han army had not yet entered Wang Yuancheng, the former Wei minister Cheng Ji surrendered and rebelled, once again attacking Han officials.

古文：左将军使右渠子长、降相路人之子最告谕其民。诛成己。
现代文：荀彘命卫右渠的儿子卫长、降相路人的儿子路最劝告朝鲜民众归顺汉朝，并诛杀成己。
English: Wei Chang, the son of Wei Juqu, who died in the battle, and Lu You, the son of Gu Xianglu, advised the Korean people to submit to the Han Dynasty, and then killed themselves.

古文：以故遂定朝鲜，为乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番四郡。
现代文：汉朝因此而平定朝鲜，设置乐浪、临屯、玄菟、真番四郡。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty subdued Korea and set up four counties: Le Lang, Lintun, Xuanzang and Zhenban.

古文：封参为澅清侯，阴为萩苴侯，唊为平州侯，长为几侯，最以父死颇有功，为涅阳侯。
现代文：封参为清侯，韩阴为苴侯，王为平州侯，卫长为几侯；路最的父亲路人为降汉而死，颇有功劳，封为涅阳侯。
English: He was given the titles of Qing vassal, Han Yin vassal, Wang vassal, Pingzhou vassal, and Wei Chang vassal. Lu's father, Lu, died for the Han Dynasty and was awarded the title of Neiyang vassal.

古文：左将军征至，坐争功相嫉乖计，弃市。
现代文：左将军荀彘被召回长安，汉武帝以争功相嫉、计谋乖戾的罪名将其当众斩首。
English: General Zuo Yao was recalled to the imperial court, where he was beheaded for the crime of competing for glory and violating the military plan.

古文：楼船将军亦坐兵至列口，当待左将军，擅先纵，失亡多，当诛，赎为庶人。
现代文：楼船将军杨仆也因当初兵至列口时，本应等待与左将军会合，却擅自先行，造成很大伤亡，其罪本应斩首，赎身后成为平民。
English: The general of the block of flats, Yang Pupu, should have waited for the meeting with General Zuo, but he went ahead without permission, causing a lot of casualties. His crime should have been beheaded, and he became a civilian after redeeming himself.

古文：班固曰：玄菟、乐浪，本箕子所封。
现代文：班固曰：玄菟、乐浪，本是箕子的封国。
English: Ban Gu said: Xuan Zang and Le Lang are originally the fiefdoms of Zangzi.

古文：昔箕子居朝鲜，教其民以礼义，田蚕织作，为民设禁八条，相杀，以当时偿杀；相伤，以谷偿；相盗者，男没入为其家奴，女为婢；欲自赎者人五十万，虽免为民，俗犹羞之，嫁娶无所售。
现代文：当初箕子居住在朝鲜，用礼义教导他的百姓，掌握种田、养蚕、纺织的方法，并为他们制定八条法令。凡杀人的，当即以本人性命相抵；伤人的，用谷物赔偿对方的损失；盗窃的，男子给被盗者做奴，女子做婢；想要自赎其罪的，一人要交赎金五十万钱，虽被免罪为平民，但按风俗仍被人看不起，想结婚都找不到对象。
English: At that time, Miao Zi lived in North Korea, teaching his people the etiquette and manners, mastering the methods of farming, raising silkworms and weaving, and formulating eight decrees for them. Anyone who killed someone would immediately pay with his own life; anyone who injured someone would compensate the other party's loss with grain; anyone who stole, the man would be a slave to the stolen person, and the woman would be a maid; anyone who wanted to atone for his sin, would have to pay a ransom of half a million dollars. Although he was exonerated as a civilian, he was still looked down upon by people according to custom, and he could not

古文：是以其民终不相盗，无门户之闭，妇人贞信不淫辟。
现代文：因此，当地百姓始终不偷不盗，不必为防偷盗而关门闭户；女子都守贞节，没有乱行为。
English: Therefore, the local people always do not steal and do not have to close their doors to prevent theft; women are chaste and do not behave disorderly.

古文：其田野饮食以笾豆，都邑颇放效吏，往往以杯器食。
现代文：在乡间，人们都用竹器和木器盛放食物；在城市中，人们颇仿效官吏的作法，往往用杯盘器皿盛放食物。
English: In the countryside, people use bamboo and wooden utensils to hold food; in the city, people follow the example of officials and often use cups and plates to hold food.

古文：郡初取殒于辽东，吏见民无闭臧，及贾人往者，夜则为盗，俗稍益薄，今于犯禁浸多，至六十馀条。
现代文：郡的官员，最初是来自辽东，其中有些人和前来经商的商人看到这里的老百姓不闭门户，便在夜间进行偷盗，使当地淳朴的风俗渐遭破坏，以致如今犯禁者日益增多，法令也增加到六十余条。
English: County officials, originally from Liaodong, some of whom and businessmen who came to do business saw that the people here did not close the door, they stole at night, so that the local simple customs were gradually destroyed, so that now the number of violators is increasing, and the decree has increased to more than sixty.

古文：可贵哉，仁贤之化也！
现代文：由此可见，仁人圣贤的教化是多么的可贵啊！
English: How precious, the enlightenment of benevolence!

古文：然东夷天性柔顺，异于三方之外。
现代文：然而，东夷民族天性柔顺，与南、西、北三方各民族不同。
English: However, the Eastern Yi people are naturally docile, which is different from the peoples of the south, west and north.

古文：故孔子悼道不行，设浮桴于海，欲居九夷，有以也夫！
现代文：所以孔子哀痛他的道理不能得到推行时，打算乘筏出海，要到九夷地区去居住，这种想法是有根据的。
English: Therefore, when Confucius lamented that his theory could not be implemented, he planned to go out to sea on a raft and go to live in the Jiujiang area. This idea is well-founded.

古文：秋，七月，胶西于王端薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，胶西王刘端去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Duan, King of Jiaoxi, passed away.

古文：武都氐反，分徙酒泉。
现代文：武都郡氐族叛乱，汉朝将他们分批迁往酒泉。
English: The Han Dynasty moved them to Jiuquan in batches after the rebellion of the Yi people in Wudu County.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上元封四年
现代文：元封四年冬季，十月，汉武帝巡游至雍，祭祀于五。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, in October, Emperor Hanwu went on a tour to Yong, and the sacrifice was held on the 5th.

古文：冬，十月，上行幸雍，祠五畤。通回中道，遂北出萧关。历独鹿、鸣泽，自代而还，幸河东。
现代文：回中的道路已然打通，于是汉武帝北出萧关，经独鹿山、鸣泽湖，到代地返回、途中巡察了河东郡。
English: The main road had already been opened, so Emperor Hanwu went from the north to Shouguan, passed through Lushan Mountain and Lake Mingze, and returned to his place. On the way, he inspected Hedong County.

古文：春，三月，祠后土，赦汾阴、夏阳、中都死罪以下。
现代文：春季，三月，汉武帝祭祀后土神，下令赦免汾阴、夏阳、中都地区死刑以下囚犯。
English: In the spring, in March, after Emperor Hanwu had offered sacrifices to the earth god, he issued an order to pardon prisoners who had been sentenced to death or less in the regions of Shuyin, Xiayang, and Zhongdu.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏季，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：匈奴自卫、霍度幕以来，希复为寇，远徙北方，休养士马，习射猎，数使使于汉，好辞甘言求请和亲。
现代文：匈奴自卫青、霍去病率军穿越大沙漠以来，很少再对汉朝进行侵扰，迁往北方很远的地方，休养士卒马匹，进行射猎训练，并多次派使臣到汉朝来，用甜言蜜语请求和亲。
English: Since the Huns led their armies across the great desert at the time of Weiqing and Huo Dexia, they rarely intruded on the Han Dynasty again. They moved to a place far away in the north to recuperate their soldiers and horses, conduct hunting training, and repeatedly sent envoys to the Han Dynasty to use sweet words to ask for reconciliation.

古文：汉使北地人王乌等窥匈奴，乌从其俗，去节入穹庐，单于爱之，佯许甘言，为遣其太子入汉为质。
现代文：汉朝派北地人王乌等前去窥探匈奴的虚实，王乌遵从匈奴的风俗，放下使者的旄节，自己进入匈奴单于的毡帐之中。单于很喜欢他，假意用好听的话许诺，要为王乌派匈奴太子到汉朝做人质。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Wang Wu, a man from the North, to spy out the true identity of the Xiongnu. Wang Wu followed the customs of the Xiongnu, put aside the envoy's oath of allegiance, and entered into the Xiongnu's oath of allegiance himself. The Xiongnu liked him very much, and pretended to promise with pleasant words to send the Xiongnu prince to the Han Dynasty as a hostage for Wang Wu.

古文：汉使杨信于匈奴，信不肯从其俗，单于曰： 故约汉尝遣翁主，给缯絮食物有品，以和亲，而匈奴亦不扰边。
现代文：汉朝又派杨信为使者前往匈奴。杨信不肯遵从匈奴的风俗，单于说： 据从前的盟约，汉朝曾将其藩王的女儿嫁到匈奴来，供给一定数量的缯絮、食物，用这种方式和亲；匈奴也不再侵扰汉朝的边境。
English: The Han Dynasty also sent Yang Xin as an envoy to the Xiongnu. Yang Xin refused to follow the customs of the Xiongnu, simply saying: According to the previous treaty, the Han Dynasty had married the daughter of its lord to the Xiongnu, provided a certain amount of filth and food, and in this way made peace; the Xiongnu would no longer invade the border of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今乃欲反古，令吾太子为质，无几矣。 
现代文：如今却要违反以往的盟约，让我的太子去做人质，那还能剩下什么呢？ 
English: Now, in violation of the ancient covenant, my prince has been taken hostage. There is no hope for a reconciliation.

古文：信既归，汉又使王乌往，而单于复谄以甘言，欲多得汉财物，绐谓王乌曰： 吾欲入汉见天子，面相约为兄弟。 
现代文：杨信回来后，汉朝再次派王乌前往匈奴，单于又用好话献媚，希望多得到汉朝的财物，骗王乌说： 我想亲自到汉朝去面见天子，相互结为兄弟。 
English: After Yang Xin's return, the Han Dynasty again sent Wang Wu to the Xiongnu, but he only flattered the Xiongnu with kind words, hoping to get more Han Dynasty property. He deceived Wang Wu and said, "I want to go to the Han Dynasty in person to meet the Son of Heaven and become a brother to each other."

古文：王乌归报汉，汉为单于筑邸于长安。
现代文：王乌回来后报告汉武帝，汉武帝下令在长安为单于修建宫邸。
English: On his return, Wang Wu reported to the Han Dynasty, which built an official residence in Chang'an for him.

古文：匈奴曰： 非得汉贵人使，吾不与诚语。 
现代文：匈奴又表示： 除非汉朝派地位尊贵的人作为使者前来，否则我们不说实话。 
English: The Xiongnu said, "I don't see a noble person from the Han Dynasty acting as an envoy. I don't think he's telling the truth."

古文：匈奴使其贵人至汉，病，汉予药，欲愈之，不幸而死。
现代文：匈奴派地位尊贵的人到汉朝来，来人生了病，汉朝给他药吃，想治好他的病，但他却不幸死去。
English: The Xiongnu sent one of his nobles on a mission to the Han Dynasty, and he fell ill. The Han Dynasty gave him medicine to try to cure his illness, but unfortunately he died.

古文：汉使路充国佩二千石印绶往使，因送其丧，厚葬直数千金，曰： 此汉贵人也。 
现代文：于是，汉朝派路充国佩带二千石官员的印绶，出使匈奴，顺便将匈奴使臣灵柩送回，并致送丰厚的丧葬费，价值数千金，又对匈奴介绍路充国说： 这是汉朝地位尊贵的人。 
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent Lu Chong Guo to carry the seal of a 2,000-koku official, and dispatched an envoy to the Xiongnu. He also sent back the casket of the Xiongnu envoy, and sent rich funeral expenses worth thousands of gold. He also introduced Lu Chong Guo to the Xiongnu, saying: This is a person of high status in the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于以为汉杀吾贵使者，乃留路充国不归。
现代文：单于认为是汉朝将其尊贵的使臣杀了，所以将路充国扣留匈奴，不放他回国。
English: Just because he thought that the Han Dynasty had killed my distinguished envoy, he detained Luo Chengguo and would not let him return to the Han Dynasty.

古文：诸所言者，单于特空绐王乌，殊无意入汉及遣太子。
现代文：以前所说的话，都是单于故意用空言欺骗王乌，他根本就无意到汉朝去，也无意派太子去。
English: What he had said before was just to deliberately deceive Wang Wu with empty words. He had no intention of going to the Han Dynasty at all, nor did he intend to send the crown prince.

古文：于是匈奴数使奇兵侵犯汉边。
现代文：因此匈奴屡次派出奇兵，侵犯汉朝边界。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu repeatedly sent strange soldiers to encroach on the Han Dynasty border.

古文：乃拜郭昌为拔胡将军，及浞野侯屯朔方以东，备胡。
现代文：于是，汉武帝任命郭昌为拔胡将军，与浞野侯赵破奴屯兵于朔方以东地区防备匈奴。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu appointed Guo Chang to be the general of Bahu, and together with Zhao, the Marquis of Shenyang, he defeated the Xiongnu and guarded the area east of Shuo Fang from the Xiongnu.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上元封五年
现代文：元封五年冬季，汉武帝向南巡游，到达盛唐，遥望九疑山，祭祀虞舜。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu went on a tour to the south and arrived at the height of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：冬，上南巡狩，至于盛唐，望祀虞舜于九疑。
现代文：又登县天柱山，然后从寻阳乘船游长江，在江中亲自射蛟，并将其捕获。
English: He also climbed Tianzhu Mountain in the county, and then took a boat from Xuanyang to swim the Yangtze River. He personally shot and caught a dragonfly in the river.

古文：登灊天柱山，自寻阳浮江，亲射蛟江中，获之。舳舻千里，薄枞阳而出，遂北至琅邪，并海，所过礼祠其名山大川。春，三月，还至太山，增封。
现代文：汉武帝的船队首尾衔接，连绵千里，接近枞阳时弃船登陆，向北行至琅邪郡，沿海前行，一路祭祀名山大川。春季，三月，汉武帝于归途中经过泰山，命人将祭天神坛增大。
English: Emperor Hanwu's fleet of ships sailed thousands of miles back-to-back, abandoning the ship when approaching Shenyang. They sailed north to Shiyan County and traveled along the coast, offering sacrifices to the famous mountain river. In the spring, in March, Emperor Hanwu passed Mount Taishan on his way back, and ordered the altar of the gods to be enlarged.

古文：甲子，始祀上帝于明堂，配以高祖，因朝诸侯王、列侯，受郡、国计。
现代文：甲子，汉武帝第一次在明堂中祭祀上天，将汉高祖刘邦作为配祀，又命各诸侯王、列侯前来朝见，接受各郡、国记载户口赋税的薄册。
English: For the first time, Emperor Hanwu offered a sacrifice to the heavens in the Ming Hall, and made Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han dynasty, the co-sacrificer. He also ordered all princes and vassals to come to the imperial court to receive a booklet of tax records from each county and country.

古文：夏，四月，赦天下，所幸县毋出今年租赋。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉武帝下令大赦天下，凡此次巡游经过的各县一律免除今年的田租、赋税。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Hanwu issued a general amnesty to the whole country, and all the counties that the parade passed through were exempted from this year's field rent and tax.

古文：还，幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：回京后，巡幸甘泉宫，祭祀于泰。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he made a tour of Gansen-gu Shrine and performed a religious service in Thailand.

古文：长平烈侯卫青薨。
现代文：长平侯卫青去世。
English: Changping Houweiqing passed away.

古文：起冢，象庐山。
现代文：汉武帝为他修建了一座像庐山一样形状的坟墓。
English: Emperor Hanwu built a tomb for him in the shape of a dragonfly.

古文：上既攘却胡、越，开地斥境，乃置交趾、朔方之州，及冀、幽、并、兗、徐、青、扬、荆、豫、益、凉等州，凡十三部，皆置刺史焉。
现代文：汉武帝已经驱逐了北方的匈奴，消灭了南方的越族政权，开疆拓土，于是设置交趾、朔方二州，以及冀州、幽州、并州、兖州、徐州、青州、扬州、荆州、豫州、益州、凉州，共将全国划分为十三州，全都设刺史。
English: Emperor Hanwu had already expelled the Huns from the north, eliminated the Viet regime from the south, and opened up the country. Therefore, he set up the two states of Jiaozuo and Shuofang, as well as Jizhou, Yuzhou, Bianzhou, Zhangzhou, Xuzhou, Qingzhou, Yangzhou, Jingzhou, Yuzhou, Yizhou, and Liangzhou, and divided the country into thirteen states, all of which have their own history.

古文：上以名臣文武欲尽，乃下诏曰： 盖有非常之功，必待非常之人。
现代文：汉武帝因朝中有名的文武大臣快要没有了，所以颁布诏书，求取贤才： 凡是非同寻常的功业，必须等待非同寻常的人才去完成。
English: Emperor Hanwu was about to lose his famous minister of literature and military affairs, so he issued an edict calling for talent: Any extraordinary work must wait for extraordinary talent to complete it.

古文：故马或奔踶而致千里，士或有负俗之累而立功名。
现代文：所以有的马虽然凶暴不驯，却能一口气奔驰千里；有的士人虽然遭到世俗的诟骂，却能建功立业。
English: Therefore, some horses, although ferocious and unruly, can gallop thousands of miles in a single breath; some scholars, although subjected to worldly abuse, can make achievements.

古文：夫泛驾之马，跅弛之士，亦在御之而已。
现代文：无论是容易翻车之马，还是放荡不羁之士，都只看如何驾御而已。
English: Whether it is an easy-to-roll-over horse, or a debauched person, it only depends on how to drive.

古文：其令州、郡察吏、民有茂才、异等可为将、相及使绝国者。 
现代文：命令各州、郡官长考察本地官吏和一般百姓中，是否有才干优秀或不同凡俗，能够胜任将相之职，或出使遥远国家的人，保荐给朝廷。 
English: The governors of the states and counties were ordered to examine local officials and common people to see if any of them had superior or unusual talents, and if they were capable of performing the duties of a shogun, or of sending someone from a faraway country, and recommending them to the imperial court.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上元封六年
现代文：元封六年冬季，汉武帝巡游回中地区。春季，兴建首山宫。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu returned to the central region. In the spring, the first mountain palace was built.

古文：冬，上行幸回中。春，作首山宫。
现代文：三月，汉武帝巡游河东地区，祭祀后土神，赦免汾阴地区死罪以下囚犯。
English: In March, Emperor Hanwu toured the Hedong region, where he offered sacrifices to the deity Hou Tu, and pardoned prisoners in the Shuyin region who had been sentenced to death or less.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土，赦汾阴殊死以下。汉既通西南夷，开五郡，欲地接以前通大夏，岁遣使十馀辈出此初郡，皆闭昆明，为所杀，夺币物。
现代文：汉朝打通西南夷之后，增设五郡，希望在这一带找出一条通往大夏国的道路，每年都要派出十几批使者，从这些新郡出发，但都被困在昆明，使者被杀，财物被抢。
English: After the Han Dynasty opened the Southwest Yiwu, five counties were added, hoping to find a way to the Great Xia Kingdom in this area. Every year, more than a dozen groups of emissaries were sent to set out from these new counties, but they were all trapped in Kunming. The emissaries were killed and their property was robbed.

古文：于是天子赦京师亡命，令从军，遣拔胡将军郭昌将以击之，斩首数十万。
现代文：于是汉武帝赦免京师的死罪之徒，命他们从军，派拔胡将军郭昌率领前往昆明地区进行征讨，共斩杀数十万人。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu pardoned the capital offenders of the Beijing Division, ordered them to join the army, and sent Hu General Guo Chang to the Kunming region to conduct a conscription, killing hundreds of thousands of people.

古文：后复遣使，竟不得通。
现代文：可是以后再派出使者，到底还是不能通过此地。
English: Later, another messenger was sent, but he was not able to pass through.

古文：秋，大旱，蝗。
现代文：秋季，大旱，并发生蝗灾。
English: Autumn, drought, locusts.

古文：乌孙使者见汉广大，归报其国，其国乃益重汉。
现代文：乌孙使臣看到汉朝地域广大，回国后向其国王报告，乌孙于是更加重视与汉朝的关系。
English: Seeing the vast territory of the Han Dynasty, the Uson envoy reported to his king after returning to China. Uson then paid more attention to the relationship with the Han Dynasty.

古文：匈奴闻乌孙与汉通，怒，欲击之。
现代文：匈奴听说乌孙与汉朝建立联系，感到恼怒，准备出兵攻打乌孙；而其旁边的大宛、月氏等国也都服从汉朝。
English: When the Xiongnu heard that the Wusun had established contact with the Han Dynasty, they felt angry and prepared to send troops to attack the Wusun; while the neighboring Dawan, Yue and other countries also obeyed the Han Dynasty.

古文：又其旁大宛、月氏之属皆事汉，乌孙于是恐，使使愿得尚汉公主，为昆弟。
现代文：乌孙国王害怕匈奴对其发动攻击，派使臣向汉朝表示愿意娶汉朝公主为妻，与汉结为兄弟。
English: King Wusun was afraid that the Xiongnu would attack him, so he sent an envoy to the Han Dynasty to express his willingness to marry a Han Dynasty princess and become brothers with the Han Dynasty.

古文：天子与群臣议，许之。
现代文：汉武帝与群臣商议，决定同意乌孙王的请求。
English: Emperor Hanwu deliberated with his courtiers and decided to agree to King Wusun's request.

古文：乌孙以千匹马往聘汉女。
现代文：于是，乌孙王以一千匹马作为聘礼，派人去迎接汉朝公主。
English: As a result, King Wusun sent someone to meet the Han Dynasty princess with a thousand horses as a betrothal gift.

古文：汉以江都王建女细君为公主，往妻乌孙，赠送甚盛；乌孙王昆莫以为右夫人。
现代文：汉武帝封江都王刘建的女儿刘细君为公主，嫁给乌孙王，并赠以十分丰盛的陪嫁；乌孙王昆莫封汉公主为右夫人。
English: Liu Xijun, the daughter of Emperor Hanwu's vassal Liu Jian, the capital of the Yangtze River, became a princess and married King Wusun, and was given a very rich bride; King Wusun Kunmo made Han Princess his right-hand woman.

古文：匈奴亦遣女妻昆莫，以为左夫人。
现代文：匈奴也嫁给乌孙王一女，被封为左夫人。
English: Xiongnu also married a daughter of King Wusun and was named Lady Zuo.

古文：公主自治宫室居，岁时一再与昆莫会，置酒饮食。
现代文：汉朝公主自建宫室居住，一年四季于乌孙王见面一两次，在一起饮酒吃饭。
English: Han dynasty princesses lived in a self-built palace, and met once or twice a year with King Wusun, drinking and eating together.

古文：昆莫年老，言语不通，公主悲愁思归，天子而怜之，间岁遣使者以帷帐锦绣给遗焉。
现代文：由于乌孙王年老，语言又不通，所以公主悲伤忧愁，思念家乡。汉武帝听说后很可怜她，每隔一年派使臣给她送去锦帐、绸缎等物。
English: As King Wusun was old and did not understand the language, the princess was sad and sorrowful and missed her hometown. Emperor Hanwu felt sorry for her when he heard about it, and sent envoys every other year to send her brocade, silk and other things.

古文：昆莫曰： 我老， 欲使其孙岑娶尚公主。
现代文：乌孙王对汉公主说： 我年纪已老。 想让公主嫁给他的孙子岑娶军须靡。
English: King Wusun said to Princess Han, "I am too old, and it would take too much effort to get the princess to marry his grandson Yao.

古文：公主不听，上书言状。
现代文：汉公主不肯依从，并上书汉武帝报告此事。
English: Princess Han refused to comply, and wrote to Emperor Wu of Han to report the matter.

古文：天子报曰： 从其国俗，欲与乌孙共灭胡。 
现代文：汉武帝回复她说： 你应当遵从乌孙国的风俗，因为崐我国希望与乌孙共灭匈奴。 
English: Emperor Hanwu replied to her, "You should follow the customs of the Wusun Kingdom, because our country hopes to work with the Wusun to exterminate the Xiongnu."

古文：岑娶遂妻公主。
现代文：军须靡终于娶了汉公主。
English: Jun Subai finally married the Han princess.

古文：昆莫死，岑娶代立，为昆弥。
现代文：昆莫去世后，其孙军须靡即位，号为昆弥王。
English: After the death of Kunmo, his grandson Shumai ascended to the throne and was called King Kunmi.

古文：是时，汉使西逾葱岭，抵安息。
现代文：此时，汉朝使者向西越过葱岭，抵达安息国。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty emissaries crossed the Qiu Ling to the west and arrived in the Land of Rest.

古文：安息发使，以大鸟卵及黎轩善眩人献于汉，及诸小国驩潜、大益、车姑师、扜冞、苏Ε之属，皆随汉使献见天子，天子大悦。西国使更来更去，天子每巡狩海上，悉从外国客，大都、多人则过之，散财帛以赏赐，厚具以饶给之，以览示汉富厚焉。
现代文：安息国也派出使者，并将大鸟蛋和精通魔术的黎轩人作为礼品献给汉朝。
English: The country of peace also sent an envoy, and presented the large bird's egg and the Lixuan people, who were proficient in magic, as gifts to the Han Dynasty.

古文：大角抵，出奇戏、诸怪物，多聚观者。
现代文：还进行大规模角抵游戏，演出奇戏，展示各种怪物等，聚集许多人观看。
English: There will also be a large-scale arrival game, a magic show, a display of various monsters, and many people will gather to watch.

古文：行赏赐，酒池肉林，令外国客遍观名仓库府藏之积，见汉之广大，倾骇之。
现代文：每逢赏赐，都要大摆酒宴，筑池蓄酒，悬肉为林；又让外国宾客到处参观各个仓库中储存的物品，以显示汉朝的广大富强，使他们倾慕惊骇。
English: Every time a reward was given, there would be a grand wine banquet, the Tsukiji pond would be used to store wine, and the meat would be hung up as a forest. Foreign guests were also allowed to visit the items stored in various warehouses to show the vast wealth and strength of the Han Dynasty and make them admire and be amazed.

古文：大宛左右多蒲萄，可以为酒；多苜蓿，天马嗜之；汉使采其实以来，天子种之于离宫别观旁，极望。
现代文：大宛周围盛产葡萄，可以造酒；还盛产苜蓿，大宛出的天马最喜欢吃；汉使将葡萄、苜蓿的果实采集带回，汉武帝大量种在行宫附近，一眼望不到头。
English: The area around Dawan is rich in grapes, which can be used to make wine; it is also rich in camphor, which is a favorite food of the Heavenly Horse; the Han emissaries brought back the fruits of grapes and camphor. Emperor Wudi planted a large number of them near the palace, and you couldn't see his head at all.

古文：然西域以近匈奴，常畏匈奴使，待之过于汉使焉。
现代文：然而，因西域各国靠近匈奴，常常对匈奴使者怀有畏惧，对他们比对汉使更为恭顺。
English: However, because the countries of the Western Regions were close to the Huns, they often feared the Hun emissaries and were more obedient to them than to the Han envoys.

古文：是岁，匈奴乌维单于死，子乌师庐立，年少，号 儿单于 。
现代文：这一年，匈奴乌维单于去世，其子乌师庐即位，年纪幼小，号称儿单于。
English: In this year, the Hun Uwijitan died, and his son Ushijun ascended to the throne. He was very young, and was known as the son of Uwijitan.

古文：自此之后，单于益西北徙，左方兵直云中，右方直酒泉、敦煌郡。
现代文：从此以后，匈奴单于更向西北方向迁徙；其左翼兵力抵达云中一带，右翼兵力抵达酒泉、敦煌郡地区。
English: From then on, the Xiongnu migrated further to the northwest; its left-wing troops arrived in the Yunchu area, and its right-wing troops arrived in the Jiuquan and Dunhuang counties.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上太初元年冬，十月，上行幸泰山。
现代文：太初元年冬季，十月，汉武帝巡游泰山。十一月甲子朔清晨，冬至。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the winter, in October, Emperor Hanwu was on a tour of Mount Tai. In November, in the early morning, at the winter solstice.

古文：十一月，甲子朔旦，冬至，祠上帝于明堂。东至海上，考入海及方士求神者莫验；然益遣，冀遇之。
现代文：汉武帝在明堂祭祀上天。然后东到海滨，考查入海寻仙和方士求神的结果，发现没有一个人的话应验。
English: Emperor Hanwu offered sacrifices to the heavens at Myeongdong. Then he went east to the seashore and examined the results of the sea search for immortals and the prayers of the priests to the gods, and found that no one's words had been fulfilled.

古文：乙酉，柏梁台灾。
现代文：然而武帝却派出更多的人，希望能够遇到神仙。
English: On November 23rd, a fire broke out in Bai Liang Tai.

古文：十二月，甲午朔，上亲禅高里，祠后土，临勃海，将以望祀蓬莱之属，冀至殊廷焉。
现代文：乙酉，柏梁台遭火灾。十二月甲午朔，汉武帝在高里山亲自祭祀地神，又祭后土神，然后来到渤海边，准备遥祭蓬莱等仙山，希望能亲身到达神仙所在的仙庭。
English: In the early afternoon of December, Emperor Hanwu personally sacrificed the earth god and the earth god in Mount Gaoli, and then came to the coast of the Bohai Sea to prepare for the distant sacrifice of Penglai and other fairy mountains, hoping to personally reach the fairy garden where the gods were located.

古文：春，上还，以柏梁灾，故朝诸侯，受计于甘泉。甘泉作诸侯邸。
现代文：春季，汉武帝回返长安，因柏梁台失火，所以在甘泉宫接受各诸侯王的朝拜和各郡、国载录户口，赋税的簿册。在甘泉修建诸侯王宫邸。
English: In the spring, Emperor Hanwu returned to Chang'an. Due to the fire of Bai Liang Tai, he received the worship of all princes and kings in Ganquan Palace, and recorded the household registration and tax books of each county and country. He built the princely palace residence in Ganquan.

古文：越人勇之曰： 越俗，有火灾复起屋，必以大，用胜服之。 
现代文：有个名叫勇之的越族人说： 按照越族的风俗，如果火灾之后再建房屋，一定要比原来的大，以镇服火灾。 
English: According to the custom of the Yue people, if a house is rebuilt after a fire, it must be larger than the original, and the fire must be extinguished.

古文：于是作建章宫，度为千门万户。
现代文：于是汉武帝下令兴建建章宫，计有千门万户。
English: As a result, Jianzhang Palace was built, thousands of doors were designed, and the height of the vestibule exceeded that of Weiyang Palace.

古文：其东则凤阙，高二十馀丈；其西则唐中，数十里虎圈；其北治大池，渐台高二十馀丈，命曰太液池，中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁，象海中神山、龟鱼之属；其南有玉堂、璧门、大鸟之属。
现代文：东面为凤阙，高二十余丈。西面为唐中，有方圆数十里的养虎园。北面挖一大池，命名为太液池，池中渐台高二十余丈，还有蓬莱、方丈、瀛洲、壶梁等处胜景，象征海中的神山和龟鱼之类。南面建有玉堂、璧门、大鸟像等。
English: To the east is Fengyao, which is more than 20 meters high. To the west is Tangzhong, which has a tiger breeding park with a circumference of dozens of miles. To the north is a large pond, named Taiyue Pond, which is more than 20 meters high, and there are scenic spots such as Penglai, Hojo, Zhouzhou, and Huliang, symbolizing the sacred mountain and turtle fish in the sea. To the south is the Jade Hall, Bi Gate, Big Bird Statue, etc.

古文：立神明台、井幹楼，度五十丈，辇道相属焉。
现代文：另外，建章宫中还修有神明台、井干楼、各高五十丈。各景之间有皇帝专用的辇道相连接。
English: In addition, in the Jianzhang Palace, there is also a Shinmeidai and a Jingan Building, each of which is 50 meters high. There is a passageway dedicated to the emperor between each scene.

古文：大中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等言： 历纪坏废，宜改正朔。 
现代文：大中大夫公孙卿、壶遂、太史令司马迁等上奏说： 历法、纪年都已坏废，应当改正朔。 
English: The grand vice-chancellors Gongsunqing, Jugsui and Taishi ordered Sima Qian and others to report: The calendar and the calendar have been broken and should be corrected.

古文：上诏兒宽与博士赐等共议，以为宜用夏正。
现代文：汉武帝命宽与名叫赐的博士等共同商议，认为应使用夏胡历法。
English: Emperor Hanwu and the doctor who gave his name to the calendar discussed the matter and agreed that the Xia Hu calendar should be used.

古文：夏，五月，诏卿、遂、迁等共造汉《太初历》，以正月为岁首，色上黄，数用五，定官名，协音律，定宗庙百官之仪，以为典常，垂之后世云。
现代文：夏季，五月，汉武帝下诏，命公孙卿、壶遂、司马迁等共同制定汉朝《太初历》，以正月为一年的开始，崇尚黄颜色，以 五 为吉祥数字，重新定官名，协调音律，制定宗庙、百官的仪礼，作为国家常规，流传后世。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Hanwu issued an edict, ordering Sun Quan, Jue Sui, Sima Qian, and others to jointly formulate the Han Dynasty's "Great New Year's Calendar," with the first month as the beginning of the year, advocating the yellow color, with five as the auspicious number, re-determining the official name, coordinating the melody, and formulating the rituals of the ancestral temple and the hundred officials, as a national standard, passed down to future generations.

古文：匈奴儿单于好杀伐，国人不安；又有天灾，畜多死。
现代文：匈奴儿单于性好杀戮，使国中百姓不安，又发生天灾，很多牲畜死亡。
English: The Xiongnu's eagerness to kill has made the people of the country uneasy. Natural disasters have also occurred, and many livestock have died.

古文：左大都尉使人间告汉曰： 我欲杀单于降汉，汉远，即兵来迎我，我即发。 
现代文：匈奴左大都尉派人偷偷对汉朝说： 我打算杀死单于，归降汉朝，但汉朝路远，如能派兵来接应，我马上就可以发动。 
English: Captain Zuo of the Xiongnu secretly sent a message to the Han Dynasty, saying, "I plan to kill Xian Yu and surrender to the Han Dynasty, but the Han Dynasty is far away. If I can send troops to meet them, I can launch the attack immediately."

古文：上乃遣因杅将军公孙敖筑塞外受降城以应之。
现代文：于是汉武帝派因将军公孙敖在塞外修建受降城，驻兵接应。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu sent his general, Gongsun Rong, to build a city to accept the surrender outside of Tibet, and stationed troops there to receive the surrender.

古文：秋，八月，上行幸安定。
现代文：秋季，八月，汉武帝巡游安定郡。
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Hanwu went on a tour of Anding County.

古文：汉使入西域者言： 宛有善马，在贰师城，匿不肯与汉使。 
现代文：汉朝派到西域去的使臣奏道： 大宛有好马，藏在贰师城中，不肯献给汉使。 
English: The envoy sent by the Han Dynasty to the Western Regions sang: There is a good horse in Dawan, hidden in the city of Jinshi, which they refused to give to the Han envoy.

古文：天子使壮士车令等持千金及金马以请之。
现代文：于是汉武帝派壮士车令等带着黄金千斤和金马前往大宛，请求交换。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu sent the valiant chariot commanders and others with gold ingots and gold horses to Dayuan to request an exchange.

古文：宛王与其群臣谋曰： 汉去我远，而盐水中数败，出其北有胡寇，出其南乏水草，又且往往而绝邑，乏食者多，汉使数百人为辈来，而常乏食，死者过半，是安能致大军乎！
现代文：大宛国王与其群臣商议道： 汉朝离我国很远，而盐中道路艰难，屡屡致人死亡；如从此北路来，有匈奴骚扰；从南路来，没有水草，又往往缺少城郭、食粮。汉朝派数百人作为使团前来，还常因缺乏粮食死亡过半，这怎能派大军前来呢！
English: King Dawang and his courtiers deliberated: The Han Dynasty is far away from our country, and the road through the salt is difficult and often leads to death. If you come from the north, you will be harassed by the Huns. If you come from the south, there is no water and grass, and often there is a lack of fortifications and food. The Han Dynasty sent hundreds of people as a mission, and often more than half of them died due to lack of food. How can it send a large army to come?

古文：无奈我何。
现代文：所以汉朝对我们无可奈何。
English: Therefore, the Han Dynasty had no choice but to deal with us.

古文：贰师马，宛宝马也。 
现代文：贰师城的马，是我们大宛国的宝马。 
English: The horse of Shinshicheng is the BMW of our great destination country.

古文：遂不肯予汉使。
现代文：于是不肯给汉使。
English: refused to give the Han Dynasty envoy.

古文：汉使怒，妄言，椎金马而去。
现代文：汉使恼怒，破口大骂，用锤击破金马而去。
English: The envoy of the Han Dynasty became angry and casually threatened to smash the golden horse and leave.

古文：宛贵人怒曰： 汉使至轻我！ 
现代文：大宛众贵族生气地说： 汉使太轻视我们！ 
English: Dawan aristocratic officials said angrily: The Han Dynasty emissary despised us too much!

古文：遣汉使去，令其东边郁成王遮攻，杀汉使，取其财物。
现代文：让汉使离去，然后命驻守东部边境的郁成王率兵拦截，杀死汉使，夺取了汉使携带的财物。
English: He ordered the Han envoys to leave the great destination country, and let the shackled Yu Cheng Wang stop them, kill the Han envoys and seize their property.

古文：于是天子大怒。
现代文：汉武帝大怒。
English: Emperor Hanwu was furious.

古文：诸尝使宛姚定汉等言： 宛兵弱，诚以汉兵不过三千人，强弩射之，可尽虏矣。 
现代文：曾经出使大宛的姚定汉等奏道： 大宛军事力量薄弱，只要派去三千人马，用强弩射杀，就可将其全部俘获。 
English: Yao Dinghan, who once sent an envoy to Dayuan, and others said: Dayuan's military strength is weak. As long as they send three thousand horses and shoot them with strong spears, they can capture all of them.

古文：天子尝使浞野侯以七百骑虏楼兰王，以定汉等言为然；而欲侯宠姬李氏，乃拜李夫人兄广利为贰师将军，发属国六千骑及郡国恶少年数万人，以往伐宛。
现代文：汉武帝因曾经派浞野侯赵破奴率七百骑兵生擒过楼兰王，认为姚定汉等说得对；况且，汉武帝此时正想封宠姬李夫人家为侯，于是任命李夫人的哥哥李广利为贰师将军，征发附属国骑兵六千及各郡、国品行恶劣的青年数万人，前往征讨大宛国。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought that Yao Dinghan and others were right because he had once sent seven hundred horsemen led by the warlord Zhao Bonu to capture King Loulan alive. Moreover, Emperor Hanwu wanted to make Lady Li's brother Li Guangli the warlord at this time, so he appointed Lady Li's brother Li Guangli as the general of the cavalry division, and conscripted six thousand attached cavalrymen and tens of thousands of young people with bad national character from all counties to go to conquer the big destination country.

古文：期至贰师城取善马，故号贰师将军。
现代文：期望李广利到贰师城取得好马，所以称他为贰师将军。
English: He expected Li Guangli to get a good horse in Jinshicheng, so he called him General Jinshicheng.

古文：赵始成为军正，故浩侯王恢使导军，而李哆为校尉，制军事。
现代文：另外又任命赵始成为军正官，原浩侯王恢为军前向导，李哆为校尉，负责军事指挥。
English: Zhao Shicheng was the military commander, the former great lord Wang Hui was the guide of the army, and Li Xi was the captain, mastering the affairs of the army.

古文：臣光曰：武帝欲侯宠姬李氏，而使广利将兵伐宛，其意以为非有功不侯，不欲负高帝之约也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：汉武帝想封自己宠爱的姬妾李夫人的娘家为侯，所以派李广利率兵征伐大宛，他的意思是，没有为国立功就不能封侯，不想改变高祖皇帝的约定。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Emperor Hanwu wanted to make the daughter of his favorite concubine, Lady Li, a marquess, so he sent Li Guangzhi's soldiers to conquer Dawan. He meant that without national merit, he could not make a marquess. He did not want to change Emperor Gaozu's agreement.

古文：夫军旅大事，国之安危、民之死生系焉。苟为不择贤愚而授之，欲徼幸咫尺之功，藉以为名而私其所爱，不若无功而侯之为愈也。
现代文：但军务大事关系着国家的安危、民众的生死，如果不辨贤愚就授予军事大权，希望拿侥幸的微小功劳，作为封自己所喜欢的人为侯的借口，还不如无功就封侯好些。
English: However, military affairs are related to the safety of the country and the life and death of the people. If you do not distinguish between the wise and the foolish, you will grant military power. If you hope to take the chance of a small merit as an excuse to appoint someone you like as a vassal, it is better to appoint a vassal without merit.

古文：然则武帝有见于封国，无见于置将；谓之能守先帝之约，臣曰过矣。
现代文：汉武帝在处理封国事务上颇有见地，却在任命将领方面失当。所以，说他能够遵守先帝的约定，我认为是过分了。
English: Emperor Hanwu was quite insightful in dealing with the affairs of the state, but he failed in the appointment of generals. Therefore, I think it is too much to say that he was able to comply with the agreement of the former emperor.

古文：中尉王温舒坐为奸利，罪当族，自杀；时两弟及两婚家亦各自坐佗罪而族。
现代文：中尉王温舒被指控犯有奸诈贪利之罪，应当灭族，王温舒自杀；当时，王温舒的两个弟弟和两个亲家也分别因其他罪名被灭族。
English: Lieutenant Wang Wenshu was accused of committing the crime of treachery and greed, and should be exterminated. Wang Wenshu committed suicide. At that time, Wang Wenshu's two younger brothers and two relatives were also exterminated for other crimes.

古文：光禄勋徐自为曰： 悲夫！
现代文：光禄勋徐自为说： 可悲哪！
English: Guanglu Xiu said to himself: "How sad! How sad!"

古文：古有三族，而王温舒罪至同时而五族乎！ 
现代文：古时候有灭三族的，而今王温舒的罪到了同时灭五族的地步！ 
English: In ancient times, there were those who exterminated three ethnic groups, but now Wang Wenshu's sin has reached the point of simultaneously exterminating five ethnic groups!

古文：关东蝗大起，飞西至敦煌。
现代文：关东地区发生严重蝗灾，大批蝗虫向西飞去，到达敦煌。
English: A serious locust plague occurred in the Kanto region, and a large number of locusts flew westward, reaching Dunhuang.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上太初二年春，正月，戊申，牧丘恬侯石庆薨。
现代文：太初二年春季，正月戊申，牧丘侯石庆去世。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Taisho era, in the first month of the Boshin era, Mu Qiu Hou Shi Qing passed away.

古文：闰月，丁丑，以太仆公孙贺为丞相，封葛绎侯。
现代文：闰正月丁丑，汉武帝任命太仆公孙贺为丞相，封葛绎侯。
English: In the intercalary month of Dingwu, Emperor Hanwu appointed his servant Sun He as chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty, and Gao Jianhou was enthroned.

古文：时朝廷多事，督责大臣，自公孙弘后，丞相比坐事死。
现代文：当时，国家多事，汉武帝对大臣督责严厉，自公孙弘之后，丞相连续被指控有罪而死。
English: At that time, the country was in turmoil, and Emperor Hanwu was strict in his supervision of ministers. Since the time of King Gongsun Hong, the prime minister had been repeatedly accused of crimes and died.

古文：石庆虽以谨得终，然数被谴。
现代文：石庆虽然因为谨小慎微而得以善终，但也多次受到谴责。
English: Although Shi Qing had a happy ending because of his prudence, he was condemned many times.

古文：贺引拜为丞相，不受印绶，屯首涕泣不肯起。
现代文：公孙贺被引来举行拜授丞相的仪式时，不接受印信，叩头在地上，哭着不肯起来。
English: When Gongsun He was brought to hold the ceremony of conferring the title of chancellor, he did not accept the seal letter, bowed to the ground, and refused to get up, crying.

古文：上乃起去，贺不得已拜，出曰： 我从是殆矣！ 
现代文：汉武帝不理他，起身而去。公孙贺不得已接受印信，出宫后叹道： 我从此危险了！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu ignored him and got up to leave. Gongsun He had no choice but to accept the letter, and after leaving the palace, he lamented: I am in danger now!

古文：三月，上行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，汉武帝巡游河东郡，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, Emperor Chengdi went to the eastern part of the river to offer sacrifices to the deity of soil.

古文：夏，五月，籍吏民马补车骑马。
现代文：夏季，五月，登记征用官吏和百姓的马匹，补充军马。
English: In the summer, in May, the horses of officials and commoners were registered and requisitioned to supplement the army horses.

古文：秋，蝗。
现代文：秋季，发生蝗灾。
English: In autumn, a locust plague occurs.

古文：贰师将军之西也，既过盐水，当道小国各城守，不肯给食，攻之不能下。下者得食，不下者数日则去。
现代文：贰师将军李广利率兵西征，过盐泽之后，沿途小国都据城自守，不肯供应汉军粮食，攻又攻不下；攻下之后，粮食自可得到补充；如不能攻破，数日后便离去。
English: General Li Guanglian led his troops on the Western Expedition. After passing Yanchezawa, the small countries along the way all defended themselves by refusing to supply the Han army with grain, and they could not be attacked again. After being attacked, the grain could be replenished; if it could not be broken, it would leave after a few days.

古文：比至郁成，士至者不过数千，皆饥罢。
现代文：等到达郁成时，全军只剩下数千人，且全都饥饿疲惫。
English: By the time the Chinese army arrived in Yucheng, the soldiers had caught up with only a few thousand people, all of whom were hungry and tired.

古文：攻郁成，郁成大破之，所杀伤甚众。
现代文：进攻郁成，反被镇守郁成的军队打得大败，伤亡惨重。
English: They attacked Uccheng, and Uccheng defeated them. Many Han soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：贰师将军与李哆、赵始成等计： 至郁成尚不能举，况至其王都乎！ 
现代文：李广利与李哆、赵始成等商议道： 到郁成尚且不能攻破，更何况到大宛的国都呢！ 
English: Li Guangli discussed with Li Yu, Zhao Shicheng and others: It is impossible to break through to Yucheng, let alone to the capital of Dawan!

古文：引兵而还。
现代文：于是领兵返回。
English: So the leader returned.

古文：至敦煌，十不过什一二，使使上书言： 道远，多乏食，且士卒不患战而患饥，人少，不足以拔宛。愿且罢兵，益发而复往。 
现代文：到敦煌时，士兵只剩下出征时的十分之一二。李广利派人上奏汉武帝： 道路遥远，粮食缺乏，将士们虽不惧战斗，但饥饿难忍；况且人数太少，不足以攻下大宛，希望能暂且罢兵，待证调更多的军队后再前往征讨。 
English: By the time they reached Dunhuang, only two-tenths of the soldiers were left. Li Guangli sent someone to report to Emperor Wu of Han: The road is far away, food is scarce, and although the soldiers are not afraid of fighting, they are starving; moreover, the number of soldiers is too small to capture Dawan, and they hope to temporarily disengage and wait for permission to transfer more troops before going to collect.

古文：天子闻之，大怒，使使遮玉门曰： 军有敢入者，辄斩之！ 
现代文：汉武帝闻奏大怒，派使臣至玉门阻拦，同时下令： 军队有胆敢退入玉门关的，一律斩首！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu was enraged and sent envoys to Yumen to stop them. At the same time, he ordered: If the army dared to retreat into Yumen Pass, they would all be beheaded!

古文：贰师恐，因留敦煌。
现代文：李广利大为惶恐，因而留在敦煌。
English: General Kaji was afraid, so he stayed in Dunhuang.

古文：上犹以受降城去匈奴远，遣浚稽将军赵破奴将二万馀骑出朔方西北二千馀里，期至浚稽山而还。浞野侯既至期，左大都尉欲发而觉，单于诛之，发左方兵击浞野侯。
现代文：汉武帝认为受降城仍离匈奴太远，又派浚稽将军赵破奴率二万余骑兵从朔方郡出塞，向西北方推进二千余里，准备到达浚稽山接应匈奴左大都尉后返回，赵破奴已经前来约会，匈奴左大都尉却在打算举事时被单于察觉。单于杀死左大都尉，派左翼军袭击赵破奴。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought that the surrendered city was still too far away from the Xiongnu, so he sent the general Zhao Bano and more than twenty thousand cavalry from Shuofang County to push more than two thousand miles to the northwest, ready to arrive at the Dungan Mountain to meet the Xiongnu Zuo Duifeng and return. Zhao Bano had come for a date, but the Xiongnu Zuo Duifeng was only noticed when he was planning to do something. He only killed the Zuo Duifeng and sent the left wing army to attack Zhao Bano.

古文：浞野侯行捕首虏，得数千人，还，未至受降城四百里，匈奴兵八万骑围之。
现代文：赵破奴一路捕杀敌军，俘虏数千人，然后班师。行至距受降城四百里之处，被匈奴八万骑兵包围。
English: Zhao Bonu hunted down and killed the enemy all the way, captured thousands of people, and then formed a division. He went to a place four hundred miles away from the city, and was surrounded by eighty thousand cavalry of the Huns.

古文：浞野侯夜自出求水，匈奴间捕生得浞野侯，因急击其军，军吏畏亡将而诛，莫相劝归者，军遂没于匈奴。
现代文：赵破奴夜间亲自出营寻找水源，与匈奴侦察部队遭遇，赵破奴被俘。匈奴军乘势猛攻汉军，汉军军吏害怕回去后因丧失主将而被杀，所以无人劝同伴突围逃回，因而全军覆没。
English: Zhao Banu personally went out of the camp at night to look for a water source, encountered the Hun reconnaissance troops, and Zhao Banu was captured. The Hun army took advantage of the situation to attack the Chinese army. The Chinese army officers were afraid to go back and were killed because they lost their commander, so no one persuaded their companions to break out and escape, so the whole army was destroyed.

古文：儿单于大喜，因遣奇兵攻受降城，不能下，乃寇入边而去。
现代文：匈奴儿单于大喜，于是派出奇兵攻打受降城，未能攻下，便侵入边界，掳掠后离去。
English: The Xiongnu's son was alone in Daxi, so he sent a special force to attack the city, but failed to capture it, so he invaded the border, plundered it, and left.

古文：冬，十二月，兒宽卒。
现代文：十二月，兒宽去世。太初三年
English: In December, Ikuhiro passed away.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上太初三年春，正月，胶东太守延广为御史大夫。
现代文：春季，正月，胶东太守延广被任命为御史大夫。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Jiaodong Taishu Enguang was appointed as a goshi taifu.

古文：上东巡海上，考神仙之属皆无验，令祠官礼东泰山。
现代文：汉武帝向东巡游海边，考查对神仙踪迹的寻访情况，发现都没有着落。命令祀官以礼祭告东泰山。
English: Emperor Hanwu cruised the coast to the east to check on the status of the search for the traces of the gods, and found that none of them had been found. He ordered the ritual officials to announce the East Taishan with a ritual.

古文：夏，四月，还，修封泰山，禅石闾。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉武帝返回长安，途中在泰山祭天，在石闾祭地。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Hanwu returned to Chang'an. On the way, he held a festival at Mount Taishan and a festival at Shijiazhuang.

古文：匈奴儿单于死，子年少，匈奴立其季父右贤王呴犁湖为单于。
现代文：匈奴儿单于去世，因其子年纪小，匈奴部众共立儿单于的叔父右贤王湖为单于。
English: Xiongnu's son died alone, because his son was young, and his uncle, Uxian Wanghu, who was the leader of the Xiongnu group, died alone.

古文：上遣光禄勋徐自为出五原塞数百里，远者千馀里，筑城、障、列亭，西北至庐朐，而使游击将军韩说、长平侯卫伉屯其旁；使强弩都尉路博德筑居延泽上。
现代文：汉武帝派光禄勋徐自为从五原出塞数百里，最远处达千余里，修筑城墙、要塞、亭燧等，向西北直到庐朐，命游击将军韩说、长平侯卫伉屯兵庐朐附近；命强弩都尉路博德在居延泽筑城镇守。
English: Emperor Hanwu sent Guanglu Xiu to build city walls, fortresses, pavilions, etc. for hundreds of miles from Wuhuan, and up to more than a thousand miles at the farthest point, to the northwest until the end of the year. The guerrilla general Han said that the guerrilla general Changping Houwei was near the garrison; the strong-willed lieutenant Lu Baode was in Yanze to build town guards.

古文：秋，匈奴大入定襄、云中，杀略数千人，败数二千石而去，行破坏光禄所筑城、列亭、障；又使右贤王入酒泉、张掖，略数千人。
现代文：秋季，匈奴大举侵入定襄、云中二郡，杀掠数千人，打败汉朝好几名二千石官后方才离去，沿途破坏光禄勋徐自为所筑城墙、要塞、亭遂等；又派右贤王侵入酒泉、张掖二郡，掳掠数千人。
English: In autumn, the Xiongnu invaded the two counties of Dingxiang and Yunzhong on a large scale, killing and looting thousands of people, defeating several 2,000-stone officials of the Han Dynasty before leaving, destroying the city walls, fortresses, pavilions and so on built by Guanglu Xun Xu along the way; and sent the Right Wise King to invade the two counties of Jiuquan and Zhangye, kidnapping and looting thousands of people.

古文：会军正任文击救，尽复失所得而去。
现代文：正好汉军军正任文率兵前来救援，右贤王兵败，丧失了全部掳掠所得后退走。
English: Just at that time, the Han army led by Zheng Rongwen came to the rescue, and Uxian Wang was defeated, lost all the plundered income, and retreated.

古文：是岁，睢阳侯张昌坐为太常乏祠，国除。
现代文：这一年，睢阳侯张昌被指控身为太常官，掌管祭祀事务有不到之处，被废除封爵食邑。
English: In the same year, Zhang Chang, the Marquis of Fenyang, was accused of being too much of a bureaucrat to be in charge of sacrificial affairs, and his knighthood was revoked.

古文：初，高祖封功臣为列侯百四十有三人。
现代文：起初，汉高祖分封功臣为侯，共一百四十三人。
English: At the beginning, there were a total of one hundred and forty-three meritorious retainers of the Han Dynasty.

古文：时兵革之馀，大城、名都民人散亡，户口可得而数，裁什二三。
现代文：当时正是战乱之后，大城和著名都会的百姓散失，国家掌握的户口数字，只有从前的十分之二三。
English: At that time, just after the war, the people of the big cities and famous cities were scattered, and the number of household registration in the hands of the state was only two-thirds of the previous one.

古文：大侯不过万家，小者五六百户。
现代文：所以汉初所封列侯，其食邑大的不过一万户，小的只有五六百家。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there were only ten thousand households in the large food villages and only five or six hundred in the small ones.

古文：其封爵之誓曰： 使黄河如带，泰山若厉，国以永存，爰及苗裔。 
现代文：分封时，汉高祖曾经立誓说： 既使黄河变得像腰带一样狭窄，泰山变得像砥石一样矮小，各位列侯的封国食邑也将永存，传给后世子孙。 
English: At the time of the division of fiefs, Emperor Gaozhu vowed: "Even if the Yellow River becomes as narrow as a girdle, and Mount Tai becomes as small as a whetstone, the feudal food towns of the feudal lords will also last forever and be passed down to future generations."

古文：申以丹书之信，重以白马之盟。
现代文：并将誓言用朱砂写下，杀白马祭告上苍，表示守信和郑重。
English: And he wrote down the oath with cinnabar and announced the killing of the white horse to the heavens, expressing his sincerity and solemnity.

古文：及高后时，尽差第列侯位次，藏诸宗庙，副在有司。
现代文：到高后时，厘订全体列侯的位次高低，将记录存在宗庙之内，副本存于有关官署。
English: After reaching the highest rank, the ranks of all vassals were determined, and the records were kept in the ancestral temple, with copies kept at the relevant government offices.

古文：逮文、景，四五世间，流民既归，户口亦息，列侯大者至三四万户，小国自倍，富厚如之。
现代文：到汉文帝、汉景帝时，已过了四五世，流民已经回归故里，户口也有增加，列侯中，大的食邑达到三四万户，小的也增加了一倍，财富的增长也与食邑相同。
English: By the time of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanjing, four or five generations had passed. The exiles had returned to their hometowns, and the number of households had increased. Among the feudal lords, the number of large food villages had reached 30,000 to 40,000 households, and the number of small food villages had doubled. The growth of wealth was the same as that of food villages.

古文：子孙骄逸，多抵法禁，陨身失国，至是见侯裁四人，罔亦少密焉。
现代文：列侯的子孙们骄奢淫逸，多触犯国家法律，不仅本人丧命，祖宗留下的食邑也因而失去，到如今，现存的功臣侯只剩下四家，而法网也稍微严密了。
English: The sons and grandsons of feudal lords were arrogant and debauched, and many of them violated national laws. Not only did they lose their lives, but they also lost the food towns left by their ancestors. To this day, there are only four existing meritorious feudal lords, and the legal net is slightly tighter.

古文：汉既亡浞野之兵，公卿议者皆愿罢宛军，专力攻胡。
现代文：汉朝丧失了赵破奴这支部队后，议论此事的公卿大臣们都希望停止征讨大宛，集中全力对付匈奴。
English: After the Han Dynasty lost the army of Zhao Bonu, the noblemen and ministers who discussed the matter all hoped to stop the conquest of Dayuan and concentrate all their efforts on dealing with the Xiongnu.

古文：天子业出兵诛宛，宛小国而不能下，则大夏之属渐轻汉，而宛善马绝不来，乌孙、轮台易苦汉使，为外国笑，乃案言伐宛尤不便者邓光等。
现代文：而汉武帝则认为，既已出兵征讨大宛，如果连大宛这样一个崐小国都不能征服，那么大夏等国将逐渐轻视汉朝，大宛的好马不会来，乌孙、轮台等国将随意虐待汉朝使团，从而使汉朝遭到外国的耻笑。于是汉武帝处罚了认为征讨大宛不利的邓光等人。
English: Emperor Han, on the other hand, believed that if he had already dispatched troops to conquer Dawan and could not conquer even such a small country as Dawan, then Daxia and other countries would gradually despise the Han Dynasty, Dawan's good horses would not come, and Wusun, Rundai and other countries would abuse the Han Dynasty's envoys at will, thus exposing the Han Dynasty to ridicule from foreign countries. Therefore, Emperor Han punished Deng Guang and others who believed that the conquest of Dawan was unfavorable.

古文：赦囚徒，发恶少年及边骑，岁馀而出敦煌者六万人，负私从者不与，牛十万，马三万匹，驴、橐驼以万数，赍粮、兵弩甚设。
现代文：赦免正在服刑的囚徒，征发品行恶劣的青年和边塞地区的骑兵，一年多的时间里，派到敦煌增援贰师将军李广利的人达六万多人，背负私人装备而跟从的人未计算在内。另外，又征调了牛十万头，马三万匹，驴、骆驼等数以万计，以及十分充足的粮食和兵器弓弩。
English: He pardoned prisoners who were serving their sentences, conscripted and dispatched young men with bad conduct and cavalry from the border fortress area, and in more than a year, more than 60,000 people were sent to Dunhuang to reinforce the general Li Guangli, not including those who followed with their personal equipment. In addition, another 100,000 head of cattle, 30,000 horses, tens of thousands of donkeys and camels, as well as sufficient grain and weapons were conscripted.

古文：天下骚动，转相奉伐宛五十馀校尉。
现代文：全国都受到震动，从各地调到征讨大宛部队中的校尉军官也达五十余名。
English: The whole country was shaken, and more than fifty lieutenant officers were transferred from all over the country to the troops of Daewon.

古文：宛城中无井，汲城外流水，于是遣水工徙其城下水，空以穴其城。
现代文：因大宛城中无井，靠汲引城外河水使用，所以汉武帝派水工随军前往，准备将大宛城外河水引向别处，利用旧水道挖洞攻城。
English: As there was no well in Dawan and the water had to be drawn from the river outside the city for use, Emperor Hanwu sent water engineers to accompany the army to prepare to divert the water from the river outside Dawan to other places and use the old waterway to dig a hole to attack the city.

古文：益发戍甲卒十八万酒泉、张掖北，置居延、休屠屯兵以卫酒泉，而发天下吏有罪者、亡命者及赘婿、贾人、故有市籍、父母大父母有市籍者凡七科，适为兵；及载Я给贰师，转车人徒相连属；而拜习马者二人为执、驱马校尉，备破宛择取其善马云。
现代文：又增调了十八万戍卒进驻酒泉、张掖以北地区，并在居延、休屠两地屯兵以卫护酒泉。汉武帝下令：全国犯罪的官吏、逃亡者、入赘妇家的男子、商人、原属商人户籍者、其父母或祖父母属商人户籍者，共七种人，一律谪罚为兵。为贰师运送粮食的车辆和役夫络绎不绝。汉武帝还任命两名熟悉马匹情况的人充当执马校尉和驱马校尉，预备在攻破大宛后挑选好马。
English: An additional 180,000 soldiers were dispatched to the areas north of Jiuquan and Zhangye, and garrisons were set up in Jiyan and Xiutu to guard the wine springs. Emperor Hanwu ordered that seven types of people were to be punished as soldiers: officials who had committed crimes across the country, fugitives, men who had joined their wives' families, merchants, those who were originally registered as merchants, and those whose parents or grandparents were registered as merchants. There was no end to the vehicles and servants that transported grain for the soldiers. Emperor Hanwu also appointed two people who were familiar with horses to act as the horse-handling lieutenant and the horse-driving lieutenant, preparing to

古文：于是贰师后复行，兵多，所至小国莫不迎，出食给军。
现代文：贰师将军李广利得到巨大的人力物力增援后，再次率兵出征。由于汉军兵多，所到之处，西域各小国无不迎接，为汉军提供粮食供应。
English: At this time, General Gong Shih was on his second expedition, the team was huge, so all the small countries along the way greeted him and took out grain to feed the army.

古文：至轮台，轮台不下。攻数日，屠之。
现代文：行至轮台，轮台国不降，汉军攻城数日，在城中进行了一场大屠杀。
English: They went to Lantai, Lantai did not surrender, the Chinese army besieged the city for several days, and carried out a massacre in the city.

古文：自此而西，平行至宛城，兵到者三万。
现代文：自此向西，汉军一路平安推进，直抵大宛城下，到达的士兵共三万人。
English: From here westward, the peaceful march reached the capital of Dawan, with the arrival of 30,000 desert soldiers.

古文：宛兵迎击汉兵，汉兵射败之，宛兵走入，保其城。
现代文：大宛军队出城迎击汉军，汉军以箭射杀，大宛军大败，逃入城中拒守。
English: The Dawan army went out of the city to meet the Chinese army, the Chinese army shot with arrows, the Dawan army was defeated, fled into the city and refused to defend.

古文：贰师欲攻郁成城，恐留行而令宛益生诈，乃先至宛，决其水原移之，则宛固已忧困，围其城，攻之四十馀日。
现代文：李广利本想攻取郁成城，又恐怕一时难于攻克，反使大宛生出其他计谋，于是先到大宛城，挖开水源，引向别处。城中的大宛军民本已忧愁困扰，汉军再将全城包围，攻击四十余日。
English: Li Guangli originally wanted to capture Yucheng, and feared that it would be difficult to conquer for a while, but made Dawan come up with other plans, so he first went to Dawan City, dug up water sources, and led them elsewhere. The Dawan army and people in the city were already sad and troubled, and the Chinese army then surrounded the whole city and attacked for more than forty days.

古文：宛贵人谋曰： 王母寡匿善马，杀汉使，今杀王而善马，汉兵宜解；即不解，乃力战而死，未晚也。 
现代文：大宛贵族密谋道： 大王母寡将好马隐藏起来，又杀死汉朝使臣，如今我们将大王杀死，把好马献出，汉军就会解围而去；如仍不解围退兵，我们再拼死力战，也为时未晚。 
English: The Dawan nobles plotted: The great king's widow hid the good horse and killed the Han Dynasty envoy. Now we will kill the great king and sacrifice the good horse, and the Han Army will leave the encirclement. If the encirclement is still not relieved and the soldiers are withdrawn, we will fight desperately again, and it is not too late.

古文：宛贵人皆以为然，共杀王。
现代文：大家都表示同意，于是一起行动，将大宛王杀死。
English: The high-ranking officials of Dawan all agreed that it was right to jointly kill Wanwang.

古文：其外城坏，虏宛贵人勇将煎靡。
现代文：此时大宛的外城已破，大宛的贵族猛将煎靡被汉军俘获。
English: Their high-ranking officials discussed among themselves: The reason why the Han Dynasty came to attack Dawan is that our king killed the Han Dynasty's envoy while he was hiding a good horse.

古文：宛大恐，走入城中，持王母寡头，遣人使贰师约曰： 汉无攻我，我尽出善马恣所取，而给汉军食。
现代文：大宛极为恐慌，逃入内城，派人手持大宛王母寡的人头，前去见李广利，相约说： 汉军如不进攻我们，我们将把所有的好马都拿出来，任凭汉军随意挑选，并为汉军提供粮食。
English: Greatly alarmed, Dawan fled to the inner city and sent someone to meet Li Guangli, holding the heads of Dawan Wang's widow and mother. They agreed: "If the Chinese army does not attack us, we will take out all the good horses, let the Chinese army choose at will, and provide food for the Chinese army."

古文：即不听我，我尽杀善马，康居之救又且至，至，我居内，康居居外，与汉军战。
现代文：如不接受我们的建议，我们将杀死所有的好马。康居的援兵又即将到达，援兵一到，我们居内，康居兵居外，两面夹击汉军。
English: If you do not accept our proposal, we will kill all the good horses. Kangju's reinforcements are about to arrive, and as soon as the reinforcements arrive, we will stay inside, and Kangju soldiers will stay outside, sandwiching the Chinese army on both sides.

古文：孰计之，何从？ 
现代文：请将军仔细考虑，怎么办好？ 
English: Let the Chinese army carefully consider what to do?

古文：是时，康居候视汉兵尚盛，不敢进。
现代文：此时，康居探知汉军还很强盛，不敢前进。
English: At this time, the Kangju detective spied on the non-Chinese soldiers. The Chinese soldiers were still very strong and did not dare to join the army.

古文：贰师闻宛城中新得汉人，知穿井，而其内食尚多，计以为 来诛首恶母寡，母寡头已至，如此不许则坚守，而康居候汉兵罢来救宛，破汉兵必矣 ，乃许宛之约。
现代文：李广利闻知大宛城中新近抓到一些汉人，懂得了凿井技术，且城中粮食尚多，因而考虑： 此次前来主要是为了诛杀罪魁祸首母寡，而今母寡的人头已然送到，这样再不接受他们的请求，他们必定会坚守城池，而康居等到汉军疲惫来援救大宛，汉兵必为其所败。 
English: Li Guangli heard that some Han people had recently been caught in the city of Dayuan, understood the drilling technology, and there was still a lot of food in the city, so he considered: This time I came mainly to kill the culprit's widow, and now the widow's head has been sent, so I will not accept their request, they will certainly stick to the city, and Kangju will wait until the Chinese army is tired to rescue Dayuan, and the Chinese soldiers will be defeated by it.

古文：宛乃出其马，令汉自择之，而多出食食汉军。
现代文：所以接受了大宛的求和条件。于是，大宛将马献出，让汉军自己选择，并拿出大批粮食供给汉军。
English: Dawan people let out their good horses, let the Chinese soldiers choose their own, and also took out a lot of grain to feed the Chinese army.

古文：汉军取其善马数十匹，中马以下牝牡三千馀匹，而立宛贵人之故时遇汉善者名昧蔡为宛王，与盟而罢兵。
现代文：汉军挑选了数十匹好马，中等及以下的雌、雄马三千余匹，又扶立过去对汉朝态度友好的大宛贵族昧蔡登上大宛国王位，与其订立盟约后罢兵而还。
English: The Han army selected dozens of good horses, more than 3,000 middle-aged and younger female and male horses, and also helped the Dawan nobles who were friendly to the Han Dynasty in the past, such as Cai, to ascend to the throne of the Dawan Kingdom. After concluding a treaty with them, they withdrew from the army and returned.

古文：初，贰师起敦煌西，分为数军，从南、北道。
现代文：当初，李广利自敦煌起兵西进时，分兵数路，分别从南、北两条道路进兵。
English: At first, when Li Guangli marched west from Dunhuang, he divided his army into several routes, marching from the south and north respectively.

古文：校尉王申生将千馀人别至郁成，郁成王击灭之，数人脱亡，走贰师。
现代文：校尉王申生另率一千余人到郁成，被郁成王消灭。只有数人得脱，逃到李广崐利大军。
English: Wang Shensheng, a school lieutenant, led another thousand people to Yucheng and was wiped out by Yucheng Wang. Only a few people were able to escape and fled to Li Guangxi's army.

古文：贰师令搜粟都尉上官桀往攻郁成，郁成王亡走康居，桀追至康居。
现代文：李广利命搜粟都尉上官桀率兵前往攻打郁成，郁成王逃到康居，上官桀也追到康居。
English: Li Guangli was searching for his life, and Lieutenant Shangguan Yu led his troops to attack Iku Cheng, Iku Cheng Wang fled to Kangju, and Shangguan Yu also chased him to Kangju.

古文：康居闻汉已破宛，出郁成王与桀，桀令四骑士缚守诣贰师。
现代文：康居王听说汉军已打败大宛，便将郁成王献给上官桀，上官桀命四名骑兵将郁成王捆绑押送李广利军营。
English: When King Kangju heard that the Chinese army had defeated Dayuan, he dedicated Iku Cheng Wang to Shangguan Xuan. Shangguan Xuan ordered four cavalrymen to tie up Iku Cheng Wang and escort him to Li Guangli's military camp.

古文：上邽骑士赵弟恐失郁成王，拔剑击斩其首，追及贰师。
现代文：上骑士赵弟怕郁成王在半路上逃跑，拔剑将郁成王人头砍下后，追上李广利大军。
English: The upper knight Zhao's younger brother was afraid that Iku Cheng Wang would run away in the middle of the road. He drew his sword and cut off Iku Cheng Wang's head, and then caught up with Li Guangli's army.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上太初四年
现代文：太初四年春季，贰师将军李广利回到京城长安。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Taisho era, the general Li Guangli returned to the capital Chang'an.

古文：春，贰师将军来至京师。贰师所过小国闻宛破，皆使其子弟从入贡献，见天子，因为质焉。
现代文：沿途经过的西域小国听说大宛被汉军攻破，全都派其子弟跟随李广利来到长安向汉朝进贡，拜见汉武帝，并留在长安充当人质。
English: All the small countries in the western region that passed along the way heard that Dayuan had been broken by the Chinese army, and they all sent their sons and daughters to follow Li Guangli to Chang'an to pay tribute to the Han Dynasty, meet Emperor Wu of Han, and stay in Chang'an as hostages.

古文：军还，入马千馀匹。
现代文：大军回来时，入关的马有一千余匹。
English: When the large army returned, there were more than a thousand horses in custody.

古文：后行，军非乏食，战死不甚多，而将吏贪，不爱卒，侵牟之，以此物故者众。
现代文：此番再次出征，并非缺乏军粮，战死的人也不太多，只因将领贪暴，不爱惜士卒，掠夺、虐待他们，因此死亡很多。
English: This time, when they went to war again, it wasn't because of a lack of food for the troops, and there weren't too many people who died in battle. It was because the generals were corrupt, didn't care about the soldiers, plundered and mistreated them, and as a result, there were many deaths.

古文：天子为万里而伐，不录其过，乃下诏封李广利为海西侯，封赵弟为新畤侯，以上官桀为少府，军官吏为九卿者三人，诸侯相、郡守、二千石百馀人，千石以下千馀人，奋行者官过其望，以谪过行，皆黜其劳，士卒赐直四万钱。
现代文：汉武帝因李广利万里征伐，不计其过失，下诏书封李广利为海西侯，赵弟为新侯，任命上官桀为少府，其他军官为九卿的三人，任诸侯国相、郡太守、二千石官职的一百余人，任一千石及以下官职的一千余人。凡自愿随军出征的人，所授官职都超出了他们自己的希望；凡因罪过而谪罚出征的人，一律免其罪而不记功劳；对士卒的赏赐价值四万钱。
English: Emperor Hanwu, because of Li Guangli's long-distance campaign, regardless of his fault, issued the following edict to seal Li Guangli as the West Sea Lord, Zhao Di as the new lord, appointed three senior officials as the young governor, and other officers as the nine nobles, more than one hundred people who were ministers of state in the provinces, county governors, and officials of 2,000 koku, and more than one thousand people who were officials of 1,000 koku and below. All those who volunteered to go to war with the army were given official positions beyond their own hopes; all those who were punished for their crimes and went to war were absolved of their crimes without credit; the

古文：匈奴闻贰师征大宛，欲遮之，贰师兵盛，不敢当，即遣骑因楼兰候汉使后过者，欲绝勿通。
现代文：匈奴听说李广利率兵征讨大宛，曾经企图拦截，后见汉军声势浩大，不敢与汉军交战，便派骑兵前往楼兰国，等候袭击在大军后面的汉朝使臣，要断其通道。
English: The Huns heard that Li Guangzhi was recruiting soldiers to conquer Dawan and had attempted to intercept them, but later saw that the Chinese army was very powerful and did not dare to fight with the Chinese army, so they sent cavalry to Loulan Province, waiting to attack the Han Dynasty envoys behind the army, to cut off their channel.

古文：时汉军正任文将兵屯玉门关，捕得生口，知状以闻。
现代文：当时汉军军正任文正率兵屯驻玉门关，抓到匈奴俘虏，得知这一消息后报告朝廷。
English: At that time, the Han army was stationed in Yumen Pass under the command of Zheng Rongwen Zheng, captured the Hun prisoners, and reported to the imperial court after learning this news.

古文：上诏文便道引兵捕楼兰王，将诣阙簿责。
现代文：汉武帝下诏命任文率兵捕捉楼兰王，押到长安问罪。
English: Emperor Hanwu issued an edict ordering Renwen to lead soldiers to capture Loulan Wang and bring him to Chang'an for questioning.

古文：王对曰： 小国在大国间，不两属无以自安，愿徙国入居当地。 
现代文：楼兰王分辩说： 楼兰作为一个小国，夹在汉朝与匈奴两大国之间，如不两边听命，便无法自保平安，我愿率本国百姓迁入汉朝境内。 
English: Loulan Wang said: Loulan, as a small country, is sandwiched between the Han Dynasty and the Huns. If we do not obey the orders of both sides, we will not be able to keep ourselves safe. I am willing to lead my people to move into the territory of the Han Dynasty.

古文：上直其言，遣归国，亦因使候司匈奴，匈奴自是不甚亲信楼兰。
现代文：汉武帝放他回国，也让他协助探听匈奴动静。从此匈奴对楼兰国不十分信任。
English: Emperor Hanwu allowed him to return to China, and also allowed him to assist in listening to the movements of the Xiongnu. From then on, the Xiongnu did not fully trust the Loulan Kingdom.

古文：自大宛破后，西域震惧，汉使入西域者益得职。
现代文：自从大宛被打败后，西域各国十分震恐，派往西域的汉使因此越发顺利地完成使命。
English: Since Dayuan was defeated, the countries of the Western Regions were very shocked. As a result, the Han envoys sent to the Western Regions were able to complete their missions more and more successfully.

古文：于是自敦煌西至盐泽往往起亭，而轮台、渠犁皆有田卒数百人，置使者、校尉领护，以给使外国者。
现代文：于是，从敦煌向西直到盐泽，处处建起亭燧，而轮台、渠等地都有汉朝的屯田兵卒数百人，分别设置使者、校尉加以统领护卫，用以供给出使外国的使团所需。
English: As a result, pavilions were built everywhere from Dunhuang in the west to Yanze, and hundreds of soldiers from the Han Dynasty were stationed at platforms, canals, and other places. Envoys and lieutenants were separately set up to lead the escort, which was used to supply the needs of foreign missions.

古文：后岁馀，宛贵人以为昧蔡善谀，使我国遇屠，乃相与杀昧蔡，立毋寡昆弟蝉封为宛王，而遣其子入质于汉。
现代文：一年多以后，大宛贵族认为昧蔡善于讨好汉朝，使本国遭受屠戮，于是联合杀死昧蔡，立母寡的弟弟蝉封为大宛王，派蝉封的儿子到汉朝充当人质。
English: More than a year later, the Dayuan aristocrats believed that Cai Cai was good at pleasing the Han Dynasty and causing the country to be slaughtered, so they jointly killed Cai Cai, set up his widowed brother Cifu as the King of Dayuan, and sent Cifu's son to the Han Dynasty to serve as a hostage.

古文：汉因使使赂赐，以镇抚之。
现代文：汉朝因而派出使者赏赐蝉封，对他进行镇扶。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to reward and support him.

古文：蝉封与汉约，岁献天马二匹。
现代文：蝉封与汉朝约定，每年向汉朝进献天马二匹。
English: Cicada seal and the Han Dynasty agreed to donate two celestial horses to the Han Dynasty every year.

古文：秋，起明光宫。
现代文：秋季，汉武帝兴建明光宫。
English: In autumn, the Komyo-gu Shrine is lit up.

古文：匈奴呴犁湖单于死，匈即将立其弟左大都尉且鞮侯为单于。
现代文：匈奴湖单于去世，其弟左大都尉且侯被立为单于。
English: Xiongnuhu Shan died, and his younger brother Zuo Datu Qi Hou was appointed as Shan.

古文：天子欲因伐宛之威遂困胡，乃下诏曰： 高皇帝遗朕平城之忧，高后时，单于书绝悖逆。
现代文：汉武帝打算乘征伐大宛的兵威困扰匈奴，便颁发诏书说： 高皇帝给朕留下平城的忧恨，高后时，匈奴单于给我朝的书信又悖逆绝伦。
English: Emperor Hanwu planned to use the military might of the conquest of Dawan to trouble the Xiongnu, so he issued an edict saying: Emperor Gao left me with the sorrow of Pingcheng. After Gao's death, the Xiongnu rebelled against the emperor in letters to me.

古文：昔齐襄公复九世之雠，《春秋》大之。 
现代文：当年齐襄公报九世先祖之仇，《春秋》认为他的行为符合了大义。 
English: In the past, Qixiang Gongyuan avenged the ninth generation of ancestors, and "Spring and Autumn" praised it.

古文：因尽归汉使之不降者路充国等，使使来献。世宗孝武皇帝下之上天汉元年
现代文：且侯单于刚刚即位，害怕汉军袭击他，便向汉朝表示： 我是小孩子，岂敢和大汉天子相比，汉朝天子是我的长辈。 
English: Moreover, Hou Shan had just ascended to the throne, and he was afraid of the Chinese army attacking him, so he said to the Han Dynasty: I am a child, how dare I compare myself to the Great Han Emperor, the Han Emperor is my elder.

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：于是将不愿投降而被扣留在匈奴的汉使路充国等全部放回，又派使臣前来进贡。
English: Liu Xing, the king of Zhongshan, and Liu Xin, the king of Dingtao, both went to Chang'an to meet the emperor.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：天汉元年春季，正月，汉武帝到甘泉，在泰祭祀天神。三月，汉武帝巡游河东郡，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：上嘉匈奴单于之义，遣中郎将苏武送匈奴使留在汉者，因厚赂单于，答其善意。
现代文：汉武帝嘉许匈奴单于的义举，派中郎将苏武将留在汉朝的匈奴使臣送回匈奴，顺便携带厚礼，答谢匈奴单于的好意。
English: Emperor Hanwu appreciated Xiongnu Zanyu's act of charity and sent Zhonglang to return the Xiongnu envoys left by Su Wu to the Xiongnu in the Han Dynasty. He also brought a gift to thank Xiongnu Zanyu for his kindness.

古文：武与副中郎将张胜与假吏常惠等俱。既至匈奴，置币遣单于。
现代文：苏武与副使中郎将张胜及暂时充任使团官吏的常惠等一同前往，到达匈奴后，将礼品送给单于。
English: Su Wu and the deputy envoy Zhong Lang went together with Zhang Sheng and Chang Hui, who temporarily served as the official of the mission. After arriving in Xiongnu, they gave the gift to Shan Yu.

古文：单于益骄，非汉所望也。
现代文：单于却更加骄横，不是汉朝原来所希望的样子。
English: Xingting was even more arrogant, completely different from what the Han Dynasty expected.

古文：会缑王与长水虞常等及卫律所将降者，阴相与谋劫单于母阏氏归汉。
现代文：正在此时，曾经归降过汉朝的匈奴缑王和长水人虞常，以及卫律所率领的投降匈奴的原汉朝人暗中商议，企图劫持匈奴单于母亲阏氏回到汉朝。
English: At this time, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, the Huns who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty.

古文：卫律者，父故长水胡人，律善协律都尉李延年，延年荐言律使于匈奴，使还，闻延年家收，遂亡降匈奴。
现代文：卫律的父亲原是长水地区的匈奴人，卫律本人则因与汉朝的协律都尉李延年关系很好，经李延年推荐，受汉朝派遣出使匈奴。卫律出使归来，听说李延年一家被收捕，便逃到匈奴投降。
English: Wei Luo's father was originally a Hun from the Changshui region. Wei Luo himself had a good relationship with the Han Dynasty's lieutenant Li Yan Nian. On Li Yan Nian's recommendation, he was sent an envoy from the Han Dynasty to the Huns. When Wei Luo's envoy returned, he heard that Li Yan Nian's family had been arrested and fled to the Huns to surrender.

古文：单于爱之，与谋国事，立为丁灵王。虞常在汉时素与副张胜相知，私候胜曰： 闻汉天子甚怨卫律，常能为汉伏弩射杀之。
现代文：单于很喜欢他，与他商讨国家大事，封他为丁灵王，虞常在汉朝时一直与副使张胜关系密切，私下拜访张胜时说： 听说大汉天子非常怨恨卫律，我可以埋伏弓弩手为汉朝将其射死。
English: Because he liked him very much, discussed national affairs with him, and named him Dingling Wang, Yu Chang always had a close relationship with the deputy envoy Zhang Sheng during the Han Dynasty. When he visited Zhang Sheng privately, he said: I heard that the great man Tianzi was very resentful of Wei Lu, I can ambush the bowman and shoot him to death for the Han Dynasty.

古文：吾母、弟在汉，幸蒙其赏赐。 
现代文：我的母亲和弟弟都在汉朝，希望他们能得到赏赐。 
English: My mother and brother were in the Han Dynasty, and I hope they will be rewarded.

古文：张胜许之，以货物与常。
现代文：张胜答应了虞常的要求，并送给他很多财物。
English: Zhang Sheng agreed and gave the money to Gu Chang.

古文：后月馀，单于出猎，独阏氏、子弟在，虞常等七十馀人欲发，其一人夜亡告之。
现代文：一个多月以后，单于出外打猎，只有他母亲和部分子弟留在王庭。虞常等七十余人正准备发动政变，不料其中一人于夜间逃走，告发了虞常等人的政变计划。
English: More than a month later, only his mother and some of his children remained at Wangting while he went out hunting alone. Yu Chang and more than seventy others were preparing to launch a coup, but one of them escaped during the night and denounced the coup plan of Yu Chang and others.

古文：单于子弟发兵与战，缑王等皆死，虞常生得。
现代文：于是单于子弟调兵与虞常等人交战，缑王等全部被杀，虞常被活捉。
English: As a result, only the younger son sent soldiers to fight with Yu Chang and others, and all of them were killed, and Yu Chang was captured alive.

古文：单于使卫律治其事。
现代文：匈奴单于派卫律处理此事。
English: Only the appointment of the law of the guard to hear the case.

古文：张胜闻之，恐前语发，以状语武。
现代文：张胜听到消息后，害怕先前与虞常约定之事被查出，便向苏武报告。
English: When Zhang Sheng heard this news, he was afraid that the word of conspiracy with Gu Chang had been leaked, so he told the situation to Su Wu.

古文：武曰： 事如此，此必及我，见犯乃死，重负国。 
现代文：苏武说： 发生了这样的事，肯定会涉及到我，如受到侵犯再死，那就更加辜负国家了。 
English: Su Wu said: "If something like this happens, it will definitely affect me. If I am violated and then die, then I will have failed the country even more.

古文：欲自杀。胜、惠共止之。
现代文：于是准备自杀，被张胜、常惠一起阻止。
English: He then prepared to commit suicide, but was stopped by Zhang Sheng and Chang Hui together.

古文：虞常果引张胜。单于怒，召诸贵人议，欲杀汉使者。
现代文：后虞常果然供出张胜，单于大怒，召集贵族们商议，打算杀死汉使。
English: Later, Yue often successfully offered Zhang Sheng, alone in great anger, to convene the nobles to discuss, intending to kill the Han envoy.

古文：左伊秩訾曰： 即谋单于，何以复加！
现代文：匈奴左伊秩訾说： 谋杀卫律就要处死，如果谋害单于，又应如何加重惩处呢！
English: Xiongnu Zuo Yi Chichibu said: "Murder is punishable by death. If the murder is committed alone, how should the punishment be increased?

古文：宜皆降之。 
现代文：应让他们全部归降。 
English: Might as well let them all surrender.

古文：单于使卫律召武受辞。
现代文：单于派卫律传话给苏武。
English: He only sent Wei Lu to deliver a message to Su Wu.

古文：武谓惠等： 屈节辱命，虽生，何面目以归汉！ 
现代文：苏武对常惠等人说： 如果卑躬屈节，有辱我们的使命，既使活着，又有何面目再回到我们大汉呢！ 
English: Su Wu said to Chang Hui and the others: "If you grovel and humiliate our mission, even if you keep us alive, what kind of face will you have when you return to us great men?"

古文：引佩刀自刺。
现代文：说完拔出佩刀刺入自己的身体。
English: He pulled out his sword and committed suicide.

古文：卫律惊，自抱持武，驰召医，凿地为坎，置煴火，覆武其上，蹈其背以出血。
现代文：卫律大吃一惊，一把将苏武抱住，急忙召医生前来，在地上挖了一个土洞，点起炭火，将苏武放在洞上，用脚踩苏武的后背，使淤血流出。
English: Wei Lu was taken aback. He held Su Wu in his arms and hurriedly called for a doctor. He dug a hole in the ground, lit a charcoal fire, placed Su Wu on the hole, and stepped on Su Wu's back with his foot to make the congestion flow out.

古文：武气绝，半日复息。
现代文：苏武气绝，半日才慢慢苏醒。
English: Su Wu was exhausted and took half a day to slowly wake up.

古文：惠等哭，舆归营。
现代文：常惠等痛哭，将苏武抬回驻地。
English: Changhui and the others carried him crying back to the camp.

古文：单于壮其节，朝夕遣人候问武，而收系张胜。
现代文：单于很钦佩苏武的气节，早晚都派人问候，而将张胜逮捕。
English: He was so impressed with his temperament that he sent someone to inquire about his condition sooner or later, and arrested Zhang Sheng.

古文：武益愈，单于使使晓武，欲降之，会论虞常，欲因此时降武；剑斩虞常已，律曰： 汉使张胜谋杀单于近臣，当死，单于募降者赦罪。 
现代文：苏武逐渐痊愈，单于派人来劝谕苏武，要苏武归降匈奴。正在此时，虞常被定为死罪，便打算借此机会逼苏武投降。用剑斩下虞常的人头之后，卫律说： 汉使张胜想谋杀单于的亲信大臣，其罪当死，单于招募归降，降者赦免。 
English: Suwu gradually recovered, but Yan sent someone to persuade Suwu to surrender to the Huns. At this time, Yu Chang was sentenced to death, and he intended to take this opportunity to force Suwu to surrender. After cutting off Yu Chang's head with a sword, Wei Lu said: Han envoy Zhang Sheng wanted to murder Yan's trusted minister, and his crime should be death, but only for recruiting to surrender, and those who surrendered would be pardoned.

古文：举剑欲击之，胜请降。
现代文：说完举剑要刺张胜，张胜请求投降。
English: He raised his sword to kill Zhang Sheng, and Zhang Sheng asked him to surrender.

古文：律谓武曰： 副有罪，当相坐。 
现代文：卫律又对苏武说： 副使有罪，你作为正使，应连坐受罚。 
English: Wei Lu also said to Su Wu: The vice-envoy is guilty, you should sit with him.

古文：武曰： 本无谋，又非亲属，何谓相坐！ 
现代文：苏武回答说： 我本未参与其事，与张胜又没有亲属关系，为什么要连坐受罚！ 
English: Su Wu replied, "I was not involved in the matter, and I am not related to Zhang Sheng. Why should I be punished even if I did not participate?"

古文：复举剑拟之，武不动。
现代文：卫律又举剑威胁苏武，苏武纹丝不动。
English: Wei Rui drew a sword to stab Su Wu, but Su Wu did not waver.

古文：律曰： 苏君，律前负汉归匈奴，幸蒙大恩赐号称王，拥众数万，马畜弥山，富贵如此！
现代文：卫律说： 苏先生！我以前背叛汉朝，归顺匈奴，有幸蒙单于大恩、赐号称王，并拥有数万人众，马匹牲畜满山，这样富贵！
English: Wei Lu said, "Mr. Su! I once betrayed the Han Dynasty and submitted to the Xiongnu. I was fortunate to receive great favors, be given the title of king, and have tens of thousands of people, horses and livestock all over the mountains. I am so rich!"

古文：苏君今日降，明日复然；空以身膏草野，谁复知之！ 
现代文：苏先生如果今日归降，明日就会和我一样，否则白白横尸荒野，又有谁知道呢！ 
English: If Mr. Su surrenders today, he will be the same as me tomorrow, otherwise he will die in the wilderness for nothing, and who knows!

古文：武不应。
现代文：苏武闭口大答。
English: Su Wu ignored it.

古文：律曰： 君因我降，与君为兄弟；今不听吾计，后虽欲复见我，尚可得乎！ 
现代文：卫律又说： 你要是听我的话，归降匈奴，我与你就如兄弟一般；如今日不听我的建议，以后即使想再见我，还能够办得到吗？ 
English: Wei Lu also said, "If you listen to me and surrender to the Xiongnu, I will be like a brother to you. If you do not listen to my advice today, even if you want to see me again in the future, will you be able to do it?"

古文：武骂律曰： 汝为人臣子，不顾恩义，畔主背亲，为降虏于蛮夷，何以汝为见！
现代文：苏武骂道： 你身为汉朝臣子，却不顾恩义，背叛君主、亲人、投降蛮夷异族，我见你干什么！
English: Su Wu scolded, "You are a Han courtier, yet you have no regard for loyalty, betraying the sovereign, your relatives, and surrendering to barbarian aliens. What have I done to you!

古文：且单于信汝，使决人死生，不平心持正，反欲斗两主，观祸败。
现代文：况且单于信任你，让你决定别人的生死，你不但不公平处理，反而想挑动两国君主相互争斗，在一旁坐观成败。
English: Moreover, just by trusting you and letting you decide the life and death of others, instead of treating you fairly, you want to provoke the two monarchs to fight each other and sit on the sidelines.

古文：南越杀汉使者，屠为九郡；宛王杀汉使者，头悬北阙；朝鲜杀汉使者，即时诛灭；独匈奴未耳。
现代文：南越国杀死汉使，被汉灭掉后变为九郡；大宛王杀死汉使，其人头被悬于长安宫廷北门；朝鲜杀死汉使，立即招来灭国之祸；只有匈奴还没有干过这种事。
English: South Vietnam killed Han envoys and was annihilated by the Han and turned into nine counties; King Dawan killed Han envoys and his head was hung on the north gate of the Chang'an Palace; North Korea killed Han envoys and immediately brought about the disaster of destroying the country; only the Huns have not done such a thing.

古文：若知我不降明，欲令两国相攻，匈奴之祸从我始矣。 
现代文：你明知我不会投降，却想借此挑起两国之间的战争，只怕匈奴的灾难，将会从我开始了。 
English: You know very well that I will not surrender. If you want the two countries to attack each other, the Hun's calamity will begin with killing me.

古文：律知武终不可胁，白单于，单于愈益欲降之。
现代文：卫律明白苏武终究不会受他的胁迫，只得禀报单于。
English: Wei Lu understood that Su Wu would not be coerced by him after all, so he had no choice but to report to him.

古文：乃幽武置大窖中，绝不饮食；天雨雪，武卧，啮雪与旃毛并咽之，数日不死。
现代文：单于见苏武如此忠心，越发想争取他归顺，便将苏武囚禁于一个大地窖中，断绝苏武的饮食，企图逼其就范。当时正下大雪，苏武躺在地上，靠吞食雪片和衣服上的毡毛，一同咽下，几天后竟然未死。
English: Seeing that Su Wu was so loyal, he wanted to win his submission more and more, so he imprisoned Su Wu in a large cellar, cut off Su Wu's diet, and tried to force him to submit. At that time, it was snowing heavily, and Su Wu was lying on the ground, swallowing snowflakes and bristles on his clothes, and swallowed them together. A few days later, he did not die.

古文：匈奴以为神，乃徙武北海上无人处，使牧羝，曰： 羝乳乃得归。 
现代文：匈奴人以为有神灵庇护，便将苏武放逐到北海荒无人烟之处，让他放牧一群公羊，并对苏武说： 等到公羊能产出羊奶，你就可以回国了。 
English: The Huns thought that they had the protection of the gods, so they banished Su Wu to an uninhabited place in the North Sea, let him herd a herd of rams, and said to Su Wu: Wait until the rams can produce goat's milk, then you can return home.

古文：别其官属常惠等，各置他所。
现代文：常惠等使团中不肯投降的官员，也被分别扣留在其他地方。
English: Officials who refused to surrender from the mission, such as Chang Hui, were also detained separately in other places.

古文：天雨白氂。
现代文：天空降下硬而弯曲的白毛。
English: White hairs, stiff and crooked, fell from the sky.

古文：五月，赦天下。
现代文：五月，大赦天下。
English: In May, Emperor Wen declared a general amnesty.

古文：发谪戍屯五原。
现代文：征发贬谪有罪的人到五原郡屯垦戍边。
English: Guilty people will be sent to Tongluan in Wuhuan County.

古文：浞野侯赵破奴自匈奴亡归。
现代文：浞野侯赵破奴从匈奴逃回汉朝。
English: Zhangye marquis Zhao Banu fled from the Xiongnu to the Han Dynasty.

古文：是岁，济南太守王卿为御史大夫。
现代文：这一年，济南太守王卿被任命为御史大夫。
English: In the same year, Wang Qing, the governor of Jinan, was appointed to the post of imperial historian.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝下之上天汉二年春，上行幸东海。
现代文：天汉二年壬午，公元前年春季，汉武帝巡游东海郡。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Heian and Han dynasties, Emperor Hanwu went on a tour of Donghae County.

古文：还，幸回中。
现代文：在回京途中巡游回中。
English: On the way back to Beijing, the parade was in the middle of the loop.

古文：夏，五月，遣贰师将军广利以三万骑出酒泉，击右贤王于天山，得胡首虏万馀级而还。
现代文：夏季，五月，汉武帝派贰师将军李广利率三万骑兵从酒泉出塞，在天崐山一带袭击匈奴右贤王，共擒斩匈奴一万余人后返回。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Hanwu sent general Li Guangzhi with 30,000 cavalry from Jiuquan to attack the Hun Uxian Wang in the area of Tianyaoshan, and returned after killing more than 10,000 Huns.

古文：匈奴大围贰师将军，汉军乏食数日，死伤者多。
现代文：途中被匈奴重兵包围。汉军一连几天缺乏粮食，伤亡惨重。
English: On the way, they were surrounded by heavy Hun troops. The Han army was short of food for several days in a row and suffered heavy casualties.

古文：假司马陇西赵充国与士百馀人溃围陷陈，贰师引兵随之，遂得解。
现代文：代理司马的陇西人赵充国率精壮兵卒一百余人冲破匈奴的包围，李广利率大军紧跟其后，才得以解脱困境。
English: Zhao Chongguo from Shaanxi, who acted as Sima's deputy, led more than a hundred strong soldiers to break through the siege of the Xiongnu, and Li Guangren's army followed closely, only to be able to get out of the predicament.

古文：汉兵物故什六七，充国身被二十馀创。
现代文：这次战役，汉兵阵亡了十分之六七，赵充国受伤二十余处。
English: In this battle, Chinese soldiers were killed in 67 out of 10 battles, and Zhao Chongguo was injured in more than 20 places.

古文：贰师奏状，诏征充国诣行在所，帝亲见，视其创，嗟叹之，拜为中郎。
现代文：李广利上奏朝廷，汉武帝将赵充国召到驻所，亲自接见，察看了他的的伤势，叹息不已，封赵充国为中郎。
English: Li Guangli appealed to the imperial court, and Emperor Wudi summoned Zhao Chongguo to the residence, personally received him, inspected his injuries, sighed, and appointed Zhao Chongguo as the middle brother.

古文：汉复使因酐杅将军敖出西河，与强弩都尉路博德会涿涂山，无所得。
现代文：汉武帝又派因杆将军公孙敖率兵从西河郡出塞，与强弩都尉路博德会师于涿涂山，但毫无收获。
English: Emperor Hanwu also sent Injo General Gong Sunye and his troops from Saihe County to join Qiangye Lieutenant Lu Baode in the mountains of Zhudu, but nothing was gained.

古文：初，李广有孙陵，为侍中，善骑射，爱人下士。
现代文：当初，李广的孙子李陵担任侍中，精通骑马射箭之术，爱护士卒，谦恭地对待贤士。
English: At the beginning, Li Guang's grandson Li Ling served as an attendant. He was proficient in horse riding and archery, loved nurses, and treated sages with courtesy.

古文：帝以为有广之风，拜骑都尉，使将丹杨、楚人五千人，教射酒泉、张掖以备胡。
现代文：汉武帝认为李陵颇有其祖父李广的风范，封他为骑都尉，命他带领丹阳和楚地人五千，在酒泉、张掖一带教习射箭之术，以防备匈奴。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought that Li Ling was quite like his grandfather Li Guang. He made him a cavalry captain and ordered him to lead five thousand people from Danyang and Chu to learn archery in the areas of Jiuquan and Zhangye to be prepared for the Xiongnu.

古文：及贰师击匈奴，上诏陵，欲使为贰师将辎重，陵叩头自请曰： 臣所将屯边者，皆荆楚勇士奇材剑客也，力扼虎，射命中，愿得自当一队，到兰干山南以分单于兵，毋令专向贰师军。 
现代文：李广利出击匈奴时，汉武帝召见李陵，想命他为李广利押运辎重。李陵叩头请求说： 我所率领屯戍边塞的人，都是荆楚地区勇武之士和奇才剑客，论力量能够手扼猛虎，论箭术堪称百发百中，希望能让我自己率领一队人马，前往兰于山以南地区，用以分散匈奴单于的兵力，使其不能全力对抗贰师将军的部队。 
English: When Li Guangli attacked the Huns, Emperor Wudi summoned Li Ling and asked him to escort Li Guangli. Li Ling kowtowed and begged: The people I led to the border fortress were all brave warriors and talented swordsmen in the Jingchu region. In terms of strength, they could hold a tiger in their hands. In terms of archery, they were a hundred times better. I hope that I can lead a team of men and horses to the area south of the Lanyu Mountains to disperse the Huns' isolated forces, so that they can not fully resist the troops of General Zou.

古文：上曰： 将恶相属邪！
现代文：汉武帝说： 你不愿作别人的部下吗！
English: The emperor said, "Where can I assign men and horses to you?"

古文：吾发军多，无骑予女。 
现代文：这次我调动的军队太多，没有马匹分配给你。 
English: This time I've brought too many troops, and there are no horses assigned to you.

古文：陵对： 无所事骑，臣愿以少击众，步兵五千人涉单于庭。 
现代文：李陵说： 我用不着马匹，愿以少敌众，率五千步兵直捣匈奴单于的王庭。 
English: Li Ling replied: There is no need to send cavalry, the vassal is willing to attack the crowd with a small number, and five thousand infantry can enter the palace alone.

古文：上壮而许之。因诏路博德将兵半道迎陵军。
现代文：汉武帝赞赏李陵的豪情壮志，同意了他的请求，下诏命路博德在半途中接应李陵。
English: Emperor Hanwu appreciated Li Ling's heroic ambition, agreed to his request, and ordered Lu Bode to meet Li Ling halfway.

古文：博德亦羞为陵后距，奏言： 方秋，匈奴马肥，未可与战，愿留陵至春俱出。 
现代文：路博德也羞于做李陵的后援部队，便上奏说： 如今正值秋季，匈奴马肥，不宜于此时与匈奴交战，希望陛下命李陵稍等，到明年春天再一同出征。 
English: Lubod was also ashamed to be Li Ling's back-up troops, so he made a report saying: It is autumn now, Xiong Niu Ma Hui, it is not appropriate to fight with the Xiong Niu at this time, I hope that His Majesty will order Li Ling to wait a little and go to war with him again next spring.

古文：上怒，疑陵悔不欲出而教博德上书，乃诏博德引兵击匈奴于西河。诏陵以九月发，出遮虏障，至东浚稽山南龙勒水上，徘徊观虏，即亡所见，还，抵受降城休士。
现代文：汉武帝很生气，怀疑是李陵胆怯后悔，不想出征，而让路博德上书，便下诏命路博德率兵赴西河袭击匈奴，同时命李陵于九月自居延遮虏障出发，深入东浚稽山南面的龙勒水边巡回观察匈奴动静，如果不见敌踪，便退回受降城休息士卒。
English: Emperor Hanwu was very angry and suspected that Li Ling was timid and regretted not wanting to go to war, so he had Lu Bode write a letter and ordered Lu Bode to lead an army to attack the Xiongnu in the West River. At the same time, he ordered Li Ling to set out in September and go deep into the Longle waterside south of Dongjunqi Mountain to observe the movement and movement of the Xiongnu. If he did not see the enemy, he would return to the city to rest.

古文：陵于是将其步卒五千人，出居延，北行三十日，至浚稽山止营，举图所过山川地形，使麾下骑陈步乐还以闻。
现代文：于是，李陵率领步兵五千人，出居延向北推进，三十天后抵达浚稽山，停下扎营，沿途命人将所过之处的山川地形绘制成图，派部下骑兵陈步乐送回长安。
English: As a result, Li Ling led five thousand infantrymen, left home and pushed northward. Thirty days later, he arrived at Dianchi Mountain, stopped and camped. Along the way, he ordered people to draw the mountain and river topography of the places he passed, and sent his cavalryman Chen Bule back to Chang'an.

古文：步乐召见，道陵将率得士死力，上甚悦，拜步乐为郎。
现代文：汉武帝召见陈步乐，听他报告说李陵能使部下拚死效力，非常高兴，封陈步乐为郎官。
English: Emperor Hanwu summoned Chen Bu Le, and was very pleased to hear him report that Li Ling could make his subordinates work hard. Chen Bu Le was appointed as his vassal.

古文：陵至浚稽山，与单于相值，骑可三万围陵军，军居两山间，以大车为营。陵引士出营外为陈，前行持戟、盾，后行持弓、弩。
现代文：李陵在浚稽山与单于率领的匈奴军队相遇，匈奴约三万骑兵将李陵的部队包围。李陵屯兵两山之间，用大车围成营寨，亲自率领士卒在营外列下战阵，前排手持戟、盾，后排手持弓、弩。
English: Li Ling met the Xiongnu army led by Shan Yu on Dungjishan Mountain. The Xiongnu army of about thirty thousand cavalrymen surrounded Li Ling's troops. Li Ling encamped soldiers between two mountains, surrounded them with carts, and personally led the soldiers outside the camp to form a line of battle, with the front row holding shields and shields, and the back row holding bows and halberds.

古文：虏见汉军少，直前就营。
现代文：匈奴兵见汉军人少，便直逼营前阵地。
English: Seeing that there were few Han soldiers, the Xiongnu soldiers drove them straight to the front of the camp.

古文：陵搏战攻之，千弩俱发，应弦而倒。虏还走上山，汉军追击杀数千人。
现代文：李陵率部迎击，展开搏斗，汉军千弩齐发，匈奴兵纷纷应弦倒地，只得退回山上，汉军追击，杀死匈奴数千人。
English: Li Ling led his troops to meet the attack and started fighting. The Han army launched a thousand attacks, and the Xiongnu soldiers fell to the ground one after another. They had to retreat to the mountains. The Han army chased and killed thousands of Xiongnu.

古文：单于大惊，召左、右地兵八万馀骑攻陵。
现代文：单于大惊，召左、右两翼军八万余骑兵崐前来围攻李陵。
English: He was so shocked that he summoned the left and right wing armies of more than 80,000 cavalrymen to besiege Li Ling.

古文：陵且战且引南行，数日，抵山谷中，连战，士卒中矢伤，三创者载辇。两创者将车，一创者持兵战，复斩首三千馀级。
现代文：李陵率部且战且走，向南撤退，数日后，来到一个山谷之中。汉军接连作战，士卒大多身带箭伤，仍顽强苦战，受伤三处的坐在车上，受伤两处的驾车，受伤一处的手持武器坚持战斗，又斩杀匈奴三千余人。
English: Li Ling led his troops to fight and retreat to the south, and after a few days, they came to a valley. The Chinese troops fought one after another. Most of the soldiers were wounded with arrows, but they still fought tenaciously. They were injured in three places while sitting in a car, injured in two places while driving, and injured in one place while holding weapons. They insisted on fighting, and killed more than three thousand Huns.

古文：引兵东南，循故龙城道行四五日，抵大泽葭苇中，虏从上风纵火，陵亦令军中纵火以自救。
现代文：李陵率部沿着龙城旧道向东南方撤退，四五日后，退到一大片沼泽芦苇之中。匈奴在上风放火，企图烧死汉军；李陵也命部下放火烧光周围的芦苇以自救。
English: He led the army to the southeast and marched along the old Longcheng Road. After four or five days of marching, he reached the middle of the Ozawa Plain. The Huns set fire from the upper wind, and Li Ling also let the army set fire to burn out the isolation zone to save themselves.

古文：南行至山下，单于在南山上，使其子将骑击陵。
现代文：汉军继续南行，来到一座山下。单于在南山上命他的儿子率领骑兵向汉军进攻。
English: He marched south to the foot of the mountain, and once on Nanshan, he sent his son and cavalry to attack Li Ling.

古文：陵军步斗树木间，复杀数千人，因发连弩射单于，单于下走。
现代文：汉军在树林之中步战，又杀死匈奴数千人，并用连弩机射单于，单于下山逃避。
English: Li Ling's army fought in the woods, killed thousands of enemy soldiers, and retreated down the mountain firing single shots at each other.

古文：是日捕得虏，言 单于曰： 此汉精兵，击之不能下，日夜引吾南近塞，得无有伏兵乎？ 
现代文：这一天，汉军抓到部分匈奴俘虏，据他们说： 我们听单于说： 这是汉朝的精兵，猛攻也没能将他们消灭，他们日夜引我们向南接近汉塞，莫非是有埋伏的军队吗？ 
English: On this day, the Han army captured some of the Hun prisoners. According to them, "We only heard: This is the elite soldiers of the Han Dynasty, the onslaught could not destroy them, they led us south to the Han Sea day and night, is there an ambushed army?

古文：诸当户君长皆言： 单于自将数万骑击汉数千人不能灭，后无以复使边臣，令汉益轻匈奴。
现代文：各位当户、君长都说： 单于亲率数万骑兵攻击汉军数千人而不能将他们消灭，以后将无法再号令边臣，还会使汉朝更加轻视匈奴。
English: The heads of families in each tribe said: "Just by personally leading tens of thousands of cavalrymen, we cannot wipe out several thousand Han soldiers. In the future, we will no longer be able to send people into the country, which will make the Han Dynasty despise us Huns even more."

古文：复力战山谷间，尚四五十里，得平地，不能破，乃还。  
现代文：所以要在山谷中再次力战，还有四五十里才到平原地区，如仍不能取胜就返回。  
English: So we have to fight hard again in the valley, there are still forty or fifty miles to go to the plains, and if we still can't win, we'll go back.

古文：是时陵军益急，匈奴骑多，战一日数十合，复伤杀虏二千馀人。
现代文：此时汉军处境越发凶险。匈奴骑兵多，一日交战数十回合，汉军又杀伤匈奴二千余人。
English: At this time, the situation of the Han army became more and more dangerous. The Huns had more cavalry, and fought dozens of rounds a day. The Han army killed and wounded more than 2,000 Huns.

古文：虏不利，欲去，会陵军候管敢为校尉所辱，亡降匈奴，具言： 陵军无后救，射矢且尽，独将军麾下及校尉成安侯韩延年各八百人为前行，以黄与白为帜。
现代文：匈奴作战不利，打算撤兵离去。然而就在此时，李陵军中有一个名叫管敢的军候，因受到校尉的欺辱，逃到匈奴军中投降，一一说出汉军实情： 李陵部队并无后援，箭矢也即将用尽，只有将军部下和校尉成安侯韩延年所属部队各八百人在前面开路，以黄旗和白旗作为标志。
English: The Huns were not doing well in the battle and were planning to withdraw. However, just at this time, a soldier named Guan Dang, who was in the Li Ling Army, was bullied by the captain and fled to the Hun army to surrender. He told the truth about the Chinese army: Li Ling's troops had no backup and were about to run out of arrows and arrows. Only the general's subordinates and the troops belonging to the captain Cheng An Hou Han Yan Nian, eight hundred people each, opened the way in front, with yellow flags and white flags as signs.

古文：当使精骑射之，即破矣。 
现代文：应当派精锐骑兵用弓箭射杀他们，汉军立即就可击破。 
English: They should send elite cavalry to shoot them with bows and arrows, and the Chinese army can be defeated immediately.

古文：单于得敢大喜，使骑并攻汉军，疾呼曰： 李陵、韩延年趣降！ 
现代文：单于得到管敢，喜出望外，命匈奴骑兵一齐向汉军发起进攻，同时令人大声喊叫： 李陵、韩延年快快投降！ 
English: He was overjoyed to have gained control, and sent his cavalry to attack the desert army, shouting: Li Ling, Han Yan Nian, quickly surrender!

古文：遂遮道急攻陵。
现代文：又派兵截断汉军的道路，猛攻李陵。
English: So they blocked the road and attacked Li Ling.

古文：陵居谷中，虏在山上，四面射，矢如雨下。
现代文：李陵的部队被困在山谷之中，匈奴军在山上，从四面射箭，箭如雨下。
English: The Han army is in the valley, the Xiongnu is on the mountain, and it is raining arrows on all sides.

古文：汉军南行，未至鞮汗山，一日五十万矢皆尽，即弃车去。
现代文：李陵继续向南退却，尚未到达汗山，一天中五十万支箭已全部用尽，于是放弃辎重车辆，继续前往。
English: The Han army went south, but did not reach the Jiankang Mountains. It consumed half a million arrows in one day, and immediately abandoned the vehicle and retreated.

古文：士尚三千馀人，徒斩车辐而持之，军吏持尺刀，抵山，入狭谷，单于遮其后，乘隅下垒石，士卒多死，不得行。
现代文：此时军中士兵还有三千余人，只能砍下车的辐条拿在手中做武器，文职人员也手持短刀加入战斗行列。汉军退入狭谷之中，单于亲自率兵截断汉军后路，指挥匈奴兵卒将山上巨石滚入谷中，汉军多数死去，不能前进。
English: At this time, there were still more than three thousand soldiers in the army, who could only cut off the spokes of the car and hold them in their hands to make weapons, and civilians also joined the battle line with a knife. The Chinese army retreated into the narrow valley, and he personally led the soldiers to cut off the back road of the Chinese army, and commanded the Hun soldiers to roll the mountain boulders into the valley. Most of the Chinese army died and could not advance.

古文：昏后，陵便衣独步出营，止左右： 毋随，丈夫一取单于耳！ 
现代文：黄昏以后，李陵独自一人身穿便衣走出大营，止住左右随从说： 不要跟着我，我要独自一人生擒单于！ 
English: After dusk, Li Ling walked out of the camp alone in plain clothes. He stopped his entourage and said: "Don't follow me, I want to live alone!"

古文：良久，陵还，太息曰： 兵败，死矣！ 
现代文：过了很长一段时间，李陵回到营中，叹道： 我们已然兵败，即将死于此地了！ 
English: After a long time, Li Ling returned to the camp and sighed: We have already been defeated and are about to die here!

古文：于是尽斩旌旗，及珍宝埋地中，陵叹曰： 复得数十矢，足以脱矣。
现代文：于是将所有的旌旗尽行砍倒，与珍宝一起埋入地下，李陵叹了口气，对部下说道： 如果再有数十支箭，我们就足以逃脱了。
English: So he cut down all the flags and buried the treasure. Li Ling sighed and said, "With a few more arrows, I can escape."

古文：今无兵复战，天明，坐受缚矣。各鸟兽散，犹有得脱归报天子者。 
现代文：现在已没有武器再战，天亮以后，就只能坐等被擒了，不如各自逃命，还有人能够侥幸逃脱回去报告天子。 
English: Now there is no weapon to fight again. After dawn, they can only sit and wait to be captured. It is better to flee for their own lives. There are still people who can get away with it and go back to report to the emperor.

古文：令军士人持二升Я，一片冰，期至遮障者相待。
现代文：于是命将士每人身带二升干粮，一片冰，约定到遮虏障会合。
English: As a result, the commanders ordered each person to bring two liters of dry food, a piece of ice, and agreed to meet at the barricade.

古文：夜半时，击鼓起士，鼓不鸣。
现代文：半夜时，李陵命人击鼓叫醒将士们，但战鼓已破，敲不响。
English: At midnight, the drumming started, but there was no sound.

古文：陵与韩延年俱上马，壮士从者十馀人，虏骑数千追之，韩延年战死。
现代文：李陵与韩延年都跨上战马，十几名壮士跟随。匈奴数千名骑兵随后追击，韩延年战死。
English: Li Ling and Han Yan Nian both mounted their war horses, followed by more than a dozen strong men. The Huns were then pursued by thousands of cavalry, and Han Yan Nian was killed.

古文：陵曰： 无面目报陛下！ 
现代文：李陵说道： 我已无面目报答皇帝陛下了！ 
English: Li Xu said: I have no face to report to His Majesty!

古文：遂降。
现代文：于是投降。
English: So he agreed to surrender.

古文：军人分散，脱至塞者四百馀人。
现代文：其他人分散突围，逃回边塞的有四百余人。
English: Others scattered to break out of the encirclement, and more than four hundred people fled back to the border fortress.

古文：陵败处去塞百馀里，边塞以闻。
现代文：李陵兵败之处距边塞只有一百余里，边塞将领将此事报告朝廷。
English: The place of Li Ling's defeat was only a hundred miles away from the frontier fortress, and the frontier fortress general reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：上欲陵死战；后闻陵降，上怒甚，责问陈步乐，步乐自杀。
现代文：汉武帝本希望李陵能死战，后听说李陵投降匈奴，十分愤怒，责问陈步乐，陈步乐自杀而死。
English: Emperor Hanwu originally hoped that Li Ling could fight to the death, but when he heard that Li Ling had surrendered to the Xiongnu, he was very angry and scolded Chen Bule. Chen Bule committed suicide and died.

古文：群臣皆罪陵，上以问太史令司马迁，迁盛言： 陵事亲孝，与士信，常奋不顾身以徇国家之急，其素所畜积也，有国士之风。
现代文：满朝大臣都说李陵有罪，汉武帝问太史令司马迁对此事的看法，司马迁竭力为李陵分辩说： 李陵对父母孝顺，对士人讲信义，常常奋不顾身，赴国家急难，这正是他平时的志愿所在，颇有国士的风范。
English: The ministers of the Manchu Dynasty all said that Li Ling was guilty. Emperor Wudi of Han asked the Taishi to ask Sima Qian for his opinion on the matter. Sima Qian tried his best to argue for Li Ling, saying: Li Ling was dutiful to his parents, loyal to scholars, often worked hard, and went to the country in an emergency. This was exactly what he wanted to do in his free time. He had the demeanor of a statesman.

古文：今举事一不幸，全躯保妻子之臣随而媒蘖其短，诚可痛也！
现代文：如今出征偶然不幸失败，那些保全自身性命和妻子儿女的臣子就跟着捏造他的短处，实在令人痛心！
English: Now that the expedition has failed miserably by chance, those courtiers who saved their own lives and the lives of their wives and children have followed suit by fabricating his shortcomings. It is truly heartbreaking!

古文：且陵提步卒不满五千，深蹂戎马之地，抑数万之师，虏救死扶伤不暇，悉举引弓之民共攻围之，转斗千里，矢尽道穷，士张空弮，冒白刃，北首争死敌，得人之死力，虽古名将不过也。
现代文：况且李陵率领不到五千步兵，深入满是战马的匈奴腹地，抵挡数万敌军；匈奴被打得连救死扶伤都顾不过来，将全国所有能拉弓射箭的人全部调来围攻李陵。李陵率部转战千里，箭矢用尽，无路可走，将士们手拿着没有箭的空弩机，冒着敌人锋利的枪尖刀刃，仍然面向北方拚死力战，能够得到部下这样的拚死效力，既使是古代的名将，也不过如此！
English: Moreover, Li Ling led less than five thousand infantry, penetrated deep into the Hun hinterland full of war horses, resisted tens of thousands of enemy troops; the Huns were beaten so badly that they could not even save their lives, and all the people in the country who could draw a bow and shoot arrows were transferred to besiege Li Ling. Li Ling and his troops fought for thousands of miles, exhausted their arrows, and had no way to go. The soldiers held empty harpoons without arrows in their hands, braved the enemy's sharp gun-tipped blades, and still faced the north to fight to the death, and were able to obtain such deadly effectiveness from their subordinates

古文：身虽陷败，然其所摧败亦足暴于天下。
现代文：李陵虽然兵败，但他对匈奴的打击也足以使他名扬天下了。
English: Although he failed and was captured, his record of defeating the enemy is enough to shine the world.

古文：彼之不死，宜欲得当以报汉也。 
现代文：李陵之所以没有死节，当是想找机会报效国家。 
English: Li Ling did not die because he wanted to repay the Han Dynasty at the right time.

古文：上以迁为诬罔，欲沮贰师，为陵游说，下迁腐刑。
现代文：汉武帝认为司马迁在诬陷欺骗，是为了诋毁李广利，为李陵游说开脱，下令对司马迁施以宫刑。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought that Sima Qian was framing and deceiving, in order to discredit Li Guangli, to excuse Li Ling's lobbying, and ordered that Sima Qian be subjected to palace punishment.

古文：久之，上悔陵无救，曰： 陵当发出塞，乃诏强弩都尉令迎军；坐预诏之，得令老将生奸诈。 
现代文：很久以后，汉武帝才对原先使李陵陷入孤立无援的境地表示后悔，说道： 应当在李陵率军出塞时，再让强弩将军路博德前去接应；而我预先就颁下诏书，使老将路博德生出奸诈之心，不肯接应李陵。 
English: It was not until much later that Emperor Hanwu expressed regret for having left Li Ling in a helpless situation. He said: When Li Ling led his army out of the dungeon, he should have asked the strong general Lu Baode to go and meet him; but I issued an edict in advance, so that the veteran Lu Baode had a treacherous heart and refused to meet Li Ling.

古文：乃遣使劳赐陵馀军得脱者。
现代文：于是派使臣对逃脱回来的李陵余部进行慰劳赏赐。
English: So he sent an envoy to reward the remaining part of the Li Ling that had escaped.

古文：上以法制御下，好尊用酷吏，而郡、国二千石为治者大抵多酷暴，吏民益轻犯法；东方盗贼滋起，大群至数千人，攻城邑，取库兵，释死罪，缚辱郡太守、都尉，杀二千石；小群以百数掠卤乡里者，不可胜数。道路不通。
现代文：汉武帝用法制来控制国家，喜欢任用执法严苛的官吏，各郡、国的二千石官也大多以残暴的手段治理地方，而小吏和平民百姓对犯法却越发不当回事。东部地区盗贼兴起，大股数千人，攻打城邑，夺取府库的兵器，释放犯死罪的囚徒，捆缚、污辱郡太守、都尉，杀死二千石官；小股数百人，在乡村中劫杀抢掠，多得无法计算，致使道路断绝。
English: Emperor Hanwu used the legal system to control the country. He liked to appoint officials who were strict in enforcing the law. Most of the 2,000-koku officials in each county and the country governed localities with brutal means, while petty officials and ordinary people became more and more careless about breaking the law. Thieves arose in the eastern region. Thousands of large groups attacked cities and towns, seized weapons from government treasuries, released prisoners who had committed capital crimes, tied up and insulted county governors and captains, and killed 2,000-koku officials; hundreds of small groups robbed and killed in the countryside, too many to count, causing roads to be cut off.

古文：上始使御史中丞、丞相长史督之，弗能禁；乃使光禄大夫范昆及故九卿张德等衣绣衣，持节、虎符，发兵以兴击。斩首大部或至万馀级，及以法诛通行、饮食当连坐者，诸郡甚者数千人。
现代文：汉武帝开始只派御史中丞、丞相长史负责督察镇压，但未能禁绝；于是派光禄大夫范昆及曾经位居九卿的张德等身穿绣花官服，手持皇帝符节和调兵的虎符，调集军队进行围剿，有的大郡斩杀达一万余人；另外，各郡因帮助盗贼通行、提供食物而受到牵连、犯法被杀的普通百姓多的也达数千人。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu only sent the imperial historian Zhongzheng and the imperial minister Changshi to supervise the suppression, but they could not stop it. Therefore, he sent the Guanglu doctor Fan Kun and Zhang De, who was once a member of the Nine Elders, wearing embroidered official uniforms, holding the emperor's emblem and the tiger emblem of troop mobilization, to mobilize the army to carry out the siege. Some large counties killed more than 10,000 people; in addition, many ordinary people in each county were implicated in helping thieves pass and providing food, and thousands of people were killed in violation of the law.

古文：数岁，乃颇得其渠率，散卒失亡复聚党阻山川者往往而群居，无可奈何。
现代文：过了几年，抓获了大部分盗贼首领。一些被打散逃亡的人，往往重新聚集在一起，占据山川险要之处，官府无可奈何。
English: After a few years, most of the leaders of the thieves were captured. Some of those who were dispersed and fled often regrouped to occupy dangerous places in the mountains and rivers, and the government was helpless.

古文：于是作《沈命法》，曰： 群盗起，不发觉，发觉而捕弗满品者，二千石以下至小吏，主者皆死。 其后小吏畏诛，虽有盗不敢发，恐不能得，坐课累府，府亦使其不言。
现代文：于是，汉武帝命人制定《沉命法》，规定： 凡有成帮结伙盗贼兴起，地方官不能及时发现，或虽然发现却未能全部擒获，自二千石官以下直至小吏，主持其事的一律处死； 从此以后，小吏畏惧朝廷治罪，既使发现有盗贼，也因害怕不能全部捕获而不敢报告；各郡长官因害怕受到牵连，也让下属不要报告。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu ordered the "Death Penalty Law" to be formulated, stipulating that: If a gang of thieves arises and the local officials are unable to discover it in time, or if they discover it but fail to capture all of them, all those who presided over the matter, from the officials of 2,000 koku and below to the petty officials, shall be executed. From then on, the petty officials were afraid of being punished by the court, and even if they discovered the thieves, they were afraid to report it for fear of not being able to capture all of them; the county governors also asked their subordinates not to report it for fear of being implicated.

古文：故盗贼多，上下相为匿，以文辞避法焉。
现代文：因此，盗贼越来越多，而地方官上下串通，隐瞒不报，空以虚文应付朝廷，逃避法网。
English: As a result, there are more and more thieves, and local officials are colluding with each other, concealing and not reporting, and using empty and false documents to deal with the imperial court and evade the law.

古文：是时，暴胜之为直指使者，所诛杀二千石以下尤多，威振州郡。
现代文：此时，暴胜之担任直指使者，经他之手处死的二千石以下官员尤其众多，因此威镇各州郡。
English: At this time, Wu Shengzhi served as the direct messenger, and the officials with less than 2,000 koku who were executed by him were particularly numerous, so Wizhen was the leader of all prefectures and counties.

古文：至勃海，闻郡人隽不疑贤，请与相见。
现代文：暴胜之来到渤海郡，听说当地人隽不疑贤明练达，便请来相见。
English: When he came to Bohai County, he heard that the local people were undoubtedly wise and experienced, so he invited them to meet.

古文：不疑容貌尊严，衣冠甚伟，胜之躧履起迎，登堂坐定，不疑据地曰： 窃伏海濒，闻暴公子旧矣，今乃承颜接辞。
现代文：隽不疑容貌庄重严肃，衣冠十分华丽整齐，暴胜之听说隽不疑到来，连鞋崐都没顾上穿好就急忙起来相迎，让进客厅坐定，隽不疑以手按地，欠身说道： 我虽生活在偏僻的海滨，但也久闻暴公子的大名，想不到今天有幸蒙公子接见指教。
English: There is no doubt that his appearance is solemn and serious, his robe is very gorgeous and neat, when he heard that the sudden victory would come, he did not even care about wearing shoes, he hurried up to meet him, let him enter the living room and sit down, he undoubtedly put his hand on the ground and said: Although I live on a remote beach, I have long heard the name of a tyrant, and I can't imagine that today I am lucky enough to receive advice from a prince.

古文：凡为吏，太刚则折，太柔则废，威行，施之以恩，然后树功扬名，永终天禄。 
现代文：我认为，作为一名官吏，过于刚强容易折断，过于柔弱则法令难行，应既展示威严，又施以恩惠，才能建立功业，立身扬名，永远保持上天所赐的福禄。 
English: I believe that, as a government official, if you are too strong, it is easy to break, and if you are too weak, it is difficult to carry out the law. You should show both dignity and grace in order to build a career, make a name for yourself, and always maintain the blessings given by God.

古文：胜之深纳其戒；及还，表荐不疑，上召拜不疑为青州刺史。
现代文：暴胜之对他的告诫深为赞同，回到京城后，上奏推荐隽不疑。汉武帝召隽不疑前来，任命为青州刺史。
English: Surpassing his admonition, he was deeply in agreement. After returning to Beijing, Emperor Hanwu no doubt called him to come and appointed him as the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：济南王贺亦为绣衣御史，逐捕魏郡群盗，多所纵舍，以奉使不称免，叹曰： 吾闻活千人，子孙有封，吾所活者万馀人，后世其兴乎！ 
现代文：济南人王贺也曾担任绣花御史，负责驱捕魏郡的盗贼，他放过了很多人，因此被以不称职的罪名罢免。王贺叹道： 我听说，救活一千人，子孙就可得到封爵，我救活的人有一万多，后代会有人兴起吧！ 
English: Wang He, a native of Jinan, also served as the imperial historian of embroidery, responsible for chasing thieves in Wei County. He let go of many people, so he was dismissed on charges of incompetence. Wang He sighed: I heard that if you save a thousand people, your descendants can be knighted. I have saved more than ten thousand people, so there will be future generations!

古文：是岁，以匈奴降者介和王成娩为开陵侯，将楼兰国兵击车师；匈奴遣右贤王将数万骑救之，汉兵不利，引去。
现代文：这一年，汉武帝封归降汉朝的匈奴介和成娩为开陵侯，命其率领楼兰国军队袭击车师国。匈奴派右贤王率数万骑兵前往援救，汉军作战失利，退兵而去。
English: In the same year, Emperor Hanwu conferred the title of Kailing on the Hunsuke and Chengbao, who had been demoted to the Han Dynasty, and ordered them to lead the Lulang troops to attack the Chariot Kingdom. The Huns sent King Ugyen to the rescue with tens of thousands of cavalry, but the Chinese army lost the battle and withdrew.

