古文：子曰： 父子之道，天性也，君臣之义也。 
现代文：孔子说： 父子间的道义，来自于天性，有如君臣之间的礼义。 
English: Confucius said: The morality between father and son comes from nature, like the etiquette between monarchs and subjects.

古文：人之含孝禀义，天生所同，淳薄因心，非俟学至。
现代文：人们所禀承的孝义，是天生一样的，或淳厚或浇薄都是来自本心，并非是由后天学习所达到的。
English: The filial piety that people cherish is innate, and whether it is pure or watered down comes from the heart, not from acquired learning.

古文：迟遇为用，不谢始庶之法；骄慢之性，多惭水菽之享。
现代文：无论居家为民还是遇合于君王，都不能免去嫡庶的礼法；骄傲侮慢的性格，对于孝养亲长之道都有损害而觉惭愧。
English: No matter whether one is a commoner or a prince, one cannot avoid the etiquette of a legitimate child; pride and arrogance are detrimental to the way of filial piety, and one should feel ashamed.

古文：夫色养尽力，行义致身，甘心垅亩，不求闻达，斯即孟氏三乐之辞，仲由负米之叹也。
现代文：那亲身奉行孝道，对长辈和颜悦色尽力奉养，甘心终老于田园，不求闻名腾达于天下，造些就是孟子所说的人生三乐和仲由背米时的感叹。
English: Those who personally practice filial piety, do their best to nurture the elders, are willing to stay in the countryside, do not seek fame and rise to the world, and create something are what Mencius said about the three joys of life.

古文：通乎神明，理缘感召。
现代文：孝道通达于神明，受其感召而形成。
English: Filial piety reaches the gods and is inspired by them.

古文：情浇世薄，方表孝慈。
现代文：世俗风情浇薄不淳，才要表彰孝慈。
English: It is necessary to commend filial piety before worldly customs can be considered impure.

古文：故非内德者所以寄心，怀仁者所以标物矣。
现代文：所以孝道并不仅衹是心怀仁德的人才有的寄托情思、标榜于世的品德。
English: Therefore, filial piety is not only a sentimental attachment that people with benevolence have, but also a virtue that they flaunt to the world.

古文：埋名韫节，鲜或昭著，纪夫事行，以列于篇。
现代文：由于这些人姓名被埋没，节义被隐藏，很少能彰显于世。所以便将他们的事迹行为记录于这篇《列传》中。
English: Since the names of these people were buried and the significance of the festival was hidden, they could rarely be revealed to the world. Therefore, their deeds and actions were recorded in this "Biography."

古文：崔怀慎，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔怀慎是遣回东武城人。
English: Cui Huaixin is a returnee from Dongwu City.

古文：父邪利，鲁郡太守，宋元嘉中没虏。
现代文：父亲崔邪利为鲁郡太守，宋元嘉年间，陷落于敌虏手中。
English: His father, Cui Yakli, was the governor of Lu County and fell into the hands of the enemy during the reign of Song Yuanjia.

古文：怀慎与妻房氏笃爱，闻父陷没，即日遣妻，布衣蔬食，如居丧礼。
现代文：崔怀慎与妻庆压笃爱情深，听说父亲陷没于敌虏，当天便把妻子遣送回家，自己穿着粗布麻衣，吃粗茶淡饭，好像处在丧礼中一样。
English: Cui Huaixin and his wife Qingpu were deeply in love. When he heard that his father had been captured by the enemy, he sent his wife home the same day. He wore a coarse linen shirt and ate coarse tea and light meals, as if he were at a funeral.

古文：邪利后仕虏中书，戒怀慎不许如此，怀慎得书更号泣。
现代文：崔邪利后来在胡虏中书省为官，告诫怀慎不许他这样做，怀慎得到父亲来信更是号哭连天。
English: Cui Yakli later became an official in the Book Ministry in Hulun, and warned Huai Shen not to do so. When Huai Shen received a letter from his father, he cried for days.

古文：怀填从叔模为荥阳太守，亦同没虏，模子虽居处改节，而不废婚宦。
现代文：怀慎的堂叔崔模为荣肠太守，也一同陷没于胡虏之中，崔模的儿子虽然居住处事有所改变，但没有放弃婚姻和做官。
English: Huai Zhen's uncle Cui Meng, the crown prince, was also caught up in the corruption scandal. Although Cui Meng's son has changed his place of residence, he has not given up his marriage and his position as an official.

古文：大明中，怀慎宗人冀州刺史元孙北使，虏问之曰： 崔邪利、模并力屈归命，二家子侄，出处不同，义将安在？ 
现代文：刘宋大明年间，崔怀慎同族人冀州刺史元孙出使北廷，魏人问他说： 崔邪利、崔模都因为力量弱小而屈从归顺，但两家子侄行事处世却不相同，道理何在? 
English: During the second year of Liu Song University, Cui Huaixin's compatriot, Jizhou Jishi Yuan Sun, sent an envoy to the Northern Court. The Wei people asked him: Cui Yali and Cui Ma are both submissive because of their weak power, but the two nephews and nieces act and live differently. What is the reason?

古文：元孙曰： 王尊驱骥，王阳回车，欲令忠孝并弘，臣子两节。 
现代文：元孙回答说： 益州道险，王尊驱马直进，王阳返车回转，是欲使忠与孝都得到弘扬，臣节和子义都能够保全。 
English: The great-grandson replied, "Yizhou Highway Insurance, Wang Zong drives the horse straight ahead, Wang Yang returns the car to turn around, is to promote loyalty and filial piety, and to preserve the vassalage and filial piety.

古文：泰始初，淮北陷没，界上流奔者多有去就，怀慎因此入北。至桑乾，邪利时已卒，怀慎绝而后苏。
现代文：刘宋泰始初年，淮北陷落，边界上流亡逃难的人，大多部已离开，崔怀慎由此而进入北国到达桑干时，父亲邪利已经死去，怀慎悲伤万分，昏厌过去，随后苏醒了。
English: In the first year of Liu Songtai's reign, Huaibei fell, and most of the exiles and refugees on the border had already left. When Cui Huaixin entered the north country and arrived in Sangan, his father Xili had died, and Huaixin was very sad and tired, and then he woke up.

古文：载丧还青州，徒跣冰雪，土气寒酷，而手足不伤，时人以为孝感。
现代文：他运载父亲的灵柩回转青州，赤脚行走在冰雪上。那时气候酷寒，但他的手脚都没有被冻坏，当时的人们认为这是孝心感动了天地的缘故。
English: He carried his father's coffin around Qingzhou and walked barefoot on the snow and ice. At that time, the climate was extremely cold, but his hands and feet did not freeze. People at the time believed that this was because his filial piety had moved heaven and earth.

古文：丧毕，以弟在南，建元初又逃归，而弟亦已亡。
现代文：待丧事办完以后，因为弟弟仍留在南国，所以在建元初年，怀慎又逃回南方，但这时他的弟弟也已经亡故。
English: After the funeral was over, because his younger brother still remained in the south of the country, in the first year of the Jianyuan era, Huai Shen fled back to the south, but by this time his younger brother had also died.

古文：怀慎孤贫独立，宗党哀之，日敛给其升米。
现代文：崔怀慎孤独一人贫困无依，同族的人都怜悯他，每天都捐助给他一些粮食。
English: Cui Huaixin was alone and destitute. His fellow countrymen pitied him and donated some grain to him every day.

古文：永明中卒。
现代文：崔怀慎在南齐永明年间逝世。
English: Cui Huaixin passed away in the middle of the next year in Nanjing.

古文：公孙僧远，会稽剡人也。
现代文：公孙僧远是会稽剡县人。
English: His great-great-grandson, So Yuan, was from Huiqi County.

古文：治父丧至孝，事母及伯父甚谨。年谷饥贵，僧远省餐减食以供母及伯。
现代文：治办父亲丧事极尽孝道，侍奉母亲及伯父尤其恭敬，遇荒年谷米昂贵，僧远便减少吃饭的餐次和数量，以便供养母亲和伯父。
English: During his father's funeral, he was extremely filial, and served his mother and uncle with particular respect. In times of famine, when grain and rice were expensive, the monk would reduce the number and frequency of meals in order to provide for his mother and uncle.

古文：弟亡，无以葬，身贩贴与邻里，供敛送之费。
现代文：弟弟亡故，无钱埋葬，公孙僧远就亲自依附邻里乡亲出卖劳力，用以提供装殓送葬所需的费用。
English: When his younger brother died and there was no money to pay for his burial, his grandchild, Sangyuan, personally depended on his neighbors and fellow villagers to sell their labor to provide the money needed to decorate the grave.

古文：躬负土，手种松柏。
现代文：并且亲自背土上坟，亲手栽种松柏。
English: He also dug the grave himself and planted pine trees with his own hands.

古文：兄姊未婚嫁，乃自卖为之成礼。
现代文：他的哥哥姐姐因无钱不能娶亲嫁人，公孙僧远便自己出卖自己，替哥姐按礼成婚。
English: His brother and sister could not marry their relatives because they had no money, so the grandson-in-law sold himself to marry his brother and sister.

古文：名闻郡县。
现代文：因此孝名闻于郡县。
English: Therefore, the filial piety is well-known in the county.

古文：太祖即位，遣兼散骑常侍虞炎等十二部使行天下，建元三年，表列僧远等二十三人，诏并表门闾，蠲租税。
现代文：齐太祖即位，派遣兼散骑常侍虞炎等十二部巡行天下并于建元三年，表彰公孙僧远等二十三人，还同时表彰他们的家族乡里，免除他们的租税。
English: When Emperor Qizong ascended to the throne, he sent twelve units of cavalry and horsemen to march around the country in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, and commended twenty-three people, including sons and grandsons of Emperor Qizong, and also commended their family villages and exempted them from taxes.

古文：吴欣之，晋陵利城人也。
现代文：吴欣之是南东海郡利城县人。
English: Wu Xinzhi is from Licheng County, South Donghai County.

古文：宋元嘉末，弟尉之为武进县戍，随王诞起义，太初遣军主华钦讨之，吏民皆散，尉之独留，见执将死。
现代文：刘宋元嘉末年，他的弟弟吴尉之作武进县的守卫。随王刘诞起义，璺翅派遣主将茎钦征讨他，全城的官吏百姓都四散奔逃，仅有吴尉之一人留守不走，被塞兵捉住将要处死。
English: At the end of Liu Songyuan Jia's life, his younger brother Wu Li was sent as a guard to Wujin County. With the uprising of Wang Liu's birthday, Zou Ying sent his commander Zhuo Qin to recruit him. The officials and people of the whole city scattered and fled. Only one of the Wu Li stayed behind and was captured by the Siberian soldiers and was about to be executed.

古文：欣之诣钦乞代弟命，辞泪哀切，兄弟皆见原。
现代文：吴欣之往见华钦请求替代弟弟去死，泪流满面，言辞哀切，兄弟俩最终都被原谅。
English: In Wu Xin's past, he saw Hua Qin request to die in place of his brother, his face was full of tears, his words were sad, and both brothers were eventually forgiven.

古文：建元三年，有诏蠲表。
现代文：建元三年，下诏免除死罪予以表彰。
English: In the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was commended for being exempted from the death penalty.

古文：永明初，广陵民章起之二息犯罪争死，太守刘悛表以闻。
现代文：齐永明初年，广陵百姓章起之的两个儿子囚犯罪而争着去死，太守刘悛上表告于朝廷。
English: In the first year of Qi Yongming, the two sons of the Guangling people Zhangqi committed crimes and fought to die, and the eunuch Liu Xuan reported to the imperial court.

古文：韩系伯，襄阳人也。
现代文：韩系伯是襄阳人。
English: Bo, who is of Korean descent, is from Yangyang.

古文：事父母谨孝。襄阳土俗，邻居种桑树于界上为志，系伯以桑枝荫妨他地，迁界上开数尺，邻畔随复侵之，系伯辄更改种。
现代文：侍奉父母谨慎孝顺襄阳地方风俗，邻居们都在地界卜栽种桑树作为标志韩系伯认为桑树的枝叶会遮盖妨碍别人地里的农作物生长，因此把自己的地界内移数尺，但邻居却马上把地界外移，侵占了他所移开的地方。
English: Serve parents with caution and filial piety According to local customs in Xiangyang, the neighbors all planted mulberry trees on the property line as a sign of respect. The Korean-Chinese man thought that the branches and leaves of the mulberry tree would cover and hinder the growth of crops in other people's land, so he moved his property line a few feet inside, but the neighbor immediately moved the property line outside and occupied the place he moved.

古文：久之，邻人惭愧，还所侵地，躬往谢之。
现代文：韩系伯便又再次变更地界，向内移植桑树。久而久之，邻居感到惭愧，于是就归还了以往所侵占的上地，并亲自到韩系伯家道歉谢过。
English: As time went on, the neighbors felt ashamed, so they returned the land they had occupied in the past, and personally went to Han Bo's house to apologize and thank him.

古文：建元三年，蠲租税，表门闾。以寿终。
现代文：建元三年，官府免除了韩家的租税，并表彰他的家族乡最后韩系伯良涛而终。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the government exempted the Han family from tax, and commended his family's hometown, finally ending with the Korean Horyangtao.

古文：孙淡，太原人也。居长沙，事母孝。母疾，不眠食，以差为期。母哀之，后有疾，不使知也。
现代文：孙淡是太原人氏居住在长沙，侍奉母亲很孝顺母亲患病，他睡不着觉、吃不下饭，一直到母亲病愈为止母亲怜惜他，后来有病便不让他知道。
English: Sun Tan is a Taiyuan person who lives in Changsha. He serves his mother very dutifully. When his mother was ill, he couldn't sleep or eat. His mother took pity on him until she was well. Later, she didn't let him know she was ill.

古文：豫章王领湘州，辟骠骑行参军。
现代文：豫章王作湘州刺史时，征召他为骠骑行参军。
English: When Yu Zhangwang was writing the history of Hunan Province, he was called up to join the army on horseback.

古文：建元三年，蠲租税，表门闾。
现代文：建元三年，朝廷免除了他家的租税，并表彰他的家族乡里。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the imperial court exempted his family from taxes and commended his family's hometown.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：最后孙淡于家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：华宝，晋陵无锡人也。
现代文：华宝足晋陵郡无锡县人。
English: Hua Bao was from Wuxi County, Jinling County.

古文：父豪，义熙末戍长安，宝年八岁。
现代文：父亲名华豪，束晋义熙末年，守卫长安，当时华宝仅八岁。
English: Hua Bao was only eight years old when his father, the famous Hua Gao, guarded Chang'an in the last years of the Shogun Yixi.

古文：临别，谓宝曰： 须我还，当为汝上头。 
现代文：临别时，父亲对华实说： 必须等我回家来，方才为你行冠礼。 
English: At the time of parting, the father said to Huasheng: I have to wait until I get home before I can perform the coronation for you.

古文：长安陷虏，豪殁。宝年至七十，不婚冠，或问之者，辄号恸弥日，不忍答也。
现代文：后长安陷落于敌虏之手，华豪战死华宝直到七十岁，不结婚也不行冠礼；有人间起缘由，便整天号哭悲恸，不忍回答。
English: Later, Chang'an fell into the hands of the enemy. Hua Gao died in battle, and Hua Bao lived until the age of seventy. He could not marry or be crowned. For some reason, he cried all day and could not bear to answer.

古文：同郡薛天生，母遭艰菜食，天生亦菜食，母未免丧而死，天生终身不食鱼肉。
现代文：同郡人薛天生，他的母亲因娘家有人丧亡而正在服丧礼所以吃素，薛天生也跟着吃素食，母亲在没有除去丧服时便死了，薛天生就一辈子也不吃鱼肉荤腥。
English: Xue Tian Sheng, a county resident, is a vegetarian. His mother was attending a funeral because someone in her family had died. Xue Tian Sheng also followed a vegetarian diet. His mother died without removing her funeral clothes. Xue Tian Sheng has never eaten fish or meat in his life.

古文：与弟有恩义。
现代文：对弟弟有恩义。
English: He is grateful to his brother.

古文：又同郡刘怀胤与弟怀则，年十岁，遭父丧，不衣絮帛，不食盐菜。
现代文：又有同郡人刘怀胤及弟弟刘怀则，他十岁时，遭遇父亲丧亡之灾，因此一辈子不穿丝、棉织品，不吃盐和蔬菜。
English: There are also Liu Huaiyin and his brother Liu Huai Ze, both from the same county. When he was ten years old, his father died, so he never wore silk or cotton, and did not eat salt or vegetables.

古文：建元三年，并表门闾。
现代文：建元三年，这三家同时被表彰。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, these three companies were commended at the same time.

古文：韩灵敏，会稽剡人也。
现代文：韩囊敏是会稽郡剡县入。
English: Han Zuximin is from Jixian County, Hefei County.

古文：早孤，与兄灵珍并有孝性。
现代文：很小的时候父亲便丧亡而成为孤儿，他和兄长灵珍都有孝性。
English: When he was very young, his father died and he became an orphan. Both he and his elder brother, Ling Zhen, have filial piety.

古文：寻母又亡，家贫无以营凶，兄弟共种瓜半亩，朝采瓜子，暮已复生，以此遂办葬事。
现代文：不久母亲又亡故了，由于家境贫寒无法办理丧事，于是兄弟俩共同种了半亩瓜田。早上将瓜采摘下来，晚上又再生出新瓜，因此终于办完了丧葬之事。
English: Soon after, his mother died, and since the family was too poor to pay for a funeral, the two brothers planted half an acre of melon fields together. In the morning, they picked the melons, and in the evening, new melons were born, so the funeral was finally over.

古文：灵珍亡，无子，妻卓氏守节不嫁，虑家人夺其志，未尝告归，灵敏事之如母。
现代文：后来韩灵珍又死了，他没有儿子，妻卓氏坚守贞节不想再嫁，但顾虑娘家人会强行改变她的守节志向，于是便不回娘家，而韩灵敏侍奉她好像对待母亲一样。
English: Later, Han Lingzhen died again. He did not have a son. His wife, Zhuo Shi, insisted on keeping the festival and did not want to remarry. However, she was worried that her daughter's family would force her to change her intention to keep the festival, so she did not return to her daughter's house. Han Lingmin served her as if she were her mother.

古文：晋陵吴康之妻赵氏，父亡弟幼，值岁饥，母老病笃，赵诣乡里自卖，言辞哀切，乡里怜之，人人分升米相救，遂得免。
现代文：晋陵郡吴康之的妻子趟氏，父亲早亡弟弟年幼，正遇上饥荒之年，母亲又年老病重，于是她便到乡里自己出卖自身，言辞悲哀恳切，乡里人都可怜他，家家都分出一些米来救助她，最终免于饿死。
English: Mr. Wai, the wife of Wu Kangzhi of Jinling County, whose father died young and his brother died young, was experiencing a famine year, and her mother was old and seriously ill. So she went to the village to sell herself. The words were sad and sincere. The villagers all pitied him, and the families all allocated some rice to help her, and eventually she was saved from starving to death.

古文：及嫁康之，少时夫亡，家欲更嫁，誓死不贰。
现代文：等到嫁给吴康之后，不久丈夫又死了，家里人想要她改嫁，她却誓死不变心。
English: After marrying Wu Kang, her husband died not long after, and her family wanted her to remarry, but she was determined.

古文：义兴蒋隽之妻黄氏，夫亡不重嫁，逼之，欲赴水自杀，乃止。
现代文：义兴蒋俊之的妻子黄氏，丈夫死后不再嫁，家人逼迫她，她就想要投水自杀，这才终止了逼嫁。
English: After her husband's death, the wife of Yixing Jiang Junzhi, Ms. Huang, refused to remarry. The family persecuted her, and she wanted to commit suicide by throwing herself into the water, which ended the forced marriage.

古文：建元三年，诏蠲租赋，表门闾。
现代文：建元三年，朝廷颁诏免除租税，表彰家门。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the imperial court issued an edict exempting tax and commending the family.

古文：永明元年，会稽永兴吴翼之母丁氏，少丧夫，性仁爱。
现代文：齐永明元年，会稽郡永兴县倪翼之的母亲丁氏，年轻时丈夫便去世了。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Ms. Ding, the mother of Ni Yingzhi of Yongxing County, Hefei County, lost her husband at a young age.

古文：遭年荒，分衣食以贻里中饥饿者，邻里求借，未尝违。
现代文：她生性仁慈，遇上荒年，就将衣服食物分发给乡里那些挨饿受冻的贫苦百姓。邻居求借东西，没有不借的。
English: She was kind-hearted by nature, and when a bad year came, she distributed clothes and food to the poor people in the countryside who were starving and freezing. Neighbors asked to borrow things, and no one refused.

古文：同里陈穰父母死，孤单无亲戚，丁氏收养之，及长，为营婚娶。
现代文：同村的陈穣父母死了，孤独一人又没有亲戚，丁氏便收养了他，等他长大后又给他娶亲成家。
English: Chen Yao's parents, who lived in the same village, died. Alone and without any relatives, Mr. Ding adopted him. When he grew up, he married him and started a family.

古文：又同里王礼妻徐氏，荒年客死山阴，丁为买棺器，自往敛葬。
现代文：又有同村邻居王礼的妻子徐氏，遇上荒年歹脓山阴县，丁氏就替她买了棺材冥器，并亲自前往山阴收殓埋葬。
English: There was also the wife of Wang Li's neighbor from the same village, Ms. Xu, who had a bad year in Shanyin County. Mr. Ding bought a coffin for her and personally went to Shanyin to collect the coffin and bury it.

古文：元徽末，大雪，商旅断行，村里比屋饥饿，丁自出盐米，计口分赋。
现代文：在宋元徽末年时，一次下大雪，长途贩运的商人也难以出门，村中家家饥饿无粮，丁氏从自家拿出盐米按人分发。
English: At the end of the Song and Yuan dynasties, a heavy snowfall made it difficult for long-distance traffickers to go out. Families in the village were starving and had no food. Mr. Ding took out salted rice from his home and distributed it to each person.

古文：同里左侨家露四丧，无以葬，丁为办冢椁。
现代文：同村人左侨家死了四人无力埋葬，丁氏替他们家营造坟冢置办棺材。
English: Four members of a fellow villager family, the Zuoqiao family, died and could not be buried. The Ding family built a grave and placed a coffin for their family.

古文：有三调不登者，代为输送。
现代文：有交不起各种赋税的人家，丁氏都替他们送交。
English: There are people who can't afford to pay all kinds of taxes, and Mr. Ding sends money for them.

古文：丁长子妇王氏守寡执志不再醮。
现代文：丁氏的长媳王氏守寡后矢志不再嫁人。
English: Mr Ding's eldest daughter-in-law, Ms Wang, no longer wants to marry after becoming a widow.

古文：州郡上言，诏表门闾，蠲租税。
现代文：州郡把她们家的善行上报，朝廷颁诏表彰倪家，并免除租税。
English: The state and county reported their family's good deeds, and the imperial court issued an edict commending the Ni family and exempting them from taxes.

古文：又广陵徐灵礼妻遭火救儿，与儿俱焚死。
现代文：广陵人徐灵礼的妻子遭受火灾，她因为抢救儿子而与儿子一同被烧死。
English: The wife of Guangling resident Xu Lingli suffered a fire. She was burned to death together with her son because she tried to save him.

古文：太守刘悛以闻。
现代文：太守刘悛把此事上报朝廷。
English: The daimyō Liu Ye reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：又会稽人陈氏，有三女，无男。
现代文：会稽人隆氐，有三个女儿，没有男孩。
English: Long Hao, the auditor of the association, has three daughters and no sons.

古文：祖父母年八九十，老耄无所知，父笃癃病，母不安其室。
现代文：三个女孩的祖父母年纪已有八九十岁了，年老昏聩已不晓人事，父亲患重病手脚很不霞活，母亲又不安于室想再嫁。
English: The grandparents of the three girls are in their eighties and nineties. They are old and feeble and do not know what to do. Their father is seriously ill and is not very active. Their mother is anxious and wants to remarry.

古文：值岁饥，三女相率于西湖采菱莼，更日至市货卖，未尝亏怠。
现代文：正碰上荒年，三个女孩都去西湖采摘菱角和莼菜，第二：天到集市上去卖钱，从来不亏待和怠慢别人。
English: It was a bad year, and all three girls went to the West Lake to pick rutabagas and amaranth. The second day, they went to the market to sell money. They never mistreated or neglected others.

古文：乡里称为义门，多欲取为妇，长女自伤茕独，誓不肯行。
现代文：乡里人都称她们家为仁义之门，很多人都想要娶这三个女孩为媳妇。
English: The villagers call their home the gate of benevolence and righteousness, and many people want to marry these three girls as their daughters-in-law.

古文：祖父母寻相继卒，三女自营殡葬，为庵舍墓侧。
现代文：大女伤感家中无男孩而孤独无依，所以发誓不肯出嫁祖父母不久便相继去世，三个女孩自己设法安葬了老人，并曰。
English: The eldest daughter felt sad and lonely without a boy at home, so she vowed not to marry off her grandparents, who soon died one after another. The three girls managed to bury the old man themselves, and said:

古文：又永兴概中里王氏女，年五岁，得毒病，两目皆盲。
现代文：在坟墓旁边建了小草屋守孝。永兴县概中里有一个姓王的女孩，五岁时得了恶疾，两眼都瞎了。
English: A small grass hut, Moritaka, was built next to the grave. There was a girl named Wang in Yongxing County Middle School. When she was five years old, she got a terrible disease and lost her sight in both eyes.

古文：性至孝，年二十，父母死，临尸一叫，眼皆血出，小妹娥舐其血，左目即开，时人称为孝感。
现代文：她生性非常孝顺，二十岁父母便死了，她面对尸体喊叫一声，两眼都流出了鲜血。她的小妹：娥用舌舔血。她的左眼立刻重见光明，当时人们都称这是孝义感动丁老天。
English: She was very filial by nature. When her parents died at the age of twenty, she cried out in front of the corpse, and blood came out of both eyes. Her little sister: 娥 licked the blood with her tongue. Her left eye immediately regained its brightness, and people said at the time that it was the filial piety that moved Ding Laotian.

古文：县令何昙秀不以闻。
现代文：县令何昙秀没有奏报此事。
English: County magistrate He Yuxiu did not report the incident.

古文：又诸暨东洿里屠氏女，父失明，母痼疾，亲戚相弃，乡里不容。
现代文：诸暨县东袴里有一位姓屠的女子，父亲双目失明，母亲患病经久不愈，亲戚非常嫌弃，乡里也不容他们安身。
English: There is a woman surnamed Tu in Donglu, Zhuji County. Her father is blind, her mother has been ill for a long time, her relatives are very reluctant, and they are not allowed to settle down in the village.

古文：女移父母远住罗，昼樵采，夜纺绩，以供养。
现代文：女子就把父母远远迁移到麻草丛生的地方住下，白天砍柴，晚上纺纱织布，用以供养父母。
English: The girl moved her parents far away to live in a place full of reeds, chopping wood during the day and spinning and weaving at night to support her parents.

古文：父母俱卒，亲营殡葬，负土成坟。
现代文：父母都去世后，亲自设法安葬他们，背土垒筑坟茔。
English: After the death of his parents, he personally tried to bury them, digging a grave behind the earth.

古文：忽闻空中有声云： 汝至性可重，山神欲相驱使。
现代文：忽然听见天空中有声音说： 你这种极其孝顺的心性值得敬重，山神想要差派你。
English: Suddenly, he heard a voice in the sky saying, "Your extremely filial spirit is worthy of respect. The mountain god wants to send you."

古文：汝可为人治病，必得大富。 
现代文：你可以替人治病，必定会获得很多财富。 
English: If you can cure someone's illness, you are sure to get a lot of wealth.

古文：女谓是妖魅，弗敢从，遂得病。
现代文：女子认为这是妖精作怪，不敢听从，于是就得了病。
English: The woman thought it was a trick of the fairies and did not dare to obey, so she fell ill.

古文：积时，邻舍人有中溪蜮毒者，女试治之，自觉病便差，遂以巫道为人治疾，无不愈。
现代文：遇了些日子，邻居中有人中了溪裹害虫的毒，女子尝试着替他治疗，自己也觉得病立刻好了，于是就用巫术给人治病，没有不痊愈的。
English: Once upon a time, one of the neighbors was poisoned by a pest in the creek. The woman tried to treat him, and she herself felt better immediately, so she used witchcraft to cure people. No one was left unhealed.

古文：家产日益，乡里多欲娶之，以无兄弟，誓守坟墓不肯嫁，为山贼劫杀。
现代文：女子的家产曰渐增多，乡里很多人都想娶她为妻，她因为没有兄弟，所以发誓看守父母的坟墓而不肯嫁人，后来被山中强盗抢去杀掉。
English: The girl's family property was gradually increasing, and many people in the village wanted to marry her. Since she had no brothers, she swore to guard the graves of her parents and refused to marry. Later, she was robbed and killed by bandits in the mountains.

古文：县令于琳之具言郡，太守王敬则不以闻。
现代文：县令于琳之把这些情况全都报告给郡裹，但郡太守王敬则却不奏报。
English: The county magistrate, Yu Lin, reported all of this to the county magistrate, but the county governor, Wang Jing, did not report it.

古文：建武三年，吴兴乘公济妻姚氏生二男，而公济及兄公愿、乾伯并卒，各有一子欣之、天保，姚养育之，卖田宅为娶妇，自与二男寄止邻家。
现代文：齐明帝建达三年，吴兴人乘公济的妻子姚氏生有二个男孩，而乘公济和兄长乘公愿、乘干侦都死了。两位兄长各留下一个男孩，名叫欣之、天保，姚氏把他们抚养成人，并卖掉田产房屋给他们娶妻，自己却和两个孩子寄居在邻居家中。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Qiming, Wu Xingren's wife Yao, who took advantage of the public welfare, gave birth to two boys, but she and her brother, who took advantage of the public welfare, and took advantage of the investigation, both died. The two brothers each left a boy, named Xinzhi and Tianbao. Yao raised them to adulthood and sold the farmhouse to marry them, but he and his two children lived in a neighbor's house.

古文：明帝诏为其二子婚，表门闾，复徭役。
现代文：明帝颁下诏书为她的两个儿子完婚，并表彰她的家族，免除他们家的徭役。
English: Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict to marry off her two sons, and commended her family, exempting them from household duties.

古文：吴郡范法恂妻褚氏，亦勤苦执妇业。
现代文：吴郡范法恂的妻子褚氏，也很勤劳刻苦严守妇道。
English: Ms. Zou, the wife of Mr. Fan Fahui of Wuxi County, is also very hardworking and strictly observes the women's way.

古文：宋升明中，孙昙瓘谋反亡命，褚谓其子僧简曰： 孙越州先姑之姊子，与汝父亲则从母兄弟，交则义重古人。
现代文：宋升明年间，孙昙璀谋反而逃亡在外，褚氏对她的儿子范僧简说： 孙越州是我已故的婆母姐姐的儿子，他和你父亲是姨表兄弟，交结的情谊比古人还重。
English: During Song Sheng's second year, however, Sun Yimou fled abroad. Ms. Zou said to her son, Fan Xiangyan: Sun Yezhou is the son of my late mother-in-law's sister. He and your father are cousins. Their friendship is even stronger than that of the ancients.

古文：逃窜脱不免，汝宜收之。 
现代文：他现在逃亡流窜但总免不了一死，你应当为他收尸。 
English: He is now a fugitive and a fugitive, but he cannot avoid death. You should collect his body.

古文：昙瓘寻伏法，褚氏令僧简往敛葬。
现代文：孙昙罐不久便被处以死刑，渚氏命范僧简前去收殓和掩埋尸体。
English: Sun Yujan was soon sentenced to death, and the Nagisa clan ordered Fan Jian, a monk, to collect the body and bury it.

古文：年七十余，永明中卒。
现代文：褚氏活了七十余岁，在齐永明中期去世。
English: He lived for more than seventy years and died in the middle of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：僧简在都，闻病驰归，未至而褚已卒，将殡，举尸不起，寻而僧简至焉。
现代文：范僧简当时在京都，听说母亲病了便急忙赶回家，他还没有回到家中褚氏就已经死了，将要出殡，但众人却抬不动尸体，不多久，范僧简便赶回到家中。
English: Fan Xiangjian was in Kyoto at the time. When he heard that his mother was ill, he hurried home. Before he got home, Mr. Xing had already died. A funeral was to be held, but no one could carry the body. Soon, Fan Xiangjian rushed home.

古文：封延伯，字仲琏，渤海人也。
现代文：封延伯字仲琏，渤海人氏。
English: He was given the posthumous name of Zhongyao, a member of the Erhai clan.

古文：有学行，不与世人交，事寡嫂甚谨。
现代文：学问德行都很好，不和世俗人交往，侍奉守寡的嫂嫂很是恭顺小心。
English: They are very good at academic virtue, do not socialize with worldly people, and serve the widowed sister-in-law very obediently and carefully.

古文：州辟主簿，举秀才，不就。后乃仕。
现代文：州宫征聘他为主簿，荐举为秀才，都不肯前去接受，以后才出来做官。
English: The state palace recruited him as the chief librarian, recommended him as a talented person, but he refused to accept, and only later did he come out as an official.

古文：垣崇祖为豫州，启太祖用为长史，带梁郡太守。
现代文：垣崇祖为豫州刺史，请求太祖用封延伯作长史，并兼梁郡太守。
English: For the history of Yuzhou, he asked the great ancestor to use Fenyenbo to make a long history, and he was also the governor of Liang County.

古文：以疾自免，侨居东海，遂不至京师。
现代文：后因有病而自请免职，侨居东海，于是就不去京师了。
English: Later, due to illness, he asked to be relieved of his duties and lived in the East China Sea, so he did not go to Beijing.

古文：三世同财，为北州所宗附。
现代文：他家三代都不分家，为北部州郡的人们所崇仰归附。
English: His family has been together for three generations and is revered by the people of the northern state.

古文：豫章王辟中兵，不就，卒。
现代文：豫章王征聘他作中兵，不肯就任，终老于家。
English: King Yuanzhang recruited him as a middle-ranking soldier, but he refused to take up the post and remained at home.

古文：建元三年，大使巡行天下，义兴陈玄子四世一百七十口同居。
现代文：建元三年，大使巡察天下。义兴人陈玄子四代共一百七十口人共同生活而不分家。
English: In the third year of the Jianyuan era, the ambassador surveyed the world. Four generations of a total of one hundred and seventy people lived together without splitting up.

古文：武陵郡邵荣兴、文献叔八世同居。
现代文：武陵郡邵荣兴家、文献叔家八代同堂。
English: Eight generations of the Shao Rongxing family and the literati uncle's family in Wuling County live in the same house.

古文：东海徐生之、武陵范安祖、李圣伯、范道根五世同居。
现代文：东海徐生之家、亘噬范安祖家、李圣伯家、范道担家都是五代同堂。
English: The Donghai Xusheng family, the Wanchuan Fan Anzu family, the Li Shengbo family, and the Fan Daotang family are all five generations of the same family.

古文：零陵谭弘宝、衡阳何弘、华阳阳黑头疏从四世同居，并共衣食。
现代文：零陵谭弘宝家、衡阳何弘家、华阳阳黑头家疏亲表戚四代同堂，并且共同享用吃穿。
English: Four generations of distant cousins from the Ziling Tan Hongbao family, Hengyang He Hong family and Huayang Yang Hegtou family have been living in the same house for four generations, and enjoy eating and dressing together.

古文：诏表门闾，蠲租税。
现代文：颁诏表彰门风，免除租税。
English: An imperial edict was issued to commend the style and exempt it from taxes.

古文：又蜀郡王续祖、华阳郝道福并累世同爨。
现代文：又有蜀郡王续祖家、华阳郝道福家都是世代同堂共食。
English: In addition, the ancestral family of Wang Zhaoyi in Shu County and the Daofu family in Huayang County have been eating together for generations.

古文：建武三年，明帝诏表门闾，蠲调役。
现代文：建武三年，齐明帝颁韶表彰其门风，免除调税差役。
English: In the third year of Jianwu's reign, Emperor Qiming awarded him a medal in recognition of his style, exempting him from tax adjustment.

古文：吴达之，义兴人也。
现代文：吴达之是义兴人。
English: Wu Dazhi is a philanthropist.

古文：嫂亡无以葬，自卖为十夫客以营冢椁。
现代文：他嫂嫂死了，无钱安葬，就自己卖自己为十夫佣客，以此来造坟买棺。
English: When his sister-in-law died, he had no money to pay for her burial, so he sold himself as a hired hand to build a grave and buy a coffin.

古文：从祖弟敬伯夫妻荒年被略卖江北，达之有田十亩，货以赎之，与之同财共宅。
现代文：他堂祖父那一房的族弟呈数值夫妻俩因荒年而被强卖到江北，吴达之有十亩田产，就把它卖了替族弟夫妇赎身，并和他们一起享用家财，共住一座房屋。
English: His great-grandfather's two brothers were sold to the north of the Yangtze River during the famine. Wu Dazhi, who had ten mu of farmland, sold it to redeem himself for his brothers and sisters, and enjoyed the family wealth with them, living in a house together.

古文：郡命为主簿，固以让兄。
现代文：郡裹任命县达之为主簿，他坚决要让给兄长。
English: Guan Wai appointed Guan Dacai as his chief accountant, but he was determined to let his brother take over.

古文：又让世业旧田与族弟，弟亦不受，田遂闲废。
现代文：又把祖宗传下来的家业旧田让给族弟，族弟也不肯接受，那些田地便闲置荒芜了。
English: He also ceded the old fields of the family business passed down from his ancestors to his younger brother, but the younger brother refused to accept, and those fields were left idle and desolate.

古文：建元三年，诏表门闾。
现代文：建元三年，颁诏表彰其家。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, an imperial edict was issued to commend his family.

古文：河南辛普明侨居会稽，自少与兄同处一帐，兄亡，以帐施灵座，夏月多蚊，普明不以露寝见色。
现代文：河南人辛普明侨居会稽，从小和兄长共睡一顶蚊帐，兄长亡故，他将蚊帐放置于兄长的灵位上，夏天蚊虫很多，卒普明并不因为睡在没挂蚊帐的床上而面露难色。
English: Xin Pu Ming, an expatriate from Henan Province, lived in a commune. Since he was a child, he and his brother slept with a mosquito net. When his brother died, he placed the mosquito net on his brother's place of worship. There are many mosquitoes in the summer, and his brother did not look sad because he was sleeping in a bed without a mosquito net.

古文：兄将葬，邻人嘉其义，赙助甚多，普明初受，后皆反之。
现代文：兄长将被殡葬，邻居们赞许他的义气，所以捐钱帮他办丧事的人很多。
English: The elder brother will be buried, and many people have donated money to help pay for his funeral, as his neighbors praise his selflessness.

古文：赠者甚怪，普明曰： 本以兄墓不周，故不逆来意。
现代文：开始时辛普明还接受人们的赞助，后来就把钱财退还给他们。赠送财物的人感到很奇怪，辛普明说： 原先因为兄长墓地不完善，所以没有违背你们赠物的美意。
English: At the beginning, Simpmin also accepted people's sponsorship, and later he returned the money to them. The person who donated the property felt very strange, Simpmin said: Originally, because the brother's cemetery was not perfect, it did not violate the beauty of your gift.

古文：今何忍亡者余物以为家财。 
现代文：现在怎么忍心将死者剩余的钱物当做自己的家财呢。 
English: Now how can I bear to take the dead man's leftover money and belongings as my own family property?

古文：后遭母丧，几至毁灭。
现代文：后来辛普明又遇到母亲丧亡，几乎因哀痛而毁灭自身。
English: Later, when Simpmin's mother died, she almost destroyed herself with grief.

古文：扬州刺史豫章王辟为议曹从事。
现代文：扬州刺史豫章王征召他为议曹从事。
English: He was recruited by the Yangzhou prefectural governor Yu Zhangwang to serve as a councillor.

古文：年五十卒。
现代文：他五十岁死去。
English: He died at the age of 50.

古文：又有何伯玙，弟幼玙，俱厉节操。
现代文：又有何伯锳及弟弟何幼锳。都非常有节操。
English: He also has a brother and several cubs. They are very disciplined.

古文：养孤兄子，及长为婚，推家业尽与之。
现代文：他们抚养亡兄的儿子，等他长大后又为他成婚，并把家财产业全都给了他。
English: They raised their dead brother's son, and when he grew up, they married him and gave him all the family property.

古文：安贫枯槁，诲人不倦，乡里呼为人师。
现代文：他们安心于贫困的生活，身体很瘦弱，但教育他人却不知疲倦，乡里人们都叫他们是人师。
English: They are comfortable living in poverty, their bodies are very thin, but they are tireless in educating others. People in the countryside call them teachers.

古文：郡守下车，莫不修谒。
现代文：郡中官吏来乡，没有不前去拜见他们的。
English: When officials from the county government came to the village, they did not hesitate to visit them.

古文：永明十一年，伯玙卒。
现代文：永明十一年，何伯琐去世。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, He Bozo passed away.

古文：幼玙少好佛法，翦落长斋，持行精苦。
现代文：何幼塽从小喜欢佛法，这时便剪去头发，长吃素斋，修行精深勤苦。
English: How many cubs like Buddhism from childhood, then they cut off their hair, eat vegetarian food for a long time, and practice hard.

古文：梁初卒。
现代文：梁朝初年去世。
English: He died in the first year of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：兄弟年并八十余。
现代文：兄弟俩都活了八十多岁。
English: Both brothers lived into their eighties.

古文：王文殊，吴兴故鄣人也。
现代文：王文殊是吴兴郡故鄣人。
English: Wang Wenshu is a deceased person from Wuxing County.

古文：父没虏，文殊思慕泣血，蔬食山谷三十余年。
现代文：父亲陷没于胡虏，王文殊想念伤，至极以至于泣血，居住在山中蔬食淡饭三十余年。
English: Wang Wenshu has lived in the mountains for more than 30 years, living on a diet of vegetables and light meals.

古文：太守谢抃板为功曹，不就。
现代文：太守谢满征用他为功曹，不肯任职。
English: Tai Shou Xie Man requisitioned him as a gong cao and refused to serve.

古文：永明十一年，太守孔琇之表曰： 文殊性挺五常，心符三教。
现代文：永明十一年，太守孔绣之上表说： 王文迭心性服膺于三教五常之礼。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, the eunuch Kong Xiu said on the table: Wang Wen tenaciously obeyed the Three Teachings and Five Constants.

古文：以父没獯庭，抱终身之痛，专席恒居，衔罔极之恤。
现代文：因为父亲陷没于胡虏之廷，所以怀抱有终身的悲痛，平时常睡草席，内心埋藏没有终极的忧虑。
English: Because my father was trapped in the court of the Khurik, I have a lifelong grief, I often sleep on straw, and there is no ultimate worry buried in my heart.

古文：服纟宁缟以经年，饵蔬菽以俟命，婚义灭于天情，官序空于素抱。
现代文：多年来都穿着麻衣丧服，吃蔬食淡饭以等待天命，本能的婚娶情感已经泯灭，出仕作官的想法也已冷淡。
English: For many years, they have been wearing sackcloth and mourning clothes, eating vegetables and light meals to wait for fate. The instinctive emotion of marriage has been extinguished, and the idea of serving as an official has also cooled.

古文：傥降甄异之恩，榜其闾里 。
现代文：倘或降下鉴选异才的恩典，希望能给他的门闾题匾。 
English: If the grace of selecting exceptional talent is lowered, it is hoped that his door will be opened.

古文：郁林诏榜门，改所居为 孝行里 。
现代文：郁林王便下诏在他的里巷门额上题字，把他所居住的地方改名为 孝行里 。
English: King Yulin then decreed an inscription on the front of the door of his alley, renaming the place where he lived as "Xiaojingli."

古文：朱谦之，字处光，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：朱谦之字处光，吴郡钱唐人氏。
English: Zhu Qian's character is light, Wu County Qiantang people.

古文：父昭之，以学解称于乡里，谦之年数岁，所生母亡，昭之假葬田侧，为族人朱幼方燎火所焚。
现代文：父亲朱昭之，因学问通达而为乡里人们所称道朱谦之年纪才几岁时，生身母亲就去世了，父亲朱昭之把她暂时葬在田地旁边，却被同族人朱幼方放火烧掉。
English: His father, Zhu Zhaozhi, was only a few years old when his biological mother died. Zhu Zhaozhi's father buried her temporarily next to the field, but she was set on fire by Zhu Youfang, a member of the same tribe.

古文：同产姊密语之，谦之虽小，便哀戚如持丧。
现代文：朱谦之的同母姐姐暗中告诉了他，虽然当时朱谦之年岁还很小，却悲伤欲绝像守丧一样。
English: Zhu Qianzhi's same-mother sister secretly told him that although Zhu Qianzhi was still very young at the time, his grief was like a funeral.

古文：年长不婚娶。
现代文：长大以后他不结婚娶亲。
English: When he grows up, he does not want to get married.

古文：永明中，手刃杀幼方，诣狱自系。
现代文：永明年间，朱谦之拿刀刺杀了朱幼方，到监狱中自首。
English: In the middle of the eternal year, Zhu Qianzhi stabbed Zhu Yufang with a knife and surrendered to the prison.

古文：县令申灵勖表上，别驾孔稚圭、兼记室刘璡、司徒左西掾张融笺与刺史豫章王曰： 礼开报仇之典，以申孝义之情；法断相杀之条，以表权时之制。
现代文：县令申灵勖申表上报，别驾孔稚珪、兼记室刘琏、司徒左西掾张融写信给刺史豫章王说： 礼制已经设置有报仇的典章，用以伸张孝义的情感；法律有禁绝相杀的条款，用以表明权宜的制度。
English: The county magistrate, Shen Ling, reported on the petition form, and the governor, Liu Zhen, and the assistant registrar, Liu Zhen, and the magistrate, Zuoxi Zhen, Zhang Rong, wrote to the scribe, Yu Zhangwang, saying: The etiquette system has set up a vengeance ordinance to express the sentiment of filial piety; the law has a clause prohibiting mutual killing to indicate the expedient system.

古文：谦之挥刃酬冤，既申私礼；系颈就死，又明公法。今仍杀之，则成当世罪人；宥而活之，即为盛朝孝子。
现代文：朱谦之挥刀杀死仇敌，已经伸张了私礼；现在伸出脖子去死，又显扬了公法如果现在仍然把他杀死，那他就成了当世的罪人；如果赦免而让他活着，那他就成了繁荣时代的孝子。
English: Zhu Qianzhi waved his sword to kill the enemy, he had already made a private vow; now he stretched out his neck to die, and showed the public law. If he still killed him now, he would become a sinner of the world; if he was pardoned and let him live, he would become a filial son of the prosperous era.

古文：杀一罪人，未足弘宪；活一孝子，实广风德。
现代文：杀一个罪人，并不足以弘扬法令；存活一位孝子，确实能够推广教化道德。
English: Killing a sinner is not enough to promote the law; the survival of a filial son can indeed promote moral education.

古文：张绪、陆澄，是其乡旧，应具来由。融等与谦之并不相识，区区短见，深有恨然。 
现代文：张绪、陆澄两人，是朱谦之的同乡，应当陈述事情的来由我张融等人和朱谦之并不认识，仅表明上述微小浅短的意见，并深深感到遣憾。 
English: Zhang Xu and Lu Cheng are two of Zhu Qianqiao's fellow villagers. Zhang Rong and Zhu Qianqiao did not know each other, and only expressed the above-mentioned small and shallow opinions, and deeply regretted it.

古文：豫章王言之世祖，时吴郡太守王慈、太常张绪、尚书陆澄并表论其事，世祖嘉其义，虑相复报，乃遣谦之随曹虎西行。
现代文：豫章王把这事告诉了齐世祖，当时吴郡太守王慈、太常张绪、尚书陆澄一齐上表评论遣事。世祖赞赏朱谦之的义气，又担心他受到报复，便派他跟随曹虎去西部州郡。
English: Yu Zhang Wang told this to Qi Shizu. At that time, Wu County's governor Wang Ci, governor Zhang Xu, and Shang Shul Lucheng all made comments on the matter. The ancestor appreciated Zhu Qianqi's loyalty and feared that he would be retaliated against, so he sent him to follow Cao Hu to the West County.

古文：将发，幼方子恽于津阳门伺杀谦之，谦之之兄选之又刺杀恽，有司以闻。
现代文：将要出发时，朱幼方的儿子朱惮在津阳门伺机杀死了朱谦之，谦之的兄长朱选之又刺死了朱惮，有司上奏此事。
English: When they were about to leave, Zhu Yu's son Zhu Shu killed Zhu Qianzhi at the Tsuyang Gate, and Zhu Qianzhi's brother Zhu Xuanzhi stabbed Zhu Shu to death.

古文：世祖曰： 此皆是义事，不可问。 
现代文：世祖说： 这些都是义事，不须过问。 
English: The patriarch said, "These are all righteous deeds, and there is no need to question them.

古文：悉赦之。
现代文：全部赦免了他们。
English: The two families were completely pardoned.

古文：吴兴沈摐闻而叹曰： 弟死于孝，兄殉于义。
现代文：吴兴沈颉听说这件事后叹息说： 弟弟死于孝道，兄长殉难于义气。
English: After hearing about this, Wu Xing Shenyi sighed and said: My younger brother died of filial piety, and my elder brother was martyred for his loyalty.

古文：孝友之节，萃此一门。 
现代文：孝亲友爱的节操，汇集到这一家了。 
English: Filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety, filial piety,

古文：选之字处林，有志节，著《辩相论》。
现代文：朱选之字处林，有志气节操，着有《辩相论》。
English: Zhu Xuan's character, Shuchulin, had the spirit of self-restraint, and was the author of "Dialogue of the Phases."

古文：幼时顾欢见而异之，以女妻焉。
现代文：年幼时顾欢见丫他感到非常惊奇，所以将自己的女儿许配给他为妻。
English: When Gu Huan was young, he was very surprised to see her, so he betrothed his daughter to her.

古文：官至江夏王参军。
现代文：后来他官位做到江夏王的参军。
English: Later, he was promoted to the highest rank to join the army of the King of Jiangxia.

古文：萧睿明，南兰陵人。领军将军谌从祖兄弟也。父孝孙，左军。
现代文：萧睿明是南兰陵氏，是领军将军蕴谌的堂祖父那一房的族兄弟父亲萧孝孙，任左军将军。
English: Xiao Ruiming was a member of the Southern Lanling clan. He was the great-uncle of the leading general Yuanzhang, and the father of the other brother, Xiao Xiaosun, who was a general of the Left Army.

古文：睿明初仕员外殿中将军，少有至性，奉亲谨笃。母病躬祷，夕不假寐，及亡，不胜哀而卒。
现代文：萧散明最初官职是员外殿中将军。他从小性情纯厚，侍奉双亲恭顺诚实母亲患病，萧散明亲自祈祷，晚上连瞌睡都不打一下。
English: Xiao Sanming's first official position was a member of the General Staff of the Outer Palace. He had a pure temperament since childhood. He served his parents and obeyed his honest mother when she was ill. Xiao Sanming prayed in person and did not even doze off at night.

古文：永明五年，世祖诏曰： 龙骧将军、安西中兵参军、松滋令萧睿明，爱敬淳深，色养尽礼，丧过乎哀，遂致毁灭。
现代文：及至母亲去世，他经受不住哀伤悲痛，自己也死了。永明五年，世祖颁诏说： 龙骧将军、安西中兵参军、松滋县令萧敔明，爱亲敬老之心淳朴深厚，和颜悦色奉养双亲极尽礼仪。由于母亲丧亡而哀伤过度，致使本人也遭毁灭。
English: When his mother died, he could not bear the sorrow and grief, and he also died. In the fifth year of Yongming, the ancestor issued an edict saying: General Longyu, Anxi middle-ranking soldier who joined the army, Songzhi County commander Xiao Yiming, love and respect for the elderly are simple and profound, and they are kind and gentle and uphold their parents' utmost etiquette. Due to the loss of his mother and excessive grief, he was also destroyed.

古文：虽未达圣教，而一至可愍。
现代文：虽然未通达于圣教，而这种诚心值得哀怜。
English: Though uninitiated in sacred religion, this sincerity is to be pitied.

古文：宜加荣命，以矜善人。
现代文：应加授荣誉的职衔，以褒奖善人。
English: An honorary title should be given to commend a good man.

古文：可赠中书郎。 
现代文：可追赠中书郎。 
English: You can give Chushiro as a gift.

古文：乐颐，字文德，南阳涅阳人。世居南郡。
现代文：乐颐字文德，南阳涅阳人，世代居住在南郡。
English: Le Yao Zi Wen De, Nanyang Niyang people, have lived in Nan County for generations.

古文：少而言行和谨，仕为京府参军。
现代文：年轻时就言行和顺谨慎，出仕为京府参军。
English: When he was young, he was prudent in words and deeds, and served in the army for the capital.

古文：父在郢州病亡，颐忽思父涕泣，因请假还，中路果得父凶问。
现代文：父亲在郢州病死。乐颐忽然思念父亲以至于泪如雨下，所以请假回家，中途果然得到父亲死去的凶讯。
English: His father died of illness in Zhangzhou. Le Yao suddenly missed his father so much that he was in tears, so he took a leave of absence to return home. Halfway there, he received the terrible news of his father's death.

古文：颐便徒跣号咷，出陶家后渚，遇商人附载西上，水浆不入口数日。
现代文：乐颐就打着赤脚号啕大哭，出陶家后渚时，遇见商人，就搭乘他们的船西上，几天中粒米滴水未进。
English: Le Yao played the barefoot bugle and wailed loudly. After leaving the potter's house, when he met the merchants, he took their boat to the west, and the middle-grain rice did not drip for several days.

古文：尝遇病，与母隔壁，忍痛不言，啮被至碎，恐母之哀己也。
现代文：他曾经生病，因为住处与母亲仅隔一墙，所以忍耐痛楚不说，而用牙齿紧咬着棉被，以至于将被头咬碎，深恐母亲为自己的病痛哀伤。
English: He once fell ill, and because his mother lived only one wall away, he endured the pain and gnawed the quilt with his teeth so tightly that his head would be crushed, deeply afraid that his mother would be saddened by his illness.

古文：湘州刺史王僧虔引为主簿，以同僚非人，弃官去。
现代文：湘州刺史王僧虔征召他为主簿，因为与他共事的同僚行为不正，所以便弃官离开。
English: Wang Shengyi, a monk from Xiangzhou, enlisted him as his master, but he resigned from his post because his colleagues who worked with him acted improperly.

古文：吏部郎庾杲之尝往候，颐为设食，枯鱼菜菹而已。
现代文：吏部郎庾杲之曾去问候他，乐颐给他准备饭食，衹不过是些干鱼腌菜而已。
English: The vice-minister of the Ministry of Public Security, Lang Xizhi, had gone to greet him, and Le Yao had prepared a meal for him, but it was nothing more than some dried fish stew.

古文：杲之曰： 我不能食此。 
现代文：庾杲之说： 我不能吃这种饭菜。 
English: "I can't eat this kind of food," said Shizhi.

古文：母闻之，自出常膳鱼羹数种。
现代文：乐颐的母亲听见了，便将自己平时吃的几种鱼羹拿出来招待他。
English: When Le Yao's mother heard this, she took out several kinds of fish soup that she usually ate to invite him.

古文：杲之曰： 卿过于茅季伟，我非郭林宗。 
现代文：庾杲之说： 您这样做人超过了茅季伟，但我并不是郭林宗。 
English: Zou Zhi said: You have done more than Mao Jiwei, but I am not Guo Linzong.

古文：仕至郢州治中，卒。
现代文：乐颐官至郢州治中去世。
English: The eunuch Le died in the middle of the reign of Xizhou.

古文：弟预亦孝，父临亡，执其手以托郢州行事王奂，预悲感闷绝，吐血数升，遂发病。
现代文：乐颐的弟弟乐预也很孝顺。父亲临死前，抓着他的手把他托付给郢州行事王奂，乐预深感悲伤而胸闷气绝，吐血数升，于是就生病了。
English: Le Yao's younger brother, Le Pre, was also very filial. Before his father's death, Ruan grabbed his hand and entrusted him to Zhangzhou Wang Yao, Le Pre was deeply saddened and exhausted, vomited several liters of blood, and then fell ill.

古文：官至骠骑录事。
现代文：他官至骠骑录事。
English: He's got a record for riding a horse.

古文：隆昌末，预谓丹阳尹徐孝嗣曰： 外传藉藉，似有伊周之事，君蒙武帝殊常之恩，荷托付之重，恐不得同人此举。
现代文：郁林王隆昌末年，乐预对丹阳太守徐孝嗣说： 外面传闻众多，大约将要发生伊尹放太甲、周公戒成王这类事情。您蒙受武帝超乎常人的特殊恩典，肩负着托付的重任，恐怕是不会赞同别人这一举动的。
English: In the last years of Yu Lin Wang Longchang, Le Pre said to Danyang Daju Xu Xiaozhi: There are many rumors out there, and it is likely that things like Yi Yin Fang Taiga and Zhou Gong Jie Cheng Wang will happen. You have received extraordinary grace from Emperor Wu and shoulder the heavy task entrusted to you. I am afraid that you will not agree with this action of others.

古文：人笑褚公，至今齿冷。 
现代文：人们耻笑褚公，至今尚觉得齿冷啊。 
English: People are still laughing about what Shibuya did that year. This is a lesson for the future!

古文：孝嗣心甚纳之。
现代文：徐孝嗣内，很赞成他的意见。
English: Xu Xiaozhong agrees with his opinion.

古文：建武中为永世令，民怀其德。
现代文：建武年间，乐预为永世县令，百姓都感念他的德政。
English: During the Jianwu era, Le Ying became the county magistrate of Yongse County, and the people were impressed by his German politics.

古文：卒官。
现代文：他死在任卜。
English: He later died in office.

古文：有一老妪行担斛蔌叶将诣市，闻预死，弃担号泣。
现代文：有一位老太婆准备挑一斛蔬菜去街市上寅，听见銮题的死讯，抛下担子就大哭起来。
English: An old woman was about to pick up a bunch of vegetables to take to the market in Shangyin. When she heard the news of Yu Qi's death, she dropped her burden and burst into tears.

古文：雁门解仲恭，亦侨居南郡。
现代文：雁门人解仲恭，也客居于南郡。
English: The people of Ganmen also visit Nan County.

古文：家行敦睦，得纤豪财利，辄与兄弟平分。
现代文：家风敦厚和睦，如果得到一点点的财利，就马上与兄弟们平分。
English: The family is close-knit and harmonious. If they get a little bit of money, they immediately share it equally with their brothers.

古文：母病经时不差，入山采药，遇一老父语之曰： 得丁公藤，病立愈。
现代文：母亲生病长期不得痊愈，他就进山采药，碰见一位老翁告诉他说： 能得到丁公藤，病立刻会好。
English: His mother had been ill for a long time and could not recover, so he went into the mountains to find medicine. He met an old man who told him, "If you can get some Ding Gong vine, your illness will get better immediately."

古文：此藤近在前山际高树垂下便是也。 忽然不见。仲恭如其言得之，治病，母即差。
现代文：在前山边那棵高树上垂下来的就是这种藤 说完忽然不见踪影解仲恭按照他所说的终于获得了了公藤，拿来治病，母亲立刻痊愈。
English: It was this wisteria that hung down from the tall tree at the front edge of the mountain. After speaking, there was suddenly no trace of it, so Zhong Qian finally obtained the public wisteria according to what he said. He used it to treat his illness, and his mother was immediately cured.

古文：至今江陵人犹有识此藤者。
现代文：至今江陵犹有认识这种藤的人。
English: To this day, there are still people in Gangneung who know this wisteria.

古文：江泌，字士清，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江泌字士清，济阳考城县人氏。
English: Jiangxi Zhixiqing, Jiyang Kaocheng County people.

古文：父亮之，员外郎。
现代文：父亲江亮之是员外郎。
English: His father, Jiang Liangzhi, was a member of the outer circle.

古文：泌少贫，昼日斫屟，夜读书，随月光握卷升屋。
现代文：江泌小时很贫苦，白天削制木鞋，夜晚读书，由于要凭藉月光，所以随着月亮的偏转而拿著书登上屋顶去读。
English: Jiang Xiu was very poor in his childhood. During the day, he whittled wooden shoes and read books at night. Since he had to rely on moonlight, he climbed onto the roof with a book to read as the moon deflected.

古文：性行仁义，衣弊，恐虱饥死，乃复取置衣中。
现代文：性格品行都非常仁义，衣服破了将抛弃，恐怕虱子饿死，就又把虱子放进所穿的衣服中。
English: His character and conduct are very benevolent. If his clothes are torn, he will throw them away. If he is afraid that the lice will starve to death, he will put the lice back into the clothes he is wearing.

古文：数日间，终身无复虱。
现代文：几间，终生再不生虱子。
English: A few, and you'll never get lice again.

古文：母亡后，以生阙供养，遇鲑不忍食。
现代文：母亲死后，认为母亲生前缺乏衣食供养，所以江泌凡是遇见鱼类菜肴都不忍心吃。
English: After his mother's death, he thought that his mother lacked food and clothing during her lifetime, so he could not bear to eat fish dishes.

古文：食菜不食心，以其有生意也。
现代文：吃蔬菜不吃菜心，因为菜心包含有 生 的意义。
English: Do not eat the heart of vegetables, because the heart of vegetables contains the meaning of life.

古文：历仕南中郎行参军，所给募吏去役，得时病，莫有舍之者，吏扶杖投泌，泌亲自隐恤，吏死，泌为买棺。
现代文：历官至南中郎行参军。凡是官府所供给招募的小吏离开差使，或者患流行病，没有一人被江泌所抛弃的。小吏拄着拐杖投奔江泌，江泌都亲自接收关照他们，小吏死，江泌替他们买棺材。
English: All officials went to Nanzhonglang to join the army. None of the minor officials who were recruited by the government left the mission or suffered from epidemics were abandoned by Jiangxi. The minor officials went to Jiangxi on crutches, and Jiangxi personally received and cared for them. When the minor officials died, Jiangxi bought coffins for them.

古文：无僮役，兄弟共舆埋之。
现代文：没有僮仆差役，江泌兄弟便自己抬着去掩埋尸体。
English: Without any attendants, the Jiang brothers carried the body to the burial site themselves.

古文：领国子助教。乘牵车至染乌头，见老翁步行，下车载之，躬自步去。
现代文：他受领为国子助教乘坐牲口拉的车到了染乌头，看见一个老翁徒步行走，江泌就下车，让车子载着老翁，而他自身却步行前往。
English: He was accepted as a tutor assistant for Kuniko and rode a cattle-drawn cart to Dyed Ebony Head. When he saw an old man walking on foot, Jiang Xiu got off the cart and let the cart carry the old man, while he walked on foot.

古文：世祖以为南康王子琳侍读。
现代文：齐世祖派江泌作南康王萧子琳的侍读。
English: Qi Shizuo sent Jiang Xiu to serve as the attendant of Nankang Wang Xiao Zilin.

古文：建武中，明帝害诸王后，泌忧念子琳，诣志公道人问其祸福。
现代文：建武年间，明帝杀害诸王的后代，江泌担心萧子琳也遭难，所以到志公道人那儿询问萧子琳的吉凶祸福。
English: During the Jianwu era, Emperor Ming killed the descendants of the kings. Jiang Xiu was worried that Xiao Zilin would also suffer, so he went to a righteous person to inquire about Xiao Zilin's good fortune, misfortune and misfortune.

古文：志公覆香炉灰示之曰： 都尽，无所余。 
现代文：志公道人把香炉灰全部倒掉暗示他，说： 全都完，没有什么可以剩下的。 
English: The fair-minded man poured out all the ashes of the incense burner and hinted at him, saying: "It's all over, there's nothing left.

古文：及子琳被害，泌往哭之，泪尽，继之以血。
现代文：等到萧子琳被害，江泌前去哭悼他，眼泪流完了，接着流出了鲜血。
English: When Xiao Zilin was killed, Jiang Xuan went to mourn for him. After the tears flowed, blood flowed.

古文：亲视殡葬，乃去。
现代文：他亲眼看着把萧子琳安葬好才离开。
English: He watched Xiao Zilin being buried with his own eyes before leaving.

古文：时广汉王侍读严桓之亦哭王尽哀。
现代文：当时广汉王的侍读严桓之哭悼广汉王也极尽悲哀。
English: At that time, Guan Han Wang's attendant read Yan Kan's Lament, and Guan Han Wang was also extremely sad.

古文：泌寻卒。
现代文：过了不久，江泌也死了。
English: Not long after, Jiang Jie also died.

古文：泌族人兖州治中泌，黄门郎悆子也。与泌同名。世谓泌为 孝江泌 以别之。
现代文：江泌有一个任兖州治中的同族人，名字也叫江泌，是黄门郎江念的儿子，他和江泌同名一为了区别，世人都把这位任侍读的江泌称作 孝江泌 。
English: Jiang Jie had a compatriot who was in charge of the administration of Zhangzhou. His name was also Jiang Jie, and he was the son of Huangmen Lang Jiang Nian. He and Jiang Jie had the same name. In order to distinguish them, the world called this Jiang Jie, who was in charge of the administration of Zhangzhou, as Xiao Jiang Jie.

古文：杜栖，字孟山，吴郡钱唐人，征士京产子也。同郡张融与京产相友，每相造言论，栖常在侧。
现代文：杜栖字孟山，吴郡钱唐人，是征士杜京产的儿子同郡人张融和杜京产是好朋友，每次来访，言谈论辩，杜栖都在身旁。
English: Du Qian, surnamed Monsan, a Qiantang man from Wuxi County, is the son of the warlord Du Jingzhu. He is a good friend of fellow county man Zhang Rong and Du Jingzhu. Every time he visits, Du Qian is by his side to talk and argue.

古文：融指栖曰： 昔陈太丘之召元方，方之为劣。以今方古，古人何贵。 栖出京师，从儒士刘瓛受学。
现代文：张融指着杜栖说： 从前陈太丘所呼唤的那位陈元方，比起杜栖来还差得远呢以今比占，古人未必尊贵 杜栖去京师，跟着儒上刘斌学习。
English: Zhang Rong pointed to Du Qian and said: Chen Yuanfang, who was once called by Chen Taiqiu, is still far behind Du Qian. Compared to today, the ancients may not have respected Du Qian to go to Beijing to study and study with Confucian scholar Liu Bin.

古文：善清言，能弹琴饮酒，名儒贵游多敬待之。中书郎周颙与京产书曰： 贤子学业清标，后来之秀。嗟爱之怀，岂知云已。
现代文：他善于清谈，会弹琴能饮酒，有名的儒上和有地位的清谈家对他都很敬重中书：郎周显写信给杜京产说： 您的这位贤子学业清秀高标，定是后来的俊才我赏爱他的这种情怀，不知!有多么深厚。
English: He is good at plain talk, can play the piano and can drink alcohol. Famous Confucian scholars and distinguished plain talkers hold him in high esteem. In a letter, Lang Zhouxian wrote to Du Jingzang, "This wise son of yours, with a high standard of academic excellence, is sure to be a great talent in the future. I do not know how deeply I appreciate his feelings.

古文：所谓人之英彦，若己有之也。 
现代文：所谓别人家的英才美士，就好像我自己拥有他一样。 
English: The so-called talented beauties of other people's families are as if I had them myself.

古文：刺史豫章王闻其名，辟议曹从事，仍转西曹佐。竟陵王子良数致礼接。
现代文：刺史豫章王听说他的名摊，微召他为议曹从事，转为西曹佐竞陵王萧子良多次招呼他来以礼接待。
English: King Yuanzhang of Zhishi heard of his famous stall, summoned him to engage in negotiation, and he was turned into a negotiator. King Xiao Ziliang of Jingling repeatedly invited him to receive him with courtesy.

古文：国子祭酒何胤治礼，又重栖，以为学士，掌婚冠仪。
现代文：国子祭酒何胤研究礼，又很推重杜栖，诸他为学士，掌管婚、克等仪式。
English: Kuniko held a ceremony to celebrate the study of the wine Hoin, and placed great emphasis on Du Sui, who was a scholar and was in charge of ceremonies such as marriage and graduation.

古文：以父老归养，怡情垅亩。
现代文：因为父亲年老，所以杜栖辞官返家奉养老人，他对田园生活感到非常快活。
English: Because his father is old, Du Qian returned home to take care of the old man. He is very happy with the rural life.

古文：栖肥白长壮，及京产疾，旬日间便皮骨自支。
现代文：杜栖生得面皮白净体态肥壮，及至杜京产患病，衹十几他便消瘦得皮包骨头。
English: Du Qian was born with a white face, a clean body and a fat body. When Du Jing suffered from an illness, he lost weight and became emaciated.

古文：京产亡，水浆不入口七日，晨夕不罢哭，不食盐菜。
现代文：杜京产去世，杜栖七天不进水米，早晚不停地哀哭，不吃咸盐菜蔬。
English: Du Jingshan passed away, Du Qi did not drink rice for seven days, wept incessantly in the morning and evening, and did not eat salted vegetables.

古文：每营买祭奠，身自看视，号泣不自持。朔望节岁，绝而复续，吐血数升。
现代文：凡是建坟买棺祭奠等事务，必定要亲自过问，而且总是号哭，不能控制住自己、每逢朔、望、岁时节日，都要大哭，时断时续，直哭得吐血数升。
English: In all matters such as building a grave, buying a coffin, and holding a memorial service, it is necessary to ask questions in person, and always cry, unable to control oneself, every New Year's Eve, New Year's Day, New Year's Day, and festivals, have to cry, from time to time, crying until I vomit several liters of blood.

古文：时何胤、谢朏并隐东山，遗书敦譬，诫以毁灭。
现代文：当时何胤、谢绌都隐居在东山，他们写信给杜栖，敦促劝谕，告诫他要当心自己垮下来。
English: At that time, both He Tan and Xie Yao were living in seclusion in Dongshan. They wrote to Du Qian, urging him and warning him to beware of his downfall.

古文：至祥禫，暮梦见其父，恸哭而绝。初，胤兄点见栖叹曰： 卿风韵如此，虽获嘉誉，不永年矣。 卒时年三十六。
现代文：到掸祭这一天，杜栖夜晚梦见自己的父亲，便痛哭而死当初，何胤的兄长何点见了杜栖，叹息说： 你有这样的风度气韵，虽然可以获得人们的赞誉，但年寿却不长啊， 杜栖死时年龄衹有三十六岁？
English: On the day of the sacrificial offering, Du Qi dreamed of his father in the night, and wept bitterly as he died. When he died, what did his brother see of Du Qi? He sighed and said, "You have such grace and charm. Although you can win people's praise, your life expectancy is not long. Du Qi was 36 years old when he died."

古文：当世咸嗟惜焉。
现代文：当世的人们都感到非常惋惜。
English: People today feel very sorry for him.

古文：建武二年，剡县有小儿，年八岁，与母俱得赤班病。母死，家人以小儿犹恶，不令其知。
现代文：建武二年，剡县有一个小孩，年龄才八岁，和母亲都得了赤斑病：母亲去世了，家中人因为小孩仍病得很沉重，所以不让他知道。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, there was a child in Handan County, who was only eight years old, and his mother both had erythema: the mother died, and the family did not let him know because the child was still very ill.

古文：小儿疑之，问云： 母尝数问我病，昨来觉声羸，今不复闻，何谓也？ 
现代文：小孩觉得事情很可疑，问人说： 母亲曾经好几次询问我的病情，昨天我就觉得母亲的声音已很微弱，今天却再也听不见了，这是怎么啦? 
English: The child thought it was suspicious and asked, "My mother has asked me several times about my condition. Yesterday I thought my mother's voice was very weak, but today I can't hear it anymore. What's wrong?"

古文：因自投下床，匍匐至母尸侧，顿绝而死。
现代文：于是就自己滚下床，慢慢爬到母亲尸体身旁，立刻断气而死。
English: So he rolled out of bed, slowly crawled to his mother's body and died instantly.

古文：乡邻告之县令宗善才，求表庐，事竟不行。
现代文：乡里邻居把这件事告诉县令宗善才，请求表彰他们家，这件事最终没有办成。
English: Neighbors in the village reported the matter to the county magistrate, Zong Shencai, and requested that their family be commended, but the matter was ultimately not resolved.

古文：陆绛，字魏卿，吴郡人也。
现代文：陆绛字魏卿，吴郡人。
English: Lu Hao, surnamed Wei Qing, from Wuxi County.

古文：父闲，字遐业，有风概，与人交，不苟合。
现代文：父亲陆闲，字遐业，有风姿气度，与人交往，不随声附和别人。
English: His father was idle, had a penchant for calligraphy, had an elegant demeanor, socialized with people, and did not follow others.

古文：少为同郡张绪所知，仕至扬州别驾。
现代文：年轻时受到同郡人张绪的知遇，出仕作官至扬州别驾。
English: When he was young, he was befriended by Zhang Xu, a fellow county resident, and was sent to Yangzhou to work as an official.

古文：明帝崩，闲谓所亲曰： 宫车晏驾，百司将听于冢宰。
现代文：明帝驾崩，陆闲对亲近的人说： 皇上驾崩，百官将听命于冢宰。
English: When Emperor Ming died, Lu Xun said to those close to him, "The emperor has died, and all the officials will obey the command to kill him."

古文：主王地重才弱，必不能振，难将至矣。 
现代文：辅佐王地位贵重而才智太差，必不能振兴国家，灾难将要降临了。 
English: The position of the assistant king is valuable, but his talent is too poor, he will not be able to revitalize the country, and disaster will come.

古文：乃感心疾，不复预州事。
现代文：于是感染上了心病。就不再参预州中的事务。
English: As a result, he contracted a heart disease and was no longer able to participate in prefectural affairs.

古文：刺史始安王遥光反，事败，闲以纲佐被召至杜姥宅，尚书令徐孝嗣启闲不预逆谋，未及报，徐世檦令杀之。
现代文：扬州刺史始安王萧遥光谋反，事情失败，陆闲因为是刺史的佐吏，所以被召到杜姥宅，尚书令徐孝嗣陈说陆闲没有参预谋反，还没有来得及上报，徐世榇便令杀死陆闲。
English: Yangzhou assassinated Shi An Wang Xiao Yaoguang and plotted a rebellion. The plot failed. Lu Liao was summoned to Du Bao's house because he was an aide to the assassin. Shang Shuling ordered Xu Xiaozhi Chen to say that Lu Liao did not participate in the premeditated rebellion. Before the report could be submitted, Xu Shijun ordered Lu Liao to be killed.

古文：绛时随闲，抱闲颈乞代死，遂并见杀。
现代文：陆绛当时正跟随着陆闲，他抱着陆闲的脖颈乞求代替父亲去死，于是一同被杀害、
English: At that time, Lu Xun was following Lu Xun. He held Lu Xun's neck and begged to die in place of his father, so they were killed together.

古文：史臣曰：浇风一起，人伦毁薄，抑引之教徒闻，圭璋之璞罕就。
现代文：史臣曰：浇薄的风气一起，入伦道德便丧失了，抑制、导引的教化衹是白白地传播，那些未经雕琢的良玉之才却很少去听从。
English: Shichen said: With the dilution of the culture, the morality of ethics is lost, the suppression and guidance of the enlightenment is spread in vain, and those unpolished talents rarely obey.

古文：若令事长移忠，傥非行举，姜桂辛酸，容迁本质。
现代文：如果使此风长久发展下去，就会改变忠诚的观念，或者行为举止不符常礼，像姜桂那样愈老愈辣，或许就要使人们的本质发生变化。
English: If this trend is allowed to continue for a long time, it will change the concept of loyalty, or the behavior will not conform to common decency, and like ginger, it will become more and more spicy, and it may be necessary to change the essence of people.

古文：而旌闾变里，问饩存牢，不过鳏寡齐矜，力田等劝。
现代文：而旌表乡里，改变风俗，赠送些粮食牲畜，也不过是使大家都来怜愍鳏寡之人，劝勉耕作而已。
English: However, changing the customs and giving away some grain and livestock in the countryside is just to make everyone feel sorry for the poor and encourage farming.

古文：其于扶奖名教，未为多也。
现代文：这对于扶持奖掖名声教化来说，实在算不上有多大的帮助啊。
English: This is not really a great help for the support award and reputation education.

古文：赞曰：孝为行首，义实因心。
现代文：赞曰：孝是人们品行的首要。
English: Zang said: Filial piety is the top priority of people's moral conduct.

古文：白华秉节，寒木齐心。
现代文：义是出自于人们的本心花朵洁白在于守节，木能受寒由于齐心。
English: Righteousness comes from people's original hearts, the white flowers are due to the protection of the festival, and the trees can withstand the cold because of the unity of the heart.

