古文：磬氏为磬，倨句一矩有半，其博为一，股为二，鼓为三。
现代文：磬氏制作磬，股、鼓弯曲的度数为一矩半。以股的宽度作为一，股的长度就是二，鼓的长度则为三。
English: Mr. Zou makes cymbals, and the degree of bending of the struts and drums is one and a half. The width of the struts is one, the length of the struts is two, and the length of the drums is three.

古文：参分其鼓博，去一以为鼓博。参分其鼓博，以其一为之厚。
现代文：把股的宽度分成三等分，去掉一等分就是鼓的宽度；把鼓的宽度分成三等分，用一等分作为磬的厚度。
English: Divide the width of the cymbals into three equal parts, and the width of the cymbals is the width of the cymbals. Divide the width of the cymbals into three equal parts, and use one equal part as the thickness of the cymbals.

古文：已上，则摩其旁；已下，则摩其耑。矢人为矢，鍭矢，参分。茀矢，参分一在前，二在后。
现代文：磬发出的声音太清就琢磨它的两面使变得较薄，发出的声音太浊就琢磨它的两端使变得较短。矢人制作矢。把镞矢的长度分为三等分，把杀矢的长度分为三等分，一等分在前，二等分在后，则前后重量相等。
English: If the sound emitted by the crossbow is too clear, its two sides are sharpened to make it thinner, and if the sound emitted by the crossbow is too soft, its two ends are sharpened to make it shorter. The archer makes an arrow. The length of the crossbow arrow is divided into three equal parts, the length of the killing arrow is divided into three equal parts, the first is divided into the front, the second is divided into the back, and the front and back are of equal weight.

古文：兵矢、田矢，五分二在前，三在后。
现代文：把兵矢、田矢的长度分为五等分，二等分在前，三等分在后，则前后重量相等。
English: If the length of a soldier's arrow or field arrow is divided into five equal parts, with two equal parts at the front and three equal parts at the back, then the front and back weights are equal.

古文：杀矢，七分三在前，四在后。
现代文：把弗矢的长度分为七等分，三等分在前，四等分在后，则前后重量相等。
English: If the length of the arrow is divided into seven equal parts, three equal parts in front and four equal parts behind, then the front and back weights are equal.

古文：参分其长，而杀其一。五分其长，而羽其一。
现代文：把箭杆的长度分为三等分而把前面的一等分削细以便安镞。
English: Divide the length of the arrow shaft into three equal parts and whittle the front one so that it is smooth.

古文：以其笴厚为之羽深。水之，以辨其阴阳，夹其阴阳，以设其比。夹其比，以设其羽。
现代文：把箭杆的长度分为五等分而设羽的部分占一等分，以箭杆的厚度作为设羽的深度。把箭杆浸入水中以辨别它的阴面和阳面，夹在阴阳分界处的两边开口设比，夹在比的两边设羽。
English: Divide the length of the arrow shaft into five equal parts and the feathered part into one equal part, with the thickness of the arrow shaft as the depth of the feathering. Dip the arrow shaft into the water to distinguish its shady side from the sunny side, set the opening ratio on both sides at the yin-yang boundary, and set the feathers on both sides of the ratio.

古文：参分其羽，以设其刃，则虽有疾风，亦弗之能惮矣。刃长寸围寸，铤十之，重三垸。
现代文：把羽的长度分为三等分而以一等分的长度作为设置镞刃的长度，那么即使有迅疾的风也不怕。刃长二寸，刃最阔处围长一寸，铤的长度是围长的十倍，镞重三垸。
English: Divide the length of the feather into thirds and set the length of the beak as the length of the beak, then even if there is a swift wind, it is not afraid. The blade is two inches long, the widest part of the blade is one inch long, the length of the beak is ten times the circumference, and the weight of the beak is three ounces.

古文：前弱则俯，后弱则翔，中弱则纡，中强则扬。羽丰则迟，羽杀则趮。
现代文：箭杆前面弱箭头就会向下栽，后面弱箭头就会向上扬，中间弱箭的飞行就纡曲而不直，中间强而两头弱箭就会飘飞；羽毛过大箭就飞行迟缓，羽毛过少箭就飞行疾速而偏离目标掉落一旁。
English: A weak arrow in front of the shaft will fall down, a weak arrow behind it will rise up, a weak arrow in the middle will fly crooked and not straight, a strong arrow in the middle and two weak arrows will fly; an arrow with too many feathers will fly slowly, and an arrow with too few feathers will fly fast and fall off the target.

古文：是故夹而摇之，以眡其丰杀之节也。桡之，以眡其鸿杀之称也。
现代文：因此用手指夹着矢的比部摇动它，以观察它的羽的大小是否合适，弯曲箭杆以观察它的粗细是否匀称。
English: Therefore, shake the arrow with your finger to see if its feathers are the right size, and bend the shaft to see if its thickness is well-balanced.

古文：凡相笴，欲生而抟。同抟，欲重；同重，节欲疏；同疏，欲栗。
现代文：凡选择箭杆，要挑选无异色无虫眼而又圆的，同样圆的要挑选重的，同样重的要挑选木节稀疏的，同样木节稀疏要挑选颜色如栗的。
English: Whoso chooseth a quiver, let him choose one that is round, without blemish, and without spot; and one that is round, let him choose one that is heavy; and one that is heavy, let him choose one that is thin; and one that is thin, let him choose one that is like a chestnut.

古文：陶人为，实二鬴，厚半寸，唇寸。
现代文：陶人制作甗，容量为二鬴，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸。
English: The potter made a jar with a capacity of two jars, half an inch thick, with a one-inch thick rim.

古文：盆实二鬴，厚半寸，唇寸。
现代文：盆，容量为二鬴，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸。
English: basin, capacity two urns, thickness half an inch, rim thickness one inch.

古文：甑实二鬴，厚半寸，唇寸，七穿。
现代文：甑，容量为二鬴，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸，底部有七个孔。
English: , the capacity is two, the thickness is half an inch, the lip is one inch thick, and there are seven holes at the bottom.

古文：鬲实五觳，厚半寸，唇寸。
现代文：鬲，容量为五觳，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸。
English: , the capacity is five, the thickness is half an inch, and the rim is one inch thick.

古文：庾，实二觳，厚半寸，唇寸。
现代文：庾，容量为二觳，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸。
English: , the capacity is two, the thickness is half an inch, and the rim is one inch thick.

古文：瓬人为簋，实一觳，崇尺，厚半寸，唇寸。
现代文：瓬人制作簋，容量为一觳，高一尺，厚半寸，口缘厚一寸。
English: A potter makes a vessel with a capacity of one pot, a height of one foot, a thickness of half an inch, and a thickness of one inch at the rim.

古文：豆实三而成觳，崇尺。
现代文：豆，三豆为一觳，高一尺。
English: Beans, three beans are one stalk, one foot high.

古文：凡陶瓬之事，髻垦薜暴不入市。
现代文：凡陶人、瓶人制作的器物，如果有断足、损伤、破裂或突起不平的，就不拿到市场上去卖。
English: If there is a broken leg, damage, rupture or uneven protrusion in any ware made by potters or bottle makers, it will not be taken to the market for sale.

古文：器中膊，豆中县，膊崇四尺，方四寸。
现代文：所制陶器要符合膊，豆的柄要很直而符合垂线。膊高四尺，横断面四寸见方。
English: The pottery to be made should be in line with the cup, the bean handle should be very straight and in line with the vertical. The cup is four feet high, and the cross-section is four inches square.

古文：梓人为筍虡。
现代文：梓人制作笋虞。
English: The author of this article is the producer of 虞.

古文：天下之大兽五：脂者、膏者、臝者、羽者、鳞者。
现代文：天下的大兽分五类：脂类，膏类，裸类，羽类，鳞类。
English: The great beasts of the earth are divided into five classes: blubber, paste, hairless, feathered, and scaly.

古文：宗庙之事，脂者膏者以为牲，臝者、羽者、鳞者以为筍虡，外骨、内骨，却行、纡行、以脰鸣者、以注鸣者、以旁鸣者、以翼鸣者、以股鸣者、以胸鸣者，谓之小虫之属，以为雕琢。
现代文：宗庙祭祀，用脂类、膏类的兽为牲，用裸类、羽类、鳞类的兽的形象作为笋虞上的刻饰。骨长在外的，骨长在内的，倒行的，侧行的，连贯而行的，纡曲而行的，用脖子发声的，用嘴发声的，用翅膀发声的，用腿部发声的，用胸部发声的，这些都叫做小虫类，用它们的形象作为祭器上的雕琢。
English: In ancestral temple sacrifices, animals of the blubber and paste classes were used as sacrifices, and images of naked, feathered, and scaled animals were used as carvings on the mortar and pestle. Those with long bones on the outside, those with long bones on the inside, those that walked backwards, those that walked sideways, those that walked in a continuous line, those that walked in a sinuous line, those that spoke with their necks, those that spoke with their mouths, those that spoke with their wings, those that spoke with their legs, and those that spoke with their chests were all called small insects, and their images were used as carvings on the sacrificial

古文：厚唇弇口，出目短耳，大胸燿后，大体短脰，若是者谓之臝属。恒有力而不能走，其声大而宏。
现代文：厚唇，深口，突眼，短耳，胸部阔大，后身渐小，身体大，颈项短，像这样的动物就叫做裸类，这类动物总是很有力而不能跑，发出的声音大而宏亮。
English: Thick lips, deep mouth, protruding eyes, short ears, broad chest, small behind, large body, short neck, animals like this are called naked, these animals are always very strong and can not run, the sound they make is big and loud.

古文：有力而不能走，则于任重宜；大声而宏，则于钟宜。若是者以为钟虚，是故击其所县，而由其虚鸣。
现代文：有力而不能跑，就宜于负重；声音大而宏亮，就同钟相宜：像这类动物的形象用作钟虞上的刻饰，因此敲击所悬挂的钟，而好像声音是由钟虞发出来的。
English: Powerful, but unable to run, it is suitable for bearing weight; loud and loud, it is suitable for the bell: the image of such an animal is used as an engraving on the bell, so it strikes the hanging bell, and the sound seems to be emitted by the bell.

古文：锐喙决吻，数目顅脰，小体骞腹，若是者谓之羽属。恒无力而轻，其声清阳而远闻。
现代文：嘴巴尖利，嘴唇张开，眼睛细小，颈项长，身体小，腹部低陷，像这样的动物叫做羽类，这类动物总是无力而轻捷，鸣声清阳而远播。
English: The mouth is pointed, the lips are open, the eyes are small, the neck is long, the body is small, and the abdomen is depressed. Animals like this are called feathered. These animals are always weak and light, and the song is clear and far-reaching.

古文：无力而轻，则于任轻宜；其声清阳而远闻，则于磬宜若是者以为磬虚，故击其所县而由其虚鸣。
现代文：无力而轻捷，适于负载轻物；鸣声清阳而远播，就同磬相宜：像这类动物的形象用作磬虞上的刻饰，因此敲击所悬挂的磬，而好像声音是由磬虞发出来的。
English: Weak and light, it is suitable for light loads; the sound is clear and far-reaching, it is suitable for cocoon: the image of such an animal is used as a carving on the cocoon, so it strikes the hanging cocoon, and the sound seems to be emitted by the cocoon.

古文：小首而长，抟身而鸿，若是者谓之鳞属，以为筍。
现代文：小头而长身，抟起身体而显得肥大，像这样的动物叫做鳞类，用这种动物的形象作为笋上的刻饰。
English: Small-headed and long-bodied, heaving up his body and appearing fat, animals like this are called scaly, and the image of this animal is used as a carving on the beak.

古文：凡攫閷援之类，必深其爪，出其目，作其鳞之而。
现代文：凡在笋虞上刻饰善于捕杀抓咬的兽类，一定要深藏它的爪，突出它的眼，张起它的鳞与颊毛。
English: Any animal that is good at killing, catching and biting must hide its claws, protrude its eyes, and spread its scales and cheek hairs.

古文：深其爪，出其目，作其鳞之而，则于眡必拨尔而怒。
现代文：深藏它的爪，突出它的眼，张起它的鳞与颊毛，对于看它的人就一定像是勃然大怒。
English: Hide its claws, protrude its eyes, spread its scales and cheek hairs, for those who look at it, it must seem like a rage.

古文：苟拨尔而怒，则于任重宜，且其匪色必似鸣矣。
现代文：假如能够勃然大怒，这类动物就宜于负重，而且从它所涂饰的色彩来看，也一定像是能够发出宏大的叫声。
English: If able to fly into a rage, this animal is suitable for carrying heavy loads, and from the color it is painted, it must also seem to be able to make a grand cry.

古文：爪不深，目不出，鳞之而不作，则必穨尔如委矣，苟穨尔如委，则加任焉，则必如将废措，其匪色必似不鸣矣。
现代文：爪不深藏，眼不突出，鳞与颊毛不张起，就一定会显得颓丧不振。假如颓丧不振。那么加给重负，就一定如同将要把重物废弃，而它的色彩也一定像是不能发出宏大的声音。
English: If the claws are not deep, if the eyes are not prominent, if the scales and cheek hairs are not uplifted, it must appear depressed. If it is depressed, then adding weight must be like throwing away a heavy object, and its color must also look like it cannot make a grand sound.

古文：梓人为饮器，勺一升，爵一升，觚三升。
现代文：梓人制作饮器，勺容一升，爵容一升，觯容三升。
English: Zi Ren made drinking vessels with a spoon capacity of one liter, a jars capacity of one liter, and a jars capacity of three liters.

古文：献以爵而酬以觚。
现代文：向宾客献酒用爵而进酬酒用觯，献酒一升而酬酒三升，就合一豆了。
English: If you give a guest a gift of wine and receive a gift of wine and a gong, if you give a gift of wine and receive a gift of wine and receive a gift of wine and receive a gift of wine and receive a gift of wine and a gong, it's all the same.

古文：一献而三酬，则一豆矣；食一豆肉，饮一豆酒，中人之食也。凡试梓饮器，乡衡而实不尽，梓师罪之。
现代文：吃一豆肉，饮一豆酒，这是一般人的食量。凡检验梓人制作的饮器，如果爵上的两柱向眉而酒还没能饮尽，梓师就要加罪于制作此爵的梓人。
English: Eating a bean of meat, drinking a bean of wine, this is the amount of food for an average person. Anyone who inspects a drinking vessel made by a craftsman, if the two pillars on the bar are facing each other and the wine has not been drunk, the craftsman will be guilty of making this bar.

古文：梓人为侯，广与崇方。参分其广，而鹄居一焉。
现代文：梓人制作射侯。侯中的宽与高相等，把侯中的宽度分成三等分而鹄宽占三分之一。
English: The width of the middle is equal to the height, and the width of the middle is divided into three equal parts, while the width of the top is one third.

古文：上两个，与其身三；下两个，半之。
现代文：如以躬的长度为一，上两个则为二，与躬合而为三，下两个长出于躬的部分是上两个所长出的一半。
English: If the length of the groin is one, the upper two are two, and the groin is three, the lower two long parts of the groin are half of the upper two.

古文：上纲与下纲出舌寻，縜寸焉。
现代文：上纲与下纲各长出于舌八尺，系纲的纽襻长一寸。
English: The upper and lower segments are each eight feet from the tongue, and the base of the system is one inch long.

古文：张皮侯而栖鹄，则春以功；张五采之侯，则远国属；张兽侯，则王以息燕。
现代文：张设皮侯而在中央缀鹄，春季用以比赛诸侯群臣的射功而选拔参加祭祀的人。张设五彩侯，王与远方来朝的诸侯举行宾射礼。
English: In the central part of the shrine, there is a shrine for the feudal lords, and in the spring, there is a shooting competition for the feudal lords and their retainers to select those who will take part in the ritual. There are five-colored halls, and the king holds a guest shooting ceremony with lords who have come from far away.

古文：祭侯之礼，以酒脯醢，其辞曰： 惟若宁侯，毋或若女不宁侯，不属于王所。
现代文：张设兽侯，王与诸侯、群臣举行燕射礼。祭祀射侯之礼，用酒和脯醢，祭祀辞说： 你们这些安顺而有功德的诸侯，不像有的不安顺的诸侯，不到王这里来朝会，因此张举射侯而射他们。
English: The vassals, princes, and courtiers held a ceremonial sword-shooting ceremony. The ceremonial sword-shooting ceremony was held with wine and gourds, and the sacrificial speech said: "You princes who are peaceful and have merit, unlike some princes who are not peaceful, do not come to the imperial court to meet the king. Therefore, you should raise your swords and shoot them."

古文：故抗而射女，强饮强食，诒女曾孙诸侯百福。 
现代文：努力地饮酒用食吧，遗留给你们后世做诸侯的子孙多多的福。 
English: Make an effort to drink and eat, and you will bequeath to future generations many blessings as the descendants of princes.

古文：庐人为庐器，戈柲六尺有六寸，殳长寻有四尺，车戟常，酋矛常有四尺，夷矛三寻。
现代文：庐人制作长兵器的柄。戈柄长六尺六寸，殳长一寻零四尺，车戟长一常，酋矛长一常零四尺，夷矛长三寻。
English: They made the handle of a long weapon. The go handle is six feet six inches long, the shovel is one point four feet long, the chariot is one point long, the spear is one point four feet long, and the spear is three points long.

古文：凡兵无过三其身，过三其身，弗能用也，而无已，又以害人。
现代文：凡兵器的长度不要超过人的身高的三倍，超过人的身高的三倍，不只是不能使用，还会危害拿兵器的人。
English: The length of any weapon should not exceed three times the height of a person. If it exceeds three times the height of a person, not only can it not be used, but it will also endanger the person holding the weapon.

古文：故攻国之兵欲短，守国之兵欲长。
现代文：因此攻国的兵器要短，守国的兵器要长。
English: Therefore, offensive weapons should be short and defensive weapons should be long.

古文：攻国之人众，行地远，食饮饥，且涉山林之阻，是故兵欲短；守国人之寡，食饮饱，行地不远，且不涉山谓林之阻，是故兵欲长。
现代文：攻国的人员多，行路远，饮食短缺，而且要跋涉山林险阻，因此兵器要短；守国的人员较少，饮食充足，行路不远，而且不用跋涉山林险阻，因此兵器要长。
English: There are many people attacking the country, they have to travel a long distance, they lack food, and they have to trek through mountains and forests, so their weapons are short; there are fewer people defending the country, they have enough food, they don't have to travel far, and they don't have to trek through mountains and forests, so their weapons are long.

古文：凡兵，句兵欲无弹，刺兵欲无蜎。是故句兵椑，刺兵抟。
现代文：凡兵器，勾兵的兵刃不可转动，刺兵的兵刃不可弯折，因此勾兵的柄要椭圆，刺兵的柄要圆。
English: In all weapons, the blade of the hook cannot be turned, and the blade of the assassin cannot be bent. Therefore, the handle of the hook should be elliptical, and the handle of the assassin should be round.

古文：兵同强，举围欲细，细则校。刺兵同强，举围欲重，重欲傅人，傅人则密，是故侵之。
现代文：击兵的柄从上到下同样坚劲，手握处要细，手握处细攻击敌人就迅疾；刺兵的柄从上到下同样坚劲，手握处要稍大而重，手握处稍大而重就能迫近敌人，迫近敌人就能准确命中，因此能够攻击敌人。
English: The hilt of the striker is equally strong from top to bottom, the grip should be thin, and if the grip is thin, the enemy will be attacked quickly; the hilt of the stabber is equally strong from top to bottom, the grip should be slightly larger and heavier, and if the grip is slightly larger and heavier, the enemy can be approached, and if the enemy is approached, the enemy can be accurately hit, so the enemy can be attacked.

古文：凡为殳，五分其长，以其一为之被，而围之。参分其围，去一以为晋围。五分其晋围，去一以为首围。
现代文：凡制作殳，把殳的长度分为五等分，用一等分的长度作为手握处的长度而制成圆形；把殳的手握处的围长分为三等分，去掉一等分就是晋处的围长；把晋处的围长分为五等分，去掉一等分就是首部的围长。
English: When making a yakitori, divide the length of the yakitori into five equal parts, and use the length of the first equal part as the length of the handle to make a round shape; divide the circumference of the handle into three equal parts, and remove the first equal part to make the circumference of the shin; divide the circumference of the shin into five equal parts, and remove the first equal part to make the circumference of the head.

古文：凡为酋矛，参分其长，二在前，一在后，而围之。五分其围，去一以为晋围。参分其晋围，去一以为刺围。
现代文：凡制作酋矛，把它的长度分为三等分，二等分在前，一等分在后而制成圆形；把酋矛的围长分为五等分，去掉一等分就是它的晋处的围长；把酋矛的晋处的围长分为三等分，去掉一等分就是刺处的围长。
English: Whoso maketh a lance, divideth the length thereof into three parts, and the second part into the front, and the first part into the back, and maketh it round; and divideth the girth of a lance into five parts, and taketh away the first part, and it is the girth of the point; and divideth the girth of a lance into three parts, and taketh away the first part, and it is the girth of the point.

古文：凡试庐事，置而摇之，以眡其蜎也；炙诸墙，以眡其桡之均也；横而摇之以眡其劲也。
现代文：凡检验庐人所制作的长兵器的柄，树立在地上摇动它，以观察它是否弯折；撑在两墙之间，以观察它弯曲是否均匀；横过来摇动它，以观察它是否强劲有力。
English: Whoever examines the handle of a long weapon made by the Jurchens, stands it on the ground and shakes it to see if it bends; holds it between two walls to see if it bends evenly; and shakes it sideways to see if it is strong and powerful.

古文：六建既备，车不反覆，谓之国工。
现代文：五种兵器和旌旗都在车上插好，车行时不给人以反复不定的感觉，这样的庐人就可以称做国工。
English: The five kinds of weapons and the national flag are all placed on the car, and when driving, it does not give people the feeling of being uncertain. Such a person can be called a national worker.

古文：匠人建国，水地以县，置槷以县，眡以景，为规，识日出之景与日入之景，昼参诸日中之景，夜考之极星，以正朝夕。
现代文：匠人建造都城，用立柱悬水法测量地平，用悬绳的方法设置垂直的木柱，用以观察日影辨别方向。以所树木柱为圆心画圆，记下日出时木柱在圆上的投影与日落时木柱在圆上的投影，这样来确定东西方向。白天参考正中午时的日影，夜里参考北极星，以确定正南北和正东西的方向。
English: The craftsmen built the capital city, and measured the horizon with the vertical column suspension method, and set up the vertical wooden column with the hanging rope method to observe the sun shadow and distinguish the direction. Draw a circle with the wooden column as the center of the circle, and record the projection of the wooden column on the circle at sunrise and the projection of the wooden column on the circle at sunset, so as to determine the east-west direction. During the day, refer to the sun shadow at noon, and refer to the North Star at night to determine the direction of north-south and east-west.

古文：匠人营国，方九里，旁三门。
现代文：匠人营建都城，九里见方，都城的四边每边三门。
English: The craftsmen built the capital city, nine li square, three gates on each side of the capital city.

古文：国中九经九纬，经涂九轨，左祖右社，面朝后市，市朝一夫。
现代文：堂的四周有九层台阶。每室的四方各开一门，每门两旁有两窗相夹。
English: There are nine flights of steps around the church, with a door on each side of each room, and two windows on either side of each door.

古文：夏后氏世室，堂修二七，广四修一，五室，三四步，四三尺，九阶，四旁两夹，白盛，门堂三之二，室三之一。殷人重屋，堂修七寻，堂崇三尺，四阿重屋。
现代文：用蛤灰把墙涂饰成白色。门堂是正堂的三分之二，堂后的室是正堂的三分之一。殷人的重屋，堂深七寻，堂高三尺，堂上有四注屋，四注屋上有重屋。
English: The entrance hall is two-thirds of the main hall, and the room behind the hall is one-third of the main hall. It is a large heavy house, the hall is seven feet deep, the hall is three feet high, there is a four-pitched house in the hall, and there is a heavy house on the four-pitched roof.

古文：周人明堂，度九尺之筵，东西九筵，南北七筵，堂崇一筵，五室，凡室二筵。
现代文：周人的明堂，用长九尺的筵来量度，它的南堂东西宽九筵，南北深七筵，堂高一筵，共有五室，每室二筵见方。
English: Zhou Ren's Ming Hall, measured by a nine-foot-long cubit, its south hall is nine cubits wide from east to west, seven cubits deep from north to south, and one cubit high, with a total of five rooms, two cubits square in each room.

古文：室中度以几，堂上度以筵，宫中度以寻，野度以步，涂度以轨，庙门容大扃七个，闱门容小扃三个，路门不容乘车之五个，应门二彻三个。
现代文：室中用几来度量，堂上用筵来度量，宫中用寻来度量，野地用步来度量，道路用车轨来度量。庙门的宽度可容七个大扃，闱门的宽度可容三个小扃，路门的宽度容不下五辆乘车并行，应门的宽度为三轨。
English: The width of the temple gate can accommodate seven large gates, the width of the gate can accommodate three small gates, the width of the road gate can not accommodate five cars in parallel, and the width of the gate is three lanes.

古文：内有九室，九嫔居之。
现代文：路寝内有九室，九嫔居住在那里。
English: There are nine rooms in the dormitory, and nine sisters live there.

古文：外有九室，九卿朝焉。
现代文：路门外有九室，九卿在那里处理政事。
English: There are nine chambers outside the gateway, where the nine lords conduct the affairs of state.

古文：九分其国，以为九分，九卿治之。
现代文：把国事划分为九个方面，由九卿负责治理。
English: divided the affairs of state into nine areas, with the nine nobles responsible for governing.

古文：王宫门阿之制五雉，宫隅之制七雉，城隅之制九雉，经涂九轨，环涂七轨，野涂五轨。
现代文：王宫门屋屋脊的建制高五雉，宫墙四角浮思建制高七雉，城墙四角浮思建制高九雉。城内南北大道宽九轨，环城大道宽七轨，野地大道宽五轨。
English: The structure of the roof ridge of the palace gatehouse is 5m high, the structure of the palace wall is 7m high, and the structure of the city wall is 9m high. The width of the north and south avenues in the city is 9 lanes, the width of the ring road is 7 lanes, and the width of the field road is 5 lanes.

古文：门阿之制，以为都城之制。
现代文：用王宫门阿建制的高度，作为公和王子弟大都之城四角浮思高度的标准。
English: Using the height of the gate system of the royal palace as the standard for the height of the four corners of the city of the prince and prince's younger brother.

古文：宫隅之制，以为诸侯之城制。
现代文：用王宫宫墙四角浮思建制的高度，作为诸侯都城四角浮思高度的标准。
English: Using the height of the four-cornered floating structure of the palace wall of the royal palace as the standard for the height of the four-cornered floating structure of the capital of the princes.

古文：环涂以为诸侯经涂，野涂以为都经涂。
现代文：用王都环城大道的宽度，作为诸侯都城中南北大道宽度的标准；用王畿野地大道的宽度，作为公和王子弟大都城中南北大道宽度的标准。
English: The width of Wangdu Huancheng Avenue is used as the standard for the width of Zhongnanbei Avenue in the Princely Capital; the width of Wangki Yuchi Avenue is used as the standard for the width of Zhongnanbei Avenue in the Princely Capital.

古文：匠人为沟洫，耜广五寸，二耜为耦一耦之伐，广尺深尺，谓之；田首倍之，广二尺，深二尺，谓之遂九夫为井，井间广四尺，深四尺，谓之沟方十里为成，成间广八尺，深八尺，谓之洫；方百里为同，同间广二寻，深二仞，谓之浍。专达于川，各载其名。
现代文：百里见方的土地叫做同，同与同之间宽二寻、深二仞的叫做浍，浍直通河流。
English: The land that is a hundred miles square is called Tong, and the land that is two fathoms wide and two fathoms deep between Tong and Tong is called Tong, and the Tong leads straight to the river.

古文：凡天下之地埶，两山之间，必有川焉，大川之上，必有涂焉。
现代文：这里是记载各种沟渠之名。凡天下的地势，两山之间一定有河流，大河流岸上一定有道路。
English: The names of various ditches are recorded here. No matter the topography of the world, there must be a river between two mountains, and there must be a road on the bank of a large river.

古文：凡沟逆地阞谓之不行。水属不理孙，谓之不行。
现代文：凡开沟渠违逆地的脉理，叫做水流不行；水的流注不顺，也叫水流不行。
English: Anyone who digs a trench against the natural flow of the earth is said to be impeding the flow of water; if the flow of water is not smooth, it is said to be impeding the flow of water.

古文：梢沟三十里，而广倍。
现代文：所挖的沟渠下流三十里而宽度增加一倍。
English: The trench was dug thirty leagues downstream and doubled in width.

古文：凡行奠水，磬折以参伍。
现代文：凡疏导停积的水，所开渠道要顺地势曲直交错。
English: Where water is diverted from accumulating, the channels should follow the earth's curvature.

古文：欲为渊，购句于矩。
现代文：要想使水成渊，渠道弯曲度就要大于直角。
English: If you want to make the water into a chasm, the channel curvature must be greater than a right angle.

古文：凡沟必因水埶，防必因地埶。
现代文：凡开沟一定要顺水的流势，凡筑堤防一定要顺地势。
English: Wherever a ditch is opened, it must follow the current of the water, and wherever a dike is built, it must follow the current of the land.

古文：善沟者。水漱之；善防者，水淫之。
现代文：善开沟渠的人能利用水势冲荡障碍物，善筑堤防的人能利用水淤积的泥土增厚堤防。
English: Those who are good at digging ditches can use the water potential to push obstacles, and those who are good at building dikes can use the silted soil to thicken the dike.

古文：凡为防，广与崇方，其閷参分去一，大防外閷，凡沟防，必一日先深之以为式，里为式，然后可以傅众力。
现代文：凡建筑堤防，下基的宽度与堤防的高度相等，上面的宽度比下基渐减三分之一。大的堤防因下基增厚而外侧向上减薄的比例增大。凡开渠筑堤，定要先用数人一天试作的进度为每天工作量的标准，再计算出完成一里长度所需天数和人数，然后可依此计算整个工程所用人力数。
English: When building a dike, the width of the lower foundation is equal to the height of the dike, and the upper width is gradually reduced by one-third compared to the lower foundation. The proportion of thinning on the outer side of a large dike increases due to the thickening of the lower foundation. When opening a canal to build a dike, it is necessary to first use the progress of several people's one-day trial as the standard of daily workload, and then calculate the number of days and people required to complete a mile length, and then calculate the number of manpower used for the entire project.

古文：凡任索约，大汲其版，谓之无任。
现代文：圆仓、地窖、方仓、城墙，它们的墙上端的厚度渐减为墙高的六分之一。
English: Round barns, cellars, square barns, city walls, the thickness of the upper end of their walls is gradually reduced to one-sixth of the wall height.

古文：茸屋参分，瓦屋四分，囷、窌、仓、城，逆墙六分，堂涂十有二分，窦，其崇三尺，墙厚三尺，崇三之。
现代文：堂阶前的路中间高出的尺寸是两旁宽度的十二分之一。宫中水道深三尺。墙的厚度与高度的比例是：墙厚三尺，高为九尺。
English: The height of the road in front of the steps is one-twelfth of the width of the two sides. The waterway in the palace is three feet deep. The ratio of the thickness to the height of the wall is: the wall is three feet thick and nine feet high.

古文：车人之事，半矩谓之宣，一宣有半谓之欘，一欘有半谓之柯，一柯有半谓之磬折。
现代文：车人制作器物的事，直角的一半叫做宣，一宣半的角叫做欘，一榍半的角叫做柯，一柯半的角度就是磬的弯曲度。
English: In the production of utensils by wheelwrights, the half of the right angle is called xuan, the half of xuan is called yang, the half of yang is called ke, and the half of ke is the degree of curvature of yang.

古文：车人为耒，庛尺有一寸，中直者三尺有三寸，上句者二尺有二寸。
现代文：车人制作耒，下端的庇长一尺一寸，中间直的一段长三尺三寸，上端向后弯的一段长二尺二寸。
English: The driver made a cocoon. The lower end of the cocoon was one foot and one inch long, the middle straight section was three feet and three inches long, and the upper end bent backwards was two feet and two inches long.

古文：自其庛，缘其外，以至于首，以弦其内六尺有六寸，与步相中也。
现代文：从庇端沿着耒木，而到达首端，以两端之内的直线距离为弦，长六尺六寸的耒木，而弦的长度正好等于一步的长度。
English: From the end of the eaves along the hazel, and reaching the head end, with a straight line distance between the two ends as a string, the length of the hazel is six feet six inches, and the length of the string is exactly equal to the length of a step.

古文：坚地欲直庛，柔地欲句庛，直庛则利推，句庛，则利发。倨句磬折，谓之中地。
现代文：坚硬的土地要用直庛的耜，柔软的土地要用庛弯折的耜。直庇利于推耜入土，弯折的庛于强士，庛弯折的角度如磬体，称之为适宜于各类土地。
English: Hard soil should be ploughed with a straight plough, soft soil should be ploughed with a curved plough. The straight plough is good for pushing the plough into the soil, the curved plough is good for strong men, and the angle of plough bending is like a plough body, which is suitable for all types of land.

古文：车人为车，柯长三尺，博三寸，厚一寸有半，五分其长，以其一为之首。
现代文：车人制造货车。柯长三尺，宽三寸，厚一寸半，把柯长分为五等分，用一等分的长度作为斧刃的长度。
English: A car man builds a truck. The length of the cutter is three feet, the width is three inches, and the thickness is one and a half inches. The length of the cutter is divided into five equal parts, and the length of one equal part is used as the length of the axe blade.

古文：毂长半柯，其围一柯有半。
现代文：大车毂长一尺五寸，毂围长四尺五寸。
English: The chariot is 1'5" long and 4'5" in circumference.

古文：辐长一柯有半，其博三寸，厚三之一。
现代文：辐长四尺五寸，辐宽三寸，厚一寸。轮牙周长二丈七尺。
English: The spokes are four feet five inches long, three inches wide and one inch thick. The circumference of the wheel teeth is 22 feet.

古文：渠三柯者三，行泽者欲短毂，行山者欲长毂。短毂则利，长毂则安。
现代文：在沼泽地行驶毂要短，在山地行驶毂要长；短毂便利，长毂安稳。
English: It is necessary to have a short beak for driving in swampy areas and a long beak for driving in mountainous areas; a short beak is convenient and a long beak is stable.

古文：行泽者反輮，行山者仄輮，反輮则易，仄輮则完。六分其轮崇，以其一为之牙围。
现代文：在泽地行驶煤制轮牙要使木的阴面朝外，在山地行驶煤制轮牙要使木的阴阳面各一半朝外；煤制轮牙使木的阴面朝外就滑易而不黏泥，揉制轮牙使木的阴阳面各一半朝外就能保持完好而不被山石所损坏。将轮的高度分为六等分，用一等分作为牙的围长。
English: When driving a coal-powered wheel cog in the forest, it is necessary to make the shady side of the tree face outwards. When driving a coal-powered wheel cog in the mountains, it is necessary to make both the shady and sunny sides of the tree face outwards; when driving a coal-powered wheel cog, it is necessary to make the shady side of the tree face outwards smooth and not sticky, and when driving a wheel cog, it is necessary to make both the shady and sunny sides of the tree face outwards smooth and not sticky. When driving a wheel cog, it is necessary to keep both the shady and sunny sides of the tree face out

古文：柏车毂长一柯，其围二柯，其辐一柯，其渠二柯者三。
现代文：柏车毂长三尺，毂的围长六尺，辐长三尺，轮牙的周长一丈八尺，把轮的高度分为五等分，用一等分的长度作为牙的围长。
English: The hub of the cart is three feet long, the rim is six feet long, the spokes are three feet long, and the circumference of the wheel teeth is eight feet. The height of the wheel is divided into five equal parts, and the length of one equal part is used as the circumference of the teeth.

古文：五分其轮崇，以其一为之牙围，大车崇三柯，绠寸，牝服二柯有参分柯之二。
现代文：大车轮高九尺，牙边留出的绠宽一寸，牝服长八尺。
English: The large wheel is nine feet high, the toothed rim is one inch wide, and the rim is eight feet long.

古文：羊车二柯有参分柯之一，柏车二柯。
现代文：羊车的牝服长七尺。柏车的牝服长六尺。
English: The yoke of the cart is seven feet long, and the cart of the horse is six feet long.

古文：凡为辕，三其轮崇，参分其长，二在前，一在后，以凿其钩，彻广六尺，鬲长六尺。
现代文：凡制作牛车的辕，辕长是轮高的三倍。把辕长分为三等分，二等分在前，一等分在后，以在此凿衔轴的钩。轨宽六尺，轭长六尺。
English: Whosoever maketh a yoke for an oxcart, let the yoke be three times as long as the height of the wheel; and let the yoke be divided into three parts, and the first part into the front, and the second into the back, and let the hook of the yoke be made in the middle thereof: and the breadth of the track shall be six feet, and the length of the yoke six feet.

