古文：达生之情者，不务生之所无以为；达命之情者，不务知之所无奈何。
现代文：通晓生命真实情形的人，不会去追求对于生命来说不必要的东西；通晓命运实情的人，不会去追求对命运无能为力的事情。
English: Those who know the truth of life will not pursue things that are unnecessary for life; those who know the truth of fate will not pursue things that are powerless against fate.

古文：养形必先之以物，物有余而形不养者有之矣。有生必先无离形，形不离而生亡者有之矣。
现代文：保养身体必定先得备足各种物品，可是物资充裕有余而身体却不能很好保养的情况是有的；保住生命必定得先使生命不脱离形体，但是形体未死生命却死去的情况也是存在的。
English: To maintain the body, various articles must first be prepared. However, there are cases where the body cannot be well maintained due to the abundance of materials. To maintain life, it is necessary to keep the life from leaving the body, but there are also cases where the body does not die but the life dies.

古文：生之来不能却，其去不能止。
现代文：生命的到来不能推却，生命的离去不能留止。
English: The arrival of life cannot be postponed, and the departure of life cannot be delayed.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊！
English: How sad!

古文：世之人以为养形足以存生，而养形果不足以存生，则世奚足为哉！
现代文：世俗的人认为养育身形便足以保存生命；然而养育身形果真不足以保存生命，那么，世间还有什么事情值得去做呢！
English: Worldly people think that nurturing the body is enough to preserve life; however, if nurturing the body is really not enough to preserve life, then what else is there worth doing in the world!

古文：虽不足为而不可不为者，其为不免矣！
现代文：虽然不值得去做却不得不去做，内中的操劳或勤苦也就不可避免。
English: Although it is not worth doing, it has to be done, and inner toil or diligence is inevitable.

古文：夫欲免为形者，莫如弃世。弃世则无累，无累则正平，正平则与彼更生，更生则几矣！
现代文：要想避免为了养身而操劳，便不知抛弃世俗之事就没有拖累，没有拖累就会心正气平，心正气平就能和大自然一同变化发展而生生不息，生生不息就接近大道了！
English: If you want to avoid exerting yourself for the sake of self-cultivation, you do not know that abandoning worldly things will not drag you down. Without dragging, you will be calm and level-headed. With a calm and level-headed mind, you will be able to change and develop with nature and continue to live, and you will be close to the main road!

古文：事奚足遗弃而生奚足遗？
现代文：为什么世事值得抛弃，而生命值得遗忘呢？
English: Why is the world worth abandoning, and life worth forgetting?

古文：弃事则形不劳，遗生则精不亏。
现代文：因为抛弃世事就能让身体不操劳，遗忘生命就能让精神不亏损。
English: Because abandoning worldly affairs can make the body not work hard, forgetting life can make the spirit not lose money.

古文：夫形全精复，与天为一。
现代文：形体得到保全，精神复归凝聚，就能与自然融为一体。
English: If the body is preserved and the spirit is restored and consolidated, it will be able to integrate with nature.

古文：天地者，万物之父母也。合则成体，散则成始。
现代文：天地，是万物的父母；阴阳二气的相合就形成万物之体，阴阳二气的离散就又复归于物的原初。
English: Heaven and earth are the parents of all things; the combination of yin and yang forms the body of all things, and the separation of yin and yang returns to the origin of things.

古文：形精不亏，是谓能移。
现代文：形体与精神都不亏损，这叫做能够随着自然变化而更新。
English: There is no loss of form or spirit, which is called being able to renew with natural changes.

古文：精而又精，反以相天。
现代文：精神修养到了极高处，反过来可以辅助大自然的化育。
English: Spiritual cultivation has reached a very high level, which, in turn, can assist nature's cultivation.

古文：子列子问关尹曰： 至人潜行不窒，蹈火不热，行乎万物之上而不栗。
现代文：列子问关尹说： 道德修养极高的人在水中潜行却不会感到阻塞，跳入火中却不会感到灼热，行走在万物之巅也不会感到恐惧。
English: The reporter asked Guan Yin, "A highly moral person can sneak through water without feeling blocked, jump into fire without feeling scorching, and walk on the top of all things without feeling fear.

古文：请问何以至于此？ 
现代文：请问为什么会达到这样的境界？ 
English: How did they get to this point?

古文：关尹曰： 是纯气之守也，非知巧果敢之列。
现代文：关尹回答说： 这是因为持守住纯和之气，并不是智巧、果敢所能做到的。
English: Guan Yin replied, "This is because holding on to the spirit of purity and harmony is not something that can be done with cleverness and courage.

古文：居，予语女。
现代文：坐下，我告诉给你。
English: Sit down, I'll tell you how.

古文：凡有貌象声色者，皆物也，物与物何以相远！
现代文：大凡具有面貌、形象、声音、颜色的东西，都是物体，那么物与物之间又为什么差异很大，区别甚多？
English: Everything that has a face, image, sound, and color is an object, so why are there so many differences between things?

古文：夫奚足以至乎先！
现代文：又是什么东西最有能耐足以居于他物之先的地位？
English: And what is the most capable of staying ahead of the rest?

古文：是色而已。
现代文：这都只不过是有形状和颜色罢了。
English: It's all a matter of form and tone.

古文：则物之造乎不形，而止乎无所化。夫得是而穷之者，物焉得而止焉！
现代文：大凡一个有形之物却不显露形色而留足于无所变化之中，懂得这个道理而且深明内中的奥秘，他物又怎么能控制或阻遏住他呢！
English: But if a corporeal thing, which does not reveal its form, but remains in the midst of no change, understands this principle and knows the mysteries within, how can another thing control or restrain it!

古文：彼将处乎不淫之度，而藏乎无端之纪，游乎万物之所终始。壹其性，养其气，合其德，以通乎物之所造。
现代文：那样的人处在本能所为的限度内，藏身于无端无绪的混沌中，游乐于万物或灭或生的变化环境里，本性专一不二，元气保全涵养，德行相融相合，从而使自身与自然相通。
English: Such a person is within the limits of what the instinct does, hiding in the chaos of the chaos, enjoying the changing environment in which everything is either destroyed or born, the nature is one and the same, the vitality is preserved and nurtured, and the virtues are integrated, so that he can communicate with nature.

古文：夫若是者，其天守全，其神无隙，物奚自入焉！夫醉者之坠车，虽疾不死。
现代文：像这样，他的禀性持守保全，他的精神没有亏损，外物又从什么地方能够侵入呢！ 喝醉酒的人从车上摔下来，虽然满身是伤却没有死去。
English: In this way, his tenacity is preserved, his spirit is not lost, and from where can foreign objects invade? A drunken man falls from a car, although he is covered with injuries, he does not die.

古文：骨节与人同而犯害与人异，其神全也。乘亦不知也，坠亦不知也，死生惊惧不入乎其胸中，是故遻物而不慴。
现代文：骨骼关节跟旁人一样而所受伤害却跟别人不同，因为他的神思高度集中，乘坐在车子上也没有感觉，即使坠落地上也不知道，死、生、惊、惧全都不能进入到他的思想中，所以遭遇外物的伤害却全没有惧怕之感。
English: The skeletal joints are the same as those of other people, but the injury is different from others, because his mind is highly concentrated, he has no feeling when sitting on the car, even if he falls to the ground, he does not know, death, birth, shock, and fear can not enter his mind, so there is no sense of fear when encountering damage from a foreign object.

古文：彼得全于酒而犹若是，而况得全于天乎？
现代文：那个人从醉酒中获得保全完整的心态尚且能够如此忘却外物，何况从自然之道中忘却外物而保全完整的心态呢？
English: Can a drunken man by wine be made perfect, and a man be made perfect by the law of nature?

古文：圣人藏于天，故莫之能伤也。
现代文：圣人藏身于自然，所以没有什么能够伤害他。
English: The sage is hidden in nature, so nothing can harm him.

古文：复仇者，不折镆干；虽有忮心者，不怨飘瓦，是以天下平均。
现代文：复仇的人并不会去折断曾经伤害过他的宝剑，即使常存忌恨之心的人也不会怨恨那偶然飘来、无心地伤害到他的瓦片，这样一来天下也就太平安宁。
English: A vengeful person will not break the sword that once hurt him, and even a person with an abiding hatred will not resent the tile that accidentally floated and unintentionally hurt him, so that the world will be peaceful.

古文：故无攻战之乱，无杀戮之刑者，由此道也。不开人之天，而开天之天。
现代文：没有攻城野战的祸乱，没有残杀戮割的刑罚，全因为遵循了这个道理。 不要开启人为的思想与智巧，而要开发自然的真性。
English: There is no scourge of siege warfare, no punishment of killing and slaughtering, all because of following this principle: Do not open up artificial thoughts and cleverness, but develop the authenticity of nature.

古文：开天者德生，开人者贼生。
现代文：开发了自然的真性就能培养好的道德；开启人为的思想与智巧，就会产生贼害之心。
English: The development of natural authenticity can cultivate good morals; the opening of artificial thought and cleverness will produce the thief's heart.

古文：不厌其天，不忽于人，民几乎以其真。 
现代文：不满足于自然的禀赋，也不忽略人为的才智，这样的人也就几近纯真无伪了！ 
English: Not content with natural endowment, nor neglecting artificial intelligence, such a person is also almost pure!

古文：仲尼适楚，出于林中，见佝偻者承蜩，犹掇之也。
现代文：孔子到楚国去，走出树林，看见一个驼背的老人正用竿子在粘蝉，就好像用手拾取那样简单。
English: Confucius went to Chu Province, walked out of the woods, and saw a hunchbacked old man using a pole to catch cicadas. It was as simple as picking them up by hand.

古文：仲尼曰： 子巧乎，有道邪？ 
现代文：孔子说： 先生的手真是灵巧啊！这里边有什么门道吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Master's hand is really dexterous! Is there any doorway here?"

古文：曰： 我有道也。
现代文：驼背老人说： 似的，我有我的办法。
English: The man replied, "It's a skill.

古文：五六月累丸二而不坠，则失者锱铢；累三而不坠，则失者十一；累五而不坠，犹掇之也。
现代文：我在竹竿上累放两个弹丸，经过五六个月的练习就不会掉不下来，那么粘蝉失误的概率就只有四分之一；如果练习到累放到三个弹丸不掉，那么粘蝉失误的概率就只有十分之一了；如果再继续练习到累放五个弹丸也掉不下来，那么粘蝉就如随手拾取那样容易了。
English: I accumulate two projectiles on a bamboo pole, and after five or six months of practice, the cicada will not fall, so the probability of a sticky cicada error is only one-fourth; if I practice to accumulate up to three projectiles, then the probability of a sticky cicada error is only one-tenth; if I continue to practice to accumulate up to five projectiles, then the sticky cicada is as easy as picking it up.

古文：吾处身也，若蹶株拘；吾执臂也，若槁木之枝。虽天地之大，万物之多，而唯蜩翼之知。吾不反不侧，不以万物易蜩之翼，何为而不得！ 
现代文：当我粘蝉时，我立定身子，犹如临近地面的断木，我举竿的手臂，就像枯木的树枝；虽然天地很大，万物品类很多，我一心只注意蝉的翅膀，从不思前想后左顾右盼，绝不因纷繁的万物而改变对蝉翼的注意，为什么不能成功呢！ 
English: When I am sticking to the cicada, I stand firmly, like a piece of wood close to the ground, and the arm of my pole is like the branch of a dead tree. Although the world is big and there are many kinds of things, I only pay attention to the wings of the cicada. I never think ahead, look back, look left and right, and never change my attention to the wings of the cicada because of the variety of things. Why can't I succeed?

古文：孔子顾谓弟子曰： 用志不分，乃凝于神。
现代文：孔子转身对弟子们说： 运用心志不分散，就是高度凝聚精神，恐怕说的就是这位驼背的老人吧！ 
English: Confucius turned to his disciples and said, "Using one's mind and not scattering it is a highly cohesive spirit. I'm afraid I'm talking about this hunchbacked old man!"

古文：其佝偻丈人之谓乎！ 
现代文：颜渊问孔子说： 我曾经在觞深过渡，摆渡人驾船的技巧实在神妙。
English: Yan Yuan asked Confucius and said: I was once on a ferry in Shaoshen. The ferryman's skill in driving the boat is really amazing.

古文：颜渊问仲尼曰： 吾尝济乎觞深之渊，津人操舟若神。
现代文：我问他： 驾船可以学习吗？ 摆渡人说： 可以的。
English: I asked him, "Can you learn to drive a boat?" The ferryman said, "Yes, you can."

古文：吾问焉曰： 操舟可学邪？ 
现代文：善于游泳的人很快就能驾船。
English: Those who are good swimmers will soon be able to drive the boat.

古文：曰： 可。善游者数能。
现代文：假如是善于潜水的人，那他不曾见到船也会熟练地驾驶船。 
English: If you are a good diver, you will be able to navigate the boat even if you have never seen it.

古文：若乃夫没人，则未尝见舟而便操之也。 
现代文：我进而问他怎样学习驾船而他却不再回答我。
English: I went on to ask him how to learn to sail and he stopped answering me.

古文：吾问焉而不吾告，敢问何谓也？ 
现代文：请问他的话说的是什么意思呢？ 
English: What does he mean by that?

古文：仲尼曰： 善游者数能，忘水也；若乃夫没人之未尝见舟而便操之也，彼视渊若陵，视舟若履，犹其车却也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 善于游泳的人很快就能学会驾船，这是因为他们习以成性适应于水而处之自然。至于那善于潜水的人不曾见到过船就能熟练地驾驶船，是因为他们眼里的深渊就像是陆地上的小丘，看待船翻犹如车子倒退一样。
English: Confucius replied, "Those who are good at swimming can quickly learn to drive a boat, because they are accustomed to adapt to the nature of the water. As for those who are good at diving, they can skillfully drive a boat without ever seeing a boat, because the abyss in their eyes is like a hill on the land, and they see the boat overturn as if it were a car going backwards.

古文：覆却万方陈乎前而不得入其舍，恶往而不暇！
现代文：船的覆没和车的倒退以及各种景象展现在他们眼前却都不能扰乱他们的内心，他们到哪里不从容自得！
English: The sinking of the boat and the reversal of the car and all kinds of scenes unfold in front of their eyes but can not disturb their hearts, they do not take it easy!

古文：以瓦注者巧，以钩注者惮，以黄金注者殙。
现代文：用瓦器作为赌注的人心地坦然而格外技高，用金属带钩作为赌注的人而心存疑惧，用黄金作为赌注的人则头脑发昏内心迷乱。
English: The man who gambles with earthenware is serene but highly skilled, the man who gambles with metal hooks is suspicious, and the man who gambles with gold is dazed and confused.

古文：其巧一也，而有所矜，则重外也。
现代文：各种赌注的赌博技巧本是一样的，而有所顾惜，那就是以身外之物为重了。
English: The gambling technique of all kinds of bets is the same, but there is a regret that it is based on things outside the body.

古文：凡外重者内拙。 
现代文：大凡对外物看得过重的人其内心世界一定笨拙。 
English: An ordinary person who places too much weight on external things must be clumsy in his inner world.

古文：田开之见周威公，威公曰： 吾闻祝肾学生，吾子与祝肾游，亦何闻焉？ 
现代文：田开之拜见周威公。周威公说： 我听说祝肾在学习养生，先生跟祝肾交往，应该从他那儿听到过什么吧？ 
English: Tian Kai's visit to Zhou Weigong. Zhou Weigong said: I heard that Zhu Ren is studying health care, and my teacher is in contact with Zhu Ren. Should I have heard something from him?

古文：田开之曰： 开之操拔篲以侍门庭，亦何闻于夫子！ 
现代文：田开之说： 我在那里只不过是打扫门庭，又能从先生那里听到什么呢！ 
English: "I was only there to clean the courtyard, but what could I expect to hear from the teacher?" said Tian Kaiji.

古文：威公曰： 田子无让，寡人愿闻之。 
现代文：周威公说： 先生不必谦虚，我希望能听到这方面的道理。 
English: Zhou Weigong said, "Teachers do not need to be modest. I hope to hear the truth in this regard."

古文：开之曰： 闻之夫子曰： 善养生者，若牧羊然，视其后者而鞭之。  
现代文：田开之说： 听先生说： 善于养生的人，就像牧羊一样，看到有落后的就用鞭子抽打它。  
English: Tian Kai said: Listen to what the teacher said: People who are good at health maintenance are like shepherds. When they see someone who is lagging behind, they lash him with a whip.

古文：威公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：周威公问：这话说的是什么意思呢？ 
English: Zhou Wei Gong asked: What does this mean?

古文：田开之曰： 鲁有单豹者，岩居而水饮，不与民共利，行年七十而犹有婴儿之色，不幸遇饿虎，饿虎杀而食之。
现代文：田开之说： 鲁国有个叫单豹的，在岩穴里居住在山泉边饮水，不跟任何人争利，活了七十岁还有婴儿一样的面容；不幸遇上了饿虎，饿虎扑杀并吃掉了他。
English: Tian Kai Zhi said: In the country of Lu, there was a leopard called the Lone Leopard, who lived in a rock cave and drank water from a mountain spring. He did not compete with anyone for profit, and lived to be seventy years old with a baby-like face. Unfortunately, he met a hungry tiger, which killed and ate him.

古文：有张毅者，高门县薄，无不走也，行年四十而有内热之病以死。
现代文：另有一个叫张毅的，高门甲第、朱户垂帘的富贵人家，无不趋走参谒，活到四十岁便患内热病而死去。
English: There is another one called Zhang Yi, a wealthy man with a high rank and a high-ranking family, who lived until he was forty years old and died of internal fever.

古文：豹养其内而虎食其外，毅养其外而病攻其内。此二子者，皆不鞭其后者也。 
现代文：单豹注重内心世界的修养可是老虎却吞食了他的身体，张毅注重身体的调养可是疾病侵扰了他的内心世界，这两个人，都不是能够鞭策落后而取其适宜的人。 
English: The lone leopard paid attention to the cultivation of the inner world, but the tiger devoured his body; Zhang Yi paid attention to the cultivation of the body, but the disease invaded his inner world. These two people are not able to lash the backward and take their appropriate people.

古文：仲尼曰： 无入而藏，无出而阳，柴立其中央。
现代文：孔子说： 不要进入荒山野岭把自己深藏起来，也不要投进世俗而使自己处处显露，要像槁木一样站立在两者中间。
English: Confucius said: "Do not go into the deserts and mountains to hide yourself, and do not throw yourself into the world to reveal yourself everywhere, but stand like a beech tree between the two.

古文：三者若得，其名必极。
现代文：倘若以上三种情况都能具备，他的名声必定最高。
English: If the above three conditions can be met, his reputation must be the highest.

古文：夫畏涂者，十杀一人，则父子兄弟相戒也，必盛卒徒而后敢出焉，不亦知乎！
现代文：使人可畏的道路，十个行人有一个人被杀害，于是父子兄弟相互提醒和戒备，必定要使随行的徒众多起来方才敢于外出，这不是很聪明吗！
English: Isn't it very clever to make the path so fearsome that one out of ten pedestrians is killed, so the father and son brothers remind and warn each other that they must make the accompanying followers numerous before they dare to go out!

古文：人之所取畏者，衽席之上，饮食之间，而不知为之戒者，过也！ 
现代文：人所最可怕的，还是枕席上的姿意，还有在饮食间的失度；却不知道为此提醒和戒备，这实在是过错。 
English: The most dreadful thing a man can do is to lose his place on the bedside table, or to lose his temper in the dining room; but not to know how to warn and guard against this is really a fault.

古文：祝宗人玄端以临牢柙说彘，曰： 汝奚恶死！
现代文：主持宗庙祭祀的官吏穿好礼服戴上礼帽来到猪圈边，对着栅栏里的猪说： 你为什么要讨厌死呢？
English: The official who presided over the ritual of the ancestral temple put on a ceremonial robe and a ceremonial hat and came to the edge of the pigsty. He said to the pig in the fence: "Why do you hate death?

古文：吾将三月㹖汝，十日戒，三日齐，藉白茅，加汝肩尻乎雕俎之上，则汝为之乎？ 
现代文：我将要花三个月的时间精心喂养你，还要用十天为你上戒，用三天为你作斋，铺上白茅草，然后把你的肩胛和臀部放在雕有花纹的祭器上，你愿意这样吗？ 
English: I am going to spend three months carefully feeding you, I am going to spend ten days chastising you, I am going to spend three days fasting for you, I am going to spread white thatch, and then I am going to place your shoulders and hips on a carved altar, are you willing to do this?

古文：为彘谋曰： 不如食以糠糟而错之牢柙之中。 自为谋，则苟生有轩冕之尊，死得于腞楯之上、聚偻之中则为之。
现代文：如果真是为猪谋划，就不如放置在猪圈里以糟糠为食更好，为了自己谋划，就希望活在世上有高贵荣华的地位，死后则能盛装在绘有文采的柩车上和棺椁中。
English: If you are really planning for pigs, it is better to place them in a pigsty to feed on the dregs. If you are planning for yourself, you hope to live in a noble and glorious position in the world, and after death, you can be dressed in a literary carriage and coffin.

古文：为彘谋则去之，自为谋则取之，所异彘者何也！
现代文：为猪打算就会舍弃白茅、雕俎之类的东西，为自己打算却想求取这些东西，所不同于猪的原因究竟是什么呢？ 
English: If you think about pigs, you will give up things like whitebeam and carved gourds, but if you think about yourself, you will want to obtain these things. What is the reason for the difference from pigs?

古文：桓公田于泽，管仲御，见鬼焉。
现代文：齐桓公在草泽中打猎，管仲为他驾车，突然桓公见到了鬼。
English: King Qi Huan was hunting in the grass, and Guanzhong was driving for him, when suddenly King Huan saw a ghost.

古文：公抚管仲之手曰： 仲父何见？ 
现代文：桓公拉住管仲的手说： 仲父，你看见了什么没有？ 
English: Prince Kan gripped Guanzhong's hand and said: Guanzhong, did you see anything?

古文：对曰： 臣无所见。 
现代文：管仲回答： 我什么都没看见。 
English: Guanzhong replied: I didn't see anything.

古文：公反，诶诒为病，数日不出。
现代文：桓公打猎回来，失魂呓语而得病，好几天不出门。
English: When Kuan Kung returned from hunting, he fell ill and did not go out for several days.

古文：齐士有皇子告敖者，曰： 公则自伤，鬼恶能伤公！
现代文：齐国有一位贤士叫皇子告敖的，对齐桓公说： 您是自己伤害了自己，鬼哪里能伤害您呢？
English: There was a wise man in the state of Qi who told the prince to denounce him. He said to the prince of Qi: You have hurt yourself. How could the devil hurt you?

古文：夫忿滀之气，散而不反，则为不足；上而不下，则使人善怒；下而不上，则使人善忘；不上不下，中身当心，则为病。 
现代文：身体内部郁结着气，精魂就会离散而不返归于身，对于来自外界的骚扰也就缺乏足够的精神力量。郁结着的气上通而不能下达，就会使人易怒；下达而不能上通，就会使人健忘；不上通又不下达，郁结内心而不离散，那就会生病。 
English: If the body is depressed, the spirit will be dispersed without returning to the body, and it will lack sufficient spiritual strength to deal with external harassment. If the body is depressed, the person will be irritable if the spirit can't be released; if the spirit can't be released, the person will be forgetful; if the spirit can't be released, the person will be depressed, and if the spirit can't be released, the person will get sick.

古文：桓公曰： 然则有鬼乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这样，那么还有鬼吗？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "So, are there still ghosts?"

古文：曰： 有。
现代文：告敖回答： 有。
English: And he said, I have.

古文：沈有履。灶有髻。
现代文：水中污泥里有叫履的鬼，灶里有叫髻的鬼。
English: In the sludge in the water, there is the ghost of the yakitori, and in the kitchen there is the ghost of the yakitori.

古文：户内之烦壤，雷霆处之；东北方之下者倍阿，鲑蠪跃之；西北方之下者，则泆阳处之。
现代文：门户内的各种烦攘，名叫雷霆的鬼在处置；东北的墙下，名叫倍阿鲑蠪的鬼在跳跃；西北方的墙下，名叫攻入阳的鬼住在那里。
English: In the portal, there are all kinds of hustle and bustle, and the ghost named Thunder is dealing with it; in the northeast, under the wall, the ghost named Beelzebub is jumping; in the northwest, under the wall, the ghost named Breaking into the Sun lives there.

古文：水有罔象，丘有峷，山有夔，野有彷徨，泽有委蛇。 
现代文：水里有水鬼罔象，丘陵里有山鬼峷，大山里有山鬼夔，郊野里有野鬼彷徨，草泽里还有一种名叫委蛇的鬼。 
English: There are water ghosts in the water, mountain ghosts in the hills, mountain ghosts in the mountains, wandering wild ghosts in the countryside, and a ghost called the snake in the grass.

古文：公曰： 请问委蛇之伏状何如？ 
现代文：桓公接着问： 请问，委蛇的形状怎么样？ 
English: Prince Kan went on to ask: Excuse me, what is the shape of the snake?

古文：皇子曰： 委蛇，其大如毂，其长如辕，紫衣而朱冠。
现代文：告敖回答： 委蛇，身躯大如车轮，长如车辕，穿着紫衣戴着红帽。
English: The informant replied: "He is a snake. His body is as big as a wheel and as long as a cart hoop. He wears purple clothes and a red cap.

古文：其为物也恶，闻雷车之声则捧其首而立。
现代文：他作为鬼神，最讨厌听到雷车的声音，一听见就两手捧着头站着。
English: As a ghost god, he hates the sound of thunder most of all. As soon as he hears it, he stands with his head in his hands.

古文：见之者殆乎霸。 
现代文：见到了他的人恐怕也就成了霸主了。 
English: I'm afraid that anyone who meets him becomes a domineering person.

古文：桓公辴然而笑曰： 此寡人之所见者也。 
现代文：桓公听了后开怀大笑，说： 这就是我所见到的鬼。 
English: After listening, Prince Kan laughed heartily and said, "This is the ghost I saw."

古文：于是正衣冠与之坐，不终日而不知病之去也。
现代文：于是整理好衣帽跟皇子告敖坐着谈话，不到一天时间病也就不知不觉地消失了。
English: So he sorted out his clothes and hat, sat down to talk with the prince, and in less than a day, the illness disappeared unnoticed.

古文：纪渻子为王养斗鸡。
现代文：纪渻子为周宣王驯养斗鸡。
English: Ji Xunzi raised fighting cocks for Zhou Xuanwang.

古文：十日而问： 鸡已乎？ 
现代文：过了十天周宣王派人来问： 鸡训练好了吗？ 
English: After ten days, Zhou Xuanwang sent someone to ask: Is the chicken trained?

古文：曰： 未也，方虚骄而恃气。 
现代文：纪渻子回答说： 还没有，正虚浮骄矜自恃意气哩。 
English: He replied, "No, I can't. I don't have any real ability, I just rely on my pride."

古文：十日又问，曰： 未也，犹应向景。 
现代文：十天后周宣王又派人来问，回答说： 还没有，还是听见响声就叫，看见影子就跳。 
English: Ten days later, King Zhou Xuan sent someone to ask again, and he replied, "Not yet. I still scream when I hear a noise, and jump when I see a shadow."

古文：十日又问，曰： 未也，犹疾视而盛气。 
现代文：十天后周宣王又派人来问，回答说： 还是那么顾看迅疾，意气强盛。 
English: Ten days later, King Zhou Xuan sent someone to ask him again, and he replied, "You are still so quick-witted and strong-willed.

古文：十日又问，曰： 几矣，鸡虽有鸣者，已无变矣，望之似木鸡矣，其德全矣。异鸡无敢应者，反走矣。 
现代文：又过了十天周宣王派人来问，回答说： 差不多了。别的鸡即使打鸣，它已不会有什么变化，看上去像木鸡一样，它的德行真可说是完备了，别的鸡没有敢于应战的，掉头就逃跑了。 
English: After another ten days, Zhou Xuanwang sent someone to inquire, and he replied, "It's almost done. Even if another chicken chirps, it won't change anything. It looks like a woodcock. Its virtue can truly be said to be complete. If another chicken doesn't dare to challenge, it will turn around and run away."

古文：孔子观于吕梁，县水三十仞，流沫四十里，鼋鼍鱼鳖之所不能游也。
现代文：孔子在吕梁观赏，瀑布高悬二三十丈，冲刷而起的激流和水花远达四十里，鼋、鼍、鱼、鳖都不敢在这一带游水。
English: Confucius observed it in Luliang. The waterfall is twenty to thirty meters high, and the torrent and splash of the water are up to forty miles away. Dragonflies, damselflies, fish, and dragonflies do not dare to swim in this area.

古文：见一丈夫游之，以为有苦而欲死也。使弟子并流而拯之。
现代文：只见一个壮年男子游在水中，还以为是有痛苦而想寻死的，派弟子顺着水流去拯救他。
English: He saw a middle-aged man swimming in the water, thought he was in pain and wanted to die, and sent his disciples to follow the current to save him.

古文：数百步而出，被发行歌而游于塘下。
现代文：忽见那壮年男子游出数百步远而后露出水面，还披着头发边唱边游在堤岸下。
English: I suddenly saw the middle-aged man swim out hundreds of paces and then emerge from the water, still wearing his hair and singing while swimming under the embankment.

古文：孔子从而问焉，曰： 吾以子为鬼，察子则人也。
现代文：孔子紧跟在他身后而问他，说： 我还以为你是鬼，仔细观察你却是个人。
English: Confucius followed closely behind him and asked him, "I thought you were a ghost, but on closer inspection you are a person."

古文：请问：蹈水有道乎？ 
现代文：请问，游水也有什么特别的门道吗？ 
English: Excuse me, is there any special entrance for swimming?

古文：曰： 亡，吾无道。吾始乎故，长乎性，成乎命。
现代文：那人回答： 没有，我并没有什么特别的方法。我起初是故常，长大是习性，有所成就在于自然。
English: The man replied, "No, I don't have any special methods. I started out with the same habits, I grew up with habits, and I achieved something through nature.

古文：与齐俱入，与汩偕出，从水之道而不为私焉。
现代文：我跟水里的漩涡一块儿下到水底，又跟向上的涌流一道游出水面，顺着水势而不作任何违拗。
English: I went down to the bottom with the swirl in the water, and swam out of the water with the upstream flow, following the water without any resistance.

古文：此吾所以蹈之也。 
现代文：这就是我游水的方法。 
English: That's how I swim.

古文：孔子曰： 何谓始乎故，长乎性，成乎命？ 
现代文：孔子说： 什么叫做 起初是故常，长大是习性，有所成就在于自然 呢？ 
English: Confucius said: What is the meaning of "At first it is habitual, growing up is a habit, and success lies in nature"?

古文：曰： 吾生于陵而安于陵，故也；长于水而安于水，性也；不知吾所以然而然，命也。 
现代文：那人又回答： 我出生于山地就安于山地的生活，这就叫做故常；长大了又生活在水边就安于水边的生活，这就叫做习性；不知道为什么会这样而这样生活着，这就叫做自然。 
English: The man said: I was born in the highlands and feel at ease in the highlands, which means to be at ease with nature; I grew up by the water and practice at the water's edge, which means to be habitual; I do not know why I do this and do it, which means to comply with natural destiny.

古文：梓庆削木为鐻，日成，见者惊犹鬼神。
现代文：梓庆刻削木料做成鐻，鐻做成后，见到的人都惊叹为鬼斧神工。
English: Zi Qing chiseled wood to make a crossbow. After the crossbow was made, the people who saw it were amazed at the miracle.

古文：鲁侯见而问焉，曰： 子何术以为焉？ 
现代文：鲁侯见了之后对梓庆说： 你用什么技艺方法做出来的呀？ 
English: After seeing it, Lu Hou said to Zi Qing: What technique did you use to make it?

古文：对曰： 臣，工人，何术之有！
现代文：回答说： 臣是一名工匠，哪有什么技艺！
English: He replied, "The minister is a craftsman, what kind of skills does he have?

古文：虽然，有一焉：臣将为鐻，未尝敢以耗气也，必齐以静心。
现代文：即使如此，有一点可以讲一讲。臣将要作鐻时，不敢有一点分散精神，一定要斋戒使心志安静专一。
English: Even so, there is one thing that can be said. When a minister is about to perform the funeral rites, he dare not have a little scattered spirit, he must fast and make his mind quiet and single-minded.

古文：齐三日，而不敢怀庆赏爵禄；齐五日，不敢怀非誉巧拙；齐七日，辄然忘吾有四枝形体也。
现代文：斋戒三日，不敢有思得奖赏官爵俸禄的念头；斋戒五日，不敢想及别人是非难作品笨拙或是赞誉作品精巧；斋戒七日，则木然不动忘记我有四肢和形体的存在。
English: If I fast for three days, I won't dare to think about the reward of a knighthood; if I fast for five days, I won't dare to think that someone else's difficult work is clumsy or praised work is exquisite; if I fast for seven days, I won't forget that I have limbs and a body.

古文：当是时也，无公朝。其巧专而外骨消，然后入山林，观天性形躯，至矣，然后成鐻，然后加手焉，不然则已。
现代文：在这个时候，心中不存在朝见君主的想法，专心致志于制作技巧而外界的扰乱全部排除。然后进入山林中，观察木料的自然性能，选取那些自然形态完全合乎标准的，然后一个现成的鐻如同就在眼前了，然后才动手去做，没有这些条件就不去做。
English: At this time, there is no thought of seeing the monarch in my heart, I concentrate on the production techniques and exclude all external disturbances. Then I go into the mountains and forests, observe the natural properties of the wood, select those natural forms that fully meet the standards, and then a ready-made beak is right in front of me, and then I start to do it, without these conditions I will not do it.

古文：则以天合天，器之所以疑神者，其是与！ 
现代文：这是以已之天性与木之天性相合，器物之所以如同鬼神所造，大概就是这个原因吧！ 
English: This is a natural fit with the nature of wood, and the reason why the utensils are made like ghosts and gods is probably this reason!

古文：东野稷以御见庄公，进退中绳，左右旋中规。
现代文：东野稷因为善于驾车而得见鲁庄公，他驾车时进退能够在一条直线上，左右转弯形成的弧形像圆规画的一般圆。
English: Because Higashino Min is good at driving, he was able to see Luzhong. When driving, he can advance and retreat in a straight line, and the arc formed by the left and right turns is like a general circle drawn by a compass.

古文：庄公以为文弗过也。使之钩百而反。
现代文：庄公认为就是编织花纹图案也未必赶得上，于是命令他驾车一百圈后再返回。
English: Zhuang Gong thought that even weaving patterns might not be able to catch up, so he ordered him to drive a hundred laps and then return.

古文：颜阖遇之，入见曰： 稷之马将败。 
现代文：颜阖遇上了这件事，入内会见庄公，说： 东野稷的马一定会失败的。 
English: When Yan Xuan encountered this matter, he went to meet Zhuang Gong and said, "Higashino's horse will surely fail.

古文：公密而不应。
现代文：庄公默不作声。
English: Zhuang Gong remained silent.

古文：少焉，果败而反。
现代文：不多久，东野稷果然失败而回。
English: It didn't take long for Higashino Atsushi to return home in defeat.

古文：公曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：庄公问： 你为什么事先就知道定会失败呢？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "On what basis do you know this?

古文：曰： 其马力竭矣而犹求焉，故曰败。 
现代文：颜阖回答说： 东野稷的马力气已经用尽，可是还要它转圈奔走，所以说必定会失败的。 
English: Yan Xuan replied, "Higashino Yagura's horsepower has been exhausted, but if you ask it to run around in a circle, it will surely fail.

古文：工倕旋而盖规矩，指与物化而不以心稽，故其灵台一而不桎。
现代文：工匠随手画来就胜过用圆规与矩尺画出的，他的手指随物而变化，不须存留于心，再作有意度量，所以他的心志专一而没有滞碍。
English: A craftsman's freehand drawing is better than that drawn with a compass and a tape measure. His fingers change with the object, and he does not need to keep it in mind and then make an intentional measurement, so his mind is single-minded and does not get stuck.

古文：忘足，履之适也；忘要，带之适也；知忘是非，心之适也；不内变，不外从，事会之适也；始乎适而未尝不适者，忘适之适也。
现代文：忘掉脚的大小，什么鞋子都很舒适；忘掉了腰的粗细，什么带子都合适；知道忘掉是非，便是内心的安适；不改变内心的持守，不顺从外物的影响，便是遇事的安适。本性常适而从未有过不适，也就是忘掉了安适的安适。
English: Forget the size of the feet, any shoes are comfortable; forget the thickness of the waist, any straps are suitable; know that forgetting right and wrong is inner comfort; do not change the inner hold, do not obey the influence of foreign objects, is the comfort in case of trouble. Nature is always comfortable and has never been uncomfortable, that is, forget the comfort of comfort.

古文：有孙休者，踵门而诧子扁庆子曰： 休居乡不见谓不修，临难不见谓不勇。然而田原不遇岁，事君不遇世，宾于乡里，逐于州部，则胡罪乎天哉？
现代文：有一个叫孙休的人，亲自来到扁庆子的门上诧异地发问道： 我安居乡里不曾受人说过道德修养差，面临危难也没有人说过不勇敢；然而我的田地里却从未遇上过好年成，为国家出力也未遇上圣明的国君，被乡里所摈弃，受地方官放逐，而我对于上天有什么罪过呢？
English: A man named Sun Xiu personally came to the door of Bian Keizi and asked in surprise: I live in the countryside and have never been said to have poor moral cultivation, and no one has ever said that I am not brave in the face of danger; however, I have never met a good harvest in my fields, nor have I met a holy king for the country, I have been rejected by the village, and I have been banished by local officials, and what is my sin against heaven?

古文：休恶遇此命也？ 
现代文：我怎么会遇上如此的命运？ 
English: How did I meet such a fate?

古文：扁子曰： 子独不闻夫至人之自行邪？
现代文：扁子说： 你难道没有听说至人的所行吗？
English: Lian Zi said, "Haven't you heard of the deeds of man?

古文：忘其肝胆，遗其耳目，芒然彷徨乎尘垢之外，逍遥乎无事之业，是谓为而不恃，长而不宰。
现代文：忘掉了他的肝胆，忘掉了他的耳目，迷恫无知徘徊游移于世俗生活之外，逍遥自在于无为之中，这就叫施助万物而不自恃其功。作万物之长而又不加主宰。
English: He forgets his liver and gallbladder, forgets his eyes and ears, wanders in ignorance, wanders away from worldly life, and enjoys himself in doing nothing. This is called helping all things without taking credit for it. Being the master of all things without dominating them.

古文：今汝饰知以惊愚，修身以明汙，昭昭乎若揭日月而行也。
现代文：现在你修饰己智以惊醒愚昧，修养自身以显示别人卑污，光明煊赫的样子就像举着日月行走一样。
English: Now you adorn yourself with wisdom to wake up stupidity, cultivate yourself to show others despicable, and the bright and brilliant appearance is like walking with the sun and the moon.

古文：汝得全而形躯，具而九窍，无中道夭于聋盲跛蹇而比于人数亦幸矣，又何暇乎天之怨哉！
现代文：像你这样的人能得以保全身躯，身体器官完备，没有中途毁损成为聋子瞎子和瘸腿，与众人并列一起已属侥幸，又哪有闲工夫来报怨老天啊！你走吧！ 
English: That a man like you should be able to preserve his body, with all his organs intact, and not be half-destroyed, deaf, blind, and lame, side by side with everyone else, is a stroke of luck, and what a waste of time to complain to God! Go away!

古文：子往矣！ 孙子出，扁子入。
现代文：孙休走出屋子，扁子回到房里。
English: Sun Xiu walked out of the room, and Lian Zi returned to the room.

古文：坐有间，仰天而叹。弟子问曰： 先生何为叹乎？ 
现代文：不多一会儿，扁子仰天长叹，弟子问道： 先生为什么长叹呢？ 
English: After a short while, Lian Zi raised his eyes to heaven and sighed. His disciple asked, "Why is Teacher sighing?

古文：扁子曰∶ 向者休来，吾告之以至人之德，吾恐其惊而遂至于惑也。 弟子曰： 不然。
现代文：扁子说： 刚才孙休进来，我把道德修养极高的人的德行告诉给他，我真担心他会吃惊以至迷惑更深。 弟子说： 不对哩。
English: Lian Zi said: Just now, when Sun Xiu came in, I told him about the virtues of a person with extremely high moral cultivation. I was really worried that he would be surprised and even more confused. The disciple said: That's not right.

古文：孙子之所言是邪，先生之所言非邪，非固不能惑是；孙子所言非邪，先生所言是邪，彼固惑而来矣，又奚罪焉！ 扁子曰： 不然。
现代文：孙休所说的话是正确的吗？先生所说的话是错误的吗？
English: Is what Sun Xiu said correct? Is what you said wrong?

古文：昔者有鸟止于鲁郊，鲁君说之，为具太牢以飨之，奏九韶以乐之。鸟乃始忧悲眩视，不敢饮食。
现代文：从前有只海鸟飞到鲁国都城郊外，鲁国国君很喜欢它，用 太牢 来宴请它，奏 九韶 乐来让它快乐，海鸟竟忧愁悲伤，眼花缭乱，不敢吃喝。
English: Once upon a time, a seabird flew to the outskirts of the capital city of Lu. The ruler of Lu liked it very much. He invited it to a banquet and played music to make it happy. However, the seabird was sad, dazzled and did not dare to eat or drink.

古文：此之谓以己养养鸟也。
现代文：这叫做按自己的生活习性来养鸟。
English: This is called raising birds according to one's own lifestyle.

古文：若夫以鸟养养鸟者，宜栖之深林，浮之江湖，食之以委蛇，则安平陆而已矣。
现代文：假若是按鸟的习性来养鸟，就应当让它栖息于幽深的树林，浮游于大江大湖，让它吃泥鳅和小鱼，这本是极为普通的道理而已。
English: If you raise a bird according to its habits, you should let it live in deep woods, swim in rivers and lakes, and let it eat mud and small fish. This is just a very common reason.

古文：今休，款启寡闻之民也，吾告以至人之德，譬之若载鼷以车马，乐鴳以钟鼓也，彼又恶能无惊乎哉！ 
现代文：如今的孙休，乃是管窥之见、孤陋寡闻的人，我告诉给他道德修养极高的人的德行，就好像用马车来托载小老鼠，用钟鼓的乐声来取悦小鴳雀一样。他又怎么会不感到吃惊啊！ 
English: Today's Sun Xiu is a man of narrow views and deaf ears. When I told him about the virtues of a highly moral person, it was like using a carriage to carry a small mouse and the music of a bell and drum to amuse a small chickadee. How could he not be surprised?

