古文：楚熊渠子夜行见寝石，以为伏虎，弯弓射之。没金，铩羽。
现代文：楚国熊渠子夜间巡行，看见横卧着的石头，以为是趴在地上的老虎，便拉弓射它，箭头陷没在石头里边，箭杆上的羽毛都掉下来了。
English: A bear from Chu Province was patrolling the canals at night. Seeing a stone lying on its side, he thought it was a tiger lying on the ground, so he drew his bow and shot it. The arrowhead sank into the stone, and the feathers on the shaft fell off.

古文：下视，知其石也。因复射之，矢摧，无迹。
现代文：下马仔细一看，才知道那是石头，接着又射它，箭被折断了，也没有留下什么痕迹。
English: He dismounted, took a closer look and realized that it was a stone, then shot it again. The arrow was broken and left no trace.

古文：汉世复有李广，为右北平太守，射虎，得石，亦如之。
现代文：汉代又有个李广，任右北平太守，他以为自己是在射老虎，结果射到的却是石头。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was another Li Guang, the right-hand governor of Peking, who thought he was shooting a tiger, but ended up shooting a stone.

古文：刘向曰： 诚之至也，而金石为之开，况于人乎！
现代文：也象熊渠子那样。刘向说： 精诚所至，金石为开，更何况是人？
English: Liu Xiang said, "What sincerity can achieve is beyond human comprehension, let alone human beings.

古文：夫唱而不和，动而不随，中必有不全者也。
现代文：你倡议而别人不响应，你行动而别人不追随，那么你内心深处一定有不完善的地方。
English: If you take the initiative and others do not respond, if you take action and others do not follow, then there must be an imperfect place in your heart.

古文：夫不降席而匡天下者，求之己也。 
现代文：不离开座席而能匡正天下，是因为以身作则的缘故啊。 
English: The reason why he is able to set the world straight without leaving his seat is because he leads by example.

古文：楚王游于苑，白猿在焉；王令善射者射之，矢数发，猿搏矢而笑；乃命由基，由基抚弓，猿即抱木而号。
现代文：楚王在园林中游玩，有只白色的猿在那里。楚王命令擅长射箭的人射它。箭射出去好几支了，只见那白猿接了箭，嘻笑着。
English: King Chu was playing in the garden. There was a white monkey there. King Chu ordered someone who was good at archery to shoot it. Several arrows were shot, and the white monkey caught the arrow and smiled.

古文：及六国时，更羸谓魏王曰： 臣能为虚发而下鸟。 
现代文：楚王就命令养由基来射。养由基刚拿起弓，那猿就抱着树木号哭起来。到战国时代，更羸对魏王说： 我能虚拉弓弦不发箭就把鸟射下来。 
English: King Chu ordered Yaoyu Ji to shoot. As soon as Yaoyu Ji picked up the bow, the monkey hugged the tree trunk and began to cry. In the Warring States period, Yaoyu said to King Wei: I can pull the bowstring without firing and shoot the bird down.

古文：魏王曰： 然则射可至于此乎？ 羸曰： 可。 
现代文：魏王说： 你的射技真能达到这种地步吗？ 更羸说： 能。 
English: Wei Wang said, "Can your shooting skill really reach such a level?" and Zhi Yao said, "Yes."

古文：有顷闻雁从东方来，更羸虚发而鸟下焉。
现代文：一会儿：听见大雁从东方飞来，更羸虚拉弓弦不发箭，大雁便栽下来了。
English: A moment later: Hearing the geese flying in from the east, he pulled the strings of his bow even tighter and did not fire his arrows, and the geese flew down.

古文：齐景公渡于江、沅之河，鼋衔左骖，没之。
现代文：齐景公渡黄河的时候，有一只老鳖衔走了他车前左边的马，潜入水下去了，大家都惊恐万状。
English: When Qi Jing Gong was crossing the Yellow River, an old donkey pulled the horse to the left in front of his cart and dived into the water. Everyone was terrified.

古文：众皆惊惕；古冶子于是拔剑从之，邪行五里，逆行三里，至于砥柱之下，杀之，乃鼋也，左手持鼋头，右手拔左骖，燕跃鹄踊而出，仰天大呼，水为逆流三百步。
现代文：古冶子却在这时拔出室剑追赶它，他斜着走了五里，逆水走了三里，来到砥柱山下，把它杀了，原来是只鳖。古冶子左手拿着鳖头，右手拔出那马，象飞燕、天鹅那样飞跃而出。他仰天大喊，河水因此而倒流了三百步。
English: At this time, however, he drew his sword and chased it. He walked five miles diagonally and three miles against the water. He came to the foot of the pillar and killed it, which turned out to be a dragonfly. He held the hoe in his left hand and pulled out the horse in his right hand, and flew out like a swallow or a swan. He shouted to the heavens, and the river flowed back three hundred paces as a result.

古文：观者皆以为河伯也。
现代文：观看的人都以为他是黄河的水神河伯。
English: People watching thought he was the Yellow River's water god, He Bo.

古文：楚干将莫邪为楚王作剑，三年乃成，王怒，欲杀之。
现代文：楚国的干将、莫邪夫妇给楚王锻造宝剑，三年才造成。楚王很生气，想杀掉他们。
English: King Chu was very angry and wanted to kill them. The evil couple, the leaders of the Chu Kingdom, forged a sword for King Chu, which took three years to make.

古文：剑有雌雄，其妻重身，当产，夫语妻曰： 吾为王作剑，三年乃成；王怒，往，必杀我。
现代文：宝剑有雌雄两把。干将的妻子怀孕要分娩了，丈夫便对妻子说： 我们给楚王铸造宝剑，三年才造成。楚王生气了，我去进献宝剑时他必定会杀我。
English: There were two swords, one male and one female. The wife of the general was pregnant and about to give birth, so the husband said to his wife, "We cast a sword for King Chu, and it took three years to make it. King Chu got angry, and when I went to present the sword, he was sure to kill me."

古文：汝若生子，是男，大，告之曰： 出户，望南山，松生石上，剑在其背。  
现代文：你如果生下的孩子是男的，等他长大了，就告诉他说： 出门望南山，可以看见那长在石头上的松树，宝剑就在它的背面。  
English: If you give birth to a male child, when he grows up, tell him: When you go out and look toward the South Mountain, you will see the pine tree growing on the rock, and the sword will be on its back.

古文：于是即将雌剑往见楚王。
现代文：于是他就带着雌剑去见楚王。
English: So he went to see King Chu with a female sword.

古文：王大怒，使相之，剑有二一雄，一雌，雌来，雄不来。
现代文：楚王非常生气，叫人仔细察看那宝剑。看剑的人说： 宝剑该有两把，一把雄一把雌。现在雌剑拿来了，雄剑没拿来。 
English: King Chu was very angry and asked someone to take a closer look at the sword. The person looking at the sword said: There should be two swords, one male and one female. Now the female sword has been brought, but the male sword has not been brought.

古文：王怒，即杀之。
现代文：楚王生气了，就杀了干将。
English: When King Chu became angry, he killed the go-between.

古文：莫邪子名赤，比后壮，乃问其母曰： 吾父所在？ 
现代文：莫邪生下来的儿子名字叫赤比，长大后，就问他的母亲说， 我的父亲在什么地方？ 
English: Mo's son, named Chabi, grew up and asked his mother, "Where is my father?"

古文：母曰： 汝父为楚王作剑，三年乃成，王怒，杀之。
现代文：母亲说： 你父亲给楚王造剑，三年才造成。楚王生气了，把他杀了。
English: His mother said, "Your father made a sword for King Chu, and it took him three years to make it. King Chu got angry and killed him."

古文：去时嘱我： 语汝子：出户，往南山，松生石上，剑在其背。  
现代文：他离家时嘱咐我： 告诉你的儿子：出门望南山，可以看见那长在石头上的松树，宝剑就在它的背面。  
English: When he left home, he told me: "Tell your son: when you go out and look at Nanshan Mountain, you can see the pine tree growing on the stone, and the sword is on its back.

古文：于是子出户，南望，不见有山，但睹堂前松柱下石砥之上，即以斧破其背，得剑。
现代文：于是赤比便出门向南望去，看不见有什么山，只看见堂前的松木柱下，有石墩把它顶着。他就用斧子劈开木柱的背面，得到了宝剑。
English: So Red Beard went out and looked to the south. He could not see any mountains, but under the pine pillar in front of the hall, he saw a stone pillar holding it up. He split the back of the pillar with his axe and got the sword.

古文：日夜思欲报楚王。
现代文：于是日日夜夜想要向楚王报仇。
English: Therefore, he wanted to take revenge on King Chu day and night.

古文：王梦见一儿，眉间广尺，言欲报雠。
现代文：楚王梦见一个男孩，两眉之间有一尺宽，说要向他报仇。
English: King Chu dreamed of a boy with a foot between his eyebrows and said he wanted to take revenge on him.

古文：王即购之千金。
现代文：楚王就用千金的重赏来缉拿他。
English: King Chu used the reward money to track him down.

古文：儿闻之，亡去，入山，行歌。
现代文：赤比听到这消息，就逃走了。他进山后一边走一边悲歌。
English: When Akebi heard the news, he ran away. After entering the mountain, he wailed a sad song as he walked.

古文：客有逢者。谓： 子年少。
现代文：有个侠客碰见了他，对他说： 您年纪轻轻，为什么哭得很悲伤呢？ 
English: A knight met him and said to him, "You are young, why are you weeping?

古文：何哭之甚悲耶： 曰： 吾干将莫邪子也。楚王杀吾父，吾欲报之。 
现代文：赤比说： 我是干将、莫邪的儿子。楚王杀了我的父亲，我要向他报仇！ 
English: Akebi said, "I am the son of a go-getter and an evil-doer. King Chu killed my father, and I want to avenge him!"

古文：客曰： 闻王购子头千金，将子头与剑来，为子报之。 
现代文：侠客说： 听说楚王悬赏千金来缉拿您的头，把您的头和剑拿来，我为您去向他报仇。 
English: The knight said, "I heard that King Chu has offered a reward of a thousand gold to find your head. Bring me your head and your sword, and I will avenge you."

古文：儿曰： 幸甚。 
现代文：赤比说： 这太幸运了！ 
English: Akabi said, "This is so lucky!

古文：即自刎，两手捧头及剑奉之，立僵。 
现代文：就自刎而死，两手捧着头和剑交给侠客，尸体却直挺挺地站着。
English: He hanged himself and died, handing over his head and sword to the knight with both hands, but his corpse stood upright.

古文：客曰： 不负子也。 
现代文：侠客说： 我不会辜负您的。 
English: The knight said: I will not fail you.

古文：于是尸乃仆。
现代文：于是尸体才倒了下去。
English: That's how the body fell down.

古文：客持头往见楚王，王大喜。
现代文：侠客拿着赤比的头去见楚王，楚王非常高兴。
English: The knight went to see King Chu with the head of the red horse. King Chu was very happy.

古文：客曰： 此乃勇士头也。当于汤镬煮之。 
现代文：侠客说： 这可是勇士的头颅，应该放在汤锅中煮它。 
English: The knight said, "This is a warrior's head, it should be boiled in a pot of soup."

古文：王如其言。
现代文：楚王照他的话做了。
English: King Chu did as he was told.

古文：煮头三日，三夕，不烂。
现代文：这头煮了三天三夜，也没煮烂。
English: This head has been cooked for three days and three nights, and it hasn't spoiled.

古文：头踔出汤中，踬目大怒。
现代文：这头还从沸水中跳出来，瞪着眼睛，十分愤怒。
English: This one also leapt out of the boiling water, eyes wide with rage.

古文：客曰： 此儿头不烂，愿王自往临视之，是必烂也。 
现代文：侠客说： 这孩子的头煮不烂，请大王亲自到锅边看看它，这头就一定会烂了。 
English: The knight said, "This child's head can't be boiled until it's rotten. Please go to the pot yourself and look at it. This head will surely rot."

古文：王即临之。
现代文：楚王便走到锅边看孩子的头。
English: King Chu then went to the side of the pot to look at the child's head.

古文：客以剑拟王，王头随堕汤中；客亦自拟己头，头复堕汤中。
现代文：侠客就挥剑向楚王砍去，楚王的头随即落入那沸水中。侠客自己也砍了自己的头，头也落进那沸水中。
English: The knight swung his sword at King Chu and cut off his head, which immediately fell into the boiling water. The knight also cut off his own head, which also fell into the boiling water.

古文：三首俱烂，不可识别。
现代文：三个头都煮烂了，无法辨认。
English: All three heads were cooked beyond recognition.

古文：乃分其汤肉葬之。故通名三王墓。
现代文：于是大臣们只好把锅里的汤和肉分开来埋葬了，所以人们把它们统称为 三王墓 。
English: As a result, the ministers had to bury the soup and meat separately, which is why they are collectively known as the Tomb of the Three Kings.

古文：今在汝南北宜春县界。
现代文：今天这墓在汝南郡北宜春县境内。
English: Today, this tomb is located in the territory of North Yichun County, Runan County.

古文：汉武时，苍梧贾雍为豫章太守，有神术，出界讨贼，为贼所杀，失头，上马回营中，咸走来视雍。
现代文：汉武帝时，苍梧郡人贾雍任豫章郡太守，他有神奇的法术。有一次，他离开豫章郡去讨伐强盗，被强盗杀了，丢了脑袋，却又上马回了营，军营中的人都跑来看他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Jia Yong, a native of Cangwu County, was appointed the governor of Yuzhang County. He had magical powers. Once, he left Yuzhang County to fight bandits. He was killed by the bandits and lost his head, but he got back on his horse and returned to the camp. Everyone in the camp came to see him.

古文：雍胸中语曰： 战不利，为贼所伤。
现代文：贾雍在胸膛中说话道： 战斗失利，我被强盗杀伤。
English: Jia Yong spoke in his chest: The battle was a failure, I was killed and injured by the robbers.

古文：诸君视有头佳乎？
现代文：你们看我有头的好呢？
English: Do you think it's a good idea for me to have a head?

古文：无头佳乎？ 
现代文：还是没有头的好？ 
English: Or is it better without a head?

古文：吏涕泣曰： 有头佳。 
现代文：他的部下哭着说： 有头的好。 
English: His men cried out, "It is good to have a head."

古文：雍曰： 不然。无头亦佳。 
现代文：贾雍说： 不对，没有头也好。 
English: Jia Yong said, "No, it's better without the head."

古文：言毕，遂死。
现代文：就完，他就死了。
English: After that, he died.

古文：渤海太守史良姊，一女子，许嫁而不果，良怒，杀之，断其头而归，投于灶下。曰 当令火葬。 
现代文：渤海太守史良爱上了一个女子，那女子答应嫁给他而后来却变了卦。史良生气了，杀死了她，把她的头割下来拿回家去，扔在灶下，说： 我要让你火葬。 
English: The governor of Bohai, Shiliang, fell in love with a woman who promised to marry him, but later changed her mind. Shiliang became angry, killed her, cut off her head, took it home, threw it under the stove, and said, "I want you to be cremated."

古文：头语曰： 使君我相从，何图当尔。 
现代文：那头对他说： 太守，我顺从您，您为什么要这样呢？ 
English: The other one said to him, "Master, I obey you. Why do you do this?

古文：后梦见曰： 还君物。 
现代文：后来史良梦见她说： 还给您的信物。 
English: Later, Shi Liang had a dream in which he saw her saying, "I'll give you back your token."

古文：觉而得昔所与香缨金钗之属。
现代文：史良醒来后，使得到了过去送给她的香缨、金钗之类。
English: After Shi Liang woke up, she was able to retrieve the champagne and gold ingots that were given to her in the past.

古文：周灵王时，苌弘见杀，蜀人因藏其血，三年，乃化而为碧。
现代文：周灵王的时候，苌宏被杀。蜀国的人就把他的血收藏起来，三年后，这些血竟变成了青白色的玉石。
English: During the reign of King Zhou Ling, Gong Hong was killed. The people of Shu collected his blood, and three years later, this blood turned into a bluish-white jade.

古文：汉武帝东游，未出函谷关，有物当道，身长数丈，其状象牛，青眼而曜睛，四足，入土，动而不徙。
现代文：汉武帝到东部去游览，还没有出函谷关，便有一个怪物挡住了去路，那怪物身长几丈，形状象牛，青色的眼睛，闪亮的眸子，四只脚插入泥土中，虽在动却没有移动位置。
English: Emperor Hanwu went to the east for a tour, but before he left Hanzhongguan, there was a monster blocking his way. The monster was several feet tall, shaped like a cow, with blue eyes and shiny eyes, and four feet stuck in the dirt. Although it was moving, it did not move.

古文：百官惊骇。
现代文：官吏们又惊又怕。
English: The officials were shocked and afraid.

古文：东方朔乃请以酒灌之。
现代文：东方朔于是出来请求用酒浇它。
English: Dongfang Shuo then came out and asked for it to be doused with wine.

古文：灌之数十斛，而物消。
现代文：给它浇了几十斛酒，那怪物就消失了。
English: After pouring dozens of gallons of wine over it, the monster disappeared.

古文：帝问其故。
现代文：汉武帝问东方朔这是什么缘故。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked Dongfang Shuo what the reason was.

古文：答曰： 此名为患忧气之所生也。
现代文：东方朔回答说： 这怪物的名字叫患，是忧愁的冤气所产生出来的。
English: Dongfangshuo replied, "This monster's name is Zhao, and it is the product of sorrowful anger.

古文：此必是秦之狱地，不然，则罪人徒作之所聚。
现代文：这里一定是秦国的监狱所在地。如果不是监狱所在地，那么就一定是犯人服劳役所聚居的地方。
English: This must be the location of the prison in Qin. If it is not the location of the prison, then it must be the place where the prisoners of the forced labor camp live together.

古文：夫酒忘忧，故能消之也。 帝曰： 吁！
现代文：酒能用来忘记忧愁，所以能把它消去。 汉武帝说： 啊！
English: Wine can be used to forget sadness, so it can erase it. Emperor Han Wu said: Ah!

古文：博物之士，至于此乎！ 
现代文：东汉时的谅辅，字汉儒，是广汉郡新都县人。
English: He was a native of Xindu County, Guanghan County during the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：后汉，谅辅，字汉儒，广汉新都人，少给佐吏，浆水不交，为从事，大小毕举，郡县敛手。
现代文：他年轻时供职佐吏，廉洁得连谈酒茶水都不接受。任从事史时，大大小小的错误他都检举法办。因此郡、县的官吏都不敢为所欲为。
English: When he was a young official, he was so incorruptible that he would not even accept to talk about wine and tea. When he was in charge of history, he reported all mistakes, big and small, to the legal department. Therefore, the officials of the county and the county did not dare to do whatever they wanted.

古文：时夏枯旱，太守自曝中庭，而雨不降；辅以五官掾出祷山川，自誓曰： 辅为郡股肱，不能进谏，纳忠，荐贤，退恶，和调百姓；至令天地否隔，万物枯焦，百姓喁喁，无所控诉，咎尽在辅。
现代文：那一年夏天大旱，太守在院子中曝晒自己来求雨，但雨仍然不下。谅辅以五官掾的身份出去向山川祈祷，他自己发誓说： 我谅辅是广汉郡的股肱之臣，不能规劝太守改正错误、进纳忠言，推荐贤能、贬退邪恶，协调老百姓之间的关系，以致于使天地闭塞不通，万物干枯焦脆，百姓喁喁，但没有地方申诉，这罪过都在我谅辅身上。
English: That year, there was a drought in the summer, and the daimyō exposed himself in the courtyard to pray for rain, but the rain still did not fall. Yakuzu went out to the mountains and rivers to pray as the fifth official, and he himself swore: I, Yakuzu, am the vassal of the chief vassal of Guanghan County. I cannot persuade the daimyō to correct mistakes, accept loyal advice, recommend talents, discard evil, and coordinate the relationship between the people, so that heaven and earth are blocked, everything is dry and crisp, and the people are angry, but there is no place to appeal. This sin is all on me, Yaku

古文：今郡太守内省责己，自曝中庭，使辅谢罪，为民祈福；精诚恳到，未有感彻，辅今敢自誓：若至日中无雨，请以身塞无状。 
现代文：现在郡太守反省责备自己，在院中曝晒，还派我来向上天谢罪，为民众求福，太守的真诚恳切，还没有能感动上天。我谅辅现在胆敢发誓，如果到中午还不下雨，请求用我的身体来补救那不可言状的弥天大罪。 
English: Now the county magistrate has reflected and reproached himself, exposed himself in the hospital, and sent me to thank God for the sin and pray for the people. The sincerity and earnestness of the magistrate has not yet been able to move heaven. I am sorry and now dare to swear that if it does not rain by noon, I will use my body to remedy the unspeakable crime.

古文：乃积薪柴，将自焚焉。
现代文：于是他就堆起柴草，准备自焚。
English: So he piled up firewood and prepared to set himself on fire.

古文：至日中时，山气转黑，起雷，雨大作，一郡沾润。
现代文：何敞，是吴郡人。年轻时他爱好学问，隐居在家。
English: He is a native of Wuxi County. When he was young, he was fond of learning and secluded himself at home.

古文：世以此称其至诚。何敞吴郡人，少好道艺，隐居，里以大旱，民物憔悴，太守庆洪遣户曹掾致谒，奉印绶，烦守无锡。
现代文：有一年家乡大旱，老百姓困苦憔悴，太守庆洪派户曹掾来征请他，让户曹掾捧上官印，麻烦他署理无锡县的政事。
English: One year, when there was a drought in his hometown and the people were in dire straits, the daimyō Qinghong sent the householder Cao Wei to recruit him. He asked Cao Wei to hold the official seal and to trouble him to be in charge of the political affairs of Wuxi County.

古文：敞不受。
现代文：何敞不肯接受。
English: He refused to accept anything.

古文：退，叹而言曰： 郡界有灾，安能得怀道！ 
现代文：但退回室内后，又感叹他说： 郡内有灾害，我哪能一心扑在学问上呢？ 
English: But after returning indoors, he sighed and said: There are disasters in the county, how can I concentrate on learning?

古文：因跋涉之县，驻明星屋中，蝗蝝消死，敞即遁去。
现代文：于是他就徒步跋涉来到无锡县，住在祭祀女媊星神的房屋中。蝗虫都死亡了，何敞就悄俏地溜走了。
English: So he trekked on foot to Wuxi County, where he lived in a house dedicated to the goddess of the locusts. The locusts were all dead, and he quietly slipped away.

古文：后举方正博士，皆不就，卒于家。
现代文：后来，推举他当方正、博士，他都没有就职，最后死在家中。
English: Later, he was elected as a Founder and Doctor, but he did not take office, and finally died at home.

古文：后汉，徐栩，字敬卿，吴由拳人，少为狱吏，执法详平。
现代文：东汉时的徐栩，字敬卿，吴郡由拳县人。他年轻时当管理监狱的小吏，执行法律谨慎公平。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, Xu Yu, also known as Jing Jing, was from Wuxi County, Jiangsu Province. When he was young, he was a minor official in charge of a prison. He was careful and fair in enforcing the law.

古文：为小黄令时，属县大蝗，野无生草，过小黄界，飞逝，不集。
现代文：后来他当陈留郡小黄县县令的时候，相邻各县大闹蝗灾，田野里连青草都长不起来，但蝗虫经过小黄县境时，却径直飞过去而不聚集在那里。
English: Later, when he was the county magistrate of Xiaohuang County, Chenliu County, locusts plagued the neighboring counties. Even green grass could not grow in the fields, but when the locusts passed through the border of Xiaohuang County, they flew straight over and did not gather there.

古文：刺史行部责栩不治。
现代文：刺史巡视部属来到小黄县，责备徐栩不治蝗灾。
English: Members of the inspection team came to Xiaohuang County to reproach Xu Zhulong for not treating the locusts.

古文：栩弃官，蝗应声而至。
现代文：徐栩辞去了官职，蝗虫便闻声赶到。
English: When Xu Xu resigned from his post, the locusts arrived.

古文：刺史谢令还寺舍，蝗即飞去。
现代文：于是刺史向徐栩道歉，叫他回到官府上任，蝗虫就又飞走了。
English: Therefore, the chief of staff apologized to Xu Chu and told him to return to the government office, and the locusts flew away again.

古文：王业，字子香，汉和帝时为荆州刺史，每出行部，沐浴斋素，以祈于天地，当启佐愚心，无使有枉百姓。
现代文：王业，字子香，汉和帝时任荆州刺史。他每次巡视部属，都沐浴吃素，沽净身心，从而向天地祈求： 天神地神可要启发帮助我那愚笨的心眼，别使我做出冤枉百姓的事情来。 
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, Wang Ye, Zi Zi Xiang, and Emperor He, he was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou. Every time he inspected his subordinates, he would bathe in a vegetarian bath to purify his mind and body, and thus pray to heaven and earth: "Heavenly gods and earthly gods, please enlighten and help my stupid mind's eye, and don't make me do things that are unfair to the people."

古文：在州七年，惠风大行，苛慝不作，山无豺狼。
现代文：他在荆州七年，仁爱的风气盛行，残酷罪恶的事情没发生过，连山中都没有了豺狼。
English: In his seven years in Jingzhou, the benevolent ethos prevailed, cruel and evil things did not happen, and there were no jackals even in the mountains.

古文：卒于湘江，有二白虎，低头，曳尾，宿卫其侧。
现代文：他后来死在湘江中，有两只白虎，低着头拖着尾巴，守卫在他的身边。
English: He later died in the Xiang River, with two white tigers, heads down and tails dragging, guarding his side.

古文：及丧去，虎踰州境，忽然不见。
现代文：等到他丧事完毕，那两只老虎便越过荆州州界，忽然不见了。
English: When his funeral was over, the two tigers crossed the state border of Jingzhou and suddenly disappeared.

古文：民共为立碑，号曰：湘江白虎墓。
现代文：人们一起给王业与老虎立了块碑，称为 湘江白虎墓 。
English: People together erected a monument to Wang Ye and the tiger, known as the Xiangjiang White Tiger Tomb.

古文：吴时，葛祚为衡阳太守，郡境有大槎横水，能为妖怪，百姓为立庙，行旅祷祀，槎乃沈没，不者，槎浮，则船为之破坏。
现代文：吴国时，葛祚任衡阳郡太守。郡内有个大木筏横在河中，能兴妖作怪，百姓就在河边给这木筏建立了祠庙。旅客祭祀它，木筏就沉下去；否则，木筏就浮在水面，那么船就要被它破坏了。
English: When he was the governor of Hengyang County in the State of Wu, there was a large raft in the county that lay in the river and was able to conjure up monsters. The people built an ancestral temple for the raft by the river. If the passengers worshiped it, the raft would sink; otherwise, the raft would float on the surface of the water, and the ship would be destroyed by it.

古文：祚将去官，乃大具斧斤，将去民累。
现代文：葛祚将离任时，便准备好了斧子，要除去这一民众的祸害。
English: When Ge Ying was about to leave office, he prepared an axe to remove this scourge from the people.

古文：明日，当至，其夜闻江中汹汹有人声，往视之，槎乃移去，沿流下数里，驻湾中。
现代文：第二天他就要去砍那木笺了，而在这前一天的夜里，人们却听见河中汹汹汹地有人的声音，就前往观看，木筏竟被移走了，沿着江水向下飘浮了几里，停留在河湾中。
English: The next day he was going to cut down the raft, but on the night before, people heard a menacing voice in the river and went to see. The raft was actually removed and floated down the river for several miles, staying in the bay.

古文：自此行者无复沈覆之患。
现代文：从此过河的人不再有沉没翻船的祸患了。
English: From then on, passing ships no longer had to worry about being capsized and sunk.

古文：衡阳人为祚立碑，曰 正德祈禳，神木为移。 
现代文：衡阳郡的人为葛柞立了块碑，碑文写道： 用正直的德行祈祷消除灾祸，神奇的木筏就被移走了。 
English: The people of Hengyang County erected a stone monument for Ge Ying, the inscription reads: With honest virtue and prayer to eliminate the scourge, the magical raft was removed.

古文：曾子从仲尼在楚，而心动，辞归，问母，母曰： 思尔，啮指。 
现代文：曾参跟随孔子出游，在楚国时感到心跳，就辞别了孔子回家询问母亲。母亲说： 我思念你，所以咬了自己的手指。 
English: He once went on a trip with Confucius, and when he felt his heartbeat in Chu, he said goodbye to Confucius and went home to ask his mother. His mother said, "I miss you, so I bit my finger."

古文：孔子曰： 曾参之孝，精感万里。 
现代文：孔子说： 曾参的孝心，使他的精神感觉到万里之外。 
English: Confucius said: The filial piety of Zeng Zang made his spirit feel a million miles away.

古文：周畅，性仁慈，少至孝，独与母居，每出入，母欲呼之，常自啮其手，畅即觉手痛而至。
现代文：周畅的性情仁爱慈善。他年轻时就已极其孝顺，当时他一个人和母亲居住，每次出门，母亲想叫他来，常常咬一下她自己的手，周畅就会感觉到手痛，便马上回来了。
English: Zhou Chang's disposition is benevolent and charitable. When he was young, he was already extremely filial. At that time, he lived alone with his mother. Every time he went out, his mother wanted to call him to come. She would often bite her own hand. Zhou Chang would feel pain in his hand and immediately come back.

古文：治中从事未之信。候畅在田，使母啮手，而畅即归。
现代文：治中从事不相信这种事，等周畅在田间干活的时候，让他母亲咬手，而周畅真的马上回来了。
English: When Zhou Chang was working in the field, he asked his mother to bite his hand, and Zhou Chang really came back immediately.

古文：元初二年，为河南尹，时夏大旱，久祷无应；畅收葬洛阳城旁客死骸骨万余，为立义冢，应时澍雨。
现代文：元初二年，周畅任河南尹，那年夏天大旱，人们祈祷了很久都没有应验。周畅把洛阳城旁一万多流民的死尸骸骨收起来埋葬了，给他们建造了公墓，天上便降下了及时雨。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhou Chang was in charge of Yin, Henan Province. That summer, there was a severe drought, and people prayed for a long time, but their prayers were not answered. Zhou Chang collected and buried the dead bodies of more than ten thousand displaced people near Luoyang City, built a cemetery for them, and timely rain fell from the sky.

古文：王祥，字休征，琅邪人，性至孝，早丧亲，继母朱氏不慈，数谮之，由是失爱于父。
现代文：王祥，字体征，琅邪郡人，生来就极孝顺。他很早就失去了母亲，继母朱氏不爱他，多次诬陷他。
English: Wang Xiang, a native of Zhiyang County, was born with great filial piety. He lost his mother very early, and his stepmother Zhu did not love him and repeatedly framed him.

古文：每使扫除牛下。
现代文：因此他也失去了父亲对他的爱，父亲经常让他去打扫牛圈。
English: As a result, he also lost the love of his father, who used to make him clean the cowshed.

古文：父母有疾，衣不解带。
现代文：但父母亲有病时，他总是精心服恃，从不脱衣去睡。
English: But when his parents were ill, he always dressed carefully and never undressed to go to bed.

古文：母常欲生鱼，时天寒，冰冻，祥解衣将剖冰求之，冰忽自解，双鲤跃出，持之而归。
现代文：继母曾经想吃鲜鱼，当时天寒地冻，王祥便脱了衣服，准备破冰下水去抓鱼，这时冰层忽然自己裂开来，两条鲤鱼从水中跳出来，他就拿了这两条鱼回家了。
English: The stepmother once wanted to eat fresh fish. At that time, it was freezing cold. Wang Xiang took off his clothes and was about to break the ice and go into the water to catch fish. At that time, the ice layer suddenly cracked on its own, and two eels jumped out of the water. He took the two fish and went home.

古文：母又思黄雀炙，复有黄雀数十，入其幙，复以供母。
现代文：继母又想吃烤黄雀，又有几十只黄雀飞进了他的帷幕，王祥又把它们烤了给继母吃。
English: The stepmother also wanted to eat roasted yellow finches, and dozens of yellow finches flew into his curtain, and Wang Xiang roasted them for the stepmother to eat.

古文：乡里惊叹，以为孝感所致。
现代文：乡邻们都惊叹万分，认为这都是王祥的孝顺感动了神灵的结果。
English: The neighbors were amazed and thought that this was all the result of Wang Xiang's filial piety moving the gods.

古文：王延，性至孝；继母卜氏，尝盛冬思生鱼，敕延求而不获，杖之流血；延寻汾叩凌而哭，忽有一鱼，长五尺，跃出冰上，延取以进母。
现代文：王延生来就极其孝顺。他的继母卜氏，曾经在隆冬季节想吃鲜鱼，命令王延去寻觅，结果没搞到，继母就用棍棒打他，把他打得鲜血直淌。王延找到汾水上，敲着冰大哭，忽然有一条鱼，长五尺，跳到冰上。王延捉了去献给继母。
English: Wang Yan was born with extreme filial piety. His stepmother Bu, who once wanted to eat fresh fish in the middle of winter, ordered Wang Yan to search for it. When he couldn't find it, his stepmother beat him with a club until he bled profusely. Wang Yan found it on the surface of the lake, tapped the ice and cried. Suddenly, a five-foot-long fish jumped onto the ice. Wang Yan caught it and gave it to his stepmother.

古文：卜氏食之，积日不尽。
现代文：卜氏吃这条鱼，吃了几天都没吃完。
English: Mr. Bu ate this fish and did not finish eating it for several days.

古文：于是心悟，抚延如己子。楚僚，早失母，事后母至孝，母患痈肿，形容日悴，僚自徐徐吮之，血出，迨夜即得安寝。乃梦一小儿，语母曰： 若得鲤鱼食之，其病即差，可以延寿。
现代文：于是心里有点领悟了，知道这是神灵在护佑着王延，从此，她对待王延就象对待自己的亲生儿子一样。楚僚很早就失去了母亲，他侍奉后母极其孝顺。后母生了毒疮，容貌日益憔悴，楚僚便亲口伏在疮上慢慢地吮吸，毒血便被吸出来了，到晚上，他的后母就能安然入睡了，但她又梦见一个小孩对她说： 如果能抓到鲤鱼吃了，你的病就好了，而且还可以延长寿命。
English: So she had a bit of understanding in her heart, and knew that it was the gods protecting Wang Yan. From then on, she treated Wang Yan as if he were her own son. Chu Liang lost his mother very early, and he served his stepmother with the utmost filial piety. His stepmother gave birth to poisonous sores, and her face became increasingly haggard. Chu Liang himself lay down on the sores and slowly sucked on them, and the poisoned blood was sucked out. By the evening, his stepmother was able to sleep peacefully, but she also dreamed of a child who said to her: If you can catch and eat eels, your illness will be cured, and

古文：不然，不久死矣。 
现代文：否则，你不久使会死去。 
English: Otherwise, you will die soon.

古文：母觉而告僚，时十二月，冰冻，僚乃仰天叹泣，脱衣上冰，卧之。
现代文：后母醒来后告诉了楚僚。当时正值十二月，冰封地冻，楚僚就仰望着上天悲叹哭泣，脱了衣服走到冰上躺下，用他的体温来化冰。
English: After the stepmother woke up, she told Chu Rong. At that time, it was December and the ground was frozen. Chu Rong looked up at the sky, lamented and cried, took off his clothes and lay down on the ice, using his body temperature to melt the ice.

古文：有一童子，决僚卧处，冰忽自开，一双鲤鱼跃出。
现代文：这时来了一个小孩，他敲击楚僚躺卧的地方，冰忽然自己裂开了，一对鲤鱼从冰下跳出来。
English: At this time, a child came, he tapped on the place where the chief was lying, the ice suddenly broke itself, and a pair of eels jumped out from under the ice.

古文：僚将归奉其母，病即愈。寿至一百三十三岁。
现代文：楚僚便抓了回家幸献给他的后母，后母吃了，病就痊愈了，寿命活到一百三十三岁。
English: Chu-liang then caught the goose and brought it home to his stepmother, who ate it and recovered from her illness, living to the age of one hundred and thirty-three.

古文：盖至孝感天神，昭应如此。此与王祥，王延事同。
现代文：这大概是楚僚那极端的孝顺感动了天神，所以显示出来的应验才象这样，这与王祥、王延的事情是相同的。
English: This is probably because the extreme filial piety of Zhu Liang moved the gods, so the fulfillment that was shown was like this. This is the same thing as Wang Xiang and Wang Yan.

古文：盛彦，字翁子，广陵人，母王氏，因疾失明，彦躬自侍养。
现代文：盛彦，字翁子，广陵人。他母亲王氏，因为眼睛上生了病而丧失了视力，盛彦便亲自服侍赡养她。
English: His mother, Wang, lost her sight due to an eye disease, so Morihiko took it upon himself to care for her.

古文：母食，必自哺之。
现代文：母亲吃东西，他一定亲自喂食。
English: If his mother eats, he must feed her himself.

古文：母疾，既久，至于婢使数见捶挞，婢忿恨，闻彦蹔行，取蛴螬炙饴之。
现代文：母亲的毛病拖久了，脾气便变得很暴躁，以致于那些婢女，多次被她鞭打。婢女很怨恨她，听说盛彦暂时外出。
English: His mother's illness dragged on for a long time, and her temper became very violent, so much so that she whipped the maidservants several times. The maidservants resented her very much, and they heard that Morihiko was temporarily out of the house.

古文：母食，以为美，然疑是异物，密藏以示彦。
现代文：于是就拿了金龟子的幼虫烤了用饴糖拌了给她吃。母亲吃了。觉得味道很好，但怀疑这不是食物，于是就偷偷地把它藏起来拿给盛彦看。
English: So he took the caterpillars of the golden beetle, roasted them and mixed them with maple syrup for her to eat. The mother ate it. She thought it tasted good, but suspected that it was not food, so she secretly hid it and showed it to Morihiko.

古文：彦见之，抱母恸哭，绝而复苏。母目豁然即开，于此遂愈。
现代文：盛彦看见后，抱着母亲十分悲痛地大哭起来，哭得死去活来，母亲的眼睛忽然大大地睁开了，从此她的眼病就痊愈了。
English: After seeing this, Morihiko hugged his mother and wept with great sorrow. He cried himself to death. His mother's eyes suddenly opened wide, and her eye disease was cured.

古文：颜含，宇弘都，次嫂樊氏，因疾失明，医人疏方，须蚺蛇胆，而寻求备至，无由得之。
现代文：颜含，字弘都。他的第二个嫂嫂樊氏，因为生了病而双目失明了。医生开了个药方，须用蚺蛇的胆，但到处都找遍了，也没有地方能找到它。
English: Yanhan, Zi Hongdu. His second sister-in-law, Ms. Zou, became blind due to an illness. The doctor prescribed a medicine that required the gall of a boa constrictor, but after searching everywhere, there was no place to find it.

古文：含忧叹累时，尝昼独坐，忽有一青衣童子，年可十三四，持一青囊授含，含开视，乃蛇胆也。
现代文：颜含忧虑地叹息了很长时间。有一天他独自坐着，忽然有一个穿着青色衣服的小孩，年纪大约在十三四岁，拿了一个青袋给颜含。颜含打开一看，竟然是蚺蛇的胆。
English: One day, he was sitting alone, when suddenly a child dressed in blue, aged about thirteen or fourteen, took a blue bag and gave it to Yan Han. When Yan Han opened it, it turned out to be the gall bladder of a boa constrictor.

古文：童子逡巡出户，化成青鸟飞去。
现代文：那小孩迅速出了门，变成了青鸟飞走了。
English: The child quickly went out of the door, turned into a blue bird and flew away.

古文：得胆，药成，嫂病即愈。
现代文：颜含得到了蚺蛇胆，药就合成了，嫂嫂的病立即就痊愈了。
English: Yan Han obtained python gall, the medicine was synthesized, and her sister-in-law's illness was cured immediately.

古文：郭巨，隆虑人也，一云河内温人，兄弟三人，早丧父，礼毕，二弟求分，以钱二千万，二弟各取千万，巨独与母居客舍，夫妇佣赁以给公养。居有顷，妻产男，巨念举儿妨事亲，一也；老人得食，喜分儿孙，减馔，二也；乃于野凿地，欲埋儿，得石盖，下有黄金一釜，中有丹书，曰： 孝子郭巨，黄金一釜，以用赐汝。 
现代文：过了不久，他妻子生了儿子。郭巨想想抚养儿子就要妨碍传奉母亲，这是其一：老人得到食物，总喜欢分给孙子，这就减少了母亲的食物，这是其二。于是他就在野外挖土，想埋掉儿子。结果却挖到一块石板盖，下面有黄金一锅，锅中有朱砂写的天书，写着： 孝子郭巨，这黄金一锅，是用来赏赐你的。 
English: Not long after, his wife gave birth to a son. Guo Jiu thought that raising a son would interfere with the propagation of his mother. This was the first: the old man got food and always liked to give it to his grandson, which reduced the mother's food. This was the second. So he dug in the field and wanted to bury his son. As a result, he dug a stone plate cover, under which there was a pot of gold. In the pot there was a heavenly letter written in cinnabar, which read: Filial son Guo Jiu, this pot of gold is used to reward you.

古文：于是名振天下。
现代文：于是郭巨的名声震动了全国。
English: As a result, Guo Jiu's fame shook the whole country.

古文：新兴刘殷，字长盛，七岁丧父，哀毁过礼，服丧三年，未尝见齿。
现代文：新兴郡的刘殷，字长盛。他七岁的时候死了父亲，因为悲哀而减食消瘦的程度超过了一般的礼仪。他服丧三年，从来没有露牙笑过。
English: Liu Yin of Xinxing County, known as Changsheng. When his father died when he was seven years old, his grief caused him to eat less and lose weight to an extent that exceeded the usual etiquette. He was in mourning for three years and never smiled with his teeth bared.

古文：事曾祖母王氏，尝夜梦人谓之曰： 西篱下有粟。 
现代文：他精心侍奉曾祖母王氏。有一天夜里，梦见有人对他说： 西边的篱笆下有谷子。 
English: He served his great-grandmother Wang diligently. One night, he dreamed that someone said to him, "There is millet under the fence to the west."

古文：寤而掘之，得粟十五钟，铭曰： 七年粟百石，以赐孝子刘殷。 
现代文：他醒来后去挖它，得到了十五钟谷子。那盖子上的刻辞说： 七年的谷子一百石，是用来赏赐给孝子刘殷的。 
English: After he woke up, he went to dig it up and got fifteen o'clock millet. The inscription on the lid said: "The seven-year-old millet is a hundred stone, and is used to reward the filial son Liu Yin."

古文：自是食之七岁，方尽。
现代文：从那时开始吃这谷子，吃了七年刚吃完。
English: Since then, I started to eat this millet, and I have just finished eating it after seven years.

古文：及王氏卒，夫妇毁瘠，几至灭性。
现代文：等到王氏逝世，刘殷夫妇两人减食消瘦，几乎丧生。
English: After Wang's death, Liu Yin and her husband both lost weight and nearly died.

古文：时柩在殡，而西邻失火，风势甚猛，殷夫妇叩殡号哭，火遂灭。
现代文：当时王氏入棺待葬，而西边的邻居失了火，风力很大，刘殷夫妇敲着棺材号陶大哭，大火就熄灭了。
English: At that time, Mr. Wang was in the coffin to be buried, and the neighbor to the west lost the fire, the wind was very strong, Liu Yin and his wife knocked on the coffin and cried, and the fire was extinguished.

古文：后有二白鸠来巢其树庭。
现代文：后来有两只白鸠飞来，在他家院子里的树上做了窠。
English: Then two egrets came and made nests in the trees in his yard.

古文：杨公伯，雍雒阳县人也，本以侩卖为业，性笃孝，父母亡，葬无终山，遂家焉。
现代文：杨伯雍，是洛阳县人。本来以做买卖的经纪人为职业。他天性忠诚孝顺，父母亲死了，葬在无终山，他就把家安在那里。
English: Yang Boyong is from Luoyang County. Originally, he was a broker by profession. He is loyal and filial by nature. His parents died and were buried in the Endless Mountain, and he made his home there.

古文：山高八十里，上无水，公汲水作义浆于阪头，行者皆饮之。
现代文：无终山高八十里，山上没有水，他就打来了水，烧好免费供应的茶水放在山坡上，过路的人都喝它。
English: The endless mountain is eighty miles high, and there is no water on the mountain, so he called for water. He boiled the free tea and placed it on the hillside, and people passing by drank it.

古文：三年，有一人就饮，以一斗石子与之，使至高平好地有石处种之，云： 玉当生其中， 杨公未娶，又语云： 汝后当得好妇。 
现代文：三年后，有一个人来喝水，拿了一斗石子给他，叫他到高爽平坦的好田挑有石头的地方把它种下，并对他说： 宝玉会从这里面长出来。 杨伯雍当时还没有娶妻，那人又对他说： 你以后会娶到一个好媳妇。 
English: Three years later, a man came to drink water, took a bucket of stones to him, told him to go to a high and flat good field, pick a place with stones and plant it, and said to him, "Precious stones will grow from here." Yang Boyong had not married a wife at that time, and the man said to him, "You will marry a good daughter-in-law in the future."

古文：语毕，不见。
现代文：那人说完就不见了。
English: The man finished speaking and disappeared.

古文：乃种其石，数岁，时时往视，见玉子生石上，人莫知也。
现代文：杨伯雍就种下了那石子。几年中，他经常去察看，只见小宝玉长在石头上，而别人却没有一个知道这件事。
English: Yang Boyong planted the stone. Over the years, he often went to inspect it and saw the small gem growing on the stone, but no one else knew about it.

古文：有徐氏者，右北平着姓女，甚有行，时人求，多不许；公乃试求徐氏，徐氏笑以为狂，因戏云： 得白璧一双来，当听为婚。 
现代文：有一个姓徐的，是右北平郡的名门，他的女儿很有德行，当时的人来求婚，姓徐的都没有答应。杨伯雍却试着去向徐家求婚，姓徐的讥笑他，认为他太狂妄了，便戏弄他说： 如果你搞到一双白壁来，我就同意您娶我的女儿。 
English: There was a man surnamed Xu, who belonged to a famous family in Right Beiping County. His daughter was very virtuous. People at that time came to propose marriage, but the man surnamed Xu did not agree. Yang Boyong, however, tried to propose marriage to the Xu family. The man surnamed Xu mocked him, saying that he was too arrogant, and teased him, saying, "If you can get a pair of white walls, I will agree to you marrying my daughter."

古文：公至所种玉田中，得白璧五双，以聘。
现代文：杨伯雍来到他种玉的田中，收到了五双白壁，便将它们作为聘礼。
English: Yang Boyong came to Tanaka, where he grows jade, and received five pairs of shirakabe, which he used as a betrothal gift.

古文：徐氏大惊，遂以女妻公。
现代文：姓徐的大吃一惊，就把女儿嫁给了他。
English: Surprised, Ms. Xu married her daughter to him.

古文：天子闻而异之，拜为大夫。
现代文：皇帝听说了这件事，觉得杨伯雍这个人很奇特，就任命他为大夫。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he thought Yang Boyong was a very strange person and appointed him as a doctor.

古文：乃于种玉处四角，作大石柱，各一丈，中央一顷地名曰 玉田。 
现代文：还在种玉的地方，四角立起了大石往，每根石往各有一丈高，这中央的一顷地，被命名为 玉田 。
English: In addition, in the place where jade was planted, large boulders were erected at the four corners. Each stone was a foot high. This central hectare was named Tamada.

古文：衡农，字剽卿，东平人也。
现代文：衡农，字剽卿，东平国人。
English: Heng Nong, Zhe Qianqing, Dongping Guozhong.

古文：少孤，事继母至孝。
现代文：他从小就失去了母亲，侍奉继母极其孝顺。
English: He lost his mother at a young age and served his stepmother with the utmost filial piety.

古文：常宿于他舍，值雷风，频梦虎啮其足，农呼妻相出于庭，叩头三下。屋忽然而坏，压死者三十余人，唯农夫妻获免。
现代文：有一次他在别处房间过夜，正好碰上打雷刮风，他接二连三地梦见老虎咬他的脚。他马上叫妻子一起到院子中去，磕了三个头，这房子忽然崩塌，压死的人有三十多个，只有衡农夫妻两人幸免于难。
English: Once, when he was sleeping in another room, he happened to be caught in a thunderstorm. He had a series of dreams about a tiger biting his foot. He immediately called his wife to go to the courtyard with him, and they hit three heads. The house suddenly collapsed, crushing more than thirty people to death. Only Heng Nong and his wife survived.

古文：罗威，字德仁，八岁丧父，事母性至孝，母年七十，天大寒，常以身自温席而后授其处。
现代文：罗威，字德仁。他八岁时死了父亲，侍奉母亲极孝。母亲已经七十岁了，天气十分寒冷的时候，他常常用自己的身体把席子睡暖，然后再请母亲睡。
English: Lo Wei, alias Naruhito. His father died when he was eight years old, and he served his mother with great filial piety. His mother is seventy years old, and when the weather is very cold, he often uses his body to warm the mat and then invites his mother to sleep.

古文：王裒，字伟元，城阳营陵人也。
现代文：王裒，字伟元，城阳郡营陵县人。
English: Wang Qi, also known as Wei Yuan, was from Yingling County, Joyang County.

古文：父仪，为文帝所杀。裒庐于墓侧，旦夕常至墓所拜跪，攀柏悲号，涕泣着树，树为之枯。
现代文：他父亲王仪，被文帝所杀害，王裒在父亲的坟墓旁盖起了守丧时住的草屋，早晚常在坟墓边行礼跪拜，抓着柏树悲痛地大哭。他的眼泪落到树上，树便干枯了。
English: His father, Wang Yi, was killed by Emperor Wen. Wang Yao built a grass hut next to his father's grave, where he lived during the mourning period. He often bowed down at the grave in the morning and evening, clutching a cypress tree and crying with grief. His tears fell on the tree, and the tree withered.

古文：母性畏雷，母没，每雷，辄到墓曰： 裒在此。 
现代文：他母亲天生害怕打雷，母亲死了后，每逢打雷，他总是来到母亲的坟墓边上说： 王裒在这儿哩。 
English: His mother had a natural fear of thunder. After her death, whenever there was thunder, he would always go to her grave and say, "Wang Ye is here."

古文：郑弘迁临淮太守，郡民徐宪在丧，致哀，有白鸠巢户侧。
现代文：郑弘升任临淮郡太守。郡民徐宪在家守丧致哀时，有只白鸠在他家门边做窝。
English: Zheng Hong became the governor of Linhuai County. When county resident Xu Xian was mourning at home, an egret made a nest at the door of his house.

古文：弘举为孝廉。朝廷称为 白鸠郎。 
现代文：郑弘推荐徐宪为孝廉，朝廷称徐宪为 白鸠郎 。
English: Zheng Hong recommended Xu Xian as a filial son, and the imperial court called Xu Xian a white-bearded son.

古文：汉时，东海孝妇养姑甚谨，姑曰： 妇养我勤苦，我已老，何惜余年，久累年少。 
现代文：西汉时，东海郡有一个孝顺的媳妇，赡养婆婆非常恭敬。婆婆说， 媳妇赡养我很辛苦。我已经老了，哪能爱惜我的风烛残年而长久地拖累年轻人呢！ 
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, there was a filial daughter-in-law in Donghai County, who supported her mother-in-law very respectfully. Her mother-in-law said, "It is hard for my daughter-in-law to support me. I am already old, how can I cherish my wind candle for the rest of my life and drag young people for a long time!"

古文：遂自缢死。
现代文：她说完后便上吊死了。
English: When she had finished, she hanged herself.

古文：其女告官云： 妇杀我母。 
现代文：她的女儿到官府告状说： 这媳妇杀了我的母亲。 
English: Her daughter went to the government office to complain, saying: This daughter-in-law killed my mother.

古文：官收，系之。
现代文：官府就把这媳妇抓了起来，用酷刑拷打审讯。
English: The authorities arrested the daughter-in-law and interrogated her under torture.

古文：拷掠毒治，孝妇不堪苦楚，自诬服之。
现代文：这孝顺的媳妇忍受不了痛苦，便自己捏造了罪状承认了罪名。
English: This dutiful daughter-in-law could not bear the pain, so she fabricated charges and confessed to the crime.

古文：时于公为狱吏，曰： 此妇养姑十余年，以孝闻彻，必不杀也。 
现代文：当时于公定国当管理监狱的小吏，他说： 这媳妇赡养婆婆十多年，因为孝顺而名声很响，一定不会杀死婆婆的。 
English: He said: This daughter-in-law has been supporting her mother-in-law for more than ten years. She has a very good reputation for filial piety. She would never kill her mother-in-law.

古文：太守不听。
现代文：太守不听他的。
English: The governor did not listen to him.

古文：于公争不得理，抱其狱词哭于府而去。
现代文：于公与太守争辩，但没被理会，于是就抱着那媳妇的供词，在官府哭了一场走了。
English: Yu Gong argued with the Emperor, but was ignored, so he hugged the daughter-in-law's confession and went away crying in the government office.

古文：自后郡中枯旱，三年不雨。
现代文：从那以后，东海郡内大旱，三年不下雨。
English: Since then, there has been a severe drought in Tokaigun, with no rain for three years.

古文：后太守至，于公曰： 孝妇不当死，前太守枉杀之，咎当在此。 
现代文：太守立刻亲自去祭奠那孝妇的坟墓，接着还给她的坟墓立了碑，用以表彰她的孝顺。
English: The Empress Dowager herself immediately went to the grave of the filial woman to pay her respects, and then erected a monument to her grave in recognition of her filial piety.

古文：太守实时身祭孝妇冢，因表其墓，天立雨，岁大熟。
现代文：天上立刻下起雨来了，这一年便获得了大丰收。老人们传话说：这孝顺的媳妇名字叫周青。周青临刑的时候，车子上插着十丈高的竹竿，用来悬桂五种颜色的长幅挂旗。
English: It immediately began to rain, and there was a bumper harvest that year. The old people sent word: This dutiful daughter-in-law's name is Zhou Qing. When Zhou Qing was about to be executed, there was a ten-foot-tall bamboo pole on the cart, which was used to hang a long banner with five colors of cinnamon.

古文：长老传云： 孝妇名周青，青将死，车载十丈竹竿，以悬五旛，立誓于众曰： 青若有罪，愿杀，血当顺下；青若枉死，血当逆流。 既行刑已，其血青黄缘旛竹而上，极标，又缘旛而下云。 
现代文：她对着众人发誓说： 我周青如果有罪，甘心被杀，我的鲜血该顺流而下：我周青如果死得冤枉，鲜血该倒流向上。 过了一会儿行刑完毕，她的鲜血呈青黄色，沿着旗杆流上了顶端，又沿着旗帜流下来。
English: She swore to the crowd: "If I, Zhou Qing, am guilty, I am willing to be killed, my blood should flow down: if I, Zhou Qing, die unjustly, my blood should flow back up." After a while, when the execution was over, her blood was blue-yellow, flowing up the flagpole and down the flagpole.

古文：犍为叔先泥和，其女名雄，永建三年，泥和为县功曹，县长赵祉遣泥和拜檄，谒巴郡太守，以十月乘船，于城湍堕水死，尸丧不得。
现代文：犍为郡人叔先泥和，他的女儿名叫雄。永建三年，叔先泥和任县功曹，县长赵祉派叔先泥和去拜见巴郡太守，进呈文书。他在那一年十月乘船出发，却在湍急的城河中落水而死，尸体被冲走没捞到。
English: In the third year of the Yongjian era, Uncle Xian and the county gong cao, county governor Zhao Zhi sent Uncle Xian and went to visit the governor of Bashu County to submit a document. He set off by boat in October of that year, but fell into the rushing city river and died, and his body was washed away without being recovered.

古文：雄哀恸号咷，命不图存，告弟贤及夫人，令勤觅父尸，若求不得，吾欲自沈觅之。
现代文：叔先雄悲痛得号陶大哭，连性命也不想要了，她告诉弟弟叔先贤及其夫人，让他们赶快去打捞父亲的尸体，如果捞不到，她就要跳到河里去找。
English: The grief-stricken uncle burst into tears and didn't even want to live. She told her brother, the uncle and his wife, to quickly go and salvage their father's body. If they couldn't, she would jump into the river to look for him.

古文：时雄年二十七，有子男贡，年五岁，贳，年三岁，乃各作绣香囊一枚，盛以金珠，环，预婴二子，哀号之声，不绝于口，昆族私忧。
现代文：当时叔先雄才二十七岁，她有一个儿子叫贡，年龄才五岁；有一个叫贳，年龄才三岁。她就给他们每人做了一个绣花的香袋，拿黄金珠宝饰品装在里面，预先给两个儿子挂上了。
English: At that time, my uncle was only 27 years old. She had a son named Gong, who was only 5 years old, and a son named Yao, who was only 3 years old. She made a flower-embroidered sachet for each of them, put gold jewelry inside, and hung it up in advance for her two sons.

古文：至十二月十五日，父丧不得，雄乘小船于父堕处，哭泣数声，竟自投水中，旋流没底。
现代文：那悲痛的哭声，在他口中从不间断，她的兄弟亲族都暗暗为她担心。到十二月十五日，父亲的尸体还是没找到。叔先雄就乘了一条小船，在父亲落水的地方哭了儿声，便自己跳到河中去了，一会儿她就随着旋涡沉到河底去了。
English: Her brothers and relatives were secretly worried about her. By the 15th of December, her father's body had still not been found. My great-uncle took a small boat, cried softly where his father had fallen into the water, and jumped into the river himself. In a moment, she sank to the bottom of the river with the whirlpool.

古文：见梦告弟云： 至二十一日，与父俱出。 
现代文：她托梦告诉弟弟说： 到二十一日，我和父亲一起出来。 
English: She told her brother about the dream and said, "On the 21st, I will come out with my father."

古文：至期，如梦，与父相持幷浮出江。
现代文：到了那一天，果然象梦中所说的那样，她与父亲互相搀着，一起浮出水面。
English: On that day, as she had said in her dream, she and her father hugged each other and surfaced together.

古文：县长表言郡太守，肃登承上尚书，乃遣户曹掾为雄立碑，图象其形，令知至孝。
现代文：县长奏上表文称道这件事，郡太守肃登把县长的表文进呈给了尚书，尚书就派遣户曹掾为叔先雄立了碑，把她的形象画在碑上，让人们知道她是极其孝顺的。
English: The county magistrate wrote a letter praising the matter, and the county grand marshal Su Deng presented the letter of the county magistrate to Shangshu. Shangshu sent the household of Cao Qi to erect a monument for her uncle, and painted her image on the monument to let people know that she was extremely filial.

古文：河南乐羊子之妻者，不知何氏之女也。
现代文：河南郡乐羊子的妻子，不知道是哪一家的女儿。
English: According to the biography of Dong Zhi's wife, Chen Liu, the wife of Dong Zhi, was the daughter of the same county's Cai Qi, a famous woman, known as Wen Ji.

古文：躬勤养姑。
现代文：她身体力行来赡养婆婆。
English: She does her best to support her mother-in-law.

古文：尝有他舍鸡，谬入园中，姑盗杀而食之。
现代文：曾经有别人家的鸡误入了她家的园子中，婆婆偷偷地把它杀了吃。
English: Once, when someone else's chicken strayed into her garden, my mother-in-law secretly killed it and ate it.

古文：妻对鸡不食而泣。
现代文：乐羊子的妻子对着烧好的鸡不吃，反而哭了。
English: Le Yangzi's wife refused to eat the cooked chicken and cried instead.

古文：姑怪问其故。妻曰： 自伤居贫，使食有他肉。 
现代文：她婆婆奇怪地问她哭泣的缘故，她说： 我伤心我们的生活太贫穷了，以致于使我们的食物中有别人家的肉。 
English: Her mother-in-law, strangely, asked her why she was crying. She said, "I am sad that our life is so poor that we have other people's meat in our food."

古文：姑竟弃之。
现代文：婆婆终于把鸡肉扔了。
English: Now I can only recite more than four hundred articles.

古文：后盗有欲犯之者，乃先劫其姑，妻闻，操刀而出。
现代文：后来有个强盗想侮辱她，就先劫持了她的婆婆，她听见声音，拿着刀冲出来。
English: Later, a robber wanted to humiliate her, so he kidnapped her mother-in-law first. She heard a voice and rushed out with a knife.

古文：盗曰： 释汝刀。
现代文：强盗说： 放下你的刀！
English: The robber said: Put down your knife!

古文：从我者，可全；不从我者，则杀汝姑。 
现代文：顺从我，可以保全你们；不顺从我，就杀掉你的婆婆。 
English: Obey me and you will be safe; disobey me and you will kill your mother-in-law.

古文：妻仰天而叹，刎颈而死。
现代文：乐羊子的妻子对着上天长叹了一声，将刀往自己的脖子上一抹就死了。
English: Le Yangzi's wife gave a long sigh to the heavens, put the knife to her neck and died.

古文：盗亦不杀姑。
现代文：这强盗因而也没有杀死她的婆婆。
English: The robber did not kill her mother-in-law as a result.

古文：太守闻之，捕杀盗贼，赐妻缣帛，以礼葬之。
现代文：太守听说了这件事，把强盗抓住处死了，并赠给乐羊子妻一些绸缎，按照礼仪把她安葬了。庾衮，字叔褒。
English: When the governor heard about this, he caught the robber and put him to death. He also gave Le Yangzi's wife some silk brocade and buried her in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：庾衮，字叔褒，咸宁中大疫，二兄俱亡，次兄毗复殆，疠气方盛，父母诸弟皆出次于外，衮独留，不去。
现代文：咸宁年间，瘟疫大流行，他两个哥哥都死了，二哥庾毗又病危。当时瘟疫的气焰正十分嚣张，父母亲和几个弟弟都住到外地去了，只有庾衮独自留下没离家。
English: During Xianning's lifetime, there was a plague epidemic. Both of his brothers died, and his second brother, Zou Pi, was critically ill. At that time, the plague was in full swing, and his parents and several younger brothers all went to live in other places. Only Zou was left alone and did not leave home.

古文：诸父兄强之，乃曰： 衮性不畏病。 
现代文：各位父老兄长勉力劝他离开，他却说： 我生来就不怕疾病。 
English: His parents and older brothers tried to persuade him to leave, but he said: "I was born with no fear of illness.

古文：遂亲自扶持，昼夜不眠。间复抚柩哀临不辍。
现代文：于是他就亲自照料二哥，日夜不眠；又不时去抚恤他两个哥哥的灵柩，哀悼吊唁从不废止。
English: So he personally took care of his second brother, day and night without sleep; and from time to time he went to support the caskets of his two brothers, mourning and condolences never ceased.

古文：如此十余旬，疫势既退，家人乃返。
现代文：象这样过了一百多天。瘟疫的势头已经开始消退了，家里的人才回来。
English: More than a hundred days passed like this. The momentum of the plague had already begun to subside, and only then did the family return.

古文：毗病得差，衮亦无恙。
现代文：二哥庾毗的病痊愈了，庾衮也太平无事。
English: The second brother, Zou Bi, has recovered from his illness, and Zou is also in good health.

古文：宋康王舍人韩凭娶妻何氏，美，康王夺之。
现代文：宋康王的侍从官韩凭娶了个妻子何氏，长得很美丽，宋康王寺走了她。
English: Han Biao, the attendant of Song Kang Wang, married a very beautiful wife, He, and she went to the Song Kang Wang Temple.

古文：凭怨，王囚之，论为城旦。
现代文：韩凭十分怨恨，宋康王就把他囚禁起来，判处他到边境服白天守备、夜间筑城的刑罚。
English: Han Biao was very resentful, so King Song Kang imprisoned him and sentenced him to go to the border to guard during the day and build a city at night.

古文：妻密遗凭书，缪其辞曰： 其雨淫淫，河大水深，日出当心。 
现代文：他妻子秘密地寄给韩凭一封信，信中把她的话写成了隐语说： 那雨绵绵下不停，河流宽广水又深，太阳出来照我心。 
English: His wife secretly sent a letter to Han Bye, in which she wrote her words as a cryptic saying: "The rain is incessant, the rivers are wide and deep, and the sun comes out to shine on my heart."

古文：既而王得其书，以示左右，左右莫解其意。
现代文：过了不久，这信落到了康王手中，他拿给身边的侍从看，侍从们没有谁能懂得这封信的含意。
English: Soon after, the letter fell into the hands of King Kang, who showed it to the attendants around him. None of the attendants could understand the meaning of the letter.

古文：臣苏贺对曰： 其雨淫淫，言愁且思也。河大水深，不得往来也。日出当心，心有死志也。 
现代文：这时大臣苏贺出来回答说：  那雨绵绵下不停 ，是说她忧愁很深，老是想念； 河流宽广水又深 ，是说他们不能互相来往； 太阳出来照我心 ，是说她对日发誓，心中有殉情的志向。 
English: At this time, Minister Soga came out and replied, "The rain falling incessantly means that she is very sad and always misses you; the rivers are wide and deep, which means that they cannot come and go; the sun comes out according to my heart, which means that she swears to the sun and has the ambition of martyrdom in her heart.

古文：俄而凭乃自杀。
现代文：不久韩凭就自杀了。
English: Han Byung committed suicide soon after.

古文：其妻乃阴腐其衣，王与之登台，妻遂自投台，左右揽之，衣不中手而死。
现代文：他的妻子就暗中腐蚀了自己的衣服。有一次，宋康王和她一起登上高台赏景，韩凭的妻子就趁机从高台上跳下去，身旁的人去拉她，她的衣服经不起手拉，因而就摔死了。
English: His wife secretly corroded her own clothes. Once, Song Kang Wang and she went up to the viewing platform together. Han Biao's wife took the opportunity to jump down from the platform. The people around her pulled her down. Her clothes could not withstand the pulling, and she fell to her death.

古文：遗书于带曰： 王利其生，妾利其死，愿以尸骨赐凭合葬。 
现代文：她在衣带上留下遗书说： 大王希望我活，我希望我死。请把我的尸骨，赐给韩凭合葬。 
English: She left a suicide note on her belt saying: "The king wants me to live, I want to die. Please give my bones to Han Biao for burial."

古文：王怒，弗听，使里人埋之，冢相望也。
现代文：康王十分恼怒，不依她的遗言办，派乡里的人把她埋了，让她的坟墓与韩凭的远远相对。
English: King Kang was very angry and did not follow her last words. He sent people from the village to bury her, so that her grave would be far away from Han Biao's.

古文：王曰： 尔夫妇相爱不已，若能使冢合，则吾弗阻也。 
现代文：康王说： 你们夫妻俩爱个没完，如果你们能让两个坟墓合在一起，那么我就不再阻拦你们了。 
English: King Kang said, "You and your wife love each other endlessly. If you can make two tombs fit together, then I won't stop you."

古文：宿昔之间，便有大梓木，生于二冢之端，旬日而大盈抱，屈体相就，根交于下，枝错于上。
现代文：一夜之间，便有大梓树长在两个坟墓的顶上，十来天这梓树就长大到一抱，两棵树干弯曲着互相靠近，树根在下面互相缠绕，树枝在上面互相交错。
English: Overnight, a large azusa tree grew on top of the two graves. Over the next ten days, the azusa tree grew to an arm's length. The two tree trunks bent close to each other, the roots wrapped around each other below, and the branches intertwined with each other above.

古文：又有鸳鸯，雌雄各一，恒栖树上，晨夕不去，交颈悲鸣，音声感人。
现代文：又有一对鸳鸯鸟，一雌一雄，经常栖息在树上，从早到晚一直不离开，它们把脖子互相依偎着京叫，叫声让人感动。
English: Another pair of ostriches, one female and one male, often roost in the trees, and do not leave from morning to night. They put their necks around each other and chirp. The chirping is moving.

古文：宋人哀之，遂号其木曰 相思树。 
现代文：宋国的百姓哀悼韩凭夫妇，就把那梓树叫做 相思树 。
English: When the people of Song mourned the death of Han Biao and his wife, they called the tree the "Asiatic Tree."

古文： 相思 之名，起于此也。
现代文：相思这个名词，就是从这儿产生的。
English: This is where the term "love-sickness" comes from.

古文：南人谓：此禽即韩凭夫妇之精魂。
现代文：南方的人说这鸳鸯鸟就是韩凭夫妇的灵魂变的。
English: People in the south say that this ostrich is the soul of Han Biao and his wife.

古文：今睢阳有韩凭城，其歌谣至今犹存。
现代文：现在睢阳县有韩凭城，那传颂韩凭夫妇的歌谣到今天还流传着。
English: Now, there is Han Byeong City in Poyang County, and the song about Han Byeong and his wife is still popular today.

古文：汉末零阳郡太守史满，有女，悦门下书佐；乃密使侍婢取书佐盥手残水饮之，遂有妊。
现代文：汉朝末年，零陵郡太守史满有个女儿，爱上了府上的文书，就偷偷地叫她的丫鬓把文书的洗手水拿来喝了，于是就怀孕了。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the governor of Luling County, Shiman, had a daughter. She fell in love with the documents in the palace, and secretly asked her maid to drink the hand washing water from the documents. As a result, she became pregnant.

古文：已而生子，至能行，太守令抱儿出，使求其父。
现代文：不久她便生了个孩子。到孩子会走路了，太守便叫人把小孩抱出来，让他寻找自己的父亲。
English: Soon after, she gave birth to a child. When the child was able to walk, the governor called for someone to take the child out and let him look for his father.

古文：儿匍匐直入书佐怀中。书佐推之仆地，化为水。
现代文：这小孩径直爬进文书的怀里，文书把他推掉，他便倒在地上变成了水。
English: The child crawled right into the clerk's arms, the clerk pushed him away, and he fell to the ground and turned into water.

古文：穷问之，具省前事，遂以女妻书佐。
现代文：太守追问自己的女儿，女儿把过去的事都讲了，太守就把女儿嫁给了文书。
English: The daimyō questioned his daughter, who told him everything about the past, and the daimyō married his daughter to the clerk.

古文：鄱阳西有望夫冈。
现代文：鄱阳县西部有座望夫冈。
English: In the western part of Fenyang County, there is a mountain called Mofugang.

古文：昔县人陈明与梅氏为婚，未成，而妖魅诈迎妇去。
现代文：传说从前县里有个叫陈明的，和梅氏缔结了婚姻。结果还没有成婚，梅氏却被妖怪骗走了。
English: According to legend, there was once a man in the county named Chen Ming who married Ms. Mei. As it turned out, they were not yet married, but Ms. Mei was tricked by a monster.

古文：明诣卜者，决云： 行西北五十里求之。 
现代文：陈明去叫人占卜，那人占卜后说： 你朝西北方向走五十里后去找她。 
English: Chen Ming went to ask a fortune-teller, and the fortune-teller said, "Go fifty miles to the northwest and find her."

古文：明如言，见一大穴，深邃无底。以绳悬人，遂得其妇。
现代文：陈明按他的吩咐去了，便看见一个大洞，深得没有个底，他用绳子把自己悬吊下去，就找到了他的妻子，他便叫妻子先出去。
English: Chen Ming did as he was told and saw a big hole, so deep that there was no bottom. He hung himself with a rope and found his wife. He told his wife to go out first.

古文：乃令妇先出，而明所将邻人秦文，遂不取明。
现代文：但陈明带来的邻居秦文，在洞外用绳子把梅氏拉出来后，却不再把陈明拉上来了。
English: But Chen Ming's neighbor Qin Wen, after pulling Mei out of the cave with a rope, stopped pulling Chen Ming up.

古文：其妇乃自誓执志登此冈首而望其夫，因以名焉。
现代文：陈明的妻子就向秦文发誓，表明自己嫁给陈明的坚定志向，并登上了这山冈顶上盼望她的丈夫，因而人们把这山冈叫做望夫冈。
English: Chen Ming's wife swore to Qin Wen, expressing her firm intention to marry Chen Ming, and climbed to the top of this mountain to look forward to her husband, so people called this mountain Mofu Mountain.

古文：后汉，南康邓元义，父伯考，为尚书仆射，元义还乡里，妻留事姑，甚谨。
现代文：东汉时南康人邓元义，父亲叫邓伯考，任尚书仆射。邓元义回到家乡省亲，妻子便被留下来侍奉婆婆，她对婆婆十分恭敬。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty, Deng Yuanyi, a well-to-do man from Nankang, whose father was named Deng Bercow, was appointed as Shang's aide-de-camp. When Deng Yuanyi returned to his hometown to visit his relatives, his wife was left to serve his mother-in-law. She was very respectful of her mother-in-law.

古文：姑憎之，幽闭空室，节其饮食，羸露，日困，终无怨言。
现代文：但婆婆却讨厌她，把她关在空房间里，并且限制她的饮食。她虽然疲惫衰弱，一天比一天困窘，但始终没有怨言。
English: But her mother-in-law hated her, kept her in an empty room and restricted her diet. Although she was exhausted, weak and more and more embarrassed every day, she never complained.

古文：时伯考怪而问之，元义子朗，时方数岁，言： 母不病，但苦饥耳。 
现代文：当时邓伯考感到奇怪而去问她，邓元义的儿子邓朗，当时才几岁，对邓伯考说： 妈妈没生病，只是饿得太苦了。 
English: Deng Yuanyi's son, Deng Lang, who was only a few years old at the time, said to Deng Bercow, "Mom is not sick, she is just very hungry."

古文：伯考流涕曰： 何意亲姑反为此祸！ 
现代文：邓伯考流着眼泪说： 哪里料到这亲婆婆，反而会造这样的孽！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Deng Berkow said, "How could I have expected that my own mother-in-law would commit such evil!

古文：遗归家，更嫁，为华仲妻。
现代文：于是就把媳妇休了让她回娘家去，她便改嫁给应华仲做妻子。
English: So he dismissed his daughter-in-law and let her go back to her mother's house. She then married Ying Huazhong.

古文：仲为将作大匠，妻乘朝车出，元义于路旁观之，谓人曰： 此我故妇，非有他过，家夫人遇之实酷，本自相贵。 
现代文：应华仲任将作大匠，妻子便乘着上朝的车子出了门。邓元义在路边看见她，对人说： 这是我原来的妻子，她不是有别的过错，只是我母亲对待她实在太残忍了。
English: Deng Yuanyi saw her on the side of the road and said to the man, "This is my former wife. She did not have any other fault, but my mother treated her very cruelly."

古文：其子朗，时为郎，母与书，皆不答，与衣裳，辄以烧之。
现代文：本来应该互相尊重才是。 邓元义的儿子邓朗，当时已做了郎官，母亲给他写信，他从不回信，母亲给他衣裳，他总是拿来烧掉。
English: They should have respected each other. Deng Yuanyi's son, Deng Lang, was already a vassal at that time. His mother wrote to him, but he never wrote back. His mother gave him clothes, but he always burned them.

古文：母不以介意。
现代文：他母亲也不把这些事放在心上。
English: His mother didn't think much of it either.

古文：母欲见之，乃至亲家李氏堂上，令人以他词请朗。
现代文：母亲总想看看儿子，就到亲家李氏的家里，叫人用其它的理由去请邓朗。
English: The mother always wanted to see her son, so she went to the home of her relatives, the Li family, and asked someone to use other reasons to invite Deng Lang.

古文：朗至，见母，再拜涕泣，因起出。
现代文：邓朗来了后看见母亲，恭敬地拜了两次，流泪抽泣，便起身出门去了。
English: After arriving, Deng Lang saw his mother, respectfully bowed twice, shed tears and sobbed, then got up and left the house.

古文：母追谓之曰： 我几死。
现代文：母亲追上去对他说： 我差一点死了。
English: His mother chased after him and told him: "I almost died.

古文：自为汝家所弃，我何罪过，乃如此耶！ 
现代文：我是被你家遗弃的，我有什么罪过，你怎能如此来对待我呢？ 
English: I was abandoned by your family. What is my sin? How can you treat me like this?

古文：因此遂绝。
现代文：从此以后母子便断绝了往来。
English: Since then, there have been no more strange creatures in the pavilion.

古文：严遵为扬州刺史，行部，闻道傍女子哭声不哀。问所哭者谁。对云： 夫遭烧死。 
现代文：严遵任扬州刺史，有一次到所属郡县巡视，听见路旁一个女子的哭声不悲哀，就问她哭的是谁，那女子回答说： 是我的丈夫，他被火烧死了。 
English: Yan Zun Rong, a historian of Yangzhou, once went on a tour of his county. He heard a woman on the side of the road crying inconsolably. He asked her who was crying. The woman replied, "It was my husband. He was burned to death."

古文：遵敕吏舁尸到，与语，讫，语吏云： 死人自道不烧死。 
现代文：严遵使命令差役们把尸体抬来，他与尸体说完话，就对差役们说： 死人自己说不是被烧死的。 
English: Yan obeyed the orders of the officers to bring the body. After he finished talking to the body, he said to the officers: The dead man himself said that he was not burned to death.

古文：乃摄女，令人守尸，云： 当有枉。 
现代文：于是就逮捕了那女子，并叫人看守尸体，说： 这里边一定有冤枉。 
English: So they arrested the woman and took the body away, saying, "There must be a crime here."

古文：吏曰： 有蝇聚头所。 
现代文：差役报告说： 有苍蝇聚集在尸体头部。 
English: The attendant reported: There are flies gathered around the head of the corpse.

古文：遵令披视，得铁锥贯顶。
现代文：严遵便叫人拨开头发察看，发现铁椎子贯穿了那尸体的头顶。
English: Yan Zun then asked someone to look through the hair and found that the iron vertebrae had penetrated the top of the corpse's head.

古文：考问，以淫杀夫。
现代文：于是就拷问那女子，原来是那女子因为与别人通奸而杀死了丈夫。
English: After torturing the woman, he killed her husband when he learned that she had committed adultery with another man.

古文：汉，范式，字巨卿，山阳金乡人也，一名泛，与汝南张劭为友，劭字符伯。
现代文：东汉的范式，字巨卿，是山阳郡金乡县人，又名汜，他和汝南郡的张劭交了朋友。
English: The paradigm of the Eastern Han Dynasty, the character Juqing, was a native of Jinxiang County, Shanyang County, also known as Yu, and he made friends with Zhang Yu from Runan County.

古文：二人并游太学，后告归乡里，式谓元伯曰 后二年，当还。将过拜尊亲，见孺子焉。 
现代文：张劭，字元伯，两人曾一起在京城里的太学学习。后来范式请假回家时，对张劭说： 两年后我回来，一定来拜访你的双亲，看看你的孩子。 
English: Zhang Yao and Zhi Yuan Bo, the two of them used to study together at Taishu in Beijing. Later, when the paradigm asked for leave to go home, he said to Zhang Yao: When I come back in two years, I will definitely visit your parents and see your children.

古文：乃共克期日。
现代文：两人就共同约定了日期。
English: So the two agreed on a date.

古文：后期方至，元伯具以白母，请设馔以候之。
现代文：后来，约定的日期就要到了，张劭就把这事全告诉了母亲，请她准备饭菜来迎接范式。
English: Later, the day was approaching, Zhang Yuanbo told his mother all the details of the matter, and asked his mother to prepare wine and rice to wait for the arrival of the paradigm.

古文：母曰： 二年之别，千里结言，尔何相信之审耶！ 
现代文：他母亲说： 两年的离别，相隔千里的诺言，你怎么会相信得这样认真呢？ 
English: His mother said: "Two years of separation, a promise thousands of miles apart, how could you believe so seriously?

古文：曰： 巨卿信士，必不乖违。 
现代文：张劭说： 巨卿是个重信用的人，一定不会违背的。 
English: Zhang Ye said, "Juqing is a trustworthy person, and he will not renege on his word.

古文：母曰： 若然，当为尔酝酒。 
现代文：母亲说： 如果是这样，应该为你们酿酒了。 
English: My mother said, "If that's the case, we should make wine for you."

古文：至期，果到。
现代文：到了约定的日期，范式果然来了。
English: On the appointed day, the standard arrived.

古文：升堂，拜饮，尽欢而别。
现代文：他登堂拜见了张劭的父母，就一起饮酒，极尽了欢乐后才和张劭告别。
English: He went to the court to visit Zhang Yao's parents, drank alcohol together, and only said goodbye to Zhang Yao after he had thoroughly enjoyed himself.

古文：后元伯寝疾，甚笃，同郡到君章殷子征晨夜省视之。
现代文：后来张劭卧病不起，病情很重，同郡的郅君章、殷子征从早到晚照料看护他。
English: Later, Zhang Xuan was bedridden and very ill. He was taken care of and looked after from morning to night by the county's Zou Junzhang and Yin Zizheng.

古文：元伯临终，叹曰： 恨不见我死友。 
现代文：张劭临死时，叹息道： 遗憾的是还没能见一下我那生死与共的朋友。 
English: When Zhang Ye was about to die, he sighed, "Unfortunately, I haven't been able to meet my lifelong friend."

古文：子征曰： 吾与君章尽心于子，是非死友，复欲谁求？ 
现代文：殷子征说： 我与郅君章对您尽心竭力，我们如果不是你生死与共的朋友，那么你再想找谁来与你相见呢？ 
English: Yin Zixian said: I and Zou Junzhang have made every effort for you. If we are not your friends for life and death, then who would you like to meet?

古文：元伯曰： 若二子者，吾生友耳。山阳范巨卿，所谓死友也。 
现代文：张劭说， 象你们这两个人，只是我活着时的朋友罢了，山阳郡的范巨卿，才是我所说的生死与共的朋友。 
English: Yuan Bo: Like you two, he is my life-long friend. Sanyang Fan Jiuqing is my dead friend.

古文：寻而卒。
现代文：一会儿张劭便死了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：式忽梦见元伯，玄冕，垂缨，屣履，而呼曰： 巨卿！吾以某日死，当以尔时葬。永归黄泉。子未忘我，岂能相及！ 
现代文：范式忽然梦见张劭穿着黑祭服，帽子也没系好，垂挂着帽带，拖着鞋子叫道： 巨卿，我在某日死了，该在某日下葬，永远回到地下去了，您如果没有忘记我，是否能再见我一面？ 
English: Paradigm suddenly dreamed that Zhang Ye was wearing a black ceremonial robe, his hat was not tied properly, his hatband was hanging down, and his shoes were dragging behind him, and he cried out: Giant Lord, I died one day, I should be buried one day, I have gone back underground forever. If you have not forgotten me, will you be able to see me again?

古文：式恍然觉悟，悲叹泣下。便服朋友之服，投其葬日，驰往赴之。
现代文：范式清清楚楚地醒过来，悲痛地叹息着，禁不住哭泣起来，眼泪直往下掉，于是他就穿上了给朋友服丧时穿的衣服，按照张劭的安葬日期，赶马前去奔丧。
English: Paradigm clearly woke up, sighed with grief, couldn't help but cry, tears fell straight down, so he put on the clothes he wore to his friend's funeral, and according to Zhang Ye's burial date, he rushed to the funeral.

古文：未及到而丧已发引。
现代文：范式还没有赶到而灵车已经启行了。
English: The paradigm has not yet arrived and the hearse has already set off.

古文：既至圹，将窆，而柩不肯进。
现代文：一会儿灵车就到了墓穴，马上要把棺材下葬到墓穴中去了，而棺材却不肯朝前了。
English: In a moment the hearse arrived at the grave, and immediately they wanted to bury the coffin in the grave, but the coffin refused to move.

古文：其母抚之曰： 元伯！岂有望耶？ 
现代文：他母亲抚摸着棺材说： 元伯，你是否还有什么指望呢？ 
English: His mother stroked the coffin and said: Uncle Yuan, do you still have any hope?

古文：遂停柩移时，乃见素车，白马，号哭而来。
现代文：于是就把棺材停下。过了一会儿，便看见白车白马，有人痛哭着奔来。
English: So he stopped the coffin. After a while, he saw a white horse and a white carriage, and people were crying and running.

古文：其母望之，曰： 是必范巨也。 
现代文：张劭的母亲望着那车马说： 这一定是范巨卿了。 
English: Zhang Ye's mother looked at the carriage and horse and said, "This must be Fan Jiuqing."

古文：既至，叩丧，言曰： 行矣元伯！死生异路，永从此辞。 
现代文：一会儿范式就到了，他磕头吊唁，说道： 走吧元伯，死者和生者走不同的路，从此我们永远分别了。 
English: After a while, the paradigm arrived, he bowed his head in condolence and said: Let's go, grandfather, the dead and the living take different paths, and from now on we are separated forever.

古文：会葬者千人，咸为挥涕。
现代文：参加葬礼的上千人，都为他们的别离而淌眼泪。
English: More than a thousand people who attended the funeral shed tears.

古文：式因执绋而引柩。于是乃前。
现代文：范式便握着牵引棺材的绳索向前拉，棺材这才向前移动了。
English: Paradigm then grabbed hold of the coffin's tow rope and pulled it forward, causing the coffin to move.

古文：式遂留止冢次，为修坟树，然后乃去。
现代文：范式就留在坟边，给张劭垒了坟，种了树，然后才离去。
English: The paradigm is to stay by the grave, fix the tree, and go back.

