古文：武皇帝讳炎，字安世，文帝长子也。
现代文：武皇帝名炎，字安世，是晋文帝的长子。
English: Emperor Wu was the eldest son of Emperor Jinwen.

古文：宽惠仁厚，沈深有度量。
现代文：为人宽惠仁厚，深沉有度量。
English: He is broad-minded, benevolent, and deep-rooted.

古文：魏嘉平中，封北平亭侯，历给事中、奉车都尉、中垒将军，加散骑常侍，累迁中护军、假节。
现代文：魏嘉平年间，封为北平亭侯，历任给事中、奉车都尉、中垒将军，加散骑常侍，又迁为中护军、假节。
English: During the reign of Wei Jiaping, he was given the title of Beiping Tingzhou, and successively served as a middle-ranking official, a lieutenant of Fengche, a middle-ranking general, and a non-commissioned officer, and was also transferred to the middle-ranking military escort and the false festival.

古文：迎常道乡公于东武阳，迁中抚军，进封新昌乡侯。
现代文：到东武阳迎常道乡公即位，迁为中抚军，晋封为新昌乡侯。
English: He went to Dongwuyang and was enthroned as the lord of Yingchang Road Township. He was transferred to Zhongfu Army and promoted to Xinchang Township.

古文：及晋国建，立为世子，拜抚军大将军，开府、副贰相国。
现代文：晋国建立，立为世子，授予抚军大将军，开府、副贰相国。
English: He founded Jin Province, established it as his successor, was awarded the title of Fuzun Da Genera, and founded and served as vice-governor of Jin Province.

古文：初，文帝以景帝既宣帝之嫡，早世无后，以帝弟攸为嗣，特加爱异，自谓摄居相位，百年之后，大业宜归攸。
现代文：当初，文帝因为景帝是宣帝的继承人，去世早而无后，便把武帝的弟弟司马攸作为景帝后嗣，看得与众不同，特加爱护，自以为居丞相之位，死后应将大业传给司马攸。
English: At first, Emperor Wen, because Emperor Jing was the heir of Emperor Xuan, and Emperor Wu's younger brother Sima You, as the heir of Emperor Jing, was considered to be different and special, and he thought that he was the prime minister, and that he should pass on the great cause to Sima You after his death.

古文：每曰： 此景王之天下也，吾何与焉。 
现代文：常说： 这是景王的天下，我是不会参与其事的。 
English: He often said, "This is King Gyeongbokgung's world, I won't get involved."

古文：将议立世子，属意于攸。
现代文：将要议定世子时，文帝的意思想立司马攸。
English: When it was time to agree on a successor, Emperor Wen wanted to appoint Sima You.

古文：何曾等固争曰： 中抚军聪明神武，有超世之才。
现代文：何曾等人坚持异议说： 中抚军聪明神武，有超世之才。
English: He Zeng and others persisted in their objection, saying: Zhong Fuzhi's army is clever and powerful, and has extraordinary talent.

古文：发委地，手过膝，此非人臣之相也。 
现代文：头发拖地，手臂过膝，这不是做人臣的相貌啊！ 
English: Hair dragging the floor, arms crossed over the knees, this is not the look of a statesman!

古文：由是遂定。
现代文：自此便定下来了。
English: It's been settled ever since.

古文：咸熙二年五月，立为晋王太子。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年五月立为晋王太子。
English: In May of the second year of Wei and Yuan Dynasties, Emperor Han Xi became the crown prince of Jin.

古文：八月辛卯，文帝崩，太子嗣相国、晋王位。
现代文：八月初九，文帝死，太子继承了相国和晋王的官爵。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Emperor Wen died, and the prince inherited the country and the official title of Jin Wang.

古文：下令宽刑宥罪，抚众息役，国内行服三日。
现代文：下令放宽刑罚，赦免罪人，安抚百姓，减轻徭役，国内服丧三日。
English: He ordered to relax the punishment, pardon the guilty, appease the people, lighten the forced labor, and hold a three-day national mourning.

古文：是月，长人见于襄武，长三丈，告县人王始曰： 今当太平。 
现代文：这个月，在襄武出现一个长人，高三丈，对当地人王始说： 现在当是太平盛世了。 
English: This month, in Xiangwu, there appeared an elder, a high-ranking official, who said to the local people, "Now is the time for peace and prosperity."

古文：九月戊午，以魏司徒何曾为丞相，镇南将军王沈为御史大夫，中护军贾充为卫将军，议郎裴秀为尚书令、光禄大夫，皆开府。
现代文：九月初七，以魏司徒何曾为丞相，镇南将军王沈为御史大夫，中护军贾充为卫将军，议郎裴秀为尚书令、光禄大夫，这些人都可以开府署设僚属。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Wei Sitou He Zeng was appointed as chancellor, Zhenan General Wang Shen was appointed as chief historian, Jia Chong of the Middle Protector Army was appointed as the general of Wei, and He Long Pei Xiu was appointed as the minister of letters and Guanglu doctor. All of these people could set up subordinates in the government office.

古文：十一月，初置四护军，以统城外诸军。
现代文：十一月，初次设置四护军，统率城外诸军。
English: In November, for the first time, the Four Guards were set up to lead the troops outside the city.

古文：乙未，令诸郡中正以六条举淹滞：一曰忠恪匪躬，二曰孝敬尽礼，三曰友于兄弟，四曰洁身劳谦，五曰信义可复，六曰学以为己。
现代文：十五日，下令让诸郡中正官按六条标准荐拔淹没于民间的人才：第一条是忠诚恭谨奋不顾身，第二条是孝敬尽礼，第三条是兄弟友善，第四条是洁身自好勤劳谦恭，第五条是严守信义言行可验，第六条是为修养自己刻苦学习。
English: On the 15th, it was ordered that the county-level officials should recommend and select the talents drowned in the folk according to six standards: the first is loyalty, respect and diligence, the second is filial piety, the third is brotherly friendship, the fourth is cleanliness, self-reliance, hard work and courtesy, the fifth is strict adherence to faith and righteousness, and the sixth is to study hard for self-cultivation.

古文：是时晋德既洽，四海宅心。
现代文：此时晋王之德广施天下，四海归心。
English: At this time, Jin Wang's virtue spread all over the world, and the four seas were converted.

古文：于是天子知历数有在，乃使太保郑冲奉策曰： 咨尔晋王：我皇祖有虞氏诞膺灵运，受终于陶唐，亦以命于有夏。
现代文：于是天子知道天道运转将移于晋，就使太保郑冲奉读策书说： 告知晋王，我皇祖有虞氏，应天之命，受陶唐之禅而得位，亦以天下授于有夏。
English: As a result, the heavenly son knew that the operation of the heavenly way would be transferred to Jin, so he asked the eunuch Zheng Chong to read the policy book and said: Tell the king of Jin that my imperial ancestor, Yu Shi, was ordained by Tao Tang's Zen in accordance with Heaven's order, and was also bestowed by Heaven on Yu Xia.

古文：惟三后陟配于天，而咸用光敷圣德。
现代文：惟夏禹、商汤、周文上能配天，都因为他们圣德如日月普照。
English: However, Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wen are able to match the heavens, all because their holiness is like the sun and the moon.

古文：自兹厥后，天又辑大命于汉。火德既衰，乃眷命我高祖。方轨虞夏四代之明显，我不敢知。
现代文：此后天又将大命倾注于汉，汉之火德既衰，皇天眷顾我高祖，授以天下，我朝仿效虞、夏、商、周四代之明德显绩，我不尽知。
English: After that, Heaven poured its great life into Han, and Han's fire and virtue had already waned. Emperor Heaven looked after my great-grandfather and bestowed him with the world, and I followed the example of Yu, Xia, Shang, and the fourth generation of Ming Dynasty. I don't know.

古文：惟王乃祖乃父，服膺明哲，辅亮我皇家，勋德光于四海。格尔上下神祗，罔不克顺，地平天成，万邦以乂。
现代文：只是你祖你父，心性明哲，辅助我皇家，勋德光照四海，及于上下鬼神，无不和顺，水土平治，天行有序，万邦以安。
English: But your father and your father's father, both of whom were sages by nature, assisted my royal family. Their virtues shone on the four seas, and to the spirits above and below, there was nothing but harmony, peace on land and water, order in the heavens, and peace to all nations.

古文：应受上帝之命，协皇极之中。
现代文：应受上天之命，协和帝王中正之道。
English: He should accept God's command and follow the righteous path of the emperor.

古文：肆予一人，祗承天序，以敬授尔位，历数实在尔躬。允执其中，天禄永终。
现代文：我谨受天命，将天子之位敬授于你，新朝重任在于你身，允当行中正之道，国运得以长久。啊！
English: I respectfully accept the mandate of Heaven to bestow upon you the position of the Son of Heaven. The weighty responsibility of the new dynasty lies with you. You should follow the middle and right path, and the national fortune will be long-lasting. Ah!

古文：於戏！王其钦顺天命。
现代文：王应敬顺天命。
English: The king should respect and obey the will of heaven.

古文：率循训典，底绥四国，用保天休，无替我二皇之弘烈。 
现代文：一切遵循先圣训典，安抚四方之国，维护天之美意，不要废弃我二皇大业。 
English: Everything should follow the Sunnah of the Prophet, pacify the four quarters of the country, maintain the goodwill of heaven, and do not abandon the great cause of my second emperor.

古文：帝初以礼让，魏朝公卿何曾、王沈等固请，乃从之。
现代文：武帝开始以礼辞让，魏朝公卿何曾、王沈等坚决请求，武帝这才答应即天子位。
English: Emperor Wu began to concede with a speech, and the Wei court nobles He Zeng and Wang Shen firmly requested, and Emperor Wu finally agreed to be the son of heaven.

古文：泰始元年冬十二月丙寅，设坛于南郊，百僚在位及匈奴南单于四夷会者数万人，柴燎告类于上帝曰： 皇帝臣炎敢用玄牡明告于皇皇后帝：魏帝稽协皇运，绍天明命以命炎。
现代文：泰始元年冬十二月十七日，在南郊设坛，在位的百僚及匈奴南单于等四方少数民族来集会的数万人，燃起燎火，举行米犬祭，告于上天说： 皇帝臣司马炎敢用玄牡告于皇天后土，魏帝考皇运之所归，承天之明命以命炎。
English: On December 17th, the winter of the first year of the Tai Dynasty, a altar was set up in the southern suburb, and tens of thousands of ethnic minorities from all four directions gathered there, including the reigning centurions and the Xiongnu Nanshan, lit bonfires, held a rice dog festival, and announced to the heavens: The emperor's vassal Sima Yan dared to use the occult to announce to the empress Dowager's land, where the Wei Emperor's examination of the emperor's fortune had come from, and to carry out Heaven's clear command to burn.

古文：昔者唐尧，熙隆大道，禅位虞舜，舜又以禅禹，迈德垂训，多历年载。
现代文：昔日唐尧兴隆大道，禅让于虞舜，舜又禅让于禹，高德垂于后世，经久不衰。
English: In the old days of the Tang Dynasty, the road of Xinglong, Zen yielded to Yu, and Zen yielded to Yu, and high moral standards were passed down to future generations.

古文：暨汉德既衰，太祖武皇帝拨乱济时，扶翼刘氏，又用受命于汉。
现代文：及汉德既衰，太祖武皇帝拨乱反正，拯救时局，扶助刘氏，因而汉禅让于魏。
English: However, Emperor Wu, the forefather of the Han dynasty, saved the situation and supported the Liu clan, so the Han dynasty gave way to the Wei dynasty.

古文：粤在魏室，仍世多故，几于颠坠，实赖有晋匡拯之德，用获保厥肆祀，弘济于艰难，此则晋之有大造于魏也。
现代文：魏室连年多故，几乎败亡，实赖晋匡扶拯救之德，因而得保宗祀，渡过艰难。这说明晋是有大功于魏的。
English: Wei's family suffered many hardships over the years and almost fell into ruin, but they relied on Jin Kuang to help them save their lives. As a result, they were able to keep their family name and survived the hardships. This shows that Jin owed a great deal to Wei.

古文：诞惟四方，罔不祗顺，郭清梁岷，包怀扬越，八纮同轨，祥瑞屡臻，天人协应，无思不服。
现代文：四方之人无不顺服，廓清梁岷，安抚扬越，八方同轨，祥瑞屡呈，天人应和，有思皆服。
English: The people of the four directions are all obedient, the gulf is clear, the beam is smooth, the pacification is better, the eight directions are on the same track, the auspicious and the auspicious are frequent, the heavenly beings should be harmonious, and the thoughts are all obedient.

古文：肆予宪章三后，用集大命于兹。炎维德不嗣，辞不获命。
现代文：我效法三后，天命因集于此。炎之德不足嗣位，辞让而不获准。
English: I followed the example of the three emperors, because the destiny of heaven is concentrated here. The virtue of fire is not enough to inherit the throne, and I was not allowed to resign.

古文：于是群公卿士，百辟庶僚，黎献陪隶，暨于百蛮君长，佥曰： 皇天鉴下，求人之瘼，既有成命，固非克让所得距违。
现代文：于是群公卿士，诸侯臣僚，诸贤陪臣，百蛮君长，都说： 皇天鉴于下土，求民间之疾苦，天命既成，本非谦让所能拒违。
English: As a result, a group of nobles, princes, ministers, wise men and women, and hundreds of kings and princes all said: "The emperor, in view of the soil, asked for the suffering of the people, the destiny was fulfilled, and it was not possible to refuse.

古文：天序不可以无统，人神不可以旷主。 
现代文：帝王世系不可无继，人神不可以无主。 
English: The imperial line must not be without a successor, and human gods must not be without a master.

古文：炎虔奉皇运。寅畏天威，敬简元辰，升坛受禅，告类上帝，永答众望。 
现代文：炎敬奉皇运，敬畏天威，敬选吉日，升坛受禅，告于上天，以满众望。 
English: The flame reveres the emperor's good fortune, fears the divine power, honors the auspicious day of the election, ascends the altar to receive Zen, and announces to the heavens that it is full of hope.

古文：礼毕，即洛阳宫幸太极前殿，诏曰： 昔朕皇祖宣王，圣哲钦明，诞应期运，熙帝之载，肇启洪基。
现代文：礼毕，到洛阳宫太极前殿，下诏说： 昔朕皇祖宣王，圣哲钦明，顺应天运，兴隆帝业，开创洪基。
English: After the ceremony, he went to the front hall of the Taiji Hall of Luoyang Palace and issued a proclamation: Long ago, my ancestor, Emperor Xuanwang, and the sage, King Qinming, followed Heaven's will, prospered the imperial cause, and founded Hongji.

古文：伯考景王，履道宣猷，缉熙诸夏。
现代文：伯考景王，行大道而遍谋于众，光照诸夏。
English: Berkow King of Scenery, walking the avenue and plotting everywhere in the crowd, shines brightly all summer.

古文：至于皇考文王，睿哲光远，允协灵祗，应天顺时，受兹明命。仁济于宇宙，功格于上下。肆魏氏弘鉴于古训，仪刑于唐虞，畴咨群后，爰辑大命于朕身。
现代文：至于宣考文王，明哲光远，协和人神，应天顺时，受此明命，仁德匡济宇宙，功勋及于上下，魏氏鉴于古训，仿效尧舜，咨询于群臣，委大命于朕身。
English: As for the proclamation of King Wen, the wise man is far away, and the man is in harmony with the gods. When the weather is good, he will receive this clear mission. When benevolence and virtue benefit the universe, the merit will be up and down. When the Wei Dynasty learned the ancient teachings, it followed the example, consulted with the ministers, and the great commission was given to me.

古文：予一人畏天之命，用不敢违。
现代文：我畏天命，不敢违抗。
English: I am afraid of fate and dare not disobey it.

古文：惟朕寡德，负荷洪烈，托于王公之上，以君临四海，惴惴惟惧，罔知所济。
现代文：朕德微薄，肩负大任，托身于王公之上而君临四海，惴惴恐惧，不知所为。
English: I am a humble person, shouldering a great responsibility, holding myself above the prince and reigning over the four seas, trembling with fear, not knowing what to do.

古文：惟尔股肱爪牙之佐，文武不贰之臣，乃祖乃父，实左右我先王，光隆我大业。
现代文：尔等为股肱爪牙之佐，文武忠贞之臣，尔祖尔父，实为我先王左右辅臣，光大兴隆我晋大业。
English: He was the assistant of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal.

古文：思与万国，共享休祚。 
现代文：欲与万国臣民共享天下。 
English: They want to share the world with the subjects of all nations.

古文：于是大赦，改元。
现代文：于是实行大赦，改年号。
English: As a result, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：赐天下爵，人五级；鳏寡孤独不能自存者谷，人五斛。复天下租赋及关市之税一年，逋债宿负皆勿收。除旧嫌，解禁锢，亡官失爵者悉复之。
现代文：赐天下官吏爵位，每人五级，鳏寡孤独不能自养者，每人给谷五斛，免征天下租赋及关市之税一年，过去的旧债不再收，旧的嫌疑禁锢都解除，失去官爵者都予恢复。
English: The officials of the whole country will be given a title of nobility, five grades per person, and the widows and orphans who are unable to support themselves will be given five rupees per person. They will be exempted from the national rent and the customs tax for one year. The old debts of the past will no longer be collected, the old suspicions and imprisonment will be lifted, and those who have lost the title of nobility will be restored.

古文：丁卯，遣太仆刘原告于太庙。
现代文：十八日，派遣太仆刘原告于太庙。
English: On the 18th, the plaintiff's servant Liu was dispatched to the Great Temple.

古文：封魏帝为陈留王，邑万户，居于鄴宫；魏氏诸王皆为县侯。
现代文：封魏帝为陈留王，食邑万户，居住邺宫；魏氏诸王都封为县侯。
English: The Wei emperor was named Chen Liu Wang, and he lived in the imperial palace. All the kings of the Wei dynasty were named county magistrates.

古文：迫尊宣王为宣皇帝，景王为景皇帝，文王为文皇帝，宣王妃张氏为宣穆皇后。
现代文：追尊宣王为宣皇帝，景王为景皇帝，文王为文皇帝，宣王妃张氏为宣穆皇后。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Xuan dynasty, Emperor Jing of the Jing dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Wen dynasty, Empress Xuan of the Zhang dynasty, and Empress Xuan of the Mu dynasty.

古文：尊太妃王氏曰皇太后，宫曰崇化。
现代文：尊太妃王氏为皇太后，所住之宫叫崇化宫。
English: Princess Sonoda was the empress dowager, and the palace she lived in was called the Chonghua Palace.

古文：封皇叔祖父孚为安平王，皇叔父干为平原王，亮为扶风王，伷为东莞王，骏为汝阴王，肜为梁王，伦为琅邪王，皇弟攸为齐王，鉴为乐安王，几为燕王，皇从伯父望为义阳王，皇从叔父辅为渤海王，晃为下邳王，瑰为太原王，圭为高阳王，衡为常山王，子文为沛王，泰为陇西王，权为彭城王，绥为范阳王，遂为济南王，逊为谯王，睦为中山王，凌为北海王，斌为陈王，皇从父兄洪为河间王，皇从父弟楙为东平王。
现代文：封皇叔祖父司马孚为安平王，皇叔父司马干为平原王，司马亮为扶风王，司马亻由为东莞王，司马骏为汝阴王，司马肜为梁王，司马伦为琅王牙王，皇弟司马攸为齐王，司马鉴为乐安王，司马机为燕王，皇从伯父司马望为义阳王，皇从叔父司马辅为渤海王，司马晃为下邳王，司马环为太原王，司马王圭为高阳王，司马衡为常山王，司马子文为沛王，司马泰为陇西王，司马权为彭城王，司马绥为范阳王，司马遂为济南王，司马逊为谯王，司马睦为中山王，司马陵为北海王，司马斌为陈王，皇从父兄司马洪为河间王，皇从父弟司马楙为东平王。
English: The emperor's great-uncle Sima Fu was the king of Anping, the emperor's great-uncle Sima Gan was the king of the Plain, Sima Liang was the king of Fu Feng, Sima Qiyu was the king of Dongguan, Sima Qian was the king of Ruyin, Sima Qian was the king of Liang, Sima Lun was the king of Zhai, the emperor's brother Sima You was the king of Qi, Sima Jian was the king of Le An, Sima Ji was the king of Yan, the emperor's uncle Sima Wang was the king of Yiyang, the emperor's uncle S

古文：以骠骑将军石苞为大司马，封乐陵公，车骑将军陈骞为高平公，卫将军贾充为车骑将军、鲁公，尚书令裴秀为巨鹿公，侍中荀勖为济北公，太保郑冲为太傅、寿光公，太尉王祥为太保、睢陵公，丞相何曾为太尉、郎陵公，御史大夫王沈为骠骑将军、博陵公，司空荀顗为临淮公，镇北大将军卫瓘为菑阳公。
现代文：以骠骑将军石苞为大司马，封为乐陵公，车骑将军陈骞为高平公，卫将军贾充为车骑将军、鲁公，尚书令裴秀为巨鹿公，侍中荀勖为济北公，太保郑冲为太傅、寿光公，太尉王祥为太保、睢陵公，丞相何曾为太尉、郎陵公，御史大夫王沈为骠骑将军、博陵公，司空荀岂页为临淮公，镇北大将军卫瓘为菑阳公。
English: He appointed the cavalry general Shi Yan as the grand steward, Feng as the lord of Le Ling, the cavalry general Chen Yan as the lord of Gaoping, the general of Wei Jia Chong as the cavalry general and the lord of Lu, Shang Shuling Peixiu as the lord of Juhu, the chamberlain Zheng Chong as the lord of Jibei, the eunuch Zheng Xiang as the eunuch and the lord of Shuguang, the eunuch Wang Xiang as the eunuch and the lord of Le Ling, the chancellor He Zeng as the eunuch and the lord of Langling, the historian Wang Shen as the eunuch

古文：其余增封进爵各有差，文武普增位二等。改景初历为太始历，腊以酉，社以丑。
现代文：其余增封晋爵不等，文武官员普遍晋位二等，改《景初历》为《泰始历》，腊祭在酉，社日在丑。
English: The rest were promoted to the second grade, the civil and military officials were generally promoted to the second grade, the "Jingchuan Calendar" was changed to the "Thai New Year's Calendar," the wax festival was held in June, and the social day was in September.

古文：戊辰，下诏大弘俭约，出御府珠玉玩好之物，颁赐王公以下各在差。
现代文：十九日，下诏大张俭约之风，将宫中的珠玉玩好之物，拿出来赏赐给王公以下的官吏，多少不等。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an edict of great frugality, taking out the jewels in the palace and giving them to officials below the prince, to varying degrees.

古文：置中军将军，以统宿卫七军。
现代文：设置中军将军以统领宿卫七军。
English: Set up a Chinese general to lead the Seven Armies of the Succession Guards.

古文：己巳，诏陈留王载天子旌旗，备五时副车，行魏正朔，郊祀天地，礼乐制度皆如魏旧，上书不称臣。
现代文：二十日，下诏让陈留王出行时可举天子的旌旗，备有五种季节的副车，使用魏的历法，可以像天子一样郊祀天地，礼乐制度皆照魏例，上书不称臣。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that Chen Liu Wang could hold the banner of Tianzi when traveling, have five kinds of seasonal sidecars, use the Wei calendar, and worship heaven and earth like Tianzi. The ritual music system was in accordance with the Wei example, and the letter was not praised by the minister.

古文：赐山阳公刘康、安乐公刘禅子弟一人为附马都尉。
现代文：赐山阳公刘康、安乐公刘禅子弟一人为驸马都尉。
English: Sanyang Prince Liu Kang and Anle Prince Liu Zen's son was given the rank of lieutenant.

古文：乙亥，以安平王孚为太宰、假黄钺、大都督中外诸军事。
现代文：二十六日，以安平王司马孚为太宰、假黄钺、大都督中外诸军事。
English: On the 26th, Anping King Sima Fu was appointed as Dazai, pseudo Huang Di, and grand governor of the Middle and Outer Military Provinces.

古文：诏曰： 昔王凌谋废齐王，而王竟不足以守位。
现代文：下诏说： 昔日王腸谋废齐王，而齐王最终还是被废。
English: The next edict said: In the past, Wang Ji tried to depose Qi Wang, but Qi Wang was eventually deposed.

古文：邓艾虽矜功失节，然束手受罪。
现代文：邓艾虽恃功骄傲有失臣节，然束手认罪。
English: Although Deng Ai is proud of his achievements and has lost his vassal status, he still pleaded guilty.

古文：今大赦其家，还使立后。
现代文：今大赦二人家属，回故乡立后嗣。
English: Now amnesty two family members, return to hometown to raise heirs.

古文：兴灭继绝，约法省刑。
现代文：使灭者复兴，绝者有继，简法省刑。
English: Revive those who have been eliminated, ensure the continuation of those who have been eliminated, and simplify the law and reduce the penalty.

古文：除魏氏宗室禁锢。
现代文：解除对魏氏宗室的禁锢。
English: The confinement of the Wei family was lifted.

古文：诸将吏遭三年丧者，遣宁终丧。
现代文：诸将士官吏遭三年丧者，遣回守丧三年。
English: All officers and non-commissioned officers who have suffered three years of bereavement will be sent back for three years of mourning.

古文：百姓复其徭役。
现代文：百姓有三年丧者，服丧期免除徭役。
English: If a commoner has been deceased for three years, the period of mourning is exempted from corvee service.

古文：罢部曲将长吏以下质任。省郡国御调，禁乐府靡丽百戏之伎及雕文游畋之具。开直言之路，置谏官以掌之。 
现代文：免除部曲将及长吏以下以家属作人质，俭省各郡国向京师调运的物资，禁止乐府、靡丽的百戏技艺及雕饰华丽的游猎器具，广开言路，设谏官掌管此事。 
English: Exempt the music master and the officials below him from using their families as hostages, economize the materials transported to the capital by counties and provinces, prohibit the music palace, the magnificent opera skills and the ornately carved hunting equipment, open up the way, and set the eunuchs in charge of the matter.

古文：是月，凤皇六、青龙三、白龙二、麒麟各一见于郡国。
现代文：这个月里，有六只凤凰、三条青龙、两条白龙、麒麟各一在各郡国出现。
English: This month, six phoenixes, three blue dragons, two white dragons and a unicorn appeared in each county.

古文：二年春正月丙戌，遣兼侍中侯史光等持节四方，循省风俗，除禳祝之不在祀典者。
现代文：二年正月初七，派遣兼侍中侯史光等持节到全国各地，巡视考察风俗，罢除不在祀典的祭祀。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Heian period, they dispatched the equerry and middle steward, Marquis Shiguang, and others to all parts of the country to observe the festival, inspect the customs, and remove the rituals that were not part of the ceremony.

古文：丁亥，有司请建七庙，帝重其役，不许。
现代文：初八，有司请求建七庙，武帝以为徭役太重，不允许。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, there was a request to build seven temples, but Emperor Wu thought that it was too heavy and was not allowed.

古文：庚寅，罢鸡鸣鼓。
现代文：十一日，罢唱鸡鸣歌的人。
English: On the 11th day, people who sing chicken songs.

古文：辛丑，尊景皇帝夫人羊氏曰景皇后，宫曰弘训。
现代文：二十二日，尊景皇帝夫人羊氏为景皇后，所居宫叫弘训宫。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the wife of Emperor Chongqing, Ms. Yang, became the Empress of Jing. Her residence was called Hongxun Palace.

古文：丙午，立皇后杨氏。
现代文：二十七日，立皇后杨氏。
English: On the 27th, Empress Yang was established.

古文：二月，除汉宗室禁锢。
现代文：二月，解除对汉宗室的禁锢。
English: In February, the ban on Han Zongshu was lifted.

古文：己未，常山王衡薨。
现代文：十一日，常山王司马衡死。
English: On the 11th day, King Sima Heng of Changshan died.

古文：诏曰： 五等之封，皆录旧勋。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 五等爵位之封，都是旧时功臣。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: The titles of the fifth class of nobility are all meritorious vassals in the old days.

古文：本为县侯者传封次子为亭侯，乡侯为关内侯，亭侯为关中侯，皆食本户十分之一。 
现代文：原为县侯者，袭爵时次子封为亭侯；原为乡侯者，次子为关内侯；原为亭侯者，次子为关中侯，皆食本爵封户的十分之一。 
English: Those who were originally prefectural governors, when they succeeded to the peerage, the second son of the fief became the prince; those who were originally village governors, the second son became the prince of Kwanai; those who were originally prince governors, the second son became the prince of Kwananaka, all ate one-tenth of the fief of the lord.

古文：丁丑，郊祀宣皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：二十九日，郊祀宣皇帝以配天，在明堂祀文皇帝以配上天。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Xuan was worshipped in the suburbs as a match made in heaven, and Emperor Wen was worshipped in the Ming Hall as a match made in heaven.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 古者百官，官箴王阙。然保氏特以谏诤为职，今之侍中、常侍实处此位。
现代文：二十二日下诏说： 古时设百官，就是让他规劝王的过失，而保氏官特以谏诤为职业，今之侍中、常侍实处于这个职位。
English: On the 22nd day of the following month, the imperial edict said: In ancient times, a hundred officials were set up, that is, let him persuade the king's fault, and the courtier's official specifically took the post of eunuch as his occupation. Today's chamberlains and regular attendants are actually in this position.

古文：择其能正色弼违匡救不逮者，以兼此选。 
现代文：选择那些能正色纠正违法匡救缺漏的人，以兼此职。 
English: Select those who are able to rectify the shortcomings of the illegal rescue, in order to concurrently hold this position.

古文：三月戊戌，吴人来吊祭，有司奏为答诏。
现代文：三月二十日，吴人来吊祭，有司上奏以诏书答复。
English: On March 20th, the Wu people came to the hanging ceremony, and the chief priest replied with an edict.

古文：帝曰： 昔汉文、光武怀抚尉佗、公孙述，皆未正君臣之仪，所以羁糜未宾也。
现代文：武帝说： 昔日汉文帝招抚尉他，光武帝招抚公孙述，都没有按君对臣的礼仪，这是为了笼络未归附的人。
English: Emperor Wu said: In the past, Emperor Hanwen invited his lieutenants and Emperor Guangwu invited his sons and grandsons, but they did not follow the etiquette of the prince to the vassal. This was to entice those who had not returned.

古文：皓遣使之始，未知国庆，但以书答之。 
现代文：孙皓开始派使者时，不知晋已开国建帝号，只用书信形式答谢他。 
English: When Sun Yat-sen began to send envoys, he did not know that Jin had already founded the country and established the emperor, and only thanked him in the form of a letter.

古文：夏五月戊辰，诏曰： 陈留王操尚谦冲，每事辄表，非所以优崇之也。
现代文：夏五月戊辰，下诏说： 陈留王品德谦虚，每有事都要上表，这不是我对他优待尊崇的要求。
English: Xia May Wuchen, the next emperor said: Chen Liuwang's moral character is modest, everything must be on the table, this is not my request for his preferential treatment and respect.

古文：主者喻意，非大事皆使王官表上之。 
现代文：主管此事的人向他说明，只要不是大事，让陈留王的官吏上表就行了。 
English: The person in charge of the matter explained to him that as long as it was not a big deal, it would be fine for Chen Liuwang's officials to go to the table.

古文：壬子，骠骑将军博陵公王沈卒。
现代文：壬子这天，骠骑将军博陵公王沈死。
English: On the same day, the horse-riding general Boling Gongwang drowned.

古文：六月壬申，济南王遂薨。
现代文：六月二十五日，济南王司马遂死。
English: On June 25, King Sima of Jinan died.

古文：秋七月辛巳，营太庙，致荆山之木，采华山之石 铸铜柱十二，涂以黄金，镂以百物，缀以明珠。
现代文：秋七月初五，营建太庙，从荆山运来木材，开采华山的石料，铸造十二根铜柱，涂一层黄金，刻镂百物，缀上明珠。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month of the autumn, the Great Temple was built. Wood was brought from Mount Jing, and stone from Mount Huashan was mined. Twelve copper pillars were cast, coated with a layer of gold, engraved with hundreds of objects, and decorated with pearls.

古文：戊戌，谯王逊薨。
现代文：二十二日，谯王司马逊死。
English: On the twenty-second day, King Sima Xiong died.

古文：丙午晦，日有蚀之。八月丙辰，省右将军官。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。八月初十，裁减右将军官职。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse. On the 10th day of the 8th month, the position of the right general was reduced.

古文：初，帝虽从汉魏之制，既葬除服。而深衣素冠，降席撤膳，哀敬如丧者。
现代文：当初，武帝虽实行汉魏丧制，安葬后即除丧服，而还是穿深色衣服，戴素冠，食则避席减膳，哀敬同于服丧。
English: At first, although Emperor Wu implemented the Han and Wei funeral system, he removed his mourning clothes immediately after the funeral, but still wore dark clothes, wore a crown of vegetables, and avoided eating and reduced his meals. Mourning is the same as mourning.

古文：戊辰，有司奏改服进膳，不许，遂礼终而后复吉。及太后之丧，亦如之。九月乙未，散骑常侍皇甫陶、傅玄领谏官，上书谏诤，有司奏请寝之。
现代文：二十二日，有司奏请改换服装，照常进膳，武帝不许，一直守丧满期才恢复正常，后为太后服丧也是如此，九月二十日，散骑常侍皇甫陶、傅玄兼谏官，上书谏诤，有司奏请压下谏书，不予议论。
English: On the 22nd, there was a sitar player who asked to change his clothes and eat as usual, but Emperor Wu did not allow it. He kept the mourning period until it was back to normal. Later, it was the same for the empress dowager. On the 20th of September, there was a horseback rider who often accompanied the emperor, Futao, Fu Xuan and eunuchs, and put on a book, and there was a sitar player who asked to put down a book, and would not discuss it.

古文：诏曰： 凡关言人主，人臣所至难，而苦不能听纳，自古忠臣直士之所慷慨也。每陈事出付主者，多从深刻，乃云恩贷当由主上，是何言乎？
现代文：武帝下诏说： 凡关系到人主的言论批评，人臣是很难做到的，而又苦于人主不能听纳，自古忠臣直士为此而慷慨叹息，每每将陈事之书交付主事者，主事者深究苛求，说什么恩赐当由皇上，这是什么话呢？
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: It is very difficult for a vassal to criticize anything related to his lord, and he cannot listen to criticism that hurts his lord. Ever since ancient times, the loyal vassal Naoshi has generously sighed for this reason. Every time he hands over the book of records to the master, the master investigates and demands. What kind of gift should be given by the emperor? What is this saying?

古文：其详评议。 
现代文：还是让朝臣详细评议。 
English: Or let the courtier discuss it in detail.

古文：戊戌，有司奏： 大晋继三皇之踪，蹈舜禹之迹，应天顺时，受禅有魏，宜一用前代正朔服色，皆如虞遵唐故事。 
现代文：九月二十三日，有司上奏说： 大晋继承三皇的业绩，步舜禹的后尘，应天顺时，受禅于魏，应该沿用前一代历法，如虞舜遵循唐尧的例子。 
English: On September 23rd, there was a message from the Supreme Leader of the CPC Central Committee: "Dajin inherited the achievements of the three emperors and followed in the footsteps of Xuanyu. When the weather is good, he should meditate in Wei. He should follow the previous generation's calendar. For example, Yu Xi should follow the example of Tang Xi.

古文：奏可。
现代文：武帝认可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：冬十月丙午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日蚀。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁未，诏曰： 昔舜葬苍梧，农不易亩；禹葬成纪，市不改肆。
现代文：初二，下诏说： 昔日舜在苍梧安葬，农民不改变耕地，禹安葬在成纪，市场不改变地方。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: In the past, Yao was buried in Cangwu, farmers did not change the cultivated land, Yu An was buried in Chengji, and the market did not change the place.

古文：上惟祖考清简之旨，所徙陵十里内居人，动为烦扰，一切停之。 
现代文：追思祖考清简的宗旨，迁徙陵墓周围十里以内的居民，烦扰百姓，停止实行。 
English: Pursue the purpose of ancestor examination and clarification, migrate residents within ten miles around the mausoleum, disturb the people, and stop the implementation.

古文：十一月己卯，倭人来献方物。
现代文：十一月初五，倭人来献本国异物。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the Wa people came to offer foreign objects from their country.

古文：并圜丘、方丘于南、北郊，二至之祀合于二郊。
现代文：将祭天的圜丘与祭地的方丘合并于南、北郊，夏至、冬至的祭祀合并于二郊之祀。
English: The sacred mound for the festival of heaven and the square mound for the festival will be combined in the southern and northern suburbs, and the summer solstice and winter solstice ceremonies will be combined in the two suburbs.

古文：罢山阳公国督军，除其禁制。
现代文：罢除山阳公国督军，除去其禁例。
English: The governor's army of Sanyang Duchy was dismissed, and its prohibitions were removed.

古文：己丑，追尊景帝夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
现代文：十五日，追封景帝夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Jing's wife, Lady Xia Hou, was enthroned as Empress Jinghuai.

古文：辛卯，迁祖祢神主于太庙。
现代文：十七日将祖、父神主迁于太庙。
English: On the 17th, the ancestor and father deities were moved to the Imperial Temple.

古文：十二月，罢农官为郡县。
现代文：十二月，罢除各地农官，归于郡县。
English: In December, the agricultural officials of various regions were dismissed, and they were transferred to the counties.

古文：是岁，凤皇六、青龙十、黄龙九、麒麟各一见于郡国。
现代文：这一年中，有六只凤凰、十条青龙、九条黄龙、麒麟各一，出现于各郡国。
English: During the year, six phoenixes, ten blue dragons, nine yellow dragons, and one unicorn each appeared in each county.

古文：三年春正月癸丑，白龙二见于弘农渑池。
现代文：三年春正月癸丑，两条白龙出现于弘农渑池。
English: In the spring of the third year, two white dragons appeared in the pond of Hongnong.

古文：丁卯，立皇子衷为皇太子。
现代文：丁卯这天，立皇子司马衷为皇太子。
English: On this day, Emperor Dingwu made Prince Sima Zhen the crown prince.

古文：诏曰： 朕以不德，托于四海之上，兢兢祗畏，惧无以康济寓内，思与天下式明王度，正本清源，于置胤树嫡，非所先务。
现代文：下诏说： 朕以不德之身，托于四海之上，兢兢业业，敬畏守职，犹恐不能使宇内康济，思与天下之人申明王法制度，正本清源，至于立太子之事，非当务之急。
English: The following edict said: I, with my virtuous body, entrusted to the four seas, diligent work, reverence and duty, I am afraid that I cannot make the world prosperous, and I would like to declare to the people of the world that the royal law system is the original and pure source, and as for the establishment of the crown prince, it is not an urgent matter.

古文：又近世每建太子，宽宥施惠之事，间不获已，顺从王公卿士之议耳。
现代文：再者，近世每次立太子，总要施行宽赦恩赐，此事不能免除，往往是顺从王公卿士的议论罢了。
English: Furthermore, in modern times, every time a crown prince is crowned, there must be a pardon and a gift. This cannot be waived, and it is often just a matter of following the advice of princes and nobles.

古文：方今世运垂平，将陈之以德义，示之以好恶，使百姓蠲多幸之虑，笃终始之行，曲惠小仁，故无取焉。
现代文：方今天下太平，将向天下人陈述德义，显示好恶，使百姓丢掉侥幸得福的想法，而要行为忠实，始终如一，施小恩小惠，是不可取的。
English: It is not advisable for the Party to make peace today, to tell the world about its virtues and virtues, to show its likes and dislikes, to make the people lose the idea of being lucky, and to act faithfully, consistently, and to give small favors.

古文：咸使知闻。 
现代文：都使大家知道此意。 
English: They have all made this known.

古文：三月戊寅，初令二千石得终三年丧。
现代文：三月初六，初次令二千石官服丧三年。
English: On the 6th of March, for the first time, an official of 2,000 koku was ordered to serve for three years.

古文：丁未，昼昏。
现代文：丁未这天，白日昏暗。
English: On this day, the day is dark.

古文：罢武卫将军官。
现代文：罢除武卫将军官职。
English: General Wuwei was removed from his post.

古文：以李憙为太子太傅。
现代文：以李熹为太子太傅。
English: With Li Xi as the prince's grand tutor.

古文：太山石崩。
现代文：泰山石崩塌。
English: Mount Tai rock collapse.

古文：夏四月戊午，张掖太守焦胜上言，氐池县大柳谷口有玄石一所，白画成文，实大晋之休祥，图之以献。诏以制币告于太庙，藏之天府。
现代文：夏四月十六日，张掖太守焦胜上奏说，氐池县大柳谷口一个地方有黑色石，石上有白色文彩，实是大晋吉祥的象征，把彩文画出来献给皇帝，下诏以制币祭告于太庙，图文收藏在天府。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhang Ye, the eunuch Jiao Sheng, said that there was a black stone in a place at the mouth of Daliu Valley in Dianchi County, and there was a white color on the stone, which was actually a symbol of the auspicious of the Great Jin Dynasty. The color painting was dedicated to the emperor, and the next edict was announced at the temple with a coin-making ceremony, and the pictures and texts were collected in Tianfu.

古文：秋八月，罢都护将军，以其五署还光禄勋。
现代文：秋八月，罢除都护将军，将其所辖五署归光禄勋。
English: In autumn and August, the governor-general was dismissed, and the five stations under his jurisdiction were awarded the Order of the Star.

古文：九月甲申，诏曰： 古者以德诏爵，以庸制禄，虽下士犹食上农，外足以奉公忘私，内足以养亲施惠。
现代文：九月十五日，下诏说： 古制以德定爵位，以功定俸禄，虽下士的俸禄还要相当于上等农民的收入，对外则可以奉公忘私，对内则足以养亲施惠。
English: On September 15th, the next imperial edict said: In the old system, the nobility was determined by virtue, and the salary was determined by merit. Although the salary of a corporal was equivalent to the income of a high-class farmer, it could be used to serve the outside world, and it was enough to support relatives and provide benefits to the inside.

古文：今在位者禄不代耕，非所以崇化之本也。
现代文：今在位官吏俸禄不能代耕，这就不能达到推崇教化的目的。
English: The current government officials' salaries cannot be used for farming, which cannot achieve the goal of promoting education.

古文：其议增吏俸。 
现代文：可议定增加官吏俸禄。 
English: It can be agreed to increase the salary of officials.

古文：赐王公以下帛各有差。
现代文：赐王公以下帛不等。
English: Awarded to princes and lower ranks.

古文：以太尉何曾为太保，义阳王望为太尉，司空荀顗为司徒。
现代文：以太尉何曾为太保，义阳王司马望为太尉，司空荀岂页为司徒。
English: Taifu He was once Taibo, Yiyang Wang Sima Wang was Taifu, and Sikuo Xizhe was Sito.

古文：冬十月，听士卒遭父母丧者，非在疆场，皆得奔赴。
现代文：冬十月，准许士卒遭父母丧者，如不在疆场，都可以回家治丧。
English: In winter and October, those who have lost their parents are allowed to go home to mourn if they are not in the battlefield.

古文：十二月，徙宗圣侯孔震为奉圣亭侯。
现代文：十二月，徙宗圣侯孔震为奉圣亭侯。
English: In December, Kong Zhen, the holy vassal of the Yuezong Sect, became the holy vassal of the Bong Seongjeong Sect.

古文：山阳公刘康来朝。
现代文：山阳公刘康来朝。
English: Sanyang Prince Liu Kang is coming to the DPRK.

古文：禁星气谶纬之学。
现代文：禁止观星望气谶纬迷信之类的学说。
English: Doctrines such as star-gazing and superstition are forbidden.

古文：四年春正月辛未，以尚书令裴秀为司空。
现代文：四年春正月初三，以尚书令裴秀为司空。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, Baishuu was appointed as the secretary.

古文：丙戌，律令成，封爵赐帛各有差。
现代文：正月十八日，新订律令完成，封爵赐帛不等。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the year, the newly enacted law was completed, and knighthoods were conferred.

古文：有星孛于轸。
现代文：有彗星出现于轸星附近。
English: A comet appears in the vicinity of the planet Krypton.

古文：丁亥，帝耕于藉田。
现代文：十九日，武帝到专供帝王大臣耕种的籍田里耕作。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu went to work in a field that had been reserved for the emperor's ministers.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 古设象刑而众不犯，今虽参夷而奸不绝，何德刑相去之远哉！
现代文：二十日，下诏说： 古代设象征性的刑罚而众人不犯，今虽诛灭三族而奸邪之事不绝，德与刑相隔多么远啊！
English: On the 20th, the next imperial edict said: In ancient times, symbolic punishments were set up, but people did not commit crimes. Now, although the Three Nationalities have been annihilated, evil deeds continue. How far is the distance between virtue and punishment!

古文：先帝深愍黎元，哀矜庶狱，乃命群后，考正典刑。
现代文：先帝深忧黎民，哀怜狱囚，才命大臣考正刑律。
English: The previous emperor was deeply concerned about the people of Lai and felt sorry for the prisoners, so he ordered the minister to revise the criminal law.

古文：朕守遗业，永惟保乂皇基，思与万国以无为为政。
现代文：朕守遗业，应永保皇业安定，思欲无为而治万国。
English: I will uphold the legacy, keep the stability of the imperial cause, and govern the world without doing anything.

古文：方今阳春养物，东作始兴，朕亲率王公卿士耕藉田千亩。
现代文：方今阳春滋养万物，春耕开始，朕亲率王公卿士耕籍田千亩。
English: Spring nourishes all things. Spring ploughing begins. My father and I lead the princes and nobles to plough a thousand mu of our ancestral land.

古文：又律令既就，班之天下，将以简法务本，惠育海内。
现代文：又律令已成，颁布天下，将可以简省法律，劝民务本，化育海内。
English: In addition, the regulation has been made, promulgated all over the world, it will be possible to simplify the law, advise the civil affairs, and improve education.

古文：宜宽有罪，使得自新，其大赦天下。长吏、郡丞、长史各赐马一匹。 
现代文：应当宽赦罪人，使能自新。今大赦天下，长吏、郡丞、长史各赐马一匹。
English: Sinners should be pardoned so that they can be reformed. Now the world is being pardoned, and the chief official, the county magistrate, and the chief historian have each been given a horse.

古文：二月庚子，增置山阳公国相、郎中令、陵令、杂工宰人、鼓吹车马各有差。
现代文：二月初三，增设山阳公国相、郎中令、陵令、杂工宰人、鼓吹车马不等。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month, the posts of Sanyang Duchy's minister, vassal, mausoleum, handyman, and propagandist were added.

古文：罢中军将军，置北军中候官。
现代文：罢除中军将军，设北军中侯官。
English: The general of the Chinese army was dismissed, and a middle-ranking official of the Northern army was appointed.

古文：甲寅，以东海刘俭有至行，拜为郎。
现代文：十七日，因东海刘俭品行高尚，拜为郎。
English: On the seventeenth day, because of the noble behavior of the East China Sea Liu Jian, he was worshiped as a son.

古文：以中军将军羊祜为尚书左仆射，东莞王伷为尚书右仆射。
现代文：以中军将军羊祜为尚书左仆射，东莞王司马亻由为尚书右仆射。
English: With the Chinese army general Yang Jie as Shang Shu's left-hand man, and Dongguan Wang Simayu as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：三月戊子，皇太后王氏崩。
现代文：三月二十一日，皇太后王氏死。
English: On March 21, Empress Dowager Wang died.

古文：夏四月戊戌，太保、睢陵公王祥薨。
现代文：夏四月初二，太保、睢陵公王祥死。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Taibo and Fuling Prince Xiang died.

古文：己亥，祔葬文明皇后王氏于崇阳陵。
现代文：初三，文明皇后王氏合葬于崇阳陵。
English: On the third day of the first month, the civilized empress Wang clan was buried together in the Chongyang Mausoleum.

古文：罢振威、扬威护军官，置左右积弩将军。
现代文：罢除振威、扬威护军官，设左右积弩将军。
English: The officers of Zhenwei and Yangweiwei were dismissed, and the generals of left and right were set up.

古文：六月甲申朔，诏曰： 郡国守相，三载一巡行属县，必以春，此古者所以述职宣风展义也。
现代文：六月初一，下诏说： 各郡太守，各封国国相，每三年巡行属县一次，必在春天。古人即用这种办法述职守宣风教显忠义。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was issued: The county governors and the ministers of the fiefs and provinces shall go on a tour of the counties once every three years, which must be in the spring. The ancients used this method to explain their duties, preach the customs, and show their loyalty.

古文：见长吏，观风俗，协礼律，考度量，存问耆老，亲见百年。
现代文：巡行时要接见长吏，观察风俗，协调礼律，考正度量衡，慰问老人，亲自看望百岁老人。
English: During the procession, it is necessary to meet with officials, observe customs, coordinate etiquette, check weights and measures, console the elderly, and personally visit centenarians.

古文：录囚徒，理冤枉，详察政刑得失，知百姓所患苦。
现代文：还要讯问囚徒，处理冤案，详察政刑得失，了解百姓疾苦。
English: It is also necessary to interrogate prisoners, deal with unjust cases, scrutinize the gains and losses of political punishment, and understand the hardships of the people.

古文：无有远近，便若朕亲临之。
现代文：远近必至，就像朕亲临一样。
English: Far and near, as near as I come.

古文：敦喻五教，劝务农功，勉励学者，思勤正典，无为百家庸末，致远必泥。
现代文：宣喻孝、义、慈、恭、友五教之德，鼓励务农，劝勉学子，使民勤于正业，不从事百家末流之事，行远者必有险阻。
English: Proclaiming the five virtues of filial piety, righteousness, compassion, reverence, and friendship, encouraging farming, exhorting students, and making the people work hard at their real jobs, and not engaging in the things of the last generation of a hundred families, those who travel far must have obstacles.

古文：士庶有好学笃道，孝弟忠信，清白异行者，举而进之；有不孝敬于父母，不长悌于族党，悖礼弃常，不率法令者，纠而罪之。
现代文：士人与庶民中有好学重道，孝悌忠信，清白优异者，推荐提拔他们；有不孝父母，不尊重党族，背礼越轨，不循法令者，纠察惩罚他们。
English: Among the scholars and the common people, those who are good at learning, filial piety, loyalty, innocence and excellence should be recommended and promoted; those who are not filial to their parents, do not respect the party and the people, go beyond the bounds of propriety, and do not follow the laws and regulations should be picketed and punished.

古文：田畴辟，生业修，礼教设，禁令行，则长吏之能也。
现代文：田地开辟，各业兴旺，礼教齐备，令行禁止，这说明长吏有能。
English: The opening up of fields, the prosperity of various industries, the readiness of etiquette, the prohibition of orders, this shows that the officials are capable.

古文：人穷匮，农事荒，奸盗起刑，狱烦，下陵上替，礼义不兴，斯长吏之否也。
现代文：人民贫困，农事荒废，奸盗频起，刑狱繁多，上下废弛，礼义不兴，这是长吏的失职。
English: The people are impoverished, agricultural affairs are in disrepair, there are frequent cases of treason and theft, there are many prison sentences, the upper and lower ranks are in disrepair, and propriety is not popular. This is a dereliction of duty on the part of officials.

古文：若长吏在官公廉，虑不及私，正色直节，不饰名誉者，及身行贪秽，诌黩求容，公节不立，而私门日富者，并谨察之。
现代文：若长吏在官公廉，不谋私利，正直有节，不饰名誉者，以及行为贪秽，谄媚钻谋，无奉公之节而私门日富者，都要严肃查处。
English: If officials are honest in public office, do not seek personal gain, are honest and have integrity, and do not flaunt their honor, as well as those who are greedy, flattering and scheming, do not have the discipline of public service and are privately wealthy, should be seriously investigated and punished.

古文：扬清激浊，举善弹违，此朕所以垂拱总纲，责成于良二千石也。
现代文：表扬清廉者而扫荡污浊者，推荐善良者而弹劾违法者，即是朕垂拱而治的总纲，也是责成良二千石要做到的。
English: Praising the clean and honest and sweeping away the corrupt, recommending the virtuous and impeaching the lawbreakers, that is the general outline of our governance, and it is also what we have been tasked to do.

古文：於戏戒哉！ 
现代文：呜呼！警戒啊！ 
English: Alas! Be on the alert!

古文：秋七月，太山石崩，众星西流。
现代文：秋七月，泰山石崩塌，众星向西流动。
English: In autumn and July, Mount Tai collapsed, and the stars flowed westward.

古文：戊午，遣使者侯史光循行天下。
现代文：戊午，派遣使者侯史光巡行天下。
English: At noon, the envoy Hou Shiguang was dispatched to tour the world.

古文：己卯，谒崇阳陵。
现代文：十四日，拜谒崇阳陵。
English: On the 14th, he paid homage to the Chongyang Mausoleum.

古文：九月，青、徐、兗、豫四州大水，伊洛溢，合于河，开仓以振之。
现代文：九月，青、徐、兖、豫四州发大水，伊水洛水漫堤，入黄河，政府开仓济民。
English: In September, the four prefectures of Qing, Xu, Handan and Henan were flooded, and the Yishuo and Luo rivers overflowed their dikes and entered the Yellow River. The government opened warehouses to help the people.

古文：诏曰： 虽诏有所欲，及奏得可而于事不便者，皆不可隐情。 
现代文：下诏说： 虽诏书要求做的，及批复奏章要做的，但不便于实行的事，皆如实上报，不可隐瞒。 
English: The next edict said: Although what the edict requires is to be done, and what is to be done by the appointee, but is not easy to implement, must be reported truthfully and must not be concealed.

古文：冬十月，吴将施绩入江夏，万郁寇襄阳。
现代文：冬十月，吴将施绩入江夏，万郁侵扰襄阳。
English: In the winter of October, Wu will perform feats into Jiangxia, and Wanyu will invade Yangyang.

古文：遣太尉义阳王望屯龙陂。
现代文：武帝派遣太尉义阳王司马望屯兵龙陂。
English: Emperor Wu dispatched Lieutenant Yiyang Wang Simamang to garrison Longjing.

古文：荆州刺史胡烈击败郁。
现代文：荆州刺史胡烈击败万郁。
English: Jingzhou stabbing Shi Hu Lie defeated Wan Yu.

古文：吴将顾容寇郁林，太守毛炅大破之，斩其交州刺史刘俊、将军修则。
现代文：吴将顾容侵扰玉林，太守毛炅大破其军，斩吴交州刺史刘俊、将军修则。
English: Wu Zong took it upon himself to invade Yulin, and the grand marshal Mao Zang defeated his army, beheading the governor of Wu Jiaozhou, Liu Jun, and the general Shuzi.

古文：十一月，吴将丁奉等出芍陂，安东将军汝阴王骏与义阳王望击走之。
现代文：十一月，吴将丁奉等出兵芍陂，被安东将军汝阴王司马骏与义阳王司马望击败逃走。
English: In November, Wu dispatched Ding Bong and others as soldiers, and they were defeated and fled by Anton's generals Ru Yin Wang Sima Wei and Yiyang Wang Sima Wang.

古文：己未，诏王公卿尹及郡国守相，举贤良方正直言之士。
现代文：二十七日，下诏令王公卿尹及郡国太守国相，推荐贤良方正直言之士。
English: On the 27th, Wang Gongqing Yin and the County Governor and Minister of State issued a decree to recommend the virtuous and honest person.

古文：十二月，班五条诏书于郡国：一曰正身，二曰勤百姓，三曰抚孤寡，四曰敦本息末，五曰去人事。
现代文：十二月，向各郡国颁发五条诏书，这五条是：第一正身，第二勤于百姓之事，第三抚恤孤寡，第四敦促本务停止末业，第五禁绝请托贿赂。
English: In December, five edicts were issued to all counties and states. These five are: first, be upright; second, be diligent in the affairs of the people; third, support the widows and orphans; fourth, urge the work to stop; and fifth, forbid the solicitation of bribes.

古文：庚寅，帝临听讼观，录廷尉洛阳狱囚，亲平决焉。
现代文：二十八日，武帝亲临听讼观，检查属于廷尉的洛阳狱囚犯，并亲自判决。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Wu personally came to listen to the opinion of the court, inspected the prisoners of Luoyang Prison who belonged to the imperial lieutenant, and personally sentenced them.

古文：扶南、林邑各遣使来献。
现代文：扶南、林邑各派遣使者纳贡。
English: Funan and Linyi each sent emissaries to collect tribute.

古文：五年春正月癸巳，申戒郡国计吏守相令长，务尽地利，禁游食商贩。
现代文：五年春正月初一，申戒郡国计吏守相令长，务必发挥地利，禁止游手好闲者与商贩。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, Shenkai County's chief state accountant, Shou Xiang, must give full play to the situation and prohibit idlers and merchants.

古文：丙申，帝临听讼观录囚徒，多所原遣。
现代文：初四，武帝临听讼观，检查囚徒，很多囚徒被宽赦遣返。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Emperor Wu inspected the prisoners, and many prisoners were pardoned and repatriated.

古文：青龙二见于荥阳。
现代文：两条青龙出现于荥阳。
English: Two blue dragons appeared in Fenyang.

古文：二月，以雍州陇右五郡及凉州之金城、梁州之阴平置秦州。
现代文：二月，将雍州陇右五郡及凉州之金城、梁州之阴平合并为秦州。
English: In February, the five counties on the right bank of the Yangtze River in Yongzhou, as well as Jincheng in Liangzhou and Yinping in Liangzhou, were merged into Qinzhou.

古文：辛巳，白龙二见于赵国。
现代文：二十日，两条白龙出现于赵国。
English: On the 20th, two white dragons appeared in Zhao Province.

古文：青、徐、兗三州水，遣使振恤之。
现代文：青、徐、兖三州有水灾，派遣使者救济百姓。
English: There was a flood in the three states of Qing, Xu, and Qin, and envoys were sent to help the people.

古文：壬寅，以尚书左仆射羊祜都督荆州诸军事，征东大将军卫瓘都督青州诸军事，东莞王伷为镇东大将军都督徐州诸军事。
现代文：壬寅，以尚书左仆射羊祜都督荆州诸军事，征东大将军卫馞都督青州诸军事，东莞王司马亻由为镇东大将军，都督徐州诸军事。
English: Ren Yin, the left-hand servant of Shang Shuxu, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, the general of the Eastern Expedition, and the general of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 古者岁书群吏之能否，三年而诛赏之。
现代文：二十六日，下诏说： 古时每岁记载各地官吏的称职与否，积三年而进行赏罚。
English: On the 26th, the next edict said: In ancient times, the competence of officials in various regions was recorded every year, and rewards and punishments were carried out after three years.

古文：诸令史前后，但简遣疏劣，而无有劝进，非黜陟之谓也。
现代文：今负责记事的前后令史，只选记疏劣的官吏，而没有对优异者劝勉，这不符合用人有升有降、有赏有罚的原则。
English: It is not in line with the principle of promoting and demoting, rewarding and punishing, that the person in charge of recording the history of the previous and subsequent orders only selects officials who are inferior, and does not encourage those who are superior.

古文：其条勤能有称尤异者，岁以为常。吾将议其功劳。 
现代文：要条陈那些勤于政事，才能声誉出众的官吏，每岁一次，形成常规，我将议其功劳。 
English: Once a year, I will commend officials who are diligent in government affairs and have a good reputation. This will become a regular practice.

古文：己未，诏蜀相诸葛亮孙京随才署吏。
现代文：己未这天，下诏给诸葛亮的孙子诸葛京安排适合其才能的官职。
English: On the same day, Zhuge Liang's grandson Zhuge Jing was given an official position suitable for his talents.

古文：夏四月，地震。
现代文：夏四月，地震。
English: In the summer of April, an earthquake.

古文：五月辛卯朔，凤皇见于赵国。
现代文：五月初一，凤凰出现于赵国。
English: On the first day of May, the phoenix appeared in Zhao Province.

古文：曲赦交趾、九真、日南五岁刑。
现代文：特赦交趾、九真、日南等地五年以内的囚徒。
English: Amnesty for prisoners who have been imprisoned for less than five years in Koji, Kuching, Nichinan and other places.

古文：六月，鄴奚官督郭暠上疏陈五事以谏，言甚切直，擢为屯留令，西平人曲路伐登闻彭，言多袄谤，有司奏弃市。
现代文：六月，邺城奚官督郭訥上书陈述五件事以进谏，话恳切而直爽，被提拔为屯留令。西平人麴路敲朝门外的登闻鼓，散布妖言，有司奏请处死暴尸街头。
English: In June, Guo Gan, the eunuch-in-charge of Lucheng, made a written statement on five matters, which was earnest and straightforward, and was promoted to the order to stay in the settlement. Xiping people were beating drums outside the front door, spreading evil words, and there was a call for the execution of the corpse in the street.

古文：帝曰： 朕之过也。 
现代文：武帝说： 这是我的过失。 
English: Emperor Wu said: This is my fault.

古文：舍而不问。
现代文：不予追查。
English: Not to be traced.

古文：罢镇军将军，复置左右将军官。
现代文：罢除镇军将军，恢复左右将军官职。
English: The general of the town army was dismissed, and the posts of the left and right generals were restored.

古文：秋七月，延群公，询谠言。
现代文：秋七月，接待群公，询问正直之言。
English: In autumn and July, he received a group of officials and asked them for their honest opinion.

古文：九月，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：九月有彗星出现于紫宫星座。
English: In September, a comet appeared in the constellation of Aquila.

古文：冬十月丙子，以汲郡太守王宏有政绩，赐谷千斛。
现代文：冬十月十九日，因汲郡太守王宏有政绩，赐谷一千斛。
English: In the winter of October 19th, due to the political achievements of Wang Hong, the governor of Ku County, he was awarded a thousand baht.

古文：十一月，追封谥皇弟兆为城阳哀王，以皇子景度嗣。
现代文：十一月，追封谥皇弟司马兆为城阳哀王，以自己的儿子司马景度为继嗣。
English: In November, Sima Zhao, the younger brother of Emperor Xizong, was made the King of Chengyang, and his son Sima Jiedu became the heir.

古文：十二月，诏州郡举勇猛秀异之才。
现代文：十二月，诏州郡推举猛勇秀异的人才。
English: In December, Zhaozhou County nominated outstanding talents.

古文：六年春正月丁亥朔，帝临轩，不设乐。
现代文：六年春正月初一，武帝在殿前接见群臣，不奏乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, Emperor Wu received a group of ministers in front of the hall and did not play music.

古文：吴将丁奉入涡口，扬州刺史牵弘击走之。
现代文：吴将丁奉侵入涡口，被扬州刺史牵弘击退。
English: Wu sent Ding Bong into the vortex and was repulsed by Yangzhou's Zhishihong.

古文：三月，赦五岁刑已下。
现代文：三月，赦五岁以下刑徒。
English: In March, prisoners under the age of five were pardoned.

古文：夏四月，白龙二见于东莞。
现代文：夏四月，两条白龙出现于东莞。
English: In the summer of April, two white dragons appeared in Dongguan.

古文：五月，立寿安亭侯承为南宫王。
现代文：五月，立寿安亭侯司马承为南宫王。
English: In May, Lishuanting Prince Ma Cheng became the king of the Southern Palace.

古文：六月戊午，秦州刺史胡烈击叛虏于万斛堆，力战，死之。
现代文：六月初四，秦州刺史胡烈与叛虏战于万斛堆，奋力拼搏，战死。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, Qinzhou assassin Shi Hulei fought with the rebels in Wanyuandui, fought hard, and died in battle.

古文：诏遣尚书石鉴行安西将军、都督秦州诸军事，与奋威护军田章讨之。
现代文：下诏派遣尚书石鉴代行安西将军、都督秦州诸军职务，与奋威护军田章共同讨伐叛虏。
English: The following edict dispatched Shang Shushi Shi Jian to act as the general of Anxi and the governor of Qin State, and to fight against the rebels together with Tian Zhanglu, the valiant protector.

古文：秋七月丁酉，复陇右五郡遇寇害者租赋，不能自存者禀贷之。
现代文：秋七月十四日，免除陇右五郡受寇害居民的租赋，无法生活的，官仓借贷救济。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the residents of the five counties on the right side of the Yangtze River who were victims of robbery were exempted from rent, unable to live, and received government warehouse loan relief.

古文：乙巳，城阳王景度薨。
现代文：二十二日，城阳王司马景度死。
English: On the 22nd, King Sima Jingdu of Chengyang died.

古文：诏曰： 自泰始以来，大事皆撰录秘书，写副。后有其事，辄宜缀集以为常。 
现代文：下诏说： 自泰始以来，有大事皆撰文记录，秘书抄写副本，以后有大事，都应收集整理，作为常规。 
English: The next edict said: Since the beginning of the Thai era, all important events should be recorded in writing and the secretary should copy the copy. In the future, all important events should be collected and organized as a general rule.

古文：丁未，以汝阴王骏为镇西大将军、都督雍凉二州诸军事。
现代文：二十四日，以汝阴王司马骏为镇西大将军、都督雍梁二州诸军事。
English: On the 24th, King Sima Qian of Ruyin was appointed as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Yongliang, leading the military of the two states.

古文：九月，大宛献汗血马，焉耆来贡方物。
现代文：九月，大宛献汗血马，焉耆来贡本地异物。
English: In September, Dayan donated blood and sweat to pay tribute to local foreign objects.

古文：冬十一月，幸辟雍，行乡饮酒之礼，赐太常博士、学生帛牛酒各有差。
现代文：冬十一月，武帝视察京师太学，行乡饮酒礼，赐给太常博士、学生帛牛酒不等。
English: In the winter of November, Emperor Wu inspected the Beijing Normal School, and held a drinking ceremony in the village, bestowing upon Dr. Tai Chang and the students yakitori wine.

古文：立皇子柬为汝南王。
现代文：立皇子司马柬为汝南王。
English: The prince Sima Kam was established as the king of the south of the country.

古文：十二月，吴夏口督、前将军孙秀帅众来奔，拜骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，封会稽公。
现代文：十二月，吴夏口督、前将军孙秀率众来投奔，拜为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，封为会稽公。
English: In December, Governor Wu Xiaokou and former general Sun Xiu led the crowd to rush to the capital to pay homage to the general of the imperial cavalry, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments, and the treasurer.

古文：戊辰，复置镇军官。
现代文：十七日，恢复设置镇军官职。
English: On the 17th, the post of town officer was reinstated.

古文：七年春正月丙子，皇太子冠，赐王公以下帛各有差。
现代文：七年春正月二十六日，皇太子成年加冠，赐王公以下帛不等。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the crown prince came of age and was crowned, and was given the rank of prince.

古文：匈奴帅刘猛叛出塞。
现代文：匈奴统帅刘猛叛变出塞。
English: The Hun commander Liu Mengde mutinied and fled.

古文：二月，孙皓帅众趋寿阳，遣大司马望屯淮北以距之。
现代文：三月孙皓率兵进逼寿阳，晋派遣大司马司马望屯兵淮北抗拒吴军。
English: In March, Sun Yat-sen led his troops to force Shouyang, and Jin dispatched his general Ma Simamang to resist the Wu army in Huaibei.

古文：三月，丙戌，司空、巨鹿公裴秀薨。
现代文：初七，司空、巨鹿公裴秀死。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Siku and Kourakucho Baishu died.

古文：癸巳，以中护军王业为尚书左仆射，高阳王珪为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十四日，以中护军王业为尚书左仆射，高阳王司马王圭为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 14th, Wang Ye of the Central Guard Army was appointed as Shang Shu's left-hand man and Gaoyang Wang Sima Wang Gui as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：孙秀部将何崇帅众五千人来降。
现代文：孙秀部将何崇率众五千人来降。
English: Sun Hsiu-bu sent He Chong and five thousand men to subdue them.

古文：夏四月，九真太守董元为吴将虞氾所攻，军败，死之。
现代文：夏四月，九真太守董元被吴将虞汜攻击，晋军失败，董元战死。
English: In the summer of April, Dong Yuan, the guardian of the Nine Immortals, was attacked by Wu Shou Yu Yao, the Jin army failed, and Dong Yuan died in battle.

古文：北地胡寇金城，凉州刺史牵弘讨之。群虏内叛，围弘于青山，弘军败，死之。
现代文：北地胡人侵扰金城，凉州刺史牵弘讨伐胡人，原来归降的胡虏在内部叛乱，将牵弘包围在青山，牵弘的军队失败，牵弘战死。
English: The Northland Hu people invaded Jincheng, and the Liangzhou Zhishi led the Hu people to fight the Hu people. The Hu people who had originally surrendered rebelled internally and surrounded the Hu people in Aoyama. The Hu people's army failed, and the Hu people died in battle.

古文：五月，立皇子宪为城阳王。
现代文：五月立皇子司马宪为城阳王。
English: In May, the prince Sima Xian became the King of Chengyang.

古文：雍、凉、秦三州饥，赦其境内殊死以下。
现代文：雍、凉、秦三州发生饥荒，赦免三州境内死刑以下的罪人。
English: Famine occurred in the three prefectures of Yong, Liang and Qin, and the criminals who were sentenced to death or less in the three prefectures were pardoned.

古文：闰月，大雩，太官减膳。
现代文：闰月，举行求雨大祭，掌管皇帝百官膳食的太官，减少了膳食费用。
English: During the leap month, the rain-seeking festival was held, and the eunuch in charge of the emperor's meal reduced the meal cost.

古文：诏交趾三郡、南中诸郡无出今年户调。
现代文：下诏交趾三郡、南中各郡，免除每户今年应交的绢帛。
English: The following decree exempts the three counties of Jiaozuo and the counties in the south and the middle from the tax that each household should pay this year.

古文：六月，诏公卿以下举将帅各一人。
现代文：六月，下诏在公卿以下推举将帅各一人。
English: In June, the emperor decreed that one person below the court nobles would be promoted to Generalissimo.

古文：辛丑，大司马义阳王望薨。
现代文：二十四日，大司马义阳王司马望死。
English: On the 24th, the grand steward of Ma Yiyang, Wang Sima, died.

古文：大雨霖，伊、洛、河溢，流居人四千余家，杀三百余人，有诏振贷给棺。
现代文：大雨连绵，伊水、洛水、黄河泛滥，冲毁居民四千余家，淹死三百余人，下诏赈济灾民，死者供给棺材。
English: The continuous heavy rain caused the flooding of the Yishui, Luoshui and Yellow Rivers, destroying more than 4,000 homes and drowning more than 300 people. The government ordered to provide relief for the victims and coffins for the dead.

古文：秋七月癸酉，以车骑将军贾充为都督秦、凉二州诸军事。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，以车骑将军贾充为都督秦、凉二州诸军事。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, General Jia Chong, riding a chariot, became the military governor of Qin and Liang two states.

古文：吴将陶璜等围交趾，太守杨稷与郁林太守毛炅及日南等三郡降于吴。
现代文：吴将陶璜等包围交趾，交趾太守杨稷与玉林太守毛炅及日南等三郡投降吴。
English: Wu encircled Tao Xuan and others, and Yang Xuan, the governor-general of Yulin, and Mao Xuan, the governor-general of Yulin, and Nichinan and other three counties surrendered to Wu.

古文：八月丙戌，以征东大将军卫瓘为征北大将军、都督幽州诸军事。
现代文：八月初九，以征东大将军卫馞为征北大将军、都督幽州诸军事。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the Eastern Expeditionary Army was led by General Wei Wei as the Northern Expeditionary Army and Yuzhou as the capital.

古文：丙申，城阳王宪薨。
现代文：十九日，城阳王司马宪死。
English: On the 19th, King Sima Xian of Chengyang died.

古文：分益州之南中四郡置宁州，曲赦四郡殊死已下。
现代文：将益州南部四郡分出设置宁州，特赦四郡死刑以下囚徒。
English: The four counties in the south of Yizhou will be separated and set up in Ningzhou, and prisoners under the death penalty in the four counties will be amnestied.

古文：冬十月丁丑，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日蚀。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月丁巳，卫公姬署薨。
现代文：十一月十二日，卫公姬署死。
English: On November 12th, Wei Gongji died.

古文：十二月，大雪。
现代文：十二月，下大雪。
English: In December, it snowed heavily.

古文：罢中领军，并北军中候。
现代文：撤销中领军，并于北军中侯。
English: He was removed from the position of the middle leader and became the middle steward of the Northern Army.

古文：以光禄大夫郑袤为司空。
现代文：以光禄大夫郑袤为司空。
English: Dr. Kwang-rok Chung-soo plays the role of Sikyong.

古文：八年春正月，监军何桢讨匈奴刘猛，累破之，左部帅李恪杀猛而降。
现代文：八年春正月，监军何桢讨伐匈奴刘猛，屡破刘猛军，匈奴左部帅李恪杀刘猛降晋。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, the supervising army, He Xuan, fought against the Xiongnu Liu Meng, repeatedly defeated the Liu Meng army, and the Xiongnu left wing commander Li Ke killed Liu Meng and was demoted to Jin.

古文：癸亥，帝耕于藉田。
现代文：十九日，武帝耕于籍田。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu ploughed his home field.

古文：二月乙亥，禁雕文绮组非法之物。
现代文：二月初一，禁用雕饰华丽的非法之物。
English: On the first day of February, illegal objects with ornate carvings will be banned.

古文：壬辰，太宰、安平王孚薨。
现代文：十八日，太宰、安平王司马孚死。
English: On the 18th, the Dazai, Anping Wang Sima Fu died.

古文：诏内外群官举任边郡者各三人。
现代文：下诏让内外群官推举能在边郡任职者各三人。
English: The following edict calls on officials at home and abroad to nominate three people each who can serve in the border county.

古文：帝与右将军皇甫陶论事，陶与帝争言，散骑常侍郑徽表请罪之。
现代文：武帝与右将军皇甫陶讨论问题，皇甫陶与武帝发生争执，散骑常侍郑徽上表请求治皇甫陶的罪。
English: Emperor Wu discussed the issue with the right general, Emperor Futao. Emperor Futao and Emperor Wu got into a dispute, and the imperial equerry, Zheng Hui, went to the table to plead for the punishment of Emperor Futao.

古文：帝曰： 谠言謇谔，所望于左右也。
现代文：武帝说： 刚直不阿，敢于直言，是我对左右群臣的要求。
English: Emperor Wu said, "Being forthright and having the courage to speak frankly are my requirements for the ministers on my right and left.

古文：人主常以阿媚为患，岂以争臣为损哉！
现代文：人主常以阿谀谄媚之人为患，怎能以直言之臣为损害呢？
English: The human master often suffers from flattery, so how can a straightforward vassal be a detriment?

古文：徽越职妄奏，岂朕之意。 
现代文：郑徽越职妄奏，不合我意。 
English: Zheng Hui's dereliction of duty is not to my liking.

古文：遂免徽官。
现代文：于是免了郑徽的官。
English: As a result, Zheng Hui was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏四月，置后将军，以备四军。
现代文：夏四月，设置后将军，备四军之数。
English: In the summer of April, after the establishment of the general, the number of four armies was prepared.

古文：六月，益州牙门张弘诬其刺史皇甫晏反，杀之，传首京师。
现代文：六月，益州牙门将张弘诬陷益州刺史皇甫晏谋反，杀了皇甫晏，将首级传递到京师。
English: In June, Zhang Hong, the governor of Yizhou, framed the governor of Yizhou for conspiring to assassinate Emperor Fuxi, killed Emperor Fuxi, and sent his head to the capital.

古文：弘坐伏诛，夷三族。
现代文：张弘被判死刑，夷灭三族。
English: Zhang Hong was sentenced to death for exterminating the three ethnic groups.

古文：壬辰，大赦。
现代文：十九日，大赦。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：丙申，诏复陇右四郡遇寇害者田租。
现代文：二十三日，下诏免除陇右四郡中遇寇害人家的田租。
English: On the 23rd, the next edict exempted the land rent of those who were robbed in the four counties on the right side of the Han River.

古文：秋七月，以车骑将军贾充为司空。
现代文：秋七月，以车骑将军贾充为司空。
English: In autumn and July, Jia Chong, the general of chariot and cavalry, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：九月，吴西陵督步阐来降，拜卫将军、开府仪同三司，封宜都公。
现代文：九月，吴西陵督步阐来降，拜为卫将军、开府仪同三司，封为宜都公。
English: In September, Wu Xiling, the governor of Yidong, bowed down and paid homage to General Wei, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and was given the title of Yidong.

古文：吴将陆抗攻阐，遣车骑将军羊祜帅众出江陵，荆州刺史杨肇迎阐于西陵，巴东监军徐胤击建平以救阐。
现代文：吴将陆抗进攻步阐，晋派遣车骑将军羊祜率军出江陵，荆州刺史杨肇往西陵迎步阐，巴东监军徐胤进击建平以救步阐。
English: Wu sent the army to resist the attack from the land, Jin sent the cavalry general Yang Xuan to lead the army out of Gangneung, the Jingzhou general Yang Zhao went to Xiling to meet the attack, and the East Pakistan supervisor Xu Yin attacked Jianping to rescue the attack.

古文：冬十月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日蚀。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：十二月，肇攻抗，不克而还。阐城陷，为抗所禽。
现代文：十二月，杨肇攻陆抗，不胜而退回，步阐的守城被陆抗攻陷，步阐被俘。
English: In December, Yang Zhao attacked the land resistance, but was defeated and retreated. The defense of the city of Shuguang was attacked by the land resistance, and Shuguang was captured.

古文：九年春正月辛酉，司空、密陵侯郑袤薨。
现代文：九年春正月二十二日，司空、密陵侯郑袤死。
English: On the 22nd day of the 1st month of the 9th year of the Spring, Siku and Miling Hou Zhengxuan passed away.

古文：二月癸巳，司徒、乐陵公石苞薨。
现代文：二月二十四日，司徒、乐陵公石苞死。
English: On February 24th, Szeto and Le Ling Gongshi passed away.

古文：立安平亭侯隆为安平王。
现代文：立安平亭侯司马隆为安平王。
English: Anping King Anping King Anping King.

古文：三月，立皇子祗为东海王。
现代文：三月立皇子司马祗为东海王。
English: In March, the prince Sima Qian became the king of the East Sea.

古文：夏四月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日蚀。五月，天旱。
English: In summer, the first day of April, a solar eclipse. In May, a drought.

古文：五月，旱。以太保何曾领司徒。
现代文：以太保何曾兼司徒职。
English: How is it possible for a police officer to also be a magistrate?

古文：六月乙未，东海王祗薨。
现代文：六月二十九日，东海王司马祗死。
English: On June 29th, the East Sea King Sima Xuan died.

古文：秋七月丁酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：吴将鲁淑围弋阳，征虏将军王浑击败之。
现代文：吴将鲁淑围弋阳，被晋征虏将军王浑击败。
English: Wu encircled Shuyang with Lu Shu and was defeated by the Jin general Wang Hun.

古文：罢五官左右中郎将、弘训太仆、卫尉、大长秋等官。
现代文：罢除五官左右中郎将、弘训太仆、卫尉、大长秋等官。
English: Five officials were dismissed, including the left and right middle-rank generals, the high-ranking eunuch, the guard lieutenant, and the grand chief eunuch.

古文：鲜卑寇广宁，杀略五千人。
现代文：鲜卑侵扰广宁，屠杀掳掠五千人。
English: The Xianbei invaded Guangning and killed and plundered five thousand people.

古文：诏聘公卿以下子女以备六宫，采择未毕，权禁断婚姻。
现代文：下诏聘公卿以下官吏女子以充实六宫，在没有挑选完之前，暂且禁止婚嫁。
English: In order to enrich the Six Palaces, the Emperor decreed that women officials below the rank of Kugyo (high court noble) were not allowed to marry until they had been selected.

古文：冬十月辛巳，制女年十七父母不嫁者，使长吏配之。
现代文：冬十月十七日，下令女子年十七父母不嫁者，使地方长官为她选择配偶强迫出嫁。
English: On the 17th of October in winter, a local governor was ordered to force a 17-year-old girl whose parents did not marry to choose a spouse for her.

古文：十一月丁酉，临宣武观大阅诸军，甲辰乃罢。
现代文：十一月初三，武帝登宣武观隆重检阅诸军，初十才检阅完毕。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Emperor Wu ascended to Xuanwu and held a grand review of the troops. The review was only completed on the tenth day of the first month.

古文：十年春正月辛亥，帝耕于藉田。
现代文：十年春正月十八，武帝耕于籍田。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 10th year of the Spring, Emperor Wu began to cultivate his home field.

古文：闰月癸酉，太傅、寿光公郑冲薨。
现代文：闰月十一日，太傅、寿光公郑冲死。
English: On the 11th day of the leap month, Taifu and Shuguang Zheng Chong died.

古文：己卯，高阳王珪薨。
现代文：十七日，高阳王司马王圭死。
English: On the 17th, Gaoyang Wang Sima Wang Gui died.

古文：庚辰，太原王瑰薨。
现代文：十八日，太原王司马环死。
English: On the 18th, King Sima of Taiyuan died.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 嫡庶之别，所以辨上下，明贵贱。
现代文：二十五日，下诏说： 嫡长与庶亲的差别，是为了区别上下，分清贵贱。
English: On the 25th, the next edict said: The difference between the eldest son and the second cousin is to distinguish between the upper and lower, and to distinguish between the noble and the base.

古文：而近世以来，多皆内宠，登妃后之职，乱尊卑之序。
现代文：而近世以来，很多人都是让宠爱的婢妾登上后妃之位，这就打乱了尊卑的秩序。
English: Since modern times, however, many people have allowed their favorite concubine to ascend to the position of empress dowager, which disrupted the order of superiority and inferiority.

古文：自今以后，皆不得登用妾媵以为嫡正。 二月，分幽州五郡置平州。
现代文：从今以后都不许以婢妾侍女为嫡正。 二月，从幽州分出五郡设置平州。
English: In February, five counties were separated from Yuzhou to form Pingzhou.

古文：三月癸亥，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月初二，日蚀。
English: March 2nd, solar eclipse.

古文：夏四月己未，太尉、临淮公荀顗薨。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，太尉、临淮公荀岂页死。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, Tai Lai and Lin Huai died.

古文：六月癸巳，临听讼观录囚徒，多所原遣。
现代文：六月初三，到听讼观检查囚徒，很多囚徒被宽赦遣返。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, prisoners were inspected at the court of public opinion, and many prisoners were pardoned and repatriated.

古文：是夏，大蝗。
现代文：这年夏天，蝗虫为灾。
English: This summer was plagued by locusts.

古文：秋七月丙寅，皇后杨氏崩。
现代文：秋七月初六，皇后杨氏死。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Empress Yang died.

古文：壬午，吴平虏将军孟泰、偏将军王嗣等帅众降。
现代文：二十二日，吴平虏将军孟泰、偏将军王嗣等率众投降。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Pingru's generals, Meng Tai and Wang Ci, led the troops to surrender.

古文：八月，凉州虏寇金城诸郡，镇西将军、汝阴王骏讨之，斩其帅乞文泥等。
现代文：八月，凉州胡虏侵扰金城诸郡，镇西将军、汝阴王司马骏率兵讨伐，斩胡虏统帅乞文泥等。
English: In August, Liangzhou Hurui invaded Jincheng counties. Zhenxi General and Ruyin King Sima Qian led the troops in the crusade and beheaded Hurui Commander Qianwen Di.

古文：戊申，葬元皇后于峻阳陵。
现代文：十九日，葬元皇后杨氏于峻阳陵。
English: On the 19th, the funeral of Empress Yang was held at the Yongyang Mausoleum.

古文：九月癸亥，以大将军陈骞为大尉。
现代文：九月初四，以大将陈骞为太尉。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, General Chen Qi was promoted to the rank of Second Lieutenant.

古文：攻拔吴枳里城，获吴立信校尉庄祜。
现代文：攻克吴枳里城，俘获吴立信校尉庄祜。
English: Conquered Wu Baili City and captured Wu Lixin's lieutenant Zhuang Zuo.

古文：吴将孙遵、李承帅众寇江夏，太守嵇喜击破之。
现代文：吴将孙遵、李承率兵侵扰江夏，被江夏太守嵇喜击破。
English: Wu invaded Jiangxia with soldiers led by Sun Zun and Li Cheng, and was defeated by Jiangxia's grand marshal Yan Xi.

古文：立河桥于富平津。
现代文：在富平津建造了黄河桥。红潮网
English: The Yellow River Bridge was built in Fupingjin.

古文：冬十一月，立城东七里涧石桥。
现代文：冬十一月，建造城东七里涧石桥。
English: In the winter of November, the construction of the seven-mile stone bridge in the east of the city began.

古文：庚午，帝临宣武观，大阅诸军。
现代文：十二日，武帝到宣武观，举行大规模阅兵。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Wu went to Xuanwu to hold a large-scale military parade.

古文：十二月，有星孛于轸。
现代文：十二月，有彗星出现于轸星座。
English: In December, a comet appeared in the constellation of Cancer.

古文：置藉田令。
现代文：设置籍田令官职。
English: The post of Kimida-Ryo was established.

古文：立太原王子缉为高阳王。
现代文：立太原王的儿子司马缉为高阳王。
English: The son of King Taiyuan, Sima Jiao, became King Gaoyang.

古文：吴威北将军严聪、扬威将军严整、偏将军硃买来降。
现代文：吴威北将军严聪、扬威将军严整、偏将军朱买来降。
English: Wu Wei Bei's General Yan Cong, Yang Wei's General Yan Jie, and Bi's General Zhu bought their way down.

古文：是岁，凿陕南山，决河，东注洛，以通运漕。
现代文：这一年，开凿陕南山，挖开河水，东流入洛水，以便漕运。
English: In this year, the Nanshan Mountain in Shaanxi Province was excavated, and the river water was dug up, and it flowed into the Luoshui River in the east, so that it could be rowed.

古文：咸宁元年春正月戊午朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：武帝咸宁元年春正月初一，实行大赦，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Emperor Wu Xianning, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：二月，以将士应已娶者多，家有五女者给复。
现代文：二月，因军中将士已娶妻者多，家中有五个女儿的免服兵役。
English: In February, due to the fact that many lieutenant generals have married wives, five daughters in the family were exempted from military service.

古文：辛酉，以故鄴令夏谡有清称，赐谷百斛。
现代文：辛酉这天，因原邺令夏谡有清廉之名，赐给谷一百斛。
English: On this day, Hsin-tao gave Gu one hundred pennies because he had given Xia-tao the reputation of being incorruptible.

古文：以奉禄薄，赐公卿以下帛有差。
现代文：因俸禄薄，公卿以下赐帛不等。
English: Due to the low salary, it was not given to nobles and below.

古文：叛虏树机能送质请降。
现代文：叛虏树机能送来人质请求投降。
English: The traitor sent a message to the hostages asking them to surrender.

古文：夏五月，下邳、广陵大风，拔木，坏庐舍。
现代文：夏五月，下邳、广陵刮大风，大风拔起树木，吹倒房舍。
English: In summer and May, a strong wind blew in the lower Yunnan and Guangling regions. The strong wind uprooted trees and blew down houses.

古文：六月，鲜卑力微遣子来献。
现代文：六月，鲜卑力微派遣其子进贡。
English: In June, Emperor Xianbei sent his son to pay tribute.

古文：吴人寇江夏。
现代文：吴人侵扰江夏。
English: Wu people invade Jiangxia.

古文：西域戊己校尉马循讨叛鲜卑，破之，斩其渠帅。
现代文：西域戊己校尉马循讨伐逃往鲜卑的叛军，击破鲜卑军，斩其首领。
English: Captain Ma Gui of the Western Region fought against the rebels who fled to Xianbei, defeated the Xianbei army, and beheaded its leader.

古文：戊申，置太子詹事官。
现代文：二十四日，设置太子詹事官职。
English: On the 24th, Prince Janzhi was appointed to the post.

古文：秋七月甲申晦，日有蚀之。郡国螟。
现代文：秋七月三十日，日蚀。郡国发生螟害。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of autumn, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：八月壬寅，沛王子文薨。
现代文：八月十八日，沛王司马子文死。
English: On August 18th, Pe Wang Sima Ziwen passed away.

古文：以故太傅郑冲、太尉荀顗、司徒石苞、司空裴秀、骠骑将军王沈、安平献王孚等及太保何曾、司空贾充、太尉陈骞、中书监荀勖、平南将军羊祜、齐王攸等皆列于铭飨。
现代文：以已故的太傅郑冲、太尉荀岂页、司徒石苞、司空裴秀、骠骑将军王沈、安平献王司马孚等以及现任太保何曾、司空贾充、太尉陈骞、中书监荀勖、平南将军羊祜、齐王司马攸等，皆刻名列于朝庙受飨。
English: The names of the late Taifu Zhengchong, Taifu Xinghuanzhe, Szczu Shijie, Siku Peixiu, Shiji General Wang Shen, Anping Xian Wang Sima Fu and others, as well as the current Taifu He Zeng, Siku Jia Chong, Taifu Chen Zheng, Chushu Guan Zheng, Pingnan General Yang Zheng, Qi King Sima You and others, are all inscribed in the imperial temple.

古文：九月甲子，青州螟，徐州大水。
现代文：九月十一日，青州发生螟害，徐州发大水。
English: On September 11, hail damage occurred in Qingzhou, and heavy rain occurred in Xuzhou.

古文：冬十月乙酉，常山王殷薨。
现代文：冬十月初二，常山王司马殷死。
English: On the second day of October in winter, King Sima Yin of Changshan died.

古文：癸巳，彭城王权薨。
现代文：初十，彭城王司马权死。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Pengcheng Wang Sima Quan died.

古文：十一月癸亥，大阅于宜武观，至于己巳。
现代文：十一月十一日，在宣武观举行大规模阅兵，十七日结束。
English: On November 11, a large-scale military parade was held in Xuanwuguan, which ended on the 17th.

古文：十二月丁亥，追尊宣帝庙曰高祖，景帝曰世宗，文帝曰太祖。
现代文：十二月初五，追尊宣帝庙号叫高祖，景帝叫世宗，文帝叫太祖。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the temple name of Emperor Xuanzong is Gao Zu, that of Emperor Jing is Shizong, and that of Emperor Wen is Taizu.

古文：是月大疫，洛阳死者大半。
现代文：这个月发生大瘟疫，洛阳人死的有一大半。
English: This month, a great plague occurred, killing more than half of the people in Luoyang.

古文：封裴頠为钜鹿公。
现代文：封裴危页为巨鹿公。
English: Feng Pei's dangerous page is a giant deer.

古文：二年春正月，以疾疫废朝。
现代文：二年春正月，因瘟疫流行停止朝会。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Imperial Diet was suspended due to the plague.

古文：赐诸散吏至于士卒丝各有差。二月丙戌，河间王洪薨。
现代文：赐给诸散吏及士卒丝不等。二月初五，河间王司马洪死。
English: On the fifth day of the second month, King Sima Hong of Kawama died.

古文：甲午，赦五岁刑以下。
现代文：十三日，赦免五年以下囚徒。
English: On the 13th, prisoners under the age of five were pardoned.

古文：东夷八国归化。并州虏犯塞，监并州诸军事胡奋击破之。
现代文：东夷八国归化，并州胡虏侵犯边塞，监并州诸军事胡奋击破胡虏军。
English: Dongyi eight countries were naturalized, and the state of Khurik invaded the border fortress, and the military of the state of Khurik defeated the Khurik army.

古文：初，燉煌太守尹璩卒，州以燉煌令梁澄领太守事。议郎令狐丰废澄，自领郡事。
现代文：当初，敦煌太守尹璩死，州里以敦煌令梁澄兼管太守事，议郎令孤丰废黜梁澄，自己处理郡事。
English: At first, after the death of the governor of Dunhuang, Yin Xi, the state of Dunhuang appointed Liang Cheng to be in charge of the affairs of the governor of Dunhuang as well as the affairs of the governor of Dunhuang. The governor of Dunhuang, Gui Lang, ordered Guofeng to depose Liang Cheng and deal with the affairs of the county on his own.

古文：丰死，弟宏代之。
现代文：令狐丰死，其弟令狐宏接任此职。
English: When Ling Foofeng died, his younger brother Ling Foohong took over the post.

古文：至是，凉州刺史杨欣斩宏，传首洛阳。
现代文：到咸宁二年二月，凉州刺史杨欣杀令狐宏，首级传到京师。
English: In February of the second year of Xianning, Yang Xin, a Zhangshi from Liangzhou, killed Fox Hong, and his head was sent to the Beijing division.

古文：先是，帝不豫，及瘳，群臣上寿。
现代文：此前，武帝身体不适，康复后，群臣祝寿。
English: Previously, Emperor Wu had been unwell, and after his recovery, a group of courtiers came to wish him a happy birthday.

古文：诏曰： 每念顷遇疫气死亡，为之怆然。
现代文：武帝下诏说： 每想到在最近瘟疫流行中可能死亡，心中为之悲伤。
English: Emperor Wu issued a proclamation saying, "Every time I think about the possibility of dying in the recent plague epidemic, I feel sad.

古文：岂以一身之休息，忘百姓之艰邪？
现代文：怎能自己安息于地下，而忘百姓之艰辛呢？
English: How can you rest underground and forget the hardships of the people?

古文：诸上礼者皆绝之。 
现代文：那些送寿礼的一概谢绝不收。 
English: I will never accept any of those birthday gifts.

古文：夏五月，镇西大将军、汝阴王骏讨北胡，斩其渠帅吐敦。
现代文：夏五月，镇西大将军、汝阴王司马骏讨伐北胡，斩其魁首吐敦。
English: In the summer of May, Zhenxi Grand General and Ruyin King Sima Yi fought against the Northern Hu and beheaded its leader Tutong.

古文：立国子学。
现代文：建立国子学。
English: The establishment of "Kokushigaku" is a must.

古文：庚午，大雩。
现代文：二十一日，举行求雨大祭。
English: On the 21st, the Great Rain Festival was held.

古文：六月癸丑，荐荔支于太庙。
现代文：六月癸丑这天，以荔枝作祭品献于太庙。
English: On the day of the Ugly Goat Festival in June, litchis were offered as offerings to the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲戌，有星孛于氐。
现代文：甲戌这天，有彗星出现于氐星旁。
English: On the day of Armadillo, a comet appeared near the planet Krypton.

古文：自春旱，至于是月始雨。
现代文：入春即旱，本月才下雨。
English: At the beginning of spring there was a drought, and it only rained this month.

古文：吴京下督孙楷帅众来降，以为车骑将军，封丹阳侯。
现代文：吴京下督孙楷率众来投降，任命为车骑将军，封为丹杨侯。
English: Wujing Sub-governor Sun Kai led the crowd to surrender and was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry and given the title of Prince of Danyang.

古文：白龙二见于新兴井中。
现代文：两条白龙出现于新兴井中。
English: Two white dragons appear in an emerging well.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于大角。
现代文：秋七月，有彗星出现于大角星旁。
English: In autumn and July, a comet appeared near the star Arcturus.

古文：吴临平湖自汉末壅塞，至是自开。
现代文：吴临平湖自汉末已壅塞，此时又自行通水。
English: Wu Linping Lake has been blocked since the end of the Han Dynasty. At this time, it was allowed to flow by itself.

古文：父老相传云： 此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。 
现代文：当地父老相传说： 此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。 
English: According to the local legend, this lake is a dam and the world is in chaos; this lake is open and the world is flat.

古文：癸丑，安平王隆薨。
现代文：初五，安平王司马隆死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Anping King Sima Long died.

古文：东夷十七国内附。
现代文：东夷十七国归附中国。
English: Seventeen Eastern Yi countries were annexed to China.

古文：河南、魏郡暴水，杀百余人，诏给棺。
现代文：河南、魏郡暴雨成灾，淹死百余人，下诏供给棺材。
English: Torrential rain in Henan and Wei County caused a disaster, drowning more than a hundred people, and ordered the supply of coffins.

古文：鲜卑阿罗多等寇边，西域戊己校尉马循讨之，斩首四千余级，获生九千余人，于是来降。
现代文：鲜卑人阿罗多等侵扰边疆，西域戊己校尉马循出兵讨伐，斩首四千余级，俘虏九千余人，阿罗多来降。
English: Arrodo, a freshman, and others invaded the frontier. Captain Ma Xun of the Western Region sent troops to fight, beheaded more than four thousand people, and captured more than nine thousand people. Arrodo came down.

古文：八月庚辰，河东、平阳地震。
现代文：八月初二，河东、平阳地震。
English: On the second day of August, the earthquakes in Hedong and Pingyang occurred.

古文：己亥，以太保何曾为太傅，太尉陈骞为大司马，司空贾充为太尉，镇军大将军齐王攸为司空。
现代文：二十一日，以太保何曾为太傅，太尉陈骞为大司马，司空贾充为太尉，镇军大将军齐王司马攸为司空。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Ether Bao He was the Tai Fu, the Tai Leutnant Chen Yao was the Da Sima, the Siku Jia Chong was the Tai Leutnant, and the Town General Qi Wang Sima You was the Siku.

古文：有星孛于太微，九月又孛于翼。
现代文：有彗星出现于太微星旁，九月又出现于翼星旁。
English: A comet appeared near Taimix, and in September it appeared near Pleiades.

古文：丁未，起太仓于城东，常平仓于东西市。
现代文：二十九日，在城东建太仓，在东西市建常平仓。
English: On the 29th, Tai Cang was built in the east of the city, and Chang Ping Cang was built in the east and west of the city.

古文：闰月，荆州五郡水，流四千余家。
现代文：闰月，荆州五郡发大水，冲毁四千余家。
English: During the leap month, five counties in Jingzhou were flooded, destroying more than 4,000 homes.

古文：冬十月，以汝阴王骏为征西大将军，平南将军羊祜为征南大将军。
现代文：冬十月，以汝阴王司马骏为征西大将军，平南将军羊祜为征南大将军。
English: In the winter of October, Ruyin King Sima Qian became the general of the Western Expedition, and Pingnan General Yang Qian became the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：丁卯，立皇后杨氏，大赦，赐王公以下及于鳏寡各有差。
现代文：二十一日，立皇后杨氏，实行大赦，赏赐王公以下直至民间孤寡不等。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Queen Yang clan was established, an amnesty was implemented, and rewards ranged from princes to people.

古文：十一月，白龙二见于梁国。
现代文：十一月，两条白龙出现于梁国。
English: In November, two white dragons appeared in Liang Province.

古文：十二月，征处士安定皇甫谧为太子中庶子，封后父镇军将军杨骏为临晋侯。
现代文：十二月，征召民间处士安定人皇甫谧为太子中庶子，封皇后之父杨骏为临晋侯。
English: In December, the people's procurator and stabilizer Wang Fuxi was called up as the prince's middle child, and Yang Jie, the father of the empress, was appointed as the Prince of Jin.

古文：是月，以平州刺史傅询、前广平太守孟桓清白有闻，询赐帛二百匹，桓百匹。
现代文：这个月里，因平州刺史傅询、前广平太守孟桓为政清廉，赐帛傅询二百匹，孟桓一百匹。
English: In this month, due to the Pingzhou assassin Fu Xun and the former Guangping governor Meng Huan's political integrity, Fu Xun was given 200 horses and Meng Huan 100 horses.

古文：三年春正月丙子朔，日有蚀之。立皇子裕为始平王，安平穆王隆弟敦为安平王。
现代文：三年春正月初一，日蚀，立皇子司马裕为始平王，安平穆王司马隆的弟弟司马敦为安平王。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2

古文：诏曰： 宗室戚属，国之枝叶，欲令奉率德义，为天下式。然处富贵而能慎行者寡，召穆公纠合兄弟而赋《棠棣》之诗，此姬氏所以本枝百世也。
现代文：下诏说： 宗室亲属，是国家的枝叶，要让他们以身作则，奉行德义，为天下楷模，然而处于富贵地位而行为谨慎的人少，西周召穆公集合兄弟们赋《唐棣》之诗，这是姬氏根枝茂盛，百世不衰的原因。
English: The next edict said: Family members are the branches and leaves of the country, and they should set an example, practice virtue, and be a model for the world. However, there are few people who are in a wealthy position and act prudently. Xi Zhou called Mu Gong to gather brothers to compose a poem of "Tang Xuan." This is the reason why the roots and branches of the Hsieh clan are flourishing and will not fade away.

古文：今以卫将军、扶风王亮为宗师，所当施行，皆咨之于宗师也。 
现代文：今以卫将军、扶风王司马亮为管教宗室子弟的宗师，宗室亲属要做的事，都要征求宗师的意见。 
English: Now with General Wei and Fu Feng Wang Sima Liang as the gurus to discipline the Pope's son-in-law, the guru's opinion should be sought for anything the family wants to do.

古文：庚寅，始平王裕薨。
现代文：十五日，始平王司马裕死。
English: On the 15th, Prince Sima died.

古文：有星孛于西方。
现代文：有彗星出现于西方。
English: A comet appears in the west.

古文：使征北大将军卫讠雚讨鲜卑力微。
现代文：使征北大将军卫馞讨伐鲜卑力微。
English: Enlisting the Northern Expeditionary Force to fight against Wei Wei was a small victory.

古文：三月，平虏护军文淑讨叛虏树机能等，破之。
现代文：三月，平虏护军文淑讨伐叛虏树机能等，叛虏皆被击破。
English: In March, Wen Shuk, the protector of Pingrui, fought against the rebels, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：有星孛于胃。
现代文：有彗星出现于胃星旁。
English: A comet appears next to the stomach star.

古文：乙未，帝将射雉，虑损麦苗而止。
现代文：二十一日，武帝将出猎射野鸡，怕毁坏麦苗而中止。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Wu would go out to hunt and shoot pheasants, but stopped for fear of destroying the wheat seedlings.

古文：夏五月戊子，吴将邵凯、夏祥帅众七千余人来降。
现代文：夏五月十五日，吴将邵凯、夏祥率众七千余人来降。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, Wu Shao Kai and Xia Xiang led more than seven thousand people to descend.

古文：六月，益、梁八郡水，杀三百余人，没邸阁别仓。
现代文：六月，益州梁州八郡发生水灾，淹死三百余人，淹没了一些住宅仓库。
English: In June, flooding occurred in eight counties in Liangzhou, Yizhou, drowning more than three hundred people and flooding some residential warehouses.

古文：秋七月，以都督豫州诸军事王浑为都督扬州诸军事。
现代文：秋七月，以都督豫州诸军事王浑为都督扬州诸军事。
English: In autumn and July, Wang Hun, the military governor of Yuzhou, became the military governor of Yangzhou.

古文：中山王睦以罪废为丹水侯。
现代文：中山王司马睦因罪废为丹水侯。
English: King Sima Mu of Zhongshan was stripped of his title of Dan Shui Hou for his crimes.

古文：八月癸亥，徙扶风王亮为汝南王，东莞王伷为琅邪王，汝阴王骏为扶风王，琅邪王伦为赵王，渤海王辅为太原王，太原王颙为河间王，北海王陵为任城王，陈王斌为西河王，汝南王柬为南阳王，济南王耽为中山王，河间王威为章武王。
现代文：八月二十一日，徙封扶风王司马亮为汝南王，东莞王司马亻由为琅王牙王，汝阴王司马骏为扶风王，琅王牙王司马伦为赵王，渤海王司马辅为太原王，太原王司马颙为河间王，北海王司马陵为任城王，陈王司马斌为西河王，汝南王司马柬为南阳王，济南王司马耽为中山王，河间王司马威为章武王。
English: On August 21st, Fu Feng Wang Sima Liang was crowned as the king of South Run, Dongguan Wang Sima Yu was crowned as the king of Shandong, Ruyin King Sima Yu was crowned as the king of Fu Feng, Shandong King Sima Lun was crowned as the king of Zhao, Bohai King Sima Fu was crowned as the king of Taiyuan, Taiyuan King Sima Yu was crowned as the king of Hebei, Beihai King Sima Ling was crowned as the king of Rencheng, Chen King Sima Bin was crowned as the king of West River, Runan King Sima Kam was crowned as

古文：立皇子玮为始平王，允为濮阳王，该为新都王，遐为清河王，钜平侯羊祜为南城侯。
现代文：立皇子司马玮为始平王，司马允为濮阳王，司马该为新都王，司马遐为清河王，巨平侯羊祜为南城侯。
English: He set up the prince Sima Qian as the king of Shihping, Sima Yun as the king of Shenyang, Sima Gao as the king of Xindu, Sima Qian as the king of Qinghe, and Juping marquis Yang Qian as the marquis of Nancheng.

古文：以汝南王亮为镇南大将军。
现代文：以汝南王司马亮为镇南大将军。
English: King Sima Liang of Southern Ru as the great general of Zhenan.

古文：大风拔树，暴寒且冰，郡国五陨霜，伤谷。
现代文：大风拔起树木，天气突然寒冷，而且结了冰。五个郡国下了霜，冻坏了谷苗。
English: High winds uprooted trees, the weather suddenly turned cold and icy, and five counties were hit with frost that froze seedlings.

古文：九月戊子，以左将军胡奋为都督江北诸军事。兗、豫、徐、青、荆、益、梁七州大水，伤秋稼，诏振给之。
现代文：九月十七日，以左将军胡奋为都督江北诸军事，兖、豫、徐、青、荆、益、梁七州发生水灾，淹毁秋庄稼，下诏赈济灾民。
English: On September 17th, with the Left General Hu Fen as the governor of the north of the Yangtze River, floods occurred in the seven provinces of Min, Yu, Xu, Qing, Jing, Yi and Liang, which drowned the autumn crops, and the following decree was issued to help the victims.

古文：立齐王子蕤为辽东王，赞为广汉王。
现代文：立齐王之子司马蕤为辽东王，司马赞为广汉王。
English: Sima Qian, the son of King Li Qi, was the king of Liaodong, and Sima Zan was the king of Guanghan.

古文：冬十一月丙戌，帝临宣武观大阅，至于壬辰。
现代文：冬十一月十六日，武帝登宣武观举行大规模阅兵。
English: In winter, on November 16th, Emperor Wu ascended the throne and held a large-scale military parade.

古文：十二月，吴将孙慎入江夏、汝南，略千余家而去。
现代文：二十二日结束。十二月，吴将孙慎侵入江夏、汝南，掳掠千余家而去。
English: It ended on the 22nd. In December, Wu invaded and captured more than a thousand houses in Jiangxia and Yunan.

古文：是岁，西北杂虏及鲜卑、匈奴、五溪蛮夷、东夷三国前后十余辈，各帅种人部落内附。
现代文：这一年，西北杂虏及鲜卑、匈奴、五溪蛮夷、东夷三国前后十余批，各率本族部落归附内地。
English: In this year, more than ten batches of Northwest Hakka, Xianbei, Xiongnu, Wuxi barbarians and Eastern barbarians were annexed to the mainland, each with their own tribe.

古文：四年春正月庚午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring.

古文：三月甲申，尚书左仆射卢钦卒。
现代文：三月十五日，尚书左仆射卢钦死。
English: On March 15, Shangshu's left-hand man shot Lu Qin to death.

古文：辛酉，以尚书右仆射山涛为尚书左仆射。
现代文：辛酉，以尚书右仆射山涛为左仆射。东夷六国纳贡。
English: Xin Xuan, with Shang Shu's right-hand man, Shan Tao, as his left-hand man. The Eastern Barbarians paid tribute to six countries.

古文：东夷六国来献。夏四月，蚩尤旗见于东井。
现代文：夏四月，名叫蚩尤旗的彗星出现于东井星座。
English: In the summer of April, a comet named Pleiades appeared in the constellation of the East Well.

古文：六月丁未，阴平、广武地震，甲子又震。
现代文：六月初十，阴平、广武地震，二十七日又震。
English: At the beginning of June, the Yinping and Guangwu earthquakes occurred, followed by another earthquake on the 27th.

古文：凉州刺史杨欣与虏若罗拔能等战于武威，败绩，死之。
现代文：凉州刺史杨欣与胡虏若罗拔能等在武威作战，杨欣大败，战死。
English: Yang Xin, a member of the Liangzhou Zhishi, and Hu Ru, if they had been able to fight in Wuwei, Yang Xin would have been defeated and killed.

古文：弘训皇后羊氏崩。
现代文：弘训皇后羊氏死。
English: Hongxun Empress Yang died.

古文：秋七月己丑，祔葬景献皇后羊氏于峻平陵。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，景献皇后羊氏合葬于峻平陵。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the queen of Jingxian, Yang Shi, was buried together in the Junping Mausoleum.

古文：庚寅，高阳王缉薨。
现代文：二十三日，高阳王司马缉死。
English: On the 23rd, Gaoyang Wang Sima died.

古文：癸巳，范阳王绥薨。
现代文：二十六日，范阳王司马绥死。
English: On the 26th, Fanyang Wang Simasong died.

古文：荆、扬郡国二十皆大水。
现代文：荆、扬二州有二十个郡国发生大水。
English: Heavy water occurred in 20 counties in Jing and Yang provinces.

古文：九月，以大傅何曾为太宰。
现代文：九月，以太傅何曾为太宰。
English: In September, Ether Fu He was appointed as Dazai.

古文：辛巳，以尚书令李胤为司徒。
现代文：十五日，以尚书令李胤为司徒。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shang Shuling appointed Li Yin as a disciple.

古文：冬十月，以征北大将军卫瓘为尚书令。
现代文：冬十月，以征北大将军卫馞为尚书令。
English: In the winter of October, it was decreed that the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Wei Wei, should be summoned.

古文：扬州刺史应绰伐吴皖城，斩首五千级，焚谷米百八十万斛。
现代文：扬州刺史应绰攻打吴皖城，斩首五千级，焚烧谷米一百八十万斛。
English: Yangzhou Zhi Shi Ying attacked Wuyi City, beheaded five thousand people, and burned 1.8 million bushels of rice.

古文：十一月辛巳，太医司马程据献雉头裘，帝以奇技异服典礼所禁，焚之于殿前。
现代文：十一月十六日，太医司马程据献雉头裘，武帝认为奇技异服是典章礼制所禁止的，将此裘在殿前烧掉。
English: On November 16th, Grand Physician Sima Cheng presented a skull and crossbones to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu believed that the extraordinary costumes were prohibited by the ceremonial system, and burned the crossbones in front of the palace.

古文：甲申，敕内外敢有犯者罪之。
现代文：十九日，下令内外宫吏敢有犯者治罪。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the palace officials inside and outside the palace to dare to punish the offenders.

古文：吴昭武将军刘翻、厉武将军祖始来降。
现代文：吴昭武将军刘翻、厉武将军祖始来降。
English: Wu Zhaowu's general Liu Tuo and Liwu's general ancestors came and went.

古文：辛卯，以尚书杜预都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：二十六日，以尚书杜预都督荆州诸军事。
English: On the 26th, Shangshu Du Yuan, the governor of Jingzhou, led the military.

古文：征南大将军羊祜卒。
现代文：征南大将军羊祜死。
English: The general of the Southern Expedition died of dysentery.

古文：十二月乙未，西河王斌薨。
现代文：十二月初一，西河王司马斌死。
English: On the first day of December, Xihe Wang Sima Bin passed away.

古文：丁未，太宰郎陵公何曾薨。
现代文：十三日，太宰朗陵公何曾死。
English: On the 13th, Dazai Langling died.

古文：是岁，东夷九国内附。
现代文：这一年，东夷九国归附内地。
English: In the same year, nine eastern provinces were annexed to the mainland.

古文：五年春正月，虏帅树机能攻陷凉州。
现代文：五年春正月，胡虏统帅树机能攻陷凉州。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Commander-in-Chief Hu Rui was able to capture Liangzhou.

古文：乙丑，使讨虏护军武威太守马隆击之。
现代文：初一，使讨虏护军武威太守马隆击树机能。
English: On the first day of the new year, the martial prowess of the anti-capture and protection troops made Malong hit the tree.

古文：二月甲午，白麟见于平原。
现代文：二月初一，白麟出现于平原。
English: On the first day of February, the white unicorn appeared on the plain.

古文：三月，匈奴都督拔弈虚帅部落归化。
现代文：三月，匈奴都督拔奕虚率部落归顺。
English: In March, the Xiongnu governor ordered the tribe to surrender.

古文：乙亥，以百姓饥馑，减御膳之半。
现代文：十二日，因百姓有饥荒，宫庭膳食减去一半。
English: On the twelfth day, because of the famine among the people, the food in the palace was reduced by half.

古文：有星孛于柳。
现代文：有彗星出现于柳星旁。
English: A comet appeared next to the willow star.

古文：夏四月，又孛于女御。
现代文：夏四月，彗星又出现于女御。
English: In the summer of April, the comet reappeared at Nyogo.

古文：大赦，降除部曲督以下质任。
现代文：实行大赦，免除部曲中督官以下的人质。
English: An amnesty will be implemented, exempting hostages below the rank of inspector in the orchestra.

古文：丁亥，郡国八雨雹，伤秋稼，坏百姓庐舍。
现代文：丁亥这天，八个郡国下冰雹，损伤秋庄稼，毁坏百姓房舍。
English: On the day of Dinghai, hailstorms hit eight counties, damaging autumn crops and destroying people's houses.

古文：秋七月，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：秋七月，有彗星出现于紫宫星座。
English: In autumn and July, a comet appeared in the constellation of Aquila.

古文：九月甲午，麟见于河南。
现代文：九月初四，麟出现在河南。
English: On the fourth day of September, the unicorn appeared in Henan Province.

古文：冬十月戊寅，匈奴余渠都督独雍等帅部落归化。
现代文：冬十月十九日，匈奴余渠都督独雍等率部落归顺。
English: In the winter, on October 19th, the Huns left the canal and the local governor, Du Yong, and other leaders of the tribe surrendered.

古文：汲郡人不准掘魏襄王冢，得竹简小篆古书十余万言，藏于秘府。
现代文：汲郡有个叫不准的人挖掘魏襄王坟墓，得到用小篆写的竹简十余万字，藏于秘府。
English: In Gu County, there was a person who was not allowed to dig the tomb of Wei Xiang Wang and obtained more than one hundred thousand words of bamboo cuttings written with a small shovel, which was hidden in the secret palace.

古文：十一月，大举伐吴，遣镇军将军、琅邪王伷出涂中，安东将军王浑出江西，建威将军王戎出武昌，平南将军胡奋出夏口，镇南大将军杜预出江陵，龙骧将军王浚、广武将军唐彬率巴蜀之卒浮江而下，东西凡二十余万。
现代文：十一月，大举伐吴，派遣镇军将军、琅王牙王司马亻由出兵涂中，安东将军王浑出兵江西，建威将军王戎出兵武昌，平南将军胡奋出兵夏口，镇南大将军杜预出兵江陵，龙骧将军王浚、广武将军唐彬率巴蜀军队浮江而下，东西兵力共二十余万。
English: In November, the general of the town army was sent to Wu in a big way, and the general of the Shandong army, Wang Ya, Wang Sima, was sent to the middle of Tu, the general of the Andong army, Wang Hun, was sent to the west of Jiangxi, the general of the Jianwei army, Wang Rong, was sent to Wuchang, the general of the Pingnan army, Hu Fen, was sent to Xiakou, the general of the Zhennan army, Du Yuan, was sent to Jiangling, the general of the Longjing army, Wang Jun, and the general of the Guangwu army, Tang Bin, led the Bashu army to

古文：以太尉贾充为大都督，行冠军将军杨济为副，总统众军。
现代文：以太尉贾充为大都督，行冠军将军杨济为副职，全面指挥众军。
English: With Lieutenant General Jia Chong as the grand governor, and General Yang Jie as his deputy, he was in overall command of the troops.

古文：十二月，马隆击叛虏树机能，大破，斩之，凉州平。肃慎来献楛矢石砮。
现代文：十二月，马隆击叛虏树机能，大破虏军，斩树机能，凉州平定，肃慎来献木苦矢石纈。
English: In December, Malong defeated the rebel army, defeated the invading army, defeated the invading army, pacified Liangzhou, and paid tribute to Su Sheng.

古文：太康元年春正月己丑朔，五色气冠日。
现代文：太康元年春正月初一，有五色云气绕于日上。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year of Taikang, there were five-colored clouds circling the sun.

古文：癸丑，王浑克吴寻阳赖乡诸城，获吴武威将军周兴。
现代文：二十五日，王浑攻克吴寻阳赖乡诸城，俘获吴武威将军周兴。
English: On the 25th, Wang Hun attacked the towns of Wu Huan Yang Lai Township and captured Wu Wuwei's general Zhou Xing.

古文：二月戊午，王浚、唐棼等克丹阳城。
现代文：二月初一，王浚、唐彬等攻克丹杨城。
English: On the first day of February, Wang Jun, Tang Bin and others conquered Danyang City.

古文：庚申，又克西陵，杀西陵都督、镇军将军留宪，征南将军成璩，西陵监郑广。
现代文：初三，又攻克西陵，杀了西陵都督、镇军将军留宪及征南将军成璩、西陵监郑广。
English: On the third day of the first month, he also conquered Xiling and killed the governor of Xiling, the general of the town army, Liu Xian, and the general of the Southern Expedition, Cheng Yao, and the superintendent of Xiling, Zheng Guang.

古文：壬戌，浚又克夷道乐乡城，杀夷道监陆晏、水军都督陆景。
现代文：初五，王浚又攻克夷道乐乡城，杀了夷道监陆晏、水军都督陆景。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Jun also conquered the town of Yidu Le, and killed the Yidu overseer, Lu Yao, and the naval governor, Lu Jing.

古文：甲戌，杜预克江陵，斩吴江陵督王延；平南将军胡奋克江安。
现代文：十七日，杜预攻克江陵，斩吴江陵督伍延；平南将军胡奋攻克江安。
English: On the 17th, Du Yue conquered Jiangling, Wu Yan, the governor of Wujiangling, was beheaded, and Pingnan General Hu Qian conquered Jiang'an.

古文：于是诸军并进，乐乡、荆门诸戍相次来降。
现代文：于是诸军并进，乐乡、荆门等地吴戍守军，先后投降。
English: As a result, the armies marched side by side, and the Wusong defenders in Le Township, Jingmen and other places surrendered one after another.

古文：乙亥，以浚为都督益、梁二州诸军事，复下诏曰： 浚、彬东下，扫除巴丘，与胡奋、王戎共平夏口、武昌，顺流长鹜，直造秣陵，与奋、戎审量其宜。
现代文：十八日，以王浚为都督益、梁二州诸军事，并下诏说： 王浚、康彬东下，扫除巴丘吴军，与胡奋、王戎共同平定夏口、武昌，顺流长驱，直逼秣陵，今后行动与胡奋、王戎计议商量，相机行事。
English: On the 18th, Wang Jun was appointed as the military governor of the capital and Liang of the two states, and the following edict was issued: Wang Jun and Kang Bin will go to the east to sweep away the Baqiu Wu army, and together with Hu Fen and Wang Rong, they will pacify Xia Kou and Wuchang, drive along the long stream, and drive straight to Bao Ling. In the future, they will discuss the plan with Hu Fen and Wang Rong, and act with the camera.

古文：杜预当镇静零、桂，怀辑衡阳。
现代文：杜预当安定零陵、桂林一带，招抚衡阳军民。
English: Du Yuantang stabilized the area around Jingluling and Guilin, and encouraged the military and civilians of Hengyang.

古文：大兵既过，荆州南境固当传檄而定，预当分万人给浚，七千给彬。
现代文：大兵过后，荆州南部一道檄文即可平定，杜预应当分一万人给王浚，分七千人给唐彬。
English: After the soldiers left, the southern part of Jingzhou could be pacified with a single letter. Du Yu should give ten thousand people to Wang Jun and seven thousand people to Tang Bin.

古文：夏口既平，奋宜以七千人给浚。
现代文：夏口平定后，胡奋应分七千人给王浚。
English: After the subjugation of Xiakou, Hu Fen should give seven thousand people to Wang Jun.

古文：武昌既了，戎当以六千人增彬。
现代文：武昌平定后，王戎应分六千人与唐彬。
English: After Wuchang was pacified, Wang Rong was divided into six thousand people and Tang Bin.

古文：太尉充移屯项，总督诸方。 
现代文：太尉贾充移驻项，总督各路兵马。 
English: Second Lieutenant Jia Chong transferred to the garrison, and the governor was surrounded by soldiers and horses.

古文：浚进破夏口、武昌，遂泛舟东下，所至皆平。
现代文：王浚攻破夏口、武昌，遂即乘船东下，所到之处，立即平定。
English: Wang Jun broke through Xiakou and Wuchang, and then took a ship to the east, and immediately pacified everywhere he went.

古文：王浑、周浚与吴丞相张悌战于版桥，大败之，斩悌及其将孙震、沈莹，传首洛阳。
现代文：王浑、周浚与吴丞相张悌战于版桥，大破吴军，斩张悌及其将孙震、沈莹，首级传到洛阳。
English: Wang Hun, Zhou Jun and Zhang Ye, the prime minister of Wu Zheng, fought in Panqiao and defeated the Wu army, decapitating Zhang Ye and sending the heads of Sun Zhen and Shen Ying to Luoyang.

古文：孙皓穷蹙请降，送玺绶于琅邪王伷。
现代文：孙皓已到穷途末路，请求投降，将玺绶送给琅王牙王司马亻由。
English: Sun Yat-sen had come to the end of the road, asked for surrender, and gave the scepter to Wang Yao and Wang Sima Yiyu.

古文：三月壬申，王浚以舟师至于建鄴之石头，孙皓大惧，面缚舆榇，降于军门。
现代文：三月十五日，王浚率水师达到吴都建邺附近的石头城，孙皓十分恐惧，缚住双手，抬着棺木，在军门前投降。
English: On March 15th, Wang Jun and his sailors reached the Stone Town near Wudu Jianye. Sun Yao was very afraid, tied his hands, carried the coffin, and surrendered in front of the military gate.

古文：浚杖节解缚焚榇，送于京都。
现代文：王浚持皇帝符节，为孙皓解缚，烧掉棺木，送到京师。
English: Wang Jun, holding the Emperor's emblem, released Sun Yat-sen, burned the coffin, and sent it to the capital.

古文：收其图籍，得州四，郡四十三，县三百一十三，户五十二万三千，吏三万三千，兵二十三万，男女口二百三十万。
现代文：收查了吴的图书簿籍，这次平吴之战，共得四个州，四十三个郡，三百一十三个县，五十二万三千户，官吏三万二千，士兵二十三万，男女人口二百三十万。
English: After checking Wu's books and records, the battle of Pingwu resulted in a total of four provinces, 43 counties, 313 counties, 523,000 households, 32,000 officials, 230,000 soldiers, and 2.3 million men and women.

古文：其牧守下皆因吴所置，除其苛政，示之简易，吴人大悦。
现代文：郡守以下的官吏按原职不动，除去吴时苛政，实行简易的法规，吴人十分高兴。
English: The officials below the county magistrate do not move according to their original duties, remove Wu Shi's harsh politics, and implement simple laws and regulations. Wu people are very happy.

古文：乙酉大赦，改元，大酺五日，恤孤老困穷。
现代文：乙酉这天，实行大赦，改年号，让民众开怀畅饮五天，救助孤老贫困者。
English: On this day, an amnesty will be implemented, the year will be changed, and the people will be allowed to drink freely for five days to help the elderly and the poor.

古文：夏四月，河东、高平雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：夏四月，河东、高平下冰雹，损坏了秋庄稼。
English: In the summer of April, hailstorms in Hedong and Gaoping damaged autumn crops.

古文：遣兼侍中张侧、黄门侍郎硃震分使扬越，尉其初附。
现代文：派遣兼侍中张侧、黄门侍郎朱震分别出使扬越，慰问初归附的吏民。
English: Zhang Xiang, the second-in-command, and Zhu Zhen, Huangmen's second-in-command, were dispatched separately to Yangtze to offer condolences to the officials and people who had been annexed for the first time.

古文：白麟见于顿丘。
现代文：白麟出现于顿丘。
English: The white unicorn appears in Dongqiu.

古文：三河、魏郡、弘农雨雹，伤宿麦。
现代文：三河、魏郡、弘农下冰雹，损伤了冬小麦。
English: Three Rivers, Wei County and Hongnong were hit by hailstorms, which damaged winter wheat.

古文：五月辛亥，封孙皓为归命侯，拜其太子为中郎，诸子为郎中。吴之旧望，随才擢叙。
现代文：五月二十五日，封孙皓为归命侯，孙皓太子拜为中朗，其他诸子为郎中，原来吴国有威望的旧臣，量才录用。
English: On the 25th of May, Sun Yat-sen was appointed as the Returning Prince, Prince Sun Yat-sen was appointed as the Middle Prince, and the other sons were appointed as the middle sons. He was originally a prestigious old minister of the State of Wu, but he was only hired as a second-in-command.

古文：孙氏大将战亡之家徙于寿阳，将吏渡江复十年，百姓及百工复二十年。
现代文：孙氏大将有战死者，将其家属迁移到寿阳，将吏渡江者，免除十年徭役，百姓及百工免除二十年。
English: The Sun Dynasty will have the war dead and their families moved to Shouyang, and the officials crossing the river will be exempted from ten years of forced labor, and the common people and hundred laborers will be exempted from twenty years.

古文：丙寅，帝临轩大会，引皓升殿，群臣咸称万岁。
现代文：丙寅这天，武帝在殿前大会群臣，引孙皓升殿阶，群臣都高呼万岁。
English: On this day, Emperor Wu was in front of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall.

古文：丁卯，荐酃渌酒于太庙。
现代文：丁卯，献酃渌酒于太庙。
English: Dingwu, offering wine at the Great Temple.

古文：郡国六雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：六个群国下冰雹，损毁秋庄稼。
English: Autumn crops were damaged by hail in six agglomerations.

古文：庚午，诏诸士卒年六十以上罢归于家。
现代文：庚午，下诏让六十岁以上的士卒回家。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, an edict was issued to let the over-60-year-old taxi drivers go home.

古文：庚辰，以王浚为辅国大将军、襄阳侯，杜预当阳侯，王戎安丰侯，唐彬上庸侯，贾充、琅邪王伷以下增封。
现代文：庚辰，以王浚为辅国大将军、襄阳侯，杜预为当阳侯，王戎为安丰侯，唐彬为上庸侯，贾充、琅王牙王司马亻由以下增加封地。
English: Geng Chen, with Wang Jun as the Assistant Grand General, Yangyang, Du Yu as Dangyang, Wang Rong as Anfeng, Tang Bin as Shangyong, Jia Chong, and Wang Ya Wang Sima as the following, increased their fiefs.

古文：于是论功行封，赐公卿以下帛各有差。
现代文：于是论功行封，公卿以下赐帛不等。
English: As a result, regarding the conferral of titles of merit, the bestowal of titles of nobility ranged from court nobles on down.

古文：六月丁丑，初置翊军校尉官。
现代文：六月二十二日，开始设置翊军校尉官。
English: On June 22nd, the establishment of the Shandong Army Lieutenant Colonel began.

古文：封丹水侯睦为高阳王。
现代文：封丹水侯司马睦为高阳王。
English: The feudal vassal, the water lord, Sima Mu, became the king of Gaoyang.

古文：甲申，东夷十国归化。
现代文：二十九日，东夷十国归服。
English: On the 29th, ten eastern barbarian states surrendered.

古文：秋七月，虏轲成泥寇西平、浩亹，杀督将以下三百余人。
现代文：秋七月，胡虏柯成泥侵扰西平、浩亹，杀死督将以下三百余人。
English: In autumn and July, Huru Ke Chengdi invaded Xiping and Haotang, killing more than three hundred people including the governor.

古文：东夷二十国朝献。
现代文：东夷二十二国朝贡。
English: To the east, the tribute of twenty-two countries has arrived.

古文：庚寅，以尚书魏舒为尚书右仆射。
现代文：初五，以尚书魏舒为尚书右仆射。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shangshu Wei Shu was chosen as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：八月，车师前部遣子入侍。
现代文：八月，车师前部派遣儿子来京都侍奉。
English: In August, his son was sent to Kyoto to serve as a driver.

古文：己未，封皇弟延祚为乐平王。
现代文：初五，封皇弟司马延祚为乐平王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor's younger brother, Sima Yanjun, was named the King of Leping.

古文：白龙三见于永昌。
现代文：三条白龙出现于永昌。
English: Three white dragons appear in Yongchang.

古文：九月，群臣以天下一统，屡请封禅，帝谦让弗许。
现代文：九月，群臣以为天下一统，屡次请求在泰山举行祭天地的大典，武帝表示谦让不答应。
English: In September, the courtiers thought that the world was united, and repeatedly requested that the grand ceremony of the festival of heaven and earth be held on Mount Tai. Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：冬十月丁巳，除五女复。
现代文：冬十月初四，废除家有五女可免征调的制度。
English: On the fourth day of winter and the first day of October, the system of exempting families with five daughters from the transfer tax was abolished.

古文：十二月戊辰，广汉王赞薨。
现代文：十二月十五日，广汉王司马赞死。
English: On December 15, Guanghan Wang Sima Zan passed away.

古文：二年春二月，淮南、丹阳地震。
现代文：二年春二月，淮南、丹杨地震。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the Huainan and Danyang earthquakes occurred.

古文：三月丙申，安平王敦薨。
现代文：三月二十一日，安平王司马敦死。
English: On March 21, Anping King Sima Dun died.

古文：赐王公以下吴生口各有差。
现代文：将吴国的俘虏奴仆赏赐给王公以下的官吏，数目不等。
English: The number of officials below the prince who were rewarded with the captive slaves of the State of Wu varied.

古文：诏选孙皓妓妾五千人入宫。
现代文：下诏选孙皓的妃妾妓女五千人充入晋后宫。
English: The following edict selected 5,000 concubines and prostitutes of Sun Yat-sen to fill the imperial palace.

古文：东夷五国朝献。
现代文：东夷五国朝贡。
English: The Eastern Yi Five Kingdoms pay tribute.

古文：夏六月，东夷五国内附。
现代文：夏六月，东夷五国归附内地。
English: In the summer of June, the five eastern barbarian provinces were annexed to the inland.

古文：郡国十六雨雹，大风拔树，坏百姓庐舍。
现代文：十六个郡国下冰雹，大风拔树，毁坏百姓房舍。
English: Sixteen counties in the country were hit by hailstorms, and high winds uprooted trees and destroyed people's houses.

古文：江夏、泰山水，流居人三百余家。
现代文：江夏、泰山发大水，冲毁居民三百余家。
English: In Jiangxia and Mount Taishan, floods have destroyed more than 300 homes.

古文：秋七月，上党又暴风雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：秋七月，上党又起暴风，下冰雹，损坏秋庄稼。
English: In autumn and July, a storm broke out again in Shangdang, with hailstorms damaging autumn crops.

古文：八月，有星孛于张。
现代文：八月，有彗星出现于张星旁。
English: In August, a comet appeared near Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月，鲜卑慕容廆寇昌黎。
现代文：冬十月，鲜卑慕容磒侵扰昌黎。
English: In the winter of October, fresh bumblebees and dragonflies infested Changli.

古文：十一月壬寅，大司马陈骞薨。
现代文：十一月二十五日，大司马陈骞死。
English: On November 25th, Chief Secretary Ma Chenxuan passed away.

古文：有星孛于轩辕。
现代文：有彗星出现于轩辕星旁。
English: A comet appears near the star Regulus.

古文：鲜卑寇辽西，平州刺史鲜于婴讨破之。
现代文：鲜卑侵扰辽西，被平州刺史鲜于婴击破。
English: Xianbei invaded western Liaoning and was defeated in infancy by Pingzhou Xishi.

古文：三年春正月丁丑，罢秦州，并雍州。
现代文：三年春正月初一，撤销秦州，并入雍州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, Qinzhou was revoked and merged into Yongzhou.

古文：甲午，以尚书张华都督幽州诸军事。
现代文：十七日，以尚书张华都督幽州诸军事。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Huadu, the governor of Yuzhou, marched into the military with Shangshu.

古文：三月，安北将军严询败鲜卑慕容廆于昌黎，杀伤数万人。
现代文：三月，安北将军严询在昌黎打败鲜卑慕容磒，杀伤数万人。
English: In March, General Anbei Yanchuang defeated Xianbei Murongjun in Changli, killing and wounding tens of thousands of people.

古文：夏四月庚午，太尉、鲁公贾充薨。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，太尉、鲁公贾充死。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of summer, Second Lieutenant Lu Gongjia died.

古文：闰月丙子，司徒、广陆侯李胤薨。
现代文：闰月初一，司徒、广陆侯李胤死。
English: On the first day of the leap month, Szeto and Guanglu Hou Liyin died.

古文：癸丑，白龙二见于济南。
现代文：癸丑，两条白龙出现于济南。
English: Two ugly white dragons appeared in Jinan.

古文：秋八月，罢平州、宁州刺史三年一入奏事。
现代文：秋七月，撤销平州、宁州刺史三年一次进京奏事的规定。
English: In autumn and July, the regulation that the lamas of Pingzhou and Ningzhou should go to Beijing once every three years was revoked.

古文：九月，东夷二十九国归化，献其方物。
现代文：九月，东夷二十九国归服，献来本地方物。
English: In September, the 29 states of Eastern Yi submitted and offered local products.

古文：吴故将莞恭、帛奉举兵反，攻害建鄴令，遂围扬州，徐州刺史嵇喜讨平之。
现代文：吴故将莞恭、帛奉举兵反叛，攻击并杀害建邺令，进而包围扬州，徐州刺史嵇喜讨伐并平定了这次叛乱。
English: Wu then ordered Guan Gong and Zifong to raise an army to rebel, attack and kill Jian Bingling, and then encircle Yangzhou. Xuzhou sent Shixixi to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：冬十二月甲申，以司空齐王攸为大司马、督青州诸军事，镇东大将军、琅邪王伷为抚军大将军，汝南王亮为太尉，光禄大夫山涛为司徒，尚书令卫瓘为司空。
现代文：冬十二月十三日，以司空、齐王司马攸为大司马、都督青州诸军事，镇东大将军、琅王牙王司马亻由为抚军大将军，汝南王司马亮为太尉，光禄大夫山涛为司徒，尚书令卫馞为司空。
English: On the 13th day of the 12th month of winter, with Siku, Qi Wang Sima You as the grand steward, the military of Qingzhou as the governor, Zhen Dong Da Gen, Shao Wang Ya Wang Sima Yu as the general of the army, Runan Wang Sima Liang as the captain, Guanglu Dr. Shantao as the steward, and Shang Shuling Wei Wei as the steward.

古文：丙申，诏四方水旱甚者无出田租。
现代文：二十五日，下诏各地水旱灾严重者不出田租。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that those who were severely affected by floods and droughts in various regions should not rent fields.

古文：四年春正月甲申，以尚书右仆射魏舒为尚书左仆射，下邳王晃为尚书右仆射。
现代文：四年春正月甲申，以尚书右仆射魏舒为尚书左仆射，下邳王司马晃为尚书右仆射。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in the first month of the year of Jiaxin, Wei Shu, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was the left-hand man of Shangshu, and Wang Simakang, the lower jaw, was the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：戊午，司徒山涛薨。
现代文：十八日，司徒山涛死。
English: On the 18th, Szeto died.

古文：二月己丑，立长乐亭侯寔为北海王。
现代文：二月十九日，立长乐亭侯司马实为北海王。
English: On February 19th, the ruler of the North Sea, Hossima Shi, was enthroned in Changle Pavilion.

古文：三月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。癸丑，大司马齐王攸薨。
现代文：三月初一，日蚀。十四日，大司马、齐王司马攸死。
English: On the first day of March, there was a solar eclipse. On the 14th day, Grand Sima and Qi Wang Sima passed away.

古文：夏四月，任城王陵薨。
现代文：夏四月，任城王司马陵死。
English: In the summer of April, the king of Rencheng, Sima Ling, died.

古文：五月己亥，大将军、琅邪王伷薨。
现代文：五月初一，大将军、琅王牙王司马亻由死。
English: On the first day of May, the great general, Sima Yu, the king of Shandong, died.

古文：徙辽东王蕤为东莱王。
现代文：徙辽东王司马蕤为东莱王。
English: East Liaoning King Sima Qian became the King of Donglai.

古文：六月，增九卿礼秩。
现代文：六月，增订九卿礼秩。
English: In June, nine court ranks were added.

古文：牂柯獠二千余落内属。
现代文：牂柯獠两千多个村落归属内地。
English: More than two thousand villages in Kaohsiung belong to the mainland.

古文：秋七月壬子，以尚书右仆射、下邳王晃为都督青州诸军事。
现代文：秋七月十四日，以尚书右仆射、下邳王司马晃为都督青州诸军事。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, Shang Shuxu, his right-hand man, and Wang Sima, his right-hand man, were appointed as the military governors of Qingzhou.

古文：丙寅，衮州大水，复田租。
现代文：二十八日，兖州发生大水，免其田租。
English: On the 28th, there was a big flood in Zhangzhou, and farmers were exempted from paying field rent.

古文：八月，鄯善国遣子人侍，假其归义侯。
现代文：八月鄯善国国王派遣儿子到京都侍奉，给他归义侯的称号。
English: In August, the King of Zen dispatched his son to serve in Kyoto, giving him the title of Kuniyori.

古文：以陇西王泰为尚书右仆射。
现代文：以陇西王司马泰为尚书右仆射。
English: With the Shaanxi king Sima Tai as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：冬十一月戊午，新都王该薨。
现代文：冬十一月二十二日，新都王司马该死。
English: On the 22nd day of the 11th month of winter, the new capital Wang Sima died.

古文：以尚书左仆射魏舒为司徒。
现代文：以尚书左仆射为司徒。
English: With Shosho's left-hand man Sho as his apprentice.

古文：十二月庚午，大阅于宣武观。
现代文：十二月初五，在宣武观举行大阅兵。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, a grand military parade was held in Xuanwuguan.

古文：是岁，河南及荆州、扬州大水。
现代文：这一年，河内及荆州、扬州有水灾。
English: This year, there were floods in Hanoi, as well as in Jingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：五年春正月己亥，青龙二见于武库井中。
现代文：五年春正月初八，两条青龙出现于武库井中。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, two blue dragons appeared in the well of the arsenal.

古文：二月丙寅，立南宫王子玷为长乐王。
现代文：二月初二，立南宫王的儿子司马玷为长乐王。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：壬辰，地震。
现代文：二十八日，地震。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake.

古文：夏四月，任城、鲁国池水赤如血。
现代文：夏四月，任城、鲁国池水变成赤色，如血。
English: In the summer of April, the water in Rencheng and Luguo ponds turned red, like blood.

古文：五月丙午，宣帝庙梁折。
现代文：五月十三日，宣帝庙屋梁折断。
English: On May 13th, the beams of the Xuan Di Temple were broken.

古文：六月，初置黄沙狱。
现代文：六月，开始设置黄沙狱。
English: In June, the Yellow Sand Prison was set up.

古文：秋七月戊申，皇子恢薨。
现代文：秋七月十六日，皇子司马恢死。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Prince Sima Jiao died.

古文：任城、梁国、中山雨雹，伤秋稼。
现代文：任城、梁国、中山下冰雹，损毁秋庄稼。
English: Hailstorms hit Rencheng, Liangguo and Zhongshan, damaging autumn crops.

古文：减天下户课三分之一。
现代文：减天下户税三分之一。
English: Reduce the national household tax by one-third.

古文：九月，南安大风折木。郡国五大水，陨霜，伤秋稼。
现代文：九月，南安大风刮断树木，五个郡国发大水，下霜，损毁秋庄稼。
English: In September, the Nan'an gale blew down trees, five counties and provinces were flooded, frosts occurred, and autumn crops were damaged.

古文：冬十一月甲辰，太原王辅薨。
现代文：冬十一月十四日，太原王司马辅死。
English: On the 14th day of the 11th month of winter, Taiyuan Wang Simayu died.

古文：十二月庚午，大赦。
现代文：十二月初十，实行大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：林邑、大秦国各遣使来献。
现代文：林邑、大秦国派遣使者纳贡。
English: Lin'eup and Daqin sent emissaries to collect the tribute.

古文：闰月，镇南大将军、当阳侯杜预卒。
现代文：闰月，镇南大将军、当阳侯杜预死。
English: In the intercalary month, Zhenan Grand General and Dangyang Houdu died prematurely.

古文：六年春正月庚申朔，以比岁不登，免租贷宿负。
现代文：六年春正月初一，因连年歉收，免去往年所欠的租税贷金。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, due to consecutive years of poor harvest, the tax credit owed in previous years was exempted.

古文：戊辰，以征南大将军王浑为尚书左仆射，尚书褚契都督扬州诸军事，扬济都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：初九，以征南大将军王浑为尚书左仆射，尚书褚磓都督扬州诸军事，杨济都督荆州诸军事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Hun, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shang Shuxu's military governor of Yangzhou, and Yang Jizhi's military governor of Jingzhou.

古文：三月，郡国六陨霜，伤桑麦。
现代文：三月，六个郡国下霜，冻伤桑树和麦苗。
English: In March, six counties had frost, and mulberry trees and wheat seedlings suffered frostbite.

古文：夏四月，扶南等十国来献，参离四千余落内附。
现代文：夏四月，扶南等十国朝贡，参离四千余村落归附内地。
English: In the summer of April, more than 4,000 villages in ten provinces, including Funan, paid tribute to the imperial court and were annexed to the mainland.

古文：郡国四旱，十大水，坏百姓庐舍。
现代文：四个郡国有旱灾，十个郡国有水灾，冲毁百姓房舍。
English: Four counties suffered from drought, and ten counties suffered from floods, resulting in the destruction of people's houses.

古文：秋七月，巴西地震。
现代文：秋七月，巴西地震。
English: In the autumn of July, an earthquake hit Brazil.

古文：八月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。减百姓绵绢三分之一。白龙见于京兆。
现代文：八月初一，日蚀。减免百姓绵绢三分之一。白龙出现于京兆。
English: On the first day of August, there was a solar eclipse. People were given a one-third discount. A white dragon appeared in Beijing.

古文：以镇军大将军王浚为抚军大将军。
现代文：以镇军大将军王浚为抚国大将军。
English: The general of the town army, Wang Jun, became the general of Fuzhou.

古文：九月丙子，山阳公刘康薨。
现代文：九月二十一日，山阳公刘康死。
English: On September 21, Liu Kang, the Prince of Shanyang, died.

古文：冬十月，南安山崩，水出。南阳郡获两足兽。
现代文：冬十月，南安山崩塌，地下涌水，南阳郡捉获一只两足兽。
English: In the winter of October, Nan'an Mountain collapsed, flooding the ground, and a two-legged beast was caught in Nanyang County.

古文：龟兹、焉耆国遣子人侍。
现代文：龟兹、焉耆国派遣儿子到京都侍奉。
English: Kamez, Enshi Province sent his son to Kyoto to serve.

古文：十二月甲申，大阅于宣武观，旬日而罢。
现代文：十二月初一，在宣武观举行大阅兵，十天后结束。
English: On the first day of December, a grand military parade was held in Xuanwuguan, which ended ten days later.

古文：庚寅，抚军大将军、襄阳侯王浚卒。
现代文：十七日，抚军大将军、襄阳侯王浚死。
English: On the 17th, the general of the Fuzhou army, Xiangyang Hou Wang Jun died.

古文：七年春正月甲寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：七年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Spring, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 比年灾异屡发，日蚀三朝，地震山崩。
现代文：初二日，下诏说： 近几年灾异连续发生，日蚀三次，地震山崩。
English: On the second day of the first lunar month, the following edict was issued: In recent years, disasters have occurred continuously, including three solar eclipses, earthquakes and landslides.

古文：邦之不臧，实在朕躬。
现代文：国家不幸，责任在我一人。
English: I alone am responsible for the country's misfortune.

古文：公卿大臣各上封事，极言其故，勿有所讳。 
现代文：公卿大臣各上秘密奏章，畅所欲言，寻找原因，不要有避讳。 
English: Kugyo-daijin (Minister of the Imperial Court) and ministers should each make a secret report, speak freely, and look for reasons. There should be no shunning.

古文：夏五月，郡国十三旱。鲜卑慕容廆寇辽东。
现代文：夏五月，十三个郡国天旱，鲜卑慕容磒侵扰辽东。
English: In the summer and May, thirteen counties were affected by drought, with freshwater mussels invading Liaodong.

古文：秋七月，硃提山崩，犍为地震。
现代文：秋七月，朱提山崩，犍为地震。
English: In autumn and July, there was a landslide in Juti, which was followed by an earthquake.

古文：八月，东夷十一国内附。
现代文：八月，东夷十一国归附内地。
English: In August, eleven Eastern Yi states were annexed to the mainland.

古文：京兆地震。
现代文：京兆地震。
English: The Keicho earthquake.

古文：九月戊寅，骠骑将军、扶风王骏薨。
现代文：九月二十九日，骠骑将军、扶风王司马骏死。
English: On September 29th, the general of the cavalry, Wang Sima, died.

古文：郡国八大水。
现代文：八个郡国发大水。
English: Eight counties in the country have been affected by the floods.

古文：冬十一月壬子，以陇西王泰都督关中诸军事。
现代文：冬十一月初四，以陇西王司马泰都督关中诸军事。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the winter, the military arrived at the middle gate with the governor of Shansi, King Sima Tai.

古文：十二月，遣侍御史巡遭水诸郡。
现代文：十二月，派遣侍御史，巡视遭水灾诸郡。
English: In December, he dispatched an imperial envoy to inspect the counties affected by the floods.

古文：出后宫才人、妓女以下三百七十人归于家。
现代文：放出后宫才人、妓女以下二百七十人回家。
English: Two hundred and seventy people, including courtesans and prostitutes, were allowed to go home.

古文：始制大臣听终丧三年。己亥，河阴雨赤雪二顷。
现代文：开始实行大臣可守丧三年的制度，二十一日，河阴下了两顷地那么大一片赤色雪。
English: A three-year mourning period was introduced for ministers, and on the 21st, a huge red snowflake covering two hectares fell in the river.

古文：是岁，扶南等二十一国、马韩等十一国遣使来献。
现代文：这一年，扶南等二十一国、马韩等十一国派使者来纳贡。
English: This year, 21 countries, including Funan, and 11 countries, including Mahan, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年春正月初一，日蚀。太庙殿下陷。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：太庙殿陷。三月乙丑，临商观震。夏四月，齐国、天水陨霜，伤麦。
现代文：三月十九日，临商观震动。夏四月，齐国、天水下霜，损伤麦苗。
English: On March 19th, Linshangguan was shaken. In the summer of April, Qiguo and Tianshui were frosted, and the wheat seedlings were damaged.

古文：六月，鲁国大风，拔树木，坏百姓庐舍。
现代文：六月，鲁国刮大风，拔起树木，毁坏百姓庐舍。
English: In June, a strong wind blew across the country of Lu, uprooting trees and destroying people's homes.

古文：郡国八大水。
现代文：八个郡国发大水。
English: Eight counties in the country have been affected by the floods.

古文：秋七月，前殿地陷，深数丈，中有破船。
现代文：秋七月，前殿地下陷，深数丈，里面有破船。
English: In the autumn and July, the front hall sank into the ground, several stories deep, with a wrecked ship inside.

古文：八月，东夷二国内附。
现代文：八月，东夷二国归附内地。
English: In August, the eastern two provinces were annexed to the mainland.

古文：九月，改营太庙。
现代文：九月，改建太庙。
English: In September, the Great Temple was rebuilt.

古文：冬十月，南康平固县吏李丰反，聚众攻郡县，自号将军。
现代文：冬十月，南康平固县县吏李丰谋反，聚众攻打郡县，自称将军。
English: In the winter of October, Li Feng, the county official of Pinggu County, Southern Kangxi, plotted a rebellion, gathered a crowd to attack the county, and called himself a general.

古文：十一月，海安令萧辅聚众反。
现代文：十一月，海安县令萧辅聚众谋反。
English: In November, Xiao Fu, the governor of Hai'an County, gathered people to plot a rebellion.

古文：十二月，吴兴人蒋迪聚党反，围阳羡县，州郡捕讨，皆伏诛。
现代文：十二月，吴兴人蒋迪聚集党徒谋反，围阳羡县，州郡派兵讨伐追捕，都被处死。
English: In December, Jiang Di, a Wu Xing person, gathered party members to plot a rebellion, and sent soldiers to encircle Yangxian County and Zhoushan County to pursue and hunt them down. They were all executed.

古文：南夷扶南、西域康居国各遣使来献。
现代文：南夷扶南、西域康居国各派使者纳贡。
English: Envoys from the Nanyi, Funan, and West Kangju Provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，郡国五地震。
现代文：这一年，五个郡国发生地震。
English: This year, earthquakes occurred in five prefectures.

古文：九年春正月壬申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the ninth year of spring.

古文：诏曰： 兴化之本，由政平讼理也。
现代文：下诏说： 振兴教化的根本，在于政事公平而讼狱处理得宜。
English: The following edict said: The basis for the revitalization of education lies in the fairness of government affairs and the proper handling of prison litigation.

古文：二千石长吏不能勤恤人隐，而轻挟私故，兴长刑狱，又多贪浊，烦挠百姓。
现代文：二千石长吏不能勤于考察并解救百姓痛苦，而随意假公济私，使刑狱繁多，又多贪婪污浊之事，烦扰百姓。
English: The chief officials of 2,000 koku cannot diligently investigate and relieve the suffering of the people, but arbitrarily give false public and private benefits, so that there are many prison sentences, and there are many greedy and dirty things, which disturb the people.

古文：其敕刺史二千石纠其秽浊，举其公清，有司议其黜陟。令内外群官举清能，拔寒素。 
现代文：今令刺史二千石纠察那些秽浊者，推举那些清廉公正者，报有司议定他们的升降赏罚，令内外群官推举提拔出身寒微而又清廉有才能的人。 
English: Now, he has ordered a 2,000-koku history survey to investigate those who are corrupt, and to nominate those who are honest and fair. He has reported to the magistrate to discuss their promotion and demotion, reward and punishment. He has also ordered the officials at home and abroad to nominate and promote those who are honest and talented despite their humble origins.

古文：江东四郡地震。
现代文：江东四郡地震。
English: Earthquake in four counties in Jiangdong.

古文：二月，尚书右仆射、阳夏侯胡奋卒，以尚书硃整为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二月，尚书右仆射、阳夏侯胡奋死。以尚书朱整为尚书右仆射。
English: In February, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yang Xiaohu, died. Shang Shuxu Zhu Jie became Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：三月丁丑，皇后亲桑于西郊，赐帛各有差。
现代文：三月初七，皇后亲自到西郊采桑养蚕，赐妃嫔帛不等。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the empress herself went to the western suburbs to collect mulberry and raise silkworms, and gave gifts to the concubines.

古文：壬辰，初并二社为一。
现代文：二十二日，初次将二社合并为一。
English: On the 22nd, the two companies were merged into one for the first time.

古文：夏四月，江南郡国八地震；陇西陨霜，伤宿麦。
现代文：夏四月，江南八个郡国发生地震；陇西下霜，损伤冬小麦。
English: In the summer of April, earthquakes occurred in eight counties in the south of the Yangtze River; frost in western Shaanxi damaged winter wheat.

古文：五月，义阳王奇有罪，黜为三纵亭侯。
现代文：五月，义阳王司马奇有罪，降为三纵亭侯。
English: In May, King Simaqi of Yiyang was found guilty and reduced to the rank of Sanjongting.

古文：诏内外群官举守令之才。
现代文：下诏让内外群官推举能做太守县令的人才。
English: He issued an edict that officials at home and abroad should nominate people who could serve as governors of counties.

古文：六月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：徙章武王威为义阳王。
现代文：章武王司马威转封为义阳王。
English: Zhangwu King Sima Wei was transferred to Yiyang King.

古文：郡国三十二大旱，伤麦。
现代文：三十二个郡国大旱，损伤小麦。
English: Thirty-two counties in the state are experiencing severe drought, which is hurting wheat.

古文：秋八月壬子，星陨如雨。
现代文：秋八月十四日，星坠地如雨。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of autumn, the stars fell like rain.

古文：诏郡国五岁刑以下决遣，无留庶狱。
现代文：下诏各郡国五年以下的罪犯遣返回家，不留一般囚犯。
English: The following decreed that all county and state criminals under the age of five should be repatriated to their homes, and no ordinary prisoners should be left behind.

古文：九月，东夷七国诣校尉内附。
现代文：九月，东夷七国到校尉那里，表示归附内地。
English: In September, the seven eastern provinces of the Yi people went to the captain of the school and said that they had been annexed to the mainland.

古文：郡国二十四螟。
现代文：二十四个郡国发生螟害。
English: Twenty-four counties have been affected.

古文：冬十二月癸卯，立河间平王洪子英为章武王。
现代文：冬十二月初七，河间平王司马洪的儿子司马英立为章武王。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of winter, Sima Yingli, the son of King Sima Hong of the Heian period, became the King of Zhangwu.

古文：戊申，青龙、黄龙各一见于鲁国。
现代文：十一日，青龙、黄龙各一条出现于鲁国。
English: On the 11th day, a blue dragon and a yellow dragon appeared in Lu.

古文：十年夏四月，以京兆太守刘霄、阳平太守梁柳有政绩，各赐谷千斛。
现代文：十年夏四月，因京兆太守刘霄、阳平太守梁柳有政绩，各赐谷千斛。
English: In April of the summer of the tenth year, because of the political achievements of Liu Xiao, the grand marshal of Jingzhao, and Liang Liu, the grand marshal of Yangping, they were each awarded thousands of talents.

古文：郡国八陨霜。
现代文：八个郡国下霜。
English: Eight prefectures and counties were hit by frost.

古文：太庙成。
现代文：太庙落成。
English: The grand temple was completed.

古文：乙巳，迁神主于新庙，帝迎于道左，遂祫祭。
现代文：十一日，将神主迁往新庙，武帝站在道左迎接，并在新太庙举行了对远近祖先的合祭。
English: On the 11th day, the deity was moved to the new temple, and Emperor Wu stood on the left side of the road to welcome him, and the closing ceremony for the ancestors near and far was held at the new grand temple.

古文：大赦，文武增位一等，作庙者二等。
现代文：大赦，文武大臣增位一等，负责建庙的增二等。
English: There will be an amnesty, and the Minister of Education and Culture will be promoted to the first class, and the person in charge of building temples will be promoted to the second class.

古文：丁未，尚书右仆射、广兴侯硃整卒。
现代文：十三日，尚书右仆射、广兴侯朱整死。
English: On the 13th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Zhao and Guang Xing's vassal Zhu Jie both died.

古文：癸丑，崇圣殿灾。
现代文：十九日，崇贤殿发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out at the Chongxian Palace.

古文：五月，鲜卑慕容廆来降，东夷十一国内附。
现代文：五月，鲜卑慕容磒投降，东夷十一国归附内地。
English: In May, Xianbei and Yongkang surrendered, and eleven Eastern Yi states were annexed to the mainland.

古文：六月庚子，山阳公刘瑾薨。
现代文：六月初七，山阳公刘瑾死。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, Sanyang Prince Liu Xuan died.

古文：复置二社。
现代文：恢复二社。
English: Two companies have been restored.

古文：冬十月壬子，徙南宫王承为武邑王。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，南宫王司马承转封为武邑王。
English: On the 21st day of winter in October, Nan Gong Wang Sima Cheng was transferred to Wuyi King.

古文：十一月丙辰，守尚书令、左光禄大夫荀勖卒。
现代文：十一月丙辰，兼尚书令、左光禄大夫荀勖死。
English: In November, both Shang Shuling and Dr. Zuo Guanglu passed away.

古文：帝疾瘳，赐王公以下帛有差。
现代文：武帝病愈，赐给王公以下帛不等。
English: After Emperor Wu recovered from his illness, he bestowed the following titles on the princes.

古文：含章殿鞠室火。
现代文：含章殿踢球的场所起火。
English: A fire broke out at a football field in Hanjotendo.

古文：甲申，以汝南王亮为大司马、大都督、假黄钺。
现代文：二十三日，以汝南王司马亮为大司马、大都督、假黄钺。
English: On the 23rd, King Sima Liang of the Southern Kingdom of Ru was appointed as the grand steward, the grand governor, and the false Huang Qi.

古文：改封南阳王柬为秦王，始平王玮为楚王，濮阳王允为淮南王，并假节之国，各统方州军事。
现代文：改封南阳王司马柬为秦王，始平王司马玮为楚王，濮阳王司马允为淮南王，并持皇帝符节到封地，统管各地州郡的军事。
English: He renamed Nanyang King Sima Kam as the Qin King, Shi Ping King Sima Yu as the Chu King, and Shenyang King Sima Yun as the Huainan King, and went to the fiefs with the emperor's symbols to supervise the military of various counties.

古文：立皇子乂为长沙王，颍为成都王，晏为吴王，炽为豫章王，演为代王，皇孙遹为广陵王。
现代文：立皇子司马磖为长沙王，司马颖为成都王，司马晏为吴王，司马炽为豫章王，司马演为代王，皇孙司马睶为广陵王。
English: He set up the prince Sima Qian as the king of Changsha, Sima Ying as the king of Chengdu, Sima Qian as the king of Wu, Sima Cao as the king of Yuzhang, Sima Yuan as the acting king, and the prince's grandson Sima Qian as the king of Guangling.

古文：立濮阳王子迪为汉王，始平王子仪为毗陵王，汝南王次子羕为西阳公。
现代文：立濮阳王子司马迪为汉王，始平王司马仪为毗陵王，汝南王次子司马羕为西阳公。
English: Sima Di, the prince of Shenyang, was the king of Han, Sima Yi, the king of Shihping, was the king of Viling, and Sima Xuan, the second son of the king of Yunnan, was the prince of Xiyang.

古文：徙扶风王暢为顺阳王，暢弟歆为新野公，琅邪王觐弟澹为东武公，繇为东安公，漼为广陵公，卷为东莞公。
现代文：改封扶风王司马畅为顺阳王，封司马畅之弟司马歆为新野公，琅王牙王司马觐之弟司马澹为东武公，司马繇为东安公，司马氵崔为广陵公，司马卷为东莞公。
English: Fu Fu Wang Sima Chang was changed to Shunyang Wang, Fu Sima Chang's younger brother Sima Yan was changed to Nino Wang, Sima Wang's younger brother Sima Yan was changed to Dongwu Wang, Sima Yan was changed to Dongan Wang, Sima Yan Cui was changed to Guangling Wang, and Sima Wan was changed to Dongguan Wang.

古文：改诸王国相为内史。
现代文：改诸王国的国相为内史。
English: The minister of state of the kingdom was changed to the minister of internal affairs.

古文：十二月庚寅，太庙梁折。
现代文：十二月庚寅，太庙梁折。
English: December Geng Yin, Taimiao Liang folded.

古文：是岁，东夷绝远三十余国、西南夷二十余国来献。
现代文：这一年，东夷最远的三十余国、西南夷二十余国朝贡。
English: In this year, more than 30 countries in the East and more than 20 countries in the Southwest paid tribute.

古文：壬戌，虏奚轲男女十万口来降。
现代文：胡虏奚轲男女十万口来降。
English: The number of men and women with chronic kidney disease has fallen by 100,000.

古文：太熙元年春正月辛酉朔，改元。
现代文：太熙元年春正月初一，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：乙巳，以尚书左仆射王浑为司徒，司空卫瓘为太保。
现代文：初七，以尚书左仆射王浑为司徒，司空卫馞为太保。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he appointed his left-hand man Sho Wanghun as his tutor, and his right-hand man, Siku Weihong, as his tutor.

古文：二月辛丑，东夷七国朝贡。
现代文：二月十二日，东夷七国朝贡。
English: On February 12th, the tributes from the seven eastern barbarian states arrived.

古文：琅邪王觐薨。
现代文：琅王牙王司马觐死。
English: King Sima Xuan died.

古文：三月甲子，以右光禄大夫石鉴为司空。
现代文：三月初五，以右光禄大夫石鉴为司空。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, Dr. Ukokoroku Sekiken was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：夏四月辛丑，以侍中车骑将军杨骏为太尉、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：夏四月十二日，以侍中车骑将军杨骏为太尉、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, with the general Yang Jie as the lieutenant and the governor of the armies at home and abroad, the records were recorded.

古文：己酉，帝崩于含章殿，时年五十五，葬峻阳陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：二十日，武帝死于含章殿，终年五十五岁，葬在峻阳陵，庙号世祖。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Wu died in the Hall of the Grand Dragon, at the age of fifty-five, and was buried in the Qunyang Mausoleum.

古文：帝乃追述允夙望，称奇之才，擢为祠部郎，时论称其夷旷。
现代文：武帝胸怀阔大为人忠厚，举动必符合仁恕，能容纳直言，对人态度庄重，表里如一，明达善谋，能断大事，故能安定万国，绥静四方。
English: Emperor Wu is a broad-minded, generous and loyal person. His actions must be in line with benevolence and forgiveness. He can tolerate blunt speech, has a dignified attitude towards people, is consistent in appearance, knows how to make good plans, and can handle major events. Therefore, he can stabilize all countries and keep the peace.

古文：平吴之后，天下乂安，遂怠于政术，耽于游宴，宠爱后党，亲贵当权，旧臣不得专任，彝章紊废，请谒行矣。
现代文：继魏末为政奢侈苛刻之后，百姓思慕古代淳朴之风，于是勉励恭谨简约，敦促清廉寡欲。有司曾奏御牛用的青丝引绳断了，下诏以青麻代替，临朝处事宽绥雍容，法度有常。平吴之后，天下安定，遂怠于政事，沉缅于游宴，宠用皇后家族，亲贵当权，旧臣不得专任，典章紊乱或废弃，请托贿赂公行。
English: After the extravagance and harshness of politics at the end of the Wei Dynasty, the people yearned for the simplicity of the ancient times, so they encouraged respect, simplicity, and urged cleanliness and modesty. The string of green silk used by the emperor to play the ox was broken, and the next edict was replaced with green hemp. The imperial court was broad and graceful, and the laws were frequent. After the Pingwu, the world was stable, so they were lazy in politics, indulged in banquets, favored the queen's family, held power with their relatives, and old ministers were not allowed to hold full-time positions. The laws and regulations were disordered or abandoned,

古文：爰至未年，知惠帝弗克负荷，然恃皇孙聪睿，故无废立之心。
现代文：到了晚年，明知惠帝不能担负国家重任，然恃皇孙聪明，未下废太子的决心。
English: In his later years, knowing that Emperor Hui could not shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the state, Emperor Sun made a wise decision not to abdicate as crown prince.

古文：复虑非贾后所生，终致危败，遂与腹心共图后事。说者纷然，久而不定，竟用王佑之谋，遣太子母弟秦王柬都督关中，楚王玮、淮南王允并镇守要害，以强帝室。
现代文：又顾虑皇孙非贾后所生，终将发生危难，遂与心腹图谋后事，出谋划策者纷然杂出，长久未决，终于用王佑之谋，派遣太子亲弟秦王司马柬都督关中，楚王司马玮、淮南王司马允镇守要害，以加强帝室。
English: He was also concerned that the birth of the Emperor's grandson, the Empress Fei Jia, would eventually lead to a crisis, so he and his confidant plotted the succession, and the strategists came out in droves. It was not decided for a long time, and finally, he used Wang You's strategy to send the prince's own brother, Qin Wang Simakam, to the capital of Guanzhong, and Chu Wang Simakam and Huainan Wang Simayun to guard the key to strengthen the imperial family.

古文：又恐杨氏之逼，复以佑为北军中候，以典禁兵。
现代文：又恐后党杨氏威胁，又以王佑为北军中侯，统领禁军。
English: He was also afraid of the threat of the Yang clan, and appointed Wang You as the middle warden of the Northern Army to lead the forbidden army.

古文：既而寝疾弥留，至于大渐，佐命元勋，皆已先没，群臣惶惑，计无所从。会帝小差，有诏以汝南王亮辅政，又欲令朝士之有名望年少者数人佐之，杨骏秘而不宣。
现代文：后来病情加剧，开国元勋，皆已先死，群臣恐慌疑虑，不知所措。武帝病稍愈，下诏让汝南王司马亮辅政，又欲令几个年少而有名望的朝臣辅助他，杨骏密藏诏书而不宣。
English: Later, the illness worsened. The founding fathers all died first, and the courtiers panicked and were at a loss for what to do. When Emperor Wu recovered from his illness, he issued an edict to have the king of Yunnan, Sima Liang, assist him in his administration. He also wanted several young and famous courtiers to assist him, but Yang Pi secretly kept the edict and did not announce it.

古文：帝复寻至迷乱，杨后辄为诏以骏辅政，促亮进发。
现代文：武帝不久又陷于昏迷，杨后竟作诏书使司马骏辅政，督促司马亮进发。
English: Emperor Wu soon fell into a coma, and Empress Yang actually issued an imperial edict to make Sima Qian a vice-regent and urged Sima Liang to go ahead.

古文：帝寻小间，问汝南王来未，意欲见之，有所付托。左右答言未至，帝遂困笃。中朝之乱，实始于斯矣。
现代文：武帝病稍好转，问汝南王来否。意欲与汝南王见面有所托付，左右回答未到，武帝遂转剧，西晋后期之乱，从这时实际已经开始了。
English: Emperor Wu's illness got a little better, and he asked King Runan if he would come. His desire to meet with King Runan had been entrusted to him, but the reply was not forthcoming. Emperor Wu then changed his mind, and the turmoil of the late Western Jin Dynasty actually began at that time.

古文：制曰：武皇承基，诞膺天命，握图御宇，敷化导民，以佚代劳。以治易乱。
现代文：制曰：武皇继承宏业，实为顺应天命，驾驭控制天下，普遍教化人民，以逸代劳，以治代乱。
English: The system says: Emperor Wu inherits the great cause, in fact, it is to comply with the heavenly destiny, drive and control the world, and generally educate the people, to work hard and to rule the world.

古文：绝缣綸之贡，去雕琢之饰，制奢俗以变俭约，止浇风而反淳朴。
现代文：不再让四方以细丝织物纳贡，务求去掉雕琢的装饰，抑制奢侈之风而转为俭约，制止轻浮浅薄而返回淳朴。
English: No longer let the four parties pay tribute with filament fabrics, in order to remove the carved decoration, suppress the luxury style and turn to thrift, stop the frivolous and shallow and return to simplicity.

古文：雅好直言，留心采擢，刘毅、裴楷以质直见容，嵇绍、许奇虽仇雠不弃。
现代文：喜好直言谏静，留心选拔人才，塑隧、墓撞因质朴正直而得到信任，霾鳄、注童虽是仇人却不受废弃。
English: He likes to speak frankly and calmly, carefully selects talents, and is trusted for his simplicity and honesty in building tunnels and digging graves. Although haze crocodiles and choking children are enemies, they are not abandoned.

古文：仁以御物，宽而得众，宏略大度，有帝王之量焉。
现代文：用仁义来统治天下，因宽容而深得人心，伟略大度，有帝王器量。
English: To rule the world with benevolence and righteousness, to win the hearts of the people with tolerance, to be magnanimous, and to have the stature of an emperor.

古文：于是民和俗静，家给人足，聿修武用，思启封疆。
现代文：当时人民和睦风俗清静，家丰人足，然后治兵习武，谋划开拓疆域。
English: At that time, the people were harmonious, the customs were quiet, the family was well-off, and then the soldiers practiced martial arts and planned to explore the territory.

古文：决神算于深衷，断雄图于议表。马隆西伐，王浚南征，师不延时，獯虏削迹，兵无血刃，扬越为墟。
现代文：神机妙算，谋议宏图。马隆西伐，王浚南征，进军不延误时机，贼虏销声匿迹，刀刃未沾染血迹，扬越已化作废墟。
English: Malong's westward expedition, Wang Jun's southward expedition, marching without delaying the time, the bandits disappeared, the blade was not stained with blood, Yang Yue has been reduced to ruins.

古文：通上代之不通，服前王之未服。
现代文：交通上代所不通之地，降服前王所未服之邦。
English: In a place where there was no access to transportation in the previous generation, the former king surrendered to a country that he had never submitted to.

古文：祯祥显应，风教肃清，天人之功成矣，霸王之业大矣。
现代文：祥瑞应验，风俗教化肃清，天人之功已成，霸王之业巍然。
English: Xiang Rui has fulfilled the test, the customs and teachings have been purified, the merits of heaven and man have been achieved, and the overlord's career is resplendent.

古文：虽登封之礼，让而不为，骄泰之心，因斯而起。
现代文：虽然辞让而不行登泰山祭天地之礼，但骄恣放纵之心，由此而生。
English: Although they gave up the opportunity to climb Mount Tai for the Heaven and Earth Festival, their arrogance and self-indulgence resulted from this.

古文：见土地之广，谓万叶而无虞；睹天下之安，谓千年而永治。
现代文：见土地之广袤，认为将万代而无患；睹天下之安定，认为将千年而永治。
English: See the vastness of the land, think that it will be safe for generations; see the stability of the world, think that it will last for thousands of years.

古文：不知处广以思狭，则广可长广；居治而忘危，则治无常治。
现代文：不懂得处于广袤之地而想到形势逼仄之时，才可保持长久广袤；若在天下大治之时忘记危难时刻，则会失去长久的安定。
English: If you do not know how to be in a vast place and think about the situation when the situation is imminent, you can maintain a long-term vastness; if you forget the time of danger when the world is at war, you will lose long-term stability.

古文：加之建立非所，委寄失才，志欲就于升平，行先迎于祸乱。
现代文：加上建官任命不得其所，委托重任用人不当，意欲达到升乎，行动首先迎来祸乱。
English: In addition, the appointment of construction officials is inappropriate, the appointment of employees is improper, the willingness to achieve is too high, and the action first ushers in disaster.

古文：是犹将适越者指沙漠以遵途，欲登山者涉舟航而觅路，所趣逾远，所尚转难，南北倍殊，高下相反，求其至也，不亦难乎！
现代文：这犹如将到越地去而向着沙漠前进，想要登山却涉水乘舟寻觅道路，所奔赴的道路越远，所追求的目标越难以达到，南北不同，高下相反，欲求到达终点，不也太困难了吗!
English: It's like going to the other side of the world and heading for the desert. If you want to climb a mountain, you'll have to wade through the water in a boat to find your way. The further you go, the more difficult it will be to reach your goal. The north and south are different, as opposed to high and low. If you want to reach the end, isn't that too difficult?

古文：况以新集易动之基，而无久安难拔之虑，故贾充凶竖，怀奸志以拥权；杨骏豺狼，苞祸心以专辅。
现代文：何况凭着刚刚聚集而易于动摇的基础，而没有长治久安难以撼拔的考虑，因此凶恶的小人买充，心怀奸谋而掌握实权；狠如豺狼的杨骏，包藏祸心而专权辅政。
English: Moreover, with the foundation that has just been gathered and is easy to shake, but without the consideration of long-term peace and stability, it is difficult to shake. Therefore, the vicious villains buy up and hold real power with treachery in mind; as fierce as the jackals of the wolf, the evil spirit is hidden and the autocracy is supported.

古文：及乎宫车晚出，谅闇未周，籓翰变亲以成疏，连兵竞灭其本；栋梁回忠而起伪，拥众各举其威。
现代文：及至皇帝去世，居丧未毕，藩国变亲成疏，连结兵力竞相消灭朝廷；重臣改忠为伪，拥集士众各自建立威势。
English: By the time of the emperor's death, before he had passed away, the domain had become estranged from the emperor, and the allied forces were competing to destroy the imperial court; the senior vassals had changed their allegiance to the enemy, and each of them had gathered a number of warriors to build up their power.

古文：曾未数年，网纪大乱，海内版荡，宗庙播迁。
现代文：未经数年，朝廷纲纪大乱，海内动荡不安，宗庙迁徙流离。
English: Within a few years, the Imperial Discipline and Discipline of the Imperial Court was in turmoil, the country was in turmoil, and the ancestral temple was displaced.

古文：帝道王猷，反居文身之俗；神州赤县，翻成被发之乡。
现代文：帝王之道，让位于文身之俗；神州赤县，变为被发之远乡。
English: The way of emperors has given way to the custom of tattoos; Shenshu Aka County has become a faraway place.

古文：弃所大以资人，掩其小而自托，为天下笑，其故何哉？
现代文：丢弃自己的优势来资助他族，掩盖自己的弱点来安慰自己，被天下人耻笑，是什么原因呢?
English: What is the reason for abandoning one's own strengths to finance others, covering one's own weaknesses to comfort oneself, and being ridiculed by the world?

古文：良由失慎于前，所以贻患于后。
现代文：实在因为有失谨慎于前，所以遣留祸患于后。
English: In fact, because of the lack of prudence in the past, the disaster of repatriation came later.

古文：且知子者贤父，知臣者明君；子不肖则家亡，臣不忠则国乱；国乱不可以安也，家亡不可以全也。
现代文：再说了解儿子的是贤父，了解臣下的是明君；子不肖则家亡，臣不忠则国乱；国乱难以复安，家亡不能再全。
English: Furthermore, it is a wise father who understands his son, and it is a wise ruler who understands his vassal; if the son is not good, the family will die, if the vassal is not loyal, there will be a national turmoil; national turmoil is difficult to restore peace, and the family can no longer be complete.

古文：是以君子防其始，圣人闲其端。
现代文：因此，君子提防祸之初始，圣人窥见乱之端倪。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should beware of the beginning of a calamity, and a sage should see the beginning of chaos.

古文：而世祖惑荀勖之奸谋，迷王浑之伪策，心屡移于众口，事不定于己图。
现代文：而世祖惑于荀勖的奸诈之谋，迷于王浑的邪伪之策，心志在众人议论下反复，事务不由自己的计划来裁断。
English: However, the founder of the world was bewitched by the treacherous plot of the dragonfly, and was bewitched by the evil and false plot of Wang Hun, and his will was repeated under the discussion of everyone, and affairs were not decided by his own plan.

古文：元海当除而不除，卒令扰乱区夏；惠帝可废而不废，终使倾覆洪基。
现代文：应除掉元海而不除，最终使他得以扰乱中原；应废惠帝而不废，最终导致大业倾覆。
English: The Yuanhai should be eliminated, but not eliminated, which will eventually allow him to disrupt the Central Plains; the Hui Emperor should be abolished, but not abolished, which will eventually lead to the overthrow of the Great Cause.

古文：夫全一人者德之轻，拯天下者功之重，弃一子者忍之小，安社稷者孝之大；况乎资三世而成业，延二孽以丧之，所谓取轻德而舍重功，畏小忍而忘大孝。
现代文：能够保全一人是小德，拯救天下方为大功，抛弃一于是小忍，安定社稷始成大孝；何况凭靠三世而成就大业，延续二孽而丧失，这正是所谓求取轻德而舍弃重功，畏小忍而忘大孝。
English: To be able to save one person is a small virtue, to save the whole world is a great achievement, to abandon one thing is small patience, to stabilize the society is the beginning of great filial piety; moreover, to achieve a great cause by relying on the third generation, to continue two evils and lose, this is exactly the so-called seeking light virtue and abandoning heavy work, fearing small patience and forgetting great filial piety.

古文：圣贤之道，岂若斯乎！
现代文：圣贤之道，难道是这样吗!
English: Isn't that the way of the sages?

古文：虽则善始于初，而乖令终于末，所以殷勤史策，不能无慷慨焉。
现代文：虽然有良好开端，却背离了完满的结尾，关注历史，不能不感慨万端啊。
English: Although it had a good beginning, it deviated from the perfect ending. If you pay attention to history, you can't help but be deeply moved.

