古文：李公李宗回崔朴李藩韦执谊袁滋裴度张辕赵昌时
现代文：李公李宗回崔朴李藩韦执谊袁滋裴度张辕赵昌时
English: Li Gong, Li Zong, Cui Park, Li Fan, Wei Zhen, Yuan Zi, Pei Du, Zhang Ye, Zhao Chang,

古文：李公
现代文：李公
English: Li Gong

古文：唐贞元中，万年县捕贼官李公，春月与所知街西官亭子置鲙。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，万年县的捕贼官李公，在春天里准备和朋友在街西边的官亭子里喝酒吃鱼。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, Li Gong, the thief-catcher of Wannian County, was preparing to drink and eat fish with his friends in the spring in the official pavilion on the west side of the street.

古文：一客偶至，淹然不去，气色甚傲。
现代文：偶然间来了一个人，停留在亭子里不走，并且神色很傲慢。
English: By chance, a man came, stayed in the pavilion and did not leave, and looked very arrogant.

古文：众问所能，曰： 某善知人食料。 
现代文：大家问他有什么能耐？他说： 我能知道人们每天吃什么饭。 
English: They asked him what he could do, and he said, "I can tell what people eat every day."

古文：李公曰： 且看今日鲙，坐中有人不得吃者否？ 
现代文：李公说： 你看今天的菜，座位中的人有吃不着的吗？ 
English: Li Gong said, "Looking at today's dishes, are there any that people in the seats can't eat?

古文：客微笑曰： 唯足下不得吃。 
现代文：那人微笑着说： 唯独您吃不着。 
English: The man smiled and said, "Only you can't eat it."

古文：李公怒曰： 某为主人，故置此鲙，安有不得吃之理？
现代文：李公生气地说： 我是主人，我安排的酒菜，哪有吃不着的道理！
English: Li Gong said angrily, "I am the host, I arranged the food and drink, why can't I eat it!

古文：此事若中，奉五千，若是妄语，当遭契阔。
现代文：你如果说对了，送给你五千文钱。如果是胡说，当心报应，请大家作证人。 
English: If you're right, I'll give you five thousand coins. If you're wrong, beware of retribution. I'd like you all to testify.

古文：请坐中为证，因促吃。将就，有一人走马来云： 京兆尹召。 
现代文：于是催促快做菜，刚刚要做好，在这时，忽然有人骑着马跑来说： 京兆尹召见。 
English: So he urged them to quickly prepare the dishes, which were just about to be done, when suddenly someone ran on horseback and said, "See you later, Jing Zhaoyun."

古文：李公奔马去，适会有公事，李公惧晚，使报诸客但餐，恐鲙不可停。
现代文：李公只好上马快走，因为有公事，李公怕回来得晚，便告诉客人们现在就吃，否则菜就凉了。
English: Li Gong had no choice but to get on his horse and speed away. As he had business to attend to, Li Gong was afraid that he would be late, so he told the guests to eat now, otherwise the food would get cold.

古文：语庖人： 但留我两碟。 欲破术人之言。诸客甚讶。
现代文：又告诉厨师，给他留两碟菜，以便破了那个人的预言，大家非常惊讶，过了很长一段时间，李公才骑马回来。
English: He also told the chef to leave two dishes for him to break the man's prophecy. Everyone was very surprised. It took a long time before Li Gong returned on horseback.

古文：良久，走马来，诸人已餐毕，独所留鲙在焉。李公脱衫就座，执箸而骂。
现代文：大家已经吃完了，只剩下留下的两碟菜，李公脱去外衣坐下，拿起筷子就骂。
English: Everyone has finished eating, and there are only two dishes left. Li Gong takes off his coat, sits down, picks up his chopsticks, and curses.

古文：术士颜色不动，曰： 某所见不错，未知何故？ 
现代文：可那个人不动声色，说： 我所说的不应该错，不知道什么原因？ 
English: But the man remained impassive and said: What I said should not be wrong, I don't know why?

古文：李公曰： 鲙见在此，尚敢大言。
现代文：李公说： 菜就在我面前，你还敢说大话。
English: Li Gong said: The dish is right in front of me, how dare you talk big.

古文：前约已定，安知某不能忽忽酬酢 言未了，官亭子仰泥土壤，方数尺，堕落，食器粉碎，鲙并杂于粪埃。
现代文：事先已经约定了，你怎么知道我不能惩罚你？ 话没说完，亭子顶上抹的一大片泥土足有好几尺见方忽然掉下来，吃饭的器皿被砸得粉碎，剩下的两碟鱼已混杂在泥粪土中。
English: It was agreed in advance, how do you know I can't punish you? Before the words were out, a large piece of dirt several feet square that had been spread on the roof of the pavilion suddenly fell down, the eating utensils were smashed to pieces, and the remaining two plates of fish were mixed in the mud and excrement.

古文：李公惊异，问厨者更有鲙否？
现代文：李公很惊异，问厨师还有鱼吗？
English: Li Gong was surprised and asked the chef, "Do you have any fish?"

古文：曰： 尽矣。 
现代文：回答说： 没有了。 
English: And he said, There is not.

古文：乃厚谢术士，以钱五千与之。
现代文：于是李公重谢那人，给了他五千文钱。
English: So Li Gong again thanked the man and gave him five thousand yuan.

古文：李宗回
现代文：李宗回
English: Li Zonghui

古文：李宗回者，有文词，应进士举，曾与一客自洛至关。
现代文：李宗回这个人很有文才，为了去考进士，他与另一个人一同从洛阳前往关中。
English: Li Zonghui, a man of great literary talent, traveled from Luoyang to Guanzhong with another person in order to take the entrance examination.

古文：客云： 吾能先知人饮馔，毫厘不失。 
现代文：这个人说： 我能预先知道人每天吃什么饮食，一点都不会差。 
English: This person said: I can know in advance what diet people eat every day, and it won't be bad at all.

古文：临正旦，一日将往华阴县。
现代文：快到正月初一的一天，他们赶往华阴县。
English: One day close to the first day of the first month of the year, they rushed to Huayin County.

古文：县令与李公旧知，先遣书报。
现代文：华阴县令和李宗回是老朋友，李宗回又事先捎去了书信。
English: The Huayin County magistrate and Li Zonghui are old friends. Li Zonghui had previously intercepted the letter.

古文：李公谓客曰： 岁节人家皆有异馔，况县令与我旧知。看明日到，何物吃？ 
现代文：李宗回问同行的那个人： 过年的时候，人家都有好吃的，况且县令和我是老朋友，你看我们明天到了吃什么？ 
English: Li Zong asked his companion: At the time of the New Year, everyone has delicious food. Moreover, the county magistrate and I are old friends. What will we eat when we get there tomorrow?

古文：客抚掌曰： 大哥与公各饮一盏椒葱酒，食五般馄饨，不得饭吃。 
现代文：那人拍着手说： 大哥，你我各饮一杯椒葱酒，吃五种馄饨，但是吃不着饭。 
English: The man clapped his hands and said, "Elder brother, you and I each drink a glass of chili wine and eat five kinds of lettuce, but we can't eat rice.

古文：李公亦未信。
现代文：李宗回不相信。
English: Li Zonghui didn't believe it.

古文：及到华阴县，县令传语，遣鞍马驮乘，店中安下，请二人就县。
现代文：到了华阴县，县令传话让他们先在店房中住下，然后到县衙去。
English: When they arrived in Huayin County, the county magistrate sent word for them to first live in a store room, and then go to the county seat.

古文：相见喜曰： 二贤冲寒，且速暖两大盏酒来，着椒葱。 
现代文：见面后县令高兴地说： 两位路上寒冷，快热两大杯酒来，加胡椒和葱籽。 
English: After the meeting, the county magistrate said happily: The two of you are cold on the road, quickly heat up two large glasses of wine, add pepper and green onion seeds.

古文：良久台盘到，有一小奴与县令耳语。令曰： 总煮来。 
现代文：一会儿就端了上来，这时有个仆人在县令的耳边悄悄说了几句话，县令说： 一块煮上来。 
English: After a while, the fish was served. At this time, a servant whispered a few words in the ear of the prefectural governor. The prefectural governor said, "Boil up one piece."

古文：谓二客曰： 某有一女子，年七八岁，常言何不令我勾当家事？
现代文：然后对他俩说： 我有一个女儿，七八岁经常对我说 为什么不让我做家里的事情？ 
English: Then he said to the two: I have a daughter, seven or eight years old, who often says to me, "Why don't you let me do things at home?"

古文：某昨恼渠，遣检校作岁饭食。
现代文：昨天我被她缠得没办法，便叫她检校准备过年的食物。
English: Yesterday, I was so entangled with her that I couldn't do anything, so I asked her to prepare food for the New Year's Eve after school.

古文：适来云，有五般馄饨，问煮那般？某云，总煮来。 
现代文：刚才仆人来告诉说有五种馅的馄饨，问煮哪一种，我告诉每样都煮一点送来。 
English: Just now, the servant came to tell me that there are five kinds of stuffed oysters, and asked which one to cook. I told him to cook a little bit of everything and send it to me.

古文：逡巡，以大碗盛，二客食尽。
现代文：不一会儿，用大碗将馄饨盛了上来，两个人很快吃光了。
English: A moment later, a large bowl of tuna soup was brought out, and the two men quickly ate it all.

古文：忽有佐吏从外走云， 敕使到。 
现代文：这时忽然有佐吏从外面进来，告诉说： 皇帝的使者到了。 
English: At that moment, an attendant suddenly came in from outside and announced, "The emperor's messenger has arrived."

古文：旧例合迎。
现代文：按照惯例应该去迎接。
English: According to the usual practice, it should be welcomed.

古文：县令惊，忙揖二客，鞭马而去，客遂出。
现代文：县令急忙向二人拱一拱手，出门骑马而去。
English: The county magistrate hurriedly extended his hand to the two men and rode away.

古文：欲就店终餐，其仆者已归，结束先发，已行数里。二人大笑，相与登途，竟不得饮吃。
现代文：两人出了县衙，回到客店想再吃点饭，做饭的仆人已经回家去了。他俩结了帐就上路了，走了几里地后，两人大笑，一同行走，竟吃不着饭。
English: The two of them left the county seat and returned to the inn to get some more food, but the servant who had prepared the meal had already gone home. They settled the bill and went on their way. After walking a few miles, the two of them were laughing and walking together, but they couldn't eat.

古文：异哉，饮啄之分也。
现代文：奇怪的是吃喝的事，也是一定的。
English: Strange things to eat and drink are also a given.

古文：崔朴
现代文：崔朴
English: Cui Pak

古文：唐渭北节判崔朴，故荥阳太守祝之兄也。
现代文：唐朝渭北节判崔朴，是原来的荥阳太守祝的哥哥。
English: Cui Pak, who was sentenced on the North Festival of the Tang Dynasty, was the older brother of the original ruler of Shenyang.

古文：常会客夜宿，有言及宦途通塞，则曰： 崔琯及第后，五任不离释褐，令狐相七考河东廷评，六年太常博士。 
现代文：他曾经出去会客住在别处，与人谈话的时候涉及到做官的道路的通达或壅塞。崔朴说： 崔琯考中进士后，连续做了五任官。令狐相国七考河东廷评。六年太常博士。
English: He used to go out to meet guests and live elsewhere, and when talking with people, it involved the access or obstruction of the road to becoming an official.Cui Pu said: After entering the middle school of Cui Yingkou, he served as an official for five consecutive years.

古文：尝自赋诗，嗟其蹇滞曰： 何日肩三署，终年尾百僚。
现代文：曾经自己给自己做了两句诗，感叹仕途的艰难说： 何日肩三署，终年尾百僚。 
English: I once made two poems for myself, lamenting the difficulties of my career: How many days do I work, and how many colleagues do I have throughout the year.

古文：其后出入清要，张宿遭遇，除谏议大夫，宣慰山东。
现代文：意思是说，终年跟随在百官后面，什么时候才能当上三署里的大官。到了最后他才进入达官显贵的行列。张宿的经历是，被任命为谏议大夫去安抚山东。
English: That is to say, if you follow hundreds of officials all the year round, when will you be able to become a high-ranking official in the three departments? Only at the end will he enter the ranks of dignitaries. Zhang Shuk's experience is that he was appointed as a mediator to appease Shandong.

古文：宪宗面许，回日与相。
现代文：宪宗当面许诺，回来后任命他为丞相。
English: Kenzong promised in person and appointed him as chancellor after his return.

古文：至东洛都亭驿暴卒。
现代文：可是他走到东洛都亭驿站突然死了。
English: But he died suddenly after walking to the East Lothian Railway Station.

古文：崔元章在举场无成，为执权者所叹。
现代文：崔无章在考场上失败。为掌权的官员们所惋惜。
English: Cui Wuzhang failed the exam, much to the chagrin of officials in power.

古文：主司要约，必与及第。
现代文：主考官同他在考试前约定，一定让他考中。
English: The chief examiner made an appointment with him before the exam and made sure that he would pass the exam.

古文：入试日中风，不得一名如此。 
现代文：结果考试当天患中风，就这样还是没有成名。 
English: As a result, he suffered a stroke on the day of the exam, but still did not become famous.

古文：朴因话家世曾经之事：朴父清，故平阳太守。建中初，任蓝田尉。
现代文：崔朴又讲了他们家经历的事情。崔朴父亲崔清，原来是平阳太守，建中初年，任蓝田县尉。
English: Cui Pak also talked about their family's experiences. Cui Pak's father, Cui Qing, was originally the governor of Pingyang, and in his first year of junior high school, he was the lieutenant of Lantian County.

古文：时德宗初即位，用法严峻。
现代文：当时德宗刚刚即位。用法极其严厉。
English: At that time, Emperor Dezong had just ascended to the throne.

古文：是月，三日之内，大臣出贬者七，中途赐死者三，刘晏、黎干，皆是其数。
现代文：那个月的三天之内，有七个大臣被降职调离，中途有三个大臣又被皇帝赐死。刘晏、黎干都在其中。
English: Within three days of that month, seven ministers were demoted and transferred, and in the middle of the process, three ministers were killed by the emperor. Liu Bei and Li Gang were among them.

古文：户部侍郎杨炎贬道州司户参军，自朝受责，驰驿出城，不得归第。
现代文：户部侍郎杨炎被贬到道州做司户参军，从他在朝中受到责难，到骑马兼程而行，中间没让他回家看一下。
English: Yang Yan, the steward of the household, was relegated to Doushu to be the steward of the household to join the army. From the time he was reprimanded in the court to the time he rode a horse, he did not let him go home in the middle.

古文：炎妻先病，至是炎虑耗达，妻闻惊，必至不起。
现代文：杨炎的妻子先前就有病。杨炎考虑如果自己获罪被贬官的消息让妻子知道了，妻子的病情必然加重。
English: Yang Yan's wife had been ill before. Yang Yan thought that if he let his wife know that he had been convicted and demoted, his wife's condition would inevitably worsen.

古文：其日，炎夕次蓝田，清方主邮务。炎才下马，屈崔少府相见。
现代文：当天晚上，杨炎到达蓝田，崔清正在这里主持驿站上的公务，杨炎下马请崔少府相见。
English: On the evening of the same day, Yang Yan arrived in Lantian, where Cui Qing was presiding over the official business of the station. Yang Yan dismounted and asked Cui Shaofu to meet him.

古文：便曰： 某出城时，妻病绵缀。闻某得罪，事情可知。
现代文：杨炎对崔清说： 我出京城时，妻子病得很严重，如果知道我获罪，其后果不堪设想。
English: Yang Yan said to Cui Qing: When I left Beijing, my wife was very ill. If I knew that I had been convicted, the consequences would be unimaginable.

古文：欲奉烦为申辞疾，请假一日，发一急脚附书，宽两处相忧，以侯其来耗，便当首路，可乎？ 
现代文：想要麻烦您为我请一天病假，我好写一封信送去，以解除两处的忧虑，并等候妻子的消息，然后就出发，可以吗？ 
English: Would you be so kind as to grant me a day's sick leave, so that I may write and send a letter to relieve the anxiety in both places, wait for news of my wife, and then set out?

古文：清许之，邮知事吕华进而言曰： 此故不可，敕命严迅。 
现代文：崔清同意了。邮知事吕华说： 此事一定不行，皇帝的命令要求快行。 
English: Cui Qing agreed. Postmaster General Lu Hua said, "This must not be done. The emperor's order requires that we move quickly."

古文：清谓吕华： 杨侍郎迫切，不然，申府以阙马，可乎？ 
现代文：崔清对吕华说： 杨侍郎事情紧急，要求迫切，向上报告，这里没有马匹行吗？ 
English: Cui Qing said to Lu Hua, "Yang Zhi Lang, the matter is urgent, the request is urgent, report to the higher-ups, is it possible that there are no horses here?

古文：华久而对曰： 此即可矣。 
现代文：吕华考虑了一下说： 这样可以了。 
English: Lu Hua thought for a moment and said, "That's fine.

古文：清于是以闻于京府，又自出俸钱二十千，买细毡，令选毡舁，顾夫直诣炎宅，取炎夫人。
现代文：于是崔清同京城通报了情况，又拿出自己的俸禄二十千文，买来细毛毡，命令人制造用毡子围起来的暖车。带人赶到杨炎家，去接杨炎的妻子。
English: Therefore, Cui Qing and Beijing informed the situation, and took out his salary of twenty thousand yuan to buy a fine felt and ordered him to make a warm car surrounded by felt. He rushed to Yang Yan's house to pick up Yang Yan's wife.

古文：夫人扶病登舁，仍戒其丁勤夜行。旦日达蓝田，时炎行李简约，妻亦病稍愈，便与炎偕往。
现代文：杨炎的妻子带病上车，清叫车夫连夜出发，第二天白天，到达蓝田，杨炎的行李非常简单，他妻子的病好一点，便同他一起上路。
English: Yang Yan's wife got on the car with her illness, Qing called the driver to leave overnight. The next day, during the day, they arrived in Lantian. Yang Yan's luggage was very simple, his wife's illness was a little better, so they went on the road with him.

古文：炎执清之手，问第行，清对曰： 某第十八。 
现代文：杨炎握着崔清的手问他排行老几，崔清回答说： 我排行十八。 
English: Yang Yan held Cui Qing's hand and asked him who was the highest ranked. Cui Qing replied: I was ranked 18th.

古文：清又率俸钱数千，具商于已来山程之费。
现代文：崔清又资助杨炎俸禄钱数千文，全部算作补贴杨炎出京以来的费用。
English: Cui Qing also subsidized Yang Yan's salary of thousands of yuan, all of which are counted as subsidies for Yang Yan's expenses since he left Beijing.

古文：至韩公驿，执清之袂，令妻出见曰： 此崔十八，死生不相忘，无复多言矣。
现代文：到了韩公驿站，杨炎扯着崔清的衣袖让妻子出来相见，说： 这就是崔十八郎，我们生死也不能忘了他，不需要多说了。 
English: When they arrived at the Hankong Railway Station, Yang Yan tugged on Cui Qing's sleeve to let his wife out to meet him, saying: This is Cui Shihachiro, we can't forget him for the rest of our lives, there's no need to say more.

古文：炎至商於洛源驿，马乏，驿仆王新送骡一头。
现代文：杨炎走到洛源驿站，马匹跑不动了，驿站的仆人王新送给他一头骡子。
English: When Yang Yan walked to Luoyuan Mule Station, his horses could no longer run. The station's servant, Wang Xin, gave him a mule.

古文：又逢道州司仓参军李全方挽运入奏，全方辄倾囊以济炎行李。
现代文：正巧还碰上了道州司仓参军李全方押运贡品去京城，李全方将身上带的钱，全都送给了杨炎，以帮助他添置行李用具。
English: It just so happened that Li Quanfang, the secretary of the provincial warehouse and a member of the military, was escorting the tribute to Beijing. Li Quanfang gave all the money he had brought to Yang Yan to help him buy more luggage.

古文：后二年秋，炎自江华除中书侍郎，入相，还至京兆界，问驿使：崔十八郎在否？
现代文：二年后的秋天，杨炎在江华被重新起用，任命为中书侍郎，当了丞相。他回到京城边界的驿站问驿使： 崔十八郎在吗？ 
English: Two years later, in the autumn, Yang Yan was reinstated in Jianghua, appointed as the Secretary of the Central Government, and became the Prime Minister. He returned to the post station on the border of Beijing to ask the envoy: Is Cui Shihachiro there?

古文：驿吏答曰：在。
现代文：驿使回答： 在。 
English: The envoy replied: Yes.

古文：炎喜甚。
现代文：杨炎非常高兴。
English: Yang Yan was very happy.

古文：顷之，清迎谒于前。
现代文：不一会儿，崔清出来迎接拜见杨炎。
English: Soon after, Cui Qing came out to meet Yang Yan.

古文：炎便止之曰： 崔十八郎，不合如此相待。今日生还，乃是子之恩也。 
现代文：杨炎制止他说： 崔十八郎，你不应该同我这样相处，我今天能活着回来，全是因为您的恩惠啊！ 
English: Yang Yan stopped him and said, "Cui Shihachiro, you shouldn't get along with me like this. I'm able to come back alive today all because of your grace!"

古文：仍连镳而行，话湘楚气候。因曰， 足下之才，何适不可？
现代文：仍旧和他在马上并行。他们谈论湘楚一带的气候，杨炎却说： 您的才华，干什么不行？
English: They talk about the climate around Hunan and Chu, but Yang Yan says: Your talent, what can't you do?

古文：老夫今日可以力致。柏台谏署，唯所选择。 
现代文：我现在可以极力推荐你，御史或是谏议大夫，随你选择。 
English: I can now highly recommend you, Dr. History or Dr. Debate, whichever you choose.

古文：清因逊让，无敢希侥幸意。
现代文：崔清谦虚退让，没有想侥幸升官的意思。
English: Cui Qing humbly conceded and did not want to be promoted by chance.

古文：炎又曰： 勿疑，但言之。 
现代文：杨炎又说： 不要有顾虑，有什么想法尽管说。 
English: Yang Yan also said, "Don't worry, say what you think.

古文：清曰： 小谏闲且贵，敢怀是望？ 
现代文：崔清说： 当个小小的谏官很清闲且高贵，我胆敢抱这个希望吗？ 
English: Cui Qing said, "Being a small eunuch is very leisurely and noble. Do I dare to hold this hope?

古文：炎曰： 吾闻命矣，无虑参差。 
现代文：杨炎说： 我知道你的意思了，一定能满足你，不要顾虑会有什么差错。 
English: Yang Yan said: I know what you mean, I will definitely be able to satisfy you, don't worry about any mistakes.

古文：及炎之发蓝田，谓清曰： 前言当一月有期。 
现代文：等到杨炎从蓝田出发，又对崔清说： 我说的事，大约一个月就会有消息。 
English: When Yang Yan set off from Lantian, he said to Cui Qing, "About what I said, there will be news in about a month."

古文：炎居相位十日，追洛源驿王新为中书主事，仍奏授鄂州唐年县尉李全方监察御史，仍知商州洛源监。
现代文：杨炎当丞相十天，提拔洛源驿站王新为中书主事，请示皇帝授予鄂州唐年县尉李全方为监察御史。仍然主官商州洛源监。
English: After Yang Yan served as chancellor for ten days, he promoted Luoyuan stationmaster Wang Xin to be in charge of Chinese calligraphy, and asked the emperor to grant Li Quanfang, a lieutenant of Tangnian County in Ezhou, to be the inspector of imperial history. He is still the chief inspector of Luoyuan.

古文：清之所约沉然。
现代文：只有与崔清所约定的事没有消息。
English: Only the matter agreed upon with Choi Ching remains unanswered.

古文：清罢职，特就炎第谒之。
现代文：崔清去职后，特意到杨炎家里去拜见他。
English: After Cui Qing left his post, he went to Yang Yan's home to visit him.

古文：初见则甚喜。留坐久之，但饮数杯而已，并不及前事。
现代文：杨炎第一次见到崔清很高兴，留他坐了很久，喝了几杯茶，却不提及推荐他的事。
English: Yang Yan was very happy to see Cui Qing for the first time. He sat with him for a long time, drank several cups of tea, but did not mention recommending him.

古文：逾旬，清又往焉。
现代文：过了十几天，崔清又去他家，杨炎则已显露出冷淡的神色。
English: A dozen days later, Cui Qing went to his house again, but Yang Yan had already shown a cold expression.

古文：炎则已有怠色，清从此退居，不复措意。
现代文：崔清从此再也不去了，不再把杨炎的话放在心里，二年后，杨炎又被贬到崖州。
English: From then on, Cui Qing never went there again, and no longer took Yang Yan's words to heart. Two years later, Yang Yan was relegated to Jiaozhou again.

古文：后二年，再贬崖州，至蓝田，喟然太息若负者。使人召清，清辞疾不往。
现代文：路过蓝田的时候，叹息自己对不住崔清，叫人去请崔清，崔清托病不去。
English: When passing through Lantian, Cui Qing sighed that she couldn't help herself, and asked someone to go and ask Cui Qing. Cui Qing didn't go because she was ill.

古文：乃自咎曰： 杨炎可以死矣，竟不还他崔清官。 
现代文：杨炎惭愧地自责说： 杨炎应该死了，竟没有偿给崔清一个官职。 
English: Yang Yan reproached himself with shame and said, "Yang Yan should have died, but he didn't give Cui Qing an official post.

古文：李藩
现代文：李藩
English: Li Clan

古文：李相藩，尝寓东洛。
现代文：丞相李藩，曾经居住在东洛，三十岁的时候，还没当官。
English: The prime minister, Li Han, once lived in East L.A. At the age of thirty, he had not yet become an official.

古文：李公患脑疮，又欲挈家居扬州，甚愁闷。
现代文：他的夫人是崔构的女儿，李藩寄住在岳丈崔家，受到冷淡的待遇。
English: His wife is the daughter of Cui Jie, and Li Fan stayed at the home of Cui Jie's brother-in-law and was treated coldly.

古文：及与崔氏弟兄访胡芦生，芦生好饮酒，人诣之，必携一壶，故谓为胡芦生。
现代文：当时，中桥有个算命的叫胡芦生。只要听到人说话的声音，就能知道贵贱。李藩患脑疮，又想携带家眷搬到扬州去住，心情很不好，便和崔家的两兄弟去拜访胡芦生。胡芦生好喝酒，别人找他算命，必须拿一壶酒，所以被称做胡芦生。
English: At that time, there was a fortune-teller in Zhongqiao called Hu Lucheng. As long as you hear the voice of people talking, you can know the price. Li Fan had a brain tumor and wanted to bring his family to live in Yangzhou. He was in a bad mood, so he and the two brothers of the Cui family went to visit Hu Lucheng. Hu Lucheng was good at drinking, others asked him to tell fortunes and had to take a jug of wine, so he was called Hu Lucheng.

古文：李公与崔氏各携钱三百。
现代文：李藩和崔家兄弟各带了三百文钱。
English: The Li clan and the Cui brothers each brought three hundred mon.

古文：生倚蒲团，已半酣。
现代文：胡芦生靠在蒲团上，已经半醉。
English: Hu Lucheng leaned against the futon, already half drunk.

古文：崔氏弟兄先至，胡芦不为之起，但伸手请坐。
现代文：崔家兄弟先到了，胡芦生也不站起来，只打个手势，请他们坐下。
English: The Cui brothers arrived first, but Hu Liusheng did not stand up and only gestured for them to sit down.

古文：李公以疾后至，胡芦生曰： 有贵人来。 
现代文：李藩有病，走在后面。胡芦生说： 有贵人来。 
English: Li Han was ill and walked behind. Hu Lusheng said, "A dignitary is coming."

古文：乃命侍者扫地，即毕，李公已到，未下驴，胡芦生笑迎执手曰： 郎君贵人也。 
现代文：于是叫仆人扫地。
English: So he called his servants and had them sweep the floor.

古文：李公曰： 某贫且病，又欲以家往数千里外，何有贵哉？ 
现代文：刚扫完地，李藩就到了。还没等他下驴，胡芦生就笑着拱手来迎接说： 您是贵人啊！ 李藩说： 我很穷又有病，并且全家要搬到几千里之外去，有什么贵呢？ 
English: Just after sweeping the floor, Li Fan arrived. Before he got off the donkey, Hu Lousheng greeted him with a smile and said: You are a noble! Li Fan said: I am poor and sick, and the whole family has to move thousands of miles away, what is expensive?

古文：芦生曰： 纱笼中人，岂畏迍厄。 
现代文：胡芦生说： 纱笼中人，怎么能怕挫折呢？ 
English: Hu Lucheng said: "People in the sarcophagus, how can they be afraid of setbacks?

古文：李公请问纱笼之事，终不说。
现代文：李藩请教他什么是纱笼？胡芦生一直不肯说明。
English: Li Han asked him what a sarong was, but Hu Lusheng refused to explain.

古文：遂往扬州。
现代文：李藩搬到扬州的参佐桥。
English: The Li clan moved to Sansa Bridge in Yangzhou.

古文：居于参佐桥，使院中有一高员外，与藩往还甚熟。
现代文：节度使的官署里有一个高员外，与李藩来往密切。
English: There is a high-ranking official in the government office of the Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army who has close contacts with the Li Clan.

古文：一旦来诣藩，既去，际晚又至，李公甚讶之。
现代文：一天早上他来看望李藩，很快就走了。当天晚上又来了，李藩有点奇怪。
English: One morning, he came to visit the Li Clan, but soon left. That evening, he came again, and the Li Clan was a bit strange.

古文：既相见，高曰： 朝来拜候，却归困甚。
现代文：高员外说： 早晨看望你回去后，觉得很困，就在白天睡了一觉。
English: The senior official said, "After I went to visit you in the morning, I felt very sleepy and took a nap during the day.

古文：昼寝，梦有一人，召出城外，于荆棘中行，见旧使庄户，卒已十年，谓某曰，员外不合至此，为物所诱，且便须回，某送员外去。
现代文：忽然看见了过去的佃户，这个人已经死了十多年了。他对我说： 员外不应该来这里，是受了诱惑，应该马上回去，我送员外回去。 
English: Suddenly, I saw the former tenant, who had been dead for more than ten years. He said to me, "Foreigners should not come here. They are tempted. They should go back immediately. I will send them back."

古文：却引至城门。
现代文：将我领到城门外。
English: He led me outside the city gate.

古文：某谓之曰，汝安得在此。
现代文：我对他说： 你怎么在这里。 
English: I said to him: Why are you here?

古文：云，我为小吏，差与李三郎当直。
现代文：他回答说： 我是衙役，被分配到李三郎处当差。 
English: He replied, "I am a steward, and I was assigned to Li Saburo's office.

古文：某曰，何外李三郎？
现代文：我说： 什么地方的李三郎？ 
English: I said, "Where did Li Saburo come from?"

古文：曰，住参佐桥之员外。
现代文：他回答说： 住在参佐桥。
English: He replied: I live in Sansabashi.

古文：与李三郎往还，故此祗候。
现代文：我知道员外和李三郎来往密切，所以在这里等候。 
English: I know that members of the public and Li Saburo are in close contact, so wait here.

古文：某曰，三郎安得如此？
现代文：我说： 三郎怎么能够这样？ 
English: I said, "How could Saburo do this?"

古文：曰，是纱笼中人。
现代文：他回答说： 因为是纱笼中人。 
English: He replied: Because it is a man in a sarong.

古文：诘之不肯言。
现代文：再问，他就不肯说了。
English: Asked again, he declined to comment.

古文：因曰，某饥，员外能与少酒饭钱财否？
现代文：他又对我说： 我饿了，员外能不能给我点酒菜钱财？
English: He also said to me: I'm hungry, can you give me some wine, food and money?

古文：子城不敢入，某与城外置之。
现代文：你们的城里我不敢进，我就在城外等着。 
English: I dare not enter your city, so I will wait outside.

古文：某谓曰，就是三郎宅中得否？
现代文：我对他说： 就到李三郎家里取，行不行？ 
English: I said to him: Can I just go to Li Saburo's house and pick it up?

古文：曰，若如此，是杀某也。
现代文：他说： 要是那样，就同杀我一样。 
English: He said: "In that case, it would be the same as killing me."

古文：遂觉。已令于城外与置酒席，且奉报好消息。 
现代文：然后我就醒了，我已经派人去城外摆一桌酒席，并且来向你报告这个好消息。 
English: And then I woke up, and I'd already sent someone to set up a table outside the city and come and tell you the good news.

古文：李公微笑，数年，张建封仆射镇扬州，奏李公为巡官校书郎。
现代文：李藩微笑着不说话。几年后，张建封被任命为仆射，镇守扬州。他请示朝廷聘任李藩为巡官校书郎。
English: Li Fan smiled and did not speak. A few years later, Zhang Jianfeng was appointed as the town guard of Yangzhou. He asked the court to appoint Li Fan as the inspector's school teacher.

古文：会有新罗僧，能相人，且言张公不得为宰相。
现代文：恰巧有个新罗和尚来到扬州，他很会看相。
English: It so happened that a Shilla monk came to Yangzhou. He was very good at reading the signs.

古文：遍视良久：曰，并无。张公尤不乐。曰，莫有郎官未入院否？
现代文：他说张建封不能当宰相，张建封听了很不高兴，便叫新罗和尚看一看官署里的官员有没有能当宰相的。和尚看了半天，说： 没有。 张建封更加不高兴了，说： 有没有官员没在院子里？ 
English: He said that Zhang Jianfeng could not be the prime minister. Zhang Jianfeng was very unhappy to hear this, so he asked the Shilla monk to see if there were any officials in the government office who could be the prime minister. The monk looked at it for half a day and said, "No." Zhang Jianfeng was even more unhappy and said, "Are there any officials not in the courtyard?"

古文：报云，李巡官未入。
现代文：差官报告说： 李巡官没来。 
English: The officer reported: Inspector Li did not come.

古文：便令促召，逡巡至，僧降阶迎，谓张公曰，巡官是纱笼中人，仆射且不及。
现代文：张建封叫人去找，不一会儿李藩来了。和尚走下台阶去迎接，对张建封说： 李巡官是纱笼中的人，仆射您也赶不上他。 
English: Zhang Jianfeng called for someone to look for him, and soon Li Fan arrived. The monk walked down the steps to meet him and said to Zhang Jianfeng: Inspector Li is a man in a sarong, you can't even catch up with him.

古文：张公大喜，因问纱笼中之事。
现代文：张建封非常高兴，便问什么是纱笼中人？
English: Zhang Jianfeng was very happy and asked, "What is a person in a sarong?"

古文：僧曰，宰相冥司必潜纱笼护之，恐为异物所扰，余官即不得也。
现代文：和尚说： 如果是宰相，阴间必然派人以纱笼守护着，恐怕被异物所伤害，其余的官员都没有这种待遇。 
English: The monk said: If it is the prime minister, the underworld will inevitably send someone to guard him with a sarong, fearing that he will be harmed by a foreign object. The rest of the officials do not have this treatment.

古文：方悟胡芦生及高所说。李公竟为宰相也。
现代文：这时才知道胡芦生所说的是指李藩能当宰相啊！
English: It was only then that I realized that what Hu Lousheng said was referring to the Li Clan being able to become prime minister!

古文：信哉，人之贵贱分定矣。
现代文：不能不相信，人的贵贱是早由天定的。
English: It is impossible not to believe that a person's worth is predetermined by the heavens.

古文：韦执谊
现代文：韦执谊
English: Wei Zhenrui

古文：韦执谊自相贬太子宾客，又贬崖州司马。
现代文：韦执谊从丞相被贬为太子宾客，又从太子宾客被贬为崖州司马。
English: Wei Zhengyi was demoted from chancellor to prince's guest, and from prince's guest to Jiaozhou Sima.

古文：执谊前为职方员外，所司呈诸州图。每至岭南州图，必速令将去，未尝省之。
现代文：韦执谊从前是职方员外，手下的官员向他报送各州的地图，每当送上岭南州的地图时，都必然叫人赶紧拿走，一次也没有看过。
English: Wei Xuxiyi used to be a non-party member, and his subordinate officials submitted maps of various states to him. Whenever a map of Lingnan State was sent to him, he would immediately ask someone to take it away, and he never looked at it.

古文：及为相，北壁有图。经数日，试往阅焉，乃崖州图矣。
现代文：等到他当了宰相，北墙上有张挂图，过了几天，他无意中走过去一看，正是崖州挂图，心中非常反感。
English: When he became prime minister, there was a wall chart on the north wall. A few days later, he unintentionally walked over and took a look. It was a wall chart of Yazhou. He was very disgusted.

古文：意甚恶之。至是，果贬崖州。二年死于海上。
现代文：最后，他果然被贬到崖州，两年后死在了海上。
English: In the end, he was indeed cast adrift and died at sea two years later.

古文：袁滋
现代文：袁滋
English: Yuan Zhi

古文：复州清溪山，焕丽无比。
现代文：复州有座青溪山，风景秀丽无比。
English: There is a Qingxi Mountain in Fuzhou with incomparably beautiful scenery.

古文：袁相公滋未达时，复郢间居止。
现代文：丞相袁滋在没有发达当官时，在复州、郢州一带居住。
English: Premier Yuan Zi lived in Fuzhou and Zhangzhou when he was not a high-ranking official.

古文：因晴日，登临此山。
现代文：因为天晴，便登上了青溪山。
English: Because of the fine weather, they climbed Qingxi Mountain.

古文：行数里，幽小，渐奇险，阻绝无踪。
现代文：走了几里地以后，道路越来越窄，越来越险，慢慢地便找不到路径了。
English: After walking for several miles, the road became narrower and more dangerous, and I slowly lost my way.

古文：有儒生以卖药为业，宇于山下。
现代文：有个书生在这里以卖药为生，家就住在山脚下。
English: There is a student here who sells medicine for a living, and his family lives at the foot of the mountain.

古文：袁公与语，甚相狎，因留宿。
现代文：袁滋与他交谈，非常投机，所以晚上就住在书生家里。
English: Yuan Zi was very opportunistic in his conversation with him, so he stayed at Shousheng's home in the evening.

古文：袁公曰： 此处合有灵仙隐士。 
现代文：袁滋说： 此处应该有隐士和神仙。 
English: Yuan Zi said: There should be hermits and immortals here.

古文：儒生曰： 有道者五六人，每三两日即一来。不知居处。
现代文：书生说： 有五六个道士，每隔三两天就来一次，不知道他们住在什么地方。
English: The student said, "There are five or six Taoists who come here every three or two days. I don't know where they live.

古文：与其虽熟，即不肯细言。 
现代文：我与他们虽然很熟，可他们不肯详细介绍他们的情况。 
English: Although I know them well, they refused to give details of their situation.

古文：袁公曰： 求修谒得否？ 
现代文：袁滋说： 能不能让我拜见他们？ 
English: Yuan Zhi said: Can you let me meet them?

古文：曰： 彼甚恶人，然颇好酒。
现代文：书生说： 他们非常厌恶俗人，但是很喜欢喝酒。
English: The student said: "They hate the laity, but they love to drink.

古文：足下但得美酒一榼，可相见也。 
现代文：您如果准备一坛美酒，就可以与他们见面。 
English: You can meet them if you prepare a bowl of wine.

古文：袁公辞归。
现代文：袁滋告辞回家。
English: Yuan Zi resigned and went home.

古文：后携酒再往，经数宿，五人果来。
现代文：后来带了酒又去，等了几天，五个道士果然来了。
English: Later, they brought wine and went back. After waiting for a few days, five Taoists did come.

古文：或鹿巾纱帽，杖藜草履，遥相与通寒温，大笑，乃临涧濯足，戏弄儒生。
现代文：他们带着道巾，穿着草鞋，拿着藜杖，很远就互相打招呼，问冷暖，大声说笑，到山涧的溪水里洗脚，同书生开玩笑。
English: Carrying a towel, wearing straw sandals, and holding a cane, they greeted each other from afar, asked for warmth and cold, laughed loudly, washed their feet in the mountain stream, and joked with fellow students.

古文：儒生为列席致酒，五人睹甚喜。
现代文：书生为他们摆酒席，斟上酒。五个人见了非常高兴，问他： 什么地方弄来的这东西？ 
English: The student set up a wine table for them and poured the wine. The five people were very happy to see him and asked him: Where did you get this thing?

古文：曰： 何处得此物？且各三五盏。 
现代文：于是每个人喝了三五杯。
English: So each of them drank three or five cups.

古文：儒生曰： 非某所能致，有客携来，愿谒先生。 
现代文：书生说： 不是我所能敬献的，是有个客人拿来的，他要拜见先生。 
English: The student said, "It's not something I can offer, but a guest brought it to me. He wants to see me.

古文：乃引袁公出，历拜，五人相顾失色，悔饮其酒，并怒儒生曰： 不合以外人相扰。 
现代文：于是将袁滋叫出来，与五个人一一见面。五个道士相顾失色，后悔喝了袁滋的酒，并且生气地对书生说： 不应该让外人来打扰！ 
English: So he called Yuan Zi out and met with the five people one by one. The five Taoists lost all respect for each other, regretted drinking Yuan Zi's wine, and angrily said to the scholar: "We shouldn't let outsiders disturb us!"

古文：儒生曰： 此人志诚可赏，且是道流。稍从容，亦何伤也？ 
现代文：书生说： 这个人心很诚，并且也信奉道教，稍稍大方热情一点，又有什么坏处。 
English: The student said, "This man is sincere, and he also believes in Taoism. What's the harm in being a little generous and enthusiastic?"

古文：意遂渐解。见袁众谦恭甚，及时与笑语，目袁生曰： 座。 
现代文：五个道士不满的神色逐渐缓和，他们见袁滋对他们很谦虚恭敬，便不时同他说几句话，后来看着袁滋说： 坐吧！ 
English: The disgruntled looks of the five Taoists gradually softened. They saw that Yuan Zi was very humble and respectful to them, so they said a few words to him from time to time. Later, they looked at Yuan Zi and said: Sit down!

古文：袁公再拜就席。
现代文：袁滋拜谢后入座。
English: Yuan Zhi bowed and took his seat.

古文：少顷酒酣，乃注视袁公，谓曰： 此人大似西华坐禅和尚。 
现代文：一会儿，酒喝得高兴畅快，一个道士注视袁滋说： 此人很像西华坐禅和尚。 
English: For a moment, the wine was drunk happily. A Taoist watched Yuan Zi and said: This person is very similar to Xihua Zazen Monk.

古文：良久云： 直是。 
现代文：过了很久又说： 真是。 
English: After a long time, he said, "Really."

古文：便屈指数，此僧亡来四十七年。
现代文：屈指计算说： 那和尚死了有四十七年了。 
English: Counting on one hand, he said, "That monk has been dead for forty-seven years."

古文：问袁公之岁，正四十七。抚掌曰： 须求官职，福禄已至。 
现代文：然后又问袁滋的年龄。回答说正是四十七岁，道士拍手大笑说： 你应该去求功名，福禄都已经降临了。 
English: Then he asked Yuan Zi's age. He answered that he was forty-seven years old. The Taoist clapped his hands and laughed loudly and said, "You should go and seek fame. Your fortune has already come."

古文：遂与袁公握手言别。
现代文：然后，他们与袁滋握手告别。
English: Then, they shook hands with Yuan Zhi and said goodbye.

古文：前过洞，上山头，扪萝跳跃，翩翻如鸟飞去，逡巡不见。
现代文：一个个经过山洞，攀上山头，扯着藤萝跳跃，像飞鸟一样走去，一会儿就不见了踪影。
English: One by one, they passed through the cave, climbed up the mountain, jumped with the vine, walked like a bird, and disappeared in a moment.

古文：袁公果拜相，为西川节度使。
现代文：后来，袁滋果然当了上丞相，并成为西川节度使。
English: Later, Yuan Zhi indeed became the prime minister, and became the envoy of the Nishikawa shogunate.

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：故中书令晋国公裴度，自进士及第，博学宏词制策三科，官途二十余载。
现代文：已故中书令晋国公裴度，博学多才，文词出众，主持制定科举考试的题目和条例三次，自从考中进士开始，做官二十多年。
English: The late Zhong Shuling Jin Guo Gong Pei Du, a polymath with excellent writing skills, presided over the formulation of the questions and regulations for the imperial examinations three times. He has been an official for more than 20 years since the junior high school entrance examination began.

古文：从事浙右，为河南掾。至宪宗朝，声闻隆赫，历官三署，拜御史中丞。
现代文：任浙右从事，当河南的掾史，到宪宗即位后，声望显赫，换了三个官署以后，又当上了御史中丞。
English: He was engaged in the history of Zhejiang and Henan, and after the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong, his reputation was outstanding. After changing three government offices, he became the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：上意推重，人情翕然。
现代文：皇帝非常器重，人缘也很好。
English: The emperor is very important and very popular.

古文：明年夏六月，东平帅李师道包藏不轨，畏朝廷忠臣，有贼杀宰辅意。密遣人由京师靖安东门禁街，候相国武元衡，仍暗中传声大呼云： 往驿坊，取中丞裴某头。 
现代文：第二年夏天的六月，东平帅李师道暗中谋反，但他害怕朝廷里的忠臣，有杀害皇帝的辅政大臣阴谋，秘密派人在京城的靖安东门戒严，等候丞相武元衡，同时暗中派兵前往驿坊，大喊： 取中丞裴度的头！ 
English: In June of the following summer, Dongping commander Li Shidao secretly plotted a rebellion, but he was afraid of loyal courtiers in the imperial court, there was a plot to kill the emperor's assistant minister of state, secretly sent people to the Jing'an East Gate in Beijing to wait for the martial law, and at the same time secretly sent soldiers to Weifang, shouting: Take the head of Vice-Commander Pei Du!

古文：是时京师始重扬州毡帽。前一日，广陵师献公新样者一枚，公玩而服之。
现代文：当时京城正流行扬州的毡帽，前一天，广陵师送给裴度一顶新式样的毡帽，裴度戴在头上玩。
English: At that time, the Yangzhou skullcap was popular in Beijing. The day before, Guangling gave Pei Du a new-style skullcap. Pei Du wore it on his head to play.

古文：将朝，烛下既栉，及取其盖张焉。导马出坊之东门。
现代文：今天准备入朝见皇帝，在灯下梳头后，又将毡帽取过来戴在头上，骑马出了驿坊的东门。
English: Today, after combing his hair under the lamp while preparing to enter the court to see the emperor, he took off his skullcap and put it on his head, and rode out of the east gate of Weifang.

古文：贼奄至，唱杀甚厉。
现代文：这时李师道派来的贼兵杀了过来，喊杀声很响。
English: At this time, the bandits sent by Li Shidao came to kill him, shouting loudly.

古文：贼遂挥刀中帽，坠马。
现代文：一名贼将挥刀砍中了裴度的毡帽，裴度落马。
English: A thief slashed Pei Duo's skullcap with a sword, and Pei Duo fell off his horse.

古文：贼为公已丧元矣，掠地求其坠颇急。骖乘王义遽回鞚，以身蔽公。贼知公全，再以刀击义，断臂且死。
现代文：贼将以为裴度已掉了脑袋，急忙趋马掠过来寻找裴度的头颅，跟随裴度的王义立刻回马以身体挡住裴度，贼将知道裴度没死，用刀砍王义，王义断臂几乎死去。
English: The thief will think that Pei Du has lost his head. He will rush to the horse to look for Pei Du's head. Wang Yi, who is following Pei Du, will immediately return to the horse to block Pei Du with his body. The thief will know that Pei Du is not dead. He will cut Wang Yi with a knife. Wang Yi almost died after breaking his arm.

古文：度赖帽子顶厚，经刀处，微伤如线数寸，旬余如平常。
现代文：裴度倚仗帽子顶部厚，被刀砍的地方，只伤了几寸长像一条线一样的口子，十几天就好了。
English: Pei Du leaned against the thick top of the hat. Where he was slashed with the knife, he only injured a few inches of the line-like opening. He would be fine in a dozen days.

古文：及升台衮，讨淮西，立大勋，出入六朝，登庸授钺。门馆僚吏，云布四方。
现代文：等到他升任宰相，领兵征讨淮西，立了大功，成为六朝以来的名臣，被授予文武官职，学生、下属和同僚遍布全国各地，从始至终都一样。
English: When he was promoted to the post of prime minister, he led the army to recruit Huaxi, and made great contributions. He became a famous minister since the Six Dynasties. He was awarded the post of civil and military officer. His students, subordinates and colleagues are all over the country. It is the same from beginning to end.

古文：其始终遐永也如此。张辕
现代文：张辕
English: Zhang Ye

古文：吴郡张辕，自奉天尉将调集。时李庶人锜在浙西，兼榷管。辕与之有旧，将往谒。具求资粮，未至，梦一人将官诰至，云： 张辕可知袁州新喻县令。 
现代文：吴郡的张辕，从奉天县尉的职位上将要调任新的职务，当时庶人李锜在浙西兼任管理专卖事物的榷管，张辕同他有老关系，想要去拜访他，以便求得他的资助，没等到李锜处，他梦见一个人，拿着任命官员的公文来找他，说： 张辕可以担任袁州新喻县令。 
English: Zhang Qian of Wuxi County was going to be transferred to a new position from the position of Fengtian County Lieutenant. At that time, the commoner Li Qian was also in charge of managing the monopoly of things in western Zhejiang. Zhang Qian had an old relationship with him and wanted to visit him in order to obtain his funding. Before he could reach Li Qian, he dreamed of a person who came to him with the official document of the appointed official and said: Zhang Qian can serve as the county magistrate of Yuzhou Xinyu County.

古文：辕梦中已曾为赤尉，不宜为此，固不肯受。
现代文：他在梦中曾当过赤尉，不适合当县令，所以不肯接受。
English: In his dream, he had been a second lieutenant, and he was not fit to be a county magistrate, so he refused to accept it.

古文：其人曰： 两季之俸，支牒已行，不受何为？ 
现代文：来人说： 有两季的俸禄，支出俸禄的公文已经发出，你不接受想干什么？ 
English: The visitor said: There are two seasons of salary, and the official document for the payment of salary has been issued. What do you want to do?

古文：遂委之而去。
现代文：硬是把公文塞给他就走了。
English: He just gave him the official document and left.

古文：辕觉，甚恶之。及见锜，具言将选，告以乏困。
现代文：张辕睡醒后非常不高兴，等到见到了李锜，告诉他自己将要调任新职，并说很穷困。
English: Zhang Yao was very unhappy when he woke up. When he saw Li Yao, he told him that he was going to be transferred to a new position and said that he was very poor.

古文：锜留之数日，将辞去。锜因谓曰： 足下选限犹远，且能为一职乎？亦可资桂玉之费。 
现代文：李锜留他住了几天，他要走，李锜说： 您重新任命的期限还很远，能不能在这里担任一个职务，还可以补充柴米的费用。 
English: Li Qian stayed with him for a few days. When he wanted to leave, Li Qian said, "The deadline for your reappointment is still far away. Can you take up a position here, and can you supplement the cost of firewood?"

古文：辕不敢让，因署毗陵郡盐铁场官。
现代文：张辕不敢推辞，代理的是毗陵郡盐铁场的官。
English: Zhang Qian did not dare to refuse. The agent was an official from the Filing County Salt Mine.

古文：辕以职虽卑而利厚，遂受之。
现代文：张辕因为其职位虽低，但油水很厚，所以接受了。
English: Zhang Rong accepted the position because, although it was a low-level position, it was a high-pressure one.

古文：既至所职，及视其簿书所用印，乃袁州新喻废印也。
现代文：等到任职以后，看到所使用的帐簿文书所用的印鉴，竟是袁州新喻县作废的印鉴。
English: After taking office, I saw that the seal used for the account book documents was actually the seal of Yuanzhou Xinyu County.

古文：辕以四月领务，九月而罢。
现代文：张辕四月代理职务，九月结束。
English: Zhang Jun took up the acting position in April and ended it in September.

古文：两季之俸，皆如其言。
现代文：得到两个月的俸禄，正如梦中所说的一样。
English: He received two months' pay, just as he had said in the dream.

古文：赵昌时
现代文：赵昌时
English: Zhao Changshi

古文：元和十二年，宪宗平淮西。
现代文：元和十二年，宪宗平定淮西，赵昌时为吴元济的副将。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhaozong subdued Huaxi, and Zhao Chang was the vice-general of Wu Yuanji.

古文：赵昌时为吴元济裨将，属张伯良。于青陵城与李诉九月二十七日战，项后中刀堕马死。
现代文：属于张伯良部。九月二十七日在青陵城与李诉的部队激战，赵昌时脖子后面中刀，掉下马昏死过去了。
English: Belonged to the Chamberlain's Department. On September 27th, in Qingling City, in a fierce battle with Li Zhen's troops, Zhao Chang was stabbed in the back of the neck, fell off his horse and passed out.

古文：至夜四更，忽如睡觉。
现代文：夜里四更天，他忽然觉得像睡觉刚醒一样，听到将军检阅部队点名的声音。
English: In the middle of the night, he suddenly felt as if he had just woken up from a deep sleep when he heard the sound of a general reviewing the roll call of troops.

古文：闻将家点阅兵姓名声，呼某乙，即闻唱唯应声。
现代文：叫某一个人，就听到这个人的应答声，就这样点了一千多人。
English: If you call out to a particular person, you will hear that person's answering voice, and in this way you will have called out to more than a thousand people.

古文：如是可点千余人。
现代文：赵昌时专门注意听什么时候点自己的名字，等到点完，没听着叫他。
English: Zhao Chang paid special attention to when to call his own name, and when he finished calling, he did not listen to him.

古文：赵生专听之，将谓点名姓。
现代文：一会儿天亮了。
English: Soon it was dawn.

古文：及点竟，不闻呼之。俄而天明，赵生渐醒，乃强起，视左右死者，皆是夜来闻呼名字者也。乃知冥中点阅耳。
现代文：赵昌时渐渐苏醒，尽力站起身来，见左右的死者，全是夜里听到点了名字的人，原来听到的是阴间点名。
English: When Zhao Chang gradually woke up, he tried his best to stand up and saw the dead around him, all of whom had heard their names called out in the night. He had originally heard the names being called out in the underworld.

古文：赵生方知身不死。
现代文：赵昌时才知道自己没死。
English: It was only then that Zhao Chang realized that he was not dead.

古文：行归，月余疮愈。
现代文：回去一个多月，刀伤痊愈。
English: More than a month after returning, the knife wound had healed.

古文：方知战死者亦有宿命耳。
现代文：这时候才明白，打仗死的人也是命中注定的。
English: This is when it becomes clear that those who die in battle are also doomed.

