古文：盛夏之时，雷电迅疾，击折树木，坏败室屋，时犯杀人。
现代文：炎热夏天的时候，雷电迅猛响亮，击断树木，毁坏房屋，有时还危害杀人。
English: In the heat of summer, lightning strikes fast and loud, snapping trees, destroying homes and sometimes killing people.

古文：世俗以为 击折树木、坏败室屋 者，天取龙；其 犯杀人 也，谓之阴过，饮食人以不洁净，天怒，击而杀之。
现代文：世俗认为雷电击断树木、毁坏房屋，是天来取龙；它危害杀人，是人暗地里有罪过，拿不干净的东西给别人吃喝，于是天发怒，击杀了他。
English: The world believes that thunder and lightning break trees and destroy houses, and that the sky came to take the dragon; it harms and kills people, and that people secretly sinned by giving unclean things to others to eat and drink, so the sky got angry and killed him.

古文：隆隆之声，天怒之音，若人之呴吁矣。
现代文：隆隆的雷声，就是天发怒的声音，好像人的怒吼。
English: The sound of the crashing of the thunder is the sound of the wrath of God, like the sound of the roar of a man.

古文：世无愚智，莫谓不然。
现代文：社会上不论是愚蠢人还是聪明人，没有人认为不是这样的。
English: No one in society, whether stupid or intelligent, thinks otherwise.

古文：推人道以论之，虚妄之言也。
现代文：推究人间的道理加以评论，它是虚假的说法。
English: It is a fallacy to extrapolate from human reason to make a comment.

古文：夫雷之发动，一气一声也，折木坏屋亦犯杀人，犯杀人时亦折木坏屋。
现代文：雷的产生，同属一种气、一种声响。折断树木，毁坏房屋的时候，也危害打死人；危害打死人的时候，也折断树木，毁坏房屋。
English: The production of thunder is a kind of breath, a kind of sound. When breaking trees and destroying houses, it also harms and kills people; when harming and killing people, it also breaks trees and destroys houses.

古文：独谓折木坏屋者，天取龙；犯杀人，罚阴过，与取龙吉凶不同，并时共声，非道也。
现代文：偏偏要认为析断树木，毁坏房屋，是天来取龙；危害打死人，是惩罚暗中有过错的人，这跟天取龙表现出的吉凶不一样，同一时候，同样雷声，这不符合事理。
English: It is unreasonable to think that cutting down trees and destroying houses is God's way of getting rid of dragons, and harming and killing people is to punish those who are secretly at fault. This is not the same as God's way of getting rid of dragons. At the same time, it is the same as thunder.

古文：论者以为 隆隆 者，天怒呴吁之声也。
现代文：辩解的人认为，雷声隆隆，是天怒吼的声音。
English: Apologists argue that the rumble of thunder is the sound of nature's wrath.

古文：此便於罚过，不宜於取龙。
现代文：这种说法只适合于惩罚过错，不适合于天取龙。
English: This kind of argument is only suitable for punishing mistakes, not for divine intervention.

古文：罚过，天怒可也；取龙，龙何过而怒之？
现代文：惩罚过错，天发怒可以；天来取龙，龙有什么过错而要对它发怒呢？
English: If the sky punishes a mistake, it can be angry; if the sky takes a dragon, what is the dragon's fault and should it be angry with it?

古文：如龙神，天取之，不宜怒。
现代文：如果龙是神，天来取他，不应该发怒。
English: If the dragon is a god and heaven has come to take him, it should not be angry.

古文：如龙有过，与人同罪，杀而已，何为取也？
现代文：如果龙有过错，跟人一样有罪，杀死龙罢了，天为什么还要取它呢？
English: If the dragon is at fault, as guilty as a man, why should Heaven take it, when all that is needed is to kill the dragon?

古文：杀人，怒可也。取龙，龙何过而怒之？
现代文：打死人，天发怒可以；来取龙，龙有什么过错而要对它发怒呢？
English: If you kill a man, the sky can be angry; if you capture a dragon, what is the dragon's fault and why should you be angry with it?

古文：杀人不取；杀龙取之。人龙之罪何别？而其杀之何异？
现代文：打死人不取，杀死龙要取，人与龙的罪过有什么分别，而雷处死他们为什么却不一样呢？
English: There is no difference between killing a person and killing a dragon. What is the difference between the sins of a person and a dragon, and why are they different when it comes to death by lightning?

古文：然则取龙之说既不可听，罚过之言复不可从。
现代文：这样看来，天取龙的说法既不能听，惩罚过错的话也不可从。
English: From this point of view, it is impossible to listen to Tiantanglong's argument, and it is also impossible to follow the words of punishing mistakes.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：以什么来证明呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：案雷之声迅疾之时，人仆死於地，隆隆之声临人首上，故得杀人。
现代文：考察雷声迅猛响亮的时候，人仆向前在地上死去，接着隆隆的声音降临到人的头上，所以能够打死人。
English: According to the study, when the thunder is very fast and loud, the servant will die on the ground, and then the booming sound will fall on the person's head, so it can kill the person.

古文：审隆隆者天怒乎？
现代文：果真隆隆的雷声是天发怒吗？
English: Is the rumbling thunder really God's wrath?

古文：怒用口之怒气杀人也。
现代文：要是天发怒，那天是在用口里的怒气杀人。
English: If the sky is angry, that day is using the anger of the mouth to kill.

古文：口之怒气，安能杀人？
现代文：口里的怒气，怎么能杀人呢？
English: How can a man kill, when anger is in his mouth?

古文：人为雷所杀，询其身体，若燔灼之状也。
现代文：人被雷打死，察看那人的身体，像被烧烤过的样子。
English: A man has been killed by lightning. Look at his body. It looks like it's been barbecued.

古文：如天用口怒，口怒生火乎？
现代文：如果天用的是口里的怒气，口里的怒气能产生火吗？
English: If God uses the anger of the mouth, can the anger of the mouth produce fire?

古文：且口着乎体，口之动与体俱。
现代文：况且口长在身体上，口的活动是跟身体一起的。
English: Moreover, the mouth is long on the body, and the activity of the mouth is with the body.

古文：当击折之时，声着於地；其衰也，声着於天。
现代文：当雷击断树木的时候，声音觉得在地上；雷声减弱，声音感到在天上。
English: When lightning strikes trees, the sound is felt on the ground; when the thunder subsides, the sound is felt in the sky.

古文：夫如是，声着地之时，口至地，体亦宜然。
现代文：像这样，声音感到在地上的时候，那么口要到地上，身体也应该这样。
English: Thus, when the voice is felt to be on the ground, then the mouth should be on the ground, and so should the body.

古文：当雷迅疾之时，仰视天，不见天之下，不见天之下，则夫隆隆之声者，非天怒也。
现代文：当雷声迅猛响亮的时候，抬头看天，却不见天落下来。看不见天落地，那么隆隆的雷声，就不是天在发怒。
English: When the thunder is loud and fast, you look up at the sky, but you don't see the sky falling. If you can't see the sky falling, then the rumbling thunder is not the sky getting angry.

古文：天之怒与人无异。
现代文：天怒跟人怒没有两样。
English: The wrath of God is no different from the wrath of man.

古文：人怒，身近人则声疾，远人则声微。
现代文：人发怒，自己靠近别人那么声音就大，远离别人那么声音就小。
English: People get angry. The louder they are when they are close to others, the quieter they are when they are far away.

古文：今天声近，其体远，非怒之实也。
现代文：如今天的声音离得近，而它的身体却离得很远，可见这不是天发怒的真实情况。
English: If today's voice is close, but its body is far away, this is not the reality of God's wrath.

古文：且雷声迅疾之时，声东西或南北，如天怒体动，口东西南北，仰视天亦宜东西南北。
现代文：况且雷声迅猛响亮的时候，声音或在东、西，或在南、北。如果是天发怒，天体就应该移运，口也应该向东西南北移动，那么抬头看天，天体也应该向东西南北移动。
English: Moreover, when the thunder is fast and loud, the sound is either in the east or west, or in the south or north. If the sky is angry, the celestial body should be moved, and the mouth should also move to the east, west and south, then look up at the sky, the celestial body should also move to the east, west, south and north.

古文：或曰： 天已东西南北矣，云雨冥晦，人不能见耳。 
现代文：有人说： 天已经随着声音向东、西、南、北移动了，只因为云雨昏暗不明，人们不能看见罢了。 
English: Some people say: The sky has moved to the east, west, south and north according to the sound, but people can't see it because the clouds and rain are dim and unclear.

古文：夫千里不同风，百里不共雷。
现代文：千里内外不会同刮一股风，百里内外不会同响一声雷。
English: A gust of wind will not blow in and out of a thousand miles, and a thunder will not sound in and out of a hundred miles.

古文：《易》曰： 震惊百里。 
现代文：《周易·震卦》上说： 雷能惊动一百里。 
English: "Zhou Yi · Zhengjia" said: Lightning can alarm a hundred miles.

古文：雷电之地，雨晦冥，百里之外无雨之处，宜见天之东西南北也。
现代文：雷鸣电闪的地方，打雷下雨天空昏暗不明，但是百里之外，没有雨的地方，应该看见天向东、西、南、北移动了。
English: Where there is thunder and lightning, thunder and rain, the sky is dim and unclear, but a hundred miles away, where there is no rain, you should see the sky moving east, west, south and north.

古文：口着於天，天宜随口，口一移普天皆移，非独雷雨之地，天随口动也。
现代文：口长在天体上，天体应该跟随口，口一移动，整个天体都该移动，不能只是打雷下雨的地方，天体才跟随着口活动。
English: The mouth is long on the celestial body, the celestial body should follow the mouth, once the mouth moves, the whole celestial body should move, it can't just be thunder and rain, the celestial body should follow the mouth.

古文：且所谓怒者，谁也？
现代文：况且说发怒的是谁呢？
English: Besides, who is angry?

古文：天神邪？
现代文：是天神呢？
English: Is it Tenjin?

古文：苍苍之天也？
现代文：还是苍天呢？
English: Or is it the sky?

古文：如谓天神，神怒无声；如谓苍苍之天，天者体不怒，怒用口。
现代文：如果说是天神，神发怒没有声音。如果说是苍天，天是一种物体，不会发怒，因为发怒要用口。
English: If it is a celestial god, there is no sound when the god is angry. If it is a sky, the sky is an object, it will not be angry, because it is necessary to use the mouth to be angry.

古文：且天地相与，夫妇也，其即民父母也。
现代文：况且天和地的关系，像夫妻一样，它们就是人的父母。
English: Moreover, the relationship between heaven and earth, like husband and wife, they are people's parents.

古文：子有过，父怒，笞之致死，而母不哭乎？
现代文：儿子有过错，父亲发怒，用板子把他打死，母亲不会哭吗？
English: The son is at fault, the father gets angry and beats him to death with a board, won't the mother cry?

古文：今天怒杀人，地宜哭之。
现代文：如今天发怒杀人，地应该哭。
English: If you kill someone in anger today, you should cry.

古文：独闻天之怒，不闻地之哭。
现代文：现在偏偏只听见天发怒，不听见地在哭。
English: Now, on the other hand, we hear only the wrath of heaven, and weep without hearing.

古文：如地不能哭，则天亦不能怒。
现代文：要是地不会哭，那么天也不会发怒。
English: If the earth does not weep, then the sky will not be angry.

古文：且有怒则有喜。
现代文：况且天有愤怒就有欢乐。
English: Besides, where there is anger, there is joy.

古文：人有阴过，亦有阴善。
现代文：人暗中有过错，也暗中有善行。
English: For every one that doeth wrong doeth also good privily.

古文：有阴过，天怒杀之；如有阴善，天亦宜以善赏之。
现代文：暗中有过错，天发怒杀掉他；如果暗中有善行，天也应该高兴而奖赏他。
English: If there is a secret fault, the wrath of heaven will kill him; if there is a secret good deed, heaven should also be happy and reward him.

古文：隆隆之声谓天之怒，如天之喜，亦哂然而笑。
现代文：隆隆的雷声，认为是天发怒；如果是天欢喜，也应该哈哈地笑。
English: The rumbling of thunder is thought to be the wrath of heaven; if it is the joy of heaven, it should also be laughed at.

古文：人有喜怒，故谓天喜怒、推人以知天，知天本於人。
现代文：人有欢喜有愤怒，所以说天也应该有欢喜有愤怒。推究人的情况来说明天，可见对天的知识是以人为基础的。
English: People have joy and anger, so heaven should also have joy and anger. By studying the human condition, it can be seen that the knowledge of heaven is based on people.

古文：如人不怒，则亦无缘谓天怒也。
现代文：如果人不会发怒，那么也没有根据认为天会发怒。
English: If man does not get angry, then there is no reason to believe that God will get angry.

古文：缘人以知天，宜尽人之性。
现代文：既然根据人来说明天，就应该全部把人的特征用上。
English: Since according to people, tomorrow, we should use all human characteristics.

古文：人性怒则呴吁，喜则歌笑。
现代文：人生来发怒就要怒吼，欢喜就要唱歌欢笑。
English: In life, if you want to be angry, you must roar. If you want to be happy, you must sing and laugh.

古文：比闻天之怒，希闻天之喜；比见天之罚，希见天之赏。
现代文：经常听见天发怒，很少听见天欢喜；经常看见天惩罚人，很少看见天奖赏人。
English: We often hear of heaven's wrath, but seldom of its joy; we often see heaven punish man, but seldom see it reward man.

古文：岂天怒不喜，贪於罚，希於赏哉？
现代文：难道天愿意发怒，不愿意欢喜，贪恋惩罚，吝啬奖赏吗？
English: Is heaven willing to be angry, unwilling to rejoice, greedy for punishment, and stingy with reward?

古文：何怒罚有效，喜赏无验也？
现代文：为什么天发怒惩罚人有证明，天欢喜奖赏人没有证明呢！
English: Why is it that those who are punished by Heaven's wrath have proof, but those who are rewarded by Heaven's joy have no proof?

古文：且雷之击也， 折木坏屋 ， 时犯杀人 ，以为天怒。
现代文：雷击，折断树木，毁坏房屋，有时危害打死人，就认为是天发怒。
English: Lightning strikes, breaking trees, destroying houses, sometimes harming and killing people, are considered to be the wrath of heaven.

古文：时或徒雷，无所折败，亦不杀人，天空怒乎？
现代文：但有时只是打雷，没有折断树木，毁坏房屋，也没有打死人，难道是天无缘无故地发怒吗？
English: But sometimes it just thunders, without breaking trees, destroying houses, or killing people. Is the heavens angry for no reason?

古文：人君不空喜怒，喜怒必有赏罚。
现代文：君主不无缘无故地欢喜，也不无缘无故地发怒，欢喜与发怒一定会有奖赏与惩罚。
English: The monarch does not rejoice for no reason, nor does he become angry for no reason. There must be rewards and punishments for joy and anger.

古文：无所罚而空怒，是天妄也。
现代文：没有惩罚而白白地发怒，是天在胡闹。
English: To be angry for no reason, without punishment, is a fool's errand.

古文：妄则失威，非天行也。
现代文：乱来就会失掉威严，这不是天的行为。
English: It is not the act of heaven to lose its majesty when things go wrong.

古文：政事之家，以寒温之气，为喜怒之候，人君喜即天温，则天寒。
现代文：解释政事的人，用寒冷与温和的气候作为欢喜与发怒的征兆。君主欢喜那么天就温和，要是发怒那么天就寒冷。
English: The cold and the temperate weather are used by the interpreters of the government as the signs of joy and anger; when the prince is joyful, the weather is temperate, and when he is angry, the weather is cold.

古文：雷电之日，天必寒也。
现代文：打雷闪电的日子，天气就一定寒冷了。
English: On a day of thunder and lightning, the weather is sure to be cold.

古文：高祖之先刘媪曾息大泽之陂，梦与神遇，此时雷电晦冥。
现代文：汉高祖先人刘媪曾在大泽的岸边休息，梦中与天神交合，这时雷鸣电闪昏暗不明。
English: Henkel's ancestor Liu Wei once rested on the shore of Osawa, and in his dream he communed with the gods, at which time thunder and lightning flashed dimly and indistinctly.

古文：天方施气，宜喜之时也，何怒而雷？
现代文：天正施气给刘媪，这应该是大喜的时候，怎么天要发怒响雷呢？
English: The heavens are sending their energy to Liu Bei. This should be a time of great joy. Why should the heavens be angry and thunderous?

古文：如用击折者为怒，不击折者为喜，则夫隆隆之声，不宜同音。
现代文：如果认为击断树木是天发怒，不击断树木是天欢喜，那么隆隆的雷声就不应该是同一种声音。
English: If the breaking of the trees is considered to be the wrath of heaven, and not breaking the trees is the joy of heaven, then the rumble of thunder should not be the same sound.

古文：人怒喜异声，天怒喜同音，与人乖异，则人何缘谓之天怒？
现代文：人发怒、欢喜是不同的声音，天发怒、欢喜却是同一种声音，跟人的不相同，那么人根据什么认为打雷是天发怒呢？
English: People's anger and joy are different sounds, but heaven's anger and joy are the same kind of sound, different from people's. So on what basis do people think that thunder is heaven's anger?

古文：且 饮食人以不洁净 ，小过也。
现代文：拿不洁净的东西给人吃喝，是个小过错。
English: It is a very small thing to take something unclean to eat or drink.

古文：以至尊之身，亲罚小过，非尊者之宜也。
现代文：以极尊贵的身份，亲自处罚这样小的过失，不是尊贵的人该做的事。
English: To personally punish such a small transgression in a highly respected position is not what a respected person should do.

古文：尊不亲罚过，故王不亲诛罪。
现代文：尊贵的人不亲自惩罚有过失的人，所以君主不亲自惩办有罪的人。
English: Nobles do not themselves punish the guilty, so the sovereign does not himself punish the guilty.

古文：天尊於王，亲罚小过，是天德劣於王也。
现代文：天比君王尊贵，亲自处罚有小过失的人，这是天的德行比君王还低劣。
English: Heaven is more honorable than the king, and personally punishes those who have minor faults. This is the virtue of heaven is inferior to the king.

古文：且天之用心，犹人之用意。
现代文：天用心，跟人用意一样。
English: The will of heaven is the same as the will of man.

古文：人君罪恶，初闻之时，怒以非之；及其诛之，哀以怜之。
现代文：君王惩办恶人，刚听到他罪恶的时候，愤怒地遣责他，等到要惩办他的时候，又同情怜悯他。
English: The king punishes the wicked, and when he hears of their sin, he rebukes them in anger; but when he punishes them, he has compassion on them.

古文：故《论语》曰： 如得其情，则哀怜而勿喜。 
现代文：所以《论语·子张》上说： 如果弄清他犯罪的情由，在杀他们的时候就应该同情怜悯他们而不要高兴。 
English: Therefore, "Analects of Confucius and Confucius" said: If you find out the reason for his crime, when you kill them, you should sympathize and pity them and not be happy.

古文：纣至恶也，武王将诛，哀而怜之。
现代文：商纣恶贯满盈，周武王要杀他，还同情怜悯他。
English: King Zhou Wu wanted to kill him, but he also pitied and pitied him.

古文：故《尚书》曰： 予惟率夷怜尔。 
现代文：所以《尚书·多士》说： 我将按照公平合理的办法处治并怜悯你们。 
English: Therefore, "Shangshu Tozhi" said: I will deal with you in a fair and reasonable manner and have mercy on you.

古文：人君诛恶，怜而杀之；天之罚过，怒而击之。是天少恩而人多惠也。
现代文：君王惩罚恶人，是怜悯地杀掉他们，而天惩罚有过错的人，是发怒并击毙他们，这是天刻薄而人慈悲了。
English: The king punishes the wicked by mercifully killing them, but heaven punishes the guilty by getting angry and killing them.

古文：说雨者以为天施气。
现代文：解说雨的人认为是天施气。
English: People who talk about rain think it's just the weather.

古文：天施气，气渥为雨，故雨润万物，名曰澍。
现代文：天施放气，气聚集厚了就变成雨，所以雨能滋润万物，称为及时雨。
English: When the heavens release the gas, the gas gathers thickly and turns into rain. Therefore, rain can moisturize all things, which is called timely rain.

古文：人不喜，不施恩。天不说，不降雨。
现代文：人不高兴，不会给予恩惠；天不高兴，不会降雨。
English: If the people are not happy, there will be no favors; if the sky is not happy, there will be no rain.

古文：谓雷，天怒；雨者，天喜也。
现代文：认为打雷是天发怒，下雨是天欢喜。
English: They believe that thunder is the wrath of heaven, and rain is the joy of heaven.

古文：雷起常与雨俱，如论之言，天怒且喜也。
现代文：响雷常常跟雨一起来，按照解说者的话，天是在一边发怒一边高兴了。
English: Thunder often comes with rain, and according to the narrator, the sky is angry and happy at the same time.

古文：人君赏罚不同日，天之怒喜不殊时，天人相违，赏罚乖也。
现代文：君主不在同一个时候进行赏罚，而天的喜怒却同时，天与人相反，赏与罚相背。
English: The monarch does not carry out reward and punishment at the same time, but heaven's joy and anger are at the same time. Heaven is the opposite of man, and reward and punishment are opposite.

古文：且怒喜具形，乱也。
现代文：况且发怒与欢喜同时表现出来，是混乱的行为。
English: Moreover, to be angry and happy at the same time is a disorderly act.

古文：恶人为乱，怒罚其过；罚之以乱，非天行也。
现代文：憎恨人作乱，发怒惩罚他们的过错，但却用混乱行为去惩罚他们，这不应是天的行为。
English: It should not be the work of heaven to hate men for their disorder, to punish them in anger for their faults, but to punish them for their disorderly conduct.

古文：冬雷人谓之阳气泄，春雷谓之阳气发。夏雷不谓阳气盛，谓之天怒，竟虚言也。
现代文：冬天打雷，人们认为是阳气开始散发；春天打雷，认为是阳气进一步发泄；夏天打雷，却不认为是阳气旺盛，而认为是天发怒，可见这终究是句假话。
English: When it thunders in winter, people think that the yang is beginning to radiate; when it thunders in spring, they think that the yang is further venting; when it thunders in summer, they do not think that the yang is strong, but that it is the wrath of heaven, which shows that this is ultimately a lie.

古文：人在天地之间，物也。物，亦物也。
现代文：人在天地之间，是一种物质实体；动物，也是一种物质实体。
English: Between heaven and earth, man is a material entity; animals are also a material entity.

古文：物之饮食，天不能知。人之饮食，天独知之。
现代文：动物吃的东西，上天不能知道；人吃的东西，上天偏偏就知道吗？
English: Heaven cannot know what animals eat; does Heaven know what people eat?

古文：万物於天，皆子也；父母於子，恩德一也。岂为贵贤加意，贱愚不察乎？
现代文：万物对于天，都是儿子。父母对于子女，恩德都是同样的，难道会因为人尊贵贤能特别关心，而因为动物低贱愚蠢毫不留心吗？
English: For heaven, all things are sons. Parents are the same for their children, and benevolence is the same. Is it because humans are noble and virtuous that they are particularly concerned, but because animals are lowly and stupid, they pay no attention?

古文：何其察人之明，省物之暗也！
现代文：为什么天观察人这么清楚，而观察动物却这么不清楚呢！
English: Why is it that the heavens observe people so clearly, but observe animals so unclearly!

古文：犬豕食，人腐臭食之，天不杀也。
现代文：狗和猪吃人给的腐臭食物，天却不杀那个人。
English: Dogs and pigs eat rancid food given by man, but God does not kill that man.

古文：如以人贵而独禁之，则鼠洿人饮食，人不知，误而食之，天不杀也。
现代文：如果认为人尊贵只禁止给人吃脏东西，那么老鼠弄脏了人吃的东西，人不知道，不注意吃了它，天却不杀老鼠。
English: If you think that respectable people only forbid people to eat dirty things, then the mouse has soiled what people eat, people do not know, do not pay attention and eat it, but God does not kill the mouse.

古文：如天能原鼠，则亦能原人，人误以不洁净饮食人，人不知而食之耳，岂故举腐臭以予之哉？
现代文：如果天能原谅老鼠，那么也应该能原谅人。人不小心把不洁净的东西给了别人，别人不知道吃了它，难道是故意拿腐臭东西给别人吃吗？
English: If heaven can forgive mice, then it should also be able to forgive people. People accidentally give unclean things to others, others do not know to eat it, is it intentional to take rancid things to others to eat?

古文：如故予之，人亦不肯食。
现代文：如果是故意给别人，别人也不会肯吃。
English: If you give it to someone on purpose, they won't eat it.

古文：吕后断戚夫人手，去其眼，置於厕中，以为人豕。
现代文：吕后斩断戚夫人的手，挖去她的眼睛，关她在猪圈里，把她当做 人猪 。
English: Lv Hou chopped off her cousin's hand, gouged out her eyes, locked her in a pigsty, and treated her like a human pig.

古文：呼人示之，人皆伤心；惠帝见之，疾卧不起。
现代文：喊人们来看，人们都很伤心；孝惠帝看了，就病倒卧床不起。
English: He called for people to come and see, and they were very sad; when Emperor Xiao Hui saw this, he fell ill and was bedridden.

古文：吕后故为，天不罚也。人误不知，天辄杀之，不能原误，失而责故，天治悖也。
现代文：吕后故意这样做，天不惩罚她；人粗心不知道把脏东西给别人吃了，天立即就杀死他。
English: Lu Huan deliberately did this, and Heaven did not punish her; if someone carelessly and unknowingly fed something dirty to someone else, Heaven would immediately kill him.

古文：夫人食不净之物，口不知有其洿也；如食，已知之，名曰肠洿。
现代文：不能原谅无心的过失反而宽恕有意的罪过，这是上天办事太昏乱了。人吃了不洁净的东西，口不晓得那是脏的；如果吃完了，才知道，名叫肠洿。
English: God's providence is so confused that he cannot forgive an unintentional sin, but forgives a deliberate one. When a man eats something unclean, his mouth does not know that it is unclean; when he has finished eating, he knows that it is a maggot.

古文：戚夫人入厕，身体辱之，与洿何以别？
现代文：戚夫人被关进猪圈，身体被脏东西污辱，跟 肠洿 有什么分别？
English: What is the difference between a relative being locked up in a pigsty and having her body defiled with filth and having her intestines ripped out?

古文：肠之与体何以异？
现代文：肠跟身体有什么区别？
English: What is the difference between the intestine and the body?

古文：为肠不为体，伤洿不病辱，非天意也。
现代文：只顾肠不顾身体，只怜悯肠子被弄脏而不怨恨身体被污辱，这不是上天的意思。
English: It is not God's will to care only for the intestines and not for the body, to feel only pity for the intestines being soiled and not to resent the body being insulted.

古文：且人闻人食不清之物，心平如故，观戚夫人者，莫不伤心。
现代文：况且人听说别人吃了不干净的东西，心里平静得像没有听见一样，但看见戚夫人的人，没有不伤心的。
English: Moreover, when people hear that others have eaten something unclean, they are as calm as if they had not heard it, but when they see their relatives, they are not without sorrow.

古文：人伤，天意悲矣。
现代文：人悲伤，天意也悲痛。
English: Man is sorrowful, and Providence is also sorrowful.

古文：夫悲戚夫人则怨吕后，案吕后之崩，未必遇雷也。
现代文：天悲痛戚夫人，那么就应该怨恨吕后。考察吕后死时，未必遭雷打。
English: If one's relatives are grieving, then one should resent Lv Hou. When examining Lv Hou's death, it is not necessary that she was struck by lightning.

古文：道士刘春荧惑楚王英，使食不清。
现代文：道士刘春使楚王英迷惑，让他吃了不干净的东西。
English: The Taoist priest Liu Chun confused Chu Wangying and made him eat unclean things.

古文：春死，未必遇雷也。
现代文：刘春死时，也未必遭雷打。
English: When Liu Chun died, he may not have been struck by lightning.

古文：建初四年夏六月，雷击杀会稽专日食羊五头皆死。
现代文：建初四年六月，雷击会稽郡鄞县的五头羊都死了。
English: In June of the fourth year of the Jianchu era, five sheep in Luo County, Jianchu County, were killed by lightning.

古文：夫羊何阴过，而雷杀之？
现代文：那羊暗中有什么过错而雷要打死它们？
English: What fault do the sheep secretly have that the thunder wants to strike them dead?

古文：舟人洿溪上流，人饮下流，舟人不雷死。
现代文：船夫弄脏了小河的上游，人们吃了下游的水，船夫并没有被雷打死。
English: The boatman polluted the upper reaches of the creek, the people ate the water downstream, the boatman was not killed by lightning.

古文：天神之处天，犹王者之居也。
现代文：天神住在天上，就像君王住在地上一样。
English: The angels live in heaven, just as kings live on earth.

古文：王者居重关之内，则天之神宜在隐匿之中。
现代文：君王住在层层宫门之内，那么天神就应该住在隐蔽的地方。
English: The king lives within the palace gates, so the celestial deities should live in secluded places.

古文：王者居宫室之内，则天亦有太微、紫宫、轩辕、文昌之坐。
现代文：君王住在宫室里面，那么天也有太微、紫宫、轩辕、文昌等居住的星座。
English: The monarch lives in the palace, so the sky also has constellations such as Taimiao, Ziguang, Xuanwu and Wenchang.

古文：王者与人相远，不知人之阴恶。天神在四宫之内，何能见人暗过？
现代文：君王跟一般人相互离得很远，不知道人的暗中罪过；天神住在四宫之内，又怎么能看见人的暗中罪过呢？
English: Kings and ordinary people are far away from each other and do not know people's secret sins; angels live within the four palaces, and how can they see people's secret sins?

古文：王者闻人进，以人知。天知人恶，亦宜因鬼。
现代文：君王听说人的过错，是靠人报告才知道；上天知道人的罪过，也应该是靠鬼的报告。
English: When a king hears of a man's fault, he relies on a report from the man to know about it; when God knows about a man's sin, he should also rely on a report from a ghost.

古文：使天问过於鬼神，则其诛之，宜使鬼神。
现代文：假使天是向鬼神了解人的过错，那么天要杀人，也应该是派鬼神去执行。
English: If heaven is to ghosts and gods to understand people's faults, then heaven to kill, it should also be to send ghosts and gods to carry out.

古文：如使鬼神，则天怒，鬼神也，非天也。
现代文：如果天派鬼神去杀人，那么所谓天发怒，实际是鬼神在发怒，而不是天在发怒了。
English: If heaven sends ghosts and gods to kill people, then the so-called anger of heaven is actually the anger of ghosts and gods, not the anger of heaven.

古文：且王断刑以秋，天之杀用夏，此王者用刑违天时。
现代文：况且君王处决死囚在秋天，天用雷杀人在夏天，这是君王用刑违背大时。
English: Moreover, the king executes death row prisoners in the autumn, and the sky kills people with thunder in the summer, which is when the king violates the law with punishment.

古文：奉天而行，其诛杀也，宜法象上天。
现代文：如果遵循天意办事，君王杀人，也应该仿效上天。
English: If you act in accordance with the will of heaven, and the king kills, you should also follow the example of heaven.

古文：天杀用夏，王诛以秋，天人相违，非奉天之义也。
现代文：天杀人在夏天，君王杀人在秋天，天与人相背，这不符合遵循天意办事的道理。
English: Heaven kills people in the summer, kings kill people in the fall, and the heavens turn their backs on people. This does not conform to the principle of following the will of heaven.

古文：或论曰： 饮食不洁净，天之大恶也。
现代文：有人解释说： 拿不洁净的东西给人吃，是天最讨厌的事。
English: One person explained: "It is the most disgusting thing in the world to take something unclean and give it to someone to eat.

古文：杀大恶，不须时。 
现代文：杀罪恶大的人，不必等待规定的时间。 
English: If you kill someone who has committed a serious crime, you don't have to wait for the allotted time.

古文：王者大恶，谋反大逆无道也。天之大恶，饮食人不洁清。
现代文：君王最讨厌的，是谋反大逆无道；天最讨厌的，是拿不洁净的东西给人吃。
English: The most repugnant thing for a king is to plot treason; the most repugnant thing for a god is to give unclean things to people to eat.

古文：天所恶，小大不均等也。
现代文：天和人讨厌的事，小恶大恶是不一样的。
English: Things that are repugnant to God and man are not the same.

古文：如小大同，王者宜法天，制饮食人不洁清之法为死刑也。
现代文：如果对小恶大恶的看法相同，那么君王就应该效法天，制订拿不洁净东西给人吃的法律是死刑。
English: If the opinion of the lesser evil is the same as that of the greater evil, then the king should follow the example of heaven, and the law of eating unclean things is the death penalty.

古文：圣王有天下，制刑不备此法，圣王阙略，有遗失也？
现代文：可是自古以来圣王统治天下，制订刑法不具备这条法律。这样说来，是圣王疏忽大意，在制订刑法时有遗漏了。
English: However, since ancient times, holy kings have ruled the world, and this law has not been included in the formulation of criminal law. Therefore, it is the king's negligence and omission in the formulation of criminal law.

古文：或论曰： 鬼神治阴，王者治阳。
现代文：有人解释说： 鬼神惩处暗中的过错，君王惩处公开的过错。
English: It has been said that "gods punish secret faults, but kings punish open faults."

古文：阴过暗昧，人不能觉，故使鬼神主之。 
现代文：暗中的过错隐秘，人不会察觉，所以让鬼神来管。 
English: Secret faults are hidden, and people do not notice them, so let ghosts and gods take care of them.

古文：曰： 阴过非一也，何不尽杀？
现代文：我说，暗中的过错不只一种，为什么不把他们全部杀掉呢？
English: I said, there is more than one type of hidden fault, so why not kill them all?

古文：案一过，非治阴之义也。
现代文：只查办 饮食人不洁净 这一种过失，不是惩处暗中过错的公正道理。
English: It is not a just principle to punish a hidden fault, but only to investigate and deal with this kind of fault that eating and drinking is unclean.

古文：天怒不旋日，人怨不旋踵。
现代文：天发怒不过一天，人发怒在瞬间。
English: The day of wrath is but for a day, but a man's wrath is but for a moment.

古文：人有阴过，或时有用冬，未必专用夏也。
现代文：人暗中有过错，也许有在冬天发生，未必专门在夏天发生。
English: Mistakes are made in secret, perhaps in the winter, but not necessarily in the summer.

古文：以冬过误，不辄击杀，远至於夏，非不旋日之意也。
现代文：在冬天犯了错误，天不立即用雷击打死他，要拖到久远的夏天，这不符合 天怒不旋日 的道理。
English: If you make a mistake in winter and the heavens don't immediately strike you down with lightning and kill you, you will have to wait until the distant summer. This is not in line with the principle that the wrath of the heavens does not turn back.

古文：图画之工，图雷之状，累累如连鼓之形；又图一人，若力士之容，谓之雷公，使之左手引连鼓，右手推椎，若击之状。
现代文：绘画工匠，画雷的形状，一个接一个，像把鼓连在一起的样子。又画一个人，像力士的容貌，称他是雷公，让他左手拉着连在一起的鼓，右手举槌，像要击鼓的样子。
English: The artist drew the shapes of thunder, one after the other, as if he were connecting drums. He also drew a man with the appearance of a wrestler, calling him Thunderlord, and having him hold a connected drum in his left hand and raise a mallet in his right hand, as if he were about to beat the drum.

古文：其意以为雷声隆隆者，连鼓相扣击之也；其魄然若敝裂者，椎所击之声也；其杀人也，引连鼓相椎，并击之矣。
现代文：那意思是用来表示：雷声隆隆，就是连成一起的鼓相互扣击的声音；那巨大的像霹雳的声音，就是槌打鼓的声音；雷劈死人，是雷公一边拉连鼓一边举槌，同时撞击造成的。
English: The meaning is used to express: the thunder rumble is the sound of consecutive drums hitting each other; the huge gong-like sound is the sound of hammering drums; the thunder splits the dead is caused by the thunder god pulling the drum and lifting the hammer at the same time.

古文：世又信之，莫谓不然。
现代文：世人相信它，没有认为不是这样的。
English: The world believed it and didn't think otherwise.

古文：如复原之，虚妄之象也。
现代文：如果再仔细研究一下，可以看出，它是幅乱来的图画。
English: If you study it more closely, you can see that it is a chaotic picture.

古文：夫雷，非声则气也。
现代文：雷，不是声音就是气。
English: Thunder is either sound or wind.

古文：声与气，安可推引而为连鼓之形乎？
现代文：声音和气，怎么能推拉而变成把鼓连在起的样子呢？
English: How can sound and qi push and pull each other and become like connecting drums?

古文：如审可推引，则是物也。
现代文：如果确实能推拉，那就是物件。
English: If it can really push and pull, it's an object.

古文：相扣而音鸣者，非鼓即钟也。
现代文：能互相敲打而发出响声的，不是鼓就是钟。
English: It is either a drum or a bell that can make a sound by beating each other.

古文：夫隆隆之声，鼓与钟邪？
现代文：隆隆的声音，是鼓呢？还是钟呢？
English: Is that a drum or a bell?

古文：如审是也，钟鼓不空悬，须有笋虡，然後能安，然後能鸣。
现代文：如果的确说对了，那么钟鼓不能凭空悬挂，必须要有■簴，然后才能稳固，然后才能发出响声。
English: If it is indeed true, then the bell and drum cannot be suspended in the air, they must have a gong, and then they can be stable, and then they can make a sound.

古文：今钟鼓无所悬着，雷公之足，无所蹈履，安得而为雷？
现代文：如今钟鼓成了没有依托悬空挂着的东西，雷公的脚没有踩踏的地方，怎么能打雷呢？
English: Nowadays, the bell and drum have become things hanging in the air without support, and there is no place for Lei Gong's feet to step on. How can he thunder?

古文：或曰： 如此固为神。
现代文：有人说： 正因为这样所以才是神。
English: Some people say, "That's why it's God."

古文：如必有所悬着，足有所履，然後而为雷，是与人等也，何以为神？ 
现代文：如果一定要有依托才能悬空挂着，脚要有踏的地方，然后才打雷，这与人一样了，怎么是神呢？ 
English: If there must be a support in order to hang in the air, and a place for the foot to tread, and then thunder, this is the same as people, how can it be God?

古文：曰：神者，恍惚无形，出入无门，上下无垠，故谓之神。
现代文：我说，神是恍恍惚惚没有固定形体，进出没有门，上下无界限，所以才称之为神。
English: I said that God is a trance without a fixed form, there is no door to enter and exit, and there is no boundary between above and below, so it is called God.

古文：今雷公有形，雷声有器，安得为神？
现代文：如今雷公有形体，雷声又由器物发出，怎么能是神呢？
English: Now that Lei Gong has a body, and the thunder is emitted by objects, how can he be a god?

古文：如无形，不得为之图象；如有形，不得谓之神。
现代文：如果没有形体，不能画成图象；如果有形体，就不能称之为神。
English: If there is no form, it cannot be pictured; if there is a form, it cannot be called God.

古文：谓之神龙升天，实事者谓之不然，以人时或见龙之形也。
现代文：要说神龙能升天，尊重事实的人却认为不是这样，因为人有时看见了龙的形状。
English: To say that a divine dragon can ascend to heaven is not accepted by those who respect facts, because one sometimes sees the shape of a dragon.

古文：以其形见，故图画升龙之形也；以其可画，故有不神之实。难曰： 人亦见鬼之形，鬼复神乎？ 
现代文：因为它的形体出现，所以人才可以画出升天的龙的样子；因为它可以被画出来，所以实际上不是神。有人责难说： 人也看见过鬼的形体，鬼不是神吗？ 
English: Because its shape appears, so people can draw the appearance of the dragon ascending to heaven; because it can be drawn, so it is not actually a god. Some people criticize: People have also seen the shape of the ghost, isn't the ghost a god?

古文：曰：人时见鬼，有见雷公者乎？
现代文：我说，人有时看见鬼，但有看见过雷公的吗？
English: I said, people sometimes see ghosts, but have you ever seen Lei Gong?

古文：鬼名曰神，其行蹈地，与人相似。
现代文：鬼称叫神，它行走时脚踏在地上，跟人差不多。
English: A ghost is called a god, it walks with its feet on the ground, almost like a human.

古文：雷公头不悬於天，足不蹈於地，安能为雷公？
现代文：画上雷公的头没有悬挂在天上，脚不踏在地上，怎么能是雷公？
English: If Lei Gong's head is not hanging in the sky and his feet are not on the ground, how can he be Lei Gong?

古文：飞者皆有翼，物无翼而飞，谓仙人。
现代文：会飞的东西都有翅膀，动物没有翅膀而会飞的，称作仙人。
English: Things that can fly have wings. Animals that can fly without wings are called hermits.

古文：画仙人之形，为之作翼。
现代文：画仙人的形体，却要给他画上翅膀。
English: Draw the shape of a fairy, but give it wings.

古文：如雷公与仙人同，宜复着翼。
现代文：如果雷公与仙人一样，也应该再画上翅膀。
English: If Lei Gong is the same as the Immortal, it should also be painted with wings.

古文：使雷公不飞，图雷家言其飞，非也；使实飞，不为着翼，又非也。
现代文：假使雷公不会飞，画雷公像的人说他会飞，就不对；假使确实会飞，不给他画上翅膀，这又不对。
English: If Lei Gong can't fly, it's not right for the person who painted Lei Gong's portrait to say that he can fly; if he really can fly, it's not right not to paint wings on him.

古文：夫如是，图雷之家，画雷之状，皆虚妄也。
现代文：这样说来，画雷公像的人画出雷公的样子，都是虚构的。
English: In this way, the person who draws the image of Lei Gong draws the appearance of Lei Gong, all of which are fictional.

古文：且说雷之家，谓雷，天怒呴吁也；图雷之家，谓之雷公怒引连鼓也。
现代文：况且解说雷的人，说打雷是天发怒在怒吼；画雷公像的人，说雷公发怒是在拉动连在一起的鼓。
English: Moreover, the person who interprets thunder says that thunder is the wrath of heaven roaring; the person who draws the thunder god statue says that the thunder god's wrath is pulling the connected drums.

古文：审如说雷之家，则图雷之家非；审如图雷之家，则说雷之家误。
现代文：确实像解说雷的人说的，那么画雷公像的人说的就不对；确实像画雷公像的人说的，那么解说雷的人说的就是错误的。
English: If it is true what the person who interprets thunder says, then what the person who draws the image of thunder is wrong; if it is true what the person who draws the image of thunder says, then what the person who interprets thunder says is wrong.

古文：二家相违也，并而是之，无是非之分。
现代文：二家的说法相背，并且都说是对的，这就没有是非的区别。
English: There is no difference between right and wrong, since the two sides' statements contradict each other and are both correct.

古文：无是非之分，故无是非之实。
现代文：没有是非的区别，所以实际上也就没有是非。
English: There is no difference between right and wrong, so in fact there is no right and wrong.

古文：无以定疑论，故虚妄之论胜也。
现代文：正因为无法判定这些疑惑的说法，所以虚构的说法得逞了。
English: It is precisely because these dubious claims cannot be determined that the fictitious claims have succeeded.

古文：《礼》曰： 刻尊为雷之形，一出一入，一屈一伸，为相校轸则鸣。 
现代文：《礼》上说： 在尊上刻雷的样子，或凸或凹，或弯或直，因为相互纠缠，就像有响声一样。 
English: "Li" said: The appearance of the thunderbolt is either convex or concave, or curved or straight, because they are entangled with each other, just like there is a sound.

古文：校轸之状，郁律垒之类也，此象类之矣。
现代文：纠缠的形状，就像征沉闷不绝一类的雷声，这是用形象来拟雷。
English: The shape of the entanglement is like a dull, incessant thunder, which is used to simulate lightning.

古文：气相校轸分裂，则隆隆之声，校轸之音也。魄然若裂者，气射之声也。
现代文：气相互纠缠而突然分裂，那隆隆的雷声，就是纠缠发出的声音；那巨大的像霹雳的声音，就是气喷射出来的声音。
English: Gas entangled with each other and suddenly split, the rumbling thunder is the sound of entanglement; the huge beep-like sound is the sound of gas ejected.

古文：气射中人，人则死矣。
现代文：气射中人，人就会死。
English: If you're shot, you're dead.

古文：实说，雷者太阳之激气也。
现代文：实际上，雷是极盛的阳气冲击阴气造成的。
English: In fact, lightning is caused by the yang in full swing striking the yin.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：怎么证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：正月阳动，故正月始雷。
现代文：正月阳气开始散发，所以正月开始有雷。
English: In the first month of the year, yang qi began to be emitted, so thunder began in the first month of the year.

古文：五月阳盛，故五月雷迅。
现代文：五月阳气旺盛，所以五月雷声迅猛。
English: The yang of May is strong, so the thunder of May is rapid.

古文：秋冬阳衰，故秋冬雷潜。
现代文：秋天冬天阳气衰微，所以秋天冬天雷潜伏。
English: In autumn and winter, the yang is fading, so thunder lurks in autumn and winter.

古文：盛夏之时，太阳用事，阴气乘之。
现代文：炎热夏天的时候，太阳主事，阴气来侵犯。
English: During the hot summer, the sun dominates, and the gloomy weather encroaches.

古文：阴阳分，则相校轸。
现代文：阴气与阳气纷争，就互相纠缠。
English: When yin and yang are in conflict, they entangle each other.

古文：校轸则激射。
现代文：相互纠缠就会互相碰撞、喷射。
English: If they are entangled with each other, they will collide and eject.

古文：激射为毒，中人辄死，中木木折，中屋屋坏。
现代文：它们碰撞而喷射出来的东西有毒，射中人人就要死，射中树木树木就要折断，射中房屋房屋就要毁坏。
English: When they collide and eject something poisonous, everyone will die if hit, trees will be broken if hit, and houses will be destroyed if hit.

古文：人在木下屋间，偶中而死矣。
现代文：人在树下或房屋之间，碰巧被射中就会死去。
English: If you happen to be under a tree or between houses and get shot, you die.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：以什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：试以一斗水灌冶铸之火，气激裂，若雷之音矣。
现代文：试拿一斗水倒在冶炼的火上，气被冲得霹雳作响，像雷声一样。
English: Try pouring a bucket of water on a smelting fire, and the gas will crackle like thunder.

古文：或近之，必灼人体。
现代文：稍微靠近，一定会烧伤人的身体。
English: If you get a little closer, you're bound to get burned.

古文：天地为炉大矣，阳气为火猛矣，云雨为水多矣，分争激射，安得不迅？
现代文：天地是个极大的火炉，阳气是猛烈的火，云雨是极多的水，相互纷争、冲击、喷射，怎么会不迅猛呢？
English: Heaven and earth are a huge furnace, the yang is a fierce fire, the clouds and rain are a lot of water, mutual disputes, impact, spray, how can it not be rapid?

古文：中伤人身，安得不死？
现代文：射中烧伤人的身体，人怎么会不死呢？
English: How can a person not die after being shot and burned?

古文：当冶工之消铁也，以士为形，燥则铁下，不则跃溢而射。
现代文：当冶炼工匠溶化铁的时候，用泥土作模子，模子干了，那么铁水就会顺着往下流，否则就要飞溅出来向周围喷射。
English: When smelting craftsmen melt iron, they use mud as a mold. When the mold dries, the molten iron will flow down, otherwise it will splash out and spray around.

古文：射中人身，则皮肤灼剥。
现代文：射中人的身体，那么皮肤就会被烧伤脱落。
English: If it hits the human body, the skin will be burned and fall off.

古文：阳气之热，非直消铁之烈也；阴气激之，非直土泥之湿也；阳气中人，非直灼剥之痛也。
现代文：阳气的热度，不仅仅只是溶化铁水那点点热度；阴气冲击阳气，不仅仅只是泥土那点点湿度；激气射中了人，不仅仅只是烧伤脱皮的那点点痛苦。
English: The heat of the yang is not just the heat of the molten iron; the yang of the yin is not just the humidity of the soil; the person who is hit by the gas is not just the pain of the burn.

古文：夫雷，火也。气剡人，人不得无迹。
现代文：雷是火，火气烧人，人不可能没有痕迹。
English: Lightning is fire, fire burns people, and people cannot be without traces.

古文：如炙处状似文字，人见之，谓天记书其过，以示百姓。
现代文：或者烧焦的地方样子类似文字，人看见了，认为是天记录他的过错，就拿给老百姓看。
English: Or the scorched places look like letters, and when people see them, they think it's the heavens recording their mistakes, so they show them to the common people.

古文：是复虚妄也。
现代文：这又是假的。
English: Again, this is false.

古文：使人尽有过，天用雷杀人。
现代文：假使一个人的死是由于他有罪过，所以天用雷杀他。
English: Suppose a man's death is due to his guilt, so Heaven kills him with lightning.

古文：杀人当彰其恶，以惩其後，明著其文字，不当暗昧。
现代文：杀他就应当公开他的罪过，以惩诫那后人，就应该使这些文字明明白白地显示出来，不该隐秘不清。
English: If he is to be put to death, his crime must be made public, and in order to discipline those who come after him, these words must be made public and not kept secret.

古文：《图》出於河，《书》出於洛。
现代文：图在黄河中出现，书在洛水中出现。
English: Pictures appear in the Yellow River, and books appear in the Luo River.

古文：河图、洛书，天地所为，人读知之。
现代文：黄河中的图、洛水中的书，都是天作的，人一读就知道它的意思。
English: The map in the Yellow River and the book in the Luo River are both made by heaven, and people know their meaning as soon as they read them.

古文：今雷死之书，亦天所为也，何故难知？
现代文：如今被雷打死的人身上的字，也是天写的，怎么就难得读懂呢？
English: Why is it so hard to understand that the characters on the bodies of people killed by lightning today were also written by the heavens?

古文：如以人皮不可书，鲁惠公夫人仲子，宁武公女也，生而有文在掌，曰 为鲁夫人 ，文明可知，故仲子归鲁。
现代文：如果认为人皮不能写字，那么鲁惠公夫人仲子，即宋武公的女儿，生下来就有文字在她的掌心，说 为鲁夫人 。文字明白可以读懂，所以仲子嫁给鲁公子。
English: If it is thought that human skin cannot write, then Lady Lu Hui's daughter Zhong Zi, that is, Song Wuchong's daughter, was born with a letter in her palm, saying that she was Lady Lu. The letter could be read clearly, so Zhong Zi married Lu Gongzi.

古文：雷书不著，故难以惩後。
现代文：雷书不显露，所以难得用来惩诫后人。
English: The Book of Thunder is not revealed, so it is rarely used to discipline future generations.

古文：夫如是，火剡之迹，非天所刻画也。
现代文：这样说来，火烧人留下的痕迹，不是天刻画的了。
English: In this way, the traces left by the burning man were not painted by the heavens.

古文：或颇有而增其语，或无有而空生其言，虚妄之俗，好造怪奇。
现代文：或许，被雷打死的人身上稍微有点痕迹，却被夸大其词，或许根本没有却凭空生造那说法。可见弄虚作假的庸人，喜欢偏造奇谈怪论。
English: Perhaps the people who were killed by lightning had slight marks on their bodies, but they were exaggerated, or perhaps there were none at all, but they made up the story out of thin air.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：怎么证明，雷是火呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：雷者火也，以人中雷而死，即询其身，中头则须发烧燋，中身则皮肤灼焚，临其尸上闻火气，一验也。
现代文：因为人被雷击中而死，立即察看他的身体，要是击中头部那么头发胡子就被烧燋，要是击中身体那么皮肤就被烤煳，到他的尸体上能嗅出火气，这是证明之一。
English: For example, if a person is struck by lightning and dies, immediately inspect his body. If he was hit on the head, his hair and beard will be burned. If he was hit on the body, his skin will be roasted. This is one of the proofs that you can smell fire on his corpse.

古文：道术之家，以为雷烧石，色赤，投於井中，石燋井寒，激声大鸣，若雷之状，二验也。
现代文：道术之家因为仿造雷，把石头烧红了，丢在井里，石头滚烫井水冰凉，激声轰鸣，像打雷一样，这是证明之二。
English: Due to the imitation of thunder, the Taoist House burned the stone red and threw it into the well. The stone was hot and the well water was cold, and it made a loud noise, like thunder. This is the second proof.

古文：人伤於寒，寒气入腹，腹中素温，温寒分争，激气雷鸣，三验也。
现代文：人受了寒气，寒气进入腹部，腹中原来温和，热气与寒气纷争，激气就咕噜咕噜像雷响一样，这是证明之三。
English: The third proof is that when a person is exposed to cold air, the cold air enters the abdomen, which is originally mild, the hot air and the cold air fight, and the excited air rumbles like thunder.

古文：当雷之时，电光时见大，若火之耀，四验也。
现代文：当打雷的时候，电光时常闪现，光就像火闪耀一样，这是证明之四。
English: When there is thunder, lightning often flashes, and the light shines like fire. This is the fourth proof.

古文：当雷之击，时或燔人室屋，及地草木，五验也。
现代文：当雷击的时候，也许会烧掉人的房屋和地上的草木，这是证明之五。
English: When lightning strikes, it may burn people's houses and the vegetation on the ground, which is the fifth proof.

古文：夫论雷之为火有五验，言雷为天怒无一效。
现代文：解释雷是火有五条证明，说雷是天发怒却没有一条证明。
English: There are five proofs to explain that lightning is fire, but there is no proof to say that lightning is God's wrath.

古文：然则雷为天怒，虚妄之言。
现代文：这样看来，雷是天发怒，就是句假话。
English: From this perspective, thunder is the wrath of heaven, which is a lie.

古文：曰： 《论语》云： 迅雷风烈必变。 
现代文：有人责难说： 《论语·乡党》上说： 遇上炸雷暴风人一定会改变神色。 
English: Some people reproached: "The Analects of Confucius and the Rural Party" said: In the event of a thunderstorm, people will certainly change their appearance.

古文：《礼记》曰： 有疾风迅雷甚雨则必变，虽夜必兴，衣服、冠而坐。 
现代文：《礼记·玉藻》上说： 有狂风炸雷暴雨那么人一定会改变神色，即使是夜深也一定会起床，穿好衣服，戴上帽子坐正。 
English: "Li Ji · Tamamo" said: If there is a strong wind, thunder and rainstorm, then people will definitely change their appearance, even if it is late at night, they will definitely get up, get dressed, put on a hat and sit upright.

古文：惧天怒，畏罚及己也。
现代文：因为害怕天发怒，害怕惩罚到自己头上。
English: For fear of heaven's wrath, fear of punishment falling on their own heads.

古文：如雷不为天怒，其击不为罚过，则君子何为为雷变动、朝服而正坐？ 
现代文：如果打雷不是天发怒，雷击不是惩罚过错，那么做官的为什么会被吓得变色心跳穿上朝服而端端正正地坐在那里呢？ 
English: If thunder isn't God's wrath and lightning isn't punishment for wrongdoing, then why would officials be scared out of their wits to put on a royal robe and sit there in a proper manner?

古文：曰：天之与人犹父子，有父为之变，子安能忽？
现代文：我说，天跟人就同父与子一样，父亲被某件事而改变神色，作儿子的怎么能不在乎呢？
English: I said, heaven and man are the same as father and son, the father is changed by something, how can the son not care?

古文：故天变，己亦宜变，顺天时，示己不违也。
现代文：所以天改变神色，自己也应该跟着改变神色。顺应天时，以表示自己没有违背天意。
English: Therefore, when God changes His countenance, you should also change your countenance. Obey God's timing to show that you have not violated God's will.

古文：人闻犬声於外，莫不惊骇，竦身侧耳以审听之。况闻天变异常之声，轩盍迅疾之音乎？
现代文：人听见狗在外面叫，没有不惊慌害怕的，于是就毛骨悚然地侧着耳朵仔细地听动静，何况是听到天改变神色发出不寻常的、砰磕一声迅猛巨大的声响呢？
English: There is no one who hears a dog barking outside who is not alarmed and frightened, so they eerily put their ear to the side to listen carefully to the movement and sound. What's more, did they hear the sky change its appearance and emit an unusual, loud, rapid and huge sound?

古文：《论语》所指，《礼记》所谓，皆君子也。
现代文：《论语·乡党》上指的，《礼记·玉藻》上说的，都是道德高尚的君子。
English: The ones referred to in "Analects of Confucius and the Rural Party" and the ones mentioned in "Rituals and Customs" were all highly moral gentlemen.

古文：君子重慎，自知无过，如日月之蚀，无阴暗食人以不洁清之事，内省不惧，何畏於雷？
现代文：君子做事慎重，自己知道没有过错，即使有过也像日食，月食一样明显，不会有暗中拿不洁净东西给别人吃的事，自我检查没有可畏惧的，为什么要害怕打雷呢？
English: A gentleman does things carefully. He knows that there is no fault. Even if there is, it is as obvious as a solar eclipse or a lunar eclipse. There will be no such thing as secretly taking unclean things for others to eat. Self-examination is nothing to be afraid of. Why be afraid of thunder?

古文：审如不畏雷，则其变动不足以效天怒。
现代文：如果真是不害怕打雷，那么他们变色心跳就不足以证明打雷是天发怒。
English: If they really are not afraid of thunder, then their color-changing heartbeats are not enough to prove that thunder is God's wrath.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不为己也。
现代文：因为雷不是针对自己响的。
English: Because thunder doesn't strike for itself.

古文：如审畏雷，亦不足以效罚阴过。
现代文：要是确实害怕打雷，也不足以证明是在惩罚暗中有过错的人。
English: A real fear of thunder is not enough to prove that you are punishing someone who is secretly at fault.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：雷之所击，多无过之人。
现代文：因为雷击杀的，很多都是没有过错的人。
English: Many of those killed by lightning were not at fault.

古文：君子恐偶遇之，故恐惧变动。
现代文：君子是害怕偶然碰巧被雷打，所以恐惧变色动心。
English: The gentleman is afraid of being struck by lightning by chance, so his fear turns into enthusiasm.

古文：夫如是，君子变动，不能明雷为天怒，而反著雷之妄击也。
现代文：这样说来，君子变色心跳，不能证明打雷是天发怒，却反而表明雷是在乱击杀人。
English: In this way, the gentleman's discolored heartbeat cannot prove that the thunder is the wrath of heaven, but it does show that the thunder is indiscriminately killing people.

古文：妄击不罚过，故人畏之。
现代文：乱击杀人而不惩罚有过错的，因此人害怕雷。
English: They kill indiscriminately and do not punish those who are at fault, so people are afraid of thunder.

古文：如审罚过，有过小人乃当惧耳，君子之人无为恐也。
现代文：如果雷真是在惩罚有过错的，那么邪恶的人就该害怕打雷，而道德高尚的人就用不着恐惧了。
English: If thunder really does punish wrongdoing, then the wicked should fear thunder, while the virtuous need not.

古文：宋王问唐鞅曰： 寡人所杀戮者众矣，而群臣愈不畏，其故何也？ 
现代文：宋王偃问唐鞅： 我杀的人很多，但是臣子们却越来越不怕我，其原因是什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Song asked Emperor Tang: I have killed many people, but the courtiers are less and less afraid of me. What is the reason for this?

古文：唐鞅曰： 王之所罪，尽不善者也。
现代文：唐鞅回答说： 君王惩罚的，全都不是好人。
English: Don Juan replied, "Those who are punished by the king are not good people.

古文：罚不善，善者胡为畏？
现代文：惩罚坏人，好人为什么要害怕呢？
English: Punish the bad people, why should the good people be afraid?

古文：王欲群臣之畏也，不若毋辨其善与不善而时罪之，斯群臣畏矣。 
现代文：君王想要臣子们害怕，不如不管他们好与不好都经常惩罚他们，这样臣子们就会害怕了。 
English: If a prince wants his subjects to be afraid, it is better to punish them often, whether they are good or bad, so that his subjects will be afraid.

古文：宋王行其言，群臣畏惧，宋国大恐。
现代文：宋王按照他的话做了，群臣都感到害怕恐惧，于是宋国的大臣都极为恐惧。
English: King Song did as he said, and the courtiers all felt fear, so the ministers of Song were extremely afraid.

古文：夫宋王妄刑，故宋国大恐。
现代文：这是由于宋王胡乱施刑杀人，因此宋国上下害怕恐惧。
English: This was due to the fact that the Song King had arbitrarily punished and killed people, so the Song Kingdom was full of fear.

古文：惧雷电妄击，故君子变动。
现代文：因为惧怕雷电乱击杀人，所以君子听到打雷都变色动心。
English: Because of the fear of lightning randomly striking and killing people, a gentleman becomes emotional when he hears thunder.

古文：君子变动，宋国大恐之类也。
现代文：君子 惧雷电妄击 而变色动心，就同宋国群臣害怕 宋王妄刑 而感到极大的恐惧一样。
English: A gentleman's fear of lightning and electric shock is the same as the great fear of the Song Dynasty's courtiers who were afraid of King Song's punishment.

