古文：肃宗孝章皇帝讳炟，显宗第五子也。
现代文：肃宗孝章皇帝名火旦，显宗第五子。
English: Emperor Suzong Xiaozhang's name was Huitan, and he was the fifth son of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：母贾贵人。永平三年，立为皇太子。
现代文：母贾贵人，永平三年，立为皇太子。
English: His mother, Jia Guijin, was crowned crown prince three years after Yongping.

古文：少宽容，好儒术，显宗器重之。
现代文：年少宽容，爱好儒术，显宗很器重他。
English: He was young and tolerant, loved Confucianism, and was held in high esteem by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：十八年八月壬子，即皇帝位，年十九。尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：永平十八年八月初六，即皇帝位，年十九，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the 18th year of Yongping, that is, the emperor's reign, in the 19th year, His Majesty the Empress became the empress dowager.

古文：壬戌，葬孝明皇帝于显节陵。
现代文：十六日，葬孝明皇帝于显节陵。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Xiaoming was buried in the Tomb of Emperor Xian Jie.

古文：冬十月丁未，大赦天下。
现代文：冬十月初二，大赦天下。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, the general amnesty begins.

古文：赐民爵，人二级，为父后及孝悌、力田人三级，脱无名数及流人欲占者人一级，爵过公乘得移与子若同产子；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，为父后及孝悌、力田每人三级，流亡无户籍及想归首的每人一级，爵位过了公乘可以移与儿子或兄弟的儿子。鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得活不下去的，每人发三斛粟。
English: A peerage is awarded to every man in the world, second class to every man, third class to every father and son-in-law and relative, first class to every exile without a household registration and those who want to return to the head of the family, and the peerage can be transferred to a son or brother's son. Those who are destitute, widowed, orphaned, alone, terminally ill, and too poor to live, each receive three poppies.

古文：诏曰： 朕以眇身，托于王侯之上，统理万机，惧失厥中，兢兢业业，未知所济。
现代文：诏令说： 我渺小薄德，居于王侯之上，统理万机，惟恐偏颇失误，兢兢业业，不知怎样才搞得好。
English: The edict said: I am small and weak, I live above the prince, I manage all the machines, but I am afraid of making mistakes, I work hard, I don't know how to do it well.

古文：深惟守文之主，必建师傅之官。
现代文：我深知守文的君主，必建师傅之官。
English: I am well aware that a monarch who is a stickler for the letter of the law must be a master builder.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 不愆不忘，率由旧章。
现代文：《诗经》上不是说过吗？ 成王不过误，不违失，是由于遵循周公的旧典章程 。
English: The "Book of Songs" does not say: If you want to avoid making mistakes and not forgetting lessons, you must start with the old rules and regulations.

古文：行太尉事节乡侯憙，三世在位，为国元老；司空融，典职六年，勤劳不怠。
现代文：代理太尉事务的节乡侯赵，三朝为官，是国家元老；司空牟融，在职六年，勤劳不怠。
English: The deputy captain of the affairs of the festival township, Hou Zhao, has been an official for three dynasties and is a national elder; Siku Mulong, in office for six years, is hardworking.

古文：其以憙为太傅，融为太尉，并录尚书事。三事大夫，莫肯夙夜 ，《小雅》之所伤也。
现代文：今任赵为太傅，牟融为太尉，并领尚书事。 三公大夫，晨昏不省 ，《小雅》以为不对。
English: At present, Zhao is the dean, Mulong is the captain, and Shang is in charge of bookkeeping. The three royal doctors, do not wake up in the morning, "Xiao Ya" thought it was wrong.

古文：予违汝弼，汝无面从 ，股肱之正义也。
现代文：王有过失 ，臣下应加辅正，不要唯唯诺诺 ，《尚书·益稷》所说的道理，才是国家股肱的正当大义。
English: The king made a mistake, and his vassals should be more supportive, not acquiescent. The principle stated in "Shangshu Yixuan" is the legitimate great justice of the state.

古文：群后百僚，勉思厥职，各贡忠诚，以辅不逮。
现代文：群臣百僚应做好本职工作，各献忠诚匡辅我。
English: The hundreds of ministers should do a good job of their duties, and each of them should be loyal to and support me.

古文：申敕四方，称朕意焉。 
现代文：现在明白通令四方，希望满足我的意愿。 
English: Now it is clear that the Quartet wishes to satisfy my wishes.

古文：十一月戊戌，蜀郡太守第五伦为司空。
现代文：十一月二十四日，任蜀郡太守第五伦为司空。
English: On November 24th, he was appointed as the fifth governor of Shu County.

古文：诏征西将军耿秉屯酒泉。遣酒泉太守段彭救戊己校尉耿恭。
现代文：诏令征西将军耿秉屯守酒泉，派酒泉太守段彭援救戊己校尉耿恭。
English: He ordered Geng Bing, the general of the Western Expedition, to guard Jiuquan, and sent Jiuquan's governor Duan Peng to rescue Captain Geng Gong.

古文：甲辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：于是避正殿，寝兵，不听事五日。
现代文：于是章帝避正殿，停止干戈，五天不上朝。
English: As a result, Emperor Zhang avoided the main hall, stopped fighting, and did not go to court for five days.

古文：诏有司各上封事。
现代文：诏令各部官员对朝政上封书，提批评、建议。
English: The imperial edict ordered officials of all ministries to submit criticisms and suggestions to the imperial edict.

古文：十二月癸巳，有司奏言： 孝明皇帝圣德淳茂，劬劳日昊，身御浣衣，食无兼珍。
现代文：十二月二十日，有关部门报告说： 孝明皇帝圣德淳朴盛大，辛苦终日，身穿浣衣，食无兼味。
English: On December 20th, the relevant departments reported: Emperor Xiaoming is a man of great virtue, simplicity and grandeur. He works hard all day, wears a long robe, and his food is delicious.

古文：泽臻四表，远人慕化，僬侥、儋耳，款塞自至。
现代文：他的恩泽达于四方，远方的人慕义教化。僬侥、儋耳，通好归附。
English: His bounty is in the four directions, and those who are far away seek righteousness and become enlightened.

古文：克伐鬼方，开道西域，威灵广被，无思不服。
现代文：克伐鬼方，开发西域，声威远播，没有不服的。
English: There is no disapproval of the fact that the ghost-hunting party has developed the western region, and its voice has been broadcast far and wide.

古文：以烝庶为忧，不以天下为乐。
现代文：以老百姓的生活为忧，不以统治天下为乐。
English: To worry about the lives of ordinary people, not to enjoy ruling the world.

古文：备三雍之教，躬养老之礼。
现代文：完备三雍的教化，躬行养老之礼。
English: Complete the enlightenment of Sanyong, and pay tribute to the elderly.

古文：作登歌，正予乐，博贯六艺，不舍昼夜。聪明渊塞，著在图谶。
现代文：登堂而歌，正八佾舞乐，博通六艺，日夜不休息，聪明深远，显示在图谶。
English: Singing in the classroom, eight-year-old dance music, six arts, day and night without rest, far-reaching wisdom, shown in the figure.

古文：至德所感，通于神明。
现代文：至德所感，通于神明。
English: A sense of virtue is a path to the gods.

古文：功烈光于四海，仁风行于千载。
现代文：丰功伟业，光照四海，仁风流传千载。
English: His great achievements and great undertakings have lit up the four seas, and his benevolent demeanor has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：而深执谦谦，自称不德，无起寝庙，扫地而祭，除日祀之法，省送终之礼。遂藏主于光烈皇后更衣别室。
现代文：却一味谦让，自称不德，不起寝庙，扫地而祭，免除日祀的制度，省去送终的礼仪，藏神主灵牌于光烈皇后更衣别室。
English: However, he was too modest, claiming that he was not virtuous, that he could not sleep in a temple, that he would sweep the floor in order to offer a sacrifice, that he would exempt himself from the system of daily worship, that he would omit the last rites, and that he would hide the Lord's spirit tablet in the changing room of the Empress Guanglie.

古文：天下闻之，莫不凄怆。
现代文：天下人听说，无不为之凄怆。
English: People all over the world have heard that it is nothing short of amazing.

古文：陛下至孝烝烝，奉顺圣德。
现代文：皇上至孝淳厚，遵行圣德。
English: The Emperor is a filial son and a virtuous man, and he follows the rules of morality.

古文：臣愚以为更衣在中门之外，处所殊别，宜尊庙曰显宗，其四时禘袷，于光武之堂，间祀悉还更衣，共进《武德》之舞，如孝文皇帝袷祭高庙故事。 制曰： 可。 
现代文：臣等以为更衣在中门之外，地点特殊。应上庙号为显宗，四时正祭，在光武庙堂举行，平常闻祀都回便殿举行，共进《武德》舞，像孝文皇帝正祭于高庙一样。 章帝批示： 可以。 
English: The vassals thought that the changing room was outside the middle gate, a special place. The temple name should be Xianzong, and the four o'clock main festival should be held in the Guangwu Temple, and the usual memorial service should be held in the Ben Hall, and the "Wu De" dance should be performed together, just like the Emperor Xiaowen was celebrating in the Gao Temple. Emperor Zhang instructed: Yes.

古文：是岁，年疫。京师及三州大旱，诏勿收兖、豫、徐州田租、刍稿，其以见谷赈给贫人。
现代文：这年，牛发瘟，京师及三州大旱，诏不收兖、豫、徐州田租、柴草，并以现存谷物赈济贫民。
English: In this year, the cattle plague, the great drought in Beijing and the three states, and the failure to collect rice, yakitori, Xuzhou field rent, and firewood, and to use the existing grain to help the poor.

古文：建初元年春正月，诏三州郡国： 方春东作，恐人稍受禀，往来烦剧，或妨耕农。
现代文：建初元年春正月，诏三州郡国： 现正是春耕，恐稍微给粮食与贫民，往来麻烦，有妨农事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year of the First Year

古文：其各实核尤贫者，计所贷并与之。
现代文：应分别核实特别贫困的，连借贷一齐给他们。
English: Those who are particularly poor should be verified separately, and loans should be given to them together.

古文：流人欲归本者，郡县其实禀，令足还到，听过止官亭，无雇舍宿。
现代文：流浪的人想回本乡的，郡县要给足口粮，使他们能够回到本乡，让他们在驿站官亭投宿，不要出客店钱。
English: If vagrants want to return to their hometowns, counties should give them foot rations so that they can return to their hometowns, and let them stay at the government kiosks. They should not take money from the inns.

古文：长吏亲躬，无使贫弱遗脱，小吏豪右得容奸妄。
现代文：长吏要亲自过问，不要让贫弱之民漏掉了，而让小吏豪强得以作弊。
English: It is necessary for officials to make inquiries in person, so as not to let the poor and weak people miss out, and let the petty officials and powerful people cheat.

古文：诏书既下，勿得稽留，刺史明加督察尤无状者。 
现代文：诏书既下，不要拖延，刺史明加督察那些罪恶特大的人。 
English: Now that the edict has been issued, do not delay, and dispatch inspectors to investigate those who have committed extremely serious crimes.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 比年牛多疾疫，垦田减少，谷价颇贵，人以流亡。
现代文：二十三日，章帝诏令说： 这些年牛多疾病，垦田减少，谷价很贵，人口因此流亡。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying, "In recent years, cattle have been plagued by disease, the number of rice fields has decreased, and grain prices are very high. As a result, the population has been forced into exile.

古文：方春东作，宜及时务。
现代文：现正春耕，应及时抓住农时。
English: Now spring ploughing is in progress, it is necessary to seize the agricultural time in time.

古文：二千石勉劝农桑，弘致劳来。
现代文：二千石要勉励百姓从事农桑，使大家勤于耕作。
English: It is necessary to encourage the people to engage in agricultural mulberry, so that everyone is diligent in farming.

古文：群公庶尹，各推精诚，专急人事。
现代文：公卿百官，要以精诚相见，专心致力于老百姓的事情。
English: The hundreds of court nobles and officials should treat each other with sincerity and devote themselves to the affairs of the people.

古文：罪非殊死，须立秋案验。
现代文：囚犯除了非要斩首的外，等立秋后再审理。
English: In addition to the mandatory beheading of prisoners, trials will be held after the new year.

古文：有司明慎选举，进柔良，退贪猾，顺时令，理冤狱。 五教在宽 ，帝《典》所美；恺悌君子，《大雅》所叹。
现代文：有关部门用人要慎重选择举荐，进用温良的人，排斥贪婪狡猾的人，顺应时令，清理冤狱。 五教的根本是宽， 为《尚书·舜典》所嘉美； 父母官就是要平易 ，为《诗大雅·洞酌》所赞赏。
English: The relevant departments should carefully select the employees to recommend, promote the gentle people, reject the greedy and cunning people, conform to the times, and clean up the unjust prisons.The fundamental of the Five Teachings is broad, which is praised by the "Shangshu·Shanxi"; the parents' official is to be easy, which is praised by the "Poetic Elegance·Dongshu."

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。 
现代文：布告天下，使天下明白我的心意。 
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：酒泉太守段彭讨击车师，大破之。罢戊己校尉官。
现代文：酒泉太守段彭讨伐车师，将车师军队打得大败。罢去戊己校尉官。
English: Jiuquan Governor Duan Peng fought against the carvers and defeated the army of carvers. He was dismissed as a lieutenant.

古文：二月，武陵澧中蛮叛。
现代文：二月，武陵澧中蛮反叛。
English: In February, there was a violent rebellion in Wuling County.

古文：三月甲寅，山阳、东平地震。
现代文：三月十二日，山阳、东平地震。
English: On March 12, the Sanyang and Dongping earthquakes occurred.

古文：己巳，诏曰： 朕以无德，奉承大业，夙夜栗栗，不敢荒宁。
现代文：二十七日，章帝下诏说： 我以无德，承继帝业，日夜不安，不敢荒政自宁。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying, "I am inheriting the imperial inheritance with no virtue, and I am uneasy day and night, and dare not embark on despotic rule.

古文：而灾异仍见，与政相应。
现代文：而灾异不断出现，与政务相应。
English: But disasters and abnormalities continue to occur, corresponding to government affairs.

古文：朕既不明，涉道日寡；又选举乖实，俗吏伤人，官职耗乱，刑罚不中，可不忧与！
现代文：我本来就不英明，涉道时间很短，推荐的人员名不符实，俗吏伤民，官职禾毛乱，刑罚不当，能不发愁吗？
English: I am not wise by nature, the travel time is very short, the names of the recommended personnel are not true, the secular officials hurt the people, the official position is chaotic, the punishment is improper, can I not worry?

古文：昔仲弓季氏之家臣，子游武城之小宰，孔子犹诲以贤才，问以得人。
现代文：以前仲弓为季氏家臣，子游为武城小宰，孔子尚且教诲要举贤才，问是否得到能人。
English: In the past, Zhongyun was a vassal of the Ji clan, and Ziyu was a vassal of the Wucheng clan. Confucius also taught that it was necessary to elevate the wise and ask whether they were capable people.

古文：明政无大小，以得人为本。
现代文：清明的政事不管大小，以得人治理为根本。
English: No matter how big or small, a clean government is based on the principle of governance by the people.

古文：夫乡举里选，必累功劳。今刺史、守相不明真伪，茂才、孝廉岁以百数，既非能显，而当授之政事，甚无谓也。
现代文：乡里选举推荐，必多番用功劳苦，现在刺史、守相不明真伪，茂才、孝廉一年举荐数百，既不是什么能干的人，而授之政事，实在是无聊。
English: The recommendation of the township election must be made repeatedly with great effort, and now the history and the guard phase are unknown. Maozai and Xiaolian recommend hundreds a year, which is not a capable person, and the political affairs are really boring.

古文：每寻前世举人贡士，或起甽亩，不系阀阅。
现代文：每思前世推荐人士，有的起于田间垄亩，不讲究门第。
English: Every time I think about the people I recommended in my previous life, some of them were born in a field, and I don't care about their family background.

古文：敷奏以言，则文章可采；明试以功，则政有异迹。文质彬彬，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：要他们上书议事论政，则所言多可采纳；在岗位加以试用，就能看出不同寻常的政绩。文质彬彬，我十分赞赏。
English: If they are asked to discuss politics in writing, most of what they say can be accepted; if they are put to the test in their posts, they will be able to see their extraordinary political achievements. I very much appreciate their courteous manners.

古文：其令太傅、三公、中二千石、二千石、郡国守相，举贤良方正、能直言极谏之士各一人。 
现代文：现令太傅、三公、中二千石、二千石、郡国守相，举荐贤良方正能直言批评的人各一人。 
English: It is now the duty of taifu, sankong, junior 2,000 koku, senior 2,000 koku, and county governors to recommend one person each who can criticize the virtuous Fang Zheng directly.

古文：夏五月辛酉，初举孝廉、郎中宽博有谋，任典城者，以补长、相。
现代文：夏五月二十日，开始推举孝廉，郎中宽厚博学有谋略，足以主持政务的，用来补充县长、侯相。
English: On the 20th day of the 5th month of the summer, the election of filial piety began. Those who were generous, erudite and strategic enough to preside over government affairs were used to supplement county governors and princes.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏以上林池篽田赋与贫人。
现代文：秋七月十一，诏令把上林苑圈禁的那些田土，给予贫民。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Emperor issued an edict to give the poor the land that was forbidden in Shanglinyuan.

古文：八月庚寅，有星孛于天市。
现代文：八月二十日，有彗星出现于天市星。
English: On August 20th, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：九月，永昌哀牢夷叛。
现代文：九月，永昌哀牢夷反叛。
English: In September, Yongchang mourned the rebellion.

古文：冬十月，武陵郡兵讨叛蛮，破降之。
现代文：冬十月，武陵郡兵讨伐叛蛮，击败叛蛮，并迫使其投降。
English: In the winter of October, the soldiers of Wuling County fought against the rebels, defeated the rebels, and forced them to surrender.

古文：十一月，阜陵王延谋反，贬为阜陵侯。
现代文：十一月，阜陵王刘延谋反，贬为阜陵侯。
English: In November, Liu Yan, the King of Fulin, plotted a rebellion and was demoted to the position of the Marquis of Fulin.

古文：二年春三月辛丑，诏曰： 比年阴阳不调，饥馑屡臻。
现代文：二年三月初五，诏令说： 近年阴阳不调和，连连发生饥荒。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the second year, the imperial edict said: In recent years, yin and yang have not been reconciled, and famine has occurred one after another.

古文：深惟先帝忧人之本，诏书曰： 不伤财，不害人 ，诚欲元元去末归本。
现代文：深思先帝替平民担忧的根本点，是诏书所说： 不伤财，不害民 ，真诚希望平民去末归本，从事农作。
English: Thinking deeply about the fundamental point of the emperor's concern for the common people, the edict said, "Don't hurt the wealth, don't harm the people," and sincerely hoped that the common people would return to their roots and engage in farming.

古文：而今贵戚近亲，奢纵无度，嫁娶送终，尤为僣侈。
现代文：但现在贵戚近亲，骄奢放纵无度，嫁娶送终，超越身份财力大操大办。
English: But now, the close relatives of the noble family are extravagant and indulgent, marrying and sending off, exceeding the status and financial resources.

古文：有司废典，莫肯举察。《春秋》之义，以贵理贱。
现代文：官员违法乱纪。没有敢检举的。《春秋》之义，以贵理贱。
English: Officials violate the law and discipline. There is no one who dares to report them. The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is to be high-minded and low-minded.

古文：今自三公，并宜明纠非法，宣振威风。
现代文：今从三公起，一并明白纠正非法行为，宣扬振奋威风。
English: Now, starting from the three principals, it is clear to correct the illegal behavior and promote the spirit of enthusiasm.

古文：朕在弱冠，未知稼穑之艰难，区区管窥，岂能照一隅哉！
现代文：我当弱冠之年，不知稼穑艰难。区区一见之愚，难道能照亮一方吗？
English: I'm in my twilight years, I don't know how hard it is to make money. Is it possible to illuminate one side with a single glance?

古文：其科条制度所宜施行，在事者备为之禁，先京师而后诸夏。 
现代文：所有科条制度应当实施的，任何人都得遵守，先京师再地方，一律执行。 
English: All subject systems should be implemented, and everyone must comply with them. They should be implemented first in Beijing and then in localities.

古文：甲辰，罢伊吾庐屯兵。
现代文：初八，罢去伊吾卢屯兵。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the Iguru garrison was dismissed.

古文：永昌、越巂、益州三郡民、夷讨哀牢，破平之。
现代文：永昌、越巂、益州三郡民、夷讨伐哀牢，打败哀牢，地方平定。
English: The people of the three counties of Yongchang, Yuexuan and Yizhou, and the barbarians fought against and defeated the villagers, and the area was pacified.

古文：夏四月戊子，诏还坐楚、淮阳事徙者四百余家，令归本郡。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，诏令因楚王刘英、淮阳王刘延谋反事迁徙的四百余家，令归回本郡。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, more than 400 families who had migrated due to the plots of Chu King Liu Ying and Huai Yang King Liu Yan were ordered to return to the county.

古文：癸巳，诏齐相省冰纨、方空縠、吹纶絮。
现代文：二十七日诏令齐相省去冰纨、方空谷、吹纶絮三服官。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Qixiang was ordered to omit three officials: Hefei, Fangkuogu, and Fuyu.

古文：六月，烧当羌叛，金城太守郝崇讨之，败绩，羌遂寇汉阳。
现代文：六月，烧当羌反叛，金城太守郝崇去讨伐，被打得大败，羌于是寇汉阳。
English: In June, after the rebellion of Burnt-Dong, Jincheng Taishou went to fight against Xizong and was soundly defeated. Therefore, Qo Hanyang took the lead.

古文：秋八月，遣行车骑将军马防讨平之。
现代文：秋八月，派代理车骑将军马防去讨伐，平定了叛乱。
English: In the autumn and August, he sent an agent car to ride on the general's horse to fight, and quelled the rebellion.

古文：十二月戊寅，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：十二月十六日，彗星出现于紫宫星座。
English: On December 16th, the comet appeared in the constellation of Aquila.

古文：三年春正月己酉，宗祀明堂。
现代文：三年春正月十七日，于明堂祭祀祖先。
English: On the 17th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of spring, the ancestors were sacrificed in Myodo.

古文：礼毕，登灵台，望云物。
现代文：礼毕，登灵台，望云气。
English: All right, let's go to the platform. Let's go.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：三月癸巳，立贵人窦氏为皇后。
现代文：三月初二，立贵人窦氏为皇后。
English: On the second day of March, the noble Dou clan was crowned empress.

古文：赐爵，人二级、三老、孝悌、力田人三级，民无名数及流民欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，无户籍及流民想归首的每人一级。鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫不能生存者每人发粟五斛。
English: Reward the world's men with a peerage, two levels per person, three levels per person for the elderly, filial piety, and virtue, and one level per person for those without a household registration and those who want to return to their families.

古文：夏四月己巳，罢常山呼沲石臼河漕。
现代文：夏四月初九，停修常山、呼池、石臼河漕。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of summer, the construction of the Changshan, Huitian, and Shisu River was suspended.

古文：行车骑将军马防破烧当羌于临洮。
现代文：代理车骑将军马防在临洮打败烧当羌。
English: The agent car rides the general horse defense in Linyi to defeat the burning of Dangdang.

古文：闰月，西域假司马班超击姑墨，大破之。冬十二月丁酉，以马防为车骑将军。武陵溇中蛮叛。
现代文：闰月，西城假司马班超大败姑墨。冬十二月十一日，任马防为车骑将军。武陵溇中蛮反叛。
English: In the intercalary month, the horse-drawn carriages of the horse-drawn carriages of the West City Horse Guards were defeated. On December 11th, the horse guards were appointed as the cavalry generals. The people of Wuling County rebelled violently.

古文：是岁，零陵献芝草。
现代文：这年，零陵献芝草。
English: In this year, Ziling contributed turf grass.

古文：四年春二月庚寅，太尉牟融薨。
现代文：四年二月初五，太尉牟融去世。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 4th year, Taifu Mu Rong passed away.

古文：夏四月戊子，立皇子庆为皇太子。
现代文：夏四月初四，立皇子刘庆为皇太子。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：赐爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田人三级，民无名数及流人欲自占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，民无户籍及流浪者想归首的每人一级。鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫不能生存者每人发五斛粟。
English: Award the second-level title to every man in the world, the third-level title to every three-year-old, filial son, and son-in-law, and the first-level title to every person without a household registration and the first-level title to every person who wants to return to the family. The destitute, widowed, lonely, alone, terminally ill, and poor who cannot survive will each receive five poppies.

古文：己丑，徙巨鹿王恭为江陵王，汝南王畅为梁王，常山王昞为淮阳王。
现代文：初五，调迁巨鹿王刘恭为江陵王、汝南王刘畅为梁王、常山王刘日丙为淮阳王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Gong, the King of the Giant Deer, was transferred to be the King of Jiangling, Liu Chang, the King of Runan, was transferred to be the King of Liang, and Liu Rihong, the King of Changshan, was transferred to be the King of Huaiyang.

古文：辛卯，封皇子伉为千乘王，全为平春王。
现代文：初七，封皇子刘伉为千乘王，刘全为平春王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the crown prince Liu Ye became the King of Chun Ye, and Liu Quan became the King of Ping Chun.

古文：五月丙辰，车骑将军马防罢。
现代文：五月初二，免去马防车骑将军职务。
English: On the second day of May, he was relieved of his duties as horse-drawn carriage cavalry general.

古文：甲戌，司徒鲍昱为太尉，南阳太守桓虞为司徒。
现代文：二十日，任司徒鲍昱为太尉，南阳太守桓虞为司徒。
English: On the 20th, Baojun, who had been appointed as a tutor, was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and Nanyang Taishu Kanyu was promoted to tutor.

古文：六月癸丑，皇太后马氏崩。
现代文：六月三十日，皇太后马氏去世。
English: On June 30, Empress Dowager Ma passed away.

古文：秋七月壬戌，葬明德皇后。
现代文：秋七月初九，葬明德皇后。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, Empress Mingde was buried.

古文：冬，牛大疫。
现代文：冬天，牛发生了大面积疫病。
English: In the winter, there was a large-scale epidemic in cattle.

古文：十一月壬戌，诏曰： 盖三代导人，教学为本。
现代文：十一月十一日，章帝诏令说： 三代开导指引民众，教学为本。
English: On November 11th, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: Three generations of enlightened leaders will guide the people, and teaching will be the foundation.

古文：汉承暴秦，褒显儒术，建立《五经》，为置博士。
现代文：汉继暴秦，褒扬儒术，建立《五经》，设置博士。
English: Han successively subjugated Qin, praised Confucianism, established the "Five Classics," and set up doctoral programs.

古文：其后学者精进，虽曰承师，亦别名家。
现代文：此后学者精进，虽说是继承老师学业，但又别为一家之学。
English: Since then, scholars have been diligent, although it is to inherit the teacher's studies, but do not be a family of learning.

古文：孝宣皇帝以为去圣久远，学不厌博，故遂立《大、小夏侯尚书》，后又立《京氏易》。
现代文：孝宣皇帝认为离圣人久远，学不厌博，就设立《大、小夏侯尚书》，后来又设立《京氏易》。
English: Emperor Xiaoxuan thought that it was a long way from the sage and was not tired of learning, so he set up the "Big and Small Xia Hou Shang Shu" and later the "Keiji Yi."

古文：至建武中，复置《颜氏、严氏春秋》，《大、小戴礼》博士。
现代文：至建武中，再设置《颜氏春秋》、《严氏春秋》、《大戴礼》、《小戴礼》博士。
English: At Jianwu Middle School, there were also professors of "Yan's Spring and Autumn," "Yan's Spring and Autumn," "Big Weary" and "Small Weary."

古文：此皆所以扶进微学，尊广道艺也。
现代文：这都是为了扶植微学，尊新开放道艺。
English: This is all for the purpose of fostering micro-science and respecting the new and open Daoism.

古文：中元元年诏书，《五经》章句烦多，议欲减省。
现代文：中元元年诏书，《五经》章句繁多，想议定减省。
English: In the imperial edict of the first year of the Middle Ages, the "Five Classics" had a large number of chapters, and they wanted to agree on a reduction.

古文：至永平元年，长水校尉儵奏言，先帝大业，当以时施行。
现代文：至永平元年，长水校尉樊修上奏说，先帝大业，应当及时施行。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, Changshui school captain Zou Xiu said in his report that the great cause of the former emperor should be implemented in a timely manner.

古文：欲使诸儒共正经义，颇令学者得以自助。
现代文：要使诸儒共同正确理解经义，颇使学者得以提高。
English: In order to enable all Confucians to correctly understand the meaning of the sutra, scholars must be able to improve.

古文：孔子曰： 学之不讲，是吾忧也。
现代文：孔子说： 不讲究学术，这是我最耽心的。 
English: Confucius said, "It is my greatest concern not to be too academic.

古文：又曰： 博学而笃志，切问而近思，仁在其中矣。
现代文：又说： 广泛学习又能立志笃行，深究不懂的问题，反复思考已懂的事物，那么仁就在里面了。 唉！
English: He also said, "If you can study extensively and have the determination to do well, if you can deeply investigate problems you don't understand, and if you can repeatedly think about things you already understand, then benevolence is within you. Alas!

古文：於戏，其勉之哉！ 于是下太常，将、大夫、博士、议郎、郎官及诸生、诸儒会白虎观，讲议《五经》同异，使五官中郎将魏应承制问，侍中淳于恭奏，帝亲称制临决，如孝宣甘露石渠故事，作《白虎议奏》。
现代文：大家奋勉努力吧！ 于是从太常以下，将、大夫、博士、议郎、郎官及诸生诸儒会于白虎观，讲议《五经》同异，使五官中郎将魏应承制问，侍中淳于恭奏议，帝亲自称制临决，一如孝宣皇帝甘露二年和甘露中在石渠台诸儒讲论《五经》的先例，作《白虎通》。
English: Let us all make strenuous efforts! Therefore, from Taizang on downwards, doctors, scholars, advisers, vassals, and all living beings of the Confucian Society should be taught the white tiger view and discuss the same and different aspects of the Five Classics, so that the middlemen of the five officials should question Wei Yingcheng, the middlemen of the attendants should make a solemn speech, and the emperor himself should announce the impending decision, just as Emperor Xiaoxuan preached the "Five Classics" to the Confucians in the Second Year of Nehru and the middlemen of Nehru in the Stone Canal, and made "White Tiger Road."

古文：是岁，甘露降泉陵、洮阳二县。
现代文：这年，泉陵、洮阳三县降及时雨。
English: This year, it rained heavily in the three counties of Quanling and Fenyang.

古文：五年春二月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五年春二月初一，朔，日蚀。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the fifth year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：诏曰： 朕新离供养，愆咎众著，上天降异，大变随之。《诗》不云乎： 亦孔之丑。
现代文：章帝下诏说： 我刚刚遭受太后逝世的痛苦。衍咎丛集，上天出现异象，巨大的变故随着来了，《诗经·小雅》上不是说过吗？ 日食是十分不好的 。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying, "I have just suffered the pain of the death of the empress dowager. Accusations have been piled up, visions have appeared in the heavens, and great changes have come with it. Didn't it say in the Xiao Ya Poems that a solar eclipse is very bad?"

古文：又久旱伤麦，忧心惨切。
现代文：加上久旱伤麦，我忧心惨切。
English: Coupled with the long drought, I'm worried sick.

古文：公卿已下，其举直言极谏、能指朕过失者各一人，遣诣公车，将亲览问焉。
现代文：公卿以下，宜各推荐大胆批评能指出我过失的各一人，送到公车门，我将亲自接见询问。
English: From the Lord Chancellor downwards, I would like to invite anyone who has the audacity to criticise me and point out my failings to come to the door of the bus, where I will personally be available for questioning.

古文：其以岩穴为先，勿取浮华。 
现代文：推荐的人，应以岩穴偏僻地方的为好，切不要那种轻浮不实的人。 
English: The person to be recommended should preferably be from a rock cave in a remote place, and should never be someone who is frivolous or insincere.

古文：甲申，诏曰： 《春秋》书 无麦苗 ，重之也。
现代文：初五，章帝诏令说： 《春秋》记载： 无麦苗 ，意谓民食为重。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: "Spring and Autumn" records: no wheat seedlings, which means that people's food is important.

古文：去秋雨泽不适，今时复旱，如炎如焚。凶年无时，而为备未至。
现代文：去年秋天雨水不调匀，今年又遭旱，像火一样烧，荒年随着来了，而防备的工作又没有。
English: Last autumn, the rain was not evenly distributed. This year, the drought is burning like a fire. A bad year is coming, but there is no work to prevent it.

古文：朕之不德，上累三光，震栗忉忉，痛心疾首。
现代文：我因薄德，惹及日、月、星辰三光生怒，我震忄栗忄刀忄刀，痛心疾首。
English: I have angered the sun, the moon, and the stars because of my weak virtue. I tremble, tremble, tremble.

古文：前代圣君，博思咨诹，虽降灾咎，辄有开匮反风之应。
现代文：前代圣贤君王，思虑深远，咨诹善道，虽降灾咎，还有如成王开启金匮反风起禾之应，免除了灾害。
English: The previous generation of sages and kings, with far-reaching thoughts and good advice, although they reduced the blame for disasters, they also, like Chengwang, opened the response to the lack of money and the wind, and avoided disasters.

古文：令予小子，徒惨惨而已。
现代文：现在我呢？只有凄凄惨惨而已。
English: Where am I now? I'm just so miserable.

古文：其令二千石理冤狱，录轻系；祷五岳四渎，及名山能兴云致雨者，冀蒙不崇朝遍雨天下之报。
现代文：今命令二千石平反冤狱，释放轻罪系囚；祷告五岳四渎，及能兴云致雨的名山，希望得到不要一个早晨就蒙受遍降喜雨的好报。
English: I now order that the 2,000-koku unjust prison be leveled, and the prisoners of misdemeanors be released; I pray for the five mountains and four faults, and the famous mountains that can cause clouds to rain, and hope to get a good reward for not suffering the rain of joy in one morning.

古文：务加肃敬焉。 
现代文：大家一定要虔诚肃穆啊！ 
English: Everyone must be pious and serious!

古文：三月甲寅，诏曰： 孔子曰： 刑罚不中，则人无所措手足。
现代文：三月初五，章帝诏令说： 孔子说： 刑罚不得当，老百姓就不知怎么样才好。 
English: On March 5th, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: Confucius said, "If punishment is not appropriate, the common people will not know what to do.

古文：今吏多不良，擅行喜怒，或案不以罪，迫胁无辜，致令自杀者，一岁且多于断狱，甚非为人父母之意也。
现代文：目前吏多不良，随自己的喜怒专横跋扈，办案不根据罪状，威胁迫害无辜，以致自杀的多于一年判处死刑的。这根本不是为人父母的君王本意。
English: At present, there are many bad officials, who act arbitrarily according to their own emotions, do not deal with the case according to the charges, threaten to persecute the innocent, and even commit suicide more than a year after the death sentence. This is not the intention of the royal parents.

古文：有司其议纠举之。 
现代文：有关部门应察觉纠正。 
English: Relevant departments should detect and correct it.

古文：荆、豫诸郡兵讨破武陵溇中叛蛮。
现代文：荆、豫诸郡兵讨伐打败武陵溇中叛蛮。
English: The soldiers of Jing and Yu counties fought against and defeated the rebels in Wuling County.

古文：夏五月辛亥，诏曰： 朕思迟直士，侧席异闻。其先至者，各以发愤吐懑，略闻子大夫之志矣，皆欲置于左右，顾问省纳。
现代文：夏五月二十七日，章帝诏令说： 我希望得到正直的士大夫，恭敬地听取他们的高见，首先到达的，各自发愤吐懑，大致了解到他们的志趣了，我都想把他们安放在左右，作为顾问，以了解采纳他们的意见。
English: On the 27th day of the 5th month in the summer, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: I hope to get honest scholars and scholars, respectfully listen to their high opinions, the first to arrive, each of them is angry, roughly understand their interests, I want to place them around, as a consultant, to understand the adoption of their opinions.

古文：建武诏书又曰，尧试臣以职，不直以言语笔札。
现代文：建武年间的诏书又说，尧在岗位职务上试用臣下，不仅以能说会写的为准。
English: The imperial edict issued during Jianwu's reign also said that the emperor should not only use vassals who could speak and write as candidates for positions.

古文：今外官多旷，并可以补任。 戊辰，太傅赵憙薨。
现代文：目前外地的官位多空着，可以让他们去补充。 戊辰，太傅赵憙去世。
English: At present, there are many vacant posts in foreign countries, so they can be replenished. In Wucheng, Taifu Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：冬，始行月令迎气乐。
现代文：冬天，开始实行月令迎气乐。
English: In winter, the lunar new year celebration begins.

古文：是岁，零陵献芝草。
现代文：这年，零陵贡献芝草。
English: In this year, Ziling contributed turf grass.

古文：有八黄龙见于泉陵。
现代文：有八条黄龙出现于泉陵。
English: There are eight yellow dragons in the spring mausoleum.

古文：西域假司马班超击疏勒，破之。
现代文：西陵假司马班超击败疏勒。
English: Xiling fake Sima Bancha defeated Shule.

古文：六年春二月辛卯，琅邪王京薨。
现代文：六年春正月辛卯，琅笽王刘京去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Liu Jing, the king of the Xing Dynasty, passed away.

古文：夏五月辛酉，赵王盱薨。
现代文：夏五月十九日，赵王刘盱去世。
English: In the summer of May 19th, Zhao Wang Liu Ye passed away.

古文：六月丙辰，太尉鲍昱薨。
现代文：六月十五日，太尉鲍昱去世。
English: On June 15th, Lieutenant Bao Tong passed away.

古文：辛未晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：秋七月癸巳，以大司农邓彪为太尉。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，任大司农邓彪为太尉。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Deng Biao, who had been appointed as the chief farmer, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：七年春正月，沛王辅、济南王康、东平王苍、中山王焉、东海王政、琅邪王宇来朝。
现代文：七年春正月，沛王刘辅、济南王刘康、东平王刘苍、中山王刘焉、东海王刘政、琅笽王刘宇进京朝拜。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, King Liu Fu of Pei, King Liu Kang of Jinan, King Liu Cang of Dongping, King Liu Yan of Zhongshan, King Liu Zheng of the East Sea, and King Liu Yu of Shandong made a pilgrimage to Beijing.

古文：夏六月甲寅，废皇太子庆为清河王，立皇子肇为皇太子。
现代文：夏六月十八日，废皇太子刘庆为清河王，立皇子刘肇为皇太子。
English: On the 18th day of the 6th month of the summer, the former crown prince Liu Qing became the king of Qinghe, and the crown prince Liu Zhao became the crown prince.

古文：己未，徙广平王羡为西平王。
现代文：二十三日，调迁广平王刘羡为西平王。
English: On the 23rd, Guangping King Liu En was transferred to Xiping.

古文：秋八月，饮酎高庙，禘祭光武皇帝、孝明皇帝。
现代文：秋八月，饮酎高朝，禘祭光武皇帝、孝明皇帝。
English: Autumn and August, drinking shochu Gao Dynasty, dragonfly festival of Emperor Guangwu, Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：甲辰，诏曰： 《书》云： 祖考来假 ，明哲之祀。
现代文：初九，章帝诏令说： 《尚书》上说 ：祖考来格 ，是言明哲之祀，能致祖考之神来到。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Emperor Zhang issued a decree saying, "It is said in the Shang Shu: Zukaolai Ge, is the worship of Zhenming Zhe, can bring the god of Zukaolai to come.

古文：予末小子，质又菲薄，仰惟先帝烝烝之情，前修禘祭，以尽孝敬。
现代文：我微不足道，气质菲薄，仰赖先帝淳厚之情，前来举行礻帝祭，以尽孝思。
English: I am insignificant, my temperament is weak, I rely on the previous emperor's benevolence, and I come to hold the Emperor's Birthday Festival to show my filial piety.

古文：朕得识昭穆之序，寄远祖之思。
现代文：我得以了解父子昭穆的顺序，寄托对远祖的怀念。
English: I was able to understand the order of father and son, and cherish the memory of my distant ancestors.

古文：今年大礼复举，加以先帝之坐，悲伤感怀。
现代文：今年大礼再次举行，又新加先帝神坐，更是悲伤感怀。
English: This year's grand ceremony was held again, and the former emperor was newly seated, which is even sadder.

古文：乐以迎来，哀以送往，虽祭亡如在，而空虚不知所裁，庶或飨之。
现代文：乐以迎来，哀以送往，虽祭亡如在，但空虚不定，只希望来享受这祭典。
English: Happy to welcome, sad to send, although the sacrifice and death are present, but the emptiness is uncertain, I only hope to enjoy this festival.

古文：岂亡克慎肃雍之臣，辟公之相，皆助朕之依依。
现代文：岂无克慎肃雍之臣？百官诸侯都来助祭，更让我思慕无穷。
English: Is there nothing more prudent and dignified than a retainer of the Yong Dynasty? Hundreds of officials and lords came to assist the priest, which made me yearn for more.

古文：今赐公钱四十万，卿半之，及百官执事各有差。 
现代文：现赏赐公钱四十万，卿二十万，百官执事分别不等。 
English: Currently, the reward of public money is 400,000 yuan, the reward of nobles is 200,000 yuan, and the reward of officials and deacons are different.

古文：九月甲戌，幸偃师，东涉卷津，至河内。下诏曰： 车驾行秋稼，观收获，因涉郡界。
现代文：九月初十，章帝到偃师，东渡卷津，至河内，下诏令说： 我出来看秋收情况，了解年岁丰歉，因而涉足郡界。
English: At the beginning of September 10th, Emperor Zhang went to Shanshi, Dongdu, Wuling, and Hanoi, and issued a decree saying: I came out to see the autumn harvest and learn about the annual harvest, so I set foot in the county.

古文：皆精骑轻行，无它辎重。
现代文：都是轻骑简从，没有多的车辆行李。
English: They are all light riders, without much vehicle luggage.

古文：不得辄修道桥，远离城郭，遣使逢迎，刺探起居，出入前后，以为烦扰。
现代文：不要修理道路桥梁，不要远离城市，派官民逢迎，伺候起居，前呼后拥，增加滋扰。
English: Do not repair roads and bridges, do not stay away from the city, send officials to meet and greet the people, wait for them to move in, call them forward and hold them back, and increase the nuisance.

古文：动务省约，但患不能脱粟瓢饮耳。所过欲令贫弱有利，无违诏书。 遂览淇园。
现代文：一切行动都要省俭，我只希能脱粟瓢饮就行了，所经过之处，必使贫弱有利，千万不要违背我这诏书上所说的。 于是游览了淇园。
English: All actions should be frugal, I only hope to be able to get rid of poppy seeds and drink, everywhere I go, I will make the poor and weak benefit, do not go against what I said in this edict.

古文：己酉，进幸邺，劳飨魏郡守令已下，至于三老、门阑、走卒，赐钱各有差。
现代文：二十一日，行进到邺县。慰劳犒赏魏郡守令以下，至于三老、门阑、走卒，分别赐钱各不等。
English: On the twenty-first day, they marched to Weixian County. The Wei County Guard Order and below were rewarded for their hard work, while the three elders, the gatekeeper, and the footman were all given different amounts of money.

古文：劳赐常山、赵国吏人，复元氏租赋三岁。
现代文：慰劳赏赐常山、赵国吏民，免除元氏租赋三年。
English: The officials and people of Changshan and Zhao were rewarded for their hard work and were exempted from the Yuan clan rent for three years.

古文：辛卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十七日，章帝回到洛阳。
English: On the 28th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：诏天下系囚减死一等，勿笞，诣边戍；妻子自随，占著所在；父母同产欲相从者，恣听之；有不到者，皆以乏军兴论。
现代文：诏天下系囚减死一等。不要笞击，送往边境守边；妻子儿女自愿随往，登上当地户籍，父母同胞兄弟想同去的，不要限制；有不去的，都以耽误军用物资征集调拨论处。
English: Do not beat prisoners, send them to the border to guard the border; wives and children voluntarily accompany them, board the local household registration, parents and brothers and sisters want to go with them, do not restrict; if they do not go, they will be punished by delaying the collection and allocation of military materials.

古文：及犯殊死，一切募下蚕室；其女子宫。
现代文：犯斩首罪的一律下蚕室施以腐刑，女子施以宫刑。
English: Those who committed the crime of beheading were all subjected to corrosive punishment in the women's quarters, and to palace punishment in the women's quarters.

古文：系囚鬼薪、白粲已上，皆减本罪各一等，输司寇作。
现代文：系囚鬼薪、白粲三年徒刑以上的，都减本罪一等，罚往戍边作苦工。
English: If the prisoner's criminal record is more than three years of imprisonment, he or she will be given a first-class reduction of the principal crime and sent to work as a hard laborer.

古文：亡命赎：死罪入缣二十匹，右趾至髡钳城旦舂十匹，完城旦至司寇三匹，吏人有罪未发觉，诏书到自告者，半入赎。
现代文：亡命的赎罪：死罪入缣二十匹，刖右脚至髡钳城旦舂入缣十匹，完城旦至司寇入缣三匹，吏民有罪未发觉，诏书到自首者，半入赎。 
English: Atonement for the crime of defection: 20 horses were sacrificed for the crime of death, 10 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot to the left foot, 3 horses were sacrificed for the crime of defection from the right foot

古文：冬十月癸丑，西巡狩，幸长安。
现代文：冬十月十九日，章帝巡视西部，到长安。
English: In winter, on October 19th, Emperor Zhang inspected the west and went to Chang'an.

古文：丙辰，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：二十二日，参拜高庙，祭祀十一陵。
English: On the 22nd, they visited the high temple and made offerings to the eleven mausoleums.

古文：遣使者祠太上皇于历年，以中牢祠萧何、霍光。
现代文：派使者祭祀太上皇于万年，以猪、羊祭祀萧何、霍光。
English: Envoys were sent to offer sacrifices to the Retired Emperor for 10,000 years, and pigs and sheep were used to offer sacrifices to Xiao He and Huo Guang.

古文：进幸槐里。
现代文：帝到槐里。
English: The emperor has arrived in Bali.

古文：岐山得铜器，形似酒樽，献之。
现代文：歧山获得铜器，形状像酒缶尊，贡献皇上。
English: Fushan received bronze ware, shaped like a sake can, as a gift to the emperor.

古文：又获白鹿。
现代文：又获白鹿。
English: He also won the White Deer.

古文：帝曰： 上无明天子，下无贤方伯。人之无良，想怨一方。
现代文：章帝说： 上无英明的天子，下无贤德的地方长官。 人君所为没有一点善行，就令人各相怨于一方 。
English: Zhang Di said: There is no wise heavenly son at the top, and no virtuous local governor at the bottom. If there is no good deed done by the ruler, it will make people resent each other.

古文：斯器亦曷为来哉？ 又幸长平，御池阳宫，东至高陵，造舟于泾而还。
现代文：这些尊贵的器物来做什么呢？ 又到辰平，御池阳宫，东至高陵，连舟为浮桥，过泾水而返。
English: What did these precious objects come for? They went to Tatsunotama, Oikeyang Palace, east to Koryo, with a pontoon as a floating bridge, and returned via Surabaya.

古文：每所到幸，辄会郡县吏人，劳赐作乐。
现代文：每到一处，就会集郡县吏民，慰劳赏赐作乐。
English: Whenever they come to a place, they will gather county and county officials and people, and reward them for their hard work.

古文：十一月，诏劳赐河东守、令、掾以下。
现代文：十一月，诏令慰劳赏赐河东守、令、掾以下。
English: In November, the Emperor issued a decree to reward the hard work of the following people: the governor of Hedong Province, the deputy governor, and the deputy governor.

古文：十二月丁亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月丁亥，章帝回到洛阳。
English: In December of Dinghai, Emperor Zhang returned to Luoyang.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国螟。
现代文：这年，京师及郡国蝗灾。
English: In that year, the locust plagues swept through Kyoto and the surrounding prefectures.

古文：八年春正月壬辰，东平王苍薨。
现代文：八年春正月二十九日，东平王刘苍去世。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the eighth year of Spring, Dongping King Liu Cang passed away.

古文：三月辛卯，葬东平宪王，赐銮辂、龙旂。
现代文：三月二十九日，葬东平宪王，赐銮辂、龙旂。
English: On March 29th, the funeral of King Dongping Xian was held, and the imperial pallium and dragon pallium were presented.

古文：夏六月，北匈奴大人率众款塞降。
现代文：夏六月，北匈奴首领率众内附投降。
English: In the summer of June, the leaders of the Northern Xiongnu led the troops to surrender.

古文：冬十二月甲午，东巡狩，幸陈留、梁国、淮阳、颍阳。
现代文：二月十八日，章帝诏令说： 王者八政，以食为本，故古代重视耕稼，致力于耒耒吕之勤，节用储蓄，防备荒年，因而年岁不好也不会挨饿。
English: On February 18th, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: The Eight Kingdoms are based on food, so the ancients attached great importance to farming, working hard, saving money, and preparing for bad years, so they would not starve in bad years.

古文：戊申，车驾还宫。诏曰： 《五经》剖判，去圣弥远，章句遗辞，乖疑难正，恐先师微言将遂废绝，非所以重稽古，求道真也。
现代文：闾中发瘟以来，谷米连年减少，这的确是由于官吏没有责任心，刺史、二千石不以民众食物为忧。今命令郡国募集无田而想迁移富饶地域者，悉听自愿。到达所在地，派给公田，为他雇请佣工，贷给种粮，借与农具，五年不收租，三年不收人口税。以后有想回原籍的，不禁止。 章帝诏令说： 分析五经，离圣人很远，章句遗辞，乖误疑难不易校正，恐先师微言大义将被荒废绝灭，这是不重视考查古训，探求天地间真正的道理的。
English: Since the outbreak of the plague in the middle of the last century, the amount of grain and rice has been decreasing year after year. This is indeed due to the fact that government officials have no sense of responsibility, do not care about the history, and do not care about the food of the people. Now, the county is ordered to recruit landless people and those who want to move to rich areas should do so voluntarily. When they arrive at the location, they will be assigned to the public land, hire a helper for him, lend him grain, borrow agricultural tools, do not charge rent for five years, and do not charge personal income tax for three years. If anyone wants to return to their hometown in the future,

古文：其令群儒选高才生，受学《左氏》、《穀梁春秋》、《古文尚书》、《毛诗》，以扶微学，广异义焉。 
现代文：现令儒者选择高才学生，授学《左氏春秋》、《谷梁春秋》、《古文尚书》、《毛诗》，扶救衰微的学术，弘扬新颖的义理。 
English: Confucians are now required to select talented students to teach "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," "The Spring and Autumn of Gu Liang," "Ancient Texts," and "Mao Poetry," to help the declining academic field and promote novel principles.

古文：夏四月己卯，分东平国，封宪王苍子尚为任城王。
现代文：这年，京师及郡国蝗灾。元和元年，中山王刘焉来朝，日南界外蛮夷献生犀、白雉。闰一月十五日，济阴王刘长去世。夏四月二十四日，分东平国，封宪王刘苍子刘尚为任城王。
English: In the same year, locust plagues struck Beijing and the county. In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the Yuan, the king of Zhongshan, Liu Yan, came to Korea, and the barbarians outside the southern border of Japan sacrificed rhinoceroses and egrets. On the 15th day of the leap month, the king of Jilin, Liu Chang, died. On the 24th day of the summer, in the east of Pingguo, Liu Shang, the son of the king of Fuxian, Liu Cang, became the king of the city.

古文：六月辛酉，沛王辅薨。
现代文：六月初七，沛王刘辅去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, King of Pae, Liu Wei passed away.

古文：秋七月丁未，诏曰： 《律》云 惊者唯得榜、苔、立 。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，章帝诏令说： 《律》规定 问案只能榜击、笞击、罚站。 
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: "According to the provisions of the "Law," the interrogation can only be made by beating, beating, and penalizing.

古文：又《令丙》，箠长短有数。
现代文：又《令丙》规定，打人的有一定的长短。
English: In addition, "Order C" stipulates that beating a person has a certain length.

古文：自往者大狱已来，掠考多酷，钻钻之属，惨苦无极。
现代文：自过去考讯大狱以来，掠考多残酷用刑，钻、凿、刀锯，惨苦无极。
English: Since the time of the examination hell in the past, many cruel punishments, such as drilling, chiseling, and sawing, have been carried out.

古文：念其痛毒，怵然动心。
现代文：念其痛毒，怵目惊心。
English: It's so painful, it's heartbreaking.

古文：《书》曰 鞭作官刑 ，岂云若此？
现代文：《尚书》中说 用鞭打作审判的刑罚 ，难道是这样的吗？
English: Does the Shangshu say that whipping is the punishment for judging, and is that true?

古文：宜及秋冬理狱，明为其禁。 
现代文：应当在秋冬审理案件时，明确禁止酷刑。 
English: Torture should be explicitly prohibited when cases are tried in the autumn and winter.

古文：八月甲子，太尉邓彪罢，大司农郑弘为太尉。
现代文：八月十一日，太尉邓彪免职，任大司农郑弘为太尉。
English: On August 11th, Lieutenant Deng Biao was relieved of his duties, and Major General Nong Zhenghong was appointed Lieutenant.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 朕道化不德，吏政失和，元元未谕，抵罪于下。
现代文：二十日，章帝诏令说： 我的治道教化不行，吏政失和，平民无知，在下抵偿罪责。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying, "My administration of justice and enlightenment is not enough. Officials and politicians have lost harmony, and the common people are ignorant. I must atone for my guilt."

古文：寇贼争心不息，边野邑屋不修。
现代文：寇贼争心不息，边野村舍不修。
English: Burglars are constantly fighting each other, and the houses in Henono village remain unrepaired.

古文：永惟庶事，思稽厥衷，与凡百君子，共弘斯道。
现代文：久久思考许多事，希望考核出它们中正的规律，与众伯君子，共同弘扬它。
English: After thinking about many things for a long time, I hope to check out the positive laws in them, and promote it together with my uncles.

古文：中心悠悠，将何以寄？
现代文：我心悠悠，将用什么来寄托？
English: My heart lingers, what will I rely on?

古文：其改建初九年为元和元年。
现代文：今改建初九年为元和元年。
English: Now, the first nine years of reconstruction are the first year and the first year.

古文：郡国中都官系囚减死一等，勿笞，诣边县；妻子自随，占著在所。
现代文：郡国中都官系囚减死一等，不要笞击，送往边县；妻子自愿同去的，上当地户籍。
English: In county-level cities and counties, the death penalty is reduced to the first-class prisoners, do not beat them, and send them to the border counties; if the wife voluntarily goes with him, he will be registered with the local household.

古文：其犯殊死，一切募下蚕室；其女子宫。系囚鬼薪、白粲以上，皆减本罪一等，输司寇作。
现代文：犯斩罪的，一律下蚕室施以腐刑，女子施以宫刑；在押鬼薪，白粲以上，都减本罪一等，发往边疆作苦工。
English: For those who committed the crime of beheading, they were all subjected to the punishment of "corruption" in the "silkworm room" and "palace punishment" in the "women's room"; those who were sentenced to "devil's salary" and "white mule" or above were all reduced to the first class of the crime and sent to the frontier to do hard labor.

古文：亡命者赎，各有差。 丁酉，南巡狩，诏所经道上，郡县无得设储跱。
现代文：逃亡在外的，分别按罪轻重用钱物赎罪。 丁酉，章帝南巡视察，诏令所经道上，郡县不得预先准备。
English: Those who have fled abroad shall use money and goods to atone for their sins according to the severity of their crimes.Ding Xi, Zhang DiNan inspection tour, on the road where the imperial edict was issued, counties shall not prepare in advance.

古文：命司空自将徒支柱桥梁。
现代文：命令司空自带员工支柱桥梁。
English: Ordered Skytrax to bring its own employee support bridge.

古文：有遣使奉迎，探知起居，二千石当坐。
现代文：有派人欢迎，探望起居，二千石坐罪。
English: There are people to welcome, visit and live in, and two thousand koku is a crime.

古文：其赐鳏、寡、孤、独、不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐鳏、寡、孤、独、生活困难难以生存者，每人五斛栗。
English: Those who are destitute, widowed, lonely, isolated, and those who find it difficult to survive will each receive five chestnuts.

古文：九月乙未，东平王忠薨。
现代文：九月十二日，东平王刘忠去世。
English: On September 12, Dongping King Liu Zhong passed away.

古文：辛丑，幸章陵，祠旧宅园庙，见宗室故人，赏赐各有差。
现代文：十八日，章帝到章陵，祭祀旧宅园庙，接见宗室故旧，分别赏赐不等。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Zhang went to Zhangling to offer sacrifices to the old house, garden and temple, and to meet with the ancestral family, and the rewards were different.

古文：冬十月己未，进幸江陵，诏庐江太守祠南岳，又诏长沙、零陵太守祠长沙定王、舂陵节侯、郁林府君。
现代文：冬十月初七，行进到江陵，诏令庐江太守祭祠南岳，又诏令长沙、零陵太守祭祀长沙定王、舂陵节侯、郁林府君。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, they marched to Gangneung, and ordered Nangyue, the chief abbot's shrine of the Minjiang River, and the chief abbots of Changsha and Luling to offer sacrifices to the king of Changsha, the prince of Fuling, and the prince of Yulin.

古文：还，幸宛。
现代文：返转时到宛。
English: Return transfer time to destination.

古文：十一月己丑，车驾还宫，赐从者各有差。
现代文：十一月初七，回到洛阳。分别赏赐随行人员。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, he returned to Luoyang. He rewarded his entourage separately.

古文：十二月壬子，诏曰： 《书》云： 父不慈，子不祗，兄不友，弟不恭，不相及也。
现代文：十二月初一，章帝诏令说： 《尚书》上说 ：父不慈、子不敬，兄不友、弟不恭，是彼此不亲近呵！ 
English: On the first day of December, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: "It is said in the Shang Shu: Father is not merciful, son is not respectful, brother is not a friend, brother is not respectful, they are not close to each other!

古文：往者妖言大狱，所及广远，一人犯罪，禁至三属，莫得垂缨仕宦王朝。
现代文：以往对妖言大狱，株连很广，一人犯罪，罚及父、母、妻三族，不能做官，任职王朝。
English: In the past, there was a wide range of punishments for witchcraft, and if a person committed a crime, his father, mother, and wife would be punished, and he would not be able to be an official and serve the dynasty.

古文：如有贤才而没齿无用，朕甚怜之，非所谓与之更始也。
现代文：即使有贤才也没齿不用，我十分怜惜，这是不给人重新振作的机会。
English: Even if there are sages who don't need it, I'm very sorry, this is not an opportunity for people to cheer up.

古文：诸以前妖恶禁锢者，一皆蠲除之，以明弃咎之路，但不得在宿卫而已。 
现代文：现在凡是以前因妖恶禁锢的，一律解除，给以出路，但不得在宫中值夜，担任警卫。 
English: Now, all those who were previously imprisoned for evil will be released and given a way out, but they will not be allowed to guard the palace at night.

古文：二年春正月乙酉，诏曰： 《令》云 人有产子者复，勿算三岁 。
现代文：二年春正月初五，章帝诏令说： 《令》规定 民有生孩子的，免田赋，免三年人头税 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the second year of spring, Emperor Zhang issued a decree saying: "The decree stipulates that if people have children, they will be exempt from the rice field tax and the three-year head tax.

古文：今诸怀妊者，赐胎养谷人三斛，复其夫，勿算一岁，著以为令。 又诏三公曰： 方春生养，万物莩甲，宜助萌阳，以育时物。
现代文：现在怀孕的，赏赐胎养者一人三斛，丈夫免赋，免人头税一年，明文规定。 又诏令三公说： 春天正是生养的时候，万物种子发芽，应助当阳萌动，使发育得时。
English: For those who are currently pregnant, it is clearly stipulated that one person who is a gestational carrier will be awarded three gongs, and the husband will be exempted from giving gifts and exempted from the head tax for one year.In addition, the emperor ordered the three kings to say: Spring is the time for bearing and rearing, the seed of all species germinates, and it should be helped when the sun germinates, so that it can develop.

古文：其令有司，罪非殊死，且勿案验，及吏人条书相告，不得听受，冀以息事宁人，敬奉天气。
现代文：今命有司，罪非斩首外暂且不要案验，吏民条陈告状也不要受理，希望息事宁人，享受天时。
English: Now there is a magistrate, the crime is not decapitated, and the case is not to be examined for the time being, and the complaint of the officials and the people is not to be accepted. I hope to calm things down and enjoy the day.

古文：立秋如故。
现代文：立秋后照旧办理。
English: After the beginning of autumn, it will be handled as usual.

古文：夫俗吏矫饰外貌，似是而非，揆之人事则悦耳，论之阴阳则伤化，朕甚餍之，甚苦之。
现代文：俗吏故意做表面功夫，似是而非，以人事测度还蛮好听，拿天地阴阳来讲就有伤造化，我很厌恶，很为苦恼。
English: Secular officials deliberately make a superficial effort, it is plausible, but it is quite good to listen to people's measurements. In terms of heaven and earth, there are injuries and deformities. I am disgusted and very distressed.

古文：安静之吏，悃逼无华，日计不足，月计有余。
现代文：安分的官员，至诚无华，暂看不出他好，日久就显得突出。
English: An official at the security checkpoint is sincere and unpretentious. You may not see him for a while, but after a while he will stand out.

古文：如襄城令刘方，吏人同声谓之不烦，虽未有它异，斯亦殆近之矣。
现代文：如襄城令刘方，吏民异口同声说他不怕麻烦，虽然没有什么特异，但这样也算差不多达到了这种境界。
English: If Xiangcheng ordered Liu Fang, officials and people said in unison that he is not afraid of trouble, although there is nothing special, but this is also almost reached this level.

古文：间敕二千石各尚宽明，而今富奸行赂于下，贪吏枉法于上，使有罪不论而无过被刑，甚大逆也。
现代文：以前勒令二千石各尚宽明，而今奸富行贿于下，贪吏枉法于上，让有罪的逍遥法外而无过的受刑，是最大的倒行逆施。
English: In the past, it was lenient to impose a fine of 2,000 koku per person, but now it is the most perverse thing to allow the guilty to go unpunished and the guilty to be punished.

古文：夫以苛为察，以刻为明，以轻为德，以重为威，四者或兴，则下有怨心。
现代文：以苛求为察，以刻薄为明，以轻为德，以重为威，四者或兴，下面就有怨恨。
English: Whether it is demanding, mean-spirited, light-hearted, or heavy-handed, there is resentment underneath.

古文：吾诏书数下，冠盖接道，而吏不加理，人或失职，其咎安在？
现代文：我诏令下了几遍，官员来往于途，而吏治并不见好一点，有的还失职，这祸害究从何来？
English: I have issued the edict several times, officials come and go on the road, but the leadership is not any better, and some have even failed in their duties. Where does this evil come from?

古文：勉思旧令，称朕意焉。 
现代文：希望好好执行旧日的法令，以合乎我的心意。 
English: I hope the old laws will be enforced to suit me.

古文：二月甲寅，始用《四分历》。
现代文：二月初四，开始用四分历。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, the use of the quarter calendar began.

古文：诏曰： 今山川鬼神应典礼者，尚未咸秩。
现代文：章帝下诏说： 今山川鬼神应祭祀的都没有秩序。
English: Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: There is no order in the worship of ghosts and gods in Imayamakawa.

古文：其议增修群祀，以祈丰年。 丙辰，东巡狩。
现代文：今应议定增加各种祭祀，以祈祷丰年。 初六，章帝东巡察。
English: It should now be agreed to increase all kinds of sacrifices to pray for a prosperous year. On the sixth day of the first month, Emperor Zhang inspected the East.

古文：己未，凤皇集肥城。
现代文：初九，凤凰聚集肥城。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th lunar month, the phoenixes gathered in Feicheng.

古文：乙丑，帝耕于定陶。
现代文：十五日，章帝耕于定陶。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Zhang cultivated in Dingtao.

古文：诏曰： 三老，尊年也。孝悌，淑行也。
现代文：诏令说： 三老，年高，孝悌，德行端淑。
English: The edict said, "The three ages, old age, filial piety, and virtuous conduct are of the utmost importance."

古文：力田，勤劳也。
现代文：勉力田作，勤劳辛苦。
English: Work hard, work hard, work hard.

古文：国家甚休之。
现代文：国家很崇敬他们。
English: They are revered by the nation.

古文：其赐帛人一匹，勉率农功。 使使者祠唐尧于成阳灵台。
现代文：今赏赐他们每人一匹帛，勉励农功。 派使者到成阳灵台祭祀尧帝。
English: Now reward each of them with a donkey to encourage their agricultural work, and send emissaries to the Chengyang Mausoleum to offer sacrifices to Emperor Gong.

古文：辛未，幸太山，柴告岱宗。
现代文：二十一日，章帝到泰山，烧柴祷告岱宗。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Zhang went to Mount Taishan to burn wood and pray.

古文：有黄鹄三十从西南来，经祠坛上，东北过于宫屋，翱翔升降。
现代文：有黄鹄三十从西南飞来，经过祭坛上空，去东北时飞过宫屋，翱翔上下。
English: There were thirty yellow kites flying from the southwest, passing over the altar, and when they went to the northeast, they flew over the palace, soaring up and down.

古文：进幸奉高。
现代文：行进到奉高。
English: March to Fenggao.

古文：壬申，宗祀五帝于汶上明堂。
现代文：二十二日，在汶上明堂祭祀五帝。
English: On the 22nd, the Five Emperors were enshrined in the Wen Shangming Hall.

古文：癸酉，告祠二祖、四宗，大会外内群臣。
现代文：二十三日，祭祠二祖、四宗，大会外内群臣。
English: On the 23rd, there will be two ancestral shrines, four sects, and a group of ministers from both inside and outside the assembly.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 朕巡狩岱宗，柴望山川，告祀明堂，以章先勋。
现代文：二十六日，诏令说： 我巡视岱宗，烧柴望祭山川，祭祠明堂，以彰扬先帝功勋。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict said, "I will make a tour of Shizong, burn firewood, visit the mountains and rivers of the festival, and the Ming Hall of the festival, in order to praise the merits of the former emperor."

古文：其二王之后，先圣之胤，东后蕃卫，伯父伯兄，仲叔季弟，幼子童孙，百僚从臣，宗室众子，要荒四裔，沙漠之北，葱领之西，冒耏之类，跋涉悬度，陵践阻绝，骏奔郊畤，咸来助祭。
现代文：二王和先圣孔子后代，东方国君的蕃卫，同姓诸侯伯父、叔父及众兄弟子孙，百官从僚，宗室众子，要荒四裔，沙漠之北，葱岭之西，西域之人，跋涉悬度，历尽艰险，骏奔郊畴，都来助祭。
English: The descendants of the two kings and the former Saint Confucius, the guards of the Eastern sovereigns, the uncles, uncles and brothers and sons of the same surnames, the officials, the sons of the family, the four descendants of the desert, the north of the desert, the west of the green hills, the people of the western region, the people who trekked the suspension, experienced the hardships, and ran to the suburbs, all came to assist the priest.

古文：祖宗功德，延及朕躬。
现代文：祖宗功德，延续到我。
English: The merits of our ancestors have been passed down to me.

古文：予一人空虚多疚，纂承尊明，盥洗享荐，惭愧祗栗。
现代文：我一人空虚多疚，继承尊明，盥洗神灵享用的祭品，惭愧恐惧。
English: I alone am empty and guilty, inheriting honor and glory, washing the sacrifices for the gods to enjoy, ashamed and afraid.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 君子如祉，乱庶遄已。
现代文：《诗经·小雅》上不是说 福贤人有爵禄，动乱也可以快速地制止 吗？
English: Isn't it said in the "Shih Ching, Xiao Ya" that blessed people have peerage, and turmoil can also be quickly stopped?

古文：历数既从，灵耀著明，亦欲与士大夫同心自新。
现代文：四分历已经实行，日月昭著，也是想与士大夫同德自新。
English: The quarter calendar has been implemented, the sun and the moon are bright, and we also want to make a fresh start with the scholars and doctors.

古文：其大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: It is time for a general amnesty.

古文：诸犯罪不当得赦者，皆除之。
现代文：诸犯罪不当得赦的，一律赦免。
English: All unpardonable crimes shall be pardoned.

古文：复博、奉高、嬴，无出今年田租、刍稿。 戊寅，进幸济南。
现代文：免去博、奉高、嬴赋税，不要出今年田租、毛草。 二十八日，帝到济南。
English: Don't pay taxes on bo, bonggao, and yakitori, and don't pay this year's farm rent and hay.On the 28th, the emperor went to Jinan.

古文：三月己丑，进幸鲁，祠东海恭王陵。
现代文：三月初十，帝进到鲁，祭祀东海恭王陵。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, Emperor Jin came to Lu and made a sacrifice at the tomb of King Donghaigong.

古文：庚寅，祠孔子于阙里，及七十二弟子，赐褒成侯及诸孔男女帛。
现代文：十一日，在阙里祭祀孔子及七十二弟子。赏赐褒成侯及诸孔家男女布帛。
English: On the 11th day, Confucius and his seventy-two disciples were worshipped in Bali, and rewards were given to those who were successful and to all the Confucian men and women.

古文：壬辰，进幸东平，祠宪王陵。
现代文：十三日，帝到东平，祭宪王陵。
English: On the 13th, the emperor went to Dongping to visit the Mausoleum of Emperor Xianwang.

古文：甲午，遣使者祠定陶太后、恭王陵。
现代文：十五日，派使者祭祀令陶太后、恭王陵。
English: On the fifteenth day, an emissary was sent to perform a ritual at the tombs of Empress Dowager Tao and King Gong.

古文：乙未，幸东阿，北登太行山，至天井关。
现代文：十六日，帝到东阿，北登太行山，至天井关。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to Dong'a, climbed Mount Taihang in the north, and arrived at Dingcheng Pass.

古文：夏四月乙巳，客星入紫宫。
现代文：夏四月乙巳，有客星入于紫宫星座。
English: At the end of April, a guest star entered the constellation of the Purple Palace.

古文：乙卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：初六，章帝回到洛阳。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, Emperor Zhang returned to Luoyang.

古文：庚辰，假于祖祢，告祠高庙。
现代文：十一日，到祖先庙宇，祭祠高帝。
English: On the 11th day, we went to the ancestral temple, the Gao Di Shrine.

古文：五月戊申，诏曰： 乃者凤皇、黄龙、鸾鸟比集七郡，或一郡再见，及白乌、神雀、甘露屡臻。
现代文：五月三十日，章帝诏令说： 近来凤凰、黄龙、鸾鸟并集七郡，有的郡还出现第二次，还有白乌、神雀、甘露屡屡降临。
English: On May 30, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying, "Recently, the phoenix, the yellow dragon, and the ostrich have all gathered in seven counties. Some counties have seen them appear for the second time, and the white phoenix, the divine sparrow, and the nectar bird have repeatedly descended.

古文：祖宗旧事，或班恩施。
现代文：祖宗的旧例，有的要颁布恩施。
English: According to the old practice of the ancestors, some should issue a grace.

古文：其赐天下吏爵，人三级；高年、鳏、寡、孤、独帛，人一匹。
现代文：今赐天下吏爵位，每人三级；高年、鳏、寡、孤、独，每人赐帛一匹。
English: Now bestow peerages on the world's officials, three ranks for each; the elderly, the aged, the widowed, the lonely, and the single, and bestow a yakitori on each.

古文：《经》曰： 无侮鳏寡，惠此茕独。
现代文：经书上说： 不要欺侮鳏寡茕独，让他们受恩惠。 
English: It is written: "Do not oppress the widow or the fatherless, but give them their rights."

古文：加赐河南女子百户牛、酒，令天下大酺五日。
现代文：现加赐河南女子百户牛一头，酒十石，让天下饮酒作乐五天。
English: Now, Henan women are given one head of cattle for every hundred households, and ten kilos of wine, so that the whole world can enjoy drinking for five days.

古文：赐公卿已下钱、帛各有差；及洛阳人当酺者布，户一匹，城外三户共一匹。
现代文：赏赐公卿以下钱帛各不等，洛阳人当酉甫的赐布，每户一匹，城外的三户一匹。
English: The money given to court nobles and below varies. Luoyang residents receive one horse per household, and three households outside the city receive one horse each.

古文：赐博士员弟子见在太学者布，人三匹。
现代文：博士员弟子现在太学的赐布，每人三匹。
English: The doctor's disciples now have the gift of learning, three horses each.

古文：令郡国上明经者，口十万以上五人，不满十万三人。 
现代文：命令郡国上报明经的人，人口十万以上的五人，不满十万的三人。 
English: The people who reported the Ming Dynasty to the county were ordered to be five people with a population of more than 100,000 and three people with a population of less than 100,000.

古文：改庐江为六安国，江陵复为南郡。
现代文：改庐江为六安国，江陵恢复为南郡。
English: The Lijiang River was changed to the Lu'an River, and Gangneung was restored to the Nan County.

古文：徙江陵王恭为六安王。
现代文：调迁江陵王刘恭为六安王。
English: Liu Gong, the king of Jiangling, was transferred to be the king of Lu'an.

古文：秋七月庚子，诏曰： 《春秋》于春每月书 王 者，重三正，慎三微也。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，诏令说： 《春秋》于春每月书 王 ，是重视三正一一一天正、地正、人正，审慎三微一一一三正之始，万物皆微。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the imperial edict said: "Spring and Autumn" is the beginning of the spring monthly book king, it is the beginning of attaching importance to the three virtues, the earth, the people, and the prudence, and everything is fine.

古文：律十二月立春，不以报囚。
现代文：十二月立春，律定不论囚。
English: In December, the first day of spring, all prisoners are released.

古文：《月令》冬至之后，有顺阳助生之文，而无鞠狱断刑之政。
现代文：冬至后《月令》上有顺阳助生的记载，而没有审讯囚犯判刑的作法。
English: After the winter solstice, there is a record of Shunyang's assistance in life in the "Monthly Regulation," but there is no practice of interrogating prisoners for sentencing.

古文：朕咨访儒雅，稽之典籍，以为王者生杀，宜顺时气。
现代文：我请教高明，考查古籍，都说人君决定生杀，应顺从时候节气。
English: I asked Gao Ming for advice and examined ancient books. They all said that if you decide to live or die, you should obey the time of the solar terms.

古文：其定律，无以十一月、十二月报囚。 
现代文：现在规定十一月、十二月不审讯罪犯。 
English: It is now stipulated that criminals will not be tried in November and December.

古文：九月壬辰，诏： 凤皇、黄龙所见亭部，无出二年租赋。
现代文：九月十六日，章帝诏令说： 凤凰、黄龙所出现过的地方免交二年租赋。
English: On September 16th, Emperor Zhang issued an edict saying: The places where phoenixes and yellow dragons have appeared are exempt from paying two years of rent.

古文：加赐男子爵，人二级；先见者帛二十匹，近者三匹，太守三十匹，令、长十五匹，丞、尉半之。
现代文：加赐男子爵位，每人二级；先见者赐帛二十匹，近的三匹，太守三十匹，县令、县长十五匹，丞、尉半数。
English: In addition, a peerage was bestowed on the men, second class for each; the seer bestowed twenty horses on the king, nearly three horses, thirty horses on the governor, fifteen horses on the county magistrate and the county governor, and half a horse on the jong and the lieutenant.

古文：《诗》云： 虽无德与汝，式歌且舞。
现代文：《诗经》上说 ：虽没有大德与你，歌舞娱乐一番也好。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Although there is no great virtue with you, song and dance entertainment is the best.

古文：它如赐爵故事。 
现代文：其他一如赐爵先例。 
English: Others, like the knighthood, are precedent-setting.

古文：丙申，征济南王康、中山王焉会烝祭。
现代文：二十日，征召济南王刘康、中山王刘焉参加举行祭祀。
English: On the 20th, Liu Kang, the king of Jinan, and Liu Yan, the king of Zhongshan, were summoned to participate in the sacrifice.

古文：冬十一月壬辰，日南至，初闭关梁。
现代文：冬十一月十七日，冬至，初闭关梁，商旅不行。
English: Winter November 17th, the winter solstice, the first closing of the bridge, business travel is not possible.

古文：三年春正月乙酉，诏曰： 盖君人者，视民如父母，有憯怛之忧，有忠和之教，匍匐之救。
现代文：三年春正月十一日，章帝诏令说： 作为一国君王，要像父母一样看待平民，为他们担忧操心，教他们智、仁、义、忠、和，有丧葬困难就救助。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, Emperor Zhang issued an edict: "As the sovereign of a country, you should treat the common people like your parents, worry about them, teach them wisdom, benevolence, righteousness, loyalty, and harmony, and help them with funeral difficulties.

古文：其婴儿无父母亲属，及有子不能养食者，禀给如《律》。 丙申，北巡狩，济南王康、中山王焉、西平王羡、六发王恭、乐成王党、淮阳王昞、任城王尚、沛王定皆从。
现代文：婴儿没有父母亲属，或有子女不能养活的，照法定给粮食。 二十二日，章帝巡视北方，济南王刘康、中山王刘焉、西平王刘羡、六安王刘恭、乐成王刘党、淮阳王刘日丙、任城王刘尚、沛王刘定，都随从前往。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Zhang inspected the north, and King Liu Kang of Jinan, King Liu Yan of Zhongshan, King Liu Qian of Xiping, King Liu Gong of Lu'an, King Liu Ting of Lecheng, King Liu Rong of Huaiyang, King Liu Shang of Rencheng, and King Liu Ding of Pei all accompanied him.

古文：辛丑，帝耕于怀。
现代文：二十七日，章帝耕于怀县。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Zhang cultivated in Huai County.

古文：二月壬寅，告常山、魏郡、清河、巨鹿、平原、东平郡太守、相曰： 朕惟巡狩之制，以宣声教，考同遐迩，解释怨结也。
现代文：二月壬寅，对常山、魏郡、清和、巨鹿、东平郡太守说： 我想到巡视的制度，是用以宣传教化，考察远近，解释怨结。
English: In February, Jinyin said to the governors of Changshan, Wei County, Qinghe, Julu and Dongping County: I think of the inspection system as being used for propaganda and education, to investigate the distant and near, and to explain grievances.

古文：今 四国无政，不用其良 ，驾言出游，欲亲知其剧易。
现代文：当今 四方政事不好，是由于没有用德才兼备的人 ，皇帝巡视，是想亲自了解艰难和轻易。
English: Today's bad political situation in the four directions is due to the lack of people with both virtue and talent, the emperor's inspection tour is to personally understand the difficulties and ease.

古文：前祠园陵，遂望祀华、霍，东祡贷宗，为人祈福。
现代文：以前祭祀园陵，望祀华山霍山，东登岱宗烧柴祭天，为人祈福。
English: In the past, people made offerings to gardens and tombs, hoping to worship Huashan Huoshan, the firewood-burning festival god of the Dongdeng Sect, and to pray for people's well-being.

古文：今将礼常山，遂徂北土，历魏郡，经平原，升践堤防，询访耆老，咸曰 往者汴门未作，深者成渊，浅则泥涂 。
现代文：现在将礼拜常山，遂往北土，历魏郡、经平原，升践堤防，询访耆老，都说 ：过去汴渠未修，深的地方成了渊源，浅的地方成了烂泥塘。 
English: Now I will worship Changshan, and then go to the north, to Ligu County, through the plains, climb up and down the dike, and inquire with the old people. They all said: in the past, the canal was not repaired, the deep place became a source, and the shallow place became a muddy pond.

古文：追惟先帝勤人之德，厎绩远图，复禹弘业，圣亦滂流，至于海表。
现代文：追怀先帝勤于人事的美德，置功远图，恢复夏禹治水的大业，圣迹滂流，至于海外。
English: Pursue the virtues of the previous emperor's diligence in personnel, make contributions, restore the great cause of Xia Yu's flood control, the holy trickle, and as for overseas.

古文：不克堂构，朕甚惭焉。
现代文：不能继承大业，我十分惭愧。
English: I am very ashamed of not being able to inherit the great cause.

古文：《月令》，孟春善相丘陵土地所宜。
现代文：《月令》上说，孟春要善于看中丘陵土地所宜种植的作物。
English: "The Monthly" said that Meng Chun should be good at looking at the crops that are suitable for planting in hilly land.

古文：今肥田尚多，未有垦辟。
现代文：今肥田尚多，没有开垦。
English: There are still a lot of fertilized fields, but they have not been reclaimed.

古文：其悉以赋贫民，给与粮种，务尽地力，勿令游手。
现代文：应一律交给贫民，并给以粮种，务必尽量发挥地力，不让人们游手偷闲。
English: It should be handed over to the poor without exception, and grain should be given to them. It is necessary to make the best use of the land and prevent people from idling.

古文：所过县邑，听半入今年田租，以劝农夫之劳。 
现代文：所过邑县，只交年田租的半数，以示奖励农民的辛苦。 
English: After passing through Eup County, only half of the annual field rent is paid to reward the hard work of farmers.

古文：乙丑，敕侍御史、司空曰： 方春，所过无得有所伐杀。
现代文：二十一日，章帝敕令侍御史、司空说： 现在正当春天，所到之处不得有所砍伐杀害。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Emperor Zhang issued an order to the attendants of the historian, Siku, saying: Now that it is spring, there must be no cutting and killing anywhere.

古文：车可以引避，引避之；騑马可辍解，辍解之。
现代文：车可以绕道避开的，就绕道避开；马非马可以停止解除的，就停止解除。
English: If the car can avoid the detour, it will avoid the detour; if the horse can stop and release, it will stop and release.

古文：《诗》云： 敦彼行苇，牛羊勿践履。
现代文：《诗经》说： 路旁茂盛的苇草，牛羊不要践踏。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Do not trample the luxuriant rushes by the roadside.

古文：《礼》，人君伐一草木不时，谓之不孝。
现代文：《礼记》上说 ：人君伐一草一木，不得其时，谓之不孝。 
English: "Riki" says, "It is unfilial for a man to cut a blade of grass or a tree when it is not the right time."

古文：俗知顺人，莫知顺天。
现代文：一般人知道顺人情，而不知顺天意。
English: The average person knows how to please people, but does not know how to please God.

古文：其明称朕意。 
现代文：希望大家明白而称我意。 
English: I hope you understand and agree with me.

古文：戊辰，进幸中山，遣使者祠北岳。出长城。
现代文：二十四日，章帝进到中山，派使者祭祀北岳，到长城外。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Zhang entered Zhongshan and sent an emissary to worship Beidake outside the Great Wall.

古文：癸酉，还幸元氏，祠光武、显宗于县舍正堂；明日又祠显宗于姓生堂，皆奏乐。
现代文：二十九日，返回元氏，在县舍正堂祭祀光武、显宗；第二天又祭祀显宗于始生堂，都奏乐。
English: On the 29th, after the return of the Yuan clan, they held a memorial service for Guangwu and Xian Zong in the county seat hall; the next day, they held a memorial service for Xian Zong in the first-born hall, and both played music.

古文：三月丙子，诏高邑令祠光武于即位坛。
现代文：三月初三，诏令高邑令祭祀光武即位坛。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：赐从行者各有差。夏四月丙寅，太尉郑弘免，大司农宋田为太尉。五月丙子，司空第五伦罢，太仆袁安为司空。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，太尉郑弘免职，任大司农宋由为太尉。五月初三，司空第五伦罢去，任太仆袁安为司空。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the captain Zheng Hong was relieved of his duties, and the chief secretary Nong Song Yu was appointed captain. On the 3rd day of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of

古文：秋八月乙丑，幸安邑，观盐池。
现代文：秋八月二十四日，章帝到安邑，察看盐池。
English: On the 24th day of the 8th month of autumn, Emperor Zhang went to Anyi to inspect the salt ponds.

古文：九月，至自安邑。
现代文：九月，自安邑回京。
English: In September, he returned to Kyoto from Ami.

古文：冬十月，北海王基薨。
现代文：冬十月，北海王刘基去世。
English: In the winter of October, Liu Ji, the king of the North Sea, passed away.

古文：烧当羌叛，寇陇西。
现代文：烧当羌叛变，侵犯陇西。
English: He burned Dangdang and rebelled, invading Shaanxi.

古文：是岁，西域长史班超击斩疏勒王。
现代文：这年，西域长史班超，击斩疏勒王。
English: In that year, the Western Region Governor Shi Banchao defeated King Shule.

古文：章和元年春三月，护羌校尉傅育追击叛羌，战殁。
现代文：章和元年春三月，护羌校尉傅育追击叛羌，阵亡。
English: In the spring and March of the first year of the Zhanghe era, Colonel Fu Yu pursued the rebels and was killed in battle.

古文：夏四月丙子，令郡国中都官系囚减死一等，诣金城戍。
现代文：夏四月初九，命令郡国中都官对系囚减死一等，送往金城戍守。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, he ordered the county-level central government officials to reduce the death sentence of the prisoners by one grade and send them to Jincheng.

古文：六月戊辰，司徒桓虞免。
现代文：六月初二，司徒桓虞免职。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Sito Kengo was relieved of his duties.

古文：癸卯，司空袁安为司徒，光禄勋任隗为司空。
现代文：癸卯，任司空袁安为司徒，光禄勋任隗为司空。
English: At the same time, Yuan An, the first secretary of the Kuomintang, was appointed as the first secretary of the Kuomintang, and Guanglu Xun, the second secretary of the Kuomintang, was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：秋七月癸卯，齐王晃有罪，贬为芜湖侯。
现代文：秋七月初八，齐王刘晃有罪，贬为芜湖侯。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Liu Akira, the king of Qi, was found guilty and demoted to the position of governor of Wuhu.

古文：壬子，淮阳王昞薨。
现代文：十七日，淮阳王刘日丙去世。
English: On the 17th, Huaiyang King Liu Rihong passed away.

古文：鲜卑击破北单于，斩之。
现代文：鲜卑击斩北单于。
English: North Korea defeated South Korea in a humiliating defeat.

古文：烧当羌寇金城，护羌校尉刘盱讨之，斩其渠帅。
现代文：烧当羌侵犯金城，护羌校尉刘盱讨伐，斩其首领。
English: When the Burning Donkey invaded Jincheng, Liu Yao, the captain of the Guarding Donkey, fought against it and beheaded its leader.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 朕闻明君之德，启迪鸿化，缉熙康乂，光照六幽，讫惟人面，靡不率俾，仁风翔于海表，威霆行乎鬼区。
现代文：二十七日，章帝诏令说： 我知道明君之德，在于弘扬教化，和洽安定，光照宇宙，到达每一个人，没有不相率而行的，仁风翔于海外，声威震于四方。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Zhang issued the following edict: I know that the virtue of Mingjun is to promote enlightenment, maintain peace and stability, illuminate the universe, reach everyone, do nothing out of proportion, send benevolent winds overseas, and have a powerful voice in all directions.

古文：然后敬恭明祀，膺五福之庆，获来仪之贶。
现代文：然后敬祭祠，享膺五福的吉庆，获凤凰来仪的嘉惠。
English: Then he paid tribute to the shrine, enjoyed the auspiciousness of the five blessings, and received the blessing of the phoenix.

古文：朕以不德，受祖宗弘烈。
现代文：我以薄德，受祖宗宏业。
English: I am guided by the virtues of my forefather Hongye.

古文：乃者凤皇仍集，麒麟并臻，甘露宵降，嘉谷滋生，芝草之类，岁月不绝。朕夙夜祗畏上天，无以彰于先功。
现代文：近来凤凰频集，麒麟来到，时雨宵降，嘉谷丛生，芝兰瑞草，年年月月不绝，我日夜敬畏上天，对先王的功德无所彰明。
English: Recently, the phoenix has been frequenting, the unicorn has come, the rain has fallen, the valley has grown, and the grass has sprouted. Year after year, month after month, I have been in awe of the heavens day and night, and I have nothing to show for the merits of the former king.

古文：今改元和四年为章和元年。
现代文：今改元和四年，为章和元年。 
English: Now it is the year of the change of the era and the fourth year, the chapter and the first year.

古文：《秋令》： 是月养衰老，授几杖，行糜粥饮食。
现代文：秋，令是月供养衰老，授几杖，行烂粥饮食。
English: Autumn is the month to make offerings to the aging, give a few sticks, and eat rotten porridge.

古文：其赐高年二人共布帛各一匹，以为醴酪。
现代文：赐高年二人共布帛各一匹，折甜食乳浆。
English: Give two elderly people a cloth horse each, fold sweet cream.

古文：死罪囚犯法在丙子赦前而后捕系者，皆减死，勿笞，诣金城戍。 
现代文：犯死罪的囚犯，犯法的四月初九日赦前而后逮捕的，都减死，不笞击，送金城戍守。
English: The prisoners who committed capital crimes, and those who were arrested before and after the amnesty on the 9th of April, were all commuted to death, not beaten, and sent to the custody of Jincheng.

古文：八月癸酉，南巡狩。
现代文：八月初八，章帝巡视南方。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, Emperor Zhang inspected the south.

古文：壬午，遣使者祠昭灵后于小黄园。甲申，征任城王尚会睢阳。
现代文：十七日，派使者在小黄园祭祠昭灵后。十九日，征召任城王刘尚相会睢阳。
English: On the 17th, an envoy was sent to the Small Huangyuan Festival Shrine to pay tribute to the deceased. On the 19th, Liu Shangxiang, the appointed king of the city, was summoned to Poyang.

古文：戊子，幸梁。
现代文：二十三日，帝到梁。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor arrived in Liang.

古文：己丑，遣使祠沛高原庙，丰枌榆社。
现代文：二十四日，派使者祭祠沛高原庙，丰木分榆社。
English: On the 24th, an emissary was sent to the festival shrine, Pei Kogen Temple, and Toyoki Bunka Shrine.

古文：乙未，幸沛，祠献王陵，征会东海王政。
现代文：三十日，帝到沛，祭祀献王陵，召会东海王刘政。
English: On the thirtieth day, the emperor arrived in Pae, a ritual was held to dedicate the royal mausoleum, and the East Sea King Liu Zheng was summoned.

古文：乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，晦，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse will occur on the evening of the 30th.

古文：九月庚子，幸彭城，东海王政、沛王定、任城王尚皆从。
现代文：九月初五，帝到彭城，东海王刘政、沛王刘定、任城王刘尚随从。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, the emperor arrived in Pengcheng, accompanied by the East Sea King Liu Zheng, the Pei King Liu Ding, and the Rencheng King Liu Shang.

古文：辛亥，幸寿春。
现代文：十六日，帝到寿春。
English: On the 16th, the emperor arrived in Shuchun.

古文：壬子，诏郡国中都官系囚减死罪一等，诣金城戍；犯殊死者，一切募下蚕室；其女子宫；系囚鬼薪、白粲已上，减罪一等，输司寇作。
现代文：十七日，诏令郡国中都官系囚减死罪一等，送金城戍守；犯斩首的男子一律改判腐刑，女子宫刑。系囚鬼薪、白粲以上，减罪一等，送到边地守边、当苦工。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict decreed that the first-class prisoners of the county-level central government prisoners would be reduced to the death penalty and sent to Jincheng, and the men who committed beheading would be sentenced to corruption and the women would be sentenced to palace punishment. The first-class prisoners of the county-level central government prisoners and the white-bearded prisoners and above would be reduced to the border guard and hard labor.

古文：亡命者赎：死罪缣二十匹，右趾至髡钳城旦舂七匹，完城旦至司寇三匹；吏民犯罪未发觉，诏书到自告者，半入赎。
现代文：逃亡的罪犯赎罪：死罪缣二十匹，刖右脚到髡钳城旦舂七匹，完城旦至司寇三匹；官吏百姓犯罪未发觉，诏书到达自首的，半入赎。
English: Fugitive criminals atonement: the death penalty 20 horses, the right foot to the city 7 horses, the end of the city to the police 3 horses; officials and people did not find the crime, the edict arrived to surrender, half into the redemption.

古文：复封阜陵侯延为阜陵王。
现代文：再封阜陵侯为阜陵王。
English: He was re-appointed as the Prince of Fulin.

古文：己未，幸汝阴。
现代文：二十四日，帝到汝阴。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor died.

古文：冬十月丙子，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十月十二日，帝回到洛阳。
English: In winter, on October 12, the emperor returned to Luoyang.

古文：北匈奴屋兰储等率众降。
现代文：北匈奴屋兰储等率领部众降附。
English: The Northern Xiongnu House, led by Lan Ru and others, led the troops to surrender.

古文：是岁，西域长史班超击莎车，大破之。
现代文：这年，西域长史班超出击莎车，打他个大败。
English: This year, the long-term history class in the western region exceeded the sardine car, and it was a big defeat.

古文：月氏国遣使献扶拔、师子。
现代文：月氏国派使者献无角麟、狮子。
English: The State of the Moon sent an envoy to present a unicorn and a lion.

古文：二年春正月，济南王康、阜陵王延、中山王焉来朝。
现代文：二年春正月，济南王刘康、阜陵王刘延、中山王刘焉入京朝拜。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, Liu Kang, the King of Jinan, Liu Yan, the King of Fuling, and Liu Yan, the King of Zhongshan, came to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：二月壬辰，帝崩于章德前殿，年三十三。
现代文：二月三十日，帝在章德前殿逝世，享年三十三岁。
English: On February 30th, the emperor passed away at the age of thirty-three at the Zhangde Ancestral Hall.

古文：遗诏无起寝庙，一如先帝法制。
现代文：遗诏不起寝庙，一概依照先帝制度。
English: If the imperial edict does not allow the emperor to sleep in a temple, everything will be done in accordance with the previous emperor's system.

