古文：十有九年春，宋公伐邾。
现代文：十九年春季，宋公发兵攻打邾国。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, Song Gong sent troops to attack Shandong.

古文：夏五月戊辰，许世子止弑其君买。
现代文：夏季五月戊辰日，许国的世子止杀了许国国君。
English: In the summer of May, on the day of Pentecost, the son of Xu Guo killed Xu Guo Guo.

古文：己卯，地震。
现代文：己卯日，鲁国发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Russia.

古文：秋，齐高发帅师伐莒。
现代文：秋季，齐国的高发率领军队攻打莒国。
English: In autumn, Gao Fang of Qi led an army to attack Yan.

古文：冬，葬许悼公。
现代文：冬季，安葬许悼公。
English: In winter, there is a public funeral.

古文：十九年春，楚工尹赤迁阴于下阴，令尹子瑕城郏。
现代文：十九年春季，楚国的工尹赤把阴戎迁移到下阴，令尹子瑕在郏地筑城。
English: In the spring of the 19th year, Yin Chih, a worker from Chu, moved Yin Rong to Xieyin, and ordered Yin Zi Ke to build a city in Xuan Di.

古文：叔孙昭子曰： 楚不在诸侯矣！
现代文：叔孙昭子说： 楚国的意图不在于诸侯了！
English: His great-uncle Akiko said: The intention of the state of Chu does not lie with the lords!

古文：其仅自完也，以持其世而已。 
现代文：楚国仅仅是为了保持自己的完整，以维持它的世代而已。 
English: The State of Chu is merely trying to maintain its integrity, to maintain its lineage.

古文：楚子之在蔡也，郹阳封人之女奔之，生大子建。
现代文：楚平王在蔡国的时候，郹阳封人的女儿私奔到他那里，生了太子建。
English: When King Chuping was in Cai Guo, the daughter of the Fuhrer of Shenyang eloped to him and gave birth to Prince Jian.

古文：及即位，使伍奢为之师。
现代文：等楚平王即位，派伍奢做太子的师傅，费无极做少师。
English: When King Chuping ascended to the throne, he sent Wu Shu to be the prince's teacher, and it was extremely difficult to be a lesser teacher.

古文：费无极为少师，无宠焉，欲谮诸王，曰： 建可室矣。 
现代文：费无极不受宠信，想要向楚平王诬谄太子以求得宠信，说： 建可以娶妻了。 
English: He tried his best not to be trusted. He wanted to trick King Chuping into believing that he was the crown prince in order to gain his trust. He said, "Jian can marry a wife."

古文：王为之聘于秦，无极与逆，劝王取之。
现代文：楚平王为太子在秦国行聘，费无极参加迎娶，劝楚平王自己娶这个女子。
English: King Chuping arranged for the prince to marry a woman in Qin, and went to great lengths to attend the wedding and persuade King Chuping to marry her himself.

古文：正月，楚夫人嬴氏至自秦。
现代文：正月，楚夫人嬴氏从秦国来到。
English: In the first month of the year, Mrs. Chu Zou came from Qin.

古文：鄅夫人，宋向戌之女也，故向宁请师。
现代文：鄅国国君的夫人，是宋国向戌的女儿，所以向宁请求出兵。
English: Xiang Ning's wife was the daughter of Xiang Yao of Song, so he asked Xiang Ning to send troops.

古文：二月，宋公伐邾，围虫。
现代文：二月，宋公进攻邾国，包围虫地。
English: In February, Song attacked Shandong and besieged Wushi.

古文：三月，取之。乃尽归鄅俘。
现代文：三月，占取虫地，就把鄅国的俘虏全部放了回去。
English: In March, after seizing the worm field, they released all the prisoners of the country.

古文：夏，许悼公疟。五月戊辰，饮大子止之药，卒。
现代文：夏季，许悼公得了疟疾，五月初五日，喝了太子止送的药就死了。
English: In the summer, Prince Xu fell ill with malaria. On the fifth day of the fifth month, he drank the medicine sent by the crown prince and died.

古文：大子奔晋。
现代文：太子逃亡到晋国。
English: The prince fled to Jin Province.

古文：书曰： 弑其君。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 弑其君。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that:  its jun.

古文：君子曰： 尽心力以事君，舍药物可也。 
现代文：君子说： 尽心竭力以事奉国君，不进药物是可以的。 
English: The gentleman said, "It is all right not to take medicine, as long as you do your best to serve the sovereign."

古文：邾人、郳人、徐人会宋公。
现代文：邾人、郳人、徐人会见宋元公。
English: Xing Ren, Xing Ren and Xu Ren meet with Song Yuan Gong.

古文：乙亥，同盟于虫。
现代文：五月十二日，在虫地一起结盟。
English: On May 12th, they formed an alliance together in the Worm Field.

古文：楚子为舟师以伐濮。
现代文：楚平王发动水军以进攻濮地。
English: King Chu Ping launched a naval force to attack Shunde.

古文：费无极言于楚子曰： 晋之伯也，迩于诸夏，而楚辟陋，故弗能与争。若大城城父而寘大子焉，以通北方，王收南方，是得天下也。 
现代文：费无极对楚平王说： 晋国称霸诸侯的时候，接近中原诸国，而楚国偏僻简陋，所以不能和它争夺，如果扩大城父的城墙，而把太子安置在那里，用来和北方交通，君王收取南方，这是得到天下的好办法。 
English: It was extremely difficult to say to King Chuping: When Jin dominated the provinces, it was close to the Central Plains countries, while Chu was remote and simple, so it could not compete with it. If you expand the walls of the city father and place the prince there to communicate with the north, and the king collects the south, this is a good way to get the world.

古文：王说，从之。故大子建居于城父。
现代文：楚平王很高兴，听从了他的话，所以太子建住在城父。
English: King Chuping was very pleased and obeyed his words, so the prince settled in Chengdu.

古文：令尹子瑕聘于秦，拜夫人也。
现代文：令尹子瑕到秦国聘问，这是为了拜谢把夫人嫁给楚国。
English: Yin Zikai went to Qin to ask for advice, this was to thank him for marrying his wife to Chu.

古文：秋，齐高发帅师伐莒。莒子奔纪鄣。
现代文：秋季，齐国的高发领兵进攻莒国，莒共公逃亡到纪鄣。
English: In autumn, Gao Fa of Qi led an army to attack Yan, and Yan fled to Jilin.

古文：使孙书伐之。
现代文：派孙书进攻纪鄣。
English: He sent Sunshu to attack Guizhou.

古文：初，莒有妇人，莒子杀其夫，己为嫠妇。
现代文：当初，莒国有个女人，莒子杀了她丈夫，她就成了寡妇。
English: Once upon a time, there was a woman in the country of Shan. A mule killed her husband, and she became a widow.

古文：及老，託于纪鄣，纺焉以度而去之。
现代文：等到年老，寄居在纪鄣，纺线搓绳量了城墙的高度然后收藏起来。
English: Wait until old age, sojourn in Jiwu, spinning reins measured the height of the city wall and then collect it.

古文：及师至，则投诸外。
现代文：等到齐军来到，就把绳扔出城外。
English: When the Qi army arrived, they threw the rope outside the city.

古文：或献诸子占。子占使师夜缒而登。登者六十人，缒绝，师鼓噪。
现代文：有人把绳子献给孙书，孙书派部队在夜里攀绳登城，登上城的有六十个人，绳子断了。
English: Someone gave the rope to Sun Shou. Sun Shou sent troops to climb the rope to the city at night. There were sixty people who climbed the city, but the rope broke.

古文：城上之人亦噪。
现代文：军队击鼓呐喊，城上的人也呐喊。
English: The army shall shout, and the people of the city shall cry out.

古文：莒共公惧，启西门而出。
现代文：莒共公害怕，打开西门逃跑。
English: Panic-stricken, he opened the west gate and fled.

古文：七月丙子，齐师入纪。
现代文：七月十四日，齐军进入纪鄣。
English: On July 14, the Qi army entered Jiwu.

古文：是岁也，郑驷偃卒。
现代文：这一年，郑国的驷偃死了。
English: In the same year, Zheng Guo's brother-in-law died.

古文：子游娶于晋大夫，生丝，弱。
现代文：驷偃在晋国的大夫那里娶妻，生了丝，年幼。
English: He married a woman from a doctor in Jin Province, and they had a son, Sil.

古文：其父兄立子瑕。
现代文：他的父辈兄辈立了驷乞做继承人。
English: His parents and siblings had set up a groom to be his heir.

古文：子产憎其为人也，且以为不顺，弗许，亦弗止。
现代文：子产讨厌驷乞的为人，而且认为不合继承法规，不答应，也不制止。
English: Offspring hate beggars, and believe that it is not in line with inheritance laws, and will not allow or stop it.

古文：驷氏耸。
现代文：驷氏害怕。
English: Mr. Zou is afraid.

古文：他日，丝以告其舅。
现代文：过了几天，丝把情况告诉了他舅父。
English: A few days later, Si told his uncle about the situation.

古文：冬，晋人使以币如郑，问驷乞之立故。
现代文：冬季，晋国的大夫派人带了财礼来到郑国，询问立驷乞的缘故。
English: In winter, a doctor from Jin Province sent someone to Zheng Province with a gift of money to inquire about the reason for the begging.

古文：驷氏惧，驷乞欲逃。子产弗遣。请龟以卜，亦弗予。
现代文：驷氏害怕，驷乞想要逃走，子产不让走；请求用龟甲占卜，也不给。
English: Mr. Zou is afraid, the beggar wants to run away, the progeny won't let him go; they won't give him his request to use the tortoise shell to tell fortunes.

古文：大夫谋对。子产不待而对客曰： 郑国不天，寡君之二三臣，札瘥夭昏。
现代文：大夫们商量如何回答晋国，子产不等他们商量好就回答客人说： 郑国不能得到上天保佑，寡君的几个臣下不幸夭折病死。
English: The doctors discussed how to respond to Jin, and the progeny did not wait for them to discuss it before answering the guests: Zheng cannot receive God's blessing, and several of the oligarch's vassals unfortunately died young.

古文：今又丧我先大夫偃，其子幼弱，其一二父兄，惧队宗主，私族于谋而立长亲。
现代文：现在又丧失了我们的先大夫偃。他的儿子年幼，他的几位父兄害怕断绝宗主，和族人商量立了年长的亲子。
English: Now we have lost our former chief doctor again. His son was young, and several of his brothers and fathers were afraid to cut off the head of the family, so they consulted with the members of the tribe to set up an older sibling.

古文：寡君与其二三老曰： 抑天实剥乱是，吾何知焉？ 
现代文：寡君和他的几位大夫说： 或者上天确实搅乱了这种继承法，我能知道什么呢？ 
English: The widower and some of his doctors said, "Perhaps the heavens have indeed disturbed this law of succession. What can I know?"

古文：谚曰： 无过乱门。 民有兵乱，犹惮过之，而况敢知天之所乱。
现代文：俗话说， 不要走过动乱人家的门口 ，百姓动武作乱，尚且害怕经过那里，而何况敢知道上天所降的动乱？
English: As the saying goes, don't walk through the door of a tumultuous person's house, the people are stirring up trouble, yet you are afraid to go through there, and how dare you know the turmoil sent down by heaven?

古文：今大夫将问其故，抑寡君实不敢知，其谁实知之。
现代文：现在大夫将要询问它的原因，寡君确实不敢知道，还有谁知道？
English: Now the doctor is going to ask the reason for it, the widower really does not dare to know, who else knows?

古文：平丘之会，君寻旧盟曰： 无或失职。 
现代文：平丘的会盟，君王重温过去的盟约说： 不要有人失职。 
English: The alliance of the flat hill, the king revisited the past covenant and said: Let no one fail in his duty.

古文：若寡君之二三臣，其即世者，晋大夫而专制其位，是晋之县鄙也，何国之为？ 
现代文：如果寡君的几个臣下，其中有去世的，晋国的大夫却要专断地干涉他们的继承人，这是晋国把我们当作边境的县城了，还成什么国家？ 
English: If a few vassals of a monarch, some of whom have passed away, and the doctor of Jin Province want to arbitrarily interfere with their heirs, this is Jin Province treating us as a county town on the border, what kind of country have we become?

古文：辞客币而报其使。晋人舍之。
现代文：辞谢客人的财礼而回报他的使者，晋国人对这件事不再过问了。
English: After thanking the guest for his gift and returning his messenger, the people of Jin no longer questioned the matter.

古文：楚人城州来。沈尹戌曰： 楚人必败。
现代文：楚国人在州来筑城，沈尹戌说： 楚国人一定失败。
English: When the people of Chu came to build a city in Zhouzhou, Shen Yunyuan said: The people of Chu will surely fail.

古文：昔吴灭州来，子旗请伐之。
现代文：过去吴国灭亡州来，子旗请求攻打吴国。
English: In the past, after the fall of the State of Wu, Zifang requested to attack the State of Wu.

古文：王曰： 吾未抚吾民。 
现代文：君王说： 我没有安抚好我的百姓。 
English: And the king said, I have not pacified my people.

古文：今亦如之，而城州来以挑吴，能无败乎？ 
现代文：现在也像当时一样，而又在州来筑城去挑动吴国，能够不失败吗？ 
English: Now, as then, can he build a city in Zhou and provoke Wu without failure?

古文：侍者曰： 王施舍不倦，息民五年，可谓抚之矣。 
现代文：侍者说： 君王施舍从不厌倦，让百姓休息五年，可以说安抚他们了。 
English: The waiter said, "The king never tires of giving alms. Letting the people rest for five years can be said to have pacified them."

古文：戌曰： 吾闻抚民者，节用于内，而树德于外，民乐其性，而无寇仇。
现代文：沈尹戌说： 我听说安抚百姓，在国内节约开支，在国外树立德行，百姓生活安乐，而没有仇敌。
English: Shen Yunyun said: I have heard that to appease the people, to save expenses at home, and to establish virtue abroad, the people should live a happy life without enemies.

古文：今宫室无量，民人日骇，劳罢死转，忘寝与食，非抚之也。 
现代文：现在宫室的规模没有限度，百姓时刻惊恐不安，辛劳疲乏至死还没有人收葬，忘掉了睡觉和吃饭，这不是安抚他们。 
English: There is no limit to the size of the palace now, the people are always frightened and uneasy, they are exhausted to death, no one has been buried, they have forgotten to sleep and eat, this is not to appease them.

古文：郑大水，龙斗于时门之外洧渊。
现代文：郑国发生大水灾，有龙在时门外边的洧渊争斗，国内的人们请求举行禳灾求福的祭祀。
English: A great flood occurred in Zheng Guo, dragons were fighting in the abyss outside the time gate, and people in the country requested to hold a sacrifice to relieve the disaster and seek happiness.

古文：龙斗，我独何觌焉？
现代文：子产不答应，说： 我们争斗，龙不看，龙争斗，我们为什么偏要去看呢？
English: The offspring did not agree, saying: We fight, dragons do not watch, dragons fight, why do we want to watch?

古文：禳之，则彼其室也。吾无求于龙，龙亦无求于我。 
现代文：向它们祭祀祈祷，那洧渊本来是龙居住的地方，岂能使它们离开呢？我们对龙没有要求，龙对我们也没有要求。 
English: If we offer sacrifices and pray to them, will they be able to leave the abyss, where dragons used to live? We have no claim on dragons, and dragons have no claim on us.

古文：乃止也。
现代文：于是就停止了祭祀。
English: As a result, the ritual was stopped.

古文：令尹子瑕言蹶由于楚子曰： 彼何罪？
现代文：令尹子瑕为蹶由对楚平王说： 他有什么罪？
English: Yin Zikai said to King Chuping, "What is his crime?

古文：谚所谓 室于怒，市于色 者，楚之谓矣。
现代文：俗话说 在家里发怒，而在大街上给人脸色看 ，说的就是楚国了。
English: As the saying goes, "If you get angry at home, but lose face on the street," the country in question is Chu.

古文：舍前之忿可也。 
现代文：舍弃以前的怨愤可以了。 
English: It's okay to let go of old grudges.

古文：乃归蹶由。
现代文：楚平王就把蹶由放回了吴国。
English: King Chuping then returned the scepter to Wu.

