古文：徐光启，字子先，上海人。
现代文：徐光启，字子先，上海人。
English: Xu Guangqi, character first, Shanghainese.

古文：万历二十五年举乡试第一，又七年成进士。由庶吉士历赞善。
现代文：万历二十五年考中乡试第一名，七年后成为进士，由庶吉士担任赞善。
English: In the 25th year of the Wanli calendar, he won the first place in the middle-town examination. Seven years later, he became a Jin Shi, and was appointed as a Zanzan by the offshoot Kishi.

古文：从西洋人利玛窦学天文、历算、火器，尽其术。
现代文：跟着西洋人利玛窦学习天文、历法、数学、火器，得到了诸门学问的要义。
English: He studied astronomy, calendars, mathematics, and firearms with the Western scholar Matteo Ricci, and learned the essentials of all fields of learning.

古文：遂遍习兵机、屯田、盐策、水利诸书。
现代文：于是广泛阅读有关兵机、屯田、盐策、水利等各种书籍。
English: As a result, he read a wide range of books on military machines, military camps, salt policy, water conservancy and other topics.

古文：杨镐四路丧师，京师大震。
现代文：杨镐四路出兵失败，京师受到很大震动。
English: Yang Hui's four-way troop dispatch failed, and the Beijing division was greatly shaken.

古文：累疏请练兵自效，神宗壮之，超擢少詹事兼河南道御史。
现代文：徐光启多次上疏请求练兵自卫。神宗皇帝支持他，破格提拔为少詹事兼河南道御史。
English: Emperor Shenzong supported Xu Guangqi's repeated requests to train soldiers for self-defense, and promoted him to Shao Zhanji and Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：练兵通州，列上十议。
现代文：徐光启在通州练兵，上书给皇帝提出了十项意见。
English: Xu Guangqi was training soldiers in Tongzhou and submitted a letter to the emperor with ten suggestions.

古文：时辽事方急，不能如所请。
现代文：这时辽东战事正在危急关头，政府没有能够满足他的要求。
English: At this time, the war in Liaodong was at a critical juncture, and the government was unable to meet his request.

古文：光启疏争，乃稍给以民兵戎械。
现代文：徐光启上疏争论，于是稍微发给民兵一些军事器械。
English: Xu Guang started an argument, so he sent some military equipment to the militia.

古文：未几，熹宗即位。
现代文：不久，熹宗即位。
English: Soon after, Shinso ascended the throne.

古文：光启志不得展，请裁去，不听。
现代文：徐光启的志向得不到拓展，请求皇帝裁并淘汰他，皇帝不答应，不久因病回家。
English: Xu Guangqi's ambition could not be expanded, and he asked the emperor to cut and eliminate him. The emperor did not agree, and he soon went home due to illness.

古文：既而以疾归。
现代文：辽阳失陷，召见起用他。
English: When Liaoyang fell, he was summoned and put to work.

古文：辽阳破，召起之。还朝，力请多铸西洋大炮，以资城守。
现代文：回到朝廷，极力请求多铸造一些西洋大炮，以加强城邑的防守能力。
English: Back at court, he pleaded for more Western cannons to be cast in order to strengthen the town's defences.

古文：帝善其言。方议用，而光启与兵部尚书崔景荣议不合，御史邱兆麟劾之，复移疾归。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得好，正准备讨论施行，但徐光启与兵部尚书崔景荣的意见不合，御史丘兆麟弹劾他，又一次称病回家。
English: The emperor thought that he spoke well and was preparing to discuss the implementation, but Xu Guangqi and the military secretary Cui Jingrong disagreed, and the Grand Historian Qiu Zhaolin impeached him and once again said that he was sick and went home.

古文：天启三年起故官，旋擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：天启三年官复原职，不久提拔为礼部右侍郎。
English: After three years, the post was reinstated, and he was soon promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：五年，魏忠贤党智铤劾之，落职闲住。
现代文：五年魏忠贤的党徒智铤弹劾他，被剥夺官职在家闲居。
English: Five years later, Wei Zhongxian was impeached by party members and deprived of his official position.

古文：崇祯元年召还，复申练兵之说。
现代文：崇祯元年征召回到朝廷，再次陈述练兵的主张。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was summoned back to the imperial court to once again present the idea of military training.

古文：未几，以左侍郎理部事。
现代文：不久，以礼部左侍郎的身份管理部里的工作。
English: Before long, he was managing the work in the ceremonial department as the left attendant.

古文：帝忧国用不足，敕廷臣献屯盐善策。
现代文：皇帝正担心国家的资财不够用，下令廷臣进献屯田、盐务方面的好计策。
English: The emperor was worried that the country's resources were not enough, and ordered courtiers to come up with good strategies in the fields and salt.

古文：光启言屯政在乎垦荒，盐政在严禁私贩。
现代文：徐光启说屯田的关键在于开垦荒地，盐政的关键在于严禁私商贩卖。
English: Xu Guangqi said that the key to tonden is to reclaim wasteland, and the key to salt policy is to strictly prohibit private traders.

古文：帝褒纳之，擢本部尚书。
现代文：皇帝奖励他，采纳了他的意见，提拔他为礼部尚书。
English: The emperor rewarded him, adopted his opinion, and promoted him to be the head of the etiquette department.

古文：时帝以日食失验，欲罪台官。
现代文：这时皇帝因为日食的预测与实际不相符，想要追究天文台官员的过失。
English: At this time, the emperor wanted to investigate the fault of the observatory officials because the prediction of the eclipse did not match the reality.

古文：光启言： 台官测候本郭守敬法。
现代文：徐光启说： 天文台官员预测天象根据郭守敬的历法。
English: Xu Guangqi said: Observatory officials predict the celestial bodies according to Guo Shoujing's calendar.

古文：元时尝当食不食，守敬且尔，无怪台官之失占。
现代文：元朝时曾经说应当日食却没有出现日食，郭守敬尚且如此，不能怪罪台官的预测不灵。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Guo Shoujing once said that there should be a solar eclipse, but there was no eclipse. If this is still the case, it cannot be blamed on the prediction of the official.

古文：臣闻历久必差，宜及时修正。 
现代文：微臣听说历法使用时间长了就会出现误差，应该根据实际情况随时加以修正。 
English: Weixin heard that if the calendar is used for a long time, there will be errors, which should be corrected at any time according to the actual situation.

古文：帝从其言，诏西洋人龙华民、邓玉函、罗雅谷等推算历法，光启为监督。
现代文：皇帝听从他的话，下诏让西洋人龙华民、邓玉函、罗雅各等人推算历法，让徐光启做监督。
English: The emperor obeyed his words and issued a decree to let Westerners Long Hua Min, Deng Yukan, Luo Yao and others calculate the calendar, and let Xu Guangqi supervise.

古文：四年春正月，光启进《日躔历指》一卷、《测天约说》二卷、《大测》二卷、《日躔表》二卷、《割圜八线表》六卷、《黄道升度》七卷、《黄赤距度表》一卷、《通率表》一卷。
现代文：崇祯四年春天正月，徐光启进献《日躔历指》一卷、《测天约说》二卷、《大测》二卷、《日躔表》二卷、《割圜八线表》六卷、《黄道升度》七卷、《黄赤距度表》一卷、《通率表》一卷。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Chongzhen, Xu Guangqi presented one volume of "Diamond Calendar Finger," two volumes of "Measuring the Sky Covenant," two volumes of "Great Measurement," two volumes of "Diamond Table," two volumes of "Cutting Eight Line Table," six volumes of "Eclination of the Zodiac," seven volumes of "Yellow and Red Distance Table" and one volume of "Passing Rate Table."

古文：是冬十月辛丑朔日食，复上测候四说。
现代文：这年冬天十月初一，日食，又上测侯四说。
English: This winter, on the first day of October, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：其辩时差里差之法，最为详密。
现代文：他分辨时差里差的方法，最详细周密。
English: His method of distinguishing the difference in time difference is the most detailed and thorough.

古文：五年五月，以本官兼东阁大学士，入参机务，与郑以伟并命。
现代文：崇祯五年五月以尚书身份兼任东阁大学士，入阁参与讨论国家机密，和郑以伟同时任命。
English: In May of the fifth year, Chongzhen also served as a scholar of the East Cabinet University in the capacity of Shangshu, joined the cabinet to participate in the discussion of state secrets, and was appointed at the same time as Zheng Yiwei.

古文：寻加太子太保，进文渊阁。
现代文：不久加封太子太保，进入文渊阁。
English: He was soon given the title of Crown Prince Taibo and entered Bunyukaku Palace.

古文：光启雅负经济才，有志用世。
现代文：徐光启一向有经世的才干，也有大干一番事业的抱负。
English: Xu Guangqi has always had the ability to go through the world, and also has the ambition to do a great job.

古文：及柄用，年已老，值周延儒、温体仁专政，不能有所建白。
现代文：但当他受到重用时，年纪已老，又正当周延儒、温体仁当政，不可能有什么建树。
English: But when he was reused, he was already old, and it was right for Zhou Yanru and Wen Tianren to be in power, and it was impossible for him to do anything.

古文：明年十月卒。赠少保。
现代文：第二年十月去世，追赠为少保。
English: He died in October of the following year and was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

