古文：曹爽擅政，懿谋诛之，惧事泄，乃诈称疾笃。
现代文：原文三国时期的曹爽骄纵专权，司马懿想要杀了他，又恐事谋划不秘而泄露了，于是就对外宣称自己得了重病。
English: In the Three Kingdoms period, Cao Shuang arrogantly wielded absolute power. Sima Yi wanted to kill him and feared that his secret plans would be leaked, so he announced to the outside world that he was seriously ill.

古文：会河南尹李胜将莅荆州，来候懿，懿使两婢侍持衣，指口言渴，婢进粥，粥皆流出沾胸，胜曰： 外间谓公旧风发动耳，何意乃尔？ 
现代文：河南令尹李胜要去荆州上任，前来问候司马懿，司马懿让两个婢女扶着自己出来，又拉着婢女的衣角指着嘴巴表示自己口渴了，让婢女端来一碗粥，司马懿却喝得胸上都流满了粥汁。李胜说： 外面传言说您的痛风病发，怎么会这么严重呢？ 
English: Henan ordered Yin Lisheng to go to Jingzhou to take office, and he came to greet Sima Qian. Sima Qian had two maidservants carry her out, and he pulled the maidservant's crotch and pointed to his mouth to show that he was thirsty. He asked the maidservant to bring him a bowl of porridge, but Sima Qian had drunk so much that his chest was full of porridge juice. Li Sheng said, "Outside rumors say that you have gout, how could it be so serious?"

古文：懿微举声言： 君今屈并州，并州近胡，好为之备，吾死在旦夕，恐不复相见，以子师、昭为托。 
现代文：司马懿声音微弱地说道： 听说你屈身在并州。并州离胡人很近，你要小心防备，我生命垂危，以后怕见不到你了，小儿司马师、司马昭就托付你多多照顾了。 
English: Sima Yao said in a weak voice, "I heard that you were bent over in Bianzhou. Bianzhou is very close to the Hu people. You should be careful and take precautions. My life is in danger. I'm afraid I won't be able to see you in the future. Little Sima Shi and Sima Zhao have entrusted you with a lot of care."

古文：胜曰： 当忝本州，非并州。 
现代文：李胜说： 我在荆州，不是并州。 
English: Li Sheng said, "I am in Jingzhou, not Nianzhou.

古文：懿故乱其词曰： 君方到并州。 
现代文：司马懿装出满脸糊涂的神色说： 哦，你才刚到并州啊？ 
English: Sima Yi feigned a confused look on his face and said: Oh, you just arrived in Wenzhou?

古文：胜复曰： 忝荆州。 
现代文：李胜又纠正了他一次： 我在荆州。 
English: Li Sheng corrected him again: I am in Jingzhou.

古文：懿曰： 年老意荒，不解君语。 
现代文：司马懿又说： 我年纪大了，脑子不清楚了，听不懂你在说什么。 
English: Sima Ye also said: I am old, my mind is not clear, I do not understand what you are talking about.

古文：胜退告爽曰： 司马公尸居余气，形神已离，不足复虑。 
现代文：李胜在离开司马府后，非常高兴地对曹爽说： 司马老头儿现在只剩下一口气了，神色相离，不用忧虑他了。 
English: After leaving Sima's house, Li Sheng said to Cao Shuang with great pleasure, "Old Sima only has one breath left now. He looks frail, so don't worry about him.

古文：于是爽遂不设备。寻诛爽。
现代文：于是曹爽就放松了对司马懿的戒备，使得司马懿终于有机可乘，杀了曹爽。
English: As a result, Cao Shuang relaxed his guard against Sima Yao, so that Sima Yao finally had an opportunity to kill Cao Shuang.

古文：安仁义、朱延寿，皆吴王杨行密将也，延寿又行密朱夫人之弟。
现代文：安仁义、朱延寿都是吴王杨行密的将军，朱延寿又是杨行密夫人的弟弟。
English: An Ren Yi and Zhu Yan Shou were both generals of King of Wu Yang Xingmi, and Zhu Yan Shou was the younger brother of Yang Xingmi's wife.

古文：淮徐已定，二人颇骄恣，且谋叛，行密思除之。
现代文：自从平定淮南后，安、朱二人骄纵放肆，并暗中商议着谋反。
English: After subduing Huainan, An and Zhu were arrogant and reckless, and secretly discussed plotting a rebellion.

古文：乃阳为目疾，每接延寿使者，必错乱其所见以示之，行则故触柱而仆，朱夫人挟之，良久乃苏，泣曰： 吾业成而丧明，此天废我也，诸儿皆不足任事，得延寿付之，吾无恨矣。 
现代文：杨行密知道后，想要除去这两个人，于是就谎称自己得了眼病，每次接见朱延寿派来的使者，都将使者所呈上的公文胡乱指评，走路也常因碰到屋柱而摔倒，虽然有朱夫人在一旁搀扶着他，也要很久才能苏醒过来。杨行密哭着说： 我虽然功业已成，可是却丧失了视力，这是老天要废我啊。儿子们都不能担当重任，幸好有朱延寿可以托付后事，我也就没什么可遗憾的了。 
English: When Yang Xingmi found out, he wanted to get rid of these two people, so he falsely claimed that he had an eye disease. Every time he received an envoy sent by Zhu Yanshou, he would randomly comment on the official document presented by the envoy. When he walked, he often fell down because he hit a pillar. Although Mrs. Zhu was holding him by the side, it took him a long time to wake up. Yang Xingmi cried and said, "Although my work is done, I have lost my eyesight. This is God's way of getting rid of me. My sons can't take on heavy responsibilities. Fortunately, Zhu Yanshou can be entrusted with

古文：朱夫人喜，急召延寿。
现代文：朱夫人听了后暗自高兴，立即召朱延寿入宫。
English: After hearing this, Madam Zhu was secretly pleased and immediately invited Zhu Yanshou to enter the palace.

古文：延寿至，行密迎之寝门，刺杀之，即出朱夫人，而执斩仁义。
现代文：朱延寿入宫的时候，杨行密在寝宫门口迎接他，等到朱延寿一踏入寝宫，就杀了他。朱延寿死后，杨行密下令将朱夫人逐出了宫廷，将安仁义斩首。
English: When Zhu Yanxu entered the palace, Yang Xingmi met him at the entrance of the sleeping palace, and waited until Zhu Yanxu stepped into the sleeping palace and killed him. After Zhu Yanxu died, Yang Xingmi ordered to expel Mrs. Zhu from the palace and behead An Renyi.

古文：孙坚举兵诛董卓，至南阳，众数万人，檄南阳太守张咨，请军粮，咨曰： 坚邻二千石耳，与我等，不应调发。 
现代文：东汉末年，孙坚发兵讨伐董卓，率领数万大军来到了南阳，发文请求南阳太守张咨支援米粮。张咨说： 孙坚是二千石的太守，和我职位一样，不应该向我调发军粮？ 
English: At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Sun Jian sent soldiers to fight against Dong Zhuo, and led tens of thousands of troops to Nanyang. He sent a letter to Nanyang Governor Zhang Zia to request support for rice grain. Zhang Zia said: Sun Jian is the governor of 2,000 koku, the same as my position, shouldn't I be given military grain?

古文：竟不与。
现代文：于是不加理会。
English: So he ignored it.

古文：坚欲见之，又不肯见。
现代文：孙坚想要见他，张咨也不肯相见。
English: Sun Jian wanted to see him, but Zhang Zhe refused to meet.

古文：坚曰： 吾方举兵而遂见阻，何以威后？ 
现代文：孙坚说： 我刚刚起兵就受到这样的阻碍，以后如何树立威信呢？ 
English: Sun Jian said, "I have just joined the army, but I have been hindered in this way. How can I establish my prestige in the future?"

古文：遂诈称急疾，举兵震惶，迎呼巫医，祷祠山川，而遣所亲人说咨，言欲以兵付咨。咨心利其兵，即将步骑五百人，持牛酒诣坚营。
现代文：于是谎称自己得了重病，消息很快传开了，全军士兵都非常担心，不但延请医生诊治，并且焚香祝祷。孙坚派亲信告诉张咨，想将军队交由张咨统领，张咨贪图那些兵力，于是率领五百个兵士，带着美酒来到孙坚的营中探望。
English: So he lied that he was seriously ill. The news soon spread, and the soldiers of the whole army were very worried. They not only delayed the doctor's diagnosis, but also burned incense to pray. Sun Jian sent his close friends to tell Zhang Zi that he wanted to put the army under Zhang Zi's command. Zhang Zi coveted those troops, so he led five hundred soldiers and brought fine wine to visit Sun Jian's camp.

古文：坚卧见，亡何起，设酒饮咨，酒酣，长沙主簿入白： 前移南阳，道路不治，军资不具，太守咨稽停义兵，使贼不时讨，请收按军法。 
现代文：孙坚躺在床上见他，过了一会才起身设酒宴款待。二人喝得正高兴的时候，长沙主簿进入营帐求见孙坚，说： 前几天大军来到南阳，前行的道路没有修好，军中物资缺乏，太守张咨又拒绝提供军粮，使得大军无法按计划讨贼，请将他收复并按军法处置。 
English: Sun Jian lay in bed to see him, and after a while he got up to prepare a banquet. When the two were drinking happily, the Changsha master entered the camp and asked to see Sun Jian, saying: A few days ago, a large army came to Nanyang. The road ahead was not repaired, and there was a lack of materials in the army. Zhang Jia, the military governor, also refused to provide military food, which made it impossible for the large army to catch the thief as planned. Please recover him and dispose of him according to military law.

古文：咨大惧，欲去。兵阵四围，不得出，遂缚于军门斩之。
现代文：张咨惊慌失措想要逃走，但是军队已经将他团团包围，没有办法逃出去，于是众兵将张咨绑在军门前斩首。
English: Zhang Zihao panicked and wanted to escape, but the army had surrounded him and there was no way to escape, so the soldiers tied Zhang Zihao in front of the military gate and beheaded him.

古文：一郡震栗，无求不获，所过郡县皆陈糗粮以待坚军。
现代文：郡民听说后非常惊讶，从此对孙坚的要求无不照办。后来孙坚所经过的郡县都准备好粮草等待他的军队取用。
English: The people of the county were very surprised when they heard about this, and from then on they did everything that Sun Jian asked of them. Later, all the counties that Sun Jian passed through were ready with grain and grass for his army to use.

古文：君子谓坚能用法矣。
现代文：君子认为孙坚懂得用 法 。
English: The gentleman thought that Sun Jian knew how to use it.

古文：法者，国之植也，是以能开东国。
现代文：法是建立一个国家的根本，这也是孙坚后来能够开创吴国的原因之一。
English: Law is the foundation of building a country, which is one of the reasons why Sun Jian was later able to create the State of Wu.

古文：正德五年，安化王寘鐇反，游击仇钺陷贼中，京师讹言钺从贼，兴武营守备保勋为之外应。
现代文：明武宗正德五年，安化王朱寘鐇叛变。游击将军仇钺被俘，京师谣传仇钺投降了叛贼，而兴武营守备保勋则是外应。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengde of the Ming Dynasty, King Zhu Xi of Anhua rebelled. The guerrilla general Qiu Qi was captured, and it was rumored in Beijing that Qiu Qi surrendered to the traitors, while the Xingwu Battalion guarding Bao Xun was an outsider.

古文：李文正曰： 钺必不从贼，勋以贼姻家，遂疑不用，则诸与贼通者皆惧，不复归正矣。 
现代文：李东阳说： 仇钺一定不会投降贼人。至于保勋，如果因为他和寘鐇有姻亲关系，就怀疑他是贼人的外应，那么凡是和贼人有交往的，都会害怕而不敢归附我们了。 
English: Li Dongyang said: "The enemy will never surrender to the thief. As for Bao Xun, if he is suspected of being a thief because he is related to the thief by marriage, then anyone who has dealings with the thief will be afraid and will not dare to join us.

古文：乃举勋为参将，钺为副戎，责以讨贼。
现代文：于是推荐保勋为参将，仇钺为副将，将讨贼的任务交给他们。
English: Therefore, Bao Xun was recommended as a general and Qiu Jun as a vice-general, and the task of catching thieves was given to them.

古文：勋感激自奋，钺称病卧，阴约游兵壮士，候勋兵至河上，乃从中发为内应。
现代文：保勋十分感激，暗暗发誓一定要消灭贼人。仇钺在贼营中谎称生了病，暗中却集结旧部在河岸边等候保勋的部队，伺机接应。
English: Bao Xun was very grateful and secretly vowed to destroy the bandits. Qiu Yao lied in the bandit camp that he was ill, but secretly assembled the old troops waiting for Bao Xun on the riverbank, waiting for an opportunity to respond.

古文：俄得勋信，即嗾人谓贼党何锦： 宜急出守渡口，防决河灌城。
现代文：不久得到了保勋的书信，就唆使人告诉贼将何锦说： 要赶紧调派军队防守河口，严防朝廷大军决堤灌城。
English: Soon after, he received a letter of commendation, prompting him to tell the thief, General He Jin, to "urgently dispatch troops to defend the estuary and strictly prevent the imperial army from breaking through the dike and flooding the city."

古文：遏东岸兵，勿使渡河。 
现代文：并阻击东岸的朝廷军队，不要让他们渡河。 
English: And block the imperial army on the east bank, do not let them cross the river.

古文：锦果出，而留贼周昂守城。
现代文：何锦果然上了当，命令周昂守城，自己则带着军队去河口防守。
English: He Jin fell for the trick and ordered Zhou Ang to defend the city, while he himself took the army to defend the estuary.

古文：钺又称病亟，昂来问病，钺犹坚卧呻吟，言旦夕且死。
现代文：仇钺又谎称自己的病情加重，于是周昂前去探视，仇钺正躺在床上痛苦呻吟，看到周昂来后就说：恐怕自己的死期到了。
English: Cixi also falsely claimed that her condition had worsened, so Zhou Ang went to visit her. Cixi was lying in bed, moaning in pain. When she saw Zhou Ang coming, she said, "I'm afraid my time to die has come."

古文：苍头卒起，捶杀昂，斩首。
现代文：然后趁周昂不注意，突然起身杀了周昂，砍下他的首级。
English: Then, taking advantage of Zhou Ang's inattention, he suddenly got up and killed Zhou Ang, chopping off his head.

古文：钺起披甲仗剑，跨马出门一呼，诸游兵将士皆集，遂夺城门，擒寘鐇。
现代文：接着仇钺披上盔甲拿起剑，骑上快马冲出营门，召集从前的部下，一举攻下城门，擒获了寘鐇。
English: Then he put on his armor, picked up his sword, rode a fast horse, rushed out of the camp gate, gathered his former subordinates, and captured the gate in one fell swoop.

