古文：二十七年春，越子使后庸来聘，且言邾田，封于骀上。
现代文：二十七年春季，越王派后庸来鲁国聘问，并且商谈邾国土田的事，协议以骀上作为鲁、邾两国的边界。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, the king of Yue sent Hou Yong to Lu to ask questions, and discussed the matter of the land and fields of Lu, and agreed to use the border of Lu and Lu as the border of Lu and Lu.

古文：二月，盟于平阳。三子皆从。
现代文：二月，在平阳结盟，季康子等三位都跟随前去。
English: In February, they made an alliance in Pingyang, and Ji Kangzi and the other three followed.

古文：康子病之，言及子赣，曰： 若在此，吾不及此夫。 
现代文：季康子对结盟感到忧虑，谈到子赣，说： 如果他在这里，我不会到这地步的！ 
English: Ji Kang Zi was worried about the alliance and said of Zi Yao: "If he were here, I wouldn't have come this far!"

古文：武伯曰： 然。
现代文：孟武伯说： 对。
English: Meng Wubo said: That's right.

古文：何不召？ 
现代文：为什么不召他来？ 
English: Why not call him in?

古文：曰： 固将召之。 
现代文：季康子说： 本来是要召他的。 
English: Ji Yasuko said: I was going to call him.

古文：文子曰： 他日请念。 
现代文：叔孙文子说： 过些时候请仍然记着他。 
English: Uncle Fumiko said, "Please remember him in the future.

古文：夏四月己亥，季康子卒。
现代文：夏季四月二十五日，季康子去世。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of summer, Ji Kangzi passed away.

古文：公吊焉，降礼。
现代文：哀公去吊丧，礼节降等。
English: Mourners go to the funeral, etiquette is lowered, and so on.

古文：晋荀瑶帅师伐郑，次于桐丘。
现代文：晋国的知伯率领军队攻打郑国，驻扎在桐丘。
English: Zhibo of Jin Province led an army to attack Zheng Province and was stationed in Tongqiu.

古文：郑驷弘请救于齐。
现代文：郑国的驷弘到齐国请求救援，齐军准备出发。
English: Zheng Zhenhong went to Qi to ask for help, and the Qi army was ready to leave.

古文：齐师将兴，陈成子属孤子，三日朝。
现代文：陈成子集合为国战死者的儿子，通知他们三天内朝见国君。
English: Chen Chengzi gathered the sons of those who died in the civil war and told them to meet the king within three days.

古文：设乘车两马，系五邑焉。
现代文：设置了一辆车两匹马，把册书放在五个口袋里。
English: He set up a cart and two horses, and put the record books in five pockets.

古文：召颜涿聚之子晋，曰： 隰之役，而父死焉。
现代文：召见颜涿聚的儿子晋，说： 隰地那一役，你的父亲死在那里。
English: He summoned Yan Xizhu's son Jin and said, "Your father died in the Battle of Fengtian.

古文：以国之多难，未女恤也。
现代文：由于国家多难，没有能抚恤你。
English: Due to the difficulties of the country, there is no one who can support you.

古文：今君命女以是邑也，服车而朝，毋废前劳。 
现代文：现在国君命令把这个城邑给你，穿着朝服驾着车子去朝见，不要废弃你父亲的功劳。 
English: Now the sovereign has ordered that this town be given to you, so don't throw away your father's achievements by driving to the court in a carriage and wearing a royal robe.

古文：乃救郑。
现代文：于是就出兵救援郑国。
English: So they sent troops to rescue Zheng.

古文：及留舒，违穀七里，穀人不知。
现代文：到达留舒，离开穀地七里，縠地人竟没有发觉。
English: When they reached Liushu, seven miles away from the grain fields, the people of Shandong didn't even notice.

古文：及濮，雨，不涉。
现代文：到达濮地，天下雨军队不肯渡河。
English: When they arrived in Handan, the army refused to cross the river in the pouring rain.

古文：子思曰： 大国在敝邑之宇下，是以告急。
现代文：子思说： 大国的军队就在敝邑的屋檐底下，因此告急。
English: Zisi said: The big country's army is under the eaves of Xiangyi, so they are in a hurry.

古文：今师不行，恐无及也。 
现代文：现在军队不走，恐怕要来不及了。 
English: If the army doesn't leave now, I'm afraid it will be too late.

古文：成子衣製，杖戈，立于阪上，马不出者，助之鞭之。
现代文：陈成子披着雨衣拄着戈，站在山坡上，马不肯走出来的，就拉着它或者用鞭子抽打它。
English: Chen Chengzi stood on the hillside, wearing a raincoat and a riding crop. If the horse refused to come out, he would pull it or beat it with a whip.

古文：知伯闻之，乃还，曰： 我卜伐郑，不卜敌齐。 
现代文：知伯听说，就收兵回去，说： 我占卜过进攻郑国，没有占卜和齐国作战。 
English: When Zhibo heard of this, he withdrew his troops and said, "I have divined an attack on Zheng, but I have not divined a battle with Qi."

古文：使谓成子曰： 大夫陈子，陈之自出。
现代文：派人对陈成子说： 大夫陈子，您这一族是从陈国分支出来的。
English: The person sent to Chen Chengzi said: Doctor Chen Zi, your family is a branch from Chen Guo.

古文：陈之不祀，郑之罪也。故寡君使瑶察陈衷焉。谓大夫其恤陈乎？
现代文：陈国的断绝祭祀，是郑国的罪过，所以寡君派我来调查陈国被灭亡的实情，还要询问您是否为陈国忧虑。
English: It was Zheng Guo's fault that Chen Guo broke off the sacrificial rites, so the oligarchs sent me to investigate the true circumstances of Chen Guo's demise, and to ask if you were worried about Chen Guo.

古文：若利本之颠，瑶何有焉？ 
现代文：如果您对树干的倒置认为有利，那和我有什么关系？ 
English: What does it matter to me if you find upside-down tree trunks useful?

古文：成子怒曰： 多陵人者皆不在，知伯其能久乎？ 
现代文：陈成子发怒说： 经常欺压别人的人，都没有好结果，知伯难道能够长久吗？ 
English: Chen Chengzi said angrily, "Those who often oppress others have no good results. Can Zhi Bo last long?

古文：中行文子告成子曰： 有自晋师告寅者，将为轻车千乘，以厌齐师之门，则可尽也。 
现代文：中行文子告诉陈成子说： 有一个从晋军中来告诉我的人说，晋军准备出动轻车一千辆，迫击齐军的营门，就可以全部歼灭齐军。 
English: "A person from the Jin army came to tell me that the Jin army was preparing to dispatch a thousand light vehicles to attack the camp gate of the Qi army, so that they could completely annihilate the Qi army.

古文：成子曰： 寡君命恒曰： 无及寡，无畏众。 
现代文：陈成子说： 寡君命令我说： 不要追赶少数的士卒，不要害怕大批的敌人。 
English: Chen Chengzi said, "The Emperor ordered me, 'Don't chase a few soldiers, and don't be afraid of a large number of enemies.

古文：虽过千乘，敢辟之乎？
现代文：敌军即使超过一千辆战车，岂敢避开他们呢？
English: Would the enemy dare to avoid them, even if they had more than a thousand chariots?

古文：将以子之命告寡君。 
现代文：我将要把您的话报告寡君。 
English: I'm going to report your words to the Emperor.

古文：文子曰： 吾乃今知所以亡。
现代文：中行文了说： 我到今天才知道自己为什么逃亡在外了。
English: In the middle of the letter, he said: "To this day, I don't know why I fled.

古文：君子之谋也，始衷终皆举之，而后入焉。
现代文：君子谋划一件事，对开始、发展、结果都要考虑到，然后向上报告。
English: A gentleman plans a matter, taking into account the beginning, development, and result, and then reports it up.

古文：今我三不知而入之，不亦难乎？ 
现代文：现在我对这三方面都不知道，就向上报告，不也是很难了吗？ 
English: Now I don't know about these three aspects, so I report it to the higher-ups. Isn't that also difficult?

古文：公患三桓之侈也，欲以诸侯去之。三桓亦患公之妄也，故君臣多间。
现代文：哀公担忧三桓的威胁，想利用诸侯除掉他们；三桓也担忧哀公的狂妄，所以君臣之间嫌隙很多。
English: Aiko was worried about the threat of the three kings and wanted to use the lords to get rid of them; the three kings were also worried about Aiko's arrogance, so there were a lot of rifts between the monarchs and the ministers.

古文：公游于陵阪，遇孟武伯于孟氏之衢，曰： 请有问于子，余及死乎？ 
现代文：哀公在陵坂游玩，在孟氏之衢碰上孟武伯，说： 请问您：我能得到善终吗？ 
English: Aigong went for a walk in the mausoleum hill, met Mengwubo in the Meng family tomb, and said, "May I ask you: Can I have a good death?

古文：对曰： 臣无由知之。 
现代文：孟武伯回答说： 我没法知道。 
English: Mengwubo replied, "I have no way of knowing."

古文：三问，卒辞不对。
现代文：问了三次，始终辞谢不回答。
English: I asked him three times, but he always declined to answer.

古文：公欲以越伐鲁，而去三桓。
现代文：哀公想要利用越国攻打鲁国而除掉三桓。
English: Aiko wanted to use Yue Province to attack Lu Province and get rid of Sankan.

古文：秋八月甲戌，公如公孙有陉氏，因孙于邾，乃遂如越。
现代文：秋季，八月初一日，哀公到了公孙有陉氏那里，由此又避居于邾国，后来就乘机去了越国。
English: In autumn, on the first day of August, Aigong went to Gongsun Youjun's place, and thus he took refuge in Shandong Province. Later, he took a plane to Yue Province.

古文：国人施公孙有山氏。
现代文：国内的人们拘捕了公孙有山氏。
English: People in the country have arrested his grandson, Mr. Ariyama.

古文：悼之四年，晋荀瑶帅师围郑。未至，郑驷弘曰： 知伯愎而好胜，早下之，则可行也。 
现代文：悼公四年，晋国的知伯领兵包围郑国，还没有到达，郑国的驷弘说： 知伯刚愎而好胜，我们及早向他表示软弱无能，他就可以退走了。 
English: During the four years of mourning for the death of the emperor, Jin's Zhibo led his troops to encircle Zheng. Before they arrived, Zheng's Zhi Hong said, "Zhibo is tough and eager to win. If we show him weakness and incompetence at an early stage, he can retreat."

古文：乃先保南里以待之。
现代文：于是就先守在南里以等候晋军。
English: As a result, they stayed in Nanli to await the advancing troops.

古文：知伯入南里，门于桔柣之门。
现代文：知伯攻进南里，又攻打桔秩之门。
English: Zhibo invaded Nanli and attacked the gate of Kikuchi.

古文：郑人俘酅魁垒，赂之以知政，闭其口而死。
现代文：郑国人俘虏了酅魁垒，用卿的地位来引诱他投降，不答应，就把他的嘴塞住而杀死了他。
English: The Zheng people captured Zou Kuiyang and used his position as a lord to lure him into surrendering. When he refused, they gagged him and killed him.

古文：将门，知伯谓赵孟： 入之。 
现代文：晋军将要攻打城门，知伯对赵孟说： 攻进去！ 
English: Jin's army was about to attack the city gate. Zhi Bo said to Zhao Meng: "Attack inside!

古文：对曰： 主在此。 
现代文：赵孟说： 主人在这里。 
English: Zhao Meng said: My master is here.

古文：知伯曰： 恶而无勇，何以为子？ 
现代文：知伯说： 你貌丑而缺乏勇气，为什么成了太子？ 
English: Zhi Bo said: You are ugly and lack courage, why did you become a prince?

古文：对曰： 以能忍耻，庶无害赵宗乎。 
现代文：赵孟回答说： 因为我能够忍受耻辱，也许对赵氏宗族没有害处吧！ 
English: Zhao Meng replied, "Since I can bear the shame, perhaps there is no harm to the Zhao clan!"

古文：知伯不悛，赵襄子由是惎知伯，遂丧之。
现代文：知伯不肯改悔，赵孟因此而憎恨知伯，知伯就想要灭亡赵襄子。
English: Zhibo refused to repent, so Zhao Meng hated Zhibo, and Zhibo wanted to destroy Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：知伯贪而愎，故韩、魏反而丧之。
现代文：知伯贪婪而刚愎自用，所以韩、魏反过来与赵氏合谋灭亡了他。
English: Zibo was greedy and self-serving, so Han and Wei, in turn, conspired with the Zhao clan to destroy him.

