古文：刘诚之宗玄成孟神爽飞骑席人韩令珪李宏长孙昕张易之兄弟权怀恩宋之逊张干等彭先觉张德士子吞舍利刘子振荆州鬻札者
现代文：刘诚之宗玄成孟神爽飞骑席人韩令珪李宏长孙昕张易之兄弟权怀恩宋之逊张干等彭先觉张德士子吞舍利刘子振荆州鬻札者
English: Liu Cheng's ancestor, Xuancheng, Meng Shengfei's horseman, Han Lingqian, Li Hong, Zhang Yi's eldest grandson, Zhang Yi's brother, Quan Wai, Song's subordinate, Zhang Gan, etc.

古文：刘诚之
现代文：刘诚之
English: Liu Chengzhi

古文：唐天授年，彭城刘诚之，粗险不调，高言庳语，凌上忽下，恐吓财物，口无关钥，妄说袄灾。
现代文：唐朝天授年间，有个彭城人刘诚之，粗野险恶又与人不合，忽而豪言，忽而卑语，欺上瞒下，恐吓诈取财物，口无约束，胡说天将反时而有大灾。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Liu Chengzhi from Pengcheng. He was rude, dangerous, and did not get along with people. He was at times boastful, at times vulgar. He was deceitful, intimidating, and swindled people out of their property. He was unrestrained in what he said. He would say that the sky would fall and that there would be a great disaster.

古文：从万年县尉常彦玮，索钱一百千。云：我是刘果毅，当与富贵。
现代文：他从万年县尉常彦玮那儿勒索十万钱，说：我是刘果毅，你应当帮我富贵起来。
English: He extorted 100,000 yuan from Wannen County Lieutenant Chang Yanyu, saying, "I am Liu Guoyi, you should help me become rich."

古文：彦玮进状告之。
现代文：常彦玮向皇上进呈文状控告了他。
English: Tsunehiko wrote a letter to the emperor to accuse him.

古文：上令二给事先入彦玮房中，下帘坐窗下听之。
现代文：皇上派出两个内侍先到常彦玮的屋子里，放下门帘坐在窗下监听。
English: The emperor sent two chambermaids to the house of Tsunehiko first, and they put down the door curtain and sat under the window to listen.

古文：有顷，诚之及户千仞至，于厅上坐，谈话。彦玮引之说国家长短，无所忌讳，给使一一纸笔抄之以进。上怒，令金吾捕捉。
现代文：过了一会儿，刘诚之和卢千仞便来了，他们坐在厅里说话，常彦玮便引导他们对国家说长道短，他们竟毫无顾忌，二内侍把他们所言一一记录下呈送皇上，皇上一看大怒，命令执掌治安的官员立即把他们捕来。
English: After a while, Liu Chengzhi and Lu Qianyao arrived. They sat in the hall and talked. Chang Yanyan led them to talk about the state. They had no scruples. The two servants recorded what they said and sent it to the emperor. The emperor was furious and ordered the officials in charge of public security to arrest them immediately.

古文：亲问之，具承。
现代文：皇上亲自问案，他们全都承认。
English: The Emperor asked them personally, and they all admitted it.

古文：遂腰斩诚之，千仞处绞，授彦玮侍御史。
现代文：于是腰斩刘诚之，绞死卢千仞，任命常彦玮为侍御史。
English: As a result, Liu Chengzhi was beheaded, Lu Qianqian was hanged, and Chang Yanqian was appointed as the Emperor's attendant.

古文：宗玄成
现代文：宗玄成
English: Zong Xuancheng

古文：唐老三卫宗玄成，邢州南和人。祖齐黄门侍郎。
现代文：唐朝时，有一个曾做过宫廷禁卫的人宗玄成，他是邢州南和县人氏，祖父宗齐当过黄门侍郎。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Zong Xuancheng who had been a palace guard. He was from the Nanhe County of Zhangzhou, and his grandfather Zong Qi had been a Yellow Gate attendant.

古文：玄成性粗猛，禀气凶豪，凌轹乡村，横行州县。
现代文：此人粗野残暴，凶狠蛮横。欺凌乡村百姓，横行于州府县衙。
English: This man is crude, brutal, and violent. He bullies the rural people and runs rampant in the prefectures.

古文：纪王为邢州刺史，玄成与之抗行。
现代文：纪王当时任邢州刺史，玄成竟与他抗衡。
English: At that time, Ji Wang was the governor of Zhangzhou, and Xuanzeng was actually competing with him.

古文：李备为南和令，闻之，每降阶引接。
现代文：李备为南和县令，每次听说他要来，都要走到台阶下去迎接。
English: Li Bei is the governor of Nanhe County. Every time I hear that he is coming, I have to walk down the steps to greet him.

古文：分庭抗礼，务在招延，养成其恶。
现代文：与他分庭抗礼，他还要热情接待，因此养成了此人的恶性。
English: He had to be courted, he had to be received warmly, and so he developed the viciousness of this person.

古文：属河朔失稔，开仓赈给，玄成依势，作威乡野，强乞粟一石。
现代文：有一年，河朔管辖的地区闹灾荒，官府开仓救济灾民，玄成依仗自己有势力，在乡村的穷苦农户家大耍威风，强行要走一石救灾粮。
English: One year, when the area under the jurisdiction of Hexuo was stricken by disaster and famine, the government opened warehouses to provide relief to the victims. With his own power, Xu Rongcheng exerted great influence on the poor farmers in the countryside and forced them to take one stone of relief grain.

古文：备与客对，不命，玄成乃门外扬声，奋臂直入。
现代文：李备让他来说明此事，他不从命，并在门外大喊大叫，挥舞的拳头闯进来。
English: Li Bei asked him to explain the matter, but he did not comply, and burst in shouting and waving his fist outside the door.

古文：备集门内典正一百余人，举牒推穷，强乞是实。
现代文：李备在院内集合典正等一百余人，举着文状一一追问其罪责，夺灾粮的事完全属实。
English: Li Bei gathered more than a hundred people in the hospital, including Dian Zheng, and questioned them one by one about their culpability, holding up letters. It was completely true that they took food from the victims of the disaster.

古文：初令项上著鏁，后却鏁上著枷，文案既周，且决六十，杖下气绝。
现代文：起初下令给他的脖子上锁，后来又令去掉锁上枷。文案详细周全后，判决杖罚六十，宗玄成在棍棒下断气。
English: At first, he ordered his neck to be chained, and later he ordered the shackles to be removed. After a detailed and well-written document, the sentence was 60 strokes of the cane, and Zong Xuancheng expired under the cane.

古文：无敢言者。
现代文：此事没有一个敢谈论的。
English: No one dares to talk about it.

古文：孟神爽
现代文：孟神爽
English: Meng Shenshuang

古文：孟神爽，扬州人，禀性狼戾，执心鸩毒，巡市索物，应声即来；入邸须钱，随口而至。
现代文：孟神爽，是扬州人。此人禀性凶残狠毒，在集市上索要东西，卖主立即就给；到哪个店铺说声需要钱，顺嘴说一声就送到。
English: Meng Shenshuang is from Yangzhou. He is a stubborn, cruel and vicious person. When he asks for something at the market, the seller immediately gives it to him. When he says he needs money at any store, the seller will give it to him.

古文：长史县令，高揖待之，丞尉判司，颔之而已。
现代文：长史县令，对他都是以礼相待；而他见到丞尉判司，只是点点头而已。
English: The county magistrate treated him with courtesy, but when he saw the lieutenant judge, he only nodded.

古文：张潜为扬州刺史，闻其暴乱，遣江都县令店上捉来。
现代文：当时张潜任扬州刺史，听说他如此凶恶妄为，便派遣江都县令把他从一家店铺中捉来。
English: At that time, Zhang Qian served as Yangzhou chief historian. Hearing that he had committed such a heinous act, he sent an order from Jiangdu County to capture him from a store.

古文：拖入府门，高声唱速付法曹李广业推鞠。
现代文：将他拖入府门后，刺史大声说速交司法官李广业审讯。
English: After dragging him into the gate of the government office, the thug said loudly that he would immediately hand him over to judicial officer Li Guangye for interrogation.

古文：密事并虚，准敕决百，杖下卒。
现代文：查清了事实，皇上批复，杖刑一百，在棍棒下死去。
English: After ascertaining the facts, the emperor punished him with a hundred strokes of the cane, and he died under the club.

古文：飞骑席人
现代文：飞骑席人
English: The flying horseman sings

古文：则天之废庐陵也。
现代文：武则天废黜了太子庐陵。
English: Wu Zetian dethroned the crown prince's tomb.

古文：飞骑十余人于客户坊同饮，有一人曰：早知今日无功赏，不及扶竖庐陵。
现代文：有十几个侍卫军士在一家客店饮酒时，其中一人说道：早知道今日得不到功赏，不如去扶持庐陵王了。
English: When more than a dozen guards and sergeants were drinking in an inn, one of them said, "I knew I wouldn't get a reward today, so I might as well go and support King Goryeo."

古文：席上一人起出，北门进状告之。
现代文：酒席上有一个人走了出去，其实是去向羽林军的长官们呈文告了他们的状。
English: At the banquet, one person walked out and actually went to present a report to the officers of the Ulin Army.

古文：席未散，并擒送羽林。
现代文：酒席还没散，就被一起捉到羽林军。
English: The drinking party had not yet dispersed when they were caught together by Uebayashi's army.

古文：鞠问皆实。
现代文：经审问全属实。
English: It was all true after interrogation.

古文：告者授五品，言者斩，自余知反不告，坐绞。
现代文：告状的人授五品官衔，说那句话的人处斩，其余的人属于知道反叛而不告发，处以绞刑。
English: The person who made the accusation was awarded five official ranks, the person who said that sentence was beheaded, and the rest of the people who knew about the rebellion but did not report it were hanged.

古文：韩令珪
现代文：韩令珪
English: Han Lingyao

古文：周令史韩令珪耐羞耻，厚貌强梁。
现代文：周朝时有个令史叫韩令珪，此人不怕羞耻，厚颜无耻而又蛮横无礼。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, there was a ruler named Han Lingyu, who was not afraid of shame, brazen and rude.

古文：王公贵人，皆呼次第。
现代文：见了王公贵人，都称呼人家的排行。
English: When they saw Wang Gonggui, they all called him by his rank.

古文：平生未面，亦强干之。
现代文：即使是对从未见过面的人，他也硬去干谒人家。
English: Even if it's someone he's never met, he'll go out of his way to meet them.

古文：曾选，于陆元方下引铨。时舍人王勮夺情，与陆同厅而坐。珪佯惊曰：未见王五。
现代文：他曾参加过选官考试，由陆元方主持推荐授官的事，舍人王勮丧假未满便提前让他出任，当时与陆元方一起坐在厅内，韩令珪便装作惊讶地说：怎么没见到王五呀？
English: He had taken part in the election of officials exam, and Lu Yuanfang presided over the recommendation of the awarding of officials. He let Wang Wei take office ahead of time before the expiration of the bereavement leave. At that time, he was sitting with Lu Yuanfang in the hall, and Han Lingyi pretended to be surprised and said: How did you not see Wang Wei?

古文：勮便降阶悯然，令珪颦眉蹙刺，相尉而去。
现代文：王勮立即很谦恭地走过来，仍然是面带忧愁的样子，令珪也装出一副颦眉蹙额的忧愁貌，对他安慰几句便要走。
English: Wang Yao immediately came over very humbly, still looking sad. Ling Yao also put on a sad face with a frown, and said a few words of consolation to him before leaving.

古文：陆与王有旧，对面留住，问：勮是谁？
现代文：陆元方与王勮有旧交，便将令珪拦住，问他王勮是谁，他说不认识。
English: Lu Yuanfang had an old friendship with Wang Yao, so he stopped Ling Yao and asked him who Wang Yao was. He said he didn't know him.

古文：莫之识也。后吓人事败，于朝堂决杖。遥呼河内王曰：大哥何不相救？
现代文：后来韩令珪冒充唬人的事败露，在朝堂上对他执行杖刑，他在很远地方还呼叫河内王说：大哥，为什么不来救我？
English: Later, when it was revealed that Han Lingyu had been pretending to be a swindler, he was caned in the imperial court. He even called out to the King of Hanoi from a great distance, saying, "Big brother, why don't you come and save me?"

古文：懿宗目之曰：我不识汝。
现代文：河内王武懿宗看了看他说：我不认识你。
English: The king of Hanoi, Emperor Wu, looked at him and said, "I don't know you."

古文：催杖苦鞭，杖下取死。
现代文：于是催促执杖人狠打。韩令珪被杖刑而死。
English: So he urged the person holding the cane to beat him. Han Lingyao was beaten to death with the cane.

古文：李宏
现代文：李宏
English: Li Hong

古文：唐李宏，汴州浚仪人也。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫李宏的，汴州浚仪县人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Li Hong, from Jianyi County, Ganzhou.

古文：凶悖无赖。狠戾不仁。
现代文：此人是个凶恶忤逆的无赖，狠毒而不讲仁义。
English: This man is a vicious, treacherous scoundrel, cruel and without mercy.

古文：每高鞍壮马。巡坊历店，唬庸调租船纲典，动盈数百贯。
现代文：经常骑着高头大马，游荡于作坊商店，通过伪装恫吓的办法骗取各种税金，动不动就叫人交他数百贯钱。
English: He often rode on a high horse, wandered in workshops and shops, cheated various taxes by means of disguise and intimidation, and asked people to pay him hundreds of yuan at every turn.

古文：强贷商人巨万。竟无一还。
现代文：他强行借买卖人的钱上万，竟然没有一份偿还的。
English: He forcibly borrowed tens of thousands of yuan from merchants, but failed to repay any of it.

古文：商旅惊波，行纲侧胆。
现代文：商人们都很惧怕他，各商行组织更是对他又恨又怕。
English: Businessmen are afraid of him, and business organizations hate and fear him even more.

古文：任正理为汴州刺史，上十余日，遣手力捉来，责情决六十。
现代文：任正理当了汴州刺史后，上任十几天，便派手下的小吏把他捉来，问明案情后判杖刑六十。
English: After Ren Zhengli became the governor of Zhangzhou, he sent his subordinates to arrest him within ten days of taking office. After clarifying the circumstances of the case, he was sentenced to sixty years on the cane.

古文：杖下而死。
现代文：李宏被棍棒打死。
English: Li Hong was clubbed to death.

古文：工商客生，酣饮相欢。
现代文：工商界的人士，都饮酒欢庆。
English: People in business and industry are drinking to celebrate.

古文：远近闻之，莫不称快。
现代文：远近闻听，没有不称快的。
English: Hearing it from near and far, there's no mistaking it.

古文：长孙昕
现代文：长孙昕
English: The eldest grandson

古文：唐长孙昕，皇后之妹夫。
现代文：唐朝人长孙昕，是皇后的妹夫。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the first emperor of the Tang Dynasty, was the queen's brother-in-law.

古文：与妻表兄杨仙玉乘马二十余骑。并列瓜挝，于街中行。
现代文：他和妻表兄杨仙玉与二十多人并列骑马穿行于大街上。
English: He and his wife's cousin, Yang Xianyu, rode through the streets alongside more than 20 people.

古文：御史大夫李杰在坊中内参姨母，僮仆在门外。昕与仙郎，使奴打杰左右。
现代文：此时御史大夫李杰正到作坊内来探望姨母，他的随从留在门口，长孙昕和杨仙玉便让殿上执卫用金瓜击打李杰的随从。
English: At this time, the imperial historian Li Jie was visiting his aunt in the workshop. His entourage remained at the door, and the eldest grandson Zou and Yang Xianyu let the palace guard beat Li Jie's entourage with a gold melon.

古文：杰出来，并波按顿。
现代文：李杰出来，对他们进行了制止。
English: Li Jie came out and stopped them.

古文：须臾。金吾及万年县官并到，送县禁之。
现代文：过了一会儿，金吾和万年县官一起来到，把他们送到县衙囚禁起来。
English: After a while, Kingo came with the county magistrate, and they were sent to the county jail.

古文：昕妻父王开府，将二百百骑，劫昕等去。
现代文：长孙昕的岳父王开府带了二百骑士又把他们劫走。
English: Wang Kaifu, the father-in-law of Yao's eldest grandson, took 200 knights with him and abducted them.

古文：杰与金吾、万年，以状闻上，奏敕断昕杀，积杖至数百而卒。
现代文：李杰与金吾及万年县官诉状于皇上，皇上下旨判长孙昕死刑，杖挞数百而死。
English: Li Jie, Kingu and the county officials appealed to the emperor, and the emperor ordered the death penalty for Sun Yat-sen, and hundreds of Jie Yat-sen died.

古文：张易之兄弟
现代文：张易之兄弟
English: Brother of Zhang Yi

古文：张易之兄弟骄贵，强夺庄宅奴婢姬妾，不可胜数。
现代文：张易之的兄弟都是骄奢淫逸的贵族，抢夺霸占庄园奴婢姬妾不知有多少。
English: Zhang Yizhi's brothers were all aristocrats who were proud of their luxury and lasciviousness. I don't know how many slaves, maids, and concubines they robbed to occupy the manor.

古文：昌期于万年县街内行，逢一女人，婿抱儿相逐。昌期马鞭拨其头巾，女妇骂之。昌期顾谓奴曰：横驮将来。
现代文：昌期在万年县大街上行走时，遇上一个女人，她的丈夫抱着孩子紧随其后，昌期便用马鞭杆去拨弄人家的头巾，那女人骂他，他便回头对奴仆说：把她横在马上驮走。
English: While he was walking on a street in Wannian County, Changzhi met a woman. Her husband was holding a child and following closely behind. Changzhi used a horse whip to play with the headscarf of the person. The woman scolded him. He turned to his servant and said, "Take her away on a horse."

古文：婿投匦三四状，并不出。
现代文：丈夫投匦三四份状文，媳妇也未放回来。
English: Her husband has sent three or four letters, and her daughter-in-law has not been allowed to return.

古文：昌期捉送万年县，诬以他罪，决死之。
现代文：后来昌期被捉拿到万年县衙，是以其他罪名被处死的。
English: Later, he was arrested and taken to the Wannian County Court, where he was sentenced to death on other charges.

古文：昌仪常谓人曰：丈夫当如此，今时千人推我不倒，及其败也，万人擎我不能起。
现代文：昌仪常对人讲：当大丈夫就是这样，今天千人想推倒我却推不倒，到了败落的时候，万人举我也举不起来。
English: Changyi often said to people: When everything is fine, it is like this. Today, a thousand people want to push me down, but I can't be pushed down. When it comes to defeat, even if a million people lift me up, I can't get up.

古文：俄而事败，兄弟俱斩。
现代文：不久他的恶行败露，兄弟俩都被斩首。
English: Soon his evil deeds were exposed, and both brothers were beheaded.

古文：权怀恩
现代文：权怀恩
English: Kwon Wai Yan

古文：唐邢州刺史权怀恩，无赖，除洛州长史。州差参军刘犬子迎，至怀州路次拜。
现代文：唐朝时，有个邢州刺史权怀恩，是个无赖。他被任命为洛州长史后，州府派遣参军刘犬子迎接他。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scoundrel named Guan Wai, who was appointed governor of Luo Province. After his appointment, the provincial government sent Liu Inuko to join the army to welcome him.

古文：怀恩突过，不与语。
现代文：走到怀州路时，刘犬子停下来迎候并向他致礼。
English: When he came to Huizhou Road, Liu Yingzi stopped to greet him and salute him.

古文：步趁二百余步，亦不遣乘马。
现代文：权怀恩突然从他跟前跑过去，连句话都不跟他说。
English: Mr. Kwon suddenly ran past him without saying a word.

古文：犬子觉不似，乃自上马驰之。
现代文：刘犬子一直追赶了二百多步，也不让他上马，刘犬子觉得此人不像是来上任的权怀恩，便自己上马而去。
English: Liu Inuko chased him for more than two hundred paces and did not let him get on the horse. Liu Inuko felt that this person did not seem to be the right person to take office, so he got on the horse and left.

古文：至驿，令脱靴讫，谓曰：洛州几个参军？
现代文：到了驿站，权怀恩命刘犬子给自己脱掉靴子后问：洛州有几个参军？
English: When he arrived at the station, he took off his boots and asked, "How many people from Lozhou have joined the army?"

古文：对曰：正员六人，员外一人。
现代文：刘犬子说：正员六人，正员之外一人。
English: Liu Inuko said: There are six regular members and one person outside the regular members.

古文：怀恩曰：何得有外员？
现代文：权怀恩问：怎么还用了员外的参军？
English: Quan Huai'en asked: How did you still use non-members to join the army?

古文：对曰：余一员，遣与长史脱靴。
现代文：刘犬子说：多出一人来，好派他给长史脱靴子啊。
English: Liu Inuko said, "Bring one more person so that I can send him to take off Chang Shi's boots."

古文：怀恩惊曰：君谁家儿？
现代文：权怀恩一听此人口气有些惊诧地问：你是谁的儿子？
English: Hearing this, Quan Huai'en asked in surprise: "Whose son are you?"

古文：对曰：阿父为仆射。
现代文：刘犬子说：我父亲是仆射。
English: Liu Inuko said, "My father was a poacher.

古文：怀恩抚然而去。
现代文：权怀恩茫然若失地走了。
English: Guan Huai'en walked away in a daze.

古文：仆射刘仁轨谓曰：公草里刺史，至神州，不可造次。
现代文：后仆射刘仁轨对他说：你不过是个草野间的普通刺史，到了京都，不可以鲁莽行事。
English: His manservant, Liu Renluo, said to him, "You are nothing but a common ruffian. When you get to Kyoto, you must not act recklessly."

古文：参军虽卑微，岂可令脱靴耶？
现代文：参军的官职虽小，可是怎么能命令人家给自己脱靴子呢？
English: The official position of joining the army is small, but how can you order a man to take off his boots?

古文：怀恩惭，请假不复出，旬日为益州刺史。
现代文：权怀恩很觉惭愧，请假不再上任。十几天后，任命他为益州刺史。
English: Guan Huai'en felt very ashamed and asked for leave of absence from his post. A dozen days later, he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：宋之逊
现代文：宋之逊
English: Song Zhisong

古文：唐洛阳丞宋之逊，太常主簿之问弟。
现代文：唐朝时，洛阳县丞宋之逊，是太常寺主簿宋之问的弟弟。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Luoyang County official Song Zhixun was the younger brother of the main bookkeeper of Taizhong Temple, Song Zhimen.

古文：罗织杀驸马王同皎。
现代文：他曾罗织罪名陷害了附马王同皎。
English: He had conspired to frame a colleague of Ma Wang's.

古文：初，之逊谄附张易之兄弟，出为兖州司仓，遂亡而归，王同皎匿之于小房。
现代文：最初，宋之逊谄媚攀附张易之兄弟，因而出任为兖州司仓。张易之兄弟事败处死后，他偷着逃回来，王同皎把他藏到一间小房里。
English: In the beginning, Song Zhixun charmingly attached himself to Zhang Yi's brother, and thus became the secretary of Zhangzhou. After Zhang Yi's brother was killed, he secretly fled back, and Wang Tongyao hid him in a small room.

古文：同皎慷慨之士也，忿逆韦与武三思乱国，与一二所亲论之，每至切齿。
现代文：王同皎是一位充满正义之气的君子，他十分憎恨韦氏和武三思乱国，曾跟一两个知近的人谈论过，每次谈论起韦、武乱国之事都表现出切齿痛恨样子，宋之逊便在帘后偷听。
English: Wang Tongyao was a gentleman full of justice. He absolutely hated Wei and Wusan for thinking about overthrowing the country. He had talked to one or two people who were close to him. Every time they talked about overthrowing Wei and overthrowing the country, they showed a gritted-teeth look of hatred. Song Zhixun would eavesdrop behind the curtain.

古文：之逊于帘下窃听之，遣侄昙，上书告之，以希韦之旨。
现代文：之后他便指使侄子宋昙上书告发，以求韦氏下旨恩赏。
English: After that, he ordered his nephew, Song Jun, to report the matter in writing, in order to receive a reward from Wei.

古文：武三思等果大怒，奏诛同皎之党。
现代文：武三恩等人果然大怒，奏本诛灭王同皎及同伙。
English: Wu San'en and others were really furious, and they set out to exterminate Wang's colleagues and associates.

古文：兄弟并授五品官，之逊为光禄丞，之问为鸿胪丞，昙为尚衣奉御。
现代文：于是宋家兄弟一起被授予五品官，任命宋之逊为光禄丞，宋之问为鸿胪丞，宋昙为尚衣奉御。
English: As a result, the brothers of the Song family were awarded the five-ranked officer together, and Song Zhixun was appointed as Guanglu Rongzheng, Song Zhifan as Hongyu Rongzheng, and Song Xi as Shangyi Bongguo.

古文：天下怨之，皆相谓曰：之问等绯衫，王同皎血染也。
现代文：天下没有不恨他们的，人们都说：宋之问等人的红色官袍，是用王同皎的鲜血染成的。
English: There is no one in the world who does not hate them, and people all say: The red official robes of Song Zhifan and others were dyed with the blood of Wang Tonglu.

古文：诛逆韦之后，之逊等长流岭南。
现代文：诛灭韦氏之后，宋之逊等被长期流放于岭南。
English: After the death of the Wei clan, Song Zhisong and others were exiled to Lingnan for a long time.

古文：客谓浮休子曰：来俊臣之徒如何？
现代文：有个客人问浮休子：来俊臣这个人如何？
English: A guest asked Ukikyuko, "What about this man, Comrade Chunseong?"

古文：对曰：昔有狮子王于深山，获一豺，将食之。豺曰： 请为王送二鹿以自赎。
现代文：他回答说：从前，有个狮王在深山里捕到一只豺，要吃掉它，豺说：我愿为大王送上两头鹿来赎出我自己。
English: He answered, "Once upon a time, a lion king caught a roe deer deep in the mountains and wanted to eat it. The roe deer said, 'I will give the king two deer to redeem myself.'

古文：狮子王喜。
现代文：狮王大喜。
English: The lion king is delighted.

古文：周年之后，无可送，王曰： 汝杀众生亦已多，今次到汝，汝其图之？ 
现代文：可一年以后，什么也没送来，狮王道：你杀死的众生已经够多的了，今天换到你了，你还有什么图谋？
English: But a year later, nothing has been sent, the lion king said: You have killed enough sentient beings, today it is your turn, what else do you have in mind?

古文：豺默然无应，遂齚杀之。
现代文：豺默然无声，于是狮王将它吃掉。
English: The baboon was silent, so the lion king ate it.

古文：俊臣之辈，何异豺也。
现代文：来俊臣之流，与豺狼有什么两样！
English: What's the difference between him and a jackal?

古文：张干等
现代文：张干等
English: Zhang Gan, etc.

古文：上都市肆恶少，率髡而肤扎，备众物形状。
现代文：京都中有一群恣意妄为的恶少，全都剃光了头并文身，各种物类的形状都有。
English: In Kyoto, there is a group of reckless youths, all with shaved heads and tattoos, in the shape of various animals.

古文：恃诸军，张拳强劫，至有以蛇售酒，捉羊甲击人者。
现代文：他们还依仗军队的势力，强抢财物。甚至还有用蛇去换酒、捉来羊甲打人的。
English: They also relied on the power of the army and robbed people of their property. They even used snakes to exchange for wine, and captured sheepskins to beat people with.

古文：京兆尹薛元赏，上三日，令里长潜捕，约三十余人，悉杖杀，尸于市。
现代文：京兆尹薛元赏上书三天后，便下令里长秘捕，约有三十多人，全部被乱杖打死，尸体弃于街上。
English: Three days after Jing Zhao Yin Xue Yuan was awarded the letter, he ordered the secret arrest of about thirty people, all of whom were beaten to death with a cane and their bodies left on the street.

古文：市人有点青者，皆炙灭之。
现代文：市人中凡有文身的，都吓得把它烫掉了。
English: Everyone in the city who had a tattoo was so scared that they had it burned off.

古文：时大宁坊力者张干，扎左膊曰生不怕京兆尹，右膊曰死不怕阎罗王。
现代文：当时有个在大宁坊干活的人张干，左臂上刺的字是生不怕京兆尹，右臂上刺的是死不怕阎罗王。
English: At that time, there was a man named Zhang Gan who worked in Damingfang. The words tattooed on his left arm read, "Born not afraid of Jing Zhaoyun," and the words tattooed on his right arm read, "Died not afraid of the King of Hell."

古文：又有王力奴，以钱五千召劄工，可胸腹为山亭院、池榭、草木、鸟兽，无不悉具，细若设色。
现代文：还有个叫王力奴的人，出钱五千招扎工，在胸腹上刺出山园水池、楼榭、鸟兽等，无所不有，细致逼真就像着了颜色。
English: There was also a man called Wang Linu, who paid five thousand yuan to recruit a tie-dyer, and on his chest and abdomen he stabbed out mountain gardens, ponds, towers, birds and beasts, and so on. There was everything, and the detail and realism seemed to be colored.

古文：公悉杖杀之。
现代文：他们一起都被杖杀。
English: They were both caned to death.

古文：又贼赵武建，扎一百六处番印、盘鹊等，右膊刺言：野鸡滩头宿，朝朝被鹘捎。
现代文：还有个强盗赵武建，在身上刺了一百六十处野兽的抓印和盘旋的喜鹤等，在右臂上刺字道：野鸡滩头宿，朝朝被鹘捎。
English: There was also a robber, Zhao Wu Jian, who pierced his body with one hundred and sixty marks of wild beasts and circling cranes, and on his right arm he had the words: "Pheasant beach head lodge, morning morning bed."

古文：忽惊飞入水，留命到今朝。
现代文：忽惊飞入水，留命到今朝。
English: He suddenly flew into the water and survived until this morning.

古文：又高陵县捉得镂身者宋元素，扎七十一处，刺左臂曰：昔日已前家未贫，千金不惜结交亲。
现代文：又在高陵县捉到一个文身人宋元素，在身上刺了七十一处，并在左臂上刺字道：昔日已前家未贫，千金不惜结交亲。
English: In addition, in Gaoling County, a person with a Song Dynasty tattoo was caught. He had 71 tattoos on his body, and a message was tattooed on his left arm: "In the past, my family was not poor, I spent a lot of money to make friends."

古文：及至恓惶觅知己，行尽关山无一人。
现代文：及至恓惶觅知己，行尽关山无一人。
English: Even in the most desperate search for friends, there is no one who has gone all the way to the mountain.

古文：右膊上扎瓠芦，上扎出人首，如傀儡戏有郭公者。
现代文：右臂上刺了一个胡芦，胡芦的上面刺了一个人头，那人头就像木偶戏中郭公。
English: On his right arm, he has a hookah, and on top of the hookah, he has a human head, which resembles Guo Gong from the puppet show.

古文：县吏不解，问之，言胡芦精也。
现代文：县官不解其意，便问他，他说是胡芦精。
English: The county official was puzzled and asked him what it was. He said it was fenugreek essence.

古文：彭先觉
现代文：彭先觉
English: Peng Xian Jue

古文：周御史彭先觉，无面目。
现代文：周朝的御史彭先觉，是个没脸没皮的家伙。
English: Zhou Dynasty's Emperor Spen Xian Jue was a guy with no face and no skin.

古文：如意年中，断屠极急，先觉知巡事，定鼎门草车翻，得两羫羊。
现代文：如意年间，严禁屠宰牲畜，当时彭先觉正主管巡察监督之事。定鼎门因一辆草车翻倒，砸伤了两只羊，护门人便将此事告到御史那里。
English: During the Ruyi era, the slaughter of livestock was strictly prohibited. At that time, Peng Xian Jue was in charge of inspection and supervision. Dingding Gate was overturned by a grass cart, injuring two sheep, and the gatekeeper reported the matter to the historian.

古文：门家告御史，先觉进状奏请：合宫尉刘缅专当屠，不觉察，决一顿杖。
现代文：于是彭先觉就向皇帝进呈奏书，宫尉刘缅本当负责有关屠宰之事的，但并没有觉察到这件事，应惩他吃一顿棍棒。
English: As a result, Peng Xian Jue submitted a report to the emperor. Liu Meng, the palace lieutenant, was actually responsible for the slaughter, but he was not aware of it. He should be punished with a meal of sticks.

古文：肉付南衙官人食。
现代文：而羊肉要送给尚书省的官员们吃。
English: The mutton is to be given to the officials of Shangshu Province to eat.

古文：缅惶恐，缝新裤待罪。
现代文：刘缅很害怕，新做了一条裤子等待挨打。
English: Liu Meng was so scared that he made a new pair of trousers and waited to be beaten.

古文：明日，则天批曰：御史彭先觉，奏决刘缅，不须，其肉乞缅吃却。
现代文：第二天，武则天批示道：御史彭先觉奏书判决刘缅一事不妥。羊肉应给刘缅吃。
English: The next day, Wu Zetian gave the following instruction: the decision of Liu Meng, which was made by the imperial court, was not proper. The mutton should be given to Liu Meng to eat.

古文：举朝称快。先觉于是乎惭。
现代文：举朝称快，彭先觉因此很羞惭。
English: Peng Xian Jue felt very ashamed for being so quick to praise the morning.

古文：张德
现代文：张德
English: Zhang De

古文：周长寿中，断屠极切。
现代文：周朝长寿年间，武则天下令严禁屠宰牲畜。
English: During the long life of the Zhou Dynasty, the Wu Zetian decreed that the slaughter of livestock was strictly prohibited.

古文：左拾遗张德，妻诞一男。秘宰一口羊宴客。
现代文：左拾遗张德的妻子生了一个男孩，便偷偷地杀了一头羊宴请宾客。
English: After Zhang De's wife gave birth to a boy, he secretly killed a sheep to entertain guests.

古文：其日，命诸遗补。
现代文：那天，他请来了各位拾遗补阙。
English: That day, he invited everyone to come and pick up the pieces.

古文：杜肃私囊一餤肉，进状告之。
现代文：其中有个叫杜肃的人，饱吃一顿羊肉之后便写了状文向皇帝告发。
English: One of them, a man named Du Su, wrote a complaint to the emperor after eating a full meal of mutton.

古文：至明日，在朝前，则天谓张德曰：郎妻诞一男，大欢喜。
现代文：到了第二天，在朝堂上，武则天对张德说：你的妻子生了一个男孩，大欢大喜啊。
English: The next day, in the morning hall, Wu Zetian said to Zhang De, "Your wife has given birth to a boy. She is overjoyed."

古文：德拜谢。则天又谓曰：然何处得肉？
现代文：张德向武则天拜谢，武则天又道：可是肉从哪里弄到的？
English: Zhang De thanked Wu Zetian, and Wu Zetian said, "But where did you get the meat from?"

古文：德叩头称死罪。
现代文：张德叩头连称死罪。
English: Zhang De's kowtowing is punishable by death.

古文：则天曰：朕断屠，吉凶不预。
现代文：武则天道：我禁止宰杀牲畜，是吉是凶难以预测。
English: Wu Zetian: I prohibit the slaughter of livestock. It is difficult to predict whether it will be good or bad.

古文：卿命客，亦须择交。
现代文：可是你邀请客人，也该有选择地交往。
English: But when you invite guests, you should also selectively socialize.

古文：无赖之人，不须共聚集。
现代文：无赖之人，不能一起聚会。
English: Scoundrels don't hang out together.

古文：出肃状示之。肃流汗浃背。
现代文：之后拿出杜肃的状文给大家看，杜肃立即汗流浃背。
English: After that, he took out Du Su's letter and showed it to everyone. Du Su immediately broke into a sweat.

古文：举朝唾其面。
现代文：满朝官员都往他脸上唾唾沫。
English: Officials all over the country spit in his face.

古文：士子吞舍利
现代文：士子吞舍利
English: Shishi Tonsheri

古文：唐洛中，顷年有僧，以数粒所谓舍利者，贮于琉璃器中，昼夜香火。
现代文：唐朝时，在洛中州，近年来有个和尚把几粒舍利放在琉璃瓶中，日夜香火不断地祭祀。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, in Luozhong Prefecture, in recent years, there was a monk who put a few grains of sherry in a glass bottle and continuously offered incense day and night.

古文：檀越之礼，日无虚焉。
现代文：施主送的礼物，没有一天断过。
English: The gift given by the benefactor has not been broken for a day.

古文：有士子迫于寒馁，因请僧，愿得舍利，掌而观之。
现代文：有一个读书人，迫于饥寒，便去请求和尚说想要把舍利放在手上看一看。
English: One reader, forced by hunger and cold, went to ask the monk if he would like to put the relic in his hand and have a look.

古文：僧遂出瓶授与，即吞之。
现代文：和尚于是取出来拿给他看。那人接过舍利就一口吞下肚里。
English: The monk then took it out and showed it to him. The man took it and swallowed it whole.

古文：僧惶骇如狂，复虑闻之于外。
现代文：和尚惊恐如狂，又怕外面的人知道这件事。
English: The monk was terrified and afraid that people outside would find out about it.

古文：士子曰：与吾几钱，当服药出之。
现代文：那个书生道：你给我一些钱，我就服药把它快点泻出来。
English: The student said, "If you give me some money, I'll take some medicine and pour it out quickly."

古文：僧喜闻，遂赠二百缗。乃服巴豆。
现代文：于是那和尚送给他二百缗钱，他便服下巴豆。
English: So the monk gave him two hundred taels of money, and he wore a chinstrap.

古文：僧下泻取濯而收之。
现代文：那和尚等他泻下来后取出来清洗干净收藏起来。
English: The monk waited for him to vomit and then took it out, cleaned it and put it away.

古文：刘子振
现代文：刘子振
English: Liu Zizhen

古文：刘子振，蒲人。
现代文：刘子振，蒲州人。
English: Liu Zizhen, from Puzhou.

古文：颇富学业，而不知大体，尤好凌轹同道，诋讦公卿。
现代文：很有学问，然而不识大体，尤其喜好欺凌同事们，诋毁攻击那些身居高位的大官。
English: He is very learned, but he does not know the big picture. He especially likes to bully his colleagues, slander and attack high-ranking officials.

古文：不耻干索州县，稍不留意，立致寒暑。
现代文：他甚至不知羞耻地向州官县令们索要财物，稍不满意，便立即对人家冷嘲热讽。
English: He even shamelessly demanded money and property from state and county officials. Slightly dissatisfied, he immediately sneered at others.

古文：以至就试明庭，稠人广众，罕有与立谈者。
现代文：因而他去考场应试的时候，那么多人，竟很少有人与他交谈的。
English: So when he went to the examination hall to take the exam, there were so many people, but few people talked to him.

古文：刘允章知举岁，患举子纳卷繁多，榜云：纳卷不得过三卷，子振纳四十轴。
现代文：那一年是刘允章主持科举考试之事，因他忧虑举子们交上来的试卷太多，就张榜写道：交上来的卷子不能超过三卷，但刘子振必须交四十卷。
English: That year, it was Liu Yunzhang who presided over the imperial examinations. Because he was worried that the exam papers submitted by the candidates were too many, Zhang Bang wrote: The submitted papers cannot exceed three volumes, but Liu Zizhen must submit forty volumes.

古文：因之大掇凶誉。
现代文：因此遭到他凶猛的攻击。
English: As a result, he was violently attacked.

古文：荆州鬻札者
现代文：荆州鬻札者
English: The counterfeiters of Jingzhou

古文：荆州贞元中，市中有鬻札者，有印，上簇针为众物状，如蟾蝎鸟兽，随人所欲。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，在荆州的集市上，有卖札青工具的。那札具制作的像印章，印上用一簇小针围出各种东西的形状，如蛤蚂、蝎子、鸟、兽等等，应有尽有，你想要什么有什么。
English: During the first year of the Zhengyuan reign of the Tang Dynasty, in the market of Jingzhou, there was a seller of stamping tools. The stamping tools were made like seals, printed with a cluster of small needles to enclose the shapes of various things, such as grasshoppers, scorpions, birds, animals, etc. There was everything you wanted.

古文：一印之，刷以石墨，疮愈后，细于随永印。
现代文：用那札具在皮肤上刺印之后，再刷上石墨，等刺伤好了疮痂脱落之后，那印上去的图形会十分精致并会永久地保留下去。
English: After being imprinted on the skin with the stamping tool, and then brushed with graphite, after the wound has healed and the scab has fallen off, the imprinted image will be very delicate and will remain permanently.

