古文：九天使者十仙子二十七仙姚泓李卫
现代文：九天使者十仙子二十七仙姚泓李卫
English: Nine Angels, Ten Immortals, Twenty-seven Immortals

古文：公九天使者
现代文：公九天使者
English: The public nine angels are rising

古文：唐开元中，玄宗梦神仙羽卫，千乘万骑，集于空中。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，唐玄宗梦见了神仙的仪仗队，千乘万骑会集在空中。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty had a dream about an honor guard of immortals.

古文：有一人朱衣金冠，乘车而下，谒帝曰： 我九天采访，巡纠人间，欲于庐山西北，置一下宫，自有木石基址，但须工力而已。 
现代文：有一个人穿着红色衣服，戴着金色帽子，从车上下来，拜见唐玄宗说： 我是九天的采访使，到人间来巡查探访，想要在庐山的西北面盖一所下宫，木石基址已经有了，只是需要人力罢了。 
English: A man wearing red clothes and a gold hat got out of the car and said to Tang Xuanzong: "I am a nine-day interview envoy. I have come to the human world to inspect and visit. I want to build a lower palace on the northwest side of Lushan. The wood and stone foundation has already been built, but it needs manpower.

古文：帝即遣中使，诣山西北，果有基迹宛然。
现代文：唐玄宗就派中使到庐山西北去看，果然有基址在那里。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to the northwest of Lushan Mountain to have a look, and sure enough, the foundation site was there.

古文：信宿，有巨木数千段，自然而至，非人所运。
现代文：过了两宿，又有几千根大木头自然地到来，不是什么人所运来的。
English: After two nights, several thousand large logs arrived naturally, not transported by anyone.

古文：堂殿廊宇，随类致木，皆得足用。
现代文：按照殿、堂、廊、宇的不同需要，分别运来不同的木料，长短粗细都很适用。
English: According to the different needs of the hall, the hall, the corridor, and the room, different wood was transported separately, and the length and thickness are very suitable.

古文：或云，此木昔九江王所采，拟作宫殿，沉在江州湓浦；至是神人运来，以供所用。
现代文：有人说，这些木头是以前九江王采伐的，打算建造宫殿，沉没在江州湓水岸边，其实是神仙运来供使用的。
English: Some people say that these trees were once felled by the king of Jiujiang, who intended to build a palace, and sank on the shore of Jiangzhou Surabaya. In fact, they were transported by the gods for use.

古文：庙西长廊，柱础架虚，在巨涧之上。其下汨流奔响，泓窅不测，久历年岁，曾无危垫。
现代文：庙西的长廊，柱子架在空中，在大山涧的上面，它下面有奔流轰响的河水，深不可测，已经好多年了，从来没有危险发生。
English: The promenade to the west of the temple, with pillars in the air, on the top of a large mountain, with a rushing and roaring river below, is unfathomable. It has been many years, and there has never been any danger.

古文：初作庙时，材木并至，一夕巨万，皆有水痕。
现代文：当初盖庙的时候，木材是一齐来的，一天晚上就来了上万根，根根都有水痕。
English: When the temple was first built, all the lumber came together. One night, tens of thousands of logs arrived, with water marks all over them.

古文：门殿廊宇之基，自然化出，非人版筑。
现代文：门殿廊宇的基石，是自然变化出来的，并不是人筑造的。
English: The foundation stone of the vestibule corridor is a result of natural changes, not man-made.

古文：常有五色神光，照烛庙所，常如昼日。
现代文：曾经有五色的神光，照耀着要盖庙的地方，常常像白天一样。
English: There used to be five-colored divine light, shining on the place where the temple was to be built, often like daylight.

古文：挥斤运工，略无余暇，人力忘倦，旬日告成。
现代文：盖庙的时候，人们挥斧做工，一点不闲着，却谁也不疲倦，十来天就把庙盖了起来。
English: When the temple was being built, people worked with axes. They were not idle at all, but no one was tired. It took about ten days to build the temple.

古文：毕工之际，中使梦神人曰： 赭垩丹绿，庙北地中，寻之自得，勿须远求。 
现代文：完工的时候，中使梦见一个神仙对他说： 赭垩、丹、绿各种颜料，庙北的地下就有，找一找就能找到，不必到很远的地方去找。 
English: At the time of completion, the middle envoy dreamed of a fairy who said to him, "There are various pigments such as indigo, tan, and green in the underground of the north of the temple. If you look for them, you can find them. You don't have to go very far to find them."

古文：于是访之，采以充用，略无所缺。
现代文：于是中使派人寻找，挖回来使用，一点也不缺。
English: So the central government sent people to look for, dig back and use, there is no shortage at all.

古文：既而建昌渡有灵官五百余人，若衣道士服者，皆言诣使者庙。
现代文：后来建昌渡有五百多名仙官，好像穿着道士服的人，都说要到使者庙来。
English: Later, more than five hundred immortals in Jianchangdu, as if they were wearing Taoist robes, all said they wanted to come to the Envoy Temple.

古文：今图象存焉。
现代文：现在那图像还存在。
English: That image still exists today.

古文：初玄宗梦神人日，因召天台道士司马承祯，以访其事。
现代文：当初唐玄宗梦见神仙的那天，就找来了天台山的道士司马承祯，向他打听这事。
English: On the day when Tang Xuan Zong had a dream about a god, he sought out the Taoist of Tiantai Mountain, Sima Chengyu, and asked him about it.

古文：承祯奏曰： 今名山岳渎血食之神，以主祭祠，太上虑其妄作威福，以害蒸黎，分命上真，监莅川岳，有五岳真君焉。
现代文：太上老君担心他们作威作福而为害黎民百姓，分别派来上界的仙人，到名川岳监察他们。五岳有真君在那里，又有青城丈人为五岳之长。
English: Fearing that they were harming the people of Lai, the high lords separately sent hermits from the upper realm to inspect them at Mt. Nagawa. At Mt. Nagawa, Shinkun was there, and his father-in-law from Qingcheng was the head of Mt. Nagawa.

古文：又青城丈人为五岳之长，潜山九天司命立九天生籍，庐山九天使者执三天之符，弹劾万神，皆为五岳上司，盍各置庙，以斋食为飨。 
现代文：潜山的九天司命主管九天的生死簿籍；庐山九天使者执掌清微天、禹余天、大赤天等三天的令符，可弹劾所有的神仙。他们都是五岳的上司。何不各为他们盖上庙，用斋食犒赏他们呢？ 
English: The nine angels of Kuching are in charge of the nine-day book of life and death; the nine angels of Shaoshan are in charge of the three-day charters such as Qingwu Tian, Yuyu Tian, and Daecha Tian, and can impeach all the immortals. They are the bosses of the five mountains. Why not build a temple for each of them and reward them with fasting?

古文：玄宗从之。
现代文：唐玄宗听了他的话。
English: Tang Xuan Zong listened to his words.

古文：是岁，五岳三山，各置庙焉。
现代文：这一年五岳三山都盖起了庙。
English: In this year, temples were built on all five peaks and three mountains.

古文：十仙子
现代文：十仙子
English: The Ten Immortals

古文：唐玄宗尝梦仙子十余辈，御卿云而下列于庭，各执乐曲而奏之，其度曲清哉，真仙府之音也。
现代文：唐玄宗曾经梦见十多个仙子，驾着祥云下到庭院里站成一排，各拿着乐器演奏。那乐曲清越优美，真正是仙府里的声音。
English: Tang Xuan Zong once dreamed of more than ten fairies, and drove under the auspicious cloud to stand in a row in the courtyard, each holding a musical instrument to play. That music is more beautiful and beautiful, truly the voice of the fairyland.

古文：及乐阕，有一仙人前而言曰： 陛下知此乐乎？
现代文：等到音乐停止，有一位仙人上前说道： 陛下知道这是什么音乐吗？
English: When the music stopped, a fairy came forward and said, "Your Majesty, do you know what kind of music this is?"

古文：此神仙《紫云曲》也。今愿传授陛下，为圣唐正始音。与夫咸池大夏，固不同矣。 
现代文：这是神仙的《紫云曲》，现在愿意传授给陛下，作为大唐的标准的基本的音乐，和那《咸池》《大厦》等乐曲就大大不同了。 
English: This is the Divine Immortal's "Purple Cloud Music," which I am now willing to teach to Your Majesty, as the basic music of the standard of the Great Tang Dynasty, and it is very different from the music of "The Salt Pond" and "The Building."

古文：玄宗喜甚，即传受焉。
现代文：唐玄宗特别高兴，立即接受传授。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was particularly pleased and immediately accepted the teaching.

古文：俄而寤，其余响犹若在听。
现代文：不一会儿，他醒了，那音乐的余响还像在耳中。
English: A moment later, he woke up, the aftershocks of the music still ringing in his ears.

古文：玄宗遽命玉笛吹而习之，尽得其节奏；然嘿不泄。
现代文：他急忙拿起玉笛吹奏演习，完全掌握了那乐曲的节奏，但是他默默地记在心里，没有向别人泄露。
English: He hurriedly picked up the tambourine and played the drill, fully grasping the rhythm of the music, but he silently kept the melody in his heart and did not reveal it to others.

古文：及晓，听政于紫宸殿，宰臣姚崇、宋璟入，奏事于御前，玄宗俯若不闻。
现代文：等到天亮，他在紫宸殿听政，宰相姚崇、宋璟进来，向他奏报事情，他好像根本没听见。
English: At dawn, he was listening to the government in the Courtyard of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Cixi. The prime ministers Yao Chong and Song Tao came in and reported the situation to him, but he did not seem to hear at all.

古文：二相惧，又奏之。
现代文：二宰相害怕了，又奏报一遍。
English: The second prime minister got scared and reported it again.

古文：玄宗即起，卒不顾二相。
现代文：玄宗就站了起来，但他到底没理睬二相。
English: Xuanzong stood up, but he did not pay any attention to the two aspects.

古文：二相益恐，趋出。
现代文：二相更加害怕，急忙走出去。
English: The second phase was even more scared and hurried to go out.

古文：时高力士侍于玄宗，即奏曰： 宰相请事，陛下宜面决可否。
现代文：当时高力士侍立在玄宗身旁，立即奏道： 宰相请示事情，陛下应该当面决定，是否可行。
English: At that time, Koryoshi stood next to Hyunjong and immediately said, "Your Majesty should personally decide whether or not it is possible for you to do what the prime minister has requested."

古文：向者崇、璟所言，皆军国大政，而陛下卒不顾，岂二相有罪乎？ 
现代文：方才姚崇和宋璟说的，都是军政大事，而你始终不理，难道二相有罪了吗？ 
English: What Fangcai Yao Chong and Song Tao said are both military and political events, and you always ignore them. Are the two sides guilty?

古文：玄宗笑曰： 我昨夕梦仙人奏乐曰《紫云曲》，因以授我，我失其节奏，由是嘿而习之，故不暇听二相奏事。 
现代文：玄宗笑道： 我昨天夜里梦见仙人奏乐，曲名叫《紫云曲》，他们就把曲子传授给我。我怕忘了它的节奏，因此默默地在心里练习，所以顾不上听二位国相奏事。 
English: Xuanzong said with a smile, "Yesterday night, I dreamt of a fairy godmother playing a piece of music. The piece is called "Purple Cloud," and they taught the piece to me. I'm afraid of forgetting its rhythm, so I practiced silently in my heart, so I couldn't pay attention to listening to the two countries playing.

古文：即于衣中出玉笛，以示力士。
现代文：于是他从衣服里取出玉笛来给高力士看。
English: So he took out the jade flute from his clothes and showed it to Goliath.

古文：是日力士至中书，以事语于二相。二相惧少解。
现代文：这一天高力士来到中书省，把事情对二相讲了，二相的畏惧稍微消解了。
English: On this day, Gao Lixin came to the People's Republic of China and told the two sides about the situation. The fear of the two sides was slightly resolved.

古文：曲后传于乐府。
现代文：这支曲子后来传给了乐府。
English: This piece was later passed on to the Music Office.

古文：二十七仙
现代文：二十七仙
English: Twenty-seven Immortals

古文：唐开元中，玄宗皇帝昼景宴居，昏然思寐，梦二十七仙人云： 我等二十八宿也，一人寓直，在天不下。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，玄宗皇帝在白天宴居昏昏欲睡，梦见二十七位仙人对他说： 我们是天上的二十八宿，一个人因为值班，在天上不能下来。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong was drowsy from feasting during the day. He dreamt of twenty-seven sages who said to him, "We are the twenty-eight mansions in the sky. One person cannot come down from the sky because he is on duty."

古文：我等寄罗底间三年矣，与陛下镇护国界，不令戎虏侵边。
现代文：我们寄住在罗底间三年了，一直给陛下镇护国界，不让外寇侵扰边疆。
English: We have been living in Lodi for three years, and we have been guarding the national borders for His Majesty, not allowing foreign invaders to invade the border.

古文：众仙每易形混迹游处耳。 
现代文：众神仙常常改换形貌混迹在人群中到处游玩。 
English: The gods and goddesses often change their appearance to blend in with the crowd and play around.

古文：既寤，敕天下山川郡县，有 罗底 字处访之，竟不能得。
现代文：醒了之后，他就下令全国，寻找那个叫 罗底 的地方，到底也没找到。
English: When he woke up, he ordered the whole country to search for that place called Lodi, but they never found it.

古文：他夕又梦云： 有音乐处是也。 
现代文：改天的夜里又梦见二十八宿对他说， 罗底 在一个有音乐的地方。
English: The next night, he dreamed of the twenty-eight mansions again and said to him, "Lodi is a place where there is music.

古文：再诏访焉。
现代文：于是他就又下令寻找。
English: So he ordered another search.

古文：于宁州东南五里，有地名罗川，川上有县，县以川名。
现代文：在宁州东南五里的地方，有个地方叫罗川，川中有县，县是以川名命名的。
English: In a place five miles southeast of Ningzhou, there is a place called Luo River. There is a county in the river, and the county is named after the river.

古文：有罗州山，相传有洞穴，而翳荟不通。樵牧者闻音乐之声。
现代文：还有个罗州山，相传山中有洞穴，而且草木荫翳不通，打柴的放牧的听到里边有音乐之声。
English: There is also a mountain in Luozhou. According to legend, there is a cave in the mountain, and the shade of the trees and plants is not transparent. The herdsmen who collect firewood hear the sound of music inside.

古文：诏使寻之，久而不见。
现代文：唐玄宗下令派人寻找这个地方，找了很久也没找到。
English: Tang Xuan Zong ordered to send people to search for this place, but they did not find it for a long time.

古文：忽有白兔出于林中，径入崖下。寻所入而得嵌窦焉。
现代文：忽然有一只白兔从林中跑出来，直接跑进一座山崖下边，寻找兔子跑入的地方找到了一个洞口。
English: Suddenly, a white rabbit ran out of the forest and ran straight into the bottom of a cliff. Looking for the place where the rabbit ran into, he found a hole.

古文：石室宽博，中有石像二十七真，得之以进。乃于内殿设位，晨夕焚香，躬自瞻谒。
现代文：进洞一看，这是一个宽敞的石室，里边有二十七尊石像。于是就把这二十七尊石像运进宫中，在殿内为它们设了位置，早晚烧香。皇帝还亲自来瞻仰拜谒。
English: When he looked into the cave, he saw that it was a spacious stone chamber with twenty-seven stone statues inside. So he transported the twenty-seven stone statues into the palace, set up a place for them in the hall, and burned incense in the morning and evening. The emperor himself also came to pay homage.

古文：命夹紵工作二十七像，送于本洞。于其处置通圣观，改县为真宁以旌之。
现代文：皇帝又让夹印花工仿制了二十七尊神像，送回原来的洞里，在那地方盖起了通圣观，改罗川县为真宁县，用来表彰这个地方。
English: The emperor also had the copyist make twenty-seven statues of deities, sent them back to the original cave, and built the Tong Sheng Gu in that place, changing Luochuan County to Janning County to commend this place.

古文：赐宝香及炉，炉今犹在。
现代文：又赐了宝香和香炉，香炉至今还在。
English: He also gave them precious incense and an incense burner, which is still there.

古文：乡里之人言： 昔年有底老者，不知所来，庞眉皓发，异于他叟。或出或处，乡俗咸敬之。
现代文：本地的人说，往年有一位底老人，不知他从什么地方来。他眉毛花白，头发雪白，与其他老头不同，有时外出，有时静处，乡里人都敬重他。
English: Local people said that in previous years, there was an old man, I don't know where he came from. His eyebrows were gray, his hair was white, unlike other old men, sometimes he went out, sometimes he was quiet, and the villagers respected him.

古文：于山下卖酒，常有异人来饮。
现代文：他在山下卖酒，常常有些跟普通人不同的人来喝酒。
English: He sells alcohol at the foot of the mountain and often has people who are different from ordinary people come to drink.

古文：或药童樵父，来往其家。
现代文：有的药童和樵夫，也来往于他家。
English: Some druggists and widowers also came and went at his house.

古文：一旦众人谓底老曰： 加其酝，更一饮，不复来矣。 
现代文：一天早晨众异人对他说： 加酒啊，再喝一回，以后不再来了！ 
English: One morning, the strangers said to him: "Take another drink, and don't come back!"

古文：如其言，加酿以待焉。
现代文：像他们说的那样，他加酒招待他们。
English: He plied them with wine, as they say.

古文：酿熟，群仙果至，饮酣，居下者一人，与坐云： 我请刻众仙之形，以留于世。 
现代文：酒烫好之后，群仙果然来了。喝到酣畅的时候，在下边的一个人来到座间说： 我要刻下众仙人的像留于后世。 
English: After the wine had been heated, the fairies did indeed arrive. When the drinking was well under way, a man from downstairs came to the seating area and said: I want to carve the images of the fairies for posterity.

古文：乃取石二十七片。刻成二十七人。俄顷之间，备得众仙真容，置于洞中，依饮时列坐。皆志仙之名氏于其背。安讫而散去。
现代文：于是他取出二十七块石片，刻成了二十七个人，顷刻之间，完全刻出了众仙人的逼真容貌，放在洞中，按照喝酒时的座次排列，全都在后面记上他们的名字，安放完了便散去。
English: So he took out twenty-seven pieces of stone, carved them into twenty-seven people, and in an instant, completely carved out the lifelike appearance of the fairies, placed them in the cave, arranged them according to the seating order when drinking, wrote their names on the back of all of them, placed them and then dispersed.

古文：底老亦不复知所之。时人咸谓仙举也。
现代文：底老也不知去了哪里，当时人们都认为他成仙飞升了。
English: Di Lao didn't know where he had gone either. At the time, people thought he had become an immortal.

古文：底老者，疑其氐宿耳。后著作郎东门诰，为赞序以纪之。
现代文：底老，人们怀疑他是二十八宿中的氐宿，后来著作郎东门诰，写了赞序记下了这件事。
English: Di Lao, people suspected that he was one of the twenty-eight lodgings, and later he wrote the book "Langdongmen" and wrote a praise sequence to record the matter.

古文：姚泓
现代文：姚泓
English: Yao Wei

古文：唐太宗年，有禅师行道精高，居于南岳。
现代文：唐太宗的时候，有一位禅师的道术精明高超。他住在南岳。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong of Tang, there was a Zen master who was highly skilled in the art of Taoism. He lived in Nanyue.

古文：忽一日。见一物人行而来，直至僧前，绿毛覆体。
现代文：忽然有一天，有一个东西像人那样走来，直接来到他的面前。
English: Suddenly, one day, there was something that walked like a man and came directly in front of him.

古文：禅师惧，谓为枭之属也；细视面目，即如人也。
现代文：那东西一身绿毛遮盖着身体，禅师有些害怕，以为是枭一类动物。仔细看了看面目，那东西像人。
English: The Zen master was a little scared of the creature, which was covered in green fur, and thought it was an animal such as a baboon. When he took a closer look at its face, the creature looked human.

古文：僧乃问曰： 檀越为山神耶？野兽耶？
现代文：禅师就问道： 施主是山神呢，还是野兽呢？
English: The Zen master then asked: Is the donor a mountain god or a wild beast?

古文：复乃何事而特至此？
现代文：你又是为了何事来到这里？
English: What are you here for again?

古文：贫道禅居此地，不扰生灵，神有知，无相恼也。 
现代文：贫僧住在此地，不打扰生灵，神有知，就不会恼恨我。 
English: The poor monk lives here and does not disturb living beings. If God has knowledge, He will not be angry with me.

古文：良久，其物合掌而言曰： 今是何代？ 
现代文：许久，那东西合掌说道： 现在是什么朝代？ 
English: For a long time, the thing clasped its hands and said: What dynasty is it now?

古文：僧曰： 大唐也？ 
现代文：和尚说： 现在是唐朝。 
English: The monk said, "This is the Tang Dynasty.

古文：又曰： 和尚知晋宋乎？
现代文：那人又说： 和尚您知道晋朝和南北朝的宋吗？
English: The man also said: Monk, do you know the Song Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty and the Northern and Southern Dynasties?

古文：自不知有姚泓乎？ 
现代文：从那时到现在是多少年了？ 和尚说： 从晋朝到现在，将近四百年了。 
English: How many years has it been since then? The monk said, "From the Jin Dynasty to now, it's been nearly four hundred years.

古文：僧曰： 知之。 物曰： 我即泓也。 
现代文：那人就说： 和尚您博古知今，难道不知道有个姚泓吗？ 和尚说： 知道。 
English: The man said, "Monk, you know so much about the past, don't you know that there was a Yao Jie?" The monk said, "I know.

古文：僧曰： 吾览晋史，言姚泓为刘裕所执，迁姚宗于江南，而斩泓于建康市。
现代文：那人说： 我就是姚泓。 和尚说： 我看《晋史》，那上面说姚泓被刘裕捉住，把姚氏宗族迁移到江南，而在建康市上把姚泓斩了。
English: The man said, "I am Yao Yao." The monk said, "I read the "History of Jin," and it says that Yao Yao was captured by Liu Yu, who moved the Yao clan to the south of the Yangtze River and beheaded Yao Yao in Jiankang City.

古文：据其所记，泓则死矣，何至今日子复称为姚泓耶！ 
现代文：根据这种记载，姚泓已经死了，为什么到了今天，你还说自己是姚泓呢？ 
English: According to this record, Yao Wei has already died. Why do you still say that you are Yao Wei today?

古文：泓曰： 当尔之时，我国实为裕所灭，送我于建康市，以徇天下；奈何未及肆刑，我乃脱身逃匿。
现代文：姚泓说： 在那个时候，我国确实被刘裕所灭，把我送到建康市上，向天下示众。他们哪知道未到行刑，我就逃跑藏起来了。
English: Yao Yao said: At that time, our country was indeed annihilated by Liu Yu, and he sent me to Jiankang City to show it to the world. Little did they know that before the execution, I would run away and hide.

古文：裕既求我不得，遂假一人貌类我者斩之，以立威声，示其后耳。
现代文：刘裕既然找不到我，就找一个相貌像我的人杀掉，以保住自己的威名，给以后的人看罢了。
English: Since Liu Yu couldn't find me, he had to find someone who looked like me and kill him in order to preserve his reputation and show it to future generations.

古文：我则实泓之本身也。 
现代文：我确实是姚泓本人。 
English: I am indeed Yao Xuan himself.

古文：僧因留坐，语之曰： 史之说岂虚言哉？
现代文：和尚于是留他坐下，对他说： 史书上说的，难道是假话吗？ 
English: The monk then sat him down and said to him, "Is it true what the history books say?

古文：泓笑曰： 和尚岂不闻汉有淮南王刘安乎，其实升仙，而迁、固状以叛逆伏诛。
现代文：姚泓笑道： 和尚你难道不知道汉朝有个淮南王刘安吗？他其实已经飞升成仙，而司马迁和班固写他叛逆被杀。
English: Yao Yao laughed: Monk, don't you know that there was a King of Huainan, Liu An, in the Han Dynasty? In fact, he had already ascended to immortality, but Sima Qian and Ban Gu wrote that he was killed for his rebellion.

古文：汉史之妄，岂复逾于后史耶？
现代文：汉史的荒谬之处，难道还能超过后来的史书吗？
English: Can the absurdity of Han history surpass that of later history books?

古文：斯则史氏妄言之证也。
现代文：这就是史学家说错话的证据。
English: This is proof that the historians are wrong.

古文：我自逃窜山野，肆意游行，福地静庐，无不探讨。
现代文：我自从逃进山野，肆意地游玩，福地静庐，没有不去探索的。
English: Since I escaped into the mountains, I have been playing freely, the land is blessed with tranquility, and there is nothing I would not like to explore.

古文：既绝火食，远陟此峰，乐道逍遥，唯餐松柏之叶。
现代文：断绝烟火饭食之后，后来登上这座山峰，乐于修道，日日逍遥，只吃松柏树的叶子。
English: After breaking off the fireworks meal, he later ascended this mountain peak, happy to practice, day after day, eating only the leaves of the pine tree.

古文：年深代久，遍身生此绿毛，已得长生不死之道矣。 
现代文：年长日久，遍身长出了绿毛，已经得到了长生不死的道术了。
English: As he grew older, green hair sprouted all over his body, and he had already obtained the Taoism of immortality.

古文：僧又曰： 食松柏之叶，何至生毛若是乎？ 
现代文：和尚又说： 吃松柏的叶子，怎么至于长出这样多的绿毛呢？ 
English: The monk also said, "If you eat the leaves of conifers, how can you grow so much green hair?"

古文：泓曰： 昔秦宫人遭乱避世，入太华之峰，饵其松柏，岁祀浸久，体生碧毛尺余。
现代文：姚泓说： 以前秦朝宫中的一个女人遭到战乱，避世逃进了太华山，吃那里的松柏叶子，时间渐久，她身上长出了一尺多长的绿毛。
English: Yao Wei said: In the past, a woman in the palace of the Qin Dynasty was caught up in a war, and she fled to Mount Taihua to escape the world. She ate the leaves of the conifers there, and over time, she grew more than a foot of green hair.

古文：或逢世人，人自惊异，至今谓之毛女峰。
现代文：有时候她遇上世人，人们自然都感到惊奇。那地方至今还叫毛女峰。
English: Sometimes, when she meets people, they are naturally surprised. That place is still called Mao Meifeng.

古文：且上人颇信古，岂不详信之乎？ 
现代文：况且上人你很相信古人，难道不相信这件事吗？ 
English: Besides, Master, you have great faith in the ancients. Don't you believe in this matter?

古文：僧因问请须所食。
现代文：和尚于是就问姚泓想要吃点什么。
English: The monk then asked Yao Jun what he wanted to eat.

古文：泓言： 吾不食世间之味久矣，唯饮茶一瓯。 
现代文：姚泓说： 我不吃人世间的食物已经很久了。只喝了一杯茶。 
English: Yao Yao said: I haven't eaten human food for a long time. I only drank a cup of tea.

古文：仍为僧陈晋宋历代之事，如指诸掌。
现代文：他仍然给和尚讲晋朝和南北朝宋的事，就像说着手掌纹那样讲得很清楚。
English: He still told the monk about the Jin Dynasty and the Northern and Southern Dynasties of the Song Dynasty, as clearly as if he were talking about the palm print of the hand.

古文：更有史氏阙而不书者，泓悉备言之。
现代文：还有一些史家缺漏没写的，他全都讲得很详细。
English: There are also some gaps that historians have not written about, and he describes them all in great detail.

古文：既而辞僧告去，竟不复见耳。
现代文：然后他向和尚告别，以后就没有再见到他。
English: He then said goodbye to the monk and never saw him again.

古文：李卫公
现代文：李卫公
English: Li Weigong

古文：苏州常熟县元阳观单尊师，法名以清。
现代文：苏州常熟县元阳观里有一位单尊师，法名叫以清。
English: There is a single venerable teacher in the Wanyang Monastery in Changshu County, Suzhou, whose Dharma name is Yixing.

古文：大历中，常往嘉兴。入船中，闻香气颇甚，疑有异人。
现代文：大历年间，有一次他到嘉兴去，走进船中，闻到一股很大的香气，怀疑船中有奇异的人。
English: During the year of the great calendar, he once went to Jiaxing, walked into the ship, smelled a great aroma, and suspected that there were strange people on the ship.

古文：遍目舟中客，皆贾贩之徒，唯船头一人，颜色颇殊，旨趣恬静。
现代文：他把船中人逐个打量，见他们全都是商贩之类的人物，只有船头上的一个人，模样很是与众不同，性格很恬静。
English: He looked at the people in the boat one by one and saw that they were all merchants and the like, only one person on the bow of the boat, very different in appearance and very quiet in personality.

古文：单君至中路，告船人，令易席座船头，就与言也。
现代文：单尊师走到半路上，告诉船家，把他的坐席换到船头上去，想靠近那个人说话。
English: Mr. Shan walked to the middle of the road and told the boatman to change his seat to the bow, wanting to get closer to the man and talk to him.

古文：既并席之后，香气亦甚。
现代文：二人的坐席靠近之后，单尊师闻到更大的香气。
English: After the two people's seats were closer, the single teacher smelled a greater aroma.

古文：单君因从容问之。
现代文：单尊师于是从容地问那人。
English: So the Venerable Master calmly asked the man to leave.

古文：答曰： 某本此地人也，少染大风，眉发皆落，自恶不已，遂私逃于深山，意任虎豹所食。
现代文：那人回答说： 我本来就是这地方人，小时候得上了麻疯病，眉毛头发全掉了，自己也很厌恶自己，就私自逃进深山，打算是让虎豹吃掉算了。
English: The man replied, "I am originally from this area. When I was a child, I contracted leprosy and lost all my eyebrow hair. I was so disgusted with myself that I secretly fled into the mountains, intending to be eaten by a leopard.

古文：数日，山路转深，都无人迹。忽遇一老人问曰： 子何人也，远入山谷。 
现代文：走了几天，山路渐渐转深，全都没有人迹了，忽然遇上一位老人问我说： 你是什么人？为什么大老远跑到山里来？ 
English: After walking for a few days, the mountain road gradually deepened, and there were no traces left. Suddenly, I met an old man who asked me: Who are you? Why did you come all the way to the mountains?

古文：某具述本意。
现代文：我详细地说明了本意。
English: I explained my intentions in detail.

古文：老人哀之。视曰： 汝疾得吾，今能差矣。可随吾行。 
现代文：老人可怜地看着我说： 你的病遇上我，现在就能好。你可以跟着我走。 
English: The old man looked at me pitifully and said, "Your illness can only get better now that I'm here. You can follow me."

古文：因随老人行，入山十余里，至一涧，过水十余步，豁然广阔，有草堂数间。
现代文：于是我跟着老人走。进山十几里，来到一处山涧。渡过涧水十几步，山谷豁然广阔了，出现了几间草房。
English: So I followed the old man. A dozen miles into the mountains, we came to a mountain pass. A dozen steps across the stream, the valley suddenly widened, and several grass huts appeared.

古文：老人曰： 汝未可便入，且于此堂中待一月日，后吾自来看汝。 
现代文：老人说： 你不能马上就进去，暂且在这草房里住上一个来月，以后我自然会来看你。 
English: The old man said, "You can't go in right away, just stay in this grass hut for the next month, and then I'll naturally come to see you."

古文：因遗丸药一裹，令服之。
现代文：于是老人送给我一包丸药，让我服用。
English: So the old man gave me a pack of pills and told me to take them.

古文：又云： 此堂中有黄精、百合、茯苓、薯蓣、枣、栗、苏、蜜之类，恣汝所食。 
现代文：他又说： 这草房里有黄精、百合、茯苓、薯蓣、枣、栗子、苏子、蜂蜜等东西，你随便吃。 
English: He also said, "This herb garden has things like astragalus, cucumbers, lilies, thistles, yams, dates, chestnuts, plums, and honey. You can eat whatever you like.

古文：某入堂居，老人遂行，更入深去。
现代文：我进屋住下，老人就走了，向更深的山中走去。
English: I went into the house to stay and the old man left, heading deeper into the mountains.

古文：某服药后，亦不饥渴，但觉身轻。
现代文：我吃了药之后，也不知饥渴。只觉得身体很轻。
English: After I took the medicine, I didn't feel hungry or thirsty. I just felt very light.

古文：如是凡经两月日，老人方至。
现代文：如此过了两个来月，老人才来。
English: It took two months for the old man to come.

古文：见其人笑曰： 尔尚在焉，不亦有心哉！
现代文：他见了我便笑道： 你还在这儿呢？这不也是很有恒心吗？
English: When he saw me, he smiled and said, "You're still here? Isn't that also perseverance?

古文：汝疾已差，知乎？ 曰： 不知。 
现代文：你的病已经好了，知道吗？ 我说： 不知道。 
English: Your illness is over, you know? I said: I don't know.

古文：老人曰： 于水照之。 
现代文：老人说： 到水边上照照！ 
English: The old man said, "Go to the water's edge and shine!"

古文：鬓眉皆生矣，色倍少好。
现代文：我去一照，见头发眉毛全长出来了，颜色比小时候更好。
English: When I went to take a picture, I saw that all my hair and eyebrows had grown out, and the color was better than when I was a child.

古文：老人曰： 汝未合久居此。
现代文：老人说： 你不应该长住在这里。
English: The old man said, "You shouldn't stay here.

古文：既服吾药，不但祛疾，可长生人间矣。
现代文：吃了我的药之后，不只治病，还能长生不老呢！
English: After taking my medicine, not only can I cure my illness, but I can also live forever!

古文：且修行道术，与汝二十年后为期。 
现代文：你要好好修行道术，二十年之后再和你相见。 
English: You should do a good job of practicing Taoism, and I'll see you again in twenty years.

古文：因令却归人间。
现代文：于是他让我回到人间。
English: So he brought me back to life.

古文：临别，某拜辞曰： 不审仙圣复何姓名，愿垂告示。 
现代文：临别的时候，我拜辞说： 不知道老神仙的姓名，希望老神仙告诉我。 
English: At the time of parting, I bowed and said: I do not know the name of the old god, I hope the old god will tell me.

古文：老人曰： 子不闻唐初卫公李靖否！
现代文：老人说： 你没听说唐朝初期的卫公李靖吗？
English: The old man said, "Didn't you hear that Li Jing, the prince of Wei, died in the early Tang Dynasty?

古文：即吾身是也。 
现代文：那就是我呀！ 
English: That's me!

古文：乃辞出山。
现代文：于是我辞别他出山而来。
English: So I said goodbye to him and came out of the mountains.

古文：今以所修恐未合圣旨，年限将及，再入山寻师耳。 
现代文：现在因为我修行的恐怕不符合老神仙的旨意，年限要到了，再进山寻找老师罢了。 
English: Now, because I am afraid that my practice is not in line with the will of the old god, the time limit is coming, so I just have to go into the mountains to find a teacher.

古文：单君因记其事，为人说之。
现代文：单尊师于是便记录了此事，对人说起过这件事。
English: So he recorded it and told people about it.

