古文：徐湛之，字孝源，东海郯人。
现代文：徐湛之，字孝源，东海郯人。
English: Xu Zhanzhi, surnamed Xiaoyuan, was born in the East China Sea.

古文：司徒羡之兄孙，吴郡太守佩之弟子也。
现代文：司徒徐羡之哥哥的孙子，吴郡太守徐佩之弟弟的儿子。
English: He was the grandson of the elder brother of Stu Xu En, and the son of the younger brother of Wu County Governor Xu Pei.

古文：祖钦之，秘书监。父逵之，尚高祖长女会稽公主，为振威将军、彭城、沛二郡太守。
现代文：祖父徐钦之，秘书监；父亲徐达之，娶的是高祖的长女永兴公主，任振武将军、彭城、沛两郡太守。
English: Grandfather Xu Qinzhi, secretary supervisor; father Xu Dazhi, married the eldest daughter of Gao Zu, Princess Yongxing, served as Zhenwu General, Pengcheng, and Pei County Governor.

古文：高祖诸子并幼，以逵之姻戚，将大任之，欲先令立功。
现代文：高祖儿子们还年幼，因与达之有姻亲关系，要重用他，就想让他先立功。
English: Gao Zu's sons are still young, and since they are related to Dazhi by marriage, if they want to make heavy use of him, they want him to make a contribution first.

古文：及讨司马休之，使统军为前锋，配以精兵利器，事克，当即授荆州。
现代文：高祖讨伐司马休之时，让他统领军队作前锋，给他配备了强兵利器；胜利了的话，就将荆州封给他。
English: When Gaozu fought against Sima Xiu, he let him lead the army as a forward, and equipped him with strong soldiers and sharp weapons; if he won, he would give him Jingzhou.

古文：休之遣鲁宗之子轨击破之，于阵见害。
现代文：司马休之派鲁宗之的儿子鲁轨打败了徐达之，达之自己也在战斗中被杀。
English: Sima Xiu's son Lu Lu defeated Xu Dazhi, who was also killed in the battle.

古文：追赠中书侍郎。
现代文：高祖追赠他为中书侍郎。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Chusho-sajiro (chamberlain) by the founder of the school.

古文：湛之幼孤，为高祖所爱，常与江夏王义恭寝食不离于侧。
现代文：湛之幼年时便成了孤儿，深得高祖宠爱，常和江夏王刘义恭呆在高祖身边，寝食不离。
English: Zhan Zhi became an orphan when he was young. He was deeply loved by Gao Zu. He often stayed with Liu Yikong, the King of Jiangxia, at Gao Zu's side, sleeping and eating together.

古文：永初三年，诏曰： 永兴公主一门嫡长，早罹辛苦。
现代文：永初三年，高祖下诏： 永兴公主是我的嫡亲长女，早年遭遇不幸。
English: In the third year of the Yongchu era, Gao Zu issued a decree: Princess Yongxing is my eldest daughter, who suffered misfortune in her early years.

古文：外孙湛之，特所钟爱。
现代文：外孙湛之，尤为我宠爱，可封他为枝江县侯，食邑五百户。 
English: My grandson, Zhan Zhi, is a particular favorite of mine. He could be named the lord of Shejiang County, which has more than 500 households.

古文：且致节之胤，情实兼常。可封枝江县侯，食邑五百户。 年数岁，与弟淳之共车行，牛奔车坏，左右驰来赴之。湛之先令取弟，众咸叹其幼而有识。
现代文：几年后，一次他和弟弟徐淳之一起坐车，牛受惊，车子遇险，下人飞奔前来救他们，湛之让人们先救弟弟下车，众人都惊叹他年纪虽小却有识见。
English: A few years later, he and one of his younger brothers, Xu Chun, were once riding in a car. The cow was frightened, the car was in danger, the underlings rushed to save them, and Zhan Zhi let people get off the car first to save his younger brother. Everyone was amazed that he was young but had insight.

古文：及长，颇涉大义，善自位待。
现代文：湛之长大后，十分喜欢钻研文义。
English: After growing up, Zhan Zhi was very fond of studying literature.

古文：事祖母及母，并以孝谨闻。
现代文：侍奉祖母、母亲以孝敬闻名。
English: He served his grandmother, and his mother was known for her filial piety.

古文：元嘉二年，除著作佐郎，员外散骑侍郎，并不就。
现代文：元嘉二年，他被任命为著作佐郎，员外散骑侍郎，他未接受。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Jia era, he was appointed to the post of Zhuozhongzaro, and he did not accept it.

古文：六年，东宫始建，起家补太子洗马，转国子博士，迁奋威将军、南彭城、沛二郡太守，徙黄门侍郎。
现代文：元嘉六年，开始修建东宫，他始任补太子洗马，转任国子博士，后任奋威将军，南彭城、沛二郡太守，又调黄门侍郎。
English: In the sixth year of Yuan Jia, he began to build the East Palace. He first served as Prince Fufu's horse-washing, then as Dr. Kuniko, and later as General Fenwei, the governor of Nan Pengcheng and Pei Er County, and also as the Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：祖母年老，辞以朝直，不拜。
现代文：因祖母年老，辞去官职。
English: He resigned from his post because of his grandmother's old age.

古文：复授二郡，加辅国将军，迁秘书监，领右军将军，转侍中，加骁骑将军。
现代文：又被授予二郡太守，加辅国将军，调秘书监，领右军将军，转任侍中，加骁骑将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of the governor of two counties, the general of Gaifu Province, the inspector of the secretary of transfer, the general leading the right army, the transfer to the position of the chamberlain, and the general of the horse cavalry.

古文：复为秘书监，加散骑常侍，骁骑如故。
现代文：又任秘书监，加散骑常侍，骁骑将军职位不变。
English: He will also serve as secretary supervisor, and will add some riding attendants. The position of riding general will remain unchanged.

古文：会稽公主身居长嫡，为太祖所礼，家事大小，必咨而后行。
现代文：会稽公主是高祖的嫡长女儿，被太祖敬重礼遇，家事无论大小，一定先征求她的意见再实行。
English: Princess Kieki was the eldest daughter of Emperor Gaozu. She was treated with great respect and courtesy by Emperor Gaozu. No matter how big or small the household chores were, she was always consulted before they were carried out.

古文：西征谢晦，使公主留止台内，总摄六宫。
现代文：太祖西征谢晦时，让公主留守京城，统管六宫之事。
English: At the end of the Western Expedition, Emperor Taizu asked the princess to stay in the capital and take charge of the affairs of the Six Palaces.

古文：忽有不得意，辄号哭，上甚惮之。
现代文：公主稍有不如意就号哭，太祖十分惧怕她。
English: The princess would cry if she didn't get what she wanted, and her grandfather was very afraid of her.

古文：初，高祖微时，贫陋过甚，尝自往新洲伐荻，有纳布衫袄等衣，皆敬皇后手自作；高祖既贵，以此衣付公主，曰： 后世若有骄奢不节者，可以此衣示之。 
现代文：当初高祖没有富贵时非常贫穷，曾亲自在新洲砍荻草，有打补丁的衣裳都是敬皇后亲手缝制的。高祖显贵后将一件补丁衣裳交给公主说： 后代子孙如果骄纵奢侈而无节制，可将它拿给他们看。 
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu was very poor when he was not rich. He used to personally chop rushes in Xinzhou. The patched clothes were all sewn by hand in honor of the queen. Gao Zu handed a patched dress to the princess and said: If future generations indulge in luxury and excess, they can show it to them.

古文：湛之为大将军彭城王义康所爱，与刘湛等颇相附协。
现代文：湛之被大将军彭城王义康宠幸，并和刘湛等人十分投合。
English: Zhan Zhi was favored by the great general Peng Cheng Wang Yikang and got along very well with Liu Zhan and others.

古文：及刘湛得罪，事连湛之，太祖大怒，将致大辟。
现代文：到刘湛犯罪时，事情牵连到湛之，太祖大怒，要处之以极刑。
English: When Liu Zhan committed a crime, the matter implicated Zhan, the great-grandfather was furious, and he was to be punished with capital punishment.

古文：湛之忧惧无计，以告公主。
现代文：湛之既担忧又害怕没有法子，只有去求母亲。
English: Both worried and scared, Zhan Zhi had no choice but to ask her mother for help.

古文：公主即日入宫，既见太祖，因号哭下床，不复施臣妾之礼。
现代文：公主当日就进宫，见了太祖后，也不对太祖行礼，只大声哭闹。
English: The princess entered the palace on the same day, and after seeing the great-grandfather, she did not bow to the great-grandfather, but only cried loudly.

古文：以锦囊盛高祖纳衣，掷地以示上曰： 汝家本贫贱，此是我母为汝父作此纳衣。
现代文：她用一锦袋装着高祖的补丁衣裳，将衣裳掷在地上给太祖看，并说： 你们家本来贫穷低贱，这是我母亲为你父亲缝的衣裳。
English: She picked up Gao Zu's patched clothes in a brocade bag, threw the clothes on the ground for her grandfather to see, and said, "Your family was originally poor and humble. This is the clothes my mother sewed for your father."

古文：今日有一顿饱食，便欲残害我兒子！ 
现代文：如今有一顿饱饭就要杀我的儿子啊！ 
English: Now a full meal is going to kill my son!

古文：上亦号哭，湛之由此得全也。
现代文：太祖也哭起来，湛之因之得以保全性命。
English: The great-grandfather also began to cry, and because of this, Zhan was able to save his life.

古文：迁中护军，未拜，又迁太子詹事，寻加侍中。
现代文：调任中护军未接受，又调任太子詹事，不久又加侍中。
English: He was transferred to the position of Prince Zhanji, and was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：湛之善于尺牍，音辞流暢。
现代文：湛之擅长写公文，文辞顺达，音节流畅。
English: Zhan Zhi is good at writing official documents, his words are smooth and his syllables are fluent.

古文：贵戚豪家，产业甚厚。
现代文：作为皇亲国戚富豪之家，其家业非常庞大厚实。
English: As the home of a wealthy relative of the imperial family, the family business is very large and substantial.

古文：室宇园池，贵游莫及。
现代文：楼台园林，贵族中无人赶得上他。
English: No one among the aristocrats can match him.

古文：伎乐之妙，冠绝一时。
现代文：他府里歌伎美妙，冠绝当时。
English: The kabuki in his prefecture was wonderful, the best at the time.

古文：门生千余人，皆三吴富人之子，姿质端妍，衣服鲜丽。
现代文：有门生一千多人，都是三吴富家子弟，个个气质端庄美丽，服饰华美。
English: There are more than a thousand disciples, all of whom are the sons and daughters of rich families in Sanwu. All of them are dignified and beautiful, and their clothes are gorgeous.

古文：每出入行游，途巷盈满，泥雨日，悉以后车载之。
现代文：每当他出行，门生随从挤满了道路。碰到雨天，道路泥泞，则全乘车子。
English: Whenever he travels, his entourage fills the roads. When it rains and the roads are muddy, they all travel by car.

古文：太祖嫌其侈纵，每以为言。
现代文：太祖嫌他太奢侈放纵，常常劝说他。
English: His great-grandfather thought he was too extravagant and often tried to persuade him.

古文：时安成公何勖，无忌之子也，临汝公孟灵休，昶之子也，并各奢豪，与湛之共以肴膳、器服、车马相尚。
现代文：当时无忌的儿子安成公何勖、孟昶的儿子临汝公孟灵休，两个都奢侈豪华，与徐湛之一同以肴膳、器服、车马的享乐著名。
English: At that time, the sons of An Chenggong He Yao, the son of Meng Yao, and Lin Rukong Meng Lingxiu, the son of Meng Yao, were both extravagant and luxurious. Together with Xu Zhan, they were famous for the enjoyment of dishes, clothing, and horses.

古文：京邑为之语曰： 安成食，临汝饰。 
现代文：京城百姓称： 安成的饮食，临汝的服饰。 
English: The people of Beijing said: the food is safe, the clothes are good.

古文：湛之二事之美，兼于何、孟。勖官至侍中，追谥荒公。灵休善弹棋，官至秘书监。
现代文：湛之则兼有何孟两家的豪奢，何勖官至侍中，死后谥荒公，灵休擅长弹琴下棋，官至秘书监。
English: Zhan Zi is the sumptuousness of the two Meng families, he is a eunuch to a waiter, after his death he is a baron, Ling Xiu is good at playing the piano and playing chess, and he is a secretary supervisor.

古文：湛之迁冠军将军、丹阳尹，进号征虏将军，加散骑常侍，以公主忧不拜。
现代文：湛之任冠军将军、丹阳尹，又封为征虏将军，加散骑常侍，因为服公主丧，未接受。
English: Zhan's champion general, Danyang Yin, was also appointed as a conscript general, plus a cavalryman, but was not accepted because the princess was in mourning.

古文：过葬，复授前职，湛之表启固辞，又诣廷尉受罪；上诏狱官勿得受，然后就命。
现代文：葬礼过后，又被授予前面的官职，他上表坚决辞谢，又到廷尉那里去请罪，皇上诏令狱官不得接受，这之后他接受了任命。
English: After the funeral, he was reappointed to the previous post. He presented his resignation, went to the court officer to plead guilty, and the emperor ordered the prison officer not to accept, after which he accepted the appointment.

古文：善于为政，威惠并行。
现代文：出朝任前军将军、南兖州刺史，湛之非常善于治理，恩威并用。
English: Zhan Zhi, a former army general and governor of Nanxizhou Province, was appointed to the imperial court. Zhan Zhi was very good at governance and was endowed with benevolence.

古文：广陵城旧有高楼，湛之更加修整，南望钟山。城北有陂泽，水物丰盛。湛之更起风亭、月观，吹台、琴室，果竹繁茂，花药成行，招集文士，尽游玩之适，一时之盛也。
现代文：广陵城后有一高楼，湛之将之修缮一新，向南远眺钟山，城北有河流，物产丰富，风光迷人，湛之又在河畔修起风亭、月观、吹台、琴室，其间果竹繁茂，花草成行。他在那儿招集文士，极尽游赏之乐，成为当时的盛事。
English: There is a high-rise at the back of Guangling City. Zhan Zhi repaired it and made it look brand new. To the south, there is a distant view of the Bell Mountain. To the north of the city, there is a river, rich in products and fascinating scenery. Zhan Zi also built a wind pavilion, a moon view, a sounding board and a piano room on the riverbank. In the meantime, fruit and bamboo were flourishing, and flowers and plants were blooming. He invited scribes there to enjoy the pleasure of travel, which became a grand event at that time.

古文：时有沙门释惠休，善属文，辞采绮艳，湛之与之甚厚。
现代文：当时有一和尚叫作惠休，很会写文章，辞采绮艳，湛之和他交情深厚。
English: At that time, there was a monk named Zuo Hui Xiu, who was very good at writing articles, his words were eloquent, and he had a deep friendship with Zhan Zhi.

古文：世祖命使还俗。本姓汤，位至扬州从事史。
现代文：世祖命惠休还俗，他本姓汤，官扬州从事史。
English: The ancestor's name was Tang, and he was a government official in Yangzhou engaged in history.

古文：二十六年，复入为丹阳尹，领太子詹事，将军如故。
现代文：元嘉二十六年，湛之又任丹阳尹，领太子詹事，将军不变。
English: In the 26th year of Yuan Jia, Zhan Zhi was also appointed as Danyang Yin, leading the crown prince Zhan Zhi, the general unchanged.

古文：二十七年，索虏至瓜步，湛之领兵置佐，与皇太子分守石头。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，索虏南侵至瓜步，湛之率军保护京城，与皇太子一道守卫石头城。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, Sauru invaded Guapu from the south. Zhan Zhi led the army to protect the capital, and guarded Stone City together with the crown prince.

古文：二十八年春，鲁爽兄弟率部曲归顺，爽等，鲁轨子也。
现代文：二十八年春，鲁爽兄弟率部下归顺宋，鲁爽是鲁轨的儿子。
English: In the spring of the 28th year, Lu Shuang's brothers and subordinates went to Shun Song. Lu Shuang was Lu Lu's son.

古文：湛之以为庙算远图，特所奖纳，不敢苟申私怨。
现代文：湛之为了国家的长远利益，特加奖励接纳鲁爽等人，没有任性申明自己的私怨。
English: For the sake of the long-term interests of the country, Zhan Zhi specially rewarded and accepted Lu Shuang and others, and did not arbitrarily declare his personal grudge.

古文：乞屏居田里，不许。
现代文：他乞求退居乡村，没被批准。
English: He begged to be allowed to retire to the countryside, but was denied.

古文：转尚书仆射，领护军将军。
现代文：转任尚书仆射，领护军将军。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shang Shufu, and became the general of the escorting army.

古文：时尚书令何尚之以湛之国戚，任遇隆重，欲以朝政推之。凡诸辞诉，一不料省。湛之亦以《职官记》及令文，尚书令敷奏出内，事无不总，令缺则仆射总任。
现代文：当时尚书令何尚之认为湛之是国戚，深得皇上恩宠，就想把朝政都推给他，一切上书上诉全不处理，湛之也根据《职官记》以及有关法令认为：尚书令掌管朝廷内外事务，总揽全局，如果尚书令空缺，政事才归仆射负责。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling thought that Shang Shuling was a relative of the state and deeply favored by the emperor, so he wanted to push the imperial government to him, and did not deal with any written appeals at all. According to the "Record of Officials" and relevant laws and regulations, Shang Shuling also believed that Shang Shuling was in charge of the internal and external affairs of the imperial court, and the overall situation. If Shang Shuling was vacant, political affairs would be the responsibility of the deputy.

古文：又以事归尚之，互相推委。
现代文：因而他也将政务推给尚之，两相互相推委。
English: Therefore, he also pushed the government affairs to Shang Shou, and the two mutually promoted each other.

古文：御史中丞袁淑并奏免官，诏曰： 令仆治务所寄，不共求体当，而互相推委，纠之是也。
现代文：御史中丞袁淑上奏要求将二人一起免去官职。皇帝下诏： 尚书令、仆射是具体处理朝政的，两人不共同努力各司其职却相互推委，应该纠正。
English: The Imperial Historian, Yuan Shuk, demanded that the two be removed from office together. The emperor issued an edict: Shang Shuling and Pudong Xie are specific to deal with the government of the dynasty, the two do not work together to carry out their duties, but push each other, which should be corrected.

古文：初，刘湛伏诛，殷景仁卒，太祖委任沈演之、庾炳之、范晔等，后又有江湛、何瑀之。晔诛，炳之免，演之、瑀之并卒，至是江湛为吏部尚书，与湛之并居权要，世谓之江、徐焉。
现代文：但是因为前朝的朝政比较混乱错谬才导致如今的问题，破例不予追究，应详加匡正。 于是就让湛之和尚之共同受理下面的上书。尚之虽然是尚书令，但朝政仍全归湛之处理。先前，刘湛被诛杀，殷景仁死去，太祖委任沈演之、庾炳之、范晔等人，后来又有江湛、何禹之，范晔被杀后，炳之免官，演之、禹之皆去世。到这时江湛任吏部尚书和湛之共处权要之位，世称 江徐 。
English: However, it was the chaotic and erroneous policies of the previous dynasty that led to today's problems. As an exception, they should not be investigated, but should be rectified in detail. Therefore, the following petition was jointly accepted by the monks of Zhan. Although it was the order of Zhan, the imperial government was still entirely handled by Zhan. Previously, Liu Zhan was killed, Yin Jingren died, the great-grandfather appointed Shen Yanzhi, Zou Zhi, Fan Zheng and others, and later Jiang Zhan, He Yu Zhi, after Fan Zheng was killed, Zou Zhi was dismissed, Yanzhi and Yu Zhi all died. At

古文：上每有疾，湛之辄入侍医药。
现代文：皇上有病，湛之就入宫侍候医药。
English: When the emperor was ill, Zhan Zhi went to the palace to wait for medicine.

古文：二凶巫蛊事发，上欲废劭，赐浚死。
现代文：二凶巫蛊的事情暴露后，皇上想废弃劭，赐浚死。
English: After the two villains, the witch and the dragon, were exposed, the emperor wanted to abandon the dragon and give the dragon a death sentence.

古文：而世祖不见宠，故累出外蕃，不得停京辇。
现代文：而世祖不为皇上宠爱，所以屡次出使外藩，不能住在京城。
English: However, the ancestor was not favored by the emperor, so he was repeatedly sent to foreign domains and could not live in the capital.

古文：南平王铄、建平王宏并为上所爱，而铄妃即湛妹，劝上立之。
现代文：南平王铄、建平王宏同被皇上宠爱，铄的妃子就是江湛的妹妹，就劝皇上立铄为太子。
English: Nanping Wang Yao and Jianping Wang Hong were both favored by the emperor. Yao's concubine was Jiang Zhan's sister, so he persuaded the emperor to make Yao the crown prince.

古文：元嘉末，征铄自寿阳入朝，既至，又失旨，欲立宏，嫌其非次，是以议久不决。
现代文：元嘉末年，皇帝将铄从寿阳召回京城，来了后又改变主意，想立宏为太子，但又嫌宏不够次序，所以议论许久却难以定下来。
English: At the end of Yuan Jia's reign, the emperor summoned Zou from Shouyang back to Beijing. After he arrived, he changed his mind and wanted to make Hong Hong the crown prince, but he didn't like the lack of order, so the discussion lasted for a long time but it was difficult to settle down.

古文：与湛之屏人共言论，或连日累夕。
现代文：皇上和湛之除去旁人共同议事，有时通宵达旦。
English: Emperor Kazuchika and his attendants would discuss matters together, sometimes staying up all night.

古文：每夜常使湛之自秉烛，绕壁检行，虑有窃听者。
现代文：皇上常在夜里让湛之拿着蜡烛，绕着房外墙壁的护卫，担心有人窃听。
English: The emperor often had Zhan Zhi hold a candle at night and walk around the guards on the wall outside the room, fearing that someone was eavesdropping.

古文：劭入弑之旦，其夕，上与湛之屏人语，至晓犹未灭烛。
现代文：劭入宫杀君之日，皇上和湛之两人头天晚上就在房内单独谈话，直到早上还未熄灯。
English: On the day he entered the palace to kill the emperor, the emperor and Zhan were talking alone in the room the night before, and they did not turn off the lights until the morning.

古文：湛之惊起趣北户，未及开，见害。时年四十四。
现代文：湛之听到响声惊起走到北门，还没有来得及开门就被杀害，时年四十四岁。
English: Hearing the noise, Zhan Zhi was startled and walked to the north gate. Before he could open the door, he was killed, at the age of forty-four.

古文：世祖即位，追赠司空，加散骑常侍，本官如故，谥曰忠烈公。
现代文：世祖即皇位后追赠他为司空，加封散骑常侍，原官职不变，谥号为忠烈公。
English: The ancestor, that is, after the throne, posthumously gave him the title of Siku (司空) and the title of Jifeng (加封) Sanzhi (散騎) Changzhi (常侍), the original official position remained unchanged, and his posthumous name was Zhongreikou (忠烈公).

古文：又诏曰： 徐湛之、江湛、王僧绰门户荼酷，遗孤流寓，言念既往，感痛兼深。
现代文：又下诏： 徐羡之、江湛、王僧绰三家遭祸害荼炭，遗孤流落在外，思念他们的过去，心情异常沉痛。
English: He also issued the following edict: The three families of Xu Enzhi, Jiang Zhan, and Wang Zengchao have been plagued by calamities, left alone and left outside, missing their past, and feeling extremely sad.

古文：可令归居本宅，厚加恤赐。 
现代文：可以让他们的子孙回到他们原先的住处，厚加抚恤。 
English: Their children and grandchildren can be allowed to return to their original homes, with a generous pension.

古文：于是三家长给廪。
现代文：从此这三家长期接受国家的供给。
English: Since then, these three companies have been receiving supplies from the state for a long time.

古文：三子：聿之、谦之，为元凶所杀。恆之嗣侯，尚太祖第十五女南阳公主，蚤卒，无子。
现代文：湛之有三个儿子：聿之、谦之被元凶杀害，恒之继承父亲的封侯，娶了太祖第十五女南阳公主，早亡，无子。
English: Zhan Zhi had three sons: Yan Zhi and Qian Zhi, who were killed by the culprits. Heng Zhi inherited the title of prince from his father and married the fifteenth daughter of his great-grandfather, Nanyang Princess. He died young and had no children.

古文：新建者，嗣之封也。
现代文：聿之的儿子孝嗣继承封号。
English: His son, Takatsugu, inherited the title.

