古文：王曰： 呜呼，大师，朕维民务官，论用有征，观诚考言，视声观色，观隐揆德，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：成王说： 啊呀，太师我要为民求官，考评与任用都有依据，即所谓视诚、考志、视声、观色、观隐、揆德，能讲给我听吗? 
English: Cheng Wang said: Ah, Master, I want to seek a post for the people. The evaluation and appointment are all based on the so-called "seeing sincerity," "examining one's mind," "seeing sound," "seeing color," "seeing the hidden," and "knowing virtue." Can you tell me?

古文：周公曰： 亦有六征。
现代文：周公说： 那也有六种验证的方法，啊呀，你要分辨揣摩它们!
English: Zhou Gong said: There are also six verification methods, ah, you have to distinguish and guess them!

古文：呜呼，乃齐以揆之。一曰富贵者观其有礼施，贫贱者观其有德守，嬖宠者观其不骄奢，隐约观其不慑惧，其少者观其恭敬好学而能悌，其壮者观其连接务行而胜私，其老者观其思慎，强其所不足而不逾。
现代文： 一是说：富贵的人看他有无礼数和施舍，贫贱的人看他有无道德和操守，受宠的人看他是否骄横放纵，地位低下的人看他是否胆怯畏惧。那年少的，看他是否恭敬好学而且能顺从兄长；那壮年的，看他是否廉洁办事而克服私利；那年老的，看他是否思虑谨慎，努力弥补不足而又不过头。
English: First, the rich man is judged by his impudence and generosity, the poor man by his morality and integrity, the favored man by his arrogance and indulgence, and the lowly man by his timidity and fear; the young man by his respect and eagerness to learn and his ability to obey his elder brother; the middle-aged man by his integrity and his ability to overcome selfishness; and the old man by his prudence and his ability to make up for his shortcomings without overdoing it.

古文：父子之间观其孝慈，兄弟之间观其和友，君臣之间观其忠惠，乡党之间观其信诚。
现代文：父子之间，看是否子孝父慈；兄弟之间，看是否和睦友爱；君臣之间，看是否臣忠君惠；乡党之间，看是否诚实守信。
English: Between father and son, see if the son is filial and kind; between brothers, see if there is harmony and friendship; between monarchs and ministers, see if they are loyal and beneficial; between township parties, see if they are honest and trustworthy.

古文：省其居处观其义方，省其丧哀观其贞良，省其出入观其交并以，省其交友观其任廉。
现代文：检查他的居处，看出他的处世方法；检查他对丧事的哀伤程度，看出他的忠贞善良；检查他进出的人家，看出他的交际与朋友；检查他的交际与朋友，看出他的诚信与廉直。
English: Examine his abode, and behold his manners; examine his grief at a funeral, and behold his fidelity; examine the houses he enters and leaves, and behold his society and friends; examine his society and friends, and behold his honesty and uprightness.

古文：设之以谋以观其智，示之以难以观其勇，烦之以事以观其治，临之以利以观其不贪。
现代文：给他设一个计谋，以观察他的智慧；让他看到危难，以观察他的勇敢；用杂事烦扰他，以观察他的办事能力；把利益摆在面前，以观察他是否贪婪；用享乐不断地施与他，看他是否逸乐过度。
English: Set him a stratagem to observe his wisdom; let him see a peril to observe his valour; vex him with trifles to observe his ability to act; place an advantage before him to observe whether he is avaricious; and continually supply him with pleasures to see whether he is too much pleased.

古文：滥之以乐以观其不荒，喜之以观其轻，怒之以观其重，醉之以观其恭，从之色以观其常，远之以观其不二，昵之以观其不狎。
现代文：让他高兴，以观察他是否轻浮；让他生气，以观察他是否稳重。用酒灌醉他，以观察他是否恭谨；用女色放纵他，以观察他是否保持常态。疏远他，以观察他是否有二心；亲昵他，以观察他是否庄重。
English: Make him happy to see if he is frivolous; make him angry to see if he is steady; get him drunk to see if he is respectful; indulge him with women to see if he remains normal; alienate him to see if he is double-minded; caress him to see if he is serious.

古文：复征其言以观其精，曲省其行以观其备。
现代文：反复验征他说的话，以观察他的细微末节；多方面察看他的行为，以观察他的方方面面。
English: Examine his words repeatedly to observe his subtleties; examine his behavior in many ways to observe his various aspects.

古文：此之谓观诚。 二曰方与之言以观其志，志殷以渊其气，宽以柔，其色俭而不谄，其处仙，其言后人，见其所不足。曰日益者也。好临人以色，高人以气，贤人以言，防其所不足，发其所能，曰日损者也。
现代文：这就叫做观诚。 二是说：常与他交谈，以观察他的志向。心志纯正而深远的，他的气度宽广而柔和，他的情态谦恭而不谄媚，他的礼貌在人之先，他的言语在人之后，总是表现出自己的不足，叫做日益进步者，喜欢给别人以脸色，以气势高出他人，以言语胜过他人，遮掩自己的不足，夸耀自己的能干，叫做日益退步者。
English: This is called beholding sincerity. The second is to say: often talk to him to observe his aspirations. The mind is pure and far-reaching, his temperament is broad and gentle, his demeanor is humble and not obsequious, his manners are ahead of others, his words are behind others, always showing their own shortcomings, called increasingly progressive, like to give others a face, with momentum higher than others, with words better than others, covering their own shortcomings, boasting of their ability, called increasingly regressive.

古文：其貌直而不止其言，正而不私，不饰其美，不隐其恶，不防其过，曰有质者也。
现代文：他的性格正直而不轻慢，他的言辞公正而不偏私，不装饰自己的优点，不隐瞒自已的缺点，不遮掩自己的错误，叫做有质者。
English: His character is honest and not contemptuous, his words are just and not selfish, he does not embellish his own merits, does not hide his own shortcomings, does not cover up his own mistakes, and is called a quality person.

古文：其貌曲媒，其言工巧，饰其见物，务其小证，以故自说，曰无质者也。
现代文：他的外表邪曲而诌媚，他的言辞精美而巧妙，修饰那些显眼的事，求取小节之证以维护自己的看法，叫做无质者。
English: His appearance is devious and charming, his words are exquisite and ingenious, he embellishes the obvious things, seeks evidence to support his views, and is called a non-qualifier.

古文：喜怒以物而色不变，烦乱一事而志不营，深道以利而心不移，临慑以威而气惵惧，曰鄙心而假气者也。
现代文：用实物让他高兴或生气而他的表情不变，用杂事烦扰他而心意不乱，用利益深深引诱他而他的意志不转移，面对恐吓威胁而他的气节不卑下，叫做平心而固守者。
English: To make him happy or angry with material things without changing his expression, to annoy him with trifles without disturbing his mind, to entice him deeply with benefits without transferring his will, to face intimidation and threats without lowering his spirit, is called a calm and steadfast person.

古文：设之以物而数决，敬之以卒而度应，不文而辩，曰有虑者也。
现代文：用实物使他高兴或生气而他的心意改变，用杂事烦扰他就心志不静，以利益引诱他就意志转移，面对恐吓威胁他的神气恐惧，叫做心志浅陋而志气虚伪者。
English: Those who use material things to make him happy or angry and change his mind, annoy him with trifles and make his mind restless, lure him with profits and divert his will, and face intimidation and threaten him with arrogance and fear, are called shallow-minded and hypocritical.

古文：难决以物，难说以守，一而不可变，困而不知止，曰愚依人也。
现代文：设一件事能够迅速处理，惊吓他而能在仓猝之间揆度应变，言辞不华美而聪慧，叫做有志虑者，处理事情困难，语言表达困难，守着一事一物而不能变通，因循旧例而不知停止。叫做愚昧之人。
English: A person who is able to deal with one thing quickly, scare him and be able to make adjustments in a hurry, whose speech is not flashy but intelligent, is called a person with ambition, who has difficulty in dealing with things, who has difficulty in expressing himself in words, who sticks to one thing and cannot change, and who does not know when to stop because he is following the old example, is called a foolish person.

古文：营之以物而不误，犯之以卒而不惧，置义而不可迁，临之货色而不过，曰果敢者也。
现代文：用杂事扰乱他而不会有错，突然惊恐他而心不畏惧，立身于义而不会使他转变，面对钱财美色而不顾盼，叫做果敢者。
English: One who disturbs him with trifles and does not err, who frightens him suddenly and is not afraid, who stands up for righteousness and does not convert him, who does not look forward to money and beauty, is called a daredevil.

古文：移易以言，志不能固，已诺无决，曰弱志者也。
现代文：叫他改变主意而他的心志不能固守，已经许诺又不能决断，叫做弱志者也。
English: To ask him to change his mind when his heart is not in it, when he has made a promise and cannot keep it, is called weak-mindedness.

古文：顺予之弗为喜，非夺之弗为怒，沈静而寡言，多稽而险貌，曰质静者也。
现代文：和顺地给他而不为之高兴，无理地夺走他也不会生气，性格沉静少说话，博学而行为廉洁，叫做本质平静者。
English: If you give it to him without being happy, and take it away without reason, he will not be angry. If you are quiet and speak less, and are erudite and behave with integrity, you are called a natural calm person.

古文：屏言而弗顾，自顺而弗让，非是而强之，曰妒诬者也。
现代文：善辩而不顾他人之言，依自己所想行事，以是为非而强行，叫做妒贤诬善者。
English: A person who is good at arguing, disregarding the words of others, and acting according to his own will, so that he is forced to do wrong, is called a jealous person.

古文：微而能发，察而能深，宽顺而恭俭，温柔而能断，果敢而能屈，曰志治者也。
现代文：隐微之事而能显发之，审视而能显其深远，宽顺而恭俭，温柔而能决断，果敢而能委曲，叫做心志平稳者。
English: The one who can reveal the hidden things, the one who can reveal the far-reaching things by examining them, the one who is easy-going and frugal, the one who is gentle and decisive, and the one who is bold and can command, is called a person with a stable mind.

古文：华废而诬，巧言令色，皆以无为有者也。
现代文：言语浮夸而不实，花言巧语而表情虚伪，都是以无为有者。
English: The words are pompous but not true, the rhetoric is clever but the facial expression is false, all of which are based on nothing.

古文：此之谓考言。
现代文：这就叫做考言。
English: This is called kaogen.

古文： 三曰，诚在其中，必见诸外，以其声，处其实，气初生物，物生有声，声有刚柔，清浊好恶，咸发于声。
现代文： 三是说：实物在内里，一定会表现在外面。
English: The third is to say that what is true on the inside will surely be manifested on the outside.

古文：新气华诞者，其声流散，心气顺信者，其声顺节。
现代文：用他的声音，判断他的气息。气最早生于实体，实体产生才有声音。
English: Use his voice to judge his breath. The breath is first born in the body, and only after the body is born does the voice arise.

古文：心气鄙戾者，其声醒丑，心气宽柔者，其声温和。信气中易，义气时舒，和气简备，勇气壮力。
现代文：声音有刚柔、清浊、美丑，都产生于气。心气虚妄不实的，他的声音漂移不定；心气平稳实在的人，他的声音顺畅有节奏；心气鄙陋乖戾的，他的声音嘶哑难听；心气宽广柔顺的人，他的声音温柔平和。诚信之气适中而平易，仁义之气纯正而舒缓，智慧之气精要而完备，勇武之气雄壮有力。
English: The sound is strong and soft, clear and clear, beautiful and ugly, all of which are produced by qi. If the qi is false or false, his voice will drift; if the qi is stable and real, his voice will be smooth and rhythmic; if the qi is mean and surly, his voice will be hoarse and unpleasant; if the qi is broad and soft, his voice will be gentle and peaceful. The qi of sincerity is moderate and easy, the qi of benevolence is pure and soothing, the qi of wisdom is essential and complete, and the qi of courage is strong and powerful.

古文：听其声，处其气，考其所为，观其所由，以其前观其后，以其隐观其显，以其小占其大，此之谓视声。 四曰：民有五气，喜怒欲惧忧。喜气内蓄，虽欲隐之，阳喜必见。
现代文：喜气积蓄内心，即使想隐藏它，真正的喜悦一定会表现出来。
English: Joy is stored within, and even if you try to hide it, true joy is bound to come out.

古文：怒气内蓄，虽欲隐之，阳怒必见。
现代文：怒气积蓄内心，即使想隐藏起来，真正的愤怒一定会表露出来。
English: Anger builds up inside, and even if you try to hide it, the real anger is bound to come out.

古文：欲气、惧气，忧悲之气，皆隐之，阳气必见。
现代文：贪欲之气、畏惧之气、忧悲之气都想隐藏起来，真正的贪欲、畏惧、忧悲也一定会表现出来。
English: Avarice, fear, and sorrow all want to hide, but true covetousness, fear, and sorrow are bound to come out.

古文：五气诚于中，发形于外，民情不可隐也。
现代文：五气真实的存于内心，表现在外面，人的情感是不可隐藏的。
English: The five qi really exist in the heart and are manifested on the outside. People's emotions cannot be hidden.

古文：喜色犹然，以出怒色，荐然以侮，欲色妪然。以愉惧色，薄然以下，忧悲之色，瞿然以静。
现代文：喜悦之情自然地表达，愤怒之情火爆爆地欺人，贪欲之情贪婪地苟安，畏惧之情被吓得卑下，忧悲之情令人若有所失的沉静。
English: Joy is naturally expressed, anger is fiery and deceitful, greed is greedy, fear is frightened and abject, and sadness is quiet.

古文：诚智必有难局之色，诚仁必有可尊之色，诚勇必有难慎之色，诚忠必有可新之色，诚洁必有难污之色，诚静必有可信之色。
现代文：真正的智慧，一定有难于尽知的表情；真正的仁爱，一定有值得尊敬的表情；真正的勇敢，一定有难以威慑的表情；真正的忠诚，一定有值得亲近的表情；真正的干净，一定有难以污染的表情；真正的安静，一定有值得信任的表情。
English: True wisdom must have an expression that is difficult to know; true benevolence must have an expression that is worthy of respect; true bravery must have an expression that is difficult to deter; true loyalty must have an expression that is worth being close to; true cleanliness must have an expression that is difficult to pollute; true quietness must have an expression that is worthy of trust.

古文：质浩然固以安，伪蔓然乱以烦，虽欲改之中色，弗听。
现代文：真实的，浩然纯正，坚固而安稳；虚假的，枝枝蔓蔓，杂乱而烦琐。即使想改变，内心的感情也不听从。
English: The real, vast and pure, strong and stable; the false, rambling, messy and cumbersome. Even if you want to change, your inner feelings won't listen.

古文：此之谓观色。
现代文：这就叫观色。
English: This is called colour vision.

古文： 五曰：民生则有阴有阳，人多隐其情、饰其伪，以攻其名。
现代文： 五是说：人生来就有阴的一面，有阳的一面。多数人隐瞒其实情而修饰而其虚伪，以求取好名声。
English: Fifth, people are born with a dark side and a bright side. Most people hide their true selves and embellish their falsehoods in order to gain a good reputation.

古文：有隐于仁贤者，有隐于智理者，有隐于文艺者，有隐于廉勇者，有隐于忠孝者，有隐于交友者。
现代文：有隐饰在仁贤的人，有隐饰在智理的人，有隐饰在文艺的人，有隐饰在廉勇的人，有隐饰在忠孝的人，有隐饰在交友的人。
English: There are people who are covertly adorned in benevolence and virtue, people who are covertly adorned in wisdom and reason, people who are covertly adorned in literature and art, people who are covertly adorned in courage, people who are covertly adorned in loyalty and filial piety, and people who are covertly adorned in making friends.

古文：如此不可不察也。
现代文：像这样，不能不加审察。
English: You can't do something like this without scrutiny.

古文：小施而好德，小让而争大，言愿以为质，伪爱以为忠，尊其得以改其名，如此，隐于仁贤者也。
现代文：作点小施舍而喜好别人感恩戴德，作点小谦让而争取大回报。言语谨慎以表示质朴，假装友爱以表示忠诚，注重某方面美德以求取好名声。像这样，就是隐饰于仁贤的人。
English: To be grateful for a little charity, to be grateful for a little indulgence, to be modest for a great reward, to be simple in speech, to be loyal in the pretense of friendship, to be famous for a certain virtue, and so on, are the marks of a virtuous man.

古文：前总唱功，虑诚弗及，佯为不言，诚不足，色示有余。
现代文：一开始总是倡导办事，智虑实际上没有达到，却假装不完全表达。内心实际是不足，而表面上显出有余。
English: At the beginning, he always advocates doing things, pretending that he has not fully expressed his thoughts, even though he has not actually achieved them. In his heart, he is actually deficient, but on the surface, he appears to have more than enough.

古文：自顺而不让，措辞而不遂，此隐于智理者也。
现代文：顺随己意而不让人，措辞又不能达意。这是隐饰于智理的人。
English: A person who follows his own will and does not allow others to do so, and whose words do not achieve his will. This is a person who conceals his wisdom.

古文：动人以言，竭而弗终，问则不对，佯为不穷，□貌而有余，假道而自顺，因之□初穷则托深，如此者，隐于文艺者也。□言以廉，矫厉以为勇，内恐外夸，亟称其说，以诈临人，如此，隐于廉勇者也。自事其亲而好以告人，饰其见物，不诚于内，发名以事亲，自以名私其身，如此，隐于忠孝者也。
现代文：像这样，就是隐饰于忠孝的人。
English: Like this, it is a person who conceals loyalty and filial piety.

古文：比周以相誉，智贤可征而左右，不同而交，交必重己，心说而身弗近身，进而实不至，惧不尽见于众，而貌克，如此，隐于交友者也。
现代文：结党以彼此吹捧，知道贤士而求为左右。志向不同而结交他，结交在于抬高自己。结交贤士而心喜却并不靠近他，身虽靠近贤士而内心又保持距离。
English: Those who form a party praise each other. Those who know a wise man seek the best for themselves. Those with different aspirations make friends with him, but friendship is based on self-exaltation. Those who make friends with a wise man do not feel close to him, and those who are close to a wise man keep their distance.

古文： 六曰：言行不类，终始相悖，外怎能不合，虽有假节，见行，曰非成质者也。
现代文：始终担心别人不知他能交结贤士，在众人面前能做到与贤士表面上亲密。像这样，就是隐饰于交友的人。这就叫观隐。 六是说：言行不一致，终始相背违，表里不相合，即使有假借的节操和显眼的行为，还是叫非诚实者。
English: Always worried that others do not know that he can make contact with sages, and can achieve a superficial intimacy with sages in front of everyone. Like this, it is a person who conceals himself in making friends. This is called Guan Yin. Six is to say: words and deeds are inconsistent, ultimately contradict each other, and do not match on the surface, even if there are feigned modesty and conspicuous behavior, they are still called dishonest.

古文：言忠行夷，靡及私□，弗求及，情忠而宽，貌庄而安，曰有仁者也。
现代文：言语公平，行为平和有得而不私用，施舍不求多，心态忠正宽厚，外貌端庄而稳重，和做有仁者。
English: His speech should be fair, his behavior should be peaceful and beneficial rather than selfish, his charity should not seek more, his mentality should be loyal and generous, his appearance should be dignified and steady, and he should be a benevolent person.

古文：事变而能治，效穷而能达，措身立方而能遂，曰有知者也。
现代文：事情变化而能治理，事功受困而能达目的，立身处事而能成功，叫做有智者。
English: To be able to manage things when they change, to be able to achieve goals when things are difficult, and to be able to succeed in doing things, is to be wise.

古文：少言以行恭俭，以让有知而言弗发，有施而□弗德，曰谦良者也。
现代文：少言语多行动，恭敬礼让，有智慧而不说大话，有施舍而不求感恩戴德，叫做谦良者。
English: He who speaks less and acts more, he who is respectful and courteous, he who is wise but does not boast, he who gives alms but does not seek gratitude, he is called a modest and good-natured person.

古文：微忽之言，久而可复，幽间之行，独而弗克，其行亡如存，曰顺信者也。
现代文：细微的的言语，过很久还能再现；暗地里办的事，独自办好而不变动，虽死犹存，叫做顺信者。
English: Subtle words can still reappear after a long time; things done in secret, done alone and unchanged, although dead, are called obedient.

古文：贵富恭俭而能施，严威有礼而不骄，曰有德者也。
现代文：富贵而恭谦，能施舍，威严有礼貌而不骄傲，叫做有德者。
English: Rich and humble, generous, dignified, courteous and not proud, they are called virtuous.

古文：隐约而不慎，安乐而不奢，勤劳而不变，喜怒而有度，曰有守者也。
现代文：不得志而不泄气，生活安乐而不奢侈，勤劳而不变本色，喜与怒都有节制，叫做有守者。
English: Those who are discouraged but not discouraged, who live comfortably but not extravagantly, who work hard but do not change their nature, and who are temperate in their joy and anger are called conservative.

古文：直方而不毁，廉洁而不戾，强立而无私，曰有经者也。
现代文：身有方术而不丢弃，廉洁自爱而不休止，刚强自立而无私心，叫做有经者。
English: A person who possesses the skills of the four elements without abandoning them, who is honest and self-loving without ceasing, and who is strong and self-reliant without being selfish is called a person with the Sutra.

古文：虚以待命，不报刊不至，不问不言，言不过行，行不过道，曰沈静者也。
现代文：虚心以等待受命，不征召就不到，不问就不讲，言语不超过行为，行为不超越轨矩，叫做沉静者。
English: Those who are humble and wait for orders, who do not come without being called, who do not speak without being asked, whose words do not exceed their actions, and whose actions do not go beyond the moment, are called quiet.

古文：中忠爱以事亲，欢以尽力而不回，敬以尽力而不□，曰忠孝者也。
现代文：忠心以侍奉父母，愉快地敬奉，尽其力而不表露，敬奉父母使之安泰，叫做忠孝者。
English: Those who faithfully serve their parents, respect them cheerfully, do their best without showing it, and respect their parents to keep them safe are called loyal and filial.

古文：合志而同方，共其忧而任其难，行忠信而不疑□，隐远而不舍，曰交友者也。
现代文：心意合又志向同，共忧患又同灾难，行为忠诚而不猜疑，友人遥远或隐匿都不舍弃，叫做交友者。
English: Those who share the same mind and the same aspiration, the same sorrow and the same calamity, act faithfully without suspicion, and do not abandon friends who are distant or hidden, are called friends.

古文：志色辞气，其人甚偷，进退多巧，就人甚数，辞不至，少其所不足，谋而不已，曰伪诈者也。
现代文：心态、表情、言辞、气势，很容易随人变化，进与退都工于计谋，为人很灵巧，靠拢人很迅速，背叛人也很轻易，叫做位志者。
English: The mentality, facial expression, rhetoric, and momentum are easy to change with people, and the advance and retreat are all done by strategy. They are very dexterous, very quick to get close to people, and very easy to betray people. They are called aspirants.

古文：言行亟变，从容克易，好恶无常，行身不笃，曰无诚者也。少知而不大决，少能而不大成，规小物而不知大伦，曰华诞者也。
现代文：靠吃喝亲近人，用财物结交人，以利交往，有心贪取声誉，求得利益，依靠他人，叫做贪鄙者。内心无决断，表达不清楚，遮掩其不足，而谋事不止，叫做伪诈者。言辞多变，行为错乱，好恶无常，行事不实，叫做无诚者。缺乏智慧不能决大事，缺乏才能不能成大事，规划小事而不识大体，叫做华诞者。
English: Those who get close to others by eating and drinking, use wealth to make friends, and socialize for profit, are greedy for reputation, seek profit, and rely on others, are called greedy. Those who are indecisive at heart, do not express themselves clearly, cover up their shortcomings, and are always scheming are called deceivers. Those whose words are changeable, whose behavior is disordered, whose likes and dislikes are fickle, and whose actions are untrue are called dishonest. Those who lack wisdom cannot decide big things, those who lack talent cannot achieve big things, and those who plan small things without knowing the big picture are called brilliant.

古文：规谏而不类道，行而不平，曰窃名者也。
现代文：规劝上级而不合宜，导引下属而不正派，叫做窃名者。
English: It is not proper to persuade superiors, and it is not proper to lead subordinates. They are called name stealers.

古文： 故曰事阻者不夷，时□者不回，面誉者不忠，饰貌者不静，假节者不平，多私者不义，扬言者卦按信，此之谓揆德。 
现代文：所以说：事情阻隔的不平顺，特别诡诈的不仁慈，当面吹捧的不忠诚，修饰容貌的不实在，假借节操的不正当，私心重的不正义，说大话的少信用。这就叫揆德。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: things that are blocked are not smooth, especially cunning and unkind, face-to-face touting is not loyal, face-painting is not real, pretending to be virtuous is not legitimate, selfishness is not fair, and big talkers are not trustworthy. This is called virtue.

