古文：陆逊陆逊多沉虑，筹无不中，尝谓诸葛恪曰： 在吾前者，吾必奉之同升；在吾下者，吾必扶持之。
现代文：原文陆逊向来深思静虑，所推测的事没有一件不应验。他曾经对诸葛恪说： 地位在我之上的人，我一定尊重他；在我之下的人，我一定扶持他。
English: The original text Lu Xun always thought deeply and carefully, and none of the things he surmised were untrue. He once said to Zhuge Ke: Those who are above me, I must respect them; those who are below me, I must support them.

古文：君今气陵其上，意蔑乎下，恐非安德之基也! 
现代文：如今您的气势侵犯地位在您之上的人，又轻蔑地位在您之下的人，恐怕不是安德的基础。 
English: Now, I'm afraid that your arrogance towards those who are above you and your contempt for those who are below you are not the basis of Ender.

古文：恪不听，卒见死。
现代文：诸葛恪不听，最后果然被杀。
English: Zhuge Ke did not listen and was finally killed.

古文：嵇康从孙登游三年，问终不答。
现代文：嵇康跟随孙登求学三年，问老师对自己的看法，孙登始终不回答。
English: Yan Kang followed Sun Deng to study for three years, asked the teacher's opinion of himself, Sun Deng never answered.

古文：康将别，曰： 先生竟无言耶？ 
现代文：嵇康临走前说： 先生没有什么话要告诉我吗？ 
English: Before leaving, Yan Kang said, "Doesn't the teacher have anything to tell me?"

古文：登乃曰： 子识火乎？
现代文：孙登才说： 你知道火吗？
English: Sun Dengcai said: Do you know fire?

古文：生而有光，而不用其光，果在于用光；人生有才，而不用其才，果在于用才。
现代文：火一产生就有光，如果不晓得利用它的光亮，跟没有光亮有什么差别；就如同人天生有才华，却不懂得运用自己的才华，如此，跟没有才华也没什么两样。
English: As soon as fire is born, there is light, and if you do not know how to use its light, it is no different from no light; just as people are naturally talented, but do not know how to use their talent, so it is no different from no talent.

古文：故用光在乎得薪，所以保其曜；用才在乎识物，所以全其年。
现代文：所以想要利用火光，必须有木柴，来保持光亮的延续；想运用才华，就要了解外在的客观世界，才能保全自己。
English: Therefore, if you want to use firelight, you must have firewood to maintain the continuity of light; if you want to use talent, you must understand the external objective world in order to preserve yourself.

古文：今子才多识寡，难乎免于今之世矣! 
现代文：你才华高而见识少，在当今这样的乱世很难保全自己。 
English: You're a man of many talents and few insights, and it's hard to protect yourself in today's turbulent world.

古文：康不能用，卒死吕安之难。
现代文：嵇康不肯听，最后死于吕安之难。
English: Jikang refused to listen and eventually died in the Battle of Lu'an.

