古文：儒书言：黄帝采首山铜，铸鼎於荆山下。
现代文：儒者的书上说：黄帝开采了首山的铜，到荆山下去铸鼎。
English: The book of Confucians said: the Yellow Emperor mined the copper of the first mountain, and went down to the Jing Mountain to cast the tripod.

古文：鼎既成，有龙垂胡髯，下迎黄帝。
现代文：鼎铸成了，有条龙垂下胡子髯须伏在地上迎接黄帝。
English: When the casting was complete, a dragon with its whiskers hanging down bowed to the ground to greet the Yellow Emperor.

古文：黄帝上骑龙，群臣，後宫从上七十余人，龙乃上去。
现代文：黄帝爬上去，骑在龙背上，群臣，宫中嫔妃又跟看爬上去七十多人，龙才上天离开。
English: The Yellow Emperor climbed up and rode on the dragon's back. The courtiers and concubines in the palace watched more than seventy people climb up, and the dragon only left the sky.

古文：余小臣不得上，乃悉持龙髯。
现代文：其余的小臣没有能上去，于是都揪着龙的髯须。
English: The rest of the ministers were not able to go up, so they all clutched the dragon's whiskers.

古文：龙髯拔，堕黄帝之弓，百姓仰望黄帝既上天，乃抱其弓与龙胡髯吁号。
现代文：龙的髯须被拔断，还弄落了黄帝的弓。老百姓抬着头看着黄帝已上天，于是抱着他的弓和龙的断胡子呼喊。
English: The dragon's whiskers were plucked off, and the Yellow Emperor's bow was knocked down. The common people looked up and saw that the Yellow Emperor had ascended to heaven, so they held his bow and the dragon's broken mustache and shouted.

古文：故後世因其处曰 鼎湖 ，其弓曰 乌号 。
现代文：所以后代因此称这个地方叫 鼎湖 ，称这张弓叫 乌号 。
English: So the descendants called this place Dinghu, and called this bow Wu.

古文：《太史公记》诔五帝，亦云：黄帝封禅已，仙云。群臣朝其衣冠。因葬埋之。
现代文：司马迁《史记》叙述五帝生平时，也说黄帝封禅完毕，成仙而去，群臣朝拜他的衣帽，于是把它埋葬了。
English: Sima Qian's "Histories" describes the lives of the five emperors in ordinary times, and also says that the Yellow Emperor completed the sealing of Zen and went away to become an immortal, and his courtiers worshiped his clothes and hat, so they buried it.

古文：曰：此虚言也。
现代文：我认为，这是无根据的说法。
English: I don't think that's true.

古文：实 黄帝 者何等也？
现代文：事实上， 黄帝 是什么称呼呢？
English: In fact, what is the name of the Yellow Emperor?

古文：号乎，谥乎？
现代文：是生前的称号呢？还是死后的谥号呢？
English: Was it a title during his lifetime? Or a nickname after his death?

古文：如谥，臣子所诔列也。诔生时所行为之谥。
现代文：如果是谥号，那就是大臣们写祭文时给加上的，因为叙述他生前事迹，是为了追加谥号。
English: If it is a nickname, it was added by the ministers when they wrote the dedicatory poem, because the description of his life's deeds was to add a nickname.

古文：黄帝好道，遂以升天，臣子诔之，宜以仙升，不当以 黄 谥。
现代文：黄帝喜欢道术，就因此而升天，大臣们写祭文，应该用 仙 、 升 等字，不该用 黄 字作谥号。
English: The Yellow Emperor liked Daoism and ascended to heaven for this reason. Ministers should write dedicatory texts using the characters 仙, 升, etc., and should not use the yellow character as a nickname.

古文：《谥法》曰： 静民则法曰黄。  黄 者，安民之谥，非得道之称也。
现代文：《谥法》上说： 使人民安定而能依法办事的叫 黄 。 黄 是使人民能安定生活的谥号，并不是得道成仙的称号。
English: "The Law of the People's Republic of China" says: The one who makes the people stable and able to act in accordance with the law is called Huang. Huang is the nickname that makes the people able to live a stable life, and is not the title of a Taoist.

古文：百王之谥，文则曰文，武则曰 武 。
现代文：众多君王的谥号，有文治的则谥号叫 文 ，有武功的则谥号叫 武 。
English: There are many emperors with the name of Wen, those with the name of Wenji have the name of Wen, and those with the name of Wu have the name of Wu.

古文：文武不失实，所以劝操行也。
现代文：给予 文 、 武 的谥号都不能违背生前的实际情况，目的是勉励人们注意操行。
English: The posthumous names of Wen and Wu should not contradict the actual situations in their lifetimes. The purpose is to encourage people to pay attention to their behavior.

古文：如黄帝之时质，未有谥乎？
现代文：要说是黄帝时社会风气质朴，还没有谥号吗？
English: To say that the social style of the Yellow Emperor was simple, there was no nickname?

古文：名之为黄帝，何世之人也？
现代文：那么称他为黄帝的，是哪个时代的人呢？
English: So who was the person of which era who called him the Yellow Emperor?

古文：使黄帝之臣子，知君，使後世之人，迹其行。黄帝之世，号谥有无，虽疑未定， 黄 非升仙之称，明矣。
现代文：假使是黄帝的大臣们加的，那么他们是了解黄帝的决不会把仙号谥为 黄 ；假使是后代人追加的，那么他们必定考查过黄帝生前的事迹也不会错给谥号。黄帝时代，有没有称号、谥号，虽然难以断定，但 黄 不是得道 升 、 仙 的称号，是很明确的。
English: If it was added by the ministers of the Yellow Emperor, then they would understand that the Yellow Emperor would never give the name of the Immortal to the Yellow Emperor; if it was added by the descendants, then they must have examined the deeds of the Yellow Emperor during his lifetime and would not be mistaken to give the nickname. In the era of the Yellow Emperor, whether there is a title or nickname, although it is difficult to determine, it is clear that the Yellow Emperor did not get the title of Tao Sheng or Immortal.

古文：龙不升天，黄帝骑之，乃明黄帝不升天也。
现代文：龙不能升天，黄帝骑它，就证明黄帝没有升天。
English: The dragon cannot ascend to heaven. If the Yellow Emperor rode it, it would prove that the Yellow Emperor did not ascend to heaven.

古文：龙起云雨，因乘而行；云散雨止，降复入渊。
现代文：龙随云雨而起，于是乘云而飞行；云散雨停，又落入深渊。
English: The dragon rises with the clouds and rain, so it flies on the clouds; the clouds disperse and the rain stops, and it falls into the abyss.

古文：如实黄帝骑龙，随溺於渊也。
现代文：如果真是黄帝骑龙升天，就会随着云雨落入深渊中淹没。
English: If it is true that the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven on a dragon, it will fall into the abyss with the clouds and rain.

古文：案黄帝葬於桥山，犹曰群臣葬其衣冠。
现代文：根据考察，黄帝埋葬在桥山，还说大臣们在这里埋葬了他的衣帽。
English: According to the investigation, the Yellow Emperor was buried in Qiaoshan, and it was also said that the ministers buried his clothes and hats here.

古文：审骑龙而升天，衣不离形；如封禅已，仙去。衣冠亦不宜遗。
现代文：要是黄帝果真骑龙升天，那么他的衣服就不该离开身体；如果是黄帝封禅完毕，成仙而去，那么他的衣帽也不该留下。
English: If it is true that the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven on a dragon, then his clothes should not leave his body; if it is true that the Yellow Emperor left after he was enthroned as an immortal, then his clothes and hat should not remain.

古文：黄帝实仙不死而升天，臣子百姓所亲见也。
现代文：要是黄帝真的成仙不死而升天了，那么大臣和老百姓肯定会亲眼看见。
English: If the Yellow Emperor really became immortal and ascended to heaven, then the minister and the common people would certainly see it with their own eyes.

古文：见其升天，知其不死，必也。
现代文：看见他升天，知道他没有死，这是确定无疑的。
English: To see him ascend into heaven and know that he is not dead is a certainty.

古文：葬不死之衣冠，与实死者无以异，非臣子实事之心，别生於死之意也。
现代文：如果认为埋葬没有死的人的衣帽，跟埋葬死人没有两样，这不是作臣子的应实事求是、区分活人跟死人的态度。
English: If you think that burying a person who is not dead is no different from burying a dead person, this is not the attitude of a courtier who should seek truth from facts and distinguish between the living and the dead.

古文：载太山之上者，七十有二君，皆劳情苦思，忧念王事，然後功成事立，致治太平。
现代文：记载在泰山刻石上的，共有七十二位君主，他们都是操心苦思，忧念国事，然后功业成立，达到了天下太平。
English: There are a total of seventy-two monarchs recorded on the stone carved on Mount Taishan. They were all worried and worried about national affairs, and then their work was established and they achieved world peace.

古文：太平则天下和安，乃升太山而封禅焉。
现代文：天下太平就是天下和平安定，这样才能登泰山去封禅。
English: Peace under heaven means peace and stability under heaven. Only in this way can we go to Mount Tai to practice Zen.

古文：夫修道求仙，与忧职勤事不同。
现代文：要知道，修道求仙跟忧心职责勤劳国事不一样。
English: You know, it's not the same thing to be religious and seek immortality as it is to be anxious, responsible, hard-working, and concerned about the affairs of state.

古文：心思道则忘事，忧事则害性。
现代文：一心想得道成仙就会忘记国家大事，忧心国家大事就会伤害身体。
English: If one's heart is set on achieving immortality, one will forget important national events. If one is worried about important national events, one will harm one's body.

古文：世称尧若腊，舜若腒，心愁忧苦，形体赢癯。
现代文：说尧瘦得像块干肉，舜瘦得像只干鸟，心愁忧苦，身体就会瘦弱。
English: It is said that the cocoon is as thin as a piece of dried meat, and the cocoon is as thin as a dried bird. If the mind is sad, the body will be weak.

古文：使黄帝致太平乎，则其形体宜如尧、舜。
现代文：假使黄帝尽心使天下太平，那么他的身体应该像尧，舜一样干瘦。
English: If the Yellow Emperor did his best to make the world peaceful, then his body should be as lean as a horse.

古文：尧、舜不得道，黄帝升天，非其实也。
现代文：尧、舜没有得道成仙，黄帝得道升天，都不是事实。
English: It is not true that Zou and Zou did not attain immortality or that the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven.

古文：使黄帝废事修道，则心意调和，形体肥劲，是与尧、舜异也，异则功不同矣。
现代文：假使黄帝废弃国事一心修道，就该心情舒畅，身体粗壮结实，跟尧、舜有区别。有此区别业绩就会不一样。
English: If the Yellow Emperor abandoned the affairs of state and devoted himself to monasticism, he would be in a good mood, and his body would be strong and robust, which is different from that of a baboon or a rooster. With this difference, performance would be different.

古文：功不同，天下未太平而升封，又非实也。
现代文：业绩不同，天下还没有太平就去登泰山封禅，又不是事实。
English: Different performance, the world is not yet peaceful, it is not a fact to go to Mount Tai to seal the zen.

古文：五帝三王皆有圣德之优者，黄帝在上焉。
现代文：在有圣德的帝王中，五帝、三王都是杰出的，黄帝也在其中。
English: Among the holy emperors, the Five Emperors and the Three Emperors are outstanding, and the Yellow Emperor is also among them.

古文：如圣人皆仙，仙者非独黄帝；如圣人不仙，黄帝何为独仙？
现代文：如果圣人都成了仙，成仙的就不只黄帝一个人；要是圣人不能成仙，黄帝为什么偏偏能成仙呢？
English: If all saints have become immortals, then it is not only the Yellow Emperor who has become an immortal; if saints cannot become immortals, why can the Yellow Emperor become an immortal?

古文：世见黄帝好方术，方术仙者之业，则谓帝仙矣。
现代文：世人都看见黄帝喜欢仙术，仙术是修道成仙人的事情，于是就说黄帝成仙了。
English: The world saw that the Yellow Emperor liked magic, and that magic was a matter of cultivating immortals, so it was said that the Yellow Emperor had become an immortal.

古文：又见鼎湖之名，则言黄帝采首山铜铸鼎，而龙垂胡髯迎黄帝矣。
现代文：人们又听说鼎湖这个名称，就说黄帝开采首山的铜去铸鼎，然后有条龙垂下胡子髯须伏下身体去迎接他。
English: When people heard the name Dinghu, they said that the Yellow Emperor mined copper from the first mountain to make Dinghu, and then a dragon lowered his mustache and whiskers to greet him.

古文：是与说会稽之山无以异也。
现代文：这跟说会稽山没有什么差别。
English: It's no different from saying that you're going to climb Mt.

古文：夫山名曰 会稽 ，即云夏禹巡狩，会计於此山上，故曰 会稽 。
现代文：山名叫会稽，就是说夏禹巡视各地，会合诸侯在这山上计功行赏，所以称为 会稽 。
English: The name of the mountain is Kueiwa, which means that Xia Yu visited various places and gathered the lords to reward their efforts on this mountain, so it is called Kueiwa.

古文：夫禹至会稽治水不巡狩，犹黄帝好方伎不升天也。
现代文：其实，禹到会稽是治水并没有巡视各地，就像黄帝喜欢仙术并没有升天一样。
English: As a matter of fact, Yu arrived at the water control meeting and did not tour around the country, just as the Yellow Emperor liked magic and did not ascend to heaven.

古文：无会计之事，犹无铸鼎龙垂胡髯之实也。
现代文：没有会合诸侯，计功行赏的事，也就没有铸鼎龙垂胡髯之类的事。
English: There was no gathering of lords, no reward for meritorious deeds, and there was no such thing as the casting of dragons.

古文：里名胜母，可谓实有子胜其母乎？
现代文：里的名字叫 胜母 ，能说这里真有儿子胜过他的母亲吗？
English: Can it really be said that there is a son here who is better than his mother?

古文：邑名朝歌，可谓民朝起者歌乎？
现代文：城镇的名字叫 朝歌 ，能说老百姓早晨起来就唱歌吗？
English: The name of the town is "Chouka," can it be said that the people sing when they get up in the morning?

古文：儒书言：淮南王学道，招会天下有道之人，倾一国之尊，下道术之士。
现代文：儒者的书上说：淮南王学道，招集天下有道的人，屈国君的尊严，接待有道术的人士。
English: The Confucianist's book said: King Huainan was the first to learn Taoism, he summoned all the Taoists in the world, he had the dignity of Qu Guojun, and he received those who had learned Taoism.

古文：是以道术之士，并会淮南，奇方异术，莫不争出。
现代文：因此有道术的人，一起会聚淮南王，奇异的方术，没有不争先献出的。
English: Therefore, people who have Taoism will gather together in Huainan, and there is no strange Fangzhu that will not be presented first.

古文：王遂得道，举家升天。畜产皆仙，犬吠於天上，鸡鸣於云中。
现代文：淮南王终于得道成仙，全家升天，连家中的禽兽都成了仙，狗会在天上叫，鸡会在云中啼。
English: King Huainan finally achieved immortality, the whole family ascended to heaven, even the animals in the family became immortals, the dog would howl in the sky, and the chicken would cluck in the clouds.

古文：此言仙药有余，犬鸡食之，并随王而升天也。
现代文：这是说淮南王的仙药有多余，狗、鸡吃了，都一起随他升天。
English: This is to say that Huainan King's elixir is superfluous, the dog and chicken ate it, and they all ascended to heaven with him.

古文：好道学仙之人，皆谓之然。
现代文：喜欢求道学仙的人，都说是真的。
English: People who like to seek the Taoist immortals all say that it is true.

古文：此虚言也。
现代文：这话不确实。
English: That's a lie.

古文：夫人，物也，虽贵为王侯，性不异於物。
现代文：因为人是动物。即使尊贵做了王侯，本性跟动物没有差别。
English: Because man is an animal. Even if he becomes a prince, his nature is no different from that of an animal.

古文：物无不死，人安能仙？
现代文：动物没有不死的，人又怎么能为仙人不死呢？
English: Animals don't have immortality, so how can a human be immortal?

古文：鸟有毛羽，能飞，不能升天。
现代文：鸟有羽毛，会飞不能升天。
English: Birds have feathers. They can fly, but they can't fly to the sky.

古文：人无毛羽，何用飞升？
现代文：人没有羽毛，用什么来飞，来升天呢？
English: People do not have feathers. What do they use to fly and ascend into the sky?

古文：使有毛羽，不过与鸟同；况其无有，升天如何？
现代文：假使有羽毛，不过跟鸟一样，何况没有，怎么能升天呢？
English: If it has feathers, but is like a bird, how can it fly into the sky?

古文：案能飞升之物，生有毛羽之兆;能驰走之物，生有蹄足之形。
现代文：考察能飞能升天的动物，生来就有羽毛的形状；能奔跑的动物，生来就有蹄子的形状。
English: Animals that can fly and soar into the sky are born with the shape of feathers; animals that can run are born with the shape of hooves.

古文：驰走不能飞升，飞升不能驰走。禀性受气，形体殊别也。
现代文：动物能奔跑的不会飞，不会升天，会飞能升天的又不能奔跑，这是因为它们承受的特性和气各不相同，所以形体也不一样的缘故。
English: Animals that can run can't fly and can't ascend to heaven, and those that can fly and can ascend to heaven can't run. This is because their characteristics and qi are different, so their shapes are also different.

古文：今人禀驰走之性，故生无毛羽之兆，长大至老，终无奇怪。
现代文：如今人承受了能奔跑的特性，所以生来就没有羽毛的形状，从长大到老，始终没有异常的变化。
English: Nowadays, people have inherited the ability to run, so they are born without the shape of feathers, and there is no abnormal change from growing up to old age.

古文：好道学仙，中生毛羽，终以飞升。
现代文：据说好道学仙的人，能中途长出羽毛，终于会飞能升天。
English: It is said that a person who is a good Taoist can grow feathers in the middle and finally fly to heaven.

古文：使物性可变，金木水火可革更也。
现代文：即使物体的特性可以改变，金木水火，也可以改变，虾蟆能变成鹌鹑，麻雀到水里能变成大蛤蜊。
English: Even if the characteristics of objects can be changed, such as gold, wood, water, and fire, they can also be changed. A shrimp's beak can turn into a beak, and a sparrow can turn into a large beak when it enters the water.

古文：虾蟆化为鹑，雀入水为蜃蛤，禀自然之性，非学道所能为也。好道之人，恐其或若等之类，故谓人能生毛羽，毛羽备具，能升天也。
现代文：这都是承受气而自然形成的特性，并不是学道能做到的。喜欢道的人，恐怕他们也许就像这一类东西，所以他们说人能长羽毛，等到羽毛具备了，就能升天。
English: I'm afraid that people who like Tao might be like this kind of thing, so they say that people can grow feathers, and when they have feathers, they can ascend to heaven.

古文：且夫物之生长，无卒成暴起，皆有浸渐。
现代文：再说，动物的生长，没有突然长成猛然产生的，都有渐变的过程。
English: Moreover, the growth of animals is not a sudden growth, but a gradual process.

古文：为道学仙之人，能先生数寸之毛羽，从地自奋，升楼台之陛，乃可谓升天。
现代文：为道学仙的人，假使能先长出几寸长的羽毛，从地上自己奋起，飞到楼台的台阶上，然后才说得上能升天。
English: For those who are Taoist immortals, if they can first grow a few inches of feathers, rise up from the ground on their own and fly to the steps of the platform, then they can ascend to heaven.

古文：今无小升之兆，卒有大飞之验，何方术之学成无浸渐也？
现代文：如今没有一点能飞升的样子，怎么会突然有直飞上天的效验，是什么道术的成功没有渐变的过程呢？
English: Nowadays, there is no such thing as a point that can soar. How can there suddenly be an effect of flying straight up to the sky? What kind of Daoist success does not have a gradual process?

古文：毛羽大效，难以观实。
现代文：人生毛羽的功效，很难具体观察到。
English: The effectiveness of fluff in life is difficult to observe concretely.

古文：且以人髯发物色少老验之。
现代文：用人的头发、植物的颜色初生与衰老的情况来验证。
English: Using human hair, plant color and the situation of birth and aging to verify.

古文：物生也色青，其熟也色黄。人之少也发黑，其老也发白。
现代文：植物生长初期颜色青，到它成熟时颜色变黄；人年少时头发颜色黑，到他年老时头发变白。
English: A plant is blue at the beginning of its growth and turns yellow when it matures; a man's hair is black when he is young and turns white when he is old.

古文：黄为物熟验，白为人老效。
现代文：颜色变黄是植物成熟的证明，头发变白是人年老的证明。
English: The yellowing of the color is proof of the maturity of the plant, and the graying of the hair is proof of old age.

古文：物黄，人虽灌溉壅养，终不能青；发白，虽吞药养性，终不能黑。
现代文：植物变黄，人即使灌溉培土施肥培植它，始终不能变青；头发白了，即使吃药保养身体，始终不会变黑。
English: Plants turn yellow, even if people irrigate and fertilize the soil to cultivate it, they can never turn blue; hair turns white, even if they take medicine to maintain their body, they will never turn black.

古文：黑青不可复还，老衰安可复却？
现代文：黑色青色不能再还原，年老体衰怎么可以重新退回到年轻的时候去呢？
English: Black and blue can no longer be restored, how can the old body decline back to the time of youth?

古文：黄之与白，犹肉腥炙之燋，鱼鲜煮之熟也。
现代文：黄色与白色，就像把生肉烤煳，把生鱼煮熟一样。
English: Yellow and white, like raw meat grilled and raw fish cooked.

古文：燋不可复令腥，熟不可复令鲜。
现代文：烤煳的不能又叫它成为生肉，煮熟的不能再使它成为生鱼。
English: Roasted clams cannot be made into raw meat, and cooked clams cannot be made into raw fish.

古文：鲜腥犹少壮，燋熟犹衰老也。
现代文：生肉生鱼就像人年轻体壮一样，烤煳的肉煮熟的鱼就像人体衰年老一样。
English: Raw meat and raw fish are like people who are young and strong, and grilled meat and cooked fish are like people who are old.

古文：天养物，能使物暢至秋，不得延之至春；吞药养性，能令人无病，不能寿之为仙。
现代文：天供养植物，能使植物顺利地生长到秋天，但不能使它延长到来年春天。吃药能保养身体，能使人不生病，但不能延寿成仙人不死。
English: Heaven provides plants, can make plants grow smoothly until autumn, but can not extend it to spring. Taking medicine can maintain the body, can make people not sick, but can not prolong life into immortality.

古文：为仙体轻气强，犹未能升天，令见轻强之验，亦无毛羽之效，何用升天？
现代文：成为仙人体轻气足，尚且不能升天，即令有明显的体轻气足的证明，也没有长羽毛的证明，用什么来升天呢？
English: What is the use of ascending to heaven if you can't ascend to heaven even though you've become a light-footed fairy? Even if you have a clear proof of light-footedness and no proof of feathers?

古文：天之与地，皆体也。地无下，则天无上矣。
现代文：天和地都是实体。没有比地更低的地方，那么也没有比天更高的地方。
English: Heaven and earth are entities. There is no place lower than the earth, so there is no place higher than heaven.

古文：天无上升之路，何如？
现代文：没有比天更高的地方，那么升天的路怎么走呢？
English: There is no place higher than heaven, so how do you go about ascending to heaven?

古文：穿天之体？人力不能入。
现代文：如果要穿透天体，靠人力是不可能进去的。
English: If you want to penetrate a celestial body, it's impossible to get in by hand.

古文：如天之门在西北，升天之人，宜从昆仑上。
现代文：如果天的门在西北，升天的人应该从昆仑山上。
English: If the gate of heaven is in the northwest, the person who ascends to heaven should start from Mount Kunlun.

古文：淮南之国，在地东南。如审升天，宜举家先从昆仑，乃得其阶。
现代文：淮南国，在地的东南，如果确实要升天，淮南王应该全家先迁移到昆仑山，才能得到上天的阶梯。
English: Huainan, in the southeast of the earth, if he really wants to ascend to heaven, the king of Huainan should first move his whole family to Kunlun Mountain in order to get the ladder to heaven.

古文：如鼓翼邪飞，趋西北之隅，是则淮南王有羽翼也。
现代文：要是淮南王能展翅斜着向西北角飞，这就是说他有翅膀了。
English: If Huainan Wang can spread his wings and fly diagonally to the northwest corner, it means that he has wings.

古文：今不言其从之昆仑，亦不言其身生羽翼，空言升天，竟虚非实也。
现代文：现在不说淮南王迁移昆仑山，也不说他身上长有翅膀，而凭空说他升天，可见终究是虚假不真实的。
English: Now, it does not say that King Huainan moved Mount Kunlun, nor does it say that he has wings on his body, but it says that he ascended to heaven out of thin air, which is ultimately false and untrue.

古文：案淮南王刘安，孝武皇帝之时也。
现代文：考察淮南王刘安是孝武皇帝时人。
English: An examination of Liu An, King of Huainan, who lived during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：父长，以罪迁蜀严道，至雍道死。
现代文：他父亲刘长，因为获罪被流放蜀郡严道，在去雍县路上死了。
English: His father, Liu Chang, died on his way to Yong County after being exiled to Shu County.

古文：安嗣为王，恨父徙死，怀反逆之心，招会术人，欲为大事。
现代文：刘安继承做了淮南王，怀恨他父亲被流放而死，怀有叛逆之心，于是招聚有道术的人，想为谋反作准备。
English: Liu An succeeded as King of Huainan. He hated that his father was exiled and died. He harbored a rebellious heart, so he gathered people with Taoism to prepare for a rebellion.

古文：伍被之属充满殿堂，作道术之书，发怪奇之文，合景乱首。
现代文：这样伍被之类，充满大殿，写作道术的书，发表稀奇古怪的文章，与作乱的首领形影不离。
English: The likes of Wu Quan and the like fill the halls, write books on Taoism, publish bizarre articles, and are inseparable from the ringleaders of the turmoil.

古文：《八公之传》欲示神奇，若得道之状，道终不成，效验不立，乃与伍被谋为反事，事觉自杀，或言诛死。
现代文：八公之类的人想显示自己的神奇，装作好像修仙得道的样子。修道终究没有成功，没有效果，于是跟伍被策划谋反的事，事情被发觉而自杀。有人说是被处死。
English: People like the Eight Immortals wanted to show their magic, pretending to be as if they were cultivators of the Tao. After all, the cult was not successful, it had no effect, so the followers were plotting a rebellion, the matter was discovered and they committed suicide. Some say they were executed.

古文：诛死、自杀，同一实也。
现代文：被处死与自杀，同是一回事。
English: Being put to death is the same as committing suicide.

古文：世见其书，深冥奇怪，又观《八公之传》似若有效，则传称淮南王仙而升天，失其实也。
现代文：世人看见他们写的书深奥莫测罕见怪异，又看见八公之类好像有成效的样子，就流传说淮南王成仙而且升天，这就失掉了它的真实性。
English: When the world saw that the books they wrote were abstruse, rare and strange, and also saw that the Eight Immortals and the like seemed to be effective, the legend of King Huainan becoming immortal and ascending to heaven was spread, which lost its authenticity.

古文：儒书言：卢敖游乎北海，经乎太阴，入乎玄关，至於蒙谷之上，见一士焉：深目玄准，雁颈而肩，浮上而杀下，轩轩然方迎风而舞。
现代文：儒者的书上说：卢敖在北方边远地区游历，经过最北边，进入玄阙，到了蒙谷山上，看见一个人，凹眼睛高鼻子，雁长颈鹰凸肩，上身肥胖下身瘦削，飘飘然正迎风而舞。
English: The book of the Confucians said: Lu Xun traveled in the remote areas of the north, passed through the northernmost, entered Xuan Zang, and arrived at Menggu Mountain, where he saw a person with concave eyes, high nose, goose-like long neck, hawk-like convex shoulders, fat upper body, thin lower body, and was dancing against the wind.

古文：顾见卢敖，樊然下其臂，遁逃乎碑下。
现代文：反脸看见卢敖，慌忙放下手臂，逃到竖石后边。
English: When he saw Lu Yao, he hurriedly dropped his arm and fled behind the rock.

古文：敖乃视之，方卷然龟背而食合梨。
现代文：卢敖才看见他，正像龟样弓着背在吃蛤蜊。
English: Lu Yao only saw him when he was bending his back like a turtle and eating grasshoppers.

古文：卢敖仍与之语曰： 吾子唯以敖为倍俗，去群离党，穷观於六合之外者，非敖而己？
现代文：于是就跟他讲话： 您是仅仅把我当作抛弃人间，离开亲友，才遍游天地四方之外的人，而瞧不起我罢。 
English: So I spoke to him: You only look down on me as someone who abandoned the human world, left his relatives and friends, and traveled all over the world and beyond.

古文：敖幼而游，至长不偷解，周行四极，唯北阴之未窥。
现代文：我从小就游历，到老不改变，不松懈，走遍了各处边远的地方，只有最北边还没有看过。
English: I've been travelling since I was a child, and I've never changed, never slackened off. I've travelled all over the remote places, but I haven't seen the northernmost part yet.

古文：今卒睹夫子於是，殆可与敖为友乎？ 若士者悖然而笑曰： 嘻！
现代文：今天终于在这里见到了先生，大概先生能跟我做个朋友吧？ 那个人突然大笑说： 嘻！
English: Today, I finally met my teacher here. I wonder if my teacher can be my friend? The man suddenly burst out laughing and said, "Hee hee!

古文：子中州之民也，不宜远至此。
现代文：你是中原地方的人，不该远游到这里。
English: You're from the Central Plains, you shouldn't have come all the way here.

古文：此犹光日月而戴列星，四时之所行，阴阳之所生也。
现代文：这里还是日月照耀，布满群星，春夏秋冬交替出现，阴气阳气产生的地方。
English: It is still a place where the sun and moon shine, stars are everywhere, spring, summer, autumn and winter alternate, and yin and yang are generated.

古文：此其比夫不名之地，犹突兀也。
现代文：这比那些叫不出名字的地方来，就像孤秃的小山一样。
English: It's more like places that can't be named, like lonely hills.

古文：若我南游乎罔浪之野，北息乎沉薶之乡，西穷乎杳冥之党，而东贯湏懞之先。
现代文：像我，南到无边无际的旷野游玩，北在无声无息的地方休息，西走遍了幽深渺茫的地方，而东穿过大地到了太阳升起的地方。
English: Like me, south to play in the boundless wilderness, north to rest in the silent place, west to walk through the dark places, and east across the earth to the place where the sun rises.

古文：此其下无地，上无天，听焉无闻，而视焉则营；此其外犹有状，有状之余，壹举而能千万里，吾犹未能之在。
现代文：这些地方没有比地更低的，也没有比天更高的，听也听不见，而一看就眼花；这些地方外表上还有形状，至于有形状以外无形状的地方，一跃就能千万里，我还未能到过那样的地方。
English: These places are not lower than the ground, nor higher than the sky, nor can they be heard or heard, but they are dazzling at a glance; these places still have shapes on the outside, as for the places that have no shape other than the shape, one jump can be ten thousand miles, I have not been able to go to such a place.

古文：今子游始至於此，乃语穷观，岂不亦远哉？
现代文：今天你游历刚到这里，就说游遍了，岂不差得太远了吗！
English: Today, when you have just arrived here, you say that you have traveled all over. Isn't that too far off?

古文：然子处矣。
现代文：这样，你就留下来。
English: Then you'll stay.

古文：吾与汗漫期於九垓之上，吾不可久。 
现代文：我跟汗漫在九重天上有个约会，不能久留。 
English: I have an appointment with Khanman in Jiuquan. I can't stay for long.

古文：若士者举臂而纵身，逐入云中。
现代文：那个人抬臂一纵身，就进了云中。
English: The man raised his arm and dove into the clouds.

古文：卢敖目仰而视之，不见，乃止喜心不怠，怅若有丧，曰： 吾比夫子也，犹黄鹄之与壤虫也，终日行，而不离咫尺，而自以为远，岂不悲哉！ 
现代文：卢敖抬头看他，已经不见了，这才停止前进。但他心中不愉快，感到惆怅像丢了什么，说： 我比先生，就像黄鹄与小虫，整天走就没有超过咫尺，而自己却认为走得远，难道不可悲吗！ 
English: Lu Xun looked up at him and saw that he had disappeared, and only then did he stop moving forward. However, he was unhappy in his heart and felt as if he had lost something. He said, "I, Mr. Bi, am just like the beetle and the worm. I walk all day without exceeding a meter, but I think I have gone too far. Isn't it sad?"

古文：若卢敖者，唯龙无翼者升则乘云。
现代文：会飞的动物中只有龙没有翅膀，要飞升就乘云。
English: Of all the flying animals, only dragons do not have wings. To fly, they have to soar above the clouds.

古文：卢敖言若士者有翼，言乃可信。
现代文：卢敖说那个人有翅膀，他的话才可信。
English: Lu Yao said that the man had wings, and his words were credible.

古文：今不言有翼，何以升云？
现代文：如今不说有翅滂，怎么能飞升到云里呢？
English: Now, how can a crane fly up into the clouds without wings?

古文：且凡能轻举入云中者，饮食与人殊之故也。
现代文：况且凡是能够轻轻一跃进入云中的，都是因为吃的东西跟人不同的缘故。
English: What's more, anyone who can leap into the clouds is able to do so because they eat something different from humans.

古文：龙食与蛇异，故其举措与蛇不同。
现代文：龙吃的跟蛇不一样，所以龙的举动与蛇不相同。
English: The food of a dragon is different from that of a snake, so the behavior of a dragon is different from that of a snake.

古文：闻为道者，服金玉之精，食紫芝之英。食精身轻，故能神仙。
现代文：听说修道的吞服纯的金玉，吃紫灵芝的花，吃精美的东西身体会轻捷，所以能成神仙。
English: It is said that if a practitioner swallows pure gold nuggets, eats lingzhi flowers, and eats exquisite things, his body will be light and agile, so he can become a god.

古文：若士者食合蜊之肉，与庸民同食，无精轻之验，安能纵体而升天？
现代文：那个人吃蛤蜊的肉，跟一般人是同样的食物，没有吃得精美身体轻捷的证明，怎么能一纵身体就升天呢？
English: That man ate the flesh of maggots, the same food as ordinary people. How could he ascend to heaven without proof that he had eaten deliciously and his body was light?

古文：闻食气者不食物，食物者不食气。
现代文：听说以气为食的不吃东西，吃东西的不以气为食。
English: It is said that one should not eat food that feeds on qi, and one should not eat food that feeds on qi.

古文：若士者食物如不食气，则不能轻举矣。
现代文：那个人吃东西而不以气为食，那么就不会轻轻一跃进入云中。
English: If that person eats and does not feed on qi, then he will not leap into the clouds.

古文：或时卢敖学道求仙，游乎北海，离众远去，无得道之效，惭於乡里，负於论议。
现代文：或许是卢敖学道求仙，到北方边远地区游历，由于离开大家远行，没有得道的效果在乡亲面前感到惭愧，在议论面前感到羞耻，自己知道会因这事被世人指责，就捏造荒唐的话，说见到了一个人。
English: Perhaps it was Lu Xun who studied Taoism to seek immortality, traveled to the remote areas of the north, and because he traveled far away from everyone, he felt ashamed in front of the villagers because he did not get the effect of Taoism, and felt ashamed in front of the discussion. Knowing that he would be criticized by the world for this, he fabricated absurd words and said that he saw a person.

古文：自知以必然之事见责於世，则作夸诞之语，云见一士，其意以为有，求之未得，期数未至也。淮南王刘安坐反而死，天下并闻，当时并见，儒书尚有言其得道仙去，鸡犬升天者；况卢敖一人之身，独行绝迹之地，空造幽冥之语乎？
现代文：他的意思认为，是有仙人的，自己求仙未能实现，是因为 期数 还没有到。淮南王刘安因犯谋反罪而死，天下人都知道，当时的人都看见的，儒者的书上尚且有说他得道成仙升天而去、鸡犬也跟随升天的；何况卢敖只身一人，走到没有人迹的地方，而凭空捏造出一些神秘莫测的话呢？
English: He believes that there are immortals, and that his quest for immortals has not been fulfilled because the number of years has not yet arrived. Liu An, the king of Huainan, died for committing treason. The whole world knows about it, and everyone at the time saw it. In the books of the Confucians, it is also said that he had to ascend to heaven as an immortal, and the chicken dog also followed him to heaven. What's more, Lu Xun was alone, went to a place where there were no traces, and fabricated some mysterious words out of thin air?

古文：是与河东蒲坂项曼都之语，无以异也。
现代文：这跟河东郡蒲坂镇项曼都的说法没有两样。
English: This is no different from what was said about Xiangmandu, Busaka Town, Hedong County.

古文：曼都好道学仙，委家亡去，三年而返。家问其状，曼都曰： 去时不能自知，忽见若卧形，有仙人数人，将我上天，离月数里而止。
现代文：项曼都喜欢学道求仙，弃家出走，三年才回来，家里人问他离家后的情况，曼都说： 离开家的时候连自己也不知道，忽然像睡着一样，有几个仙人把我送上了天，到离月亮几里远就停下来。
English: Both of them like to learn the Tao and seek immortality. They ran away from home and only came back three years later. When their families asked them about the situation after they left home, both of them said: When I left home, I didn't even know it myself. Suddenly, it was like I fell asleep. A few immortals sent me up to the sky, and when I was a few miles away from the moon, I stopped.

古文：见月上下幽冥，幽冥不知东西。
现代文：看见月亮四周幽深渺茫，幽深渺茫得使人不知道是东是西。
English: Seeing the moon all around is dim and faint, so dim and faint that one does not know whether it is east or west.

古文：居月之旁，其寒凄怆。
现代文：住在月亮旁边，那儿寒冷凄凉。
English: Living next to the moon, it's cold and bleak.

古文：口饥欲食，仙人辄饮我以流霞一杯，每饮一杯，数月不饥。
现代文：口饿得想吃东西，仙人就拿一杯 流霞 给我喝。每喝一杯，几个月不会饿。
English: My mouth was so hungry that I wanted to eat, so the hermit brought me a glass of Lixia. With each glass, I wouldn't be hungry for months.

古文：不知去几何年月，不知以何为过，忽然若卧，复下至此。 
现代文：不知道离开了多少年月，也不知道因为犯了什么过错，忽然像睡着一样，又被降到这里。 
English: I don't know how many years I've been away, nor do I know what mistakes I've made, but suddenly, like falling asleep, I've been relegated here again.

古文：河东号之曰 斥仙 。
现代文：这样河东郡的人就称他叫 斥仙 。
English: As a result, the people of Hedong County call him "Chuxian."

古文：实论者闻之，乃知不然。
现代文：尊重事实的人听了这些，就知道不真实。
English: Anyone with any respect for the truth hears this and knows it's not true.

古文：夫曼都能上天矣，何为不仙？
现代文：既然曼都能上天，为什么不成仙呢？
English: Since everyone can go to heaven, why not become immortal?

古文：已三年矣，何故复还？
现代文：已经三年了，为什么又回来呢？
English: It's been three years, why come back?

古文：夫人去民间，升皇天之上，精气形体，有变於故者矣。
现代文：人离开人间，飞升到皇天上，精气与形体，本来就会有变化。
English: When a person leaves the human world and soars to the imperial heaven, the essence and form will naturally change.

古文：万物变化，无复还者。
现代文：万物变化，没有再还原的。
English: Everything changes, there is no going back.

古文：复育化为蝉，羽翼既成，不能复化为复育。
现代文：复育变化成蝉，翅膀完全长成，就不能再变成复育了。
English: Reproduction changes into a cicada, the wings are fully grown, it can no longer become a re-breeding.

古文：能升之物，皆有羽翼，升而复降，羽翼如故。
现代文：会飞的动物，都有翅膀，升上去又降下来，翅膀仍然像原来一样。
English: All flying creatures have wings. They can fly up and down, and their wings are still the same.

古文：见曼都之身有羽翼乎，言乃可信；身无羽翼，言虚妄也。
现代文：要看见曼都身上长有翅膀，他的话才能相信；身上没有翅膀，他的话就是假的。
English: To see Mantu with wings on his body is to believe his words; without wings on his body, his words are false.

古文：虚则与卢敖同一实也。
现代文：虚假的程度跟卢敖是同一种情况。
English: The degree of falsity is the same as that of Lu Yao.

古文：或时曼都好道，默委家去，周章远方，终无所得，力勌望极，默复归家，惭愧无言，则言上天。
现代文：也许曼都喜欢道术，悄悄地弃家出走，周游远方，终于没有得到什么，但身体疲乏感到绝望，悄悄地又回到家里，惭愧得无话可说，就只好说自己已经上过天。
English: Maybe they all like Taoism, quietly leave home, travel far and wide, and finally get nothing, but they are physically tired and feel desperate, and quietly return home, too ashamed to say anything, so they have to say that they have gone to heaven.

古文：其意欲言道可学得，审有仙人;己殆有过，故成而复斥，升而复降。
现代文：他的意思想说，道是能学到的，确实有仙人，自己恐怕有过错，所以成仙之后又被贬斥，升天了又被降到人间。
English: He meant to say that the Tao can be learned, that there really are immortals, and that he was afraid of making a mistake, so he was rebuked after becoming an immortal, ascended to heaven and was relegated to the world.

古文：儒书言：齐王疾痏，使人之宋迎文挚。
现代文：儒者的书上说：齐湣王得了头疼病，派人去宋国接文挚。
English: The Confucianist's book said: King Qizong got a headache and sent someone to Song to pick up Wenxin.

古文：文挚至，视王之疾，谓太子曰： 王之疾，必可已也。 
现代文：文挚来了，察看了齐王的病之后，对太子说： 王的病，肯定可以治好。
English: After inspecting King Qi's illness, Wen Weiwei came and said to the prince, "The king's illness can definitely be cured."

古文：虽然，王之疾已，则必杀挚也 。太子曰： 何故？ 
现代文：虽然这样，王的病治好了，但他肯定要杀我。 太子问： 为什么呢？ 
English: In spite of this, the king's illness was cured, but he definitely wanted to kill me. The prince asked: Why?

古文：文挚对曰： 非怒王，疾不可治也。
现代文：文挚回答说： 要是不激怒齐王，他的病就不能治好。
English: Wen earnestly replied, "If you don't anger King Qi, you won't be able to cure his illness."

古文：王怒，则挚必死。 
现代文：齐王被激怒，那么我必死无疑。 
English: If King Qi is enraged, then I will surely die.

古文：太子顿首强请曰： 苟已王之疾，臣与臣之母以死争之於王，必幸臣之母。
现代文：太子磕头竭力恳请说： 如果治好了父王的病，我跟我母亲将以死向父王力争。父王一定会答应我跟我母亲的请求。
English: Prince Shantou begged with all his might, saying, "If my father's illness is cured, I and my mother will fight to the death against my father. My father will surely agree to my and my mother's request."

古文：愿先生之勿患也。 
现代文：请先生不用害怕。 
English: Please, sir, don't be afraid.

古文：文挚曰： 诺，请以死为王。 
现代文：文挚说： 好，我愿冒死给王治病。 
English: Wen earnestly said: Good, I am willing to risk my life to cure Wang.

古文：与太子期，将往，不至者三，齐王固已怒矣。
现代文：于是跟太子约定日期去给齐王治病，但是三次说好要去都没有去，齐王本来已被激怒。
English: So he made an appointment with the crown prince to go and treat King Qi, but after three times of promising to go, he did not go. King Qi was already enraged.

古文：文挚至，不解屦登床，履衣，问王之疾。
现代文：文挚来了，不解鞋就上床踩着齐王的衣服，问齐王的病。
English: When Wen Zhengyi arrived, he went to bed with his shoes on, stepped on Qi Wang's clothes, and asked about Qi Wang's illness.

古文：王怒而不与言。
现代文：齐王心里生气不跟他说话。
English: King Qi was angry in his heart and would not talk to him.

古文：文挚因出辞以重王怒。
现代文：文挚便说重话使王发怒。
English: The king was angered by Wen Weiwei's harsh words.

古文：王叱而起，疾乃遂已。
现代文：齐王高声大骂翻身而起，病于是就好了。
English: Qi Wang cursed loudly and rolled over, and his illness was cured.

古文：王大怒不悦，将生烹文挚。
现代文：但是齐王仍然大发皮气不高兴，要活活地把文挚煮死。
English: However, King Qi was still furious and unhappy, and wanted to boil Wenxin alive.

古文：太子与王后急争之而不能得，果以鼎生烹文挚。
现代文：太子和王后赶忙为他恳求却得不到齐王的允许，果真用鼎活活地煮文挚。
English: The prince and the queen hurriedly pleaded for him but did not get the permission of the king of Qi, and they really cooked the letter with the utmost vigor.

古文：爨之三日三夜，颜色不变。
现代文：烧火煮了他三天三夜，他颜色一点不变。
English: King Qi finally boiled Wenzhong alive with a pickaxe. Wenzhong was boiled for three days and three nights, and his appearance was not ruined.

古文：文挚曰： 诚欲杀我，则胡不覆之，以绝阴阳之气？ 
现代文：文挚说： 实在想杀我，那为什么不盖上盖子，以断绝阴气和阳气呢？ 
English: The writing pad said, "If you really want to kill me, why don't you cover it up and cut off the yin and yang?"

古文：王使覆之，文挚乃死。
现代文：齐王让人盖上盖子，文挚才被煮死。
English: Qiren let people put the lid on, Wen Wei only died.

古文：夫文挚，道人也，入水不濡，入火不燋，故在鼎三日三夜，颜色不变。
现代文：文挚是得道的人，入水不会被沾湿，进火不会被烧焦，所以在鼎里三天三夜，颜色一点不改变。
English: Wenxin is a person who knows the way, he will not get wet when he goes into the water, and he will not be burned when he goes into the fire, so he will not change his color for three days and three nights in Dingli.

古文：此虚言也。
现代文：这是虚假的说法。
English: That's a lie.

古文：夫文挚而烹三日三夜，颜色不变，为一覆之故绝气而死，非得道之验也。
现代文：文挚能被煮三天三夜，颜色一点不变，却因为一盖上盖子的缘故，就断气而死，这就是没有得道的证明。
English: Wen Zhi can be boiled for three days and three nights, the color does not change at all, but because of the cover on the cover, he died, which is proof that he did not attain enlightenment.

古文：诸生息之物，气绝则死。
现代文：凡活着能呼吸的东西，气一断就会死，一煮就会烂。
English: Everything that is alive and can breathe will die as soon as its breath is cut off, and will rot as soon as it is boiled.

古文：死之物，烹之辄烂。致生息之物密器之中，覆盖其口，漆涂其隙，中外气隔，息不得泄，有顷死也。
现代文：如果把有生命的东西放在严密的器皿中，用盖子盖上它的口，用漆涂抹它的缝隙，把里外的气隔断，呼吸不能相通，他立即就会死。
English: If you put a living thing in a tight container, cover its mouth with a lid, paint its crevices with paint, cut off the breath from the inside and the outside, and the breath cannot communicate, it will die immediately.

古文：如置汤镬之中，亦辄烂矣。
现代文：如果放在开水镬里，也立即会被煮烂。为什么呢？
English: If you put it in a pan of boiling water, it will be boiled immediately. Why?

古文：何则？体同气均，禀性於天，共一类也。
现代文：因为有生命之物的身体同他的气一样，是从天禀受来的特性，所以是相同的一类。
English: For the body of a living being, like his breath, is a property received from heaven, and therefore belongs to the same class.

古文：文挚不息乎？与金石同，入汤不烂，是也。令文挚息乎？烹之不死，非也。
现代文：要说文挚不需要呼吸，跟金石一样，放进开水里煮不烂，这可以；如今文挚需要呼吸，又煮他不死，那不可能。
English: To say that Wenxin doesn't need to breathe, is like a precious stone, and can't be boiled in boiling water, that's fine; now that Wenxin needs to breathe, and can't be boiled to death, that's impossible.

古文：令文挚言，言则以声，声以呼吸。
现代文：如果文挚要说话，说话是靠声音，声音靠呼吸。
English: If you want to speak, speak with your voice, and your voice with your breath.

古文：呼吸之动，因血气之发。
现代文：呼吸靠运动，运动靠血气的运行。
English: Breathing depends on movement, and movement depends on the circulation of blood and gas.

古文：血气之发，附於骨肉。
现代文：血气的运行，依附于骨肉。
English: The circulation of blood and gas, adhering to the flesh and bones.

古文：骨肉之物，烹之辄死。
现代文：有骨肉的东西，一煮他就死。
English: Anything with bones and flesh will die as soon as it is boiled.

古文：今言烹之不死，一虚也。
现代文：如今说煮它不死，这是虚假之一。
English: Now to say it doesn't die when you boil it, that's one of the fallacies.

古文：既能烹煮不死，此真人也，与金石同。
现代文：既然会煮不死，这是仙人，跟金石一样。
English: Since it can cook and not die, it is a fairy godmother, just like Kiseki.

古文：金石虽覆盖，与不覆盖者无以异也。
现代文：金石即使盖上鼎的盖子，跟不盖盖子没有两样。
English: Even if the lid is covered with a lid, it is no different from not covering the lid.

古文：今言文挚覆之则死，二虚也。
现代文：现在说文挚，盖上盖子就死了，这是虚假之二。
English: Now, to be honest, if you put the lid on it and it dies, that's the second lie.

古文：置人寒水之中，无汤火之热，鼻中口内不通於外，斯须之顷，气绝而死矣。
现代文：要是把人放在冷水里，没有开水与火的热量，鼻与口跟水面不相通，片刻之间，就会断气而死。
English: If you put a person in cold water, without the heat of boiling water and fire, the nose and mouth are not connected to the surface of the water, and in a few moments, they will die of suffocation.

古文：寒水沉人，尚不得生，况在沸汤之中，有猛火之烈乎？
现代文：冷水淹没了人，尚且不得活，何况是在滚开的水中，下边还有猛烈的火呢！
English: Cold water drowns a man, and yet he is not allowed to live, and what is more, in the water that has rolled away, there is still a fierce fire below!

古文：言其入汤不死，三虚也。
现代文：说他被放进开水里不死，这是虚假之三。
English: Saying that he was put in boiling water and did not die is the third untruth.

古文：人没水中，口不见於外，言音不扬。
现代文：人被淹没在水里，口不露在水面之外，说话的声音不能传扬。
English: A person is submerged in water, his mouth is not exposed above the surface of the water, and his voice cannot be heard.

古文：烹文挚之时，身必没於鼎中。没则口不见，口不见则言不扬。
现代文：煮文挚的时候，他的身体肯定被淹没在鼎的水中，被淹没了，那么口就不会露出水面，口不露出水面那么说话就不会传扬。
English: When boiled, his body must be submerged in boiling water. If he is submerged, his mouth will not come out of the water. If his mouth does not come out of the water, he will not be able to speak.

古文：文挚之言，四虚也。
现代文：文挚能说话，这是虚假之四。
English: This is the fourth fallacy.

古文：烹辄死之人，三日三夜，颜色不变，痴愚之人，尚知怪之。
现代文：一煮就死的人，三天三夜颜色一点不变，就是痴呆和傻瓜，尚且都知道是件神奇的事情。
English: People who die as soon as they are boiled, and their color does not change at all for three days and three nights, are demented and stupid, even though they know it is a magical thing.

古文：使齐王无知，太子群臣宜见其奇。
现代文：即使齐王无知，太子和大臣们也该看出这件神奇的事。
English: Even if King Qi is ignorant, the prince and ministers should also see this miraculous thing.

古文：奇怪文挚，则请出尊宠敬事，从之问道。
现代文：认为文挚很神奇，就应请求齐王把他放出来，敬重、宠信、恭敬地侍奉他，向他问道。
English: Thinking that Wenxin was very miraculous, he released him at the request of King Qi, served him with respect, favor, and reverence, and asked him.

古文：今言三日三夜，无臣子请出之言，五虚也。
现代文：如今说他三天三夜颜色一点不变，又没有大臣们请求齐王放他出来的话，这是虚假之五。
English: Now he says that his color has not changed at all for three days and three nights, and no ministers have asked King Qi to release him. This is the fifth lie.

古文：此或时闻文挚实烹，烹而且死。世见文挚为道人也，则为虚生不死之语矣。
现代文：这也许是文挚确实被煮，一煮就死了，世人见文挚是学道的人，就无中生有的造出他不会死的后来。
English: This may be because Wen Zhiying was actually boiled and died as soon as he was boiled. The world saw that Wen Zhiying was a scholar and created him out of nothing so that he would not die later.

古文：犹黄帝实死也，传言升天；淮南坐反，书言度世。
现代文：就像黄帝真死了，还传说他升天；淮南王犯了谋反罪，儒者的书上却说他成了仙。
English: Just as the Yellow Emperor really died, it is also said that he ascended to heaven; King Huainan committed treason, but the Confucian book says that he became a fairy god.

古文：世好传虚，故文挚之语，传至於今。
现代文：世人喜欢传说毫无根据的事，所以关于文挚的话一至流传到今天。
English: People like to talk about things that have no basis in fact, which is why the story of Wenxin has been passed down to this day.

古文：世无得道之效，而有有寿之人，世见长寿之人，学道为仙，逾百不死，共谓之仙矣。
现代文：世人没有得道的功效，而有长寿的人。世人看见长寿的人，学道求仙，超过百岁不死，大家就说他们成仙了。
English: The world sees people who live long lives, learn the Tao and seek immortality, and live to be over a hundred years old, and everyone says they have become immortals.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么证明呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：如武帝之时，有李少君，以祠灶、辟谷、却老方见上，上尊重之。
现代文：像汉武帝的时候，有个李少君用祀祭灶神，不吃五谷，返老还童的方术去拜见汉武帝，武帝很敬重他。
English: Like Emperor Wu of Han, there was a Li Shaojun who worshiped the god of the hearth, did not eat grain, and used the method of returning to childhood to visit Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu respected him very much.

古文：少君匿其年及所生长，常自谓七十，而能使物却老。
现代文：李少君隐瞒自己的年龄及生长的地方，常常自称有七十岁，能够使用药物返老还童。
English: Li Shaojun hides his age and where he grew up, often claiming to be seventy years old and able to use drugs to rejuvenate.

古文：其游以方遍诸侯。无妻。
现代文：他用方术在诸侯间到处游说，没有妻子。
English: He lobbied everywhere among the lords, without a wife.

古文：人闻其能使物及不老，更馈遗之，常余钱金衣食。
现代文：人们听说他能使用药物使人长生不老，就轮番赠送他东西，因此他经常金钱衣食用不完。
English: People heard that he could use drugs to make people live forever, so they gave him gifts one after another, so he often had more than enough money and clothes to eat.

古文：人皆以为不治产业饶给，又不知其何许人，愈争事之。
现代文：人们都认为他不治产业却很富足，又不知道他是什么样的人，就更加争着侍奉他。
English: They all thought that he was very rich, but they did not know who he was, so they were all the more eager to serve him.

古文：少君资好方，善为巧发奇中。
现代文：李少君凭着奇妙的方术，善于巧妙地猜测事情，而且总是出奇地说中。
English: Shao Jun was born with a talent for magic and was good at performing feats of skill.

古文：尝从武安侯饮，座中有年九十馀者，少君乃言其王父游射处。
现代文：他曾经与武安侯一道喝酒，在座的人中有位年纪九十多岁的老人，李少君却说起跟他祖父去过的打猎的地方。
English: He used to drink with Wu An Hou. Among those present was a 90-plus-year-old man, but Li Shaojun talked about the hunting place he had visited with his grandfather.

古文：老人为兒时，从父，识其处。一座尽惊。
现代文：老人还是小孩的时候，跟随他祖父打过猎，还记得是那个地方，于是满座的人全感到吃惊。
English: The full house was surprised when the old man, who had hunted with his grandfather as a boy, remembered the place.

古文：少君见上，上有古铜器，问少君。
现代文：李少君去拜见皇上，皇上拿出一件古铜器问他。
English: Li Shaojun went to see the emperor, and the emperor took out a bronze vessel and asked him.

古文：少君曰： 此器齐桓公十五年陈於柏寝。 
现代文：少君说： 这件铜器是齐桓公十五年陈列在柏寝的。 
English: Shogun said, "This bronze ware was displayed in the courtyard of the Imperial Palace in the fifteenth year of King Qiguan's reign.

古文：已而案其刻，果齐桓公器，一宫尽惊，以为少君数百岁人也。
现代文：后来查看铜器铭文，果然是齐桓公的铜器，整个宫中的人都感到吃惊，认为他有好几百岁了。
English: Later, when the inscriptions on the bronze ware were examined, it turned out to be the bronze ware of Prince Qi Huan. Everyone in the palace was surprised and thought that he was several hundred years old.

古文：久之，少君病死。
现代文：过了很久，李少君得病死了。
English: After a long time, Li Shaojun died of illness.

古文：今世所谓得道之人，李少君之类也。
现代文：现在世人认为得道的人，不过像李少君之类。
English: Nowadays, the world thinks that people who have attained the Way are just like Li Shaojun.

古文：少君死於人中，人见其尸，故知少君性寿之人也。
现代文：李少君死在人世间，人们看见过他的尸体，所以知道他是长寿的人。
English: Li Shaojun died on earth. People saw his corpse, so they knew that he was a long-lived person.

古文：如少君处山林之中，入绝迹之野，独病死於岩石之间，尸为虎狼狐狸之食，则世复以为真仙去矣。
现代文：如果李少君住在山林里，去到人烟绝迹的荒野，偏偏病死在岩石之间，尸体被虎狼狐狸吃了，那么世人又会认为他真的成仙离开人世了。
English: If Li Shaojun lived in the mountains and forests, went to the wilderness where there were no human beings, died of illness among the rocks, and his corpse was eaten by tigers, wolves and foxes, then the world would think that he had really become immortal and passed away.

古文：世学道之人无少君之寿，年未至百，与众俱死。
现代文：学道的人没有李少君长寿，年龄还没有到一百岁，就跟众人一齐死去。
English: Those who learned the Tao did not live as long as Li Shaojun. They did not reach the age of one hundred and died together with everyone else.

古文：愚夫无知之人，尚谓之尸解而去，其实不死。
现代文：笨蛋、没有知识的人，尚且都说他们尸解成仙而去，的确没有死。
English: Fools and ignorant people say that they are not dead even though they are cremated.

古文：所谓尸解者，何等也？
现代文：所谓尸解，是什么意思呢？
English: What does the so-called autopsy mean?

古文：谓身死精神去乎，谓身不死得免去皮肤也？
现代文：是说身体死了精神成仙而去呢，还是说身体没有死只是脱掉一层皮呢？
English: Does it mean that when the body dies, the spirit becomes immortal, or does it mean that the body is not dead, but just takes off a layer of skin?

古文：如谓身死精神去乎，是与死无异，人亦仙人也；如谓不死免去皮肤乎，诸学道死者骨肉具在，与恆死之尸无以异也。
现代文：如果说身体死了精神成仙而去，这跟一般人死没有两样，那么所有的人也都成为仙人了；如果说身体没有死只是脱掉一层皮，那么凡是学道死去的人骨肉都在，跟平常人死了的尸体也没有两样。
English: If it is said that the body dies and the spirit becomes immortal, which is no different from the death of ordinary people, then all people have become immortals; if it is said that the body does not die but just takes off a layer of skin, then the bones and flesh of all people who have died are there, and there is no difference from the dead bodies of ordinary people.

古文：夫蝉之去复育，龟之解甲，蛇之脱皮，鹿之堕角，壳皮之物解壳皮，持骨肉去，可谓尸解矣。
现代文：蝉脱去幼虫的壳，乌龟脱掉甲壳，蛇脱落一层皮，鹿退落它的角，有壳皮的动物脱掉它的壳皮，都带着骨肉离开，这可以说是尸解了。
English: A cicada sheds its larval shell, a turtle sheds its carapace, a snake sheds a layer of skin, a deer sheds its horn, a shelled animal sheds its shell, and they all leave with their bones and flesh. This can be said to be a necropsy.

古文：今学道而死者，尸与复育相似，尚未可谓之尸解。
现代文：如今学道而死去的人，即使尸体跟蝉的幼虫相似，还不能够说是尸解。
English: People who die while studying Taoism nowadays, even if their bodies resemble the larvae of cicadas, cannot be said to be necropsies.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：案蝉之去复育，无以神於复育，况不相似复育，谓之尸解，盖复虚妄失其实矣。
现代文：因为考察蝉脱去幼虫时的壳，并没有比脱壳前的幼虫神奇。况且学道的人死去骨肉都在，跟蝉脱壳的幼虫不一样，称他们尸解，恐怕又不符合真实情况。
English: Because examining the shell of the cicada when it sheds its larvae is no more miraculous than the larvae before shedding its shell. Moreover, the dead flesh and bones of the Taoists are not the same as the larvae of the shelled cicada, and calling them necropsies is probably not true.

古文：太史公与李少君同世并时，少君之死，临尸者虽非太史公，足以见其实矣。
现代文：太史公司马迁与李少君是同代同时的人，少君死的时候，到尸体旁边哀悼的虽然不是他，他也完全知道李少君的真实情况。
English: Ma Qian of the Tai Shi Company was a contemporary of Li Shaojun. When Li Shaojun died, although he was not the one who went to mourn next to the body, he also fully knew the true situation of Li Shaojun.

古文：如实不死。
现代文：如果少君真是没有死，只是尸解而去，太史公应该记下当时情况，不应该说他病死。
English: If the young prince really did not die, but was only dissected and left, the Grand Historian should have recorded the circumstances at the time, and should not have said that he died of illness.

古文：尸解而去，太史公宜纪其状，不宜言死，其处座中年九十老父为兒时者，少君老寿之效也。或少君年十四五，老父为兒，随其王父。
现代文：李少君能说出同座中九十岁老人做孩子时到过的方，这是他长寿的证明。或许当时少君十四五岁，老父还是孩子，常跟着他的祖父游玩。
English: Li Shaojun was able to say which of the ninety-year-old people in the audience had been there when he was a child, which is proof of his longevity. Perhaps when Shaojun was fourteen or fifteen years old, his father was still a child and often went to play with his grandfather.

古文：少君年二百岁而死，何为不识？
现代文：少君百把岁才死，怎么会不记得玩过的地方呢？
English: The young prince was only a few hundred years old when he died, so how could he not remember the places he played?

古文：武帝去桓公铸铜器，且非少君所及见也。
现代文：汉武帝离齐桓公铸造铜器时间相隔很远，而且又不是少君亲眼看见。
English: Emperor Hanwu was a long time away from the casting of bronze ware by Qi Kuan Gong, and the young prince did not see it with his own eyes.

古文：或时闻宫殿之内有旧铜器，或案其刻以告之者，故见而知之。
现代文：或许是听见宫中有古铜器，有人查看过那上面的刻辞而告诉了李少君，所以一看见他就知道。
English: Perhaps he had heard that there was a bronze vessel in the palace, and someone had looked at the inscription on it and told Li Shaojun, so he knew it as soon as he saw it.

古文：今时好事之人，见旧剑古钩，多能名之，可复谓目见其铸作之时乎？
现代文：现在喜欢这类事情的人，看见古剑古钩，大多能说出它们的时间及有关的情况，难道能又说他们亲眼看见古铜器铸造时的情况吗？
English: Now people who like this kind of thing, when they see ancient swords and hooks, most of them can tell their time and the relevant circumstances. Can they also say that they saw with their own eyes the situation at the time of casting bronzes?

古文：世或言：东方朔亦道人也，姓金氏，字曼倩。
现代文：有人说东方朔也是得道的人，姓金，字曼倩。
English: Some people say that Dongfang Shuo is also a Taoist, surname Jin, character Mandao.

古文：变姓易名，游宦汉朝。
现代文：他改变姓名，到汉朝做官。
English: He changed his name and became an official in the Han Dynasty.

古文：外有仕宦之名，内乃度世之人。
现代文：表面上有做官的名声，实际上却是成仙的人。
English: On the surface, he has the reputation of being an official, but in reality, he is a man who has become immortal.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这话又是虚假的了。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫朔与少君并在武帝之时，太史公所及见也。
现代文：东方朔和李少君同在汉武帝时候，太史公能够见到他们。
English: When Dongfang Shuo and Li Shaojun were together with Emperor Hanwu, Taishi Gong could see them.

古文：少君有道祠灶却老之方，又名齐桓公所铸鼎，知九十老人王父所游射之验，然尚无得道之实，而徒性寿迟死之人也。
现代文：李少君有不吃五谷、祀祭灶神、返老还童的方术，又能说出齐桓公十五年铸造铜鼎的事，还有他知道九十岁老人祖父打猎地方的证明，然而都还没有得道的事实，却仅只是个长寿晚死的人。
English: Li Shaojun did not eat grain, worshiped the god of the hearth and returned to his childhood. He was able to tell the story of Qi Huan's 15 years of casting copper tripods, as well as the fact that he knew where his 90-year-old grandfather hunted. However, he had not yet attained the truth, but he was just a long-lived man who died late.

古文：况朔无少君之方术效验，世人何见谓之得道？
现代文：何况东方朔没有李少君的方术效验，世人根据什么说他得道了呢？
English: What's more, Dongfangshuo didn't have the effectiveness of Li Shaojun's square technique. On what basis did the world say that he had obtained the Tao?

古文：案武帝之时，道人文成、五利之辈，入海求仙人，索不死之药，有道术之验，故为上所信。
现代文：考察汉武帝的时候，有道人文成、五利之辈，到海外去寻找仙人，寻求不死的药，因为有道术的证明，所以为皇上所相信。
English: During the inspection of Emperor Hanwu, there were generations of Taoist scholars Cheng and Wuli who went overseas to look for immortals and seek immortality. Because there was proof of Taoism, the emperor believed in it.

古文：朔无入海之使，无奇怪之效也。
现代文：东方朔没有被派到海外去的使命，又没有神奇表现的证明。
English: Dongfang Shuo did not have the mission of being sent overseas, and there was no proof of miraculous performance.

古文：如使有奇，不过少君之类，及文成、五利之辈耳，况谓之有道？
现代文：如果出使有神奇的表现，也不过是李少君之类和文成、五利之辈罢了，怎么就称赞他得道呢？
English: If the envoy has a miraculous performance, it is nothing more than the likes of Li Shaojun and Wencheng and Wuli's generation, how can he be praised for his path?

古文：此或时偶复若少君矣，自匿所生之处，当时在朝之人，不知其故，朔盛称其年长，人见其面状少，性又恬淡，不好仕宦，善达占卜射覆，为怪奇之戏，世人则谓之得道之人矣。
现代文：这也许碰巧又是个像李少君的人，自己隐瞒了生长的地方，当时在朝的人不知道他原来的情况，而东方朔又极力宣扬他自己年长，人们看他脸貌年轻，性格又清静少欲，不喜欢做官，精通占卜、射覆，爱做神奇的游戏，于是世人就认为他是得道的人。
English: Perhaps it just so happened that he was a person like Li Shaojun, who concealed the place where he grew up. At that time, people in the North did not know his original situation, while Dongfang Shuo vigorously proclaimed that he was older. People saw his face as young, his personality as calm and less greedy, he did not like to be an official, he was proficient in divination and conjuring, and loved to play magical games. So the world thought he was a man of the Way.

古文：世或以老子之道为可以度世，恬淡无欲，养精爱气。
现代文：有人认为老子的道术可以成仙，于是就清静无欲，保养精神爱惜元气。
English: Some people think that Laozi's Taoism can become immortal, so they are calm and desireless, maintain the spirit and cherish the vitality.

古文：夫人以精神为寿命，精神不伤则寿命长而不死。
现代文：因为人以精神为寿命，精神不受伤害，那么寿命就长而不死。
English: Because people take the spirit as the life span, and the spirit is not harmed, then the life span is long and does not die.

古文：成事：老子行之，逾百度世，为真人矣。
现代文：这是既成事实：老子奉行它，超过百岁脱离尘世，成了仙人。
English: This is a fait accompli: Lao Zi adhered to it, and more than a hundred years old, he left the world and became a hermit.

古文：夫恬淡少欲，孰与鸟兽？
现代文：那在清静少欲上，人跟鸟兽比起来怎么样呢？
English: In terms of tranquility and lack of desire, how does man compare to birds and beasts?

古文：鸟兽亦老而死。
现代文：鸟兽也会老会死。
English: Birds and animals die all the time.

古文：鸟兽含情欲，有与人相类者矣，未足以言。
现代文：鸟兽有情欲，跟人相类似，不足以说明问题。
English: It is not enough to say that birds and beasts have sexual desire and are similar to humans.

古文：草木之生何情欲？而春生秋死乎？
现代文：草木活着有什么情欲，而要春天发芽秋天枯死呢？
English: What is the passion of plants to live, but to sprout in the spring and die in the fall?

古文：夫草木无欲，寿不逾岁；人多情欲，寿至於百。
现代文：草木没有情欲，活不超过一年；人多情欲，要活到一百岁。
English: Grass and trees have no passions and live no more than a year; people have many passions and live to be a hundred years old.

古文：此无情欲者反夭，有情欲者寿也。
现代文：这样没有情欲的反而早夭，有情欲的却长寿。
English: In this way, those without lust die early, while those with it live longer.

古文：夫如是，老子之术，以恬淡无欲、延寿度世者，复虚也。
现代文：像这样说来，老子的道术，以清静无欲能长寿成仙，又是假的了。
English: In this way, Laozi's Taoism, which teaches that long life and immortality can be achieved through tranquility and absence of desire, is false.

古文：或时老子，李少君之类也，行恬淡之道，偶其性命亦自寿长。
现代文：或许老子是李少君之类的人，奉行清静无欲的道术，正好他性命又自然长寿。
English: Perhaps Lao Tzu was a man like Li Shao Jun, who followed the Taoism of tranquility and non-desire. It just so happened that he lived a long and natural life.

古文：世见其命寿，又闻其恬淡，谓老子以术度世矣。
现代文：世人见他命长，又听说他清静无欲，就认为老子是由于有道术成仙的。
English: When the world saw his long life, and heard that he was quiet and without desires, they thought that Lao Zi was immortal because of his Taoism.

古文：世或以辟谷不食为道术之人，谓王子乔之辈，以不食谷，与恆人殊食，故与恆人殊寿，逾百度世，逐为仙人。
现代文：有人认为不吃五谷可以成为有道术的人，以为王子乔一类的人因为不吃五谷，跟一般人吃的不同，所以与一般人的寿命也不一样，超过百岁脱离尘世，终于成为仙人。
English: Some people think that people who don't eat grains can become Taoists. They think that people like Prince Qiao, because they don't eat grains, are different from ordinary people, so their life expectancy is also different from that of ordinary people. They are more than a hundred years old and are detached from the world, and finally become immortals.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这又是假的。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫人之生也，禀食饮之性，故形上有口齿，形下有孔窍。
现代文：人生下来，就禀承了会吃喝的本性，所以身体的上部有口齿，身体的下部有排泄的器官。
English: When a person is born, he inherits the nature of being able to eat and drink, so the upper part of the body has the mouth, and the lower part of the body has the excretory organs.

古文：口齿以噍食，孔窍以注泻。
现代文：口齿用来噍食物，排泄器官用来排泄。
English: The mouth is used for chewing food, and the excretory organs are used for excretion.

古文：顺此性者，为得天正道，逆此性者为违所禀受。
现代文：遵循 食饮之性 的人算符合自然常规，背逆 食饮之性 的人要算违反生理本能。
English: A person who follows the nature of eating and drinking is considered to be in line with the natural routine, and a person who goes against the nature of eating and drinking is considered to be against the physiological instinct.

古文：失本气於天，何能得久寿？
现代文：失掉了从天禀受来的元气，怎么能够长寿呢？
English: How can you live a long life if you have lost the vitality that you received from God?

古文：使子乔生无齿口孔窍，是禀性与人殊。禀性与人殊，尚未可谓寿，况形体均同而以所行者异？
现代文：假使王子乔生来就没有口齿与排泄器官，禀受的特性跟人不同；本性跟人不一样，尚且不能说是长寿，何况他身体跟人完全相同为什么会在吃喝的行为上与人两样呢？
English: Assuming that Prince Qiao was born without oral teeth and excretory organs, the characteristics of swallowing are different from those of humans; the nature is different from that of humans, and it cannot be said to be a long life, not to mention that his body is exactly the same as humans, why would he be different from humans in eating and drinking behavior?

古文：言其得度世，非性之实也。
现代文：要说他能成仙，就不符合人性的实际情况。
English: To say that he can become immortal is not in line with the reality of human nature.

古文：夫人之不食也，犹身之不衣也。
现代文：人不吃东西，就像身上不穿衣服一样。
English: A man without food is like a man without clothes.

古文：衣以温肤，食以充腹。
现代文：穿衣服是为了温暖皮肤，吃东西是为了填饱肚子。
English: Clothes are worn to keep the skin warm, and food is eaten to fill the stomach.

古文：肤温腹饱，精神明盛。
现代文：皮肤得到温暖，肚子填饱了，精神才焕发。
English: The skin is warmed, the stomach is filled, and the spirit is refreshed.

古文：如饥而不饱，寒而不温，则有冻饿之害矣。
现代文：如果肚子受饥挨饿，皮肤受寒受冷，就会有挨冻受饿的危害。
English: If the stomach is starved by hunger and the skin is cold by cold, there will be the danger of freezing and starving.

古文：冻饿之人，安能久寿？
现代文：挨冻受饿的人，怎么会长寿呢？
English: How can people who are freezing and starving live longer?

古文：且人之生也，以食为气，犹草木生以土为气矣。
现代文：况且人生下来，就靠食物来保养元气，就像草木一发芽就靠泥土保养元气一样。
English: Moreover, when people are born, they rely on food to maintain their vitality, just as plants rely on soil to maintain their vitality as soon as they sprout.

古文：拔草木之根，使之离土，则枯而蚤死。
现代文：拔掉草木的根，使它们离开土地，就会干枯而早死。
English: If you pull the roots of plants and make them leave the land, they will dry out and die early.

古文：闭人之口，使之不食，则饿而不寿矣。
现代文：封掉人的口，让他不能吃东西，就会饥饿而死去。
English: Seal a man's mouth so he can't eat, and he will starve to death.

古文：道家相夸曰： 真人食气 。
现代文：道家互相夸耀说：仙人吃气。
English: Taoists boast to each other, "The immortals are bored."

古文：以气而为食，故传曰： 食气者寿而不死 ，虽不谷饱，亦以气盈。 
现代文：用气能当食物，所以传书上说：吃气的人长寿不会死，虽然他们不用五谷填饱肚子，但可以用气充实身体。
English: Qi can be used as food, so the legend says: People who eat qi will not die for a long time. Although they do not need to fill their stomachs with grain, they can fill their bodies with qi.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这又是句假话了。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫气谓何气也？
现代文：那么这气指的是什么气呢？
English: So what is this qi referring to?

古文：如谓阴阳之气，阴阳之气，不能饱人，人或咽气，气满腹胀，不能餍饱。
现代文：如果说是阴气和阳气，而阴气和阳气不能使人吃饱。人有时吞下一口气，会感到满腹气胀，却不能充饥。
English: If it is said to be yin and yang, and yin and yang can not make people full. People sometimes swallow a breath, will feel full and bloated, but can not satisfy hunger.

古文：如谓百药之气，人或服药，食一合屑，吞数十丸，药力烈盛，胸中愦毒，不能饱人。
现代文：如果说是各种药物的气，那么人有时服药，吃下一合药末，吞了几十颗药丸，药力猛烈，胸中只会感到中毒难受，并不能使人吃饱。
English: If it is the qi of various drugs, then people sometimes take medicine, eat a bunch of pills, swallow dozens of pills, the potency is fierce, and they will only feel poisoned and uncomfortable in the chest, and can not make people full.

古文：食气者必谓吹呴呼吸，吐故纳新也，昔有彭祖尝行之矣，不能久寿，病而死矣。
现代文：吃气的人一定要说 呼气吸气，吐出已有的纳进新鲜的 。昔日彭祖曾经奉行过，但不能永久长寿，终于得病死了。
English: A person who is choking must say, "Breathing in, breathing out, and spitting out what has been taken in is fresh." Peng Zu once practiced this, but he couldn't live forever and eventually died of illness.

古文：道家或以导气养性，度世而不死，以为血脉在形体之中，不动摇屈伸，则闭塞不通。
现代文：道家或者用练气功来保养生命，成仙不死，认为血脉在身体中，如果不活动，不弯曲舒展，就会闭塞不通。
English: Taoists also use the practice of qigong to maintain life and become immortal, believing that blood vessels are in the body, and if they are not active and do not bend and stretch, they will become blocked.

古文：不通积聚，则为病而死。
现代文：血脉积聚不通，就会生病而死亡。
English: If the blood does not accumulate properly, they will get sick and die.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这话不真实。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫人之形，犹草木之体也。
现代文：因为人的身体，就像草木的形体一样。
English: Because the human body is like the shape of a plant.

古文：草木在高山之巅，当疾风之冲，昼夜动摇者，能复胜彼隐在山谷间，鄣於疾风者乎？
现代文：草木在高山顶，正当大风冲击，昼夜摇动，它们能更胜过那些隐蔽在山谷里免受大风吹动的草木吗？
English: Can the plants on the high mountain tops, which are shaken day and night when the wind blows, be better than the plants that are sheltered from the wind in the valleys?

古文：案草木之生，动摇者伤而不暢，人之导引动摇形体者，何故寿而不死？
现代文：我们观察到草木刚发芽，被摇动的，要受到损伤而不能正常生长，那么人导气，屈伸筋骨，活动身体的，又怎么能长寿而不死呢？
English: We have observed that plants that have just sprouted and have been shaken will be damaged and unable to grow normally, so how can people who breathe, flex their muscles and bones, and move their bodies live long and not die?

古文：夫血脉之藏於身也，犹江河之流地。
现代文：血脉隐藏在人的身体中，就像江河在地上流淌一样。
English: Blood veins are hidden in the human body, just like rivers flowing on the ground.

古文：江河之流，浊而不清，血脉之动，亦扰不安。
现代文：江河奔流，水浑浊不清；血脉流动，也会被搅动得不安宁。
English: Rivers and streams flow, the water is turbid and unclear; blood flows, it will also be agitated and restless.

古文：不安，则犹人勤苦无聊也，安能得久生乎？
现代文：血脉不得安宁，就像人勤苦而不愉快一样，怎么能够长生不老呢？
English: Blood cannot be at peace, just as people are industrious and unpleasant, how can they live forever?

古文：道家或以服食药物，轻身益气，延年度世。
现代文：道家有的由于吞吃了药物，身子变轻体气增加，于是延年益寿成了仙人。
English: Some Taoists have become immortals due to the fact that they have swallowed drugs, their bodies have become lighter and their physical strength has increased. As a result, their longevity has increased.

古文：此又虚也。
现代文：这话又错了。
English: That's not true anymore.

古文：夫服食药物，轻身益气，颇有其验。
现代文：因为吞吃药物，身子变轻体气增加，略有证明。
English: Because of swallowing drugs, the body becomes lighter and the stamina increases, which is slightly proved.

古文：若夫延年度世，世无其效。
现代文：至于延年益寿成仙人的，世上还没有效验。
English: As for prolonging life into immortality, there is no test in the world.

古文：百药愈病，病愈而气复，气复而身轻矣。
现代文：各种药物能治好疾病，病治好了能使气恢复，气恢复了能使身子变轻。
English: All kinds of drugs can cure diseases, cure diseases can restore qi, and restore qi can make the body lighter.

古文：凡人禀性，身本自轻，气本自长，中於风湿，百病伤之，故身重气劣也。
现代文：凡人从天禀受特性，身体本来开始就轻，气本来开始就壮，由于受到风湿的侵击，各种各样的疾病都来伤害它，于是身体感到沉重，气感到短促。
English: The body is originally light, and the qi is originally strong. Due to the attack of rheumatism, all kinds of diseases have come to harm it, so the body feels heavy and the qi feels short.

古文：服食良药，身气复故，非本气少身重，得药而乃气长身更轻也，禀受之时，本自有之矣。
现代文：吃了良药，身体和气又还原了，并非本来气短少身体沉重，吃了药才能气壮身轻的，而是在天禀受的时候，本来一开始就有的。
English: After taking good medicine, the body and qi are restored. It is not that the body is short of qi and heavy, and the medicine can strengthen the body and make it lighter, but that it was originally there at the time of the heavenly judgment.

古文：故夫服食药物除百病，令身轻气长，复其本性，安能延年至於度世？
现代文：所以吃药物能除百病，即令身体轻了气壮了，恢复了他原来的特性，又怎么能延年益寿甚至于成仙呢？
English: Therefore, taking medicine can eliminate all kinds of diseases, even if it makes the body lighter and stronger and restores its original characteristics, how can it prolong life and even become immortal?

古文：有血脉之类，无有不生，生无不死。
现代文：有血脉之类的动物，没有谁不是生下来的，生下来的没有谁不死。
English: There is no such thing as an animal with a bloodline, no one is not born, and no one who is born does not die.

古文：以其生，故知其死也。
现代文：由于他生下来，所以知道他会死。
English: Because he was born, he knew he would die.

古文：天地不生，故不死；阴阳不生，故不死。
现代文：天地不是生下来的。所以它们不死；阴气和阳气不是生下来的，所以也不死。
English: Heaven and earth are not born, so they do not die; yin and yang are not born, so they do not die.

古文：死者，生之效；生者，死之验也。
现代文：死，是活着的证明，活着，又是死的证明。
English: To die is proof of life, to live is proof of death.

古文：夫有始者必有终，有终者必有死。
现代文：有开始就一定有结束，有结束就必定有开始。
English: If there is a beginning, there must be an end, and if there is an end, there must be a beginning.

古文：唯无终始者，乃长生不死。
现代文：只有没有开始与结束的，才会长生不死。
English: Only those who have no beginning and no end will live forever.

古文：人之生，其犹也。
现代文：人的一生就像冰一样。
English: A man's life is like ice.

古文：水凝而为冰，气积而为人。
现代文：水凝固就成冰，气聚积而成人。
English: When water freezes, it turns into ice, and when gas accumulates, it turns into adults.

古文：冰极一冬而释，人竟百岁而死。
现代文：冰过一冬而融化，人到百岁就会死。
English: Ice melts after one winter, and people die at the age of one hundred.

古文：人可令不死，冰可令不释乎？
现代文：要是人可以使自己不死，那么冰可以让其不融化吗？
English: If man can make himself immortal, can ice keep him from melting?

古文：诸学仙术，为不死之方，其必不成，犹不能使冰终不释也。
现代文：凡以学仙术作不死方术的，肯定不会成功，就像不可能让冰始终不融化一样。
English: Anyone who tries to learn immortality through magic will certainly not succeed, just as it is impossible to keep ice from melting.

