古文：第三子牧犍统任，自称河西王，遣使请朝命。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊死后，他的第三个儿子沮渠牧犍继任其位，自称河西王，派遣使者来朝廷请命。
English: After the death of Deshu Mengxun, his third son Deshu Muxun succeeded to his throne. He called himself the King of Hexi and sent an envoy to the court to plead for his life.

古文：先是，世祖遣李顺迎蒙逊女为夫人，会蒙逊死，牧犍受蒙逊遗意，送妹于京师，拜右昭仪。
现代文：先前，世祖曾派李顺迎娶沮渠蒙逊的女儿为夫人，恰巧当时蒙逊去世，沮渠牧犍秉承父亲临终嘱咐，把妹妹送到京师，被封为右昭仪。
English: Previously, the ancestor had sent Li Shun to marry the daughter of Deshu Monson. It happened that when Monson died, Deshu Muxun followed his father's dying instructions and sent his sister to Beijing, and was given the title of U Zhaoyi.

古文：改称承和元年。
现代文：沮渠牧犍把他的年号改为承和元年。
English: Dejected, the herdsman changed his year to the first year of the Heian period.

古文：世祖又遣李顺拜牧犍使持节，侍中，都督凉沙河三州、西城羌戎诸军事，车骑将军，开府仪同三司，领护西戎校尉，凉州刺史，河西王。
现代文：世祖又派李顺授任沮渠牧犍为使持节，侍中，都督凉州、沙州、河州三州以及西域羌戎各地军事，车骑将军，开府仪同三司，领护西戎校尉，凉州刺史，河西王。
English: The ancestor also sent Li Shun to be appointed as the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dow

古文：牧犍以无功授赏，乃留顺，上表乞安、平一号，优诏不许。
现代文：沮渠牧犍因为没有功劳而得到朝廷的封授和赏赐，就把李顺留下来，上表请求皇帝授予他安某某、平某某一类的称号，皇帝很客气地未予允许。
English: Dechu Muxu, who was awarded and rewarded by the imperial court because he had no merit, kept Li Shun and asked the emperor to grant him the titles of An so-and-so and Ping so-and-so. The emperor very politely did not allow it.

古文：牧犍尚世祖妹武威公主，遣其相宋繇表谢，献马五百匹，黄金五百斤。
现代文：沮渠牧犍娶了世祖的妹妹武威公主，派他的丞相宋繇前来进表致谢，并进献马五百匹，黄金五百斤。
English: Deshu Muxuan married Princess Wuwei, the younger sister of the founder of the dynasty, and sent his prime minister, Song Jun, to present a gift of 500 horses and 500 catties of gold.

古文：繇又表请公主及牧犍母妃后定号。
现代文：宋繇又奏请皇帝给武威公主和牧犍的母亲确定妃后的称号。
English: Song Tao also asked the emperor to determine the title of empress for Princess Wuwei and Mu Tao's mother.

古文：朝议谓礼母以子贵，妻从夫爵，牧犍母宜称河西国太后，公主于其国内可称王后，于京师则称公主，诏从之。
现代文：朝廷大臣们计议，认为按照礼法规定，母亲应凭儿子的地位而显贵，妻子应随从丈夫的爵位，牧犍的母亲最好称之为河西国太后，武威公主在他的国内可以称王后，在京师则应称公主，世祖同意了这种意见。
English: The ministers of the imperial court deliberated and believed that according to the provisions of the etiquette law, the mother should be distinguished by the status of the son, the wife should follow the husband's title, the mother of the herdsman should be called the empress dowager of Hexi, the princess of Wuwei could be called the queen in his country, and the princess should be called the princess in Beijing. The ancestor agreed with this opinion.

古文：牧犍遣其将军沮渠旁周朝京师，世祖遣侍中古弼、尚书李顺赐其侍臣衣服有差，产征世子封坛入侍。
现代文：沮渠牧犍派他的将军沮渠旁周到京师来朝贡，世祖就派侍中古弼、尚书李顺赐给他相应等级的侍臣衣服，并征召牧犍的儿子沮渠封坛来朝廷侍奉皇帝。
English: Deshu Mucu sent his general, Deshu Bong, to Beijing to pay tribute to the emperor, and the patriarch sent his attendants, Zhong Guoqi and Shangshu Li Shun, to give him the appropriate level of attendant clothing, and called upon his son, Deshu Huotan, to serve the emperor at court.

古文：牧犍乃遣封坛朝于京师。
现代文：诅渠牧犍就派遣封坛来京师朝见皇帝。
English: Cursing the canal, the herdsman sent the banner to the imperial court in Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：太延五年，世祖遣尚书贺多罗使凉州，且观虚实。
现代文：太延五年，世祖派遣尚书贺多罗出使凉州，并且观察河西国内的动静虚实。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiyan era, the ancestors sent Shangshu Hetaro to Liangzhou, and observed the movement and reality in Hexi.

古文：以牧犍虽称蕃致贡，而内多乖悖，于是亲征之。
现代文：因为沮渠牧犍虽然对朝廷称藩进贡，但实际上有许多乖迕悖逆的事实，于是世祖领兵亲自前往征讨他。
English: Because despite the fact that Shichiku Mokko called the tribute payment to the imperial court, there were actually many disobedient and rebellious facts, the ancestor personally led the soldiers to go and collect it.

古文：诏公卿为书让之曰： 王外从正朔，内不舍僭，罪一也。
现代文：皇帝诏令朝廷公卿写下诏书声讨沮渠牧犍说： 河西王外表上服从大魏新颁的历法，但在其内部却不肯放弃其超越本分的帝王称号，这是第一大罪状。
English: The emperor ordered the court noble to write down the imperial rescript to complain about the frustration of the ditch, saying: King Hexi outwardly obeyed the newly issued calendar of the Great Wei Dynasty, but inside he refused to give up his title of emperor beyond his duty, which was the first major crime.

古文：民籍地图不登公府，任土作贡不入农司，罪二也。
现代文：人口户籍和区域地图不在朝廷官府登记，按照土地数量计征的田赋，不向朝廷司农缴纳，这是第二大罪状。
English: The second biggest crime was not registering the population, household registration, and regional maps at the imperial government office, and not paying the land tax, which was levied according to the amount of land, to the court farmer.

古文：既荷王爵又授伪官，取两端之荣，邀不二之宠，罪三也。
现代文：既然接受朝廷封授的王爵，又接受伪职，博取两方面的殊荣，骗取朝廷认为其专一不二的宠信，这是第三大罪状。
English: This is the third major crime, since he accepted a peerage bestowed by the imperial court, accepted a fake post, won two kinds of honors, and deceived the imperial court into believing that he was a trustworthy person.

古文：知朝廷志在怀远，固违圣略，切税商胡，以断行旅，罪四也。
现代文：明知朝廷志在安抚边远地区，而有意违背圣上的方略，切断边地商人交纳的税收，断绝过往旅客的道路，这是第四大罪状。
English: The fourth major crime is knowing that the imperial court wanted to pacify the outlying areas, but deliberately violated the sacred strategy, cut off the taxes paid by outlying merchants, and cut off the road of passing passengers.

古文：扬言西戎，高自骄大，罪五也。
现代文：在西北各部族中有意宣扬自己，自逞高傲骄横，这是第五大罪状。
English: It is the fifth major crime to deliberately promote oneself among the tribes in the northwest, and to be arrogant and conceited.

古文：坐自封殖，不欲入朝，罪六也。
现代文：擅自坐地聚敛财物，不愿向朝廷进献奉贡，这是第六大罪状。
English: It is the sixth most serious crime to amass wealth without permission and be unwilling to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：北托叛虏，南引仇池，凭援谷军，提挈为奸，罪七也。
现代文：北边依托反叛的胡虏，南边交结仇池之国，倚仗他人军队的援助，互相扶持，狼狈为奸，这是第七大罪状。
English: Relying on the rebellious Khurik in the north, and on the country of the enemy in the south, relying on the assistance of other people's armies, supporting each other, and acting as traitors, this is the seventh major crime.

古文：承敕过限，辄假征、镇，罪八也。
现代文：奉承朝廷敕令超过限度，动辄假借名义进行征伐、镇压，这是第八大罪状。
English: Flattering the imperial edict beyond the limit, plundering and suppressing in the name of pretending, this is the eighth major crime.

古文：欣敌之全，幸我之败，侮慢王人，供不以礼，罪九也。
现代文：敌寇得以保全就感到高兴，朝廷若有失败则幸灾乐祸，对待朝廷使者轻侮怠慢，不以礼相待，这是第九大罪状。
English: It is the ninth major crime to rejoice when enemy raiders are saved, to gloat when the imperial court fails, and to treat emissaries of the imperial court with contempt and disrespect, and not to treat them with courtesy.

古文：既婚帝室，宠逾功旧，方恣欲情，蒸淫其嫂，罪十也。
现代文：既然与魏室公主匹配婚姻，所受到的宠幸已超过元勋旧臣，还要恣意纵欲，与其兄嫂私通，这是第十大罪状。
English: Since the match of marriage with the princess of the Wei dynasty, the favors received by the prince have exceeded the original honorees and former ministers, but also wanton indulgence, and adultery with his brother and sister-in-law, which is the tenth major crime.

古文：既违伉俪之体，不笃婚姻之义，公行鸩毒，规害公主，罪十一也。
现代文：既违背夫妻伉俪的体统，不专行男女婚姻的理义，又公然用毒药施以毒害，企图谋杀武威公主，这是第十一大罪状。
English: This is the eleventh count of the crime of violating the dignity of husband and wife, not adhering to the rationality of marriage between a man and a woman, and openly attempting to murder Princess Wuwei by poisoning her with poison.

古文：备防王人，候守关要，有如寇仇，罪十二也。
现代文：对大魏朝廷的人严加防备，派人把守边关要塞，如同对待仇寇，这是第十二大罪状。
English: It is the twelfth major crime to take strict precautions against the people of the Wei Dynasty and send people to guard the border fortifications, as if they were dealing with foreign invaders.

古文：为臣如是，其可恕乎！
现代文：身为藩臣有这样多的罪行，难道还可以宽恕吗？
English: As a vassal with so many crimes, is it possible to forgive?

古文：先令后诛，王者之典也。
现代文：先施以号令然后再发兵诛剿，这是自古以来王者的常道。
English: It has been the practice of kings since ancient times to first issue an order and then dispatch troops.

古文：若亲率群臣，委贽郊迎，谒拜马首，上策也；六军既临，面缚舆榇，又其次也。
现代文：倘若你亲自率领群臣，手执礼品出郊迎接圣上车驾，见马首而进谒参拜，这才是上策；大魏六军到达之后，你能够反绑双手，并抬着棺材随从于后，以表示投降改悔的决心，这是中策。
English: If you personally lead a group of ministers, holding gifts, out of the countryside to meet the holy chariot, see the horse's head and enter the coffin to worship, this is the best strategy; after the arrival of the Great Wei Six Army, you can bind your hands and carry the coffin to follow, to show the determination to surrender and repent, this is the best strategy.

古文：如其守迷穷城，不时悛悟，身死族灭，为世大戮。
现代文：如果你执迷不悟，不及时悔改，那就只会落得身死族灭，终成当今的最大耻辱。
English: If you persist and do not repent in time, you will only end up dead and destroyed, and end up with today's greatest shame.

古文：宜思厥中，自求多福也。 
现代文：你应当慎重考虑，自己求得更多的福分才是。 
English: You should carefully consider whether it is better to seek more blessings for yourself.

古文：官军济河，牧犍曰： 何故尔也！ 
现代文：官军渡过黄河，沮渠牧犍得知以后说： 为什么非要这样啊？ 
English: After learning that the government army had crossed the Yellow River and had been defeated, the herdsmen said, "Why do we have to do this?

古文：用其左丞姚定国计，不肯出迎，求救于蠕蠕，又遣弟董来率兵万余人拒官军于城南，战退。
现代文：他采用他的左丞相姚定国的计谋，不肯出城迎接，派人向蠕蠕国求救，又遣他的弟弟沮渠董来率兵一万多人在城南抗拒官军，战败而退。
English: He used the stratagem of his minister of the left, Yao Dingguo, and refused to go out of the city to meet them. He sent people to the State of Cnim to ask for help. He also sent his younger brother Deqiu Dong to lead more than ten thousand soldiers to resist the government army in the south of the city. They were defeated and retreated.

古文：车驾至姑臧，遣使喻牧犍令出。
现代文：世祖到达姑臧之后，派遣使者晓喻沮渠牧犍，令他出来迎接。
English: After the ancestor of the world arrived in Guzheng, he sent an envoy to Xiao Yu to meet the herdsman, and asked him to come out to meet him.

古文：牧犍闻蠕蠕内侵于善无，幸车驾返旆，遂婴城自守。
现代文：牧犍听说蠕蠕派兵到善无侵犯骚扰，侥幸希望世祖率军返回，就加固防守。
English: The herdsman heard that Creep Creep had sent soldiers to harass Shanshan without encroachment, and fortunately hoped that Shizuo would return with his army, so he strengthened the defense.

古文：牧犍兄子祖逾城出降，具知其情，世祖乃引诸军进攻。牧犍兄子万年率麾下又来降。
现代文：牧犍之兄的儿子沮渠祖越城出来投降，把城内的情况全都告知官军，世祖就领各路兵马攻城，牧犍的另一个侄儿沮渠万年率领部下又来投降。
English: The son of the elder brother of Mu Xi, Deqiu Zu, went across the city to surrender, and informed the government army of all the situation in the city. The ancestor led all the soldiers and horses to attack the city, and another nephew of Mu Xi, Deqiu Wan Nian, led his subordinates to surrender again.

古文：城拔，牧犍与左右文武面缚请罪，诏释其缚。
现代文：攻占了城池之后，沮渠牧犍同他的左右文武官员全部反缚自己，向世祖当面请罪，世祖令人解开他们的束缚。
English: After conquering the city, Deshu Muxuan and his left and right military and civilian officials all tied themselves up, pleaded guilty to the ancestor in person, and the ancestor forced them to release their shackles.

古文：徙凉州民三万余家于京师。
现代文：于是，将凉州民户三万余家迁到京师。
English: As a result, more than 30,000 households in Liangzhou were relocated to Beijing.

古文：初，太延中，有一父老投书于敦煌城东门，忽然不见，其书一纸八字，文曰： 凉王三十年，若七年。 
现代文：先前，在太延年间，有一位父老在敦煌城东门投下一封书信，忽然不见其人，这封书信只有一张纸，上面写了八个字，信上说： 凉王三十年，若七年。 
English: Previously, in the Tai Yan years, there was a father who dropped a letter at the east gate of Dunhuang City, and suddenly no one was there. This letter only had one piece of paper with eight words written on it. The letter said: Liangwang thirty years, if seven years.

古文：又于震电之所得石，丹书曰： 河西、河西三十年，破带石，乐七年。 
现代文：又一次在雷击的地方拾得一块石头，石头上用红字写道： 河西、河西三十年，破带石，乐七年。 
English: Once again, he picked up a stone at the place where the lightning struck. On the stone, he wrote in red letters: Hexi, Hexi 30 years, broken stone, Le 7 years.

古文：带石，山名，在姑臧南山祀傍，泥陷不通。
现代文：带石，是一座山的名称，在姑臧南山祀庙的一侧，道路泥泞陷塌，不能通行。
English: Zoushi is the name of a mountain. On the side of the Nanshan Temple in Guqin, the road is covered with mud and is impassable.

古文：牧犍征南大将军董来曰： 祀岂有知乎！ 
现代文：沮渠牧犍的征南大将军沮渠董来说： 难道祀庙还懂得什么道理吗？ 
English: Depu Qu Dong, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, said: "Does the temple still know what is right?

古文：遂毁祀伐木，通道而行。
现代文：就拆毁祀庙，砍伐树木，辟开一条道路得以通行。
English: They demolished the temple, cut down trees, and opened a road to allow traffic.

古文：牧犍立，果七年而灭，如其言。
现代文：沮渠牧犍继位之后，果然只过了七年就被消灭，就如同书信和石头上所预言的那样。
English: It took only seven years after the succession of the Despondent Shepherds for them to be destroyed, just as the epistles and the stones had predicted.

古文：牧犍淫嫂李氏，兄弟三人传嬖之。
现代文：沮渠牧犍与其嫂李氏勾搭成奸，他们兄弟三人传相宠爱她。
English: Frustrated, Muxuan hooked up with his sister-in-law Li, and the three brothers loved her dearly.

古文：李与牧犍姊共毒公主，上遣解毒医乘传救公主得愈。
现代文：李氏与牧犍的姐姐合谋用毒药杀害武威公主，皇帝派医生带上解毒药乘驿车驰往急救，使公主得以痊愈。
English: Mr. Li and the herdsman's sister conspired to use poison to kill Princess Wuwei. The emperor sent a doctor with an antidote to ride in a horse-drawn carriage to the emergency room, so that the princess could recover.

古文：上征李氏，牧犍不遣，厚送居于酒泉，上大怒。
现代文：皇帝下令征召李氏，沮渠牧犍拒不遣送，以丰厚的待遇把她送到酒泉居住，皇帝大怒。
English: The emperor ordered the Lee clan to be conscripted, but the disgraced herdsman refused to be sent, and sent her to live in Jiuquan with rich treatment. The emperor was furious.

古文：既克，犹以妹婿待之。
现代文：但是在把牧犍打败之后，皇帝还是把他当作妹夫来看待。
English: But after defeating the herdsman, the emperor still regarded him as his brother-in-law.

古文：其母死，以王太妃礼葬焉。
现代文：牧犍的母亲死了以后，用王太妃的礼仪厚葬她。
English: After the death of the herdsman's mother, she was given a lavish funeral with the etiquette of a princess.

古文：又为蒙逊置守墓三十家。
现代文：皇上又为沮渠蒙逊的坟墓设置了三十家守墓之人。
English: The emperor also set up thirty families to guard the tomb of Deshu Monson.

古文：改授牧犍征西大将军、王如故。
现代文：后来又改授沮渠牧犍为征西大将军，河西王的称号不变。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of "Grand General of the Western Expedition" and the title of "King of Hexi" remained unchanged.

古文：初，官军未入之间，牧犍使人斫开府库，取金银珠玉及珍奇器物，不更封闭。
现代文：当初，官军还没有进入凉州的时候，沮渠牧犍派人用刀斧劈开官府的仓库，拿走金银珠玉和珍奇器物，事后没有再把府库的门封闭起来。
English: At the beginning, when the government army had not yet entered Liangzhou, the despondent canal herdsman sent people to use knives and axes to break open the government warehouse, take away gold, silver, precious stones and rare objects, and did not close the door of the government warehouse afterwards.

古文：小民因之入盗，巨细荡尽。
现代文：一些市井小民趁机进入府库进行偷盗，所有大小物件荡然无存。
English: Some commoners took advantage of the opportunity to enter the prefectural treasury to steal, and all large and small objects disappeared.

古文：有司求贼不得。
现代文：有关官员四处搜寻盗窃的人都没有找到。
English: Officers searched the area for the thieves, but they were not found.

古文：真君八年，其所亲人及守藏者告之，上乃穷竟其事，搜其家中，悉得所藏器物。
现代文：真君八年，牧犍的亲信和守卫府库的人告发了这件事，皇帝就令人进行追究，搜查牧犍的家中，找出了他所藏匿的全部珍宝器物。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of King Zhen, the relatives of the herdsman and the guards of the treasury reported the incident, and the emperor ordered an investigation, searched the herdsman's home, and found all the treasures he had hidden.

古文：又告牧犍父子多畜毒药，前后隐窃杀人乃有百数；姊妹皆为左道，朋行淫佚，曾无愧颜。
现代文：又有人告发沮渠牧犍父子家中藏有许多毒药，前后暗中用毒药杀死一百多人；牧犍的姊妹都懂得巫术的邪门左道，经常聚集在一起干荒淫佚乐之事，毫无羞耻惭愧的颜色。
English: It was also reported that there were many poisons hidden in the home of the father and son of Dechu Muxu, and more than a hundred people were secretly killed with poisons before and after; Muxu's sisters all knew the evil ways of witchcraft, and they often gathered together to do wild, lewd and fun things, with no shame.

古文：始罽宾沙门曰昙无谶，东入鄯善，自云 能使鬼治病，令妇人多子 ，与鄯善王妹曼头陀林私通。
现代文：起先有一个宾国的僧人名叫昙无谶，来到东边的鄯善国，自称有方术 能驱使鬼给人治病，能让女人多生孩子 ，这人与鄯善王的妹妹曼头陀林私通。
English: At first, there was a guest monk named Zou Wuzhong, who came to the eastern kingdom of Zou Zhen and claimed to have a method that could drive demons to cure people and make women have more children. This man had an affair with Zou Zhen's sister, Mantou Durin.

古文：发觉，亡奔凉州。
现代文：后来他的劣迹被发觉，他就逃走投奔到了凉州。
English: Later, when his misdeeds were discovered, he fled to Liangzhou.

古文：蒙逊宠之，号曰 圣人 。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊对他非常宠幸，把他称为 圣人 。
English: Despenser Monson was very fond of him and called him a saint.

古文：昙无谶以男女交接之术教授妇人，蒙逊诸女、子妇皆往受法。
现代文：昙无谶把男女交接的房中术教授给女人，沮渠蒙逊的所有女儿、儿媳都到他那里接受这种法术。
English: 无 taught the male-female sexual intercourse to a woman, and all of Mengsong's daughters and daughters-in-law went to him to receive this spell.

古文：世祖闻诸行人，言昙无谶之术，乃召昙无谶。
现代文：世祖从使者那里知道了这种事，使者向他陈说昙无谶的种种法术，他就要征召昙无谶来京师。
English: The ancestor learned about this from the messenger, who told him about the various magic spells of Yu Wuzhong, and that he should recruit Yu Wuzhong to come to Beijing to be his teacher.

古文：蒙逊不遣，遂发露其事，拷讯杀之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊拒不遣送，于是就把这些事揭露出来，将昙无谶捉来拷打讯问，并把他杀掉。
English: Despatch Mengxun refused to send him, so he exposed these things, captured Yan Wuzhong for torture and interrogation, and killed him.

古文：至此，帝知之，于是赐昭仪沮渠氏死，诛其宗族，唯万年及祖以前先降得免。
现代文：到这个时候，皇帝全部知道了内情，于是就赐右昭仪沮渠氏自杀，并诛灭她的宗族，惟有沮渠万年和沮渠祖由于先前已投降了朝廷而得以幸免。
English: By this time, the emperor knew all the inside information, so he gave U Zhaoyi Deqiu to commit suicide and destroy her clan. Only Deqiu Wanli and Deqiu Zu were spared because they had previously surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：是年，人又告牧犍犹与故臣民交通谋反，诏司徒崔浩就公主第赐牧犍死。
现代文：这一年，又有人告发沮渠牧犍还在同他过去的臣民暗中交结往来，图谋反叛，皇帝就诏令司徒崔浩在武威公主的宅第赐牧犍死。
English: In the same year, it was also reported that the disgraced Qiu Mu Rong was still secretly communicating with his former subjects and plotting a rebellion. The emperor then ordered the tutor Cui Hao to kill the disgraced Qiu Mu Rong in Princess Wuwei's residence.

古文：牧犍与主诀，良久乃自裁，葬以王礼，谥曰哀王。
现代文：沮渠牧犍同公主诀别，徘徊很久才自杀身亡，朝廷用藩王的礼仪埋葬了他，给他定谥号为哀王。
English: Frustrated, the herdsman bade farewell to the princess, lingered for a long time before committing suicide. The court buried him with the etiquette of the king of the domain, and gave him the nickname of the mourning king.

古文：及公主薨，诏与牧犍合葬。
现代文：到武威公主死后，皇帝诏令把她同沮渠牧犍合葬为一处。
English: After the death of Princess Wuwei, the emperor decreed that she be buried in the same place as Depu Qu Mu Xi.

古文：公主无男，有女，以国甥亲宠，得袭母爵为武威公主。
现代文：武威公主没有生下男孩，有一个女儿，凭国甥的身份受到皇帝亲切的宠爱，并获准承袭她母亲的爵号称武威公主。
English: Princess Wuwei did not give birth to a boy, but had a daughter, who was cordially favored by the emperor as the country's nephew, and was allowed to inherit her mother's title of Princess Wuwei.

古文：蒙逊子秉，字季义。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊的儿子沮渠秉，字季义。
English: Depuqiu Mengsong's son Depuqiu Bing, also known as Ji Yi.

古文：世祖以其父故，拜东雍州刺史。
现代文：世祖因为他父亲的原因，授予他东雍州刺史之职。
English: For his father's reasons, the founder of the dynasty awarded him the post of chief historian of East Yongzhou.

古文：险诐多端，真君中，遂与河东蜀薛安都谋逆。
现代文：沮渠秉邪谄不正，诡计多端，真君年间，他就与河东蜀薛安都共同策划反叛朝廷。
English: He was devious, devious and cunning. During the reign of Zhenjun, he and Shu Xue Andu of Hedong jointly planned to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：至京师，付其兄弟扼而杀之。
现代文：皇帝将他召到京师，交给他的兄弟把他给掐死了。
English: The emperor summoned him to the capital and handed him over to his brother, who beat him to death.

古文：万年、祖并以先锋，万年拜安西将军、张掖王，祖为广武公。
现代文：沮渠万年、沮渠祖都因他们先前已投降而得到信任，沮渠万年被授予安西将军、张掖王，沮渠祖被授予广武公。
English: Decheng Quanlian and Decheng Quanzu were trusted because they had previously surrendered. Decheng Quanlian was awarded to General Anxi and King Zhang Ye, and Decheng Quanlian was awarded to Guangwu Gong.

古文：万年后为冀定二州刺史，复坐谋逆，与祖俱死。
现代文：沮渠万年后来任冀州、定州二州刺史，又因图谋叛逆而获罪，与沮渠祖一道被处死。
English: Depuqiu Wannen was later appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou and Dingzhou, and was also convicted of plotting rebellion, and was executed together with Depuqiu Zu.

