古文：饭化蜈蚣气蠮螉颠当蜾蠃沙虱水弩徐玄之
现代文：饭化蜈蚣气蠮螉颠当蜾蠃沙虱水弩徐玄之
English: From rice to air, to wind, to sand, to water, to Xu Xuan

古文：短狐蜘蛛怨蜥蜴殷琅豫章民婢南海毒虫诺龙
现代文：短狐蜘蛛怨蜥蜴殷琅豫章民婢南海毒虫诺龙
English: Short foxes, spiders, malignant lizards, spiders, lizards, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, spiders, lizards, spiders, spiders, spiders, lizards, spiders, spiders, lizards, spiders, spiders, lizards, spiders, lizards, spiders, lizards, spiders, lizards, lizards, spiders, lizards, spiders, lizards, lizards, spiders, lizards, lizards, lizards, spiders, lizards, lizards, lizards, spiders, lizards, l

古文：饭化
现代文：饭化
English: Rice cooking

古文：道士许象之言，以盆覆寒食饭于暗室地，入夏，悉化为赤蜘蛛。
现代文：道士许象之说：用盆把寒食那天做的饭扣在不见光线的屋子里的地上，进入夏天后，饭就会都变成红蜘蛛。
English: Taoist priest Xu Xiangzhi said: Use a basin to hold the meal made on the day of the cold meal on the ground in a room that does not see light. After entering the summer, the meal will all turn into red spiders.

古文：蜈蚣气
现代文：蜈蚣气
English: Hailstorms

古文：绥县多蜈蚣，气大者，能以气吸兔，小者吸蜥蜴。
现代文：绥县蜈蚣很多，吸气力量大的能吸住兔子，气小的也能吸住蜥蜴。
English: There are a lot of dragonflies in Handan County. The large-breathing dragonflies can suck in rabbits, and the small-breathing dragonflies can suck in lizards.

古文：相去三四尺，骨肉自消。
现代文：相距三四尺，就能使兔子和蜥蜴的骨肉自行销毁。
English: At a distance of three or four feet, the bones and flesh of rabbits and lizards can be destroyed by themselves.

古文：蠮螉
现代文：蠮螉
English: 

古文：蠮螉，段成式书斋多此虫，盖好窠于书卷也，或在笔管中。
现代文：段成式书房有很多细腰蜂，原来它们喜欢在书卷中做窝，有时在笔管中作窝。
English: There are a lot of wasps in the tiered study. Originally, they liked to nest in books, and sometimes in pen tubes.

古文：祝声可听。
现代文：发出祝祷似的鸣声，还挺好听。
English: It's quite a nice song with a chant that sounds like a prayer.

古文：有时开卷视之，悉是小蜘蛛，大如蝇虎，旋以泥隔之。
现代文：段成式有时打开书卷观察它们，看到窝中全是小蜘蛛，有蝇虎那样大，周围都用泥围着。
English: Duan Jian sometimes opened the scroll to observe them, and saw that the nest was full of small spiders, as big as tigers, surrounded by mud.

古文：方知不独负桑虫也。
现代文：才知道这种蜂不只是把桑树虫背回来。
English: It was only then that I realised that this bee was not just bringing the mulberry beetle back.

古文：颠当
现代文：颠当
English: Bystand

古文：颠当，段成式书斋前，每雨后多颠当窠，深如蚓穴。
现代文：段成式书房前面，每当雨后常见许多土蜘蛛窝，有蚯蚓洞那样深。
English: In front of the tiered study, there are often many soil spider nests after rain, as deep as a wormhole.

古文：网丝其中，吐盖与地平，大如榆荚。
现代文：里面结成丝网，露出的盖儿与地一样平，有榆钱那样大小。
English: The inside is woven into a silk net, and the exposed cover is as flat as the ground and the size of a dime.

古文：常仰捭其盖，伺蝇蠖过，辄翻盖捕之，才入复闭，与地一色，并无丝隙可寻也。
现代文：这种蜘蛛经常仰附在盖上，等到绳或尺蠖经过时，就翻过盖来捉住它们。蝇蠖刚被捉进去，盖又马上盖严，跟土地颜色相同，并且没有一丝缝隙可寻。
English: This spider often rests on the lid, and when a rope or a ruler passes by, it turns over the lid to catch them. As soon as the flycatcher is caught, the lid is immediately tight, the same color as the ground, and there is not a single gap to be found.

古文：其形似蜘蛛，《尔雅》谓之 王蛛蜴 ，《鬼谷子》谓之 跌母 。
现代文：它的形状像蜘蛛。《尔雅》中称它 王蛛蜴 ，《鬼谷子》称它 跌母 。
English: It is shaped like a spider. In "Lya" it is called the king spider lizard, and in "Kigayatsi" it is called the falling mother.

古文：秦中儿童戏曰： 颠当牢守门，蠮螉寇汝无处奔。 
现代文：陕西的儿童游戏时唱道： 土蜘蛛牢牢的守住大门，细腰蜂来犯你却无处逃奔。 
English: Children's games in Shaanxi sing: Earth spiders firmly guard the gate, while wasps come to attack you but have nowhere to run.

古文：蜾蠃
现代文：蜾蠃
English: 

古文：蜾嬴，今谓之蠮螉也，其为物纯雄无雌，不交不产。
现代文：蜾蠃，当今把它叫细腰蜂。它这种东西全是雄性没有雌性，因此不交尾，不生子。
English: The wasp, today we call it the wasp. This thing is all male and no female, so it doesn't mate and doesn't give birth.

古文：取桑虫之子祝之，则皆化为己子。
现代文：它们把桑虫的幼虫弄来祝祷，就都变成了自己的孩子。
English: They made the larvae of the mulberry worm pray, and they all became their own children.

古文：蜂亦如此耳。
现代文：蜂子也是这样。
English: It's the same with bees.

古文：沙虱
现代文：沙虱
English: Satsang

古文：潭袁处吉等州有沙虱，即毒蛇鳞中虱也，细不可见。
现代文：潭、袁、处、吉等州有一种沙虱，就是毒蛇鳞片中的虱子。这种虱子小得几乎看不见。
English: In the provinces of Tan, Yuan, Chuan and Ji, there is a kind of sand moth, which is a mite in the scales of a poisonous snake. This mite is so small that it is almost invisible.

古文：夏月，蛇为虱所苦，倒挂身于江滩急流处，水刷其虱。或卧沙中，碾虱入沙。
现代文：夏季，毒蛇被这种虱子咬得难受，就把身体倒挂在江中浅滩水流很急的地方，让水冲去身上的虱子；或者卧在沙子里，把虱子碾压到沙中。
English: In the summer, when the viper is badly bitten by this louse, it hangs upside down in the shallows of the river, where the current is very fast, and lets the water wash away the lice on its body; or it lies in the sand and crushes the lice into the sand.

古文：行人中之，所咬处如针孔粟粒，四面有五色文，即其毒也。
现代文：走路的人碰上这种虱子，被咬的地方就像针眼谷粒，四周皮肤上有各种颜色的花纹，就是中了沙虱的毒了。
English: When a pedestrian encounters this louse, the place where it bites is like the eye of a needle. There are patterns of various colors on the skin all around, which means that the person has been poisoned by sand flies.

古文：得术士禁之，乃剜其少许，因以生肌膏救治之，即愈。
现代文：如果找到会巫术的人用法术控制，再剜去少量中毒的皮肉，然后用生肌膏治疗，就可以治愈。
English: If you find a sorcerer who can control it with spells, then remove a small amount of poisoned flesh, and then treat it with raw cream, it can be cured.

古文：不尔，三两日内死矣。水弩
现代文：不这样的话，三两天内就会死。水弩
English: Otherwise, it will die within three or two days.

古文：水弩之虫，状如蜣蜋。黑色，八足，钳曳其尾，长三四寸，尾即弩也。
现代文：水弩这种虫样子像蜣螂，身体黑色，有八只脚，尾巴上拖着一个 钳子 ，长约三四寸，尾巴就是 弩 。
English: This insect looks like a cockroach, its body is black, it has eight legs, it has a hook on its tail, it is about three or four inches long, and its tail is a beak.

古文：常自四月一日上弩，至八月卸之。
现代文：水弩尾上的弩经常从四月一日开始出现，至八月才收起来。
English: The tadpoles on the tails of the otters often appear from the first of April and are not collected until August.

古文：时弯其尾，自背而上于头前，以钳执之。
现代文：水弩不时卷起它的尾巴，从后背一直到脑袋前面，用那把 钳子 夹着它，见到人影就射。
English: From time to time, the otter would curl up its tail from the back to the front of its head, hold it between its pincers, and pounce at the sight of a human being.

古文：见人影则射，中影之处，人身随有辽肿，大小与沙虱之毒同矣。速须禁气制之，剜去毒肉，固保其命。
现代文：人影被射中的地方，人体相应处随后就高高地肿了起来。毒性跟沙虱的毒相同，必须马上用法术控制毒气蔓延，再剜去中了毒的肉，才能保住命。
English: Where the shadow was shot, the corresponding part of the human body then swelled up high. The toxicity is the same as that of sand flies, and it is necessary to immediately use spells to control the spread of poison gas, and then remove the poisoned meat in order to save lives.

古文：不尔，一两日死矣。
现代文：不这样，过一两天就会死去。
English: Otherwise, he will die in a day or two.

古文：复多盅毒，行者尤宜慎之。
现代文：盅毒虫也不少，走路的人尤其应该小心它。
English: There are also many poisonous insects, and people who walk should be especially careful of them.

古文：凡入盅家，慎告主人曰： 汝家有盅毒，不得容易害我。 
现代文：凡是进到有盅虫的人家，千万告诉主人说： 你家有盅这种毒虫，不要轻易害我。 
English: Anyone who enters the home of a person with tapeworms must tell the owner: "Your home has a tapeworm, a poisonous insect. Don't hurt me so easily."

古文：如此则毒不行矣。
现代文：这样盅毒虫就不会毒害你了。
English: That way, the stink bug won't be able to poison you.

古文：徐玄之
现代文：徐玄之
English: Xu Xanzhi

古文：有徐玄之者，自浙东迁于吴，于立义里居。
现代文：有位叫徐玄之的人从浙江东部迁到了吴地，住在立义里。
English: A man named Xu Xianzhi moved from eastern Zhejiang to Wudi and lived in Liyi.

古文：其宅素有凶藉，玄之利以花木珍异，乃营之。
现代文：那座宅子向来就有不吉利的记载。徐玄之却觉得这宅子里有珍奇的花木是很便宜的，于是开始修整它。
English: That house has always had an unlucky record. However, Xu Xuanzhi felt that the rare flowers and trees in this house were very cheap, so he began to renovate it.

古文：月余，夜读书，见武士数百骑升自床之西南隅，于花氈上置缯缴，纵兵大猎。飞禽走兽，不可胜计。
现代文：过了一个多月，徐玄之夜晚读书时，忽然看见武士数百人骑着马从床的西南方的屋角那里冒出来，在花毡上用绢丝作弓弦，然后让士兵们大规模打猎，猎取的飞禽走兽，不可胜数。
English: More than a month later, when Xu Xuanzhi was reading in the evening, he suddenly saw hundreds of warriors on horseback emerge from the southwest corner of the bed, using reeds as bowstrings on the flower beds, and then letting the soldiers hunt on a large scale. The birds and beasts they hunted were countless.

古文：猎讫，有旌旗豹纛，并导骑数百，又自外入，至西北隅。
现代文：打完猎，又看见各种用羽毛装饰的旗子和画有豹子的大旗，连同开路的骑兵好几百，又从外面进来了，到了屋子的西北角。
English: When the hunt was over, he saw the various feathered banners and the large banner with the leopard on it, together with several hundred cavalrymen who had cleared the way, come in again from outside, to the northwest corner of the house.

古文：有戴剑操斧，手执弓槌，凡数百。
现代文：佩剑的，拿斧子的，还有手持弓箭或者大槌的，总共有好几百。
English: There were hundreds of people with swords, axes, bows and arrows, and large hammers.

古文：挈幄幕帘榻，盘碟鼎镬者，又数百。
现代文：带着帐篷、帘子、床和盘、碟、鼎、锅的，又有好几百。
English: There were hundreds of people with tents, curtains, beds, dishes, plates, pots and pans.

古文：负器盛陆海之珍味者，又数百。
现代文：背着装有山珍海味器具的又有几百人。
English: There were also several hundred people with mountain and sea delicacy utensils on their backs.

古文：道路往返，奔走探值者，又数百。
现代文：在道上来来往往，传达命令侦察值班的又有数百人。
English: On the road, there are hundreds of people coming and going, conveying orders to the scouts on duty.

古文：玄之熟视转分明。
现代文：徐玄之仔细看了半天，人物更加分明。
English: Xu Xianzhi looked carefully for half a day, and the characters were more distinct.

古文：至中军，有错彩信旗，拥赤帻紫衣者，侍从数千，至案之右。
现代文：到了中军帐，有交错的彩绸旗、信号旗簇拥着一位头戴红巾，身穿紫衣的人，侍从有好几千，他们都走到了桌子的右面。
English: At the Chinese military account, there were interlaced colored silk flags, signal flags, and a person wearing a red scarf and a purple dress, with thousands of attendants. They all walked to the right side of the table.

古文：有大铁冠，执铁简，宣言曰： 殿下将欲观渔于紫石潭，其先锋后军并甲士执戈戟者，勿从。 
现代文：一个头戴铁盔，手拿铁页文书的人，向众人宣布道： 殿下将到紫石潭观看打鱼，先锋军、后军还有拿着戈戟的甲士都不要跟随。 
English: A man wearing an iron helmet and holding an iron-covered document announced to the crowd: Your highness will go to the Purple Rock Lake to watch the fishing. The vanguard army, the rear army, and the armadillos with gongs should not follow.

古文：于是赤帻者下马，与左右数百，升玄之石砚之上。
现代文：于是戴红巾的人下了马，和左右的数百人升到徐玄之的石砚上面。
English: So the man with the red scarf got off the horse, and together with hundreds of people around him, they climbed up onto Xu Xuanzhi's ledge.

古文：北设红拂卢帐，俄尔盘榻幄幕，歌筵舞席毕备。
现代文：北面设置了红拂庐帐，不一会儿盘榻、帐蓬，配备歌舞的筵席都准备齐全了。
English: On the north side, the red whisk curtain was set up, and soon the camp beds, tents, and banquet tables equipped with singing and dancing were all ready.

古文：宾旅数十，绯紫红绿，执笙竽箫管者，又数十辈。
现代文：宾客有数十人，穿着绯、紫、红、绿衣服，拿着笙、竽、箫、笛的，又有数十人。
English: There were dozens of guests, wearing red, purple, red and green clothes, and dozens of people holding gongs, cymbals, gongs and flutes.

古文：更歌迭舞，俳优之类，不可尽记。
现代文：轮流唱歌跳舞的演员之类的人，实在记不胜记。
English: Actors and the like, who take turns singing and dancing, are hard to remember.

古文：酒数巡，上客有酒容者，赤帻顾左右曰： 索渔具。 
现代文：酒过数巡，贵宾中有的脸上已显醉意。戴红头巾的人看着左右的人说： 拿打鱼的工具来！ 
English: After several rounds of drinks, some of the VIPs' faces already showed signs of intoxication. A man wearing a red bandana looked at the people around him and said: "Bring me a fishing tool!"

古文：复有旧网笼罩之类凡数百，齐入砚中。
现代文：就有旧的鱼网、鱼笼、鱼罩之类渔具共几百件一起搬到砚台上。
English: A total of several hundred pieces of fishing gear such as old fishing nets, fish cages, and fish covers were moved to the bait station.

古文：未顷，获小鱼数百千头。
现代文：只一会儿工夫，就捞到了成百上千头小鱼。
English: In just a short time, he caught hundreds of small fish.

古文：赤帻谓上客曰： 予深得任公之术，请以乐宾。 
现代文：戴红巾的人对贵宾说： 我精通古代善捕鱼的任公子的本领，让我钓些鱼为贵宾助兴吧。 
English: The person wearing the red scarf said to the honored guest: I am proficient in the ancient skill of good fishing, let me catch some fish to help the honored guest.

古文：乃持钓于砚中之南滩。
现代文：于是便拿着鱼竿在砚台的南端水中钓鱼。
English: So he took a fishing rod and fished in the water at the southern end of Xingtai.

古文：乐徒奏《春波引》，曲未终，获鲂鲤鲈鳜百余。
现代文：乐伎演奏《春波引》助钓，一曲没完，就钓了鲂、鲤、鲈、鳜等鱼一百多条，红巾人立刻命令操刀细细切鱼，赶快做饭。
English: Legi played "Spring Wave Guide" to help with the fishing, and before the song was over, they had caught more than a hundred fish such as bream, bream, bream, bream, etc. The red scarf person immediately ordered the knife to cut the fish finely and cook it quickly.

古文：遽命操脍促膳，凡数十味，皆馨香不可言。
现代文：做出的菜共几十种，都馨香扑鼻、美不可言。
English: A total of dozens of dishes have been made, all of which are fragrant and beautiful.

古文：金石丝竹，铿鞫齐奏。
现代文：这时金、石、丝、竹各种乐器一齐演奏，交混回响，美妙和谐。
English: At this time, various musical instruments such as gold, stone, silk and bamboo are played together, creating a wonderful harmony.

古文：酒至赤帻者，持杯顾玄之而谓众宾曰： 吾不习周公礼，不习孔氏书，而贵居王位。
现代文：轮到戴红巾的人喝酒了，戴红巾的人举着酒杯瞅着徐玄之对众宾客说： 我没学习周公的礼，也没读孔子的书，可是却贵居王位。
English: It was the turn of the person wearing the red scarf to drink, and the person wearing the red scarf raised his glass and put his arm around Xu Xuanzhi and said to the guests: I haven't studied Zhou Gong's etiquette, nor have I read Confucius's book, but I hold the throne.

古文：今此儒，发鬓焦秃，肌色可掬，虽孜孜矻矻，而又奚为？
现代文：现在这位儒生头发两鬓干枯脱落，饥饿的脸色很明显，虽然勤奋苦学，可是又能做什么呢？
English: Now this Confucian scholar's hair is falling out in clumps and his hungry face is obvious. Although he has studied hard, what can he do?

古文：肯折节为吾下卿，亦得陪今日之宴。 
现代文：如果肯降低身份做我的下卿，也就可以在今天的宴会上作陪。 
English: If he is willing to lower his status and become my second-in-command, he can also accompany me at today's banquet.

古文：玄之乃以书卷蒙之，执烛以观，一无所见。
现代文：徐玄之便用书本把他们盖上，拿起烛来观看，却什么也看不见了。
English: Xu Xianzhi then covered them with books and took a candle to look at them, but he couldn't see anything.

古文：玄之舍卷而寝。
现代文：徐玄之于是放下书本就寝。
English: So Xu Xianzhi put down his book and went to bed.

古文：方寐间，见被坚执锐者数千骑，自西牖下分行布伍，号令而至。
现代文：刚入睡，就看见穿着铠甲拿着武器的数千骑兵，从西面的窗户下面分成行列，摆开队形，奏着军乐来了。
English: As soon as I fell asleep, I saw thousands of cavalrymen in armor and weapons, from under the western window, divided into rows, arranged in formation and playing military music.

古文：玄之惊呼仆夫，数骑已至床前，乃宣言曰： 蚍蜉王子猎于羊林之茸，钓于紫石之潭。玄之牖奴，遽有迫胁，士卒溃乱，宫车振惊。
现代文：徐玄之惊慌地招呼仆人时，有几名骑兵已来到床前。向徐玄之宣布说： 蚍蜉王子到草林的嫩草地里打猎，到紫石潭那里钓鱼，徐玄之这个愚钝的奴才，立刻进行威逼胁迫，以至士兵混乱溃散，皇宫的车辆大受惊吓。
English: When Xu Xuanzhi called his servants in panic, several cavalrymen had already arrived at the bedside. They announced to Xu Xuanzhi: "The prince went hunting in the fresh grass of the grassland, and went fishing at the Purple Rock Pool. Xu Xuanzhi, this stupid servant, immediately carried out intimidation and coercion, so that the soldiers scattered in confusion, and the vehicles of the palace were greatly frightened.

古文：既无高共临危之心，须有晋文还国之伐。
现代文：你既没有古代战国时高共面临危难时仍不失礼的风度，又没有春秋时晋文公救宋破楚的战功，有什么了不起的！
English: You do not have the demeanor of the ancient Warring States period, when the Gao and the Communists were still not rude when facing danger, and you do not have the war exploits of the Spring and Autumn period, when Jinwen publicly rescued Song Baichu, what is remarkable!

古文：付大将军蛖虰追过。 
现代文：现在王子命令把你交给大将军蠬虰追查你的罪过！ 
English: Now the prince orders you to be handed over to the general - to be tried for your crimes!

古文：宣讫，以白练系玄之颈，甲士数十，罗曳而去。
现代文：宣布之后，用白绢拴着徐的脖子，甲士数十人押着，前呼后拥地拉走了。
English: After the announcement, dozens of cadets held Xu's neck with a white halter and pulled him forward and backward.

古文：其行迅疾，倏忽如入一城门，观者架肩叠足，逗五六里。
现代文：他们走得很快，不一会儿就觉得进入一道城门，围观的人肩挨肩，脚踩着脚，跟随了五六里。
English: They walked quickly and soon felt like they had entered a city gate, with onlookers following them shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot for five or six miles.

古文：又行数里，见子城，有赤衣冠者唱言： 蚍蜉王大怒曰： 披儒服，读儒书，不修前言往行，而肆勇敢凌上。付三事已下议。 
现代文：又走了几里，看见了内城。有位穿红衣服戴红帽子的人大声宣布道： 蚍蜉王对你十分恼怒，说你穿着儒者的衣服，读儒家的书，不好好反省以往的言行，却一味逞能竟敢犯上，决定把你交给三公的官员议处。 
English: After walking a few more miles, they saw the inner city. A man wearing red clothes and a red cap loudly announced: "King Yao is very angry with you, saying that you wear Confucian clothes, read Confucian books, do not properly reflect on past words and deeds, but are so arrogant that you dare to commit crimes, and has decided to hand you over to the officials of the Three Kingdoms for deliberation."

古文：乃释缚，引入议堂。
现代文：于是给徐玄之松了绑，带到议事厅堂。
English: So they tied him up and took him to the council hall.

古文：见紫衣冠者十人，玄之遍拜，皆瞋目踞受。
现代文：徐看见穿紫衣戴紫帽的有十人，就一一拜见。那十个人都瞪着眼睛傲慢地坐在那里受礼。
English: When Xu saw that there were ten people wearing purple clothes and purple hats, he bowed to them one by one. The ten people were sitting there with their eyes wide open, arrogantly accepting the salute.

古文：听陈劾之词，尤炳焕于人间。
现代文：他听到那些官员弹劾的文辞，比人间的这类文辞更加漂亮。
English: He had heard the language of impeachment spoken by those officials, and it was more beautiful than such language on earth.

古文：是时王子以惊恐入心，厥疾弥甚。
现代文：此时蚍蜉王子因为惊恐深入内心，病情更趋严重。
English: At this time, Prince Zou's condition became more serious as he was deeply frightened.

古文：三事已下议，请置肉刑。
现代文：三公以下官员做出决议，要求对徐使用肉刑。
English: Officials below the Third Prince made a resolution, demanding that corporal punishment be used on Xu.

古文：议状未下，太史令马知玄进状论曰： 伏以王子曰不遵典法，游观失度，视险如砥，自贻震惊。
现代文：决议文书还没下达，太史令马知玄上奏章说： 臣伏在地上想，因为王子一天天地不遵守法律，游玩过度，把危险的地方看得平如磨刀石，以致给自己带来了很大的惊恐。
English: Before the resolution document was issued, the Grand Historian ordered Ma Zhixuan to recite the following: The vassal prostrated himself on the ground and thought, because the prince did not abide by the law day in and day out, played excessively, and saw the dangerous place as flat as a grindstone, so that he brought great fear to himself.

古文：徐玄之性气不回，博识非浅，况修天爵，难以妖诬。
现代文：徐玄之的性格气质是不会改变的，又见识广博，并非浅薄之辈，况且又注意培养仁义忠信的品德，难以诬蔑他是妖邪。
English: Xu Xianzhi's personality and temperament will not change, and he is not a shallow person. Moreover, he pays attention to cultivating the virtues of benevolence, loyalty and faithfulness. It is difficult to slander him as a demon.

古文：今大王不能度己，返恣胸臆，信彼多士，欲害哲人。
现代文：现在大王不能正确估价自己，反而任凭自己心意，信任那众多的官员，要害有远见有才能的人。
English: Now the great king is not able to evaluate himself correctly, but instead lets his heart be led astray and trusts the numerous officials to the detriment of those with foresight and talent.

古文：窃见云物频兴，沴怪屡作，市言讹谶，众情惊疑。
现代文：我私下看到天象云气之色频繁变化，反常怪异的现象屡屡出现，街上流传着错误的预言，人们的情绪惊慌疑虑。
English: Privately, I saw frequent changes in the color of the celestial clouds, abnormal and strange phenomena repeatedly appearing, false prophecies circulating in the streets, and people's emotions panicking and doubting.

古文：昔者秦射巨鱼而衰，殷格猛兽而灭。今大王欲害非类，是蹑殷秦，但恐季世之端，自此而起。 
现代文：从前秦朝射死大鱼因而国家衰败，殷朝打死猛兽而国家灭亡，现在大王想杀害跟我们不是同类的人，这是重蹈殷朝和秦朝的覆辙，只怕本朝的衰败，就从这里开始了。 
English: Once upon a time, the Qin Dynasty shot a big fish to death, which led to the decline of the country. The Yin Dynasty killed a ferocious beast, which led to the country's demise. Now the king wants to kill people who are not like us. This is a repetition of the mistakes of the Yin and Qin Dynasties. I am afraid that the decline of this dynasty will begin here.

古文：王览疏大怒，斩太史马知玄于国门，以令妖言者。
现代文：蚍蜉王看了奏章大怒，下令在国门那里斩了太史马知玄，并以此号令妖言惑众的人，正处刑时，突然下起了暴雨。
English: The king of Shanshan was very angry when he read the play, and ordered the execution of Taishi Ma Zhixuan at the gate of the country, and used this as a signal to the sorcerers. When the punishment was being carried out, it suddenly rained heavily.

古文：是时大雨暴至，草泽臣螱飞上疏曰： 臣闻纵盘游，恣渔猎者，位必亡；罪贤臣，戮忠谠者，国必丧。
现代文：这时，还没当上官的螱飞上奏章说： 我听说凡是放纵地娱乐游玩，尽情地打鱼打猎的，他的王位就一定会失去，加罪贤臣，杀戮忠诚正直的人，他的国家一定要灭亡。
English: At this time, Zou Fei, who had not yet become the commander-in-chief, said: I have heard that anyone who indulgently entertains and plays, fishes and hunts to his heart's content, will certainly lose his throne, offend wise ministers, kill loyal and honest people, and his country must perish.

古文：伏以王子猎患于绝境，钓祸于幽泉，信任幻徒，荧惑儒士。丧履之戚，所谓自贻。
现代文：我伏在地上想，因为王子到绝境去猎取祸患，到幽暗的泉水里钓取灾难，信任妖言惑众的人，怀疑信奉儒家学说的人，丢失鞋子的悲哀，像人们说的是自己招来的。
English: I lay on the ground and thought, because the prince went to the desperate situation to hunt for disasters, to the dark springs to fish for disasters, to trust the sorcerers, to doubt those who believe in Confucianism, and the sorrow of losing shoes, as people say, is self-inflicted.

古文：今大王不究游务之非，返听诡随之议。
现代文：现在大王不反省自己沉迷于游猎的过失，反而听信诡诈谄媚者的主张。
English: Now the great king does not reflect on his mistake of indulging in hunting, but listens to the insistence of deceitful sycophants.

古文：况知玄是一国之元老，实大朝之世臣，是宜采其谋猷，匡此颠仆。
现代文：况且马知玄是一国的元老，又是我国历经几代的大臣。实在是应该采纳他的计策谋略，扭转目前这种颠倒的是非。
English: Moreover, Ma Chixuan is a veteran of the country and has been a minister of our country for several generations. It is really necessary to adopt his strategies and strategies to reverse the current inversion.

古文：全身或止于三谏，犯上未伤于一言。肝胆方期于毕呈，身首俄惊于异处。
现代文：如果他要保全自身就不会多次进谏，虽然触犯了皇上，但他没有一句话是伤害皇上的，正是由于他一片忠诚，才能把意见都说出来，可是马上就得到了身首分家的下场。
English: If he wanted to save himself, he wouldn't have repeatedly gotten into trouble. Although he offended the emperor, he didn't say a single word that hurt the emperor. It was precisely because of his loyalty that he was able to express all his opinions, but he immediately got the fate of being separated from the family.

古文：臣窃见兵书云，无云而雨者天泣。
现代文：我私下里看到兵书上说，没有云彩而下雨是天在哭泣。
English: I secretly read in a military manual that when there are no clouds and it rains, the sky is crying.

古文：今直臣就戮，而天为泣焉。
现代文：现在正直的大臣被杀戮，天已为他哭泣啦。
English: Now that an honest minister has been killed, the heavens are weeping for him.

古文：伏恐比干不恨死于当时，知玄恨死于今日。
现代文：我伏在这里想，恐怕古时被剜心的忠臣比干死的时候并不遗憾，马知玄却对死在今天感到遗憾。
English: I crouched here and thought, I'm afraid I'm not sorry for the death of the loyal vassal Bi Gan, but I'm sorry for the death of Ma Zhixuan today.

古文：大王又不贷玄之峻法，欲正名于肉刑，是抉吾眼而观越兵，又在今日。
现代文：大王又不肯宽恕徐玄之，要对他使用严峻的刑法，而想要用肉刑使名分正当，这是战国时吴子胥眼看着越国的兵进入吴国在今天的重演。
English: The great king did not want to forgive Xu Xuanzhi, he wanted to use severe criminal law against him, and he wanted to use physical punishment to justify his position. This is a replay of today, when Wu Zixuan watched the soldiers from Vietnam enter Wuxi during the Warring States period.

古文：昔者虞以宫之奇言为谬，卒并于晋公；吴以伍子胥见为非，果灭于句践。
现代文：从前虞国把宫之奇的话当作错误，结果虞国最终被晋国吞并，吴国把伍子胥的看法当作荒谬，吴国果然被勾践灭掉。
English: Formerly, the State of Yu regarded Gongzixi's words as a mistake, and as a result, the State of Yu was eventually annexed by the State of Jin, and the State of Wu regarded Wu Zixuan's view as absurd, and the State of Wu was indeed overthrown and destroyed.

古文：非敢自周秦悉数，累黩聪明，窃敢以尘埃之卑，少益嵩岳。 
现代文：不是我敢从周朝秦朝一一列举，连续地滥用聪明，而是我想以自己尘埃般微贱的身躯，对巍峨嵩山尽一点力量。 
English: It is not that I dare to enumerate from the Zhou Dynasty to the Qin Dynasty one by one, continuously abusing wisdom, but I want to use my dust-like body to exert a little power on the towering Mount Songshan.

古文：王览疏，即拜螱飞为谏议大夫，追赠太史马知玄为安国大将军，以其子蚳为太史令，赙布帛五百段，米各三百石。
现代文：蚍蜉王看了奏章，就授予螱飞谏议大夫的职务。又追封太史令马知玄为安国大将军，以他的儿子蚳为太史令，并赠给蚳办丧事的布帛五百块。赠给螱飞和蚳各三百石米。
English: After reading the record, King Yao granted Yao Fei Yao the post of doctor of consultation. He also made Ma Zhixuan the Grand General of An Guo and his son Yao the Grand Historian, and gave Yao 500 pieces of cloth for the funeral. He also gave Yao Fei and Yao 300 koku meters each.

古文：其徐玄之，待后进旨。
现代文：并说，那个徐玄之等以后听取了意见再处理。
English: He also said that Xu Xuanzhi and others listened to the opinions and then dealt with them.

古文：于是蚳诣移市门进官表曰： 伏奉恩制云，马知玄有殷王子比干之忠贞，有魏侍中辛毗之谏诤，而我亟以用己，昧于知人。
现代文：于是蚳到了移市门呈上官表说： 我伏在地上捧着看皇帝的诏书，上面说，马知玄有殷代王子比干那样的忠贞，有魏国侍中辛毗那样的直言敢谏的品质，而我屡次因为坚持己见。
English: So when he arrived at the city gate, he presented his official form and said, "I prostrated myself on the ground and read the emperor's edict. It said that Ma Zhixuan had the loyalty of Prince Bi Gan of the Yin Dynasty and the qualities of Sin Pi, a waiter of the Wei Dynasty, who was outspoken and daring, and I was repeatedly punished for holding my own opinions.

古文：爇栋梁于将为大厦之晨，碎舟楫于方济巨川之日。由我不德，致尔非辜。
现代文：而对别人不了解，因而造成在将要建造大厦的早晨却把栋梁烧掉了，将要渡过巨大河流的时候却把船只打碎了。由于我不施恩德，以致你无罪被杀。
English: And not understanding others, I caused the beams to be burned in the morning when the building was to be built, and the boats to be broken when the great rivers were to be crossed, and you were killed for no fault of mine.

古文：是宜褒赠其亡，赏延于后者。
现代文：这是应该对其死亡进行表彰和追封的，奖赏应该延续到他的后人身上。
English: This is something that should be honored and sealed after his death, and the reward should be passed on to his descendants.

古文：宸翰忽临，载惊载惧，叩头气竭，号断血零。
现代文：这时忽然接到皇帝的诏书，我又惊又怕，连连叩头，呼吸都停止了，号哭中断，鲜血滴落。
English: At this time, I suddenly received the Emperor's edict. I was shocked and afraid. I bowed my head repeatedly, my breathing stopped, my crying stopped, and blood dripped down.

古文：伏以臣先父臣知玄，学究天人，艺穷历数，因玄鉴得居圣朝。
现代文：我伏在地上想，我去世的父亲知玄，学问上，探究天道与人事关系技能上，历法数学全都懂得，凭着高超的见解得以官居高位。
English: I prostrated myself on the ground and thought that my deceased father knew everything, in terms of learning, exploring the heavenly way and personnel relations skills, he understood the calendar and mathematics, and was able to hold high positions with his superb views.

古文：当大王采当刍荛之晨，是臣父展嘉谟之日。
现代文：在大王采伐柴草的日子里，正是我的父亲制定妙计的时候。
English: In the days of the great king cutting firewood, it was time for my father to devise a clever plan.

古文：逆耳之言难听，惊心之说易诛。
现代文：逆耳的话难以听进去，说震惊人心的话容易被杀。
English: It is difficult to listen to words that go against the grain, and it is easy to be killed by shocking words.

古文：今蒙圣哲旁临，照此非罪。鸿恩沾洒，犹惊已散之精魂；好爵弥缝，难续不全之腰领。
现代文：现在承蒙圣恩浩荡，为我父亲平反昭雪，这样深广的恩泽会使已散去的精魂吃惊；尽管显赫的爵位虽能弥补缝合，也难接合残缺的腰和头。
English: Now, by the abundance of the grace of God, my father has been vindicated, and the depth and breadth of that grace will astonish the departed soul; for though a great title may supply the sutures, it cannot supply the missing loins and head.

古文：今臣岂可因亡父之诛戮，要国家之宠荣。
现代文：但现在我怎么可以因为先父被杀戮，而领受国家的宠爱与荣耀？
English: But how can I now receive the love and glory of the nation because my father was killed?

古文：报平王而不能，效伯禹而安忍。
现代文：我即不能像周平王那样继承他父亲幽王的事业，又不忍像禹王那样不顾自己的身家。
English: I can't inherit the business of his father, Yu Wang, like King Zhou Ping, and I can't bear to disregard my family status like King Yu.

古文：况今天图将变，历数堪忧，伏乞斥臣遐方，免逢丧乱。 
现代文：何况现在天象预示着国家将有大变，历法也显出令人忧虑的预兆。臣伏在地上请求把臣驱逐到远方，以免遭受死丧祸乱。 
English: What's more, the sky is now foreshadowing a major change in the country, and the calendar is also showing worrying signs. The vassal is prostrate on the ground, begging to be banished to a faraway place, so as not to suffer death and disaster.

古文：王览疏不悦，乃返寝于候雨殿。
现代文：蚍蜉王看了奏章不高兴，就回到候雨殿寝宫睡觉。
English: Shao Wang was not happy to see the score, so he went back to his palace to sleep.

古文：既寤，宴百执事于凌云台曰： 适有嘉梦，能晓之，使我心洗然而亮者，赐爵一级。 
现代文：睡醒后，就在凌云台宴请百官，说： 刚才我做了个好梦，谁能说明白它，使我的心里亮堂堂的，就赏给他一级爵位。 
English: After waking up, he held a banquet for a hundred officials at Lingyuntai and said, "I just had a good dream. Whoever can explain it and make my heart bright, will be awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：群臣有司，皆顿首敬听。
现代文：群臣和各主管官员都叩头，然后洗耳恭听。
English: The courtiers and officials all bowed their heads and listened.

古文：曰： 吾梦上帝云，助尔金，开尔国，展尔疆土，自南自北，赤玉洎石，以答尔德。
现代文：王说： 我梦见上天说， 助尔金，开尔国，展尔疆土，自南自北，赤玉洎石，以答尔德。
English: And the king said, I saw in my dream, and God said, This is Succoth, and this is the land of the Cherethites, and this is the land of the Cherethites, from the north even unto the south, and this is the land of the Chaldeans, and this is the land of the Chaldeans.

古文：卿等以为如何？ 
现代文：你们认为这个梦怎么样？ 
English: What do you think of this dream?

古文：群臣皆拜舞称贺曰： 答邻国之庆也。 
现代文：群臣都跪拜舞蹈，称赞祝贺说， 这是我们答邻国的幸福啊！ 
English: The ministers all kneeled and danced, praised and congratulated, saying, "This is the happiness of our neighboring country!"

古文：螱飞曰： 大不祥，何庆之有？ 
现代文：螱飞说： 很不吉利！有什么幸福？ 
English: Zou Fei said: Very unlucky! What is happiness?

古文：王曰： 何谓其然？ 
现代文：王问： 你为什么说不吉利？ 
English: Wang asked: Why do you say it is unlucky?

古文：螱飞曰： 大王逼胁生人，滞留幽穴，锡兹咎梦，由天怒焉。
现代文：螱飞说： 大王威逼胁迫世间的生人，把他拘留在幽暗的洞穴里。你这个梦恰恰是上天震怒，托梦谴责你。
English: Hao Fei said, "Great King Wei forced and coerced the living beings of the world and detained him in a dark cave. This dream of yours is exactly the wrath of Heaven, condemning you with this dream."

古文：夫助金者锄也，开国者辟也，展疆土者分裂也，赤玉洎石，与火俱焚也。
现代文：助金 者， 锄 也， 开国 者， 辟 也， 展疆土 分裂也， 赤玉洎石 ，与火俱焚也。
English: The benefactors, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders, the founders.

古文：得非玄之锄吾土，攻吾国，纵火南北，以答系领之辱乎？ 
现代文：莫不是徐玄之要用锄锄我们的国土，攻打我们的国家，放火于南北，来报复绳拴脖子的耻辱吗？ 
English: Wasn't it Xu Xuanzhi who wanted to take revenge for the shame of the rope around his neck by seizing our land, attacking our country, and setting fire to the north and south?

古文：王于是赦玄之之罪，戮方术之徒，自坏其宫，以禳厥梦。
现代文：王于是赦免了徐玄之的罪，杀了会方术的那些人，自己毁掉了宫殿，以便消除那个梦中所预示的灾难。
English: The king then pardoned Xu Xuanzhi's crime, killed those people of the party, and destroyed the palace himself in order to eliminate the disaster foreshadowed in the dream.

古文：乃以安车送玄之归，才及榻，玄之寤。
现代文：接着又用舒适的车子送回了徐玄之。徐玄之刚一挨着床，就醒过来了。
English: Next, they sent back Xu Xuanzhi in a comfortable car. As soon as Xu Xuanzhi was next to the bed, he woke up.

古文：既明，乃召家僮，于西牖掘地五尺余，得蚁穴如三石缶。
现代文：天明以后，徐就召集家里的年轻仆人，在西窗下挖地五尺多深，找到一个蚂蚁洞，有装三石粮的大缸那样大。
English: After daybreak, Xu called his young servants to dig more than five feet deep under the west window and found an ant hole as big as a large jar containing three stone of grain.

古文：因纵火以焚之，靡有孑遗，自此宅不复凶矣。
现代文：于是放火烧了这个蚂蚁洞，一个蚂蚁也没留下，从此这座宅子再没出现不吉祥的事。
English: So they set fire to the ant hole, and not a single ant was left behind. Since then, nothing bad has happened to the house.

古文：短狐
现代文：短狐
English: Short Fox

古文：搜神记》及《鸿范五行传》曰，蜮射生于南方，谓之短狐者也。
现代文：《搜神记》及《鸿范五行传》说，蜮射生在南方，人们把它称作短狐。
English: "Sojin Ji" and "Hong Fan Wuxing Biographies" said that the dragonfly was born in the south, and people called it the short fox.

古文：南越夷狄，男女同川而浴，淫以女为主，故曰多蜮。
现代文：南越的少数民族，男女在同一条河里洗澡。淫荡之事主要是女子做的，所以说有很多蜮。
English: In the ethnic minorities of South Vietnam, men and women bathe in the same river. It is mainly women who indulge in lewd acts, so there are a lot of baboons.

古文：蜮者淫女惑乱之气所生。
现代文：蜮是淫荡的女子迷惑盅惑之气产生的。
English: It is the result of the seduction of a lewd woman.

古文：蜘蛛怨
现代文：蜘蛛怨
English: Arachnid Grudge

古文：顷有寺僧所住房前，有蜘蛛为网，其形绝大。
现代文：不久前有个庙里和尚住的房子前面，有蜘蛛织的网，蜘蛛的个儿极大。
English: Not long ago, there was a spider's web in front of a house where a monk lived in a temple. The spider was very large.

古文：此僧见蜘蛛，即以物戏打之，蜘蛛见僧来，即避隐。
现代文：这个和尚看见蜘蛛，就用东西戏弄、打它，所以蜘蛛看见和尚来，就隐蔽躲藏起来。
English: When the monk saw the spider, he teased and hit it with something, so when the spider saw the monk coming, it hid.

古文：如此数年。
现代文：就这样过了好几年。
English: This went on for several years.

古文：一日，忽盛热，僧独于房，因昼寝。
现代文：有一天，忽然非常热，和尚白天单独一人在房中睡觉。
English: One day, suddenly very hot, the monk was sleeping alone in his room during the day.

古文：蜘蛛乃下在床，啮断僧喉成疮，少顷而卒。
现代文：蜘蛛于是落到床上，咬断了和尚的喉咙形成伤口，不一会儿和尚就死了。
English: The spider then fell onto the bed, biting off the monk's throat to form a wound, and the monk died soon after.

古文：蜂虿有毒，非虚言哉。
现代文：看来蜂和蜘蛛有毒可不是假话呀。
English: It seems that it is not a lie that bees and spiders are poisonous.

古文：蜥蜴
现代文：蜥蜴
English: Common lizard

古文：曹叔雅《异物志》曰：鱼跳跳，则蜥蜴从草中下。
现代文：曹叔雅的《异物志》中说：鱼不断跳跃时，蜥蜴就会从草里下水，它们渐渐地互相依傍
English: Cao Shuya's "Stranger Things" said: "When the fish keep jumping, the lizards will descend from the grass. They gradually lean on each other

古文：稍相依近，便共浮水上而相合，事竟，鱼还水底，蜥蜴还草中。
现代文：靠近，就一块浮在水面上交配。交配完了，鱼回到水底，蜥蜴回到草中。
English: After mating, the fish returns to the bottom of the water and the lizard returns to the grass.

古文：殷琅
现代文：殷琅
English: 殷

古文：陈郡殷家养子名琅，与一婢结好经年。
现代文：陈郡有一户姓殷的人家，有个养子名叫琅，跟一个丫环相好有一年了。
English: In Chen County, there is a family with the surname Yin. They have an adopted son named Zou, who has been dating a maid for a year.

古文：婢死后，犹往来不绝，心绪昏错。
现代文：后来丫环死了，但他们仍然不断来往，这使得琅的心绪糊涂错乱。
English: The maidservant later died, but they still continued to see each other, which made Yao's mood confused and chaotic.

古文：其母深察焉。
现代文：琅的母亲就周密地进行观察。
English: Zou's mother watched carefully.

古文：后夕见大蜘蛛，形如斗样，缘床就琅，便燕尔怡悦。
现代文：后来有一天晚上，见一只大蜘蛛，形状像斗，沿着床靠近了琅，于是就听见他们云雨交欢的声音。
English: Then, one night, she saw a large spider, shaped like a bucket, crawl along the bed and approach the baboons, and she heard them making love.

古文：母取而杀之，琅性理遂复。
现代文：琅母抓住蜘蛛杀了，琅的性情理智才恢复了正常。
English: The mother caught the spider and killed it, and the baboon's temperament and sanity returned to normal.

古文：豫章民婢
现代文：豫章民婢
English: Yuanzhang Minbi

古文：豫章有一家，婢在灶下。
现代文：豫章有一家人的婢女在灶下，忽见有个几寸高的人来到灶间，婢女没小心，踩死了一个小人。
English: In Yuzhang, a family's maid was under the stove when she suddenly saw a man several inches tall come to the kitchen. The maid was not careful and trampled a small man to death.

古文：就视皆是鼠妇，作汤浇杀，遂绝。
现代文：于是烧热水浇死了它们，这种虫子再也没有出现。
English: The boiling water killed them, and the insects never reappeared.

古文：南海毒虫
现代文：南海毒虫
English: Nankai toxin worms

古文：南海有毒虫者，若大蜥蜴，眸子尤精朗，土人呼为十二时虫。一日一夜，随十二时变其色，乍赤乍黄。
现代文：南海一带有种毒虫像大蜥蜴，眼珠子尤其明亮。当地人把它叫十二时虫，因为它会随着日夜的十二个时辰改变它的颜色，忽红忽黄。
English: The South China Sea is home to a species of venomous worm resembling a large lizard, with particularly bright eyeballs. Locals call it the twelve o'clock worm, because it changes its color with the twelve hours of the day and night, turning red and yellow.

古文：亦呼为篱头虫。
现代文：也称作篱头虫。
English: Also known as the hedgehog worm.

古文：传云，伤人立死，既潜噬人，急走于藩篱之上，望其死者亲族之哭。
现代文：古书上说它咬伤了人，人马上就会死；暗中咬了人后，它急忙跑到篱笆上，看那被咬死的人的亲族哭泣。
English: The ancient books say that if it bites a man, the man will die immediately; after biting a man secretly, it hurried to the fence to see the relatives of the man who was bitten and died crying.

古文：新州西南诸郡，绝不产蛇及蚊蝇。
现代文：新州西南各郡，绝没有蛇和蚊子、苍蝇。
English: In the south-western counties of NSW, there are no snakes, mosquitoes or flies.

古文：余窜南方十年，竟不睹蛇，盛夏露卧，无噆肤之苦。
现代文：我被流放到南方十年，竟然没看到蛇，盛夏裸露着，没有皮肉被咬之苦。
English: I've been exiled to the south for ten years, and I haven't seen a snake, I'm naked in the middle of summer, and I don't have the pain of being bitten.

古文：此人谓南方少蛇，以为夷獠所食。
现代文：这里的人们说，南方少蛇，因为是被当地少数民族吃了。
English: People here say that there are fewer snakes in the south because they were eaten by the local ethnic minority.

古文：别有水蛇，形状稍短，不居陆地，非喷毒啮人者。
现代文：另外有种水蛇，形状稍短，不住在陆地上，也不喷毒咬人。
English: In addition, there is a kind of water snake, slightly shorter in shape, does not live on land, and does not spray poison to bite people.

古文：诺龙
现代文：诺龙
English: Nauru

