古文：太祖元贞皇后张氏，单州砀山县渠亭里富家子也。
现代文：梁太祖元贞皇后张氏，单州砀山县渠亭里富贵人家女子。
English: Liang Taizhu Yuanzhen, Empress of the Zhang family, was a wealthy woman living in a canal pavilion in Lushan County, Shan State.

古文：太祖少以妇聘之，生末帝。
现代文：太祖年少时娶张氏，生末帝。
English: The great-grandfather married into the Zhang family at a young age and became the last emperor.

古文：太祖贵，封魏国夫人。
现代文：太祖投降唐，升官，封魏国夫人。
English: The great-grandfather surrendered to Tang, was promoted, and became the wife of Wei.

古文：后贤明精悍，动有礼法，虽太祖刚暴，亦尝畏之。
现代文：后贤明精悍，动有礼法，太祖虽然刚烈残暴，也害怕后。
English: Hou was wise, refined, and moved with etiquette. Although the ancestor was fierce and cruel, he was also afraid of Hou.

古文：太祖每以外事访之，后言多中。
现代文：太祖经常问后关于军国大事，后多数说对了。
English: The great-grandfather often asked the latter about the military affairs of the country, and the latter mostly said the right thing.

古文：太祖时时暴怒杀戮，后尝救护，人赖以获全。
现代文：太祖常常暴怒杀人，后常常救护，一些人因此得救。
English: The great-grandfather often killed people in a rage, and later he often saved people, and some people were saved as a result.

古文：太祖尝出兵，行至中途，后意以为不然，驰一介召之，如期而至。
现代文：太祖出兵，走到半路，后感觉不对，派一人召回，太祖按时回师。
English: The great-grandfather sent out soldiers, walked halfway, and then felt bad, sent one person to recall, and the great-grandfather returned to the division on time.

古文：郴王友裕攻徐州，破硃瑾于石佛山，瑾走，友裕不追，太祖大怒，夺其兵。
现代文：郴王友裕攻徐州，破朱瑾于石佛山，瑾败走，友裕不去追赶，太祖大怒，夺了友裕的兵权。
English: King Youyu attacked Xuzhou, defeated Zhu Xi in Shifoshan, defeated Zou, and went away. Youyu did not chase after him. Grandfather was furious and seized Youyu's military power.

古文：友裕惶恐，与数骑亡山中，久之，自匿于广王。
现代文：友裕害怕，与数骑逃到山中，过了很久，自己藏到广王家里。
English: Terrified, Tomohiro fled to the mountains with several horsemen. After a long time, he hid himself in Guangwang's house.

古文：后阴使人教友裕脱身自归，友裕晨驰入见太祖，拜伏庭中，泣涕请死，太祖怒甚，使左右捽出，将斩之。
现代文：后暗地派人教给友裕脱身回来的办法，友裕早晨回来见太祖，跪在地上哭着请死，太祖非常愤怒，叫左右拉出去准备杀掉。
English: Later, he secretly sent someone to teach Tomoyuki the way to escape and return. Tomoyuki came back in the morning to see Taizu, kneeled on the ground and cried for death. Taizu was very angry and told him to pull out left and right and prepare to kill him.

古文：后闻之，不及履，走庭中持友裕泣曰： 汝束身归罪，岂不欲明非反乎？ 
现代文：后听说了，来不及穿鞋，走到庭中拉着友裕哭着说： 你回来请罪，说明了你不是造反呀？ 
English: After hearing about it, he didn't have time to put on his shoes, so he walked to the courtyard, dragged Tomohiro crying and said, "You came back to plead guilty, which means you didn't rebel?

古文：太祖意解，乃免。
现代文：太祖想通了，才免死。
English: The great-grandfather figured it out and avoided death.

古文：太祖已破硃瑾，纳其妻以归，后迎太祖于封丘，太祖告之。
现代文：太祖已经击破朱瑾军，夺他的妻子归己，后到封丘迎接太祖，太祖将此事告知。
English: The great-grandfather had already defeated Zhu Xi's army, captured his wife and returned to his own, and then went to Fengqiu to meet the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather told the matter to Zhu Xi.

古文：后遽见瑾妻，瑾妻再拜，后亦拜，凄然泣下曰： 兗郓与司空同姓之国，昆仲之间，以小故兴干戈，而使吾姒至此；若不幸汴州失守，妾亦如此矣！ 
现代文：后立即见朱瑾的妻子，瑾妻拜礼，后也拜，流泪说： 兖郓与司空同姓，兄弟之间因小事动干戈，造成我们妯娌悲惨的命运；如果不幸汴州失守，我也是如此呀！ 
English: Afterward, he immediately saw Zhu Yao's wife, and his wife prayed, and later also prayed, and shed tears, saying: "I have the same surname as Siku, and the brothers fought each other over trivial matters, resulting in our tragic fate; if unfortunately Zhangzhou is lost, so am I!

古文：司空，太祖时检校官也。天祐元年，后以疾卒。
现代文：说毕又哭。太祖因此感动，才送朱瑾的妻子去当尼姑，后常常送给她衣服食物。天祐元年，后病死。
English: The great-grandfather was so moved by this that he sent Zhu Xi's wife to become a nun, and later often gave her clothes and food. In the first year of Tianyu, Hou died of illness.

古文：太祖即位，追册为贤妃。
现代文：太祖即帝位，追封为贤妃。
English: The great-grandfather was enthroned as emperor, and was posthumously crowned as a virtuous empress.

古文：◎兄广王全昱全昱子友谅友能友诲广王全昱，太祖即位封。
现代文：初葬于开封县润色乡。末帝即位，追谥曰元贞皇太后，迁葬宣陵。后死了，太祖开始荒淫，致祸。广王全昱，梁太祖的长兄，太祖即位，封他为广王。
English: He was first buried in Runshi Township, Kaifeng County. When the last emperor ascended to the throne, the empress dowager Yuan Zhen was pursued and moved to the Xuanling Mausoleum. After she died, the great-grandfather began to commit fornication, leading to disaster. Guang Wang Quanzhang, the eldest brother of Liang Great-grandfather, when the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, he was named Guang Wang.

古文：太祖与仲兄存俱亡为盗，全昱独与其母犹寄食刘崇家。
现代文：太祖与二兄存逃亡参加农民军，全昱与母亲在刘崇家当佣工。
English: The great-grandfather and his second brother survived the escape to join the peasant army, and Quanzhang and his mother worked as domestic helpers in Liu Chong's family.

古文：太祖已贵，乃与其母俱归宣武，领岭南西道节度使。
现代文：太祖当节度使，接母和兄到宣武，后来任他当山南西道节度使。
English: His great-grandfather was the festival envoy, and he took his mother and brother to Xuanwu. Later, he was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：以太师致仕。
现代文：年老以太师退归家中闲居。
English: The old ether master retreated to his home and idled.

古文：太祖将受禅，有司备礼前殿，全昱视之，顾太祖曰： 硃三，尔作得否？ 
现代文：太祖将接受唐哀帝的让位，有司在前殿准备大礼，全昱看到了，对太祖说： 朱三，你做得了吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizu was about to accept Emperor Tang's abdication. An attendant was preparing a grand gift in the vestibule. Quanzhang saw this and said to Emperor Taizu: Zhu San, have you done it?

古文：太祖宴居宫中，与王饮博，全昱酒酣，取骰子击盆而迸之，呼太祖曰： 硃三，尔砀山一百姓，遭逢天子用汝为四镇节度使，于汝何负？
现代文：太祖在宫中设宴，与王饮酒赌博，喝得最高兴的时候，全昱取骰子甩到盆子上，喊太祖说： 朱三，你是砀山一个老百姓，天子叫你当四镇节度使，有什么地方对不起你？
English: The great-grandfather held a banquet in the palace and gambled with the king by drinking alcohol. When he was at his happiest, he took a whole bunch of hazelnuts and threw them onto the basin. He called out to the great-grandfather and said, "Zhu San, you are an ordinary citizen of Shaoshan. God has called you to be the festival envoy of the four towns. Do you have any regrets?

古文：而灭他唐家三百年社稷，吾将见汝赤其族矣，安用博为！ 
现代文：你灭他唐家三百年社稷，我看你将来会灭族，还用赌博吗？ 
English: You wiped out the Tang Dynasty's three-hundred-year-old social system. I see that you will wipe out ethnic groups in the future. Do you still use gambling?

古文：太祖不悦，罢会。
现代文：太祖不高兴而罢宴。
English: Unhappy, the great-grandfather left the banquet.

古文：全昱亦不乐在京师，常居砀山故里。
现代文：全昱也不愿住在京城，常常回到砀山故乡居住。
English: Quanzhang did not want to live in Beijing, and often returned to his hometown in Lushan to live.

古文：三子皆封王：友谅衡王，友能惠王，友诲邵王。
现代文：三个儿子都封王：友谅衡王，友能惠王，友诲邵王。
English: All three of his sons were crowned kings: King Youzhen Heng, King Youneng Hui, and King Youzhen Shao.

古文：乾化元年，升宋州为宣武军，以友谅为节度使。
现代文：乾化元年，升宋州为宣武军，用友谅为节度使。
English: In the first year of the Qianhua era, Sheng Songzhou became the propaganda and military force, and Uyou Yuzhen became the military commander.

古文：友谅进瑞麦一茎三穗，太祖怒曰： 今年宋州大水，何用此为！ 
现代文：友谅进献瑞麦一茎三穗，太祖大怒说： 今年宋州大水灾，你搞这些干什么？ 
English: He presented a stem and three spikes of ramie, and the great-grandfather angrily said, "This year, there was a big flood in Songzhou. What are you doing?

古文：乃罢友谅，居京师。
现代文：罢免友谅的官职，叫他闲住在京城。
English: He removed Tomofusa from his official position and told him to stay in Kyoto.

古文：太祖卧病，全昱来视疾，与太祖相持恸哭；太祖为释友谅，使与东归。
现代文：太祖卧病，全昱来探病，二人拉着手痛哭；太祖叫友谅与全昱回故里。
English: The great-grandfather was ill, and Quanzhang came to check on him. The two of them held hands and wept bitterly. The great-grandfather called for Yu Peng and Quanzhang to return to their hometown.

古文：贞明二年，全昱以疾薨。徙衡王友谅嗣封广王。
现代文：贞明元年，全昱病死。衡王友谅袭封广王。
English: In the first year of Zhenming, Quanzhang died of illness. Heng Wangyou inherited Guangwang.

古文：友能为宋、滑二州留后、陈州刺史，所至为不法，奸人多依倚之。
现代文：友能任宋、滑二州留后、陈州刺史，到处胡作非为，奸恶之人多依靠他。
English: Yu Neng was appointed by Song, Slip two states to stay behind, and Chen state to stab history, and he misbehaved everywhere, and many treacherous people relied on him.

古文：而陈俗好淫祠左道，其学佛者，自立一法，号曰 上乘 ，昼夜伏聚，男女杂乱。妖人母乙、董乙聚众称天子，建置官属，友能初纵之，乙等攻劫州县，末帝发兵击灭之。
现代文：陈州风俗喜欢立庙祭祀，信佛的人自创上乘教，日夜聚会，男女杂乱。妖人毋乙、董乙聚众称天子，建置官属，友能最初放纵这些人，乙等攻劫州县，末帝派兵镇压下去。
English: The customs of Chenzhou favored the establishment of temples and religious rites, and the believers of Buddhism created their own superior teachings, gathered day and night, and men and women were disorderly. The demons, including Bao B and Dong B, gathered together and were known as the sons of heaven. Officials and subordinates were established. At first, these people were indulged by their friends. B attacked the prefectures and counties, and eventually the emperor sent soldiers to suppress them.

古文：友裕破灵台、良原，下陇州，杨崇本以邠州降。
现代文：自从康王友孜谋反被杀，末帝开始疏远排斥宗室亲王，宗室都不安定或者谋反。
English: Since the death of Prince Kang Youzi, the last emperor began to alienate and exclude the prince's family, and the family was either unstable or plotting rebellion.

古文：后崇本复叛，太祖遣友裕攻之，屯于永寿。
现代文：贞明四年，友能在陈州反，进攻京城，走到陈留县兵败，退回陈州，过了几个月才投降，末帝赦免他，降为房陵侯。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenming, You Neng rebelled in Chenzhou, attacked Beijing, went to Chenliu County and was defeated, returned to Chenzhou, and surrendered after a few months. The last emperor pardoned him and reduced him to the position of Fongling Hou.

古文：友裕以疾卒。○子博王友文
现代文：友诲当陕州节度使，想用州兵作乱，末帝召还京城，与友谅、友能一起被囚禁。
English: When Tomoaki was the envoy of the Shaanxi Festival, he wanted to use the National Guard to create a disturbance, but the Emperor called him back to Beijing, and he was imprisoned together with Tomoaki and Tomonaga.

古文：博王友文，字德明，本姓康名勤。
现代文：梁朝灭亡，庄宗到汴州，把他们都杀了。博王友文字德明，本姓康名勤。
English: When the Liang Dynasty fell, Zhuo Zong went to Zhangzhou and killed them all. Bo Wangyou, whose real name was Kang Mingqin, was called Deming.

古文：幼美风姿，好学，善谈论，颇能为诗，太祖养以为子。
现代文：幼时风姿美好，好学，善谈论，诗歌写得好，太祖收为养子。
English: When he was young, he was good-looking, eager to learn, good at talking, and good at writing poetry. He was adopted by his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖领四镇，以友文为度支盐铁制置使。
现代文：太祖兼四镇节度使时，用友文当度支盐铁制置使。
English: When the great-grandfather Kaneshizhen made the four-town festival, he used a friend's text to support the salt and iron system.

古文：太祖用兵四方，友文征赋聚敛以供军实。
现代文：太祖用兵四方，友文征赋聚敛以供军需。
English: The great-great-grandfather used soldiers in all directions, and amassed amulets to supply the war needs.

古文：太祖即位，以故所领宣武、宣义、天平、护国四镇征赋，置建昌宫总之，以友文为使，封博王。
现代文：太祖即帝位，以原来的宣武、宣义、天平、护国四镇征赋，置建昌宫总管，用友文为使臣，封博王。
English: The great-grandfather, that is, the imperial throne, used the original four towns of Xuanwu, Xuanyi, Tianping, and Guo to recruit, build the general manager of Chang Palace, use Yuwen as an envoy, and seal Bo Wang.

古文：太祖幸西都，友文留守东京。
现代文：太祖到西都，友文留守东京。
English: The great-grandfather went to the western capital, while Tomofumi stayed in Tokyo.

古文：○子庶人友珪庶人友珪者，太祖初镇宣武，略地宋、亳间，与逆旅妇人野合而生也。长而辩黠多智。
现代文：庶人友皀，是太祖开始镇守宣武，到宋、亳扩大地盘时，与一妇人野合而生，长大后狡猾多智谋。
English: The commoner, Yuxuan, was the town guard of Xuanwu at the beginning of the Great Ancestor's reign. When the Song Dynasty and Qing Dynasty expanded their territory, he was born together with a woman. When he grew up, he was cunning and resourceful.

古文：博王友文多材艺，太祖爱之，而年又长，太祖即位，嫡嗣未立，心尝独属友文。
现代文：博王友文多才多艺，太祖很爱他，而且年长，太祖即帝位，未立太子，心里很想以友文为嗣君。
English: Bao Wang Youwen is multi-talented and versatile. His great-grandfather loved him very much, and he was older. His great-grandfather was an emperor, not a crown prince. In his heart, he wanted to make Youwen his heir.

古文：太祖自张皇后崩，无继室，诸子在镇，皆邀其妇入侍。
现代文：太祖自从张皇后死，无继室，诸子在镇，都叫媳妇入侍。
English: Since the death of Empress Zhang, the great-grandfather has no successor, and all the sons in the town have called their daughters-in-law to serve.

古文：友文妻王氏有色，尤宠之。
现代文：友文妻王氏有美色，尤其受到宠爱。
English: Mr. Wang's wife, Ms. Tomobumi, was especially favored because of her beauty.

古文：太祖病久，王氏与友珪妻张氏，常专房侍疾。
现代文：太祖病久了，王氏与友皀妻张氏常常侍奉。
English: The great-grandfather had been ill for a long time, and Wang and his friend's wife Zhang often served.

古文：太祖病少间，谓王氏曰： 吾知终不起，汝之东都，召友文来，吾与之决。 
现代文：太祖对王氏说 ：我知道病好不了，你去东都召友文来，我与他说临别的话。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Mr. Wang, "I know that my illness will not get better. If you go to Dongdu, call your friend Wen, and I will have a parting word with him."

古文：盖心欲以后事属之。
现代文：是想托付后事给他。
English: I wanted to entrust him with my future.

古文：乃谓敬翔曰： 友珪可与一郡，趣使之任。 
现代文：就对敬翔说： 友皀可以给他一郡，催他去上任。 
English: He said to Qian Xiang: You can give him one county and urge him to take office.

古文：乃以友珪为莱州刺史。
现代文：于是用友皀为莱州刺史。
English: As a result, Utoyocho made history for Laizhou.

古文：太祖素刚暴，既病，而喜怒难测，是时左降者，必有后命，友珪大惧。
现代文：太祖平时刚烈残暴，病中喜怒无常，那时降职的人，往往很快下诏处置，友皀非常害怕。
English: The great-grandfather was usually stubborn and cruel, and he was moody when he was ill. People who were demoted at that time were often dealt with quickly, and Tomoe was very afraid.

古文：其妻张氏曰： 官家以传国宝与王氏，使如东都召友文，君今受祸矣！ 
现代文：他的妻子张氏说 ：皇帝把传国宝给王氏，叫她到东京召友文，你要大祸临头了。 
English: His wife, Ms. Zhang, said, "The emperor gave the national treasure to Ms. Wang and told her to go to Tokyo to call for friends. You are heading for disaster."

古文：夫妇相对而泣。
现代文：夫妇相对哭泣。
English: The couple wept.

古文：左右劝友珪曰： 事急计生，何不早自为图？ 
现代文：左右的人劝友皀说 ：事急出计谋，为啥不早点想办法？ 
English: People on both sides of the issue urged Yuyao to think of a way out of the situation. Why not think of a way out earlier?

古文：友珪乃易衣服，微行入左龙虎军，见统军韩勍计事，勍以牙兵五百随友珪，杂控鹤卫士而入。
现代文：友皀换了衣服，秘密地到左龙虎军，与统军韩京力商议，京力连夜用牙兵五百随友皀杂在控鹤卫士里进入宫中。
English: Tomohiro changed his clothes and secretly went to the left dragon and tiger army to discuss with the unified army Han Jingli. Overnight, Jingli entered the palace with five hundred tooth soldiers mixed with friends in the guardian cranes.

古文：夜三鼓，斩关入万春门，至寝中，侍疾者皆走。
现代文：夜里三更，斩关入万春门，至寝宫，侍奉的人都吓跑了。
English: At three o'clock in the evening, they entered the Wanchun Gate, and when they reached the sleeping palace, the servants were scared away.

古文：太祖惶骇起呼曰： 我疑此贼久矣，恨不早杀之，逆贼忍杀父乎！ 
现代文：太祖吓得坐起大喊说 ：我怀疑此贼很久了，恨没早点杀掉，逆贼忍心杀父吗？ 
English: Terrified, the great-grandfather sat up and shouted, "I have suspected this thief for a long time. I wish I had killed him earlier. Would the traitor have had the heart to kill my father?"

古文：友珪亲吏冯廷谔以剑犯太祖，太祖旋柱而走，剑击柱者三，太祖惫，仆于床，廷谔以剑中之，洞其腹，肠胃皆流。
现代文：友皀亲吏冯廷谔用剑刺太祖，太祖围着柱子转，剑三次击在柱上，太祖疲劳了，扑倒床上，廷谔以剑刺中，穿过腹部，肠胃都流出来了。
English: Feng Tingyao, a close relative of Zhuge Liang, stabbed the great-grandfather with a sword. The great-grandfather circled around the pillar. The sword hit the pillar three times. The great-grandfather was tired and threw himself on the bed. The great-grandfather stabbed the great-grandfather with a sword and passed through the abdomen. The intestines and stomach came out.

古文：友珪以裀褥裹之寝中，秘丧四日。
现代文：友皀用蚊帐被褥包裹起来放在寝室里，秘不发丧达四天之久。
English: The friend was wrapped in a mosquito net quilt and placed in a bedroom, where it remained undiscovered for four days.

古文：乃出府库，大赍群臣及诸军。
现代文：拿出府库钱财，大赏群臣及各军。
English: Take out the treasury money and reward the ministers and the troops.

古文：又下诏曰： 朕艰难创业，逾三十年。托于人上，忽焉六载，中外协力，期于小康。
现代文：派丁昭浦传假诏书到东都，杀友文。又下诏说 ：朕艰难创业三十多年，当皇帝六年，大家努力，希望能达到小康。
English: He sent Ding Zhaopu to transmit the fake imperial edict to Dongdu, killing his friend. The next imperial edict said: I have been struggling to start a business for more than 30 years, and I have been emperor for six years. Everyone is working hard, hoping to achieve a well-off life.

古文：岂意友文阴畜异图，将行大逆。
现代文：没料到友文阴谋异图，将行大逆。
English: Unexpectedly, Tomowen's conspiracy will backfire.

古文：昨二日夜，甲士突入大内，赖友珪忠孝，领兵剿戮，保全朕躬。然而疾恙震惊，弥所危殆。
现代文：昨二日夜甲士入宫，多亏友皀忠孝，领兵剿贼，保全朕体。然而病体受到震惊，危在旦夕。
English: On the evening of the 2nd day of the last month, a knight entered the palace. Thanks to the loyalty of my friends, I was able to lead the soldiers and protect my body. However, my body was shocked and I was in danger.

古文：友珪克平凶逆，厥功靡伦，宜委权主军国。 
现代文：友皀清除凶逆，功劳无比，应委他主持军国大事。 
English: As a peerless hero, he was appointed to preside over military affairs.

古文：然后发丧。
现代文：然后发丧。
English: And then the funeral.

古文：乾化二年六月既望，友珪于柩前即皇帝位，拜韩勍忠武军节度使，以末帝为汴州留后，河中硃友谦为中书令。
现代文：乾化二年六月十六日，友皀在柩前即帝位，升韩京力忠武军节度使，用末帝为汴州留后，河中朱友谦为中书令。
English: On June 16th, the second year of the Qianhua era, Emperor Youjun ascended to the throne before the Spring Festival. He was promoted to the imperial envoy of Han Jingli Zhongwu Jun, and after Emperor Youjun stayed in Zhangzhou, Zhu Youqian became the imperial envoy to China.

古文：友谦不受命。
现代文：友谦不接受命令。
English: Tomohito doesn't take orders.

古文：而怀州龙骧军三千，劫其将刘重霸，据怀州，自言讨贼。
现代文：怀州龙骧军三千，劫其将刘重霸，占据怀州，声言讨贼。
English: Huai Zhou Longyu's army of three thousand captured Liu Shigeha and occupied Huai Zhou, claiming to be looking for thieves.

古文：三年正月，友珪祀天于洛阳南郊，改元曰凤历。
现代文：三年正月，友皀在洛阳南郊祀天，改元凤历。
English: In the first month of the third year, Yu Yu in the southern suburb of Luoyang worshiped the heavens and changed the calendar to the Yuan Feng calendar.

古文：太祖外孙袁象先与驸马都尉赵岩等，谋与末帝讨贼。
现代文：太祖外孙袁象先与驸马都尉赵岩等商议与末帝讨贼。
English: The great-great-grandfather's grandson, Yuan Xiangxian, and the imperial equerry, Zhao Yan, discussed with the last emperor how to deal with thieves.

古文：二月，象先以禁兵入宫，友珪与妻张氏趋北垣楼下，将逾城以走，不果，使冯廷谔进刃其妻及己，廷谔亦自杀。
现代文：二月，象先率禁军入宫，友皀与妻张氏跑到北墙楼下，准备爬城墙逃走未成，叫冯廷谔杀妻与自己，廷谔也自杀。
English: In February, when Xiang first led the forbidden army into the palace, Youjun and his wife Zhang ran to the lower floor of the north wall and prepared to climb the city wall to escape, but failed to do so. He ordered Feng Tingyao to kill his wife and himself, and Tingyao also committed suicide.

古文：末帝即位，复友文官爵，废友珪为庶人。
现代文：末帝即位，恢复友文官爵，废友皀为庶人。
English: When the last emperor ascended the throne, Tomonobu was reinstated as a court noble, and Tomomine was abolished as a commoner.

古文：○子康王友孜康王友孜，目重瞳子，尝窃自负，以为当为天子。
现代文：康王友孜，太祖第七子，眼是双眼皮，自认为很了不起，以为应当做天子。
English: Kang Wang Youzi, the seventh son of the great-grandfather, was born with double eyelids. He thought he was so great that he should be the son of heaven.

古文：贞明元年，末帝德妃薨，将葬，友孜使刺客夜入寝中。
现代文：贞明元年，末帝德妃死，将要下葬，友孜派刺客夜入帝寝室中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhengming, the late Emperor Tefui died and was about to be buried. The assassins of the Yu Ze faction entered the emperor's bedroom at night.

古文：末帝方寐，梦人害己，既寤，闻榻上宝剑枪然有声，跃起，抽剑曰： 将有变邪！ 
现代文：末帝正睡觉，梦见有人害自己，惊醒，听见榻上宝剑有响声，一跃而起，抽剑说： 有情况呀！ 
English: At the end of his life, the emperor was sleeping. He had a dream about someone hurting him, woke up, heard the sound of a sword on the bed, jumped up, drew his sword and said, "There's a situation!"

古文：乃索寝中，得刺客，手杀之，遂诛友孜。
现代文：立即搜索寝室，捉住刺客，亲手杀了，下令诛友孜。
English: Immediately search the bedroom, catch the assassin, kill him with your own hands, and give the order to hang him.

古文：明日，谓赵岩、张汉杰曰： 几与卿辈不相见。 
现代文：第二天，对赵岩、张汉杰说 ：朕几乎不能与你们再见面。 
English: The next day, he said to Zhao Yan and Zhang Hanjie: I can hardly meet you again.

古文：由此遂疏弱宗室，而信任赵、张，以至于败亡。
现代文：从此以后对宗室疏远，而信任赵、张，以至于败亡。
English: From then on, he distanced himself from the family and trusted Zhao and Zhang, which led to his downfall.

古文：呜呼，《春秋》之法，是非与夺之际，难矣哉！
现代文：唉！《春秋》之法，是非争夺之际，难判断啊！
English: Alas! The law of "Spring and Autumn" is hard to judge when it is time to fight for right and wrong!

古文：或问： 梁太祖以臣弑君，友珪以子弑父，一也。
现代文：有人问： 梁太祖以臣弑君，友皀以子弑父，一样吧？
English: Some people asked: Liang Taizu is the same as his father, isn't he?

古文：与弑即位，逾年改元，《春秋》之法，皆以君书，而友珪不得列于本纪，何也？
现代文：弑后即位，过一年改元，《春秋》之法，都按君主来写，然而友皀不得列入本纪，为什么？
English: After the empress dowager's accession to the throne, the era was changed a year later, and the laws of "Spring and Autumn" were all written according to the monarch. However, Youyou was not allowed to be included in this discipline. Why?

古文：且父子之恶均，而夺其子，是与其父也，岂《春秋》之旨哉？ 
现代文：而且父子之恶一样，只夺其子，却给其父，这难道是《春秋》的主旨吗？ 
English: Moreover, the evil of the father and son is the same, only the son is taken away, but the father is given, is this the main theme of "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：予应之曰： 梁事著矣！其父之恶，不待与夺其子而后彰，然末帝之志，不可以不伸也。
现代文：我回答说 ：梁朝的事已经写出来了，其父之恶，不必靠夺其子而后写明，然而末帝为君父报仇之志不可不伸张啊。
English: I replied, "The events of the Liang Dynasty have already been written. The evil of his father does not need to be made clear by seizing his son. However, the last emperor's desire to avenge his father cannot be denied."

古文：《春秋》之法，君弑而贼不讨者，国之臣子任其责。
现代文：《春秋》之法，弑君之贼不讨伐者，国家大臣要承担责任。
English: According to the law of "Spring and Autumn," if the thief does not fight, the minister of state should bear the responsibility.

古文：予于友珪之事，所以伸讨贼者之志也。 
现代文：我对于友皀的事，是要伸张讨贼者的壮志啊！ 
English: As far as I'm concerned, I want to live up to my ambition of being a thief!

