古文：千日酒擒奸酒若下酒昆仑觞碧筒酒九酝酒消肠酒青田酒粘雨酒
现代文：千日酒擒奸酒若下酒昆仑觞碧筒酒九酝酒消肠酒青田酒粘雨酒
English: Thousand-day liquor, treacherous liquor, young wine, Kunlun ginger beer, nine-brewing liquor, digestive liquor, Qingdao liquor, sticky rain wine

古文：酒名南方酒李景让夏侯孜孙会宗陆扆
现代文：酒名南方酒李景让夏侯孜孙会宗陆扆
English: Name of the wine: Nanfang Liquor Li Jing Zhan Xia Houzi Sun Hui Zong Lu Yao

古文：酒量山涛周顗裴弘泰王源中
现代文：酒量山涛周顗裴弘泰王源中
English: The amount of alcohol consumed by the middle-aged Wang Yuan

古文：嗜酒徐邈刘伶酒臭
现代文：嗜酒徐邈刘伶酒臭
English: Alcoholic, stinks of booze

古文：千日酒
现代文：千日酒
English: Sennichi sake

古文：昔有人名玄石，从中山酒家沽酒。
现代文：从前有个叫玄石的人，到中山酒店买酒。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man named Gemstone who went to Zhongshan Hotel to buy wine.

古文：酒家与千日酒，忘语其节。
现代文：店家将千日醉卖给了他，忘了告诉他这是什么酒了。
English: The shopkeeper sold him a thousand-day drunk and forgot to tell him what kind of wine it was.

古文：至家醉卧，不醒数日。
现代文：结果，玄石回到家里喝了千日醉后，醉倒在床上，一连好几天也不醒过来。
English: As a result, after returning home drunk for a thousand days, he fell drunk on his bed and did not wake up for several days.

古文：家人不知，以为死也，具棺殓葬之。
现代文：家里人不知道，以为他死了，就将他装入棺椁中埋葬了。
English: Unbeknownst to the family, they thought he was dead and buried him in a coffin.

古文：酒家至千日，乃忆玄石前来沽酒，醉当醒矣。
现代文：到了一千天，卖酒的店家才想起一千天前来买醉的玄石，今天该醒酒了，于是到玄石家询问情况。
English: After a thousand days, the liquor store owner remembered that it was time to sober up, so he went to the black stone house to inquire about the situation.

古文：遂往索玄石家而问之，云：石亡已三年，今服阕矣。
现代文：家里人说：玄石已经死了三年啦，现在正好守丧期满。
English: A family member said: "He's been dead for three years, and now the mourning period is over.

古文：于是与家人至玄石墓，掘冢开视，玄始醒，起于棺中。
现代文：于是这位店家跟玄石家里人一块儿来到玄石墓前，挖开坟墓，打开棺椁一看，玄石正好刚醒酒，自己从棺椁中走出来。
English: So the shopkeeper, together with the family members of Gemstone, came to Gemstone's grave, dug up the grave, opened the coffin and saw that Gemstone had just sobered up and walked out of the coffin.

古文：擒奸酒
现代文：擒奸酒
English: 奸酒from

古文：河东人刘白坠者善于酿酒。
现代文：河东有个叫刘白坠的人，擅长酿酒。
English: There is a man in the east of the river called Liu Bai Xing, who is good at making wine.

古文：六月中时暑赫，刘以罂贮酒，曝于日中。
现代文：每到六月中旬盛夏时节，刘白坠将酒贮藏在罂瓮里，放在太阳底下曝晒。
English: Every mid-June, at the height of summer, Liu Baikeng stores the wine in a jar and places it under the sun to expose it.

古文：经一旬，酒味不动，饮之香美，醉而不易醒。
现代文：晒过十天后，酒味不变。饮它感觉味道特别甘甜芳香，而且喝醉后不容易醒酒。
English: After ten days of exposure, the taste of the wine remains unchanged. When drinking it, the taste feels particularly sweet and aromatic, and it is not easy to sober up after getting drunk.

古文：京师朝贵出郡者，远相饷餽，逾于千里。
现代文：京城里的朝廷显贵每次出京，都不远千里带回刘白坠酿造的这种酒送人。
English: Every time the imperial court dignitaries in the capital went to Beijing, they would travel thousands of miles to bring back this wine, brewed by Liu Baikang, to give away.

古文：以其可至远，号曰鹤觞，亦名骑驴酒。
现代文：因为它能扬名千里之外，所以起名叫鹤觞，又叫骑驴酒。
English: Because it can make a name for itself thousands of miles away, it is called "crane wine" or "donkey wine."

古文：永熙中，青州刺史毛鸿宾带酒之任。
现代文：晋惠帝永熙年间，青州刺史毛鸿宾带着刘白坠酿造的鹤觞酒到任上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongxi of the Jin Dynasty, Mao Hongbin, the governor of Qingzhou, came to office with a bottle of crane wine brewed by Liu Baikang.

古文：路中夜逢劫盗，盗饮之皆醉，遂备擒获。
现代文：途中遇到劫道的贼寇，喝了鹤觞酒后都醉得人事不省。于是，这些盗贼都被捕获。
English: On the way, they encountered highway robbers who were drunk to the point of unconsciousness after drinking moonshine. As a result, these thieves were all captured.

古文：因此复名擒奸酒。
现代文：从这以后，刘白坠酿造的这种酒又叫擒奸酒。
English: Since then, this kind of wine brewed by Liu Baikang has also been called Xingzhu wine.

古文：游侠语曰：不畏张弓拔刀，唯畏白坠春醪。
现代文：当时在江湖上行走的侠士们说：不惧怕箭射刀砍，只畏惧白坠酿的春酒啊！
English: At that time, the knights who walked on the rivers and lakes said: Do not be afraid of arrows, swords, and knives, only be afraid of spring wine brewed by Bai Xing!

古文：若下酒
现代文：若下酒
English: Wakashitazake

古文：《舆地志》：村人取若下水以酿酒，醇美。俗称若下酒。
现代文：《舆地志》上说：村里的乡民取来若下水酿酒，酒味醇美，当地人称若下酒。
English: "Public History" said: the villagers of the village took Wakasa water to make wine, the wine tasted mellow, and the locals called it Wakasa wine.

古文：张协士所云：荆州乌程，豫北竹叶。即此是也。
现代文：张协士说：荆州的乌程酒，豫北的竹叶青，就是这种酒啊！
English: Zhang Xieshi said: "Wu Cheng wine from Jingzhou and Zhuye Qing wine from Henan are the same wine!

古文：昆仑觞
现代文：昆仑觞
English: Kunlun Dragonfly

古文：魏贾摪家累千金，博学善著作。
现代文：魏人贾摪家财千金，字识广博，还能著书写文章。
English: The Wei people, the Jia family, have a lot of money, extensive literacy, and can also write articles.

古文：有苍头善别水，常令乘小舟于黄河中。以瓠匏接河源水，一日不过七八升。
现代文：有一位老翁擅长识别水性，贾摪经常让这位老翁乘坐小船驶到黄河中流，用葫芦接黄河源的水，一天不过能接到七八升。
English: There was an old man who was good at identifying the properties of water. Jia Wei often had this old man sail to the middle reaches of the Yellow River in a small boat, and use a gourd to connect the water from the source of the Yellow River. He was only able to receive seven or eight liters a day.

古文：经宿，器中色如绛。
现代文：放了一宿，葫芦里的水变成绛色。
English: After being left overnight, the water in the gourd turns a dark brown.

古文：以酿酒，名昆仑觞，酒之芳味，世间所绝。
现代文：用这种黄河源的水酿的酒，名叫昆仑觞。它的甘美芳香的酒味儿，是人世间所没有的。
English: The wine brewed with water from the source of the Yellow River is called Kunlun. Its sweet and aromatic taste is like nothing else in the world.

古文：曾以三十斛上魏庄帝。
现代文：贾摪曾经用三十斛昆仑觞，进献给魏庄帝。
English: Jia Wei once used 30 Kunlun coins to make an offering to Emperor Wei Zhuang.

古文：碧筒酒
现代文：碧筒酒
English: Bicchu is brewed

古文：历城北有使君林。
现代文：历城城北有一片使君林。
English: In the north of Licheng, there is a piece of Shijun cedar forest.

古文：魏正始中，郑公悫三伏之际，每率宾僚避暑于此。
现代文：魏齐王正始年间，郑悫公每到三伏天便率领宾朋属僚们到这里来避暑。
English: At the beginning of the Wei and Qi dynasties, Zheng Rongguo led his guests and colleagues to come here to spend the summer every three days.

古文：取大莲叶置砚格上。盛酒三升。
现代文：郑悫公让家人拿来硕大的莲叶放在砚格上面，再盛酒三升。
English: Zheng Yigong asked his family members to bring a huge lotus leaf and place it on top of the urn, and then pour three liters of wine.

古文：以簪刺叶，令与柄通。屈茎上，轮菌如象鼻。传吸之，名为碧筒。
现代文：之后，用簪子刺莲叶，让它与莲叶的柄相通，再将叶柄弯曲，如象鼻，相传着饮吸，起名叫碧筒。
English: After that, he pricked the lotus leaf with a pair of tweezers, so that it would connect with the stem of the lotus leaf, and then bent the leaf stem like an elephant's trunk, which was passed down as drinking and sucking, and was named Bicchu.

古文：历下效之，言酒味杂莲气，香冷胜于冰。
现代文：后来人们争相效仿，说这样喝酒味中掺进去莲花的清香，香冷如冰。
English: Later, people tried to follow suit, saying that the fragrance of the lotus flower mixed with the taste of alcohol in this way was cold as ice.

古文：九酝酒
现代文：九酝酒
English: Nine brewing

古文：张华既贵，有少时知识来候之。华与共饮九酝酒，为酣畅，其夜醉眠。
现代文：张华发迹后，他小时候的朋友来看他，张华用九酝酒来招待这位童年时的朋友，两人喝得非常畅快。
English: After Zhang Hua made his fortune, his childhood friend came to visit him. Zhang Hua invited his childhood friend with nine bottles of wine, and the two drank very happily.

古文：华常饮此酒，醉眠后，辄敕左右，转侧至觉。
现代文：这天晚上，两个人都喝得大醉，躺下就睡着了。张华经常喝九酝酒。每次喝后睡觉时，都令家里人来将他翻转来，调过去，一直到醒酒才停下来。
English: That night, both of them got very drunk and fell asleep after lying down. Zhang Hua often drank nine glasses of wine. Every time he went to sleep after drinking, he asked his family members to turn him over and put him back until he sobered up.

古文：左右依常时为张公转侧，其友人无人为之。
现代文：这天晚上，张华忘了告诉家人；仆人象往常一样翻转他。张华的那位朋友却没有人去照看。
English: That night, Zhang Hua forgot to tell his family; the servant turned him over as usual. But Zhang Hua's friend had no one to look after him.

古文：至明，友人犹不起。
现代文：到天亮，张华的朋友还没有醒过来。
English: By dawn, Zhang Hua's friend had still not woken up.

古文：华咄云：此必死矣。
现代文：张华惋惜地说：我这位朋友一定是死啦！
English: Zhang Hua said sadly: This friend of mine must be dead!

古文：使视之，酒果穿肠流，床下滂沱。消肠酒
现代文：派人过去看看，酒果然穿过他这位朋友的肚肠流出来，床下汪着一地的酒水。消肠酒
English: He sent someone over to take a look, and sure enough, the wine flowed out through his friend's stomach, leaving a pool of booze under the bed.

古文：张华为醇酒，煮三薇以渍曲蘖。
现代文：张华酿造的醇酒，用煮三薇的水来浸泡曲麦蘖。
English: The wine brewed by Zhang Hua is made by soaking buckwheat noodles in boiled Sanwei water.

古文：蘖出西羌，曲出北胡。
现代文：蘖产在西羌，曲出产在北胡。
English: Dong is produced in Xidi, Qu is produced in North Hubei.

古文：胡中有指星麦，四月火星出，获麦而食之。
现代文：胡地产一种指星麦。说的是农历四月火星出来，将麦子收割后吃。
English: Hu Real Estate produces a kind of star wheat. It is said that the star crab comes out in April of the lunar calendar, and the wheat is harvested and eaten.

古文：蘖用水渍，三夕而麦生萌芽。
现代文：蘖芽用水浸泡，经过三个晚上，麦子泡出蘖芽。
English: The alfalfa sprouts are soaked in water, and after three nights, the wheat sprouts.

古文：以平旦时鸡初鸣而用之，俗人呼为鸡鸣麦。
现代文：在天刚亮鸡初次打鸣时候，用它来酿酒。民间称它为鸡鸣麦。
English: It is used to make wine when the Tian Gangliang chicken chirps for the first time. It is popularly known as the chicken chirping wheat.

古文：以酿酒，清美鬯。
现代文：用这种鸡鸣麦酿的酒，清美甘醇，芳香持久。
English: The wine brewed with this chicken song wheat is clear and sweet, with a long-lasting aroma.

古文：久含令人齿动，若大醉不摇荡，使人肝肠烂，当时谓之消肠酒。或云，醇酒可为长宵之乐。
现代文：喝到嘴里含着不咽，时间长了，能将牙齿泡活动了。如果喝醉了不翻转摇动，能将人的肝肠浸烂。当时人称：消肠酒，还有人说：这种醇酒可让你长宵欢乐。
English: If you drink it into your mouth without swallowing, it will last a long time, and you will be able to activate the tooth foam. If you are drunk and do not shake it, it can soak the human liver and intestines. At that time, people called it "gut liquor," and others said: "This liquor can make you happy all night long."

古文：二说声同而事异焉。
现代文：二种说法，声音相同，但是包含的内容却不一样啊。
English: Two sayings, the sound is the same, but the content is different.

古文：青田酒
现代文：青田酒
English: Aota sake

古文：乌孙国有青田核，莫知其树与实。
现代文：乌孙国出产一种青田核，不知道是什么树结的，也不知道它的果实是什么样子的。
English: Wusun Province produces a kind of seed kernel. It is not known what kind of tree it is, nor what its fruit looks like.

古文：而核大如五六升瓠，空之盛水，俄而成酒。
现代文：这种青田核象能盛五六升东西的葫芦那么大。用这种空核盛水，不一会儿，水就变成了酒。
English: This kind of seed kernel is as big as a gourd that can hold five or six liters of things. Use this empty kernel to hold water, and in a moment, the water will turn into wine.

古文：刘章曾得二枚，集宾设之，可供二十人。
现代文：有个叫刘章的人，曾得到两枚青田核，将朋友邀来设酒宴。这两枚青田核酿出来的酒，可供得上二十个人来喝。
English: A man named Liu Zhang once received two Aota nuclei and invited his friends to a wine banquet. The wine made from these two Aota nuclei could be drunk by more than twenty people.

古文：一核方尽，一核所盛，复中饮矣。
现代文：一核的酒才饮完，另一核中的水又变成了酒，可以接着钦。
English: After drinking the wine from one core, the water in the other core is turned into wine, which can then be drunk.

古文：唯不可久置，久则味苦难饮。
现代文：但是，不能将水放得时间长了。时间长了，则味苦难饮。
English: However, you can't leave the water for a long time. If you leave it for a long time, it will taste bitter.

古文：因名其核曰青田壶，酒曰青田酒。
现代文：因此，管这种核叫青田壶，这种酒叫青田酒。
English: Therefore, this kind of core is called Aota pot, and this kind of liquor is called Aota sake.

古文：粘雨酒
现代文：粘雨酒
English: Sticky rain wine

古文：石虎于大武殿前起楼，高四十丈。
现代文：石虎在大武殿前建造一座楼，高四十丈。
English: Shihu built a forty-story building in front of the Great Hall of the Emperor.

古文：结珠为帘，垂五色玉珮。上有铜龙，腹空，盛数百斛酒。
现代文：将珠编结成门帘挂在上面，帘下饰有五色玉珮，帘上安装一条铜龙，龙腹是空的，可以盛几百斛酒。
English: The beads are woven into a door curtain and hung on it. The curtain is decorated with five-colored jade bracelets. A bronze dragon is mounted on the curtain. The dragon's belly is empty and can hold hundreds of bottles of wine.

古文：使胡人于楼上噀酒，风至，望之如云雾。
现代文：让胡人在楼上喝酒，有风刮来，远远望去整座楼如在云雾中。
English: The bearded man is upstairs having a drink, the wind is blowing, and from far away the whole building looks like it's in a fog.

古文：名曰粘雨台，使以洒尘。
现代文：因此，这座楼名叫粘雨台，用它来洒尘。
English: Therefore, this building is called the sticky rain table, and it is used to sprinkle dust.

古文：酒名
现代文：酒名
English: Sake names

古文：酒名：郢之富水，乌城之若下，荥阳之土窟春，富平之石冻春，剑南之烧春，河东之乾和蒲桃，岭南之灵溪博罗，宜成之九酝，浔阳之湓水，京城之西市腔，虾蟆陵之郎官清。河汉之三勒浆，其法出波斯。
现代文：名酒有：郢城产的富水酒，乌程产的若下酒，荥阳产的土窟春酒，富平产的石冻春酒，剑南产的烧春酒，河东产的乾和葡萄酒，岭南产的灵溪博罗酒，宜城产的九酝酒，浔阳产的湓酒，京城产的西市腔酒，虾蟆陵产的郎官清酒，河汉产的三勒浆酒。三勒浆酒的酿造方法出处波斯国。
English: Famous wines include: rich water wine produced in Shicheng, young wine produced in Wucheng, earth cave spring wine produced in Shiyang, stone-frozen spring wine produced in Fuping, boiled spring wine produced in Jianan, dry wine produced in Hedong, Lingxi boro wine produced in Lingnan, nine-year-old wine produced in Yicheng, ginger wine produced in Shiyang, Xichichang wine produced in Beijing, Langguan wine produced in Shifangling, and Sanle syrup wine produced in Hehan. The brewing method of Sanle syrup wine originated in Persia.

古文：三勒者，谓庵摩勒、毗黎勒、诃黎勒。
现代文：所谓三勒，就是庵摩勒、毗黎勒、诃黎勒的简称。
English: The so-called Sanle is the abbreviation for Anmol, Bi-Rile and Su-Rile.

古文：南方酒
现代文：南方酒
English: Nanfang liquor

古文：新州多美酒。
现代文：新州盛产美酒。
English: NSW is rich in fine wine.

古文：南方酒不用曲蘖，杵米为粉，以众草叶胡蔓草汁溲，大如卵，置蓬蒿中阴蔽，经月而成。
现代文：南方酒不用曲蘖酿造，而是将米杵成粉，用胡蔓草汁和粉，外面包裹上各种草叶，做成卵形，放在蓬蒿中荫蔽一个月，让它发酵变馊。
English: Nanfang liquor is brewed without the use of lees. Instead, the rice is pounded into a powder, mixed with cranberry juice and powder, and then wrapped with various grass leaves to form an egg shape. It is then placed in the shade of a hillside for one month, allowing it to ferment and turn sour.

古文：用此合糯为酒。
现代文：然后再掺对上糯米，酿造成酒。
English: Then it is mixed with glutinous rice and brewed into wine.

古文：故剧饮之后，既醒，犹头热涔涔，有毒草故也。
现代文：这种酒，快速喝它，不醉，只是头上往外冒热汗，是因为有毒草的缘故啊。
English: This kind of wine, drink it quickly, not drunk, just sweating from the head, because of the poisonous grass.

古文：南方饮既烧。即实酒满瓮，泥其上，以火烧方熟。
现代文：南方人饮这种酒得烧它，就是将酒装满瓮，上面涂泥，再用火烧才算熟了。
English: People in the south who drink this kind of wine have to distill it, which means filling the wine with straw, coating it with mud, and then using fire to make it ripe.

古文：不然，不中饮。
现代文：不然，不能饮。
English: Otherwise, you can't drink it.

古文：既烧即揭瓶趋虚，泥固犹存。
现代文：烧完后，立即将瓮上的盖揭去，中间出现空隙，上面的泥还在。
English: After burning, immediately remove the lid from the crucible, there is a gap in the middle, and the mud on top is still there.

古文：沽者无能知美恶，就泥上钻小穴可容筋，以细筒插穴中，沽者就吮筒上，以尝酒味，俗谓之滴淋。
现代文：买酒的人不知道酒的好坏，就在泥上钻个小洞象筷子那么粗，将细管插入洞中。买酒的人吮吸细管的一端，来品尝酒的味道，民间叫滴淋。
English: People who buy wine do not know whether the wine is good or bad. They drill a small hole in the mud as thick as chopsticks and insert a thin tube into the hole. People who buy wine suck one end of the thin tube to taste the taste of the wine. People call it dripping.

古文：无赖小民空手入市，遍就酒家滴淋，皆言不中，取醉而返。
现代文：有的无赖小民空手来到集市上，遍尝酒家的滴淋。每尝一家，都说不好喝，最后也能尝得大醉回去。
English: Some scoundrels and villains come to the market empty-handed and taste the wines of the winemakers. They say that every wine they taste is not good, and in the end they can go home very drunk.

古文：南人有女数岁，即大酿酒。
现代文：南方人生下女孩后，长到几岁时，就为她酿造很多的酒。
English: After Nanfang gave birth to a girl, he brewed a lot of wine for her when she was a few years old.

古文：既漉，候冬陂池水竭时，置酒罂，密固其上，痤于陂中。
现代文：过滤好了后，等到冬天池塘里的水枯竭时，将这滤好的酒盛在酒罂中，将上面的罂盖密封加固好，把酒罂埋在池塘岸边。
English: After filtering, when the water in the pond dries up in winter, the filtered wine is placed in the crucible, the upper crucible cover is sealed and reinforced, and the crucible is buried on the shore of the pond.

古文：至春涨水满，不复发矣。
现代文：到春天池塘里涨满了水，也不再挖出来。
English: By spring, the pond is full of water and the worms can no longer be dug out.

古文：候女将嫁，因决陂水，取供贺客。南人谓之女酒。
现代文：待到这个女孩长大成人出嫁时，才在堤岸挖个缺口，将水放开，然后挖出埋在岸边泥土下面的酒罂，用里面埋藏多年的美酒招待贺喜的宾客。南方人称它为女儿酒。
English: When the girl grows up and gets married, she digs a gap in the embankment, releases the water, and then digs out the lees buried under the mud on the shore, using the wine that has been buried for many years to invite congratulatory guests. Southerners call it daughter wine.

古文：味绝美，居常不可致也。
现代文：这种陈年佳酿，味道绝对甘美。平常是喝不到的啊！
English: This aged fine wine has an absolutely sweet taste. It's impossible to drink normally!

古文：李景让
现代文：李景让
English: Li Jingzhan

古文：大中年，丞郎宴席，蒋伸在座。忽斟一杯言曰：席上有孝于家，忠于国，及名重于时者，饮此爵。
现代文：唐宣宗大中年间，一次，在尚书省的左右丞及云部侍郎的宴席上，蒋伸忽然斟一杯酒，说：在咱们今天的宴席上，有在家孝敬父母，在朝为国尽忠，而且名重时下的人，请饮这一杯。
English: During the middle school years of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, once, at a banquet held by Zuo Rong and Yun Bo, the attendants of Shang Shuzhou, Jiang Shin suddenly poured a glass of wine and said: "At our banquet today, those who are at home, honor their parents, are loyal to the country in the morning, and are famous, please drink this glass.

古文：众皆肃然，无敢举者。
现代文：蒋伸说完后，在座的人都神色严肃，你看看我，我看看你，谁也没敢举起这杯酒。
English: After Jiang Shin finished speaking, everyone present looked serious. Look at me, look at you, no one dared to lift this glass of wine.

古文：独李公景让起引此爵，蒋曰：此宜其然。
现代文：独有李景让站起身，端起这杯酒一饮而尽。
English: Only Li Jing stood up and took the glass of wine and drank it down.

古文：夏侯孜
现代文：蒋伸说：李景公最适宜喝这杯酒啦。夏侯孜
English: Xia Houzhi

古文：崔郢为京尹日，三司使在永达亭子宴丞郎。崔乘酒突饮，众人皆延之。
现代文：崔郢任京兆尹时，一次，御史、中书、门下三司使臣，在永达亭宴请丞相，崔郢乘着酒劲忽然不礼貌地狠劲喝。
English: When Choe Ryong was appointed to the post of the Grand Duke of Jin, he once invited the Emperor, the Grand Historian, the Grand Historian of China, and his three subordinate envoys to a banquet at the Yongda Pavilion. Choe Ryong took advantage of the power of alcohol to suddenly and impolitely drink heavily.

古文：时谯公夏侯孜为户部使，问曰：尹曾任给舍否？
现代文：众人都停止喝酒看着他。当时任户部使的夏侯孜问他：崔京尹你曾经任过给事中与中书舍人吗？
English: Everyone stopped drinking and looked at him. Xia Houze, who was the Household Division's envoy at the time, asked him: "Cui Jingyin, did you ever appoint someone who was indifferent to the situation?

古文：崔曰：无。
现代文：崔郢回答说：没有任过。
English: Cui Rong replied, "I have never been appointed."

古文：谯公曰：若不曾历给舍，京光尹不合冲丞郎宴。
现代文：夏侯孜说：如果不曾任过给事中与中书舍人，你就不应该冲撞这次丞郎宴。
English: Xia Houzeh said: If you have not been appointed as a person who has given up the middle and middle school, you should not collide with this high school reunion.

古文：命酒乣来，命下筹，且吃罚爵。
现代文：我叫监酒人过来！让崔京尹吃罚酒！
English: I'll call the bartender over! Let Cui Jingyin drink the wine!

古文：取三大器物。引满饮之。
现代文：于是，监酒人拿来三只大杯，都满满地斟上酒，罚崔郢喝这三大杯酒。
English: As a result, the bartender brought three large glasses, filled them with wine, and ordered Cui Yao to drink the three large glasses of wine.

古文：良久方起。
现代文：崔郢喝了这三杯酒，过了好久才站起来。
English: Cui Yao drank the three glasses of wine and stood up after a long time.

古文：孙会宗
现代文：孙会宗
English: Sun Huizong

古文：唐孙会宗仆射，即渥相大王父也。
现代文：唐朝时仆射孙会宗，就是渥相大王的父亲。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, his servant, Sun Huizong, was the father of King Wotsang the Great.

古文：宅中集内外亲表开宴。
现代文：一次，在家中摆酒席宴请内外亲表。
English: On one occasion, he held a banquet at his home for friends and relatives.

古文：有一甥侄为朝官，后至。及中门，见绯衣官人，衣襟前皆是酒涴，咄咄而出。不相识。
现代文：有一位甥侄辈的亲戚在朝廷里任职，来晚了，走到中门，看见一位身着红色官服的官人，衣襟前边全是酒渍，气冲冲地从庭院里走出来，他不认识这位官人是谁。
English: A relative of my nieces and nephews, who worked at the imperial court, arrived late, walked to the middle gate, and saw an official in a red official uniform, with wine stains all over the front of his collar, storming out of the courtyard. He didn't know who the official was.

古文：顷即席，说于主人。
现代文：这位亲属来到酒席前，把刚才见到的事情告诉了孙会宗。
English: The relative came to the reception and told Sun Huizong what he had just seen.

古文：讶无此官。沉思之，乃是行酒时，阶上酹酒，草草倾泼也。
现代文：孙会宗听了后特别惊讶，说：没有这样一位官人来赴宴啊！孙会宗沉思好久，才恍然大悟，说：一定是我们刚才行酒时，向阶前地上洒酒祭祀，大家都随便乱洒而洒到哪位家神的衣服上了。
English: After listening, Sun Huizong was particularly surprised and said, "There is no such official coming to the banquet! Sun Huizong pondered for a long time before suddenly realizing, saying, "It must be that when we were drinking, we sprinkled the wine sacrifice on the ground in front of the steps, and everyone sprinkled it randomly and spilled it on the clothes of which house god.

古文：自此每酹酒，止则身恭跪，一酹而已，自孙氏始，今人三酹非也。
现代文：从此，每次洒酒祭祀时，都侧身恭敬地跪在地上，洒一下而已。这种洒酒祭祀的仪式始自孙会宗，现在的人洒三次是不对的。
English: From then on, every time there was a wine-pouring ceremony, people would kneel respectfully on the ground and pour just a little. This kind of wine-pouring ceremony started with the Sun Yat-sen sect, and it is not right for people today to pour three times.

古文：陆扆
现代文：陆扆
English: Land reclamation

古文：陆相扆出典夷陵时，有士子修谒。
现代文：丞相陆扆出任夷陵时，有位叫修的读书人进见他。
English: When the chancellor, Lu Xun, was in charge of Yiling, a reader named Xiu went to see him.

古文：相国与之从容，因命酒酌劝。
现代文：陆扆接待了这位读书人，并让人设酒宴招待他。席间，陆扆劝这位读书人喝酒。
English: Lu Yao received the reader and had a banquet set up for him. During the banquet, Lu Yao persuaded the reader to drink.

古文：此子辞曰：天性不饮酒。
现代文：他坚持不喝，说：我天性不能饮酒。
English: He insisted he did not drink, saying: "I am not a natural drinker.

古文：相曰：诚如所言，已校五分矣。
现代文：陆扆说：真的向你说的那样，我这次考核你已经得了五分啦。
English: Lu Wei said, "Really, as I told you, you have already scored five points in this assessment."

古文：盖平生悔吝有十分，不为酒困，自然减半也。
现代文：人一生中让你悔恨的事情有十分，不饮酒便减去了五分啊！
English: There are enough things in life to make you regret, and if you don't drink, you lose five points!

古文：酒量
现代文：酒量
English: Amount of alcohol

古文：山涛
现代文：山涛
English: Mountains and seas

古文：山涛字巨源，饮酒量至八斗。
现代文：山涛，字巨源。他的酒量能喝八斗。
English: Shantao, the character of a great source. He can drink eight buckets of wine.

古文：武帝欲试之，使人私默以记之，至量而醉。
现代文：晋武帝想试探一下，一次饮酒，让人暗中为山涛记数，果然喝到八斗才醉。
English: Emperor Jinwu wanted to test the waters. He had someone secretly count the mountains for him while he was drinking, and he only got drunk when he reached eight doos.

古文：周顗
现代文：周顗
English: Zhou Ying

古文：周顗字伯仁，饮酒至量一石。
现代文：周顗，字伯仁，每次最多能饮一石酒。
English: Zhou Qi, also known as Bo Ren, can drink up to one stone of wine at a time.

古文：及过江，虽日醉，每恨无对。
现代文：过江以后，虽然每天都喝得酩酊大醉，还是每每为没人跟他对饮而感到遗憾。
English: After crossing the river, although he got very drunk every day, he still regretted that no one drank with him.

古文：偶有归对北来，顗遇之，为忻然。乃置酒二石共饮，各大醉。
现代文：偶然有一次，从江北来一位过去在一起饮酒的朋友，周顗遇到后非常高兴，准备了两石酒两人共饮，都喝得酩酊大醉。
English: Once by chance, a friend who used to drink together came from the north of the Yangtze River. When he met Zhou Ye, he was very happy. He prepared two kilos of wine for the two of them to drink together, and they both got very drunk.

古文：及醒，顗使人视，客已腐肋而死矣。裴弘泰
现代文：待到醒酒后，周顗让人看看客人怎么样了，才发现那位从江北来的酒友已经肋侧腐烂而死。裴弘泰
English: After he sobered up, Zhou Qi let the guest see what had happened, only to find that the friend who had come from the north of the river had died from the side of his ribs. Bei Hongtai

古文：唐裴均之镇襄州，裴弘泰为郑滑馆驿辷官，充聘于汉南。遇大宴，为宾司所漏。
现代文：唐朝时，裴均之镇守襄州，他的侄子裴弘泰任郑滑馆驿辷官，被汉南聘请去，有一次特大的宴会，却因为负责接待的人忘了通知他而没有参加。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Pei Junzhi, the town guard of Xiangzhou, and his nephew Pei Hongtai, the eunuch of Zhengsu Pavilion, were invited by Hannan. There was a huge banquet, but they did not attend because the person in charge of the reception forgot to inform him.

古文：及设会，均令走屈郑滑裴辷官。
现代文：待到举行社火集会时，裴均之让人去找裴弘泰。
English: When it came time for the social gathering, Pei Junzhi sent someone to find Pei Hongtai.

古文：弘泰奔至，均不悦。
现代文：裴弘泰得到通知后立即赶来。
English: Pei Hongtai arrived immediately after being notified.

古文：责曰：君何来之后，大涉不敬。
现代文：裴均之很不高兴，责备他说：你怎么来晚了？这是很不尊敬人的。
English: Pei Junzhi was very unhappy and scolded him: "Why did you come late? This is very disrespectful.

古文：酌后至酒，已投乣筹。
现代文：我们都喝半天了，监酒员已经开始投筹码罚酒了。
English: We've all been drinking for half a day, and the bartender has already started throwing chips and fining us.

古文：弘泰谢曰：都不见客司报宴，非敢慢也。
现代文：裴弘泰表示感谢，说：总没有见到有人来通知我参加宴会啊，不是我敢怠慢您老人家。
English: Pei Hongtai expressed his gratitude, saying: I have never seen anyone come to inform me to attend the banquet, it is not that I dare to neglect you old people.

古文：叔父舍罪，请在座银器，尽斟酒满之。
现代文：叔叔真要处罚我，请将宴席上的所有银器都斟上酒。
English: My uncle really wants to punish me. Please fill all the silverware at the banquet with wine.

古文：器随饮以赐弘泰，可乎？
现代文：我喝了多少，就请将我喝干的银器赏给我，怎么样？
English: How about if I drink as much as I like and you give me the silverware I've drained?

古文：合座壮之，均亦许焉。
现代文：整个宴席上的人，都为裴弘泰助威，裴均之就答应了他。
English: All the people at the banquet cheered for Pei Hongtai, and Pei Junzhi agreed to dance with him.

古文：弘泰次第揭座上小爵，以至觥船。
现代文：于是裴弘泰按次序喝干席上的小银杯。接着，觥、船等大银器里的酒也都喝了。
English: As a result, Pei Hongtai drank the small silver cups on the dry table in order. Next, he also drank the wine from the large silver vessels such as the gong and the boat.

古文：凡饮皆竭，随饮讫。
现代文：凡是喝到的银杯，酒全部喝干。
English: Every silver cup that you drink from, drink it all.

古文：即置于怀，须臾盈满。
现代文：而且喝干后，就将这只银杯揣在怀里，不一会儿就揣满了，都鼓胀出来。
English: And after drinking it, he would hold this silver cup in his arms, and soon it would be full and swell up.

古文：筵中有银海，受一斗以上，其内酒亦满。
现代文：筵席上有只银海杯，能盛一斗以上的酒。
English: There is a silver sea cup at the banquet, which can hold more than a barrel of wine.

古文：弘泰以手捧而饮，饮讫。
现代文：此刻盛得满满的，放在那儿。裴弘泰双手捧起来喝。
English: At this moment, the bowl is filled to the brim and placed there. Bei Hongtai cupped his hands together and drank.

古文：目吏人，将海覆地，以足踏之，卷抱而出，即索马归驿。
现代文：喝干后，眼睛看着这些官员们，将银海杯扔在地上，用脚将它踩扁后，伸手拾起来捲巴捲巴，抱在怀中走出去，到外面要一匹马骑着回驿馆。
English: After drinking it, he looked at these officials with his eyes, threw the silver sea cup on the ground, trampled it flat with his feet, reached out and picked it up, rolled it up, held it in his arms and walked out to get a horse to ride back to the hall.

古文：均以弘泰纳饮器稍多，色不怿。
现代文：裴均之认为裴弘泰将银杯拿走的太多了，有些不高兴。
English: Pei Junzhi thought that Pei Hongtai took away too much of the silver cup, and was somewhat unhappy.

古文：午后宴散，均又思弘泰之饮，必为酒过度所伤，忧之。
现代文：但是，到午后筵席散了，他又怕裴弘泰酒喝多了伤了身子，很是担心。
English: However, when the banquet broke up in the afternoon, he was worried that he might have drunk too much Bei Hongtai wine and hurt his body.

古文：迨暮，令人视饮后所为。
现代文：到了傍晚，裴均之让人去看看裴弘泰在干什么？
English: In the late afternoon, Pei Junzhi sent someone to see what Pei Hongtai was doing.

古文：使者见弘泰戴纱帽，于汉阴驿厅，箕踞而坐。
现代文：使者回来将看到的情形如实告诉了裴均之。
English: When the messenger returned, he truthfully told Pei Junzhi what he had seen.

古文：召匠秤得器物，计二百余两。
现代文：裴均之不禁大笑，感到真有意思。
English: Pei Junzhi couldn't help but laugh, feeling really amused.

古文：均不觉大笑。明日再饮，回车日，赠遗甚厚。
现代文：第二天再饮酒时，喝完后派车将裴弘泰送回驿馆，并赠送他很丰厚的礼品。
English: When drinking again the next day, after drinking, they sent a car to send Pei Hongtai back to Yuyuan, and presented him with a very rich gift.

古文：王源中
现代文：王源中
English: Wang Yuanzhong

古文：王源中，文宗时为翰林承旨。
现代文：唐朝人王源中，文宗皇帝李昂在位时任翰林承旨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Liang served as Hanlin's successor.

古文：暇日，与诸昆季蹴踘于太平里第。
现代文：一天闲暇，跟他的几个兄弟在太平里的自家庭院中踢球玩。
English: A day of leisure, playing football with a few of his brothers in the courtyard of their home in Taiping.

古文：球子击起，误中源中之额，薄有所损。
现代文：球踢起来后，打在王源中的额头上，受点轻伤。
English: After the ball was kicked up, it hit Wang Yuanzhong on the forehead, causing a slight injury.

古文：俄有急召，比至，上讶之。
现代文：不一会儿，皇上紧急召令让他进朝见驾。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an urgent summons for him to come to the court.

古文：源中具以上闻，上曰：卿大雍睦。
现代文：待到拜见文宗皇帝后，皇上看见他额上受伤很是惊讶。
English: After meeting Emperor Wenzong, the emperor was surprised to see him with a wound on his forehead.

古文：命赐酒二盘，每盘贮十金碗，每碗各容一升许，宣今并碗赐之。
现代文：王源中就将在家里玩球误伤的事情如实秉报了文宗皇帝。文宗皇帝听了后说：爱卿，你这是最大的和睦啊！然后命令赏赐给王源中御酒两盘，每盘放置十只金碗，每碗各盛一升酒。皇上宣令连同盛酒的金碗，一并赏赐给王源中。
English: Wang Yuanzhong truthfully reported to Emperor Wenzong that he was injured while playing ball at home. Emperor Wenzong listened and said, "My lord, this is the greatest reconciliation! Then he ordered that Wang Yuanzhong be given two trays of wine, each tray containing ten gold bowls, each bowl containing one liter of wine. The imperial edict was given to Wang Yuanzhong together with the gold bowl containing the wine.

古文：源中饮之无余，略无醉容。
现代文：听到文宗皇帝的宣令后，王源中当场将两盘酒共计二斗，全部喝光了，一点醉意也没有。
English: After hearing Emperor Wenzong's proclamation, Wang Yuanzhong drank two trays of wine on the spot for a total of two bu, all of which were drunk, and he was not at all intoxicated.

古文：嗜酒
现代文：嗜酒
English: Alcoholism

古文：徐邈
现代文：徐邈
English: Xu Jun

古文：魏徐邈字景山，为尚书郎。
现代文：魏国人徐邈，字景山，官任尚书郎。
English: The Wei people Xu Xi, the word Jing Shan, the official title Shang Shuro.

古文：时禁酒，邈私饮沉醉。
现代文：魏国当时禁止饮酒。徐邈私自饮酒喝得酩酊大醉。
English: At that time, alcohol was prohibited in Wei. Xu Yao drank himself into a stupor.

古文：从事赵达问曹事，邈曰：中圣人。
现代文：属下赵达问他有关曹务的事。徐邈回答说：喝的是圣人。
English: His subordinate, Zhao Da, asked him about Cao Yu. Xu Yao replied, "He drank like a saint."

古文：达白太祖，太祖甚怒。
现代文：赵达将这话秉报了太祖。
English: Zhao Da reported this to his great-grandfather.

古文：鲜于辅曰：醉人谓清酒为圣人，浊酒为贤人。
现代文：太祖大怒，鲜于辅说：喝醉了酒的人，称清酒为 圣人 ，称 浊酒 为贤人。
English: The great-grandfather flew into a rage and said, "People who are drunk call sake a saint and sake a sage.

古文：邈性修慎，偶醉言耳。
现代文：徐邈性情一向谨慎，这次是偶尔说的醉话啊。
English: Xu Xi has always been cautious by nature. This time, it was an occasional drunken talk.

古文：乃得免罪。
现代文：于是，徐邈才得以免去罪过。
English: As a result, Xu Yao was able to absolve himself of the crime.

古文：刘伶
现代文：刘伶
English: Liu Xuan

古文：刘伶常乘鹿车，携一壶酒，使人荷锸随之。
现代文：晋朝人刘伶，经常乘坐鹿车，带着一壶酒，出外郊游。
English: Liu Xuan, a Jin dynasty person, often rode a deer car, took a pot of wine, and went on outings.

古文：曰：死便埋我。其遗形如此。
现代文：同时让一个仆人带着一把锹同车而行，说：我若是喝死，你就地将我埋了。
English: And he made a servant come up to him with a jar of meal, saying, If I drink, I will die, and you will bury me.

古文：渴甚，求酒于妻。妻藏酒弃器，谏曰：非养生之道，宜断之。伶曰：善。
现代文：他妻子将酒藏起来，将盛酒的器具扔掉，苦苦地劝说他：喝酒对身体一点益处也没有，不是养生的好办法，还是戒酒别喝了吧。刘伶说：好！
English: His wife hid the wine, threw away the equipment that held it, and tried hard to persuade him: drinking is not good for the body at all, it's not a good way to maintain health, so stop drinking. Liu Yao said: Good!

古文：当祝鬼神自誓，便可具酒肉。
现代文：我不喝了。但是，我要向神明发誓不再喝酒了，请你为我准备好酒菜来。
English: I don't drink. However, I swear to the gods that I won't drink anymore. Please prepare wine and food for me.

古文：妻从之。
现代文：妻子答应了他。
English: His wife agreed.

古文：伶跪祝曰：天生刘伶，以酒为名。
现代文：妻子将酒菜端上来后，刘伶跪在地上向神明祈祝说：上天将我刘伶降生在人世间，就是让我以能饮而闻名。
English: After his wife brought up the wine and vegetables, Liu Yao knelt on the ground and prayed to the gods, saying, "Heaven gave birth to me, Liu Yao, so that I would be famous for being able to drink.

古文：一饮一石，五斗解酲。
现代文：我每次饮酒必饮一石，饮到五斗时才刚刚解了我的酒瘾啊！
English: Every time I drink alcohol, I have to drink a stone. When I drank five bucks, I just got rid of my alcohol addiction!

古文：妇人之言，必不可听。
现代文：老娘们的话，一定不要听啊！
English: Don't listen to old women!

古文：于是酌酒御肉，塊然复醉。
现代文：说完，斟酒吃肉，大吃大喝，安然又醉了。
English: Having said that, I poured wine and ate meat, ate and drank a lot, and got drunk again.

古文：酒臭
现代文：酒臭
English: Stinks of booze

古文：义宁初，一县丞衣缨之胄。年少时，甚有丰采。涉猎书史，兼有文性。
现代文：隋恭帝义宁初年，有一位县丞原本是官宦人家的后代，小时候长的很英俊，读过许多书，很有文字素养。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yining of the Sui and Qing Dynasties, there was a county magistrate who was originally a descendant of a government official family. As a child, he was very handsome, read many books, and was very literate.

古文：其后沉湎于酒，老而弥笃。
现代文：但是，长大成人后，整日沉湎在酒中。
English: But as an adult, he drank all day.

古文：日饮数升，略无醒时。
现代文：越老喝得越厉害，每天都要喝好几升酒，几乎没有清醒的时候。
English: The older I get, the more I drink. I drink several litres of wine every day, and I hardly ever wake up.

古文：得病将终，酒臭闻于数里，远近惊愕，不知所由。
现代文：待到他患病将要死去时，他散发出来的酒臭在几里地以外就能闻到，远近的人都特别惊异，不知道这是什么原因。
English: By the time he fell ill and was about to die, the stench of alcohol he emitted could be smelled miles away, and people near and far were particularly surprised and did not know why.

古文：如此一旬，此人遂卒。
现代文：这样持续了十天左右，他终于死了。
English: This went on for about ten days and he finally died.

古文：故释典戒酒，令人昏痴。
现代文：因为这个人的缘故，后来有人专门撰写了一篇劝人戒酒的文章。
English: Because of this man, someone later wrote an article specifically to persuade people to stop drinking.

古文：今临亡酒臭，彰其入恶道而。
现代文：文章中说：喝酒过量，能使人浑沌呆痴。
English: The article said: "Drinking too much alcohol can make people chaotic and stupid."

