古文：项忠，字荩臣，嘉兴人。
现代文：项忠，字荩臣，嘉兴人。
English: Xiaozhong Zhong, Zhaozhong Chen, Jiaxing Ren.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年，考中进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：授刑部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：授予刑部主事职，晋升为员外郎。
English: He was awarded the position of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department and promoted to the position of a member of the outer circle.

古文：从英宗陷于瓦剌，令饲马，乘间挟二马南奔。
现代文：跟随明英宗北征瓦剌，兵败被俘。瓦剌人命令项忠养马，项忠乘敌军不注意挟持二匹马往南奔逃。
English: He followed Ming Ying Zong's Northern Expedition to Varan, but was defeated and captured. The Varan people ordered Xiang Zhong to raise a horse, but Xiang Zhong inadvertently took two horses from the enemy army and ran south.

古文：马疲，弃之，徒跣行七昼夜，始达宣府。
现代文：马跑不动了，项忠弃马，光脚徒步走了七天七夜，才到达宣府。
English: The horse could no longer run, so Xiang Zhong abandoned the horse and walked barefoot for seven days and seven nights to reach Xuanfu.

古文：景泰中，由郎中迁广东副使。
现代文：景泰年间，由郎中调升广东副使。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, he was promoted to vice-envoy to Guangdong from vice-envoy.

古文：按行高州，谍报贼携男女数百剽村落。
现代文：巡行高州，接到秘密报告称有贼携带男女数百人劫持村庄。
English: While on patrol in Gaozhou, they received a confidential report that thieves had hijacked a village with hundreds of men and women.

古文：忠曰： 贼无携家理，必被掠良民也。 
现代文：项忠说 ：贼绝无携带家小之理，一定是被抢劫的善良百姓。 
English: Xiangzhong said, "There is no reason for a thief to carry a small family, they must be good people who have been robbed."

古文：戒诸将毋妄杀。
现代文：他告诫诸位将领不要胡乱杀人。
English: He warned the generals not to kill indiscriminately.

古文：已，讯所俘获，果然，尽释之。
现代文：战事完后，讯问被俘的人，果然如此，于是将他们全部释放。
English: After the war, he interrogated the captives, and sure enough, they were all released.

古文：从征泷水瑶有功，增俸一秩。
现代文：因项忠跟随出征泷水瑶有功，增加一级俸禄。
English: Because of Xiangzhong's meritorious service following the expedition to Shishui, his first-class salary was increased.

古文：天顺初，历陕西按察使。
现代文：天顺初年，任陕西按察使。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was appointed inspector of Shaanxi Province.

古文：母忧归，部民诣阙乞留，诏起复。
现代文：因母亲去世回乡守服，所辖的百姓上书朝廷请求项忠留任。朝廷下诏命项忠仍如常起用。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he returned to his hometown to keep his clothes, and the people under his jurisdiction sent a letter to the imperial court requesting that he remain in office. The imperial court ordered him to remain in office as usual.

古文：时陕西连岁灾伤，忠发廪振，且请轻罪纳米，民赖以济。
现代文：那时陕西连着几年遭到天灾，项忠散发粮食救济灾民，并且对犯轻罪的人施行纳米抵罪，百姓依靠这些帮助度过灾年。
English: At that time, Shaanxi had been hit by natural disasters for several years in a row. Xiangzhong distributed food relief to the victims, and imposed nano-penalties on people who committed minor crimes. The people relied on these help to get through the disaster years.

古文：七年以大理卿召，民乞留如前，遂改右副都御史，巡抚其地。
现代文：天顺七年，朝廷召项忠任大理卿官职，百姓又像上次那样请求项忠留下，朝廷于是改任项忠为左副都御史，巡抚陕西。
English: In the seventh year of Tenshun, the imperial court summoned Xiang Zhong to assume the official position of Daliqing, and the people again requested Xiang Zhong to stay, as they did last time. The imperial court then reassigned Xiang Zhong as the left vice-governor of the capital and governor of Shaanxi.

古文：洮、岷羌叛，忠疏言： 羌志在劫掠，尽诛则伤仁，遽抚则不威，请听臣便宜从事。 
现代文：洮州、岷州两地羌人反叛，项忠上疏说： 羌人的目的在于抢劫掠夺，全部诛杀则不仁，仓促安抚则有损威严，请求听任我见机行事。 
English: Xiang Zhong Shang Zuo said: "The purpose of the Xiang people is to rob and plunder, all fighting and killing is not benevolent, and hasty appeasement is demeaning. I ask you to allow me to act as I see fit."

古文：报可。
现代文：朝廷批复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：乃发兵据险，扬声进讨，众尽降。
现代文：项忠就发兵占据险要地方，扬言要进军讨伐，众叛羌人全部投降。
English: Xiangzhong sent troops to occupy the critical place, threatening to march into the crusade, and all the rebels surrendered.

古文：西安水泉卤不可饮，为开龙首渠及皂河，引水入城。
现代文：西安水含碱不能饮用，项忠为此开凿龙首渠到秔河，引水入城。
English: Xi'an's water contains alkali and cannot be drunk, so Xiang Zhong dug the Dragon's Head Canal to the Li River to bring water into the city.

古文：又疏郑、白二渠，溉泾阳、三原、醴泉、高陵、临潼五县田七万余顷，民祠祀之。
现代文：又疏通郑、白二渠，灌溉泾阳、三原、醴泉、高陵、临潼五县的田七万余顷，百姓建立祠堂祭祀项忠。
English: In addition, the Zheng and Bai two canals were dredged, and more than 70,000 hectares of fields in five counties of Fenyang, Sanyuan, Jiuquan, Gaoling and Linyi were irrigated, and people built ancestral halls to worship Xiangzhong.

古文：陕西数苦兵。成化元年上言： 三边大将遇敌逗留，虽云才怯，亦由权轻。
现代文：陕西经常受到战争骚扰，成化元年，项忠进言道： 三边大将遇敌停留不前，虽说是因为胆怯，权轻也是原因之一。
English: Shaanxi was often harassed by war, and in the first year of Chenghua, Xiang Zhongjin said: The general of the three sides did not advance in the face of the enemy, although it was because of timidity, the lack of power was also one of the reasons.

古文：士卒畏敌不畏将，是以战无成功。宜许以军法从事。
现代文：士兵畏惧敌人而不怕自己的将领，因此每次打仗总不能克敌制胜，应该按军法从事。
English: Soldiers fear the enemy more than they fear their own generals. Therefore, every time they fight, they cannot defeat the enemy and win. They should be engaged in accordance with military law.

古文：庙堂举将才，逾年不闻有一人应诏。
现代文：朝廷要推举将才，过了一年还没听说有一个人应诏。
English: The imperial court wanted to nominate generals, but after a year they had not heard of a single candidate.

古文：陕西风土强劲，古多名将，岂无其人？但格于不能答策耳。
现代文：陕西民风强悍，自古就多名将，岂能说没有将才，仅仅受阻于不能应对策问罢了。
English: The people of Shaanxi are strong-willed, and there have been many generals since ancient times. It cannot be said that there are no generals, only that they are hindered by the inability to deal with intrigues.

古文：今天下学校生徒善答策者百不一二，奈何责之武人。 
现代文：如今天下学校学生善于对策的人百人中不到一、二个，又怎么能以此苛求武人。 
English: If today there are less than one or two out of a hundred school students who are good at countermeasures, how can they demand martial artists in this way?

古文：帝善其言，而所司守故事不能用。
现代文：明宪宗认为他说得对，然而主管部门恪守成规不采用他的意见。
English: Ming Xianzong thought that he was right, but the competent department followed the rules and did not adopt his opinion.

古文：毛里孩寇延绥，诏忠偕彰武伯杨信御之，无功。
现代文：毛里孩入侵延绥，朝廷下诏书命项忠与彰武伯杨信共同抵御，没有成功。
English: The Maori children invaded Yancheng, and the imperial edict ordered Xiang Zhong and Zhangwu Bo Yangxin to jointly resist, without success.

古文：明年，信议大举搜河套，敕忠提督军务。
现代文：第二年，杨信主张大举搜索河套地区，宪宗命项忠任提督军务。
English: In the following year, Yang Xin advocated a large-scale search of the Hetao region, and Kenzong appointed Xiangzhong Zhong as admiral of military affairs.

古文：忠方赴延绥，而寇复陷开城，深入静宁、隆德六州县，大掠而去。
现代文：他刚到延绥，而毛里孩又攻陷开城，深入到静宁、隆德六个州县，大肆抢掠一番而离去。
English: He had just arrived in Yancheng, but Mao's children attacked and captured Kaesong, went deep into Jingning, Lund and six prefectures and counties, looted a lot and left.

古文：兵部劾忠，帝特宥之，搜套师亦不出。
现代文：兵部弹劾项忠，明宪宗特别宽容他，搜索河套的军队也没出兵。
English: The military department impeached Qiang Zhong, the Ming Constitutionalists were particularly tolerant of him, and the army that searched Hetao did not send troops.

古文：又明年，召理院事。
现代文：又过了一年，项忠被召回掌管都察院事务。
English: A year later, Xiang Zhong was recalled to take charge of the affairs of the Duka Academy.

古文：四年，满俊反。满俊者，亦名满四。其祖巴丹，自明初率所部归附，世以千户畜牧为雄长。
现代文：成化四年，满俊反叛，满俊又名满四，他的祖先巴丹，自明朝初年率领部属归附朝廷，世代统领千户的游牧部落。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, Manjun rebelled. Manjun is also known as Manchukuo. His ancestor Badan, since the first year of the Ming Dynasty, led the tributary to the imperial court and led the nomadic tribes of thousands of households for generations.

古文：仍故俗，无科徭。
现代文：沿用过去俗规，无捐税徭役。
English: In keeping with past custom, there will be no tax on the service.

古文：其地在开城县之固原里，接边境。
现代文：其地在开城县的固原里，接着边境。
English: It is located in Gupyong-ri, Kaesong County, next to the border.

古文：俊犷悍，素藏匿奸盗，出边抄掠。
现代文：满俊蛮横，向来收藏坏人盗贼，常出边境抢掠。
English: Manjun is rude and arrogant. He always collects bad guys and thieves, and often goes out to rob the border.

古文：会有狱连俊，有司迹逋至其家，多要求。俊怒，遂激众为乱。
现代文：恰好有官司牵连满俊，有关部门追踪来到他的家，多方索求，满俊发怒，于是煽动部众作乱。
English: There happened to be a lawsuit involving Manjun, and the relevant departments tracked him down to his home and made many demands. Manjun became angry and incited the club members to riot.

古文：守臣遣俊侄指挥璹往捕。
现代文：守臣派遣满俊侄子指挥满王寿前往捉拿。
English: Shouchen dispatched his nephew, Manjun, to lead his nephew, Man Wangshou, to the scene of the capture.

古文：俊杀其从者，劫璹叛，入据石城。
现代文：满俊杀掉满王寿的随从，劫持满王寿反叛，进入石城据守。
English: Manjun killed Man Wang Shou's attendant, kidnapped Man Wang Shou's rebel, and entered Shicheng to defend it.

古文：石城，即唐吐番石堡。
现代文：石城，即唐代吐番石堡。
English: Shicheng, that is, the Tang Dynasty Tuban Stone Castle.

古文：城称险固，非数万人不能克者也。
现代文：城非常险固，没有数万人是不能攻克的。
English: The city is very impregnable and cannot be conquered without tens of thousands of people.

古文：山上有城寨，四面峭壁，中凿五石井以贮水，惟一径可缘而上。
现代文：山上有城墙栅栏，四面峭壁，里面开凿五口石井用以贮水，只有一条小路可以上。
English: There is a city wall fence on the mountain, cliffs on all four sides, five stone wells dug inside to store water, and only one path can be climbed.

古文：俊自称招贤王，有众四千。
现代文：满俊自称招贤王，有兵四千。
English: Manjun claimed to be a recruiting king, with four thousand soldiers.

古文：都指挥邢端等御之，败绩。
现代文：都指挥邢端等与满俊交战，被打败。
English: Du Du commanded Shantuan and others to fight against Manjun and was defeated.

古文：不再月，众至二万，关中震动。
现代文：不到二个月，满俊众至二万，关中震动。
English: In less than two months, the number of Manjun people reached 20,000, and Guanzhong was shaken.

古文：乃命忠总督军务，与监督军务太监刘祥、总兵官都督刘玉帅京营及陕西四镇兵讨之。
现代文：就命项忠为总督军务，与监督军务太监刘祥、总兵官都督刘玉率领京营以及陕西四镇的军队讨伐满俊。
English: On the appointment of Xiangzhong as the military governor, and with the supervision of the military eunuch Liu Xiang and the military commander-in-chief, the military governor Liu Yu, led the Beijing camp and the army of the four towns of Shaanxi to fight Manjun.

古文：师未行，而巡抚陈价等先以兵三万进讨，复大败。
现代文：军队还未行，而巡抚陈价等先以三万军队前往讨伐，又被打得大败。
English: The army was not yet ready, but the governor Chen Xian and others first went to the crusade with thirty thousand troops, and were again defeated.

古文：贼因官军器甲，势益张。
现代文：满俊军队借助缴获的官军器械铠甲，声势更加嚣张。
English: With the help of captured government and army equipment and armor, Manjun's army became more arrogant.

古文：朝议欲益兵。
现代文：朝廷中商议要增兵。
English: The imperial court is discussing the need to increase the number of soldiers.

古文：忠虑京军脆弱不足恃，且更遣大将挠事权，因上言： 臣等调兵三万三千余人，足以灭贼。
现代文：项忠考虑到京师的军队脆弱不能依靠，而且再派遣大将则扰乱军队的统一指挥，因而向宪宗报告说： 臣等调兵三万三千余人，足以灭贼。
English: Considering that the army of the Beijing Division was fragile and could not be relied on, and that sending another general would disrupt the unified command of the army, Xiangzhong reported to Xianzong: The vassals have mobilized more than 33,000 troops, which is enough to destroy the thieves.

古文：今秋深草寒，若更调他军，恐往复需时，贼得远遁。
现代文：现在深秋野地寒冷，如果再调其他军队，恐怕来回需要时间，贼得以远逃。
English: It's bitterly cold now, and if other troops are redeployed, I'm afraid it will take time to go back and forth, and thieves will be able to flee far away.

古文：且边兵不能久留，益兵非便。 
现代文：况且边兵不能久留，增兵不便。 
English: Moreover, frontier soldiers cannot stay for a long time, and it is inconvenient to increase the number of soldiers.

古文：大学士彭时、商辂主其议，京军得毋遣。
现代文：大学士彭时、商辂表示赞同，京军也就没有派遣。
English: Peng Shi, a university scholar, and Shang Qi agreed, and the Beijing army was not dispatched.

古文：忠遂与巡抚都御史马文升分军七道，抵石城下，与战，斩获多。伏羌伯毛忠乘胜夺其西北山，几破，忽中流矢死。
现代文：项忠就与巡抚都御史马文升分兵七路，抵达石城下，与满军交战，杀敌和俘虏敌人很多，伏羌伯毛忠乘胜攻其西北山，几乎攻破，忽然中箭而死。
English: Xiangzhong went with the governor of the capital, Shima Wen, to the seventh road, arrived at the foot of Shicheng, fought with the full army, killed and captured many enemies, Fuzhou Bo Mao Zhong took advantage of the victory to attack the northwest mountain, almost broke through, and suddenly died from an arrow.

古文：玉亦被围。
现代文：刘玉也被包围。
English: Liu Yu was also surrounded.

古文：诸军欲退，忠斩一千户以徇。众力战，玉得出，乃列围困之。
现代文：诸军想退，项忠斩一千户长示众，军队兵士尽力拼战，刘玉方得获救，于是项忠布兵围困敌军。
English: The troops wanted to retreat, so Xiang Zhong decapitated a thousand heads of households to demonstrate to the public, the army soldiers fought hard, Liu Yufang was rescued, and then Xiang Zhongbo's soldiers besieged the enemy troops.

古文：适有星孛于台斗，中朝多言 占在秦分，师不利 。
现代文：恰好有彗星在台斗星位出现，朝中很多人说其对应于秦地，这次出师不利。
English: A comet just happened to appear in the constellation of the Big Dipper, and many people in both North Korea and China said that it corresponded to the land of Qin. This was not a good time to send out an army.

古文：忠曰： 李晟讨朱泚，荧惑守岁，此何害。 
现代文：项忠说 ：李晟讨伐朱氵此时，彗星就居岁星位，这又有什么关系呢？ 
English: Xiangzhong said, "At this time, the comet is in the position of the year star, so what does it matter?

古文：日遣兵薄城下，焚刍草，绝汲道。
现代文：项忠每天派兵迫近城下，焚烧牲口草料，断绝其引水的渠道。
English: Every day, Xiangzhong sent soldiers to approach the city, burn livestock and grass, and cut off its water supply channels.

古文：贼窘欲降，邀忠与文升相见。忠偕刘玉单骑赴之，文升亦从数十骑至，呼俊、璹谕以速降。
现代文：叛贼走投无路想投降，就邀请与项忠、马文升相见，项忠同刘玉两人骑马赴约，马文升也带着几十骑兵到了，呼喊满俊、满王寿迅速投降。
English: When the traitors ran out of options and wanted to surrender, they invited Xiang Zhong and Ma Wensheng to meet. Xiang Zhong and Liu Yu rode to the rendezvous. Ma Wensheng also arrived with dozens of cavalry, shouting for Manjun and Man Wangshou to quickly surrender.

古文：贼遥望罗拜，忠直前挟璹以归。俊气沮，犹豫不出。
现代文：叛贼远远的望见罗列而拜，项忠单骑上前挟制满王寿返回，满俊十分沮丧，犹豫着不出来。
English: The traitors were lined up and bowing at a distance, Xiang Zhong rode forward single-handedly to pin down Man Wang Shou and return, Man Jun was very frustrated and hesitated to come out.

古文：忠命缚木为桥，人负土囊填濠堑，击以铜炮，死者益众。
现代文：项忠命令兵士将木头绑成桥，用土袋填平护城河和濠沟，以铜炮发石头攻击，叛贼伤亡更加惨重。
English: Xiangzhong ordered the soldiers to tie the wood into a bridge, fill the moat and ditch with earth bags, and attack with copper cannons. The traitors suffered more serious casualties.

古文：贼倚爱将杨虎狸为谋主，夜出汲被擒。忠贳其死，谕以购贼赏格。示之金，且赐金带钩。纵归，使诱俊出战，伏兵擒焉。
现代文：满俊依靠爱将杨虎狸为主谋，杨夜间出城取水被捉，项忠赦免他的死罪，对杨虎狸说明，如果配合抓住满俊将有重赏，又当面出示了赏金，并且赐他金带钩，放他回去，杨返城后引诱满俊出来作战，被埋伏的军士活捉。
English: Manjun relied on the love of Yang Huqin as his chief strategist. Yang went out of the city at night to fetch water and was caught. Xiang Zhong pardoned his capital crime. He explained to Yang Huqin that if he cooperated in catching Manjun, there would be a heavy reward. He also showed the reward in person, and gave him a gold belt hook to let him go back. After Yang returned to the city, he lured Manjun out to fight and was caught alive by the ambushed sergeant.

古文：急击下石城，尽获余寇。
现代文：项忠带兵迅速攻下石城，将城内余寇全部俘获。
English: Xiang Zhong led the soldiers to quickly capture Shicheng and captured all the remaining robbers in the city.

古文：毁其城，凿石纪功。
现代文：捣毁这座城，在石头上刻字记下战功。
English: Destroy the city and write your name in stone.

古文：增一卫于固原西北西安废城，留兵戍之而还。
现代文：在固原西北西安废城增加一个卫所，留下军队戍守后，项忠率军而还。
English: He added a sanatorium to the abandoned city of Xi'an northwest of Guyuan. After leaving the army to guard it, Xiang Zhong led the army and returned.

古文：初，石城未下，天甚寒，士卒颇困。忠虑贼奔突，乘冻渡河与套寇合，日夜治攻具。身当矢石不少避，大小三百余战。
现代文：当初，石城尚未攻下，天气十分寒冷，士兵非常疲乏，项忠担心叛贼突围逃走，乘河水结冰过河与河套敌寇汇合，就日夜准备进攻的器具，战时身先士卒，面对流箭石雨从不躲避，经历了大小三百多战。
English: At the beginning, Shicheng had not yet been conquered, the weather was very cold, the soldiers were very tired, Xiang Zhong was worried that the traitors would break out and escape, he used the icy river to cross the river and meet the river pirates, he used the equipment to prepare for the attack day and night, he was the forerunner during the war, he never avoided the rain of flowing stones, and he experienced more than three hundred battles.

古文：彭时、商辂知忠能办贼，不从中制，卒用殄贼。
现代文：彭时、商辂深信项忠能够打败叛贼，不从中遏制他，项忠终于消灭了叛贼。
English: Peng Shi and Shang Yao were convinced that Xiang Zhong could defeat the traitor, but instead of containing him, Xiang Zhong finally eliminated the traitor.

古文：论功，进右都御史，与林聪协掌院事。
现代文：因为战功，升为右都御史，与林聪协同主管院事。
English: Because of his war service, he was promoted to the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and he was in charge of the academy together with Lin Cong.

古文：白圭既平刘通，荆、襄间流民屯结如故。
现代文：白圭已经平定刘通，荆州、襄阳地区的流民聚集如故。
English: Bai Gui has already pacified Liu Tong, and the displaced people in Jingzhou and Xiangyang regions continue to gather.

古文：通党李胡子者名原，伪称平王，与小王洪、王彪等掠南漳、房、内乡、渭南诸县。
现代文：刘通同党有叫李胡子的人，名字叫李原，伪称平王，与小王洪、王彪等抢劫南漳、房县、内乡、渭南各县。
English: Liu Tong and his party had a man named Li Beard, whose name was Li Yuan, falsely called Ping Wang, and Xiao Wang Hong, Wang Biao, and others, who robbed Nanlu, Fang County, Neixiang, and various counties in southern Anhui Province.

古文：流民附贼者至百万。
现代文：流民归附李贼的已到百万人。
English: The number of displaced people who have been reunited with their families has reached one million.

古文：六年冬，诏忠总督军务，与湖广总兵官李震讨之。忠乃奏调永顺、保靖土兵。
现代文：成化六年冬天，朝廷下诏书任项忠为总督军务，与湖广总兵官李震一同征讨李原，项忠上奏章请调永顺、保靖士兵。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Chenghua, the imperial court issued an edict appointing Qiang Zhong as the military governor, and together with the general military officer of Huguang, Li Zhen, he conscripted Li Yuan, and asked Qiang Zhong to transfer Yongshun and Baojing soldiers.

古文：而先分军列要害，多设旗帜钲鼓，遣人入山招谕。流民归者四十余万，彪亦就擒。
现代文：而先分兵守住各要害部位，到处竖立旗帜配备钲鼓，派人进山招降，流民返回家乡的有四十余万，王彪也被擒获。
English: On the other hand, the advance detachment of soldiers guarded the key points, erected flags everywhere, equipped with gongs and drums, and sent people into the mountains to invite people to surrender. More than 400,000 displaced people returned to their hometowns, and Wang Biao was also captured.

古文：时白圭为兵部，遣锦衣百户吴绶赞参将王信军。绶欲攘功，不利贼瓦解。纵流言，圭信之，止土兵毋调。
现代文：这时白圭任兵部尚书，他派锦衣百户吴辅助参将王信的军队，吴企图窃取战功，不希望叛贼瓦解，放出流言，白圭相信了，停止增调士兵。
English: At this time, Bai Gui was the secretary of the military department, and he sent Wu, a member of the Hundred Families of Jing Yi, to assist Wang Xin's army. Wu tried to steal the war exploits, did not want the traitors to collapse, and spread rumors. Bai Gui believed it and stopped the increase of soldiers.

古文：忠疏争，且劾绶罪，帝为召绶还，而听调土兵如故。
现代文：项忠上疏争辩，并且弹劾吴的罪行，皇帝因此召吴回来，而且批准原调兵计划。
English: The emperor summoned Wu back and approved the original troop transfer plan.

古文：合二十五万，分八道逼之，流民归者又数万。
现代文：加起来二十五万，分八路进逼，流民归来的又有几万。
English: A total of two hundred and fifty thousand were forced to march in eight different directions, and tens of thousands of displaced persons returned.

古文：贼潜伏山寨，伺间出劫。
现代文：贼潜伏在山栅，伺机出来掠劫。
English: Thieves lurk in the mountain lattice, waiting for an opportunity to come out and loot.

古文：忠命副使余洵、都指挥李振击之，遇于竹山。乘溪涨半渡截击，擒李原、小王洪等，贼多溺死。
现代文：项忠命令副使余洵、都指挥李振攻打，在竹山两军相遇，溪水上涨，乘贼渡河过了一半发起截击，擒获李原、小王洪等，贼被溺死很多。
English: Xiangzhong ordered the vice-envoy Yu Yu, both commanded Li Zhen to attack, the two armies met in Zhushan, the stream water rose, the thieves crossed the river halfway and launched an interception, Li Yuan and Xiao Wanghong were captured, and many thieves were drowned.

古文：忠移军竹山，捕余孽。复招流民五十万，斩首六百四十，俘八百有奇，家口三万余人。
现代文：项忠将军队转移到竹山，捕捉余孽，又招来流民五十万，斩首六百四十，俘获八百多敌人，家眷人口三万余人。
English: Xiangzhong moved his army to Zhushan, captured the remnants of evil, brought in half a million refugees, beheaded 640, captured more than eight hundred enemies, and had more than thirty thousand family members.

古文：户选一丁，戍湖广边卫，余令归籍给田。
现代文：每户选一男丁，守卫湖广边境，其余的回归原籍分田耕种。
English: One man from each household was chosen to guard the Hukang border, while the rest returned to their hometowns to farm the land.

古文：疏陈善后十事，悉允行。
现代文：项忠上疏陈述善后十件事，朝廷全都批准实行。
English: The Imperial Court approved the implementation of all the ten matters listed in the Zhong Shang Zuo's statement on rectification.

古文：忠之下令逐流民也，有司一切驱逼。
现代文：项忠下令驱赶流民，有关部门则一律逼迫驱逐。
English: Xiangzhong ordered the eviction of the displaced people, and the relevant departments all forced the eviction.

古文：不前，即杀之。
现代文：如不走，就杀掉。
English: If you don't go, I'll kill you.

古文：民有自洪武中占籍者，亦在遗中。
现代文：流民中有自洪武年间就自外地迁来，已成为有户籍的当地居民，也在被遣返中。
English: Among the displaced people, there are those who have moved from other places since the Hongwu era, have become local residents with household registration, and are also being repatriated.

古文：戍者舟行多疫死。
现代文：守边的流民乘船途中病死很多。
English: Many of the displaced people in Moribane died of illness on the way by boat.

古文：给事中梁璟因星变求言，劾忠妄杀。白圭亦言流民既成业者，宜随所在著籍，又驳忠所上功次互异。帝皆不听。进忠左都御史。荫子绶锦衣千户，诸将录功有差。
现代文：给事中梁王景趁着朝廷因为星相变化广开言路之机，弹劾项忠胡乱杀人，白圭也说流民已经立业的，应随所在地落户籍，又驳斥项忠所报功的等次互相矛盾，明宪宗都不听，升项忠为左都御史，荫庇儿子项绶为锦衣千户，对诸将按级别记录功劳。
English: In this matter, Liang Wangjing took advantage of the opportunity of the imperial court to speak widely because of the change of the stars, and impeached Xiangzhong for killing indiscriminately. Bai Gui also said that the displaced people had established businesses and should be registered according to the location. He also refuted the contradictions in the order of the merits awarded by Xiangzhong. The Ming Dynasty did not listen. Xiangzhong was promoted to the left capital of the imperial history, and his son Xiangyi was a thousand households in brocade. He recorded the merits of the generals according to their ranks.

古文：忠上疏言： 臣先后招抚流民复业者九十三万余人，贼党遁入深山，又招谕解散自归者五十万人。
现代文：项忠上疏道 ：臣先后招抚流民复业的有九十三万余人，贼党逃入深山，又通过告示解释自动解散归来五十万人。
English: On Zhongshan Road: The minister successively attracted more than 930,000 people to resume their business, the thieves fled into the mountains, and 500,000 people returned through the announcement explaining the automatic dissolution.

古文：俘获百人，皆首恶耳。
现代文：俘获的一百人都是首恶。
English: The hundred people captured were all top villains.

古文：今言皆良家子，则前此屡奏猖獗难御者，伊谁也？
现代文：现在说都是良家子弟，那么前些时屡次上奏朝廷猖獗难以抵御的又是谁呢？
English: Now it is said that they are all sons and daughters of good families, but who was it who, some time ago, repeatedly reported the rampant and hard-to-resist antics of the imperial court?

古文：贼党罪固当死，正因不忍滥诛，故令丁壮谪发遣戍。
现代文：贼党本来就应判死罪，正因为不忍滥杀，因此才罚遣壮年男子去守边。
English: Originally, the thieves should have been sentenced to death. It was precisely because they could not bear to kill indiscriminately that they were punished by sending able-bodied men to guard the border.

古文：其久附籍者，或乃占山四十余里，招聚无赖千人，争斗劫杀。若此者，可以久居故不遣乎？
现代文：这些久已在当地落户籍的人，有的竟然占山四十余里，招聚无赖千人，争斗劫掠杀人，像这样的人，可以久居而不遣返吗？
English: Some of these people, who have long settled in the local area, even occupy more than forty miles of mountains, recruit thousands of ruffians, fight, rob, and kill. Can people like this stay for a long time without repatriation?

古文：臣揭榜晓贼，谓已杀数千，盖张虚势怵之，非实事也。
现代文：臣张榜警告贼，说是已杀几千，只是虚张声势威慑贼人的，并不是实事。
English: The vassal Zhangbang warned the thieves, saying that he had killed several thousand, but it was just a bluff to deter the thieves, not a fact.

古文：且圭固尝身任其事，今日之事又圭所遗。
现代文：况且白圭本人也曾经负责此事，今天这件事又是白圭本人所遗留下来的。
English: Moreover, Baikei himself was also responsible for this matter, and today this matter is left by Baikei himself.

古文：先时，中外议者谓荆、襄之患何日得宁。今幸平靖，而流言沸腾，以臣为口实。
现代文：前些时，朝廷内外谈论的是说荆、襄流民的祸患哪一天能安定，现在有幸平定了，而流言沸沸腾腾，以我为攻击的目标。
English: Some time ago, people inside and outside the Imperial Court were talking about the day when the calamity of the Jing and Xiangyuan people could be stabilized. Now, fortunately, it has been calmed down, but rumors are on the rise, with me as the target of attack.

古文：昔马援薏苡蒙谤，邓艾槛车被征。功不见录，身更不保。臣幸际圣明，愿赐骸骨，勿使臣为马、邓之续。 
现代文：从前马援打胜仗后从交趾运回一车薏苡被人诽谤为一车明珠，魏将邓艾被朝廷下诏书用槛车囚回，他们的功劳不被记载，连自身都难保，臣有幸遇到圣明的皇帝，请求赐给我这把骨头，不要使臣步马援、邓艾的后尘。 
English: Once upon a time, after Ma Yuan won the war, a cart of oysters was brought back from Jiaozuo and was slandered as a cart of pearls. Wei took Deng Ai back as a prisoner by the imperial edict. Their merits are not recorded, and even they themselves are not safe. The vassal was lucky enough to meet the emperor of Shenming and asked him to give me this bone. Don't let the vassal follow in the footsteps of Ma Yuan and Deng Ai.

古文：帝温诏答之。
现代文：明宪宗以情词恳挚的诏书答复他。
English: Emperor Mingxianzong replied to him with a cordial imperial edict.

古文：八年召还，与李宾协掌院事。
现代文：成化八年，朝廷召项忠回来，与李宾协掌院事。
English: In the 8th year of Chenghua, the imperial court called Xiang Zhong back, and he became the head of the academy together with Li Bin.

古文：后二年拜刑部尚书，寻代圭为兵部。
现代文：过两年拜为刑部尚书，不久代替白圭为兵部尚书。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and soon after, he replaced Bai Gui as the head of the Military Investigation Department.

古文：汪直开西厂，恣横，忠屡遭侮不能堪。会大学士商辂等劾直，忠亦倡九卿劾之。奏留中，而西厂遂罢，直深恨之。未几，西厂复设，直以吴绶为腹心，绶挟前憾，伺忠益急。
现代文：汪直开西厂，放肆蛮横，项忠屡次遭到汪直的侮辱不堪忍受，正好大学士商辂等弹劾汪直，项忠也带领九卿弹劾汪直，皇帝将弹劾汪直的奏章留在宫中不加处理，但是西厂还是停办，汪直心中十分怨恨项忠等，没多久，西厂又恢复，汪直用吴绶为心腹，吴绶心揣前仇，更加急切地寻找项忠的差错，以资报复。
English: Wang Zhaozhong opened the West Factory, he was impudent and insolent. Xiang Zhong was repeatedly insulted by Wang Zhaozhong, which was unbearable. It was just the university scholars and merchants who impeached Wang Zhaozhong. Xiang Zhong also led the nine nobles to impeach Wang Zhaozhong. The emperor left the impeachment report of Wang Zhaozhong in the palace without dealing with it. However, the West Factory was still closed. Wang Zhaozhong was very resentful of Xiang Zhong and so on. It was not long before the West Factory was restored. Wang Zhaozhong used Wu Gan

古文：忠不自安，乞归治病。未行，而绶嗾侦事者诬忠罪。
现代文：项忠心中不安，请求返乡治病，还未成行，而吴绶唆使侦探的人诬告项忠有罪。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Xiang Zhong requested to return home to treat his illness, which has not yet been carried out, and Wu Gan instigated the detective to falsely accuse Xiang Zhong of being guilty.

古文：给事中郭镗、御史冯贯等复交章劾忠，事连其子经、太监黄赐、兴宁伯李震、彰武伯杨信等。
现代文：给事中郭镗、御史冯贯等又上奏章弹劾项忠，事情牵连项忠的儿子项经、太监黄赐、兴宁伯李震、彰武伯杨信等。
English: Guo Jian, Guo Shi Feng Quan and others also wrote articles of impeachment against Qiang Zhong, implicating Qiang Zhong's son, Qiang Jing, eunuch Huang Qi, Xingningbo Li Zhen, Zhangwubo Yangxin and others.

古文：诏法司会锦衣卫廷鞫，忠抗辩不少屈。然众知出直意，无敢为之白者，竟斥为民，赐与震等亦得罪。
现代文：宪宗下诏由法司会同锦衣卫在朝廷审讯，项忠大声争辩毫不屈服，然而众人知道这一切出自汪直的意愿，无人敢为他辩白，竟将项忠削职为民，黄赐与李震等也被判罪。
English: Xiang Zhong was put on trial at the imperial court by the Legal Affairs Bureau and Jin Yiwei. Xiang Zhong argued loudly and did not give in. However, everyone knew that all of this came from Wang Zhi's will. No one dared to defend him. In fact, Xiang Zhong was demoted and Huang Ji and Li Zhen were also convicted.

古文：直败，复官，致仕。家居二十六年，至弘治十五年乃卒，年八十二。
现代文：汪直垮台后，项忠恢复官职，后辞官回乡，在家居二十六年，到弘治十五年，去世，享年八十二岁。
English: After the fall of Wang Zhi, Xiang Zhong resumed his official position. After resigning, he returned to his hometown. He lived at home for 26 years, and died at the age of 82.

古文：经，江西参政。
现代文：追授太子太保，谥号襄毅。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and given the posthumous name of Xiang Yi.

古文：锡，南京光禄寺卿。治元，员外郎。韩雍，字永熙，长洲人。
现代文：项忠为人倜傥，胸怀大略，精通军务，刚正不阿，善于处理政事，因此他所任职之处，都受到人们特别称赞。韩雍，字永熙，长洲人。
English: Xiang Zhongzhong was a loyal person, with a broad mind, proficient in military affairs, upright, and good at handling political affairs, so he received special praise wherever he served. Han Yong, Zi Yongxi, Changzhou people.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年，考中进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：授御史。
现代文：授御史职务。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：负气果敢，以才略称。
现代文：韩雍豪气自负、果敢，以才能和谋略著称。
English: Han Yong is proud, courageous, and famous for his talent and strategy.

古文：录囚南畿。砀山教谕某笞膳夫，膳夫逃匿，父诉教谕杀其子，取他尸支解以证。既诬服，雍踪迹得之，白其冤。
现代文：在南畿审阅刑事案件卷宗，砀山教谕某人鞭打膳夫，膳夫逃跑后躲起来，膳夫的父亲告发教谕杀了他的儿子，并取他人尸体肢解做伪证，教谕已经无辜服罪，韩雍跟踪而得到膳夫，洗清教谕的冤屈。
English: The criminal case file was being reviewed in Nanki. Shaoshan ordered someone to whip Zengfu. Zengfu ran away and hid. Zengfu's father accused Zengfu of killing his son and taking the dismembered body of another person as a false witness. Zengfu has pleaded not guilty. Han Yong followed and got Zengfu to clear up Zengfu's grievances.

古文：出巡河道。
现代文：又出巡河道事务。
English: River patrols are also on the agenda.

古文：已，巡按江西，黜贪墨吏五十七人。
现代文：不久，到江西巡察，罢免贪官污吏五十七人。
English: Soon after, he went to Jiangxi to inspect and remove fifty-seven corrupt officials.

古文：庐陵、太和盗起，捕诛之。
现代文：庐陵、太和发生盗贼，韩雍派人捕杀。
English: Thieves occurred in Fuling and Taihe, and Han Yong sent people to catch and kill them.

古文：十三年冬，处州贼叶宗留自福建转犯江西。
现代文：正统十三年冬，处州贼叶宗留自福建转而危害江西。
English: In the winter of the 13th year of the Zhengde Emperor, the provincial thief Ye Zong left Fujian and came to Jiangxi.

古文：官军不利，都督佥事陈荣、指挥刘真遇伏死。
现代文：官军失利，都督佥事陈英、指挥刘真遇到埋伏而死。
English: The government army was defeated, and the governor, Chen Ying, and the commander, Liu Zhen, were ambushed and killed.

古文：诏雍及镇守侍郎杨宁督军民协守。
现代文：皇帝下诏命韩雍与镇守侍郎杨宁督促军民共同防守。
English: The emperor ordered Han Yong and the town guard Yang Ning to urge the military and civilians to jointly defend the town.

古文：会福建巡按御史汪澄牒邻境会讨贼邓茂七，俄以贼议降，止兵。雍曰： 贼果降，退未晚也。 
现代文：恰巧福建巡按御史汪澄给邻境送来文书会同讨伐贼邓茂七，因为贼人商量投降，官军停止军事行动，韩雍说 ：贼真的投降了再退兵也不晚。 
English: Coincidentally, the Fujian patrolman Wang Cheng sent a document to the neighboring territory in conjunction with the crusader Deng Shouqi. Because the thieves discussed surrender, the government army stopped military operations. Han Yong said: The thieves really surrendered and then it is not too late to withdraw.

古文：趋进，贼已叛，澄坐得罪死。人以是服雍识。
现代文：急速进军，贼已经叛变，汪澄因此被判死刑，人们由此佩服韩雍有见识。
English: Rapidly marching into the army, the thieves had already mutinied, and Wang Cheng was sentenced to death as a result. People admired Han Yong for his insight.

古文：景泰二年擢广东副使。大学士陈循荐为右佥都御史，代杨宁巡抚江西。
现代文：景泰二年，韩雍提升为广东副使，大学士陈循推荐他为右佥都御史，代替杨宁巡抚江西。
English: In the second year of King Tae's reign, Han Yong was promoted to vice-envoy to Guangdong, and Chen Xun, a university scholar, recommended him as the right-hand governor of the capital, replacing Yang Ning as the governor of Jiangxi.

古文：岁饥，奏免秋粮。劾奏宁王不法事，王府官皆得罪。
现代文：年成不好，韩雍上奏章免去百姓要交的秋粮，弹劾宁王做的不法事，宁王府的官吏都获罪。
English: The year was not a success, Han Yong issued a proclamation exempting the common people from paying autumn grain, impeached Ning Wang for doing illegal things, and the officials of Ning Wangfu were all found guilty.

古文：时雍年甫三十，赫然有才望，所规画措置，咸可为后法。
现代文：这时韩雍才三十岁，却才能、名望显赫，他所制定的措施都可以为后来者所效法。
English: At this time, Han Yong was only thirty years old, but his talent and reputation were outstanding, and the measures he formulated could be imitated by later generations.

古文：天顺初，罢天下巡抚官，改山西副使。宁王以前憾劾其擅乘肩舆诸事，下狱，夺官。
现代文：天顺初年，取消所有巡抚官，韩雍改任山西副使，宁王因为以前的怨恨，弹劾他擅自乘坐轿子等事，韩雍被捕入狱，削去官职。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, all the inspectors were abolished, and Han Yong was reappointed as the vice-envoy of Shanxi Province. Because of his previous grudge, Ning Wang impeached him for taking a sedan chair without permission. Han Yong was arrested and sent to prison, and his official position was eliminated.

古文：起大理少卿。寻复为右佥都御史，佐寇深理院事。
现代文：后起用任大理少卿，不久又恢复右佥都御史职位，辅佐寇深治理都察院事。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Dali Shaoqing, and soon he resumed the post of the right-hand man of the capital's imperial historian, and assisted in the administration of the capital's academies.

古文：石亨既诛，锦衣指挥刘敬坐饭亨直房，用朋党律论死。
现代文：石亨已被杀，锦衣指挥刘敬因供石亨值班的房间饭食而被判罪，套用朋党律判以死罪。
English: Shi Heng had been killed, and the commander Liu Jing was convicted of serving meals to the room where Shi Heng was on duty, and was sentenced to death according to the rules of the Party.

古文：雍言： 律重朋党，谓阿比乱朝政也。以一饭当之，岂律意？
现代文：韩雍说： 律重判朋党罪，是因为勾结扰乱朝政，因人供应饭食就判为朋党罪，哪会是法律之本意？
English: Han Yong said: The heavy sentence for the crime of cronyism is because of collusion to disrupt the government of the DPRK, and the crime of cronyism is because of the provision of meals. What is the intention of the law?

古文：且亨盛时大臣朝夕趋门，不坐，独坐敬何也？ 
现代文：况且石亨势盛时，大臣早晚上他家，这倒不判罪，独独判刘敬这是为什么？ 
English: Moreover, when Shi Heng was at the height of his power, the minister was at his home in the morning and in the evening, but this did not result in a conviction, and Liu Jing was solely convicted. Why is this?

古文：深叹服，出之。
现代文：寇深赞叹佩服他，刘敬被释放。
English: He was praised and admired by Kou Sheng, and Liu Jing was released.

古文：母忧，起复。
现代文：韩雍母亲去世，服未满仍被起用。
English: Han Yong's mother passed away, but he was still appointed when his service was not complete.

古文：四年，巡抚宣府、大同。
现代文：天顺四年，巡抚宣府、大同。
English: In the fourth year of Tenshun, the procuratorates of Xuanfu and Datong were established.

古文：七年议事入觐，帝壮其貌，留为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：七年，因商量事情晋见皇帝，明英宗见他气宇不凡留下任兵部右侍郎。
English: In the seventh year, due to the discussion of the matter, Jin met the emperor, and Ming Ying Zong saw his extraordinary spirit and left him as the right attendant of the military department.

古文：宪宗立，坐学士钱溥累，贬浙江左参政。
现代文：宪宗继位，韩雍受学士钱溥牵连，贬为浙江左参政。
English: Xianzong succeeded to the throne, Han Yong was implicated by the bachelor Qian Ye, and was relegated to Zhejiang's left-wing politics.

古文：广西瑶、僮流剽广东，残破郡邑殆遍。
现代文：广西的瑶人和僮人流窜到广东劫掠。
English: The Xiongnu people and the Xiongnu people from Guangxi migrated to Guangdong to plunder.

古文：成化元年正月大发兵，拜都督赵辅为总兵官，以太监卢永、陈瑄监其军。兵部尚书王竑曰： 韩雍才气无双，平贼非雍莫可。 
现代文：沿途的郡县几乎全被捣毁坏，成化元年正月，采取大规模军事行动，拜都督赵辅为总兵官，派太监卢永、陈蠧担任监军，兵部尚书王雄说 ：韩雍才气无双，平定贼非韩雍莫属。 
English: Counties and counties along the way were almost completely destroyed. In the first month of the first year of the 21st century, a large-scale military action was taken. The military governor Zhao Fu was appointed as the chief military officer, and the eunuchs Lu Yong and Chen Yu were sent to supervise the army. Shang Shu Wangxiong of the Ministry of Military Affairs said: Han Yong's talent is unparalleled, and Han Yong is the only one who can defeat the thief.

古文：乃改雍左佥都御史，赞理军务。
现代文：于是改任韩雍左佥都御史，协助治理军务。
English: As a result, he was reassigned to the post of Han Yong Zuo, the governor of the capital, to assist in the management of military affairs.

古文：雍驰至南京，集诸将议方略。
现代文：韩雍骑马奔驰到南京，召集诸将商议计谋策略。
English: Han Yong rode a horse-drawn carriage to Nanjing and gathered the generals to discuss strategy.

古文：先是，编修邱濬上书大学士李贤，言贼在广东者宜驱，在广西者宜困。欲宿兵大藤峡，扼其出入，蹂其禾稼，期一二年尽贼。
现代文：在此以前，编修丘浚写信给大学士李贤，说贼在广东适宜驱赶，贼在广西的应该采用围困的方法，要将军队驻扎在大藤峡，控制其出入，破坏贼的庄稼，一二年可望灭贼。
English: Prior to this, editor Qiu Jun wrote a letter to Li Xian, a university scholar, saying that it was appropriate to drive out the thieves in Guangdong, and that the thieves in Guangxi should adopt the method of siege, to station the army in Dafuji Gorge, control their entry and exit, destroy the thieves' crops, and hopefully eliminate the thieves in a year or two.

古文：贤善之，献于朝，诏录示诸将。
现代文：李贤很赞赏这项作战的计划，把信献给宪宗，宪宗下诏抄写下来让诸将看。
English: Li Xian appreciated this battle plan very much and dedicated the letter to Xianzong. Xianzong copied down the edict for the generals to see.

古文：诸将主其说，请令游击将军和勇率番骑趋广东，而大军直趋广西，分兵扑灭。
现代文：诸将都主张按此计划实行，请求下令派游击将军和勇率领少数民族骑兵直奔广东，而大军一直赶到广西，分兵扑灭叛乱。
English: The generals all advocated the implementation of this plan, and asked for an order to send the guerrilla general He Yong to lead the cavalry of ethnic minorities straight to Guangdong, while the large army rushed all the way to Guangxi to extinguish the rebellion.

古文：雍曰： 贼已蔓延数千里，而所至与战，是自敝也。
现代文：韩雍说： 贼已经蔓延数千里，而所到处就与贼交战，这是使自己疲惫。
English: Han Yong said: Thieves have spread thousands of miles, and everywhere they fight with thieves, which is exhausting.

古文：当全师直捣大藤峡。
现代文：应该全军直捣大藤峡，这样南可支援高州、肇庆、雷州，廉州。
English: The whole army should directly attack Dafuji Gorge, so that the South can support Gaozhou, Zhaoqing, Leizhou, and Lianzhou.

古文：南可援高、肇、雷、廉；东可应南、韶；西可取柳、庆；北可断阳峒诸路。
现代文：东可以与南雄、韶州应合，西可以攻取柳州、庆远，北可以切断阳峒各条道路。
English: In the east, it can meet with Nanxiong and Bozhou, in the west, it can capture Liuzhou and Qingyuan, and in the north, it can cut off all roads of Yangtze River.

古文：首尾相应，攻其腹心。巢穴既倾，余迎刃解耳。
现代文：首尾相应，攻其腹心之地，巢穴已经倾覆，其余则可迎刃而解。
English: Corresponding to the beginning and the end, attacking the place of his confidant, the nest has been overturned, the rest can be solved.

古文：舍此不图，而分兵四出，贼益奔突，郡邑益残，所谓救火而嘘之也。 众曰 善。 
现代文：舍弃这不去谋取，而分兵四出，贼更加奔逃，郡县更加遭到破坏，这等于是救火时却鼓风一样。 众人说 ：对。 
English: Abandoning this and not seeking gains, while detachments of soldiers are on the move, thieves are fleeing more, and counties and counties are being destroyed more, is like trying to put out a fire while the wind is blowing.

古文：辅亦知雍才足办贼，军谋一听雍。
现代文：赵辅也相信韩雍完全能够战胜贼，军中一切完全听从韩雍谋划。
English: Zhao Fu also believed that Han Yong was fully capable of defeating the thieves, and everything in the army fully obeyed Han Yong's plan.

古文：雍等遂倍道趋全州。阳峒苗掠兴安，击破之。至桂林，斩失机指挥李英等四人以徇。按地图与诸将议曰： 贼以修仁、荔浦为羽翼，当先收二县以孤贼势。 
现代文：韩雍等日夜兼程直奔全州，击破劫掠兴安的阳峒苗人，到达桂林，将错过战机的指挥李英等四人斩首示众，韩雍手按着地图同诸将商议说： 贼以修仁、荔浦为羽翼，应该先攻取这二县来孤立贼的势力。 
English: Han Yong and others drove straight to Quanzhou day and night, defeated the impotent Miao people who looted and plundered Xing'an, and arrived in Guilin. He beheaded four people, including the commander Li Ying, who missed the fighter plane. Han Yong discussed with the generals by clicking on the map and said: The thieves use Shujin and Lippu as their wings. They should first capture these two counties to isolate the thieves' power.

古文：乃督兵十六万人，分五道，先破修仁贼，穷追至力山。擒千二百余人，斩首七千三百级。荔浦亦定。
现代文：于是率领十六万兵士，分五路出兵，先攻破修仁县的贼，穷追到力山，俘获一千二百余人，斩首七千三百个，荔浦也平定了。
English: So he led 160,000 soldiers and dispatched troops in five directions, first breaking through the thieves in Shuren County, chasing them all the way to Lishan, capturing more than 1,200 people, beheading 7,300, and leveling Lippu.

古文：十月至浔州，延问父老，皆曰： 峡，天险，不可攻，宜以计困。 
现代文：十月到氵寻州，向当地父老询问，都说： 峡，是天险，不能强攻，应用计围困。 
English: In October, I went to Minhangzhou and asked the local elders. They all said: "The gorge is a natural hazard, it cannot be attacked forcefully, it should be besieged."

古文：雍曰： 峡延广六百余里，安能使困？
现代文：韩雍说： 峡延绵六百余里，怎能围困？
English: Han Yong said: The gorge stretches for more than six hundred miles, how can it be besieged?

古文：兵分则力弱，师老则财匮，贼何时得平？
现代文：兵分则力弱，长期用兵则财物缺乏，贼何时能够平定！
English: Troops are weak, long-term soldiers are lacking in property, when can thieves be subdued!

古文：吾计决矣。 
现代文：我的计划已定。 
English: My mind is made up.

古文：遂长驱至峡口。
现代文：就长驱到峡口。
English: They drove all the way to the mouth of the gorge.

古文：儒生、里老数十人伏道左，愿为向导。雍见即骂曰： 贼敢绐我！ 
现代文：有儒生、里老数十人伏在道路左边，愿意担任向导，韩雍见了立刻骂道 ：贼胆敢欺骗我！ 
English: There were dozens of Confucianists, Li and Lao people lying on the left side of the road, willing to serve as guides. Han Yong immediately scolded: "How dare the thief deceive me!"

古文：叱左右缚斩之，左右皆愕，既缚，而袂中利刃出。推问，果贼也。悉支解刳肠胃，分挂林箐中，累累相属。
现代文：喝令左右绑起来斩首，左右都非常吃惊。捆绑时而发现袖中的利刀，一审问，果然是贼，斩杀后，全部肢解，挖出肠胃，分挂竹林中，成串相连。
English: When they tied him up, they found a sharp knife in his sleeve. On first interrogation, it turned out to be a thief. After the beheading, they dismembered him, dug out his intestines, and hung him separately in a bamboo grove, connected in strings.

古文：贼大惊曰： 韩公天神也！ 
现代文：贼大为吃惊地说 ：韩公是天神。 
English: The thief was very surprised and said, "Han Gong is a god."

古文：雍令总兵官欧信等为五哨，自象州、武宣攻其北；身与辅督都指挥白全等为八哨，自桂平、平南攻其南；参将孙震等为二哨，从水路入；而别分兵守诸隘口。
现代文：韩雍下令总兵官欧信等为五哨，自象州、武宣攻其北面；自己与赵辅率领都指挥白全等为八哨，自桂平、平南攻其南面；参将孙震等为二哨，从水路进来；而且另外分兵守住各险要的地方。
English: Han Yong ordered the commander-in-chief, Ou Xin, to set up five outposts, with troops from Xiangzhou and Wuxuan attacking to the north; himself and Zhao Fu, who led the capital command, Baichuan, to set up eight outposts, with troops from Guiping and Pingnan attacking to the south; and the commander-in-chief, Sun Zhen, to set up two outposts, coming in from the waterway; and another detachment of soldiers to guard each critical place.

古文：贼魁侯大狗等大惧，先移其累重于桂州横石塘，而立栅南山，多置滚木、礧石、镖枪、药弩拒官军。
现代文：贼首侯大狗等大为恐惧，先把其家属资产转移到桂州横石塘，而在南山竖立栅栏，准备很多滚木、石块、标枪、涂毒的弓箭来抗拒官军。
English: Greatly fearful of the bandit lord, the Great Dog first transferred his family's assets to Hengshitang, Guizhou, and erected a fence in Nanshan, preparing a lot of logs, stones, javelins, and poisoned bows and arrows to resist the government army.

古文：十二月朔，雍等督诸军水陆并进，拥团牌登山，殊死战。连破石门、林峒、沙田、古营诸巢，焚其室庐积聚，贼皆奔溃。
现代文：十二月初一，韩雍等率领各军水陆并进，持圆盾登山，殊死作战，接连攻破石门、林峒、沙田、古营各巢穴，焚烧其房屋积聚，贼都奔跑溃败。
English: On the first day of December, Han Yong and others led the armies to march along the water and land, hold the round shield and climb the mountain, fight to the death, successively break the nests of Shimen, Linfen, Shatian and the ancient camp, burn their houses and accumulate, and the thieves all ran and were defeated.

古文：伐木开道，直抵横石塘及九层楼诸山。
现代文：伐木开路，直抵横石塘以及九层楼各山。
English: The logging has opened up the road, reaching the cross-rock pond and the mountains of the nine-story building.

古文：贼复立栅数重，凭高以拒。
现代文：贼又竖立栅栏好几层，凭借地势高来抗拒。
English: The thieves also erected several layers of fencing, using the height of the terrain to resist.

古文：官军诱贼发矢石，度且尽，雍躬督诸军缘木攀藤上。别遣壮士从间道先登，据山顶举炮。
现代文：官军引诱贼发放箭石，估计快用尽了，韩雍亲自率领诸军借着树攀藤而上，另外派遣壮士从小路先上，占据山顶用火炮发石击贼。
English: The government army lured the thieves to hand out arrow stones, and it was estimated that they were almost exhausted. Han Yong personally led the army to climb up the rattan tree. In addition, he sent strong men from the path ahead to occupy the top of the mountain and use artillery to fire stones at the thieves.

古文：贼不能支，遂大败。
现代文：贼抵挡不住，被打得大败。
English: The thief could not resist and was soundly beaten.

古文：先后破贼三百二十四寨，生擒大狗及其党七百八十人，斩首三千二百有奇，坠溺死者不可胜计。
现代文：先后摧毁栅寨三百二十四个，活捉侯大狗及其同党七百八十人，斩首三千二百余个，坠入水中淹死的不计其数。
English: They successively destroyed 324 stockades, captured 780 Houdaigou and his comrades alive, beheaded more than 3,200 people, and drowned countless people who fell into the water.

古文：峡有大藤如虹，横亘两厓间。雍斧断之，改名断藤峡，勒石纪功而还。
现代文：峡有根大藤像虹，横着交错在两山崖之间，韩雍用斧砍断大藤，改名断藤峡，刻石记功而返。
English: The canyon has large wisteria roots like a rainbow, criss-crossing between the two mountain cliffs. Han Yong chopped off the large wisteria with an axe, changed the name to Broken Wisteria Gorge, and returned with a stone inscribed with his achievements.

古文：分兵击余党，郁林、阳江、洛容、博白次第皆定。
现代文：分兵打击余党，郁林、阳江、洛容、博白接连都被平定。
English: Separate troops were sent to fight the Yu Party, and Yulin, Yangjiang, Luo Rong, and Bo Bai were successively subdued.

古文：帝大喜，赐敕嘉劳，召辅等还，迁雍左副都御史，提督两广军务。
现代文：明宪宗大喜，下诏书表彰功劳，召回赵辅等，调升韩雍为左副都御史，提督两广军务。
English: Emperor Mingxianzong was overjoyed, issued an imperial edict commending his services, recalled Zhao Fu and others, and promoted Han Yong to Left Vice-Governor of the Capital, Admiral of the Two Great Military Commands.

古文：雍乃散遣诸军，以省馈饷。而遗孽侯郑昂等遂乘虚陷浔州及洛容、北流二县。
现代文：韩雍就在各军中遣散人员，以此节约军饷，而贼人余部侯郑昂等就乘虚攻破氵寻州以及洛容、北流二县。
English: Han Yong demobilized personnel in each army, thus saving military pay, while the remaining thieves, such as Hou Zheng Ang, took advantage of the situation to break through Shichangzhou and the two counties of Lorong and Beiliu.

古文：雍被劾引罪，帝宥之。
现代文：韩雍被弹劾服罪，明宪宗宽容他。
English: Han Yong was impeached and pleaded guilty, and the Ming Dynasty tolerated him.

古文：雍益发兵扑讨。
现代文：他更加奋力投入发兵讨伐中。
English: He threw himself even harder into the war effort.

古文：时诸贼所在蜂起，思恩、浔、宾、柳城悉被扰掠。
现代文：这时各地的叛乱蜂起，思恩、氵寻州、宾州、柳城全都被骚扰劫掠。
English: At this time, there were rebellions and uprisings all over the country, and the cities of Sion, Yixing, Pengzhou and Liucheng were all harassed and plundered.

古文：流劫至广东，钦、化二州皆应时破殄。
现代文：贼流窜抢劫到广东，钦、化二州均随即被攻陷。
English: Thieves went on a looting spree in Guangdong, and both Qin and Hebei provinces were immediately conquered.

古文：四年春，雍以两广地大事殷，请东西各设巡抚，帝可之。命陈濂抚广东，张鹏抚广西，而雍专理军事。
现代文：成化四年春，由于两广地大事繁，韩雍请求东西各设置巡抚，明宪宗表示同意，任命陈濂抚广东，张鹏抚广西，而韩雍专门治理军事。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Jin Dynasty, due to the great events in the two provinces, Han Yong requested that an inspector be set up in the east and west, and Ming Xianzong agreed, appointing Chen Bing as the governor of Guangdong, Zhang Peng as the governor of Guangxi, and Han Yong specifically governed the military.

古文：寻以忧归。
现代文：不久韩雍因家有丧事而归。
English: Soon after, Han Yong returned home due to a death in the family.

古文：明年，两广盗复起，佥事陶鲁言： 两广地势错互，当如臂指相使，不可离析。
现代文：第二年，两广盗贼又起，佥事陶鲁说： 两广地势交错，应当像手臂与手指一齐使用，不能分开。
English: In the second year, the thieves of the two provinces rose again. An anecdote of Tao Lu said: The two provinces are intertwined, and should be used together like an arm and a finger, and cannot be separated.

古文：近贼犯广西，臣与广东三司议调兵，匝月未决，盗贼无所惮。
现代文：最近贼侵犯广西，我与广东三司商议调兵，一个月还没结果，盗贼毫无畏惧之心。
English: Recently, thieves invaded Guangxi. I discussed the transfer of troops with the Guangdong Third Division, but there was no result for a month. The thieves had no fear.

古文：乞仍命大臣总督便。 
现代文：请求仍然任命大臣总督为好。 
English: The request remains for the appointment of a Minister-Governor.

古文：会佥事林锦、巡按御史龚晟亦以为请。乃罢两巡抚，而起复雍右都御史，总督如故。
现代文：正好佥事林锦、巡按御使龚晟也同样的向上请求，于是撤去两巡抚，而又起用韩雍为右都御史，同以往一样总督两广军务。
English: Just at that time, Lin Jin, the inspector of the capital, and the envoy of the envoy of the envoy also made the same request, so the two inspectors were removed, and Han Yong was appointed as the governor of the capital, and the military affairs of the two provinces were carried out as before.

古文：又明年正月，雍疏辞新命，乞终制，不许。
现代文：又过了一年的正月，韩雍上疏要求辞去所新任官职，恳求服满三年之丧。
English: After another year of the first month of the year, Han Yong Shangsuo asked to resign from the newly appointed official position, and implored to serve three years of mourning.

古文：雍抵任，遣参将张寿、游击冯昇等分道讨贼，忻州八寨蛮及诸山瑶、僮掠州县者，皆摧破之。
现代文：宪宗没批准。韩雍到任，派遣参将张寿、游击冯升等分路讨伐贼，摧毁忻州八砦蛮以及抢劫州县诸山的瑶人、僮人。
English: Han Yong came to office and dispatched general Zhang Shou, guerrilla Feng Sheng, and others to fight against the loggers, destroy the eight fortresses in Zhangzhou, and rob the people of Zhang and Zhang in the mountains of Zhu County.

古文：蛮民素慑雍威，寇盗浸息。
现代文：少数民族百姓向来害怕韩雍威力，寇盗逐渐平息。
English: Ethnic minority people have always been afraid of Han Yong's power, and banditry has gradually subsided.

古文：九年，柳、浔诸蛮复叛，参将杨广等俘斩九百人。方更进，而贼破怀集县。兵部劾雍奏报不实。
现代文：成化九年，柳州、氵寻州各少数民族又发动叛乱，参将杨广等俘获、斩首共九百人，正准备继续进击，而贼攻破怀集县，兵部弹劾韩雍向朝廷奏报不实。
English: In the ninth year of Chenghua, the ethnic minorities in Liuzhou and Guixing launched another rebellion. The general Yang Guang and other participants captured and beheaded a total of 900 people. They were preparing to continue the attack, but the thieves broke through Huaiji County, and the military department impeached Han Yong for submitting false reports to the court.

古文：广西镇守中官黄沁素憾雍抑己，因讦雍，且言其贪欲纵酒，滥赏妄费。帝遣给事中张谦等往勘。而广西布政使何宜、副使张斅衔雍素轻己，共酝酿其罪。
现代文：广西镇守宦官黄沁向来恨韩雍压抑自己，借机攻击韩雍，并且说韩贪欲纵酒，滥加奖赏，胡乱开支花费，宪宗派给事中张谦等去调查，而广西布政使何宜、副使张学攴怀恨韩雍一贯轻视自己，两人在一起酝酿韩雍的罪状。
English: Huang Qi, the Guangxi town guard and eunuch, has always hated Han Yong and suppressed himself, taking the opportunity to attack Han Yong, and said that Han is greedy for alcohol, excessive reward, reckless expenditure, and that the constitutional sect sent Zhang Qian to investigate, while the Guangxi cloth political envoy He Yi and the deputy envoy Zhang Xuecheng hate Han Yong and have always despised themselves, and the two have been brewing Han Yong's crimes together.

古文：谦还奏，事虚实交半，竟命致仕去。
现代文：张谦返朝向宪宗上奏，半为捏造半为事实地报告了韩雍的情况，宪宗竟然命韩雍退职回家。
English: Zhang Qian returned to the DPRK to report to Han Yong, and reported the situation of Han Yong in a half-fabricated and half-factual manner. Han Yong was even ordered by Han Yong to retire and return home.

古文：雍洞达闿爽，重信义。
现代文：韩雍通达开朗，重信义。
English: Han Yong is cheerful and trustworthy.

古文：抚江西时，请追谥文天祥、谢枋得。诏谥天祥忠烈、枋得文节。
现代文：巡抚江西时，请求给文天祥、谢枋得追加谥号，皇帝下诏追加文天祥谥号为忠烈，谢枋得谥号为文节。
English: When he was the governor of Jiangxi Province, he requested that additional honorific titles be given to Wen Tianxiang and Xie Junde, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to add the honorific titles of Wen Tianxiang and Zhongli to Wen Tianxiang, and the honorific titles of Xie Junde to Wen Jie.

古文：有雄略，善断，动中事机。
现代文：韩雍有雄才大略，善于决断，常常能抓住时机。
English: Han Yong has great talent, is good at making decisions, and can often seize the opportunity.

古文：临战，率躬亲矢石，不目瞬。自奉尊严，三司皆长跪白事。
现代文：作战时，他常冒箭林石雨，眼睛都不眨一下，因为讲究尊严，三司都长跪言事。
English: During the war, he often braved the rain of arrows and stones, without blinking an eye, because he was concerned about dignity, the three divisions were kneeling to speak.

古文：军门设铜鼓数十，仪节详密。
现代文：军门设置铜鼓几十个，礼节详密。
English: Dozens of bronze drums are set up at the military gate, and the etiquette is detailed.

古文：裨将以下，绳柙无所假。
现代文：副将以下犯事，绳绑装入囚笼毫不宽容。
English: The deputy will have no tolerance for the following offenses, rope binding into a cage.

古文：两地镇守宦官素骄恣，亦惕息无敢肆。
现代文：广东广西镇守宦官向来骄傲放纵，面对韩雍也屏声静气不敢放肆。
English: Guangdong and Guangxi town guards and eunuchs have always been proud and indulgent, and they dare not be impudent in the face of Han Yong.

古文：疾恶严，坦中不为崖岸，挥斥财帛不少惜。
现代文：韩雍痛恨罪恶，心胸开阔而不高傲，挥霍财物从不可惜。
English: Han Yong abhors sin, is broad-minded but not arrogant, and never regrets squandering his wealth.

古文：故虽令行禁止，民得安堵，而谤议亦易起。
现代文：因此虽然令行禁止，百姓安居，然而对他的毁谤、非议也容易产生。
English: Therefore, although the order is prohibited and the people live in peace, it is easy to defame and criticize him.

古文：为中官所齮龁，公论皆不平。
现代文：他被宦官所毁伤，公众的舆论都为他抱不平。
English: He was mauled by eunuchs, and public opinion turned against him.

古文：正德间，谥襄毅。初以军功予一子锦衣百户，雍以授其弟睦。
现代文：两广的人怀念韩雍的功绩，尤其痛惜他的离去，建立祠堂纪念他。韩雍回家后，家住五年去世。
English: People in Zhiguang miss the achievements of Han Yong, especially regret his departure, and set up an ancestral hall to commemorate him. After Han Yong returned home, he lived at home for five years and died.

古文：至是，录一子国子生。余子俊，字士英，青神人。
现代文：享年五十一岁。正德年间，追封谥号襄毅。余子俊，字士英，青神人。
English: He died at the age of fifty-one. During the Zhengde era, he was given the posthumous name of Xiang Yi. Yu Zijun, also known as Shih Ying, was a member of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：父祥，户部郎中。
现代文：父亲余祥曾任户部郎中。
English: His father, Yu Xiang, was once a junior aide to the Minister of the Interior.

古文：子俊举景泰二年进士，授户部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：景泰二年余子俊考中进士，授予户部主事官职，升为员外郎。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, Yu Zi Junko was promoted to junior high school, awarded the post of head of the household department, and promoted to the post of foreign minister.

古文：在部十年，以廉干称。
现代文：在户部十年，以清廉有才干而著称。
English: Ten years in the household department, he is known for his integrity and talent.

古文：出为西安知府。岁饥，发廪十万石振贷。区画以偿，官不损而民济。
现代文：后调离户部任西安知府，遇到灾年，他打开粮仓取出十万石粮食救济贫民，偿还时区别对待，做到官府不受损而百姓得到救济。
English: Later, he was transferred from the household department to Xi'an prefecture. In the year of the disaster, he opened the granary and took out 100,000 kilos of grain to help the poor. When repaying, he was treated differently, so that the government would not be damaged and the people would receive relief.

古文：成化初，所司上治行当旌者，知府十人，而子俊为首。
现代文：成化初年，主管部门上报政绩突出应当受到表彰的官员，知府有十人，而余子俊位居第一。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the competent department reported the officials who should be commended for their outstanding performance. There were ten people in the prefecture, and Yu Zijun ranked first.

古文：以林聪荐，为陕西右参政，岁余擢右布政使。
现代文：由于林聪推荐，他被任为陕西右参政，一年多后提升为右布政使。
English: As a result of Lin Cong's recommendation, he was appointed as a right-wing politician in Shaanxi Province, and more than a year later he was promoted to a right-wing political envoy.

古文：六年转左，调浙江。甫半载，拜右副都御史，巡抚延绥。
现代文：六年，转为左布政使，调任浙江，刚刚半年，授他右副都御史官职，巡抚延绥。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of political envoy of Zuo Bu and assigned to Zhejiang. Just half a year later, he was given the post of vice-governor of the capital and governor of Yan'an.

古文：先是，巡抚王锐请沿边筑墙建堡，为久远计，工未兴而罢。
现代文：在这以前，巡抚王锐从长远考虑请求沿边境筑墙建堡，工程还未动工就被否决了。
English: Prior to this, the governor Wang Rui had requested the construction of a wall and fort along the border from a long-term perspective, but the project was rejected before construction began.

古文：子俊上疏言： 三边惟延庆地平易，利驰突。
现代文：余子俊上疏说 ：三边只有延庆平坦开阔，利于驱马急驰。
English: Yu Zi Shun Shang Zuo said: On the three sides, only Yanqing is flat and open, which is conducive to driving horses.

古文：寇屡入犯，获边人为导，径入河套屯牧。
现代文：寇屡次入侵，俘获边民做向导，一直进入河套驻扎放牧。
English: The moose repeatedly invaded, captured the border people as guides, and went all the way into Hetao to stay and graze.

古文：自是寇顾居内，我反屯外，急宜于沿边筑墙置堡。
现代文：从此寇竟居于塞内，我们反而屯于塞外，在沿边筑墙建堡是当务之急。
English: Since then, the Kuchis have actually lived in Sein, but we have been living outside Sein. It is urgent to build walls and fortifications along the border.

古文：况今旧界石所在，多高山陡厓。依山形，随地势，或铲削，或垒筑，或挑堑，绵引相接，以成边墙，于计为便。 
现代文：况且现在旧界石还在，高山多悬崖陡壁，依照山形，随着地势，有的铲削，有的垒筑，有的挖壕沟，延绵相接，形成边墙，这对于边墙工程来说较为方便。 
English: What's more, the old boundary stones are still there. The high mountains have many cliffs and steep walls, and according to the shape of the mountain, some are shoveled, some are fortified, and some are trenched. They are continuously connected to form a border wall, which is more convenient for the border wall project.

古文：尚书白圭以陕民方困，奏缓役。
现代文：尚书白圭以陕西百姓正贫困，奏请缓兴工程。
English: Shangshu Bai Gui said that the people of Shaanxi are poor and asked for the project to be delayed.

古文：既而寇入孤山堡，复犯榆林，子俊先后与朱永、许宁击败之。
现代文：不久寇进入孤山堡，又入侵榆林，余子俊先后与朱永、许宁一起击败寇贼。
English: Soon, the bandits entered the lonely mountain fortress and invaded Yulin. Yu Zijun defeated the bandits together with Zhu Yong and Xu Ning.

古文：是时，寇据河套，岁发大军征讨，卒无功。
现代文：这时，寇占据河套，连年派遣大军征讨，没有什么实际效果。
English: At this time, the Kuo occupied Hetao and sent a large army to conquer it year after year, with little practical effect.

古文：八年秋，子俊复言： 今征套士马屯延绥者八万，刍茭烦内地。若今冬寇不北去，又须备来年军资。
现代文：成化八年秋，余子俊说： 现在征讨河套的兵马驻扎在延绥的有八万，牲口饲料靠内地，如果今年冬天敌寇不向北退却，又需要准备下一年的军需供应。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of Chenghua, Yu Zijun said: There are now eighty thousand soldiers and horses stationed in Yancheng to collect the Hetao, and the livestock feed is inland. If the enemy does not retreat north this winter, it will be necessary to prepare the next year's military supply.

古文：姑以今年之数约之，米豆需银九十四万，草六十万。
现代文：姑且用今年的数额约略估计，米豆需银九十四万两，草料需银六十万两。
English: Let's use this year's amount to roughly estimate that rice and beans require 940,000 taels of silver, and grass requires 600,000 taels of silver.

古文：每人运米豆六斗、草四束，应用四百七万人，约费行资八百二十五万。
现代文：每人运米豆六斗、草四束，应该动用四百零七万人，大约花费用八百二十五万两。
English: To transport six barrels of rice and beans and four bundles of grass per person, 4.07 million people should be used, with an approximate cost of 8.25 million taels.

古文：公私烦扰至此，安得不变计。
现代文：公私冗杂繁乱到这种地步，怎能不改变谋划！
English: How can we not change the plan when public and private affairs have become so complicated!

古文：臣前请筑墙建堡，诏事宁举行。请于明年春夏寇马疲乏时，役陕西运粮民五万，给食兴工，期两月毕事。 
现代文：臣先要求筑墙建堡，诏书说要等事情安定后再进行，请求于明年春夏敌寇人马疲乏时，役使陕西运粮百姓五万，供给食物，兴建工程，要求两个月完工。 
English: The courtiers asked for the construction of a wall and a fortress, and the imperial edict said that it should wait until things were stable before proceeding. They requested that when the enemy invaders were tired in the spring and summer of the next year, they should help Shaanxi to transport grain to fifty thousand people, supply food, and build projects, and required two months to complete.

古文：圭犹持前议阻之。帝是子俊言，命速举。
现代文：白圭仍然坚持他的意见，阻挠兴建工程，皇帝认为余子俊说的对，下令迅速进行此项工程。
English: Bai Gui still insisted on his opinion and blocked the construction project. The emperor thought that Yu Zijun was right and ordered the project to be carried out quickly.

古文：子俊先用军功进左副都御史。明年，又用红盐池捣巢功，进右都御史。
现代文：余子俊先因军功升为左副都御史，第二年，又因捣毁红盐池巢穴有功，升为右都御史。
English: First, because of his military service, Yu Zijun was promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital, and the next year, because of the destruction of the Red Salt Pond lair, he was promoted to the right governor.

古文：寇以捣巢故远徙，不敢复居套。
现代文：由于巢穴被捣毁，贼寇因此远徙，不敢再在河套居住。
English: Due to the destruction of their nests, the bandits have migrated and no longer dare to live in Hetao.

古文：内地患稍息，子俊得一意兴役。
现代文：内地忧患渐渐平息，余子俊就全力兴建工程。
English: As the troubles on the mainland gradually subsided, Yu Zijun devoted all his energy to the construction project.

古文：东起清水营，西抵花马池，延袤千七百七十里，凿崖筑墙，掘堑其下，连比不绝。
现代文：东起清水营，西抵花马池，连绵一千七百七十里，凿崖筑墙，又在其下挖濠沟，一直连绵不绝。
English: From Qingshui Camp in the east to Huama Pond in the west, it stretches for 1,770 miles, cutting cliffs to build walls, and digging trenches under them, all the time.

古文：每二三里置敌台崖寨备巡警。
现代文：每隔二三里建置望台、崖栅以便巡视警戒。
English: Observation towers and cliff fences are built every two or three miles to facilitate patrols.

古文：又于崖寨空处筑短墙，横一斜二如箕状，以瞭敌避射。
现代文：又在崖栅空处筑矮墙，横一斜二如箕状，用来望和避箭。
English: They also built a low wall in the gap of the cliff gate, with a diagonal diagonal like a cocoon, used to look out and avoid arrows.

古文：凡筑城堡十一，边墩十五，小墩七十八，崖寨八百十九，役军四万人，不三月而成。
现代文：总共建筑城堡十一个、边墩十五个、小墩七十八个、崖栅八百一十九个，动用士兵四万人，不到三个月就完工了。
English: A total of eleven castles, fifteen border towers, seventy-eight small towers, and eight hundred and nineteen cliff gates were built, using forty thousand soldiers, and completed in less than three months.

古文：墙内之地悉分屯垦，岁得粮六万石有奇。
现代文：墙内的土地全部分给军队屯垦，一年收获粮食六万石有余。
English: All of the land inside the wall was given to the army for settlement, and more than 60,000 koku of grain was harvested each year.

古文：十年闰六月，子俊具上其事，因以母老乞归，慰留不许。
现代文：成化十年闰六月，余子俊向朝廷一一禀报工程之事，因为母亲年老恳求回乡，朝廷安慰挽留他，没有批准他返乡的请求。
English: In the tenth leap month of the year, Yu Zijun reported the project to the imperial court one by one. Because his mother was old and pleaded to return to his hometown, the imperial court consoled him and did not approve his request to return home.

古文：初，延绥镇治绥德州，属县米脂、吴堡悉在其外。寇以轻骑入掠，镇兵觉而追之，辄不及，往往得利去。
现代文：当初，绥德州是延绥镇的地方官署所在地，所辖米脂县、吴堡县都在镇外，敌寇用轻骑进来劫掠，等镇兵发觉而去追击，总是追赶不上，敌寇往往得利而去。
English: At the beginning, Shunde Prefecture was the location of the local government office of Yancheng Town. Mizhi County and Wubo County, which were under its jurisdiction, were both outside the town. The enemy bandits rode in and plundered the town. When the town soldiers found out, they chased them. They could not always catch up, and the enemy bandits often took advantage of the situation and left.

古文：自子俊徙镇榆林，增卫益兵，拓城置戍，攻守器毕具，遂为重镇，寇抄渐稀，军民得安耕牧焉。
现代文：自余子俊将镇迁徙到榆林，增加守卫，扩大城墙安署军队，攻守器械都俱备逐渐成为重镇，敌寇来掠夺次数渐渐少了，军民得以平安耕种放牧。
English: Since Yu Zijun moved the town to Yulin, increased the number of guards, expanded the city wall and the army of the Public Security Bureau, the attack and defense equipment have gradually become a major town, the number of enemy robberies has gradually decreased, and the military and the people have been able to cultivate and graze safely.

古文：十二年十二月移抚陕西。子俊知西安时，以居民患水泉咸苦，凿渠引城西潏河入灌，民利之。
现代文：成化十二年十二月，余子俊调抚陕西，在他任西安知府时，曾因了解到居民为水质含碱发苦不能饮用而发愁的情况，他凿渠引入城西贑河的河水，解决人民的饮水问题。
English: In December of the 12th year of Chenghua, Yu Zijun was appointed governor of Shaanxi Province. When he was the governor of Xi'an, he was troubled by the fact that the residents were unable to drink due to the water quality containing alkali. He dug a canal to introduce the river water of the Xi'an River to solve the people's drinking water problem.

古文：久而水溢无所泄。至是，乃于城西北开渠泄水，使经汉故城达渭。
现代文：时间长了渠水往外漫而无法排泄，此时，他主持在城西北开凿渠道排水，水渠流经汉代旧城到达渭水。
English: At this time, he presided over the excavation of a drainage channel in the northwest of the city, and the canal flowed through the Han Dynasty old city to Surabaya.

古文：公私益便，号 余公渠 。
现代文：对国家和百姓更加有利，号称余公渠。
English: It is more beneficial to the country and the people, and is known as the Yu Gongqu.

古文：又于泾阳凿山引水，溉田千余顷。
现代文：又在泾阳凿山引水，灌溉农田千余顷。
English: In addition, water was diverted from the mountains in Fenyang to irrigate more than 1,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：通南山道，直抵汉中，以便行旅。
现代文：打通到南山的道路，直达汉中，方便来往的旅客。
English: The road leading to Nanshan is directly connected to Hanzhong, which is convenient for travelers.

古文：学校、公署圮者悉新之。
现代文：对于毁塌破旧的学校、公署全部补修一新。
English: For the destroyed and dilapidated schools and public offices, they will all be repaired and renovated.

古文：奏免岷、河、洮三卫之戍南方者万有奇。
现代文：上奏章免除岷州、河州、洮州三卫的戍守，南方的兵卒一万多人。
English: In the last chapter of the Song Dynasty, more than ten thousand soldiers from the south were exempted from guarding Bozhou, Hezhou and Bozhou Sanwei.

古文：易置南北之更戍者六千有奇，就戍本土。
现代文：更换了南北轮戍的兵卒六千多人，让他们各自戍守本土。
English: More than six thousand soldiers were exchanged between the North and the South, so that they could each defend the mainland.

古文：岷州栗林羌为寇，子俊潜师设伏击走之。
现代文：岷州栗林羌反叛，子俊埋伏军队突然出击，将其击败逃走。
English: In the rebellion of Li Linqi in Luzhou, Zijun's ambushed army suddenly attacked, defeated and fled.

古文：十三年召为兵部尚书。
现代文：成化十三年，朝廷召还余子俊任兵部尚书。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, the imperial court summoned Yu Zijun to serve as the military secretary.

古文：奏申明条例十事，又列上军功赏格，由是中外有所遵守。
现代文：他上奏章申述明确条例十项，又列立军功悬赏等级，由此朝廷内外有章可循。
English: He clearly stated ten items of regulations in his petition, and also listed the military merit award levels, from which there are rules to follow both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：缅甸酋卜剌浪欲夺思洪发贡章地，设词请于朝。
现代文：缅甸酋长卜刺浪企图夺取思洪发、贡章地，找借口向朝廷要求。
English: Burmese chieftain Bu Gyan attempted to seize Shihongfa and the tribute land, and made excuses to the imperial court.

古文：子俊言不宜许，乃谕止之。
现代文：子俊说不能答应，朝廷谕止了卜刺浪夺地的企图。
English: Zijun said he could not agree, and the court ordered an end to Bu Gashi's attempt to seize the land.

古文：贵州巡抚陈俨等以播州苗窃发，请调湖广、广西、四川兵五万，合贵州兵会剿。
现代文：贵州巡抚陈俨等因为播州苗人暗中起事，请求调湖广、广西、四川兵五万，会同贵州兵一起围剿。
English: The governor of Guizhou, Chen Qi, and others requested the transfer of fifty thousand soldiers from Huguang, Guangxi, and Sichuan to join the Guizhou soldiers to encircle the city, because the Banshu Miao people had secretly revolted.

古文：子俊言贼在四川，而贵州请讨，是邀功也，奏寝其事。
现代文：子俊说贼在四川，而贵州请求征讨，是为邀功，上奏章止息这件事。
English: Zijun said that the thief was in Sichuan, and Guizhou's request to collect the money was to solicit contributions, and to stop the matter.

古文：初，子俊论陈钺掩杀贡夷罪，帝以汪直故宥之。
现代文：当初，子俊疏论陈钺击杀进贡的夷人之罪，宪宗由于汪直的缘故宽恕陈钺。
English: At first, Zijun was vague about Chen Xi's crime of killing the tribute-paying barbarians, but Emperor Xianzong forgave Chen Xi for Wang Zhi's sake.

古文：钺多方构子俊于直，会母忧归，得免。
现代文：陈钺在汪直面前多方陷害余子俊，时逢余子俊因母亲去世回家守丧，才免遭陷害。
English: Chen Hao framed Yu Zijun in many ways in front of Wang Zhi, and when Yu Zijun went home to mourn his mother's death, he was only saved from being framed.

古文：子俊之筑边墙也，或疑沙土易倾，寇至未可恃。
现代文：余子俊建造的榆林边镇城墙，有人怀疑用沙土建造容易倒塌，敌寇来不能依靠。
English: Some people suspect that the city wall of Yulin Town built by Yu Zijun, which was built with sand, is easy to collapse, and cannot be relied on by enemy raiders.

古文：至十八年，寇入犯，许宁等逐之。寇扼于墙堑，散漫不得出，遂大衄，边人益思子俊功。
现代文：到成化十八年，寇入侵内地，许宁等追逐的敌寇被城墙濠沟所困，四处乱跑而出不了城，于是被打得大败，边镇的人更加思念子俊的功劳。
English: In the eighteenth year of Chenghua, the bandits invaded the inland, and the enemy bandits pursued by Xu Ning and others were trapped by the city wall and ditch. They ran around and could not get out of the city, so they were defeated. The people of the border town thought more about Zijun's achievements.

古文：服阕，拜户部尚书，寻加太子太保。
现代文：三年服满，宪宗授他户部尚书，不久加封太子太保。
English: After three years of service, Gensong awarded him the title of household minister, and he was soon given the title of crown prince and grand tutor.

古文：二十年命兼左副都御史，总督大同、宣府军务。
现代文：成化二十年，兼任左副都御史，总督大同、宣府的军务。
English: Twenty years later, he also served as the Left Vice-Governor of the Capital, the Governor of Datong, and the Military Affairs of Xuanfu.

古文：其冬还朝。
现代文：这年冬天返回朝廷。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court in the winter of that year.

古文：明年正月，星变，陈时弊八事，帝多采纳。
现代文：第二年正月，星相有变异，余子俊陈述时弊八种，宪宗大多采纳。
English: In the first month of the second year, there was a change in the astrological signs, and when Yu Zijun made a report, there were eight kinds of defects, most of which were adopted by the Constitutional Church.

古文：未几，复出行边。
现代文：没多久，又到边境巡视。
English: It didn't take long before they were patrolling the border again.

古文：初，子俊巡历宣、大，请以延绥边墙法行之两镇，因岁歉而止。
现代文：当初余子俊巡视宣府大同两镇，要求以延绥边墙法在两镇推行，因年成歉收而停止。
English: At first, Yu Zijun toured the two towns of Datong in Xuanfu, demanding that the extension of the border wall method be implemented in the two towns, which was stopped due to poor harvest.

古文：比复出，锐欲行之。言东起四海冶，西抵黄河，延袤千三百余里，旧有墩百七十，应增筑四百四十，墩高广皆三丈，计役夫八万六千，数月可成。
现代文：到这次他又巡视边境，他坚决要推行，他说东起四海治，西抵黄河，连绵一千三百余里，旧有墩一百七十个，应增建四百四十个，墩高宽都是三丈，估计需要劳动人手八万六千人，几个月可以完成。
English: This time, he inspected the border again, and he was determined to carry it out. He said that from the east to the four seas, and from the west to the Yellow River, there would be a continuous length of more than 1,300 miles. Previously, there were 770 miles, and 440 miles should be added. The height and width of the fence were three meters. It was estimated that it would require 86,000 laborers, and it could be completed in a few months.

古文：诏明年四月即工。然是时，岁比不登，公私耗敝，骤兴大役，上下难之。
现代文：宪宗下诏书同意第二年四月开工，然而到了那个时候，年成不好，国家和百姓都不宽裕，陡然兴建大工程，上下都感到困难。
English: Emperor Gensong issued an edict approving the start of construction in April of the following year. However, by that time, the year was not going well, the country and the people were not well off, and the sudden construction of a large project was difficult for everyone.

古文：子俊又欲责成于边臣，而己不亲其事。
现代文：子俊又想责成边臣去完成，而自己不亲自管这件事，由此招来毁谤和议论。
English: Zijun also wanted to order the vassal to complete it, but he did not personally manage the matter, thus inviting slander and discussion.

古文：谤议由是起。至冬，疏请还京。帝入蜚语，命改左都御史，巡抚大同。
现代文：到冬天，他上疏请求还京，宪宗听信谣言，改任他为左都御史，抚巡大同。
English: By the winter, he petitioned Shangsu to return to Beijing, and upon hearing the rumor, Kenzong appointed him as the governor of the Left Capital and the governor of Datong.

古文：中官韦敬谗子俊假修边多侵耗，又劾子俊私恩怨，易将帅。
现代文：宦官韦敬进谗言说子俊借修边墙侵吞财物，又弹劾他以私人恩怨换将帅。
English: The eunuch Wei Jingjin said that Zijun borrowed money to repair the border wall and embezzled property, and also impeached him for replacing the general with a personal grudge.

古文：兵部侍郎阮勤等为白。帝怒，让勤等。
现代文：兵部侍郎阮勤等为他辩白，宪宗发怒，责备阮勤等。
English: The attendant of the military department, Nguyn Qun, and others defended him, but Khánh Tông became angry and blamed Nguyn Qun and others.

古文：而给事、御史复交章劾，中朝多欲倾子俊。
现代文：而给事中、御史又纷纷呈上奏章弹劾，宦官大半想搞垮子俊。
English: However, in the middle of the matter, the Imperial Historian presented the impeachment report one after another, and most of the eunuchs wanted to bring down Shih Chun.

古文：工部侍郎杜谦等往勘，平情按之。还奏易置将帅如勤等言，所费无私。
现代文：工部侍郎杜谦等前往调查，按实事情况公平地对待，返京向朝廷奏报换置将帅是同阮勤说的情况相符，没有侵吞建边墙的费用。
English: Du Qian, the secretary of the works department, and others went to investigate and treated them fairly according to the actual situation. They returned to Beijing to report to the imperial court that the replacement of the general was consistent with the situation said by Ruan Qin, and there was no embezzlement of the cost of building the border wall.

古文：然为银百五十万，米菽二百三十万，耗财烦民，不得无罪。
现代文：然而花费银一百五十万两、米豆二百三十万石。耗费财物，劳动百姓，不能说没有罪。
English: However, spending one and a half million taels of silver and 2.3 million koku of rice and beans, expending wealth and laboring the people, cannot be said to be without sin.

古文：遂落太子太保，致仕去，时二十二年二月也。
现代文：于是削去太子太保职，退休回家，这时是成化二十二年二月。
English: So he cut short his term of service as crown prince and retired to his home, which was in February 1922.

古文：明年正月，兵部缺尚书。帝悟子俊无罪，复召任之，仍加太子太保。
现代文：第二年正月，兵部缺尚书，宪宗醒悟到子俊无罪，又召他回来任职，仍加封太子太保。
English: In the first month of the second year, there was a shortage of officers in the military department, and Kenzong realized that Zijun was not guilty, and called him back to office, still adding the title of Crown Prince.

古文：孝宗嗣位，以先朝老臣，待之弥厚。
现代文：明孝宗继位，因余子俊是先朝老臣，对他更加尊敬。
English: As the successor of Akitaka Zong, he was more respected because Yuzihun was an old retainer of the previous dynasty.

古文：弘治元年疏陈十事，已，又上边防七事，帝多允行。
现代文：弘治元年，他上疏陈述十件事，完后又陈述边防七件事，孝宗大多同意实行。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, he made a summary statement of ten matters, and after that he made a statement of seven border defense matters, and most of the Xiaozong agreed to implement them.

古文：明年，疾亟，犹手削奏稿，陈救荒弭盗之策，甫得请而卒，年六十一。
现代文：第二年，余子俊病重，还亲自撰写奏稿，陈述救荒息盗的办法。刚刚得到朝廷的允准就去世了，享年六十一岁。
English: In the following year, Yu Zijun fell seriously ill. He also personally wrote a report outlining ways to save the country from ruin. He had just received permission from the imperial court when he died at the age of 61.

古文：赠太保，谥肃敏。
现代文：追赠太保，谥号肃敏。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo, and his posthumous name was Shumin.

古文：子俊沉毅寡言，有伟略。
现代文：子俊深沉、刚毅，寡于言词，有谋略。
English: Zojun is profound, strong-willed, not given to words, and has a strategy.

古文：凡奏疏公移，必自属草，每夜分方寝。
现代文：凡是奏章疏议公文，必定亲自起草。
English: Any official document that is not a written record must be drafted in person.

古文：尝曰： 大臣谋国，当身任利害，岂得远怨市恩为自全计。 
现代文：每天到半夜才睡，他曾说： 大臣为国，应当不考虑自身利害关系，怎能躲避埋怨换取恩惠，为保全自己作考虑？ 
English: He did not sleep until midnight every day. He once said: "A minister, as a country, should not consider his own interests. How can he avoid complaining in exchange for favors and consider his own safety?

古文：筑墩台十四所，治垣堑三十余里。
现代文：因此榆林边墙工程才开始，怨言诽谤众起，子俊态度更坚决，终于大功告成，有利于后世几代人。
English: Therefore, the Yulin Border Wall Project began, complaints and slander arose, Zijun's attitude was more resolute, and finally the great work was completed, which is beneficial to future generations.

古文：岁饥，奏免七府租四十余万石。入为侍郎，调南京刑部。
现代文：余子俊孝顺父母、友爱兄弟，为母丧守服时，要儿子余蜫不参加会试，他说 ：虽然律令上无这条，但我于心不忍。 
English: As a dutiful son and a loving brother, he asked his son, Yu Xi, not to take part in the examination when he was in uniform for his mother's funeral. He said, "Although there is no such rule in the law, I cannot bear it in my heart."

古文：蛮邦人著声中国者，勤为最。朱英，字时杰，桂阳人。
现代文：本当荫庇封儿子官职，他改为荫庇封弟弟官职。朱英，字时杰，桂阳人。
English: He changed the official position of his son to that of his younger brother. Zhu Ying, also known as Shi Jie, was from Guiyang.

古文：五岁而孤。
现代文：五岁时父亲去世。
English: His father died when he was five.

古文：力学，举正统十年进士，授御史。
现代文：学习勤奋，考取正统十年进士，授御史职位。
English: Studying diligently, he was awarded the title of "Orthodox Ten-Year Young Scholar" and the post of "Imperial Historian."

古文：浙、闽盗起，简御史十三人与中官分守诸府，英守处州。而叶宗留党四出剽掠，处州道梗。
现代文：浙江、福州府闽县大规模的贫民暴乱，朝廷选拔御史十三人与宦官分守各府，朱英守处州，而叶宗留一伙四出劫掠，处州道路阻塞。
English: Large-scale poor people's riots in Handan County, Zhejiang and Fuzhou Prefectures. The imperial court selected thirteen people and eunuchs to guard the various prefectures. Zhu Ying guarded Handan, while Ye Zongrui's group went on a looting spree and blocked the roads of Handan.

古文：英间道驰至，抚降甚众，戮贼首周明松等，贼散去乃还。
现代文：朱英从小路赶到，按抚招降甚多，杀叛乱首领周明松等人，叛乱分子四处逃走，朱英才班师回营。
English: Zhu Ying arrived from a small road, promoted many subordinates, killed the rebel leader Zhou Mingsong and others, the rebels fled everywhere, and Zhu Yingcai's division returned to the camp.

古文：景泰初，御史王豪尝以勘陈循争地事，忤循，为所讦。
现代文：景泰初年，御史王豪曾经因为调查陈循争地的事，得罪了陈循，被陈循所攻击。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, Wang Hao, the imperial historian, offended Chen Xujiu and was attacked by Chen Xujiu because he had investigated the dispute between Chen Xujiu and Wang Hao.

古文：至是，循草诏，言风宪官被讦者，虽经赦宥，悉与外除。
现代文：此时，陈循起草诏书，暗示说凡是受到揭发的御史，虽然经过救免宽恕，全都改任地方职务。
English: At this time, Chen Cui began to draft an edict, suggesting that all imperial histories that had been exposed, although they had been saved and pardoned, would all be transferred to local posts.

古文：于是豪当改知县，英言： 若如诏书，则凡遭御史抨击之人，皆将挟仇诬讦，而御史愈缄默不言矣。 
现代文：这样王豪应当改任知县，朱英上奏章说： 如果像诏书这要处理，那么凡是遭到御史抨击的人都将怀着私仇诬陷攻击，而御史愈来愈缄默不敢说直话。 
English: In this way, Wang Hao should be reassigned to Zhixian, Zhu Ying said in his report: If this is to be handled like an edict, then anyone who is criticized by the imperial historian will be attacked with personal hatred, and the imperial historian will become more and more silent and dare not speak frankly.

古文：章下法司，请如英言，乃复豪职。
现代文：奏章下到掌管司法刑狱的官署，也要求接受朱英的意见，于是仍恢复王豪御史职位。
English: Wang Hao was reinstated to the post of imperial historian after he sent a petition to the government office in charge of the judicial prison, requesting that they also accept Zhu Ying's opinion.

古文：未几，出为广东右参议。过家省母，橐中惟赐金十两。
现代文：不久，朱英被调任广东右参议，路过家乡探望母亲，口袋里只有赐金十两。
English: Soon after, Zhu Ying was transferred to the post of Guangdong Right Counselor, and he passed by his hometown to visit his mother, with only ten taels of gold in his pocket.

古文：抵任，抚凋瘵流亡。
现代文：到任后，抚慰流亡百姓，关心百姓疾苦。
English: After taking office, he comforted the exiled people and was concerned about the hardships of the people.

古文：立均徭法，十岁一更，民称便。
现代文：建立均徭法，十年一换，人民都觉得便利。
English: It is convenient for the people to establish the law of equal weight, which is changed once every ten years.

古文：天顺初，两广贼愈炽，诸将多滥杀冒功。巡抚叶盛属英督察。
现代文：天顺初年，两广叛乱活动愈来愈厉害，诸将多滥杀无辜百姓冒领功劳，巡抚叶盛委托朱英督察。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the rebellion activities of the two regions became more and more severe. Many generals killed innocent people and took credit for it. The governor Ye Sheng commissioned Zhu Ying as an inspector.

古文：参将范信诬宋泰、永平二乡民为贼，屠戮殆尽，又欲屠进城乡。英驰讯，悉纵去。
现代文：参将范信诬称宋泰、永平二乡百姓做贼，几乎将村民全部屠杀，又要血洗进城乡，朱英赶去查讯实情后，将被虏百姓全部放走。
English: General Fan Xin falsely called the people of Song Tai and Yongping Second Township thieves, almost all the villagers were slaughtered, and they wanted to wash the blood into the city and countryside. After Zhu Ying rushed to investigate the facts, all the captured people were released.

古文：信忿，留师不还。
现代文：范信十分怨恨，屯兵不还。
English: Fan Xin was very resentful and did not return the troops.

古文：英密请于盛，檄信班师，一方始靖。
现代文：朱英秘密向叶盛求援，叶盛命范信班师。此地方才开始安定。
English: Zhu Ying secretly appealed to Ye Sheng for help, and Ye Sheng ordered Fan Xin to become a teacher. Only then did the region begin to stabilize.

古文：潮州贼罗刘宁等流劫远近，屡挫官兵。英会师破灭之。还所掠人口数千，别置一营以处妇女，人莫敢犯。
现代文：潮州叛乱分子罗刘宁等流窜抢掠，屡次挫败官兵，朱英汇合军队消灭之，夺回所掠人口数千人，单独置一营安置妇女，无人敢侵犯。
English: Chaozhou rebels Luo Liu Ning and others looted and plundered, repeatedly defeating officers and soldiers. Zhu Ying combined forces to destroy them, recaptured thousands of plundered people, and set up a separate battalion to resettle women. No one dared to encroach.

古文：官参议十年，进右参政。
现代文：朱英任参议官职十年，升为右参政。
English: Zhu Ying served as a senator for ten years and rose to become a right-wing politician.

古文：遭母忧。成化初服阕，补陕西。
现代文：母亲去世，成化初年服丧期满，补任陕西。
English: After the death of his mother, Chenghua's first year of mourning period expired, and he was appointed to Shaanxi Province.

古文：大军讨满四，英主馈饷有功。
现代文：官军大举征讨满四，他掌管运输军粮有功。
English: He was in charge of the transportation of army rations.

古文：历福建、陕西左、右布政使，皆推行均徭法。
现代文：历任福建、陕西左、右布政使，都推行均徭法。
English: Successive Fujian and Shaanxi left and right cloth political envoys have all implemented the equalization method.

古文：十年以右副都御史巡抚甘肃，先后陈安边二十八事。
现代文：成化十年，以右副都御史职务巡抚甘肃，先后陈述安定边防二十八件事。
English: In the past ten years, with the title of Right Vice-Governor of Gansu, he has successively stated 28 matters related to the stabilization of border defense.

古文：其请徙居戎、安流离、简贡使，于时务尤切。
现代文：其中请求迁徙定居的戎人，安置流转、离散人员，减少进贡使臣，这些都十分切中当时的事务。
English: Among them, the request for the emigration and settlement of eunuchs, the resettlement of displaced and dispersed people, and the reduction of the tribute of envoys were all very relevant to the affairs of the time.

古文：明年冬，两广总督吴琛卒，廷议以英前在广东有威信，遂以代琛。
现代文：第二年冬天，两广总督吴琛去世，因为朱英以前在广东有威信，廷臣推选他代替吴琛任两广总督。
English: In the winter of the following year, Wu Xuan, the governor of the two provinces, died. Because Zhu Ying had previously enjoyed prestige in Guangdong, the courtiers elected him to replace Wu Xuan as governor of the two provinces.

古文：自韩雍大征以来，将帅喜邀功，利俘掠，名为 雕剿 。
现代文：自从韩雍大征讨以来，将帅喜好邀功，以俘掠为利，称为 雕剿 。
English: Since the Han and Yong Dynasty's great campaign, the general liked to solicit feats of valor and take advantage of capture and plunder, which was called "carving."

古文：英至，镇以宁静，约饬将士。毋得张贼声势，妄请用师。
现代文：朱英来后，以安定清静为原则，约束告诫将士，不得为叛乱者夸大声势，胡乱出兵。
English: After Zhu Ying came to power, he took the principle of stability and tranquility as his guiding principle, restrained and admonished soldiers, and forbade them from boasting loudly about the insurgents and sending out troops indiscriminately.

古文：招抚瑶、僮效顺者，定为编户，给复三年。于是马平、阳朔、苍梧诸县蛮悉望风附。
现代文：招抚瑶族、僮族归顺者，定为编户，免除三年徭役，于是马平、阳朔、苍梧诸县的少数民族全都望风归附。
English: The ethnic minorities of Ma Ping, Yangshuo, and Cangwu counties all hoped for annexation.

古文：而荔波贼李公主有众数万，久负固，亦遣子纳款。为置永安州处之，俾其子孙世吏目。
现代文：而且荔波叛乱者李公主有几万人马，长期凭恃地势险固，也派儿子归顺，朱英将他们安置在永安州居住，使他的子孙世代为吏目。
English: Moreover, Li Bo's rebel, Princess Li, had tens of thousands of horses, and for a long time she was able to maintain a precarious position. She also sent her sons to submit. Zhu Ying resettled them in Yongan Prefecture, so that his children and grandchildren would become officials.

古文：自是归附日众，凡为户四万三千有奇，口十五万有奇。
现代文：以此归附的一天比一天多，总共四万三千多户，十五万余人，宪宗十分赞赏。
English: With this, the number of households added to the register is increasing day by day. In total, there are more than 43,000 households and more than 150,000 people, which is greatly appreciated by Kenzong.

古文：帝甚嘉之。镇守中官与督抚、总兵官坐次，中官居中，总督居总兵官左。
现代文：镇守宦官与督抚、总兵官的坐次排列是宦官居中，总督居于总兵官左。
English: The eunuchs were seated in the middle, and the governor was seated to the left of the commander.

古文：时总兵官陈政以伯爵欲抑英居右，英不可，奏乞裁定。命解英总督，止为巡抚，居政下。
现代文：这时总兵官陈政因为有伯爵封号想抑朱英居右，朱英不答应，奏请朝廷裁定，朝廷下令解除朱英总督职务，以巡抚职，居于陈政之下。
English: At this time, the chief military officer Chen Zheng wanted to keep Zhu Ying in the right because he had the title of count. Zhu Ying did not agree and petitioned the court for a ruling. The court ordered the removal of Zhu Ying from the post of governor and placed him under Chen Zheng as an inspector.

古文：尚书余子俊言英招徕功多，当增秩褒赏，乃反削其事权，恐无以镇诸蛮。
现代文：尚书余子俊说朱英招之来归附者众多，本应当增加俸禄给予奖赏，却反而削减其权力，只怕无法控制各少数民族。
English: Shangshu Yu Zijun said that Zhu Ying had recruited a large number of adherents, and that he should have increased the salary and given rewards, but instead reduced his power, fearing that he would not be able to control the ethnic minorities.

古文：乃擢英右都御史仍总督，位次如故。
现代文：于是提升朱英为右都御史，仍任总督，坐次如前。
English: As a result, Zhu Ying was promoted to the post of the Right Capital Imperial Historian, and he still served as the governor, as before.

古文：田州酋黄明烝其知府岑溥祖母，欲杀溥。溥出走思恩，明因肆屠戮。
现代文：田州酋长黄明奸其知府岑溥祖母，要杀岑溥，岑溥逃到思恩，黄明于是大肆屠杀。
English: The chieftain of Tianzhou, Huang Ming, who was a traitor to his governor and grandmother, wanted to kill her, but she fled to Sion, whereupon Huang Ming carried out a large-scale massacre.

古文：英将进讨，檄溥族人恩城知州岑钦杀明雪耻。钦遂诛明并其族属，传首军门。
现代文：朱英带领军队去征讨，传檄岑溥族人思恩城知州岑钦杀黄明雪耻，岑钦就诛杀黄明及族属，将首级挂在军营之门示众。
English: Zhu Ying led the army to investigate. It was rumored that the Yi people of Siancheng, Zhizhou and Qincheng killed Huang Ming and his relatives. Qincheng then killed Huang Ming and his relatives, and hung their heads on the gate of the military camp for the public to see.

古文：英淳厚，然持法无所假借。与市舶中官韦眷忤，眷摭奏英专权玩贼。浔州知府史芳以事见责，亦讦英奸贪欺罔。
现代文：朱英质朴、敦厚，然而执法从不宽容，与管理市舶贸易宦官韦眷相抵触，韦眷择其若干事例奏告朱英专权轻视贼人，氵寻州知府史芳因犯事曾被朱英责备，也攻击朱英奸诈、贪婪、欺骗蒙蔽。
English: Zhu Ying is simple and dignified, but law enforcement is never tolerant, and conflicts with the eunuch Wei Yan, who manages the city's shipping trade. Wei Yan chose several cases to report to Zhu Ying's authority to despise thieves, and the governor of Shihang was blamed by Zhu Ying for the crime, and also attacked Zhu Ying for treachery, greed, and deception.

古文：按皆无验，乃镌芳二官，谕眷协和共事。
现代文：调查都无证据，就降史芳官职二级，告诫韦眷与朱英融洽共事。
English: As there was no evidence in the investigation, he downgraded Shi Fang's official position to the second level and warned Wei Yan to work harmoniously with Zhu Ying.

古文：十六年，交阯攻老挝，议者恐其内寇，诏问英处置之宜。英对言： 彼不过争瓯脱耳，谕之当自悔惧。 
现代文：成化十六年，交趾进攻老挝，朝廷有人担心交趾借机入侵，皇帝问朱英处置的办法，朱英回答说： 那不过是为争边界而已，警告他们，他们就一定会恐惧、改悔。 
English: In 16th year of Chenghua, the Chinese invaded Laos. Some people in the imperial court were worried that the Chinese would use the opportunity to invade. The emperor asked Zhu Ying what to do. Zhu Ying replied, "It was just a border dispute. If you warn them, they will be afraid and repent."

古文：帝从其言，果上表谢。
现代文：宪宗接受朱英的意见，交趾果然上表道歉。
English: Kenzong accepted Zhu Ying's opinion, and Kojima apologized.

古文：浔、梧、高、廉贼起，偕政等分道击之。再战，俘斩甚众。十九年，桂林平乐蛮攻城杀将，英、政复分兵十二道击破之。
现代文：氵寻州、梧州、高州、廉州发生叛乱，朱英与陈政等分兵击贼，二次交战，俘虏斩杀很多，十九年，桂林平乐蛮攻城杀将，朱英、陈政又分兵十二路将其击败。
English: There were rebellions in Guizhou, Wuzhou, Gaozhou, and Lianzhou. Zhu Ying and Chen Zheng led a detachment of soldiers to fight against the bandits. They fought twice and killed many captives. In 19th year, Guilin Pingle brutally attacked the city and killed the general. Zhu Ying and Chen Zheng led another detachment of soldiers to defeat him in twelve ways.

古文：明年入掌都察院事，寻加太子少保。
现代文：第二年掌管都察院事，不久加封太子太保。
English: In the second year, he was put in charge of the affairs of the Duza Academy, and soon he was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Protector.

古文：又明年正月，星变，疏陈八事：请禁边将节旦献马；镇守中官、武将不得私立庄田，侵夺官地；烧丹符咒左道之人，当置重典；四方分守监枪内官勿进贡品物；罢撤仓场、马房、上林苑增设内侍；召还建言得罪诸臣；清内府收白粮积弊；治奸民投献庄田及贵戚受献者罪。
现代文：又过一年正月，星相有异变，上疏陈述八件事：请求禁止边将节日、元旦献马；镇守宦官、武将不得私立庄田，侵夺官地；对炼丹、搞符咒歪门邪道的人，应当施以重法；四方分守监仓内官不要进贡物品；撤去仓场、马房、上林苑增设的内侍；召还因发表意见而得罪朝廷的诸臣；清理内府收白粮的积弊；治奸民献送庄田以及贵戚中受献者的罪。
English: In the first month of the next year, there was a change in the stars, and eight things were reported by Shang Shou: a request was made to prohibit the commander of the frontier from offering horses on festivals and New Year's Day; town guards, eunuchs, and military commanders were not allowed to have private shodati and encroach on official land; those who were engaged in alchemy and magic spells should be punished with heavy laws; officials in charge of guarding warehouses in the four directions were not allowed to receive tribute items; the storage yard, stable, and palace attendants added to Shanglin Court were removed; court officials who had offended the court by expressing their opinions were recalled; the

古文：权幸皆不便，执政多持之不行。英造内阁力争，竟不能尽从也。
现代文：这对于有权势、受宠幸的人都不利，主持政务的人多反对实行，朱英到内阁去力争，终究不能全部接受。
English: This is not good for the powerful and favored people. Many people who preside over government affairs oppose the implementation. Zhu Ying went to the cabinet to fight for it. After all, it cannot be accepted in its entirety.

古文：时流民集京师者多，英请人给米月三斗，幼者半之，报许。
现代文：这时流民聚集京师的人很多，朱英请求每人每月供应米三斗，幼儿减半，朝廷答复准行。
English: At this time, there were a lot of people from the Beijing Division gathered by the exiles. Zhu Ying requested that each person be supplied with three buckets of rice per month, and that the number of children be reduced by half. The imperial court replied that they were allowed to go.

古文：其年秋卒。赠太子太保。
现代文：这年秋末，赠封太子太保。
English: At the end of the autumn of that year, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：英为总督承韩雍、吴琛后。雍虽有大功，恢廓自奉，赠遗过侈，有司困供亿，公私耗竭；而琛务谨廉；至英益持清节，仅携一苍头之官。
现代文：朱英承韩雍、吴琛之后任职总督，韩雍虽有大功，但出手大方，馈赠过于奢侈，有关部门为巨量供应而为难，公私财物耗费殆尽。而吴琛致力谨慎清廉，到朱英更保持高尚的节操，仅携带一个仆人赴任。
English: Zhu Ying succeeded Han Yong and Wu Gan as governor. Although Han Yong had great achievements, he was generous with his gifts. The gifts were too extravagant. The relevant departments were overwhelmed by the huge supply, and the public and private assets were exhausted. Wu Gan was committed to prudence and integrity, and he maintained a high level of discipline to Zhu Ying. He only brought one servant with him to the post.

古文：先后屡赐玺书、金币，英藏玺书，贮金币于库。
现代文：前后屡次赐给他的玺书、黄金、纸币，朱英将玺书收藏起来，把黄金、纸币交给国库。
English: Zhu Ying collected the rare books, gold, and paper money that were repeatedly given to him, and gave the gold and paper money to the state treasury.

古文：其威望不及雍，而惠泽过之。
现代文：他的威望不及韩雍，而恩泽超过韩雍。
English: His prestige is not as high as that of Han Yong, but his favor exceeds that of Han Yong.

古文：在甘肃积军储三十万两，广四十余万，皆不以闻。
现代文：他在甘肃积储三万两银子，在广东积储四十万两银子，都没往外宣传。
English: He accumulated thirty thousand taels of silver in Gansu and four hundred thousand taels of silver in Guangdong, but did not publicize them.

古文：或问之，答曰： 此边臣常分，何足言。 
现代文：有人问起这件事，他回答说： 这是边臣应该做的，没什么值得说。 
English: When asked about it, he replied, "It's what a vassal should do, there's nothing to say."

古文：秦纮，字世缨，单人。
现代文：人们佩服他识大体。正德年间，追赠谥号恭简。秦纮，字世缨，山东单县人。
English: People admired his general knowledge. During the Zhengde era, he was posthumously awarded the posthumous names of Qin Zhen, Qin Zhen, and Shixian Zhen. He was from Shan County in Shandong.

古文：景泰二年进士。授南京御史。
现代文：景泰二年考中进士，授南京御史职务。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to a member of the middle school in the second year of the examination, and was given the post of Nanjing Imperial Historian.

古文：劾治内官傅锁儿罪，谏止江南采翠毛、鱼等使。权贵忌之，蜚语闻。会考察，坐谪湖广驿丞。
现代文：弹劾处理内官傅锁儿的罪行，进谏停止江南采翠色羽毛和香草等差遣，权贵很忌恨他，以流言蜚语攻击他，正好碰上考察官吏，他因此被贬职任湖广驿丞。
English: Impeachment dealt with the crimes of the internal affairs officer Fu Zhao, and Jin Xuan stopped sending Jiangnan to pick green feathers and herbs. The powerful hated him very much and attacked him with gossip. He just happened to meet the inspection officials, so he was demoted to the post of Hukang Zhenzhen.

古文：天顺初，以御史练纲荐，迁雄县知县。奉御杜坚捕天鹅暴横，纮执杖其从者，坐下诏狱。
现代文：天顺初年，经御史练纲推荐，升为雄县知县，奉御使杜坚肆意残暴地捕捉天鹅，秦纮杖责其随从，获罪被关进诏狱。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was promoted to Xiongxian Zhixian through the recommendation of the history training program. Du Jian was ordered to capture the swan in a wanton and cruel manner, Qin Jianjie was ordered to follow him, and he was convicted and imprisoned.

古文：民五千诣阙讼，乃调知府谷。
现代文：百姓五千人到皇宫前的楼台前为他辩冤，就调任他任府谷知县。
English: Five thousand people came to the platform in front of the Imperial Palace to plead his case, and he was transferred to Fuchigata.

古文：宪宗即位，迁葭州知州，调秦州。母丧去官，州人乞借纮，服阕还故任。
现代文：宪宗即位，升葭州知州，调任秦州，母丧离官，州人请求留住秦纮，秦纮服满回任旧职。
English: Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, Xizhou was promoted to Zhizhou, Qinzhou was transferred to Qinzhou, his mother died and he left his post, the people of Qinzhou requested that Qin Zang be retained, and Qin Zang returned to his old post after serving his full term.

古文：寻擢巩昌知府，改西安，迁陕西右参政。
现代文：不久提升为巩县知府，调换到西安，升为陕西右参政。
English: He was soon promoted to governor of Gong County, transferred to Xi'an, and promoted to the right to participate in politics in Shaanxi.

古文：岷州番乱，提兵三千破之，进俸一级。
现代文：岷州少数民族叛乱，他率领三千人将其击败，增加一级俸禄。
English: He led three thousand people to defeat the Zhangzhou ethnic minority rebellion and increase the first-class salary.

古文：成化十三年擢右佥都御史，巡抚山西，奏镇国将军奇涧等罪。奇涧父庆成王钟镒为奏辩，且诬纮。
现代文：成化十三年，提升为右佥都御史，巡抚山西，奏告镇国将军奇涧等罪行，奇涧父亲庆成王奇钟镒上奏章为儿辩护，并且诬陷秦纮。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, he was promoted to the right-hand man of the capital, the governor of Shanxi, and reported to the general of the town, Qichen, and other crimes. Qichen's father, Qingcheng Wang Qichen, defended his son and framed Qin Zhen.

古文：帝重违王意，逮纮下法司治。
现代文：宪宗难违庆成王的意愿，将秦纮逮捕交法司处理，事情查无证据。
English: Kenzong could not go against Qingcheng Wang's wishes and had Qin Yao arrested and handed over to the legal department for handling. There was no evidence to investigate the matter.

古文：事皆无验，而内官尚亨籍纮家，以所得敝衣数事奏。帝叹曰： 纮贫一至此耶？ 
现代文：而内宫尚亨抄秦纮的家，将仅得几件破旧衣服等事奏告皇帝，宪宗叹息地说 ：秦纮清贫竟到如此地步吗？ 
English: However, Shang Heng of the Inner Court copied Qin Hui's family and reported to the emperor that he had only received a few worn-out clothes and other things. Xianzong said with a sigh: Has Qin Hui's poverty really reached such a level?

古文：赐钞万贯旌之。
现代文：赐秦纮万贯纸币嘉奖。
English: Awarded the Qin Hui Banknote Award.

古文：于是夺奇涧等三人爵，王亦削禄三之一，而改纮抚河南。寻复调宣府。
现代文：于是削去奇涧等三人爵位，庆成王也减去三分之一的俸禄，而改秦纮巡抚河南，不久又调任宣府。
English: As a result, the three knighthoods of Qichen and others were removed, and the salary of King Qingcheng was also reduced by one-third, and he was replaced by Qin Xuan as the governor of Henan Province, and was soon transferred to Xuanfu.

古文：小王子数万骑寇大同，长驱入顺圣川，掠宣府境。
现代文：蒙古小王子部数万骑兵入侵大同，长驱直入顺圣川，劫掠宣府地区。
English: Tens of thousands of cavalrymen of the Mongolian Little Prince invaded Datong, drove straight into the Shunsheng River, and looted the Xuanfu area.

古文：纮与总兵官周玉等邀击，遁去。
现代文：秦纮与总兵官周玉等举兵阻击，小王子被打败逃走。
English: Qin Yu and the general officer Zhou Yu raised an army to resist, and the little prince was defeated and fled.

古文：寻入掠兴宁口，连战却之，追还所掠，玺书劳焉。
现代文：不久劫掠兴宁口，秦纮等又与之接连交战，敌人退去，追还其所抢掠的物资，宪宗下玺书慰劳。
English: Soon after, Xingningkou was looted and plundered, and Qin Hui and others fought with them one after another. The enemy retreated, recovered the materials they had looted, and Emperor Xianzong sent a letter of condolence.

古文：进左佥都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：升他为左佥都御史，巡抚如故。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zuoying Metropolitan Historian, and remained as the governor.

古文：未几，召还理院事，迁户部右侍郎。
现代文：没过多久，召回任理院事，调升户部右侍郎。
English: Not long after, he was recalled to the position of director of the academy and promoted to the position of the right hand man of the household.

古文：万安逐尹旻，诬纮旻党，降广西右参政。
现代文：万安赶走尹，诬陷秦纮与尹同党，降秦纮为广西右参政。
English: Wan'an chased away Yin, framed Qin Hui as a member of the same party as Yin, and demoted Qin Hui to be a right-wing politician in Guangxi.

古文：进福建左布政使。
现代文：秦纮后升为福建左布政使。
English: After Qin Hui, he was promoted to Fujian Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：弘治元年以王恕荐，擢左副都御史，督漕运。
现代文：弘治元年，由王恕推荐，提升为左副都御史，监督漕运。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, recommended by Wang Shou, he was promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital, supervising rowing.

古文：明年三月进右都御史，总督两广军务。奏言： 中官、武将总镇两广者，率纵私人扰商贾，高居私家。擅理公事，贼杀不辜，交通土官为奸利。
现代文：第二年三月升右都御史，总督两广军务，他奏道 ：宦官、武将统领，镇守两广的，都纵容家臣骚扰商贾，以私家仆人身份，擅自干涉公事，残杀无辜，勾结土官以求得到好处。
English: In March of the following year, when he was promoted to the position of Metropolitan of the Right and Governor of the Two Provinces, he wrote: "The eunuchs, military commanders, and town guards of the Two Provinces all tolerated their vassals harassing merchants, interfering in public affairs without authorization, killing innocents, and colluding with local officials in order to obtain benefits, using their status as private servants.

古文：而天下镇守官皆得擅执军职，受民讼，非制，请严禁绝。
现代文：而天下镇守官都擅自掌握军队职责，接受民间诉讼，这些与制度不符，请严加禁绝。
English: However, town guards all over the world are taking control of military duties without authorization and accepting civil lawsuits. These are inconsistent with the system and should be strictly prohibited.

古文：总镇府故有赏功所，岁储金钱数万，费出无经，宜从都御史勾稽。
现代文：总镇府原有赏功所，每年积储金钱数万，花费无法度，应听从都御史考核。
English: The general town government should listen to the assessment of the prefectural government. The prefectural government has accumulated tens of thousands of money every year, and the expenditure is excessive.

古文：广、潮、南、韶多盗，当设社学，编保甲，以绝盗源。 
现代文：广州、潮州、南雄、韶州有很多盗贼，应该设立社学，编制保甲，以此断绝盗贼之源。 
English: There are many thieves in Guangzhou, Chaozhou, Nanxiong, and Zhangzhou. It is necessary to set up social studies and armour maintenance to cut off the source of thieves.

古文：帝悉从其请。
现代文：孝宗全都允准。
English: The emperor complied with all of these requests.

古文：恩城知州岑钦攻逐田州知府岑溥，与泗城知州岑应分据其地。纮入田州逐走钦，还溥于府，留官军戍之，乱遂定。
现代文：恩城知州岑钦进攻田州，赶走田州知府岑溥，与泗城知州岑应分据其地，秦纮带兵进入田州赶跑岑钦，岑溥返回知府，秦纮留官军驻守，内乱平定。
English: Encheng, Chizhou and Qin attacked Tianzhou and drove out Tianzhou's prefectural government. Qin and Qin led their troops into Tianzhou to drive out Qin and Qin's troops returned to Tianzhou. Qin and Qin's troops remained in Tianzhou and quelled the civil unrest.

古文：复遣将讨平黎贼陵水，瑶贼德庆。
现代文：又遣将征讨平息了黎族叛乱者陵水、瑶族叛乱者德庆。
English: He also sent generals to subdue and quell the Li rebels Lingshui and the Shan rebels Deqing.

古文：纮之初莅镇也，劾总兵官安远侯柳景贪暴，逮下狱。
现代文：秦纮刚赴镇守任时，就弹劾总兵官安远侯柳景贪婪残暴，将其逮捕下狱。
English: As soon as Qin Yu went to the town to take up his post, he impeached the commander-in-chief, Anyuan Hou Liujing, for greed and brutality, and had him arrested and sent to prison.

古文：景亦讦纮，勘无左证，法司当景死。
现代文：柳景也揭发秦纮，经调查无佐证，司法部门判柳景死罪。
English: Liu Jing also denounced Qin Hui. After an investigation with no corroboration, the judicial department sentenced Liu Jing to death.

古文：景连姻周太后家，有奥援，讦纮不已。诏并逮纮，廷鞫卒无罪。
现代文：柳景与周太后家连姻，有得力的靠山，不停地攻击秦纮，朝廷下诏连秦纮一并逮捕，经审讯终究无罪。
English: Liu Jing married into the Zhou Empress Dowager's family and was a powerful supporter. He constantly attacked Qin Yu. He was arrested together with Qin Yu under the imperial court. After the trial, he was eventually acquitted.

古文：诏宥景死，夺爵闲住，而纮亦罢归。
现代文：下诏宽免柳景死罪，削爵闲住，而秦纮也免官归乡。
English: Under the edict, Liu Jing was pardoned from the death penalty, Qiao Jiao lived idly, and Qin Yu was also pardoned and returned to his hometown.

古文：大臣王恕等请留纮，不纳。
现代文：大臣王恕等请求留下秦纮，孝宗并不采纳。
English: At the request of Minister Wang Shou and others, Qin Huo was allowed to stay, but this was not accepted by Xiaozong.

古文：廷臣复连章言纮可大用。
现代文：朝臣又接连上奏章说秦纮有大可用之处。
English: The courtier went on to say that Qin Nan had much to offer.

古文：居数月，起南京户部尚书。
现代文：过数月，起用为南京户部尚书。
English: A few months later, he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Household Department.

古文：十一年引疾去。
现代文：十一年，因病离职。
English: After eleven years, he left the company due to illness.

古文：十四年秋，寇大入花马池，败官军孔坝沟，直抵平凉。
现代文：十四年秋，敌寇大肆进攻花马池，在孔霸沟打败官军，直抵平凉。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year, the enemy bandits attacked Hanamachi in a big way, defeated the government army in Kongba ditch, and reached Pingliang.

古文：言者谓纮有威名，虽老可用。
现代文：有人说秦纮有威名，虽然年老但仍可任用。
English: Some people say that Qin Hui has a prestigious name, although he is old, he can still be appointed.

古文：诏起户部尚书兼右副都御史，总制三边军务。
现代文：朝廷下诏起任他为户部尚书兼右副都御史，统领三边军务。
English: After the imperial edict, he was appointed as the head of the household and the right vice-governor of the capital, in charge of trilateral military affairs.

古文：纮驰至固原，按行败所。躬祭阵亡将士，掩其骼。
现代文：秦纮急驰到固原，巡行战败的地方，亲自祭奠阵亡将士，掩埋其尸骨。
English: Qin Hui hurried to Guyuan, the place where he was defeated in battle, to personally pay tribute to the fallen soldiers and bury their bones.

古文：奏录死事指挥朱鼎等五人，恤军士战殁者家。劾治败将杨琳等四人罪，更易守将。
现代文：奏报记载为国捐躯指挥朱鼎等五人，抚恤战死者的家属，弹劾处置败将杨琳等四人的罪，更换守将。
English: The report recorded that five people, including commander Zhu Ding, sacrificed their lives for the country, the families of those who died in the war were given pensions, and four people, including the defeated general Yang Lin, were impeached and punished, and the guard was replaced.

古文：练壮士，兴屯田，申明号令，军声大振。
现代文：选择壮士、兴屯田，再次申明号令，军威大振。
English: Choose a strong man, Xingtun Tian, and once again declare the order, and the military power will be greatly strengthened.

古文：初，寇未入河套，平凉、固原皆内地，无患。
现代文：当初，敌寇未进入河套，平凉、固原均处内地无忧患。
English: At first, the enemy raiders did not enter Hetao, and the inland areas of Pingliang and Guyuan were not affected.

古文：自孛来往牧后，固原当兵冲，为平、庆、临、巩门户。而城隘民贫，兵力单弱，商贩不至。纮乃拓治城郭，招徕商贾，建改为州，而身留节制之。
现代文：自孛来定居放牧后，固原为军事要冲，是平凉、庆阳、临洮、巩昌的门户，而城市狭隘民众困穷，兵力单弱，商贩不来，秦纮就扩展城郭，招来商贾，建议改为州，而自己留下调度管束。
English: After settling and grazing in Zhili, Guyuan was a military stronghold and the gateway to Pingliang, Qingyang, Linyi and Gongchang. While the city's narrow-minded people were poor, the military was weak, and merchants did not come, Qin Hui expanded the city walls, attracted merchants, proposed to change it to a prefecture, and left himself with scheduling control.

古文：奏言： 固原主、客兵止万八千人，散守城堡二十四。势分力弱，宜益兵。
现代文：向朝廷奏道： 固原主、客兵只有一万八千人，分守二十四个城堡，势分力弱，应该增兵。
English: He reported to the imperial court: Lord Gohara, there are only 18,000 guest soldiers, guarding twenty-four castles. Their strength is weak, and they should increase the number of soldiers.

古文：旧临、巩、秦州诸军岁赴甘、凉备御。
现代文：旧临洮、巩昌、秦州诸军每年要赴甘州、凉州设防。
English: The former Linyi, Gongchang and Qinzhou armies had to go to Ganzhou and Liangzhou to set up fortifications every year.

古文：及他方有警，又调兵甘、凉，或发京军征讨。
现代文：而其他地方如有战事，又从甘州、凉州调兵，或是派京军征讨。
English: However, if there is a war in other places, troops will be transferred from Ganzhou and Liangzhou, or the Beijing army will be sent to fight.

古文：夫京师天下本，边将手握重兵，而一遇有事辄请京军，非强干弱枝之道。
现代文：京师是国家的根本，边将手握重兵，而一遇有事总是动用京军，这不是强干弱枝之道。
English: The Beijing division is the foundation of the country. The general will hold the heavy soldiers in his hand, and in the event of an emergency, he will always use the Beijing army. This is not the way of the strong and the weak.

古文：请自今京兵毋轻发，临、巩、甘、凉诸军亦宜各还本镇。但选知兵宿将一二人各守其地，人以戍为家，军以将为命，自乐趋役，而有战心，计之得者也。 
现代文：请求自今后京兵毋随便派遣，临洮、巩昌、甘州、凉州诸军也应该各还本镇，只选通晓军事的老将一二人各守其地，人以军队为家，军队服从将领的命令，心情愉快地服兵役，这样就有战斗力，计划就能实行。 
English: It is requested that the Beijing soldiers should not be dispatched at random in the future, and the armies of Linyi, Gongchang, Gansu and Liangzhou should also return to their hometowns. Only one or two veterans who are familiar with military affairs should be selected to guard their respective places. People take the army as their home, the army obeys the orders of the generals, and serves the military service with a happy mood. In this way, there will be combat effectiveness, and the plan can be implemented.

古文：纮见固原迤北延袤千里，闲田数十万顷，旷野近边，无城堡可依。
现代文：秦纮见固原向北连绵千里，闲田数十万顷，旷野接近边境，无城堡可依托。
English: Qin Yu saw thousands of miles of plains stretching northward, hundreds of thousands of hectares of idle fields, wilderness close to the border, and no castle to rely on.

古文：议于花马池迤西至小盐池二百里，每二十里筑一堡，堡周四十八丈，役军五百人。
现代文：主张于花马池向西延绵至小盐池二百里，每二十里筑一堡，堡周长四十八丈，役使士兵五百人。
English: It was proposed to build a fort every twenty miles from Hanamachi, stretching westward for two hundred miles, to Koitachi. The fort would be forty-eight stories in circumference and would be manned by five hundred soldiers.

古文：固原迤北诸处亦各筑屯堡，募人屯种，每顷岁赋米五石，可得五十万石。
现代文：固原向北绵延各处也各筑屯堡，招募人丁屯种，每顷交赋税米五石，可以得到五十万石。
English: Everywhere in the northward extension of the Guyuan, they also built fortified towns, recruited people to cultivate crops, paid five koku of tax rice per hectare, and could get half a million koku.

古文：规画已定，而宁夏巡抚刘宪为梗。纮乃奏曰： 窃见三边情形，延绥、甘、凉地虽广，而士马精强。宁夏怯弱矣，然河山险阻。惟花马池至固原，军既怯弱，又墩台疏远，敌骑得长驱深入，故当增筑墩堡。韦州、豫望城诸处亦然。
现代文：规划已定，而宁夏巡抚刘宪作梗，秦纮于是奏道： 我私下观察三边的情形，延绥、甘州、凉州地虽广阔，而兵强马壮，宁夏怯弱，却有河山险阻，唯花马池至固原，军队既怯弱，墩台又间隔疏远，敌骑得以长驱深入，因此应该增筑墩堡，韦州、豫望城诸处也这样。
English: The plan had been decided, but Liu Xian, the governor of Ningxia, stood in the way, so Qin Yu said: I have privately observed the situation on the three sides. Although Yancheng, Ganzhou, and Liangzhou are vast, the soldiers are strong and strong. Ningxia is weak, but there are rivers and mountains that are dangerous, but Huamaike to Guyuan. The army is weak, the battlefield is distant, and the enemy cavalry can drive deep. Therefore, it is necessary to build more bunkers. This is also the case in Weizhou and Yuwangcheng.

古文：今固原迤南修筑将毕，惟花马池迤北二百里当筑十堡。而宪危言阻众，且废垂成之功。乞令宪制三边，而改臣抚宁夏，俾得终边防，于事为便。 
现代文：现在固原向南斜行的修筑工事即将完成，唯有花马池向北绵延二百里，应当筑十堡，而刘宪故造危言阻拦，垂成之功将被废，恳求命令刘宪掌握三边，而改换臣抚宁夏，使得以完成边防工事，办起事来也方便些。 
English: Now, the construction work of the southward slope of Guyuan is about to be completed. Only Huama Lake stretches 200 miles to the north, and ten castles should be built. But Liu Xian's artificial threat will be blocked, and the work of hanging will be scrapped. Please order Liu Xian to control the three sides, and change the subject to Ningxia, so that it is more convenient to complete the border construction and get things done.

古文：帝下诏责宪，宪引罪，卒行纮策。
现代文：皇帝下诏责备刘宪，刘宪伏罪，终于实施秦纮的计划。
English: The emperor issued an edict to reprimand Liu Xian, and Liu Xian committed the crime of subjugation, finally implementing Qin Yu's plan.

古文：修筑诸边城堡一万四千余所，垣堑六千四百余里，固原屹为重镇。
现代文：修筑诸边城堡一万四千余所，矮墙濠沟六千四百余里，固原屹立成为重镇。
English: More than 14,000 castles were built in various regions, and there were more than 6,400 miles of low walls and ditches. Guyuan became an important town.

古文：纮又以意作战车，名 全胜车 ，诏颁其式于诸边。
现代文：秦纮又凭自己所想制作战车，取名为 全胜车 。孝宗下诏将这种战车的形式推行于各边塞。
English: Qin Hui also made a chariot of his own design, which he called the "all-conquering chariot." Emperor Xiaozong decreed that this form of chariot should be introduced to all the frontier fortresses.

古文：在事三年，四镇晏然，前后经略西陲者莫及。
现代文：经过三年治理，四镇安逸，前后治理西方边陲的都没有他的功劳大。
English: After three years of governance, the four towns are comfortable, and the success of the governance of the western border areas is not his great merit.

古文：十七年加太子少保，召还视部事。
现代文：十七年，加封太子少保，召还掌户部事务。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, he was given the title of Crown Prince and Minor Protector, and was called back to be in charge of household affairs.

古文：以年老连章力辞，乞致仕。
现代文：秦纮以年老接连呈奏章尽力推辞，恳求辞官回家。
English: Qin Yu tried his best to refuse, pleading with the magistrate to go home.

古文：诏赐敕乘传归，月廪岁隶如制。
现代文：孝宗下诏赐他敕书、乘坐驿道马车返回家乡，月粮供应和奴仆岁役一如旧制。
English: Emperor Xiaozong gave him the imperial edict to return to his hometown by imperial carriage, and the monthly grain supply and slave labor were the same as the old system.

古文：明年九月卒，年八十。
现代文：第二年九月去世，享年八十。
English: He died in September of the following year, aged 80.

古文：赠少保，谥襄毅。
现代文：追赠少保，谥号襄毅。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Bao, and his posthumous name is Xiang Yi.

古文：纮廉介绝俗，妻孥菜羹麦饭常不饱。
现代文：秦纮清廉忠直异于常人，妻子儿女连菜汤麦屑做的饭也常常吃不饱。
English: Qin Hui and Qing Liang Zhong are quite different from ordinary people. Their wives and children often can't get enough of the meals made with vegetable soup and wheat crumbs.

古文：性刚果，勇于除害，不自顾虑，士大夫识与不识称为伟人。
现代文：他性格刚毅果敢，勇于除害，从不为自己考虑，士大夫不管认不认识他的都称赞他为伟人。
English: He was a man of fortitude and courage, brave in eliminating harm, and never thought about himself. Whether he was recognized or not, the scholar praised him as a great man.

古文：在两广被逮时，方议讨后山贼。治军事毕，从容就道，仪卫驺从不贬损。既逾岭，始囚服就系。
现代文：在两广被逮捕时，他正在商量征讨后山的贼，将军事处理完毕，从容上路，仪仗及车后侍从一点不马虎，越过山岭，才去官服束手就囚。
English: At the time of Liangguang's arrest, he was in the process of discussing the recruitment of thieves from the mountains behind. After the military treatment was completed, he took his time on the road. The guard of honor and the attendants behind the car were not sloppy at all. He crossed the mountains before he went to the official uniform to tie his hands and go to prison.

古文：谓官校曰： 两广蛮夷杂处，总制体尊，遽就拘执，损国威。今既逾岭，真囚矣。 
现代文：他对官吏、将校说 ：西广少数民族杂处，总都体制尊严，突然被逮捕，有损国威，现在既然越过山岭，就是真正的囚犯了。 
English: He said to the officials and officers: "The ethnic minorities in Western Guangxi have always been treated with dignity by the system. Being arrested suddenly is detrimental to the national prestige. Now that I have crossed the mountains, I am a real prisoner."

古文：其严重得体如此。
现代文：其如此庄重得体。
English: It's so dignified.

古文：正德五年，刘瑾乱政。纮家奴憾纮妇弟杨瑾，以纮所遗火炮投缉事校尉，诬瑾畜违禁军器。
现代文：正德五年，刘瑾乱政，秦纮家奴对秦纮内弟杨瑾不满，借秦纮送内弟火炮之事向校尉告密，诬陷杨瑾收藏违禁军器。
English: In the 5th year of Zhengde, when Liu Bei's government was in chaos, Qin Hui's family slave was dissatisfied with Qin Hui's younger brother Yang Hui, borrowed Qin Hui's artillery to inform the captain, and framed Yang Hui for collecting prohibited military equipment.

古文：刘瑾怒，归罪于纮。籍其家，无所得。
现代文：刘瑾发怒，归罪于秦纮，抄其家，什么没得到。
English: Outraged, Liu Ye blamed Qin Hui and ransacked his home, but got nothing.

古文：言官张九叙、涂敬等复希瑾意劾纮，士类嗤之。
现代文：言官张九叙、涂敬等又承刘瑾之意弹劾秦纮，士大夫对此嗤之以鼻。
English: Zhang Jiuxiu, Tu Jian, and other officials also followed Liu Bei's intention to impeach Qin Hui, but the magistrate scoffed at this.

