古文：炀皇帝讳广，一名英，小字阿，高祖第二子也。
现代文：炀皇帝名广，一名英，小字阿，是高祖的第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Gaozong was well-known. He was the second son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：母曰文献独孤皇后。
现代文：母亲为文献独孤皇后。
English: His mother was the only queen mentioned in documents.

古文：上美姿仪，少敏慧。高祖及后于诸子中，特所钟爱。
现代文：杨广仪容俊美，从小聪慧敏捷，高祖和皇后在各儿子里特别喜爱他。
English: Yang Guangyi was handsome, intelligent and agile from a young age. Gao Zu and the Empress especially loved him among their sons.

古文：在周以高祖勋，封雁门郡公。
现代文：在周朝时，他因高祖的功勋而被封为雁门郡公。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, he was named the Duke of Ganmen County for the merits of his great-grandfather.

古文：开皇元年，立为晋王，拜柱国、并州总管，时年十三。
现代文：开皇元年，被立为晋王，封柱国、并州总管，当时十三岁。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was appointed as the king of Jin, the head of the pillar country and the head of the state, at the age of thirteen.

古文：寻授武卫大将军，进上柱国、河北道行台尚书令，大将军如故。
现代文：不久又被任命为武卫大将军，又晋升为上柱国、河北道行台尚书令，大将军职务如故。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the General of Wuwei, and was promoted to Shangzhuang, Hebei Province, and Xingtai, and his duties as the General remained unchanged.

古文：高祖令项城公歆、安道公李彻辅导之。
现代文：高祖让项城公韶、安道公李彻来辅导他。
English: Gao Zu asked Xiangcheng Gongye and Ando Gong Li Che to tutor him.

古文：上好学，善属文，沈深严重，朝野属望。
现代文：炀帝好学，善于写文章，为人深沉严肃，朝野都很有名望。
English: Emperor Zou was eager to learn, good at writing articles, and a deep and serious person. Both Emperor Zou and Emperor Asano were famous.

古文：高祖密令善相者来和遍视诸子。
现代文：高祖又暗中让一个名叫来和的善于看相的人给所有的儿子看相。
English: Gao Zu also secretly let a man named Lai He, who was good at seeing faces, see the faces of all his sons.

古文：和曰： 晋王眉上双骨隆起，贵不可言。 
现代文：来和说： 晋王的眉上双骨隆起，高贵得不可言说。 
English: He came and said, "The brow of the King of Jin has a double brow ridge, which is so noble that it cannot be described.

古文：既而高祖幸上所居第，见乐器弦多断绝，又有尘埃，若不用者，以为不好声妓之玩。
现代文：接着，文帝又到晋王居住的府第，他看见晋王的乐器上的弦大都已经断掉，上面还有一层灰尘，就像很久没使用了，便认为晋王不喜欢听音乐和歌妓这些玩乐的东西。
English: Next, Emperor Wen went to the palace where Jin Wang lived. He saw that most of the strings on Jin Wang's musical instrument had been broken and there was a layer of dust on it, as if it had not been used for a long time. He thought that Jin Wang did not like to listen to music and singers.

古文：上尤自矫饰，当时称为仁孝。
现代文：晋王特别注意装模作样，掩饰自己，当时人都盛赞他是个仁孝的人。
English: Jin Wang paid special attention to pretending and disguising himself. At that time, people praised him as a kind and filial person.

古文：尝观猎遇雨，左右进油衣，上曰： 士卒皆沾湿，我独衣此乎！ 
现代文：他曾经在观看打猎时遇到大雨，身边的人送上了防雨的油衣，晋王说 ：士兵们都淋湿了，我能独自穿这件衣服吗？ 
English: He once encountered heavy rain while watching a hunt. The people around him gave him a rainproof oil coat. Jin Wang said, "The soldiers are all wet. Can I wear this coat alone?"

古文：乃令持去。
现代文：便让他们取走。
English: and let them take it away.

古文：六年，转淮南道行台尚书令。
现代文：开皇六年，转任淮南道行台尚书令。
English: Six years after the founding of the emperor, he was transferred to Huainan Dao Xingtao Shang Shuling.

古文：其年，征拜雍州牧、内史令。
现代文：当年，又被征召，任雍州牧、内史令。
English: In the same year, he was called up again, and was appointed as Yongzhou herdsman and secretary of internal history.

古文：八年冬，大举伐陈，以上为行军元帅。
现代文：八年冬，隋军大举进攻陈国，任命杨广为行军元帅。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, the Sui army launched a large-scale attack on Chen Guo and appointed Yang Guang as the marching marshal.

古文：及陈平，执陈湘州刺史施文庆、散骑常侍沈客卿、市令汤慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧，以其邪佞，有害于民，斩之石阙下以谢三吴。
现代文：当平定陈朝以后，他抓了陈国的湘州刺史施文庆、散骑常侍沈客卿、市令汤慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧，因为他们都是一些奸臣，为害民众，便在石阙下把他们斩首，以此向三吴民众谢罪。
English: After subduing the Chen Dynasty, he arrested Chen's Xiangzhou assassin Shi Wenqing, errant equerry Shengkeqing, city magistrate Tang Huilang, criminal law inspector Xu Xie, and court secretary Ling Shi Jihui, because they were all treacherous vassals who harmed the people, and then beheaded them under the stone, in order to apologize to the people of Sanwu.

古文：于是封府库资财，无所取，天下称贤。
现代文：他封了陈国府库中的资财，一无所取，天下人都称赞他的贤德。
English: He sealed the assets in Chen Guofu's treasury and took nothing. People all over the world praised his virtue.

古文：进位太尉，赐路车、乘马、衮冕之服，玄珪、白璧各一双。
现代文：于是，他被晋封为太尉，赏赐给他络车、乘马、兖冕制服，玄王圭和白璧各一双。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of captain, and was given a carriage, a horse, a crowned uniform, and a pair of Genwanggui and Bai Bi respectively.

古文：复拜并州总管。
现代文：又被任命为并州总管。
English: He was also appointed as the state's chief administrator.

古文：俄而江南高智慧等相聚作乱，徙上为扬州总管，镇江都，每岁一朝。
现代文：不久，江南的高智慧等人相聚在一起作乱，文帝改任他为扬州总管，镇守江都，每年入京朝见一次。
English: Soon, high-level intellectuals from the south of the Yangtze River gathered together to make trouble, and Emperor Wen appointed him as the governor of Yangzhou and the governor of the Yangtze River. He came to Beijing once a year to meet with the emperor.

古文：高祖之祠太山也，领武候大将军。
现代文：高祖祭祀泰山时，他任武侯大将军。
English: When Gao Zu was worshiping Mount Tai, he was the grand marshal of Wuhou.

古文：明年，归籓，后数载，突厥寇边，复为行军元帅，出灵武。
现代文：第二年，回到封地。过了几年，突厥进犯边境，他又任行军元帅，兵出灵武，因见不到敌人便领军归来。
English: The next year, he returned to his fiefdom. A few years later, when the Turks invaded the border, he was appointed as a marching marshal. He led the army back because he could not see the enemy.

古文：无虏而旋。及太子勇废，立上为皇太子。是月，当受册。
现代文：当太子杨勇被废后，立杨广为皇太子。当月，准备接受册文。
English: When the crown prince Yang Yong was abolished, Yang Guang was appointed crown prince. That month, he was ready to accept the document.

古文：高祖曰： 吾以大兴公成帝业。 
现代文：高祖说： 我是由大兴公而成就帝业的。 
English: Gao Zu said, "I achieved imperial success through Daxing Gong.

古文：令上出舍大兴。
现代文：让杨广出居大兴。
English: Letting Yang Guang move out was a great success.

古文：其夜，烈风大雪，地震山崩，民舍多坏，压死者百余口。
现代文：当夜，狂风大雪，地震山崩，许多民房被毁坏，压死了一百多人。
English: That night, strong winds, heavy snow, an earthquake and a landslide destroyed many houses, crushing more than a hundred people to death.

古文：仁寿初，奉诏巡抚东南。
现代文：仁寿初年，奉诏巡抚东南。
English: In the first year of his life, he was appointed as the magistrate of the southeastern region.

古文：是后，高祖每避署仁寿宫，恆令上监国。
现代文：以后，每当高祖到仁寿宫避暑时，就命令太子监国。
English: Later, whenever Gao Zu went to Renshou Palace to spend the summer, he ordered the prince to supervise the country.

古文：四年七月，高祖崩，上即皇帝位于仁寿宫。
现代文：四年七月，高祖去世，杨广在仁寿宫即皇帝位。
English: In July of the fourth year, Gaozu died, and Yang Guang ascended to the throne at Renshou Palace.

古文：八月，奉梓宫还京师。
现代文：八月，侍奉文帝灵柩回京都。
English: In August, he returned to Kyoto after attending the funeral of Emperor Monti.

古文：并州总管、汉王谅举兵反，诏尚书左仆射杨素讨平之。
现代文：并州总管、汉王谅起兵反叛，诏令尚书左仆射杨素前去讨平。
English: And the provincial governor, Han Wang Peng, raised an army to rebel and ordered Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yang Su, to go and settle the matter.

古文：九月乙巳，以备身将军崔彭为左领军大将军。
现代文：九月十二日，任命备身将军崔彭为左领军大将军。
English: On September 12, General Cui Peng was appointed as the general of the left leading army.

古文：十一月乙未，幸洛阳。
现代文：十一月初三，前往洛阳。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he went to Luoyang.

古文：丙申，发丁男十数万掘堑，自龙门东接长平、汲郡，抵临清关，度河，至浚仪，襄城，达于上洛，以置关防。
现代文：初四，征发男丁十多万人挖沟，从龙门东接长平、汲郡，抵达临清关，过黄河到浚仪、襄城，直到上洛，以设置关隘。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, more than 100,000 men were conscripted and dispatched to dig ditches, from Longmen East to Changping and Qiu County, arriving at Linqing Pass, crossing the Yellow River to Dongyi and Yangcheng, and up to Shangluo, to set up a pass.

古文：癸丑，诏曰：
现代文：二十一日，下诏说：
English: On the twenty-first day, the following edict was issued:

古文：乾道变化，阴阳所以消息；沿创不同，生灵所以顺序。
现代文： 天道变化，阴阳所以有消息；沿创不同，生灵所以有顺序。
English: Changes in the heavenly way, yin and yang, so there is news; different along the creation, so there is a sequence of life.

古文：若使天意不变，施化何以成四时？
现代文：如果天意不变，施化又怎能成四时？
English: If God's will does not change, how can it be four o'clock?

古文：人事不易，为政何以利万姓？
现代文：人事不变，为政如何利百姓？
English: Personnel unchanged, how will politics benefit the people?

古文：《易》不云乎，通其变，使民不倦。
现代文：《易》经中不是说，通其变，使民不倦。
English: Doesn't the Yi sutra say that through change, the people won't get tired?

古文：变则通，通则久。
现代文：变就能够通畅，通畅便能够长久。
English: Change can be smooth, and smoothness can last for a long time.

古文：有德则可久，有功则可大。
现代文：有德就能长久，有功就能扩大。
English: If you have virtue, you can live a long time, and if you have merit, you can expand.

古文：朕又闻之，安安而能迁，民用丕变。
现代文：我又听说，安定而能改迁，民心因而不变。
English: I also heard that people's minds remain unchanged because it is stable and can be relocated.

古文：是故姬邑两周，如武王之意；殷人五徙，成汤后之业。
现代文：所以姬氏之邑有两周，正合武王的心意，殷人五迁，成就了商汤的大业。
English: Therefore, there are two weeks in Himeji's town, which is in line with King Wu's intention, and five relocations, which has achieved the great cause of Shang Tang.

古文：若不因民顺天，功业见乎变，爱民治国者，可不谓欤。
现代文：如果不因民顺天，功业就会改变。爱民治国者，能够不这样吗？
English: If the people do not follow the will of heaven, the work will change. Can those who love the people and govern the country do otherwise?

古文：然雒邑自古之都，王畿之内，天地之所合，阴阳之所和；控以三河，固以四塞；水陆通，贡赋等。
现代文： 然则洛邑自古帝都，王畿之内，天地之所合，阴阳之所和，控辖三河，有四塞为固，水陆通畅，便于贡赋税。
English: However, Luoyang, since the ancient imperial capital, within the Kingdom of Guizhou, is the meeting place of heaven and earth, the harmony of yin and yang, controls the three rivers, has four fortresses, the water and land are smooth, and is convenient for tribute and taxation.

古文：故汉祖曰： 吾行天下多矣，唯见雒阳。 
现代文：所以汉祖说： 我所行经天下多处，惟见洛阳。 
English: Therefore, Han Zu said, "I have traveled to many places in the world, but I have never seen Luoyang."

古文：自古皇王，何尝不留意，所不都者，盖有由焉。或以九州未一，或以困其府库，作雒之制，所以未暇也。
现代文：自古皇王，何尝不留意，所以没有在这里定都，是有原因的，或者因为九州未统一，或因为府库中资财困乏，建造洛都的想法，因而未能顾及。
English: There is a reason why emperors since ancient times did not set their capital here, either because Kyushu was not unified, or because the prefectural treasury was short of funds and the idea of building Lodo was not taken into consideration.

古文：我有隋之始，便欲创兹怀、雒，日复一日，越暨于今。念兹在兹，兴言感哽。
现代文：我有隋之始，便打算创建此怀、洛，日复一日，牵延至今，念此在此，感兴而叹。
English: I have the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, I intend to create this Huai, Luo, day after day, delayed until now, read this here, impressed and sighed.

古文：朕肃膺宝历，纂临万邦，遵而不失，心奉先志。今者，汉王谅悖逆，毒被山东；遂令州县，或沦非所。
现代文：我继承帝业，君临万邦，心奉祖先之志，遵从而不遗失。今者汉王谅，叛逆朝廷，流毒山东，遂令州县，沦于非所。
English: I inherited the imperial inheritance, I reign over all nations, I follow the will of my ancestors, and I will not lose it. The current one is a traitor to the Han Dynasty, a traitor to the imperial court, a poisoner of Shandong, and a traitor to the prefecture.

古文：由关河悬远，兵不赴急。
现代文：由于关河阻隔遥远，军队难以应急。
English: As the Guanhe barrier is far away, it is difficult for the army to take emergency measures.

古文：加以并州移户，复在河南；周迁殷民，意在于此。
现代文：加之并州移民，又在河南，周迁殷民，其意在此。
English: Add to this the immigrants from the annexed prefectures and, in Henan, the influx of migrants, and you get the idea.

古文：况复南服遐远，东夏殷大，因机顺动，今也其时。
现代文：况且南国辽远，东夏广大，因时而动，今正其时。
English: Moreover, the southern country is far away, and the eastern country is vast, so it moves from time to time, and now is the right time.

古文：群司百辟，佥谐厥议。
现代文：群司百官，都赞成此议。
English: Hundreds of officials in the group of magistrates are all in favour of this motion.

古文：但成周歔脊，弗堪胥宇。今可于伊雒营建东京，便即设官分职，以为民极也。
现代文：但成周废墟，不堪建造，今可在伊洛营建东京，便即此设官分职，以求为民立极。
English: However, it was in ruins for weeks and could not be built. Now, Tokyo can be built in Ilo, so this division of duties was set up in order to stand up for the people.

古文：夫宫室之制，本以便生人；上栋下宇，足以避风露。
现代文： 宫室建制，本以便于生人，设上栋下宇，足以遮避风露。
English: The construction of the palace room was originally designed to make it easier for people to live in, with an upper floor and a lower floor, sufficient to shelter from the wind and dew.

古文：高台广厦，岂曰适形？
现代文：高台广厦，岂适合居处？
English: Is a high-rise building a suitable place to live?

古文：故《传》云：俭，德之恭；侈，恶之大。
现代文：所以《传》中说： 俭，是谦和的美德；侈，是最大的恶德。 
English: Therefore, "Biography" said: "Frugality is the virtue of modesty; extravagance is the greatest evil."

古文：宣尼有云：与其不逊也，宁俭。
现代文：孔子说过，与其不顺，宁可节俭。
English: Confucius said that it is better to be thrifty than to be unlucky.

古文：岂谓瑶台琼室，方为宫殿者乎？
现代文：难道说瑶台琼室，才是宫殿吗？
English: Is it really true that the Xingtai Qiong's house is a palace?

古文：土阶采椽，而非帝王者乎？
现代文：土阶采椽里居住，就不成为帝王吗？
English: If you live in a graveyard, don't you become an emperor?

古文：是知非天下以奉一人，乃一人以主天下也。
现代文：所以应知不是以天下来侍奉一人，而是一人主宰天下。
English: Therefore, it should be known that it is not one person serving the world, but one person dominating the world.

古文：民惟国本，本固邦宁。
现代文：民是国家之本，本固邦宁。
English: The people are the foundation of the country, the foundation of the nation.

古文：百姓足，孰与不足。
现代文：百姓富足了，哪个还会不足？
English: If the people are rich, which one will be short?

古文：今所营构，务从节俭。无令雕墙峻宇，复起于当今；俗使卑宫菲食，将贻于后世。
现代文：今日营建，务必节俭，不让雕墙高屋，重建于当今，要将低矮宫墙和菲薄食物，准备留传给后世。
English: To build today, we must be frugal. We must not let the high-rise buildings with carved walls be rebuilt today. We must prepare to pass on the low palace walls and thin food to future generations.

古文：有司明为条格，称朕意焉。
现代文：有关方面明设条例，以称我意。 
English: The relevant authorities have clearly set up regulations to express my opinion.

古文：十二月乙丑，以右武卫将军来护兒为右骁卫大将军。
现代文：十二月初三，任命右武卫将军来护儿为右骁卫大将军。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, he appointed the General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：戊辰，以柱国李景为右武卫大将军，以右卫率周罗为右武候大将军。
现代文：初六，任命柱国李景为右武卫大将军，右卫率周罗目侯为右武侯大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Jing of Zhu Guo was appointed as the right guard general, and the right guard leader Zhou Romu marquis was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：大业元年春正月壬辰朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：大业元年，春正月初一，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, on the first day of the first month of the spring, there was a general amnesty, and the year name was changed.

古文：立妃萧氏为皇后。
现代文：立妃萧氏为皇后。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao became the empress.

古文：改豫州为溱州，洛州为豫州。
现代文：改称豫州为溱州，洛州为豫州。
English: Renamed Yuzhou as Zhangzhou, and Luozhou as Yuzhou.

古文：废诸州总管府。
现代文：废除各州总管府。
English: Abolition of the State Governments.

古文：丙申，立晋王昭为皇太子。
现代文：初五，立晋王昭为皇太子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, King Jin Zhao was crowned crown prince.

古文：丁酉，以上柱国宇文述为左卫大将军，上柱国郭衍为左武卫大将军，延寿公于仲文为右卫大将军。
现代文：初六，任命上柱国宇文述为左卫大将军，上柱国郭衍为左武卫大将军，延寿公于仲文为右卫大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shangzhu Guo Wenshu was appointed as General of the Left Division, Shangzhu Guo Yan as General of the Left Division, and Yanzhukong Yu Zhongwen as General of the Right Division.

古文：己亥，以豫章王暕为豫州牧。
现代文：初八，任命豫章王为豫州牧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he appointed Yu Zhangwang as the Herdsman of Yuzhou.

古文：戊申，发八使巡省风俗。
现代文：十七日，派出八位使者巡视各地风俗。
English: On the 17th, eight emissaries were sent to inspect local customs.

古文：下诏曰：
现代文：并下诏说：
English: He also said the following:

古文：昔者哲王之理天下也，其在爱民乎？
现代文： 古代哲王治理天下时，其要在于爱民吧！
English: When the ancient philosopher kings ruled the world, it was all about loving the people!

古文：既富而教，家给人足，故能风教淳厚，远至迩安。理定功成，率由斯道。
现代文：既富而教，家用充足，所以能风俗淳厚，远人来服，近处安宁，理定功成，全由此道。
English: If you are rich and educated, and have a sufficient household, you will be able to have simple and profound customs. People from far away will come to serve you, and you will have peace and tranquility nearby.

古文：朕恭嗣宝位，抚育黎献，夙夜战兢，若临川谷。
现代文：我忝居宝位，抚育众贤，日夜战战兢兢，如临大川深谷。
English: I live in the throne, nurture all the sages, and tremble day and night, as if I were in the deep valley of the great river.

古文：虽则聿遵先绪，弗敢失坠，永言政术，多有缺然。
现代文：虽则遵从先王之道，不敢闪失，长言政术，多有缺失。
English: Although he followed the way of the former king, he did not dare to lose his way, and his long speech and political skills were mostly lacking.

古文：况以四海之远，兆民之众，未获亲临，问其疾苦。
现代文：况且以四海之远，兆民之众，未能亲临，访问疾苦。
English: Moreover, with the distance of the four seas, trillions of people are unable to come in person, and the visit is suffering.

古文：每虑幽仄莫举，冤屈不申，一物失所，用伤和气。
现代文：每思虑幽昧未举，冤屈未伸，一物失所，便伤和气。
English: Every thought is vague, grievance is unsatisfied, one thing is lost, and it hurts.

古文：万方有罪，责在朕躬，所以兴寤增叹，而夕惕载怀者也。
现代文：万方有罪，责任在我，所以夙兴夜寐，徒增感叹，而朝乾夕惕，戴于心怀。
English: All parties are guilty, the responsibility is mine, so I sleep at night, sigh in vain, and I am cautious in the morning and evening, wearing it in my heart.

古文：今既布政惟始，宜存宽大。
现代文： 今既为政之始，应存宽大。
English: Now that we are at the beginning of the political process, we should be lenient.

古文：可分遣使人，巡省方俗，宣扬风化，荐拔淹滞，申达幽枉。
现代文：可分派使者，巡察方俗，宣扬风化，举荐淹滞之士，申达幽情冤枉。
English: You can assign emissaries, inspect parties and customs, promote manners, recommend stagnant people, and claim that you have been wronged.

古文：孝悌力田，给以优复。
现代文：孝悌力田者，给予优待免役。
English: Those who are filial and diligent will be given preferential treatment and exempted from military service.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，量加振济。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，量情加以赈济。
English: Widows and widowers who are unable to survive on their own should be given financial assistance according to their needs.

古文：义夫节妇，旌表门闾。
现代文：义夫节妇，旌表门闾。
English: On the occasion of the Day of the Righteous Husband, women should keep their watches and doors locked.

古文：高年之老，加其板授，并依别条，赐以粟帛。
现代文：高龄老人，加授朝板，并依照条例，赐给粟帛。
English: Elderly people will be awarded a morning board, and in accordance with the regulations, they will be given a millet bowl.

古文：笃疾之徒给侍丁者，虽有侍养之名，曾无赒赡之实，明加检校，使得存养。
现代文：重病者配给侍人，虽有侍养之名，并无赡养之实的，明加检查改正，使得存养。
English: If a seriously ill person is assigned a caretaker, although there is the name of a caretaker, but there is no actual support, it should be checked and corrected to ensure that the caretaker is maintained.

古文：若有名行显著，操履修洁；及学业才能，一艺可取，咸宜访采，将身入朝。
现代文：如有名声品行显著，德操修行高洁，以及学业才能，有一艺可取的，都应加以访问采用，送其入朝。
English: If one's reputation and conduct are conspicuous, if one's moral training is high and pure, and if one's academic ability is good, they should be visited and adopted and sent to the DPRK.

古文：所在州县，以礼发遣。
现代文：所在州县，以礼送派。
English: If you live in a state or county, it will be sent as a gift.

古文：其蠹政害人，不便于时者，使还之日，具录奏闻。
现代文：恶政害民，不便为时所用者，使者还朝之日，详录奏闻。 
English: Bad government harms the people, inconvenience is used as a time, the messenger is also the day of the morning, detailed record hearing.

古文：己酉，以吴州总管宇文弼为刑部尚书。
现代文：十八日，任命吴州总管宇文瞖为刑部尚书。
English: On the 18th, Wuzhou Governor U Wenjun was appointed as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：二月己卯，以尚书左仆射杨素为尚书令。
现代文：二月十八日，任命尚书左仆射杨素为尚书令。
English: On February 18th, Yang Su, Shang Shu's left-hand man, was appointed as Shang Shu's regent.

古文：三月丁未，诏尚书令杨素、纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，徙豫州郭下居民以实之。
现代文：三月十七日，令尚书令杨素、纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，迁移豫州城下居民来充实。
English: On March 17th, Shangshu ordered Yang Su and Nagan Yang Da to build Tokyo as the great craftsman Uwenqi, and to relocate the residents of the castle town of Yuzhou to enrich it.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 听采舆颂，谋及黎庶，故能审政刑之得失。
现代文：十八日，下诏说 ：听采议论，谋于庶民，以此能知政刑之得失。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: listen to the opinions of the people, and consult with the common people, so as to know the merits and demerits of political punishment.

古文：是知昧旦思治，欲使幽枉必达，彝伦有章。
现代文：所以知早晚思治，要使幽枉必达，人伦有序。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to think about it sooner or later, so that the wrongdoers will be punished, and the human relations will be orderly.

古文：而牧宰任称朝委，苟为侥幸，以求考课，虚立殿最，不存理实。
现代文：而牧宰任意称誉推委，苟且侥幸，以求考课之绩，虚立上下之位，不存理实。
English: And the pastoral arbitrarily praised the selection committee, just by chance, in order to obtain the performance of the examination, the position of the top and bottom, there is no truth.

古文：纲纪于是不理，冤屈所以莫申。
现代文：纲纪因而不理，冤屈所以难申。
English: As a result, Gang Ji ignored it, and it was difficult to file a grievance.

古文：关河重阻，无由自达。
现代文：关河重阻，无由到达。
English: The Guanhe River was blocked, and there was no way to get there.

古文：朕故建立东京，躬亲存问。
现代文：我因此建立东京，亲自过问。
English: That's why I built Tokyo, and I've been there myself.

古文：今将巡历淮海，观省风俗。
现代文：今将巡历淮海，观察民间风俗。
English: He will now tour the Huaihai Sea and observe folk customs.

古文：眷求谠言，徒繁词翰，而乡校之内，阙尔无闻；恇然夕惕，用劳兴寝。
现代文：寻求直言，徒费词藻，而乡校之内，缺而不闻。心中不安，朝乾夕惕，日夜辛劳。
English: They seek to be outspoken, but in the village school, they are not heard. They are uneasy in their hearts, they are dry in the morning and evening, and they are hardworking day and night.

古文：其民下有知州县官人政理苛刻，侵害百姓，背公徇私，不便于民者，听诣朝堂封奏。
现代文：凡民众有知州县官员为政苛刻，侵害百姓，徇私害公，不便于民的，听任到朝堂上奏。 
English: If the people think that the officials of Zhizhou County are harsh in politics, infringe on the people, harm the public interest, and are inconvenient to the people, they should be allowed to report it to the court.

古文：庶乎四聪以达，天下无冤。 
现代文：于是四方民情通达，天下百姓无冤。
English: As a result, the people's feelings in all four directions were understood, and the people of the world had no grievances.

古文：又于皁涧营显仁宫，采海内奇禽异兽草木之类，以实园苑。
现代文：他又在白十涧营建显仁宫，采集海内的奇禽异兽、草木之类，充实园苑。
English: He also built the Xianren Palace in Baizhimen, collecting exotic birds and animals, plants and trees from the sea to enrich the garden.

古文：徙天下富商大贾数万家于东京。
现代文：又迁徙天下富商大贾几万家来到东京。
English: Tens of thousands of the world's richest business tycoons also migrated to Tokyo.

古文：辛亥，发河南诸郡男女七百万开通济渠，自西苑引谷、洛水达于河，自板渚引河通于淮。
现代文：二十一日，征发河南各郡男女七百万人开挖通济渠，从西苑引谷、洛水到黄河，从板渚引黄河水通往淮河。
English: On the 21st, seven million men and women from all counties in Henan Province were conscripted and sent to excavate the canal, from Xiyuan to the valley and Luoshui to the Yellow River, and from Panzhu to the Yellow River to the Huai River.

古文：庚申，遣黄门侍郎王弘、上仪同于士澄往江南采木，造龙舟、凤抃、黄龙、赤舰楼船等数万艘。
现代文：三十日，派黄门侍郎王弘、上仪同於士澄到江南采办木材，建造龙舟、凤瞘、黄龙、赤舰楼船等几万艘。
English: On the 30th, he sent Huangmen waiter Wang Hong and Shangyi to Shicheng to procure timber and build tens of thousands of dragon boats, phoenix boats, yellow dragons, and red ships.

古文：夏四月癸亥，大将军刘仲方击林邑破之。
现代文：夏四月初三，大将军刘仲方进攻林邑，攻破它。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, General Liu Zhongfang attacked Linyi and broke it.

古文：五月庚戌，户部尚书、义丰侯韦冲卒。
现代文：五月二十一日，户部尚书、义丰侯韦冲去世。
English: On May 21st, the head of the household, Shangshu, Yifeng Hou Wei Chong passed away.

古文：甲子，荧惑入太微。
现代文：六月初五，火星进入太微。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, Mars enters Cancer.

古文：秋七月丁酉，制战亡之家，给复十年。
现代文：秋七月初九，规定阵亡者的家属，免十年赋税。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was stipulated that the families of those who died in battle would be exempt from paying taxes for ten years.

古文：丙午，滕王纶、卫王集并夺爵徙边。
现代文：十八日，滕王纶、卫王集都被削去爵位流放边境。
English: On the 18th, both Teng Wangyao and Wei Wangji were stripped of their titles and exiled to the border.

古文：闰七月甲子，以尚书令杨素为太子太师，安德王雄为太子太傅，河间王弘为太子太保。
现代文：闰七月初六，任命尚书令杨素为太子太师，安德王雄为太子太傅，河间王弘为太子太保。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Shang Shuling appointed Yang Su as the prince's daishi, Ando Wangxiong as the prince's taifu, and Kawama Wanghong as the prince's taibo.

古文：丙子，诏曰：
现代文：十八日，下诏说：
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued:

古文：君民建国，教学为先；移风易俗，必自兹始。
现代文： 治民建国，教学为先，移风易俗，必从此始。
English: To govern the people and build a country, teaching comes first, and changing customs must begin from here.

古文：而言绝义乖，多历年代，进德修业，其道浸微。
现代文：而言路断绝，大义乖舛，历时多年；进德修业，其道衰弱。
English: But if the path of speech is cut off, the path of righteousness is tortuous and takes many years; if the path of virtue is advanced, the path of virtue is weak.

古文：汉采坑焚之余，不绝如线；晋承板荡之运，扫地将尽。
现代文：汉采焚书坑儒之余，不绝如线；晋承板荡丧乱之运，扫地将尽。
English: Han collection, book-burning and Confucianism are like a continuous thread; Jin inherits the fate of chaos, and the ground will be swept away.

古文：自时厥后，军国多虞；虽复黉宇时建，示同爱礼；函丈或陈，殆为虚器。
现代文：自此之后，军国多难，虽时建黉学之宇，以示爱礼，讲席虽列，实为虚设。
English: Since then, the military state has been difficult, although it has built a world of learning to show love, and although the lecture seats are lined up, they are actually empty.

古文：遂使纡青拖紫，非以学优；制锦操刀，类多墙面。
现代文：遂使结青穿紫者，不因学优而得，制锦操刀者，类多墙面之人。
English: So he made those who wear the blue and purple, those who do not get by virtue of academic excellence, those who make brocade and wield swords, and those who are more like walls.

古文：上陵下替，纲维不立，雅缺道消，实由于此。
现代文：上下陵替，纲纪不立，雅道消缺，实由于此。
English: This is the real reason for the replacement of the mausoleums, the lack of discipline, and the lack of elegance.

古文：朕纂承洪绪，思弘大训。
现代文： 朕继承宏业，想要弘扬训教之道，将要尊师重道，以阐发其由来。
English: I want to carry on the great cause and promote the way of training and education, and I will respect the teacher-centered way to explain its origin.

古文：将欲尊师重道，用阐厥繇；讲信修睦，敦奖名教。
现代文：讲信修睦，奖励名教。
English: Teach faith and practice, and reward outstanding teachers.

古文：方今区宇平壹，文轨攸同，十步之内，必有芳草；四海之中，岂无孝、秀。
现代文：如今天下统一，文字车轨皆同，十步之内，必有芳草；四海之中，岂无孝秀之人？
English: If unification were to take place today, the text tracks would all be the same. Within ten steps, there would surely be good grass. Among the four seas, would there not be someone who is filial?

古文：诸在家及见入学者，若有笃志好古，耽典悦礼，学行优敏，堪膺时务，所在采访，具以名闻。
现代文：所有在家以及现已入学者，如有笃志好古，沉迷典籍，喜爱礼仪，学识优异，办事机敏，堪委以时务者，所在官员采访，详报名字上闻。
English: All students at home and those who have already enrolled, if they have a strong sense of history, are addicted to classic books, love etiquette, excellent knowledge, and are quick at work, can be interviewed by the committee as a current affairs person and the officials in charge, and their names will be reported in detail.

古文：即当随其器能，擢以不次。
现代文：即当随其才能，擢举任用。
English: That is, they should be promoted and appointed according to their talents.

古文：若研精经术，未顾进仕，可依其艺业深浅，门廕高卑，虽未升朝，并量准给禄。
现代文：如精研经术，不愿出仕，可依照其造诣深浅，门荫高低，虽不在朝，一并量情给予食禄。
English: If you are a keen student of the sutras and do not wish to serve, you may be given a stipend according to the depth of your attainment and the height of your shadow, although not in the morning.

古文：庶夫恂恂善诱，不日成器，济济盈朝，何远之有。
现代文：这样谆谆善诱，不日便可成器，济济满朝人才，何须久待。
English: In this way, if you are good at seduction, you will soon be able to become a tool, and if you are full of talent, you will not have to wait long.

古文：其国子等学，亦宜申明旧制，教习生徒，具为课试之法，以尽砥砺之道。
现代文：国子等学校，也应申明旧制，教习学生，制定考试之法，以尽激励之道。 
English: Kuniko and other schools should also affirm the old system, teach students, formulate the law of examination, and do their best to motivate.

古文：八月壬寅，上御龙舟幸江都，以左武卫大将军郭衍为前军，右武卫大将军李景为后军。
现代文：八月十五日，炀帝乘龙舟巡幸江都，以左武卫大将军郭衍为前军，右武卫大将军李景为后军。
English: On August 15th, Emperor Qian took a dragon boat to tour the Yangtze River, with General Guo Yan of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard as the vanguard, and General Li Jing of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard as the rearguard.

古文：文武官五品以上给楼船，九品以上给黄篾。
现代文：文武官员五品以上的给楼船，九品以上的给小船。
English: Civil and military officials with five or more products will be given a mansion ship, and those with nine or more products will be given a small ship.

古文：舳舻相接，二百余里。
现代文：各种船只前后相接，连绵二百多里。
English: Vessels of all kinds come and go, stretching for more than two hundred miles.

古文：冬十月己丑，赦江、淮已南，扬州给复五年；旧总管内，给复三年。
现代文：冬二月初二，赦免江、淮以南、扬州徭役五年；扬州旧总管辖区内，免役三年。
English: On the second day of February in winter, Jiang, Huainan, and Yangzhou were pardoned from five years of forced labor; Yangzhou was exempted from three years of forced labor in the former general jurisdiction area.

古文：十一月己未，以大将军崔仲方为礼部尚书。
现代文：十一月初三，任命大将军崔仲方为礼部尚书。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, General Cui Zhongfang was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：二年春正月辛酉，东京成，赐监督者有差。
现代文：二年春正月初六，东京建成，赏赐各监督官员数量不等财物。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, Tokyo was completed, and each supervisory official was rewarded with an unequal number of assets.

古文：以大理卿梁毗为刑部尚书。
现代文：任命大理卿梁毗为刑部尚书。
English: He appointed Liang Pi, the Minister of Justice, as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：丁卯，遣十使，并省州县。
现代文：十一日，派出十名使者，合并省、州、县。
English: On the 11th, ten envoys were sent to merge the provinces, prefectures, and counties.

古文：二月丙戌，诏尚书令杨素、吏部尚书牛弘、大将军宇文恺、内史侍郎虞世基、礼部侍郎许善心制定舆服。
现代文：二月初一，下诏让尚书令杨素、吏部尚书牛弘、大将军宇文恺、内史侍郎虞世基、礼部尚书许善心制定车马衣冠定式。
English: On the first day of February, it was decreed that Yang Su, Niu Hong, Uwen Yao, Yu Shiji, and Xu Zenshin of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies should work out the dress code.

古文：始备辇辂及五时副车。
现代文：开始配备辇辂和五时使用的副车。
English: Began to be equipped with a sleigh and a sidecar for use at five o'clock.

古文：上常服皮弁，十有二琪。
现代文：皇帝经常戴皮冠，上有十二块美玉。
English: The emperor often wore a leather crown with twelve precious stones on it.

古文：文官弁服，珮玉；五品已上，给犊车通宪；三公、亲王加油络。
现代文：文官用弁服，上有佩玉。五品以上的，赐给牛车车幔，三公、亲王加赐油络。
English: For civil servants, a valet dress with a feathered bead was used. For those with five or more pins, an ox-drawn cart was given, and the three princes and the prince were given a wreath of oil.

古文：武官平巾帻，裤褶；三品已上，给瓟槊。
现代文：武官戴平头巾，穿夹衣套裤，三品以上的，赐给瓜槊为仪仗。
English: The military attaché wears a flat headscarf, a jacket and trousers, and more than three articles are given to the melon egret as an honor.

古文：下至胥吏，服色各有差。
现代文：直至下吏，服色都不相同。
English: All the way down to the lowest officials, the color of their clothing is different.

古文：非庶人不得戎服。
现代文：不是平民不得身穿戎服。
English: Non-civilians are not allowed to wear military uniforms.

古文：戊戌，置都尉官。
现代文：十三日，设都尉官。
English: On the 13th, he was appointed captain.

古文：三月庚午，车驾发江都。
现代文：三月十六日，车驾从江都出发。
English: On March 16th, the driver set off from Jiangdu.

古文：先是，太府少卿何稠、太府丞云定兴盛修仪仗，于是课州县送羽毛。
现代文：早些时候，太府少卿何稠、太府丞云定兴大修仪仗用品，于是下令各州县送羽毛。
English: Earlier, Taifu Shosho Ho Choso and Taifu Cho Yun Dingxing overhauled ceremonial war supplies, and ordered all prefectures and counties to send feathers.

古文：百姓求捕之，网罗被水陆，禽兽有堪氈毦之用者，殆无遗类。
现代文：百姓到处寻找和捕捉野兽，罗网遮满水中和陆地，禽兽的羽毛能够制作大衣和充当饰物的，都被捕获无遗。
English: The people searched for and caught wild animals everywhere, the trawling nets covered the water and land, and the feathers of the animals, which could make coats and serve as ornaments, were all captured.

古文：至是而成。
现代文：到这时，仪仗也就齐备了。
English: By this time, the ceremonial battle was ready to begin.

古文：夏四月庚戌，上自伊阙，陈法驾，备千乘万骑，入于东京。
现代文：夏四月二十六日，皇帝到达伊阙，陈列皇帝专用的法驾，准备了千万匹马，进入东京。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor arrived in Ili, displayed the emperor's special Dharma chariot, prepared tens of thousands of horses, and entered Tokyo.

古文：辛亥，上御端门，大赦天下，免今年租赋。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝来到端门，大赦天下，并免去全国当年租赋。
English: On the 27th, the emperor came to the gate, pardoned the world, and exempted the whole country from the rent.

古文：癸丑，以冀州刺史杨文思为民部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，任命冀州刺史杨文思为民部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Yang Wensi, a prominent scholar from Jizhou, was appointed as the Minister of People's Affairs.

古文：五月甲寅，金紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书李通坐事免。
现代文：五月初一，金紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书李通因事被免职。
English: On the first day of May, Jin Zi Guanglu, a doctor, and Li Tong, a military official, were removed from their posts.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 旌表先哲，式在飨祀。所以优礼贤能，显彰遗爱。
现代文：初二，下诏说： 表彰先哲，列以祭祀，能够以此优待和礼敬贤能，显示和彰明遗爱。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the next imperial edict said: "In honoring the predecessors of the sages, it is possible to show and highlight the legacy of love with this preferential treatment and courtesy.

古文：朕永鉴前修，尚想名德，何尝不兴叹九原，属怀千载。
现代文：朕永以前贤为鉴，追想其名德，何尝不兴叹于九原，感怀于千载！
English: I will always follow the example of the sages and think of their great virtues. How can I not sigh in Jiuhara and feel nostalgic for thousands of years!

古文：其自古以来贤人君子，有能树声立德，佐世匡时，博利殊功，有益于人者，并宜营立祠宇，以时致祭。
现代文：凡自古以来贤人君子，有能建树名声，立有德行，佐世匡时，博利殊功，有益民众的，都应建立庙宇，按时祭祀。
English: All the wise men and gentlemen since ancient times, who have been able to build a reputation, establish a virtue, establish a world-renowned time, have made great contributions, and are beneficial to the people, should build temples and make sacrifices on time.

古文：坟垄之处，不得侵践。有司量为条式，称朕意焉。 
现代文：坟垄所在之处，不得损坏践踏，有关部门量情制定规格，以称我心。 
English: Where the grave ridge is located, it must not be damaged or trampled, and the relevant departments shall formulate the specifications according to the conditions.

古文：六月壬子，以尚书令、太子太师杨素为司徒。
现代文：六月二十九日，任命尚书令、太子太师杨素为司徒。
English: On June 29th, Shang Shurong and Yang Su, the prince and grandmaster, were appointed as tutors.

古文：进封豫章王暕为齐王。
现代文：晋封豫章王为齐王。
English: Yu Zhang Wang was promoted to Qi Wang.

古文：秋七月癸丑，以卫尉卿卫玄为工部尚书。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命卫尉卿卫玄为工部尚书。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Wei Xuan, a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：庚申，制百官不得计考增级。必有德行功能，灼然显著者，擢之。
现代文：初八，规定百官不得按照考课次数而增加品级，必须有德行功绩才能十分显著的，才可加以晋升。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was stipulated that officials could not be promoted according to the number of examinations they had taken, and that they could only be promoted if they had made significant contributions to virtue.

古文：壬戌，擢籓邸旧臣鲜于罗等二十七人，官爵有差。
现代文：初十，晋升炀帝任藩王时的旧臣鲜于罗等二十七人的官职和爵位，高低不等。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, twenty-seven people, including former vassals such as Xian Yu Luo, who were promoted when Emperor Zou was appointed as the king of the domain, received official positions and peerages, ranging from high to low.

古文：甲戌，皇太子昭薨。
现代文：二十二日，皇太子昭去世。
English: On the 22nd, Crown Prince Akira passed away.

古文：乙亥，上柱国、司徒、楚国公杨素薨。
现代文：二十三日，上柱国、司徒、楚国公杨素去世。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Su, the prince of Shangzhu, Szeto and Chu, passed away.

古文：八月辛卯，封皇孙倓为燕王，侗为越王，侑为代王。
现代文：八月初九，封皇孙亻炎为燕王，侗为越王，侑为代王。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Emperor Sun Wenyan was named the king of Yan, the king of Yue, and the acting king.

古文：九月乙丑，立秦王俊子浩为秦王。
现代文：九月十四日，立秦王俊的儿子浩为秦王。
English: On September 14th, the son of Qin Wangjun, Hao, was crowned King of Qin.

古文：冬十月戊子，以灵州刺史段文振为兵部尚书。
现代文：冬十月初七，任命灵州刺史段文振为兵部尚书。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Lingzhou's top military official, Duan Wenzhen, was appointed to the post of military commissar.

古文：十二月庚寅，诏曰： 前代帝王，因时创业，君民建国，礼尊南面。
现代文：十二月初十，下诏说： 前代帝王，因时创业，君民建国，以礼尊居南面。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the following edict was issued: The former emperor, because of the time, started a business, built a country, and lived in the south with dignity.

古文：面历运推移，年代永久，丘垄残毁，樵牧相趋；茔兆堙芜，封树莫辨。
现代文：而时运推移，年代长久，坟墓残毁，打樵放牧者相继而至，使坟茔埋没荒芜，封树凋残难辨。
English: However, the passage of time, the passage of time, the destruction of tombs, the arrival of herdsmen in succession, the burial of graves, and the withering of trees are difficult to distinguish.

古文：兴言沦灭，有怆于怀。
现代文：每感思沦灭之情，心中怆然。
English: Every time I feel the feeling of being doomed, my heart sinks.

古文：自古以来帝王陵墓，可给随近十户，蠲其杂役，以供守视。 
现代文：自古代以来帝王陵墓，可赐给附近十户人家，免除他们杂役，以供看守。 
English: Since ancient times, the imperial mausoleum can be given to ten nearby families, exempting them from chores to provide guards.

古文：三年春正月癸亥，敕并州逆人已流配而逃亡者，所获之处，即宜斩决。
现代文：三年春正月十四日，下令并州叛逆犯人已经流放发配自行逃亡的，在所捕获的地方，立即处斩。
English: On the 14th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, it was ordered that the state traitor prisoners who had been exiled and assigned to escape on their own would be immediately executed in the place where they were captured.

古文：丙子，长星竟天，出于东壁，二旬而止。
现代文：二十七日，长星光照满天，从东壁宿出来，二十天后才终止。
English: On the 27th, the long star light shined all over the sky and came out from the east wall, and it only ended after 20 days.

古文：是月，武阳郡上言河水清。
现代文：当月，武阳郡上奏说，黄河水清。
English: That month, Wuyang County reported that the Yellow River water was clear.

古文：二月己丑，慧星见于东井、文昌；历大陵、五车、北河，入太微，扫帝座，前后百余日而止。
现代文：二月初十，彗星出现于东井、文昌，经过大陵、五车、北河，进入太微，扫进帝座，前后过了一百多天才消失。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, the comet appeared in Dongjing and Wenchang, passed through Daling, Wuchang and Beihe, entered Taimiao, swept into the constellation of the Emperor, and disappeared after more than a hundred days.

古文：三月辛亥，车驾还京师。
现代文：三月初二，车驾回到京城。
English: On the second day of March, I drove back to Beijing.

古文：壬子，以大将军姚辩为左卫将军。
现代文：初三，任命大将军姚辩任左卫将军。
English: On the third day of the junior high school term, he appointed General Yao Yan as the left guard general.

古文：癸丑，遣羽骑硃宽使于流求国。
现代文：初四，派羽骑尉朱宽出使流求国。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, he sent Captain Zhu Guang on a mission to seek a country.

古文：乙卯，河间王弘薨。
现代文：初六，河间王弘去世。
English: At the age of six, Kawama Wanghiro passed away.

古文：夏四月庚辰，诏曰： 古者帝王观风俗，皆所以忧勤兆庶，安集遐荒。
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏说： 古代帝王观风俗，都以此显示为万众忧虑，安抚远荒之人。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: The ancient emperor-viewing customs are all used to show the worries of all people and to appease those who are far away.

古文：自蕃夷内附，未遑亲抚，山东经乱，须加存恤。
现代文：自蕃夷内附以来，未顾及亲自慰问，山东历经战乱，应当加以抚恤。
English: Since the annexation of Shanxi Province, Shandong Province should be given a pension, despite the lack of personal condolences.

古文：今欲安辑河北，巡省赵、魏，所司依式。 
现代文：如今准备安抚河北，巡察赵、魏地区，所在地方依规格准备。 
English: Now they are preparing to pacify Hebei Province and inspect the Zhao and Wei regions. The locations will be prepared according to specifications.

古文：甲申，颁律令，大赦天下，关内给复三年。
现代文：初六，颁布法律条令，大赦天下，关内免役三年。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, a decree was issued to grant amnesty to the whole country, and the Guanai was exempted from military service for three years.

古文：壬辰，改州为郡。
现代文：十四日，改州为郡。
English: On the 14th, it was changed to a county.

古文：改度量衡，并依古式。
现代文：更改度量衡，一律依照古代样式。
English: Change the measures and weights, all in accordance with the ancient style.

古文：改上柱国以下官为大夫。
现代文：改称上柱国以下官员为大夫。
English: The officials below Shangzhu Guo were renamed as doctors.

古文：甲午，诏曰：
现代文：十七日，下诏说：
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued:

古文：爰及一艺可取，亦宜采录；若众善毕举，与时无弃。
现代文： 天下重任，非独理能安；帝王之功，岂一士之策。自古明君哲王，立政经邦，何尝不选贤与能，振拔贤才于淹滞之境。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have been kings and philosophers, and states have been established based on politics and scriptures. How can we not choose the wise and the capable, and elevate the wise and the talented in a state of stagnation?

古文：以此求理，庶几非远。文武有职事者，五品已上，宜依令十科举人。有一于此，不必求备。
现代文：周称多士，汉号得人，上想前风，满怀钦伫文武官员在职任事者，五品以上的，应依令十科举人，有一艺可取便可举荐，不必求全责备。
English: Zhou said many scholars, the Han Dynasty got people, the Shang Dynasty wanted to be ahead of the times, full of wisdom and culture, and the military and civilian officials on duty, more than five grades, should be nominated according to the ten disciplines, and if there is a skill to be recommended, it is not necessary to seek full blame.

古文：朕当待以不次，随才升用。
现代文：我当破格厚待，量才升用。
English: I should be treated exceptionally well, and the quantity should be increased.

古文：其见任九品已上官者，不在举送之限。
现代文：凡现任九品以上官员，不在举送之列。 
English: All current officials with nine or more pins are not included in the list.

古文：丙申，车驾北巡狩。
现代文：十八日，车驾北巡。
English: On the 18th, I went on a driving tour of the north.

古文：丁酉，以刑部尚书宇文弼为礼部尚书。
现代文：十九日，任命刑部尚书宇文瞖为礼部尚书。
English: On the 19th, he appointed the head of the Ministry of Justice, U Wenjun, as the head of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：戊戌，敕百司不得践暴禾稼。
现代文：二十日，下令百官不得践踏禾苗庄稼。
English: On the 20th, officials were ordered not to trample on crops.

古文：其有须开为路者，有司计地所收，即以近仓酬赐，务从优厚。
现代文：凡是必须开为道路的，有关方面计算土地的收成，就在附近官仓中加以酬报，务必优厚。
English: If it is necessary to build a road, the relevant parties will calculate the yield of the land and reward it in the nearby government warehouse. It must be generous.

古文：己亥，至赤岸泽，以太牢祭故太师李穆。
现代文：二十一日，到达赤岸泽，以太牢祭礼祭祀已故太师李穆。
English: On the twenty-first day, they arrived at Akagisawa, where they held a memorial service for the late Grand Master Li Mu.

古文：五月丁巳，突厥启民可汗遣子拓特勒来朝。
现代文：五月初九，突厥启民可汗派儿子拓特勤来朝见。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth lunar month, the Turkic Qimin Khan sent his son Tuo to the Imperial Court.

古文：戊午，发河北十余郡丁男，自太行山达于并州，以通驰道。
现代文：初十，征发河北十余郡男丁，从太行山直达并州，修筑车道。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, more than ten counties in Hebei were requisitioned to build a road from Taihang Mountain to Yingzhou.

古文：丙寅，启民可汗遣其兄子毗黎伽特勒来朝。
现代文：十八日，启民可汗派他哥哥的儿子毗黎伽特勤前来朝见。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Qimin Khan sent his brother's son, Pi Li Jia, to meet the emperor.

古文：天子七庙，事著前经；诸侯二昭，义有差降。
现代文：二十三日，启民可汗派使者请求自己入塞迎接皇帝车驾，炀帝不允许。二十五日，有彗星在文昌，上将星都在摇动。六月初四，在连谷狩猎。
English: On the 23rd, the Khan of the Qin Dynasty sent an envoy to request that he enter the citadel to meet the emperor's chariot, but the emperor did not allow it. On the 25th, there was a comet in Wenchang, and the general stars were shaking. On the 4th of June, hunting in Liangu.

古文：故知以多为贵，王者之礼，今可依用，贻厥后昆。
现代文：初十，下诏说 ：高祖文皇帝应别建庙宇，以显彰巍巍大德 
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the next imperial edict said: Emperor Gaozouwen should build a temple to show his great virtue

古文：戊子，次榆林郡。
现代文：十一日，到达榆林郡。
English: On the 11th, he arrived in Yulin County.

古文：丁酉，启民可汗来朝。
现代文：二十日，启民可汗前来朝见。
English: On the 20th, Qimin Khan came to see the emperor.

古文：己亥，吐谷浑、高昌并遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十二日，吐谷浑、高昌都派使者进贡地方特产。
English: On the 22nd, envoys from both Tuyuhun and Gaochang paid tribute with local specialties.

古文：甲辰，上御北楼，观渔于河，以宴百僚。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝登上北楼，在黄河观看捕鱼，宴请百官。
English: On the 26th, the emperor ascended the north tower, watched the fishing in the Yellow River, and held a banquet for hundreds of officials.

古文：秋七月辛亥，启民可汗上表请变服，袭冠带。
现代文：秋七月初四，启民可汗上表请求改变原服饰，袭用中原冠带。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Qimin Khan made a request to change the original costume and use the Central Plains crown.

古文：诏启民赞拜不名，在诸侯王上。
现代文：下诏启民可汗参拜时不必称名，位居诸侯王之上。
English: According to the following edict, the Qimin Khan does not need to be named when he visits, and he is above the princes.

古文：甲寅，上于郡城东御大帐，其下备仪卫，建旌旗，宴启民及其部落三千五百人。
现代文：初七，皇帝住在郡城东头的大帐里，下面布置了仪仗和侍卫，立起大旗，宴请启民可汗和他部落里三千五百人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor lived in a large tent at the east end of the county seat. A ceremonial battle and attendants were arranged below, a large flag was set up, and a banquet was held for the Qimin Khan and 3,500 members of his tribe.

古文：奏百戏之乐，赐启民及其部落各有差。
现代文：表演百戏作乐，赏赐启民可汗和他部落里的人，数量多少不等。
English: Perform a hundred plays and make music, reward the people of Qimin Khan and his tribe, the number varies.

古文：丙子，杀光禄大夫贺苦弼、礼部尚书宇文弼、太常卿高颎。
现代文：二十八日，杀光禄大夫贺若弼、礼部尚书宇文瞖、太常卿高赹。
English: On the 28th, He Ruojuan, the doctor of Guanglu, Shangshu Wenyuan of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Gao Yao, the Tai Changqing, were killed.

古文：尚书左仆射苏威坐事免。
现代文：尚书左仆射苏威因事被免职。
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Suwei, was removed from his post as a result of the incident.

古文：发丁男百余万筑长城，西钜榆林，东至紫河，二旬而罢，死者十五六。
现代文：征发丁男一百多万人修筑长城，西至榆林，东到紫河，二十天停止，死亡的有十分之五六。
English: More than a million men were conscripted and sent to build the Great Wall, stretching from Yulin in the west to Zihe in the east. Construction was halted for 20 days, and 56 out of every 10 people died.

古文：八月壬午，车驾发榆林。
现代文：八月初六，车驾从榆林出发。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, I drove from Yulin.

古文：乙酉，启民饰卢清道以候乘舆，帝幸其帐。
现代文：初九，启民可汗装饰居庐，清扫道路以迎候皇帝的车驾，皇帝来到他的帐中。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Qimin Khan decorated the residence, swept the road to welcome the emperor's car, and the emperor came to his account.

古文：启民奉觞上寿，宴赐极厚。
现代文：启民可汗举觞为皇帝祝寿。宴席上赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Qimin Khan held up a scepter to celebrate the emperor's birthday. The rewards at the banquet were very rich.

古文：上谓高丽使者曰： 归语尔王，当早来朝见。
现代文：皇帝对高丽国的使者说 ：回去告诉你们国王，应当早来朝见。
English: The emperor said to the envoy of the Koryo Kingdom: Go back and tell your king that he should come to see you early in the morning.

古文：不然者，吾与启民巡彼土矣。 
现代文：不然的话，我和启民可汗就准备巡视那块土地了。 
English: Otherwise, I and Qimin Khan are ready to inspect the land.

古文：皇后亦幸义城公主帐。
现代文：皇后也进入义城公主的帐篷中。
English: The empress also entered the tent of the princess of Yicheng.

古文：己丑，启民可汗归蕃。
现代文：十三日，启民可汗回到本土。
English: On the 13th, Qimin Khan returned to the mainland.

古文：癸巳，入楼烦关。
现代文：十七日，皇帝进入楼烦关。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor entered the palace.

古文：壬寅，次太原，诏营晋阳宫。
现代文：二十六日，到达太原，下诏营建晋阳宫。
English: On the 26th, he arrived at Taiyuan and ordered the construction of Jinyang Palace.

古文：九月己未，次济源，幸御史大夫张衡宅，宴享极欢。
现代文：九月十三日，到达济源，前往御史大夫张衡的宅院，宴席间十分欢乐。
English: On September 13th, they arrived in Jiyuan and went to the residence of Grand Historian Zhang Heng. They were very happy during the banquet.

古文：己巳，至于东都。
现代文：二十三日，到达东都。
English: On the 23rd, I arrived in Dongdu.

古文：壬申，以齐王暕为河南尹、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十六日，任命齐王为河南尹、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Qi Wang as the Henan Yin, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments.

古文：癸酉，以户部尚书杨文思为纳言。
现代文：二十七日，任命户部尚书杨文思为纳言。
English: On the 27th, Yang Wensi, the head of the Household Division, was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：四年春正月乙巳，诏发河北诸郡男女百余万开永济渠，引沁水南达于河，北通涿郡。
现代文：四年春正月初一，下诏征发河北各郡男女一百多万人开挖永济渠，引沁水南通到黄河，北通到涿郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, more than one million men and women from all counties in Hebei Province were ordered to dig the Yongji Canal and divert water from the South Channel to the Yellow River and from the North Channel to Shixian County.

古文：庚戌，百僚大射于允武殿。
现代文：初六，百官在允武殿举行大射之礼。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the centurions held a grand firing ceremony at the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁卯，赐城内居民米各十石。
现代文：二十五日，赏赐京城中居民各十石米。
English: On the 25th, residents of central Kyoto were awarded ten koku of rice each.

古文：壬申，以太府卿元寿为内史令，鸿胪卿杨玄感为礼部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，任命太府卿元寿为内史令，鸿胪卿杨玄感为礼部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Grand Mufu Emperor Yuan Shou was appointed to the post of Inner Historian, and Hongwu Emperor Yang Xuanxuan was appointed to the post of Ceremonial Secretary.

古文：癸酉，以工部尚书卫玄为右武候大将军，大理卿长孙炽为户部尚书。
现代文：二十九日，任命工部尚书卫玄为右武侯大将军，大理卿长孙炽为户部尚书。
English: On the 29th, Shangshu Wei Xuan of the Ministry of Industry was appointed as the grand marshal of the Right Wu, and Dali Ching's eldest grandson Blazing was appointed as Shangshu of the Household.

古文：二月己卯，遣司朝谒者崔毅使突厥处罗，致汗血马。
现代文：二月初六，派司朝谒者崔毅出使突厥处罗可汗，求要汗血马。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the person in charge of the pilgrimage, Cui Yi, sent an envoy to the Turkic Office, Luo Khan, to ask for a blood-sweat horse.

古文：三月辛酉，以将作大匠宇文恺为工部尚书。
现代文：三月十八日，任命将作大匠宇文恺为工部尚书。
English: On March 18th, the appointment of the great craftsman Uwen Wei as the head of the engineering department was announced.

古文：壬戌，百济、倭、赤土、迦罗含国并遣使贡方物。
现代文：十九日，百济、倭、赤土、迦逻含国都派遣使者进贡地方物品。
English: On the 19th, Baekje, Wa, Chakdo, and Kalgo countries all sent envoys to pay tribute with local goods.

古文：乙丑，车驾幸五原，因出塞，巡长城。
现代文：二十二日，车驾前往五原，因而出塞，巡视长城。
English: On the 22nd, he drove to Wuhuan, and thus got out of the traffic jam to inspect the Great Wall.

古文：丙寅，遣屯田主事常骏使赤土，致罗罽。
现代文：二十三日，派屯田主事常骏出使赤土，送去锦罗绸缎。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of Tonden sent an envoy of red clay to Jinluo.

古文：夏四月丙午，以离石之汾源、临泉，雁门之秀容为楼烦郡。
现代文：夏四月初四，把离石郡的汾源、临泉和雁门的秀容划为楼烦郡。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 6

古文：起汾阳宫。
现代文：修建汾阳宫。
English: Shenyang Palace was built.

古文：癸丑，以河内太守张定和为左屯卫大将军。
现代文：十一日，任命河内太守张定和为左屯卫大将军。
English: On the 11th, Zhang Dinghe, the governor of Hanoi, was appointed General of the Left Division.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 突厥意利珍豆启民可汗率领部落，保附关塞，遵奉朝礼，思改戎俗。
现代文：十三日，下诏说： 突厥意利珍豆启民可汗率领部落，保护关塞，尊奉朝廷礼仪，想要改变戎俗。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: "Turkic Yi Li Jizhen Mame Qimin Khan is leading the tribe, protecting the pass, honoring the imperial court etiquette, and wants to change the military custom.

古文：频入谒觐，屡有陈请。以氈墙毳幕，事穷荒陋；上栋下宇，愿同比屋。
现代文：多次入朝拜见，并多次陈奏请求说，毡墙毳幕，居处荒陋，愿同内地兴建房屋，上栋下宇。
English: He has visited the Imperial Palace many times to pay homage, and has repeatedly requested that the walls and curtains be torn down, the residence be desolate, and that he would like to build a house with the mainland, from top to bottom.

古文：诚心恳切，朕之所重。
现代文：十分真诚恳切，朕十分重视。
English: Very sincerely, I attach great importance to it.

古文：宜于万寿戍置城造屋，其帷帐床褥以上，随事量给，务从优厚，称朕意焉。 
现代文：应当在万寿戍建造城市和房屋，凡使用的床褥帷帐等用品，根据需要量情供给，务必优厚，以称我心。 
English: Cities and houses should be built in Wanshou, and all the bedding, curtains and other supplies used should be supplied in accordance with the needs and conditions, and must be of good quality, so as to win my heart.

古文：五月壬申，蜀郡获三足乌，张掖获玄狐，各一。
现代文：五月初一，蜀郡捕获三足鸟一只，张掖捕获玄狐一头。
English: On the first day of May, Shu County captured a three-legged bird, and Zhangye captured a black fox.

古文：秋七月辛巳，发丁男二十余万筑长城，自榆林谷而东。
现代文：秋七月初九，征发丁男二十多万人修筑长城，从榆林谷向东。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, more than 200,000 men were conscripted to build the Great Wall from the Yulin Valley to the east.

古文：乙未，左翊卫大将军宇文述破吐谷浑于曼头、赤水。
现代文：二十四日，左翊卫大将军宇文述在曼头、赤水击败吐谷浑。
English: On the 24th, General of the Left Division Yu Wenshu defeated Tuyagun at Mantou and Chishui.

古文：八月辛酉，亲祠恆岳，河北道郡守毕集。
现代文：八月二十一日，亲自祭祀恒岳，河北道的郡守们都前来。
English: On August 21st, the county governors of Hebei Province all came to personally offer sacrifices to Hengyue.

古文：大赦天下，车驾所经郡县，免一年租调。
现代文：大赦天下。车驾所经过的郡县，免除一年租调。
English: The county you drive through is exempt from the one-year lease transfer.

古文：冬十月丙午，诏曰： 先师尼父，圣德在躬，诞发天纵之姿，宪章文武之道；命世膺期，蕴兹素王。
现代文：九月初一，征召天下能够驯养鹰的人，全部到东京集中，一万多人来到。初八，彗星从五车出现，扫过文昌，到房宿而灭。
English: On the first day of September, everyone in the world who could tame an eagle was summoned to Tokyo, and more than ten thousand people came. In the eighth month of the year, the comet appeared from five cars, swept through Wenchang, and disappeared into the room.

古文：而颓山之叹，忽逾于千祀；盛德之美，不在于百代。永惟懿范，宜有优崇。
现代文：十一日，下诏修建长城的人免交一年租赋。冬十月初七，下诏说： 先师孔子，圣德于身永为典范，应当优崇。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the next edict exempted those who built the Great Wall from paying a year's rent. In the winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, the next edict said: Confucius, the forerunner, is a model of sanctity and should be highly respected.

古文：可立孔子后为绍圣侯，有司求其苗裔，录以申上。 
现代文：可立孔子后代为绍圣侯，有关部门求其后裔，录以上奏。 
English: The descendants of Confucius can be set up as Shao Sheng Hou, and the relevant departments ask their descendants to record and play.

古文：辛亥，诏曰： 昔周王下车，首封唐虞之胤；汉帝承历，亦命殷周之后。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 昔时周王下车，首封唐虞之后；汉帝承位，也封殷、周后裔。
English: On the 12th, the next edict said: In the past, Zhou Wang got off the train, after the first Tang Yu; Han Emperor succession, also sealed Yin, Zhou descendants.

古文：皆所以褒立先代，宪章在昔。
现代文：都是以此褒立先代，宪章自古而然。
English: All of them have been established in this way to praise their predecessors, and the charter has been around since ancient times.

古文：朕嗣膺景业，傍求雅训，有一弘益，钦若令典。
现代文：朕继承大业，旁求雅训，有一弘益，奉为令典。
English: I am the inheritor of a great cause, and I am seeking to learn from others, and I have received a boon, which is regarded as a command.

古文：以为周兼夏殷，文质大备；汉有天下，车书混一；魏晋沿袭，风流未远。
现代文：以为周兼用夏殷之礼，文质大备；汉有天下，车书同一；魏晋沿袭，风流未远。
English: It was thought that Zhou used both Xia and Yin's etiquette, and the literary quality was great; Han had the world, and the car book was the same; Wei and Jin followed suit, and the trend was not far away.

古文：并宜立后，以存继绝之义。
现代文：都应为之立后嗣，以存继绝世之义。
English: Heirs should be established for all of them, in order to preserve the principle of succession.

古文：有司可求其胄绪，列闻。 
现代文：有司可寻求其后裔，列名奏闻。 
English: You can search for his descendants and record their names.

古文：乙卯，颁新式于天下。
现代文：十六日，颁布新的规定于天下。
English: On the 16th, the new regulations were promulgated to the world.

古文：五年春正月丙子，改东京为东都。
现代文：五年春正月初八，改称东京为东都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, Tokyo was renamed the eastern capital.

古文：癸未，诏天下均田 戊子，上自东都还京师。
现代文：十五日，下诏天下实行均田。二十日，皇帝从东都回京城。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor decreed that the whole country should practice equal fields. On the twentieth day, the emperor returned to the capital from the eastern capital.

古文：己丑，制民间铁叉搭钩刃之类，皆禁绝之。
现代文：二十一日，规定民间使用的铁叉、搭钩、小矛之类，一律禁止。
English: On the 21st, it was stipulated that the use of forks, hooks, spears, etc. by the general public was prohibited.

古文：太守每岁密上属官景迹。
现代文：太守每年秘密上奏所属官员状况和事迹。
English: The Tai Shou secretly reports the status and deeds of the officials who belong to it every year.

古文：二月戊戌，次于阌乡。
现代文：二月初一，皇帝到达阌乡。
English: On the first day of February, the emperor arrived in Handan.

古文：诏祭古帝王陵及开皇功臣墓。
现代文：下诏祭祀古代帝王陵和开皇时期功臣的坟墓。
English: The lower hall enshrines the ancient imperial mausoleum and the tomb of a meritorious subject from the time of the founding emperor.

古文：庚子制，汉魏、周官不得为廕。
现代文：初三，规定魏、周时期的官员不能再荫后代。
English: On the third day of the first month, it was stipulated that officials from the Wei and Zhou dynasties could no longer be passed down to future generations.

古文：辛丑，赤土国遣使贡方物。
现代文：初四，赤土国派使者进贡地方特产。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Red Earth country sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：戊申，车驾至京师。
现代文：十一日，车驾到达京城。
English: On the 11th day, I arrived in Kyoto by car.

古文：丙辰，宴耆旧四百人于武德殿，颁赐各有差。
现代文：十九日，在武德殿设宴宴请四百名德高望重的老人，赏赐物品，多少不等。
English: On the 19th, a banquet was held at the Wude Hall for four hundred elderly people of high moral standing, and gifts were given, the amount of which varied.

古文：己未，上御崇德殿之西院，愀然不悦，顾谓左右曰： 此先帝所居，实用增感，情所未安。于此院之西，别营一殿。 
现代文：二十二日，皇帝来到崇德殿的西院，心中伤感不乐，他对身边人说 ：这是先帝所居住的地方，实在让人增添伤感，心中不安，可在这院子的西边，另建一座宫殿。 
English: On the 22nd, the emperor came to the West Courtyard of the Chongde Hall, feeling sad and unhappy in his heart. He said to those around him, "This is the place where the former emperor lived. It really makes people feel sad and uneasy, but on the west side of this courtyard, build another palace."

古文：壬戌，制父母听随子之官。
现代文：二十五日，规定父母可以随从儿子到官府居住。
English: On the 25th, it was stipulated that parents could accompany their sons to live in government offices.

古文：三月己巳，车驾西巡河右。
现代文：三月初二，车驾西巡到河西。
English: On the second day of March, the car drove westward to Hexi.

古文：庚午，有司言武功男子史永遵与从父昆弟同居，上嘉之，赐物一百段，米二百石，表其门闾。
现代文：初三，有关官员上奏说，武功有位男子叫史永遵，和他堂叔父的兄弟们一起居住，皇帝很赞许，赏赐布一百段，米二百石，表彰他家门庭。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the relevant officials reported that there was a man named Shi Yongzun, who lived with his uncle's brothers, and the emperor was very approving, awarding one hundred pieces of cloth, two hundred meters of stone, and commending his family.

古文：乙亥，幸扶风旧宅。
现代文：初八，前往扶风的旧宅院。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I went to Fu Feng's old mansion.

古文：夏四月己亥，大猎于陇西。
现代文：夏四月初三，在陇西大举狩猎。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, there was a large-scale goose hunting in Shaanxi.

古文：壬寅，高丽、吐谷浑、伊吾并遣使来朝。
现代文：初六，高丽、吐谷浑、伊吾都使者前来朝见。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, emissaries from Goryeo, Tutian, and Yigou all came to see the emperor.

古文：乙巳，次狄道。
现代文：初九，到达狄道。
English: Early 9th, Dade Road.

古文：党项羌来贡方物。
现代文：党项、羌前来进贡地方特产。
English: Local special products are brought in as tributes to the party and the emperor.

古文：癸亥，出临津关，度黄河，至西平，陈兵讲武。
现代文：二十七日，出临津关，渡过黄河，到达西平，陈列军队，讲习武艺。
English: On the 27th, they left Imjinguan, crossed the Yellow River, and arrived at Xiping, where they displayed their troops and taught martial arts.

古文：五月乙亥，上大猎于延山。
现代文：五月初九，皇帝在拔延山大举狩猎。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, the emperor went hunting in Banyan Mountain.

古文：长围周亘二千里。
现代文：山周围长达二千里。
English: The mountain has a circumference of two thousand miles.

古文：庚辰，入长宁谷。
现代文：十四日，进入长宁谷。
English: On the 14th, it entered the Changning Valley.

古文：壬午，度星岭。
现代文：十六日，越过星岭。
English: On the 16th, they crossed the Xingling Mountains.

古文：甲申，宴郡臣于金山之上。
现代文：十八日，在金山上宴请群臣。
English: On the 18th, he held a banquet for his ministers on the mountain.

古文：丙戌，梁浩亹，御马度而桥坏，斩朝散大夫黄亘及督役者九人。
现代文：二十日，在浩架设桥梁，皇帝御马经过时桥坏，斩了朝散大夫黄亘和监督及架桥的九人。
English: On the 20th, a bridge was built in Hao. When Emperor Mima passed by, the bridge broke, and he beheaded the Choshan doctor Huang Wuan and the nine people who supervised and built the bridge.

古文：吐谷浑主率众保覆袁川。
现代文：吐谷浑国王率领部众守在覆袁川。
English: King Tutankhun led his troops to besiege Yuanchuan.

古文：帝分命内史元寿南屯金山，兵部尚书段文振北屯雪山，太仆卿杨义臣东屯琵琶峡，将军张寿西屯泥岭，四面围之。
现代文：皇帝分别命令内史元寿南屯在金山，兵部尚书段文振往北屯守雪山，太仆卿杨义臣东屯于琵琶峡，将军张寿西屯兵泥岭，四面包围敌人。
English: The emperor separately ordered the internal historian Yuan Shou to set up camp in Jinshan in the south, the military commander Shang Shuhan to set up camp in the north to guard the Snow Mountain, the great servant Yang Yichen to set up camp in Biwa Gorge in the east, and the general Zhang Shou to set up camp in the west to surround the enemy in all directions.

古文：吐谷浑主伏允以数十骑遁出，遣其名王诈称伏允，保车我真山。
现代文：吐谷浑国王伏允带着几十骑逃出，派遣下面名王冒充伏允，据守在车我真山。
English: King Fuxiong of Tuyugun fled with dozens of horsemen, and sent the following famous kings to impersonate Fuxiong, and guarded the real mountain in the chariot.

古文：壬辰，诏右屯卫大将军张定和往捕之。
现代文：二十六日，命令右屯卫大将军张定和前往追捕。
English: On the 26th, he ordered Zhang Dinghe, the general of the Right Tunwei, to go in pursuit.

古文：定和挺身挑战，为贼所杀。
现代文：张定和挺身挑战，被敌人杀死。
English: Zhang Dinghe challenged and was killed by the enemy.

古文：亚将柳武建击破之，斩首数百级。
现代文：副将柳武建打败了敌军，斩首几百颗。
English: Vice-commander Liu Wu Jian defeated the enemy and beheaded hundreds of them.

古文：甲午，其仙头王穷蹙，率男女十余万口来降。
现代文：二十八日，吐谷浑的仙头王无力抵抗，率领男女十多万人前来投降。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, King Sento of Tugu was unable to resist and led more than one hundred thousand men and women to surrender.

古文：六月丁酉，遣左光禄大夫梁默、右翊卫将军李琼等追吐谷浑主，皆遇贼，死之。
现代文：六月初二，派遣左光禄大夫梁默、右翊卫将军李琼等追赶吐谷浑国王，都在中途遇到敌人，被杀死。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, he dispatched the doctor of the Left Guanglu, Liang Mo, and the general of the Right Han Guards, Li Qiong, to chase King Tuguhun. They all encountered the enemy in the middle of the road and were killed.

古文：癸卯，经大斗拔谷。山路隘险，鱼贯而出，风霰晦暝，与后宫相失。
现代文：初八，穿越大斗拔谷，山路狭隘险要，众人鱼贯而出，大风夹着霰雪，昏昏沉沉，和后方失去联系。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, I was crossing a large valley, the mountain road was narrow and dangerous, many people went out to fish, the wind was blowing snow, I was dizzy, and I lost contact with the rear.

古文：士卒冻死者大半。
现代文：士兵们被冻死了大半。
English: Most of the soldiers froze to death.

古文：丙午，次张掖。
现代文：十一日，到达张掖。
English: On the 11th day, we arrived in Zhangye.

古文：辛亥，诏诸郡学业该通，才艺优洽；膂力骁壮，超绝等伦；在官勤奋，堪理政事；立性正直，不避强御：四科举人。
现代文：十六日，下诏各郡：凡学业博通，才艺优秀；膂力强壮，勇猛绝伦；为官勤奋，善理政务；本性正直，不避强暴者；这四种人才加以举荐。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued to all counties: Those who are well-versed in studies and have excellent talents; those who are strong and courageous; those who are diligent officials and good at managing government affairs; those who are honest by nature and do not avoid violence; these four kinds of talents should be recommended.

古文：壬子，高昌王曲伯雅来朝。伊吾吐屯设等献西域数千里之地，上大悦。
现代文：十七日，高昌王麴伯雅前来朝见，伊吾吐屯设等进献西域几千里土地，皇帝大为高兴。
English: On the 17th, Gaochang Wang Zibo Ya came to see the emperor, and Iwu Tutun Set and others donated several thousand miles of land in the western region. The emperor was very pleased.

古文：癸丑，置西海、河源、鄯善、且末等四郡。
现代文：十八日，设置了西海、河源、善阝善、且末等四郡。
English: On the 18th, four counties were set up, including Saikai, Heyuan, Zhengyi, Zhen and Matsu.

古文：丙辰，上御观风行殿，盛陈文物；奏九部乐，设鱼龙曼延，宴高昌王、吐屯设于殿上，以宠异之。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝来到观风行殿，大肆陈列各种文物，演奏九部之乐，演出鱼龙曼延等百戏，在殿上宴请高昌王和吐屯设，以示宠异。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor came to the Guanfengxing Hall, lavishly displayed various cultural relics, played nine pieces of music, performed a hundred dramas such as the Yulongman Yan, and invited King Gaochang and Tutun to a banquet in the hall to show his favor.

古文：其蛮夷陪列者，三十余国。
现代文：那些蛮夷首领陪同两旁的，有三十多国。
English: Accompanying the barbarian chieftains on both sides were more than thirty nations.

古文：戊午，大赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：开皇已来流配，悉放还乡。
现代文：凡是开皇年间以来流放发配的人员，都放回故乡。
English: All those who had been exiled since the time of the emperor were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：晋阳逆党，不在此例。
现代文：晋阳叛逆的同党，不在大赦之列。
English: Jinyang's traitorous fellow party members are not included in the amnesty.

古文：陇右诸郡，给复三年。
现代文：陇西各郡，免除三年赋税。
English: All counties in Shaanxi Province are exempt from tax for three years.

古文：秋七月丁卯，置马牧于青海渚中，以求龙种，无效而止。
现代文：秋七月初二，把马放在青海湖的小岛上放牧，想寻求龙种交配，没有效果而停止。
English: On the second day of the seventh month of autumn, the horse was put on the small island of Qinghai Lake for grazing, trying to seek dragon mating, but there was no effect and it was stopped.

古文：九月癸未，车驾入长安。
现代文：九月十八日，车驾回到长安。
English: On September 18, he drove back to Chang'an.

古文：冬十月癸亥，诏曰： 优德尚齿，载之典训；尊事乞言，义彰胶序。
现代文：冬十月二十九日，下诏说： 优待有德者，敬重老年人，这是载入典籍中的事。
English: On the 29th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: "Preferential treatment for the virtuous and respect for the elderly are to be recorded in the classics."

古文：鬻熊为师，无取筋力；方叔元老，克壮其猷。
现代文：凡事敬听他们的意见，其义显彰于国学之中。鬻熊为周文王之师，并不是以其力气；方叔而为元老，因为他有好的谋略。
English: The importance of listening to their opinions in all things is evident in the study of Chinese classics. Raccoon was the teacher of King Zhou Wen, not because of his strength; Uncle Fang was the elder, because he had a good strategy.

古文：朕永言稽古，用求至理。
现代文：朕常寻求古义，以求至善之理。
English: I often seek the old meaning in order to find the best meaning.

古文：是以庞眉黄发，更令收叙；务简秩优，无亏药饵，庶等卧理，伫其弘益。
现代文：所以庞眉黄发老人，更令收录叙用，务必给以优待，不要缺少药品食物，注意休息和治疗，等待逐步壮健。
English: Therefore, the elderly with big eyebrows and yellow hair should receive preferential treatment, do not lack medicine and food, pay attention to rest and treatment, and wait for gradual improvement.

古文：今岁耆老赴集者，可于近郡处置。
现代文：今年老人集合，可在附近郡中进行。
English: This year's gathering of the elderly may take place in a nearby county.

古文：年七十已上，疾患沈滞不堪居职，即给赐帛，送还本郡。
现代文：年纪七十以上，因有病难以胜任职务的，便赐给布帛，送回本郡。
English: Those who are over seventy years old and are unable to perform their duties due to illness will be given cloth aprons and sent back to the county.

古文：其官至七品以上者，量给廪以终厥身。 
现代文：任官七品以上的，量情给予食粮，使他安享天年。 
English: If an official has been appointed to more than seven grades, he shall be given food in a reasonable amount, so that he may enjoy a long life.

古文：十一月丙子，车驾幸东都。
现代文：十一月十三日，车驾前往东都。
English: On November 13th, he drove to Dongdu.

古文：六年春正月癸亥朔，旦，有盗数十人，皆素冠练衣，焚香持华，自称弥勒佛。入自建国门，监门者皆稽首。
现代文：六年春正月初一为朔日。清晨，有强盗几十人，都头戴白冠，身穿白衣，焚香，手里拿着鲜花，自称是弥勒佛，从建国门进来，守门人都向他们低头敬拜。
English: In the early morning of the first day of the first month of the sixth year of Spring, there were dozens of robbers, all wearing white crowns, white clothes, burning incense, holding flowers in their hands, and claiming to be Maitreya Buddha. They came in through Jianguomen, and the gatekeepers bowed down to them.

古文：既而夺卫士仗，将为乱。
现代文：他们立即抢夺卫士们的兵器，准备作乱。
English: They immediately snatched the guards' weapons and prepared to riot.

古文：齐王暕遇而斩之。
现代文：齐王日柬见到后把他们斩首。
English: After seeing them, King Qi of Japan and Cambodia beheaded them.

古文：于是都下大索，与相连坐者千余家。
现代文：于是，在京都大搜捕，和这件事有牵连的多达一千多家。
English: As a result, there was a large-scale manhunt in Kyoto, and as many as a thousand people were implicated in the incident.

古文：茅土妄假，名实相乖；历兹永久，莫能惩革。
现代文：十五日，在端门街演出角角氐大戏，天下各种奇特的杂技艺人都汇集在这里，直到月底才停止。
English: On the 15th, a large-scale acrobatic performance was held in Danmen Street. All kinds of strange acrobatic artists from all over the world gathered here and did not stop until the end of the month.

古文：皇运之初，百度伊始，犹循旧贯，未暇改作。今天下交泰，文轨攸同。
现代文：皇帝多次更换便服前往观看。二十七日，倭国派使者进贡地方特产。
English: The emperor changed his casual clothes several times and went to see it. On the 27th, Wakoku sent an envoy to pay tribute with local special products.

古文：宜率遵先典，永垂大训。自今已后，唯有功勋，乃得赐封，仍令子孙承袭。 
现代文：二月十三日，武贲郎将陈棱、朝请大夫张镇州攻打流求，打败了它，进献俘虏一万七千人，把他们赏给百官们。二十三日，下诏说： 从今以后，只有立下功勋人员，国家才能赐封土地，仍令子孙们继承。 
English: On February 13th, Wu Gan Lang led Chen Ren and invited the doctor Zhang Zhenzhou to attack Liu Kui, defeated it, sacrificed 17,000 prisoners, and awarded them to hundreds of officials. On the 23rd, the next edict said: From now on, the state can only grant land to those who have made meritorious personnel, and still let their descendants inherit.

古文：丙辰，改封安德王雄为观王，河间王子庆为郇王。
现代文：二十四日，改封安德王雄为观王，河间王的儿子庆为郇王。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Ando Wangxiong was renamed as Guan Wang, and Kawama Wang's son, Qing, was renamed as Yao Wang.

古文：庚申，征魏、齐、周、陈乐人，悉配太常。
现代文：二十八日，征召魏、齐、周、陈地方的乐人，全部送到太常寺。
English: On the 28th, musicians from Wei, Qi, Zhou and Chen regions were conscripted and all of them were sent to Taiji Temple.

古文：三月癸亥，幸江都宫。
现代文：三月初二，前往江都宫。
English: On the second day of March, they went to the Jiangdu Palace.

古文：甲子，以鸿胪卿史祥为左骁卫大将军。
现代文：初三，任命鸿胪卿史祥为左骁卫大将军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he appointed Hongyuqing Shi Xiang as General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：夏四月丁未，宴江、淮已南父老，颁赐各有差。
现代文：夏四月十六日，宴请江、淮以南地区的父老们，赏赐数量不等的财物。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, the fathers and grandfathers in the areas south of the Yangtze River and Huai River were invited to a banquet, and were rewarded with varying amounts of wealth.

古文：六月辛卯，室韦、赤土并遣使贡方物。
现代文：六月初一，室韦、赤土都派使者进贡地方特产。
English: On the first day of June, the cities of Muroto and Akatsuchi sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：壬辰，雁门贼帅尉文通，聚众三千，保于莫壁谷，遣鹰扬杨伯泉击破之。
现代文：初二，雁门贼人统率尉文通聚集三千人，占领了莫壁谷，派鹰扬将军杨伯泉打败了他们。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Ganmen bandits gathered three thousand people under the leadership of Lieutenant Wen Tong, occupied the Mogi Valley, and sent the eagle Yang general Yang Boquan to defeat them.

古文：甲寅，制江都太守，秩同京尹。
现代文：二十四日，下令江都太守的俸禄和京兆尹相同。
English: On the 24th, he ordered that the salary of the governor of the Yangtze River should be the same as that of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：冬十月壬申，刑部尚书梁毗卒。
现代文：冬十月壬申，刑部尚书梁毗去世。
English: In the winter of October in Jinshin, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuliang, passed away.

古文：壬子，户部尚书、银青光禄大夫长孙炽卒。
现代文：二十四日，户部尚书、银青光禄大夫长孙炽去世。
English: On the 24th, the eldest grandson of Dr. Hube, Dr. Shangshu and Dr. Yin Qingguanglu passed away.

古文：十二月己未，左光禄大夫、吏部尚书牛弘卒。
现代文：十二月初三，左光禄大夫、吏部尚书牛弘去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Dr. Sakoroku and the head of the personnel department, Shoshu Ushihiro passed away.

古文：辛酉，硃崖人王万昌举兵作乱，遣陇西太守韩洪讨平之。
现代文：初五，朱崖人王万昌起兵叛乱，派陇西太守韩洪前去讨平。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Wanchang, a man from Zhujiajie, started a mutiny and sent Han Hong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, to settle the matter.

古文：七年春正月壬寅，左武卫大将军、光禄大夫、真定侯郭衍卒。
现代文：七年春正月十六日，左武卫大将军、光禄大夫、真定侯郭衍去世。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, General Zuo Wuwei, Doctor Guanglu, and Prince Guoyan passed away.

古文：二月己未，上升钓台，临杨子津，大宴百僚，颁赐各有差。
现代文：二月初三，皇帝登上钓台，面临杨子津，大宴群臣，赏赐各有差别。
English: On the third day of the second lunar month, the emperor boarded the fishing platform, facing Yang Zijin, a large banquet of ministers, and the rewards were different.

古文：庚申，百济遣使朝贡。
现代文：初四，百济派使者朝贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Baekje sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，上自江都御龙舟入通济渠，遂幸于涿郡。
现代文：十九日，皇帝从江都乘龙舟进入通济渠，并前往涿郡。
English: On the 19th, the emperor took a dragon boat from Jiangdu to Tongji Canal, and then went to Jiu County.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 武有七德，先之以安民；政有六本，兴之以教义。
现代文：二十六日，下诏说： 武有七德，先在于安民；政有六本，兴之以教义。
English: On the 26th, he issued the following edict: "Wu has seven virtues, the first of which is peace and security for the people; politics has six, the first of which is doctrine.

古文：高丽亏失籓礼，将欲问罪辽左，恢宣胜略。
现代文：高丽有失藩臣之礼，我将问罪于辽东，广宣克敌之策。
English: Goryeo has lost the courtesy of the vassal, I will blame Liaodong, and the strategy of defeating the enemy is widely publicized.

古文：虽怀伐国，仍事省力。
现代文：虽为伐国，仍巡视地方。
English: Even though he is the head of the country, he still inspects the local areas.

古文：今往涿郡，巡抚民俗。
现代文：今前往涿郡，巡抚民俗。
English: Now I'm going to Min County to supervise folk customs.

古文：其河北诸郡及山西、山东年九十已上，版授太守；八十者，授县令。
现代文：凡河北各郡及山西、山东年纪九十岁以上的，赐朝笏任为太守，八十岁以上的，授县令之职。 
English: In all counties of Hebei, Shanxi and Shandong, those who are over ninety years old will be given the title of imperial governor, and those who are over eighty years old will be given the title of county magistrate.

古文：三月丁亥，右光禄大夫、左屯卫大将军姚辩卒。
现代文：三月初二，右光禄卿大夫、左屯卫大将军姚辩去世。
English: On the second day of March, Yao Yan, doctor of the Right Guangluqing and general of the Left Tunwei, passed away.

古文：夏四月庚午，幸涿郡之临朔宫。
现代文：夏四月十五日，前往涿郡的临朔宫。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to Lin Shuo Palace in Handan County.

古文：五月戊子，以武威太守樊子盖为民部尚书。
现代文：五月初四，任命武威太守樊子盖为民部尚书。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Wuwei's grand vizier, Zizi Gai, was appointed minister of the people.

古文：秋，大水，山东、河南漂没三十余郡，民相卖为奴婢。
现代文：秋天，大水灾，山东、河南被水冲没三十多郡，民众争相卖给人当奴婢。
English: In the autumn, there was a great flood, and more than 30 counties in Shandong and Henan were flooded, and people scrambled to be sold as slaves.

古文：冬十月乙卯，底柱山崩，偃水逆流数十里。
现代文：冬十月初三，砥柱山崩倒，堵住黄河，河水倒流几十里。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the main pillar of the mountain collapsed, blocking the Yellow River, and the river flowed back dozens of miles.

古文：戊午，以东平太守吐万绪为左屯卫大将军。
现代文：初六，任命东平太守吐万绪为左屯卫大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Dongping Daju, Tu Wansu, as the General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：十二月己酉，突厥处罗多利可汗来朝，帝大悦，接以殊礼。
现代文：十二月初八，突厥处罗多利可汗前来朝见，皇帝大喜，以特别隆重礼节接待他。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the year, Rhodoly Khan of the Turkic Department came to see the emperor. The emperor was overjoyed and received him with great ceremony.

古文：于时，辽东战士及馈运者填咽于道，昼夜不绝。
现代文：当时，辽东的战士和运送物品的人塞满道路，日夜不停。
English: At that time, soldiers from Liaodong and people transporting goods clogged the roads day and night.

古文：苦役者，始为群盗。
现代文：这些当苦役的人，开始成群当强盗。
English: These people, who had been forced to work as slaves, began to bandit in droves.

古文：甲子，敕都尉、鹰扬与郡县相知追捕，随获斩决之。
现代文：十三日，下令让都尉、鹰扬和各郡县追捕，抓住以后立即斩首。
English: On the 13th, he ordered captains, eagles, and counties to hunt down, capture, and immediately behead Zhuang.

古文：八年春正月辛巳，大军集于涿郡。
现代文：八年春正月初一，大军聚集在涿郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, a large army gathered in Zou County.

古文：以兵部尚书段文振为左候卫大将军。
现代文：任命兵部尚书段文振为左候卫大将军。
English: He appointed the head of the military department, Shangshu Danman Zhen, as the general of the Left Guards.

古文：以布恩宥，以喻祸福。
现代文：初二，下诏：
English: On the second day of the first month, the following edict was issued:

古文：若其同恶相济，抗拒官军，国有常刑，俾无遗类。
现代文： 左第一军可从镂方道，第二军可从长岑道，第三军可从海冥道，第四军可从盖马道，第五军可从建安道，第六军可从南苏道，第七军可从辽东道，第八军可从玄菟道，第九军可从扶馀道，第十军可从朝鲜道，第十一军可从沃沮道，第十二军可从乐浪道；右第一军可从黏蝉道，第二军可从含资道，第三军可从浑弥道，第四军可从临屯道，第五军可从侯城道，第六军可从提奚道，第七军可从踏顿道，第八军可从肃慎道，第九军可从碣石道，第十军可从东瞙道，第十一军可从带方道，第十二军可从襄平道。凡此众军，先领方略，络绎进发，总集平壤 
English: On the left, the First Army can come from Shifang Road, the Second Army can come from Changchun Road, the Third Army can come from Haitou Road, the Fourth Army can come from Gaima Road, the Fifth Army can come from Jian'an Road, the Sixth Army can come from Nansu Road, the Seventh Army can come from Liaodong, the Eighth Army can come from Xuancheng Road, the Ninth Army can come from Fuyu Road, the Tenth Army can come from Chosun Road, the Eleventh Army can come from Wode Road, and the Twelfth Army can come from Lelang Road; on the right, the First Army can come

古文：明加晓示，称朕意焉！总一百一十三万三千八百，号二百万，其馈运者倍之。
现代文：全军总计将士一百一十三万三千八百，号称二百万，运送物资的人员加倍。
English: The total number of soldiers in the whole army has increased to 1,133,800, which is said to be 2 million, and the number of personnel transporting materials has doubled.

古文：癸未，第一军发，终四十日，引师乃尽。
现代文：初三，第一军出发，四十天以后，所有军队才全部上路。
English: On the third day of the first month, the first army set out. Forty days later, all the armies were on the road.

古文：旌旗亘千里，近古出师之盛，未之有也。
现代文：旌旗长达千里，自古以来出兵人马之多，从未有过。
English: The flagpole is a thousand miles long. Since ancient times, there have never been so many soldiers and horses.

古文：乙未，以右候卫大将军卫玄为刑部尚书。
现代文：十五日，任命右候卫大将军卫玄为刑部尚书。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he appointed the General of the Right Guard, Wei Xuan, as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：甲辰，内史令元寿卒。
现代文：二十四日，内令史元寿去世。
English: On the 24th, Shigenobu passed away.

古文：二月甲寅，诏曰： 朕观风燕裔，问罪辽滨，文武叶力，爪牙思奋；莫不执锐勤王，舍家从役。
现代文：二月初四，下诏说： 朕观风于燕边，问罪于辽滨，文武协力，士卒争先，无不执兵戈以勤王事，舍家园而从征战。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the following edict was issued: "I will watch the wind in Yanbian, ask for punishment in Liaobin, cooperate in literature and armed forces, and strive to be the first to fight. I will do my duty as a soldier and devote myself to the king, and sacrifice my home to go to war."

古文：罕蓄仓廪之资，兼捐播殖之务。
现代文：罕有仓廪之积，又误播种之期。
English: Rarely, there is a build-up of silkworms and a period of mistaken sowing.

古文：朕所以夕惕愀然，虑其匮乏。
现代文：我因此心中不安，忧虑其匮乏。
English: Therefore my heart is troubled, and I am afraid of what it will lack.

古文：虽复素饱之众，情在忘私；悦使之徒，宜从其厚。
现代文：虽为素食之众，因公忘私；乐听使唤之徒，应予优待。
English: Although they are vegetarians, they should be given preferential treatment because they are selfless and willing to do what is asked of them.

古文：诸行从一品以下佽飞募人以上家口，郡县宜数存问。
现代文：所有从征人员从一品以下到招募来的士兵的家人，郡县应当经常慰问。
English: Counties and counties should always offer condolences to the families of all conscripts from one grade and below to the soldiers who are recruited.

古文：若有粮食乏少，皆赈给之。
现代文：如果粮食缺少的，应立即加以赈济。
English: If there is a shortage of food, it should be provided immediately.

古文：或虽有田畴，贫弱不能自耕重，可于多丁富室，勤课相助。
现代文：或者虽有田地，但贫困和缺少劳力难以自行耕种的，可以让人丁多的和富裕家庭，劝他们多耕种并相互帮助。
English: Or if there are fields, but poverty and lack of labor force make it difficult to cultivate on their own, they can let a few people and rich families persuade them to cultivate more and help each other.

古文：使夫居者有敛积之丰，行役无顾后之虑。 
现代文：这样，使家中的人有所积蓄，出征者无后顾之忧。 
English: In this way, the people at home have some savings, and those who go to war have no worries.

古文：壬戎，司空、京兆尹、光禄大夫、观王雄薨。
现代文：十二日，司空、京兆尹、光禄大夫、观王雄去世。
English: On the 12th, Siku, Jing Zhaoyun, Dr. Guanglu, and Guan Wangxiong passed away.

古文：三月辛卯，兵部尚书、左候卫大将军段文振卒。
现代文：三月十二日，左候卫大将军段文振去世。十四日，皇帝亲自指挥军队。
English: On March 12th, General Duan Wen Zhen, the commander-in-chief of the Western Front, passed away. On the 14th, the emperor personally commanded the army.

古文：癸巳，上御师。
现代文：十五日，在辽水桥和敌军对阵。
English: On the 15th, they faced off against the enemy at Liao Shui Qiao.

古文：甲午，临戎于辽水桥。
现代文：十九日，大军遇到敌军强烈抵抗，未能渡过河。
English: On the 19th, the large army encountered strong resistance from the enemy and was unable to cross the river.

古文：戊戌，大军为贼所拒，不果济。右屯卫大将军左光禄大夫麦铁杖、武贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉等皆死之。
现代文：右卫屯大将军左光禄大夫麦铁杖、武贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉等都死去。
English: General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, Doctor Sakoroku Makitetso, General of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, General Qian Shixiong, Meng Jinsha, and others all died.

古文：甲午，车驾度辽，大战于东岸，击贼破之，进围辽东。
现代文：十五日，车驾渡过辽河，两军大战于辽河东岸，大败敌军，进而围困辽东。
English: On the 15th, the car drove across the Liao River, and the two armies fought a big battle on the east bank of the Liao River, defeated the enemy army, and then besieged Liaodong.

古文：乙未，大顿。
现代文：十六日，大军停止前进。
English: On the 16th, the large army stopped advancing.

古文：见二大鸟，高丈余，皓身硃足，游泳自若。
现代文：在这里看到两只大鸟，一丈多高，白身红脚，游泳时神态安然自若。
English: Here you can see two large birds, as tall as a tree, with white bodies and red feet, looking at ease as they swim.

古文：上异之，命工图写，并立铭颂。
现代文：皇帝十分惊奇，命令画工画下来，并立了铭颂碑。
English: The emperor was so surprised that he ordered an artist to paint it down and erected a monument in his honour.

古文：五月戊午，纳言杨达卒，于时，诸将各奉旨，不敢越机。
现代文：五月初四，纳言杨达去世。当时，各将都按照原来的旨意安排，不敢前来参战。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Nagan Yanda passed away. At that time, all generals followed the original intention and did not dare to come to fight.

古文：既而高丽各固城守，攻之不下。
现代文：接着，高丽各地坚守城池，多次进攻不克。
English: Next, all parts of Korea held fast to the castle and repeatedly attacked.

古文：六月己未，幸辽东，责怒诸将，止城西数里，御六合城。
现代文：六月十一日，皇帝前往辽东，十分生气地责骂众将，他停留在城西几里路远处，住在六合城。
English: On June 11, the emperor went to Liaodong and angrily scolded the generals. He stayed a few miles west of the city and lived in Liuhe City.

古文：七月壬午，宇文述等败绩于萨水，右屯卫将军薛世雄死之。
现代文：七月初四，宇文述等在萨水失败，右屯卫将军辛世雄死去。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the year, Uwenshu and others failed in Sasui, and the Right Tunwei General Xin Shixiong died.

古文：九军并陷，师奔还，亡者千余骑。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 领军治国，情形不同，文官武将，用途有别。
English: On the 12th, the next edict said: Leading the army to govern the country, the situation is different, civil officers and generals, the use is different.

古文：癸卯，班师。九月庚辰，上至东都，己丑，诏： 军国异容，文武殊用，匡危拯难，则霸德攸兴；化人成俗，则王道斯贵。
现代文：匡救危难，则霸业可兴；化人易俗，则王道乃贵。
English: If you can save people from danger, then you will be able to succeed in your business; if you can transform people and change the world, then you will be a king.

古文：时当拨乱，屠贩可以登朝；世属隆平，经术然后升仕。
现代文：时世混乱，屠贩之徒可以登朝为官；世道升平，经术之士然后出仕。
English: In times of chaos, a butcher's apprentice can ascend to the throne as an official; the world is leveled, and a man of skill then serves.

古文：丰都爰肇，儒服无预于周行；建武之朝，功臣不参于吏职。
现代文：丰都之始，儒服之士不参与军事；建武之朝，有功之臣不任以官职。
English: At the beginning of Fengdu, people in Confucian clothing did not participate in the military; during the Jianwu Dynasty, meritorious vassals were not appointed to official positions.

古文：自三方未一，四海交争；不遑文教，唯尚武功。
现代文：自三分天下，四海纷争，无暇文教，惟尚武功。
English: Since the world was divided into three parts, the four seas have been in conflict, and there has been no time for literature and education, but there has been martial arts.

古文：设官分职，罕以才授；班朝理人，乃由勋叙。
现代文：设官分职，罕有因才而授；朝臣牧守，皆由功勋叙用。
English: The positions of officials are rarely awarded for merit, while the positions of courtier and herdsman are all awarded for merit.

古文：莫非拔足行阵，出自勇夫。
现代文：无非拔自战阵，出自勇夫。
English: It's all from the war front, from a brave man.

古文：学敩之道，既所不习；政事之方，故亦无取。
现代文：学教之道，向所未习；治政方术，亦无所取。
English: The way of learning and teaching has never been learned; the way of governing has never been learned.

古文：是非暗于在己，威福专于下吏。
现代文：是非暗于一己，威福专于下吏。
English: Whether it is hidden from one's own, Wei Fu specializes in subordinates.

古文：贪冒货贿，不知纪极；蠹政害民，实由于此。
现代文：贪冒受贿，不知纲纪，蠹政害民，实由此出。
English: Greed, bribery, ignorance of discipline, abuse of power and harm to the people are the real reasons for this.

古文：自今已后，诸授勋官者，并不得回授文武职事。
现代文：从今以后，各授勋官员，都不得回授文武职务。
English: From now on, all officials who have been awarded the medal are not allowed to return to the post of civil and military affairs.

古文：庶遵彼更张，取类于调瑟；求诸名制，不伤于美锦。
现代文：务必改弦更张，如同调瑟；求之于名制，不伤于美锦。
English: Be sure to change the strings and tension, like tuning; ask for it in the nominal system, without harming the brocade.

古文：若吏部辄拟用者，御史即宜纠弹。 
现代文：如吏部打算任用时，御史应立即纠正弹劾。 
English: If the cadre department intends to appoint, the governor should immediately correct the impeachment.

古文：冬十月戊寅，工部尚书宇文恺卒。
现代文：冬十月初八，工部尚书宇文恺去世。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, Shangshuu Wenzhong of the Ministry of Industry passed away.

古文：十一月己卯，以宗女华容公主嫁于高昌王。
现代文：十一月初三，以皇族之女华容公主嫁给高昌王。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Princess Hua Rong, the daughter of the royal family, married King Gaochang.

古文：辛巳，光禄大夫韩寿卒。
现代文：初五，光禄大夫韩寿去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Guanglu doctor Han Shou passed away.

古文：甲申，败将宇文述、于仲文等除名为民，斩尚书右丞刘士龙以谢天下。
现代文：初八，将败将宇文述、于仲文等除名为平民，斩尚书右丞刘士龙以向天下谢罪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wu Wenshu, Yu Zhongwen, and others were stripped of their titles as commoners, and Liu Shilong, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was beheaded to express his gratitude to the world.

古文：是岁，大旱疫，人多死，山东尤甚。
现代文：当年，大旱、瘟疫，百姓死亡很多，山东尤其严重。
English: At that time, there were droughts and plagues, and many people died, especially in Shandong.

古文：密诏江、淮南诸郡，阅视民间童女姿质端丽者，每岁贡之。
现代文：皇帝下密诏给江南、淮南各郡，让观察民间童女，长得端庄秀丽的，每年进贡到朝廷。
English: The emperor issued a secret edict to Jiangnan and Huainan counties to observe the folk maidens, who grew up to be dignified and beautiful, and paid tribute to the imperial court every year.

古文：九年春正月丁丑，征天下兵，募民为骁果，集于涿郡。
现代文：九年春正月初二，征召天下兵员，招募民众为骁果军，集合于涿郡。
English: On the second day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, soldiers from all over the country were conscripted, and the people were recruited as the Yunnan Fruit Army and gathered in Yunnan County.

古文：壬午，贼帅杜彦永、王润等陷平原郡，大掠而去。
现代文：初七，贼军统率杜彦永、王润等攻陷平原郡，大肆抢掠后离开。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the thief army led by Du Yan Yong, Wang Run and others invaded Pingyuan County, looted extensively and left.

古文：辛卯，置折冲、果毅、武勇、雄武等郎将官，以领骁果。
现代文：十六日，设置折冲、果毅、武勇、雄武等郎将官员，以率领骁果军。
English: On the 16th, officials such as Fuchong, Guoyi, Wuyong and Xiongwu were set up to lead the Xingguo Army.

古文：乙未，平原李德逸聚众数万，称阿舅贼，劫掠山东。
现代文：二十日，平原人李德逸聚集了几万人马，自称为阿舅贼，在山东大肆劫掠。
English: On the 20th, the plainsman Li Deyi gathered tens of thousands of horses, calling himself a thief, and plundered Shandong.

古文：灵武白榆妄称奴贼，劫掠牧马；北连突厥，陇右多被其患。
现代文：灵武人白榆妄自称奴贼，抢劫牧马，北通突厥，陇右一带多受其害。
English: The white-robed white-robed self-proclaimed slave-thief robbed the wranglers, the Turks in the north, and the people in the right bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：遣将军范贵讨之，连年不能克。
现代文：派将军范贵前去讨伐，几年都没有能打败他们。
English: He sent General Fan Gui to fight them, but he was unable to defeat them for several years.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：己亥，遣代王侑、刑部尚书卫玄镇京师。
现代文：二十四日，派代王侑、刑部尚书卫玄镇守京都。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he appointed Wang Xi and the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shouwei, to be the governors of Kyoto.

古文：辛丑，以右骁卫将军李浑为右骁卫大将军。
现代文：二十六日，任命右骁卫将军李浑为右骁卫大将军。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the right guard general Li Hun as the right guard general.

古文：二月己未，济北人韩进洛聚众数万为群盗。
现代文：二月十五日，济北人韩进洛聚集几万人成为群盗。
English: On February 15th, tens of thousands of people from North Jeju gathered in Hanjinluo to become bandits.

古文：壬午，复宇文述等官爵，又征兵讨高丽。
现代文：壬午日，恢复宇文述等人官爵，又征兵讨伐高丽。
English: On the day of Renpo, he restored the official titles of Uwenshu and others, and recruited soldiers to fight against Goryeo.

古文：三月丙子，济北人孟海公起兵为盗，众至数万。
现代文：三月初二，济北人孟海公起兵为强盗，集合几万人。
English: On the second day of March, Meng Haigong, a native of North Jeju, raised an army to fight the bandits, gathering tens of thousands of people.

古文：丁丑，发丁男十万城大兴。
现代文：初三，征召丁男十万人修建大兴城。
English: On the third day of the new year, 100,000 men were conscripted to build Daxing City.

古文：戊寅，幸辽东。
现代文：初四，皇帝前往辽东。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor went to Liaodong.

古文：以越王侗、工部尚书樊子盖镇东都。
现代文：任命越王侗、工部尚书樊子盖坐镇京都。
English: Appointed Yue Wangjun, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce's Shoshu Shanzigai, to be stationed in Kyoto.

古文：庚子，北海人郭方预聚徒为贼，自号卢公，众至三万，攻陷郡城，大掠而去。
现代文：二十六日，北海人郭方预聚众为贼，自称卢公，聚合了三万人，攻陷郡城，大肆掳掠后离开。
English: On the 26th, Guo Fangyuan, a North Sea man, pre-assembled a crowd of thieves, calling himself Lu Gong, gathered 30,000 people, captured the county seat, plundered and left.

古文：夏四月庚午，车驾度辽。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，皇帝渡过辽河。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor crossed the Liao River.

古文：壬申，遣宇文述、杨义臣趣平壤城。
现代文：二十九日，派宇文述、杨益臣进逼平壤城。
English: On the 29th, he sent Yu Wenshu and Yang Yixin to force their way into Pyongyang City.

古文：五月丁丑，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：五月初四，火星进入南斗。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Mars enters the Southern Cross.

古文：己卯，济北人甄宝车聚众万余，寇掠城邑。
现代文：初六，济北人甄宝车聚合一万多人，攻打抢掠城镇。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, more than ten thousand people from North Jeju gathered to attack and loot towns.

古文：六月乙巳，礼部尚书杨玄感反于黎阳。
现代文：六月初三，礼部尚书杨玄感在黎阳反叛。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Yang Xuanxuan rebelled in Liyang.

古文：丙辰，玄感逼东都。
现代文：十四日，杨玄感进逼东都。
English: On the 14th, Yang Xuanxuan entered Dongdu.

古文：河南赞理裴弘策拒之，反为贼所败。
现代文：河南赞理裴弘策领兵对抗，反而被贼兵所击败。
English: Henan praised Pei Hongtao for leading the troops in the confrontation, but he was defeated by the bandits.

古文：戊辰，兵部侍郎斛斯政奔于高丽。
现代文：二十六日，兵部侍郎斛斯政投奔高丽。
English: On the 26th, Hyobushojiro Gohsu defected to the Goryeo Dynasty.

古文：庚午，上班师。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝回师。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned to his master.

古文：高丽犯后军，敕右武卫大将军李景为后拒，遣左翊卫大将军宇文述、左候卫将军屈突通等驰传发兵，以讨玄感。
现代文：高丽攻打后军，命令右武卫大将军李景在后面抵御高丽军。派左翊卫大将军宇文述、左候卫将军屈突通等飞传命令发兵，以征讨杨玄感。
English: Goryeo attacked the rear army and ordered the Right Guard General, Li Jing, to defend the rear against the Goryeo army. He sent the Left Guard General, Wu Wenshu, the Left Guard General, Qu Jutong, and others to fly orders to send troops to collect Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：秋七月己卯，令所在发人城县府驿。
现代文：秋七月初七，下令各地征发民众修建县、府驿站。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he ordered all regions to solicit people to build county and prefectural stations.

古文：癸未，余杭人刘元进举兵反，众至数万。
现代文：十一日，余杭人刘元进起兵造反，聚众达几万人。
English: On the 11th day, Liu Yuanjin, a resident of Yuhang, started a mutiny, gathering tens of thousands of people.

古文：八月壬寅，左翊卫大将军宇文述等破杨玄感于阌乡，斩之。余党悉平。
现代文：八月初一，左翊卫大将军宇文述在阌乡打败了杨玄感，将他斩首，同党全部被讨平。
English: On the first day of August, General Yu Wenshu of the Left Division of the National Guard defeated Yang Xuanxuan of the Kuomintang in Handan Township, beheaded him, and leveled his entire party.

古文：癸卯，吴人硃燮、晋陵人管崇拥众十万余，自称将军，寇江左。
现代文：初二，吴人朱燮、晋陵人管崇聚众十万多人，自称为将军，在江东为寇。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, more than 100,000 people from Zhu Xi in Wuxi and Guan Chong in Jinling gathered together, calling themselves generals and plotting in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲辰，制骁果之家，蠲免赋役。
现代文：初三，下令骁果兵士的家庭，免除赋税和徭役。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered the families of soldiers to be exempted from taxes and forced labor.

古文：丁未，诏郡县城去道过五里已上者，徙就之。
现代文：初六，下令郡县城离道路超过五里以上的，迁移到路边。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the county seat was ordered to move to the side of the road if it was more than five miles away from the road.

古文：戊申，制盗贼籍没其家。
现代文：初七，下令所有盗贼全部家产籍没。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he ordered all thieves to forfeit all their family property.

古文：乙卯，贼帅陈瑱等三万，攻陷信安郡。
现代文：十四日，贼人首领陈調等三万人攻下了信安郡。
English: On the 14th, 30,000 people, including the leader of the bandits, Chen Chou, captured Xin'an County.

古文：辛酉，司农卿、光禄大夫、葛国公赵元淑以罪伏诛。
现代文：二十日，司农卿、光禄大夫、葛国公赵元淑因罪处死。
English: On the 20th, Secretary of Agriculture, Guanglu Doctor, and Ge Guogong Zhao Yuanshu were executed for their crimes.

古文：九月己卯，济阴人吴海流、东海人彭孝才并举兵为盗，众数万。
现代文：九月初八，济阴人吴海流、东海人彭孝才都起兵为盗，领兵几万人。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Wu Hailiu from Jilin Province and Peng Xiaocai from the East China Sea both raised an army to steal, leading tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：庚辰，贼帅梁慧尚聚众四万，陷苍梧郡。
现代文：初九，贼军统率梁慧尚聚众四万人，攻陷了苍梧郡。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the bandit army led by Liang Huishang gathered a total of forty thousand people and invaded Giangwu County.

古文：甲午，车驾次上谷。以供费不给，上大怒，免太守虞荷等官。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝到达上谷，因为提供的费用不足，皇帝大怒，免去太守虞荷等人官职。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor arrived in Shanggu, because the expenses provided were insufficient, the emperor was furious and removed the official post of the daimyo Yu He and others.

古文：丁酉，东阳人李三兒、向但子举兵作乱，众至万余。
现代文：二十六日，东阳人李三儿、向但子领兵作乱，聚合人马一万多人。
English: On the 26th, Dongyang residents Li San'er and Xiang Danzi led the troops in a riot, gathering more than 10,000 people.

古文：闰月己巳，幸博陵。
现代文：闰月二十八日，皇帝前往博陵。
English: On the 28th day of the leap month, the emperor went to Boling.

古文：庚午，上谓侍臣曰： 朕昔从先朝，周旋于此，年甫八岁。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝对侍臣们说： 我以前跟从先帝，周转来到这里时，年纪只有八岁。
English: On the 29th, the emperor said to his courtiers, "I used to follow the previous emperor. When I came here, I was only eight years old.

古文：故以道冠《豳风》，义高姚邑。
现代文：日月流逝，倏忽间已过了三纪，追想往昔，不可能再回到那个时候了。 
English: The sun and moon have passed, and the three ages have passed in the blink of an eye. Looking back on the past, it is impossible to return to that time.

古文：朕巡抚氓庶，爰届兹邦，瞻望郊廛，缅怀敬止。
现代文：话未说完，已流着泪呜咽不已。侍卫们也都哭泣着，眼泪滴下沾湿了衣襟。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he was sobbing uncontrollably with tears streaming down his face. The guards were also crying, and their collars were wet with tears.

古文：思所以宣播庆泽，覃被下人；崇纪显号，式光令绪。
现代文：冬十月初七，贼帅吕明星带领几千人围住东郡，武贲郎将费青奴打败他并将他斩首。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Lv Xingxing, a thief, led thousands of people to surround Dong County. Wu Yulang defeated Fei Xiongnu and beheaded him.

古文：可改博陵为高阳郡，赦境内死罪以下，给复一年。 
现代文：十五日，下诏说： 博陵原为定州，地处交通要道，是先王历次使用的基业可改博陵为高阳郡，赦免境内死罪以下囚犯，免一年徭役赋税。 
English: On the 15th, the next imperial edict said: Boling was originally part of Dingzhou, located on a major transportation route, and was the foundation used by the previous king. Boling can be changed to Goyang County, prisoners with capital crimes or less in the territory can be pardoned, and one year of tax on laborers can be exempted.

古文：于是召高祖时故吏，皆量才授职。
现代文：于是召见了高祖时旧官吏，都量才授给官职。
English: As a result, the old officials of Gaozhu were summoned, and they were all given official positions.

古文：壬辰，以纳言苏威为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十二日，任命纳言苏威为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 22nd, Nagon Su Wei was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：硃燮、管崇推刘元进为天子，遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗讨之，连年不能克。
现代文：朱燮、管崇拥戴刘元进当皇帝，炀帝派将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗讨伐，连续几年不能平定。
English: Zhu Xi and Guanzhong supported Liu Yuanjin as emperor, and Emperor Gao sent generals to fight against the Manx and the Fish Club, which could not be settled for several years.

古文：齐人孟让、王薄等众十余万，据长白山，攻剽诸郡。
现代文：齐人孟让、王薄等领十多万人，占领长白山，攻打和剽掠各郡。
English: Meng Zhan and Wang Bo led more than one hundred thousand people, occupied Changbai Mountain, and attacked and plundered counties.

古文：清河贼张金称众各数万，勃海贼帅格谦，自号燕王，孙宣雅自号齐王，众各十万，山东苦之。
现代文：清河贼张金称有部众几万人，渤海贼帅格谦自称燕王，孙宣雅自称齐王，各有部众十万人，山东民众苦不堪言。
English: Zhang Jin, the thief of the Qing River, claimed to have tens of thousands of followers. The thief of the Bohai Sea, the handsome Ge Qian, claimed to be the King of the Swallows. Sun Xuan Ya claimed to be the King of the Qi. Each of them had hundreds of thousands of followers. The people of Shandong were miserable.

古文：丁亥，以右候卫将军郭荣为右候卫大将军。
现代文：十七日，任命右候卫将军郭荣为右候卫大将军。
English: On the 17th, Guo Rong, the right guard general, was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：十一月己酉，右候卫将军冯孝慈讨张金称于清河，反为所败，孝慈死之。
现代文：十一月初九，右候卫将军冯孝慈在清河讨伐张金称，反而被张打败，冯孝慈死去。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of November, Feng Xiao Ci, the right guard general, challenged Zhang Jin in Qinghe, but was defeated by Zhang, and Feng Xiao Ci died.

古文：十二月甲辰，车裂杨玄感弟朝散大夫积善及党与十余人，仍焚而扬之。
现代文：十二月十五日，车裂了杨玄感的弟弟朝散大夫杨积善和他的同党十多人，将尸体焚烧后扬灰。
English: On December 15th, Yang Xuanxuan's younger brother, Dr. Yang Jishan, and more than ten of his fellow party members were killed in a car crash. Their bodies were cremated and their ashes scattered.

古文：丁亥，扶风人向海明举兵作乱，称皇帝，建元白乌。
现代文：十八日，扶风人向海明起兵作乱，自称皇帝，建元为白乌。
English: On the 18th, Fufeng people rioted against Haiming, claiming to be the emperor, and Jianyuan was Baiwu.

古文：遣太仆卿杨义臣击破之。
现代文：炀帝派太仆卿杨义臣击败他。
English: Emperor Qian sent his servant Yang Yichen to defeat him.

古文：十年春正月甲寅，以宗女为信义公主，嫁于突厥曷娑那可汗。
现代文：十年春正月十五日，封皇室之女为信义公主，嫁给突厥曷娑那可汗。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, the daughter of the imperial family, Princess Xinyi, married the Turk Jinnakhan.

古文：二月辛未，诏百寮议伐高丽，数日无敢言者。
现代文：二月初三，下令百官商议讨伐高丽，几天之内没有人敢说话。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, he ordered all officials to discuss the campaign against Goryeo, but within a few days no one dared to speak out.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 竭力王役，致身戎事，咸由徇义，莫匪勤诚。
现代文：二十日，下诏说 ：尽力帝王之役，致身战场，都为遵从大义，无非勤奋忠诚。
English: On the 20th, the next imperial edict said, "To do one's best in the emperor's war and to give one's life on the battlefield is to obey the great justice and to be diligent and loyal."

古文：委命草芥，暴骸原野；兴言念之，每怀愍恻。
现代文：而将士委身于草芥，暴尸于原野，每念至此，心中怜悯凄恻。
English: But the soldiers committed themselves to the mustard, the corpse in the field, every time I think of this, my heart is full of pity.

古文：往年问罪，将届辽滨；庙算胜略，具有进止。
现代文：往年兴师问罪，将至辽水之滨，庙堂制定方略，均有进止。
English: In previous years, Xing Shi asked for punishment, will go to Liao Shui's beach, the temple to formulate a strategy, all have progressed.

古文：而谅昏凶，罔识成败；高颎愎狠，本无智谋。
现代文：高丽王谅昏庸凶残，不知成败；高赹凶狠刚愎，本无智谋。
English: The King of Goryeo is stupid and cruel, and does not know whether he will succeed or fail; Gao Yu is fierce and stubborn, and has no wisdom.

古文：临三军犹兒戏，视人命如草芥；不遵成规，坐贻挠退。
现代文：掌管三军如同儿戏，轻视人命犹如草芥。不遵守成规，以致败退。
English: Commanding the three armies is like a child's play, despising human life as if it were nothing. Failure to abide by the rules leads to defeat.

古文：遂令死亡者众，不及埋藏。
现代文：造成死亡众多，来不及埋葬。
English: Caused many deaths, too late to be buried.

古文：今宜遣使人，分道收葬。
现代文：今应派人，分路收埋。
English: Someone should be sent now to close the road.

古文：设祭于辽西郡，立道场一所。
现代文：设祭于辽西郡，建立一所道场。
English: The festival was set up in West Liao County, and a dojo was built.

古文：有司便宜宣布，咸使知闻。
现代文：恩加于地下，以消孤魂之冤；泽及于枯骨，以弘仁者之惠。 
English: Benevolence is added to the earth to erase the wrongs of the lonely soul; grace to the dry bones to benefit the benevolent.

古文：丁酉，扶风人唐弼举兵反，众十万，推李弘为天子，自称唐王。
现代文：二十三日，下诏说： 便可分命六师，百道齐进。我当亲执武节，统率诸军，秣马于丸都，观兵于辽水，顺天诛伐于海外，拯救民众于倒悬 二十九日，扶风人唐弼举兵造反，有兵卒十万，拥戴李弘当皇帝，自称为唐王。
English: On the 23rd, he issued the following edict: "I can assign six divisions and advance in a hundred directions. I should personally hold the Martial Arts Festival, lead the troops, hold a horse in Marutsu, watch the soldiers in Liao Shui, march across the sky overseas, and save the people by hanging upside down. On the 29th, Tang Xuan, the windmaker, raised an army to rebel, with 100,000 soldiers, supported Li Hongdan as emperor, and called himself Tang Wang.

古文：三月壬子，行幸涿郡。
现代文：三月十四日，皇帝到达涿郡。
English: On March 14th, the emperor arrived in Shixian.

古文：癸亥，次临渝宫。亲御戎服，祃祭黄帝，斩叛军者以衅鼓。
现代文：二十五日，到达临渝宫，皇帝亲自穿上戎服，祭祀黄帝，斩了叛军，用血来涂战鼓。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, arriving at the Linyu Palace, the emperor himself put on a military uniform, sacrificed to the Yellow Emperor, beheaded the rebels, and smeared the war drums with blood.

古文：夏四月辛未，彭城贼张大彪聚众数万，保县薄山为盗，遣榆林太守董纯击破斩之。
现代文：夏四月初四，彭城贼徒张大彪聚集几万人占据县薄山当强盗，派榆林太守董纯打败他并将他斩首。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：甲午，车驾次北平。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝到达北平。
English: On the 27th, the emperor arrived in Beiping.

古文：五月庚子，诏举郡孝悌廉洁各十人。
现代文：五月初三，下诏举荐各郡的孝悌、廉洁的人士各十人。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the following edict was issued to recommend ten filial piety and incorruptible persons from each county.

古文：壬寅，贼帅宋世谟陷琅邪。
现代文：初五，贼帅宋世谟攻占了琅笽。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Song Shimo, a master thief, captured the capital.

古文：庚申，延安人刘迦论举兵反，自称皇王，建元大世。
现代文：二十三日，延安人刘迦论起兵造反，自称皇王，建年号大世。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Jia, a native of Yan'an, declared that he would rise up in revolt and call himself the emperor.

古文：六月辛未，贼帅郑文雅、林宝护等众三万，陷建安郡，太守杨景祥死之。
现代文：六月初五，贼帅郑文雅、林宝护等领兵三万人，攻占建安郡，太守杨景祥死去。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Zheng Wenya, Lin Baogu, and other leaders of the 30,000-strong army captured Jian'an County, and Yang Jingxiang, the governor, died.

古文：秋七月癸丑，车驾次怀远镇。
现代文：秋七月十七日，皇帝到达怀远镇。
English: Autumn On July 17th, the emperor arrived at Huaiyuan Town.

古文：乙卯，曹国遣使贡方物。
现代文：十九日，曹国派使者朝贡地方特产。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Cao sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：甲子，高丽遣使请降，囚送斛斯政。
现代文：二十八日，高丽派使者请降，并用囚车送回斛斯政。
English: On the 28th, the Koryo sent an envoy to ask for surrender and sent him back to Gyeongsangbuk-do in a prison van.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：八月己巳，班师。
现代文：八月初四，班师回国。
English: On the 4th of August, the class teacher returned to China.

古文：右卫大将军、左光禄大夫郑荣卒。
现代文：右卫大将军、左光禄大夫郑荣去世。
English: General Yu Wei and Doctor Zuo Guanglu Zheng Rong passed away.

古文：冬十月丁卯，上至东都。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇帝到达东都。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the emperor arrived in Dongdu.

古文：己丑，还京师。
现代文：二十四日，回到京城。
English: On the 24th, he returned to Beijing.

古文：十一月丙申，支解斛斯政于金光门外。
现代文：十一月初二，将斛斯政肢解在金光门外。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the government of Gansu was dismembered outside the Golden Gate.

古文：乙巳，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一日，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 11th day, a religious service was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：己酉，贼帅司马长安破长平郡。
现代文：十五日，贼帅司马长安攻下长平郡。
English: On the fifteenth day, the thief Sima Chang'an captured Changping County.

古文：乙卯，离石胡刘苗王举兵反，自称天子，以其弟六兒为永安王，众至数万。
现代文：二十一日，离石胡人刘苗王起兵造反，自称为天子，封第六个儿子为永安王，领兵几万人。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Miao Wang from Shihwu rebelled, calling himself the Son of Heaven and naming his sixth son the King of Yongan, leading tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：将军潘长文讨之，不能克。
现代文：将军潘长文前去进讨，没能攻下。
English: General Pan Changwen went to advance and failed to capture it.

古文：是月，贼帅王德仁拥众数万，保林虑山为盗。
现代文：当月，贼帅王德仁聚众几万人，占领林虑山为盗。
English: That month, the thief Wang Deren gathered tens of thousands of people to occupy Linxi Mountain.

古文：十二月壬申，上如东都，其日大赦天下。
现代文：十二月初九，皇帝前往东都，当天大赦天下。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, the emperor went to Dongdu, and on that day he pardoned the whole country.

古文：戊子，入东都。
现代文：二十五日，进入东都。
English: On the 25th, he entered Dongdu.

古文：庚寅，贼帅孟让众十余万，据都梁宫。
现代文：二十七日，贼帅孟让带领十多万人，占领都梁宫。
English: On the 27th, the thief Meng Zhan led more than 100,000 people to occupy the Du Liang Palace.

古文：遣江都丞王世充击破之，尽虏其众。
现代文：派江都丞王世充打败了他，全部俘虏了他的部众。
English: Wang Shichong defeated him and captured all of his subordinates.

古文：十一年春正月甲午朔，宴百寮。
现代文：十一年春正月初一，宴请百官。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of spring, a banquet was held for a hundred officials.

古文：突厥、新罗、靺鞨、毕大辞、诃咄、傅越、乌那曷、波腊吐火罗、俱虑建、忽论、靺鞨、诃多、沛汗、龟兹、疏勒、于阗、安国、曹国、何国、穆国、毕、衣密、失范延、伽折、契丹等国，并遣使朝贡。
现代文：突厥、新罗？毕大辞、诃咄、傅越、乌那曷、波腊、吐火罗、俱虑建、忽论？诃多、沛汗、龟兹、疏勒、于阗、安国、曹国、何国、穆国、毕、衣密、失范延、伽折、契丹等国，都派使者朝贡。
English: The Turkic, Silla, Bi Dajie, Xingyi, Fu Yue, Unaju, Bala, Tu Huo Luo, Qiu Xian Jian, Huo Xuan, Baikang, Kuez, Shule, Yuxi, An Guo, Cao Guo, He Guo, Mu Guo, Bi, Yi Mi, Shufan Yan, Qia Li, Qidan and other countries all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：贼帅魏刀兒自称历山飞，众各十余万，北连突厥，南寇赵。
现代文：初五，武贲郎将高建毗在齐郡打败了贼帅颜宣政，俘虏男女几千人。二十二日，设宴招待各蛮夷国使者，陈设鱼龙曼延等百戏为乐，赏赐多少不等的物品。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Wu Biao defeated the thief Yan Xuan Zheng and captured several thousand men and women. On the 22nd day, Emperor Wu Biao held a banquet to invite the emissaries of the barbarian barbarian countries, and set up a hundred plays such as Yu Longman Yan for fun, and rewarded them with many different items.

古文：三月丁酉，杀右骁卫大将军光禄大夫郕公李浑、将作监光禄大夫李敏，并族灭其家。
现代文：二月初五，贼帅杨仲绪等人带领一万多人进攻北平，滑公李景打败他并将他斩首。十三日，王须拔造反，自称漫天王，国号为燕；贼帅魏刀儿自称历山飞，各有部众十多万人，他们北连突厥，南侵赵地。三月初五，杀了右骁卫大将军光禄大夫絣公李浑、将作监光禄大夫李敏，并且族灭全家。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, Yang Zhongxu and others led more than 10,000 people to attack Beiping, and Shigong Li Jing defeated him and beheaded him. On the 13th day, Wang Su rebelled, claiming to be the King of Heaven, and his country's name was Yan; the Thief-in-Chief Wei Cutter claimed to be Leshan Fei, and each of them had more than 100,000 people, and they invaded Turku in the north and Zhao Di in the south. On the 5th day of the 3rd month, they killed the Right Guard General Guanglu Daifu Gong Li Hun, and Li Min,

古文：癸卯，贼帅司马长安破西河。
现代文：十一日，贼帅司马长安攻下西河。
English: On the 11th day, Sima Chang'an, the thief-in-chief, captured the West River.

古文：己酉，幸太原，避暑汾阳宫。
现代文：十七日，皇帝到汾阳宫避暑。
English: On the 17th, the emperor went to the Poyang Palace to spend the summer.

古文：秋七月己亥，淮南人张起绪举兵为盗，众至三万。
现代文：秋七月初七，淮南人张起绪起兵当强盗，聚众达三万人。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, Zhang Qi of Huainan raised an army of bandits, gathering up to 30,000 people.

古文：辛丑，光禄大夫、右御卫大将军张寿卒。
现代文：十一日，光禄大夫、右御卫大将军张寿去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Dr. Guanglu and General Zhang Shou passed away.

古文：八月乙卯，巡北塞。
现代文：八月初五，巡察北部边塞。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, they inspected the northern border fortress.

古文：戊辰，突厥始毕可汗率骑数十万，谋袭乘舆；义成公主遣使告变。
现代文：初八，突厥始毕可汗带领几十万骑兵，阴谋偷袭皇帝，义成公主派使者报告这个变故。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the Turkic calendar, Bikhan led hundreds of thousands of cavalry in a plot to ambush the emperor. Princess Yicheng sent an envoy to report the plot.

古文：壬申，车驾驰幸雁门。
现代文：十二日，车驾快速前往雁门。
English: On the 12th, the car drove quickly to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：癸酉，突厥围城，官军频战不利。
现代文：十三日，突厥围困城池，官兵多次作战都失败。
English: On the 13th, the Turks besieged the city, and the officers and soldiers failed in many battles.

古文：上大惧，欲率精骑溃围而出；民部尚书樊子盖固谏，乃止。
现代文：皇帝十分恐惧，打算率领精锐骑兵突围而出，民部尚书樊子盖力谏，这才停止行动。
English: The emperor was very afraid and planned to lead the elite cavalry out of the encirclement. The Ministry of Civil Affairs had to intervene to stop the action.

古文：齐王暕以后军保于崞县。
现代文：齐王日柬以后军坚守崞县。
English: After the invasion of Japan and Cambodia by King Qi, the army held fast to Min County.

古文：甲申，诏天下诸郡募兵。于是守令各来赴难。
现代文：二十四日，下诏令天下各郡派兵勤王，于是各地守令们都前来救援。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an edict ordering all the counties in the country to send soldiers to serve the king, so the guards from all over the country came to the rescue.

古文：九月甲辰，突厥解围而去。
现代文：九月十五日，突厥解围而去。
English: On September 15, the Turks left.

古文：丁未，曲赦太原、雁门死罪已下。
现代文：十八日，特赦太原、雁门死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 18th, Taiyuan and Ganmen were pardoned.

古文：冬十月壬戌，上至于东都。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇帝到达东都。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the emperor arrived in Dongdu.

古文：丁卯，彭城人魏骐驎聚众万余为盗，寇鲁郡。
现代文：初八，彭城人魏骐聚合一万多人当强盗，进犯鲁郡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Pengcheng people Wei Wei gathered more than 10,000 people to be robbers and invaded Lu County.

古文：壬申，贼帅卢明月聚众十余万，寇陈、汝间。
现代文：十三日，贼帅卢明月聚众十多万人，入侵陈、汝之间。
English: On the 13th, the bandit Lu Mingyue gathered more than one hundred thousand people to invade Chen and Ru.

古文：东海贼李子通拥众度淮，自号楚王，建元明政，寇江都。
现代文：东海贼李子通带领部众渡过淮河，自称楚王，建年号为明政，入侵江都。
English: The East Sea bandit, Li Zi Tong, led his troops across the Huai River, calling himself the King of Chu, with the founding year of Ming Dynasty, and invaded Jiangdu.

古文：十一月乙卯，贼帅王须拔破高阳郡。
现代文：十一月二十七日，贼帅王须拔攻下高阳郡。
English: On November 27th, the thief and general Wang Subao captured Goyang County.

古文：十二月戊寅，有大流星如斛，坠明月营，破其冲车。
现代文：十二月二十日，有大流星如斛，掉入卢明月的军营，毁坏了他的冲车。
English: On December 20th, a large meteor fell into Lu Mingyue's military camp, destroying his vehicle.

古文：庚辰，诏民部尚书樊子盖发关中兵，讨绛郡贼敬盘陁、柴保昌等，经年不能克。
现代文：二十二日，命令民部尚书樊子盖征发关中兵马，讨伐绛郡贼人敬盘瞓、柴保昌等，过了一年多不能打败他们。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People

古文：谯郡人硃粲拥众数十万寇荆、襄，僭称楚帝，建元昌达。
现代文：谯郡人朱粲带领几十万人入侵荆、襄，自称楚帝，建年号为昌达。
English: Zhu Xi, a native of Handan County, led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Jing and Xiang. He called himself Emperor Chu, and his founding year name was Changda.

古文：汉南诸郡，多为所陷焉。
现代文：汉水南面各郡，大多被他占领。
English: The counties south of Hanshui were mostly occupied by him.

古文：十二年春正月甲午，雁门人翟松柏起兵于灵丘，众至数万，转攻傍县。
现代文：十二年春正月初七，雁门人翟松柏在灵丘起兵，聚合几万人，转攻周围各县。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, the people of Ganmen, led by Zou Songbo, raised an army in Lingqiu, gathered tens of thousands of people, and attacked the surrounding counties.

古文：二月己未，真腊遣使贡方物。
现代文：二月初二，真腊派使者进贡地方物品。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：甲子夜，有二大鸟似雕，飞入大业殿，止于御幄，至明而去。
现代文：初七晚上，有两只大鸟长得像雕，飞进大业殿，停息在皇帝的帷帐之中，到天亮时才离开。
English: On the evening of the seventh day of the first month, two large birds resembling eagles flew into the Great Hall of the Work and rested among the emperor's curtains. They did not leave until dawn.

古文：癸亥，东海贼卢公暹率众万余，保于苍山。
现代文：初六，东海贼卢公暹率领一万多人，占据苍山。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, more than ten thousand people led by the East Sea thief Lu Gong Sie occupied Cangshan.

古文：夏四月丁巳，显阳门灾。
现代文：夏四月初一，显阳门发生火灾。
English: On the first day of April in summer, a fire broke out at the Xianyang Gate.

古文：癸亥，魏刀兒所部将甄翟兒号历山飞，众十万，转寇太原。
现代文：初七，魏刀儿的部将甄翟儿，号称历山飞，带领十万人，转而进犯太原。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhen Xun Er, the leader of the Wei sword, known as Leshanfei, led 100,000 people to attack Taiyuan.

古文：将军潘长文讨之，反为所败，长文死之。
现代文：将军潘长文前往征讨，反而被打败，潘长文死去。
English: General Pan Changwen went to collect, but was defeated, and Pan Changwen died.

古文：五月丙戌朔，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：五月初一，日全食。初八，大流星殒落在吴郡，是石质。
English: On the first day of May, there was a total solar eclipse. On the eighth day of the first month, a large meteorite landed in Wuxi County. It was made of stone.

古文：癸巳，大流星殒于吴郡，为石。壬午，上于景华宫征求萤火，得数斛，夜出游山而放之，光遍岩谷。
现代文：初七，皇帝在景华宫求取萤火虫，得到了好几斛，晚间出外游山，把萤火虫放飞，其光照亮山谷。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month, the emperor asked for fireflies in the Jinghua Palace and got several dragonflies. In the evening, he went out to the mountains to release the fireflies, and their light illuminated the valley.

古文：秋七月壬戌，民部尚书、光禄大夫、济北公樊子盖卒。
现代文：秋七月初八，民部尚书、光禄大夫、济北公樊子盖去世。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Minister of the People's Ministry, Dr. Guanglu, and the Jibei Prince, Zizigai, passed away.

古文：甲子，幸江都宫，以越王侗、光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检校民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚等总留守事。
现代文：初十，皇帝前往江都宫，由越王侗、光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检校民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚等一起负责留守京都。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emperor went to the Edo Imperial Palace, and was left in charge of Kyoto by Prince Koshio, Doctor Koroku Danda, Dafu-kyo Motomundo, Kengakko Minbu Shoshu Uetsu, Ubukei no shogun Empress Dowager Muji, and Ujitsuro Ruchu, among others.

古文：奉信郎崔民象以盗贼充斥，于建国门表谏不宜巡幸。
现代文：奉信郎崔民象认为目前盗贼充斥国中，在建国门上表劝谏不应外出巡视。
English: Fengxin Lang Cui Minxiang believes that thieves are currently rife in the country, and advises that they should not go out on patrols.

古文：上大怒，先解其颐，乃斩之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，先挖掉他的下巴，然后斩首。
English: Enraged, the emperor first gouged out his jaw and then beheaded him.

古文：戊辰，冯翊人孙华自号总管，举兵为盗。
现代文：十四日，冯翊人孙华自称总管，起兵为盗。
English: On the 14th, Sun Hua, a member of the Fenghuang Clan, claimed to be the chief steward and raised an army to steal.

古文：高凉通守洗宝彻举兵作乱，岭南溪洞多应之。
现代文：高凉通守洗瞚彻起兵作乱，岭南一带溪涧少数民族大都响应。
English: Gaoliang Tongshou of Laiwu launched a full-scale military riot, and most of the Xidi ethnic minorities in the Lingnan region responded.

古文：己巳，荧惑守羽林，月余乃退。
现代文：十五日，火星占据羽林位，一个多月后才离开。
English: On the fifteenth day, Mars occupied the feather forest, and left more than a month later.

古文：车驾次汜水，奉信郎王爱仁以盗贼日盛，谏上，请还西京。上怒，斩之而行。
现代文：车驾到达汜水时，奉信郎王爱仁以盗贼越来越多为理由，劝谏皇帝，请他返回西京，皇帝发怒，把他斩首后出发。
English: When the car arrived in Surabaya, Wang Airen advised the emperor to return to Xijing on the grounds that there were more and more thieves. The emperor was angry and beheaded him before leaving.

古文：八月乙巳，贼帅赵万海众数十万，自恆山寇高阳。
现代文：八月二十一日，贼帅赵万海率领几十万人从恒山进犯高阳。
English: On August 21st, the thief Zhao Wanhai led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Gaoyang from Hengshan.

古文：壬子，有大流星如斗，出王良、阁道，声如坏墙。
现代文：二十八日，有大流星如斗，出王良、阁道，响声就像墙壁倒塌似的。
English: On the 28th, there was a large meteor like a battle, out of Wang Liang, loft road, the sound was like a wall collapsing.

古文：癸丑，大流星如甕，出羽林。
现代文：二十九日，有大流星像瓮那样大，出自羽林位。
English: On the 29th, a large meteor, as big as a cricket, came out of the forest of feathers.

古文：九月丁酉，东海人杜伏威、扬州沈觅敌等作乱，众至数万，右御卫将军陈棱击破之。
现代文：九月丁酉，东海人杜伏威、扬州人沈觅敌等叛乱，聚众几万人，右御卫将军陈棱打败了他们。
English: In September, rebellions such as Dingyao, the East China Sea people Du Fuwei, and the Yangzhou people Shen Kuai and other rebellions gathered tens of thousands of people, and the right guard general Chen Ren defeated them.

古文：戊午，有二枉矢，出北斗魁，委曲蛇形，注于南斗。
现代文：初五，有两颗流星形如弯矢，出自北斗星，弯弯曲曲，就像蛇的形状，注入南斗。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, two meteors, shaped like curved arrows, came from the Big Dipper, curved like the shape of a snake, and entered the Southern Dipper.

古文：壬戌，安定人荔非世雄杀临泾令，举兵作乱，自号将军。
现代文：初九，安定人荔非世雄杀了临泾县令，起兵作乱，自封为将军。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the stable man Lih Fei Shixiong killed the Linyi County magistrate, started a riot, and appointed himself as a general.

古文：冬十月己丑，开府仪同三司、左翊卫大将军、光禄大夫、许公宇文述薨。
现代文：冬十月初六，开府仪同三司、左翊卫大将军、光禄大夫、许公宇文述去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Kaifu Yi passed away, along with the 3rd Division, General Zuo Jianwei, Doctor Guanglu, and Xu Gongyu Wenshu.

古文：十二月癸未，鄱阳贼操天成举兵反，自号元兴王，建元始兴，攻陷豫章郡。
现代文：十二月初一，鄱阳贼操天成起兵造反，自称元兴王，建年号始兴，攻下了豫章郡。
English: On the first day of December, the Poyang bandits led by Tiancheng rebelled, claiming to be the King of Yuanxing, the year of the founding of Yuanxing, and captured Yuzhang County.

古文：乙酉，以右翊卫大将军来护为开府仪同三司，行左翊卫大将军。
现代文：初二，任命右翊卫大将军来护儿为开府仪同三司，代行左翊卫大将军职务。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, he appointed the right guard major general to take care of the children as the head of the ceremony and the three departments, acting as the left guard major general.

古文：壬辰，鄱阳人林士弘自称皇帝，国号楚，建元太平。攻陷九江、庐陵郡。
现代文：初九，鄱阳人林士弘自称皇帝，国号为楚，建年号太平，攻下了九江、庐陵郡。
English: In the early 9th century, Lin Shihong, a native of Fenyang, claimed to be the emperor, with the country name of Chu and the founding year of Taiping. He conquered Jiujiang and Fuling County.

古文：唐公破甄翟兒于西河，虏男女千口。
现代文：唐公在西河打败了甄翟儿，俘虏了男女几千人。
English: Tang Gong defeated Zhen Rong in the West River and captured thousands of men and women.

古文：十三年春正月壬子，齐郡贼杜伏威率众度淮，攻陷历阳郡。
现代文：十三年春正月初一，齐郡贼人杜伏威率领部众渡过淮河，攻下历阳郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, Du Fuwei, the thief of Qi County, led the troops across the Huaihe River and captured Liyang County.

古文：丙辰，勃海贼窦建德设坛于河间之乐寿，自称长乐王，建元丁丑。
现代文：初五，渤海贼窦建德设祭坛在河间的乐寿，自称为长乐王，建年号为丁丑。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Erhai thief Dou Jiande set up an altar in the Le Shou of the river, calling himself the Changle King, and the year of establishment was Dingwu.

古文：辛巳，贼帅徐圆郎率众数千破东平郡。
现代文：三十日，贼帅徐圆朗带领几千人攻破东平郡。
English: On the 30th, the thief Xu Yuanlang led several thousand people to break through Dongping County.

古文：弘化人到成聚众万余人为盗，傍郡苦之。
现代文：弘化人到人山成聚集一万多人当强盗，周围各郡遭受苦难。
English: More than 10,000 people from Hongwah gathered in Jinshancheng to become robbers, and the surrounding counties suffered.

古文：二月壬午，朔方人梁师都杀郡丞唐世宗，据郡反，自称大丞相。
现代文：二月初一，朔方人梁师都杀了郡丞唐世宗，占领郡城造反，自称为大丞相。
English: On the first day of February, all the members of the Shuo faction and Liang Shizong killed the county magistrate Tang Shizong, occupied the county seat and rebelled, calling themselves the grand marshals.

古文：遣银青光禄大夫张世隆击之，反为所败。
现代文：派银青光禄大夫张世隆去攻打，反而被打败。
English: He sent Zhang Shilong, a silver-haired doctor of Qing Guanglu, to attack, but was defeated.

古文：戊子，贼帅王子英破上谷郡。
现代文：初七，贼帅王子英攻破上谷郡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the thief Prince Ying defeated Shanggu County.

古文：己丑，马邑校尉刘武周杀太守王仁恭，举兵作乱，北连突厥，自称定杨可汗。
现代文：初八，马邑校尉刘武周杀了太守王仁恭，起兵作乱，北连结突厥，自称为定杨可汗。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liu Wuzhou, a lieutenant of Ma'iyu, killed the imperial governor Wang Rinkong, started a riot, allied with the Turks in the north, and called himself Ding Yang Khan.

古文：庚寅，贼帅李密、翟让等陷兴洛仓。
现代文：初九，贼帅李密、翟让等攻克兴洛仓。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the thieves Li Mi and Xuan Zhan conquered Xingluo Cang.

古文：越王侗遣武贲郎将刘长恭、光禄少卿房崱击之，反为所败，死者十五六。
现代文：越王侗派武贲郎将刘长恭、光禄少卿房山则去攻打，反被打败，死去的有十分之五六。
English: Yue Wangjun sent Wu Yulang to attack Liu Changqing and Guanglu Shaoqing Fangshan, but they were defeated, and 56 out of 10 died.

古文：庚子，李密自号魏公，称元年；开仓以赈群盗，众至数十万。
现代文：十九日，李密自封为魏公，称元年，打开粮仓赈济群盗，前来的人多达几十万。
English: On the 19th, Li Mi proclaimed himself Wei Gong and said that it was the first year of the year. He opened the granary to help the bandits, and as many as hundreds of thousands of people came.

古文：河南诸郡，相继皆陷焉。
现代文：河南各郡，都相继沦陷。
English: All counties in Henan Province have fallen one after another.

古文：壬寅，刘武周破武贲郎将王智辩于桑乾镇，智辩死之。
现代文：二十一日，刘武周在桑乾镇打败了武贲郎将王智辩，王智辩死去。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Wuzhou defeated the military commander Wang Zhifen in Sangqian Town, and Wang Zhifen died.

古文：三月戊午，庐江人张子路举兵反，遣右御卫将军陈稜讨平之。
现代文：三月初八，庐江人张子路起兵造反，派右御卫将军陈棱前去讨平。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Zhang Zilu, a native of the Minjiang River, started a mutiny and sent Chen Ren, the right guard general, to settle the matter.

古文：丁丑，贼帅李通德众十万寇庐江，左屯卫将军张镇州击破之。
现代文：二十七日，贼帅李通德的部众十万人进犯庐江，左屯卫将军张镇州击败了他们。
English: On the 27th, the bandit general Li Tongde's army of 100,000 people invaded the Minjiang River, and the Left Tunwei general Zhang Zhenzhou defeated them.

古文：夏四月癸未，金城校尉薛举率众反，自称西秦霸王，建元秦兴。攻陷陇右诸郡。
现代文：夏四月初三，金城校尉薛举带领部众造反，自称西秦霸王，建年号为秦兴，攻占了陇右各郡。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Jincheng Lieutenant Xue led the rebellion, claiming to be the overlord of the Western Qin Dynasty, with the founding year of Qin Xing, and captured all the counties on the right side of the Han Dynasty.

古文：己丑，贼帅孟让夜入东都外郭，烧丰都市而去。
现代文：初九，贼帅孟让在夜间进入东都外城，烧了丰都市后离去。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the thief Meng Zhan entered the Dongdu Outer City at night, burned the city of Fengdu and then left.

古文：癸巳，李密陷迥洛东仓。
现代文：十三日，李密攻下了回洛东仓。
English: On the 13th, Li Mi captured Huiluo Dongcang.

古文：丁酉，贼帅房宪伯陷汝阴郡。
现代文：十七日，贼帅房宪伯攻下了汝阴郡。
English: On the 17th, the thief Shuai Fang Xianbo captured Ruyin County.

古文：是月，光禄大夫武贲郎将裴仁基、淮阳太守赵佗等，并以众叛归李密。
现代文：当月，光禄大夫、武贲郎将裴仁基和淮阳太守赵佗等人，都带领部众归附李密。
English: In the same month, Dr. Guanglu, Wuchang Lang, Pei Rongji and Zhao Qi, the governor of Huaiyang, all led their followers to join Li Mi.

古文：五月辛酉夜，有流星如甕，坠于江都，甲子，唐公起义师于太原。
现代文：五月十二日夜晚，有流星大如瓮，坠落在江都。十五日，唐公在太原带兵起义。
English: On the night of May 12th, a meteor as big as a dragonfly fell on Jiangdu. On the 15th, Tang Gong led an uprising in Taiyuan.

古文：丙寅，突厥数千寇太原，唐公击破之。
现代文：十七日，突厥几千人入侵太原，被唐公打败。
English: On the 17th, several thousand Turks invaded Taiyuan and were defeated by Tang.

古文：秋七月壬子，荧惑守积尸。
现代文：秋七月初四，火星占据积尸位。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, Mars occupies the position of the corpse.

古文：丙辰，武威人李轨举兵反，攻陷河曲诸郡，自称凉王，建元安乐。
现代文：初九，武威人李轨起兵造反，攻下了河西各郡，自称为凉王，建年号为安乐。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Li Liao, a Wuwei man, rebelled and conquered all counties in Hexi. He called himself Liang Wang, and his founding year was Anle.

古文：八月辛巳，唐公破武牙郎将宋老生于霍邑，斩之。
现代文：八月初三，唐公在霍邑打败了武牙郎将宋老生，斩了他。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Tang Gong defeated Wu Ya Lang's general Song Laosheng in Huoyu and beheaded him.

古文：九月己丑，帝括江都人女、寡妇以配从兵。
现代文：九月己丑，炀帝将江都人家的女儿、寡妇抓来给随从兵士们当配偶。
English: In September, Emperor Gong captured the daughters and widows of families in Jiangdu to serve as wives for his soldiers.

古文：是月，武阳郡丞元宝藏以郡叛归李密，与贼帅李文相攻陷黎阳仓。
现代文：当月，武阳郡丞元宝藏以所属郡叛变，归附李密，并和贼帅李文相攻下黎阳仓。
English: In the same month, the county treasurer of Wuyang County, Zheng Yuan Baozang, rebelled with his county and attached himself to Li Mi, and together with the thief commander Li Wenxiang, he attacked Li Yangcang.

古文：彗星见于营室。
现代文：彗星在营室出现。
English: The comet appeared in the camp room.

古文：冬十月丁亥，太原阳世洛聚众万余人。寇掠城邑。
现代文：冬十月初十，太原阳世洛聚集一万多人，侵扰和掠夺城邑。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the winter, more than ten thousand people gathered in Yangshilou, Taiyuan, to invade and plunder the towns.

古文：丙申，罗令萧铣以县反，鄱阳人董景珍以郡反，迎铣于罗县，号为梁王，攻陷傍郡。
现代文：十九日，罗县守令萧铣以县反叛，鄱阳人董景珍以郡反叛，从罗县接来萧铣，号称梁王，攻下了周围各郡。
English: On the 19th, the governor of Luo County, Xiao Wei, rebelled in Luo County, and Dong Jingzhen, a native of Fenyang, rebelled in Luo County. Xiao Wei, known as Liang Wang, was brought from Luo County and conquered the surrounding counties.

古文：戊戌，武贲郎将高毗败济北郡贼甄宝车于监山。
现代文：二十一日，武贲郎将高毗在山监山打败了济北郡贼人甄宝车。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wu Yulang defeated Gao Bi in the mountain supervision mountain and defeated the thief screening treasure car in Jibei County.

古文：十一月丙辰，唐公入京师。
现代文：十一月初九，唐公进入京城。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, Tang Gong entered Beijing.

古文：辛酉，遥尊帝为太上皇，立代王侑为帝，改元义宁。
现代文：十四日，尊炀帝为太上皇，立代王侑为皇帝，改年号为义宁。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Emperor Zonglu became the Emperor Emeritus, Emperor Wang Rong was established, and the era name was changed to Yining.

古文：上起宫丹杨，将逊于江左。
现代文：炀帝建造丹杨宫，准备让位后留住在江东。
English: Emperor Gao built the Danyang Palace and planned to stay in the East River after abdicating.

古文：有乌鹊来巢幄帐，驱不能止。
现代文：有乌鸦来到帷帐上建巢，驱赶不走。
English: A crow came to build a nest on the curtain rod, and I couldn't drive it away.

古文：荧惑犯太微。
现代文：火星进犯太微。
English: Mars is too faint.

古文：有石自江浮入于杨子，日光四散如流血，上甚恶之。
现代文：有石头从江面浮入到杨子江。阳光四射，如同流血一般，炀帝十分厌恶。
English: A stone floated from the surface of the river into the Yangzi River. The sun was shining brightly, as if it were bleeding, and Emperor Gong was very disgusted.

古文：二年三月，右屯卫将军宇文化及、武贲郎将司马德戡、元礼、监门直阁裴虔通、将作少监宇文智及、武勇郎将赵行枢、鹰扬郎将孟景、内史舍人元敏、符玺郎李覆、牛方裕、千牛左右李孝本、弟孝质、直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺等，以骁果作乱，入犯宫闱。上崩于温室，时年五十。
现代文：义宁二年三月，右屯卫将军宇文化及、武贲郎将司马德甚戈、元礼、监门直阁裴虔通、将作少监宇文智及、武勇郎将赵行枢、鹰扬郎将孟景、内史舍人元敏、符玺郎李覆、牛方裕、千牛左右李孝本和他弟弟孝质、直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺等人，以骁果兵作乱，攻入宫闱，炀帝死于温室，当年五十岁。
English: In March of the 2nd year of Yining, U Bunka, the general of the Right Tunwei, Sima Deshigo, the general of the Military Garrison, Genrei, the supervisor of the prison gate, U Bunchi, the junior supervisor of the prison gate, Wu Wenzhi, the general of the Military Garrison, Zhao Xingzhu, Ying Yang, the general of the Military Garrison, Meng Jing, the general of the Inner History, Yuan Min, the general of the Military Garrison, Li Zhe, the general of the Military Garrison, Niu Fang Yu, the general of the Military Garrison, Li Xiaobeng and his younger brother, Xia

古文：萧后令宫人撤床箦为棺，以埋之。
现代文：萧皇后让宫人拆下床席制成棺木，将他埋葬了。
English: Empress Xiao had the palace staff remove the bed seat to make a coffin and buried him.

古文：化及发后，右御卫将军陈稜奉梓宫于成象殿，葬吴公台下。
现代文：宇文化及离开江都后，右御卫将军陈棱将炀帝的灵柩放在成象殿，埋葬在吴公台下。
English: After leaving the capital of Yunnan Province, Chen Ren, the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, placed the coffin of Emperor Gao in the Chengxiang Hall and buried it under the Wu Gong Terrace.

古文：发敛之始，容貌若生，众咸异之。
现代文：发殓的时候，见炀帝容貌仍跟活着时一样，众人都感到惊讶。
English: When he died, everyone was surprised to see that his appearance was still the same as when he was alive.

古文：大唐平江南之后，改葬雷塘。
现代文：大唐平定江南以后，又改葬到雷塘。
English: After Datang subdued the south of the Yangtze River, he was reburied in Letang.

古文：初，上自以蕃王，次不当立，每矫情饰行，以钓虚名，阴有夺宗之计。
现代文：起初，炀帝因为自己是个藩王，按照次序不能立为皇帝，便常常违反常情掩饰自己的行为，以此沽名钓誉，阴谋夺取继承权。
English: At first, because he was the king of a domain and could not be made emperor according to the order of succession, Emperor Xuan often violated the normal circumstances to cover up his actions, in order to make a name for himself and plot to seize the right of succession.

古文：时高祖雅重文献皇后，而性忌妾媵；皇太子勇内多嬖幸，以此失爱。
现代文：当时高祖特别敬重文献皇后，而文献皇后一向最妒嫉那些有妾媵的人，皇太子杨勇内室有许多宠幸的女子，因而失去文献皇后的爱心。
English: At that time, Gao Zu especially respected the Empress of Literature, and the Empress of Literature was always the most jealous of those who had concubines. Crown Prince Yang Yong's wife had many favorite women, and thus lost the love of the Empress of Literature.

古文：帝后庭有子皆不育之，示无私宠，取媚于后。
现代文：炀帝后庭宫女有了孩子以后炀帝都不让抚育，以此表示自己没有私下宠幸的人，以取得文献皇后的喜欢。
English: After the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：大臣用事者，倾心与交。
现代文：大臣们在朝廷中担任要职的，炀帝都倾心结交。
English: The ministers who held important positions in the imperial court were all eager to make friends with the emperor.

古文：中使至第，无贵贱，皆曲承颜色，申以厚礼。
现代文：太监们来到府第，不论贵贱，他都降低身份讨好，以讨得他们的欢心，并送上厚礼。
English: When the eunuchs came to the palace, no matter how high or low they were, he would lower his status to please them and give them gifts.

古文：婢仆往来者，无不称其仁孝。
现代文：所以那些来来往往的女婢奴仆们，无不称赞炀帝的仁孝。
English: Therefore, all the maidservants and servants who came and went praised the benevolence and filial piety of Emperor Xuan.

古文：又常私入宫掖，密谋于文献后。
现代文：他又常常私入宫庭，和文献皇后密谋。
English: He also often sneaked into the palace courtyard to conspire with the queen of literature.

古文：杨素等因机构扇，遂成废立。
现代文：杨素又乘机挑拨离间，因此皇太子被废而炀帝继立。
English: Yang Su also took the opportunity to sow discord, as a result of which the crown prince was dethroned and the emperor was enthroned.

古文：自高祖大渐暨谅闇之中，蒸淫无度。
现代文：而当高祖病重以及后来炀帝在守丧期间，便荒淫无度。
English: However, when Gao Zu was seriously ill, and later when Emperor Xizong was in mourning, she became wildly debauched.

古文：山陵始就，即事巡游。
现代文：高祖刚埋葬结束，他就开始巡游天下。
English: As soon as Gao Zu was buried, he began to travel around the world.

古文：以天下承平日久，士马全盛。慨然慕秦皇、汉武之事。
现代文：他因天下太平日久，兵员马匹都是全盛时期，便慨然思慕秦始皇、汉武帝的事迹。
English: Because the world had been at peace for a long time and soldiers and horses were in their prime, he was moved to think about the deeds of the First Emperor of Qin and Emperor of Han.

古文：乃盛理宫室，穷极侈靡。
现代文：于是，大建宫室，穷奢极欲，尽量奢华。
English: As a result, Da Jian palace room, the most extravagant desire, as far as possible luxury.

古文：召募行人，分使绝域。
现代文：他召募使者，分派到遥远的国家，各国使臣到达后，便大加赏赐。
English: He called for envoys and dispatched them to distant countries. When the envoys from various countries arrived, he rewarded them greatly.

古文：诸蕃至者，厚加礼赐；有不恭命，以兵击之。
现代文：如果有对他不恭敬和不听命令的，便以军队进攻。
English: If anyone disrespects him or disobeys his orders, he attacks with the army.

古文：盛兴屯田于玉门、柳城之外。
现代文：他又大举在玉门、柳城外屯田。
English: He also amassed a large amount of land in Gyumon and outside of Liucheng.

古文：课天下富室分道市武马，疋直十余万。富强坐是而冻馁者，十家而九。
现代文：命令天下富户分头购买战马，每匹价值十多万，那些富户因此而导致冻死饿死的，十家有九家。
English: Ordered the world's rich households to buy war horses separately, each worth more than one hundred thousand, those rich households were thus caused to freeze to death and starve to death, nine out of ten.

古文：性多诡谲。所幸之处，不欲人知；每幸之所，辄数道置顿。
现代文：他性情十分诡谲，所到之处，为了不让人家知道行踪，便安排了好几处住所。
English: He had a very mischievous nature and arranged several residences to hide his whereabouts wherever he went.

古文：四海珍羞殊味，水陆必备焉。
现代文：四海的珍玩佳肴，水陆特产，必定十分齐备。
English: The rare delicacies of the four seas, aquatic and terrestrial special products, must be fully prepared.

古文：求市者无远不至。
现代文：求购者不论多远都要照办送来。
English: No matter how far away the buyer is, they must be sent as ordered.

古文：郡县官人，竞为献食；丰厚者进擢，疏俭者获罪。
现代文：各郡县官员，竞相进献食物，进献丰厚的就加以提升，送得少就因此有罪。
English: The officials of each county competed to donate food, and those who donated more were promoted, while those who donated less were punished.

古文：奸吏侵渔，内外虚竭；头会箕敛，人不聊生。
现代文：奸臣猾吏，侵扰百姓，谋取私利，使内外虚空枯竭，赋税苛繁，民不聊生。
English: Treacherous vassals and cunning officials, intruding on the people, seeking personal gain, exhausting the internal and external void, taxing and taxing, and the people do not want to live.

古文：于时，军国多务，日不暇给。
现代文：当时，郡国多事，应接不暇。
English: At that time, the county was busy with many things.

古文：帝方骄怠，恶闻政事；冤屈不理，奏请罕决。
现代文：炀帝正是骄惰的时候，不喜欢听说政事，因而冤屈不得审理，奏请的事情很少作出决断。
English: This was precisely the time when Emperor Xuan was at his most arrogant. He did not like to hear about political affairs, so grievances could not be heard, and decisions on appeals were rarely made.

古文：又猜忌臣下，无所专任。
现代文：他又猜疑大臣和下属，没有真心委任的人。
English: He is also suspicious of ministers and subordinates, who do not have a genuine mandate.

古文：朝臣有不合意者，必构其罪而族灭之。
现代文：朝臣中有不合自己心意的，必定想法加罪并族灭他们。
English: If there are courtiers who are not to his liking, he is bound to think of adding to their crimes and exterminating them.

古文：高颎、贺若弼先皇心膂，参谋帷幄；张衡、李金才籓邸惟旧，绩著经纶。
现代文：高赹、贺若弼原是隋文帝的心腹，参谋于帷帐之中；张衡、李金才本是炀帝在藩邸的旧臣，处理国家大事很有功绩。
English: Gao Yao and He Ruo Yao were originally the confidants of Emperor Sui Wen, and served as advisors; Zhang Heng and Li Jincai were the former vassals of Emperor Xizong at the residence of the Han Dynasty, and had great achievements in dealing with national affairs.

古文：恶其直道，忌其正义；求其无形之罪，加以丹颈之戮。
现代文：可是炀帝讨厌他们禀性耿直，不愿听他们发表正直的言论，便搜求没有根据的罪名，将他们处斩。
English: However, Emperor Xuan hated their stubbornness and unwillingness to listen to their honest speech, he searched for unfounded charges and executed them.

古文：其余事君尽礼，謇謇匪躬；无辜无罪，横受夷戮者，不可胜纪。
现代文：其他尽心侍奉皇帝，忠诚正直，毫无过错，莫名其妙便被杀掉的人，难以计数。
English: There are countless others who served the emperor wholeheartedly, were loyal and honest, and did nothing wrong, but were killed for no reason.

古文：政刑弛紊，贿货公行，莫敢有言，道路以目。
现代文：政令松弛，刑律混乱，贪污受贿，公开进行，没有人敢于进言，路人只敢用目光表示不满。
English: Government decrees are lax, criminal law is in disarray, corruption and bribery are carried out openly, no one dares to speak out, and passers-by only dare to express their dissatisfaction with their eyes.

古文：六军不息，百役繁兴；行者不归，居者失业；人饥相食，邑落为墟，上弗之恤也。
现代文：六军不得休息，百役沉重频繁，外出者难以归家，居家者失去所业，民众饥荒，人相食，城邑村落，变为废墟，而炀帝毫无怜悯之心并不加赈济。
English: The six armies were not allowed to rest, the hundred services were heavy and frequent, it was difficult for those who went out to return home, those who stayed at home lost their jobs, the people were starving, people were cannibalizing each other, towns and villages were turned into ruins, and Emperor Xuan had no mercy and did not give any aid.

古文：东西行幸，靡有定居；每以供费不给，逆收数年之赋。所至，唯与后宫流连耽湎，惟日不足。
现代文：他东游西巡，没有定居处所，经常因供给的费用不足而预收几年的赋税，所到之处，也只是和后宫嫔妃们流连光景，寻欢作乐而已，就这样也得不到满足。
English: He travels from place to place, has no place to live, and often receives several years of taxes in advance due to insufficient supply costs. Everywhere he goes, he just lingers with the harem concubines, looking for fun, and is not satisfied.

古文：招迎姥媪，朝夕共肆丑言。
现代文：他又找来一些老妇人，从早到晚说下流话。
English: He also brought in some old women to talk dirty to him from morning till night.

古文：又引少年，令与宫人秽乱。
现代文：又招引一些少年，让他们进宫和宫女们乱来。
English: He also lured some young boys, letting them enter the palace and romp with the ladies-in-waiting.

古文：不轨不逊，以为娱乐。
现代文：这样没有规矩和没有廉耻的事情，他却当成一种娱乐。
English: He treats these things, which have no rules and no shame, as a form of entertainment.

古文：区宇之内，盗贼蜂起；劫掠从官，屠陷城邑。
现代文：于是，四海之内，盗贼蜂起，劫掠官员，攻占城邑。
English: So, all over the world, thieves rose up, robbed officials, and captured cities.

古文：近臣互相掩蔽，皆隐贼数，不以实对。
现代文：近臣们相互隐瞒，不敢实奏盗贼人数。
English: The courtiers kept it a secret from each other, not daring to reveal the number of thieves.

古文：或有言贼多者，辄大被诘责。
现代文：如果有人进言盗贼众多的，就要大受斥责。
English: If anyone says that there are many thieves, let him be anathema.

古文：各求苟免，上下相蒙。
现代文：各人只求苟安，上下相互欺骗。
English: Everyone is just looking for peace of mind and deceiving each other.

古文：每出师徒，败亡相继。
现代文：每当出兵，失败相继。
English: Whenever troops are sent, they fail one after another.

古文：战士尽力，不加赏赐；百姓无辜，咸受屠戮。
现代文：战士尽力作战，他却不加赏赐，百姓毫无罪责，却被大加屠杀。
English: The soldier fought as hard as he could, but he was not rewarded, and the people were not guilty, but they were massacred.

古文：蒸庶积怨，天下土崩；至于就禽，而犹未之寤也。
现代文：民众积怨迸发，天下土崩瓦解，直至他被人抓住，还一点儿也没有醒悟。
English: Until he was caught, he did not wake up at all.

