古文：张烈，字徽仙，清河东武城人也。
现代文：张烈，字徽仙，清河东武城人。
English: Zhang Lie, also known as Huixian, was from Dongwucheng, Qinghe Province.

古文：高祖赐名曰烈，仍以本名为字焉。
现代文：魏高祖赐名叫烈，张烈便以本名为字。
English: Wei Gao Zu gave him the name of Lie, and Zhang Lie used his real name.

古文：高祖忄希，为慕容俊尚书右仆射。
现代文：高祖张忄希，任慕容隽尚书右仆射。
English: Zhang Rongxi, the great-grandfather, appointed Murong Rongshan as his right-hand man.

古文：曾祖恂，散骑常侍，随慕容德南渡，因居齐郡之临淄。
现代文：曾祖张恂，为散骑常侍，跟随慕容德南渡，因而定居在齐郡的临淄郡。
English: Zhang Qian, the ancestor of the Zeng family, was a horseback riding attendant who followed Murong De to the south and settled in Linyi County, Qi County.

古文：烈少孤贫，涉猎经史，有气概。
现代文：张烈少时孤贫，涉猎经史，有气概。
English: Zhang Lie was poor when he was young, dabbled in history, and had a strong character.

古文：时青州有崔徽伯、房徽叔，与烈并有令誉，时人号曰 三徽 。
现代文：当时青州有崔徽伯、房徽叔，与张烈一起都有美名，当时人称为 三徽 。
English: At that time, there were Cui Huibo and Fang Hui uncle in Qingzhou, and they had a good reputation together with Zhang Lie. At that time, they were called Sanhui.

古文：高祖时，入官代都，历侍御、主文中散。
现代文：高祖时，为官代郡，历侍御、主文中散。
English: At the time of Gao Zu, he was the official representative of the county, and he was appointed as an attendant to the emperor, and was dismissed in the middle of the main text.

古文：迁洛，除尚书仪曹郎、彭城王功曹史、太子步兵校尉。
现代文：魏都迁入洛阳之后，除授尚书仪曹郎、彭城王功曹史、太子步兵校尉。
English: After Wei Du moved to Luoyang, he conferred the titles of Shang Shuxi Cao Lang, Pengcheng Wang Gong Cao Shi, and Prince Infantry Lieutenant.

古文：萧宝卷将陈显达治兵汉南，谋将入寇。
现代文：萧宝卷将领陈显达治兵汉南准备入侵。
English: Xiao Baowan's general Chen Xianda leads troops to Hannan to prepare for the invasion.

古文：时顺阳太守王青石世官江南，荆州刺史、广阳王嘉虑其有异，表请代之。
现代文：当时顺阳太守王青石的祖先世代为官江南，荆州刺史、广阳王元嘉担心他变节，上表请求派员代替他。
English: At that time, the ancestral generation of Wang Qingshi, the governor of Shunyang, was in the south of the Yangtze River. Jingzhou Zhishi and Guangyang Wang Yuanjia were worried about his defection, and they requested that someone be sent to replace him.

古文：高祖诏侍臣各举所知，互有申荐者。
现代文：高祖诏侍臣各自列举自己所了解的人，大家互有申荐。
English: Gao Zuhao's attendants and retainers each listed people they knew, and they all recommended each other.

古文：高祖曰： 此郡今当必争之地，须得堪济之才，何容泛举也？
现代文：高祖说： 此郡现在处于必争之地，必须得到堪济之才，怎么能够泛泛推举人士呢？
English: Gao Zu said: This county is now in a competitive field, we must get the best talent, how can we choose the best people?

古文：太子步兵张烈每论军国之事，时有会人意处，朕欲用之，何如？ 
现代文：太子步兵张烈每每论列军国之事，时有会人意处，朕想用他，你们说怎么样？ 
English: Zhang Lie, the prince's foot soldier, is always talking about the military state, sometimes there are people's wishes, I want to use him, what do you say?

古文：彭城王勰称赞之，遂敕除陵江将军、顺阳太守。
现代文：彭城王元勰称赞他，于是帝敕除授为陵江将军、顺阳太守。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanqi praised him, so the emperor awarded him the title of Lingjiang General and Shunyang Governor.

古文：烈到郡二日，便为宝卷将崔慧景攻围，七十余日，烈抚厉将士，甚得军人之和。
现代文：张烈到郡第二天，便被萧宝卷将领崔慧景攻围，七十多天中，张烈抚慰激励将士，很得军人之和。
English: On the second day of Zhang Li's arrival in the county, he was besieged by Xiao Baozhong's general Cui Huijing. For more than 70 days, Zhang Li comforted and encouraged the soldiers, and was well received by the soldiers.

古文：会车驾南讨，慧景遁走。
现代文：逢帝车驾南讨，慧景逃走。
English: Feng Di drove south to discuss, Hui Jing fled.

古文：高祖亲劳烈曰： 卿定可，遂能不负所寄。 
现代文：高祖看望劳慰张烈说： 卿定可，遂能不负朕所寄的希望。 
English: Gao Zu visited Zhang Lie, a laborer, and said, "Sir, I am sure that you can live up to the hope I have placed in you.

古文：烈拜谢曰： 若不值銮舆亲驾，臣将不免困于犬羊。
现代文：张烈拜揖说： 如不逢帝驾亲征，臣将不免困于犬羊。
English: Zhang Liebai said: If the emperor does not personally lead the expedition, the minister will inevitably be trapped by dogs and sheep.

古文：自是陛下不负臣，非臣能不负陛下。 
现代文：这是陛下不负臣，而不是臣不辜负陛下。 
English: This is His Majesty not failing His subjects, not His subjects failing His Majesty.

古文：高祖善其对。
现代文：高祖觉得他的对答很好。
English: Gaozu thought his answer was very good.

古文：世宗即位，追录先勋，封清河县开国子，邑二百户。
现代文：世宗即位，追录他以前功勋，朝廷封他为清河县开国子，食邑二百户。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, his previous achievements were recorded, and the court named him the founder of Qinghe County, with 200 households.

古文：寻以母老归养。
现代文：不久因母亲年老辞官回家侍奉。
English: Soon, because of his mother's old age, the clerk returned home to serve.

古文：积十余年，频值凶俭，烈为粥以食饥人，蒙济者甚众，乡党以此称之。
现代文：有十多年，频逢荒年，张烈备粥供给饥饿之人，蒙受他接济的很多，乡亲们都很赞赏他的行为。
English: For more than ten years, in times of famine, Zhang Rong prepared porridge to feed the hungry. Many people received help from him, and the villagers appreciated his actions.

古文：肃宗初，除龙骧将军、司徒右长史。
现代文：肃宗初年，朝廷除授他为龙骧将军、司徒右长史。
English: In the first year of Suzong's reign, the imperial court stripped him of his title of Longjing General, and he became Sito Uchoshi.

古文：又转征虏将军、司空长史。
现代文：又转征虏将军、司空长史。
English: In addition, the conscript general, Siku Choshi, was transferred.

古文：先是，元义父江阳王继曾为青州刺史，及义当权，烈托故义之怀，遂相谄附。
现代文：这以前，元叉父江阳王元继曾任青州刺史，等到元叉当权，张烈托以前交情，便谄奉附帖。
English: Prior to this, Jiangyang Wangyuan, the father of Yuan Xie, had served as the governor of Qingzhou. When Yuan Xie was in power, Zhang Letuo was his former friend.

古文：除前将军、给事黄门侍郎，寻加平南将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：除任前将军、给事黄门侍郎，不久又加平南将军、光禄大夫。
English: In addition to the former general, he was given the position of Huangmen waiter, and soon he was promoted to Pingnan general and Guanglu doctor.

古文：后灵太后反政，以烈义党，出为镇东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：后来灵太后返政，认为张烈、元叉为一党，出其为镇东将军、青州刺史。
English: Later, Lingdaigou returned to politics, and considered Zhang Lie and Yuan Zha to be one party, out of which were Zhendong General and Qingzhou Zhishi.

古文：于时议者以烈家产畜殖，僮客甚多，虑其怨望，不宜出为本州，改授安北将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：这时有人觉得张烈家产畜殖，仆役宾客很多，考虑其影响不好，不宜出任本州之职，改授安北将军、瀛州刺史。
English: At this time, some people felt that Zhang Lie's domestic production and animal breeding, and there were many servants and guests. Considering its influence, it was not good, and it was not appropriate to hold the post of Honshu, and he was awarded the title of General of Anbei and the History of Zhangzhou.

古文：为政清静，吏民安之。
现代文：他为政清静，吏民安定。
English: He is clean and quiet for politics, and officials and people are stable.

古文：更满还朝，因辞老还乡里。
现代文：期满还朝，因年老辞官归里。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to the court due to old age.

古文：兄弟同居怡怡然，为亲类所慕。
现代文：兄弟同居怡和安睦，让亲故乡人很羡慕。
English: The brothers live together happily and amicably, which makes their relatives and fellow villagers very envious.

古文：元象元年，卒于家，时年七十七。
现代文：元象元年，在家去世，时年七十七岁。
English: Yuan Xiang died at home in the first year of the year, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：烈先为《家诫》千余言，并自叙志行及所历之官，临终敕子侄不听求赠，但勒《家诫》立碣而已。
现代文：张烈先撰《家诫》千余言，并自叙志向行绩以及所历官职，临终告诫子侄，不让他们求朝廷赠官，只是刻《家诫》立碑碣而已。
English: Zhang Lie first wrote more than a thousand words of the "Family Precepts," and described his own aspirations and achievements as well as the official positions he had held. On his deathbed, he admonished his nephews and nieces not to ask the imperial court to give them official positions, but only to engrave the "Family Precepts" and erect a monument.

古文：其子质奉行焉。
现代文：他的儿子张质照着做了。
English: His son, Zhang Qian, did the same.

古文：质，博学多才艺。
现代文：张质，博学多才艺。
English: Eloquent, erudite and multi-talented.

古文：解褐奉朝请，员外郎、龙骧将军、谏议大夫。
现代文：释褐奉朝请，任员外郎、龙骧将军、谏议大夫。
English: Xie Hongzhu served the emperor, and was appointed as a member of the outer circle, the general of the Long March, and the doctor of deliberation.

古文：未袭爵。
现代文：没有袭父爵。
English: He did not inherit his father's title.

古文：兴和中，卒于家。
现代文：兴和年间，在家去世。
English: He passed away at home during the Heungwa era.

