古文：天一，地二；天三，地四；天五，地六；天七，地八；天九，地十。
现代文：天即阳，地即阴，阳数奇，即一三五七九，阴数为偶，即二四六八十。
English: Heaven is yang, earth is yin, the odd number of yang is 13579, and the even number of yin is 24680.

古文：天数五，地数五，五位相得而各有合；天数二十有五，地数三十，凡天地之数五十有五，此所以成变化而行鬼神也。大衍之数五十，其用四十有九。分而为二以像两，挂一以像三，揲之以四以象四时，归奇于扐以象闰；五岁再闰，故再扐而后挂。
现代文：任意分为二堆以象两仪，从右手堆中取一根挂于左手小指无名指间以象三才，以四根四根分之，以象四时的运行，先以右手取左手的蓍草，以四根四根数之，将其余数或一或二或三或四，挂于无名指与中指间，以象农历的三年一闰，再以左手取右手堆的蓍草用四四分之，将其余数或一或二或三或四，挂于中指与食指间，以象农历的五年两闰。如是将挂于左手的蓍草取出，非五即九，即成一变，是谓再扐而后挂。
English: Arbitrarily divided into two piles with two instruments, take one from the right-hand pile hanging between the left little finger and ring finger with three years, with four fourths, with the operation of four hours. First, take the left-hand eelgrass with the right hand, count it with four fourths, and hang the remaining number or one or two or three or four between the ring finger and the middle finger, like the three-year leap of the lunar calendar. Then take the right-hand eelgrass pile with four fourths, hang the remaining number or one or two or three or four between the middle finger and the index finger, like the five-year leap of the lunar calendar

古文：《乾》之策二百一十有六，《坤》之策百四十有四，凡三百六十，当期之日。
现代文：乾为阳，策即推算蓍草的根数，阳数九，以四时乘之为卅六，再以六爻乘之为二百一十六。坤为阴，阴数六，以四时乘之为廿四，再以六爻乘之为一百四十四。二策相加凡三百六十，相当于一年的日数。
English: Dry is yang, and the measure is to calculate the number of roots of rushes. The yang number is nine, which is multiplied by four to make sixty, and then multiplied by six to make two hundred and sixteen. Kun is yin, and the yin number is six, which is multiplied by four to make twenty-four, and then multiplied by six to make one hundred and forty-four. The two measures add up to three hundred and sixty, equivalent to the number of days in a year.

古文：二篇之策，万有一千五百二十，当万物之数也。
现代文：《易经》上下二篇六十四卦，共有三百八十四爻，阴阳各一百九十二，以阳数卅六，阴数廿四，各乘以一百九十二而加之，总计得一万一千五百二十，相当于万物的数字。
English: The I Ching consists of two sets of sixty-four sutras, a total of three hundred and eighty-four sutras, one hundred and ninety-two for each yin and yang, with the yang number being thirty-six and the yin number twenty-four, each multiplied by one hundred and ninety-two, adding up to a total of eleven thousand five hundred and twenty, which is equivalent to the number of all things.

古文：是故四营而成《易》，十有八变而成卦，八卦而小成。
现代文：所以 揲之以四 去营求，而构成《易》筮数的变化，三变而成一爻，卦有六爻，十八变即筮成一卦，圣人作《易》画八卦以括万事万物之象，仅为小成而已。
English: Therefore, it is better to seek with four changes, and the changes in the number of folds that make up the "Yi" folds, three changes into one fold, there are six folds in the gua, and eighteen changes into one fold, and the sage made the "Yi" painting eight folds to cover the image of all things and all things, just a small achievement.

古文：引而伸之，触类而长之，天下之能事毕矣。
现代文：引而伸之，顺其类而推求之，增长之，即构成六十卦，三百八十四爻，方作成一部《易经》，天下的能事皆尽在此《易经》之中了。
English: What is extended, what is inferred according to its kind, what is increased, that is to say, sixty ge, three hundred and eighty-four syllables, make up one "I Ching," and all the powerful things in the world are contained in this "I Ching."

古文：显道神德行，是故可与酬酢，可与佑神矣。
现代文：故《易经》可使道术显明于天下，使德行神妙莫测，所以可以应酬于人间之世，而如获得神明的祐助了。
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" can make the Taoism clear to the world, make the virtue mysterious, so it can be used in the human world, and it is like getting the help of the gods.

古文：子曰： 知变化之道者，其知神之所为乎。 
现代文：孔子说： 了解《易经》的变化道理的人，岂不就能知道神的所作所为了吗！ 
English: Confucius said, "Whoever understands the principle of the changes in the I Ching, will not be able to know what God has done!

