古文：黄帝坐明堂，召雷公而问之曰：子知医之道乎？
现代文：黄帝坐于明堂，召见雷公问道：你懂得医学的道理吗？
English: Sitting in the Ming Hall, the Yellow Emperor summoned Lei Gong and asked: Do you understand the principles of medicine?

古文：雷公对曰：诵而颇能解，解而未能别，别而未能明，明而未能彰，足以治群僚，不足至侯王。
现代文：雷公回答说：我诵读医书不能完全理解，有的虽能粗浅的理解，但不能分析辨别，有的虽能分析辨别，但不能深入了解其精奥，有的虽能了解其精奥，但不能但不能加以阐发和应用。所以我的知识，只足以治疗一般官吏的病，不足以治疗侯王之疾。
English: Lei Gong replied, "I read medical books, but I cannot fully understand them. Although I can understand some of them, I cannot analyze and distinguish them. Although I can analyze and distinguish them, I cannot understand their essence. Although I can understand their essence, I cannot interpret and apply it. Therefore, my knowledge is only enough to treat the general official's disease, and it is not enough to treat Hou Wang's disease.

古文：愿得受树天之度，四时阴阳合之，别星辰与日月光，以彰经术，后世益明，上通神农，著至教，疑于二皇。帝曰：善！
现代文：我很希望你能给我关于树立天之度数，如何合之四时阴阳，测日月星辰之光等方面的知识，以进一步阐发其道理，使后世更加明了，可以上通于神农，并让这些精确的道理得到发扬，其功可以拟二皇。黄帝说：好。
English: I very much hope that you can give me knowledge about how to establish the degree of heaven, how to match the four times of yin and yang, and measure the light of the sun, moon and stars, so as to further explain its principles, make the future generations more clear, can be passed on to Shennong, and let these accurate principles be promoted, and its work can be modeled on the Second Emperor. Yellow Emperor said: Good.

古文：无失之，此皆阴阳表里上下雌雄相輸应也，而道上知天文，下知地理，中知人事，可以长久，以教众庶，亦不疑殆，医道论篇，可传后世，可以为宝。
现代文：不要忘掉，这些都是阴阳表里上下雌雄相互应和的道理，就医学而言，必须上通天文，下通地理，中知人事，才能长久流传下去，用以教导群众，也不致发生疑惑，只有这样的医学论篇，才能传于后世，而作为宝贵的遗产。
English: Don't forget that these are the principles of the harmony between the upper and lower sexes in the yin and yang table. As far as medicine is concerned, it is necessary to have knowledge of astronomy, geography, and personnel in order to be able to pass it on for a long time, to teach the masses, and to avoid doubts. Only such a medical treatise can be passed on to future generations, and as a valuable heritage.

古文：雷公曰：请受道，讽诵用解。
现代文：雷公说：请把这些道理传授给我，以便背诵和理解。
English: Lei Gong said, "Please teach me these principles so that I can memorize and understand them."

古文：帝曰：子不闻《阴阳传》乎！
现代文：黄帝说：你没听说过有《阴阳传》这部书吗？
English: Huang Di said, "Haven't you heard of the book "Yin Yang Chuan"?"

古文：曰：不知。
现代文：雷公说：不知道。
English: Lei Gong said: I don't know.

古文：曰：夫三阳天为业，上下无常，合而病至，偏害阴阳。
现代文：黄帝说：三阳之气，主护卫人一身之表，以适应天气的变化，若人之上下经脉的循行失其常度，则内外之邪相合而病至，必使阴阳有所偏盛而为害。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: The qi of the three yang deities, the main guardian of a person's body, adjusts to the changes in the weather. If a person's meridians are out of balance, the internal and external evil will combine and cause illness. The yin and yang will inevitably prevail and cause harm.

古文：雷公曰：三阳莫当，请闻其解。
现代文：雷公说： 三阳莫当 这句话，应当怎样理解？
English: Lei Gong said: Sanyang Mo Dangong How should this sentence be understood?

古文：帝曰：三阳独至者，是三阳并至，并至如风雨，上为巅疾，下为漏病，外无期，内无正，不中经纪，诊无上下，以书别。
现代文：黄帝说：所谓三阳独至，实为三阳之气合并而至，并至则阳气过盛，其病来疾如风雨，犯于上则发为头癫部疾病，犯于下则发为大小便失禁的漏病。
English: Huangdi said: The so-called "three yang" is actually the combination of the three yang qi, and the yang qi is overpowering, and the disease comes from the wind and rain. If it is committed in the upper part, it will be a disease of the head, and if it is committed in the lower part, it will be a leaking disease of incontinence.

古文：雷公曰：臣治疏愈，说意而已。帝曰：三阳者，至阳也，积并则为惊，病起疾风，至如礔砺，九窍皆塞，阳气滂溢，干嗌喉塞，并于阴，则上下无常，薄为肠澼，此谓三阳直心，坐不得起，卧者便身全。
现代文：由于这种病变化无常，外无明显的气色变化等症状可察，内无一定的征象可以预期，其病又不符合于一肌的发病规律，所以在诊断时，也就无法记录分辨其病变的属上属下。雷公说：我治疗这类病，很少治愈，请你详尽解释一下，以解除我的疑惑。黄帝说：三阳是及盛之阳，若三阳之气积并而至，则发而为惊，病起讯如疾风，病至猛如霹雳，九窍皆因之闭塞，因阳气滂渍盈溢，而咽干喉塞。若并于阴，则为盛阳之气内薄于脏，病亦上下无常，如果迫于下，则发为肠澼。若三阳之气直冲心膈，使人坐而不得起，卧下觉得舒适，这是三阳积并而至之病。
English: As this disease is fickle, there are no obvious changes in appearance and other symptoms on the outside, and there are no certain signs on the inside that can be expected. The disease does not conform to the pathogenesis of a muscle, so when diagnosing, it is also impossible to record and distinguish the members of the disease. Lei Gong said: I treat this kind of disease, and it is rarely cured. Please explain it in detail to relieve my doubts. Huang Di said: Sanyang is the sun of prosperity. If the gas volume of Sanyang comes together, it will be startled. The onset of the disease is like a gale, and the disease is as fierce as a thunderstorm. All

古文：三阳之病，且以知天下，何以别阴阳，应四时，合之五行。
现代文：由此而知，欲通晓人与天地相应的关系，必须知道如何辨别阴阳，极其上应于四时，下合地之五行等道理。
English: From this, we know that if we want to understand the corresponding relationship between man and heaven and earth, we must know how to distinguish between yin and yang, and the most important thing is that the top should be at four o'clock, and the bottom should match the five elements.

古文：雷公曰：阳言不别，阴言不理，请起受解，以为至道。
现代文：雷公说：对这些道理，明显的讲，我不能辨别，讲隐晦的，我更不能理解，请你再解释一下其中的精微，使我能更好地领会这一深奥的道理。
English: Lei Gong said, "As for these principles, I can't discern the obvious ones, and I can't understand the obscure ones. Please explain the subtleties again, so that I can better understand this profound principle."

古文：帝曰：子若受传，不知合至道以惑师教，语子至道之要。
现代文：黄帝说：你受老师的传授，若不知与至道相合，反而会对老师的传授产生疑惑，我现在告诉你知道的要点。
English: Huang Di said: You have been taught by a teacher. If you do not know if you are compatible with the true way, you will have doubts about the teacher's teaching. I will now tell you what you know.

古文：病伤五藏，筋骨以消，子言不明不别，是世主学尽矣。
现代文：若人患病伤及了五脏，筋骨日渐瘦削，如果像你所说的那样不能辨别，世上的医学岂不失传了吗？
English: If a person suffers from a disease that affects the internal organs, and the muscles and bones become thinner and thinner, if they cannot be distinguished as you said, will the world's medicine not be lost?

古文：肾且绝，惋惋日暮，从容不出，人事不殷。
现代文：例如肾气将绝，则终日心中惋惋不安，欲静处不欲外出，更不欲频繁的人事往来。
English: For example, if the kidney qi is exhausted, the heart will be uneasy all day long, the desire to be quiet will not want to go out, and the frequent personnel exchanges will not want.

