古文：父景昇，任员外官，不理产业，常居岐州。
现代文：元载，凤翔岐山人，出身卑微。父亲名景升，担任员外官，常年居住在岐州，不理家产。
English: Yuan Zai, Feng Xiang, a native of Qishan, came from a humble background. His father was well-known, served as a foreign minister, lived in Qizhou all year round, and did not manage the family property.

古文：载母携载适景昇，冒姓元氏。
现代文：载的母亲带着载到景升住处，假冒称元氏。
English: Zang's mother took Zang to Jing Sheng's residence and pretended to be a member of the Yuan clan.

古文：载自幼嗜学，好属文，性敏惠，博览子史，尤学道书。
现代文：元载从小酷爱学习，喜爱作文，性情敏锐聪慧，博览子史众书，尤其爱读道书。
English: Yuan Zang loved to study from a young age, loved composition, was sensitive and intelligent, and read a lot of books, especially Taoist books.

古文：家贫，徒步随乡赋，累上不升第。
现代文：家境贫寒，常徒步去参加乡试，多次考中却不被提升。
English: His family was poor, and he often went on foot to participate in the village examination, but he was not promoted in the examination for many times.

古文：天宝初，玄宗崇奉道教，下诏求明庄、老、文、列四子之学者。
现代文：天宝初年，玄宗崇尚奉行道教，下诏书求得精通庄子、老子、文子、刘子四人的学者。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Xuanzong advocated the practice of Taoism, and issued an edict calling for four scholars who were proficient in Zhuangzi, Lao Zi, Wen Zi, and Liu Zi.

古文：载策入高科，授邠州新平尉。
现代文：载被选入高科，授予州新平尉。
English: He was elected to the high school of science and awarded the new lieutenant of the state.

古文：监察御史韦镒充使监选黔中，引载为判官，载名稍著，迁大理评事。
现代文：监察御史韦镒和充使监选黔中，引荐元载为判官，载此时稍有名声，升为大理评事。
English: In the supervision of Wei Wei and the supervision of the election, the recommendation was originally listed as the judge. At this time, it was slightly famous, and it was promoted to the critic.

古文：东都留守苗晋卿又引为判官，迁大理司直。
现代文：东都留守苗晋卿又引荐元载为判官，升为大理司直。
English: Miao Jinqing, who stayed behind in the eastern capital, also recommended Yuan Zhao to be the judge, and he was promoted to Dali Sizhi.

古文：肃宗即位，急于军务，诸道廉使随才擢用。
现代文：肃宗即位，迫于军务紧急，各道廉使按其才能提拔。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, and due to the military emergency, all officials were promoted according to their abilities.

古文：时载避地江左，苏州刺史、江东采访使李希言表载为副，拜祠部员外郎，迁洪州刺史。
现代文：此时元载正避地江左，苏州刺史、江东采访使李希言推荐元载为副职，授祠部员外郎，又升为洪州刺史。
English: At this time, Yuan Zai was taking refuge in Jiangzu, Suzhou, and Jiangdong, and Li Xiyan recommended Yuan Zai as a deputy, and he was promoted to Hongzhou.

古文：两京平，入为度支郎中。
现代文：两京平息后，进入朝廷升为度支郎中。
English: After settling down in the two capitals, he entered the imperial court and was promoted to the middle of the officials.

古文：载智性敏悟，善奏对，肃宗嘉之，委以国计，俾充使江、淮，都领漕輓之任，寻加御史中丞。
现代文：载机敏聪慧，善于上奏，受到肃宗嘉奖，委其谋略国事，派其充使江、淮，统领水路运输。
English: He was an astute pilot, good at playing the flute, and was commended by Su Zong, who appointed him to plan state affairs and sent him to serve as the commander of the waterway transportation of the Jiang and Huai Rivers.

古文：数月征入，迁户部侍郎、度支使并诸道转运使。
现代文：数月征入，升为户部侍郎、度支使连同诸道转运使。
English: He was conscripted for a few months, and was promoted to the position of a servant of the head of the household, and then to the position of a provincial governor, along with the position of a transportation commissioner for various provinces.

古文：既至朝廷，会肃宗寝疾。
现代文：不久到朝廷，恰遇肃宗病重在床。
English: Shortly after arriving at the Imperial Court, Su Zong fell seriously ill in bed.

古文：载与幸臣李辅国善。辅国妻元氏，载之诸宗，因是相昵狎。
现代文：元载与宠臣李辅国善好，辅国之妻名元氏，载很尊奉她，两人关系亲昵暧昧。
English: Yuan Zang and his favorite, Li Yu Guo, were on good terms. Yuan Zang's wife, Mei Yuan, was held in high esteem by Yuan Zang, and the two had an intimate and ambiguous relationship.

古文：时辅国权倾海内，举无违者，会选京尹，辅国乃以载兼京兆尹。
现代文：此时辅国权势极大，周围无一敢违背者，适逢提拔京尹，辅国于是让载兼任京兆尹。
English: At this time, the Auxiliary State was extremely powerful, and there was no one around who dared to disobey. It was a good time to promote Jing Yin, so the Auxiliary State allowed Ji Zhaotong to also serve as Jing Zhaotong.

古文：载意属国柄，诣辅国恳辞京尹，辅国识其意，然之。
现代文：元载意欲把握大权，希望辅国恳辞京尹，辅国知道其意，同意。
English: Yuan Zang wanted to hold on to power, and hoped that the ancillary states would appeal to Beijing and Yin. The ancillary states knew what he meant and agreed.

古文：翌日拜载同中书门下平章事，度支转运使如故。
现代文：第二天授载为同中书门下平章事，度支转运使官职不变。
English: The next day, the awarding of the award was the same as that of the middle school, and the official position remained unchanged.

古文：旬日，肃宗晏驾，代宗即位，辅国势愈重，称载于上前。
现代文：十天后，肃宗驾崩，代宗即位，辅国权势愈来愈大，在皇帝面前称赞元载。
English: Ten days later, Su Zong passed away, and Daizong ascended to the throne. The Auxiliary State became more and more powerful, and praised Yuan Zeng in front of the emperor.

古文：载能伺上意，颇承恩遇，迁中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，加集贤殿大学士，修国史。
现代文：载能侍奉皇上旨意，颇受恩宠，升为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，加封集贤殿大学士，修订国史。
English: He was able to serve the emperor's will, and was greatly favored by the emperor. He was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC and the vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the CPC, and was awarded the title of the academician of the Qian Dian University, and revised the national history.

古文：又加银青光禄大夫，封许昌县子。
现代文：封为许昌县子。
English: He was given the title of Xu Changxianzi.

古文：载以度支转运使职务繁碎，负荷且重，虑伤名，阻大位，素与刘晏相友善，乃悉以钱谷之务委之，荐晏自代，载自加营田使。
现代文：载认为度支转运使职务繁杂琐碎，负荷又重，担心损害名声，阻碍任大官，平时与刘晏关系友善，于是委其为钱财管理之职，推荐晏代替自己，载自加封营田使。
English: He thought that the expenditure and transportation made the duties complicated and trivial, the load was heavy, he was worried about damaging the reputation, hindering the appointment of high-ranking officials, and he had a friendly relationship with Liu Yao in normal times. Therefore, he appointed him to the position of money and wealth management, recommended him to replace himself, and appointed him as Yingtan envoy.

古文：李辅国罢职，又加判天下元帅行军司马。
现代文：李辅国被罢职，又被加封为判天下元帅行军司马。
English: Li Fuguo was dismissed from his post, and was also awarded the title of Marshal of the Marching Sima.

古文：广德元年，与宰臣刘晏、裴遵庆同扈从至陕。
现代文：广德元年，与宰臣刘晏、裴遵度同皇上侍从到陕西。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, he went to Shaanxi as an attendant of the emperor with his vassals Liu Zhen and Pei Zundu.

古文：及舆驾还宫，遵庆皆罢所任，载恩宠弥盛。
现代文：与皇帝回宫，遵度所任官职全被罢免，载愈发受到恩宠。
English: After returning to the palace with the emperor, Zundu was removed from all of his official positions, and he was favored more and more.

古文：辅国死，载复结内侍董秀，多与之金帛，委主书卓英倩潜通密旨。
现代文：辅国死后，载又结交内侍董秀，多次赠其金帛，委派主书卓英倩偷探密旨。
English: After the death of Fu Guo, Zou befriended the chambermaid Dong Xiu, presented him with gold ingots several times, and appointed the chief scribe Zhuo Yingyao to secretly investigate the secret.

古文：以是上有所属，载必先知之，承意探微，言必玄合，上益信任之。
现代文：于是皇上所要讲的，载必然会先知，承意探询，其所言与皇上所想符合，皇上更加信任他。
English: As a result, what the emperor wanted to say would inevitably come from the prophet, who was willing to inquire. His words were in line with what the emperor wanted, and the emperor trusted him more.

古文：妻王氏狠戾自专，载出朝谒，纵子伯和等游于外，上封人顾繇奏之，上方任载以政，反罪繇而已。
现代文：妻子王氏狠戾自专，在载上朝拜谒时，纵容其子伯和等在宫外游玩，上封人顾繇上奏，皇上信任载的施政，反而兴罪于繇。
English: Wang's wife ruthlessly practiced self-restraint. When Zang Shang paid homage to Zang, she allowed her sons and nephews to play outside the palace. The upper echelon people paid attention to Zang. The emperor trusted Zang's governance, but he sinned against Zang.

古文：内侍鱼朝恩负恃权宠，不与载协，载常惮之。
现代文：内侍鱼朝恩仗恃权势，不与载协从，载往往畏惧他。
English: Naishi, who was favored by the emperor and wielded great power, did not cooperate with him, and he was often afraid of him.

古文：大历四年冬，乘间密奏朝恩专权不轨，请除之。
现代文：大历四年冬，乘机密奏朝恩专权不轨，请求除掉他。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the lunar calendar, he took advantage of the secret to derail the exclusive power of the emperor, and asked to get rid of him.

古文：朝恩骄横，天下咸怒，上亦知之，及闻载奏，适会于心。
现代文：朝恩骄横，天下皆怒，皇上也知道，待听到载的上奏，正合此意。
English: The arrogance of the Emperor, the whole world is angry, and the Emperor also knows that waiting to hear Takeda's overture is in line with this intention.

古文：载遂结北军大将同谋，以防万虑。
现代文：载于是同北军大将合谋，共商对策。
English: Therefore, he conspired with the general of the Northern Army and discussed countermeasures.

古文：五年三月，朝恩伏法，度支使第五琦以朝恩党坐累，载兼判度支，志气自若，谓己有除恶之功，是非前贤，以为文武才略，莫己之若。
现代文：五年三月，朝恩伏法，度支使第五琦因为朝恩同党受牵连，载兼任判度支，踌躇满志，说自己有除恶之功劳，辨是非之劳顿，认为在文武才略方面，没有比自己更强的人了。
English: In March of the fifth year, because of the implication of the court favor with the party, the fifth-ranked tributary tributary was appointed as the tributary tributary. He was full of ambition, saying that he had the merit of eliminating evil, and the fatigue of distinguishing between right and wrong. He believed that there was no one stronger than himself in terms of literary and military skills.

古文：外委胥吏，内听妇言。
现代文：在外委任小官吏，在内言听计从妇言。
English: Appointing petty officials abroad, listening to the inner speech and following the wife's advice.

古文：城中开南北二甲第，室宇宏丽，冠绝当时。
现代文：在城南北修二座住宅，气势恢宏壮丽，当时无与伦比。
English: Two residences were built in the north and south of the city, with a grandeur that was unparalleled at the time.

古文：又于近郊起亭榭，所至之处，帷帐什器，皆于宿设，储不改供。
现代文：又在近郊修建亭台，所到之处帷帐什器，皆按星宿设置，储不改供。
English: They also built pavilions in the suburbs. Wherever they go, the curtains are set according to the stars, and they are not changed for storage.

古文：城南膏腴别墅，连疆接畛，凡数十所，婢仆曳罗绮一百余人，恣为不法，侈僭无度。
现代文：城南豪华别墅，连疆接界，约数十所之多，身着飘曳丝绸的婢仆达一百多人，恣意放纵，骄侈无度。
English: There are dozens of luxurious villas in the south of the city, stretching from one end of the country to the other, and more than a hundred maids dressed in flowing silk, indulging in wanton luxury.

古文：江、淮方面，京辇要司，皆排去忠良，引用贪猥。
现代文：在江、淮的管理及京城的重要职位，都排挤忠良，引用贪官污吏。
English: In the management of Jiangsu and Huai and the important positions of Beijing, the loyal and the good are crowded out, and the corrupt officials are cited.

古文：士有求进者，不结子弟，则谒主书，货贿公行，近年以来，未有其比。
现代文：士中有求仕者，而不结交子弟，则告诉主书，行贿受贿公开流行，这在近年以来，还没有与其能相比。
English: Among the scholars, there are those who are looking for a job, but those who do not make friends with their children tell the master that it is popular to bribe and accept bribes openly, which has not been comparable to them in recent years.

古文：与王缙同列，缙方务聚财，遂睦于载，二人相得甚欢，日益纵横。
现代文：与王缙同级，缙正极力聚财，与载和睦相处，关系甚密，愈发骄纵。
English: At the same level as Wang Yao, Yao is trying his best to accumulate wealth. He and Zang live in harmony, have a very close relationship, and are becoming increasingly arrogant.

古文：代宗尽察其迹，以载任寄多年，欲全君臣之分，载尝独见，上诫之，不悛。
现代文：代宗尽察其行径，由于载任职多年，想保全君臣的关系，载曾经被单独召见，皇上劝诫他，却不思改过。
English: The daimyō carefully observed his actions. Since he had been in office for many years, he wanted to preserve the relationship between the emperor and his subjects. Once, when he was called to a private audience, the emperor admonished him, but he did not think about changing his ways.

古文：初，扈驾自陕还，与缙上表，请以河中府为中都，秋杪行幸，春首还京，以避蕃戎侵轶之患。
现代文：初，随皇上驾车从陕回来，与缙上书，请求将河中府定为中都，秋末到此，开春还京，以避免蕃人侵扰之患。
English: At the beginning of the year, he drove back from Shaanxi with the emperor and sent a letter to the emperor, requesting that he designate Hechuan Prefecture as the central capital. He arrived here at the end of autumn and returned to Beijing in early spring to avoid the danger of being disturbed by the Xiongnu.

古文：帝初纳之，遣条奏以闻。
现代文：皇上开始采纳此意，令其按条目上奏。
English: The emperor began to adopt this idea and ordered it to be played according to the article.

古文：自鱼朝恩就诛，志颇盈满，遂抗表请建中都，文多不载。
现代文：自从鱼朝恩伏法，颇感踌躇，于是上表请建中都，文字多不载。
English: Since the fish morning favor method, quite a feeling of hesitation, so the above table is built in the capital, the text is mostly not loaded.

古文：大略以关辅、河东等十州户税入奉京师，创置精兵五万，管在中都，以威四方，辞多开合。
现代文：大意是以联辅、河东等十个州的户税奉入京师，创建精兵五万人，驻守中都，以威慑四方。
English: The idea was to send household taxes from ten states, such as Lianyungu and Hedong, to Beijing, create fifty thousand elite soldiers, and garrison the capital in order to deter all sides.

古文：自以为表入事行，潜遣所由吏于河中经营。
现代文：文辞纵横捭阖，自以为表送上即可执行。暗中派所由吏到河中经营。
English: The wording is ambiguous, and they think that they can implement it by sending a form. They secretly send officials to the river to operate it.

古文：节度寄理于泾州。大历八年，蕃戎入邠宁之后，朝议以为三辅已西，无襟带之固，而泾州散地，不足为守。
现代文：大历八年，蕃戎进入宁之后，朝廷商议认为三辅已失，无联襟之牢固，而泾州为散地，不能固守。
English: In the eighth year of the lunar calendar, after Qiong Rong entered Ning, the imperial court deliberated that the three auxiliary provinces had been lost, and no alliance was solid, while Zhangzhou was scattered and could not be held fast.

古文：载尝为西州刺史，知河西、陇右之要害，指画于上前曰： 今国家西境极于潘源，吐蕃防戍在摧沙堡，而原州界其间。
现代文：载曾为西州刺史，明白河西、陇右的重要性，手指地图对皇上说： 现在国家西部境界在潘源，吐蕃的军队在摧沙堡防戍，而原州居其中间。
English: Jang, who was a historian of Xizhou, understood the importance of the west of the river and the right side of the river. The finger map said to the emperor: Now the western border of the country is in Panyuan, the army of Tubo is in the sand castle, and Wonju is in the middle.

古文：原州当西塞之口，接陇山之固，草肥水甘，旧垒存焉。
现代文：原州为西塞之要道，联接陇山的坚固城郭。草肥水甘，旧垒都还存在。
English: Wonju is the main road of Xisai, connecting the fortified castle of Shaoshan. The grass is fertile and the water is sweet, and the old fortifications still exist.

古文：吐蕃比毁其垣墉，弃之不居。
现代文：吐蕃到处捣毁了所有的城墙，放弃原州不守。
English: Tubo destroyed all the city walls everywhere, abandoning the original state.

古文：其西则监牧故地，皆有长濠巨堑，重复深固。
现代文：原州西面是监视百姓的老地方，四面有长而宽的护城河，可重新巩固。
English: The western side of Wonju is an old place to monitor the people. There is a long and wide moat on all sides, which can be re-consolidated.

古文：原州虽早霜，黍稷不艺，而有平凉附其东，独耕一县，可以足食。
现代文：原州虽然降霜早，不能种粮食，但在其东面有平凉，只需一个县耕种，就可以足够吃了。
English: Although frosts fall early in Wonju and it is not possible to grow grain, there is a cool climate in the east of Wonju, and it only takes one county to grow enough to eat.

古文：请移京西军戍原州，乘间筑之，贮粟一年。
现代文：请调移京西军驻守原州，悄悄地筑墙，储存粮食一年。
English: Please transfer the Western Capital Army to garrison Wonju, quietly build a wall, and store grain for one year.

古文：移子仪大军居泾，以为根本。
现代文：蕃戎人夏天多在青海放牧，等到羽书覆至，已超过一个月。
English: The Qiong people mostly graze in the Qinghai Sea in the summer, and it has been more than a month since the feathers have fallen.

古文：分兵守石门、木峡、陇山之关，北抵于河，皆连山峻岭，寇不可越。
现代文：现在搬运建筑一起进行，不到二十天便可完成。调遣子仪大军驻守泾州，以泾州之地为根本，分兵把守石门、木峡、陇山要塞地带。北面直到河，都为崇山峻岭，敌人不能跨越。
English: Now, the moving and construction are carried out together, and it can be completed in less than 20 days. The Ziyi army is stationed in Bozhou, with the land of Bozhou as the foundation, and the soldiers guard the Shimen, Muxia, and Lushan fortress areas. The north to the river are all high mountains, and the enemy can not cross.

古文：稍置鸣沙县、丰安军为之羽翼，北带灵武五城为之形势。
现代文：逐渐设立鸣沙县，丰安军为它的羽翼，北面形成被灵武五城围绕的形势。
English: Gradually, Mingsha County was established, with the Feng'an Army as its wing, and the situation of being surrounded by the five cities of Lingwu was formed in the north.

古文：然后举陇右之地以至安西，是谓断西戎之胫，朝廷可高枕矣。 
现代文：然后占领陇右的地盘直到安西，此举为截断西戎的小腿，朝廷可以高枕无忧了。 
English: Then they occupied the area to the right of the castle as far as Anxi. This action cut off Sihon's lower leg, and the imperial court could rest easy.

古文：兼图其地形以献。
现代文：载将地形图献上。
English: Please upload the topographic map.

古文：载密使人逾陇山，入原州，量井泉，计徒庸，车乘畚锸之器皆具。检校左仆射田神功沮之曰： 夫兴师料敌，老将所难。
现代文：载秘密派人越过陇山，进入原州，计量井泉容积，计算步兵人数，车马箕畚铁锨等工具都准备好，检校左仆射田神功阻止说： 兴师动众估计敌人，老将所难。
English: He secretly sent people to cross the Lushan Mountains and enter the plains, measuring the volume of wells and springs, counting the number of infantrymen, and preparing tools such as chariots and horses, iron hoes, etc. He was stopped by the left-hand man of the inspection school, Shida Shingong, who said: It is difficult for a veteran to estimate the enemy by mobilizing teachers.

古文：陛下信一书生言，举国从之，听误矣。 
现代文：陛下相信一个书生的话，让全国顺从，这是听从错误啊。 
English: Your Majesty believes the words of a scholar, and expects the whole country to obey. This is a mistake of obedience.

古文：上迟疑不决，会载得罪乃止。
现代文：皇上迟疑不决，适逢载得罪此事方才作罢。
English: The Emperor hesitated, and only relinquished the matter when it suited him.

古文：初，六年，载条奏应缘别敕授文武六品以下，敕出后望令吏部、兵部便附甲团奏，不得检勘，从之。
现代文：天宝六年，载分条目上奏应缘别，敕文武六品之下，诏书下后，望令吏部、兵部便附军队编制数上奏，不得检勘，得到允准。
English: In the sixth year of the Heavenly Treasure, it was decided that the record entry should be recorded according to the fate, and after the imperial edict was issued, it was ordered that the personnel department and the military department should be recorded according to the military establishment number, which was not subject to inspection, and was approved.

古文：时功状奏拟，结衔多谬，载欲权归于己，虑有司驳正。
现代文：当时功状书准备好，连接处多错误，元载欲将权势归于自己，又担心有司驳正。
English: At that time, the certificate of merit was ready, there were many errors in the connection, Yuan Zang wanted to attribute the power to himself, and he was worried that there would be a dispute.

古文：会有上封人李少良密以载丑迹闻，载知之，奏于上前，少良等数人悉毙于公府。
现代文：时逢上封人李少良秘密将载的劣迹报告给皇上，元载知道后，在皇上面前上奏，少良等人在公府处死。
English: When the time came, Li Shao Liang, the person in charge of the imperial seal, secretly reported the evil deeds to the emperor. After Yuan Zai knew about it, he made a report in front of the emperor, and Shao Liang and others were executed at the government office.

古文：由是道路以目，不敢议载之短。
现代文：由于明目张胆行事，人们不敢议论载的过错。
English: By acting so brazenly, people are afraid to speak out about the wrongdoing.

古文：门庭之内，非其党与不接，平素交友，涉于道义者悉疏弃之。
现代文：门庭之内，不是同党派的不予接纳，平素交友，涉及道义的人都疏远不用。
English: In the court of public opinion, it is not necessary to reject people of the same party, make friends with them, and alienate those who are involved in morality.

古文：代宗宽仁明恕，审其所由，凡累年，载长恶不悛，众怒上闻。
现代文：代宗宽仁明恕，审察载的行为结果有多年，载长期作恶不改，致众人皆怒，上奏皇上。
English: The daimyō, Emperor Hirohito, was very forgiving. The result of his actions, which had been scrutinized for many years, was that he did evil for a long time without changing, which made everyone angry. This was reported to the Emperor.

古文：大历十二年三月庚辰，仗下后，上御延英殿，命左金吾大将军吴凑收载、缙于政事堂，各留系本所，并中书主事卓英倩、李待荣及载男仲武、季能并收禁，命吏部尚书刘晏讯鞫。
现代文：大历十二年三月庚辰，解除武器后，上御延英殿，命令左金吾大将军吴氵奏在政事堂逮捕载和缙，各拘囚在所内。中书主事卓英倩、李待荣及载的儿子仲武、季能一并拘捕，命吏部尚书刘晏审讯。
English: In March of the 12th year of the lunar calendar, Emperor Gaotian, after disarming the weapons, ordered the Left King's general Wu Xinsao to arrest Zhao and Zhao in the government hall, and all the prisoners were in the detention center. Zhao Yingyao, Li Zhirong, and Zhao's sons Zhongwu and Qineng were arrested together, and Zhao Zangyao was ordered to be interrogated.

古文：晏以载受任树党，布于天下，不敢专断，请他官共事。
现代文：晏认为载受任树党，布于天下，不敢独自论断，便请其他官员共同商议。
English: Zou believed that the party was spreading all over the world and did not dare to judge it alone, so he asked other officials to discuss it together.

古文：朕恭己南面，推诚股肱，敷求哲人，将弼予理。
现代文：吩咐御史大夫李涵、右散骑常侍萧昕、兵部侍郎袁亻参、礼部侍郎常衮、谏议大夫杜亚共同商议载之罪。审讯问罪，都从禁中引出，继续派中使追问阴事，载、缙都伏罪。
English: He ordered the goshi doctor Li Han, the right horseback riding attendant Xiao Jie, the military attendant Yuan Shishan, the ceremonial attendant Chang Jie, and the deliberation doctor Du Ya to jointly discuss the crime. The interrogation and interrogation were all derived from the ban, and the central envoy was continued to inquire about the evil deed, and the crime was carried out.

古文：昧于任使，过在朕躬，无旷厥官，各慎厥职。 
现代文：这天，宦官左卫将军、知内侍省事董秀因与载同污，先于载在禁中被乱棍打死。
English: On this day, the eunuch General Zawei and the provincial secretary of the Ministry of the Interior, Dong Xiu, were beaten to death with a club for the same reason as Jang.

古文：初，晏等承旨，缙亦处极法，晏谓涵曰： 重刑再覆，国之常典，况诛大臣，岂得不覆奏！
现代文：初，晏等人承受旨意，缙亦被处以极刑，晏对涵说： 重复施以重刑，是国家的法典，何况杀大臣，岂能不再次上奏！
English: At the beginning, Zou and others received the will, and Zou was also sentenced to capital punishment. Zou said to Han: Repeatedly imposing heavy punishment is the country's code, let alone killing a minister, how can it not be played again!

古文：又法有首从，二人同刑，亦宜重取进止。 
现代文：再者法律上有主犯从犯之分，二人同时处罚，也应该重处首犯即可。 
English: Furthermore, there is a legal distinction between the principal offender and the accessory offender. If two people are punished at the same time, the first offender should also be punished.

古文：涵等咸听命。及晏等覆奏，上乃减缙罪从轻。
现代文：涵等人都听从此令，于是晏等人重新上奏，皇上于是减免缙之罪从轻发落。
English: Han and the others all obeyed this order, so Zou and the others played it again, and the emperor then reduced and pardoned Zou's crime.

古文：载长子伯和，先是贬在扬州兵曹参军，载得罪，命中使驰传于扬州赐死。
现代文：载的长子伯和，先是贬在扬州任兵曹参军，载伏法后，命中使策马疾驰到扬州传令赐死。
English: The eldest son, Bohe, was first demoted to the rank of petty officer in Yangzhou to join the army. After the carrying method, he was ordered to make the horse gallop to Yangzhou and was sentenced to death.

古文：次子仲武，祠部员外郎，次子季能，秘书省校书郎，并载妻王氏并赐死。
现代文：次子仲武，祠部员外郎，次子季能，秘书省校书郎，一并与载之妻王氏赐死。
English: His second son, Nakatake, a member of the ancestral hall, and his second son, Kineno, a secretary of the provincial school, died together with his wife, Wang.

古文：女资敬寺尼真一，收入掖庭。
现代文：其女资敬寺尼真一，收入旁庭。
English: His daughter-in-law, Keiji Ni Shinichi, earns a sideline income.

古文：王氏，开元中河西节度使忠嗣之女也，素以凶戾闻，恣其子伯和等为虐。
现代文：王氏，是开元中河西节度使忠嗣的女儿。素以凶戾闻名，纵容其子伯和等人助纣为虐。
English: The Wang clan was the daughter of the founder of the Western Han Dynasty, King Sejong, who was known for his cruelty and allowed his sons and other people to help him.

古文：伯和恃父威势，唯以聚敛财货，征求音乐为事。
现代文：伯和仗恃其父权势，惟以聚财敛货、穷奢极欲为平生乐事。
English: He coveted his father's power, but he enjoyed life by amassing wealth, hoarding goods, and living extravagantly.

古文：载在相位多年，权倾四海，外方珍异，皆集其门，资货不可胜计，故伯和、仲武等得肆其志。
现代文：载在位多年，权势庞大，人间珍异尽搜其中，资产不计其数。故伯和、仲武等人放纵其行。
English: They have been on the throne for many years, their power is huge, they have all the rarities in the world, and their assets are countless. Therefore, Bohe, Zhongwu and others indulge in their activities.

古文：轻浮之士，奔其门者，如恐不及。
现代文：轻浮之士，争先恐后投奔其门下。
English: light-hearted people, rushing to his door.

古文：名姝、异乐，禁中无者有之。
现代文：美女、异乐，禁中没有的其都有。
English: Beautiful women, exotic music, everything that is not prohibited.

古文：兄弟各贮妓妾于室，倡优偎亵之戏，天伦同观，略无愧耻。及得罪，行路无嗟惜者。
现代文：兄弟各人家中贮有妓妾，表演猥琐嬉调之戏，天伦同观，毫不愧耻，其伏法，路人无一为之怜惜。
English: Each of the brothers has prostitutes and concubines in their homes, and they perform lewd and frolicsome plays, which passers-by are not ashamed to watch. No passers-by have any pity for them.

古文：元载当承宠得志，每改张朝政，出于载手，中外共怒，当时归咎于载，故少良封事于前，郇谟哭市于后。
现代文：中使董秀、主书卓英倩、李待荣及阴阳人李季连，与载牵连，全被处以极刑。派中官到万年县黄台乡捣毁载的祖及父母坟墓，砍棺弃柩，以及其私庙园林。
English: The middle envoy, Dong Xiu, the chief scribe, Zhuo Yingqi, Li Ti Rong, and the yin and yang man, Li Jilian, were all implicated with Zai and were all sentenced to capital punishment. The middle officers were sent to Huang Tai Township, Wannian County, to destroy the graves of Zai's grandparents and parents, cut the coffins and abandoned the urns, as well as the gardens of his private temple.

古文：凡百有位，宜为明诫。王缙，字夏卿，河中人也。
现代文：将载大宁里、安仁里二处住宅充当百司官署，将没收载的钟乳石五百两分别赐予中书门下御史台五品以上、尚书省四品以上官员。王缙，字夏卿，河中人。
English: The two residences in Dainingli and Anrenli will be used as the headquarters of the Hundred Officers' Office, and the five hundred and two stalactites confiscated will be given to the officials of the Ministry of History of the People's Republic of China and the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China respectively.

古文：少好学，与兄维早以文翰著名。
现代文：少年时喜爱学习，与兄王维很早就以文章著名。
English: He loved to study when he was a boy, and he and his brother Wang Wei were famous for their articles very early on.

古文：缙连应草泽及文辞清丽举，累授侍御史、武部员外。
现代文：王缙连连应考因书法及文辞清丽中举，多次授予侍御史、武部员外。
English: Wang Qilianlian was awarded the honorable mention for his excellent calligraphy and writing, and he was also awarded the title of historical attendant and military attaché several times.

古文：禄山之乱，选为太原少尹，与李光弼同守太原，功效谋略，众所推先，加宪部侍郎，兼本官。
现代文：安禄山叛乱时，被提为太原少尹，与李光弼共同驻守太原，擅长谋略，为众人所推崇，加授宪部侍郎，兼任本官。
English: At the time of the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, he was promoted to Taiyuan Shao Yin. He was stationed in Taiyuan together with Li Guangyao. He was good at strategizing and was respected by many. He was also awarded the title of Constituent Office Attendant and concurrently served as his own official.

古文：时兄维陷贼，受伪署，贼平，维付吏议，缙请以己官赎维之罪，特为减等。
现代文：此时兄王维陷入敌手，被授伪官职，叛乱平息后，王维被交付吏官审判，王缙请求以自己的官职来赎王维的罪过，特别给予减免处罚等级。
English: At this time, his brother Wang Wei fell into the enemy's hands and was awarded a false official post. After the rebellion was quelled, Wang Wei was handed over to the officials for trial. Wang Yao asked to use his official post to atone for Wang Wei's sins, and in particular to give him a reduced punishment level.

古文：缙寻入拜国子祭酒，改凤翔尹、秦陇州防御使，历工部侍郎、左散骑常侍。
现代文：缙不久入朝提为国子祭酒，改为凤翔尹、秦陇州防御使，历任工部侍郎、左散骑常侍。
English: Soon after entering the imperial court, it was designated as the national son's sacrificial liquor, and was changed to Feng Xiangyin, Qin Bozhou defense envoy, successive attendants of the work department, and left horseback riding attendants.

古文：撰《玄宗哀册文》，时称为工。
现代文：撰写的《玄宗哀册文》，为当时称作精品。
English: He wrote "The Book of Lamentations of Xuanzong," which was called a masterpiece at the time.

古文：改兵部侍郎。
现代文：改为兵部侍郎。
English: He changed his title to Hyobu-zirō (兵部侍郎).

古文：属平殄史朝义，河朔未安，诏缙以本官河北宣慰，奉使称旨。
现代文：接着以武力平定史朝义。河朔不太平，诏令缙以本官身份宣读诏书以示安抚，使之称旨。
English: He then used force to pacify the historic imperial edict. When the situation was not peaceful, he read out the edict in his official capacity as a sign of appeasement and commended it.

古文：广德二年，拜黄门侍郎、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文崇贤馆大学士。
现代文：广德二年，升为黄门侍郎、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文崇贤馆大学士。
English: In the second year of Guangde, he was promoted to Huangmen Zhi Rong, Tongping Zhangji, Taiwu Palace Envoy, and a scholar of the Hongwen Chongxian Museum.

古文：其年，河南副元帅李光弼薨于徐州，以缙为侍中、持节都统河南、淮西、山南东道诸节度行营事。
现代文：这年，河南副元帅李光弼死于徐州，由缙作为侍中、持节都统领河南、淮西、山南东道各节度事情的料理。
English: In the same year, the Henan Vice-Marshal Li Guangyao died in Xuzhou. As an attendant, he presided over the festivities in Henan, Huaixi and Shannan.

古文：缙恳让侍中，从之，加上柱国，兼东都留守。
现代文：缙恳切让出侍中职位，同意了，加封上柱国，兼任东都留守。
English: Yao earnestly conceded the position of chamberlain, agreed, and was given the title of Shangzhu Guo (上柱国). He also held the post of Dongdu Rong (東都留守).

古文：岁余，迁河南副元帅，请减军资钱四十万贯修东都殿宇。
现代文：一年后，升为河南副元帅，请求减少军资费用四十万用来修筑东都殿宇。
English: A year later, he was promoted to vice-marshal of Henan Province, and requested that the military budget be reduced by 400,000 yuan to build the Dongdu Palace.

古文：大历三年，幽州节度使李怀仙死，以缙领幽州、卢龙节度。
现代文：大历三年，幽州节度使李怀仙死了，由缙统领幽州、卢龙节度。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, the Yuzhou Festival caused the death of Li Huaixian, and the Yuzhou and Lulong Festival was led by Zou.

古文：缙赴镇而还，委政于燕将硃希彩。
现代文：缙赶赴镇守后归还，将政事委任于燕将朱希彩。
English: Zhai rushed to the town guard and returned it, entrusting the political affairs to Yan general Zhu Xisai.

古文：又属河东节度辛云京卒，遂兼太原尹、北都留守、河东节度营田观察等使。
现代文：不久河东节度辛云京死了，于是兼任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度营田观察等使。
English: Soon after, the festival's organizer, Xin Yunjing, died, so he also served as an envoy to Taiyuan Yin, the Northern Capital, and the festival's organizer, Yingtian.

古文：缙又让河南副元帅、东都留守，从之。
现代文：缙又让出河南副元帅、东都留守等职务，得到同意。
English: He also agreed to relinquish the posts of Henan Vice-Marshal and Dongdu Remaining Officer.

古文：太原旧将王无纵、张奉璋等恃功，且以缙儒者易之，每事多违约束。
现代文：太原旧将王无纵、张奉璋等人仗恃有功，以缙为儒将为由轻视他，常常违反约束。
English: Taiyuan used to hold Wang Muzheng, Zhang Bongyu and others in high esteem for their military exploits, but despised Zou for being a Confucian, and often violated the restraints.

古文：缙一朝悉召斩之，将校股栗。
现代文：缙一天将他们召集来全部斩首，将校极为畏惧。
English: One day he called them all together and beheaded them all. The officer was very afraid.

古文：二岁，罢河东归朝，授门下侍郎、中书门下平章事。
现代文：大历二年，卸任河东职务归朝，授予门下侍郎、中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, he returned to the imperial court after stepping down from his post in Hedong, and was awarded the title of Jiro (侍郎) and the title of Shimodaira (下平) from the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：时元载用事，缙卑附之，不敢与忤，然恃才与老，多所傲忽。载所不悦，心虽希载旨，然以言辞凌诟，无所忌惮。
现代文：此时元载主事，缙卑微依附于他，不敢与他相违，然而自恃才能和资历，常常现出傲慢与疏忽，载有所不高兴，心里虽然敬慕载的意图，却又以言辞污诟载，无所忌惮。
English: At this time, Yuan Zai was in charge. He was humbly attached to him and did not dare to contradict him. However, he often showed arrogance and negligence when boasting of his talent and seniority. He was not happy. Although he admired Zai's intention, he used foul language and was unscrupulous.

古文：时京兆尹黎干者，戎州人也，数论事，载甚病之，而力不能去也。干尝白事于缙，缙曰： 尹，南方君子也，安知朝礼！ 
现代文：京兆尹黎干，戎州人，多次论述时事，载病重不能去。干曾经向缙陈述，缙说： 尹，为南方的君子，如何知晓朝礼！ 
English: Jing Zhao Yin Ligan, a native of Eunoshu, has discussed current affairs many times, but he is seriously ill and cannot go. Gan once made a statement to Gong, Gong said: Yin, as a southern gentleman, how to know the morning ceremony!

古文：其慢而侮人，率如此类。
现代文：其怠慢并且侮辱人的行为，多如此类。
English: His negligent and insulting behaviour, and so on.

古文：缙弟兄奉佛，不茹荤血，缙晚年尤甚。
现代文：缙兄弟两人信奉佛，不吃荤血，缙晚年时更为特别。
English: The two brothers believed in Buddha and did not eat dragonfly blood, which was even more special in their later years.

古文：与杜鸿渐舍财造寺无限极。
现代文：与杜鸿渐施舍财务造建寺院毫不节制。
English: He and Du Hongxian lavished money on the construction of the temple without restraint.

古文：妻李氏卒，舍道政里第为寺，为之追福，奏其额曰宝应，度僧三十人住持。
现代文：妻子李氏死后，将道政里住宅改为寺院，为妻追福，其牌匾称为宝应，有僧侣三十人来里面住持。
English: After the death of his wife, Li Shizhen, he changed his residence in Doushengli into a temple to seek good fortune for his wife. The plaque is called Baoying, and thirty monks come to live in it.

古文：每节度观察使入朝，必延至宝应寺，讽令施财，助己修缮。
现代文：每当有节度观察使入朝，都将迎入到宝应寺，暗示给予施舍钱财，以帮助修缮。
English: Whenever there is a festival to observe the arrival of the emperor, they will be welcomed to the Hoying Temple, implying that they will be given alms money to help repair.

古文：初，代宗喜祠祀，未甚重佛，而元载、杜鸿渐与缙喜饭僧徒。
现代文：当初，代宗喜好祠祀，不太重视佛教，而元载、杜鸿渐与缙喜爱赡养僧徒。
English: At first, the Daizong liked to worship at ancestral shrines and did not attach much importance to Buddhism, while Yuan Zhao, Du Hongqian, and Zou loved to support the monks.

古文：代宗尝问以福业报应事，载等因而启奏，代宗由是奉之过当，尝令僧百余人于宫中陈设佛像，经行念诵，谓之内道场。
现代文：代宗曾经问起关于福业的报应之事，载等人因此开始上奏，代宗由此信奉而过头，曾经令百余僧人在宫中摆设佛像，念诵经文，称这为内道场。
English: Daizong once asked about the retribution of good fortune, and Rong and others began to play it as a result. Daizong believed this and went too far. He once ordered more than a hundred monks to set up Buddha statues in the palace and recite scriptures, calling it an inner dojo.

古文：其饮膳之厚，穷极珍异，出入乘厩焉，度支具廪给。
现代文：僧人们饮食之丰厚，穷极珍异，开支都由朝廷供给。
English: The food of the monks was rich and rare, and the expenses were provided by the imperial court.

古文：每西蕃入寇，必令群僧讲诵《仁王经》，以攘虏寇。
现代文：每逢西藩入侵，都要众僧讲诵《仁王经》，以驱赶入寇。
English: Whenever the Western Han invaded, all the monks had to recite the "King of Mercy" to drive away the invaders.

古文：苟幸其退，则横加锡赐。
现代文：如有幸虏寇败退，则大肆给予奖赐。
English: If there is a lucky defeat of the Krupko, they will give prizes to the winners.

古文：胡僧不空，官至卿监，封国公，通籍禁中，势移公卿，争权擅威，日相凌夺。
现代文：胡人僧侣不空，其官职已达卿监，封为国公，在禁中地位显赫，权势可左右公卿，争权揽威，豪取强夺。
English: Wu monks are not empty-handed. Their official posts have reached the level of chancellor, and they have been awarded the title of prince. They have a prominent position in the imperial court. They can wield power over nobles, compete for power, and take power by force.

古文：凡京畿之丰田美利，多归于寺观，吏不能制。
现代文：凡是京都内的良田美利，大多归属于寺观。吏官不能管制。
English: Most of the Ryota Mili in Kyoto belong to the Jikan, and cannot be controlled by bureaucrats.

古文：僧之徒侣，虽有赃奸畜乱，败戮相继，而代宗信心不易，乃诏天下官吏不得箠曳僧尼。
现代文：僧侣们虽然干些肮脏勾当，羞辱败坏之事不断，而代宗却仍信心不改，诏令全国官吏不得鞭打僧尼。
English: Although the monks did some dirty deeds, and the humiliation and corruption continued, the Daizong still did not change his faith. He ordered the national officials not to whip the monks and nuns.

古文：又见缙等施财立寺，穷极瑰丽，每对扬启沃，必以业果为证。
现代文：又见缙等人施舍财物修建寺院，穷极瑰丽，每次酬答应对，都证之以因果报应之说。
English: In addition, we see that Zou and others give alms to build temples, which are extremely magnificent, and every reward and response is evidence of karma.

古文：以为国家庆祚灵长，皆福报所资，业力已定，虽小有患难，不足道也。
现代文：认为国家的福久灵长，都是报应的结果，国业已定，即使有小小的患难，也是微不足道的。
English: They believe that the country's good fortune and long life are the result of retribution, the national cause has been determined, and even if there is a small hardship, it is insignificant.

古文：故禄山、思明毒乱方炽，而皆有子祸。仆固怀恩将乱而死；西戎犯阙，未击而退。
现代文：因而安禄山、史思明的起兵叛乱，都是有其隐患的；仆固怀恩起兵叛乱身死；西戎入侵犯边，不击自退。
English: Therefore, Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming's mutinies all have their hidden dangers; the mutiny of the servant Gu Wai'en led to his death; Xi Rong entered the encroaching side and retreated without striking.

古文：此皆非人事之明征也。
现代文：这些都不是常人所能预料的。
English: None of this is predictable.

古文：帝信之愈甚。
现代文：皇上越来越相信它了。
English: The Emperor believed in it more and more.

古文：公卿大臣既挂以业报，则人事弃而不修，故大历刑政，日以陵迟，有由然也。
现代文：公卿大臣都信于报应，而国家人事都放弃不治，所以大历年间的刑政，日渐废弛，是有其缘故的。
English: There is a reason why the chancellors and ministers of justice all believe in retribution, while the state officials have all given up the idea of reform.

古文：五台山有金阁寺，铸铜为瓦，涂金于上，照耀山谷，计钱巨亿万。
现代文：五台山上有金阁寺，瓦为铜铸成，在上面涂上黄金，光彩照耀山谷，造价亿万。
English: On Mount Wutai, there is the Golden Pavilion Temple. The tiles are cast in copper and coated with gold. The splendour shines over the valley. It cost hundreds of millions to build.

古文：缙为宰相，给中书符牒，令台山僧数十人分行郡县，聚徒讲说，以求货利。
现代文：缙为宰相时，给予中书符牒，命令台山数十名僧人分别去各郡县，召集信徒讲说经文，以求钱财。
English: When he was the prime minister, he gave an ultimatum to the monks of Taishan and ordered dozens of monks to go to various counties to gather believers to recite scriptures in order to solicit money.

古文：代宗七月望日于内道场造盂兰盆，饰以金翠，所费百万。
现代文：代宗七月在内道场望日修造盂兰盆，以金翠装饰，所需费用达百万。
English: In July, Daizong built a gourd basin at the Inner Taoist Site of Wangri and decorated it with gold and emeralds. The cost was one million yuan.

古文：又设高祖已下七圣神座，备幡节、龙伞、衣裳之制，各书尊号于幡上以识之，舁出内，陈于寺观。
现代文：又设置高祖以下的七座神像，以幡节、龙伞、衣裳装饰，在幡上分别写上各自的尊号，以示区别。抬出内宫，陈列在寺观。
English: In addition, seven statues of deities below Gaozu were set up, decorated with flags, dragon umbrellas, and costumes, and their respective honorifics were written on the flags to show the difference. They were carried out of the inner palace and displayed in the temple.

古文：是日，排仪仗，百僚序立于光顺门以俟之，幡花鼓舞，迎呼道路。
现代文：这日，排列仪仗，百名幕僚在光顺门站立等候，幡花迎风飞舞，道路两旁百官迎呼。
English: On this day, hundreds of staff members lined up at the Guangshun Gate to wait for the ceremony, and hundreds of officials on both sides of the road welcomed the event.

古文：岁以为常，而识者嗤其不典，其伤教之源始于缙也。
现代文：每年都引为常例，而有识者嗤其不符礼典。其伤败教礼的源始在于缙。
English: Every year, it is cited as a common practice, but people of insight scoff at it as not being in accordance with the ritual. The origin of the ritual of wounding and defeating lies in the dragonfly.

古文：李氏，初为左丞韦济妻，济卒，奔缙。缙嬖之，冒称为妻，实妾也。
现代文：李氏，开始为左丞韦济的妻子，济死后，投奔缙，缙宠爱她，假称为妻，实际上是妾。
English: Li, who started out as the wife of Zuo Wei Zi, after Zi's death, fell in love with Zou, who doted on her, pretending to be his wife, but actually a concubine.

古文：又纵弟妹女尼等广纳财贿，贪猥之迹如市贾焉。
现代文：又纵容弟妹女尼等人大肆收受财物，其贪婪劣迹如同市井贾富。
English: He also indulged his younger brothers, sisters, nieces and nephews in receiving wealth, and his greed and bad deeds were like those of Ichii Jafu.

古文：元载得罪，缙连坐贬括州刺史，移处州刺史。
现代文：元载犯罪后，缙受牵连贬为括州刺史，又移任处州刺史。
English: After the original crime, Zou was implicated and relegated to the position of the state prosecutor. He was also transferred to the post of the state prosecutor.

古文：大历十四年，除太子宾客，留司东都。
现代文：大历十四年，任为太子宾客，留在东都司职。
English: In the 14th year of the lunar calendar, he was appointed as a guest of the crown prince and remained in the post of Dongdu.

古文：始以善星纬数术进，待诏翰林，累官至谏议大夫。
现代文：建中二年十二月死，终年八十二岁。黎干，戎州人。当初以擅长星术进朝，等待诏令为翰林，多次升为谏议大夫。
English: He died at the age of 82, in December of the second year of his junior high school career. He was a native of Jeonju, Jeonju. He entered the imperial court as an expert in astrology, and was promoted several times to the position of doctor of the Imperial Court.

古文：寻迁京兆尹，以严肃为理，人颇便之，而因缘附会，与时上下。大历二年，改刑部侍郎。
现代文：不久升为京兆尹，以威严治理，人们非常熟悉他，随当时事政上下而因缘附会。大历二年，改为刑部侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Jing Zhaoyun and ruled with authority. People were very familiar with him. As the political situation at the time, he was attached to the party. In the second year of the Tai Lian, he was changed to the sergeant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：鱼朝恩伏诛，坐交通出为桂州刺史、本管观察使。
现代文：鱼朝恩伏法，因受牵连出朝任桂州刺史、本管观察使。
English: As a result of being implicated in the Fish Dynasty's benevolence and subservience, he was appointed as the Guizhou chief historian and chief observer.

古文：至江陵，丁母忧。
现代文：到达江陵，遇到母亲丧事。
English: Arriving in Gangneung, he was confronted with his mother's funeral.

古文：久之，会京兆尹缺，人颇思干。
现代文：很久以后，京兆尹职位空缺，人们非常想念干。
English: After a long time, Jing Zhaoyun's position was vacant, and people missed him very much.

古文：八年，复拜京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：八年，又升为京兆尹，兼任御史大夫。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to Jingzha Yin and concurrently served as a goshi daifu.

古文：干自以得志，无心为理，贪暴益甚，徇于财色。
现代文：干自认为得志，无心为政，贪暴之举越来越严重，徇于钱财女色。
English: They think that they are successful, but they have no intention to govern, and the corruption is getting more and more serious. They are obsessed with money and women.

古文：十三年，除兵部侍郎。
现代文：十三年，任兵部侍郎。
English: Thirteen years later, he was appointed to the position of Hyobushirō.

古文：性险，挟左道，结中贵，以希主恩，代宗甚惑之。
现代文：性格险恶，挟制左道，结交权贵，以求蒙受恩宠，代宗被他完全迷惑。
English: He had a sinister personality, controlled the left path, and made friends with the powerful in order to receive grace. The daimyo was completely confused by him.

古文：时中官刘忠翼宠任方盛，干结之素厚，尝通其奸谋。
现代文：当时中官刘忠翼倍受宠爱，干与他交情深厚，曾经与他共同谋划。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Colonel Liu Zhongyi was greatly loved, and he had a deep friendship with him, and had planned together with him.

古文：及德宗初即位，干犹以诡道求进，密居舆中诣忠翼第。
现代文：到了德宗即位，干仍以诡计谋求晋职，秘密藏在舆中到忠翼家宅。
English: When Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, Gan still used trickery to seek promotion, secretly hiding in public to the house of Zhongyi.

古文：事发，诏曰： 兵部侍郎黎干，害若豺狼，特进刘忠翼，掩义隐贼，并除名长流。 
现代文：事情败露，诏曰： 兵部侍郎黎干，如同豺狼危害，刘忠翼忘义隐藏贼人，一并除名长期流放。 
English: When the affair was exposed, the edict said: Li Gan, the attendant of the military department, was like a dangerous wolf, and Liu Zhongyi was a forgetful and hidden thief, and they were both expelled and exiled for a long time.

古文：即行，市里兒童数千人噪聚，怀瓦砾投击之，捕贼尉不能止，遂皆赐死于蓝田驿。
现代文：走的时候，市井上有数千名儿童叫嚷着聚在一起，用瓦砾投掷他们，捕贼尉制止不了，于是全部在蓝田驿赐死。
English: As they were leaving, thousands of children in the city gathered, shouting, and pelted them with rubble. The thief-catchers could not stop them, and they all died in Lantian.

古文：忠翼，宦官也，本名清潭，与董秀皆有宠于代宗。
现代文：忠翼，是个宦官，原名清潭，与董秀都受代宗宠爱。
English: Zhongyi, a eunuch whose original name was Qingtan, and Dongxiu were both favored by the emperor.

古文：天宪在口，势回日月，贪饕纳贿，货产巨万。
现代文：法令在口，权势极盛，贪财受贿，钱财巨万。
English: The decree is in the mouth, the power is extremely strong, greed and bribery, money and wealth are huge.

古文：大历中，德宗居东宫，干及清潭尝有奸谋动摇。
现代文：大历年中，德宗还在东宫，干与清潭曾密谋推翻德宗。
English: In the year of the great calendar, Dezong was still in the East Palace, so he and Qingtan had plotted to overthrow Dezong.

古文：及是，积前罪以诛之。
现代文：如今，加上以前罪行将他处死。
English: Now, in addition to his previous crimes, he will be put to death.

古文：庾准，常州人。
现代文：庾准，常州人。
English: Zhang Zhen, a native of Changzhou.

古文：父光先，天宝中，文部侍郎。
现代文：父亲光先，天宝年中任过文部侍郎。
English: His father worked as a lighthouse keeper, and in the middle of the Tenpo era he served as a clerk in the Ministry of Education.

古文：准以门入仕，昵于宰相王缙，缙骤引至职方郎中、知制诰，迁中书舍人。
现代文：准凭借门荫入仕，与宰相王缙亲近，缙马上引见他任郎中、知制诰，升为中书舍人。
English: He entered the service by virtue of his connections, and was close to the prime minister, Wang Xi. He was immediately promoted to the position of junior secretary and secretary, and was promoted to the position of junior secretary.

古文：准素寡文学，以柔媚自进，既非儒流，甚为时论所薄。
现代文：准文学知识很少，而凭借长相柔媚进朝，也不是属于儒人之流，被当时人们非常看不起。
English: They had little knowledge of quasi-literature, and they did not belong to the Confucian school, and were looked down upon by the people at the time.

古文：寻改御史中丞，迁尚书左丞。
现代文：不久又调为御史中丞，升为尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Goshi Chujo and was promoted to Shoshu Sajo.

古文：缙得罪，出为汝州刺史。
现代文：王缙获罪，出朝任汝州刺史。
English: Wang Yao was found guilty and was appointed to the post of Ruzhou magistrate.

古文：复入为司农卿，与杨炎厚善。
现代文：又入朝任司农卿，与杨炎非常友好。
English: He also entered the imperial court as the Secretary of Agriculture, and was very friendly with Yang Yan.

古文：炎欲杀刘晏，知准与晏有隙，乃用为荆南节度。
现代文：炎想杀刘晏，知道准与晏有矛盾，于是任准为荆南节度。
English: Yan wanted to kill Liu Yao, knowing that Quan was in conflict with Yao, so he appointed Quan as Jingnan's regent.

古文：准乃上言得晏与硃泚书，且有怨望，又召补州兵以拒命。
现代文：准于是向皇上说得到晏给朱氵此的书信，里面有怨言，同时号召补州的兵马拒绝服从命令。
English: Quan then told the emperor that he had received a letter from Zhu Xi to this effect, in which there was a complaint, and at the same time called on the soldiers and horses in Fuzhou to refuse to obey orders.

古文：于是先杀晏，然后下诏赐自尽，海内冤之。
现代文：于是先杀死晏后，再下诏赐予自尽，众人都认为晏冤枉。
English: As a result, they killed him first, and then issued an edict ordering him to commit suicide. Everyone thought he had been wronged.

古文：炎以杀晏征准为尚书左丞。
现代文：炎由于杀了晏任用准，转为尚书左丞。
English: As a result of killing Shun, Yan was appointed to the post of vice-premier and became Shoshu Sajo.

古文：建中三年六月丁巳卒，时年五十一。
现代文：建中三年六月丁巳死去，终年五十一岁。
English: In June of the third year of middle school, Ding died, at the age of fifty-one.

古文：赠工部尚书。
现代文：赠予工部尚书。
English: It was presented to the Ministry of Works.

