古文：祭不欲数，数则烦，烦则不敬。祭不欲疏，疏则怠，怠则忘。
现代文：祭祀不可太频繁，太频繁就倦烦，倦烦就失去了敬意；但祭祀又不可太疏阔，太疏阔就怠慢，怠慢了就要遗忘。
English: Sacrifices should not be too frequent. If they are too frequent, people will get tired, and if they are tired, they will lose respect. However, sacrifices should not be too extensive. If they are too extensive, people will neglect them, and if they neglect them, people will forget them.

古文：是故君子合诸天道：春禘秋尝。
现代文：所以君子按照天道运行的规律，春天举行禘祭，秋天举行尝祭。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the laws of the heavens, the nobles held a purification festival in spring and a tasting festival in autumn.

古文：霜露既降，君子履之，必有凄怆之心，非其寒之谓也。
现代文：秋天霜露覆盖大地，君子踏上这霜露，心中产生凄怆的感情。
English: The autumn dew covers the earth, and when a gentleman steps on the dew, terrible feelings arise in his heart.

古文：春，雨露既濡，君子履之，必有怵惕之心，如将见之。
现代文：这倒并非因为天气的寒冷，而是想起了死去的亲人。春天雨露滋润大地，君子踏上这雨露，必然会有所震动，疑惑将会见到死去的亲人。
English: This is not because of the cold weather, but because of the memory of the dead relatives. Spring rain and dew moisten the earth. When a gentleman steps on this rain and dew, he will inevitably be shaken. Doubt will see the dead relatives.

古文：乐以迎来，哀以送往，故禘有乐而尝无乐。
现代文：人们以喜悦的心情迎接春天到来，以哀伤的心情送别秋天归去，所以禘祭奏乐而尝祭不奏乐。
English: People greet the arrival of spring with joy and bid farewell to autumn with sadness, so they play music for the wreath-laying ceremony but not for the feast.

古文：君子生则敬养，死则敬享，思终身弗辱也。
现代文：君子在父母生前尽心奉养，父母死后则诚心祭享。终身都想着不可辱没父母。
English: A gentleman devotes himself to the upbringing of his parents during their lifetime, and devotes himself wholeheartedly to their enjoyment after their death. All his life, he thinks about not dishonoring his parents.

古文：君子有终身之丧，忌日之谓也。
现代文：君子终身要为父母服丧，这就是指每年父母的忌日。
English: A gentleman should mourn his parents for life. This refers to the anniversary of the death of his parents.

古文：忌日不用，非不祥也。言夫日，志有所至，而不敢尽其私也。
现代文：忌日里不做其他事情，并非这个日子本身是个不吉祥的日子，而是说在这个日子里，对父母的思念到了极点，不敢再为自己做私事了。
English: If you don't do anything else on the day of your death, it's not because the day itself is inauspicious, but because on this day, you miss your parents so much that you don't dare to do anything for yourself.

古文：唯圣人为能飨帝，孝子为能飨亲。
现代文：只有圣人才能使上帝来飨用他的祭祀，也只有孝子才能使父母来飨用他的祭祀。
English: Only a saint can make God use his sacrifice, and only a filial son can make his parents use his sacrifice.

古文：飨者，乡也。乡之，然后能飨焉。
现代文：因为 飨 就有 向 的意思，只有诚心向往，鬼神才会来飨。
English: Because  has the meaning of yearning, only sincere yearning, ghosts and gods will come to.

古文：是故孝子临尸而不怍。
现代文：所以孝子在尸前站立，不会有不和悦的颜色。
English: Therefore, if a filial son stands in front of a corpse, there will be no discordant colors.

古文：君牵牲，夫人奠盎。
现代文：诸侯祭祀时，国君亲自牵牲，夫人献上盎齐之酒。
English: During the sacrificial rites of the lords, the sovereign himself led the sacrifice, and his wife presented wine from the ounce.

古文：君献尸，夫人荐豆。
现代文：杀牲后，国君亲自以血毛献尸，夫人也献上盛放在豆中的祭品。
English: After killing the animal, the sovereign himself offered the corpse in blood and hair, and his wife also offered a sacrifice in beans.

古文：卿大夫相君，命妇相夫人。齐齐乎其敬也，愉愉乎其忠也，勿勿诸其欲其飨之也。
现代文：大夫们协助国君，有封号的妇人们协助夫人，整齐而又恭敬，和悦而又诚心，非常勤勉地忙碌着，希望鬼神来飨用。
English: The doctors assist the sovereign, the women with seals assist their wives, neatly and respectfully, pleasantly and sincerely, very diligently busy, hoping to be used by ghosts and gods.

古文：文王之祭也：事死者如事生，思死者如不欲生，忌日必哀，称讳如见亲。
现代文：文王祭祀时，事奉死者就好像事奉活人，思念死者好像不想活了。每到忌日，一定十分哀伤，提到父母的名讳，就好像看见了父母。
English: In the ritual of King Wen, to serve the dead is to serve the living, and to miss the dead is to not want to live. On the day of one's death, one must be very sad. Mentioning the name of one's parents is like seeing one's parents.

古文：祀之忠也，如见亲之所爱，如欲色然；其文王与？《诗》云： 明发不寐，有怀二人。 
现代文：文王祭祀时心中是多么忠诚啊，就好像见到父母生前所喜爱的东西一样，又好像世俗之人喜好美色一般，也只有文王才能这样吧!《诗经》上说: 天明尚未眠，心中想双亲。 
English: How loyal King Wen is in his heart during the ritual. It is as if he is seeing the things that his parents loved in their lifetimes. It is also as if ordinary people like beautiful things. Only King Wen can do this! "The Book of Songs" says: "The morning has not yet come, and my heart yearns for my parents."

古文：文王之诗也。
现代文：这就是写文王的诗啊!
English: This is how to write the king of poetry!

古文：祭之明日，明发不寐，飨而致之，又从而思之。
现代文：正祭的第二天，直到天亮还没有入睡。进献祭品请双亲来飨用，又因此更加思念双亲。
English: On the second day of the main festival, I didn't fall asleep until dawn. I asked my parents to use the offerings, and I missed my parents even more.

古文：祭之日，乐与哀半；飨之必乐，已至必哀。
现代文：祭祀的日子里，又是喜悦又是哀伤。迎接双亲来飨时，心中十分喜悦；双亲既来之后，想到马上又要离去，心中就又十分哀伤。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, there is both joy and sadness. When welcoming the parents to the shrine, there is great joy in the heart; after the parents have come, the thought that they will soon leave is also very sad.

古文：仲尼尝，奉荐而进其亲也悫，其行趋趋以数。
现代文：孔子举行秋祭，亲自奉献祭品，其神态是那样的忠厚诚恳，走得很快步子急促。
English: Confucius held the autumn festival and personally offered sacrifices. His demeanor was so loyal and sincere, and he walked quickly and hurriedly.

古文：已祭，子赣问曰： 子之言祭，济济漆漆然；今子之祭，无济济漆漆，何也？ 
现代文：祭祀之后，子贡问道: 您曾说祭祀时君子应该仪态从容、神情矜持，而您今天祭祀却不是这样，这是为什呢? 
English: After the ritual, Zigong asked, "You once said that when performing a ritual, a gentleman should have a calm demeanor and a restrained expression, but this is not the case with your ritual today. Why is this?"

古文：子曰： 济济者，容也远也；漆漆者，容也自反也。
现代文：孔子说: 仪态从容，是一种疏远的表现；神情矜持，是自我专注的表现。
English: Confucius said: A calm demeanor is a sign of aloofness; a reserved demeanor is a sign of self-absorption.

古文：容以远，若容以自反也，夫何神明之及交，夫何济济漆漆之有乎？
现代文：疏远而又注重自我，怎么与神明交接呢?在这时怎么还能仪态从容、神情矜持呢?
English: How can one communicate with the gods when one is distant and self-centered? How can one maintain a calm and reserved demeanor at this time?

古文：反馈，乐成，荐其荐俎，序其礼乐，备其百官。君子致其济济漆漆，夫何慌惚之有乎？夫言，岂一端而已？
现代文：而当国君祭祀，我们作为宾客去参加时，反馈之礼完毕，奏起了音乐，荐上了牲体，按照礼乐的次序，大夫百官济济一堂，这时君子便可以仪态从容，神情矜持，这时怎么能像与神明交接时那样恍恍惚惚呢?说话岂能一概而论?
English: On the other hand, when we, as guests, go to participate in the king's sacrifice, when the feedback ceremony is completed, the music is played, the animal is recommended, and according to the order of the ritual music, the doctors and officials gather together. At this time, the gentleman can be calm and reserved. At this time, how can he be in a trance like when he is communicating with the gods? Is it possible to generalize?

古文：夫各有所当也。 
现代文：应当针对各不相同的情况呀。 
English: It should be tailored to different situations.

古文：孝子将祭，虑事不可以不豫；比时具物，不可以不备；虚中以治之。
现代文：孝子将要举行祭祀，有关的事情不可不提前考虑；届时，一切物品都要置办齐备；在做这些准备工作时，心中不可有其它杂念。
English: The filial son will hold a ritual, and the relevant matters must be considered in advance; at that time, all items must be prepared; when doing these preparations, there must be no other thoughts in mind.

古文：宫室既修，墙屋既设，百物既备，夫妇齐戒沐浴，盛服奉承而进之，洞洞乎，属属乎，如弗胜，如将失之，其孝敬之心至也与！
现代文：宗庙中的宫室已经装修，墙屋已经粉刷，各种物品都已准备好。此时，孝子夫妇就可以进行斋戒、沐浴，穿上礼服，捧着祭品向神明进献。进献时的神情是那样的诚恳，那样的专注，就好像拿不动手中的祭品，又好像生怕失手脱掉，这都是孝子夫妇孝敬之心达到极端才有的表现吧。
English: The palace room in the ancestral temple has been decorated, the wall has been painted, and all kinds of items have been prepared. At this time, the filial couple can fast, bathe, put on ceremonial clothes, and hold offerings to the gods. The look at the time of offering is so sincere, so focused, it is as if they are not able to hold the offerings in their hands, and they are afraid to take them off. This is a manifestation of the filial couple's filial piety to the extreme.

古文：荐其荐俎，序其礼乐，备其百官，奉承而进之。
现代文：献上各种祭品，依礼奏起音乐，百官也都协助主人进献。
English: Various offerings were made, music was played according to the rite, and the centurions also assisted the host in the offering.

古文：于是谕其志意，以其恍惚以与神明交，庶或飨之。 庶或飨之 ，孝子之志也。
现代文：此时此刻，通过祝的祝词表达孝子的心意，恍惚之中，仿佛真的是在和神明对话，仿佛神明真的在享用祭品。仿佛神明真的在享用祭品，这本是孝子的初衷啊！
English: At this moment, expressing the filial son's heart through the congratulatory words, in a trance, as if he were really talking to the gods, as if the gods were really enjoying the offerings. As if the gods were really enjoying the offerings, this was the filial son's original intention!

古文：孝子之祭也，尽其悫而悫焉，尽其信而信焉，尽其敬而敬焉，尽其礼而不过失焉。
现代文：孝子的祭祀，其实是一种自尽其敬的行为，尽其虔诚之心而表现为虔诚的动作，尽其对神明的相信而表现为确信神明一定存在，尽其敬意而表现为敬事神明的行为，尽其礼节而表现为不违背一点规矩。
English: The sacrifice of filial piety is, in fact, a self-sacrificing act, a pious act that expresses its piety to the best of its ability, a belief in the gods to the best of its ability, a conviction that the gods must exist to the best of its ability, an act of reverence to the gods to the best of its ability, and a courtesy to the best of its ability that does not violate any rules.

古文：进退必敬，如亲听命，则或使之也。
现代文：举手投足，都毕恭毕敬，就好像真的听到了神明在讲话，有什么事要使唤自己似的。
English: Hands and feet were raised in reverence, as if they had really heard the gods speak, as if there was something they needed to do.

古文：孝子之祭，可知也，其立之也敬以诎，其进之也敬以愉，其荐之也敬以欲；退而立，如将受命；已彻而退，敬齐之色不绝于面。
现代文：孝子的祭祀，其内心如何可以通过外表观察出来：他站立时，像鞠躬似的；捧着祭品向前走时，和颜悦色；献上祭品时，真心希望神明尝一尝；退下来返回原位时，好像在倾听神明的吩咐；到了撤下祭品而退出时，脸上还始终保持着庄重的神色。
English: How the heart of a filial son's sacrifice can be observed from the outside: when he stands, it is as if he is bowing; when he walks forward holding the offering, his face is pleasant; when he offers the offering, he sincerely hopes that the gods will taste it; when he retreats and returns to his original position, it is as if he is listening to the commands of the gods; when he withdraws from the offering, his face remains solemn.

古文：孝子之祭也，立而不诎，固也；进而不愉，疏也；荐而不欲，不爱也；退立而不如受命，敖也；已彻而退，无敬齐之色，而忘本也。
现代文：相反，孝子在祭祀时，如果不是鞠躬式的站立，那就显得太粗野；捧着祭品向前时不是和颜悦色，月吓就显得疏远神明；进献祭品时不是唯恐神明不来品尝，那就显得对神明并不真爱；退回原位站着时不是像在倾听神明的吩咐，那就显得傲慢；了撤下祭品退出时就全然失去了庄重的神色，那就等于忘掉祖宗了。
English: On the other hand, if the filial son does not stand in a bowing position during the sacrifice, it will appear too rough; if he does not hold the sacrifice forward, it will not be pleasant, and the moon scare will appear to alienate the gods; if he does not enter the sacrifice because he is afraid that the gods will not come to taste it, it will appear that he does not really love the gods; if he does not return to his original position and stand as if he is listening to the gods' orders, it will appear arrogant; if he withdraws from the sacrifice, he will completely lose his solemn appearance, which is tantamount to forgetting the ancestors.

古文：如是而祭，失之矣。
现代文：这样的祭祀，就失去祭祀的意义了。
English: Such a ritual would lose its meaning.

古文：孝子之有深爱者，必有和气；有和气者，必有愉色；有愉色者，必有婉容。
现代文：如果孝子对父母有深深的爱戴，心中就必然充满和顺之气；·心中充满和顺之气，脸上就一定会表现为和颜悦色；脸上有和颜悦色，就一定会表现为曲意承欢的样子。
English: If a filial son has a deep love for his parents, his heart will be filled with a spirit of harmony; if his heart is filled with a spirit of harmony, his face will be filled with a pleasant countenance; if his face is filled with a pleasant countenance, he will be filled with a pleasant countenance.

古文：孝子如执玉，如奉盈，洞洞属属然，如弗胜，如将失之。
现代文：孝子在祭祀时，容貌敬慎，就好像拿着贵重的玉，又好像端着满满的一杯水，那份虔诚，那份专注，就好像拿不动，又好像生怕失手打坏。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the filial son looked cautious, as if he was holding a precious jewel, and as if he was carrying a full glass of water. That part of piety, that part of concentration, was as if he couldn't hold it, and as if he was afraid of losing it.

古文：严威俨恪，非所以事亲也，成人之道也。
现代文：相反，那种威严肃穆一本正经的样子，不是孝子可以用来事奉父母的态度，而只是作为成年人应有的态度。
English: On the contrary, that dignified and serious look is not the attitude that a filial son can use to serve his parents, but only the attitude that an adult should have.

古文：先王之所以治天下者五：贵有德，贵贵，贵老，敬长，慈幼。
现代文：先王用来治理天下的原则有五条:重视有德的人，重视有地位的人，尊重年老的人，敬重长辈，爱护幼辈。
English: There are five principles that the late king used to govern the world: to value people of virtue, to value people of status, to respect the elderly, to respect the elders, and to cherish the young.

古文：此五者，先王之所以定天下也。
现代文：这五条就是先王用来定天下的。
English: These five rules were used by the former king to determine the fate of the world.

古文：贵有德，何为也？
现代文：重视有德的人，是为了什么呢?
English: What is the purpose of valuing virtuous people?

古文：为其近于道也。
现代文：因为有德的人接近天道。
English: Because a virtuous person is close to the heavenly way.

古文：贵贵，为其近于君也。
现代文：重视有地位的人，是因为他近似于君王。
English: A man of rank is valued because he resembles a king.

古文：贵老，为其近于亲也。
现代文：尊重老年人是因为他近似于父母。
English: Respect for the elderly is because he is close to his parents.

古文：敬长，为其近于兄也。
现代文：敬重长辈，是因为他近似于兄长。
English: He respects his elders because he resembles his elder brother.

古文：慈幼，为其近于子也。
现代文：爱护幼辈，是因为他近似于子女。
English: Love the younger generation, because he is close to the children.

古文：是故至孝近乎王，至弟近乎霸。
现代文：因此，孝的极点，也就接近于王道；悌的极点，也就接近于霸道。
English: Therefore, the extreme of filial piety is also close to the royal way; the extreme of arrogance is also close to the domineering way.

古文：至孝近乎王，虽天子，必有父；至弟近乎霸，虽诸侯，必有兄。
现代文：孝的极点接近王道，是因为即使是称王的天子也一定孝其父母；悌的极点接近霸道，是因为即使是称霸的诸侯也一定敬其兄弟。
English: The extreme of filial piety is close to the royal way, because even a prince who claims to be a king must be filial to his parents; the extreme of arrogance is close to the tyrannical way, because even a tyrannical prince must respect his brothers.

古文：先王之教，因而弗改，所以领天下国家也。
现代文：先王的礼教，就是遵循上述原则而不加改变，所以能够领导天下国家。
English: The last king's etiquette was to follow the above principles without change, so he was able to lead the country.

古文：子曰： 立爱自亲始，教民睦也。
现代文：孔子说: 建立仁爱之心，应从孝顺父母开始，用以教导人民慈爱和睦。
English: Confucius said: To establish a heart of benevolence, it is necessary to begin with filial piety to teach the people to be kind and harmonious.

古文：立教自长始，教民顺也。
现代文：建立恭敬之心，应从尊敬兄长开始，用以教导人民顺从命令。
English: The establishment of a spirit of reverence, beginning with respect for one's elder brother, should be used to teach people to obey orders.

古文：教以慈睦，而民贵有亲；教以敬长，而民贵用命。
现代文：教导人民慈爱和睦，人民就会以事奉双亲为美德；教导人民尊敬兄长，人民都会以顺从命令为光荣。
English: Teach the people love and harmony, and they will have the virtue of serving their parents; teach the people to respect their brothers, and they will have the honor of obeying orders.

古文：孝以事亲，顺以听命，错诸天下，无所不行。 
现代文：以 孝 心来事奉双亲，以 顺 的态度来听从命令，这个方法放到天下任何地方，都不会行不通的。
English: To serve one's parents with filial piety and to obey orders with a submissive attitude, this method will not fail to work anywhere in the world.

古文：郊之祭也，丧者不敢哭，凶服者不敢入国门，敬之至也。
现代文：天子南郊祭天，这是最最重要的吉祭，有丧事的人也不敢哭，披麻戴孝的人也不敢进入国都城门，对天的恭敬到了极点。
English: This is the most important auspicious festival. Mourners do not dare to cry, and those who wear mourning clothes do not dare to enter the capital city gate. The respect for heaven has reached the extreme.

古文：祭之日，君牵牲，穆答君，卿大夫序从。
现代文：举行宗庙之祭时，国君亲自牵引牺牲，嗣子在旁协助，卿大夫按照班序紧随其后。
English: When the festival of the ancestral temple was held, the sovereign himself led the sacrifice, his son-in-law assisted, and the doctor followed in order of precedence.

古文：既入庙门，丽于碑，卿大夫袒，而毛牛尚耳，鸾刀以刲，取膟菺，乃退。
现代文：进入庙门以后，就把牺牲拴在庭中的石碑上，卿大夫袒露左臂宰牛，先取牛耳上的毛献祭，然后用莺刀分割牲体，取出血和肠间脂肪献祭，乃退。
English: After entering the temple gate, the sacrifice was chained to a stone monument in the courtyard. The noble doctor bared his left arm to slaughter the cow, first taking the hair on the cow's ear as a sacrifice, and then using a sickle to divide the animal, take the blood and inter-intestinal fat as a sacrifice, and then retreat.

古文：爓祭，祭腥而退，敬之至也。
现代文：接着还要用半生不熟的肉献祭，还要用生肉献祭，祭毕退下，也真是恭敬到极点了。
English: Then there is the offering of half-cooked meat, and the offering of raw meat, and then the offering is withdrawn, which is the height of reverence.

古文：郊之祭，大报天而主日，配以月。
现代文：南郊祭天，是为了普遍报答上天诸神而以日神为主，以月神为配享。
English: The Southern Suburbs Festival is held in order to reward the gods of heaven in general, with the sun god as the main deity and the moon god as an accessory.

古文：夏后氏祭其闇，殷人祭其阳，周人祭日，以朝及闇。
现代文：夏人尚黑，在黄昏时祭天。殷人尚白，在中午时分祭天。周人尚文，从早上一直祭到黄昏。
English: The summer people are still dark, and they celebrate the day at dusk. The autumn people are still white, and they celebrate the day at noon. The week people are still literate, and they celebrate the day from morning until dusk.

古文：祭日于坛，祭月于坎，以别幽明，以制上下。
现代文：祭日神是在坛上，祭月神是在坑内，以此区别幽暗和光明，以此划分上下。
English: The deity of the festival is on the altar, and the deity of the festival is in the pit, in order to distinguish between darkness and light, and to divide up and down.

古文：祭日于东，祭月于西，以别外内，以端其位。
现代文：祭日于东方，祭月于西方，以此区别内外，端正其位。
English: The festival day is in the east, and the festival month is in the west, thus distinguishing the inside and outside, and correcting its position.

古文：日出于东，月生于西。
现代文：因为旭日出于东方，新月生子西方。
English: For the rising sun cometh out of the east, and the new moon out of the west.

古文：阴阳长短，终始相巡，以致天下之和。
现代文：日月一阴一阳，昼夜或长或短，终始相接，循环往复，天下的有条不紊即由此而生。
English: Sun, moon, yin and yang, day and night, whether long or short, are ultimately connected, the cycle goes back and forth, and the orderliness of the world arises from this.

古文：天下之礼，致反始也，致鬼神也，致和用也，致义也，致让也。
现代文：天下的礼有这么五项作用：一是让人们缅怀初始，二是让人们不忘祖宗，三是开发资源以便利用，四是树立道义，五是提倡谦让。
English: Rituals around the world have five functions: one is to let people remember the beginning, the second is to let people not forget their ancestors, the third is to develop resources for use, the fourth is to establish morality, and the fifth is to promote modesty.

古文：致反始，以厚其本也；致鬼神，以尊上也；致物用，以立民纪也。
现代文：缅怀初始，意在使人饮水思源而不忘其本。不忘祖宗，意在使人知道尊上。开发资源以便利用，意在使人民的生活有保障。
English: Remembering the beginning is intended to make people drink water and think about the source without forgetting its origin. Not forgetting the ancestors is intended to make people know that they are respected. Developing resources for use is intended to make people's lives secure.

古文：致义，则上下不悖逆矣。
现代文：树立道义，意在理顺君君、臣臣、父子的关系。
English: Establishing morality is intended to straighten out the relationship between the king, the vassal, and the father and son.

古文：致让，以去争也。
现代文：提倡谦让，意在消除争讼。
English: To advocate modesty, with the intention of eliminating disputes.

古文：合此五者，以治天下之礼也，虽有奇邪，而不治者则微矣。
现代文：把这五项作用合起来，就构成了治理天下的无所不包的字，即令还有些坏人坏事不能治住，其数量也微乎其微。
English: Taken together, these five functions constitute an all-encompassing word for governing the world. Even if there are still some bad people and bad things that cannot be cured, their number is extremely small.

古文：宰我曰： 吾闻鬼神之名，而不知其所谓。 
现代文：宰我说： 我听到人们常说鬼呀神呀的，就是不知其涵义。 
English: Zai said, "I often hear people say "ghost" or "god," but I don't know what they mean.

古文：子曰： 气也者，神之盛也；魄也者，鬼之盛也；合鬼与神，教之至也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 气是神的旺盛，魄是鬼的旺盛。既祭鬼，又祭神，这便达到了圣人以神道设教的完满境界。
English: Confucius replied, "The qi is the vigor of the gods, and the draught is the vigor of the ghosts. Both the ghosts and the gods are worshiped, and this has reached the perfect realm of the sage's teaching with Shinto.

古文：众生必死，死必归土：此之谓鬼。
现代文：一切活着的东西都要死去，死后其体魄必然归土，这就叫鬼。
English: All living things must die, and after death their bodies must return to the earth. This is called a ghost.

古文：骨肉毙于下，阴为野土；其气发扬于上，为昭明，焄蒿，凄怆，此百物之精也，神之着也。
现代文：体魄腐烂于地下，化为野土；而其灵魂则发扬于上，成为看得见的光明，闻得到的气味，感受到的凄酸，这是一切生物都具有的可以意会而难以言传的精灵，也是神的存在的显示。
English: The body rots underground and turns into wild earth, while the soul rises above, becoming visible light, smell, and bitter taste. This is an intangible spirit that all living things have, and it is also a manifestation of the existence of God.

古文：因物之精，制为之极，明命鬼神，以为黔首则。百众以畏，万民以服。 
现代文：圣人就根据万物的这种精灵，给它们取了个至高无上的名子，曰鬼日神，作为黎民百姓遵守的法则，于是黎民百姓都害怕鬼神，服从鬼神。
English: On the basis of these spirits of all things, the sage gave them a supreme name, the "ghost sun god," as a rule for the people of Lê to obey. As a result, the people of Lê feared and obeyed the ghosts and gods.

古文：圣人以是为未足也，筑为宫室，谓为宗祧，以别亲疏远迩，教民反古复始，不忘其所由生也。
现代文：圣人以为光这样做还不够，于是又建造宫室，设立宗庙和桃庙，以区别鬼神的亲疏远近，教导人民不但要缅怀远祖，而且要祭祀父母，不要忘掉自己是从哪里来的。
English: The saint thought that this was not enough, so he also built a palace, set up a family temple and a peach temple to distinguish between the relatives of ghosts and gods and to teach the people not only to remember their distant ancestors, but also to worship their parents, and not to forget where they came from.

古文：众之服自此，故听且速也。
现代文：这一着很奏效，老百姓之所以服从领导，就是由于这一点，而且服从得非常快。
English: This worked very well, and it was because of this that the people obeyed the leadership, and they obeyed very quickly.

古文：二端既立，报以二礼。
现代文：既然设立了鬼和神这两个名称，就相应地报以两种不同的祭礼。
English: Now that the two names of ghost and god have been established, two different rites have been reported accordingly.

古文：建设朝事，燔燎膻芗，见以萧光，以报气也。
现代文：一是朝事之礼，即把牲血和肠间脂肪放在萧篙上焚烧，升起的烟，既有芳香之气，还杂有萧篙之气。这是用气味来报答气，也就是神的。
English: The first is the morning ritual, that is, the blood of the animal and the fat between the intestines are placed on the gong and burned, and the smoke that rises is both aromatic and mixed with the qi of the gong. This is to use the smell to repay the qi, that is, the god.

古文：此教众反始也。
现代文：这种质朴尚古的祭祀可以提醒人们追怀初始。
English: This simple and ancient ritual can remind people to cherish the beginning.

古文：荐黍稷，羞肝肺首心，见间以侠甒，加以郁鬯，以报魄也。
现代文：一是进献熟食之礼，即献以黍樱，又献以牲的肝、肺、首、合。加上两瓶醛酒，再加上郁粤香酒。这是用熟食来报答魄，也就是鬼的。
English: The first is the offering of cooked food, that is, the offering of pickled cherries, and the offering of the liver, lungs, neck, and intestines of the animal, plus two bottles of aldehyde wine, plus yu guang yuang wine. This is using cooked food to repay evil spirits, that is, ghosts.

古文：教民相爱，上下用情，礼之至也。
现代文：这种进献熟食之祭可以起到教民相爱的作用。对上有报神之祭，对下有报鬼之祭，从礼数上来讲可以说两头都照顾到了。
English: This kind of offering of cooked food can play a role in the love of the people. On the right is the offering of the god, and on the left is the offering of the ghost. In terms of the number of rites, it can be said that both ends have been taken care of.

古文：君子反古复始，不忘其所由生也，是以致其敬，发其情，竭力从事，以报其亲，不敢弗尽也。
现代文：君子缅怀父母以至于远祖，不忘掉自己是从哪里来的，所以对他们是有多少敬意就拿出多少敬意，有多厚的感情就拿出多厚的感情，在祭祀活动中竭心尽力以报答自己的亲人，不敢有丝毫的保留。
English: A gentleman remembers his parents and even his distant ancestors, and does not forget where he came from. Therefore, he will show them as much respect as he has, and as much affection as he has. He will do his best to repay his relatives in the sacrificial activities, and dare not have the slightest reservation.

古文：是故昔者天子为藉千亩，冕而朱纮，躬秉耒。诸侯为藉百亩，冕而青纮，躬秉耒，以事天地、山川、社稷、先古，以为醴酪齐盛，于是乎取之，敬之至也。
现代文：所以从前天子有藉田千亩，到了春耕的时候，要戴上系有红色帽带的礼帽，亲执犁把而耕；诸侯也有藉田百亩，到了春耕的时候，要戴上系有青色帽带的礼帽，亲执犁柄而耕。藉田所得的收入，用来祭祀夫地、山川几社樱和先祖。醋酪黍傻等等祭品，就是来自藉田的收入。
English: Therefore, since the day before yesterday, the Son of Heaven has borrowed a thousand mu of land, and when it is time for spring plowing, he must wear a ceremonial hat with a red hat band and personally plow the plow handle; the princes also have borrowed a hundred mu of land, and when it is time for spring plowing, they must wear a ceremonial hat with a blue hat band and personally plow the plow handle. The income from the borrowed land is used to sacrifice the husband's land, the mountains and rivers, several shrines and ancestors. Sacrifices such as vinegar and cheese are the income from the borrowed land.

古文：古者天子、诸侯必有养兽之官，及岁时，齐戒沐浴而躬朝之。牺牷祭牲，必于是取之，敬之至也。
现代文：这是多么虔诚的祭祀啊：古时候天子和诸侯都专门设有养兽之官，每年到了一定的时候，天子和诸侯都要在斋戒沐浴之后前往巡视，因为符合要求的祭牲一定要从其中挑选，这是对祭祀极其虔敬的表现。
English: What a pious ritual this is: in ancient times, the emperor and princes had an official responsible for raising animals. At a certain time each year, the emperor and princes would go on inspection after fasting and bathing, because the sacrificial animals that met the requirements had to be selected from among them. This was an extremely pious display of sacrifice.

古文：君召牛，纳而视之，择其毛而卜之，吉，然后养之。
现代文：在祭前三月，国君派人把牛牵来，亲自察看，挑选毛色纯一体无损伤的牛加以占卜如果得到吉兆，然后就把此牛敬养起来。
English: In the third month before the festival, the sovereign sent someone to bring the cow, personally inspect it, select a cow with a pure and undamaged coat color, make a divination, and if a good omen is obtained, then raise this cow.

古文：君皮弁素积，朔月，月半，君巡牲，所以致力，孝之至也。
现代文：到了每月的初一、十五，国君还要穿上皮弃礼服，亲自察看被养之牛。在这上面下这样大的力气，也是极其孝顺的表现。
English: On the first and fifteenth day of each month, the sovereign would also put on the ceremonial dress and personally inspect the cattle being raised. Such great strength above and below is also a manifestation of extreme filial piety.

古文：古者天子、诸侯必有公桑、蚕室，近川而为之。
现代文：古时候天子和诸侯还都设有公家的桑园和养蚕的宫室，临着河边建造，以便漂洗蚕种。
English: In ancient times, princes and princes also had a public mulberry garden and a silkworm-raising palace, built next to the river to wash the silkworms.

古文：筑宫仞有三尺，棘墙而外闭之。
现代文：养蚕的宫室有一丈高，其周围种上荆棘当墙，门反锁着。
English: The silkworm-rearing room is a foot high, with a wall of thorns around it and a locked door.

古文：及大昕之朝，君皮弁素积，卜三宫之夫人世妇之吉者，使入蚕于蚕室，奉种浴于川；桑于公桑，风戾以食之。
现代文：到了季春三月初一的早上，国君身穿皮弃服，通过占卜选择后宫中符合吉兆的夫人和世妇，让她们到蚕室去养蚕。她们捧着蚕种到河里漂洗，到公家的桑园里采摘桑叶，让风吹干桑叶上的露水，然后用来喂蚕。
English: On the morning of the first day of the third month of the spring season, the king, dressed in a fur coat, selected through divination the women and women of the harem who were auspicious, and asked them to go to the silkworm room to raise silkworms. They took the silkworms and washed them in the river, went to the public mulberry garden to pick mulberry leaves, let the wind dry the dew on the mulberry leaves, and then used them to feed the silkworms.

古文：岁既殚矣，世妇卒蚕，奉茧以示于君，遂献茧于夫人。
现代文：等到春季已尽，世妇们养蚕的事情也告结束，于是捧着收获的蚕茧请国君过目，然后就献茧于夫人。
English: When the spring was over, the women of the world had finished raising silkworms, so they held up the harvested cocoons to invite the king to take a look, and then presented the cocoons to his wife.

古文：夫人曰： 此所以为君服与？ 
现代文：夫人就说： 这是用来给国君做衣服的吧！ 
English: The lady said: This is used to make clothes for the sovereign!

古文：遂副袆而受之，因少牢以礼之。
现代文：就身着礼服而接收了下来，并且用少牢之礼慰劳献茧的世妇。
English: A woman in ceremonial dress received it, and used the gift of a short prison sentence to console the woman who had worked so hard to offer it.

古文：古之献茧者，其率用此与！
现代文：古代献茧的礼节，大概都是这样吧？
English: This is probably how the ancient etiquette of donating skulls started, right?

古文：礼得其报则乐，乐得其反则安。礼之报，乐之反，其义一也。曾子曰： 孝有三：大孝尊亲，其次弗辱，其下能养。 
现代文：等到黄道吉日，夫人就开始缀丝。先由夫人把手伸入泡蚕茧的盆中三次，每次抽出一个丝头，然后就把蚕茧分给符合吉兆的夫人和世妇，让她们缥丝。此后，还要把丝分别染成红色、绿色、黑色、黄色，制成绘有种种图案的礼服。礼服做成以后，国君穿上礼服祭祀先王先公，真是虔敬到极点了。 曾子说： 孝有三等。第一等的孝是能光父耀母，第二等的孝是不钻辱父母的令名，第三等的孝是能够赡养父母。 
English: After waiting for the auspicious day of the zodiac, the lady began to embroider the silk. First, the lady put her hand into the basin of the cocoon three times, each time extracting a silk head, and then divided the cocoon to the lady and the woman who met the auspicious sign, and let them embroider the silk. After that, the silk was dyed red, green, black, and yellow, respectively, to make a dress with various patterns. After the dress was made, the king put on the dress to worship the former king, which was really pious to the extreme. Zeng Zi said: There are three levels of filial piety. The first level of fil

古文：公明仪问于曾子曰： 夫子可以为孝乎？ 
现代文：曾子的学生公明仪向曾子问道： 老师您可以说是、做到了 孝 字吧？ 
English: Zeng Zi's student, Gong Ming Yi, asked Zeng Zi: Teacher, can you say that you have achieved filial piety?

古文：曾子曰： 是何言与！是何言与！
现代文：曾子答道： 这是哪儿的话这是哪的话！
English: Zeng Zi replied, "If this is the case, then this is the case!"

古文：君子之所为孝者：先意承志，谕父母于道。参，直养者也，安能为孝乎？ 
现代文：君子的所谓孝，是不等父母有所表示就把父母想办的事办了，同时又能使父母放心自已的所作所为都是合乎正道的。
English: The so-called filial piety of a gentleman is to do what the parents want to do without waiting for the parents to say anything, and at the same time reassure the parents that what they are doing is right.

古文：曾子曰： 身也者，父母之遗体也。
现代文：我只不过是能赡养父母罢了，怎能说是做到了 孝 字呢！ 曾子说： 自己的身体，乃是父母的遗体。
English: I can only support my parents, so how can I say that I have fulfilled my duty of filial piety? Zeng Zi said: My body is the remains of my parents.

古文：行父母之遗体，敢不敬乎？
现代文：以父母的遗体来做事，敢不小心翼翼吗？
English: Do you dare to do things with the bodies of your parents without being careful?

古文：居处不庄，非孝也；事君不忠，非孝也；莅官不敬，非孝也；朋友不信，非孝也；战陈无勇，非孝也；五者不遂，灾及于亲，敢不敬乎？
现代文：日常起居不端重，就是不孝；为君主做事不忠诚，就是不孝；面对工作而儿儿戏戏，就是不孝；对朋友说话不算数，就是不孝；临阵作战不勇敢，就是不孝。这五个方面做不到，表面上看是自身受到惩罚，实际上是殃及父母的遗体，由此看来，敢不小心翼翼吗！
English: If you are not serious in your daily life, then you are not filial; if you are not loyal in your work for the monarch, then you are not filial; if you play around at work, then you are not filial; if you do not speak to your friends, then you are not filial; if you are not brave in battle, then you are not filial. If you cannot do these five things, you will be punished on the surface, but it will actually affect the remains of your parents. From this point of view, dare not be careless!

古文：亨孰膻芗，尝而荐之，非孝也，养也。君子之所谓孝也者，国人称愿然曰：如此，所谓孝也已。
现代文：用嘉肴美味，岁时祭祀，这不能算作是孝，只能算作是养 君子的所谓孝，是全国的人都称羡喝彩地说： 有这样儿子的爹娘真是有福气呀！ 这才是所谓的孝啊。
English: Eating delicious dishes and making sacrifices at certain times of the year cannot be counted as filial piety, but only as the so-called filial piety of raising a gentleman. People all over the country said with admiration and applause: Parents of such a son are truly blessed! This is the so-called filial piety.

古文：众之本教曰孝，其行曰养。
现代文：各种道德的根本叫做孝，表现于行为则叫做养。
English: The foundation of all kinds of morality is called filial piety, and its manifestation in behavior is called upbringing.

古文：养，可能也，敬为难；敬，可能也，安为难；安，可能也，卒为难。
现代文：养就算是可以做到，但尊敬就难了；尊敬就算是可以做到，但毫无勉强之意就难了；毫无勉强就算是可以做到，而在父母去世之后还能坚持不改就难了。
English: Even if it is possible to raise, it is difficult to respect; even if it is possible to respect, it is difficult to do without reluctance; even if it is possible to do without reluctance, it is difficult to persist after the death of parents.

古文：父母既没，慎行其身，不遗父母恶名，可谓能终矣。
现代文：父母去世以后，还能够小心翼翼地运用父母的遗体行事，不连累父母被人垢骂，这才叫做能终身行孝。
English: After the death of one's parents, one should be able to use the remains of one's parents with care, without being scolded by others. This is called being able to practice filial piety for life.

古文：仁者，仁此者也；礼者，履此者也；义者，宜此者也；信者，信此者也；强者，强此者也。
现代文：所谓仁，就是要仁在孝上；所谓宇，就是要履行孝字；所谓义，就是要适宜于孝的事才做；所谓信，就是要诚信在孝上；所谓努力，就是要努力在孝字上做文章。
English: The so-called benevolence is to be benevolent in filial piety; the so-called virtue is to fulfill filial piety; the so-called righteousness is to do what is suitable for filial piety; the so-called faith is to be honest in filial piety; the so-called effort is to make efforts in filial piety.

古文：乐自顺此生，刑自反此作。 
现代文：欢乐是由于顺着孝道办事而产生的，刑罚是由于违背孝道办事而导致的。 
English: Joy is the result of acting in accordance with filial piety, and punishment is the result of acting against filial piety.

古文：曾子曰： 夫孝，置之而塞乎天地，溥之而横乎四海，施诸后世而无朝夕，推而放诸东海而准，推而放诸西海而准，推而放诸南海而准，推而放诸北海而准。
现代文：曾子说： 孝作为一种美德，竖起来可以顶天立地，平着放可以覆盖四海，传到后代也被人们永远奉行，也不受地域的限制，推广到东海是准则，推广到西海是准则，推广到南海是准则，推广到北海也是准则。
English: Zeng Zi said: Filial piety, as a virtue, can stand on top of the world when it is upright, and can cover the four seas when it is laid flat. It will be passed down to future generations and people will always follow it, and it is not subject to regional restrictions. It is a standard to be promoted to the East Sea, a standard to be promoted to the West Sea, a standard to be promoted to the South Sea, and a standard to be promoted to the North Sea.

古文：《诗》云：此之谓也。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 从西到东，从南到北，没有人不遵从。 
English: The Book of Songs says: From west to east, from south to north, there is no one who does not obey.

古文：曾子曰： 树木以时伐焉，禽兽以时杀焉。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。 曾子说： 树木要在适当的时候砍伐，禽兽要在适当的时候捕杀。
English: Zeng Zi said: Trees should be cut down at the right time, and animals should be hunted at the right time.

古文：夫子曰：孝有三：小孝用力，中孝用劳，大孝不匮。
现代文：孔子说： 哪怕是砍伐一棵树木，哪怕是捕杀一只禽兽，只要砍伐、捕杀得不是时候，就是不孝。 孝有三等：小孝只要出力即可，中孝则要求建功立业，大孝则要求要啥有啥。
English: Confucius said: Even if it is to cut down a tree, even if it is to kill an animal, as long as it is not the right time to cut down or kill, it is not filial piety. Filial piety has three levels: small filial piety only requires effort, medium filial piety requires achievement, and big filial piety requires anything.

古文：思慈爱忘劳，可谓用力矣。
现代文：思念父母的养育之恩而忘掉疲劳，可以说是出力了。
English: If you miss your parents' nurturing and forget your fatigue, you can say that you have made an effort.

古文：尊仁安义，可谓用劳矣。
现代文：躬行仁义，可以说是建功立业了。
English: To practice benevolence and righteousness can be said to have made contributions and established a career.

古文：博施备物，可谓不匮矣。
现代文：广泛地施惠于人，人们纷纷携带礼品参加自家的祭祀，可以说是要啥有啥了。
English: They have benefited people extensively, and people have brought gifts to participate in their own sacrificial rites, so it can be said that they have what they want.

古文：父母爱之，嘉而弗忘；父母恶之，惧而无怨；父母有过，谏而不逆；父母既没，必求仁者之粟以祀之。
现代文：父母喜爱自己，自己就高兴地永记在心。父母不喜欢自己，自己就戒惧反省，但无一句怨言。父母有了过失，自己可以婉言规劝，但不可和他们顶撞。
English: If your parents love you, you will always remember them with joy. If your parents don't like you, you will fear and reflect, but without a word of complaint. If your parents make a mistake, you can gently persuade them, but you must not confront them.

古文：此之谓礼终。 乐正子春下堂而伤其足，数月不出，犹有忧色。
现代文：父母去世，就是穷到告贷才能举行祭祀的地步，也不向恶人乞求，这才叫做终身行孝。 乐正子春下堂时，不小心扭伤了脚，好几个月不出门，还面带忧色。
English: When parents die, even if they are so poor that they have to take out a loan to be able to hold a religious service, and they do not beg from the wicked, this is called lifelong filial piety.When Le Zhengzi went to the spring hall, he accidentally sprained his foot and did not go out for several months, and his face was sad.

古文：门弟子曰： 夫子之足瘳矣，数月不出，犹有忧色，何也？ 乐正子春曰： 善如尔之问也！
现代文：他的弟子对此不解几个月不出门问的太好了！就问道： 老师的脚伤已经好了，这是为什么呢？ 乐正子春说，还面带忧色，你问的太好了！
English: His disciple couldn't understand this and didn't go out to ask for months, which was great! So he asked: The teacher's foot injury has healed, why is that? Lezheng Zichun said, still with a sad face, what you asked was great!

古文：善如尔之问也！吾闻诸曾子，曾子闻诸夫子曰：父母全而生之，子全而归之，可谓孝矣。
现代文：好 你我听曾子说过，而曾子也是从孔子那儿听到：一 天之所生，地之所养，没有比人更高贵的。
English: Well, I heard my great-grandson say, and my great-grandson also heard it from Confucius: There is nothing nobler than a man who is born of heaven and nurtured by the earth.

古文：不亏其体，不辱其身，可谓全矣。
现代文：父母完整地把自己生了下来，做儿子的也要把身体完整地还给父母，这才叫做孝。
English: Parents gave birth to themselves completely, and sons should also return their bodies completely to their parents. This is called filial piety.

古文：故君子顷步而弗敢忘孝也。
现代文：不使身体受到损伤，不使名声受到污辱，这才叫做完整。 所以君子抬腿动脚都不敢忘掉孝道。
English: To be complete is not to have one's body harmed or one's reputation tarnished. Therefore, a gentleman dares not forget filial piety.

古文：今予忘孝之道，予是以有忧色也。
现代文：现在我扭伤了脚，是忘掉孝道的表现，所以我才面有忧色啊。
English: Now that I've sprained my foot, it's a sign that I've forgotten my filial duty, so I'm sad.

古文：壹举足而不敢忘父母，壹出言而不敢忘父母。
现代文：每抬一次脚都不敢忘掉父母，每说一句话都不敢忘掉父母。
English: Every time they lift their feet, they dare not forget their parents, and every time they speak, they dare not forget their parents.

古文：壹举足而不敢忘父母，是故道而不径，舟而不游，不敢以先父母之遗体行殆。
现代文：因为每抬一次脚都不敢忘掉父母，所以走路的时候光走大道而不走邪径，过河的时候要乘船而渡而不游泳而渡，不敢拿已故父母的遗体冒险。
English: Because they do not dare to forget their parents every time they lift their feet, so when they walk, they walk barefoot and do not take the wrong path. When they cross the river, they take a boat and do not swim. They dare not risk the bodies of their deceased parents.

古文：壹出言而不敢忘父母，是故恶言不出于口，忿言不反于身。
现代文：因为每说一句话都不敢忘掉父母，所以伤害他人的话不出于口，别人的辱骂也绝不会摊到自己身上。
English: Because they do not dare to forget their parents every time they say a word, the words that hurt others do not come out of their mouths, and the abuse of others will never spread to themselves.

古文：不辱其身，不羞其亲，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：不让自己的身体受辱，也就等于不让自己的父母受辱，做到这一点，可以称得上孝了。 
English: Not allowing one's body to be humiliated is tantamount to not allowing one's parents to be humiliated. If you can achieve this, you can be called a filial son.

古文：昔者，有虞氏贵德而尚齿，夏后氏贵爵而尚齿，殷人贵富而尚齿，周人贵亲而尚齿。虞夏殷周，天下之盛王也，未有遗年者。
现代文：从前虞舜之时，虽然尊重有德之人，但也不忘尊重年长之人；夏代虽然尊重有爵之人，但也不忘尊重年长之人；殷代虽然尊重有钱之人，但也不忘尊重年长之人；周代虽然尊重有亲属关系的人，但也不忘尊重年长之人。虞、夏、殷、周四代， 是人们公认的盛世，他们都没有忘记对年长者的尊重。
English: Formerly, in the era of Yu Xi, although people respected those with virtue, they did not forget to respect the elderly; in the era of Xia, although people respected those with peerage, they did not forget to respect the elderly; in the era of Yin, although people respected those with wealth, they did not forget to respect the elderly; in the era of Zhou, although people respected those with family ties, they did not forget to respect the elderly.

古文：年之贵乎天下，久矣；次乎事亲也。
现代文：由此看来，年龄的被人们看重是很久以来的事了，其重要性仅次于孝道。
English: From this point of view, people have valued age for a long time, and its importance is second only to filial piety.

古文：是故朝廷同爵则尚齿。七十杖于朝，君问则席。八十不俟朝，君问则就之，而弟达乎朝廷矣。
现代文：因此，在朝廷上，彼此官爵相同，则年长者居上位；年龄到了七十岁，可以拄着拐杖上朝，国君如果有所咨询，就要在堂上为他铺席以便落座；到了八十岁就不但可以扶杖上朝，而且可以在行过朝见礼后就打道回府，国君如果有所咨询，就要亲自到他府上求教。这样，涕道就通行于朝廷了。
English: Therefore, in the imperial court, officials and nobles are equal to each other, but the elderly are in the upper ranks; when they reach the age of seventy, they can go to the imperial court on crutches, and if the sovereign has any questions, they should make a seat for him in the hall so that he can sit down; when they reach the age of eighty, they can not only go to the imperial court on crutches, but also return to the capital after the imperial court ceremony, and if the sovereign has any questions, they should personally go to his capital to ask for advice. In this way, the gondola is popular in the imperial court.

古文：行，肩而不并，不错则随。见老者，则车徒辟；斑白者不以其任行乎道路，而弟达乎道路矣。
现代文：在道路上行走，不能和年长者并肩，年长者如果是兄辈的年龄，就斜错在他身后走；年长者如果是父辈的年龄，就紧随在他身后走。无论是乘车的还是步行的，遇到年长者都要让路。
English: You cannot walk alongside an elderly person on the road. If the elderly person is the same age as your brother or sister, walk diagonally behind him or her; if the elderly person is the same age as your father or mother, walk closely behind him or her. Whether you are travelling by car or on foot, you must give way to an elderly person.

古文：居乡以齿，而老穷不遗，强不犯弱，众不暴寡，而弟达乎州巷矣。
现代文：看见头发花白的老人挑着担子行路，年轻人就要为他代劳。这样一来，梯道就通行于道路了。在乡里居住，凡事都讲究个长幼，即使贫穷的老人也不遗弃，年轻人不可恃强凌弱，以众欺寡。这样一来，涕道就通行于乡里了。
English: If you see a gray-haired old man carrying a load on the road, the young people should work for him. In this way, the ladder will pass through the road. Living in the countryside, everything is about the eldest and the youngest, even if the poor old man is not abandoned, the young people should not be stubborn and bully the weak. In this way, the road passes through the countryside.

古文：古之道，五十不为甸徒，颁禽隆诸长者，而弟达乎搜狩矣。
现代文：按照古代的规矩，年龄到了五十岁就可以不参加田猎活动了，而在分配猎获物的时候还要让年长者多得点。这样一来，涕道就通行于田猎了。
English: According to the ancient rules, when you reach the age of fifty, you can not participate in the field hunting activities, and when distributing the prey, you should let the elderly get more points. In this way, the gondola will pass through the field hunting.

古文：军旅什伍，同爵则尚齿，而弟达乎军旅矣。
现代文：在军队里边，官爵相同则以年长者居上。这佯一来，梯道就通行于军旅了。
English: In the army, as well as the nobility, it was the older men who held the upper hand. As a result, the stairway was used for military travel.

古文：孝弟发诸朝廷，行乎道路，至乎州巷，放乎搜狩，修乎军旅，众以义死之，而弗敢犯也。
现代文：孝涕之道，从朝廷开始，通行于道路；通行于乡里，通行于田猎，通行于军旅，大家都抱着宁可为孝佛而死的信念，没有人敢违背它。
English: The way of filial piety, starting from the imperial court, is practiced on the roads; it is practiced in the countryside, it is practiced in hunting, it is practiced in the army, everyone holds the belief that they would rather die for filial piety, and no one dares to violate it.

