古文：酒正掌酒之政令，以式法授酒材。
现代文：酒正掌管有关酒的政令，按照法式授给造酒的材料。
English: Sake breweries are in charge of liquor-related government decrees, according to the French style of awarding brewing materials.

古文：凡为公酒者，亦如之。
现代文：凡为公事酿造酒的，也按法式授给造酒的材料。
English: Those who brew wine for official business are also given the materials for making wine according to the French style.

古文：辨五齐之名：一曰泛齐，二曰醴齐，三曰盎齐，四曰缇齐，五曰沈齐。
现代文：辨别五齐的名称种类：一是泛齐，二是醴齐，三是盎齐，四是缇齐，五是沉齐。
English: Distinguish the name types of the five Qi: one is Pan Qi, the second is Ru Qi, the third is Wanzi, the fourth is Ru Qi, and the fifth is Shen Qi.

古文：辨三酒之物：一曰事酒，二曰昔酒，三曰清酒。
现代文：辨别三种酒的名称种类：一是事酒，二是昔酒，三是清酒。
English: Distinguish the names and types of the three types of liquor: the first is koto-zake, the second is yakitori, and the third is sake.

古文：辨四饮之物：一曰清，二曰医，三曰浆，四曰酏。
现代文：辨别四种饮料的名称种类：一是清，二是医，三是浆，四是酏。
English: Distinguish the name types of four beverages: one is clear, the second is medicine, the third is syrup, and the fourth is syrup.

古文：掌其厚薄之齐，以共王之四饮三酒之馔，及后、世子之饮与其酒。
现代文：负责辨别它们的厚薄程度，以供王所需用的四种饮料、三种酒的陈设，以及供给王后、太子的饮料和酒。
English: He was responsible for distinguishing their thickness and thinness in order to prepare four kinds of drinks and three kinds of wine for the king, as well as drinks and wine for the queen and the prince.

古文：凡祭祀，以法共五齐三酒，以实八尊。
现代文：凡祭祀，按常法供应五齐、三酒，用以盛满八个酒尊。
English: For all sacrificial rites, five cups of wine and three cups of sake are served according to the usual method, which is used to fill eight cups of sake.

古文：大祭三贰，中祭再贰，小祭壹贰，皆有酌数。
现代文：大祭祀要添加三次，中祭祀添加两次，小祭祀添加一次，都有一定的勺数。
English: The large sacrifice should be added three times, the medium sacrifice added twice, and the small sacrifice added once, all of which have a certain number of spoons.

古文：唯齐酒不贰，皆有器量。
现代文：只有齐酒不添加，都有一定的数量。
English: Only Qi wine does not add, all have a certain amount of wax.

古文：共宾客之礼酒，共后之致饮于宾客之礼医酏糟，皆使其士奉之。
现代文：供应王送给宾客所需的酒，供应王后送给宾客所需的饮料即未经过滤的医和酏，都是派士送去。
English: The wine that the king needed to serve to his guests, and the drink that the queen needed to serve to her guests - unfiltered mead and brandy - were sent by courier.

古文：凡王之燕饮酒，共其计，酒正奉之。
现代文：凡王举行燕饮酒礼，供给预计所当用的酒，酒正亲自送去。
English: Van Wang held a swallow drinking ceremony, supplying the wine that was expected to be used, and the wine was sent in person.

古文：凡飨士、庶子，飨耆老、孤子，皆共其酒，无酌数。
现代文：凡用飨礼款待士、庶子，款待老人、孤子，都供给所需的酒，没有一定勺数。
English: Those who use the gong to entertain servants, illegitimate children, the elderly, and orphans are all provided with the necessary wine, and there is no set number of spoons.

古文：掌酒之赐颁，皆有法以行之。
现代文：负责供应颁赐臣下卢卮声的酒，都有一定的制度依照执行。
English: Responsible for the supply of award-winning wines, there is a certain system in accordance with the implementation.

古文：凡有秩酒者，以书契授之。
现代文：凡有依常制当供应酒的，就依照符券账册授予。
English: If any wine is served according to the regular system, it will be awarded according to the voucher account book.

古文：酒正之出，日入其成，月入其要，小宰听之。
现代文：酒正支出的造酒材料和酒，每日记载其数而将十日的会计文书上报，每月将当月的会计文书上报，由小宰加以评断，年终总结全年的会计文书。
English: Sake brewing materials and sake that are being spent are recorded daily, and the accounting documents of the tenth day are reported, and the accounting documents of the current month are reported every month, and the accounting documents of the whole year are summarized at the end of the year.

古文：岁终，则会，唯王及后之饮酒不会。以酒式诛赏。
现代文：只有王和王后饮用的酒不结算。按照造酒的法式以决定赏罚。
English: Only the wine drunk by the king and queen is not settled. Rewards and punishments are decided according to the French way of making wine.

古文：酒人掌为五齐三酒。祭祀，则共奉之，以役世妇。
现代文：酒人负责酿造五齐、三酒，祭祀时供给所需用的酒，听从世妇指使。
English: The sake brewer is responsible for brewing the five kinds of sake and the three kinds of sake, supplying the sake needed for the ritual, and obeying the instructions of the concubine.

古文：共宾客之礼酒、饮酒而奉之。
现代文：把供应宾客所需的礼酒和饮酒送到酒正那里。
English: Deliver the wine and alcohol needed to serve the guests to the bar.

古文：凡事，共酒而入于酒府。
现代文：凡有燕饮的事就供应酒而送到酒正的府那里。
English: Whenever there is drinking, wine is served and brought to the house of the head brewer.

古文：凡祭祀，共酒以往。
现代文：凡有小祭祀就送酒前往。
English: Whenever there is a small religious service, alcohol is sent.

古文：宾客之陈酒，亦如之。
现代文：馈赠宾客的酒也派人送去。
English: The guests' gifts of wine were also sent on their way.

古文：浆人掌共王之六饮，水、浆、醴、凉、医、酏，入于酒府。
现代文：浆人掌管供应王的六种饮料：水、浆、醴、凉、医、酏，送到酒正的府那里。
English: The sommelier is in charge of supplying the king with six kinds of drinks: water, syrup, ginger, cold, medicine, and ginger, which are sent to the brewer's residence.

古文：共宾客之稍礼，共夫人致饮于宾客之礼，清醴医酏糟，而奉之。
现代文：供给宾客所需的饮料。供给夫人向宾客行致饮礼所需的饮料：经过过滤的，或未经过滤的醴、医、酏，而送到酒正那里。
English: Serve the guests with the drinks they need. Serve the hostess with the drinks she needs to present to the guests: filtered or unfiltered gin, tonic, cognac, and bring them to the bar.

古文：凡饮共之。
现代文：凡所需的饮料都负责供给。
English: All necessary beverages are provided.

古文：凌人掌冰正，岁十有二月，令斩冰，三其凌。
现代文：凌人掌管有关藏冰出冰的政令。夏历十二月，命令斩伐冰块，三倍的数量而藏入冰窖。
English: In December of the lunar calendar, an order was given to cut down three times the amount of ice and store it in ice cellars.

古文：春始治鉴。
现代文：春天开始检查盛冰的鉴。
English: In the spring, we started to check the ice-filled jars.

古文：凡外内饔之膳羞，鉴焉。
现代文：凡外饔、内饔的牲肉和美味都盛在冰鉴中。
English: All the meat and delicacies from the outer and inner yakitori are served in the shaved ice.

古文：凡酒浆之酒醴，亦如之。祭祀，共冰鉴。
现代文：凡酒人的五齐、三酒和浆人的六饮也都盛在冰鉴中。祭祀时供给冰鉴。
English: All of the drinker's five drinks, three drinks and the sipper's six drinks are also served in the ice goblet.

古文：宾客，共冰。
现代文：对于宾客则供给冰。
English: Ice will be provided for guests.

古文：大丧，共夷槃冰。
现代文：王丧，供给夷粲所需的冰。
English: Wang Kui, supplying the ice needed by the urchins.

古文：夏颁冰，掌事，秋刷。
现代文：夏季颁赐冰给臣下，就掌管颁赐的具体事宜。秋天，清除冰窖。
English: In the summer, he is in charge of awarding ice to his subjects, and in the fall, he clears out the ice cellar.

古文：笾人掌四笾之实。
现代文：笾人掌管四次用笾进献的食物。
English: The eunuch is in charge of the food that is brought in four times.

古文：朝事之笾，其实麷、蕡、白、黑、形盐、膴、鲍鱼、鱐。
现代文：行朝事礼时所进献的笾，盛的食物是炒熟的麦、麻子、炒熟的稻米、炒熟的黍米、虎形的盐块、大块的生鱼片、烘干的鱼、干鱼块。
English: The bowl offered during the morning ritual is filled with stir-fried wheat, sesame seeds, stir-fried rice, stir-fried glutinous rice, tiger-shaped salt cubes, large pieces of sashimi, dried fish and dried fish cubes.

古文：馈食之笾其实枣、□、桃、乾、榛实。
现代文：行馈食礼时所进献的笾，盛的食物是枣、栗子、桃、干梅、榛食。
English: The food offered to the deities during the offering ceremony consisted of dates, chestnuts, peaches, dried plums, and ginger.

古文：加笾之实，凌、芡、□脯。
现代文：进献加笾所盛的食物是菱角、鸡头米、栗子、肉脯，菱角、鸡头米、栗子、肉脯。
English: The food that was served in the offering jar was loquat, chickpea rice, chestnuts, and minced meat, and loquat, chickpea rice, chestnuts, and minced meat.

古文：羞笾之实。糗、饵、粉、餈。
现代文：进献羞笾所盛的食物是糗饵、粉糍。
English: The food served in Jin Xian Xian is bean paste and powdered bean paste.

古文：凡祭祀，共其笾荐羞之实。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，供给需用笾进献的食物。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, food that needs to be offered in a bowl is served.

古文：丧事及宾客之事，共其荐笾羞笾。
现代文：有丧事以及燕享宾客的事，供给需用笾进献的食物。
English: There are funerals and guests to be entertained, and food to be served that requires the use of chopsticks.

古文：为王及后、世子共其内羞。
现代文：为王及王后、太子，供给陈放在房中的食物。
English: for the king, and for the queen, and for the princes, to prepare food in their houses.

古文：凡笾事，掌之。
现代文：凡有关笾的事都由笾人掌管。
English: All matters related to the cormorants are in the hands of the cormorants.

古文：醢人掌四豆之实。
现代文：醢人掌管四次用豆进献的食物。
English: The eunuch is in charge of the food offered four times with beans.

古文：朝事之豆，其实韭菹、醓醢、昌本、麋臡，菁菹、鹿臡、茆菹、麇臡。
现代文：行朝事礼时所进献的豆，盛的食物是韭菜做的菹、多汁的肉酱、菖蒲根做的菹、带骨的麇鹿肉做的酱、蔓菁做的菹、带骨的鹿肉做的酱、凫葵做的菹、带骨的獐肉做的酱。
English: The beans that are offered during the morning ritual are filled with foods such as bean paste made from amaranth, juicy meat sauce, bean paste made from amaranth root, sauce made from deers with bones, bean paste made from cranberries, sauce made from venison with bones, bean paste made from anemones, and sauce made from meat stew with bones.

古文：馈食之豆，其实葵菹、蠃醢、脾析、醓醢、蜃、蚳醢、豚拍、鱼醢。
现代文：行馈食礼时所进献的豆，盛的食物是葵菜做的菹、蜗牛肉酱、牛肚、蛤肉酱、大蛤肉酱、蚁卵酱、小猪两胁的肉、鱼肉酱。
English: The beans that are offered at the time of the offering of food gifts, the food that is served is the bean stew made of sunflower, beef stew sauce, tripe, stewed meat sauce, large stewed meat sauce, ant egg sauce, meat from two pigs, and fish sauce.

古文：加豆之实，芹菹、兔醢、深蒲、酝醢、箈菹、雁醢、笋菹、鱼醢。
现代文：进献加豆所盛的食物是水芹菜做的菹、兔肉酱、嫩蒲叶做的菹、多汁的肉酱、小竹笋做的菹、鹅肉酱、竹笋做的菹、鱼肉酱。
English: The foods that were served with the doner kebabs were the toad made from water celery, rabbit meat sauce, toad made from young shobu leaves, juicy meat sauce, toad made from small bamboo shoots, goose meat sauce, toad made from bamboo shoots, and fish meat sauce.

古文：羞豆之食，酏食、糁食。
现代文：进献羞豆所盛的食物是酏食、糁食。
English: The food served with shiny beans is nibble, nibble.

古文：凡祭祀，共荐羞之豆实。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，供给需用豆进献的食物。
English: Whenever a religious service is held, food that requires the use of beans is served.

古文：宾客、丧纪，亦如之。
现代文：款待宾客及丧事，也供给需用豆进献的食物。
English: They also cater for guests and funerals, and provide food that requires bean sprouts.

古文：为王及后，世子共其内羞。
现代文：为王及王后、太子，供给陈放在房中的食物。
English: for the king, and for the queen, and for the princes, to prepare food in their houses.

古文：王举，则共醢六十瓮，以五齐、七醢、七菹、三臡实之。
现代文：王杀牲盛馔，就供给六十饔，用五种齑类、七种酱类、七种菹类、三种蔫类盛在里边。
English: The king killed an ox and loaded it with sixty quails, and it was loaded with five kinds of quails, seven kinds of sauce, seven kinds of pigeons, and three kinds of pigeons.

古文：宾客之礼，共醢五十瓮。
现代文：接待宾客之礼时，供给酱类五十饔。
English: When receiving a gift from a guest, serve 50 clams with sauce.

古文：凡事，共醢。
现代文：凡有事需用酱类就负责供给。
English: Whenever there is a need for sauces, they are responsible for supplying them.

古文：醯人掌共五齐、七菹，凡醯物。以共祭祀之齐菹，凡醯酱之物。
现代文：醯人掌管五齑、七菹等，凡用醯调和的食物，以供给祭祀所需的齑、菹。
English: The eunuchs were in charge of the five bowls, seven bowls, and so on, and all the food that was mixed with the bowls was used to supply the bowls and jars needed for the sacrifices.

古文：宾客，亦如之。
现代文：凡所需调和醯的齑、菹以及未调和醯的酱类。
English: The same applies when entertaining guests.

古文：王举，则共齐菹醯物六十瓮，共后及世子之酱齐菹。
现代文：款待宾客也这样。王杀牲盛馔，就供给用醯调和的齑、菹六十饔。供给主后和太子所需的酱类，以及齑、菹。
English: The same is true for entertaining guests. The king killed a large number of animals, and he provided a yakitori with yakitori, yakitori with yakitori, yakitori with yakitori, yakitori with yakitori, yakitori with yakitori, yakitori with yakitori, and yakitori with yakitori.

古文：宾客之礼，共醯五十瓮。
现代文：接待宾客之礼，供给醯物五十饔。
English: When receiving a gift from a guest, offer a gift of fifty baht.

古文：凡事，共醯。
现代文：凡有事需用醯物就负责供给。
English: Whenever there is a need to use stolen goods, we are responsible for the supply.

古文：盐人掌盐之政令，以共百事之盐。
现代文：盐人掌管有关盐的政令，以供各种事情所需用的盐。
English: The salt people are in charge of the salt decree to supply salt for all kinds of things.

古文：祭祀，共其苦盐、散盐。
现代文：祭祀时供给所需的苦盐、散盐。
English: Bitter salt and loose salt, which are needed during the ritual, are provided.

古文：宾客，共其形盐、散盐。
现代文：款待宾客时供给所需的形盐、散盐。
English: When entertaining guests, provide them with the required salt and loose salt.

古文：王之膳羞，共饴盐。后及世子，亦如之。
现代文：为王烹制膳食佳肴共给饴盐，为王后和太子也这样。
English: For the king, salt was used in the preparation of his meals, as well as for the queen and the prince.

古文：凡齐事，鬻盐，以待戒令。
现代文：凡调和食品的事，煮盐以待命。
English: When it comes to preparing food, salt is always on standby.

古文：幂人掌共巾幂。
现代文：幕人负责供给覆盖器物所需的巾。
English: The person in charge of the curtain is responsible for supplying the cloth needed for the drapes.

古文：祭礼，以疏布、巾幂八尊，以画布、巾幂、六彝，凡王巾皆黼。
现代文：祭祀时用粗疏的布巾覆盖八尊，用画有花纹的布巾覆盖六彝。凡为王覆盖饮食的巾都带有黼纹。
English: During the ritual, a coarse cloth is used to cover the eight deities, and a patterned cloth is used to cover the six deities.

古文：宫人掌王之六寝之修，为其井匽，除其不蠲，去其恶臭，共王之沐浴。
现代文：宫人掌管王的六寝的清扫整理，在隐蔽处修建厕所，清除厕所中的污秽，消除它的恶臭。供给王洗头洗澡所需。
English: The palace people are in charge of cleaning and organizing the king's six bedrooms, building a toilet in the hiding place, removing the filth in the toilet, eliminating its stench, and providing the king with what he needs to wash his hair and take a bath.

古文：凡寝中之事，埽除、执烛、共炉炭，凡劳事。
现代文：凡六寝中的杂事，如扫除、天黑执掌火把、冬天供给炉炭，凡属脏累的活都负责干。
English: He is responsible for all the menial tasks that fall to him while he is asleep, such as sweeping, carrying torches in the dark, and providing charcoal in the winter.

古文：四方之舍事，亦如之。
现代文：王有事外出时的行宫中的杂事也同样负责干。
English: When the king is away on a trip, he is also responsible for the chores in the palace.

古文：掌舍掌王之会同之舍。
现代文：掌舍负责王外出会同时的宫舍。
English: The palanquin is responsible for the palace where the king meets his concubines.

古文：设梐枑再重。
现代文：设置两重梐桓作为防禁。
English: Set up a two-tiered moat as a defense.

古文：设车宫辕门，为坛壝宫棘门，为帷宫，设旌门。
现代文：如果停宿在险阻处就用车围成一圈以象宫，用相对仰起的车辕以象宫门。筑土坛，并筑矮墙以象宫，树立双戟以象宫门。用帷帐围宫，设置旌旗以象宫门。
English: If you stop at a dangerous obstacle, use the car to form a circle around the elephant palace, use the relatively raised car frame to resemble the palace gate, build an earthen altar, and build a low wall to resemble the elephant palace, erect a double gate to resemble the palace gate, enclose the palace with curtains, and set up a banner to resemble the palace gate.

古文：无宫，则共人门。
现代文：不设宫，就选择人站立两边以象门。
English: If there is no palace, he chooses people to stand on both sides of the elephant gate.

古文：凡舍事，则掌之。
现代文：凡有关宫舍的事都负责掌管。
English: He is in charge of everything related to the palace.

古文：幕人掌帷、幕、幄、帟、绶之事。
现代文：幕人掌管有关帷、幕、幄、帘和绶带的事。
English: The curtain maker is in charge of the curtain, the screen, the curtain, the curtain and the ribbon.

古文：凡朝觐、会同、军旅、田役、祭祀，共其帷、幕、幄、帟、绶。
现代文：凡有诸侯朝见王、王出外与诸侯会同、征伐、田猎、祭祀等事，供给所需的帷、幕、幄、帘和绶带。
English: Whenever the princes came to see the king, or the king went abroad to meet with princes, to go to war, to hunt, or to perform religious rites, they would provide the necessary drapery, curtain, screen, curtain, and ribbon.

古文：大丧，共帷、幕、帟、绶。
现代文：有大丧，供给所需的帷、幕、帘和绶带。
English: There was a great mourning, and the required hangings, curtains, screens, and cords were provided.

古文：三公及卿、大夫之丧，共其帟。
现代文：有三公及卿大夫的丧事，供给所需的帘。
English: For the funeral of the three princes and the noble doctor, the curtain needed to be provided.

