古文：穆子客僧重公孙绍魏市人魏彦渊陆乂王元景李庶邢子才卢询祖北海王晞李騊駼卢思道石动筒徐之才萧彪
现代文：穆子客僧重公孙绍魏市人魏彦渊陆乂王元景李庶邢子才卢询祖北海王晞李騊駼卢思道石动筒徐之才萧彪
English: Mu Zi Hakka Monk Chong Gong Sun Shaowi City People Wei Yan Yuan Lu Yao Wang Yuan Jing Li Zhe Zi Cai Lu Enquirer Zi Bei Hai Wang Yao Li Zhe Lu Si Dao Stone Moving Cylinder Xu Zi Cai Xiao Biao

古文：穆子客
现代文：穆子客
English: Muziker

古文：魏使穆子客聘梁，主客范胥谓之曰：卿名子客，思归之传，一何太速。
现代文：北魏派穆子客出使南梁，南梁负责接待工作的官员范胥对穆子客说：您的名字叫子客，想回转的想法，为何产生的太快了？
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent Mucik to Nanliang, and the official in charge of the reception work of Nanliang, Fan Yu, said to Mucik: Your name is Mucik, why did the idea of turning back arise too quickly?

古文：客曰：吾名子客，所以将命四方。礼成告返，那得言速。
现代文：穆子客回答说：我的名字叫子客，所以才奉命出使四方，待完成访问工作后才能返回，哪能说想回转的想法产生得太快呢。
English: Mu Zikai replied: My name is Mu Zikai, that's why I was ordered to go to the four directions, and I can't return until the visit is completed. How can I say that the idea of returning came about too quickly?

古文：僧重公
现代文：僧重公
English: Monk Shigong

古文：魏使主客郎李恕聘梁，沙门重公接恕曰：向来全无菹酢膎乎！
现代文：北魏派主客郎李恕出使南梁，僧人重公接待他时说：我们寺院里从来都没有肉酱、酒和膎啊！
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent the chief guest, Li Shou, to send a delegation to Nanliang. When the monk, Chonggong, received him, he said: "We have never had meat sauce, wine, and candy in our temple!

古文：恕父名谐，以为犯讳，曰：短发稀疏。
现代文：李恕的父亲名谐，以为犯讳，因此回骂了一句：你个短发粗疏的和尚。
English: Li Shou's father thought he was being cheeky, so he scolded him back: "You're a monk with short, coarse hair.

古文：重公曰：贫道短发是沙门种类。
现代文：僧人重公说：贫僧短发是僧门的戒规。
English: Monk Zhengrong said: "Short hair for a poor monk is a precept for monks.

古文：以君交聘二国，不辨膎谐！
现代文：你作为两国交往的使臣，竟然辩识不了膎与谐同音不同义！
English: As an envoy of the two countries, you can't even recognize the different meanings of the same sound!

古文：重公尝谒高祖，问曰：天子闻在外有四声，何者为是？
现代文：僧人重公有一次拜见梁高祖，高祖问：听说天子在外面有四种名声，哪种名声是应该有的？
English: The monk Chonggong once visited Liang Gaozu. Gaozu asked: I have heard that the Son of Heaven has four kinds of fame outside, which kind of fame should he have?

古文：重公应声答曰：天保寺刹中，出逢刘孝绰，说以为能。
现代文：僧人重公应声回答说：天宝寺中住个刘孝绰，说是胜任。
English: Monk Chonggong replied in response: "Liu Xiaoqiao, a resident of Tianbao Temple, is competent.

古文：绰曰：何如道天子万福。
现代文：刘孝绰得知重公这样回答时说：还不如说声天子多福！
English: When Liu Xiaoqiao learned of Chonggong's answer, he said, "It would be better to say, 'God bless you!'"

古文：孙绍
现代文：孙绍
English: Sun Shaow

古文：后魏孙绍历职内外，垂老始拜太府少卿。
现代文：后魏孙绍历任宫内外各种不重要的职务，到了垂暮的老年才官拜太府少卿。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, Sun Shao successively held various unimportant positions inside and outside the palace, and at the end of his life, he was promoted to Taifu Shaoqing.

古文：谢日，灵太后曰：公年似太老。
现代文：谢恩那天，灵太后说：你的年岁似乎太老一些了。
English: On the day of Shane's death, the Reverend Mother said, "Your age seems to be too old."

古文：绍重拜曰：臣年虽老，臣卿太少。
现代文：孙绍再次拜谢回答说：我的年龄虽然老了，但是我任少卿一职太少了。
English: Sun Shao thanked him again and replied, "Although I am old, I am too young to be appointed to the post of Shaoqing.

古文：后大笑曰：是将正卿？
现代文：太后听了大笑，说：是啊！正要任命你为正卿的！
English: The empress dowager heard the loud laughter and said, "Yes! I was just about to appoint you to the position of chancellor!"

古文：魏市人
现代文：魏市人
English: People from Wei

古文：后魏孝文帝时，诸王及贵臣多服石药，皆称石发。
现代文：后魏孝文帝时，皇室各个王子和达官贵戚很多人都服用铅汞等矿石丹药，而且都自称服用后身体发热。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen in the late Wei Dynasty, many princes and high-ranking officials of the imperial family took lead, mercury and other ores, and they all claimed to have fever after taking them.

古文：乃有热者，非富贵者，亦云服石发热，时人多嫌其诈作富贵体。
现代文：也有自称服用石药发热的人并不富贵，当时有许多人厌恶这些人谎称自己是富贵身子。
English: There were also people who said they were not rich who took stone medicine for fever. At that time, many people were disgusted with these people who falsely claimed to be rich.

古文：有一人，于市门前卧，宛转称热，因众人竞看。
现代文：一次，有一个人躺在集市门前边的大道上，身体翻来覆去不停地转动，自称是服用石药后发热了，吸引许多人争相来看。
English: On one occasion, a man was lying on the road in front of the market gate, his body tossing and turning constantly, claiming to be feverish after taking stone medicine, attracting many people to come and see.

古文：同伴怪之，报曰：我石发。
现代文：跟他同来的伙伴怪他假作富贵人，告诉他说：我也身上发热了。
English: His companion, who had come with him, accused him of pretending to be a rich man, and said to him, "I am also feverish."

古文：同伴人曰：君何时服石？
现代文：这个人问：你什么时候服用的石药？
English: This person asked: When did you take the stone medicine?

古文：今得石发。曰：我昨在市得米。米中有石，食之乃今发。
现代文：同伴回答说：我昨天在市上买的米，米里头有石啊，吃了后现在就发热了。
English: His companion replied, "The rice I bought in the market yesterday has stones in it. After eating it, I feel hot.

古文：众人大笑。
现代文：围观的人听了后，哄然大笑。
English: Onlookers roared with laughter.

古文：自后少有人称患石发者。
现代文：从此，很少有人声称自己服石药发热了。
English: Since then, very few people have claimed that they had a fever after taking stone medicine.

古文：魏彦渊
现代文：魏彦渊
English: Wei Yanyuan

古文：北齐崔昂尝宴筵招朝彦。
现代文：北齐崔昂，有一次设宴款待朝中有名望才干的人士。
English: North Qi Cui An once held a banquet to entertain famous and talented people from the Middle Kingdom.

古文：酒酣后，人多散走。
现代文：酒喝过高潮后，参加宴会的人有许多人偷偷溜走了。
English: After the climax of drinking, many people who attended the banquet sneaked away.

古文：即令著作郎钜鹿魏彦渊追之。
现代文：崔昂发现后，立即让著作郎钜鹿人魏彦渊将他们追回来。
English: After Cui Ang found out, he immediately asked Wei Yan Yuan, the author of the book, to chase them back.

古文：彦渊左手执中参军周子渊，渊以知名，右手执御史郑守信，来谘昂曰：彦渊后周入郑，执讯获丑。
现代文：魏彦渊左手抓着中参军周子渊，周子渊以面貌丑陋而名闻朝野，右手抓着御史郑守信，回到宴席上征询崔昂说：我彦渊跑这一趟，抓回来了周参军、郑御史，执讯获丑怎么样？
English: Wei Yan Yuan clutched Zhou Ziyuan, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, in his left hand. Zhou Ziyuan was famous for his ugly appearance. In his right hand, he clutched Zheng Shouxin, a military historian. He returned to the banquet to consult Cui Ang and said, "I Yan Yuan ran this trip and brought back Zhou Ziyuan and Zheng Shouxin. How was it to receive the ugly news?"

古文：济州长史李翥尝为主人，朝士咸集，幽州长史陆仁惠不来，翥甚衔之。
现代文：济州长史李翥一次以主人的身份设宴请客，朝中的官员都聚在他家，只有幽州长史陆仁惠没有来赴宴，李翥记恨在心。
English: The governor of Ji Province, Shi Li Rong, once held a banquet as the host, and officials from the central government and the government gathered at his house. Only the governor of Yu Province, Shi Lu Ren Hui, did not come to the banquet, and Li Rong held a grudge.

古文：彦渊曰：一目之罗，岂能获鸟。
现代文：魏彦渊说：一个眼的罗网，怎么能捕捉到鸟呢？
English: Wei Yanyuan said, "How can a bird be caught by a net with only one eye?"

古文：翥眇一目，陆号角鸱。
现代文：原来，济州长史李翥瞎了一只眼睛，幽州长史陆仁惠号角鸱。
English: It turned out that the governor of Jeju Province, Shi Liwei, was blind in one eye, and the governor of Yu Province, Shi Lu Renhui, was deaf in one ear.

古文：又崔儦谓彦渊曰：我拙于书，不能 儦 字使好。
现代文：所以，魏彦渊戏谑地说：一目之罗，岂能获鸟！还有一次，崔儦对魏彦渊说：我不擅长书法，写不好这个 儦 字，你看怎么写好？
English: Therefore, Wei Yanyuan jokingly said, "If you can't catch a bird at a glance, you can't catch a bird!" Another time, Cui Yao said to Wei Yanyuan, "I'm not good at calligraphy, I can't write this  character well, how can you write it well?"

古文：彦渊曰：正可长牵人脚，斜飘鹿尾，即好。
现代文：魏彦渊说：正应当拉长人脚，斜飘鹿尾就可以写好这个 儦 字了。
English: Wei Yanyuan said: It is time to lengthen the human foot, so that the  character can be written well.

古文：彦渊，司农卿李昌之子。
现代文：魏彦渊，是司农卿李昌的儿子。
English: Wei Yan Yuan is the son of the Secretary of Agriculture Li Chang Yu.

古文：陆乂
现代文：陆乂
English: Land reclamation

古文：北齐散骑常侍河南陆乂，黄门郎卯之子。
现代文：北齐陆义，河南人，官任散骑常侍，是黄门郎陆卯的儿子。
English: Beiqi Lu Yi, from Henan Province, was a government official and a knight errant. He was the son of Huangmen Lang Lu Wu.

古文：卯字云驹，而乂患风，多所遗志。尝与人言：马曰云驹。
现代文：陆卯，字云驹。陆卯患有疯病，好健忘，一次跟人说：马叫云驹。
English: Lu Wu, the character Yun Qi. Lu Wu suffers from a mental illness and is forgetful. He once told someone: "The horse is called Yun Qi."

古文：有刘某者常带神符，渡漳水致失。
现代文：有个姓刘的人，一次带着神符过漳河时丢失了神符。
English: A man surnamed Liu once lost a talisman when he was carrying it across the Li River.

古文：乂笑曰：刘君渡水失神符。
现代文：陆义笑着对这个人说：刘君过河看了神符。
English: Lu Yi said to this person with a smile: Liu Jun crossed the river and saw the divine sign.

古文：其人答曰：陆乂名马作云驹。
现代文：这个人回答说：陆义名字叫马充当了云驹！
English: The man replied, "The horse with the name Lu Yi serves as a cloud!

古文：王元景
现代文：王元景
English: Wang Yuanjing

古文：北齐王元景为尚书。
现代文：北齐的王元景任尚书。
English: Wang Yuanjing of Northern Qi is still alive.

古文：性虽懦缓，而每事机捷。
现代文：他为人虽然怯懦软弱，但是遇事的反映却特别机智敏捷。
English: Although he is a cowardly and weak person, his reaction to the situation is particularly quick-witted.

古文：有奴名典琴尝旦起，令索食，谓之解斋。
现代文：王元景家中有个使唤丫环叫典琴，一天早晨起来，王元景让典琴准备早餐，说：今天早晨解除斋戒了。
English: Wang Yuanjing's family had a servant maiden called Dingqin. One morning, Wang Yuanjing asked Dingqin to prepare breakfast and said: "This morning, I have broken my fast."

古文：奴曰：公不作斋，何故尝云解斋。
现代文：典琴说：老爷没有戒斋，为什么常常说解除斋戒呢？
English: Dianqin said, "My lord did not fast, so why do you often say that he has broken his fast?

古文：元景徐谓奴曰：我不作斋，不得为解斋。
现代文：王元景语调缓慢地对典琴说：老爷没有斋戒，不得说解除斋戒。
English: Wang Yuanjing said to Dianqin in a slow tone: "My lord has not fasted, he cannot say that he has broken his fast.

古文：汝作字典琴，何处有琴可典？
现代文：你起名叫典琴，在那里有琴可以典卖呀！
English: You name it, there's a qin for sale!

古文：李庶
现代文：李庶
English: Li Zhaozhou

古文：世呼病瘦为崔家疾。
现代文：世人称身体瘦弱这种病是崔家世纪相传的遗传病。
English: This disease, which the world calls emaciation, is a genetic disease that has been passed down in the Cui family for centuries.

古文：北齐李庶无须，时人呼为天阉。
现代文：北齐的李庶不长胡须，当时人称他是天生的阉人。
English: At that time, it was said that he was a natural eunuch.

古文：崔谌调之曰：教弟种须法。
现代文：崔谌调笑李庶说：教给老弟一个种须的方法。
English: "Teach your brother how to grow a mustache," Cui Yao said, making fun of Li Zhe.

古文：以锥锥遍刺作孔，插以马尾。
现代文：用锥子在你的脸上到处都刺上孔，再在孔上插入马尾，既可。
English: Use a skewer to poke holes all over your face, and then insert a ponytail into the hole.

古文：庶曰：持此还施贵族。
现代文：李庶说：这种方法还是先在您家试用吧。
English: Li Shou said, "You should try this method at home first."

古文：艺眉有验，然后树须。
现代文：你们家用这种方法种眉毛成功了，然后我再种胡须。
English: You have successfully grown eyebrows using this method, and then I will grow a beard.

古文：崔氏世有恶疾，故庶以此嘲之。
现代文：崔谌家族世代相传，都患有眉发自行脱落的麻风病。因此，李庶这样嘲弄崔谌。
English: For generations, members of the Cui family have suffered from leprosy, which causes the eyebrows to fall out on their own. Therefore, Li Shuxiong mocked Cui this way.

古文：俗呼滹沱河为崔氏墓田。
现代文：民间称为滹沱河的地方，就是崔家的墓地滹沱河，即呼秃河的意思。
English: The place that is popularly known as Shaohe is the cemetery of the Cui family, Shaohe, which means Houzhang River.

古文：邢子才
现代文：邢子才
English: 子才

古文：北齐中书侍郎河东裴袭字敬宪，患耳。
现代文：北齐中书侍郎裴袭，字敬宪，河东人氏，患有耳聋症。
English: Beiqi Middle School's librarian Pei Wei, surnamed Jing Xian, from Hedong, suffers from deafness.

古文：新构山池，与宾客宴集。
现代文：裴袭新建造一座山塘，在这里宴请宾客。
English: Pei built a new mountain pond and held a banquet for the guests.

古文：谓河间邢子才曰：山池始就，愿为一名。
现代文：宴席上，裴袭对河间人邢子才说：这座山刚刚建成，请您给起个名字好吗？
English: At the banquet, Pei Wei said to Hanzi, a native of Kawama, "This mountain has just been built. Could you please give it a name?"

古文：子才曰：海中有蓬莱山，仙人之所居。
现代文：邢子才说：东海中有座蓬莱山，传说有仙人在那里居住。
English: "There is a mountain called Penglai in the East China Sea, and it is said that there are immortals living there.

古文：宜名蓬莱。
现代文：我看这座山塘就叫蓬莱吧。
English: I think this mountain pond is called Penglai.

古文：蓬莱、裴聋也。故以戏之。
现代文：蓬莱，谐音裴聋，邢子才是在戏弄裴袭呢。
English: Penglai, homophonic Pei deafness, the cripple is teasing Pei attack.

古文：敬宪初不悟，于后始觉。忻然谓子才曰：长忌及户，高则无害。
现代文：裴袭听了起初并没有什么感觉，待到醒悟后，微笑着对邢子才说：高个子的人忌讳头碰门，你将门修得高点就行了嘛！
English: At first, Pei Hei didn't feel anything when he heard this. After he came to his senses, he smiled at the cripple and said, "Tall people should not touch the door with their heads. All you have to do is build the door higher!"

古文：公但大语，聋亦何嫌。
现代文：你尽管大点声音说话，耳聋又有什么妨碍呢！
English: Speak louder if you must, deafness is no hindrance!

古文：卢询祖
现代文：卢询祖
English: Lu Xunzu

古文：齐主客郎顿丘李恕身短而袍长，卢询祖腰麄而带急。
现代文：北齐主客郎李恕，顿丘人氏。李恕生得身材短小却喜欢穿过长的袍服，卢询祖腰身粗大偏爱将腰带系得紧紧的。
English: North Qi's main guest, Li Shou, is from Dongqiu. Li Shou was born with a short stature but likes to wear long robes. Lu Xunzu, with a thick waist, prefers to tie his belt tightly.

古文：恕曰：卢郎腰麄带难匝。
现代文：李恕说：老卢这个人，腰长得五大三粗却系个紧身腰带，多能匝啊！
English: Li Shou said, "Old Lu is a man with a thick waist, but he wears a tight belt. How can you blame him!

古文：答曰：丈人身短袍易长。
现代文：询祖反唇相讥道：李老身才生小袍服应当长一些才好哇！
English: The inquiring ancestor retorted with a sneer: Li Laobin only got into the habit of wearing robes when he was born, so it would be nice if they were a little longer!

古文：恕又谓询祖曰：卢郎聪明必不寿。
现代文：李恕对卢询祖说：老卢你人虽然聪明却不一定长寿哇！
English: Li Shou said to Lu Xunzu: Old Lu, although you are smart, you may not live long. Wow!

古文：答曰：见丈人苍苍在鬓，差以自安。
现代文：卢询祖回敬道：看你老两宾苍白，但是你很难自保平安那！
English: Lu Xunzu replied respectfully, "Look, your old two guests are pale, but it's hard for you to keep yourself safe!"

古文：北海王晞
现代文：北海王晞
English: North Sea Kingfisher

古文：齐北海王晞字叔朗，为大丞相府司马。
现代文：北齐王晞，字叔朗，北海人官任大丞相府司马。
English: Northern Qi Wang Qian, also known as Shu Lang, was appointed to the post of grand secretary of the prefectural government of the North Sea.

古文：尝共相祭酒卢思道禊饮晋湖，晞赋诗曰：日暮应归去，鱼鸟见留连。
现代文：一次，王晞与丞相府祭酒卢思道一块儿在晋湖禊祭饮酒。王晞赋诗一首，其中的两句是这样的：日暮应归去，鱼鸟见留连。
English: On one occasion, Wang Xi drank alcohol together with Lu Sidao, the minister of the prime minister's office, at the Lake Jin Festival. Wang Xi wrote a poem, two lines of which are as follows: At dusk, you should return, but when you see fish and birds, you stay.

古文：时有中使召晞，驰马而去。
现代文：那天，宫中派来宦官召见王晞，王晞才骑马返回。
English: On that day, eunuchs were sent from the palace to summon Wang Xuan. Wang Xuan only returned on horseback.

古文：明旦，思道问晞：昨被召以朱颜，得无以鱼鸟致责。
现代文：第二天早朝，卢思道问王晞：昨天被皇上召见，有没有因为留连鱼鸟而受到责备？
English: In the early morning of the next day, Lu Sidao asked Wang Yao: You were summoned by the emperor yesterday. Were you reprimanded for leaving the fish and birds behind?

古文：晞曰：昨晚陶然，颇以酒浆被责。
现代文：王晞回答说：昨晚喝得特别高兴，很是因为喝酒被皇上责备了。
English: Wang Yao replied, "I was very happy to drink last night, because I was scolded by the emperor for drinking.

古文：卿等亦是留连之一物，何独鱼鸟而已。
现代文：祭酒等人也是我留连的东西啊！怎么单单是鱼鸟呢？
English: Sacrificial wine and the like are also things that stay with me! How can it just be fish and birds?

古文：晞好文酒，乐山水。
现代文：王晞擅长文章词赋，也喜爱饮酒，愿意在山水间寻找乐趣。
English: Wang Yao is good at writing prose, also enjoys drinking, and is willing to look for fun in the mountains and rivers.

古文：府寮呼为方外司马焉。
现代文：丞相府中的同事们，都称他为世外司马。
English: Colleagues at the prime minister's office all call him the world's best secretary.

古文：及昭孝立，待遇弥隆。
现代文：待到昭孝帝高演即位后，给予他的待遇更加优厚。
English: After Emperor Gao was enthroned, the treatment he received was even more generous.

古文：而晞每日自疏退，谓人曰：非不爱热官，但思其烂熟耳。李騊駼
现代文：但是，王晞却自行疏懒恢退下来。对人说：我不是不爱作官，但是一想到整天就是那些事情，翻过来调过去的，一点意思也没有。李騊駼
English: However, Wang Yao reluctantly withdrew. He said to people: "I don't dislike being an official, but when I think about those things all day long, turning them upside down and pasting them, it doesn't make any sense at all. Li Yao

古文：陈使聘齐，见朝廷有赤鬣者，顾谓散骑常侍赵郡李騊駼曰：赤也何如？
现代文：陈国派使臣出齐国，看见大殿上有红胡须的人，问身边的齐国散骑常侍赵郡人李騊駼：红胡须是什么人啊？
English: Chen Guo sent an envoy out of Qi, saw a man with a red beard on the main hall, and asked the attendant of Qi, Zhao County, Li Wei: Who is the man with the red beard?

古文：騊駼曰。束带立于朝，可使与宾客言。
现代文：李騊駼回答说：扎着腰带站在大殿上，可让他跟宾客谈话。
English: Li Yao replied, "Standing on the main hall with his belt around his waist will allow him to talk to the guests."

古文：騊駼时接客。
现代文：李騊駼当时被安排接待客人。
English: At the time, Li Yao was assigned to receive guests.

古文：卢思道
现代文：卢思道
English: Ruth Road

古文：北齐卢思道聘陈，陈主令朝贵设酒食，与思道宴会，联句作诗。
现代文：北齐的卢思道出使南陈。南陈的国君让满朝的达官显贵跟卢思道在一起聚宴饮酒。宴席上，南陈国君提议用联句的方法作诗。
English: Lu Sidao of Northern Qi sent an envoy to Nan Chen. Nan Chen's sovereign ordered the high-ranking officials of the Manchu Dynasty to have a banquet and drink alcohol together with Lu Sidao. At the banquet, Nan Chen's sovereign proposed to write a poem in the form of a couplet.

古文：有一人先唱，方便讥刺北人云：榆生欲饱汉，草长正肥驴。
现代文：有一位南陈的大臣先念出一句，乘机讥讽北方人。这句诗是：榆生欲饱汉，草长正肥驴。
English: A minister of the Southern Chen first read out a sentence, taking the opportunity to ridicule the northerners. This poem is: "He who wants to be full of life is a man, and the grass grows is a fat donkey."

古文：为北人食榆，兼吴地无驴，故有此句。
现代文：因为北方人用榆钱、榆叶和树皮粉成末放在面里一块吃，而南方的吴池不饲养驴，因此联出这句诗。
English: Because the people in the north eat the noodles with nian money, nian leaves and tree bark powder, while the people in the south of Wuching do not keep donkeys, this poem was composed.

古文：思道援笔即续之曰：共甑分炊米，同铛各煮鱼。
现代文：卢思道听了后，提笔就联上一句诗：共甑分炊米，同铛各煮鱼。
English: After listening to Lu Si Dao, he took up his pen to write a poem: cook rice together and boil fish separately.

古文：为南人无情义，同炊异馔也，故思道有此句。
现代文：因为南方人无情无义，非常小气，在一个锅灶上做饭，却各吃各的，因此卢思道联上这句诗。
English: Because southerners are merciless, very stingy, cook on a pot stove, but each eat their own, so Lu Si Dao linked this poem.

古文：吴人甚愧之。
现代文：在坐的吴人听了这句联诗后，都很不好意思。
English: After listening to this couplet, the Wu people who were sitting there were very embarrassed.

古文：又卫尉卿京兆杜台卿，共中兵忝军清河崔儦握塑，十子成都，止赌一雉。
现代文：又有一次卫尉卿京都地区人杜台卿，跟中兵参军清河人崔儦玩掷点的赌博游戏，说好投掷十子只赌一只野鸡。
English: There was also a time when the captain of the guards, Dudai, a man from the Kyoto area, played a game of dice with Cui Yao, a soldier from Qinghe who had joined the army. They agreed to throw ten dice and bet on a pheasant.

古文：卢思道曰：翳成都，不过一雉。
现代文：卢思道在一旁说：遮住成都只需一只野鸡！
English: Lu Si Dao said on the sidelines: it only takes one pheasant to cover Chengdu!

古文：儦又谓思道曰：昨夜大雷，吾睡不觉。
现代文：崔儦有一次跟卢思道说：昨夜雷声特别大，可是我睡得死，一点也不知道。
English: Cui Yao once said to Lu Si Dao: Last night, the thunder was particularly loud, but I slept like the dead and didn't know a thing.

古文：思道曰：如此震雷，不能动蛰。
现代文：卢思道戏谑地说：这样大的雷声，也没有使你这个冬眠的虫豸苏醒！
English: Ruth said playfully: Such a loud thunder didn't wake you up, you hibernating worm!

古文：太子詹事范阳卢叔虎有子十人。大者字畜生，最有才思。
现代文：太子詹事范阳人卢叔虎有十个儿子，老大字畜生，最有才干。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Fan Yang's Lu Shuguo had ten sons, all of whom were the most talented.

古文：思道谓人曰：从叔有十子，皆不及畜生。
现代文：卢思道对人说：我堂叔有十个儿子，都赶不上畜生。
English: Lu Si said to the man, "My uncle has ten sons, but they can't keep up with the animals.

古文：叔虎、主客郎中泽之孙也。
现代文：卢叔虎，是北齐王客郎卢中泽的孙子。
English: Lu Shuguang is the grandson of the Northern Qi king Lu Zhongze.

古文：散骑常侍陇西辛德源谓思道曰：昨作羌妪诗，惟得五字云： 皂陂垂肩井。
现代文：散骑常侍陇西人辛德源对卢思道说：我昨天写一首吟诵羌族老太太的诗，琢磨了一天只写出一句来：黑色的陂巾陂在肩窝上。
English: Xin Deyuan, a westerner who often accompanies Lu Xi, said to Lu Sidao: I wrote a poem yesterday, chanting the poem of a Yao old lady. I pondered for a day to write only one sentence: A black scarf is tied on the shoulder socket.

古文：苦无其对。思道寻声曰：何不 道黄物插脑门。
现代文：卢思道接过来说：何不接下来写黄色的饰物插在脑门上。
English: Lu Si Dao took over and said, "Why don't you write a yellow ornament and put it on your forehead?"

古文：思道尝谓通直郎渤海封孝骞曰：卿既姓封，是封豕之后。
现代文：卢思道一次对通直郎渤海人封孝骞说：你既然姓封，大概是大猪的后代吧。
English: Lu Si Dao once said to Tong Naorang Bohai human Fong Xiaojun: Since your surname is Fong, you are probably a descendant of a big pig.

古文：骞曰：卿既姓卢，是卢令之裔。
现代文：封孝骞回敬道：你既然姓卢，一定是黑狗的后裔了。
English: Feng Xiaojuan replied respectfully: Since your surname is Lu, you must be a descendant of the black dog.

古文：石动筒
现代文：石动筒
English: Stone cylinder

古文：北齐高祖尝宴近臣为乐。
现代文：书北齐高祖有一次设宴招待身边亲近的臣子，在一块儿乐呵乐呵。
English: Shubei Qigao's ancestor once held a banquet to invite close courtiers to have fun together.

古文：高祖曰：我与汝等作谜，可共射之。
现代文：宴席上，高说：我给你们说个谜语，你们可以一块儿来猜。
English: At the banquet, Gao said, "I'll tell you a riddle. You can guess it together."

古文：卒律葛答。
现代文：卒律葛答，请猜吧。
English: Judge Grada, please guess.

古文：或云，是骮子箭。高祖曰：非也。
现代文：这些近臣们都没有猜中。有人说：是响箭吧。高祖说：不是。
English: None of these courtiers guessed right. Someone said, "It must be the sound of an arrow." Gaozu said, "No."

古文：石动筒曰：臣已射得。
现代文：石动筒说：我已经猜着啦！
English: The stone cylinder said: I've guessed it!

古文：高祖曰：是何物？
现代文：高祖问：是什么东西？
English: Gaozu asked, "What is it?"

古文：动筒对曰：是煎饼。
现代文：石动筒回答说：是煎饼。
English: The stone cylinder replied, "It's a pancake."

古文：高祖笑曰：动筒射着是也。
现代文：高祖笑着说：石动筒猜对啦！
English: Gaozu smiled and said, "You guessed it, the stone cylinder!"

古文：高祖又曰：汝等诸人，为我作一谜，我为汝射之。
现代文：高祖又说：你们这些人，也可以给我说一个谜语，我为你猜猜看。
English: Gaozu also said, "You people can also tell me a riddle, and I will guess it for you."

古文：诸人未作，动筒为谜。复云卒律葛答。
现代文：出席宴会的大臣们，谁也没有出谜语，只有石动筒出了一个谜语，说的也是卒律葛答。
English: None of the ministers present at the banquet came up with a riddle, only the stone cylinder came up with a riddle, which was also said by the pawn.

古文：高祖射不得，问曰：此是何物。
现代文：高祖猜不中，问：你出的迷语打一何物？
English: Gaozu couldn't figure it out and asked, "What is the meaning of the riddle you came up with?"

古文：答曰：是煎饼。
现代文：石动筒说，是煎饼。
English: It's pancakes, says the stone cylinder.

古文：高祖曰：我始作之，何因更作。
现代文：高祖说：我刚才出了一次了，你为什么还出呢？
English: Gaozu said, "I just went out once, why are you still going out?

古文：动筒曰：承大家热铛子头，更作一个。
现代文：石动筒回答说：趁大家在那烧热鏊子的时候，又烙了一张。
English: The stone cylinder replied, "I took advantage of the time when everyone was burning hot cocoons to burn another one."

古文：高祖大笑。
现代文：高祖听后高兴地笑了。
English: After listening to this, Gaozu couldn't stop laughing.

古文：高祖尝令人读《文选》。
现代文：高祖曾经让文武百官都来读《文选》。
English: Gaozu once had all the civil and military officials come to read "Wenxuan."

古文：而郭璞游仙诗，嗟叹称善。
现代文：《文选》中有一首郭璞的《游仙诗》，高祖边读边赞叹不已，连说好诗。
English: In the "Selected Works," there is a "Traveling Immortal Poem" by Guo Gan. Gao Zu was full of admiration while reading it, and even said it was a good poem.

古文：诸学士皆云：此诗极工，诚如圣旨。
现代文：在场的掌管文学撰述的官员们也都附和着说：这首诗确实好哇！对仗工稳，文词清丽，正如皇上说的那样啊！
English: The officials in charge of literary writing who were present also agreed, saying: "This poem is really good! The composition is stable and the words are beautiful, just as the emperor said!

古文：动筒即起云：此诗有何能，若令臣作，即胜伊一倍。
现代文：石动筒立即站起来说：这首诗有什么好的，值得你们称赞？
English: The stone cylinder immediately stood up and said: What is so good about this poem that it deserves your praise?

古文：高祖不悦。
现代文：如果让我作一首，一定能强过郭璞一倍。
English: Gaozu was not happy to hear this.

古文：良久语云：汝是何人，自言作诗胜郭璞一倍，岂不合死。
现代文：高祖听了后很不高兴，沉默好长时间才说：你是什么人？自我吹虚说作诗能胜过郭璞一倍。这不是应当犯了死罪吗？
English: Gaozu was very unhappy after hearing this, and he was silent for a long time before he said, "Who are you? You boast that you can write poetry twice as well as Guo Yao. Shouldn't you have committed a capital crime?"

古文：动筒即云：大家即令臣作，若不胜一倍，甘心合死。
现代文：石动筒立即回答说：皇上马上让我作一首，如果不胜过郭璞一倍，心甘情愿被处死。
English: The stone cylinder immediately replied: "The emperor immediately asked me to make a song, if it does not exceed the double of Guo Yao, I am willing to be executed."

古文：即令作之：动筒曰：郭璞《游仙诗》云： 青溪千余刃，中有一道士，臣作云 青溪二千仞，中有两道士。
现代文：高祖立即让石动筒作诗。石动筒说：郭璞游仙诗写的是： 青溪千余仞，中有一道士。 我作的诗是 青溪二千仞，中有两道士。 
English: Gao Zu immediately asked the stone cylinder to write a poem. The stone cylinder said: Guo Zhi Youxian's poem is written: Qingxi has more than a thousand rivers, among which there is a Taoist priest. My poem is Qingxi has two thousand rivers, among which there are two Taoist priests.

古文：岂不胜伊一倍。
现代文：难道不是胜过他一倍吗？
English: Is it not better to be twice as good as him?

古文：高祖始大笑。校补。又齐文宣帝曰：恕臣万死即得。
现代文：高祖这才哈哈大笑，又：北齐文宣帝说：□□□□□□□□□。
English: Gaozu just laughed out loud, and: North Qiwen Xuandi said: □□□□□□□□□□□.

古文：帝曰：好。
现代文：文宣帝说：好，请说吧。
English: Emperor Wenxuan said, "Okay, please speak."

古文：曰：臣昨落密瓮里，臣为陛下却还复上天真乎。
现代文：石动筒说：我昨天晚上作梦跟随皇上□□□□□□□□□落在一个蜜抽渣子里，我还以为皇上又上天□□□□□□□□□。文宣帝说：真的吗？
English: The stone cylinder said, "I had a dream last night that I followed the emperor and fell into a honey vat. I thought the emperor had gone to heaven." Emperor Wenzhong said, "Really?

古文：对曰：臣作夜梦随陛下行，落一厕中出来。舔之。
现代文：石动筒说：我昨天晚上作梦跟随皇上走，落在一个厕所中。出来后，□□□□用舌头舔它。
English: The stone cylinder said, "I had a dream last night that I was walking with the emperor, and I fell into a toilet. When I came out, I licked it with my tongue."

古文：帝大怒，付所司杀却。
现代文：文宣帝大发雷霆，下命将石动筒交付主管的官吏处死。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was furious and ordered the official who delivered the stone cylinder to the supervisor to be put to death.

古文：曰：臣请一言而死。
现代文：石动筒说：我请求皇上允许我再说一句话，死而无憾。
English: The stone cylinder said, "I ask the emperor's permission to say one more sentence. I have no regrets."

古文：帝曰。
现代文：文宣帝说：好吧。
English: Emperor Wenxuan said, "All right.

古文：陛下得臣头极无用，臣失头。
现代文：石动筒说：皇上斩下我的头一点用处也没有，我没有了脑袋□□□。
English: The stone cylinder said, "It was no use at all for the emperor to cut off my head, I have no head left."

古文：笑而舍之。
现代文：文宣帝笑了，不斩石动筒的头了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong laughed and let Anlu Mountain go.

古文：高斋会，大德法师开讲。
现代文：高祖曾经到过讲授佛经的讲堂，由大德法师主讲。
English: Gaozu once went to a lecture hall where Buddhist sutras were being taught, and the main speaker was Daede Mage.

古文：道俗有疑，滞者，即论难议。
现代文：僧人和世俗人里有人听不太懂，或有些地方不好理解。
English: Among both monks and laypeople, there are people who do not understand well, or do not understand well in some areas.

古文：援引大义，说法门，言议幽深，皆在雅正。
现代文：皇上让大家在一起议论一下，一些人旁征博引一些大道理，讲述进入佛门的途径，讲的都很高雅正确。
English: The emperor asked everyone to discuss it together. Some people read books, quoted some great principles, and talked about the way to enter the Buddhist gate. The talk was very elegant and correct.

古文：动筒最后论议，谓法师曰：且问法师一个小议，佛常骑何物。
现代文：石动筒最后一个发言，问大德法师：我暂且请教大德法师一个小问题，佛祖经常骑乘什么？
English: At the end of the speech, the stone cylinder asked the Great German Magician: I would like to ask the Great German Magician a small question. What did the Buddha often ride?

古文：法师答曰：或坐干叶莲花，或乘六牙白象。
现代文：大德法师回答说：有时坐千叶莲花，有时骑六牙白象。
English: Daede replied, "Sometimes I ride a Chiba lotus, sometimes I ride a six-toothed white elephant."

古文：动筒云：法师今不读经，不知佛所乘骑物。
现代文：石动筒说：大德法师你现在不阅读经书，不知道佛祖乘骑的是什么。
English: The stone cylinder said, "Great Dharma Master, you don't read the scriptures now, you don't know what the Buddha is riding on."

古文：师即问云：檀越读经，佛骑何物。
现代文：大德法师问：施主读看经书，你说佛祖骑的是什么？
English: Grandmaster Daede asked, "The benefactor is reading the scripture. What do you think the Buddha is riding?

古文：答曰：骑牛。
现代文：石动筒回答说：佛祖骑的是牛啊。
English: The stone cylinder replied, "Buddha is riding a cow."

古文：法师曰：何以知。
现代文：大德法师问：怎么知道是牛呢？
English: Dade asked, "How do you know it's a cow?"

古文：经云，世尊甚奇特，非骑牛。
现代文：石动筒说：经书上说，世人敬仰的佛祖特别奇特，不是骑牛吗？
English: The stone cylinder said, "According to the scriptures, the world's revered Buddha had a very peculiar carriage. Wasn't it a bull?

古文：座皆大笑。
现代文：在场的僧人和俗人，听了都哈哈大笑。
English: The monks and laymen present burst into laughter.

古文：又谓法师曰：法师既不知佛常骑牛，今更问法师一种法义。
现代文：石动筒又对大德法师说：法师既然不知道佛祖经常骑牛，现在我再问您一个佛经上的问题。
English: The stone cylinder also said to Daede Mage, "Since Mage doesn't know that Buddha often rode a bull, now I'll ask you a question from the Buddhist scriptures.

古文：比来每经之上皆云价值百千两金，未知百千两金总有几斤。
现代文：近来，我读经书，常常遇到上面动辄说价值百千两黄金。我不知道百千两黄金总共有多少斤？
English: Recently, when I read the Bible, I often come across passages that say the value of one hundred thousand two gold. I don't know how many kilograms of one hundred thousand two gold there are in total.

古文：遂无以对。□尝作内道场，时有法师先立无一无二无是无非义。
现代文：高祖登上高位坐在上面讲话，还让大家研讨无一无二无是无非这一旧题。
English: Gaozhu ascended to a high position, sat on it and gave a speech, and also let everyone discuss the old topic of nothing but nothing.

古文：高□升高坐讲，还令立旧义，当呼儒生学士，大德名僧。义理百瑞，无能得者。
现代文：当场让有学问的人士和在国学学习的学士，以及大德法师，谈这个议题说法各式各样，但是没有一个人能谈得特别透彻，让人信服。
English: On the spot, let the learned people and the bachelor of Chinese studies, as well as the great German master, talk about this issue in a variety of ways, but no one can talk very thoroughly and convincingly.

古文：动筒即讲难此僧必令结舌。
现代文：石动筒当即说我要讲，一定能让大德法师没话可讲。
English: The stone cylinder immediately said, "I want to speak," which must have left the great German wizard speechless.

古文：高祖大□□□高坐褰衣阔立，问僧：看弟子有几个脚。
现代文：高祖大□□□高坐，石动筒手提衣襟远远地站在那儿，问大德法师：你看我有几只脚？
English: Gao Zu sat up high and stood far away with a stone cylinder handbag on his lap. He asked Daede Mage, "Do you see how many feet I have?

古文：僧曰：两脚。
现代文：大德法师说：你有两只脚。
English: Daede replied, "Two feet."

古文：又翘一脚向后。一脚独立。问僧。更看弟子有几个脚。
现代文：石动筒这次翘起一只脚放在另一只脚的后面，一只脚站立着问大德法师：再看看我有几只脚？
English: This time, the stone cylinder cocked up one foot and placed it behind the other foot. It stood on one foot and asked Daede Mage, "Let's see how many feet I have."

古文：僧曰：两脚。
现代文：大德法师回答说：两只脚。
English: Daede replied, "Two feet."

古文：动筒云：向有两脚，今有一脚，若为能无一无二。
现代文：石动筒说：我刚才有两只脚，现在只有一只脚了。若不然怎么能无一无二呢。
English: "I used to have two feet, but now I only have one," said the stone cylinder. "Otherwise, how can there be only one?"

古文：僧答云：若其二是直，不应有一脚。
现代文：大德法师：如果有两只脚是真实的，不应该有一只脚。
English: Darth Vader: If two feet are real, there shouldn't be one foot.

古文：脚既得有一，明二即非直。
现代文：脚既然只有一只，那么，眼睛看到的两只脚就不是真实的。
English: Since there is only one foot, the two feet seen by the eye are not real.

古文：动□□以僧义不穷，无难得之理者。乃谓僧曰：向者剧问法师，未是好义。
现代文：石动筒□□认为大德法师这样翻过来调过去的诡辩没有终极的时候，不能找到难住他的道理，于是对大德法师说：刚才我伧促地向法师提出的，不是个好议题。
English: The stone cylinder thought that there was no end to Daede Mage's sophistry of reversing and changing the past, and could not find a reason to stop him, so it said to Daede Mage: Just now, what I hurriedly proposed to the mage is not a good issue.

古文：法师师云： 无一无二，无是无非。
现代文：法师说无一无二，无是无非。
English: The master said that nothing is nothing, and nothing is nothing but.

古文：今问法师，此义不得不答。
现代文：现在问法师一个问题，不行不回答。
English: Now ask the mage a question, do not answer.

古文：弟子问天无二日，上无二王。
现代文：我请问大德法师，天上没有两个太阳，朝中没有两个皇上。现在，皇上一个人，驾御统治普天下。
English: I would like to ask the Great German Mage, there are not two suns in the sky, there are not two emperors in the morning. Now, there is only one emperor, who reigns over the whole world.

古文：今者天子一人，临御四海，法师岂更得云无一？
现代文：大德法师难道您还能说无一吗？易卜有乾卦、坤卦，天上有日有月。
English: Daede Mage, can you still say that there is only one thing? Ibu has Qian Gua and Kun Gua, and there is a sun and a moon in the sky.

古文：易有乾坤，天有日月，星辰配于天子，即是二人。
现代文：将星辰伴着天子，就是二人。
English: The stars are accompanied by the Son of God, that is, by two people.

古文：法师岂更得云无二？
现代文：法师您难道还能说无二吗？
English: Master, can you really say that there is no other way?

古文：今者帝临广德，无幽不烛，昆虫草木，皆得其生。
现代文：现在，皇上广施恩德，没有黑暗的地方不能照亮的。
English: Now, Emperor Guangshi, there is no dark place that cannot be illuminated.

古文：法师岂更得无是？今四海为家，万方归顺，唯有宇文黑獭，独阻皇风。
现代文：各种生物、草木，都在皇上的恩泽下生存着，法师您难道还能说无是？现在普天下都是我大齐的疆土，各个小国都归顺称臣，只有宇文毓这只黑獭，单独跟我大齐抗衡。
English: All kinds of creatures and plants are living under the emperor's grace. Mage, can you still say nothing is right? Now the whole world is my vast territory, and all small countries have become obedient subjects. Only the black stork, Uwen Zhao, can compete with me alone.

古文：法师岂更得云无非？
现代文：法师您难道还能说无非吗？
English: Master, can you still say it's all true?

古文：于是僧默然以无应，高祖抚掌大笑。
现代文：于是，大德法师沉默不语，无话可答。高祖拍着巴掌大笑不止。
English: As a result, Daide Mage was silent and had nothing to say. Gaozu clapped his hands and laughed uncontrollably.

古文：高祖又常集儒生会讲，酧难非一。
现代文：还有一次，高祖将朝中有知识的人召集在一起开研讨会，讨论酬难非一这样一个论题。
English: On another occasion, Gaozu called together knowledgeable people in the court to hold a seminar to discuss such a topic.

古文：动筒后来谓众士曰：先生知天何姓？
现代文：石动筒等到别人讲完了他才讲。石动筒问参加研讨会的人：诸位先生们，你们知道天姓什么吗？
English: The stone cylinder waited until the others had finished before speaking. The stone cylinder asked the participants of the seminar: Gentlemen, do you know what Heaven's name is?

古文：博士天子姓高，动筒曰：天子姓高，天□必姓高。
现代文：一位博士回答说：天子姓高。石动筒说：天子姓高，天不必姓高。
English: A doctor answered, "His name is Gao." The stone cylinder said, "His name is Gao, but God doesn't have to be Gao."

古文：此乃学他蜀臣秦密，本非新义。
现代文：你这是效仿 蜀臣秦密 的论辩，原本就不是什么新货色。
English: You are imitating the argument of Shu minister Qin Min, which is nothing new.

古文：正经之上，自有天姓。
现代文：正统的经书上，记载着天姓什么。
English: In the orthodox scriptures, it is recorded what God's name is.

古文：先生可引正文，不须假讬旧事。
现代文：先生可以引正经上的说法，没有必要假借那些旧东西。
English: The teacher can make a serious statement, there is no need to borrow those old things.

古文：博士云，不知何经，得有天姓。
现代文：这位博士说：不知道什么经书上，记载着天姓什么？
English: The doctor said, "I don't know what scripture records what the name of God is."

古文：动筒云：先生全不读书，《孝经》亦似天本姓也。
现代文：石动筒说：先生您啊一点也不读书，《孝经》上已经告诉你天姓了嘛。
English: The stone cylinder said, "Sir, you don't read books at all. You've already been told the divine name in the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：先生可不见《孝经》云， 父子之道，天姓也！岂不是天姓。
现代文：先生没见到《孝经》上说： 父子之道，天姓也。 ，难道不是天姓吗？
English: Didn't the teacher see the "Filial Piety" saying, "The way of the father and the son is the same as the heavenly surname," isn't it the heavenly surname?

古文：高祖大笑。
现代文：高祖听了后，大笑不止。
English: After listening to this, Gaozu couldn't stop laughing.

古文：动筒又尝于国学中看博士论云：孔子弟子，达者七十二人。
现代文：一次，石动筒在国学里阅读那些博士们写的论文。其中，有篇论文中说： 孔子弟子，达者七十二人。
English: On one occasion, Shi Dingzhu was reading a paper written by a group of Ph.D. students in Chinese studies. One of the papers said: "There are seventy-two disciples of Confucius.

古文：动筒因问曰：达者七十二人，几人已着冠，几人未著冠。
现代文：石动筒问这位博士：孔子的弟子中贤达的有七十二人，其中有多少人已经戴冠？有多少人没有戴冠？
English: The stone cylinder asked the doctor: There are seventy-two sages among the disciples of Confucius. How many of them have been crowned? How many have not been crowned?

古文：博士曰：经传无文。
现代文：这位博士回答说经传上面没有记载。
English: The doctor replied that it was not mentioned in the hadith.

古文：动筒曰：先生读书，岂合不解。
现代文：石动筒说：先生读经传，为什么不理解呢？
English: The stone cylinder said: Sir, why don't you understand the sutras?

古文：孔子弟子，已著冠有三十人，未著冠有四十二人。
现代文：孔老夫子的七十二位贤达弟子中，已戴冠的有三十人，没戴冠的有四十二人。
English: Among the seventy-two sages disciples of Confucius, there are thirty crowned and forty-two uncrowned.

古文：博士曰：据何文以辨之。
现代文：这位博士问：你根据那篇经得到这个答案的。
English: The doctor asked, "You got that answer from that sutra?"

古文：曰：《论语》云， 冠者五六人。五六三十人也。
现代文：石动筒说：《论语》上说： 冠者五六人 ，五六三十人啊。
English: The stone cylinder said, "In the Analects, it says, 'The champions are fifty-six, fifty-six thirty.'

古文：童子六七人。六七四十二人也。
现代文：童子六七人 ，六七四十二人啊。
English: Boys, sixty-seven, sixty-seven and forty-two.

古文：岂非七十二人也。
现代文：加在一块，难道不是七十二人吗？
English: Are there not seventy-two persons in one?

古文：坐中皆大悦，博士无以复之。徐之才
现代文：在场的人听了后，都捧腹大笑。这位博士再也没话可讲了。徐之才
English: After listening, everyone present burst into laughter. The doctor had nothing more to say. Xu Zhicai

古文：齐西阳王高平徐之才博识，有口辨。
现代文：北齐西阳王属下高平县人徐之才博学多识，能言善辩。
English: Northern Qi Xiyang Wang's subordinate Gaoping County's Xu Zhiguo is a man of great learning and knowledge, and can speak well.

古文：父雄，祖成伯，并善术世传其业。
现代文：徐之才的父亲徐雄、祖父徐成伯，都擅长医术，世代相传。
English: Xu Zhicai's father, Xu Xiong, and grandfather, Xu Chengbo, were both good at medicine, which was passed down from generation to generation.

古文：纳言祖孝征戏之，呼为师公。
现代文：主管出纳王命的官员祖孝徵开玩笑地叫徐之才的父亲为师公。
English: Zu Xiaoqian, the official in charge of the treasurer Wang Ming, jokingly called Xu Zhicai's father his mentor.

古文：之才曰：即为汝师，复又汝公。
现代文：徐之才说即是你的老师，又是你的父亲。
English: Xu Zizai said that he is your teacher and your father.

古文：在三之义，顿居其两。
现代文：尹、父、师，立时就占了两项啊！
English: Yin, father, teacher, immediately accounted for two!

古文：孝征仆射莹之子。
现代文：祖孝徵，是仆射祖莹的儿子。
English: Zu Xiaozhu is the son of Zhu Ying.

古文：之才尝以剧谈调仆射魏收。
现代文：一次，徐之才用长篇宏论来戏谑仆射魏收。
English: On one occasion, Xu Zhicai used a long macro argument to play a joke on Wei Wei.

古文：收熟视之曰：面似小家方相。
现代文：魏收盯盯地看了他一会儿，说：看你这长相，活象个小户人家供奉的驱除疫鬼的方相神灵。
English: Wei Jie stared at him for a moment and said, "Look at your appearance. You look like a small household's offering to the square-faced deity to drive away the pestilence.

古文：之才答曰：若尔，便是卿之葬具。
现代文：徐之才回答说：果真如此，我便是让你死亡的恶煞。
English: Xu Zhicai replied: If this is true, then I am the evil one who let you die.

