古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕每日坐朝，欲出一言，即思此一言于百姓有利益否，所以不敢多言。 
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 我每天坐朝理政，每讲一句话，都要想想这句话是否对百姓有好处，所以我不敢多说话。 
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: I sit in the government every day, and every time I say a sentence, I have to think about whether this sentence is good for the people, so I dare not speak more.

古文：给事中兼知起居事杜正伦进曰： 君举必书，言存左史。
现代文：给事中兼起居注史官杜正伦进言道： 君主办什么事，讲什么话都要记录在起居注里。
English: Du Zhenglun, a historian who is also a member of the Standing Committee, said: What you host and what you say should be recorded in the Standing Committee.

古文：臣职当兼修起居注，不敢不尽愚直。
现代文：我的职务是兼修起居注，所以不敢不尽忠职守。
English: My job is to be a part-time student, so I dare not fail to fulfill my duties.

古文：陛下若一言乖于道理，则千载累于圣德，非止当今损于百姓，愿陛下慎之。 
现代文：陛下如果有一句话违背了常理，那么，即使在千年之后都会损害陛下的圣德，所以这不仅仅只会对当今的百姓造成损害。希望陛下慎重。 
English: Your Majesty, if there is a word that goes against common sense, then even after a thousand years, it will damage Your Majesty's sanctity, so it will not only cause damage to the people of today. I hope Your Majesty will be careful.

古文：太宗大悦，赐彩百段。
现代文：唐太宗听后非常高兴，赏赐他彩色绢帛一百段。
English: Tang Taizong was very pleased to hear this and rewarded him with a hundred pieces of colored enamel.

古文：贞观八年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 言语者，君子之枢机，谈何容易？
现代文：贞观八年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 言语是表现君子德行的关键，因此，讲话怎能草率随便呢？
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to the attendant ministers: Speech is the key to expressing the gentleman's virtue, so how can speech be hasty and casual?

古文：凡在众庶，一言不善，则人记之，成其耻累，况是万乘之主？
现代文：庶民百姓，一句话讲得不好，就会被别人记住，遭到耻笑损害，更何况是作为万乘之主的君主呢？
English: Common people, if you don't say a word well, it will be remembered by others and subject to ridicule, let alone the monarch as the Lord of Ten Thousand Buddhas and Bodies?

古文：不可出言有所乖失。
现代文：君主决不能讲出不妥当的话来。
English: The monarch must never say anything inappropriate.

古文：其所亏损至大，岂同匹夫？
现代文：这样做的损害是极大的，君主岂能和普通人相比？
English: The damage done by this is enormous. Can a monarch be compared to an ordinary person?

古文：我常以此为戒。
现代文：我常以此为戒。
English: I'm always wary of that.

古文：隋炀帝初幸甘泉宫，泉石称意，而怪无萤火，敕云： 捉取多少于宫中照夜。 
现代文：隋炀帝刚到甘泉宫的时候，那里秀丽的山水泉石让他称心如意，但他却责怪没有萤火虫，便下令说： 捕捉一些萤火虫到宫里来，以供晚上照明用。 
English: When Emperor Sui Xuan had just arrived at Ganquan Palace, the beautiful landscape and spring stones there pleased him to his heart's content, but he blamed the lack of fireflies and ordered: "Catch some fireflies and bring them to the palace for lighting at night."

古文：所司遽遣数千人采拾，送五百舆于宫侧，小事尚尔，况其大乎？ 
现代文：于是，主管部门马上派几千人去捕捉，后来从各地送来五百车萤火虫到宫中。小事尚且如此，更何况大事？ 
English: As a result, the competent authorities immediately sent several thousand people to catch them, and later sent five hundred carloads of fireflies from all over the country to the palace.

古文：魏征对曰： 人君居四海之尊，若有亏失，古人以为如日月之蚀，人皆见之，实如陛下所戒慎。 
现代文：魏徵回答说： 人君位居四海之尊的高位，行为如果有所亏失，古人认为如同日食和月食那样，人人都能看见。陛下的确应该有所警戒啊。 
English: Wei Zheng replied, "People hold you in high esteem in the four seas. If your behavior is lacking, the ancients believed that everyone can see it, just like the solar and lunar eclipses. Your majesty should really be on the alert."

古文：贞观十六年，太宗每与公卿言及古道，必诘难往复。
现代文：贞观十六年，唐太宗每次和各位公卿大臣谈到古代的治国之道，必然要反复责备辩论。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, every time Tang Taizong talked to the nobles and ministers about the ancient way of governing the country, he inevitably had to repeatedly reproach and debate.

古文：散骑常侍刘洎上书谏曰： 帝王之与凡庶，圣哲之与庸愚，上下相悬，拟伦斯绝。
现代文：散骑常侍刘洎也上书发表见解，他说： 帝王和平民，圣哲和凡夫，一上一下，如有天壤之别，不可相提并论。
English: Liu Wei, the imperial equerry, also wrote a letter to express his views. He said: Emperors and commoners, sages and ordinary people, one above the other, if there is a world of difference, they cannot be compared.

古文：是知以至愚而对至圣，以极卑而对极尊，徒思自强，不可得也。
现代文：因此，我们可以得知极其愚昧的人想要成为圣哲，极其卑下的人想要成为至尊之人，都是不可能的。
English: Therefore, we can know that it is impossible for a very ignorant person to become a saint, and for a very humble person to become a supreme person.

古文：陛下降恩旨，假慈颜，凝旒以听其言，虚襟以纳其说，犹恐群下未敢对扬，况动神机，纵天辩，饰辞以折其理，援古以排其议，欲令凡庶何阶应答？
现代文：陛下降下圣旨，大发慈悲，虚心听取臣下的意见，但还是担心臣下不敢直言，更何况陛下要求臣下谈论天人之际，旁征博引，还要文辞华丽，这叫一般的凡夫俗子如何应对呢？
English: His majesty decreed the holy will, showed great mercy, and humbly listened to the opinions of his subjects, but he was still worried that his subjects would not dare to speak out, not to mention that when his majesty asked his subjects to talk about heavenly beings, he also asked them to quote from books and to write in a magnificent style. How should the average man and woman respond to this?

古文：臣闻皇天以无言为贵，圣人以不言为德，老子称 大辩若讷 ，庄生称 至道无文 ，此皆不欲烦也。
现代文：臣听说苍天把不说话看做尊贵，圣人把不说话看做美德。老子认为 真正善辩的人像是言语迟钝一样 ，庄子认为 大道不须用文采修饰 。
English: The minister heard that heaven regards not speaking as noble, and the sage regards not speaking as a virtue. Lao Tzu believed that a truly eloquent person is like a speech-impaired person, and Zhuang Zi believed that the road does not need to be decorated with literature.

古文：是以齐侯读书，轮扁窃议，汉皇慕古，长孺陈讥，此亦不欲劳也。
现代文：这都是不希望多说话的意思。所以齐桓公读书，轮扁私下议论，认为徒劳无用；汉武帝仰慕古风尊崇儒学，汲黯讥讽说这是外表施行仁义而内心欲望过多；这是不希望他们耗费精神。
English: All this meant that they did not want to talk too much. Therefore, Qi Huan Gong read books, and Luan Bian and others talked in private, thinking that it was futile and useless; Emperor Hanwu admired the ancient style and revered Confucianism, and jokingly said that this was the appearance of carrying out benevolence and righteousness, but the inner desire was too much; this was because they did not want to consume their spirit.

古文：且多记则损心，多语则损气，心气内损，形神外劳，初虽不觉，后必为累。
现代文：而且多记事就会损伤心思，多说话就会损伤元气。在内损伤心思、元气，在外损伤形体、精神，即使起初察觉不到，将来一定会受连累。
English: Moreover, if you remember more things, it will damage your mind, and if you talk more, it will damage your vitality. If you damage your mind and vitality internally, and damage your body and spirit externally, even if you don't notice it at first, you will definitely be affected in the future.

古文：须为社稷自爱，岂为性好自伤乎？
现代文：应该为国家爱惜自己，岂能为兴趣损伤自己呢？
English: One should cherish oneself for the sake of the country, how can one damage oneself for the sake of interest?

古文：窃以今日升平，皆陛下力行所至。
现代文：如今天下升平，都是陛下精心治理国家才实现的。
English: Today's rise and fall is the result of His Majesty's careful management of the country.

古文：欲其长久，匪由辩博，但当忘彼爱憎，慎兹取舍，每事敦朴，无非至公，若贞观之初，则可矣。
现代文：想要它长久保持下去，不是靠雄辩能办到的；只能忘掉那些爱憎之情，谨慎进行现实的取舍，做每件事都要踏踏实实，一心为公，像贞观初年一样就行了。
English: If you want to keep it for a long time, you can't do it with eloquence; you can only forget those feelings of love and hate, carefully make realistic choices, and do everything in a down-to-earth manner, with one heart for the public, just like the first year of Zhenguan.

古文：至如秦政强辩，失人心于自矜，魏文宏材，亏众望于虚说。
现代文：至于秦始皇善于强辩，由于自傲而失去人心；魏文帝富有辩才，由于言语空洞而失去声望。
English: As for Qin Shihuang, he was good at strong argumentation, but lost the hearts of the people because of his pride; Wei Wendi was rich in argumentation, but lost his reputation because of his empty words.

古文：此才辩之累，皎然可知。
现代文：这是口才和雄辩带来的拖累，结局是非常清楚的。
English: This is the drag of eloquence and eloquence, and the outcome is very clear.

古文：伏愿略兹雄辩，浩然养气，简彼缃图，淡焉怡悦，固万寿于南岳，齐百姓于东户，则天下幸甚，皇恩斯毕。 
现代文：希望陛下少和别人争论，而要修养浩然正气；少看些古代书籍，而要恬淡轻松。自己像南山一样长寿，把国家治理得像东户时代一样太平，那么天下就特别幸运，皇恩也就遍及天下了。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will not argue with others, but cultivate a magnanimous and righteous spirit; not read some ancient books, but be light and easy. If he lives as long as Nanshan, and governs the country as peacefully as the Higashido era, then the world will be particularly lucky, and the imperial grace will spread throughout the world.

古文：太宗手诏答曰： 非虑无以临下，非言无以述虑。
现代文：太宗亲笔，写诏书批复说： 不思考就不能统御臣子；不说话就不能阐述自己的想法。
English: Taizong wrote a reply to the imperial edict in his own handwriting, saying, "You can't rule your subjects without thinking; you can't explain your thoughts without speaking."

古文：比有谈论，遂至烦多。轻物骄人，恐由兹道。形神心气，非此为劳。
现代文：近来和臣子谈论过于频繁，恐怕因此产生轻视别人的骄傲态度：身体、精神、心思和元气，倒不怕劳累。
English: Lately, I've been talking to my courtiers too often, and I'm afraid that this has led to a prideful attitude that belittles others: body, spirit, mind and vitality, but not afraid of fatigue.

古文：今闻谠言，虚怀以改。 
现代文：如今听到你忠诚正直的言论，我一定虚心改正。 
English: Now that I have heard your loyal and honest remarks, I must humbly correct them.

