古文：起强圉单阏，尽著雍执徐七月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起强圉单阏，尽著雍执徐七月，凡一年有奇。
English: It's a strange time of the year, when the single cormorant starts to grow stronger and more vigorous in July.

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝上开平元年春，正月，辛巳，梁王休兵于贝州。
现代文：后梁太祖开平元年春季，正月辛巳，梁王朱全忠率兵在贝州休整。
English: In the spring of the first year of Liang Taizhu Kaiping and the first month of Xin Si, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong and his soldiers took a rest in Bozhou.

古文：淮南节度使兼侍中、东面诸道行营都统弘农郡王杨渥既得江西，骄侈益甚，谓节度判官周隐曰： 君卖人国家，何面复相见！ 
现代文：淮南节度使兼侍中、东面诸道行营都统弘农郡王杨渥夺取江西以后，骄横奢侈更加厉害，对节度判官周隐说： 您出卖我们的国家，有什么脸面再相见！ 
English: After Wang Yangwo of Hongnong County, an envoy to the Huainan Festival and an attendant in the middle and the east of all the roads, conquered Jiangxi, he became even more arrogant and extravagant. He said to the judge of the festival, Zhou Yin: You sell our country, what a face to meet again!

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是杀了周隐。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：由是将佐皆不自安。
现代文：因此属下将佐都自感不安。
English: As a result, his subordinate, General Sato, felt uneasy.

古文：黑云都指挥使吕师周与副指挥使綦章将兵屯上高，师周与湖南战，屡有功，渥忌之。
现代文：黑云都指挥使吕师周与副指挥使綦章率领军队驻扎上高。吕师周与湖南作战，屡次立功，杨渥忌恨他。
English: The commander of Heiyundu ordered Lv Shizhou and the deputy commander to order Yu Zhang to lead the army to be stationed in Shanggao. Lv Shizhou fought against Hunan and repeatedly made contributions. Yang Wo hated him.

古文：师周惧，谋于綦章曰： 马公宽厚，吾欲逃死焉，可乎？ 
现代文：吕师周害怕，与綦章商议说： 马殷宽厚，我想要死里逃奔，可以吗？ 
English: Lu Shizhou was afraid, and discussed with Zou Zhang, saying: Ma Yin is generous, I want to run away from death, is that okay?

古文：章曰： 兹事君自图之，吾舌可断，不敢泄！ 
现代文：綦章说： 这件事您自己考虑，我的舌头可以断，但决不敢泄露！ 
English: Zou Zhang said: You should think about this matter by yourself. My tongue can be broken, but I would never dare to reveal it!

古文：师周遂奔湖南，章纵其孥，使逸去。
现代文：吕师周于是投奔湖南马殷，綦章放走他的妻子儿女让他们逃走。
English: Lu Shizhou then fled to Ma'in in Hunan Province, and Xing Zhang let his wife and children go and let them escape.

古文：师周，扬州人也。
现代文：吕师周是扬州人。
English: Lu Shizhou is from Yangzhou.

古文：渥居丧，昼夜酣饮作乐，然十围之烛以击球，一烛费钱数万。
现代文：杨渥服丧期间日夜饮酒，点燃粗大围的蜡烛来击球，一支蜡烛费钱数万。
English: During Yang Wu's funeral, he drank alcohol day and night, and lit a large candle to hit the ball. A candle costs tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：或单骑出游，从者奔走道路，不知所之。
现代文：有时单独骑马外出游玩，随从的人在道路奔走，不知他到哪里去了。
English: Sometimes he would go out to ride alone, and his followers would run along the road, not knowing where he had gone.

古文：左、右牙指挥使张颢、徐温泣谏，渥怒曰： 汝谓我不才，何不杀我自为之！ 
现代文：左、右牙指挥使张颢、徐温哭着劝谏，杨渥勃然大怒说： 你们认为我没有才能，为什么不杀死我自己当节度使！ 
English: The commander of the left and right teeth persuaded Zhang Ye and Xu Wen with tears, Yang Wo said angrily: You think I have no talent, why don't you kill me as a commander!

古文：二人惧。
现代文：张颢、徐温二人非常惧怕。
English: Zhang Qian and Xu Wen are both very afraid.

古文：渥选壮士，号 东院马军 ，广署亲信为将吏；所署者恃势骄横，陵蔑勋旧。
现代文：杨渥挑选壮士，号称 东院马军 ，广泛安置亲信为将领官吏；所任命的人仗势骄傲专横，欺凌蔑视功臣旧人。
English: Yang Wo selected strong men, known as the East Yard Horse Army, and widely placed his cronies as generals and officials; the appointed people were proud and arrogant, bullying and despising the old heroes.

古文：颢、温潜谋作乱。
现代文：张颢、徐温暗中谋划发动叛乱。
English: Zhang Ye and Xu Wen secretly plotted to start a rebellion.

古文：渥父行密之世，有亲军数千，营于牙城之内，渥迁出于外，以其地为射场，颢、温由是无所惮。
现代文：杨渥父亲杨行密在世的时候，有数千名亲军驻扎在节度使所居的牙城之内，杨渥把他们迁出在外，用腾出的空地作为骑射的场地，张颢、徐温因此没有忌惮了。
English: When Yang Wou's father, Yang Xingmi, was alive, there were thousands of pro-army troops stationed in the city of Fang, where the ceremonial envoys lived. Yang Wou moved them outside and used the vacated space as a venue for horse shooting. As a result, Zhang Ye and Xu Wen had no fear.

古文：渥之镇宣州也，命指挥使硃思勍、范思从、陈璠将亲兵三千；及嗣位，召归广陵。
现代文：杨渥镇守宣州的时候，命令指挥使朱思、范思从、陈率领亲兵三千人；等到继位以后，召回广陵。
English: When Yang Wouzhen was guarding Xuanzhou, he ordered the commander to send Zhu Si, Fan Si Zong, and Chen to lead 3,000 soldiers; after the succession, Guangling was recalled.

古文：颢、温使三将从秦裴击江西，因戍洪州，诬以谋叛，命别将陈祐往诛之。
现代文：张颢、徐温让朱思等三位将领跟随秦裴攻打江西，因此防守洪州，又诬陷三将图谋叛变，派别将陈前去杀他们。
English: Zhang Ye, Xu Wen let Zhu Si and other three generals followed Qin Pei to attack Jiangxi, so they defended Hongzhou. They also framed the three generals for plotting a mutiny, and the faction sent Chen forward to kill them.

古文：祐间道兼行，六日至洪州，微服怀短兵径入秦裴帐中，裴大惊，祐告之故，乃召思勍等饮酒，祐数思勍等罪，执而斩之。
现代文：陈从偏僻小路兼程前进，六天到达洪州，穿着平民衣服、怀揣短兵器直接进入秦裴帐中。秦裴大惊，陈告诉他缘故，于是召朱思等饮酒，陈数说朱思等的罪状，把他逮捕斩首。
English: Chen took a side trip from a remote path and arrived in Hongzhou in six days, wearing civilian clothes and carrying a short weapon directly into Qin Pei's account. Qin Pei was shocked, Chen told him the reason, so he called Zhu Si and others to drink, Chen counted the charges against Zhu Si and others, arrested him and beheaded him.

古文：渥闻三将死，益忌颢、温，欲诛之。
现代文：杨渥听说三将被杀，更加忌恨张颢、徐温，想要杀死他们。
English: When Yang Wo heard that the three would be killed, he hated Zhang Ye and Xu Wen even more and wanted to kill them.

古文：丙戍，渥晨视事，颢、温帅牙兵二百，露刃直入庭中，渥曰： 尔思欲杀我邪？ 
现代文：丙戌，杨渥早晨处理事务，张颢、徐温率领二百牙兵，手执刀剑直入庭中，杨渥说： 你们真的要杀我吗？ 
English: In the morning, when Zhang Ye and Xu Wen led 200 soldiers with swords into the court, Yang Wo said, "Do you really want to kill me?

古文：对曰， 非敢然也，欲诛王左右乱政者耳！ 
现代文：张颢、徐温回答说： 不敢这样做，想要杀您左右扰乱政事的人罢了！ 
English: Zhang Ye and Xu Wen replied, "We don't dare to do that, we just want to kill those who are disrupting political affairs around you!"

古文：因数渥所亲信十馀人之罪，曳下，以铁楇击杀之，谓之 兵谏 。
现代文：于是数说杨渥的亲信十余人的罪状，拖下去，用铁打死。称之为 兵谏 。
English: As a result, more than ten of Yang Wou's close confidants were accused of crimes, dragged down, and beaten to death with an iron rod. They were called "soldiers."

古文：诸将不与之同者，颢、温稍以法诛之，于是军政悉归二人，渥不能制。
现代文：诸将当中不与张颢、徐温同心合力的，二人逐渐设法将其处死，于是军政大权全归二人，杨渥不能控制。
English: Among the generals, if they did not join forces with Zhang Ye and Xu Wen, the two of them would gradually try to have them executed. As a result, the military and political power was entirely in the hands of the two of them, and Yang Wo could not control them.

古文：初，梁王以河北诸镇皆服，唯幽、沧未下，故大举伐之，欲以坚诸镇之心，既而潞州内叛，王烧营而还，威望大沮。
现代文：当初，梁王朱全忠因河北各藩镇全都归服，只有幽州刘仁恭、沧州刘守文父子没有攻下，所以大举讨伐他们，想要藉以坚定各藩镇的归服之心。不久，潞州内部叛变，朱全忠烧毁营寨而返回，威望大受损害。
English: At first, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong, because all the hanzhongs in Hebei had surrendered, only Yuzhou Liu Renkong and Cangzhou Liu Shouwen father and son had not been captured, so he fought them on a large scale, hoping to strengthen the loyalty of the hanzhongs. Soon, there was a mutiny in Zhangzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong burned the camp and returned, and his prestige was greatly damaged.

古文：恐中外因此离心，欲速受禅以镇之。
现代文：朱全忠恐怕内外因此离心离德，想要迅速接受唐昭宣帝禅让来镇慑他们。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was afraid that both inside and outside would be alienated from virtue, and he wanted to quickly accept Tang Zhaoxuan's surrender of Zen in order to deter them.

古文：丁亥，王入馆于魏，有疾，卧府中，魏博节度使罗绍威恐王袭之，入见王曰： 今四方称兵为王患者，皆以翼戴唐室为名，王不如早灭唐以绝人望。 
现代文：丁亥，朱全忠进入魏州，患病，躺在节度使府中。魏博节度使罗绍威担心朱全忠袭击自己，进见朱全忠说： 现在四方发兵成为您祸患的人，都以拥戴唐室为名义，您不如先灭唐室来断绝众望。 
English: Ding Hai, Zhu Quanzhong entered Weizhou, fell ill, and lay in the palace during the festival. The Wei Bo festival made Rossowei worry that Zhu Quanzhong would attack him, and he went to see Zhu Quanzhong and said: Now the people who have become your misfortune are all in the name of supporting the Tang Dynasty. You might as well destroy the Tang Dynasty first to break the expectations.

古文：王虽不许而心德之，乃亟归。
现代文：朱全忠虽然没有应允，心里却感激他，于是急忙起程回归。
English: Although Zhu Quanzhong did not agree, he was grateful to him in his heart, so he hurriedly set off to return.

古文：壬寅，至大梁。
现代文：壬寅，到达大梁。
English: Jinyin, we've reached the girder.

古文：甲辰，唐昭宣帝遣御史大夫薛贻矩至大梁劳王，贻矩请以臣礼见，王揖之升阶，贻矩曰： 殿下功德在人，三灵改卜，皇帝方行舜、禹之事，臣安敢违！ 
现代文：甲辰，唐昭宣帝派遣御史大夫薛贻矩到大梁慰劳朱全忠，薛贻矩请以臣子见君之礼请见，朱全忠拱手作揖让他登阶而上，薛贻矩说： 殿下的功业德行都在人们心里，天、地、人三灵已经另选新君，皇帝正要举行舜、禹禅让事宜，我怎么敢违抗！ 
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanxuan of Tang Zhaoxuan dispatched the imperial historian Xue Yanzhong to the Great Beam to console Zhu Quanzhong. Xue Yanzhong invited Zhu Quanzhong to see him with the courtesy of a courtier. Zhu Quanzhong made a great effort to let him ascend the steps. Xue Yanzhong said: His royal highness's achievements and virtues are in people's hearts. Heaven, earth, and the three spirits of man have chosen a new prince. The emperor is about to hold a succession ceremony. How dare I disobey!

古文：乃北面拜舞于庭。
现代文：于是，面朝北在厅堂行朝拜皇帝之礼。
English: As a result, they bowed to the emperor in the hall, facing north.

古文：王侧身避之。
现代文：朱全忠侧身避开。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sidestepped.

古文：贻矩还，言于帝曰： 元帅有受禅之意矣！ 
现代文：薛贻矩回到东都洛阳，对唐昭宣帝说： 元帅有接受禅让帝位的意思了！ 
English: After returning to Luoyang, the eastern capital, Xue Yuanzhong said to Tang Zhaoxuan: "The marshal has accepted the idea of abdicating the imperial throne!"

古文：帝乃下诏，以二月禅位于梁，又遣宰相以书谕王；王辞。
现代文：唐昭宣帝于是颁下诏书，在二月让位给梁王朱全忠。又派遣宰相拿着书信告诉朱全忠；朱全忠推辞。
English: Emperor Zhaoxuan of Tang then issued an imperial edict to abdicate the throne to Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong in February. He also sent a prime minister with a letter to tell Zhu Quanzhong; Zhu Quanzhong declined.

古文：河东兵犹屯长孑，欲窥泽州。
现代文：河东李克用的军队仍然驻扎长子，想要南下窥伺泽州。
English: The army used by Li Ke in Hedong is still stationed in the eldest son, who wants to go south to spy on Zezhou.

古文：王命保平节度使康怀贞悉发京兆，同华之兵屯晋州以备之。
现代文：梁王朱全忠命令保平节度使康怀贞全部征发京兆、同华的军队驻扎晋州来防御守备。
English: Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong ordered Baoping Jiedu to make Kang Huaizhen conscript the entire capital, and Tonghua's army stationed in Jinzhou to defend it.

古文：二月，唐大臣共奏请昭宣帝逊位。
现代文：二月，唐大臣共同奏请昭宣帝退位。
English: In February, Tang ministers jointly petitioned Emperor Shō Xuan to abdicate.

古文：壬子，诏宰相帅百官笺诣元帅府劝进，王遣使却之。
现代文：壬子，诏令宰相率领百官前往元帅府劝即帝位，朱全忠派遣使者到洛阳推却不受。
English: According to the imperial edict, the prime minister led hundreds of officials to the marshal's palace to persuade the emperor to abdicate. Zhu Quanzhong sent an envoy to Luoyang but was rebuffed.

古文：于是朝臣、籓镇，乃至湖南、岭南上笺劝进者相继。
现代文：于是，朝中大臣、藩镇乃至湖南、岭南呈进奏笺劝朱全忠即帝位的接连不断。
English: As a result, the ministers of the dynasty, the towns of the domain, and even Hunan and Lingnan continued to urge Zhu Quanzhong to ascend to the throne.

古文：三月，癸未，王以亳州刺史李思安为北路行军都统，将兵击幽州。
现代文：三月癸未，梁王朱全忠任命毫州刺使李思安为北路行军都统，率领军队攻击幽州。
English: On the last day of March, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong appointed Li Sian, an emissary of Wanzhou, to lead the army to attack Yuzhou.

古文：庚寅，唐昭宣帝诏薛贻矩再诣大梁谕禅位之意，又诏礼部尚书苏循赍百官诣大梁。
现代文：庚寅，唐昭宣帝诏命薛贻矩再往大梁告知禅让帝位的意愿，又诏命礼部尚书苏循携带文武百官的奏笺前往大梁。
English: Geng Yin, Emperor Xuan of Tang Zhao ordered Xue Xuan to go to Daliang to inform the emperor of the emperor's intention to abdicate, and also ordered the ceremonial department of Shang Shuxu to go to Daliang to carry the sermons of hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：镇海、镇东节度使吴王钱镠遣其子传镣、传瓘讨卢佶于温州。
现代文：镇海、镇东节度使吴王钱派遣他的儿子钱传、钱传率领军队到温州讨伐卢佶。
English: The Zhenhai and Zhendong festivals made Wu King Qian send his son Qian Chuan, Qian Chuan led the army to Wenzhou to fight Lu Wei.

古文：甲辰，唐昭宣帝降御札禅位于梁。
现代文：甲辰，唐昭宣帝颁下诏书让位给梁王。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaoxuan of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to abdicate to King Liang.

古文：以摄中书令张文蔚为册礼使，礼部尚书苏循副之；摄侍中杨涉为押传国宝使，翰林学士张策副之；御史大夫薛贻矩为押金宝使，尚书左丞赵光逢副之；帅百官备法驾诣大梁。
现代文：任命代理中书令的张文蔚为册礼使、礼部尚书苏循为副使，代理侍中杨涉为押传国宝使、翰林院学士张策为副使，御史大夫薛贻矩为押金宝使、尚书左丞赵光逢为副使，率领文武百官准备皇帝车驾仪仗前往大梁。
English: Zhang Wenwei, acting as the representative of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as the envoy, Shang Shuxu, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Yang Zhan, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Yang Zhan, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Zhang Zhe, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, Xue Yuhan, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Zhao Guangfeng, acting as the deputy of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, led by the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee,

古文：杨涉子直史馆凝式言于涉曰： 大人为唐宰相，而国家至此，不可谓之无过。
现代文：杨涉的儿子直史馆杨凝式对杨涉说： 大人为唐朝宰相，国家到了这个地步，不能说没有过错。
English: Yang Zhan's son, Yang Jingshi of the History Museum, said to Yang Zhan: An adult is the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, the country has reached this stage, it cannot be said that there is no fault.

古文：况手持天子玺绶与人，虽保富贵，奈千载何！盍辞之！ 
现代文：况且亲手拿着天子的印玺组绶送给别人，虽然保住了荣华富贵，千年以后怎么说？何不辞职！ 
English: Moreover, he personally held the seal of the Son of God and gave it to others. Although he retained his glory and wealth, what would he say after a thousand years? Why not resign!

古文：涉大骇曰： 汝灭吾族！ 
现代文：杨涉听了大惊说： 你想要灭我全族！ 
English: Hearing this, Yang Zhou was shocked and said, "You want to exterminate my entire family!"

古文：神色为之不宁者数日。策，敦煌人。
现代文：为此好几天神色不安。张策是郭煌人。
English: For this reason, he looked uneasy for several days. Zhang Ce is Guo Guangren.

古文：光逢，隐之子也。
现代文：赵光逢是赵隐的儿子。
English: Zhao Guangfan is the son of Zhao Yin.

古文：卢龙节度使刘仁恭，骄侈贪暴，常虑幽州城不固，筑馆于大安山，曰： 此山四面悬绝，可以少制众。 
现代文：卢龙节度使刘仁恭，骄横奢侈，贪婪凶残，经常顾虑幽州城垣不坚固，在大安山上建筑馆舍，说： 这山四面悬崖绝壁，可以少制众。 
English: The Lulong Festival made Liu Rengong, arrogant, extravagant, greedy and ferocious, often worried that the Yuzhou city walls were not strong, build a museum on the Da'an Mountain, saying: This mountain has cliffs on all sides and can control the crowd.

古文：其栋宇壮丽，拟于帝者。
现代文：馆舍的房屋雄壮美丽，与皇帝的宫殿相匹。
English: The building of the museum is majestic and beautiful, comparable to the emperor's palace.

古文：选美女实其中。
现代文：选美女住在里面。
English: Choose a beautiful woman to live inside.

古文：与方士炼丹药，求不死。
现代文：与方士炼丹药，寻求长生不死。
English: With the alchemists, seeking immortality.

古文：悉敛境内钱，瘗于山颠；令民间用堇泥为钱。又禁江南茶商无得入境，自采山中草木为茶，鬻之。
现代文：聚敛境内全部的钱，埋藏在山顶上，让民间用粘土作钱使用，又禁止江南茶商入境，自采山中草木做茶，卖给民间百姓。
English: They collected all the money in the country and buried it on the top of the mountain, and allowed the people to use clay to make money. They also banned the tea merchants from the south of the Yangtze River from entering the country, and made tea from the plants and trees in the mountains and sold it to the people.

古文：仁恭有爱妾罗氏，其子守光通焉。
现代文：刘仁恭有爱妾罗氏，他的儿子刘守光与她私通。
English: Liu Renkong had a mistress, Luo Shi, and his son, Liu Shouguang, had an affair with her.

古文：仁恭杖守光而斥之，不以为子数。
现代文：刘仁恭杖责刘守光并把他赶走，不把他排在儿子之列。
English: Liu Renyong scolded Liu Shouguang and drove him away, and did not include him among his sons.

古文：李思安引兵入其境，所过焚荡无馀。
现代文：李思安率兵进入刘仁恭的境内，经过的地方焚烧毁坏没有剩余。
English: Li Sian and his soldiers entered Liu Rengong's territory, and the places they passed through were burned and destroyed. There was nothing left.

古文：夏，四月，己酉，直抵幽州城下。
现代文：夏季，四月己酉，直抵幽州城下。
English: In the summer, in April, it reaches as far as Yuzhou Castle.

古文：仁恭犹在大安山。城中无备，几至不守。
现代文：刘仁恭还在大安山，城中没有防备，几乎失守。
English: Liu Rengong was still in Da'an Mountain. There was no defense in the city, and it was almost lost.

古文：守光自外引兵入，登城拒守；又出兵与思安战，思安败退。
现代文：刘守光从外面带兵进入，登城抵御防守；又出兵与李思安作战，李思安被打败退走。
English: Liu Shouguang led troops from outside and entered the city to resist the defense; he also sent troops to fight with Li Sian, who was defeated and retreated.

古文：守光遂自称节度使，命部将李小喜、元行钦将兵攻大安山。
现代文：刘守光于是自称节度使，令部将李小喜、元行钦率兵攻打大安山。
English: Liu Shuguang then claimed to be an envoy to the festival, and he led Li Xiaoxi and Yuan Xingqin to attack Mount Tai'an.

古文：仁恭遣兵拒战，为小喜所败。
现代文：刘仁恭派遣军队抵抗，被李小喜打败。
English: Liu Rengong sent troops to resist and was defeated by Li Xiaoxi.

古文：虏仁恭以归，囚于别室。
现代文：李小喜俘虏了刘仁恭把他带回幽州，囚禁在另外的屋子里。
English: Li Xiaoxi captured Liu Rengong and took him back to Yuzhou, imprisoning him in another room.

古文：仁恭将佐及左右，凡守光素所恶者皆杀之。
现代文：刘仁恭的将佐及左右亲信，凡是刘守光厌恶的全都杀死。
English: Liu Renkong's generals and right and left cronies, all of whom Liu Shouguang detested, were all killed.

古文：银胡录都指挥使王思同帅部兵三千，山后八安巡检使李承约帅部兵二千奔河东，守光弟守奇奔契丹，未几，亦奔河东，河东节度使晋王克用以承约为匡霸指挥使，思同为飞腾指挥使。
现代文：银胡都指挥使王思同率领所部士兵三千，山后八军巡检使军李承约率领所部士兵二千，投奔河东；刘守光的弟弟刘守奇投奔契丹，不久，也投奔了河东。河东节度使晋王李克用以李承约任匡霸指挥使，王思同任飞腾指挥使。
English: Wang Sitong, commander of the Silver Hutu, led 3,000 soldiers from the headquarters, and Li Chengyou, commander of the Eighth Mountain Army, led 2,000 soldiers from the headquarters, and went to Hedong. Liu Shuguang's brother Liu Shouqi went to Khitan, and soon went to Hedong. At the festival in Hedong, Jin King Li Ke used Li Chengyou as commander of the Kuangba, and Wang Sit as commander of the Flying.

古文：思同母，仁恭之女也。
现代文：王思同的母亲是刘仁恭的女儿。
English: Wang Sitong's mother is Liu Renkong's daughter.

古文：庚戌，梁王始御金祥殿，受百官称臣，下书称教令，自称曰寡人。
现代文：庚戌，梁王朱全忠开始登金祥殿，接受唐室文武百官称臣，下行文书称教令，自称寡人。
English: Geng Zheng, Liang Wang, and Zhu Quanzhong began to ascend to the Jinshang Palace, accepting the Tang Room, hundreds of officers and soldiers called them, outgoing documents called edicts, and self-proclaimed few people.

古文：辛亥，令诸笺、表、簿、籍皆去唐年号，但称月、日。
现代文：辛亥，命令各种笺、表、簿、籍都去掉唐朝年号，只称月、日。
English: Xinhai, ordered all kinds of urns, tables, books, and registers to remove the Tang Dynasty year, only the month and day.

古文：丙辰，张文蔚等至大梁。
现代文：丙辰，张文蔚等到达大梁。
English: Xing Chen, Zhang Wenwei and others reach the girders.

古文：卢佶闻钱传镣等将至，将水军拒之于青澳。
现代文：温州卢佶听说钱传等将要到达，率领水军在青澳抵抗。
English: Wenzhou Lu Wei heard that Qian Chuan and others were about to arrive and led the navy to resist in Qing'ao.

古文：钱传瓘曰： 佶之精兵尽在于此，不可与战。 
现代文：钱传说： 卢佶的精锐部队都在这里，不能与他们作战。 
English: Qian legend: Lu Yao's elite troops are all here, can't fight them.

古文：乃自安固舍舟，间道袭温州。
现代文：于是自安固弃舟登岸，抄小路袭击温州。
English: So they abandoned the boat and went ashore to attack Wenzhou.

古文：戊午，温州溃，擒佶斩之。
现代文：戊午，温州军队逃散，擒住卢佶斩首。
English: At noon, the Wenzhou army fled and captured Lu Wei and beheaded him.

古文：吴王镠以都监使吴璋为温州制置使，命传瓘等移兵讨卢约于处州。
现代文：吴王钱任命都监使吴璋为温州制置使，命令钱传等率领军队转移到处州讨伐卢约。
English: Wu Wang Qian appointed the governor of Wenzhou, Wu Wei, as the governor of Wenzhou, and ordered Qian Chuan and others to lead the army to Wenzhou to fight Luyo.

古文：壬戌，梁王更名晃。
现代文：壬戌，梁王朱全忠更名为晃。
English: At the same time, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong changed his name to Gao.

古文：王兄全昱闻王将即帝位，谓王曰： 硃三，尔可作天子乎！ 
现代文：朱全忠的哥哥朱全昱听说朱全忠将要即皇帝位，对他说： 朱三，你可以作天子吗？ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong's brother Zhu Quanzhong heard that Zhu Quanzhong would become emperor, and said to him: Zhu San, can you become the son of heaven?

古文：甲子，张文蔚、杨涉乘辂自上源驿从册宝，诸司各备仪卫卤簿前导，百官从其后，至金祥殿前陈之。
现代文：甲子，张文蔚、杨涉乘大车自上源驿随从册宝，诸司各备陈仪仗、卫士、车驾在前导引，唐朝的文武百官随后，到金祥殿前排列。
English: Gao Zi, Zhang Wenwei, and Yang Watan rode in a carriage from Shangyuanqiao to follow the treasures. The officials were each provided with a ceremonial sword, a guard, and a chariot to guide them. The Tang Dynasty's civil and military officials then lined up in front of the Jinshang Palace.

古文：王被兗冕，即皇帝位。
现代文：梁王朱全忠身披衮袍，头戴冠冕，即皇帝位。
English: Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong put on the imperial robe and wore a crown on his head, that is, the imperial throne.

古文：张文蔚、苏循奉册升殿进读，杨涉、张策、薛贻矩、赵光逢以次奉宝升殿，读已，降，帅百官舞蹈称贺。
现代文：张文蔚、苏循捧着册文登殿，进读册文，杨涉、张策、薛贻矩、赵光逢依次捧着印玺登殿，读完册文，下殿，率领文武百官跪拜称颂庆贺。
English: Zhang Wenwei and Su Guan held the book and entered the hall, and read the book. Yang Zhan, Zhang Zhe, Xue Qian Rui and Zhao Guangfeng held the seal and entered the hall in turn. After reading the book, they led hundreds of military and civilian officials to kneel in praise and celebration.

古文：帝遂与文蔚等宴于玄德殿。
现代文：后梁太祖朱晃于是同张蔚等在玄德殿宴饮。
English: Later, Liang Taizu's ancestor Zhu Kiao and Zhang Wei had a banquet at the Xuan De Hall.

古文：帝举酒曰： 朕辅政未久，此皆诸公推戴之力。 
现代文：后梁太祖举酒说： 朕辅佐朝政不久，这都是诸公拥护爱戴之力。 
English: Houliang Taizu raised his glass and said, "I have not been an aide to the government for long. All of this is due to the support and love of the princes.

古文：文蔚等皆惭惧，俯伏不能对，独苏循、薛贻矩及刑部尚书张祎盛称帝功德宜应天顺人。
现代文：张文蔚等惭愧惶惧，俯伏在地，不能回答，只有苏循、薛贻矩及刑部尚书张盛称后梁太祖的功业德行，需要顺应天命、人心称帝。
English: Zhang Wenwei and others were so ashamed and frightened that they fell to the ground, unable to answer. Only Su Xun, Xue Xuan Rui and the head of the criminal investigation department, Zhang Sheng, said that the merits and virtues of Hou Liang Taizu needed to conform to the fate of heaven, and that the people should worship the emperor.

古文：帝复与宗戚饮博于宫中，酒酣，硃全昱忽以投琼击盆中迸散，睨帝曰： 硃三，汝本砀山一民也，从黄巢为盗，天子用汝为四镇节度使，富贵极矣！奈何一旦灭唐家三百年社稷，自称帝王！行当族灭，奚以博为！ 
现代文：后梁太祖又与同宗亲属在宫中宴饮戏博，酒喝得正畅快，朱全昱忽然用骰子向盆中击去而迸碎四散，斜视着太祖说： 朱三，你本来是砀山的一介平民，跟随黄巢做强盗，天子用你任四镇节度使，富贵极了，为什么突然灭了唐朝三百年的国家，自称帝王，将要全族被杀，还玩了什么博戏！ 
English: Later, Liang Taizu and his relatives of the same clan were feasting and playing in the palace. The wine was drinking smoothly. Zhu Quanzhang suddenly hit the basin with a rake and broke it into pieces. He squinted at Taizu and said: Zhu San, you were originally a commoner in Shaoshan, followed the Yellow Nest to become a robber. The Son of Heaven used you as an envoy to the Four Towns Festival. You are extremely wealthy. Why did you suddenly destroy the three hundred year old country of the Tang Dynasty? You claimed to be an emperor. You were going to kill the whole family. What kind of game were you playing!

古文：帝不怿而罢。
现代文：太祖不高兴而散场。
English: The great-grandfather was not happy and left.

古文：乙丑，命有司告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：乙丑，后梁太祖命有关官吏祭祀天地、宗庙、社稷。
English: Second ugly, after Liang Taizu ordered the relevant officials to sacrifice heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and shrines.

古文：丁卯，遣使宣谕州、镇。
现代文：丁卯，派遣使者向各地州、镇宣布受禅称帝。
English: Dingwu sent emissaries to every province and town to announce that he had accepted Zen as emperor.

古文：戊辰，大赦，改元，国号大梁。
现代文：戊辰，大赦天下，改年号为开平，国号大梁。
English: Wuchen, amnesty to the world, change the year name to Kaiping, and the country name to Daliang.

古文：奉唐昭宣帝为济阴王，皆如前代故事，唐中外旧臣官爵并如故。
现代文：尊奉唐昭宣帝为济阴王，都如前代的成例；唐内外旧臣的官职爵位同过去一样。
English: The honoring of Emperor Zhaoxuan of the Tang Dynasty as the king of Jilin is the same as the previous generation; the official titles and ranks of the old ministers inside and outside the Tang Dynasty are the same as in the past.

古文：以汴州为开封府，命曰东都；以故东都为西都；废故西京，以京兆府为大安府，置佑国军于大安府，更名魏博曰天雄军。
现代文：以汴州为开封府，命名为东都；以故东都洛阳为西都；废故西京长安，以京兆府为大安府，在大安府设置佑国军。改魏博名为天雄军。
English: He named Bozhou as Kaifeng Prefecture as the eastern capital; Luoyang, the former eastern capital, as the western capital; Chang'an, the former western capital, as the western capital; Keizhao Prefecture as Da'an Prefecture, and set up the Yu Guo Army in Da'an Prefecture. He renamed Wei Bo as Tianxiong Army.

古文：迁济阴王于曹州，栫之以棘，使甲士守之。
现代文：迁济阴王李到曹州，用荆棘圈围，派披甲的士兵守卫。
English: King Li of Jianyin moved to Caozhou, surrounded it with thorns, and sent soldiers in armor to guard it.

古文：辛未，以武安节度使马殷为楚王。
现代文：辛未，后梁太祖封武安节度使马殷为楚王。
English: Shortly after, Emperor Liang's great-great-grandfather, Emperor Wu'an, made Ma Yin the King of Chu.

古文：以宣武掌书记、太府卿敬翔知崇政院事，以备顾问，参谋议，于禁中承上旨，宣于宰相而行之。
现代文：后梁太祖以宣武掌书记、太府卿敬翔主管崇政院事务，以备顾问，参与谋划计议，在宫内承受皇上谕旨，传达给宰相执行。
English: Later, Liang Taizu was in charge of the affairs of the Supreme People's Procuratorate with Xuanwu Shou Secretary and Taifuqing Qixiang as advisers, participated in planning and discussion, received the emperor's order in the palace, and conveyed it to the prime minister for implementation.

古文：宰相非进对时有所奏请及已受旨应复请者，皆具记事因崇政院以闻，得旨则复宣于宰相。
现代文：宰相不是进宫奏对的时候有所奏请以及已经受旨应该再行请示的，都详细记事，通过崇政院奏报，敬翔得旨后再传达给宰相。
English: If the prime minister does not enter the palace at the right time to make a request, and if he has already received the order that he should make a request again, he should make a detailed record, report it through the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and then convey it to the prime minister after receiving the order.

古文：翔为人沉深，有智略，在幕府三十馀年，军谋、民政，帝一以委之。
现代文：敬翔为人沉着内向，有才智谋略，在幕府三十余年，军事计划、民事政务，太祖一切都委任他办理。
English: For more than thirty years in the shogunate, he handled military plans, civil affairs, and everything his great-grandfather had entrusted to him.

古文：翔尽心勤劳，昼夜不寐，自言惟马上乃得休息，帝性暴戾难近，人莫能测，惟翔能识其意趣。
现代文：敬翔尽心勤劳，白天晚上很少睡觉，自己说只有在马上才能休息。太祖性情残暴乖戾，难于接近，别人不能猜测，只有敬翔能够知道他的思想旨趣。
English: Keixiang is diligent and hardworking, rarely sleeps during the day and at night, and says that he can only rest immediately. Taizu's temperament is cruel and grumpy, difficult to approach, others can not guess, only Keixiang can know his ideological interest.

古文：或有所不可，翔未尝显言，但微示持疑；帝意已悟，多为之改易。
现代文：有时有不能办的事情，敬翔未曾明显说出，只是稍微表示疑难，梁太祖已经理解，多数为此改变。
English: Sometimes there are things that cannot be done, but Qixiang did not clearly say anything, but only slightly expressed doubt. Liang Taizu has understood, and most of them have changed for this reason.

古文：禅代之际，翔谋居多。
现代文：惮让取代之际，敬翔的谋划居多。
English: When fear takes the place of letting go, most people's plans are based on respect.

古文：追尊皇高祖考、妣以来皆为帝、后，皇考诚为烈祖文穆皇帝。妣王氏为文惠皇后。
现代文：后梁太祖追尊高祖父、母以来都为帝、后；父亲朱诚为烈祖文穆皇帝，母王氏为文惠皇后。
English: Later Liang Taizu followed his great-great-grandfather, and his mother became emperor and empress; his father, Zhu Cheng, was the ancestor of Emperor Wenmu, and his mother, Wang Shi, was Empress Wenhui.

古文：初，帝为四镇节度使，凡仓库之籍，置建昌院以领之；至是，以养子宣武节度副使友文为开封尹、判院事，掌凡国之金谷。
现代文：当初，后梁太祖任四镇节度使，凡是仓库的簿籍文书，设置建昌院来管理。称帝以后，以养子宣武节度副使朱友文担任开封尹、判建昌院事，掌管全国的钱财粮食。
English: At first, Emperor Gao Liang Taizu appointed four town festival envoys, and set up Jianchang Academy to manage all the books and documents in the warehouse. After he was proclaimed emperor, he appointed his adopted son Zhu Youwen, the vice-envoy of the Xuanwu Festival, to serve as Kaifeng Yin and Jianchang Academy, in charge of the country's money and grain.

古文：友文本康氏之子也。
现代文：朱友文本来是康氏的儿子。
English: Zhu Youwen was originally the son of the Kang clan.

古文：乙亥，下制削夺李克用官爵。
现代文：乙亥，下令削夺李克用的官职爵位。
English: Yihai, ordered to deprive Li Kegui of his official title.

古文：是时，惟河东、凤翔、淮南称 天祐 ，西川称 天复 年号。馀皆禀梁正朔，称臣奉贡。
现代文：这时，只有河东、凤翔、淮南称天年号，西川称天复年号，其余各镇都接受后梁的年号，向后梁称臣纳贡。
English: At this time, only Hedong, Fengxiang and Huainan called it the Year of Heavenly Return, while West River called it the Year of Heavenly Return. The rest of the towns accepted the year of Houliang and paid tribute to Houliang.

古文：蜀王与弘农王移檄诸道，云欲与岐王、晋王会兵兴复唐室，卒无应者。
现代文：蜀王王建与弘农王杨渥移送檄文给诸道，说要与岐王李茂贞、晋王李克用合兵兴复唐室，结果没有响应的。
English: Wang Jian, the king of Shu, and Yang Wo, the king of Hongnong, sent the imperial edict to various provinces, saying that they would use joint forces with Li Maozhen, the king of Qi, and Li Ke, the king of Jin, to restore the Tang dynasty, but there was no response.

古文：蜀王乃谋称帝，下教谕统内吏民；又遗晋王书云： 请各帝一方，俟硃温既平，乃访唐宗室立之，退归籓服。 
现代文：王建于是计划称帝的，下令告诉辖区内的官吏百九，又送书信晋王李克用说： 请各称帝一方，等到朱温平定以后，就寻访唐皇宗室的人立他为皇帝，我们再恢复藩镇之职。 
English: Wang Jian then planned to proclaim the emperor, ordered to tell the officials in the area under his jurisdiction one hundred and nine things, and sent a letter to the Jin king, Li Kegui, saying: Please, on the part of those who proclaim the emperor, wait until Zhu Wen has been pacified, then find someone from the Tang royal family to appoint him as emperor, and we will resume the position of the hanzhen.

古文：晋王复书不许，曰： 誓于此生靡敢失节。 
现代文：晋王李克用回信不赞成，说： 发誓在这一生不敢丧失臣节。 
English: Li Ke, the King of Jin, disapproved with a reply letter, saying, "I swear that I will not dare to lose my vassalage in this lifetime."

古文：唐末之诛宦官也，诏书至河东，晋王匿监军张承业于斛律寺，斩罪人以应诏。
现代文：唐末诛杀宦官的时候，诏书传到河东，晋王李克用把监军张承业藏在斛律寺，斩了一个罪犯来应付诏旨。
English: When the eunuchs were killed at the end of the Tang Dynasty, the edict was sent to Hedong, and the Jin King Li Ke used the overseer Zhang Chengye to hide in the Pei Li Temple, and cut off a criminal to deal with the edict.

古文：至是，复以为监军，待之加厚，承业亦为之竭力。
现代文：到这个时候，又以张承业任监军，待他更加忧厚，张承业也为李克用竭尽心力。
English: At this time, Zhang Chengye was appointed as the supervisor of the army, and he was treated more sympathetically. Zhang Chengye also made every effort for Li Kejun.

古文：岐王治军甚宽，待士卒简易。
现代文：岐王李茂贞治军很宽松，对待兵士平易坦率。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, governed the army very loosely and treated soldiers with simplicity and frankness.

古文：有告部将苻昭反者，岐王直诣其家，悉去左右，熟寝经宿而还；由是众心悦服。
现代文：有人告发部将符昭谋反，岐王李茂贞特意前往符昭家里，让左右的人全部离开，自己在符昭家里熟睡一夜而回去，所以众人心悦诚服。
English: Some people denounced Fu Zhao for plotting a rebellion, and the king of Qi, Li Maozhen, went to Fu Zhao's home, asked everyone to leave, and went back to Fu Zhao's home after a good night's sleep, so everyone was pleased.

古文：然御军无纪律。
现代文：但他统率军队却没有纪律。
English: But he led an undisciplined army.

古文：及闻唐亡，以兵羸地蹙，不敢称帝，但开岐王府，置百官，名其所居为宫殿，妻称皇后，将吏上书称笺表，鞭、扇、号令多拟帝者。
现代文：听说唐室灭亡，由于兵士衰弱，地盘狭小，不敢自称皇帝，只是扩大岐王府，设置文武百官，把居住的房全称为宫殿，妻称为皇后，将领官吏上书称为笺表，鸣鞭、持扇、号令多数模仿皇帝。
English: It is said that when the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, the soldiers were so weak and the territory was so small that they did not dare to call themselves emperors. Instead, they expanded the Qi royal palace, set up hundreds of civil and military officials, called all the houses they lived in palaces, called their wives empresses, wrote to the generals and officials as "empresses," and most of them imitated the emperor by whipping, holding fans, and giving orders.

古文：镇海节度判官罗隐说吴王镠兴兵讨梁，曰： 纵无成功，犹可退保杭、越，自为东帝；奈何交臂事贼，为终古之羞乎！ 
现代文：镇海节度使判官罗隐劝说吴王钱讨伐梁，说： 纵然不能成功，尚且可以退保杭州、越州，自己在东边称帝，怎么能拱手侍奉盗贼，成为永远的耻辱呢！ 
English: The Zhenhai Festival made the judge Luo Yin persuade Wu Wangqian to fight against Liang, saying: Even if it is not successful, you can still withdraw from Hangzhou and Yuezhou, and you can call yourself an emperor in the east. How can you serve the thief and become an eternal disgrace!

古文：镠始以隐为不遇于唐，必有怨心，及闻其言，虽不能用，心甚义之。
现代文：钱开始以为罗隐在唐没得到重用，一定心有怨恨，等到听了他的话，虽然不能采用，心里很赞许他坚持正义。
English: Qian began to think that Luo Yin did not get much use in Tang, he must have a grudge, until he listened to his words, although he could not use them, he was very pleased with his insistence on justice.

古文：五月，丁丑朔，以御史大夫薛贻矩为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：五月，丁丑朔，后梁太祖任御史大夫薛贻矩为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In May, after Emperor Lingzhu's abdication, Emperor Liang's great-great-grandfather, Grand Historian Xue Rongrui, was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and was promoted to the same rank.

古文：加武顺军节度使赵王王镕宁太师，天雄节度使鄴王罗绍威守太傅，义武节度使王处直兼侍中。
现代文：后梁太祖加授武顺节度使赵王王熔守大师，天雄节度使邺王罗绍威守太傅，义武节度使王处直兼侍中。
English: Later, Liang Taizu added the Wu Shun Festival to make Zhao Wang Wang Rongshu Maestro, the Tianxiong Festival to make Zhao Wang Rongshu Daifu, and the Yiwu Festival to make Wang Shanzhong attendant.

古文：契丹遣其臣袍笏梅老来通好，帝遣太府少卿高颀报之。
现代文：契丹派遣使臣袍笏梅老到大梁互通友好，后梁太祖派遣太府少卿高颀回府。
English: Khitan sent an envoy, Gao Jimei Lao, to Daliang to exchange friendship, and Liang Taizu sent Taifu Shaoqing Gao Yu to return to the capital.

古文：初，契丹有八部，部各有大人，相与约，推一人为王，建旗鼓以号令诸部，每三年则以次相代。
现代文：起初，契丹有八部，每部各有大人，共同约定，推举一人为王，建置旗鼓以号令各部，每三年就依次相代。
English: At the beginning, there were eight branches of Khitan, each with an adult leader. It was agreed that one person would be chosen as king, a banner and drum would be set up to signal the branches, and every three years there would be a new king.

古文：咸通末，有习尔者为王，土宇始大。
现代文：咸通末年，有名叫习尔的为王，疆土开始扩大。
English: In the last years of Hamdang, the famous Xi'er became king, and the territory began to expand.

古文：其后钦德为王，乘中原多故，时入盗边。
现代文：其后钦德为王，趁着中原多难，时常入侵中原边境抢劫。
English: After that, Chinde became king, taking advantage of the difficulties of the Central Plains, often invading the Central Plains border and robbing.

古文：及阿保机为王，尤雄勇，五姓奚及七姓室韦、达靼咸役属之。
现代文：等到阿保机为王，尤其威武勇敢，五姓奚及七姓室韦、达靼都附属于他。
English: When Ahok is king, he will be especially powerful and brave. The five surnames of Hao and the seven surnames of Shwe and Datar will all belong to him.

古文：阿保机姓邪律氏，恃其强，不肯受代。
现代文：阿保机姓邪律氏，仗恃自己强大，不肯在三年任满的时候接受替代。
English: Ah Bao-chi, surnamed Yalong, was so confident of his own strength that he refused to accept a replacement when his three-year term expired.

古文：久之，阿保机击黄头室韦还，七部劫之于境上，求如约。
现代文：过了很久，阿保机攻打黄头室韦回来，其他七部在边界上胁迫他，要求遵守三年一换王的约定。
English: After a long time, Ah Bao came back to attack Huang Tou Shou Wei, and the other seven departments coerced him at the border and demanded that he abide by the agreement of changing the king every three years.

古文：阿保机不得已，传旗鼓，且曰： 我为王九年，得汉人多，请帅种落居古汉城，与汉人守之，别自为一部。 
现代文：阿保机无可奈何，只得传与旗鼓，并且说： 我为王九年，得到汉人很多，请率领同种部落在古汉城居住，与汉人共同守护，另外自为一部。 
English: Ah Bao Chi could not help but be moved and said, "I have been king for nine years and have gained a lot of Han people. Please lead a tribe of the same kind to live in the ancient city of Han, guard it together with the Han people, and be a part of it.

古文：七部许之。
现代文：七部应允了他。
English: Seven agreed with him.

古文：汉城者，故后魏滑盐县也。
现代文：汉城是原来的后魏滑盐县。
English: Seoul is the original post-Wei slip salt county.

古文：地宜五谷，有盐池之利。
现代文：土地适宜五谷生长，有盐池之利。
English: The land is suitable for grain growing and has the advantage of a salt pond.

古文：其后阿保机稍以兵击灭七部，复并为一国。
现代文：后来阿保机逐渐发兵灭亡其他七部，合并成为一国。
English: Later, Ahok gradually sent troops to destroy the other seven provinces and merged into one country.

古文：又北侵室韦、女真，西取突阙故地，击奚，灭之，复立奚王而使契丹监其兵，东北诸夷皆畏服之。
现代文：阿保机又北侵室韦、女真，西取突厥旧地，攻打、灭亡五姓奚，后来又立奚王而让契丹监督他的军队。东北各夷族都敬畏服从他。
English: Ahokji also invaded the old lands of the Turks in the north, including Muxi and Jizhen, and in the west, attacked and destroyed the five clans of the Xiongnu. Later, he set up a king of the Xiongnu and let the Khitan supervise his army. All the barbarians in the northeast feared and obeyed him.

古文：是岁，阿保机帅众三十万寇云州，晋王与之连和，面会东城，约为兄弟，延之帐中，纵酒，握手尽欢，约以今冬共击梁。
现代文：这一年，阿保机率领部众三十万侵犯云州，晋王李克用与他和好，在云州东城会面，相约为兄弟，延请到帐中，纵情饮酒，握手尽欢，相约在当年冬天共同攻梁。
English: That year, Ah Bao led 300,000 troops to invade Yunnan, and the Jin king Li Ke used the opportunity to make peace with him. They met in Dongcheng, Yunnan, and were like brothers. They invited each other to a banquet, indulged in heavy drinking, shook hands, and agreed to jointly attack the enemy in the winter of that year.

古文：或劝晋王： 因其来，可擒也， 王曰： 仇敌未灭而失信夷狄，自亡之道也。 
现代文：有人劝晋王说： 趁着阿保机前来，可以擒住他。 晋王说： 仇敌朱全忠没有消灭，却对夷狄失信，是自取灭亡之道啊。 
English: Some people advised the king of Jin, saying, "Take advantage of the opportunity to come and capture him." The king of Jin said, "The enemy Zhu Quanzhong has not been eliminated, but he has been disloyal to the Yidi, which is a self-defeating way to perish."

古文：阿保机留旬日乃去，晋王赠以金缯数万。
现代文：阿保机留住十天才离开云州，晋王赠送给他金缯数。
English: Ah Bao kept the machine for ten days before leaving Yunnan, and Jin Wang presented him with a number of gold ingots.

古文：阿保机留马三千匹，杂畜万计以酬之。
现代文：阿保机留下马三千匹，各种牲畜数以万计，用来酬谢晋王。
English: Ah Bao Ji left behind three thousand horses and tens of thousands of livestock of all kinds, which were used to reward King Jin.

古文：阿保机既归而背盟，更附于梁，晋王由是而恨之。
现代文：阿保机回去以后就背叛了盟约，又归附了后梁，晋王李克用因此怨恨阿保机。
English: After Ah Bao Ji returned, he betrayed the covenant and became a vassal. Therefore, the Jin king Li Kejun resented Ah Bao Ji.

古文：己卯，以河南尹兼河阳节度使张全义为魏王；镇海、镇东节度使吴王钱镠为吴越王；加清海节度使刘隐、威武节度使王审知兼侍中，乃以隐为大彭王。
现代文：已卯，后梁太祖进封河南尹兼河阳节度使张全义为魏王，镇海、镇东节度使吴王钱为吴越王，加授清海节度使刘隐、威武节度使王审知兼侍中，并以刘隐为大彭王。
English: After Liang Taizu entered Henan, the Yin and Heyang Festival made Zhang Quanyi the king of Wei, the Zhenhai and Zhendong Festival made Wu Wang Qian the king of Wu Yue, the Qinghai Festival made Liu Ying, the Weiwu Festival made Wang Xizhi and attendants, and Liu Ying was the king of Da Peng.

古文：癸未，以权知荆南留后高季昌为节度使。
现代文：癸未，后梁太祖任命暂时代理荆南留后的高季昌为荆南节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu appointed Gao Jichang, who had temporarily stayed in Jingnan, as Jingnan's ceremonial envoy.

古文：荆南旧统八州，乾符以来，寇乱相继，诸州皆为邻道所据，独馀江陵。
现代文：荆南过去统辖荆、归、硖？忠、万、澧、朗八州，唐僖宗乾符年间以来，外寇内乱一个接一个，诸州都被相邻各道占据，只剩下了江陵。
English: In the past, the eight prefectures of Jing, Guizhong, Zhizhong, Wanzhong, Handan and Lang were under the jurisdiction of Jingnan. Since the Qianfu era of the Tang Dynasty, there have been internal conflicts caused by foreign invaders one after another. All prefectures have been occupied by neighboring provinces, and only Gangneung remains.

古文：季昌到官，城邑残毁，户口雕耗。
现代文：高季昌到任，城邑残破毁坏，户口零落减损。
English: Gao Jichang took office, the cities and towns were destroyed, and the household registration was reduced.

古文：季昌安集流散，民皆复业。
现代文：高季昌安顿抚恤流散的人，百姓全都恢复了常业。
English: Gao Jichang settled the pensioners who had been dispersed, and the people all resumed their regular jobs.

古文：乙酉，立皇兄全昱为广王，子友文为博王，友珪为郢王，友璋为福王，友贞为均王，友雍为贺王，友徽为建王。
现代文：乙酉，后梁太祖封立他的哥哥朱全昱为广王，儿子友文为博王、友为郢王、友璋为福王、友贞为均王、友雍为贺王、友徽为建王。
English: After Liang Taizu's death, his brother Zhu Quanzhang was named Guang Wang, and his sons Youwen was named Bo Wang, Youwen was Shao Wang, Youwen was Fu Wang, Youzhen was Jun Wang, Youyong was He Wang, and Youhui was Jian Wang.

古文：辛卯，以东都旧第为建昌宫，改判建昌院事为建昌宫使。
现代文：辛卯，后梁太祖以东都故居为建昌宫，将判建昌院事改为建昌宫使。
English: According to Xin, the former residence of Emperor Taizu in the eastern capital was Jianchang Palace, and the award of Jianchang Academy was changed to Jianchang Palace.

古文：壬辰，命保平节度使康怀贞将兵八万会魏博兵攻潞州。
现代文：壬辰，后梁太祖命令保平节度使康怀贞率领八万大军，会同魏博军队攻打潞州。
English: In Imjin, after Liang Taizu ordered Baoping Jiedu to make Kang Huai Zhen lead an army of eighty thousand to attack Bozhou together with the Wei Bo army.

古文：甲午，诏废枢密院，其职事皆入于崇政院，以知院事敬翔为院使。
现代文：甲午，后梁太祖诏令撤消枢密院，它的职掌事务全都归入崇政院，任命知院事敬翔为院使。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to abolish the Privy Council. All of its duties and affairs were transferred to the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and the governor of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Ji Jianxiang, was appointed as the envoy of the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：礼部尚书苏循及其子起居郎楷自谓有功于梁，当不次擢用；循朝夕望为相，帝薄其为人，敬翔及殿中监李振亦鄙之。
现代文：礼部尚书苏循及他的儿子起居郎苏楷自认为对后梁有功劳，应当不按寻常的次序升用。
English: The head of the ceremonial department, Shangshu Su Cun, and his son, Kijiro Su Kai, considered themselves to be of great service to Hou Liang and should be promoted out of the usual order.

古文：翔言于帝曰： 苏循，唐之鸱枭，卖国求利，不可以立于惟新之朝。 
现代文：苏循日夜盼着做宰相。后梁太祖轻视他的为人，敬翔及殿中监李振也瞧不起他。敬翔对太祖说： 苏循是唐朝如同鸱枭一样的奸邪小人，出卖国家，贪求私利，不可以立于新的朝廷。 
English: Su Xun looked forward to becoming prime minister day and night. Emperor Taizu of Later Liang despised him as a person, and Emperor Keixiang and the palace inspector Li Zhen also looked down on him. Emperor Keixiang said to Emperor Taizu: Su Xun was a traitorous villain in the Tang Dynasty, who betrayed the country and sought personal gain. He should not be allowed to stand in the new imperial court.

古文：戊戍，诏循及刑部尚书张祎等十五人并勒致仕，楷斥归田里。
现代文：戊戌，诏令苏循及刑部尚书张等十五人一并强迫退休，苏楷驱逐回乡。
English: At the same time, 15 people, including Su Xun and Shang Shuzhang of the Criminal Law Department, were forced to retire, and Su Kai was expelled to his hometown.

古文：循父子乃之河中依硃友谦。
现代文：苏循父子于是往河中依附朱友谦。
English: So Su Xun and his son went to the river to attach themselves to Zhu Youqian.

古文：卢约以处州降吴越。
现代文：卢约以处州投降吴越王钱。
English: Lu Yao surrenders Wu Yue Wang Qian in Duanzhou.

古文：弘农王以鄂岳观察使刘存为西南面都招讨使，岳州刺史陈知新为岳州团练使，庐州观察使刘威为应援使，别将许玄应为监军，将水军三万以击楚。
现代文：弘农王杨渥任用鄂岳观察使刘存为西南面都招讨使，岳州刺史陈知新为岳州团练使，庐州观察使刘威为应援使，别将许玄应为监军，率领三万水军攻楚。
English: Yang Wo, the king of Hongnong, appointed Liu Cun as the envoy to the southwest with the observation of Ege, Chen Zhixin as the envoy to the Yuezhou regimental drill, Liu Wei as the envoy to the Yuezhou observation, and General Xu Xuan as the supervisor to lead the thirty thousand naval troops to attack Chu.

古文：楚王马殷甚惧，静江军使杨定真贺曰： 我军胜矣！ 
现代文：楚王马殷非常害怕，静江军使杨定真庆贺说： 我军胜利了！ 
English: King Ma Yin of Chu was very afraid. Yang Dingzhen, commander of the Jingjiang Army, congratulated him and said, "Our army has won!

古文：殷问其故，定真曰： 夫战惧则胜，骄则败。
现代文：马殷问是什么缘故，杨定真说： 打仗知道害怕就会胜利，骄傲就会失败。
English: When Ma Yin asked what was the reason, Yang Dingzhen said: When fighting a war, knowing fear will lead to victory, and pride will lead to defeat.

古文：今淮南兵直趋吾城，是骄而轻敌也；而王有惧色，吾是以知其必胜也。 
现代文：现在淮南军队直奔我城，是骄傲轻敌的表现。可是大王您有害怕的神色，我因此知道您一定胜利。 
English: Now the Huainan army is heading straight for our city, which is a manifestation of pride and contempt for the enemy. However, Your Majesty, you have a look of fear, so I know that you will definitely win.

古文：殷命在城都指挥使秦彦晖将水军三万浮江而下，水军副指挥使黄璠帅战舰三百屯浏阳口。
现代文：马殷命在城都指挥使秦彦晖率领水军三万顺湘江漂浮而下，水军副指挥使黄率战舰三百条驻守浏阳口。
English: Ma Yin commanded Qin Yanyan to lead the naval force of 30,000 ships down the Xiangjiang River, and the deputy commander of the naval force ordered Huang to station 300 warships at Liuyangkou.

古文：六月，存等遇大雨，引兵还至越堤北，彦晖追之。
现代文：六月，刘存等遇大雨，带兵回到越堤北边，秦彦晖追赶他们。
English: In June, Liu Cun and others were caught in a heavy rain, and they led their soldiers back to the north side of the embankment. Qin Yanjun chased them.

古文：存数战不利，乃遗殷书诈降。
现代文：刘存屡战失利，于是送书信给马殷假装投降。
English: Liu Cun repeatedly lost the battle, so he sent a letter to Ma Yin pretending to surrender.

古文：彦晖使谓殷曰： 此必诈也，勿受！ 
现代文：秦彦晖派人对马殷说： 这一定是诈降，不要接受！ 
English: Qin Yanqi sent people to say to Ma Yin: This must be a fraud, don't accept it!

古文：存与彦晖夹水而阵，存遥呼曰： 杀降不祥，公独不为子孙计耶！ 
现代文：刘存与秦彦晖夹水列阵，刘存遥呼说： 杀戮投降的人不吉祥，您难道不为子孙考虑吗！ 
English: Liu Cunxuan and Qin Yanqian were lined up in a row. Liu Cunxuan shouted: "Killing those who surrender is not auspicious. Don't you think about your descendants?"

古文：彦晖曰： 贼入吾境而不击，奚顾子孙！ 
现代文：秦彦晖说： 贼寇侵入我境却不攻击，怎么顾及子孙！ 
English: Qin Hanzhong said: If a bandit invades our territory but does not attack us, how can we take care of our descendants!

古文：鼓噪而进。
现代文：擂鼓呐喊而前进。
English: Marching to the beat of a drum.

古文：存等走，黄璠自浏阳引兵绝江，与彦晖合击，大破之，执存及知新，裨将死者百馀人，士卒死者以万数，获战舰八百艘。
现代文：刘存等退走，黄自浏阳带兵横渡湘江，与秦彦晖合击，把淮南军队打得大败，生擒刘存及陈知新，杀死裨将一百余人，死的士卒以万计，缴获战舰八百艘。
English: Liu Cun and others retreated, Huang Zi Liu Yang led troops across the Hunan River, clashed with Qin Yanyu, and defeated the Huainan army. Liu Cun and Chen Zhixin were killed, more than one hundred people were killed, tens of thousands of soldiers were killed, and eight hundred warships were captured.

古文：威以馀众遁归，彦晖遂拔岳州。
现代文：刘威带着剩下的兵众逃回，秦彦晖于是夺取了岳州。
English: Liu Wei fled back with the rest of the soldiers, and Qin Yanqi then captured Yuezhou.

古文：殷释存、知新之缚，慰谕之。
现代文：马殷解开捆绑刘存、陈知新的绳索，安慰劝解他们。
English: Ma Yin untied the new ropes tying Liu Cun and Chen Zhi, and consoled and persuaded them.

古文：二人皆骂曰： 丈夫以死报主，肯事贼乎！ 
现代文：二人都大骂说： 大丈夫以死报答主人，岂肯事奉贼子吗！ 
English: Both of them cursed loudly and said, "It is not right for a man to repay his master with death, how can he serve a thief!"

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：于是把他们斩了。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：许玄应，弘农王之腹心也，常预政事，张颢、徐温因其败，收斩之。
现代文：许玄应是弘农王杨渥的心腹亲信，经常参与政事，张颢、徐温因为他战败，把他拘捕斩了。
English: Xu Xuanying was a close confidant of Yang Wo, King of Hongnong, and was often involved in political affairs. Zhang Ye and Xu Wen arrested and beheaded him because of his defeat.

古文：楚王殷遣兵会吉州刺史彭玕攻洪州，不克。
现代文：楚王马殷派遣军队会同吉州刺史彭攻打洪州，没有攻克。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu dispatched an army to attack Hongzhou together with Zhang Speng of Jizhou, but Hongzhou was not conquered.

古文：康怀贞至潞州，晋昭义节度使李嗣昭、副使李嗣弼闭城拒守。
现代文：保平节度使康怀贞率兵到达潞州，晋昭义节度使李嗣昭、副使李嗣弼闭城拒守。
English: The Baoping Festival made Kang Huaizhen and his soldiers arrive in Zhangzhou, and the Jin Zhaoyi Festival made Li Shizhao and his deputy Li Shizhao refuse to defend the city.

古文：怀贞昼夜攻之，半月不克，乃筑垒穿蚰蜓堑而守之，内外断绝。
现代文：康怀贞日夜攻打，半月没有攻下，于是挖筑垣墙并穿通如同蚰蜒行地形状的壕沟，日夜守护，使城内外隔绝。
English: Kang Huai Zhen attacked day and night, but did not capture anything for half a month, so he dug and built a wall and cut through a trench like a meandering shape, guarding day and night, isolating the city from the outside.

古文：晋王以蕃、汉都指挥使周德威为行营都指挥使，帅马军都指挥使李嗣本、马步都虞候李存璋、先锋指挥使史建瑭、铁林都指挥使安元信、横冲指挥使李嗣源、骑将安金全救潞州。
现代文：晋王李克用任命蕃、汉都指挥使周德威为行营都指挥使，率马军都指挥使李嗣本、马步都虞候李存璋、先锋指挥使史建瑭、铁林都指挥使安元信、横冲指挥使李嗣源、骑将安金全，救援潞州。
English: The Jin king Li Ke appointed Zhou Dewei as the commander of the camp with the appointment of Zhou Dewei as the commander of the Han capital, the commander of the horse army with the command of Li Shibun, the commander of the horse capital with the command of Li Cunxu, the commander of the vanguard with the command of Shi Jianjun, the commander of the iron forest with the command of An Yuanxin, the commander of the rampage with the command of Li Shiyuan, the cavalry general with the command of An Jinquan, and the rescue of Zhangzhou.

古文：嗣弼，克修之子；嗣本，本姓张；建瑭，敬思之子；金全，代北人也。
现代文：李嗣弼是李克修的儿子；李嗣本，本姓张；史建瑭是史敬思的儿子；安金全是代北人。
English: Li Shizhen is the son of Li Kexiu; Li Shibun, whose family name is Zhang; Shi Jianwen is the son of Shi Jingsi; and An Jinrou are all from the North.

古文：晋兵攻泽州，帝遣左神勇军使范居实将兵救之。
现代文：晋兵攻泽州，后梁太祖派遣左神勇军使范居实率兵救援。
English: The Jin army attacked Zezhou, after which Liang Taizu sent Fan Jushi, an envoy of the Left Divine Valiant Army, to rescue the soldiers.

古文：甲寅，以平卢节度使韩建守司徒、同平章事。
现代文：甲寅，后梁太祖任命平卢节度使韩建守为司徒、同平章事。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu of the Later Liang Dynasty appointed Pinglu Jiedu to make Han Jianshu a member of the Jiedu and Tongping chapters.

古文：武贞节度使雷彦恭会楚兵攻江陵，荆南节度使高季昌引兵屯公安，绝其粮道；彦恭败，楚兵亦走。
现代文：武贞节度使雷彦恭会同楚兵进攻江陵，荆南节度使高季昌率失驻扎公安，断绝他们的粮道。雷彦恭被打败，楚兵也退走了。
English: The Wu Zhen Festival made Lei Yanyong attack Jiangling with the Chu soldiers, and the Jingnan Festival made Gao Jichang rate lose the stationing of the public security and cut off their food supply. Lei Yanyong was defeated and the Chu soldiers also retreated.

古文：刘守光既囚其父，自称卢龙留后，遣使请命。
现代文：刘守光囚禁他的父亲刘仁恭以后，自称卢龙留后，派遣使者请求任命。
English: After Liu Shouguang imprisoned his father Liu Rengong, he sent an envoy to request the appointment after claiming to be Lu Longyu.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，以守光为卢龙节度使、同平章事。
现代文：秋季，七月甲午，后梁太祖任命刘守光为卢龙节度使、同平章事。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of the first day of July, Emperor Taizu appointed Liu Shouguang as the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：静海节度使曲裕卒，丙申，以其子权知留后颢为节度使。
现代文：静海节度使曲裕去世。丙申，后梁太祖任命他的儿子权知留后曲颢为静海节度使。
English: Jinghai Jietuo caused Qu Yu's death. According to the legend, Liang Taizu appointed his son, Quanzhi Liu, as Jinghai Jietuo's envoy.

古文：雷彦恭攻岳州，不克。
现代文：武贞节度使雷彦恭攻打岳州，没有攻克。
English: Wu Zhen's discipline made Lei Yan rise up and attack Yuezhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：八月，丙午，赐河南尹张全义名宗奭。
现代文：八月丙午，后梁太祖赐河南尹张全义名宗。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of August, Emperor Taizu of the Later Liang Dynasty bestowed the title of Minzong of Henan Province to Yin Zhang Quan Yi.

古文：辛亥，以吴越王镠兼淮南节度使，楚王殷兼武昌节度使，各充本道招讨制置使。
现代文：辛亥，后梁太祖任命吴越王钱兼淮南节度使、楚王马殷兼武昌节度使，各充本道招讨制置使。
English: After Xinhai, Liang Taizu appointed Wu Yue Wang Qian and Huainan Festival Envoy, and Chu King Ma Yin and Wuchang Festival Envoy, each of whom was responsible for recruiting and appointing envoys.

古文：晋周德威壁于高河，康怀贞遣亲骑都头秦武将兵击之，武败。
现代文：晋周德威在高河扎营，康怀贞派遣亲骑都头秦武率兵攻击，秦武战败。
English: Jin Zhou Dewei set up camp in Gaohe, Kang Huai Zhen dispatched his cavalry to attack the capital Qinwu, and Qinwu was defeated.

古文：丁已，帝以亳州刺史李思安代怀贞为潞州行营都统，黜怀贞为行营都虞候。
现代文：丁巳，后梁太祖任命亳州刺史李思安代康怀贞为潞州行营都统，贬康怀贞为行营都虞候。
English: Later, Liang Taizu appointed the governor of Bozhou, Li Si'an, to succeed Kang Huai Zhen as the governor of Bozhou, and Kang Huai Zhen as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：思安将河北兵西上，至潞州城下，更筑重城，内以防奔突，外以拒援兵，谓之夹寨。
现代文：李思安率领河北军队西上，到达潞州城下，又修筑二重城垣，内防奔突，外拒援兵，叫作夹寨。
English: Li Sian led the Hebei army westward, reaching the city of Zhangzhou, and built a double city wall, internal defense rushing, rejecting foreign reinforcements, called a sandwich.

古文：调山东民馈军粮，德威日以轻骑抄之，思安乃自东南山口筑甬道，属于夹寨。
现代文：调发山东百姓输送军粮，周德威天天派出轻骑兵抄劫，李思安于是从东南山口修筑甬道，与夹寨连接。
English: The people of Shandong were dispatched to deliver military rations, Zhou Dewei sent light cavalry to plunder every day, and Li Sian then built a causeway from the southeastern mountain pass to connect with Jizhai.

古文：德威与诸将互往攻之，排墙填堑，一昼夜间数十发，梁兵疲于奔命。
现代文：周德威与各位将领交替前去攻击，推倒垣墙，填平壕沟，一昼夜间出数十次，后梁兵防备不暇，疲于奔命。
English: Zhou Dewei and the generals took turns to attack, knock down the wall, fill the trench, and go out dozens of times a day and night. The rear Liang soldiers were overprepared and tired of running for their lives.

古文：夹寨中出刍牧者，德威辄抄之，于是梁兵闭壁不出。
现代文：夹寨中有出来割草放牧的，周德威就抄劫他们，于是后梁兵紧闭营垒不出。
English: Zhou Dewei plundered those who came out to cut grass and graze in the stockade, so the rear Liang soldiers could not close the camp.

古文：九月，雷彦恭攻涔阳、公安，高季昌击败之。
现代文：九月，武贞节度使雷彦恭进攻涔阳、公安，荆南节度使高季昌把他打败。
English: In September, the Wu Zhen Festival caused Lei Yanqong to attack Fenyang and the Public Security Bureau, and the Jingnan Festival caused Gao Jichang to defeat him.

古文：彦恭贪残类其父，专以焚掠为事，荆、湖间常被其患；又附于淮南。
现代文：雷彦恭贪婪残暴像他的父亲雷满，专以焚烧抢掠为事业，荆、湖间经常受他祸害；又依附于淮南。
English: Lei Yan Gong was greedy and cruel like his father Lei Man. He specialized in burning and looting. Jing and Huma were often harmed by him. He also clung to Huainan.

古文：丙申，诏削彦恭官爵，命季昌与楚王殷讨之。
现代文：丙申，后梁太祖诏令削夺雷彦恭的官爵，命令高季昌会同楚王马殷讨伐他。
English: However, Liang Taizu issued an edict to strip Lei Yanqiong of his title and ordered Gao Jichang to join forces with King Ma Yin of Chu to fight him.

古文：蜀王会将佐议称帝，皆曰： 大王虽忠于唐，唐已亡矣，此所谓 天与不取 者也。 
现代文：蜀王王建会同部将僚佐商议称帝，都说： 大王虽然忠于唐室，但唐室已经灭亡了，这就是所说的 上天授与不取 了！ 
English: Shu King Wang Jian Hui and his generals and advisors discussed whether to proclaim him emperor, and they all said: Although the Great King is loyal to the Tang Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty has already perished. This is what is meant by "bestowed by Heaven, but not taken by Heaven!"

古文：冯涓独献议，请，以蜀王称制，曰： 朝兴则未爽称臣，贼在则不同为恶。 
现代文：冯涓独自进献意见请以蜀王代行皇帝事，说： 这样做，唐朝复兴就没有丧失臣节，贼子存在就没有一起作恶。 
English: Feng Yao alone put forward suggestions and asked Shu Wang to act as the emperor, saying: In this way, the revival of the Tang Dynasty will not lose the vassalage, and the existence of thieves will not do evil together.

古文：王不从，涓杜门不出。
现代文：王建没有听从，冯涓闭门不出。
English: Wang Jian did not listen, and Feng Ye closed the door and did not come out.

古文：王用安抚副使、掌书记韦庄之谋，帅吏民哭三日；己亥，即皇帝位，国号大蜀。
现代文：王建采用安抚副使、掌书记韦庄的计谋，率领官吏、百姓哭三日。已亥，即皇帝位，国号大蜀。
English: Wang Jian adopted the strategy of appeasing Wei Zhuang, the deputy envoy and chief secretary, and led the officials and people to cry for three days.

古文：辛丑，以前东川节度使兼侍中王宗佶为中书令，韦庄为左散骑常侍、判中书门下事，阆州防御使唐道袭为内枢密使。
现代文：辛丑，任命前东川节度使兼侍中王宗佶为中书令，韦庄为左散骑常侍、判中书门下事，阆州防御唐道袭为内枢密使。
English: Xin ugly, appointed the former Dongchuan Festival envoy and attendant Wang Zongyi as the middle secretary, Wei Zhuang as the left horseback riding attendant, sentenced to the middle secretary, and the defense of Bozhou against the Tang Dynasty as the inner secret envoy.

古文：庄，见素之孙也。
现代文：韦庄是天宝末年宰相韦见素的孙子。
English: Wei Zhuang is the grandson of the late Tianbao Prime Minister Wei Mingsu.

古文：蜀主虽目不知书，好与书生谈论，粗晓其理。
现代文：前蜀国主王建虽然目不知书，但喜好与读书人谈论，粗略知道书中的道理。
English: Although Wang Jian, the former ruler of Shu, does not know books by sight, he likes to talk with readers and knows roughly the truth in books.

古文：是时唐衣冠之族多避乱在蜀，蜀主礼而用之，使修举故事，故其典章文物有唐之遗风。
现代文：当时，唐朝的官宦之家大多在蜀躲避战乱，王建对他们以礼相待，让他们研究编纂典故成例，所以蜀的法令礼乐制度有唐的遗风。
English: At that time, most of the families of officials and eunuchs of the Tang Dynasty were hiding in Shu to avoid the war. Wang Jian treated them with courtesy and let them study and compile legends. Therefore, the law and ritual system of Shu has a Tang legacy.

古文：蜀主长子校书郎宗仁幼以疾废，立其次子秘书少监宗懿为遂王。
现代文：王建的长子校郎王宗仁小时候因病致残，立他的次子秘书少监王宗懿为遂王。
English: Wang Jian's eldest son, schoolmaster Wang Zongren, became disabled due to illness when he was a child, and his second son, secretary and junior superintendent Wang Zongyao, was named Sui Wang.

古文：冬，十月，高季昌遣其将倪可福会楚将秦彦晖攻朗州，雷彦恭遣使乞降于淮南，且告急。
现代文：冬季，十月，高季昌派遣他的部将倪可福会同楚将秦彦晖攻打朗州，雷彦恭派使者到淮南乞求归降，并告急。
English: In the winter, in October, Gao Jichang sent his general Ni Kefu to attack Lanzhou with Qin Yanqi, and Lei Yanqong sent an envoy to Huainan to beg for surrender, and he was in a hurry.

古文：弘农王遣将泠业将水军屯平江，李饶将步骑屯浏阳以救之，楚王殷遣岳州刺史许德勋将兵拒之。
现代文：弘农王杨渥派遣将领泠业率领水军驻扎平江，李饶率领步兵、骑兵驻扎浏阳以救援雷彦恭；楚王马殷派遣岳州刺史许德勋率兵抗拒。
English: King Yang Wo of Hongnong dispatched the general Xinye to lead the naval forces stationed in Pingjiang, Li Rao led the infantry and cavalry to Liuyang to rescue Lei Yanqong, and King Ma Yin of Chu dispatched the commander of Yuezhou Jishi Xu Dexun to lead the troops to resist.

古文：泠业进屯朗口，德勋使善游者五十人，以木枝叶覆其首，持长刀浮江而下，夜犯其营，且举火，业军中惊扰。
现代文：泠业进军驻扎朗口，许德勋派善于游泳者五十人，用树木枝叶遮盖他们的头部，手持长刀，顺长江漂浮直下，夜里侵犯泠业军营，并且放手，泠业军中大乱。
English: Xu Dexun sent fifty swimmers, covered their heads with branches and leaves of trees, and floated down the Yangtze River with long swords in hand. They invaded the camp at night and let go of the camp. There was a great disturbance in Xu Dexun's army.

古文：德以大军进击，大破之，追至鹿角镇，擒业；又破浏阳寨，擒李饶；掠上高、唐年而归。
现代文：许德勋率军进击，把泠业打得大败，追至鹿角镇，生擒泠业。又攻破浏阳寨，生擒李饶，抢掠上高、唐年二县而返回。
English: Xu Dezhun led the army to attack, and defeated Xingye to a large extent. He chased it to Lugu Town, where Xingye was born. He also broke through Liuyang Village, where Li Rao was born, and plundered Shanggao and two counties in the Tang Dynasty, and then returned.

古文：斩业、饶于长沙市。
现代文：在长沙街市上，把泠业、李饶斩首。
English: On the Changsha Street Market, they beheaded Gong Ye and Li Rao.

古文：十一月，甲申，夹马指挥使尹皓攻晋江猪岭寨，拔之。
现代文：十一月甲申，后梁夹马指挥使尹皓攻打晋江猪岭寨，予以攻克。
English: In November, Jia Sheng, the commander of the rear beam of the horse, ordered Yin Qi to attack Jinjiang Inlingzhai and conquer it.

古文：义昌节度使刘守文闻其弟守光幽其父，集将吏大哭曰： 不意吾家生此枭獍！
现代文：义昌节度使刘守文听说他的弟弟刘守光囚禁了他的父亲刘仁恭，集合将吏大哭说： 想不到我家生了这个枭獍一样的禽兽！
English: During the Yichang Festival, Liu Shouwen heard that his brother Liu Shouguang had imprisoned his father Liu Rengong. The assembled officials burst into tears and said, "I can't believe my family has given birth to such a beast like a baboon!"

古文：吾生不如死，誓与诸君讨之！ 
现代文：我生不如死，誓与你们讨伐他！ 
English: I'll fight him to the death with you!

古文：乃发兵击守光，互有胜负。
现代文：于是发兵攻打刘守光，互有胜负。
English: As a result, troops were sent to attack Liu Shouguang, with mixed results.

古文：天雄节度使鄴王绍威谓其下曰： 守光以窘急归国，守文孤立无援，沧州可不战服也。 
现代文：天雄节度使邺王罗绍威对其部下说： 刘守光因为窘困危急归梁，刘守文孤立无援，沧州可以不战就降服了。 
English: The festival of Tianxiong made Luo Shaowei, the king of Zhai, say to his subordinates: Liu Shouguang returned to Liang because of distress and crisis, Liu Shouwen was isolated and helpless, and Cangzhou could surrender without a fight.

古文：乃遗守文书，谕以祸福。
现代文：于是送书信给刘守文，晓谕祸福。
English: So he sent a letter to Liu Shouwen, telling him about the misfortune and good fortune.

古文：守文亦恐梁乘虚袭其后，戊子，遣使请降，以子延祐为质。
现代文：刘守文也担心梁兵乘虚袭击他的后路，戊子，派遣使者请求归降，以儿子刘延作为人质。
English: Liu Shouwen was also worried that Liang soldiers would take advantage of the false attack on his back road, and sent an envoy to request surrender, with his son Liu Yan as a hostage.

古文：帝拊手曰： 绍威折简，胜十万兵！ 
现代文：后梁太祖拍手说： 罗绍威一封书信，胜过十万军队！ 
English: Houliang Taizu clapped his hands and said, "One letter from Roshowe is better than a hundred thousand troops!"

古文：加守文中书令，抚纳之。
现代文：加授刘守文中书令，抚慰收纳了他。
English: Liu Shouwen was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun, and received him with consolation.

古文：初，帝在籓镇，用法严，将校有战没者，所部兵悉斩之，谓之跋队斩。士卒失主将者，多亡逸不敢归。
现代文：当初，后梁太祖在藩镇的时候，执法严苛，将校有战死的，他的部下兵卒全都斩首，称为 跋队斩 ，士卒损失主将的，大多逃跑不敢回来。
English: At first, when Hou Liang Taizu was in the town, the law enforcement was strict. Some officers were killed in battle, and his subordinates and soldiers were all beheaded, which was called "headhunting." The soldiers lost their captain, and most of them did not dare to escape and return.

古文：帝乃命凡军士皆文其面以记军号。
现代文：太祖于是命令，凡军士都在他们的面部刺字来记录军号。
English: The grandfather then ordered that all the sergeants should record the bugle call by tattooing their faces.

古文：军士或思乡里逃去，关津辄执之送所属，无不死者，其乡里亦不敢容。
现代文：军士有的思念家乡逃走，关口津渡常常把他们捉住送回所属，没有一个不被处死的，他们的乡里也不敢收容。
English: Some sergeants miss their hometowns and run away, but Sekiguchi Tsudo often catches them and sends them back to where they belong. Not a single one of them is not executed, and their hometowns are afraid to take them in.

古文：由是亡者皆聚山泽为盗，大为州县之患。
现代文：因此，逃亡者都聚集在山林川泽之中做强盗，成为州县的大害。
English: As a result, the fugitives have gathered in the mountains, forests, rivers and streams to become robbers, becoming a great harm to the state and county.

古文：壬寅，诏赦其罪，自今虽文面亦听还乡里。
现代文：壬寅，颁布诏令赦免他们的罪过，从今即使脸部刺字也听任回乡里。
English: Ren Yin, issued a decree to pardon their sins, from now on, even if the face is tattooed, they are allowed to return to the countryside.

古文：盗减什七八。
现代文：强盗减少了十之七八。
English: Robberies have fallen by seven-eighths.

古文：淮南右都押牙米志诚等将兵渡淮袭颍州，克其外郭。
现代文：淮南右都押牙米志诚等率兵渡过淮河袭击颍州，攻克颍州外城。
English: Huainan's right-wing capital, Oshiga, led by Mi Zhicheng and other soldiers crossed the Huai River to attack Zhangzhou and conquered the outer city of Zhangzhou.

古文：刺史张实据子城拒守。
现代文：颍州刺史张实据颍州内城抵御守卫。
English: Zhang Shizhi from Zhangzhou said that Zhangzhou's inner city was well defended.

古文：晋王命李存璋攻晋州，以分上党兵势。
现代文：晋王李克用命令李存璋进攻晋州，藉以分散上党的军力。
English: Li Ke, the king of Jin, ordered Li Cunxu to attack Jinzhou in order to disperse the military forces of the upper party.

古文：十二月，壬戌，诏河中、陕州发兵救之。
现代文：十二月壬戌，后梁太祖诏令河中、陕州发兵救援晋州。
English: In December, Emperor Taizu of the Later Liang Dynasty issued an edict to send troops from Hechong and Shaanxi to rescue Jinzhou.

古文：甲子，诏发步骑五千救颍州，米志诚等引去。
现代文：甲子，后梁太祖诏令派遣五千步兵骑兵救颍州，米志诚等退走。
English: After Liang Taizu's edict to dispatch five thousand infantry and cavalry to rescue Zhangzhou, Yizhicheng and others retreated.

古文：丁卯，晋兵寇洺州。
现代文：丁卯，晋兵侵犯州。
English: Dingwu, Jin soldiers invaded the state.

古文：淮南兵攻信州，刺史危仔倡求救于吴越。
现代文：淮南军队攻打信州，信州刺史危仔倡向吴越王钱求救。
English: The Huainan army attacked Shinshu, and Shinshu's assassin, Gui Zi, appealed to Wu Yue Wang Qian for help.

古文：太祖神武元圣孝皇帝上开平二年春，正月，癸酉朔，蜀主登兴义楼。
现代文：开平二年春季，正月，癸酉朔，前蜀主王建登兴义楼。
English: In the spring of the second year of Kaiping, in the first month of the year, the former Shu lord Wang Jianden Xingyi Building was completed.

古文：有僧抉一目以献，蜀主命饭僧万人以报之。
现代文：有个僧人剜出一只眼珠献上，王建命令施饭给一万名僧人作为回报。
English: A monk plucked out an eyeball and offered it, and Wang Jian ordered to give rice to ten thousand monks in return.

古文：翰林学士张格曰： 小人无故自残，赦其罪已幸矣，不宜复崇奖以败风俗。 
现代文：翰林学士张格说： 僧人无故自残，赦免他的罪过已经是幸运了，不应该再加以推崇奖赏而败坏风俗。 
English: Zhang Ge, a scholar of Hanlin, said, "The monk harmed himself without reason, and it is already fortunate to forgive his sins. It is no longer appropriate to promote and reward him and corrupt the custom.

古文：蜀主乃止。
现代文：王建这才作罢了。
English: Wang Jian then stopped the plan to flood Jiangling.

古文：丁丑，蜀以韦庄为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁丑，前蜀任命韦庄为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Ding Yuxi, the former Shu appointed Wei Zhuang as a subordinate attendant, Tongping Shongji.

古文：辛巳，蜀主祀南郊；壬午，大赦，改元武成。
现代文：辛巳，王建到南效祭天。壬午，大赦天下，改年号为武成。
English: Soon after, Wang Jian went to Nanqu Festival. At noon, he was pardoned by the emperor and his era name was changed to Wu Cheng.

古文：晋王疽发于首，病笃。
现代文：晋王李克用头上生毒疮，病情严重。
English: Jin Wang Li Ke is seriously ill with poisonous sores on his head.

古文：周德威等退屯乱柳。
现代文：周德威等撤退到乱柳驻扎。
English: Zhou Dewei and others retreated to Ranyu and were stationed there.

古文：晋王命其弟内外蕃汉都知兵马使、振武节度使克宁、监军张承业、大将李存璋、吴珙、掌书记卢质立其子晋州刺史存勖为嗣，曰： 此子志气远大，必能成吾事，尔曹善教导之！ 
现代文：晋王李克用命他的弟弟内外蕃汉都知兵马使与振武节度使李克宁，监军张承来，大将李存璋、吴珙，掌书记卢质等人拥立他的儿子晋州刺史李存勖为嗣，说： 此子志向远大，必能成就我的事业，你们好好教导他！ 
English: King Li Ke of Jin dispatched his younger brother, Li Kening, the military commander Zhang Chenglai, the military overseer Zhang Chenglai, and the generals Li Cunxu and Wu Qi, as well as the chief secretary Lu Qian, to support his son, the prince of Jin, Li Cunxu, as his successor, saying, "This son has great aspirations and will surely be able to accomplish my cause. You should teach him well!"

古文：辛卯，晋王谓存勖曰： 嗣昭厄于重围，吾不及见矣。
现代文：辛卯，晋王对李存勖说： 李嗣昭困于重围，我来不及见他了。
English: Xinwu, Jin Wang said to Li Cunxu: Li Shizhao is trapped in the heavy siege, I can't see him.

古文：俟葬毕，汝与德威辈速竭力救之！ 
现代文：等到葬事完毕，你与周德威等立即竭力救他！ 
English: When the funeral is over, you and Zhou Dewei should immediately try your best to save him!

古文：又谓克宁等曰： 以亚子累汝！ 
现代文：又对李克宁等说： 把亚子烦劳你们照管了！ 
English: He also said to Li Kening and others, "You have taken care of bothering Ya Zi!

古文：亚子，存勖小名也。
现代文：亚子是李存勖的小名。
English: Yazi is Li Cunxu's nickname.

古文：言终而卒。
现代文：话说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：克宁纲纪军府，中外无敢喧哗。
现代文：李克宁治理军府，内外没有人敢于喧哗。
English: With Li Kening running the military government, no one inside or outside dared to make a fuss.

古文：克宁久总兵柄，有次立之势，时上党围未解，军中以存勖年少，多窃议者，人情忷忷。
现代文：李克宁长期总理兵权，有兄死弟立之势，当时上党围困没解除，军中认为李存勖年少，多有私下议论的，人心不定。
English: Li Kening, the long-serving prime minister, had the military power, and there was a tendency for his brother to succeed him. At that time, the siege of the upper party had not been lifted. The military thought that Li Cunxu was young, and there were many private discussions, and people's minds were uncertain.

古文：存勖惧，以位让克宁。
现代文：李存勖害怕，把王位让给李克宁。
English: Li Cunxu was afraid and ceded the throne to Li Kening.

古文：克宁曰： 汝冢嗣也，且有先王之命，谁敢违之！ 
现代文：李克宁说： 你是嫡长子，况且有先王的遗命，谁敢违抗！ 
English: Li Kening said, "You are the eldest legitimate son, moreover, you have the last will and testament of the former king. Who would dare to disobey?

古文：将吏欲谒见存勖，存勖方哀哭未出。
现代文：将吏想要谒见李存勖，李存勖正在悲伤哭泣，没有出来。
English: The officers wanted to see Li Cunxu, but Li Cunxu was crying with grief and did not come out.

古文：张承业入谓存勖曰： 大孝在不坠基业，多哭何为！ 
现代文：张承业进内对李存勖说： 大孝在于不失去基业，多哭泣做什么！ 
English: Zhang Chengye went inside and said to Li Cunxu: Great filial piety lies in not losing the foundation, what do you do if you cry a lot!

古文：因扶存勖出，袭位为河东节度使、晋王。
现代文：于是扶着李存勖出来，继位为河东节度使、晋王。
English: So he helped Li Cunxu to come out, and was succeeded by the Hedong Festival envoy, Jin Wang.

古文：李克宁首帅诸将拜贺，王悉以军府事季之。
现代文：李克宁首先率领诸将拜贺，晋王李存勖把军府事务全部委托给李克宁。
English: Li Kening first led the generals to pay homage, and the Jin king Li Cunxu entrusted all the military affairs to Li Kening.

古文：以李存璋为河东军城使、马步都虞候。
现代文：晋王李存勖任李存璋为河东军城使、马步都虞候。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu appointed Li Cunxu as the military envoy of Hedong Military City, and Ma Bodu became the governor.

古文：先王之时，多宠借胡人及军士，侵扰市肆，存璋既领职，执其尤暴横者戮之，旬月间城中肃然。
现代文：先王李克用的时候，多宠信依靠胡人及军士，侵犯扰乱街市店铺，李存璋任以后，逮捕其中尤其残暴蛮横的杀死，一个月的时间城中秩序肃然。
English: When the late King Li Ke was in power, he relied on the Hu people and military officers to invade and disturb the shops in the streets. After Li Cunxu took office, he arrested some of them and killed them in a particularly brutal and outrageous manner. Within a month, order in the city was restored.

古文：吴越王镠遣兵攻淮南甘露镇，以救信州。
现代文：吴越王钱派遣军队进攻淮南甘露镇来救援信州。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian sent troops to attack Huainan Ganlu Town to rescue Shinshu.

古文：蜀中书令王宗佶，于诸假子为最长，且恃其功，专权骄恣。
现代文：前蜀中书令王宗佶在蜀主王建的养子中居长，并且仗恃他的功劳，独揽大权，骄傲放纵。
English: Wang Zonglu, the former Shu Zhongshu commander, was the eldest of the adopted sons of the Shu lord Wang Jian, and he relied on his merits, monopolized power, and was proud and indulgent.

古文：唐道袭已为枢密使，宗佶犹以名呼之；道袭心衔之而事之逾谨。
现代文：唐道袭已经担任枢密使，王宗佶仍然直呼其名。唐道袭心怀不满但对他更加恭敬。
English: Tang Daogae had already served as a Privy Counsellor, and Wang Zongyao still called him by his first name. Tang Daogae was dissatisfied but more respectful to him.

古文：宗佶多树党友，蜀主亦恶之。
现代文：王宗佶多结党援，王建也憎恶他。
English: Wang Zongxuan often gathered party support, and Wang Jian also detested him.

古文：二月，甲辰，以宗佶为太师，罢政事。
现代文：二月甲辰，任命王宗佶为太师，停止参与政务。
English: In February, Wang Zonglu was appointed Grand Master and ceased to participate in government affairs.

古文：蜀以户部侍郎张格为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：前蜀任命户部侍郎张格为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Former Shu appointed Zhang Ge, the Household Attendant, as the Chusho Attendant and Tonghei Shoji.

古文：格为相，多迎合主意；有胜己者，必以计排去之。
现代文：张格作为宰相，极力迎合前蜀主王建的意向，有超过自己的人，一定要用计谋把他排斥走。
English: Zhang Ge, as the prime minister, tried his best to meet the intentions of the former Shu master Wang Jianlu. He had more than his own people, so he had to use trickery to expel him.

古文：初，晋王克用多养军中壮士为子，宠遇如真子。
现代文：当初，晋王李克用收养许多军中壮士为养子，宠信待遇如同亲子。
English: At first, the Jin king Li Ke used to adopt many soldiers as foster children, and treated them as if they were his own children.

古文：及晋王存勖立，诸假子皆年长握兵，心怏怏不服，或托疾不出，或见新王不拜。
现代文：等到晋王李存勖继位，诸养子都年长并掌握军权，心里郁闷不服，或者托病不出，或者进见新王不叩拜。
English: By the time the Jin king Li Cunxu succeeded to the throne, all the adopted sons were older and in control of the military power. They were depressed, or feigned illness, or refused to bow to the new king.

古文：李克宁权位既重，人情多向之。
现代文：李克宁的权力地位既已重要，人情多数倾向他。
English: Li Kening's position of power is already important, and the majority of people are inclined towards him.

古文：假子李存颢阴说克宁曰： 兄终弟及，自古有之。
现代文：养子李存颢暗中劝说李克宁道： 哥哥死了，弟弟继位，自古就有这样的。
English: Adopted son Li Cunxu secretly persuaded Li Kening: Brother dies, brother succeeds, it's been like this since ancient times.

古文：以叔拜侄，于理安乎！
现代文：以叔叔叩拜侄子，于理心安吗！
English: Is it reasonable to worship one's nephew as one's uncle?

古文：天与不取，后悔无及！ 
现代文：上天授与不取，后悔就来不及了！ 
English: Whether you accept it or not, it's too late to regret it!

古文：克宁曰： 吾家世以慈孝闻天下，先王之业苟有所归，吾复何求！
现代文：李克宁说： 我家世代以父慈子孝闻名天下，先王的基业如果有了归属，我又有什么希求！
English: Li Kening said: My family's generation is world-renowned for the filial piety of father and son. If the previous king's inheritance were to belong to me, what more could I ask for!

古文：汝勿妄言，我且斩汝！ 
现代文：你再胡说，我就杀了你！ 
English: If you talk any more nonsense, I'll kill you!

古文：克宁妻孟氏，素刚悍，诸假子各遣其妻入说孟氏，孟氏以为然，且虑语泄及祸，数以迫克宁。
现代文：李克宁的妻子孟氏，向来刚强蛮横，诸养子各派他们的妻子到内室劝说孟氏，孟氏认为有理，并且担心这些话泄露出去遭受祸患，屡次逼迫李克宁。
English: Li Kening's wife, Meng, has always been strong and domineering. The adopted sons each sent their wives to the inner room to persuade Meng. Meng thought it was reasonable, and fearing that these words would leak out and suffer misfortune, repeatedly persecuted Li Kening.

古文：克宁性怯，朝夕惑于众言，心不能无动；又与张承业、李存璋相失，数诮让之；又因事擅杀都虞候李存质；又求领大同节度使，以蔚、朔、应州为巡属。
现代文：李克宁性情怯懦，早晚被众人的话蛊惑，不能不动心；又与张承业、李存璋失和，屡次责备他们；又因故擅自杀死都虞候李存质；又要求兼任大同节度使，以蔚州、朔州、应州为巡属。
English: Li Kening was of a cowardly disposition, and sooner or later he was bewitched by the words of many people, and could not remain unmoved; he also lost the peace with Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu, and repeatedly reproached them; he also killed himself for reasons beyond his control, waiting for Li Cunxu; he also requested to serve concurrently as a delegate to the Great Tongji Festival, with Wuzhou, Shuozhou and Yingzhou as deputies.

古文：晋王皆听之。
现代文：晋王李存勖都听从了他。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu obeyed him.

古文：李存颢等为克宁谋，因晋王过其第，杀承业、存璋，奉克宁为节度使，举河东九州附于梁，执晋王及太夫人曹氏送大梁。
现代文：李存颢等为李克宁谋划，趁着晋王到李克宁的家里探望，杀死张承业、李存璋，拥奉李克宁为节度使，率河东所属九州归附后梁，逮捕晋王李存勖及太夫人曹氏送往大梁。
English: Li Cunxu and others plotted for Li Kening, took advantage of the Jin king's visit to Li Kening's home, killed Zhang Chengye and Li Cunxu, hailed Li Kening as the festival envoy, led Kyushu, which belonged to Hedong, to be annexed to Houliang, arrested the Jin king Li Cunxu and his wife Cao, and sent them to Daliang.

古文：太原人史敬镕，少事晋王克用，居帐下，见亲信，克宁欲知府中阴事，召敬镕，密以谋告之。
现代文：太原人史敬熔，年轻时侍奉晋王李克用，居于帐下，受到亲信，李克宁想知道王府中的秘密事情，召见史敬熔，秘密地把计划告诉他。
English: The Taiyuan man Shi Jing Rong, when he was young, served the Jin king Li Ke Rong, lived under the account, and was trusted by close friends. Li Kening wanted to know the secret things in the royal palace, summoned Shi Jing Rong, and secretly told him the plan.

古文：敬镕阴许之，入告太夫人，太夫人大骇，召张承业，指晋王谓之曰： 先王把此儿臂授公等，如闻外间谋欲负之，但置吾母子有地，勿送大梁，自它不以累公。 
现代文：史敬熔假装应允他，入府报告太夫人、太夫人大惊，召见张承业，指着晋王李存勖对他说： 先王把着此儿的胳膊交给您等，如果听到外边图谋想要背弃他，就只求有地方安置我母子，不要送往大梁，其他不连累您。 
English: Shi Jing Rong pretended to agree with him. When he entered the palace, he reported to the great lady. The great lady was shocked and summoned Zhang Chengye. Pointing to the Jin king Li Cunxu, she said to him, "Wait until the former king hands over his arm to you. If you hear outside plots to betray him, just ask for a place to settle my mother and son. Don't send them to Dalian. Don't let others bother you."

古文：承业惶恐曰： 老奴以死奉先王之命，此何言也！ 
现代文：张承业惶恐说： 老奴以死奉先王的遗命，这是什么话呢！ 
English: Zhang Chengye panicked and said, "What kind of words are these, that an old slave would die to carry out the last order of the former king!"

古文：晋王以克宁之谋告，且曰： 至亲不可自相鱼肉，吾苟避位，则乱不作矣。 
现代文：晋王李存勖把李克宁的图谋告诉张承业，并且说： 至亲不可以自相残杀，我如果让位，祸乱就不会发生了。 
English: The Jin king, Li Cunxu, told Zhang Chengye about Li Kening's plot, and said: "The closest relatives must not kill each other. If I give way, the disaster will not happen."

古文：承业曰： 克宁欲投大王母子于虎口，不除之岂有全理！ 
现代文：张承业说： 李克宁想要把大王母子投入虎口，不除掉他岂有安全的道理！ 
English: Zhang Chengye said: Li Kening wants to throw the great king mother and son into the mouth of the tiger, without removing him, there is no reason to be safe!

古文：乃召李存璋、吴珙及假子李存敬、长直军使硃守殷，使阴为之备。
现代文：于是召见李存璋、吴珙及养子李存敬、长直军使朱守殷，让他们暗中防卫设备。
English: Therefore, he summoned Li Cunxu, Wu Gan, and his adopted son Li Cunxu Jing, as well as the commander of the Changzhong Army, Zhu Shouyin, and asked them to secretly remove the defense equipment.

古文：壬戍，置酒会诸将于府舍，伏甲执克宁、存颢于座。
现代文：壬戌，在王府摆酒宴请诸将，埋伏的甲兵在座位上把李克宁、李存颢逮捕。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, Li Kening and Li Cunxu were arrested by the ambushed armored soldiers while they were seated at a banquet in the royal palace.

古文：晋王流涕数之曰： 儿郎勖以军府让叔父，叔父不取。
现代文：晋王李存勖流着泪数说李克宁道： 孩儿以前把节度使府让给叔父，叔父不接受。
English: Li Cunxu, the King of Jin, said with tears streaming down his face, "As a child, I used to let my uncle have the festival, but he didn't accept it.

古文：今事已定，奈何复为此谋，忍以吾母子遗仇雠乎！ 
现代文：现在事情已定，怎么又有这样的图谋，忍心把我母子送给仇人吗！ 
English: Now that the matter is settled, how can there be such a plot, how can I bear to give my mother and son to the enemy!

古文：克宁曰： 此皆谗人交构，夫复何言！ 
现代文：李克宁说： 这都是说坏话的谗人挑拔离间，又有什么话可说！ 
English: Li Kening said, "These are all bad-mouthing troublemakers sowing discord, and what can I say!

古文：是日，杀克宁及存颢。
现代文：当日，杀了李克宁及李存颢。
English: On the same day, he killed Li Kening and Li Cunxu.

古文：癸亥，鸩杀济阴王于曹州，追谥曰唐哀皇帝。
现代文：癸亥，后梁太祖派人在曹州用毒酒害死济阴王李，追谥称为唐哀皇帝。
English: In the Heian period, Emperor Taizu of the Later Liang Dynasty sent people to kill King Li of Jianyin with poisoned wine in Caozhou. The person who chased Li was known as Emperor Tangai.

古文：甲子，蜀兵入归州，执刺史张瑭。
现代文：甲子，前蜀兵进入归州，逮往归州刺史张瑭。
English: Gao Zi, a former Shu soldier, entered Guizhou and arrested the Guizhou assassin Zhang Ye.

古文：辛未，以韩建为侍中，兼建昌宫使。
现代文：辛未，后梁太祖任命平卢节度使韩建为侍中，兼建昌宫使。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizu of Later Liang appointed Pinglu Jiedu to make Han Jian an aide-de-camp as well as an aide-de-camp of Chang Palace.

古文：李思安等攻潞州，久不下，士卒疲弊，多逃亡。
现代文：后梁行营都统李思安等攻潞州，久攻不下，士卒疲惫困乏，多数逃跑。
English: After Liang Xingying, Du Tong, Li Si'an and others attacked Bozhou, but they could not attack for a long time. The soldiers were tired and exhausted, and most of them fled.

古文：晋兵犹屯余吾寨，帝疑晋王克用诈死，欲召兵还，恐晋人蹑之，乃议自至泽州应接归师，且召匡国节度使刘知俊将兵趣泽州。
现代文：晋兵仍在余吾寨，后梁太祖怀疑晋王李克用是装死，想要召回军队，又怕晋兵尾随追击，于是商议亲自到泽州接应召回的军队，并且召匡国节度使刘知俟俊率兵赶往泽州。
English: The Jin soldiers were still in Yuwuzhai. Later, Liang Taizu suspected that the Jin king Li Ke was pretending to be dead, wanted to recall the army, and was afraid that the Jin soldiers would follow the pursuit, so he negotiated to personally meet the recalled army in Zhezhou, and called the Kuangguo Festival to make Liu Zhijunjun and his soldiers rush to Zhezhou.

古文：三月，壬申朔，帝发大梁；丁丑，次泽州。
现代文：三月，壬申朔，太祖从大梁出发，丁丑，到达泽州驻扎。
English: In March, Jinshen Shuo, Taizu departed from Daliang, Dingwu, arrived in Zezhou and stationed.

古文：辛巳，刘知俊至。
现代文：辛巳，刘知悛到达。
English: Soon, Liu Zhisheng arrived.

古文：壬午，以知俊为潞州行营招讨使。
现代文：壬午，太祖任命刘知悛为潞州行营招讨使。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Emperor Taizu appointed Liu Zhisheng as the recruiting envoy for the encampment in Zhangzhou.

古文：癸巳，门下侍郎、同平章事张文蔚卒。
现代文：癸巳，门下侍郎、同平章事张文蔚去世。
English: At this time, Zhang Wenwei, a subordinate attendant of Tongping Zhang, passed away.

古文：帝以李思安久无功，亡将校四十馀人，士卒以万计，更闭壁自守，遣使召诣行在。
现代文：后梁太祖因李思安长期没有功绩，逃跑将校四十余人，士卒以万计，又闭守营垒，于是派遣使者召李思安前来泽州。
English: Hou Liang Taizu sent an envoy to summon Li Sian to come to Zhezhou, because Li Sian had not performed any meritorious deeds for a long time, more than forty officers and tens of thousands of soldiers had fled, and the camp was closed.

古文：甲午，削思安官爵，勒归本贯充役。斩监押杨敏贞。
现代文：甲午，革除李思安官职爵位，勒令回到本籍应差充役，杀监押杨敏贞。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Li Sian was stripped of his official title and ordered to return to his hometown, and Yang Minzhen was sent to prison.

古文：晋李嗣昭固守逾年，城中资用将竭，嗣昭登城宴诸将作乐。
现代文：晋李嗣昭固守潞州过了一年，城中物资用品将要竭尽，李嗣昭登城宴请诸将取乐。
English: After one year of Jin Li Shizhao's firm adherence to Bozhou, the city's materials and supplies will be exhausted, and Li Shizhao will attend the city banquet to invite the generals to have fun.

古文：流矢中嗣昭足，嗣昭密拔之，座中皆不觉。
现代文：飞箭射中李嗣昭的脚，李嗣昭秘密地把箭拔掉，座中的人都没有发觉。
English: The flying arrow hit Li Shizhao's foot. Li Shizhao secretly pulled the arrow out, and no one in the audience noticed.

古文：帝数遣使赐嗣昭诏，谕降之。嗣昭焚诏书，斩使者。
现代文：后梁太祖屡次派遣使者前去颁赐诏书，劝他投降；李嗣昭烧毁诏书，斩杀使者。
English: Later Liang Taizu repeatedly sent emissaries to issue the imperial edict and persuade him to surrender; Li Shizhao burned the imperial edict and killed the emissaries.

古文：帝留泽州旬馀，欲召上党兵还，遣使就与诸将议之。
现代文：后梁太祖在泽州留住十几天，想要召回上党的军队，派遣使者前去与诸将商议。
English: Hou Liang Taizu stayed in Zezhou for ten days, wanting to call back the army of the upper party and send an envoy to negotiate with the generals.

古文：诸将以为李克用死，余吾兵且退，上党孤城无援，请更留旬月以俟之。
现代文：诸将认为李克用死了，余吾寨的晋兵将要撤退，上党孤城无援，请再留十天半月以等待机会。
English: The generals thought that Li Ke was dead, the Jin soldiers in Yu Wuzhai were about to retreat, and there was no help from the upper party. Please stay another ten and a half days to wait for the opportunity.

古文：帝从之，命增运刍粮以馈其军。
现代文：太祖听从诸将的意见，命令增运粮草来供给军队。
English: The great-grandfather listened to the opinions of the generals and ordered to increase the shipment of grain and grass to supply the army.

古文：刘知俊将精兵万馀人击晋军，斩获甚众，表请自留攻上党，车驾宜还京师。
现代文：刘知俊率领精锐军队一万人余人攻击晋军，斩杀俘获很多，上表请求自己留下进攻上党，太祖应当回京师。
English: Liu Zhijun led an elite army of more than ten thousand people to attack the Jin army, killed and captured many, the above table asked him to stay to attack the upper party, the great ancestor should return to Beijing division.

古文：帝以关中空虚，虑岐人侵同华，命知俊休兵长子旬日，退屯晋州，俟五月归镇。
现代文：后梁太祖因关中空虚，担心岐州李茂贞侵犯同州、华州，命令刘知俊让军队在长子县休息十天，然后撤退到晋州驻扎，等到五月回藩镇。
English: Later, Liang Taizu, worried about the invasion of Tongzhou and Huazhou by Li Maozhen of Qizhou, ordered Liu Zhijun to let the army rest for ten days in the eldest son's county, and then retreat to Jinzhou to stay until returning to the town in May.

古文：蜀太师王宗佶既罢相，怨望，阴畜养死士，谋作乱。
现代文：前蜀太师王宗佶被罢宰相职务以后，心中怨恨，暗中豢养区猛敢死之徒，图谋作乱。
English: After the former grandmaster Wang Zongya was removed from the post of prime minister, he harbored resentment in his heart and secretly plotted to create turmoil.

古文：上表以为： 臣官预大臣，亲则长子，国家之事，休戚是同。
现代文：王宗佶上表以为： 我官列大臣，论骨内之亲又是长子，国家大事，休戚与共。
English: Wang Zongkun said in his last will and testament: I am a minister in the official ranks, and I am the eldest son of my in-laws. When it comes to national affairs, we all stand shoulder to shoulder.

古文：今储贰未定，必启厉阶。
现代文：现在太子没有确定，一定发生祸端。
English: Now that the crown prince is not sure, a disaster is bound to happen.

古文：陛下若以宗懿才堪继承，宜早行册礼，以臣为元帅，兼总六军。
现代文：陛下如果以为王宗懿的才干能够继承皇位，应该早日举行册封大礼，任用我为元帅，统领六军。
English: Your Majesty, if you think that Wang Zongyao's talent can succeed to the throne, you should hold a grand ceremony of enthronement as soon as possible and appoint me as a marshal to command the Six Armies.

古文：傥以时方艰难，宗懿冲幼，臣安敢持谦不当重事！
现代文：倘若以为时势正在艰难，王宗懿年幼，我怎么敢保持谦逊不承担重任呢！
English: If I thought that the times were difficult and Wang Zongyao was young, how could I dare to remain humble and not shoulder heavy responsibilities!

古文：陛下既正位南面，军旅之事宜委之臣下。
现代文：陛下已经南面称帝，军队事宜应当委任臣下。
English: His Majesty has already been crowned emperor in the south, and matters concerning the army should be delegated to his vassals.

古文：臣请开元帅府，铸六军印，征戍征发，臣悉专行。
现代文：我请求设置元帅府，铸六军印，征战守边之事，我都独自掌管施行。
English: I request the establishment of a marshal's office, the casting of six military seals, and the enlistment and defense of the border. I am solely in charge of the implementation.

古文：太子视膳于晨昏，微臣握兵于环卫，万世基业，惟陛下裁之。 
现代文：太子早晚侍奉饮食，我掌握军队护卫宫禁，此是万世基业，希望陛下考虑决定。 
English: The crown prince serves meals in the morning and in the evening, and I am in charge of the army escorting the palace ban. This is an eternal foundation, and I hope that His Majesty will consider the decision.

古文：蜀主怒，隐忍未发，以问唐道袭，对曰： 宗佶威望，内外慑服，足以统御诸将。 
现代文：前蜀主王建大怒，暗中忍耐没有发作，问唐道袭，回答说： 王宗佶的威名声望，内外畏惧顺服，足以驾驭诸将。 
English: The former Shu lord Wang Jian flew into a rage and secretly lost patience. When asked about the Tang attack, he replied: Wang Zongyao's prestige and reputation, fear of obedience both at home and abroad, are enough to control the generals.

古文：蜀主益疑之。
现代文：蜀主更加怀疑王宗佶。
English: Shu's master was even more suspicious of Wang Zonglu.

古文：已亥，宗佶入见，辞色悖慢。蜀主谕之，宗佶不退，蜀主不堪其忿，命卫士扑杀之。
现代文：已亥，王宗佶入见，言辞神色狂悖不敬，蜀主向他指出，王宗佶仍不听，蜀主不能按捺自己的忿怒，命卫士打死他。
English: At this time, Wang Zonglu came into the court, and his words were wild and disrespectful. Lord Shu pointed out to him that Wang Zonglu still did not listen, Lord Shu could not suppress his anger, and the guards killed him.

古文：贬其党御史中丞郑骞为维州司户，卫尉少卿李钢为汶川尉，皆赐死于路。
现代文：贬王宗佶的党羽御史中丞郑骞为维州司户、卫尉少卿李钢为汶川尉，都在路途中赐死。
English: Wang Zongyao's subordinate, Zheng Yao, the Party General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Li Gang, the Lieutenant of Wenchuan, both died on the way.

古文：初，晋王克用卒，周德威握重兵在外，国人皆疑之。
现代文：当初，晋王李克用去世，周德威在外地掌握重兵，国中人都怀疑他。
English: At first, the Jin king Li Kegui died, and Zhou Dewei was in control of heavy troops outside the country. People in the country suspected him.

古文：晋王存勖召德威使引兵还。
现代文：晋王李存勖召周德威带兵回晋阳。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu called Zhou Dewei to lead the troops back to Jinyang.

古文：夏，四月，辛丑朔，德威至晋阳，留兵城外，独徒步而入，伏先王柩，哭极哀。退，谒嗣王，礼甚恭。众心由是释然。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛丑朔，周德威到晋阳，把军队留在城外，独自步行入城，伏在先王李克用的灵柩上哭得极为悲伤；退出后，拜见嗣王李存勖，礼节非常恭敬，众人心里的疑虑因此消释了。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhou Dewei went to Jinyang, left the army outside the city, walked into the city alone, lay down on the coffin used by the former King Li Ke and cried with great sadness; after leaving, he met the successor King Li Cunxu, the etiquette was very respectful, and the doubts in everyone's hearts were thus relieved.

古文：癸卯，门下侍郎、同平章事杨涉罢为右仆射；以吏部侍郎于兢为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨张策为刑部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：癸卯，后梁门下侍郎、同平章事杨涉被免职降为右仆射；任命吏部侍郎于兢为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨张策为刑部侍郎，都为同平章事。
English: At the same time, Yang Zhan was removed from his post and demoted to the position of right-hand man; Yu Jing, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Education; and Zhang Ce, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：兢，琮之兄子也。
现代文：于兢是于琮哥哥的儿子。
English: Yu Jing is the son of Yu Yao's brother.

古文：夹寨奏余吾晋兵已引去，帝以为援兵不能复来，潞州必可取，丙午，自泽州南还；壬子，至大梁。
现代文：潞州夹寨的后梁军将领奏报余吾寨的晋兵已经退走，后梁太祖以为晋的援兵不能再来，潞州一定能够夺取，丙午自泽州南下返回，壬子到大梁。
English: The general of Hou Liang's army in Zhangzhai, Zhangzhou, reported that the Jin soldiers in Yuwuzhai had retreated. Hou Liang's great-grandfather thought that Jin's reinforcements could not come again, and that Zhangzhai would surely be able to capture it. He returned from the south of Zhejiang in the afternoon, and went to Dalian.

古文：梁兵在夹寨者亦不复设备。
现代文：在夹寨的后梁兵也不再布置防备。
English: The soldiers at the rear of the encampment are no longer on guard.

古文：晋王与诸将谋曰： 上党，河东之籓蔽，无上党，是无河东也。
现代文：晋王李存勖与诸将商议说： 上党是河东的屏障；没有上党，就没有河东啊。
English: Jin king Li Cunxu discussed with the generals and said: Shangdang is the barrier of Hedong; without Shangdang, there would be no Hedong.

古文：且硃温所惮者独先王耳，闻吾新立，以为童子未闲军旅，必有骄怠之心。
现代文：况且朱温惧怕的只是先王罢了，听说我才登帝位，以为小孩不熟习军事，一定有骄傲懈怠的心理。
English: Moreover, Zhu Wen was only afraid of the previous king. He had heard that I had just ascended to the throne, and thought that children were not familiar with military affairs, and must have the mentality of pride and slackness.

古文：若简精兵倍道趣之，出其不意，破之必矣。
现代文：如果选派精锐部队兼程急速前去，出其不意，打败梁兵是一定的了。
English: If the elite troops are sent to advance rapidly and unexpectedly, it is certain to defeat the Liang soldiers.

古文：取威定霸，在此一举，不可失也！ 
现代文：取得威势，确定霸业，在此一举，不可失掉机会啊！ 
English: To gain power, to determine hegemony, in this one fell swoop, we must not lose the opportunity!

古文：张承业亦劝之行。
现代文：张承业也劝他亲自出征。
English: Zhang Chengye also advised him to go to the front in person.

古文：乃遣承业及判官王缄乞师于凤翔，又遣使赂契丹王阿保机求骑兵。
现代文：于是，派遣张承业及判官王缄到凤翔请求李茂贞发兵援助，又派遣使者贿赂契丹王阿保机请求借给骑兵。
English: As a result, Zhang Chengye and the magistrate Wang Xi were sent to Fengxiang to request Li Maozhen to send troops for assistance, and an envoy was sent to bribe the Khitan king Abaoji to request the loan of cavalry.

古文：岐王衰老，兵弱财竭，竟不能应。
现代文：岐王李茂贞衰老，兵弱财尽，结果没能应允。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, was old, his army was weak, and his wealth was exhausted. As a result, he was unable to agree.

古文：晋王大阅士卒，以前昭义节度使丁会为都招讨使。
现代文：晋王李荐勖大阅士卒，任命前昭义节度使丁会为都招讨使。
English: Jin King Li recommended the appointment of the former Shao Yi and the appointment of the former Shao Yi and the appointment of the former Shao Yi and the appointment of the former Shao Yi.

古文：甲子，帅周德威等发晋阳。
现代文：甲子，率领周德威等由晋阳出发。
English: Gao Zi, led by Zhou Dewi and others, set off from Jinyang.

古文：淮南遣兵寇石首，襄州兵败之于瀺港。又遣其将李厚将水军万五千趣荆南，高季昌逆战，败之于马头。
现代文：淮南弘农王杨渥派遣军队侵犯石首，襄州军队在港把他们打败；又派遣他的部将李厚率领水军一万五千人奔赴荆南，高季昌迎战，在马头把李厚打败。
English: Yang Wo, King of the Hongnong peasants of Huainan, sent troops to invade Shishou, and the troops of Xiangzhou defeated them at the port; he also sent his minister Li Hou to lead 15,000 sailors to Jingnan, and Gao Jichang met the battle and defeated Li Hou at Ma Tou.

古文：己巳，晋王军于黄碾，距上党四十五里。
现代文：已巳，晋王李存勖驻扎在黄碾，距离上党四十五里。
English: By now, the Jin king Li Cunxu was stationed in Huangren, forty-five miles away from Shangdang.

古文：五月，辛未朔，晋王伏兵三垂冈下，诘旦大雾，进兵直抵夹寨。
现代文：五月，辛未朔，晋王埋伏军队在三垂冈下，凌晨大雾，进兵直达夹寨。
English: In May, Xin Wei Shuo, Jin Wang ambushed the army under the three hanging hills, in the early morning fog, marching straight to the village.

古文：梁军无斥候，不意晋兵之至，将士尚未起，军中惊扰。
现代文：后梁军未设岗哨，没料到晋兵的到来，将士还未起床，军中惊慌纷扰。
English: Houliang's army did not set up guard posts, did not expect the arrival of Jin soldiers, the soldiers had not yet got up, and the army panicked.

古文：晋王命周德威、李嗣源分兵为二道，德威攻西北隅，嗣源攻东北隅，填堑烧寨，鼓噪而入。
现代文：晋王李存勖命令周德威、李嗣源分兵两路，周德威攻西北角，李嗣源攻东北角，填沟烧寨，擂鼓呐喊而入。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu ordered Zhou Dewei and Li Siyuan to divide their troops into two groups. Zhou Dewei attacked the northwest corner, and Li Siyuan attacked the northeast corner. They filled the ditch and burned the village, and marched in with drums and shouts.

古文：梁兵大溃，南走，招讨使符道昭马倒，为晋人所杀。失亡将校士卒以万计，委弃资粮、器械山积。
现代文：后梁兵大败，向南逃跑，招讨使符道昭的坐马栽倒，被晋兵杀死；逃失死亡将士以万计，丢弃的物资、粮草、器械堆积如山。
English: After the Liang soldiers were defeated, they fled to the south, instigated and instigated the defection of Fu Dao Zhao, and were killed by Jin soldiers; tens of thousands of soldiers escaped death, and mountains of discarded materials, grain and grass, and equipment piled up.

古文：周德威等至城下，呼李嗣昭曰： 先王已薨，今王自来，破贼夹寨。
现代文：周德威等到潞州城下，呼唤李嗣昭说： 先王已经去世，现在嗣王亲自前来，攻破梁贼夹寨。
English: When Zhou Dewei arrived at the foot of Zhangzhou Castle, he called Li Shizhao and said, "The previous king has passed away. Now, King Shizhao has come in person to break through the encirclement.

古文：贼已去矣，可开门！ 
现代文：梁贼已经逃走了，可打开城门！ 
English: The thieves have escaped, open the gates!

古文：嗣昭不信，曰： 此必为贼所得，使来诳我耳。 
现代文：李嗣昭不信，说： 这一定是被梁贼俘虏，派来诳骗我。 
English: Li Shizhao didn't believe it and said, "This must be a prisoner sent by the Liang thieves to trick me."

古文：欲射之。
现代文：想要用箭射周德威。
English: He wanted to shoot Zhou Dewei with an arrow.

古文：左右止之，嗣昭曰： 王果来，可见乎？ 
现代文：左右的人阻止他，李嗣昭说； 嗣王果然来了，可以相见吗？ 
English: People around him stopped him, Li Shizhao said; King Shih has indeed come, can we meet?

古文：王自往呼之。
现代文：晋王李存勖自己往前呼唤他。
English: The Jin king Li Cunxu himself called him forward.

古文：嗣昭见王白服，大恸几绝，城中皆哭，遂开门。
现代文：李嗣昭见晋王穿着白色丧服，放声大哭悲痛欲绝，城中全都哭了，于是开了城门。
English: When Li Shizhao saw that Jin Wang was wearing white mourning clothes, he burst into tears and was overwhelmed with grief. Everyone in the city was crying, so he opened the city gate.

古文：初，德威与嗣昭有隙，晋王克用临终谓晋王存勖曰： 进通忠孝，吾爱之深。
现代文：当初，周德威与李嗣昭有仇怨，晋王李克用临死对晋王李存勖说： 进通忠诚孝敬，我爱他很深。
English: At first, Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao had a grudge, and the Jin king Li Ke used his dying breath to say to the Jin king Li Cunxu: I love him deeply.

古文：今不出重围，岂德威不忘旧怨邪！
现代文：现在没有出重围，难道是周德威不忘旧日的仇怨吗！
English: Now there is no heavy siege, is it that Zhou Dewei does not forget the old grudge!

古文：汝为吾以此意谕之。
现代文：你替我把这个意思告诉他。
English: You tell him that for me.

古文：若潞围不解，吾死不瞑目。 
现代文：如果潞州不能解围，我死了也不能闭上眼睛。 
English: If Zhangzhou can't break the siege, I won't be able to close my eyes even if I die.

古文：进通，嗣昭小名也。
现代文：进通是李嗣昭的小名。
English: Shintsu is a nickname for Li Shizhao.

古文：晋王存勖以告德威，德威感泣，由是战夹寨甚力；既与嗣昭相见，遂欢好如初。
现代文：晋王李存勖把父王的意思告诉周德威，周德威感激哭泣，因此攻打夹寨非常卖力，与李嗣昭相见后，从此欢洽和好像当初一样。
English: Li Cunxu, the king of Jin, told Zhou Dewei the meaning of his father. Zhou Dewei was grateful and wept. Therefore, he fought very hard. After meeting with Li Shizhao, the friendship was as good as it was at the beginning.

古文：康怀贞以百馀骑自天井关遁归。
现代文：后梁潞州行营都虞候康怀贞率领骑兵一百余人自天井关逃回大梁。
English: After Liang's encampment in Bozhou, Kang Huizhen led more than a hundred cavalrymen to escape from the ceiling pass back to Daliang.

古文：帝闻夹寨不守，大惊，既而叹曰： 生子当如李亚子，克用为不亡矣！
现代文：后梁太祖听说潞州夹寨没有守住，大惊失色，过了一会儿长叹说； 生子当如李亚子，李克用家业可以不亡了！
English: After Liang Taizu heard that Zhangzhou Jizhai did not hold on, he was shocked and disgraced. After a while, he sighed and said, "My son should be like Li Yazi. Li Ke can use his family business to never die!"

古文：至如吾儿，豚犬耳！ 
现代文：至于像我的儿子，只是一些猪狗罢了！ 
English: As for those like my son, they are nothing but pigs and dogs!

古文：诏所在安集散兵。
现代文：诏令当地安抚召集逃散的士卒。
English: He ordered local pacifiers to round up the fleeing soldiers.

古文：周德威、李存璋乘胜进趣泽州，刺史王班素失人心，众不为用。
现代文：周德威、李存璋乘胜进赴泽州，泽州刺史王班向失人心，众人不为他所用。
English: Zhou Dewei and Li Cunxu took advantage of the victory and went to Zhezhou. Zhezhou's Wang Ban lost the hearts of the people, and the people were not used by him.

古文：龙虎统军牛存节自西都将兵应接夹寨溃兵，至天井关，谓其众曰： 泽州要害地，不可失也；虽无诏旨，当救之。 
现代文：后梁龙虎统军牛存节自西都洛阳率兵迎接夹寨溃逃的军队，到天井关，对他的部下说： 泽州是要害之地，不可丢失；即使没有诏旨，也应当救援。 
English: After Liang Longhu unified the army, Niu Cunjie led the troops from the western capital Luoyang to meet the fleeing army, and said to his subordinates: Zezhou is a critical place, it must not be lost; even if there is no imperial decree, it should be rescued.

古文：众皆不欲，曰： 晋人胜气方锐，且众寡不敌。 
现代文：众人都不想救，说： 晋军胜气正锐，况且众寡不敌。 
English: Many people did not want to help, saying, "The Jin army is in the midst of victory, and moreover, they are outnumbered.

古文：存节曰： 见危不救，非义也；畏敌强而避之，非勇也。 
现代文：牛存节说： 见到危难不救，是不义；害怕敌人强大逃避，是不勇。 
English: The Cow Survival Day says: It is unfair to see the danger and not rescue; it is not brave to fear the enemy's strong escape.

古文：遂举策引众而前。
现代文：于是挥鞭带领众士卒前进。
English: So he waved his whip and led the soldiers forward.

古文：至泽州，城中人已纵火喧噪，欲应晋王，班闭牙城自守，存节至，乃定。
现代文：到达泽州，城中人已经放火喧哗，想要响应晋王，刺史王班关闭牙城自己坚守，牛存节到了以后，这才安定下来。
English: Arriving in Zezhou, the people in the city had already set fire to loud noises, wanting to respond to the king of Jin, stabbing the king to shut down the city to defend themselves, and it was only after the Cow Preservation Festival that it settled down.

古文：晋兵寻至，缘城穿地道攻之，存节昼夜拒战，凡旬有三日。刘知俊自晋州引兵救之，德威焚攻具，退保高平。
现代文：晋兵随即到达、沿城挖掘地道攻城，牛存节日夜抵御作战，一共十三天；刘知俊自晋州带领军队前来救援，周德威烧毁攻城器具，撤退保卫高平。
English: The Jin soldiers arrived immediately, dug tunnels along the city to attack the city, and fought against the fighting for a total of thirteen days; Liu Zhijun led the army from Jinzhou to come to the rescue, Zhou Dewei burned the siege equipment, and retreated to defend Gaoping.

古文：晋王归晋阳，休兵行赏。以周德威为振武节度使、同平章事。
现代文：晋王李存勖回晋阳，休整军队，进行赏赐，任命周德威为振武节度使、同平章事。
English: King Li Cunxu of Jin returned to Jinyang, reorganized the army, made rewards, and appointed Zhou Dewei as the Zhenwu Festival envoy and the same rank.

古文：命州县举贤才，黜贪残，宽租赋，抚孤穷，伸冤滥，禁奸盗，境内大治。
现代文：诏命州县举荐有才德的人。罢斥贪婪残暴的官吏，减轻田租赋税，抚恤孤寡穷民，申雪冤案，禁止奸盗，境内太平。
English: The edict ordered prefectures and counties to recommend talented people. Greedy and cruel officials were ousted, land rent and taxes were reduced, orphans and poor people were supported, grievances were redressed, theft was prohibited, and the country was at peace.

古文：以河东地狭兵少，乃训练士卒，令骑兵不见敌无得乘马。
现代文：因为河东地狭兵少，于是训练士卒，命骑兵看不见敌人不准骑马。
English: Because of the small number of soldiers in the eastern part of the river, the training officers were not allowed to ride horses, and the cavalry could not see the enemy.

古文：部分已定，无得相逾越，及留绝以避险；分道并进，期会无得差晷刻。
现代文：各军部署已定，不得相互超越和停留、中断来躲避危险。分路并进，约定会合的时间不得相差片刻。
English: The deployment of each army has been determined, and they must not overtake each other and stop or interrupt to avoid danger. They must travel side by side, and the time of the agreed meeting must not differ by more than a moment.

古文：犯者必斩。
现代文：有建犯者，一定斩首不赦。
English: If there is a mastermind behind the crime, he must be beheaded.

古文：故能兼山东，取河南，由士卒精整故也。
现代文：晋所以能兼并山东、攻取河南，是由于军队精锐整齐的缘故。
English: The reason why Jin was able to annex Shandong and conquer Henan was due to the neatness of the army elite.

古文：初，晋王克用平王行瑜，唐昭宗许其承制封拜。
现代文：起初，晋王李克用平定难军节度使王行瑜，唐昭宗准许他先用制书任命官职、封授爵位。
English: At first, the Jin king Li Ke used the festival of pacifying and settling the difficult army to make Wang Xingyu, and Tang Zhaozong allowed him to use the book to appoint officials and confer titles.

古文：时方镇多行墨制，王耻与之同，每除吏必表闻。
现代文：当时各藩镇多实行不向朝廷奏请，墨制用人，李克用认为与他们混同是一种耻辱，每次补授官吏一定要预先上表奏报皇帝。
English: At that time, most of the provinces and towns did not report to the imperial court, and employed people of Chinese descent. Li Kegui thought that it was a disgrace to be confused with them. Every supplementary official must report to the emperor in advance.

古文：至是，晋王存勖始承制除吏。
现代文：到这个时候，晋王李存勖才开始用制书任命官吏。
English: It was at this time that the Jin king Li Cunxu began to use bookmaking to appoint officials.

古文：晋王德张承业，以兄事之，每至其第，升堂拜母，赐遗甚厚。
现代文：晋王李存勖感谢张承业的恩德，把他作为兄长侍奉，常到他家，进入内堂叩拜母亲，赐给的物品非常丰厚。
English: King Li Cunxu of Jin thanked Zhang Chengye for his kindness, served him as an elder brother, often went to his house, entered the inner hall to bow to his mother, and gave him very rich goods.

古文：潞州围守历年，士民冻馁死者太半，市里萧条。
现代文：潞州困守超过了一年，士兵百姓冷饿死了一大半，市里萧条冷落。
English: Ganzhou was besieged for more than a year, and most of the soldiers and civilians died of cold and hunger. The city was depressed and deserted.

古文：李嗣昭劝课农桑，宽租缓刑，数年之间，军城完复。
现代文：李嗣昭奖励督促耕织，减租宽刑，数年之间，潞州完全恢复。
English: Li Shizhao rewarded the supervision of cultivation and weaving, reduced the rent and pardoned the sentence, and within a few years, Zhangzhou was fully restored.

古文：静江节度使、同平章事李琼卒，楚王殷以其弟永州刺史存知桂州事。
现代文：静江节度使、同平章事李琼去世，楚王马殷委任李琼的弟弟李存主桂州事务。
English: After the death of Li Qiong, Jingjiang's ceremonial envoy and Tongping's successor, King Ma Yin of Chu appointed Li Qiong's younger brother, Li Cunrong, to be in charge of Guizhou affairs.

古文：壬申，更以许州忠武军为匡国军，同州匡国军为忠武军，陕州保义军为镇国军。
现代文：壬申，后梁改许州忠武军为匡国军，同州匡国军为忠武军，陕州保义军为镇国军。
English: In Jinshin, Houliang changed the Huzhou Loyalist Army into the Kuangguo Army, the Tongzhou Loyalist Army into the Kuangguo Army, and the Shaanxi Baoyi Army into the Zhenguo Army.

古文：乙亥，楚兵寇鄂州，淮南所署知州秦裴击破之。
现代文：乙亥，楚王马殷的军队侵犯鄂州，淮南所署知州秦裴把楚兵打败。
English: At the time of Emperor Yihai, the army of King Ma Yin of Chu invaded Ezhou, and Qin Pei of Chizhou, the deputy of the South Huainan Government, defeated the Chu soldiers.

古文：淮南左牙指挥使张颢、右牙指挥使徐温专制军政，弘农威王心不能平，欲去之而未能。
现代文：淮南左牙指挥使张颢、右牙指挥使徐温专断军政事务，弘农威王杨渥心中不平，想要除掉他们却不能。
English: Huainan left-tooth commander Zhang Qian and right-tooth commander Xu Wen arbitrarily decided military and political affairs. Hongnongwei Wang Yang Wo was not satisfied, but he could not get rid of them.

古文：二人不自安，共谋弑王，分其地以臣于梁。
现代文：张颢、徐温自感不安，共同策划杀死杨渥，瓜分他的国土来向后梁称臣投降。
English: Zhang Ye and Xu Wen felt uneasy and jointly plotted to kill Yang Wo and divide his land to surrender to Hou Liang.

古文：戊寅，颢遣其党纪祥等弑王于寝室，诈云暴薨。
现代文：戊寅，张颢派遣其党羽纪祥等在寝室把杨渥杀死，欺骗说是得急病突然死去。
English: Wu Yin, Zhang Ye dispatched his party member Yu Ji Xiang and others to kill Yang Wo in his bedroom, deceiving that he was suddenly ill and died suddenly.

古文：己卯，颢集将吏于府廷，夹道及庭中堂上皆列白刃，令诸将悉去卫从然后入。
现代文：已卯，张颢召集将吏到节度使府庭院，夹道及庭中堂上各摆列着利刃，命令诸将让卫兵全都离开然后进入。
English: At this point, Zhang Ye summoned the officials to the palace courtyard for the festival, and ordered the generals to let all the guards leave and then enter.

古文：颢厉声问曰： 嗣王已薨，军府谁当主之？ 
现代文：张颢大声喝问说： 嗣王已经去世，节度使府应当由谁主持？ 
English: Zhang Ye shouted loudly and asked: The king has passed away, who should preside over the festival?

古文：三问，莫应，颢气色益怒。幕僚严可求前密启曰： 军府至大，四境多虞，非公主之不可。
现代文：问了三次，没有人答应，张颢的气色更加愤怒，幕僚严可求向前秘密开导说： 节度使府极大，四方边境问题很多、非您主持不可。
English: After asking three times, no one said yes, and Zhang Ye's expression became more angry. The staff member sternly demanded to be let in on the secret, saying, "The government is extremely conservative, and there are many problems with the four-party border, so you must preside over it."

古文：然今日则恐太速。 
现代文：但是，今天就当恐怕太快了。 
English: However, I am afraid that today is too soon.

古文：颢曰： 何谓速也？ 
现代文：张颢说： 怎么说太快了？ 
English: Zhang Jun said: How can you say it's too fast?

古文：可求曰： 刘威、陶雅、李遇、李简皆先王之等夷，公今自立，此曹肯为公下乎？
现代文：严可求说： 刘威、陶雅、李遇、李简，都是先王同等地位的人，您今天自立为王，这些人能做您的属下吗？
English: Yan can be asked to say: Liu Wei, Tao Ya, Li Yuang, Li Jian, are all people of the same status as the previous king, you are the king today, can these people be your subordinates?

古文：不若立幼主辅之，诸将孰敢不从！ 
现代文：不如立幼主辅佐他，诸将谁敢不听从！ 
English: It would be better to appoint a young master to assist him, generals who dare not obey!

古文：颢默然久之。
现代文：张颢沉默了很久。
English: Zhang Ye was silent for a long time.

古文：可求因屏左右，急书一纸置袖中，麾同列诣使宅贺，众莫测其所为，既至，可求跪读之，乃太夫人史氏教也。
现代文：严可求于是躲过左右的人，急写一纸放进衣袖里，召呼同事各官前往节度使住宅去祝贺，众人猜不透他要做什么。到了节度使住宅，严可求跪在地上宣读，原来是太夫人史氏的教书。
English: So Yan Kegui dodged the people around him, hastily scribbled a piece of paper and put it in his sleeve, calling on his colleagues and officials to go to the residence to congratulate him. People couldn't figure out what he was going to do. When it came to the residence, Yan Kegui knelt on the ground and read out what turned out to be Mrs. Shi's teaching.

古文：大要言： 先王创业艰难，嗣王不幸早世，隆演次当立，诸将宜无负杨氏，善辅导之。 
现代文：大要说： 先王创业艰难，嗣王不幸早逝，隆演按照次序应当嗣立，诸将应该不辜负杨氏，很好地开导教诲他。 
English: It is necessary to say: the founder's business was difficult, the successor unfortunately died early, the grand performance should be established in accordance with the order, and the generals should live up to Mr. Yang and educate him well.

古文：辞旨明切。
现代文：言辞意旨明白恳切。
English: The meaning of the words is clear and sincere.

古文：颢气色皆沮，以其义正，不敢夺，遂奉威王弟隆演称淮南留后、东面诸道行营都统。
现代文：张颢的气色很沮丧，因为史氏的告谕合乎正义，不敢强行夺取，于是奉弘农威王杨渥的二弟杨隆演称为淮南留后、东面诸道行营都统。
English: Zhang Ye's appearance was very depressed, because Shi Shi's proclamation was just and he did not dare to forcibly seize it. Therefore, Yang Longyan, the second brother of Yang Wo, the king of Gonghong and Nongwei, was called to stay in Huainan and to march to the east to unite all the provinces.

古文：既罢，副都统硃瑾诣可求所居，曰： 瑾年十六七即横戈跃马，冲犯大敌，未尝畏慑，今日对颢，不觉流汗，公面折之如无人。
现代文：这事情完了以后，副都统朱瑾前往严可求的住所，说： 我十六七岁就横戈跃马，冲犯强大的敌人，从来没有畏惧，今天面对张颢，不觉流汗，您当面指摘他像没有人一样。
English: After this incident was over, Zhu Xi, deputy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), went to the residence of Yan Que, and said: "I was sixteen or seventeen years old when I took up arms against a powerful enemy. I have never been afraid. Today, when I faced Zhang Xi, I was sweating profusely. You pointed him out to my face like no one else.

古文：乃知瑾匹夫之勇，不及公远矣。 
现代文：这才知道我只是匹夫之勇，比您差得太远了。 
English: That's when I knew I was just a rookie, too far behind you.

古文：因以兄事之。
现代文：于是，把严可求作为哥哥侍奉。
English: As a result, Yan can be asked to serve as an elder brother.

古文：颢以徐温为浙西观察使，镇润州。
现代文：张颢委任除温为浙西观察使，镇守润州。
English: Zhang Ye was appointed as the observation envoy of West Zhejiang and the town guard of Runzhou.

古文：严可求说温曰： 公舍牙兵而出外籓，颢必以弑君之罪归公。 
现代文：严可求劝说徐温道： 您舍弃牙兵而出任外藩，张颢一定把杀死君王的罪名归在您身上。 
English: Yan can seek persuasion from Xu Wendao: You abandoned your tooth soldiers and left for a foreign domain, Zhang Ye will definitely put the blame of killing the king on you.

古文：温惊曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：徐温大惊，说： 既然这样，怎么办？ 
English: Xu Wen was shocked and said, "Since this is the case, what should we do?"

古文：可求曰： 颢刚愎而暗于事，公能见听，请为公图之。 
现代文：严可求说： 张颢刚愎自用而又不明事理，如果您能够听从，请为您想办法。 
English: Yan can be asked to say: Zhang Ye is stubborn and self-serving and unreasonable, if you can listen, please find a way for you.

古文：时副使李承嗣参预军府之政，可求又说承嗣曰： 颢凶威如此，今出徐于外，意不徒然，恐亦非公之利。 
现代文：当时，淮南行军副李承嗣参预节度使府的军政事务，严可求又劝李承嗣说； 张颢凶恶淫威如此，现在将徐温调到外地，意图不仅于此，恐怕对您也不利。 
English: At that time, Li Chengzhi, deputy commander of the Huainan Campaign, was involved in the military and political affairs of the prefecture-level diplomatic mission, and Li Chengzhi said that it was strictly possible to ask and persuade Li Chengzhi to say that Zhang Ye was so vicious and arrogant, and now he would transfer Xu Wen to another place, with the intention of not only this, but I am afraid it would also be unfavorable to you.

古文：承嗣深然之。
现代文：李承嗣深以为是。
English: Lee Seung Hee thought so.

古文：可求往见颢曰： 右牙欲之，非吾意也。
现代文：严可求前去见张颢说： 您将徐温调到外地，人们都说您想要夺他的兵权并把他杀死，很多人这样说那是可怕的。 
English: You transferred Xu Wen to another province. People say you want to seize his military power and kill him. Many people say this is terrible.

古文：业已行矣，奈何？ 可求曰： 止之易耳。 
现代文：张颢说： 徐温自己想去，不是我的意思。
English: Zhang Jun said: Xu Wen wanted to go on his own, that's not what I meant.

古文：明日，可求邀颢及承嗣俱诣温，可求真目责温曰： 古人不忘一饭之恩，况公杨氏宿将！
现代文：事情已经这样，怎么办？ 严可求说： 阻止他很容易。 第二天，严可求邀张颢及李承嗣一同拜访徐温，严可求瞪着眼睛责问徐温说： 古人不忘记一顿饭的恩德，何况您是杨氏的老将！
English: The next day, Yan can be asked to invite Zhang Xuan and Li Chengzhi to visit Xu Wen together, and Yan can be asked to stare at Xu Wen and say: The ancients do not forget the benefits of a meal, not to mention that you are a veteran of Mr. Yang!

古文：今幼嗣初立，多事之时，乃求自安于外，可乎？ 
现代文：现在幼主初立，正是多事的时候，却求自己安适到外地去，能这样吗？ 
English: Now the young master Hatsuchika, at a time when there are many things to do, is asking himself whether it is safe to go to a foreign country. Is this possible?

古文：温谢曰： 苟诸公见容，温何敢自专！ 由是不行。
现代文：徐温谢罪说： 如果您们宽容，徐温我哪里敢自己独断独行！ 
English: Xu Wen Xie Sin said: If you are tolerant, Xu Wen, how dare I go it alone!

古文：颢知可求阴附温，夜，遣盗刺之，可求知不免，请为书辞府主。
现代文：因此，我没有前往润州。张颢知道严可求暗地里依附徐温，夜里派遣强盗前去刺杀严可求。严可示知道不能避免，请求强盗允许他写文书向府主杨隆演辞别。
English: Therefore, I did not go to Renzhou. Zhang Ye knew that it was possible for Yan to secretly attach himself to Xu Wen, and it was possible for Yan to send robbers to assassinate him at night. Yan knew that it was unavoidable, and he asked the robbers to allow him to write a farewell letter to the governor Yang Longyan.

古文：盗执刀临之，可求操笔无惧色。盗能辨字，见其辞旨忠壮，曰： 公长者，吾不忍杀。 
现代文：强盗拿刀对着他，严可求挥笔疾书没有惧色；强盗能识字，见他言辞意旨忠诚雄壮，说： 您是年高有德的人，我不妨心杀您。 
English: The robber held a knife to him, but he was not afraid to write; the robber could read, and when he saw that his words and intentions were loyal and strong, he said: You are a man of great age and virtue, I may as well kill you.

古文：掠其财以复命，曰： 捕之不获。 
现代文：抢劫他的财物回去复命，说： 没有抓到严可求。 
English: Robbed him of his belongings, went back to answer for his life, saying: I didn't get caught.

古文：颢怒曰： 吾欲得可求首，何用财为！ 
现代文：张颢勃然大怒说： 我想要得到严可求的首级，要财物做什么！ 
English: Zhang Yao flew into a rage and said, "I want to get the highly coveted first rank, what do I need money for!

古文：温与可求谋诛颢，可求曰： 非钟泰章不可。 
现代文：徐温与严可求商量杀死张颢，严可求说： 非钟泰章不可。 
English: Xu Wen and Yan Ke could discuss the killing of Zhang Ye, and Yan Ke could say: It must be Zhong Tai Zhang.

古文：泰章者，合肥人，时为左监门卫将军。
现代文：钟泰章是合肥人，当时担任左监门卫将军。
English: Zhong Taizhang is a native of Hefei. At that time, he served as the left guard of the gate.

古文：温使亲将彭城翟虔告之。
现代文：徐温派亲将彭城人翟虔告诉钟章。
English: Xu Wen sent his relatives to tell Zhongzhang about the Pengcheng people.

古文：泰章闻之喜，密结壮士三十人，夜，刺血相饮为誓。
现代文：钟泰章听说后非常高兴，秘密结交壮士三十人，夜里刺血互饮立下盟誓。
English: Zhong Taizhang was very happy when he heard about it. He secretly made friends with thirty strong men and swore an oath to drink each other's blood at night.

古文：丁亥旦，直入斩颢于牙堂，并其亲近。
现代文：丁亥晨，钟泰章等直入左右牙指挥使厅把张颢及其亲近的人斩首。
English: Ding Haichen, Zhong Taizhang and others went straight to the left and right commanding offices to decapitate Zhang Xuan and his relatives.

古文：温始暴颢弑君之罪，轘纪祥等于市。
现代文：徐温开始揭露张颢杀死弘农威王杨渥的罪状，并在市上把纪祥等人车裂。
English: Xu Wen began to expose Zhang Qian's crime of killing Hong Nong Wei Wang Yang Wou, and he drove Ji Xiang and others out of the market.

古文：诣西宫白太夫人。
现代文：徐温前往西宫禀告太夫人史氏。
English: Xu Wen went to the West Palace to inform the great-grandmother Shi.

古文：太夫人恐惧，大泣曰： 吾儿冲幼，祸难如此，愿保百口归庐州，公之惠也。 
现代文：史太夫人恐惧，放声大哭，说： 我儿年幼，遭此灾难，希望保全我家人口回庐州，这是您的恩惠啊！ 
English: Frightened, Mrs. Shi burst into tears and said, "My son is young and has suffered from this disaster. I hope to save my family and return to Zhangzhou. This is your blessing!"

古文：温曰： 张颢弑逆，不可不诛，夫人宜自安。 
现代文：徐温说： 张颢杀主叛逆，不能不杀，夫人应当自安！ 
English: Xu Wen said: Zhang Ye is a traitor who killed his master, he cannot help but kill, his wife should be at ease!

古文：初，颢与温谋弑威王，温曰： 参用左、右牙兵，心必不一，不若独用吾兵。 
现代文：当初，徐温与张颢谋杀弘农威王杨渥，徐温说： 同用左、右牙兵，心必不一，不如只用我的兵。 
English: At first, Xu Wen and Zhang Ye murdered Hong Nongwei Wang Yang Wou. Xu Wen said, "It is better to use only my soldiers than to use both left and right soldiers.

古文：颢不可，温曰： 然则独用公兵。 
现代文：张颢不同意，徐温说： 那么，只用您的兵士。 
English: Zhang Ye disagreed, and Xu Wen said: Well, just use your soldiers.

古文：颢从之。
现代文：张颢答应了。
English: Zhang Ye agreed.

古文：至是，穷治逆党，皆左牙兵，也由是人以温为实不知谋也。
现代文：到这个时候，彻底惩办逆党，都是左牙兵，因此人们以为徐温确实不知道张颢的密谋。
English: By this time, it was the Left Fang soldiers who were thoroughly punishing the traitors, so people thought that Xu Wen really did not know about Zhang Ye's conspiracy.

古文：隆演以温为左、右牙都指挥使，军府事咸取决焉。
现代文：杨隆演任命徐温为左、右牙都指挥使，军府事务都取决于他。
English: Yang Longyan appointed Xu Wen as the commander of the left and right teeth, and the military affairs all depended on him.

古文：以严可求为扬州司马。
现代文：任命严可求为扬州司马。
English: Yan can be appointed as Yangzhou Sima.

古文：温性沉毅，自奉简俭，虽不知书，使人读狱讼之辞而决之，皆中情理。先是，张颢用事，刑戮酷滥，给亲兵剽夺市里。
现代文：徐温性格沉稳坚毅，生活简朴，虽然不识字，但让人阅读诉讼案件的口供呈状而作出判决，都符合情理，在这以前，张颢当权，刑罚极端残酷，放纵亲兵抢劫市井闾里。
English: Xu Wen's personality is calm, steady and resolute, his life is simple. Although he is illiterate, it is reasonable for people to read the deposition of the litigation case and make a judgment. Before this, Zhang Ye was in power, the punishment was extremely cruel, and he indulged his relatives to rob the city.

古文：温谓严可求曰： 大事已定，吾与公辈当力行善政，使人解衣而寝耳。 
现代文：徐温对严可示说： 大事已定，我与您等就应当力行善政，使人们能够脱衣安稳睡觉呢。 
English: Xu Wen said to Yan Ke: The important thing has been decided. I and you should work hard to carry out good governance so that people can sleep undressed and safe.

古文：乃立法度，禁强暴，举大纲，军民安之。
现代文：于是，制定法律，禁除强暴，提出大纲，军民相安。
English: As a result, laws were enacted to prohibit rape, and an outline was proposed to ensure peace between the military and the people.

古文：温以军旅委可求，以财赋委支计官骆知祥，皆称其职，淮南谓之 严、骆 。
现代文：徐温把军队事务委交严可求，把财货赋税委交支计官骆知祥，都很称职，淮南称他们为 严、骆 。
English: Xu Wen submitted the Military Affairs Commission to Yan, and Luo Zhixiang, the finance and accounting officer of the Finance and Taxation Commission, to Luo Zhixiang, both of whom were very competent. Huainan called them Yan and Luo.

古文：己丑，契丹王阿保机遣使随高颀入贡，且求册命。
现代文：已丑，契丹王阿保机派遣使臣随梁使高颀到京城进献物品，并且请求颁给册封的命令。
English: It was so bad that the Khitan king, Aboki, sent envoys to accompany Liang to present goods to Gao to the capital, and requested an order to grant him a title of nobility.

古文：帝复遣司农卿浑特赐以手诏，约共灭沙陀，乃行封册。
现代文：后梁太祖又派遣司农卿浑特到契丹，赐给阿保机亲笔诏书，约定共同消灭沙陀李存勖，这才给契丹王阿保机举行册封典礼。
English: Later, Liang Taizu also sent the Secretary of Agriculture Hunte to Khitan, and gave Ah Bao Ji a handwritten edict, agreeing to jointly eliminate Satho Li Cunxu. Only then did the enthronement ceremony for King Ah Bao Ji of Khitan take place.

古文：壬辰，夹寨诸将诣阙待罪，皆赦之。
现代文：壬辰，后梁在潞州夹寨逃出的各位将领到京城等候处分，全部赦免。
English: Those who escaped from Imjin and Houliang in Zhangzhou will be taken to Beijing to await punishment, and all will be pardoned.

古文：帝赏牛存节全泽州之功，以为六军马步都指挥使。
现代文：后梁太祖赏识牛存节保全泽州的功劳，任命他为六军马步都指挥使。
English: Houliang Taizu appreciated the merits of preserving Zezhou on the Cow Preservation Day and appointed him as the commander of the six armies.

古文：雷彦恭引沅江环朗州以自守，秦彦晖顿兵月馀不战，彦恭守备稍懈。彦晖使裨将曹德昌帅壮士夜入自水窦，内外举火相应，城中惊乱，彦晖鼓譟坏门而入，彦恭轻舟奔广陵。
现代文：武贞节度使雷彦恭引沅江水环绕朗州来守卫自已，秦彦晖屯驻军队一个多月不发动攻击，雷彦恭的防守戒备逐渐松懈；秦彦晖派小将曹德昌率领壮士在晚上从水洞里潜入城内，内外点火相应，城中惊乱，秦彦晖擂鼓呐喊毁坏城门而入，雷彦恭乘轻捷小船逃往广陵。
English: Martial law made Lei Yan Gong lead the water of the Minjiang River around Lanzhou to defend itself. Qin Yan Rong stationed troops for more than a month without launching an attack, and Lei Yan Gong's defensive alertness gradually slackened. Qin Yan Rong sent the young general Cao Dechang to lead the strong men to sneak into the city from the water cave at night. The inside and outside were ignited accordingly, and the city was in turmoil. Qin Yan Rong shouted and destroyed the city gate, and Lei Yan Gong fled to Guangling by light boat.

古文：彦晖虏其弟彦雄，送于大梁。
现代文：秦彦晖俘虏了雷彦恭的弟弟雷彦雄，送到大梁。
English: Qin Yanyu captured Lei Yanyong, Lei Yanyong's younger brother, and sent him to Daliang.

古文：淮南以彦恭为节度副使。
现代文：淮南任命雷彦恭为节度副使。
English: Huainan appoints Lei Yanqong as vice minister of discipline.

古文：先是，澧州刺史向瑰与彦恭相表里，至是亦降于楚，楚始得澧、朗二州。
现代文：在这以前，澧州刺史向与雷彦恭互为表里，到这时也投降了楚王，楚才得到了澧、朗二州。
English: Prior to this, Zhangzhou Zhi Xiang and Lei Yan Qiong were on the same side. At this time, he also surrendered to King Chu, and it was only then that Chu gained the two states of Zhai and Lang.

古文：蜀主遣将将兵会岐兵五万攻雍州，晋张承业亦将兵应之。
现代文：前蜀主王建派遣将领率兵会同岐王李茂贞的五万军队攻打雍州，晋监军张承业也率这响应他们。
English: Former Shu ruler Wang Jian dispatched 50,000 troops led by generals and soldiers to attack Yongzhou together with the king of Qi, Li Maozhen. Zhang Chengye, the military governor of Jin, also led this response to them.

古文：六月，壬寅，以刘知俊为西路行营都招讨使以拒之。
现代文：六月，壬寅，梁太祖任命刘知俊为西路行营都招讨使率兵抵御。
English: In June, in Ren'in, Liang Taizu appointed Liu Zhijun to lead troops to resist the Western Camp.

古文：金吾上将军王师范家于洛阳，硃友宁之妻泣诉于帝曰： 陛下化家为国，宗族皆蒙荣宠。
现代文：金吾上将军王师范家在洛阳，朱友宁之妻在后梁太祖面前哭诉说： 陛下化家为国，宗族的人都承蒙荣恩宠。
English: King Wu's superior general Wang Shifan's family was in Luoyang, and Zhu Youning's wife cried in front of Houliang Taizu and said, "Your Majesty has turned the family into a country, and all members of the family have been honored and favored.

古文：妾夫独不幸，因王师范叛逆，死于战场。
现代文：我的丈夫唯独不幸，因王师范背叛从逆，死于战场。
English: My husband was the only one who was unlucky. He died on the battlefield due to Wang Shifan's betrayal.

古文：今仇雠犹在，妾诚痛之！ 
现代文：现在仇人尚在，我实在痛恨他！ 
English: Now that the enemy is still there, I really hate him!

古文：帝曰： 朕几忘此贼！ 
现代文：太祖说： 朕几乎忘了这个贼子！ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "I almost forgot about the thief!

古文：已酉，遣使就洛阳族之。
现代文：已酉，太祖派遣使者到洛阳把王师范的全族处死。
English: After his death, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to Luoyang to execute Wang Shifan's entire family.

古文：使者先凿坑于第侧，乃宣敕告之。师范盛陈宴具，与宗族列坐，谓使者曰： 死者人所不免，况有罪乎！
现代文：使者先在王师范住宅旁边挖掘土坑，这才宣读敕书告诉王师范；王师范摆设丰盛的筵席，与宗族的人依次入座，对使者说： 死是人所不免的，何况有罪呢！
English: The messenger first dug a pit next to Wang Shifan's house, and only then read out the imperial edict to Wang Shifan. Wang Shifan prepared a sumptuous banquet, and sat down with the members of his family in turn. He said to the messenger: Death is inevitable for man, how much more so for the guilty!

古文：予不欲使积尸长幼无序。 
现代文：我不想让尸体堆积得长幼没有次序。 
English: I don't want the bodies to pile up in random order.

古文：酒既行，命自幼及长，引于坑中戳之，死者凡二百人。
现代文：于是，依次饮酒之后，乃命自年幼到年长，依次带到坑中杀死，被杀死的总共二百人。
English: So, after drinking in turn, they killed from the youngest to the oldest, and took them in turn to the pit to kill them, a total of two hundred people were killed.

古文：丙辰，刘知俊及佑国节度使王重师大破岐兵于幕谷，晋、蜀兵皆引归。
现代文：丙辰，后梁西路行营都招讨使刘知俊及佑国节度使王重师在幕谷大败岐王李茂贞的军队，后晋和前蜀的军队都退回了。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuancheng and after the Western Liang Road Campaign, Liu Zhijun and You Guo set out to persuade Wang Chongshi to defeat Wang Li Maozhen's army in the Valley of the Amulets, and the armies of the Later Jin and the Former Shu both retreated.

古文：蜀立遂王宗懿为太子。
现代文：前蜀立遂王王宗懿为太子。
English: Former Shu ruler Wang Wang Zongyao became the crown prince.

古文：帝欲自将击潞州，丁卯，诏会诸道兵。
现代文：后梁太祖想要亲自统率军队攻打潞州，丁卯，诏令会合各道的军队。
English: Hou Liang Taizu wanted to personally lead the army to attack the troops of various provinces of Luzhou, Dingwu and Dalian.

古文：湖南判官高郁请听民自采茶卖于北客，收其征以赡军，楚王殷从之。
现代文：湖南判官高郁请求允许百姓自己采茶卖给北方的客商，征收他们的赋税来供给军队，楚王马殷听从了他。
English: The Hunan magistrate Gao Yu requested that the common people be allowed to harvest their own tea and sell it to merchants in the north, and collect their taxes to supply the army. King Ma Yin of Chu listened to him.

古文：秋，七月，殷奏于汴、荆、襄、唐、郢、复州置回图务，运茶于河南、北，卖之以易缯纩、战马而归，仍岁贡茶二十五万斤，诏许之。
现代文：秋季，七月，马殷奏请在汴州、荆州、襄州、唐州、郢州、复州设置名为 回图务 的贸易场所，运茶到黄河南北，卖茶换回丝绵织品及战马，并且每年进贡茶叶二十五万斤，后梁太祖应允了他的请求。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ma Yingxo requested to set up a trading place called Hui Tu Mu in Zhangzhou, Jingzhou, Xiangzhou, Tangzhou, Zhangzhou and Fuzhou, to transport tea to the north and south of the Yellow River, to sell tea to exchange for silk fabrics and war horses, and to pay a tribute of 250,000 catties of tea every year. Houliang Taizu agreed to his request.

古文：湖南由是富赡。
现代文：湖南因此富足。
English: As a result, Hunan is rich.

古文：壬申，淮南将吏请于李俨，承制授杨隆演淮南节度使、东面诸道行营都统、同平章事、弘农王。
现代文：壬申，淮南将吏向江淮宣谕使李俨请求，承用制书授予杨隆演淮南节度使、东面诸道行营都统、同平章事、弘农王。
English: In Jinshin, the Huainan generals issued an edict to the Jianghuai and asked Li Xi to request that Yang Longyan be awarded the title of Huainan Festival Envoy, Dongmen Zhuodu Xingyuan Tudong, Tongping Zhangji, and Hongnong Wang.

古文：钟泰章赏薄，泰章未尝自言；后逾年，因醉与诸将争言而及之。
现代文：钟泰章得到奖赏很少，但他自己不曾说。后来过了一年，因为喝醉了与众将争论言及此事。
English: Zhong Taizhang received a small reward, but he did not say it himself. A year later, he got drunk and argued with the crowd.

古文：或告徐温，以泰章怨望，请诛之，温曰： 是吾过也。 
现代文：有人禀报徐温，认为钟泰章怨恨，请把他杀死，徐温说： 这是我的过错。 
English: Some people falsely reported to Xu Wen that Zhong Taizhang was resentful, please kill him. Xu Wen said: This is my fault.

古文：擢为滁州刺史。
现代文：于是，擢升钟泰章为滁州刺史。
English: As a result, Zhong Tai Zhang was promoted to be the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

