古文：散势者，神之使也。用之，必循间而动。
现代文：散发威势。即利用权威和有利形势采取行动，要效法鸷鸟。
English: Exude swagger. That is, take advantage of authority and favorable situation to take action, to emulate the ostrich.

古文：威肃内盛，推间而行之，则势散。
现代文：散发威势，是由精神主宰的。要散发威势，必须看准对方的间隙采取行动。
English: It is the spirit that dominates the diffusion of power. To diffuse power, it is necessary to look at the other side's gap and take action.

古文：夫散势者，心虚志溢；意衰威失，精神不专，其言外而多变。
现代文：威力收敛集中，内在的精神旺盛，善于利用对方的间隙采取行动，那么，就能将威势散发出去。散发威势时，要思想虚静，从而考虑周详；要意志充沛，从而能够决断。
English: When the power converges and concentrates, the inner spirit is strong, and it is good at taking advantage of the other side's gap to take action, then it can distribute the power. When distributing the power, it is necessary to think quietly, so as to consider carefully; it is necessary to be full of will, so as to be able to make a decision.

古文：故观其志意，为度数，乃以揣说图事，尽圆方，齐短长。
现代文：如果意志衰微，便会丧失威势，精神不专一，谈论外界的情况时就会变数太多。
English: If the will is weakened, it will lose its power, the spirit is not specific, and there will be too many variables when talking about the external situation.

古文：无间则不散势者，待间而动，动而势分矣。
现代文：所以，要仔细观察对方的思想意志和办事标准，运用揣摩之术游说他，并采取不同的政治权谋谋划各种事情，有时圆转灵活，有时方正直率。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to carefully observe the other party's ideological will and standards of work, use the art of speculation to lobby him, and take different political powers to plan various things, sometimes with flexibility, sometimes with honesty.

古文：故善思间者，必内精五气，外视虚实，动而不失分散之实。
现代文：如果缺少间隙或意志等主客观条件，就不能发散威势。因为散势必须等待间隙而采取行动，一行动便要发出威势。所以，那些善于发现间隙的人，一定是内部蓄积着五脏精气，对外能观察形势的虚实。
English: If there is a lack of space or subjective and objective conditions such as will, it is impossible to disperse the power. Because the power must wait for a gap to take action, and an action must issue power. Therefore, those who are good at finding gaps must have internal accumulation of visceral energy and can observe the truth of the situation externally.

古文：动则随其志意，知其计谋。
现代文：他一旦行动，便不会失去散发威势的实效，便会紧紧抓住对方的思想意志。及时了解对方的计谋。
English: Once he acts, he will not lose the effectiveness of spreading power, will firmly grasp the other party's ideological will, and timely understand the other party's strategy.

古文：势者，利害之决，权变之威。
现代文：总之，形势是决定利害的，也是能够权变并发挥威力的条件。
English: In short, the situation determines the interests, and it is also a condition for being able to make changes and exert power.

古文：势败者，不可神肃察也。
现代文：威势衰败，往往是因为不能够集中精神去审察事物结果。
English: The decline of power is often due to the inability to concentrate on examining the results of things.

