古文：张仪为秦破从连横，谓燕王曰： 大王之所亲，莫如赵，昔赵王以其姊为代王妻，欲并代，约与代王逼于句注之塞。
现代文：张仪为秦国破坏合纵策略推行连横政策，对燕王说： 大王最亲近的，莫过于赵国了。过去赵襄子把他的姐姐嫁给代君做妻子，想要吞并代国，就和代君约好在句注的关塞见面。
English: Zhang Yi carried out the policy of connecting the horizontal and vertical strategies for the destruction of the vertical and vertical strategies of Qin, and said to Yan Wang: The closest to the great king is Zhao. In the past, Zhao Xiangzi married his sister to the deputy prince as a wife, and if he wanted to annex the deputy country, he would meet with the deputy prince at the junction of the punctuation.

古文：乃令工人作为金斗，长其尾，令之可以击人。
现代文：他让工匠制作一个铁斗，把铁斗的柄做得很长，使它可以用来打人。
English: He asked craftsmen to make an iron bucket and made the handle of the bucket very long so that it could be used to hit people.

古文：与代王饮，而阴告厨人曰： 即酒酣乐，进热歠，即因反斗击之。 
现代文：赵襄子在和代君喝酒之前，暗中告诉厨夫说： 等到酒喝得正酣畅的时候，就送上热汤，然后就找机会掉过铁斗打死代君。 
English: Before drinking with the steward, Zhao Xiangzi secretly told the cook, "Wait until the wine is well drunk, then serve hot soup, and then look for an opportunity to drop the iron bucket and kill the steward."

古文：于是酒酣乐进取热歠。厨人进斟羹，因反斗而击之，代王脑涂地。
现代文：当时酒喝得正畅快，赵襄子要热汤，厨夫进来盛汤，趁机掉过铁斗打在代君的头上，代君的脑浆流了一地。
English: At that time, the wine was drinking smoothly, Zhao Xiangzi asked for hot soup, the cook came in to hold the soup, and took the opportunity to drop the iron bucket and hit the deputy's head, and the deputy's brain flowed to the ground.

古文：其姊闻之，摩笄以自刺也。
现代文：赵襄子的姐姐听说这件事后，就用磨尖的金簪自杀了。
English: When Zhao Xiangzi's sister heard about this, she killed herself with a sharpened gold pick.

古文：故至今有摩笄之山，天下莫不闻。
现代文：所以说到现在还有摩笄山，天下人没有不知道的。
English: Therefore, it can be said that there is still a Mount Maki, and there is nothing that the world does not know.

古文： 夫赵王之狼戾无亲，大王之所明见知也。
现代文：赵王凶狠暴戾，六亲不认，这是大王很清楚的。
English: Zhao Wang is ferocious and violent, and his six parents do not recognize him, which is very clear to the great king.

古文：且以赵王为可亲邪?赵兴兵而攻燕，再围燕都而劫大王，大王割十城乃却以谢。
现代文：赵国曾经派军队攻打燕国，围困燕都，威逼大王，大王割让十座城邑去谢罪，赵国才退兵。
English: Zhao once sent an army to attack Yan, besieged Yan's capital, and threatened the great king. The great king ceded ten cities and towns to atone for his sins. Only then did Zhao withdraw.

古文：今赵王已入朝渑池，效河间以事秦。
现代文：现在赵王已经到渑池去朝见秦王，献出河间而归顺秦国。
English: Nowadays, King Zhao has gone to Dianchi to pay homage to King Qin, and has offered land in the Hema area to serve Qin.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下甲云中、九原，驱赵而攻燕，则易水、长城非王之有也。
现代文：如果大王不归顺秦国，秦发兵云中、九原，驱使赵国军队进攻燕国，那么易水和长城，就不再是大王所有了。
English: If the great king did not surrender to Shun Qin, and Qin sent troops to Yunzhong and Jiuyuan, and drove the Zhao army to attack Yan, then the Yishui and the Great Wall would no longer be owned by the great king.

古文：且今时赵之于秦，犹郡县也，不敢妄兴师以征伐。
现代文：况且当前赵国对于秦国来说，就如同郡县一般，不敢妄自发动军队去攻打别国。
English: Moreover, at present, for Qin State, Zhao State, just like counties in general, does not dare to launch troops to attack other countries.

古文：今大王事秦，秦王必喜，而赵不敢妄动矣。
现代文：如果大王归顺秦国，秦王一定会很高兴，赵国也就不敢轻举妄动。
English: If the great king surrendered to Qin, Qin would be very happy, and Zhao would not dare to act rashly.

古文：是西有强秦之援，而南无齐、赵之患，是故愿大王之熟计之也。 
现代文：这样燕国西面有强大的秦国援助，南边没有了齐赵的侵扰，所以希望大王能够慎重考虑这件事情。 
English: In this way, there is a strong Qin state aid in the west of Yan, and there is no Qi Zhao's intrusion in the south, so I hope the great king can carefully consider this matter.

古文：燕王曰： 寡人蛮夷辟处，虽大男子，裁如婴儿，言不足以求正，谋不足以决事。
现代文：燕王说： 我身居野蛮僻远的地方，这里的人即使成年男子的智慧也如小孩一般，他们讲话不能有正确的看法，他们的智慧不足以判断事情。
English: Yan Wang said: I live in a wild and remote place. The people here, even adult men, have the intelligence of a child. They can't have a correct opinion when they speak. Their intelligence is not enough to judge things.

古文：今大客幸而教之，请奉社稷西面而事秦，献常山之尾五城。 
现代文：如今有幸得到贵客的指教，我愿意献上燕国，归服秦国，并献出恒山西南的五个城池。 
English: Now that I have the honor of receiving the advice of a distinguished guest, I am willing to offer up Yan Province, submit to Qin Province, and offer up the five cities in the southwest of Hengshan.

