古文：天福四年春正月癸卯，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：天福四年春一月一日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝贺，仪仗侍卫按礼行事。
English: On January 1st, in the spring of the 4th year of Tianfu, Gao Zu drove to the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, and the guards of honor acted according to protocol.

古文：朕方示信于四方，岂食言于汝也。 延光俯伏拜谢，其心遂安。丁未，以西京副留守龙敏为吏部侍郎。戊申，盗发唐闵帝陵。
现代文：四日，高祖在休息宴游的别殿召见并宴请了以太子太师辞官退隐的范延光，因为范延光归顺后，心存疑虑恐惧，所以，高祖在休假期间，赐以诚挚关切，高祖对他说 ：不要因忿疾伤害了精神，不要因忧思劳苦了内心，我正在向各地表示诚信，难道会对你食言？ 范延光俯身伏地拜谢，心于是安定了。六日，强盗挖掘了唐闵帝陵墓。
English: On the fourth day, Gaozu invited Fan Yanguang, who had retired from his post as Ethereal Grandmaster, to a banquet at the hall of rest and recreation. Because Fan Yanguang had doubts and fears after his surrender, Gaozu gave him sincere concern during his vacation. Gaozu said to him, "Don't hurt your spirit because of anger, don't work your heart out because of sorrow. I am expressing my sincerity to all parts of the country. Will I renege on my promise to you?" Fan Yanguang bowed down and worshiped, and his heart became stable. On the sixth day, the robbers excavated the tomb of Emperor Tang.

古文：若改旧条而为新制，则未审何门可以刊削，何事可以编联。既当革故从新，又须废彼行此，则未知国朝能守不能守乎？
现代文：七日，朔方军节度使张希崇去世，追赠太师。十三日，左谏议大夫曹国珍上书： 请在朝廷内外官员中，选拔有才华学术的人，收聚《唐六典》、《前后会要》、《礼阁新仪》、《大中统类》、《律令格式》等，精密详实地编纂汇集，使不要遗漏失落，另编成一书，命名为《大晋政统》。 
English: On the 7th day of the month, Zhang Xizhong died in the Suo Fang Army Festival, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master. On the 13th day, Zuo Zhengyi Doctor Cao Guozhen sent a letter: Please select talented scholars from among the officials inside and outside the imperial court, collect "Tang Six Classics," "Before and After Society," "Rituals and Ceremonies," "Classes of the Great Middle Ages" and "Forms of the Rulings," and compile them in a precise and detailed manner, so that they would not be lost, and compile them into another book, named "Great Jin Dynasty."

古文：臣等同共参详，未见其可。疏奏，嘉之，其事遂寝。
现代文：高祖应允。太子少师梁文矩等都说 ：若更改前代礼乐刑宪为《大晋政统》，那《尧典》、《舜典》就应当改名为《晋典》。 
English: Gao Zu agreed. The prince's apprentice, Liang Wencang, and others all said that if the previous Rite and Music Constitution was changed to the "Great Jin Constitution," then the "Shu Xuan" and "Shu Xuan" should be renamed the "Shu Xuan."

古文：辛酉，以前晋昌军节度使李周为静难军节度使。
现代文：并陈状驳斥。状奏送呈高祖，高祖加以赞赏，这件事于是停办。
English: The complaint was sent to Gaozu, who appreciated it, and the case was closed.

古文：丁酉，宰臣冯道、左散骑常侍韦勋、礼部员外郎杨昭俭自契丹使回。帝慰劳备至，锡赍丰厚。
现代文：十九日，册封高祖第十一位妹妹安定郡主为延庆长公主，第十二位妹妹广平郡主为清平长公主。二月一日，改东京玉华殿为永福殿。七日，宰相冯道、左散骑常侍韦勋、礼部员外郎杨昭俭出使契丹回朝，高祖慰劳备至，赏赐丰厚。
English: On the 19th, Gao Zu's 11th younger sister, Princess Anning, was given the title of Yanqing First Princess, and his 12th younger sister, Princess Guangping, was given the title of Qingping First Princess. On the 1st of February, Tokyo's Tamahada Palace was changed to the Yongfu Palace. On the 7th, Prime Minister Feng Dao, Zuo Sanzhong's equerry Wei Xun, and his brother-in-law Yang Zhaojian, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, sent Qidan back to the North, where Gao Zu was consoled for his hard work and received a generous reward.

古文：庚子，以天和节宴群官于广政殿，赐物有差。
现代文：十日是天和节，在广政殿宴请百官，按等级赏赐礼物。
English: The tenth day is Tianhe Festival. In the Guangzheng Hall, hundreds of officials are invited to a banquet, and gifts are awarded according to rank.

古文：三月癸卯朔，左仆射刘昫、给事中卢重自契丹使回，颁赐器币如冯道等。
现代文：三月一日，右仆射刘日句、给事中卢重出使契丹回朝，颁令像冯道等一样地赏赐器物布帛。
English: On March 1st, Liu's right-hand man, Liu Rongquan, re-emerged from the middle of the matter to send Qidan back to the North, and issued an order to reward the utensils like Feng Dao and others.

古文：乙巳，回鹘可汗仁美遣使贡方物，中有玉狻猊，实奇货也。
现代文：三日，回鹘可汗杨仁美派使者进贡地方土产，其中有玉狻猊，实是珍宝奇货。
English: On the third day, Hui Khan Yang Renmei sent an envoy to pay tribute to local local products, including jade ingots, which are truly rare and unique goods.

古文：丙午，泾州节度使张万进卒，赠太师。
现代文：四日，泾州节度使张万进去世，追赠太师。
English: On the 4th, Zhang Wanjin passed away on the day of the Zhangzhou Festival, and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：己未，皇子开封尹郑王重贵、归德军节度使兼侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使刘知远、忠武军节度使杜重威，并加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，皇子开封尹郑王石重贵、归德军节度使兼侍卫亲军步军总指挥使刘知远、忠武军节度使杜重威，一并加封同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, the prince opened the seal of Yin Zheng Wang Shi Chonggui, the returning German army's ceremonial envoy and the general commander of the infantry of the guards Liu Zhiyuan, the loyal army's ceremonial envoy Du Chongwei, together with the seal of the Zhongshumen.

古文：天平军节度使赵在礼封卫国公。
现代文：天平军节度使赵在礼册封为卫国公。
English: The Tianping Army's festival made Zhao the patron of the country in the ceremony book.

古文：庚申，遣内臣赵处玭以版诏征华山隐者前右拾遗郑云叟、玉笥山道士罗隐之。
现代文：十八日，派遣内臣赵处王比用上朝手版征召华山隐士原右拾遗郑云叟和玉笥山道士罗隐之。
English: On the 18th, he sent his vassal, Zhao Zhenwangbi, to recruit the Huashan hermit Zheng Yunqi and the Yulunshan Taoist Luo Yingzhi.

古文：灵州戍将王彦忠据怀远城作叛，帝遣供奉官齐延祚乘驿而往，彦忠率众出降，延祚矫制杀之。
现代文：灵州守将王彦忠凭借怀远城兴兵作乱，高祖派供奉官齐延祚乘驿骑前往，王彦忠率部投降，齐延祚假传君命杀掉了他。
English: Wang Yanzhong, the governor of Lingshou, used the city of Huaiyuan to stir up a riot, Gao Zu sent the offering officer Qi Yanjun to go there on horseback, Wang Yanzhong led his troops to surrender, and Qi Yanjun killed him.

古文：诏： 齐延祚辜我誓言，擅行屠戮。彰杀降之罪，隳示信之文。宜除名决重杖一顿配流。
现代文：高祖下令： 齐延祚辜负我的教诲，擅自进行屠杀，为了明示他屠杀降将的罪行，毁坏诚信的过错，应该除去他的名籍，罚重打一顿，发配流放。
English: Gaozu ordered: "Qiyan Zang failed to live up to my teachings and carried out the massacre without authorization. In order to make clear his crime of slaughtering the surrendering general and the fault of destroying the integrity, he should be stripped of his citizenship, severely punished and exiled.

古文：王彦忠赠官收葬。
现代文：王彦忠追赐官爵收尸安葬。 
English: Wang Yanzhong was posthumously given a title of nobility, and his body was buried.

古文：辛酉，封回鹘可汗仁美为奉化可汗。
现代文：十九日，册封回鹘可汗杨仁美为奉化可汗。
English: On the 19th, Yang Renmei, the Hui Khan, was officially designated as the Fenghua Khan.

古文：癸亥，以左龙武统军皇甫遇为镇国军节度使，张彦泽为彰义军节度使。
现代文：夏四月八日，改明德殿为滋德殿，是因为宫城南门与它同名的原因。
English: On the 8th of April in the summer, the Mingde Hall was changed to the Zide Hall, because the South Gate of Miyagi had the same name as it.

古文：枢密院学士、尚书仓部郎中司徒诩，枢密院学士、尚书工部郎中颜衎并落职守本官，枢密副使张从恩改宣徽史：初废枢密院故也。
现代文：九日，征召原右拾遗郑云叟担任右谏议大夫，玉笥山道士罗隐之封为希夷先生。十三日，枢密副使张从恩改任宣徽使，这是因为开始废除枢密院的缘故。
English: On the 9th, the former Right Rev. Zheng Yunqi was called up to serve as the Right Rev. and the title of Yuyaoshan Daoist Luo Yin was changed to Mr. Xi Yi. On the 13th, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Zhang Cong'en, was changed to the Vice-Minister of the State Council, which was due to the beginning of the abolition of the Privy Council.

古文：先是，桑维翰免枢密之务，以刘处让代之，奏议多不称旨，及处让丁母忧，遂以密院印付中书，故密院废焉。
现代文：在此之前，桑维翰免去了枢密院的职务，用刘处让接任，奏议大多不合高祖旨意，到刘处让遇到母亲的丧事，就把枢密院的印章交付给了中书院，所以枢密院就废止了。
English: Prior to this, Sang Wai Han was relieved of the duties of the Privy Council, and Liu Duan was appointed to take over. Most of the motions were not in accordance with Gao Zu's will. When Liu Duan encountered his mother's funeral, he handed over the seal of the Privy Council to the Chinese Academy of Sciences, so the Privy Council was abolished.

古文：丙戌，以韩昭允为兵部尚书致仕，马允孙为太子宾客致仕，房皓为右骁卫大将军致仕，皆唐末帝之旧臣也。
现代文：十五日，韩昭裔以兵部尚书辞官退隐，马裔孙以太子宾客辞官退隐，房詗以右骁卫大将军辞官退隐，这些人都是唐末帝的旧臣。
English: On the 15th, Han Zhaoxiong retired from the military with a letter of resignation from the Ministry of Military Affairs, Sun Yatai, a guest of Ma, retired from the military with a letter of resignation from the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Fang Yao retired from the military with a letter of resignation from the General of the Right Division of the National Guard. These people were all former ministers of the late Tang Dynasty.

古文：戊子，升永、岳二州为团练使额，改湘川县为全州，从马希范之奏也。
现代文：十七日，把永、岳二州提升具有团练使军额，把湘川县改为全州，这是准允马希范的上奏。
English: On the 17th, Yong and Yue two prefectures were upgraded to the level of troops with group training, and Xiangchuan County was changed to the whole prefecture. This was the prelude to the approval of Ma Xifan.

古文：五月壬寅朔，帝御崇元殿受朝，仗卫如式。
现代文：五月一日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝拜，仪仗侍卫按礼行事。
English: On May 1, Gao Zu drove to the Chongyuan Hall to receive worship, and the guards of honor acted according to protocol.

古文：癸卯，以左仆射刘昫兼太子太保，封谯国公。乙巳，昭顺军节度使姚彦章卒。
现代文：四日，昭顺军节度使姚彦章去世。
English: On the fourth day, the Shao Shun Army Festival caused Yao Yanzhang to die.

古文：升灵州方渠镇为威州，隶于灵武。改旧威州为清边军。
现代文：把灵州方渠镇升格为威州，隶归灵武，把原威州改为清边军节镇。
English: Lingzhou Fangqu Town was upgraded to Weizhou, subordinated to Lingwu, and the original Weizhou was changed to Qingbian Military Festival Town.

古文：戊申，湖南节度使马希范加天策上将军。
现代文：七日，湖南节度使马希范加封为天策上将军。
English: On the seventh day, the Hunan Festival made Ma Xifan Jiafeng the general.

古文：壬子，以侍御史卢价为户部员外郎、知制诰。户部尚书崔居俭卒。
现代文：十日，在温州设置静海军，是准允钱元馞的奏请。十一日，户部尚书崔居俭去世。
English: On the 10th, the Jing navy was set up in Wenzhou, which was a request from Qian Yuanjun. On the 11th, the head of the household, Cui Juzhen, died.

古文：甲寅，诏止绝朝臣，不得外州府求觅表状，奏荐交亲。
现代文：十三日，下令禁止朝内官员到朝外州府搜求表奏状折，上奏推荐知交亲威。
English: On the 13th, an order was issued prohibiting officials within the DPRK from going to prefectures outside the DPRK to search for and submit application forms, and recommending acquaintances and relatives.

古文：丙寅，以镇海军衙内统军、上直马步军都监、检校太傅、睦州刺史陆仁章为同平章事，遥领遂州武信军节度使；以镇海军兴武左右开道都指挥使、明州刺史仰仁铨为检校太傅、同平章事，领宣州宁国军节度使，从钱元瓘之请也。
现代文：十四日，把金州升格为节镇，把怀德军作为军队番号。
English: On the 14th, Jinzhou was upgraded to a festival town, and the Huai De Army was used as an army number.

古文：六月辛未朔，陈郡民王武穿地得黄金数饼，州牧取而贡之。帝曰： 宿藏之物，既非符宝，不合入官。 
现代文：十九日，将华清宫降格为灵泉观。六月一日，陈郡百姓王武挖地得到几饼黄金，州里长官收取进贡给高祖，高祖说 ：以前就储藏的物品，既然不是符节印玺，不应没收充公。 
English: On the 19th, the Huaqing Palace was downgraded to a spiritual fountain. On the 1st of June, Wang Wu, a citizen of Chen County, dug into the ground and obtained a few pieces of gold. The prefect of the prefecture collected the tribute to Gao Zu. Gao Zu said: The previously stored items, since they are not festival stamps, should not be confiscated.

古文：命付所获之家。
现代文：命令退还给挖得黄金的人家。
English: The order was to return the gold to the digger's family.

古文：庚辰，西京大风雨，应天福门屋瓦皆飞，鸱吻俱折。
现代文：十日，西京起暴风雨，天福门房子的盖瓦都刮掉了，鸱吻也都被折断。
English: On the 10th, there was a storm in West Beijing. The roof tiles of the Tianfu Gate House were all scraped off, and the eaves were all broken.

古文：其同籍课役，一准令文。 
现代文：二十一日，下令礼部贡举选拔应暂停一年。秋七月一日，日蚀。
English: On the 21st, it was ordered that the selection of the ceremonial tribute should be suspended for one year.

古文：壬午，濮州刺史武从谏勒归私第，受赃十五万故也。
现代文：西京发大水，伊水、洛水、氵廛水、涧水四河都暴涨外溢，冲毁了天津桥。九日，御史中丞薛融等上呈详勘定编的皇帝诏令三百六十八道，分编为三十一卷。
English: On the 9th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict detailing 368 provinces, divided into 31 volumes, which was presented to Emperor Xue Rong and others.

古文：丁酉，故皇子河南尹重乂妻虢国夫人李氏落发为尼，赐名悟因，仍锡紫衣、法号及夏腊二十。
现代文：闰七月一日，文武百官不入阁朝拜。是因为下雨浸湿衣服的缘故。十三日，濮州刺史武从谏被勒令免职回家，是因为受贿十五万的缘故。二十八日，已故皇子河南尹石重繧的妻子虢国夫人李氏剃发为尼，赐封尼名悟因，又赐给紫衣、法号和二十年僧龄。
English: On the first day of leap July, hundreds of civil and military officials did not enter the pavilion to pay homage. It was because of rain-soaked clothes. On the 13th, Zhangzhou Zishiwu was ordered to leave his post and return home because of a bribe of 150,000 yuan. On the 28th, the wife of the late prince of Henan, Yin Shi, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late prince of Henan, the wife of the late

古文：八月己亥朔，河决博平，甘陵大水。
现代文：八月一日，黄河在博平溃口，甘陵被大水淹没。
English: On August 1, the Yellow River was flooded at the mouth of Boping, and Ganling was flooded.

古文：戊申，前兵部尚书王权授太子少傅致仕。
现代文：三日，任命代理司空兼门下侍郎平章事、弘文馆大学士冯道为代理司徒，兼任侍中，赐封鲁国公。
English: On the third day, he appointed the acting secretary Ku and his attendant, Taira no Shoji, and the scholar of Kobunkan University, Fong Dao, as acting attendants, concurrently serving as attendants, and bestowed the title of Prince of Lu.

古文：己酉，以天下兵马副元帅、镇海镇东等军节度使、检校大师、行中书令、吴越王钱元瓘为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：十一日，任命天下兵马副元帅，镇海、镇东等军节度使、检校太师、行中书令、吴越王钱元馞为天下兵马元帅。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan was appointed as the vice marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and Zhenhai, Zhendong and other military festival envoys, inspectors, middle-ranking officials, and Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan were appointed as the world's soldiers and horses marshals.

古文：壬子，升亳州为防御使额，依旧隶宋州。
现代文：十四日，提升亳州具有防御使的编制，仍旧隶属宋州。
English: On the 14th, Bozhou was upgraded to have a defense force, but it still belonged to Songzhou.

古文：丙辰，司天监马重绩等进所撰新历。
现代文：十九日，司天监马重绩等进献编纂的新历书，高祖下诏褒奖新历书。
English: On the 19th, the new calendar book compiled by Siti Tianyunma Chong Rong and other contributors, and the new calendar book praised by Gao Zu.

古文：己卯，遥领洮州保顺军节度使鲍君福加检校太师、兼侍中，判湖州诸军事。
现代文：敕命翰林学士承旨和凝撰序，称为调元历。九月五日，提升婺州为具有武胜军的编制。
English: On September 5th, Bozhou was upgraded to a state with a victorious army.

古文：辛巳，相州节度使桑维翰上言： 管内所获贼人，从来籍没财产，请止之。 
现代文：二十四日，高祖在永福殿宴请文武百官。契丹派遣使臣粘木孤来问候，送来牛马等物品。十一日，相州节度使桑维翰上奏： 管辖范围内抓获的贼匪，向来是没收其财产，请停止这种做法。 
English: On the 24th, Gaozu held a banquet at the Yongfu Hall for hundreds of civil and military officials. Khitan dispatched envoy Mu Mu to send greetings and sent cattle and horses and other items. On the 11th, the Songzhou Festival made San Weihan play: Thieves and bandits caught within the jurisdiction have always been confiscated their property, please stop this practice.

古文：诏： 今后凡有贼人，准格律定罪，不得没纳家资，天下诸州准此。 
现代文：高祖下令： 以后凡是抓获贼匪，按照法律条款定罪，不得没收缴纳其家产。全国各州按此办理。 
English: Gao Zu ordered: In the future, anyone who is caught as a thief and bandit and convicted in accordance with the provisions of the law shall not have his or her family property confiscated and paid. All states in the country shall handle this accordingly.

古文：丙申，以威胜军节度副使罗周岳为给事中，中书舍人李详改礼部侍郎，礼部侍郎吕琦改刑部侍郎，刑部侍郎王松改户部侍郎，户部侍郎阎至改兵部侍郎，中书舍人王易简充史馆修撰，判馆事。
现代文：十三日，赐封后唐许王李从益为郇国公，承奉后唐的祠祀，衣服颜色旌旗式样全准旧制，仍旧把西京的至德宫作为祠庙，祭祀用的牛羊布帛器用服饰等全由官府供给。十六日，高丽王王建派遣使者进贡地方土产。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Goryeo bestowed the title of Prince of Goryeo to King Li Congyi of the Later Tang Dynasty, and he followed the old system of temples and shrines in the Later Tang Dynasty. The color of his clothes, the flag, and the style of his clothing were all in accordance with the old system. He still used the Shidong Palace in West Beijing as his ancestral temple, and all of his ceremonial clothing, such as oxen, sheep, and cloth, was supplied by the government. On the 16th, King Jian of Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute to local indigenous products.

古文：冬十月戊戌朔，故昭信军节度使白奉进赠太尉。丙午，以太常卿程逊没于海，废朝一日，赠右仆射。
现代文：二十日，下令废止在寒食、七夕、重阳以及十月暖帐等节日里朝廷内、外官员贡献礼物。冬十月九日，因太常卿程逊在海上被淹死，停止上朝一天，追赠为右仆射。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the abolition of gifts from officials inside and outside the imperial court on festivals such as the Cold Food Festival, the Chinese New Year's Eve, the Double Ninth Day of the Moon, and the October New Year's Eve.

古文：庚戌，闽王王昶、威武军节度使王继恭遣僚佐林思、郑元弼等朝贡，致书于宰执，无人臣之礼。
现代文：十三日，闽王王昶、威武军节度使王继恭派僚佐林思、郑元弼等入朝进贡，写信给宰执，没有人臣的礼节。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the king of Wei, the king of Wei, and the great military commander, Wang Jixiong, sent his colleagues, Zuo Lin Si and Zheng Yuanqi, to the court to pay tribute, and wrote a letter to the commander-in-chief, without the etiquette of a vassal.

古文：帝怒，诏令不受所贡，应诸州纲运，并令林思、郑元弼等押归本道。
现代文：高祖发怒，下令不接受朝贡礼物。凡闽地各州进贡的大宗货物，一起让林思、郑元弼等押送退回本地。
English: Gao Zu was angry and ordered not to accept the tribute gifts. He also ordered Lin Si, Zheng Yuanqi and others to escort the large cargoes of tribute from all the states of the Han Dynasty back to the local area.

古文：既而兵部员外郎李知损上疏，请禁锢使人，籍没纲运。可之，收林思等下狱。
现代文：不久兵部员外郎李知损上疏奏请拘押闽王使臣，没收朝贡礼物，高祖准允了，把林思等收押进监牢。
English: Soon after, his younger brother, Li Zhizai, a member of the military department, issued a request to detain the envoys of Shao Wang and confiscate the tribute gifts. Gao Zu agreed and took Lin Si and others into custody.

古文：丙辰，谿州刺史彭士愁，以锦、奖之兵与蛮部万人掠辰、澧二境，湖南节度使马希范遣牙兵拒之而退。
现代文：十九日，溪州刺史彭士愁率领锦、奖的士兵和南蛮部族一万多人在辰、澧二州抢掠财物，湖南节度使马希范派军队去阻止他们才退去。
English: On the 19th, more than ten thousand people from the Jin and Prize soldiers and Nanban tribes led by the Xizhou assassin, Spen Shixu, looted and plundered property in the two prefectures of Shandong and Hunan. The Hunan festival made Ma Xifan send troops to stop them before they retreated.

古文：己卯，吏部侍郎龙敏改尚书左丞。
现代文：金州山林土匪度从谠等侵扰洵阳，朝廷派兵去讨伐平定山匪。
English: The bandits in the mountains and forests of Jinzhou invaded Fenyang from Shan, and the imperial court sent soldiers to fight the bandits in Dingshan.

古文：己丑，以太子宾客杨凝式为礼部尚书致仕。诏建钱炉于栾川。丙申，谏议大夫致仕逍遥先生郑云叟卒。
现代文：十一月八日，下令在洛阳建立唐高祖、太宗和庄宗、明宗、闵帝五座祠庙。二十二日，诏令在乐川建立钱炉。二十九日，以谏议大夫辞官退隐的逍遥先生郑云叟去世。
English: On November 8th, he ordered the establishment of five ancestral temples in Luoyang, including Tang Gaozu, Taizong, Zhuangzong, Mingzong, and Emperor Qian. On the 22nd, he ordered the establishment of a money-making furnace in Lechuan. On the 29th, Mr. Zheng Yunyao, who had retired as a doctor, passed away.

古文：十二月丁酉朔，百官不入阁，大雪故也。
现代文：十二月一日，文武百官不入阁朝拜，是因为下大雪的缘故。
English: On December 1st, the reason why hundreds of civil and military officials did not enter the pavilion to pay homage was because of the heavy snow.

古文：己亥，故皇子重英妻张氏落发为尼，赐名悟慎，并夏腊二十。
现代文：三日，已故的皇子石重英的妻子张氏剃发做了尼姑，赐僧名悟慎，赐与僧龄二十年。
English: On the third day, Zhang, the wife of the late Prince Shi Chongying, shaved her head and became a nun, and gave the monk the name of Guoshen and granted him a monk's age of twenty years.

古文：庚戌，礼官奏： 来岁正旦，王公上寿，皇帝举酒，奏《元同之乐》；再饮，奏《文同之乐》；三饮，奏同前。 
现代文：四月，礼官上奏 ：明年元旦，王公上朝祝寿，皇帝举杯赐酒，演奏《玄同之乐》，第二次饮酒，演奏《文同之乐》，第三次饮酒，仍奏前乐。 
English: In April, the ritual begins: On New Year's Day of the following year, when the prince is celebrating his birthday, the emperor raises a glass of wine and plays "The Music of Xuan Tong," the second time he drinks, he plays "The Music of Wen Tong," and the third time he drinks, he still plays the prelude.

古文：从之。
现代文：高祖准允了礼官的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：歌辞不录。丙辰，诏今后城郭村坊，不得创造僧尼院舍。丁巳，帝谓宰臣曰： 大雪害民，五旬未止。京城祠庙，悉令祈祷，了无其验。岂非凉德不储，神休未洽者乎？ 
现代文：十日，下令城镇乡村以后都不能建造僧尼寺院房舍。二十一日，高祖对宰臣说： 大雪损害了人民，五十天不停，京城祠庙都令进行祈祷了，全无一点效应，难道不是我寡德不配帝位，神明不予保佑吗？ 
English: On the 10th, it was decreed that monks and nuns could no longer build temple buildings in towns and villages. On the 21st, Gaozu said to his vassal, "The heavy snow has harmed the people. For fifty days in a row, the temples and shrines in the capital have been ordered to offer prayers, with no effect at all. Isn't it true that I am too poor to be worthy of the imperial throne and am not blessed by the gods?

古文：因令出薪炭米粟给军士贫民等。
现代文：于是下令拿出柴火薪炭粮食供给士兵和贫民等人。
English: He then ordered that firewood, charcoal and grain be brought out to feed the soldiers and the poor.

