古文：凡人臣之所道成奸者有八术：一曰同床，二曰在旁，三曰父兄，四曰养殃，五曰民萌，六曰流行，七曰威强，八曰四方。
现代文：臣下得以实现奸谋的途径有八种：一是同床，二是在旁，三是父兄，四是养殃，五是民萌，六是流行，七是威强，八是四方。
English: There are eight ways for a vassal to carry out a treacherous plot: one is to be in the same bed, the second is to be next to him, the third is to be a father and brother, the fourth is to be a scourge, the fifth is to be popular, the sixth is to be popular, the seventh is to be powerful, and the eighth is to be in all directions.

古文：何谓同床？
现代文：什么叫同床？
English: What do you call sharing a bed?

古文：曰：贵夫人，爱孺子，便僻好色，此人主之所惑也。
现代文：即宠幸夫人，受宠的年轻美貌姬妾，她们善于谄媚便巧和利用自己的姿色，这些正是君主所迷恋的。
English: That is, the favored lady, the favored young beautiful concubine, they are good at flattering and using their appearance, these are what the monarch is infatuated with.

古文：托于燕处之虞，乘醉饱之时，而求其所欲，此必听之术也。
现代文：她们总是趁着君主在安居快乐、酒醉饭饱的机会，来央求她们想要得到的东西，这是让君主一定听从的手段。
English: They always take advantage of the opportunity when the monarch is at home, happy, drunk and full, to beg for what they want to get, which is a means to make the monarch obey.

古文：为人臣者内事之以金玉，使惑其主，此之谓 同床 。
现代文：做臣子的通过内线用金玉财宝贿赂她们，让她们迷惑君主而答应臣子请托的事情，这就叫 同床 。
English: When a vassal bribes them with gold, jewels, and treasures through an inside line, so that they can deceive the monarch and promise the vassal a favor, this is called bed-sharing.

古文：二曰在旁。
现代文：第二种是在旁。
English: The second is on the sidelines.

古文：何谓在谤？
现代文：什么叫在旁？
English: What do you call standing by?

古文：曰：优笑侏儒，左右近习，此人主未命而唯唯，未使而诺诺，先意承旨，观貌察色以先主心者也。
现代文：就是指倡优侏儒，君王身边的亲信是侍从。这些人在君主没下令的时候就应承，没指派任务的时候就应承，总是事先领会君主的意图，察颜观色来预先猜测君主的心意。
English: These people obey the monarch when he does not give an order, and when he does not assign a task, they always understand the monarch's intention in advance, and look at the face to guess the monarch's intention in advance.

古文：此皆俱进俱退，皆应皆对，一辞同轨以移主心者也。
现代文：这些人都是一致行动、一个腔调，统一口径和行动来改变君主的心意。
English: These men were all acting in unison, with one voice, one caliber and one action to change the mind of the monarch.

古文：为人臣者内事之以金玉玩好，外为之行不法，使之化其主，此之谓 在旁 。
现代文：做臣子的通过内线用金玉珍宝贿赂他们，在宫外帮他们干不法之事，让他们影响君主，这就叫 在旁 。
English: If you are a courtier, you can bribe them with gold, jewels, and precious stones through an inside line, help them do illegal things outside the palace, and let them influence the monarch. This is called being on the sidelines.

古文：三曰父兄。
现代文：第三中是父兄。
English: In the third middle school, it was my father and brother.

古文：何谓父兄？
现代文：什么叫父兄？
English: What do you call a brother and a father?

古文：曰：侧室公子，人主之所亲爱也；大臣廷吏，人主之所与度计也。
现代文：就是指君主的兄弟叔伯，他们是君主亲近宠爱的人；大臣和朝廷的官吏，是与君主谋划国家政事的人。
English: It refers to the brothers and uncles of the monarch, who are the monarch's close and favorite people; ministers and officials of the court are the people who plan national affairs with the monarch.

古文：此皆尽力毕议，人主之所必听也。
现代文：这些人都竭尽全力参与议政，而君主一定会听从的。
English: These people are doing their best to participate in the deliberation, and the monarch will certainly obey.

古文：为人臣者事公子侧室以音声子女，收大臣延吏以辞言，处约言事，事成则进爵益禄，以劝其心，犯其主，此之谓 父兄 。
现代文：做臣子的用音乐美女来侍奉君主的叔伯、兄弟，又用花言巧语来笼络大臣和朝廷管理，让他们在关键时刻进言，事成之后就进爵加禄，这样来耸恿他们，使他们干扰君主，这就叫 父兄 。
English: Uncles and brothers who are courtiers and use beautiful music to serve the monarch, and coax ministers and the court administration with flowery language, let them have their say at critical moments, and enter into the peerage after the matter is concluded, and thus deceive them and cause them to interfere with the monarch, are called father and brother.

古文：四曰养殃。
现代文：第四种是养殃。
English: The fourth is to raise worms.

古文：何谓养殃？
现代文：什么叫养殃？
English: What do you call raising vermin?

古文：曰：人主乐美宫室台池，好饰子女狗马以娱其心，此人主之殃也。
现代文：就是君主喜欢修饰宫室台池，喜欢打扮美女狗马来来使自己欢愉，这是君主的灾殃。
English: It is the monarch who likes to decorate the palace courtyard pool, likes to dress up beautiful women, dogs and horses to make himself happy, this is the disaster of the monarch.

古文：为人臣者尽民力以美宫室台池，重赋敛以饰子女狗马，以娱其主而乱其心，从其所欲，而树私利其间，此谓 养殃 。
现代文：做臣子的用尽民力来修饰宫室台池，加重百姓赋税来打扮美女狗马，这样来娱乐君主而扰乱他的心事，顺从他的欲望，而在其中夹杂私利，这就叫 养殃 。
English: A vassal uses all the people's strength to decorate the palace's terrace, increases the people's tax to dress up the beautiful women, dogs and horses, and thus entertains the monarch and disturbs his mind, obeys his desires, and mixes selfish interests in it. This is called "raising curses."

古文：五曰民萌。
现代文：五是民萌。
English: The fifth is Minmoe.

古文：何谓民萌？
现代文：什么叫民萌？
English: What is minmeng?

古文：曰：为人臣者散公财以说民人，行小惠以取百姓，使朝廷市井皆劝权誉己，以塞其主而成其所欲，此之谓 民萌 。
现代文：即，做臣子的散发公家财物来取悦民众，行小恩小惠来赢得百姓，让朝廷民间都鼓动起来称颂自己，这样来蒙蔽君主而达到他的欲望，这就叫 民萌 。
English: That is to say, to be a courtier, to distribute public property to please the people, to do small favors to win the people, to encourage the people of the court to praise themselves, so as to deceive the monarch and achieve his desire, this is called Minmoe.

古文：六曰流行。
现代文：六是流行。
English: Six is a fad.

古文：何谓流行？
现代文：什么叫流行？
English: What is fashion?

古文：曰：人主者，固壅其言谈，希于听论议，易移以辩说。
现代文：即，作为君主，话全闷在肚里不与人交谈，很少听到臣下议论，容易被花言巧语打动。
English: That is to say, as a monarch, he does not converse with people, rarely hears his subjects talk, and is easily moved by rhetoric.

古文：为人臣者求诸候之辩士，养国中之能说者，使之以语其私。
现代文：做臣子的寻求国外善辩的人，供养国内能言的人，让他们来为自己的私利进说。
English: As a courtier, seek out foreign eloquent people, and support domestic eloquent people, and let them come to speak for their own interests.

古文：为巧文之言，流行之辞，示之以利势，惧之以患害，施属虚辞以坏其主，此之谓 流行 。
现代文：说出华美的言语，流利的辞句，用有利的形势来诱导他，用祸害来恐吓他，编造虚假的言辞来损害君主，这就叫 流行 。
English: It is called "popularity" to say beautiful words, fluent words, to use favorable situations to induce him, to intimidate him with evil, and to fabricate false words to damage the monarch.

古文：七曰威强。
现代文：七是威强。
English: Seven is mighty.

古文：何谓威强？
现代文：什么叫威强?
English: What do you mean by powerful?

古文：曰：君人者，以群臣百姓为威强者也。
现代文：即，统治者是靠群臣百姓来形成强大威势的。
English: That is to say, the ruler relies on the masses of people to form a powerful force.

古文：群臣百姓之所善，则君善之；非群臣百姓之所善，则君不善之。
现代文：群臣百姓喜欢的，君主就喜欢；不是群臣百姓喜欢的，君主就不喜欢。
English: If the subjects like it, the monarch likes it; if the subjects don't like it, the monarch doesn't like it.

古文：为人臣者，聚带剑之客，养必死之士，以彰其威，明为己者必利，不为己者必死，以恐其群臣百姓而行其私，此之谓 威强 。
现代文：做臣子的收罗带剑的侠客，供养亡命之徒，用来耀武扬威，倡言顺从他的一定得到，不顺从他的一定要死，这样来恐吓群臣百姓从而实现个人意图，这就叫 威强 。
English: A chivalrous knight with a sword, who serves as a retainer for a vassal, is used to feed the desperate, to show off his military prowess, to advocate that obedience to him must be obtained, and disobedience to him must be death, and to intimidate the vassals and the people in this way to achieve personal intentions, this is called "majesty."

古文：八曰四方。
现代文：八是四方。
English: Eight is square.

古文：何谓四方？
现代文：什么叫四方？
English: What do you call a square?

古文：曰：君人者，国小，则事大国；兵弱，则畏强兵。
现代文：即，做国君的，国小就侍奉大国，兵弱就害怕强兵。
English: That is to say, if you are the ruler of a country, you should serve the big country, and the weak soldiers should be afraid of the strong soldiers.

古文：大国之所索，小国必听；强兵之所加，弱兵必服。
现代文：大国勒索的，小国一定听从；强兵压境的，弱兵一定服从。
English: If a big country blackmails, a small country must obey; if a strong army oppresses, a weak army must obey.

古文：为人臣者，重赋敛，尽府库，虚其国以事大国，而用其威求诱其君；甚者举兵以聚边境而制敛于内，薄者数内大使以震其君，使之恐惧，此之谓 四方 。
现代文：做臣子的，加重赋敛，耗尽钱粮，削弱自己国家去侍奉大国，求助大国威势来透迫自己君主；严重的，招引大国军队压境来挟制国内，轻些的，屡屡引进大国使者来震慑君主，使他害怕，这就叫 四方 。
English: If you are a courtier, you will increase the austerity, exhaust the money and grain, weaken your own country to serve the great power, and seek the help of the great power to force your monarch; if you are serious, you will attract the great power's army to suppress the border and control the country, and if you are lighter, you will repeatedly introduce the great power's emissaries to deter the monarch and make him afraid, this is called the four directions.

古文：凡此八者，人臣之所以道成奸，世主所以壅劫，失其所有也，不可不察焉。
现代文：所有这八种手段，是臣子实现奸谋的途径，是当代君主受到蒙蔽挟制以至失掉权势的原因，是不可不明察的。
English: All of these eight means are the ways for courtiers to achieve treachery, and the reasons why contemporary monarchs are blinded and blackmailed into losing power, which cannot be overlooked.

古文：明君之于内也，娱其色而不行其谒，不使私请。
现代文：明君对于宫内的夫人美女，欣赏她们的美色而不理睬她们的禀告，不让她们有私人的请求。
English: For the beautiful ladies of the imperial court, Emperor Ming appreciated their beauty, but ignored their obituaries and did not allow them to have personal requests.

古文：其于左右也，使其身必责其言，不使益辞。
现代文：对于身边的近侍，使用他们，一定要严察他们的言论，不准夸大其辞。
English: For the close attendants around you, when using them, be sure to scrutinize their statements and do not exaggerate.

古文：其于父兄大臣也，听其言也必使以罚任于后，不令妄举。
现代文：对于父兄和大臣，听取他们的意见，但一定要使他们用受罚担保后果，不许胡乱举荐。
English: For parents and ministers, listen to their opinions, but be sure to make them use the punishment to guarantee the consequences, do not randomly recommend.

古文：其于观乐玩好也，必令之有所出，不使擅进擅退，不使群臣虞其意。
现代文：对于观赏玩乐的东西，在法令上一定要有依据，不准群臣擅自进献或裁减，不让群臣猜测到君主的心意。
English: For things for entertainment, there must be a basis in the law, and ministers are not allowed to donate or reduce them without permission, and ministers are not allowed to guess the monarch's mind.

古文：其于德施也，纵禁财，发坟仓，利于民者，必出于君，不使人臣私其德。
现代文：明君对恩惠的施行，凡是发放国库的财物和官仓的粮食，有利于民众的事，一定要用君主的名义，不要让臣下将恩德归于自己。
English: When the Ming Emperor grants favors, such as the distribution of treasury goods and grain from the official storehouses, which are beneficial to the people, he must do so in the name of the monarch, and not allow his subjects to take the benefits for themselves.

古文：其于说议也，称誉者所善，毁疵者所恶，必实其能，察其过，不使群臣相为语。
现代文：对于议论，赞美称颂的人所称颂的，毁疵者所憎恶的人，一定要去核实他们的才能，查明她们的过失，不让群臣相互吹捧或诽谤。
English: For those who are talked about, praised by those who praise, and detested by those who criticize, it is necessary to verify their talents, find out their faults, and prevent ministers from praising or slandering each other.

古文：其于勇力之士也，军旅之功无逾赏，邑斗之勇无赦罪，不使群臣行私财。
现代文：对于有勇力的人，作战立功不破格行赏，私斗犯法不赦免罪行，不让群臣用财物收买人。
English: For those who have the courage, they should be rewarded for their outstanding performance in battle, not pardoned for their crimes of breaking the law in selfish struggles, and not allowed to be bribed by their vassals with their property.

古文：其于诸候之求索也，法则听之，不法则距之。
现代文：明君对于其他诸侯国的要求，合法的就听从，不一合法的就拒绝。
English: As far as the demands of other vassal states were concerned, Emperor Ming would listen to those that were legitimate and reject those that were not.

古文：则谓亡君者，非莫有其国也，而有之者，皆非己有也。
现代文：所谓亡国之君，并非没了这个国家，而是这个国家的存在全然不归自己所有。
English: The so-called ruler of a dead country does not lose this country, but the existence of this country does not belong to him at all.

古文：令臣以外为制于内，则是君人者亡也。
现代文：让臣下用外力控制国内，就是统治者丧失自己的国家了。
English: The ruler loses his country when he allows his vassals to use external forces to control the country.

古文：听大国为救亡也，而亡亟于不听，故不听。
现代文：为了挽救国家危亡而听从大国，这比不听从亡得更快，所以不去听从。
English: In order to save the country from peril, obeying the great power is faster than not obeying, so do not obey.

古文：群臣知不听，则不外诸候，诸候知不听，则不受臣之诬其君矣。
现代文：群臣知道君主不听从，就不去同国外诸侯勾结；国外诸侯知道君主不听从，也就不接受臣下诈骗自己君主的胡说了。
English: The vassals know that the monarch does not obey, so they do not collude with the foreign princes; the foreign princes know that the monarch does not obey, so they do not accept the nonsense of the vassals deceiving their monarch.

古文：明主之为官职爵禄也，所以进贤材劝有功也。
现代文：明君设置官职爵禄，是用来进升贤才奖励有功的人的。
English: The Ming Dynasty set up the official title of knighthood, which was used to reward meritorious people for promotion.

古文：故曰：贤材者处厚禄任大官；功大者有尊爵受重赏。
现代文：所以说，有贤才的人享受丰厚的俸禄，担任高的官职；功劳大的人获得尊贵爵位，受到重重奖赏。
English: Therefore, people with talents enjoy rich salaries and hold high official positions; people with great merits receive honorary titles and are rewarded heavily.

古文：官贤者量其能，赋禄者称其功。
现代文：任命贤才要根据他的才能，授予俸禄要考量他本身的功劳是否相称。
English: The appointment of a talented person should be based on his talent, and the award of a salary should consider whether his own merit is commensurate.

古文：是以贤者不诬能以事其主，有功者乐进其业，故事成功立，今则不然，不课贤不肖，不论有功劳，用诸候之重，听左右之谒，父兄大臣上请爵禄于上，而下卖之以收财利及以树私党。
现代文：因此，有才能的人不隐藏自己的才能来为君主效力，有功劳的人乐于进献功业，所以事情能办成，功业能建立。现在却不是这样，不考核贤不贤，不论有无功劳，任用被他国诸侯所看重的人，听从左右近侍的请求，父兄大臣在上面向君主请求爵禄，在下面又出卖它来收取财利和培植私党。
English: Therefore, talented people do not hide their talents to serve the monarch, and meritorious people are willing to make contributions, so things can be done and achievements can be established. However, this is not the case now. Regardless of merit, people who are valued by the princes of other countries are appointed, and the requests of the close attendants on the left and right are obeyed. The father and brother ministers ask the monarch for a knighthood at the top, and sell it at the bottom to receive financial benefits and cultivate a private party.

古文：故财利多者买官以为贵，有左右之交者请谒以成重。
现代文：所以财利多的就买官而成为尊贵的人，同君主近侍有交往的靠托人请求而成为有权势的人。
English: That is why the rich and powerful buy their way into high office, and those who have dealings with the monarch's closest aides become powerful at their own request.

古文：功劳之臣不论，官职之迁失谬。
现代文：劳苦功高的臣子得不到论定，官职的变动颠倒错乱。
English: Subordinates with a high degree of hard work and merit do not receive approval, and changes in official positions are reversed and chaotic.

古文：是以吏偷官而外交，弃事而亲财。
现代文：因此官吏玩忽职守而四外交往，抛弃事务而贪图财利。
English: Therefore, officials neglect their duties and go abroad, abandon affairs and seek money and profit.

古文：是以贤者懈怠而不劝，有功者隳而简其业，此亡国之风也。
现代文：因此有才能的人懈怠而不求上进，有功劳的人堕落而轻慢职务，这是亡国的风气啊！
English: Therefore, talented people slack off and do not strive for advancement, and meritorious people fall and despise their duties. This is the culture of a ruined country!

