古文：薛矜朱七娘李光远李霸洛阳鬼兵道德里书生安宜坊书生裴盛杨溥薛直刘洪
现代文：薛矜朱七娘李光远李霸洛阳鬼兵道德里书生安宜坊书生裴盛杨溥薛直刘洪
English: Xue Qi Zhu's seventh daughter, Li Guangyuan, Li Bao, Luoyang ghost soldier, moralist, student, An Yi Fang, student, Pei Sheng, Yang Jie, Xue Zhi, Liu Hong

古文：薛矜
现代文：薛矜
English: Xue Ying

古文：薛矜者，开元中为长安尉，主知宫市，迭日于东西二市。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，薛矜任长安尉，执掌为宫内采买事宜。他交替往来于东西两市。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Xue Yao was appointed as the first lieutenant of Chang'an and was in charge of procurement for the imperial court. He alternated between the two cities.

古文：一日于东市市前，见一坐车，车中妇人，手如白雪。
现代文：一天，在东市市前，看见一驾坐车，车中有一妇人，手白如雪，薛矜顿生爱慕之心。
English: One day, in front of Dongshi, I saw a car driving by. There was a woman in the car, her hands were white as snow, and she was full of admiration.

古文：矜慕之，使左右持银镂小合，立于车侧。
现代文：于是派手下人拿一只银镂小盒，站在车傍。
English: So he sent a subordinate to take a small silver ingot box and stand next to the car.

古文：妇人使侍婢问价，云：此是长安薛少府物，处分令车中若问，便宜饷之。
现代文：妇人让侍婢去问价钱。薛矜手下人说：这是长安薛少尉的东西，吩咐说如果车中人问，就廉价卖给她。
English: The woman asked the servant to ask the price. Xue Yao's men said, "This is Second Lieutenant Chang'an Xue's stuff. If anyone in the car asks, sell it to her at a low price."

古文：妇人甚喜谢，矜微挑之，遂欣然，便谓矜曰：我在金光门外，君宜相访也。
现代文：妇人很高兴地道了谢，薛矜稍稍挑逗了这妇人，妇人竟很高兴，就对薛矜说：我住在金光门外，你应该去看看我呀！
English: The woman happily said thank you. Xue Ye slightly teased the woman. The woman was so happy that she said to Xue Ye, "I live outside the Jinguangmen, you should come and see me!"

古文：矜使左右随至宅。
现代文：薛矜派手下人跟着去了她住的地方。
English: Xue Yao sent his men to follow her to where she lived.

古文：翌日往来过，见妇人门外骑甚众，跃蹰未通。
现代文：第二天，薛矜来到妇人的住处，看到门外有很多坐骑，犹豫着没有通报。
English: The next day, Xue Ye came to the woman's residence, saw a lot of horses outside the door, and hesitated to inform.

古文：客各引去，矜令白己在门，使左右送刺。
现代文：渐渐客人们都散去了，薛矜叫通禀说自己在门外，并让手下人呈上自己的名片。
English: Gradually, the guests dispersed. Xue Yao called Tong Yao to say that he was outside the door, and asked his subordinates to present their business cards.

古文：乃邀至外厅，令矜坐，云：待汝束。
现代文：于是薛矜被邀请到外厅落坐，说：稍候片刻，妇人在修饰打扮。
English: So Xue Yao was invited to sit in the outer hall and said: "Wait a moment, the woman is dressing up.

古文：矜觉火冷，心窃疑怪。
现代文：薛矜觉得很冷，心中暗暗生疑，感觉事情有点奇怪。
English: Xue Yao felt very cold and had a sneaking suspicion that things were a bit strange.

古文：须臾，引入堂中。其幔是青布，遥见一灯，火色微暗，将近又远，疑非人也。
现代文：不一会儿，薛矜被领入堂中，堂上的帐幔是黑布的，远远地看见一盏灯，灯光有点儿暗淡，灯光象在近前，却又似离得很远。
English: After a while, Xue Yao was led into the hall. The curtain on the hall was made of black cloth. He saw a light in the distance. The light was a bit dim. The light seemed to be close, but it also seemed to be far away.

古文：然业已求见，见毕当去，心中恒诵千手观音咒。
现代文：薛矜怀疑这女子不是人，但已经要求见面，只有见面后马上离去。他心中不停地默诵千手观音咒。
English: Xue Yao suspected that the woman was not human, but he had already asked to meet her, only to leave immediately after the meeting. He kept reciting the Thousand-Handed Guanyin Mantra in his mind.

古文：至内，见坐中帐中，以罗巾蒙首，矜苦牵曳，久之方落，见妇人面长尺余，正青色，有声如狗，矜遂绝倒。
现代文：走到内室，见那妇人坐在帷帐中，用罗巾蒙住脸。薛矜用力拉，好一会儿才把罗巾拉下来，看见妇人的脸有一尺多长，纯黑色，发出了象狗一样的叫唤声。
English: When he went to the inner room, he saw the woman sitting in the curtain, covering her face with a shawl. Xue Yao pulled hard, and it took him a while to pull the shawl off. He saw that the woman's face was more than a foot long, pure black, and it let out a barking sound like a dog.

古文：从者至其室宇，但见殡宫，矜在其内，绝无间隙。
现代文：薛矜被吓得立即昏倒在地。他的随从只看到了一处临时停放棺材的地方，薛矜正在里面，里面一点空隙都没有。
English: Terrified, Xue Yao immediately fainted and fell to the ground. His entourage only saw a place where the coffin was temporarily parked. Xue Yao was inside, and there was no gap at all.

古文：遽推壁倒，见矜已死，微心上暖。移就店将息，经月余方苏矣。
现代文：随从立即推倒墙壁，看见薛矜已经昏死过去，只有心房上还有点儿热气，随从把他抬到店中细心护理，过了一个多月薛矜才醒过来。
English: The attendant immediately knocked down the wall, saw that Xue Yao had passed out, only a little heat remained on the atrium, the attendant carried him to the store for careful care, and it took more than a month for Xue Yao to wake up.

古文：朱七娘
现代文：朱七娘
English: Zhu Xi Niang

古文：东都思恭坊朱七娘者，倡妪也，有王将军，素与交通。
现代文：东都洛阳思恭坊的朱七娘，是个妓女。当时有位王将军，平时和朱七娘有私情。
English: Zhu Qi's daughter, who lived in the eastern capital of Luoyang, Shigongfang, was a prostitute. At that time, there was a king general who had an affair with Zhu Qi's daughter.

古文：开元中，王遇疾卒，已半岁，朱不知也。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，王将军患病死去，已经过了半年，朱七娘也不知道。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, General Wang fell ill and died. It's been half a year, and Zhu Qiye doesn't even know about it.

古文：其年七月，王忽来朱处，久之日暮，曰：能随至温柔坊宅否？
现代文：那年七月，王将军忽然来到朱七娘住处，呆了很长时间，天色已经很晚，王将军说：能跟我到温柔坊我的住处吗？
English: In July of that year, General Wang suddenly came to Zhu Qiye's residence and stayed for a long time. It was very late in the day. General Wang said, "Can you come with me to my residence, Gentle Boy?"

古文：朱欲许焉，其女弹唱有名，不欲母往。乃曰：将军止此故佳，将还有所惮耶？
现代文：朱七娘想跟他去，但朱七娘那位很有名气善歌舞弹唱的女儿，不愿让母亲去，说：将军留在这里本来挺好的，还有什么顾忌吗？
English: Zhu Qi Niang wanted to go with him, but Zhu Qi Niang's daughter, who was a very famous and good singer, did not want her mother to go, saying, "It was fine for the general to stay here, is there anything to be afraid of?"

古文：不获已，王以后骑载去。
现代文：女儿没有阻止住母亲。
English: The daughter did not stop her mother from singing.

古文：入院，欢洽如故。明旦，王氏使婢收灵床被，见一妇人在被中，遽走还白。
现代文：王将军把朱七娘放在坐骑后面载着她一起去了他的住处，进入院内，就象过去一样与朱七娘欢爱。第二天早上，王将军的妻子让婢女收拾灵柩的床被，看见被中有个妇人，立即跑回去报告。
English: General Wang put the seventh daughter of the Zhu family on the back of his horse and rode with her to his residence. They entered the courtyard and made love to the seventh daughter of the Zhu family as they had in the past. The next morning, General Wang's wife asked her maid to tidy up the coffin bed, and when she saw a woman in the bedclothes, she immediately ran back to report it.

古文：王氏诸子，惊而来视。问其故，知之父所引。
现代文：王将军的几个儿子，感到很惊奇，个个都跑来看，并寻问其中的缘故，才知道是亡父领来的。
English: Surprised, General Wang's sons all ran to see and inquire about it, only to learn that their late father had given it to them.

古文：哀恸久之，遂送还家焉。
现代文：大家哀痛了很久，后来就把朱七娘送回家去了。
English: Everyone grieved for a long time, and later sent Zhu Qiye home.

古文：李光远
现代文：李光远
English: Li Guangyuan

古文：李光远，开元中，为馆陶令。
现代文：唐开元年间，李光远做馆陶令。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Li Guangyuan became the director of the pottery museum.

古文：时大旱，光远大为旱书，书就暴卒。
现代文：当时天大旱，李光远极力书写旱情，书写成就突然死去。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought, and Li Guangyuan tried his best to write about the drought, but he died suddenly.

古文：卒后，县申州，州司马覆破其旱。
现代文：死后，县令告诉了州里，州司马遮掩旱情，百姓全都怨恨。
English: After his death, the county magistrate told the prefectural governor that the prefectural governor had covered up the drought, which the people all resented.

古文：百姓胥怨，有恸哭者，皆曰：长官不死，宁有是耶？其夜，光远忽乘白马，来诣旱坊，谓百姓曰：我虽死，旱不虑不成。
现代文：有痛哭的人，都说：长官不死，哪有这样的事？那天夜里，李光远忽然乘着白马，来到旱灾地区，对百姓说：我虽然死了，旱情不考虑不行，司马是什么人？
English: Those who were in tears said, "The chief did not die. How could such a thing happen?" That night, Li Guangyuan suddenly rode a white horse to the drought-stricken area and said to the people, "Although I am dead, I cannot ignore the drought. Who is Sima?"

古文：司马何人，敢沮斯议。
现代文：竟敢阻止这样的建议？
English: How dare they block such a proposal?

古文：遂与百姓诣司马宅，通云：李明府欲见。
现代文：于是和百姓到司马宅府去，通告说：李明府想要见他。
English: So he and the people went to Sima's residence and announced that Li Mingfu wanted to see him.

古文：司马大慎，使人致谢。光远责云：公非人，旱是百姓事，何以生死为准？
现代文：司马非常惊惧，派人表示谢意，李光远责骂道：你不是人，旱灾是百姓的事，怎么也得以生死为准绳应该尽快解决这事。
English: Sima was very alarmed and sent someone to express his gratitude. Li Guangyuan scolded: "You are not a human being. Drought is a matter for the people. How can life and death be the yardstick? This matter should be resolved as soon as possible."

古文：宜速成之，不然，当为厉矣。言讫，与百姓辞诀方去。
现代文：不这样，必当成为祸害了。说完，和百姓告辞诀别才离去。
English: And when he had said these things, he departed, taking leave of the people.

古文：其年旱成，百姓赖焉。李霸
现代文：那年是大旱年被认定了，百姓多亏李光远。李霸
English: That year was identified as the year of the great drought, and the people were grateful to Li Guangyuan.

古文：岐阳令李霸者，严酷刚鸷，所遇无恩。
现代文：歧阳县令李霸，残酷凶猛，他从没有给别人施过恩惠。
English: Li Ba, the ruler of Gwanyang County, was cruel and ferocious. He never did anyone any favors.

古文：自承尉已下，典吏皆被其毒。
现代文：从承尉以下到典吏都遭到过他的毒害。
English: He poisoned everyone from warrant officers down to ushers.

古文：然性清婞自喜，妻子不免饥寒。
现代文：他秉性倔强，以清贫自喜。他的妻子儿女不免跟他受饥寒。
English: He was stubborn and took pleasure in being poor. His wife and children had to go hungry and cold with him.

古文：一考后暴亡。
现代文：李霸在任三年后，突然死去了。
English: Li Ba died suddenly after three years in office.

古文：既敛庭绝吊客。
现代文：他入殓以后，他的灵堂没有来给他吊唁的。
English: After he was buried, no one from his funeral home came to offer condolences.

古文：其妻每抚棺恸哭，呼曰：李霸在生云何？今妻子受此寂寞。
现代文：他的妻子每当抚棺痛哭；就哭诉着：李霸在世时又怎么样，让妻子儿女忍受这样的寂寞。
English: His wife cried bitterly every time she patted the coffin; she cried and said, "What was it like when Li Ba was alive, for his wife and children to endure such loneliness?"

古文：数日后，棺中忽语曰：夫人无苦，当自办归。
现代文：过了几天，棺材里忽然传出话语，道：夫人不要痛苦，我会自己回来的。
English: A few days later, words suddenly came out of the coffin, saying: "Lady, don't be in pain, I'll come back myself."

古文：其日晚衙，令家人于厅事设案几，霸见形，令传呼召诸吏等。
现代文：就在这天该上晚衙的时候，李霸让家人在灵堂摆设案几，之后他现出身形，让传呼个个小吏们。
English: On this day, when it was time for the last rites, Li Ba asked his family to set up a case table in the church, after which he emerged from the shape and let the petty officials call.

古文：吏人素所畏惧，闻命奔走，见霸莫不战惧股慄。
现代文：小使们平时就很惧怕他，听到传呼，急忙跑。这些人见到李霸个个都吓得浑身发抖，腿打哆嗦。
English: Envoys are usually very afraid of him. When they hear the call, they run in haste. When they saw Li Ba, they were all trembling with fear, and their legs were shaking.

古文：又使召丞及簿尉，既至。霸诃怒云：君等无情，何至于此！
现代文：李霸又派人召来县丞及簿尉，他们到了以后，李霸怒喝道：你们无情无义，怎么竟到了这种地步？
English: Li Ba also sent someone to summon the county magistrate and the bookkeeper. After they arrived, Li Ba shouted angrily: "You are merciless and senseless. How did it come to this?

古文：为我不能杀君等耶？
现代文：以为我不能杀了你们吗？
English: Did you think I couldn't kill you?

古文：言讫，悉颠仆无气。
现代文：说完，这些人全都倒下断了气。
English: And when he had said these things, they all fell down and breathed their last.

古文：家人皆来拜庭中祈祷，霸云：但通物数，无忧不活。
现代文：家人都来到灵堂上祈祷。李霸说：只要通晓物理数术，就不愁不能使他们复活。
English: The family members all came to the chapel to pray. Li Ba said, "As long as you are familiar with physics and mathematics, you can resurrect them."

古文：卒以五束绢为准，绢至便生。
现代文：最后以五疋绢为准，绢送到，他们就复活了。
English: In the end, the five loaves prevailed, and they were resurrected.

古文：各谢讫去后，谓两衙典：吾素厚于汝，何故亦同众人？
现代文：众人各自谢过后离去，李霸对两个衙典说：我一向厚待你们，为什么你们也同其他人一样？
English: After everyone thanked each other and left, Li Ba said to the two scribes: I have always treated you kindly, why are you the same as others?

古文：唯杀汝一身，亦复何益？当令两家马死为验。
现代文：只杀了你们一条命，也没有什么好处，应该让你们两家的马死，作为考验。
English: It's no good killing just one of you. We should let both your horses die as a test.

古文：须臾，数百疋一时皆倒欲死。
现代文：过了不久，两家的几百匹马一下都倒下。眼看就要死了。
English: Before long, hundreds of horses belonging to both families had collapsed and were dying.

古文：遂人通两疋细马，马复如故，因谓诸吏曰：我虽素清，今已死，谢诸君，可能不惠涓滴乎？
现代文：于是有人送来两匹好马，其他的马又都复苏如平常了。于是李霸对各个小吏们说：我虽然一直很清廉可现在我已经死了，就谢谢你们各位吧，可能不会不给我一些好处吧！
English: As a result, someone sent two good horses, and the other horses all recovered as usual. So Li Ba said to the various petty officials: Although I have always been very clean, now that I am dead, I would like to thank you all. Perhaps you would like to give me some benefits!

古文：又率以五疋绢毕。
现代文：又以五匹绢为准才作罢。
English: It was decided that five horses would be sufficient.

古文：指令某官出车，某出骑，某吏等修，违者必死。
现代文：李霸派某官出车，某某出马，某吏等侍修理车辆，违者必死。
English: Li Ba sent a certain official to drive the car, a certain official to ride the horse, a certain official and other attendants to repair the vehicle, and the violator would die.

古文：一更后方散。
现代文：一更后众人才散去。
English: After a while, the crowd dispersed.

古文：后日处分悉了，家人便引道，每至祭所，留下歆飨，飨毕，又上马去。
现代文：第三天全都处理停当，家人便引道上路。每到一个祭祀的地方，就留下祭献的物品，祭献完毕，又马上离去。
English: On the third day, after everything had been taken care of, the family members led the way on the road. Whenever they reached a place of worship, they left the sacrificial items. After the sacrifice was completed, they immediately left.

古文：凡十余里，已及郊外，遂不见。
现代文：约走了十多里路，已经到了郊外，就不见了。
English: After walking more than ten miles, they reached the outskirts of the city and disappeared.

古文：至夜，停车骑，妻子欲哭，棺中语云：吾在此，汝等困弊，无用哭也。
现代文：到了夜晚，停下车马，妻子想要哭，棺材里传出话，说：我在这里，你们很疲劳，不要哭了。
English: In the evening, the carriage stopped, the wife wanted to cry, and a voice came out of the coffin, saying: I am here, you are tired, don't cry.

古文：霸家在都，去岐阳千余里，每至宿处，皆不令哭。
现代文：李霸家在都城，离歧阳一千多里，每次到了住宿的地方，都不让他们哭。
English: Li Ba's family is in the capital, more than a thousand miles away from Biyang. Every time they arrive at their accommodation, they don't let them cry.

古文：行数百里，忽谓子曰：今夜可无寐，有人欲盗好马，宜预为防也。
现代文：又走了几百里，李霸忽然对儿子说：今夜不要睡觉，有人要来偷好马，应该防备呀！
English: After walking several hundred miles, Li Ba suddenly said to his son: "Don't sleep tonight, someone is coming to steal the good horse, you should be prepared!"

古文：家人远涉困弊，不依约束，尔夕竟失马。
现代文：家里人长途跋涉，都很疲惫，没有依照李霸说的做，这天夜里，竟真的丢了马。
English: The family members were very tired from the long journey and did not do as Li Ba said. That night, they actually lost the horse.

古文：及明启白，霸云：吾令防盗，何故贪寐？
现代文：天亮时告诉了李霸，李霸说：我让你们防备盗贼，为什么贪睡？
English: At dawn, he told Li Ba. Li Ba said, "I told you to be on guard against thieves. Why did you snooze?"

古文：虽然，马终不失也。
现代文：虽然如此，马还是没有丢。
English: Despite this, the horse was not lost.

古文：近店东有路向南，可遵此行十余里，有藂林，马系在林下，往取。
现代文：附近店东面有条路，向南走十多里，有片丛林，马就拴在丛林下，去把它牵回来。
English: There is a road to the east of the nearby store, more than ten miles to the south, there is a jungle, the horse is under the jungle, go and bring it back.

古文：如言得之。
现代文：家人按照他的话找到了马。
English: The family took him at his word and found the horse.

古文：及至都，亲族闻其异，竞来吊慰，朝夕谒请，霸棺中皆酬对，莫不躇踧。
现代文：到了都城，亲戚们听说了李霸这奇异的事，争着来吊唁他。早晚拜见，李霸在棺材中都应对。客人们都恭恭敬敬地，却又侷促不安。
English: When they arrived at the capital, relatives heard about the strange story of Li Ba and scrambled to come to pay their respects. Li Ba was in his coffin, and they asked to see him in the morning and in the evening. The guests were respectful, but anxious.

古文：观听聚喧，家人不堪其烦。
现代文：很多人来谛听，人声喧闹，家人忍受不了烦乱。
English: A lot of people come to listen, the vocals are loud, and the family can't stand the commotion.

古文：霸忽谓子云：客等往来，不过欲见我耳。汝可设厅事，我欲一见诸亲。
现代文：李霸忽然对儿子说：客人们来来往往，不过是想见见我罢了，你可以设置厅事，我想见一下各位亲朋。
English: Li Ba suddenly said to his son: Guests come and go, but they just want to see me. You can set up an office, I want to see my relatives and friends.

古文：其子如言，众人于庭伺候。久之曰：我来矣！
现代文：他的儿子照他说的做了。大家在厅堂等候，过了很久李霸说：我来了。
English: His son did as he said. Everyone waited in the hall, and after a long time Li Ba said: I'm coming.

古文：命捲帏，忽见霸，头大如雍，眼亦睛突，瞪视诸客等。客莫不颠仆，稍稍引去。
现代文：命令卷起帏帐，忽然看见李霸，头大得象个大坛子，眼睛红红的，眼珠凸出来，瞪着眼睛看各位宾客，客人没有不吓倒的，渐渐被引领离去。
English: Ordered to roll up the bill of fare, he suddenly saw Li Ba, his head as big as a large jar, his eyes red, his eyeballs protruding, staring at the guests. The guests were not intimidated and were gradually led away.

古文：霸谓子曰：人神道殊，屋中非我久居之所，速殡野外。
现代文：李霸对儿子说：人神的道路不一样，屋里不是我长久居住的地方，快把我葬到郊外。
English: Li Ba said to his son: "The paths of men and gods are different. The house is not a place for me to live for a long time. Quickly bury me in the suburbs."

古文：言讫不见，其语遂绝。
现代文：说完就不见了，他的话就没有了。
English: And then he was gone. His words were gone.

古文：洛阳鬼兵
现代文：洛阳鬼兵
English: Luoyang Ghost Soldiers

古文：贞元二十三年，夏六月，帝在东京。百姓相惊以鬼兵，皆奔走不知所在，或自冲击破伤。
现代文：唐贞元二十三年，夏历六月，皇帝在东都洛阳，百姓因传说有鬼兵而相互惊骇，都不知逃跑到哪里去了，有的自相冲撞击伤。
English: In June of the lunar calendar in the 23rd year of Tang Zhengyuan, when the emperor was in the eastern capital Luoyang, the people were shocked by the legend of ghost soldiers. They did not know where to flee, and some were injured by self-collision.

古文：其鬼兵初过于洛水之南，坊市喧喧，渐至水北。
现代文：那些鬼兵刚从洛水之南经过，街市喧闹，渐渐到了洛水以北。
English: Those ghost soldiers have just passed from the south of Luoshui, the street market is noisy, and gradually came to the north of Luoshui.

古文：闻其过时，空中如数千万骑甲兵，人马嘈嘈有声，俄而过尽。
现代文：听到鬼兵经过的时候，天空中象有几千万穿着铠甲的骑兵，人马嘈嘈声不断，不久全都过去了。
English: When I heard the ghost soldiers passing by, it was as if there were tens of millions of cavalrymen in armor in the sky. There was a constant din of people and horses, and soon they were all gone.

古文：每夜过，至于再，至于三。帝恶之，使巫祝禳厌，每夜于洛水滨设饮食。
现代文：每当黑夜过去，就会一而再，再而三地来，皇帝非常厌恶这件事，派巫师向鬼神祝祷以消除灾祸，每夜晚就在洛水边摆设饮食。
English: Every night after dark, it would come again and again, and the emperor was so disgusted by this that he sent a sorcerer to pray to the gods to eliminate the scourge, and every night he set up a meal by the Luo Shui.

古文：尝读《北齐书》。亦有此事。
现代文：皇帝曾经读过北齐的书，书上也记有这样的事。
English: The emperor had once read a book by Bei Qi, in which such a thing was also recorded.

古文：天宝中，晋阳云有鬼兵，百姓竟击铜铁以畏之，皆不久丧也。
现代文：天宝年间，晋阳说有鬼兵，百姓争着击打铜铁来吓唬鬼兵，不久就全丧命了。
English: During the Tenpo era, when Jinyang was said to have ghost soldiers, the people fought to hit the copper and iron to scare the ghost soldiers, and soon they all died.

古文：道德里书生
现代文：道德里书生
English: Moral of the story

古文：唐东都道德里有一书生，日晚行至中桥，遇贵人部从，车马甚盛。
现代文：唐代东都洛阳道德里有一个书生，有天晚上走到中桥，遇到显贵人及部下随从，车马很多。
English: There was a scholar in Luoyang Daode, the eastern capital of the Tang Dynasty. One evening, he walked to Zhongqiao Bridge and encountered a dignitary and his entourage, with many chariots and horses.

古文：见书生，呼与语，令从后。
现代文：他们看见书生，招呼他让他跟在后面。
English: They saw the student and beckoned him to follow.

古文：有贵主，年二十余，丰姿绝世，与书生语不辍。因而南去长夏门，遂至龙门，入一甲第，华堂兰室。召书生赐珍馔，因与寝。
现代文：有位高贵的女主人，二十多岁，容貌超群，她和书生不停地说着话，因而向南走离开长夏门，便到了龙门，进入一个最好的住宅，华丽的厅堂幽静的屋子，女主人召呼书生，赐予他美酒佳肴。
English: There was a noble hostess, in her twenties, with superb looks. She and the scholar kept talking, so they walked south and left Changxia Gate. They arrived at Longmen and entered one of the best residences, a magnificent hall and a quiet room. The hostess called the scholar and gave him wine and delicacies.

古文：夜过半，书生觉，见所卧处，乃石窟。前有一死妇人，身王洪涨，月光照之，秽不可闻。
现代文：于是和她同床共枕。过了半夜，书生醒来，看见所躺的地方，竟是石窟，前面有一个死了的妇人，身体浸泡在水中，月光照着她，污秽不堪，臭不可闻。
English: After midnight, Shousei woke up and saw that the place where he was lying was actually a cave. In front of him was a dead woman, her body soaked in water, moonlight shining on her, filthy and stinking.

古文：书生乃履危攀石，仅能出焉。
现代文：书生便踩着危险的石头攀援着，勉强能走出来。
English: The student then stepped on a dangerous rock and struggled to get out.

古文：晓至香山寺，为僧说之，僧送还家，数日而死。
现代文：天亮时到了香山寺，对寺僧说了这件事。寺僧送他到家，没几天就死了。
English: When he arrived at Xiangshan Temple at dawn, he told the monk about it. The monk took him home, and he died a few days later.

古文：安宜坊书生
现代文：安宜坊书生
English: An Yi Fang Shousheng

古文：开元末，东京安宜坊有书生，夜中闭门理书。门隙中，忽见一人出头。
现代文：唐开元末年，东京安宜坊有位书生，夜里关门整理书籍，门隙中，忽然看见一个人露出个头。
English: At the end of the 19th century, there was a book student in Tokyo's Anyi Square. At night, he closed the door to sort out his books. In the gap between the doors, he suddenly saw a man with his head poking out.

古文：呵问何辈，答云：我是鬼，暂欲相就。
现代文：书生呵问是什么人，回答说：我是鬼，暂且想要靠近你。
English: The student asked who it was and replied, "I'm a ghost. I just want to get close to you."

古文：因邀书生出门。
现代文：于是邀请书生出门。
English: So they invited the students to go out.

古文：书生随至门外，画地作十字，因尔前行。出坊，至寺门铺，书生云：寺观见，必不得度。
现代文：书生随他到门外，在地上画了个十字，便向前走，走出安宜坊，到了寺门铺，书生说：寺观出现，一定不能通过。
English: The student followed him outside the door, drew a cross on the ground, then walked forward, walked out of An Yi Fang, and arrived at the temple gate. The student said: "If the Temple View appears, you must not pass."

古文：鬼言：但随我行，无苦也。
现代文：鬼说只随我走，没有痛苦。
English: The ghost said just follow me, there is no pain.

古文：俄至定鼎门内，鬼负书生从门隙中出，前至五桥，道旁一冢，天窗中有火光。
现代文：不久，到了定鼎门内，鬼背着书生从门隙中出来，向前走到五桥，道旁有一座坟。
English: Soon after arriving at the Dingding Gate, the ghost emerged from the gap in the door with the scholar on his back and walked forward to the Five Bridges. There was a grave next to the road.

古文：鬼复负书生上天窗侧，俯见一妇人，对病小儿啼哭，其夫在旁假寐。
现代文：天窗中有火光，鬼又背着书生上天窗旁边，低下头看见一个妇人，对着有病的小孩啼哭，她的丈夫在旁边假装睡觉。
English: There was a firelight in the skylight, and the ghost walked up to the skylight with a book on his back. He looked down and saw a woman crying over a sick child, and her husband pretending to be asleep next to her.

古文：鬼遂透下，以手掩灯，妇人惧，呵其夫云：儿今垂死，何忍贪卧！
现代文：鬼就跳下，用手遮挡灯光，妇人害怕，呵呼丈夫说：儿子现在快要死了，你怎么忍心贪睡？
English: The ghost jumped down and covered the light with his hand. The woman was afraid and called out to her husband: "My son is about to die, how can you bear to sleep?

古文：适有恶物掩火，可强起明灯。
现代文：正赶上有个恶物，遮掩灯光，可以勉强起来点灯。
English: There's a bad guy on the way, he's covering the lights, you can barely get up to turn on the lights.

古文：夫起添烛，鬼回避妇人。
现代文：丈夫起来添灯油，鬼回避妇人。
English: The husband gets up to add oil to the lamp, but the ghost avoids the woman.

古文：忽取布袋盛儿，儿犹能动于布袋中。
现代文：忽然拿出布袋包儿子，儿子还能在布袋里动，鬼就背着出来。
English: Suddenly he took out a cloth bag to wrap up his son. The son was still able to move inside the cloth bag, and the ghost came out on his back.

古文：鬼遂负出，至天窗上，兼负书生下地。
现代文：到天窗上，又背着书生下到地上，送他到定鼎门。
English: to the skylight, and then carrying the book to the ground, sent him to Dingding Gate.

古文：送入定鼎门，至书生宅，谢曰：吾奉地下处分，取小儿，事须生人作伴，所以有此烦君。当可恕之。
现代文：到书生的住宅，感激地说：我奉地下人的吩咐，来抱小孩，这事须活人作伴，所以这次麻烦您了，应该可以宽恕我吧。
English: He went to Shousei's house and said gratefully, "I came to hold a child at the behest of an underground person. This requires a living person as a companion, so this time you are in trouble. You should be able to forgive me."

古文：言讫乃去，其人初随鬼行，所止之处，辄书十字。
现代文：说完就离开了。那书生当初随鬼去时，所停的地方都画十字。
English: After saying that, he left. When the student originally went with the ghost, he drew a cross everywhere he stopped.

古文：翌日，引其兄弟覆之，十字皆验。
现代文：第二天，书生领他的兄弟察看那些十字。
English: The next day, the scholar took his brother to inspect the crosses.

古文：因至失儿家问之，亦同也。裴盛
现代文：十字都验证了，于是到丢儿子的人家里询问情况，也都相同。裴盛
English: The crosshairs were all verified, so I went to the home of the person who had lost his son to inquire about the situation, and they were all the same.

古文：董士元云，义兴尉裴盛昼寝，忽为鬼引，形神随去。
现代文：董士元说，义兴尉裴盛白天睡觉，忽然被鬼牵引，形神都随着离去。
English: Dong Shiyuan said that Yi Xingfei Pei Sheng was sleeping during the day, when he was suddenly pulled by a ghost, and all the deities left with him.

古文：云：奉一儿。
现代文：鬼说：送给我一个儿子。
English: The demon said, "Give me a son."

古文：至儿家，父母夹儿卧，前有佛事。鬼云：以其佛。
现代文：到了一个孩子家，父母夹着儿子躺着，前面有拜佛的事，鬼说： 因为那种佛事，活人到了。
English: When he arrived at a child's house, the parents were lying down with their son between them, and there was the matter of a Buddhist service in front of them. The ghost said, "Because of that Buddhist service, a living person has arrived."

古文：生人既至，鬼手一挥，父母皆寐。
现代文：鬼手就一挥，那孩子的父母就都睡去了。
English: With a wave of his hand, the child's parents fell asleep.

古文：鬼令盛抱儿出床，抱儿喉有声，父母惊起。
现代文：鬼让裴盛抱孩子出床，抱的孩子喉咙还发出声响，父母惊醒起床，鬼就领裴盛出来。
English: The ghost asked Pei Sheng to carry the child out of the bed, and the child's throat made a noise. The parents woke up, and the ghost took Pei Sheng out.

古文：鬼乃引盛出，盛苦邀甚至舍，推入形中乃悟。
现代文：裴盛苦苦邀鬼到他的房舍，将自己魂推入形体中他才醒过来。
English: Pei Sheng painstakingly invited the ghost to his house and pushed his soul into his body before he woke up.

古文：杨溥
现代文：杨溥
English: by Yang Hui

古文：豫章诸县，尽出良材，求利者采之，将至广陵，利则数倍。
现代文：豫章各县，都出产好木材。谋利的人去采伐木材，将它运到广陵，价钱就增加几倍。
English: Every county in Yuzhang produces good timber. Profiteers go to harvest timber and transport it to Guangling, and the price increases several times.

古文：天宝五载，有杨溥者，与数人入林求木。
现代文：唐天宝五年，有个叫杨溥的人，和几个人到树林中找好木材。
English: In the fifth year of Tang Tianbao, a man named Yang Qi and several others went to the forest to find good wood.

古文：冬夕雪飞，山深寄宿无处。
现代文：冬天的傍晚，满天飞雪，深山中没有住处。
English: In the evening of winter, the sky is covered with snow, and there is no place to live deep in the mountains.

古文：有大木横卧，其中空焉，可容数人，乃入中同宿。
现代文：有个粗大的木头横卧在那里，它里面是空的，可容纳几个人，他们就进入里面同住。
English: There was a big log lying there, it was empty inside, it could hold a few people, and they went inside to live together.

古文：而导者未眠时，向山林再拜咒曰：士田公，今夜寄眠，愿见护助。
现代文：可是向导没睡的时候，他对着山林又拜说：士田公，今夜寄宿在这里，希望得到您帮助。
English: But when the guide was still awake, he bowed to the forest and said, "Shida, I'm lodging here tonight, and I'm hoping for your help."

古文：如是三请而后寝。
现代文：象这样几次祈祷之后才睡觉。
English: It was only after several such prayers that he was able to sleep.

古文：夜深雪甚，近南树下，忽有人呼曰：张礼。
现代文：深夜，雪更大了，靠南边树下，忽然有人喊道：张礼。
English: In the middle of the night, when the snow was heavier, under a tree on the south side, someone suddenly called out, "Zhang Li."

古文：树头有人应曰：诺。
现代文：树上有人答应道：唉。
English: Someone on the tree agreed and said: Alas.

古文：今夜北村嫁女，大有酒食，相与去来。
现代文：今天夜晚北村有一家女儿出嫁，有丰盛的酒饭，我们一起去。
English: Tonight, a daughter of a family in Kitamura is getting married. There will be a sumptuous banquet, and we will all go together.

古文：树头人曰：有客在此，须守至明。若去，黑狗子无知，恐伤不宥。
现代文：树上人说：有客人在这，要守候到天亮，如果离开，黑狗无知，我担心伤害到他们，就不可宽恕了。
English: The man in the tree said, "There are guests here, and we must wait for them until dawn. If they leave, the black dog will not know, and I am afraid of hurting them, so I cannot forgive them."

古文：树下又曰：雪寒若是，且求饮食，理须同去。
现代文：树下的人又说：大雪天这么冷，姑且找点吃喝，理当同去。
English: The person under the tree also said, "It's so cold on a snowy day, let alone finding something to eat and drink, it's only natural to go with them."

古文：树上又曰：雪寒虽甚，已受其请，理不可行，须防黑狗子。
现代文：树上的人又说：下雪天虽然冷得厉害，已经接受他的请求，按理不应该去，应防备黑狗子。
English: The man in the tree also said: Although it is very cold in the snowy weather, I have accepted his request. By rights, I should not go. I should beware of the black dog.

古文：呼者乃去，及明装毕，撤所卧毯，有黑虺在下，其大若瓶，长三尺而蛰不动，方惊骇焉。
现代文：到了天亮，杨溥他们装车完毕，撤掉铺的毡子。原来有条黑蛇在下面，蛇大得象瓶子，长三尺而冬眠不动，大家方才惊骇不已。
English: In the morning, when they had finished loading the car, they took off the floor mats. It turned out that there was a black snake underneath. The snake was as big as a bottle, three feet long and hibernating. Everyone was shocked.

古文：薛直
现代文：薛直
English: Xue Zhi

古文：胜州都督薛直，丞相纳之子也，好杀伐，不知鬼神。
现代文：胜州都督薛直，是丞相薛纳的儿子。好杀杀打打，不知道有鬼神。
English: Xue Zhi, the governor of Shengzhou, was the son of the prime minister Xue Na. He was fond of killing and fighting, and did not know that there were ghosts and gods.

古文：直在州，行县还归，去州二驿，逢友人自京来谒。
现代文：薛直在胜州，去县里返回胜州。离胜州还有两个驿站，遇见朋友从京城来拜见他。
English: Xue Zhi was in Shengzhou. He went to the county to return to Shengzhou. There were still two stations away from Shengzhou. He met a friend from Beijing who came to visit him.

古文：直延入驿厅，命食，友人未食先祭，直曰：出此食谓何？
现代文：薛直请他进入驿站厅里，命令上酒饭，朋友没吃饭先祭祀。薛直说：拿出这些饭食祭祀怎么讲？
English: Xue Zhi asked him to go into the station hall and ordered wine and rice to be served, as his friend had not eaten before offering the sacrifice. Xue Zhi said: "How can you offer these food sacrifices?

古文：友人曰：佛经云，有旷野鬼，食人血肉，佛往化之，令其不杀，故制此戒。又俗所传，每食先施，得寿长命。
现代文：朋友说：佛经上说： 空旷的野外有鬼，吃人的血肉，佛能去感化他，让他不杀人 ，所以做了这样的戒备，又是俗人所留传的习惯，每次吃饭前先拜佛，能够长寿。
English: My friend said, "The Buddhist scriptures say, 'Out in the open there are ghosts that eat people's flesh and blood. Buddha can influence them so that they don't kill people.' That's why I took such precautions. It's also a custom passed down by the laity to worship Buddha before every meal so that I can live a long life."

古文：直曰：公大妄诞，何处有佛？
现代文：薛直说：您太荒诞不经了，什么地方有佛？
English: Xue Zhi said, "You are too absurd. Where is there a Buddha?"

古文：何者是鬼？
现代文：谁是鬼？
English: Who is the ghost?

古文：俗人相诳，愚者雷同，智者不惑。
现代文：俗人互相迷惑，愚蠢的人跟着人云亦云，聪明的人不会被迷惑的。
English: The vulgar confuse one another, the stupid follow one another, but the wise are not confused.

古文：公盖俗人耳！
现代文：你大概也是俗人吧。
English: You're probably a layman, too.

古文：言未久，空中有声云：薛直，汝大狂愚！宁知无佛！
现代文：刚说完不久，空中传来话语声，说：薛直，你太狂妄愚蠢了，怎么知道没有佛？
English: Shortly after he finished speaking, a voice came from the sky, saying: "Xue Zhi, you are too arrogant and stupid. How do you know that there is no Buddha?

古文：宁知无鬼！
现代文：怎么知道没有鬼？
English: How do you know there are no ghosts?

古文：来祸于君，命终必不见妻子。
现代文：给你带来祸患，到死一定见不到你妻子儿女了，你应当死在这里！
English: I will bring disaster on you, and you will not see your wife and children again until you die. You should die here!

古文：当死于此，何言妄耶？
现代文：为什么口出狂言呢？
English: Why are you talking gibberish?

古文：直闻之大惊，趋下再拜，谢曰：鄙人蒙固，不知有神，神其诲之。
现代文：薛直听到这些大吃一惊，急忙走下来拜了又拜，道歉说：我愚昧固执，不知道有神，神教诲我吧。
English: Hearing this, Xue Zhi was taken aback. He hurried down and prayed again and again. He apologized and said, "I am stupid and stubborn, I don't know if there is a God. Please God, teach me."

古文：空中又言曰：汝命尽午时，当急返，得与妻孥相见。
现代文：空中又说道：你命绝在中午，应当赶紧返回，能够和妻子儿女见面。
English: He also said in the air: Your life ends at noon, you should hurry back so that you can meet your wife and children.

古文：不尔，殡越于此矣！
现代文：不然就要埋葬在这里，成为游魂野鬼。
English: Otherwise, they will be buried here and become wandering ghosts.

古文：直大恐，与友人驰赴郡，行一驿，直入厅休偃。
现代文：薛直非常恐惧，和朋友骑马急奔回州郡，走到一个驿站，薛直进入客厅仰卧休息，随从的人都休息了。
English: Xue Zhi was very frightened, and he and his friend rode back to the county and went to a post station. Xue Zhi went into the living room to lie on his back and rest, and his followers also rested.

古文：从者皆休，忽见直去，从者百余人，皆左右从人。
现代文：忽然看见薛直离去，随从的一百多人，都跟在左右。
English: Suddenly, he saw Xue Zhi leaving, followed by more than a hundred people.

古文：驿吏入户，已死矣。
现代文：驿站小吏进门一看，薛直已经死了。
English: When the station attendant came to the door, he saw that Xue Zhi was already dead.

古文：于是驿报其家。直已先至家，呼妻与别曰：吾已死北驿，身在今是鬼，恐不得面诀，故此暂来。
现代文：因此驿站的人去报告薛直家，薛直已经回到家里，招呼妻子和她诀别说：我已经死在北边驿站，身在这里，现在成了鬼，恐怕不能当面诀别了。因此暂且回来。
English: Therefore, the station attendant went to report to Xue Nao's house. Xue Nao had already returned home, greeted his wife and said goodbye to her: "I have died in the north station, I am here, now I have become a ghost, I am afraid I cannot say goodbye in person. Therefore, I will come back for the time being."

古文：执妻子之手，但言努力，复乘马出门，奄然而殁。
现代文：他握着妻子的手，一个劲儿地勉励妻子，后又骑马出门，气息奄奄慢慢地死去了。
English: He held his wife's hand, encouraged her, and then rode away, gasping for breath and slowly dying.

古文：刘洪
现代文：刘洪
English: Liu Hong

古文：沛国刘洪，性刚直，父为折冲都尉，薛楚玉之在范阳，召为行军。
现代文：沛国人刘洪，性情刚直。他父亲任折冲尉，薛楚玉在范阳时，被征召做行军，刘洪跟着到了蓟地。
English: Liu Hong, a native of Pei Province, has a straightforward temperament. His father was an officer of Renrenchong, and when Xue Chuyu was in Fanyang, he was conscripted to march, and Liu Hong followed him to Shunde.

古文：洪随之蓟，因得给事楚玉，楚玉悦之。楚玉补屯官，洪请行。
现代文：于是刘洪有机会在薛楚玉处供职。薛楚玉很喜欢刘洪，他要补任一位屯官，刘洪要求前往。
English: As a result, Liu Hong had the opportunity to work in Xue Chuyu's office. Xue Chuyu liked Liu Hong very much. He wanted to fill the position of a township official, and Liu Hong Yu requested to go.

古文：檀州有屯曰太和，任者辄死，屯遂荒废，洪乃请为之。
现代文：檀州有个屯子叫太和屯，来这里上任的就死，屯子就荒废了。刘洪请求到这里任职。
English: There is a township in Danzhou called Taihe Township. Whoever takes office here will die, and the township will be abandoned. Liu Hong requested to take office here.

古文：楚玉以凶难之，洪曰：妖由人兴，妖不自作。
现代文：薛楚玉就讲恐怖的故事来吓他。刘洪说：妖怪是由人兴起的，不能自己兴妖。
English: Xue Chuyu told him horror stories to scare him. Liu Hong said, "Monsters are raised by people, you can't raise monsters by yourself."

古文：洪且不惧，公何惜焉？
现代文：我都不怕，你为什么顾惜呢？
English: I'm not afraid, why do you care?

古文：楚玉遂以为太和屯官。
现代文：薛楚玉就把他补做太和屯官。
English: Xue Chuyu made up for him by making him Taihe Tuenguan.

古文：洪将人吏到屯。
现代文：刘洪带着人马到了太和屯。
English: Liu Hong and his entourage arrived in Taihe Town.

古文：屯有故墟落，洪依之架屋。
现代文：屯子有处废墟。刘洪依傍着废墟盖起了房屋。
English: There are some ruins in Tunzi. Liu Hongyi built a house next to the ruins.

古文：匠人方运斧而度，木自折举，击匠人立死。
现代文：木匠正举斧掂量着如何砍下去时，树自己就断了，砸到木匠身上立即就死了。
English: While the carpenter was raising his axe and measuring how to cut it down, the tree itself broke, fell on the carpenter and died immediately.

古文：洪怒，叱吏卒，扶匠人起而笞之。询曰：汝是何鬼，吾方治屯，汝则干之，罪死不赦！
现代文：刘洪大怒，训斥吏卒，扶着木匠站起来而鞭打他，询问说：你是什么鬼，我刚刚管理屯子，你就胃犯我，罪该当死不可饶恕。
English: Liu Hong flew into a rage, reprimanded the official, helped the carpenter to his feet and whipped him, asking: "What the hell are you, I have just managed the township, and you have violated my stomach, a crime worthy of death and unforgivable."

古文：笞数发，匠人言说：愿见宽恕，吾非前后杀屯官者也。
现代文：鞭打很多下，木匠说：愿您宽恕我，我不是先后杀屯官的人。
English: After a lot of whipping, the carpenter said, "May you forgive me, I am not the one who killed the garrison officers one after another.

古文：杀屯官者，自是辅国将军。
现代文：杀屯官的人，本是辅国将军。
English: The man who killed the garrison officer was originally a general from the Auxiliary Province.

古文：所居去此不远，吾乃守佛殿基鬼耳。此故墟者，旧佛殿也。以其净所，故守之。
现代文：他住的地方离这不远。我是守佛殿基鬼罢了，这废墟是旧佛殿，用它净化这地方，所以守着它。
English: The place where he lives is not far from here. I am just a guardian of the foundation of the Buddhist temple. This ruin is the old Buddhist temple, and I use it to purify this place, so I guard it.

古文：吾因为人有罪，配守此基。基与地平，吾方得去。
现代文：我因做人时有罪过，安排我守护这个殿基，殿基和地齐平，我才能离去。
English: I have sinned as a human being, and they have arranged for me to guard the foundation of this temple. The foundation of the temple is level with the ground, and only then can I leave.

古文：今者来，故诉于公。公为平之，吾乃去为人矣。
现代文：现在您来，因此向您诉说，您给我平了，我就去做人了。
English: Now you come, therefore, to tell you that you have flattened me, and I will become a man.

古文：洪曰：汝言辅国不远，可即擒来。
现代文：刘洪说：你说辅国将军离这里不远，可以立刻把他捉来。
English: Liu Hong said: You said that General Fu Guo is not far from here, you can catch him immediately.

古文：鬼曰：诺。
现代文：鬼说：行。
English: The ghost said, "That's fine.

古文：须臾，匠人言曰：刘洪，吾辅国将军也。汝为人强直，兼有才干，吾甚重之，将任汝以职。今当辟汝，即大富贵矣。
现代文：不一会儿，匠人说：刘洪，我是辅国将军，你做人刚强正直，又有才干，我很器重你，我要委任你职务，现在应当征召你，你立即就大富大贵了。
English: After a while, the craftsman said, "Liu Hong, I am a vice-governor general. You are a strong, honest, and talented person. I respect you very much. I want to appoint you to a position. You should be conscripted now. You will immediately become very rich and valuable."

古文：勉之。因索纸，作诗二章。其匠人兵卒也，素不知诗。及其下笔，书迹特妙，可方王右军。
现代文：匠人规劝他，于是要来纸张，写了两首诗，那个匠人只是个小卒，一向不懂诗，等到他下笔，书写得特别奇妙，可以与王羲之相比。
English: The craftsman persuaded him, so he wanted to get some paper and wrote two poems. The craftsman was just a pawn, and had never understood poetry. When he put pen to paper, his writing was particularly wonderful, and could be compared to Wang Xizhi's.

古文：薛楚玉取而珍之，其诗曰：乌乌在虚飞，玄驹遂野依。
现代文：薛楚玉要过来珍藏起来，那诗是：乌乌在虚飞，玄驹遂野依。
English: Xue Chuyu wants to come over and treasure it. The poem is: Wu Wu is flying in the air, Xuanzang is in the field.

古文：名今编户籍，翠过叶生稀。
现代文：名今编户籍，翠过叶生稀。
English: My name is now on the family register.

古文：其二章曰：个树枝条朽，三花五面啼。
现代文：第二首是：个树枝条朽，三花五面啼。
English: The second one is: a tree branch is rotten, three flowers and five faces are rotten.

古文：移家朝度日，谁觉□。
现代文：移家朝度日，谁觉□□□。
English: Moving home in the morning to spend the day, who would have thought?

古文：诗成而去。
现代文：诗写成就离去了。
English: The achievement of writing poetry is gone.

古文：匠人乃屯属役。数日疾甚，舁至范阳。
现代文：匠人就给屯官役使，几天后，刘洪得了重病，把他抬到范阳。
English: A few days later, Liu Hong fell seriously ill and was carried to Fanyang.

古文：黄本作而二人密介气侵未岁乃卒□。
现代文：他的父亲拜见名医给他治病，也正赶上父亲有病。
English: His father went to see a famous doctor to treat him, and is also catching up with his father's illness.

古文：洪初得鬼诗，思不可解。
现代文：刘洪说话象平常一样，而二冷密冷气侵，刘洪刚刚得到鬼诗，思考着不能明白其意。
English: Liu Hong speaks as usual, but the two are cold and dense. Liu Hong has just received a ghost poem, and cannot understand its meaning while thinking.

古文：及卒，皆黑，遂以载棺。
现代文：等到他死了。鬼诗都黑了，就把他装在棺材里。
English: Wait until he's dead and it's dark, then put him in a coffin.

古文：名今编户籍，盖洪名。
现代文：现在编在户籍的上的名字是刘洪。
English: The name on the family register is now Liu Hong.

古文：生希者。言洪死像也。
现代文：活着的人，说刘洪死的模样。
English: People who are still alive say that Liu Hong looks dead.

古文：其二章个树枝条朽，故条枝朽也。
现代文：第二首诗的个树枝条朽，是旧枝条朽。
English: The first tree branch of the second poem is rotten, it is the old branch rotten.

古文：三花五面啼者，洪家有八口，洪又二人亡，所谓三花也。五人哭之，所谓五面啼。
现代文：三花五面啼，是刘洪家有八口人，刘洪和两个人死了，是所说的三花；五人哭，是所说的五面啼。
English: The three flowers and five faces are the eight people in Liu Hong's family. Liu Hong and the two people who died are the said three flowers; the five people crying are the said five faces.

古文：洪死后二十日，故吏野外见洪紫衣，从二百骑，神色甚壮。告吏曰：吾已为辅国将军所用，大富贵矣。
现代文：刘洪死后二十天，过去的屯吏在野外看见刘洪穿着的紫衣服，跟着二百个骑兵，表情很庄重，告诉小吏说：我已经被辅国将军所用，大富大贵了。
English: Twenty days after Liu Hong's death, the former township official saw Liu Hong in the field wearing purple clothes, followed by two hundred cavalrymen. With a very solemn expression, he told the small official: "I have been used by the general of the auxiliary country, and I am very rich and expensive."

古文：今将骑从向都迎母。母先在都。初洪舅有女，养于刘氏，年与洪齿，尝与洪言曰：吾闻死者有知，吾二人，先死必扰乱存者，使知之。
现代文：现在率领骑兵向都城去迎候母亲母亲在都城，最初刘洪舅舅有个女儿，在刘洪母亲那儿抚养，年龄与刘洪一样大，曾经和刘洪说：我听说死的人有知觉，我们两个人，先死的一定扰乱活着的人，让他知道。
English: At first, Uncle Liu Hong had a daughter, who was raised by Liu Hong's mother. She was the same age as Liu Hong. He once said to Liu Hong, "I heard that the dead are conscious. The two of us who die first must disturb the living and let him know."

古文：是日，女在洪母前行，忽有引其衣者，令不得前，女怪之。
现代文：这天，舅舅的女儿在刘母前面走，忽然有人拽她衣服，让她不能向前走，她很奇怪。
English: On this day, my uncle's daughter walked in front of Liu Mu. Suddenly, someone tugged at her clothes, making it impossible for her to walk forward. She was very strange.

古文：须臾得前，又引其中，取其梳，如相狎者。
现代文：过了一会儿，又能向前走，又有人拽她头巾的，拿她的梳卡，象猥狎她。
English: After a while, she was able to walk forward again, and someone tugged at her headscarf and took her hairbrush, as if to molest her.

古文：洪母惊曰：洪存日尝有言，须来在军，久绝书问。今见死乎？
现代文：刘洪母亲惊恐地说：刘洪活着时曾经有话，他很久没有书信来了，现在死了吗？
English: Liu Hong's mother said in shock: "When Liu Hong was alive, he used to say that he had not received any letters for a long time. Is he dead now?

古文：何与平生言协也？
现代文：为什么和平生所说的这样协调一致呢？
English: Why is there such a lack of coordination with what He Ping Sheng said?

古文：母言未毕，洪即形见庭中，衣紫金章，仆从多至。
现代文：她没说完，刘洪就现出身形在庭院中，穿着紫衣服，黄色花纹，来了很多仆人。
English: Before she had finished speaking, Liu Hong appeared in the courtyard, wearing purple clothes with yellow patterns. Many servants had arrived.

古文：母问曰：汝何缘来？
现代文：母亲问他说：你为什么而来？
English: His mother asked him, "Why did you come here?"

古文：洪已富贵，身亦非人。福乐难言，故迎母供养。
现代文：刘洪说：我已富贵，身体已不是人，福乐万分，所以迎候母亲供养。
English: Liu Hong said: I am already rich, my body is no longer human, and I am very happy, so I am waiting for my mother to support me.

古文：于是车舆皆进，母则升舆，洪乃侍从，遂去。
现代文：因此车马都进来了，母亲就上车，刘洪侍候着。就离去了。
English: So all the horses and carriages came in, my mother got on, Liu Hong waited, and then left.

古文：去后而母殂，其见故吏时，亦母殂之日也。
现代文：刘洪离开后母亲就死了，他看见过去的小吏时，也是母亲死那天。
English: Liu Hong's mother died after he left, and when he saw the petty official from the past, it was also the day his mother died.

