古文：禽滑厘问于子墨子曰： 由圣人之言，凤鸟之不出，诸侯畔殷周之国，甲兵方起于天下，大攻小，强执弱，吾欲守小国，为之奈何？ 
现代文：译文禽滑厘问墨子说： 从圣人的说法来看，现在凤鸟没有出现，诸侯背叛王朝，天下兵争方起，大国攻打小国，强国攻打弱国。我想为小国防守，应怎么做呢？ 
English: "From the perspective of the sages, the phoenix and the bird have not appeared, the princes have betrayed the dynasty, the armies of the world have begun to fight, the big countries have attacked the small countries, and the strong countries have attacked the weak countries. I want to defend the small countries, what should I do?

古文：子墨子曰： 何攻之守？ 
现代文：墨子说： 防御什么方式的进攻呢？ 
English: Mozi said, "What kind of attack should be used for defense?

古文：禽滑厘对曰： 今之世常所以攻者：临、钩、冲、梯、堙、水、穴、突、空洞、蚁傅、轒辒、轩车，敢问守此十二者奈何？ 
现代文：禽滑厘回答说： 现在世上常用的进攻方法有：筑山临攻、钩梯爬城、冲车攻城、云梯攻城、填塞城沟、决水淹城、隧道攻城、穿突城墙、城墙打洞、如蚁一般密集爬城、使用蒙上牛皮的四轮车、使用高耸的轩车。请问防守这十二种攻城方式应怎么办？ 
English: The bird replied, "The attack methods commonly used in the world today include: building a mountain to attack, climbing the city with a hook and ladder, storming the city with a car, storming the city with a ladder, filling the city ditch, flooding the city with water, attacking the city through a tunnel, breaking through the city wall, making holes in the city wall, climbing the city densely like ants, using a four-wheeled vehicle covered with cowhide, and using a towering carriage. What should we do with these twelve methods of attacking the city?

古文：子墨子曰： 我城池修，守器具，推粟足，上下相亲，又得四邻诸侯之救，此所以持也。
现代文：墨子说： 我方城池修固，守城器具备好，柴禾粮草充足，上下相亲，又取得四邻诸侯的救助，这就是用来长久守御的条件。
English: Mozi said, "Our side has repaired the castle, the fortifications are in good condition, the firewood, grain, and grass are sufficient, the upper and lower levels are interrelated, and we have obtained the assistance of the four neighboring lords. These are the conditions for long-term defense.

古文：且守者虽善，则犹若不可以守也。
现代文：而且，守城的人虽有本事，而国君不信任他，那么仍然不可防守。
English: Moreover, even if the person who defends the city has the ability, and the sovereign does not trust him, then it still cannot be defended.

古文：若君用之守者，又必能乎守者，不能而君用之，则犹若不可以守也。
现代文：如果国君用来防守的人，一定是有能力防守的人；如果他没有能力而国君信任他，也是不能防守的。
English: If the sovereign uses a defender, he must be able to defend; if he is not able and the sovereign trusts him, he cannot defend.

古文：然则守者必善而君尊用之，然后可以守也。 
现代文：既然如此，那么守城的人必须有能力，而国君又信任他，这才可以防守得住。 
English: Since this is the case, the defender must be capable, and the sovereign must trust him, in order to be able to defend the city.

古文：凡守围城之法，厚以高；壕池深以广；楼撕揗，守备缮利；薪食足以支三月以上；人众以选；吏民和；大臣有功劳于上者，多主信以义，万民乐之无穷；不然，父母坟墓在焉；不然，山林草泽之饶足利；不然，地形之难攻而易守也；不然，则有深怨于适而有大功于上；不然，则赏明可信而罚严足畏也。
现代文：凡守城的方法共有：厚而高，濠沟深而宽，修好望敌之楼，防守器械精良，粮食柴草足以支持三月以上，防守的人多而经过挑选，官吏和民众相互和睦，为国家建立功劳的大臣多，国君讲信义，万民安乐无穷。或者，父母的坟墓就在这里；或者，具备富饶的山林草泽；或者，地形难攻易守；或者，对敌人有深仇大恨而对君主有大功；或者，奖赏明确可信，惩罚严厉可怕。
English: All the methods of defending the city are common: thick and high, the ditch is deep and wide, the building to watch the enemy is repaired, the defensive equipment is excellent, the grain and firewood are sufficient to support more than three months, there are many people to defend and they are selected, the officials and the people are in harmony with each other, there are many ministers who have established merit for the country, the prince is faithful and the people are happy. Or, the grave of the parents is here; or, it has rich mountains and forests; or, the terrain is difficult to attack and easy to defend; or, there is deep hatred for the enemy and great merit for the monarch; or, the reward

古文：此十四者具，则民亦不宜上矣，然后城可守。
现代文：这十四个条件具备，那么民众就不会怀疑君主，这以后城池才可以守住。
English: If these fourteen conditions are met, then the people will not doubt the monarch, and only then can the castle be defended.

古文：十四者无一，则虽善者不能守矣。
现代文：这十四者一个没有，那么即使防守的人善于防守也守不住。
English: If you don't have one of these 14, then even if the defenders are good at defending, they can't defend.

古文：故凡守城之法，备城门为县门，沉机长二丈，广八尺，为之两相如；门扇数合相接三寸。施土扇上，无过二寸。
现代文：所以凡守城的方法：在城门上准备好悬门和左右悬门的机关。悬门长二丈，宽八尺，两扇相同，两扇间有三寸重叠衔接；门扇上涂上泥土，不要厚于二寸。
English: Therefore, the best way to defend the city is to prepare the hanging door and the organs of the left and right hanging doors on the gate. The hanging door is two feet long and eight feet wide, the two doors are the same, and there is a three-inch overlapping connection between the two doors; the door leaf is coated with soil, and should not be thicker than two inches.

古文：堑中深丈五，广比扇，堑长以力为度，堑之末为之县，可容一人所。
现代文：濠沟有一丈五尺深，宽度相当于门扇的长度，长短以人才为度，濠沟边修一管理悬门的房间，大概可以容纳一人。
English: The gully is five feet deep, the width is equal to the length of the door, and the length is based on talent. There is a room next to the gully with a suspended door, which can probably accommodate one person.

古文：客至，诸门户皆令凿而慕孔。
现代文：敌兵到了，各门都叫人凿开两个洞；一个洞系上绳子，绳长四尺。
English: When the soldiers came, they made two holes in each of the gates, and tied a four-foot rope to one of the holes.

古文：孔之，各为二慕二，一凿而系绳，长四尺。城四面四隅皆为高磨■，使重室子居其上候适，视其态状与其进左右所移处，失候斩。
现代文：城墙的四边和四角都建高高的望敌楼，使贵家子在楼上了望敌人，观察敌人的势态，进及左右移动的地方。失职者处以斩刑。
English: On all four sides and corners of the city wall, high towers for watching the enemy were built, so that the noblemen could watch the enemy, observe the situation of the enemy, and enter the places where the enemy was moving left and right. Those who failed in their duties were punished by beheading.

古文：适人为穴而来，我亟使穴师选本，迎而穴之，为之且内弩以应之。
现代文：敌兵打隧道来进攻，我方立即派穴地之师确定穴地之处，迎头穴地以待，准备好短弩射击敌人。
English: If the enemy soldiers attack by tunneling, we will immediately send a cavalry division to determine the location of the hole, wait for them at the hole, and be ready to shoot the enemy with a short crossbow.

古文：民室杵木瓦石，可以盖城之备者，尽上之。
现代文：民家的木材瓦石，凡可用来增加城池守备的，全部上缴。
English: All timber, tiles and stones from private homes that can be used to increase the city's defenses will be handed over.

古文：不从令者斩。
现代文：不服从命令的处斩。
English: Disobeying orders is punishable by death.

古文：昔筑，七尺一居属，五步一垒。五筑有锑。长斧，柄长八尺。十步一长镰，柄长八尺。
现代文：准备各种筑城工具：每七尺一把锄头，五步一筐，五筑有一铁锄，一柄长八尺的斧头，十步一把长镰刀，柄长八尺。
English: Prepare all kinds of tools for building the city: every seven feet a hoe, every five steps a basket, every five steps a spade, every eight steps an eight-foot axe, every ten steps a scythe with an eight-foot handle.

古文：十步一斗，长椎，柄长六尺，头长尺，斧其两端。
现代文：十步一斫，一长锥，柄长六尺，头长一尺，用斧削其两端。
English: Ten paces, one hoop, one long cone, handle six feet long, head one foot long, with an axe at both ends.

古文：三步一大铤，前长尺，蚤长五寸。
现代文：三步一短矛，长一尺，刀尖五寸。
English: One short spear at three paces, one foot long, with a five-inch tip.

古文：两铤交之，置如平，不如平不利，兑其两末。
现代文：两矛尖交叉安上，放得很平，不平不方便，两头要锋利。
English: Cross the tips of the two spears and place them on top, lay them very flat, uneven is not convenient, the two ends should be sharp.

古文：穴队若冲队，必审如攻队之广狭，而令邪穿其穴，令其广必夷客队。
现代文：用打隧道的方法来抵御敌方的隧道进攻，我方所打隧道必要恰好相当敌方隧道的宽狭，使它斜穿敌方隧道，使之可以填平敌方的隧道。
English: Using the method of tunneling to resist the enemy's tunnel attack, the tunnel we hit must be just as wide as the enemy's tunnel, so that it can pass through the enemy's tunnel obliquely, so that it can fill the enemy's tunnel.

古文：疏束树木，令足以为柴抟，毋前面树，长丈七尺一，以为外面，以柴抟从横施之，外面以强涂，毋令土漏。
现代文：把木柴捆扎起来，使之能成为一捆捆的柴抟，穿前面树连起来，长一丈七尺一，作为外面，把柴抟横放在内面，外面涂上粘土，不要让土脱漏。
English: Tie up the firewood so that it can become a bundle of bundles of faggots, connect them through the front tree, grow seven feet one, as the outside, put the faggots horizontally on the inside, and paint the outside with clay, do not let the soil leak.

古文：令其广厚，能任三丈五尺之城以上，以柴木土稍杜之，以急为故。
现代文：柴抟推积的宽度和厚度，要足以充当三丈五尺高的城墙的屏障，用柴抟、树木、泥土来加固城墙，越坚固越好。
English: The width and thickness of the pile of firewood should be sufficient to act as a barrier to the three-and-a-half-foot-high city wall. The stronger the better, with firewood, trees, and soil to reinforce the city wall.

古文：前面之长短，豫蚤接之，令能任涂，足以为堞，善涂其外，令毋可烧拔也。
现代文：柴抟前面的长短，要预先弄好，以便涂上泥土，可充城堞之用，妥善涂好外面，使敌方无法烧掉或拔掉。
English: The length and width of the front of the match should be prepared in advance, so that it can be coated with soil, which can be used as a palisade, and the outside should be properly coated so that the enemy can not burn or pull out.

古文：大城丈五为闺门，广四尺。
现代文：大城，要在一丈五尺之外做闺门，宽四尺。
English: Dacheng, it is necessary to make a boudoir door, four feet wide, one height and five feet away.

古文：为郭门，郭门在外，为衡，以两木当门，凿其木维敷上堞。
现代文：做一郭门，在闺门之外。
English: Make a doorway, outside the boudoir.

古文：为斩县梁，■穿断城，以板桥邪穿外，以板次之，倚杀如城报。
现代文：做好两根横木，以关闭郭门。横木上凿孔，穿上绳子，牵到城堞上。做好悬梁，用木板做成，让它从城坎处向外斜着伸出。
English: Make two crossbeams to close the gate. Drill a hole in the crossbeam, put a rope on it and pull it up to the battlements. Make a hanging beam, made of wood, and let it protrude diagonally outwards from the battlements.

古文：城内有傅壤，因以内壤为外。
现代文：悬梁的斜度，符合城墙的形势。城墙内修傅堞，作为外堞的辅助。
English: The slope of the overhanging beams is in line with the situation of the city wall.

古文：凿其间，深丈五尺，室以樵，可烧之以待适。
现代文：在其中凿穴，深一丈五尺，放柴草于内，可以焚烧御敌。
English: A hole is drilled in it, five feet deep, and firewood and grass are placed inside to burn the enemy.

古文：令耳属城，为再重楼，下凿城外堞，内深丈五，广丈二。
现代文：连着城墙修筑令耳，令耳是两重的楼房。在城墙外堞下凿穴，深一丈五尺，宽一丈二尺。
English: The city wall was connected to the construction of the linglu, a two-storey building. Outside the city wall, a hole was dug, five feet deep and two feet wide.

古文：楼若令耳，皆令有力者主敌，善射者主发，佐皆广矢。
现代文：城楼与令耳，都派有勇力的人负责杀敌，善于射箭的人放箭，辅佐的人勇敢善射。
English: Both the castle and Ling'er sent brave men to kill the enemy. Those who were good at archery fired arrows, and those who assisted were brave and good at shooting.

古文：治裾。诸延堞高六尺，部广四尺，皆为兵弩简格。
现代文：编造樊篱，与城堞相连，高六尺，各宽四尺，都设置兵弩弓箭，格杀敌人。
English: Made up of hedges, connected to the battlements, six feet high, four feet wide, all set up with soldiers, bows and arrows, to kill the enemy.

古文：转射机，机长六尺，貍一尺。
现代文：转射机，机身长六尺，埋入土中一尺。
English: Transmitter, the fuselage is six feet long, buried one foot in the ground.

古文：两材合而为之辒，辒长二尺，中凿夫之为道臂，臂长至桓。
现代文：用两根木头合为车辒，辒长二尺，在中间凿之为道，插入横臂，臂长至趺足。
English: Make a chariot of two pieces of wood. Make a chariot two feet long, and make a road in the middle of it. Insert a crossbeam, and make it as long as a man's foot.

古文：二十步一，令善射之者，佐一人，皆勿离。
现代文：二十步放一机，令善射的人主之，派一人辅助，都不要离开。
English: Put a machine at twenty paces, let the person who is good at shooting be the master, send one person to assist, and don't leave.

古文：城上百步一楼，楼四植，植皆为通舄，下高丈，上九尺，广、丧各丈六尺，皆为宁。
现代文：城上百步筑一楼，楼有四根柱子，柱子安在基石上。下面高一丈，上面高九尺，长宽都一丈六尺，都安上窗户。
English: And he built the first floor a hundred paces above the city; and the building had four pillars, and the pillars rested on the foundation stone; and the height of the bottom was a story, and the height of the top was nine feet, and the length and the width were both a story and six feet; and there were windows in all of them.

古文：三十步一突，九尺，广十尺，高八尺，凿广三尺，表二尺，为宁。
现代文：三十步一个突门，长九尺，宽十尺，高八尺，凿一窗，宽三尺，长二尺。
English: At thirty paces he made a door nine feet long, ten feet wide, and eight feet high, and hewed a window three feet wide and two feet long.

古文：城上为攒火，夫长以城高下为度，置火其末。
现代文：城上设置火捽，火捽长短以城墙的高下为度，置火于末端。
English: A fire was set on the castle, the length of the fire was measured by the height of the city wall, and the fire was set at the end.

古文：城上九尺一弩、一戟、一椎、一斧、一艾，皆积参石、蒺藜。
现代文：城上每九尺置一弩、一戟、一椎、一斧、一镰。各处都贮备礌石、蒺藜。
English: On the castle, every nine feet there is a pestle, a chisel, a whetstone, an axe, and a plough. Flints and hoes are stored everywhere.

古文：渠长丈六尺，夫长丈二尺，臂长六尺，其貍者三尺，树渠毋傅堞五寸。
现代文：渠长一丈六尺，箭长一丈二尺，臂长六尺，埋在地下三尺，竖立渠柱不要附着城堞，要离开五寸。
English: The length of the canal is six feet, the length of the arrow is two feet, the length of the arm is six feet, and it is buried three feet underground. When erecting the canal pillar, do not attach the battlements, but leave five inches.

古文：藉莫长八尺，广七尺，其木也广五尺，中藉苴为之桥，索其端；适攻，令一人下上之，勿离。
现代文：藉幕长八尺，宽七尺。它的木架宽五尺。在藉幕中部，设立一桥，桥端系上绳索，以便牵拉上下。敌方来攻，派一人上下牵拉，不得离开。
English: The curtain is eight feet long and seven feet wide. Its wooden frame is five feet wide. In the middle of the curtain, a bridge is set up, and a rope is attached to the end of the bridge to pull it up and down. When the enemy attacks, he sends one person to pull it up and down, and he cannot leave.

古文：城上二十步一藉车，当队者不用此数。城上三十步一■灶。
现代文：城上隔二十步安置一藉车，当攻隧道时不按此数，城上每三十步设置一垄灶。
English: Place a tank every twenty paces on the castle. Do not use this number when attacking tunnels. Set up a ridge of cookers every thirty paces on the castle.

古文：持水者必以布麻斗、革盆，十步一。
现代文：持水的必须用布麻斗、皮盆，十步一件。
English: To carry water, it is necessary to use a linen bucket and a leather basin, one step at a time.

古文：柄长八尺，斗大容二斗以上到三斗。
现代文：斗柄长八尺，斗的大小可以容纳两斗到三斗水。
English: The handle of the bucket is eight feet long, and the size of the bucket can hold two to three buckets of water.

古文：敝裕、新布长六尺，中拙柄，长丈，十步一，必以大绳为箭。
现代文：旧布、新布长六尺；麻斗中间安上柄，长一丈，每十步放一件。必以粗大的绳子为箭。
English: The old cloth and the new cloth are six feet long; in the middle of the jug is a handle, one foot long, and one piece is placed every ten steps. A thick rope must be used as an arrow.

古文：城上十步一鈂。
现代文：城上隔十步有一支鈂。
English: There's a dragonfly ten paces above the castle.

古文：水缻，容三石以上，小大相杂。
现代文：水缸要能装三尺以上，大小相杂。
English: The water tank should be able to hold more than three feet of foam, and the sizes are mixed.

古文：盆、蠡各二财。
现代文：盆、蠡各二具。
English: There are two trays and two bowls.

古文：为卒干饭，人二斗，以备阴雨，面使积燥处。
现代文：做好士卒的干粮，每人二斗，以防备阴雨天，而使之积贮于干燥处。
English: Two buckets of good quality dry grain per person should be stored in a dry place in case of a rainy day.

古文：令使守为城内堞外行餐。
现代文：派遣士卒为守卫内外城堞的人送餐。
English: Officers were dispatched to deliver meals to those guarding the inner and outer city gates.

古文：置器备，杀沙砾、铁。
现代文：设置器备，撒放沙砾、铁屑。
English: Set the device ready to scatter gravel and iron filings.

古文：皆为坯斗。
现代文：各处都准备好粗制陶斗。
English: Rough earthenware buckets are ready everywhere.

古文：令陶者为薄缻，大容一斗以上至二斗，即用取，三秘合束。
现代文：使陶工做小罐，大小为装一斗至二斗水，用时即取，垒着捆在一起。
English: Have the potter make small jars, the size of which is to hold one to two buckets of water, take them out when needed, and tie them together with string.

古文：坚为斗城上隔。栈高丈二，剡其一末。
现代文：坚固地做好斗城上的隔栈，高一丈二尺，削其一端。
English: Firmly make the partition on the battlement, two feet high, and cut off one end.

古文：为闺门，闺门两扇，令可以各自闭也。
现代文：造好闺门，闺门由两扇组成，使之可以各自关闭。
English: You shall make a door for the vestibule. The vestibule shall be of two doors, so that it may be shut in its place.

古文：救闉池者，以火与争，鼓橐，冯埴外内，以柴为燔。
现代文：抢救敌方填濠沟，用火攻与之争夺，鼓动风箱，在墙内外堆着木柴，以之焚烧。
English: Rescue the enemy, fill the ditch, fight with fire, fan the bellows, pile up firewood inside and outside the wall, and burn it.

古文：灵丁，三丈一，火耳施之。
现代文：隔三丈安一个灵丁，犬牙交错地安放。
English: Three cubits apart, a ling ding is placed, and the canine teeth are interlaced.

古文：十步一人，居柴，内弩；弩半，为狗犀者环之。
现代文：每十步有一人管理柴抟和弩箭，弩边用狗犀环绕。
English: Every ten steps, one person manages the firewood and the crossbow arrows, and the ruffles are surrounded by dog hair.

古文：墙七步而一。救车火，为烟矢射火城门上，凿扇上为栈，涂之，持水麻斗、革盆救之。
现代文：抢救薰火，若敌人用燃着烟火的箭射到城门上，我方要凿门扇，安上木栈，涂上泥，拿盛水的麻斗、皮盆救火。
English: If the enemy shoots at the gate with a flaming arrow, we should hew the door, set up a wooden table, cover it with mud, and take a jug of water and a basin to put out the fire.

古文：门扇薄植，皆凿半尺一寸，一涿弋，弋长二寸，见一寸相去七寸，厚涂之以备火。
现代文：门扇上安木桩的地方都凿上一寸深的穴，每穴安一根木桩，木桩长两寸，有一寸露在外面。木桩间隔七寸，厚厚地涂上泥巴来防火。
English: An inch-deep hole was drilled in each of the places where wooden stakes were placed on the doors, and a stake was placed in each hole. The stakes were two inches long, with one inch exposed on the outside. The stakes were spaced seven inches apart and were thickly coated with mud to prevent fire.

古文：城门上所凿以救门火者，各一垂水，火三石以上，小大相杂。
现代文：城门下凿下救火的地方，各备一缸水，装三石以上，大小相杂。
English: Under the city gate, there is a place to put out the fire, each equipped with a basin of water, containing more than three stones, mixed in size.

古文：门植关必环锢，以锢金若铁鍱之。
现代文：城门的直木和横栓，一定要完好坚固，用坚韧的钢铁包裹着。
English: The straight timber and cross bolts of the gate must be intact and strong, wrapped in tough steel.

古文：门关再重，鍱之以铁，必坚。
现代文：门的横栓要上下两根，用铁包裹，必须坚固。
English: The cross bolts of the door should be two up and down, wrapped with iron, and must be strong.

古文：梳关，关二尺，梳关一苋，封以守印，时令人行貌封，及视关入桓浅深。
现代文：门楗长两尺，锁一把，加上封条，盖上守印。经常派人察看封条的情况，并视察门楗插入的深浅。
English: The latch is two feet long, with a lock, a seal, and a tamper-proof seal. People are often sent to inspect the condition of the seal and inspect the depth at which the latch is inserted.

古文：门者皆无得挟斧、斤、凿、锯、椎。
现代文：守门的人都不得挟带斧、凿、锯和椎子。
English: Gatekeepers are not allowed to carry axes, chisels, saws and scissors.

古文：城上二步一渠，渠立程，丈三尺，冠长十丈，辟长六尺。
现代文：城上每两步设立一渠柱。
English: There is a canal pillar every two steps on the castle.

古文：二步一荅，广九尺，袤十二尺。
现代文：渠是立着的木柱。丈三尺，顶长十丈，臂长六尺。
English: A ditch is a standing wooden post. It is three feet high, ten feet long at the top, and six feet long at the bottom.

古文：二步置连梃，长斧、长椎各一物；枪二十枚，周置二步中。
现代文：每两步设立一排竹答，宽九尺，长一丈二尺。每两步设立连梃，长斧、长椎各一件，枪二十支，在两步范围内分开放置。
English: Every two steps, a row of bamboo poles, nine feet wide and two feet long, is set up. Every two steps, there is a connecting hoe, a long axe, a long spine, and twenty guns, which are set up separately within the two-step range.

古文：二步一木弩，必射五十步以上。
现代文：每两步设一弓弩，射程在五十步以上。
English: A crossbow is set up every two steps, with a range of more than fifty steps.

古文：及多为矢，节毋以竹箭，楛、赵、■、榆，可。
现代文：多做些箭。如果没有竹箭，楛木、挑木、柘木、榆木也可以做箭杆。
English: Make more arrows. If you don't have any bamboo arrows, you can also make arrow shafts from birch, poplar, alder and hazel.

古文：盖求齐铁夫，播以射■及栊枞。
现代文：再求齐铁为箭头。弩箭分布城上，用以射敌人的冲梯和栊枞。
English: In addition, Qi iron was used as arrows. Zang arrows were distributed on the city to shoot the enemy's ramps and crossbows.

古文：二步积石，石重千钧以上者，五百枚。
现代文：每二步堆积石头，石头重达半钧以上的，共五十块。
English: Every two steps, stones are piled up, stones weighing more than half a bushel, a total of fifty.

古文：毋百以亢，疾犁、壁皆可善方。二步积苙，大一围，长丈，二十枚。
现代文：如果没有石头可用来抗击敌人，蒺藜、砖瓦也可用作好的防备工具。每二步堆积火炬，大一围，长一丈，共二十根。
English: If there is no stone that can be used to resist the enemy, shovels and bricks can also be used as good defense tools. Every two steps, torches are piled up, one large and one long, a total of twenty.

古文：五步一罂，盛水。
现代文：每五步一坛子盛水。
English: Every five steps, a jar is filled with water.

古文：有奚，奚蠡大容一斗。
现代文：坛子旁有葫芦瓢，葫芦瓢可盛一斗水。
English: Next to the jar is a gourd, which can hold a bucket of water.

古文：五步积狗尸五百枚，狗尸长三尺，丧以弟，瓮其端，坚约弋。
现代文：每五步堆积狗尸五百条。狗尸长三尺，用茅草覆盖，削其尖端，牢牢捆好。
English: Five hundred dog carcasses are piled up every five steps. The dog carcasses are three feet long, covered with thatch, sharpened at the tips, and tightly bound.

古文：十步积抟，大二围以上，长八尺者二十枚。
现代文：每十步堆积柴抟，大二围以上，长八尺，共二十捆。
English: Stacks of firewood are stacked every ten paces. They are more than two meters in circumference and eight feet long, with a total of twenty bundles.

古文：二十五步一灶，灶有铁鐕容石以上者一，戒以为汤。
现代文：每二十五步修一座灶，灶上有铁甑一个，可盛水一石以上，准备着烧热水。
English: A stove is repaired every twenty-five steps. There is a spade on the stove, which can hold more than a stone's worth of water, and hot water is prepared.

古文：及持沙，毋下千石。
现代文：还要储备沙石，不下一千石。
English: It is also necessary to reserve sand and stone, not less than a thousand stone.

古文：三十步置坐候楼，楼出于堞四尺，广三尺，广四尺，板周三面，密傅之，夏盖其上。
现代文：每三十步共建一座候楼。楼伸出女墙四尺，宽三尺，下面宽四尺，三面围上木板，密密涂泥，夏天盖住上面。
English: A waiting building was built every thirty paces. The wall of the building was four feet high, three feet wide at the top, and four feet wide at the bottom. It was surrounded on three sides by wooden boards, covered with mud, and covered in the summer.

古文：五十步一藉车，藉车必为铁纂。
现代文：每五十步一个藉车，藉车必用铁作车轴。
English: At every fifty paces a cart shall be drawn, and the cart shall be drawn by an iron axle.

古文：百步一栊枞，起地高五丈；三层，下广前面八尺，后十三尺，其上称议衰杀之。
现代文：每五十步一座厕所，周围的围墙，高八尺。每五十步一房，房上必须安置门柱和铁锁，以便住守。
English: Every fifty paces, a toilet, surrounded by a wall eight feet high; every fifty paces, a room, on which a gatepost and iron lock must be placed, so that it can be guarded.

古文：百步一木楼，楼广前面九尺，高七尺，楼■居■，出城十二尺。
现代文：每五十步堆积柴木，不下于三百尺，好好用泥土封盖，使城外放的火不能燃烧它。每百步建一木楼，楼宽前面九尺，高七尺，楼窗安在城墙上，伸出城墙外十二尺。
English: Every fifty paces heaped up firewood, not less than three hundred feet, and covered it well with earth, so that the fire outside the city could not burn it. Every hundred paces he built a wooden tower, nine feet wide in front and seven feet high, with windows on the city wall, extending twelve feet outside the city wall.

古文：百步一井，井十瓮，以木为系连。
现代文：每百步挖一口井，每井安排十瓮，用木制造提水的桔槔。
English: A well is dug at every hundred paces, and ten reeds are arranged in each well, and the reeds are used to make water-carrying reeds.

古文：水器容四斗到六斗者百。
现代文：贮水器可容纳四斗到六斗水，共一百个。
English: The reservoir can hold four to six buckets of water, a total of one hundred.

古文：百步一积杂秆，大二围以上者五十枚，百步为橹，橹广四尺，高八尺，为冲术。
现代文：每百步堆积一堆禾秆，大于二围以上的五十捆。每百步树立一块木盾牌，宽四尺，高八尺。做好冲锋的大路。
English: At every hundred paces, heap up a pile of straw, fifty bundles of which are larger than twice the circumference. At every hundred paces, erect a wooden shield, four feet wide and eight feet high. Prepare the road for the charge.

古文：百步为幽■，广三尺高四尺者千。
现代文：每百步要开暗沟，宽三尺高四尺的十条。
English: Every hundred paces, a dark ditch is to be opened, with ten strips three feet wide and four feet high.

古文：二百步一立楼，城中广二丈五尺二，长二丈，出枢五尺。
现代文：每两百步建一座立楼，宽二丈五尺，其中五尺伸到女墙外。
English: Every two hundred paces a tower was built, two feet high and five feet wide, five feet of which extended beyond the female wall.

古文：城上广三步到四步，乃可以为使斗。
现代文：城墙上宽三步到四步，才可以使士兵活动战斗。
English: The walls are three to four paces wide to allow soldiers to move and fight.

古文：俾倪广三尺，高二尺五寸。
现代文：俾倪宽三尺，高二尺五寸。
English: Bini is three feet wide and two feet five inches tall.

古文：陛高二尺五，广长各三尺，远广各六尺。
现代文：阶陛高二尺五，宽广各三尺，路宽六尺。
English: The steps are two and a half feet high, three feet wide, and the road is six feet wide.

古文：城上四隅童异，高五尺，四尉舍焉。
现代文：城上四角为重楼，高五尺，四个尉官驻扎于此。
English: The four corners of the castle are heavy buildings, five feet high, and four lieutenants are stationed here.

古文：城上七尺一渠，长丈五尺，貍三尺，去堞五寸；夫长丈二尺，臂长六尺半植一凿，内后长五寸。
现代文：城上每七尺建一渠柱，长一丈五尺，埋在地下三尺，离开城堞五寸；露在外者长一丈二尺，臂长六尺。在中部凿一孔，内径长五寸。
English: A canal pillar was built every seven feet on the city, five feet long, buried three feet underground, and five inches away from the city wall; those exposed to the outside were two feet long and six feet long. A hole was drilled in the middle, with an inner diameter of five inches.

古文：夫两凿，渠夫前端下堞四寸而适。
现代文：外露部分凿两孔，渠柱顶端比女墙低四寸为宜。
English: Two holes should be drilled in the exposed part, and the top of the drainage column should be four inches lower than the female wall.

古文：凿渠、凿坎，覆以瓦，冬日以马夫寒，皆待命，若以瓦为坎。
现代文：凿渠、凿坎，以瓦覆盖，冬天以马草覆盖。都待命而行，或以瓦为坎。
English: Hewn channels, hewn ditches, covered with tiles, covered with horse grass in winter. All on standby, or with tiles as ditches.

古文：城上千步一表，长丈，弃水者操表摇之。
现代文：城上每千步立一表，长一丈。要向城下颂倒废水的人，拿表摇动。
English: Upon the wall of the city there shall be a watchman every thousand paces: he that watereth under the wall shall be called a watchman.

古文：五十步一厕，与下同圂。
现代文：每五十步一厕所，与城下的厕所同一粪坑。
English: A toilet every fifty paces, the same cesspit as the one under the city.

古文：之厕者不得操。
现代文：上厕所的人不准手拿武器。
English: Toilet attendants are not allowed to carry weapons.

古文：城上三十步一藉车，当队者不用。
现代文：城上三十步一藉车，当攻打隧道时不按此数。
English: Thirty paces up the castle is one taxi ride, so don't count on this when attacking tunnels.

古文：城上五十步一道陛，高二尺五寸，长十步。
现代文：城上五十步一道台阶，高二尺五寸，长十步。
English: There is a staircase fifty paces up the castle, two feet five inches high and ten paces long.

古文：城上五十步一楼■，■勇勇必重。土楼百步一，外门发楼，左右渠之。
现代文：城上五十步一楼，楼必多层。每百步一座土楼，外面安上悬门，左右开渠。
English: At fifty paces from the city, the first floor, the building must be multi-storey. Every hundred paces, an earthen tower, with a hanging door on the outside, and canals on the left and right.

古文：为楼加藉幕，栈上出之以救外。
现代文：建楼加上藉幕，有栈道出城以救外面。
English: A building plus a curtain, there is a footbridge out of the city to save the outside.

古文：城上皆毋得有室，若也可依匿者，
现代文：城墙上都不能盖房屋，或其他可隐匿的处所，若有则必须全部拆除。
English: No houses or other hiding places can be built on the city walls, and if there are any, they must all be demolished.

古文：尽除去之。城下州道内百步一积薪，毋下三千石以上，善涂之。
现代文：城下道路每百步堆积柴薪，不少于三千石以上，用泥土好好涂上。
English: Every hundred paces, the road under the city is piled with firewood, no less than three thousand stones, which is well coated with soil.

古文：城上十人一什长，属一吏士、一帛尉。
现代文：城上每十人任命一名什长，管理十名士卒。每百步一座亭。
English: For every ten people in the city, a chief steward is appointed to manage ten servants, and there is a pavilion every hundred paces.

古文：百步一亭，高垣丈四尺，厚四尺，为闺门两扇，令各可以自闭，亭一尉，尉必取有重厚忠信可任事者。
现代文：墙高一丈四尺，厚四尺，做两扇闺门，使两扇门可以各自开关。每亭一尉，尉必须选稳重忠信能胜任的人担任。
English: The walls shall be four feet high and four feet thick, with two small doors at the top, so that the two doors can be opened and closed independently. For each pavilion, there shall be a captain, and the captain must choose a stable, loyal, and competent person to serve as captain.

古文：二舍共一井爨，灰、康、秕、杯、马矢，皆谨收藏之。
现代文：两舍共一井灶。灰、糠、秕谷、谷皮、马尿都要小心收藏。
English: Both houses share a well stove. Ash, straw, straw valley, corn husk, horse urine should be carefully collected.

古文：城上之备：渠谵、藉车、行栈、行楼、到、颉皋、连梃、长斧、长椎、长兹、距、飞冲、县□、批屈。
现代文：城上的守备工具：渠答、籍车、行栈、行楼、斫、桔槔、连梃、长斧、长椎、长锄、钩钜、飞冲、悬、批屈。
English: Defensive tools on the castle: channel answer, carriage, carriage house, carriage house,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.

古文：楼五十步一，堞下为爵穴，三尺而一为薪皋，二围，长四尺半，必有洁。
现代文：楼五十步一座，城堞下挖掘 爵穴 。每三尺设立一个桔槔，大二围，长四尺半，必须有挈。
English: The towers were built one at a time, fifty paces apart, and caves were dug under the battlements. An orangery was set up every three feet. It was two meters in circumference, four and a half feet long, and had to have a moat.

古文：瓦石重二升以上，上城上。
现代文：瓦石重二斤以上，搬上城。
English: The rubble weighs more than two pounds and is carried to the city.

古文：沙，五十步一积。
现代文：沙土，五十步一堆。
English: Sand at fifty paces a heap.

古文：灶置铁鐟焉，与沙同处。
现代文：灶上安放铁甑，和沙堆放在一起。
English: Put a spade on the stove and pile it up with the sand.

古文：木大二围，长丈二尺以上，善耿其本，名曰长从，五十步三十。
现代文：木大二围，长一丈二尺以上。把它的底部好好连在一起，叫作 长从 。每五十步放三十个。
English: It is about two times the size of a large tree, and more than two feet long. Tie its base together well, and it is called a long stem. Put thirty of them every fifty paces.

古文：木桥长三丈，毋下五十。
现代文：木桥长三丈，不下五十个。
English: The wooden bridge is three stories long, with no less than fifty spans.

古文：复使卒急为垒壁，以盖瓦复之。
现代文：再派士卒急造垒壁，以瓦覆盖起来。
English: Officers were then dispatched to hastily build a wall and cover it with tiles.

古文：用瓦木罂，容十升以上者，五十步而十，盛水且用之。
现代文：用陶制或木制的坛子，能装十升以上的，每十步放十个，盛水时将使用它们。
English: Use earthenware or wooden jars that can hold more than ten liters, put ten in every ten steps, and use them when filling water.

古文：五十二者十步而二。
现代文：能盛水五斗的十步放两个。
English: If you can hold five buckets of water, put two in every ten steps.

古文：城下里中家人，各葆其左右前后，如城上。
现代文：城墙下里巷中的人家，各保卫其左右前后，像城上一样。
English: Under the city wall and in the alleys, people's homes, each guarding its left and right, like on top of the city.

古文：城小人众，葆离乡老弱国中及他大城。
现代文：如果城小人众，就保护老弱离乡到国中的其他大城去。
English: If the population of the city is small, it will protect the old and weak from leaving their hometowns to go to other big cities in the country.

古文：寇至，度必攻，主人先削城编，唯勿烧。
现代文：敌人来了，估计他们必定进攻，主方必定先拆除城外附属物，只是不烧毁。
English: When the enemy came, it was assumed that they would attack, and that the owner would first dismantle the out-of-town annex, but not burn it down.

古文：寇在城下，时换吏卒署，而毋换其养，养毋得上城。
现代文：敌人在城下，我方应不时更换吏卒防守，但不要更换给养人员，给养人员不能上城。
English: When the enemy is below the city, we should change the officials and guards from time to time, but we should not change the supply personnel. The supply personnel should not go up to the city.

古文：寇在城下，收诸盆瓮耕，积之城下，百步一积，积五百。
现代文：敌方在城下，我方收集盆、罐，堆在城下，百步一堆，堆五百堆。
English: The enemy is under the city. We are collecting pots and jars, piling them up under the city, one pile at a hundred paces, five hundred piles.

古文：城门内不得有室，为周官桓吏，四尺为倪。行栈内闭，二关一堞。
现代文：城门内不可有房子，只筑周宫派吏驻守。四尺为倪，行栈内閈，二关一堞。
English: There must be no houses inside the city gate, only the Zhou palace should be built and officials stationed there. Four feet is the minimum, with a gate inside the gate and a gate outside the gate.

古文：除城场外，去池百步，墙垣树木小大俱坏伐，除去之。
现代文：清除城外离开护城河百步内的墙垣，大小树木都伐毁，除掉。
English: Remove the walls within a hundred paces of the moat outside the city, cut down and remove large and small trees.

古文：寇所从来，若昵道、傒近若城场，皆为扈楼，立竹箭天中。
现代文：敌人从来之处，如便道、近道，或城场，都修建扈楼，并在水中插上竹箭。
English: The enemy has always built mirages everywhere, such as byways, shortcuts, or city squares, and stuck bamboo arrows in the water.

古文：守堂下为大楼，高临城，堂下周散道；中应客，客待见。
现代文：守官堂下造大楼，高可临视全城。堂下四往有路。在堂中应客，客等待接见。
English: The lower building of the Shokan-do Hall offers a high-level view of the entire city. There are paths leading to and from the hall. Guests are received in the hall, and guests wait to be received.

古文：时召三老在葆宫中者，与计事得先。
现代文：不时召见在有保护的室中的三老，与之计议事之得失。
English: From time to time, the three elders in the protected room are summoned, and the gains and losses of the deliberation are considered.

古文：行德计谋合，乃入葆。
现代文：行事有得，计谋相合，就回入保护之屋。
English: When good fortune and cunning coincide, they return to the House of Protection.

古文：葆入守，无行城，无离舍。
现代文：保者入屋，不要逃城，不要离开房屋。
English: If you are a homeowner, do not flee the city, do not leave the house.

古文：诸守者审知卑城浅池，而错守焉。
现代文：各个担负守卫的人要详知卑城浅池，而措意防守。
English: Each person in charge of the guard should know the details of Baicheng shallow pond, and be prepared to defend.

古文：晨暮卒歌以为度，用人少易守。
现代文：早晚士卒歌以为度，用人少有变换。
English: In the morning and in the evening, it is customary to sing a song, and there is little change in employment.

古文：守法：五十步丈夫十人、丁女二十人、老小十人，计之五十步四十人。
现代文：守卫之法：每五十步男子十人，成年女子二十人，老小十人，共计五十步四十人。
English: The method of guarding: every fifty paces, ten men, twenty adult women, and ten old and young people, a total of fifty paces and forty people.

古文：城下楼卒，率一步一人，二十步二十人。
现代文：城下守楼士卒，一步一人，计二十步二十人。
English: Under the castle, the guards of the castle, one step at a time, twenty people at twenty steps.

古文：城小大以此率之，乃足以守圉。
现代文：按城的大小以此为标准，才足以守御。
English: According to the size of the city, it is sufficient to protect it.

古文：客冯面而蛾傅之，主人则先之知，主人利，客适。
现代文：如果敌人附城如蛾进攻，主人预先知道，主人有利，进攻者不利。
English: If the enemy attaches the city like a moth and attacks, the owner knows in advance that the owner is advantageous and the attacker is disadvantageous.

古文：客攻以遂，十万物之众，攻无过四队者，上术广五百步，中术三百步，下术五十步。
现代文：如果敌方以队进攻，十万之众，进攻不会超过四队，最大的排路五百步，中等三百步，下等五十步。
English: If the enemy attacks in groups of a hundred thousand, the attack will not exceed four groups, with the largest line moving five hundred paces, the middle line three hundred paces, and the lower line fifty paces.

古文：诸不尽百五步者，主人利而客病。
现代文：各种不到百五十步宽的，主人有利而客方不利。
English: All kinds of less than one hundred and fifty paces wide, the host is advantageous and the guest is unfavorable.

古文：广五百步之队，丈夫千人，丁女子二知人，老小千人，凡四千人，而足以应之，此守术之数也。
现代文：防御宽五百步的队伍，需男子一千人，成年女子二千人，老小千人，共四千人，就足以应付，这是防守道路之数。
English: To defend a line five hundred paces wide, one thousand men, two thousand women, one thousand old and young, four thousand in all, would suffice. This is the number of defensive roads.

古文：使老小不事者，守于城上不当术者。
现代文：使老小不能任事，在城上不当路的地方防守。
English: Make the old and the young unable to do anything, and defend the wrong places in the city.

古文：城持出必为明填，令吏民皆智知之。
现代文：城中将军出城，必须持 明填 ，要使官民都了解 明填 。
English: When the general in the city goes out of the city, he must fill in a form, so that the officials and the people can understand the form.

古文：从一人百人以上，持出不操填章，从人非其故人乃其稹章也，千人之将以上止之，勿令得行。
现代文：将军率一百人以上出城，不带 明填 ，或不是由本人持有 明填 ，千夫长以上的官可以制止他，不让他通行。
English: If a general leads more than a hundred people out of the city without a permit, or if he does not have a permit himself, an officer of the rank of major can stop him and prevent him from passing.

古文：行及吏卒从之，皆斩，具以闻于上。
现代文：如果出行或吏卒放纵他出行，都要杀头，要把具体情况报告给上级。
English: If he travels or officials indulge him to travel, they should kill him and report the specific situation to their superiors.

古文：此守城之重禁之。
现代文：这是守城的重大禁令。
English: This is a major ban on the city's defenses.

古文：夫奸之所生也，不可不审也。
现代文：奸细往往出在这里，不能不详细考察。
English: Spies are often found here, and it is essential to investigate in detail.

古文：城上为爵穴，下堞三尺，广其外，五步一。
现代文：城上建爵穴，在城堞下三尺之处，它的外口要大，每五步建一穴。
English: On the top of the castle, build a knight's hole. At the place three feet below the castle, its outer opening should be large, and a hole should be built every five steps.

古文：爵穴大容苴，高者六尺，下者三尺，疏数自适为之。
现代文：爵穴的大小能放得下火炬，高的有六尺，低的有三尺，它的密度可视情况而定。
English: The hole is large enough to hold a torch, up to six feet high and three feet deep. Its density depends on the situation.

古文：塞外堑，去格七尺，为县梁。
现代文：于城外挖壕沟，离 杜格 七尺远，沟上作吊桥。
English: Dig a trench outside the city, seven feet away from Dug, and build a suspension bridge over the trench.

古文：城■陕不可堑者勿堑。
现代文：城外狭窄不能作壕沟处可以不挖。
English: Where it is too narrow to dig a trench outside the city, it may not be necessary to dig one.

古文：城上三十步一聋灶。
现代文：城上每三十步建一个垄灶。
English: A furnace was built every thirty paces on the castle.

古文：人擅苣，长五节。
现代文：守城的人都备有火炬，有五个竹节长。
English: The people guarding the city are equipped with torches and five bamboo poles.

古文：寇在城下，闻鼓音，燔苣，复鼓，内苣爵穴中，照外。
现代文：敌人到了城下，听到鼓声后，点燃火炬；再次听到鼓声后，将火炬放入爵穴中，照亮城外。
English: When the enemy arrived at the foot of the castle, after hearing the drums, they lit a torch; after hearing the drums again, they put the torch into the castle cave to illuminate the outside of the city.

古文：诸藉车皆铁什。
现代文：各种藉车皆用铁。
English: All kinds of taxis use the railway.

古文：藉车之柱长丈七尺，其貍者四尺；夫长三丈以上至三丈五尺，马颊长二尺八寸，试藉车之力而为之困，失四分之三在上。
现代文：藉车的柱子长一丈七尺，埋于地下部分长四尺；车座长三丈至三丈五尺，马颊长二尺八寸，根据所测试的籍车的力度而制作车困，车座四分之三在地面上。
English: The pillar of the car is one meter and seven feet long, and the part buried in the ground is four feet long; the car seat is three meters to three meters and five feet long, and the horse's cheek is two meters and eight inches long, and the car seat is made according to the strength of the tested car, and three quarters of the car seat is on the ground.

古文：藉车，夫长三尺，四二三在上，马颊在三分中。
现代文：籍车，车座长三丈，四分之三在地面上，马颊在地面以上部分正中间。
English: The car seat is three meters long, three-quarters of it is on the ground, and the horse's cheek is in the middle of the part above the ground.

古文：马颊长二尺八寸，夫长二十四尺，以下不用。
现代文：马颊长二尺八寸，车座长二丈四尺，更短的不用。
English: The horse's cheek is two feet eight inches long, the car seat is two feet four inches long, and it doesn't need to be shorter.

古文：治困以大车轮。
现代文：用大车轮作车困。
English: Use large wheels to create a traffic jam.

古文：藉车桓长丈二尺半。
现代文：藉车的车桓长一丈二尺半。
English: The driver of the hired car is two and a half feet taller.

古文：诸藉车皆铁什，复车者在之。
现代文：各种藉车都用铁包裹，后面的车辅助它。
English: All kinds of cars are wrapped in iron, and the car behind is supporting it.

古文：寇■池来，为作水甬，深四尺，坚慕貍之。
现代文：敌人填塞护城河来进攻，我方就制作水甬，深为四尺，封固，埋于地下。
English: When the enemy attacked by filling up the moat, we made a moat four feet deep, sealed it, and buried it.

古文：十尺一，覆以瓦而
现代文：每十尺一个，盖上瓦待命而用。
English: One every ten feet, covered with tiles and ready for use.

古文：待令。以木大围长二尺四分而早凿之，置炭火其中合慕之，而以藉车投之。
现代文：用围长二尺四寸的木头，凿空中间，把炭火放进去再封上，然后用藉车投向敌军。
English: With a piece of wood with a circumference of two feet and four inches, he cut a hole in the air, put the charcoal in it, sealed it, and then threw it at the enemy with a borrowed car.

古文：为疾犁投，长二尺五寸，大二围以上。
现代文：制 疾犁投 ，长为二尺五寸，粗两围以上。
English: It was made of sickly cast iron, two feet and five inches long, and more than twice as thick.

古文：涿弋，弋长七寸，弋间六寸，剡其末。狗走，广七寸，长尺八寸，蚤长四寸，犬耳施之。
现代文：门上钉小木桩，长七寸，木桩间距为六寸，末端削尖。 狗走 宽为七寸，长一尺八寸，钩长四寸，犬牙交错地安设。
English: Small wooden stakes, seven inches long, were nailed on the door, the distance between the stakes was six inches, and the ends were sharpened.The dog walker was seven inches wide, one foot eight inches long, the hook was four inches long, and the dog's teeth were staggered.

古文：子墨子曰： 守城之法，必数城中之木，十人之所举为十挈，五人之所举为五挈，凡轻重以挈为人数。
现代文：复：当为 后 。 ■ 应作 ■ 。 慕 应作 幂 。 分 应作 寸 。 早 应作 中 。 耳 应作 牙 。 吏 应作 使 。 三 字疑衍； 丈 后应加 五尺 二字。 下地至 后应加 泉三尺 三字。 贼 应作 栈 。 传 应作 傅 。 比 应作 北 。
English: Re: should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after. ■ should be after.

