古文：唐洛阳经黄巢之乱，城无居人，县邑荒圮，仅能筑三小城，又遭李罕之争夺，但遗余堵而已。
现代文：唐代洛阳经历黄巢之乱，城内无人居住，周围县城荒废坍塌，残破砖石只能筑起三座小城，又遭李罕之争夺，只剩下断坦残壁。
English: Luoyang in the Tang Dynasty experienced the Yellow Nest Disturbance. The city was uninhabited, the surrounding county towns were abandoned and collapsed, and the broken masonry could only build three small cities. It was also contested by Li Han, and only the broken flat remnants remained.

古文：张全义招怀理葺，复为壮藩。
现代文：张全义招抚流民整理修造，又成为强大的军镇。
English: Zhang Zhengyi encouraged the displaced people to tidy up and rebuild, and became a powerful military town.

古文：《五代史》于《全义传》书之甚略，《资治通鉴》虽稍详，亦不能尽。辄采张文定公所著《搢绅旧闻记》，芟取其要而载于此。曰： 今荆襄淮沔创痍之余，绵地数千里，长民之官，用守边保障之劳，超阶擢职，不知几何人？其真能仿佛全义所为者，吾未见其人也，岂局于文法讥议，有所制而不得骋乎？
现代文：《五代史•张全义传》记载十分简略，《资治通鉴》虽稍微详细些，也不够详尽我就选取张文定公所著《洛阳摺绅旧闻记》，节选其中要点记录如下： 如今江淮一带遭受战争创伤的土地，绵延数千里，地方官吏因为守边保障的功劳，越级提拔的，不知有多少人至于真能象张全义所作所为的，我还没有见过难道编修史书受行文法则局限，讥评议论受限制而不能任情吗？
English: "Five Generations of History: The Biography of Zhang Quanyi" is very concise, "Capitalism and Governance" is a little more detailed, but not exhaustive enough, so I chose "Ancient Records of Luoyang's Aristocrats" by Zhang Wenzing. An excerpt of the main points is recorded as follows: Today, the war-torn land in the Jianghuai region stretches for thousands of miles. Local officials have been promoted beyond their ranks for their efforts to protect the border. I don't know how many people can really do what Zhang Quanyi did. Haven't I seen that the compilation of history books is limited by the rules of writing, and criticism

古文：全义始至洛，于麾下百人中，选可使者十八人，命之曰屯将，人给一旗一榜。
现代文：全义刚到洛阳，在部下一百人中，选出十八个有能力的人，称他们叫屯将，每人发给一面旗帜、一张文告。
English: As soon as Chenyi arrived in Luoyang, he selected eighteen capable people from the hundred people under his command, calling them "commander of the garrison." Each of them was given a banner and a message.

古文：于旧十八县中，令招农户自耕种，流民渐归。
现代文：在原有十八县中，让他们招募农民象原先一样种田，流民逐渐回归。
English: In the original eighteen counties, let them recruit farmers to farm as before, and the displaced people will gradually return.

古文：又选可使者十八人，命之曰屯副，民之来者绥抚之，除杀人者死，余但加仗，无重刑，无租税，归者渐众。
现代文：再挑选十八个有能力的人，称他们作屯副，安抚那些回归的百姓，除杀人者处死，其余只用权刑，不用重刑，不交租税，回归的人慢慢多起来。
English: Eighteen more capable people were selected, and they were called "town deputy" to pacify the returning people. In addition to the death penalty for murderers, the remaining people were only sentenced to capital punishment, did not have to serve a heavy sentence, and did not have to pay taxes. The number of returning people slowly increased.

古文：又选谙书计者十八人，命之曰屯判官，不一二年，每屯户至数千。
现代文：再挑选十八个熟悉写字计算的人，称他们作屯判官，不到一、二年，每屯人口达到数千户。
English: Eighteen people who were familiar with writing and calculation were then selected and appointed as township judges. Within one or two years, the population of each township reached several thousand households.

古文：于农隙时，选丁夫，教以弓矢枪剑，为坐作进退之法。
现代文：农闲时，选拔青壮年，教他们使用弓箭刀枪，为他们制定前进后的规矩。
English: When farmers are idle, they select young adults, teach them to use bows, arrows, swords and guns, and set rules for them.

古文：行之一二年，得丁夫二万余人，有盗贼即时擒捕。
现代文：实行一二年，得到壮丁二万多人，有盗贼就及时捉拿。
English: After one or two years of implementation, more than 20,000 men and boys have been obtained, and thieves have been caught in time.

古文：关市之赋，迨于无籍，刑宽事简，远近趋之如市，五年之内，号为富庶，于是奏每县除令簿主之。
现代文：关卡集市的捐税，几乎等于没有征收，刑罚宽容，手续简便，远近百姓前米投奔如同赶集，五年之内，号称富裕，于是奏请每县任命县令，建立文书，进行管碑。
English: The tax levied at the checkpoint bazaar is almost equal to no collection, the punishment is lenient, the procedures are simple, the people from far and near rush to the front as if they were rushing to the bazaar, within five years, they are known to be rich, so they asked each county to appoint a county magistrate, establish a document, and carry out a control plaque.

古文：喜民力耕织者，知某家蚕麦善，必至其家，悉召老幼亲慰劳之，赐以酒食茶果，遗之布衫裙裤，喜动颜色。
现代文：他喜爱努力耕织的百姓，了解到谁家蚕养得好，麦种得好，必定到这家来，召集全家老小亲自慰劳他们，又给美活、食物、茶叶、果品，送给布料、衣衫，裙子、裤子，人人喜笑顾开。
English: He loved the people who worked hard to cultivate and weave, and when he learned who had good silkworms and good wheat seeds, he would certainly come to this house, gather the whole family to personally comfort them, and give them beauty, food, tea, fruits, and give them fabrics, shirts, skirts, and trousers. Everyone laughed and looked away.

古文：见稼田中无草者，必下马观之，召田主赐衣服，若禾下有草，耕地不熟，则集众决责之。
现代文：见到农田的没有野草的，必定下马观看，召来田主赏给衣服；如果庄稼下有草，地犁得不透，就当众指责他。
English: If anyone sees that there is no weed in the farmland, he must get off his horse and look at it, call the owner of the field to reward him with clothes; if there is grass under the crops and the ground is not thoroughly plowed, publicly criticize him.

古文：或诉以阙牛，则召责其邻伍曰： 此少牛，如何不众助？ 
现代文：有人诉说缺少耕牛，就召来当地部长、伍长责备说： 这一家缺少耕牛，为什么不发动众人来帮助？ 
English: When someone complained that there was a shortage of farm cattle, the local minister and the corporal were summoned to rebuke them, saying: This family lacks farm cattle, why not mobilize everyone to help?

古文：自是民以耕桑为务，家家有蓄积，水旱无饥人，在任四十余年，至今庙食。 
现代文：从此百姓把务农植桑作为主要职业，家家粮食有储积，发生水旱天灾无人挨饿。在任四十多年，至今受到祭祀。 
English: Since then, the people have regarded farming and planting mulberry as their main occupation. Every family has grain reserves, and no one has gone hungry in the event of floods, droughts, and natural disasters. He has been in office for more than forty years, and has been worshipped to this day.

古文：呜呼！今之君子，其亦肯以全义之心施诸人乎？
现代文：啊，如今的正人君子们，难道也愿拿出全义那样的善心来施于众人吗？
English: Ah, today's righteous gentlemen, are they willing to show the same kindness to all people?

