古文：四年春，王正月，公会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯侵蔡。
现代文：四年春季，周历正月，僖公联合齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯一起攻打蔡国。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Zeng Gong and Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man and Cao Bo jointly attacked Cai Guo.

古文：蔡溃。
现代文：蔡军溃败。
English: Cai's army was routed.

古文：遂伐楚，次于陉。
现代文：齐桓公就接着进攻楚国，将军队驻扎在陉地。
English: Lord Qi Kuan then attacked Chu and stationed his army in Xizhi.

古文：夏，许男新臣卒。
现代文：夏季，许国国君的新大臣死了。
English: In the summer, Xu Guo Guojun's new minister died.

古文：楚屈完来盟于师，盟于召陵。
现代文：楚国屈完带兵到诸侯军驻地。
English: Chu Quan led the troops to the residence of the vassal army.

古文：齐人执陈辕涛涂。
现代文：诸侯军队撤退，驻扎在召陵。齐国将辕涛涂抓了起来。
English: The troops of the princes retreated and were stationed at Zhaoling. Qi seized Baotao.

古文：秋，及江人、黄人伐陈。
现代文：秋季，齐国和江国、黄国进攻陈国。
English: In autumn, Qi, Jiang and Huang attacked Chen.

古文：八月，公至自伐楚。
现代文：八月，僖公从攻打楚国的战场回国。
English: In August, Shoko returned home from the battlefield of the attack on Chūkoku.

古文：葬许穆公。
现代文：安葬许穆公。
English: The funeral of Prince Xu Mu is over.

古文：冬十有二月，公孙兹帅师会齐人、宋人、卫人、郑人、许人、曹人侵陈。
现代文：冬季十二月，公孙兹率领军队与齐国、宋国、卫国、郑国、许国、曹国一起进攻陈国。
English: In the winter of December, Gongsunzi led the army together with Qi, Song, Wei, Zheng, Xu and Cao to attack Chen.

古文：四年春，齐侯以诸侯之师侵蔡，蔡溃，遂伐楚。
现代文：四年春季，齐桓公率领鲁僖公、宋桓公、陈宣公、卫文公、郑文公、许穆公、曹昭公各诸侯的联军入侵蔡国。蔡军溃败，齐桓公就接着进攻楚国。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Prince Qi Huan led the allied forces of princes Lu Wei, Song Huan, Chen Xuan, Wei Wen, Zheng Wen, Xu Mu and Cao Zhao to invade Cai. Cai's army was defeated, and Prince Qi Huan then attacked Chu.

古文：楚子使与师言曰： 君处北海，寡人处南海，唯是风马牛不相及也。
现代文：楚成王派遣使者来到军中，说： 君王住在北方，我住在南方，即使是牛马发情狂奔彼此也不会相关。
English: King Chu Cheng sent an envoy to the army, saying: The king lives in the north, I live in the south, even if the bulls and horses run wild, they will not be related to each other.

古文：不虞君之涉吾地也，何故？ 
现代文：没有想到君王竟不顾路远来到我国的土地上，这是什么缘故？ 
English: I didn't expect you to come to my place. What's the reason?

古文：管仲对曰： 昔召康公命我先君大公曰： 五侯九伯，女实征之，以夹辅周室。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 以前召康公命令我们的先君太公说： 五侯九伯，你都可以征伐他们，以便辅助王室。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "In the past, Zhao Kangong ordered our forefather, the Grand Duke Taigong, to say, 'Five lords and nine nobles, you can all conquer them in order to assist the royal family.'

古文：赐我先君履，东至于海，西至于河，南至于穆陵，北至于无棣。
现代文：赐给我们的先君征伐的范围，东边到大海，西边到黄河，南边到穆陵，北边到无棣。
English: The scope of conquest given to us by our forefathers extends from the east to the sea, from the west to the Yellow River, from the south to Muling, and from the north to Muxun.

古文：尔贡包茅不入，王祭不共，无以缩酒，寡人是征。
现代文：你不进贡王室的包茅，使天子的祭祀缺乏应有的物资，不能漉酒请神，我为此而来问罪。
English: If you do not pay tribute to the royal purse, so that the sacrifice of the Son of Heaven lacks the proper materials, and you cannot make wine to please God, I come to ask you about this.

古文：昭王南征而不复，寡人是问。 
现代文：昭王南征到楚国而没有回去，我为此而来责问。 
English: Zhao Wangnan was conscripted to the Chu Kingdom and did not return. I have come to question him about this.

古文：对曰： 贡之不入，寡君之罪也，敢不共给。
现代文：使者回答说： 贡品没有送来，这确是我君的罪过，今后岂敢不供给？
English: The envoy replied: "The tribute has not been sent, and this is indeed my lord's fault. How dare you not provide it in the future?

古文：昭王之不复，君其问诸水滨。 
现代文：至于昭王没有回去，君王还是问水边上的人吧！ 
English: As for the fact that King Zhao did not return, the king should ask the people on the water's edge!

古文：师进，次于陉。
现代文：诸侯的军队前进，驻扎在陉地。
English: The armies of the lords advanced and stationed themselves at Tsumochi.

古文：夏，楚子使屈完如师。
现代文：夏季，楚成王派遣屈完带兵到诸侯军驻地。
English: In the summer, King Chu Cheng dispatched Qu Gan to lead soldiers to the residence of the vassal army.

古文：师退，次于召陵。
现代文：诸侯军队撤退，驻扎在召陵。
English: The troops of the lords retreated and were stationed in Zhaoling.

古文：齐侯陈诸侯之师，与屈完乘而观之。
现代文：齐桓公把所率领的军队列成战阵，和屈完坐一辆战车检阅队伍。
English: Qi Kuan Gong lined up the troops he led into battle formation, and Qu Gan sat in a chariot reviewing the troops.

古文：齐侯曰： 岂不穀是为？
现代文：齐桓公说： 我们出兵，难道是为了我一个人吗？
English: Qi Kuan Gong said, "We sent troops, is it because of me alone?

古文：先君之好是继。
现代文：为的是继续先君建立的友好关系。
English: In order to continue the friendly relations established by his predecessor.

古文：与不穀同好如何？ 
现代文：我们两国共同友好怎么样？ 
English: What about the mutual friendship between our two countries?

古文：对曰： 君惠徼福于敝邑之社稷，辱收寡君，寡君之愿也。 
现代文：屈完回答说： 君王惠临敝国求福，承蒙君王安抚我君，这正是我君的愿望！ 
English: After bowing, he replied, "The king has come to seek the welfare of the country, and I am grateful to the king for appeasing me. This is exactly what I want!"

古文：齐侯曰： 以此众战，谁能御之？
现代文：齐桓公说： 用这样的军队来作战，谁能够抵御他们？
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: With such an army to fight, who can resist them?

古文：以此攻城，何城不克？ 
现代文：用这样的军队来攻城，哪个城不被攻破？ 
English: With such an army to attack the city, which city will not be broken?

古文：对曰： 君若以德绥诸侯，谁敢不服？
现代文：屈完回答说： 君王如果用德行安抚诸侯，谁敢不服？
English: When he had finished, he replied: "If the king uses virtue to appease the princes, who would dare to disobey?

古文：君若以力，楚国方城以为城，汉水以为池，虽众，无所用之。 
现代文：君王如果用武力，楚国有方城山作为城墙，汉水作为护城河，君王的军队即使很多，也没有什么用处。 
English: If the king uses force, the state of Chu has Fangcheng Mountain as a city wall, and Han Water as a moat. The king's army, even if it is many, is of no use.

古文：屈完及诸侯盟。
现代文：屈完与各诸侯订立了盟约。
English: He concluded a treaty with all the lords.

古文：陈辕涛涂谓郑申侯曰： 师出于陈、郑之间，国必甚病。
现代文：陈国的辕涛涂对郑国的申侯说： 军队取道陈国和郑国之间，两国供应必然发生困难。
English: Zhen Tao Tu of Chen said to Shen Hou of Zheng: If the army takes the road between Chen and Zheng, the supply of the two countries will inevitably be difficult.

古文：若出于东方，观兵于东夷，循海而归，其可也。 申侯曰： 善。 
现代文：如果向东走，向东夷炫耀武力，沿着海道回国，这就很好了。 申侯说： 好。 
English: If you go to the east, show force to the Dongyi, and return to the country along the sea route, it will be fine. Shen Hou said: Good.

古文：涛涂以告，齐侯许之。
现代文：辕涛涂就把这个意见告诉齐桓公，齐桓公同意了。
English: Gong Tao Tuo told this opinion to Qi Huan Gong, and Qi Huan Gong agreed.

古文：申侯见，曰： 师老矣，若出于东方而遇敌，惧不可用也。
现代文：申侯进见齐桓公说： 军队在外头久了，如果往东走而遇到敌人，恐怕是不能打硬仗了。
English: Shen Hou went to see Qi Huan Gong and said, "The army has been away for a long time. If we go east and encounter the enemy, I'm afraid we won't be able to fight a hard battle.

古文：若出于陈、郑之间，共其资粮屝屦，其可也。 
现代文：如果取道陈国和郑国之间，由两国供给军队的粮食、军鞋，这就可以了。 
English: If we take the road between Chen Guo and Zheng Guo, and the two countries supply the army with grain and army shoes, this will be fine.

古文：齐侯说，与之虎牢。执辕涛涂。
现代文：齐桓公很高兴，将虎牢赏给他，而把辕涛涂抓了起来。
English: King Qi Huan was very pleased and rewarded him with a tiger's stronghold, while he caught Baotao.

古文：秋，伐陈，讨不忠也。
现代文：秋季，齐国和江国、黄国进攻陈国，这是为了讨伐陈国对齐国的不忠。
English: In the autumn, Qi, Jiang and Huang attacked Chen in order to fight Chen's disloyalty to Qi.

古文：许穆公卒于师，葬之以侯，礼也。
现代文：许穆公死在军中，用安葬侯的制度安葬他，这是合于礼的。
English: Xu Mukong died in the army. It is proper to bury him according to the system of peaceful burial.

古文：凡诸侯薨于朝会，加一等；死王事，加二等。
现代文：凡是诸侯在朝会时死去，葬礼加一等；为天子作战而死的，加二等。
English: If a vassal died at a court assembly, the funeral was given a first-class award; if he died fighting for the emperor, a second-class award was given.

古文：于是有以衮敛。
现代文：在这种情况下才可以用天子的礼服入殓。
English: In this case, you can use the dress of the son of heaven to enter the coffin.

古文：冬，叔孙戴伯帅师，会诸侯之师侵陈。
现代文：冬季，叔孙戴伯带兵会合诸侯的军队侵犯陈国。
English: In winter, his uncle and grandson Dai Bo led the army of the princes to invade Chen.

古文：陈成，归辕涛涂。
现代文：陈国求和，便把辕涛涂放回去了。
English: Chen Kuo-kuo sued for peace, and then put the painting back.

古文：初，晋献公欲以骊姬为夫人，卜之不吉，筮之吉。
现代文：当初，晋献公想立骊姬做夫人，用龟来占卜，不吉利；用草占卜，吉利。
English: At first, Jin Xian Gong wanted to make Gong Ji his wife. He used a turtle to tell fortunes, which was unlucky; he used grass to tell fortunes, which was lucky.

古文：公曰： 从筮。 
现代文：献公说： 听从蓍草所占卜的结果。 
English: The deity said: Listen to the result of the divination of the reed grass.

古文：卜人曰： 筮短龟长，不如从长。
现代文：占卜的人说： 蓍草之数短而龟象却长，不如按照龟卜。
English: The soothsayer said, "The number of thistles is short, but the turtle is long. It is better to follow the turtle."

古文：且其繇曰： 专之渝，攘公之羭。
现代文：而且它的繇辞说： 专宠会使人心生不良，将要偷走您的公羊。
English: And its epitaph says: "Pets are bad for you, they'll steal your horse."

古文：一薰一莸，十年尚犹有臭。 
现代文：香草和臭草放在一起，十年以后还会有臭气。 
English: Put vanilla and stinkweed together, and after ten years there will still be stench.

古文：必不可。 
现代文：一定不可以。 
English: Absolutely not.

古文：弗听。
现代文：晋献公不听，立了骊姬。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：立之，生奚齐。其娣生卓子。
现代文：骊姬生了奚齐，她的妹妹生了卓子。
English: Zou Ji gave birth to Zou Qi, and her sister gave birth to Zhuo Zou.

古文：及将立奚齐，既与中大夫成谋，姬谓大子曰： 君梦齐姜，必速祭之。 
现代文：等到打算立奚齐做太子，骊姬已经和中大夫定了计谋。骊姬对太子说： 国君梦见你母亲齐姜，你一定要赶快祭祀她。 
English: By the time she planned to make Qi Qi the crown prince, Yan Ji had already made a plan with Zhongdafu. Yan Ji said to the crown prince: "The sovereign dreamed of your mother Qi Jiang, you must quickly sacrifice her."

古文：大子祭于曲沃，归胙于公。
现代文：太子到曲沃祭祀，把祭酒祭肉带回来给献公吃。
English: The prince went to Quwo for a sacrifice, and brought back the sacrificial wine and meat for a public meal.

古文：公田，姬寘诸宫六日。
现代文：献公刚好出外打猎，骊姬把酒肉放在宫里过了六天。
English: As a tribute to her father-in-law, she went out to hunt, but she kept the meat and wine in the palace for six days.

古文：公至，毒而献之。
现代文：献公回来，骊姬在酒肉里下毒药而献上去。
English: After returning from the offering, Yan Ji put poison in the wine and meat and offered it.

古文：公祭之地，地坟；与犬，犬毙；与小臣，小臣亦毙。
现代文：献公以酒祭地，地土突起像坟堆。把肉给狗吃，狗就死掉；给宦官吃，宦官也死了。
English: The land mourneth; the land is as an heap; yea, the dogs eat thereof, and the dogs die; the eunuchs also eat thereof, and die.

古文：姬泣曰： 贼由大子。 
现代文：骊姬哭着说： 阴谋来自太子那里。 
English: Yan Ji cried and said, "The conspiracy came from the crown prince."

古文：大子奔新城。公杀其傅杜原款。
现代文：太子逃亡到新城，献公杀了他的保傅杜原款。
English: The prince fled to Xincheng and killed his bodyguard, Du Yuanfeng.

古文：或谓大子： 子辞，君必辩焉。 
现代文：有人对太子说： 您如果声辩，国君是必定能弄清楚的。 
English: Someone said to the crown prince: If you argue, the sovereign will surely be able to figure it out.

古文：大子曰： 君非姬氏，居不安，食不饱。
现代文：太子说： 国君没有骊姬，居不安，食不饱。
English: The crown prince said: "The country's ruler does not have a concubine, he is insecure and cannot get enough to eat.

古文：我辞，姬必有罪。
现代文：我如果声辩，骊姬必定有罪。
English: If I plead guilty, Zou Ji must be guilty.

古文：君老矣，吾又不乐。 
现代文：国君年纪老了，骊姬有罪会使国君不高兴，我也会忧郁不乐的。 
English: The sovereign is getting old, and if she is guilty, it will make the sovereign unhappy, and I will also be sad and unhappy.

古文：曰： 子其行乎！ 
现代文：说： 那么您逃走吧！ 
English: He said: Then you run away!

古文：大子曰： 君实不察其罪，被此名也以出，人谁纳我？ 
现代文：太子说： 国君还没有查清我的罪过，带着这个名义出去，别人谁会接纳我？ 
English: The prince said: The sovereign has not yet ascertained my guilt, so I will go out with this name. Who else will accept me?

古文：十二月戊申，缢于新城。
现代文：十二月二十七日，太子吊死在新城。
English: On December 27th, the crown prince hanged himself in Xincheng.

古文：姬遂谮二公子曰： 皆知之。 
现代文：骊姬就诬陷两位公子说： 太子的阴谋他们都参预了。 
English: Yan Ji slandered the two princes and said: They all participated in the prince's plot.

古文：重耳奔蒲，夷吾奔屈。
现代文：于是重耳逃亡到蒲城，夷吾逃亡到屈地。
English: As a result, Chong Er fled to Putian and Yigo fled to Qu Cun.

