古文：宇文翃韩简胡令杨铮谢柴书郡牧张咸光长须僧道流三妄人
现代文：崔育宇文翃韩简胡令杨铮谢柴书郡牧张咸光长须僧道流三妄人
English: Choe Iuk-Wen, Han Chien-Hoo, Yang Mi-Chieh, Chai Shu-Gun, Mu, Zhang Ham-Kuang, the Long-Bearded Monk, and the Three Deviants of Taoism

古文：周韦二子不识镜啮鼻助丧礼外学归行吊痴婿鲁人执杆齐人学瑟市马
现代文：周韦二子不识镜啮鼻助丧礼外学归行吊痴婿鲁人执杆齐人学瑟市马
English: Zhou Wei's two sons don't know how to read mirrors, pick their noses, help with funerals, go abroad to study, return home, hang themselves, have an idiot for a son-in-law, a Lu person to hold a pole, a Qi person to study, a Su Shi Ma

古文：昭应书生
现代文：昭应书生
English: Sho Ying Shosei

古文：时窦年四十余，方谋继室，兄回为谏议，能为人致登第。
现代文：崔育他有一个儿女已到了出嫁的年龄，生得异常美丽，使那些当朝的进士们，也求亲而不能获得。当时窦璠已四十多岁，正打算要续妻，他的哥哥窦回在朝中任谏议大夫，能设法使人复试获中。
English: Cui Yu had a daughter and a son who had reached the age of marriage. They were born unusually beautiful, so that those who entered the imperial court at that time also asked for relatives and could not obtain them. At that time, Dou Yu was more than forty years old and was planning to take a second wife. His brother Dou Hui was in the middle of the imperial court as a medical doctor, and he could try to make people re-enter the imperial court.

古文：遂娉女于璠，为言于回矣，果有所获。
现代文：于是宇文翃把女儿嫁给了窦璠，窦璠把宇文翃的事说给了窦回，果然使他获得官职。
English: So Uwen Yao married his daughter to Dou Yao, and Dou Yao told Uwen Yao's story to Dou Hui, and he was given an official post.

古文：相公韦公说，即其中表，甚鄙之。
现代文：相公韦公说即是他的表兄弟，也很鄙视他。
English: His father-in-law Wei Gong said that even his cousins despised him.

古文：因滑台杜志名，时有丧遭火，几棺柩，家人云： 老鼠尾曳火入库内，因而延燎。 
现代文：当时有一家办丧事遭火灾，几乎把棺柩也烧毁，那家的人说是老鼠尾巴把火带进了库房，而使火蔓延开的。
English: At that time, a funeral home suffered a fire that almost destroyed the coffin. The family said that the rat's tail brought the fire into the storeroom, causing the fire to spread.

古文：杜谓宇文曰： 鱼将化龙，雷为烧尾。近日老鼠亦有烧尾之事。
现代文：于是滑名人杜志名对宇文翃说道：鱼将化龙，雷为烧尾，近日竟然老鼠也有烧尾的事。
English: As a result, the skating celebrity Du Zhiming said to Yu Wenyi: the fish will turn into a dragon, the thunder is a burning tail, and recently even the mouse has a burning tail.

古文：用以讥之，
现代文：这是用来讽刺他的。
English: It was meant to lampoon him.

古文：韩简
现代文：韩简
English: Han Jian

古文：唐魏博节度使韩简性粗质，每对文士，不晓其说，心常耻之，乃召一孝廉讲《论语》。至《为政》篇，翌日谓诸从事曰：仆近方知古人淳朴，年至三十，方能行立。
现代文：唐朝时，魏博节度使韩简粗朴而没文化，每次与文人们对话都不明白人家说些什么，内心总觉得很羞愧，于是请来一个举人为他讲《论语》，讲到了《为政》篇，第二天便对下属们说：我近来才知道古代的人是很淳朴的，年龄到了三十方能行走站立。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian rude and uneducated. Every time he had a dialogue with writers, he did not understand what they said. He always felt very ashamed. So he invited a person to speak to him about "The Analects." He spoke about the "Politics" chapter, and the next day he said to his subordinates: I only recently learned that ancient people were very simple. At the age of thirty, they could walk and stand.

古文：外有闻者，无不绝倒。
现代文：外边有听到的人，无不俯仰大笑。
English: People outside who heard it all laughed uproariously.

古文：胡令
现代文：胡令
English: Hu Ling

古文：奉先县有令，姓胡，忘其名。
现代文：奉先县曾有一个姓胡的县令，已不详其名字了。
English: Fuxian County once had a county magistrate surnamed Hu, but his name is no longer known.

古文：渎货靳食，僻好博奕。
现代文：此人贪财而又不舍得吃，特别喜好下棋。
English: This man is greedy for money, but not reluctant to eat. He especially likes to play chess.

古文：邑寄张巡官，好尚既同，往来颇洽。
现代文：寄居于城里的张巡官，爱好与他相同，因此往来很融洽。
English: Inspector Zhang, who lives in the city, has the same hobbies as him, so they get along very well.

古文：每会棋，必自旦及暮。品格既停，略无厌倦。
现代文：每次来下棋，必然是从早一直下到晚，不分高下，丝毫不觉厌倦。
English: Every time I come to play chess, I always play from morning to night, regardless of the level, and I never feel tired.

古文：然宰君时入中门，少顷，又来对棋。
现代文：然而胡县令有时便进中间的房门里去一趟，过一会儿，再出来继续下棋。
English: However, Hu Xianling sometimes went into the door of the middle room, and after a while, he came out again to continue playing chess.

古文：如是日日，早入晚归，未尝设食于张，不胜饥冻。
现代文：就这样一天又一天，早来晚走，胡县令也没有让张巡官吃过一顿饭，张巡官自然会觉得十分饥寒。
English: In this way, day after day, early in the morning and late in the evening, the Hu County government did not let Inspector Zhang have a meal. Inspector Zhang would naturally feel very hungry and cold.

古文：潜知之。时入盖自食而复出，及暮辞宰曰：且去也，极是叨铁。
现代文：后来张巡官终于在暗中发现了这个秘密，便也时而入中门去吃一通再出来下棋。到了晚上向县令告辞说：且去也，极是叨铁。
English: Later, inspector Zhang finally discovered this secret in the dark, so he also went into the middle gate to eat a pass and then came out to play chess. In the evening, he said goodbye to the county magistrate and said: And go, it's very annoying.

古文：胡唯唯而已。张去，胡忽思之曰：此人相别云： 极是叨铁 ，出何文谭？
现代文：胡县令也只是顺嘴答应了几句，等张巡官走后，他忽然想到：此人告别的时候说， 极是叨铁 ，出于哪篇文章？
English: The Hu County magistrate only agreed to a few words, and after the inspector Zhang left, he suddenly thought: When this person said goodbye, he was very impatient, for which article?

古文：急令追之。
现代文：于是立即叫人去追回来。
English: So they immediately called for someone to go and retrieve it.

古文：曰：还见冶炉家，置一铁攒长杖乎？
现代文：等把张巡官追回来之后，胡县令便问他刚才说的极是叨铁是什么意思，张巡官慢慢地坐下来对他说道：长官难道还不知 叨铁 吗？
English: After bringing Inspector Zhang back, the Hu County magistrate asked him what he meant by "extremely tough." Inspector Zhang slowly sat down and said to him, "Don't you know what tough is?"

古文：只此是。
现代文：胡县令说：不知道。
English: The Hu County magistrate said: I don't know.

古文：炉中猛火炎炽，铁汁或未消融，使此杖时时于炉中橦猛火了，却出来，移时又橦猛火了，却出来，只此是叨铁也。
现代文：张巡官说：你见过炼铁炉用的一种铁制的长棍吧，就是这个。熔炉里烈火炽热，铁水中也有没熔化的，就使用这种铁棍时常探进炉中去捅火烧，之后退出来，过一会儿再用它去捅捅火，再退出来，只有这样才是叨铁。说完便走了。
English: Inspector Zhang said, "You've seen a kind of iron long stick used in iron furnaces, it's this one. In the furnace, the fire is blazing hot, and there is also molten iron in the molten iron, so use this iron stick to often dip into the furnace to quench the fire, then pull out, and after a while, use it to quench the fire, then pull out. This is the only way to quench the iron. After saying that, he left.

古文：言讫而去。胡入室，话于妻子。再三思之，方知讽其每日自入，噇猛火了，却出来棋也。
现代文：胡县令进屋里，把此话说给妻子，再三思考，方明白是在讽刺自己每天进厨房猛吃一顿，退出来再下棋这件事。
English: Hu Xianling went into the house, said this to his wife, and thought about it again and again. Fang understood that he was satirizing the fact that he went into the kitchen every day to eat a meal, and then came out to play chess.

古文：凡靳食倦客之士，时人多以此讽之。
现代文：当时，凡是有舍不得给客人吃饭而让人家饿肚疲劳的人，人们都用这句话去讽刺他。
English: At that time, people used this saying to satirize anyone who was reluctant to feed guests and let people go hungry.

古文：杨铮
现代文：杨铮
English: by Yang Hui

古文：蜀秀才杨铮，行恶思，或故作落韵，或丑秽语，取人笑玩。
现代文：四川有个秀才叫杨铮，尽想些坏点子作弄人。或者在诗赋中故意失韵，或者是秽语脏话连篇，拿人开玩笑，然后装上卷轴，去拜访王侯官僚。
English: There was a talented man in Sichuan named Yang Xuan. He would come up with some bad ideas to tease people. Or he would deliberately misspell a rhyme in a poem, or he would use a string of obscenities to make fun of people, and then he would load up a scroll and visit the princes and bureaucrats.

古文：装修卷轴，投谒王侯门，到者无不逢迎。雄藩火幕，争驰车马迎之。
现代文：凡是去的地方，无不隆重迎接。就是那些很有雄威的藩镇幕府，也是争相以车马接迎。
English: Wherever they went, they were greeted with great pomp. Even the very powerful feudal shoguns competed to be greeted by carriages and horses.

古文：铮每行，仆马甚盛，平头骑从骡，携书袋。
现代文：他每次出行，仆人和乘马都装饰得很华丽，仆人骑骡与他并肩而行，为他带着装书的袋子。
English: Every time he travelled, his servants and horses were richly decorated, and the servants rode alongside him on donkeys, carrying bags of books for him.

古文：偏郡小邑，尤更精意承事之，虑其谤渎。
现代文：地处偏僻的郡或小县。尤其更加精心接待侍候他，主要是怕他进行诽谤和亵渎。
English: Especially in remote counties or small counties, they are more careful to receive and serve him, mainly because they are afraid of his slander and blasphemy.

古文：黔南节度使王茂权，聪明，有文武才。四方负艺之士，罔不集其门。
现代文：黔南节度使王茂权，是个聪明而又文武全才的人，四方身负技艺的名士，无不聚集于他的门下。
English: Wang Maoquan, a clever and well-educated man, was appointed as the head of the Southern Song Festival. All over the country, there were famous craftsmen who gathered under his leadership.

古文：召铮至，饬东阁，尽礼待之。
现代文：他召见了杨铮，他叫人收拾东阁给他住，并以礼相待。
English: He summoned Yang Xuan, he ordered someone to clean up the East Pavilion for him to live in, and treated him with courtesy.

古文：时令贡恶诗，以为欢笑。
现代文：当时让他献来恶诗，好以此作为欢笑。
English: At the time, he asked him to recite a bad poem as a joke.

古文：诸客请召，有不得次者，以为怏怏。
现代文：他把门客都请来，有没有排上号的，还因此而很不快活。
English: He invited all the guests, whether or not they were in the first row, and was very unhappy about it.

古文：茂权一日忽屏从谓之曰：秀才客子，当州必欲咨留，相伴至罢镇同归，可乎？
现代文：有一天，茂权忽然屏退随从对杨铮说：秀才，本州一定想要商量留下你，希望能伴我到罢任后同归故里，可以吗？
English: One day, Mao Quan suddenly screened his retiring followers and said to Yang Xuanlu: "Clever man, the state must want to discuss leaving you behind. I hope you can accompany me to return to my hometown after leaving office. Is that okay?"

古文：如可，则当奉为卜娶，所居奉留。
现代文：如果可以，就给你以占卜的方式择女娶妻，东阁仍留给你居住。
English: If you can, you will be able to choose a wife by divination, and you will still be able to live in Dongge.

古文：铮欣然从之。
现代文：杨铮欣然从命。
English: Yang Wei gladly obeyed the order.

古文：权令媒氏与问名某氏之属。
现代文：于是茂权让媒人去问清楚女方的姓名宗属等等。
English: So Mao Quan asked the matchmaker to find out the woman's name, family, and so on.

古文：至于成迎，筵宴容质异常端丽。
现代文：到了成亲那天，宴席早早准备好了，于是邀请各位佐官从事来赴婚礼。杨铮亲眼见过那女子，容貌端庄美丽。
English: On the day of the wedding, the banquet was ready early, so they invited all the commanders to come to the wedding. Yang Xi saw the woman with his own eyes, her appearance was dignified and beautiful.

古文：及成礼，遽遭殴辱，左右婢仆，皆是扶同共相毁詈，不胜其苦。
现代文：可是刚举行过婚礼，就遭到她的殴打辱骂，而且左右婢仆，都是帮她一起对他进行毁誉谩骂，使他不胜其苦。
English: However, as soon as the wedding was over, he was beaten and abused by her, and both the right and left servants helped her to defame and abuse him, making him suffer.

古文：乃是茂权诈饬无须少年数辈，皆浓装艳服以绐之。
现代文：其实这是茂权让几个少年人假扮的，让他们浓装艳服以欺骗杨铮。
English: In fact, it was Mao Quan who had several young men pretend to be him, and had them dress up in sexy clothes in order to deceive Yang Hui.

古文：然后茂权自赴会大笑。此后复就茂权。屡自乞一邑。
现代文：这时茂权才到来，他看到这场面只是大笑，此后杨铮多次来找茂权，每次都乞求放他到一个小城去任职。
English: At this time, Mao Quan arrived, he saw that the scene was just a big laugh, after that, Yang Wei came to Mao Quan many times, each time begging to let him go to a small town to work.

古文：初有难色，宾从其谘，方许之。遂命给蕳署。
现代文：茂权一开始表示不好办，后来托人来商议，才准许。于是命他到蕳署，到时去充任行李。
English: At first, Mao Quan said that it was not easy to do, and later he asked someone to discuss it before granting permission. So he ordered him to go to the Shao Department, and then to fill in the baggage.

古文：及其治行李，择良日辞谢。本邑迎候人力，自衙门外至通衢。
现代文：选择吉日起程告别，那一天，县城迎接他的人从衙门外一直排到大街上。
English: He chose to bid farewell on the auspicious day of departure. On that day, the people who greeted him in the county town lined up from outside the gate to the street.

古文：忽有二健步，手执一牒，当街趋拽下马，夺去中带，云：有府断，摄官送狱，荷校灭耳！
现代文：忽然有两个人疾步而来，手中拿着令帖，在大街上当众把杨铮拖下马来，夺去他的中带，说道：我们有官府的判决书，来拘捕你入狱，核对后将你处死！
English: Suddenly, two people came at a gallop, holding writs in their hands, dragged Yang Qi off his horse in public on the street, took away his middle belt, and said: We have the government's verdict, come to arrest you and put you in prison, and will execute you after verification!

古文：茂权遂诈作计，赠遗二夫，令脱逃而遁。潜藏旬日，方召出之。
现代文：这也是茂权用的欺骗之计。杨铮给那两个人送了钱物，才让他脱逃而出，一直潜藏了十天，才叫他出来。
English: This was also a trick used by Mao Quan. Yang Hui sent money and goods to the two men, only to have him escape. He remained in hiding for ten days before he was called out.

古文：军州大以为笑。
现代文：幕府的人以此大笑。
English: The people of the shogunate laughed at this.

古文：谢柴书
现代文：谢柴书
English: by Xie Chai Shu

古文：唐有内大臣学作别纸言语。凤翔节度使寄柴数车，回书谢云：蒙惠也愚若干。
现代文：唐朝时有个宫廷内的大臣想学用别种样式的语言，当凤翔节度使给他送来几车柴禾时，他回信谢道：承蒙你的恩惠，我有很多。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a court official who wanted to learn to speak a different style of language. When Fengxiang Jiedu sent him several cartloads of firewood, he wrote back, "Thanks to your kindness, I have a lot."

古文：郡牧
现代文：郡牧
English: Gunmoku District

古文：唐有膏梁子出刺，郡人迎候甚至，前任与之设交代之礼。
现代文：唐朝时，有个富豪家的儿子出任刺史，郡城里很多人都出来迎接，前任刺史为他安排了交接仪式。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a son of a wealthy family who was appointed as the crown prince. Many people in the county town came out to welcome him. The crown prince's predecessor arranged a handover ceremony for him.

古文：仪无缺者，二礼生具头冠礼衣，相其宾主，升降揖让。
现代文：仪式的程序应有尽有，两个礼生都按照礼制头顶礼冠身着礼服，分别相伴宾主，宾主升降进退都以礼作揖让请。
English: The procedure of the ceremony should be complete. The two courtiers should wear ceremonial robes in accordance with the etiquette of the headdress, and accompany the guest separately. The guest's ascending and descending should be done with courtesy.

古文：而新牧巑岏踧踖。
现代文：而新上任的刺史像登临险峰那样很不安的样子。
English: The newly appointed Sashi, however, looked as uneasy as if he were climbing a dangerous peak.

古文：敛容低视，不敢正面对礼生。
现代文：他紧绷着脸，眼睛一直看着脚下，不敢正面对着礼生。
English: His face tightened, his eyes kept looking down at his feet, not daring to face the student.

古文：及礼毕，使人再三传话，慰劳感谢，皆莫涯其意。
现代文：等到仪式完毕，他派人再三传话，表示慰劳和感谢，人们都没有揣度到他是什么意思。
English: When the ceremony was over, he sent someone to repeatedly send messages of consolation and thanks, but people didn't understand what he meant.

古文：翌日，于内阁，从礼生从容，生极惶恐，罔知去就。
现代文：第二天，在官府内，新刺史很从容地跟随上那个礼生，礼生很慌恐，不知他要干什么。
English: The next day, in the government office, the new chief secretary calmly followed the previous proctor. The proctor was panicked and didn't know what to do.

古文：既坐，颦蹙低语曰：贤尊安否？
现代文：等到坐下，刺史才皱着眉低声说道：你家的长辈们可安好？
English: When he sat down, he frowned and said in a low voice: Are the elders of your family safe?

古文：礼生唯唯。
现代文：礼生恭敬地答应着。
English: Reishi respectfully agreed.

古文：又曰：顷年营大事时，极烦贤尊心力。
现代文：刺史又道：近年办理大事时，太烦劳你家长辈用了心力。
English: Zushi Mata: In recent years, when dealing with major events, your parents have been too busy and have used their energy.

古文：生亦懵然。
现代文：此话让礼生也感到糊涂。
English: This made Reishi also feel confused.

古文：及罢，有亲知细询之，乃曰：此礼生缘方相子弟，昔曾使他家君，是以再三感谢。
现代文：事后，有知近的人去详细询问，他才说：这个礼生本是方相的子弟，以前我家办丧事曾使用过他家的人。因此才对他再三感谢。
English: After the event, someone who knew the family went to inquire in detail, and only then did he say: "This lay student was actually the son of Fang Fang. In the past, I had used a member of his family to conduct funerals. That's why I thanked him again and again."

古文：且士流中亦有故为轻薄者，亦有昧于菽爽，不能分别者。
现代文：如今在读书人之中也有故作轻薄的人，也有愚笨到连菽豆都辨认不出来的人。
English: Today, among the readers, there are also people who pretend to be frivolous, and there are also people who are so stupid that they can't even recognize peas.

古文：信而有之。
现代文：对于神鬼，你信就有。
English: When it comes to gods and demons, you have to believe.

古文：张咸光
现代文：张咸光
English: Zhang Xiangguang

古文：梁龙德年，有贫衣冠张咸光，游乞无度。
现代文：后梁朝龙德年间，有一个身上缺少衣帽的人叫张咸光，到处去行乞讨食。
English: During the Later Liang Dynasty, there was a man named Zhang Xianguang who was short of clothes and hat. He went everywhere to beg for food.

古文：于梁宋之间，复有刘月明者，与咸光相类。
现代文：在开封、商丘一带还有个叫刘月明的，与张咸光是一样的人。
English: In Kaifeng and Shangqiu, there is also a man named Liu Yueming, who is the same as Zhang Xiangguang.

古文：常怀匕著，每游贵门。即遭虐戏。
现代文：张咸光的怀中常揣着一个吃饭用的小竹片，每到豪门去讨要，都要遭到虐待和戏弄。
English: Zhang Xiangguang often carries a small piece of bamboo for eating in his arms. Every time he goes to a rich man's house to ask for something, he is abused and teased.

古文：方飧则夺其匕著，则袖中出而用之。
现代文：刚要吃饭便抢下他的竹片，他便从袖简里再拿出一个来用。
English: Just as he was about to eat, he grabbed his piece of bamboo and took another one out of his sleeve to use.

古文：梁驸马温积谏议，权判开封府事。咸光忽遍诣豪门告别。问其所诣，则曰：往投温谏议也。
现代文：当听说驸马、谏议大夫温积去主管开封府时，张咸光便忽然到各豪门贵宅去告别，问他要到哪里去，他说：去投奔温谏议。
English: When he heard that Wen Jiaba, the doctor in charge of the discussion, was leaving for Kaifeng, Zhang Xiangguang suddenly went to the mansions of the rich to say goodbye. When asked where he wanted to go, he said, "I want to go to Wen Jiabao."

古文：问有何绍介而往，答曰：顷年大承记录，此行必厚遇也。大谏常制《碣山潜龙宫上梁文》云：馒头似碗，胡饼如笠。
现代文：问他是由何人介绍而去，他说：是近年的 大承记录 。此行必有厚遇，在温谏议写的《碣山潜龙宫上梁文》中说：那里馒头似碗，饼如草帽。
English: When asked by whom he was introduced to go there, he said, "It was a recent record of Dazheng. This trip is sure to be a success. In the "Lushan Submerged Dragon Palace Shangliangwen" written by Wen Xuan, he said, "There, the steamed buns look like bowls, and the cakes look like straw hats."

古文：畅杀刘月明主簿，喜杀张咸光秀才。
现代文：高兴死了刘月明主簿，喜欢死了张咸光秀才！
English: I'm glad Liu Yueming's home book is dead, and I'm glad Zhang Xiangguang's talent is dead!

古文：以此知必承顾盼。
现代文：由此可以知道一定会蒙受他的赏赐。
English: From this we can know that we will certainly be rewarded by him.

古文：闻者绝倒。
现代文：听到人俯仰大笑。
English: I heard people laughing.

古文：长须僧
现代文：长须僧
English: Long-bearded monk

古文：三蜀有长须长老，自言是宰相孔谦子，莫知谁何。
现代文：三蜀有一个长胡子老和尚，自称是宰相孔谦的儿子，不知他到底是谁。
English: There is a long-bearded old monk in Sanshu who claims to be the son of Prime Minister Kong Qian. I don't know who he really is.

古文：不剃发须，皓然垂腹。
现代文：因不剃胡子，长长的白胡须一直垂到肚子上。
English: Because he doesn't shave, his long white beard hangs down to his stomach.

古文：拥百余众，自江湖入蜀。
现代文：跟随他的有一百多人，从江湖上去投奔蜀主。
English: There were more than a hundred people who followed him, from all walks of life, to join Shu Shu.

古文：所在氓俗，瞻骇仪表，争相腾践而礼其足。
现代文：各地的百姓都惊恐地看着他的模样，争相跑来送上优厚的礼物。
English: People from all over the country looked at him in horror and rushed to give him generous gifts.

古文：凡所经曲，倾城而出，河目海口，人莫之测。
现代文：凡是他所经过的地方，都是倾城而出，汇集来的人眼睛多的像长河，嘴多的像大海，有多少人谁也无法测定。
English: Wherever he passed, people streamed out of the city. The number of gathered people was like a river with many eyes, and like the sea with many mouths. No one could tell how many people there were.

古文：至蜀，螺钹迎焉。
现代文：到了蜀都，是吹起螺号、击响大钹隆重迎接的。
English: When they arrived in Shudu, they were greeted with the blowing of the snail horn and the ringing of the gong.

古文：先谒枢密使宋光嗣，因问曰：师何不剃须？
现代文：他先去拜见了枢密使宋光嗣。宋光嗣问他： 大师为何不剃胡须？ 
English: He first went to see the envoy Song Guangzhi. Song Guangzhi asked him: Why doesn't the master shave his beard?

古文：答曰：落发除烦恼，留髭表丈夫。
现代文：他答道： 落发除烦恼，留胡表丈夫。 
English: He replied, "To get rid of one's troubles, grow a beard and be a husband."

古文：宋大恚曰：吾无髭，岂是老婆耶？
现代文：宋光嗣大为恼恨，道： 我没有胡子，难道我是个老太婆吗？ 
English: Song Guangzhi was very angry and said: I don't have a beard, am I an old woman?

古文：遂揖出，俟剃却髭，即引朝见。
现代文：于是他只好作揖出来。只要等他剃去胡子，就可领他入朝拜见蜀主。
English: So he had to come out as a skeleton. As long as he shaved off his beard, he could lead him into the morning to worship the Lord of Shu.

古文：徒众既多，旬日盘桓，不得已剃髭而入。
现代文：徒弟们又这么多，他犹豫徘徊了十来天，实在不得已才剃掉胡子去进见。
English: There were so many apprentices, he hesitated for about ten days before he had to shave off his beard to see them.

古文：徒众耻其失节，悉各散亡。
现代文：这时，徒弟们因耻于他失去气节，都已各自散去。
English: By this time, the disciples had all dispersed in shame at his loss of composure.

古文：伪蜀主问曰：远闻师有长须之号，何得如是？
现代文：伪蜀主问他道： 远闻大师有长须的称号，怎么这样了？ 
English: The false Shu master asked him: Master Yuanwen has the title of Longbeard, how come?

古文：对曰：臣在江湖，尝闻陛下已证须陀洹果，是以和须而来；今见陛下将证阿那舍果，是以剃须而见。
现代文：他回答道： 臣在江湖上曾听说陛下已证须陀舍果，所以是留着胡子来的，现在知道陛下将证阿那舍果，所以就剃掉了胡子来见。 
English: He replied, "In the past, my father-in-law had heard that your majesty had been awarded the Sutra, so he came with a beard. Now, he knows that your majesty will be awarded the Anas, so he shaved his beard to come and see you."

古文：少主初未喻，首肯之。
现代文：蜀少主开始未听明白，只是点点头表示同意。
English: Shu Shao Shou did not understand at first, but nodded his head in agreement.

古文：及近臣解释，大为欢笑。
现代文：等到近臣解释清楚，便大为欢笑。
English: When a close aide explained it clearly, there was much laughter.

古文：后住持静乱寺，数为大众论讼，有上足，以不谨获罪。
现代文：后来他做了静乱寺的住持。曾多次为人们辩护雪冤，也有过高徒。后来因不谨慎而获罪。
English: Later, he became the abbot of Jingran Temple. He repeatedly defended people from grievous wrongs, and was also a high-ranking disciple. Later, he was found guilty of being imprudent.

古文：伶人藏柯曲深慕空门，而不知其中猥细。
现代文：有一个艺人藏柯曲很羡慕佛门，但不知道其中的下流事。
English: There was an entertainer, Zang Kequ, who was very envious of the Buddhist gate, but did not know about the sordid goings-on inside.

古文：谓是清静，舍俗落发。
现代文：因为是清静之地，便舍俗为僧。
English: Because it is a place of serenity, he renounced the world and became a monk.

古文：谨事瓶钵，渐见秽监。诟詈而出，以袈裟挂于寺门曰：吾比厌俗尘，投身清洁之地，以涤其业鄣。
现代文：他一直是严格地按戒律饮食，然而渐渐地发现其中的污秽和一一婬一一滥，便大骂而出走。他把袈裟挂在寺院的大门上说： 我很厌烦俗尘，才亲投身于清洁之地，以洗涤那些罪恶。
English: He had always eaten strictly in accordance with the precepts, but gradually he discovered the filth and debauchery in it, and he left, cursing loudly. He hung his scepter on the gate of the temple and said: "I am tired of the filth, so I threw myself into a clean place to wash away those sins."

古文：今大师之门，甚于花柳曲，吾不能为之。
现代文：可是今见大师之门，胜过花柳之巷，我再也不能呆下去了！ 
English: But now that I see the door of the master is better than the alley of the willow, I can't stay any longer!

古文：遂复归于乐籍。
现代文：于是又回到了他原来的乐班。
English: So he returned to his original music class.

古文：蜀人谓师曰：一事南无，折却长须。
现代文：蜀人说这个法师是 一旦当了和尚，也只是除去了长胡子罢了。 
English: The Shu people said that once this sorcerer became a monk, he only removed his long beard.

古文：道流
现代文：道流
English: Dōryū

古文：□□□□任兴元节判。
现代文：任兴元节度判官。
English: Ren Xingyuan became the judge of the festival.

古文：离秦州乡地，未及岁年，忽有来寻师者。
现代文：他离开秦州家乡还不到一年，忽然来了一个寻找师父的人。
English: Less than a year after he left his hometown in Qinzhou, a man came looking for his master.

古文：赍亲表施州刺史刘缄封，衣紫而来，兼言往洋州求索。
现代文：此人是带来皇上褒封施州刺史刘缄的，身着紫色袈裟，并说还要到洋州去求化。
English: This person is the one who brought the emperor's conferment of the title of Shizhou scribe Liu Qi, dressed in a purple robe, and said that he would also go to Yangzhou to seek enlightenment.

古文：询其行止，云：某忝窃乡关之分，先于秦州西升观，入道多年。
现代文：再问他别的情况，他说： 我有幸愧居于你的家乡，早些年便到了秦州的西升观，已入道多年了。
English: When asked about other circumstances, he said, "I am fortunate to live in your hometown. I came to Xishengguan in Qinzhou a few years ago, and I have been a practitioner for many years.

古文：遂沉吟思之，当离乡日，观中无此道流，深感其命服所求。
现代文：于是沉吟着回忆：当自己离开家乡的时候，西升观并没有这个道士呀。
English: So he mused and recalled: When he left his hometown, Xishengguan did not have this Taoist.

古文：其人亦匆匆而过。旬月间，自洋源回，薄有所获。
现代文：尤其感到奇怪的是，他身上穿的这件皇帝赐给的紫色袈裟是从哪里来的呢？那个人也只是匆匆而过，可是不到一个月，道士从洋源回来，只是稍有收获。
English: What was particularly strange was that the purple robe given to him by the emperor, which he was wearing, came from where? The man was just passing by in a hurry, but less than a month later, the Taoist returned from Yangyuan with only a small gain.

古文：告辞之意，亦甚挥遽。
现代文：告辞之意，也很急切。
English: It was also an eager farewell.

古文：遂设计延伫，拂榻止之。
现代文：由于一再挽留安排他而站立了很久，不过还留下他并收拾出一张床让他住下。
English: She stood for a long time as she repeatedly restrained him, but she left him and made up a bed for him to sleep in.

古文：夜静，沃以醲醪数瓯，然后徐询之曰：尊师身边紫绶，自何而得？
现代文：夜深人静，打来几瓯烈酒对饮，后来又慢慢地问道： 尊师身上的紫带，是从哪里得到的？
English: In the dead of night, he knocked back a few shots of spirits, and then slowly asked: Where did you get the purple sash from?

古文：宜以直诚相告。
现代文：应该真诚地告诉我。 
English: You should tell me honestly.

古文：对曰：此是先和尚命服，传而衣之。
现代文：道士回答说： 这是先和尚的命服，是他传送给我的。
English: The spiritualist replied, "This is the monk's life vest, which he passed on to me.

古文：乃是广修寺著紫僧弟子，师既殂，乃舍空门，投西升观入道，便以紫衣而服之。
现代文：我本是广修寺著紫和尚的弟子，师父死后，我便舍弃空门，投奔西升观入了道家，因此便穿上了这身紫色袈裟。 
English: Originally, I was a disciple of the purple-robed monk of Guangshu Temple. After my master's death, I abandoned the empty door and went to Xisheng Monastery to enter the Taoist School. Therefore, I put on this purple robe.

古文：自谓传得本师衣钵，岂有道士窃衣先和尚紫衣？
现代文：他自称是先师传与了他衣钵，可是哪里有道士得到和尚师父遗赠的紫袈裟呢？
English: He claims to have received the mantle from the previous master, but where has any Taoist received the purple robe bequeathed by the master monk?

古文：未之前闻。
现代文：真是前所未闻！
English: This is unheard of!

古文：三妄人
现代文：三妄人
English: Three delusional people

古文：孙光宪在蜀时，曾到资州，见应贞观李道士，话州有姓赵人，闭关却扫，以廊庙自期。
现代文：孙光宪在四川时，曾去过资州，会见过那里应贞观的李道士。他说本州有个姓赵的读书人，闭门谢客，以朝廷高官为自己的目标。
English: When Sun Guangxian was in Sichuan, he once went to Zhizhou and met Li Daoshi, who was supposed to be a chaste scholar, there. He said that there was a scholar in Zhizhou with the surname Zhao, who would thank guests behind closed doors, and whose goal was to become a high-ranking official in the imperial court.

古文：都虞侯阎普敬异之，躬自趋谒。
现代文：都虞侯阎普勒觉得这人很怪，便亲自去拜访他。
English: The mayor of the city, Yan Pu Le, thought this man was very strange, so he went to visit him in person.

古文：阎魁梧丈夫，赵生迎门，愕眙良久，磬折叙寒温曰：伏惟貔貅。
现代文：阎普敬身材魁梧，又很有大丈夫气概，赵生开门迎接时，惊愕地看了他很久。赵生十分恭敬地寒暄道：伏惟貔貅。
English: Yan Puking was a large man with a strong character. When Zhao Sheng opened the door to greet him, he looked at him in surprise for a long time. Zhao Sheng said very respectfully, "Fu Weiyuan."

古文：阎乃质于先容者，俾询之，赵生曰：若云熊罴，即须宰相之才，方当此语。阎公止于都头已来，只销呼为貔貅。
现代文：阎普敬对于这样的评价有疑问，就派人去问个明白。赵生道：如说是熊罴，必须是宰相之才，才能用这样词语；阎公只不过是个都头而已了，只配称作貔貅。
English: Zhao Sheng said: If it is Xiong Yao, it must be the prime minister's talent to use such words; Yan Gong is just a head of the capital, and only deserves to be called Yao.

古文：人闻咸笑之。
现代文：人们听说后都笑了。
English: People laughed when they heard about it.

古文：又一士自称张舍人。诉于光宪曰：兄长以术惑我心神。
现代文：又有一个人，自称张舍人，他告诉孙光宪说：兄长用某种技术迷惑我的心神。
English: Another person, who called himself Zhang Sheren, told Sun Guangxian: "My brother used a certain technique to confuse my spirit.

古文：宪谓曰：得非盅毒厌胜之术耶？
现代文：孙光宪问他：是不是用盅毒或者诅咒之术？张舍人说：不是。
English: Sun Guangxian asked him, "Did you use poison or curse?" Zhang She said, "No."

古文：张曰：非也，乃用鬼谷子押阖，捭破我心神，至今患心风不禁。
现代文：他是把鬼谷子画在门扇上，以此来扯破我的心神。直到现在仍患有心风不禁症。
English: He painted "Kigayako" on the door to break my spirit. To this day, he still suffers from a heart attack.

古文：又江陵颜云，偶收诸葛亮兵书，自言可用十万军，吞并四海。
现代文：还有个人，是江陵的颜云，偶然得到一本诸葛亮的兵书，便自言可用十万兵吞并天下。
English: There was also a man, Yan Yun from Jiangling, who by chance obtained a copy of Zhuge Liang's military manual and said he could use 100,000 soldiers to annex the world.

古文：每至论兵，必攘袂叱咤，若对大敌。时人谓之检谱角觝也。
现代文：每次谈论到兵法，必然是挽袖子大喊大叫，如临大敌，当时人们都说他简直是相扑表演。
English: Every time he talked about the art of war, he would roll up his sleeves and yell like an impending enemy, and people said at the time that he was like a sumo wrestler.

古文：时有行军王副使，幽燕旧将，声闻宇内。颜生候谒，称是同人，自言大志不伸，丧良友也，每恸哭焉。
现代文：当时有一位很有指挥作战才能的王节度副使，是幽州燕州一带的老将领，声望传遍天下，颜云曾去拜访过，声称与人家志同道合，说只可惜自己空有大志而没有机会伸展。王副使死后，他觉得自己失去了最好的朋友，经常悲痛地大哭。
English: At that time, there was a vice-envoy, Wang Jiedu, who was very talented in commanding operations. He was a veteran general in the Yuzhou-Yanzhou area, and his reputation spread all over the world. Yan Yun had visited him, claiming to be of the same mind as others, saying that it was a pity that he had empty ambitions and no opportunity to expand. After the death of Wang Jiedu, he felt that he had lost his best friend, and often cried out in grief.

古文：周韦二子
现代文：周韦二子
English: Zhou Wei Erzi

古文：周韦巽，太尉昭度之子也。
现代文：周韦巽，是太尉周昭度的儿子。
English: Zhou Weiwei is the son of Lieutenant Zhou Zhaoduo.

古文：尪懦昏钝，率由婢妪。
现代文：人很懦弱愚钝，做任何事都要听从婢女的。
English: People are so weak and stupid that they have to obey their maids in everything.

古文：仕伪蜀王氏，以事旧优容之，因至卿监。
现代文：他在伪蜀主的朝廷做官，由于他过去侍奉过伪蜀主而有老交情，伪蜀主对他很宽容，因此而官至卿监。
English: He worked as an official in the court of the false Shushi, and because he had served the false Shushi in the past and had old friendships, the false Shushi was very tolerant of him, so he became a high-ranking official.

古文：或为同列所讥，云：三公门前出死鼠。
现代文：他常被同僚们所讥讽，有人讽刺他说：三公门前出死鼠。
English: He was often ridiculed by his colleagues, with one quipping: "There's a dead rat in front of the three gates."

古文：巽曰：死鼠门前出三公。
现代文：他却回击人家说：死鼠门前出三公。
English: But he hit back, saying: "There are three kings in front of the dead mouse's door."

古文：周即蜀相周博雅之子，为王氏驸马都尉，性识庸鄙。
现代文：这样每天可得二三百钱。然后就与他的那帮难兄难弟们去大吃大喝一顿。
English: In this way he could earn two or three hundred dollars a day. Then he would go out to eat and drink with his gang of brothers and sisters.

古文：国亡后，与贫丐者为伍，俾一人先导爵里于阛阓酒肆，有哀之者，日获三二百钱，即与其徒饮啖而已。咸嗟叹之。
现代文：人们对他的行为都很叹息。
English: His actions have been widely condemned.

古文：不识镜
现代文：不识镜
English: Can't read glasses

古文：有民妻不识镜。
现代文：有个人的妻了不认得镜子。
English: One man's wife didn't recognize the mirror.

古文：夫市之而归。妻取照之，惊告其母曰：某郎又索一妇归也。
现代文：丈夫买了一个拿回来，妻子拿过来一照，吃惊地告诉她的母亲说：我丈夫又取回来一个媳妇！
English: The husband bought one and took it back, the wife took a picture of it and, surprised, told her mother: "My husband has brought back another daughter-in-law!"

古文：其母也照曰：又领亲家母来也。
现代文：她母亲也去照了照，说道：还把亲家母也领来了！
English: Her mother also went to take a picture and said, "I also brought my own mother!"

古文：啮鼻
现代文：啮鼻
English: 鼻

古文：甲与乙斗争，甲啮下乙鼻，官吏欲断之，甲称乙自啮落，吏曰：夫人鼻高耳口低，岂能就啮之乎？
现代文：甲与乙打架，甲咬下了乙的鼻子，有个官吏正想要给他们断案，甲却说是乙自己把鼻子咬掉的。官说：人的鼻子在高处，而嘴在低处，怎么能够咬到它呢？
English: A and B were fighting, and A bit off B's nose. An official was about to give them a verdict, but A said that B had bitten off his own nose. The official said: A person's nose is high and his mouth is low, how can he bite it?

古文：甲曰：他踏床子就啮之。
现代文：甲说：他是登上床去咬的。
English: A said: He climbed onto the bed to bite her.

古文：助丧礼
现代文：助丧礼
English: Funeral assistance

古文：有人吊丧，并欲赍物助之，问人：可与何等物？
现代文：有个人要去吊丧，并想要送些礼物帮助他们，向别人打听可以送些什么东西。
English: Someone is going to a funeral and wants to send some gifts to help them, so they ask others what they can send.

古文：答曰：钱布帛。任君所有尔。
现代文：别人告诉他：钱、布或绸缎，不管任何东西只要你有都可。
English: He was told: money, cloth or silk, whatever you have is fine.

古文：因赍大豆一斛，置孝子前，谓曰：无可有，以大豆一斛相助。
现代文：于是送去一斛大豆，放在孝子面前。他对孝子说：没有可以拿的，送一斛大豆帮帮你吧。
English: So he sent a bunch of soybeans and placed it in front of Takako. He said to Takako, "There's nothing you can take, send a bunch of soybeans to help you."

古文：孝子哭孤穷奈何，曰：造豉。
现代文：孝子哭述说我这么孤单穷困可怎么办。
English: The filial son cried and said, "How can I be so lonely and destitute?"

古文：孝子又哭孤穷，曰：适得便穷，更送一石。
现代文：那人说：你可以做豆豉。可孝子还哭又孤单又穷困，那人道：是相当穷困。又送来一石大豆。
English: The man said, "You can make soybean meal. However, the filial son is still crying, lonely and poor. The man said, "I am quite poor." He also sent a stone of soybeans.

古文：外学归
现代文：外学归
English: Returning students

古文：甲父母在，出学三年而归，舅氏问其学何得，并序别父久。
现代文：某人的父母都在世，去外地学习了三年回来，舅舅问他这三年学习有什么收获，并说一说久别父亲有何感受。
English: Someone's parents are both alive. He went abroad to study for three years and came back. His uncle asked him what he had gained from these three years of study, and said how he felt when he said goodbye to his father.

古文：乃答曰：渭阳之思，过于秦康。
现代文：他回答道：对舅舅的思念，超过秦康。
English: He replied: I miss my uncle more than Qin Kang.

古文：既而父数之：尔学奚益？
现代文：接着父亲一一列举了他的不是，并问道：你学了半天有什么用呢？
English: Then his father listed his faults one by one and asked, "What is the use of your studying for half a day?

古文：答曰：少失过庭之训，故学无益。
现代文：他回答说：小时候得不到父教，所以学业没有长进。
English: He replied: I didn't have a father to teach me when I was a child, so I didn't do well in school.

古文：行吊
现代文：行吊
English: Hanging out

古文：既至丧所，旧习者在前，伏席上，余者一一相髡于背。
现代文：几个粗人要一起去吊丧，可是谁也不懂得吊丧的礼节，其中有一个平时说话很粗俗的人对同伴们说：你们都随着我做就行了。
English: Several roughnecks wanted to go to the funeral together, but none of them knew the etiquette of the funeral. One of them, who usually spoke very vulgarly, said to his companions: "You all just have to do as I do."

古文：而为首者，以足触詈曰：痴物！诸人亦为仪当尔，各以足相踏曰：痴物！
现代文：到了办丧事的人家后，那个人走在最前面，他先趴在席子上，其余的人也随着他依次趴在后面，那个人用脚登了后边的人一下骂道：蠢物！
English: After arriving at the funeral home, the man walked in the front, he first lay down on the mat, the rest of the people followed him and lay down in the back. The man stepped on the back of the people with his feet and cursed: Stupid!

古文：最后者近孝子，亦踏孝子而曰：疾物！
现代文：大家都以为礼节就该是这样，每个人都登了一脚后边的人道：蠢物！最后边的人紧挨着孝子，也登孝子一脚说：蠢物！
English: Everyone thought that this is how etiquette should be, everyone stepped up to the back of the crowd: "Stupid!" The person at the end, right next to the filial son, also stepped up to the filial son and said: "Stupid!"

古文：痴婿
现代文：痴婿
English: Absent-minded son-in-law

古文：有痴婿，妇翁死，妇教以行吊礼。
现代文：有一个傻女婿，岳父去世，媳妇在家时已教给他怎样行吊孝礼。
English: There was a foolish son-in-law whose father-in-law had died, and his daughter-in-law had already taught him how to perform the hanging ceremony when she was at home.

古文：于路值水，乃脱袜而渡，惟遗一袜。
现代文：路上遇河，就脱袜子蹚过去，可是不慎丢了一只。
English: Encountering a river on the way, he took off his socks and waded across, but accidentally lost one.

古文：又睹林中鸠鸣云：喒締咕。而私诵之，都忘吊礼。
现代文：他又看到林子里的鸠鸟在喒締咕地叫，就默默地背诵鸟的叫声，而把吊孝的礼节全忘光了。
English: He also saw an ostrich cooing in the forest and silently recited the bird's call, forgetting all filial piety.

古文：及至，乃以有袜一足立，而缩其跣者，但云：喒締咕。
现代文：到了灵堂，他便用穿着袜子的那只脚站地，把光着的那只脚抬起来，只是说：喒締咕！
English: When he got to the chapel, he stood up on his socked foot, lifted his bare foot, and simply said, "Woo!"

古文：孝子皆笑。又曰：莫笑莫笑，如拾得袜，即还我。
现代文：孝子们也都笑了，可他还说道：别笑别笑，如果拾到袜子，就快点儿还给我。
English: His sons and daughters also laughed, but he also said, "Don't laugh, don't laugh. If you find a sock, quickly give it back to me."

古文：鲁人执杆
现代文：鲁人执杆
English: Lu Ren sticks together

古文：鲁有执长杆入城门者，初竖执之，不可入；横执之，亦不可入。计无所出。
现代文：山东有这么一个人要拿长木杆进城门，一开始是竖着拿，怎么也进不去，后来又横着拿，也是进不去，他实在想不出什么办法了。
English: There is such a person in Shandong who wants to take a long wooden pole to enter the city gate. At first, he took it vertically, but he couldn't get in. Later, he took it horizontally, but he couldn't get in. He really couldn't think of a way.

古文：俄有老父至曰：吾非圣人，但见事多矣。
现代文：一会儿过来一个老头对他说：我倒不是圣人，但是见的事可多了。
English: After a while, an old man came up to him and said: "I'm no saint, but I've seen a lot of things.

古文：何不以锯中截而入？
现代文：你为什么不把它用锯从中间截断再进啊？
English: Why don't you use a saw to cut it down the middle and re-enter it?

古文：遂依而截之。
现代文：于是那人就依照老人说的把木杆截断了。
English: So the man did as the old man said and cut down the pole.

古文：齐人学瑟
现代文：齐人学瑟
English: Qi Ren Xue Si

古文：齐人就赵人学瑟，因之先调，胶柱而归，三年不成一曲。
现代文：一个齐人跟一个赵人学弹琴。他为了记好先前学弹琴的调子，就把调节音调的钮柱用胶粘死而回来。可是回来后三年弹不成一个曲子，齐人十分奇怪。
English: A Qi person learns to play the piano with a Zhao person. In order to remember the tune of the previous learning to play the piano, he glued the tone adjustment knob to death and came back. However, after returning, he could not play a tune for three years. Qi people are very strange.

古文：齐人怪之，有从赵来者，问其意，方知向人之愚。
现代文：有从赵地来的人，他就去问这是怎么回事。那人一看才知道跟前这个人是何等愚笨。
English: When someone came from Zhao Di, he went to ask what was going on. At a glance, the person only knew how stupid the person in front of him was.

古文：市马
现代文：市马
English: Ma Town

古文：洛中有大僚，世籍膏梁。
现代文：洛阳城里有个大官，世代都是富豪。
English: In the city of Luoyang, there is a high-ranking official who has been a millionaire for generations.

古文：不分牝牡。
现代文：此人连牲畜的公母都分辨不出来。
English: This man can't even tell the difference between the mothers of his animals.

古文：偶市一马，都莫知其妍媸。
现代文：偶然间买了一匹马，竟然不知这马是美是丑。
English: I accidentally bought a horse, and I don't know if this horse is beautiful or ugly.

古文：为驵侩所欺曰：此马不唯驯良，齿及二十余岁，合直两马之资。
现代文：当时马贩子欺骗他说：这匹马不仅很驯顺善良，而且牙口才二十多龄，合起来能值两马的价钱。
English: At that time, the horse dealer deceived him and said, "This horse is not only very docile and kind, but also only 20 years old. Together, they can be worth the price of two horses."

古文：况行不动尘，可谓驯良之甚也。
现代文：何况走起路来一点不能拂扬起灰尘，可以说是驯良得很。
English: What's more, it can't kick up any dust when it walks, so it can be said to be very docile.

古文：遂多金以市之。侩既倍获利。
现代文：于是便以大价钱买下，马贩子也获得了成倍的利钱。
English: So he bought it at a great price, and the horse-dealer received double the profit.

古文：临去又曰：此马兼有榅桲牙出也。
现代文：临走时马贩子又说：这马还要有榅桲牙快出世了。
English: As he was about to leave, the horse-dealer added: "This horse will soon be born with bad teeth."

古文：于是大喜。
现代文：于是他非常高兴。
English: So he was very happy.

古文：诘旦乘出，如鹅鸭之行。
现代文：第二天早晨他骑上这匹马回来，走起路来简直像鹅鸭一样。
English: The next morning he came back on the horse, walking like a duck.

古文：及至家。矜衒曰：此马不唯驯熟，兼饶得果子牙两所。
现代文：回到家里，他炫耀道：这马不光是驯良，还能得到个小马驹。
English: Back home, he showed off: this horse is not only tame, but can also get a foal.

古文：复召侩，别赠二十。
现代文：于是又把马贩子找来，另赠送二十钱。
English: So he sent for the horse-dealer and gave him another twenty.

古文：唐有德音，搜访怀才抱器不求闻达者。
现代文：唐朝时，皇帝颁下恩诏，要遍访那些怀才抱器而又不求功名的人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the emperor issued an edict to visit all those who had talent and did not seek fame.

古文：有人于昭应，逢一书人，奔驰入京。问求何事？答曰：将应不求闻达科。
现代文：有人便表示要去应试。有这么一个书生，快马奔驰进入京城，有人问他来京有求于何事，他说：我是来考取 不求功名 科的。
English: Someone said he was going to take the exam. There was a student who entered Beijing on a fast horse. Someone asked him what he was looking for when he came to Beijing. He said, "I'm here to take the exam. I'm not looking for a prestigious degree."

