古文：吴益，字叔谦，盖字叔平，俱宪圣皇后弟也。
现代文：吴益，字叔谦；吴盖，字叔平，都是宪圣皇后的弟弟。
English: Wu Yi, also known as Uncle Qian, and Wu Gai, also known as Uncle Ping, were the younger brothers of Empress Xian Sheng.

古文：益，建炎末，以恩补官，累迁干办御辇院、带御器械。
现代文：吴益在建炎末年因恩荫补官，历迁干办御辇院、带御器械。
English: In the last years of the construction, Wu Yi, due to the grace and favor of the officials, had the opportunity to run the Imperial Palace and carry the imperial equipment.

古文：盖，绍兴五年，以恩补官，累迁宣赞舍人。
现代文：吴盖在绍兴五年因恩荫补官，历迁宣赞舍人。
English: Wu Gai served as a vice-governor in Shaoxing for five years.

古文：帝与后皆喜翰墨，故益、盖兄弟师法，亦有书名。
现代文：皇上与皇后都喜欢翰墨，故而吴益、吴盖兄弟也效法，均有擅长书法的名声。
English: Both the emperor and the empress liked Hanmo, so the Wu Yi and Wu Gai brothers also followed suit, and both had a reputation for being good at calligraphy.

古文：后受册推恩，益加成州团练使，盖加文州刺史。
现代文：皇后受册封后，皇帝又推恩，吴益被加官为成州团练使，吴盖为文州刺史。
English: After the empress was canonized, the emperor also extended grace, Wu Yi was promoted to the post of Chengzhou regimental training envoy, and Wu Gai was crowned as the crown prince of Wenzhou.

古文：帝为置皇后宅大小学教授，以王纟兹为之。
现代文：皇帝为皇后宅设置大小学教授，命王钅兹担任。
English: The emperor set up a professor of primary and secondary school for the empress's house, and ordered Wang Bingzi to serve as the professor.

古文：纟兹明经，善训导，益、盖折节事之。
现代文：因王钅兹通晓经学，善于训导，吴益、吴盖对他十分尊敬。
English: Wu Yi and Wu Gai had great respect for Wang Yanzi because he was well versed in the study of scriptures and was good at discipline.

古文：益娶秦桧长孙女，又与王继先交相荐引，故三家姻族皆躐美官。
现代文：吴益娶秦桧的长孙女为妻，又同王继先互相推荐，故此他们三家的姻亲都做了美官。
English: Wu Yi married the eldest granddaughter of Qin Hui as his wife, and he and Wang recommended each other one after another, so their three in-laws all became beauticians.

古文：益历官至保康军节度使，加太尉、开府仪同三司。
现代文：吴益历官至保康军节度使，加官为太尉、开府仪同三司。
English: Wu Yik Lian was appointed as the envoy to the festival of the Hokang Army, and was promoted to the rank of captain, Kaifu Yi and three divisions.

古文：初，既建节，以桧故，授文资，直秘阁。
现代文：开始已经授予节钺，因秦桧的缘故，授给他文学资格，任直秘阁。
English: At the beginning, he had been awarded the title of Setsubun, and because of Qin Yu, he was awarded the title of literature, and was appointed as a direct secretary.

古文：桧进徽宗御制，辞免加恩，帝乃特命赐益三品服，累加秘阁修撰，直徽猷阁。
现代文：秦桧献上徽宗的御制，辞去加恩，皇上就特命赏给吴益三品官的服饰，历加他为秘阁修撰，直徽猷阁。
English: Qin Hui presented the imperial system of Huizong, resigned from Ghan, and the emperor specially ordered to award Wu Yi the three-grade official's clothing, adding that he was a secret cabinet and a direct emblem cabinet.

古文：以桧提举编修宽恤诏令，又加益直宝文阁。
现代文：因秦桧为提举编修宽恤诏令，又加官吴益为直宝文阁。
English: Because Qin Hui was promoted to edit and amend the edict of leniency, and Wu Yi was promoted to the post of Zhiobao Wenge.

古文：桧死，其子熺复请于帝，又升敷文阁待制。
现代文：秦桧去世后，他的儿子秦火喜又向皇上请求，吴益又升为敷文阁待制。
English: After the death of Qin Hui, his son Qin Huoxi also petitioned the emperor, and Wu Yi was promoted to Shibunkaku.

古文：中丞汤鹏举言，益以庸琐之才，恃亲昵之势，乞褫职名，以示至公，帝谓： 鹏举所论甚切当，然朕于奠桧日，谕桧妻子，许以保全其家，今若遽出其婿则伤恩，臣僚无得更有论列。 自是不复迁。
现代文：中丞汤鹏举说，吴益是庸碌之才，靠的是亲昵的势力，汤鹏举请求削夺吴益的职名，来显示公道。皇上说： 汤鹏举所论十分恳切恰当，但朕在祭奠秦桧时，对秦桧的妻子许诺要保全他全家，现在如果立即罢免他的孙婿，那就有伤圣恩，臣僚们不必再议论。 自此不再升吴益的官职。
English: Tang Pengju, the vice-commander, said that Wu Yi was a mediocre talent, relying on the power of intimacy. Tang Pengju requested that Wu Yi's title be taken away to show fairness. The emperor said: "What Tang Pengju said was very sincere and appropriate, but when I was honoring Qin Yu, I promised Qin Yu's wife to protect his whole family. Now, if his grandson-in-law is immediately dismissed, it will hurt the sacred grace, and the ministers do not need to discuss it. Since then, Wu Yi's official position will not be promoted.

古文：显仁太后葬，为攒宫总护使，始进少保。
现代文：显仁太后下葬，吴益任攒宫总护使，才升为少保。
English: When Empress Dowager Henin was buried, Wu Yi served as the chief guardian of the Imperial Palace before he was promoted to junior guardian.

古文：孝宗嗣位，进少傅，又进太师，封太宁郡王。
现代文：孝宗即位后，进升为少傅，又进升为太师，被封为太宁郡王。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was promoted to Shao Fu, and then promoted to Taishi, and was named the King of Taining County.

古文：乾道七年，卒，年四十八，谥庄简，追封卫王。
现代文：乾道七年，吴益去世，终年四十八岁，谥号 庄简 ，追封为卫王。
English: After seven years of hard work, Wu Yi died at the age of forty-eight. He was given the posthumous name Zhuo Jian and the title of Wei Wang.

古文：盖官至宁武军节度使，亦累升太尉、开府仪同三司、少保，封新兴郡王。
现代文：吴盖官至宁武军节度使，也历升太尉、开府仪同三司、少保，加封为新兴郡王。
English: Wu Gai was promoted from an official to the Ningwu army's festival envoy, and was also promoted to the rank of captain, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shao Bao, and was awarded the title of emerging county king.

古文：乾道二年，卒，年四十二。
现代文：乾道二年去世，终年四十二岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of 42.

古文：赠太傅，追封郑王。
现代文：赠官为太傅，追封为郑王。
English: He was given the title of Taifu and the posthumous title of Zheng Wang.

古文：益子琚，习吏事，乾道九年，特授添差临安府通判，其后历尚书郎、部使者，换资至镇安军节度使，复以才选，除知明州兼沿海制置使。
现代文：吴益的儿子吴琚，熟习吏事，乾道九年，特授予他添差临安府通判，以后历任尚书郎、部使者，转资任镇安军节度使，又因才选，被任命为明州知州兼沿海制置使。
English: Wu Yi's son, Wu Hao, who was familiar with administrative affairs and had been practicing law for nine years, was specially awarded the Lin'an Provincial Judgeship. Later, he was successively appointed as Shang Shulang, Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the

古文：宁宗初，乃得祠，奉朝请。
现代文：宁宗初年，才得到管理祠观的闲职，并得到奉朝请的待遇。
English: It was not until the first year of Ningzong's reign that he was given the job of managing the ancestral hall, and received the treatment of being invited by the emperor.

古文：寻知鄂州，再知庆元府，位至少师，判建康府兼留守，卒。
现代文：不久又任鄂州知州，再次任庆元知府，官至少师，通判江宁府兼留守，去世。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Ezhou chizhou, Qingyuan chifu again, and Jiangning chifu, and he passed away.

古文：方孝宗崩，光宗以疾不能执丧，大臣请太后垂帘，册立宁宗。
现代文：孝宗去世时，光宗因病不能主持丧礼，大臣请太后垂帘听政，册立宁宗。
English: When Xiaozong died, Guangzong could not preside over the funeral ceremony due to illness. The minister asked the empress dowager to listen to the government and establish Ningzong.

古文：琚言于后曰： 垂帘可暂不可久。 后遂以翌日彻帘。
现代文：吴琚对太后说： 垂帘可以暂时，不可以长久。 太后就在第二天撤帘。
English: Wu Yao said to the Empress Dowager: "The curtain can be hung temporarily, but not for a long time," and the Empress Dowager removed the curtain the next day.

古文：琚尝使金，金人嘉其信义。
现代文：吴琚曾出使金国，金人赞赏他的信义。
English: Wu Gan once sent an envoy to the state of Jin, and the people of Jin appreciated his loyalty.

古文：琚死后，宋遣使至金议和，屡不合，金人言南使中惟吴琚言为可信。
现代文：吴琚死后，宋派使臣到金国议和，屡屡不合，金人说南使中只有吴琚的话可信。
English: After the death of Wu Xuan, the Song Dynasty sent envoys to the Jin Dynasty to discuss peace, but they repeatedly disagreed. The Jin Dynasty said that only the words of Wu Xuan among the Southern Envoys were credible.

古文：琚弟璹，仕至保静军节度使。
现代文：吴琚的弟弟吴王寿，官至保静军节度使。
English: Wu Han's younger brother, Wu Wang Shou, was the official envoy to the Baoding Military Festival.

古文：盖子环，亦至昭化军节度使。
现代文：吴盖的儿子吴王襄，也官至昭化军节度使。
English: Wu Gui's son, Wu Wang Xiang, also served as the military envoy of the Zhao Dynasty.

