古文：邸珍宋游道卢斐毕义云夫人之性灵，禀受或异，刚柔区别，缓急相形，未有深察是非，莫不肆其情欲。
现代文：人的性情，从上天承受来时有所区别，刚柔不同，缓急相异，没能深入考察是非，都随意按自己的欲望做事。
English: People's dispositions are different when they come from heaven. They are different in their hardness and softness, have different priorities, fail to thoroughly investigate right and wrong, and do things according to their own desires at will.

古文：至于详观水火，更佩韦弦者鲜矣。狱吏为患，其所从来久矣。
现代文：能够做到和衷共济，引以为戒，接受启迪和教导的就更少了。掌管刑狱的官吏为非作歹，由来已久。
English: There are even fewer who are able to help others from the bottom of their hearts, set an example, and receive inspiration and instruction. The officials in charge of prisons have been doing evil for a long time.

古文：自魏途不竞，网漏寰区，高祖惩其宽怠，颇亦威严驭物，使内外□官，咸知禁网。
现代文：从魏开始对官吏的限制不够严格，有许多漏网之鱼，高祖认为过于宽松不好，就强调用威猛严厉加以控制，使朝廷内外官员，都能知道法网的厉害。
English: From the Wei Dynasty, the restrictions on officials were not strict enough, and there were many fish that slipped through the net. Gao Zu thought that it was not good to be too loose, so he emphasized the use of fierce and strict control, so that officials inside and outside the court could know the severity of the net.

古文：今录邸珍等以存酷吏，惩示劝励云。
现代文：如今收录邸珍等人编入《酷吏传》，以便起到惩前毖后劝诫警世的作用。
English: It is now included in the "Cruel Official's Biography" compiled by Teizhen and others, so as to play the role of chastising and warning the world.

古文：邸珍，字宝安，本中山上曲阳人也。
现代文：邸珍，字宜圭，原是史山上地屋人。
English: Teizhen, also known as Yigui, was originally a dweller on Mount Shisan.

古文：从高祖起义，拜为长史，性严暴，求取无厌。
现代文：追随直担起兵，任为长史，性情严酷贪暴，搜刮无度。
English: He has a long history of following the direct charge of raising an army, and his temperament is harsh and violent, and he is a relentless scrounger.

古文：后兼尚书右仆射、大行台，节度诸军事。
现代文：后来兼尚书右仆射、大行台，节度诸军事。
English: Later, he was also awarded the titles of Right-Handed Shooter, Grand Marching Band, and Military Commander.

古文：珍御下残酷，□士离心，为民所害。
现代文：壁壁控制部下极其残酷，众官背离，被百姓杀死。
English: His subordinates, who were under his control, were extremely cruel. The officers deserted him and were killed by the people.

古文：后赠定州刺史。
现代文：后来追赠为宣业刺史。
English: Later, it was posthumously awarded as a history of propaganda.

古文：宋游道，广平人，其先自炖煌徙焉。
现代文：宋游道，卢垩人，他的祖先从炖煌迁来。
English: Song Youdao, a Luye person, his ancestors migrated from Suihuang.

古文：父季预，为渤海太守。
现代文：父亲宋季预，任邀连太守。
English: His father, Song Ji-hyun, was invited to become the crown prince.

古文：游道弱冠随父在郡，父亡，吏人赠遗，一无所受，事母以孝闻。
现代文：二十岁时宋游道陪同父亲在郡，父亲亡故时，官吏的馈赠，他丝毫不接受，侍奉母亲以孝顺而出名。
English: At the age of twenty, Song Youdao accompanied his father to the county. When his father died, he did not accept the gift of officials at all. He served his mother and was known for his filial piety.

古文：与叔父别居，叔父为奴诬以逆，游道诱令返，雪而杀之。
现代文：他和叔父分开居住，叔父被奴仆诬陷为叛逆，游道用计召回了奴仆，杀了他为叔父雪恨。
English: He lived separately from his uncle, who was falsely accused of being a rebel by his slaves. Yu Doudou used a stratagem to recall his slaves and killed him out of hatred for his uncle.

古文：魏广阳王深北伐，请为铠曹，及为定州刺史，又以为府佐。
现代文：魏广阳王元深北伐，请他为钟曹，五垤作了窒业刺史，又命他为府佐。
English: Wei Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng's Northern Expedition, invited him to be Zhong Cao, Wuxi made him a historian, and appointed him as a prefectural governor.

古文：广阳王为葛荣所杀，元徽诬其降贼，收录妻子，游道为诉得释，与广阳王子迎丧返葬。
现代文：广阳王被姜莹杀死后，亘銮诬蠛五扰投降贼寇，逮捕了五拯的妻子儿女，全靠游道替他们上诉而释放，又和广阳王的儿子一起把棺木迎回家埋葬。
English: After Guangyang Wang was killed by Jiang Ying, Guanzhong falsely accused Wuzhong of surrendering to the bandits, arrested Wuzheng's wife and children, released them by appealing on their behalf, and buried the coffin together with Guangyang Wang's son.

古文：中尉郦善长嘉其气节，引为殿中侍御史，台中语曰： 见贼能讨宋游道。 
现代文：中尉鄘善长嘉赏他有气节，引荐他作侍御史，御史间传说： 见贼能讨宋游道。 
English: Lieutenant Zou Zhenchang praised him for his valor and recommended him to be a courtier. Legend has it that the thief was able to defeat Song Yu Dao.

古文：孝庄即位，除左中兵郎中，为尚书令临淮王彧谴责，游道乃执版长揖曰： 下官谢王瞋，不谢王理。 即日诣阙上书曰： 徐州刺史元孚频有表云：以孚宗室重臣，告请应实，所以量奏给武官千人。
现代文：孝庄帝即位后，游道任左中兵郎中，受到尚书令临淮王元或的谴责，游道拿着笏板长揖说： 您如果嗔怪我我表示谢罪，如果把我送交刑狱我不能谢罪。 当天他就到宫中上书说： 徐州刺史元孚多次有表章说： 南梁调集了大批军队，来攻打彭城，请求增派二千羽林军，元孚是皇亲重臣，申请的事应该属实，所以根据他的请求调派了一千名武官。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozhuang, Youdao, who was one of the middle-ranking soldiers on the left, was reprimanded by Shang Shuling Lin Huai Wang Yuan, and Youdao said, holding the gong board, "If you blame me, I will express my gratitude, but if you send me to prison, I will not be able to express my gratitude." On the same day, he went to the palace to submit a letter saying, "Xuzhou chief statesman Yuan Fu has repeatedly said: Nan Liang mobilized a large number of troops to attack Pengcheng and requested to send an additional two thousand Lin troops. Yuan Fu is a senior

古文：孚今代下，以路阻自防，遂纳在防羽林八百人，辞云：臣忝局司，深知不可。
现代文：现在元孚调职，却在路上筑起路障防守，把驻防的八百羽林军收编在自己手下，向朝廷说： 边境上没有什么事，请求率领他们回家，我负责有关部门，知道这样做不行。
English: Now that Yuan Fu had been transferred to a new post, he set up a roadblock on the road to defend himself, gathered the eight hundred forest troops stationed there under his own command, and said to the imperial court: There is nothing going on at the border, please lead them home, I am in charge of the relevant departments, and I know that this is not possible.

古文：尚书令临淮王彧即孚之兄子，遣省事谢远三日之中八度逼迫，云宜依判许。
现代文：尚书令临淮王元或是元孚兄长的儿子，在接连三天中八次派省事谢远来催逼，说应该允许。
English: Shang Shu ordered Lin Huai Wang Yuan, or the son of the elder brother of Yuan Fu, to send Xie Yuan eight times in three consecutive days to urge that it should be allowed.

古文：臣不敢附下罔上，孤负圣明。
现代文：我不敢因附和大臣而欺瞒皇上，辜负皇上的圣明。
English: I did not dare to deceive the emperor and betray the emperor's sacred trust by becoming a conciliator.

古文：但孚身在任，乞师相继，及其代下，便请放还，进退为身，无忧国之意。
现代文：但元孚在任，屡次请求增兵，等他被调换时，又请求放兵士回家，进退都是为了自身，没有替国家分忧之意。
English: However, when Yuan Fu was in office, he repeatedly asked for more soldiers, and when he was replaced, he also asked for soldiers to be sent home. He was only in it for himself, and had no intention of sharing the country's worries.

古文：所谓不合，其罪下科。
现代文：我就直言相告，说： 忠臣效忠国家，主要在于内心，又何必论高低贵贱。
English: I told him straight out, saying: A loyal subject's loyalty to the country lies mainly in his heart, and it doesn't matter how high or low he is.

古文：彧乃召臣于尚书都堂云：丑骂溢口，不顾朝章，右仆射臣世隆、吏部郎中臣薛琡已下百余人并皆闻见。臣实献直言，云：为臣此言，彧赐怒更甚。臣既不佞，干犯贵臣，乞解郎中。 帝召见游道嘉劳之。
现代文：自从高祖从北海入主洛堕，王爷不能为酉盘死难，反而大开宫门迎接贼寇。郑先护在广州举义，王爷又打着大旗去讨伐他。趋恶如流，伐善何速。如今你位居百官之首，竟然为私利而害政。 我说了这话，元或更加恼怒。我没有才能，触犯了贵臣，请求解除郎中令职务。 皇上召见游道，对他给予嘉奖和慰劳。
English: Ever since Gao Zu entered the capital of Luo from the North Sea, the prince couldn't die for the traitor, but opened the palace gate to welcome the thief. Zheng Xianguo proclaimed righteousness in Guangzhou, and the prince went to fight him with a big flag. Evil is flowing like a river, how fast to fight good. Now you are at the head of a hundred officials, even harming politics for self-interest. I said this, originally or more angry. I have no talent, offended the dignitary, and asked to be relieved of the post of lieutenant. The emperor summoned Yu Dao and gave him awards and consolation.

古文：彧亦奏言： 臣忝冠百僚，遂使一郎攘袂高声，肆言顿挫，乞解尚书令。 帝乃下□听解台郎。
现代文：亘毖也对皇上说： 我在百官之列，竟然被一郎中捋起袖子大声喝叱，出言无忌损害我的威严，请求解除尚书令。 皇上下旨听凭游道辞去郎中令。
English: Watanabe also said to the emperor, "I am one of hundreds of officials, yet I was scolded loudly by the chief vassal, and my words were bound to damage my dignity, and I asked to be relieved of my position.

古文：后除司州中从事。
现代文：后来任司州中从事。
English: Later, he was engaged in teaching at Sizhou Middle School.

古文：时将还邺，会霖雨，行旅拥于河桥。
现代文：当时要回邺去，正赶上霖雨不停，行人拥挤在河桥上。
English: At that time, I wanted to go back, but it was raining and raining, and pedestrians were crowded on the river bridge.

古文：游道于幕下朝夕宴歌，行者曰： 何时节作此声也，固大痴。 游道应曰： 何时节而不作此声也，亦大痴。 
现代文：游道在帐篷中早晚饮宴欢歌，行人说： 都什么时候了还唱歌，肯定是大白痴。 他应声说： 都什么时节了还不唱歌，也是大白痴。 
English: When a passer-by said, "At what time of the year do you still sing, you must be an idiot," he replied, "At what time of the year do you still not sing, you are also an idiot."

古文：后神武自太原来朝，见之曰： 此人宋游道耶？
现代文：后来神武从太原来朝见，见到了他，说： 造就是宋游道吗?
English: Later, Shenwu from the original morning, saw him and said: Is Zou Song Youdao?

古文：常闻其名，今日始识其面。 迁游道别驾。
现代文：常听说大名，今天才见到本人。 任他作了别驾。
English: I have often heard of the daimyo, but I only met him today.

古文：后日，神武之司州，飨朝士，举觞属游道曰： 饮高欢手中酒者大丈夫，卿之为人，合饮此酒。 及还晋阳，百官辞于紫陌。
现代文：后天，神武到达司州，宴会大臣时，举杯劝他说： 喝了高欢手中这杯酒的是大丈夫，按你的为人，应该喝这杯酒。 回到晋阳之前，文武百官在紫陌告别。
English: The day after tomorrow, when Shenwu arrived in Sizhou and met the minister of the banquet, he raised a glass to persuade him: "It's okay to drink this glass of wine from Gao Huan, according to your character, you should drink this glass of wine." Before returning to Jinyang, the civil and military officials said goodbye in Zimao.

古文：神武执游道手曰： 甚知朝贵中有憎忌卿者，但用心，莫怀畏虑，当使卿位与之相似。 于是启以游道为中尉。
现代文：神武帝拉着他的手说： 我了解权贵中有人怨恨你，你用心办事，不用害怕，我会使你的官职和他们相似。 于是上奏皇上任他为中尉。
English: Emperor Shenwu took him by the hand and said, "I understand that there are people in authority who resent you. If you work hard, don't be afraid. I will make your official position similar to theirs." So Emperor Shangsoo appointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：文襄执请，乃以吏部郎中崔暹为御史中尉，以游道为尚书左丞。
现代文：文襄又执意请求，便任吏部郎中崔暹为御史中尉，游道为尚书左丞。
English: At Wen Xiang's insistent request, he appointed Choi Siam, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as the lieutenant of the Ministry of History, and Youdo as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Education.

古文：文襄谓暹、游道曰： 卿一人处南台，一人处北省，当使天下肃然。 游道入省，劾太师咸阳王坦、太保孙腾、司徒高隆之，司空侯景、录尚书元弼、尚书令司马子如官赉金银，催征酬价，虽非指事赃贿，终是不避权豪。
现代文：文襄对他们说： 你们一人负责南台，一人掌管北省，应该把天下治理得井井有条。 他到了尚书省后，弹劾太师咸阳王元坦、太保孙腾、司徒高隆之，司空侯景、录尚书元弼、尚书令司马子如利用公家的金银，放贷取息，虽然不是揭发贪脏受贿，却也是不畏豪强。
English: Wen Xiang said to them, "One of you is in charge of South Taiwan, and one is in charge of North Province, and you should govern the world in an orderly manner." After he arrived at Shangshu Province, he impeached the Grand Master Xianyang Wangyuan Tan, the Grand Master Bao Sunteng, and the Grand Master Shitou Gaolongzhi, the Grand Master Kuo Houjing, the Grand Master Luo Shangshu, and the Grand Master Shangshu ordered Sima Zi to use public gold and silver, lend money and collect interest. Although he did not expose the corruption, he was also brave and strong.

古文：又奏驳尚书违失数百条，省中豪吏王儒之徒并鞭斥之。
现代文：又上书批驳尚书省各种违法事几百条，尚书省的高官王儒等人都受到鞭刑和叱责。
English: In addition, several hundred letters were written to refute various illegal activities in Shangshu Province. Wang Ru, a high-ranking official of Shangshu Province, and others were whipped and reprimanded.

古文：始依故事，于尚书省立门名，以记出入早晚，令仆已下皆侧目。
现代文：开始按照旧例，在尚书省门设立签名的地方，记下每人出入早晚的情况，尚书令仆射以下的官员都得小心翼翼。
English: In accordance with the old practice, they began to record the morning and evening of each person's entry and exit at the place where the signature was set up at the provincial gate of Shangshu, and the officials below the rank of lieutenant had to be careful.

古文：魏安平王坐事亡，章武二王及诸王妃、太妃是其近亲者皆被征责。
现代文：魏安平王犯事逃亡，章武二王和各位王妃、太妃这些直系亲属都被叱责。
English: King Wei Anping committed a crime and fled, King Zhangwu II and all the queens and queens of the immediate family were reprimanded.

古文：都官郎中毕义云主其事，有奏而禁，有不奏辄禁者。
现代文：都官郎中毕义云负责造件事，有的奏明加以拘禁，有的未经奏明也禁闭起来。
English: Bi Yiyun, a high-ranking official in the capital, was in charge of the affair, some of whom were detained without notice, and some of whom were detained without notice.

古文：游道判下廷尉科罪，高隆之不同。
现代文：游道决定移交廷尉定罪，高隆之不同意。
English: Youdao decides to hand over and convict the courtier, but Gao Longzhi disagrees.

古文：于是反诬游道厉色挫辱己，遂枉考□令史证成之，与左仆射襄城王旭、尚书郑述祖等上言曰： 饰伪乱真，国法所必去；附下罔上，王政所不容。
现代文：于是反诬他直言厉色折辱自己，就冤枉拷打各令史使他们作证，和左仆射襄城王元旭、尚书郑述祖等人上书说： 掩饰混淆真情，依国法必须革职；附和下属欺瞒皇上，朝政不能容忍。
English: As a result, he rebelled against his detractors by speaking bluntly and insulting himself. He unjustifiably tortured each of his subordinates to make them testify, and wrote a letter to his left-hand man, King Yuanxu of Xiangcheng, Shangshu Zhengshuzu and others, saying: Concealing and confusing the truth, according to the national law, must be dismissed; Accompanying subordinates to deceive the emperor, the imperial government cannot tolerate.

古文：谨案尚书左丞宋游道名望本阙，功绩何纪。
现代文：我们认为尚书左丞宋游道本来缺乏名望，又没有功绩。
English: We believe that Shang Shuzhong and Song Youdao originally lacked fame and had no achievements.

古文：属永安之始，朝士亡散，乏人之际，叨窃台郎。
现代文：永安初年，朝中大臣逃散，没有人才的时候，他投机作了郎中。
English: In the first year of Yongan, when the ministers of the two Koreas fled and there was no talent, he took the opportunity to become a henchman.

古文：躁行谄言，肆其奸诈，罕识名义，不顾典文，人鄙其心，□畏其口。
现代文：急躁谄媚，十分奸诈，不懂名义，不顾法令，人们都鄙视他的为人，却怕他诬害。
English: Impatient and charming, very treacherous, does not know the name, disregards the law, people despise him as a person, but they are afraid of him slandering.

古文：出州入省，历忝清资，而长恶不悛，曾无忌讳，毁誉由己，憎恶任情。
现代文：从州调入尚书省，历次担任清贵职务，却长期作恶不悔改，毫无忌讳，败坏或赞美由自己决定，好恶随自己的性情。
English: Transferred from the state to the province of Shangshu, he has held high-ranking positions, but he has long been doing evil without repentance, without any taboo, corrupting or praising at his own discretion, and likes and dislikes according to his own temperament.

古文：比因安平王事，遂肆其褊心，因公报隙，与郎中毕义云递相纠举。
现代文：近因为安平王的事，出于偏心，公报私仇，和郎中毕义云互相勾结检举。
English: Recently, because of the matter of King Anping, out of eccentricity, the communique was a personal vendetta, and the vassal Bi Yiyun colluded with each other to report.

古文：又左外兵郎中魏叔道牒云：大将军在省日，判。
现代文：又有左外兵郎中魏叔道送来文书说： 管辖的左泽等投降者被京畿府送到尚书省，命他们取保释放。 
English: Another document sent by Zuo Wei Shu Dao, a Zuo foreign soldier, said: Zuo Ze and other surrendering soldiers under the jurisdiction of Gyeonggi Prefecture were sent to Shangshu Province and ordered to be released on bail.

古文：游道发怒曰：又云：依事请问，游道并皆承引。
现代文：大将军在尚书省时，判定说 任凭处理，宋游道大怒说： 过去的官府是什么官府，竟然按他的惯例办事。 又说： 按照过去的规定，那成什么体统! 
English: When the great general was in Shangshu Province, he judged that the matter should be left alone, and Song Youdao said angrily: What kind of government office was it in the past that it should act according to its usual practice, and also said: According to the rules of the past, what kind of system is that!

古文：案律：对捍使者尚得死坐，况游道吐不臣之言，犯慢上之罪，口称夷、齐，心怀盗跖，欺公卖法，受纳苞苴，产随官厚，财与位积，虽赃污未露，而奸诈如是。举此一隅，余诈可验。
现代文：依事问他，他都承认了。依照法令： 对抗皇上的使者，没有大臣礼节，对皇上大不敬的死罪，对抗使者尚且是死罪，更何况他说出大逆不道的言论，犯了轻侮皇上之罪，嘴上说着伯夷、叔齐，心中想的却是盗跖，欺骗皇上出卖法律，贪污受贿，官位越高，家产越多，虽然贪污受贿还没有显露，但如此奸诈，仅举一例，其他可想而知。
English: According to the law: "He who opposes the emperor's envoy lacks the etiquette of a minister and is guilty of the capital offense of showing great disrespect to the emperor; he who opposes the envoy is also guilty of the capital offense; furthermore, he has uttered words of high treason and has committed the crime of slighting the emperor; he has spoken of being a peer and an uncle, but in his heart he is thinking of stealing money, deceiving the emperor and selling the law, and accepting bribes; the higher the official rank, the greater the family fortune; although the bribe-taking and corruption have not yet been revealed, they are so treacherous; to

古文：今依礼据律处游道死罪。 是时朝士皆分为游道不济。
现代文：现依照礼法和律令应判处游道死罪。 当时朝中大臣都认为他过不了这一关，而文襄听说了他和高隆之反对的话，对杨遵彦说： 他真是个鲠直刚烈的大恶人。 
English: At that time, the ministers of the two Koreas thought that he could not pass this test, and when Wen Xiang heard his and Gao Long's objection, he said to Yang Zunyan, "He is really a great villain who is upright and strong."

古文：而文襄闻其与隆之相抗之言，谓杨遵彦曰： 此真是鲠直大刚恶人。 遵彦曰： 譬之畜狗，本取其吠，今以数吠杀之，恐将来无复吠狗。 诏付廷尉，游道坐除名。
现代文：遵彦说： 比如说养狗吧，本来是要其叫唤的，如果现在因为叫唤的次数太多而杀了它，恐怕将来再也没有会叫的狗了。 
English: Zunyan said, "For example, if you have a dog and you want it to bark, but you kill it because it barks too often, I'm afraid there will be no more barking dogs in the future.

古文：文襄使元景康谓曰： 卿早逐我向并州，不尔，他经略杀卿。 游道从至晋阳，以为大行台吏部，又以为太原公开府咨议。
现代文：下诏移交廷尉。游道被定罪开除官职。文襄派元景康对他说： 你早点随我到并州去，否则，用别的方法也会杀掉你。 游道随从到了晋阳，任大行台吏部，又任太原公开府谘议。
English: Yuan Xiang sent Yuan Jingkang to him and told him: "You should follow me to Nianzhou as soon as possible, otherwise, I will kill you by other means." Yuan Xiang sent Yuan Xiang to Jinyang, where he was appointed to the cadre department of the Taihangtai and to the advisory council of the Taiyuan Public Security Bureau.

古文：及平阳公为中尉，游道以咨议领书侍御史。
现代文：平阳公任中尉时，游道以谘议领书侍御史。
English: When Pingyang was a public lieutenant, Youdao served as an advisor to him.

古文：寻以本官兼司徒左长史。
现代文：不久以本官兼任司徒左长史。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of chief magistrate as well.

古文：及文襄疑黄门郎温子升知元瑾之谋，系之狱而饿之，食敝襦而死。
现代文：文襄怀疑黄门郎温子升知道元瑾的阴谋，把他投入监狱不给饭吃，温子升吃短袄破絮而死。
English: Wen Xiang suspected that Huangmen Lang Wen Zi Sheng knew about the plot of Yuan Xuan, and threw him into prison without giving him any food. Wen Zi Sheng died after eating the short noodles.

古文：弃尸路隅，游道收而葬之。
现代文：尸体被丢弃在路边，游道把他收殓埋葬了。
English: The body was dumped on the side of the road and he was picked up and buried by the roadside.

古文：文襄谓曰： 吾近书与京师诸贵，论及朝士，卿僻于朋党，将为一病。
现代文：文襄对他说： 近我写信给京城的权贵，谈论到朝中大臣，你不善于结交朋党，将是一大缺陷。
English: Wen Xiang said to him, "Recently I wrote a letter to the dignitaries of Beijing, talking about the ministers of the DPRK and China, you are not good at making friends with the party, which will be a big flaw.

古文：今卿真是重旧节义人，此情不可夺。
现代文：现在看来，你真是重视节义之人，这种节义不可夺。
English: Now it seems that you really are a person who attaches importance to righteousness, and this righteousness is inalienable.

古文：子升吾本不杀之，卿葬之何所惮。
现代文：我本来不想杀子升，你埋葬他又怕什么呢。
English: I didn't want to kill Zi Sheng in the first place. What are you afraid of if you bury him?

古文：天下人代卿怖者，是不知吾心也。 寻除御史中尉。
现代文：天下替你担心的人，是不了解我的心啊。 不久任御史中尉。
English: Those who worry about you don't know my heart. Soon to be Lt. Goshi.

古文：东莱王道习参御史选，限外投状，道习与游道有旧，使令史受之。
现代文：束莱王道习参加御史的铨选，在规定的期限之外呈状，道习和游道是故友，他命令令史接受。
English: King Sukrai invited Daoxi to take part in the election, but he submitted his application outside the prescribed time limit. Daoxi and Youdo were old friends, and he ordered Youdo to accept.

古文：文襄怒，杖游道而判之曰： 游道禀性遒悍，是非肆口，吹毛洗垢，疮疵人物。
现代文：文襄很生气，杖罪游道并判令说： 游道禀性强悍，随口谈论是非，吹毛求疵，中伤人物。
English: Wen Xiang was very angry, cane crime Yu Dao and ordered: Yu Dao is stubborn and strong, casually talking about right and wrong, nitpicking, slandering people.

古文：往与郎中兰景云忿竞，列事十条。
现代文：过去和郎中兰景云争竞，列举了景云十条罪状。
English: In the past, he competed with Lan Jingyun, his son-in-law, and listed ten of Jingyun's crimes.

古文：及加推穷，便是虚妄。
现代文：等到仔细查察，发现全是捏造。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a complete fabrication.

古文：方共道习凌侮朝典，法官而犯，特是难原，宜付省科。 游道被禁，狱吏欲为脱枷，游道不肯曰： 此令命所著，不可辄脱。 文襄闻而免之。
现代文：这一次和道习两人凌侮国家法典，执法之人犯法，尤其难以宽恕，应该交付尚书省定罪。 游道被拘禁，狱卒想为他解去枷锁，他却不肯，说： 这是令公让戴上的，不能轻易脱下。 文襄听说后就免了他的罪。
English: This time, he and Daoxi violated the national code, and it is especially difficult to forgive those who enforce the law, and they should be sentenced to Shangshu Province. Yu Dao was detained, and the jailer wanted to remove the shackles for him, but he refused, saying, "This is what I ordered you to wear, and you can't take it off easily." After hearing this, Wen Xiang absolved him of his crime.

古文：游道抗志不改。
现代文：游道仍恪守刚强的性格不改。
English: Yudo still adheres to the strong character and does not change.

古文：天保元年，以游道兼太府卿，乃于少府覆检主司盗截，得巨万计。奸吏返诬奏之，下狱。
现代文：天保元年，命他兼任太府卿，在少府检核主管部门截留的财物，有数以万计，狡猾奸吏反而诬陷他而上奏，游道入狱。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was ordered to serve concurrently as Taifu-kyo, and there were tens of thousands of items of property intercepted by the inspection authority of Shofu. However, the cunning and treacherous officials framed him and went to prison.

古文：寻得出，不归家，径之府理事。
现代文：不久被放出来，他没有回家，而是直接到府中处理事务。
English: He was soon released, and instead of going home, he went straight to the prefectural government to attend to business.

古文：卒，遗令薄葬，不立碑表，不求赠谥。
现代文：去世时，留下遗嘱丧事从简，不立墓碑，不要朝廷的追赠和谧号。
English: When he died, he left a will stating that his funeral would be simple, that he would not erect a tombstone, and that he did not want a posthumous gift or nickname from the imperial court.

古文：赠瓜州刺史。
现代文：朝廷迫赠他为瓜州刺史。
English: The imperial court forced him to become Guazhou's chief historian.

古文：武平中，以子士素久典机密，重赠仪同三司，谥曰贞惠。
现代文：武平年间，因为他的儿子士素长久掌管国家大事，重新追赠为仪同三司，谧号贞惠。
English: During the Wuping era, because his son Shisu had been in charge of national affairs for a long time, he was posthumously re-awarded the title of "Gi Tong San Shi" and the nickname "Zhen Hui."

古文：游道刚直，疾恶如，见人犯罪，皆欲致之极法。
现代文：游道性情刚直，嫉恶如仇，看到别人犯罪。就想处以极刑。
English: Youdao's temperament is upright, jealousy is like a vendetta, and when he sees others commit crimes, he wants to impose capital punishment.

古文：弹纠见事，又好察阴私。
现代文：弹劾大臣雷厉风行，又好揭发人的隐私。
English: The impeachment of the minister is rampant, and it is good to expose people's privacy.

古文：问狱察情，捶挞严酷。
现代文：审问案件，鞭挞严酷。
English: interrogation cases, the whipping is severe.

古文：兖州刺史李子贞在州贪暴，游道案之。文襄以贞预建义勋，意将含忍。
现代文：兖州刺史李子贞在本州贪暴，游道审理时，文襄因为子贞参预起兵有功，想含糊了事。
English: When Li Zizhen, the governor of Zhangzhou, was put on trial for corruption in Huzhou, Wen Xiang tried to obfuscate the matter because Zizhen had participated in the pre-dawn raid.

古文：游道疑陈元康为其内助，密启云： 子贞、元康交游，恐其别有请嘱。 文襄怒，于尚书都堂集百僚，扑杀子贞。
现代文：游道疑心陈元康是子贞的内应，暗中向文襄报告说： 子贞、元康有交往，恐怕他另有请托。 文襄很生气，在尚书都堂召集百官，打死了子贞。
English: Yu Dao suspected that Chen Yuankang was Zizhen's inside man, and secretly reported to Wen Xiang: Zizhen and Yuankang had a relationship, I'm afraid he asked for another favor.Wen Xiang was very angry, he gathered hundreds of officials in Shangshudu Hall and killed Zizhen.

古文：又兖州人为游道生立祠堂，像题曰 忠清君 。
现代文：又有兖州人为游道建立生祠，为塑像题名叫 忠清君 。
English: In addition, some people from Zhangzhou built a new shrine on the promenade. The statue is named "Zhongqingjun."

古文：游道别劾吉宁等五人同死，有欣悦色。
现代文：游道另外弹劾的吉宁等五人一同被处死，他却显得很高兴。
English: Youdao Jinin, who was also impeached, and five others were executed together, but he appeared to be happy.

古文：朝士甚鄙之。
现代文：朝中大臣很鄙视他。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Household Agency despised him very much.

古文：然重交游，存然诺之分。
现代文：可是游道注重和朋友交往，时常记着对别人的许诺。
English: However, the tour pays attention to socializing with friends, and often remembers promises made to others.

古文：历官严整，而时大纳贿，分及亲故之艰匮者，其男女孤弱为嫁娶之，临丧必哀，躬亲襄事。
现代文：任官都很严谨，可是有时又大收贿赂，分给亲友中生活艰难的人，遇到失去父母或家境贫困的人，就为他们主持婚嫁，丧事必去哀悼。亲自办理丧葬事宜。
English: Appointed officials are very strict, but sometimes they take large bribes and distribute them to relatives and friends who have a hard life. When they encounter people who have lost their parents or are from poor families, they will preside over their wedding, and they must mourn the death. They will personally handle the funeral.

古文：为司州纲纪与牧昌乐、西河二王乖忤，及二王薨，每事经恤之。
现代文：任司州纲纪时和州牧昌乐王、西河王不和，二王死后，他却都加以过问存恤。
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Shuzhou, he did not get along with the governor of Shuzhou, Mu Changle, and the governor of the West River. However, after the death of the two kings, he asked for their forgiveness.

古文：与顿丘李□一面，便定死交。
现代文：和顿丘李奖见过一面，就结下了以死相报的交情。
English: Once he met Dongqiu Li Rong, they struck up a friendship that would last until death.

古文：□曰： 我年位已高，会用弟为佐史，令弟北面于我足矣。 游道曰： 不能。 既而□为河南尹，辟游道为中正，使者相属，以衣帢待之，握手欢谑。
现代文：李奖说： 我年纪已经大了，正好用你做我的佐史，如果总能做我的佐史就好了。 游道说： 不行。 时间不长，李奖任河南尹，以游道为中正，使者相继来到，给官服宫帽，两人握手高兴地开玩笑。
English: Li Shizhen said: I am already old, I just use you to be my assistant, if I can always be my assistant, it would be good. Youdao said: No, it is not possible. The time is not long, Li Shizhen is Henan Yin, with Youdao as the center, the envoys came one after another, gave the official uniform the palace hat, the two shook hands and joked happily.

古文：元颢入洛，□受其命，出使徐州，都督元孚与城人赵绍兵杀之。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，李奖奉命出使盆州，都督五星和城中居民赵绍杀了他。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luoyang, and Li Xuan was ordered to send an envoy to Bonshu. The governor, Wuxing, and a resident of the city, Zhao Shao, killed him.

古文：游道为□讼□，得雪，又表为请赠，□己考一泛阶以益之。
现代文：游道替他讼冤，昭雪后，又上表替他请求追赠，把自己被考察后升一级的奖励转加给李奖。
English: Youdao sued for his grievances, and after clearing the snow, he asked the upper table for a follow-up gift for him, and transferred the reward of one level up to the Li Award after he was inspected.

古文：又与刘廞结交，托廞弟粹于徐州杀赵绍。
现代文：又和刘厂结交，委托刘厂的弟弟刘粹到徐州杀了赵绍。
English: He also made friends with Liu Zhan and commissioned Liu Zhan's younger brother Liu Zi to go to Xuzhou to kill Zhao Shao.

古文：后刘廞伏法于洛阳，粹以徐州叛，官军讨平之，枭粹首于邺市。
现代文：后来刘厂犯法在洛阳被处死，刘粹占据徐州叛乱。官军平定了反叛，在邺市上把刘粹斩首。
English: Later, Liu Zhan was executed in Luoyang for breaking the law, and Liu Zi occupied Xuzhou for rebellion. The government army quelled the rebellion and beheaded Liu Zi in the city of Handan.

古文：孙腾使客告市司，得钱五百万后听收。
现代文：孙腾派门客告诉管理市场的官员，有人出钱五百万就可收殓尸体。
English: Sun Teng sent a customer to tell the officials managing the market that someone could pay five million yuan to collect the body.

古文：游道时为司州中从事，令家人作刘粹所亲，于州陈诉，依律判 许 而奏之。
现代文：游道当时任司州中从事，命家人扮作刘粹的亲戚，上州陈诉，依照法律应该判 允许收尸 而上奏。
English: At that time, Yu Dao was engaged in the middle school of Shizhou. He ordered his family members to pretend to be relatives of Liu Zi. They went to Shizhou to file a lawsuit. According to the law, they should be allowed to collect the corpse.

古文：□至，市司犹不许。游道杖市司，勒使速付。
现代文：命令下达，市场上的官员仍然不许，游道对他施以杖刑，命他快速交出尸首。
English: When the order was issued, the market officials still did not allow it, and the tour guide punished him with a cane and ordered him to quickly hand over the body.

古文：腾闻大怒。
现代文：孙腾听到消息大怒。
English: Sun Teng was furious when he heard the news.

古文：时李□二子构、训居贫，游道后令其求三富人死事，判免之，凡得钱百五十万，尽以入构、训。
现代文：此时李奖的两个儿子李构、李训闲居在家，生活难以维持，游道让他们找三家犯死罪的富裕人家，判决免去死刑，一共得钱一百五十万，全部送给两人。
English: At this time, Li Xuan's two sons, Li Jie and Li Xun, were idle at home, and their lives were difficult to maintain. He asked them to find three wealthy families who had committed capital crimes. They were sentenced to be spared the death penalty and received a total of 1.5 million yuan, all of which was given to the two of them.

古文：其使气党侠如此。
现代文：他就是这样义气豪侠。
English: That's how much of a hero he is.

古文：时人语曰： 游道猕猴面，陆操科斗形，意识不关貌，何谓丑者必无情。 构尝因游道会客，因戏之曰： 贤从在门外，大好人，宜自迎接。 为通名称 族弟游山。 游道出见之，乃猕猴衣帽也。
现代文：当时人说： 宋游道长了一副弥猴相，陆操身材像蝌蚪，但情义和相貌无关，何必一定认为丑陋的人必然无情呢。 有一次他大会宾客，李构戏弄他说： 你的堂兄弟在门外，是位大好人，应该亲自去迎接。 并替他通名说是 族弟游山 。游道出门来看，竟然是一只戴着帽子的孺猴。
English: At that time, people said: Song Youdao has a monkey's face, Lu Fu is like a baboon, but the meaning and appearance are irrelevant, why must you think that ugly people must be merciless. Once he was a big guest, Li Ge teased him and said: Your cousin is outside the door, he is a great person, you should go to meet him in person. And he is known as Brother Youshan. When Youdao went out, he saw that it was a macaque monkey wearing a hat.

古文：将与构绝，构谢之，豁然如旧。
现代文：他要和李构绝交，李构连忙谢罪，他就像什么也没发生一样和李构继续来往。
English: He wanted to sever ties with Li Jie, but Li Jie quickly apologized, and he continued to associate with Li Jie as if nothing had happened.

古文：游道死后，构为定州长史，游道第三子士逊为墨曹、博陵王管记，与典签共诬奏构。
现代文：他去世后，李盐任室业长史，游道的第三子逊任墨曹、盟医王管记，和典签一起诬陷李构并上奏朝廷。
English: After his death, Li Yan as the chief historian of the office, Yu Dao's third son Sun Ren Mo Cao, and the doctor Wang Guan Ji, together with the signature, framed Li Jie and reported to the imperial court.

古文：构于禁所祭游道而诉焉。
现代文：李构在被拘禁的地方祭奠游道并诉说了情况。
English: Li Jie made a pilgrimage to the place where he was detained and reported the situation.

古文：士逊昼卧如梦者，见游道怒己曰： 我与构恩义，汝岂不知，何共小人谋陷清直之士！ 士逊惊跪曰： 不敢、不敢。 旬日而卒。
现代文：士逊白天在床上躺着就觉得像作梦一样，看见游道很生气地对他说： 我和李构的恩义，你难道不知道吗，为什么和小人一起诬陷清白正直之人! 士逊惊慌地跪下说： 不敢、不敢。 十天后就去世了。
English: When he was lying in bed during the day, he felt like he was in a dream. When he saw Youdao, he was very angry and said to him, "I am indebted to Li Jie, don't you know, why frame an innocent and honest person together with a villain!" The scholar panicked and knelt down and said, "I don't dare, I don't dare." Ten days later, he passed away.

古文：游道每戒其子士素、士约、士慎等曰： 吾执法太刚，数遭屯蹇，性自如此，子孙不足以师之。 诸子奉父言，柔和谦逊。
现代文：游道常常告诫他的孩子士素、士约、士慎等说： 我执法过于严厉，多次遭受艰难困苦，这是我天性如此，子孙不值得效仿。 孩子们认真听取父亲的话，为人谦逊柔和。
English: Yu Dao often admonished his children Shisu, Shijo, Shishen and so on, saying: I am too strict in enforcing the law, I have suffered hardships many times, this is my nature, my children and grandchildren are not worth following. The children listen carefully to their father's words and are humble and gentle.

古文：士素沉密少言，有才识。
现代文：塞沉静寡言，有才能见识。
English: He is quiet and reserved, but has the ability to see things clearly.

古文：稍迁中书舍人。
现代文：升迁任中书舍人。
English: Promoted to the post of middle school teacher.

古文：赵彦深引入内省，参典机密，历中书、黄门侍郎，迁仪同三司、散骑常侍，常领黄门侍郎。
现代文：趟产拯把他引荐到内省，参预大事，历任中书、黄门侍郎，升仪同三司、散骑常侍，常领黄门侍郎。
English: He was introduced to introspection by his father-in-law, and participated in important events, successively serving as the middle secretary, the yellow gate attendant, the third secretary of the promotion ceremony, the horseback riding attendant, and the yellow gate attendant.

古文：自处机要近二十年，周慎温恭，甚为彦深所重。
现代文：任要职将近二十年，谨慎周到温和谦恭，很受赵产速倚重。
English: He has held important positions for nearly 20 years. He is cautious, thoughtful, gentle and courteous. He is very much influenced by Zhao Shanzhong.

古文：初祖珽知朝政，出彦深为刺史。
现代文：童哩执掌朝政时，命彦深出任刺史。
English: When Tongli was in charge of the imperial government, Myohikoh was appointed to the post of crown prince.

古文：珽奏以士素为东郡守，中书侍郎李德林白珽留之，由是还除黄门侍郎，共参机密。
现代文：又上奏朝廷任用士素为束郡太守，中书侍郎李德林劝说祖埏把他留下，由此任黄门侍郎，共同参预机密。
English: It was also reported that the imperial court had appointed Shisu as the governor of Sok County. Li Delin, the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, persuaded Zu Xi to keep him, and he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate to jointly participate in the pre-secrecy.

古文：士约亦为善士，官尚书左丞。
现代文：垫也是善士，官至尚书左丞。
English: Mat is also a good man, the official to Shang Shul Zojo.

古文：卢斐，字子章，范阳涿人也。
现代文：卢斐，字子章，范阳涿县人。
English: Lu Fei, Zizi Zhang, Fan Yang, from Jixian County.

古文：父同，魏殿中尚书。
现代文：父亲卢同，任魏殿中尚书。
English: His father, Lu Tong, was a high-ranking official in the Wei dynasty.

古文：斐性残忍，以强断知名。
现代文：卢斐本性残忍，以残忍独断出名。
English: Luffy is cruel by nature and has a reputation for being brutally opinionated.

古文：世宗引为相府刑狱参军，谓之云： 狂简，斐然成章，非佳名字也。 天保中，稍迁尚书左丞，别典京畿诏狱，酷滥非人情所为。
现代文：世宗引荐为相府刑狱参军，对他说： 狂妄而疏略却又斐然成章，你的名字不好。 天保年间，升任尚书左丞，另外负责京畿地区的刑狱，他严酷用刑不是一般人所能做的。
English: Sejong recommended him to join the army for the Sangfu Penitentiary, and said to him: "You are arrogant and careless, but you have accomplished a great deal. Your name is not good. During the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the post of Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and he was also in charge of the Penitentiary in the Gyeonggi region. His harsh use of punishment is not something that ordinary people can do.

古文：无问事之大小，拷掠过度，于大棒车辐下死者非一。
现代文：无论大事小事，都用刑过度，在大棒和车辐下致死的人有很多。
English: No matter how big or small the case is, the use of punishment is excessive, and there are many people who die under the big stick and the car beam.

古文：或严冬至寒，置囚于冰雪之上；或盛夏酷热，暴之日下。
现代文：有时在严冬极冷的天气，把囚犯放在冰雪上；有时盛夏酷暑，放在烈日下。
English: Sometimes, in the dead of winter, the prisoners were placed on snow and ice; sometimes, in the heat of summer, under the scorching sun.

古文：枉陷人致死者，前后百数。
现代文：受冤枉诬陷而死的人，前后敷以百计。
English: People who are falsely accused and die have a hundred different plans.

古文：又伺察官人罪失，动即奏闻，朝士见之，莫不重迹屏气，皆目之为卢校事。
现代文：又暗中侦察官员的过失罪行，动不动就上奏朝廷，朝臣见了他，全都加快脚步屏住呼吸，把他叫做卢校事。
English: He also secretly investigated the negligent crimes of officials, and reported to the imperial court at every turn. When the courtiers saw him, they all quickened their pace, held their breath, and called him Lu Xueji.

古文：斐后以谤史，与李庶俱病鞭死狱中。
现代文：后来因为诽谤国史，和李庶一起受鞭刑病死在狱中。
English: Later, because of slandering the country's history, he and Li Shizhu were both flogged and died in prison.

古文：毕义云，小字儿。
现代文：毕义云，小名叫陁儿。
English: Bi Yiyun, whose nickname is Hao Er.

古文：少粗侠，家在兖州北境，常劫掠行旅，州里患之。
现代文：年少时粗犷豪侠，家住在兖境，经常打劫商旅，州乡把他当作祸患。
English: When he was young, he was a rough-and-tumble hero. His family lived in Xingjing, and he often robbed merchants and travelers. The county town regarded him as a scourge.

古文：晚方折节从官，累迁尚书都官郎中。
现代文：晚些时候才归顺官府，多次升职任尚书都官郎中。
English: He was too old to exercise self-restraint, changed evil for good, came out to be an official, and rose to be one of the most senior officials in Shangshu.

古文：性严酷，事多干了。
现代文：本性严酷，办事果决。
English: His temperament is stern and inflexible, and he deals with most things efficiently and decisively.

古文：齐文襄作相，以为称职，令普勾伪官，专以车辐考掠，所获甚多。
现代文：齐文襄做丞相时，认为他很称职，命他负责管理投降过来的官员，专以车辐拷打，大有收获，却引起许多人的怨恨和议论。
English: When Qi Wenxiang was the prime minister, he thought he was very competent, and ordered him to be responsible for the management of officials who surrendered, especially the torture with car spokes, which was very fruitful, but caused many people's resentment and discussion.

古文：然大起怨谤。曾为司州吏所讼，云其有所减截，并改换文书。
现代文：有一次司州官吏诉讼，说他自己截留钱财，并且改换文书。
English: There was a lawsuit filed by a prefectural government official, saying that he had withheld money and changed documents.

古文：文襄以其推伪，□人怨望，并无所问，乃拘吏数人而斩之。
现代文：文襄因为他查问伪官，引起众人的怨恨，所以毫不过问，就逮捕了几个吏人杀掉。
English: Because Wen Xiang's questioning of false officials aroused the resentment of many people, he arrested and killed several officials without asking any questions.

古文：因此锐情讯鞠，威名日盛。
现代文：从此义云审讯时更加严酷，威名日盛一日。
English: From then on, Yiyun's trials became more severe, and his reputation grew day by day.

古文：文宣受禅，除治书侍御史，弹射不避勋亲。
现代文：文宣接受禅位后，义云任治书侍御史，弹劾时也不避讳有功的大臣和皇亲国戚。
English: After Wen Xuan accepted the zen rank, Yiyun was appointed to the post of secretary to the emperor, and did not shy away from meritorious ministers and relatives of the emperor during impeachment.

古文：累迁御史中丞，绳劾更切。
现代文：多次升迁任御史中丞，执行法律、检举大臣更是严切。
English: He has been promoted to the position of vice-minister of history several times, and he is even stricter when it comes to enforcing laws and prosecuting ministers.

古文：然豪横不平，频被怨讼。
现代文：但为人专横不公，常被人控诉。
English: However, he aroused the discontent of the powerful and influential people, and was repeatedly falsely accused by them.

古文：前为汲郡太守翟嵩启列：义云从父兄僧明负官债，先任京畿长吏，不受其属，立限切征，由此挟嫌，数遣御史过郡访察，欲相推绳。
现代文：被汲郡太守翟嵩在奏章中列述说：义云堂伯僧明欠下官债，原先翟嵩任京畿长吏，没有理会义云的请托，定下期限强行征收，义云从此怀恨在，多次派御史到郡巡察，想把他捉起来审问。
English: It was recorded in the record of the court that the governor of Gu County, Yiyun Tong Boseong, owed a debt to the government. Yiyun did not pay attention to Yiyun's request and imposed a deadline to collect the debt. Yiyun held a grudge against him and repeatedly sent envoys to inspect the county in an attempt to arrest and interrogate him.

古文：又坐私藏工匠，家有十余机织锦，并造金银器物。
现代文：又因为私藏工匠，家中用十几张织机织锦，并且打造金银器物，因此获罪并拘禁。
English: He was also convicted and detained for having a private collection of craftsmen, using more than a dozen looms to weave brocade at home, and for making gold and silverware.

古文：乃被禁止。寻见释，以为司徒左长史。
现代文：但很快又被释放，任司徒左长史。
English: However, he was soon released and left to live out the rest of his life.

古文：尚书左丞司马子瑞奏弹义云，称： 天保元年四月，窦氏皇姨祖载日，内外百官赴第吊省，义云唯遣御史投名，身遂不赴。
现代文：尚书左丞司马子瑞上表弹劾他，说： 天保元年四月，为窦氏皇姨举行祖祭礼造一天，朝廷内外大臣都到家中吊唁慰问，义云仅派了御史递上名帖，自己却不参加。
English: Shangshu Zuozhong, Ma Zirui's subordinate, went to the table to impeach him, saying: In April of the first year of the Tenpo era, the ancestor's festival was held for the aunt of the Dou Dynasty for one day, and the ministers of the Imperial Court and the Ministry of the Interior all came to the house to offer condolences and condolences. Yi Yun only sent a letter of condolence, but he did not participate.

古文：又义云启云：及义云成婚之夕，□储备设，克日拜合，鸣驺清路，盛列羽仪，兼差台吏二十人，责其鲜服侍从车后。
现代文：他上书说： 我的妻子死了而家中孤苦贫困，续娶李世安之女为妻。世安自己虽然为父守丧没有结束，他女儿认为祖父已经入土为安，特意请求悄悄迎娶，不敢送礼品，盏云成婚的当晚，把家中珍藏的东西，全部陈列出来，到了拜门之时，用高头大马开路，摆起盛大的仪仗，同时派出御史台吏二十名，命令他们穿上光鲜的衣服在车后侍奉。
English: He wrote: My wife died and the family was destitute, and he married the daughter of Li Shiyan. Although Shiyan himself did not end his mourning for his father, his daughter thought that her grandfather had gone to the grave, specifically requested to marry quietly, and did not dare to send gifts. On the night of his marriage, he displayed all the things he treasured at home. When it was time to visit the door, he used a tall horse to open the way and staged a grand ceremonial battle. At the same time, he sent twenty imperial historians and ordered them to wear shiny clothes and serve behind the car.

古文：直是苟求成婚，诬罔干上。
现代文：逭真是为了成婚，不惜欺瞒皇上。
English: It's really impolite to propose marriage, it's against etiquette, and it's a crime against the imperial family.

古文：义云资产宅宇足称豪室，忽道孤贫，亦为矫诈。
现代文：他的资产房宅足以算得上豪富之家，忽然说自己孤苦贫寒，也是欺君之罪。
English: His asset house is enough to be considered a rich man's house, suddenly saying that he is lonely and poor is also a crime of cheating.

古文：法官如此，直绳焉寄。
现代文：作为法官尚且如此，怎么可能会有公正的判决呢。
English: As a judge, how can there be a fair verdict?

古文：又驾幸晋阳，都坐判：义云乃乖例，署表之日，索表就家先署，临日遂称私忌不来。 于是诏付廷尉科罪，寻□免推。
现代文：皇上到置盐时，都坐判示说： 参拜皇上起居表，四品以下五品以上官员提前一天到南都签名，三品以上当天签名。 
English: When the emperor arrived to place the salt, they all sat in judgment and said, "Please refer to the emperor's living table. Officials with four or fewer goods and those with five or more goods should go to Nanto one day in advance to sign, and those with three or more goods should sign on the same day."

古文：子瑞又奏弹义云事十余条，多烦碎，罪止罚金，不至除免。
现代文：他却违反规定，签名这一天，要过表先在家签上名，到了第二天却说自己有私人忌日不能前去。 
English: Sima Zirui also impeached him for more than a dozen other things, most of which were trivial and minor. The conviction was limited to a fine and did not result in dismissal.

古文：子瑞从兄消难为北豫州刺史，义云遣御史张子阶诣州采风闻，先禁其典签家客等，消难危惧，遂叛入周。
现代文：于是皇上下令移交廷尉论罪，不久又下令免予追究。子瑞又上表弹劾义云十条罪状，都是琐碎小事，仅是处以罚金，还不至于罢官。王遗堂兄逍整任韭塑出刺史，羞昼派御史张子阶到州裹收集民间反映，先拘禁了他手下的典签门客等人。消难害怕，叛逃到北周。
English: As a result, the emperor gave the order to hand over the courtier to discuss the crime, and soon ordered to be exempted from prosecution. Zi Rui also impeached the ten charges of Yiyun on the table, all of which were trivial matters, only fined, but not dismissed. Wang Yi's cousin, Xu Zhenren, forged a false history, sent the historian Zhang Zida to the state to collect public feedback, and first detained his subordinates' signers. Afraid of difficulties, he defected to the north of Zhou.

古文：时论归罪义云，云其规报子瑞，事亦上闻。
现代文：当时人们认为应归罪于毕义云，说他报复子瑞，遣事也呈报皇上。
English: At that time, people believed that Bi Yiyun was to blame, saying that he took revenge on Zi Rui, and the matter was reported to the emperor.

古文：尔前燕赏，义云常预，从此后集见稍疏，声望大损。
现代文：以前的宴饮赏赐，常有义云参加，从此皇上召见他的次数逐渐稀少，声望大受损害。
English: At previous banquets and awards, Yiyun often attended. Since then, the number of times the emperor has summoned him has gradually dwindled, and his reputation has been greatly damaged.

古文：干明初，子瑞迁御史中丞。
现代文：乾明初，子瑞升任御史中丞。
English: Early in the reign of Emperor Qianming, Zi Rui was promoted to the position of Goshi Chujo.

古文：郑子默正被任用，义云之姑即子默祖母，遂除度支尚书，摄左丞。
现代文：塑王麸正受皇上重用，羞云的姑姑是王麸的祖母，就任命他为度支尚书，摄左丞。
English: Zheng Ziming was heavily used by the imperial court, and Bi Yiyun's aunt was Zheng Ziming's grandmother. Therefore, Yiyun was protected by him, and he was appointed to be the chancellor and also the secretary of the left.

古文：子默诛后，左丞便解。
现代文：子默被处死后，左丞的职务撤销。
English: After Zheng Ziming was executed, Bi Yiyun Zuo was also relieved of his duties.

古文：孝昭赴晋阳，高元海留邺，义云深相依附。
现代文：圣压到置盟，高元海留在邺，羞雪依附他。
English: Sheng Peng became a member of the alliance, Gao Yuanhai stayed in Handan, and Shixue clung to him.

古文：知其信向释氏，常随之听讲，为此□密，无所不至。
现代文：知道他信奉佛教，常常跟随他去听讲佛法，由此二人关系密切，无所不至。
English: Knowing that he was a Buddhist, she often followed him to listen to his teachings, and the two of them became very close and went everywhere together.

古文：及孝昭大渐，顾命武成。
现代文：孝昭帝病危，临终前把顾命重任交给武盛。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao became seriously ill, he issued a posthumous edict that Emperor Wucheng should be succeeded by Emperor Gaozhan.

古文：高归彦至都，武成犹致疑惑。
现代文：产盟产到京城传递消息，亘递表示疑惑。
English: Gao Guihang, the younger brother of Emperor Gaozhen, came to the capital. Emperor Wu Rongcheng was very suspicious of him.

古文：元海遣犊车迎义云入北宫参审，遂与元海等劝进，仍从幸晋阳，参预时政。
现代文：五渔派人用牛车把义云接到北宫共同谋议，就和元海等人劝武成帝继任帝位，随同来到置屋，参预朝政。
English: The Five Fishermen sent a man with an ox-drawn cart to take Yiyun to the North Palace for joint deliberation, and together with Yuanhai and others, they persuaded Emperor Wucheng to succeed to the throne, and then came to the Imperial Villa to participate in the pre-imperial politics.

古文：寻除兖州刺史，给后部鼓吹，即本州岛也，轩昂自得，意望铨衡之举。
现代文：不久任兖州刺史，给后部鼓吹，他到达兖州时，洋洋自得，希望很快就会受到提拔。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Luzhou, preaching to the rear. When he arrived in Luzhou, he was full of confidence and hoped to be promoted soon.

古文：见诸人自陈，逆许引接。
现代文：接见官员时，答应可以引荐。
English: When meeting officials, promise to introduce them.

古文：又言离别暂时，非久在州。
现代文：又说很快就要和大家分手，不会在兖州停留很长时间。
English: He also said that his separation from the emperor was temporary and that he would not stay in Zhangzhou for a long time.

古文：先有铙吹，至于案部行游，遂两部并用。
现代文：原先已经有了演奏铙歌的军乐队，到巡视队伍游行时，又和后部鼓吹同时使用。
English: Originally, there was already a military band that played the national anthem, but when it came to the inspection procession, it was used at the same time as the rear trumpet.

古文：犹作书与元海，论□时事。
现代文：他还写信给元海，论述时事。
English: He also wrote to Yuanhai to discuss current affairs.

古文：元海入内，不觉遗落，给事中李孝贞得而奏之，为此元海渐疏，孝贞因是兼中书舍人。
现代文：元海入宫时，不觉把信遗失，被给事中李孝贞拾到呈送皇上，因此对元海渐渐疏远，孝贞因而兼任中书舍人。
English: When Yuanhai entered the palace, he unintentionally lost the letter, and Li Xiaozhen picked it up to present it to the emperor. As a result, he gradually became estranged from Yuanhai, and Xiaozhen also served as the book keeper.

古文：又高归彦起逆，义云在州私集人马，并聚甲仗，将以自防，实无他意。
现代文：高归彦发动叛乱时，义云在兖州私自招集人马，并且收集钟甲武器，想用来自卫，实际并没有其他意思。
English: When Gao Guihang launched the rebellion, Yiyun secretly recruited men and women in Zhangzhou, and collected bell armored weapons, wanting to use them for self-defense, but actually had no other intention.

古文：为人所启。
现代文：结果被人上奏朝廷。
English: As a result, it was reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：及归彦被擒，又列其朋党专擅，为此追还。
现代文：高归彦被擒获时，列举他为同党专权，因此义云被追召回朝。
English: When Gao Guihiko was captured and his friends were interrogated, Bi Yiyun was implicated.

古文：武成犹录其往诚，竟不加罪，除兼七兵尚书。
现代文：武成帝记得他过去的忠心，最终没有定他的罪，又命他兼七兵尚书。
English: Emperor Wucheng still remembered the loyalty of his persuasion, and did not punish him, but allowed him to remain as a soldier for seven years.

古文：义云性豪纵，颇以施惠为心，累世本州岛刺史，家富于财，士之匮乏者，多有拯济。
现代文：义云性情粗豪放纵，时常对别人施行恩惠，他家世代任本州刺史，家中广有资财，遇到贫困的士人，都加以救济。
English: Yiyun's temperament is coarse and indulgent, and he often does favors for others. His family has been the history of the state for generations. The family has a wide range of wealth and provides relief to scholars who are in poverty.

古文：及贵，恣情骄侈，营造第宅宏壮，未几而成。
现代文：为贵臣后，就十分骄奢淫逸，营造的房屋宏伟壮丽，不久就完工了。
English: When he became an official, he lived a luxurious life to the full. He built a magnificent palace, which was completed in a short time.

古文：闺门秽杂，声遍朝野。
现代文：家中淫乱污秽，恶名遍于朝野。
English: Among them, obscene rumors of mixed gender spread all over the morning and evening.

古文：为郎，与左丞宋游道因公事忿竞，游道廷辱之云： 雄狐之诗，千载为汝。 义云一无所答。
现代文：任郎中时，与尚书左丞宋游道因公事而生气争吵，塑笪在朝堂上侮辱他说： 《诗经》上讽刺淫乱的《雄狐》，千年以来就是你的写照。 
English: When he was a junior vassal, he quarreled angrily with Shang Shuzhong and Song Youdao over a business matter, and Shuxuan insulted him in the morning hall, saying: "Xionghu," which satirizes sexual promiscuity in the Book of Songs, has been a portrayal of you for a thousand years.

古文：然酷暴残忍，非人理所及，为家尤甚，子孙仆隶，常疮痍被体。
现代文：把他说得哑口无言。但他为人残暴狠毒，不近人理，治家更是厉害，子孙奴仆，常常被打得遍体伤痕。
English: But he was a cruel and vicious man, not to be trifled with. He was an even worse family manager, and often beat his slave children and grandchildren until they had scars all over their bodies.

古文：有孽子善昭，性至凶顽，与义云侍婢奸通，搒掠无数，为其笼头，系之庭树，食以□秣，十余日乃释之。
现代文：他有一孽子叫善昭，性情极其凶狠，和义云的侍女通奸，拷打无数，给他戴上笼头，系在院中树上，用草料喂他，十几天才放下来。
English: He had a son named Zenzhao, who was extremely vicious. He committed adultery with the maid of Yiyun, tortured him countless times, put him in a cage, tied him to a tree in the courtyard, fed him with grass, and only let him out after ten days.

古文：夜中，义云被贼害，即善昭所佩刀也，遗之于义云庭中。
现代文：半夜，义云被强盗杀死，凶器就是善堕经常佩带的腰刀，遣落在义云的院中。
English: In the middle of the night, Yiyun was killed by a robber. The murder weapon was a belt knife often carried by good-for-nothings, which landed in Yiyun's yard.

古文：善昭闻难奔哭，家人得佩刀，善昭怖，便走出，投平恩墅舍。
现代文：善鳄听说父亲死了大哭着跑过来，家人发现了佩刀，他就害怕了，跑出家门，投奔到平恩的别墅住下。
English: When the good crocodile heard that his father had died, he ran crying. When his family found the saber, he got scared and ran out of the house to live in Ping'en's villa.

古文：旦日，世祖令舍人兰子畅就宅推之。
现代文：第二天，世祖命舍人兰子畅到他家访察。
English: The next day, Lan Zichang, who had given up his life for the ancestors, visited his home.

古文：尔前，义云新纳少室范阳卢氏，有色貌。
现代文：原先，羞昼新娶了茎堡卢旦为妾，有姿色。
English: Prior to this, Yiyun Xin married Fan Yang Lu's concubine, who was quite beautiful.

古文：子畅疑卢奸人所为，将加拷掠。
现代文：王蝗怀疑是卢家奸人所为，要动用刑具。
English: Wang Locust suspected that it was done by a traitor to the Lu family and wanted to use the torture equipment.

古文：卢具列善昭云尔，乃收捕系临漳狱，将斩之。
现代文：卢氏把善鳄所作所为都供了出来，子畅捉住善昭羁押在临连监狱，要将他斩首。
English: Mr. Lu exposed all of Zenzhao's actions, and Zichang captured Zenzhao and detained him in Linlian Prison, intending to behead him.

古文：邢卲上言，此乃大逆，义云又是朝贵，不可发。
现代文：邢邵向皇上说，此人杀父，但垦羞垩是朝中显贵，不能够声张。
English: Zou Shao said to the emperor that this man killed his father, but Zou Shixuan was a dignitary in the court and could not speak out.

古文：乃斩之于狱，弃尸漳水。
现代文：于是在狱中把善昭杀死，尸体抛入漳河。
English: So he killed Zenzhao in prison and threw his body into the Fen River.

