古文：黄帝曰：五脏者，所以藏精神魂魄者也；六腑者，所以受水谷而行化物者也。其气内干五脏，而外络肢节。
现代文：黄帝说：五脏是贮藏精神魂魄的，六腑是受纳和传化水谷的。由饮食所化生的精微之气，在内则入于五脏，在外则行于分肉、经络、肢节。
English: The Yellow Emperor said: "The five viscera store the spirit of the soul, while the six glands receive and transmute it. The subtle qi generated by diet enters the five viscera internally, and travels to the meridians, meridians, and joints externally.

古文：其浮气之不循经者，为卫气；其精气之行于经者，为营气。
现代文：其浮而在外之气，不循行于经脉之中的，叫卫气；其精气之行于经脉之中的，叫营气。
English: The qi that floats outside the meridians and does not travel along the meridians is called Wei qi; the qi whose essence travels along the meridians is called Ying qi.

古文：阴阳相随，外内相贯，如环之无端，亭亭淳淳乎，孰能窃之。
现代文：卫气行脉外属阳，营气行脉中属阴，阴阳相随而行，内外贯通，有如环之无端，如水之源远流长，无有穷尽。
English: The external aether is yang, the internal aether is yin, and the yin and yang go hand in hand, penetrating inside and outside, like a ring with no end, like the source of water flowing far and wide, inexhaustible.

古文：然其分别阴阳，皆有标本、虚实、所离之处。
现代文：但在分别阴阳属性时，都有标本、虚实、和各自的循行、经历之处。
English: However, when distinguishing the yin and yang attributes, there are examples, false and true, and their respective lineage and experience.

古文：能别阴阳十二经者，知病之所生；候虚实之所在者，能得病之高下；知六腑之气街者，能知解结契绍于门户；能知虚实之坚软者，知补泻之所在；能知六经标本者，可以无惑于天下。岐伯曰：博哉！
现代文：因此，能分别三阴三阳十二经的就可以知道病是怎样产生的；能判断出虚实所在，便能找出疾病的上下部位；能知道六腑之气往来的通道，在诊断和治疗上，就像能解开绳结，开达门户一样，方便自如；能知虚者软一一经气空虚，实者硬一一邪气结聚，就能知道补虚泄实的关键所在；能知手足六经的标和本，对复杂的疾病在治疗时就能应付裕如而无所疑惑。岐伯说：真是广博啊！
English: Therefore, if you can distinguish the three yin, three yang and twelve sutras, you can know how the disease is caused; if you can judge where the false and the true are, you can find out the upper and lower parts of the disease; if you can know the passage of the six kinds of qi, it is convenient and easy in diagnosis and treatment, just like you can untie the knots and open the portal; if you can know that the false one is soft and the true one is hard and evil, you can know the key to filling the void; if you can know the standard and the book of the six sutras, you can deal with complex diseases in treatment without any doubt.

古文：圣帝之论！
现代文：只有圣明的帝王才能有这样的论述！
English: Only the emperor of light can have such a discourse!

古文：臣请尽意悉言之。
现代文：让臣下紧接您的论述，更详尽地谈一谈。
English: Let your subordinates follow up your discussion and talk about it in more detail.

古文：足太阳之本，在跟以上五寸中，标在两络命门。命门者，目也。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的本，在足跟以上五寸中；标，在两络的命门，这里的命门，是指眼睛。
English: The sole of the foot and the sole of the bladder are in the five inches above the heel; the target, in the two networks of the gate of life, here the gate of life, refers to the eyes.

古文：足少阳之本，在窍阴之间，标在窗笼之前。窗笼者，耳也。
现代文：足少阳胆经的本，在足第四趾外侧端的窍阴穴之间；标，在窗笼之前，这里的窗笼，指耳。
English: The book of the little yang and yang of the foot, between the acupoints of the lateral end of the fourth toe; the sign, before the window cage, the window cage here, the ear.

古文：足少阴之本，在内踝下上三寸中，标在背俞与舌下两脉也。
现代文：足少阴肾经的本，在内踝上下三寸；标，在背部，与舌下两脉。
English: Foot Shao Yin Renjing this, in the inner ankle up and down three inches; target, in the back, and the two veins under the tongue.

古文：足厥阴之本，在行间上五寸所，标在背腧也。
现代文：足厥阴肝经的本，在行间穴上五寸；标，在背部。
English: The book of the Foot, Foot, Yin and Liver Sutra has a five-inch hole between the lines; the scale is on the back.

古文：足阳明之本，在厉兑，标在人迎，颊挟颃颡也。
现代文：足阳明胃经的本，在足次趾端的厉兑穴；标，在人迎穴，穴位在颊下结喉两旁。
English: Foot Yang Ming stomach of the book, in the foot of the second toe end of the hole; target, in the person of the hole, the hole under the cheek of the throat on both sides.

古文：足太阴之本，在中封前上四寸之中，标在背腧与舌本也。
现代文：足太阴脾经的本部，在中封穴前上四寸中；标，在背部与舌根部。
English: The base of the foot is too yin and the spleen is too yang, in the middle of the anterior and superior four inches of the middle seal hole; the target is in the back and the base of the tongue.

古文：手太阳之本，在外踝之后，标在命门之上一寸也。
现代文：手太阳小肠经的本，在手外踝之后；标，在睛明穴上一寸处。
English: The small intestine of the hand, after the ankle outside the hand; the mark, one inch above the eye socket.

古文：手少阳之本，在小指次指之间上二寸，标在耳后上角下外眦也。
现代文：手少阳三焦经的本，在手无名指之间；标，在耳后上角与下外眦。
English: The book of Shao Yang Sanjiao Jing is between the ring finger of the hand; the scale is in the upper corner behind the ear and the lower outer eyelid.

古文：手阳明之本，在肘骨中，上至别阳，标在颜下合钳上也。
现代文：手阳明大肠经的本，在肘骨中，上至；标，在颊下，人迎穴之后，扶突穴之上。
English: The book of the hand yangming large intestine, in the elbow bone, up to; scale, under the cheek, after the man hole, above the buttock hole.

古文：手太阴之本，在寸口之中，标在腋内动也。
现代文：手太阴肺经的本，在寸口中；标，在腋内动脉，就是腋下三寸。
English: The base of the palms is in the groin; the target is in the internal carotid artery, which is three inches below the armpit.

古文：手少阴之本，在锐骨之端，标在背腧也。
现代文：手少阴心经的本，在掌后锐骨之端；标，在背部。
English: The handle of the Shoshoin Shingon is at the end of the sharp bone behind the palm; the scale is on the back.

古文：手心主之本，在掌后两筋之间二寸中，标在腋下下三寸也。
现代文：手厥阴心包经的本，在掌后两筋之间二寸内；标，在腋下三寸。
English: The sutra in the palm of the hand should be within two inches between the two lines at the back of the hand; the standard should be three inches below the armpit.

古文：凡候此者，下虚则厥，下盛则热；上虚则眩，上盛则热痛。
现代文：凡要测候十二经标本上下所主的疾病，一般在下的为本，下虚则元阳衰于下而为厥逆，下盛则阳气盛于下而为热。在上者为标，上虚则清阳不升而为眩晕，上盛则阳盛于上而为热痛。
English: When it is necessary to measure the diseases of the above and below of the 12 sutra specimens, it is generally based on the lower one, the lower false one is the original yang that fades down and is retrograde, the lower high one is the yang that prevails below and is hot. The upper one is the standard, the upper false one is the clear sun that does not rise and is dizziness, and the upper high one is the yang that prevails above and is hot pain.

古文：故石者，绝而止之，虚者，引而起之。
现代文：属实证的当泄，以绝其根而使疾病停止发作；属虚证的当补，助其气而振其不足。
English: It is a positive antidote to the root cause of the disease to stop the attack; it is a false remedy to the root cause of the disease to help the root cause and relieve the deficiency.

古文：请言气街，胸气有街，腹气有街，头气有街，胫气有街。
现代文：让我再谈谈各部的气街：胸、腹、头、小腿之气，各有所聚所行的通道。
English: Let me talk about the qi street of each part: the qi of the chest, abdomen, head, and calf, each of which has its own channel.

古文：故气在头者，止之于脑；气在胸者，止之膺与背腧；气在腹者，止之背腧，与冲脉，于脐左右之动脉者；气在胫者，止之于气街，与承山踝上以下。
现代文：气在腹部的，聚于背俞穴，即自十一椎膈膜以下，足太阳经诸脏之俞穴，并聚于腹前冲脉及在脐左右经脉处的穴位。气在小腿部的，则于足阳明经的气街穴及承山穴和足踝部上下等处。
English: The qi in the abdomen is concentrated in the dorsal iliac fossa, i.e. below the eleventh cervical vertebrae, the tarsal iliac fossa, and is concentrated in the ventral anterior ciliary artery and in the ankle meridians. The qi in the lower leg is concentrated in the tarsal iliac fossa, the zhenshan fossa and around the ankle.

古文：取此者，用毫针，必先按而在久，应于手，乃刺而予之。
现代文：凡刺这些穴位都要用毫针，操作时，必须用手先在穴位上作较长时间的按压，待其气至，然后针刺与之补泄。
English: All needles at these points should be used with a millimeter needle. When operating, you must use your hand to press the points for a long time, wait for the breath to come, and then use the needle to supplement the flow.

古文：所治者，头痛、眩、仆、腹痛、中满暴胀，及有新积。
现代文：刺各部气街的穴位能治疗头痛、眩晕、中风跌仆、腹痛、腹部突然胀满，及新得的积聚。
English: The acupoints on each qi street can treat headache, dizziness, stroke, abdominal pain, abdominal distension, and new accumulation.

古文：痛可移者，易已也；积不痛，难已也。
现代文：疼痛按之移动的，治之易愈；积聚处不疼痛的，难愈。
English: The more the pain moves, the easier it is to cure; the less pain there is at the point of accumulation, the more difficult it is to cure.

