古文：侯白卢嘉言陆操薛道衡刘焯山东人吃人赵小儿长孙无忌任环李绩
现代文：侯白卢嘉言陆操薛道衡刘焯山东人吃人赵小儿长孙无忌任环李绩
English: Hou Bai, Lu Jiayin, Lu Cao, Xue Daoheng, Liu Qishan, Dongren cannibalism, Zhao Xiao'er, the eldest grandson, must be appointed as the ring leader.

古文：李荣
现代文：李荣
English: Li Rong

古文：侯白
现代文：侯白
English: Hou Bai

古文：隋侯白，州举秀才，至京。
现代文：隋朝人侯白，在州试时考中了秀才，来到京城长安。
English: Hou Bai, a member of the Sui Dynasty, came to the capital city of Chang'an after passing the state examination.

古文：机辩捷，时莫之比。
现代文：侯白机敏善辩，当时没有人能跟他相比。
English: Hou Bai was quick-witted and eloquent. At that time, no one could compare to him.

古文：尝与仆射越国公杨素并马言话。
现代文：一次，侯白跟仆射越国公杨素并排骑马边走边聊天。
English: On one occasion, Hou Bai and his servant Yang Su, the Duke of Yue, rode side by side and chatted as they walked.

古文：路傍有槐树，憔悴死。
现代文：路旁边有一株槐树，已经枯死了。
English: There's a dead elm tree on the side of the road.

古文：素乃曰：侯秀才理道过人，能令此树活否。
现代文：杨素问侯白：侯秀才理论过人，能让这株槐树活吗？
English: Yang Su asked Hou Bai: Hou Xiucai is an excellent theorist, can he make this eucalyptus tree live?

古文：曰：能。
现代文：侯白回答说：能啊！
English: Hou Bai replied: Well done!

古文：素云：何计得活。
现代文：杨素说：你有什么办法让它活了？
English: Yang Su said, "What can you do to keep it alive?"

古文：曰：取槐树子于树枝上悬著，即当自活。
现代文：侯白说：拿来槐树子悬挂在这株树的枝上，立即自己就活了。
English: Hou Bai said, "Take a piece of eucalyptus and hang it on the branch of this tree. You will immediately come back to life."

古文：素云：因何得活。
现代文：杨素问：因为什么它能自己活了呢？
English: Yang Su asked: Why is it able to survive on its own?

古文：答曰：可不闻《论语》云， 子在，回何敢死。
现代文：侯白说：你没有听到《论语》上说： 子在，回何敢死？ 
English: Hou Bai said, "Didn't you hear the Analects of Confucius say, 'If I have a son, how dare I die?'

古文：素大笑。
现代文：杨素听了捧腹大笑。
English: Yang Su laughed again.

古文：开皇中，有人姓出，名六斤。
现代文：隋文帝开皇所间，有一个人姓出，名字叫六斤，想要参见杨素。
English: When Sui Emperor Wen opened the imperial palace, there was a person named Liujin who wanted to see Yang Su.

古文：欲参素，赍名纸至省门。遇白，请为题其姓。
现代文：这个人带着空白的名片来到省衙门口，遇见了侯白，请侯白在空白的名片上给他写上名字。
English: This person came to the gate of the Provincial Government with a blank business card, met Hou Bai, and asked Hou Bai to write his name on the blank business card.

古文：乃书曰：六斤半。
现代文：于是侯白在名片上写上：六斤半。
English: So Hou Bai wrote on his business card: six and a half jin.

古文：名既入，素召其人问曰：卿姓六斤半。
现代文：名片送到省衙的办公室里后，杨素召见这个人，问：你叫六斤半吗？
English: After the business card was delivered to Guozhen's office, Yang Su summoned the man and asked: "Is your name Liujin and a half?"

古文：答曰：是出六斤。
现代文：这个人回答说：我叫出六斤。
English: The man answered, "I weigh six pounds."

古文：曰：何为六斤半。
现代文：杨素问：为什么名片上写着六斤半？
English: Yang Su asked: Why does the business card say six and a half jin?

古文：曰：向请侯秀才题之，当是错矣。
现代文：这个人回答说：刚才，我请侯秀才题写的，可能是他写错了吧。
English: The man replied, "Just now, I asked Hou Xiuquan to write it down. Maybe he wrote it down wrong.

古文：即召白至。谓曰：卿何为错题人姓名。
现代文：杨素立即将侯白叫到跟前，问他：你为什么错写了这个人的姓名啊？
English: Yang Su immediately called Hou Bai to his side and asked him: Why did you misspell this person's name?

古文：对云：不错。
现代文：侯白回答说没有写错呀！
English: Hou Bai replied that there was no mistake!

古文：素曰：若不错，何因姓出名六斤，请卿题之，乃言六斤半。
现代文：杨素说：如果没有写错，为什么这个人姓出名六斤，请你题写，就给写成了六斤半？
English: Yang Su said: If there is no mistake in writing, why is this person's surname famous for six pounds, please write it, it will be written as six pounds and a half?

古文：对曰：向在省门，会卒无处见称。
现代文：侯白回答说：刚才在省衙门口，跟这个人仓促相遇，没有地方找秤去。
English: Hou Bai replied, "Just now, I met this person in a hurry at the gate of the Provincial Government, and there was no place to find a scale.

古文：既闻道是出六斤，斟酌只应是六斤半。
现代文：既然听他说是六斤出点头，我反复考虑觉得只应该是六斤半。
English: Since I heard him say that it was six pounds, I repeatedly thought that it should only be six and a half pounds.

古文：素大笑之。
现代文：杨素听了，哈哈大笑。
English: Yang Su listened and burst out laughing.

古文：素关中人，白山东人，素尝卒难之，欲其无对。
现代文：杨素是关中人，侯白是山东人。杨素经常突然发难，提出难题，想让侯白回答不上来。
English: Yang Su is from Guanzhong, and Hou Bai is from Shandong. Yang Su often suddenly gets into difficulties, raises difficult questions, and wants to make it impossible for Hou Bai to answer.

古文：而关中下俚人言音，谓水为霸。山东亦言擎将去为拃刀去。
现代文：关中的普通百姓讲话说：水为霸，山东人说：擎将去为搩刀去。
English: The ordinary people in Guanzhong said in their speech: Water is supreme, and the people in Shandong said: The engine will be replaced by the scythe.

古文：素尝戏白曰：山东固多仁义，借一而得两。
现代文：一次，杨素戏谑侯白说：山东还是多仁义之士，借一件东西而得到两件。
English: On one occasion, Yang Su jokingly said to Hou Bai: Shandong is still a person of much benevolence and righteousness, borrow one thing and get two.

古文：曰：若为得两。
现代文：侯白问：怎么就得到两件呢？
English: Hou Bai asked, "How did you get two?"

古文：答曰：有人从其借弓者。乃曰： 拃刀去。岂非借一而得两？
现代文：杨素说：有人向他借一张弓，他说： 搩刀去 ，难道不是借一张弓外搭上一把刀吗？
English: Yang Su said, "Someone borrowed a bow from him, and he said, "Go scythe." Isn't it just borrowing a bow and attaching a knife to it?

古文：白应声曰：关中人亦甚聪明，问一知二。
现代文：侯白听了后立即说：你们关中人也很聪明啊，问一个问题却知道另一个问题。
English: After listening, Hou Bai immediately said: You Guanzhong people are also very smart, you ask a question but know another question.

古文：素曰：何以得知。
现代文：杨素问：怎么可以证明呢？
English: Yang Su asked: How can it be proved?

古文：白曰：有人问，比来多两，渭水涨否？
现代文：侯白说：有人问，近来下雨很多，渭河里的水涨没涨啊？
English: Hou Bai said, "Someone asked, it's been raining a lot recently, has the water in the Fen River risen?

古文：答曰：霸长。
现代文：被问的人回答说： 霸长 。
English: The interviewee replied: "Hegemony."

古文：岂非问一知二？
现代文：难道这不是问一知二吗？
English: Isn't that asking too much?

古文：素于是伏其辩捷。
现代文：于是，杨素很是佩服侯白的随机应辩。
English: As a result, Yang Su was very impressed with Hou Bai's random response.

古文：白在散官，隶属杨素，爱其能剧谈。每上番日，即令谈戏弄。
现代文：侯白担任的是没有具体职务的散官，归杨素领导。杨素喜爱侯白健谈，每次轮到他值日，都让侯白来一块儿戏谑聊天。
English: Hou Bai served as a non-commissioned officer without a specific position, and was under the leadership of Yang Su. Yang Su liked Hou Bai's talkativeness, and every time it was his turn to be on duty, he let Hou Bai come and play and chat with him.

古文：或从旦至晚，始得归。
现代文：有时候，从早晨上省衙值班，一直聊到晚上下班，才能回家。
English: Sometimes, I can't go home until I've chatted from the time I get to work in the morning to the time I get off work in the evening.

古文：才出省门，即逢素子玄感。
现代文：一次，侯白刚走出省衙门口，就遇见杨素的儿子扬玄感。
English: Once, just after Hou Bai walked out of the gate of the provincial capital, he met Yang Xuanxuan, Yang Su's son.

古文：乃云：侯秀才，可以玄惑说一个好话。
现代文：杨玄感说：侯秀才，可以为我讲个有趣的故事吗？
English: Yang Xuanxuan said: Hou Xiucai, can you tell me an interesting story?

古文：白被留连，不获已。乃云：有一大虫，欲向野中觅肉，见一刺猬仰卧，谓是肉脔。欲衔之，忽被猬卷着鼻，惊走，不知休息。
现代文：侯白被杨玄感缠住，不得已，就讲了一个故事：有一只老虎，想到山中寻找肉吃。看见一只刺猥仰身躺在那儿，以为是一块肉，正想伸嘴去叼，忽然被刺猥卷住了鼻子，惊慌地逃去，一点也不敢停下来歇息一会儿。
English: Hou Bai was entangled by Yang Xuanxuan and, as a last resort, told a story: There was a tiger who wanted to search for meat in the mountains. He saw a stingray lying on its back and thought it was a piece of meat. He was about to poke it with his beak, when the stingray caught his nose and he fled in panic, not daring to stop and rest for a moment.

古文：直至山中，因乏，不觉昏睡。
现代文：一直跑到山里，又困又乏，不知不觉中就睡过去了。
English: I ran all the way to the mountains, feeling sleepy and exhausted, and I fell asleep before I knew it.

古文：刺猬乃放鼻而去。
现代文：刺猥这才放开老虎的鼻子离去。
English: The impaler then let go of the tiger's nose and walked away.

古文：大虫忽起欢喜，走至橡树下，低头见橡斗，乃侧身语云： 旦来遭见贤尊，愿郎君且避道。
现代文：老虎睡醒后，忽然发现鼻子上的刺猬没有了，非常高兴。它走到一株橡树下面，低头看见橡票子。于是转过身说： 白天遇见了你的父亲，希望你呀暂且让让道。
English: When the tiger awoke from his sleep, he was overjoyed to suddenly find that the hedgehog on his nose was gone. He went under an oak tree, looked down and saw an acorn. Then he turned around and said, "I met your father during the day. I hope you'll give way for the time being."

古文：素与白剧谈，因曰：今有一深坑，可有数百尺。公入其中，若为得出。
现代文：杨素跟侯白在一块闲聊。杨素讲：现在有一个深坑，约有几百尺，你进到这深坑下面能出来吗？
English: Yang Su was chatting with Hou Bai. Yang Su said, "There is a deep pit now, about several hundred feet deep. If you go under this pit, will you be able to get out?"

古文：白曰：入中不须余物，唯用一针即出。
现代文：侯白说：我到这个深坑里后，不需要别的东西，只要有一根针就能出来。
English: Hou Bai said, "After I fell into this pit, I don't need anything else. As long as I have a needle, I can get out."

古文：素曰：用针何为？
现代文：杨素问：用针干什么？
English: Yang Su asked: What do you do with a needle?

古文：答曰：针头中令水饱坑，拍浮而出。
现代文：侯白说：用针刺头出水，让水将坑灌满了，我就从水中浮上来了。
English: Hou Bai said, "I poked the water out with a needle and let the water fill the pit, and I came up from the water."

古文：素曰：头中何处有尔许水。
现代文：杨素问：你头里哪来的这许多水呀？
English: Yang Su asked: Where does all this water in your head come from?

古文：白曰：若无尔许水，何因肯入尔许坑。
现代文：侯白说：如果没有那么多的水，怎么能敢于进入你那么深的坑里面呢？
English: Hou Bai said, "If there is not so much water, how can you dare to enter such a deep pit?"

古文：素又谓白曰：仆为君作一谜，君射之，不得迟，便须罚酒。
现代文：杨素对侯白说：我给你出个谜语，你猜猜，不得拖延时间。若拖延时间不能立即猜中，就须罚酒。
English: Yang Su said to Hou Bai: I will give you a riddle, you guess, you must not delay the time. If you delay the time and cannot guess immediately, you must be fined.

古文：素曰：头长一分，眉长一寸，未到日中，已打两顿。
现代文：接着，杨素说：头发长一分，眉毛长一寸，没等到中午，已经打了两顿。
English: Next, Yang Su said, "My hair has grown one point, my eyebrows have grown one inch. I didn't wait until noon, and I've already had two meals.

古文：白应声曰：此是道人。
现代文：侯白随声说：这是僧人。
English: Hou Bai said, "This is a monk."

古文：素曰：君须作谜，亦不答迟。
现代文：杨素说：你也要出个谜语，也不行拖延时间。
English: Yang Su said: You should also come up with a riddle, and you should not delay the time.

古文：白即云：头长一分，眉长一寸，未到日中，已打两顿。
现代文：侯白当即说道：头发一分长，眉毛一寸长，没等到中午，已经打了两顿。
English: Hou Bai immediately said: "My hair is a minute long, my eyebrows are an inch long, I didn't wait until noon, and I've already had two meals.

古文：素曰：君因何学吾作道人谈。
现代文：杨素问：你为什么学我出的僧人谜语？
English: Yang Su asked: Why did you learn the riddle of the monk that I gave you?

古文：白曰：此是阿历。
现代文：侯白说：我说的是阿历。
English: Hou Bai said: I am talking about Ah Li.

古文：素大笑。
现代文：杨素大笑。
English: Yang Su laughed again.

古文：白仕唐，尝与人各为谜。
现代文：唐朝灭隋后，侯白在唐朝担任官职，一次跟同事们出谜语。
English: After the Tang Dynasty eliminated the Sui Dynasty, Hou Bai served as an official in the Tang Dynasty, and once had a riddle with his colleagues.

古文：白云：必须是实物，不得虚作解释。
现代文：侯白说：所出的谜语必须是真的东西，不行随便乱解释，盅惑大家。
English: Hou Bai said, "The riddle must be a real thing. It cannot be explained in a random way to bewitch everyone."

古文：浪惑众人，若解讫，无有此物，即须受罚。
现代文：如果说出谜底，没有这种东西，就要受到处罚。
English: If you tell the riddle that there is no such thing, you will be punished.

古文：白即云：背共屋许大，肚共碗许大，口共盏许大。
现代文：侯白马上说出一个谜语：背跟屋那么大，肚子跟碗那么大，口跟杯子那么大。
English: Hou Bai immediately said a riddle: the back is as big as a house, the stomach is as big as a bowl, and the mouth is as big as a cup.

古文：众人射不得。
现代文：大家都猜不出来，都说：普天下什么地方有这种东西？
English: Everyone couldn't figure it out and said: Where in the world is there something like this?

古文：皆云：天下何处有物，共盏许大口，而背共屋许大者，定无此物。必须共赌。
现代文：跟杯子那么大的嘴，背跟屋那么大。一定是没有这种东西的，必须一起打个赌。
English: A mouth as big as a cup, a back as big as a house. There must be no such thing, we must make a bet together.

古文：白与众赌讫，解云：此是胡燕窠。
现代文：侯白跟同事们打好赌后，解开迷底，说：这是胡燕窝。
English: After Hou Bai made a good bet with his colleagues, he unraveled the mystery and said: This is Hu Yan Niao.

古文：众皆大笑。
现代文：同事们都哈哈大笑。
English: My colleagues all burst out laughing.

古文：又逢众宴，众皆笑白后至。
现代文：一次，大家在一块儿聚宴，人们都起哄说侯白来晚了，都让他出个谜语。
English: On one occasion, everyone was having a party together, and people were whispering that Hou Bai was late, and they all asked him to come up with a riddle.

古文：俱令作谜，必不得幽隐难识，及诡谲希奇，亦不假合而成，人所不见者。
现代文：所出的谜语，不许是深奥难懂，以及希奇怪诞的。也不许随便凑合一个，谁也没见着过的。
English: The resulting riddle must not be abstruse, difficult to understand, or fantastical, and must not be made up by someone who has never seen it before.

古文：白即应声云：有物大如狗，面貌极似牛。
现代文：侯白立即出一个：有一种东西象狗那么大，长相极象牛。
English: Hou Bai immediately came up with one: there is a thing as big as a dog, looking very much like a cow.

古文：此是何物。
现代文：请问，这是什么东西？
English: Excuse me, what is this?

古文：或云是獐，或云是鹿，皆云不是。
现代文：有的人猜是獐子，有人猜是鹿，侯白都说不是，人们马上让侯白说出谜底来。
English: Some people guessed it was a mule, others guessed it was a deer, but Hou Bai said no. People immediately asked Hou Bai to tell them the answer to the riddle.

古文：即令白解，云：此是犊子。
现代文：侯白说：这种物是牛犊子。
English: Hou Bai said: This kind of thing is cow dung.

古文：白又与素路中遇胡，负青草而行。
现代文：一次，侯白跟杨素一块儿走，在路上遇到一个胡人，背上背着下一捆青草走路。
English: Once, Hou Bai and Yang Su were walking together, and on the road they met a goose, walking with a bundle of grass on his back.

古文：素曰：长安路上，乃见青草湖。
现代文：杨素说：在长安的道上，还能见到青草湖。
English: Yang Su said: On the road of Chang'an, you can still see Qingcao Lake.

古文：须臾，又有两醉胡。衣孝重服，骑马而走。
现代文：过了一会儿，又走过来两上喝醉酒的胡人，身上穿着孝服，骑着马。
English: After a while, two drunken Hu people, dressed in filial piety and riding a horse, came over.

古文：俄而一胡落马。
现代文：不一会儿，其中的一个胡人从马上跌落在地。
English: Moments later, one of the hooded figures falls from the horse to the ground.

古文：白曰：真所谓孝乎，惟孝有之矣。
现代文：侯白看见后说：真可称为孝啊！只有孝才能这样啊！
English: After seeing this, Hou Bai said, "This can truly be called filial piety! Only filial piety can do this!"

古文：白初未知名，在本邑。
现代文：初时，侯白还没有出名。
English: At the beginning, Hou Bai was not yet famous.

古文：令宰初至，白即谒。
现代文：他居住的那个县，新上任一位知县，侯白当即去拜见。
English: Hou Bai immediately went to visit a newly appointed magistrate in the county where he lived.

古文：谓知识曰：白能令明府作狗吠。
现代文：拜见前，侯白对一位熟人说：我能让县太爷学狗叫。
English: Before the meeting, Hou Bai said to an acquaintance: "I can teach the County Grandfather to bark like a dog."

古文：曰：何有明府得遣作狗吠，诚如言，我辈输一会饮食。
现代文：这位熟人说：你怎么能让知县学狗叫呢？真的像你说的那样，我们请你吃一顿。
English: The acquaintance said, "How can you make the Zhixian dog bark? Really, as you said, we'll treat you to a meal."

古文：若妄，君当输。
现代文：如果不像你说的那样，你应当请我们喝一顿。
English: If it's not as you say, you should buy us a drink.

古文：于是入谒，知识俱门外伺之。
现代文：于是，侯白进入县衙里参见知县，那些熟人都在门外看着他。
English: As a result, Hou Bai entered the county seat, and all those acquaintances were watching him outside the door.

古文：令曰：君何须，得重来相见。
现代文：知县问：你何必再来拜见本知县呢？
English: Zhixian asked: Why do you need to visit Honji County again?

古文：白曰：公初至，民间有不便事，望谘公。
现代文：侯白说：您刚到我县，乡里有不适宜的事情，特意来讨教您。
English: Hou Bai said: You have just come to my county, there is something inappropriate in the village, I specially came to teach you.

古文：公未到前，甚多贼盗。
现代文：知县大人没有来上任前，县里盗贼特别多。
English: Before the adults of Zhixian County took office, there were a lot of thieves in the county.

古文：请命各家养狗，令吠惊，自然贼盗止息。
现代文：希望知县大人让各家各户都养狗，贼一来狗就叫。这样，盗贼就会自己停止偷盗的。
English: I hope that the adults in Zhixian County will let every family have a dog, and the dog will bark when the thief comes. In this way, the thief will stop stealing by himself.

古文：令曰：若然，我家亦须养能吠之狗，若为可得？
现代文：知县说：果然如此，我家也必须饲养一条能叫的狗。怎么才能挑选到这样的狗呢？
English: Zhixian said: Sure enough, my family must also raise a dog that can bark. How can we choose such a dog?

古文：白曰：家中新有一群犬，其吠声与余狗不同。
现代文：侯白回答说：我家里刚刚生下来一群小狗，他们的叫声跟别的狗不一样。
English: Hou Bai replied, "A group of puppies have just been born in my home, and their cries are different from other dogs.

古文：曰：其声如何？
现代文：知县问：它们是怎样叫的？
English: Zhixian asked: How are they called?

古文：答曰：其吠声恸恸者。令曰：君全不识好狗吠声。
现代文：侯白回答说：它们的叫声都是 怮怮 的呀知县说：你呀完全不会识别好狗的叫声。
English: Hou Bai replied, "Their cries are all hoarse." Zhixian said, "You are completely unable to recognize the cries of a good dog."

古文：好狗吠声，当作号号。怮怮声者，全不是能吠之狗。
现代文：好狗的叫声应当是 号号 ， 怮怮 声的，都不是善于叫的狗。
English: The barking of a good dog should be a trumpet, and dogs that bark are not good at barking.

古文：伺者闻之，莫不掩口而笑。
现代文：在外面察看的熟人们听到这里，没有一个人不用手捂着嘴笑。
English: None of my acquaintances who were watching outside did not cover their mouths with their hands when they heard this.

古文：白知得胜，乃云：若觅如此能吠者，当出访之。
现代文：侯白知道自己赢了，于是说：知县大人如果要寻找这样能叫的狗，我去给您寻找去。
English: Hou Bai knew that he had won, so he said: If the adults of Zhixian want to find a dog that can bark like this, I will go and find it for you.

古文：遂辞而出。
现代文：说着告辞走出县衙。
English: He walked out of the county hall with a farewell speech.

古文：卢嘉言
现代文：卢嘉言
English: Lu Jiagang

古文：隋卢嘉言就寺礼拜，因入僧房。
现代文：隋朝有个叫卢嘉言的人，去寺庙礼拜敬佛，借着这个机会来到僧人的住房里坐坐。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, there was a man named Lu Jiagang who went to a temple to worship Buddha, and took this opportunity to sit in the monk's house.

古文：一僧善于论议，嘉言即与谈话。因相戏弄，此僧理屈。
现代文：僧房中有位僧人喜欢高谈阔论，卢嘉言就跟他神侃，相互戏谑，这位僧人到后来说不过卢嘉言了。
English: There was a monk in the monk's room who liked to talk a lot, and Lu Jiaguan was always arguing with him and joking with him. This monk later said that Lu Jiaguan was just joking.

古文：同坐二僧，即助此僧酬对。
现代文：在坐的另外二位僧人立即帮助这位僧人，共同对付卢嘉言。
English: The two other monks sitting there immediately helped the monk and together they tackled Lu Jiagang.

古文：往复数回，三僧并屈。
现代文：你来我往，又经过几番论战，三位僧人都败下阵来。
English: You came to me, and after several debates, all three monks were defeated.

古文：嘉言乃笑谓曰：三个阿师，并不解樗蒱。
现代文：卢嘉言于是笑着对三位僧人说：三位大师，你们并不懂得樗蒱博戏吧。
English: Lu Jiagen then smiled and said to the three monks: "Three masters, you don't understand the Zibo Opera, do you?"

古文：僧未喻，嘉言即报言：可不闻樗蒱人云， 三个秃，不敌一个卢。
现代文：三位僧人不知道卢嘉言忽然说出来樗蒱，为的是什么。卢嘉言立即告诉他们：你们听说过没有？玩樗蒱博戏的人说：三个秃，抵不上一个卢彩。
English: The three monks didn't know why Lu Jiagang suddenly spoke out. Lu Jiagang immediately told them: Have you ever heard of it? The people who played the card game said: Three bald men are not equal to one Lu Cai.

古文：观者大笑，僧无以应。
现代文：围观的人们听了都捧腹大笑，三位僧人一言不语。
English: The onlookers burst into laughter, and the three monks did not say a word.

古文：陆操
现代文：陆操
English: Athletics

古文：隋七兵尚书河间陆操无姿貌，有辩。
现代文：隋朝时，统管七军的尚书、河间人陆操长相丑陋，但是有辩才。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Shang Shu, who was in charge of the Seven Armies, and Lu Cao, who was in charge of the River People, were ugly in appearance, but they had the ability to argue.

古文：尝新婚，太子少保赵郡李□谓之曰：屡逢射雉，几度启颜。
现代文：在他又娶一方妻室时，太子少保赵郡人李某戏谑地问陆操：屡次在新娘面前显露才华，博得新娘子几次笑脸啊？
English: When he married his second wife, Li Mou, the prince's younger brother and a resident of Zhao County, jokingly asked Lu Mu: "You have repeatedly shown your talent in front of the bride. How many times have you won the bride's smile?"

古文：操曰：息妫二子，不言不笑。
现代文：陆操回答说：新娘子就像春秋时息妫一样，虽然跟楚文王生了两个儿子，但是始终不说不笑。
English: Lu Tao replied, "The bride is like a phoenix in spring and autumn. Although she has given birth to two sons with King Chu Wen, she never speaks or laughs.

古文：薛道衡
现代文：薛道衡
English: Xue Daoheng

古文：隋前内史侍郎薛道衡以醴和麦粥食之，谓卢思道曰：礼之用，和为贵。
现代文：隋朝的前内史侍郎薛道衡爱吃甜酒和麦粥，对卢思道说：在众多的道德规范，行为法则中，还是 和 最宝贵啊！
English: Xue Daoheng, a former imperial secretary of the Sui Dynasty, loved to eat sweet wine and wheat porridge, and said to Lu Sidao: Among the many moral norms and rules of conduct, it is still the most valuable!

古文：先王之道，斯为美。
现代文：先王留下来的好传统，还是甜酒加麦粥最好吃啊！
English: It is here that the precious place of the ancient monarchs' way of governing the country lies.

古文：思道答曰：知和而和，不以礼节之，亦不可行也。
现代文：卢思道回答说单知道 和为贵 而和，不用规范、法则去约束，也是达不到 和 的呀！
English: Lu Sidao replied that simply knowing that "harmony is precious," and not having to be constrained by norms and laws, is not enough to achieve harmony.

古文：刘焯
现代文：刘焯
English: Liu Xuan

古文：隋河间郡刘焯之从侄炫并有儒学，俱犯法被禁。
现代文：隋朝时，河间人刘焯和他的堂侄子刘炫，都是精研儒学的大儒，一块儿触犯了刑律被关押在牢狱中。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Liu Hui, a native of Hebei Province, and his cousin Liu Xuan, both great scholars of Confucianism, were imprisoned together for violating the criminal law.

古文：县吏不知其大儒也，咸与之枷著。
现代文：主管牢狱的县吏不知道他们叔侄二人是大儒，给他们都戴上了刑枷。
English: The county official in charge of the prison did not know that their two uncles and nephews were Confucian scholars, and put the shackles on them.

古文：焯曰：终日枷中坐，而不见家。
现代文：刘焯说：整天在枷中坐着，然而却看不到家。
English: Liu Yao said: "Sitting in the shackles all day, yet I can't see home.

古文：炫曰：亦终日负枷坐。而不见妇。
现代文：刘炫说：我也是整天负枷坐着，然而看不到妇啊。
English: Liu Xuan said, "I also sit all day with my shackles on, but I can't see a woman."

古文：山东人
现代文：山东人
English: People from Shandong

古文：山东人娶蒲州女，多患瘿。
现代文：有个山东人娶一位蒲州姑娘作媳妇。
English: A man from Shandong married a girl from Puzhou as his daughter-in-law.

古文：其妻母项瘿甚大。成婚数月，妇家疑婿不慧。
现代文：蒲州有很多人都患有粗脖子病，这个山东人的岳母脖颈上灼肿块特别大。
English: Many people in Puzhou suffer from thick neck disease. The mother-in-law of this Shandong resident has a particularly large burn on her neck.

古文：妇家置酒，盛会亲戚，欲以试之。问曰：某郎在山东读书，应识道理，鸿鹤能鸣何意？
现代文：结婚几个月后，媳妇家怀疑姑爷不聪明，于是岳父家特意置办了一桌酒席，将亲友都请来，准备在酒桌上，好好试探考问一下姑爷。开宴后，岳父问姑爷：我姑爷在山东读书，按说是有知识懂得道理，你能说说鸿雁与仙鹤为什么会鸣叫吗？
English: A few months after the wedding, the daughter-in-law's family suspected that the uncle was not smart, so the father-in-law's family specially set up a wine table, invited relatives and friends, and prepared to test and ask the uncle on the wine table. After the banquet, the father-in-law asked the uncle: My uncle studied in Shandong, and is said to have knowledge and understand reason. Can you say why wild geese and cranes sing?

古文：曰：天使其然。
现代文：姑爷回答说：这是自然生成的。
English: He replied: "It's a naturally occurring thing.

古文：又曰：松柏冬青何意？
现代文：又问：松树、柏树为什么冬天长青呢？
English: Another question: Why do pine and cypress trees turn green in winter?

古文：曰：天使其然。
现代文：回答说：这是自然生成的。
English: He replied: "It's a naturally occurring thing.

古文：又曰：道边树有骨骴何意？
现代文：又问：道边的树为什么长着一个大包呢？
English: He also asked, "Why does the tree by the roadside have a big bag of cucumbers?"

古文：曰：天使其然。
现代文：回答说：这是自然生成的。
English: He replied: "It's a naturally occurring thing.

古文：妇翁曰：某郎全不识道理，何因浪住山东。
现代文：岳父说；我姑爷一点也不懂得道理，为什么白白住在山东读书。
English: My father-in-law said that my uncle didn't understand why he was living and studying in Shandong for nothing.

古文：因以戏之曰：鸿鹤能鸣者颈项长；松柏冬青者心中强；道边树有骨骴者，车拨伤。
现代文：趁机戏弄地说：鸿雁、仙鹤能鸣叫是因为长着长长的脖子，松树、柏树冬天长青是因为心刚强，道边的树长着个大包是因为车碰伤后造成的。
English: He took the opportunity to teasingly say: wild geese and cranes can sing because they have long necks, pine trees and cypress trees are evergreen in winter because they are strong-hearted, and trees along the roadside have a big bump because they were hit by a car.

古文：岂是天使其然。
现代文：难道是自然生成的吗？
English: Is it naturally occurring?

古文：婿曰：请以所闻见奉酬，不知许否。
现代文：姑爷听岳父说完后，说：请允许我用我所看见和听到的来回答您，不知可不可以？岳父说：可以！
English: After listening to his father-in-law, the uncle said, "Please allow me to answer you with what I saw and heard. I don't know if I can or not?" His father-in-law said, "Yes!"

古文：曰：可言之。婿曰：虾蟆能鸣，岂是颈项长？
现代文：姑爷说：蛤蟆能鸣叫，难道是因为它脖子长的长吗？
English: The uncle said, "Is it because of its long neck that the baboon can sing?

古文：竹亦冬青，岂是心中强？
现代文：竹子冬天也青，难道是因为它心刚强吗？
English: Bamboo is also blue in winter, is it because it has a strong heart?

古文：夫人项下瘿如许大，岂是车拨伤？
现代文：岳母大人脖子下面长着那么大个包，难道也是车碰伤造成的吗？
English: My mother-in-law has such a big bump under her neck. Was it caused by a car accident?

古文：妇翁羞愧，无以对之。
现代文：岳父听了姑父的这番回答后，羞愧满面，一句话也说不出来了。
English: After listening to his uncle's answer, his father-in-law was so ashamed that he couldn't say a word.

古文：吃人
现代文：吃人
English: Cannibalism

古文：隋朝有人敏慧，然而口吃。
现代文：隋朝时，有个人非常聪慧机敏，就是口吃。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a man who was very clever and quick-witted. He stuttered.

古文：杨素每闲闷，即召与剧谈。
现代文：越国公杨素每到闲闷得慌时，就将这个人召来神侃。
English: Every time Yang Su, the prince of Yue, was bored and panicked, he would call this person to ridicule.

古文：尝岁暮无事对坐，因戏之云：有大坑深一丈。方圆亦一丈。遣公入其中，何法得出。
现代文：一次，快到年根没有什么事情，杨素又将这个人召来闲坐。杨素戏谑地说：有一个大坑一丈深，方圆也一丈阔，派你进到这个大坑里面，你用什么方法才能上来呢？
English: Once, when there was nothing going on at the turn of the year, Yang Su summoned this person to sit idly by. Yang Su jokingly said, "There is a big pit a yard deep and a yard wide. If I send you into this big pit, how will you get out?"

古文：此人低头良久，乃问云：有梯出否？
现代文：这个人低头沉思了好久，才问杨素：有梯子可以爬上来吗？
English: The man bowed his head and pondered for a long time before he asked Yang Su: Is there a ladder to climb up?

古文：素云：只论无梯，若论有梯，何须更问。
现代文：杨素说：只当是没有梯子。如果说有梯子，还用再问你吗？
English: Yang Su said, "Let's just say there is no ladder. If there is a ladder, do I need to ask you again?"

古文：其人又低头良久，问曰：白白白白日，夜夜夜夜地。
现代文：这个人又低头沉思了许久，问：白白白白日，夜夜夜夜地？
English: The man bowed his head again and pondered for a long time. He asked, "What do you do day after day, night after night?

古文：素云：何须云白日夜地，若为得出。
现代文：杨素说：你为什么需要问是白日还是夜里呢？只问你怎么能从坑中上来？
English: Yang Su said: "Why do you need to ask whether it is day or night? Just ask how you can come up from the pit?

古文：乃云：若不是夜地，眼眼不瞎，为甚物入入里许。
现代文：这个口吃人说：如果不是黑夜，眼睛又不瞎，为了什么东西入入坑里？
English: The stutterer said, "If it is not night, and the eyes are not blind, why does anything go into the pit?"

古文：素大笑。
现代文：杨素开怀大笑。
English: Yang Su laughed again.

古文：又问云：忽命公作将军，有小城。
现代文：接着，杨素又问这个口吃人：忽然任命你为将军。
English: Yang Su then asked the stutterer, "You were suddenly appointed as a general.

古文：兵不过一千已下，粮食唯有数日。
现代文：有一座小城，城里有兵不过一千以内，粮草只够吃用几天，城外却有几万敌军围困。
English: There is a small city, there are less than a thousand soldiers in the city, the grain and grass are only enough to eat for a few days, but there are tens of thousands of enemy troops besieged outside the city.

古文：城外被数万人围，若遣公向城中，作何谋计。低头良久，问云：有有救救兵否？
现代文：假如派你进入这座小城里，你有什么好办法吗？这个口吃的人沉思许久，问杨素：有有救兵吗？
English: If I were to send you into this small town, what would you do? The stutterer pondered for a long time and asked Yang Su, "Are there any rescuers?"

古文：素云：只缘无救，所以问公。
现代文：杨素说：只因为没有救兵所以才问你呢？
English: Yang Su said, "Is it because there are no rescuers that I'm asking you?

古文：沉吟良久，举头向素云：审审如如公言，不免须败。
现代文：口吃的人沉吟良久，抬头对杨素说：细细想想如如你说的的的那那样样，免不不了了失败。
English: The stutterer pondered for a long time, looked up and said to Yang Su: "If you think about it carefully, as you said, you will inevitably fail.

古文：素大笑。
现代文：杨素又大笑。
English: Yang Su laughed again.

古文：又问云：计公多能。无种不解。
现代文：杨素又对这个口吃人说：经考察，你这个人能力很多，没有你解决不了的事情。
English: Yang Su also said to this stutterer: After investigation, you have a lot of ability as a person, there is nothing you can't solve.

古文：今日家中，有人虵蛟足，若为医治。
现代文：我再问你一个问题，你家今天有一个人被蛇咬了脚，请问你怎么给他治疗？
English: Let me ask you another question. A person in your family was bitten on the foot by a snake today. How did you treat him?

古文：此人即应声报云：取取五月五日南墙下雪雪涂涂，即即治。
现代文：这个口吃人接站话音说：取五月五日南墙下雪涂涂，即即治好了。
English: The stutterer said in a halting voice: "Take the fifth day of May, when the south wall was covered with snow, and it will be cured immediately.

古文：素云：五月何处得有雪。
现代文：杨素问：五月是夏天了，上哪里寻找雪去呀？
English: Yang Su asked: May is summer, where should I go to look for snow?

古文：答云：若五月五日无雪，腊月何处有虵咬。
现代文：这个人回答说如果五月五日没地方找雪，那么现在是腊月寒冬哪里有蛇咬人呢！
English: This person replied that if there was no place to look for snow on May 5th, then now it is the cold winter of the waxing moon, where are the snakes biting people!

古文：素笑而遣之。
现代文：杨素听了，笑着将这个口吃的人打发走了。
English: Yang Su listened and dismissed the stuttering man with a smile.

古文：赵小儿
现代文：赵小儿
English: Zhao Xia'er

古文：隋有三藏法师，父本商胡，法师生于中国，仪容面目，犹作胡人。
现代文：隋朝时，有个通晓《佛经》经、律、论三藏的僧人，他的父亲原本是个胡人。这位僧人虽然生长在中国，相貌举止还是像胡人。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, there was a monk who was well versed in the "Buddha Sutra," the sutras, the laws, and the three sacred books of Tibet. His father was originally a Wu man. Although this monk grew up in China, he still looked and behaved like a Wu man.

古文：行业极高，又有辩捷。
现代文：他德行功业特别高，还具有敏捷的思维，擅长辩讲。
English: He has a particularly high level of moral accomplishment, as well as a quick mind and is good at debate.

古文：尝以四月八日设斋讲说，时朝官及道俗观者千余人。
现代文：一次，这位三藏僧人在四月八日这天设置斋会，讲说佛法。那天，朝中的文武官员，以及普通市民、僧人，前来听讲的有一千多人。
English: On one occasion, the three Tibetan monks held a sermon on the 8th day of the 4th lunar month, and more than a thousand people came to listen to the sermon, including government and military officials, ordinary citizens and monks.

古文：大德名僧，官人辩捷者，前后十余人论议。
现代文：在这位僧人讲法时，大德高僧及朝中的官员，前后有十多人跟他争论，都是能言善辩的人。
English: When this monk was teaching, there were more than a dozen highly moral monks and officials from the central and northern courts arguing with him, all of whom were eloquent.

古文：法师随难即对，义理不穷。
现代文：尽管提出的问题都很难，这位三藏法师却都能立即回答，而且讲述的道理无穷无尽。
English: Although the questions asked are difficult, the three Tibetans are able to answer immediately, and the story is endless.

古文：最后有小儿姓赵，年十三，即出于众中。
现代文：最后，有个姓赵的小孩，年仅十三岁，从人群里站起来跟三藏僧人问答。
English: Finally, a child surnamed Zhao, only 13 years old, stood up from the crowd and asked the three Tibetan monks a question.

古文：法师辩捷既已过人，又复向来皆是高明旧德，忽见此儿欲来论议，众咸怪笑。
现代文：三藏僧人敏捷的辩才既然已经超过刚才那些参与议论的人，况且这些人都是修养极高、德高望重的老臣。忽然间冒出个小孩要跟这位胡人和尚辩谈，在场的众人都惊怪好笑。
English: Since the three Tibetan monks had already surpassed those who had just participated in the discussion in their ability to debate quickly, and moreover, these people were highly cultured and highly respected elders, a child suddenly appeared to argue with this old man, and everyone present was surprised and amused.

古文：小儿精神自若，即就座。
现代文：然而这位赵小孩神情很是镇静，一点也不怯场。
English: However, this Zhao kid looked very calm and was not scared at all.

古文：大声语此僧：昔野狐和尚自有经文，未审狐作阿阇黎，出何典语？
现代文：坐下后，便大声问这位高僧：从前来的一些野胡和尚来讲经说法都有经文，不知你这位胡和尚讲的这些出自什么经典？
English: After he sat down, he asked the high priest in a loud voice, "From some of the wild-bearded monks who have come here, the sutras all have scriptures. I don't know from which scriptures you, this wild-bearded monk, are speaking.

古文：僧语云：此郎子声高而身小，何不以声而补身。
现代文：胡人和尚说：这个小孩声音高而身子矮小，怎么不用声高来补身短呢？
English: Hu Rongzang said, "This child has a high-pitched voice but a short stature. Why not use his high-pitched voice to make up for his short stature?"

古文：儿即应声报云：法师以弟子声高而身小，何不以声而补身。
现代文：赵小孩马上应声说：你这位和尚认为我声高身子矮小，为什么不用声音来补身矮。
English: Zhao Xiao immediately replied, "You, a monk, think that I am tall and short. Why don't you use your voice to make up for your short stature?"

古文：法师眼深而鼻长，何不截鼻而补眼。
现代文：那么，我问你：法师你眼窝深而鼻子长，为什么不将鼻子截下一段补在眼窝上呢？
English: So, I ask you: mage, your eye sockets are deep and your nose is long, why don't you cut off a section of your nose and patch it over your eye sockets?

古文：众皆惊异，起立大笑。
现代文：在场的人们听后都异常震惊，站起身来大笑不止。
English: Everyone present was shocked and stood up laughing.

古文：是时暑月，法师左手把如意，右手摇扇。
现代文：当时正值伏天盛暑，三藏法师左手挥着一只如意，右手摇着一柄团扇。
English: At that time, it was the height of summer, and the Three Tibetans were waving a fan in their left hand and a fan in their right hand.

古文：众笑声未定，法师又思量答语：以所摇扇，掩面低头。儿又大声语云：团圆形如满月，不藏顾兔，翻掩雄狐。
现代文：大家的笑声没有住下来，三藏法师边思考如何回答赵小孩刚才的戏谑边摇着扇子，掩面低头地站在那儿，赵小孩又大声说道：团扇的形状宛如一轮满月，没有藏着左右顾盼的玉免，却遮掩着一只雄狐。哄！
English: The laughter of everyone did not stay down. While thinking about how to answer Zhao Xiao's banter, the three Tibetan mages shook their fans and stood there with their heads down, hiding their faces. Zhao Xiao also said loudly: The shape of the fan is like a full moon. There is no hidden gem, but it hides a male fox. Lol!

古文：众大笑。
现代文：斋会上又暴发出一阵大笑声。
English: The crowd roars with laughter.

古文：法师即去扇，以如意指麾，别送问，并语未得尽，忽如意头落。
现代文：三藏胡僧听了后，忙收起团扇，左手举起如意指向别处，跟另外人搭话。还没等他们把话说完，不料他手中如意的脑袋掉下来了。
English: After listening, the Three Tibetan Monks hurriedly put away the fan, raised his left hand to point elsewhere, and spoke to the other people. Before they had finished speaking, his head fell off.

古文：儿即起谓法师曰：如意既折，义锋亦摧。
现代文：赵小孩随即站起身对胡僧说：你手中的如意已经断了，你议论的话题也接不上稔了，咱们就对辩到这里吧。
English: Zhao Xiao immediately stood up and said to the monk: Your wish has been broken, and the topic you are discussing cannot be connected, so let's end the debate here.

古文：即于座前，长揖而去。
现代文：说着，走到胡僧座位前面，深深地鞠了一躬，转身离去。
English: Saying this, he walked to the front of the monk's seat, bowed deeply, and turned away.

古文：此僧既怒且惭，更无以应，无不惊叹称笑。
现代文：这位三藏胡僧既恼怒又羞愧，更没有什么话可说。在场的人，没有一个人不惊讶、赞叹、称道这个年仅十三岁的赵小孩，而又觉得好笑。
English: The Sanzanghu monk was both angry and ashamed, and had nothing to say. No one present was not surprised, admired, praised the thirteen-year-old Zhao child, and felt amused.

古文：长孙无忌
现代文：长孙无忌
English: The eldest grandson of Mubi

古文：唐太宗宴近臣，戏以嘲谑。
现代文：唐太宗设宴招待跟他关系亲近密切的朝臣们，席间，互相戏谑调笑。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang set up a banquet to invite courtiers who were closely related to him. During the meal, they teased and joked with each other.

古文：赵公长孙无忌，嘲欧阳询曰：耸膊成山字，埋肩不出头。谁家麟阁上，画此一猕猴。
现代文：赵国公长孙无忌嘲谑欧阳询说：举起胳膊是个 山 字，放下胳膊又将脑袋埋藏在肩腋中，哪家王朝的麒麟阁上，画着这样一只猕猴？
English: Zhao Guogong's eldest grandson did not hesitate to taunt Ouyang Yinglong, saying: "Raising your arm is a mountain character, putting down your arm and burying your head in your shoulder, which dynasty's Kirin Pavilion has such a macaque monkey?

古文：询应曰：缩头连背煖，倇当畏肚寒。
现代文：欧阳询听后应声说：缩着脑袋使脊背温暖，带着兜肚是怕肚子寒冷受病。
English: After listening to Ouyang's inquiry, Ying Sheng said: shrinking the head to keep the spine warm, and wearing a pouch to keep the stomach from getting cold.

古文：只因心混混，所以面团团。
现代文：只因为你心中浑浑噩噩，所以你脸上才表现出忧苦不安。
English: It's only because your mind is clouded that your face shows sadness and anxiety.

古文：帝敛容曰：欧阳询，汝岂不畏皇后闻，赵公、皇后之兄也。
现代文：唐太宗听了后，严肃地说：欧阳询，你就不怕皇后知道吗？赵国公长孙无忌，是长孙皇后的哥哥。
English: After listening, Tang Taizong said seriously: Ou Yangcheng, aren't you afraid that the Empress will find out? Zhao Guogong's eldest grandson has nothing to fear, he is the eldest grandson of the Empress's brother.

古文：任环
现代文：任环
English: Renhuan

古文：唐管国公任环酷怕妻。
现代文：唐朝的管国公任环特别惧怕老婆。
English: The governor of the Tang Dynasty was particularly afraid of his wife.

古文：太宗以功赐二侍子，环拜谢，不敢以归。
现代文：唐太宗因为他有功劳，赏赐给他两名侍妾，任环跪拜辞谢，不敢将她们带回家中。
English: Tang Taizong, because of his merits, rewarded him with two concubines. Ren Huan knelt down to thank them and did not dare to take them home.

古文：太宗召其妻，赐酒。谓之曰：妇人妒忌，合当七出。
现代文：唐太宗召见任环的妻子，赏赐给她御酒，说：作为一个女人，性情妒忌，是在被休回家中的七条缘由之中的。
English: Tang Taizong summoned Renhuan's wife, gave her wine, and said: As a woman, jealousy is one of the seven reasons for being sent home.

古文：若能改行无妒，则无饮此酒。不尔，可饮之。
现代文：如果你能改正不再妒忌，就可以不饮这杯酒；不然，就将它喝下去。
English: If you can correct and no longer be jealous, you can not drink this glass of wine; otherwise, drink it.

古文：曰：妾不能改妒，请饮酒。
现代文：任环的妻子说：我不能改正妒忌，情愿饮下这杯御酒。
English: Renhuan's wife said, "I can't correct my jealousy, I'd rather drink this goblet of wine."

古文：遂饮之。比醉归。与其家死诀。
现代文：于是，任环妻子端起酒杯一饮而尽，醉着回到家中，跟家里人痛哭流涕地告别。
English: As a result, Renhuan's wife took a glass of wine and drank it all, returned home drunk, and bade a tearful farewell to her family.

古文：其实非鸩也，既不死。
现代文：其实，任环妻子喝的不是毒药酒，并没有死。
English: In fact, Renhuan's wife did not drink poisoned wine and did not die.

古文：他日，杜正伦讥弄环。
现代文：日后，杜正伦用这件事来讥讽戏弄任环。
English: Later, Du Zhenglun used this incident to mock and tease Renhuan.

古文：环曰：妇当怕者三，初娶之时，端居若菩萨，岂有人不怕菩萨耶。
现代文：任环说：老婆有三个时期让你惧怕她。刚结婚时，她端坐在洞房中象尊菩萨。难道有人不怕菩萨吗？
English: Ren Huan said, "A wife has three periods for you to fear her. When you were first married, she sat in the bridal chamber like a Bodhisattva. Is there anyone who is not afraid of a Bodhisattva?"

古文：既长生男女，如养儿大虫，岂有人不怕大虫耶。
现代文：时间长了，生了子女，又象护犊的老虎。难道有人不怕老虎吗？
English: Time has lengthened, children have been born, and a tiger has appeared as a guardian of the cocoon. Is there anyone who is not afraid of tigers?

古文：年老面皱，如鸠盘荼鬼，岂有人不怕鬼耶。
现代文：待到年老时，脸上打皱象佛经上说的吸人精气的冬瓜鬼。难道有人不怕鬼吗？
English: When you reach old age, your face will wrinkle like the winter melon ghost mentioned in Buddhist scriptures. Isn't there anyone who isn't afraid of ghosts?

古文：以此怕妇，亦何怪焉。
现代文：因为这些惧怕老婆，又有什么奇怪的呢？
English: Because these are afraid of their wives, what's so strange about that?

古文：闻者欢喜。
现代文：听的人，都欢呼雀跃，连连叫好。
English: Everyone who heard it cheered and applauded.

古文：李绩
现代文：李绩
English: Li Jian

古文：曹左司郎中封道弘，身形长大，而臀甚阔。
现代文：唐朝人左司郎中封道弘，身体长的又高又大，臀部肥胖。
English: The Tang Dynasty left-hand man, Zhongfu Daohong, was tall and big, with a fat buttock.

古文：道弘将入阁奏事，英公李绩在后，谓道弘曰：封道弘，你臀斟酌坐得即休，何须尔许大。
现代文：封道弘要去内阁谈公事，英国公李绩走在他身后，说：封道弘，你的屁股估量着长到能坐下休息就行了，何必这么肥大啊！
English: Fong Daohong is going to the cabinet to talk about business. The British official walks behind him and says, "Fong Daohong, you only need to make sure that your bottom is long enough to sit down and rest. Why do you have to be so fat?"

古文：唐有僧法轨，形容短小。于寺开讲，李荣往共论议。
现代文：唐朝时，有个叫法轨的僧人，身形矮小，法轨在寺内讲授佛经，李荣前去跟他一块儿讨论。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a short monk named Horao who taught Buddhist scriptures in the temple. Li Rong went to discuss with him.

古文：往复数番。僧有旧作诗《詠荣》，于高座上诵之云：姓李应须李，言荣又不荣。此僧未及得道下句，李荣应声接曰：身长三尺半，头毛犹未生。
现代文：去了几次后，法轨僧人曾写过一首歌咏李荣的诗，在讲坛上当着李荣的面背诵：姓李应须李，说荣又不荣还没等法轨僧人诵出下两句，李荣在下面应声接上说：身体只有三尺半那么高，头上的毛还没有长出来呢！
English: After going there several times, the legal track monk once wrote a song based on Li Rong's poem, and recited it in front of Li Rong on the pulpit: surname Li Ying Su Li, say Rong and not Rong Before the legal track monk could recite the next two sentences, Li Rong said in response: the body is only three and a half feet tall, and the hair on the head has not grown out yet!

古文：四座欢喜，伏其辩捷。
现代文：在座的人欢呼雀跃，都佩服李荣的敏捷与机辩。
English: Everyone present cheered and admired Li Rong's agility and wit.

